a geuteling (plural geutelingen) is a traditional food of the flemish ardennes region of belgium. it bears some similarity to a pancake.  origin  geutelingen began as a food to celebrate the catholic feast of saint apollonia. families made their own dough, and they brought their dough to the local bakery to be baked. the next weekend the geutelingen were reheated in a casserole and eaten with the whole family.  saint apollonia is the patron saint of dentists, and there is a tradition that the geuteling confers year-long immunity to toothache.  the geuteling today  today, the religious association has almost disappeared, but the feast of the geutelingen is still organised on the first weekend after the feast of saint apollonia: february 9. there is also a tradition of tossing the geuteling, as pancakes are tossed elsewhere.  elst, part of the community of brakel in east flanders, promotes the geuteling in the flemish ardennes and elsewhere in the country. elst is known as the village of the geutelingen.  preparation  geutelingen are made from flour, milk, eggs, yeast, a little salt and a little cinnamon. the liquid dough is poured onto a clay tile in a very hot oven. the high temperature gives the geuteling its typical odour and flavour.  external links   http://www.geutelingen.be  belgian cuisine flemish culture
the daniel centers for progressive judaism is a reform jewish organization based in tel aviv, israel. the daniel centers consist of the beit daniel synagogue and kehilat halev congregation in tel aviv and the mishkenot ruth daniel hostel and community center in jaffa. the beit daniel synagogue was established in 1991. the current rabbis are rabbi meir azari and rabbi galia sadan.  the daniel centers were founded by gerard and ruth daniel, a business family of german birth who had migrated to the united states and established a firm in the aerospace technology business and later a real estate business in florida. while living in the united states, the daniels became involved in reform jewish causes, with gerard becoming president of the world union for progressive judaism and ruth concurrently becoming treasurer of the organization from 1980 to 1988. the family established the beit daniel synagogue in 1991, and later the mishkenot ruth daniel in 2007 following ruth's death. the beit daniel synagogue's construction went up against legal opposition, with the family fighting up to the supreme court of israel for the right to build the synagogue.  journalist and former finance minister yair lapid, who identifies as hiloni, has written extensively of his frequent attendance and experience at beit daniel.  references  external links  website  reform synagogues in israel synagogues in tel aviv jewish organizations established in 1991 1991 establishments in israel
was a japanese letterpress printer specializing in western typesetting. he was advisor to the kazui press limited, a letterpress company in tokyo, japan, and a fellow of the royal society of arts, uk.  personal history and profile   juzo takaoka was born in tokyo in 1921. his father was a traditional japanese bookbinder. never caring much about money, his father was always poor, as were most craftspersons in those days. he paid little attention to his son's education.  after finishing elementary school, takaoka was sent by his father to apprentice at a printing company. at the company, he was often treated badly by his seniors. they foisted on him all the things they did not want to do. during his second apprenticeship, he was again ill-treated by his seniors. they had him distribute types in the latin alphabet to their type cases after printing. they could not read the alphabet, and the distribution of types was tedious for them. takaoka could not read the alphabet either, something which had a positive outcome. he soon realized the advantage of handling the latin alphabet: it basically has only 26 characters whereas japanese has thousands. before he knew it, takaoka was completely captivated by western typefaces.  in 1937, takaoka read a short magazine article that would change his life. it was about the poor standard of western typography in japan and was written by yoshimitsu inouye (also known as kazui inoue), takaoka's future teacher and mentor. inouye, a lover of western letterpress printing, worked in london between 1934 and 1939 as representative of major japanese shipping company nippon yusen. while overseas, he developed expertise in western typography and acquired a small printing press and types, enough to become an amateur printer. in january 1937, inouye contributed the article to japan's leading printing magazine, insatsu zasshi. his article had a strong impact on japanese progressive printers and compositors of the time, inspiring them to form the study group on western typography so that they could learn directly from inouye. takaoka joined this group and was its youngest member. on february 17, 1940, the study group held its first meeting.  enthralled by inouye's lectures, takaoka desperately wanted to become inouye's apprentice. he persistently went to his home with work samples in hand to seek his permission. though he was repeatedly turned away, takaoka was finally accepted as inouye's disciple in 1940 thanks to the mediation of inouye's wife,
kimiko. he was the only member of the study group to be accepted as an apprentice.  with high aspirations, takaoka started going to the kazui press, inouye's private press based at his home in harajuku, tokyo. even after takaoka had gone several times, though, inouye spoke not a word about typography. instead, he told takaoka about english towns and people in london. one day takaoka gently asked inouye to give him practical instruction on typography. inouye scolded takaoka, saying, "the instruction has already begun! do you not see that? i am telling you about the people who will use the prints you make in western typesetting. without understanding their lifestyle and culture, you will not be able to meet their needs." these words of inouye shaped takaoka's attitude toward letterpress work and typographic education. under inouye's tutelage, takaoka mastered the principles and philosophy of western typography and became an expert printer-typographer as well as a gentleman with social graces.  during the apprenticeship period, takaoka used to go to maruzen, the most prestigious bookstore in tokyo at that time, to look for books on western typography, whenever he had spare time and a bit of cash. sticking out among the properly dressed clients with his poor attire, he could not possibly have been seen as a good customer, but the head clerk of maruzen appreciated takaoka's genuine enthusiasm for western typography and often kept books aside for him and even paid for some of them himself.  in 1941, as world war ii was spreading, inouye and takaoka were asked to cooperate in the production of japan's war propaganda magazine front by tohosha, a publisher under the direct control of the imperial japanese army.  obviously inspired by the american magazine life, front was reputed for its excellence in design. the production team was composed of japan's most talented people of the time, including hiromu hara and ihei kimura, who later became the nation's leading designer and photographer, respectively.  the many western typefaces that inouye collected during his posting in london were stored at the kazui press, but all of them were destroyed during the war. inouye decided to reconstruct his printing shop after the war ended, and he entrusted much of the project to takaoka. upon receiving this request from inouye, takaoka left his work at hosokawa printing co., ltd., in ginza, tokyo, and set to creating a new printing shop for inouye
. in 1948, with funding from inouye, the kazui press was reopened in kanda-kajicho, tokyo. busy with his primary job at the shipping company, inouye entrusted an increasing amount of work to takaoka, and the kazui press began to accept more commercial printing work. helped by inouye's acquaintances as well as by large orders from ghq, takaoka's business flourished.  in 1956, when inouye died, takaoka took over the printing shop and made it into a limited company called the kazui press limited. takaoka's reputation as a letterpress printer was well established by then, and he was chosen to print certificates for the 1964 tokyo olympic medalists.  without inouye, however, takaoka was increasingly unsure about his western typographic skills. he had never been to the united kingdom or any other part of europe. in order to keep abreast of the latest trends in typography and maintain his unique status in japan, he joined the british printing society (bps) in 1965. his printed specimens made a strong impression on the bps members, including kenneth hardacre of the kit-cat press, john easson of the quarto press, and paul peter piech of the taurus press, all of whom became his lifelong friends.  in 1970, takaoka made his first trip abroad to meet members of the bps in london, bringing with him his latest letterpress work, ars typographica 1, and his business card, which was set in american uncial. he traveled on from there to frankfurt, germany, to visit the d. stempel ag type foundry to buy the optima typeface designed by hermann zapf, who was then type director at stempel. after returning home from europe, takaoka received a letter from stempel saying that zapf was very impressed with his printing and would like to meet him when he visited germany again. in 1972, takaoka and eiichi kono (see below for profile) traveled to germany together with a group of japanese printers to visit the drupa trade fair, the world's largest printing equipment exhibition. during their stay, takaoka met zapf for the first time. after that, they visited each other a number of times and became lifelong friends.  takaoka frequently visited the uk and other countries in europe to obtain metal types at type foundries and to deepen his ties with typeface designers, typographers, and letterpress printers. he had a long friendship with susan shaw, founder of the type archive (formerly, type museum),
london; james mosley, former librarian at the st bride library, london; and the cardozo kindersley workshop (formerly, david kindersley workshop), cambridge.  takaoka received the overseas award in both 1975 and 1984 and the printer of the year award '89 in 1990 from bps.  in 1995, takaoka became advisor to the kazui press, and his son, masao, took over the presidency. in the same year, takaoka was conferred the title of fellow of the royal society of arts.  from 1998 to 2002, takaoka served as adviser to the printing house, a printing workshop operated by the printing museum, tokyo, of toppan printing co., ltd.  between the mid-1960s and the 1980s, takaoka ran a typography workshop called "friday salon" every friday for a small number of young design students and graduates as well as amateur printers.  eiichi kono, who is known for his design of the new johnston typeface for london underground and the meiryo type for microsoft, attended friday salon, and his longtime student-teacher relationship with takaoka continued to this day. akira kobayashi, type director at monotype gmbh, has also looked up to takaoka as his mentor since their first meeting in the 1990s. both kono and kobayashi travelled to europe with takaoka many times to visit places of relevance to typography.  my study of letterpress typography, a collection of takaoka's letterpress studies created mainly in the 1970s, was published in 2013.  that same year, takaoka visited the uk at the invitation of the double crown club and attended the club's dinner as kono's guest.  in 2014, kono contributed an article about takaoka's long career as letterpress printer to matrix 32, which is published by the whittington press. for the article, john randle of the whittington press wrote an introduction in which he says:  the range of work and types shown in my study of letterpress typography, a beautifully designed and printed (in japan) large octavo, is truly extraordinary. how did this man from the 1930s onwards collect together the gems of the european typefoundries and put them to such good use that they could have come from the hands of any of the most able european typographers? his list of typefaces reads like a roll-call of the great and the good . . . . juzo has achieved all this with little or no knowledge of english. and still going strong, now inspiring another generation of young japanese typographers.  after retirement from letterpress work, takaoka wittily
described himself to his acquaintances and interviewers both in japan and abroad, saying, "i left my composing stick for a walking stick!"  he died on september 15, 2017, at the age of 96 in tokyo.  letterpress studies  while working as a commercial printer, takaoka created several collections of letterpress studies:   light up, won't you? (1942)  ars typographica 1 (1970, reprinted in 1972)  wandering from type to type (1973)  wandering from type to type · two (1979)  takaoka's letterpress studies in the 1970s were highly regarded overseas for the high level of skill and understanding of western typography that they demonstrated. these works are included in my study of letterpress typography.  authored books (in japanese)   obun katsuji [latin types]. tokyo: insatsu gakkai shuppanbu, 1948 (first edition), 2001 and 2004 (reprinted editions).  obun katsuji [latin types]. tokyo: uyu shorin, 2010 (new format edition).  takaoka juzo kappan shusakushu: my study of letterpress typography. tokyo: uyu shorin, 2013.  coauthored and edited books (in japanese)   obun katsuji to taipogurafi [latin types and typography]. tokyo: insatsu gakkai shuppanbu, 1966 (coauthor).  inouye, yoshimitsu, and taro shimo. romaji insatsu kenkyu [roman alphabet print research]. tokyo: dai nippon insatsu icc honbu, 2000 (coauthor).  "insatsu zasshi" to sono jidai: jikkyo insatsu no kingendaishi [printing magazine and its era: current and modern history of printing in japan]. tokyo: insatsu gakkai shuppanbu, 2008 (supervisory editor and commentator).  takaoka, masao. obun kumihan: kumihan no kiso to mana [western language typesetting: basics and styles]. tokyo: bijutsu shuppansha, 2010 (supervisory editor).  teaching  takaoka also taught at an art university and technical college, instructing typography through courses on letterpress printing.  part-time lecturer, musashino art university junior college of art and design, 1970-90.  part-time lecturer, department of graphic design, nihon kogakuin college, 1975-90.  references  external links   the kazui press
(in japanese)  1921 births printers 2017 deaths
fassnacht or faßnacht is a german surname. notable people with the surname include:  hans fassnacht (born 1950), german swimmer robert fassnacht (1937-1970), american physicist rudi faßnacht (1934-2000), german football manager  german-language surnames
ernesto belloni (23 august 1883 - 23 november 1938) was an italian businessman, academic and politician. he was the 1st podesta of milan from 1926 to 1928. in 1929 he was accused of corruption and condemned to leave his party and then to a 5-years confino. under belloni, the public debt of the city of milan raised from 60 to 185 million lire between 1926 and 1927.  son of money changer and graduated in pharmaceutical chemistry, ernesto belloni marked the passage of milan from the traditional administrative system to the potestarile system of the fascist period, first with his appointment as prefectural commissioner on 3 september 1926 and, in rapid succession, to podesta with royal decree, on 4 december the same year, after having become a deputy to parliament already in 1924 as a member of the fascist party, to which he has already been a member since 1919 of the milan section.  references  bibliography   maulsby e m. lucy, fascism, architecture and the claiming of modern milan, 1922-1943, university of toronto press, 2014.  annalisa albuzzi, il cuore di milano: identita e storia di una capitale morale, bur, 2012.  1883 births 1938 deaths businesspeople from milan academics from milan mayors of milan 20th-century italian businesspeople
maria luisa gonzalez gragirena de escobar (nee maria luisa gonzalez gragirena; known artistically by her married name maria luisa escobar; also credited as maritza graxirena; valencia, 5 december 1903 - caracas, 14 may 1985) was a venezuelan musicologist, pianist, composer, and caricaturist, who founded the caracas athenaeum in 1931. she also served as president of the venezuelan red cross (valencia, 1921; caracas, 1922-23).  early life and education  maria luisa gonzalez gragirena was the daughter of henrique a. gonzalez and maria gragirena y mijarez de gonzalez. at the age of five, she entered the colegio de lourdes where she began to study piano. a year later, she composed her first piece titled "blanca, la nina angelica" (blanca, the girl angelica). at the age of eight, she travelled with her parents to curacao, netherlands antilles, and entered the welgelegen habaai school where she studied french and english in addition to piano, violin, and musical composition, concluding with a baccalaureate in 1917. then, she moved to paris to continue her studies of piano and composition in addition to singing under the tutelage of jean roger-ducasse, arthur honegger and charles koechlin.  career when she returned to venezuela two years later she composed 16 pieces of musical theatre, a collaboration with poetess olga capriles, and the musician and composer juan vicente lecuna. in 1918 she married the german federico wolf and they moved to puerto cabello. they had three children, waldemar, irma, and ivan wolf gonzalez, but divorced afterward. she went on to marry  the violinist and composer jose antonio escobar saluzzo (1877-1970) in caracas. with this union, she had another son, toney escobar gonzalez. with saluzzo, and the musician/composer pedro antonio rios reyna, in addition to other artists, she initiated the instrumental vocal group "quintet avila" of which she was a singer and arranger. on july 11, 1928 she recorded for victor talking machine company in a studio in caracas her compositions "alondras", "mar adentro", "tu maldad", and "angel de mis suenos". in these recordings, her name is credited as "maritza graxirena" in deference to her catalan maternal surname.  in honor of her career as a researcher, musician, singer, and composer, as well as her fight in favor
of authors and composers, maria luisa escobar obtained the national prize of music in the year 1984, few months before her death in 1985.  awards diploma of honor, second salon, venezuelan humorists (caricatures category, 1931)  selected works    "desesperanza"  "como la primera vez"  "vente con el alba"  "noches de luna de altamira"  "contigo"  "orquideas azules" con letra de mercedes carvajal de arocha (lucila palacios)  "luna de camoruco"  "la despedida"  "caribe" tema de presentacion de radio caracas (rctv) durante mucho tiempo.  "la luz de mi ciudad"  "el marinero"  "no puedo olvidarte"  "cancion de oro"  "sueno de bolivar"  "paraguana"  "curiana"  "orinoco"  "cancion del aviador"  "siete lunas"  "siempre"  "aleluya"  "carnaval de candela"  "concierto sentimental",  "vals de concierto"  "petit suite"  "mi general bolivar"  "diez canciones sentimentales"  references  bibliography  1903 births 1985 deaths people from valencia, carabobo venezuelan pianists venezuelan women pianists venezuelan women composers venezuelan women singer-songwriters venezuelan people of catalan descent venezuelan caricaturists 20th-century venezuelan women singers 20th-century pianists organization founders women founders
the cathedral of st. john the baptist  () also called nicolet cathedral is a parish of the roman catholic church and seat of the bishop of the diocese of nicolet. it is located in the city of the same name in the province of quebec, in eastern canada. the 8th church and 5th cathedral church built since the creation of the parish, the cathedral church is noted for its stained glass windows.  the parish of st. john the baptist was created in 1702 as a result of the colonization of the lordship of nicolet (seigneurie de nicolet). it was elevated to cathedral status upon the erection of the diocese of nicolet from the diocese of trois-rivieres in 1885.  on november 12, 1955, a landslide caused damage to the centre of nicolet. although the cathedral was saved, it was too close to the accident and was deemed unsafe. therefore, the present structure was built to replace it, begun 1961 and completed 1963.  on july 12, 2019, some covering material fell from the cathedral's tower. as a precaution, the cathedral stopped ringing its bells and closed the entrance nearest the tower.  see also catholic church in canada  references  roman catholic cathedrals in quebec nicolet, quebec roman catholic churches completed in 1963 religious organizations established in 1702 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in canada
balleri is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  costanzo balleri (born 1933), italian footballer and coach david balleri (born 1969), italian footballer, son of costanzo mario balleri (1902-1962), italian rower  see also belleri  italian-language surnames
sergio fernandez roda (born 1 april 1993) is a spanish track and field athlete. he competed at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands, where he won the silver medal in the 400 metres hurdles event. later that year he represented his country at the 2016 olympic games where he narrowly missed the final with a new national record in the semifinals.  fernandez represented his country in qualifying rounds at the 2012 world junior championships in athletics, 2014 european athletics championships and the 2015 european athletics u23 championships.  competition record  personal bests  outdoor  references  external links     1993 births living people european athletics championships medalists spanish male hurdlers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of spain people from cuenca de pamplona world athletics championships athletes for spain spanish athletics championships winners athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
saloli is a large village located in reni tehsil of alwar district, rajasthan with total 550 families residing. the saloli village has population of 2807 of which 1488 are males while 1319 are females as per population census 2011.  in saloli village population of children with age 0-6 is 437 which make up 15.57% of total population of village. average sex ratio of saloli village is 886 which are lower than rajasthan state average of 928. child sex ratio for the saloli as per census is 1005, higher than rajasthan average of 888.  saloli village has lower literacy rate compared to rajasthan. in 2011, literacy rate of saloli village was 64.51% compared to 66.11% of rajasthan. in saloli male literacy stands at 79.06% while female literacy rate was 47.73%.  according to census 2011 information the location code or village code of saloli village is 073419. saloli village is located in rajgarh tehsil of alwar district in rajasthan, india. it is situated 15 km away from sub-district headquarter rajgarh and 48 km away from district headquarter alwar. as per 2009 stats, saloli village is also a gram panchayat. the total geographical area of village is 453 hectares. saloli has a total population of 2,807 peoples. rajgarh is nearest town to saloli which is approximately 15 km away. as per constitution of india and panchyati raj act, saloli village is administrated by sarpanch (head of village) who is elected representative of village. saloli gram panchayat has many government employees, private sector employees (engineers, marketing managers, metro employees, professors and assistant professors), self-employment (shops, marketing and others) and agriculture based. most of the employees are in the teaching sector, the multinational companies, police department (delhi police and rajasthan police . saloli village is situated in delhi ncr  transportation  the nearest railway station is rajgarh (15 km from saloli), apart from it bandikui railway station is also a nearby railway station to saloli. however, alwar junction is major railway station 46 km near to saloli.connectivity of saloli connectivity of saloli:  public bus service available within 5 - 10 km distance  private bus service available within 5 - 10 km distance  railway station available within 14 km distance villages in saloli panchayat: 1.	buchpuri 2.	khark
hari rana 3.	saloli other nearby villages to saloli are :-  machari ishwana babeli makroda barh makroda tahtara dera  saloli data:  particulars	    total	male	female total no. of houses:535	        -	- population	    2,807	1,488	1,319 child (0-6)	    437	        218	219 schedule caste	    710	        370	340 schedule tribe	    314	        159	155 literacy	    64.51%	79.06%	47.73% total workers	    1,258	731	527 main worker	    724	        0	0 marginal worker	    534	        164	370  history saloli was a jagir of kalyanot/kalyanwat rajputs (one of the 12 royal kacchawaha chambers known as "barah kothri" of house of amber) in the erstwhile alwar state. kalyanot is a sub clan of rajawat clan of kachawaha suryavanshi lineage. the jagir was granted to thakur saal singh kalyanot , one of the descendants of king prithviraj of amber. the name saloli is derived form the name of its founder thakur saal singh. other brothers of thakur saal singh were thakur baal singh , who founded babeli in erstwhile alwar state and thakur bhaav singh , who founded bhaogarh near sikrai (dausa). saloli , babeli and bhaogarh shares the same familial linage.  present position  the village consists of rajputs, meena, jogis, bhramins (gaur), nai castes people. most of the people in saloli had migrated to cities due to a scarcity of water in the village and lack of employment.  references   villages in alwar district
dhaliwal dona  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both its district and sub-district headquarters. the village is administrated by a sarpanch. who is an elected representative of village.  demography according to the 2011 census of india, dhaliwal dona has a total number of 313 houses and population of 1,504 of which include 782 males and 722 females.  literacy rate of dhaliwal dona is 73.56%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 169 which is  11.24% of total population of dhaliwal dona, and child sex ratio is approximately  837, lower than state average of 846.  66 per cent of the population were designated as schedule castes.  air travel  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
portland church is an ancient church located in county tipperary, ireland.  location  portland church is located near portumna, about  from the river shannon.  description portland church is an early stone church with romanesque features. the east window is very small and the sacristy at the rear is corbelled.  references  national monuments in county tipperary archaeological sites in county tipperary
chak kalan is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport. closest international airport is sri guru ram das jee international airport, amritsar.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
the coward (spanish: la cobarde) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by julio bracho and starring irasema dilian, ernesto alonso and carlos navarro.  cast  irasema dilian as mara    ernesto alonso as arturo    carlos navarro as roberto  carlos agosti as julio    andrea palma as irene, hermana de arturo    giuseppe di stefano as cantante    angelica maria as mara, nina   marina herrera as lupita, criada  hector mateos as comisario  angel merino as marino  daniel arroyo as invitado a boda  alejandro ciangherotti as roberto, nino    enrique diaz indiano as doctor arriaga  ana maria hernandez as invitada a boda  cecilia leger as invitada a fiesta  fernando lujan as julio, nino  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by julio bracho mexican black-and-white films
c.e. jeatt & sons limited, trading as white bus services (sometimes shortened to white bus), is an independent bus operator based in berkshire and runs bus and coach hire services within windsor and ascot. it is part of the rowgate group.  history  the company first started in the 1920s in winkfield, then in 1930 as a family run bus company, being run from generation to generation. the company was established by william rule jeatt, after purchasing the bus depot from republic bus company in 1930 and naming it white bus services. it was subsequently passed down the family to cecil jeatt, then in 1972 to his son doug jeatt. the amount of public buses in the fleet were between 15 and 20 at the time.  acquisition by rowgate group  white bus services was sold to fernhill travel of bracknell in november 2016, which is managed by rowgate group's chairman, simon rowland.  in december 2018, white bus services received five short length adl enviro200s. two years later to celebrate their centenary anniversary, they bought two 10.8m variants of the same model which arrived in january 2020.  services  as of january 2021, white bus services runs 15 public services. the majority of the routes would start at staines, windsor or woking and would terminate elsewhere within berkshire.  fleet  white bus services has a range of different buses throughout the years, only recently in the turn of the millennium using the products of merger companies of adl, along with optare buses. between 2006 and 2012, the company had bought optare deltas and plaxton premieres.  the buses that are used for public routes are adl and optare products.  incidents  on 24 january 2019, the company reduced its 441 service from staines to englefield green following minor damage to the inside of the bus where youths were throwing snowballs with stones at the bus on service. police were notified of the incident, however no arrests were made.  references  external links  company website  transport in berkshire bus operators in berkshire
the 2014 iihf u20 challenge cup of asia was an international men's under-20 ice hockey tournament run by the international ice hockey federation. the tournament took place between 4 august and 7 august 2014 in yuzhno-sakhalinsk, russia and was the third edition held since its formation in 2012 under the iihf challenge cup of asia series of tournaments. the mhl red stars won the tournament after winning all three of their round-robin games and finishing first in the standings. the win was the mhl red stars second title having previously won in 2012. kazakhstan finished in second place and japan finished third.  overview the 2014 iihf u20 challenge cup of asia began on 4 august 2014 in yuzhno-sakhalinsk, russia with games played at arena city. japan, south korea and russia's mhl red stars all returned after competing in last years tournament, while kazakhstan made their debut in the iihf u20 challenge cup of asia. the red stars team was made up of players from the mhl's sakhalinskie akuly club which is based yuzhno-sakhalinsk. japan entered the tournament as the defending champion after claiming their first title in 2013.  the tournament consisted of a single round-robin with each team competing in three games. the mhl red stars won the tournament after winning all three of their games and finished first in the standings. the win gave the mhl red stars their second tournament title after previously winning in 2012. kazakhstan finished second after losing only to the red stars and japan finished third after managing only one win against south korea. mhl red stars' oleg genze led the tournament in scoring with ten points and nikita ivandikov finished as the tournaments leading goaltender with a save percentage of 92.31.  standings  |}  fixtures all times are local. (magt - utc+11)  scoring leaders list shows the top ten skaters sorted by points, then goals, assists, and the lower penalties in minutes.  leading goaltenders only the top goaltenders, based on save percentage, who have played at least 40% of their team's minutes are included in this list.  references  external links tournament page at iihf.com  iihf u20 challenge cup of asia 2013-14 in russian ice hockey iihf u20 challenge cup of asia iihf challenge cups of asia international ice hockey competitions hosted by russia
xavier college, panama, () is a private catholic primary and secondary school, located in a suburb of panama city, panama. the school traces its current presence to 1948. it is coeducational, pre-primary through high school, and is run by the society of jesus.  notable alumni  juan carlos varela - president  stanley heckadon-moreno - conservationist  see also   list of jesuit schools  education in panama  references    panama jesuit secondary schools in panama educational institutions established in 1948 1948 establishments in panama education in panama city
grigory oyzerovich spiegel (; 24 july 1914 - 28 april 1981) was a soviet and russian actor and voice actor. honored artist of the rsfsr (1974).  biography he worked as a pleater at a dye factory in leningrad. he studied at the directing department of the central school of amateur theater in moscow.  in 1940 he graduated from an acting school at the mosfilm. he worked as a national film actors' theatre.  he took part in voicing cartoon characters, known for his voice being unusually high pitched and sonorous for a man.  death died april 28, 1981. he was buried in moscow at the vvedenskoye cemetery.  selected filmography  the oppenheim family (семья оппенгеим, 1939) as high-school student (uncredited)  taxi to heaven (воздушныи извозчик, 1943) as anany svetlovidov  ballad of siberia (сказание о земле сибирскои, 1947) as gregory galaida  the young guard (молодая гвардия, 1948) as fenbong  ivan pavlov (академик иван павлов, 1949) as professor petrushev  brave people (смелые люди, 1950) as schulze  zhukovsky (жуковскии, 1950) as passer with a lady  mussorgsky (мусоргскии, 1950) as von metz  taras shevchenko (тарас шевченко, 1951) as karl bryullov  children of the partisan (дети партизана, 1954) as spy photographer  the gadfly (овод, 1955) as james burton  the idiot (идиот, 1958) as ptitsyn  on distant shores (на дальних берегах, 1958) as schulz  michman panin (мичман панин, 1960) as father teoctist  balzaminov's marriage (женитьба бальзаминова, 1964) as policeman  tale about the lost time (сказка о потерянном времени, 1964) as first aid doctor / apple buyer in a hat  the tale of tsar saltan (сказка о царе салтане, 1966) as governor  the seventh companion (с
едьмои спутник, 1967) as shpigel  the diamond arm (бриллиантовая рука, 1968) as pharmacist-smuggler from fish street  the twelve chairs (двенадцать стульев, 1971) as aleksandr yakovlevich  the crown of the russian empire, or once again the elusive avengers (корона россиискои империи, или снова неуловимые, 1971) as photographer  as ilf and petrov rode a tram (ехали в трамвае ильф и петров, 1972) as employee of the newspaper  privalov's millions (приваловские миллионы, 1972) as oscar filippovich  the twelve chairs (двенадцать стульев, 1976) as chief editor of newspaper "the machine"  three men in a boat (трое в лодке, не считая собаки, 1979) as grenadier  the luncheon on the grass (завтрак на траве, 1979)  do not shoot at white swans (не стреляите в белых лебедеи, 1980) as passenger in the compartment  say a word for the poor hussar (о бедном гусаре замолвите слово..., 1981) as prompter  the mystery of the third planet (таина третьеи планеты, 1981) as vesselchuck oo (voice)  dog in boots (пес в сапогах, 1981) as one-eyed cat-bully (voice)  references  external links    григории шпигель: одинокая жизнь популярного актера  1914 births people from samara, russia 1981 deaths soviet male film actors soviet male stage actors soviet male voice actors honored artists of the rsfsr soviet jews  burials at vvedenskoye cemetery
elizabeth eden harris (born may 31, 1997), known professionally as cupcakke (often stylized as cupcakke; pronounced ), is an american rapper from chicago, illinois. she is known for her hypersexualised, brazen, and often comical persona and music, and has also included themes such as gay rights, female empowerment, and autism awareness in her music.  cupcakke began her career as a rapper by releasing material online in late 2012. in 2015, two of her songs, "deepthroat" and "vagina", went viral on video-sharing platforms. the songs were later included on her debut mixtape, cum cake (2016), which was included on rolling stones list of the best rap albums of 2016 at number 23. her second mixtape, s.t.d (shelters to deltas), was released in 2016 and preceded the studio albums audacious (2016), queen elizabitch (2017), ephorize (2018), and eden (2018). since then, she has been steadily releasing standalone singles, such as "grilling niggas", "lawd jesus" and "discounts".  early life elizabeth eden harris was born on may 31, 1997, in chicago, illinois, and was raised on king drive, near parkway gardens. harris was raised by a single mother and spent nearly four years in chicago's homeless shelters starting at age seven. she grew up and went to school with other established chicago rappers such as lil reese and chief keef. she got an early start into music and poetry at the age of ten by her involvement in her local church. it was also there that she got her start in performing, where she would perform for her local pastors by reciting poetry about her christianity and faith.  when she was 13, she met a fellow churchgoer who encouraged her to turn the poetry into rap music, and she became infatuated with the art form. she cites 50 cent, lil' kim, and da brat as early influences to her musical style.  career  2012-2014: early output harris released her first music video, "gold digger" onto her official youtube channel in august 2012. she was only 15 at the time of its release-the original video has since been deleted. over the next few years, she continued to release original music, as well as freestyles using beats from other artists through her youtube channel, where she has amassed over 650,000 subscribers.  2015-2016: cum cake, s.t.
d (shelters to deltas), and audacious in october 2015, the official music video for her song "vagina" was released on youtube via ymcfilmz. according to cupcakke, she wrote the song because she was inspired by khia's song "my neck, my back (lick it)". one month later, harris released "deepthroat" on her own channel. within weeks, the two videos went viral on youtube, worldstar, and facebook. the songs later became singles for harris' debut mixtape, cum cake, which was released in february 2016. its release was also supported by further singles such as "juicy coochie", "tit for tat", and "pedophile". a writer for pitchfork, which included it on "9 rap mixtapes you might have missed this year", called the mixtape a "well rounded introduction to a skilled writer" and said it used songs "about love, loss, and hardship with its more explicit tracks to create a full profile of the up-and-coming chicago rapper". "pedophile" was also specifically noted for its "blunt commentary" on sexual assault.  in june 2016, harris released her second mixtape, s.t.d (shelters to deltas). it was preceded by the single "best dick sucker". other tracks, such as "doggy style" and "motherlands", were also later released as singles. the mixtape was listed among rolling stone "best rap albums of 2016 so far".  in october 2016, harris released her debut studio album, audacious. the album was preceded by the single "picking cotton", which was described by mtv news as "a protest song about racist cops". other tracks on the album such as "spider-man dick" and "lgbt" were accompanied by music videos. in an interview harris stated that she made the song "lgbt" "...strictly for the gay community to know that they are loved and don't need to feel judged."  2017-2018: queen elizabitch, ephorize and eden in february 2017, harris released "cumshot", which served as the lead single to her second studio album. on march 7, english singer-songwriter charli xcx premiered her song "lipgloss", which featured harris. the song was later included on xcx's mixtape, number 1 angel, which was released on march 10.  her second studio album, titled queen elizabitch, was released on march 31, 2017. the f
ader described it as "the type of nasty rap that made her a viral sensation, alongside all-out pop bangers like '33rd' and the confessional a cappella freestyle 'reality, pt. 4'." stereogum also noted that the album "sees cupcakke engaging with the current political climate and radio trends in a way that could help her cross over to a more mainstream audience".  on april 7, 2017, queen elizabitch was removed from online streaming services and digital music stores due to an illegal backing track that harris had purchased from what she described as a "shady producer". she soon announced on twitter that queen elizabitch would be re-released on april 16. she then released the singles "exit" and "cartoons" in november 2017.  her third studio album, ephorize, was released on january 5, 2018. exclaim! called it "her most polished work to date" and noted that "she still slides in plenty of deliciously dirty one-liners throughout the new record." hotnewhiphop commented that "ephorize might be one of the most introspective bodies of work she's dropped off to date." pitchfork called it cupcakke's "best album yet, with terrific production and a barrage of raps that reveal elizabeth harris to be far more than her hilarious and absurdly raunchy one-liners." she released music videos for the songs "duck duck goose" and "fullest". the former features her "showing off an extensive collection of dildos as well as a souvenir statue of liberty."  on november 9, 2018, harris released her fourth studio album, eden. she released music videos for the lead single "quiz", and for the following singles "hot pockets" and "blackjack".  2019-present: hiatus and standalone singles  on january 8, 2019, harris was reportedly taken to a hospital in chicago after tweeting that she was going to commit suicide. in a tweet posted the next day, harris wrote "i've been fighting with depression for the longest. sorry that i did it public last night but i'm ok. i went to the hospital & i'm finally getting the help that i need to get through, be happy, & deliver great music. thanks for all the prayers but please don't worry bout me."  on january 11, 2019, the single "squidward nose" was released, and on february 21, a music video for the song featuring john early premiered. on april 17,
2019, harris released a remix of lil nas x's song "old town road", titled "old town hoe", on her youtube channel, and its music video the following day.  in september 2019, harris made several posts on social media criticizing several artists such as camila cabello (she accused cabello of racism) and shawn mendes, followed by her retirement announcement in an instagram live video. she stated, "this live is going to be the last video that y'all [will] see of me. i am completely done with music". she said that she would no longer be releasing music to the public and that she would be removing her music from all streaming platforms. she stated that she was disturbed to see children in videos and young people at her shows singing along to her explicit songs, felt she was corrupting the youth with her raunchy songs. harris also told fans that she has a "very bad gambling addiction" and that she had lost $700,000 at a casino in september 2018. harris' instagram and twitter accounts were deactivated after the livestream ended. her music remained available on streaming platforms.  on november 7, 2019, harris came out of retirement after a 40-day absence on all social media platforms with a tweet; "jesus fasted for 40 days & so did i...... nov 16th". on march 6, 2020, harris released a new single, "lawd jesus". harris uploaded her first video to youtube since her previous deletion of all videos on her channel the previous year, with the double video for singles "grilling niggas" and "lawd jesus", on may 13, 2020.  on june 1, 2020, cupcakke released the single "lemon pepper" with half of the proceeds going towards the minnesota bail fund. another single, "discounts" was released on june 26. the song received critical acclaim, peaked at number 78 on the uk singles downloads chart and number 80 on the uk singles sales chart, becoming her first single to do so. "discounts" also reached number one on the us itunes chart, which is her first song to do so. she is also the only female rapper to have a number-one song on the itunes chart with no label.  on december 16, 2020, harris received significant media attention after releasing "how to rob (remix)", a diss track. it was released on youtube and sees harris take aim at megan thee stallion, lizzo, and lil' kim, among others. the song received positive reviews
.  on march 1, 2021, "deepthroat" was certified gold by the recording industry association of america (riaa), which denotes five hundred thousand units based on sales and track-equivalent on-demand streams.  rolling stone magazine reported in june 2021 that harris will be co-hosting the upcoming outtv reality show hot haus with tiffany pollard, which will mark the rapper's tv hosting debut. harris said of the casting decision, "as soon as i heard what this show stood for, owning your sexuality and talent, i knew i had to be involved."  starting in june 2021, remixes of various songs featuring vocals from harris' singles "deepthroat" and "vagina" that had been posted to youtube in the years before began circulating on the video-sharing app tiktok. this has been described as one of the app's most popular and longest-running trends. the tiktok edits would usually take the form of taking popular songs and editing in harris' sexualised lyrics into the song at various intervals for comedic effect, such as replacing some of the original song's words with notorious harris lyrical content such as cum, vagina, pussy, dick, papi, twat, i'm horny, juggle them balls and smack my ass like a drum, as well as her trademark moans. harris' face would also usually be photoshopped onto the artist's or band's faces, or the artwork of the music that the tiktok was parodying, for added hilarity. she began making tiktoks to promote her music, including her latest single "marge simpson" and "cpr", the latter of which went viral as well.  discography  studio albums  mixtapes  singles  as lead artist  as featured artist  guest appearances  tours  the marilyn monhoe tour (2017)  the ephorize tour (2018)  the eden tour (2018-2019)  see also  music of illinois  references  external links  1997 births living people 21st-century american rappers 21st-century american women musicians african-american women rappers african-american women singer-songwriters american women rappers american hip hop singers christians from illinois alternative hip hop musicians rappers from chicago 21st-century african-american women 21st-century african-american musicians singer-songwriters from illinois
bhandal bet  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bhandal bet.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.school bhandal public school singer jaimalbhandal  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bhandal bet has a total number of 585 houses and population of 2,884 of which include 1,486 males and 1,398 females. literacy rate of bhandal bet is  76.45%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 306 which is  10.61% of total population of bhandal bet, and child sex ratio is approximately  889, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
herminio "sonny" b. coloma jr. (born march 28, 1953) is a filipino businessman and educator. he was a member of the philippine cabinet and secretary of presidential communications office during the presidency of benigno s. aquino iii. he is also a professor at the asian institute of management. he assumed the post of executive vice president of the manila bulletin newspaper on september 1, 2016.  early life and education  coloma was born in quezon city in metro manila on march 28, 1953. he took up bachelor of arts in political science in university of the philippines diliman where he graduated in 1973. he then took masters in business management in asian institute of management graduating with distinction in 1978. he finished his doctor of philosophy in 2009 at southeast asia interdisciplinary development institute.  career  coloma started working as editor of the far east bank and trust co.'s bank publication in march 1974. he served as vice president of the same bank from 1982 to 1988. by june 1998 he started working at asian institute of management as a professor. he has taken five work leaves from aim to work for the government. he first served as undersecretary of department of agrarian reform. then from 1989 to 1991 he served as undersecretary of department of transportation and communications. he also served as the head of the presidential management staff from 1990 to 1991 under president cory aquino. coloma briefly served as president of north luzon railways corporation and then served as undersecretary of dotc under president joseph estrada from 1998 to 2000. from 2010 until 2016 coloma served as secretary of presidential communications operations which replaces the office of press secretary.  in 2012, coloma received the quadricentennial service award from university of santo tomas for his important role in the 400th founding anniversary of the university. after civil service commission chairperson francisco duque iii stepped down last september 2015, coloma was considered to succeed as chair of csc. coloma however chose to decline the offer to be appointed as csc chairperson, and stayed in his post as pcoo secretary.  coloma also served several private companies. from 1996 to 2008 he is a director of transnational diversified group where he also served as division president and group chief learning officer from 2004 to 2008. from 2005 he is a director of loyola plans consolidated, inc. he also served as management consultant of various organizations including usaid (1990), pricewaterhousecoopers (1991-2000), canadian international development agency (circa 1995), land bank of the philippines (1992-1998), asian development bank (2005-2006
), and philippine national bank (2007).  he was president of the people management association of the philippines in 1988.  references  1953 births living people people from quezon city benigno aquino iii administration cabinet members secretaries of the presidential communications operations office university of the philippines diliman alumni asian institute of management alumni manila bulletin people
soof is a 2013 dutch comedy film directed by antoinette beumer.  cast   lies visschedijk as soof  fedja van huet as kasper  dan karaty as jim    as sascha  anneke blok as hansje  chantal janzen as bob   as harm jan   as jan jaap  maryam hassouni as najat   as gaby   as gerrit  references  external links   2013 comedy films 2013 films dutch films dutch comedy films 2010s dutch-language films
tornasol is the third studio album of the chilean singer mon laferte. it was launched officially on 7 january 2013.  background  in january 2013, mon laferte launched her second album tornasol. the album features fourteen tracks, which include collaborations from different artists like renee mooi and chilean musicians like paz quintana (tizana), mariel villagra (mariel mariel), sebastian soto (el viaje de seth) and pamela sepulveda (fakuta); the album explores a variety of genres, including rock, reggae, pop, electronic, ballad, among others, in which it leaves a clear and remarkable artistic growth and personal stamp. on this occasion, mon laferte debuts as a producer, work made in joint with mexican musician mr. cesar ceja and the track conexion espiritual under the direction of ernesto kong (ex raza). the first single was angel negro.  in addition to being the first single, "angel negro" is the one to open fire to a production that shows the maturity and the professionalism of the singer. it is a song that enters a trip by distinct passages, excellent mixes and good collaborations with artists such as mariel mariel, fakuta, and el viaje de seth.  the album can be listened to for free through mon laferte's official soundcloud.  track listing  promotion  singles   angel negro: the first single was launched in 2013, through itunes and on mon laferte's official website, and youtube published the corresponding video. the clip is quite rhythmic but with some dark tones, mon comes out dancing in different angles or with different effects in a park of some kind, or forest at night.  hey hey: the second single was launched in april 2013, through itunes and on mon laferte's official website, and youtube published the corresponding video. in it we can see mon showing a bit of what occurs off-stage and the environment that goes on at her concerts, a super typical style used in artists as popular as paramore for example.  tornasol: the third single was launched in august 2013, through itunes and on mon laferte's official website, and youtube published the corresponding video where mon laferte and renee mooi appear in a forest wearing colorful body paint reminiscent of the album cover.  external links   official website of mon laferte  official place in facebook of mon laferte  references   2013 albums mon laferte albums
arb gunəs is an azerbaijani tv channel for children. all of the channel's content is voice-overed into azerbaijani, except for those that are azerbaijan original and those that include no talking.  history  arb gunəs was launched on 10 april 2015. by the command of the national television and radio council of the republic of azerbaijan in 2011, arb gunəs is licensed to broadcast for 6 years.  the channel was previously known as gunəs tv (or gunash tv). on 19 september 2016, gunəs tv rebranded into arb gunəs, a fusion with arb media qrup, with a new logo but some of the same programming. their old slogan was 'gunəsi yandır' (turn on the sun), but was changed to 'olkənin ilk usaq kanalı' (the country's first children's channel). the channel also went from 4:3 to 16:9.  on 4 march 2019, the channel shut down until 9 march 2019 for unknown reasons, while showing a few commercials. they said that they "went to sleep."  programming  current programming   adventures of the gummi bears (qammi ayilari)  around the world with willy fog (villi foqla dunya ətrafında səyahət)  avatar: the last airbender (avatar)  bernard (bernard)  chip 'n dale: rescue rangers  gazoon  kid-e-cats  kikoriki (yumrular)  kung fu panda: legends of awesomeness  maya the honey bee (arı balası maya)  masha and the bear (masa və ayi)  my little pony: friendship is magic (mənim balaca ponim)  mia and me  musti  oscar's oasis  the penguins of madagascar (madaqaskar pinqvinləri)  pokemon: indigo league (pokemon)  scooby-doo! mystery incorporated  the smurfs (sirinlər)  spongebob squarepants (sungər bob kvadrat salvar)  strawberry shortcake's berry bitty adventures  talespin  tom and jerry (tom və cerri)  winnie pooh  winx club (vinks klub)  willy fog 2  the world of david the gnome  movies   a goofy movie  aladdin and the king of thieves  alpha and omega  alpha
and omega 2  atlantis: the lost empire  atlantis: milo's return  around the world in 80 days willy fog  back to the sea  bambi 2  barbie as rapunzel  barbie in a mermaid tale  barbie in the 12 dancing princesses  barbie in the pink shoes  barbie: princess charm school  beauty and the beast  bee movie  brother bear  brother bear 2  a bug's life (həsəratların həyatı: flikin macəraları)  the care bears' big wish movie  cars  cars 2  cloudy with a chance of meatballs  cinderella  cinderella ii: dreams come true  dragon hunters (film)  dr. seuss' horton hears a who!  ducktales the movie: treasure of the lost lamp (ordəklərin əhvalatı: itirilmis cıragın sirri)  epic  everyone's hero (hər kəsin qəhrəmanı)  gold antelope  the great mouse detective  how to train your dragon  how to train your dragon 2  the hunchback of notre dame ii  the incredibles  the iron giant  khumba (kumba)  kung fu panda  kung fu panda 2  lady and the tramp (ledi və avara)  lady and the tramp ii: scamp's adventure (ledi və avara 2: dəcəlin macəraları)  lilo and stitch 2  the lion king (kral sir 1)  the lion king 2 (kral sir 2)  the lion king 3 (kral sir 3)  the lorax  the little mermaid ii: return to the sea  the little mermaid: ariel's beginning  madagascar (madaqaskar 1)  madagascar 2 (madaqaskar 2)  madagascar 3: europe's most wanted  the many adventures of winnie the pooh  mulan  lion of oz  oliver & company  open season  open season 2  open season 3  pocahontas  the princess and the goblin  rise of the guardians  scooby-doo! and the samurai sword  scooby-doo! legend of the phantosaur  scooby-doo! mask of the blue falcon  secret of the wings  snow white and the seven dwarfs  surf's up  the swan princess: the mystery of the enchanted kingdom  tangled  tarzan & jane  the three musketeers   tinker bell  tinker
bell and the lost treasure  tom and jerry: robin hood and his merry mouse  tom and jerry: shiver me whiskers  toy story  treasure planet  the ugly duckling and me!  wall-e  up  wallace and gromit  films  dede qorqud  my seven sons  tarzan  see also  television in azerbaijan  references  external links official website facebook youtube  television networks in azerbaijan 2015 establishments in azerbaijan television channels and stations established in 2015
wang krot railway station is a railway station located in ban bung subdistrict, phichit city, phichit. it is located 339.363 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 2 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 24 january 1908 as part of the northern line extension from pak nam pho to phitsanulok.  train services  rapid 105/106 bangkok-sila at-bangkok  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
thyroplasty is a phonosurgical technique designed to improve the voice by altering the thyroid cartilage of the larynx (the voice box), which houses the vocal cords in order to change the position or the length of the vocal cords.  types there are four different types of thyroplasty procedures described by isshiki:  type 1 thyroplasty - medialization of the vocal folds  (most common surgery for unilateral vocal cord paralysis).  type 2 thyroplasty - lateralization of the vocal folds  (in case of airway insufficiency after laryngeal trauma).  type 3 thyroplasty - shortening of the vocal folds  (done to lower the vocal pitch).  type 4 thyroplasty - lengthening of the vocal folds  (done to raise the vocal pitch).  type 1 thyroplasty (medialization thyroplasty) it is the most commonly used surgical procedure to correct unilateral vocal cord paralysis (a condition where the vocal cord of one side is paralysed).  procedure in this type of thyroplasty, a rectangular portion of the thyroid cartilage is mobilized and pushed towards the medial side using a piece of silastic block of proper shape under local anesthesia. earlier, the piece of the thyroid cartilage was kept along with implant and the stitches were taken, but nowadays, the piece of the thyroid cartilage is cut and removed to avoid complications.  types of procedures currently, there are four types of implant procedures which are used to perform type 1 thyroplasty. montgomery thyroplasty implant system this system was discovered after years of research and the main advantage of this implant system is that it eliminates the process of customizing the implant at the time of surgery. this system consists of different sizes and shapes of shims made of silastic. it has the most proven success rate and the duration of the procedure is slow in comparison to other implant system. the other advantage is that it does not require suturing. it has reduced incidence of trauma. vocom system (vocal fold medialization) this system consists of different sizes and shapes of implants made from hydroxyapatite (a naturally occurring mineral form of calcium apatite). it helps in achieving accurate vocal fold medialization. this procedure is technically reversible. but it should be used in candidates of permanent implantation due to its biocompatible clinical use lasting for nearly a decade. tvfmi system this system generally consists of two sizes of implants made out of pure titanium. it has a lot of advantages and the main one is
that it reduces the operative time. titanium is safer than other implants. it has great biocompatibility. the implants are available in only two variants and they are designed in such a way that they ensure optimal fixation. the implant can be easily made as the titanium sheet is easy to shape. the technique is relatively simple and does not require expensive instruments. gore-tex implant system in this type of implant system, the implant is made of homopolymer of polytetrafluoroethylene in form of minute beads arranged in a fine fiber mesh. it is malleable and can be inserted through a small window.  indications  unilateral vocal cord paralysis where one vocal cord out of the two is paralysed.  symptomatic glottic insufficiency (dysphonia, aspiration) which leads to incomplete glottic closure which in turn results in failure to produce proper sound.  age-related vocal fold atrophy leading to glottic insufficiency.  contraindications  malignant diseases of the endolaryngeal mucosa.  previous history of radiation therapy to the larynx for treatment of laryngeal and hypolaryngeal cancers.  poor abduction of the contralateral vocal folds.  complications  airway obstruction is the most common complication.  implant migration or extrusion in cases where proper stitches are not taken.  wound infection.  penetration of the endolaryngeal mucosa.  incomplete glottal closure in 10-15% of patients.  advantages  the most important advantage is that this procedure is reversible.  it is long-lasting.  it can be performed with minimal anesthesia.  no discomfort to the patient.  disadvantages  it is an open procedure.  it is technically more difficult.  there may be limited closure of the posterior glottis.  limitations  there is increase in average phonation time (from 4.6 seconds to 15 seconds).  it provides static change to the laryngeal framework but does not have any effect on the dynamic function.  type 2 thyroplasty (lateralization thyroplasty) it is a surgical procedure used in conditions like adductor spasmodic dysphonia (a condition in which there is distortion of the voice due to excessively tight closure of the glottis on phonation). generally, lateralization thyroplasty is intended to prevent this tight closure of the glottis at the terminal stage of phonation by lateralizing the position of the vocal cord. this is a completely mechanical process.
procedure an incision is made at midline of the thyroid cartilage. a silicon wedge is used to fix the incised thyroid cartilage in the newly abducted position.  modified technique a specially devised titanium bridge is used instead of silicon wedge. nowadays, instead of one titanium bridge, two titanium bridges are used for permanent fixation of the thyroid cartilage.  indications  the only known indication for type 2 thyroplasty is adductor spasmodic dysphonia, a condition characterized by involuntary movements of muscles of the larynx during speech.  contraindications  it is contraindicated in irradiated larynx (when the larynx is exposed to radiation).  type 3 thyroplasty (relaxation thyroplasty) this procedure is generally done to lower the vocal pitch by shortening the thyroid ala.  procedure in this thyroplasty, the relaxation of the vocal cords is done by antero-posterior shortening of the thyroid ala.  indications   it is most commonly indicated in males with high-pitch voices (puberophonia) and those who are resistant to voice therapy.  in people with spasmodic dysphonia.  in people who have stiff vocal folds with high-pitched breathy voices.  type 4 thyroplasty (stretching thyroplasty)  procedure this procedure is done to elevate the vocal pitch. this procedure consists of lengthening of the thyroid cartilage. it includes cricothyroid approximation.  indications  it is done in people with bow-shaped vocal folds.  androphonia (condition characterized by low vocal pitch).  gender dysphonia, linked to gender dysphoria.  combination in some specific conditions, different types of thyroplasties are combined for the desired results.  medialization thyroplasty with arytenoid adduction (rotation technique)  purpose the main purpose of this combination is the medialization of the entire vocal cord (anterior and posterior).  indications  open posterior glottis.  in people with high vagal paralysis.  recurrent laryngeal nerve paralysis with lateralized arytenoid.  non-rotating aarytenoid.  medialization thyroplasty with arytenoid adduction (fixation technique)  purpose  medial vocal cord fixation.  indications  arytenoid fracture where there is anterior dislocation of the arytenoid cartilage.  in cricoarytenoid joint ankylosis where there is failed arytenoid adduction.
medialization thyroplasty (type 1) with stretching thyroplasty (type 4)  purpose  the main purpose of this combination is stretching of the vocal cord with medialization of the affected side.  indications  unilateral superior laryngeal nerve weakness.  medialization thyroplasty (type 1) with relaxation thyroplasty (type 3)  purpose  the main aim of this combination is relaxation and increased mass of one vocal cord.  indications  in males with high-pitched, presbyphonic voice.  bilateral medialization thyroplasty  purpose  medialization of both the vocal cords.  indications  open anterior glottis.  in presbyphonia where there is bilateral vocal cord weakness.  when there is bilateral loss of muscle mass.  tremor-induced abductor spasmodic dysphonia (absd).  bilateral relaxation thyroplasty  purpose  relaxation of both the vocal cords.  indications  in males who have an overly high-pitched voice.  stable abductor spasmodic dysphonia (absd)  references  otorhinolaryngology
tavis bailey (born june 1, 1992) is an american discus thrower.  personal  bailey was born in poughkeepsie, new york.  he attended a.l. brown high school in kannapolis, north carolina.  after high school, he received a scholarship to play football and compete on the track team at lenoir-rhyne university.  in 2012, he transferred to the university of tennessee where he finished out his collegiate career.  career  college in 2012, during his first year at tennessee, he placed second in the discus at the sec outdoor championships.  he was the runner-up thrower at the 2015 ncaa outdoor championships.  professional bailey qualified for the 2016 summer olympics by placing second at the 2016 us olympic trials with a throw of 63.42 meters.  references  external links  1992 births living people sportspeople from poughkeepsie, new york people from kannapolis, north carolina track and field athletes from new york (state) american male discus throwers african-american male track and field athletes tennessee volunteers men's track and field athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states 21st-century african-american sportspeople
david abel may refer to:   david abel (general) (1935-2019), myanmar army general and cabinet minister  david abel (cinematographer) (1883-1973), cinematographer  see also   david abell (disambiguation)
within is a technology company based in los angeles that creates, acquires, and distributes 360-degree video, ar, and vr experiences and products across web, mobile, console, and headsets.  history originally named vrse, within was founded in 2014 by chris milk, and aaron koblin, creator of google's data arts team. the company has produced and distributed some of augmented and virtual reality's most seminal's works, including clouds over sidra, in partnership with the united nations (2015), lambchild superstar (2017), co-directed by milk and ok go's damien kulash, and the children's augmented reality reading app, wonderscope (2018). in april 2020, after 2 years in development, within released supernatural, an in-home fitness, health, and wellness service for virtual reality, which combines real-life trainers with rhythm mapped exercises set in beautiful locations. in 2020, within was named one of fastcompany's most innovative companies and supernatural was named "best app" in fast company's 2020 innovation by design awards. in 2017, within announced it had raised a $40 million series b round of funding led by temasek and emerson collective. in 2016, the company announced it had raised a $12.56 million funding round, lead andreessen horowitz, which also led their seed round.  investors on june 16, 2016, within rebranded from vrse and raised a $12.65 million series a round led by andreessen horowitz, with participation from 21st century fox, wme, tribeca enterprises, annapurna pictures, vice and freelands ventures. current investors include andreessen horowitz, temasek, emerson collective, 21st century fox, raine ventures, wme, live nation, vice media, tribeca enterprises, annapurna pictures, and legendary pictures.  product within's vr app supports all major headsets, including oculus rift, oculus quest, samsung gear vr, htc vive, sony playstation®vr, and google daydream and is available on the ios app store, google play, steam and the oculus store. within hosts content that is compatible with ios and android operating systems and accessible on iphone, android phones, google cardboard, samsung gear vr, htc vive, oculus quest, and oculus rift.  within has partnered with the new york times, nbc, vice, united nations, u2, annapurna pictures, conservation international, toms, charity: water and apple to produce and distribute content.  installations & events in 2016, within (known as vrse at the time) showed roughly
1,200 attendees a synced 360-degree video collage at a ted talk.  awards within was named the #1 vr app for ios by apple insider, featured as "best new app" on itunes and is the most downloaded and highest rated cinematic vr app for google cardboard.  within vr films were selected for the tribeca film festival and chosen for the sundance film festival, respectively, in both 2015 and 2016. within film, "the displaced", won the most next award at the 2016 aicp awards and the 2016 cannes lions grand prix in the entertainment category. within founder chris milk's snl40 vr special won the best online film & video award at the 2016 webby awards. milk's "clouds over sidra" won the interactive category at the 2015 sheffield doc/fest awards. in 2020 within was named one of fast company's most innovative companies. within's supernatural won "best app" in fast company's 2020 innovation by design awards.  references  virtual reality companies companies based in los angeles 2014 establishments in california
the vinalhaven galamander is a rare surviving example of a specialized stone-hauling vehicle in vinalhaven, maine.  it is located in a small public park at the junction of main, atlantic, and school streets in vinalhaven's downtown area.  its wooden parts are a reproduction of original elements; its metal parts are original.  the vehicle, a type used in the late 19th and early 20th centuries in the island's granite quarries, was listed on the national register of historic places in 1970.  description and history the vinalhaven galamander stands under a frame shelter in bandstand park, created by the intersection of main, atlantic, and school streets in downtown vinalhaven.  its frame consists of a single large wooden beam, with a fixed rear axle supported by two large spoked wheels. the front axle is mounted on a swivel to aid steering, and is supported by two small spoked wheels.  the operator's seat is mounted at the center of the front axle, and a swiveling derrick is mounted on top of the rear axle.  the vehicle would during operation have been drawn by a team of eight horses.  the construction date of this particular galamander is unknown, but it has long been a fixture of the town's landscape.  these vehicles were in regular use during the heyday of vinalhaven's granite quarries, which extended from 1880 to the onset of world war i in 1914.  it stood for many years, exposed to the elements, in bandstand park.  its wooden elements having deteriorated, the wagon was rebuilt by the local historical society using new wood and the original metal fittings, and has been placed under a protective shelter.  the only known surviving galamander with original wooden elements is the robertson quarry galamander in franklin, maine.  see also national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine  references  national register of historic places in knox county, maine buildings and structures completed in 1880 transportation buildings and structures in knox county, maine quarrying
papa (also papa)  was the name of a gens (latin for "clan"; nemzetseg in hungarian) in the kingdom of hungary, in the arpadian era.  history according to written records from the 13th century, the ancestor of the kindred was a certain popo (papa), a bavarian knight who participated in stephen i of hungary's war against koppany. historian andras kubinyi argued that after the victory, popo became the first head of the royal manor, established in veszprem county, which is today known as papa (thus the town was named after him).  the kindred remained in the minor local nobility, the only notable member was benedict, son of syka (or sike), who served as vice-judge royal () in 1244, under demetrius csak. in 1272, paul i received the estate of eund which belonged to sopron castle until then. the kindred also owned lands in mezolak and acsad.  ladislaus i was the first member of the mezolak branch and was also father of nicholas zambo. nicholas' nephews, john and lawrence also took the zambo surname. lawrence zambo served as provost of pressburg (today bratislava, slovakia) from 1384 to 1402.  members  syka (or sike)  benedict, vice-judge royal (1244)  lampert i  paul i (fl. 1272-1286), married elizabeth n (fl. 1304)  nicholas i (died b. 1317), married twice: n, then elizabeth osl  stephen i (fl. 1317)  bungo (fl. 1317)  mark (fl. 1304)  ladislaus i (fl. 1317), mezolak branch  martin (fl. 1347-1366)  zambo family  ladislaus ii (fl. 1347)  nicholas zambo (fl. 1347-1395, died 1395), royal treasurer (1377-1382), master of the treasury (1382-1384 and 1385-1388)  stephen ii (fl. 1347-1374)  paul ii (fl. 1347)  unidentified daughter, married hector ii norapi, castellan of holgyko (fl. 1304-1317)  matthew i (fl. 1286)  lampert ii (fl. 1286)  matthew ii (fl. 1310-1347)  lawrence
(fl. 1347)  nicholas ii (fl. 1347)  john (fl. 1347)  references  sources   janos karacsonyi: a magyar nemzetsegek a xiv. szazad kozepeig. budapest: magyar tudomanyos akademia. 1900-1901.   kristo, gyula (1996). "nehany megjegyzes papa korai kozepkorarol" in: hermann, istvan (ed.): tanulmanyok papa varos tortenetebol 2., local government of papa. pp. 6-13.   zsoldos, attila (2011). magyarorszag vilagi archontologiaja, 1000-1301 ("secular archontology of hungary, 1000-1301"). historia, mta tortenettudomanyi intezete. budapest.
feng jianyu (born august 27, 1992 in heilongjiang) is a chinese actor and singer. he portrayed the role of wu suowei in the web series counterattack in may 2015, and entered into the public eye. on september 22, 2015, he collaborated with co-star wang qing and released the song this summer. he portrayed tu youyou in the web movie approaching journey. in june 2016, he released his first ep red. in july 2016, he played a lead role in the film infinite fight.  life and career  life  feng jianyu was born in heilongjiang. he graduated from beijing union university, majoring in acting. in his junior year, he was invited by wang qing, who is his lover and classmate of 4 years, to star in a web series.  career  film  feng jianyu began his career playing the role of wu suowei in the web series counterattack that was released in august 2015. in september 2015, he participated in the filming of counterattack's special episode.  in march 2016, he played one of the two leading roles in the web film approaching journey.  in july 2016, he co-starred with wang qing in the web movie infinite fight. the movie was nominated for seven awards in the world chinese science fiction movies nebula awards.  music  on september 22, 2015, feng jianyu collaborated with wang qing and released the song this summer. this summer ranked no.1 on the fresh asia weekly charts for four consecutive weeks and also ranked first on the october monthly chart. this summer also set a record of 460,000 digital copies sold on sina weibo. he co-starred with wang qing in the music video and short film of this summer. this summer music video ranked no.4 in yinyuetai 2015 mainland top 100. feng jianyu held three fan meetings for "this summer" with wang qing, in tianjin, chengdu and shenzhen. this summer won the "most popular collaboration" in the 16th top chinese music annual festival.  he also performed the theme song of approaching journey which bears the same name. on may 15, 2016, the digital single approaching journey was released and sold exclusively on kugou music. after just two days, it achieved the title of the platinum record, over 100,000 digital copies sold on kugou music. later in july 2016, he released his first ep red. the first single in that ep, which is the title track red , was released on june 16.  hosting  in march 2016, feng
jianyu co-hosted the 2nd ku music asian music awards red carpet show with wang qing. this was the first time he tried hosting.  discography  eps  singles  filmography  film  television series  host  awards and nominations   music awards ceremony   music program awards  references  external links     1992 births male actors from heilongjiang singers from heilongjiang living people 21st-century chinese male actors chinese male film actors chinese male television actors chinese mandopop singers 21st-century chinese male singers
the 1971 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1971 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 6-4-1 overall and 5-2 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by jim pittman, in his first and only year as head coach. pittman died of a heart attack suffered on the sidelines of a game against baylor in waco, texas on october 30, 1971. assistant coach billy tohill replaced pittman as head coach for the remainder of the season, finishing with a 3-1 record.  this would be the horned frogs' last winning season until 1984.   the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  roster  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
draper university, also known as draper university of heroes is a private, for-profit school located in san mateo, california. draper university partnered with arizona state university (asu) in 2013 to offer students 15 course credits for a sixteen-week semester program. prior to the partnership with asu, the school was unaccredited.  history   in 2011, venture capitalist tim draper purchased the hotel benjamin franklin building in san mateo, california. draper university was established in 2012 by tim draper, who is also the co-founder of draper fisher jurvetson (dfj). the school's first session had 40 students. since then the school has grown to offer fall, spring and summer programs for both students as well as executive education for ceo's and governmental officials.  in april 2015, a reality program called startup u featured draper university's seven-week program in a 10-episode series. the show included miss usa 2013, erin brady, who joined the series to help develop and find investors for her company, romeo in a box.  draper university formed a partnership with arizona state university and global silicon valley in may 2016 to launch an entrepreneurial program combining draper's innovations in education with asu's curriculum and large student body. dubbed the asu draper gsv accelerator, the program includes the draper university entrepreneurial boot camp with a network of scholars. six scholarships were given to asu students to attend the program in 2015. since then, draper university has launched a new partnership, teaming up with asu to offer 15 college credits and a certificate of entrepreneurship for the fall 2017 program.  program the draper university runs a five to seven-week program with four sessions each year, but will begin its sixteen-week semester long program in fall 2017. the program is primarily aimed at students aged 18 to 28, and has 500 alumni.  in addition to the program, draper includes a co-working business incubator space called hero city, vcx, a one-week program teaching early stage investment, and a one-week program aimed at executives adding innovation to corporations. draper also offers online courses.  demographics draper's spring 2016 class was 45% female. the school previously offered scholarships for women including the meera kaul foundation, women who code, and sogal. 45 percent of students are international. unlike a traditional faculty, draper has guest lecturers under a variety of themes.  pre-history of the hotel benjamin franklin  in 2011, tim draper purchased the hotel benjamin franklin building, which had first opened in san mateo on june 28, 1927. the benjamin franklin (
named not for the american statesman but as a portmanteau of the original owners' names, a.c. franklin and benjamin getz) succeeded the peninsula hotel, which was converted from alvinza hayward's mansion but had burned in 1920. the building was designed by local architect w. h. weeks. it is nine stories high, exceeding  at the flagpole. churrigueresque decorative details can be seen around windows on the second, eighth, and ninth floors.  notable guests at the benjamin franklin have included ginger rogers, stan laurel, oliver hardy, friend richardson, and masanori murakami.  the benjamin franklin had a longstanding relationship to provide temporary housing for united airlines employees, which began in 1946 and lasted until 2003, when the airline filed for bankruptcy. in 1955, the hotel was purchased by the max best family, which ran it until it was sold to westin in 1985. westin in turn sold it to the empire group in 1989. the building was largely vacant aside from a ground-level bar and restaurant after united moved out, and was part of a larger property transfer from the lembi group to ubs ag in 2009 after lembi fell behind on loan payments. draper purchased the building in 2011 with the intent to redevelop it. nearly a year later, draper revealed plans to reopen draper university as a boarding school. draper had also acquired a two-story property across the street, intending to use it as classroom space.  references  external links           universities and colleges in san mateo county, california san mateo, california draper family private universities and colleges in california 2012 establishments in california
goindwal is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
anil dave may refer to:   anil madhav dave (1956-2017), indian environmentalist and politician  anil r. dave (born 1951), indian judge
the 48th district of the iowa senate is located in eastern iowa, and is currently composed of buchanan, delaware, jones, and linn counties.  current elected officials dan zumbach is the senator currently representing the 48th district.  the area of the 48th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 95th district (represented by charlie mcclintock) the 96th district (represented by lee hein)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  jack kibbie, 1965-1966 h. kenneth nurse, 1967-1968 marvin w. smith, 1969-1970 quentin v. anderson, 1971-1972 james e. briles, 1973-1982 charles w. hutchins, 1983-1992 h. kay hedge, 1993-2000 sandy greiner, 2001-2002 jeff angelo, 2003-2008 kim reynolds, 2009-2010 joni ernst, 2011-2012 dan zumbach, 2013-present  references  48
fiona macpherson  (born 19 october 1971) is professor of philosophy at the university of glasgow, where she is also director of the centre for the study of perceptual experience. she was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh in 2017 and a member of academia europaea in 2018.  biography  she studied at the university of glasgow, the university of st andrews and the university of stirling. she has been a kennedy scholar at harvard university and a rosamund chambers research fellow at girton college, cambridge, and a research fellow at the centre for consciousness at the australian national university. macpherson has held visiting positions at the institut jean nicod, paris, umea university and the institute of philosophy, university of london. she is a member of the governing council of the arts and humanities research council (ahrc). she is a trustee of the kennedy memorial trust, having been appointed by the british prime minister for a five-year term from 1 october 2014 and reappointed for five years in 2019. she was appointed to the ahrc creative industries advisory group in 2019. macpherson was president of the scots philosophical association from december 2015 to december 2016. she is currently president of the british philosophical association.  research  macpherson's research interests include the nature of consciousness, perception, introspection, imagination and the metaphysics of mind. amongst her publications, she is the co-editor of disjunctivism: perception, action, knowledge, published by oxford university press in 2008, the admissible contents of experience, published by wiley-blackwell in 2011, editor of the senses: classic and contemporary philosophical perspectives, published by oxford university press in 2011, co-editor of hallucination: philosophy and psychology, published by mit press in 2013, and co-editor of phenomenal presence and perceptual imagination and perceptual memory and editor of sensory substitution and augmentation, all published by oxford university press in 2018. she has appeared on numerous radio programmes, including on bbc radio 4 discussing human senses and perception.  notable remarks  in relation to debates about the issue of all-male panels at academic conferences, macpherson has warned against tokenism, noting that she had herself organised an all-male panel, when the prominent women she invited were unavailable. she stated that "i think that it is even all right to only invite men as speakers to some events, if that is appropriate because of research that you want to hear about and the theme of the conference".  references  external links university of glasgow profile page  1971 births academics of the university of
glasgow living people scottish philosophers scottish women philosophers women philosophers
sullivan county poor home, also known as lakeview home, is a historic poorhouse located in hamilton township, sullivan county, indiana. it was designed by the architecture firm wing & mahurin and built in 1896-1897. it is a -story, asymmetrical, romanesque revival style brick building, consisting of a central section with flanking wings.  it features a projecting central tower with arched openings and a pyramidal roof and an octagonal tower.  also on the property is a contributing one-story, two-room cottage. the home was named lakeview home in 1947, and remained in operation until 1998.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2000.  references  government buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana romanesque revival architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1896 buildings and structures in sullivan county, indiana national register of historic places in sullivan county, indiana
j. r. heffner (born march 31, 1972) is an american professional dirt and asphalt stock car driver. he currently competes in various dirt racing events.  heffner has also raced in the arca racing series and nascar camping world truck series.  racing career heffner's interest in racing started at the age of five, when he and his parents attended races at lebanon valley speedway. in his teen years, he raced three-wheelers and eventually started racing in lebanon valley's sportsman's division, winning the championship in 1990. he moved up to the big block modified division, winning his first race in the division in 1994. in 1997, he acquired sponsorship from a. colarusso & son, inc., a highway construction firm. heffner and colarusso have developed a longterm relationship. heffner joined the company in 2003, becoming the vice president of operations, a role he still holds today.  in 2007, heffner made his debut in the arca re/max series at daytona international speedway for dgm racing, where he finished 35th after crashing. from 2007 to 2011, he ran eight arca races, with his last start being at lucas oil raceway. his best finish in the series is 14th at kentucky speedway in 2009.  in 2013, heffner entered the nascar camping world truck series' mudsummer classic at eldora speedway, the first dirt track race in a nascar national series since 1970. in the event, heffner qualified eighth and finished second in his heat race to ken schrader, but was relegated to the last chance qualifier (lcq). despite starting first, he lost fourth gear and retired from the lcq, finishing last after completing just one lap and failing to make the feature. the following year, heffner made the feature after finishing fourth in his heat, finishing 18th in the final. heffner also ran the truck race at new hampshire motor speedway, finishing 23rd after crashing on lap 137. heffner skipped the 2015 race at eldora due to the race clashing with his schedule at lebanon valley, loaning the truck to bobby pierce, who finished second. in 2016, heffner returned to eldora, driving the no. 44 for martins motorsports. after winning his heat race from the pole to start fourth in the feature, he finished 15th. a year later, heffner crashed during practice and with no backup, he withdrew from the race. heffner would return to the dirt derby
in 2018, securing a ride with premium motorsports. he qualified for the main event by finishing fourth in his heat race, and finished 24th in the feature after fading from a top 15 position late with handling problems.  heffner made his return to the truck series in march 2021 when he joined jordan anderson racing for the bristol motor speedway dirt race. however, he withdrew after crashing in the final practice session.  motorsports career results  nascar (key) (bold - pole position awarded by qualifying time. italics - pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * - most laps led.)  camping world truck series   season still in progress  ineligible for series points  arca racing series (key) (bold - pole position awarded by qualifying time. italics - pole position earned by points standings or practice time. * - most laps led.)  references  external links      living people 1972 births people from stephentown, new york arca menards series drivers nascar drivers racing drivers from new york (state)
donald philip tregonning  (born 26 november 1928) is a retired professional tennis player and coach. tregonning, a student of melbourne coach mick sweetnam, was a member of the international amateur and professional tennis communities, reaching the mixed doubles semi finals of the 1953 australian open, playing twice in the quarter finals of doubles competitions at the australian open (1949, 1953) and reaching the quarter finals of the wembley professional championships in 1953. tregonning played in a famous 1953 australian championships round 1 match in which the umpire left the grounds to "go to (his) tea".  tregonning is the former head-coach at kooyong lawn tennis club (the then site of the australian open), danish national coach, french national coach (davis cup) and for 30 years he coached the japanese national team and helped them to a 3-2 upset over australia in the "australian davis cup". his clientele included wimbledon finalist kurt nielsen, grand slam competitor elizabeth peers-little, australian open doubles finalist cliff letcher, grand slam competitor greg whitecross and "australian junior" finalists bill durham, trevor little, sally irvine.  personal life  donald philip tregonning was born on 26 november 1928 in melbourne, victoria, australia. in his childhood, he first played australian rules football and later discovered tennis as his passion. tregonning became a member at grace park tennis club and joined the mick sweetnam school of coaching. sweetnam regarded tregonning as more promising than his other student seven time grand slam champion mervyn rose.  tregonning studied engineering at the swinburne university of technology, melbourne.  tregonning married fellow australian and nursing sister claire wendy heskett at the church of our lady, london. they have one daughter and four sons. all sons have continued on to become atp ranked players and professional coaches. claire wendy tregonning, nee heskett, died in 2013.  in the 2019 queen's birthday honours (australia), tregonning received the medal of the order of australia (oam).  playing career  in 1948 tregonning played in the australian championships, losing to jack crawford in a four set round 2 match. the same year he partnered mervyn rose in the australian championships doubles competition again reaching round 2. in 1949 tregonning lost a round 2 australian championships match against bill sidwell, but partnering rose was able to secure a spot in the quarter finals of the doubles competition. in the 1950 australian championships tregonning once again reached the second round, however
, losing a first round doubles match in which he partnered philip brophy.  tregonning received direct entry into the men's singles draw of the 1951 wimbledon championships but lost in the first round to brazilian armando vieira. tregonning partnered peter cawthorn in the men's doubles and reached the third round, including a first round win against vieira and his partner leon norgarb. partnering rosemary bulleid he reached the third round in the mixed doubles. tregonning returned to wimbledon in 1952, but was defeated in the first round of the men's singles by douglas scharenguivel. he again partnered cawthorn in the doubles event, but they were defeated in the first round by americans irvin dorfman and grant golden. he was, once again, more successful in the mixed doubles reaching the third round together with gem hoahing.  in 1953 tregonning played at the wembley professional championships, then the most prominent professional tennis tournament. he was able to secure a place in the quarter finals being defeated by fellow australian tennis legend frank sedgman.  tregonning was the runner-up at the 1954 english professional championships and 1955 great britain professional championships.  australian championships match without an umpire  tregonning played in a famous 1953 australian championships rd1 match in which the umpire left the grounds to "go to (his) tea," leaving the two players - tregonning and fellow australian brian tobin - without an umpire or any ball boys. harold cornish, the president of the victorian umpires association, took over, although by this time most of the spectators had left with only eight spectators and three representatives of the press remaining.  coaching career  in 1953 tregonning travelled to england and partnered with peter cawthorn in organising and setting up a tennis school. in 1955 he was appointed danish national coach, being tasked with preparing the danish davis cup team. among tregonning's students was kurt nielsen who went on to play in the finals of 1955 wimbledon competitions becoming the first dane to play in a men's singles final of a grand slam tournament.  tregonning was head-professional at fawkner park tennis courts and for 20 years the head-coach at kooyong lawn tennis club, which was then the site of the australian open. in february 1956 he and five others founded the professional tennis association of victoria, which later changed its name to tennis coaches australia victoria, inc. (tcav) in 1973. on several occasions tregonning managed linton cup and wilson cup teams, before turning to private school
coaching at st. catherine's, methodist ladies' college, mount scopus memorial college and others.  the australian davis cup team was under tregonning's supervision in 1969. when harry hopman was establishing his tennis academy in 1970 and later his international tennis camp tregonning travelled to the united states to assist him in doing so and coaching at the academy and camp.  during his 30 years coaching the japanese national team tregonning coached japanese olympic quarter finalist jun kamiwazumi who would go on to play in the quarter finals of french open mixed doubles competitions and japanese player toshiro sakai who would go on to becoming a four time asiad gold medalist and french open doubles quarter finalist. both players later beat the australian davis cup team in the "australian davis cup".  students of tregonning included australian junior champion cliff letcher who would become a us open doubles finalist and two time australian open doubles finalist and 1979 australian open boys' singles and doubles champion greg whitecross.  in the 1990s tregonning took on coaching squads from the philippines, japan and china.  in 2010 tregonning was inducted into the tcav hall of fame with the status of legend and founding member.  tregonning has retired to coaching from his private court at his home in templestowe, melbourne.  tournament results  wembley professional championships  grand slams  australian championships  wimbledon  other professional tournament results (uk)  british professional  english professional championships  great britain professional championships  references  external links        tregonning-tennis.com  tcav - legends  life on the court  australian tennis coaches living people 1928 births australian male tennis players recipients of the medal of the order of australia
balbaroo is an extinct genus of quadrupedal kangaroo that once lived in australia.  taxonomy the genus was erected in 1983 to describe a new species of early marsupials, balbaroo camfieldensis. the craniodental features have changed by showing more sharp canines, and are thought to have been carnivores.   in addition to the type species, three others are assigned to the genus  balbaroo fangaroo  cooke, 2000   balbaroo gregoriensis flannery, archer and plane, 1983  balbaroo nalima black et al, 2014  references   marsupials of australia prehistoric macropods fossil taxa described in 1983
billel dib (born on 26 may 1989) is an australian professional boxer who has held the wba oceania super-featherweight title since 2018.  early life and education  dib was born in sydney, new south wales, on 26 may 1989, into a lebanese-australian family. his parents emigrated to australia from lebanon. he was raised on the gold coast, queensland, and graduated from benowa state high school in 2006. he currently resides on the gold coast and travels to sydney regularly for training camp, and to continue his commitments as a student of accounting at the university of western sydney. his brother, ahmed 'dynamite' dib is also a professional boxer.  professional career  australia  dib's professional career commenced in january 2011 when he debuted against jayson mac gura on the gold coast, australia. dib won and went on to win the next seven bouts before suffering his first loss in october 2012, when dib lost his claim to the australian super-featherweight title against dylan sendeckyj by way of a split decision. in june 2013, dib avenged the loss against sendeckyj to capture the australian title, winning by way of knockout. in may 2014, dib won the wbo oriental interim super-featherweight title against brett elliot in sydney, australia. in april 2015, dib won the same title for a second time, against bebong manalo.  united states  dib signed with probox management in february 2016, and went on to win his first international bout in april 2016 against jose salinas by way of majority decision. chief executive officer and co-founder of probox management, garry jonas, has expressed that dib "has all the characteristics that [pro box management] look for. he is a hard worker, well spoken, good looking action fighting young man, who is very marketable. we definitely think he can be a significant world champion sometime soon."  professional boxing record  boxing titles   australian super featherweight title;  world boxing organisation (wbo) oriental champion;  ranked sixth: world boxing organisation super featherweight division. ranked 14 wba superfeather weight 2022  personal life  dib is a self-identified devout muslim, and was raised in a muslim-australian household. he is involved in community work with islamic care, supporting social workers in disability centres in lebanon for lebanese, palestinian and syrian disabled refugees.  references   1989 births living people australian male boxers australian muslims australian people of lebanese descent sportspeople of lebanese descent boxers from sydney super-featherweight boxers
listrocerum asperipenne is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1957. it is known from somalia.  references  endemic fauna of somalia dorcaschematini beetles described in 1957
alessandro guiccioli (5 march 1843 - 3 october 1922) was an italian diplomat and politician. he was born in venice. he was mayor of rome from 1888 to 1889. he died in rome, kingdom of italy.  references  1843 births 1922 deaths politicians from venice members of the senate of the kingdom of italy mayors of rome ambassadors of italy to japan 19th-century italian politicians 20th-century italian politicians
the 1963 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1963 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 4-5-1 overall and 2-4-1 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by abe martin in his 11th year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
nicolas cammaille-saint-aubin (25 march 1770, paris - 26 august 1832, paris) was a french playwright.  biography  cammaille made his acting debut at the theatre de l'ambigu-comique in 1792 and the very day after the assassination of marat, announced in the journal des spectacles that he had written a comedy in tribute to the revolutionary leader. that was l'ami du peuple ou les intrigants demasques which met an important success when given at the ambigu-comique in 1793. le concert de la rue feydeau ou la folie du jour witten with rene perin triggered unrest in the political press conducted by alphonse martainville.  director of the ambigu-comique in 1797, he became an employee by the ministry of police after the coup of 18 fructidor then became head of the theatre de la cite in 1800 a position he held only a year due to the little success of the plays that were presented at that time.   he continued to perform in his own plays then, in 1804, joined the troupe of the theatre de la gaite before passing in 1806 into that of the theatre moliere. in 1808, he was hired by the theatre de l'imperatrice but from that date no longer held leading roles. he left the stage as an actor in 1811.  after he entered the general post office in 1814, seriously ill, he spent the last year of his life in the maison royale de sante where he died 26 august 1832 aged 52 ans.  works  1793: l'ami du peuple ou les intrigants demasques, three-act comedy, in verse 1794: le concert de la rue feydeau ou la folie du jour, one-act comedy, in prose, with rene perin 1797: marguerite, ou les voleurs, one-act drama, mingled with pantomime, fights, etc., with louis-francois ribie 1797: le moine, five-act comedy mingled withs, dances, pantomime 1797: la fausse mere ou une faute de l'amour, five-act drama 1799: les chinois ou amour et nature, three-act dialogued pantomime 1800: l'eleve de la nature, ou le nouveau peuple, three-act pantomime 1802: ima, ou les deux mondes, three-act allegorical melodrama, extravaganza 1803: louise ou le theatre, one-act comedy 1805: la fille de
l'hospice, ou la nouvelle antigone, three-act melodrama, extravaganza, from the novel by ducray-duminil 1809: le prince de la newa, three-act melodrama 1811: boutade dialoguee a napoleon pere, sur la naissance du roi de rome 1817: le passage de la mer rouge ou la delivrance des hebreux undate: a la paix, song  bibliography   charles menetrier, galerie historique des comediens de la troupe de nicolet, 1869, (p. 255-263)   henry lyonnet, dictionnaire des comediens francais, 1911  pierre larousse, grand larousse encyclopedique, vol.2, 1960, (p. 545)  external links  nicolas cammaille-saint-aubin on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french dramatists and playwrights 1770 births writers from paris 1832 deaths
the bishwakarma people are a nepali ethnic group. they are found almost everywhere in nepal, but are less common in the eastern region than the west. there are many castes inside bishwakarma people like rishal, nagarkoti, sunar, etc. rishal main occupation is working on gold and silver.  references   nepalese society
george handford (1582-5 - 1647), was an english baroque composer.  he spent some time in cambridge, and may have been a pensioner at emmanuel college, cambridge in 1604, or a fellow of trinity college, cambridge. he married twice, at st.-dunstan-in-the-west church, cambridge.  he published ayres to be sung to the lute, written in 1609, which is 'unique in that it is the only collection of lute songs that is a carefully prepared work by one man...and not simply an anthology of somebody's favourite songs'.  references  1580s births 1647 deaths 17th-century classical composers 17th-century english composers
khera bet  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of khera bet. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, khera bet had a total number of 138 houses and population of 723 which included 391 males and 332 females. literacy rate of khera bet is 78.60%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 64 which is 8.85% of total population of khera bet, and child sex ratio is approximately 684, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
fremulon is a television production company founded by television producer and writer michael schur. it is known for producing the long-running series parks and recreation, brooklyn nine-nine, master of none, and the good place.  history  fremulon was founded in april 2008 by producer and writer michael schur. the name "fremulon" comes from the fake insurance company that schur's pseudonym, ken tremendous, worked at when he was writing for the sports blog fire joe morgan. the production logo displayed at the end of fremulon produced shows is accompanied by the word "fremulon" spoken by actor nick offerman.  in march 2019, fremulon renewed its overall deal at universal television.  filmography  current  former  references  mass media companies established in 2008 television production companies of the united states
the saudi arabia men's national 3x3 team is a national basketball team of saudi arabia, administered by the saudi arabian basketball federation. it represents the country in international 3x3 (3 against 3) basketball competitions.  see also saudi arabia men's national basketball team  references  basketball in saudi arabia basketball teams in saudi arabia men's national 3x3 basketball teams 3
robert william england (8 june 1863 - 15 november 1908) was a prominent architect from christchurch, new zealand.  early life england was born on 8 june 1863 at lyttelton. his father, robert west england, was a timber merchant who had come to lyttelton from warwickshire, england, in 1860. england jr. received his education at a christchurch school. aged 19, he went to birmingham to study architecture under joseph lancaster ball, and in 1885, he was admitted to the royal institute of british architects. he returned to christchurch aged 23 and set up his own practice in 1886, and over time became a prominent architect.  professional career england took on many prominent commissions. he designed mclean's mansion for allan mclean, which is still the country's largest timber residence. he laid out the show grounds for the a&p society at addington and built the office for dalgety and company in cathedral square. he designed the ridley building on the corner of lichfield and manchester streets. he designed a number of churches, including knox church on bealey avenue, the st albans methodist church, and the ashburton presbyterian church. he designed a large residential building at 85 papanui road. originally known as wardington, it was purchased by christchurch girls' high school in 1921 as their boarding house, and is now known as the "old house" within acland house. he designed elm tree house in papanui road that is registered as a category ii heritage building. he designed a commercial building for alfred billens in high street. initially known as the england brothers house, it was later known as billens' building. damaged in the 2011 christchurch earthquake, like all heritage buildings in that block of high street, it was destroyed by arson in december 2012. england designed the mcdougall residence (now the administration building of nurse maude) and the last building of a. j. white's department store on the corner of high and tuam streets. he designed acton house in gisborne on the north island; his client was originally from christchurch and the house is now registered as category i. england worked on extensions of riccarton house in riccarton, st andrew's church (at that time located adjacent to christchurch hospital, but since relocated to rangi ruru girls' school), and st mary's church in halswell.  england designed an iron chimney and applied for a patent. subsequent to the 1888 north canterbury and 1901 cheviot earthquakes, it was claimed that his chimney was earthquake resistant.  he took his younger brother edward as his
business partner, and the practice was then known as england bros. whilst his biography on the website of heritage new zealand states that the partnership commenced in 1906, the canterbury edition of the cyclopedia of new zealand published in 1903 already refers to "messrs england bros". contemporary newspaper advertisements state that his brother edward joined the practice in july 1901. england was unwell for some time and at the time of his death, the firm had commissions for the d.i.c. building in cashel street, and new buildings for the kaiapoi woollen company.  listed buildings a number of his building are or were listed with heritage new zealand; many of those were demolished after the earthquakes and have thus been removed from the register.  death england died on 15 november 1908 from influenza at age 45 and was buried at linwood cemetery. he was survived by his wife and six children.  references  1863 births 1908 deaths 19th-century new zealand architects people from christchurch burials at linwood cemetery, christchurch royal institute of british architects 20th-century new zealand architects
"don't ever go away (por causa de voce)" aka "por causa de voce (because of you)" is a bossa nova song composed in 1957 by antonio carlos jobim, with original lyrics by dolores duran. english lyrics were later added by ray gilbert. a version in french was written by serge rohde.  bossa nova historian ruy castro relates a story of how jobim and duran wrote the song: "the two of them had met by chance at radio nacional, and jobim had shown her the song, which didn't yet have any lyrics--vinicius de moraes was supposed to be taking care of that. when dolores heard the music, she took her eyebrow pencil out of her pocket, rapidly scribbled a few lines on a paper napkin, and showed them to jobim. he liked them and sighed: 'what do you think this music would sound like with sinatra?'"  as it turned out, frank sinatra recorded the song with jobim in 1969, under the title "don't ever go away (por causa de voce), which appeared on his album sinatra & company (1971).  the first recording of the song was in 1957 by sylvia telles. in 1960, she recorded the first version in french as "gardez moi pour toujours."  recorded versions  sylvia telles - caricia (1957) and amor em hi-fi (1960)  dolores duran - dolores duran canta para voce dancar... (1957)  maysa - convite para ouvir maysa n. 2 (1958)  agostinho dos santos - antonio carlos jobim e fernando cesar na voz de agostinho dos santos (1958)  antonio carlos jobim - a certain mr. jobim (1967) and inedito (1987)  frank sinatra & antonio carlos jobim - sinatra & company (rec. 1969, released 1971)  baden powell - solitude on guitar (1971)  ella fitzgerald - ella abraca jobim (1981) - released on the original lp but left off the 1991 cd version  paulinho nogueira - tom jobim - retrospectiva  (1981)  eliane elias - eliane elias plays jobim (1990) - instrumental and vocal versions  paul winter with oscar castro-neves - brazilian days (1998)   gal costa - gal costa canta tom jobim ao vivo (1999)  rosa passos & ron carter - entre amigos (2003)  vanessa da mata - vanessa da mata canta tom jobim (2013)  carminho - car
minho canta tom jobim'' (2016)  references  1957 songs frank sinatra songs ella fitzgerald songs songs with music by antonio carlos jobim bossa nova songs brazilian songs
rafael machado is a cuban violinist.  academic background  rafael machado began to study violin and musical theory in havana, cuba, in 1972; and received his masters in music from the instituto superior de arte of havana, in 1987. during this period of time he participated in important national violin competitions and obtained the first prize in the "jose white" competition at the instituto superior de arte (havana, 1986). machado was a member of the first youth latin-american symphony orchestra (uruguay, 1985), and participated in the festival of young performers organized by juventudes musicales de peru, in 1986.  violinist  rafael machado has performed as a soloist, a member of symphony orchestras and chamber ensembles in cuba, spain, italy, france, austria, peru, uruguay, the us, canada and mexico. he was a member of the camerata "brindis de salas" in havana, cuba from 1987 to 1992, and of the conjunto de camara de la habana, from 1988 to 1992, and obtained a great national and international promotion for his participation in those ensembles.  in 1992 he arrived in mexico to participate in the orquesta sinfonica de aguascalientes, serving as concertino in this ensemble for 18 years. he participated regularly as guest concertino in the orquesta filarmonica de zacatecas. machado was a member of "solistas de mexico", from 1994 to 1995, a group created by maestro eduardo mata, and also collaborated with the camerata de las americas from 1995 to 1999. along with these ensembles, machado participated in concerts and festivals in mexico city, as well as in the festival internacional cervantino from guanajuato, mexico, from 1994 to 1999.  he recorded with the quindecim label, along with horacio franco and the camerata aguascalientes in 1998, and was invited to the "puebla instrumenta verano 2004" as a coordinator of the festival symphony orchestra. machado was selected in 2004, as an artist in residence at the banff centre in alberta, canada.  since 2005, machado was artistic director of the festival de musica de camara de aguascalientes, a project that he promoted at a national as well as an international level; and he served also as a concertino of the orquesta filarmonica del estado de queretaro. he is currently working in the ensemble of cepromusic, centro de experimentacion y promocion de la musica contemporanea (center for musical experimentation and promotion ensemble) in mexico city.
professor  rafael machado has served as violin professor at the music faculty of the universidad autonoma de zacatecas, and at conservatorio de musica "jose guadalupe velazquez" in queretaro.  references  cuban violinists cuban classical violinists male classical violinists living people 21st-century classical violinists 21st-century male musicians year of birth missing (living people)
ophryotrocha langstrumpae is a species of polychaete worm, first found on deep sea whale fall and wood fall habitats in the north-east pacific, off the southern californian coast. it is closely related to ophryotrocha scutellus and ophryotrocha batillus.  references  further reading ravara, ascensao, et al. "first account on the diversity of ophryotrocha (annelida, dorvilleidae) from a mammal-fall in the deep-atlantic ocean with the description of three new species." systematics and biodiversity 13.6 (2015): 555-570. wiklund, helena. evolution of annelid diversity at whale-falls and other marine ephemeral habitats. 2009.  external links  worms  polychaetes
the minor basilica cathedral of the immaculate conception of the metropolitan archdiocese of the victoria de durango's community,  () also called the durango cathedral, is a religious building in the catholic church that belongs to the metropolitan archdiocese of durango in mexico. it is located in the historic center of the city of victoria de durango, opposite the plaza de armas. it is the state's most important architectural representation, and one of the most beautiful buildings in the north of the country. it takes the place of the old parish of the assumption.  the current building was built around 1695 and was designed by the architect mateo nunez. the work was partially completed in 1713 and was terminated formally in 1844, after the completion of the interior decoration, altars, and well-known monuments in the cathedral.  see also roman catholicism in mexico  references  roman catholic cathedrals in mexico buildings and structures in durango roman catholic churches completed in 1844 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in mexico
gustavo rodriguez vela (born lima, 1968) is a peruvian writer and communication expert, author of several novels and story books.  biography   born in lima, rodriguez lived in trujillo on the north coast of peru from the ages of five to sixteen years old. this time made a definite impression on him and which can be seen in his first novel, the fury of achilles (2001) (la furia de aquiles). it tells the story of four young people traveling from a small town to lima to study, start a career and live together, and where they experience enmity, jealousy, insecurity and chaos of a big city.  apropos of this novel, alberto fuguet declared, in chile in 2010: "my editor, gabriel sandoval, had told me about a peruvian novel that i would like, a kind of vargas llosa's "the time of the hero" ("la ciudad y los perros"), a contemporary and endearing read, referring to "the fury of achilles". since then i have been buying the books of rodriguez during occasional stops at lima airport and now i have the great pleasure to present gustavo here in chile. rodriguez is one of those voices that surprise precisely because he does not boast of nourishing from literature. not reading him is not permitted as an indulgence."  the first book published by rodriguez was a collection of stories: 'cuentos de fin de semana' (weekend tales) (1998). three years later came his first quoted novel, followed by other works, both novels and stories, and nonfiction, as with the biography of the acclaimed peruvian tenor juan diego florez.  he has also co-authored two books with the sociologist sandro venturo: 'ampay peru!' (translatable as gotcha, peru) and 'ampay woman' that looks to knock down myths about his country and the peruvian woman. its main articles and essays are collected in peruvian translations (2008).  "la risa de tu madre" ("the laughter of your mother") (2003) tells of the obsession that invades a filmmaker when he finds a hidden photograph of his recently deceased mother. here, his mother appears with a sounding laugh, in a gesture of laughter that his son never saw in her when she was alive. to find out what had provoked that laughter in the hidden picture will take him to find a family secret which will cause a complete review of his life. this novel was one of the finalists for the herralde award.  "la sem
ana tiene siete mujeres" ("the week has seven women") (2010) tells a story of infidelity and racism in a city like lima: a white man born to a "good family" and impoverished economically will have to investigate the love of a half-caste who traveled the opposite way to enrichment and celebrity, a half-caste who also took the love of his life. this novel was a finalist for the planeta-casamerica award.  "cocinero en su tinta" ("chef in his ink") 2012 tells of the crisis of a peruvian chef "who must face his traumas and decisions while he invents a dish that represents what his country means to the world. this novel involuntarily generated a huge controversy after the writer ivan thays wrote an article on his blog at el pais and received attacks for criticizing peruvian cuisine.  "republica de la papaya" ("papaya republic") (2016) tells the story of paula yanez, 'la papaya', an important political consultant who has just ended an affair with one of her students. paula takes refuge in work and accepts the advice of the first lady of the country who has been launched as a presidential candidate without knowing that her former partner is in love with a rival candidate. in this novel, mario bellatin said that "only the words of gustavo rodriguez are able to create the nostalgia of a city that appears and disappears simultaneously".  for his part, alberto fuguet, commented about it: "apart from literature, rodriguez also believes in the street and in his eyes and in himself. rather than write, sometimes it gives the impression that what he does is to talk. as this novel creates a great dialogue".  "i wrote you tomorrow" (2016) is a novel for all those who are still young at heart and  tells the story of a teenager who starts receiving strange letters under his pillow. they seem to be arriving from the future, and they will accompany him throughout an important period of his life: the one when he'll live his first love, the complexities of his family (as of any other) and the first big wound.  sweet and direct, this novel connects directly with its readers thanks to the direct prose and the fresh of the approach. a novel that parents buy for their children to read, and end up enjoying it more than them.  rodriguez has obtained in his role as advertising creative several distinctions in his country as well as internationally. among his numerous campaigns, a highlight is the one that originated
the pisco day in 2003 after starting a trade war with chile.  in 2006, the national council of education conferred on him the journalism award in the internet category. he has also been awarded by indecopi (the institute of defense of intellectual property) for his creative contribution to the development of his country.  he has been a columnist for the el comercio of lima, contributor to the magazine etiqueta negra and co-founder, along with the writer javier arevalo, of the recreo project, which seeks to bring reading awareness benefits to the schools of peru.  after leaving toronja, an integrated communications agency of which he was founder, he runs a communications consultancy that bears his name. now divorced, he has three daughters: alesia, maira and malu.  in july 2018 published "madrugada" "madrugada" ("dawn"), a novel in tragicomedy key about violence and macho culture. spain's newspaper el pais described it as a mix of the best novels from guillermo cabrera infante and mario vargas llosa.  awards   journalism award 2006, category internet (national board of education of peru)  herralde finalist novel award for "the laughter of your mother" 2002  best communicator in the social responsibility award by the lima's law bar 2014   finalist of the planeta casamerica award for "the week has seven women" 2009  recognition for his creative contribution to the country by indecopi 2002  medal of the city of trujillo 2015  works   weekend tales (cuentos de fin de semana), stories, lluvia publishers, lima, 1998  the fury of achilles (la furia de aquiles), novel, algaguara, lima, 2001  the laughter of your mother (la risa de tu madre), novel, alfaguara, lima, 2003 (one of the finalists of the herralde novel award)  thirteen short lies (trece mentiras cortas), stories, alfaguara, lima, 2006.  ampay peru, along with the sociologist sandro venturo; aguilar, 2007  juan diego florez. notes of a voice, biography, universidad peruana de ciencias applicadas, lima, 2007  peruvian translations: our greatness and awkwardness seen by a communicator, an anthology of articles, norma group, lima, 2008  ampay woman, along with sociologist sandro venturo; aguilar, 2009  the week has seven women (la semana tiene siete mujeres), novel, planeta
, 2010 (one of the finalists for the planeta -casamerica award)  the chullachaki in the other jungle (el chullachaki en la otra selva ) story; supernatural collection daily correo; gg editors -recreo, lima, 2011  chef in his ink (cocinero en su tinta), novel, planet, 2012  juan chichones superheroe a golpes, editorial santillana, 2015  papaya republic (republica de la papaya), novel, editorial planeta, 2016  i wrote you tomorrow (te escribi manana), editorial sm, 2016  references  external links   rodriguez official website  gustavo rodriguez in  writers peruanos ]  gustavo rodriguez read the beginning of '' the rage of achilles', youtube, video, access 3 july 2012  text  my dad is the loco cienfuegos  in '' tales contemporaries; access 3 july 2012  peruvian novelists living people 1968 births
stephen warboys (born 25 october 1953) is a retired right-handed british tennis player. warboys was a runner up at junior wimbledon in 1971.  junior grand slam finals  singles: 1  references  external links      british male tennis players living people 1953 births place of birth missing (living people)
daniel federspiel (born 21 april 1987) is an austrian cross-country mountain biker, cyclo-cross and road racing cyclist, who currently rides for uci continental team . he specialises in the cross-country eliminator event, in which he was world champion in 2015 and 2016. he was also european champion in the cross-country eliminator in 2013 and 2014. he was given the austrian cyclist of the year award in 2016.  major results  mountain bike  2012  3rd  uci world xce championships 2013  1st overall uci xce world cup 1st albstadt 1st val di sole  1st  european xce championships  2nd  uci world xce championships 2014  1st  european xce championships  3rd overall uci xce world cup 2015  1st  uci world xce championships 2016  1st  uci world xce championships  2nd  european xce championships 2017  2nd  european xce championships 2018  1st graz, uci xce world cup 2021  1st  national xce championships  cyclo-cross  2013-2014  3rd national championships 2016-2017  2nd national championships 2017-2018  2nd national championships 2019-2020  1st  national championships 2020-2021  1st  national championships 2021-2022  1st  national championships  road 2020  2nd road race, national road championships  references  external links  austrian male cyclists cross-country mountain bikers austrian mountain bikers living people 1987 births
khadoor sahib assembly constituency (sl. no.: 24) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in tarn taran district, punjab state, india. before 1967, the name of constituency was sarhali.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india tarn taran district
eino siren (25 december 1909, helsinki - 4 march 1981) was a finnish lawyer and politician of the social democratic party of finland. he served as a member of the parliament of finland from 1962 to 1970 and as president of the nordic council in 1967.  references  1909 births 1981 deaths politicians from helsinki people from uusimaa province (grand duchy of finland) social democratic party of finland politicians members of the parliament of finland (1962-66) members of the parliament of finland (1966-70)
ahmed mian soomro (sindhi: احمد میاں سومرو;) was a pakistani politician who belonged to a political family from sindh province that has been active in public life since 1923.  career he belonged to district jaccobabad of sindh province.  he served as deputy speaker and senior deputy speaker of the west pakistan assembly (june 12, 1965 to mar 25, 1969); he was a member of the senate and helped to establish the senate committee systems. he remained active in local politics at district level.  family he has three wife's begum razia soomro, begum saeeda soomro and begum sarwat un nisa soomro and three children named as mr mohammed mian soomro (son) mrs maliha malik (daughter ) and mrs sarah soomro (daughter)  his son, muhammad mian soomro, has held various positions in national and international organisations. he also held various top level political positions and served as governor of sindh (2000-2002), chairman senate of pakistan (2003-2007), caretaker prime minister of pakistan (2007-2008) acting president of pakistan (2008), and chairman senate of pakistan (2008-2009)  references  date of birth missing (living people) living people political families of pakistan politicians from sindh ahmed mian year of birth missing (living people) members of the provincial assembly of west pakistan deputy speakers of the provincial assembly of west pakistan
peerewal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of peerewal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, peerewal has total number of 110 houses and population of 596 of which include 314 males and 282 females. literacy rate of peerewal is 73.99%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 100 which is 16.78% of total population of peerewal, and child sex ratio is approximately 852, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
wojda or woyda is a gender-neutral polish surname.  notable people with this surname include: edward wojda (1941-1990), polish wrestler  karol fryderyk woyda (1771-1845), president of warsaw, poland kazimierz woyda (1812-1877), president of warsaw, son of karol tadeusz wojda (born 1957), polish archbishop witold woyda (1939-2008), polish fencer wojciech wojda (born 1966), polish singer  polish-language surnames
brachyolenecamptus fuscosticticus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1948. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
elias van breussegem (born 10 april 1992) is a belgian cyclist, who currently rides for uci continental team .  major results 2014  1st  time trial, national under-23 road championships 2015  4th grote prijs stad zottegem 2016  1st omloop het nieuwsblad u23  7th overall le triptyque des monts et chateaux  9th duo normand (with christophe premont) 2021   1st dorpenomloop rucphen  references  external links  1992 births living people belgian male cyclists people from oudenaarde
timpas creek is a stream in the u.s. state of colorado.  there is some uncertainty in the origin of the place name timpas. the area's first european explorers settlers were spanish, then mexican. timpa or timpas is spanish for tympstone, the port of a blast furnace from which molten slag drains. alternatively, timpas can also be interpreted as "furnace hearth" -  of the shaley and marly rocks of the old benton group, the quarried timpas limestone would be the thickest and least unsuitable stone for the job.  john dawson, writing in 1954 in place names in colorado, states that the creek was named for the "timpas limestone" quarried near the mouth of the creek on to the arkansas river, and is still quarried today on the bluffs southeast of rocky ford. however, g.k. gilbert, when reporting on the geology of the arkansas river in 1896, naming new units to replace the old benton shale, acknowledged that the timpas was already a local name for the limestone outcropping over the bluffs of the creek, suggesting that the limestone was named for the creek.  gilbert recognized that the timpas limestone correlated with the fort hays limestone; and, in 1964, the name tampas limestone was abandoned, replaced by fort hays limestone.  see also list of rivers of colorado  references  rivers of las animas county, colorado rivers of otero county, colorado rivers of colorado
the azerbaijan grand prix () is a formula one motor racing event that was held for the first time in . it is held on the baku city circuit, a street circuit in baku, the capital of azerbaijan.  history the first formula one grand prix to be held in azerbaijan was the 2016 european grand prix, which took place at the baku city circuit. a year later, in 2017, the same venue hosted the first azerbaijan grand prix. the race was held on 25 june and was one of five races to be held on a street circuit during the 2017 formula one season, along with the singapore, monaco, australian and canadian grands prix. the first azerbaijan grand prix winner was daniel ricciardo of red bull.  the 2018 azerbaijan grand prix took place on 29 april as the 4th round of the season and was won by lewis hamilton.  the 2019 azerbaijan grand prix was held on 28 april as the 4th round of the season. in march 2020, the 2020 race was postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic, before being cancelled later in the year. the 2021 azerbaijan grand prix featured as the 6th round of the season.  no formula one driver has ever won in baku twice so far, although the race was won twice by mercedes (2018 and 2019) and red bull (2017 and 2021).  winners  repeat winners (constructors) teams in bold are competing in the formula one championship in the current season.  repeat winners (engine manufacturers) manufacturers in bold are competing in the formula one championship in the current season.  by year  notes  references    formula one grands prix national grands prix auto races in azerbaijan sports competitions in baku 2017 establishments in azerbaijan recurring sporting events established in 2017
antun radic (desno trebarjevo, 11 june 1868 - zagreb, 10 february 1919)  was a croatian scientist, writer, translator, journalist, sociologist, ethnographer and politician. he is the founder of croatian ethnography.  biography  early life and education antun radic was born in desno trebarjevo, martinska ves near sisak in the kingdom of croatia-slavonia within austria-hungary as the eighth of eleven children in the family of poor peasants, ana (nee posilovic) and imbra radic. his younger brother, born as the ninth child, was croatian politician stjepan radic.  after finishing elementary school in martinska ves, radic went to zagreb where he continued his education in the elite upper town gymnasium, after which he enrolled in the study of slavic studies and classical philology at the universities in zagreb and vienna. he received his phd from the university of zagreb in 1892 with the thesis "on some eschatological motifs in croatian literature".  professional work since 1892, radic worked as teacher in schools in osijek, pozega, varazdin and zagreb. after 1897 parliamentary elections, at the request of ban karoly khuen-hedervary, radic was discharged from the service because he did not want to vote for the pro-hungarian government candidate.  from 1897 to 1901, he worked as editor of the "almanac of public life and customs of the south slavs". from 1901 to 1909, he worked as secretary of the matica hrvatska and was one of the founders and editors of "voice of matica hrvatska" magazine. radic was also the founder of dom magazine, published between 1899 and 1904. subtitled "paper for the croatian peasant for talk and lesson", it was the first croatian magazine for peasants, which greatly contributed to the cultural and national-political development of the croatian villages. in 1917, radic took a job as a professor at zagreb upper town gymnasium, where he taught until his death.  political work on 22 december 1904, antun and stjepan founded croatian peoples' peasant party (hpss). in 1910 parliamentary election, he was elected to the croatian parliament. during his term in office, he actively advocated the reform of local government and educational system. as member of hpps, he was elected to the parliament three times (1910, 1911, 1913).  death antun radic died on 10 february 1919. after his death, authorities in the newly established kingdom of yugoslavia did
not grant a pension to his widow vilma so she lost her livelihood and when she got a court order to leave the apartment for not paying the rent, she went on july 6, 1919 to his grave and drank poison which killed her. at that time, the authorities persecuted and imprisoned many leaders of croatian peasant party and it was thought that vilma actually committed suicide in protest against those persecutions. he was buried at mirogoj cemetery on 12 february 1919.  scientific work radic greatly influenced political activity of his brother stjepan with his ethnological research. he emphasized the connection between the national liberation with social, warning that complete national freedom cannot be achieved by the simple removal of foreign national oppression. in addition to folklore, radic also dealt with the literary and historical topics in his scientific papers and also translated works of prominent russian writers (pushkin, gogol and tolstoy).  antun radic reputedly spoke croatian, latin, german, french, italian, czech, bulgarian, polish and russian, all fluently.  legacy many schools, streets and squares across croatia were named after antun radic. in 1995, order of danica hrvatska was established. order is divided into seven equally valuable decorations of which one aworded for special merits in education, is named after antun radic.  works  o nekim eshatoloskijem motivima u hrvatskoj knizevnosti [on some eschatological motifs in croatian literature], tisak dionicke tiskare, zagreb, 1893.  osnova za sabiranje i proucavanje građe o narodnom zivotu [the basis for the collection and study of materials on folk life], p. 1.-88., zbornik za narodni zivot i obicaje juznih slavena., book 2., zagreb, 1897. (also edited books: no. 3, 1898.; no. 4, 1899.; no. 5, 1900.; no. 6, 1901.)  osnova za sabiranje i proucavanje građe o narodnom zivotu [the basis for the collection and study of materials on folk life], tisak dionicke tiskare, zagreb 1897. special print from book no. 2. from the anthology of folk life and customs of south slavs  "zivot" t.j. smrt hrvatskoga preporoda? ["life" i.e. death of the croatian national revival], tisak c. albre
chta, zagreb, 1899.  hrvati i magjari ili hrvatska politika i "riecka rezolucija". [croats and hungarians or croatian politics and "resolution of rijeka"], politicka knjiznica h. p. s. s., volume 1., zagreb, 1905. matica hrvatska, tiskara i litografija mile maravica, zagreb, 1906. (special print: hrvatska misao)  novinstvo i knjizevnici prema matici hrvatskoj. [press and writers to matica hrvatska] knjige matice hrvatske za god. 1905., tiskara i litografija mile maravica, zagreb, 1906. (special print: hrvatska misao)  sto je i sto hoce hrvatska pucka seljacka stranka. [what is croatian peasant party and what it wants], ante radic and stjepan radic, hrvatska pucka seljacka tiskara, zagreb, 1908.  post mortem  osnova za sabiranje i proucavanje gradje o narodnom zivotu [the basis for the collection and study of the structure of national life], 2. ed., jazu, zagreb, 1929.  kako covjek postaje covjek [as a man becomes a man], radiceva obrazovna knjiznica, vol 3, zagreb, 1930. (2. ed., 1930.)  obrisi hrvatske povijesti u starom i srednjem vijeku [the contours of croatian history in the ancient and medieval times], radiceva obrazovna knjiznica, vol. 7, zagreb, 1930. (2. ed., 1930.)  obrisi hrvatske povijesti u novom vijeku [the contours of croatian history in the modern times], radiceva obrazovna knjiznica, vol. 8, zagreb, 1930.  sabrana djela dra antuna radica [the collected works of dr. antun radic], b. i-xix, zagreb, 1936.-1939.  sto si hrvat ili srbin: odabrano iz spisa antuna radica [what are you a croat or a serb: selected from the writings of antun radic], biblioteka gospodarski pogledi dr. antuna radica, ed. ante miljak, b. 1, ljudevit,
vinkovci, 1990.  osnova za sabiranje i proucavanje građe o narodnom zivotu [the basis for the collection and study of the structure of national life], dom i svijet, zagreb, 1997 (predgovor: andre mohorovicic)  references  sources      1868 births 1919 deaths people from martinska ves, sisak-moslavina county people from the kingdom of croatia-slavonia croatian peasant party politicians representatives in the croatian parliament (1848-1918) burials at mirogoj cemetery 19th-century croatian people 20th-century croatian people
lars stefan sundelin (8 february 1936 - 18 january 2003) was a swedish sailor. he was a cousin of the brothers jorgen, peter and ulf sundelin who competed as a team at the 1968 and 1972 olympics and at the world championships in between. at the 1976 summer olympics ulf was replaced by stefan, and the sundelin team finished ninth in the three-person keelboat event.  references   1936 births 2003 deaths sailors at the 1976 summer olympics - soling olympic sailors of sweden swedish male sailors (sport)
the 2006 gfs marketplace 400 was a nascar nextel cup series stock car race held on august 20, 2006, at michigan international speedway in brooklyn, michigan. contested over 200 laps on a  speedway, it was the 23rd race of the 2006 nascar nextel cup series season. matt kenseth of roush racing won the race.  background michigan international speedway (mis) is a  moderate-banked d-shaped speedway located off u.s. highway 12 on more than   approximately  south of the village of brooklyn, in the scenic irish hills area of southeastern michigan. the track is used primarily for nascar events. it is sometimes known as a "sister track" to texas world speedway, and was used as the basis of auto club speedway. the track is owned by international speedway corporation (isc). michigan international speedway is recognized as one of motorsports' premier facilities because of its wide racing surface and high banking (by open-wheel standards; the 18-degree banking is modest by stock car standards).  entry list  qualifying  results  race statistics  time of race: 2:57:39  average speed:   pole speed:   cautions: 10 for 36 laps  margin of victory: 0.622 sec  lead changes: 26  percent of race run under caution: 18%           average green flag run: 14.9 laps  references   gfs marketplace 400 gfs marketplace 400 nascar races at michigan international speedway gfs marketplace 400
black rock is an extinct community located in warren township in warren county, indiana, near the border with tippecanoe county.  the site, which is still listed as a populated place by the usgs, is mostly forested and is part of the black rock nature preserve administered by niches land trust.  geography  black rock is located at  along warren county road 350 north. the site occupies a prominent outcropping of mansfield sandstone that overlooks the wabash river.  references  external links   black rock nature preserve  former populated places in warren county, indiana ghost towns in indiana
the royal tank regiment memorial is a sculpture by vivien mallock in whitehall court, london. it commemorates the royal tank regiment.  the sculptural group depicts the five-man crew of a world war ii-era comet tank at 1½ times life size. general sir antony walker, who was in charge of fundraising for the memorial, described it as "a memorial to the men of the regiment, rather than the machines". it is an enlarged version of a maquette by george henry paulin in the tank museum, bovington, dorset, which dates to 1953. mallock's husband had been an officer in the rtr in the 1960s. a resin cast of mallock's group also stands outside the tank museum.  the memorial was unveiled by queen elizabeth ii, colonel-in-chief of the rtr, on 13 june 2000. she was escorted to the ceremony by an armoured rolls royce from 1924, a precursor to the tank. the date was the centenary of a battle in the second boer war in which the tank pioneer sir ernest dunlop swinton took part. other memorials to the rtr are in newcastle-upon-tyne and the national memorial arboretum in alrewas, staffordshire.  gallery  references  external links    memorial military memorials in london 2000 sculptures 2000 in london 2000 establishments in england outdoor sculptures in london whitehall
tihomir ivaylov ivanov (bulgarian: тихомир иваилов иванов; born 11 july 1994) is a bulgarian athlete specialising in the high jump. he won a gold medal at the 2019 summer universiade in naples.  he has personal bests of 2.31 metres outdoors (london 2017) and 2.28 metres indoors (banska bystrica & beograd 2017).  competition record  1no mark in the final  references  1994 births living people bulgarian male high jumpers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of bulgaria sportspeople from pleven universiade gold medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade gold medalists for bulgaria medalists at the 2019 summer universiade
the swan 82 was designed by german frers and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 2000. this was an extended version of the swan 80 hull. this was initially launched as a raised saloon but later and flush deck and semi raised saloon were introduced.  external links  nautor swan  german frers official website  references  sailing yachts keelboats 2000s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan
cylindrepomus grammicus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by francis polkinghorne pascoe in 1860. it is known from fiji, moluccas, indonesia, the solomon islands, australia, papua new guinea, and sulawesi.  varietas  cylindrepomus grammicus var. acuminatus schwarzer, 1926  cylindrepomus grammicus var. latefasciatus breuning, 1940  cylindrepomus grammicus var. oxypterus fairmaire, 1879  cylindrepomus grammicus var. waigeuensis gilmour, 1950  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1860
irina igorevna gubanova (; 1940-2000) was a russian ballerina and film actress. she was married to the actor sergei gurzo.  selected filmography   the girl without an address (1958)  the queen of spades (1960) as polina  man follows the sun (1962) as episode  the horizon (1962) as vera  713 requests permission to land (1962) as young wife, american passenger  a trip without a load (1963) as doctor (uncredited)  the first trolleybus (1963) as sveta soboleva  i accept the fight (1963) as tamara  where are you now, maxim? (1965) as alka  war and peace (1965-1967, part 1-4) as sonia rostova  the green carriage (1967) as masha dontsova  the snow queen (1967) as princess elsa  virineya (1969) as antonina  the snow maiden (1969) as kupava  the beginning (1970) as episode (uncredited)  dreams of love - liszt (1970) as olga janina  every evening after work (1974) as ellochka  heavenly swallows (1976) as caroline  stepan's remembrance (1977) as nastya yegorovna, wife of stepan   a day to think (1980) as episode  woman in white (1981) as countess fosco  sicilian defense (1981) as yanina stanislavovna gronskaya (museum expert)  women joke seriously (1981) as episode  the eighth wonder of the world (1982) as chernova  private life (1982) as nelli petrovna  az elet muzsikaja - kalman imre (1984) as nurse  through all the years (1985) as episode  battle of moscow (1985, tv series) as mother of zoya kosmodemyanskaya  complicity in murder (1985) as mrs. summers  podroze pana kleksa (1986) as queen banyaluka  face to face (1987) as jaquelin  horse riders (1987) as  episode (segment "theorist")  the blackmailer (1988) as principal  cyrano de bergerac (1989) as the duenna  homo novus (1990) as school principal  shop "rubinchik and ..." (1992) as homeless lady (final film role)  references  bibliography   peter cowie / derek elley. world filmography: 1967. fairleigh dickinson university press, 1977.
external links     1940 births 2000 deaths deaths from pneumonia in russia russian film actresses russian ballerinas soviet film actresses soviet ballerinas actresses from saint petersburg 20th-century russian actresses burials at serafimovskoe cemetery soviet voice actresses russian voice actresses vaganova graduates
the symphony no. 1 in f major, op. 29, is a three-movement orchestral composition by the finnish composer leevi madetoja, who wrote the piece from 1914-16 at the dawn of his professional career. although late-romantic in style, the symphony carefully eschews the extravagance and overindulgence typical of debut efforts, placing it among the most "mature" and restrained of first symphonies. accordingly, the first is the shortest and most concentrated of madetoja's three essays in the form and is the only one of his symphonies not to adhere to the traditional four-movement symphonic template.  the helsinki philharmonic orchestra premiered the work in helsinki, finland on 10 february 1916 under the composer's baton. the critics received the premiere warmly, concluding that an important symphonic talent had arrived on the finnish music scene, the new work's echoes of sibelius and tchaikovsky notwithstanding.  history  despite the ongoing hostilities of world war i, madetoja traveled to russia in september 1914 to take up the conductorship of the viipuri orchestra (1914-16). madetoja found the orchestra in a state of relative devastation: he was able to piece together 19 musicians, a reality that forced him to spend much of his time finding and arranging material for such an undersized ensemble. and yet, he somehow found the time to begin the biggest project of his young career: a symphony. during the composition process, which madetoja's conducting duties repeatedly disturbed (for example, he completed the finale just before the scheduled premiere), madetoja received a letter of encouragement from jean sibelius, finland's greatest symphonist (as well as madetoja's former teacher):  madetoja officially joined the ranks of symphonic composers on 10 february 1916; the helsinki philharmonic orchestra premiered the new work under the composer's own baton (robert kajanus, the founder and chief conductor of the orchestra, was the dedicatee). sibelius's "firm belief" indeed proved prescient, as the critics received the new work warmly; the general impression was that an important new symphonic talent had arrived. for example, the finnish critic  praised madetoja's symphony in uusi suometar, writing, "the symphony appeals through the logic of its construction and the translucent brightness of its orchestration."  sibelius, who was in attendance, also remarked upon the symphony's beauty. nevertheless, the teacher eyed his former student's maturation somewhat wearily. for example, when some reviews of the first symphony discerned within madetoja's music the influence of sibelius (for example,  in huf
vudstadsbladet), he worried his former pupil might take offence at the comparison and mistook madetoja's characteristic "melancholia" for "sulkiness". suddenly, sibelius found madetoja arrogant and watched with concern as he drew closer to kajanus, with whom sibelius had an on-again-off-again friendship/rivalry. "met madetoja, who-i'm sorry to say-has become pretty bumptious after his latest success," sibelius fretted to his diary. "kajanus smothers him with flattery and he hasn't the breeding to see it for what it is".  orchestration  woodwind: piccolo, 3 flutes, 2 oboes, cor anglais, 2 clarinets, bass clarinet, 2 bassoons brass: 4 horns, 3 trumpets, 3 trombones, tuba percussion: timpani, triangle, cymbals, bass drum, snare drum, tambourine strings: violins, violas, cellos, double basses, harp  structure  the first symphony is in three movements and, as such, is the only one of madetoja's three symphonies to eschew the traditional four-movement symphonic format. the movements are as follows:  allegro  lento misterioso  finale: allegro vivace  first movement  the first movement is in traditional sonata form; the first subject-allegro-is in f major and 3/4 time.  the "dreamy" second subject (meno allegro), in d-flat major, is reminiscent of tchaikovsky; relative to the first movement, it is, according to the finnish musicologist erkki salmenhaara, "from a different world, an oasis of calm which brings the symphonic process to a standstill".  second movement  the second movement, the slowest in tempo and the longest in duration of the three, is "redolent with a deep finnish melancholy". the first subject-lento misterioso-consists of a dissonant, siren-like motif on flutes juxtaposed against a lugubrious solo cello, their interplay periodically interrupted by ominous interjections from the brass. half-way through the movement, the second subject-poco tranquillo-appears: a delicate woodwind dialogue in f-sharp minor between oboe, clarinet, and flute, supported by string bass pizzicati, strings, and horns. although this passage recalls the third movement of sibelius's third symphony, it is by no means derivative; the subject is, according to finnish musicologist erk
ki salmenhaara, "all madetoja's own". the movement ends with the return of the first subject, but modified such that solo cor anglais takes up the original cello line.  third movement  discography  thus far, madetoja's first symphony has been recorded only by nordic orchestras, usually as a component piece of a larger recording project of madetoja's major orchestral works, such as those by  and the iceland symphony orchestra (1991-92), arvo volmer and the oulu symphony orchestra (1998-2006), and john storgards and the helsinki philharmonic orchestra (2012-13).  in his review of the sakari and volmer efforts, the american record guide's tom godell applauds madetoja for his ability to "craft beautiful, swirling rainbows of vivid color in every one of his scores," but nevertheless faults the first symphony for is "lack of memorable themes or smooth transitions," asserting that "all too often madetoja simply drops one idea, then abruptly moves on to the next. the result sounds more like a rough sketch than a polished final draft". fanfare's phillip scott, writing about storgards's recordings of the first and third symphonies, describes the former as "the most sibelian music on this disc" and praises madetoja for having composed "three of the 20th century's loveliest symphonies". the general impression of both reviewers seems to be that the volmer and storgards recordings, "irrepressib[ly] vigor[ous]" and "passionate", respectively, are superior to the slower, "more laid-back" interpretation of sakari.  references and sources  references  sources   books  cd liner notes  websites  journal articles      symphonies by leevi madetoja 1916 compositions compositions in f major
in the 10th through 13th centuries, the lords of esch (french seigneurs d'esch) were the holders of the castle of esch-sur-sure in the ardennes region of lower lorraine, then a part of the holy roman empire.  fredelo fredelo (or frithelo, french fredelon) (d. between 1083 and 1085), of unknown parentage, was the patriarch of the house of esch, which produced several notable knights in service of the crusades. fredelon's family were likely vassals of henry iii, count of luxembourg, and his brother and successor william.  fredelon was avoue (or vogt) of the abbeys of malmedy and echternach, and also known to be their despoiler. fredelon was an accomplice to giselbert, count of clermont, in a variety of nefarious enterprises.  fredelon and giselbert terrorized the region near nandrin preventing inhabitants from performing even the basic of tasks.  henri de verdun, bishop of liege, gave this land to conon, count of montaigu, forcing fredelon and giselbert to restore the resultant damage.  fredelon and giselbert were the lords of castle clermont in 1095 and engaged in brigandage, although these two regarded their activity as the legitimate levying of tolls on river traffic. otbert, henri's successor, organized a siege of the castle but was unsuccessful. a 1095 entry in the chronicle of giles of orval reveals that otbert's objective was ultimately accomplished by purchase, resulting in the enfeoffment of the property to his vassal lambert, count of montaigu.  giselbert subsequently joined the first crusade.  it is unclear as to what fredelon did after his ouster.  children of fredelo fredelon was married twice.  by his first wife, whose name is unknown, he had two sons:  henry of esch (d. after 1097) (henricus de ascha), crusader with godfrey of bouillon  godfrey of esch (), crusader with godfrey of bouillon. second, fredelon married ermengarde, countess of clermont, widow of gozelon, count of montaigu.  fredelon and ermenrgard had one son:  giselbert (d. after 18 march 1131), count of esch, who married aelide, of unknown origin.  it is unclear how giselbert was to become the count of esch and it is not until two generations later
that another count of esch appears.  later generations giselbert, son of fredelon, (to distinguish him from fredelon's accomplice giselbert, count of clermont) had at least one son, renard (d. after 1157), who was seigneur de hermalle-sous-huy, and had some relationship with godefroi, count of montaigu and clermont.  he married a woman named lietgard, daughter of robert richira.  they had a son henri (d. after 1187), also seigneur de hermalle-sous-huy, who witnessed a charter in 1182 regarding a matter involving conon, count of montaigu and duras.  the next generation also include godfrey ii (gottfried) (d. 1150 or after), count of esch, although it is unclear which of the sons of fredelon was his father.  he married alix de grandpre, widow of godefroi, count of durbuy.  godfrey and alix had five children:  robert (d. 25 august 1170), abbe de foigny  heinrich ii  friedrich  bartholomaus von esch (d. before 1192)  ermengarde.  bartholomaus founded the priory of ufeldange in 1182, as described in a charter confirmed by arnold i of vaucourt, archbishop of trier.  the name of his wife is unknown, but they had two children:  godfrey iii von esch (d. after 1182)  heinrich iii von esch (d. before 1220)  heinrich had a son robert i von esch (d. between 13 october 1262 and january 1266) who married ermengarde d'aspremont (d. after 1271).  ermengarde was brother to jean d'aspremont who was both bishop of verdun from 1217-1224  (as john i of aspremont) and bishop of metz from 1224-1238 (as johann of aspremont).  ermengarde's parents were ida of chiny, daughter of albert, count of chiny, and gobert v, lord of aspremont.  robert's son heinrich iv von esch appears to have been married to a member of the house of salm but the precise relationship there is unclear.  his son godfrey d'esch was the last member of the house of esch to appear in historical documents, participating in the tournament of chauvency, sponsored by louis v,
count of chiny.  godfrey was championed by his niece perrine.  sources  murray, alan v., "the army of godfrey of bouillon, 1096-1099: structure and dynamics of a contingent on the first crusade" (pdf), revue belge de philologie et d'histoire 70 (2), 1992 medieval lands project, herren von esch (an der sauer) medieval lands project, seigneurs d'aspremont le long, nicolas, histoire ecclesiastique et civile du duche de luxembourg et comte de chiny, chevalier, 1783 (available on google books) bretel, jacques, le tournoi de chauvency, 1285 (manuscripts: mons ms 330-215 and oxford ms douce 308). esch-sur-sure castle at visit luxembourg  references   christians of the first crusade
brian g. coogan is an american politician and a former democratic member of the rhode island house of representatives who represented district 83 followed by district 64 (after redistricting) from 2000 until january 2005. in the rhode island house, he served on the committee on corporations. coogan also served on the east providence city council from 2008 to 2010.  coogan is a native of east providence. while serving as a state representative, coogan was the witness to a bank robbery at an east providence bankri. representative coogan tailed the bank robber while on the phone with police until the suspect was apprehended.  in 2016, coogan unsuccessfully sought election once again for district 64 after helio melo vacated the seat.  since leaving state and municipal government, coogan has transitioned into life in the private sector.  as a real estate investor, coogan purchased the former bovi's tavern property, a former jazz club in east providence. the area surrounding the former bovi's, known as six corners, is currently under development with coogan securing commercial, retail, and residential tenants. he rebranded horton's seafood, a family-run business into a restaurant serving mexican fare called the burrito bowl.  references  external links brian coogan at ballotpedia  place of birth missing (living people) 1970 births living people members of the rhode island house of representatives people from east providence, rhode island politicians in east providence, rhode island rhode island democrats
simone ruffini (born 7 december 1989) is an italian swimmer who specializes in long-distance freestyle swimming, especially open water swimming. he won the gold medal in the men's 25 km open water swimming at the 2015 world aquatics championships.  references  1989 births living people italian male swimmers italian male long-distance swimmers olympic swimmers of italy swimmers at the 2016 summer olympics universiade medalists in swimming people from the province of macerata universiade gold medalists for italy swimmers of gruppo sportivo esercito medalists at the 2011 summer universiade
boffi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  aldo boffi (1915-1987), italian footballer franco boffi (born 1958), italian middle-distance runner jose luis boffi (1897-1981), argentine footballer and manager luigi boffi (1846-1904), italian architect  italian-language surnames
joey daleboudt (; born ), better known by his stage name joey dale, is a dutch dj, record producer and musician from rotterdam.  the majority of his releases are on hardwell's label revealed recordings.  career  in 2014, dale collaborated with dutch dj hardwell to release the song "arcadia" which charted in belgium and france. in 2015, he released "winds" with rico & miella. in 2016, he collaborated with american producer ryos to release the song "armageddon" featuring singer/songwriter tony rodini via revealed recordings. he also released "crowd control" with pitchback and "lights out" with quintino.  discography  singles  charting singles  other singles  2013: cracked [oxygen (spinnin')]  2013: poing! (with justin prime) (original mix) [dim mak records]  2014: ready for action (with alvaro) [spinnin records]  2014: shockwave [revealed recordings]  2014: watcha called me [revealed recordings]  2014: about the drop out [revealed recordings]  2014: arcadia (with hardwell) [revealed recordings]  2014: step into your light (featuring natalie angiuli) (with ares carter) [zouk recordings (armada)]  2014: deja vu (featuring delora) (with dvbbs) [spinnin records]  2014: access denied [doorn (spinnin)]  2015: gladiator [revealed recordings]  2015: zodiac [revealed recordings]  2015: haunted house [revealed recordings]  2015: the harder they fall [revealed recordings]  2015: timecode (with thomas newson) [revealed recordings]  2015: winds (with rico & miella) [revealed recordings]  2015: epsilon [revealed recordings]  2016: where dreams are made (featuring monstere) [revealed recordings]  2016: long way home (with paris & simo and brandon lethi) [revealed recordings]  2016: lights out (with quintino and channi monroe) [spinnin records]  2016: "makes me wonder" (with reece low) [armada trice]   2016: "armageddon" (with ryos and tony rodini) [revealed recordings]  2016: "everest" (with ravitez) [wall recordings]  2016: "higher" (with olly james) [revealed recordings]  2016: "crowd control" (with pitchback)
[revealed recordings]  2016: "shake it" (with maddix) [revealed recordings]  2017: "rogue ones" (with adventurer and micah martin) [revealed recordings]  2017: "show me" [mixmash deep]  2017: "taking me home" (with anthony dircson featuring kennedy ihaka) [houston, taxes]  2017: "under my sheets" (with rico & miella) [joey dale music]  2017: "black sahara" (with kaaze featuring aloma steele) [revealed recordings]  2018: "all in my head" (with luca testa featuring phillip matta) [maxximize]  remixes  2015: swanky tunes, c. todd nielsen - fire in our hearts (joey dale remix) [revealed recordings]  references  notes  a  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the flemish ultratip chart.  b  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the walloon ultratip chart.  c  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the dance bubbling under chart.  sources  external links    1993 births living people dutch dance musicians dutch djs dutch record producers dutch house musicians remixers musicians from rotterdam revealed recordings artists electronic dance music djs
a by-election was held on 31 july 2016 to fill vacancies in four districts of the tokyo metropolitan assembly. the elections were held simultaneously with the gubernatorial election. nominations for the election were announced on 22 july 2016. liberal democratic party candidates won all four elections.  ota district the ota district, which corresponds with ota city, elects eight members to the 127-member assembly. ken tanaka, a second-term democratic party member who placed 1st in the 2009 election and 7th in the 2013 election, resigned from his seat in the assembly to contest the next national general election. in the closest contest of the four districts, ldp candidate hiroyuki yamamori defeated democratic party candidate ai mori by 4,141 votes (1.32%).  shibuya district the shibuya district, which corresponds with shibuya city, elects two members to the assembly. liberal democrat hideko murakami, who was serving her fourth term in the assembly since being first elected in the november 2003 by-election, resigned from the assembly to contest the shibuya mayoral election that was held on 26 april 2015, in which she placed third.  shinjuku district the shinjuku district, which corresponds with shinjuku city, elects four members to the 127-member assembly. kenichi yoshizumi resigned from the assembly to contest the november 2014 shinjuku mayoral election, which he won.  taito district the taito district, which corresponds with taito city, elects two members to the 127-member assembly. liberal democrat yukuo hattori, who was serving his third term in the assembly, resigned to contest the taito mayoral election on 1 march 2015, which he won with 47.9% of the vote in a six-candidate contest.  references  2016 elections in japan july 2016 events in japan 2016 2016 in tokyo
sphingomonas guangdongensis  is a gram-negative bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from lead-zinc ore in meizhou in the guangdong province in china.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas guangdongensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  guangdongensis bacteria described in 2014
the probasco-dittner farmstead is a historic farmstead in colts neck township, in monmouth county, new jersey, united states. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since february 1, 2006.  references  colts neck township, new jersey houses on the national register of historic places in new jersey american colonial architecture houses completed in 1735 houses in monmouth county, new jersey national register of historic places in monmouth county, new jersey
the 1967-68 new orleans buccaneers season was the 1st season of the aba and of the buccaneers. the pipers finished first in the western division, going all the way to the aba finals.  in the western division semifinals, the bucs beat the denver rockets in five games. in the division finals, they won three straight over the dallas chaparrals to win the series in five games. in the aba finals, the bucs and the pittsburgh pipers split the six games of the series (with a game 6 loss at home) that set up a pivotal game 7 in pittsburgh. the pipers won the game and the finals 122-113.  roster  24 jesse branson - small forward	  11 larry brown - point guard		  23 john comeaux - forward		  31 john dickson - center  25 gerald govan - center	  15 jimmy jones - shooting guard	  22 leland mitchell - shooting guard  34 doug moe - small forward  32 jackie moreland - power forward  12 marlbert pradd - shooting guard  21 red robbins - center   14 red stroud - guard  23 ron widby - forward  final standings  western division  record vs. opponents  playoffs western division semifinals  western division finals  aba finals  bucs lose series, 4-3  awards, records, and honors 1968 aba all-star game played on january 9, 1968  doug moe   larry brown    jimmy jones   red robbins  brown (7-of-9 for 17 points) was named all-star mvp.  references   buccaneers on basketball reference  new orleans new orleans buccaneers new orleans buccaneers, 1967-68 new orleans buccaneers, 1967-68
this is a list of corps serving within the armies of the british empire during the second world war.  a corps was either a temporary military formation created for combat, or an "administrative" formation that coordinated specialist military functions across a national military force. a combat corps was composed of specialist units from various "administrative" corps from combat arms, combat support arms and combat services. combat arms were formation sized units from the corps of infantry and armour, usually 2 or more divisions in strength. combat support arms were smaller units from the corps of artillery, engineers, signals, intelligence or reconnaissance. combat services were units from the corps of medicine, general services, ordnance, pioneers, logistics and other more specialized functions. for example, i canadian corps consisted of 1 infantry division, 1 armour division, 1 armour brigade and corps troops (20 plus companies from the corps of engineers, signals, medicine, military police, etc...)  military formations within the british empire were composed of a changing mix of units from across britain, its colonies and the dominions. as a result, military formations within the empire and commonwealth are not easily attributable to specific imperial or national entities and naming conventions do not necessarily correlate with modern country names.  british army  field corps   i airborne corps  1 anti-aircraft corps  2 anti-aircraft corps  3 anti-aircraft corps  i corps  ii corps   iii corps  iv corps  v corps  vii corps  viii corps  ix corps   x corps  xi corps  xii corps  xiii corps  xxx corps  combat arms   army air corps  corps of royal marines   royal armoured corps  royal tank corps  combat support arms  reconnaissance corps royal engineers  intelligence corps   royal artillery  royal corps of signals  combat services  army catering corps auxiliary territorial service corps of military police  general service corps  military provost staff corps  pioneer corps  royal army medical corps   royal army ordnance corps  royal army pay corps  royal army service corps  royal army veterinary corps  royal electrical and mechanical engineers  other   army educational corps  mechanised transport corps  non-combatant corps   royal army dental corps  royal army physical training corps   royal electrical and mechanical engineers  imperial and dominion  australian army field corps  i australian corps ii australian corps  iii australian corps anzac corps  combat arms  royal australian armoured corps royal australian infantry corps australian army aviation corps  combat support arms  australian machine gun corps royal australian artillery royal australian corps of signals  royal australian engineers australian intelligence corps  combat services
australian instructional corps australian army band corps australian army catering corps australian army veterinary corps australian staff corps corps of staff cadets  royal australian army chaplains department royal australian army dental corps royal australian army medical corps royal australian army nursing corps royal australian army ordnance corps royal australian army pay corps  royal australian army service corps royal australian corps of military police royal australian corps of transport royal australian electrical and mechanical engineers royal australian survey corps women's royal australian army corps  other  civil construction corps  canadian army field corps   canadian corps  i canadian corps  ii canadian corps  combat arms   canadian infantry corps  canadian armoured corps  combat support arms   canadian intelligence corps  royal canadian artillery   corps of royal canadian engineers  royal canadian corps of signals  combat services   canadian army chaplain corps  canadian provost corps  canadian women's army corps  central canada aircraft detection corps(rcaf)  corps of military staff clerks  corps of royal canadian electrical and mechanical engineers  royal canadian army medical corps  royal canadian army pay corps  royal canadian army service corps  royal canadian army veterinary corps   royal canadian dental corps  royal canadian ordnance corps  royal canadian postal corps  other  canadian technical training corps canadian officers' training corps   canadian forestry corps corps of canadian fire fighters (auxiliary to uk)  army of india field corps  indian iii corps iv corps indian xv corps  indian xxi corps indian xxxiii corps  indian xxxiv corps burma corps  combat arms   infantry indian armoured corps  combat support arms   indian army air defence  indian army aviation corps indian army corps of signals   indian army corps of engineers  regiment of indian artillery  combat services   burma hospital corps  corps of indian military police  corps of indian electrical and mechanical engineers  indian army dental corps   indian army hospital corps  indian army medical corps  indian army ordnance corps  royal indian army service corps   military farm corps  pioneer corps remount veterinary corps  women's auxiliary corps (india)  new zealand military forces field corps   new zealand corps  anzac corps  combat arms   new zealand armoured corps  new zealand war-raised battalions  combat support arms   new zealand engineers  new zealand intelligence corps   royal regiment of new zealand artillery  royal new zealand corps of signals  combat services   new zealand military police  new zealand electrical and mechanical engineers  new zealand staff corps  new zealand veterinary corps  royal new zealand army medical corps  royal new zealand army nursing corps   royal new zealand army ordnance corps  royal new zealand corps of transport  women's auxiliary army corps (new zealand)  south african army field
corps  cape corps  south african coast defence corps  combat arms  south african tank corps infantry branch (citizen force)  combat support arms   south african corps of signals  south african engineer corps south african intelligence corps  combat services   army postal service  indian and malay service corps  native military corps  q services corps  south african corps of mechanics  south african corps of military police  south african medical corps  south african ordnance corps  south africa pay corps  south african service corps   south africa veterinary corps  technical services corps ("t corps") women's auxiliary army service  women's auxiliary military police corps  colonies and protectorates field corps (not all standard corps size)  bikaner camel corps ceylon planters' rifle corps east arab corps  hong kong volunteer defence corps   somaliland camel corps  combat support arms  east african artillery  rhodesian armoured corps  west african artillery west african engineers  combat services    african pioneer corps east african army service corps  east african military labour corps  fijian labour corps   gilbert islands labour corps mauritius civil labour corps  northern rhodesian african labour corps  solomon islands labour corps   southern rhodesian labour corps  west african military labour corps  west african army service corps women's auxiliary service (burma)  see also  list of british empire divisions in the second world war military history of the british commonwealth in the second world war  references  history of the second world war (104 volumes), her majesty's stationery office, london 1949 to 1993 official history of australia in the war of 1939-1945 (22 volumes), australian government printing service, 1952 to 1977  official history of the canadian army in the second world war, vol i six years of war, stacey, c p., queen's printer, ottawa, 1955  the canadian army 1939 - 1945, an official historical summary, stacey, c p., queen's printer, ottawa, 1948 official history of the indian armed forces in the second world war 1939-45 (24 volumes), combined inter-services historical section, india & pakistan, new delhi, 1956-1966 official history of new zealand in the second world war 1939-45, historical publications branch, wellington, new zealand, 1965  official lineages dnd, ottawa  british empire corps
indonesia participated in the 1986 asian games held in seoul, south korea from september 20, 1986 to october 5, 1986. this country was ranked ninth with 1 gold medal, 5 silver medals and 14 bronze medals with a total of 20 medals top.  medal summary  medal table  medalists  references  nations at the 1986 asian games 1986
pawan chopra is an indian actor who  works in films, tv shows and commercials. he received his theatre training from ebrahim alkazi living theatre.  filmography  films  television  web series  references  external links      21st-century indian male actors indian male film actors indian male television actors male actors in hindi cinema indian television presenters living people year of birth missing (living people)
tijana bogdanovic (, born 5 may 1998) is a serbian taekwondo athlete. she considers fellow taekwondo practitioner milica mandic as her idol.  career bogdanovic pursued her interest in taekwondo at the age of four, and started actively competing since 2004. she pursued her higher studies at the singidunum university in the field of psychology.  she represented serbia at the 2014 summer youth olympics in the women's 49kg event. she clinched a bronze medal in the women's flyweight event during the 2015 world taekwondo championships. she claimed a silver after losing to england's charlie maddock in the women's 48kg event during the 2015 european games. she was awarded the best young athlete of serbia in 2015.  she won a gold medal at the 2016 european taekwondo championships, but failed to defend the title two years later in kazan, claiming the bronze there. she made her olympic debut at the age of 18 as a schoolgirl during the 2016 summer olympics and she competed in the women's 49 kg category, where she clinched a silver medal. she was also the flagbearer for serbia at the 2016 summer olympics during the closing ceremony. she was awarded the sportswoman of the year by the olympic committee of serbia in 2016 following her success at the 2016 rio olympics.  she was knocked out of quarterfinal in the women's bantamweight event at the 2017 world taekwondo championships. she also reached round of 32 in the women's bantamweight event at the 2019 world taekwondo championships. she defeated china's wu jingyu to claim gold medal at the 2019 world taekwondo grand prix.  she also represented serbia at the 2020 summer olympics in the women's 49 kg category and won a bronze medal.  personal life bogdanovic lives in belgrade, serbia.  references  external links    serbian female taekwondo practitioners 1998 births living people sportspeople from krusevac taekwondo practitioners at the 2014 summer youth olympics taekwondo practitioners at the 2015 european games european games silver medalists for serbia european games medalists in taekwondo olympic taekwondo practitioners of serbia taekwondo practitioners at the 2016 summer olympics medalists at the 2016 summer olympics olympic silver medalists for serbia olympic medalists in taekwondo european champions for serbia universiade medalists in taekwondo universiade gold medalists for serbia world taekwondo championships medalists european taekwondo championships medalists medalists at the 2017 summer universiade taekwondo practitioners at the 2020 summer olympics medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic bronze medalists for serbia
the following are notable boarding schools in australia. there are 189 boarding schools in australia.  australian capital territory canberra girls' grammar school, deakin canberra grammar school, red hill queyanbean public high school, queanbean  new south wales  former boarding schools trinity grammar school, summer hill (until 2019)  northern territory haileybury rendall school kormilda college st philip's college, alice springs  queensland  south australia  tasmania  victoria  western australia  see also  list of schools in australia list of boarding schools list of international schools  references    boarding australia
ugreshskaya () is a station on the moscow central circle that opened in september 2016.  name the station's name from the street, ugreshskaya ulitsa, in which it is situated. the name comes from the nearby nikolo-ugreshsky monastery and is shared with a station on the moscow railway's little ring line.  originally, the name of the station was planned to be volgogradskaya; however, the city renamed it in august 2016, prior to opening.  transfer from january 2017, passengers may make out-of-station transfers to volgogradsky prospekt station on the metro's tagansko-krasnopresnenskaya line. initially a free transfer was not organized due to the considerable remoteness of these two stations. this is the longest transfer between the mcc and metro line in the entire system, the average transit time is nearly 12 minutes.  references  external links   mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who have played for chittagong vikings in twenty20 matches held by the bangladesh premier league. the chittagong vikings franchise was formed ahead of the 2015 bpl edition, replacing the former chittagong kings team which participated in the 2012 and 2013 bpl editions. the list includes all players who represented the kings. complying with other club lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a chittagong kings/vikings player, current players to the end of the 2015-16 bangladeshi cricket season.  a  aftab ahmed (2012-13)  anamul haque (2015-16)  arafat sunny senior (2011-12 to 2012-13)  ariful haque (2012-13)  asif ahmed (2015-16)  asif hasan (2015-16)  b  bilawal bhatti (pakistan; 2015-16)  ravi bopara (england; 2012-13)  dwayne bravo (west indies; 2011-12)  c  elton chigumbura (zimbabwe; 2015-16)  kyle coetzer (scotland; 2011-12)  kevon cooper (west indies; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  d  tillakaratne dilshan (sri lanka; 2015-16)  e  elias sunny (2015-16)  enamul haque (2011-12 to 2015-16)  f  faisal hossain (2011-12)  farhad reza (2011-12)  j  jahurul islam (2011-12)  shehan jayasuriya (sri lanka; 2012-13)  k  kamran akmal (pakistan; 2015-16)  chamara kapugedera (sri lanka; 2015-16)  l  dilhara lokuhettige (2012-13)  m  mahmudullah (2011-12 to 2012-13)  marshall ayub (2012-13)  mehrab hossain (2012-13)  jeevan mendis (sri lanka; 2015-16)  david miller (south africa; 2012-13)  mohammad amir (pakistan; 2015-16)  muttiah muralitharan (sri lanka; 2011-12)  n  naeem islam senior (2012-13 to 2015-16)  nasir jamshed (pakistan; 2011-12)  nurul hasan (2012-13)  o  jacob oram (new zealaand; 2012-13)  r  jason roy (
england; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  rubel hossain (2012-13)  s  saeed ajmal (pakistan; 2015-16)  sanjamul islam (2011-12)  shafiul islam (2015-16)  shamsur rahman (2011-12)  t  shaun tait (australia; 2012-13)  tamim iqbal (2011-12 to 2015-16)  taskin ahmed (2012-13 to 2015-16)  brendan taylor (zimbabwe; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  ryan ten doeschate (netherlands; 2012-13)  u  umar akmal (pakistan; 2015-16)  y  yasir ali (2015-16)  z  ziaur rahman (2011-12 to 2015-16)  references  lists of bangladeshi cricketers chittagong-related lists
the 2016-17 metal ligaen season was the 60th season of ice hockey in denmark. ten teams participated in the league. esbjerg energy defended their 2016 danish championship title by defeating gentofte stars four games to one in the finals. the regular season begun on 23 september 2016 and ended on 28 february 2017. the last final was played on 16 april 2017.  teams   teams licensed to play in the metal ligaen 2016-17  source: eliteprospects.com  regular season  league table  play-offs  g.the score for third place is goals, not games.  tv coverage  tv 2 sport got the rights of covering the 2016-17 season of metal ligaen.  regular season  source: metal ligaen  player statistics  scoring leaders the following players led the league in regular season points at the conclusion of games played on february 28, 2017.  references  external links  metal ligaen official website  dan 2015 in danish sport 2016 in danish sport seasons in superisligaen
john amadeus kiernan donovan (june 23, 1907 - january 1, 1993) was an attorney, author, dog breeder and virginia democratic politician who served part-time in the virginia senate representing fairfax county from 1952 until 1964.  early life and education born in edgewood, rhode island, donovan's family (he also had 3 sisters) moved to the washington d.c. metropolitan area when john was a child. he was educated at gonzaga college high school, georgetown university and the george washington university, receiving both an llm and llb. he married mary virginia mccarthy, and they had two daughters.  career donovan practiced law in virginia from 1933 until 1983, when he retired but continued to do legal work out of his home and remained active in his community. donovan moved to falls church, virginia in 1941 and served as the town attorney in the 1940s. he later proudly called himself the nuttiest trial lawyer in virginia.  he was active in the american bar association, the american judicature society and virginia bar association, as well as in his local lions club (serving as district governor and state parliamentarian). active in his local catholic church, st. james catholic church in falls church, as well as the knights of columbus and eagles, donovan was made a knight of the order of st. sylvester by pope pius xii. in 1956 the catholic war veterans named donovan their catholic layman of the year.  donovan and his wife bred irish wolfhounds and donovan served as president of the old dominion kennel club. with the assistance of their daughter's anne's illustrations, donovan published several books about dogs, mostly through the local publisher, denlinger:  you and your irish wolfhound (fairfax, virginia: denlinger, 1976) gaelic names for celtic dogs (with william watson denlinger) (fairfax, virginia: denlinger, 1980) the dogs in shakespeare (fairfax, virginia: denlinger 1980) the dog in philosophy  (fairfax, virginia: denlinger, 1985) the irish wolfhound - great symbol of ireland (loveland, colorado, alpine publ. 1986) the story of the dog - a compendium (west end printing company, falls churchm va, 1985) dog in sports (fairfax, virginia: denlinger 1988) the dogs found in the writings of charles dickens (fairfax, virginia: denlinger 1989) dogs in the writings of rudyard kipling (fairfax, virginia: denlinger 1991)  political career  donovan represented falls church, fairfax county and surrounding areas in
the state senate for three terms, 1952-1964, during the period of massive resistance as well as the growth of the northern virginia suburbs of washington, d.c. the district was initially numbered the 29th, and included prince william county and alexandria from donovan's original election in 1951 until the 1955 election. donovan's core falls church and fairfax area was reformulated for that election as the 28th district when growing northern virginia received some additional representation. during his legislative service, donovan also served as chairman of the interstate potomac river basin commission.  after the 1960 census documented additional growth in northern virginia which the virginia legislature's redistricting barely addressed, in april 1962 donovan joined with fellow fairfax county politician john c. webb, as well as c. harrison mann and kathryn h. stone of neighboring arlington county. all four broke with the byrd organization and challenged the gross under-representation of northern virginia (for example some rural districts had one delegate per 20,000 residents but fairfax county's two delegates each represented 143,000 people). a three-judge federal panel decided in their favor on november 28, 1962, but the state appealed. the united states supreme court eventually decided in their favor on june 15, 1964 in davis v. mann.  the 1962 redistricting (which was still in effect in the 1963 election) moved the 29th senatorial district to cover prince william county, rather than fairfax county, and renumbered the core of the old district covering fairfax county and falls church as the 27th district. like fellow state senator, armistead boothe, donovan declined to seek re-election. omer l. hirst and robert c. fitzgerald were elected as fairfax's dual senators, defeating john k. lally and william g. downey in the primary.  donovan never again held elective office, but continued his legal practice, as well as again became a statewide representative of the lions club in that national (and international) organization.  death and memorials donovan died on new year's day, 1993 at arlington hospital in arlington, having suffered from diabetes and cancer. he was survived by his wife and daughters, and donated his precious irish books to his alma mater, georgetown university.  references  external links  1907 births 1993 deaths virginia lawyers virginia state senators virginia democrats georgetown university alumni politicians from falls church, virginia 20th-century american lawyers 20th-century american politicians george washington university law school alumni
arden is an unincorporated community in stevens county, washington, united states.  arden is located on u.s. route 395 six miles south of colville. it is served by travel washington's gold line, which runs between spokane and kettle falls.the little pend oreille river flows into the colville river in the community. the huckleberry range of the selkirk mountains lie to the west of the community and the iron mountains are to the south.  references  unincorporated communities in stevens county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state)
dhudianwala  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of dhudianwala.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, dhudianwala has a total number of 686 houses and population of 3,167 of which include 1,669 males and 1,498 females. literacy rate of dhudianwala is  82.69%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 389 which is 12.28% of total population of dhudianwala, and child sex ratio is approximately  898, higher than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 1,009 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of dhudianwala which includes 851 males and 158 females. according to census survey report 2011, 98.41% workers describe their work as main work and 1.59% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 20.27% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
ykiki beat was a five-piece indie pop band from tokyo, japan.  in january, 2017, they announced they had been on hiatus from december, 2016 and that they would disband. they also announced that each member would continue to make music their own way.  three members of the band, akiyama, kachi, and kamoto, are currently members of four-piece indie rock band dygl. drummer mizuki sekigushi is currently a member of four-piece indie rock band cairophenomenons.  band members   nobuki akiyama - lead vocals, guitars  kohei kamoto - guitar  koki nozue - synthesizer  yotaro kachi - bass  mizuki sekiguchi - drum  discography  albums  studio albums  extended plays  singles  as lead artist  promotional singles  other appearances  references  external links  japanese alternative rock groups musical groups established in 2012 2012 establishments in japan musical groups from tokyo
camp smith was a 19th-century fortification located on the east bank of the fox river in green bay, wisconsin. the installation was built as a temporary home for the garrison at nearby fort howard during a malaria outbreak.  history colonel joseph lee smith took command of nearby fort howard in 1820, the same time as a malaria outbreak in the area. seeking to flee the outbreak, colonel smith decided to build a fort on the east bank of the fox river. later that year, camp smith was completed, and the garrison was moved there.  colonel smith left in 1821, and the new commander decided to move the garrison back to fort howard. camp smith was officially abandoned in 1822.  legacy the installation was located at the present day site of heritage hill state historical park.  references  buildings and structures in brown county, wisconsin howard 1820 establishments in michigan territory pre-statehood history of wisconsin
politano is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  antonio politano (born 1967), italian cyclist matteo politano (born 1993), italian footballer wladimiro politano (born 1940), italian sculptor, painter, and drawer  italian-language surnames
gabriella natalie charlton is a reality television personality and actress who works in tamil-language television and film. she has appeared on the reality dance television series jodi junior and appeared on the sixth season of jodi number one, which she won. in 2020, she was a contestant on the fourth season of the reality series bigg boss tamil.  career  charlton began her career in television at the age of nine, by appearing in jodi junior, a dance reality show broadcast on star vijay. she also appeared as gaby in 7aam vaguppu c pirivu, a tamil soap opera about school children, that aired on star vijay. she also appeared on the sixth season of star vijay's reality dance series jodi number one, which she won.  charlton appeared as sumi in the romantic thriller film 3, and later as ria in chennaiyil oru naal. she also portrayed rashitha in appa.  filmography  television  references  external links     living people indian film actresses actresses in tamil cinema 21st-century indian actresses bigg boss (tamil tv series) contestants actresses in tamil television year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people)
the aydıntepe underground city () is an ancient underground city in aydıntepe district of bayburt province, turkey. it is located  northwest of bayburt beneath a residential area.  description  discovered by coincidence during excavation works for a building construction in 1988, -to some sources in 1998- the underground city at aydıntepe features chambers, halls and hallways carved out of volcanic tufa rock formation without using building materials. it is situated  under the surface. the chambers and the halls are connected with -wide and -high hallways stretching over about   in length. there are eight conical shafts over the hallways, which are believed to be for observation or ventilation purposes. some original entrances and structures are now inaccessible because of collapse or later construction.  a round rock piece of  diameter stands as a door at the entrance to close the underground city from the outer world when needed. the tombs above the underground city and the wall figures inside it point out to a history of three millennia including the late roman or early byzantine era. it was used by christians as well as by muslims. various people sheltered in the city at different times, hiding from religious persecution or war. inside the underground city, there are cellars, storage rooms, water sources, and a pool. the city was well-fortified while still in use; it once housed a closing device and guard chamber.  the site was archaeologically researched, and was put under protection by the cultural and natural heritage preservation board in 2008. about  long part of the underground city covering an area of  is open to the public for visit.  references  external links  aydıntepe underground city at youtube  underground cities rock cut architecture archaeological sites in the black sea region buildings and structures in bayburt province tourist attractions in bayburt province
sphingomonas molluscorum  is a gram-negative, aerobic and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from the mollusc anadara broughtonii in the peter the great bay in russia.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas molluscorum at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  molluscorum bacteria described in 2007
pak nam pho railway station is a railway station in the pak nam pho sub-district, nakhon sawan city, nakhon sawan. it is 250.559 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 1 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 31 october 1905 as part of the northern line extension from lopburi to pak nam pho. the line continued to phitsanulok in 1908. originally, this was the railway station for nakhon sawan city as passengers would alight here and cross the chao phraya river to reach the city, however its main purpose was removed as the new railway station built at nong pling replaced its role. today, the station acts as a rail yard, a railway maintenance centre, and a junction for an occasionally-used freight line to kamnansong rice mill.  sub-divisions  these are the sub-divisions within the area of pak nam pho railway station:  pak nam pho branch of railcars department  railway medical team office, pak nam pho district  railway workers' union, pak nam pho branch  train services  rapid 109/102 bangkok-chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 107/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  rapid 111/108 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
nandrolone cyclohexylpropionate (, ) (brand names andol, fherbolico, megabolin, megabolin retar, pluropon, proteron-depot, sanabolicum), or nandrolone cyclohexanepropionate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-(3-cyclohexyl)propionate (nthcp), is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester that is or has been marketed in spain, austria, and israel.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids cyclohexyl compounds estranes nandrolone esters progestogens carboxylate esters testosterone
the swearengens are an american alternative country band formed in 2010 in seattle.  background the band consists of fredd luongo on vocals and guitar, soren godbersen on guitars and "cadillacs, etc.", forrest marowitz on bass and backing vocals, and jesse harmonson on drums. all of their songs are written by frontman fredd. they can often be found playing, and sipping a beverage, at places in seattle like the tractor tavern, the conor byrne pub and the little red hen.  the band has been described as: "from epic road songs to tear-stained tales of heartache, from texas-style rockers to dark-humored murder ballads, the swearengens cover a lot of musical and emotional territory in their twisted attempt at reviving the glory days alt-country of whiskeytown, the jayhawks, dwight yoakam, uncle tupelo, and steve earle."  the band released their first album, devil gets her way, on june 30, 2012. it was named one of "seattle's best country albums of 2012" by seattle weekly. their second album, waiting on the sunrise, was released on june 8, 2013. it was named one of the "top ten albums of 2013" by leigh bezezekoff at kexp-fm. the band's most recent album, 'merican woman & other tales, was released on june 26, 2015.  discography  references  external links  the swearengens on bandcamp    the swearengens on youtube  american country music groups american alternative country groups american country rock groups musical groups established in 2010 musical groups from seattle 2010 establishments in washington (state)
john dirne (born 14 september 1981), better known by his stage name john christian, is a dutch dj, record producer and musician from amsterdam.  he has been active since 2012 and is a former student of the dutch academy of music. he was unveiled in january 2013 with his remix of "i could be the one" which entered the top 100 established by beatport.  he founded his label freeway recordings in november 2015.  discography  charted singles  singles  2013: flight 643  2013: gunshot  2014: speed of light (with sem thomasson)  2014: pinball (with shermanology and oliver rosa)  2014: samba (with klauss goulart)  2015: collage (with arin tone and corey james)  2015: what  2015: down (with volt & state)  2015: brothers (featuring eric lumiere)  2015: hit 'm like this (with jacky greco)  2016: flux (with mantrastic)  2016: infinity 2016 (tribute) (with arin tone)  2016: glance to the future (with tripl featuring jessy katz)  2016: house of god (with arin tone)  2016: where is the party  2016: don't come back (with djs from mars)  2017: the grimm  2017: iconic (with nicky romero)  2017: the sign  2017: scream (with tiesto)  2017: back to the oldskool  2017: funkastarz  2018: how low (with vavo)  2018: i like it loud (with tiesto featuring marshall masters and the ultimate mc)  2018: the trip  2018: the house is mine  2019: let's get this thing started  2019: can you feel it (with tiesto)  2019: uno  2019: technoprime (with tony junior)  2020: dos  remixes  2013: nicky romero and avicii - "i could be the one" (john christian remix)  2015: moti - "valencia" (john christian remix) (intro edit) [included in the compilation of tiesto, club life: volume four new york city]  2016: andrea rullo - "alpha centauri" (john christian edit)  2017: tiesto and diplo - "c'mon" (john christian remix)  2017: vavo and redhead roman featuring max landry - "we have won" (john christian edit)  2017:
dave aude and luciana - "yeah yeah 2017" (john christian remix)  2018: john christian - "what" (2018 edit)  2018: fedde le grand - "monsta" (john christian remix)  2019: tiesto - "grapevine" (john christian remix)  2019: trobi - "we can change (infinity)" (john christian remix)  2019: mattn, klaas and roland clark - "children" (john christian remix)  2019: madonna, maluma - "medellin" (john christian & djlw remix)  references  notes  a  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the dance chart.  sources  external links    dutch dance musicians dutch djs dutch record producers living people musicians from amsterdam remixers 1981 births
gaio chiocchio (25 may 1954 - 28 july 1996) was a brazilian-born italian lyricist, record producer, composer, and singer-songwriter.  life and career  born in rio de janeiro, chiocchio was the nephew of the musicians and composers oscar and umberto chiocchio. in 1974 he started his professional career co-founding the progressive band pierrot lunaire, where he served as composer, vocalist, guitarist and sitarist. after the group disbanded, chiocchio became producer and artistic director of the record company it, and collaborated with the label una sors coniunxit.  in 1980, chiocchio released his first solo work as singer-songwriter, the ep londra, which was followed by the single "piccolo fuso" and by a tour with mario castelnuovo, marco ferradini and goran kuzminac. in 1981, he started a 6 years-collaboration as a lyricist with amedeo minghi. their songs of the time, notably "1950", received large critical acclaim. since 1987, he collaborated with other artists, including riccardo cocciante and paola turci.  in 1989 chiocchio collaborated with a multimedia project, il poliedro di leonardo, which was screened as a special event at the 46th venice international film festival.  he suffered heart failure and died prematurely on 28 july 1996, aged 42 years old.  references  external links  1954 births 1996 deaths people from rio de janeiro (city) italian record producers italian male singer-songwriters 20th-century italian male singers
young hearts (hungarian: ifju szivvel, literally "young hearts") is a 1953 hungarian comedy film directed by marton keleti and starring gyula gozon, sandor pecsi and imre soos.  cast  gyula gozon as dani nagypapa    sandor pecsi as dani sandor    imre soos as dani janos    kalman latabar as matejka bacsi    ferenc bessenyei as varga, igazgato    endre szemethy as kuczogi bacsi    gyula benko as csontos    gabor rajnay as gerloczy   noemi apor as bogar gizi    imre sinkovits as pataki, disz-titkar    violetta ferrari as florina    teri foldi as szives kati    flora kadar as rozsi    erzsi lengyel as szeder margit    endre gyarfas as pogacsas ferko    gyula szabo as czobor   gyorgy kadar as geller    csaba karolyi as peto    gyula varga as kasznar    jeno szirmay as pedro    alfonzo as mutatvanyos a vidam parkban    janos domsodi   marta fonay as kati anyja    gyorgy gonda  gyorgy ifj. gonda    laszlo horvath   sandor peti as raktaros    sandor tompa as balogh papa   margit foldessy   zsuzsa varadi  references  bibliography   karoly nemes. miert jok a magyar filmek?: tanulmanyok. magvetʺo, 1968.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films hungarian comedy films hungarian films hungarian-language films films directed by marton keleti
nandrolone hexyloxyphenylpropionate (nhpp; brand names anador, anadur, anadurine), also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-(3-(4-hexyloxy)phenyl)propionate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester that is marketed in france, denmark, austria, luxembourg, and turkey. it has been studied as a potential long-acting injectable male contraceptive, though it has not been marketed for this indication. approximately 70% of men became azoospermic, while the remaining men all became oligospermic. nhpp has a mean residence time in the body of 29.1 days and an elimination half-life in the body of 20.1 days.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids contraception for males estranes nandrolone esters progestogens carboxylate esters testosterone
vivi laurent-tackholm (7 january 1898, danderyd - 3 may 1978) was a swedish botanist and children's book author, active in egypt.  early years and education vivi laurent-tackholm was the daughter of dr. wilhelm edvard laurent and lilly jenny karolina bergstrand. she was the sister of torbern laurent and aunt to torvard c. laurent. she studied botany at the university of stockholm and received her degree in 1921. she traveled to the us from 1921 to 1923. in 1926, she married botany professor gunnar tackholm (1891-1933). they moved to egypt the same year and began work on the flora of egypt.  career during world war ii, she worked at a newspaper in stockholm but moved back to egypt after the war. she became a professor at the university of cairo in 1946, in alexandria university in 1947 and again in cairo in 1948. in 1952, she became honorary doctor of philosophy at the university of stockholm.  tackholm built the botanical institute at cairo university. she collected a herbarium, which became the largest in africa with about 100,000 plants from around the world, especially from egypt, lebanon, arabia and sudan. thanks to her swedish contacts, the agricultural academy in stockholm sent a 700 kg literature library, and gustaf vi adolf of sweden financed the purchase of foreign literature. sida donated a microfilm collection of more than half a million pages of books and herbarium specimens. thanks to the wallenberg foundation at the university of stockholm, the university was able to build up a laboratory for pollen analysis including an electron microscope. during tackholm's time, the department had about 20 professors and other teachers and over 2,000 students.  tackholm died during a visit to sweden and is buried at uppsala old cemetery.  selected works  vivis resa. ett ar som piga fran new york till san francisco, 1923   vivis resa ii. fran saltsjobaden till pacifikens strander, 1924 sagan om snipp, snapp, snorum (1926)   en skolflicka berattar, 1927 katt: en karlekssaga berattad och tecknad, 1936 som husmor i egypten, 1937 battre an svarta borsen: vivi berattar hur hon lever gott och riktigt pa kupongerna. utg. av husmodern. [recepten av capucine. illustr. av gunila stierngranat], 1942   husmoderns blomsterlexikon
, vol i o ii, 1946   hemmet blommar, en liten handbok i krukvaxtodling, 1949 faraos blomster: en kulturhistorisk-botanisk skildring av livet i gamla egypten, 1951 vara hav: en bok for stora och sma, bilder av veronica leo, 1978  oknen blommar, 1969 lillans resa till manen: en saga for stora och sma, bilder av veronica leo, 1976  egypten i narbild, 1964 sagans minareter: en bok om islam, 1971 levande forntid: strovtag i kairomuseet, 1967 egyptisk vardag, 1966   faraos barn: kopterna i egypten, 1965  students flora of egypt. 2:a utgavan tryckt i beirut 1974. publ. av universitetet i kairo. en gron "bibel" pa 888 sidor!  literature  irma ridback: vivi tackholm - botanist och kulturinstitution, 1994 beata arnborg: professor vivi - den sagolika botanisten, bokforlaget atlantis, stockholm 2008,  references  bibliography  see also dr waheeb speaking of vivi laurent-tackholm (swedish).  further reading     1898 births 1978 deaths 20th-century botanists 20th-century swedish scientists 20th-century swedish writers 20th-century women scientists 20th-century swedish women writers swedish botanists swedish children's writers swedish women children's writers swedish women botanists cairo university faculty stockholm university alumni people from danderyd municipality burials at uppsala old cemetery
this is the videography for american rapper jay-z. they often involve him performing.  as lead artist  as featured artist  references  external links   official website  jay-z at allmusic  discography discographies of american artists videographies of american artists hip hop discographies
aatishbazi ishq is a drama film, punjabi film directed by amit subhash dhawan and starring mahie gill and roshan prince with a released date of 14 october 2016.  cast mahie gill  roshan prince kulbhushan kharbanda  b.n. sharma  tanya abrol  introducing : ravinder  soundtrack  references  external links       2016 films indian films 2010s punjabi-language films
khambatki ghat is a mountain pass on pune-kolhapur section of national highway 48 in maharashtra, india. this ghat lies in the sahyadri mountain ranges (western ghats) and has picturesque mountain-scapes and a pleasant climate.  details earlier, khabataki ghat road was two-way. a separate tunnel was built later which separated the kolhapur-pune road. the current one-way tunnel was constructed through a mountain range as an alternative to existing khambatki ghat in khandala tehsil of satara district. the new road has been set up for the vehicles coming from satara to pune. this ghat is en route bengaluru from pune. people going to panchgani and mahabaleshwar via pune also use this ghat. mahabaleshwar and panchgani are two major tourist locations followed by the sajjangad and kas plateau, where thousands of tourists visit every year.  references  mountain passes of maharashtra mountain passes of the western ghats satara district
the estadio olimpico santa teresita is a multi-use stadium located in tepic, nayarit, mexico.  it is currently used mostly for football matches and is the home stadium for coras f.c.  the stadium has a capacity of 4,000 people.  references  external links  sports venues in nayarit olimpico santa teresita athletics (track and field) venues in mexico
the second series of the british television sketch comedy premiered on bbc two on 21 july 2005. this series included six episodes with the concluding episode broadcast on 25 august 2005. a christmas special followed the second series and was screened on bbc two on 20 december 2005.   series two introduced several new major characters including derek faye, irene and vernon, and janice and ray; as well as returning characters joannie 'nan' taylor, lauren cooper, bernie, paul and sam, kate and ellen, elaine figgis, and the aga saga woman.   guest stars for this series include siobhan redmond, jill halfpenny, brian murphy, james holmes, una stubbs, roger allam, robin weaver, michael brandon and peter kay. charlotte church makes a guest appearance in the christmas special.  characters   joannie 'nan' taylor: the foul-mouthed grandmother is an old east london woman who constantly swears at and criticises other people. she is always visited by her well-mannered grandson jamie, where the visits usually start off well enough, with the nan showing how grateful she is that her grandson has come to see her. however, things usually take a turn for the worse after she starts to make unfavourable comments about her neighbours, family, and home help visitors. jamie is a university student, but according to nan, is unemployed. nan repeatedly asserts that he is gay, although jamie has said on many occasions that he has a girlfriend. regular performances by catherine tate and mathew horne.  lauren cooper: lauren cooper is a comprehensive school student with a bad attitude who is most widely known for her phrase "am i bovvered?". lauren, her best friend lisa 'liese' jackson and her love interest ryan perkins are known as yobs. regular performances by catherine tate, mathew horne and niky wardley.  bernie: the incompetent irish nurse. bernie is an unruly, randy woman who bordered on being sacked in the hospital where she worked in every episode. she frequently makes inappropriate remarks to her patients, flirts with most of the male staff, takes a critically ill patient on a wild night out, and mixes up the records of living patients with those of deceased ones. regular performance by catherine tate.  paul and sam: the essex couple. they are happily married yet slightly simple, and find everyday situations surprisingly hilarious. paul and sam often excitedly tell each other stories, which they find highly amusing and interesting. the stories build up and when completed, paul and sam would both produce an
exaggerated and completely silent laugh.  regular performances by catherine tate and lee ross.  kate and ellen: this sketch followed two office workers who sat next to each other. while ellen is usually keen to get on with her work, she is frequently disturbed by kate (tate). kate continually makes conversation about her lifestyle, inviting her co-worker to "have a guess!" on such delicate situations. while ellen is reluctant to go along with the guessing games, she is pressured into making a wild guess, which almost always results in kate's becoming insulted and consequently offensive. ellen occasionally guesses correctly, causing kate to become angry and verbally or physically abuse her. regular performances by catherine tate and ella kenion.   elaine figgis: elaine is a woman who appeared in a documentary following her search for love, mostly corresponding with people around the world via the internet in search of a man. the unseen interviewer and narrator is called tanya. follows her engagement and eventual marriage to a convicted cannibal and lunatic on death row in the us, who abducted, tortured and murdered eight people, proceeding to eat two of them. regular performance by catherine tate and rebecca front as the voice of tanya.  the aga saga woman: an upper-middle-class woman who goes into a state of shock in various, seemingly innocuous situations. regular performance by catherine tate.  derek faye: derek, who first appeared in series two, is a man who shows several signs of being gay (combining some mannerisms of famous gay british comedians such as kenneth williams and frankie howerd), but seems to be in denial about his sexuality and becomes extremely offended and defensive when people assume he is gay. to his dislike, these occurrences are frequent because he behaves in an extremely effeminate way. his most famous catchphrase is "how very dare you!", along with the overuse of the word "dear". this can be seen in another catchphrase; when asked about his sexuality he replies "who, dear? me, dear? gay, dear? no, dear!", or when asked for advice replying "me, dear? advice, dear? yes, dear." when offended, derek states how he and his mother have been doing something relative to the person derek is insulted by for 25 years. regular performer includes catherine tate.  irene and vernon: irene (whose accent suggests that she is an east londoner of maltese origins) and the ever silent vernon (often referred to as vern) first appeared in series two. they are the owners of a mobile
burger van situated on the side of a motorway. during their sketches they are visited by a regular customer called neville whom irene tries to convince that she and vernon have been visited by various celebrities. neville almost always orders a double cheese with no sauce, and keeps a tab with irene and verne and always asks if he can "settle up on friday." when neville appears, irene never knows the name of the celebrity in question and always attempts to describe them. regular performers include catherine tate, aschlin ditta and brian murphy.   janice and ray: a racist, xenophobic northern couple, who express their disgust at meals they have been presented with at restaurants, usually based on either perceived over-pricing or the exotic nature of the food. they are also shown to be frustrated by the availability of such items in their locality, owing to comments such as "this were in harrogate." after complaining about the food and prices, they use their most infamous catchphrase: "the dirty bastards!" or sometimes "the dirty, evil, robbing bastards!"  episodes  release  reception  accolades  british comedy awards   -nominated: british comedy award for best tv comedy (2005: the catherine tate show)  -nominated: british comedy award for best tv comedy actress (2005: catherine tate)  british comedy award for best tv comedy actress (2006: catherine tate for the catherine tate christmas show)  british academy television awards   -nominated: bafta award for best comedy programme or series (2006: the catherine tate show)  -nominated: best comedy performance (catherine tate)  royal television society   rts television award for best comedy performance (2006: catherine tate)  rts television award for entertainment (2006: the catherine tate show)  national television awards   -nominated: national television award for most popular comedy programme (2006: the catherine tate show)  home mediathe complete second season was released on dvd on region 1 in the united states and canada on 25 march 2008 via kultur white star distribution. the christmas special was not included with the season two set; however, the catherine tate christmas show was released in a single dvd edition on 28 october 2008.series two received its dvd release on region 2 in the united kingdom on 30 october 2006 with 2 entertain distribution. the set contains the catherine tate christmas show, as it has not received single edition dvd release. in addition to the christmas special, which is listed as a special feature, the set includes a character sketch selection. series two also been released as part of
the "series one and series two" box set on 30 october 2006 and the "complete series one, two and three" box set on 12 november 2007.series two was released on dvd on region 4 in australia on 5 april 2007. similar to the region 2 version, the set contains the catherine tate christmas show which is only available with series two. this series was also released as part of the "series 1 & 2" box set and the "complete series one, two and three" box set.  further reading  am i bovvered: the catherine tate show scripts (2 october 2006 - fourth estate, )   catherine tate: laugh it up!'' (6 october 2008 - andre deutsch ltd, ) by tina ogle.  references  external links    the catherine tate show episodes at the internet movie database  the catherine tate show episodes at epguides   2005 british television seasons
grisoni is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  andre grisoni (1886-1975), french politician giuseppe grisoni (1699-1769), italian painter and sculptor tony grisoni (born 1952), british screenwriter  italian-language surnames
henri-joseph dugue de la fauconnerie (1835-1914) was a french politician. he served as a member of the corps legislatif from 1869 to 1870, and as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1876 to 1881, and from 1885 to 1893, representing orne.  publications  1859: le tribunal de la rote  1861: la bretagne et l'empire 1885: notre pauvre argent ! 1912: souvenirs d'un vieil homme: (1866-1879)  sources  references   1835 births 1914 deaths politicians from paris appel au peuple members of the 4th corps legislatif of the second french empire members of the 1st chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 2nd chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 4th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 5th chamber of deputies of the french third republic officers of the order of saints maurice and lazarus chevaliers of the legion d'honneur
tønnesminde is the site of an archaeological excavation ground and present day organic farm on the island of samsø, denmark. archaeological evidence attests the area around tønnesminde has a long history of human occupation, dating from approximately 4000 bc to present day. recent excavations suggest that tønnesminde contains settlements dating from the funnelbeaker culture in the early neolithic period, early bronze age, pre-roman iron age, and viking age.    excavations  1999 excavations began at tønnesminde when the danish national museum investigated a 500 m² area northwest of the farm in preparation for sewage pipeline construction in 1999. archaeologists excavated the remains of a house, four large pits, a fence, a cultural layer, and a few postholes. finds included flint flakes, a fishing net anchor ("netsynk"), and ceramics.  2010  interest in the tønnesminde area resumed in 2010 with a metal detector survey launched by moesgaard museum and samsø museum in the hopes of learning more about viking age military establishments on samsø and finding sites for additional excavations. the survey has increased the number of metal artifacts from the island, changed the conception of samsø's settlement history, particularly in regards to the iron age, and renewed interest in tønnesminde.  2014  after the rediscovery of the site by the metal detector campaign, excavations resumed at tønnesminde in 2014 as a joint investigation between moesgaard museum and harvard summer school viking studies program. a trial excavation composed of five trial trenches began at tønnesminde  on march 24, 2014 and revealed remains from pre-roman iron age and viking age settlements. in june and july 2014, archaeologists from moesgaard museum and aarhus university as well as students from harvard excavated three separate trenches, totaling an area of 1100 m², and examined four pit houses, one three-aisled long house, and numerous pits and postholes. several of the postholes suggested the previous presence of a fence and a small structure. a fifth pit house was discovered but not excavated, and a trial trench suggested it could be the remains of a burnt house.  finds included animal bones, charcoal, pottery, beads, flint debris, an arrowhead, and items typical of viking age pit houses, which includes but is not limited to loom weights, spindle whorls,  fragments of soap stone vessel, pottery shards, and glass beads. the investigation additionally discovered circular crop marks nearby, which could constitute ring ditches
around graves.  2015 excavations at tønnesminde the following summer represented a continuation of the 2014 excavation. archaeologists excavated approximately 1150 m² in two new separate areas and investigated four pit houses and several pits and postholes.   three of the pit houses may provide evidence of textile production because of the discovery of spindle whorls and loom weights.  the fourth pit house featured large amounts of charcoal, iron slag, iron nails and rivets, hammerscale, and multiple whetstones, leading to the conclusion that the pit house may have operated as a smithy. additional finds included other usual viking age items, ceramic fragments, flint debris and scrapers, and animal bones.  2016  during the 2016 excavations at tonnesminde, archaeologists studied a late iron age or early viking age long house, several cooking pits, a large cultural layer, and many pits and postholes. finds included bone fragments, ceramics, flint flakes and scrapers, charcoal and grain (collected from flotation samples).  2017   the 2017 excavation covered an area of 1200m2 containing three viking age pit houses of varying depths, as well as two cooking pits and over one hundred postholes. finds included worked pieces of flint from the stone age, two spindle whorls, a small piece of amber, and a wide array of ceramic pieces, several of which were rim sherds from the viking age. many bones, including a large jawbone with one tooth attached to it, were found in one of the pit houses, pit c-14. the same pit house contained layers of burnt, red clay in the northern side of the unit, suggesting that the pit house or at least remnants of it was burned down after its destruction. hope the team will come back and dig more to fint the big house, the graves etc.  archaeological discoveries  early neolithic (funnel beaker culture)    the initial excavation of tønnesminde in 1999 revealed flint flakes from polished axes, possibly from the funnel beaker culture. the 2014 and 2015 excavations also found flint flakes, including an arrow head, which again indicates settlement during the late mesolithic or early neolithic period. the 2016 excavation additionally discovered flint scrapers and flakes, as well as ceramic fragments, the patterns of which suggest they were created by the funnel beaker culture. a decorated ceramic shard and several flint tools found during the 2017 excavation have been attributed to the early neolithic period.  bronze age    the 1999 excavation found potential house remnants, which the archaeologists dated to the
late neolithic period or early bronze age because of its proximity to cultural layers containing artifacts likely from the early bronze age, namely, a stone axe and a ceramic rim shard. the largely undated flint flakes discovered in the 2014, 2015, and 2016 excavations also could indicate habitation of tønnesminde during the early bronze age.  pre-roman iron age    the excavation in 1999 investigated several pits cautiously attributed to the pre-roman iron age based on ceramics characteristic of this period. the pits also contained flint flakes, but because the flint collection likely contained older pieces, they were difficult to date. the 2014 investigation of a three aisle long house revealed pottery shards likely from the pre-roman iron age in one of its roof-bearing posts, as well as in several pits. the 2015 excavation examined a feature, interpreted as a cooking pit, which contained a significant amount of ceramics dated to the pre-roman iron age.  viking age    while the investigation in 1999 did not reveal any viking age artifacts, subsequent excavations at tønnesminde have found significant evidence of a viking age settlement. the 2014 excavation unearthed spindle whorls, glass beads, loom weights, whetstones, iron rivets, and iron knives in presumably viking age pit houses. nearby postholes likely belong to other viking age buildings, although the postholes lacked dateable material. similarly, the 2015 excavation found spindle whorls, loom weights, iron rivets and nails, and whetstones from pit houses; other excavated postholes probably derive from the viking age but could not be dated due to a dearth of dateable material. the long house excavated by the 2016 team could have functioned as an 'economy house' ('økonomibygning' in danish) during the viking age. an older, nearby large cultural layer intersects the long house, and based on the discovery of half of a loom weight and the general structure of the long house, on-site archaeologists dated the long house to the late iron age or early viking age. similarly, the 2017 excavation unearthed two spindle whorls and many ceramic rim shards that are characteristic of the viking age.  significance  handicraft production  using the artifacts recovered by the 2014-2016 excavations, archaeologists hope to better understand viking age activity on samsø, particularly craft production. the pit houses investigated in 2014 and 2015 show evidence of textile production. textiles can reflect both long-distance trading networks and daily needs, such as bedding, packing material, sails, and other products. with more
information from tønnesminde, it may be possible to connect textile production at tønnesminde with, for example, the kanhave canal and the likely fleet stationed there during the viking age. perhaps the textiles were used to repair viking age sails, replace clothing, or trade.  a pit house investigated in 2015 was identified as a viking age smithy. because of the accessibility of ore, remains from smithing can be found throughout scandinavia, and smithing a common metal craft rather than a trade reserved for specialists. smithing occurred in both rural farms and towns, so further investigation of tønnesminde is needed to categorize the settlement. nevertheless, the presence of the smithy provides more information about handicraft production on samsø and helps place samsø within the broader context of viking age scandinavian settlements.  evidence of handicraft production is further strengthened by the 2017 excavation, which revealed two spindle whorls in one of the pit houses, c15, one of which is intact. the absence of any other significant artifacts in that pit house strongly suggests that the feature has been exclusively used for textile production purposes.  viking age trade   the excavations at tønnesminde will greatly add to current knowledge about samsø and viking age trade. the kanhave canal, which has been dated, using dendrochronology, to 726 ce (before the beginning of the viking age) based on the wood used for its construction, indicates the importance of the island in the viking age, since construction of the 500m canal would have required centralized planning, extensive manual labor, and significant funding. given samsø's central location, the canal would have enabled a fleet to control ship traffic through danish waters and better levy taxes. while the kanhave canal indicates a viking age presence on the island, the lack of additional viking age evidence does not allow characterization of this presence.  around the time of the construction of the kanhave canal, scandinavia focused increasingly on trade, cultural contacts, and warfare with neighboring areas; these changes affected craft production as craftsmen and their creations became more important. indeed, other scandinavian sites demonstrate extensive long-distance exchange, far more than elsewhere in northern europe. as one of the few excavations on samsø, tønnesminde has added greatly to knowledge of viking age trade on the island.  the work houses at tønnesminde could be connected to this expanding trade and the central location of samsø. part of a norwegian soapstone vessel, found by the 2015 team, provides evidence of trade at viking
age tønnesminde. norway is particularly known for soapstone quarries, and soapstone vessels have been found throughout scandinavia as trade increased. the whetstones found by the 2014 and 2015 teams provide further evidence for craft production and possible subsequent trade at tønnesminde, as whetstones were another trade item increasingly produced during the viking age.  supplementing the norwegian soapstone vessel find, the 2017 excavation revealed an almost perfectly round slate dish in the pit house c-14, . the absence of slate in denmark implies that the dish must have been imported either from norway or sweden. the presence of soapstone on the site suggests that the dish was indeed imported from norway, further adding to the evidence of trade at tønnesminde.  references  external links   organic farm at tønnesminde  samsø museum  moesgaard museum  harvard summer school viking studies program  aarhus university  archaeological cultures of northern europe archaeological sites in denmark scandinavian archaeology scandinavian history funnelbeaker culture nordic bronze age pre-roman iron age norse people
patrik sorm (born 21 november 1993) is a czech sprinter specialising in the 400 metres. he won the bronze medal in the 4 × 400 metres relay at the 2015, 2017 european indoor championships and silver medal 2021.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 400 metres - 46.13 (ostrava 2014) indoor 200 metres - 21.15(prague 2018) 400 metres - 46.49 (prague 2015)  references  1993 births living people czech male sprinters athletes (track and field) at the 2019 european games european games medalists in athletics european games silver medalists for the czech republic czech athletics championships winners sportspeople from prague athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of the czech republic
ruggero santini (april 16, 1870 - april 4, 1958) was an italian general. he was the colonial governor of somaliland. he fought in the first italo-ethiopian war and italo-turkish war. in world war i he fought against austria-hungary.  during the second italo-ethiopian war he commanded the 1st corps and fought in the north against the ethiopians.  awards commemorative medal for the italo-austrian war 1915-1918  references  external links    1870 births 1958 deaths italian generals italian military personnel of world war i italian military personnel of the first italo-ethiopian war italian military personnel of the italo-turkish war
benedetto rezzani (died july 1639) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of sagone (1635-1639).  biography on 17 sep 1635, benedetto rezzani appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of sagone. on 23 sep 1635, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna. he served as bishop of sagone until his death in july 1639 .  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    17th-century roman catholic bishops in genoa bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1635 deaths
april's coming (finnish: huhtikuu tulee) is a 1953 finnish comedy film directed by valentin vaala and starring ossi elstela, tuija halonen and kurt ingvall.  cast    ossi elstela  as subeditor    tuija halonen  as journalist    kurt ingvall  as jaakko huhtikuu    hilkka kinnunen  as annikki teras    rauno kuosmanen  as pertti avovirta    harry lewing as jopi   tarmo manni  as kiuru - artist    kerstin nylander   rauha rentola  as elisabet avovirta    joel rinne  as heikki avovirta    anja rasanen  as kaija avovirta    emma vaananen    mika waltari  as man in a restaurant  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films finnish comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films based on works by mika waltari films directed by valentin vaala finnish black-and-white films
chris winter may refer to:  chris winter (athlete) (born 1986), canadian 3,000 meter steeplechase runner   chris winter (television presenter) (born 1989), australian television presenter for network ten
rosokhach () is a village situated in chortkiv raion (district) of ternopil oblast (province) in western ukraine. it belongs to chortkiv urban hromada, one of the hromadas of ukraine.   the village has 1947 inhabitants and local government is administered by rosokhach village council.  geography   the village is located at an altitude of 207 meters above sea level  on the banks of the seret river, and covers an area of 3,263 km2. that is located at a distance of  from the district center of chortkiv and  from the regional center ternopil.  history  the first written mention of the village rosokhach dates back to 1785. near the village are the remains of a trypillian culture settlement.  fragments of ceramics and copper fragments were found, which are stored in the lviv historical museum.  cult constructions and religion  in the village there are two religious communities and there are two churches:   st. nicholas church ocu (1904)  st. nicholas church ugcc (1995). roman catholic church is in the village, which was built in 1936. today is not valid.  references  external links   чортківська раионна рада | історична довідка | росохач    castles and churches of ukraine, rosokhach 	  weather.in.ua, rosokhach (ternopil region)  villages in chortkiv raion
natalya igorevna vetlitskaya (, born august 17, 1964) is a soviet and russian singer and actress, popular in the 1990s, who released six studio albums between 1992 and 2004. she retired from the music scene in 2009 and, as of 2018, resides in spain.  biography  early years  natalya vetlitskaya was born in moscow, to nuclear physicist igor arsenyevich (1935-2012) and his wife yevgenia ivanovna (born 1939), a piano teacher.  she studied at the moscow school no.856, and, a self-described 'ugly duckling', hated sports lessons there, because, being the smallest in the class, had to stand always the last in the line. "i've always dreamt of becoming a doctor, and yet could never stop imagining myself on stage, singing or dancing," she later remembered. at the age of ten she began to study ballet and for ten years, since fourteen, was regularly taking part in dancing competitions. she enrolled into music school to learn piano, which she graduated in 1979.  in 1981 vetlitskaya graduated from the high school with gold medal. the same year, defying her parents' wish that she should go into studying languages, she went on to start a ballet dance school of her own.  career natalya vetlitskaya started her musical career by taking part in the recording of the soundtrack for the 1983 mary poppins, goodbye, written by maksim dunayevsky, then the head of the rsfsr pop music orchestra. one of its members was pavel smeyan, whom vetlitskaya married in 1983, and it was he who insisted that she start singing too, not just dance. credited as natalya smeyan, she recorded one song for the film train out of schedule (1985). a year earlier she debuted as an actress, having received a small part in the film  higher than rainbow.  in 1986 vetlitskaya took up the job of choreographer in the retsital ballet. a year later, after the sisters bazykins left the rock band rondo, mikhail litvin invited to the auditioning sveta kolesnikova from the vizit group, who brought in her friend, natalya vetlitskaya. 'but i cannot sing,' i argued. 'and i cannot dance,' she replied. so with a great deal of mutual help, in a ten days' time we prepared our own little show, got ourselves into our old school uniforms, drastically cut, and were welcomed in, she remembered
. vetlitskaya worked there as choreographer, dancer and backing vocalist, and took part in the recording of four songs which made it into the 1986 rondo-86 album. soon her relationships with litvin deteriorated, though, and she left. in 1987-1988 she danced and sang for the bands klass and idea fix, before joining in 1988 mirage which she left later that year. in mirage i earned a certain sum, 90 per cent of which i gave to my parents for them to buy a car, and the rest kept for myself, hoping this money will keep me afloat until something else comes my way, vetlitskaya remembered.  all of her savings went into recording a jazz rock number at the snc, the stas namin studio, but nothing came of it. vetlitskaya's prospects started to look grim, but then igor matviyenko re-introduced her to igor zuyev, a young composer whom she knew from her days with klass. "i liked his new songs and so we started to record my debut album. then fyodor bondarchuk approached me, suggesting that he might shoot a clip for one of the songs, "look me into the eyes". i said, okay, but i am penniless. through some complicated financial scheme he procured the sum needed and we made this clip." considered to be russia's first true commercial video, it was a low-budget, unrehearsed affair. "those people in the video were not actors, but friends and their friends, our own circle," the singer remembered.  natalya vetlitskaya's breakthrough came in 1992 when a video for look me into the eyes, her debut album's title track received the gran prix at the moscow generation-92 festival and launched the career of fyodor bondarchuk, who made the clip with tigran keosayan and sergey kozlov, the latter as a cameraman. the clip, nominated for the mtv video music award as well as the eurovideo grand prix, made the singer famous in russia and known in europe.   vetlitskaya's second album playboy came out in 1994, the video for the title track, made by sergey kalvarsky, premiered on the new year eve to become a huge hit. it was followed by slave to love (1996), its title track again topping the russian pop radio charts. in 1997 vetlitskaya starred in the film the new adventures of buratino (as alisa the fox) and recorded three songs for the soundtrack, including taj mahal, a duo
with sergey mazayev.  another unusual collaboration, with the post-punk outfit nogu svelo! resulted in river, the duet with the band's singer maksim pokrovsky, who would later sum up her appeal as  intelligent femininity and feminine intelligence.  in 2003 vetlitskaya starred as princess natalia in maksim papernik's musical snow queen, for which she recorded the song "lanterns", a duet with vadim azarkh. also in 2003 she performed for the last time at the festival pesnya goda, with the song flame of passion. in early 2004 her sixth album my beloved came out. later that year vetlitskaya gave birth to her daughter ulyana and went into semi-retirement, only occasionally appearing on tv and releasing new songs and clips (birdie, it's not just) in the course of the next five years. she was expected to make a major comeback in 2009, but the announced massive tour never materialized for reasons which remained unknown. in 2009 vetlitskaya retired from the russian music scene and went on to reside in spain where since then she's been leading the life of a recluse, contacting only those who share her passions for yoga and eastern philosophies. the mystery of the sudden departure of russia's most stylish pop singer, remained fogged in indian incense, muz-tv reported.  legacy in 2011 the song look me into the eyes was included into the 100 songs that changed our life list, compiled by time out (russia). in december 2011 the song made it into the best of the history of russian pop, 1991-2011 list, compiled by afisha. the short editorial described vetlitskaya as "the embodiment of everything that is likeable in russian pop music."  vetkitskaya's hits provide a guideline for the recent russian pop music history. not its mainstream version, but the one that could be called a shadowy, underground one, music critic alexey mazhayev argued, reviewing her 2004 the best of compilation. "her song 'look me into the eyes' has made a huge impact on the whole industry of russian clip-making, while the singer herself single-handedly invented the genre of the 'pop easy listening' for russian pop," according to the critic who described vetlitskaya as a cult figure of the russian music scene.  private life  vetlitskaya's first husband was pavel smeyan, of the band rock atelier. this alliance proved to be a painful experience to vetlitskaya who later claimed to
have become victim to a severe case of domestic violence. ...he was beating me. the reason was his nature, evil and cruel. alcohol played its part too. we divorced after he'd all but killed me... there could be no excuse for this. i was a child, just eighteen... i decided to forgive him, but could have sent him to jail, she claimed.  vetlitskaya's marriage with zhenya belousov famously lasted for ten days, from january 1 to 10, 1998. it was a funny story. he said to me: listen, one woman wants to make me marry her. i do not want to. what am i do?' we sat and we mulled this over. then he says: listen, why shouldn't you and me marry? and i said: indeed! we were totally crazy and carefree... and we were just very good friends. hung out together, were going to the parties as a pair. i loved him as a friend but for some reason never saw a man in him. there was nothing romantic about our relationship. there was another version of the story. according to the composer lyubov voropayeva, who worked closely with belousov, the latter was deeply in love with vetliyskaya and experienced shock when, on his return from a short new year tour, found a note informing him that the marriage was over. it was a joke for her, but tragedy for him, voropayeva insisted.  vetlitskaya's third husband was kirill kirin, originally a model, later an administrator for philipp kirkorov. over the years she had relationships with dmitry malikov, vlad stashevsky, suleiman kerimov (who reportedly presented her an airplane as a parting gift), mikhail topalov (producer and businessman, father of vlad topalov), and sergey zverev. vetlitskaya's partnership with malikov lasted three years; it was him who's penned for her the song "dusha" (the soul), one of her personal favourites. in 2004 in nice, france, vetlitskaya gave birth to daughter ulyana. it later transpired that the father was vetlitskaya's fourth husband alexey, her then yoga trainer.  vetlitskaya, who once had a hit with a song called playboy, appeared in the russian version of this magazine twice, but the result produced nothing scandalous. i do not consider myself a sex symbol, besides, i am shy, she explained, why.  since 2008 vetl
itskaya resides in spain. she composes music, writes poetry, is engaged in painting and design. since 1998, she has practiced kriya yoga, and attended the sri sri ravi shankar's courses in india. vetlitskaya has been engaged in charity. since 1999, she financially supported the children's mental hospital no. 4, in the village of nikolskoye, in ruzsky district, moscow oblast. she is a vegetarian.  controversies in august 2011 natalya vetlitskaya found herself in the center of major controversy after her satyrical 'fable' describing a private all-star concert taking place at some secret residence, appeared in her blog. the figures of the 'tsar' (who chose the occasion to grant the title of the people's artist to a certain big artist) have been instantly recognised as those of vladimir putin and filipp kirkorov, respectively. she described putin as 'charismatic' but subjected to scathing criticism somebody, easily recognised as pyotr shaboltai, the director of the state kremlin palace (and the organizer of this event), describing him as vile, obnoxious 'monster' who arose in her one strong desire: to kill him on the spot.  in 2012, after the death of her father, who spent 54 years working for itep, natalya in her blog accused the head of rosatom sergey kiriyenko and director of itep yuri kozlov in her father's harassment, financial fraud and deliberate bringing russia's nuclear industry to collapse. she called kiriyenko the rosatom's mafiosi general and stated that the reason of her father's death from heart attack in may 2011 was the document he'd received notifying him that his monthly salary was being cut from 4,4 to 2,8 thousand rubles.  in october 2015, her article on the website of echo of russia issued a sharp criticism of the spiritual, informational and political atmosphere in russia. highly contentious proved to be vetlitskaya's may 9, 2016 facebook post in which she argued that "only idiots can jump madly with joy, celebrating the victory day. this is the day of mourning, not joy... those who perished should be paid tribute and glorified, personally. not the state. this accursed state deserves nothing but contempt, she went on to say.  discography  studio albums  look me into the eyes, 1992, jeff records  playboy, 1994, jeff records   slave to love, 1996, soyuz records  think what you will, 1998, extraphone
just so, 1999, soyuz  my beloved..., 2004, cd land  references  external links      natalya vetlitskaya on last.fm  1964 births living people actresses from moscow singers from moscow soviet actresses soviet women singers soviet pop singers russian pop singers russian actresses soviet female dancers
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the , after the aki district, hiroshima. it was formed on 2 april 1945 in hiroshima as a triangular division. it was one of a batch of eight divisions comprising the 201st, 202nd, 205th,  206th, 209th, 212th, 214th and 216th divisions that were created as part of the japanese reaction to the battle of okinawa.  action in june 1945, the 205th division was deployed at kochi. it did not see any combat, and was disbanded after the surrender of japan on 15 august 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第205師団 (日本軍), accessed 14 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
nicholas james timothy  (born march 1980) is a british political adviser. he served as joint downing street chief of staff, alongside fiona hill, to prime minister theresa may, until his resignation in the wake of the 2017 general election.  early life timothy was born in birmingham, the son of a steel worker and a school secretary. he was educated at king edward vi grammar school in aston, birmingham, and at the university of sheffield, where he gained a first in politics.  he has cited as his inspiration in politics the birmingham-born liberal politician joseph chamberlain, of whom he wrote a short biography for the conservative history group. he has supported conservative philosophies which he believes benefit poorer people and has suggested the conservative party should focus on benefiting all citizens.  career  early posts following his graduation, timothy worked at the conservative research department (crd) for three years, from 2001 to 2004. in 2004, timothy left the conservative research department to work as corporate affairs adviser for the corporation of london. in 2005, timothy took up a post as a policy adviser for the association of british insurers. in 2006, timothy returned to politics after two years in the financial sector, spending a year working for theresa may - the first of three posts on may's staff. in 2007, timothy returned to the crd, where he worked for a further three years.  home office in 2010, theresa may was appointed secretary of state at the home office and appointed timothy as a special adviser. he spent five years working for the home secretary, before leaving, in 2015, to become a director at the new schools network (nsn).  new schools network while at the nsn he spoke in favour of ending the 50% rule which requires oversubscribed free schools to allocate half of their places without reference to faith.  in 2015, timothy wrote an article to express his worry that the people's republic of china was effectively buying britain's silence on allegations of chinese human rights abuse and opposing china's involvement in sensitive sectors such as the hinkley point c nuclear power station. he criticised david cameron and george osborne for "selling our national security to china" and asserted that "the government seems intent on ignoring the evidence and presumably the advice of the security and intelligence agencies." he warned that security experts were worried that the chinese could use their role in the programme to build weaknesses into computer systems which would allow them to shut down britain's energy production at will and argued that "no amount of trade and investment should justify allowing a hostile state easy
access to the country's critical national infrastructure."  in october 2016, the health service journal rated him as the fifth most influential person in the english nhs in 2016.  timothy has stated that he voted to leave the european union in the 2016 membership referendum.  downing street following david cameron's resignation as prime minister in the wake of the brexit referendum result, timothy took a sabbatical from his position at the nsn to work on theresa may's 2016 leadership campaign. may's campaign was a success and timothy was appointed joint chief of staff to the prime minister on 14 july 2016.  in spring 2017, may called a snap general election. as a result of the election, the conservative party lost its majority and became a minority government dependent on the democratic unionist party for their majority. timothy, along with fiona hill, faced immediate calls for his removal. theresa may was also given an ultimatum by conservative members of parliament, to sack timothy or face her own leadership challenge.  on 9 june 2017, timothy resigned as joint chief of staff to the prime minister. he, along with hill, had been blamed by members of the conservative party for a disastrous campaign, which resulted in may losing a 20-point lead in the polls. reflecting in 2020 on the projected cost of adult social care, timothy wrote "many things went wrong in that election campaign, but i resigned as joint chief of staff in downing street because our social care proposal blew up the manifesto."  journalism since leaving downing street, timothy has worked as a columnist for  the daily telegraph newspaper.  brexit and allegations of antisemitism in february 2018, timothy denied allegations of antisemitism following the publication of an article of which he was the principal author that claimed the existence of a  "secret plot" to stop brexit by the jewish philanthropist george soros. in response, timothy tweeted: "throughout my career i've campaigned against antisemitism, helped secure more funding for security at synagogues and jewish schools".  2019 general election in november 2019, timothy failed in a bid to be selected as the conservative candidate for the meriden constituency in the west midlands, for the 2019 general election. the seat had previously been held by dame caroline spelman, who opted to stand down as an mp and candidate over the "intensity of abuse arising out of brexit".  2022 commonwealth games in january 2019 timothy was appointed as a member of the organising committee of the 2022 commonwealth games, to be held in his home city of birmingham.  the trojan horse scandal in february 2022, the new york times released a podcast entitled "the trojan horse affair
" which was created by brian reed and hamza syed. the podcast shed light on nick timothy's contribution to the scandal when he emailed a birmingham community centre which was due to host an event entitled "trojan horse or trojan hoax" in order to shut down the event. in the email it is alleged that nick insinuated that the owners of the community centre would be associated with terrorism if they allowed the event to go ahead, and references an article nick timothy himself wrote.  references  external links  twitter feed  columns by timothy for conservativehome  living people 1980 births british political consultants conservative party (uk) people people from birmingham, west midlands alumni of the university of sheffield british special advisers commanders of the order of the british empire downing street chiefs of staff
thomas "tommy" brenneck is an american guitarist and record producer best known as the leader menahan street band and member of sharon jones & the dap-kings and the budos band. he is the founder of dunham records, a subsidiary of seminal retro-soul label daptone records, and was the producer of soul singer charles bradley. as a session musician, he frequently works with other daptone artists  history  tom was born and raised in staten island, new york. he is a self-taught guitarist who joined the original daptone band the dap-kings at the age of 20. tom quickly became one of the essential members of the daptone family, working closely with the label founder and producer gabe roth aka bosco mann, and playing and touring with sharon jones, the label matriarch. sharon gave tom his nickname, tommy "tnt" brenneck.  since then, tom founded dunham records and studio, cultivated the music and career of the late charles bradley (also his son's godfather), performed and recorded with amy winehouse and is a principal in his other daptone project the menahan street band.  tom has been a session guitarist, writer and producer on projects with lady gaga, ceelo green, dan auerbach, beyonce & jay-z, josh tillman aka father john misty, rufus wainwright and miley cyrus, among others. additionally, he has played guitar for amy winehouse and he is one of the musicians featured on "telepathy" by christina aguilera featuring nile rodgers.  as an engineer on yebba's dawn, he was nominated for the grammy award for best engineered album, non-classical at the 64th annual grammy awards.  dunham records and recording studios  tom is the founder of dunham records, a subsidiary of daptone records. the record label originally operated out of tom's bedroom in bushwick, brooklyn and produced iconic hits from artists including charles bradley before eventually moving to a larger space in williamsburg, brooklyn.  brenneck ran a small recording studio out of his home in bushwick, brooklyn before opening dunham sound studios with homer steinwiess in williamsburg in 2008. the all-analog studio operated with menahan street band as the in-house band and recorded artists including mark ronson, rufus wainwright, cee-lo green, theophilus london and diane birch, among others. in 2014, the studio was succeeded by the diamond mine, a recording studio in long island city founded with steinweiss, nick movshon, and leon michels.
in 2017, brenneck moved to los angeles with his wife and two children. he now works out of los angeles' the sound factory studio with mark ronson, whom he got to know well during his time with winehouse.  discography  studio albums  eps  singles  other appearances  "up from the south" of the budos band is featured in a commercial for the nfl network (2013).  "t.i.b.w.f." of the budos band is featured in a series of commercials for 1800 tequila and in the sixth episode of this american life.  "the chicago falcon (remix)" of the budos band is featured on wale's fourth mixtape, the mixtape about nothing (2008).  "budos rising" and "the proposition" of the budos band are featured in mlb 09: the show and mlb 10: the show, respectively, for playstation consoles.  "king charles" of the budos band is featured in episode 37 of the hbo tv series entourage ("manic monday," season 3).  "origin of man," "up from the south," "t.i.b.w.f." and "hidden hand" of the budos band are featured in the movie new york, i love you (2009).  "mas o menos", "ride or die" and "scorpion" of the budos band are featured on the fictional radio station "daptone radio" in the game sleeping dogs by united front games and square enix london. (2012)  "the volcano song" of the budos band is featured in the documentary i knew it was you: rediscovering john cazale (2009).  "the sticks" of the budos band is featured in the background of a trailer for destiny's dark below dlc. (2014)  "say amen (saturday night)" by panic! at the disco features an interpolation of aphasia off of the album burnt offering of the budos band.  production discography  albums    the budos band - the budos band (daptone, 2005) (with bosco mann)  the budos band - the budos band ii (daptone, 2007) (with bosco mann)  menahan street band - make the road by walking (dunham, 2008)  the budos band - the budos band iii (daptone, 2007) (with bosco mann)  menahan street band - the crossing (dunham, 2012)  charles bradley - victim
of love (dunham, 2013)  low cut connie - hi honey (contender records, 2014)  the budos band - burnt offering (daptone, 2014)  (produced with the budos band)  the black box revelation - highway cruiser (bana kin, 2015)  paul & the tall trees - our love in the light (big crown, 2016)  lee fields & the expressions - special night (big crown, 2016)  (produced with leon michels)  lady wray - queen alone (big crown, 2016) (produced with leon michels)  charles bradley - changes (dunham, 2016)  the sha la das - love in the wind (dunham, 2018)  charles bradley - black velvet (dunham, 2018)  the budos band - v (daptone, 2019)  the jay vons - the word (daptone, 2019) (produced with wayne gordon & the jay vons)  paul & the tall trees - so long (big crown, 2019) (produced with leon michels)  the budos band - long in the tooth (dunham, 2020)  menahan street band - the exciting sounds of menahan street band (dunham, 2021)  other tracks  other standalone tracks include:   3 titans - "college" / "the life of a scholar" (dunham, 2010) (with homer steinwiess)  the like - release me (geffen, 2010); 2 tracks (with mark ronson)  ceelo green - "georgia" single (elektra, 2010)  ikebe shakedown - ikebe shakedown (ubiquity, 2011); 3 tracks  the sha la das - "sha la da la la (christmas time)" single (dunham, 2013)  black lips - underneath the rainbow (vice, 2014); 4 tracks  paloma faith - "price of fame" from the architect (rca, 2017)  (with homer steinwiess)  lee fields & the expressions - "time" single (big crown, 2017) (produced with leon michels) charlotte day wilson - "i can only whisper" featuring badbadnotgood from alpha (2021) (with wilson)  references  1981 births living people american soul guitarists american session musicians 21st-century american guitarists sharon jones & the dap-kings members
peter geoffrey noel (born 28 march 1963), known as the guru, is a former field hockey player from australia, who competed in the 1988 summer olympics for his native country. he was a member of the australia men's national field hockey team, best known as the kookaburras.  personal noel lives in adelaide, south australia.  field hockey  club hockey noel played club hockey for campbeltown hockey club in south australia - now north east hockey club.  he now plays for adelaide hockey club, for their metro competition m5 men's division.  state hockey noel played in the southern hotshots team in the national hockey league (now australian hockey league) in 1994, 1995 and 1996.  international hockey he made his olympic games debut where he was a goal keeper in 1988 in seoul where the kookaburras finished fourth. he played in the same team as ric charlesworth and graham reid (sportsman) who would go on to coach the national teams themselves.  references  1963 births living people olympic field hockey players of australia australian male field hockey players field hockey players at the 1988 summer olympics
{{infobox military unit |unit_name= 4e regiment de tirailleurs tunisiens |image=insigne regimentaire du 4e regiment de tirailleurs tunisiens 1er modele.jpg |caption= regimental insignia  |dates= 1884 - 1956 |country= france  |allegiance=  |branch= french army |type= tirailleurs  |role=  |size=  |command_structure=  |garrison=  |equipment=  |current_commander= |ceremonial_chief= |colonel_of_the_regiment= |notable_commanders=  |identification_symbol= |identification_symbol_2=  |nickname=  |patron= |motto= « sous la garde d'allah »  (fr) « sous la protection d'allah » (fr) |colors=  |march= |mascot=  |battles= world war iworld war iiindochina war |anniversaries= |decorations=  |battle_honours= casablanca 1908 guise 1914 artois 1915 champagne 1915 verdun 1917 aisne 1918 picardy 1918 somme-py 1918 le belvedere 1944 garigliano 1944 vosges 1944 stuttgart 1945 indochina 1947-1954  }}  the 4th tunisian tirailleurs regiment () was an infantry regiment of the army of africa, part of the french army.  active between 1884 and 1956, the regiment was one of the most decorated of the french army. the regiment had a distinguished record during world war i, being cited six times. it was decorated with the legion d'honneur during world war ii, as part of the 3rd algerian infantry division (3e dia). during the italian campaign, it served with the french expeditionary corps under general alphonse juin, and was cited four times at the orders of the armed forces.   history   from their establishment, the algerian and tunisian tirailleurs regiments were given sequential numbering (1st tirailleurs, 2nd etc.). this possibly reflected the fact that the areas of recruitment had formerly been part of territories under ottoman guardianship administered by the dey of algiers and the bey of tunis. frequently these regiments drew from serving soldiers already employed by the ottoman empire. the popular nickname "turcos" bestowed on these units may owe its origin to this. according to other sources, the tirailleurs gained that designation during the crimean war when algerian infantry in the french expeditionary force were sometimes mistaken for their turkish allies.  created on december 14, 1884,
under the name of 4th tirailleurs, the unit was constituted of tunisian soldiers and french officers . non-commissioned officers were both tunisian and french. with the addition of some french volunteers as soldats, the non-tunisian element in the regiment was eventually to comprise between 20% and 30% of the total strength. in 1899 the unit had six battalions of 600 men each.  in october 1900, the first battalion was sent to tonkin, and in 1907 and 1908, the 2nd and 4th battalions were engaged in the campaign of morocco with the 3rd battalion rejoining chaouia-ourdigha by the 4th battalion. from october 1911 to september 1912, six of the twelve battalions of the 4e rtt were engaged in combat in the french protectorate. in a message addressed to the bey of tunisia, on april 22, 1911, the french ambassador to morocco underlined their "valor, discipline and commitment [...] above all".   world war i  in the course of world war i, france mobilized 62,461 muslim tirailleurs and spahis in tunisia, together with 9,000 french soldiers and 24,442 indigenous colonial workers, numbering in total 86,903 men. engaged for the first time on august 23, 1914 at  in belgium, these tunisian soldiers experienced extensive service in ww1 trench warfare.   1914  on august 2, 1914, the 4th marching regiment (4e rmt) was formed in tunisia. the marching regiment was initially composed of the 6th and 1st battalions of the 4e rtt.  on october 29, 1914, the 4e rmt received the 5th battalion of the 4e rtt  from the marching tirailleurs regiment of the moroccan division. initially attached to the 38th infantry division (), the 4e passed to the moroccan division on november 24, 1914, alongside the marching regiment of the foreign legion (rmle), the 7th algerian tirailleurs regiment (7e rta) as well the 8th zouaves regiment (8e rz). on august 4, 1918, the regiment joined the 2nd moroccan division ().   1915   september 25 - october 6  : second battle of champagne   1917  the performance of the tunisian tirailleurs at the chemin des dames in verdun 1917, earned the regiment the croix de guerre and the legion d'honneur. in addition six citations were awarded collectively to the regiment and seven to individual battalions. a detachment of the 4th rtt participated in the victory parade of july 14, 1919.  a total of 16
,509 tunisian soldiers in french service were killed in world war i out of a total algerian, moroccan and tunisian death toll of between 28,000 and 36,000. another source puts tunisian losses at 10,500 out of 63,000.   1918  following the armistice of 1918, the tunisian battalions were redeployed to other theatres of operations: morocco, south tunisia, the dardanelles, and the levant campaigns, between 1925 -1926.   world war ii    battle of france (1939-1940)  on june 16, 1940, while the regiment was known as the 4e rtt of the 84th african infantry division (), 63 soldiers were killed in ablis. a commemorative plaque honors the 4e tunisian tirailleurs regiment. among the deceased was soldier mohamed amar hedhili ben salem ben hadj, whose body was transferred in november 1945 to the memorial de la france combattante at mont valerien.   tunisian campaign (1943)  during the tunisia campaign, equipped with material from whatever sources were available, the regiment fought alongside french, american and british units.   italian campaign (1943-1944)  in 1944, during the italian campaign, the 4e rtt was commanded by colonel jacques roux and then by colonel guillebaud. the regiment together with the 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment (3e rta) and 7th algerian tirailleurs regiment (7e rta), constituted the infantry of the 3rd algerian infantry division (3e dia) commanded by general joseph de goislard de monsabert at the french expeditionary corps. the regiment fought in the region of monte cassino; succeeding in reaching the gustav line and capturing belvedere. during this combat which lasted from january 25 to february 4, 1944, losses were heavy: half of the effectives of the regiment and three-quarters of its officers, including colonel jacques roux), were killed or wounded (207 killed, 75 missing, 1090 wounded). according to charles de gaulle, during the belvedere fighting: "the 4th tunisian tirailleurs regiment accomplished one of the most brilliant successes of arms endeavours at the cost of enormous heavy losses."   campaign of france (1944-1945)  following the belvedere, while decimated, the regiment reconstituted and participated in the disembarkation in provence in august 1944, the other decisive combats, in the doubs, the vogues (notably during the combats of hohneck), in alsace then germany. accordingly, adjudant-chef ahmed el abed was the first military of the french army to penetrate germany in
1945: he reached the iced waters of the river of lauter with a couple of dozens combatants and apprehended, march 14, of the village of scheibenhardt.   casualties  from january 10, 1944 to april 24, 1945, the 4e rtt endured the loss of 1009 men (575 in italy, 342 in france, and 92 in germany), 879 disappeared and 4053 wounded. from the 26000 tunisians which partook in combat, 1700 were lost at the end of war with 450 declared disappeared.   indochina war  the 4e rtt was reconstituted on february 1, 1949. the 2nd and 3rd battalions of the regiment were dispatched first to cambodia and then to south viet-nam, where they served until 1955.   1956  with the ending of the indochina war the various tirailleur units involved were disbanded or returned to their respective countries of origin. tunisia was on the verge of independence which was proclaimed on march 20, 1956. some of the veterans of the 4th ttr were integrated into the newly established tunisian national army alongside other local contingent forces. the 4th tunisian tirailleurs continued in existence until september 1958 and was reassigned to france. the regiment was then reconstituted as the 4th tirailleurs regiment, which was posted to the southern territory of algeria on september 18, 1958. its personnel were now a mixture of french and algerian conscripts and regulars, together with some tunisian volunteers who had opted to continue in french service.   post algerian war  the 4th tirailleurs regiment was disbanded at the end of the algerian war in 1962, together with most units of the former army of africa. the 1st tirailleurs regiment () was recreated on may 21, 1994. the 4th company of the modern regiment preserves the traditions of the 4th tunisian tirailleurs regiment.   traditions    insignia    regimental colors    decorations  the regimental colors of the 4e rtt is decorated with:   croix de la legion d'honneur (1919)  croix de guerre 1914-1918 with :  6 palms and a bronz star  croix de guerre 1939-1945 with :  4 palms   croix de guerre des theatres d'operations exterieures with:  1 palm  ordre du merite cherifien   ordre du nichan iftikhar  fourragere: the regimental colors of the 4e rtt is decorated with the fourragere with colors of the legion d'honneur with two olives: cut olive with colors of the legion d'honneur and the croix de guerre 1914
-1918 and cut olive with colors of the medaille militaire and croix de guerre 1939-1945.  similarly to the 7th algerian tirailleurs regiment, the regiment bears wearing the red fourragere.   uniforms   from its establishment in 1884 until the outbreak of world war i in 1914, the 4th tunisian tirailleurs wore the zouave style uniform of the algerian tirailleurs. the distinguishing feature of the tunisian regiment were light blue tombeaus (false pockets) on the front of their blue and yellow vestes (short jackets). complete with red fezzes and waist sashes, this north african style of clothing was reintroduced for parade and off-duty wear in 1932. on other occasions the standard khaki service dress of the army of africa was usually worn.   honours   battle honours casablanca 1908 guise 1914 artois 1915 champagne 1915 verdun 1917 l'aisne 1918 picardie 1918 somme-py 1918 le belvedere 1944 garigliano 1944 vosges 1944 stuttgart 1945 indochine 1947-1954   regimental commanders   lieutenant-colonel daugan, regimental commander at temporary title on september 29, 1914, then at definite title on december 25, 1914 and until january 19, 1916.  january 20 - february 24, 1916 : lieutenant-colonel maurice  february 25 - july 28, 1916 : lieutenant-colonel dardenne  1943 - january 27, 1944 : colonel roux. killed in action in january during combats at belvedere.  1944 - 1945 : colonel guillebaud   notable members   aspirant robert seguin (1921-1944), september 7, 1944  lieutenant then captain bernard pecout, chief medic of the 1st battalion then chief medic of the regiment, 1956-1957.   see also  3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment  references  bibliography  le bataillon du belvedere, ed. flammarion, paris, 1953  heros de tunisie. spahis et tirailleurs d'ahmed bey 1er 1837 - 1957, ed. ceres, tunis, 2005  tunisiens heroiques au service de la france : l'epopee du 4e tirailleurs sur la front francais. guerre 1914-1918, paris, 1939  sidi brahim des neiges... sur les traces du 4e regiment de tirailleurs tunisiens'', ed. mc-editions, carthage, 2008  external links   tirailleurs regiments of france military units and formations established in 1884 military units and formations disestablished in 1956
maggie malone (born december 30, 1993) is an american track and field athlete competing in the javelin throw. she holds a personal record of 66.82 meters (219 feet, 3 inches) for the event, set in 2021, a national record. she was the 2016 american national and collegiate record holder and ncaa division 1 champion. she is the american collegiate record holder.  prep born to danny malone and nancy kindig-malone in college station, texas and raised in geneva, nebraska, maggie attended fillmore central high school where her parents are teachers and coaches. her mother all-american collegiately for the nebraska cornhuskers and she followed her mother's example was recruited to the university of nebraska-lincoln. nancy kindig-malone qualified for the 1970 us olympics. nancy induction into the nebraska high school sports hall of fame. she won big eight heptathlon and pentathlon titles at nebraska, becoming an all-american and helping the huskers win their first indoor national championship in 1982. nancy also won a class c state basketball title with hastings st. cecilia high school in 1977. maggie won 2012 class c nebraska school activities association state long jump title , state triple jump bronze medal jumping , 5th in 200 meters in 26.63 and 2011 class c nebraska school activities association state triple jump title.  ncaa maggie malone earned 4 ncaa division i u.s. track & field and cross country coaches association all-american awards.  she started out in the heptathlon, placing 5th at 2013 kansas relays scoring 4369 points, but decided to focus on her strongest event - the javelin. in her first year of competition in 2013 she placed third at the big ten conference championships and was tenth at the 2013 ncaa outdoor championships.  she greatly improved in the 2014 season, setting a best of , winning the big ten conference title, and placing fourth at the 2014 ncaa outdoors.  malone transferred to texas a&m university and began throwing for the texas a&m aggies track team. in her first year in college station, texas, she was fourth at the southeastern conference (sec) championships and placed ninth at the ncaas, failing to build on her previous season. malone described this as "the worst season i've ever had" and credited the advice of teammate lindon victor with her change of approach to train harder in the summer months. her sister audrey joined her in the javelin team at texas a&m.  she showed marked improvement in the 2016 season, bettering her personal record by a wide margin. she won the
sec championships with a mark of  before taking the title at the 2016 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships with a collegiate record of . a victory at the 2016 united states olympic trials soon followed, making her the first athlete in american history to win the collegiate and national titles in the same year. this gained her a place on the american olympic team.  national titles usa outdoor track and field championships javelin throw: 2016 ncaa women's division i outdoor track and field championships javelin throw: 2016  professional  olympic games malone has represented the united states in two editions of the olympic games, 2016 and 2020 (the latter was actually held in 2021 due to the covid-19 pandemic). in 2016 she finished 25th in the qualifying round with a throw of 56.47 m and thus did not qualify for the finals. in 2020 she had the second-best throw in the qualifying round, 63.07 m, and in the final placed 10th with a throw of 59.82 m.  malone signed to nike and began throwing in fall 2017 and is training for us outdoor track and field championships. as a master graduate student in marketing (c/o 2019), malone trains at texas a&m with juan de la garza.  us outdoor track and field championship  references  external links  living people 1993 births track and field athletes from texas people from college station, texas christians from texas american female javelin throwers texas a&m aggies women's track and field athletes nebraska cornhuskers women's track and field athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states usa outdoor track and field championships winners
four hours before his death (spanish: cuatro horas antes de morir) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by emilio gomez muriel and starring carlos navarro and carmen montejo.  cast   jose baviera    lupe carriles    mimi derba   enrique diaz 'indiano'   rafael estrada   pedro galvan   yadira jimenez    maria cristina lesser   jose maria linares-rivas    hector mateos   francisco meneses   carmen montejo as marga    felipe montoya   jose luis moreno    luis mussot     carlos navarro   tito novaro    andrea palma   luis salazar   armando velasco   julio villarreal    enrique zambrano  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by emilio gomez muriel mexican black-and-white films
the san francisco workers' school was an ideological training center of the communist party usa (cpusa) established in san francisco for adult education in 1934.  "it was a typical specimen of a communist school, such as would come under investigation by federal and state authorities for decades afterward.". in the 1940, it emerged as the california labor school.  history  in 1934, anita whitney, samuel adams darcy, benjamin ellisberg, lincoln steffens, and steffens' wife ella winter supported the establishment of the san francisco worker's school, housed at cpusa headquarters at 121 haight street in san francisco.  the school drew inspiration from the jack london memorial institute (founded 1917).  organization  like similar workers' schools in new york and chicago, it held classes at night (after normal work hours) and taught the basics of communism.  administrators  (forthcoming)  advisory board  according to tenney committee report of 1947, the following people served on an advisory board for the school:  langston hughes  lincoln steffens  anita whitney  teachers  according to stephen schwartz, the following people taught at the school:  kenneth rexroth - art  samuel adams darcy - unknown  elaine black - unknown  karl hama (party name for goso yoneda) - unknown  sam goodwin - unknown  louise todd lambert - unknown  courses according to stephen schwartz, the following courses were taught at the school:  principles of communism  marxian economics  national and colonial problems  history of the social and communist movements  self-defense in courts (4-session)  organizing the working class (only for cpusa and ycl members)  publications  the school published a journal called writers' workshop, edited by activist, novelist, historian alexander saxton.  impact  (forthcoming)  legacy  "the early san francisco workers school morphed into the tom mooney school, and then reappeared as cls" (the california labor school).  see also  rand school of social science (1906)  work people's college (1907)  brookwood labor college (1921)  new york workers school (1923)  new workers school (1929)  jefferson school of social science (1944)  highlander research and education center (formerly highlander folk school) (1932)  commonwealth college (arkansas) (1923-1940)   southern appalachian labor school (since 1977)  california labor school (formerly tom mooney labor school) (1942)  seattle labor school (1946-
1949)  continuing education  los angeles people's education center  footnotes  further reading        educational institutions established in 1934 labor schools socialism in the united states communism in the united states communist party usa 1934 establishments in california education in san francisco politics of san francisco 1940s disestablishments in california
rampi may refer to:  rampi language, a language of sulawesi, indonesia  people with the surname alfredo rampi (1975-1981) francesco rampi (born 1991), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
millard creek is a tributary of tunkhannock creek in susquehanna county, pennsylvania. it is approximately  long and flows through harford township and lenox township. the watershed of the creek has an area of . the creek is not designated as an impaired waterbody. the surficial geology in its vicinity includes wisconsinan till, alluvium, wetlands, lakes, bedrock, and alluvial fan. the dominant land uses in the creek's watershed include forested land and agricultural land. a number of bridges have been constructed over the creek. its drainage basin is designated as a coldwater fishery and a migratory fishery.  course millard creek begins in a small unnamed pond to the south of a wetland in harford township. it flows south-southwest for a few tenths of a mile before turning south-southeast for several tenths of a mile, entering lenox township. here, the creek turns south-southwest for several tenths of a mile before turning east and then southeast and then south-southwest. after several tenths of a mile, it passes through a wetland and a lake before turning south. for the next several tenths of a mile, it flows alongside jeffers hill before passing through a wetland and jeffers pond. the creek then turns southwest for a short distance before turning south-southeast. after several tenths of a mile, it passes through another wetland and turns southeast for a few tenths of a mile before receiving an unnamed tributary from the left. it then turns south for several tenths of a mile, beginning to flow alongside pennsylvania route 167 on one side and hickory ridge on the other side. the creek then turns southeast for a few tenths of a mile before turning east-southeast and crossing pennsylvania route 92. a short distance further downstream, it reaches its confluence with tunkhannock creek.  millard creek is approximately  long. it joins tunkhannock creek  upstream of its mouth.  hydrology millard creek is not designated as an impaired waterbody.  the total sediment load in millard creek is  per year. cropland is by far the largest contributor, accounting for  per year. deciduous forest an hay/pastures/grass contribute  per year respectively. the annual sediment load contributed by coniferous forest is , while  comes from mixed forest and  comes from high-intensity development.  the annual nitrogen load in millard creek is . a total of  per year comes from cropland, while  comes from groundwater and  comes from septic systems and  comes from hay/pastures/grass. deciduous forests contribute  per year, coniferous forests contribute , mixed forests contribute , and high
-intensity development contributes .  the total phosphorus load in millard creek is . annually,  comes from cropland,  comes from groundwater,  comes from hay/pastures/grass, and  comes from deciduous forest. a total of  per year comes from coniferous forest, mixed forest and high-intensity development contribute  each, and septic systems contribute  per year.  point-source pollution does not contribute any nitrogen, phosphorus, or sediment to millard creek.  geography and geology the elevation near the mouth of millard creek is  above sea level. the elevation near the creek's source is  above sea level.  the geology in the entire watershed of millard creek consists of interbedded sedimentary rock of the catksill formation.  the surficial geology in the vicinity of millard creek mostly consists of a till known as wisconsinan till. however, patches of alluvium, wetlands, and lakes occur along some areas of the creek and the surficial geology on some nearby hills include bedrock consisting of sandstone and shale. there is also a patch of alluvial fan near the mouth of the creek.  watershed the watershed of millard creek has an area of . the stream is entirely within the united states geological survey quadrangle of lenoxville. its mouth is located within  of glenwood.  the main land use in the watershed of millard creek is forested land, which occupies nearly  in the watershed. agricultural land occupies slightly over  and urban land occupies only a very small part of the creek's watershed.  the watershed of millard creek is relatively long in a north-south direction and relatively narrow in an east-west direction.  history millard creek was entered into the geographic names information system on august 2, 1979. its identifier in the geographic names information system is 1181198.  a prestressed box beam or girders bridge carrying state route 2039 over millard creek in lenox township was built in 1951 and repaired in 2010 and is  long. a concrete tee beam bridge carrying pennsylvania route 92 over the creek in lenox township was built in 1959 and is  long.  in 2001, millard creek was used as the reference watershed for the total maximum daily load for south branch wyalusing creek.  biology the drainage basin of millard creek is designated as a coldwater fishery and a migratory fishery. wild trout naturally reproduce in millard creek from its mouth upstream for . the designated use of the creek is aquatic life.  see also east branch tunkhannock creek, next tributary of tunkhannock creek going downstream tower branch, next tributary of tunkhannock creek going
upstream list of rivers of pennsylvania  references  external links image of millard creek  rivers of susquehanna county, pennsylvania tributaries of tunkhannock creek rivers of pennsylvania
the ramat gan museum of israeli art is an art museum that displays israeli art, located on abba hillel street, tel aviv district city of ramat gan, israel. the museum was opened on 4 april 1987.  about  the museum has been showcasing eclectical exhibitions since the day of its opening. for numerous reasons, directors have come and gone. the current director is curator meir aharonson. of the museum's most popular and prominent exhibitions, we can find photographer simha shimran's photography exhibition, curator yehudit mezkel's motherhood themed group exhibition, and more.  history  the building was built in the 1930s with the initial purpose of serving as an industrial plant. prior to the opening of the museum, the building was converted into a museum space by architect danny schwarz, in order to serve its new purpose.  in 2012, the museum had 23,000 visitors.  references  external links ramat gan museum of israeli art website  1987 establishments in israel art museums and galleries in israel
antwan jemell january (born july 29, 1999) is an american basketball player for hillcrest prep academy in phoenix, arizona. january is from los angeles, california, and is a four-star recruit in the 2019 class.  in may 2019, january committed to play college basketball at the university of new mexico.  references  external links  http://www.espn.com/college-sports/basketball/recruiting/player/_/id/224501/antwan-january  basketball players from los angeles living people power forwards (basketball) william howard taft charter high school alumni 1999 births beverly hills high school alumni
events happened in 1894 in russia.  births  nikita khrushchev, soviet statesman.  deaths  alexander iii, monarch (born 1845)  nadezhda von meck, patron of peter tchaikovsky (b. 1831)  references  1894 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
andrey anatolyevich moguchy (russian: андреи анатольевич могучии; born november 23, 1961 in leningrad, ussr) is a russian stage director, primarily known for his work in drama theatre. since 2013, andrey moguchy is the artistic director of the bolshoi drama in st. petersburg. as of 2016, andrey moguchy is a professor at st. petersburg theatre academy.  life and career  andrey moguchy has graduated from leningrad institute of aerospace instrumentation in 1984. he has then decided to pursue a career in arts and culture, and obtained a degree from leningrad institute of culture as a stage director, and an actor. in 1990, moguchy has established independent theatre company formal theatre.  since 1990, moguchy has staged productions in many of the leading theatre in russia, and across europe, including alexandrinsky theatre, finnish theatre academy, theatre of nations. he has staged operas, including a production with valery gergiev, and a dance gala at the mariinsky theatre for diana vishneva.  in 2013, moguchy has been appointed artistic director of the bolshoi drama theatre in st. petersburg. in 2018, he developed a multimedia installation at the st. petersburg manege honouring hundredth anniversary of the museums in former royal residencies in tsarskoe selo, pavlovsk, peterhof and gatchina.  selected awards   seven golden mask awards as best director, and for the best production (2001, 2006, 2008, 2011, 2012, 2016, 2017);  the europe prize new theatrical realities sponsored by european commission (2011)  edinburg fringe first awards for house of fools (2001)  references   living people russian theatre directors 1961 births people from saint petersburg
jaitowal is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3.5 km away from  rurka kalan, 14.4 km from phillaur, 33.8 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 124 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , jaitowal has a total number of 72 houses and population of 328 of which include 162 males and 166 females. literacy rate of jaitowal is 80.81%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 31 which is 9.45% of total population of jaitowal, and child sex ratio is approximately 1067 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 4.57% of total population in jaitowal. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 108 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of jaitowal which includes 101 males and 7 females. according to census survey report 2011, 99.07% workers describe their work as main work and 0.93% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 20 km away from the village. the village is 44.1 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 129 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
ueli leuenberger (born 26 march 1952 in oberonz; place of origin in rohrbachgraben, bern) is a swiss politician affiliated with the green party.  biography  ueli leuenberger was born to a working-class family. after completing his education he became a chef in lucerne. in 1972, he moved to geneva. there he began to study social work at the institut d'etudes sociales de geneve, with a focus on environmental work.  after this study, he took up various roles in the social and union sectors, such as leader of a caritas refugee centre, responsible member for the hotel and hospitality sector of the sit union, social worker with the swiss evangelical church and consultant at the centre social protestant.  in 1996, leuenberger founded the universite populaire albanaise (albanian peoples' university) in geneva, a pilot project for the integration of kosovar refugees into swiss life, which he led until 2002. for this work, he received an award for human rights work from le courrier in 1996.  today, he is a vocational teacher in geneva and lectures irregularly on social integration and people from the balkans.  politics  leuenberger joined the greens in geneva in 1988. in 1990 he became the president of the greens for geneva city. the left-green coalition succeeded in achieving a majority in the municipal council and forming a government. from 1991 until 1997, he was a municipal counciller with the role of chairman of the social affairs committee. from 2001 until 2003, he was a member of the  of geneva.  on 1 june 2003, leuenberger was took the place of patrice mugny in the swiss national council, since the latter had been appointed to the geneva city executive government. he was re-elected to the national council on 21 october 2007, following the 2007 swiss federal election.  in 2004, he was appointed deputy president of the green party of switzerland and in april 2008 he became president, succeeding ruth genner. he continued in this role until 2012, when he was replaced by two co-presidents, adele thorens goumaz and regula rytz.  as a politician, he has focussed on the defense of the rights of migrants, the right of asylum and human rights. he fought against xenophobia and the "blocherisation" of switzerland. supportive of a greater north-south solidarity, he has also promoted labour ecology, protests against the "nuclear lobby", and participatory democracy.  awards   2013
: prix diaspora for his engagement with albanian culture and his work or the integration of albanians in switzerland.  works   with alain maillard: les damnes du troisieme cercle. les kosovars en suisse. 1965-1999 (the damned of the third circle: the kosovars in switzerland, 1965-1999). les editions metropolis, geneve 1999.  references  external links     (french)  website of ueli leuenberger (french)  canton of geneva politicians green party of switzerland politicians leaders of political parties 1952 births living people
jori finkel (born october 15, 1970) is an american writer and editor who specializes in contemporary art. she is best known for analyzing the inner workings of the art market and for chronicling the los angeles art scene during its expansion at the beginning of the 21st century.  she is currently a contributor to the new york times from los angeles and the l.a. correspondent for the art newspaper.  background finkel graduated summa cum laude with a b.a. in english from columbia university in new york and earned her m.a. in english and comparative literature at stanford university. she studied the history of the avant-gardes through a doctoral program at stanford but apparently did not complete the ph.d.  she married michael benjamin lubic on sept. 14, 2008 on a sailboat in the santa monica bay.  she told an interviewer from zocalo public square that her introduction to the art world occurred in college when she worked for the columbia bartending agency in new york-she bartended for julian schnabel parties at the mary boone gallery.  editing from 1998 to 2004 she was senior editor at art+auction magazine in new york. she published a memory of bruce wolmer, the longtime art+auction editor, when he died in 2010.  teaching finkel developed a course for otis college of art and design in 2007 called popular art writing.  journalism  the new york times from 2005 to 2009 and again since 2013, she has covered visual art from los angeles for the new york times on a freelance basis. she has written features on a wide range of artists, including john outterbridge, chanel miller, alison saar, mounira al solh, doris salcedo, ai weiwei, judy chicago, mary kelly, robert irwin, john baldessari, karl benjamin, doug aitken, stanya kahn and harry dodge, enrique martinez celaya, lynn hershman, andrea zittel and david hockney.  she broke news about the hard-sell strategies for unauthenticated salvador dali and pablo picasso prints taking place through cruise ship auctions. this article led to additional class-action lawsuits and major lines such as disney and royal caribbean cancelling contracts with the auction house.  she also wrote an early report on the questionable ethics of museums soliciting financial donations from galleries for museum exhibitions featuring gallery artists. this article had little lasting impact: a report nine years later in the new york times showed the problem to be much more extensive.  los angeles times as staff
art reporter at the l.a. times from 2010 through 2013, finkel wrote a mix of feature articles and news stories. her investigation into the finances of the nonprofit watts house project prompted the resignation of its founding director, edgar arceneaux.  controversy finkel's job as the art reporter of the l.a. times was eliminated in july 2013 in a round of layoffs, one of several during a period when the newspaper was up for sale.  in response, 15 california museum directors sent a letter to the editor of the l.a. times calling for her reinstatement and calling her the "go-to source here for art-world news and analysis, with articles that are consistently insightful and accessible and a byline that is read around the world."  the letter's lead authors were ann philbin, director of the hammer museum; michael govan, director of the los angeles county museum of art; and james cuno, director of the j. paul getty trust.   artists john baldessari, judy chicago, catherine opie, marina abramovic, robert gober, doug wheeler, doug aitken and lynn hershman were among those who added their names when the letter was posted online as a change.org petition. baldessari wrote: "it's a gigantic loss."  the hollywood reporter noted, "it's not often a newspaper writer makes the news rounds."  l.a. times editor davan maharaj responded with a letter, also posted on multiple news sites, identifying other staff reporters who cover arts and entertainment. he stated "our commitment to intelligent and illuminating reporting of the visual arts in southern california is in no way diminished."  finkel's job was not reinstated.  identity theft after writing a new york times article on lynn hershman's double life as roberta breitmore, finkel organized an exhibition for the santa monica museum of art to present this work for the first time in its entirety: "identity theft: lynn hershman, eleanor antin, suzy lake: 1974-78."  hershman developed the roberta breitmore persona over several years in the 1970s, going out on the town in a particular outfit and "ultimately securing, among other things, a driver's license, an apartment, a shrink and a succession of dates."  "identity theft" put the roberta project into the larger context of feminist artworks of the 1970s by exhibiting it alongside other examples of women artists fashioning alter egos or making themselves over. these role-
playing projects anticipated cindy sherman's celebrated untitled film stills of 1978.  art in america critic sarah valdez said "antin's, hershman's and lake's challenging agenda and high-quality work make their status as lesser-known feminist pioneers bewildering."  curator ali subotnick in artforum put "identity theft" on her top ten list for 2007 shows and called the projects "radical works ahead of their time and all relevant today."  the exhibition coincided with a much larger survey of feminist art at the museum of contemporary art los angeles, "wack! art and the feminist revolution."  it speaks to me in 2019 finkel published the book it speaks to me: art that inspires artists (prestel/delmonico press), featuring 50 leading artists on artworks that move them.  highlights include:  shirin neshat on alice neel, david hockney on edgar degas, marina abramovic on umberto boccioni, ai weiwei on a shang dynasty jade, nick cave on jasper johns, judy chicago on agnes pelton, do ho suh on jeong seon, mark bradford on mark rothko, and gillian wearing on rembrandt.  new york magazine published an excerpt, calling it "an argument for why art museums matter." publishers weekly called it an "entertaining tour of works that have inspired artists, adding "this thoughtful work makes artistry accessible and also serves as an educational tool for those interested in exploring art and those who create it." the l.a. weekly called it "must-read material for anyone interested in how art history shapes itself across time, place, and the lives of individuals."  public appearances finkel is a regular lecturer at museums and art fairs on topics within contemporary art, such as feminism, social-justice art, photography, and the art market.  references  living people 1970 births american art writers american editors columbia college (new york) alumni stanford university alumni
matthieu coignet (c. 1514-1586) was a french lawyer, ambassador, landowner, and author. thanks to an early english translation, some english-language sources give his name as martyn cognet.  life by 1549 coignet was an advocate in the parlement of paris, a high appellate court. he was also master of requests to the french queen, catherine de' medici, and in 1559 was appointed as procurator general of the parlement of savoy. on 22 february 1580 he was noted as a member of the conseil du roi, a sometime ambassador to schwyz and the grisons, master of requests, and lord (seigneur) of la tuillerie-les-dampmartin and of part of bregi-en-mulcian.  he died in 1586, aged 72.  publications la croix du maine notes in his les bibliotheques francoises that by 1583 coignet had published two books, instruction aux princes de garder la foi promise and la philosophie chretienne. his work was translated into english by edward hoby and published in 1586 under the title politique discourses on trueth and lying, with an introduction by thomas digges. hoby gives the original author's name as "sir martyn cognet".  notes  1510s births 1586 deaths 16th-century french diplomats ambassadors of france to switzerland ancien regime office-holders french lawyers
meridien is a serif typeface designed by adrian frutiger and released by deberny & peignot in 1957 for its phototypesetting system.  intended as a typeface suitable for text use, meridien takes inspiration from 'latin' or wedge-serif typefaces, with their sharp, exaggerated serifs, but in a more restrained style intended to be suitable for body text, with a wide spacing. it is one of several typefaces designed by frutiger in this genre; his apollo for monotype is quite similar.  meridien was later published by linotype, who released a digitisation in collaboration with adobe. an updated digitisation was released under the name of "frutiger serif" with additional weights and condensed styles.  references  typefaces designed by adrian frutiger serif typefaces linotype typefaces
suzanne azar (nee schmeck, born 1946) is a politician, aviator and former mayor of el paso, texas. azar was the first woman to serve as mayor in el paso. azar lives in central el paso. she is also a flight instructor and owner of a fixed-base operator and flight school; and is a member of the women pilots' organization the ninety-nines. azar has been inducted into the el paso women's hall of fame.  biography  azar was born in bay city, michigan in 1946 and as a young person was a member of the civil air patrol. she moved to el paso in 1970 and attended the university of texas at el paso (utep).  azar was sworn into office as mayor of el paso in 1989. during her campaign, she was called a "cheerleader" by her opponent, and azar turned the intended insult to "her advantage, campaigning with pom poms and calling herself an unabashed cheerleader for el paso". she won the campaign for mayor with a 65% majority vote.  references  external links   suzie azar on her life experiences (video)  1946 births mayors of el paso, texas politicians from bay city, michigan university of texas at el paso alumni living people women mayors of places in texas american women aviators aviators from texas american women flight instructors american flight instructors 21st-century american women
flyone is a privately owned low-cost airline headquartered in chisinau, moldova. it was founded in 2015 and formally launched operations in 2016. it operates scheduled and charter flights from its base at chisinau international airport.  history  the airline received its air operator certificate in late march 2016, and operated its first scheduled passenger flights in june 2016 to antalya, heraklion, and rhodes.  destinations  flyone currently operates direct flights to the following destinations:  fleet  as of november 2021, the flyone fleet includes the following aircraft:  references  external links  official website  airlines of moldova airlines established in 2016 moldovan brands 2016 establishments in moldova low-cost carriers
rose lagercrantz (born in stockholm in 1947) is a swedish writer for children and adults.  her first book was published in 1973, and she has since had her work translated into english, german, korean, japanese, italian, russian and slovak.  books (selection) 2010 - mitt lyckliga liv 2012 - om man annu finns 2012 - mitt hjarta hoppar och skrattar (illustrated by eva eriksson) 2012 - fodelsedagsbarnet (illustrated by rebecka lagercrantz) 2013 - julbarnet (illustrated by rebecka lagercrantz) 2013 - barnvakten (illustrated by rebecka lagercrantz) 2014 - sist jag var som lyckligast (illustrated by eva eriksson) 2015 - livet enligt dunne  english translations 2012 - my happy life, (gecko press) 136pp.,   2014 - my heart is laughing, (gecko press) 120pp.,  2015 - when i am happiest, (gecko press) 128pp.,   2016 - life according to dani, (gecko press) 108pp.,  2017 - see you when i see you, (gecko press) 152pp.,  2019 - where dani goes, happy follows, (gecko press) 184pp.,  2020 - all's happy that ends happy, (gecko press) 224pp.,  awards (selection) 1979 - astrid lindgren prize 1980 - nils holgersson plaque 1988 - expressens heffaklump 1992 - vi magazine literature prize 1995 - august prize  references  external links  rose lagercrantz author biography  official author website (swedish)  1947 births living people swedish women writers
there are many stories that describe the origin of the word thripunithura. some latter day sanskrit enthusiasts ascribe the origin of the name to "poorna veda puri" - the town of vedas in its entirety. another possible origin to name comes from the meaning "the land on the shores of poorna river".  other stories play on the pun of "pooni" or "pooneeram" which means quiver. one of them relates that arjuna - one of pandavas - who once visited lord vishnu was given an idol and arjuna carried it in his "pooni" (quiver). while searching for a place to install it, he met lord ganapati and sought help. ganapati found this place and the idol was installed. another story of the same variety is as follows. at the end of dvapara yuga, the period of lord krishna, the lord himself presented an idol to arjuna, one of the pandavas, and asked him to install it in a proper place. he kept the idol in a bag used to keep arrows, which was called pooneeram in local language. when he reached the place, he shouted pooneeram thura means 'open the bag' in local language. thus the name poonithura has come, according to this story.  when the kings of erstwhile cochin dynasty made this place their capital, the area where the palaces and the fort are constructed came to known as thiru poonithura as the word "thiru" shows respect. it became thripunithura  bigger temples  sree poornathrayesa temple  thripunithura is also known as the land of temples. the famous sree poornathrayesa temple is one of the famous temples in our india.sree poornathrayeesa, the deity of poornathrayeesa temple, is in the form of "santhana gopala moorthy" as told in the bhagavatha. it is believed those worship him truly, will be blessed with children.it is also believed that the temple thantri's family, (belonging to puliyannoor mana) is the next generations of the brahmana of the santhana gopalam story.  thamaramkulangara sree dharma sastha temple  thamaramkulangara sree dharma sastha temple is among the most prominent temples in tripunithura. the deity is lord ayyapa in the form of dharmasastha. according to anecdotes
lord dharma sastha of chamravattom (in malappuram district) followed one of his priests from morakkala mana who had shifted to tripunithura. lord sastha assumed the form of a lizard and came with the priest comfortably by sitting on his traditional umbrella made up of palm leaves. though the temple is owned by uranma devaswom board, almost all the affairs are managed by  thamaramkulangara ayyappa seva samithy (tass), a voluntary organization led by local people. the main festival of the temple is 5 day 'makaravilaku' festival culminating on makar sankranthi in zodiac calendar (around 15 january).  muthukulangara temple  the main deity in muthukulangara santhana gopala sree krishna swami temple is maha vishnu in the form of santhana gopala. it is situated in eroor. there is a legend behind the temple which makes it more special to married women who want nice babies. it is said that wife of a brahmin at puliyannur illam in thripunithura, was not lucky enough to have a live baby. whenever she delivered, the child will die.  the brahmin prayed to arjuna the great warrior of 'pancha-pandavas' to save his 10th child.  arjuna promised him to save the child. even in the presence of arjuna, the child vanished after the birth. arjuna tried to trace the way child vanished and they both, the brahmin and arjuna went to vaikundam the place of lord vishnu.  there they saw bhagawan and lakshmidevi surrounded by the deceased ten babies of the brahmin.  vishnu handed over two idols and the babies to arjuna.  the place where they get down is known as muthukulangara and arjuna placed one idol at the point they landed and later that was realised as muthukulengara santhanagopla khsetram. this is one of the famous temples with daily " thanthri pooja".  poonithura sree subrahmanya swami temple  the main deity in sree subrahmanyan(bala murukan)  and other upa devathas in the nalambalam are  sree ganapathy, sree bhadrakali and nagaraja-nagayakshi  and hidumban also there. location of the temple is at  poonithura near gandhi square, jawahar road.  list of other temples  kannankulangara temple kannanthrikovil temple  kannankulagara sri balavinayaka
temple kodankulangara temple chakkamkulangara siva temple ayani temple airettil temple pavamkulangara temple tharmekkavu temple thevarakkavu temple pishari kovil temple(shariyil temple) anthimahakalan temple puthankulangara siva temple adampillykavu temple palliparambukavu temple maramkulangara krishna temple puthiyakavu bhagawati temple nadakkavu temple muthukulangara temple sree rama temple  mukkottil devi temple  poonithura sree subrahmanya swami temple  poonithura kottaram sree krishna temple  thammandi temple  pottayil temple  mathoor baghavathy temple  thuruthy baghavathy temple  sree bhuvaneswary temple  mutturuthy baghavathy temple  churches thrippunithura is said to be having the presence of christian faithful belonging to the syrian christian tradition from ancient times. saint mary's jacobite syrian church (nadamel pally) is the oldest christian church in thrippunithura. the church was established in a.d. 1175. it is believed that a prominent landlord of the region, namely valamthuruthy bhattathirippad donated a huge stretch of land to the local christian families for the purpose building a church. the church came to be known as nadamel church as it was required to climb stairs (nada in malayalam) to reach the building. following the arrival of european stream of christianity, professed by the portuguese, a split occurred in the parish and resulted in the formation of saint mary's forane church. many other prominent churches stand in the peripherals of thrippunithura town. this includes st. george's jacobite cathedral (karingachira church pally), st. mary's forane church and many other churches. thrippunithura is also divine with mosques including one adjacent to the municipal market complex and in pettah.  history the 'raja nagari' or the royal city is one of the most prominent centers of traditional kerala cultural heritage. the erstwhile rulers of kingdom of cochin were great patrons of art. this made fine arts and architecture flourish under them in many ways. the town is also a prominent centre of learning for classical arts like carnatic music, kathakali and mohiniyattam besides percussion instruments like mridangam, chenda and maddalam. much of this is facilitated by the rlv college of music and institute of fine arts was established here
in 1956. another center of learning is kalmandalam. tripunithura also has many dedicated centers for stage performances and promotion of art.  the kalikotta palace, adjacent to the sree poornathrayesa temple is an important cultural focal point for this small town with many eastern classical musical programs being conducted on the premises.  the culture and surprisingly many aspects of the life of a typical person here is intrinsically bound to temples and surroundings. in the current 'modern' age fine arts and art forms are still promoted and sustained by temples in and around tripunithura.  tripunithura is the place where the legendary artiste couple of kathakali maestro kalamandalam krishnan nair and mohiniyattam doyenne kalamandalam kalyanikutty amma lived for long. kj yesudas is another famous artist who learned music in tripunithura.  tripunithura is also a prominent center of ayurveda. one of the three ayurveda colleges in kerala is located at puthiyakaavu near tripunithura town. it also has attached hospital to it. one of the famous celebration "atha chamayam" takes place in this town during onam festival.  history of poornathrayesa temple  according to local folklore, it is said that arjuna and krishna requested lord ganesha to go ahead of them and select an appropriate place for the idol to be consecrated. lord ganesha travelled far and wide and finally reached a divine place which was the seat of the vedas in its entirety[3] known as 'poorna veda puri' which later became tripunithura. lord ganesha was so pleased with the place that he chose a holy spot and seated there himself. when arjuna reached tripunithura, he saw that lord ganesha has seated himself down in the place where he was to keep lord vishnu's idol. he requested lord ganesha to kindly move from there so that he may install the idol there.  lord ganesha said that he could not move from there. as he could not place the idol anywhere on the ground other than at the appointed spot, arjuna had no other choice and it is said that he gave lord ganesha a kick which caused lord ganesha to turn southwards and placed the idol there. the poornathrayesa temple is the only temple where lord ganesha faces southwards. all other temples traditionally have the idols facing the east and/or the west. this temple grew into the beautiful and magnificent sree poornathrayesa temple we see
today.  references  history of kochi
a list of wardens of keble college, oxford. the head of keble college, university of oxford is called the warden. the current warden is sir jonathan phillips, since october 2010.  list of wardens  edward stuart talbot 1870-1888  robert wilson 1888-1897  walter lock 1897-1920  beresford kidd 1920-1939  harry james carpenter 1939-1955  eric symes abbott 1956-1960  austin farrer 1960-1968  spencer barrett (acting warden, 1968-1969)  dennis nineham 1969-1979  christopher ball 1980-1988  george barclay richardson 1988-1994  dame averil cameron 1994-2010  sir jonathan phillips, 2010-.  references     keble keble
fatehgarh churian assembly constituency (sl. no.: 9) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in gurdaspur district, punjab state, india.  member of legislative assembly  2012: tripat rajinder singh bajwa, indian national congress  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india gurdaspur district
acteocina infrequens, common name the magdalena barrel bubble, is a species of small sea snail, a marine opisthobranch gastropod mollusk in the family acteocinidae, the barrel bubble snails.  description the length of the shell attains 6.7 mm, its diameter 2.5 mm.  the small, slender shell has a subcylindric shape. it is translucent white and is polished. the shell contains four whorls. the protoconch is minute, subglobular and transparent. the suture is distinct, more or less channeled. the spire is short but distinctly turreted. the aperture is narrow. the outer lip is straight, rounding below into the thickened columella which has a strong plait with a groove behind it. the body has a slight glaze.  distribution this marine species occurs in magdalena bay, lower california; off baja california to pacific panama.  references   keen, a. m. 1971. sea shells of tropical west america. marine mollusks from baja california to peru, ed. 2. stanford university press. xv, 1064 pp., 22 pls.  jordan, eric. the pleistonence fauna of magdalena bay, lower california. stanford university press, 1936.  angulo-campillo, orso. "a four year survey of the opisthobranch fauna (gastropoda, opisthobranchia) from baja california sur, mexico." vita malacologia 3 (2005): 43-50 (cited as acteocina magdalensis).  external links   valdes, angel, and yolanda e. camacho-garcia. "" cephalaspidean" heterobranchs (gastropoda) from the pacific coast of costa rica." proceedings-california academy of sciences 55.26/35 (2004): 459.  acteocinidae gastropods described in 1852 molluscs of mexico
the qarabag 2016-17 season is qarabag's 25th azerbaijan premier league season, of which they are defending champions, and will be their ninth season under manager gurban gurbanov. they won the league for the fourth season in a row on 16 april 2017, reaching the final of the azerbaijan cup and the group stages of the uefa europa league having been eliminated from the uefa champions league in the 3rd qualifying round by viktoria plzen on away goals.  squad  out on loan  transfers  summer  in:  out:  winter  in:  out:  friendlies  competitions  azerbaijan premier league  results summary  results  league table  azerbaijan cup  final  uefa champions league  qualifying phase  uefa europa league  qualifying rounds  group stage  squad statistics  appearances and goals  |- |colspan="14"|players away from qarabag on loan: |- |colspan="14"|players who appeared for qarabag but left during the season:  |}  goal scorers  disciplinary record  notes  references  external links   official website  qarabag fk seasons qarabag qarabag azerbaijani football clubs 2016-17 season
naomi ekperigin is an american comedian, actress and writer. she has written for the television shows great news and broad city.  early life ekperigin was born and raised in harlem, with a father from nigeria and a mother from detroit. she attended the dalton school, where she was one of six black students in a class of 118, and graduated from wesleyan university in 2005. in college, ekperigin began performing comedy and doing improv.  career after graduating from college, ekperigin spent a year touring with the national theatre for the deaf, and she returned to new york in 2007 where she got a start doing stand-up while working a day job at an art magazine. when that magazine folded in 2013, ekperigin found a position working as a writer's assistant for broad city. she was promoted to staff writer in the show's second season and served as a writer on season 3 as well.  in 2015, ekperigin was a nominee, with the broad city writing staff, for the writers guild of america award for television: comedy series. splitsider praised her work as "savvy, smart, funny and politically active" and  essence named her to its list of "8 black comediennes who are 'ready' for snl."  in may 2016, comedy central announced that ekperigin would create a half-hour special for the network, taped in new orleans in june 2016. september 29, 2016, she made her late-night debut on late night with seth meyers. her half-hour special premiered on comedy central just two weeks later, october 14 at midnight. ekperigin also co-wrote a television pilot for comedy central with former daily show correspondent jessica williams. ekperigin has also written for difficult people and written for and appeared on totally biased with w. kamau bell.  she's been a regular performer on the wnyc podcast 2 dope queens, standing out as a fan favorite. other projects include a pilot for trutv called inside caucasia, developed with ekperigin's fiance, comedian andy beckerman.  in june 2017, she joined the writing staff of the nbc sitcom great news, starring briga heelan, andrea martin, and john michael higgins. she then went on to write for season 2 of the cbs all access show no activity and the hbo limited series mrs. fletcher, starring kathryn hahn.  she has a recurring role in the apple tv+ show mythic quest as carol, the beleaguered hr person at
a video game company.  references  external links  sundance.tv, the approval matrix: 4 questions with comedian naomi ekperigin  living people 21st-century american comedians american television writers dalton school alumni wesleyan university alumni screenwriters from new york (state) year of birth missing (living people) 21st-century american screenwriters african-american actresses american people of nigerian descent entertainers from new york city 21st-century african-american women 21st-century african-american writers people from harlem
the 2016-17 texas longhorns women's basketball team represents the university of texas at austin in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. it was head coach karen aston's fifth season at texas. the longhorns were members of the big 12 conference and play their home games at the frank erwin center. they finished the season 25-9, 15-3 in big 12 play to finish in second place. they advanced to the semifinals of the big 12 women's basketball tournament where they lost to west virginia. they received at-large bid of the ncaa women's basketball tournament where they defeated central arkansas and nc state in the first and second rounds before losing to stanford in the sweet sixteen.  roster  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  2016-17 media  television and radio information most university of texas home games were shown on the longhorn network, with national telecasts on the big 12 conference's television partners. on the radio, women's basketball games aired on ktxx-hd4 "105.3 the bat", with select games on ktxx-fm 104.9.  schedule  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#cc5500; color:#ffffff;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#cc5500; color:#ffffff;"| regular season  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#cc5500; color:#ffffff;"| big 12 women's tournament  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#cc5500; color:#ffffff;"| ncaa women's tournament  see also  2016-17 texas longhorns men's basketball team  references  texas longhorns women's basketball seasons texas texas texas longhorns texas longhorns
iran women's national inline hockey team represents iran at international inline hockey competitions for women.  current staff technical director:   maliheh khorrambagheri head coach:   marina fagoaga jalinier coach:   saba valadkhani   staff member:   farzaneh samimi  team roster the following 16 players have been invited to take part in roller hockey asia cup which will be held in china in october 2016.  ? - sousan ghasemi (goalie) ? - behnaz sarbazi (goalie) 1 - samaneh nazeri (goalie) ? - mahsa shadan (defence) ? - sadaf mansouri (defence) 13 - faezeh modabber (defence) [vice captain] 26 - hoda ahmadbegi (defence) [vice captain] 66 - helia sohani (defence) [captain] 67 - sara satarian (defence) 88 - maryamalsadat seyedmahmoud (defence) 7 -  maral rasekhi (forward) 12 - marzieh seyedghandi (forward) 17 - bita mohsenizadehtehrani (forward) 18 - azamossadat sanaei (forward) 33 - azin gharouni (forward) 99 - samaneh heydari (forward)  tournaments  asian roller skating championship - inline hockey international cup  firs world championship  open championship  references   inline hockey in iran national inline hockey teams inline
padang besar (thai) railway station is a railway station located in padang besar subdistrict, sadao district, songkhla. it is a class 1 railway station located 978 km from thon buri railway station  services   super express no. 45/46 bangkok-padang besar-bangkok  special cross-border service no. 947/948 hat yai junction-padang besar-hat yai junction  special cross-border service no. 949/950 hat yai junction-padang besar-hat yai junction  former services  express peninsular (ktm) no. 953/954 hat yai junction-jb sentral-hat yai junction  references       railway stations in thailand buildings and structures in songkhla province
huazhou subdistrict () is a subdistrict in huazhou district, weinan, shaanxi, china.  history  in june 2015, the shaanxi provincial government upgraded huazhou from a town to a subdistrict.  administrative divisions  huazhou subdistrict is divided into five residential communities and eight administrative villages.  residential communities  the subdistrict's five residential communities are as follows:   xiguan community ()  dajie community ()  wujia community ()  dianli community ()  hongling community ()  villages  the subdistrict's eight administrative villages are as follows:   tiema village ()  xiguan village ()  chengnei village ()  wujia village ()  tuanjie village ()  linwang village ()  wangshizi village ()  xiannong village ()  references   township-level divisions of shaanxi weinan  subdistricts of the people's republic of china
the 2016-17 georgia bulldogs basketball team represented the university of georgia during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the team's head coach was mark fox, who was in his eighth season at uga. they played their home games at stegeman coliseum as members of the southeastern conference. they finished the season 19-15, 9-9 in sec play to finish in eighth place. they defeated tennessee in the second round of the sec tournament to advance to the quarterfinals where they lost to kentucky. they were invited to the national invitation tournament where they lost in the first round to belmont.  previous season the bulldogs finished the season 20-14, 10-8 in sec play to finish in a tie for sixth place. they defeated mississippi state and south carolina to advance to the semifinals of the sec tournament where they lost to kentucky. they were invited to the national invitation tournament where they defeated belmont in the first round to advance to the second round where they lost to saint mary's.  departures  incoming transfers  recruits class of 2016  recruits class of 2017  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#000000; color:white;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#000000; color:white;"| regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#000000; color:white;"| sec tournament  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#000000; color:white;"|  nit  see also 2016-17 georgia lady bulldogs basketball team  references  georgia bulldogs basketball seasons georgia georgia georgia bulldogs georgia bulldogs
{{infobox racehorse | horsename = refund | image =  | caption =  | sire = sensation | grandsire = leamington | dam = letty | damsire = australian | sex = stallion | foaled = 1885 | country = united states | colour = chestnut | breeder = r. wyndham walden | owner = r. wyndham walden | trainer = r. wyndham walden | record = | earnings =  | race = american classics wins:preakness stakes (1888) | awards =  | honors =   | updated =  }}refund''' was an american thoroughbred racehorse. ridden by fred littlefield, he won the 1888 preakness stakes.  pedigree  references  1885 racehorse births thoroughbred family 4-r racehorses bred in maryland racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners
harmony at home ( she steps out) is a 1930 pre-code domestic-comedy film directed by hamilton macfadden. it was produced and distributed by fox film corporation. it was based on a 1925 broadway play, the family upstairs by actor, writer, composer harry delf.  cast marguerite churchill - louise haller rex bell - dick grant charlotte henry - dora haller charles eaton - willie haller  dixie lee - rita joyce william collier, sr. - joe haller elizabeth patterson - emma haller dot farley - the modiste  see also the family upstairs (1926) stop, look and love (1939)  references  external links    1930 films american films based on plays films directed by hamilton macfadden fox film films american films american black-and-white films 1930 comedy films american comedy films remakes of american films sound film remakes of silent films films scored by samuel kaylin
andrew buckley (born august 20, 1993) is a former professional canadian football quarterback. he played for the calgary stampeders of the canadian football league (cfl) for two seasons before announcing his retirement prior to the 2018 cfl season. he was drafted in the seventh round, 63rd overall, by the stampeders in the 2015 cfl draft. he played cis football for the calgary dinos where he won two consecutive hec crighton trophy awards in 2014 and 2015.  background  buckley was born in calgary and spent his high school career playing at rundle college and then the university of calgary (dinos).  professional career buckley was drafted in the seventh round of the 2015 cfl draft and participated in the stampeders' 2015 training camp before returning to university to play his final season of cis football. he re-signed with the stampeders on january 6, 2016 and made the team's 2016 roster as the third-string quarterback.  buckley played as a back-up quarterback for the stampeders in the 2016 grey cup and scored a rushing touchdown in the third quarter. he was the first canadian quarterback to score a touchdown in a grey cup since russ jackson in 1969. on june 17, 2017, buckley was named as calgary's back-up quarterback, by head coach dave dickenson after the departure of drew tate. buckley announced his retirement from professional football on may 7, 2018 after being accepted into medical school at the university of calgary. his parents are both doctors and he always wanted to be one, as well.  references  external links calgary stampeders bio   1993 births living people players of canadian football from alberta canadian football quarterbacks calgary dinos football players calgary stampeders players sportspeople from calgary
arthur kenney or art kenney may refer to: arthur kenney (basketball) (born 1946), american basketball player arthur kenney (priest) (c.1776-1855), irish priest and dean of achonry arthur robert kenney-herbert (1840-1916), british army colonel art kenney (1916-2014), american major league baseball pitcher
a member of parliament in the rajya sabha (abbreviated: mp) is the representative of the indian states to the one of the two houses of the parliament of india (rajya sabha). rajya sabha mps are elected by the electoral college of the elected members of the state assembly with a system of proportional representation by a single transferable vote. parliament of india is bicameral with two houses; rajya sabha (upper house i.e. council of states) and the lok sabha (lower house i.e. house of the people). the total number of members of rajya sabha are lesser than the members of parliament in the lok sabha and have more restricted power than the lower house (lok sabha). unlike membership to the lok sabha, membership to the rajya sabha is permanent body and cannot be dissolved at any time. however every second year, one third of the members are retired and vacancy are filled up by fresh elections and presidential nomination at the beginning of every third year.  responsibilities of the members of parliament broad responsibilities of the members of parliament of rajya sabha are:   legislative responsibility: to pass laws of india in the rajya sabha.  oversight responsibility: to ensure that the executive (i.e. government) performs its duties satisfactorily.   representative responsibility: to represent the views and aspirations of the people of their constituency in the parliament of india (rajya sabha).   power of the purse responsibility: to approve and oversee the revenues and expenditures proposed by the government.  the union council of ministers, who are also members of parliament have an additional responsibility of the executive as compared to those who are not in the council of ministers.  special powers members of parliament in the rajya sabha enjoy special powers and responsibilities with regard to:  making laws on any subject in the state list;  making laws to create services at national level.  term unlike membership to the lok sabha, membership to the rajya sabha is permanent. one third of its members retire every two years. so each member has a term of six years  qualifications for being a member of parliament a person must satisfy all following conditions to be qualified to become a member of parliament of the rajya sabha:   must be a citizen of india  30 years of age  disqualifications for being a member of parliament a person would be ineligible for being a member of the rajya sabha if the person:  holds any office of profit under the government of india (other than an office permitted by parliament of india by law).  is of unsound mind.  is an undischarged insolvent.
has ceased to be a citizen of india.  is so disqualified by any law made by the indian parliament.  is so disqualified on the ground of defection.  has been convicted, among other things, for promoting enmity between different groups.  has been convicted for offence of bribery.  has been punished for preaching and practicing social crimes such as untouchability, dowry, sati.  has been convicted for an offence and sentenced to imprisonment.  has been dismissed for corruption or for disloyalty to the state (in case of a government servant).  composition/strength  members of the rajya sabha  see also member of parliament, lok sabha  parliament of india  references   rajya sabha
the 2018 united states senate election in new mexico took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of new mexico, concurrently with other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various state and local elections.  incumbent democratic senator martin heinrich won reelection to a second term. his opponents were republican nominee and businessman mick rich and libertarian nominee gary johnson, a two-term republican governor of new mexico and two-time candidate for president of the united states.  the candidate filing deadline was march 13, 2018. the republican and democratic primary elections were held june 5, 2018. johnson's results were the highest results for a libertarian candidate in new mexico history.  democratic primary  candidates  declared  martin heinrich, incumbent u.s. senator  results  republican primary  candidates  declared  mick rich, businessman  declined  aubrey dunn jr., new mexico commissioner of public lands and candidate for nm-02 in 2008 (ran as a libertarian, later endorsed gary johnson)  steve pearce, u.s. representative, candidate for the u.s. senate in 2000 and nominee for the u.s. senate in 2008 (ran for governor)  susana martinez, governor of new mexico  results  libertarian primary on july 30, 2018, nominee aubrey dunn withdrew from the race. on august 4, former governor gary johnson was formally nominated by the libertarian party of new mexico as dunn's replacement. johnson accepted his party's nomination on august 13.  candidates  declared  gary johnson, former governor of new mexico, libertarian nominee for president in 2012 and 2016  withdrew nomination  aubrey dunn jr., new mexico commissioner of public lands  results  general election  debates  complete video of debate, october 12, 2018  endorsements  predictions  ^highest rating given  polling  graphical summary  polls   with mick rich  with gary johnson  with aubrey dunn  results  county results  references  external links  candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia  campaign finance at fec  campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites  gary johnson (l) for senate  martin heinrich (d) for senate  mick rich (r) for senate  2018 new mexico united states senate
banghushree (), sometimes banghusri (बनघसर) or bankhorsi (बनखरस), is a village located in gadhawa rural municipality ward number 1 of dang deukhuri district, nepal. it is one of the oldest villages of deukhuri valley.  introduction agriculture is the main occupation of people and no industrial colony has been established. height from sea level: south- 310 meters, north- 290 meters. total households-more than 300 including banbari, population- more than 1100.topographic map of sheet number- 2782038d. this village is known for its higher fertile land. the village is situated on the northern and southern sides of two roads: damodar road and dulaiya road.  people there mainly cultivate grains, vegetables, herbs, and plants, many people are attracted to livestock production and processing. this village holds four conservation areas:janashakti samudayik ban, banshakti samudayik ban, mahila ban and kharkatti conservation area. n.l. livestock has been established there intending to industrialize in production of livestock.  this village has one school named nimna madhyamika vidyalaya, which was established with the initiation of dulaiya in 2025 b.s. this government school currently holds nearly 400 children of age between 5 and 13 years old. school children come from nearby villages such as banghushree, badahara, patringa, bauraha. at present, the school is running with a new committee.  bauraha khola,which runs from south to north, is lying on the west side of this banghushree village. in the time of monsoon season, it causes a huge loss of property. upper large catchment area where high precipitation in monsoon season results in devastating flash flood each year which turns into a nightmare for the locals of banghushree. bauraha khola, which generally carries mud, boulders, and much debris due to steep slope, sweeps fertile land of banghushree each year. land of banghushree, in terms of geology, is new; formed by sedimentation of sand, soil, and small pebbles. many kinds of sedimentary rocks are, therefore, found there.  the names of dry streams that must be crossed to reach banghushree village from kalakate are listed below:  kalakate khola  bhalu khola  bire khola  forester khola  kolte
khola  budi khola  lahure kate khola  tharunijhundi khola  parshampure khola  the distance from kalakate to the demarcation between malmala and banghushree is nearly 3.5 kilometers.  history banghushree was forest before the presence of dulaiya dashnami sanyasi sampradaya. they made the place suitable for residency at the time of anglo-nepalese war by clearing the land of banghushree. dulaiya arrived at banghushree in 1870 vikram samvat. historical monuments, some left documents, and some historians indicate that dulaiyas houses were built there for homestay. nepalese workers from india, while returning to their home, used to live there. at that time, the business of dulaiyas in the sector of hospitality was sound. there was no bridge on west rapti river and people used to travel through banghushree. dulaiyas used to serve the literate guest in different ways. dulaiyas had built separate houses for literate guests and they used to tell guests to teach their children instead of paying fees. banghushree village was a center of attraction for migrating people for their permanent residency because this village had fertile land, along with this there was a proper water supply, reliable energy source, and proper management of transportation than other nearby villages.  some important places within banghushree village  maajhghat (मझघट): it is the national forest between banghushree and banbari  putali danda (पतल डड): this place was swept by bauraha khola. this place does not exist now.  kolyaad (कलयड)  parshampur (परशमपर)   chiyan danda (चयन डड )  banshakti thaan (बनशकत थन)  kharkatti (खरकटट): kharkatti is a conservation site located towards the northern side of the village. #cliche: aware banghushreli people made their attempts to fight flood, landslide, and soil erosion by establishing a committee that launched a series of projects with the help of local hands within this area to conserve fertile soil for more than two decades ago.  jakhera (जखर)  kula baandha (कल ब�
�)  bagaldondh (बगल डण)  pakhe danda (पख डड)  references   populated places in dang district, nepal
olenecamptus zanzibaricus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
interpersonal cognitive behavioral therapy (i-cbt) is a branch of cognitive behavioral therapy (cbt) that is mainly used to treat anxiety, depression, attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd), obsessive compulsive disorder (ocd), post traumatic stress disorder (ptsd), and autism spectrum disorder. it was developed by thomas cordier of glastonbury connecticut, usa (an introduction to the interpersonal cognitive behavioral therapy treatment system: a 21st century recipe for mental health treatment success, t.a. cordier, 2016).  description i-cbt seeks to help patients overcome their psychiatric/mental health problems by teaching them - through the utilization of emotional intelligence (ei) - to dismiss irrational thoughts by helping them to understand and define their emotional states. emotional intelligence is thought to be a better indicator for success than intelligence quotient (iq) test scores.  core beliefs clients are also taught to challenge negative core beliefs by challenging assumptions based on these beliefs. the treatment system focuses on the relationship between the patient and provider as a primary source for the patient's improvement. i-cbt also draws on other proven treatment modalities, (e.g., psychodynamic principals and group therapy) and utilizes mindfulness, yoga, art therapy, and social skills training to help behaviorally challenged adolescents and adults find calmness. i-cbt is a structured treatment approach based on a workbook/manual that can be tailored for an individual patient's needs. the program also utilizes the beck depression inventory (bdi), the beck anxiety inventory (bai), and the beck youth inventory (byi) to help track clients progress, and ensure an effective treatment program.  family i-cbt also focuses on treating the family unit as a whole, by including mandatory behavioral parent training (bpt), to teach good parenting skills, and how to encourage positive behavior/thinking - while discouraging negative behavior/thinking.  references  cognitive behavioral therapy mindfulness (psychology)
boletus vermiculosoides is a species of bolete fungus in the family boletaceae. found in north america, it was described as new to science in 1971 by mycologists alexander h. smith and harry delbert thiers. the type collection was made by smith in hartland, michigan, in 1966.  see also  list of boletus species list of north american boletes  references  vermiculosoides fungi described in 1971 fungi of north america taxa named by harry delbert thiers taxa named by alexander h. smith
the 2nd china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting were held at the sapporo atsubetsu park stadium in sapporo, japan on july 12, 2015.  medal summary  men  women  score table  overall  men  women  results  men  200 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:40 -  wind: +2.1 m/s  800 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:40 -  400 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:10 -  4 x 400 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:00 -  high jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:00 -  triple jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:00 -  shot put prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:00 -  women  100 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:30 -  wind: +1.8 m/s  400 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:10 -  100 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:55 -  wind: +2.5 m/s  4 x 100 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:40 -  pole vault prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:00 -  long jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:00 -  shot put prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 13:00 -  references   김승욱 (2015-07-13). 정일우, 남자 포환던지기 한국신기록...19m49. yonhap. retrieved on 2016-05-22. timetable. official website (archived). retrieved on 2016-05-22. athlete. official website (archived). retrieved on 2016-05-22. reports rikuren jihou (p.3-5). jaaf. retrieved
on 2016-05-22. results results. jaaf. retrieved on 2016-05-22. results. athleteranking.com. retrieved on 2016-05-22.  external links japan association of athletics federations  china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting international athletics competitions hosted by japan china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting
how to grow a band is a 2011 music documentary film about the early days of american progressive bluegrass band punch brothers. the film stars chris thile, gabe witcher, noam pikelny, chris eldridge, paul kowert and greg garrison and features interviews with a number of notable musicians including yo-yo ma, john paul jones of led zeppelin, jerry douglas, bassist edgar meyer and sara watkins. the film's structure tracks mandolinist chris thile's ambitious four movement suite, "the blind leaving the blind" as it follows the band on their first tour as punch brothers in the united kingdom and united states in early 2008 leading up to a triumphant performance at jazz at lincoln center's allen room in new york.  how to grow a band was directed by mark meatto and produced by michael bohlmann and mark meatto and edited by purcell carson and mark meatto. daniel algrant and bert keely were executive producers. the film premiered at the 2011 nashville film festival.  development development of the film began in the summer of 2007 when producer michael bohlmann and director mark meatto approached the band members while they were recording their debut album punch and preparing for their first tour as punch brothers. bohlmann had grown up in southern california with punch brothers fiddle player gabe witcher.  production principal photography began in october 2007 in new york city. the filmmakers followed the band during their first tour as punch brothers starting in the united kingdom including performances at celtic connections in glasgow, scotland and bush hall in london, england. the film follows the band as their tour continues in united states.  release the film premiered at the 42nd nashville film festival in nashville, tennessee on april 15, 2011. the film also screened as part of the 38th annual telluride bluegrass festival in june 2011, the newport folk festival in july 2011, hardly strictly bluegrass in october 2011, the 2012 vancouver international film festival and the cbgb film festival in new york. how to grow a band opened theatrically in new york april 12, 2012 and screened in cities the us throughout 2012. the film was released digitally by cinedigm in april 2013 on itunes, netflix, hulu and other platforms in the us and uk.  dvd release following a successful kickstarter campaign, the film was released  in 2014 on dvd and blu-ray in a 2-disc deluxe edition that includes the 90 minute film plus a second disc featuring 3 hours of previously unreleased footage and bonus material.  reception how to grow a band received a majority of positive reviews from critics.
joe leydon of variety called the film "most fascinating as it tactfully charts the sort of artistic and philosophical differences that can eventually undermine any group endeavor, even among seemingly like-minded collaborators." nicolas rapold of the new york times notes "meatto's framing tends to catch the musicians' give-and-take, merging and dueling notes onstage, especially at a manhattan concert that is the film's highlight." joan radell of paste magazine called the film "masterful filmmaking" and named the film one of the 10 best music documentaries of 2012 new york magazine named the film a "critic's pick" noting that "the music is both challenging and heavenly". dustin ogdin wrote for no depression "htgab is not just a film of concert footage or a "behind the scenes" clip collection"; it is a portrait of the creative process.". some other reviews of the film were less favorable.  slant magazine writer joseph jon lanthier noted that "one can't speak of mark meatto's documentary profile, how to grow a band, without starting squarely with thile, because the movie is unsurprisingly devoted to peddling the up-and-comer as something daring, something new.". marshall fine of hollywood & fine said "'how to grow a band' misses its chance to enlighten, choosing instead to promote.  references  external links      2011 films documentary films about music and musicians
bikanta is a startup biotech company that develops clinical products which focus on the detection of cancer through the insertion of fluorescent nanodiamonds.  history  the company was founded in 2013 and is based in berkeley, california. bikanta raised $120k in seed funding in 2014. in 2014, bikanta participated in the y combinator program and was one of four companies backed by y combinator.  awards and recognitions  named one of four best diagnostic startups by qb3. won first place at the 11th annual business plan competition of the silicon valley boomer venture summit. participated in the california life sciences institute's fast advisory program.  references  life sciences industry technology companies based in the san francisco bay area biotechnology companies of the united states 2013 establishments in california companies based in alameda county, california biotechnology companies established in 2013
zoppetti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alessandro zoppetti (born 1979), italian footballer cesare zoppetti (1876-1940), italian actor david zoppetti (born 1962), swiss writer  italian-language surnames
budo punder  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of budo punder.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, budo punder has a total number of 29 houses and population of 143 of which include 76 males and 67 females. literacy rate of budo punder is 85.51%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 5 which is 3.50% of total population of budo punder, and child sex ratio is approximately  667, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
lucretia is a 1664 history painting historically attributed to the dutch golden age painter rembrandt in the collection of the national gallery of art. in 2015, ernst van de wetering of the rembrandt research project said that "the formal properties and execution of [this] painting, i am convinced, exclude the possibility that it could be an autograph work by rembrandt", and that the painting recalls aert de gelder. the painting is not included in the project's 2015 rembrandt corpus (while the 1666 lucretia is).  painting  this painting was documented by hofstede de groot in 1915, who wrote: "218. lucretia. sm. 192; bode 375 ; dut. 114 ; wb. 357 ; b-hdg. 595. seen in full face with the lips parted. she inclines her head slightly to the left, in which direction she is looking. with her right hand she points a dagger at her breast ; her uplifted left hand is stretched out. she wears a rich dress of greenish gold with wide sleeves and a laced bodice. round her throat are a pearl necklace and a string with a pendant ; in her ear is a pearl. life size, more than half-length. signed on the left, "rembrandt f. 1664"; canvas, 46 inches by 39 inches. exhibited at the british institution, london, 1832, no. 44 ; at the hudson-fulton celebration, metropolitan museum, new york, 1909, no. 105 [lent by m. c. d. borden] ; [in london, june 1913, by m. knoedler and co.] ; at amsterdam, 1913. etched by w. koepping in l' art, and in the demidoff sale-catalogue. mentioned by vosmaer, pp. 367, 564 ; by bode, pp. 524, 608 ; by dutuit, p. 58 ; by michel, pp. 489, 563 [380-82, 435].  sales. lapeyriere, paris, april 19, 1825 (1300 francs). london, 1826 (£199 : 10s., bought in). michael zachary, london, 1828 (£115 : 10s., sir t. lawrence for munro). h. a. j. munro of novar, london, march 26, 1859. prince paul demidoff, san donato, near florence, march 15, 1880, no. 1146 (14,700 francs). in the possession of the paris dealer s.
bourgeois.  sale. m. c. d. borden, new york, february 13, 1913 (26,000, m. knoedler and co.). in the possession of fred. muller and co., amsterdam. in the collection of august janssen, amsterdam."  before him, smith wrote "192. the death of lucretia, the roman heroine is represented in a loose and neglected attire, standing in a front view, her countenance, indicating the firm resolve of her injured honour, is slightly raised, while her right hand plunges the dagger in her bosom. colour, effect, and dexterous execution, are the chief qualities of this production, which, according to the date, 1664, must have been one of his last works.  3ft. 6 in. by 3ft.- c. collection of m. lapeyriere, paris, 1825. . 1300 fs. 52l.  in a sale at mr. h. phillips, . . 1826. . (bt. in.) 190 gs. collection of michael zachary, esq., . . 1828 110 gs.  exhibited in the british gallery in 1832. now in the collection of j. h. munro, esq."  two years later rembrandt made another painting of lucretia, depicting the moment after she stabs herself:  see also list of paintings by rembrandt  references     lucretia in the demidov sale catalog on archive.org  lucretia in the rkd  external links  at the national gallery of art  paintings by rembrandt 1664 paintings rembrandt works of uncertain authorship collections of the national gallery of art
risto korhonen (born 27 november 1986) is a finnish former professional ice hockey defenceman who played for hpk of the finnish liiga. he was selected in the fifth round, 159th overall, by the carolina hurricanes in the 2005 nhl entry draft.  references  external links    1986 births living people carolina hurricanes draft picks finnish ice hockey defencemen hpk players lempaalan kisa players
progress ms-12 (), russian production no.442, identified by nasa as progress 73p, was a progress spacecraft used by roscosmos to resupply the international space station (iss). this is the 164th flight of a progress spacecraft.  history  the progress-ms is a uncrewed freighter based on the progress-m featuring improved avionics. this improved variant first launched on 21 december 2015. it has the following improvements:   new external compartment that enables it to deploy satellites. each compartment can hold up to four launch containers. first time installed on progress ms-03.  enhanced redundancy thanks to the addition of a backup system of electrical motors for the docking and sealing mechanism.  improved micrometeoroid (mmod) protection with additional panels in the cargo compartment.  luch russian relay satellites link capabilities enable telemetry and control even when not in direct view of ground radio stations.  gnss autonomous navigation enables real time determination of the status vector and orbital parameters dispensing with the need of ground station orbit determination.  real time relative navigation thanks to direct radio data exchange capabilities with the space station.  new digital radio that enables enhanced tv camera view for the docking operations.  the ukrainian chezara kvant-v on board radio system and antenna/feeder system has been replaced with a unified command telemetry system (ucts).  replacement of the kurs a with kurs na digital system.  pre-launch  in 2014, the launch was planned for 1 july 2018, rescheduled for 5 june 2019 and rescheduled to 31 july 2019. the liftoff had been initially set for the two-day rendezvous profile with the station, but the launch time was later shifted to enable a two-orbit (three-hour) flight to the station.  launch  progress ms-12 was launched in 31 july 2019, at 12:10:46 utc from baikonur cosmodrome in kazakhstan, using a soyuz-2.1a rocket.  docking progress ms-12 docked with the pirs docking module. the docking took place 3 hours 18 minutes 31 seconds into the mission (a new record time).  cargo  the progress ms-12 spacecraft delivered  of dry cargo (in the cargo compartment).   of water (in the rodnik-system tanks)   of oxygen (in pressurized bottles)   of propellant in the refueling section   of propellant in the integrated propulsion system to the international space station.  the dry cargo consisted of:   of hardware for onboard
systems   of medical supplies   of personal protective gear   of hygiene items   of repairs and servicing equipment   of means of crew support   of food   of payloads   of structural components and other hardware   of nasa cargo.  undocking and decay  the progress ms-12 craft undocked from iss on 29 november 2019 at 10:25 utc, initiated braking maneuver at 13:39 utc, re-entered earth's atmosphere at 14:11 utc (end of mission), with any remaining debris impacting a remote part of pacific ocean at 14:19 utc.  see also   uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references   progress (spacecraft) missions spacecraft launched in 2019 2019 in russia supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft launched by soyuz-2 rockets spacecraft which reentered in 2019
sphingomonas fennica is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from groundwater, which was collected near a sawmill in finland.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas fennica at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase	  fennica bacteria described in 2007
zeljko perovic (cyrillic: жељко перовић; born 11 august 1975) is a montenegrin retired football midfielder.  club career born in niksic, sr montenegro, still within yugoslavia, perovic played with fk sutjeska niksic before joining red star belgrade in summer 1998. he made 4 appearances with red star in the first league of fr yugoslavia. besides red star, he played for several other clubs in yugoslavia, namely serbian sides fk rad and fk mladost apatin, and montenegrin fk sutjeska niksic and fk mogren. between 2003 and 2006 he played abroad in poland with zagłebie lubin. he made 14 appearances with zagłebie in the 2003-04 i liga, and then, after promotion, 3 appearances in the 2004-05 ekstraklasa. then he played with mogren in the 2006-07 montenegrin first league.  honors red star first league of fr yugoslavia: 2000-01 fr yugoslavia cup: 1999  references  1975 births living people sportspeople from niksic association football midfielders serbia and montenegro footballers montenegrin footballers fk sutjeska niksic players red star belgrade footballers fk rad players fk mladost apatin players fk mogren players zagłebie lubin players second league of serbia and montenegro players first league of serbia and montenegro players ekstraklasa players montenegrin first league players serbia and montenegro expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in poland serbia and montenegro expatriate sportspeople in poland
1996-97 bosnia and herzegovina football cup was the third season of the bosnia and herzegovina's annual football cup. the cup was won by sarajevo who defeated zeljeznicar in the final.  quarterfinals the matches were played on 30 april 1997.  |}  semifinals the first legs were played on 14 may and the second legs were played on 21 may 1997.  |}  final  see also  1996-97 first league of bosnia and herzegovina  external links statistics on rsssf  bosnia and herzegovina football cup seasons cup bosnia
guru shama bhate (marathi: शम भट)(born 6 october 1950) also known as shama tai, is among the kathak exponents in india today. her career spans over 40 years and she has been learning and performing kathak from the age of 4 and has been a teacher and is involved with choreography and training many kathak dancers in india. she is also the artistic director of her dance academy nadroop in pune  personal life guru shama bhate was born in belgaum (now belagavi) on 6 october 1950. born to smt gulab baisa naik and sri ganagadhar g naik. she is married to sanat bhate, who is the son of guru rohini bhate, in 1974 and has a son angad bhate.  training shama bhate is the disciple and daughter in law of guru smt. rohini bhate. she has also had her training from pt. birju maharaj and pt. mohanrao kallianpurkar. her idiom of kathak dance has special inputs in 'taal' and 'laya', from tabla taal maestro and exponent pt. suresh talwalkar.  shama bhate has trained numerous professional kathak dancers and is on the board of many universities and functions as one of the senior guru's in lalit kala kendra of pune university, nalanda college of mumbai university, bharat college of nagpur university, bharati vidyapeeth in pune. under her guidance, more than thirty of her students have acquired a post-graduate degree from various universities and as many as 12 students have been awarded the hrdc national scholarship (for senior students), and also ccert scholarship (for junior students)  choreographic work shama bhate's choreographic work is extensive. she has experimented with both traditional as well as contemporary format of kathak. she has created a repertoire of traditional and classical compositions -taals, taranas, thumris etc. with her own perspective. for instance, trishul (a blend of taal cycles of 9, 10 and 11 beats); samvaad (domuhi composition), layasopan (traditional kathak sequence presented through panch jatis). a more recent production from 2015 saw her drawing inspiration from the indian epic mahabaratha and created the "ateet ki parchhaiyan - reflections on the mahabharata saga" with dancers performing 7 different indian classical and indian folk dance forms. another choreography that was performed by her students from nadroop during the occasion of
the 85th birthday celebration of the singer lata mangeshkar, was the dance ballet 'chala vahi des'. some of her most recent production in 2018 are  1. chaturang ki chaupal - this production introduces the four components of chaturang-sahitya, sargam, nach ke bol and tarana in four ragas intricately woven together with music showcasing the richness of this production.  2. echoes - shama tai's latest choreography is inspired by the inner voice and focuses on bhaav and abhinaya through the medium of five stories  guru shama bhate also organizes and curates the madame menaka choreography movement, a proverb based choreography festival which happens on an annual basis in pune.  awards and honours    maharashtra rajya puraskar - 2011 conferred by the maharashtra state government. kala darpan puraskar in 2012.  kala samvardhan puraskar by krishna mulgur smriti pratishthan, 2012. kala gaurav puraskar by kalanidhi, 2013. rohini bhate puraskar by the pune municipal corporation, 2018. y.u.v.a puraskar on international women's day, 2018 for her invaluable contribution to kathak. nehru yuva kendra puraskar - krida mantralaya. 2018. shri kundanlal gangani award, 2019.  see also  list of kathak dancers  references  external links  https://www.wikipedia-saswati-sen.com//   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i8uubntivie//   https://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/dance/shama-bhate-on-her-artistic-journey/article17475803.ece//   http://www.rotarypeace.in/chala-wahi-des//  1950 births kathak exponents artists from pune indian dance teachers performers of indian classical dance 20th-century indian dancers indian female classical dancers living people dancers from maharashtra women artists from maharashtra 20th-century indian women artists
the grant transit authority is a public transit operator in grant county, washington. it operates 13 routes, including intercity services that converge in the city of moses lake.  history  grant transit authority began as a demonstration project with 4 buses in november 1995. the project, deemed a success after one year, led to a november 1996 vote to establish a public transportation benefit area (ptba) to fund a permanent system. the vote passed, creating a 0.2 percent sales tax and allowing regular service to begin and expand the following year.  the ptba boundaries were expanded in 1998 to include quincy, which had opted out of the 1996 vote, thus encompassing all of grant county. the grant transit authority previously partnered with a local non-profit organization, people for people, for operations but became independent in october 2013.  in 2015, construction began on a new transit center in downtown moses lake. the transit center opened on august 1, 2017, with an indoor waiting area, a customer service desk, and several bays. the grant transit authority debuted inter-county commuter services during the same month, connecting moses lake to ellensburg and wenatchee on weekdays. several routes were consolidated in a major service change that took effect in april 2019.  fares  regular fare: $1.00 reduced/senior: $0.50  monthly passes adult: $25 student: $20 reduced/senior: $15  references  external links  bus transportation in washington (state) transit agencies in washington (state) transportation in grant county, washington
filippo bottazzi (23 december 1867 - 19 september 1941) was an italian biochemist who is considered the father of italian biochemistry. bottazzi conducted experiments on the physiology and biochemical aspects of blood in his early career. his political association with the fascist regime in italy and his participation in antisemitism led to his scientific contributions being overlooked.  bottazzi was born in diso, apulia where his father giuseppe maria antonio was an artist. his mother was maria donata cecilia bortone. he studied medicine in rome, graduating in 1893 and joining the institute of higher, practical, and postgraduate studies of florence the next year.  bottazzi studied under giulio fano who was influenced by the physiology schools of luigi luciani and angelo mosso. in 1894 bottazzi studied the reduction in osmotic resistance experienced by red blood cells during the splenic cycle. he continued his research in the area of the milieu interieur begun in france by claude bernard that compared the life of aquatic and land animals. bottazzi collaborated with scientists in other countries, he was invited to work with michael foster at cambridge in 1894 and he translated foster's treatise on physiology in 1899. in 1923 the university of edinburgh conferred an honorary ll.d. degree to botttazzi during the eleventh international physiological congress. bottazzi rose to head the institute of physiology at the university of genoa and later at naples. in early 1940 he was a candidate for the nobel prize in medicine but the prizes themselves were suspended until 1943 due to the war. bottazzi also took an interest in the history of science and in the philosophy of science and its methods. bottazzi published il metodo sperimentale nelle discipline biologiche in 1906 where he examined experimental methods in biology. he celebrated the role of italian scientists leonardo, galileo, spallanzani, and bufalini and pointed to biology being best explained by mechanistic or physico-chemical phenomena. he however considered human thought to be different.  botazzi was however not recognized by scientists due to the part he played in fascist politics. he was one of the signatories to the manifesto degli scienziati razzisti (manifesto of race). bottazzi became a member of the commissione dell'alimentazione created to solve problems of malnutrition arising from the sanctions imposed on italy from 1926. in 1933 he published a report along with a. niceforo and g. quagliarello on the dietary status of italians. in 1938, a letter was sent by the ministry of education to the accademia d'italia and it put
several scientists in charge of purging all scientific works made by jewish scientists. the list of scientists included on this purging committee included the chemist francesco giordani, admiral giancarlo vallauri, mathematician francesco severi and bottazzi.  for his studies on the role of sarcoplasm in muscle contraction, and in the regulation of osmotic pressure in marine animals, between 1925 and 1938 he received three nobel prize nominations. in 1941 the nominations were three in the same year, but the outbreak of the second world war, with the consequent suspension of the assignments, prevented him from competing for recognition.  selected works   la mente e l'opera di leonardo da vinci, citta del vaticano: pontificia academia scientiarum, 1941.  trattato di chimica fisiologica (milan 1898-9) 2 voll, translation into german by h. boruttau (1901).  principi di fisiologia (milan 1905-6),  lezioni di fisiologia sperimentale (naples 1906),  fisiologia dell'alimentazione (1910, 1919),  la grotta zinzulusa in terra d'otranto ed il ritrovamento in essa di typhlocaris (catania 1923) with pasquale de laurentiis and gino stasi.  bibliography   giuseppe antonio giannuzzo, francesco corvaglia, filippo bottazzi: vita, opere, giudizi (tricase 1992)  carlo stasi, dizionario enciclopedico dei salentini (grifo, lecce, 2018) vol. i, pp.108-109  references  italian physiologists 1867 births 1941 deaths
bhait is a village in gurdaspur district of punjab state, india, located  from gurdaspur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, an elected representative of the village as per the constitution of india and the panchayati raj system.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bhait has 207 houses and a population of 988 residents, 508 males and 480 females. its literacy rate is 78.54%, higher than the state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 98, forming 9.92% of its population, and the child sex ratio is approximately 633, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in gurdaspur  external links   villages in gurdaspur   -tehsil-in-batala-district.html gurdaspur villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
pradeep gadge is an indian diabetologist known for managing complicated diabetic cases.  education pradeep gadge is a graduate of maharashtra university of health sciences. he holds an md in medicine,  dph, diploma in diabetology, and  f.r.s.h (london).  medical career pradeep gadge specializes in diabetology and is known for treating diabetic patients and taking initiatives to educate people about diabetes care. he serves as a clinical investigator on several clinical endeavours. he also serves in the teaching faculty for postgraduate diabetology students at the college of physicians & surgeons of mumbai.  pradeep has worked as a visiting diabetologist at seven hills hospital, mumbai and breach candy hospital, mumbai.  pradeep has worked as a clinical associate-icu at s l raheja hospital mumbai & all india institute of diabetes mahim, mumbai . he has also served  at lilavati hospital & research centre in the department of endocrinology / diabetology. gadge writes articles on diabetes  which are regularly published in various textbooks. he is a certified speaker for the american diabetes association (ada).  pradeep is regularly quoted in various medical write-ups published by reputed newspapers such as the times of india, dna, hindustan times, business standard, mumbai mirror, the economic times,  see also  diabetes mellitus  diabetes mellitus type 1  diabetes mellitus type 2  references  indian diabetologists living people year of birth missing (living people)
lotrisor may refer to the following rivers in romania:  lotrisor (calimanesti), a right tributary of the olt near calimanesti lotrisor, a left tributary of the olt (river) near calinesti
villa said is a cul-de-sac in the 16th arrondissement of paris, france. it runs for 200 metres from 68, rue pergolese. it is 7,5 metre wide.  history the street was built by mr. alphonse hardon, an investor in the development of the suez canal, who named it after sa'id of egypt.  pierre laval, who served as the prime minister of france from 1942 to 1944, moved into the hotel particulier at 15, villa said, in 1917. he was a tenant from 1917 to 1925, and he purchased the townhouse at an auction for 371,339 french francs on july 23, 1925. prior to the auction, laval had sued the owner over allegations of dereliction.  laval's next-door neighbour was french author anatole france. anatole france acquired this house, at number 5, in 1894 and kept it until his death, in 1924.  the painter kees van dongen (1877-1969) lived and painted at number 29 after the first world war.  references  streets in the 16th arrondissement of paris
mars theatre is a historic theatre building at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built in 1921, and is a four-story, rectangular, georgian revival style brick building, with limestone ornamentation and terra cotta panels. it measures 69 feet, 4 inches, wide and 141 feet, 4 inches deep.  it was originally built as a vaudeville theater and sat 1,205 patrons. the building houses the denis h. long center for the performing arts.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1981.  references  external links cinema treasures: long center for the performing arts  theatres on the national register of historic places in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana georgian revival architecture in indiana theatres completed in 1921 buildings and structures in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
tritek technologies, inc. was founded in 1984 by inventor and innovator james malatesta. headquartered in wilmington, delaware, usa, tritek specializes in custom designed hardware and software for mail processing equipment, imaging, and vote-by-mail.  tritek has many patents in mail sorting and processing.  tritek provides machinery and services to fortune 500 companies and educational institutions. customers include j p morgan chase bank and george mason university. washington state, sedgwick county, kansas, camden county, new jersey, the five boroughs of new york city, napa county california, the state of delaware, kansas city, missouri, and charleston, south carolina all rely upon tritek's vote-by-mail technology for processing mailed-in ballots during elections.  tritek's assembly plant is in wilmington, delaware where the company also operates a mail processing center. tritek is a global company providing products and services to european countries, universities, presort mail businesses, and many us government postal operations. tritek is a multi-million dollar privately owned company.   tritek has worked with well-known organizations such as siemens, the united states postal service, and lockheed martin.  history tritek's sister company, independent computer services (ics), was established as a mail sorting machine service company for canadian-based leigh marsland mail sorting equipment in 1981. in 1984, ics purchased the worldwide rights to leigh mail sorting technology. ics eventually developed their own reader and computer systems to replace aging components in the legacy equipment. ics developed an optical character reader (ocr) and named it the model 88-5. this reader was used to presort mail on leigh instrument (canada) mail sorting machines. ics named the development company of the 88-5 tritek technologies. this name was derived from the three technologies used in mail sortation: conveying, computing and sorting.  in 1988, tritek introduced the first multi-font programmable optical reader for mail processing machines. tritek developed the first high-speed flats sorter in 1991 and named it the 91-5 ultrasorter. the united states postal service tested the 91-5 under their fmbcs (flat mail barcode sorter) development project as a high speed flats sorter replacement. the postal service licensed tritek's technology which is still in use today.  in 2003 tritek developed "rule editor" software that sorts mail according to a custom programmed set of software rules tied to a database. this software allows organizations to sort generically addressed in
bound mail pieces, handle ad mail, or forward mail to a different address.  since 2009 tritek technologies has been known for handling undeliverable mail pieces the post office has returned to the sender. returned mail often features marked-up address blocks, stickers, and stamps that obscure original addressing information making this material difficult to process with automated equipment.  partners cambridge corporate services uses tritek automated mail sorting machines to internally handle high volumes of mail.  products  tritek compact - small footprint mail sorter  ace parcel processing station  inbound mail processing equipment  presort mail processing equipment  return mail processing equipment  vote-by-mail processing and signature verification mail tracking systems character recognition software parcel sorting mail forwarding digital e-mail delivery multi-level sorting systems rule-based software  references  companies based in wilmington, delaware manufacturing companies based in delaware 1984 establishments in delaware american companies established in 1984 manufacturing companies established in 1984
a magic hexagram of order 2 is an arrangement of numbers in a hexagram with triangular cells with 2 cells on each edge, in such a way that the numbers in each row, in all three directions, sum to the same magic constant m.  magic star hexagram   magic star hexagram or 6-pointed magic star is a star polygon with schlafli symbol {6/2} in which numbers are placed at each of the six vertices and six intersections, such that the four numbers on each line sum to the same magic constant.  magic star hexagram with triangular cell   there are two solutions of magic star hexagram with 12 triangular cells.  magic star hexagram with more than 12 vertices   harold reiter and david ritchie calculated the solution of magic hexagrams with 19 vertices.  see also magic square magic hexagon  references  external links    the magic hexagram  a complete solution to the magic hexagram problem  magic squares star symbols
kendra clarke (born november 16, 1996 in edmonton, alberta) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the sprint events, predominantly the 400m event.  in july 2016, she was officially named to canada's olympic team.  references  1996 births living people athletes from edmonton canadian female sprinters athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada black canadian female track and field athletes olympic female sprinters
the 2016-2017 unrest in kashmir, also known as the burhan aftermath, refers to a series of violent protests in the kashmir valley and subsequently chenab valley,  poonch district and rajouri district of northern jammu division in the indian state of jammu and kashmir. it started with the killing of burhan wani, a commander of the kashmir-based islamic militant organisation hizbul mujahideen, by indian security forces on 8 july 2016. after his killing, anti-indian protests started in all 10 districts of the kashmir valley. protesters defied curfew with attacks on security forces and public properties.  curfew was imposed in all 10 districts of the valley on 15 july and mobile services were suspended by the government. kashmir valley remained under 53 days of consecutive curfew which was lifted from all areas on 31 august, however was reimposed in some areas the next day. jammu and kashmir police and indian paramilitary forces used pellet guns, tear gas shells, rubber bullets, as well as assault rifles, resulting in the deaths of more than 90 civilians, with over 15,000 civilians injured and as the result of pellet guns, many people also were blinded. two security personnel also died while over 4,000 personnel were injured in the riots.  some columnists including prem shankar jha have termed the unrest as kashmir's intifada.  background  in late 2015 and early 2016, observers of kashmir reported growth in home-grown islamic militancy and radicalization of the kashmiri muslim population. several reasons for the growth have been cited such as the absence of a political dialogue, the lack of economic opportunities, frustration due to high unemployment, excessive militarization of the public space and repeated human rights violations by the security forces.  according to scholar-journalist haris zargar, the increasing radicalization represented a counter-reaction to the shaping of the nationalist identity in india based on its rising middle class and hindu nationalism. the rise of forceful hindu nationalism affected how kashmiri muslims viewed the indian state and reshaped their kashmiri muslim identity. the communal polarization in india and the violence targeting muslims are widely discussed in kashmiri homes.  in the 2014 indian general election, the bharatiya janata party (bjp) won a majority in the lower house of the indian parliament. narendra modi became the prime minister. in the state legislative assembly elections in the same year the peoples democratic party (pdp) won a majority of the seats in the kashmir region and the bjp won the majority of seats in the jammu region. even though both parties campaigned against each other, they
joined to form a coalition government, with mufti mohammad sayeed becoming the chief minister. following his death in 2016, his daughter mehbooba mufti took over as chief minister (first woman chief minister in region). the joining of the two parties led to the perception of a shrinking political space. it is said to have formed the "final straw" in the people's disaffection.furthermore,the muslim majority sub -regions chenab valley and pir panjal range in northern jammu division had intensified their demand for separate divisionhood and more autonomy which irked the ruling class of mainland jammu   the militant wing commanded by burhan wani, part of the islamic militant organisation, hizbul mujahideen, has been dubbed "new-age militancy". it has been designated as a terrorist organization. it has recruited local youth, educated and middle-class, who are conversant with social media and not afraid to reveal their identities. they have achieved an immense popularity among the kashmiri population. when waseem malla and naseer ahmad pandit, two of burhan's associates were killed by security forces, tens of thousands of local kashmiris came to attend the funeral and the funeral rites had to be repeated six times to allow all the mourners to participate. some of the youths who recently became militants had campaigned for pdp during the general elections in 2014.  operation against burhan on 8 july 2016, burhan wani was killed in a planned operation by the jammu and kashmir police and the rashtriya rifles. following a tip-off that wani was planning to come down from the tral forest for eid celebrations, he and two associates were cornered in the kokernag area. according to police officials, after an exchange of fire, the house in which the militants were staying was bombed, killing all three militants. however, some eyewitnesses have stated that the three militants were shot down while trying to escape.  according to a police official, there were misgivings within the security establishment against killing wani owing to his popularity, but they were not heeded by the authorities. wani left home to become a militant at age 15 after an incident with the police that humiliated him. the kashmiri youth angered by the "never-ending militarization" of the valley were drawn to him. his constant presence on social media made him a household name.  journalist fahad shah stated that, with wani's killing, the situation in kashmir entered a period of "amplified instability". at wani's
funeral, an estimated 200,000 people came to mourn him, some of them from remote parts of the valley. forty back-to-back funeral prayers were offered as well as a 21-gun salute by militants. protesters started demonstrating against his killing, and continuous incidents of stone-pelting have been reported since the news of his death.  timeline of unrest  2016  july   after the news of burhan's death spread, protests erupted in some areas of kashmir valley. curfew-like restrictions were imposed in some places in south kashmir during the night, and internet services in many areas were suspended. hurriyat chairman syed ali shah geelani and jammu kashmir liberation front chairman yasin malik called for a strike to protest against the killing of wani. geelani, along with other separatist leaders including asiya andrabi and mirwaiz umar farooq, called for a three-day shutdown in kashmir to protest against the killing. the shutdown was repeatedly extended into august by the end of the month.  violent clashes broke out in response to burhan's killing on 9 july in some areas. over 20 police stations were attacked by mobs who stole weapons from the stations and fired upon the security forces. stone pelting was reported from many parts of kashmir,  including transit camps of kashmiri pandits. train services and the pilgrimage to amarnath temple were suspended. all state board exams were postponed, while the srinagar jammu national highway was shut to traffic. by the end of the day, over 200 people were injured and 11 protesters were killed. by 10 july, more than 20 were confirmed to have died during the unrest. more than 300 crpf personnel were reported to have been injured. in addition, many vehicles and buildings belonging to security forces were attacked during the day with a number of them being set ablaze. some suspected militants hiding among protesters also threw grenades at the security personnel.  two policemen also died in july during the unrest. one of them died on 9 july when a mob attacked and pushed his mobile bunker into the waters of jhelum river. another died on 24 july, having succumbed to the injuries he received in an attack on a police station by stone-pelters on 15 july.  on the night of 12 july, about 200-300 kashmiri pandit employees fled the transit camps in kashmir due to the constant attacks by protesters. over 1300 government employees belonging to the community fled the region during the unrest.  800 personnel of the central reserve police force (crpf) meanwhile were sent to kashmir in addition to
the 1,200 already sent on 9 july to aid the state's police.  on 15 july, curfew was imposed in all districts of kashmir and mobile phone networks were suspended. also on the same day, the separatists extended the call for shutdown till 18 july. re-opening of schools and colleges in kashmir was postponed due to the unrest. the government announced on the same day that it was sending 2,000 additional crpf personnel to kashmir.  the law-and-order situation in the valley had started to improve by 24 july. in view of this, curfew was lifted from four districts and parts of srinagar city, with section 144 of code of criminal procedure still remaining in force. by 26 july, it was lifted from all areas of the region except anantnag.  protests erupted in many areas after the lifting of the curfew, which was reimposed a day later in kulgam district, anantnag and some parts of srinagar in view of the march called by separatists.  it was later reimposed in pulwama district and shopian district as well.  on 29 july, violent clashes broke out in several places, with over 130 people reported injured. 70 incidents of stone-pelting were reported, including attacks on army camps. during the protests, a government building in rafiabad and an animal husbandry office in shopian were set on fire, and a grenade lobbed in shopian. on 30 july, the cavalcade of state education minister naeem akhtar, who was traveling with mlc yashir reshi, was pelted with stones by crowds who were later dispersed at dangerpora and shilwat.  august  on 1 august in srinagar, protesters attacked state education minister naeem akhtar's residence with petrol bombs. akhtar and his family were not present at the time. the cavalcade of law and rural development minister abdul haq was attacked with stones by protesters in tangdhar area managed to escape the attack unhurt. a mob attacked the vehicle of the additional deputy commissioner (adc) of ramban with stones and set it ablaze on the national highway near lethpora. two protesters were killed in defence by a personal security officer of the adc who was rescued by the crpf.  the shutdown was repeatedly extended by separatists into september.  the unrest also started spreading to the chenab valley region of jammu division in august with shutdowns being observed in many towns. protests against civilian casualties were held in doda with people shouting pro-freedom slogans.  on 5 august curfew was imposed in several places in view of
the march called by separatists who were arrested. three people were killed and 674 injured during violent clashes that erupted after friday prayers.  the separatists asked kashmiris to observe a "black day" on 15 august on 11 august. curfew was extended in several parts of kashmir the next day in view of the call given by separatists to people for marching to the eidgah on 13 and 14 august.  the next day after friday prayers, violent protests erupted in several cities, during which hundreds of people were injured. protests after friday prayers also took place in doda against the civilian deaths in kashmir. many were injured in the clashes that broke out, with police and protesters blaming each other. the seerat committee called for a three-day shutdown against alleged police action.  most parts of kashmir were placed under curfew on 13 august in view of the weekend protests called by separatists.  on pakistan's independence day, flags of pakistan were hoisted at many places across kashmir and pro-pakistan rallies were carried out, with dozens of people reported injured when security personnel tried to disperse them. separatist leader asiya andrabi was injured along with many other protesters while leading a women-only rally in tral when security personnel lobbed teargas shells to disperse them.  on 16 august, five protesters were killed due to firing by security personnel in clashes with security forces and protesters blaming each other.  on 17 august, a march called by the separatists to the office of unmogip, in srinagar, was stopped by security forces. on the same day, the house of the mla of shopian, mohammed yousuf bhat, was attacked by a mob.  on 21 august, a youth was killed after being hit by a teargas shell in srinagar while over 70 people were injured in protests across the region, including about 60 people in a village of rafiabad tehsil. pro-freedom rallies were held at anantnag, shopian and pulwama, with 40,000 people attending a rally in a shopian village addressed by separatists including geelani. the border security force (bsf) was removed from counter-insurgency operations and deployed to maintain law and order in srinagar for the first time in 12 years on 22 august. on 23 august, two special police officers in sopore resigned from their posts after their houses were attacked by mobs.  on 24 august, a youth died after receiving injuries in a clash with the security forces while 9 policemen were reportedly injured on the same day when a grenade was lobbed at them from a
crowd of protestors in pulwama.  curfew was lifted from all parts of kashmir on 31 august. one person was killed while over 100 were injured in clashes during the day. a police quarters and house of rajya sabha member of pdp, nazir ahmad laway were set on fire by protesters in hanad chawalgam of kulgam district.  september curfew was reimposed in most places of the region on 2 september including srinagar, badgam, ganderbal, bandipora and handwara. the next day, curfew was lifted from most parts it had been reimposed a day earlier, with only some areas of srinagar remaining under curfew. meanwhile, a youth was killed in clashes between protesters and security forces in qazigund. over 600 people were reported to have been injured during clashes on 4 september with the office of deputy commissioner in shopian being set on fire. on 5 september, a youth who had been wounded a day earlier in the protests, succumbed to his injuries in sopore. in addition, over 120 people were injured during the day as security forces tried to foil pro-freedom rallies. in zangalpora village of kulgam, protesters set a policeman's house on fire.  the shutdown was repeatedly extended by the separatists into october. on 15 september, the shutdown was extended till 22 september. on 16 september, a protester who had been injured on 9 september, succumbed to his death while over 50 people were injured in clashes during the day including 15 in dooru village and 20 in sopore.  on 7 september, over 250 protesters were injured in clashes with security forces. a jawahar navodaya vidyalaya school in kulgam caught fire after teargas shells lobbed by security forces landed inside the school's compound. meanwhile, a rest house in chawalgam village of kulgam was set on fire after protesters hurled petrol bombs at it. curfew and restrictions on assembly of people were lifted from all parts of the region on the same day, however were reimposed in most parts of srinagar on 9 september. it was however lifted again the very next day. two protesters were killed on 10 september in clashes.  curfew was reimposed on 13 september across the entire region in view of the call given by separatists for a march to the un offices in kashmir, while helicopters and drones were deployed to keep a watch on the situation. this was the first time in 26 years that curfew had been imposed in the region during eid al-adha. eid congregations were also barred from being held at the eidgah and hazrat
bal shrine. two protesters were also killed in clashes in clashes with security forces on the same day. on 17 september, the body of an 11-year-old boy, who went missing in protests on the previous day in harwan, was found near a stream at dachigam national park and had been hit by pellets. protests erupted in harwan and other areas after the news of his death spread with several people being injured.  on 19 september, curfew was lifted from all areas except some parts of srinagar in view of the improving situation. a 19-year-old girl died of cardiac arrest during clashes between protesters and security forces in shopian district while a school in vehil village of the district was burnt under mysterious circumstances. the police blamed the protesters for setting it on fire, however locals denied the accusation. another school in anantnag district was also burnt under mysterious circumstances. curfew was lifted from all parts of kashmir on 25 september while the separatists also declared a temporary relaxation in the shutdown.  curfew was reimposed in kishtwar after clashes erupted due to arrests of three youths for disturbing law and order. it was lifted two days later, with night curfew remaining in place.  operation calm down was launched by the indian army to restore normalcy and connectivity to regions that had been affected the most, especially in south kashmir. the additional 4000 troops deployed were ordered to use minimal force in carrying out their duties. tasks involved ensuring schools opened and were secure.  november on 16 november, separatists announced a full-day relaxation for two days on 19 and 20 november. this is the first such relaxation to occur since the beginning of the unrest.  december the separatists increased the full-day relaxation to five days on 14 december, calling for shutdown on two days. they also stated on 16 december that they will come up with an annual protest program soon.  2017  february the separatists called off their strikes in mid-february, including the one scheduled for 24 february as it coincided with the shivaratri festival celebrated by the hindu community.  march  on 28 march, in a clash between security forces and protesters during an operation against a militant in chadoora, 3 civilians were killed and at least 20 others, including the army personnel and police, were injured. indian security forces launched operation all-out. 'operation all-out' is a joint offensive launched by indian security forces (indian army, crpf, jammu and kashmir police, bsf and ib) to flush out militants and terrorists in kashmir until there is complete peace in
the state. the offensive is against militants and terrorists from terrorist organisations such as lashkar-e-taiba, jaish-e-mohammed, hizbul and al- badr. operation all out has so far resulted in the deaths of over 190 terrorists (110 infiltrators and 80 locals).  april  a by-election for the srinagar lok sabha seat was held, as the previous mp of the constituency, tariq hamid karra of pdp had resigned from the party and parliament in september 2016, accusing the pdp of "surrendering its ideals for power", for its handling of the situation in kashmir. the separatists called for a boycott of the election, and on 9 april, when the polls for by-election were conducted, violence broke out in the region leading to 8 civilian deaths and over 170 injuries. the voter turnout was recorded to be 7%, which is lowest ever in the past three decades.  casualties more than 100 people including 5 security personnel have died during the unrest. over 19,000 people including more than 15,000 civilians as well as 4,000 security personnel have been injured in the unrest. according to local doctors, at least 117 civilians were likely to lose their eyesight as a result of injuries caused by buckshot blasts. three policemen went missing on 9 july and one was killed on 10 july during protests in anantnag district when a mob pushed his vehicle into the jhelum river. another policeman died on 24 july, succumbing to injuries received on 15 july during an attack on a police station in kulgam.  two of the missing policemen were later traced by the state police and were found to have become incommunicado after mobile services were cut. security forces were not able to find the third policeman, or a large cache of arms that went missing after a police station in south kashmir was immolated. on 18 september 2016, 18 indian army soldiers were killed during an attack by militants in uri. the target was a brigade headquarters.  use of pellet guns  indian security forces trying to control the kashmiri agitators have used pellet guns, which, although billed as "non-lethal", led to a high number of casualties including permanent eye injuries. in total during the 2016 uprising, 10 civilians were killed by pellet gunfire.  seventy-seven people were injured, with two killed and many losing their eyesight,  between 8-12 july 2016.  due to the medical emergency in kashmir, there was a shortage of eye specialists who could treat the injured lying in kashmiri hospitals.  in shri maharaja hari
singh (smhs) hospital of srinagar, over 200 patients were admitted by 13 july with the same problem.  a five-year-old, zohra zahoor, had pellet wounds in her legs, forehead and abdomen, and is one of the youngest victims from the region; she was admitted to a hospital in srinagar.  human rights watch strongly condemned the use of pellet guns on protesters and called it a failure of the authorities to respect basic human rights. according to a sky news report, the indian paramilitary fired up to 3,800 cartridges between july and august, each containing 450 metallic balls, totaling up to 1.7 million pellets.  a team of three eye-specialists from the all india institute of medical sciences in new delhi, headed by ophthalmologist prof sudarshan k. kumar, reached kashmir to help the local doctors in treating the pellet gun injuries. after watching the condition of patients in the hospital, they described it as a "war-like situation". by 22 july, the smhs hospital has received at least 182 patients with eye injuries, mostly due to pellets with more than 137 eye surgeries having taken place.  another team of three eye-specialists, led by renowned ophthalmologist sundaram natarajan of aditya jyot eye hospital, mumbai, organized by adhik kadam of borderless world foundation arrived in the region on 26 july to treat eye injuries caused by the pellets and performed over 40 retinal surgeries in 3 days.  by 28 august 570 people injured by the guns had been treated in the smhs hospital and 425 eye surgeries were performed. about 3,000 civilians have been injured due to pellet guns as of 24 august.  events  media blackout on 9 july, mobile internet services were suspended in kashmir as well as in jammu region to prevent the rumor-mongering. on 16 july, the jammu and kashmir government imposed a press emergency. the police raided the newspaper installations and seized copies of newspapers and printing plates. they said that, in view of the curfew, movement of newspaper staff and the distribution of newspapers would not be possible "for a few days". landline and mobile telephone services were cut off, except for the lines of a government-owned company, bsnl. internet services remained suspended. cable television was also shut off, ostensibly to stop pakistani channels from being broadcast.  on 19 july, chief minister mehbooba mufti denied that there was a ban on newspapers, and her adviser amitabh mattoo hinted that the decision might have been taken at the "local level". mat
too also declared that newspapers would be able to print from 19 july. however, the newspapers refused to publish on tuesday, claiming there were uncertainties about the restrictions. one editor also asked the government to "own the ban" and issue a statement guaranteeing that the media would not be hampered. the chief minister held a meeting with the srinagar-based newspaper editors, expressing regret for the restrictions and assuring them that their work would not be hampered. following this, the newspapers went to press on wednesday, delivering them on thursday. the senior superintendent of police of budgam district fayaz ahamad lone was held responsible for raiding the press and transferred.  mobile internet was restored in jammu on 26 july. mobile telephone services were restored on 27 july for most of the postpaid and some of the prepaid numbers in kashmir. mobile internet was suspended again in jammu on 5 august in view of the growing unrest in chenab valley however they were restored later in the same day. mobile telephone services in kashmir were suspended again on 11 august. in addition, all broadband services were suspended in kashmir on 13 august resulting in internet being completely cut off in the region. broadband internet was restored on 18 august. mobile services were again partially restored in kashmir on 20 august.  on 12 september, the state government ordered the suspension of all internet services and mobile phone services in kashmir excluding postpaid connections of bsnl for a period of 72 hours.  in april 2017, the state authorities banned 22 social media sites for a one-month period in an effort to calm tensions in the disputed region after videos depicting the alleged abuse of kashmiris by indian forces emerged.  newspaper ban kashmir reader, a prominent english newspaper which is published in srinagar, was indefinitely banned by the state authorities on 30 september. it was asked to stop publication on the evening of sunday, 2 october. the daily was accused of publishing material that "tends to incite acts of violence" and "disturb public peace and tranquility". human rights group amnesty international said the ban was a "setback to free speech" and called on authorities to revoke the order. on 28 december, the newspaper resumed publication after the government lifted the ban after nearly three months.  arrest of human rights activist khurram parvez, a prominent kashmiri human rights activist, was first stopped by indian authorities at new delhi airport on 14 september to prevent him from attending the un human rights council session in geneva. parvez was later arrested on 15 september by indian officials from his home in srinagar. on 21 september
, a day after a sessions court ordered his release, khurram parvez had been detained a second time under public safety act (psa). after 76 days of detention, on 30 november he was finally released from prison following the orders of jammu and kashmir high court.  action against security personnel fayaz ahamad lone, the senior superintendent of police (ssp) of budgam district who had ordered the police forces to raid press offices and stop the publication of newspapers, was transferred to the state disaster response fund as a commandant. two officers were later transferred from south kashmir, which has been most affected by the violent protests: the deputy inspector general of police in south kashmir and the senior superintendent of police in anantnag.   the ssp in srinagar was directed on 19 july by a local court to register a case against a deputy superintendent of police (dsp) and other police personnel for allegedly murdering an innocent youth after breaking into his house during the unrest on 10 july. it also ordered that the case could not be investigated by anyone below the rank of dsp. instead of registering a case against the dsp, the state police registered a case against the youth over various offenses and alleged that he was leading a procession on the day he was killed. the court rejected the argument and ordered the ssp to register a case against the dsp within a day. a non-bailable warrant was later issued against the ssp for not obeying the court order and registering a case within the allotted time-period. the ssp was produced in the court by the deputy inspector general of police of central kashmir and was granted bail while being ordered to file his statement and register the case against the accused dsp a petition against the filing of the report against the dsp was dismissed by the jammu and kashmir high court who directed the chief judicial magistrate of srinagar to initiate contempt proceedings against the ssp if the report was not registered. the supreme court, however, stayed the contempt proceedings against the ssp as well as the inspector general of police in kashmir on 9 august.  the court directed the state government on 12 august to exhume the body of the youth and conduct an autopsy. his autopsy report was submitted to the supreme court on 26 september 2016, with the report concluding that he had died due to pellet injuries and not because of a bullet.  a crpf sub-inspector who shot an ambulance driver on 18 august was suspended the following day over the incident. on 18 august, a probe was ordered into the death of a person who was killed after the raid of the indian army in a
khrew village on the same day. d.s. hooda admitted the next day that the person was beaten to death by soldiers and stated the raid on the village was unsanctioned.  internet censorship  on 26 april 2017, the state government directed various internet service providers (isps) to block access to 22 social networking websites, saying it was needed to prevent spreading of rumors and to maintain law and order in the state, under the indian telegraph act, 1885. this move angered the youth of the state, and they resorted to using virtual private networks (vpns), internet proxies and other readily available tools to circumvent the block.  reactions  india  reactions of government and politicians on 9 july, home minister rajnath singh appealed for people to maintain peace and calm in kashmir. on 10 july, the state government appealed to all the political parties including the separatists for help in restoring normalcy in the valley. separatist leader geelani agreed and asked the kashmir is to remain "disciplined" while farooq ridiculed the appeal for help. chief minister of jammu and kashmir mehbooba mufti appealed for calm in the state on 12 july. prime minister narendra modi expressed concern over the unrest in the state and appealed for calm while assuring help to the state government.  the opposition congress party chairperson sonia gandhi expressed deep anguish at the loss of innocent lives. she pointed out the considerable advances made over the last two decades and appealed to kashmiris to let the political parties find durable ways of fulfilling people's aspirations. congress also dispatched a fact-finding team made of senior leaders ambika soni and salman khurshid, who criticised the government for discontinuing the development policies and for the excessive use of force in dealing with protesters. the party has demanded an all-party meet to discuss the kashmir situation.  women's activist and cpm party leader kavita krishnan termed the killing of burhan wani an "extrajudicial killing." she pointed out the supreme court decree that required every single encounter to be followed by a fir and a magisterial enquiry.  on 17 july, minister of state for external affairs vijay kumar singh urged people of kashmir to cooperate with the government and stated that they are being misguided by unwanted elements. on 19 july, home minister rajnath singh blamed pakistan for the violence in kashmir. in a statement to the rajya sabha, he said, "whatever is happening in kashmir is pakistan-sponsored. the name is 'pakistan', but its acts are na-pak (impure
)."  an all-party meet involving all political parties of kashmir was held on 21 july with the aim of building a consensus on measures to restore normalcy. the jammu & kashmir national conference boycotted the meeting, blaming the government for the situation in the valley.  a two-day visit by singh beginning on 23 july was announced, in which singh will visit kashmir in order to try to calm down the situation and review the law and order situation. after arrival he held a meeting with some local entrepreneurs, houseboat owners, muslim clerics, members of the sikh community, members of the kashmiri pandit community, and civilians. the meeting was boycotted by several trade bodies, with their officials saying that they boycotted the meeting due to killings of civilians and past meetings produced no results. later in the day, he met governor narinder nath vohra and chief minister mehbooba mufti. on the second day he met leaders of various political parties and members of civil society, with the congress party boycotting the meeting.  congress leader sonia gandhi on 28 july expressed anguish over the loss of lives and injuries in the region while appealing to the people of the valley to maintain calm. the party later criticized mufti and for not knowing about burhan's presence during the encounter and blamed the unrest in the state on her. it also criticised the union government for continuing talks with pakistan despite the unrest. supreme court of india on 29 july sought a report from the union government over the situation in kashmir while assuring that it will give all possible help to kashmiri civilians. on 8 august, leader of the opposition in rajya sabha ghulam nabi azad said the prime minister must call an all-party meeting to discuss the situation which should be followed by an all-party delegation to the region.  an all-party conference on the unrest was announced on 10 august along with a visit by an all-party delegation to the region to hold talks with various sections. during the meeting held in new delhi on 12 august, various suggestions were made for restoration of normalcy. on the suggestion of holding talks with separatists, finance minister arun jaitley said the decision to hold the talks will be taken based upon the prevailing situation. former home minister p. chidambaram on 17 august blamed the state and union government for the unrest in the region which he stated was sliding into chaos. a meeting of all opposition political parties in jammu and kashmir was held on the same day with resolutions demanding probe into an enquiry by a retired supreme court judge over allegations of use of excessive force, special assembly session on
the unrest and the start of a political dialogue with pakistan about the kashmir dispute were passed. during the meeting, the participants also decided that a delegation of opposition political parties will meet the president pranab mukherjee over the unrest.  on 19 august 2016, former chief minister of kashmir, farooq abdullah stated that indian forces were "unleashing a reign of terror in kashmir" that would damage india's global reputation. on the same day, the general officer commanding-in-chief of india's northern command reached out to separatist leaders, stating that their help was required to restore normalcy in the region. in addition, a delegation consisting of opposition parties from the state met the president and requested him to impress upon the union government to initiate a political dialogue with all stakeholders and to acknowledge it as a political issue. they also requested the president to impress upon the government to not to use lethal force against civilians and claimed that instead of the government, it was the opposition parties were taking steps to restore calm while also blaming it for the unrest in the state. the delegation also met the prime minister on 22 august, submitting a memorandum to him in which it demanded that the central government start a political dialogue with all stakeholders to end the unrest and ban the use of pellet guns. during the meeting, modi expressed concern over the situation in the state and asked all political parties work together to find a "permanent and lasting" solution.  janata dal (united) on 21 august advised that an all-party delegation under the leadership of the prime minister or home minister should visit the region and hold talks with mainstream parties for finding a way to restore normalcy. arun jaitley on 21 august dubbed stone-throwers as attackers while blaming pakistan for the unrest and stated that there will be no compromise with people indulging in violence.  the home minister again visited kashmir on 24 august to hold a dialogue with various stakeholders. on the first day, he took a review of the security situation in a meeting which was attended by top army, police and state officials. he advised them to use maximum restraint while dealing with protesters and appreciated their efforts in keeping law and order. he also held a meeting with delegations of several political parties. most of the parties demanded resumption of talks initiation talks with separatists. there was also a near unanimous consensus among political parties regarding a ban on use of pellet guns. the meeting was boycotted by many trade bodies of the state. singh also met with state governor nn vohra who briefed him about the internal security situation in kashmir and steps needed
to be taken for restoration of normalcy.  the next day, the state's chief minister held a press meet along with singh which she stormed out of after getting upset over allegations of her government's disproportionate use of force while criticizing omar abdullah's government during the 2010 unrest. singh promised to look into alternatives to peller guns and also stated that he is willing to talk with separatists. mufti while meeting with modi over the unrest on 27 august, called for creating a mechanism of interlocutors to hold talks with all stakeholders and blamed pakistan for fuelling the unrest. the next day, modi said that unity and compassion were the "twin mantras" for solving the kashmir issue and criticized those inciting the youth of the region to violence saying they will have to answer to them someday. he also deplored the loss of life in the unrest, saying that the loss of anyone's life was a loss for the whole country and they should do whatever it takes to restore peace in the region. on the same day, mufti said that talks should be held with anyone willing to reject violence and restore peace in the state while also stating the format of dialogue needs to better than past attempts. she also criticized people instigating the youth to violence. an announcement regarding an all-party delegation scheduled to visit kashmir on 4 september was made on 29 august. the delegation was announced to being led by rajnath singh with the goal of holding talks with various sections of the society in order to restore calm in the region. during a press conference with united states secretary of defense ash carter on 30 august, indian defense minister manohar parrikar commented on the unrest stating a small percentage of people were holding the majority "at ransom" in the valley.  the all-party delegation that arrived on 4 september met various representatives on its first day of visit. the separatists refused to meet the delegation, while mufti wrote a letter inviting them for talking with the delegation. a delegation of the ruling party that met the all-part delegation stated that there was an "urgent need to initiate a result-oriented dialogue to solve the kashmir issue". a delegation of national conference stated in a memorandum to the all-party delegation that the frequent unrests in kashmir was due to a sense of alienation among kashmiris that arose due to the union government's refusal to address the injustices meted out to them in the name of national interest and integration. on the same day, mufti commented that there was a need for unconditional dialogue with all stakeholders. some members of the delegation tried to meet
some of the separatist leaders who however refused to talk to them excluding mirwaiz umar farooq who briefly talked with all india majlis-e-ittehadul muslimeen leader asaduddin owaisi. according to owaisi, farooq had told him that the separatists had decided not to hold talks because the government was not serious about political dialogue. rajnath singh criticized the separatists for not talking with the members saying they did not believe in kashmiriyat, insaniyat (humanity) and jamhooriyat (democracy). the visit of the all-party delegation concluded on 5 september. in its two-day visit, it met with over 30 delegations comprising over 300 members representing various sections of the kashmiri society.  21 sufi clerics met singh on 6 september and requested his permission to carry out an "aman yatra" in kashmir and hold talks with the locals. the clerics also stated that no dialogue should be held with separatists and alleged pakistan was being behind the unrest. on 7 september, the all-party delegation that had visited kashmir asked the central government to hold talks with all stakeholders, however, stated that there could be no compromise on the issue of national sovereignty. on 10 september, national conference expressed grief over the deaths of protesters and stated that the situation was worsening with every passing day. it alleged that the chief minister of the state was being insensitive and ruthless.  on 11 september, rajnath singh directed the security forces crack down on all those who were instigating the youth in the region in order to restore normalcy.  reports  in march 2017, india today, after conducting an investigative operation in the valley, has reported that the stone-pelters stated they are paid for protesting though couldn't disclose their identity. india today interviewed five protesters from baramulla district who confessed on camera that they are paid an amount of rs 5,000-rs 7,000 a month and are also provided with clothes and shoes. one of them also said that separate funds are given for making petrol bombs. they refused to disclose the identity of the financiers.  in april 2017, a report by indian intelligence bureau (ib) has stated that an uprising was planned in the valley by pakistan much before july 2016, and that burhan wani's encounter helped the pakistan's intelligence agency, the inter-services intelligence (isi) ignite rebellion across the valley. the ib report said that isi supplied rs 800 crore to kashmiri separatist leaders including syed ali shah geelani and asiya andrabi to fuel unrest in
the valley. as per the report, the funds supplied by the isi were used to pay off stone-pelters and petrol bomb throwers, and also to propagate anti-india and anti-security forces sentiments in the valley.  others  an indian army veteran penned an open letter in mid-july, stating that wani would have died anyway even if he managed to escape as he was a terrorist and all those who conspired to take away kashmir from india will be met with an iron hand.  south asia director of human rights watch, meenakshi ganguly, said that stone-pelting does not give the police a "free pass" to use force. she pointed out that the main grievance of the protestors is exactly the failure of the authorities to ensure human rights. writer arundhati roy asked for an honest conversation about what kind of azadi (freedom) the kashmiris are demanding.  panun kashmir, an organisation for displaced kashmiri pandits said on 22 july that the union government should recognise the "fundamentalist upsurge" in kashmir and asked it to take immediate steps to prevent it from becoming an "islamist-controlled territory". it also demanded that the government publish a report detailing attacks on kashmiri hindus.  hurriyat chairman syed ali shah geelani on 16 july wrote a letter to several international bodies and heads of states in several countries outlining six measures that the indian government should take for return of normalcy in the valley: acceptance of kashmir's disputed status along with right to self-determination, demilitarization of the valley, repealing of afspa and the public safety act, release of all political prisoners in kashmir along with restoration of their right to political activity, allowance to all international human rights and humanitarian organizations for working in the state and ensuring free political space to all parties in the state.  a facebook spat erupted in august 2016 over the unrest between ruveda salam, kashmir's first woman indian police service officer, and harmeet singh mehta, the sp of sopore after the former criticized the pdp. this led to a series of exchanges between the two.  in a video that went viral on 15 march, hizbul mujahideen commander zakir rashid bhat asked the stone-pelters to attack the security forces for the supremacy of islam and not for nationalism, telling them to check their motives and not fall for nationalism. in the video he stated that he observed that the protesters were mostly fighting for nationalism which was not permitted in islam. he also criticized the separatist leaders and
threatened the local police as well as police informers.  pakistan  on 11 july, pakistan's prime minister nawaz sharif in a statement expressed "shock" over the killing of burhan wani and other civilians by the indian security forces. he also said that it was "deplorable that excessive and unlawful force was used against the civilians". the indian government responded by saying that the pakistan government's view on wani's killing reflected its association with terrorism and advised it to refrain from interfering in the internal affairs of india. on 13 july, pakistan's chief of army staff raheel sharif condemned the killings of protesters by indian security forces.  sharif declared wani as a "martyr" on 15 july and said 19 july will be held as a "black day" to express solidarity with kashmiri people. the indian ministry of external affairs in response criticised pakistan for "glorifying" terrorists belonging to proscribed terrorist organisations. the observance of the "black day" was postponed by pakistan's government to 20 july while 19 july was instead observed as "kashmir's accession day" to pakistan.  a rally called "kashmir caravan" organised by jamaat-ud-dawa (jud) and led by hafiz saeed was launched on 19 july at lahore in support of the freedom demands of the kashmiri people. members of various religious organisations are expected to join the rally. the rally's objective during the first phase will be pakistan's capital islamabad. during the second phase it is scheduled to reach muzaffarabad and chakothi. in the third phase, the rally is planned to cross into indian state of jammu and kashmir.  the "black day" was observed by pakistan's government on 20 july as scheduled. all government officials were directed to wear black arm bands and prayers for kashmiris were scheduled during the afternoon. in addition, all diplomatic missions of pakistan were scheduled to hold special ceremonies to highlight the issue and overseas pakistanis would hold demonstrations outside offices of united nations around the world. in a special message, sharif said that india had no option but to accept "defeat" in front of the "freedom wave" in kashmir.  sharif declared that pakistan will approach the united nations human rights council on behalf of itself and organisation of islamic cooperation to request it to send a fact-finding team over the killings of civilians in kashmir and banning the use of pellet guns on them. pakistan's ambassador to the united nations maleeha lodhi met with un officials on 19 july in which she briefed them on the situation in kashmir and forwarded letters by adviser to
the prime minister on foreign affairs sartaj aziz who raised the issue of civilians being killed during the unrest and said that fundamental human rights of kashmiris were being violated.  a jud official reported on 25 july that a 30-member medical team of its "muslim medical mission" will apply for visas to india in order to treat the injured kashmiri civilians and will seek help of pakistan's government in getting the visas. the mission's president also threatened to hold demonstrations if the indian government denied visas to it. the indian embassy in islamabad did not allow the team to enter its premises when they went there to apply for visa on 26 july. however, the team was able to apply for a visa through the internet and courier. a caravan of the jud bringing relief material for the kashmiris was stopped on 2 august by pakistani security forces at chakothi. the organisation declared that they would not leave unless india accepted the relief material.  on 1 august, the parliament of pakistan unanimously passed a resolution criticising the alleged human rights violations in kashmir by indian security forces during the unrest and demanded the unhrc to send a team to the region to investigate it. on 3 august, ahead of the saarc interior ministers' conference, prime minister nawaz sharif called the situation "a new wave of freedom movement," and said, "the kashmiri youth are writing new chapters of sacrifices to get the right to self determination." on 6 august, pakistan's government also offered to provide medical treatment to people injured in the unrest and requested on the international community to ask the indian government to allow it to provide treatment to injured kashmiris which was disparagingly rejected by the indian government. on 26 august, sartaj aziz met ambassadors of united nations security council and european union. in the meeting, he briefed the ambassadors about the "killings and human rights violations" by indian security forces in kashmir and deplored the use of "lethal force" against innocent civilians.  on 1 september, foreign office spokesperson nafees zakariya stated that sharif had written another letter to ban ki-moon alleging the situation in kashmir was deteriorating and requested him for sending a fact-finding mission to probe alleged human rights violations in the region. on 6 september, awais leghari who is a part of the delegation of 22 members of parliament selected to highlight the situation in kashmir, briefed the presidents of human rights council and international committee of the red cross over the alleged human rights violations committed by indian security forces in kashmir during the unrest and spoke out against their use of pellet guns. on 7 september,
general raheel sharif stated that the solution for the kashmir issue lay in heeding to the voices of the kashmiris and respecting their aspirations, not in firing bullets upon them. he also alleged that kashmiris were suffering from "worst form of state terrorism" and "repression".  on 13 september 2016, nawaz sharif dedicated the festival of eid al-adha to "sacrifices of kashmiris" and stated that their voices cannot be suppressed through force. president of pakistan mamnoon hussain in a message also stated that people of kashmiris were atrocities for their demands of self-determination and pakistanis must support them. during his speech at the united nations general assembly on 21 september, nawaz sharif dubbed burhan wani as a "young leader" who had emerged as a symbol of the latest "kashmiri intifada" while calling for an independent inquiry into the alleged extrajudicial killings committed by indian security forces in kashmir.  on 30 may 2017, the punjab assembly unanimously adopted a resolution demanding pakistan's federal government to immediately take up the issue of violence in kashmir to the united nations.  united nations united nations chief ban ki-moon conveyed his concern over the kashmir tense situation as reported by his spokesperson stephane dujarric and called for maximum restraint from all parties. he also offered mediation between india and pakistan for solving the kashmir dispute, provided both countries agreed to his mediation. the united nations human rights commission requested the indian government to let it visit kashmir in order to investigate the alleged human rights abuses, however the request was unanimously rejected during a meeting on the unrest in new delhi on 12 august by all political parties alleging it to be an interference in the country's internal affairs. on 17 august, united nations' high commissioner for human rights prince zeid bin ra'ad appealed to the indian and pakistani governments to allow its observers access to the region. on 12 august, ban ki-moon responded to a letter by pakistani prime minister nawaz sharif on the kashmir situation, stating: "i deplore the loss of life and hope that all efforts will be made to avoid further violence... the united nations remains convinced that it is only through dialogue that the outstanding issues between pakistan and india, including on kashmir, can be addressed." on 13 september, prince zeid again requested both the countries to grant unconditional access to observers for probing human rights violations in kashmir.  united states spokesperson john kirby while briefing the media in washington on 12 july said that the united states was concerned about the violence in jammu & kashmir during which 30 people have been killed by
indian forces.  elizabeth trudeau, director, united states press office in the department, who briefed the media on thursday 14 july 2016, said that the us is concerned about the violence and deaths of civilians in kashmir and stated that the us government was in touch with the government of india as well as the government of pakistan.  kirby again addressed the situation in the valley during late july expressing his government's concern about the violence in kashmir and called on all sides to find a peaceful solution while stating that the american government was in close touch with the indian government over the issue  according to a statement issued by the office of the pakistani prime minister nawaz sharif, the prime minister met senator john kerry in september, and both of them expressed their "strong concern" over the violence in kashmir, particularly the attack on an army base in uri. on the contrary, the official press release by the us state department mentioned that secretary kerry reiterated the need for pakistan to prevent all terrorists from using pakistani territory as safe havens, while commending recent efforts by pakistani security forces to counter extremist violence.  european union in a statement issued by its spokesperson michael mann on 28 july, the european union expressed its condolences to the civilians killed and injured during the unrest while urging the restoration of calm and maintenance of law and order in the state. he also urged india and pakistan to involve people of kashmir in the dialogue process over the state.  organization of islamic cooperation in july 2016, organization of islamic cooperation's (oic) independent permanent human rights commission expressed serious concern over alleged human rights violations in jammu and kashmir by the indian military and para-military forces. in august, oic's secretary-general iyad bin amin madani during a press conference in islamabad said human rights violations in kashmir were "not an internal matter of the indian state", adding: "the international community should raise its voice against the atrocities in india-held kashmir... the situation in kashmir is heading towards a referendum. no one should be afraid of a referendum and the solution should be through the united nations resolutions."  on 19 september, the oic's contact group on kashmir met on the sidelines of the 71st session of the un general assembly. amin again expressed concerns over the situation in kashmir and called for an immediate settlement of the dispute in accordance with wishes of kashmiri people and resolutions of united nations security council, while calling on india to immediately stop committing "atrocities" in kashmir. the foreign minister of turkey emphasised the need to resolve the dispute, while azerbaijan's foreign minister called on the oic
to explore "innovative means to highlight the human rights violations" occurring in indian-administered kashmir.  china the spokesman of china's foreign ministry, lu kang, in a statement to the press, expressed the government's concern over the casualties due to the unrest and called for a proper settlement of the kashmiri issue through peaceful means. pakistani media reports claimed that china's prime minister li keqiang assured his country's support to islamabad, emphasising a better understanding viz. pakistan's position on kashmir by the international community, adding: "we support pakistan and will speak for pakistan at every forum." li also encouraged de-escalation of tensions between pakistan and india. but on the other hand, the official press release by china's foreign ministry on the meeting between keqiang and sharif made no mention of kashmir whatsoever.  turkey turkey's foreign minister mevlut cavusoglu in a joint press conference with pakistani prime minister's foreign advisor sartaj aziz on 2 august said that his country backed pakistan's position of sending a team from the organisation of islamic cooperation in order to probe the alleged human rights violations in kashmir. he also said that his country hoped the kashmir issue will be resolved through dialogue.  italy pakistani media reports claimed that italy's defence minister roberta pinotti while on a visit to pakistan said the use of force and lethal weapons by security forces against civilians was "unbearable", and that italy would apprise the international community concerning the situation in kashmir. on the contrary, the official press release by italy's defence ministry on the italian defence minister's visit to pakistan made no mention of kashmir or pellet guns.  belarus a press release by pakistan government mentioned that belarusian president alexander lukashenko during his visit to islamabad in october 2016, exchanged views on the situation in kashmir with his pakistani counterpart, nawaz sharif. the two delegations released a joint statement underlining the "need for resolution of all outstanding issues between pakistan and india including the jammu and kashmir dispute through peaceful means and in accordance with un security council resolutions". on the contrary, the official press release by office of president of belarus on the visit made no mention of kashmir or un resolutions.  amnesty international  amnesty international accused indian security forces were using "arbitrary and excessive force" to deal with the protests in kashmir. it also stated that their actions were a violation of international standards and were leading to a worsening of the human rights crisis in the state. the organisation also criticised the use of pellet guns stating they had been used 100 times in kashmir during the first week of september
2016 even though its use was meant to be rare. it called for their ban stating they were dangerous and also expressed concern at the deployment of pava shells in the state as they could be used in an "arbitrary or indiscriminate manner". while, following a seminar on human rights abuses in kashmir, amnesty international was accused of sedition in india.  human rights watch in july, the human rights watch (hrw) urged indian authorities to credibly and impartially investigate the use of lethal force in kashmir. hrw's south asia director meenakshi ganguly criticized india for previously ignoring "the finding of abuses under the draconian armed forces special powers act". later in october, the hrw urged indian authorities to end the use of the jammu and kashmir public safety act (psa) to arbitrarily detain people, including children.  reactions against use of pellet guns  human rights organisations like amnesty international have asked the indian government for prohibition on the use of pellet guns during street demonstrations against stone-throwing protesters. on 4 august, amnesty international india called for a ban on the use of the guns following the death of a third person due to injuries inflicted by them.  in response to the high casualties caused by the use of pellet guns, rajnath singh announced that a panel would be set up to look for alternatives to pellet guns. during a visit to kashmir, he asked the security forces to avoid using pellet guns as much as possible. the director-general of central reserve police force, k. durga prasad, in a statement issued on 25 july, regretted the injuries kashmiri civilians received due to the use of the guns but said that they were the least lethal option available to control the protesting crowd and assured they will only be used in most extreme situations. lieutenant general d. s. hooda, chief of the northern command of the indian army, supported his claim regarding pellet guns. prasad's comments were criticised by congress leaders ghulam nabi azad and amarinder singh as well as mohammed yousuf tarigami, the state chief of cpi-m.  the jammu and kashmir high court on 23 july advised the government to discontinue the use of pellet guns. on 26 july, the court demanded the union government to submit report on the use of the guns by untrained personnel while disapproving of their use. it asked the government to only allow its use by trained personnel while also asking it to look into other means of crowd-control. the high court issued notices to both the state and union government asking them to file a
response to a petition seeking ban on the guns. when prasad was asked during an interview on 9 august about when will the crpf stop using pellet guns, he replied it was like asking when will you stop beating your wife. his remarks created a controversy and were seen as misogynistic by women's organisations, news organisations and social media users. prasad later apologised for his comment. deputy chief minister nirmal singh ruled out a ban on the weapons stating they were only used in extreme situations. the army recommended the crpf and police to use sound cannons, pepper shotguns and chilli grenades instead of the pellet guns.  in an affidavit filed before the court on 17 august, crpf told the court that the guns were only used in extreme situations and their withdrawal will result in crpf personnel resorting to the use of rifles which might lead to an increase in fatalities. the government-appointed panel submitted its report on 29 august, reportedly recommending nonivamide (pava) shells, stun lac shells and long range acoustic devices. it was also reported that a ban on pellet guns was ruled out with the use of weapons limited only to "rarest of rare" cases. on 3 september, pava shells as an alternative to pellet guns was approved by rajnath singh.  on 6 september, the state government justified the use of pellet guns before the state's high court stating they were a modern method to deal with violent protesters and contended that a court couldn't recommend how law and order situations are to be handled. it also claimed that pellet guns were not compatible with the standard operating procedure of firing below the knees as the pellets spread to a diameter of 6 metres when the gun is fired. on 10 september, v.k. singh who is also the former chief of indian army, supported the use of pellet guns stating they were non-lethal and it was a "sensible and well-thought" decision by the home ministry to use them. on 21 september, the state high court rejected the petition regarding banning of guns, stating that the use of force was inevitable as long as unruly mobs indulged in violence.  in february 2017, the crpf introduced deflectors as a modification for its pellet guns. the modification was introduced to make the guns less lethal while retaining their effectiveness.  see also 2008 kashmir unrest 2010 kashmir unrest 2017 srinagar by-election 2019 kashmir lockdown  notes  references  external links video:kashmir unrest prompts new curfew, reuters  2016 protests 2016 in india 2017 in india 2010s in
jammu and kashmir kashmir unrest kashmir unrest human rights abuses in jammu and kashmir july 2016 events in india august 2016 events in india kashmir conflict riots and civil disorder in india
andre previn and j. j. johnson (subtitled play kurt weill's mack the knife & bilbao-song and other music from the threepenny opera, happy end, mahagonny) is an album by pianist andre previn and trombonist j. j. johnson performing kurt weill's compositions which was released on the columbia label.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 3 stars.  track listing all compositions by kurt weill.  "bilbao song" - 4:05 (from happy end)  "barbara song" - 6:07 (from the threepenny opera)  "overture" - 5:05 (from the threepenny opera)  "seerauberjenny" - 4:20 (from the threepenny opera)  "mack the knife (moritat)" - 5:00  "surabaya johnny" - 4:15 (from happy end)  "wie man sich bettet" - 6:00 ("meine herren, meine mutter pragte" from rise and fall of the city of mahagonny)  "unzulanglichkeit"  - 4:55 (from the threepenny opera)  personnel andre previn - piano j. j. johnson - trombone red mitchell - bass frank capp - drums  references  1962 albums columbia records albums andre previn albums j. j. johnson albums kurt weill tribute albums albums produced by irving townsend
andrea faccini (born 23 august 1966) is an italian former cyclist. he competed in the sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people italian male cyclists olympic cyclists of italy cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from the province of piacenza
the 2016-17 tulane green wave women's basketball team represented tulane university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the green wave, led by 23rd year head coach lisa stockton, played their home games at devlin fieldhouse and were third year members of the american athletic conference. they finished the season 18-15, 7-9 in aac play to finish in a 4-way tie for fifth place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the american athletic women's tournament to ucf. they were invited to the women's national invitational tournament where they defeated texas-arlington and grambling state in the first and second rounds before losing to alabama in the third round.  media all green wave games will be broadcast on wrbh 88.3 fm. a video stream for all home games will be on tulane all-access, espn3, or aac digital. road games will typically be streamed on the opponents website, though conference road games could also appear on espn3 or aac digital.  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00331a; color:#87ceeb;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00331a; color:#87ceeb;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00331a; color:#87ceeb;"| conference regular season  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#004731;"| american athletic conference women's tournament  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#004731;"| women's national invitation tournament  rankings  see also  2016-17 tulane green wave men's basketball team  references  tulane tulane green wave women's basketball seasons 2017 women's national invitation tournament participants tulane tulane
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in mishan as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th, 135th,  136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation were the 2nd (suifenhe) (or 3rd), 4th (hulin) border guards groups, 46th transport guards group and 77th independent mixed brigade.  action the 135th division took the defensive sector previously occupied by the 11th division and later by 77th independent mixed brigade.  with the start of the soviet invasion of manchuria 9 august 1945, the red army immediately pierced in the sector of 135th division, manned by 15th border guards group at hutou. the 15th border guards group was assigned to 135th division at the beginning of the battle. nonetheless, because of the more threatening soviet breakthrough at suifenhe, two infantry battalions were detached from the 135th division 9 august 1945 and were reassigned to the 124th division. the 135th division, catch off-guard, with majority of officers attending a war game at yangming district was ordered to withdraw to yangming district in the evening 10 august 1945. 15 august 1945 it was ordered to retreat further to mudanjiang, and finally order to surrender was received 17 august 1945 as the part of the surrender of japan.  the lack of equipment was severe. some of the required bayonets and swords of the division were forged locally from the available material like the steel salvaged from automotive suspensions. the artillery of the 135th division was the worst among 5th army, with only about two-thirds complement represented by type 41 75 mm cavalry guns, trench mortars and other miscellaneous weapons. before the soviet invasion of manchuria, the kwantung army command has estimated the 135th division being at 15% of the nominal combat strength. the 135th division has suffered 1631 men killed during the short campaign.  the majority of the troops of the 135th division were taken prisoner by red army and sent to the siberian labour camps.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  independent mixed brigades (imperial japanese army)  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第135師団 (日本軍), accessed 8 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols
], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
type 753 radar is a chinese navigational radar used by chinese merchant ships and ships of chinese navy. developed by shanghai 4th radio factory in the early 1970s, type 753 radar is fully transistorized, with a maximum range of 48 nautical miles. in 1979, efforts were made to improve mtbf of this radar, resulting in drastic increase of mtbf, from the original 107 hours in 1978 to 406 hours in 1980. in 1981, the radar achieved a mile stone of continuously operating 1000 hours without failure.  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
janine nicandro is a filipino basketball referee and former collegiate basketball player who officiates games at the philippine basketball association. nicandro became the first female referee to officiate in the league when she participated as one of the four match officials at the 2016 pba governors' cup match between meralco bolts and phoenix fuel masters which ended 108-103 in favor of the bolts.  early life and education nicandro was born in santa cruz, laguna but grew on the town of pagsanjan in the same province. she at first was not involved that much in basketball having played for the volleyball teams of her elementary and high school in laguna. she also followed the shakey's v-league.  nicandro entered the laguna state polytechnic university for her collegiate studies where she tried out for both the university's basketball and volleyball teams. she was accepted to play for the university's basketball team, the lspu lakers, as a center. she also played for four years as part of the university's basketball team. she finished her studies in 2014 and obtained a bachelor's degree in entrepreneurship.  career graduating from college, nicandro planned to obtained corporate experience before setting up her own business. she then became employed in a lpg company but out of boredom turned to refereeing.  celso rivera, a former referee at the philippine basketball association (pba), encouraged her to take up a career in refereeing. the referee first officiated in the pba developmental league and underwent further training in the women 3x3 tournament, and the league's campus tour. nicandro was picked as one of the 15 trainees of the pba referee academy, five of which were women. she and edith boticario were among those picked by the pba to officiate games at the 2016 pba governors' cup. nicandro officiated in the pba d-league for three years.  although nicandro was not the only sole woman picked to officiate during the conference, she became the first woman referee to officiate games in the professional league when she debuted as one of the four officials at the meralco bolts 108-103 phoenix fuel masters match held on july 15, 2016.  references  year of birth missing (living people) philippine basketball association referees filipino women's basketball players people from laguna (province) living people basketball players from laguna (province) college basketball players in the philippines centers (basketball)
a matter to settle (polish: sprawa do zalatwienia) is a 1953 polish comedy film directed by jan fethke and jan rybkowski and starring gizela piotrowska, bogdan niewinowski and adolf dymsza.  partial cast  gizela piotrowska as zofia lipinska   bogdan niewinowski as stefan wisniewski    adolf dymsza as train passenger / taxi driver / clerk / waiter wladyslaw / reporter banasinski / salesman / playboy / boxer fronczak    hanka bielicka as tradeswoman, train passenger    irena brodzinska as singer    edward dziewonski as factory manager    waclaw jankowski as waiter    zofia jamry as playboy's girl    irena kwiatkowska as train passenger    jozef kondrat as train passenger   jan kurnakowicz as sound technician    antoni kolczynski as boxer jozwiak    stanislaw lapinski as manager at restaurant    kazimierz opalinski as director, train passenger    lech ordon as jerzy    jerzy pietraszkiewicz as singer   stefan witas as guest at restaurant  references  bibliography   charles ford & robert hammond. polish film: a twentieth century history. mcfarland, 2005.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films polish comedy films polish films 1950s polish-language films films directed by jan rybkowski polish black-and-white films
celestia marguerita johnson taylor (april 8, 1903 - july 28, 1996) was a professor of english at brigham young university (byu) and a member of the relief society general board. she wrote a column on homemaking for relief society magazine (1966-70). she was an avid singer and sang in many musical performances at byu.  early life taylor was born on april 8, 1903 in alpine, utah. her parents were jesse wanderus and deseret nash johnson. her father, jesse, was a school principal and business organizer. her childhood was a happy one; her parents provided her with "every advantage our world had to offer." she attended high school at the byu high school. taylor and her sister violet would accompany professors on their lecture tours in neighboring towns to sing and read poetry. as a teenager she was in high demand as a babysitter, because she would often wash floors or iron shirts at the same time, feeling compelled to do unfinished household chores. her first year of high school, she took on responsibility for the family cow, milking it and taking it out to pasture two miles away.  education she studied music and education at byu. she was awarded "most popular girl of the year" her freshman year in 1922, won a vocal contest in 1923, and graduated in 1925. she and her sister violet studied at uc berkeley the summer after taylor's graduation. the next summer, she attended the columbia teachers college in new york city. she married lynn dixon taylor in august 1927, and together they had five children. lynn joined the faculty at byu in 1931, enabling celestia to take classes free of charge. she took classes from lynn, alice louise reynolds, elise chamberlain carrol, and p.a. christianson. later on, the dean of graduate studies told her she could apply much of her credit to a master's degree if she completed it in the next two years, and in 1953 she received her ma.  taylor taught english at byu until 1974. she taught english as a second language to international students, freshman english, and other english courses. she served as vice president of byu's alumni association, on the executive board of friends of the byu library, and as byu women president. she was a member of various writing organizations and between 1980-82 she was president of the national league of american pen women.  music as a girl and teenager, taylor studied music with clair reid at byu. reid often placed taylor in vocal solos with byu choirs in high school and college
. together with her sisters violet and rhoda, taylor sang in "the johnson sisters trio." during the flu epidemic of 1918, the trio, along with murray roberts, sang many graveside funeral arrangements-as many as four in one day. taylor and violet sang in the provo tabernacle choir under the direction of professor j. r. boshard. she was state chairwoman of fine arts for the utah state federated women's club for three years. she sang a part in most of florence jepperson's productions, including in the chorus of priscilla.  taylor sang in many operas and musicals and performed in plays during her high school and college years. she won the last worldwide church chorus competition in directing both a women's chorus and the men's chorus (afterwards competitions were strictly regional).  she sang as an opera singer in william hanson's local opera "tam-man nacup" in 1933 and at gerrit de jong's organ recital in 1936. she was a member and officer of the utah opera association.  church service she was a member of the relief society general board between 1962-75. she wrote a report on "divine law and church government" about how the church helps members to progress. she wrote the column "development through homemaking education" for relief society magazine between 1966-70, covering diverse topics like family budgeting, record keeping, interior decorating, and storing food for hard times. she also lectured at byu's education week and other continuing education seminars.  selected relief society magazine articles "let's go inside" "outside housekeeping" "gardening appearance" "house plants" "garden convenience and safety" "'she looketh well to the ways of her household'" "'she perceiveth her merchandise is good'"  references  external links celestia marguerita johnson taylor, mss 8742 at l. tom perry special collections, brigham young university  1903 births 1996 deaths people from alpine, utah brigham young university alumni brigham young university faculty relief society people musicians from utah writers from utah american latter day saints harold b. lee library-related 20th century articles
studium angelopolitanum is a non-profit educational organization, based in puebla, mexico and focused on promoting study and appreciation of classical languages and literature. it was founded in 2012 by professor alexis hellmer. it is modelled after luigi miraglia's accademia vivarium novum in rome. it is one of the very few places in mexico to offer latin lessons taught entirely in latin.  see also accademia vivarium novum contemporary latin paideia institute  external links official website of studium angelopolitanum in latin  references  classical educational institutes
pacific transit system is a public transit operator in pacific county, washington. it operates 5 routes in the county, connecting to adjacent systems in aberdeen and astoria, oregon.  history  a public transportation benefit area for pacific county was created on august 8, 1979. a 0.3 percent sales tax was approved by voters in november 1979, and bus service began on january 2, 1980 through contracts with grays harbor transit and washington coast lines.  fares  routes 14, 24, or 50: $0.50 routes 20, 32 and dial-a-ride: $0.35  routes  fleet  current bus fleet  references  external links  bus transportation in washington (state) transit agencies in washington (state) transportation in pacific county, washington
willy andresen (18 october 1921 - 17 june 2016) was a norwegian jazz pianist.  he was born in oslo, and was appointed at the norwegian broadcasting corporation from 1959 to 1991.  he often backed singer erik bye during his performances in norway and the united states. he was in charge of several of the song recordings by child star grethe kausland, and composed the melody of otto nielsen's song "pappa'n til tove mette".  references  1921 births 2016 deaths musicians from oslo norwegian jazz musicians nrk people
alex gino is an american children's book writer.  gino's debut book, george, was the winner of the 2016 stonewall book award as well as the 2016 lambda literary award in the category of lgbt children's/young adult.  gino is genderqueer and uses singular they pronouns and the honorific mx.  biography  gino was born and raised in staten island, new york, but over the years they have lived in such locations as philadelphia, pennsylvania; brooklyn, new york; astoria, queens; northampton, massachusetts; and oakland, california. they have also spent time living in an rv and driving around the country.  works  gino is best known for their 2015 debut novel george, a middle grade novel featuring a young transgender girl, which they first began work on in 2003. the working title of the novel was girl george (a reference to boy george), though when the book was bought by scholastic, this was changed to the present title to broaden readership. gino has expressed some regrets about deadnaming their character with this title, and in 2021 announced that they were renaming the novel melissa's story.  in 2018, gino released another middle grade novel, you don't know everything, jilly p! it covers deaf culture and the black lives matter movement and received starred reviews from kirkus reviews, publishers weekly, and the school library journal.  with regards to requests for a sequel to george, gino stated in 2016 that "they will not be writing a transition story for a largely cis audience more interested in trans bodies than trans people."  their 2020 novel rick is a standalone follow-up to george and is about a student coming to terms with his asexuality. the book received starred reviews from kirkus reviews, booklist, and school library journal.  awards and honors   gino has been nominated for multiple awards for george, and has won several such as:  2016 stonewall book award: mike morgan and larry romans children's literature award  2016 children's choice book award: debut author  2016 california book awards: juvenile (gold)  2016 lambda literary award: lgbt children's/young adult  2016 american library association: top ten challenged books of 2016  references  external links     american children's writers non-binary writers lambda literary award for children's and young adult literature winners living people writers from staten island year of birth missing (living people) novelists from new york (state) 21st-century american novelists genderqueer people stonewall book award winners 21st-century lgbt people
gopipur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gopipur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gopipur has total number of 199 houses and population of 1,075 of which include 600 males and 475 females. literacy rate of gopipur is 77.65%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 86 which is 8.00% of total population of gopipur, and child sex ratio is approximately  593, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
frederick william allsop (22 september 1865 - 15 september 1932) was an australian politician who was a nationalist party member of the legislative council of western australia from 1930 until his death, representing north-east province. prior to entering politics he worked as a metallurgist.  allsop was born in auckland, new zealand, to anne (nee jefferies) and william allsop. his parents moved to australia when he was an infant and settled in ballarat, victoria, where he attended ballarat high school and the ballarat school of mines. in 1893, allsop moved to south africa, where he worked as a metallurgical assayer for a johannesburg-based gold mining firm. he later helped to establish a cyanide plant at spitzkop (near lydenburg). allsop returned to australia in 1896 and lived in victoria until 1905, when he moved to kalgoorlie, western australia. he served on the kalgoorlie municipal council from 1921 to 1930, including as mayor from 1922 to 1927. at the 1928 legislative council elections, allsop contested north-east province as an independent, but was defeated by the sitting nationalist member, harold seddon. he ran again two years later, with the nationalist party's endorsement, and won the seat from the labor party. however, allsop's time in parliament was short-lived, as he died in kalgoorlie in september 1932, aged 66. he had married florence hollway in 1896, with whom he had three children.  references  1865 births 1932 deaths australian metallurgists ballarat high school alumni mayors of places in western australia members of the western australian legislative council nationalist party of australia members of the parliament of western australia new zealand emigrants to australia people from auckland
the diocese of giurgiu () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the dormition of the theotokos cathedral in giurgiu and its ecclesiastical territory covers giurgiu county. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of muntenia and dobrudja. it was established in 2000, and placed under a vicar bishop, ambrozie sinaitul, who in 2006 became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  external links  official site  giurgiu 2000 establishments in romania giurgiu giurgiu county
pulpit rock is a rock located in cape schanck, victoria, australia. it is in the mornington peninsula national park, near the bass strait.  pulpit rock is a geological formation created by volcanic activity over millions of years.  its base is called devils desk (see image below).  a painting of the rock by nicholas chevalier (1828-1902) is held in the art gallery of new south wales.  erosion pulpit rock was eroded constantly by large waves and heavy winds over millions of years, thus its unique appearance.  references  landforms of victoria (australia) mornington peninsula
dorian lawrence finney-smith (born may 4, 1993) is an american professional basketball player for the dallas mavericks of the national basketball association (nba). he played college basketball for virginia tech and florida.  high school career finney-smith attended i. c. norcom high school in portsmouth, virginia. as a junior in 2009-10 playing for the school's basketball team, he averaged 19.7 points, 13 rebounds, six assists, three steals and two blocks per game.  in september 2010, finney-smith committed to virginia tech, and later signed a national letter of intent with the hokies in december.  as a senior at norcom in 2010-11, finney-smith averaged 18 points, 10.7 rebounds and 3.8 blocks per game. he led the team to back-to-back group aaa championships, along with eastern region and district titles. he recorded 19 points, 17 rebounds and three blocks in the state championship game as a senior. he finished his high school career as a two-time vhsl class aaa player of the year and first-team all-state, all-region, all-tidewater and all-district. he also earned all-tidewater player of the year as a junior and co-player of the year as a senior.  college career as a freshman at virginia tech in 2011-12, finney-smith played in all 33 games, making 30 starts. he averaged 6.3 points and 7.0 rebounds per game and was named to the acc all-freshman team. he scored a season-high 17 points in a 66-65 win over boston college.  in june 2012, finney-smith transferred to florida and was forced to sit out the 2012-13 season due to ncaa transfer regulations.  as a sophomore in 2013-14, finney-smith was named sec sixth man of the year, becoming just the second gator to win the award after chris richard in 2007. he was florida's leading rebounder, both in total rebounds (247) and per-game average (6.7). he also recorded the first 20/15 performance by a gator in a road game during billy donovan's tenure, totaling a personal-best 22 points in an overtime win over arkansas. he appeared in 37 games with two starting assignments, averaging 8.7 points, 6.7 rebounds and 2.1 assists in 25.8 minutes per game.  as a junior in 2014-15, finney
-smith was named second-team all-sec by the coaches and was florida's leading scorer (13.1), rebounder (6.2) and three-point shooter (.426). he scored a career-high 25 points in florida's win over jacksonville, including a 5-for-7 performance from three-point range.  as a senior in 2015-16, finney-smith was named second-team all-sec by the coaches and third-team all-sec by the associated press. he was florida's leading scorer (14.7) for the second straight season and top rebounder (8.3) for the third consecutive season. he became the first florida player to join the 1,000-point club after transferring to the school mid-tenure. his 1,220 career points at florida rank 36th in school history.  professional career after going undrafted in the 2016 nba draft, finney-smith signed with the dallas mavericks on july 8, and joined the team for the 2016 nba summer league. finney-smith secured an opening-night roster spot after impressing the mavericks during training camp and preseason. after playing less than five minutes cumulatively over the first five games of the 2016-17 season, finney-smith played 31 minutes on november 6 against the milwaukee bucks, including most of the second half and overtime. he subsequently recorded five points, three rebounds, three steals and one block in an 86-75 win. two days later, he made his first career start, scoring five points in a 109-97 win over the los angeles lakers. on december 9, he had a season-best game with career highs of 12 points and eight rebounds (equal game high) in a 111-103 win over the indiana pacers. on december 12, he had career highs in points and rebounds for the second straight home game, finishing with 13 points and nine boards in a 112-92 win over the denver nuggets.  on march 10, 2018, finney-smith played in his first game since november 12, 2017, after missing 51 straight games and 57 overall with left knee quadriceps tendinitis. he had seven points in 18 minutes in the mavericks' 114-80 win over the memphis grizzlies.  on july 11, 2019, he re-signed with the mavericks on a 3-year, $12 million contract.  on november 18, 2019, finney-smith had a then career high 22 points in a 117-110 victory over the san antonio spurs.
on august 4, 2020, finney-smith grabbed a career high 16 rebounds in a 114-110 win over the sacramento kings. on august 8, 2020, he had a career high 27 points and a career high 6 three pointers made in a 136-132 victory against the milwaukee bucks.  on february 12, 2022, finney-smith signed a four-year, $52 million veteran extension with the mavericks.  nba career statistics  regular season  |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 81 || 35 || 20.3 || .372 || .293 || .754 || 2.7 || .8 || .6 || .3 || 4.3 |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 21 || 13 || 21.3 || .380 || .299 || .733 || 3.6 || 1.2 || .5 || .2 || 5.9 |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 81 || 26 || 24.5 || .432 || .311 || .709 || 4.8 || 1.2 || .9 || .4 || 7.5 |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 71 || 68 || 29.9 || .466 || .376 || .722 || 5.7 || 1.6 || .6 || .5 || 9.5 |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 60 || 60 || 32.0 || .472 || .394 || .756 || 5.4 || 1.7 || .9 || .4 || 9.8 |- class="sortbottom" | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"|  career | 314 || 202 || 25.8 || .437 || .347 || .729 || 4.5 || 1.3 || .7 || .4 || 7.5  playoffs  |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2020 | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 6 || 6 || 31.8 || .442 || .367 || .800 || 5.7 || 3.2 || 1.2 || .5 || 10.2 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2021 | style="text-align:left;"| dallas
| 7 || 7 || 38.7 || .406 || .432 || .800 || 6.6 || 2.1 || 1.1 || .3 || 10.3 |- class="sortbottom" | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"| career | 13 || 13 || 35.5 || .422 || .403 || .800 || 6.2 || 2.6 || 1.2 || .4 || 10.2  references  external links  florida gators bio  1993 births living people african-american basketball players american men's basketball players basketball players at the 2014 ncaa division i men's final four basketball players from virginia dallas mavericks players florida gators men's basketball players sportspeople from portsmouth, virginia small forwards undrafted national basketball association players virginia tech hokies men's basketball players 21st-century african-american sportspeople
hugh jackman: in concert is a music concert by australian actor, musician and dancer hugh jackman.  jackman performs broadway and hollywood musical numbers backed by a 17-piece orchestra and directed by warren carlyle.  setlist  oh, what a beautiful mornin'  one night only  i won't dance  crazy little thing called love / a little less conversation  l.o.v.e.  the way you look tonight   soliloquy  fever  rock island  take me or leave me [merle & angel]  the boy next door  peter allen medley  tenterfield saddler  movie medley  somewhere over the rainbow  mack the knife  once before i go  reviews "... at every turn, jackman seems to make it abundantly clear that in this moment - whether he's riffing on the golden days of the movie musical, or feeling his way through a deeply memorable rendition of carousel's 'soliloquy,' or reprising lesser-known allen songs such as 'tenterfield saddler' or 'once before i go' - there is nowhere else he would rather be. and no one else for whom he would rather be doing it. in the face of such open-hearted generosity, there's probably not a single person in his audience who doesn't know exactly how he feels." - canoe  "hugh jackman in concert doesn't feel like a career move - it feels like fun, the work of a talented performer unexpectedly given the chance to do what he loves just for the hell of it. but where another star might have let that opportunity sour into a statement of ego, jackman lets the audience share in his passion and his fun. it's hard to imagine him ever having a better role." - the globe and mail  references  2011 concerts hugh jackman
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  mk  mkek  (turkish: makina ve kimya endustrisi kurumu - mechanical and chemical industry corporation)  mkek-1 gozcu (turkish - "observer")  mkek-2   mkek-3  mkek-4 ugur (turkish: "luck")  mkek-5  mkek-6  mkek-7  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
state highway 22 in haryana is meant for bahadurgarh-jhajjar-kosli. it is without dividers and only in cities there is divider. there is no railway crossing between bahadurgarh-jhajjar. but when jhajjar to kosli there is railway crossing just after crossing the jhajjar city. distance of bahadurgarh-jhajjar road is 28 km. the total length of state highway is of 77.61 km.  see also list of state highways in haryana  references   haryana pwd site
ely homestead is a historic home located in fairfield township, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built in 1847, and is a two-story, federal style brick dwelling, with a one-story wing. it was restored in 1972.  the surrounding property is a contributing site.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1976.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana federal architecture in indiana houses completed in 1847 houses in tippecanoe county, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
the sderot cinematheque is a film archive operating in sderot, israel  since december 1999. the cinematheque was founded in cooperation between sapir academic college (thanks to professor haim bereshit, the manager of the media and cinema school at the college) and sderot mayor eli moyal.  there are two film screening halls at the cinematheque, which's number of seats together add up to around 400.  of the many events hosted by the cinematheque, the cinema south international film festival, in which films from all over the world and israel, as well as final film projects of sapir academic college graduates are screened, is the cinematheque's biggest event of the year.  manager of the sapir academic college's media and cinema school professor haim bereshit and mayor of sderot eli moyal had the initial vision of founding the cinematheque. the cinematheque is the first educational and cultural cinema institution in the southern district of israel. the main goals of the cinematheque were bringing about culture into the daily lives of the southern district population, as well as minimizing the gaps between the center of israel and the south's populations. by definition, a cinematheque is an institution that encourages the love of film. the cinematheque in sderot gives every person the chance to enjoy its activities, without worrying about their socio-economic status. one of its main goals is the promoting of the israeli cinema's various activities, including festivals, seminars, special screenings, meetings with creators, musical and cultural events, courses, and workshops. one of the unique things about the cinematheque is that it exposes the audience to several israeli/foreign productions, documentaries/feature films, and more, accompanied by creators who bring up social issues using cinematic language. the cinematheque is active seven days a week, with an average of three to six screenings per day.  external links sderot cinematheque official website  1999 establishments in israel film archives cinemas and movie theatres in israel archives in israel
ocean acidification threatens the great barrier reef by reducing the viability and strength of coral reefs. the great barrier reef, considered one of the seven natural wonders of the world and a biodiversity hotspot, is located in australia. similar to other coral reefs, it is experiencing degradation due to ocean acidification. ocean acidification results from a rise in atmospheric carbon dioxide, which is taken up by the ocean. this process can increase sea surface temperature, decrease aragonite, and lower the ph of the ocean. the more we burn fossil fuels, the more the ocean absorbs co₂, resulting in ocean acidification.  calcifying organisms are under risk, due to the resulting lack of aragonite in the water and the decreasing ph. this decreased health of coral reefs, particularly the great barrier reef, can result in reduced biodiversity. organisms can become stressed due to ocean acidification and the disappearance of healthy coral reefs, such as the great barrier reef, is a loss of habitat for several taxa.  background  atmospheric carbon dioxide has risen from 280 to 409 ppm since the industrial revolution. this increase in carbon dioxide has led to a 0.1 decrease in ph, and it could decrease by 0.5 by 2100. when carbon dioxide meets seawater it forms carbonic acid, which then dissociates into hydrogen, bicarbonate, and carbonate and lowers the ph of the ocean. sea surface temperature, ocean acidity, and dissolved inorganic carbon are also positively correlated with atmospheric carbon dioxide. ocean acidification can cause hypercapnia and increase stress in marine organisms, thereby leading to decreasing biodiversity. coral reefs themselves can also be negatively affected by ocean acidification, as calcification rates decrease as acidity increases.  aragonite is impacted by the process of ocean acidification, because it is a form of calcium carbonate. it is essential in coral viability and health, because it is found in coral skeletons and is more readily soluble than calcite. increasing carbon dioxide levels can reduce coral growth rates from 9 to 56%. other calcifying organisms, such as bivalves and gastropods, experience negative effects due to ocean acidification as well.  as a biodiversity hotspot, the many taxa of the great barrier reef are threatened by ocean acidification. rare and endemic species are in greater danger due to ocean acidification, because they rely upon the great barrier reef more extensively.  additionally, the risk of coral reefs collapsing due to acidification poses a threat to biodiversity. the stress of ocean acidification could also negatively affect biological processes, such
as photosynthesis or reproduction, and allow organisms to become vulnerable to disease.  coral health  calcification and aragonite  coral is a calcifying organism, putting it at high risk for decay and slow growth rates as ocean acidification increases. aragonite, which impacts the ability of coral to take up caco3, decreases when ph decreases. levels of aragonite have decreased by 16% since industrialization, and could be lower in some portions of the great barrier reef because the current allows northern corals to take up more aragonite than the southern corals. aragonite is predicted to reduce by 0.1 by 2100. since 1990, calcification rates of porites, a common large reef-building coral in the great barrier reef, have decreased by 14.2% annually. aragonite levels across the great barrier reef itself are not equal; due to currents and circulation, some portions of the great barrier reef can have half as much aragonite as others. levels of aragonite are also affected by calcification and production, which can vary from reef to reef. if atmospheric carbon dioxide reaches 560 ppm, most ocean surface waters will be adversely undersaturated with respect to aragonite and the ph will have reduced by about 0.24 units - from almost 8.2 today to just over 7.9. at this point (sometime in the third quarter of this century at current rates of increase) only a few parts of the pacific will have levels of aragonite saturation adequate for coral growth. additionally, if atmospheric carbon dioxide reaches 800 ppm, the ocean surface water ph decrease will be 0.4 units and total dissolved carbonate ion concentration will have decreased by at least 60%. at this point it is almost certain that all reefs of the world will be in erosional states. increasing the ph and replicating pre-industrialization ocean chemistry conditions in the great barrier reef, however, led to an increase in coral growth rates by 7%.  temperature  ocean acidification can also lead to increased sea surface temperature. an increase of about 1 or 2 °c can cause the collapse of the relationship between coral and zooxanthellae, possibly leading to bleaching. average sea surface temperature in the great barrier reef is predicted to increase between 1 and 3 °c by 2100. this breakdown of the relationship between the coral and the zooxanthellae occurs when photosystem ii is damaged, either due to a reaction with the d1 protein or a lack of carbon dioxide fixation; these result in a lack of photosynthesis
and can lead to bleaching.  reproduction  ocean acidification threatens coral reproduction throughout almost all aspects of the process. gametogenesis may be indirectly affected by coral bleaching. additionally, the stress that acidification puts on coral can potentially harm the viability of the sperm released. larvae can also be affected by this process; metabolism and settlement cues could be altered, changing the size of population or viability of reproduction. other species of calcifying larvae have shown reduced growth rates under ocean acidification scenarios. biofilm, a bioindicator for oceanic conditions, underwent reduced growth rate and altered composition in acidification, possibly affecting larval settlement on the biofilm itself.  biodiversity  the great barrier reef is a biodiversity hotspot, but it is threatened by ocean acidification and its resulting increased temperature and reduced levels of aragonite. elasmobranchs in the great barrier reef are vulnerable to ocean acidification primarily due to their reliance on the habitat and ocean acidification's destruction of coral reefs. rare and endemic species, such as the porcupine ray, are at high risk as well. larval health and settlement of both calcifying and non-calcifying organisms can be harmed by ocean acidification. a predator to coral reefs in the great barrier reef, the crown of thorns sea star, has experienced a similar death rate to the coral on which it feeds. any increase in nutrients, possibly from river run-off, can positively affect the crown of thorns and lead to further destruction of the coral.  coralline algae holds together some coral reefs and is present in multiple ecosystems. as ocean acidification intensifies, however, it will not respond well and could damage the viability and structural integrity of coral reefs. ocean acidification can also indirectly affect any organism; increased stress can reduce photosynthesis and reproduction, or make organisms more vulnerable to disease. additionally, as coral reefs decay, their symbiotic relationships and residents will have to adapt or find new habitats on which to rely.  organisms have been found to be more sensitive to the effects of ocean acidification in early, larval or planktonic stages. as ocean acidification does not exist in a vacuum, the multiple problems facing the great barrier reef combine to further stress the organisms. not only can ocean acidification affect habitat and development, but it can also affect how organisms view predators and conspecifics. studies on the effects of ocean acidification have not been performed on long enough time scales to see if organisms can adapt to these conditions. however, ocean acidification is predicted to
occur at a rate that evolution cannot match. increasing temperature is also affecting the behavior and fitness of the common coral trout, a very important fish in sustaining the health of coral reefs.  see also  ocean acidification in the arctic ocean  references  aquatic ecology biological oceanography carbon chemical oceanography effects of climate change environmental impact by effect geochemistry great barrier reef oceanography
the 2002 sparkassen cup singles was the tennis singles event of the thirteenth edition of the sparkassen cup; a wta tier ii tournament held in leipzig, germany. kim clijsters was the two-time defending champion but lost in the semifinal to anastasia myskina.  world no.1 serena williams beat anastasia myskina 6-3, 6-2 in the final. myskina would go on to win the title the following year.  seeds the top four seeds received a bye to the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  external links  2002 sparkassen cup draw  sparkassen cup (tennis) 2002 wta tour
show your love concert () is the second live album by taiwanese singer jolin tsai. it was released on 10 may 2001, by universal music taiwan. it chronicles tsai's show your love concert at hsinchuang baseball stadium in hsinchuang, taiwan on 25 february 2001.  track listing  references  jolin tsai live albums universal music taiwan live albums 2001 live albums
john ii of loon (died 1438), lord of julich, heinsberg and lowenberg (herr zu julich und heinsberg), son of godfrey de heinsberg, count of looz, and philippa of julich, daughter of william v, duke of julich, and joanna of hainaut.  although john was the first son of godfrey, he did not inherit the countship of looz, the title instead going to arnold of rumingy.  john married first margaret (margareta van gennep, died 1419), countess of solms-braunfels, and second anna of solms (d. 1433).  john and margaret had four children:  johann iii (died before 1441), married walpurg von mors.  their granddaughter johanna was the countess of nassau-saarbrucken.  wilhelm i (died 24 april 1439), married elizabeth von blankenheim, daughter of gerhard ix, count of blankenheim, great-great-grandson of gerard i, count of durbuy.  john of heinsberg (died 1459), bishop of liege (1419-1455)  philippa (died 1464), married wilhelm von wied-isenburg.  john and anna had two children:  maria of loon-heinsberg, married john iv, count of nassau  jacoba of loon-heinsberg (died 1466), abbess of thorn. among the descendants of john (through maria of loon-heinsberg) were juliane of nassau-dillenburg and william the silent, prince of orange.  sources    arlette laret-kayser, entre bar et luxembourg : le comte de chiny des origines a 1300, bruxelles (editions du credit communal, collection histoire, serie in-8°, n° 72), 1986  marchandisse, alain, la fonction episcopale a liege aux xiiie et xive siecles: etude de politologie historique, bibliotheque de la faculte de philosophie et de lettres de l'universite de liege, 1998  medieval lands project, herren von heinsberg (sponheim)  1438 deaths
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in several towns along jilin - shenyang railroad as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th,  135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation was the small parts detached from the 1st mobile brigade.  action 30 july 1945, the 138th division was assigned to the 30th army. it was nearly unarmed until the end of july 1945, besides the small arms brought by the men transferred from the other units. even the rifles were issued only shortly before the surrender of japan. the division was coherent enough to have the first task (the construction of fortifications) issued only by 6 august 1945. also, the divisional commander did not arrive until 10 august 1945.  at the beginning of soviet invasion of manchuria 9 august 1945, the 138th division was ordered to fushun. the division was immediately reassigned to the 3rd area army. the division arrived to fushun 12 august 1945. it was disarmed by red army 19 august 1945 in the aftermath of the surrender of japan.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第138師団 (日本軍), accessed 8 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
24-bit is a reference to a 24 bit length of data or memory addressing.  24-bit may also refer to :  24-bit color, color data types a bit depth used in digital audio, see audio bit depth icao 24-bit address, a unique id given to aircraft using an aviation transponder interrogation mode 24-bit hex code, data used in transponders (aeronautics)
rashna bhandari is head, laboratory of cell signalling at the centre for dna fingerprinting and diagnostics, hyderabad. bhandari is pursuing her study on signal transduction in biological systems, with particular emphasis on understanding the role of inositol pyrophosphates in physiology and metabolism.  education bhandari obtained her bachelor's degree in human biology from the all india institute of medical sciences, followed by post graduation and doctorate in biological sciences from the indian institute of science.  career bhandari joined centre for dna fingerprinting and diagnostics in 2008 as a staff scientist.  post her doctorate at indian institute of science, bhandari worked with sandhya srikant visweswariah on signal transduction by the membrane-bound guanylyl cyclase, gcc, which is involved in maintaining fluid and ion homeostasis across the intestinal membrane.  in 2001, bhandari joined john kuriyan laboratory at the university of california, berkeley as a post-doctoral fellow to work on the structural biology and biochemistry of proteins involved in cell signaling. in 2003, bhandari relocated to the johns hopkins school of medicine in baltimore, where she worked with solomon snyder on deciphering the role of inositol pyrophosphates as signalling molecules.  in 2015, a group led by bhandari found that mice with lower levels of ip7 show reduced blood clotting.  inadequate levels of ip7 led to reduction in another phosphate-rich molecule called polyphosphate (a long chain of phosphate groups linked to each other). in mammals, polyphosphate is predominantly found in platelets and helps in strengthening blood clots during their formation. polyphosphates housed inside platelets break up during clotting. these polyphosphates and other components get released to form a mesh that constitutes the basic structure for clot. lowering ip7 levels could have potential applications in the prevention of stroke or myocardial infarction by reducing clotting.  bhandari believes that ambition leads to success and not gender.  publications  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people 20th-century indian biologists scientists from hyderabad, india indian women biologists 20th-century indian women scientists
big band is a 1954 album by charlie parker of sides recorded in 1950 and 1952. in 1999 big band was reissued with bonus material and outtakes.  reception  stacia proefrock reviewed the reissue of the album for allmusic and wrote that these "though joe lipman's arrangements are stellar, the musicians assembled for the sessions are an odd mix of popular music big-band players and improvisers. the album en todo also suffers from the popular music style of the songs themselves: solos are kept short, and songs limited to a three-minute length that was both radio-friendly and compatible with the 78-rpm format. but when parker does solo, it is just as magical as any of his earlier recordings. the songs also have a sweet smoothness to them that makes them eminently enjoyable although jazz variety is lacking. this record is not perfect, but it still musters up moments of brilliance".  track listing   "temptation" (nacio herb brown, arthur freed) - 3:33  "autumn in new york" (vernon duke) - 3:31  "lover" (lorenz hart, richard rodgers) - 3:08  "stella by starlight" (ned washington, victor young) - 2:58  "dancing in the dark" (howard dietz, arthur schwartz) - 3:16  "night and day" (cole porter) - 2:52  "i can't get started" (vernon duke, ira gershwin, thad jones) - 3:10  "what is this thing called love?" (porter) - 2:39  "almost like being in love" (alan jay lerner, frederick loewe) - 2:38  "laura" (johnny mercer, david raksin) - 3:09  "in the still of the night" (porter) - 3:28  "old folks" (dedette lee hill, willard robison) - 3:38  "if i love again" (jack murray, ben oakland) - 2:38 bonus tracks; issued on the 1999 verve cd reissue, verve 5598352  "in the still of the night" - 3:53  "in the still of the night" - 3:31  "in the still of the night" - 3:36  "old folks" - 4:12  "old folks" - 3:37  "old folks" - 3:41  "in the still of the night"
- 1:27  "in the still of the night" - 0:45  "old folks" - 0:46  "old folks" - 0:39  "old folks" - 0:29  personnel  charlie parker - alto saxophone gil evans, joe lipman - arranger, conductor ray brown, charles mingus, bob haggart - double bass manny thaler - bassoon maurice brown - cello hal mckusick - clarinet buddy rich, max roach, don lamond - drums stanley webb - flute, oboe, baritone saxophone al block - flute junior collins, joseph singer - french horn oscar peterson - piano flip phillips - tenor saxophone will bradley - trombone, trumpet freddie green, art ryerson - guitar verlye mills - harp tommy mace - oboe tony aless, bernie leighton, lou stein - piano nuncio "toots" mondello, murray williams - alto saxophone, woodwind harry terrill - alto saxophone danny bank - baritone saxophone art drelinger, hank ross -  tenor saxophone, woodwind bill harris, lou mcgarity - trombone chris griffin, jimmy maxwell, bernie pivin, carl poole, al porcino - trumpet isadore zir - viola howard kay, harry melnikoff, samuel rand, sylvan shulman, zelly smirnoff, jack zayde - violin dave lambert - vocals production norman granz - producer cynthia sesso - photo research herman leonard - photography hollis king - art direction sherniece smith - art producer sheryl lutz-brown - design bill kirchner - liner notes tom greenwood, carlos kase - production assistant bryan koniarz - production coordination ben young - research, restoration, supervisor  references  1954 albums albums arranged by gil evans albums produced by norman granz charlie parker albums clef records albums
alexander hunter (1729-1809) was a scottish physician, known also as a writer and editor.  alexander hunter is also the name of:  alexander hunter (planter) (1750-1804), american tobacco planter  alexander hunter (novelist)  (1843-1914) american writer  alexander hunter (footballer) (1862-1899), welsh footballer  alexander hunter (politician), northern irish politician  alexander hunter (madras surgeon) (1816-1890), scottish surgeon in madras and patron of art  alex hunter (1895-1984), scottish footballer (goalkeeper for queen's park, tottenham hotspur)   alex hunter (character), fictional footballer in the fifa video game series  sandy hunter (born 1939), british air marshal  sandy hunter (footballer) (fl. 1920s), scottish footballer for hamilton academical and motherwell  see also   hunter (surname)
opinion polling for the 2017 czech legislative election started immediately after the 2013 legislative election. monthly party ratings are conducted by sanep, tns aisa, stem and cvvm.  graphical summary  percentage  poll results are listed in the tables below in reverse chronological order, showing the most recent first. the highest percentage figure in each polling survey is displayed in bold, and the background shaded in the leading party's colour. in case of a tie, then no figure is shaded. poll results use the date the survey's fieldwork was done, as opposed to the date of publication. however, if this date is unknown, the date of publication will be given instead.  there was an electoral threshold of 5% for political parties, and 10% for party alliances. in 2017 kdu-csl and stan formed a political alliance, meaning they needed 10% to reach the threshold. they later disbanded this coalition.  aggregate polls aggregate polling made by kdovyhrajevolby.cz website.  election potential  individual polls  seats  map of voters behavio company and charles university made a poll showing map of voters. according to this poll civic democratic party, czech pirate party, christian and democratic union - czechoslovak people's party (as populars and mayors) and green party and top 09 can hold a strongest fight for voters according to the poll. czech social democratic party might have a problem because many of its voters are going for ano 2011.  other surveys  references  2017
filippo cansacchi or filippo consacchi (died 1645) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of gravina di puglia (1637-1645).  biography on 15 december 1636, filippo cansacchi was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of gravina di puglia. on 1 january 1637, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna, with alexandre della stufa, bishop of montepulciano, and emilio bonaventura altieri, bishop of camerino, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of gravina di puglia until his death in 1645.   while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of gaudius castelli, bishop of montepeloso (1637) and paolo pellegrini, bishop of capri (1641).  see also  catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops 1645 deaths bishops appointed by pope urban viii
roy james cameron  (11 march 19233 october 2006) was an australian public servant and diplomat. he was the australian statistician from 1977 to 1985.  life and career cameron was born in port pirie, south australia on 11 march 1923. he studied at the university of adelaide, graduating with first class honours from a bachelor of economics course in 1948. he graduated a master of economics from the university in 1951, with the topic "standard hours and the basic wage: an analysis of two aspects of the work of the commonwealth court of conciliation and arbitration." he was awarded a fulbright scholarship to study for his doctorate at harvard university, starting in 1951. he completed his phd in 1956.  from 1973 to 1977 cameron was australia's ambassador to the organisation for economic co-operation and development in paris. his appointment announcement, which was issued by gough whitlam in 1973, noted cameron's broad experience in economic and financial matters.  in 1977 cameron returned to australia to take up his appointment as australian statistician. he served in the role until his retirement in august 1985.  cameron died on 3 october 2006.  awards cameron was made a companion of the order of the bath in the 1982 birthday honours.  references  1923 births 2006 deaths australian statisticians permanent representatives of australia to the organisation for economic co-operation and development australian companions of the order of the bath harvard university alumni people from port pirie university of adelaide alumni
zig zag is a portuguese children's programming block broadcast daily on rtp2, rtp1 and rtp internacional from portugal. it airs programming that is targeted for young people (children and teenagers) from ages 3-17. it airs daily on the weekdays from 07:00 to 11:15 wet, and again later on in the day from 16:00 to 20:05 wet. it airs programming in portuguese.  broadcast area  as many other rtp television stations, zig zag airs internationally in different countries. note that all of its programming still airs in european portuguese.  north america  rtp2 zigzag airs in north america, as part of its international broadcast on rtp internacional.  united states of america  canada  south america   brazil  colombia  ecuador  venezuela  guyana  suriname  uruguay  chile  argentina  peru  africa  see rtp africa, and portuguese africa.  cape verde  mozambique  sao tome and principe  angola  guinea-bissau  equatorial guinea  asia   macau  others  europe   portugal  others  oceania   australia  new zealand  pacific islands  programming  rtp2 zigzag offers a wide range of programming for children and teenagers from ages 3-17.  fireman sam (o bombeiro sam)  noonbory and the super seven (noonbory e os super sete)  jelly jamm  the koala brothers (os irmaos koala)  shima shima tora no shimajiro (as aventuras de shimajiro)   floopaloo, where are you? (floopaloo, onde estas tu?)  kody kapow  bear in the big blue house (o urso da casa azul)  ella bella bingo  bing  vipo: adventures of the flying dog (vipo, as aventuras do cao voador)  vipo: surviving time island (vipo e os amigos na ilha do tempo)  dragon hunters (cacadores de dragoes)  the puzzle place (puzzle parque)  the little prince (o principezinho)  little robots (mini robos)  yoohoo & friends (yoohoo e amigos)  mickey mouse clubhouse (a casa do mickey mouse)  wabbit (bugs!)  peanuts  peanuts specials  the charlie brown and snoopy show (o espetaculo do charlie brown e do snoopy)  the garfield show (garfield)  sally bollywood: super detective (sally bollywood)
the epic tales of captain underpants (as historias epicas do capitao cuecas)  the looney tunes show  toddworld (o mundo de todd)  maya, the bee (a abelha maia)  vic, the viking (vicky)  be cool, scooby-doo! (scooby-doo!)  boo!  lola and virginia (lola e virginia)  sandra, the fairytale detective (sandra, a detetive de contos)  contraptus (engenhocas)  earth to luna! (o mundo de luna!)  the tom and jerry show (tom e jerry [1st season]/o show de tom e jerry [2nd season])  wild grinders  chuck's choice (o carlos escolhe)  wolfblood (sangue de lobo)  corneil and bernie (corneil e bernie)  thomas & friends (thomas e os seus amigos)  lunar jim  nutri ventures - the quest for the 7 kingdoms (nutriventures: em busca dos 7 reinos)  peep and the big wide world (o curioso mundo de pio)  shaun the sheep (a ovelha chone)  paper port (porto papel)  powerpuff girls z (super poderosas)  gawayn  caillou (ruca)  mushiking: the king of beetles (os guardiaes da floresta mushiking)  kaiketsu zorori (zorori, o fantastico)  monica's gang (turma da monica) [in the original brazilian portuguese version]  wow! wow! wubbzy!  angelo rules (as regras do angelo)  miraculous: tales of ladybug & cat noir (as aventuras de ladybug)  little people  sherlock yack  spongebob squarepants  peg + cat (peg e o gato)  arthur (artur)  clay kids  the adventures of blinky bill (blinky bill)  blinky bill  guess how much i love you (adivinha o quanto eu gosto de ti)  postman pat (o carteiro paulo)  little einsteins  mama mirabelle's home movies (mae mirabelle)  jakers! the adventures of piggley winks (pigi e os seus amigos)  pinky and the brain (pinky e o brain)  pet alien (pet alien,
amigos do outro mundo)  wordgirl (super sabina)  ovide and the gang (ovideo e companhia)  franky snow  histeria! (histeria)  max adventures (as aventuras do max)  geronimo stilton  mike, the knight (mike, o cavaleiro)  angelina ballerina: the next steps (angelina bailarina)  the mr. men show (o super apresentador)  total drama island (ilha dos desafios)  total drama action (drama total em accao)  total drama world tour (drama total - a volta do mundo)  total drama: revenge of the island (drama total: a vinganca da ilha/a vinganca da ilha dos desafios)  total drama: all stars (drama total: all stars)  total drama: pahkitew island (drama total: ilha pahkitew)  the cat in the hat knows a lot about that! (o gato da cartola)  ooglies  horrid henry (henrique, o terrivel)  horrible histories (historias horriveis)  dani's house (a casa da dani)  tom and jerry tales (as aventuras de tom e jerry)  ruby gloom (assombrosa ruby/rubi assombrosa)  fanboy & chum chum  zombie hotel  leon  chaplin & co (chaplin)  ozie boo! (no pais dos ozie boo)  glumpers  the adventures of marco & gina (as aventuras de marco e gina)  monster allergy (alergia monstra)  sergeant stripes (sargento riscado)  everything's rosie (tudo e rosie)  chrono kids  gombby's green island (gombby)  handy manny (manny maozinhas)  cloudbabies (os nuvinhas)   martin morning (martim manha)  pitt & kantrop (ze e kantropo)  the eggs (os ovos: aventuras no looneyverse)  os bolechas (os bochechas)   tip, the mouse (o rato renato)  dinosaur train (o comboio dos dinossauros)  sid, the science kid (sid ciencia)  cj, the dj (cj, a dj)  zeke's pad (o tablete do zeca)  firehouse tales (b
ombeiros sobre rodas)  lazytown (vila moleza)  the busy world of richard scarry (o mundo de richard scarry)  the adventures of tintin  hank zipzer  titeuf  cloudy with a chance of meatballs (chovem almondegas)  captain biceps (capitao biceps)  pumpkin reports (missao abobora)  grizzy and the lemmings (grizzy e os lemingues)  captain tsubasa (campeoes, a caminho da gloria) [the original and road to 2002 series]  minuscule (minusculo)  camp lakebottom (campo lakebottom)  little lunch (o patio)  wissper  chloe's closet (armario da clara)   daniel tiger's neighborhood (daniel tigre)  ricky sprocket: showbiz boy (ricky artista)  origanimals (origanimais)  3 amigonauts (3 amigonautas)  dogstar (cao do espaco)  hi hi puffy amiyumi  teen titans  cloudy with a chance of meatballs (chovem almondegas)  little princess (a princesinha)  bubble bip  olivia  1001 nights (1001 noites)  missy mila twisted tales (emilia, a contadora de historias)  robin hood: mischief in sherwood (robin dos bosques - travessuras em sherwood)  young justice (jovens justiceiros)  scooby-doo! mystery incorporated (scooby-doo: misterios s.a.)  pororo the little penguin (pororo, o pequeno pinguim)  references   portuguese children's entertainment radio e televisao de portugal original programming
was a japanese engineer who became the president of sony.  iwama was born in nagoya and studied geophysics. he worked in a seismology laboratory at the university of tokyo until 1946, when akio morita hired him to work at a predecessor of sony. by 1950, he was a director of the company. at sony, he helped introduce the first japanese transistor radio in 1954, and the first transistor television set in 1960. he headed the sony corporation of america from 1971 to 1973, and became president of sony from 1976 until his death of colon cancer on august 25, 1982.  references  1919 births 1982 deaths 20th-century japanese businesspeople sony people university of tokyo alumni
leif jarmann wilhelmsen (13 december 1910 - 14 november 1976) was a norwegian philologist and civil servant.  he was born in stokke to thomas wilhelmsen and else larsen. he served as cultural attache in london from 1946 to 1949, and was director of the university of bergen from 1949 to 1957. from 1957 to 1964 he was appointed at the ministry of culture and education, and from 1965 to 1967 at the norwegian academy of science and letters. he chaired the arts council norway from 1965 to 1972. he was decorated knight, first class of the order of st. olav in 1965.  references  1910 births 1976 deaths people from stokke norwegian civil servants university of bergen faculty norwegian expatriates in the united kingdom norwegian government scholars
clinical obstetrics and gynecology is a quarterly peer-reviewed medical journal covering obstetrics and gynecology. it was established in 1958 and is published by lippincott williams & wilkins. the editor-in-chief is james r. scott (university of utah school of medicine). according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2015 impact factor of 1.619, ranking it 51st out of 80 journals in the category "obstetrics & gynecology".  references  external links  obstetrics and gynaecology journals lippincott williams & wilkins academic journals publications established in 1958 quarterly journals english-language journals
chelsea jane bredhauer better known by her stage name chelsea jane (born 16 december 1992) is an australian rapper and songwriter from charleville, queensland. in 2013 she won the australasian performing right association (apra) hilltop hoods initiative, with a prize of $10,000.  biography after leaving school she began studying criminology at bond university on the gold coast and it was here that she discovered the enjoyment of writing for the rap scene, with its distinctive chanted rhyming lyrics. rap battles, a friendly "dissing" of an opponent and entertaining a crowd, a la muhammad ali, were chelsea's way of getting known in the scene, and she has been a guest judge at rap battles in sydney and adelaide as well as travelling overseas to the us, canada and the uk to connect with well-known artists. one of her breakthroughs came when she was visiting her brother jack on the rodeo circuit in canada. hip hop supergroup atlien workshop weren't far away in atlanta, so she flew down to write some verse with them, which was done in 20 minutes and then recorded. she's built on the national and international attention by being announced as the recipient of the 2013 hilltop hoods initiative, worth $10,000. the first female to win this prestige award for emerging rap artists, chelsea has been given respect for her distinct tone and flow as well as her amazing wordsmith abilities. the award will help her make her first full-length solo cd and market it, and gives her legal advice as well.  she said her father, charleville identity kevin "blue" bredhauer, was not "hip hop affiliated" but he fully supported everything she did.  born and bred out west, chelsea moved to toowoomba where she boarded at downlands college for two and half years, before finishing high school at the scots pgc college in warwick. she was the first female to be given the award for emerging rap artists, cementing her ability and style as one to watch.  chelsea jane's first demand of attention began international through her first recorded verse and collab on atlanta's atlien workshop's "enemy". she is known in the battle scene for her involvement as a guest judge at 'got beef' mc rap battles in sydney, adelaide and guest appearances at the 'king of the dot' world mc battles in canada. chelsea deliberately seeded connections with many artists throughout the us, canada and uk. in 2013 chelsea dropped her first ep queen of the hill in parallel to successfully taking out the 2013 hilltop hoods apra
initiative as the first female emerging hip hop artist. following a successful season chelsea landed many support act shows including supporting established acts such as rappers the game, dizzy wright, hopsin, mantra and the tongue, also landing first female mc to perform at sprung hip hop festival.  on 4 may 2014, she released her single where the boys at available on itunes.  discography eps  queen of the hill (2013)  references 6. interview with chelsea jane solovibesmusic.com retrieved 12 november 2017  living people australian women rappers 1992 births australian women singer-songwriters musicians from queensland 21st-century australian women singers people from south west queensland
mark pavlovych padun (; born 6 july 1996) is a ukrainian cyclist, who currently rides for uci worldteam .  career after matija kvasina, winner of the 2017 fleche du sud, tested positive for epo padun's second place was upgraded to first overall.  in august 2018, he was named in the startlist for the 2018 vuelta a espana. in october 2020, he was named in the startlist for the 2020 giro d'italia.  in the 2021 criterium du dauphine padun won stages 7 and 8 after spending each day in the breakaway also collecting enough points to win the mountain classification.  major results  2014  1st  time trial, national junior road championships  10th overall course de la paix juniors 2015  1st  national criterium championships  giro della friuli venezia giulia 1st  mountains classification 1st stage 3  8th overall course de la paix under-23  9th gp capodarco 2016  1st  time trial, national under-23 road championships  2nd giro del medio brenta  3rd overall giro della valle d'aosta 1st  mountains classification 1st  young rider classification 1st stage 2 2017  1st  overall fleche du sud 1st  young rider classification  1st trofeo piva  1st gp capodarco  5th overall giro ciclistico d'italia 1st stage 3 2018  1st stage 5 tour of the alps  5th road race, uci under-23 road world championships 2019  1st  time trial, national road championships  1st  overall adriatica ionica race 1st  young rider classification 1st stage 3 2021  criterium du dauphine 1st  mountains classification 1st stages 7 & 8  3rd overall vuelta a burgos 2022  3rd overall o gran camino 1st stage 4 (itt)  grand tour general classification results timeline  references  external links  1996 births living people ukrainian male cyclists sportspeople from donetsk
"the devil in the details" is the 10th episode and midseason premiere of the paranormal drama television series supernaturals season 11, and the 228th overall. the episode was written by andrew dabb and directed by thomas j. wright. it was first broadcast on january 20, 2016 on the cw. in the episode, lucifer shows sam his memories in an attempt for him to say yes to be his vessel. the title is a reference to the phrase "the devil is in the detail", meaning a mystery or loop on a detail.  the episode received critical acclaim with critics praising the castiel reveal.  plot rowena (ruth connell) had a dream where lucifer (mark pellegrino) showed up with the promise of rewards if she brought him sam (jared padalecki). in the present, lucifer shows sam a memory of his childhood to show his changes and how he and dean always take the decision to save each other instead of the world.  crowley (mark a. sheppard) accuses rowena of betraying him but she defends herself by claiming lucifer will give her rewards. dean (jensen ackles) is called by crowley to notify him that sam is in the cage. castiel (misha collins) and ambriel (valerie tian) inspect the explosion area to find amara. amara (emily swallow) consumes ambriel's soul but spares castiel's life, sending him to hell.  dean contacts billie (lisa berry) to get him through hell. he and crowley then put rowena in a witchcatcher so she can be crowley's slave. lucifer begins attacking sam and when dean and castiel arrive, he transports them into the cage. they get into a fight while rowena tries to invoke a spell. she manages to get them out of the cage before lucifer kills them. sam and dean leave the hell while castiel stays behind. sam tells dean that lucifer may have been right but dean states that lucifer and the darkness in the same earth would be catastrophic.  castiel goes with crowley and crowley discovers to his shock that castiel is none other than lucifer. it turns out castiel accepted to be his vessel so he could stop the darkness. lucifer frees rowena and then kills her so he can't go back to the cage. he then sits next to crowley, telling him they need to talk.  reception  viewers the episode was watched by 1.83 million viewers with a 0.7/2 share among adults aged 18 to 49. this was a 4% decrease in viewership from
the previous episode, which was watched by 1.90 million viewers from a 0.7/2 share in the 18-49 demographics. 0.7 percent of all households with televisions watched the episode, while 2 percent of all households watching television at that time watched it.  critical reviews  "the devil in the details" received critical acclaim from critics. matt fowler of ign gave the episode a "great" 8.6 out of 10 and wrote in her verdict, "'the devil in the details' was scrumptious supernatural. my one main gripe, however, isn't necessarily that cas made a dumb move, but that the episode sort of ham-fistedly shoved him into it with those on-the-nose scenes right beforehand about how he 'wasn't special.' still, overall it was a nice swerve. as was rowena's curtain call."  hunter bishop of tv overmind gave the episode a 4 star rating out of 5 and wrote, "supernatural is having a resurgent season. this is the best run of episodes that it's had since season 5, and it's not particularly close. the show has a sense of purpose, and drive. there isn't as much aimless wandering, or macguffin type things like the mark. there is an underlying message here that is pointing us down a specific path. since dean came back from purgatory, it's been the same beats with the winchesters, with no real development in site. it was always about the brothers-over-all, and the co-dependency of the two. the issue was always punted, always kicked down the road, to be examined for another time. it was the most frustrating thing about supernatural."  samantha highfill of ew stated: "returning from hiatus, i was a little worried that supernatural wouldn't be as strong as i said it was way back in 2015. but i'm happy to report that my worry was misplaced. thanks largely in part to the return of lucifer, this hour was highly reminiscent of the show's glory days in season 5, not to mention that it was filled with humor and the sort of last-minute twists we crave."  sean mckenna from tv fanatic, gave a 4.4 star rating out of 5, stating: "while it appeared as if supernatural season 11 episode 10 simply concluded the cage match between lucifer and sam, quickly wrapping up that story as a side stop with a dead end, a shocking twist and a major
death in the last moments of the hour revealed that lucifer's part to play has only just begun."  maryann sleasman of tv.com wrote, "'the devil in the details' had moments of brilliance, as well as moments of utter wtf - and not the good wtf like cannibal make-out sessions in 'my bloody valentine' but more like the entirety of 'season seven, time for a wedding.' i mean, smiting sickness? really? could the plot to get castiel alone with amara be any more contrived?"  becky lea of den of geek wrote, "the devil in the details manages to function as a deconstruction of the supernatural formula whilst also adhering to it to a certain extent. old dogs and old tricks are the order of the day. there's a desperate situation that can seemingly only be dealt with by one of the brothers trading their safety for that of the world. one of the sidekicks is in trouble and might be compromising the winchesters without realising. lucifer's 'this is your life' for sam tours through the various times that either sam or dean have sacrificed themselves to save the other, going as far as they possibly could for each other time and again."  references  external links      supernatural (season 11) episodes 2016 american television episodes
tom monroe (september 2, 1919 - december 2, 1993) was an american actor. he appeared in more than one hundred films from 1946 to 1977.  filmography  references  external links   1919 births 1993 deaths american male film actors 20th-century american male actors
mashhad and kalat () is a constituency for the islamic consultative assembly.  elections  10th term  references   electoral districts of iran deputies of mashhad and kalat
methynodiol diacetate () (developmental code name sc-19198), or metynodiol diacetate, also known as 11β-methyletynodiol diacetate, is a steroidal progestin of the 19-nortestosterone group which was patented in 1968 but was never marketed. it is the diacetate ester of metynodiol, which, similarly, was never marketed.  see also  etynodiol  etynodiol diacetate  list of progestogen esters  references  abandoned drugs acetate esters estranes progestogen esters progestogens
this was the first edition of the men's doubles tournament.  mitchell krueger and daniel nguyen won the title, defeating jarryd chaplin and benjamin mitchell 6-2, 7-5 in the final.  seeds the top two seeds receive a bye into the quarterfinals.  draw  references main draw  winnipeg national bank challenger winnipeg challenger
igbo nationalism is a range of ethnic nationalist ideologies relating to the igbo people of southeastern nigeria. while the term is defined as seeking igbo self-determination by some, others argue that it refers to the preservation and revival of igbo culture and, for others, the development of igboland stemming from the philosophy, aku luo uno, which means "wealth builds the home".  self-determination  colonial  the igbo people were united into the framework of what is currently known as nigeria in 1914. through the process of integration, igbo sovereignty was limited and often replaced by the sovereignty of the british colonial power. however, as the practice of colonialism faded in popularity, the igbo people (who were largely educated) led the charge in the formation of political parties. the first national party, which was the national council of nigerians and cameroon (ncnc), was founded in 1944 and led by journalist and future president nnamdi azikiwe. a man of igbo descent, azikiwe was received as a distinctly igbo figure as opposed to a pan-africanist or a nigerian nationalist. thus, the activities of the ncnc represented the emergence of organized igbo nationalism a means through which igbo political interests could be achieved.  accordingly, the igbo federal union (ifu), which was established in 1936, aligned with the ncnc in order to further extend the reach of the ncnc freedom charter and to delineate a formal agenda across various igbo organizations. the igbo federal union became the igbo state union (isu) through this merger.though the formation of an independent state was not mentioned in this charter, igbo political elites utilized this structure to assert their interests in a highly regionalized struggle for nigerian independence.  post-colonial  following the success of the independence movement in nigeria in 1960, the nation remained highly divided across ethnic and regional lines. following the 1966 anti-igbo pogrom that took place in the northern and western regions of the nation, many igbo people fled their ancestral homes in other regions for refuge in the eastern, largely igbo region of the nation. within this context of insecurity, the eastern region demanded more autonomy within the broader federal system. the eastern region under military governor lieutenant colonel chukwuemeka odumegwu ojukwu engaged in negations with the nation's military government under major general yakubu gowon. through these negotiations, which were delineated in the aburi accord, both parties suffered from a difference in interpretation regarding whether the federal military government had transitioned to a confederal military government. after these policies were
not instituted, ojukwu declared independence from the federal republic of nigeria and the establishment of the republic of biafra in 1967. thus began the nigerian civil war that lasted from 1967 till 1970 and ended in the dissolution of the attempted republic. (see: nigerian civil war and biafra)  contemporary  igbo people in the present day have noted and lamented the exclusion and marginalization of igbo politicians from high political office following the aftermath of the civil war. in fact, the last igbo head of state was major general johnson thomas umunnakwe aguiyi ironsi, the military head of state appointed following the 1966 coup. additionally, military and political appointments transpiring from 1979 to 2013 have largely overlooked igbo candidates.   in light of this issue and others, several contemporary igbo nationalist groups have emerged, offering differing visions of igbo political autonomy. groups such as the movement for the actualization of the sovereign state of biafra (massob) argue for the revitalization of the biafra project, or a sovereign igbo state. as opposed to the largely military strategy of the previous era of igbo nationalism, the  group relies on non-violent tactics in its political strategy.  preservation and revival of igbo culture  colonial  via the divide-and-rule policies embarked upon by great britain in their colonization of what is now known as nigeria, the ethnic groups that occupied the territory were purposefully separated and differentiated. for this reason, the cultural, social, and economic characteristics that distinguished each of the major groups played an important role in public spaces. the igbo state union (formerly the igbo federal union) constituted a sociopolitical union that helped solidify an igbo national consciousness amidst the political background of colonialism and budding nationalism.  in the late colonial period that followed wwii, the british colonial government's approach shifted from administrative to developmentalist; thus, civil society groups such as the igbo state union became increasingly important for the provision socio-political and economic advantages.  namely, it enabled the igbo people to send larger numbers of their children to school via communal association as opposed to the individual achievements or parents.  post-colonial  the 1966 anti-igbo pogrom and the civil war that followed constituted large threats to the preservation of igbo culture. political stability in a newly independent nigeria- that is, the duration of the first nigerian republic- was short lived. crises such as the western region crisis of 1962, the census crisis of 1963, and the election crisis of 1964-1965 signaled lack of national unity due to interethnic strife. as
early as 1964, a small group of majors in the military-mostly igbo people-began to plot a military coup in 1964 due to their dissatisfaction with the corrupt practices of the federal government. the event came to fruition on january 15, 1966 when major emmanuel arinze ifeajuna, major timothy onwuatuegwu, major christian anuforo, major donatus okafor, and major humphrey chukwuka overthrew the government under prime minister abubakar tafawa balewa and declared martial law over the country. the coup resulted in the deaths of federal officials and political figures such as prime minister abubakar tafawa balewa and premier ahmadu bello.  major general johnson thomas umunnakwe aguiyi ironsi emerged as the head of state under the military government. because the majority of targets in the coup were yoruba or hausa-fulani and the leader installed a result of these events was also igbo, the coup was characterized as an attempt by the igbo to seize control of the government. violence against igbos began to ensue in the north and spread to the west. only five months after the original coup, a counter-coup ensued which resulted in the death of ironsi and the installation of major general yakabu gowon. anti-igbo violence was not curbed after this transition of power, and igbo people began to flee to the eastern region in large numbers. following the failure of the aburi accord, lieutenant colonel chukwuemeka odumegwu ojukwu declared the eastern region independent for the protection of the lives and interests of the igbo people. the following nigerian civil war began as a police action by gowon's government to reclaim the area and quickly devolved into a gruesome, large-scale war.  contemporary  due to fact that the civil war conflict resulted in the destruction of the eastern region and the death of millions of biafrans either through military engagements, acts of ethnic cleansing, or starvation, the nationalist movement for the creation of a biafran state did not reemerge in full-force until 1999. igbo political elite such as chief ralph uwazuruike formed massob to revitalize igbo nationalist sentiments based on conceptions of continued injustices against igbo people. the contemporary reanimation of igbo nationalism also references the killing of igbo people by boko haram in northern nigeria as a reason for the reinstitution of the social movement.  massob (which has headquarters across the east and embassies internationally) has been able to leverage the development of an igbo national
consciousness for the promulgation of biafran ideals. massob has rallied supporters in the southeast and abroad to observe biafran day in commemoration of the founding of the republic of biafra in 1967. this act, which occurred in 2004 and 2013, contributed to the closure of major shops, banks, and other businesses in eastern states. they also have contributed to the hoisting of biafra flags in imo state, abia state, enugu state, ebonyi state, and anambra state.  development of igboland  colonial  as intrinsic features of the igbo social order, communalism and entrepreneurialism pervaded igbo community structures within the colonial era. this is due in large part to the british colonial institution's imposition of ethnically divisive administrative policies. in the context of colonization, which featured the native population's limited access to economic advantages, there was fierce competition between ethnic groups for employment opportunities. particularly within coastal southeastern region of the nation, igbo people's merchant commerce was forced into competition with largely imported industrial commerce and the commercial activities of other groups. within the context of the nigerian nationalist movement, these qualities took form in the intra-ethnic competition for national wealth and economic resources. following the colonial development and welfare acts put forth the british colonial government in 1945, economic and political power was gradually transferred to native populations- thereby, heightening each group's claims on profitable assets. the igbo state union, formerly the igbo federal union, worked alongside the ncnc in ensuring the advancement and welfare of the igbo people in the furtherance of the igbo's economic objectives .  post-colonial  the igbo pursuit of enrichment in the post-colonial context continued in the pre-colonial and colonial tradition of the pursuit of community enrichment. a large part of nigeria's post-colonial capitalist economy relied on the exportation of agricultural products. because of the poor quality of soil in the predominately igbo southeastern region, many igbo people began to migrate into the urban centers of other regions. due to the igbo people's relatively high levels of education, they were able to take jobs as clerks, traders, and shopkeepers and eventually rise to the ranks of professionals, journalists, and government employees. the affluence of the migrant igbo population by way of their employment in northern cities by inspired resentment within the resident population following the events of the 1966 military coup. many of these igbo individuals were targeted during the 1966 anti-igbo pogrom which eventually contributed to the onset of the war.  an important factor in the escalation of the nigerian civil war was the fact that 70
percent of the nation's oil reserves were located in the eastern region. in attempts to limit support for the secessionist movement, general gowon proclaimed that the four states that composed nigeria would be split further into 12 states, granting ethnic minority groups their own governments. one of these newly formed states was rivers state, which held both precious oil reserves and major city port harcourt. though rivers state did not join the secessionist movement, the loss of the remaining biafran states posed similar economic risks to nigerian economy and profits for the biafran economy.  during the civil war, the igbo people's properties were liquidated and destroyed. after biafra's surrender, the nigerian government delegitimized all of biafra's currency and gave all of its former citizens 20 pounds in exchange for any sum of biafran pounds.  contemporary  the call for the development of igboland is especially significant considering the lasting effects of the nigerian civil war. as a legacy of the conflict, the igbo people continue to possess significantly smaller amounts of national resources, particularly including oil. the bulk of nigeria's resources are owned by yoruba and hausa individuals. additionally, igbo men and women continue to experience anti-igbo discriminatory attitudes from members of other ethnic groups that affects the success of their businesses. groups such as massob conceive the nigerian government's post-war policies as form or economic strangulation that has persistently limited the economic agency of the igbo people. according to their 2002 constitution, civil society groups such as ohanaeze ndigbo have formed to act as a conduit between the government and the people to negotiate for the socio-economic development of igbo land.  see also biafra flag of biafra movement for the actualization of the sovereign state of biafra igbo culture society for promoting igbo language and culture  references  external links  stateless nationalism in africa igbo
yuganta: the end of an epoch is a book written by anthropologist irawati karve. it is called yuganta for short.  it is a critical analysis of the mahabharata. the book was written in marathi originally but later it was translated in english by w. norman brown. its nepali translation by sujit mainali was published in october 2020 by kathmandu-based publishing house book hill.  summary this book is a study of the main protagonists of the mahabharata. these character studies treat the protagonists of the book as historical figures rather than as mythical characters. in this book the author has attempted to interpret many of the events of the mahabharata in a socio-political context. according to karve's analysis, the mahabharata is not really a myth, but is an account of historical events that actually took place many thousands of years ago, in the nation of india. in this context, the author provides the readers with in-depth insight into the political and social situations that were prevalent during that period in indian history.  award the book won sahitya academy award in 1968.  references  novels set in india works based on literary characters works based on the mahabharata
croatian encyclopedic dictionary () is a dictionary of croatian published in 2002 as one volume edition by the publisher novi liber. second edition of the dictionary in 12 volumes was published in 2004 by the novi libar and hanza media. chief editors of the dictionary are ljiljana jojic and ranko matasovic, while the authors are vladimir anic, dunja brozovic-roncevic, ivo goldstein, slavko goldstein and ivo pranjkovic. in addition, there are twenty-three associates.  description the dictionary contains 175,000 processed terms of which 47,000 are croatian names, family names and places of their distribution, and 18,000 processed names in geography, history, mythology and general culture.  a group of authors and assistants worked on the preparation of the dictionary from 1999 until 2002. their main source materials were vladimir anic's croatian dictionary (1st edition in 1991, then two expanded editions in 1994 and 1998), dictionary of foreign words by vladimir anic and ivo goldstein (1st edition in 1999, 2nd revised in 2000) and croatian national corpus.  the concept of the dictionary is highly descriptive because authors aim was to collect and lexicographically process contemporary croatian, and not to rewrite what words should be considered as standard. however, prescriptive elements cannot be completely avoided in any dictionary.  volumes  croatian encyclopedic dictionary in its 2nd edition bears the . the first volume has 83 introductory pages marked with roman numerals. last, 12th volume, contains supplements between pages 223. and 335. the last word in the dictionary is zvrljotina (scribbles). the dictionary comes with a spelling manual prepared by ljiljana jojic and her associates; ljiljana cikota, ivo pranjkovic and vesna zecevic. the dictionary has a total of 4286 pages, which, together with spelling manual, totals 4474 pages.  references  2002 non-fiction books 21st-century encyclopedias croatian language
the journal of proteomics is a peer-reviewed scientific journal published by elsevier. it is the official journal of the european proteomics association and the editor-in-chief is juan calvete. it was established in 1979 as the journal of biochemical and biophysical methods, obtaining its current name in 2008. according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2018 impact factor of 3.537.  references  external links     elsevier academic journals english-language journals proteomics journals publications established in 1979
the discography of the danish rock band nephew consists of six studio albums, three live albums, nine eps, one compilation album, and one box set. the band was formed in 1996 by simon kvamm, kristian riis, jonas juul jeppesen, and søren arnholt. in 1998, bassist jeppesen left the band and was replaced by the current bassist kasper toustrup.   in 1998, nephew released two early demo albums, tunes and things to do. the demo ep downtown europe was released in 1999. in 2000, the band debuted with their first studio album, swimming time, on the small label martian records. the album was received well by both critics and fans, but despite the band's success, the members decided to disband. during their 2001 farewell concert in germany, the band rediscovered their passion for music and ultimately decided to stay together.  after being signed to copenhagen records, the band released their second studio album usadsb in 2004. it was certified double platinum in denmark and was also released in japan, germany, and norway. it is considered to be their "breakthrough" album. later in 2004, nephew released the en wannabe darth vader single release, containing the danish and english-language versions of their hit song "en wannabe darth vader".  nephew's third studio album, interkom kom ind, was released in october 2006; it was certified 3x platinum in denmark. "igen & igen &" is its lead single. the mexico ligger i spanien remix ep was released later in 2007, which contains remixes of the song "mexico ligger i spanien" by mofus and klovn, as well as an extended mix and a short intro version. in november 2007, nephew released a live box set (live-cd/2dvd) entitled roskilde 07.07.07 based upon a critically-acclaimed live performance at orange scene at the 2007 roskilde festival. the live cd features songs from the albums usadsb and interkom kom ind, including a special version of "hospital" which features a guest performance by danish rapper l.o.c.. the special edition of the box also includes the band's remix of the timbaland track "the way i are".  on june 5, 2009 nephew released their fourth studio album, danmark/denmark, which was certified double platinum in denmark. the album was released on the danish constitution day. in 2010, the police bells & church sirens ep was released, containing
a radio edit, a "dainty doll's trend mix", and "nephew's nightlife mix" (mixed by rene munk thalund) of the song "police bells & church sirens". the ep also contained one previously unreleased track, "jesus jesus".    in november 2012, nephew released their fifth studio album, hjertestarter, which topped charts in denmark and on the danish itunes store for that month.   on 18 november 2013, nephew released an album boxset, 1-2-3-4-5, as well as a compilation of singles, igen & igen &. 1-2-3-4-5 contains nephew's five studio albums along with 15 bonus songs; early renditions of the songs "usadsb", "mexico ligger i spanien", "hospital", "007 is also gonna die", and "hjertestarter; a remix of "downtown europe" by ørtz/mofus; an alternative version of "worst/best case scenario"; an early version of "superliga"; the previously unreleased demo songs "swedenborg" and "marking princess"; and pre-mixes of the previously unreleased "pasfotografier", "automatisk mig", "stop nu hjælp nu", "the day i laminate my heart", and "jeg kan se". it also contains the song "statusopdaterer at jeg statusopdaterer" featuring johnson. nephew's compilation album, igen & igen &, was also released in 2013 and contains a collection of all of the band's singles currently released at that time.  nephew released their sixth studio album, ring-i-ring, on 27 september 2018.  albums  studio albums  live albums  compilation albums  box sets  demo albums  eps 1998: tunes (demo)  1998: things to do (demo)  1999: downtown europe (demo)  2007: mexico ligger i spanien remix ep 2010: police bells & church sirens ep 2018: vinter-i-ring 2018: forar-i-ring 2018: sommer-i-ring 2018: efterar-i-ring  singles  others 2000: "we don't need you here" 2003: "movie klip" 2004: "en wannabe darth vader" 2004: "superliga" 2004: "ordenspoliti" 2005: "worst/best case scenario" 2005: "by
ens hotel" 2006: "igen & igen &" 2006: "science fiction og familien" 2007: "mexico ligger i spanien" 2007: "the way i are" (timbaland vs. nephew) 2009: "sov for satan mand"  references  nephew (band) songs nephew (band) albums discographies of danish artists
the naughty naughty pets is a canadian animated television series by decode entertainment and c.o.r.e. based on a series of children's books by wendy ann gardner, the show debuted on cbc television in 2006. both the books and the animated show star a girl named windywoo and her cabal of mischievous pets.  episodes  broadcast  the series originally ran on cbc television in canada between february 6 and may 17, 2006. the naughty naughty pets was part of a bid by the broadcaster to target older youth audiences in its children's programming alongside other new series like yam roll, the morgan waters show and mr. meaty. the channel initially skipped the show's seventh episode, "heedley pecked me in the eye", in their first run through the show for unexplained reasons. it later aired on june 12, 2006.  internationally, the naughty naughty pets has aired on canal once in mexico, nhk in japan, kids central in singapore, citv in the uk, abc in australia, boomerang in the us and irib pooya in iran.  references  2000s canadian animated television series 2000s canadian children's television series 2006 canadian television series debuts canadian children's animated comedy television series cbc television original programming television series by dhx media
brian keith mitchell (born 16 july 1967) is an english-born australian politician. he is the member for lyons in the australian house of representatives after winning the seat at the 2016 federal election.  early life and education mitchell was born in coventry in the united kingdom, and raised in perth, western australia. he attended maddington senior high school and curtin university, where he obtained a bachelor of arts in english, journalism and politics in 1989. at university, he worked in various jobs as a kitchenhand, shelf stacker, bartender and fast food manager, was a member of the university labor society, and a councillor of the curtin student guild.  career mitchell started his career in print journalism for the fremantle herald, where he worked as a journalist from 1989 to 1991, and then as editor from 1994 to 2007. from 1991 to 1992, he worked as publications officer for the act council of social service, and then from 1992 to 1994 as adviser to the federal labor member for chifley, roger price. after leaving the fremantle herald in 2007, he moved to tasmania and worked as chief of staff for tasmanian labor member for denison duncan kerr. he then ran his own public relations and media consultancy firm from 2008 to 2016.  political career mitchell has been a member of the australian labor party since 1988. before election to parliament, he served as a member of tasmanian labor's administrative committee and secretary of the southern central policy branch. he was also secretary of the lenah valley branch from 2009 to 2011, the richmond branch from 2011 to 2012, and the sorell-tasman branch from 2012 to 2016.  mitchell was elected to the house of representatives at the 2016 federal election, defeating the incumbent liberal mp eric hutchinson in the division of lyons.  in december 2017, during the parliamentary eligibility crisis, mitchell "tried to physically block an abc cameraman" and reportedly then told reporter matt wordsworth to "go and do your research, maggot!". mitchell says what he said was "go and do your research, matt" but concedes the audio is indistinct and that wordsworth genuinely thought he had said the former. mitchell apologised personally and in the parliament to wordsworth for what he has described as his "boofheaded intervention". wordsworth had been attempting to question justine keay about her citizenship status.  references     1967 births living people members of the australian house of representatives members of the australian house of representatives for lyons australian labor party members of the parliament of australia labor left politicians politicians from coventry english emigrants to australia english
people of irish descent australian people of irish descent 21st-century australian politicians
laila st. matthew-daniel (born february 14, 1953 in lagos, nigeria) is an executive coach, leadership trainer, speaker, author, women's rights activist and writer. she is the founder and president of acts generation gbv, a non-governmental organization which combats domestic violence and child abuse in nigeria. she has organized various protests for the rights of women and the girl-child, some of which are the buni yadi massacre of february 2014 and part of initiating group who organized first protest against the chibok schoolgirls kidnapping by the boko haram sect. she has organized various sensitization seminars and workshops to empower women on the issues of self mastery, self awareness, and self actualization.  references  1953 births living people nigerian women writers nigerian activists nigerian women's rights activists nigerian women activists
verkhniye kotly () is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro that opened in september 2016.  name the station is named for the former village of verkhniye kotly, which was annexed to moscow in 1932. the name of the station was changed from the originally planned varshavskoye shosse in august 2016.  references  external links   mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
yalıkoy, formerly podima, is a village in the administrative status of a neighborhood of catalca district in istanbul province, northwest turkey. located at the black sea coast, it is a seaside resort with a sand beach. current mukhtar is fehmi kacar.  yalıkoy was historically a greek town named potima. during the population exchange between greece and turkey in 1923 that followed the greco-turkish war (1919-22), around 60 turkish families from greece were settled in the homes of exchanged greeks. its population as of 2012 is 2,034.  yalıkoy is a coastal town surrounded on three sides by woods of the strandzha mountain massif. its sandy beach attracts tourists. the main economy of the village is forestry and fishing. a local production facility of sisecam mines silicon as raw material for the glass industry. another local facility operated by the state hydraulic works (dsi) use yalıkoy sand in water purification.   the cilingoz nature park, which offers camping and outdoor recreation activities, is about  west of yalıkoy.  yalıkoy is served from yenibosna in istanbul by private owned public buses, and from catalca by city bus line #404 .  references  external links     catalca seaside resorts in turkey fishing communities in turkey populated places in thrace former greek towns in turkey villages in istanbul province
surf factor 8 is the eighth album released by surf music band the surfin' lungs, released in 2016 on redondo records. all bar one of the 14 tracks are self-penned, with clive and ray - back on drums - contributing one song each, while there is a cover of "babysitter" by the ramones. a traditional lungs album, with songs about the sun, sea, cars and girls, with a surf punk edge and a hard driving bass prevalent throughout, plus a nod to several influences including the beach boys, gary usher, blondie and the ramones.  track listing   bring on the summer (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  art arfons (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  don't take my baby (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  she crashed the prom (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  beach beat (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - instrumental  my first car (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  babysitter (the ramones) - lead vocals: chris pearce  roadway romeo (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  the girl with the joey ramone tattoo (dean, pearce, gilling, weazel) - lead vocals: clive gilling  at the weekend (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  not that kind of girl (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  car surfin' (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  i saw the sun come up in her eyes (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  my favourite barista (dean, pearce, gilling, webb) - lead vocals: chris pearce  personnel   chris pearce - vocals, guitar  steve dean - vocals, bass  clive gilling - vocals, guitar, keyboards  ray webb - vocals, drums, percussion  producer   the surfin' lungs  trivia   ray webb's first album since goin to rockingham   at the weekend is only the second song written by ray recorded by the group  the girl with the joey ramone tattoo is sung and written by clive  2016 albums the surfin' lungs albums
sukhpal vir singh hasrat (1938 - ) was an indian poet in the punjabi language.  early life  hasrat was born in 1938 in khanewal, british india. hasrat and his family, however, moved to india after the partition of india in 1947. he attended and graduated from the panjab university, chandigarh.  career  after completing his education hasrat joined the public relation department of the punjab government.  following which he started serving as an editor of the punjab government's monthly journal, jagriti.  hasrat's career as a poet started in 1966, when he published his poem collection - sarsabaz patjharhan.  throughout his career as a poet, hasrat has published as many as twelve collections of his work. hussan kinare, hayati de somme, van kambia, shakti naad, hasrat kavya, shakti da darya being among his most significant collections.  other than being a poet he has written a novel, a biography and few books on applied criticism.  awards  hasrat received the sahitya akademi award for his book, suraj te kahkashan in 1980. two of his collections, shakti naad and suraj da kafla were awarded by the government of punjab. the books were marked as the best collections in punjab for the years 1967-68 and 1971-72.  references   1938 births 2000s deaths punjab university law college alumni punjabi-language poets indian male poets recipients of the sahitya akademi award in punjabi 20th-century indian poets 20th-century indian male writers
yoshimi nishigawa (西側よしみ, born april 8, 1953) is a retired japanese swimmer who won ten gold medals at the asian games in 1970 and 1974. a versatile swimmer, she competed at the 1968, 1972 and 1976 olympics in three events at each games and reached the final on five occasions. she married the olympic rower takashi murayama.  references  1953 births living people olympic swimmers of japan swimmers at the 1968 summer olympics swimmers at the 1972 summer olympics swimmers at the 1976 summer olympics japanese female freestyle swimmers japanese female backstroke swimmers japanese female breaststroke swimmers japanese female medley swimmers  asian games gold medalists for japan medalists at the 1970 asian games medalists at the 1974 asian games asian games medalists in swimming swimmers at the 1970 asian games swimmers at the 1974 asian games
c. h. ostenfeld nunatak is a nunatak in king christian x land, east greenland. administratively it falls under the northeast greenland national park zone.  this geographic feature was named by lauge koch during his 1929-30 expeditions after danish botanist carl hansen ostenfeld (1873-1931), author of flora of greenland and its origin.  geography it is a relatively large nunatak located east of stenoland between the wordie glacier and the granta glacier. its northern end lies 9 km to the east of faraway how's eastern point.  c. h. ostenfeld nunatak is 15.7 km in length and its maximum width is 6.4 km; the highest elevation is located at the western end and is  high.  see also list of nunataks of greenland  references  c. h.
cylindrepomus vittatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pic in 1925, originally under the genus hippardium.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1925
naeem abbas rufi is a pakistani singer. he is known as a band singer in morning shows utho jago pakistan and mazaaq raat.  career naeem abbas rufi emerged as a pakistani singer in the early 1990s both on pakistani television and in the pakistani film industry. before that, he made a name for himself by taking part in amateur singing competitions. at the age of 12, he was featured in a children's tv show 'sung sung chalay' conducted by the music composer sohail rana.  coke studio (pakistan) artist rufi's has released three albums including an album dedicated to nusrat fateh ali khan. he is also an established playback singer in television and film industry. in 2016, rufi marked his coke studio debut as a featured artist in season 9, as a part of the team with shuja haider and meesha shafi.  filmography  tv  utho jago pakistan  ishq ki inteha  mora piya   mazaaq raat  maaye ni  coke studio rufi made his debut in coke studio's season 9.  aaya laariye (o darling bride) duet with meesha shafi - episode 4, season 9  discography  kawaan  zamana  a tribute to nusrat fateh ali khan  references  external links  naeem abbas rufi at patari   naeem abbas rufi at itunes  21st-century pakistani male singers living people singers from karachi muhajir people year of birth missing (living people) coke studio (pakistani tv program)
severus von trier was bishop of trier from about 445/446. he proselytized to and contributed to the conversion of germanic peoples living in the regions of the lower moselle and middle rhine.  life von trier was in close contact with germanus of auxerre and lupus of troyes (* to 383; † about 478) and was believed to be a students of lupus in the 430's.  his term as bishop succeeded the term of leontius of trier. one of his most notable accomplishments was accompanying germanus on his second trip to britain to combat pelagianism. this trip is thought to have been about the year 446/447.  he also proselytized among the prima germania, germanic tribes such as the rhine franks and alemanni. these earlier attempts to extend the ecclesiastical influence on the region of the lower moselle and the middle rhine were successful.  a later tradition reports that he had received the first papal privilege for the trier church.  historicity severus is written about in the late antiquity vita of germanus of auxerre, and mentioned around 480 by constantine of lyon.  furthermore, he also appears in the life of lupus of troyes and the ecclesiastical history of the venerable bede. these combined works brought together the previously separate reports on the journey to britain and the german mission. in his research, wilhelm levison has been skeptical about the identification of the severus with these missions. however other researchers, such as eugen ewig, disagree. here they found value in the vita of lupus. but the question remains whether the vita is contemporary.  for many writers, the doubts have now been dispelled. hans hubert anton has examined the sources again critically and concludes that the vita of lupus must be nearly contemporary. the travel to britain he considers plausible.  veneration  in the diocese of trier, he is revered on 15 october. the bollandists revere him on march 16.  references  gallo-roman saints saints of germania 5th-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown 5th-century bishops in germania 5th-century christian saints roman catholic bishops of trier
olivia (stylized as oliviλ) is the debut ep by american singer and actress olivia holt. it was released on july 15, 2016 through hollywood records following the release of her debut single "phoenix".  track listing  charts  references  2016 debut eps olivia holt albums hollywood records eps
the fulton school is a montessori school serving preschool through twelfth grade students in st. albans, missouri.  demographics the demographic breakdown of the 104 k-12 students enrolled in 2017-18 was: asian - 3.8% black - 3.0% hispanic - 1.9% white - 86.5% multiracial - 4.8%  references  montessori schools in the united states schools in franklin county, missouri private schools in missouri private middle schools in missouri
summernights (released in some countries as: golden girls) is a 1977 album by german euro-disco group silver convention, which at the time consisted of vocalists penny mclean, ramona wolf and rhonda heath, along with producer-songwriters michael kunze (aka stephan prager) and sylvester levay.  track listing  all tracks written by michael kunze and sylvester levay  standard release  side one  "summernights" - 3:58  "wolfchild" - 4:20  "hotshot" - 5:57  "voodoo woman" - 4:00 side two  "telegram" - 5:29  "ain't it like a hollywood movie" - 5:06  "save me '77" - 3:11  "blame it on the music" - 4:27  "disco ball" - 3:10  us release (golden girls)  side one  "hollywood movie" - 5:06  alternative title for "ain't it like a hollywood movie"  "blame it on the music" - 4:27  "save me '77" - 3:11  "disco ball" - 3:10  "telegram" - 5:29 side two  "summernights" - 3:58  "wolfchild" - 4:20  "hotshot" - 5:57  "voodoo woman" - 4:00  charts  references   1976 albums silver convention albums
neither rich nor poor (spanish: ni pobres ni ricos) is a 1953 mexican comedy drama film directed by fernando cortes.  cast  lily aclemar   pepe biondi   guillermo bravo sosa   dick    fernando galiana  angel garasa   conchita gentil arcos  agustin isunza   jose jasso   jose alfredo jimenez   victor junco   ismael larumbe   carlos martinez baena   gloria marin   pepe nava   manuel noriega   jose pidal   francisco reiguera   abel salazar   manuel santigosa  jorge trevino   alfredo varela padre   pedro vargas   armando velasco   acela vidaurri  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy-drama films mexican comedy-drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by fernando cortes mexican black-and-white films
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'mo'.  mo  mohawk  (mohawk aero corp (pres: leon a dahlem), 2639 delaware st se, minneapolis, mn)  mohawk cabin  mohawk m1c-k pinto  mohawk redskin  mohawk m1c-w spurwing  mohawk m-2-c chieftain  mohawk mlv pinto  mohawk pt-7  mohme  ( (leo) mohme aero engr corp, 108 church st, new brunswick, nj)  mohme a-1  mohme a-2  mohme a-3  mohme mvp sport a  mohr  (fred mohr, riceville, ia)  mohr 1928 monoplane  moineau (rene moineau)  moineau c1  moineau pusher  moinicken  (chris moinicken, webster and aberdeen, sd)  moinicken 1924 biplane  moiseenko (v.l.moiseenko)  v.l.moiseenko 2u-b3  moisant  moisant l'ecrevisse monoplane  moles & kerr  (howard r moles & jhn a kerr, kenmore, ny)  moles & kerr 1931 monoplane  moller  ((paul) moller aircraft co, davis, ca)  moller m150 skycar  moller m200 neuera  moller m200x skycar  moller m200g volantor  moller m400 skycar  moller m600 skycar  moller xm-2  moller xm-3  moller xm-4  moller  (flugzeugbau moller)  moller stormarn  moller stomo 1  moller stomo 2  moller stomo 3 (v-3 temperolus, v-11 sturmer)  moller stromer  mollo-imoden  (ernest mollo & emil imoden, napa, ca)  mollo-imoden 1936 biplane  molniya (npo molniya) molniya-1 molniya-100 molniya-300 molniya-400 molniya-1000 molniya heracles  molteni (ernesto molteni)  molteni monoplane  molyneux  (g. c. molyneaux, melbourne, australia)  molyneux xm-1000  molyneux xm2001  monarch  (monarch aircraft corp (founders: frank stahle &
arthur w roza), 94 ogden ave, riverside, il)  monarch a  monarch commercial a.k.a. light commercial  monarch  (monarch aero products, cleveland, oh)  monarch f-130-2  moncassin  moncassin single-engined flying boat  moncassin twin-engined flying boat  mong  (ralph e mong, tulsa ok.)  mong ms1 sport  mong mongster  monnereau  (gilbert monnereau)  monnereau mg.01  monnett  ((john t) monnett experimental aircraft inc, elgin, il)  monnett sonerai  monnett sonerai ii  monnett sonerai ii-l  monnett sonerai ii-ls  monnett sonerai ii-lst  monnett sonerai ii-lt  monnett monex  monnett moni  monnett mini-moni  monnett mini  mono  (mono aircraft div (pres: w l velie), allied aviation industries inc)  mono midget  mono monocoach 201  mono monocoach 225  mono monocoupe 1  mono monocoupe 70  mono monocoupe 90  mono monocoupe 110  mono monocoupe 110 special  mono monocoupe 113  mono monocoupe 113 special  mono monocoupe 125  mono monocoupe 501  mono monoprep 218  mono monosport 1  mono monosport 2  monocoupe  (monocoupe corp/lambert engine & machine corp, lambert field, st louis, mo)  monocoupe 70-v  monocoupe 90  monocoupe 100 special  monocoupe 110  monocoupe 125  monocoupe d  monocoupe d-125  monocoupe d-145  monocoupe meteor  monocoupe monosport d  monocoupe monosport g  monocoupe monocoach h a.k.a. zenith / zephyr  universal l-7  mono-van  (mono-van aircraft inc (pres: eber h van valkenburg), 1202 prospect ave, toledo and fremont, oh)  mono-van m-v-1  mono-van m-2  monsted-vincent  ((robert) monsted-(h farley) vincent, new orleans, la)  mv-1 starflight small passenger aircraft, four pus
her engines  montagne  (william montagne, san ramon, ca)  montagne mach buster  montague  ( (m l) montague monoplane company, kansas city, ks)  montague monoplane  montalva   montalva m.1 montalva  montalva m.2 trovao azul  montana  (montana coyote inc, helena, mt)  montana coyote  montana mountain eagle  monte-copter  (monte-copter inc (fdr: maurice l ramme) seattle, wa)  monte-copter 10-a  monte-copter 12  monte-copter 15 tri-phibian  montee  ( montee aircraft co, santa monica, ca)  montee 1921 monoplane  montee dragonfly  montee mr-1  montee n-2  montee special  montgomerie autogyros   montgomerie bensen  montgomerie merlin  montgomery  (john j montgomery, santa clara, ca)  montgomery double monoplane  montijo  (john g montijo, 2322 elm st, long beach, ca)  montijo 1924 biplane  mooney   mooney a-1  mooney a-2  mooney m-5  mooney m-10  mooney m-16c  mooney m-17 (culver v)  mooney m-18 mite  mooney m-19  mooney m-20  mooney mt20  mooney m22  mooney m-30  mooney mu-2  mooney m20  mooney 201  mooney cadet  mooney tx-1  mooney mite aircraft corporation   mooney mite  moragon  (aeromoragon)  moragon stela  morane-saulnier  (leon morane et raymond saulnier / societe anonyme des aeroplanes morane-saulnier / seems - societe d'exploitation des etablissements morane saulnier / )  morane-saulnier torpille blindee  morane-saulnier 1912 hydravion  morane-saulnier a  morane-saulnier ac  morane-saulnier ae  morane-saulnier af  morane-saulnier afh  morane-saulnier ai  morane-saulnier an  morane-saulnier anl  morane-saulnier anr  morane-saulnier ans  morane-saulnier ar  morane-saulnier as  morane-saulnier av 1922   4-place parasol            prototype  morane-saulnier b  morane-saulnier bb  morane-saulnier bh  morane-saulnier bi  morane-saulnier c  morane-saulnier f  morane
-saulnier g  morane-saulnier ga  morane-saulnier gb  morane-saulnier g hydravion  morane-saulnier h  morane-saulnier i  morane-saulnier k floatplane racer, monoplane  morane-saulnier l  morane-saulnier la  morane-saulnier m  morane-saulnier n  morane-saulnier o  1914   single seater, development of g         prototype  morane-saulnier p  morane-saulnier pp (1911)  morane-saulnier s  morane-saulnier t  morane-saulnier u  morane-saulnier v  morane-saulnier wb (confusion with cyrillic script?)  morane-saulnier wr  morane-saulnier x  morane-saulnier y  morane-saulnier trk (mos-9)  morane-saulnier mos-1 (c.1)  morane-saulnier mos-2 (g)  morane-saulnier mos-3 (l)  morane-saulnier mos-4 (la)  morane-saulnier mos-5 (n)  morane-saulnier mos-5 c1  morane-saulnier mos-6 (i)  morane-saulnier mos-7 (bb)  morane-saulnier mos-8 (bh)  morane-saulnier mos-9 (trk)  morane-saulnier mos-10 (s)  morane-saulnier mos-11 (r1/a)  morane-saulnier mos-12 (h)  morane-saulnier mos-13 (m)  morane-saulnier mos-14 (gb)  morane-saulnier mos-15 (gb)  morane-saulnier mos-16 (e.2 two seat trainer)  morane-saulnier mos-17 (g)  morane-saulnier mos-18 (g)  morane-saulnier mos-19 (ga).  morane-saulnier mos-23  morane-saulnier mos-25  morane-saulnier mos-27  morane-saulnier mos-28  morane-saulnier mos-29  morane-saulnier mos-30  morane-saulnier mos-35  morane-saulnier ms.42  morane-saulnier mos-43  morane-saulnier mos-50  morane-saulnier mos-51  morane-saulnier mos-53  morane-saulnier mos-69  morane-saulnier mos-121  morane-saulnier mos-130  morane-saulnier mos-132  morane-saulnier mos-133  morane-saulnier mos-134  morane-saulnier mos-136  morane-saulnier mos-137  morane-saulnier mos-138  morane-saulnier mos-
139  morane-saulnier ms.140  morane-saulnier mos-147  morane-saulnier mos-148  morane-saulnier mos-149  morane-saulnier ms.129  morane-saulnier ms.152  morane-saulnier ms.180  morane-saulnier ms.181  morane-saulnier ms.185  morane-saulnier ms.191  morane-saulnier ms.200  morane-saulnier ms.221  morane-saulnier ms.222  morane-saulnier ms.223  morane-saulnier ms.224  morane-saulnier ms.225  morane-saulnier ms.226  morane-saulnier ms.227  morane-saulnier ms.229  morane-saulnier ms.230  morane-saulnier ms.231  morane-saulnier ms.232  morane-saulnier ms.233  morane-saulnier ms.234  morane-saulnier ms.234/2  morane-saulnier ms.234no2  morane-saulnier ms.235  morane-saulnier ms.236  morane-saulnier ms.237  morane-saulnier ms.260  morane-saulnier ms.275  morane-saulnier ms.278  morane-saulnier ms.300  morane-saulnier ms.301  morane-saulnier ms.311  morane-saulnier ms.315  morane-saulnier ms.315/2  morane-saulnier ms.316  morane-saulnier ms.317  morane-saulnier ms.325  morane-saulnier ms.340  morane-saulnier ms.341  morane-saulnier ms.342  morane-saulnier ms.343  morane-saulnier ms.345  morane-saulnier ms.350  morane-saulnier ms.405  morane-saulnier ms.406  morane-saulnier ms.410  morane-saulnier ms.430  morane-saulnier ms.435  morane-saulnier ms.450  morane-saulnier ms.470 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.471 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.472 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.473 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.474 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.475 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.476 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.477 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.478 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.479 vanneau  morane-saulnier ms.500 criquet  morane-saulnier ms.501  morane-saulnier ms.502  morane-saulnier ms.504  morane-saulnier ms.505  morane-saulnier ms.506  morane-saulnier ms
.540  morane-saulnier ms.560  morane-saulnier ms.561  morane-saulnier ms.562  morane-saulnier ms.563  morane-saulnier ms.564  morane-saulnier ms.570  morane-saulnier ms.571  morane-saulnier ms.572  morane-saulnier ms.600  morane-saulnier ms.602  morane-saulnier ms.603  morane-saulnier ms.660  morane-saulnier ms.661  morane-saulnier ms.700  morane-saulnier ms.701  morane-saulnier ms.703 petrel  morane-saulnier ms.704  morane-saulnier ms.730 alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.731 alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.732 alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.733 alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.733a alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.735 alcyon  morane-saulnier ms.755 fleuret  morane-saulnier ms.760 paris  morane-saulnier ms.880 rallye  morane-saulnier ms.880b rallye  morane-saulnier ms.885 super rallye  morane-saulnier ms.886 rallye  morane-saulnier ms.890 rallye commodore  morane-saulnier ms.893  morane-saulnier ms.894 rallye commodore  morane-saulnier ms.1500 epervier  moreau (albert moreau)  moreau 1909 monoplane  morava zlin  morava (russo) savage  moreau (jean moreau)  moreau 10  moreland  ((g e) moreland aircraft inc, mines field, el segundo, ca)  moreland m-1  moreland mt-101  moreland s-3  morgan  (morgan aircraft)  morgan bushmaster ii  morin  (pierre morin)  morin pm.1  morita  (shinzo morita)  morita 1911 aeroplane  morko   morko moraani  morris  (kenneth g morris)  morris km-ii spare parts  morris  (roy morris aircraft co, topeka, ks)  morris dove  morrisey  ((william j) morrisey aircraft co, long beach and santa ana, ca, 1959: (clifford) shinn aircraft co, santa ana, ca, c.1982: the morrisey co, san luis rey, ca, 1984: morrisey aircraft co, las vegas, nv)  morrisey 1000
c nifty  morrisey 2000c  morrisey 2150  morrisey bravo i primary  morrisey bravo ii aka mo-1-2  morrisey om-1  morrison aircraft  (nambour, queensland, australia) morrison 6  morrissette  (everett t morrissette, somers, ct)  morrissette mosquito  morrow  ((howard b) morrow aircraft corp, san bernardino, ca)  morrow 1-l victory trainer  morse  (allen morse, 3337 pincrest rd, indianapolis, in)  morse comet  morse 1935 biplane  mortensen/rutan  (dan mortensen - builder / burt rutan - designer)  mortensen/rutan racer  morton  (morton brothers airplanes, omaha and mccook, ne)  morton nightingale  moryson (josef moryson or morison / morrison)  moryson ostrovia i  moryson ostrovia ii  moryson iii  moryson iv  morton  (aviation industries inc, omaha, ne)  morton f.s.b.  moser   moser helicopter  mosca-bystritsky  (francesca e. mosca & bystritsky)  mosca-bystritsky mb  mosca-bystritsky mb encore  mosca-bystritsky mbbis  moshier (moshier technologies)  moshier aurora 400a  moskalyev   moskalyev rm-1  moskalyev mu-3  moskalyev sam-1  moskalyev sam-2  moskalyev sam-3  moskalyev sam-4  moskalyev sam-5  moskalyev sam-6  moskalyev sam-7 sigma  moskalyev sam-9 strela   moskalyev sam-10  moskalyev sam-11  moskalyev sam-11bis  moskalyev sam-12  moskalyev sam-13  moskalyev sam-14  moskalyev sam-16  moskalyev sam-18bis  moskalyev sam-19  moskalyev sam-22  moskalyev sam-23  moskalyev sam-24  moskalyev sam-25  moskalyev sam-26  moskalyev sam-28  moskalyev sam-29  mosler  (mosler motors inc, henderson
ville nc.)  mosler n3 pup  mosler n3-2  mosquito  (mosquito aviation)  mosquito aviation xe  mosquito aviation air  mosquito aviation xel  mosquito aviation xe3  mosquito aviation xet  moth  (moth aircraft corp, lowell, ma) (n.b. not related to american moth)  moth 60-gm  moth 60-gmw  moth 60-x  motor products  (designer william b stout)  motor products sx-6  moundsville  (moundsville airplane corp, moundsville, wv)  moundsville lone eagle x2lc  mountaineer  (christopher morgan, new york, ny)  mountaineer 1912 biplane  mountaineer trikes  mountaineer trikes mite-lite mountaineer trikes dual 175 mountaineer trikes solo 175  moscow technical school   itu 1911 monoplane (a.n. tupolev, b.n. yuryev and a.a. komarov)  lobanov l-1 ptenets (fledgeling) (nikolai rodionovich lobanov)  dukhovetskii d-1 liliput (a.v. dukhovetskii)  dukhovetskii d-2 malyi muromets  mosscraft  (moss brothers aircraft)  mosscraft m.a.1  mosscraft m.a.2  moura  (mauricio impelizieri p.moura)  mim esqualo-180 (shark)  mourlot   mourlot x-28  moyer  (jarrett g moyer, syracuse and skaneateles, ny)  moyer 1928 monoplane  moyes delta gliders  (botany and later kurnell, new south wales, australia)  moyes cxs  moyes gtr  moyes litespeed  moyes litesport  moyes malibu  moyes max  moyes mega  moyes mission  moyes sonic  moyes ventura  moyes x2  moyes xl  moyes xs  moyes xt  moyes xtralite  moyes microlights   moyes connie  moyes dragonfly  moyes dragonfly c  moyes tempest  moynet   moynet m-360 jupiter  mozhaiski  mozhaiski monoplane  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs
(i-m)
gianpaolo grisandi (born 4 december 1964) is an italian former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people italian male cyclists olympic cyclists of italy cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from ravenna
softball competition has been in the universiade' only in 2007  as optional sport.  events  medal table  last updated after the 2007 summer universiade  references  international university sports federation    universiade
the 2017 fiba under-19 basketball world cup (arabic: 2017 كاس العالم لكرة السلة تحت 19 سنة فيبا) was held in cairo, egypt from 1 to 9 july 2017.  canada won the gold medal by defeating italy in the final match 79-60. this marked canada's best ever international fiba tournament finish in any event.  venue  qualified teams  * brazil qualified for the tournament but was suspended by fiba. a fourth team from fiba americas had to be named to take brazil's place. the draw took place on 12 may 2017, where argentina was chosen to replace brazil.  preliminary round the draw for the tournament was held on 11 february 2017 in cairo, egypt.  group a  group b  group c  group d  knockout stage  bracket  5-8th place bracket  9-16th place bracket  13-16th place bracket  round of 16  9-16th place quarterfinals  quarterfinals  13-16th place semifinals  9-12th place semifinals  5-8th place semifinals  semifinals  15th place game  13th place game  eleventh place game  ninth place game  seventh place game  fifth place game  bronze medal match  final  final standings  statistics and awards  statistical leaders  points  rebounds  assists  blocks  steals  awards  all-tournament team  payton pritchard  r. j. barrett  lorenzo bucarelli  tommaso oxilia  abu kigab  references  external links official website  2017 fiba under-19 world championship fiba under-19 world championship international basketball competitions hosted by egypt fiba under-19 basketball world cup
the following lists events that happened in 1961 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - olafur thors, bjarni benediktsson  events  births  4 january - gunnar gislason, footballer 4 april - gyrðir eliasson, writer 23 april - þrostur leo gunnarsson, actor 30 april - arnor guðjohnsen, footballer 23 july - kristjan arason, handball player. 12 december - larus guðmundsson, footballer 13 december - guðmundur torfason, footballer  full date missing arnaldur indriðason, writer of crime fiction  deaths  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
the 2020 united states senate election in south dakota was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of south dakota, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent republican senator mike rounds was reelected to a second term in office, overperforming donald trump in the concurrent presidential election by 4.93 points.  republican primary  candidates  nominee mike rounds, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary scyller borglum, state representative  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  daniel ahlers, former state representative and former state senator  did not qualify clara hart, board member of the sioux falls arts council  declined erin healy, state representative brendan johnson, former united states attorney for the district of south dakota billie sutton, former minority leader of the south dakota senate and nominee for governor of south dakota in 2018 susan wismer, state senator and democratic nominee for governor of south dakota in 2014  independents  candidates  withdrew clayton walker, independent candidate in the 2014 united states senate election in south dakota and democratic candidate in the 2010 south dakota house of representatives elections  general election  predictions  polling  results  notes  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  daniel ahlers (d) for senate  mike rounds (r) for senate  clayton walker (i) for senate   2020 south dakota united states senate
iliski durumu: karısık is a remake of full house (south korean tv series). the turkish romantic comedy television series first aired on show tv from july 4, 2015. the series, created by banu kiremitci bozkurt, portrays love, jealousy, pride, and a love game that goes hand in hand with friendship and misunderstandings. iliski durumu: evli is a total of 4 episodes continuing iliski durumu: karısık.  plot  aysegul (seren sirince) a young girl who lives in a house with her pet cat minak. ayesagul aspires to be a writer. her friends trick her into going for a vacation where she meets the famous actor can tekin (berk oktay) and accidentally vomits on him. she tries her best to apologize, but can is way too angry at her. meanwhile, her friends, ece and efe sell her house. aysegul returns to find out she is homeless. with no other option, she decides to go to her former house and request the new owner to let her stay there. it is revealed that the new owner of the house is can tiken. after a series of fights, can finally allows her to stay till she finds shelter but for that she has to do all the house chores for can. can is in love with his beautiful fashion designer friend elif (eda ece) but elif is in love with murat. can, murat and elif are childhood friends.     a huge party is thrown to which celebrities such as can tiken are invited. aysegul also goes there as she wants to find a producer/director who can accept her script and make her a writer so that she can earn money. can gets angry on aysegul's appearance there. at the party, elif confesses to murat that she loves him but murat does not return her feelings and instead tells her that can is in love with her. engraged, elif goes to can in front of the media and says blames him for being the reason why murat rejected her. can replies that he is in love with ayseguk and the two are going to get married. this leaves everyone, including aysegul herself, shocked. at their house, can makes a deal with aysegul. aysegul has to marry can for six months and do all the house chores and after the end of those months, they will get divorced and aysegul will get her house. aysegul agrees to sign the contradict.
another condition of the contract is to keep this deal a secret.  can tiken's mother mediha meets aysegul and is devastated by aysegul's lack of proper manners and her incomplete education. can's father is dr. tahsin tiken, who is a very busy man. ismail tiken, can's grandfather, wholeheartedly welcomes aysegul to the family and quickly befriends her. he even wants aysegul and can to live in his house though can wants to live in a separate house because of his differences with his father, tahsin . aysegul and can get married. seeing this, despite the fact that elif loves murat, she starts feeling jealous of aysegul and begins to spend more time with can. meanwhile, murat tells aysegul that despite her scripts are horrible, he can help her improve her writing and gives her a job. aysegul finds a hard time completing the household chores as she wants to do only one thing; writing. meanwhile, aysegul falls in love with can while murat falls in love with aysegul due to her innocence. when can came to know that murat loves aysegul he feels jealous. later can also falls in love with aysegul. aysegul's friend efe becomes can's best friend and supporter. one day aysegul goes to can and tells her that she wants divorce from him and that she loves him. can tries a lot to stop the divorce he finally gives up. after the heartbreak, can decides to re-win aysegul and he, with the help of efe, wins aysegul back and the two decide to get married.  on the day of their wedding, elif lies to can about being pregnant. because of this, can is forced to leave aysegul at the wedding table, leaving her heartbroken and depressed. ece tries to bring murat to aysegul's life whereas efe still supports can. ece and efe, who were expecting their first child, ask aysegul and can to take care of their child if anything happens to them. ece and efe die in a car accident, leaving aysegul and can to take care of their newborn child. because of the child, aysegul and can come close again but can has to marry elif. they name efe and ece's baby ismail, after can's grandfather and nickname the baby iso. can marries elif and murat proposes aysegul and she accepts his proposal. aysegul takes iso for vaccination where she meet can. aysegul wents to drink water when she saw madiha and nia
zi. madiha was taking about elif's fake pregnancy. madiha suddenly realized that aysegul was listening everything and runs behind her. she pushes her and knocks her to the ground. can helps aysegul to stand on her feet back . meanwhile, they come to know that aysegul has lost a part of her memory and thinks that she is going to marry can. can takes advantage of this situation and starts to spend a lot of time with her. iso meanwhile starts to live with can. after a twisting turn aysegul gets her memory back and kicks can out of her house and reunites with murat. aysegul starts to focus on her novel and murats spends a lot of time with her which is not bearable for can. can heirs handan to make them separate. aysegul gets to know about the fake pregnancy of elif and threatens her that she will tell this to can. elif and madiha traps aysegul in their plan and shows that aysegul pushed elif and due to this elif lost her child. can and ismail come to know about truth. can gives elif divorce when he went to talk with her he over hears elif treatening murat that if he doent help her stay with can she will tell aysegul that murat was in the fake pregnancy, so he decides to meet with can to say the truth he keeps it in a video to show aysegul but on the other hand aysegul's and murat's marriage ceremony is going on when can enters and destroys everything by kidnapping aysegul and telling her the truth that murat has been hiding from her, after listening to the tape she calls murat and break up with him. can then tries to make things better with aysegul, aysegul refuses because can is still married to elif on paper he then tells her that he will end his marriage as soon as possible. elif tells can that she will divorce if he gives her aysegul's house he refuses and aysegul go to elif's house and tell her that she doesn't care if she has the house. elif then takes her stuff and go to aysegul's house and stay in it few days later aysegul left the house and wrote a letter to can that she will never come back again. she has a new job as a waitress and she got a new small apartment.  international broadcast  cast  series overview  references  external links iliski durumu: karısık (2015)  2015 turkish television series debuts 2016 turkish television series endings television series produced in istanbul
television shows set in istanbul television series set in the 2010s turkish drama television series turkish romantic comedy television series television series by mf yapım show tv original programming turkish television series based on south korean television series
nihill is a surname. some notable people with the surname are:  john nihill (1850-1908), irish-born soldier in the u.s. army julie nihill (born 1957), australian actress  paul nihill (1939-2020), british race walker philippa nihill, bass player for the underground lovers torsten nihill, drummer for omega lithium  english-language surnames
wetheral is a civil parish in the carlisle district of cumbria, england.  it contains 104 buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  of these, eleven are listed at grade i, the highest of the three grades, five are at grade ii*, the middle grade, and the others are at grade ii, the lowest grade.  the parish is to the east of the city of carlisle, and it contains the villages of wetheral, great corby, cumwhinton, scotby, warwick-on-eden, warwick bridge, broadwath, cotehill, and aglionby, and the surrounding countryside.  wetheral priory was in the parish, but all that remains of it is its gatehouse and a length of wall; both are listed buildings and scheduled monuments.  another important building in the parish is corby castle, initially a tower house and later expanded; this and associated structures are listed.  most of the other listed buildings are country houses and smaller houses with associated structures, farmhouses and farm buildings.  in addition, the listed buildings include churches and associated structures, medieval cave dwellings, former water mills, public houses, a milestone, bridges and viaducts, railway stations and associated buildings, war memorials, and a school.   key  buildings  notes and references  notes  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria
albert ernest thomas (10 march 1872 - 25 may 1923) was a member of the legislative assembly of western australia from 1901 to 1905, representing the seat of dundas.  thomas was born in camborne, cornwall, england, to charlotte augusta (nee dunstan) and joseph thomas. he attended the camborne school of mines, and afterward worked as a mining engineer in cornwall, wales, and south africa. thomas came to western australia in 1896, and subsequently managed mines in norseman and coolgardie. he entered parliament at the 1901 state election, winning the seat of dundas, and was re-elected at the 1904 election. at the early 1905 election, however, he was defeated by a labor candidate, charles hudson. thomas recontested dundas at the 1908 election, but again lost to hudson. he returned to cornwall in 1910, and died there in 1923, aged 51.  references  1872 births 1923 deaths british mining engineers australian people of cornish descent british emigrants to australia members of the western australian legislative assembly people from camborne
serverless computing is a cloud computing execution model in which the cloud provider allocates machine resources on demand, taking care of the servers on behalf of their customers.  "serverless" is a misnomer in the sense that servers are still used by cloud service providers to execute code for developers.  however, developers of serverless applications are not concerned with capacity planning, configuration, management, maintenance, fault tolerance, or scaling of containers, vms, or physical servers.  serverless computing does not hold resources in volatile memory; computing is rather done in short bursts with the results persisted to storage. when an app is not in use, there are no computing resources allocated to the app.  pricing is based on the actual amount of resources consumed by an application. it can be a form of utility computing.   serverless computing can simplify the process of deploying code into production. serverless code can be used in conjunction with code deployed in traditional styles, such as microservices or monoliths. alternatively, applications can be written to be purely serverless and use no provisioned servers at all. this should not be confused with computing or networking models that do not require an actual server to function, such as peer-to-peer (p2p).  serverless runtimes  serverless vendors offer compute runtimes, also known as function as a service (faas) platforms, which execute application logic but do not store data. common languages supported by serverless runtimes are java, python and php. generally, the functions run under isolation boundaries, such as, linux containers.  commercial offerings  the first "pay as you go" code execution platform was zimki, released in 2006, but it was not commercially successful. in 2008, google released google app engine, which featured metered billing for applications that used a custom python framework, but could not execute arbitrary code.  picloud, released in 2010, offered faas support for python.  kubeless and fission are two open source faas platforms which run with kubernetes.  google app engine, introduced in 2008, was the first abstract serverless computing offering. app engine included http functions with a 60-second timeout, and a blob store and data store with their own timeouts. no in-memory persistence was allowed. all operations had to be executed within these limits, but this allowed apps built in app engine to scale near-infinitely and was used to support early customers including snapchat, as well
as many external and internal google apps. language support was limited to python using native python modules, as well as a limited selection of python modules in c that were chosen by google. like later serverless platforms, app engine also used pay-for-what-you-use billing.  aws lambda, introduced by amazon in 2014, popularized the abstract serverless computing model. it is supported by a number of additional aws serverless tools such as aws serverless application model (aws sam) amazon cloudwatch, and others.  google cloud platform created a second serverless offering, google cloud functions in 2016.  ibm offers ibm cloud functions in the public ibm cloud since 2016. ibm added a second serverless offering, ibm cloud code engine, in 2021.  microsoft azure offers azure functions, offered both in the azure public cloud or on-premises via azure stack.  cloudflare offers cloudflare workers, since 2017.  fastly offers compute@edge, since 2019.  serverless databases  several serverless databases have emerged in the last few years. these systems extend the serverless execution model to the rdbms, eliminating the need to provision or scale virtualized or physical database hardware.  nutanix offers a solution named era which turns an existing rdbms such as oracle, mariadb, postgresql or microsoft sql server into a serverless service.  amazon aurora offers a serverless version of its databases, based on mysql and postgresql, providing on-demand, auto-scaling configurations.  azure data lake is a highly scalable data storage and analytics service. the service is hosted in azure, microsoft's public cloud. azure data lake analytics provides a distributed infrastructure that can dynamically allocate or de-allocate resources so customers pay for only the services they use.  firebase, also owned by google, includes a hierarchical database and is available via fixed and pay-as-you-go plans.  advantages  cost  serverless can be more cost-effective than renting or purchasing a fixed quantity of servers, which generally involves significant periods of underutilization or idle time. it can even be more cost-efficient than provisioning an autoscaling group, due to more efficient bin-packing of the underlying machine resources.  this can be described as pay-as-you-go computing or bare-code as you are charged based solely upon the time and memory allocated to run your code; without associated fees for idle
time.  immediate cost benefits are related to the lack of operating costs, including: licenses, installation, dependencies, and personnel cost for maintenance, support, or patching. the lack of personnel cost is an advantage that applies broadly to cloud computing.  elasticity versus scalability   in addition, a serverless architecture means that developers and operators do not need to spend time setting up and tuning autoscaling policies or systems; the cloud provider is responsible for scaling the capacity to the demand. as google puts it: "from prototype to production to planet-scale."  as cloud native systems inherently scale down as well as up, these systems are known as elastic rather than scalable.  small teams of developers are able to run code themselves without the dependence upon teams of infrastructure and support engineers; more developers are becoming devops skilled and distinctions between being a software developer or hardware engineer are blurring.  productivity  with function as a service, the units of code exposed to the outside world are simple event driven functions. this means that typically, the programmer does not have to worry about multithreading or directly handling http requests in their code, simplifying the task of back-end software development.  disadvantages  performance  infrequently-used serverless code may suffer from greater response latency than code that is continuously running on a dedicated server, virtual machine, or container. this is because, unlike with autoscaling, the cloud provider typically "spins down" the serverless code completely when not in use. this means that if the runtime (for example, the java runtime) requires a significant amount of time to start up, it will create additional latency.  resource limits  serverless computing is not suited to some computing workloads, such as high-performance computing, because of the resource limits imposed by cloud providers, and also because it would likely be cheaper to bulk-provision the number of servers believed to be required at any given point in time.  monitoring and debugging  diagnosing performance or excessive resource usage problems with serverless code may be more difficult than with traditional server code, because although entire functions can be timed, there is typically no ability to dig into more detail by attaching profilers, debuggers or apm tools. furthermore, the environment in which the code runs is typically not open source, so its performance characteristics cannot be precisely replicated in a local environment.  security  serverless is sometimes mistakenly considered as more secure than traditional architectures. while this is true to some extent because os vulnerabilities are
taken care of by the cloud provider, the total attack surface is significantly larger as there are many more components to the application compared to traditional architectures and each component is an entry point to the serverless application. moreover, the security solutions customers used to have to protect their cloud workloads become irrelevant as customers cannot control and install anything on the endpoint and network level such as an intrusion detection/prevention system (ids/ips).  this is intensified by the mono-culture properties of the entire server network. (a single flaw can be applied globally.) according to protego, the "solution to secure serverless apps is close partnership between developers, devops, and appsec, also known as devsecops. find the balance where developers don't own security, but they aren't absolved from responsibility either. take steps to make it everyone's problem. create cross-functional teams and work towards tight integration between security specialists and development teams. collaborate so your organization can resolve security risks at the speed of serverless."  privacy many serverless function environments are based on proprietary public cloud environments. here, some privacy implications have to be considered, such as shared resources and access by external employees. however, serverless computing can also be done on private cloud environment or even on-premises, using for example the kubernetes platform. this gives companies full control over privacy mechanisms, just as with hosting in traditional server setups.  standards  serverless computing is covered by international data center authority (idca) in their framework ae360. however, the part related to portability can be an issue when moving business logic from one public cloud to another for which the docker solution was created. cloud native computing foundation (cncf) is also working on developing a specification with oracle.  vendor lock-in  serverless computing is provided as a third-party service. applications and software that run in the serverless environment are by default locked to a specific cloud vendor. therefore, serverless can cause multiple issues during migration.  see also   cloud computing  function as a service  references  further reading         cloud computing
the 1920 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1920 college football season.  in their 14th season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 3-4 record and were outscored by their opponents, 131 to 119. end grant westgate was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
superstar k 2016 () is the eighth current season of the south korean television talent show series superstar k, which premiered on 22 september 2016 on mnet and airs every thursday night at 9:40pm kst. eliminations are determined in every episode, based on text message votes and online votes that are open to the entire public. the winner of superstar k 2016 will receive 500,000,000 won (us$470,990). kim bum-soo had been confirmed return to appear on the show. gummy, gil seong-joon, kim yeon-woo, brave brothers, ailee,  han sung-ho of fnc entertainment have joined him in the list of judges. the lineup is a mixture of veteran singers and producers in the industry.  the judges will be separated into the categories of "legendary vocal", "trendy artist", and "star maker". the contestants will be judged not only on their vocals but their star power, public appeal, and potential.  an mnet representative stated, "superstar k 2016 will show the most change among all the superstar k seasons. in order to show the audiences something new, we will be transforming the show all the way from the judging lineup. please anticipate the new season."  this is the first season to be produced by signal entertainment group for mnet due to the 890 million won contract between the former and mnet's owners cj e&m in may 2016. signal was the production company behind the hit but controversial mnet girl group survival program produce 101.  broadcasting time  broadcast  winner prize 300₩ million cash prize +  200₩ million recording contract album debut  selection process  audition period: april 11, 2016 - july 10, 2016  for korean speakers:  this season, the options of applying via kakaotalk. also became available.  for non-korean speakers:  apply directly on mnet.com by uploading video of you singing. click here for the application page.  in addition, in-person overseas auditions are planned to take place  in the us at shepard university in los angeles, berklee college of music in boston, and born star training center  in new york.  audition rounds guide  rounds 1 : 20-second battle competitors are given 20 seconds to appeal on their singing skills . judges can press the "plus" button to extend the auditioner's singing time by 10 seconds and one can only allow a maximum of 30 seconds. however, if the singer fails to receive more time, the four judges' appro
vals can pass the singer to the next round, of he the automatically drops out, even if the singer was given the full minute and 30 seconds to perform on stage.  round 2 : battle point out (64 teams)  round 3 : 2vs2 (40 teams)  round 4 : finals top10 (26 teams)  double final mission  solo mission  finalists  top 10   jinwon (ko)  jo min wook  corona  lee ji eun  lee sarah   yoo da bin  park hye-won  kim ye sung  dong  woo seok  kim young geun  elimination chart  finals  top 10 - first stage (november 17, 2016)  judges score 50% + population votes 40% + online pre votes 10%  performance  results  top 7 - judge's mission (november 24, 2016) judges score 50% + sms votes 45% + online pre votes 5%  performance  results  top 4 - my style by kim gun-mo (december 1, 2016) judges score 50% + sms votes 45% + online pre votes 5%  performance    top4 special stage: jo min wook + kim young geun + lee ji eun + park hye won : "park gwang-hyun and kim gun-mo - together"  results  final (december 8, 2016) judges score 50% + sms votes 45% + online pre votes 5%  performance    top2 special stage: kim young geun + lee ji eun : "lee moon-se - farewell my love"  top10&kim bum-soo&kim yeon-woo special stage: jinwon + jo min wook + corona + lee ji eun + lee sarah + yoo da bin + park hye won + kim ye sung + dong woo seok + kim young geun + kim bum-soo + kim yeon-woo : "now n new various artists - 하나되어"  results  discography  ratings  in the ratings below, the highest rating for the show will be in  and the lowest rating for the show will be in .  references  external links  naver  2016 south korean television seasons 8
nihal singhwala is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of moga district and is reserved for candidates belonging to the scheduled castes.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  moga district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india moga district
arthur kenney (born march 5, 1946) is a retired american professional basketball player. he played at the power forward and center positions, and was nicknamed "the great red".  high school kenney played high school basketball at power memorial academy (pma), in manhattan, new york city. at power memorial, he was a teammate of lew alcindor (later known as kareem abdul-jabbar). the team's head coach was jack donohue, and its assistant coach was dick percudani.  in may 2000, kenney's high school senior season team of 1963-64, was named "the best high school team in american history", by the national sportswriters association, and it was inducted into the catholic high school athletic association's hall of fame as, "the team of the century".  college career kenney played college basketball at fairfield university, with the fairfield stags, from 1964 to 1968. he was inducted into the fairfield university hall of fame in 1996.  professional career for his pro career, kenney moved to france, where he played with the lnb pro a club le mans, from 1968 to 1970. he then moved to italy, where he played with the italian league club olimpia milano, from 1970 to 1973. with milano, he won the fiba saporta cup title in the 1970-71 and 1971-72 seasons. he also won the italian cup and the italian league championship with milano, during the 1971-72 season.  he then returned to le mans, where he played from 1973 to 1975. he played with the italian second division club partenope napoli, during the 1975-76 season. in 2013, olimpia milano retired his number 18 jersey.  post-playing career after he ended his basketball playing career, kenney went into coaching, and then eventually began a career working on wall street.  references  external links   italian league profile   1946 births living people american expatriate basketball people in france american expatriate basketball people in italy american men's basketball players basketball players from new york city centers (basketball) fairfield stags men's basketball players le mans sarthe basket players olimpia milano players partenope napoli basket players power forwards (basketball)
gian giacomo gallarati scotti (2 september 1886 - 4 january 1983) was an italian politician. he was the 5th podesta of milan. he was a recipient of the order of saints maurice and lazarus.  references  1886 births 1983 deaths people from vimercate members of the senate of the kingdom of italy 20th-century italian politicians mayors of milan recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus
robert l. "bob" pavlak, sr. (july 18, 1924 - october 9, 1994) was an american police officer and politician.  early life  born in st. paul, minnesota in 1924, pavlak grew up in catholic orphanages in milaca, minnesota. his father, leo pavlak, was a south st. paul police officer who was shot and killed during a payroll robbery by arthur barker of the ma barker gang on august 30, 1933. bob pavlak's mother died of cancer the following year, leaving him orphaned at age 10.  bob pavlak served in the united states marine corps during world war ii. after the war, he joined the st. paul police department. he worked as a downtown traffic officer for many years.  he married edel ruth in 1951. they had six children.  political career  pavlak was elected to the minnesota house of representatives in 1966. his district included precincts in st. paul and west st. paul. a republican, pavlak served in the legislature until 1974, having won reelection in 1968, 1970, and 1972. in 1974, pavlak lost his seat when he was defeated by arnold kempe, the candidate of the democratic farmer labor party.  the 1978 election controversy  pavlak returned to politics in 1978. in an extremely close race, he defeated kempe by a margin of 321 votes out of more than 8,500 votes cast. however, in 1979, the minnesota house of representatives removed pavlak from office and ordered a special election on grounds that pavlak's campaign had violated minnesota's fair campaign practices act.  the controversy arose over a factually erroneous editorial in the saint paul dispatch newspaper. on november 4, 1978-three days before the election-a dispatch editorial mistakenly claimed that kempe had missed 325 of 329 roll call votes in the legislature. in fact, he had only missed 329 out of 1,798 roll call votes.  the dispatch based its editorial on documents provided to it by pavlak during an interview with dispatch editor william sumner. pavlak's documents accurately identified kempe's missed roll call votes. however, the dispatch'''s editorial board misinterpreted the documents. in its november 4 editorial, the dispatch asserted that its editors "have seen nothing to dispute his [pavlak's] research report that shows the incumbent voted four times in 1967-68 this out of more than 300 opportunities." after the dispatch published the erroneous editorial, pavlak's campaign alerted the editors to the
fact that kempe's missed roll call votes occurred in 1977-78, not 1967-68.  but pavlak's campaign did not alert the editors to the newspaper's gross misstatement of kempe's voting record. moreover, pavlak's campaign subsequently reprinted at least 1,800 copies of the flawed editorial and circulated them in the district just before election day.  on november 7, 1978, pavlak defeated kempe by 4,454 votes to 4,133. pavlak took his seat in the minnesota house of representatives on january 3, 1979.  the election contest, however, was far from over. voters in the district filed a lawsuit alleging that pavlak's campaign had violated state election law by reprinting and circulating the deeply flawed dispatch'' editorial. in addition, the minnesota legislature initiated an investigation into the pavlak-kempe election controversy.  in a may 11, 1979 ruling, the minnesota supreme court held that pavlak's campaign violated state election law:  "[i]t is our conclusion that mr. pavlak violated minn.st. 210a.04 and that this violation was 'deliberate, serious and material' within the meaning of minn.st. 209.02. it was deliberate in the sense that the distribution of the statement as worded was intentional and was intended to affect the voting at the election. it was serious because the distribution of 1,800-1,900 reprints in a single legislative district is a far from trivial amount. it was material because voting is the essence of a representative's position, and attacking voting performance is germane to one's conduct in that position."  however, the court declined to overturn the election results. article 4, section 6 of the minnesota constitution provides that "each house shall be the judge of the election returns and eligibility of its own members." the minnesota supreme court interpreted section 6 as ousting the courts of jurisdiction over the pavlak case. section 6, the court held, was "an absolute grant of constitutional power [to the legislature] which may not be delegated to or shared with the courts." accordingly, the justices concluded that "we have no jurisdiction to issue a final and binding decision in this matter, and our opinion by statute will be and by the minnesota constitution must only be advisory to the house of representatives."  the minnesota house of representatives ultimately resolved the issue in a party-line vote. the 1978 election saw the house of representatives evenly divided between the dfl and the independent-republicans, 67 seats
to 67. but house rules barred members from voting on their own election contests. consequently, with pavlak unable to participate in the vote, the house voted 67 to 66 to vacate pavlak's seat and order a new election.  pavlak mounted a new campaign for his seat but he lost the june 19, 1979 special election to frank j. rodriguez sr., the first hispanic elected to the minnesota house of representatives.  u.s. marshal  pavlak retired from the st. paul police department with the rank of lieutenant in 1981. president ronald reagan appointed him the united states marshal for the district of minnesota in 1981. pavlak retired as united states marshal in 1990.  death  pavlak died of esophageal cancer at his home in west st. paul, minnesota on october 9, 1994 at age 70. his funeral service was held at his home parish, st. matthews catholic church, in st. paul. he was buried at fort snelling national cemetery. colleagues described him as "a consummate gentleman."  notes  1924 births 1994 deaths politicians from saint paul, minnesota military personnel from minnesota american police officers united states marshals minnesota republicans members of the minnesota house of representatives people from west st. paul, minnesota 20th-century american politicians united states marine corps personnel of world war ii deaths from esophageal cancer deaths from cancer in minnesota
the official and de facto national symbols of afghanistan are as follows:  references  external links
the 2017 fivb volleyball world league was the 28th edition of the annual men's international volleyball tournament played by 36 teams between 2 june and 8 july. the group 1 final round was held in curitiba, brazil.  in front of a crowd of 23,149 fans, france lifted the fivb volleyball world league trophy for the second time of their history, prevailing on an epic battle over hosts brazil 3-2. this marked the fifth time in the last seven editions with brazil reaching the final without successfully winning the gold medal. canada wrapped up their best ever world league campaign by seizing the bronze medal (their first medal at an international fivb event) after coming from behind for a 3-1 win over united states. earvin n'gapeth was elected the most valuable player for the second time, after also being the mvp in 2015.  slovenia defeated japan in the group 2 finals in gold coast, australia to achieve their second straight group title since their debut last year (the team had previously won the group 3 in 2016).  moreover, estonia finished atop of group 3 at their first ever world league participation after a convincing 3-0 win over spain in the final match in leon, mexico.  on 11 june 2017, the new one-set-score world record for national teams was established in the group 3 intercontinental round match between qatar and venezuela. they spent 49 minutes in a 45-43 third set that was won by qatar. the previous highest set score was 44-42, which had happened twice (in the 1999 fivb volleyball world league match between canada and brazil, and in the 2016 world olympic qualifying tournament match between france and australia).  qualification excluding  and , who withdrew from the tournament, the remaining 34 teams from the 2016 edition directly qualified.  and  qualified through the 2016 european league.  1 teams making their debuts.  format  intercontinental round group 1, the 12 teams were drawn in 9 pools of 4 teams. in each pool, all teams will compete in round robin format. the results of all 9 pools will combine in 1 ranking table. the hosts and the top five ranked teams will play in the final round. the last ranked team after the intercontinental round could be relegated if the winners of the group 2 final round can meet the promotion requirements set by the fivb. group 2, the 12 teams were drawn in 9 pools of 4 teams. in each pool, all teams will compete in round robin format. the results of all 9 pools will combine in 1 ranking table. the hosts and the top three ranked teams
will play in the final round. the last ranked team after the intercontinental round could be relegated if the winners of the group 3 final round can meet the promotion requirements set by the fivb. group 3, the 12 teams were drawn in 6 pools of 4 teams. in each pool, all teams will compete in round robin format. the results of all 6 pools will combine in 1 ranking table. the hosts and the top three ranked teams will play in the final round.  final round group 1, the 6 teams in the final round will be divided in 2 pools determined by the serpentine system. the host team will be at the top position and the other teams will be allocated by their rankings in the preliminary round. the top 2 teams from each pool will play in the semifinals. the winning teams will play in the final match for the gold medals. group 2 and group 3, the host team will face the last ranked team among the qualified teams in the semifinals. the other 2 teams will play against each other in the other semifinal. the winning teams will play in the final match for the gold medals and a chance for promotion.  pools composition the pools  were announced on 13 september 2016.  group 1  group 2  group 3  final round  competition schedule  squads  pool standing procedure  number of matches won  match points  sets ratio  points ratio  if the tie continues as per the point ratio between two teams, the priority will be given to the team which won the last match between them. when the tie in points ratio is between three or more teams, a new classification of these teams in the terms of points 1, 2 and 3 will be made taking into consideration only the matches in which they were opposed to each other.  match won 3-0 or 3-1: 3 match points for the winner, 0 match points for the loser match won 3-2: 2 match points for the winner, 1 match point for the loser  intercontinental round  group 1  ranking  |}  week 1  pool a1 venue:  adriatic arena, pesaro, italy all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool b1 venue:  spc vojvodina, novi sad, serbia all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool c1 venue:  kazan volleyball centre, kazan, russia all times are moscow time (utc+03:00).  |}  week 2  pool d1 venue:  azadi indoor stadium, tehran, iran
all times are iran daylight time (utc+04:30).  |}  pool e1 venue:  palace of culture and sports, varna, bulgaria all times are eastern european summer time (utc+03:00).  |}  pool f1 venue:  palais des sports de pau, pau, france all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  week 3  pool g1 venue:  orfeo superdomo, cordoba, argentina all times are argentina time (utc−03:00).  |}  pool h1 venues:  spodek, katowice, poland (15 june) and  atlas arena, łodz, poland (17-18 june) all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool i1 venue:  lotto arena, antwerp, belgium all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  group 2  ranking  |}  week 1  pool a2 venue:  jangchung arena, seoul, south korea all times are korea standard time (utc+09:00).  |}  pool b2 venue:  arena poprad, poprad, slovakia all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool c2 venue:  baskent volleyball hall, ankara, turkey all times are turkey time (utc+03:00).  |}  week 2  pool d2 venue:  hartwall arena, helsinki, finland all times are eastern european summer time (utc+03:00).  |}  pool e2 venue:  takasaki arena, takasaki, japan all times are japan standard time (utc+09:00).  |}  pool f2 venue:  budvar arena, ceske budejovice, czech republic all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  week 3  pool g2 venue:  kunshan sports center gymnasium, kunshan, china all times are china standard time (utc+08:00).  |}  pool h2 venue:  cairo stadium indoor hall 2, cairo, egypt all times are eastern european time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool i2 venue:  sportcampus zuiderpark, the hague, netherlands all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  group 3  ranking  |}  week 1  pool a3 venue:  pavello de la vall d'hebron,
barcelona, spain all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool b3 venue:  nikoljac sports center, bijelo polje, montenegro all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  pool c3 venue:  fraport arena, frankfurt, germany all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  week 2  pool d3 venue:  kalevi spordihall, tallinn, estonia all times are eastern european summer time (utc+03:00).  |}  pool e3 venue:  el menzah sports palace, tunis, tunisia all times are west africa time (utc+01:00).  |}  pool f3 venue:  tipsarena linz, linz, austria all times are central european summer time (utc+02:00).  |}  final round  group 3 venue:  domo de la feria, leon, mexico all times are central daylight time (utc−05:00).  final four (week 3)  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  group 2 venue:  carrara indoor stadium, gold coast, australia all times are australian eastern standard time (utc+10:00).  final four (week 4)  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  group 1 venue:  arena da baixada, curitiba, brazil all times are brasilia time (utc−03:00).  pool play (week 6)  pool j1  |}  |}  pool k1  |}  |}  final four (week 6)  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  final standing  awards  most valuable player  earvin n'gapeth best setter  benjamin toniutti best outside spikers  ricardo lucarelli  earvin n'gapeth  best middle blockers  graham vigrass  kevin le roux best opposite spiker  wallace de souza best libero  blair bann  statistics leaders the statistics of each group follows the vis reports p2 and p3. the statistics include 6 volleyball skills; serve, recept, set, spike, block, and dig. the table below shows the top 5 ranked players in each skill by group plus top scorers as of 24 june 2017.  best scorers best scorers determined by scored points from spike, block and serve.  best spikers best spikers determined by successful spikes in percentage.  best blockers
best blockers determined by the average of stuff blocks per set.  best servers best servers determined by the average of aces per set.  best setters best setters determined by the average of running sets per set.  best diggers best diggers determined by the average of successful digs per set.  best receivers best receivers determined by efficient receptions in percentage.  see also 2017 fivb volleyball world grand prix  references  external links federation internationale de volleyball - official website 2017 fivb volleyball world league - official website media guide - introduction and tournament history at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - preview and competition information at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - team information and players statistics at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - referees at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - tournaments records and history world ranking at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - historical information at 2017 fivb volleyball world league media guide - media information at 2017 fivb volleyball world league  2017 fivb world league international volleyball competitions hosted by brazil 2017 in brazilian sport volleyball world league volleyball world league sport in curitiba 21st century in curitiba
paul bruce carpenter (february 24, 1928 - january 24, 2002) was an american psychologist and politician.  early life   born in sioux city, iowa, carpenter attended the university of iowa and received a doctorate degree in experimental psychology from florida state university. he moved to orange county, california in 1960 and worked as a psychologist.  political career  he was involved with the democratic party. from 1974 to 1976, carpenter served in the california state assembly. he then served in the california state senate from 1976 to 1986. in 1982, carpenter ran for the democratic party nomination for u.s. senate, but lost to then-governor jerry brown. carpenter also served on the california board of equalization from 1987 to 1990. despite being convicted of corruption charges in 1990, he won re-election to the board but was barred from serving because of the conviction.  carpenter led his senate caucus' election fund-raising work from 1980 to 1985, which led to accusations of corruption. in 1990, carpenter was convicted of racketeering, conspiracy, and extortion as part of the brispec sting operation. he fled to costa rica before sentencing - which he claimed was for prostate cancer treatment - and was subsequently extradited to the united states. he served his prison term from 1995 until 1999.  later life  carpenter's only child, jana carpenter-koklich (born january 1, 1960), went missing from her home in lakewood, california in august 2001 and has never been found. her husband bruce koklich was later convicted of her murder.  for many years, carpenter lived in cypress, california. carpenter died of cancer in 2002 at his home in san antonio, texas, where he had been living since 1999.  references  external links join california paul b. carpenter  1928 births 2002 deaths people from cypress, california politicians from iowa city, iowa people from san antonio university of iowa alumni florida state university alumni american psychologists california democrats california state senators members of the california state assembly california politicians convicted of crimes 20th-century psychologists 20th-century american politicians
chen weixiu (born 2 january 1966) is a chinese former cyclist. she competed in the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1966 births living people chinese female cyclists olympic cyclists of china cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
ankeny was a town in adams county, washington. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  the community was named after senator levi ankeny.  references  ghost towns in washington (state) geography of adams county, washington
emil engelmuller (4 october 1873 in prague, bohemia - 11 april 1944 prague, protectorate of bohemia and moravia) was a czech entrepreneur, founder of the engelmuller leather gloves company and motoring enthusiast.  emil engelmuller inherited the engelmuller glove shop in 1895 from his father ferdinand engelmuller. ferdinand founded his first glove shop in prague in 1865, but due to high quality of his products he was soon able to expand across the austro-hungarian empire, and he opened new shops in vienna and budapest.  after ten years of emil engelmuller's management, in february 1904, engelmuller presented new driving products at the first automobile exhibition in bohemia, where the czech automobile club was founded. besides new gloves, the range featured elegant leather coats, drivers' peaked caps and leather helmets. since then, engelmuller was forever connected with driving gloves and motoring accessories. "mr emil engelmuller is our leading designer in his field." wrote the magazine sport & games in 1908.  the outbreak of world war i led to a decline in exports and the loss of some traditional european markets, but this was quickly counterbalanced by supplies to the austro-hungarian and german armies. in 1915, emil engelmuller's son richard enrolled in the air force, and after the war brought back inspiration from the "lozenge" camouflage used on his aircraft. this design pattern would later become a hallmark of the brand.  the first republic of czechoslovakia brought the engelmuller brand its heyday. its shops offered leather suits, caps, gloves and trousers made of the best russian and swedish leather. its advertisements appeared in the majority of motoring and society magazines, such as automobil, motor revue or touch of society. engelmuller gloves were worn by car racing driver eliska junkova, by czech aerobatics legend frantisek novak, actress lida baarova and many others. engelmuller glove styles were also popular with international automobile racing stars such as tazio nuvolari, louis chiron and bernd rosemeyer.  before world war ii, the engelmuller company was manufacturing gloves for pilots of czechoslovak air force and many czech pilots still wore them during battle of britain while fighting for royal air force. after german occupation in 1939, the company's entire output was commandeered by the wehrmacht.  the worst moment for engelmuller was still yet to come. emil engelmuller died in 1944, one year before the end of the war, and in 1948, the company was nationalised by the new communist regime.  engelmuller was revived as gloves and luxury mot
oring-related goods manufacturer in 2015, and on the occasion of the 150th anniversary of its founding, the brand has launched a new collection that pays homage to its past, ensuring that its tradition lives on.  references  1873 births 1944 deaths 19th-century czech businesspeople 20th-century czech people businesspeople from prague czech fashion designers  manufacturing businesspeople leather manufacturers gloves
the outcast hall of fame is the seventh full-length album by the swedish/danish band evil masquerade.  track listing all songs written by henrik flyman except mark hur var skugga which was written by carl michael bellman.  personnel evil masquerade henrik flyman - guitar & vocals dennis buhl - drums thor jeppesen - bass artur meinild - keyboard  additional performers mats leven - vocals rick altzi - vocals apollo papathanasio - vocals nicklas sonne - lead vocals yenz leonhardt - backing vocals  production produced by henrik flyman. mixed and mastered by tommy hansen at jailhouse studios. paintings by david troest. photos by thomas trane. artwork by gunbarrel offensive design.  references  external links   evil masquerade albums 2016 albums
henry allan fagan (4 april 1889 - 6 december 1963) was the chief justice of south africa from 1957 to 1959 and previously a member of parliament and the minister of native affairs in j. b. m. hertzog's government. fagan had been an early supporter of the afrikaans language movement and a noted afrikaans playwright and novelist. though he was a significant figure in the rise of afrikaner nationalism and a long-term member of the broederbond, he later became an important opponent of hendrik verwoerd's national party and is best known for the report of the fagan commission, whose relatively liberal approach to racial integration amounted to the smuts government's last, doomed stand against the policy of apartheid.  early life and education fagan was born in tulbagh, a historical town in the winelands of the cape colony, in 1889. he was the oldest of seven children. his father was a lawyer and amateur poet, and kept a vast collection of books at the family's cape dutch residence (now a national monument) on kerk straat, including leading works of theology and english literature. fagan began his schooling in tulbagh but completed the bulk of it in somerset west. in 1905 he went to victoria college (later to become the university of stellenbosch), from which he earned a ba in literature. he hoped (like many of his peers) to be a minister of religion, and went to the seminary in stellenbosch; but his father's long-standing wish was that he would become a barrister, and continued to pay for private lessons in law.  in the end, fagan opted for law and was admitted to the llb program at the university of london in 1911. there he lived with his maternal uncle, j. j. smith, who was researching afrikaans in the library of the museum of london and would later become the leading figure in the afrikaans language movement and compiler of the language's first standard dictionary. smith soon persuaded fagan of the cultural importance of afrikaans - fagan had believed hitherto that a simplified form of dutch was the best way to develop a written language for the afrikaner people - and encouraged him to write his first afrikaans poetry and short stories. fagan earned his llb in 1914, and was admitted to the inner temple the following year. he then returned to south africa to practice at the cape bar.  political career  early involvement in the afrikaner language movement  fagan returned to the cape at a time of great turbulence and excitement. the afrikaans language movement was taking shape and j. b. m. hertzog
would soon found his national party, and fagan was thrust into this emerging movement for afrikaner nationalism. he was the secretary of the committee which founded the nasionale pers, becoming a director of the pers and the assistant editor of its flagship newspaper, die burger, under d. f. malan, then beginning his political career as leader of the national party in the cape province. he also lent editorial supervision to the pers's family magazine die huisgenoot, of which his uncle j. j. smith was the first editor, and translated the works of theodor storm into afrikaans.  in 1919, fagan left die burger and became, for a brief period, the first professor of roman-dutch law in the newly formed law faculty at the university of stellenbosch. the following year he returned to legal practice. he continued to be involved in the afrikaner language movement, and helped ensure, along with his close friend c. j. langenhoven, that afrikaans was made an official language (replacing dutch) in 1925.  in parliament  though fagan's practice had become very reputable, and he had taken silk in 1927, he was "bitten by the political bug" after hertzog's national party achieved electoral success. he decided to stand for election to the house of assembly, the lower house of parliament, in 1929 in the hottentots-holland (now helderberg) district, but lost narrowly. he succeeded four years later, becoming a national party mp representing swellendam. when hertzog fused with jan smuts' south african party in 1934, leading to rancor with malan's now 'purified' national party, fagan decided - after a two-year delay, during which he occupied his parliamentary seat as a so-called independent nationalist - to break with malan and his other old friends and follow hertzog into the united party, whose relatively conciliatory racial politics he preferred. in 1936, he was instrumental in setting up the cape town-based newspaper die suiderstem, an afrikaans-language mouthpiece for hertzog (who had lost die burger's support after splitting with malan).  in 1938, fagan was given a chance to withdraw from politics and become a judge, but he refused, preferring to stand as the united party's candidate for the contested stellenbosch seat in an attempt to wrest it away from the national party. malan himself came out to campaign on behalf of the nationalist candidate, bruckner de villiers, who promised to strip coloured voters of the franchise. fagan won by a narrow majority. he
became minister of native affairs in hertzog's government (alongside the likes of jan kemp and oswald pirow) after the 1938 general election and was, in the view of one leading historian, the "most outstanding" of hertzog's associates. just a year later, however, hertzog left the united party in protest at smuts' decision, in the face of clamant calls for neutrality from afrikaans-speakers, to take the country into war in support of britain, and fagan "felt bound to go with him into the political wilderness". fagan resumed legal practice, but remained an mp. both he and hertzog rejoined the national party a few months later, a move fagan strongly supported. when hertzog once again split from malan in 1941 to form the afrikaner party, however, fagan did not follow him, staying instead in the np caucus.  thus, although fagan had been in the vanguard of the afrikaner nationalist movement and began and ended his political career as a colleague of malan's, he "was not a malanite" and differed in crucial respects, and at crucial historical moments, from the post-hertzog national party. the best-known instance would be his report for the native laws commission (commonly called the fagan commission), which recommended a gradual liberalisation of south africa's system of racial segregation and was accordingly "savaged" by his old party. fagan was described, at least in these early years, as a "moderate", and retained significant ties to the afrikaner establishment.  judicial career  fagan was made a judge of the cape provincial division by prime minister smuts in march 1943. it was smuts who had, as minister of justice under hertzog, offered fagan the same post some years earlier. fagan also had eight months' experience as an acting judge in the kimberley high court before entering politics. one contemporary observer wrote that fagan's appointment to the bench was "richly deserved" and met with "universal approbation" from the legal profession. despite fagan's association with the ruling united party, concerns about political interference in judicial appointments were in fagan's case relatively attenuated.  unsurprisingly given his previous professorial appointment, fagan was a "great exponent of roman-dutch law", and his best-known judgments were those which dealt closely with the old authorities like voet and the digest. yet, unlike many other judges with afrikaner nationalist leanings, fagan did not shun english law on principle.  fagan commission  in 1946, as pressure was building from
malan's reactionary national party, smuts sought to devise a comprehensive united party position on the so-called native question. for this purpose he appointed the independent native laws commission, with fagan as its head, to investigate changes to the system of segregation. when the commission reported in 1948, it stated that the total segregation or apartheid envisaged by the national party was "utterly impracticable", since south africa's racial groups were inevitably interdependent, and the 'reserves' set aside for black south africans were far too small to support them. it therefore recommended that 'influx control' measures be relaxed, allowing black south africans to move to cities with relative freedom and the incremental integration of the races. yet the report did not favour racial equality, and rejected the full social or political integration of black people as unacceptable. it recommended liberalisation primarily on the basis that it would benefit the white population economically, and recommended accordingly that only those black persons who would benefit industry should be allowed to stay in the cities.  nevertheless, the commission had firmly rejected the principles on which the national party's official policy of apartheid was based, and therefore raised its ire. hendrik verwoerd, then an mp and the editor of die transvaler, was especially critical. and a declaration signed by a prominent group of stellenbosch academics angrily pointed out that if fagan's racial integration were allowed this would lead inevitably to gelykstelling (social levelling) and, as a result of pressure to give blacks equal civil rights, the political marginalisation of the white population; the upshot would be the death of the afrikaner volk. though they were angry, the nationalists had not been caught unprepared: in fact, malan had already set up a rival commission headed by his closest confidante, paul sauer, and staffed by three np parliamentarians, and which had reported in 1947. the sauer commission had given added detail and heft to the nationalists' policy of apartheid, recommending that influx control measures be strengthened to prevent any mixing between the races, with black people consigned to the reserves. it was this hard-line view which triumphed when malan's national party won the 1948 general election.  appellate division  despite the uncongenial report of his commission, the malan government was willing to elevate fagan to the appellate division, the country's highest court, in october 1950, to replace the departed chief justice watermeyer. concern was growing at that stage that the nationalists were trying to fill the appellate division with loyalists, but in fagan's case these
concerns were, again, attenuated; despite his links with the government, he was a moderate whose appointment was justified on merit. fagan's most significant judgments were about private law, raising little political intrigue: he established that gambling debts are unenforceable in south african law, and that undue influence vitiates a contract. but he did find against the government in its attempt to enforce the population registration act, 1950, raising the standard of proof required to classify a person as 'non-european' on the provocative basis that parliament could not have intended something so unjust as foisting that status on a person without adequate proof.  chief justice  greater political intrigue marked his appointment and tenure as chief justice of south africa.  the chief justiceship fell vacant upon the retirement at the end of 1956 of albert van der sandt centlivres. centlivres had stood firm, in the harris v minister of the interior cases, against the nationalists' first attempts to strip coloured voters in the cape province of their right to vote, which was constitutionally entrenched in the south africa act. but virtually his last act as a judge was finally to relent, in collins v minister of the interior, and to give legal sanction to the disenfranchisement, which the national party, now led by j. g. strydom after malan's death, had secured by packing the senate. fagan, too, had sat in this last case (but not in harris), and concurred in centlivres' judgment. the lone dissentient was oliver schreiner, a noted liberal judge of very high esteem. schreiner was also the most senior judge on the appellate division after centlivres' retirement, and was therefore first in line, according to long-standing convention, for appointment as chief justice. yet he had plainly proven himself to be politically unsafe during this so-called coloured vote crisis, and was, presumably as a result, passed over by the nationalist government. this move was widely condemned. the next most senior judge, hoexter, had joined centlivres' judgment in collins, but had voted against the government in the harris cases, so he, too, was disfavoured. that left fagan, untainted by any association with harris and with clear afrikaner and nationalist ties, who was offered the post by minister of justice c. r. swart. fagan was shocked by the offer, describing it as a "bolt from the blue". in a letter to swart, fagan said he was faced with "a very difficult
choice", noting his concerns about superseding the more senior schreiner and the obvious implication that the offer was politically motivated.  in the end, after discussions with schreiner, fagan accepted the post. they decided it was best for him to accept the appointment, despite all its problems, to prevent notorious national party favourite l. c. steyn becoming chief justice. initially they had, at centlivres' suggestion, tried to reach an agreement among the judges of the court that they would all refuse appointment, so that the government would be forced to appoint schreiner. but this plan failed, unsurprisingly, when steyn refused to agree. fagan therefore accepted the chief justiceship with misgivings. he wrote to his wife after his appointment that he still felt "sick about oliver [schreiner]" and ashamed when people congratulated him.  retirement  when fagan's judicial career ended in 1959, he re-entered politics, and became a strong opponent of the national party's increasingly conservative policies under hendrik verwoerd. his remarks on the government's racial policy, serialized in the largest afrikaans newspaper, die landstem, were hailed for "breaking the facade of nationalist unity" and finally sparking an effective opposition to apartheid from within the establishment. though there had been many black opponents of the government, as well as some prominent critics among white english-speakers, fagan was one of the first afrikaners to break ranks. his views had added traction among ordinary afrikaners as a result of his being a celebrated afrikaner author.  fagan's monograph, our responsibility, published in february 1960, said (echoing the words of the fagan commission) that verwoerd's policies were "hopelessly impractical", and that south africa's white population had to accept racial integration. the book was given a scathing review by piet cillie, then editor of die burger and a staunch nationalist.  fagan's public pronouncements resulted in calls for him to lead a political movement. he agreed to become the leader of the national union (nu), a party newly founded by japie basson, a firebrand mp who had been recently expelled from the national party for criticising verwoerd. the party was intended to provide a home for nationalist supporters who refused to tolerate strydom's disregard for constitutional principles (particularly during the coloured vote crisis, as fagan well knew). fagan stood for election as south africa's first state president after whites voted in a referendum in 1960 to establish a republic, but was defeated by
former np minister and governor-general c. r. swart by 139 votes to 71. however, he became a senator for the nu, and also its leader. the nu contested the 1961 election in alliance with the united party, now led by de villiers graaff.  the nu soon fizzled out, and fagan spent his final years as a senator for the united party, continuing to argue publicly for racial conciliation, now in the johannesburg star. his second treatise on racial politics, co-existence, was published shortly before his death in 1963.  legacy  one prominent journalist wrote in 1998, in light of the fagan commission's liberal report, which might have changed south african history had the nats not suppressed it, that fagan was one of the "unsung heroes" of afrikaner history. according to die burger, however, the report, by documenting the extent to which the races had become integrated, had only helped show how imperative it was to forcibly separate them. that assessment was self-serving, but undoubtedly fagan's views were more conservative than other critics of the government, like alan paton's liberal party, and did not question the fact that south africa's white population ought to be preserved and indeed preferred. throughout his time as an mp, his views were sufficiently close to malan's that he could move seamlessly in and out of the national party, with which he keenly reunified in 1940. even after the antipathy sparked by the fagan commission, and his retirement from the judiciary, his recommendations on the racial question were, in essence, to re-institute hertzog's racial policies. yet in part it was precisely because he was no more than a "moderate", who retained significant ties to the afrikaner establishment, and whose criticisms were so "measured", that his criticisms were able to have an impact.  family life  fagan married jessie "queeny" theron, also from tulbagh, in 1922. she was often the lead actress in performances of fagan's plays. they had three sons, the last of whom, johannes, became a judge of the cape provincial division in 1977. the family lived in bishopscourt, cape town, where fagan died of a heart attack on 6 december 1963.  references   1889 births 1963 deaths stellenbosch university alumni alumni of the university of london chief justices of south africa people from tulbagh south african people of british descent south african people of irish descent south african queen's counsel white south african people south african judges
himayunpura is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
mothers is the plural form of mother.  mothers may also refer to:  film  mothers (2010 film), a macedonian film by milco mancevski  mothers (2017 italian film), directed by liana marabini  mothers (2017 south korean film), directed by lee dong-eun  music  mothers (album), by swim deep, 2015  mothers (band), an american folk rock band  the mothers of invention or just the mothers, an american rock band led by frank zappa  mothers (music venue), a former club in birmingham, england  other uses  mothers (tokyo stock exchange), a market of the tokyo stock exchange  mother's cookies, a food brand owned by kellogg  the mothers (novel), by brit bennett, 2016  see also  mother (disambiguation)
antoine houbrechts (born 6 september 1943) is a retired belgian road racing cyclist, who competed professionally between 1965 and 1981. he won the 1967 volta a portugal and 1968 vuelta a andalucia, and rode the tour de france in 1968, 1970, 1972, 1973 and 1975.  references   1943 births living people belgian male cyclists people from tongeren sportspeople from limburg (belgium) volta a portugal winners
fernando brandolini (4 january 1932 - 27 july 1987) was an italian professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1932 births 1987 deaths italian male cyclists cyclists from milan
cantus umbrarum is the fourth studio album by lightwave, released in 2000 by horizon music.  track listing  personnel  adapted from the cantus umbrarum liner notes.  lightwave  christoph harbonnier - electronics, recording, mixing, illustrations  christian wittman - electronics, voice, art direction\  additional musicians  jacques deregnaucourt - electronics, violin, viola  john greaves - voice  marie-christine letort - voice  renaud pion - bass clarinet, turkish clarinet, flute, electronics  jean-luc revol - voice  eric theobald - voice  production  michel geiss - mastering  lightwave - production  release history  references  external links   cantus umbrarum at discogs (list of releases)  2000 albums lightwave (band) albums
the cathedral basilica of our lady of the assumption  (), also called santiago de cuba cathedral, is a roman catholic cathedral and minor basilica in santiago de cuba, in eastern cuba. the cathedral fronts onto cespedes park. its facade has two marble sculptures.  the first church in santiago was built in 1514, at the beginning of the spanish colonization of cuba, and dedicated to saint catherine. this was a small, rudimentary chapel on a hill, the future site of the provincial prison. in 1522, this parish church, called ermita de santa catalina, was elevated to the status of cathedral by pope adrian vi. its construction ended in 1526. it was destroyed in the earthquakes of 1678, 1766, 1852 and 1932. in 1882 it received the title of minor basilica from the holy see. it became a national monument of cuba in 1958.  in the late 19th century, juan perpinan y pibernat presided over the sacrament of penance at the cathedral by royal decree from spain.  see also roman catholic archdiocese of santiago de cuba roman catholicism in cuba  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in santiago de cuba roman catholic churches completed in 1514 basilica churches in cuba 16th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
form 1098-t, tuition statement, is an american irs tax form filed by eligible education institutions (or those filing on the institution's behalf) to report payments received and payments due from the paying student. the institution has to report a form for every student that is currently enrolled and paying qualifying tuition and related expenses.  form 1098-t consists of one page, with a red copy to be filed with the irs, and a black copy to be kept for records or to be sent to the student. there are ten lines that require the institution's tax information as well as the student's, tuition payments received and billed, as well as the scholarships granted to the student. there are lines for adjustments to a prior year's 1098-t, and a checkbox for whether the student is part-time or a graduate student.  filing requirements  definitions  eligible educational institution  an eligible educational institution is a college, university, vocational school, or other post-secondary educational institution. the requirements for eligibility are laid out in the higher education act of 1965, in section 481:   only admits as students those who have received a certificate of graduation from a secondary school (e.g. a high school diploma, ged)  is legally authorized within its state to provide a postsecondary education  provides programs for:  a bachelor's degree  an associate degree, with courses that can count as credit towards a bachelor's degree  any other degree that can be acceptable to admission to a graduate or professional degree program  is a public or other nonprofit institution  is accredited (or in preaccreditation) by a nationally recognized accrediting agency or association  programs that are otherwise eligible to participate in the department of education's student aid programs also qualify as eligible educational institutions. most accredited public, nonprofit, and private post-secondary institutions are considered eligible educational institutions.  qualified tuition and educational expenses  qualified tuition and educational expenses include:   tuition  school fees  the cost of course materials required to enroll in a class (e.g. lab fees)  qualified tuition and educational expenses do not include:   application and processing fees  books and other course materials that are not required to enroll in a class  money paid for any course that involves sports, games, or hobbies, unless part of a degree program or job skills training  room, board, insurance, medical insurance, transportation, personal costs, living and family expenses  exceptions  there are several instances in which a 1098-t form doesn't need to be filed
for a particular student:   courses for which no academic credit is offered (such as adjunct courses), regardless of enrollment status  nonresident alien students  students whose tuition are either completely waived or completely covered by scholarships  students whose tuition is covered by a third party under a formal agreement (such as through the department of defense or veteran affairs)  form requirements   form 1098-t requires several lines of identification, including the filer's name, address, phone number, and tax identification number, as well as the same information for the student. the filer information is for the filer themselves, not the name, address, and telephone number of the institution.  following that are ten boxes that must be filled out:   the amount of tuition that's already paid by the student.  the amount billed to the student that has yet to be paid.  a checkbox to reflect if reporting method has been changed since the previous year. the institution is only required to report in either box 1 or box 2 if they switch the box they report in, they must check this box.  monetary adjustments made for a prior year.  the amount granted to the student via scholarships or grants.  adjustments to the student's scholarships or grants for a prior year.  a checkbox indicating whether the amounts indicated in boxes 1 or 2 also includes tuition paid or billed for the beginning of the following year. for example, if the form is for year 2015, the checkbox would cover any tuition billed or paid for january through march 2016.  a checkbox for whether the student counts as a half-time student.  a checkbox for whether the student is a graduate student.  shows how much money is reimbursed by an insurer. if a student has tuition insurance and must withdraw from school, then an insurer will reimburse some of their nonrefundable tuition.  history  creation  form 1098-t was originally created in the taxpayer relief act of 1997, alongside the hope credit and the lifetime learning credit (and, later, the american opportunity tax credit), to help taxpayers pay for postsecondary education. the first 1098-t form only had four boxes, two blank ones that required no entry, and two checkboxes for part-time and graduate students.  revisions   2001: new rules for describing qualifying tuition were set in place. boxes for "qualified tuition and expenses", "reimbursements or refunds", and "scholarships or grants" were added  2002: institutions are now
given the option to report either the payments billed or the payments received. there was also an option to report payments for the beginning of 2003. the box "reimbursements or refunds" was changed to "adjustments made to a prior year"  2006: a checkbox is added to report changes to the institutions reporting method (i.e. if they changed reporting from payments billed to payments received or vice versa), for taxpayer's knowledge  2009: the american opportunity tax credit is introduced, and the 1098-t can be used to claim the credit  2016 revision  in march 2015, a report released by the treasury inspector general for tax administration revealed that taxpayers were erroneously claiming over five billion dollars in education credits. over half of the claimed money came from taxpayers for whom no form 1098-t was filed; the rest of the claims came from students who attended less than half-time, students from ineligible institutions, and students who claimed the american opportunity tax credit for longer than four years.  in light of the lost tax revenue, the irs requires, starting in 2016, that institutions must provide a 1098-t for all eligible students, with an effort required to obtain accurate tins and the 1098-t is required for taxpayers to claim an education credit. new rules were put into place to help institutions verify that they had valid tins. a new form was released for the 2016 tax year (shown above) with a new checkbox in the student's identification number box to indicate that the educational institution has made an appropriate effort in obtaining the student's tin.  starting in 2016 institutions can no longer rely on payments billed (recorded in box 2) and can only report payments received (recorded in box 1), but due to the change being implemented so late in the fiscal year, any penalties for using box 2 has been lifted.  external links  references   1098-t 1098-t 1098-t personal taxes in the united states
parc levelt is a football stadium in saint-marc, haiti. it was launched in december 1950. the stadium holds 5,000 spectators.  external links stadium information   football venues in haiti
dorcaschema nigrum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by say in 1826, originally under the genus saperda. it is known from canada and the united states.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1826
the diwan-i-khas (, or "hall of private audiences"), is located in the lahore fort in lahore, pakistan. it served as the place where the mughal emperor received courtiers and state guests.   in contrast to the diwan-i-aam, the diwan-i-khas served as a hall where the emperor would attend to matters of the state. the hall was the site of elaborate pageantry, with processions of up to one hour long occurring before each audience session.  gallery  see also diwan-i-khas (red fort), delhi  references  external links  lahore fort
carl johann von konigsmarck (15 may 1659 - 28 august 1686) was a swedish count of brandenburgian extraction and a soldier.  konigsmarck was born in nyborg in funen, denmark, as the second son of count kurt christoph von konigsmarck and his wife countess maria christina von wrangel (1628-1691). he was the grandson of two field marshalls; hermann von wrangel and hans christoff von konigsmarck. his sister maria aurora von konigsmarck was later mistress to augustus ii the strong of poland, with whom she had the son maurice de saxe, the brilliant french military commander. his other sister amalia wilhelmina was a noted dilettante artist. his brother philip christoph von konigsmarck died under mysterious circumstances after starting an affair with sophia dorothea of celle, the daughter of george william, duke of brunswick-luneburg.  karl johann von konigsmarck is alleged to have hired three assassins who killed thomas thynne - husband of heiress elizabeth seymour, duchess of somerset, whom konigsmarck had been wooing - on 12 february 1682 (2 february 1681 o.s.) the assassins were hanged on 10 march 1682, though their alleged hirer was acquitted, but banished. after leaving england he joined the army of his uncle otto wilhelm von konigsmarck in greece. he died of wounds contracted during the morean war in nauplion.  references  1659 births 1686 deaths people from nyborg 17th-century swedish military personnel
hannah lopez (born march 31, 1992) is an american rugby sevens player. she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the united states women's national rugby sevens team.  references  external links  hannah lopez at usa rugby    1992 births living people united states international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for the united states pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
sir william cornwallis of brome (c. 1549- 13 november 1611) was an english courtier and politician.  life he was the eldest son of sir thomas cornwallis, comptroller of the household to queen mary, and his wife anne jerningham. he became a courtier at around age 21, spent heavily to secure position there, and married by 1578, lucy neville.  despite a family connection to thomas cecil, cornwallis made little enough progress at court, and twice withdrew without regard for the loss of royal favour. in 1597 he was elected member of parliament for , with the support of cecil. when james i came to the throne he fared no better, and retired from public life in 1605.  cornwallis spent freely, and entertained the queen at his house in highgate. he was knighted, by 1594. at the union of the crowns, in june 1603 he rode to northamptonshire to meet anne of denmark and her children.  he laid on a performance by his friend ben jonson at highgate in 1604, for james i. he employed the composer thomas watson and other musical and literary men.  cornwallis died on 13 november 1611.  family cornwallis married, first, lucy neville, daughter of john neville, 4th baron latimer and lucy somerset. after her death, he married jane mewtas. she was a lady in waiting to anne of denmark and as a wedding gift the queen gave her a jewel studded with diamonds made by george heriot. the cornwallis family lived at brome hall near diss in norfolk.  frederick cornwallis, 1st baron cornwallis was the third son, and eldest surviving son, of sir william, a son of his second marriage. his own second marriage was to elizabeth crofts, daughter of sir henry crofts, member of parliament for .  of the daughters:  frances married sir edmund withypole. elizabeth married in 1596 sir william sandys, member of parliament for , who died in 1628. in 1630 she married richard lumley, 1st viscount lumley of waterford. cornelia married sir richard fermor of somerton. anne in 1609 married archibald campbell, 7th earl of argyll.  there are sources that give thomas cornwallis, member of parliament for  in 1625, as a son of sir william by his first wife. the history of parliament, on the other hand, gives his father as john cornwallis of earl soham. sir william cornwallis, the essayist, was a nephew who is sometimes described as "the younger" to differentiate him from this william cornwallis, who is often described
as "the elder".  notes  members of the pre-1707 english parliament for constituencies in cornwall 1611 deaths people from brome, suffolk
oksana kalashnikova and demi schuurs were the defending champions, but schuurs chose to compete in gstaad instead. kalashnikova played alongside yaroslava shvedova, but lost in the quarterfinals to lenka kuncikova and karolina stuchla.  jessica moore and varatchaya wongteanchai won the title, defeating alexandra cadantu and katarzyna piter in the final, 6-3, 7-6(7-5).  seeds  draw  references   draw  2016 wta tour 2016 doubles
the 1915 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1915 college football season.  in their ninth season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 5-1 record and outscored their opponents, 291 to 43. tackle bob mckay was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
sing yin secondary school (), founded in 1970, is a catholic, boys' grammar school and band 1 secondary school in hong kong. the campus is around 70,000 sq. ft. the school was dubbed "the greenest school on earth" by u.s. green building council in 2013.  overview  sing yin secondary school was organized by fr. h.p. canavan, the priest of the divine word missionaries. later, he became the principal and the supervisor of the school for more than 20 years. under his leadership, sing yin secondary school quickly developed into a quality school to provide students with a good and comprehensive education.  as a catholic school, sing yin secondary school follows the teachings from jesus, especially putting the focus on moral education and community service. the school's goal is to help students to establish a set of values that are meaningful, and become the true pillars of society.  facilities  old lam tin campus   sing yin secondary school old lam tin campus is located at 11 on tin street, lam tin.  new choi wan campus   sing yin moved to the new campus at 38 new clear water bay road, choi hung. it is the first environmental demonstration school in hong kong.  the new campus includes different kinds of new facilities comparing with the old campus, such as:   motion sensors in every classrooms  electricity regeneration lift  solar tracking photovoltic (pv) panels  water chiller plants  vertical wind turbine  sun tubes  solar powered water sprinklers  clubs  religious clubs    catholic society  christian fellowship  academic clubs    bafs club  biology club  chemistry club  chinese club  chinese debating club  chinese history club  computer club  economics club  english club  english debating club  geography club  history club  integrated science club  liberal studies club  mathematics club  physics club  putonghua club  sports clubs  athletic club    badminton club  basketball club  canoeing club  fencing club  football club  handball club  health and fitness club  shuttlecock club  sports climbing club  swimming club  table tennis club  tennis club  interest clubs    astronomy club  board games and chess club  bridge club  cookery club  design and technology club  environmental protection club  gardening club  hong kong award for young people  journalism club  mock trial club  orienteering club  quiz team  art clubs    dance club  drama club  photography club  visual arts club  music clubs    brass band  choir  classical guitar club  music club  string band  social / school
services    students' association  red house  yellow house  blue house  green house  sing yin pioneers  careers club  community service group  community youth club  scout  sing yin bulletin  sing yin radio  sing yin television  sports commission  stage management club  see also society of the divine word  references  external links  school website  secondary schools in hong kong boys' schools in hong kong catholic secondary schools in hong kong
the 2016-17 miami redhawks men's basketball team represented miami university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the redhawks, led by fifth-year head coach john cooper, played their home games at millett hall, as members of the east division of the mid-american conference. they finished the season 11-21, 4-14 in mac play to finish in last place. as the no. 12 seed in the mac tournament, they lost in the first round to western michigan.  head coach john cooper was fired on march 10, 2017 after five seasons at miami. purdue associate head coach jack owens was named the new head coach on march 29.  previous season the redhawks finished the 2015-16 season 13-20, 6-12 in mac play to finish in fifth place in the east division. they defeated ball state in the first round of the mac tournament to advance to the quarterfinals where they lost to buffalo.  offseason  departures  recruiting class of 2016  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac tournament  see also  2016-17 miami redhawks women's basketball team  references  miami miami redhawks men's basketball seasons
vince gamad (born january 15, 1994) is a filipino actor, model and host. he is a host in walang tulugan with the master showman; hosts german moreno, sanya lopez, jak roberto, teejay marquez and hiro peralta.  career gamad started his career and worked on gma network. he signed a contract in gma artist center. in 2012 gamad appeared as a host of walang tulugan with the master showman;  in 2015 gamad appeared in a gma tv series let the love begin as erick's friend; in 2016 he portrayed glenn on juan happy love story.  filmography  television  references  external links    1994 births living people filipino male television actors male actors from metro manila sparkle gma artist center
the 1954-55 honduran amateur league was the eighth edition of the honduran amateur league.  c.d. abaca obtained its 1st national title.  the season ran from 28 february 1954 to 20 march 1955.  regional champions  known results  national championship round played in a double round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the cuadrangular.  results  abaca's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1954 in honduras 1955 in honduras
the 2016-17 azadegan league was the 26th season of the azadegan league and 16th as the second highest division since its establishment in 1991. the season featured 12 teams from the 2015-16 azadegan league, three new teams relegated from the 2015-16 persian gulf pro league: malavan, rah ahan and esteghlal ahvaz and three new teams promoted from the 2015-16 league 2: oxin alborz and sepidrood rasht both as champions and pars jonoubi jam. baadraan tehran replaced parseh tehran. the league started on 7 august 2016 and ended on 1 may 2017. pars jonoubi jam won the azadegan league title for the first time in their history. pars jonoubi jam and sepidrood rasht promoted to the persian gulf pro league.  teams  stadia and locations  number of teams by region  league table  results  clubs season-progress  statistics  top scorers  notes:updated to games played on 1 may 2017. source: lig1.ir  attendances  average home attendances  attendances by round  notes:updated to games played on 1 may 2017. source: lig1.ir  matches with spectator bans are not included in average attendances  baadraan tehran played their matches against foolad yazd, iranjavan, mes kerman and  naft mis at ekbatan  esteghlal ahvaz played their match against mes rafsanjan at ghadir  fajr sepasi played their matches against aluminium arak, baadraan tehran, esteghlal ahvaz, foolad yazd, iranjavan, khooneh be khooneh, oxin alborz, pars jonoubi jam and mes kerman at shahid dastgheib  highest attendances  notes:updated to games played on 1 may 2017. source: lig1.ir  see also  2016-17 persian gulf pro league  2016-17 league 2  2016-17 league 3  2016-17 hazfi cup  2016 iranian super cup  references  azadegan league seasons 2016-17 in asian second tier association football leagues 2016-17 in iranian football leagues
cortinarius thiersii is a basidiomycete fungus of the genus cortinarius native to north america.  see also list of cortinarius species  references  external links  verecundus fungi of north america fungi described in 1977 taxa named by alexander h. smith
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in changchun as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th,  135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation was the garrison of changchun.  action during the soviet invasion of manchuria, the 148th division was ordered to construct fortifications and garrison changchun, although the division was nearly unarmed and not equipped.  the 148th division was disarmed 20-22 august 1945 without seeing any action during soviet invasion of manchuria.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第148師団 (日本軍), accessed 11 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
caroline emilie mundt (22 august 1842, sorø - 25 october 1922, frederiksberg)  was a danish painter, known for her portraits of children.  biography her father, carl emil mundt, was a professor of mathematics at the sorø academy. her mother died when she was three and her father moved the family to copenhagen. as a child, her home was filled with political and philosophical discussions, as her father was also a member of the danish constituent assembly and her uncle, , was the mayor of copenhagen.   she and her sister, jacobine, received their basic education at n. zahle's school and, in 1861, she took an exam to become a private tutor. however, her drawing teacher, frederik helsted was impressed with her artistic talent so, after graduation, she became a drawing and writing teacher at the school.  at the age of thirty, she finally set out to become an artist and enrolled at the "painting school for women", operated by vilhelm kyhn. it was there she met her life partner, marie luplau. in 1875, she unsuccessfully sought to gain admission to the royal danish academy of fine arts so, following the advice of elisabeth jerichau-baumann, she and luplau went to munich to continue their studies with eilif peterssen.  during a later period of study in paris at the academie colarossi (1882-1884), she was influenced by the works of jules breton and jules bastien-lepage. their depictions of the lives of poor people inspired her to create a series of paintings on the lives of poor children, many of which were done at a local orphanage.  in 1886, she and luplau set up their own painting school for women in frederiksberg, which was in operation until 1913. they were also diligent campaigners for women's suffrage and, in 1890, adopted a young girl named carla. in 1916, she became one of the first members of the kvindelige kunstneres samfund (women's art society).  in addition to paintings of children, she is known for scenes of peasant life; many created during a stay at the art colony in pont-aven, brittany.  exhibition a major retrospective of her works was presented at the women's museum, aarhus in 2007. in 2021, works by mundt and luplay were featured at a special exhibition in the hirschsrpung collection in copenhagen.  selected paintings  references  further reading  mette thelle, efter hjem
komsten: et maleri af emilie mundt, randers museum of art, 1990  external links    artnet: more works by mundt  1842 births 1922 deaths 19th-century danish painters 20th-century danish painters danish portrait painters danish feminists danish women painters people from sorø municipality academie colarossi alumni 19th-century danish women artists 20th-century danish women artists
the san angelo pac is a theatrical campus in san angelo, texas, including the stephens performing arts center and murphey performance hall, which opened to the public after renovation in 2016 with mark levine as the founding executive director.  the complex is located downtown just behind city hall.    the stephens performing arts center (dedicated on september 8, 2016) is located in the renovating coca-cola warehouse with a new 301-seat theater space, a black box performance space, 6 ballet studios, a pilates studio, and scene shops. the building also houses ballet san angelo and be theatre.  the elta joyce murphey performance hall (rededicated on october 3, 2017) is attached to city hall, and was originally constructed in 1928. the san angelo symphony and ballet san angelo are regular users of the performance hall. the first full performance season (2017/18) encompassing both performance spaces was announced on june 15, 2017.  performance and other venues  murphey performance hall this 1322-seat theater is the largest facility on the campus of san angelo pac and has been renovated to accommodate both acoustic and amplified performances. seating is on two levels - orchestra and balcony.  brooks & bates theatre this beautiful jewel-box theater provides an intimate setting for a variety of performances and cultural events. with excellent acoustics and wrapped in bamboo, the brooks & bates theatre seats 300 on one level. the proscenium theater with full backstage features can accommodate nearly any artistic production on a smaller scale.  black box performance space built as a "black box theater," customizable for any event. the black box performance space is the home of the resident theatre company, be theatre.  references  external links san angelo performing arts coalition website  performing arts centers in texas theatres in texas
celeste freytes gonzalez (born 1950s) is a puerto rican teacher who was named, in 2013, interim president of the university of puerto rico. when ratified in that position during 2016, she substituted uroyoan walker ramos as president of the institution and dr. jose lasalde as interim president.  freytes gonzalez announced on february 16, 2017, that she and other upr leaders were renouncing from their positions, a move that was investigated by the puerto rican senate. she was substituted by nivia fernandez as interim president of the upr.  biography freytes gonzalez graduated from a local university in san juan in 1979. she studied at the university of puerto rico and earned her doctoral degree from boston university in 1979. she was a teacher on the puerto rican education system for 36 years, and at the moment of her ascending to interim president of the upr (pru) she was a commissioner on the middle states commission on higher education.  in 2013, freytes was a member of puerto rico governor alejandro garcia padilla's transitional team before he took office as governor; garcia padilla contacted her directly about becoming interim president of the upr before she was named to the position.  see also list of puerto ricans  external links  1950s births boston university alumni living people puerto rican educators university of puerto rico faculty
berdini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  albert berdini of sarteano (1385-1450), franciscan friar and preacher massimo berdini (born 1958), italian footballer  see also bernini (surname)  italian-language surnames
momina mustehsan (; born 5 september 1992) is a pakistani singer, musician, and social activist. in 2017, bbc named her one of the 100 most influential women, and the following year, forbes featured her among its "30 under 30" asia list along with nine other pakistani individuals. she sang the song "awari" for the indian thriller film ek villain (2014). in season 9, she performed a rendition of nusrat fateh ali khan's "afreen afreen", with rahat fateh ali khan and received critical acclaim. her next releases, the singles "aaya na tu" (2018) and "baari" (2019), topped the country's charts. her track uchiyaan dewara (baari 2) topped the official asian top 40 charts in november 2020.  alongside her singing career, she participates in stage shows, is a prominent celebrity endorser for brands and products, and is active in humanitarian work. she is also known for promoting various causes such as education and mental health, and is particularly vocal about issues such as the role of women in pakistan and feminism.  early life and background mustehsan was born on 5 september 1992 in quetta, baluchistan, and was raised in islamabad, though she also lived in new york, paris, and kyiv while growing up. her mother, huma mustehsan, is a doctor, and father, kazim mustehsan, is a retired brigadier from the pakistan army, and a recipient of sitara-i-imtiaz, the third highest honour and civilian award of the country. she has two siblings, an older and a younger brother.  mustehsan completed her a'level from lahore grammar school and later moved to the states for higher studies and graduated with a double majors degree in biomedical engineering and applied mathematics from the stony brook university in 2016. at the time of her graduation, her name was in the dean's list.  mustehsan at first learnt to play violin and sang in public for the first time in a choir of her grade school, without any formal music training. recalling, mustehsan told that her teacher had asked her if she had something to show and had said, "i think you sing well". she further told that she realized she had interest in music after when she had sung for the first time then. her first encounter with the music came in 2004, when she recorded her first cover of irish singer damien rice's song "the blower's daughter". despite having no background of musical
training she was praised at that time.  career  2011-2015: "pee jaun" and ek villian at junoon's twentieth anniversary, mustehsan recorded a song "sajna" for their album junoon 20 in volume i, the song was written by ali azmat and was a bonus track on album. in 2012, she wrote the lyrics for the song "pee jaun", and sung with farhan saeed. the song was also featured in 2015 nescafe basement with mustehsan singing along with hamza tanveer.  in 2014, she recorded a song "awari" for pakistani band soch who approached her, without telling her that they are going to use the song in indian film ek villain, she explained, "i was approached by soch and they wanted me to feature on their track without disclosing what it was for," she recorded the song in her university dorm, "it was an extremely casual process and i never met anyone in person. i recorded the song on my own in new york. the contract was signed after the track had been lined up for release." on her future ventures she said, "i'm always working on new pieces. music is a passion for me and not a profession. i have plenty of time on my hands... i might be working on a pakistani project later this year. it's something that i am excited about."  2016-present  in 2016, mustehsan recorded her first song "zindagi kitni haseen hay" for the romantic drama film zindagi kitni haseen hay, and marked her coke studio debut as a featured artist in season 9 later that year. her first song "afreen afreen", alongside rahat fateh ali khan, broke all previous coke studio records by accumulating over 2.5 million views in one day. the other songs she performed "main raasta", partially written by her, and "tera woh pyar (nawazishein karam)" along with junaid khan and asim azhar respectively. commenting on her coke studio success she said, "it was very overwhelming for me because these are classics i am singing with very well-known singers. for me it was a great honour. i was also very nervous - i never get nervous for anything. but i got appreciated a lot once the songs were recorded."  revealing on her future in music mustehsan said "i don't want to pursue music as a career. for me, it was hard to make a decision since i
had no references. maybe after me, people would come out to show their talent," and explained "i don't think releasing number of albums defines a musician. i do music for myself and not for the masses. i'm not into the idea of being a celebrity or having people know or follow me."  in february 2017, she released the anthem for the pakistan super league franchise islamabad united. leading media outlets, the express tribune and geo news criticized the heavy use of auto-tune and the lack of substance in the single, titled "cricket jorrey pakistan" (cricket unites pakistan). on 3 november, "afreen afreen" became the fastest pakistani origin video to mark 100 million views on youtube, and become the most viewed pakistani origin youtube video on 10 november, leaving behind atif aslam's rendition of "tajdar-e-haram" and imran khan's "amplifier". that same year, she collaborated with the coke studio for a second time, and released three songs, one of which was the "qaumi taranah" (national anthem of pakistan). which she sang with the other featured artists of the season. released on 14 august, critics criticized the rendition, saying that it failed to "win hearts". her next song released was "muntazir", which was composed and written by strings. featured alongside the debutante danyal zafar, the song received positive reviews, and became one of the most viewed song of the season. the sufi rock "ghoom taana" was her final song, released in the season, and also featured the band irteassh. both the original and the recreated versions were written and composed by salman ahmad, and the song was originally released in 2003 by the band junoon in their album door. the song received mixed to positive reviews from the critics upon release, but mustehsan and irteassh were praised for their versatility in the song.  mustehsan began 2018 with the single "aaya na tu", which she sang with the indian singer arjun kanungo. composed by kanungo, and written by kunaal vermaa, the single was released under the label of universal music india. the single was shot in bangkok, and mustehsan said that the song addresses "rejection, pain and the burden of true love". upon release, the song topped the hindi and urdu music charts, trended at number five on youtube several hours later, and has garnered more than 70 million views since its release
on youtube.  in 2019, mustehsan collaborated with bilal saeed for the song "baari", written and composed by saeed from the platform of onetworecords. the song received a positive response, and gained more than 17 million views with a week of its release.  personal life and social work in september 2016, mustehsan confirmed and announced her engagement on twitter to ali naqvi, a us based banker in california. the engagement was called off in early 2017.  mustehsan supports several charitable causes and organizations, that works for the welfare of women in pakistan. she often speaks out in support of education for girls, and is particularly vocal about issues, such as women's rights and gender equality. mustehsan has also been outspoken about mental illness and depression, and in 2017, she spoke about her personal experience of overcoming depression.  in an online interview, mustehsan stated that she had donated all of her earnings of 2016 to make water-wells in the thar desert of sindh. mustehsan is planning a distant education program for children in rural pakistan along with a polio campaign. in a chat show, she said, "i plan introducing distant education plans for children in rural areas where there are no schools or a learning environment. we'll introduce learning videos which, along with projectors, would be provided to the mosques in different areas to enable children to learn. from making roties [bread] to learning physics, they'll get it all." in 2017, mustehsan was a part of the united nations women "beat me" campaign, that aimed to address the issue of domestic violence in the country. during the campaign, mustehsan talked about feminism in pakistan, and said:  "do we hate our women? i don't think so. in fact, pakistan has more women representation in government than the u.s., and we have twice elected a female head of state. empowering women in pakistan would mean raising them equal to boys, providing them the same education, giving them the same job opportunities, equal wages and equal respect."  in may 2018, mustehsan (along with sajal aly, ahad raza mir, ali rehman khan, sonya hussain, younis khan, ali sethi and gul panra), appeared in the coca-cola advertisement. the purpose of the advertisement was to collect funds for edhi foundation, a non-profit welfare organization, under the "eidi for edhi" campaign. in addition to appearing, she also recited a
part of the poem "lab pe aati hai dua", in the sindhi language for the advertisement. later in the country's first ever live digital donation drive event, mustehsan donated  to the foundation. that same month, mustehsan lend her support to the "taleem do" initiative, a non-profit right to education program, based in tharparkar.  in the media the release of the 2016 song "afreen afreen" established mustehsan as one of the most recognized singers of pakistan. she is among the most followed pakistani celebrities on social media. in 2017, bbc named her one of the bbc's 100 most influential women. the following year, forbes featured her among its "30 under 30" asia list along with nine pakistani individuals. that same year, she was honored by the stony brook universitynaming her among the "40 most successful graduates" for her civil service and activism. in december 2016, mustehsan became the goodwill ambassador of a cricket team, islamabad united for the pakistan super league. she is also the brand ambassador for the soft drink sprite and the hair color l'oreal. in 2017, mustehsan represented pakistan at the l'oreal pro business forum in seville, spain.  mustehsan performed at the fifth ceremony of the hum awards with sajjad ali, asim azhar and ali sethi in april 2017. the following year, she participated (with christian karembeu, younis khan and qurat-ul-ain balouch) in the fifa world tour, and traveled from thailand to lahore in a special chartered plane, for the unveiling of the fifa world cup trophy in pakistan.  in august 2018, coke studio produced a remake of ahmed rushdi's first south asian pop song "ko ko korina", originally lip-sync by waheed murad in the 1966 film armaan, in the voices of mustehsan and ahad raza mir. their rendition of this pakistani classic was widely criticized. within a few days of the video being released on youtube, it became the most-disliked video in the music show's 11-year history. waheed murad's son adil murad also reacted to the outcry by apologizing to the song's fans for the controversial remake.  discography  soundtracks  coke studio (pakistan)  singles  covers  references  external links  living people pakistani women singers punjabi-language singers stony brook university alumni lahore grammar school alumni pakistani expatriates in the united states people from quetta bbc 100 women 21st
-century pakistani women singers 1992 births forbes 30 under 30 recipients
on july 7, 2016, micah xavier johnson ambushed a group of police officers in dallas, texas, shooting and killing five officers ,and injuring nine others. two civilians were also wounded. johnson was an army reserve afghan war veteran and was angry over police shootings of black men. the shooting happened at the end of a protest against the police killings of alton sterling in baton rouge, louisiana, and philando castile in falcon heights, minnesota, which had occurred in the preceding days.  following the shooting, johnson fled inside a building on the campus of el centro college. police followed him there, and a standoff ensued. in the early hours of july 8, police killed johnson with a bomb attached to a remote control bomb disposal robot. it was the first time u.s. law enforcement had used a robot to kill a suspect.  the shooting was the deadliest incident for u.s. law enforcement since the september 11, 2001 attacks, surpassing two related march 2009 shootings in oakland, california, and a november 2009 ambush shooting in lakewood, washington, which had each resulted in the death of four police officers and the shooting deaths of both suspects.  background a protest was organized in dallas by the next generation action network in response to the killings of two men, alton sterling and philando castile, by police officers in louisiana and minnesota, respectively, days before. the dallas protest was one of several held across the united states on the night of july 7. around 800 protesters were involved, and around 100 police officers were assigned to monitor the event. about 20 to 30 open-carry gun rights activists joined the protest march, some wearing gas masks, bulletproof vests, and fatigues, according to dallas police chief david brown.  shootings  most of the events happened in the streets and buildings around el centro college, which forms a city block composed of multiple buildings. the block is bordered by main street on the south where the protest march was taking place; lamar street to the east from where johnson initiated the shooting spree; and elm street to the north where johnson eventually entered the college.  main street shootings around 8:58 p.m. johnson parked his suv sideways on lamar street, in front of the east entrance to the college, at building a, and left the vehicle hazard lights blinking. at the time, the street had been cleared out in anticipation of the protest. taking cover at street level, he began shooting at groups of police and protesters who were gathered on main street. johnson was believed to have talked to three of
the officers he shot before he first opened fire.  three officers were killed in the initial gunfire, while at least three others and a civilian were injured. eleven officers fired back. during the shooting, officers, unaware where the shots were coming from, scrambled to block intersections and were exposed to gunfire as a result.  immediately afterwards, johnson made his way north on lamar street, encountering officer brent thompson along the way. a civilian recorded video of the encounter from his hotel balcony on lamar street. the video showed johnson, clad in tactical clothing and armed with a rifle, loading his rifle and firing indiscriminately to draw officers near his position. when thompson approached a corner, johnson engaged him in a gunfight, forcing thompson to take cover behind a concrete pillar. johnson fired towards one side of the pillar, then ran over to the other side of the pillar to flank thompson and shot him multiple times from behind, killing him.  el centro college shootout johnson, now injured during the firefight, attempted to enter the lamar street entrance of the college by shooting out the glass door but was unable to make his way in. he wounded two campus police officers who were near the doorway inside the building. corporal bryan shaw was shot in the stomach underneath his bulletproof vest, while officer john abbott was hit by flying glass in the legs. johnson then made his way to elm street where he shot out another glass door and entered the college unseen; he then made his way to building b. hearing the shattering glass, one of the injured campus officers, corporal shaw, made his way through the building and discovered a trail of blood leading to a stairwell. accompanied by another police officer, shaw entered the stairwell and was met with a hail of gunfire coming from above. unable to see johnson, he held his fire and retreated with the other officer.  afterwards, johnson made his way along a mezzanine between the school's second-floor dining area and third-floor library, but came onto a dead end of windows facing down onto elm street. he shot out multiple windows and fired repeatedly at officers on elm street. he hit michael smith, a police officer standing in front of a 7-eleven, killing him and shattering the store-front glass. officers began entering the college, sealing escape routes from the building, and evacuating students and teachers in the building, including those on a floor above johnson, through a different stairwell.  approaching johnson on the second floor near the library, officers found him secured behind a corner firing
intermittently. he was in an area filled with offices and the school's computer servers, with only two doors leading to where he was positioned, and a hallway about  long separating him from swat members. at least 200 gunshots were believed to have been fired by johnson and swat officers in that area during the standoff.  standoff and shooter's death the police claim that officers opened negotiations for surrender but  johnson said he would speak to black police officers only. johnson stated that he had acted alone and was not part of any group. according to chief brown, johnson appeared delusional during his standoff; "we had negotiated with him for about two hours, and he just basically lied to us, playing games, laughing at us, singing, asking how many did he get and that he wanted to kill some more." sgt. larry gordon indicated in an interview that the shooter "wasn't delusional", "he was very lucid, seemed to be very sane and very in control". by about 2:30 a.m., chief brown saw no possibility of negotiating further and made the decision to use a bomb disposal remote control vehicle armed with about  of c-4 explosive. the plan was to move the robot to a point against a wall facing johnson and then detonate the explosives. the device exploded as intended, killing johnson immediately. the robot, while sustaining damage to its extended arm, was still functional.  it was later discovered that johnson had scrawled the letters "rb" in his own blood while in the college, apparently after being wounded while making his way up a stairwell. the meanings of "rb" and other markings made by johnson remain unclear, though investigators did attempt to discover the meanings.  chief brown said that, during negotiations, johnson declared he had placed explosives in downtown dallas. however, a subsequent sweep of downtown dallas had found no explosives.  victims five officers were killed; nine other officers and two civilians were injured.  most of the victims were shot during the protests, and at least one other during a shootout. the dead comprised four dallas police department (dpd) officers and one dallas area rapid transit (dart) officer. four of the injured officers were from dpd, three were from dart, and two were from el centro college. seven of the injured officers were treated at parkland memorial hospital. two officers underwent surgery. one civilian was shot in the back of the leg, breaking her tibia.  the officers killed were identified as:  dpd senior cpl. l
orne ahrens, age 48, who had been with the department since 2002 and formerly served with los angeles county sheriff's department from 1991 to 2002.  dpd officer michael krol, 40, who had been with the department since 2003.  dpd sgt. michael smith, 55, a former army ranger who had been with the department since 1989.  dart officer brent thompson, 43, a former enlisted marine who had been with the department since 2007. thompson was the first dart officer to be killed in the line of duty since the department's inception in 1989.  dpd officer patricio "patrick" zamarripa, 32, a former navy sailor and iraq war veteran who had been with the department since 2010.  this was the deadliest single incident for law enforcement officers in the united states since the september 11 attacks, surpassing two 2009 shootings in lakewood, washington, and oakland, california, where four officers each were killed.  perpetrator  early life and education micah xavier johnson was born in magee, mississippi and raised in mesquite, texas. he once described his childhood as "stressful" during a va visit on august 15, 2014, but further details were redacted on the visit report. when he was four, his parents divorced.  johnson transferred into john horn high school when he was 17 and participated in its junior reserve officers' training corps program, according to the mesquite independent school district. he struggled academically, graduating in 2009 with a 1.98 grade-point average and a ranking of 430 out of 453 students in his class.  in the spring of 2011, he enrolled in four classes at richland college, but never completed any of them. investigators believed that johnson had access to el centro college through his enrollment at richland, citing his pre-planned and coordinated movements throughout building b.  military service immediately after high school, johnson enlisted in the u.s. army reserve and served from march 2009 to april 2015 as a 12w carpentry and masonry specialist. he completed basic training, which required qualification on handling of an m16 rifle or m4 carbine, basic rifles for u.s. military personnel. according to justin garner, a high-school friend and classmate who later served alongside johnson in the same unit, johnson lacked proficiency in certain required technical skills, such as marksmanship.  johnson was activated at the rank of private first class in september 2013 in support of the war in afghanistan, where he was deployed from november 2013 to july 2014 with the 420th engineer brigade.  people
who knew johnson during his time in the army described him as openly religious and often socializing with white soldiers. a squad leader, who trained johnson in tactical maneuvers and protection in 2009 and 2010, described him as "klutzy", "goofy sometimes", and "a nice guy", but also quiet and unmotivated.  documents released by the army on july 29 detailed early signs of disturbing behavior being exhibited by him, but specific details were redacted. they also said that while johnson was sociable, he was generally described by soldiers as a loner who sometimes ate his lunch in a vehicle alone while the rest of his unit ate outside together.  discharge on may 1, 2014, during his deployment, he was accused of sexual harassment by a female soldier, who sought a protective order against him and said that he needed mental health counseling. the accusation was made after the soldier reported four pairs of women's underwear missing from her laundry bag. a "health and welfare inspection" of soldiers' rooms found one pair in johnson's quarters, while a soldier discovered the remaining three in johnson's pocket. upon being confronted about it, johnson fled with the undergarments and attempted to dispose of them in a nearby dumpster. he then lied that a female civilian acquaintance gave the underwear to him, but the female soldier confirmed that they were in fact hers.  the female soldier told investigators that she and johnson had been platonic friends for five years, but had stopped talking to each other. she described their relationship as being tumultuous and involving fights and disagreements. she specifically recalled one incident where johnson punched out a car window over her leaving for college and severed an artery, then forced her to bring him to a hospital for treatment. however, johnson claimed that he punched out the window when the soldier missed a movie they planned to see together, and added that he had been under stress from his job and turbulent home life at the time.  according to the soldier, johnson asked her for a pair of her underwear before the may 1 incident, but she declined. also, during a facebook conversation with her, johnson mentioned "tying her down and having her face down on the bed" but then claimed the statement was a joke. though she told him that rape was "never a joke" and to stop contacting her, the soldier did not report him for harassment at the time because she was used to that kind of rhetoric. though the may 1 incident did not meet the army's criteria for sexual harassment, investigators found that johnson's sexually
suggestive comments to the female soldier met said criteria.  following the inspection, he was disarmed under the recommendation of his platoon sergeant, who felt he posed a potential threat. another army official later described the action as unusual, as johnson did not appear to be visibly agitated or a threat to himself or others at the time. johnson was then placed under 24-hour escort, which was reportedly a shameful and ostracizing experience, before being temporarily moved to bagram airfield on may 3, but he did not have enough time to pack all of his belongings. while soldiers were emptying johnson's quarters and packing his belongings for him on may 14, they discovered an unauthorized single m430i high explosive dual purpose 40mm grenade, a .50-caliber round, and another soldier's prescription medication in his sleeping bag.  later, the army sent johnson back to the u.s., and according to the military lawyer who represented johnson at the time, the army initiated proceedings to give johnson an "other than honorable" discharge. the lawyer claimed this was "highly unusual" because written reprimands are usually issued before more drastic steps are taken, and also because the decision was allegedly based on a single sexual harassment allegation. the lawyer was evidently unaware of the grenade and other contraband discovered in johnson's possession shortly before he was repatriated to the united states from afghanistan as well as other factors in johnson's possibly redacted record. on the advice of his attorney, johnson waived his right to a hearing in exchange for a more favorable general discharge under honorable conditions. he was honorably discharged in september 2014, apparently as a result of an army error. johnson remained in the individual ready reserve (irr), meaning he could be recalled into the army if needed, and was part of the irr at the time of his death.  johnson received the afghanistan campaign medal with campaign star, army achievement medal, global war on terrorism service medal, armed forces reserve medal, and nato medal for his tour of duty in afghanistan.  some of johnson's fellow soldiers criticized the army's handling of the case.  motive chief brown said that johnson, who was black, was upset about recent police shootings of black men and "stated he wanted to kill white people, especially white officers." a friend and former coworker of johnson's described him as "always [being] distrustful of the police." another former coworker said he seemed "very affected" by recent police shootings of black men. a friend said that johnson had anger management problems and would
repeatedly watch videos of the 1991 beating of rodney king by police officers. brown said that johnson had told police negotiators that he was upset about black lives matter.  "two law enforcement officials told npr's dina temple-raston that they believe the suspect had been planning an attack for some time and acted on his own. they added that they have not identified a connection between the suspect and any international terrorism or domestic extremist groups".  an investigation into his online activities uncovered his interest in black nationalist groups. the southern poverty law center (splc) and news outlets reported that johnson "liked" the facebook pages of black nationalist organizations such as the new black panther party (nbpp), nation of islam, and black riders liberation army, three groups which are listed by the splc as hate groups. on facebook, johnson posted an angry and "disjointed" post against white people on july 2, several days before the attack.  nbpp head quanell x said after the shooting that johnson had been a member of the nbpp's houston chapter for about six months, several years before. quanell x added that johnson had been "asked to leave" the group for violating the organization's "chain of command" and espousing dangerous rhetoric, such as asking the nbpp why they had not purchased more weapons and ammunition, and expressing his desire to harm black church preachers because he believed they were more interested in money than god. following the shooting, a national nbpp leader distanced the group from johnson, saying that he "was not a member of" the party.  johnson also "liked" the facebook page of the african american defense league, whose leader, mauricelm-lei millere, called for the murders of police officers across the u.s. following the fatal 2014 shooting of laquan mcdonald. in response to the police killing of alton sterling, the organization had "posted a message earlier in the week encouraging violence against police".  johnson's facebook profile photo depicted johnson raising his arm in a black power salute, along with images of a black power symbol and a flag associated with the pan-africanism movement. these symbols have long represented black empowerment, but have also been co-opted by reactionary groups with bigoted views.  conversely, people familiar with johnson during his military service believed he may have been severely stressed with serving in a combat zone. they also said he had little interest in the topics of racial injustice and the killing of trayvon martin that occurred at the time. in an interview
, johnson's parents said that he was once extroverted and patriotic, and wanted to become a police officer. following his discharge from the army, they described him as disillusioned, reclusive, and resentful of the u.s. government; and believed he had been disappointed by his experience in the military. according to a soldier, johnson had a small breakdown after he began losing his friends in the army after details of the sexual harassment accusation were released.  before the shooting according to an employment application made by johnson seven months before his death, he worked in a jimmy john's sandwich shop in north dallas beginning in 2010, and took a position as a quality assurance worker at a garland, texas, truck plant in 2012. at the time of his death, johnson was working as an in-home caregiver for his mentally disabled adult brother. both men lived with their mother in her home.  johnson had no criminal record in texas. however, the mesquite police department documented an encounter with him in january 2011. according to the report, johnson walked into their police station "visibly upset and...bouncing from side to side." he told an officer that a female friend had lied to him and that he had nowhere else to go. he also declined mental health treatment and claimed he was not a threat to himself or others. johnson was eventually picked up from the station by a friend from his army reserve unit.  the veterans health administration released documents in august 2016 showing that johnson had symptoms for posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd) following his return from afghanistan. he was not formally diagnosed with the condition, and doctors concluded that he presented no serious risk to himself or others. johnson had sought treatment for anxiety, depression, and hallucinations, once telling doctors that he had experienced nightmares after witnessing fellow soldiers dying in explosions. johnson also said that he would hear voices and mortars exploding; and that after returning to the u.s., he would be paranoid, suffer from lower back pain, and experience panic attacks a few times per week. for the latter condition, he recalled one incident at a wal-mart that required a police response. for his conditions, johnson was prescribed several medications, including a muscle relaxant, an antidepressant, and anti-anxiety and sleep medication.  chief brown said that while johnson had been planning the shooting before the deaths of sterling and philando castile, both incidents served as the trigger to commit the shooting and that he saw the dallas protest as "an opportunity" to attack police officers
. johnson had offered to work security at an anti-donald trump rally led by dallas civil rights activist reverend peter johnson on june 16, but he insisted on bringing a gun, so the reverend declined.  according to police and a neighbor, johnson practiced military exercises in his backyard. in 2014, johnson received training and instruction at a private self-defense school that teaches tactics such as "shooting on the move" (i.e., quickly firing, then changing position and resuming gunfire). the tactic was designed to keep a gunman's location uncertain and create the impression of multiple shooters. although the school's website does mention such training as being offered, justin everman, the founder of the school, stated that johnson only took self-defense courses two years ago. investigators believed that he began amassing his arsenal around the same time, stockpiling guns and gathering chemicals and electronic devices and pvc piping needed to build explosives.  investigation  weapons there were conflicting reports on the type of semi-automatic rifle that johnson used during the shooting. clay jenkins, the dallas county chief executive and the director of homeland security and emergency management, said johnson used an sks. news reports, all citing unnamed officials familiar with the investigation, said johnson used an izhmash-saiga 5.45mm rifle, which is a variation on the ak-47.  the new york daily news did an interview with a man who sold johnson a semiautomatic ak-47 pattern rifle in november 2014. the man said he sold johnson the rifle and made the deal in a target parking lot. when the man asked the atf if his weapon played a part in the shooting, the atf agent who responded said, "all we can say is it was recovered. we're just finding out everything we can."  in addition to the rifle, johnson carried at least one handgun with a high-capacity magazine during the attack. cnn, citing an unnamed official, reported that two handguns were recovered, one a glock 19 gen4 pistol and the other a fraser .25-caliber.  the fbi reported that johnson wore ballistic body armor with plates during the shooting.  searches johnson's family home was searched by authorities the day after the shooting. bomb-making materials, ballistic vests, two rifles, ammunition, and a "personal journal of combat tactics" containing "instruction on shooting techniques and tactical movements" were recovered from the home by detectives. chief brown reported that the journal included "quite a bit of rambling ... that's hard to
decipher."  chief brown said that recovered evidence pointed to johnson practicing detonations and having enough explosive material to cause "devastating effects" throughout dallas and the north texas area. however, the latter claim was contradicted on july 18 by two officials familiar with the investigation, who both said small amounts of tannerite, a binary explosive used to make explosive targets for gun ranges, and acetone, an accelerant in explosives, were recovered from the home.  statements were taken from three hundred witnesses and officers during the course of the investigation. investigators are examining johnson's laptop, journal, and cell phone, along with 170 hours of body camera footage. however, there were concerns about the resolution quality of some of the 90 cameras installed in downtown dallas, which could have recorded parts of the shooting essential to the investigation. the cameras were part of a multimillion-dollar downtown surveillance system implemented to reduce crime in the area. the dallas police department planned to release surveillance footage of the shooting on august 29, but held it off, saying the release would interfere with its investigation.  related arrests officials initially said two or more snipers carried out the shooting, with the confusion later attributed to ricocheting bullets and the echoes of gunshots. they later said that johnson appears to have been the lone gunman, with all of the gunshots traced back to him. three other people were taken into custody by police, "but officials have not said what roles they may have played." these three included two people seen carrying camouflage bags and leaving the shooting scene on lamar street. they were both stopped and detained after a six-mile chase. the detained persons were all later determined to be fleeing protesters who were either armed or carrying ammunition gear. however, police announced on july 9 that they were continuing to investigate whether johnson acted alone or conspired with others in planning the shooting. investigators obtained a search warrant to look for phone numbers connected to johnson.  one of the people taken into custody by police had attended the protest wearing a camouflage t-shirt and openly carrying an unloaded ar-15 rifle. shortly after the shooting, the dallas police department (dpd) tweeted a photo of the man describing him as one of their suspects and asked the public's help in finding him. the police-released image of the suspect was widely shared on social media and broadcast on national television. the suspect turned himself in and was subsequently released after questioning without charge.  police high commands  due to the criticism against militarization of police, dallas police department's high command ordered the officers
assigned to the protest to not wear military-style bulletproof vests (such as plate carriers) because they did not want the officers to look too "militaristic, aggressive" and instead to wear standard issue kevlar vests, which were not able to protect against the rifle rounds johnson had. for the same reasons, officers were not able to arm themselves with long guns, such as ar-15s. the president of the dallas police association, mike mata, said: "[a] lot of those shots, and a lot of those wounds... were chest shots, lower abdomen wound shots, and those heavy vests would have covered them".  army internal review on july 13, pentagon officials announced that the u.s. army had launched an internal review into johnson's military service. the review was initiated after questions were raised about the appropriateness of his honorable discharge despite the sexual harassment allegations made against him, and the fact that the army had been highly considering an "other than honorable discharge" for johnson.  during the investigation, the army uncovered an incomplete amount of information regarding the sexual harassment allegations. the following day, another review was initiated by the army's criminal investigation command, to determine if a full investigation was made into the allegations. an army official echoed a statement made by the lawyer who represented johnson, saying that johnson's honorable discharge may have been the result of an administrative error. the same official added that nothing had been found in johnson's record that indicated a willingness to commit murder.  on july 29, the army released a heavily redacted report, which detailed the incident behind johnson's discharge but did not address why he was discharged honorably. another investigative report was released on august 17. on september 7, the army released johnson's personnel files.  aftermath  dart suspended service in downtown dallas after the shooting, but resumed the next morning with the exception of west end station. the federal aviation administration issued a temporary flight restriction of civilian aircraft for the immediate vicinity in which the shooting occurred, allowing only police aircraft in the airspace.  el centro college canceled all classes on july 8. police barricaded the perimeter and began canvassing the crime scene. the explosion that killed johnson also destroyed the school's servers, further delaying reopening. the school partially reopened on july 20, with staff returning that day and students on the following day. buildings a, b, and c remained closed pending the fbi investigation. a "reflect and renew" ceremony dedicated to demonstrating citywide efforts to unify dallas was held at the college on july 27. students
and staff, along with city and community officials, were in attendance.  chief brown said that police efforts to identify the gunman were made more difficult by the presence of up to thirty civilians openly carrying rifles during the protest, which is legal in texas. brown said, "we're trying as best we can as a law enforcement community to make it work so that citizens can express their second amendment rights. but it's increasingly challenging when people have ar-15s slung over their shoulder and they're in a crowd. we don't know who the good guy is versus the bad guy when everyone starts shooting." in an interview after the shooting, dallas mayor mike rawlings said that he supported changing state law to restrict the public carrying of rifles and shotguns so that the police could distinguish between suspects and civilians more easily during crises.  dallas observer noted several similarities between johnson and mark essex, a discharged u.s. navy sailor and black panther who committed two attacks against white civilians and police officers on december 31, 1972, and january 7, 1973, in new orleans. the attacks left nine people dead, including five police officers.  lawsuits in november 2016, enrique zamarripa, the father of officer patrick zamarripa, one of the murdered police officers, filed a lawsuit against black lives matter and 13 other defendants, including the nation of islam, the new black panther party, the reverend al sharpton, and individual activists. the lawsuit seeks $550 million in damages and claims that johnson was acting as an agent for the defendants and alleged that the defendants incited violence and caused the dallas shooting as a "direct result". the mother of the officer, valerie zamarripa, distanced herself from her ex-husband's lawsuit, saying that it did not reflect her views, or the views of the foundation set up in her son's name.  earlier, in september 2016, a dallas police officer, sgt. demetrick pennie, represented by lawyer larry klayman, filed a lawsuit in the u.s. district court for the northern district of texas against 17 people-including louis farrakhan, the nation of islam, sharpton, the national action network, black lives matter, deray mckesson, malik zulu shabazz, the new black panther party, george soros, president barack obama, eric holder, hillary clinton, and jesse jackson-blaming them for the attack and seeking damages of over $500 million. klayman has used his nonprofit group freedom watch to pursue lawsuits that "further supposed '
far-right' causes" in the past. the lawsuit was seen as "unlikely to be taken too seriously by a judge" and all of klayman's claims against mckesson and black lives matter were dismissed or withdrawn. attorneys for mckesson have argued that "klayman should have known his claims were frivolous."  in january 2017, pennie separately sued twitter, facebook, and google in the u.s. district court for the northern district of california, claiming that the websites "knowingly and recklessly" allowed terrorist propaganda to be spread on their social networks.  effects on policing as a result of the shooting, local law enforcement officers worked more than $800,000 in overtime to help the dallas police department (dpd). this included $86,000 spent by the dallas county sheriff's office, $88,000 spent by the arlington police department, about $705,250 by dpd, and unknown sums by the irving police department and the dallas fire-rescue department.  following this shooting and another in baton rouge, louisiana, that killed three police officers and wounded three others, local law enforcement agencies across the u.s. began readjusting response strategies, with more officers being paired up in patrol vehicles. departments also began to increase security and surveillance at protest events against police.  within twelve days following the shooting, dpd received 467 job applications, representing a 344% increase from the 136 applications received by the department in june. in the months before the shooting, dpd, along with other police departments across the country, had been struggling to recruit new officers. dpd even had to cancel academy classes because there were not enough applicants, and also struggled in retaining officers due to a low salary. on august 25, dpd announced their goal to hire 549 officers by october 2017, though some police and city council officials called it an unrealistic goal due to the department's strict hiring requirements.  use of a police robot to kill johnson the killing of johnson was the first time in united states history a robot was used by police to kill a suspect. the remotec andros mark v-a1, a bomb disposal remote control vehicle used by police, was rigged with about  of c-4 explosive. the decision to attack johnson with a robot was made after it was concluded that the heavily armed assailant had secured himself behind a corner at the end of a hallway, with no safe way for police to rush him or reach him with a sniper.  there were various
reactions to the lethal use of a robot by police. p. w. singer, a robotics expert at the new america foundation, said it was the first instance of which he was aware of a robot being used lethally by police. seth stoughton, an assistant professor of law at the university of south carolina, said, "this is sort of a new horizon for police technology. robots have been around for a while, but using them to deliver lethal force raises some new issues."  to this effect, stoughton said, "i'm not aware of any police department having on hand something that is intended to be used as a weaponized explosive." he believed that the manner in which the police used the robot was justified due to johnson being an imminent threat to police personnel and civilians, stating, "the circumstances that justify lethal force justify lethal force in essentially every form."  reactions texas governor greg abbott ordered the director of the texas department of public safety to offer any assistance to dallas when requested. he also said, "in times like this we must remember-and emphasize-the importance of uniting as americans." texas lieutenant governor dan patrick attributed the violence to individuals on social media, "former black lives matter protesters", and others with anti-police views, later expressing regret for his statement.  president barack obama called the shooting a "vicious, calculated, despicable attack" and a "tremendous tragedy". he also made immediate calls for gun control. the fraternal order of police, the largest police union in the u.s., called for the shooting to be investigated as a hate crime and criticized president obama's response, saying that he needed to speak for everyone and not give one speech for police officers and another one for african americans.  leaders associated with the black lives matter movement, including organizers of the protest rally, condemned the shooting.  on july 8, the day after the shooting, a special interfaith vigil attracted hundreds of people to thanks-giving square in downtown dallas, where dallas mayor mike rawlings and regional faith leaders led prayers for the officers involved in the shooting and for everyone affected by it.  an interfaith memorial to the dead officers was held at dallas's morton h. meyerson symphony center on july 12. u.s. president barack obama and former president george w. bush, a texan who previously served as the 46th governor of texas, spoke at the ceremony, which was also attended by then-vice president joe biden. obama praised the dallas police as heroes and called the killings "an act not just of
demented violence but of racial hatred." in the aftermath, obama urged americans not to give in to despair, saying, "[w]e are not so divided as we seem."  attorney general loretta lynch said that agents from the atf, fbi, marshals service, and other u.s. department of justice agencies were on the scene working with state and local agencies. lynch stated that the proper response to uncertainty and fear "is never violence" but rather is "calm, peaceful, collaborative and determined action." lynch also said, "to all americans, i ask you, i implore you, do not let this week precipitate a new normal in this country."  after the shootings at dallas, louisiana, and minnesota, the bahamian government issued a travel advisory telling citizens to use caution when traveling to the u.s. due to racial tensions. they specifically advised that young men use "extreme caution" when interacting with police and to be non-confrontational and cooperative.  see also   1985 move bombing  2014 killings of nypd officers  2015 attack on dallas police  2016 shootings of des moines police officers  2016 shooting of baton rouge police officers  2020 shooting of los angeles police officers  gun violence in the united states  list of american police officers killed in the line of duty  list of killings by law enforcement officers in the united states  list of rampage killers (religious, political, or ethnic crimes)  notes  references  2016 in texas 2016 mass shootings in the united states 2016 murders in the united states 2010s crimes in texas 2010s in dallas african and black nationalism in the united states american police officers killed in the line of duty assassinated police officers attacks in the united states in 2016 crimes against police officers in the united states 2016 shooting 2016 shooting deaths by firearm in texas 2016 shooting filmed killings july 2016 crimes in the united states law enforcement in texas mass murder in 2016 mass murder in texas mass murder in the united states mass shootings in texas mass shootings in the united states 2016 shooting racially motivated violence against european americans racially motivated violence in the united states anti-police violence in the united states
marko trojak (born 28 march 1988 in varazdin) is a croatian football midfielder who plays for nk brezice.  club career  trojak went through the ranks of his hometown club varteks's academy, but left the club without debuting for the first team in 2008 after a year and a half on loan to his club's feeder teams. his next club would be third-tier nk virovitica, before experiencing first-tier football in slovenia, having joined the ailing nk drava ptuj following a trial. in 2010, he moved back to croatia, joining nk lokomotiva, and, in april 2011, helped inflict his former club (which had changed its name from varteks to nk varazdin) their first loss on home turf after over a year, by assisting nino bule for the sole goal of the match. he went on to rejoin varazdin that summer, participating in the club's europa league qualifications campaign which was narrowly ended by dinamo bucharest with 4-3 aggregate, but would feature in only 6 league matches before the club was expelled from croatia's top league, prva hnl, and subsequently folded. after a season at second-tier nk zelina, trojak spent most of the next two and a half years two lower-tier austrian and german clubs. in the 2015/16 winter transfer period he returned to prva hnl football after going on trial with nk istra 1961 and passing.  references  external links   1988 births living people croatian footballers sportspeople from varazdin croatian first football league players nk istra 1961 players nk lokomotiva players nk varazdin players nk zelina players association football midfielders
alexander joseph ranald shaw  (born 1971) is an english philosopher. he serves chairman of the latin mass society, an organisation devoted to propagation of the catholic church's tridentine mass, and as president of una voce.  shaw is the son of the late thomas shaw, 3rd baron craigmyle (1923-1998) and anthea craigmyle (nee rich) (1933-2016). he was educated at ampleforth college and the university of oxford.  he is currently a tutorial fellow in philosophy at st benet's hall, oxford. his main areas of interest are practical ethics, the philosophy of religion and medieval philosophy. in 2015, he was elected a fellow of the royal society of arts. a traditionalist catholic, shaw was a signatory of the 2017 "filial correction" correctio filialis de haeresibus propagatis, which ascribed heretical content to pope francis's apostolic exhortation amoris laetitia. shaw was also an early critic of pope francis's motu proprio traditionis custodes, which abrogated permissions for celebration of the tridentine mass.  references  external links  joseph shaw's philosophy blog    1971 births 21st-century english philosophers alumni of the university of oxford british ethicists catholic philosophers christian ethicists english traditionalist catholics fellows of st benet's hall, oxford living people people educated at ampleforth college philosophers of religion scholars of medieval philosophy younger sons of barons
vaughan woods & historic homestead is a non-profit nature preserve and historic house museum in hallowell, maine.  the trails of vaughan woods are open to the public daily from dawn to dusk. they may be accessed via two designated trailhead and parking areas. the hallowell trailhead does not have a street address, but is easily located at the corner of litchfield road and middle street. the farmingdale trailhead is behind the hall-dale high school tennis courts at 97 maple street. access to the homestead and gardens is restricted unless a public program is in session.  description and history vaughan woods & historic homestead is located south of downtown hallowell on a property overlooking the kennebec river, that is bounded on the north by litchfield road, the west by interstate 95, the south by public lands containing regional schools, and the east by greenville street and small residential roads.  the property covers nearly , much of it woodland.  the northern third is separated from the south by vaughan brook, which flows east from cascade pond (on the property) to the kennebec river.  it is in this area that the homestead and outbuildings are located. the house is a large and rambling structure, two stories in height. the original main block is the southernmost portion, except for a covered porch extending across its southeastern face. to the northwest of this block there are a series of ells, also mostly of 19th-century origin, one of which is in a distinctive octagon shape.  the house is surrounded by terraced landscaping.  to the south and west of the house are woods, with hiking trails offering scenic views and access to historic uses of the property.   the property was part of the once-large holdings of benjamin hallowell, one of the kennebec proprietors and the namesake of the city.  hallowell's daughter sarah married samuel vaughan, son of a london merchant, and their two sons, charles and benjamin, moved to hallowell in 1791 and 1797, respectively. charles had the main portion of this house built in 1794 as a summer cottage, but when benjamin and his family arrived from england in 1797, they turned it into their year-round home. benjamin vaughan was a merchant and diplomat, playing a critical role in negotiations ending the american revolutionary war.  both vaughans were active in the promotion of business and the economic development of hallowell.  by the late 19th century, a significant portion of the vaughan estate had been sold off and cleared of trees. vaughan descendants william and benjamin vaughan began in 1890 to rep
urchase portions of the estate and restore the woodlands.  the present property is largely a product of their efforts. william's heirs donated a conservation easement to the kennebec land trust in 1991, and the property was eventually taken over by a non-profit organization founded in 2002.  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine  references  external links vaughan woods and historic homestead web site  houses on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in kennebec county, maine houses completed in 1797 houses in kennebec county, maine museums in kennebec county, maine historic house museums in maine protected areas of kennebec county, maine
victoria nkong is a nigerian multilingual entertainment consultant and an event producer. she worked as a bi-lingual presenter, producer for kora awards, headies awards and she helped found a charity called the life fountain orphanage home.  victoria is the executive producer of cruise & chills boat cruise networking party for business moguls, media and celebrities: she is also behind slum invasion annual charity event.  in 2017, victoria was featured on "women rock project".  life nkong was born into a family of educationists. nkong obtained her first degree in modern languages from the university of calabar in southern nigeria and further studied business communication at the university of cape town in south africa. she also studied entrepreneurial management at lagos business school womenx   nkong worked with kora all africa music awards as bilingual presenter, served as pa to the kora president and eventually became a show producer. in 2012. between year 2011 to 2014 she organized international events like 50th anniversary of african music with akon, vlisco annual fashion show, mtn yellow summer in benin republic, international african athletics competition 2012.  nkong helped to found a charity and the life fountain orphanage home.  references  living people businesspeople from lagos 21st-century nigerian businesspeople nigerian women company founders founders of orphanages university of calabar alumni lagos business school alumni 21st-century businesswomen year of birth missing (living people)
madame x (spanish: la mujer x) is a 1955 mexican drama film directed by julian soler and starring libertad lamarque.  cast in alphabetical order    victor alcocer   emilio brillas    silvia derbez     manuel donde    jose angel espinosa 'ferrusquilla'   paquito fernandez    miguel angel ferriz    victor junco    libertad lamarque    rodolfo landa   jose maria linares-rivas    miguel angel lopez    julio monterde     jose elias moreno     juan orraca    alejandro parodi   jose pulido   carlos robles gil    beatriz saavedra    hortensia santovena   andres soler    aurora walker  references  bibliography   darlene j. sadlier. latin american melodrama: passion, pathos, and entertainment. university of illinois press, 2009.  external links     1955 films 1955 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by julian soler mexican films based on plays
the east indonesia mujahideen (; abbreviated mit) is a terrorist group operating out of poso, sulawesi in indonesia. the group was led by abu wardah (also known as santoso) until he was killed by indonesian police on 18 july 2016. after the death of santoso, the group was led by ali kalora until he was killed on 18 september 2021. the group has pledged allegiance to the islamic state.  mit was proscribed by the united nations security council under the al-qaeda sanctions committee on 29 september 2015. the us department of state has designated mit as a terrorist organisation.  mit has largely carried out its operations within sulawesi but has threatened to attack targets across indonesia. the group's operations have typically avoided operations that would cause civilian casualties, but was reportedly involved in clashes between muslims and christians in maluku province between 1999 and 2002.  history  the group was founded in 2010 by santoso in central sulawesi area. the group was closely affiliated with west indonesia mujahideen that is led by abu roban. abu roban was later killed in 2013 during a police raid in central java.   in 2012, santoso was chosen to be the leader of the group. santoso was killed by indonesian forces in 2016. his successor, ali kalora, was killed on 18 september 2021 alongside another militant by indonesian security personnel in a forest near the village of astina, located in the parigi moutong regency of central sulawesi.  actions and attacks  2012  the group gained their notoriety and fame after kidnapping, and later killing, two police officers in october 2012. both police officers were kidnapped and then killed when they were scouting the area for probable terrorist activities. both of the bodies were found by indonesian army search parties that were sent out after both officers were unable to be contacted. during the search operations, santoso taunted indonesian military and law enforcement to "fight him like a man" and to "stop looking good on television". the group was known to have prepared traps for indonesian military search parties. despite the action of the mit and the death of the police officers, indonesian search and rescue attempts were able to corner mit multiple times.   on 24 october, the group attacked a police kiosk on poso, central sulawesi, injuring four people; two police officers and two civilians.  2014  one of the perpetrators in the killing of the police officers in 2012 is arrested at mamasa, west sulawesi, by densus 88. during the year, the group allegedly shot at a police station. the police also
stated that mit have participated in the abductions and killings of civilians, some of the killing is allegedly done because the civilian is acting as informant for the security forces.  2015  during 2015, the terrorist group conduct attacks on christians, and also involved in shootouts with indonesian police. one indonesian soldier and one police officer is killed during the year.  2016  one indonesian police officer is killed by mit during a shootout at poso, while the two of the terrorists are killed. indonesian police stated that the terrorist group is operating on a difficult terrain at pegunungan biru. indonesian police claimed that during their operation on 2016 28 members of the terrorist group has been arrested.  2020  after years of inactivity, the terrorist group struck again on november 2020, killing a christian family, burning a christian church, and also set fire to 6 homes. days after the attack, indonesian national police claimed that during the year detachment 88 have arrested 32 alleged terrorists from east indonesia mujahideen.  2021 on may 11, 2021, four farmers were killed by the group in the napu valley, kalimango village, east lore subdistrict, poso district. the attack was said to be a revenge for the killing of two members of the group, including santoso's son, two months prior.  foreign assistance  uyghurs  turkish passports were used by uyghurs who were seeking to contact mujahidin indonesia timor.  isis/isil aligned uyghurs have been traveling to indonesia to participate in terrorist attacks against shia, christians, and the indonesian government, during a terrorist attack in central sulawesi, one uighur, farouk, was killed by indonesian security personnel in november, and another uighur terrorist, alli, was arrested for plotting a terrorist attack. china has been contacted by the indonesian government who sought assistance in confronting uighur members of terrorist organizations in indonesia. indonesia arrested a possible suicide bomber named ali, a uyghur, on 24 december 2015.  in sulawesi on tuesday 15 march 2016 two pro-isis uyghurs in indonesia were liquidated by indonesian government forces. the indonesians used bullets to kill them. the "dogu turkistan bulteni haber ajansı" which supports the turkistan islamic party (tip), denounced the indonesian government and police for their killing of 2 uyghurs who were members of "dogu endonezya mucahitleri" (mujahidin indonesia timor). 2 uyghurs with suspected terror ties were killed in sulawesi by indonesian security forces on 8 april and the killings were condemned by "
dogu turkistan bulteni haber ajansı". the "dogu turkistan bulteni haber ajansı" slammed the indonesian government for hunting down four uyghurs who illegally entered the country to join "dogu endonezya mucahitleri" and accused the indonesian government of attacking muslims. a uighur accused of terror ties was killed in sulawesi by the indonesian security forces on 24 april, for which the "dogu turkistan bulteni haber ajansı" condemned the indonesian government.  in poso uyghurs were being instructed by santoso, the head of mujahideen indonesia timur. faruq magalasi, mus'ab, ibrohim, and joko were the names obtained by the indonesian media of uyghurs being hunted by the indonesian police.  in poso four uyghurs were captured by indonesian police after they allegedly illegally entered indonesia via malaysia and thailand with forged passports.  death of notable members on 3 april 2015,  was killed by police. on 18 july 2016, indonesian soldiers killed mit leader santoso during an operation. sobron was also killed during the tinombala operation's task force on 19 september 2016. leader ali kalora was killed alongside commander jaka "ikrima" ramadhan on september 18, 2021.  andika eka putra, one of the most wanted members of mit, died on 14 september 2016. he was found dead on the banks of the puna in tangkura village, after accidentally falling while crossing a river, and dying of head injury after hitting a rock.  members according to police commissioner leo bona lubis, before this santoso group together with his followers numbered 28 people. but it increased to 45 people who were thought to be in the mountain and the forest in poso pesisir bersaudara dan lore.   ahmad gazali aka ahmad panjang (from poso)   nae aka galuh aka mukhlas (originally bima)   askar aka jaid aka pak guru (from bima)   suhardin alias hasan pranata (from poso)    muhammad faisal aka namnung aka kobar (from poso)   abu alim aka ambo (from bima)   taufik bulaga aka upik lawanga (from poso) -  dt   alvin aka adam aka mus'ab aka alvin anshori (from banten)   khairul aka irul aka aslam (from poso)   wahid aka aan aka bojes (from poso)   azis ari
fin aka azis (from poso)   santoso aka abu wardah (from poso / java)    ali ahmad aka ali kalora (from poso)    qatar alias farel aka anas (from bima)     sabar subagyo aka daeng koro   jaka ramadan aka ikrima aka rama (from banten)   rukli (from poso)    basri aka bagong (from poso) -  dt   jumiatun muslim (santoso's wife from bima) - m   syarifudin thalib aka udin aka usman (from poso) - m   firmansyah aka thoriq aka imam (from poso) - m   nurmi usman (basri's wife from bima) -  dt   tini susanti kaduka (ali kalora's wife from bima) -  dt   aditya aka idad aka kuasa (from ambon) -  dt   basir alias romzi (from bima)   andi muhammad aka abdullah aka abdurrahman al makasari (from makassar)   alqindi mutaqien aka muaz (from banten)   alhaji kaliki aka ibrohim (from ambon)   firdaus aka daus aka baroque aka rangga (from bima)   kholid (from poso)   ali aka darwin gobel (from poso)   muis fahron aka abdullah (from poso)   rajif gandi sabban aka rajes (from ambon)    suharyono hiban aka yono sayur   word aka ikrima (from poso)   sucipto aka cipto ubaid (from poso)   adji pandu suwotomo aka sobron (from java)   andika eka putra aka hilal (from poso)   yazid aka taufik (from java)   mukhtar aka kahar (from palu)   abu urwah aka bado aka osama (from poso)   mamat   nanto bojel   can aka fajar (from bima)   sogir aka yanto (from bima)   herman aka david (from bima)   busro aka dan (from bima)   fonda amar shalihin aka dodo (from java)   hamdra tamil aka papa yusran (from poso)   udin aka rambo (from malino)   germanto aka rudi   anto aka tiger   agus suryanto farhan aka ayun   ibrahim (tip
member)   bahtusan magalazi alias farouk (tip member)   nurettin gundoggdu alias abd malik (tip member)   sadik torulmaz alias abdul aziz (tip member)   thuram ismali alias joko (tip member)   mustafa genc alias mus'ab (tip member)   samil aka nunung (from poso) -  dt   salman aka opik (from bima) - m   jumri aka tamar (from poso) - m   ibadurahman (from bima) - m   syamsul (from java) - m   mochamad sonhaji (from java) - m   irfan maulana aka akil (from poso) - m  references  2010 establishments in indonesia islamic terrorism in indonesia organizations designated as terrorist by malaysia organisations designated as terrorist by the united kingdom organizations designated as terrorist by the united states
nasir muhammad 'awad al-ghidan al-harbi, known by his kunya abu bilal al-harbi, was a saudi arabian citizen who was the governor of the islamic state's branch in yemen.  biography he was born in al-qassim region, saudi arabia on either 20 july or 5 september 1974.  in september 2014, he established contact with is and sought pledges of allegiance on their behalf. in late 2014, he allegedly facilitated the movement of people and material for is operations in saudi arabia. according to the treasury, he "was in yemen with a group that pledged allegiance to isil and received significant funding from either isil or an unidentified donor".  according to the united states department of the treasury, he recruited for the islamic state in yemen in mid-2015 having received funding from is in 2014 to implement their plan in yemen. he declined to recruit and facilitate efforts in yemen on behalf of al-qaeda in the arabian peninsula in favor of an alleged promise of 4,000 al-qaeda in the islamic maghreb fighters by abu bakr al-baghdadi.  leadership disputes in yemen in december 2015, he suffered a rebellion against his rule as governor by members of the islamic state in yemen, who appealed to the islamic state leadership in syria and iraq to replace him. seventy members announced their defection in a letter published online, though they reaffirmed their allegiance to abu bakr al-baghdadi.  the authors accused him and his "inner circle" of committing "excesses and violations against sharia."despite our efforts to advise and inform the caliph's office on matters happening in yemen, the violations against the sharia remain present and continue to increase," the letter continued. "they stopped working in accordance with the prophetic path regarding the resolution of many problems and issues."  the letter further listed three violations of sharia supposedly committed by abu bilal;the wrongful "dismissal of a number of soldiers" after they filed a complaint, a failure to provide "basic resources" during a battle in hadhramaut governorate, and the refusal to submit to a sharia ruling against a regional commander. additional accusations were made of "oppressing the downtrodden" and "expelling the muhajireen". they then demanded that baghdadi dismiss the governor for yemen, along with "his retinue."  abu ubaydah abd al-hakim, a member of the consultative council of the islamic state responded, rejecting the request to remove the governor and saying, "what you have
ventured to do is absolutely rejected. you must hear and obey he who has been tasked with your emirate, and you tasked by his emiracy over you".  us sanctions he was sanctioned by the united states department of the treasury on 29 september 2015.  death  in 2017, videos lamenting abu bilal al-harbi's death were circulated by the islamic state of iraq and the levant - yemen province, implying he had died.  references  1974 births 2017 deaths people of the yemeni civil war (2014-present) islamic state of iraq and the levant in yemen islamic state of iraq and the levant members leaders of islamic terror groups people from al-qassim province saudi arabian al-qaeda members saudi arabian islamists
ion talianu (; 1898-1956) was a romanian stage actor. he also appeared in six films.  filmography  the valley resounds (1950)  a lost letter (1953)  mitrea cocor (1953)  the sun rises (1954)  pe raspunderea mea (1956)  the protar affair (1956)  references  bibliography   cristian sandache. literatura si propaganda in romania lui gheorghiu dej. 2001.  external links     1898 births 1956 deaths romanian male film actors romanian male stage actors
freckleton's stores is a heritage-listed group of shops at barkly street, camooweal, city of mount isa, queensland, australia. it was built from  to 1950s. it is also known as synnot and co., synnot, murray and scholes and synnot, murray and scholes. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992.  history  freckleton's stores comprise a group of buildings located at the western end of barkly street, camooweal, in north-west queensland. the township of camooweal was proclaimed in 1884, and developed as a pastoral centre for outback stations. camooweal was also important in the context of pre-federation customs collection, as it was only seven miles from the border with south australia, later the northern territory.  the land was granted to thomas harding in 1888 and acquired by frank frith, a camooweal storekeeper in 1891. the land was acquired by john affleck in 1893. affleck took out a mortgage with patrick synnott in 1895, suggesting that the earliest of the present stores which was built as a general store for bulk groceries such as flour, sugar and tea, was erected at about this time. at the turn of the century a two-gallon licence to decant and sell spirits was obtained, and  a bond store was erected adjacent to the eastern side of the general store, which became known as the "gallon licence".  although normanton became the chief port into the gulf of carpentaria after the 1870s, it was from burketown that the camooweal district drew its supplies. affleck and synnott were burketown merchants, of the firm affleck, synnott and co.  synnott and co, storekeepers, were first recorded at camooweal in 1903. affleck took out a further mortgage with burns philp and co in 1906. the stores were acquired by patrick synnott in 1911, and became known as synnott, murray and scholes in 1918. they were managed by synnott's son, james h synnott, of camooweal from 1934 to 1940.  in 1943 the business, including associated buildings, was sold to joseph freckleton a tank sinker and teamster originally from south australia. by the 1940s the business had acquired the shell and qantas agencies and freckleton was able to take advantage of wartime demand for aviation gasoline and other services during camooweal's period as a military movements and supply centre.  by
the late 1940s, in addition to the general store and gallon licence, the freckleton family owned a number of buildings, including another store, in camooweal. around 1950 this store was moved onto the stores allotment and re-erected adjacent to the eastern side of the gallon licence, becoming the third building on the allotment. this former store was operated as a cafe and milkbar until the early 1980s.  concrete footpaths and street gutters were laid by freckleton during the early 1950s. concrete retaining walls were erected around the early flagstone footpath outside the general store at this time. during the early 1950s freckleton was involved in the purchase, dismantling and re-sale of ex army building materials and erected timber storage racks between the general store and gallon licence. also during this period he erected a large iron shed at the rear of the allotment for bulk storage of liquor produce and fuel.  freckleton died in 1964 and control of the stores passed to two of his children, joseph freckleton and lillian ada miller. substantial repairs and maintenance were undertaken on buildings on the allotment during the early 1970s. a kitchen and toilet were built onto the rear of the cafe for the manager, and a carport was erected at the rear of the allotment.  in 2009, following the death of joe freckleton, his sister ada closed the store and the barkly history museum within it as, aged 82, she was unable to continue to operate it.  description   freckletons stores are situated on an allotment containing several single-storeyed timber and corrugated iron buildings, which include the old store () and the bond store/gallon licence (). an iron covered timber storage rack and carport are also on the allotment.  the old store is clad in vertically-running corrugated iron on a timber frame and has a simple gabled roof flanked by skillions. the roof is supported by a simple structure of timber rafters, purlins and collar ties resting on round timber posts with brackets. the posts are founded on bedlogs, and the floor joists rest on the ground; this contact with the earth has created a white ant problem. the store contains extensive hand-hewn shelving for the storage of flour etc. externally, an awning runs the width of the street elevation to the south. it is supported by five substantial round timber posts. it covers a section of footpath which is paved in local unworked limestone slabs set in a bedding of antbed, now concrete pointed, and
is retained with a low concrete retaining wall. the building has a double door entrance at front and rear.  the bond store/gallon licence is clad in horizontally-running corrugated iron, and also has a simple gabled roof flanked by skillions. the building sits above the street on round timber stumps and steel posts. the store is lined internally with stained timber, and has extensive built-in timber shelving, cupboards and counters. an awning running the width of the gable end is supported on steel posts.  the two buildings complement each other in form and materials, and contribute to the streetscape as a now uncommon pair of corrugated iron stores.  heritage listing  freckleton's stores was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  freckleton's stores, camooweal, are important in demonstrating the pattern of queensland's history, in particular the pattern of inland development in north-west queensland, and the role of burketown as a supply centre for north-west queensland.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  they are important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of early corrugated iron outback store buildings.   the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  they exhibit particular aesthetic characteristics valued by the community, in particular their contribution to the character and streetscape of camooweal.   the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  as longstanding stores in camooweal and north-west queensland, they have a special association with the camooweal community.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register camooweal commercial buildings in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
a green bank (sometimes referred to as green investment bank, clean energy finance authority, or clean energy finance corporation) is a financial institution, typically public or quasi-public, that uses innovative financing techniques and market development tools in partnership with the private sector to accelerate deployment of clean energy technologies. green banks use public funds to leverage private investment in clean energy technologies that, despite being commercially viable, have struggled to establish a widespread presence in consumer markets. green banks seek to reduce energy costs for ratepayers, stimulate private sector investment and economic activity, and expedite the transition to a low-carbon economy.  in the united states, green banks have been created at the state and local levels. the united kingdom, australia, japan, new zealand and malaysia have all created national banks dedicated to leveraging private investment in clean energy technologies. together, green banks around the world have driven approximately $30 billion of clean energy investment.  history in the us, the green bank concept was originally developed by reed hundt and ken berlin, as a part of the 2008 obama-biden transition team's efforts to facilitate clean energy development.  a similar concept was adopted as an amendment to the federal cap and trade bill, called the american clean energy and security act, introduced in may 2009.  a companion piece of federal green financing legislation was simultaneously introduced in the senate, where it received broad bipartisan support.  when the 2009 cap and trade legislation ultimately failed to pass the senate, green bank advocates in the us focused on the state level.  connecticut established the first state green bank in 2011, followed by new york in 2013. by the end of fiscal year 2015, the connecticut green bank had supported $663 million in project investments.  in the uk in 2009, two reports were published advocating the creation of a state-backed infrastructure bank to provide financing to green projects. the first, entitled "accelerating green infrastructure financing: outline proposals for uk green bonds and infrastructure bank" was published in march 2009 by climate change capital and e3g. the second, entitled "delivering a 21st century infrastructure for britain" was published by policy exchange in september 2009 and was written by dieter helm, james wardlaw and ben caldecott.  essential elements there are many types and styles of institutions that finance clean energy and green infrastructure projects. there are several key elements that distinguish green banks from other financing institutions: a focus on commercially viable technologies, a dedicated source of capital, a focus on
leveraging private investment, and a relationship with government.  green banks focus on commercially viable technologies, as opposed to early-stage innovative technologies, because they have been tested, have less associated "technology risk" and can reliably produce revenue for project owners.  green banks are public-purpose entities with some manner of a relationship with government, and are usually capitalized by public dollars.  just like a commercial bank, green banks lend capital and own debt, so it is important they have their own balance sheet. green banks also focus on using their capital to facilitate private entry into the clean energy market-specifically by using limited public dollars to leverage private investment in clean energy.  market barriers  for consumers, high upfront costs often make clean energy technology unattractive to adopt despite declines in clean energy technology costs.  historically, the clean energy sector has depended on taxpayer-funded grants, rebates, tax credits, and other subsidies to drive market development.  ideally, private lenders would provide financing to building-owners to cover upfront cost of clean energy adoption (beyond what is covered by rebates). however, there are capital market inefficiencies and inherent challenges to financing clean energy that have resulted in inadequate investment by private lenders. some private lenders do offer financing for clean energy projects, but typically charge interest rates that are relatively high and loan tenors that are short.  such terms make financing a clean energy project unattractive from the end-user's perspective. to be attractive from the end-user's perspective, financing terms would be such that the monthly cash flow from clean energy projects would be greater than the monthly payments for the cost of financing. this kind of cash flow structure is only possible with loan terms that match the expected lifetime of the projects savings, and with rates that are commensurate with the risk. therefore, private capital offered at unfavorable terms (if it is available at all) undercuts the economic attractiveness of the project potential customers or project developers.  a shortfall of private financing exists for several reasons. one reason is that there is a relatively short track record for clean energy financing, and therefore there is little data for lenders to rely on.  without data, and observable pipeline of similar projects, banks are left with high levels of uncertainty over how well different types of projects perform and how often borrowers repay their loans. this uncertainty leads to either hesitation to enter the market, high due diligence costs and/or unfavorable lending terms.  another reason for
the financing gap is that many clean energy projects are small and distributed. building efficiency upgrades and rooftop solar projects are inherently small investments that are geographically dispersed, with varying credit among counter parties. heterogeneity in clean energy projects is more expensive for a private lender to underwrite at scale, making loans for clean energy projects potentially uneconomical from the perspective of the lender.  a third reason for the financing gap is the lack of capital market liquidity and maturity. if a commercial bank provides an energy efficiency loan, it is unknown to the bank if it will be able to sell that loan to another lender or if it will have to hold that loan on its balance sheet.  mortgage and auto lenders don't have this difficulty, because there are highly liquid secondary markets for home and car loans, which helps keeps rates low. these kinds of secondary markets are just now forming for clean energy technologies.  the final cause of private underinvestment relates to human and organizational behavior. to begin lending into a new market, a bank must hire new staff, learn about the risks and processes of a new market, and determine precise criteria for what kind of projects and credit ratings they are willing to lend to. this process may be time-consuming.  financing activities to combat these barriers to clean energy market development, green banks help consumers secure long-term, low-interest loans. green banks harness a diverse set of financing techniques, including credit enhancements, co-investment, and securitization.  credit enhancement  green banks frequently utilize credit enhancements to leverage private investment. loan loss reserves, overcollateralization and subordinated debt can help assuage concern among private lenders who are interested in entering the market, but concerned about the risks associated with developers, counter parties or technologies with less established history in their given jurisdiction. credit enhancements also help lower the cost of capital for borrowers and improve debt ratings from credit agencies.  co-investment sometimes green banks invest directly in clean energy projects to facilitate additional private investment or improve the financial terms set by private lenders.  securitization securitizing clean energy loans makes lending far more attractive for private investors. individual clean energy projects, which vary in credit, location, and technology, can be expensive for a bank to underwrite, and may not achieve the desired scale of investment. bundling these loans into portfolios and selling them (or shares of them) diffuses risk and creates scale, attracting a broader group of private investors.  a green bank can create and secur
itize portfolios of loans, allowing investors to purchase some portion of the green bank's debt on the secondary market. green banks can also add credit enhancements, such as overcollateralization or loan loss reserves, to lower the creditors exposure to default risk and secure better ratings from credit rating agencies. securitization provides greater liquidity in the market for clean energy project financing, which helps lower the cost of capital for borrowers.  the connecticut green bank executed one of the first such securitization deals, selling 75% of its $40 million pace portfolio to clean fund, a specialty finance company.  financing structures green banks' innovative financing techniques are more effective if they can operate through robust delivery mechanisms. green banks can use these structures to increase the security of debt service payments and allow lenders to offer lower interest rates for clean energy financing.  property assessed clean energy  property assessed clean energy (pace) financing allows consumers to pay energy upgrade loans through property taxes. the process places a lien on the property, and the property owner then repays the financing through pace assessments on the property tax bill.  this reduces the default risk associated with a loan and incentivizes private investment. because the pace structure reduces risk, it allows consumers to obtain lower interest rates on their loans.  because the loans are attached to the property, when property is sold, the new owners take over loan repayment.  on-bill financing on-bill financing permits consumers to repay energy upgrade loans through utility bills. similar to pace financing, on-bill repayment affords lenders security in a developing market. because electricity is a necessity, utility bills have a very high rate of repayment nationwide. placing loan payments on a utility bill increases their chances of being repaid, appealing to private investors and facilitating affordable loans for consumers.  also, the on-bill structure enables renters to reap the benefits of added energy efficiency.  furthermore, the simplicity of on-bill financing is attractive-it is logical that tenants pay for the good they consume.  market development activities  sometimes the availability of clean energy financing products is not enough to stimulate the desired level of clean energy finance activity, and various non-finance market development activities are necessary as well. a green bank may design and execute various market development activities to build the market for clean energy. market development activities may not directly involve lending, and a green bank may hire an outside organization to design and perform these activities.  demand aggregation  green banks or their partners can aggregate consumer demand for clean energy projects and
financing to reduce customer acquisition costs for contractors and provide scale for investors.  one means by which a green bank might aggregate demand is a neighborhood-wide group-buying deal. the connecticut green bank and solarizect have used this technique throughout connecticut.  contractor training  a green bank can organize contractor trainings, in which local clean energy technology installers, contractors, and developers learn about various green bank financing options. contractor trainings allow contractors to use their knowledge of green bank financing products as a sales tool, increasing the size and volume of the projects they do. ensuring that contractors fully understand green bank financing is a crucial means of getting that information to the end-users of the financing-building owners.  rec financing  innovative renewable energy credit (rec) financing plans have also helped green banks lower energy costs for consumers.  green banks can agree to acquire and monetize the recs that will be produced by a given clean energy project. after gaining possession of the recs through the financing agreement, a green bank can then sell them to utilities. as a result of this activity, green banks can offer more favorable financing terms and utilities can obtain recs in large volumes potentially at below market prices, reducing their cost of compliance and allowing them to pass savings on to their ratepayers.  central clearinghouse   green banks also operate as an interface between lenders and borrowers. green banks can offer a central clearinghouse for all online data on energy resources (including rebates and financing), technical assistance for investors, and project coordination services for contractors. by facilitating transparency and accessibility of resources, green banks bridge the gap between supply of and demand for capital for clean energy projects.  organizational structure and placement a green bank can take many forms. green banks can be newly created entities, or it can be created by repurposing an existing entity. a green bank can be a direct part of government, such as a subdivision of an existing agency. the new york green bank, for example, is a division of the new york state energy research and development authority (nyserda).  a green bank can also be a quasi-public instrumentality, such as a wholly owned non-profit public corporation. the connecticut green bank, for example, is a quasi-public entity with both government officials and independent directors serving on its board. a green bank can also an independent non-profit entity administered by the government, either through a contract, or by purpose-building an entity to serve as green bank. the montgomery county green bank, for example, is a
non-profit organization that was purpose-built in accordance with legislation and serves as montgomery county's green bank as a result of a resolution of the county council.  sources of capital green banks are usually seeded with public capital, and that capital can come from a wide variety of channels. the green bank finance model preserves limited supplies of public capital, allowing each dollar to be recycled continuously and utilized for multiple clean energy projects.  ratepayer surcharge a state or local government may place a small surcharge on energy bills within its jurisdiction, and may require that the funds raised by this charge be disbursed to a green bank. or the government may repurpose an existing surcharge and direct the revenue to a green bank. the surcharge can provide green banks with a yearly influx of capital.  the connecticut green bank and new york green bank are capitalized in part by a systems benefit charge.  bond issuance green banks can also issue bonds to obtain capital. public sector bonds have the benefit of being tax exempt, allowing governments and other public authorities to pay relatively low interest rates to bond owners.  a green bank's bonding authority allows debt investors to secure a steady stream of payments from an institution with a low risk of default. in exchange, the green bank receives capital that it can immediately invest in clean energy deployment.  types of bonds green banks can be capitalized by bond issuances that are backed by state in which the green bank exists.  green banks can also be capitalized by issuing bonds that are backed by the green bank itself.   green banks can raise capital by issuing project bonds that are backed by the revenue-generating potential of the projects they will fund. revenue bonds from a dedicated cash stream other bonds backed by a dedicated cash stream (such as ratepayer fees, or by auctions of emissions allowances) can be issued to generate capital for a green bank.  if a green bank is short on capital, it can securitize loans it has issued (assets) and, through a secondary market, sell them to another investor as a bond. for example, the connecticut green bank sold $30 million in bonds backed by commercial efficiency loans to clean fund.  industrial revenue bonds and private activity bonds can be issued for certain green bank activities.  revenue from carbon pricing  green banks can also be partially capitalized by the revenue raised from various carbon pricing policies such as carbon taxes, fees, and cap-and-trade systems. for example, both the nygb and the cgb are capitalized in part
by the revenue each state raises through the regional greenhouse gas initiative (rggi).  direct budget appropriation a government can allocate dollars to a green bank as a part of its regular budget and appropriations process.  re-allocation of existing funds sometimes an existing investment fund will be underused or completely unused. it may be possible to re-allocate some such funds and put the dollars to work in a green bank.  pension funds pension funds can invest in deals or portfolios of deals generated by green banks.  foundations foundations can make grants to green banks to fund startup costs, or they can make program-related investments in green banks and earn a return on their money in a way that is aligned with their mission.  community development financial institutions community development financial institutions (cdfis) can co-invest or provide startup capital for green banks. cdfis can also provide important technical expertise in certain areas of green bank activity.  federal sources in the us the usda and its rural utilities service (rus) program provide funding for infrastructure projects, including energy-related infrastructure, to rural communities.  the rus has funding available that could be used by green banks to finance projects in rural areas. the united states department of energy (doe) has programs, notably the loan program office (lpo), which provides federal dollars for innovative clean energy companies and project portfolios.  a green bank could take advantage of doe money by building portfolios of projects designed to meet the standard set out by the lpo. the united states environmental protection agency (epa) has a clean water state revolving fund (cwsrf) which makes low-cost financing available for various water and energy infrastructure projects.  green banks can apply for access to these funds.  current green banks  connecticut green bank the connecticut green bank (cgb) was established in 2011 and was the first green bank in the united states. it is the most advanced green bank in the nation in terms of deal volume. connecticut's legislature converted the connecticut clean energy fund, a grant-focused promoter of clean energy investment, into a deployment financing entity. the cgb is quasi-public and its board of directors is composed of both government officials and independent directors.  the cgb is continually capitalized by a systems benefit charge and revenue generated by connecticut's participation in the regional greenhouse gas initiative (rggi) trading program.  the bank also possesses the ability to issue its own bonds based on its balance sheet.  in its first four years of existence, the cgb has stimulated $663
.2 million of investment in clean energy projects, three-fourths of which came from the private sector.  the increase in clean energy investment coincided with a huge decline in the number of taxpayer-funded clean energy grants. in effect, the cgb increased clean energy investment while reducing taxpayers' financial burden.  new york green bank governor andrew cuomo created the largest green bank in the nation, ny green bank (nygb), and capitalized it through re-purposed ratepayer surcharges and revenues generated by the issuance of emissions permits.  the new york state energy research and development authority (nyserda) designed a 5-year capitalization structure with multiple infusions of capital summing to $1 billion. the nygb is now a fully staffed entity and operates as a wholesale clean energy finance lender (as opposed to connecticut, which operates more as a retail lender).  rather than design specific financing products and programs, the nygb relies on the market to learn what financing is needed.  to date, the nygb has received over $1 billion in proposals and has an active project pipeline of ~$500 million.  the first set of nygb investments were announced in the fall of 2015.  the nygb used $49 million of public capital to leverage $178 million in private capital, achieving a leverage ratio greater that 3:1.  california cleen center the california lending for energy and environmental needs center operates as the state's green bank. the cleen center exists within the california infrastructure and economic development bank. one of the center's major initiatives-the statewide energy efficiency program (sweep)-finances energy efficiency projects and upgrades for municipalities, universities, schools, and hospitals.  unlike the connecticut and new york green banks, the cleen center exclusively facilitates commercial projects and upgrades. interested parties propose a project and apply for financial assistance with the cleen center. cleen projects receive funding ranging from $500,000 to $30 million.  hawaii green infrastructure authority the hawaii green infrastructure authority was created in 2014 to finance clean energy development in hawaii. the first program to be adopted was the green energy market securitization (gems) program-an effort to provide the low-to-moderate income market with solar lease financing.  for geographical reasons, electricity is more expensive in hawaii than anywhere else in the united states. the advent of solar leasing has allowed many hawaiian homeowners to install solar panels, but solar market penetration has hardly reached low-credit households.  the
cash flow positive financing generated by gems is designed to help low-to-moderate income hawaiians enter a market from which they have historically been excluded.  rhode island in 2015, state legislators converted the rhode island clean water finance agency (ricwfa) into the rhode island infrastructure bank (riib).  the riib offers both residential and commercial pace programs designed to reduce energy costs for consumers. the riib also created the efficient buildings fund, a program used to provide low-cost financing for energy efficiency and renewable energy projects in public buildings.  montgomery county, md montgomery county, maryland is the only county in the u.s. that has created a local green bank.  the montgomery county green bank (mcgb) was capitalized with $20 million from the settlement that accompanied the merger of utilities pepco and exelon.  malaysia malaysia's green technology financing corporation was launched in 2010 as a component of the government's national green technology policy.  through the green technology financing scheme, the corporation offers companies a 2% interest rate buy down and 60% guaranteed financing for green technology projects.  united kingdom in 2012, the uk government created the uk green investment bank (gib) to attract private funds for the financing of the private sector's investments related to environmental preservation and improvement. it is structured as a public limited company and is owned by the department for business, innovation and skills (bis).  its headquarters are in edinburgh, where it is also registered, and it has a secondary office in london. the gib works with a variety of technologies including energy efficiency, waste and bioenergy, offshore wind, and onshore renewables.  uk's gib has committed £2.6 billion to 76 domestic infrastructure projects, mobilizing over £10 billion of private investment.  in march 2016, the uk government announced that it planned to move the gib to the private sector. the government plans to sell its shares in the gib, but will seek to retain a 'special share' to ensure the continued protection of gib's green purposes.  australia australia's clean energy finance corporation (cefc) was founded in 2012 with the purpose of mobilizing investment in renewable energy, energy efficiency, and low emissions technologies.  at the beginning of fiscal year 2016, the cefc had invested $1.4 billion of its own capital and attracted $2.2 billion in private sector investment.  green bank network the green bank network is an international membership organization focusing on solutions to clean energy finance. it was launched at the 2015 cop21 meeting
in paris, by state and national green banks  in connecticut, australia, malaysia, new york, japan and the united kingdom, and the non-profits the natural resources defense council (nrdc) and the coalition for green capital (cgc).  see also   climate bond  ethical banking  market-based instruments  coalition for green capital  references  banks market-based environmental policy instruments sustainable energy public-private partnership
pablo y andrea is a mexican children's telenovela produced by lucero suarez for televisa in 2005. pablo y andrea is an adaptation of the classic the adventures of tom sawyer by mark twain. the adventures are not developed on the coast of the mississippi river, but in the magical town of huasca de ocampo in the mexican state of hidalgo.  it was the last children's telenovela produced by televisa, the lack of interest of the public with novels generated lower-rated audience. scenes were cut from the original broadcast in order to reduce the 100 episodes to 75 because of the low ratings.  on august 1, 2005, canal de las estrellas started broadcasting pablo y andrea weekdays at 4:00pm, replacing suenos y caramelos. the last episode was broadcast on november 11, 2005 with peregrina replacing it.  ingrid martz and guillermo capetillo starred as adult protagonists, danna paola and jorge trejo starred as young protagonists, while mercedes molto, eduardo rivera, maria fernanda nunez, adrian alonso, valentina cuenca and geraldine galvan starred as antagonists.  cast    ingrid martz as alma guillermo capetillo as juan carlos saavedra mercedes molto as carlota/ursula/barbara/socorro barraza jorge trejo as pablo ibanez danna paola as andrea saavedra jesus zavala as nicolas geraldine galvan as hilda nadiedka as mati rodrigo llamas as pepe valentina cuenca as rita valeria lopez as susana "susanita" adrian alonso as martin ibanez maria fernanda nunez as diana marcia coutino as carmen beng zeng as joaquin carlos espejel as tobias zully keith as virginia slater carol sevilla as nicole slater juan carlos colombo as sabas nuria bages as gertrudis ibanez eduardo rivera as mikonos mario casillas as don severino adalberto parra as quintero raquel morell as ellen slater rodrigo mejia as rodrigo castro jorge ortin as cirilo frutos carlos ignacio as abelardo luis gimeno as don cipriano saavedra lupe vazquez as tiba loreli mancilla as laura barbara gomez as concepcion "conchita" rene azcoitia as father bonifacio anastasia as paula alan ledesma as osvaldo rafael perrin as mateo luis camarena as anacleto jaime lozano as francisco "pancho" ortiz luis reynoso as jesus thelma tixou as leonor arturo lorca as pielinsky juan imperio as moctezuma maripaz garcia as tona iliana de la garza as lupe javier ruan as iman
ol bodokito as chana  awards  references  external links   at esmas.com   2005 telenovelas mexican telenovelas 2005 mexican television series debuts 2005 mexican television series endings spanish-language telenovelas television shows set in mexico televisa telenovelas children's telenovelas
mansur selum () is an arab politician. since march 2016, he holds the office of co-president of the executive council of rojava. selum, serves alongside fellow co-president ilham ehmed, an ethnic kurd.  selum, a local arab tribal leader in the town of tell abyad, had risen into a prominent political role after june 2015 when syrian democratic forces (sdf) wrested control of tell abyad from the islamic state of iraq and the levant (isil) and the town was declared part of the de facto autonomous federation of northern syria - rojava by a council including representatives of local arab, kurdish, turkmen and armenian communities. in july, the 178-member higher council that then governed tell abyad had elected mixed-gender co-mayors, as mandated under rojava rules, initially selum and ethnic kurd layla mohammed, the latter 27 years old and the first female mayor of tell abyad ever. while previously education had been available only in arabic language, thereafter arabic and kurdish were used as languages of instruction in public schools and plans introduced for offering turkish in addition; one focus of the administration was to encourage women to seek higher education.  references  democratic union party (syria) politicians living people people of the syrian civil war year of birth missing (living people)
claude-marie-louis-emmanuel carbon de flins des oliviers (1757, reims - july 1806, vervins) was an 18th-century french man of letters and playwright.  publications  theatre 1790: le reveil d'epimenide a paris, one-act comedy in verse, paris, theatre de la nation, 1 january text online 1791: le mari directeur, ou le demenagement du couvent, one-act comedy, in free verse, paris, theatre de la nation, 25 february, text online 1791: la jeune hotesse, three-act comedy in verse, imitated from goldoni, paris, theatre de la republique, 24 december, text online varia 1779: voltaire, poem, text online: 1st edition 2nd edition revue et corrigee 1789: les voyages de l'opinion dans les quatre parties du monde 179?: dialogue entre l'auteur et un frondeur, sur les ennemis des lettres & les faiseurs de libelles anonymes, suivi d'un preservatif, text online 1810: choix de poesies by nicolas thomas barthe and carbon de flins  sources   pierre larousse, grand dictionnaire universel du xixe, vol. viii, 1872, (p. 485).  external links   claude-marie-louis-emmanuel carbon de flins des oliviers on cesar  claude-marie-louis-emmanuel carbon de flins des oliviers on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights people from reims 1757 births 1806 deaths
vicenta juaristi eguino (1780-1857) was a bolivian heroine. together with ursula goyzueta and simona manzaneda, she is counted as one of the three heroines of the bolivian war of independence.  biography  vincenta's mother died in childbirth, so she was raised by her brother pedro eguino, who trained her in the ideals and feelings of freedom. she married rodriguez flores de picon while she was still very young. after his death from an illness, she married mariano de ayoroa.  in 1809, vicenta decided to put her properties and the large fortune to which she was heir to the service of the revolution, and her house was the center of several clandestine meetings of the patriots.  in those years, she maintained a relationship with jose calderon y sanjines, who had fought alongside marshal sucre in ayacucho and was later part of the signing of the chuquisaca act that gave independence to upper peru.  identified as a rebel, she was sentenced to prison on numerous occasions. general jose manuel de goyeneche banished her to cuzco under a fine of six thousand pesos, and later she could return to la paz, taking refuge in one of her farms in rio abajo. she was also sentenced to death by mariano ricafort, although she avoided the maximum penalty thanks to the popular support of the citizens of la paz and the intervention of several royalist leaders, who managed to have her sentence commuted to a large fine and perpetual exile to cuzco.  once the bolivian war of independence was over, on august 18, 1825, vicenta gave simon bolivar the golden key of the city, as well as a silver garland studded with precious stones that she had made.  vincenta died on march 14, 1857, at the age of 72. upon her death, she received solemn funeral honors by the government of general jorge cordova. in la paz, there is a square dedicated to her memory with a statue of vicenta sculpted by victor hugo barrenechea, inaugurated on december 11, 1975.  references    roca, jose luis (2007). ni con lima ni con buenos aires: la formacion de un estado nacional en charcas. plural editores. p. 771. .  1780 births 1857 deaths bolivian rebels 19th-century bolivian people people of the bolivian war of independence women in 19th-century warfare 19th-century bolivian women
state is burning is the eighth full-length studio album by israeli punk band useless id. it was released on july 1, 2016, and is the band's second album and third release on fat wreck chords. it was released more than 4 years after the band's previous album, symptoms, marking the longest gap between two useless id albums. it was also preceded by a 7" ep for the album's first single "we don't want the airwaves", which was released on may 6, 2016. musically. the album is a return to the faster, more aggressive sound of earlier releases by the band.  it is the fourth  album the band recorded at the blasting room in fort collins, colorado, recorded between december 3-19, 2015, with producers bill stevenson and jason livermore, and the band's first and only album with drummer gideon berger, who announced his departure during the album's release show on june 30, 2016.  the album's release show took place on june 30, 2016, a day before the album's official release, at the barby club in tel aviv, supported by hardcore/surf rock band shifka chiefs. during the band's performance, they were joined by jamie hilsden of jerusalem based punk rock act man alive, to perform two songs, originally recorded by man alive.  singles on april 15, 2016, the song "we don't want the airwaves" was released as the first official single, through the fat wreck chords youtube channel. on april 20, 2016, the band announced on their facebook page they'll be making a music video for the single, which will be composed of fan footage that will be sent to them by fans, giving tribute to the ramones, as the song is the band's tribute to the ramones.  on june 10, 2016, the album's opening track "land of idiocracy" was streamed for free through the fat wreck chords youtube channel.  on july 25, 2016, the official music video for "we don't want the airwaves" was released, through the fat wreck chords official youtube channel. the video is a compilation of photos and short videos, referencing and paying tribute to the ramones, that were made by fans and sent to useless id, then edited together by the band, along with homage pictures by the band members themselves.  track listing  personnel  yotam ben horin - lead vocals, bass  ishay berger - lead guitar, backing vocals  guy carmel - rhythm guitar, vocals  gideon
berger - drums, percussion  production bill stevenson - production, engineering, arrangement jason livermore - production, engineering, mastering adi khavous - photography  references  2016 albums useless id albums albums produced by bill stevenson (musician) fat wreck chords albums
"heatwave" is a song by german dj and record producer robin schulz featuring vocals from american singer, rapper and songwriter akon. the song was released as a digital download in germany on 12 february 2016 as the fourth and final single from his second studio album sugar (2015). the song was written by thomas troelsen, aliaune thiam and bryan nelson.  music video the music video for this song was released onto youtube on 7 april 2016 and runs for a total length of three minutes and twenty-six seconds.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  2015 songs 2016 singles akon songs robin schulz songs songs written by thomas troelsen songs written by akon
alexander urusov can refer to the following: alexander urusov (1729-1813) - major general of the russian imperial army. alexander ivanovich urusov - a lawyer, jurist, lawyer and a court spokesman. alexander urusov (1766-1853) - chief chamberlain, president of the moscow office of the palace during the construction of the grand kremlin palace.  - a russian military leader, major general alexander petrovich urusov (1850-1914) - russia's social and political activist, co-founder of the all-russian national union.  see also list of persons with the surname urusov
mark thompson (born february 4, 1960) was an american educator and politician.  born in hennepin county, minnesota, thompson served in the united states army. he graduated from university of minnesota and taught government in middle school. thompson served on the new hope, minnesota city council in 1999 and 2000 and then served as a democratic member of the minnesota house of representatives in 2001 and 2002.  notes  1960 births living people university of minnesota alumni minnesota democrats minnesota city council members members of the minnesota house of representatives 21st-century american politicians people from new hope, minnesota
gilles de gourmont (fl. 1499-1533), egidius gormontius in latin,  was a parisian bookseller and printer active in paris between 1499 and 1533. he was one of three brothers engaged in the book trade in paris: he, robert de gourmont and jean de gourmont traded separately and sometimes in collaboration (under the imprint apud gormontios). gilles de gourmont was the first parisian printer to print books entirely in greek, in 1507 and 1508. he also published the first hebrew grammar in paris (1508).  references  15th-century births 16th-century deaths printers from paris french booksellers 15th-century printers 16th-century printers 16th-century french businesspeople
angelique kerber defeated karolina pliskova in the final, 6-3, 4-6, 6-4 to win the women's singles tennis title at the 2016 us open. it was her second major singles title. she became the first german to win the us open since steffi graf in 1996. kerber became the first player since martina hingis in 1997 to win both hard court majors in the same calendar year, having also won the australian open. kerber also attained the world no. 1 ranking for the first time after serena williams failed to reach the final. in addition to kerber and williams, garbine muguruza and agnieszka radwanska were also in contention for the no. 1 ranking at the start of the tournament.  flavia pennetta was the defending champion, but retired from the sport at the end of the 2015 season.  pliskova became the first czech woman to make the us open final since 1993, and only the fourth player to beat both of the williams sisters in the same major (she beat venus williams in the fourth round and serena williams in the semifinals).  serena williams was attempting to set new open era records by winning a 23rd major singles title and a seventh us open singles title, but she lost in the semifinals to pliskova.  it was the last professional appearance for former world no. 1 and 2008 french open champion ana ivanovic; she lost to denisa allertova in the first round. she would announce her retirement prior to the 2017 season because of ongoing injuries.  this was venus williams' 72nd main draw appearance at a major, surpassing the all-time record previously held by amy frazier.  seeds  qualifying  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  section 3  section 4  bottom half  section 5  section 6  section 7  section 8  championship match statistics  seeded players the following are the seeded players. seedings are based on wta rankings on august 22, 2016. rank and points before are as of august 29, 2016.  withdrawn players the following players would have been seeded, but they withdrew or not entered from the event.  other entry information  wild cards  protected ranking  qualifiers  lucky loser   alison van uytvanck  withdrawals  before the tournament  retirements  notes  references  external links  women's singles main draw  2016 us open - women's draws and results at the international tennis federation  women's singles us open - women's singles us open (tennis) by year - women's
singles 2016 in women's tennis 2016 in american women's sports
janet b. johnson (march 5, 1940 - august 21, 1999) was an american politician.  born in the bronx, new york city, new york, johnson moved to minnesota in 1960 and went to university of minnesota. johnson was a business owner. she served on the north branch, minnesota school board and was involved with the democratic party. johnson served in the minnesota state senate from 1991 until her death in 1999. johnson died of brain cancer in a hospital in saint paul, minnesota.  notes  1940 births 1999 deaths politicians from the bronx people from north branch, minnesota university of minnesota alumni businesspeople from minnesota women state legislators in minnesota minnesota democrats school board members in minnesota minnesota state senators deaths from brain tumor deaths from cancer in minnesota neurological disease deaths in minnesota 20th-century american women politicians 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american businesspeople
william dennehy may refer to:   william francis dennehy (1853-1918), irish journalist  billy dennehy (born 1987), irish footballer  bill dennehy, a pseudonym used by murray boltinoff
the st. isidore cathedral  () also called holguin cathedral it is the main temple of the catholic church in the diocese of holguin, is located in the city of holguin, on the caribbean island of cuba.  the first church dedicated to san isidoro (st. isidore), was designed by architect d. diego de avila y de la torre and was blessed on april 3, 1720 when cuba was still under the rule of the spanish empire.  the present cathedral of san isidoro, inaugurated as parish church between 1818 and 1820, is a construction structure with a "t". the church was elevated to the status of cathedral in 1979 under the pontificate of pope john paul ii and officially consecrated in 1996. it is a solid building with three large doors and recessed columns and a pediment in the center that defines the facade. its interior moriscos have finely crafted wood ceilings.  see also roman catholicism in cuba st. isidore church  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in holguin roman catholic churches completed in 1820 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
tornwaldt's disease is the inflammation or abscess of the embryonic cyst of pharyngeal bursa. it is located in the midline of the posterior wall of the nasopharynx. it is covered anteriorly by mucosa in the adenoid mass. it is bounded posteriorly by longus muscle.  signs and symptoms the symptoms usually appear when there is inflammation of pharyngeal bursa causing tornwaldt cyst. this is caused by spontaneous drainage in the nasopharyngeal cavity or because of involvement of nervous plexus. the symptoms are occipital headache, cough, middle ear effusion, cervical myalgia, and halitosis, i.e. bad breath. when there is an enlargement of the cyst, it causes symptoms like nasal obstruction, post-nasal discharge with foul-smelling odour, blockage of the eustachian tube causing otalgia and secretory otitis media, retro-orbital pain.  cause tornwaldt's disease is caused by many different causative agents of stimulus. this includes excessive alcohol and tobacco, which causes a decrease in local immune resistance so the pathogenic microbes take advantage, leading to the disease. frequent contact with high temperature, malnutrition, chronic heart disease, kidney disease, joint disease, poor living and working conditions and contact with dust and harmful gases leads to tornwaldt's disease.  pathogenesis tornwaldt's disease is a rare benign disorder caused by persistent notochord remnants. this disease almost remains asymptomatic. at about the 10th week of embryonic development, the pharyngeal pouch forms by adhesion of the pharyngeal ectoderm to the cranial end of the notochord. this become closed at the orifice or crusts adhere to the orifice without closing. the contact between these remnants and pharyngeal ectoderm leads to the growth of respiratory epithelium. this forms tornwaldt's bursa which drains into the nasopharyngeal cavity. this only forms a cyst when the orifice is partially or completely obstructed by infection. a tornwaldt's cyst progresses to tornwaldt's disease only after infection or inflammation occurs.  diagnosis a ct scan shows a solid mass of tornwaldt's cyst and mri shows a glass-shaped lesion with fluid on the upper part of the posterior nasopharyngeal wall. additionally, a cystic mass in the upper part of the nasopharyngeal wall and mucopurulent discharge from
upper part of the mass can be seen on nasal endoscopy. among them mri is the best for diagnosing the tornwaldt's cyst.  treatment antibiotics are given to treat the infection. if there is a large symptomatic lesion, surgery by transnasal endoscopic marsupialisation is the treatment option because it is safe, fast and provides good visualization during surgery. for small lesions, the endonasal approach is recommended.  history tornwaldt's disease was noted by mayer in 1840. he noted it in an autopsy specimen but founded as a pathologic entity by german physician gustavus l. tornwaldt in 1855. only a few cases have been reported in japan between 1929 and 1992. in 2008-2009, six patients were diagnosed to have nasopharyngeal bursitis, of which four were male and two female.  see also  tornwaldt cyst  references  external links   pharynx cysts
peter esdale is a retired ice hockey head coach who had been in charge at both american international and ferris state.  career esdale began his coaching career in the late-1960s and quickly rose to become the head coach at american international by 1972. after only two seasons, however, he moved on to other coaching options. after a short stint at the university of alberta where he won three national titles, esdale eventually landed in big rapids as an assistant to dick bertrand. after bertrand resigned mid-way through the 1985-86 season, esdale was named as the interim head coach and finished out the season with a losing but respectable record. after the season, despite a vote of confidence from the ad, esdale was not retained by the bulldogs and instead was named as head coach for the spokane chiefs. a year later esdale announced his retirement from coaching to become a sales rep for procter & gamble. esdale could not stay away from coaching for long, however, and was soon back with the  alberta golden bears, first as an assistant and eventually as head coach.  head coaching record  † midseason replacement  references  external links  year of birth missing (living people) living people canadian ice hockey coaches canadian ice hockey players american international yellow jackets men's ice hockey coaches ferris state bulldogs men's ice hockey coaches ice hockey people from alberta spokane chiefs coaches sportspeople from edmonton
andrew bruce wallace (born 27 february 1968) is an australian politician currently serving as the 31st speaker of the house of representatives. he is a member of the liberal party and has been a member of the house of representatives since the 2016 federal election, representing the division of fisher.  early life wallace was born in melbourne. at the age of 19, he entered a pallottine monastery in victoria. he was asked to leave after less than a year when it was judged that he would not be able to fulfil his monastic vows of poverty, chastity and obedience. dismissed by the rector, he was told, "there's many ways you can serve god, you don't have to be a priest."  his mother organised his apprenticeship as a carpenter, and wallace eventually started his own building business. wallace qualified as a barrister in 2000 after studying law at the queensland university of technology, subsequently practising in construction law for 16 years prior to his election to parliament.  politics wallace was elected to parliament at the 2016 federal election, succeeding mal brough as the liberal national party member for the division of fisher. he has chaired the standing committees on infrastructure, transport and cities; social policy and legal affairs; and corporations and financial services.  wallace was a member of the speaker's panel since september 2019. following the resignation of tony smith as speaker of the house of representatives on 23 november 2021, wallace was elected as the new speaker by the house of representatives 70 votes to 59 against labor party member and second deputy speaker rob mitchell. like his predecessor, wallace said he would maintain the practice of not sitting in the liberal party room while he holds the speaker position.  political positions wallace is a member of the centre-right faction of the liberal party.  wallace was initially opposed to same-sex marriage on religious grounds, but later spoke in favour of the marriage amendment (definition and religious freedoms) act 2017. he cited his daughter's coming out and his "legal background" as influential in his change of mind.  in february 2021, wallace said that australian banks should create a voluntary code of conduct barring the use of credit cards for online gambling.  personal life wallace has four daughters with his wife leonie. the couple are practising catholics who "go to church every sunday." his youngest daughter lives with a disability, as she was born with a segment missing from her chromosome 16.  references  1968 births living people speakers of the australian house of representatives liberal national party of queensland members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives
for fisher members of the australian house of representatives australian barristers 21st-century australian politicians australian roman catholics
sphingomonas oligoaromativorans  is a gram-negative, strictly aerobic, oligotrophic and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from humus forest soil in the gyeryong mountain national park in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas oligoaromativorans at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  oligoaromativorans bacteria described in 2014
"the bridge" was a #1 chart hit in 1981 for new zealand singer deane waretini, and his backing group the rising stars. this also marked a first. it was the first maori language record to hit the no 1 spot in new zealand. "the bridge" is an example of an artist in the 1980s contributing to the success of a record. this was done by kick starting the process in the beginning by self-financing the record, having a hand in its own promotion by employing various tactics to get the record heard by the public.  background it was sung in maori language, and set to nini rosso's tune "il silenzio". the words were written waretini's cousin, george tait, a te arawa elder. it pushed john lennon off the charts when it climbed to the top.  the bridge was originally independently and self-released. it wasn't picked up cbs until later. after that it became the first no 1 song to be sung in the maori language. it stayed at the top of the charts for two weeks.  the song has a meaning to it. it centers around the construction of the mangere bridge. the song's lyrics refer to the linking of two cultures in new zealand, maori and pakeha.  making the record  recording it was recorded in auckland in the suburb of henderson. the session took place in a garage studio that belonged to a country singer. the ensemble that backed him on the recording included musicians from the blind institute. according to alan perrotts article, "you must remember this" in  the march 30, 2009 edition of the new zealand herald, the group that backed waretini, referred to there as the rising suns, was formerly called the radars. the trumpet player on the song who happened to be married to the niece of george tait was kevin furey formerly of the quincy conserve.  waretini didn't have money to pay the musicians so he paid them in kentucky fried chicken.  production & promotion his use of a  tactic first employed by gary havoc & the hurricanes of self-financing a record,<ref>stranded in paradise: new zealand rock'n'roll, 1955-1988, by john dix, page  219, page 294</ref> waretini paid for his own record. he had a pile of the singles produced, which cost him $96. some singles were sent to radio 1zb. waretini then bombarded them with play requests. he also managed to get it played at intermission time at auckland's civic theatre
. another tactic was recruiting a news paper boy to sell copies to passing people for 50 cents a piece. (his backing band, the rising stars,45cat artist: deane waretini with the rising stars, catalogue: inn 009 two years later in 1983 would use the same approach to getting the single out there.)  the single which was produced by allan witana, and originally released on the innovations label.  a short time later, people going into record shops looking for "the bridge". not long afterwards, cbs wanted to put it out. on the third of april 1981, the song went to no 1, pushing john lennon's "woman" from the top spot it previously held. it also reached no 7 in australia.  for his part, warentini he received $27,000 from cbs and also gave up his rights to the song.  other versions  alternative version there is an unreleased alternative version by waretini that appears on the waiata maori showbands, balladeers & pop stars'', various artists compilation that was released by his master's voice and emi in 2011.  parody version in 1981, the song became victim to a parody by kevin blackatini and the frigids, and a record was released on the rtc label. kevin blackatini was actually radio hauraki dj, kevin black.  chart progress  releases  references  1981 singles number-one singles in new zealand deane waretini songs maori-language songs 1981 songs
michael wardrope (born 17 december 1996) is a scottish footballer who plays as a midfielder for hurlford united.  a native of ardrossan (though born in irvine), he came through the ayr united's academy system and made his debut in april 2013 in a match against arbroath. he spent the 2014-15 season on loan at new cumnock-based junior side, glenafton athletic. after four years with ayr united, wardrope left the club in june 2017 to sign for kilwinning rangers.  on 21 june 2019 wardrope has signed for hurlford united.  career statistics  last update: 10 july 2016  references  1996 births living people association football midfielders ayr united f.c. players glenafton athletic f.c. players kilwinning rangers f.c. players scottish football league players scottish footballers scottish junior football association players scottish professional football league players footballers from irvine, north ayrshire
the gens laronia was a minor family at ancient rome.  the most famous of the laronii was quintus laronius, consul  in 33 bc.  other laronii are known from inscriptions.  members   quintus laronius, served under marcus vipsanius agrippa during the war with sextus pompeius in 36 bc, and relieved the forces under lucius cornificius at tauromenium.  in 33 he was appointed consul  in the place of gaius fonteius capito.  publius laronius probatus.  quintus laronius hermo, named in a sepulchral inscription at the house of decimus antoninus phrygepanis in rome.  marcus laronius italicus, named on a sepulchral tablet found at rome, and now in the capitoline museum.  gaius laronius c. c. l. annalis, named on a marble tablet at florentia.  gaius laronius c. c. l. bassus, named on a marble tablet at florentia.  gaius laronius c. c. l. menophilus, named on a marble tablet at florentia.  gaius laronius c. l. orestes, named on a marble tablet at florentia.  laronius rufus, named on a fragment of a marble tablet from rome, now in the lateran museum.  quintus laronius q. l. salvius cascelianus, named on a marble tablet from rome, now in the public museum at panormus.  laronia q. l. nice, named on a marble tablet from rome, now in the public museum at panormus.  laronia q. f. plias, named on a marble tablet found at rome, now in the lateran museum.  quintus laronius dexster, named in a sepulchral inscription at rome, together with quintus laronius rufus.  quintus laronius rufus, named in a sepulchral inscription at rome, together with quintus laronius dexter.  see also list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated "cil"), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman
republic, american philological association (1952).    roman gentes
the second election to dyfed county council was held in may 1985. it was preceded by the 1981 election and followed by the 1989 election. once again, there were a number of unopposed returns, particularly in rural parts of the county.  overview  the independents remained the largest party but lost ground to labour.  ward results (cardiganshire)  aberaeron no.1  aberaeron no. 2  aberaeron no.3  aberystwyth no.1  aberystwyth no.2  aberystwyth no. 3  aberystwyth rural no. 1  aberystwyth rural no.2  aberystwyth rural no.3  cardigan  lampeter  teifiside no.1  teifiside no.2  teifiside no.3  tregaron  ward results (carmarthenshire)  ammanford no. 1  ammanford no.2  berwick  burry port east  burry port west  carmarthen no. 1 the liberal candidate had won the seat from labour at a by-election  carmarthen no. 2  carmarthen no. 3  carmarthen rural no.1  carmarthen rural no.2  carmarthen rural no. 3  carmarthen rural no. 4  carmarthen rural no. 5  carmarthen rural no. 6  carmarthen rural no. 7  cwmamman the sitting member was deselected by the labour party but chose to contest the seat again.  felinfoel  hengoed  llandeilo no.1  llandeilo no.2  llandeilo no.3  llandeilo no.4  llandeilo no.5  llandeilo no.6  llanedi  llanelli no.1  llanelli no.2  llanelli no. 3  llanelli no.4  llanelli no.5  llanelli no. 6  llanelli no.7  llangennech  llan-non  newcastle emlyn no.1  newcastle emlyn no.2 the alliance candidate had stood for labour at the two previous elections.  pembrey  pontyberem  trimsaran  westfa  ward results (pembrokeshire)  cemaes no. 1  cemaes no. 2  cemaes no. 3  fishgaurd and goodwick no. 1  fishgaurd and goodwick no. 2 the sitting member was elected as an independent in 1981  haverfordwest no.1  haverfordwest no. 2  haverfordwest rural no. 1  haverfordwest rural no. 2  haverfordwest
rural no. 3  haverfordwest rural no. 4  haverfordwest rural no. 5  milford haven no. 1  milford haven no. 2  milford haven no. 3  narberth no. 1  narberth no. 2  neyland and llanstadwell  pembroke no. 1  pembroke no. 2  pembroke no. 3  pembroke rural no. 1  pembroke rural no. 2  tenby  references  dyfed county council elections dyfed county council election
reynaldo starling lopez kely (born january 4, 1994) is a dominican professional baseball pitcher for the chicago white sox of major league baseball (mlb). he made his mlb debut with the washington nationals in 2016.  career  minor leagues lopez signed with the washington nationals as an international free agent in june 2012. his signing bonus of just $17,000 was relatively tiny compared to most other contemporaneous latin american prospects that would reach his same level of success in the minor leagues. the lower signing bonus may have been because lopez took several years off of baseball to finish his high school degree, and signed at age 18.  he made his professional debut that season with the dominican summer league nationals, where he pitched to a 1-1 win-loss record and 3.38 earned run average (era) in  innings pitched. lopez started one game each for both the auburn doubledays and hagerstown suns in 2013. he pitched for the same two teams in 2014, starting 16 games and finishing with a 7-3 record and 1.08 era. in 2015, he pitched for the potomac nationals where he was 6-7 with a 4.09 era in 19 starts.  lopez started the 2016 season with the harrisburg senators. after posting a 3.18 era with the senators through 14 starts, he was promoted to the syracuse chiefs on june 27, 2016. he appeared in the 2016 all-star futures game, retiring all three batters he faced as a pitcher for team world.  major leagues  washington nationals on july 17, 2016, nationals manager dusty baker announced lopez would be called up to make his major league debut with a start on july 19, 2016, against the los angeles dodgers at nationals park in washington, d.c. during the game, he gave up a lead-off home run to chase utley, allowed three runs in the first inning, and gave up hits to seven of the first 11 batters he faced. after that, he improved considerably, retiring eight batters in a row at one point, striking out six of them. after he allowed three batters to reach base and gave up two more runs in the fifth inning, he was relieved. he had pitched  innings, throwing 105 pitches (65 for strikes), giving up six runs (all earned) on 10 hits (including one home run), and walking one but striking out nine. the nationals lost the game 8-4, and he was the game's losing pitcher. however, he was the first player from the dominican republic signed and developed by the
nationals to start a game for washington - which the nationals considered  a major step forward for their organization - and his nine strikeouts was the second-highest strike-out total for a nationals pitcher during a major league debut, exceeded only by stephen strasburg′s 14 strikeouts on june 8, 2010. lopez left the field to a standing ovation by nationals fans. the nationals sent lopez back to syracuse on july 20, 2016, to make room on their roster for relief pitcher koda glover, who made his major league debut the evening after lopez's debut. he was recalled and optioned multiple times after his debut. in 19 starts between harrisburg and syracuse he compiled a 5-7 record and 3.21 era, and in 11 games (six starts) for the nationals, he was 5-3 with a 4.91 era.  chicago white sox  on december 7, 2016, lopez was traded with lucas giolito and dane dunning to the chicago white sox in exchange for adam eaton.  lopez began 2017 with the charlotte knights before being called up on august 11. he was placed on the disabled list on august 19 and activated september 1. in 22 starts for charlotte he pitched to a 6-7 record and 3.79 era, and in eight starts for the white sox he was 3-3 with a 4.72 era.  lopez began 2018 with chicago in the starting rotation. he finished the season with a record of 7-10 in 32 starts.  in 2019, he was 10-15 with a 5.38 era, and gave up the longest home run of the season in the major leagues, a 505-foot homer. he allowed the lowest ground ball percentage of all major league pitchers (35.0%). with the 2020 chicago white sox, lopez appeared in eight games, compiling a 1-3 record with 6.49 era and 24 strikeouts in  innings pitched.  lopez did not make the white sox' opening day roster for the 2021 season. he began the year with charlotte. he was called up on july 16 where he made his season debut coming out of the bullpen going 2 innings, gave up 1 hit, and struck out 1. he made his first start in 2021 against the minnesota twins during game 2 of a double header going 3 innings, gave up 2 runs and 1 home run, and struck out 3 as the white sox won 5-3. on august 11, lopez was promoted to the starting rotation due to an injury to carlos rodon. overall in 2021, lopez appeared in 20 games while making 9 starts
with an era of 3.43 and a 4-3 record. he pitched in 57.2 innings and struck out 55 batters.  pitching style while at 6 feet tall, lopez is not especially tall for a pitcher-some media stories highlighting nationals pitching prospects before both pitchers' mlb debuts made note of the height disparity between lopez and his harrisburg teammate, 6-foot-6-inches lucas giolito-he generates exceptional velocity on his fastball, which he can throw consistently above 95 mph and flash in the triple digits. lopez also throws a biting curveball and a changeup. he has been mentioned as a possible future reliever, with nationals general manager mike rizzo describing him in 2016 as "a guy that can help in a starting role and in a bullpen role".  references  external links  1994 births living people auburn doubledays players charlotte knights players chicago white sox players dominican republic expatriate baseball players in the united states hagerstown suns players harrisburg senators players dominican summer league nationals players  major league baseball pitchers major league baseball players from the dominican republic potomac nationals players syracuse chiefs players washington nationals players sportspeople from san pedro de macoris
local elections were held in south korea on 27 june 1995. it was the first election of municipal and provincial officials since the may 16 coup of 1961.  results president kim young-sam's democratic liberal party (dlp) won only five of the top fifteen posts.   the main opposition, the liberal democratic party led by kim dae-jung, took control of seoul by winning the mayoral office and 23 of the city's 25 wards. the newly founded right-wing united liberal democrats, formed after kim jong-pil quit as leader of the dlp, won three governorships.  references  local elections in south korea 1995 elections in south korea
the following lists events that happened in 1958 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - hermann jonasson, emil jonsson  events  births  23 april - hilmar orn hilmarsson, musician and art director 22 july - sævar jonsson, footballer 28 july - petur ormslev, footballer 30 august - sigrun edda bjornsdottir, actress and writer 8 september - olina þorvarðardottir, politician. 9 september - pall guðlaugsson, footballer  full date missing ragnar th. sigurdsson, photographer  deaths  5 april - asgrimur jonsson, painter (b. 1876)  references    1950s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
blue canyon is an unincorporated community in whatcom county, in the u.s. state of washington.  history a post office called blue canyon was established in 1892, and remained in operation until 1905. the community took its name from nearby blue canyon mine which was named by joe wardner, a miner in the late 1890s.  references  unincorporated communities in whatcom county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state)
ernst schwarz (6 august 1916, vienna - 6 september 2003,  munichreith) was an austrian sinologist and translator.  life   ernst schwarz came from a jewish merchant family from vienna. his father, desiderius schwarz, and his mother, bertha schwarz had a shop in mariahilfer straße. he had a brother (egon, 1904-1976), and two sisters (lilly, 1908-1972 and francis, 1909-2000). he studied egyptology and medicine at the university of vienna. after the annexation of austria to the german reich in march 1938, he was forced to leave the country. he traveled to shanghai by sea with his brother egon. there he learned chinese through self-study, while he worked as a physical education teacher. occasionally he stayed in buddhist monasteries. in 1945, he worked in nanjing as a translator; in 1946-47 he taught english literature at the university there. from 1947 to 1950, he was secretary at the austrian embassy in nanjing. subsequently, he worked again as a translator, this time for the foreign languages press in beijing. from 1958 to 1960, he taught english at the university of hangzhou, however, due to political problems during the time of the great leap forward, he was forced to leave the people's republic of china.  after staying in great britain and belgium, he finally arrived in the gdr. between 1961 and 1970, he taught chinese language and literature as a research assistant and later as a lecturer at the east asian institute of the humboldt university in east berlin. in 1965, he received a doctorate in philosophy. after he retired from the university, he worked as a freelance translator and held occasional lectures at the diplomatic academy in vienna. chancellor bruno kreisky arranged him a teaching position at the diplomatic academy. he was personally acquainted with trade minister fritz bock, a childhood friend, foreign minister rudolf kirchschlager, science minister hertha firnberg, health minister ingrid leodolter, friedrich hoess diplomat, and chief magistrate josef bandion, among others.  in 1993, he returned from berlin to vienna. in 1994, it came to light that he worked for the state security service of the gdr (stasi); he admitted his espionage activities without publicly repenting it. he retired to munichreith in the waldviertel, lower austria, where he spent his latter years.  ernst schwarz was best known for his translations of classical poems and philosophical texts from chinese, which proved to be very popular with the reading public and they set high standards concerning
tao yuan-ming, confucius and lao tse in the german-speaking world.  his autobiography, tausend tore hat die wahrheit, (a thousand gates have the truth),  published in berlin  in 2001, is no longer in print.  in 1981, ernst schwarz received the f.-c.-weiskopf prize and in 1992 the golden medal of honour of  vienna (ehrenmedaille der bundeshauptstadt wien). he is the father of actress melan schwarz aka marijam agischewa.  selected works   die klassische chinesische literatur und das weltbild chinas im feudalzeitalter, berlin 1964  zur problematik der qu yuan-forschung, berlin 1965 (thesis)  der glucksbegriff in china, vienna 1976  stein des anstoßes, berlin 1978  damit verdien ich mir mein paradies. unbekannte bildwerke in den domen zu magdeburg und stendal (gedichte), berlin 1986  der alte monch. gedichte zu chinesischen tuschezeichnungen, berlin 1990  die weisheit des alten china, munich 1994  das leben des bodhidharma, dusseldorf [u.a.] 2000  anthologies   der reiter im grunen gewand (chinas volker erzahlen; folge 1), beijing 1964; new edition in three volumes: die schonsten volkssagen aus china - der reiter im grunen gewand , die legende vom reis , das langhaarige madchen  (beijing, verlag fur fremdsprachige literatur 2005).  chrysanthemen im spiegel. klassische chinesische dichtungen, berlin 1969  lob des steinquells. koreanische lyrik, weimar 1973  der ruf der phonixflote, berlin 1973  von den mußigen gefuhlen. chinesische liebesgedichte aus 3 jahrtausenden, leipzig [u.a.] 1978  shih-fu wang: das westzimmer, leipzig 1978  chinesische liebesgedichte, frankfurt (main) 1980  so sprach der weise. chinesisches gedankengut aus 3 jahrtausenden, berlin 1981  li tsching-dschau & dschu schu-dschen: chinesische frauenlyrik. tzi-lyrik der sung-zeit, munich 1985  vom weg allen geistes. sentenzen aus dem alten china, berlin 1985  das gesprengte
grab, berlin 1989  so sprach der meister, munich, 1994  agischewa, a. & schwarz, e.: die heilige buffelfrau. indianische schopfungsmythen, munich 1995  ein spiegel ist des weisen herz. sinnspruche aus dem alten china, munich 1996  schwarz, e. & agischewa, a.: der trank der unsterblichkeit. chinesische schopfungsmythen und volksmarchen, munich 1997  die glocke schallt, die glocke schweigt. zen-buddhistische weisheit, zurich [u.a.] 1999  der rechte weg. chinesische weisheiten, berlin 2000  translations  djian be-dsan (jian bozan 翦伯赞), schao hsun-dscheng (shao xunzheng 邵循正), hu hua (hu hua 胡华): kurzer abriß der chinesischen geschichte, beijing 1958.  tschin dshao-jang (qin zhaoyang): dorfskizzen, beijing 1956  yubao gao: meine kindheit, beijing 1962  konfuzius: gesprache des meisters kung, munich 1985  li tai bo: li tai-bo, berlin 1979  laudse (laozi): daudedsching (tao te king), leipzig 1970 and munich 1995  li nan-li: lo tsai, der tigerjager und andere geschichten, beijing 1958  tao yuan-ming: pfirsichblutenquell, leipzig 1967  gung schu t.: schu ting, berlin 1988  yuanwu: bi-yan-lu. aufzeichnungen des meisters vom blauen fels, munich 1999  further reading   gunther albrecht, kurt bottcher, herbert greiner-mai and paul-gunter krohn: schriftsteller der ddr. 2., unchanged edition. bibliographisches institut, leipzig 1975.  konrad herrmann: begegnungen mit ernst schwarz. books on demand, norderstedt 2012.  eva jancak: dreizehn kapitel. selbstverlag, vienna 2014.  references   austrian sinologists austrian jews 1916 births 2003 deaths east german spies austrian translators chinese-german translators humboldt university of berlin faculty 20th-century translators people of the stasi
the 2018 oklahoma gubernatorial election was held on november 6, 2018. republican businessman kevin stitt was elected the 28th governor of the state, succeeding fellow republican mary fallin, who was term-limited. primary elections occurred on june 26, 2018, with primary runoff elections having occurred on august 28, 2018.  the democratic party nominated former oklahoma attorney general drew edmondson. the republican primary eliminated lt. gov. todd lamb, resulting in a runoff election between former oklahoma city mayor mick cornett and businessman kevin stitt. on august 28, 2018, stitt won the republican primary runoff and became the republican nominee for the office. the libertarian primary also advanced to a runoff, with chris powell, a former chair of the libertarian party of oklahoma, winning the nomination. this was also the first election in which the libertarian party has been on the ballot to participate in a gubernatorial election in oklahoma, and the first time since 1986 that a candidate from the president's party was elected governor of oklahoma.  a member of the cherokee nation, stitt became the first tribally enrolled native american to serve as governor of a u.s. state.  republican primary  candidates  nominated  kevin stitt, businessman  eliminated in the primary runoff mick cornett, former mayor of oklahoma city  eliminated in the initial primary  christopher barnett, businessman  dan fisher, former state representative  eric foutch, veteran  barry gowdy, nurse gary jones, oklahoma state auditor and inspector todd lamb, lieutenant governor of oklahoma  gary richardson, former united states attorney for the eastern district of oklahoma, nominee for ok-02 in 1978 and 1980, and independent candidate for governor in 2002  blake "cowboy" stephens, rancher and educator  endorsements  first round  polling  results  runoff  campaign finance  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  drew edmondson, former attorney general of oklahoma and candidate for governor of oklahoma in 2010  eliminated in the primary  connie johnson, former state senator and nominee for the u.s. senate in 2014  withdrew  scott inman, state representative  norman jay brown, auto mechanic  declined  dan boren, former u.s. representative  joe dorman, former state representative and nominee for governor in 2014  endorsements  polling  with norman brown  results  libertarian primary  candidates  nominated  chris powell, former chair of the oklahoma libertarian party and candidate for oklahoma county clerk in 2016  eliminated in the primary runoff  rex l. lawhorn, former chair of the oklahoma americans elect
party and oklahoma state director for our america initiative  eliminated in the initial primary  joe exotic, zoo operator  endorsements  first round  results  runoff  campaign finance  results  general election  oklahoma determines ballot order by a random drawing which took place for this election cycle on july 12, resulting in the libertarian party being listed first, republicans second, and democrats third.  debates complete video of debate , september 24, 2018  predictions  polling graphical summary  with mick cornett  with todd lamb  results  statewide results  county results  stitt won 73 counties, while edmondson won four. stitt won 56 counties with at least 60% of the popular vote, 14 counties with at least 70%, and three counties - beaver, cimarron, and ellis - with upwards of 80%. stitt had the largest margin of victory in cimarron with 73.09% more votes than edmondson's 12.27%, the latter's lowest county performance in the election. the largest county per vote count won by stitt was tulsa county, home of tulsa. oklahoma county, of which oklahoma city is county seat, was the only county where stitt failed to acquire three out of every seven votes.  edmondson won muskogee by a single vote, and had an 11.84% margin of victory - his only margin of victory above 10% - in oklahoma county. edmondson won his four counties with typically narrower margins than that of stitt, having missed 50% of the popular vote in muskogee.  powell never came close to winning any counties, but won his highest percentage of votes in washita county, with 4.97%  by congressional district stitt won 4 of 5 congressional districts.  see also oklahoma state elections, 2018  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia  official campaign websites drew edmondson (d) for governor chris powell (l) for governor kevin stitt (r) for governor  gubernatorial 2018 oklahoma
roderick mackenzie served as a british army officer in the first highland battalion of foot. he appears to have been first remarked in the london gazette on 18 january 1757, under commandant lieutenant colonel archibald montgomery. it is unclear whether he "was badly wounded" in the capture of st. john's during the 1762 battle of signal hill, as there were in the gazette of 1757 three captains and three lieutenants with the same last name.  acadians removed from nepisiguit mackenzie was commanding officer in charge of fort cumberland in 1761. as the acadians in the gulf of st. lawrence had not ceased their attacks on british shipping, he was charged by lieutenant governor of nova scotia jonathan belcher with their removal. mackenzie arrived at nepisiguit with approximately 50 highlanders on 29 october 1761, and did as he was ordered. the pregnant and the ill he did not remove, and he left a few able-bodied acadians to help them.  notes  references  18th-century british army personnel british army officers british army personnel of the seven years' war
the 2015 summer european league of legends championship series (2015 summer eu lcs) was the first split of the third season of the european league of legends championship series. it was won by fnatic, their fifth split title. the spring split began with a rematch of the 2015 eu lcs spring playoff finals between unicorns of love and fnatic. most matches were played at a film studio in adlershof, berlin. the finals were played at the hovet arena globentorget, arenatorget in johanneshov, stockholm, sweden.  rosters  final regular season standings  teams  team notes  playoffs  playoff standings  bracket  references  european league of legends championship european league of legends championship series seasons european league of legends championship european league of legends championship 2015 in berlin
the 2015-16 season was u.s. lecce's fourth consecutive season in lega pro after their relegation from serie a at the end of the 2011-12 season. the club competed in lega pro girone c, finishing 3rd, in the coppa italia, where the club was knocked out in the second round by cesena, and in the coppa italia lega pro, where the club was knocked out by akragas in the round of 16.  players  squad information  out on loan  references  u.s. lecce seasons lecce
pierre-julien nargeot (14 january 1799 - 28 august 1891) was a 19th-century french violinist, composer and conductor.  biography nargeot studied music at the conservatoire de paris where he was admitted at age 14 in october 1813. he was a pupil of rodolphe kreutzer for the violin and auguste barbereau, jean-francois lesueur and antoine reicha for composition. in 1826, he obtained a first prize in counterpoint and fugue and in 1828 a second second grand prix de rome with the scene herminie for one voice. there was no first prize awarded that year. only two candidates were rewarded: berlioz, who was running for the third time, and nargeot.  during his studies at the conservatoire, nargeot was a violinist in the orchestras of opera-comique and comedie italienne. on 31 january 1826, he joined the opera. he would remain there until 1 september 1839 when he was appointed conductor at theatre des varietes, boulevard montmartre. in this venue were given comedies en vaudeville and bals, which attracted a parisian audience hungry for entertainment. the theatre des varietes took a real boom under the direction of nestor roqueplan who presented plays by lockroy (le chevalier du guet, 1840, on demande des professeurs, 1845, les trois coups de pieds, 1851), alexandre dumas (halifax, 1842), theophile gautier (le tricorne enchante, 1845), eugene labiche (oscar xxviii, 1848, madame veuve larifla, 1849, un monsieur qui prend mouche, 1852), alfred de musset (l'habit vert, 1849), george sand (la petite fadette, 1849) and operettas by jacques offenbach (la femme a trois maris, 1853, pepito, 1853). thus nargeot wrote many songs, tunes, quadrilles, rondes, inserted in these plays, especially in the tricorne enchante by theophile gautier (1845) and le lion empaille by leon gozlan (1848). some of these scores were real successes.  in 1853, nargeot left the varietes and joined, as violist, the orchestra of the imperial chapelle, which napoleon iii had just reopened. the director was auber and the conductor narcisse girard. from 1828 to 1863, he was a member of the orchestre de la societe des concerts du conservatoire.  he spent the rest of his life composing, trying to represent his operettas
on stages of parisian boulevards and died in paris at age 92.  main works  air varie pour violon avec accompagnement de piano  plaisir d'amour for violin  le petit messelin, scene lyrique by theodore de banville, folies-nouvelles, 1855  trois troubadours, scene lyrique by etienne trefeu, folies-nouvelles, 1855  un monsieur bien servi!, 1856  j. pifferari, 1858  le docteur frontin, 1861  les contrebandistas, 1861  la volonte de mon oncle, comedie en vaudeville, 1862  les exploits de silvestre, 1865  un vieux printemps, 1865  dans le petrin, 1866  jeanne, jeannette et jeanneton, 1876  les ouvrieres de qualite, operetta  references  external links  julien nargeot on data.bnf.fr     1799 births 1891 deaths 19th-century classical composers french conductors (music) french male conductors (music) french operetta composers french romantic composers musicians from paris 19th-century french male musicians
the timothy and jane williams house is a historic house at 34 old county road in rockland, maine.  built about 1859, it is one of the finest local examples of italianate architecture, and was built for someone closely associated with the area's important 19th-century lime processing industry.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2005.  description and history the williams house stands in what is now a rural residential area of western rockland, on the northwest side of old county road, formerly a through road between thomaston and camden, and now largely used to bypass downtown rockland.  the house stands opposite one of the rockland area's many former lime quarries.  it is a -story wood-frame structure, with a gabled roof and clapboarded exterior.  a lower two-story ell extends to the left, also covered by a gabled roof.  the building corners are quoined, and the main eaves are studded with heavy brackets and lined by dentil moulding.  a two-story gabled section projects at the center of the front facade, housing the main entrance in a slight recess, flanked by sidelights and topped by an eyebrow transom window.  the doorway surround matches that of the paired round-arch windows above, with a bracketed segmented-arch top.  windows are rectangular sash, with bracketed cornices and lintels.  the house was built about 1859 for timothy and jane williams.  timothy williams was a leading businessman in the period, owning lime quarries and engaging in a diverse array of other businesses.  he also served as a city selectman and in the state legislature, and was an important figure in the area's business community prior to the consolidation of the lime processing industry.  the family's house was designed by james overlock, a prominent local architect.  see also national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine  references  houses on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in knox county, maine italianate architecture in maine houses completed in 1859 houses in knox county, maine buildings and structures in rockland, maine
henry irwin weed (february 10, 1861 - may 25, 1945) was an american lawyer, military officer, and politician.  born in livingston county, new york, his father was killed in the battle of the wilderness during the american civil war. he then moved to wisconsin in 1865 with his mother and grandparents and settled on a farm in the town of utica, winnebago county, wisconsin. weed went to the public schools. he then went to lawrence university in appleton, wisconsin and to university of wisconsin. weed studied law and was admitted to the wisconsin bar in 1882. weed practiced law in oshkosh, wisconsin. weed served as oshkosh city attorney from 1890 to 1895. in 1896, weed ran for the office of wisconsin attorney general on the democratic party ticket and lost the election. weed served in the wisconsin state senate from 1899 to 1903. weed served on the military staff of wisconsin governor george wilbur peck and was commissioned a lieutenant colonel. during world war i, weed served on the judge's advocate staff. in 1908, weed and several men started the wisconsin national life insurance company; weed was involve with the company until his death. weed died at his home in oshkosh, wisconsin.  notes  1861 births 1945 deaths people from livingston county, new york politicians from oshkosh, wisconsin lawrence university alumni university of wisconsin-madison alumni military personnel from wisconsin businesspeople from wisconsin wisconsin lawyers wisconsin democrats wisconsin state senators people from utica, winnebago county, wisconsin
pinchuk.пінчук, пинчук is the surname of the following notable people: anton pinchuk, kazakh heavyweight boxer, gold medalist in boxing at the 2014 asian games - men's 91 kg dmitri pinchuk (born 1984), russian professional football player mykola pinchuk (born 1946), retired soviet and ukrainian football player oleksiy pinchuk (born 1992), ukrainian football midfielder olena pinchuk (born 1970), daughter of ukrainian president kuchma, founder of antiaids foundation, head of the starlightmedia group supervisory board sergei pinchuk (born 1971), russian naval officer taras pinchuk (born 1989), professional ukrainian football defender vasili pinchuk (born 1994), russian football player victor pinchuk (born 1960), ukrainian businessman  vitaly iustinovich pinchuk, binomial authority of pinchuk's goby (ponticola cephalargoides), a fish in the black and the azov sea  surnames ukrainian-language surnames
invasions is an anthology of science fiction short stories edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the tenth and last volume in their isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction series. it was first published in paperback by roc/new american library in august 1990, with the first british edition issued in paperback by robinson at the same time.  the book collects fifteen novellas, novelettes and short stories by various science fiction authors, together with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction" (isaac asimov) "living space" (isaac asimov) asylum" (a. e. van vogt) exposure" (eric frank russell) invasion of privacy" (bob shaw) what have i done?" (mark clifton) impostor" (philip k. dick) the soul-empty ones" (walter m. miller, jr.) the cloud-men: being a foreprint from the london news sheet #1" (owen oliver) stone man" (fred saberhagen) for i am a jealous people!" (lester del rey) don't look now" (henry kuttner) the certificate" (avram davidson) the alien rulers" (piers anthony) squeeze box" (philip e. high) the liberation of earth" (william tenn)  notes  1990 short story collections science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
kentucky route 1954 (ky 1954) is a north-south secondary highway located entirely in mccracken county in western kentucky.  intersections  references  external links kentucky transportation cabinet  1954 1954
logan cunningham (born may 30, 1991) is an american track and field athlete who specializes in the pole vault. he holds a personal best of , set in 2016.  from texas, cunningham attended smithson valley high school before enrolling at texas state university in 2009. he competed collegiately for the texas state bobcats. at the ncaa men's division i outdoor track and field championships he was fourth in 2011, but failed to record a mark at the 2012 event. he was also a finalist at the 2012 and 2013 ncaa men's division i indoor track and field championships. at regional level, he won one western athletic conference title and one southland conference title.  on his international debut at the 2012 nacac under-23 championships in athletics he won the bronze medal. cunningham reached new heights in the 2014 season, clearing  in march. this made him the third highest ranked american vaulter that year, behind mark hollis and sam kendricks. having failed to record a height at the 2012 united states olympic trials and the 2013 usa outdoor track and field championships, he finally placed at the competition at the 2014 usa indoor championships, coming fourth and still competing without sponsor. at the outdoor championships he fell back to last place in twelfth.  cunningham missed the 2015 outdoor season and on his return placed lowly at the 2016 usa indoors in 13th. however, his return outdoor came with a new personal record clearance of . he reached  at the 2016 united states olympic trials which brought him a place on the u.s. olympic team.  major competitions  references  external links   logan cunningham athlete biz page  logan cunningham page team usa  living people 1991 births track and field athletes from texas american male pole vaulters texas state bobcats athletes texas state university alumni people from comal county, texas athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states
keketso rantso (or rantso) was a minister in lesotho. she served as the minister of labour and employment in lesotho appointed in june 2017.  education and career  rantso completed her primary education at siloe primary school. she got her secondary school certificate in masentle high school and a diploma in business studies and diploma in secretarial studies. rantso was elected as the deputy secretary for lesotho congress for democracy youth league in 2003. in 2005, she became the secretary general. rantso represented the lesotho congress for democracy in 2012 and she served as the minister of public works and transport. she held various positions in the government before she was appointed to serve as the minister of labour and employment.  references   living people lesotho politicians government ministers of lesotho women government ministers of lesotho year of birth missing (living people) lesotho congress for democracy politicians
ernest gordon reid was the archdeacon of hastings from 1938 until 1956.  reid was from cuckfield; educated at harrow school, pembroke college, oxford; and wells theological college; and ordained deacon in 1909, and priest in 1910. after a curacy at st anthony, stepney he was chaplain of oxford house, bethnal green, 1912 then vicar of st peter's in the same area. he was rector of sedlescombe with whatlington from 1920 to 1926; and vicar of holy trinity, hastings from 1926 to 1938.  he died on christmas day 1966.  references  year of birth unknown alumni of pembroke college, oxford archdeacons of hastings alumni of wells theological college 1966 deaths people educated at harrow school people from cuckfield people from hastings
legislative elections were held in the czech republic on 8 and 9 october 2021. all 200 members of the chamber of deputies were elected, with the leader of the resulting government to become the prime minister of the czech republic.  following the 2017 czech legislative election, the country has been ruled by a minority government consisting of ano 2011 (ano), led by prime minister andrej babis, and the czech social democratic party (cssd), led by interior minister jan hamacek, with confidence and supply support from the communist party of bohemia and moravia (kscm) until april 2021. the largest opposition party was the civic democratic party (ods), followed by the czech pirate party. other parties in the chamber of deputies included spd, top 09, stan, and kdu-csl.  babis ran again as leader of ano, and the main opposition parliamentary parties formed two electoral alliances, spolu and pirates and mayors (pas). ano was front runner of the election, as it was polling first ahead of spolu and pas prior election.  the result was a surprise victory for the liberal conservative alliance spolu, which received the highest number of votes, while the populist ano received the highest number of seats. no opinion poll placed spolu in the first place prior to the vote. it was the closest legislative election in the history of czech republic.  the opposition parties won a majority in the chamber of deputies and agreed to form a coalition government with spolu leader petr fiala as the new prime minister. traditional left-wing parties cssd and kscm failed to reach the 5% threshold to win any seats in the chamber of deputies for the first time since the dissolution of czechoslovakia in 1993. the pirates, which were one of the leading opposition parties, were heavily defeated due to preferential votes and won just 4 seats in the chamber of deputies. petr fiala was appointed as the new prime minister on 28 november 2021 while rest of the new cabinet was appointed on 17 december 2021.  background   according to the constitution of the czech republic, an election to the chamber of deputies, the lower house of the czech parliament, must be held every four years. the government is answerable to the chamber of deputies and remains in power only with the confidence of the majority of members of parliament. article 19(1) of the constitution states that any citizen of the czech republic who has right to vote and is 21 years old is eligible to serve as an mp.  ano 2011 (ano) emerged as the largest party in the 2017 legislative election and formed a minority government, which then lost a vote
of confidence on 16 january 2018. the party formed a coalition government with the czech social democratic party (cssd), supported by the communist party of bohemia and moravia (kscm), which lasted until april 2021. andrej babis became the new prime minister. the civic democratic party (ods) emerged as the second largest party and main opposition party, narrowly ahead of the czech pirate party.  2018 senate and municipal elections   in 2018, voters elected 27 of 81 members of the senate and approximately 61,900 members of local councils. ods won the senate election with 10 senators elected. ano won the municipal elections in most regional cities, with ods finishing first in prague and stan in liberec. cssd and kscm lost over half of their votes and seats in municipal councils.  2019 european parliament election   in may 2019, voters elected 21 members of the european parliament. ano came first, with ods and the pirates close behind in number of seats. as cssd failed to achieve more than 5 percent of votes in national elections for the first time since the mid-1990s, it did not get any seat.  2020 senate and regional elections   in october 2020, voters elected 675 members of regional assemblies in 13 regions of the nation, except prague, which then formed regional governments. ano won the election with 21.8% of votes but opposition parties, especially the pirates, made gains, while allies of ano were heavily defeated. the governing parties were also heavily defeated in the senate elections, which were won by mayors and independents ahead of ods.  coalitions of political parties  following these elections, opposition parties began negotiations about potential electoral alliances. it was speculated that two electoral blocs would be formed: a conservative bloc led by ods, which would also include kdu-csl and top 09, with petr fiala as leader, and a liberal bloc composed of the pirates and mayors and independents, with ivan bartos as the leader.  the ods leadership agreed to form an alliance on 25 october 2020, with a memorandum to be signed two days later. on 27 october 2020, fiala, marian jurecka, and marketa adamova announced that ods, kdu-csl, and top 09 would form an electoral alliance for the next legislative election, with ods leader fiala as the alliance's candidate for prime minister. on 11 november 2020, the parties agreed that ods would nominate the leaders of the election lists in nine regions, kdu-csl in three regions, and top 09 in two regions. the name of the alliance was announced as spolu
, meaning "together" in english. fiala was confirmed as the alliance's candidate for prime minister on 16 december 2020.  the leadership of mayors and independents agreed to start negotiations on 8 october 2020. the pirates are required to ratify any alliance in an members' referendum. in a poll on 20 october 2020, 51% of pirate members were opposed to the alliance while 43% supported it. the referendum to starting negotiations for an alliance was originally scheduled for 13 to 16 november 2020 but was rescheduled for 20 to 23 november 2020. among pirate members, 695 out of 858 voted in favour of negotiations, with a turnout of 80%. ivan bartos was nominated to be the pirate's election leader on 25 november 2020, and was confirmed on 2 december 2020. the pirates also offered the green party the possibility to join its electoral list. bartos was confirmed as the alliance's electoral leader on 14 december 2020. pirate members voted to approve the alliance on 13 january 2021.  cssd started to negotiate the formation of a third electoral bloc in january 2021, negotiating with the green party and some regional parties about the formation of a left-wing electoral alliance. the green party stated as a condition for joining an alliance that the parties would not form a government coalition with ano after the election.  in early 2021, the tricolour citizens' movement, svobodni, the freeholder party of the czech republic, and other minor parties began negotiations about a potential alliance. on 5 march 2021, these three parties confirmed the formation of a coalition, stating that they would run either in a formal electoral alliance or as a single party, depending on the new electoral law. the independence party of the czech republic declared support for this coalition soon after. on 23 march 2021, tricolour leader vaclav klaus jr. resigned from all political functions for personal reasons. zuzana majerova zahradnikova became acting leader of the party.  on 23 march 2021, a group of minor parties including the alliance for the future, agrarian democratic party, order of the nation, and democratic green party formed an electoral alliance, the alliance for the future, with pavel sehnal as leader. the party of common sense also subsequently joined the alliance.  some commentators have described the election as a "hidden referendum" on membership of the european union (eu).  electoral system   during the 2017 legislative election, the 200 members of the chamber of deputies were elected from 14 multi-member constituencies by open list proportional representation with an electoral threshold of 5%. it was
raised to 10% for two-party political alliances, 15% for three-party alliances, and 20% for alliances of four or more parties. seats were allocated using the d'hondt method. voters can give preference votes to up to four candidates on a list. candidates who receive preferential votes from more than 5% of voters are moved to the top of their list; in cases where more than one candidate receives over 5% of the preferential votes, they are ranked in order of votes received.  although it was expected that the 2021 legislative election would take place using the same electoral system, the constitutional court ruled on a complaint submitted by a group of senators from mayors and independents, kdu-csl, and top 09 that the electoral system was unproportional and favoured larger parties. it focused on the d'hondt method, the division of the country into 14 constituencies, and the increased electoral threshold for alliances. the constitutional court's decision, published on 3 february 2021, set the threshold for alliances at 5% and removed some provisions relating to seat allocation. new provisions were put into law before the election, establishing a threshold of 5% for single parties, 8% for coalitions of two parties, and 11% for coalitions of three or more parties.  registration process the deadline to submit candidate lists for election was 4 august 2021. as of 2 august 2021, 29 subjects had made an application to the registration bureau. all of them were approved by the bureau and permitted to run.  observers  czech republic invited experts from organization for security and co-operation in europe (osce) and office for democratic institutions and human rights (odihr) to observe election. obse provided four observers.  covid-19 pandemic  as with the regional elections in 2020, the pandemic emergency, covered by the pandemic law, allowed for the establishment of special polling stations for people in isolation or quarantine, as well as drive-in voting locations. disinfection and respiratory protection were provided to ensure hygienic conditions in traditional polling stations. special election dates were announced on 6 and 7 october 2021.  political parties   the table below lists political parties represented in the chamber of deputies after the 2017 legislative election.  pre-election composition  competing parties  campaign  issues the campaign was significantly affected by the covid-19 pandemic, with opposition parties criticizing the government for its handling of the pandemic and emphasising the country's high death rate. some parties also focused their campaigns around opposition to the covid-19 restrictions. meanwhile, the government parties defended
their handling of the crisis, and some government ministers argued that the situation would have been worse if the opposition had been in government. this issue later lost prominence, with economic issues receiving more attention. several political scientists, including daniel prokop, characterised the election as a referendum on prime minister andrej babis. during the final phase of the campaign, inflation and the increasing prices of groceries became the main issue, reflected in spolu's campaign slogan: "the cost of babis."  ano 2011 and the far-right parties also focused on immigration during their campaigns, criticising multiculturalism and pledging to prevent "muslim europe."  party campaigns  alliance for the future  in march 2021, the civic democratic alliance (oda) formed an electoral alliance with other minor parties called alliance for the future (apb), led by pavel sehnal. parties in the alliance included the agrarian democratic party, order of the nation and the democratic party of greens. in july 2021 the party of common sense joined the alliance. oda formally changed its name to alliance for the future to avoid the higher electoral threshold.  the alliance's campaign was launched at a press conference on 16 june 2021, where sehnal introduced apb's priorities, including support for czech businesses and lower taxes. he also declared support for transatlantic cooperation and eu membership.  ano 2011   after opinion polls in early 2021 showed ano 2011 (ano) falling behind the czech pirate party, prime minister andrej babis reacted by attacking the pirates for their progressive stances, such as their supposed support for immigration and legalisation of drug use. the party's campaign thus focused on criticism of the pirates in early 2021. on 27 june 2021 president milos zeman endorsed ano 2011, stating that he would vote for the party.  in july 2021, ano 2011 published a book, share it, before they ban it, allegedly written by babis, who began promoting the book during the campaign with book signings. the book primarily boasted about babis record in government. ice cream was also given out at these sessions, in response to the campaign of pirates and mayors.  the party officially launched its campaign on 2 september 2021. babis promised higher pensions and measures against illegal immigration. he also attacked the opposition alliances, stating that they wanted to destroy the visegrad group. babis also talked about the defence of czech national interests. in september 2021, ano released an election advert for czech television which attacked the pirates over alleged support for immigration and links to "antifa". his campaign used the slogan "i will fight for you until my body falls apart!"
the launch of the campaign was impacted by the arrival of babis' son andrej babis jr., who was allegedly kidnapped on his father orders leading to the 2018 czech political crisis. babis jr. confronted his father during the meeting and accused him of deceiving the nation. babis later stated that he would not wish any parent to go through such an experience.  on 29 september 2021 hungarian prime minister viktor orban visited the czech republic and formally endorsed ano 2011 at a rally in usti nad labem. orban praised babis, saying that hungarians would be glad for a prime minister like babis. he also warned about immigration and the european union during the rally, which was compared to a talkshow of two prime ministers.  babis was named in the pandora papers leak around a month later. according to the leak, babis used offshore companies to buy french mansion in 2009.  communist party of bohemia and moravia   the communist party of bohemia and moravia (kscm) launched its campaign on 4 june 2021. leader vojtech filip said that a vote for kscm meant certainty for the future. kscm named its five priorities as help for children in need, better conditions for life and safety, the right to a dignified life and better environment, a higher minimum wage, and shorter working periods. filip also stated his party's wish to leave nato and establish better relationships with china and russia.  czech crown  the monarchist party koruna ceska launched its campaign on 9 august 2021. the party supported top 09 in the 2017 elections. chairman radim spacek described the program goals, to reform the czech state from a republic to a parliamentary monarchy, to restore the historical lands of bohemia, moravia and silesia, and revise the legal order. deputy chairman petr kratky cited a public opinion polling indicating that almost 10% of czech citizens, especially younger voters, are in favor of a monarchy. the party's list also includes members of other small parties, such as the conservative party and morava 1918.  czech pirate party and mayors and independents   the czech pirate party and mayors and independents (stan) formed the liberal electoral alliance pirates and mayors led by ivan bartos, presenting their cooperation agreement in december 2020. priorities in the agreement included lower taxes, better availability of health care in the regions, protection of the climate, and transparent governance. the parties also agreed to support adoption of the euro. bartos said on 11 january that the alliance's priorities during the campaign would include reform of the debt collection system, digitalisation, environmental issues, and
education.  pirates and stan launched their campaign on 18 may 2021, with the slogan "let's give the country back its future" (). bartos and rakusan promised to regulate debt collection, raise taxes on commercial buildings, and begin preparations to adopt the euro. a major focus of the alliance's platform is digitalisation of the country. in response to the 2021 south moravia tornado, pirates and stan interrupted their campaign.  at a press conference on 24 june 2021, pirates and stan launched an anti-corruption campaign, publishing a list of the 10 biggest corruption cases since 1989, primarily involving ods. the campaign also listed the 10 biggest corruption cases involving the ruling ano. in july 2021, the alliance released a poster featuring jakub michalek, its candidate for minister of justice, trying to catch a man in a suit with a lasso, accompanied with anti-corruption slogans. the campaign attracted significant media attention but was also criticised as amateurish and populist.  the alliance relaunched its campaign in august 2021 as a reaction to declining opinion polls. the campaign began to focus more on stan and its leader vit rakusan, though bartos remained the alliance's electoral leader and candidate for prime minister. the campaign also focused more on budgetary spending and education.  the final phase of the campaign was launched on 9 september 2021. the alliance introduced an electoral bus in an attempt to replicate the success of the 2017 elections. pirates and mayors focused on criticism of the government for its handling of the covid-19 pandemic and budget spending. messages written on the bus also recalled various controversies of the government.  czech social democratic party  the czech social democratic party (cssd) launched its campaign on 29 march 2021 with the slogan "we know what to do after covid." the campaign focused on the solution of the covid-19 crisis, opposition to privatization of hospitals, support for kurzarbeit, and shorter working hours. the party also promised to increase taxes for banks and large companies.  the final phase of campaign was launched on 22 august 2021. party leader jan hamacek said that cssd was not dead, despite low opinion polling. major topics of the party's campaign were higher salaries, pension reform, and just redistribution of covid-19 expenditures. slogans included "for a just czech republic" and "so that no one endangers your life security." cssd also expressed their intention to implement progressive taxation and a lower tax on groceries, rejected privatisation of health care, and promised more achievable housing.  cssd used minister of labour and social affairs jana malac
ova prominently in its campaign. in september, malacova and matej stropnicky, a candidate for the party in prague, made a video called "cool pair", in which they attacked opposition parties, accusing them of corruption and intending to privatize public companies. malacova also campaigned at metro stations giving out leaflets for the party.  free bloc   the free bloc launched it campaign on 28 august 2021 with a meeting on letna. led by mp lubomir volny, it focused mainly on opposition to covid-19 restrictions. other prominent figures in their campaign were jana bobosikova and hana lipovska. the free bloc held electoral meetings at markets, with volny travelling around the czech republic in a bus called "volnasek". the campaign concluded with a meeting in krupka on 6 october 2021.  freedom and direct democracy  freedom and direct democracy (spd) launched its campaign on 15 july 2021 with a meeting on letna. spd stated that the price for their participation in post-election coalition discussions would be a referendum law, and to hold a referendum on membership of the eu and nato. other issues in the party's campaign included opposition to covid-19 restrictions and mandatory vaccination. spd used an election truck called "espedak" to travel around the country, and attempted to attract potential voters to meetings by holding fairs with cheap food.  green party  the green party launched its campaign on 29 june 2021, with the slogan "lets give green to women", focused on feminist issues and environmentalism. besides green, the party used pink in its campaign. magdalena davis was announced as the party's electoral leader, and a large number of their candidates were women. davis described the predominance of men in politics as a medieval custom.  the final phase of the party's campaign was launched on 31 august 2021 in brno, at the brno astronomical clock. the greens described it as a phallic, masculine symbol, and covered it with various images of female potential. participants in the meeting held signs with slogans such as "we love modern schools" and "we love fathers on parental leave". another key issue was the climate crisis, with the party proposing higher penalties for environmental crimes.  people for  the people for political movement, led by political activist mikulas minar, was launched on 3 december 2020, and started gathering the 500,000 signatures required for participation in the elections. minar said that the movement does not want to be another 5% party. on 24 march 2021, minar announced the end of
the movement due to low interest from voters, having collected only 39,251 signatures.  prisaha   robert slachta, the former director of the police unit against organized crime, formed the anti-corruption party prisaha before the election. he launched the campaign at a meeting on 28 january 2021. slachta stated that he did not believe it was the right time to adopt the euro and was opposed to migrant quotas.  the final phase of the campaign was launched on 25 august 2021. prisaha introduced its regional leaders and program, under the slogan "let's go to them!" the main campaign topic was fighting corruption and clientelism. slachta also stated that he wanted to make courts faster and fight for czech identity, rejecting the euro and migration quotas. he also pledged to investigate all state contracts concluded under the state of emergency. slachta stated that prisaha had crowdfunded 13.8 million czech koruna for the campaign, and calculated that the campaign would cost around 15 million czk.  the party hovered around the 5% electoral threshold in polling between may and the election. in september 2021, prisaha's support in opinion polls gradually declined, which was blamed on the launch of the ano campaign. slachta stated before voting that he believed the party would reach his goal of surpassing the 5% threshold.  spolu   three centre-right parties, the civic democratic party, kdu-csl, and top 09, formed an electoral alliance called spolu. led by petr fiala, the alliance launched its campaign on 9 december 2020, promising to reform tax, the social and pension system, and healthcare. its proposals included a minimum pension, a simplification of social benefits, support for education, and better use of eu funds as well as a focus on climate change. it opposes leaving the eu and supports membership of nato. top 09 leader marketa adamova described the alliance as a centre-right liberal conservative political force.  spolu launched its campaign on 19 may 2021 in brno. the campaign's slogan was "we will bring the czech republic together." fiala said that spolu wants an "economically capable and educated czechia". spolu planned to use dominik feri as the face of an instagram campaign targeting young voters entitled "i have a voice". in may 2021, feri resigned from his political posts after being accused of sexual assault and rape by eight women, and the campaign was withdrawn. in response to the 2021 south moravia tornado, spolu interrupted its campaign in south moravia and donated
1.5 million czech koruna to help people in the affected areas.  from august, spolu's campaign featured a bus, known as the "positive bus", to be used for its candidates' personal campaigns. spolu also screened the film women on the run at its campaign meetings, and featured stand-up comedians including petr ctvrtnicek in electoral adverts. fiala became more active on social media and travelled around the czech republic as part of a personal campaign. in late august 2021, spolu used billboards featuring the leaders of ano, kscm, and spd with the word "threat", which was often juxtaposed with a billboard featuring the leaders of spolu with the words "change you can trust." on 4 september 2021, spolu reacted to the launch of ano's campaign by launching a parody meme generator inspired by the ano campaign and its slogan "until my body falls apart!". on 3 september 2021, spolu were endorsed by austrian chancellor sebastian kurz, who sent a letter to fiala wishing the alliance electoral success.  spolu launched the final phase of their campaign on 20 september 2021 with a meeting inspired by the united states presidential campaigns. in a speech, fiala criticised andrej babis' cabinet for populism and warned against extremists. fiala pledged that spolu would reduce the public debt without increasing taxes, guarantee the pro-western orientation of the country, and digitalise public administration. he also said he wanted to solve the housing crisis. the meeting was held under the slogans "it is about everything now" and "let's start change." around this time, prominent representatives of spolu visited the regions to meet with citizens.  following the television debates, spolu used the line "the cost of babis" to attack the government over inflation and the rising prices of energy and groceries. the term was first used by fiala during a debate on prima cnn news, before becoming a part of the alliance's billboard campaign and spreading among ods supporters. fiala himself used the term repeatedly during debates.  in the last polls before the election, spolu were polling second behind ano. commentators noted that the gap between ano and spolu was narrowing, but none predicted that spolu would pull ahead.  tricolour-svobodni-soukromnici   the tricolour citizens' movement, svobodni, and freeholder party of the czech republic formed an electoral alliance called tricolour-svobodni-soukromnici (tss), led by tricolour leader zuzana majerova zahradnikova. vaclav klaus
jr. was originally meant to be the electoral leader, but he quit politics soon after formation of the alliance.  tss launched its campaign on 17 june 2021 with the slogan "we have a right to live". their campaign focused on traditional values and opposition to covid-19 restrictions. majerova zahradnikova targeted right-wing eurosceptic voters, and also wanted to use former czech president vaclav klaus during the campaign. majerova zahradnikova stated during the campaign that tss rejcted the lockdown, green new deal, and grocery quotas. during september 2021 she also campaigned on the issue of rising prices. tss aimed to win 7% of votes.  during final phase of the campaign, tss focused on spolu voters, distributing leaflets warning of a new opposition agreement. tss also attacked spolu for being too green and too pro-europe. the party warned of "covid totalitarianism" while attacking covid-19 restrictions, rejecting a new lockdown, school closures, or "segregation of the non-vaccinated". tss argued that it was the only "true authentic right" on the czech political scene. a few hours prior to the election it was endorsed by former czech president vaclav klaus.  urza.cz  urza.cz is an anarcho-capitalist party led by martin urza. its campaign began gathering signatures in april 2021. the party was registered in july 2021. urza was campaigning to promote his beliefs, rather than attract votes. the party promised that its mps would resign if elected, as it did not believe that anyone should govern by force.  we will open czechia the chcipl pes () initiative was created in opposition to covid-19 restrictions. its members decided to form a political party called "we will open czechia". its campaign was focused against covid-19 restrictions and included various protests. the party also called on pub owners to open their businesses despite government orders. in april 2021 the party sent a mobile barber shop to prague, where the public could get haircuts or buy beer. it was also used as a petition stand. the barber shop later moved from prague to other locations around the country, finishing its journey in ostrava. in august 2021, the leaders of the party called for a new prague defenestration, saying that "people should do anything required to overthrow criminal deputies."  independent initiatives  million moments for democracy million moments for democracy led a campaign against andrej babis and ano 2011, attempting to persuade voters to support the opposition alliances spolu
or pirates and mayors. members of the movement talked to people in the streets and gave them leaflets in order to change their minds vote for one of major opposition alliances. the campaign also included a messenger app called "i vote change", which aimed to persuade people through gifs and various questions that they should vote for spolu or pirates and mayors. leader benjamin roll denied that the organisation's activities were a real election campaign, insisting that it was aiming to inform people. the group's activities attracted the attention of the office for the supervision of the management of political parties and political movements, which launched an investigation into possible election law violations, as the organisation had not registered as an organisation participating in the campaign.  campaign finances  endorsements  ano 2011  individuals viktor orban milos zeman  czech social democratic party  parties patriots of olomouc region  individuals jiri krampol jiri slegr  pirates and mayors  parties clean budejovice idealists.cz senator 21  individuals eva holubova jan hrebejk jaroslav hutka david koller karel zima  spolu  parties club of committed non-party members snk european democrats  individuals heidi janku sebastian kurz matej ruppert filip smoljak tomas topfer  tricolour-svobodni-soukromnici  parties independence party of the czech republic  individuals frantisek ringo cech ondrej hejma daniel hulka  debates  opinion polls  results  distribution of seats for individual parties  mps by party membership  results by region  voters abroad  voter demographics  aftermath  analysis   the electoral coalition spolu won the most votes but finished with one fewer seat (71) in the chamber of deputies than ano 2011, which won 72 with a lower vote share. ano had the largest number of deputies of any party, winning twice as many seats as the second place civic democratic party (ods). the pirates and mayors (pas) electoral coalition came third with 37 seats. due to preference voting, mayors and independents won 33 seats and the czech pirate party won just 4 seats. freedom and direct democracy (spd) came fourth, and were the only other political party or electoral coalition to be elected to the chamber. the election saw the highest ever number of discarded votes for parties not meeting the 5% threshold in the history of elections in the czech republic, with more than 1 million, or about 20%. the czech social democratic party and the communist party of bohemia and moravia failed to win any seats in the lower chamber for the first time since 1990, and the respective party leaders jan
hamacek and vojtech filip resigned. for the first time since the third czechoslovak republic, a communist party would not be represented in the national parliament covering the czech lands.  political analyst jiri pehe of the new york university in prague hailed the results as a "triumph for liberal democracy" and said they "signalled the end of the post-communist era." political analyst michal klima told czech public television that the result meant "an absolute change of the politics in the czech republic. it stabilises the country's position in the west camp. it's a huge defeat for [babis]."  the media considered the result a surprise and an upset, as polls had shown ano 2011 as the clear front-runner. spolu were polling second but the last polls showed a surge in support, though it was still expected that they would lose. martin buchtik, director of the stem polling agency, said he thought it would be impossible that ano 2011 would not receive the highest number of votes. director of median, premysl cech, said it was unlikely that spolu would be first. the director of kantar, pavel ranocha, also said he believed ano 2011 would be first, but noted that the latest data showed that gap between ano 2011 and spolu narrowing. the directors of all three major polling agencies agreed that pirates and mayors had no chance of defeating ano 2011, and also agreed that only ano 2011, spolu, pirates and mayors and spd could be certain of winning seats in the chamber of deputies, as kscm, cssd and prisaha were all hovering around the 5% threshold. spolu's victory in the election, against polling evidence, was attributed to a "last minute swing". sociologist jan herzmann said that large number of voters had changed their mind in the last moments, which could not be detected by opinion polls. he argued that in the last week running up to the election it had become clear that petr fiala was an equal opponent to prime minister andrej babis, and competition between the two men led voters of smaller parties to switch to spolu or ano 2011, leading to disappointing results for pirates and mayors and spd. ranocha said that undecided voters were still deciding between spolu or pirates and mayors, and spolu were ahead in the polls. he also said that a large number of voters decided to support spolu due to the television debates. journalist jan horak of aktualne.cz said that spolu were competing with pirates and mayors to be the main opposition option, but opinion polls showed spolu
as the stronger of the two, which won them votes. he also noted that fiala was more acceptable than pirate leader ivan bartos. political scientist lubomir kopecek said that inflation and the pandora papers affair may have contributed to ano's defeat.  on 12 november 2021, stem published a poll conducted from 15 october to 25 october 2021. according to the poll, 61% of pirstan supporters were pirate party supporters, while 39% supported stan. however, 58% of stan supporters used preferential voting, compared to only 29% of pirate party supporters, resulting in a large difference in seat distribution between the two parties. according to the poll, 49% of spolu voters were supporters of ods, 26% of top 09, and 25% of kdu-csl. 47% of kdu-csl supporters, 44% of ods supporters and 35% of top 09 supporters used preferential voting.  complaints  the supreme administrative court received 210 complaints about election irregularities, three times more than in 2017. many complaints were directed at czech television, stating that its election coverage benefitted some parties. others attacked the electoral coalitions and the rule of wearing masks at polling stations.  it was reported on 22 october 2021 that the pirates and mayors had lodged a complaint stating that the czech statistical bureau misinterpreted the electoral law, resulting in an incorrect allocation of seats. if the complaint is successful, then ano 2011 will lose one seat to pirates and mayors. the deadline to respond to complaints is 11 november 2021. another complaint that received media attention was made by zdenek cerny, who was due to run as a candidate for spolu in south moravia before his candidacy was withdrawn in the last moments before the election. cerny argued his withdrawal was illegal and wanted to invalidate the election of all spolu candidates in south moravia to recount the preferential votes.  on 5 november 2021, the supreme administrative court rejected all complaints, including those made by pirates and mayors and by zdenek cerny. it stated that pirates and mayors had misunderstood the electoral law. on 8 december 2021, pirates and mayors sent a complaint to constitutional court seeking to repeal the decision by the supreme administrative court. on 26 january 2022, the constitutional court rejected the complaint for procedural reasons.  government formation   incumbent prime minister andrej babis conceded defeat and accepted the results of the vote on the night of 9 october, saying: "that's life, we understand and accept that." babis also accused the opposition of a "smear campaign" during the lead-up to the election. incumbent
president milos zeman had indicated that he would give the prime ministerial mandate to the candidate of the largest party, not the largest coalition. babis described ano's performance as a great result, but said he was not expecting a loss. he congratulated the chairman of spolu for becoming the largest coalition, and said that he was open to talks with all parties who were going to enter the new parliament, except for pas, which he ruled out. pas said they would not join or support an ano-led government, or a government that included spd, calling them "parties with a corrupt past" (ano) or parties "threatening liberal democracy" (spd).  spd ruled out joining a coalition government with ano but indicated that they were open to exploratory talks with ano about providing direct or indirect support to an ano-led minority government. spd leader tomio okamura said in a press conference that passing a new law to allow national referendums, including on czexit and possibly nato membership, was his condition for supporting babis's campaign for a second term in office. babis left the door open to possible cooperation with spd but indicated that this was not his first choice as he rejected a referendum on eu membership. after results showed that a potential ano-spd majority was mathematically impossible, babis indicated his willingness to form a grand coalition with spolu, if he were to be asked first by zeman. petr just, a political scientist at the metropolitan university prague, said many in ods were open to forming a government with ano, as long as babis was not part of the government, while many in ano preferred an alliance with ods instead of spd. spolu ruled this scenario out, especially if babis continued as prime minister.  after the results, spolu and pas signed a memorandum to form a coalition government with petr fiala as prime minister. both groups said they would not work with babis. petr fiala said: "the two democratic coalitions (spolu and pirates and mayors) have gained a majority and have a chance to form a majority government. we are the change. you are the change." pas leader ivan bartos said talks with spolu "on the possibilities of forming a new government" would likely begin on 9 october. he hailed the end of the "dominance of andrej babis", and said that "the democratic parties have shown that the era of chaos will probably be behind us."  on 10 october, zeman was hospitalized, creating uncertainty over how and when the government formation talks would be held. on 11 october, a spokesman for the hospital said that zeman's condition had
stabilized, commenting: "the reason for [zeman's] hospitalization is complications from the illnesses for which he has been receiving treatment." on 15 october, babis announced that he was prepared to go into opposition and would not accept an offer to try to create a new government, commenting: "we will hand it over to the new coalition and we will be in opposition." on 18 october, milos vystrcil, the president of the senate of the czech republic, announced he had received a letter from the central military hospital declaring zeman unfit to fulfil his duties as the president, and indicated that he planned to trigger article 66 of the constitution to remove zeman from office. in response, the senate announced their intention to transfer zeman's constitutional powers to the current prime minister, andrej babis, and the speaker of the chamber of deputies. the speaker is expected to ask fiala to form a government if article 66 is triggered.  on 2 november, spolu and pas agreed on the composition of the new government. spolu would have the prime minister and 10 ministers, while pas would have 6 ministers. ministries held by spolu include finance, labour and social affairs, defence, transportation, health, agriculture, justice, environment, culture and science. pas would get the minister for the interior, industry, education, local development, foreign affairs, legislature and european union. the signature of the coalition agreement was set for 8 november.  fiala also said that he had been contacted by zeman's staff on the same day, to say that the president was looking forward to meeting him, and intended to do so once he got transferred from the intensive care unit room to a normal room. on 4 november, zeman was transferred to a normal room. on 5 november, zeman confirmed during an interview for frekvence 1 that he would appoint fiala the new prime minister, and would do everything he could for the new government to be formed as quickly as possible.  ods and stan approved the coalition agreement on 4 november. kdu-csl and top 09 approved the agreement on 5 november. the czech pirate party announced that its members would vote on approving the agreement on 13 and 14 november. the leadership of the pirate party approved the agreement on 7 november. as a result, bartos signed the agreement along with the leaders of the other parties on 8 november, even though party members were still to vote. the leaders of all five parties signed the coalition agreement on 8 november. the new chamber of deputies had its constituent meeting the same day. babis promised that his cabinet would resign soon afterward
to allow a new government to be formed quickly. on 9 november, zeman asked fiala to form a government. the constituent meeting concluded on 10 november and the government resigned the day after. zeman accepted the resignation the same day. zeman's chancellor vratislav mynar stated that fiala would be appointed in a matter of weeks, after the president had met fiala and the ministerial candidates.  on 12 november, a referendum began among pirate party members over whether to approve the coalition agreement. mp jakub michalek, who was expected to become minister for legislation, announced that he would not be part of the incoming government to avoid the cumulation of jobs, adding that he believed it could convince more members to vote for the government. the referendum concluded on 15 november. 82% of party members agreed that the party should join the incoming government. fiala was set to meet president zeman on 17 november to present his cabinet and proposed government ministers.  presidential approval fiala met zeman on 17 november and presented him with the names of his proposed cabinet. zeman stated that he would appoint fiala as the new prime minister on 26 november, but expressed his disagreement with one potential minister, reported in czech media to be jan lipavsky, the candidate for minister of foreign affairs. fiala stated afterwards that he did not intend to make any changes to his cabinet. on 25 november 2021, zeman tested positive for covid-19, delaying the appointment until 28 november 2021. zeman said he would meet fiala's nominations for cabinet positions over the next two weeks. outgoing prime minister andrej babis said he expected the rest of the cabinet to be appointed after 13 december 2021. following his appointment, fiala said he believed his government would bring change and improve the lives of people in the czech republic, but that the next year would be difficult for many citizens and the czech republic itself.  zeman started meeting the ministerial nominees on 29 november 2021, when he met martin baxa and mikulas bek. on 7 december 2021, he met jan lipavsky, reported as the potential minister zeman did not want to appoint. according to sources cited by frekvence 1, zeman told lipavsky to withdraw his nomination. fiala subsequently declared that if zeman did not appoint all of his ministers, he would submit a jurisdiction action to the constitutional court against zeman. the meetings concluded when zeman met vlastimil valek on 10 december 2021. zeman then stated that he did not intend to appoint lipavsky. fiala responded that constitutional court would decide whether the president could reject a minister nominated by the prime minister, and said
he would meet zeman on 13 december 2021 to discuss the next steps for the appointment of the cabinet.  fiala met zeman on 13 december 2021 at lany castle. after the meeting, zeman agreed to appoint all cabinet members, including lipavsky, on 17 december 2021. a vote of confidence in the chamber of deputies was scheduled for 12 january 2022.  fiala's cabinet was appointed by zeman on 17 december 2021. fiala said that his cabinet had taken over responsibility, noting that "we are not starting in a good situation as there are many overlooked problems. we will start working immediately as there is so much work and we want to do it differently than our predeccessors." zdenek nekula was the only minister that was not appointed, as he had tested positive for covid-19. his appointment as minister of agriculture was postponed until january 2022, and marian jurecka was temporarily designated to manage the ministry of agriculture. fiala confirmed on 2 january 2022 that nekula would be appointed on 3 january, and the new cabinet would ask the chamber of deputies for confidence on 12 january 2022. nekula was appointed on 3 january 2022, completing the cabinet.  fiala's cabinet was presented to the chamber of deputies on 12 january 2022 for a confidence vote. the vote did not occur on that day as the pre-vote debate continued for 22 hours. the vote was also delayed by freedom and direct democracy leader tomio okamura, who called for a special meeting over the financing of mayors and independents, following media reports that the party had accepted gifts from cyprus. the confidence debate session continued in the evening of 13 january 2022. after 23 hours of debate, the cabinet won the confidence vote by 106-87, with 193 mps present.  see also  2021 in politics and government  2021 in the czech republic  2021 speaker of the chamber of deputies of the parliament of the czech republic election  elections in the czech republic  list of elections in 2021  references  external links  official site  legislative elections to the chamber of deputies of the czech republic czech czech
aulakh is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4.8 km from nakodar, 41.3 km from kapurthala, 28.8 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 145 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 33 km away from the village. the village is 62 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 118 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
hugh hamilton campbell (1856-1934) was an architect in warwick, queensland, australia. some of his works are now heritage-listed.  early life campbell was born in thurso, caithness, scotland. his parents were stonemason john campbell and his wife margaret hamilton.  architectural career campbell immigrated to queensland in about 1876. he worked as a cabinet maker and contractor in warwick and was inspector works for the glengallan division before offering his services as an architect around 1897. his son, roderick hamilton campbell, joined him as partner in about 1909.  public life campbell served as an alderman in the warwick town council.  later life campbell retired in about 1930. on 7 june 1934 he died at sandgate of a heart attack. he was buried on friday 8 june 1934 in nundah cemetery.  significant works   1910: aberfoyle, a residence in warwick, listed on the queensland heritage register.  references  australian architects
the 2016-17 stade malherbe caen season was the 104th season of the club since its creation in 1913, the 16th in ligue 1.  players  french teams are limited to four players without eu citizenship. hence, the squad list includes only the principal nationality of each player; several non-european players on the squad have dual citizenship with an eu country. also, players from the acp countries-countries in africa, the caribbean, and the pacific that are signatories to the cotonou agreement-are not counted against non-eu quotas due to the kolpak ruling.  current squad  as of 13 july 2016.  out on loan  transfers  transfers in  loans in  transfers out  loans out  competitions  ligue 1  league table  matches  coupe de france  coupe de la ligue  goalscorers  references  caen 2016
events from the year 1896 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  events   1896 world figure skating championships  all-russia exhibition 1896  khodynka tragedy  adolfs alunans theatre  births lev vygotsky.  deaths   13 october - alexander theodorowicz batalin,  botanist (b. 1847)  references  1896 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
marros sands is a beach in carmarthenshire between amroth and pendine and to the south of the small settlement of marros.  the beach is separated from amroth beach to the west by telpyn point and from morfabychan beach to the east by ragwen point. the land to the north of the beach is formed from cliffs and hillside that slopes steeply up towards marros beacon. there are caves towards the western end.  the beach is mostly a storm bank of stones and gravel above mean high water with a large mostly sandy beach appearing when the tide is lower. it was described in 1844 as "a fine sandy beach, a few miles in length, and well-adapted for sea-bathing from the shallowness of the water for a considerable distance from the shore" and more recently as "relatively unspoilt" when compared to the tourist honeypots nearby.  an area of submerged alder, oak and willow forest 100 m wide and 2 km long and dating from 4000/6000 years ago can be seen at low tides. it was particularly visible in 1976. flint knapping remains have been found on the beach and on top castle on marros beacon above the beach. historically blue clay and other materials were extracted from the beach. the cliffs at marros beach give their name to rocks of the marros group.  on 8 december 1886 rover a 71 ft schooner carrying a cargo of culm from saundersfoot to wexford was deliberately beached on marros sands in a force 11 gale to avoid sinking. its wreckage was further exposed by the storms of early 2014 and subsequently surveyed. due to its seclusion and quietness the beach is sometimes used by naturists.  along with pendine sands the beach forms part of the marros-pendine coast site of special scientific interest.  references  coast of carmarthenshire beaches of carmarthenshire nude beaches
the 1918 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1918 college football season.  in their 12th season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 3-2 record and outscored their opponents, 223 to 30. the team defeated hillsdale college, 103 to 0, the largest margin of victory in school history. quarterback frank thomas was the team captain; he later became head coach of the alabama crimson tide football team from 1931 to 1946.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
bodil cappelen (born april 26, 1930) is a norwegian painter, textile artist, and book illustrator. she has also written children's books.  early life cappelen was born in stavanger, the daughter of johan munthe cappelen from oslo and edith heiberg from leikanger. her father was a judge and was known for his dissenting opinion in the acquittal of police chief knut rød after the second world war. bodil grew up with two sisters: lotte cappelen thiis and eli heiberg. she attended the norwegian national academy of craft and art industry from 1948 to 1951.  life and work cappelen's first marriage was to the author and painter finn strømsted. the couple had two children, aili strømsted and rune cappelen strømsted. from 1975 to 1994, cappelen first lived with and then married the poet olav h. hauge in ulvik in hardanger. they were married on january 27, 1978. from 1977 to 1997 cappelen was supported by a government guaranteed income for artists.  in the 1970s cappelen had many solo exhibitions of tapestries, and between 1968 and 1982 she also participated many times in the southern norway exhibition (), the western norway exhibition (), and the autumn exhibition with tapestries.  after her last solo exhibition at the artists' house gallery in 1981, cappelen decided to illustrate children's books. she has illustrated five books for the sami publisher davvi girji in karasjok, with two of them featuring her own text. she also illustrated the book norske barnerim og regler (norwegian children's rhymes and songs; aschehoug 1984). in cooperation with olav h. hauge, she published the primer abc, with editions appearing in 1986, 1987, 1995, and 2008.  in 1991, cappelen had her first solo exhibition of oil paintings, at the nota bene gallery in oslo. since then she has had many exhibitions of her paintings and she is still producing paintings. since 1998, cappelen has lived in son.  bodil cappelen cites eugene delacroix's saying as her own motto: "the first merit of a painting is to be a feast for the eye."  cappelen is a member of the norwegian visual artists association (, nbk) and the association of norwegian painters (, knm). cappelen's art has been purchased by the bergen art gallery (), the norwegian arts council, and several public buildings.  solo exhibitions  1972: young artists society, tapestry  1981: bergen
art society, tapestry  1981: faorese art society (), faroe islands, tapestry  1981: artists house, oslo, tapestry  1991: nota bene gallery, oslo, paintings  1992: kolibri hallery, haugesund, paintings  1992: hardanger folk museum, paintings  1997: hjadlane gallery, osa, paintings  2000: gallery x, son, paintings  2003: næs iron works museum, ti malerier av ovnsplatemotiver fra 1600-tallet (ten paintings of spark screen designs from the 1600s)  2004: moss town and industry museum. vintervarme. fra jernverk til kunstverk (winter heat: from iron works to artworks)  2006: tromsø museum, 70 illustrations from sami children's books  awards  2012: anvil award ()  bibliography  pingvinen po (po the penguin; also published in lule sami and southern sami), picture book (1993)  pinviidna pu (1993)  modige marja (courageous marja; also published in lule sami and southern sami), picture book (1994)  jalos marja (1994)  brev 1970-1975. olav h. hauge og bodil cappelen (letters 1970-1975. olav h. hauge and bodil cappelen), biography and memoir (1996)  references  further reading  østby, leif, (ed.). 1983. norsk kunstnerleksikon, 2. oslo: universitetsforlaget. .  haugen, lambrecht. 2008. cappelen-slekten 1627-2008. rosendal.  external links  bodil cappelen's homepage  samlaget.no about bodil cappelen.  1930 births living people 20th-century norwegian women writers 20th-century norwegian writers 20th-century norwegian women artists 21st-century norwegian women artists 21st-century norwegian women writers norwegian women painters norwegian illustrators people from stavanger people from vestby bodil
olenecamptus senegalensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936. it is known from senegal, the democratic republic of the congo, the central african republic, and uganda.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
the 1910 news of the world match play was the eighth news of the world match play tournament. it was played from tuesday 4 to thursday 6 october at sunningdale golf club. 32 players competed in a straight knock-out competition, with each match contested over 18 holes, except for the final which was over 36 holes. the winner received £100 out of a total prize fund of £240. james sherlock defeated george duncan 8 & 6 in the final to win the tournament.  qualification entry was restricted to members of the professional golfers' association (pga). qualification was by a series of 36-hole stroke-play competitions; one for each of the eight pga sections. the southern section had 13 qualifiers, the northern section 7, the midland section 4, the scottish, welsh and western sections 2 and the eastern and irish sections 1. compared to 1909 one entry was allocated to the new eastern section while the western and welsh sections were increased from one to two. the scottish section was reduced to two and the irish section to one. in the event of a tie for places there was a playoff.  the qualifiers were:  eastern section: ernest riseborough irish section: hugh mcneill midland section: eric bannister, william jeffries, roland lewis, george tuck northern section: james douglas edgar, horace fulford, jack gaudin, sandy herd, cyril hughes, ted ray, charles roberts southern section: tom ball, george duncan, ernest gaudin, rowland jones, fred leach, charles mayo, willie park jr., fred robson, james sherlock, james souter, j.h. taylor, harry vardon, tom vardon scottish section: john hunter, robert thomson western section: ernest foord, ernest whitcombe welsh section: alfred matthews, sam whiting  format the format was unchanged. matches were over 18 holes except for the final which was over 36 holes. extra holes were played in the event of a tied match. two rounds were played on the first day, two more on the second day with the final on the third day.  results source:  prize money the winner received £100 and a gold medal, the runner-up £30 and a silver medal, the losing semi-finalists £15 and a bronze medal, while the third round losers received £10 and the second round losers received £5.  references  golf tournaments in england news of the world match play news of the world match play october 1910 sports events
jie chen or chen jie (depending on chinese name ordering) may refer to the following people:  chen jie (actress) on the young warriors (tv series) chen jie (ambassador) (), chinese ambassador to germany before world war ii chen jie (footballer) (; born 1989) chen jie (swimmer), on the 2016 chinese olympic team jie chen (pianist) (, born 1985) jie chen (news anchor), on ktsf jie chen (statistician) chen jie, a fictional prison guard in seventeen years (film)
minister for mental health is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by amber-jade sanderson of the labor party. the position was first created after the 2008 state election, for the government of colin barnett. the minister is responsible for the state government's mental health commission.  titles  23 september 2008 - present: minister for mental health  list of ministers  see also  minister for health (western australia)  references   david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  mental health minister for mental health mental health in australia health in western australia
the yamaha mt-10 (called fz-10 in north america until 2017) is an mt series naked bike manufactured by yamaha motor company since 2016. it was introduced at the 2015 eicma in milan, italy. it is the flagship member of the mt range from yamaha. the crossplane engine is based on the 2015 yzf-r1 but re-tuned to focus on low to mid-range torque. it features a number of significant technical changes including newly designed intake, exhaust and fuelling systems. it produces a claimed  @ 11,500 rpm and  @ 9,000 rpm. the bike with non-functional v-max-like air scoops replaces the fourteen-year old fz1 as the flagship bike in yamaha's sport naked range.  in october 2016, yamaha released the mt-10 sp (for europe only), which includes some upgrades such as ohlins electronic racing suspension derived from the yzf-r1m, full-colour tft lcd instrument panel, and an exclusive color scheme. for 2018, the bike is now designated mt-10 in all markets.  references  external links     mt-10 standard motorcycles motorcycles introduced in 2015
{{infobox rathayatra | name           = mahishadal rathayatra | image          = mahishadal rathayatra 2012.jpg | image_size     =  | alt            =  | caption        = mahishadal rathayatra in 2012 | founded        = 1776 | founded_by     = janaki devi | abolished      = | abolished_by   = | place          = mahishadal, purba medinipur district, west bengal, india | organizer      = mahishadal raj estate | ratha_height   = 50 feet (including kalash and dhwaj) | ratha weight   =  | ratha_base     =  | ratha_wheels   = 34 | ratha_style    = nabaratna | ratha_architect=  | ratha_patron   = mahishadal raj estate | footnotes      = }}  the mahishadal rathayatra is held annually in mahishadal in purba medinipur district, west bengal. the ratha yatra'' was founded by janaki devi of mahishadal estate in the year 1776.  see also   mahesh rathayatra  guptipara rathayatra  dhamrai rathayatra  references   festivals in west bengal purba medinipur district tourist attractions in purba medinipur district
jan van dalen or jan van dalen (i) (fl. 1632 - 1670) was a flemish painter active in antwerp in the mid-17th century who is known for a few works executed in a caravaggesque style. his work has been confused with a namesake referred to as jan van dalen (ii) (gorinchem c. 1610 - after 1677) who was active in the northern netherlands and is known for still lifes and portraits.  life  very little is known about the life of jan van dalen.  his date of birth is placed between 1600 and 1620 and his time of death some time between 1662 and 1682.  he is believed to have trained in rome around 1630. he was likely responsible for a pair of paintings signed and dated 'j. van dalen fec. in roma 1631' (woman holding an egg and boy holding a glass), which were previously in the liechtenstein collection in vienna. he must then have returned to antwerp where he was registered in 1632-1633 as a pupil of daniel middeleer (also called daniel middeler and daniel de middelaer). middeleer was a painter, printmaker and publisher whose other well-known pupils included cornelis de bryer and frans geffels.  the artist is believed to have remained active in antwerp where he is mentioned for the last time in 1669-1670.  work  only very few autograph works by jan van dalen are known.  one is an allegory of the four elements (christie's sale 20-21 november 2013, amsterdam, lot 128), which is fully signed and dated 1653.  a tambourine player of the same date and signed with initials is in the michaelis collection in cape town.  a half-length figure of a bacchus in the kunsthistorisches museum is also signed with initials and dated 1648.  van dalen's style reflects influences of artists of the early roman baroque. his allegory of the four elements is a typical nocturnal scene in the tradition of roman and dutch caravaggism. the dramatic lighting and figural recall nocturnal scenes of the artist alessandro turchi active in rome.  the influence of caravaggio and the first generation of his followers is more evident in his earlier works. he was exposed to these influences during his time in rome around 1630. after his return to antwerp he likely came under the influence of flemish artists. as a result, his later works show a blending of italian and northern styles.  van dalen painted a number
of portraits of bacchus, the ancient god of fertility and wine. in the version in the museum of fine arts (budapest) the artist possibly portrayed himself as the laughing bacchus. in the version in the kunsthistorisches museum jan van dalen gave the deity a mischievous and challenging expression which appears to invite the viewer to enjoy a glass of wine with him. the wild and boisterous character of the god and his disregard for, and transgression of, limits and borders are emphasized by the wreath of ivy he is wearing.  references  external links  flemish baroque painters flemish history painters flemish portrait painters
william ian miller (born march 30, 1946) is the thomas g. long professor of law at the university of michigan. he is also honorary professor of history at the university of st. andrews. his area of specialty is the sagas of medieval iceland, but he also has written extensively on revenge and on various emotions, mostly self-attentional. he grew up in green bay, wisconsin, received his ba from the university of wisconsin in 1969; a ph.d in english and a jd in law at yale 1975, 1980.  bibliography    hrafnkel or the ambiguities. oxford university press. 2017. isbn 9780198793038  references  university of michigan faculty people from green bay, wisconsin university of wisconsin-madison alumni yale university alumni 1946 births living people
the spokane shockers were a professional american football team based in spokane, washington. the team was founded in 1967 as the victoria steelers of the continental football league but transferred to spokane during the 1967-68 offseason. while in spokane the team played its home games in joe albi stadium. the shockers had a farm team arrangement with the american football league's oakland raiders, and their most notable player during their brief existence was future hall of fame quarterback ken stabler.  as a result of the demise of the cofl, spokane was first forced to suspend operations and then cease them altogether. as late as june 1970, plans to continue operating the cofl's pacific division as a separate entity were considered viable, but these plans were abandoned when the sacramento capitols folded in july and the portland loggers stopped responding to phone calls by august.  season-by-season  references  continental football league teams american football teams in washington (state) sports in spokane, washington american football teams established in 1967 sports clubs disestablished in 1970 1967 establishments in british columbia 1970 disestablishments in washington (state)
thazhekkod may refer to several places in kerala, india:  thazhekkod, malappuram district  thazhekkad, irinjalakkuda  thazhecode, kozhikode district  thazhekad, thrissur, site of one of the earliest st thomas christian communities; location of the thazhekad sasanam, an inscribed stone granting it certain privileges
donald john logan bennet,  (born 1957), known as john bennet, is a british archaeologist, classicist, and academic, who specialises in the aegean civilisations. he has been professor of aegean archaeology at the university of sheffield since 2004, and director of the british school at athens since 2015. he previously taught at the university of cambridge, the university of wisconsin-madison and the university of oxford.  early life and education bennet was born in singapore and was brought up in yorkshire, england. he studied the classical tripos at the university of cambridge, graduating with a first class bachelor of arts (ba) degree in 1980. he remained at cambridge to undertake postgraduate research on "the administrative organization of late minoan ii-iiib crete based on archaeological and textual (linear b) evidence": his supervisor was john f. cherry. he completed his doctor of philosophy (phd) degree in 1986.  academic career bennet began his academic career as a junior research fellow at sidney sussex college, cambridge from 1983 to 1986. in 1986, after completing his doctorate, he moved to the united states and joined the department of classics of the university of wisconsin-madison in madison, wisconsin. he was a visiting assistant professor of classics for the first year, an assistant professor of classics from 1987 to 1991, and achieved tenure as an associate professor of classics from 1991 to 1995. in 1995, he was appointed a professor of classics.  in 1998, bennet returned to england and joined the university of oxford as the sinclair & rachel hood lecturer in aegean prehistory. the lectureship was attached to keble college, oxford, and so he was elected a fellow of the college upon taking up the appointment. in april 2004, he gave the marett memorial lecture at exeter college, oxford; this lecture was titled "archaeologies of homer".  in january 2004, bennet was appointed professor of aegean archaeology at the university of sheffield. he has served as director of the sheffield centre for aegean archaeology since 2004, and was head of department of archaeology between 2006 and 2010. on 1 october 2015, he was appointed the director of the british school at athens, in succession to catherine morgan. this is a five-year appointment and will end in 2020. in addition to directing the school's operation in greece, he is also co-editor of the bsa annual and editor of its publication series.  personal life bennet is married to deborah.  honours on 19 november 2015, bennet was elected a fellow of the society of antiquaries of london (fsa).  selected work  references
british archaeologists directors of the british school at athens 20th-century archaeologists 21st-century archaeologists mycenaean archaeologists minoan archaeologists academics of the university of sheffield singaporean emigrants to the united kingdom living people alumni of the university of cambridge classical scholars of the university of wisconsin-madison fellows of keble college, oxford classical scholars of the university of cambridge classical scholars of the university of oxford fellows of the society of antiquaries of london archaeologists of the bronze age aegean 1957 births
k2-72c is a small exoplanet orbiting around the red dwarf star k2-72 approximately 227.7 light-years away. it is located in the inner edge of the habitable zone. k2-72c completes an orbit in 15.2 days, and it has a radius of only 86% of that of the earth.  references  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets 72  aquarius (constellation) exoplanets in the habitable zone
hoshiarpur is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of hoshiarpur district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  hoshiarpur district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
locust school is a historic building located north of decorah, iowa, united states.  built in 1854, the one-room schoolhouse is composed of rubble ashlar limestone and capped with a gable roof.  the lintels and window sills are also stone.  a belfry with round-arch openings is located above the main entrance.  the school was established just after the village of locust was surveyed and settlement had begun.  it remained in operation with all elementary grades until 1950, when it was reduced to specific grades. it was closed in 1960.  the winneshiek county historical society acquired the building and operates a museum in it.  it was one of the first school buildings constructed in winneshiek county. the building was listed on the national register of historic places in 1978.  references   school buildings completed in 1854 defunct schools in iowa one-room schoolhouses in iowa school museums vernacular architecture in iowa museums in winneshiek county, iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa school buildings on the national register of historic places in iowa
over the top is a world war i song written by marion phelps and composed by maxwell goldman. the song was first published in 1917 by buck & lowney in new york, ny. the sheet music features soldiers crawling from a trench and attacking.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   1917 songs songs of world war i
as part of the english local elections held on 5 may 1988, voting took place to elect councillors to colchester borough council. the results are shown in the attached table.  results summary  ward results  berechurch  castle  dedham  east donyland  fordham  harbour  lexden  marks tey  mile end  new town  prettygate  shrub end  st. andrew's  st. anne's  st. john's  st. mary's  stanway  tiptree  west mersea  wivenhoe  1988 1988 english local elections 1980s in essex
the 1979 spillers greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 23 june 1979 at white city stadium.   the winner was sarahs bunny and the winning owner roy hadley received £25,000. the competition was sponsored by the spillers.  final result  at white city (over 500 metres):  distances  1½, 4¼, 2¼, short head, short head (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report for the second year running the format of running heats at different tracks remained. lacca champion returned to defend his title as 215 entries were received including the team of midlands-based geoff demulder; they included ante-post favourite desert pilot and leading contenders sarahs bunny and pat seamur.  the first two rounds saw both desert pilot and laurels winner another spatter suffer defeats and pat seamur go out altogether. by the time the third round started the field was down to 48 and the eight third round winners included jebb rambler, its stylish, tyrean, desert pilot, sarahs bunny and greenville boy.  a difficult quarter final drew desert pilot, lacca champion and sarahs bunny in the same heat. all three ran well to qualify led home by desert pilot. eric pateman scored a double with tyrean and young toby with jebb rambler completing the four quarter final winners. tyrean, a former white city grader won his semi-final from lacca champion and first general and in the second semi sarahs bunny gained revenge on kennelmate desert pilot with tough decision splitting the pair. jebb rambler faded to fourth and missed out on the final.  the owners of lacca champion announced that he would be retired whatever the outcome of the race. sarahs bunny avoided trouble at the first bend to run out the winner from lacca champion. the defending champion had recovered well to finish second and could have won a second derby but for the trouble.  see also 1979 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
the leeds revolutionary feminist group was a feminist organisation active in the united kingdom in the 1970s and 1980s. while there were a number of contemporary revolutionary feminist organisations in the uk, the leeds group was 'internationally significant'. the group is remembered chiefly for two reasons. the first is organising the uk-wide 'reclaim the night' marches in november 1977. the second is the publication of the pamphlet political lesbianism: the case against heterosexuality, which advocated political lesbianism. british activist sheila jeffreys was closely involved with the group, while uk feminist julie bindel has spoken of the group's influence on her, as have many others.  the leeds revolutionary feminist group was founded in 1977, the result of a wider backlash against the perceived dominance of liberal feminism. the group emphasised the importance of women-only spaces and organisation, and identified male violence against women and the threat of it as the keystone in the oppression of women. according to alison garthwaite, who was heavily involved with the leeds group, the group differed from many separatists by their opposition to separatism as a lifestyle, or an end in itself.  the group organised the reclaim the night marches that were held in various cities across the united kingdom on the night of 12 november 1977. they were inspired by night marches which had taken place in germany with the message that women should be able to walk at night without fear. the marches took place in the context of the 'yorkshire ripper' murders, where thirteen women and girls were murdered over a five-year period. feminists were angry not just over the murders but also the police reaction to them. police had advised women not to go out at night. not only was this not practical to many women, it was also seen as blaming the victims. as many of the murders took place in the chapeltown area of leeds, and because many of the organisers lived in the area, the leeds march took place there. this drew criticism from some anti-racist campaigners. they argued that since chapeltown was a mostly-black area, the march risked reinforcing the 'black beast' stereotype and drawing unwanted police attention the area. increasing policing, however, was not a demand of the organisers.  the pamphlet political lesbianism: the case against heterosexuality also proved controversial. the pamphlet was published in 1979, having originated from a conference talk given in 1977. it was republished in 1981 under the title love your enemy? the debate between heterosexual feminism and political lesbianism. the re-publication highlighted
some of the responses to the argument. the authors of the pamphlet advocate that women should become lesbians. lesbian here is defined as a woman who refrains from heterosexual sexual activity, not necessarily a woman who sleeps with other women. it is argued that heterosexuality must be abandoned since heterosexual relations are one of the main ways that women as a whole are kept under systematic control. women who engage in heterosexual activity are denounced as 'collaborators with the enemy'. while many women were influenced by the pamphlet, it also evoked a critical reaction. many heterosexual women were offended at being called collaborators, and the labeling of all men as the enemy of women. lesbian feminists and others also opposed the suggestion that sexuality was a choice.  references  external links  love your enemy? the debate between heterosexual feminism and political lesbianism  1977 establishments in england history of leeds lesbian feminist organizations organisations based in leeds radical feminist organizations political lesbianism feminist organisations in the united kingdom
list of the odd couple episodes may refer to:  list of the odd couple (1970 tv series) episodes, episode list of the 1970-1975 abc sitcom  list of the odd couple (2015 tv series) episodes, episode list of the 2015-2017 cbs sitcom  see also   odd couple (disambiguation)
eduardo sirotsky melzer is ceo of eb capital, a brazilian private equity firm focused on creating value by investing on companies that address brazilian structural gaps. he was chairman and president of grupo rbs and owner of the business conglomerate rbs, one of the largest multimedia communications companies in brazil. eduardo was also chairman of e.bricks digital and shareholder of e.bricks ventures, a venture capital and private equity company with operations in brazil and abroad.  education and career in 1998, melzer graduated with a degree in business administration from the pontifical catholic university of rio grande do sul (pucrs), and in 2002, completed an mba from harvard university.  he began his career in brazil in the financial and franchising markets, reaching the master franchiser office at the multinational sweet sweet way, and also participated in projects for consulting firm booz allen & hamilton.  in the united states, he was a senior analyst at delphi corporation and ceo of box top media, a media company located in new york.  in 2008, melzer attended the effective strategies for media companies and the building and leading customer centric organizations at harvard business school.  melzer was member of the board of ethics of the national council for advertising self-regulation (conar), and the executive council of the standard norms (cenp), in 2009.  eb capital eb capital is a brazilian private equity firm focused on creating value by investing on companies that address brazilian structural gaps. the firm generates high risk adjusted returns whilst contributing to prosperity at large, with a strong profit and purpose approach.  we believe that private equity should be driven by execution excellence. our partners have a strong history of operational expertise, sector knowledge and an worldwide network constructed on long term relationships.  grupo rbs eduardo melzer joined grupo rbs in 2004 as ceo for the domestic market, became vice-president of market and business development in 2008, and executive vice-president of grupo rbs in 2010. melzer is the grandson of the company founder, mauricio sirotsky sobrinho.  two years later, in 2012, melzer became executive chairman of grupo rbs, a position in which he succeeded his uncle nelson pacheco sirotsky.  eduardo sirotsky melzer assumed the role of ceo of grupo rbs on july 3, 2012 in a ceremony held in porto alegre.  his office was announced in may 2012 as part of a planned succession process. in 2016, he also began acting as chairman of the board of directors.  awards in 2006, he
received the cabore award in the professional vehicle category.  he was the 2009 professional highlight of the brazilian advertising association (abp) in the executive vehicle category.  two years later, he received the 2011 coletiva.net award in the marketing management/communication/communication group category.  in 2015, he received the merit award in administration from the regional management council of rio grande do sul (cra-rs).  also in 2015, he was chosen to be part of the list of leaders at cambridge institute for family enterprise. this list brings together 25 individuals on an annual basis who are taking on leading roles in family enterprises and who are considered good examples for society.  references  external links eb capital grupo rbs website e.bricks website interview in strategy+business magazine with art kleiner: "start small and think globally." retrieved september 26, 2018.  brazilian business executives leaders of organizations living people 1972 births harvard business school alumni
francisco gatinho (22 march 1909 - deceased) is a former portuguese footballer who played as a full back.  he joined benfica in 1930, playing 88 games with them and winning three honours. afterwards, he played 73 games for belenenses.  career gatinho joined benfica in 1930, making his debut on 19 april 1931, against olhanense, helping them win the campeonato de portugal. he competed with ralph bailao, joao oliveira and luis costa, playing mainly in the campeonato de portugal. in 1932-33, he won the campeonato de lisboa, playing 6 games in the competition.   his breakthrough started in 1934-35, when he joined gustavo teixeira in the defence, and played 33 games, more than anyone else in the club. the following year, he helped the club win their first league title, playing 29 games in total, only bettered by gustavo teixeira. however, 1935-36 was his last year at benfica, as gatinho left the club after 88 games, moving to belenenses, where he spent the next five seasons.  honours benfica primeira divisao: 1935-36 campeonato de portugal: 1930-31, 1934-35 campeonato de lisboa: 1932-33  references general    specific  1909 births year of death unknown portuguese footballers association football defenders primeira liga players c.f. os belenenses players s.l. benfica footballers
gonzaga college is a coeducational, jesuit school, primary through high school, presently situated in barrio san jose in maracaibo, venezuela. it was founded by the society of jesus in 1945.  history the college was founded on 1 october 1945 and named for st. aloysius gonzaga. from 1945 to 1966 it was situated at av. delicias. it was all-boy and included the spectrum of social backgrounds in its student body. at the start all the teachers were jesuits. in 1966 it moved to av. el milagro at lakeshore and started admitting girls. the number of lay teachers increased. in 1975, in response to the jesuit "option for the poor" following the second vatican council of bishops in the catholic church, the school moved to the heart of barrio san jose and canada honda.  see also  list of jesuit schools  references    jesuit schools in venezuela educational institutions established in 1945 1945 establishments in venezuela schools in maracaibo
stoner is an unincorporated community in montezuma county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called stoner was established in 1917, and remained in operation until 1954. the community takes its name from nearby stoner creek.  references  unincorporated communities in montezuma county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
inny-christian radebe  (born 3 january 1995) is a south african rugby union player for the  in the currie cup and the  in the rugby challenge. he can play as a fly-half, inside centre or fullback.  rugby career  schoolboy rugby  radebe was born in johannesburg and represented the  at national youth competitions since primary school level, when he participated at the under-13 craven week in 2008. he also earned selection during high school level, representing the golden lions at the 2011 under-16 grant khomo week and at the under-18 craven week in both 2012 and 2013.  sharks / ukzn  radebe signed a deal to join the durban-based  academy after finishing high school. he made one appearance for the s in 2013 in a 38-0 victory against  prior to joining them on a full-time basis. in 2014, he started eleven of the team's matches in the 2014 under-19 provincial championship and scored 122 points, second only to western province's ernst stapelberg in the top scorers list in group a of the competition. he scored four tries - three in their two matches against former side golden lions and a fourth against eastern province, to help the side progress to the semi-finals, where they lost 20-43 to the blue bulls.  he made four appearances for  during the 2015 varsity shield, scoring 44 points on the way, and picked up a "player that rocks" award in the finals, where he helped ukzn to silverware by beating  29-24. less than a week after the final, he was also included in the  squad for the 2015 vodacom cup competition and made his first class debut in a defeat to a . after another match in the vodacom cup against the , he played in a match for a varsity cup dream team - with radebe being only player from the second-tier varsity shield to be included - against the south africa under-20 squad as the latter prepared for the 2015 world rugby under 20 championship, kicking one conversion in a 24-31 defeat. radebe was initially included in coach dawie theron's squad to contest the junior world cup in italy before withdrawing through injury  radebe next played for the  side in their 2015 under-21 provincial championship group a season. he made ten starts during the competition, scoring six tries and 105 points with the boot to finish as the top scorer in the competition with a tally of 135 points. this helped his side reach the semi-finals, where they
lost to .  he was included in the  super rugby squad for their 2016 season, but suffered a meniscus tear after two appearances for the  in the 2016 currie cup qualification series which ruled him out for a large part of the season. he returned at the start of july to make further appearances in the currie cup competition.  notes  references  south african rugby union players living people 1995 births rugby union players from johannesburg rugby union fly-halves rugby union centres rugby union fullbacks sharks (currie cup) players sharks (rugby union) players golden lions players eastern province elephants players
emil reinecke (26 april 1933 - 4 may 2011) was a german professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1933 births 2011 deaths german male cyclists people from einbeck
the 2016 tour of szeklerland was a six-day cycling stage race that took place in szekely land in early august 2016. the race is the 9th edition of the tour of szeklerland. it was rated as a 2.2 event as part of the 2016 uci europe tour. the race included 4 stages, starting in miercurea ciuc on 5 august and returning there for the finish on 8 august in miercurea ciuc.  references  external links   official website  tour of szeklerland 2016 tour of szeklerland tour of szeklerland
james "jaysen" bryhan (born 13 february 1970) is a british television  actor, best known for his role as lance cooper in the british film the apostate: call of the revenant and the archivist in shadow and bone.  career james bryhan began his career as an actor in  2014, playing the lead  part of lance cooper in the british horror thriller, the apostate: call of the revenant alongside british actress terri dwyer. in 2015, bryhan portrayed the older albert einstein alongside guy henry  detailing his life. bryhan has since been rumored to play the role of ramirez, made famous by sean connery in the upcoming reboot of highlander, directed by cedric nicolas-troyan. james won the award for best actor in a supporting role for the short film , shame my name at the midlands movie awards 2020 hosted by michael sales and bbc host, ed stagg.  filmography  da vinci's demons (2013) - carlo genius (2015) - albert einstein the apostate: call of the revenant (2015) - lance cooper bluff (2022)  shame my name  (2019) - argon shadow and bone (tv series) (2019) - archivist unit - 19) (2021) - dalton exiled: the chosen ones) (2021) - kato plasma dig me no grave) (2021) - pat gunther  references  external links   official twitter official instagram  british male television actors british male film actors living people 1970 births
bastl is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  george bastl (born 1975), swiss tennis player vjekoslav bastl (1872-1947), croatian architect
the champion stakes is a greyhound racing competition held annually at shelbourne park in ringsend, dublin, ireland.    it is a prestigious competition in the irish racing greyhound racing calendar and was inaugurated in 1979.  past winners  venues & distances 1979-1979 (shelbourne 525y) 1980-1987 (shelbourne 575y) 1988-present (shelbourne 550y)  sponsors 1986-1987 respond 1991-1992 febo 2005-2009 boylesports 2010-2013 townview foods 2014-2014 hamilton architects 2015-2016 doire construction 2017-2021 boylesports  references  greyhound racing competitions in dublin (city) recurring sporting events established in 1979 summer events in the republic of ireland 1979 establishments in ireland
sour cream was a dutch recorder trio.  the group was formed by frans bruggen in 1972 and consisted of bruggen, kees boeke and walter van hauwe with the intent to perform avant-garde work for the recorder.  they were involved in the dutch counterculture movement, which resulted in some unusual performances: the concluding piece of one of their boston concerts featured a keystone kops-style chase around the stage. a year or two later, with the ensemble playing telemann trios again in boston, bruggen wandered on to the stage, donned a pair of dark sunglasses, stretched himself out on a chaise longue and proceeded to read the newspaper.  discography henry viii & la musica speculativa lp 1980 (reissued dhm)  the passion of reason made as a reunion in june 1993 (reissued glossa 2016).  references  further reading arlen, walter. 1979. "recorder trio: sour cream on royce hall stage". los angeles times (27 october): c11. ericson, raymond. 1978. "virtuoso on recorder". new york times (7 april): c13. gelles, george. 1975. "breathing live into the recorder". new york times (12 october): 167. hume, paul. 1973. "cream of the concert: jamming with blue jeans, woodwinds, new musical roles". washington post (15 january): b1. rosenberg, deena. 1975. "sour cream curdles the stereotype". los angeles times (30 march): 52.  musical groups established in 1969 dutch recorder players instrumental early music groups dutch musical trios early music groups
the following lists events that happened in 1948 in iceland.  incumbents president - sveinn bjornsson prime minister - stefan johann stefansson  events  births  8 january - þuriður backman, politician 14 january - davið oddsson, politician 10 february - sigurbergur sigsteinsson, handball player 17 june - hrafn gunnlaugsson, film director 17 july - ogmundur jonasson, politician. 25 july - elmar geirsson, footballer 30 july - sigurður palsson, writer (d. 2017) 7 august - vilmundur gylfason, politician, historian and poet (d. 1983) 19 november - hanna maria karlsdottir, actress  deaths  references    1940s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
wan'an () is a town under the administration of luojiang district, deyang, sichuan, china. , it has 14 residential communities and 4 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of sichuan deyang
bains is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village  constitutes  37.38%   of schedule caste  and the village  doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
amargarh assembly constituency (sl. no.: 106) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in malerkotla district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022   sad amritsar sardar simranjit singh maan  2017  2012  see also  punjab legislative assembly  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sangrur district amritsar district
hits! is the only compilation album by the belgian eurodance singer kim kay, released on 20 november 2000. the album was produced by phil sterman and lov cook and was recorded at electric city. it features the artist's singles: "la dah-li-danse", "les vacances d'ete", "ca plane pour moi", and "les sucettes".  some of the songs from kim kay's previous debut album la vie en lilali are retained from the hits!.  track listing  references  external links      2000 albums kim kay albums emi records albums french-language albums
the 2016-17 oklahoma sooners women's basketball team will represent the university of oklahoma in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the sooners are led by sherri coale in her twenty-first season. the team will play its home games at the lloyd noble center in norman, oklahoma as a member of the big 12 conference. they finished the season 23-10, 13-5 in big 12 play to finish in third place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the big 12 women's tournament to west virginia. they received at-large bid of the ncaa women's tournament where they defeated gonzaga in the first round before losing to washington in the second round.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#960018; color:#fffdd0;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#960018; color:#fffdd0;"| non-conference regular season  |- ! colspan=9 style="background:#960018; color:#fffdd0;"| big 12 regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#960018; color:#fffdd0;"| big 12 women's tournament  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#960018; color:#fffdd0;"| ncaa tournament  x- sooner sports television (sstv) is aired locally on fox sports. however the contract allows games to air on various affiliates. those affiliates are fssw, fssw+, fsok, fsok+, and fcs atlantic, central, and pacific.  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  see also  2016-17 oklahoma sooners men's basketball team  references  external links official athletics site of the oklahoma sooners - women's basketball  oklahoma sooners women's basketball seasons oklahoma oklahoma 2016 in sports in oklahoma 2017 in sports in oklahoma
contestavel (meaning to contest in english) was a magazine published in lisbon, portugal, in the 1970s. the magazine was published by ral 1, which was a left-wing light artillery regiment. the group was also known as soldiers of the light artillery regiment. it was one of the significant groups in the formation of armed forces movement and the carnation revolution in 1974.  references  carnation revolution defunct magazines published in portugal defunct political magazines magazines with year of establishment missing magazines published in lisbon political magazines published in portugal portuguese-language magazines socialist magazines
louis-antoine-rose ormieres lacase (14 july 1809 - 16 january 1890) was a french roman catholic priest from the diocese of carcassonne and the founder of the sisters of the guardian angel - an order dedicated to the care of children and the educational needs of the poor.  ormieres became a servant of god on 25 march 1954 under pope pius xii and was made venerable on 8 march 1997 after pope john paul ii confirmed his life of heroic virtue. pope francis recognized a miracle attributed to him in 2016 which confirmed his beatification; the celebration took place in oviedo on 22 april 2017 with cardinal angelo amato presiding on the pope's behalf.  life louis-antoine-rose ormieres lacase was born in 1809 in aude in france during a time of unease due to the french revolution a decade prior to his birth. he was baptized a few hours after his birth at the local parish church. he was pleasant as a child and often joked around though sometimes had a look of uneasiness on his face.  he first attended school in his hometown and then attended a school in limoux before deciding to commence his ecclesial studies in 1828 in carcassonne. he commenced his studies for the diocesan priesthood in carcassonne where he was ordained as such on 21 december 1833. he obtained a degree in education in montpellier. his superiors at the time recognized that he had a flair for education and he himself believed he would become a diocesan teacher. this prompted his superior to name him as a professor to seminarians in carcassonne.  ormieres established - on 3 december 1839 - a school that heralded in the establishment of the sisters of the guardian angel. the school and order in and of themselves were established so that he could devote his pastoral mission to the education of children with a particular emphasis on a proper civic and cultural education that applied more to rural areas of france. napoleon iii issued a formal decree on 12 december 1852 that granted imperial recognition to ormieres' congregation that started its work in ecuador on 4 december 1861. the institute received diocesan approval on 6 june 1837.  ormieres travelled to rome where pope pius ix received him in a private audience on 16 july 1867. the pontiff blessed him and his work and provided him words of encouragement for the work of his congregation. he - at some point - relocated to spain and remained in oviedo for the remainder of his life.  he died in 1890 in spain and his remains are now located in the order's motherhouse at montauban. his order now operates in africa and asia.
the order received the papal decree of praise from pope leo xiii on 27 august 1902 and received formal papal approval of its constitution from pope pius xi on 18 december 1934 and from pope pius xii on 11 may 1942.  beatification the beatification process commenced in oviedo in the introduction of a diocesan process on 25 march 1954 tasked with collecting information in relation to ormieres' life. this process concluded its work on 10 september 1955. the commencement of the cause in 1954 under pope pius xii granted ormieres the posthumous title of servant of god as the first official stage in the process.  theologians took possession of all of his writings in order to determine if such writings were orthodox in nature and not in contradiction of the faith - a decree issued on 12 july 1973 approved all of his spiritual writings. the congregation for the causes of saints validated the diocesan process in rome on 16 june 1989 and received the positio in 1990 for assessment while a historical commission approved the contents of the dossier on 21 may 1991. consulting theologians also approved the cause on 11 june 1996 while the c.c.s. came to the same conclusion on 7 january 1997.  ormieres was declared venerable on 8 march 1997 after pope john paul ii recognized that the late priest had lived a life of heroic virtue.  the process of investigating the miracle needed for his beatification took place in the area it originated in and received c.c.s. validation on 8 november 1996. but a medical board met on 8 april 1999 and did not vote in favor of the miracle. another miracle uncovered witnessed another investigation that concluded on 3 october 2013 and received c.c.s. validation on 21 february 2014. pope francis approved the miracle on 8 july 2016 which also confirmed the beatification itself; the celebration was celebrated on 22 april 2017 in oviedo rather than in his native france; cardinal angelo amato presided on the pope's behalf.  the current postulator assigned to this cause is maria del carmen trejo delgado.  references  external links  hagiography circle  saints sqpn  sisters of the guardian angel  1809 births 1890 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century french roman catholic priests beatifications by pope francis founders of catholic religious communities french beatified people french roman catholic priests people from aude venerated catholics by pope john paul ii
marie durand (1711-1776), was a french protestant. she was famously imprisoned in the tour de constance (aigues-mortes) from 25 august 1730 for attending a huguenot assembly with her mother, or perhaps because her brother, pierre durand, was a well-known preacher, or perhaps because of her marriage.  early life marie was born to etienne and claudine durand from the hamlet of le bouchet near privas in france. her older brother pierre became well known as a huguenot preacher and pastor. her father etienne who was consular registrar of the parish was arrested in february, 1729. he was jailed in brescou at the fort where he was interned for fourteen years. marie married a much older man who was at least in his forties, mathieu serres, later that same year. her father etienne was finally released as ninety-two year old although he only had a further two years to conclude his ruined life. her brother was caught on the road to vermoux in 1732 and was hung at montpellier in that same year.  imprisonment the formal reason for her arrest is unclear. e audra writes:  "it seems this marriage was not approved of by her brother, perhaps because of the great difference of age. it seems also that it was neither solemnized by a catholic priest nor blessed by a pasteur, and that the couple, after having signed a marriage contract, which was duly registered, lived as husband and wife. perhaps for that reason alone, perhaps because she was suspected of having been married by pierre durand, lastly perhaps because she was the sister of a pasteur wanted as a rebel to the king's will, she was imprisoned in the tower of constance, at aigues-mortes, in 1730, while mathieu serres joined his father-in-law in the fort of brescou. anyhow, she continued to be called and to call herself not marie serres, but marie durand."  marie was not released until 1768, 36 years later after serving 38 years in the tower. like margaret wilson simple abjuration was all she needed for release but this offer she refused. the word "resister" scratched by her, or by one or others of her cell mates with a knitting needle into the stonework serves as an expression of her protestant faith. she did not convert to roman catholicism. it has been argued that the authorities didn't attempt to convert her once she was imprisoned as she was allowed to correspond with her pastor. it is also recorded that she was asked
every day whether she would abjure but daily refused.  letters about fifty letters by marie durand have been published. these include letters to her niece, anne in geneva who, "who, in the end, recanted in order to marry a rich catholic many years her senior." she also wrote, in 1740, on behalf of other prisoners like the nine women from vivarais complaining that ' during the ten years we have been here, nothing has ever been sent to us from vivarais.' she added: 'charity is the true principle of our religion, and they ' - meaning the people in vivarais - ' do not profess it.' she also wrote to paul rabaut, a huguenot pastor in nimes who looked after the prisoners. jean louis bridel quotes some sections of her letters to her pastor for example:  "sir, very dear and much honoured pastor, it is to you we have re-course; it is to your pastoral kindness i apply for a remedy to prevent an infection which is likely to spread among us... in the name of the divine mercy, use every possible effort to rescue us from our frightful sepulchre. we are in urgent need of all the help you can give... may god bless you, worthy sir, and your amiable family; may he protect you all and accomplish by your beloved hands the great work of his most desired peace, and grant me the blessing of the sweetest satisfaction i desire in this world, next to the peace of the church, the great pleasure of seeing you. my most respectful salutations to all who are dear to you; may you and the talent you have received from heaven live again in them for ever. burn my letter if you please. have the goodness to pray for us, particularly for our sick; the health of nearly all of us is much affected."  release, death and legacy  marie durand was released on 14 april 1768; she returned to her childhood home. charles tyler relates:   "the walloon church of amsterdam allowed marie a pension of 200 livres, which she generously shared with a neighbour, alexandre chambon, who had returned from the galleys of toulon at the age of seventy-three. marie died in september, 1776."  references    musee du vivarais protestant, maison pierre et marie durand, le bouchet, pranles,  1711 births 1776 deaths 18th-century french people french evangelicals huguenots
this is a list of notable alumni of the george washington university law school located in washington, d.c., u.s.  notable alumni  academia  ernest l. wilkinson (1926), former president of brigham young university  business  mark britton (1992), founder and ceo of avvo (now martindale-avvo), and former executive vice president and general counsel at expedia, inc.  warren brown (1998), founder of cake love and host of sugar rush on the food network  dan glickman (1969), former chairman and ceo of the motion picture association of america, former united states secretary of agriculture, and former u.s. congressman from kansas  charles james (1979), former general counsel of chevron-texaco, former assistant attorney general  michael w. rice, chairman and ceo of utz quality foods  d. bruce sewell (1986), senior vice president and general counsel of apple, inc. and former vice president and deputy general counsel at intel  sports  david falk (1975), agent for michael jordan  ted lerner (1950), owner of the washington nationals  larry macphail (1910), hall of fame baseball executive for cincinnati reds, brooklyn dodgers and new york yankees  government and politics  u.s. congress members  e. ross adair, u.s. representative from indiana (1951-1971) and u.s. ambassador to ethiopia (1971-1974)  garry e. brown (1954), former u.s. congressman from michigan  gordon canfield (1926), former u.s. congressman from new jersey  bennett champ clark, former united states senator  william henry coleman, former u.s. congressman from pennsylvania  pedro pierluisi (1984), current governor of puerto rico and former resident commissioner of puerto rico of puerto rico  felix cordova davila, former resident commissioner of puerto rico from puerto rico  john blaisdell corliss (1875), former united states congressman  ewin l. davis (1899), former u.s. congressman from tennessee  john james duncan jr. (1973), united states congressman for the second district of tennessee  john james flynt jr. (1940), united states congressman from georgia  j. william fulbright (1934), former united states senator, creator of the fulbright fellowships  ralph a. gamble (1911), former u.s. congressman from new york  stephen warfield gambrill (1896), former united states congressman  ernest w. gibson jr., former governor of vermont, u.s. senator
, judge for the u.s. district court for the district of vermont  daniel inouye (1953), former united states senator, (d-hi)  orval h. hansen (1954) (llm 1973), former u.s. congressman from idaho  frank moss (1937), former united states senator, (d-ut)  francis g. newlands (1869), congressman and drafter of the newlands resolution to annex the republic of hawaii  jim ramstad (1973), congressman whose work led to ending discrimination against those suffering from mental health and addiction problems.  harry reid (1964), united states senator, former senate minority leader, (d-nv)  james shannon, former u.s. congressman and massachusetts attorney general  susan wild, u.s. congresswoman from pennsylvania  robert wexler (1985), congressman, (d-fl)  earle d. willey, former u.s. congressman from delaware  other federal officials  william barr (1977), former united states attorney general  david bernhardt (1994), former united states secretary of the interior  russell vought, current director of the office of management and budget  a. bruce bielaski (1904), second director of the bureau of investigation  floyd i. clarke, former director of the federal bureau of investigation  kellyanne conway (1992), political strategist and pollster, campaign manager for donald trump's 2016 presidential campaign, counselor to the president  george b. cortelyou, cabinet member in the theodore roosevelt administration  makan delrahim, united states assistant attorney general   mary derosa (1984), former deputy counsel to the president for national security affairs in the obama administration  allen dulles (1926), longest serving (1953-61) director of the cia  john foster dulles, secretary of state in the dwight d. eisenhower administration  w. mark felt (1940), former associate director of the fbi and watergate scandal informant also known as "deep throat"  stanley finch (1908), first director of the bureau of investigation  gregory g. garre (1991), former solicitor general of the united states  l. patrick gray, former acting director of the fbi during the watergate scandal  will a. gunn,  was sworn in as the general counsel for the department of veterans affairs on may 26, 2009  kenneth r. harding (1937), former sergeant at arms of the united states house of representatives (1972-1980)  patricia roberts harris (1960), first african american woman to serve in
the united states cabinet as secretary of housing and urban development in the jimmy carter administration  john d. holum, director of the u.s. arms control and disarmament agency and under secretary of state for arms control and international security under bill clinton.  j. edgar hoover (1917), longtime director of the federal bureau of investigation  edward f. howrey (1927), chair of the federal trade commission, later founded the law firm of howrey llp  leon jaworski (1926), special prosecutor during the watergate scandal.  david m. kennedy, former united states secretary of the treasury  bruce m. lawlor, retired united states army major general and former chief of staff at the department of homeland security  wilma b. liebman (1974) chair, national labor relations board  eric o'neill (2003), fbi agent whose work led to the arrest and life imprisonment conviction of robert hanssen  walter north, u.s. ambassador to papua new guinea, solomon islands, and vanuatu (2012-present).    maria pallante (1990), current u.s. register of copyrights  marybeth peters (1971), former u.s. register of copyrights  mary schapiro, (1980), chair of the securities and exchange commission. first woman to chair the sec.  john w. snow (1967), former united states secretary of the treasury  james e. webb (1936), second administrator of nasa  james a. wetmore (1896), acting supervising architect of the office of the supervising architect  state and local government  rocky anderson (1978), former mayor of salt lake city  james p. coleman (1939), former governor of mississippi and chief judge on the u.s. court of appeals for the fifth circuit  lee e. emerson, governor of vermont, 1951-1955  harry r. hughes (1952), former governor of the state of maryland  rod johnston, former wisconsin state senator  alex knopp (1981), former mayor of norwalk, connecticut  edward s. northrop (1937), majority leader of maryland state senate (1958-1961), chair of the finance committee (1958), nominated by president kennedy in 1961 for a new seat on the united states district court for the district of maryland. elevated to chief judge and held that position until 1981.  carmen ortiz (1981), first woman and the first hispanic to serve as united states attorney for the district of massachusetts  arnold c. otto, former wisconsin state assemblyman edward blackmon jr. (1973) mississippi house of representatives jeffrey piccola
(1973) pennsylvania state representative, 1977-1995, pennsylvania state senator, 1995-2012  grant sawyer, former governor of nevada  deanne mazzochi, illinois house of representatives  international  hsu mo (1922), former international court of justice judge  arpad bogsch (1956), former director general (1973-1997) of the world intellectual property organization  camillo gonsalves, permanent representative of saint vincent and the grenadines to the united nations  somanahalli mallaiah krishna, foreign minister of india, former chief minister of karnataka  yasmine pahlavi, crown princess of iran  mikheil saakashvili (1996), president of georgia anja seibert-fohr (2000,2004), judge at the european court of human rights  judiciary  federal  james c. cacheris (1960), judge u.s. district court for the eastern district of virginia  joyce hens green, (1951), senior judge u.s. district court for the district of columbia  harold h. greene (1954), former judge u.s. district court for the district of columbia, presided over lawsuit which broke up at&t's vertical monopoly  kelly higashi,  associate judge on the superior court of the district of columbia  sarah t. hughes (1922), first female federal judge seated in texas, and only woman to administer the oath of office to the president of the united states  edwin f. hunter (1938), longest sitting u.s. district court judge in the nation  daniel t. k. hurley (1968), judge u.s. district court for the southern district of florida  darrin p. gayles (1993), judge u.s. district court for the southern district of florida  barbara milano keenan (1974), judge u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit  carlos f. lucero (1964), judge u.s. court of appeals for the tenth circuit  burnita shelton matthews (1920), first woman to serve as a us district judge u.s. district court for the district of columbia  suzanne mitchell, united states magistrate judge for the western district of oklahoma and a former nominee to be a united states district judge of the united states district court for the western district of oklahoma  sharon prost (llm 1984), judge united states court of appeals for the federal circuit  randall ray rader (1978), judge united states court of appeals for the federal circuit  kenneth francis ripple (1972), judge u.s. court of appeals for the seventh circuit  james robertson
(1965), judge u.s. district court for the district of columbia, presided over hamdan v. rumsfeld  william k. sessions iii (1972), chief judge u.s. district court for the district of vermont and vice chair of the united states sentencing commission  scott w. stucky (llm 1983), judge united states court of appeals for the armed forces  bolon b. turner (llm 1924), judge united states tax court  state  albert t. blackwell jr., justice of the maryland court of appeals  carmen e. espinosa (1976), first hispanic judge for the connecticut superior court, connecticut appellate court, and the connecticut supreme court  r. c. mcdonough (1949), justice of the montana supreme court  george b. nelson (1902), justice of the wisconsin supreme court  gregory k. orme (1978), judge utah court of appeals  barbara pariente (1973), current chief justice of the florida supreme court  leslie perkins snow (1891), justice of the new hampshire supreme court  joshua soule zimmerman, west virginia house delegate  lawyers  michael avenatti (1999), lawyer who filed a lawsuit on behalf of stormy daniels seeking to invalidate a 2016 "hush" agreement regarding an alleged affair with donald trump  ian c. ballon (1986), internet lawyer and author of several law books, including a 4-volume legal treatise on e-commerce law  jacob burns (1924), corporate attorney, educator and philanthropist  charles colson, leader in the christian right movement, former special counsel to richard nixon, and jailed for conspiring during the watergate scandal  roy den hollander, men's rights lawyer who became the main suspect in the fatal attack on judge esther salas' family  denise tourover ezekiel (1924), lawyer who served in various executive positions for hadassah, the women's zionist organization of america  francis la flesche, first professional native american (omaha) anthropologist  prerna lal, immigration attorney  belva ann lockwood (1872), first woman to argue before the united states supreme court  frank neuhauser (1940), patent attorney and winner of the first national spelling bee in 1925  m. gerald schwartzbach (1969), california criminal defense attorney  harry aubrey toulmin sr. (1882), patent attorney to the wright brothers  nathan hale williams, film and television producer, entertainment lawyer  media  margaret carlson, american journalist and currently a columnist for bloomberg news  mona charen, political analyst and best-selling author  david eisenhower (
1976), author and grandson of dwight d. eisenhower  michael kinsley, political commentator and journalist, former co-host of cnn's crossfire matt medved, american journalist and currently editor-in-chief of spin  military  earl e. anderson, ret. general united states marine corps  richard a. appelbaum, ret. u.s. coast guard rear admiral  vaughn ary - staff judge advocate to the commandant of the united states marine corps  jedediah hyde baxter, son of portus baxter and surgeon general of the united states army  murdock a. campbell (1919), united states army major general and adjutant general of the vermont national guard  john fugh (1960), former judge advocate general  wilfred a. hearn, former judge advocate general james f. lawrence jr. (1953), first marine lawyer to be promoted to brigadier general, navy cross recipient  sidney a. wallace, retired united states coast guard rear admiral  religion  charles colson (1959), former white house counsel, born-again christian, and founder of prison fellowship  matthew cowley (1925), former apostle of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  brooks hays (1922), united states congressman (d-ar) and president of the southern baptist convention  references
porellales is an order of liverworts.  taxonomy  jubulineae muller 1909  frullaniaceae lorch 1914  frullania raddi 1818a [amphijubula schuster 1970a; schusterella hattori, sharp & mizutani 1972; steerea hattori & kamimura 1971; mylia leman 1825 non gray 1821]  jubulaceae von klinggraff 1858  jubula dumortier 1822 nom. cons. non bates 1929 [salviatus gray 1821]  neohattoria kamimura 1962 [hattoria kamimura 1961 non schuster 1961]  nipponolejeunea hattori 1944d  lejeuneaceae cavers 1910 [metzgeriopsaceae]  lejeuneoideae   brachiolejeuneeae  brachiolejeuneinae gradstein  acanthocoleus schuster 1970b  blepharolejeunea arnell 1962b  brachiolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (brachiolejeunea) spruce 1884]  dicranolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (dicranolejeunea) spruce 1884; dicrojeunea kuntze 1903]  lindigianthus kruijt & gradstein 1985   odontolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (odontolejeunea) spruce 1884; dentijeunea kuntze 1903]  stictolejeuneinae gradstein  neurolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (neurolejeunea) spruce 1884]  stictolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (stictolejeunea) spruce 1884; leptostictolejeunea (schuster 1984) schuster 1990]  lejeuneeae  dactylophorella schuster 1980  metalejeunea grolle 1995  pictolejeunea grolle 1977  ceratolejeuneinae gradstein  ceratolejeunea (spruce 1884) jack & stephani 1892 [lejeunea (ceratolejeunea) spruce 1884; cornijeunea kuntze 1903]  luteolejeunea piippo 1986  otigoniolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893b [lejeunea (otigoniolejeunea) spruce 1884; ectojeunea kuntze 1903; physantholejeunea schuster 1978]  cheilolejeuneinae gradstein  aureolejeunea r.m.schust.  cheilolejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1890c [lejeunea (cheilolejeunea) spruce 1884; aureolejeunea schuster 1978; omphalanthus lindenberg & nees 1845; omphalolejeunea
(spruce 1884) lacouture 1908; lejeunea (omphalolejeunea) spruce 1884; peltolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (peltolejeunea) spruce 1884; osmojeunea kuntze 1903; strepsilejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (strepsilejeunea) spruce 1884; anomalolejeunea (spruce 1887) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (anomalolejeunea) spruce 1887; notholejeunea kuntze 1903; leucolejeunea evans 1907; trachylejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 nom. cons.; potamolejeunea (spruce 1884) lacouture 1908]  cyrtolejeunea evans 1903c  cystolejeunea evans 1906a  omphalanthus lindenb. & nees  cololejeuneinae gradstein  aphanotropis herzog 1952  calatholejeunea goebel 1928  cololejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1891a [lejeunea (cololejeunea) spruce 1884; aphanolejeunea evansand 1911; metzgeriopsis goebel 1888; boninoleptocolea horikawa 1936; jovetastella tixier 1974; taeniolejeunea zwickel 1933; leptocolea (spruce 1884) evans 1911; pedinolejeunea (benedix ex mizutani 1961) chen & wu 1964; cololejeunea (physocolea) spruce 1884; physocolea (spruce 1884) stephani 1916; chondriolejeunea (benedix 1953) kis & pocs]  colura (dumortier 1831) dumortier 1835 [lejeunea section colura du¬mortier 1831; myriocolea spruce 1884; colurolejeunea schiffner 1893; lejeunea (colurolejeunea) spruce 1884; mitrojeunea kuntze 1903]  diplasiolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (diplasiolejeunea) spruce 1884; dijeunea kuntze 1903]  haplolejeunea grolle 1975  macrocolura schuster 1994   myriocoleopsis schiffner 1944  nephelolejeunea grolle 1973 [austrolejeunea (schuster 1963) schuster 1963; siphonolejeunea (austrolejeunea) schuster 1963]   schusterolejeunea grolle 1980 [cladocolea schuster 1963a non van tieghem 1895]  siphonolejeunea herzog 1942  tuyamaella hattori 1951  cyclolejeuneinae gradstein  bromeliophila schuster 1994  cyclolejeunea evans 1904  prionolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (prionolejeunea) spruce 1884; ser
rijeunea kuntze 1903]  drepanolejeuneinae gradstein  capillolejeunea arnell 1965  drepanolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1891 [lejeunea (drepanolejeunea) spruce 1884; rhaphidolejeunea herzog 1943c; falcijeunea kuntze 1903]  vitalianthus schuster & giancotti 1993  echinolejeuneinae gradstein  anoplolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (anoplolejeunea) spruce 1884; anolejeunea kuntze 1903]  echinolejeunea schuster 1963  kymatolejeunea grolle 1984  leiolejeuneinae schafer-verwimp & heinrichs  leiolejeunea evans 1908  lejeuneinae gradstein  harpalejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (harpalejeunea) spruce 1884]  hattoriolejeunea mizutani 1986  lejeunea libert 1820 nom. cons. [amblyolejeunea jovet ast 1949; amphilejeunea schuster 1978; crossotolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (crossotolejeunea) spruce 1884; crossojeunea post & kuntze 1903; cryptogynolejeunea schuster; dactylolejeunea schuster 1971; dicladolejeunea schuster; echinocolea schuster 1963; macrolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (macrolejeunea) spruce 1884; neopotamolejeunea reiner; eulejeunea schiffner 1893; hygrolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893; lejeunea (hygrolejeunea) spruce 1884; taxilejeunea <small>(spruce 1884) schiffner 1893  suppressed/small>; stylolejeunea sim 1926; byssolejeunea herzog 1941;  heterolejeunea schiffner 1941; cladolejeunea zwickel 1933; sphaerolejeunea herzog 1938; nesolejeunea herzog 1947]  microlejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1888a [lejeunea (microlejeunea) spruce 1884]  taxilejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1889c nom. cons. [lejeunea (taxilejeunea) spruce 1884;evansiolejeunea vanden berghen 1949; schusteria kachroo 1957]  lepidolejeuneinae gradstein  lepidolejeunea schuster 1963  otolejeunea grolle & tixier 1980  rectolejeunea evans 1906  leptolejeuneinae heinrichs & schafer-verwimp  leptolejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1891c [lejeunea (leptolejeunea) spruce 1884]   pycnolejeuneinae heinrichs & schafer-verwimp  pycn
olejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (pycnolejeunea) spruce 1884]   xylolejeuneinae henrichs & schafer-verwimp  xylolejeunea he & grolle 2001  symbiezidieae gradstein  symbiezidium trevisan 1877  ptychanthoideae mizut.  acrolejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 nom. cons. [lejeunea (acrolejeunea) spruce 1884; acrolejeunea stephani 1890  suppressed name; trocholejeunea schiffner 1932]  archilejeunea (spruce 1884) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (archilejeunea) spruce 1884]  bryopteris (nees 1838b) lindenberg 1845a [frullania (bryopteris) nees 1838b; bryolejeunea (spruce1884) lacouture 1908; lejeunea (bryolejeunea) spruce1884]  caudalejeunea (stephani 1890) schiffner 1893 [lejeunea (caudalejeunea) stephani 1890]  cephalantholejeunea schuster 1980   cephalolejeunea mizutani 1979  frullanoides raddi 1822 [ptychocoleus trevisan 1877]  fulfordianthus gradstein 1992a  lopholejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1890c nom. cons. [lejeunea (lopholejeunea) spruce 1884; lopholejeunea stephani 1890  suppressed name]  marchesinia gray 1821 nom. cons. [homalolejeunea (spruce 1884) lacouture 1908; lejeunea (homalolejeunea) spruce 1884; phragmicoma dumortier 1822]  mastigolejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1891a [lejeunea (mastigolejeunea) spruce 1884; flagrijeunea kuntze 1903]  phaeolejeunea mizutani 1968  ptychanthus nees 1838 [ptycholejeunea (spruce1884) stephani 1895; lejeunea (ptycholejeunea) spruce 1884]  schiffneriolejeunea verdoorn 1933a  spruceanthus verdoorn 1934  thysananthus lindenberg 1844 [thysanolejeunea (spruce 1884) stephani 1896; lejeunea (thysanolejeunea) spruce 1884]  tuzibeanthus hattori 1947   verdoornianthus gradstein 1977  porellineae schuster 1963  goebeliellaceae verdoorn 1932  goebeliella stephani 1911  lepidolaenaceae nakai 1943 [jubulopsaceae]  gackstroemia trevisan 1877  lepidogyna schuster 1980  lepidolaena dumortier 1835 [jubulopsis schuster 1970; polyotus
gottsche 1845a nom. illeg. non nuttall 1837]  porellaceae cavers 1910 nom. cons.  ascidiota massalongo 1898  porella linnaeus 1753 [macvicaria nicholson 1930 non gibson & bray 1982; opeca hill 1773; antoiria raddi 1818; cavendishia gray 1821  suppressed name non lindley 1835 nom. cons.; madotheca dumortier 1822; suaresia leman 1827; schulthesia raddi 1822]  radulineae schuster 1963  radulaceae muller 1909  radula dumortier 1822 nom. cons. [martinellius gray 1821; candollea raddi 1818 non mirbel 1802; stephanina kuntze 1891; patarola trevisan 1877 non leman 1825]  references     liverwort orders
dukhan ram (1899-1990) was an indian ophthalmologist, academic, legislator and the vice chancellor of babasaheb bhimrao ambedkar bihar university. he was the principal of patna medical college, one of the oldest medical colleges in india, and the president of arya pradeshik pratinidhi sabha, a satellite organization of arya samaj, founded by dayanand saraswati. he successfully contested the 1962 bihar legislative assembly election from sasaram constituency, on indian national congress candidature and served as the president of all india ophthalmological society in 1961. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1962, for his contributions to medical science.  biography  dukhan ram was born on 15 july 1899 in a vaisya family with poor financial means in sasaram in the indian state of bihar and did his early education at local schools in shahabad district in difficult circumstances as his father died when he was only four. it is reported that his studies were with the help of scholarship as well as the earnings from part-time jobs as a tutor and as a garment peddler during holidays. his marriage took place when he was 16 years of age but he continued his education and joined calcutta medical college in 1920 to graduate in medicine from there in 1926, during which time he studied bachelor of science course concurrently to pass out in 1925. his medical internship was at patna medical college from 1927 after which he did higher studies in ophthalmology (dlo and doms) at the royal college of surgeons of london. returning to india in 1934, he joined patna medical college as a faculty member of the ophthalmology and otorhinolaryngology department where he rose in ranks to become the professor of the department in 1944. during his tenure there, the institution started four courses, do, dlo, ms (eye) and ms (ent).  two years before the indian independence, the british government awarded ram the title of rai sahib in 1945. he was involved with arya samaj and served as the president of the bihar chapter of the arya pratinidhi sabha in 1951, as the vice president of the national organization in 1956 and presided the international arya league held in mauritius in 1957. the same year, he was chosen to operate on rajendra prasad, the then president of india. he continued his association with indian president's office by serving as the honorary ophthalmic surgeon to the next four presidents viz. sarvepalli radhakrishnan, zakir husain, varahagiri venkata giri and fakhruddin ali ahmed. in
1959, he was appointed as the principal of patna medical college and it was during his tenure as the principal, he was selected as the vice chancellor of babasaheb bhimrao ambedkar bihar university. as the vice chancellor, he was reported to have contributed in the establishment of rajendra institute of medical sciences, ranchi as well as the medical colleges in muzaffarpur and bhagalpur. when the government of india set up a health survey and planning committee for reviewing medical relief and public health services and proposing guidelines, chaired by a. lakshmanaswami mudaliar (later known as mudaliar committee) in 1959, he was selected as a member of the committee.  ram was the founder president of the bihar unit of the all india ophthalmological society, chaired the organizing committee of patna and jamshedpur annual conferences in 1952 and 1956 respectively and was the national president of the organization in 1961. he presided the 1953 and 1961 national conferences of otorhinolaryngologists and ophthalmologists held in hyderabad and was the president of bihar chapter of the indian medical association during 1954-55. he was the founder-president of iasindia - institute of administrative studies, a patna-based institution of higher studies in administration and management. he was one of the founders of the national academy of medical sciences and was its elected fellow (1961). the government of india awarded him the civilian honor of the padma bhushan in 1962. later, he contested the bihar legislative assembly election of 1962 as an indian national congress candidate from sasaram assembly constituency and won against bipan behari sinha of praja socialist party by a margin of 11984 votes.  dukhan ram, whose wife had predeceased him, died on 16 april 1990 in patna, aged 90 and survived by his six children. a public school in patna, dr. dukhan ram dav public school, has been named after him. the bihar and jharkhand state branch of the association of otorhinolaryngology and head and neck surgeons of india have instituted an annual oration, dr. dukhan ram memorial oration, in his honour.  see also    1962 bihar legislative assembly election  patna medical college and hospital  a. lakshmanaswami mudaliar  references   1899 births 1990 deaths people from sasaram arya samajis indian national congress politicians from bihar bihar mlas 1962-1967 indian ophthalmologists indian medical academics indian medical administrators 20th-century indian medical doctors medical doctors from bihar heads of universities and colleges in india medical college and hospital, kolkata fellows of the national academy of medical sciences recipients of the padma bhushan in
medicine
kyeintali subtownship is divided from gwa township, rakhine state. there are two sub-tsps at thandwe district, kyeintali subtownship in gwa and maei subtownship in toungup. government offices of kyeintali subtownship are located in kyeintali  references  populated places in rakhine state
the 1996 european promotion cup for men was the 5th edition of this tournament. it was hosted in serravalle, san marino and austria achieved its second title after beating norway in the final game.  preliminary round  group a  group b  classification games  final round  bracket  final  final ranking  external links fiba archive  1996 1995-96 in european basketball 1996 in san marino international basketball competitions hosted by san marino june 1996 sports events in europe
the 1928 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1928 college football season.  in their fifth and final season under head coach earl martineau, the hilltoppers compiled a 5-2 record and outscored their opponents, 119 to 32. center dick frankowski was the team captain.  coach martineau left western state after the 1928 season to accept an assistant coaching position at purdue.  in five years at western state, martineau compile a 26-10-2 record.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
patryk stepinski (born 16 january 1995) is a polish footballer who plays as a full-back for widzew łodz.  club career on 1 september 2020 he returned to widzew łodz.  references  external links      1995 births living people footballers from łodz polish footballers poland youth international footballers association football defenders widzew łodz players wisła płock players warta poznan players ekstraklasa players i liga players
sachchidananda mishra (, born march 1, 1971) is a varanasi-based sanskrit scholar. he is a professor of philosophy and religion at the benares hindu university. he was awarded the maharshi badrayan vyas award for sanskrit for the year 2009 by pratibha patil, the then president of india. he specializes in indian philosophy and sanskrit grammar.  work mishra has edited and authored seven books, which include:  vedantasara of sadananda with the balabodhini commentary of apadeva and the balavyutpattivardhini hindi commentary  manasollasa with the manasollasavardhini commentary by ananda krsna sastri  nyayadarsana mem anumana   tattvacintamaniprabha  vyutpattivada with a detailed introductory commentary in hindi  references  1971 births living people indian sanskrit scholars
this is a list of current routes operated by the mass transit agency spokane transit authority in spokane, washington. routes are organized by route number. discontinued routes and former versions of existing routes are not listed.  major service changes to many route sept. 2019. this info no longer accurate.  these lists reflect the september 2018 service change.  routes 11 and 12 (downtown shuttles)  routes 20 to 29 (north spokane)  routes 30 to 39 (crosstown routes)  routes 40 to 49 (south spokane)  routes 60 to 69 (west plains)  routes 70 to 79 (spokane valley/liberty lake)  routes 90 to 99 (spokane valley)  routes in 100s (commuter express routes)  routes in 600s (ewu express routes)  references  external links  spokane transit authority routes  transportation in spokane, washington spokane bus transportation in washington (state) bus routes, spokane
the men's 4 × 400 metres relay at the 2016 ipc athletics european championships were held at the stadio olimpico carlo zecchini in grosseto from 11-16 june. the men's t53/54 relay was a non-medal event.  medalists  see also list of ipc world records in athletics  references  4 x 400 metres relay
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 28 february 1945 in kanazawa as a square division. it was a part of the 16 simultaneously created divisions batch numbering from 140th to 160th.  action the 152nd division was initially assigned to 11th area army. in april 1945 it was reassigned to 52nd army and sent from kanazawa to choshi in kanto region, where it performed a coastal defense duties until surrender of japan 15 august 1945 without seeing an actual combat. the 437th infantry regiment was garrisoning choshi, the 440th - west choshi, 438th - asahi, chiba (building defenses on south-western bank of tone river), and 439th infantry regiment - omigawa, chiba.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第152師団 (日本軍), accessed 13 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
the following lists events that happened in 1982 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - gunnar thoroddsen  events  births  5 january - kristin anna valtysdottir, musician 9 january - gretar steinsson, footballer. 24 march - bryndis bjorgvinsdottir, folklorist 1 april - gunnar heiðar þorvaldsson, footballer 13 october - kari arnason, footballer  deaths 9 december - asmundur sveinsson, sculptor (b. 1893)  references    1980s in iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
saunterer was an american thoroughbred racehorse. ridden by tom costello, he won the 1881 preakness stakes and belmont stakes.  references  1878 racehorse births thoroughbred family 9-c racehorses bred in the united states racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners belmont stakes winners
bobby murphy  is an american soccer coach.  coaching career murphy was the director of the soccer academy at st. stephen's episcopal school from 2003 to 2016. before this, he was the director of coaching for the south texas youth soccer association.  orlando city on january 15, 2016, murphy joined orlando city sc of major league soccer as an assistant coach. almost seven months later, on july 7, murphy was named the interim head coach of orlando city after adrian heath was relieved of his duties. his first match as interim head coach occurred on july 8 against the houston dynamo. the match ended 0-0. following the hiring of jason kreis, murphy resumed his role as assistant coach and technical coordinator of the club's u.s. soccer development academy.{cite web|last1 after kreis was relieved of his duties in 2018, murphy once again served as interim head coach until james o'connor was hired, who did not retain murphy.  union omaha in march 2021, murphy joined usl league one side union omaha as an assistant coach.  statistics  coaching statistics  references  living people american soccer coaches orlando city sc coaches major league soccer coaches place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people) orlando city sc non-playing staff union omaha usl league one coaches
the 2020 united states senate election in tennessee was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of tennessee, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states and elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent republican senator lamar alexander announced that he would not run for re-election on december 17, 2018. the former united states ambassador to japan, bill hagerty won the open seat by a large margin against his democratic opponent marquita bradshaw.  republican primary  candidates  nominee  bill hagerty, businessman, former united states ambassador to japan and former commissioner of the tennessee department of economic and community development  eliminated in the primary cliff adkins natisha brooks  byron bush, dentist  roy dale cope, small business owner and pharmacist  terry dicus, attorney  tom emerson, jr., tea party candidate for the u.s. senate in 2014  george flinn, jr., former shelby county commissioner, nixon administration official, physician, engineer, businessman and republican candidate in tennessee's 8th congressional district in 2016 and 2018  jon henry, u.s. marine corps veteran  kent morrell, business owner  glen neal, jr., retired public servant  john osborne, real estate agent and business owner  aaron pettigrew, truck driver  david schuster, u.s. navy veteran manny sethi, orthopedic surgeon, director of the vanderbilt orthopedic institute center for health policy and founder and president of the non-profit healthy tennessee  disqualified from the primary ballot  jim elkins, republican candidate for tennessee's 3rd congressional district in 2020  johnny presley, retired physician's assistant, hospital and clinic owner, farmer  withdrawn  clyde benson, army veteran and republican candidate for district 39 of the tennessee house of representatives in 2016  larry crim  josh gapp, physician (running for tn-01)  garrett "lance" nichols  stokes nielson, music industry executive and guitarist for the lost trailers  declined  lamar alexander, incumbent u.s. senator mae beavers, former state senator (endorsed sethi) diane black, former u.s. representative for tennessee's 6th congressional district and candidate for governor in 2018 randy boyd, former commissioner of the tennessee department of economic and community development, candidate for governor in 2018, and president of the university of tennessee system bob corker, former u.s. senator stephen fincher, former u.s. representative for tennessee's 8th
congressional district and candidate for u.s. senate in 2018  chuck fleischmann, u.s. representative for tennessee's 3rd congressional district mark e. green, u.s. representative for tennessee's 7th congressional district and former state senator tre hargett, tennessee secretary of state beth harwell, former speaker of the tennessee house of representatives and candidate for governor in 2018 bill haslam, former governor of tennessee david kustoff, u.s. representative for tennessee's 8th congressional district and former u.s. attorney  peyton manning, retired nfl quarterback  jeff webb, businessman (endorsed sethi)  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee marquita bradshaw, environmentalist  eliminated in the primary gary g. davis, small business owner, baker, pilot, and perennial candidate robin kimbrough hayes, attorney and clergywoman james mackler, attorney, u.s. army veteran and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2018 mark pickrell, entrepreneur, attorney and baptist deacon  disqualified from the primary ballot  tharon chandler, journalist, economist, and conservationist  withdrawn  diana c. onyejiaka, college professor and consultant  declined andy berke, incumbent mayor of chattanooga and former state senator phil bredesen, former mayor of nashville and governor of tennessee and nominee for u.s. senate in 2018 (endorsed james mackler) john ray clemmons, state representative and candidate for mayor of nashville in 2019 karl dean, former mayor of nashville and nominee for governor of tennessee in 2018 sara kyle, incumbent state senator tim mcgraw, singer-songwriter jason powell, state representative, real estate agent, non-profit manager madeline rogero, former mayor of knoxville renata soto, executive director of conexion americas jeff yarbro, minority leader of the tennessee state senate  endorsements  results  independents  declared yomi faparusi, physician, attorney, researcher, and former republican candidate for tennessee's 4th congressional district in 2014 and 2016 jeffrey grunau, activist ronnie henley, dean hill, us veteran, former federal employee, and activist steven hooper aaron james elizabeth mcleod, conservative activist eric william stansberry  withdrawn tom kovach, attorney kacey morgan, freelancer and operations director (endorsed marquita bradshaw) (remained on ballot)  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  with bill hagerty and james mackler  with manny sethi and james mackler  with generic republican and generic democrat  results  notes  partisan clients  references  external links       (state
affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  marquita bradshaw (d) for senate  yomi faparusi (i) for senate  bill hagerty (r) for senate  elizabeth macleod (i) for senate  kacey morgan (i) for senate   2020 tennessee united states senate
balehar kalan  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india.   kalan is persian language word which means big.it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of balehar kalan.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, balehar kalan has a total number of 129 houses and population of 647 of which include 346 males and 301 females. literacy rate of balehar kalan is 66.36%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 58 which is 8.96% of total population of balehar kalan, and child sex ratio is approximately  706, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
nicolle jane flint (born 15 july 1978) is an australian politician. she is the member for boothby in south australia in the australian house of representatives. she is a member of the liberal party of australia and succeeded the previous member, andrew southcott, at the 2016 federal election.  flint announced on 26 february 2021 that she will not contest the 2022 australian federal election.  ms flint gave her valedictory speech on 16 february 2022.  early political involvement flint was a member of the young liberal movement from 2000 to 2002 and joined the liberal party in 2007. she was a solicitor and newspaper columnist before entering politics, and also worked as an advisor to malcolm turnbull and brendan nelson. she also worked for the australian chamber of commerce and industry. in 2015, flint co-authored a paper for the menzies research centre entitled "gender and politics", calling for more female involvement in the liberal party.  member of parliament  first term flint was elected to the australian house of representatives for the seat of boothby in 2016, replacing retiring mp andrew southcott, who had held the seat since 1996. during her first term, flint raised awareness in parliament for endometriosis, with the government allocation $2.5 million to researchers for finding new ways of detecting and treating the disease.  in 2017, flint bought 400 copies of a book published by the menzies research centre, a liberal party think tank, spending $5818, more than any other politician spent on publications between july 2017 and june 2018, despite the book being available online for free. during the 2018 liberal party leadership spills, flint was one of 43 party members to sign a petition calling for prime minister malcolm turnbull to call for a second leadership spill.  2019 election in april 2018, the australian electoral commission rearranged the electoral boundaries of south australia to reduce the number of seats from 11 to 10, in accordance with south australia's shrinking percentage of the australian population. the changes to the seat of boothby resulted in flint's 2016 margin of 3.5% shrinking to 2.8%. after the redistribution, boothby was the only marginal seat in the state, making it a target for the australian labor party in the 2019 australian federal election. flint was also a target of the progressive activist group getup, who labelled her south australia's "most backwards politician". days before the election, flint's campaign office was vandalised with offensive graffiti. she faced further harassment during the campaign, with a man cautioned for allegedly stalking her and her office also being egged.
the race was too close to call on the night of the election, but flint was eventually declared the winner of the election despite a swing against her. following the election, flint accused getup, labor and trade union supporters of being responsible for harassment, intimidation and stalking against her during the campaign, and prime minister scott morrison labelled the actions as misogynistic and bullying.  hunting and fishing advocacy   some of flint's columns expressed her support for recreational and commercial fishing and hunting. she wrote that australian cricketer glenn mcgrath should not have apologised for taking and sharing trophy photographs with animals he killed while on safari in africa. she expressed support for the commercial hunting of saltwater crocodiles in the northern territory and described the mcgrath controversy as an "opportunity to encourage a debate about the economic, ecological and environmental benefits hunting can bring".  in her maiden speech in the commonwealth parliament in 2016, flint spoke of the "modern day scourge of environmental and animal activism".  flint is from kingston in the south-east of south australia. her hometown harbours south australia's southern rock lobster fishery and other commercial fisheries. in her the advertiser columns flint supported the prospective culling of long-nosed fur seals, great white sharks and reducing the number of marine park sanctuary zones in south australian waters. in 2014, criticising south australia's marine parks, she wrote: "the most endangered species in south australian coastal waters are our fishermen."  great white sharks  in 2014, during the western australian shark cull, flint expressed her support for the use of drum lines and shark nets to protect humans from potential attack from great white sharks. in 2017, she expressed her support for the liberal federal council's decision to consider permitting the fishing of great white sharks, pending the results of research undertaken by the csiro into the status of the species' population. as of 2017, fishing for great white sharks is prohibited as the animals are listed as "vulnerable" under the epbc act. she told the australian: "we must protect our swimmers and surfers and hard-working australians like abalone divers from being attacked or killed by sharks."  political views  flint is a member of the national right faction of the liberal party.  before her election flint's political views were expressed in regular opinion editorial columns in the advertiser. she has spoken up on issues of safety for women in the liberal party. she criticised satirical youtuber friendlyjordies in parliament, alleging that the channel pushes misogynistic views. the channel has denied the claims and questioned whether her views are genuine, pointing out
that she had previously voted against workplace protections for women.  references  1978 births living people liberal party of australia members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for boothby members of the australian house of representatives women members of the australian house of representatives australian solicitors flinders university alumni 21st-century australian politicians 21st-century australian women politicians
the merry-go-round in the sea (1965) is a novel by australian writer randolph stow.  story outline set in geraldton, western australia after world war ii the novel follows the story of a boy (rob coram) and his cousin rick.  the book begins in 1941 when rob is six and his idol, rick, is sent off to war.  by the time rick has returned after spending time as a prisoner of war rob's view of the world has changed markedly and his childhood has ended.  critical reception maurice dunlevy came late to the book so didn't review it in the canberra times until 1972 when he called it "not so much a novel as a lyric poem...the merry-go-round in the sea is a beautiful book, a novel full of controlled evocative prose, a haunting sense of place, and a wonderfully consistent structure of imagery."  in a survey of the author's work for australian book review in 2009, tony hassall has no doubts about the novel's worth: "the book captures the contradictory feelings of its author as he looks back on a golden childhood with fierce nostalgic longing, while at the same time seeing it as transient and irrevocably separate from mature experience... in its sensitive exploration of rob's reluctant progression into a world of divided allegiances, the merry-go-round in the sea stands alongside earlier australian classics like henry handel richardson's the fortunes of richard mahony and martin boyd's lucinda brayford."  see also  1965 in australian literature  references  1965 australian novels randolph stow
monon commercial historic district is a national historic district located at monon, white county, indiana.  the district encompasses 24 contributing buildings in the central business district of monon.  it developed between about 1860 and 1940 and includes representative examples of italianate and classical revival style architecture. notable contributing resources include the c.m. horner's bank (c. 1870, 1921), monon town hall (c. 1920), carnegie library, howard theater (1938), pogue building (c. 1895), fred thomas building (1912), tull block (1921), james tull / j. lackerman building (c. 1895), newbold oldsmobile building (c. 1910), state bank of monon (1912), and odd fellows building (1911).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2000.  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana neoclassical architecture in indiana buildings and structures in white county, indiana national register of historic places in white county, indiana
zainab bukky ajayi (2 february 1934  6 july 2016) was a nigerian actress.  life and career bukky ajayi was born and raised in nigeria but completed her higher education in england, united kingdom with the support of a federal government scholarship. in 1965, she left england for nigeria where her career began as a presenter and newscaster for nigerian television authority in 1966. ajayi made her film debut in the television series village headmaster during the '70s before she went on to feature in checkmate, a nigeria television series that aired during the late 1980s to the early 1990s.  during her acting career, she featured in several films and television series including critical assignment, diamond ring, witches among others. in 2016, her contributions to the nigerian film industry was recognized after she and sadiq daba were awarded the industry merit award at the 2016 africa magic viewers choice awards.  filmography  death ajayi died at her residence in surulere, lagos state on 6 july 2016 at the age of 82.  references  external links  1934 births 2016 deaths yoruba actresses 20th-century nigerian actresses 21st-century nigerian actresses actresses in yoruba cinema nigerian television actresses nigerian film actresses amvca industry merit award winners
tha lo railway station is a railway station located in tha lo subdistrict, phichit city, phichit. it is located 354.266 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 24 january 1908 as part of the northern line extension from pak nam pho to phitsanulok.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
colin winston abrams (born 14 march 1956) is a guyanese former cyclist. he competed in the sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1956 births living people guyanese male cyclists olympic cyclists of guyana cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
sara price (born september 2, 1992) is an american racing driver, having competed in motocross, rallying, the x games, stadium super trucks and extreme e. she currently races in extreme e for chip ganassi racing.  price has won 17 national motocross championships and she has medaled in the x games. she hails from southern california and has been racing since the age of 8.  racing career in 2010, price became first female factory supported motocross racer to race for monster energy kawasaki racing. over the next few years, price raced for monster energy kawasaki and medaled several times at the x games before transitioning to racing off road. price placed first at the 2013 elsinore grand prix and won the terracross championship in 2015.  in 2016, price won the off-road motorsports hall of fame rising star award in the utv, mx, and atv category.   price made her debut in stadium super trucks at the 2016 honda indy toronto race weekend, becoming the first female driver to compete in the series. the following year, she ran the season finale at lake elsinore diamond. price did not return to the series until 2020, racing at the adelaide 500 race weekend.  in 2017, price won hoonigan and fiat's female driver search to become next female hoonigan athlete. she also placed 6th place at the climb to the clouds" at mount washington in a fiat 124 rally car.  price made her debut in a trophy truck in the 2017 best in the desert laughlin desert classic and placed second.  in 2019, price became the first female score international baja 1000 ironwoman by solo driving the entire race and finishing second in the trophy trucks spec class.  price first raced rally in 2015 rallye aicha des gazelles, finishing first among rookie participants. price did not return to rally racing until 2020 when she placed second in the utv class at sonora rally.  on june 11, 2020, chip ganassi racing announced price would race with the team for the inaugural extreme e season in 2021. she was the first confirmed driver for the series, and the first female racer in cgr's history.  miss california usa price competed in the miss california usa in 2013, but did not make the finals.  motorsports career results  stadium super trucks (key) (bold - pole position. italics - fastest qualifier. * - most laps led.)   standings were not recorded by the series for the 2020 season.  extreme e (key)  * season still
in progress.  filmography  references  external links      living people american motocross riders stadium super trucks drivers x games athletes 1992 births american female racing drivers 21st-century american women extreme e drivers
ha đuc chinh (born september 22, 1997) is a vietnamese professional footballer who plays as a forward for topeland binh đinh and the vietnam national team.  honours than quang ninh v.league 2: runner-up 2016 vietnam u23 afc u-23 championship runners-up  2018 southeast asian games: 2019 vietnam  aff championship: 2018 king's cup: runner-up 2019  international goals  u-20 scores and results list vietnam's goal tally first.  u-22 scores and results list vietnam's goal tally first. only results against national teams were counted  u-23 scores and results list vietnam's goal tally first. only results against national teams were counted  references   1997 births living people vietnamese footballers association football forwards v.league 1 players shb da nang fc players than quang ninh fc players people from phu tho province association football wingers footballers at the 2018 asian games 2019 afc asian cup players competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games asian games competitors for vietnam competitors at the 2019 southeast asian games southeast asian games medalists in football southeast asian games gold medalists for vietnam vietnam international footballers
mostafa ajorlu (, born 1960) is an iranian military officer in the islamic revolutionary guard corps and football administrator. he was the chairman of tractor club from 2016 to 2018. he has been elected as the administrator of  esteghlal f.c. since 25 september 2021.  previous positions  ajorlu headed the following clubs:  moghavemat tehran (1996-1998)  fath tehran (1998-1999)  pas (2000-2005)  steel azin (2009-2010)  tractor (2016-2018)  esteghlal (2021-)  references         1960 births imam hossein university faculty imam hossein university alumni university of tehran alumni iranian football chairmen and investors living people iranian sports executives and administrators islamic revolutionary guard corps second brigadier generals islamic revolutionary guard corps personnel of the iran-iraq war
the denver pioneers women's basketball team represents the university of denver and competes in the ncaa division i women's college basketball in denver, colorado.  history denver began play in 1974, after a few years playing as a club sport. they played in the intermountain conference from 1974-1978, the continental divide/colorado athletic from 1978-1996, and the rocky mountain from 1996-98 before joining division i play in 1998. in the 2000-01 season, the pioneers won 24 games and went 14-2 to win the west division in the conference. in the sun belt conference championship game, they lost 67-55 to louisiana tech. despite the loss, they were invited to the ncaa division i tournament for the first time in school history. in the first round, they were beaten 77-57 by virginia tech. denver has made two appearances in the wnit, in 2011 and 2019. they lost 75-60 to byu in the first round in 2011 and beat the university of new mexico 83-75 in the first round in 2019. then went on to lose to the university of idaho 66-88 in the second round in 2019. the pioneers played in the western athletic conference for 2012-13 before joining the summit league in 2013. as of the end of the 2015-16 season, the pioneers have an all-time record of 637-549.  postseason  ncaa division i tournament results the pioneers have made one appearance in the ncaa division i women's basketball tournament. they have a combined record of 0-1.  ncaa division ii tournament results the pioneers made two appearances in the ncaa division ii women's basketball tournament. they had a combined record of 0-2.  references  external links
the 2016 polynesian championships in athletics was the fifth polynesian championships. it was held from the 7 - 9 april in papeete, tahiti at the pater stadium.  participation    (6)  medal summary  men  men under 18  women  women under 18  mixed  medal table  references   polynesian championships in athletics athletics competitions in french polynesia polynesian championships in athletics april 2016 sports events in oceania 2016 in french polynesian sport
the 2020 united states senate election in delaware was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of delaware, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections.  incumbent democratic senator chris coons ran for reelection to a second full term and won against republican challenger lauren witzke with 59.4% of the vote. he outperformed democratic presidential nominee and former delaware senator joe biden (whose seat coons was elected to in a 2010 special election) by 0.7 percentage points, compared to the concurrent presidential election.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  chris coons, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  jessica scarane, technology executive  withdrawn scott walker, republican nominee for delaware's at-large congressional district in 2018 (running for governor as a republican)  declined  joe biden, 47th vice president of the united states (2009-2017), u.s. senator from delaware (1973-2009), 2020 democratic nominee for president (endorsed chris coons)  lisa blunt rochester, u.s. representative (running for re-election)  kerri evelyn harris, former candidate for the democratic nomination for u.s. senate in 2018  endorsements  polling  with lisa blunt rochester and chris coons  with chris coons and more liberal female democrat  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee  lauren witzke, far-right activist and proponent of the qanon conspiracy theory  eliminated in primary  james demartino, attorney and nominee for delaware house of representatives in 2016 & 2018  declined rob arlett, former sussex county councilman and nominee for u.s. senate in 2018  endorsements  results  other candidates  libertarian party  nominee nadine frost, libertarian candidate for u.s. senate in 2018  independent party of delaware  nominee mark turley, small business owner  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  results   having only won one of delaware's three counties in 2014, coons successfully flipped kent county in this election.  notes  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  chris coons (d) for senate  mark turley (i) for senate  lauren witzke (r) for senate  2020 delaware united states senate
jovsi is an extensive natural plain divided into wetlands and covering an area of  in the municipality of brezice in slovenia. it lies west of the lower course of the sotla river below the kapele hills (). it is bounded by the road from zupelevec to dobova to the west and the sotla river to the east.  the name jovsi is derived from german jauchsee 'fetid lake'. until the sotla river was regulated, the area was regularly inundated by floodwaters from the river.  jovsi is a flood-zone wetland of exceptional natural interest, distinguished by its great diversity of flora and fauna. about 80 species of birds nest here, which has provided ornithologists with the opportunity to collect extensive data. certain important european species are regularly or intermittently found in jovsi: the white-tailed eagle (haliaeetus albicilla), european roller (coracias garrulus), black stork (ciconia nigra), white stork (ciconia ciconia), common snipe (gallinago gallinago), corn crake (crex crex), and lesser grey shrike (lanius minor).  because of its importance for nature conservation, the area is protected as a nature park.  references  wetlands of slovenia municipality of brezice lower sava valley
focseneanu is a romanian surname. notable people with the surname include:  dumitru focseneanu (1935-2019), romanian bobsledder emilian focseneanu (born 1966), romanian alpine skier   romanian-language surnames
hubert ferrer (born 26 january 1937) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in four editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1937 births living people french male cyclists sportspeople from algiers pieds-noirs
patiala rural is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of patiala district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  patiala district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india patiala district
bagga kalan is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village constitutes 25.86%  of schedule caste and the village doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
amerigo petrucci (17 december 1922 - 31 july 1983) was an italian christian democrat politician. he was mayor of rome from 1964 to 1967. he was appointed knight grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic in 1963.  biography  graduated in philosophy, petrucci joined the christian democracy in 1944, until he became the number two party in rome after giulio andreotti in 1961, of which he belongs. provincial councilor of rome from 1952 to 1960 and municipal councilor from 1960 to 1972, petrucci, from december 1960 to july 1961, was assessor in charge of the "new town plan", in the minority municipal government led by urbano cioccetti. in 1962 petrucci was re-confirmed councilor in charge of town planning in the city government headed by glauco della porta.  two years later della porta resigned and on 13 march 1964 petrucci was elected mayor, at the head of a centre-left government. during his mandate, the capital will experience a notable phase of economic recovery. on 31 march 1966, the resolution was approved that started the administrative decentralization, with the creation of twelve municipal districts.  in the local elections of 12 june 1966, the centre-left obtained an absolute majority in the municipal council of rome and petrucci was re-elected mayor. but his goal was to stand as a candidate for the chamber of deputies in the 1968 general elections. according to the rules then in force, the office of mayor of a large city is an obstacle to parliamentary candidacy: petrucci, therefore, resigns as mayor on 13 november 1967, assuming the post of councilor for the budget in the new council led by rinaldo santini, a trusted man. his objectives, however, suffered a setback: on 20 january 1968 he was indicted and placed in preventive detention for a few months, due to an incident linked to the management of the national maternity and childhood work (omni) of which he had previously been commissioner. many of the charges fell during the investigation and petrucci was acquitted with full formula by the court of rome on 28 april 1972.  elected deputy for the first time in 1972 and then re-elected in 1976, 1979 and 1983, petrucci was undersecretary of defense from 31 july 1976 to 1 december 1982; he held this office in all the governments of the vii and viii legislature, with the exception of the fifth fanfani government.  he died in 1983 following a heart attack.  references  1922 births 1983 deaths politicians from rome christian democracy (italy) politicians mayors of rome
deputies of legislature vi of italy deputies of legislature vii of italy deputies of legislature viii of italy deputies of legislature ix of italy knights grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic
hypaeus terraemediae is a species of jumping spider from the brazilian amazon, specifically sao felix do xingu, para.  references  salticidae spiders of brazil spiders described in 2015
a de ventre inspiciendo (latin for "of inspecting the belly") is a writ issued out of chancery to inspect the body, where a woman feigns to be pregnant, to see whether she is with child. it lies for the heir presumptive to examine a widow suspected to be feigning pregnancy in order to enable a supposititious heir to obtain the estate. it lay also where a woman sentenced to death pleaded pregnancy. this writ has also been recognized in the united states.  references  writs latin legal terminology
the cave of the demons () is an 1898 french short silent film directed by georges melies.  the film was one of melies's early forays into themes that would later be linked to horror cinema (his the haunted castle, made in 1896, is sometimes labeled the first horror film). the cave of the demons is also believed to be the first film in which melies used the cinematic technique of multiple exposure.  the film was released by melies's star film company and is numbered 164 in its catalogues. it is currently presumed lost.  see also  list of ghost films  references  external links    1898 films french films french silent short films french black-and-white films lost horror films 1890s horror films films directed by georges melies french horror films demons in film lost french films 1890s lost films 1890s short films
trap god 3 is the eleventh studio album by american rapper gucci mane. it serves as the third installment in his trap god series.  the album is the only one in the series to have been released during gucci mane's incarceration, on october 17, 2014, by 1017 records and rbc records. the mixtape features one lone guest appearance by chicago rapper chief keef.  track listing  references  2015 albums albums produced by honorable c.n.o.t.e. gucci mane albums sequel albums
scare campaign is a 2016 australian horror film written and directed by colin and cameron cairnes, and starring meegan warner, ian meadows, olivia dejonge and josh quong tart.  plot scare campaign is a hidden camera prank show that has been scaring its targets with old school scares for the last 5 years. their latest target (john brumpton) nearly ends up shooting an actress thinking she's a real zombie until the crew reveals that it's a prank. emma, another actress on the show, speaks to her director and ex-boyfriend marcus (ian meadows) about being more careful who they prank in case they end up scaring "the wrong guy." their manager, vicki (sigrid thornton) shows them a web series called masked freaks that involve a bunch of costumed people killing other people gruesomely. the series threatens scare campaign'''s popularity so vicki encourages the team to up the ante to increase their ratings.  hiring a new actress named abby (olivia dejonge), the team takes their next prank to an abandoned psychiatric hospital, where they intend to prank a new groundskeeper, rohan (josh quong tart). as the prank goes along as planned, emma starts having second thoughts and leaves rohan alone, where he explores the asylum through the team's special effects, despite emma's pleas to end the prank. when abby is signalled to surprise him, rohan reacts by stabbing her to death with a letter opener, strangling cameraman tony and slitting the throat of actress suze. emma and special effects specialist j.d. (patrick harvey) barricade themselves in a room and beg marcus and camera operator dick to call the police. however, rohan breaks in and kills marcus and dick. emma and j.d. make it to the van to escape, but j.d. runs back inside to find the keys. rohan appears but emma stabs his hand and runs inside. it's then revealed that the whole predicament was a prank and emma was their new stooge. trent, the actor playing rohan, berates marcus and quits.  suddenly, masked freaks appear with weapons equipped to their cameras and kills trent, revealing themselves as actual serial killers and not actors as their show made it look. they proceed to murder the other members of scare campaign. marcus tries to warn emma, who ignores him after discovering she was the real stooge of their prank. later, she believes him and they find suze's
body and witness tony getting killed. masked freaks hack into scare campaign's computer and reveal they do what they do for the new generation of online entertainment. they bury abby alive and give marcus and emma five minutes to save her. marcus and emma run out to save abby and kill one of the masked freaks, who is revealed to be merely a teenager. after saving abby, they are surrounded by the masked freaks and their boss tells emma she may leave with either marcus or abby. she chooses abby and kisses marcus before leaving. while they're driving away, the masked freaks reveal to marcus that abby was their spy the whole time before wheeling marcus on a stretcher into a furnace. on the drive back to town, emma notices one of the masked freaks cameras in the van pointing at her, leaving her to wonder about abby's involvement.  cast meegan warner as emma ian meadows as marcus olivia dejonge as abby josh quong tart as trent patrick harvey as j.d. cassandra magrath as suze steve mouzakis as tony john brumpton as george sigrid thornton as vicki kaiting yap as ayako jason geary as dick  reception andrew l. urban at urbancinefile.com gave a positive review, writing "propelled by an ever-inventive screenplay, scare campaign revels in surprising us while scaring us. to its credit, we don't see the twists coming, and the russian doll-type structure gives the film a rich texture."  accolades  references  external linksscare campaign'' at the internet movie database  2016 films 2016 horror films abandoned buildings and structures in fiction australian films australian zombie films australian independent films australian slasher films english-language films films set in psychiatric hospitals films shot in victoria (australia) films about mass murder reality television series parodies snuff films in fiction
jean-baptiste-joseph junbient philadelphe regnault-warin (28 december 1773, bar-le-duc - 4 november 1844, paris) was an 18th-19th-century french novelist, playwright and pamphleteer.  main publications   elements de politique, 1790 ;  la constitution francaise mise a la portee de tout le monde, 2 vol. in-8°, paris 1791 ;  eloge de mirabeau ;  vie de j. petion, maire de paris : cours d'etudes encyclopedique ;  la caverne de strozi ;  homeo et juliette, historical novel ;  le cimetiere de la madeleine, 4 vol. in-12, paris, 1800 ; (the book which had several printings was translated into different languages.)  la jeunesse de figaro ;  le tonneau de diogene, 2 vol. in-12 ;  les prisonniers du temple, sequel to cimetiere de la madeleine, 3 vol. in-12 ;  le paquebot de calais a douvres, roman politique et moral, in 12, 1802 ; (police authorized the publication only with many warnings inserted.)  spinalba, novel, 4 vol. in-12,1803 ;  l'homme au masque de fer, 4 vol. in-12, 1804 ;  loisirs litteraires, 1804 ;  mme de maintenon, 4 vol. in-12 ;  henri ii, duc de montmorency, marechal de france, historical novel, in-8°, 1815 ;  l'esprit de mme de stael, 2 vol. in-8° ;  biographie heroique, in-12. 1818;  memoires et correspondance de l'imperatrice josephine, 2 vol. in-8° ; (this book was disowned by prince eugene beauharnais).  les carbonari, ou le livre de sang, 2 vol. in-12 ;  memoires pour servir a la vie de lafayette, 2 vol in-8°, 1824 ;  chronique indiscrete du xixe, in-8°, 1825.  references  external links   jean-joseph regnault-warin on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french novelists 19th-century french novelists 1773 births people from bar-le-duc 1844 deaths
thais de souza melchior affonso (rio de janeiro, 2 november 1990) is a brazilian actress.  filmography  references  external links  brazilian television actresses 20th-century brazilian actresses 1990 births living people 21st-century brazilian actresses brazilian female models actresses from rio de janeiro (city)
vasundhara doraswamy (born 1949) is the founder/director of vasundhara performing arts centre, mysore (india). she is a bharatanatyam dancer, choreographer and guru. she is also one of the disciples of late shri pattabhi jois in the discipline of ashtanga vinyasa yoga and has developed her own sub domain in vasundhara style.  early life  born in moodabidri, in south canara (karnataka) to  p. nagaraj and smt.varada devi, vasundhara made her acquaintance with bharatanatyam at the tender age of 4 under the guidance of muralidhar rao and won a gold medal at the age of 5 at the state level competition. which highlighted her potential and prompted her parents to seek out the supervision of late shrirajaratnampillai the student of pandanallur meenakshi sundaram pillai, who continued in the role of her guru. vasundhara, through her dedicated training claimed 1st rank in vidwath examination conducted by karnataka secondary education board and claimed three consecutive gold medals. she was married to late sri h.s. doraswamy and has a son who lives in australia with her daughter-in-law meghala bhat hirasave continuing in her tradition running art of vinyasa school of dance. meghala is also the secretary for fimdv (federation of indian music & dance victoria) in melbourne.  career  in 1988 vasundhara earned a ph d for her study on the correlation between yoga and bharatanatyam.  she holds a post-graduate degree in folklore and is a consummate exponent of the martial arts of 'tang-ta' and 'kalarippayattu' that vouches for her quest for multidisciplinary approach to dance e. dr vasundhara has released a treatise on the correlation of yoga and dance called "natya yoga darshana".  as for her choreographies, `panchali` is noted for its singular adaptation of yakshagana music (a form of folk music from the state of karnataka) to bharatanatyam. solo productions like ganga lahari, ambe, dakshayani,panchali, shakuntakunjana (literary masterpieces of udyavara madhava acharya) and now jyothi shankar's kshaatra draupadi -with a strong female oriented theme have won acclaim.  dr vasundhara was honoured with "shantala natya sri award" -the highest state award for dance by the karnataka state governmentand
the rajyotsava award [karnataka state]. she is the youngest recipient of the "karnataka kala tilak", the prestigious award from the karnataka sangeetha nrithya academy, to date and also the only recipient of "aasthaana nritya ratna" from shri krishna mutt, udupi. she has also been honoured with "chandana award" by doordarshan india, "shreshta kala pracharak" from padma bushan saroja vaidyanathan (new delhi), " kala vipanchi" by padma vibushan shri balamurali krishna (chennai), natya jyothi [australia] and artist of the millennium award [usa], just to name a few.   an a-graded artist in doordarshan  she is the only bharatanatyam danseuse to have been invited from india to perform for 'world peace' conference in paris under aegis of unesco before an audience of 2500 representing 137 countries.  a globe-trotting dancer, dr vasundhara regularly performs and conducts workshops in bharatanatyam and yoga in different countries. she has conducted summer camps for bharatiya vidya bhavan in the uk. she has travelled to czech republic, poland, france, germany, united kingdom and austria representing the iccr [indian council for cultural relations]. vasundhara's current tours are primarily based in the us, singapore, paris and australia. vasundhara is a visiting guest professor at alabama university in the us.  for the past 15+ years she has made louisville her home every summer and has been conferred with the "honorary citizen of louisville" & "lifetime achievement award" in 2012 by the mayor of louisville, usa recognizing her contribution to the art field of louisville.  vasundhara performing arts centre vasundhara has established a performing arts centre in mysore, which has been conducting 4 classic music and dance festivals in pallavotsava, natarajotsava, parangotsava and chiguru sange each year for the past 25 years.  vasundhara style  dr vasundhara gained her initial training in pandanallur style of bharathanatyam. over the years, with her experience and creativity, she has been able to give it a unique footprint of her own, which has been recognized by the dance fraternity and the art connoisseurs in her performances and that of her students.  as a venerated guru, dr vasundhara has been successful in generating (three generations) disciples who have imbibed her every move, look (drishti) & nuances needed etc. in the way they
perform.  what inspired dr vasundhara to experiment with the boundaries of the classical dance of bharatanatyam was supposed to have been her strong footing in yoga and experience of martial arts. her use of singular hastas, alluring gaits, abhinaya which can communicate easily with the common man, modifications of the adavus, aharya, inimitable feather-touch footwork, all within the traditional framework, have led to a unique footprint that is today identified and recognized as "vasundhara style".  book release vasundhara's biography biography 'vasundhara: odyssey of a dancer' by prof g.s.paul was released in her 70th birthday celebrations on 01/11/2019 in mysore.  references   1949 births living people indian female classical dancers performers of indian classical dance people from dakshina kannada district women artists from karnataka dancers from karnataka 20th-century indian women artists 20th-century indian dancers
the following lists events that happened in 1989 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - steingrimur hermannsson  events  births  8 january - kristjan einar, racing driver 1 february - alfreð finnbogason, footballer 10 march - brynjar guðmundsson, alpine skier. 31 march - valgerður þoroddsdottir, poet and publisher 22 april - aron gunnarsson, footballer 18 september - annie mist þorisdottir, crossfit athlete  deaths 13 march - haukur oskarsson, footballer (b. 1915) 16 april - brynjolfur bjarnason, politician (b. 1898)  full date missing   jon gunnar arnason, sculptor (b. 1931)  ragnar kjartansson, sculptor (b. 1923)  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
mario vecchiato (born 24 october 1948) is a retired italian hammer thrower. he won a silver medal at the 1971 mediterranean games and placed tenth at the 1971 european championships and ninth at the 1972 summer olympics.  references  external links    1948 births living people olympic athletes of italy athletes (track and field) at the 1972 summer olympics italian male hammer throwers mediterranean games silver medalists for italy athletes (track and field) at the 1971 mediterranean games mediterranean games medalists in athletics
pierre datelin, dit jean brioche, (1567 - 1671) was a famous french puppeteer.  first a tooth-puller, brioche opened in paris in 1650, the first puppet theaters at foires saint-laurent et saint-germain,  the gaiety and verve of his speeches helped make his name and that kind of entertainment equally popular.  he later went to switzerland, where he was imprisoned and almost judged as a sorcerer, because the mechanism of his young players couldn't be understood.  upon retirement, his little theatre was taken over by his son fanchon, who, according to claude brossette, was even more successful than his father.  sources   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des litteratures, paris, hachette, 1876, (p. 326)  charles magnin, histoire des marionnettes en europe depuis l'antiquite jusqu'a nos jours, paris, michel levy freres, 1852, (p. 135-42).  external links  une famille d'operateurs-marionnettistes les brioche  17th-century french male actors french male stage actors french puppeteers 1567 births 1671 deaths french centenarians men centenarians
faiza j. saeed is an attorney in the field of mergers and acquisitions, and is currently the presiding partner of the prominent law firm cravath, swaine & moore.  early life and education saeed was born in walnut creek, california, and is of pakistani descent. she majored in molecular biology and economics at university of california, berkeley, graduating with highest distinction and phi beta kappa, in 1987, then attended harvard law school, graduating magna cum laude, in 1991.  career saeed joined cravath in 1991 and become a partner in the firm in 1998. ms. saeed is known for her close relationships with such industry titans as jeff bewkes, howard schultz and jeffrey katzenberg, the chief executives of timewarner, starbucks and dreamworks, respectively. other clients including morgan stanley and hasbro inc.  elected presiding partner at white shoe law firm cravath in july 2016, saeed received considerable media attention. according to the wall street journal, saeed is the first woman to lead cravath, which traces its origins to 1819. she is also one of few women to lead a new york law firm. the financial times noted her election as "a significant moment for the dealmaking industry". saeed has orchestrated multibillion-dollar deals for notable clients in media, pharmaceuticals, entertainment and other fields.  boards and affiliations saeed is a trustee of newyork-presbyterian hospital and of the paley center for media, a board member of partnership for new york city and a member of the council on foreign relations.  honors she was a "young global leader" at the world economic forum in davos, in 2006, and included on its "wall street's 100 masters of the new universe" list by the new york times. in 2019, she was named to crain's new york business biennial list of the "most powerful women in new york". and the asia society recognized her as a "game changer", describing saeed as "a trusted advisor to chief executives and entrepreneurs and a leading dealmaker across many industries." the hollywood reporter named saeed to its "power lawyers 2020" and "hollywood's top dealmakers of 2020" lists.  references  living people corporate lawyers cravath, swaine & moore partners people associated with fried, frank, harris, shriver & jacobson women in finance harvard law school alumni 20th-century women lawyers 21st-century women lawyers university of california, berkeley alumni american people of pakistani descent year of birth missing (living people) people from walnut creek, california asia game changer award winners

the 2016-17 fa trophy was the 47th season of the fa trophy, the football association's cup competition for teams at levels 5-8 of the english football league system. a total of 276 clubs entered the competition, which was won by york city after beating macclesfield town 3-2 in front of 38,224 spectators at wembley in the final on 21 may 2017.  calendar  preliminary round a total of 128 clubs, from level 8 of english football, entered preliminary round of the competition. eight clubs from level 8 get a bye to the first round qualifying - beaconsfield sycob, heybridge swifts, kidsgrove athletic, market drayton town, phoenix sports, waltham abbey, walton casuals and ware.  first round qualifying a total of 144 teams took part in this stage of the competition including 64 winners from the preliminary round, 72 teams from level 7 of english football and eight teams from level 8, who get a bye in the previous round.  second round qualifying a total of 72 teams took part in this stage of the competition, all winners from the first qualifying round.  third round qualifying a total of 80 teams took part in this stage of the competition, all winners from the second round qualifying and 44 clubs from level 6 of english football.  first round proper a total of 64 teams took part in this stage of the competition, all winners from the third round qualifying and the clubs from level 5 of english football.  second round proper  third round proper  fourth round proper  semi-finals semi final fixtures are due to be played on 11 march and 18 march 2017, with the second leg going to extra time and penalties if required.  first leg  second leg  final  references  2016-17 england fa trophy
is a japanese former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics. he later became a professional keirin cyclist with over 200 wins.  references  1967 births living people japanese male cyclists olympic cyclists of japan cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from iwate prefecture keirin cyclists
andre marceau (born 6 may 1946) is a french catholic prelate who served as the bishop of perpignan from 2004 to 2014, and currently serves as the bishop of nice since 2014.  biography born may 6, 1946 in cerons (gironde, france) andre marceau attended the major seminary of bordeaux in 1964 and did his national service from 1966 to 1968 in ivory coast. he also graduated from the higher institute of catechetical ministry (catholic institute of paris) and was ordained a priest on march 25, 1972. he worked in the parish st. vincent de merignac (gironde) for the archdiocese of bordeaux and 8 years in the parish st. vincent de merignac.  in 1992 he became episcopal vicar until 2000, then parish priest of la reole until 2003, where he became vicar general of the archdiocese of bordeaux. he was also responsible diocesan catechumenate and episcopal delegate to the chaplaincy of public education. he was appointed bishop of perpignan-elne (pyrenees-orientales) january 13, 2004 by pope john paul ii, he succeeded andre fort, bishop of orleans since november 2002. on march 7, 2004 by cardinal jean -pierre ricard in the saint-jean-baptiste of perpignan. within the bishops' conference of france, is a member of the council for interreligious relations and new religious movements.  on march 6, 2014, he was appointed bishop of nice and was installed may 11, 2014.  see also  catholic church in france  list of the roman catholic dioceses of france  references  1946 births living people bishops of nice people from gironde 21st-century roman catholic bishops in france
an off-season australian tropical cyclone is a tropical cyclone that existed in the australian region, between 90°e and 160°e, outside of the official season. the world meteorological organization currently defines the season as occurring between 1 november and 30 april, of the following year, which is when the majority of all tropical cyclones exist. during the off-season, systems are more likely to either develop during or persist until may, with approximately 52% of such storms occurring during that month. occasionally, however, storms develop in october, with approximately 34% of such storms occurring during that month. as of 2020, there have been 90 tropical cyclones known to have occurred off-season.  off-season cyclones are most likely to occur in the coral sea, with most affecting land in some way. cumulatively, at least 4 deaths occurred due to the storms, the most recent off-season storm was mangga in may 2020.  systems the wind speeds listed are maximum ten-minute average sustained winds, while the pressure is the minimum barometric pressure, both of which are estimates taken from the archives of either meteo-france, the australian bureau of meteorology, the fiji meteorological service, and new zealand's metservice. if there are no known estimates of either the winds or pressure then the system is listed as "not specified" under winds or pressure, if there is no known estimated winds or pressure. for deaths and damages "none" indicates that there were no reports of fatalities, although such storms may have impacted land. the damage totals are the united states dollar of the year of the storm.  |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || n/a || n/a || n/a || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new south wales || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western australia, tasmania || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || indonesia || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |-
| unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 05u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 09u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 06u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 03u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 09u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 01u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 20u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none ||  |- | 01u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 02u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none ||   |- | 32p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, new caledonianew zealand || none || none || |- | 18u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 33p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 24p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 15u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 49p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, queensland || none || none || |- | 32u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, queensland || none
|| none || |- | 33u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 34u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 35u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatunew caledonia || none || none || |- | 53p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 37u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 38u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | esther ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea || none || none || |- | lulu ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western australia || none || none || |- | 32p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | hannah ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islandspapua new guinea || none || none || |- | ida ||  || bgcolor=#|  ||  ||  || solomon islands, new caledonia || || || |- | marcelle ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || south-western australia || none || none || |- | 02p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | marcia ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos island || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#|unknown || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | norah ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || christmas island, cocos island || none || none || |- | denise ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos island || minor || none || |- | carol ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | verna ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || northern territory || none || none || |- | kevin ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | paddy ||  || bgcolor=#|category 3 severe tropical cyclone ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western australia || none || none || |- | alex ||  || bgcolor=#|category 3 severe tropical cyclone ||  bgcolor=#|
|| bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | claudia ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | naomi ||  || bgcolor=#|category 3 severe tropical cyclone ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | oscar ||  || bgcolor=#|category 3 severe tropical cyclone ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | billy -lila ||  || bgcolor=#|category 4 severe tropical cyclone ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western australia || none || none || |- | meena ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cape york peninsula || none || none || |- | ernie ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 02s ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#|not specified || bgcolor=#|not specified || none || none || none || |- | lisa ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatu || none || none || |- | adel ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea || minimal || 3 || |- | willy ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#||| bgcolor=#| || cocos islands || none || none ||  |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| not specified || queensland || none || none || |- | rhonda ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos island, western australia || none || none || |- | lindsay ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | melanie -bellamine ||  || bgcolor=#|category 2 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | zelia ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 26f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || || || |- | 20f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || || || |- | 21f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || || || |- | alex -andre ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none ||  |- | errol ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | upia ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || budelun island
|| none || none || |- | epi ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea || none || none || |- | phoebe ||  || bgcolor=#|category 1 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | pierre ||  ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea || minimal || none || |- | 01u/01s ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | kirrily ||  || bgcolor=#|category 1 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || indonesia || minimal || none || |- | 24u ||  || bgcolor=#|tropical low || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | anggrek ||  || bgcolor=#|tropical low || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos (keeling) islands || none || none || |- | 19s ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || indonesia, east timor || none || none || |- | 21p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || n/a || none || |- | zane ||  || bgcolor=#|category 2 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea, queensland || none || none || |- | quang ||  || bgcolor=#|category 4 severe tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western australia || minor || none || |- | raquel ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#||| bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || significant || 1 || |- | frances ||  || bgcolor=#|category 3 severe tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea, indonesiaeast timor || none || none || |- | greg ||  || bgcolor=#|category 1 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos (keeling) islands || none || none || |- | lili ||  || bgcolor=#|category 1 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#||| bgcolor=#| || eastern indonesia, east timortop end, northern kimberley || none || none ||  |- | ann ||  || bgcolor=#|category 2 tropical cyclone || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, new caledonia, queensland || none || none || |- | | td ||  || bgcolor=#|tropical depression|| bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || western indonesia, christmas island, cocos islands || none || none || |- | | mangga || || bgcolor=#|category 1 tropical cyclone|| bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cocos islands || none || none || |- | | tl || ||
bgcolor=#|tropical low|| bgcolor=#|not specified || bgcolor=#| not specified	|| none || none || none || |- class="sortbottom" |}  records and statistics the charts below both show during which month a tropical cyclone developed during the off-season. the statistics for april are not complete and only show those systems that formed during the month and either dissipated on 30 april, or persisted into the off-season.  notes  see also list of off-season atlantic hurricanes list of off-season pacific hurricanes list of off-season south pacific tropical cyclones  references  external links  australian region cyclones australian region cyclones off-season
the tanzer 29 is a canadian sailboat, that was designed by the french company of joubert-nivelt and first built in 1986.  production production of the boat was commenced in 1986 by tanzer industries of dorion, quebec. the company entered bankruptcy in may of that same year and production ended.  design  the tanzer 29 is a small recreational keelboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. it has a masthead sloop rig, a spade-type rudder and a fixed fin keel or optionally, a shoal-draft keel.  the boat has a phrf racing average handicap of 174 with a high of 177 and low of 171. it has a hull speed of .  variants tanzer 29 with the standard keel it has a draft of , displaces  and carries  of ballast. tanzer 29 sd with the shoal-keel it has a draft of , displaces  and carries  of ballast.  see also  list of sailing boat types similar sailboats alberg 29 bayfield 29  c&c 29 cal 29 hunter 290 island packet 29 mirage 29 northwind 29 prospect 900 thames marine mirage 29 watkins 29  references  external links  keelboats 1980s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by joubert-nivelt sailboat types built by tanzer industries
fuel project  aims at solving the problem of inconsistency and lack of standardization in software translation across the platform. fuel project develops content especially for language users. it works at making technology friendly to user by working as an interpreter. an interpreter who has localized the language of technology and made a glossary of different keywords which is accessible by the user. currently fuel project is working in 40 different languages worldwide. it helps the user to translate and understand different computer terminologies in his own native language. additionally, the content and glossaries are provided as open source. they are completely free to access by user.  history  fuel project was launched in 2008. it was initiated by red hat. it was started to create a desktop for a hindi known user. it was inspired by the thought of making a hindi user able to understand the language of technology. glossary of different terms/command, style guide in that language and other content was generated. it standardized the translation standard. the result of effort made other language communities also work with fuel project. fuel project has organized several language community workshops with the help of local communities, language academies, university language departments, several important organizations and body like red hat, c-dac, wiki media foundation.  need  it is widely seen that many user are not able to understand computer terminologies. so for them it is needed to standardize those terminologies. make technology talk in which they want it to. with each day passing society is drifting more towards a digital society where things are done online. government services, online exams, filling forms for different purposes and what not. digital platform is considered the easiest method, but for some understanding the same is not easy. making them understand which term/command means what in the language they understand gave birth to fuel project. so for a user it is very necessary to get friendly with the budding technology each day. for doing so the user need to understand the language of technology then translate it for him to do a task. fuel project works  by making the language of technology friendly to him.  services by fuel project   terminology  translation style and convention guides  unicode text rendering reference system  guides for translation quality assessment  knowledge base contents  translators' training  references   http://fuelproject.org/  software projects
the 2004 cardiff council election was the third election to the post-1996 cardiff council following the re-organization of local government in wales. it was held on 10 june 2004. it was preceded by the 1999 election and followed by the 2008 elections. on the same day, elections were held for the european parliament as well as to the other 21 local authorities and to community councils in wales as part of the 2004 welsh local elections.  overview council elections in wales were originally scheduled for may 2003, but were delayed to avoid a conflict with the 2003 wales assembly elections.  all 75 council seats were up for election. labour lost its majority at this election. the labour group leader also resigned after it became clear he would be defeated in an election for the post by llandaff councillor greg owens.  independent butetown councillor, betty campbell, narrowly lost her seat to labour amid claims of 'dirty tricks' during the campaign.  |}  ward results  adamstown (2 seats)  butetown (1 seat)  caerau (2 seats)  canton (3 seats)  cathays (4 seats)  creigiau & st. fagans (1 seat)  cyncoed (3 seats)  ely (3 seats)  fairwater (3 seats)  gabalfa (2 seats) the liberal democrats had won a seat in this ward at a by-election.  grangetown (3 seats)  heath (3 seats)  lisvane (1 seat)  llandaff (2 seats)  llandaff north (2 seats)  llanishen (4 seats)  llanrumney (3 seats)  pentwyn (4 seats) cubitt previously represented pontprennau. woodman had previously held the seat for the liberal democrats at a by-election on 11 september 2003.  pentyrch (1 seat)  penylan (3 seats)  plasnewydd (4 seats)  pontprennau & old st. mellons (2 seats)  radyr (1 seat)  rhiwbina (3 seats)  riverside (3 seats)  rumney (2 seats)  splott (3 seats)  trowbridge (3 seats)  whitchurch & tongwynlais (4 seats)  by-elections between 2004 and 2008 there were no by-elections.  references  2004 cardiff 2000s in cardiff
erik streno (born 29 september 1990) is a slovak football forward who currently plays for fk humenne in 3. liga east.  club career  1. fc tatran presov streno made his professional fortuna liga debut for tatran presov against ruzomberok on 16 july 2016.  references  external links  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1990 births living people slovak footballers association football forwards mfk vranov nad toplou players partizan bardejov players mfk zemplin michalovce players fk poprad players 1. fc tatran presov players fk humenne players slovak super liga players people from vranov nad toplou 2. liga (slovakia) players
lucas bruchet (born february 23, 1991, in vancouver, british columbia) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the middle-distance events, predominantly the 5,000m event. he competed in the 5000 metres at the 2015 pan american games in toronto, where he finished 8th.  in june 2016, he ran a personal best of 13:24.10 (in the 5,000 metres event), in the process meeting the olympic standard. in july he was officially named to the olympic team. in the men's 5,000 metres at the 2016 olympics he finished 37th after failing to qualify for the finals   he competed at the 2020 summer olympics.  running career  high school  bruchet attended elgin park secondary in surrey, british columbia. while still in high school, bruchet finished in seventh place in the 1500 meters at the 2009 pan american junior athletics championships  career highlights canadian cross country champion 2013, 2017, 2018  personal bests 1500 metres (track) - 3:39.19 (2014) one mile (indoor track) - 3.57.71 (2014) 3000 metres (track) - 7:46.89 (2017) 5,000 metres (track) - 13:12.56 min (2021) 10,000 metres (track) - 28:17.33 min (2020) 5 km (road) - 14:08 min (2016)  references  external links    1991 births living people athletes (track and field) at the 2015 pan american games pan american games track and field athletes for canada athletes from vancouver canadian male long-distance runners athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
abas ismaili (born 21 march 1967) is an iranian former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1967 births living people iranian male cyclists olympic cyclists of iran cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
zira is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of firozpur district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022           -->  2017   zira assembly constituency (sl. no.: 75) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in firozepur district, punjab state, india.  previous results  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  firozpur district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india firozpur district
cornelis johannes marinkelle (july 1, 1925 - january 18, 2012) was a dutch physician and biologist, who contributed to the taxonomy of insects, parasites, yeasts and mammals.  he described and reported several new living species; many species are named on his honour.  biography  marinkelle was born on july 1, 1925 in vienna, austria to dutch parents. he was named after his father and grandfather homonymous lieutenant captain of the royal netherlands army, lt ct. cornelis johannes marinkelle.  marinkelle studied for his bsc in biological sciences at the university of batavia in indonesia, graduating in 1950. he went on to study for a medical degree from the university of utrecht in 1956 and 1959, and then a phd from the university of brussels in 1960. marinkelle served as a physician for government of the netherlands from 1961-1962 and served as medical personnel in the peace corps for the government of the netherlands, with humanitarian and research missions at universidad del salvador in 1962.  in 1963 marinkelle was appointed as professor at the universidad de los andes. he had the chair as professor of parasitology, protozoology, entomology and zoonoses in the department of biological sciences until 2011. he was the founder of the research center for microbiology and tropical parasitology in bogota (cimpat, centro de investigaciones en microbiologia y parasitologia tropical). in 1997 he was awarded as emeritus professor. he was also advisor for the who in topics such as parasitology diseases, tropical medicine and health promotion in developing countries.  marinkelle was also an avid collector of eggs as a skilled oologist, activity he did for more than 70 years and he donated all his collected specimens to build the marinkelle collection that received attention by popular media.  marinkelle died on january 18, 2012 in bogota.  on april 20, 2020, the museo de historia natural andes of the universidad de los andes was renamed in his honor as the museo de historia natural c.j. marinkelle.  references  external links  http://www.uniandes.edu.co/institucional/profesores-emeritos/profesor-cornelis-johannes-marinkelle  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=u9qvro6zg-y  https://web.archive.org/web/20170117021543/http://www.moir.org.co/un-hombre
-universal-que-amo-e.html  1925 births 2012 deaths deaths in colombia university of el salvador faculty 20th-century dutch physicians scientists from vienna utrecht university alumni free university of brussels (1834-1969) alumni dutch parasitologists
the 2016-17 liga panamena de futbol season (also known as the liga cable onda) was the 27th season of top-flight football in panama. the season began on 2016 and was scheduled to end in may 2017. ten teams competed throughout the entire season.  teams atletico chiriqui finished in 10th place in the overall table last season and were relegated to the liga nacional de ascenso. taking their place for this season are the overall champions of last season's liga nacional de ascenso santa gema.  chepo suffered financial trouble and sold their spot to atletico veraguense.  2016 apertura  personnel and sponsoring (2016 apertura)  managerial changes  during the season  standings  results  second stage  semifinals first legs  second legs  arabe unido won 5-3 on aggregate.  plaza amador won 1-0 on aggregate.  finals  grand final  2017 clausura  personnel and sponsoring (2017 clausura)  standings  results  second stage  semifinals first legs  second legs  arabe unido won 2-1 on aggregate.  tauro won 3-2 on aggregate.  finals  grand final  list of foreign players in the league this is a list of foreign players for the 2016-2017. the following players: have played at least one game for the respective club. have not been capped for the panama national football team on any level, independently from the birthplace  alianza    facundo kroeck   robyn pertuz   gerardo negrete   mauricio castano  arabe unido   miguel lloyd  atletico nacional   manuel murillo    andres santamaria  atletico veraguense    damaso pichon   alexis mendoza   walter franco   arlinto murillo  chorillo   fabio da silva   david agudelo    jorge henriquez   justin arboleda  plaza amador   frank piedrahita   daniel blanco  santa gema   miguel duque  san francisco fc   wanegre delgado de armas    varcan sterling   sporting san miguelito   none  tauro fc   jose peraza   carlos sierra    ariel bonilla   (player released mid season)  aggregate table  external links  https://web.archive.org/web/20181006121704/http://panamafutbol.com/?cat=3&paged=3  http://lpf.com.pa/w/category/noticas/  https://int.soccerway.com/national/panama/lpf/20152016/apertura
/r31790/  http://www.rpctv.com/deportes/futbolnacional/  liga panamena de futbol seasons 1 pan
alborada del gracioso ("the jester's aubade", or other translations: see below) is a short orchestral piece by maurice ravel first performed in 1919. it is an orchestrated version of one of the five movements of his piano suite miroirs, written in 1904-05. originally created for a ballet, the work has entered the concert repertoire, and has been recorded frequently.  title  the title, in spanish, has no exact english translation. it has been various rendered as "morning song of the clown",  "the jester's aubade", and "morning song of the buffoon". alborada, literally "dawn", has a variety of musical meanings: it can be a lively folk-dance, a galician folk tune, a type of rhythmically free instrumental music played on bagpipes and small drum, a song for a wedding day, or, as it is usually construed in the context of ravel's piece, a musical announcement of dawn, a sunrise song, the equivalent of a french or english aubade. in that sense, the roots of the term can be traced to the old troubadour and trouvere tradition in which the song portrayed the parting of two lovers at dawn. a gracioso was a figure from spanish comedy, variously described as a jester or a clown, the classic genial buffoon, the standard grotesque lover, akin to don quixote, of ancient castilian comedy, a humorous or amusingly entertaining person, and a servant or squire who often comments satirically on the actions of his superiors.  background  in the years 1904-05, as he was finishing his string quartet, ravel composed miroirs (mirrors), a suite of five short piano pieces. he later orchestrated two of them: the orchestral version of "un barque sur l'ocean" (a barque on the ocean) came out in 1906; more than a decade elapsed before ravel orchestrated the other, the "alborado del gracioso".  the orchestration came about at the invitation of sergei diaghilev, the impresario of the ballets russes. he was well acquainted with ravel, having commissioned from him the music for daphnis et chloe in 1909. diaghilev visited spain for the first time in 1916 and was so taken with the country that he commissioned several ballets on spanish themes. the first appeared in the same year: leonid massine's las meninas, inspired by velazquez's painting of the same name. it was
danced to a composite score that included "alborada del gracioso" (in its piano version) along with gabriel faure's pavane and pieces by louis aubert and emmanuel chabrier. diaghilev commissioned ravel to orchestrate the alborada (and the chabrier piece, the menuet pompeux) for a production of the ballet, retitled les jardins d'aranjuez, at the alhambra theatre, london in 1919. before the ballet opened in london the orchestral alborada was premiered in paris on 17 may 1919 by the pasdeloup orchestra conducted by rhene-baton.  music  the music consists of two sections of lively dance music, separated by a rhapsodic, extended song. the opening is marked assez vif (fairly quick), ♩ = 92. like the piano original, the piece begins with imitations of guitar music. in the orchestral version they are produced by the first harp, played close to the sound board, along with precisely arranged pizzicato violins and violas. the basic metre of the opening section is  but ravel varies it with occasional bars of  and .  the music is mainly quiet for the first 28 bars as the themes are established. they are then brought together in what the commentator eric bromberger describes as "a great explosion of sound, subtly tinted by ravel's use of castanets, tambourine, cymbals and harp". and then a fortissimo chord introduces the central episode, a plaintive  melody for solo bassoon - the clown's song - alternating with shimmering string sonorities. to represent the sounds of the extreme treble of the piano original, the accompaniment to the bassoon melody is scored for 24-part strings, some instruments bowed, others plucked, and deploying a range of harmonics, multiple stops and sul tasto effects.  the music makes a gradual return to the original tempo; ravel added four bars to the original score here, making use of woodwind tremolos. the piece builds to a conclusion and ends in what critics have variously described as "a blaze of orchestral color", "an exhilarating climax", and "a grand and glorious racket".  recordings the first recording of the orchestral alborada del gracioso was made by the berlin state opera orchestra, conducted by otto klemperer in 1926. since then there have been numerous versions on record. in a comparative survey of recordings for bbc radio 3, rob cowan short-listed the following:  recordings
recommended by other critics include:  in 2015 the conductor francois-xavier roth and the orchestra les siecles, which specialises in historically informed performance, released a recording of the alborada   using original or reproduction instruments of the period.  references and sources  references  sources                    compositions for symphony orchestra 1904 compositions 1919 compositions compositions by maurice ravel
reflections of a summer day is an outdoor 1974 painted steel sculpture by duane loppnow, installed near the entrance to the jordan schnitzer museum of art on the university of oregon campus in eugene, oregon, in the united states. the sculpture was given to the university of oregon by the sculptor, a graduate of the university.  the abstract (geometric) sculpture measures approximately  x  x  and rests on a base that measures approximately  x  x . its condition was deemed "treatment needed" when the smithsonian institution surveyed the work as part of its "save outdoor sculpture!" program in 1994.  see also  1974 in art  references  1974 establishments in oregon 1974 sculptures abstract sculptures in oregon outdoor sculptures in eugene, oregon steel sculptures in oregon university of oregon campus
the 33rd district of the iowa senate is located in eastern iowa, and is currently composed of linn county.  current elected officials rob hogg is the senator currently representing the 33rd district.  the area of the 33rd district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 65th district (represented by liz bennett) the 66th district (represented by art staed)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  john w. patton, 1965-1966 james potgeter, 1967-1970 john tapscott, 1971-1972 george f. milligan, 1973-1974 philip b. hill, 1975-1978 julia gentleman, 1979-1982 donald gettings, 1983-1992 william d. palmer, 1993-1998 jeff lamberti, 1999-2002 jack hatch, 2003-2012 rob hogg, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  33
anadara broughtonii is a species of ark clam. the species was described by shrenck in 1867.  originally belonging to the genus scapharca, the genus has merged with anadara now.  adult blood clams can reach a shell length of 100 mm and are commercially harvested in china, japan, and korea as a source of sashimi. to develop both the scientific research and improve the aquaculture of blood clams, a chromosomal-level genome assembly of the s. broughtonii genome has been sequenced and assembled, producing a 884.5-mb genome.  distribution the species is distributed in far east, from russia down to korea, mainland china, japan and taiwan.  references  external links  broughtonii molluscs described in 1867
"samba do aviao" (), also known as "song of the jet", is a brazilian song composed in 1962 by antonio carlos jobim, who also wrote the original portuguese lyrics. the english-language lyrics are by gene lees.  in the biography antonio carlos jobim: an illuminated man, helena jobim describes how her brother came up with the idea for the song: "tom's many walks from ipanema to santos dumont airport yielded that ode of beauty... he would head towards the airport, following the water's edge around guanabara's bay. the pretext to go there was to buy foreign magazines and newspapers. from santos dumont airport he could observe his passion, the airplane. yet he still kept some distance from those machines. he was afraid of flying, but he loved their power, splendor, and aerodynamics-man's conquest over machine".  in the song, jobim writes about landing at "galeao" in rio de janeiro. the airport was renamed in his honor in 1999 and is now called rio de janeiro-antonio carlos jobim international airport.  jobim wrote "samba do aviao" for an italian film, copacabana palace (1962), where it was performed by jula de palma and i 4 + 4 di nora orlandi. the movie was filmed in rio and features cameo appearances by jobim, joao gilberto and os cariocas.  the first performance of the song was by jobim and os cariocas in august 1962 at the au bon gourmet restaurant in copacabana, rio, at what music historian ruy castro calls "the bossa nova show to end all bossa nova shows", as it featured jobim, joao gilberto, vinicius de moraes and os cariocas on stage together for the only time.  the first recording of the song was released in october 1962 by elza laranjeira. os cariocas had a hit with their rendition in 1963. the first english-language version was by tony bennett for his 1965 album if i ruled the world: songs for the jet set.  recorded versions  elza laranjeira (october 1962)  os cariocas - a bossa dos cariocas (1963)  sylvia telles - bossa, balanco, balada (1963)  eumir deodato - inutil paisagem - as maiores composicoes de antonio carlos jobim (1964)  paul winter, w/ luiz bonfa, roberto menescal & luiz eca - rio (1964) - as
"avion (song of the jet)"  tony bennett - if i ruled the world: songs for the jet set (1965)  charlie byrd - brazilian byrd (1965)  antonio carlos jobim - the wonderful world of antonio carlos jobim (1965)  bud shank, with joao donato - bud shank & his brazilian friends (1965)  walter wanderley - rain forest (1966)  dick hyman - brazilian impressions (1967)  stanley turrentine - a bluish bag (rec. 1967, released 2007)  gilberto gil - refavela (1977)  miucha & antonio carlos jobim - miucha & antonio carlos jobim (1977)  ella fitzgerald - ella abraca jobim (1981) - released on the original lp but left off the 1991 cd version  os mulheres negras - musica e ciencia (1988)  baden powell - live in hamburg (rec. 1983, released 1995)  eliane elias - paulistana (1993) - as "jet samba (samba do aviao)"  danilo caymmi - sol moreno (1995)  eliane elias - eliane elias sings jobim (1998)  gal costa - gal costa canta tom jobim ao vivo (1999)  jaques morelenbaum, paula morelenbaum and ryuichi sakamoto - morelenbaum 2/sakamoto: a day in new york (2003)  roseanna vitro - tropical postcards (2004)  toquinho - tributo a bossa nova (2005)  milton nascimento - novas bossas (2008)  lisa ono and miucha  - the music of antonio carlos jobim "impanema" (2007)  references  external links  lyrical brazil: samba do aviao - includes additional information about the song.  1962 songs tony bennett songs songs with music by antonio carlos jobim bossa nova songs brazilian songs portuguese-language songs
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who have played for rangpur division in first-class, list a or twenty20 matches since the team was formed ahead of the 2011-12 season for the thirteenth national cricket league (ncl) competition. complying with other club lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a rangpur player, current players to the end of the 2015-16 season.  a  abdur rahman (2011-12 to 2012-13)  afsharul sujon (2011-12)  ahamedul kabir (2013-14)  ahsanul lipu (2011-12 to 2012-13)  alauddin babu (2011-12 to 2013-14)  arafat sunny (2015-16)  arif reza (2011-12)  ariful haque (2011-12 to 2015-16)  ashraful alam (2013-14)  avishek mitra (2012-13)  b  bishawnath halder (2014-15 to 2015-16)  d  dhiman ghosh (2011-12 to 2015-16)  j  jahid javed (2013-14)  k  kalyan ashish (2013-14 to 2015-16)  l  liton das (2011-12 to 2015-16)  m  mahmudul hasan (2011-12 to 2015-16)  minhas reza (2011-12)  s. m. mustakim (2011-12)  n  naeem islam junior (2011-12)  naeem islam senior (2011-12 to 2015-16)  nahidul islam (2015-16)  nasir hossain (2012-13 to 2015-16)  nobin islam (2015-16)  r  robiul islam robi (2011-12 to 2012-13)  s  saddam hossain (2015-16)  saddam hossain shawon (2013-14 to 2015-16)  sajidul islam (2011-12 to 2015-16)  salauddin (2012-13 to 2013-14)  sanjit saha (2014-15 to 2015-16)  saymon ahmed (2011-12 to 2015-16)  subashis roy (2011-12 to 2015-16)  suhrawadi shuvo (2012-13 to 2015-16)  t  tanveer haider (2011-12 to 2015-16)  tariq ahmed (2011-12 to 2015
-16)  references  rangpur
clogestone (inn, ban), also known as chlormadinol or as 3β,17α-dihydroxy-6-chloropregna-4,6-diene-20-one, is a steroidal progestin that was synthesized in 1964 and was investigated as a progestin-only contraceptive but was never marketed. a diacetate ester, clogestone acetate, also exists and similarly was never marketed.  see also  acetomepregenol  butagest  mecigestone  references  organochlorides pregnanes progestogens abandoned drugs
wang krang railway station is a railway station located in noen makok subdistrict, bang mun nak district, phichit. named after the sound of rail cars being coupled together, it is located 290.243 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
dolls () is a 2007 czech drama film directed by karin babinska.  synopsis  during summer holidays, four teenagers, three girls and a boy, in search of sexual experiences and excesses of all kinds, decide to join amsterdam by hitchhiking. their personalities will be revealed, and the introverted iska will choose to openly assume the desire she feels for her best friend karolina.  production   title : dolls  original title : pusinky  director : karin babinska  scenario : karin babinska and petra uselova  sound : dolby digital  language : czech  duration : 90 minutes  filming location : czech republic  release date : 5 april 2007  country : czech republic  casting    : karolina  marie dolezalova : iska   : vendula  filip blazek : marek  lenka vlasakova : hanka   : vojta  erik kalivoda : bobr  mario kubas : vrbar  matej ruppert : bedas  awards   2007 finale plzen award  external links     pusinky on the encyclopedia of lesbian movie scenes  2007 films 2007 drama films czech films czech lgbt-related films golden kingfisher winners czech drama road movies 2000s drama road movies 2007 lgbt-related films lgbt-related drama films lesbian-related films 2000s czech-language films
cinearte was a brazilian magazine about cinema, which was founded in rio de janeiro on march 3, 1926. its founders were mario behring and adhemar gonzaga.  cinearte was published on a weekly basis. the magazine first attempted to lay a bridge between brazilian cinema and north american cinema. however, it later focused on national cinema. the magazine ceased publication in july 1942.  references  external links  official website  1926 establishments in brazil 1942 disestablishments in brazil magazines published in brazil weekly magazines published in brazil defunct magazines published in brazil film magazines magazines established in 1926 magazines disestablished in 1942 mass media in rio de janeiro (city) portuguese-language magazines
the oran park-gregory hills chargers rugby league club is a rugby league team based in oran park, new south wales, australia.  the chargers play in the group 6 rugby league competition. in the 2017 season they have teams playing in the group 6 second division cup competition, ladies league tag competition as well as a junior side.  history  2014-2016  2017 oran park had a team registered to play in both the group 6 crl cup competition as well as the group 6 crl shield competition. the shield side came runners up in the group 6 crl shield competition going down 36-6 to the bundanoon highlanders.  2018 oran park signed on major sponsor waratah landscape supplies for the start of the 2018 season.  notable  juniors  see also  rugby league in new south wales  references  external links oran park chargers fox sports pulse  rugby league teams in sydney rugby clubs established in 2014 2014 establishments in australia oran park, new south wales
hip 41378 b (also known as epic 211311380 b)  is an exoplanet orbiting around the f-type star hip 41378. it has a radius about 2.6 times that of earth.  see also  lists of exoplanets  gliese 1132 b, rocky exoplanet with a confirmed atmosphere.  mu arae c, in the constellation ara  planetary system  references  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets hip 41378  cancer (constellation)
usue maitane arconada (born 28 october 1998) is an american tennis player born in argentina.  arconada is the 2016 wimbledon championships girls' doubles champion, alongside claire liu. in may 2015, she achieved a career-high itf juniors combined ranking of no. 5. to date, she has won five singles and seven doubles titles on the itf circuit.  performance timelines  singles  wta 125k series finals  singles: 1 (1 runner-up)  doubles: 2 (2 runner-ups)  itf circuit finals  singles: 6 (4 titles, 2 runner-ups)  doubles: 13 (7 titles, 6 runner-ups)  junior grand slam finals  girls' doubles: 1 (1 title)  external links      1998 births living people american female tennis players tennis players from buenos aires sportspeople from san juan, puerto rico wimbledon junior champions grand slam (tennis) champions in girls' doubles american people of argentine descent american people of basque descent pan american games medalists in tennis pan american games gold medalists for the united states tennis players at the 2019 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games
martina hingis and anna kournikova were the defending champions, but none of them competed this year.  lisa raymond and rennae stubbs won the title by defeating arantxa sanchez vicario and magui serna 6-3, 4-6, 6-2 in the final. it was the 16th title for raymond and the 22nd title for stubbs in their respective doubles careers. it was also the 2nd title for the pair during the season, after their win in the australian open.  seeds the first four seeds received a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references  official results archive (itf)  official results archive (wta)  italian open - doubles women's doubles
saint patrick's school is a campus of schools (st patrick's infants school, st patrick's girls primary, st patrick's boys primary and saint patrick's college) in cork, ireland. saint patrick's is situated on gardiner's hill and has a history dating to the 1820s.  history  the school began operations in october 1822 as brickfields male and female free school in rented premises in two private homes in lower glanmire road, cork. students were not charged tuition, and funding for the school was provided by charitable donations and an annual fundraiser. the school became part of ireland's national education system in 1833. at that point the school had two teachers and 100 students (60 boys and 40 girls).  saint luke's cross  in 1840, brickfields free school held its last lessons and in september 1841, its pupils and staff moved to a new purpose-built premises at saint luke's cross. the new school, which had space for many more students was called st. patrick's school and in a fundraising letter written at the time of opening the school manager, rev. patrick william coffey, described the new building as having two floors, with the boys using the upper floor and entering the building from the ballyhooly road (just above where the pedestrian crossing is now) and the girls using the lower floor and entering from alexandra road. coffey described the interior as having been kitted out with desks, blackboards, lockers, and two fireplaces.   at the time of its opening saint patrick's school had 300 pupils on the books, 174 boys and 126 girls. most of the pupils paid 1d a month for their schooling but around 100 pupils paid no tuition. the founding school manager, fr. coffey died of typhus in june 1847 at the age of 42. a plaque was erected in his memory in the church.  in 1863, st. patrick's infants' school was opened in a newly built schoolroom, using a donation from the estate of j. murphy of clifton, montenotte. the school had 85 students (34 boys and 51 girls), most of whom had transferred from the existing boys' and girls' schools. by 1873 the infants' school had 300 students.  in 1886, an evening school for adults was opened in st. patrick's male school. it operated from 19:00 to 21:00, monday to thursday. when the district inspector from the board of education visited the night school, he found thirty students being taught (all male) and a further 47 on the books, he
recommended that the school be funded.  at the time of the first world war the writer daniel corkery was a teacher in saint patricks. he introduced gaelic games to the school in 1917. his pupils at the school included the sculptor seamus murphy and writer frank o'connor. corkery resigned from saint patrick's in 1921 after being passed over for a promotion to headmaster. he would go on to have successful careers in academia and politics.  gardiner's hill  saint patrick's school remained at saint luke's for almost a hundred years. by the late 1930s however the site had become inadequate and it was decided to move to a new purpose-built school that would be built in the fields between the ballyhooly road and gardiners hill.  on 29 november 1937 the 261 boys walked the few hundred yards to the new site on gardiner's hill. the new school was officially opened by the then lord mayor jim hickey.   the girls remained at st lukes until 1955 when they moved to their a new purpose-built school (designed by james barrett) in the site adjoining the boys school. the new building also housed st. patrick's infants' school and allowed for a post-primary level school for girls, st patrick's college, to be founded in 1958.  in 1995, a new purpose-built school was built on the campus for st patrick's college. st. patrick's infants' school and st. patrick's girls national school remained in the 1955 building.  in 2007, an all-polish weekend school was launched at saint patrick's, based in the boys national school (1937) building.  notable pupils and staff   daniel corkery, writer, academic and politician  frank o'connor, writer  seamus murphy, sculptor  alan lotty, hurler  jackie o'driscoll, footballer  joe kelly, hurler  donie o'donovan, gaelic footballer  sean o'brien, hurler  johnny buckley, hurler  donal lenihan, rugby player  david corkery, rugby player  leon mcsweeney, footballer  tomas o'leary, rugby player  references  external links  st. patrick's infants national school - website st. patrick's boys national school - website st. patrick's girls national school - website st. patrick's college - website  secondary schools in county cork educational institutions established in 1841 boys' schools in the republic of ireland girls' schools in the republic of ireland catholic primary schools in the republic of ireland 1841 establishments in ireland
late flowers ()  is a 1970 drama film based on the novella of the same name by anton chekhov wrote in the early period of the writer's work.  plot  this is a story about unrequited love and belated insight.  the film shows the life of the family priklonsky princes. the main character of princess maria (irina lavrenteva) pretty nice girl, loves her mother (olga zhizneva) and brother yegorushka (valery zolotukhin). brother is also deeply flawed man, not wanting to get rid of bad habits.  soon it appears in the narrative and dr. toporkov (alexander lazarev). maria and yegorushka ill, and  the doctor toporkov's mother called, because it was a high opinion of his professional qualities. he cured priklonskii, took money from them, and that his visits to them over. however, maroussia, having read novels about love, time to fall in love with the doctor.  life heroes went downhill. maroussia from all of life's troubles again ill. at the same toporkov suddenly woke up feeling, but later, he finds himself unable to help her, and the princess died.  cast  irina lavrenteva as  maroussia, princess priklonskaya  alexander lazarev as dr. nikolai semenovich toporkov  olga zhiznyeva as princess priklonskaya  valery zolotukhin as yegorushka    inna ulyanova as kaleria ivanovna alexander khanov as nikifor, valet irina chaliapina-baksheeva as prohorovna, matchmaker zoya vasilkova as toporkova, the doctor's wife  references  external links   мегаэнциклопедия кирилла и мефодия  1970 drama films 1970 films soviet drama films russian drama films russian films soviet films mosfilm films films based on works by anton chekhov films directed by abram room
leyou technologies holdings limited (; formerly sumpo food holdings limited) is a chinese video game holding company based at lippo centre, admiralty, hong kong. founded in 2010, the company originally dealt with poultry through its subsidiary fujian sumpo, which had been founded in 1998. after floating on the hong kong stock exchange in january 2011, poultry-based income started to fall in 2013. it agreed to buy a majority stake in the video game developer digital extremes in october 2014, renamed itself leyou in january 2015, and completed the acquisition later that year. it acquired splash damage in july 2016 before divesting its poultry business in august, majority-acquired radiance games, and invested in certain affinity in 2017, and established athlon games in 2018. in december 2020, leyou was acquired by tencent.  history  background in poultry (1998-2011)  lin qinglin founded and became the general manager of xiamen xian wu modern office facilities operation company in january 1985 and served until june 1998. the company acted as an agent for fax machines manufactured by panasonic. during the late 1990s, the longyan local government encouraged investments in chicken processing operations. lin had already opened a food shop in xiamen, which he incorporated as xiamen sumpo group limited in june 1998. using the profits from his previous venture, he established the meat production company sumpo (longyan) industrial co. ltd. in longyan that september. lin oversaw the latter's main business, which dealt with chicken products, animal feed, and chicken seedlings. among the company's clients were mcdonald's, kfc, and dicos in mainland china. lin stepped down as the chairman of sumpo (longyan) industrial in march 2003 to focus on the operations of xiamen sumpo, being replaced by lin qingrong. the company was renamed fujian sumpo foods holdings co., ltd. in january 2007. in july that year, lin qingrong's longyan investment acquired 10% of the company and lin qinglin re-assumed its chairman position, which became his primary focus. subsequently, the company underwent a corporate reorganisation and evolved into a large food processing business, producing 10,000 tons of meat and 180,000 tons of "sumpo"-branded seed annually. it had a net profit of  in 2009.  on 22 february 2010, sumpo food holdings limited was incorporated as a holding company in the cayman islands, acquiring the outstanding 90% of fujian sumpo. it completed an initial public offering on the hong kong stock exchange in january 2011
at an issue price of  per share. lin qinglin, serving as the company's chairman and chief executive officer (ceo), was the principal shareholder at 642 million shares, while his son, lin genghua, owned another 167 million. the combined 809 million shares were worth .  entry into video games (2013-2015)  due to increased competition in the animal breeding industry, sumpo food holdings started continuously losing money from 2013. to diversify its business, the company aimed at entering the video game industry. initially, it attempted to acquire an undisclosed japanese developer, speculated to be snk, but was unsuccessful. according to alex xu, the chief business officer of the video game company perfect world, sumpo food holdings was "almost out of business" in early 2014. at the same time, perfect world was cooperating with and seeking to acquire digital extremes, a canadian video game developer. however, perfect world was considering delisting itself from the nasdaq and wanted to avoid pursuing an acquisition using internal funding. at xu's behest, the company leveraged sumpo food holdings to incrementally acquire digital extremes. this move was announced in october 2014, with sumpo food holdings to acquire a 58% stake, while another 3% would be sold to perfect online, a subsidiary of perfect world. the total price for both stakes was .  in january 2015, sumpo food holdings changed its name to leyou technologies holdings limited. the acquisition of digital extreme's shares was completed in july 2015. by the end of that year, 70% of leyou's gross profit was generated by its games business, despite 80% of all revenue being generated by its poultry business. the company acquired the remaining 39% in digital extremes in may 2016 for . in july 2016, via its uk subsidiary radius maxima, leyou acquired three companies: the developer splash damage, online back-end technology company fireteam, and online multiplayer publisher warchest. all three were previously solely owned by their founder and ceo, paul wedgwood.  exit from poultry and acquisition by tencent (2016-present)  during 2016, perfect world attempted to acquire leyou, but the deal fell through due to "some difficulties". leyou divested its entire poultry business in august that year, selling it to lin qinglin's wife for . cp pokphand co., which was majority-owned by the thai food company charoen pokphand foods, subsequently acquired 70% of fujian sumpo in october 2016 for . the previous fiscal year,
fujian sumpo had revenues of  but made a net loss of . by 2017, the majority of leyou's shares had been bought out by a private investor. xu, who had since left perfect world for qihoo 360, was subsequently hired as leyou's ceo in july 2017.  in july 2017, leyou invested  into chinese developer guangzhou radiance software technology co. ltd. (radiance games) to acquire 51% of the company. it announced a  investment in the american developer certain affinity in october, gaining a 20% stake. leyou launched a publisher, athlon games, in california in may 2018. in september that year, athlon games and middle-earth enterprises agreed for the former to publish a multi-year, online free-to-play game based on the lord of the rings. amazon (through its amazon game studios unit) joined the project in july 2019, agreeing to co-develop and publish the game worldwide, while leyou would publish it in china and taiwan. later that year, athlon games became the publisher of samurai shodown and a shareholder and publishing partner of lcg entertainment, which acquired the assets of the defunct telltale games.  in 2019, leyou was reported to be seeking a buyer. idreamsky (which was 18.6%-owned by the conglomerate tencent) and cvc capital partners offered to acquire leyou, but the talks stalled due to the covid-19 pandemic. idreamsky was met with a competing offer from zhejiang century huatong, which entered into a non-binding merger agreement with leyou in may 2020. bloomberg news reported that sony and tencent were also interested in bidding for leyou as of july 2020. by august that year, tencent appeared to be close to signing a deal to acquire leyou. the tencent deal was confirmed by leyou's shareholders by 11 december 2020 and completed on 23 december 2020. under the  agreement, tencent fully acquired the firm through its subsidiary image frame investment. a dispute between tencent and amazon during contract negotiations for the planned the lord of the rings game led amazon to cancel the game's development in april 2021. the acquisition further caused an exodus of leyou employees, particularly at the beijing and shanghai offices. among them, xu left in april 2021.  references  external links     2010 establishments in hong kong 2020 mergers and acquisitions chinese companies established in 2010 entertainment companies of hong kong holding companies established in 2010 holding companies of hong kong tencent divisions and subsidiaries video game companies established in 2010 video game companies of china
video game development companies
the miners of donetsk or miners of the don () is a 1951 soviet drama film directed by leonid lukov. the film is about the life of miners in donbass. new technologies are introduced which the miners embrace with enthusiasm.  cast  aleksei gribov   a. mansvetov     g. pasechnik    viktor khokhryakov   mikheil gelovani   sergei lukyanov   vasiliy merkurev as gorovoi   anastasiya zuyeva   vitali doronin as pavel nedolya    klara luchko  andrei petrov   vladimir druzhnikov as trofimenko    lidiya smirnova as vera    oleg zhakov   pyotr aleynikov  boris chirkov as stepan nedolya    semyon svashenko as engineer  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1951 films 1951 drama films soviet drama films soviet films russian-language films films directed by leonid lukov
ivan carter (born november 10, 1970) is from zimbabwe and is a conservationist, professional guide and photographer. he is also the host of carter's w.a.r. (wildlife animal response) presented by nosler on outdoor channel.  life  carter was born in rhodesia (now zimbabwe) to bryan carter, a farmer and veterinarian for a pharmaceutical company, and claire carter. he currently resides in freeport bahamas with his wife, ashleigh, and their two children, trail and brooke. his oldest daughter makenna wainwright comes to visit him during the summer months. carter holds guiding licenses in several african countries, including zimbabwe, tanzania, botswana, and mozambique, and spends an average of 200 days a year in the field. in addition to english, he speaks two different african languages: shona and swahili.  professional career  carter's w.a.r. (wildlife animal response) debuted on outdoor channel in december 2015. the original tv series follows carter as he exposes the truth about how heavily armed poachers are butchering elephants for their tusks and rhinoceros for their horns in africa as part of his greater effort to preserve wildlife. "there is more wildlife-human conflict than there has ever been and our wildlife resources are getting squeezed," said carter on an nra news interview. his aim is to advance the ideology of conservation as a life-saving process and solution for the conflict.  carter is keen on spotlighting the conservation efforts that hunters bring. he believes it is poachers - not hunters - that condemn animals to extinction by disrespecting their place in the ecosystem. "the statistics will show that in areas with well-managed sustainable hunting, the wildlife proliferates. the wildlife populations go through the roof," he once told the huffington post. in fact, he issued a challenge to non-hunters in august 2015: join him on a safari for cape buffalo and take pictures. in return, the non-hunter would pay the same amount a hunter would expect to pay for a similar hunt, which would be between $20,000 and $25,000, which includes anti-poaching and community fees.  in november 2015, he became a nosler pro-staff member.  carter was the co-host of as close as you dare, a wildlife documentary focused on close up big game encounters across zimbabwe, botswana, uganda, and tanzania, which was featured on pbs in 2008 and 2009.  in 2008, he was chosen by the united
states marine corps as a hunting and tracking subject matter expert, and he helped in the development of the "combat hunter" program for soldiers to use while in combat.  carter also previously hosted dallas safari club's tracks across africa and hornady's africa, among other tv series.  in january 2003, he was listed among the best 15 safari guides by the daily telegraph newspaper.  carter was rated by conde nast traveler as of africa's top 10 guides in october 2002.  he was recognized in the august 2001 issue of travel + leisure magazine in their article "follow the leaders" featuring the best guides in africa.  in 2001 and again in 2003, carter was invited by stanford university to present lectures on "observations of wildlife" and "monitoring elephant populations."  he owned and operated a photographic safari business for 12 years (1992-2004) that employed almost 80 employees and serviced 500 clients annually.  references  1970 births living people conservationists zimbabwean photographers zimbabwean television presenters
easah zaheer suliman (born 26 january 1998) is an english professional footballer who plays as a centre-back for liga portugal 2 club nacional, on loan from primeira liga club vitoria de guimaraes. suliman is a product of the aston villa academy.  suliman has represented england at youth level and is the first player of asian heritage to captain an england football side, having done so at under-16, under-17 and under-19 levels. suliman played every game at centre back in the england under-19s victorious uefa european under-19 championship campaign in july 2017, scoring the opening goal in england's 2-1 final victory over portugal. suliman has played on loan at english football league sides cheltenham town and grimsby town as well as eredivisie side fc emmen.  club career  aston villa having joined the aston villa academy at a young age, suliman was called up to train with the first-team squad by remi garde during the 2015-16 season, and was named as a substitute for a match in the league cup against notts county on 25 august 2015. suliman made his first team debut under manager steve bruce, featuring as a late substitute in a 4-1 league cup victory over wigan athletic on 22 august 2017.  cheltenham town loan on 4 august 2016, suliman joined cheltenham town on loan until 2 january 2017. he made his cheltenham debut on 6 august 2016 in a 1-1 home draw against leyton orient. three days later he played the full 90 minutes in a 1-0 league cup win against league one side charlton athletic.  grimsby town loan on 31 january 2018, suliman joined league two side grimsby town until the end of the 2017-18 season. he made his league debut in a 1-1 draw with port vale on 10 march 2018.  fc emmen loan on 17 august 2018, suliman joined dutch eredivisie side fc emmen on a season-long loan deal. on 28 december 2018, suliman was recalled from his loan spell at emmen due to him playing only 9 minutes in his 4-month spell there. the villa staff and emmen manager came to an agreement that the loan was 'no longer useful'.  vitoria guimaraes on 21 january 2020, suliman joined portuguese side vitoria guimaraes for an undisclosed fee. on 5 june 2020, suliman made his debut in a 2-2 draw with sporting cp. in doing so, he became the first player of pakistani descent to play in the top flight in portugal. he made his first primeira liga
start on 30 june 2020, helping his side earn a clean sheet in a 2-0 victory over vitoria.  nacional loan on 28 july 2021, suliman joined recently relegated nacional on a season-long loan. on 15 august 2021, he made his debut for nacional as a late substitute in a 4-0 victory over vilafranquense. suliman made his first start on 28 august 2021 in a 2-1 home victory against varzim in which he played the full ninety minutes.  international career suliman has represented england at u16, u17, u18, u19 and u20 levels and was the first british asian to captain an england side at any level. suliman captained england under-16s at the 2014 montaigu tournament with the side finishing third overall. suliman has also captained england at under-17 level against the faroe islands.  suliman was promoted to the england under-19 side in august 2016 and played the full match in a 1-1 friendly against the netherlands under-19 side. a penalty shoot-out was held following the match with suliman scoring the winning penalty. tom davies of everton started the game as captain but passed the armband to suliman after he was substituted in the 61st minute.  suliman started every game at centre back in england under-19's victorious 2017 uefa european under-19 championship campaign in july 2017. he scored the opening goal in the final, a header following a rebound off the opposition goalkeeper, in england's 2-1 win over portugal in georgia's tengiz burjanadze stadium.  personal life suliman has discussed his british pakistani heritage and being a muslim professional footballer in interviews. he has spoken of his family's friendship with england cricketer moeen ali and how he encouraged him to keep going to secure a professional contract.  career statistics  honours england u19 uefa european under-19 championship: 2017  references  external links  england profile at the fa  1998 births living people british sportspeople of pakistani descent english people of pakistani descent footballers from birmingham, west midlands british muslims english footballers association football defenders english football league players eredivisie players primeira liga players aston villa f.c. players cheltenham town f.c. players grimsby town f.c. players vitoria s.c. players c.d. nacional players fc emmen players english expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in the netherlands expatriate footballers in portugal
the palais d'york is a historic mansion in nice, alpes-maritimes, france. it was built from 1762 to 1768. it has been listed as an official national monument since december 16, 1949.  references  houses completed in 1768 monuments historiques of nice 1768 establishments in france
james young (may 11, 1800 - february 9, 1878) was an american politician. he was the lieutenant governor of missouri from 1844 to 1848. he also served in the tennessee house of representatives from 1831 to 1833, in the missouri house of representatives 1836 to 1838, and in the missouri senate from 1840 to 1844.  he died at his home near lexington, missouri on february 9, 1878.  references  1800 births 1878 deaths members of the tennessee house of representatives members of the missouri house of representatives missouri state senators lieutenant governors of missouri missouri democrats  19th-century american politicians
lactobacillus acetotolerans (new latin 'vinegar-tolerating milk-bacillus') is a species of gram positive bacteria in the genus lactobacillus. discovered in rice wine vinegar, it has a very high tolerance for acetic acid. it can tolerate an acetic acid concentration of over 9% and a ph as low as 3.3. it is known to produce sour flavors in beer it invades, by producing lactic acid.  references  external links type strain of lactobacillus acetotolerans at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  lactobacillaceae bacteria described in 1986
chong khae railway station is a railway station located in chong khae subdistrict, takhli district, nakhon sawan. it is located 180.315 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 2 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 31 october 1905 as part of the northern line extension from lop buri to pak nam pho.  train services  rapid 102 chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 105/106 bangkok-sila at-bangkok  rapid 109 bangkok-chiang mai  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 209/210 bangkok-ban takhli-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  sources   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
eugene covered bridge, also known as county bridge no. 75, is a historic burr arch truss covered bridge located in eugene township, vermillion county, indiana.  it was built in 1873, and is a single span covered timber bridge.  it measures 180 feet long and 16 feet wide.  the bridge spans the big vermilion river.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1994.  see also brouilletts creek covered bridge newport covered bridge possum bottom covered bridge  references  covered bridges in indiana covered bridges on the national register of historic places in indiana bridges completed in 1873 transportation buildings and structures in vermillion county, indiana national register of historic places in vermillion county, indiana road bridges on the national register of historic places in indiana wooden bridges in indiana burr truss bridges in the united states
lauren nicholson (born 26 march 1993) is an australian professional basketball player.  college nicholson played college basketball at saint mary's college of california in moraga, california for the saint mary's gaels.  statistics   |- |2012-13 |saint mary's |31 |0 |13.9 |31.6% |28.6% |76.7% |1.6 |0.3 |0.1 |0.3 |0.6 |3.0 |- |2013-14 |saint mary's |18 |16 |29.7 |49.4% |48.0% |80.0% |2.7 |1.3 |0.0 |0.7 |1.8 |12.4 |- |2014-15 |saint mary's |33 |33 |33.1 |47.0% |33.6% |81.7% |3.5 |1.8 |0.2 |1.1 |3.2 |17.6 |- |2015-16 |saint mary's |28 |25 |31.6 |45.4% |30.1% |89.0% |3.9 |2.1 |0.1 |0.6 |2.3 |17.0 |- |career | |110 |74 |26.7 |45.4% |36.0% |84.3% |2.9 |1.4 |0.1 |0.7 |2.0 |12.5  career  wnbl nicholson would begin her wnbl career in her home town, as a development player, with the sydney uni flames. nicholson remained a member of the flames squad through to 2011. she then departed to begin her college career in the united states. after the conclusion of her college career, nicholson returned to australia and she was signed by the sydney uni flames for 2016-17.  during her second season with the adelaide lightning, nicholson was recognised as the wnbl defensive player of the year for the 2018-19 season.  in 2020, nicholson would head north and sign with the townsville fire for the 2020-21 wnbl season.  national team  youth level nicholson first played for australia at the 2009 fiba oceania under-16 championship for women where she took home gold in brisbane, australia. she would then go on to participate in the inaugural under-17 world championship in france where australia placed seventh.  senior level in january 2019, nicholson was named to
her first opals squad, earning her a place in the first camp as preparations for this years upcoming tournaments got underway. after taking part in the opals team camps, nicholson was named to the final roster for the 2019 fiba asia cup where she would make her opals debut.  references  1993 births living people australian expatriate basketball people in the united states australian women's basketball players forwards (basketball) saint mary's gaels women's basketball players basketball players from sydney sydney uni flames players
mazaak mazaak mein is an indian hindi reality television talent competition, which premiered on 23 july 2016 on life ok. the series is produced by balaji telefilms of ekta kapoor and shobha kapoor.  harbhajan singh and shoaib akhtar were the judges.  plot the show is a reality show, but the main aim of the show is to select the best comedians in the field of comedy.  judges  shoaib akhtar  harbhajan singh  cast  chandan prabhakar  raju srivastava suresh albela  vrajesh hirjee zafri khan  references  balaji telefilms television series 2016 indian television series debuts hindi-language television shows indian comedy television series television shows set in mumbai life ok original programming 2016 indian television series endings indian stand-up comedy television series
there is a significant population of american muslims in the dallas-fort worth metroplex. dallas-fort worth is home to sixty-two sunni mosques, eight sunni musalla, and four shia mosques. according to abdelrahman murphy, a chicago-born, irving-based islamic teacher and muslim community leader, other u.s.-based muslims now refer to dallas as the "medina of america". not only is dallas masjid al islam the oldest muslim community in the dfw area, it established the first mosque in the city of dallas and established the first muslim school in the dfw area. as of 2021, many major muslim organizations and charities have headquarters or operations in dfw, mostly located in richardson, texas such as: icna dallas,  muslim american society, muslim legal fund of america, helping hands for relief & development, sabrina memorial foundation, islamic relief usa, cair-texas, and ma'ruf. there are also several institutions of research and higher education such as: qalam institute (carrollton), bayyina academy (euless), and the islamic seminary of america (richardson).  history islam first came to dallas through the nation of islam, whose members were sent by elijah muhammad during the 1950s, founding temple #48 in downtown dallas. when elijah muhammad was succeeded by his sun wallace deen muhammad in 1975, the dallas temple #48 was reorganized as the dallas masjid al-islam. dallas masjid al islam was the first and oldest muslim community in dallas area. it started the first muslim school in dallas and the first mosque in the city. meanwhile, international muslims established the islamic association of north texas in 1969. in 1977, the african american muslims and the international immigrant muslims had the first combined eid al-fitr on baghdad st. in a backyard in grand prairie, tx. in 1980, iant was joined by imam yusuf ziya kavakcı. throughout the next few decades, more mosques were built. iant established the longest running free health clinics of the muslim community, followed by the east plano islamic center and valley ranch islamic center later on. eventually, nouman ali khan moved to dallas, followed by omar suleiman. this led to an increase of muslim immigration to dallas from other parts of america. there is also a growing number of hispanic muslims in dallas.  list of mosques  list of islamic scholars and speakers  controversies  holy land foundation (hlf)  the holy land foundation (hlf) was the largest islamic charity in the united states. headquartered in richardson
, texas, and run by palestinian-americans, it was originally known as occupied land fund. during the 1990s, american politicians, including chuck schumer and eliot spitzer, alongside the israeli government and "misinformation expert" steve emerson, lobbied the us government to take action against the holy land foundation. in 2004, a federal grand jury in dallas, texas charged hlf and five former officers and employees with providing material support to hamas and related offenses. the prosecution's theory was that hlf distributed charity through local zakat (charity) committees located in the west bank that paid stipends to the families of palestinian suicide bombers and hamas prisoners; that hamas controlled those zakat committees; that by distributing charity through hamas-controlled committees, hlf helped hamas build a grassroots support amongst the palestinian people; and that these charity front organizations served a dual purpose of laundering the money for all of hamas's activities. their trial has been considered by the dallas muslim community as "unjust" and has been written to have "capitalized on post-9/11 islamophobic hysteria".  critics faulted some of the evidence given during the trial. for example, over defense objection, the government called two anonymous witnesses: an israeli security agency (isa) employee who was known to the jurors and the defense as "avi" and an israeli defense forces officer who was known to the jurors and the defense as "major lior." the defense lawyers were not permitted to know the names of these witnesses. the government cited legal restrictions and safety concerns to protect avi's identity, of which the motion for protective measures was granted his testimony was based on "much of the material that has previously been provided to the defense... as well as some of the documentation seized from the holy land foundation's offices." however, the government was ordered to provide the defendants with all "tangible underlying facts and data, not previously produced, upon which the isa agent relies in reaching his opinion." civil rights attorney emily ratner wrote that the use of anonymous and hearsay evidence by the prosecutors was "constitutionally questionable" at best. additionally, much of the evidence used to convict the holy land foundation was "secret evidence" which the defense was unable to read or even know who made it.  the government did not allege that hlf paid directly for suicide bombings, but instead that the foundation supported terrorism by sending more than $12 million to charitable groups, known as zakat or charity committees, which provide social goods and services. the prosecution said the committees were controlled by
hamas, and contributed to terrorism by helping hamas spread its ideology, recruit supporters, and provide a front for laundering money and soliciting donations. according to marjorie cohn, professor emerita of the thomas jefferson school of law, the trial was a "grave miscarriage of justice" and "capitalized on post-9/11 islamophobic hysteria" in order to convict the holy land 5. pulitzer prize journalist chris hedges describes it as "one of the most egregious cases of injustice committed to date against muslim leaders in the united states."  references  dallas fort worth
rajiv gandhi national aviation university (rgnau) is an autonomous public central university located in the fursatganj airfield (formerly in raebareli district), amethi district, uttar pradesh.  it is a specialized institution and comes directly under the government of india. it will be financed primarily by ministry of civil aviation, ministry of science and technology, and collaboration with international aerospace and aviation organizations .  about  the rgnau being a specialized agency institute will participate in formulation of indian aerospace and aviation policies also including military/strategic discussions, defense/armed aerospace technology and space program.  it mainly aims to facilitate and promote aviation studies, training, research and extension work with focus on emerging areas of studies such as aviation management, aviation regulation and policy, aviation history, aviation science and engineering, aviation law, aviation safety and security, aviation medicine, search and rescue, transportation of dangerous goods, environmental studies and other related fields. the students will be internationally exposed in the course-study itself due to nature of the career.  the principal committees of the university are executive council and academic council, drawing experts and senior government officials from the government, iits, iims, iata, aai etc. the university administration is managed by vice chancellor (mr nalin kumar tandon) and registrar (mr jitendra singh), both the posts are appointed by the hon'ble president of india.  courses offered as india's first aviation university, the university commences training of aerospace engineers, aspiring pilots, aircraft maintenance technicians/engineers and cabin/ground crew. all flying schools in india are expected to become affiliated and supervised by the university, which would thus acting as an apex for aviation education.  rgnau is launching its first course as pg diploma in airport operations beginning aug 2019. and in the process of designing new training programmes and courses to be offered from the next academic session.  admissions the admission process is very stringent and depends on several factors including aptitude, intellect, personality and prospects of the student. selected students are amongst a group of students having qualified at least one of the required admission tests, like jee-mains/advanced, and sats. the students have been provided residential services in igrua campus with modern infrastructure.  references  central universities in uttar pradesh universities and colleges in amethi district aviation schools in india memorials to rajiv gandhi 2013 establishments in uttar pradesh educational institutions established in 2013
nordenskiold glacier (), is a large glacier in the avannaata municipality, on the northwestern coast of greenland.  geography this glacier is located in the lauge koch coast of melville bay, north of the upernavik archipelago. it drains the greenland ice sheet () and flows southwestwards between the king oscar glacier to the northwest and the sverdrup glacier to the southeast.  see also list of glaciers in greenland  references  external links nsidc picture glaciers of greenland
annick wilmotte is a belgian antarctic researcher, best known for her research on the diversity and ecology of antarctic cyanobacterial microflora. a genus of antarctic cyanobacteria, called wilmottia was named after her in recognition of her work in this field.  early life and education wilmotte completed her msc (botanical sciences) at the university of liege in 1982. her thesis investigated the use of epiphytic marine cyanobacteria as indicators of pollution of calvi bay, corsica, france. she subsequently completed her phd in botanical sciences from the university of liege. the title of her thesis was "contribution to the taxonomic and ecological characterisation of marine epiphytic oscillatoriaceae (cyanophyceae) of the experimental cultivation and nucleic acid studies".  career and impact wilmotte, currently research associate of the frs-fnrs, working at the university of liege, has recognized research experience in the isolation, cultivation, and characterisation of cyanobacteria by phenotypic and genotypic methods,  has contributed to the molecular taxonomy of cyanobacteria and has highlighted the importance of antarctic microbial diversity. her polar work concerns the microscopic and genotypic diversity of cyanobacteria in antarctic microbial mats (micromat, laquan, ambio) and the use of fossil dna for cyanobacterial paleodiversity reconstruction (holant).  willmotte is coordinating the belspo project ccambio using high-throughput methodologies to investigate the microbial biodiversity and biogeography in lacustrine benthic mats at the scale of the antarctic continent. she also was involved in the study of the diversity of picoplanktonic cyanobacteria in the southern ocean and arctic sea.  since 2011, she has been the promoter and curator of the bccm/ulc public collection of cyanobacteria, a dedicated public collection, currently containing one of the largest collections of documented subpolar cyanobacteria worldwide. the collection accepts deposits of polar cyanobacteria and allows their distribution to scientists and industries, for further research.  wilmotte has been the belgian delegate to the committee for environmental protection at the consultative meeting of the antarctic treaty since 2008. she is also secretary of the belgian national committee on antarctic research of the royal academy of belgium and a belgian delegate to the standing scientific group- life sciences of the scientific committee on antarctic research since 2012.  scientific outreach  wilmotte is recognised for her work in scientific outreach on the antarctic treaty and also on the importance of antarctic microorganisms.  awards and honours a new cyanobacterial genus (wilmottia)
originally described from antarctica was dedicated to her by colleagues.  she was awarded the l'adjudant lefevre of the sciences of the royal academy of belgium in 1999.  references  external links    living people antarctic scientists belgian microbiologists belgian women scientists female polar explorers university of liege alumni women antarctic scientists 20th-century belgian scientists 21st-century belgian scientists women microbiologists year of birth missing (living people)
dekho chand aaya is a pakistani ramadan special drama serial aired on geo kahani during ramadan in 2016. the drama aired throughout the month airing total of 27 episodes.  synopsis dekho chand aaya is a story of college love, where hassan who comes from an affluent family deeply falls in love with chand. chand, on the other hand, likes hassan but she is indifferent about the relationship. the protagonists are about to get married after eid, but chand's father gets a heart attack, consequently, he demands to get her daughter married as soon as possible.  samia, hassan's sister-in-law, is facing a tough time in the family because she belongs to a middle class.  she wants chand to enter the house so that the entire focus moves on her, since she belongs to a lower income bracket.  samia convinces the family to set another date, but chand's family finds out that hassan has been a failure in studies. this comes as a shock to chand; consequently, she confronts and humiliates hassan that she has been cheated. hassan calls off the marriage, but samia convinces him to marry so that he can take revenge from chand.  the main objective of samia is to bring chand so that she is no more competed with sonia; hassan's another sister-in-law who is financially sound. chand marries hassan and the new step leads to a suppressed life, but she gradually emerges as a strong woman.  cast   sarah khan as chaand  fawad jalal as hassan (chaand's husband)  sajid hassan as abbu jaan (chaand's father-in-law )  nida mumtaz as ammi jaan (chaand's mother-in-law)  aijaz aslam as mamu jaan (in a special appearance as chaand's mamu)  khaled anam as asif (chaand's father)  sumbul shahid as tayi jaan (hassan's tayi)  beena chaudhary as chaand's aunt (hassan's aunt)  tahir kazmi as jahangir(hassan's elder brother)  naveed raza as bilal (hassan's brother)  ayesha toor as sonia (jahangir's wife)  maham nizami as samia  (bilal's wife)  faria hassan as zoya (hassan's sister)  humaira bano as shaheen (chaand's mother)  hassan khan as affan (love interest of zoya)  hammad
khan as ahmed (chaand's younger brother)  soundtrack  the original soundtrack of "dekho chaand aaya" is composed by faakhir mehmood and sung by bushra bilal.  references  pakistani family television dramas urdu-language television shows
the newport antique auto hill climb is an annual festival that takes place on the first sunday of october in newport, indiana, organized and sponsored by the lions club of newport and the town of newport. the main event is a series of timed runs in which antique automobiles, trucks, and motorcycles from the steam, brass, vintage, antique, and classic car eras ascend the town's steep, 1800-foot-long main street hill as quickly as possible. the festival is the third largest auto event in indiana after the indy 500 and brickyard 400.  history  the first hill climb was held in 1909 and organized by the businessmen of newport as a way to capitalize on the interest in climbing the hill. hill climbing contests were becoming more commonplace, and by 1915 the "newness" has worn off; board-track and other circular racing forms were becoming more popular. the financial returns to the businessmen shrank, as did the interest in holding the event, and the 1916 event never materialized.   the newport volunteer fire department rekindled the event as an antique auto hill climb in 1963 and 1964, but again the financial returns and shortage of manpower ended the event after two years.  in 1967, with urging from a number of antique car enthusiasts and car clubs, the newport lions club was formed and the hill climb reborn as its major fund-raiser. the first event was held in 1968, and soon after the first sunday of october was designated as the "race day". early festivals began on thursday or wednesday with nightly activities before settling into the current three-day format.  the hill climb went on hiatus in 2020.  features   flea market  baby contest  kid's big wheels race  parade  car raffle  car show  auto and memorabilia auction  gallery  external links   newporthillclimb.com  references   festivals in indiana tourist attractions in vermillion county, indiana
canning town football club is a football club based in canning town, in the london borough of newham, england. they are currently members of the .  history the club was formed in 1948 by eric keylock who had decided to start his own football team after persuading his other founding company, traffic services, to provide sets of the club uniform. keylock decided to pursue this endeavour after being discharged from the royal air force.  during the 1980s, canning town competed in the south essex league. the club joined the essex intermediate league (later to become the essex olympian league) in 2000, winning division two in their first season in the league. the club first competed in the premier division for the first time in the 2007-08 season, remaining in the premier division for five seasons. canning town entered the fa vase for the first time in 2009, losing 7-0 to erith town in the first qualifying round. in the 2015-16 season, the first team won division one of the essex olympian football league and were promoted back into to premier division. in the 2016-17 season, they reached the first round proper of the fa vase for the first time in their history, losing 5-4 at home against biggleswade.  ground  during the early 2000s, canning town played at southern road playing fields in plaistow, later moving to gooseley playing fields in east ham by the mid-2000s. the club later moved to the terence mcmillan stadium in plaistow. currently, canning town play at the west ham united foundation ground in beckton.  in september 2011, canning town used aveley's mill field ground for a 1-1 fa vase draw against eton manor.  records best league position: 7th in the essex olympian league, 2007-08 best fa vase performance: first round, 2016-17  references  external links official website  football clubs in england football clubs in london essex olympian football league association football clubs established in 1948 1948 establishments in england sport in the london borough of newham south essex league
arkadiy tumanyan (; born 23 january 1998) is a professional armenian and ukrainian football midfielder.  references  external links    arkadiy tumanyan at zerozero  1998 births living people sportspeople from kharkiv armenian footballers ukrainian footballers ukrainian people of armenian descent association football midfielders fc chornomorets odesa players sevan fc players ukrainian premier league players armenian first league players
the end of power: from boardrooms to battlefields and churches to states, why being in charge isn't what it used to be, written by moises naim, discusses the decline of power in established leaders and institutions.  summary  the book's overall theme points out while it is becoming easier to get power, it is also becoming harder to use it to control others and harder to keep it once you have it.  naim suggests that globalization, economic growth, a growing global middle class, the spread of democracy, and rapidly expanding telecommunications technologies have changed our world. he says these developments have created a fluid and unpredictable environment which has unsettled the traditional dominions of power.  reception  on january 2, 2015, mark zuckerberg selected the end of power as his inaugural pick for his "year of books" challenge for the mark zuckerberg book club, a public resolution to read one new book every two weeks in 2015. washington post wrote, "it's not just that power shifts from one country to another, from one political party to another, from one business model to another, naim argues; it's this: 'power is decaying.'" forbes called the book the "ankle-biter economy." the end of power was also listed for the financial times and mckinsey business book of the year.  references   business books 2013 non-fiction books basic books books
poland has been a member state of the european union since 1 may 2004, with the treaty of accession 2003 signed on 16 april 2003 in athens as the legal basis for poland's accession to the eu. the actual process of integrating poland into the eu began with poland's application for membership in athens on 8 april 1994, and then the confirmation of the application by all member states in essen from 9-10 december 1994. poland's integration into the european union is a dynamic and continuously ongoing process.  comparison  early relations between poland and the eu (1988-1993)  diplomatic relations between poland and the european economic community began on 16 september 1988. a year later, on 19 september 1989, during the first visit of the chairman of the committee of ministers of the eec to poland, an agreement was signed on trade and commercial and economic cooperation in warsaw.  changes in polish politics during and after 1989 allowed diplomatic talks regarding poland's participation in the european economic community. formal negotiations began on 22 december 1990, and ended on 16 december 1991, in the "european agreement establishing an association between the republic of poland and the european communities and their member states". at the same time, along with the european agreement, poland signed a trade agreement included in the interim agreement in force from 1 march 1992.  poland's agreement with the eec came into force on 1 february 1994, three months after the maastricht treaty came into effect. the first step was the establishment of the commission for the unification of the republic of poland with the eu, whose task was to supervise the implementation of the new agreements. talks at ministerial levels in the polish parliament were conducted within this commission. the parliamentary unification committee acted as a forum for relations between the polish parliament and the european parliament.  nearing accession (1993-1997) even before accession negotiations began in june 1993, during a meeting of the european council in copenhagen, the eu member states officially confirmed that the countries of central and eastern europe, currently affiliated with the ec, will join the eu after fulfilling economic and political criteria. on 8 april 1994, the government of the republic of poland made a formal request, in athens, for membership in the european union. during the european council summit held in essen on 9-10 december 1994, member states adopted a pre-accession strategy, defining the areas and forms of cooperation recognized by the eu as essential to speed up integration. this process also confirmed that the eu was willing to go through with enlargement to associated countries. formal confirmation of the strategy outlined in the white paper (
on the alignment of countries with the requirements of the internal free-market) which was adopted at the european council summit in cannes in june 1995. the white paper, and the annual preparatory programs adopted by the polish government, determined the framework and the relations of poland with the eu. on 3 october 1996, under the resolution passed by the council of ministers on 26 january 1991, the office for european integration came into force with its purpose to coordinate and assist all ministries and institutions directly involved in the process of polish integration with the european union. the primary role of the office for european integration was to ensure the implementation of the tasks related to coordinating policies on matters related to the integration of poland into the european union. additionally, it was responsible for coordination of measures for the adaptation of poland to meet european standards, as well as managing the foreign aid that poland received from the european union.  in january 1997 poland adopted the national strategy for integration (nsi) which was passed by parliament in may 1997. the nsi set out the specific tasks that poland faced on the road to full eu membership and the sequence of their implementation. the nsi's role was, primarily, to accelerate and direct the work of government institutions as well as helping raise societal awareness of the possible consequences of polish membership in the eu. the adaptation operations for membership were carried out in-line with the national programme of preparation for membership in the european union (nppc) framework developed by the government and accepted on 23 june 1998. nppc was annually (up to and including 2001) modified to conform with the negotiation strategies of the polish government. it defined the ways in which to achieve the priorities contained in the partnership for membership document. partnership for membership and the national programme of preparation for membership in the european union were directly related to the european commission's decision to provide eu funding through phare, sapard and ispa, being the three financial instruments of the european union to assist the candidate countries in the preparation for accession.  negotiations (1997-2002) on the basis of the recommendations contained in the opinions of the european commission of 16 july 1997 the european council meeting in luxembourg on 12-13 december 1997 decided to begin accession negotiations with five countries of central and eastern europe (poland, czech republic, hungary, slovenia and estonia) as well as cyprus. for all the central and eastern european candidate countries, the european council launched an enhanced pre-accession strategy, including the implementation of the european agreements, partnership for membership and a new version of the phare program .  the
eu enlargement process was formally launched at a meeting of the council for general affairs on 30 march 1998. at the time, poland declared 31 december 2002 as the date of readiness for membership into the european union. a study of the compatibility of candidate countries' current laws with eu law began on 31 march 1998 in brussels.  after the end of the study, the actual negotiations were undertaken at the same time at the request of the candidate countries, although individually with each of the candidates from 10 november 1998. from 16 april 1999, regular meetings of political directors and european correspondents of associated and eu countries began undertaking political dialogue. for the purpose of the negotiations, the eu set up 37 task forces that were responsible for developing agreements in their respective areas. the chairmen of the polish negotiation team (pzn) were, successively: jacek saryusz-wolski (1997-2001) and danuta hubner (2001-2004).  the main role of the negotiations was to develop a common position between the chairman of the pzn and the eu commissioner for enlargement and submitting it for approval to the european commission, which prepared the draft of the revised common position of the whole eu to be accepted by the 15 member states in the european council. the aim of the negotiations was to prepare the accession treaty, which was adopted at the last meeting of the intergovernmental conference on accession.  in october 1990 it was decided to connect the capitals of the countries associated with the secretariat of the council of the eu with the help of a specially prepared communications network. by 2000, poland managed to finish talks in 25 out of 30 negotiation areas and for 9 of them it was able to agree transition periods. the remaining 5 areas were negotiated between 2001 and 2002.  polish negotiations with the eu ended during the eu summit in copenhagen, on 13 december 2002.  accession (2003-2004)  the treaty of accession was subject to approval and adoption by an absolute majority vote in the european parliament on 9 april 2003 and unanimously by the council of the european union on 14 april 2003. the next stage was ratification of the treaty by all the member countries in accordance with their constitutional requirements (except for ireland, where it was ratified after a nationwide referendum while the other member states adopted it in the form of a parliamentary vote). the treaty entered into force after the eu ratification procedure. in poland, the final process of its adoption took place in the form of a national referendum on 7-8 june 2003.  poles answered the following question:  the national electoral commission's published results state that
58.85% of eligible voters turned up to vote (i.e. 17 586 215 out of 29 868 474 people), 77.45% of those (i.e. 13 516 612) answered yes to the question. 22.55% of those (i.e. 3 936 012) answered no. the results also showed that 126 194 votes were deemed to be invalid.  the treaty of accession 2003 signed on the 16 april 2003 in athens was the legal basis for 10 countries central and southern europe (cyprus, the czech republic, estonia, latvia, lithuania, malta, polish, slovakia, slovenia and hungary) entering the european union.  on 1 may 2004 poland became a full member of the european union, along with 9 other european countries.  post-accession (2004-present)  according to information provided by the ministry of finance (on 8 february 2006), poland had to be ready to join the eurozone by 2009, however, this was postponed to at least 2018. the minister of finance announced a regulation that, as of 15 april 2004, a consumer or a recipient of services is able to pay for their goods or services using euros.  on 13 december 2007, the reform treaty was signed by representatives of the 27 eu member states in the jeronimos monastery in lisbon. on behalf of poland, the treaty was signed by prime minister donald tusk and foreign minister radoslaw sikorski. at the head of the polish delegation was president lech kaczynski, who was accompanied by the ministers of the presidential chancellery: robert draba and michal kaminski.  polish accession to the schengen agreement took place on 21 december 2007 (for land and sea crossings) and 29 march 2008 (for airports, together with the new flight timetable). on 30 july 2007, poland passed the technical tests for access to the schengen system. as proposed by portugal, a symbolic opening of the borders took place on 21 december 2007 in worek turoszowski on the tri-boundary of the polish, czech and german borders.  on 1 may 2009, five years after poland had accessed the european union, the period of protection against the purchase of homes and apartments in poland by foreigners (citizens of the eu) had ended.  according to the survey conducted by the public opinion research centre in march 2014, the polish presence in the european union was supported by 89% of poles, while 7% opposed poland's eu membership.  the most up-to-date
statistics (as of july 2016) show that in 2014 poland received €17.436 billion from the eu whilst only contributing €3.526 billion. poland also received nearly €2 billion more in eu funding than any other member state in 2013 (france being second highest). the european union has made its funding available for infrastructure and transport; agriculture and rural development; health and research; growth and jobs; environment and energy as well as other projects in the european social fund. examples include funding more than 60% of the investment needed to build a section of the a1 motorway between torun and łodz (€1.3 billion), better public transport in kielce (€54 million) and the human brain project at the warsaw university of technology (€54 million).  poland and the european neighbourhood policy   poland has made a significant contribution to the european neighbourhood policy. the european union is interested in eastern europe and, arguably, assisted with the development of democracy in the region by engaging in diplomatic discussions during the fall of communism and the soviet union in the late 1980s. the eu has started to focus on countries such as ukraine, belarus, moldova, azerbaijan, armenia and georgia.  before poland's integration into the european union, polish politicians tried to strengthen economic and political cooperation with its neighbouring countries. these efforts were made in order to help the eu in its efforts of enlargement further into the european continent.  poland and the eu's common foreign and security policy   poland has remained skeptical of the eu's common foreign and security policy and is opposed to giving further powers to the european union's foreign and security policy.  eu countries such as france and germany, want more favourable relations with russia, however, poland has strained relations and history with russia and does not want to change their foreign policy. in addition, poland is afraid that greater eu reach in foreign and security policy would violate polish national interests and sovereignty.  poland has preferred to discuss and maintain relations with nato and the united states, being skeptical about the possibility of a single eu security and defence policy being implemented. poland participates in eu crisis management operations. polish troops participated in eu missions in bosnia and herzegovina, north macedonia and the democratic republic of the congo, amongst others.  poland and the eu's enlargement   poland supports the further development and enlargement of the european union, and draws attention to the need to eliminate delaying the start of accession negotiations. poland supports montenegro, serbia and turkey's aspirations to join the eu. poland welcomed the decision to grant albania eu candidate status.
polish politicians stated that, acceptance of all the balkan states and turkey into the eu will prove that the eu's internal transformation has been completed, and that this would additionally help to bring greater stability to the entire region.  poland participates in an informal group (called the "tallinn group") that supports the expansion of the eu.  poland's internal policies and the eu (2015-present)  on 13 january 2016 the european commission, launched a formal rule-of-law assessment based on rules set out in 2014 and according to article 7 of the treaty of lisbon regarding the amendments of the constitutional court and the public media law in poland. the assessment could, theoretically, lead to poland being stripped of its voting rights in the eu. some polish and british media have criticised the eu's involvement in the polish constitutional court crisis of 2015, as out-of-scope of the european union's framework to strengthen the rule of law.  in september 2017 european commission launched the second stage of infringement over the state of rule of law in poland. this came in the context of a quarrel between poland and the eu that included also the logging of the białowieza forest, the refusal to accept refugees under the relocation program, and other issues.  in 14 july 2021, the polish constitutional tribunal rules that any interim measures from the top european court against poland's judicial reforms were "not in line" with the polish constitution. the polish justice minister, zbigniew ziobro, said the constitutional court's decision was "against interference, usurpation and legal aggression by organs of the european union".  in august 2021, in the context of the poland-eu dispute over the polish judicial reform, ziobro said poland should stay in the eu, but not 'at any cost'.  in september 2021, ryszard terlecki said that the pis party wants to remain in the eu and have a cooperative relationship, but said that "drastic solutions" (seemingly referring to polish withdrawal from the eu) may be necessary if the eu was not "acceptable to us".  on 7 october 2021, polish constitutional court ruled that parts of the treaty on european union were incompatible with its constitution, therefore opening a new conflict with the european union.  on 27 october 2021, the european court of justice (ecj) fined poland €1 million per day, for breaking the law by maintaining the disciplinary chamber of its supreme court, as a previous eu ruling called for the disciplinary chamber's suspension. the ecj ruled that the chamber
"[did] not guarantee judicial impartiality". the fine is the highest daily penalty the ecj has ever imposed on any eu member state.  euroscepticism in poland in 22 november 2020, do rzeczy, a polish conservative weekly newspaper, published a front-page article called "polexit: we have the right to talk about it".  the polish far-right confederation liberty and independence party has called for a withdrawal from the european union on several occasions.  polling in a january 2020 poll, found that 89 percent of poles said poland should stay in the eu while six percent said it should leave the union. while a november 20-23 poll found that 87% of poles said poland should remain as a member of the european union and 8% (an increase) of those polled expressed the opposite view, while a further 5 percent was unable to decide.  in july 2021, sw research made a poll for the rzeczpospolita daily, found that 16.9% of respondents answered positively when asked: "in your opinion, should poland leave the eu?" while another 62.6% responded negatively and just over 20% did not have an opinion.  see also   polexit  poland and the euro  history of the european union  stages of poland's integration into the eu   lgbt ideology-free zone  references  external links   official journals of the european union  archived page office of the committee for european integration   official website of the european union  oficjalna strona poswiecona członkostwu polski w unii europejskiej   polacy w europarlamencie   history of the european union poland and the european union enlargement of the european union
dagfinn gedde-dahl (1 march 1937 - 12 june 2016) was a norwegian physician.  he was born in florø, a son of tobias muller gedde-dahl. he served as president of the norwegian medical association from 1976 to 1979. he was a chief physician at the diakonhjemmet hospital from 1980 to 1992, and then head physician until 2003.  references  1937 births 2016 deaths people from flora, norway 20th-century norwegian physicians
vladimir vukicevic (born 6 may 1991) is a norwegian hurdler. he won a silver medal in the 110 metres hurdles at the 2010 world junior championships.  he is coached by his father, petar vukicevic, a 1980 olympic hurdler. vladimir's sister, christina vukicevic, also competed in the sprint hurdles.  his personal bests are 13.42 seconds in the 110 metres hurdles (+1.7 m/s, la chaux-de-fonds 2021) and 7.69 seconds in the 60 metres hurdles (gothenburg 2013). both are current norwegian records.  international competitions  references  1991 births living people norwegian male hurdlers norwegian people of serbian descent serb diaspora sportspeople norwegian athletics championships winners
marguerite volant is a canadian television drama series first aired in 1996.  cast catherine senart as marguerite volant michael sapieha as james elliot chase normand d'amour as laval chevigny phillipe cousineau as antoine de courval veronique le flaguais as isabeau de rouville gilbert sicotte as claude volant pascale bussieres as eleanore volant stephane gagnon as lambert volant angele coutu as eugenie beaubassin jean-emery gagnon as vincent lery pierre curzi as renaud larochelle benoit dagenais as pere godefroy volant pascale montpetit as jeanne letellier benoit briere as blaise melancon  external links    1990s canadian drama television series 1996 canadian television series debuts ici radio-canada tele original programming 1996 canadian television series endings
nct #127 is the debut extended play by nct 127, the multi-national and seoul-based sub unit of the unlimited boy band nct. following the debut announcement on july 1, sm entertainment released the eponymous extended play on july 10, 2016, with physical release on july 11, 2016. a heavily hip-hop and edm influenced release, nct #127 saw the participation of production team ldn noise, tay jasper, ylva dimberg, chris wahle, andreas oberg, timothy 'bos' bullock, adrian mckinnon, mzmc, the colleagues, double dragon, and others for both lyrics and production, while sm founder lee soo-man served as the ep's executive producer. with the eponymous release, nct 127 became the first sub-unit to receive a major release. it was also the first, and currently the only release to feature the group as a septet.  upon its release, the extended play was a commercial success for the unit, topping the gaon album chart on the third week while being their first entry on the billboard world albums chart, peaking at number two. two singles were released to promote the extended play, including the lead single "fire truck" and "switch", with the former achieving minor success on the gaon digital chart, barely missing out the top 100 in its first charting week.  background and release following the presentation and introduction of nct by sm entertainment's founder lee soo-man during january 2016, the unlimited boy group then debuted nct u, a rotational sub-unit which saw the debut of taeil, taeyong, doyoung, ten, jaehyun, and mark at the time, on april 9 with "the 7th sense" and "without you" on april 10. the latter five members participated in "the 7th sense", while "without you" saw the participation from member taeil. on june 30, 2016, it was announced that nct would debut their second sub-unit nct 127, a multi-national and fixed unit with the number 127 referring to the longitude of seoul, where the unit is based. the initial line-up consisted of four aforementioned members from the previous sub-unit nct u, taeil, taeyong, jaehyun and mark, and three new members who were sm rookies: yuta, haechan, and winwin, with the latter having appeared as a dancer for the live performance of nct u's "the 7th sense" during their first live performance at the 16
th music feng yun bang awards in china. the extended play was digitally released on july 10, and physically released on july 11.  composition nct #127 is a seven-track extended play that incorporates mainly hip-hop and edm genres. the album's lead single "fire truck" was described as "a perfect summer tune under the moombahton genre", featuring elements from hip-hop and trap music by the label. meanwhile, "once again" is a retro-pop track, while "wake up" and "another world" showcase the group's edm venture. the sixth track "mad city" is an urban hip-hop track with the participation of member taeyong, mark and jaehyun, the three members also had their writing credits for "firetruck", while taeyong and mark had their second lyrical participation for "mad city". the last track "switch" is a tropical house song performed by the members in the sm rookies show previously in 2015. the song as well as the music video was recorded in 2015 and was belatedly released on december 20, 2016.  promotion  following the announcement of their debut, the group unveiled the music video for the lead single "fire truck" on july 8, 2016. a day before the music video release, nct 127 had their debut stage on mnet's m! countdown, where they performed both "fire truck" and the album track "once again". the group then continued to promote on other television music shows, such as music bank, show champion and inkigayo. a music video for the track "switch" was released later on december 2016, featuring footage recorded in 2015 and featured all confirmed sm rookies trainees at the time.  commercial performance  nct #127 entered at number two on the gaon album chart on the chart issue dated july 16, 2016. in its third week, the extended play topped the chart for one week, giving the unit their first number one on the album chart. it ended up being the third best-selling release on the july 2016 issue of the gaon monthly album chart, having sold a total of 60,118 copies. it was the thirty-second best-selling album in 2016, with a total of 83,272 physical copies sold. the extended play went on to experience several overseas success, peaking at number two on the billboard world album chart while being their first entry on the french digital albums chart and oricon albums chart.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  monthly charts  yearly-end charts  sales
and certifications  release history  references  2016 debut eps sm entertainment eps korean-language eps dance-pop eps hip hop eps genie music eps nct 127 albums albums produced by ldn noise
the 1965 cofl season was the first season of the continental football league (cofl). the cofl entered its inaugural season with franchises in philadelphia, springfield, massachusetts, newark, new jersey, toronto, wheeling, west virginia, richmond, virginia, charleston, west virginia, hartford, connecticut, providence, rhode island, and fort wayne, indiana.  franchise changes in april 1965 the springfield franchise was purchased by a group from norfolk, virginia. the sale was approved and finalized in may.  general news happy chandler was appointed commissioner in march 1965, with a five-year contract worth $50,000 per year.  rules different from nfl games tied after four quarters move to a sudden death period. on kickoffs, if the ball goes beyond the end zone the kicking team is given a five-yard penalty and must kick again until the ball is handled. fair catches are not allowed. if the receiving team on a kickoff attempts to run the ball out of the end zone and does not reach the 20-yard-line, the ball is automatically placed at the 20.  regular season w = wins, l = losses, t = ties, pct= winning percentage, pf= points for, pa = points against   = division champion  <div>  playoffshome team in capitals''  league championship (november 28, 1965)  charleston 24, toronto 7  awards  most valuable player: bob brodhead (qb, philadelphia bulldogs) & joe williams (fb, toronto rifles)  coach of the year: perry ross, charleston  references  continental football league seasons 1965 in american football
the our lady of the assumption co-cathedral  () also called baracoa cathedral is a religious building affiliated with the catholic church which is located in the town of baracoa on the island and caribbean nation of cuba.  the present church has its origins in the church built in 1807 during the spanish colonization of cuba, was partially damaged in 1833 and was renovated almost entirely in 1886. the portico was completed in 1905. by the early twenty-first century the church had deteriorated considerably but it was renovated and restored again in works that ended in 2012.  follow the roman or latin rite and with the st. catherine of  ricci cathedral in guantanamo is the main church of the diocese of guantanamo-baracoa (dioecesis guantanamensis-baracoensis) created by pope john paul ii in 1998.  see also roman catholicism in cuba our lady of the assumption co-cathedral, opava  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba baracoa roman catholic churches completed in 1807 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
the polynesian championships in athletics records are the best marks set by athletes who are representing one of the member states of the polynesian championships council during the correspondent athletics event which began in 2000.  men key:  women key:  mixed  references  polynesian championships in athletics polynesian championships
rebecca moore may refer to:   rebecca moore (artist) (born 1968), american musician, actress and animal rights activist  rebecca moore (pageant titleholder) (born 1988), american beauty pageant contestant  rebecca moore (scientist), american software engineer and director of google earth  rebecca moore (architect), western australia government architect (2020-present)
pasli is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3.4 km from rurka kalan, 19 km from phillaur, 29 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 134 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, goraya train station is 13 km away from the village. the village is 52 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 121 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the kreuzberg group is a small range of low mountains in northern bavaria, germany, which is named after its highest peak, the kreuzberg (928 m). the group is part of the southern high rhon, which is in turn part of the high rhon, a mountain region within the east hesse highlands. the natural region is drained by the sinn in the west, the brend in the east and the schmalwasserbach and kellersbach in the south. the mountains form part of the central upland range known as the rhon mountains.  natural regions  the kreuzberg group was first defined as a natural region in 1968 as part of the natural regional classification of germany at a scale of 1:200,000 (map sheet 140 schweinfurt) and is grouped as follows: (part of no. 35 east hesse highlands) (part of no. 354 high rhon) (part of 354.0 southern high rhon) 354.02 kreuzberg group  boundaries  in the north and north-west the kreuzberg group is separated from the dammersfeld ridge by the rivers brend and sinn. in the southwest, the range is separated from the black mountains by the kellersbach. in the south it borders on the major unit of the hammelburg south rhon and adelsberg forest, which are part of the major unit known as the odenwald, spessart und sudrhon. to the east is the schonau plateau, part of the eastern south rhon.  mountains   kreuzberg (928 m, central; east of wildflecken and south of bischofsheim an der rhon)  arnsberg (843 m, northern spur)  burgberg (714 m, northeastern spur with osterburg castle ruins)  kaulingberg (754 m, eastern spur)  references   mountain ranges of bavaria rhon mountains natural regions of the east hesse highlands rhon-grabfeld bad kissingen (district)
georg geyer (20 february 1857 in schloss auhof, near blindenmarkt - 25 november 1936 in vienna) was an austrian geologist and paleontologist.  he studied at graz university of technology, at the bergakademie in leoben and at the university of vienna. from 1882 he was associated with the geological survey of austria, being named chief geologist in 1900 and serving as its director from 1920 to 1923. in 1921 he became a member of the vienna academy of sciences.  selected works   das todte gebirge, 1878 - the totes gebirge.  uber die liasischen cephalopoden des hierlatz bei hallstatt, 1886 - on liassic cephalopods of hierlatz in hallstatt.   uber die liasischen brachiopoden des hierlatz bei hallstatt, 1889 - on liassic brachiopods of hierlatz in hallstatt.   die mittelliasische cephalopoden-fauna des hinter-schafberges in oberosterreich, 1893 - the middle liassic cephalopod fauna of the hinter-schafberges in upper austria.  die karnische hauptkette der sudalpen, 1911 - the carnic backbone of the southern alps.  references   1857 births 1936 deaths people from melk district graz university of technology alumni university of vienna alumni 20th-century austrian geologists austrian paleontologists university of leoben alumni 19th-century austrian geologists
petrus johannes "piet" cillie (18 january 1917 - 20 october 1999) was a south african journalist and the editor of die burger from 1954 to 1977. he was strongly supportive of the national party government  and has been described as with "most influential thinker", alongside hendrik verwoerd, in the afrikaner nationalist movement in the early decades of apartheid. for many years, cillie wrote a popular weekly political column for die burger under the pseudonym "dawie." the first of these columns appeared on 28 january 1946.  references  1917 births 1999 deaths south african journalists 20th-century journalists
the severn stallions are a united hockey union-sanctioned junior ice hockey team from severn, ontario, canada.  they are a member of the canadian premier junior hockey league and began play in the 2016-17 season. for the team's first three seasons, it was known as the essa stallions in essa, ontario.  history on may 4, 2016, proposals were made to essa township council where it was agreed the essa stallions would be allowed to play in the fall of 2016 in the angus recreation centre. their first head coach would be sylvain cloutier, a 20-year hockey journeyman who has played in north america and england. cloutier has coached several teams including the corpus christi icerays (chl) in 2008-09. the stallions qualified for 2017 playoffs after their inaugural season. the first round consisted of a two-game series with an aggregate total score to move on. their opponent, the o-town rebels, forfeited the second game and the stallions played in the four team round-robin where they were eliminated.  the essa stallions then won the league championship in 2018 and 2019. after three season in angus, the team relocated to the coldwater community centre in severn, ontario, and was renamed the severn stallions.  season-by-season records  references  external links essa stallions website  ice hockey teams in ontario
olive christian malvery was an anglo-indian journalist, best known for her investigations into the working conditions of women and children in london.  early life  malvery was born in lahore, in the punjab, in 1871 from parents of european and indian ancestry. following her parents' separation, she and her brother were raised as anglican in india by her maternal grandparents. both siblings were well-educated.  she moved to london in 1900 to train as a professional singer at the royal college of music. to support herself during this time she gave elocution lessons, wrote fiction for periodicals and gave drawing-room performances about indian legends.  journalistic career  in 1904, she was commissioned to write a seven part series of articles for pearson's magazine. for this she explored women's work in various trades by disguising herself as a street singer, street peddler, factory girl, shop girl, costermonger, waitress, and barmaid. the series 'the heart of all things' appeared in the magazine between november 1904 and may 1905, before being published together in her first book 'the soul market'. the success of this book led to malvery being in great demand as a public speaker.  malvery donated some of the royalties from her books to christian charities and to build two shelters for homeless women in london. malvery describes the success of the soul market as "the first book that roused the public to shame and sympathy". this would appear to have affected charitable giving, as she later went on to say "to-day there are a great many mission which have been founded by people who were stirred by that book".  malvery also lectured for the temperance movement in europe and north america.  works   the alien question (1905)  the soul market. new york: mcclure, phillips & co, 1907  baby toilers. london: hutchinson, 1907  thirteen nights. london: hodder and stoughton, 1908.  the speculator. london: t. werner laurie, 1908.  year and a day. london: hutchinson, 1912.  mackirdy, olive c. m, and w n. willis. the white slave market. london: s. paul & co, 1912.   mackirdy's weekly (1914)  personal life  when malvery married archibald mackirdy, a scottish-born u.s. diplomat, she invited a thousand london working girls as wedding guests. her bridesmaids were costermongers from hoxton.  malvery and her husband
had three children before he died in 1911.  she died aged 37 in 1914, having been ill with cancer. the cause of death was apparently from an accidental overdose of sedatives.  references  external links east end women's museum. olive christian malvery: journalist, 'lecturer, reciter, and social worker'. olive christian malvery: creating a biography of edwardian britain's pioneering undercover journalist.  1871 births 1914 deaths people from lahore indian women journalists undercover journalists anglo-indian people edwardian era temperance activists poverty activism indian women's rights activists
fabio castillo (born february 19, 1989) is a dominican professional baseball pitcher who is a free agent. he has played in the kbo league for the hanwha eagles, in major league baseball (mlb) for the los angeles dodgers and in nippon professional baseball (npb) for the saitama seibu lions.  career  texas rangers castillo began his professional career as a starting pitcher in 2006, playing for the dominican summer rangers and azl rangers, going a combined 1-4 with a 3.10 era in eight games (seven starts). that year, he struck out 41 batters in 29 innings. in 2007, castillo went 3-5 with a 5.92 era in 14 starts for the spokane indians, allowing 73 hits in 62 1/3 innings.  he converted to relief pitching in 2008, going 2-5 with a 5.28 era in 36 games (seven starts) for the clinton lumberkings. in 2009, he went 3-6 with a 4.05 era in 40 games (two starts) for the hickory crawdads. he split 2010 between the bakersfield blaze and frisco roughriders, going a combined 1-3 with a 2.11 era in 39 relief appearances. he struck out 67 batters in 55 1/3 innings. in 2011, he was 3-6 with a 6.36 era in 42 games for frisco and in 2012, he was 4-1 with a 3.54 era in 35 games for frisco and the round rock express.  san francisco giants he pitched in the san francisco giants system in 2013 and went 6-7 with a 5.34 era in 37 games between the richmond flying squirrels and fresno grizzlies.  baltimore orioles/cincinnati reds in 2014, he latched on with the baltimore orioles-and later pitched in the cincinnati reds system-and went 2-2 with a 3.84 era in 40 games between the bowie baysox, pensacola blue wahoos and triple-a louisville bats.  vaqueros laguna he began 2015 with the vaqueros laguna in the mexican league and had a 3.55 era in 30 games with the club.  hanwha eagles castillo signed with the hanwha eagles of the kbo league for the 2016 season. on june 25, 2016, he made his kbo debut.  los angeles dodgers castillo signed with the los angeles dodgers for the 2017 season and was assigned to the triple-a oklahoma city dodgers. he was added to the 40-man roster on june 8 but remained in
oklahoma city. in 22 appearances (16 starts) for oklahoma city he was 4-8 with a 4.27 era.  castillo was called up to the majors by the dodgers on september 1, 2017. he made his major league debut the following night against the san diego padres, pitching  innings without allowing a run. he struck out two batters, including the first batter he faced, jabari blash. he was designated for assignment on september 6 after appearing in just two games, the second of which he allowed two runs to score without recording an out.  saitama seibu lions castillo signed with the saitama seibu lions of nippon professional baseball. the lions released him on august 7, 2019.  references  external links  1989 births living people arizona league rangers players bakersfield blaze players bowie baysox players clinton lumberkings players dominican republic expatriate baseball players in japan dominican republic expatriate baseball players in mexico dominican republic expatriate baseball players in south korea dominican republic expatriate baseball players in the united states dominican summer league rangers players el paso chihuahuas players fresno grizzlies players frisco roughriders players hanwha eagles players hickory crawdads players kbo league pitchers los angeles dodgers players louisville bats players major league baseball pitchers major league baseball players from the dominican republic mexican league baseball pitchers nippon professional baseball pitchers oklahoma city dodgers players pensacola blue wahoos players richmond flying squirrels players round rock express players saitama seibu lions players san antonio missions players spokane indians players surprise rafters players toros del este players tulsa drillers players vaqueros laguna players people from samana province
the following were the events of gymnastics for the year 2016 throughout the world.  2016 summer olympics (fig)   april 16 - 24: aquece rio final gymnastics qualifier in  rio de janeiro (olympic test event)   won the gold medal tally.  won the overall medal tally.  august 6 - 21: 2016 summer olympics in  rio de janeiro at the arena olimpica do rio  august 6 - 16: artistic gymnastics  men  men's team all-around:  ;  ;    men's individual all-around:   kohei uchimura;   oleg vernyayev;   max whitlock  men's floor:   max whitlock;   diego hypolito;   arthur mariano  men's pommel horse:   max whitlock;   louis smith;   alexander naddour  men's rings:   eleftherios petrounias;   arthur zanetti;   denis ablyazin  men's vault:   ri se-gwang;   denis ablyazin;   kenzo shirai  men's parallel bars:   oleg vernyayev;   danell leyva;   david belyavskiy  men's horizontal bar:   fabian hambuchen;   danell leyva;   nile wilson  women  women's team all-around:  ;  ;    women's individual all-around:   simone biles;   aly raisman;   aliya mustafina  women's balance beam:   sanne wevers;   laurie hernandez;   simone biles  women's floor:   simone biles;   aly raisman;   amy tinkler  women's uneven bars:   aliya mustafina;   madison kocian;   sophie scheder  women's vault:   simone biles;   maria paseka;   giulia steingruber  august 12 & 13: trampolining  men:   uladzislau hancharou;   dong dong;   gao lei  women:   rosie maclennan;   bryony page;   li dan  august 19 - 21: rhythmic gymnastics  individual all-around:   margarita mamun;   yana kudryavtseva;   ganna rizatdinova  group all-around:  ;  ;  artistic gymnastics   february 19 - 21: 2016 fig world artistic gymnastics challenge cup agf trophy (#1) in  baku   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  march 5: at&t american cup world cup
2016 c ii (#2) in  newark, new jersey  men's winner:  ryohei kato  women's winner:  gabby douglas  march 12: world cup 2016 c ii (#3) in  glasgow  men's winner:  max whitlock  women's winner:  mykayla skinner  march 19 & 20: enbw dtb-pokal world cup 2016 c ii (#4) in  stuttgart  world cup:  won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  overall men's team challenge winners:   individual men's apparatus team challenge: , , and  won 2 gold medals each. ukraine won the overall medal tally.  overall women's team challenge winners:   individual women's apparatus team challenge:  won the gold medal tally.  won the overall medal tally.  march 23 - 26: 2016 african artistic gymnastics championships for men and women in  algiers   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  march 24 - 26: 9th fig art gymnastics world challenge cup (#5) in  doha   won the gold medal tally.  and  won 4 overall medals each.  march 31 - april 4: 40th "turnier der meister" fig world challenge cup (#6) in  cottbus   won the gold medal tally. ukraine and  won 5 overall medals each.  april 8 - 10: 12th ljubljana fig world challenge cup (#7) in    won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  april 28 - may 1: fig world challenge cup #8 in  osijek   won the gold medal tally.  won the overall medal tally.  may 13 - 15: fig world challenge cup #9 in  varna   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  may 20 - 22: fig world challenge cup #10 in  sao paulo   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  may 25 - 29: 2016 european men's artistic gymnastics championships in  bern   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  june 1 - 5: 2016 european women's artistic gymnastics championships in  bern  seniors:  and  won 2 gold medals each. russia won the overall medal tally.   juniors:  won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  june 23 - 26: fig world challenge cup artistic gymnastics (#11) in  anadia, portugal   and  won 2 gold medals each. china won the overall medal tally.  july 1 - 3: fig world challenge cup #12 in  mersin   won both the gold and overall medal
tallies.  october 7 - 9: fig world challenge cup #13 (final) in  szombathely   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  november 17 - 20: 41st turnier der meister fig individual apparatus world cup 2016 in  cottbus   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  rhythmic gymnastics   february 26 - 28: world cup 2016 cat. b #1 in  espoo  all-around:  aleksandra soldatova  hoop:  ganna rizatdinova  ball:  son yeon-jae  clubs:  aleksandra soldatova  ribbon:  ganna rizatdinova  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops group:   march 17 - 20: world cup 2016 cat. b #2 in  lisbon  all-around:  aleksandra soldatova  hoop:  aleksandra soldatova  ball:  aleksandra soldatova  clubs:  ganna rizatdinova  ribbon:  ganna rizatdinova  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops group:   april 1 - 3: world cup 2016 cat. b #3 in  pesaro  all-around:  yana kudryavtseva  hoop:  margarita mamun  ball:  ganna rizatdinova  clubs:  margarita mamun  ribbon:  ganna rizatdinova  five-ribbon group:   six clubs and two hoops group:   april 28 - may 1: 2016 asian junior rhythmic gymnastics championships in  astana  team:   group:   all-around:  sumire kita  hoop:  alina adilkhanova  ball:  alina adilkhanova  clubs:  sumire kita  ribbon:  sumire kita  may 13 - 15: world cup 2016 cat. b #4 in  tashkent  all-around:  yana kudryavtseva  hoop:  yana kudryavtseva  ball:  yana kudryavtseva  clubs:  yana kudryavtseva  ribbon:  yana kudryavtseva  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   six clubs and two hoops group:   may 20 - 22: bsb bank world cup 2016 cat. b (#5) in  minsk  all-around:  margarita mamun  hoop:  margarita mamun  ball:  margarita mamun  clubs:  margarita mamun  ribbon:  margarita mamun  group all-around:   five-rib
bon group:   six clubs and two hoops group:   may 27 - 29: world cup 2016 cat. b #6 in  sofia  all-around:  yana kudryavtseva  hoop:  ganna rizatdinova  ball:  yana kudryavtseva  clubs:  son yeon-jae  ribbon:  yana kudryavtseva  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops:   june 3 - 5: world cup 2016 cat. b #7 in  guadalajara, castile-la mancha  all-around:  margarita mamun  hoop:  margarita mamun  ball:  aleksandra soldatova  clubs:  margarita mamun  ribbon:  margarita mamun  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   six clubs and two hoops:   june 17 - 19: 2016 rhythmic gymnastics european championships in  holon  all-around:  yana kudryavtseva  hoop:  ganna rizatdinova  ball:  margarita mamun  clubs:  margarita mamun  ribbon:  margarita mamun  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops:   july 1 - 3: berlin master 2016. cat. b (#8) in   all-around:  dina averina  hoop:  ganna rizatdinova and  melitina staniouta (tie)  ball:  dina averina  clubs:  ganna rizatdinova  ribbon:  dina averina  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops:   july 8 - 10: world cup 2016 cat. b #9 in  kazan  all-around:  margarita mamun  hoop:  yana kudryavtseva  ball:  yana kudryavtseva  clubs:  margarita mamun  ribbon:  margarita mamun  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops:   july 22 - 24: world cup 2016 cat. b #10 (final) in  baku  all-around:  margarita mamun  hoop:  yana kudryavtseva  ball:  margarita mamun  clubs:  margarita mamun and  yana kudryavtseva (tie)  ribbon:  margarita mamun and  yana kudryavtseva (tie)  group all-around:   five-ribbon group:   three clubs and two hoops:  trampolining/tumbling   march 5 & 6: agf trophy
world cup 2016 cat. a #1 in  baku  men's individual trampoline winner:  dmitry ushakov  women's individual trampoline winner:  hanna harchonak  men's synchronized trampoline winners:  (nikita fedorenko, dmitry ushakov)  women's synchronized trampoline winners:  (hanna harchonak, tatsiana piatrenia)  march 31 - april 3: 2016 european trampoline championships in  valladolid   won both the gold and overall medal tallies.  may 14 & 15: world cup 2016 cat. a #2 in  shanghai  men's individual trampoline winner:  dong dong  women's individual trampoline winner:  li dan  men's synchronized trampoline winners:  (bartlomiej hes, lukasz tomaszewski)  women's synchronized trampoline winners:  (dakota earnest, shaylee dunavin)  men's individual tumbling winner:  zhang luo  women's individual tumbling winner:  jia fangfang  june 18 & 19: world cup 2016 cat. a #3 in  brescia  men's individual trampoline winner:  dong dong  women's individual trampoline winner:  li dan  men's synchronized trampoline winners:  (sergei azarian, mikhail melnik)  women's synchronized trampoline winners:  (hanna harchonak, tatsiana piatrenia)  june 24 & 25: world cup 2016 cat. a #4 in  arosa  men's individual trampoline winner:  dmitry ushakov  women's individual trampoline winner:  rosie maclennan  men's synchronized trampoline winners:  (masaki ito, ginga munetomo)  women's synchronized trampoline winners:  (susana kochesok, anna kornetskaya)  july 8 & 9: world cup 2016 cat. a #5 (final) in  coimbra  men's individual trampoline winner:  uladzislau hancharou  women's individual trampoline winner:  tatsiana piatrenia  men's synchronized trampoline winners:  (sergei azarian, mikhail melnik)  women's synchronized trampoline winners:  (hanna harchonak, tatsiana piatrenia)  men's individual tumbling winner:  rasmus steffensen  women's individual tumbling winner:  anna korobeinikova  references    gymnastics by year
the ingenio azucarero vives (), also known as hacienda vives, is a historic sugar mill complex with ruins of windmill and a processing building, in barrio machete of guayama, in southern puerto rico.  sugarcane was ground by the windmill and the extracted juice was further processed in the processing building, by slaves.  a slave uprising occurred here in the early 1800s.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1976.  it is believed to have been constructed by 1828.  in 1976, the site was found to be significant as the only example of early industrial architecture and the only windmill in puerto rico.  it was documented by the historic american engineering record program, with photographs by jack boucher.  modern photographs show that the complex has been restored.  references  external links coverage in enciclopedia de puerto rico la industria azucarera en puerto rico: 1501-2008  historic american engineering record in puerto rico national register of historic places in guayama, puerto rico sugar plantations in the caribbean windmills in the united states sugar production
the gens heia was a roman family at messana, which appears in history during the final century of the republic.  they were part of the ancient nobility of the city, and at some time became hereditary clientes of the claudian gens.  members  gnaeus heius, one of the judges of the judicium albianum, the court that tried oppianicus in 74 bc.  heius, a lilybaean, and a ward of gaius claudius pulcher.  the praetor verres used his position to despoil heius of his money and works of art.  gaius heius, led a deputation of citizens from messana who were brought to rome in order to testify on behalf of verres, during his trial in bc 70.  instead, heius described for the prosecution how verres had seized numerous artworks belonging to his family, including outstanding works of greek sculpture.  gaius heius primus, flamen augustalis at olisipo in the time of nero, provided the orchestra for the theatre of that city.  marcus heius, prefect or governor of egypt between ad 42 and 45.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  marcus tullius cicero, in verrem, pro cluentio.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  corpus inscriptionum latinarum.  frank sear, roman theatres: an architectural study, oxford university press (2006).  roman gentes
"american memories" is a country rock song recorded by shamus m'cool in 1981. it is considered the rarest 45 rpm single to hit the billboard national pop chart.  history m'cool was the alias of richard doyle (march 30, 1940 - january 19, 1990), a los angeles-based stand-up comedian and talk show host, who previously recorded a novelty song in 1973 called "santa's little helper, dingo". in 1981, he revived the m'cool alter ego to record "american memories", a single he recorded under his own label, perspective records. pressing only ten copies of the record, he sent it to local los angeles radio stations with the assurance that the song would get promotion. however, the program directors who promised this had gone on vacation, and the song faded from memory. despite this, the song's inclusion on playlists in a major radio market led to "american memories" making the billboard hot 100, peaking at #80. the song also made the cash box pop chart, peaking at #93.  due to m'cool's bad experience with trying to make the song a hit, he rarely recorded music again.  a 1988 single, tuesday nite in texas b/w we got love, was also pressed on his own perspective records.  because of their limited pressings, all of doyle's recordings became highly sought after by collectors, and have sold for as much as $3000 on ebay.  references  external links    1981 singles 1981 songs
the 2018 united states senate election in delaware took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of delaware, concurrently with other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various state and local elections.  the primary for this u.s. senate election was held on thursday, september 6, 2018. the democratic party nominated incumbent u.s. senator tom carper and the republican party nominated sussex county councilman rob arlett.  incumbent democratic senator tom carper was re-elected to a fourth term.  background  three-term democratic senator tom carper was reelected with 66% of the vote in 2012 against republican kevin wade.  carper, incumbent u.s. senator, was challenged in the democratic primary by dover activist kerri evelyn harris. carper previously faced a primary challenge in the 2012 election from businessman 	keith spanarelli. however, carper defeated spanarelli by around 70 points. carper went on to defeat harris by around 30 points. it was the most competitive democratic u.s. senate primary in delaware in two decades.  the main declared candidates in the republican primary were sussex county councilman rob arlett and businessman gene truono, with a perennial candidacy from businessman rocky de la fuente, who also ran for senate in seven other states. another candidate withdrew before the primary. rob arlett defeated gene truono in a landslide to win the republican nomination.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  tom carper, incumbent u.s. senator and 71st governor of delaware  eliminated in primary  kerri evelyn harris, dover activist and u.s. air force veteran  withdrew  tykiem booker, activist  declined  lisa blunt rochester, u.s. representative (running for re-election)  endorsements  debates delaware newspaper the news journal hosted a 90-minute debate on august 27, 2018 for the democratic primary between tom carper and kerri evelyn harris at cab calloway school of the arts. republican candidate businessman gene truono answered questions from panelists before carper and harris debated. sussex county councilman rob arlett was also invited, but declined and claimed he had a scheduling conflict.  full video of debate, facebook  polling  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee rob arlett, former sussex county councilman, and former delaware state chairman for the trump campaign  eliminated in primary rocky de la fuente, businessman and perennial candidate gene truono, businessman and former chief compliance officer at
paypal  withdrew  chuck boyce, businessman (endorsed rob arlett)  declined  ken simpler, state treasurer (running for re-election)  kevin wade, businessman and candidate for senate in 2012 and 2014 (endorsed rob arlett)  endorsements  debates councilman rob arlett and businessman gene truono had four debates in total. they were normally live streamed on facebook and uploaded to youtube. a fifth debate was planned, but truono withdrew from the debate because he the organizers refused to give him control over what questions could not be asked.  instead organizers held a forum with all the other candidates for the u.s. senate and other state offices.  five candidates attended that forum.  first debate, youtube second debate, part 1, youtube second debate, part 2, youtube third debate, part 1, youtube third debate, part 2, youtube fourth debate, youtube  polling  results  green primary  candidates  nominee  demitri theodoropoulos, small business owner  declined  andrew groff, businessman and perennial candidate  endorsements  libertarian primary  candidates  nominee nadine frost, new castle county chairwoman of libertarian party of delaware and libertarian nominee for wilmington city council in 2016  independents not to be confused with the independent party of delaware, which currently has no candidate for the 2018 united states senate election.  candidates  declared  barry eveland (write-in)  matthew water stout, write-in presidential candidate in 2016 (write-in)  todd farina, ticket company owner (write-in)  general election  endorsements bold text indicates endorsement was given before the primary.  debates with kerri evelyn harris and gene truono on august 20, 2018, the greater hockessin area development association (ghada) hosted a 2-hour debate at the hockessin memorial hall between democratic candidate kerri evelyn harris and republican candidate gene truono. tom carper and rob arlett were also invited to the debate, but did not attend. carper was not present because of the u.s. senate's extended session due to session ceasing early the thursday prior because of the death of former governor and u.s. senator of nevada, paul laxalt. arlett declined and claimed he had a scheduling conflict.  full video of debate, facebook august 20, 2018  with tom carper and rob arlett the debate gained national attention after republican candidate rob arlett brought up democratic senator tom carper's past controversy of domestic abuse.  full video of debate, c-span october 17, 2018
with tom carper, rob arlett, nadine frost, and demitri theodoropoulos  full video of debate, whyy october 30, 2018  predictions  polling  with tom carper and gene truono  with kerri evelyn harris and rob arlett  with kerri evelyn harris and gene truono  results  see also   2018 united states senate elections  elections in delaware  references  external links  candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites rob arlett (r) for senate tom carper (d) for senate demitri theodoropoulos (g) for senate  2018 delaware united states senate
chhapra magarvi is a village in the dhanghata tehsil of sant kabir nagar district in the uttar pradesh state in india.  see also  dhanghata  references  general  india govt. data  govt. website for sant kabir nagar  villages in sant kabir nagar district
the following lists events that happened in 1993 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - davið oddsson  events  births  2 february - maria olafsdottir, singer and actress 11 february - horður bjorgvin magnusson, footballer 7 march - sigtryggur arnar bjornsson, basketball player 9 march - stony, actor, hip-hop artist, singer, drummer and producer 19 april - holmbert friðjonsson, footballer 26 april - kristjan emilsson, footballer 30 april - arnor ingvi traustason, footballer. 10 may - katrin daviðsdottir, crossfit athlete 17 june - thelma hermannsdottir, artistic gymnast 22 july - emil atlason, footballer 8 october - aron sigurðarson, footballer 18 december - anton sveinn mckee, swimmer.  full date missing birna berg haraldsdottir, handball player maria guðmundsdottir, alpine skier  deaths 16 january - jon pall sigmarsson, strongman, powerlifter and bodybuilder (b. 1960).  23 december - sveinbjorn beinteinsson, religious leader (b. 1924)  references    1990s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
girls in tech is a global non-profit organization focused on the engagement, education, and empowerment of women in technology. founded in 2007 by adriana gascoigne, the organization has grown from san francisco to more than 50 chapters located in north america, europe, asia, the middle east, africa, and south america.  history   in february 2007, gascoigne launched girls in tech in san francisco after noticing she was one of the only females at her tech company.  in july 2008, the second chapter of girls in tech launched in los angeles.  in december 2008, girls in tech new york launched.  in january 2009, the first international chapter of girls in tech launched in london simultaneously with new chapters in austin, boston, and portland.  in april 2015, at a girls in tech conference in phoenix, tania katan introduced "it was never a dress", that re-imagined the generic symbol for a woman on bathroom signs as wearing a cape instead of a dress.  as of july 2015, there were 47 chapters around the world.  in january 2016, espn women partnered with girls in tech for a hackathon ahead of the super bowl.  in may 2016, girls in tech partnered with traction labs to offer free san francisco office space to women and minority entrepreneurs.  programs  in march 2021, girls in tech launched an initiative to end gender disparity in boardrooms. dubbed "half the board: 50/50 by 2025," the initiative called upon organizations to commit to gender parity in their boardrooms by 2025. half the board: 50/50 by 2025 asked organizations and individuals to commit to taking action to ensure women comprise at least 50 percent of corporate boards in the technology industry. the effort included an open letter penned by girls in tech board members to tech leaders demanding gender parity by dec. 24, 2024. the campaign launched as part of the organization's efforts supporting women's history month and international women's day, and girls in tech founder and ceo adriana gascoigne wrote an op ed that ran in newsweek about the need for a "gender parity moonshot" that amplified the initiative.    girls in tech has created a number of programs to increase the number of women working in technology, including global classroom, an online learning platform that provides access to online courses and resources to improve knowledge in stem related fields. other programs include the amplify pitch competition, mentorship, and tech job openings, amongst others.  in october 2021, girls in tech teamed with amazon web services (aws) to get more women into public sector
jobs through a mentorship and training initiative.  external links  home page  references   educational foundations in the united states organizations established in 2007 international development organizations non-profit organizations based in san francisco women in technology
excessive force may refer to:   a form of police brutality  excessive force (film), a 1993 american action film  excessive force, a musical project started by sascha konietzko  see also   proportionality (law)
alexandra sergeyevna albedinskaya (; 30 november 1834 - 12 september 1913) was a russian noble and courtier.  alexandra albedinskaya was the royal mistress of tsar alexander ii of russia  from the early 1850s until 1862.  biography  alexandra albedinskaya was born to chamberlain prince sergei alekseevich dolgorukov and maria alexandrovna, nee countess apraksina.  alexandra albedinskaya was a descendant of a member of the supreme privy council of prince alexei grigoryevich dolgorukov. the latter married one of his daughters, princess catherine, the russian emperor peter ii. alexandra sergeevna was a distant relative of princess ekaterina mikhailovna dolgorukova (1847-1922) (she was the fourth cousin of mikhail mikhailovich, father of the future princess yuryevskaya). albedinskaya had four brothers ( nikolai, alexander, alexei, dmitry) and four sisters (anna, margarita, varvara, maria).  alexandra albedinskaya was baptized on november 20, 1834 in the court cathedral in the winter palace with the perception of empress alexandra feodorovna and grand duke alexander nikolaevich (the future alexander ii).  maid of honor  in 1853, alexandra albedinskaya was appointed a maid of honor to the court of empress maria alexandrovna. she was appointed in order to "save her from home oppression". according to anna tyutcheva, she initially had friendly relations with alexandra albedinskaya, but then "instinctively felt in her whole being some kind of isolation, which made me restrained as well."  references   1834 births 1913 deaths ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire mistresses of russian royalty place of birth missing
abel alejandre (1968, michoacan, mexico) is a mexican-born, united states-based hyperrealist artist, best known for his explorations of masculinity and vulnerability. working primarily in pencil, alejandre creates intricately cross-hatched drawings that can take months to complete. alejandre's series of twelve panels, "panoramas," is featured at the los angeles metro rancho park/westwood station.  alejandre also creates woodblock prints using both a giant press he built himself and by hand printing. his monumental my fathers, which is in the permanent collection at the national museum of mexican art, in chicago, illinois, was created by the latter method.  early life and education abel alejandre was born in apatzingan, michoacan, mexico. as a young child he worked in the cotton fields to earn money for his family. in 1975, when he was 7, the family immigrated to the united states via tijuana where he encountered running water, electricity, and television for the first time. alejandre grew up in the long beach area of southern california and attended long beach city college, graduating with an associate of arts degree.  work after painting in color for 25 years, alejandre began working in black and white, becoming completely focused on creating monochromatic works. his trademark crosshatching is created by gessoing and sanding the surface of the canvas or panels and then beginning work with pencil. a single piece of art can take over 5 months to complete, with the artist working 10 to 12 hours a day, and can use over 700 pencils.   in 2013, alejandre was announced as one of eight grantee artists whose art would be installed at one of the los angeles metro stations along the new expo line that runs from downtown los angeles to santa monica beach. his twelve panels, "panoramas," are displayed at the rancho park/westwood station. panels "depict the legs of travelers headed to their destinations: a business professional with her rolling briefcase, a parent with a stroller, and a hummingbird in flight," creating "story of place through the act of commuting."  his gallery work focuses around issues of machismo and masculinity and he uses art  "as a means to acknowledge and process what he confesses to be 'past insecurities, insults, and painful memories.'"   alejandre created murals for the 1984 olympic games and in 2005 curated and staged an exhibition of mexican and american artists on the border fence in mexicali/c
alexico border. in 2011, he worked with the gallery, avenue 50 studio, a recipient of southern california council for the humanities grant on "resurrected histories: voices from the chicano arts collectives of highland park." his art is featured in the book drawing from the inside out: projects for beginning through advanced drawing, and he is featured in two films by eric minh swenson.  alejandre's artworks have been exhibited at venues that include coagula curatorial gallery, center for the arts eagle rock, los angeles municipal art gallery, tropico de nopal and the mexican cultural institute. his monumental wood block print, my fathers, is part of the permanent collection at the national museum of mexican art, in chicago, illinois.  public collections national museum of mexican art, chicago, illinois metro art collection, los angeles, california  select exhibitions  2017  "committed to the line," fullerton college art gallery, fullerton, california  2016 public secrets, coagula curatorial, los angeles, california  2015 abandoned superhero, coagula curatorial, los angeles, california, us the drawing show, the loft at liz's, los angeles, california, us frank|la, no place like home, imperial art studios, los angeles, california, us artillery: contemporary art influenced by weaponry, mesa contemporary art museum, mesa, arizona, us aqui estamos / we are here california chican@ art, cabrillo gallery, aptos, california, us funny face: group show of new portraiture, red pipe gallery, los angeles, california, us beverly hills art fair, coagula curatorial booth, beverly hills, california, us palm springs fine art fair: post-war and contemporary art, coagula curatorial booth, palm springs, california, us la art show: historic | modern | contemporary, special exhibition booth, "dark progressivism: metropolis rising," los angeles, california, us la art show: historic | modern | contemporary, coagula curatorial booth, los angeles, california, us  2014 los angeles contraventions, galerie merkel, grenzach-wyhlen, germany anekantavada diverse perspectives in art, norco college art gallery, norco, california, us  2013 size really does matter, los angeles municipal gallery, los angeles, california, us la xilografia: mexican woodcut prints, fullerton college art gallery, fullerton, california, us 100 anos de posada y su catrina, national museum of mexican art, chicago, illinois, us summer group show, co
agula curatorial, los angeles, california, us encore: bringing one back for another experience, palos verdes art center, palos verdes, california, us latino heritage, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us shg print fair and exhibition, los angeles, california, us chicano y que, plaza de la raza gallery, los angeles, california, us salon style saturday, coagula curatorial, los angeles, california, us signature works: 25th anniversary gifts to the permanent collection, national museum of mexican art, chicago, illinois, us  2012 la junta/ the gathering, centro estatal de las artes, mexicali, bc, mexico la junta/ the gathering, coagula curatorial, los angeles, california, us miami project art fair, cuagula curatorial, miami, florida, us *8from bukowski to st. john the evangelist, avenue 50 studio, los angeles, california, us open your eyes/abre los ojos, the muckenthaler cultural center, fullerton, california, us latino heritage, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us resurrected histories, avenue 50 studio, los angeles, california, us  2011 top 10 now, avant-la, los angeles, california, us the 45 show, twenty miles east art gallery, pomona, california, us pasteles, fremont gallery, pasadena california, us  2010 words of paz, avenue 50 studio, highland park, california, us 12×12, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us el arte de los angeles, xico gallery, arizona, us 8va. expo arte erotico, mexicali, baja california, mexico big print show, orange coast college, costa mesa, california, us tepeyac apparitions: la virgen revealed, mexican cultural institute, los angeles, california, us  2009 dia de los muertos, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us 16×20, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us dibujos: emergency landing, tropico de nopal, los angeles, california, us nuestra madre, chimmaya gallery, los angeles, california, us drawn to you: intimate portraits, project 210, pasadena, california, us self-portraits in the age of myfacespacebook, i-5 gallery, los angeles, california, us  2008 ebbs & flows - sea change and the family gathering, center of the arts, eagle rock, california, us 25th annual
day of the dead altars and ephemera, the folk tree, pasadena, california, us 1 + 1, avenue 50, highland park, california, us ¡presente! homenaje a la mujer, avenue 50, highland park, california  2007 please, please, please don't go, avenue 50, highland park, california, us continuing the latino tradition, channing peake gallery, santa barbara, california, us a short and sweet epiphany ii, tropico de nopal, los angeles, california  2006 holy nuptials a survey of artwork based on the theme of marriage, avenue 50 studio, highland park, california, us a short and sweet epiphany, tropico de nopal, los angeles, california, us  2005 off the map, temporary alternative space, los angeles, california, us red means go, artshare, los angeles, california, us  2004 pieles y carne, casa de mi tia alternative art space, mexicali baja california, mexico terciopelo tijuana velvet, constituto de cultura de baja california, mexico  2003 shelter: coming home, avenue 50, highland park, california, us metamorphosis, gallery figueroa, highland park, california, us convergence: portable labor and convening, los angeles, california, us/mexicali, bc, mexico  2002 what price freedom?, gallery figueroa, highland park, california, us (curated) find your way home, hollywood, california, us rhythm of life, brodlin hotel, long beach, california, us  2001 peace by piece, gallery figueroa, los angeles, california, us eye-speak project, glendale, california, us  2000 recent works, east of getty gallery, beverly hills, california, us  1999 selected works, molaa (museum store), long beach, california, us recent works, whittier art walk, whittier, california, us  1989 fiesta en la playa i, long beach, california, us, sponsored by kvea ch 52  1987 long beach art gallery, long beach, california, us  references  external links http://abelalejandre.com  1968 births living people artists from michoacan people from apatzingan american artists of mexican descent mexican emigrants to the united states former roman catholics chicano
daniel bennett palka (born october 28, 1991) is an american professional baseball outfielder in the new york mets organization. he has played in major league baseball (mlb) for the chicago white sox and in the kbo league for the samsung lions.  career  amateur palka attended greer high school in greer, south carolina. he was drafted by the philadelphia phillies in the 19th round of the 2010 major league baseball draft. he did not sign with the phillies and attended georgia tech, where he played college baseball. in 2011 and 2012, he played collegiate summer baseball with the wareham gatemen of the cape cod baseball league, where he was the west division mvp of the league's all-star game in 2012. after his junior year, he was drafted by the arizona diamondbacks in the third round of the 2013 mlb draft.  arizona diamondbacks palka made his professional debut with the missoula osprey and was later promoted to the hillsboro hops. he played for the south bend silver hawks in 2014 and the visalia rawhide in 2015. after the 2015 season he played in the arizona fall league.  minnesota twins  on november 10, 2015, palka was traded from the diamondbacks to the minnesota twins for chris herrmann. he started 2016 with the chattanooga lookouts and was promoted to the rochester red wings in july. palka finished 2016 with a combined .254 batting average, 34 home runs and 90 rbi's between both clubs. the twins added him to their 40-man roster after the season. in 2017, he played for rochester, posting a .274 batting average with 11 home runs and 42 rbis in 84 games.  chicago white sox he was claimed off waivers by the chicago white sox on november 3, 2017. palka was called up to the major leagues on april 24, 2018, and made his major league debut the next day. palka led the 2018 chicago white sox with 27 home runs and finished fifth in al rookie of the year voting. he began the following season on a 0-32 slump before snapping it on april 17, 2019. he was sent down to the triple-a charlotte knights the following day. he was named international league player of the week from may 13-20. for the rest of the season, he led the knights with 27 home runs.   on november 21, 2019, palka was designated for assignment by the white sox. he was outrighted to aaa on november 25.  samsung lions on july 29, 2020, palka left the white sox organization to sign with
the samsung lions of the kbo league. in 51 games for samsung, palka slashed .209/.272/.367 with 8 home runs and 23 rbi. he became a free agent following the season.  washington nationals on april 16, 2021, palka signed a minor league contract with the washington nationals organization. palka spent the 2021 season with the triple-a rochester red wings. he played in 106 games, hitting .256 with 18 home runs and 58 rbi's. palka became a free agent following the season.  new york mets on december 13, 2021, palka signed a minor league contract with the new york mets.  see also 2013 college baseball all-america team  references  external links  georgia tech yellow jackets bio  1991 births living people sportspeople from greenville, south carolina baseball players from south carolina major league baseball outfielders chicago white sox players georgia tech yellow jackets baseball players wareham gatemen players hillsboro hops players missoula osprey players south bend silver hawks players visalia rawhide players salt river rafters players rochester red wings players chattanooga lookouts players gulf coast twins players navegantes del magallanes players american expatriate baseball players in venezuela charlotte knights players american expatriate baseball players in south korea samsung lions players
charlotte sutherland was born at caron point, near present-day bathurst, new brunswick in 1799, the daughter of james, an english settler. at the age of 20, she travelled overland in mid-winter to fredericton, a distance of 250 km, to save the family farm from repossession by the province.  background  james sutherland, an englishman of scottish descent, and his wife arrived in boston around 1786, shortly after the cessation of the american revolution.  he assaulted a yankee in a heated political discussion between the two, whereupon the other man challenged him to a duel. he accepted, and then won the duel, killing the man in the process. because of this murder, his life was in forfeit to justice and so the couple fled to saint john, new brunswick, and thence to the wilderness of the north shore near present-day bathurst, where he could settle into obscurity.  sutherland was leased for 999 years at a rate of three peppercorns a year a large tract of land near caron or belloni point. it was there that were born charlotte  and her brother frederick, four years younger.  foreclosure averted  because of the notions of british freedom particular to the colonial era, the british legal system had resolved to grant land directly to the subjects of the crown, as compared to the french system of seignories, in which the settlers were subject to overlords.  one price of this freedom was that the crown granted land subject to the condition that it be deforested ploughed and cropped, as opposed to accumulated and hoarded.  on information to a magistrate-sometimes by a jealous neighbor-hoarded land might be reclaimed by the crown.  the sutherland family appears to have fallen behind on its labour, and somehow was notified in 1818 that a procedure to remove their grant from them had begun.  the escheat and re-grant to another depended on a paperchase in fredericton.  it was thus that charlotte and her brother were prompted to trek overland to fredericton, snowshoed and in the midst of winter.  they arrived in record time, only eight days after they had started.  at the time, there were no houses between the nepisiguit and the miramichi, so the siblings were forced to sleep under spruce boughs while in the region.  between newcastle and fredericton they occasionally found shelter at farmhouses or at taverns.  the sutherlands were not without acumen. the deed of
grant was vague and failed to stipulate by whom would be performed the requisite improvements; evidently for example, to hire help was allowed.  in addition, the deed specified that the land and everything on it belonged to the grantee.  charlotte saw that the beavers, who were considered normally to be nuisances, had in fact deforested the land next to their ponds, and built bridges besides.  justice and lieutenant-governor george stracey smyth bent their ears to the strength of this argument, and so the sutherland grant was saved by the pluck and determination of charlotte.  legacy  charlotte's younger brother frederick had issue, with wife mary ann, of augustus skinner on 5 november 1835. it is unknown what happened to james and charlotte, or the family tract that was leased to james by a hugh sutherland, one of the three original landowners of the area that was eventually to become the city of bathurst.  notes  references        date of birth missing date of death missing english colonization of the americas people from bathurst, new brunswick
жива вода () is the debut studio album by ukrainian recording artist khrystyna soloviy. it was released on 22 september 2015 in ukraine through supersymmetry.  information the album consists of 12 songs, two of which were written by khrystyna, the other ten - folk songs (9 lemko and 1 ukrainian) in the author's adaptation.  the recording of the album took place in kyiv, at the studio "zvukotseh". the sound-producers of the album were milos jelic and svyatoslav vakarchuk. for two songs ("pod oblachkom" and "trymai") filmed videos.  track listing  release history  references  external links  відео на пісню «под облачком» на youtube каналі співачки;  відео на пісню «тримаи» на youtube каналі співачки;  альбом «жива вода» на itunes;  альбом «жива вода» на google play music;  альбом «жива вода» на soundcloud;  2015 albums
ban teng nam railway station is a railway station located in hua ro subdistrict, phitsanulok city, phitsanulok. it is located 393.759 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  local 403 phitsanulok-sila at  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  local 410 sila at-phitsanulok  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
minister for housing is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by peter tinley of the labor party. the position was first created after the 1947 state election, for the government of sir ross mclarty, and has existed in every government since then. the minister is responsible for the state government's department of housing, as well as several other government agencies.  titles  1 april 1947 - 1 july 2001: minister for housing  1 july 2001 - 28 april 2010: minister for housing and works  28 april 2010 - present: minister for housing  list of ministers  see also  minister for planning (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  housing minister for housing western australia
wings is a song for voice and piano written by ballard macdonald and composed by j.s. zamecnik. included is also an ukulele arrangement of the song by may singhi breen.the song was first published in 1927 by sam fox pub. co. in cleveland, ohio. the sheet music cover illustration features a photograph of charles rogers and clara bow with a border design of airplanes.  this song was written for the film wings, directed by william a. wellman.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references  bibliography  wellman, william a. 2015. wild bill wellman: hollywood rebel. new york: pantheon books. .  external links "wings" sheet music online at the frances g. spencer collection of american popular sheet music  film theme songs 1927 songs songs about aviation songs with lyrics by ballard macdonald songs written for films
the tenza valley (spanish: valle de tenza) is an intermontane valley in the eastern ranges of the colombian andes. the valley stretches over the southeastern part of the department of boyaca and the northeastern part of cundinamarca. it is located east of the altiplano cundiboyacense and in the time before the spanish conquest of the muisca, as the altiplano was inhabited by the muisca in the higher altitudes and the tegua in the lower areas to the east.  etymology  the tenza valley is named after tenza which means in chibcha: "behind the mouth" or "going down at night".  geography and geology  the tenza valley is situated in the eastern ranges of the colombian andes at altitudes between approximately  in the northwest and  in the southeast. the lengupa river, part of the orinoco drainage basin, flows through the valley and connects the higher altitude altiplano cundiboyacense with the llanos orientales. the une, villeta, socha, macanal and bogota formations outcrop in the valley. the valley is rich in water. the average temperature is .  history  the tenza valley was inhabited by the muisca before conquistador gonzalo jimenez de quesada entered the central highlands of colombia. the tenza valley was ruled by a cacique who was loyal to the zaque based in hunza, present-day tunja. on the fertile lands of the valley the indigenous people elaborated their agriculture. the valley was also important in the economy of the muisca, hosting the important emerald resources of chivor and somondoco.  archaeologist juanita saenz samper has discovered three agricultural terraces and five cemeteries hosting one grave and pertaining to pre-columbian times. the research in the tenza valley has also uncovered typical grey ceramics of the area, called valle de tenza gris.  modern times  the chivor reservoir, producing 8% of colombia's hydroelectric energy, is located in the tenza valley. despite the pleasant climate compared to the colder regions of boyaca, the tenza valley is not touristic.  economy  the temperate climate of the tenza valley allows for a variety in agriculture. main products cultivated are maize, yuca, potatoes, papa criolla, sugarcane, tomatoes, bananas, coffee, fique, arracacha, peas, beans, cucumbers, pumpkins, mangoes, chirimoya, oranges, avocadoes, pineapples, mandarines, papayas, maracuya, guayaba and l
ulo.  in terms of mining, the emerald mines of chivor and somondoco are important. coal mines and gold extraction form another part of the mining business in the valley. salt is mined on a minor scale in sutatenza and gypsum is exploited in macanal.  municipalities in the tenza valley  see also    eastern hills  muisca  altiplano cundiboyacense, bogota savanna, tegua, colombian emeralds  references  further reading  external links    cycling route in the tenza valley   video of the tenza valley  valleys of colombia geography of boyaca department geography of cundinamarca department muisca
sonam gyatso (1923-1968) was an indian mountaineer. he was the second indian man, the seventeenth man in world and the first person from sikkim  to summit mount everest the highest peak in the world, he was one of the 9 summiters  of the first successful indian everest expeditions that climbed mount everest on  may 1965 led by  captain m s kohli,. on 22 may -1965 first time that the oldest sonam gyatso at 42 and the youngest sonam wangyal at 23 climbed everest together. he became the oldest person to scale the peak in 1965 and when he spent 50 minutes at the peak, he set a world record for spending the longest time at the highest point on earth. the government of india awarded him  the third highest honour of the padma bhushan, in 1965, for his contributions to the sport of mountaineering.  biography  born in 1923 at kewzing, a south sikkimese village at the foot of kangchenjunga in northeast india, sonam gyatso started his career in 1946 as a school teacher at lachung, in the northern part of the state. after three years of service, he joined the frontier constabulary force of the indian air force as a head constable in 1949 which gave him the opportunity to attend a basic mountaineering course at the himalayan mountaineering institute, darjeeling in 1954. his first chance at mountaineering came in 1957 when he was selected for the nanda devi expedition, but the attempt was unsuccessful. however, he completed his first successful expedition when he scaled the 26,897 ft of cho oyu peak in 1958, as a member of an all-indian expedition, the first time an indian team climbed a peak of that height.  gyatso followed his cho oyu success with several successful climbs such as annapurna iii in 1961, kanchengyao in 1961, hathi parbat in 1963, rathong peak and langpo chung in 1964. in between, he attempted mount everest twice, in 1960 and 1962, but could not scale the peak on both attempts, though he reached up to 700 ft and 400 ft to the summit. subsequently, he attempted everest through the s col-se ridge route and on 22 may 1965, he reached the summit at the age of 42 as a member of the first all-indian everest expedition, thus becoming the first person from sikkim and the oldest person among all mountaineers to summit the peak. he spent 50 minutes at the top without oxygen supply which was then a world record. his record stood for
over 13 years till pierre mazeaud summitted the peak on 15 october 1978 at the age of 49. the attempt also set another world record for the highest number of successful climbers in a single expedition; the team strength of 9 members broke the record set earlier by an american expedition of 6 members. india posts issued a postage stamp in commemoration of the achievement. later, he also scaled the siniolchu peak.  gyatso was married to kunzang choden and the couple had five children. gyatso was serving as the founder principal of sonam gyatso mountaineering institute (sgmi) when he died on 22 april 1968 at a hospital in new delhi, at the age of 45, succumbing to frost bite suffered during one of his trials.  awards and honors  after two successful expeditions and before his second failed attempt on everest, the government of india awarded gaytso the honor of the padma shri in 1962. the government followed it up with the higher award of the padma bhushan in january 1965, four months before his successful everest climb in may. the government of sikkim honored him with one of their highest civilian award of pema dorji decoration the same year and he received one more honor, the arjuna award from the ministry of youth affairs and sports, the second highest indian sports award., he also received the gold medal from indian mountaineering foundation (imf), in 1960 after his first attempt on everest. the old tibet road in gangtok has since been renamed as sonam gyatso marg in his honor. the mountaineering institute in rathong, sikkim where he served as the founder principal, is now known as sonam gyatso mountaineering institute since 1968.  notable expeditions  see also    mountaineering in india indian summiters of mount everest - year wise list of mount everest summiters by number of times to the summit list of mount everest records of india list of mount everest records  tenzing norgay  edmund hillary  bachendri pal  references  external links  further reading     indian summiters of mount everest indian mountain climbers recipients of the padma bhushan in sports recipients of the padma shri in sports recipients of the arjuna award world record holders mountain climbers from sikkim people from north sikkim district 1923 births 1968 deaths
breakaway  is a soccer browser game developed by the emergent media center at champlain college and released during the 2010 fifa world cup as part of the united nations development programme. the game is intended to educate children about gender issues: when the player makes gender equality-positive choices, the game enables the player's character to play better soccer.  over 150 student developers have worked on the game since the emergent media center began development in 2008. the students chose soccer because of the united nations requirements. the developers found that the game had a positive impact on players' gender attitude; the game has also enabled mixed-gender soccer camps in multiple regions of the world.  gameplay  the player can access the game after creating an account. the player character plays on a soccer team with the goal of reaching the finals. in each level, the player makes a number of choices related to gender equality, including a girl's abuse and abduction. the player who makes choices sympathetic to gender equality wins, while the player who interacts with negative non-player characters is designed to lose the game. interspersed with the plot-focused levels are mini-games, where the player's character learns better skills from the more-positive characters, such as samuel eto'o.  development and release  the emergent media center at champlain college developed the game in response to a united nations campaign to teach children "a healthy, equal attitude towards girls and women." the game is co-developed with the population media center, and has been funded by the united nations population fund and the united nations development programme. it took the team of approximately 100 students two years to develop the game (5 "episodes"), with a further eight "episodes" fully completed by 2013. over 150 students had helped with the game by 2016.  the developers traveled to south africa to understand the "social conditions that can lead to abuse", such as physical abuse, date rape, sex slavery, and honor killing. the development of the game was challenging as a result of united nations requirements, "including that the game show no real violence and appeal to a global population." soccer was chosen because of its universality. the game was targeted at boys ages 9 to 14. the negative team captain was strongly-modeled after a person with borderline personality disorder; play-testers did not empathize with the initial design and so he was scaled back. the developers employed sabido methodology, attempting to provide 70% entertainment and 30% educational message, which the director ann demarle believes may have influenced the game's
success. the game has been translated to four languages, and the development team provides a supplementary educator's guide for post-game activities.  the game was released during the 2010 fifa world cup and was later demonstrated to a number of un officials.  in 2016, the developers were seeking an award which would enable the team to develop a mobile version, localize the game to south africa, run camps, and provide computer equipment. they were also attempting to raise money for a mandarin translation.  reception  cnet thought the graphics were "colorful" and the music "lively".  the developers found that 90% of players make positive decisions. young boys initially thought the concept of girls playing soccer controversial; after playing the game, nearly 90% "agreed that girls can play soccer". research by state university of new york at buffalo "demonstrated that the game had a profound impact on participants' awareness and attitudes, and also indicated behavioral change."  the game has been played in 185 countries, and led to mixed-gender youth soccer camps in el salvador and the palestinian territories (hebron), the latter "[challenging] social norms."  references  further reading  external links   our mission - breakaway game at champlain   2010 video games association football video games browser games educational video games single-player video games video games developed in the united states
hd 164595 is a g-type star located in the constellation of hercules,  from earth that is notably similar to the sun. with an apparent magnitude of 7.075, the star can be found with binoculars or a small telescope in the constellation hercules.  the star has the same stellar classification as the sun: g2v. it has a similar temperature, at  compared with  for the sun. it has a lower logarithm of metallicity ratio, at −0.06 compared with 0.00, and a slightly younger age, at 4.5 versus 4.6 billion years.  planetary system hd 164595 has one known planet, , which orbits hd 164595 every 40 days. it was detected with the radial velocity technique with the sophie echelle spectrograph. the planet has a minimal mass equivalent of 16 earths.  signal observation and seti  in 2016, hd 164595 briefly attracted media attention after it was reported that a possible seti signal had been detected from the direction of the star in the previous year. the signal was only heard once and never confirmed by other telescopes, and is thought to have been due to terrestrial interference.  on 15 may 2015, a brief, single radio signal at 11 ghz (2.7 cm wavelength) was observed in the direction of hd 164595 by a team led by n. n. bursov involving claudio maccone at the ratan-600 radio observatory. the signal may have been caused by terrestrial radio-frequency interference or gravitational lensing from a more distant source. it was observed only once (for two seconds), by a single team, at a single telescope, giving it a rio scale score of 1 (insignificant) or 2 (low). discussions in the media from 29 august 2016 onwards featured speculation that the signal could be caused by an isotropic beacon from a type ii civilization.  the senior astronomer of the seti institute, seth shostak, stated that confirmation by another telescope is required. astronomer nicholas suntzeff of texas a&m university stated that the signal is in a military frequency band, and that it could have been a satellite downlink, implying that some such systems may be kept secret and therefore would be unknown to seti scientists.  seti and meti studies followed with the allen telescope array and the boquete optical seti observatory. also, scientists at berkeley seti research center at the university of california, berkeley
observed hd 164595 using the green bank telescope as part of the breakthrough listen program. no signal was detected at the position and frequency of the transient reported by the ratan group.  the special astrophysical observatory of the russian academy of sciences has since released an official statement that the signal is of a "most probable terrestrial origin".  see also   arecibo message, a three-minute-long message sent into space  hd 162826  tabby's star (kic 8462852)  wow! signal, possible alien radio signal  footnotes  references  hercules (constellation) 164595 g-type main-sequence stars 088194 bd+29 3165 j18003890+2934188 search for extraterrestrial intelligence planetary systems with one confirmed planet 2016 in science
tricholoma borgsjoeense, or , is a mushroom of the agaric genus tricholoma.  it is found in norway, where it grows among moss in norway spruce forest, it was described as new to science in 2006.  see also list of tricholoma species list of fungi by conservation status  references  borgsjoeense fungi described in 2006 fungi of europe
napoles (portuguese for naples) is a portuguese and hispanic surname that may refer to anna maria napoles, american behavioral epidemiologist and science administrator gustavo napoles (born 1973), mexican football player and manager henrique da veiga de napoles (1449-1520), portuguese nobleman henrique esteves da veiga de napoles (1438-1502), portuguese nobleman janet lim-napoles (born 1964), filipino businesswoman jerald napoles (born 1983), filipino theater actor and a comedian  joao esteves da veiga de napoles (1397-1461), portuguese nobleman  jose napoles (1940-2019), cuban boxer leonardo esteves de napoles (c. 1350 - 1421), portuguese nobleman maria napoles (born 1936), portuguese fencer sergio napoles (born 1989), mexican association football player yaisnier napoles (born 1987), cuban association football player yohan leon napoles (born 1995), cuban volleyball player yusiel napoles (born 1983), cuban amateur boxer  portuguese-language surnames spanish-language surnames
patrick chene (born 26 april 1956 in lyon) is a french journalist who worked mainly on france tv, where he commented the tour de france between 1989 and 2000.  biography  youth  educated at the lyons high school of st. mary lyon, and then becoming a law graduate, patrick chene began his journalistic career in 1977 as a freelancer at the progres de lyon.  he then worked the letters department, then the sports section of the newspaper.  tv career  in 1982 he joined the newspaper l'equipe, then in 1985 he worked on television at antenne 2 as a journalist for stade 2.  he commented on the tour de france from 1989 to 2000 in the company of robert chapatte, then bernard thevenet.  patrick chene was appointed sports director of antenne 2 and presented stade 2 between march 1992 - july 1995 before moving to newscast the newsshow 13 heures on france 2 from 1995 to 1998.  he was then director of the sports department of france televisions from 1998 to 2000, succeeding jean reveillon.  from 1997 to 1999 he co-hosted telethon with sophie davant. he also co-hosted les tresors du monde with nathalie simon in 1994.  founder-director of sporever   after leaving france televisions in 2000, he founded and directed the group sporever which specializes in publishing and content production.  he was also host of the histoires de sport on orange sport.  back to tv   in september 2010 patrick chene had taken over for pierre sled - also a former presenter of stade 2 - on the parliamentary channel and presented politique matin, the "little political lunch" of the tv channel. he was also executive producer of the show.  in september 2012 patrick chene created a tv channel dedicated to sports news, sport365 where he hosted the show incognito .  in july 2015 patrick chene announced he was leaving politique matin and cpac but that the shows will continue.  arts and entertainment   in 2009 he wrote a play, c'est pas gagne  (it is not won). the main performers are his daughter juliette and his son-in-law jean-charles chagachbanian.  given the success of the performances, a tour was organized until 2011.  he wrote four tv movies about a policeman in the series les cinq dernieres minutes: un mort sur les paves.  the action takes place during the paris-roubaix and patrick chene appears as himself.  private life
patrick chene is the father of five children. one of his daughters, juliette, is an actress, best known for the role of juliet in the soap opera plus belle la vie.  his niece, astrid veillon, is also an actress, and best known for her role in quai numero un.  radio career  patrick chene has been a radio executive. indeed, on 1 august 2002, the sport o'fm radio station, which later became europe 1 sport, was put into receivership. different recovery projects were proposed and it was the tender of patrick chene's sporever group with fm sport which was chosen. patrick chene, however, resold quickly to sport fm at the groupe contact in august 2003.  books   a mon tour, editions robert laffont, 1998 ()  awards   patrick chene received four sept d'or :   sept d'or for best sports journalist (1993)  notes and references  see also    list of commentators in the tour de france in france  1956 births living people french television journalists french television presenters french male journalists mass media people from lyon tour de france people
indonesia participated in the 1966 asian games held in bangkok, thailand from december 9, 1966 to december 20, 1966. it was ranked seventh in medal count, with five gold medals, five silver medals, and twelve bronze medals, for a total of twenty-two.  medal summary  medal table  medalists  references  nations at the 1966 asian games 1966
resurrection is a lost 1912 silent drama short film based on the 1899 novel resurrection (voskraeseniye) by count leo tolstoy. it was directed by joseph a. golden, produced by adolph zukor and released by famous players film company, it is the first original film zukor ever produced in contrast to the famous les amours de la reine elisabeth starring sarah bernhardt which was made in france and which he bought the u.s. distribution rights.   resurrection starred blanche walsh, a famous american stage star of the day, who had played in resurrection on broadway. this would be walsh's only film as she died three years later.   d. w. griffith had filmed a version of the story in 1909. filmed versions followed in 1918 with pauline frederick, 1927 with dolores del rio and 1931 with lupe velez.  cast blanche walsh - katuschka sydney mason - prince necladov nicholas dunaew - smelkov carey lee - tavern girl  references  external links resurrection at imdb.com  1912 films american silent feature films films based on resurrection lost american films american films paramount pictures short films american black-and-white films american drama films 1912 drama films films set in russia 1912 lost films lost drama films films directed by joseph a. golden
bannu biradari or all india bannu biradari  is the community organisation of hindus who migrated from bannu district of northwest frontier province to india after partition of india in 1947. it consists of 11 trusts.  bannu biradari bhawan trust faridabad bannu biradari bannu biradari bhawan kanpur dehradun lucknow bareily rampur bannu biradari kotdwara vrindavan bannu biradari trust haridwar bannu biradari bhawan trust  references  people from bannu district
the automobile & touring club of the united arab emirates (atcuae), is the sole touring and sporting representative of the  federation internationale de l'automobile (fia) in the uae.  history  one of the oldest national organizations in the united arab emirates, the atcuae was founded in 1965.  the atcuae is the country's sole representative of the fia, automobile sport's world governing body, and its motorcycling and karting equivalents, the federation internationale de motocyclisme (fim) (in its guise as the uae motorcycle club) and commission internationale de karting (cik) respectively. its primary responsibilities are to promote the safe and sustainable growth of motorsport in the uae, and to ensure all events are run fairly and to regulation.  since its inception in 1965, the atcuae has played a leading role in the development of motorsport on both the national and international level. today, it governs overs 120 competitive events forming the uae motorsport calendar, and covering disciplines such as circuit racing, rallying, drag racing and motocross.  the organization is also a member of the federation internationale des vehicules anciens (fiva), the international body for classic vehicles, and the international road transport union (iru).  the atcuae is recognized by the united arab emirates national olympic committee.  governance  the club president is mohammed ben sulayem, 14 time fia middle east rally champion and one the arab world's most famous sportsmen, who took over in 2006.  sheikh mohammed bin rashid al maktoum, vice president and prime minister of the uae and ruler of dubai, is the organisations honorary president.  commercial operations  under the authority of the fia, the atcuae is the only body in the uae licensed to issue carnets de passage (cpd) and international driving permits (idp).  motorsport operations  as well as overseeing all motorsport events in the uae, the atcuae is the owner and promoter of several events directly ...  the abu dhabi desert challenge was founded by mohammed ben sulayem in 1991 and is the longest standing round of the fia cross country rally world cup and the fim cross-country rallies world championship. over the years, it has been won by famous competitors such as ari vatanen, stephane peterhansel, nasser al attiyah, cyril despres, marc coma and toby price.  the dubai international rally is the oldest motorsport event in the uae and has been an ever present round of the fia middle east rally championship since it was formed in the early 1980s.
current atcuae president mohammed ben sulayem holds the record for number of wins on the event at 15.  the atcuae is the promoter of the new formula 4 uae championship due to begin in 2016-17.  in 2013, the atcuae founded the emirates desert championship, the uae national baja series for cars, buggies, motorcycles and quads. beginning its 4th season in october 2016, the championship regularly attracts over 100 entries across all classes.  external links  official website  references  national sporting authorities of the fia auto racing organizations sports governing bodies in the united arab emirates motorsport in the united arab emirates national members of the fim
green gables may refer to:  green gables (melbourne, florida), a historic home green gables (palo alto, california), a 1950s subdivision mortimer fleishhacker house in woodside, california, also called green gables green gables (prince edward island), a 19th-century farmhouse, setting of the novel anne of green gables green gables croquet club, spring lake, new jersey needs convenience, a chain of convenience stores formerly known as "green gables"  see also   anne of green gables, a 1908 novel by lucy maud montgomery set on prince edward island
turkish coup d'etat may refer to:  coup d'etat  1960 turkish coup d'etat 1962 turkish coup d'etat attempt 1963 turkish coup d'etat attempt 1969 turkish coup d'etat attempt 1971 turkish coup d'etat attempt  1980 turkish coup d'etat 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt memorandum  1971 turkish military memorandum  1997 turkish military memorandum  2007 e-memorandum cases associated with coup  nine officers plot 1993 alleged turkish military coup  sarıkız, ayısıgı, yakamoz and eldiven  ergenekon trials  sledgehammer  operation cage action plan
mimenicodes rugiceps is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
ulisses m. braga neto (born feb 12 1971) is a brazilian-american electrical engineer and is currently professor of electrical and computer engineering at texas a&m university. his main research areas are statistical pattern recognition, machine learning, signal and image processing, and systems biology. he has worked extensively in the field of error estimation for pattern recognition and machine learning, having published with edward r. dougherty the first book dedicated to this topic. he also made contributions to the field of mathematical morphology in signal and image processing.  biography   braga neto was born in recife, brazil in 1971. he received the baccalaureate degree in electrical engineering from universidade federal de pernambuco in 1992, and the master's degree, also in electrical engineering, from the universidade estadual de campinas (unicamp) in 1994. he received an m.sc. degree in mathematical sciences in 1998 and m.sc. and ph.d. degrees in electrical and computer engineering, in 1998 and 2002, respectively, from the johns hopkins university. he worked as a post-doctoral researcher at the university of texas md anderson cancer center, under the supervision of louise strong and edward r. dougherty. he worked at the recife regional center of the fundacao oswaldo cruz from 2004 to 2007. he moved back to the u.s. in 2007, when he became an assistant professor of electrical engineering at texas a&m university. he was promoted to associate professor of electrical and computer engineering in 2013.  work   braga-neto introduced, along with edward r. dougherty the notion of bolstered error estimation. he also invented the boolean kalman filter algorithm for partially-observed boolean dynamical systems (pobds). in 2015, braga neto published, in collaboration with edward r. dougherty, the first book dedicated to the topic of error estimation for pattern recognition and machine learning. he also made contributions to the field of mathematical morphology in signal and image processing, particularly on the topic of image connectivity and connected operators.  references   living people texas a&m university faculty american computer scientists 1971 births
dewereldmorgen is a free belgian alternative media website, started in march 2010 as a synergy between pala.be  and the belgian section of independent media center. it is operated by a core of professional journalists and which receives contributions from ±300 volunteers per year. dewereldmorgen's total revenue for 2010 was , but nevertheless made a loss of  (most expenses go to personnel costs, and rent of buildings and rooms). the editorial core is given a monthly salary.  all its content is submitted under a creative commons license, namely cc by-nc-nd 2.0 be.  alternative   kaat van damme's master thesis claims that dewereldmorgen can be defined as an "alternative media" website with regards to content, editing, and business model. in the belgian context, dewereldmorgen has been coined together with apache and mondiaal nieuws as alternative news media. it is characterized by politicization.  content   the website aims to be independent of big media organizations and features the voices of non-governmental organizations and social movements. it also collaborates with similar partners such as stampmedia  and . it can be characterized as preferring to be correct, rather than neutral.  in relation to climate change, yves pepermans characterized dewereldmorgen as coming "closest to a democratic arena" (compared with other belgian newspapers de standaard and de morgen); and has claimed it criticizes the role of markets and stakeholders in relation to climate change, and that it advocates for larger public control over the economy for a socially just outcome for climate change. however, its addition to the debate is one-sided, and the media outlet has few readers.  editing   other than traditional media, there is less contrast between the professional journalist and the reader. reactions can be posted even anonymously, and can only rarely be removed. further more, dewereldmorgen encourages readers to contribute to the website via a section of the website called "community". even though everybody can create new articles in the "community", dewereldmorgen is critical of the model of gatewatching: instead, a professional redaction selects articles for promotion to the front page. dewereldmorgen also tries to inform its readers about changes within the website.  business model   because dewereldmorgen presents oneself as a "movement for media and democracy", they receive subsidies; without which they would have serious financial troubles. other than these subsidies, it is mostly dependent on
financial partners, which can create a bias towards no negative articles about those partners. micropayments, book sales, donations and lectures generate a smaller part of its revenue. in 2010,  was donated to dewereldmorgen, possibly by people who cancel their paid subscription to another newspaper. dewereldmorgen is sponsored by trade unions.  60% of the total revenue for 2010 was received via subsidies, some of which stem from the european union and from different departments of the flemish community, such as the department of popular education (). while dewereldmorgen thinks it receives much too little subsidies in comparison to other media, an extreme-right nationalist website called "react" (where vlaams belang, voorpost and :nl:vlaamse solidaire vakbond advertise) criticizes the website and its subsidies in denigrating language.  scholarly interest   a master thesis has analysed the platform in relation to apache (another belgian alternative media website) in 2010, and a post-doctoral linguist analyses it with regards to the belgian newspaper de morgen. it has been contrasted with newspapers de standaard and de morgen in a 2015 phd thesis; in relation to politicization of climate change, and it has been subjected to a case-study of "positionality" and "the environmental justice frame".  references  european news websites
fory etterle (; 1908-1983) was a romanian film actor.  selected filmography  life triumphs (1951)  the sun rises (1954)  stormy bird (1956)  the white moor (1965)  the lace wars (1965)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1908 births 1983 deaths people from ploiesti romanian male film actors romanian male stage actors
rafael ferreira reis (born 15 july 1992 in setubal) is a portuguese cyclist, who currently rides for uci continental team .  he was named in the startlist for the 2017 vuelta a espana.  major results  2009  1st  time trial, national junior road championships 2010  youth olympic games 1st  time trial 2nd  road race  national junior road championships 1st  time trial 1st  road race  uec european junior road championships 3rd road race 6th time trial  5th overall trofeo karlsberg  uci juniors road world championships 6th time trial 7th road race  9th overall course de la paix juniors 1st stage 3 (itt)  9th paris-roubaix juniors 2011  2nd time trial, national under-23 road championships  7th overall volta ao alentejo 2013  1st  time trial, national under-23 road championships 2014  1st  time trial, national under-23 road championships  4th time trial, uci under-23 road world championships 2015  4th time trial, national road championships 2016  1st prologue trofeu joaquim agostinho  1st prologue volta a portugal  3rd time trial, national road championships  7th overall vuelta a castilla y leon  10th overall volta ao alentejo 2017  2nd time trial, national road championships 2018  1st prologue trofeu joaquim agostinho  1st prologue volta a portugal 2020  4th time trial, national road championships 2021  volta a portugal 1st  points classification 1st prologue (itt), stages 1, 7 & 10 (itt)  3rd overall volta ao alentejo  grand tour general classification results timeline  references  external links  1992 births living people portuguese male cyclists cyclists at the 2010 summer youth olympics european games competitors for portugal cyclists at the 2015 european games
a writ which lies for the tenants of ancient demesne who hold by free charter, and not for those tenants who hold by copy of court roll, or by the rod, according to the custom of the manor.  references  writs writs of prevention
the communists' unity board (in spanish: mesa para la unidad de los comunistas) was an electoral coalition in spain formed to contest the 1986 general election, composed primarily by santiago carrillo's split party, the workers' party of spain-communist unity.  references  1986 establishments in spain defunct communist parties in spain defunct political party alliances in spain political parties established in 1986
hawke ministry may refer to:  australian commonwealth ministries:  first hawke ministry 1983-1984  second hawke ministry 1984-1987  third hawke ministry 1987-1990  fourth hawke ministry 1990-1991  other:  hawke ministry (western australia) 1953-1959
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who have played for dhaka division in first-class, list a or twenty20 matches since the team was formed ahead of the 1999-2000 season for the first national cricket league (ncl) competition. complying with other club lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a dhaka player, current players to the end of the 2015-16 season.  please to note that this list excludes players who appeared for the team in 1999-2000 only. this is because the ncl was not a first-class competition in its opening season. some players (for example, nahidul haque) played for dhaka that season and then played in first-class cricket for other teams in later seasons.  a  abdul mazid (2010-11 to 2015-16)  abu taher (2000-01 to 2001-02)  abul bashar (2011-12)  adil ahmed (2004-05)  al-hamim (2008-09)  ali ahmed (2015-16)  al sahariar (1999-2000 to 2007-08)  aminul islam bulbul (1994-95 to 2002-03)  anamul haque (2008-09 to 2010-11)  anwar hossain monir (2002-03 to 2007-08)  anwar hossain piju (2002-03 to 2011-12)  arafat sunny (2001-02 to 2009-10)  arman hossain (2007-08 to 2010-11)  ashiqul islam (2008-09)  ashraful haque (2005-06 to 2008-09)  ashraful khan (2003-04 to 2008-09)  asif iqbal babu (2010-11)  b  biplab sarkar (2000-01)  d  dewan sabbir (2013 to 2015-16)  didar hossain (2013-14 to 2015-16)  dippajjal day (2004-05 to 2006-07)  e  elias sunny (2003-04 to 2010-11)  emon ahmed (2008-09 to 2010-11)  f  fahim muntasir (1999-2000 to 2004-05)  g  giashuddin (2011-12)  h  halim shah (2001-02 to 2004-05)  hannan sarkar (2011-12)  harunur rashid (1999-2000 to 2000-01)  humayun kabir (2008-
09)  i  iftekhar ahmed (2008-09)  imran ahmed (1999-2000 to 2011-12)  imran nazir (2009-10)  j  jahangir alam (1994-95 to 2004-05)  jahurul islam (2009-10)  javed omar (1994-95 to 2008-09)  jewel hossain (2000-01 to 2004-05)  jony talukdar (2014-15 to 2015-16)  joyraz sheik (2015-16)  jubair hossain (2014-15)  k  thilina kandamby (sri lanka; 2009-10)  khaled mahmud (1999-2000 to 2005-06)  l  lablur rahman (2000-01 to 2003-04)  m  mahbubul alam (2003-04 to 2015-16)  mahbubur rahman (2000-01)  mahfuzur rahman (2003-04)  mahmudullah (2004-05 to 2012-13)  marshall ayub (2006-07 to 2010-11)  masudur rahman (2002-03 to 2004-05)  masum khan (2013-14 to 2014-15)  mazharul haque (2000-01 to 2003-04)  mehdi hasan (2010-11)  mehrab hossain senior (1994-95 to 2008-09)  mehrab hossain junior (2004-05 to 2010-11)  jeevan mendis (sri lanka; 2009-10)  mohammad ashraful (2001-02 to 2010-11)  mohammad azim (2006-07 to 2010-11)  mohammad kamrul islam (2005-06 to 2006-07)  mohammad nazmul islam (2009-10 to 2015-16)  mohammad rafique (2001-02 to 2009-10)  mohammad sento (2010-11)  mohammad shahid (2011-12 to 2013)  mohammad shahzada (2009-10)  mohammad shakil (2006-07)  mohammad sharif (2001-02 to 2015-16)  mohammad sukran (2006-07)  mominul haque (2008-09)  moniruzzaman (2003-04)  mosaddek hossain senior (2000-01 to 2003-04)  mosaddek hossain junior (2013-14)  mosharraf hossain (2001-02 to 2015-16)  muklesur rahman (2005-06)  myshukur rahaman
(2015-16)  n  nabil samad (2009-10)  nadif chowdhury (2006-07 to 2015-16)  nadimuddin (2009-10)  naimur rahman (1994-95 to 2003-04)  nasiruddin faruque (2014-15 to 2015-16)  nazmul hossain milon (2006-07 to 2013)  nazmus sadat (2004-05)  niamur rashid (2001-02 to 2005-06)  niaz morshed (2004-05 to 2008-09)  noor hossain (2009-10 to 2013-14)  nurul hasan (2011-12 to 2013-14)  nuruzzaman masum (2015-16)  p  prosenjit das (2015-16)  r  ranjan das (1999-2000 to 2002-03)  raqibul hasan (2011-12 to 2015-16)  rashedul islam (2006-07)  rashidul haque (2000-01 to 2008-09)  rezaul islam (2005-06 to 2008-09)  rony talukdar (2009-10 to 2015-16)  rumman ahmed (2009-10)  s  sadik hasan (1999-00 to 2001-02)  saghir hossain (2014-15 to 2015-16)  saif hassan (2015-16)  saiful islam (1999-2000 to 2003-04)  saikat ali (2011-12 to 2013)  sajib datta (2010-11)  sajjad ahmed (2001-02 to 2005-06)  sajjad kadir (2000-01 to 2007-08)  sanwar hossain (1999-00 to 2005-06)  saqib razzak (2003-04)  shahadat hossain (2005-06 to 2014-15)  shahriar hasan (2003-04 to 2006-07)  shahriar hossain (1999-2000 to 2001-02)  shamsur rahman (2006-07 to 2010-11)  sharifullah (2006-07 to 2010-11)  shuvagata hom (2009-10 to 2015-16)  milinda siriwardana (sri lanka; 2009-10)  sohel hossain (2000-01 to 2001-02)  t  taibur rahman (2010-11 to 2014-15)  talha jubair (2004-05 to 2010-11)
tapash baisya (2009-10)  u  uttam sarkar (2003-04 to 2011-12)  z  zakir hasan (2000-01)  references  dhaka
island girl (finnish: saariston tytto) is a 1953 finnish romance film directed by roland af hallstrom and starring mirja mane, leif wager and henake schubak.  cast    mirja mane  as liisa  leif wager  as antti  henake schubak  as peter  sirkka saarnio  as maija  anton soini  as masa (accordion player)  toivo hameranta  as simeon  elvi saarnio  as martta   joel asikainen  as gentleman buying fish  saara ranin  as hanna  irja kuusla  as saara  ale porkka  as mikko  enok vaananen  as lennu  matti aulos as coast guard captain  references  bibliography   tad bentley hammer. international film prizes: an encyclopedia. garland, 1991.  external links     1953 films 1950s romance films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by roland af hallstrom finnish romance films finnish black-and-white films
george frederick ryves (8 september 1758 - 20 may 1826) was an officer of the royal navy who saw service during the american war of independence, and the french revolutionary and napoleonic wars, rising to the rank of rear-admiral.  life george was born on 8 september 1758, the son of thomas ryves, of a long-established dorset family, by his second wife, anna maria, daughter of daniel graham. he received his early education at harrow, and in february 1774 was entered on board the plymouth guard ship .  in april 1775 he joined , going out to the west indies as flagship of vice-admiral james young, and shortly after arriving on the station was appointed to command the tender tartar, carrying eight guns and a crew of thirty-three men.  in her he had the fortune to capture upwards of fifty prizes, some of them privateers of superior force.  in may 1778 the portland returned to england, and in may 1779 ryves joined , the flagship of vice-admiral mariot arbuthnot, who in september appointed him acting-lieutenant of the armed ship .  his lieutenant's commission was confirmed on 18 november 1780, and in december he was appointed to  on the jamaica station.  in her he returned to england in 1782, and early in 1783 he was appointed to , which sailed for the east indies; but, having been dismasted in a gale in the bay of biscay, was obliged to put back and, consequent on the peace, was paid off and ryves placed on half-pay.  in the armament of 1787 he was appointed first lieutenant of the frigate , and in january 1795 to  on the coast of france.  on 4 july 1795 he was promoted to the command of , then in the west indies, and went out to her as a passenger in .  on arriving at st. lucia, in the absence of the bulldog, ryves volunteered for service with the seamen landed under the command of sir hugh cloberry christian for the reduction of the island, and rendered important assistance in the making of roads and the transporting of heavy guns. he afterwards joined the bulldog, in which he returned to england in september 1797. on 29 may 1798 he was advanced to post rank, and in april 1800 was appointed to the 64-gun , which during the summer carried the flag of sir charles morice pole on the newfoundland station.  in the following year the agincourt was one of the fleet with lord keith on the coast of egypt, and in march 1802 ry
ves was sent with a small squadron to receive the cession of corfu. afterwards, on intelligence that the french were preparing to seize on the island of la maddalena, he was sent there to prevent the encroachment.  the intelligence proved to be incorrect; but while waiting there ryves carried out a survey of the roadstead, then absolutely unknown, and by his chart nelson, in the following year, was led to make it his base, calling it, in compliment to ryves, agincourt sound.  in may 1803 ryves was moved to , in which he remained in the mediterranean, under nelson's command, till the summer of 1804, when the gibraltar, being almost worn out, was sent home and paid off.  in 1810 ryves commanded the 64-gun  in the baltic, from which he brought home a large convoy, notwithstanding the severity of the weather and the violence of the gales.  he had no further service, but became rear-admiral on 27 may 1825, and died at his seat, shrowton house, dorset, on 20 may 1826. ryves was twice married: first, in 1792, to catherine elizabeth, third daughter of the hon. james everard arundell (third son of the sixth baron arundell, and father of the ninth) ; and, secondly, in 1806, to emma, daughter of richard robert graham of chelsea hospital. by both wives he had children; five of his sons served in the navy. the eldest, george frederick ryves, nominated a companion of the most honourable order of the bath in 1826 for distinguished service in the first anglo-burmese war, died, a rear-admiral, in 1858.  references  dnb references these references are found in the dnb article referred to above.  external links    1758 births 1826 deaths royal navy personnel of the american revolutionary war royal navy personnel of the french revolutionary wars royal navy personnel of the napoleonic wars royal navy admirals people educated at harrow school
ophryotrocha longicollaris is a species of polychaete worm, first found on deep sea whale fall and wood fall habitats in the north-east pacific, off the southern californian coast. this species and ophryotrocha magnadentata are sister species; together with o. nauarchus and o. flabella, it falls in a clade including o. globopalpata and exallopus jumarsi from the shallow north atlantic.  references  further reading ravara, ascensao, et al. "first account on the diversity of ophryotrocha (annelida, dorvilleidae) from a mammal-fall in the deep-atlantic ocean with the description of three new species." systematics and biodiversity 13.6 (2015): 555-570. wiklund, helena. evolution of annelid diversity at whale-falls and other marine ephemeral habitats. 2009.  external links  worms  polychaetes
holding the man is a stage adaptation by tommy murphy of tim conigrave's memoir of the same title. it is one of the most successful australian plays of recent times and the winner of multiple awards. it premiered in sydney, and then across australia, as well as internationally-on london's west end and in los angeles.  productions  the original production, directed by david berthold, premiered in 2006 in a critically acclaimed, sold-out season at sydney's griffin theatre company, australia's leading new writing theatre, and became the company's highest-grossing production in its 30-year history.  the production played six, highly successful seasons in various theatres around australia:  griffin theatre company, 3 november - 23 december 2006.  griffin theatre company, 7 february - 3 march 2007.  sydney opera house, 9-26 may 2007.  company b at sydney's belvoir st theatre, 22 september - 4 november 2007.  brisbane powerhouse, 5-9 march 2008.  melbourne theatre company as part of its 2008 subscription season, 14 march - 26 april 2008.  the production was remounted at la boite theatre company with a new cast, 16 february - 9 march 2013.  west end (london) season   this original australian production was recreated in london's west end for a limited season from 23 april to 3 july 2010. the cast included jane turner, (kath from tv's kath & kim), and simon burke. david berthold directed and brian thomson designed the sets, with costumes and puppets by micka agosta. the trafalgar studios season was produced by daniel sparrow and mike walsh, matthew henderson and suzie franke, benjamin jones and neil gooding productions  other productions  the north american premiere of holding the man was staged by san francisco's new conservatory theater center, 21 september - 4 november 2007.  a new zealand production was produced by silo theatre (at auckland's herald theatre, aotea centre) from 7-29 august 2009, directed by shane bosher.  the state theatre company of south australia production ran from 21 october - 13 november 2011 at the dunstan playhouse, adelaide festival centre, directed by rosalba clemente and starring nic english, luke clayson, catherine fitzgerald, nick pelomis, geoff revell and ellen steele. it was designed by morag cook, composed by stuart day, with lighting design by mark shelton and puppets created by stephanie fisher.  in 2019, holding the man was presented for the first time in new york as a benefit reading
for gay men's health crisis starring greg ramsey and charlie munday directed by andrew victor myers and morgan bartholick.  los angeles season  the australian theatre company presented their production in los angeles in may/june 2014 at the matrix theater with larry moss directing. the production was met with much fanfare with a launch hosted by the australian consul general in los angeles. the cast featured nate jones, adam j. yeend, cameron daddo, and roxane wilson and was very well received by us critics citing moss' direction, murphy's writing and the performances of the cast, particularly the two leads.  publication  the stage version was published by currency press in november 2006 in a double volume with another play by murphy, strangers in between. a new edition of the play was published in april 2010 by nick hern books in the uk to coincide with the london season of the production.  creative teams  original australian creative team   director: david berthold  designer: brian thomson  costume designer: micka agosta  lighting designer: stephen hawker  composer & sound designer: basil hogios  associate sound designer: steve toulmin  assistant director: nic dorward  timothy conigrave: guy edmonds  john caleo: matthew zeremes  mary-gert conigrave and various: jeanette cronin  dick conigrave and various: nicholas eadie  phoebe and various: robin mcleavy  peter craig and various: brett stiller  london creative team   director: david berthold  designer: brian thomson  costumes and puppets: micka agosta  lighting designer: james whiteside  composer & original sound designer: basil hogios  uk sound designer: avgoustos psillas  associate director: adam spreadbury-maher  associate designer: morgan large  timothy conigrave: guy edmonds  john caleo: matthew zeremes  mary-gert conigrave and various: jane turner  dick conigrave and various: simon burke  phoebe and various: anna skellern  peter craig and various: oliver farnworth  understudy timothy conigrave and john caleo: oliver stoney  understudy mary-gert conigrave and various: kali hughes  understudy dick conigrave and various: lawrence carmichael  new zealand (auckland) creative team   director: shane bosher  set designer: rachael walker  costume designer: elizabeth whiting  lighting designer: jeremy fern  composer & sound designer: andrew mcmillan  timothy conigrave: dan musgrove  john caleo: charlie
mcdermott  mary-gert conigrave, lois caleo and various: alison bruce  dick conigrave, bob caleo and various: andrew laing  phoebe and various: michelle blundell  peter craig, biscuit, kevin and various: matt whelan  san francisco creative team   timothy conigrave: ben randle  john caleo: bradly mena  mary-gert conigrave, lois caleo and various: danielle perata  dick conigrave, bob caleo and various: dennis parks  phoebe and various: nicole lungerhausen  peter craig, biscuit, kevin and various: wesley cayabyab  los angeles creative team   director: larry moss  designer: john iacovelli  assistant director: peter blackburn  timothy conigrave: nate jones  john caleo: adam j. yeend  mary-gert conigrave, lois caleo and various: roxane wilson  dick conigrave, bob caleo and various: cameron daddo  juliet and various: adrienne smith  peter craig, biscuit and various: luke o'sullivan  awards for stage version    winner, $15,000 2007 new south wales premier's literary awards, best play  winner, 2007 australian writers' guild award (awgie), best play  nomination, 2007 helpmann award for best play  nomination, 2007 sydney theatre awards, best new australian work  nomination, 2007 queensland premier's literary awards, best play  judges' citation, nsw premier's literary award for best play  external links  articles and interviews  2013 podcast with tommy murphy about adapting holding the man david berthold remembers holding the man the long embrace - interview with actors guy edmonds and matt zeremes holding the guy - interview with actor guy edmonds sydney morning herald article on fourth sydney season  arts hub feature essay by director david berthold: from book, to play, and beyond video interview with playwright tommy murphy you can't keep a good man down - interview with director david berthold holding the man breaks record - article on success of first production unconditional love - holding the man article holding his breath - interview with tommy murphy bent tv interview with guy edmonds and matt zeremes including footage from stage production richard watts interviews guy edmonds and matt zeremes great theatre export heads to london - sydney morning herald  reviews of original stage production  variety sydney morning herald sydney star observer stagenoise australian stage online the blurb eureka street - a jesuit communications publication abc radio - 2008 brisbane season sunshine coast daily - 2008 brisbane season m/c reviews - 2008 brisbane season
man about town (richard watts) - review of 2008 melbourne season australian stage online - review of 2008 melbourne season mcv review of melbourne season london evening standard - london, 2010 financial times, london 2010 whatsonstage, london 2010 official london theatre, london, 2010 the london magazine, london 2010 the telegraph, london, 2010 the daily express, london, 2010 british theatre guide, london, 2010 broadway world, london, 2010 music omh, london, 2010 theatre explorer, london, 2110 pink wire, london, 2010  australian production information  education notes for teachers prepared by belvoir for 2007 season brisbane powerhouse website with information on brisbane march 2008 season information on 2013 season at la boite theatre company  articles and interviews from the new zealand production  actor true to tim's aids journey tale - interview with actor dan musgrove dramatic times - interview with director shane bosher radio interview on 95bfm with director shane bosher and actor charlie mcdermott performer charlie mcdermott - interview with actor charlie mcdermott gaynz.com  reviews of new zealand stage production  theatreview new zealand herald gaynz.com 3 news  reviews of san francisco stage production  san francisco bay times sfgate talkin' broadway beyondchron  articles and interviews from the los angeles production  cameron daddo takes aussie play holding the man to us - the daily telegraph award-winning play, 'holding the man' launches australian theatre company in l.a. - variety holding the man' brings australian theatre and a moving story of love and loss to la - wehoville theatrical thunder from down under! - rage monthly winmalee actor adam j. yeend takes hit aussie play to la - the blue mountains gazette photo flash: first look at australian theatre company's la premiere of holding the man - "broadway world"  reviews of los angeles stage production directed by larry moss  los angeles times broadway world the los angeles post stage scene la playwriting in the city gia on the move life in la movie dearest arts in la  australian plays lgbt-related plays hiv/aids in literature 2006 plays
ananias shikongo (born 25 april 1986) is a paralympian athlete from namibia competing mainly in category t11 (totally blind) shortdistance events. he was born in 1986 and lives in windhoek, namibia. he shares a shack in the katutura township with paralympic silver medalist and school friend johannes nambala.  shikongo is africa's sprint champion in 100m and 200m in t11 (classification). he grew up in okankolo constituency, oshikoto region, in a village in proximity to the angolan border. he lost his eyesight in both eyes in two separate incidents during his childhood. he went to a special school in ongwediva and to windhoek technical high school.  despite, or because of this tragedy, ananias managed to become a great sportsman, a model athlete and the fastest african (blind) sprinter. his character and his courage allowed him to overcome and to reach incredible heights.  2016 paralympics shikongo competed in the 2016 summer paralympics in rio de janeiro. he won three medals, placing third in both the t11 100m and 400m sprints and coming first in the t11 200m. he won the 200m with a paralympic record time of 22.44 seconds. he is the third namibian athlete to win a medal at a paralympic competition.  references  external links   ananias shikongo at the international paralympic committee    ananias shikongo official website  the namibian - spotlight on ananias shikongo  paralympic athletes of namibia 1986 births living people athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer paralympics medalists at the 2016 summer paralympics medalists at the 2020 summer paralympics paralympic gold medalists for namibia paralympic silver medalists for namibia paralympic bronze medalists for namibia namibian male sprinters african games gold medalists for namibia african games medalists in athletics (track and field) african games bronze medalists for namibia athletes (track and field) at the 2011 all-africa games athletes (track and field) at the 2015 african games paralympic gold medalists in athletics (track and field)
philip hugh jones (born 13 may 1951) was archdeacon of lewes & hastings from 2005 to 2014 and, after renaming, archdeacon of hastings from 2014 to 2015.  jones was educated at the leys school and  chichester theological college. he was a solicitor from 1975 to 1992. he was ordained deacon in 1994, and priest in 1995. after a curacy in horsham he was vicar of southwater from 1997 to 2005.  references  1951 births people educated at the leys school archdeacons of lewes & hastings alumni of chichester theological college living people people from southwater
the alfa m44 was a spanish machine gun developed during world war ii. at this time, stocks of machine guns ran low and no outside source was available. non-combatant nations found that the belligerent nations were unable to supply as they were preoccupied with meeting their own wartime production needs. it complimented the zb-26 light machine gun, and replaced the aging hotchkiss m1914 machine gun. originally chambered in 7.92×57mm mauser, in 1955 an updated version chambered in 7.62×51mm nato was introduced, and was subsequently issued to spanish troops, sometimes referred to as the m55. along with spain, the m44 was also prominently used by egypt, whose army had standardised on the 7.92×57mm mauser round.  gallery  see also  breda m37  zb-53  m1919 browning machine gun  sg-43 goryunov  references  external links   image of an alfa m44 mounted on a tripod with a distinctive cylindrical hopper for the belt feed   alfa modelo 44  7.62×51mm nato machine guns 7.92×57mm mauser machine guns medium machine guns military equipment introduced in the 1950s infantry weapons of the cold war weapons of egypt machine guns of spain
laki-laki tak bernama (indonesian for man without a name) is a 1969 indonesian film directed by achmad salim.  plot laki-laki tak bernama shows a number of scenes related to sexuality, including a cheating wife and husband.  production laki-laki tak bernama was written and directed by wim umboh (also known as achmad salim) for annie mambo's aries film. the film was shot by lukman hakim nain in cinemascope and eastmancolor. idris sardi provided the music, while umboh handled editing. according to tempo, the film was rumored to have been shot without a screenplay.  the film starred , , rima melati, rachmat kartolo, w.d. mochtar, and . supporting roles were held by farida arriany, farouk afero, hamid gruno, paula rumokoy, sandy suwardi hassan, sofia wd, tien samatha, jeffry sani, boes boestami, a. hamid arief, and dicky zulkarnaen. this was melati's first film role after a five year hiatus, as well as the last role of boestami, who died two years later.  release and reception laki-laki tak bernama was released in 1969. it was advertised as the first indonesian sex film, as well as "the only national film that is the bravest and biggest . . . . with sex scenes which are explicit without pulling any punches". the poster featured images of kissing and a woman undressing, and urged viewers to take their girlfriends to see the film.  j.b. kristanto, in his catalogue of indonesian films, writes that, though laki-laki tak bernama builds its characters sufficiently, the film's plot is convoluted and unclear.  references  works cited        films directed by wim umboh
prince vassili anikititch repnine (russian : василии аникитич репнин; 1696-1748) was a russian general. he was the son of prince anikita ivanovitch repnine (1668-1726) and father of nikolai vassilievitch repnine.  life his military posts included commander in chief of the russian army during the war of the austrian succession (1740-1748) and governor-general of saint petersburg (1744). he also led the rhine campaign of 1748 and took part in negotiations for the treaty of aix-la-chapelle. he died at riga and was buried at st. mary magdalene's church alongside his father.  1696 births 1748 deaths imperial russian army generals
the kfc index is an informal guide to measure purchasing power parity comparing exchange rates in african countries. inspired by the big mac index, the key difference between the two indices is that the kfc index focuses solely on africa; the big mac index coverage is worldwide but not as applicable to africa since mcdonald's has little presence there, whereas kfc chains operate in almost 20 countries across the continent.  overview   the kfc index was created by sagaci research (a pan-african primary market research firm) as an informal way to gauge whether currencies in african countries are "correctly valued". it is based on the theory of purchasing power parity, which states exchange rates should move towards the rate that would equalize the prices of an identical basket of goods and services between two countries. in this case, the concerned goods are kfc´s original 12/15 piece bucket and geographically specific to african countries. the kfc index also covers the united states, france, spain and the united kingdom.  for example, the average price of kfc´s original 12 pc. bucket in united states in january 2016 was $20.50; in namibia it was only $13.40 at market exchange rates. therefore, the index suggests that the namibian dollar was undervalued by 33% at that time.  inspiration   the index takes its name from the international fast food chain kentucky fried chicken (kfc) and is modeled on the economist´s "big mac index", which covers countries with mcdonald's presence (about 60 countries). in africa, the mcdonald's chain is only present in morocco, south africa and egypt. kfc, on the other hand, has operations in almost 20 african countries, which is the highest of any international fast food chain and therefore a more applicable benchmark to use. the index was not intended as a precise gauge of currency misalignment but merely a tool to make exchange-rate theory more digestible.  limitations   as in the case of the big mac index, the kfc index was not created to be a highly accurate and precise tool for measuring purchasing power parity and its limitations include factors such as inflation, dietary preferences, socio-economic classifications, levels of competition and local costs (e.g. advertising, production and taxes).  currency volatility - due to the nature of developing economies (in this case all countries in africa), there is more likely to be high volatility in currencies, therefore undertaking this analysis over a one to three month basis could produce large changes and different conclusions.  black market - as there is a thriving
market for us dollars in some countries, it may produce conflicting results compared to the official exchange rate. angola and nigeria are examples of these types of markets. the report produced by sagaci research takes into account black market exchange rates.  figures   the february 2016 publication states:  most overvalued currencies   72%   30%  most undervalued currencies   -48%   -34%   -32%  the june 2016 publication  states:  references   kfc purchasing power mcdonald's
goodies is an album by jazz trombonist and arranger j. j. johnson with a big band recorded in 1965 for the rca victor label.  reception  the allmusic review by jason ankeny observed "goodies captures j.j. johnson's mid-'60s big band in full gallop. ...the music marries the nimble grooves of soul-jazz with the big, bold sensibilities of swing to stunning effect. mastering adrenaline and atmosphere with equal aplomb, the music shifts effortlessly from powder keg dance melodies to lush, luminous ballad".  track listing all compositions by j. j. johnson except where noted.  "feeling good" (anthony newley, leslie bricusse) - 2:25  "the seventh son" (willie dixon) - 2:42  "how insensitive" (antonio carlos jobim, vinicius de moraes, norman gimbel) - 2:45  "pense a moi" (maurice "bugs" bower, jack wolf, jaques datin) - 2:02  "008" - 2:06  "in the name of love" (estelle levitt, kenny rankin) - 2:03  "g'won train" (patricia brown) - 2:57  "no particular place to go" (chuck berry) - 2:10  "agua de beber" (jobim, de moraes, gimbel) - 2:28  "incidental blues" - 2:40	  "i'm all smiles" (michael leonard, herbert martin) - 1:57  "billy boy" - 2:51 recorded at rca victor's studio a in new york city on july 12, 1965 (tracks 4 & 9), july 13, 1965 (tracks 1, 3, 7 & 11), july 19, 1965 (tracks 2, 6 & 8) and july 20, 1965 (tracks 5, 10 & 12)  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone, arranger clark terry - trumpet, flugelhorn alan raph, tony studd (tracks 1, 3, 7, 11) - bass trombone ray sterling - mellophone jerome richardson - alto saxophone, flute, tenor saxophone phil bodner, romeo penque (tracks 4, 5, 9, 12) - reeds, flute danny bank - baritone saxophone, flute, bass clarinet (tracks 1-3, 6-8 & 11) barry galbraith (tracks 2, 6 & 8), carl lynch (
tracks 2, 6 & 8), bucky pizzarelli (tracks 1, 3, 4, 7, 9 & 11) - guitar dick hyman - piano, arranger (tracks 5, 10 & 12) richard davis - bass sol gubin (tracks 2, 6 & 8), ossie johnson (tracks 5, 10 & 12), bob rosengarden (tracks: 1, 3, 4, 7, 9 & 11) - drums doug allen (tracks 4 & 9), john pacheco (tracks 4 & 9), phil kraus (tracks 1, 3, 7 & 11), warren smith (tracks 2, 6, 8) - percussion marlene verplanck (tracks 4 & 9), ossie johnson (tracks 2, 6 & 8) - vocals unidentified choir - backing vocals (tracks 1, 3, 7 & 11) billy byers (tracks 4 & 9), slide hampton (tracks 2, 6 & 8) - arranger  references   1966 albums rca records albums j. j. johnson albums albums arranged by billy byers albums arranged by slide hampton
air chief marshal abu esrar, bbp, ndc, acsc was the 14th chief of the air staff of the bangladesh air force. he took over as the chief on 12 june 2015 from air marshal enamul bari. he is the first four-star air officer (air chief marshal) of bangladesh. he was promoted to acm on 16 january 2016.  birth esrar was born in 1961 in gazipur to abu ayub and akhtarunnesa.  air force career esrar joined the bangladesh air force on 19 september 1978. he was commissioned in the gd(p) branch on 1 february 1981. he has worked in most of the squadrons of baf. he has flown pt-6, aa-sa, fugi-200, mig-29. he has also worked as instructor of new pilots.  he has worked as defense attache in moscow, russia. before assume the post of air chief he served as assistant chief of air staff (operations and training).  abu esrar has undergone many courses in bangladesh and abroad. he has completed 'flying  instructors course' in the united kingdom  and  'flying supervisors course' in australia. he has undergone training of a5iiia and mig-29 in china and russia respectively.  esrar was awarded the prestigious bbp medal (biman bahini padak, air force medal in english) in 2013. he is a graduate of air command and staff college (acsc) located at maxwell air force base in montgomery, alabama and also is an alumnus of 'national defence college' (ndc) - dhaka, bangladesh.  references  bangladesh air force air marshals 1961 births living people chiefs of air staff (bangladesh)
it's all in your head may refer to: it's all in your head (book), 2015 book about psychosomatic illness by suzanne o'sullivan  "it's all in your head", an episode of bear in the big blue house it's all in your head (eve 6 album), 2003 album it's all in your head (negativland album), 2014 studio album it's all in your head fm, 2006 live album by negativland "it's all in your head" (song), 1996 single by diamond rio
stephania potalivo (born 26 september 1986 in charlottenlund, copenhagen) is a danish actress and former child star. she is also a sister of christian potalivo.  early life  stephania debuted in 1995 in jørn faurschou film farligt venskab ("dangerous friendship"). she is also known for her roles in lykkefanten (1997), buldermanden,  in 1996 and mirakel (2000).  in 1998 she won a "camerio" at the carrousel international du film for "best actress".  career  in 2009-2010 she studied at the danish film actor academy.  in 2012 she joined the tv 2 zulu sitcom sjit happens, for which was nominated for a robert for "best actress" in 2015. in 2015, she also appeared in tv 2's dance program vild med dans ("dancing with the stars") where she danced with morten kjeldgaard. the pair got the highest score from the judges thrice. the pair achieved a place in the final but was beaten by ena spottag and thomas evers poulsen.  filmography  tv series  references  external links    stephania potalivo, internet movie database   stephania potalivo, filmdatabasen   stephania potalivo, danskefilm.dk   stephania potalivo i skuespillerhandbogen  vild med dans  1986 births danish child actresses living people actresses from copenhagen people from gentofte municipality
recalcati may refer to:  carlo recalcati (born 1945), italian basketball coach and player villa recalcati, a rural palace in varese, italy
toonimo is a web-based solution that offers on-site user assistance via online walkthroughs.  company overview  toonimo is a cloud-based digital walkthrough platform that helps guide users through website funnels. toonimo works by overlaying human voice audio and graphical coachmarks on web pages to guide or orient web users. other features include an analytics dashboard, a/b testing functionality, a personalization suite, and more. the company serves financial, insurance, healthcare, telecommunication, education, travel, hospitality, and other industries in both b2b and b2b2c situations.  history  toonimo was founded in 2013 by ohad rozen and dan kotlicki, who is also the ceo of the company. their headquarters are in new york city, ny, with an additional office located in tel aviv, israel. their assistance was first used by small and midsize insurance companies and banks, who did not have enough staff to help customers. in 2017, toonimo joined the oracle startup cloud accelerator program and got access to its worldwide network of bank, telecom and insurance companies.  toonimo is backed by lightspeed venture partners, real life innovations, and several other private investors.  leadership  toonimo is managed by ceo dan kotlicki. other key executives are:   edi buslovich (vice president)  references  web software software companies based in new york city software companies of the united states 2013 establishments in new york city
sofia toccalino  (born 20 march 1997) is an argentine field hockey player and part of the argentina national team. she plays with the argentina national field hockey team, winning silver medal at the 2020 summer olympics.  career  she competed at the 2016 women's hockey junior world cup, winning the gold medal. on club level she plays for st. catherine's in argentina.  she won a gold medal at the 2019 pan american games.  references  external links  1997 births living people las leonas players argentine people of italian descent field hockey players at the 2014 summer youth olympics argentine female field hockey players place of birth missing (living people) south american games gold medalists for argentina south american games medalists in field hockey competitors at the 2018 south american games field hockey players at the 2019 pan american games pan american games gold medalists for argentina pan american games medalists in field hockey medalists at the 2019 pan american games field hockey players at the 2020 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of argentina olympic silver medalists for argentina medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic medalists in field hockey
the following lists events that happened in 1987 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - steingrimur hermannsson, þorsteinn palsson  events  births  30 january - matthias vilhjalmsson, footballer 4 march - theodor elmar bjarnason, footballer 6 march - ragnar þorhallsson, musician 14 may - ari freyr skulason, footballer. 27 june - katrin omarsdottir, footballer  deaths 13 august - guðmundur ingolfsson, swimmer (b. 1929).  19 december - guðmundur ivarsson guðmundsson, politician (b. 1909).  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
bholewal qadim is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
marrakesh express is an album by saxophonist stan getz and orchestra arranged and conducted by richard hewson which was released on the mgm label in 1970.  reception  the allmusic site awarded the album 3 stars.  track listing  "marrakesh express" (graham nash) - 3:24  "raindrops keep fallin' on my head" (burt bacharach, hal david) - 3:35  "i'll never fall in love again" (bacharach, david) - 2:50  "both sides, now" (joni mitchell) - 3:18  "without her" (harry nilsson) - 3:16  "cecilia" (paul simon) - 4:05  "love theme from romeo and juliet" (nino rota) - 4:24 "medley: because/do you know the way to san jose" (john lennon, paul mccartney/bacharach, david) - 8:03  "just a child" (johnny mandel) - 4:39  "the april fools" (bacharach, david) - 3:06  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone unidentified orchestra arranged and conducted by richard hewson jeff jarratt - recording engineer  references   1970 albums stan getz albums mgm records albums albums produced by george martin
joseph kaiponohea ʻaeʻa (june 22, 1882 - november 14, 1914) was the adoptive son of queen liliʻuokalani under the hawaiian tradition of hanai. he was considered her favorite hanai son.  biography he was born on june 22, 1882 to joseph kapeau ʻaeʻa and his wife kaheo ʻaeʻa. both his parents were pure native hawaiians and retainers of the future queen liliʻuokalani, who was heir-presumptive to the hawaiian throne at the time. not having any children of her own, liliʻuokalani adopted the infant boy under the hawaiian tradition of hanai. she named him joseph kaiponohea ʻaeʻa and referred to him as kaipo throughout his life. besides kaipo, she also adopted lydia kaʻonohiponiponiokalani aholo and john ʻaimoku dominis.  historian helena allen described how the queen "adored him - a curly haired, bright-eyed toddler - her heart contracted every time she saw him". both biological parents took advantage of liliʻuokalani's love for kaipo to extort favors and debt forgiveness from her, blackmailing her by threatening to take their son away if she refused.  he was educated at fort street school and ʻiolani college and graduated in 1900 from the kamehameha school for boys. in 1901, he was recommended as a candidate for the united states military academy at west point by delegate robert william wilcox, but he failed to pass the english section of entrance examination. after his failure, wilcox chose part native hawaiians: e. vivian richardson, who declined the nomination, and later clarence kumukoa lyman, who became the first native hawaiian to attend west point.  ʻaeʻa worked as a stenographer and clerk in the honolulu clerk's office. in 1909, he was named in the queen's deed trust as a beneficiary in which she willed him kealohilani, her waikiki residence, and the fishery grounds of hamohamo. he never married or had children. while at the waikiki home of kealohilani, kaipo died on november 14, 1914, at the age of thirty-two. the cause of death was bright's disease. following a funeral service at st. andrews cathedral, he was buried the following day at the upper manoa cemetery. too ill to attend the funeral, liliʻuokalani remained in at washington place in mourning for her hanai son.  references  bibliography
1882 births 1914 deaths native hawaiian people hawaiian kingdom people kamehameha schools alumni hawaiian nobility hawaiian adoptees (hanai) deaths from nephritis ʻiolani school alumni
the 54th scripps national spelling bee was held in washington, d.c. at the capital hilton on june 3-4, 1981, sponsored by the e.w. scripps company.  the winner was 13-year-old paige pipkin of el paso, texas, who had placed second in the prior year's bee. 12-year-old jason johnson jr. of st. joseph, michigan placed second, missing "philippic". pipkin spelled that word correctly followed by "sarcophagus" for the win. pipkin had earlier missed "vitrine" but johnson also missed it. third-place went to 13 year old danielle marie spinelli of staunton, virginia, who missed "polyonymous".  there were 120 spellers this year, and a total of 571 words were used. 46 spellers made it to the second day. round 4 on day one was especially harsh on the contestants, knocking out 44 spellers on 90 words. the final rounds were completed shortly before noon on june 4. alex cameron was the official pronouncer for the first time, replacing richard r. baker, who had retired. the top prize was $1,000, followed by $500 for second and $250 for third. the next five spellers each received $100.  pipkin later joined the staff of the bee, and was named its executive director (under her married name paige kimble) in 2013.  references  scripps national spelling bee competitions scripps national spelling bee scripps national spelling bee scripps national spelling bee
dean o'brien and ruan roelofse were the defending champions but lost in the first round to quentin halys and stefan kozlov.  matt reid and john-patrick smith won the title after defeating liam broady and guilherme clezar 6-4, 6-2 in the final.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  qualifying draw  levene gouldin and thompson tennis challenger - doubles 2016 doubles 2016 levene gouldin & thompson tennis challenger
ultra south africa is africa's largest electronic music festival and is part of ultra music festival's worldwide expansion which has now spread to twenty countries. ultra south africa is a single day event taking place in two cities (johannesburg and cape town). having debuted in 2014, ultra south africa is one of the longest standing world editions of the festival. ultra south africa is a strictly 18 and over event.  the eighth edition of ultra south africa was meant to be held on 26 & 27 february 2021, unfortunately due to the covid-19 pandemic the organisers announced on 22 january 2021 that the festival will not be taking place in 2021.  history  2014  the debut of ultra south africa consisted of three stages in both johannesburg and cape town-the main stage, stage 2, and stage 3. in cape town, south africa the festival took place on 14 february 2014 and in johannesburg, the festival took place on 15 february 2014. confirmed artists for the inaugural edition of ultra south africa included tiesto, afrojack, alesso, nicky romero, krewella, w&w, martin garrix, blasterjaxx, claude vonstroke, goldfish, black coffee, and many more. the festival welcomed 15,000 people in attendance to cape town and an additional 25,000 people to the johannesburg location.  2015  the second edition of ultra south africa was once again held in johannesburg and cape town, south africa at the same two venues from the year before on 13-14 february 2015. the festival was host to three stages-the main stage, the electric stage, and the nicci beach stage. ultra south africa 2015 included the likes of protoculture, oliver heldens, dvbbs, [[martin garrix]], armin van buuren, hardwell, goldfish, axwell & ingrosso, gorgon city, black coffee, and many more. this edition of ultra south africa saw more than 50,000 dance music fans from across south africa and beyond.  2016  following an incredible second edition, the ultra south africa organisers announced that the festival will expand to three days in 2016, 26 & 27 february in johannesburg and 28 february in cape town. in response to demand from fans event organisers confirmed that they will be adding an extra date to the cape town leg (27 & 28 february 2016) and that they will also be introducing camping for the first time. attendees who already purchased early bird tickets in cape town were rewarded with a double day pass for the same, previously single day, ticket.  on
21 october 2015, ultra south africa announced its phase one lineup which included zedd, robin schulz, tiesto, skrillex , dash berlin, galantis, seth troxler, the martinez brothers and black coffee. on 24 november, organisers dropped the final line up with afrojack, carnage, goldfish, mr carmack, claptone, w&w and fedde le grand set to joined the already jam packed line up. 2016's 2-day format entertained more than 26, 000 party goers per day at the iconic nasrec in johannesburg, and 14, 000 per day at the picturesque ostrich farm in cape town.  2017  it was announced on 27 july 2016 that for ultra south africa's fourth edition, the festival would take place on the 24-25 february 2017. in johannesburg, the festival was held on 25 february 2017 at the nasrec expo centre, once again. in cape town, the festival announced a new venue-cape town stadium. the festival in cape town took place on 24 february 2017. early bird tickets went on sale on 2 august 2016 and sold out on 4 august 2016. tier one tickets were released to the public on 30 august 2016. on 30 august 2016, martin garrix and david guetta were announced as the first headliners for the 2017 edition of the festival. the phase two lineup was announced on 30 november 2016 and included dash berlin, kshmr, dj snake, black coffee, felix jaehn, djsky, head hunters, nic fanciulli and many other regional artists.  2018  ultra south africa has announced that its fifth anniversary will return to the cape town stadium in cape town, south africa on 9 february 2018 and the nasrec expo centre in johannesburg, south africa on 10 february 2018. on september 19, 2017, phase 1 of the lineup was released and the headliners were revealed to be armin van buuren and hardwell. phase 2 of the lineup was released on october 24, 2017 and included [[afrojack]], axwell λ ingrosso, [[dubfire]], [[malaa]], black coffee and carnage along with many regional artists. on friday, february 9, the cape town stadium saw 15,000 fans stream through the gates while the johannesburg show at the expo centre at nasrec welcomed a record-breaking 32,000 ultranauts through the gates on saturday, february 10, for what was the biggest and most successful ultra south africa in joburg to date.  2019  on 16 august 2018, ultra south africa announced the dates for its
6th edition. after two years at the cape town stadium, organisers have decided to return the cape town edition to the ostrich ranch with the johannesburg edition continuing its long standing tradition at its historic home at the nasrec expo centre. on 6 november 2018, ultra south africa announced for the first time ever that the chainsmokers will headline the 6th edition of ultra south africa. the phase 2 lineup was announced on 3 december 2018, which included above and beyond, martin garrix, black coffee, vini vici and infected mushroom. this edition marked the biggest ultra south africa to date with over 50 000 fans between cape town and johannesburg.  2020  five months after the wrapping up its biggest ultra to date, the festival announced the dates for its 7th edition with organisers also promising an expanded production for 2020. in october 2019, ultra south africa announced its phase one headliners, which included, afrojack, black coffee, dash berlin, dj snake as well as jamie jones who will be making his south africa debut and steve aoki who will be making his ultra south africa debut. two weeks later, ultra south africa announced camelphat, luciano and sunnery james & ryan marciano as support.  this edition also marked the biggest ultra south africa to date with ultra sa founders, shaun duvet and tony feldman commenting  "ultra south africa 2020 was, as they always are, the best one we have produced to date". "these shows are such massive projects to pull together and each year when we see it all come together with the incredible teams that join us each year in making this happen, we feel very proud. we cannot wait for 2021 and all the years to come as the shows get bigger and wilder".  2021  during the johannesburg leg of if its 7th edition, organisers confirmed that ultra south africa will return to cape town and johannesburg for its 8th edition on 26 & 27 february 2021.  attendance  see also   russell faibisch  ultra brasil  ultra buenos aires  ultra chile  ultra japan  ultra korea  ultra bali  ultra singapore  ultra europe  road to ultra  references  external links     electronic music festivals in south africa summer events in south africa festivals in cape town festivals in johannesburg
the nra whittington center in the sangre de cristo mountains of colfax county, new mexico, is one of the largest and most comprehensive shooting facilities in the united states. ten percent of the  site has been developed to include twenty-three shooting ranges, an administration building, a cafeteria, a museum, a library, classrooms, and full-service hookups for 175 recreational vehicles. the remainder of the site provides wildlife habitat at elevations above  with primitive campgrounds and remote back-country cabins for hunting, bird watching, wildlife viewing, photography, hiking, mountain biking, and horseback riding.  history whittington center includes a segment of the historic santa fe trail near the trail landmark red river peak. land including the ghost town of van houten, new mexico, was owned by the national rifle association and named for former association president george r. whittington. development began in 1973 for competitive shooting events, firearms education, and outdoor recreation. whittington center operates as an independent nonprofit with a mission of education and outdoor recreation. nra membership is not required to visit the center, and many visitors arrive from the nearby philmont scout ranch. the nearby community of raton, new mexico estimates an annual revenue of seven million us dollars from whittington center visitors.  range facilities  archery  benchrest shooting  black powder  high power rifle to   high power rifle silhouette  hunter pistol silhouette  hunter sight-in  long range pistol silhouette  precision pistol competition (ppc)  practical pistol  skeet shooting  small-bore rifle  smallbore rifle silhouette  sporting clays  trap shooting  other facilities  the frank brownell museum of the southwest located on the property includes a research library and a large firearms exhibit. temporary living facilities on the property include lodges, cabins, tent sites, and recreational vehicle pads and hookups. two consecutive two-week adventure camps are offered in june and july for boys and girls aged 13 to 17 to learn gun safety, shooting fundamentals, and marksmanship.  external links  official website  sources  national rifle association resorts 1973 establishments in new mexico buildings and structures in colfax county, new mexico
richard molyneux (c. 1368 - 27 december 1397), of sefton, lancashire, was an english politician.  family molyneux was the eldest son and heir of sir william molyneux of sefton who died in 1372. his mother was agnes hoghton, daughter of mp sir adam hoghton of hoghton. agnes was the widow of sir thomas banaster. molyneux's second wife was ellen, daughter of mp, sir robert urswyk, by whom he had two sons and one daughter.  career he was a member (mp) of the parliament of england for lancashire in january 1397.  references  1368 births members of the parliament of england (pre-1707) for lancashire 1397 deaths english mps january 1397
vice admiral filippo maria foffi is an italian navy officer, who served as head of fleet command of the italian navy.  he joined the navy and attended the italian naval academy from 1972 to 1976.  in january 2012 he was appointed chief of personnel before being promoted to vice admiral on 1 july 2012 and appointed deputy chief of naval staff.  he served as commander in chief of the italian fleet from january 25th, 2013 till 14 september 2016.  references  italian admirals 1953 births military personnel from rome living people
is a japanese computer scientist. he was born in hagi city, yamaguchi prefecture in 1939.  masuda graduated from the university of tokyo in 1963, and received his ms degree in 1956 there. from 1956 to 1977, he worked at hitachi's central research center and then systems laboratory, studying from 1969 at carnegie mellon university's computer science school on a sabbatical. he received his phd from university of tokyo. his doctorate thesis was on the "analysis and evaluation of the computer system which uses virtual memory".  from 1977, masuda taught at tsukuba university, moving to university of tokyo's engineering school as a professor of computer science in 1988, and becoming the head of the engineering school in 1995. he then moved to university of electro-communications, tokyo, as a professor in 2000 and became the president there in 2004. he retired from the university in 2008.  from 2003 to 2005, masuda served as president of the information processing society of japan. from 2008, he has served as an executive of the funai foundation, which helps those who study abroad to get  phd.  references  external links  university of electro-communications  funai foundation  japanese engineers japanese computer scientists university of tokyo faculty 1939 births living people
the deputy prime minister of italy, officially vice-president of the council of ministers of the italian republic (italian: vicepresidente del consiglio dei ministri della repubblica italiana), is a senior member of the italian cabinet. moreover, it is often colloquially known as vicepremier. the office of the deputy prime minister is not a permanent position, existing only at the discretion of the prime minister, who may appoint to other offices to give seniority to a particular cabinet minister. the office is currently vacant under mario draghi's premiership.  unlike analogous offices in some other nations, such as a vice-presidency, the italian deputy prime minister possesses no special constitutional powers as such, though they will always have particular responsibilities in government. they do not assume the duties and powers of the prime minister in the latter's absence, illness, or death, such as the powers to seek a dissolution of parliament, appoint peers or brief the president of the republic.  they do not automatically succeed the prime minister, should the latter be incapacitated or resign from the leadership of his or her political party. in practice, however, the designation of someone to the role of deputy prime minister may provide additional practical status within cabinet, enabling the exercise of de facto, if not de jure, power.  in a coalition government, as enrico letta grand coalition government between the democrats and the people of freedom, the appointment of the secretary of the smaller party (in the 2014 case, angelino alfano, secretary of the pdl) as deputy prime minister is done to give that person more authority within the cabinet to enforce the coalition's agreed-upon agenda.  list of deputy prime ministers  parties 1946-1994:  1994-present:  coalitions  timeline  see also  prime minister of italy  list of prime ministers of italy  politics of italy  lists of incumbents  references    politics of italy 1947 establishments in italy
margaret may giles  (20 may 1868 - 31 march 1949) was a british painter, sculptor, and medallist. she was a member of the society of medallists and exhibited at their first exhibition in 1898 which was held at the dutch gallery in london, where her piece "two medals" was favorably critiqued.  biography giles was born in clifton, bristol, the daughter of richard william giles, a barrister, and frances elizabeth giles. her older sister was the painter frances giles. margaret was educated at kensington high school and in brussels and heidelberg. she spent eight years at the national art training school, nats, in london. among her contemporaries at nats, which became the royal college of art in 1896, were a number of other female sculptors including ruby levick, esther moore, florence steele, lilian simpson and lucy gwendolen williams. during the 1890s giles won a number of national art prizes with her model hero winning the art union of london's statuette competition in 1895. giles was a regular exhibitor at the royal academy in london, with the arts and crafts exhibition society and with the royal west of england academy in bristol, of which she was a member. at the royal academy she showed a number of sculptures, reliefs and medals, including one for hospital nurses and another for the royal horticultural society. between 1884 and 1912 giles also exhibited works at the royal glasgow institute of the fine arts, the royal scottish academy and with the ridley art club. she married engineer bernard maxwell jenkin in 1898.  references  external links  1868 births 1949 deaths 19th-century british sculptors 19th-century british women artists 20th-century british sculptors 20th-century british women artists alumni of the royal college of art artists from bristol british medallists english women sculptors people from clifton, bristol sibling artists
the maryland highway system has several hundred former state highways. these highways were constructed, maintained, or funded by the maryland state roads commission or maryland state highway administration and assigned a unique or temporally unique number. some time after the highway was assigned, the highway was transferred to county or municipal maintenance and the number designation was removed from the particular stretch of road. in some cases, a highway was renumbered in whole or in part. this list contains all or most of the state-numbered highways between 700 and 999 that have existed since highways were first numbered in 1927 but are no longer part of the state highway system or are state highways of a different number. most former state highways have not had their numbers reused. however, many state highway numbers were used for a former highway and are currently in use. some numbers have been used three times. the former highways below whose numbers are used presently, those that were taken over in whole or in part by another highway, or have enough information to warrant a separate article contain links to those separate highway articles. highway numbers that have two or more former uses are differentiated below by year ranges. this list does not include former interstate or u.s. highways, which are linked from their respective lists.    md 711  maryland route 711 was the designation for dogwood road, which ran  from md 545 east to md 280 (now md 213) near elkton in northeastern cecil county. the highway and a bridge across dogwood run were constructed as a wartime access project in 1942 and 1943 to provide better access to the triumph explosives plant along md 545. md 711 was transferred from state to county maintenance in a road transfer agreement on may 8, 1958.  references  md 714  maryland route 714 was the designation for rivers edge road, which ran  from rivers edge west north to md 291 west of millington in eastern kent county. the highway was created to re-establish access to the portion of rivers edge road cut off by the construction of what is now us 301 near millington between 1954 and 1957. md 714 was transferred from state to county maintenance through a december 1, 1987, road transfer agreement.  references  md 752  maryland route 752 was the designation for hallowing lane, a  spur south from md 231 just east of the benedict bridge near barstow. the route was transferred to the maryland department of natural resources in an agreement dated june 29, 2017.  references  md 787  maryland route 787 was the designation for flower
avenue, which ran  from md 195 north to md 320 within takoma park in southeastern montgomery county. flower avenue from carroll avenue to piney branch road was paved as a concrete road by 1923. the pavement was extended from piney branch road north to franklin avenue in silver spring between 1931 and 1933. flower avenue between md 195 and md 516 (franklin avenue), was designated md 194 by 1939. md 194 was widened to  and resurfaced with asphalt concrete from md 195 to md 320 in 1947. the highway from md 320 to md 516 was resurfaced in 1954. in 1955, md 194 was involved in a route number swap involving three routes in different parts of the state. at the time, md 71 was assigned to the highway connecting frederick with taneytown, which connected with pennsylvania route 194 at the maryland-pennsylvania state line. md 71 was reassigned to the new blue star memorial highway on the eastern shore; this designation would be replaced with us 301 in 1959. the frederick-taneytown highway was assigned md 194 to match its pennsylvania counterpart. flower avenue's designation was changed to md 787.  the portion of md 787 from md 320 to franklin avenue was transferred from state to county maintenance in 1999. this mileage swap, which included the transfer of md 516 as well, was conducted to bring md 119 (great seneca highway) into the state highway system. the following year, a short segment of md 787 south of md 195 was removed from the state highway system. this  segment, which extended south to chaney drive, had already been maintained by the city of takoma park. chaney drive had been where flower avenue intersected the montgomery-prince george's county line before the county line was moved in 1997 to place takoma park entirely within montgomery county. the remaining state-maintained portion of flower avenue functioned as more of a city street than a state highway, and the city of takoma park desired to reconstruct it as a "green street" with improved stormwater management and complete sidewalks on both sides of the street. in november 2010, after a series of discussions on several state highways in the city, the takoma park city council proposed the city receive ownership of flower avenue from the state in exchange for a one-time payment of $696,000, which was the amount the maryland state highway administration had planned to spend to repave md 787. the city would use the state payment toward reconstructing flower avenue after ownership was transferred to the city. flower
avenue from md 195 to md 320 was officially transferred from the state to the city of takoma park through a road transfer agreement on august 1, 2012.  references  md 801  maryland route 801 was the designation for irelands corner road, which ran  between intersections with md 313 on either side of md 290 south of galena in northeastern kent county. the highway was originally paved in two segments. kent county constructed the first segment, north of md 290, with state aid as part of the  concrete road from galena south to lambson station between 1915 and 1919. the southern segment was built as part of the galena-massey highway; the  concrete road was constructed in 1921 and 1922. md 801 was assigned to irelands corner road after md 313 was reconstructed and relocated south from galena in 1956 and 1957; the segment of md 290 between md 801 and md 313 was constructed at the same time. md 801 was transferred from state to county maintenance through a december 1, 1987, road transfer agreement.  references  md 803  maryland route 803 was the designation for two segments of edgar price road with a total length of  near warwick in southern cecil county. the western segment paralleled the northbound side of us 301 from md 299 to where it curved southeast from the u.s. highway, where the county-maintained portion of the road began. the eastern segment of md 803 began where edgar price road curved northeast. the highway met the southern end of md 822 before reaching its eastern terminus at the delaware state line. the portion of the county highway west from the state line was reconstructed as the eastern section of md 803 was reconstructed as a state highway in 1955. the western section was constructed as a service road to reconnect md 299 with edgar price road, which was cut off by the construction of md 71 (now us 301) between 1954 and 1956. md 803 was transferred to county maintenance through a december 27, 1979, road transfer agreement.  references  md 809  maryland route 809 was the designation for a pair of sections of old alignment of md 273 at calvert and near fair hill in northern cecil county. md 809 was the designation for brick meetinghouse road, which ran  between junctions with md 273 on either side of calvert. the route was created when md 273 was relocated through calvert in 1958. md 809 was transferred from state to county maintenance in two sections. the  segment west of md 272 was transferred in a february 25
, 1976, road transfer agreement; part of this road no longer exists. the remaining  east of md 272 was transferred by the agreement of december 27, 1979. md 809a was the designation for stonehouse lane, which ran  from a dead end east to md 273 west of the main route's bridge across big elk creek near fair hill. the route was created when md 273 was relocated east of fair hill in 1965. md 809a was transferred from state to county maintenance in the december 27, 1979, road transfer agreement.  references  md 811  maryland route 811 was the designation for wilson avenue, which ran  from the south town limit of rising sun north to md 273 within rising sun in northern cecil county. the highway was created after the portion of md 276 between woodlawn and the town limit of rising sun was transferred to county maintenance and md 276 was placed in its present corridor through a road transfer agreement on may 8, 1958. md 811 was transferred from state to town maintenance in a road transfer agreement on january 5, 1979.  references  md 812  maryland route 812 was the designation for a pair of sections of old alignment of md 280 (now md 213) near singerly in northeastern cecil county. both routes were created after md 280 was relocated north of singerly between 1956 and 1958. based on a november 20, 1978, road transfer agreement, both segments of md 812 were transferred from state to county maintenance after the highways were resurfaced with bituminous concrete in may 1982. md 812 was the designation for cherry hill road, which ran  from md 213 south of molitor road to md 213 north of elk mills road. md 812a was the designation for a  spur from md 812 to a dead end at the north end of the unsuffixed highway.  references  md 813  maryland route 813 was the designation for a pair of sections of old alignments of md 276 between woodlawn and harrisville in western cecil county. both routes were created after md 276 was relocated between woodlawn and md 269 (liberty grove road) south of harrisville in 1962 and 1963. both segments of md 813 were transferred from state to county maintenance in a road transfer agreement on december 27, 1979. md 813 was the designation for sale barn road, which ran  between junctions with md 276 south of md 269. md 813a was the designation for harrisville road, which ran  from a dead end south of
liberty grove road to md 273 in harrisville. md 813a briefly had its northern end at md 269; the highway was extended north to harrisville after md 276 was relocated between md 269 and md 273 in 1963 and 1964.  references  md 814  maryland route 814 was the unnamed designation for the  section of old alignment of md 550 just north of the monocacy river near creagerstown, frederick county. the route was transferred to county maintenance on october 31, 2016 and became known as penterra manor lane.  references  md 822  maryland route 822 was the designation for the  section of joe meltz road north from edgar price road, which was then part of md 803, near warwick in southern cecil county. the highway was constructed concurrently with md 803 in 1955. md 822 was transferred to county maintenance through a december 27, 1979, road transfer agreement.  references  md 823  maryland route 823 was the designation for belle hill road, which ran  from md 316 east to md 279 near elkton in northeastern cecil county. the highway was created after md 279 was moved to its present course between md 316 and belle hill road in 1962. md 823 was transferred from state to county maintenance in a road transfer agreement on december 27, 1979.  references  md 835  maryland route 835 was the designation for a  section of old alignment of us 1 (now md 273) near rising sun in northwestern cecil county. the highway formed a loop on the south side of us 1 west from the western town limit of rising sun at stone run toward harrisville. md 835 was assigned to the loop of old alignment after us 1 was reconstructed and straightened west of rising sun in 1952 and 1953. the highway was transferred from state to county maintenance through a may 8, 1958, road transfer agreement. the loop that comprised md 835 ceased to exist as a road by 1971.  references  md 857  maryland route 857 was the designation for medders road and the portion of rosedale cannery road east of medders road, which had a length of  between intersections with md 566 in still pond in northern kent county. the highway was created in 1959 after md 566 was moved to its present straighter alignment in still pond. md 857 was transferred from state to county maintenance in a december 1, 1987, road transfer agreement.  references  md 859  md 859 was the designation for three stretches of old alignment of md
291 between chestertown and morgnec in central kent county. md 859a was the designation for the  section of old alignment of md 291 on the east side of morgan creek. the highway was paved as a concrete road and designated md 447 in 1930. this section of md 447 became part of md 291 in 1963. the segment was bypassed and became md 859a when md 291's s-curve east of morgan creek was made smoother when the highway was reconstructed in 1964. md 859a was removed from the state highway system in 1967, and the road itself was removed by 1976. md 859b was the designation for morgnec cutoff road or old morgnec road from a tangent intersection with md 291 east  to a dead end east of morgnec cutoff road at morgnec. the highway west of the intersection of morgnec cutoff road and old morgnec road was built as a concrete road as part of md 447, which turned north away from the chester river at morgnec, between 1930 and 1933. old morgnec road was a county highway, river road, from morgnec toward millington. the portion of md 447 through morgnec and part of the county highway east of md 447 were bypassed by a westward extension of md 291 in 1962 and 1963. md 859b was transferred from state to county maintenance through a december 1, 1987. road transfer agreement. md 859c was the designation for hadaway drive, which ran  from md 213 east to a tangent intersection with md 291 in chestertown. the highway was originally built as a concrete road as part of md 447 in 1930. what is now hadaway drive became part of md 291 in 1963. md 859c was assigned to the highway after md 291 was relocated during reconstruction of the highway in 1965 and 1966. the highway was transferred from state to municipal maintenance through an august 11, 1978, agreement.  references  md 873  maryland route 873 was the designation for the unnamed  service road that paralleled the southbound direction of us 15 north from us 15 business north of emmitsburg just south of the pennsylvania state line in frederick county. the route was transferred to county maintenance on october 31, 2016 and became known as north seton avenue.  references  md 878  maryland route 878 was the unnamed designation for a  service road spur from broadfording road west to a dead end immediately southeast of md 58's
interchange with i-81 in hagerstown. the route was removed from the state highway system in 2015 and transferred to the city of hagerstown.  references  md 880  maryland route 880 was the designation for michaels mill road, a  route that ran from md 85 east to md 80 in buckeystown, frederick county. md 880 was designated in 1975 on the former alignment of md 80 after that route was shifted south to a new alignment. on november 18, 2008, md 880 was removed from the state highway system and transferred to frederick county.  references  md 895  maryland route 895 was the designation for lockwood drive, a  route that ran from us 29 to md 650. the highway was transferred to county maintenance in 1999 as part of a highway swap to designate great seneca highway as md 119.  md 901  maryland route 901 was the designation for whelan lane, a  route that ran from md 121 to the end of state maintenance. the highway was transferred to county maintenance in 1999 as part of a highway swap to designate great seneca highway as md 119.  md 912  maryland route 912 was the designation for a pair of highways near earleville in southern cecil county. md 912 was the designation for an l-shaped  highway along segments of peddlers lane in earleville. md 912a was the designation for old crystal beach road, which ran  between a pair of intersections with md 282 on either side of glebe road north of earleville. both highways were originally part of md 283, which was paved as a concrete road on the north side of earleville in 1928. md 912 was assigned to the l-shaped part of peddlers lane after md 282 was reconstructed and relocated from cecilton to north of earleville in 1966 and 1967; md 282 had previously had a right-angle turn at peddlers lane. md 912a was bypassed when md 282 was relocated north of earleville in 1967 and 1968; md 282 had previously turned at a four-way intersection with grove neck road and sandy bottom road. md 912 and md 912a were transferred to county maintenance through a december 27, 1979, road transfer agreement.  references  md 913  maryland route 913 was the designation for the  piece of old md 267 at its former railroad crossing of the pennsylvania railroad (now amtrak's northeast corridor) on the west side of charlestown in western cecil county. the highway was assigned in 1968 after md 267 was relocated over a new bridge at the
site called weber's bridge. md 913 was removed from the state highway system in 1974.  references  md 983  maryland route 983 (md 983) was the unsigned designation for parts of the old alignment of md 216 on either side of interstate 95 (i-95) in north laurel in southeastern howard county, maryland. md 983 had a length of  and ran on the east side of i-95. md 983a spanned  on the west side of i-95.  md 216 through north laurel was built in the early 1920s. the segments of md 983 were designated when md 216 was relocated east of i-95 in the early 1960s and west of i-95 in the late 1970s. in 2017, both md 983 and md 983a were removed from the state highway system and transferred to county maintenance.  references  md 987  maryland route 987 was the designation for old columbia pike, which ran from us 29 just south of md 103 north to main street in ellicott city in northeastern howard county. the highway was originally built as the northern end of the ellicott and clarksville turnpike in the 19th century. the old turnpike was reconstructed as a  macadam road in 1918. in 1927, the highway became part of the original md 27, which was replaced by us 29 in 1934. md 987 was assigned to old columbia pike after us 29 was moved to its current course from south of md 103 to us 40 in 1951. the portion of the highway north of md 103 was removed from the state highway system in 1987. the very short piece south of md 103 remained until the construction of the us 29-md 100 interchange in 1993.  references  md 996  maryland route 996 was the designation for the portion of eggert drive from md 191 (persimmon tree rd) to the end of state maintenance near tammy court. the highway was transferred to county maintenance in 1999 as part of a highway swap to designate great seneca highway as md 119, along with the portion of md 191 south and east of md 190 via bradley blvd and persimmon tree rd.  md 999  maryland route 999 (officially md 999d) was the designation for old hammonds ferry road, which ran  from stewart avenue north to a cul-de-sac adjacent to md 176 between that route's junctions with md 162 and i-97 near glen burnie. md 999d was created in a road transfer from anne arundel
county to the state in 2001. the highway was transferred back to county maintenance in 2002.  references  see also  700 former state highways 700
julian miles trevelyan (born 29 october 1998) is a british concert pianist.  he is the son of sir peter john trevelyan, 6th baronet, and diane terry and is heir apparent to the trevelyan baronetcy of wallington. he is distantly related to julian trevelyan the artist.  trevelyan has been home-schooled. his music teachers included elizabeth altman, christopher elton, patrick hemmerle for piano and catherine manson for violin.  he studies at the ecole normale de musique de paris with rena shereshevskaia supported by a scholarship from the or du rhin foundation and patrick masure, where he was awarded the diplome superieure de composition in 2018 and the diplome superieure de concertiste (piano) in 2019. he also studies for a musicology degree at the university of oxford.  career  julian has travelled widely to give solo and orchestral concerts.  these include piano sonatas by beethoven and shostakovich, and the beethoven diabelli variations.  piano concertos include brahms, howard blake, bartok, prokofiev, shostakovich, tchaikovsky and mozart.  as well as competitions, julian trevelyan has studied in masterclasses led by stephen kovacevich and menahem pressler, paul badura-skoda and jean-marc luisada at the musikverein, vienna in 2019, maria joao pires, in 2017, peter feuchtwanger, 2015 and margaret fingerhut, 2014.  julian trevelyan has been successful in international piano competitions, with the best record for a british pianist in recent times.  2014  trevelyan was a finalist in the keyboard section of the bbc young musician of the year competition.  2015  in april 2015, trevelyan took the grand prize in the "concours festival pour le repertoire pianistique moderne" (competitive festival for the contemporary piano repertoire, or c.f.r.p.m.) in paris,  including the prize for the best interpretation of a work by maurice ravel.  in may, he took second place and the mocsari prize (given by karoly mocsari) in the ile-de-france international piano competition in maisons-laffitte.  on the 27 october, at the age of 16, julian trevelyan became the youngest prize-winner ever in the piano section of the concours international long-thibaud-crespin in paris.  he won the second grand prize, the first prize not
being awarded that year, as well as the prize awarded by prince albert ii of monaco for the best interpretation of the concerto.  the long piano prize is one of the four major international piano competitions.  in november, he was the winner of the young pianist of the north, competition, held in newcastle upon tyne, england.  2016  in 2016, trevelyan continued his modest international competition record for a british pianist, by coming second in the "kissinger klavierolymp" (bad kissingen piano olympics) for young pianists, as part of the kissinger sommer.  2017  in 2017, trevelyan participated in the arthur rubinstein international piano master competition, in which he reached stage ii, the highest placing for british pianist.  later in the year, he won the "luitpold prize" of the kissinger sommer festival. in october, he won second prize and the audience vote in the dudley international piano competition.  2018  trevelyan continued to compete internationally in 2018, participating in the andre dumortier international competition, where he was again the only british contestant.  he won second prize.  2021  in 2021, and still only 22 years old, julian trevelyan returned to major competition at the concours geza anda, where he was the youngest competitor.  over three demanding rounds and the final he played debussy, a chopin study and sonata, a bach partita, brahms and frank martin, and piano concertos by mozart and bartok.  he won the 2nd grand prize for his performance overall in the competition, as well as the mozart prize awarded by the musikkollegium winterthur for the semi-final mozart concerto (n° 9), and the geza anda audience prize voted by the public for his interpretation of bela bartok's 3rd piano concerto.  references  external links     site du concours  julian trevelyan on the bbc  concours 2020  1998 births long-thibaud-crespin competition prize-winners british classical pianists male classical pianists living people macaulay family of lewis 21st-century classical pianists alumni of the university of oxford 21st-century british male musicians
stigmodera macularia, is a species of beetle in the family buprestidae restricted to southeastern australia.  description stigmodera macularia have yellow elytra with a deeply pitted surface.  the puncturations are colored in black and the pronotum is dark.  gallery  distribution this species can be found mainly in victoria and new south wales.  references  buprestidae beetles described in 1805
jonathan marray and aisam-ul-haq qureshi were the defending champions, but qureshi chose to compete in hamburg instead. marray played alongside adil shamasdin, but lost in the final to sam groth and chris guccione, 4-6, 3-6.  seeds  draw  draw  references   draw  2016 hall of fame tennis championships
kırkpınar is a turkish oil-wrestling tournament, held annually since 1346.  kırkpınar, bayburt, a village in bayburt province, turkey kırkpınar, dicle kırkpınar, korkuteli, a village in antalya province, turkey kırkpınar, emirdag, a village in afyonkarahisar province, turkey kırkpınar, kayapınar
walter smith also known as walter purula (perrurle) or wati yuritja (2 july 1898 - 14 june 1990) was a legendary australian bushman from the arltunga region in the northern territory of australia. he was also a miner, dogger and perhaps the most widely travelled cameleer in australia who could speak more than 30 languages.  early life  smith was born at the arltunga goldfield and was the eldest of eleven children to william smith, a goldminer of welsh descent and an aboriginal woman topsy white (topsy smith). although he had no formal education, his father taught him english and his mother and grandmother taught him eastern arrernte and arabana languages.  at the age of 12, he accompanied arrernte people on their last large ceremonial gathering in the simpson desert. they travelled with camels to a large clay-pan, where traditional hunting and gathering took place. after severe drought in 1914-15 drought and the 1919 influenza ceremonial gatherings took place on the desert-fringe cattle stations or at the edges of outback towns instead. after the death of his father in 1914, smith's family moved to alice springs with the help of the hayes family of undoolya station and police sergeant robert stott. in alice walter lived with his mother at the bungalow, a 'half-caste' institution.   smith married millie carnegie on 11 february 1929 at the oodnadatta police station. while he was away on a prospecting journey to the western deserts, government officials removed millie to nepabunna mission in the flinders ranges. smith never saw her again.  working life  smith began working with afghan cameleer charlie sadadeen, meeting the train at the railhead at oodnadatta in south australia, and taking a load to alice springs with a camel team as a teenager. he then worked as a prospector, gem fossicker, dogger (dingo trapper) and miner at tennant creek during the 1930s. he took out several mining leases in the harts range.  later life  smith married mabel williams in alice springs on 26 january 1961. he was the last of the red centre's cameleers, working into the 1970s. after living with his sister for many years, he then moved to the old timers' home in 1983. he died on 14 june 1990 and is buried in the alice springs cemetery.  references  1898 births 1990 deaths australian miners australian prospectors
mimenicodes subunicolor is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1973. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1973
gian paolo pillitteri (born 5 december 1940) is a former italian democratic socialist party politician and film critic. he was also affiliated with the italian socialist party from 1976 to 1994. he was born in sesto calende, province of varese, lombardy. he served in the chamber of deputies of italy in legislature ix (1983-1987) and legislature xi (1992-1994). he was mayor of milan from 1986 to 1992.  he is married to rosilde craxi, sister of the former leader of the italian socialist party, bettino craxi.  references  external links       1940 births living people people from the province of varese italian democratic socialist party politicians italian socialist party politicians deputies of legislature ix of italy deputies of legislature xi of italy mayors of milan italian film critics
wanquan township () is a township under the administration of jiangle county, fujian, china. , it has 9 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of fujian jiangle county
st. andrews international school green valley is an international school for children aged 2 to 18 years old in rayong, thailand. green valley is one of four schools in thailand under the schools group cognita, along with st. andrews international school, sukhumvit, st. andrews international school, dusit, and st. andrews international school, sathorn.  curriculum   st. andrews green valley's secondary school follows the english national curriculum. for upper secondary school, the school offers the international general certificate of secondary education (igcse), and in the final two years of schooling, offers the international baccalaureate diploma programme (ibdp).  english language  green valley teaches in the english curriculum, and provides an english as an additional language (eal) program for students whose english is not their first language. the program aims to successfully develop students' english proficiency to ensure students are able to perform in the mainstream classroom without eal support.  dutch stream  st. andrews international school green valley is the only school on the eastern seaboard to offer a dutch stream to its students. the program provides two to three hours of instruction in a dedicated class space for students whose mother tongue is dutch, including language lessons from reception up through secondary school.  accreditation  green valley is the only school on the eastern seaboard to be awarded 1st tier level accreditation by the education development trust, making it a gold level international school. gold level accreditation indicates that the school has achieved an 'outstanding' mark in all assessment criteria, some of which include; students' personal development, consistent high standards of academic performance, leadership quality throughout management positions, and rigor and quality of teaching.  creativity action service (cas)   as part of the ib curriculum, the cas program requires students to pursue non-academic interests. students are encouraged to participate in a variety of activities, including theatre productions, sports, and community service organizations.  language   beginning at year 5, all students are taught arab and mandarin twice a week. for thai students, learning thai is mandatory and is taught by dedicated thai instructors. additionally, the dutch stream is available to dutch students, and eal support is available to students from nursery onwards.  university preparation  university counselling program  green valley employs a structured program of counselling, by utilizing parent forums and information sessions to provide an outline students can use to apply for higher level educational institutions around the world.  results  ib examinations  students at green valley achieved an average score of 38.6 out of 45 points on the may 2016 ib dp examinations
, compared to the world average of 30.07 points. students at the school achieved a 100% pass rate in comparison to the africa, europe, and middle east (aem) region which achieved a passing rate of 88%. one student at green valley achieved a perfect score on the examinations, one of 146 students worldwide.  references   international schools in thailand
hrvoje braovic (born 7 august 1956) is a croatian football manager.  clubs gnk dinamo zagreb (1998, 2000-01) fc lyn oslo (2002) nk kamen ingrad (2004-05) videoton fc, assistant coach (2006-07) hask zagreb (2011) segesta sisak (2012)  references  external links socersway  1956 births living people yugoslav football managers croatian football managers gnk dinamo zagreb managers lyn fotball managers hnk segesta managers croatian expatriate football managers croatian expatriates in norway expatriate football managers in norway
the following are the results of the 1907 finnish athletics championships. the games, known as kalevan kisat in the finnish language, were first held in 1907 in tampere, pirkanmaa, finland.  results  references   finnish athletics championships finnish athletics championships finnish athletics championships
wanquan () is a town under the administration of qionghai, hainan, china. , it has two residential communities and 16 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of hainan qionghai
lettin' go may refer to:   lettin' go (song), a song byjanelle monae  lettin' go (album), an album by son seals
mamagaru is a 1991 telugu-language drama film directed by muthyala subbaiah. it stars dasari narayana rao, vinod kumar and yamuna in the main roles. the film is a remake of the tamil film naan pudicha mappillai.  plot vijay (vinod kumar) is the president of a village. he rescues the simple satheyya (dasari narayana rao) from an attack by thieves. vijay later marries satheyya's daughter lakshmi (yamuna) against the parental wishes of kanthamma (nirmalamma), who wants him to marry his niece rani (aishwarya). vijay also brings his father-in-law to live with him. these decisions anger his brother-in-law pothuraju (kota srinivasa rao), who plots to discredit vijay's family. lakshmi accidentally dies in a bomb explosion which was planted to make a ditch. satheyya feels sad that his son-in-law could not forget his daughter. he persuades him to marry rani. rani also admires him because of his simplicity and love. but puthuraju is not happy about all the attention he gets. satheyya is driven out of vijay's house after pothuraju accuses the old man of being a womaniser. vijay finally sees through pothuraju's evil designs, but not before satheyya commits suicide.  characters the beggar character played by babu mohan gained a lot of popularity for him. he had to resign to his government job and turn into a full-time actor.  cast  dasari narayana rao as satteyya  vinod kumar as vijay kumar  yamuna as lakshmi  aishwarya as rani  annapoorna as vijay's elder sister  nirmalamma as kantamma  kota srinivasa rao as poturaju  babu mohan as beggar  awards nandi awards -1991  best actor - dasari narayana rao best supporting actor - vinod kumar best male comedian - babu mohan  references  external links  1991 films indian films indian drama films 1990s telugu-language films films scored by raj-koti telugu remakes of tamil films films directed by muthyala subbaiah
idhu vedhalam sollum kathai () is an upcoming indian tamil-language fantasy film directed by rathindran r. prasad. an adaptation of the folk tale collection baital pachisi, the film features ashwin kakumanu, abhay deol, aishwarya rajesh, guru somasundaram and greg burridge in the lead roles. featuring music by ghibran and cinematography by roberto zazzara, the film began production in mid 2016.  cast  ashwin kakumanu aishwarya rajesh abhay deol as vikramadithyan guru somasundaram as vedhalam greg burridge leslie tripathy ravindra vijay as ashok  production  the project was first announced by director rathindran prasad during july 2016, where he revealed that he would make a mythological fiction film starring  ashwin kakumanu, guru somasundaram and british stunt choreographer greg burridge in the lead roles. prasad had earlier written and directed the music video for sofia ashraf's "kodaikanal won't" song. prasad's wife, basak gaziler prasad, a turkish film producer, decided to produce the film. the film was revealed to be a contemporary take on baital pachisi (a collection of folk tales featuring vetala and vikramaditya), with ashwin portraying a video game designer who becomes rich overnight. the film began production on madhya pradesh during july 2016, with aishwarya rajesh soon joining the film as the lead actress.  the profile of the film was raised in june 2017, when bollywood actor abhay deol joined the film as a co-producer and actor. being a friend of prasad, deol joined the project after being impressed with the script and agreed to play the role of a medieval king named vikramadithyan. for his role in the film, deol lost ten kilograms and learnt to speak his lines in ancient tamil, as the makers chose a sync sound technique. in 2018, the team worked on the post-production of the film and began their promotional campaign for its release.  references   indian films upcoming films indian fantasy films films scored by mohamaad ghibran upcoming tamil-language films upcoming directorial debut films unreleased tamil-language films films based on fairy tales films based on fantasy works
emilio de mello (born 14 july 1965) is a brazilian actor. in 2015, the actor was nominated for an international emmy awards for best actor, for his starring role in the series psi  selected filmography tv 2015 - sete vidas - vinicius 2014 - geracao brasil - fernando 2014-present - psi - carlo antonini 2012 - lado a lado - carlos guerra 2011 - cordel encantado - general baldini 2010 - dalva e herivelto: uma cancao de amor - benedito lacerda 2008 - o pai, o - lacerda 2008 - queridos amigos - guto (luis augusto souza tavares) 2006 - jk - carlos murilo 2004 - historias de cama e mesa - ronaldo cunha 1994 - patria minha - helio pastor 1992 - anos rebeldes - toledo  films 2004 - o veneno da madrugada - roberto assis 2004 - cazuza - o tempo nao para - zeca (ezequiel neves) 2002 - lara - luigi 2002 - querido estranho - betinho 2001 - amores possiveis - pedro 2000 - villa-lobos - uma vida de paixao - arthur rubinstein 2017 - motorrad''  awards  references  external links  1965 births living people brazilian male television actors brazilian male telenovela actors brazilian male film actors male actors from sao paulo
the 2018 united states senate election in washington took place on november 6, 2018, in order to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of washington. incumbent democrat maria cantwell won reelection to a fourth term.  nonpartisan blanket primary  candidates the primary election featured 30 candidates, a near record amount for a u.s. senate election in washington.  democratic party  declared  maria cantwell, incumbent senator  don l. rivers  clint tannehill george h. kalberer mohammad said  republican party  declared  joey gibson, activist and founder of patriot prayer  goodspaceguy, perennial candidate  susan hutchison, former chair of the washington state republican party  rocky de la fuente, businessman and former presidential candidate tim owen matthew d. heines art coday john orlinski keith swank rc smith dave bryant matt hawkins glen stockwell  withdrawn  ron higgins (withdrew may 19, 2018)  endorsements  independents  declared  jennifer "gigi" ferguson thor amundson dave strider charlie r jackson jon butler  write-in clay johnson, activist  minor parties in washington, primary candidates may declare a preference for any party, and their party preference does not imply that the candidate is nominated or endorsed by the party. candidates may also declare a preference for new or single-candidate parties.  declared mike luke (libertarian party) brad chase (fdfr party), communications strategist sam wright (the human rights party) alex tsimerman (standupamerica) steve hoffman (freedom socialist party), union organizer james robert "jimmie" deal (green party)  notes  results  general election  debates complete video of debate, october 8, 2018 complete video of debate, october 20, 2018  predictions  polling  results  by congressional district cantwell won 7 of 10 congressional districts with the remaining 3 going to hutchison.  notes  partisan clients  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites maria cantwell (d) for senate susan hutchison (r) for senate  2018 washington united states senate
karoor kavu is a small village, situated in ernakulam district, kerala, india. the original name is "karoor" and there is temple in the village so normally people calling "karoor kavu". "kavu" stands for temple.  references   villages in ernakulam district
helder barros is a santomean economist, diplomat and former minister of economic affairs in sao tome and principe. he was a candidate for the presidency of his country in 2011 and 2016.  in his early twenties helder barros contributed to the struggle for independence of the archipelago by hosting radio programs for the independence movement from libreville, gabon.  he graduated with a m.econ. from california coast university, and joined the un in 1982 in niger. in the following decade he worked interchangeably in the head office in new york, and with conflict resolution in several african countries under the mandate of the organization. baros was coordinator for the united nations office for project services in northern iraq and subsequently returned to africa as special assistant for the united nations mission in angola (2002-2003), and between 2008 and 2014 he was head of office for the un mission in the democratic republic of congo. in 2014 barros began postgraduate studies in international relations at the london school of economics.  he was minister of economic coordination 7 july 1994 - 25 october 1994 and 26 september 2001 - 28 march 2002 in the governments led by evaristo de carvalho from independent democratic action.  references  external links  news article helder barros anuncia candidatura as presidenciais de julho proximo (''helder barros announced his candidate for the presidentials next july, tvs, 17 june 2016, accessed on 8 october 2016   year of birth missing (living people) government ministers of sao tome and principe living people sao tome and principe politicians sao tome and principe economists
in professional wrestling, championships are competed for in pre-determined matches that arise as a result of storylines featuring a professional wrestling promotion's roster of wrestlers. as of 2020 the mexican lucha libre or professional wrestling promotion known as consejo mundial de lucha libre (spanish for "world wrestling council"; cmll) promotes 30 different championships; 12 championships designated as world championships in various divisions, 8 championships on a national level and 8 championships on a regional level. the championships are divided into weight limits as well as gender specific and size-specific divisions. the professional wrestling championships are not won through legitimate athletic competition; they are instead won via scripted endings to a match or on occasion awarded to a wrestler because of a storyline.  a total of 34 wrestlers hold the 30 officially cmll promoted championships. there are thirteen male singles championships spread out over various weight classes, four championships for tag teams, three for trios (three-man teams), three for female competitors and three for mini-estrella and micro-estrella competitors. the oldest cmll championship is the mexican national welterweight championship, created on june 17, 1934, which is also the oldest championship in professional wrestling still active.  the titles branded as "world" level can or have been defended outside of mexico, whereas the mexican national championships are normally only defended in mexico and only mexican citizens are eligible to hold the championships, although occasional exceptions have been made. the regional championships are typically not promoted outside the area to which they belong, such as a specific mexican state. the cmll arena coliseo tag team championship was normally defended only in arena coliseo until 2016 when it was defended in japan. in the 20th century cmll strictly enforced the weight divisions, but since around 2000 the rules have occasionally been ignored. one example of this was mephisto holding the nwa world welterweight championship, a belt with a  upper limit, despite weighing . the mexico city boxing and pro wrestling commission governs the mexican national championships but have granted cmll control of the five championships listed. the occidente ("western") championships are endorsed by the jalisco state boxing and wrestling commission and promoted by cmll's guadalajara branch.  world championships  national championships  regional championships  former championships   lla azteca championship  mexican national mini-estrella championship  nwa world light heavyweight championship  nwa world middleweight championship  nwa world welterweight championship  cmll-reina international junior championship  cmll-reina international championship  footnotes  references    cmll current
matthew bell (born 3 january 1992) is a british virgin islands international footballer who plays as a midfielder for english  side leek town.  he came through the youth team at port vale, and has played for mansfield town, stafford rangers, leek town, solihull moors, kidsgrove athletic and nantwich town.  club career bell came through the youth ranks at port vale and turned professional with the league two club under micky adams in april 2010. however, he failed to make a first team appearance at vale park and was released in may 2011.  he signed a one-year contract with conference national club mansfield town in june 2011. manager paul cox stated that "he has a lovely left foot, is tenacious, has high fitness levels and can play at left-back, left-midfield and even in central midfield". he was loaned out to northern premier league side stafford rangers in december 2011 and leek town in march 2012.  he signed with kidsgrove athletic in february 2015. he joined nantwich town in may 2015. he helped the "dabbers" to reach the semi-finals of the fa trophy in 2015-16, scoring 12 goals in all competitions, and then to qualify for the northern premier league play-offs the following season, scoring eight goals from 51 appearances. this season also saw him collect the players player of the year award for his performances. he lifted the cheshire senior cup after scoring in a 3-0 win over stockport town in the 2018 final. he also played and scored in the 2019 final, a 5-2 victory over cammell laird 1907. he also helped the "dabbers" to reach the 2018-19 play-offs, where they were beaten by warrington town in the semi-finals.  bell re-joined leek town in october 2019, ending his nantwich town record with 31 goals from 199 competitive appearances. as a result of the covid-19 pandemic in england, the 2019-20 northern premier league division one south east season was formally abandoned on 26 march 2020, with all results from the season being expunged. he scored five goals from eleven games in the 2020-21 season, which was also curtailed early due to the pandemic on 24 february 2021.  international career bell was called up to the british virgin islands squad and made his debut on 26 march 2015, in a 3-2 defeat to dominica at windsor park in the first round of qualifying for the 2018 fifa world cup. he played in the reverse fixture three days later
, a 0-0 draw which eliminated the british virgin islands from the competition.  statistics  honours nantwich town cheshire senior cup: 2018, 2019  references  1992 births living people footballers from stoke-on-trent british virgin islands footballers british virgin islands international footballers association football fullbacks association football midfielders association football utility players port vale f.c. players mansfield town f.c. players leek town f.c. players stafford rangers f.c. players solihull moors f.c. players kidsgrove athletic f.c. players nantwich town f.c. players national league (english football) players northern premier league players
young guard (die erste wache!) is a musical score written for piano composed by harry appel. the score was first published in 1909 by seminary music co. in new york, ny. the sheet music cover, designed by frew, features a photo of a small boy with a stick in prussian helmet standing guard. the score is dedicated to prinz wilhelm von preussen.   the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   songs about soldiers 1909 songs songs of world war i march music
huazhou subdistrict () is a subdistrict of dengzhou, henan, china.  township-level divisions of henan dengzhou
the 2017-18 ahl season was the 82nd season of the american hockey league. the regular season ran from october 6, 2017, to april 15, 2018. the 2018 calder cup playoffs followed the conclusion of the regular season. the toronto marlies won their first calder cup in seven games over the texas stars.  league changes  the ahl's only alignment change was moving the charlotte checkers from the central division of the western conference to the atlantic division of the eastern conference, significantly decreasing their interdivisional travel and balancing the two conferences' members. similar to the season scheduling in the previous season, the six california and arizona based teams continued to have a 68-game season while the rest of the ahl teams play a 76-game season.  team and nhl affiliation changes the national hockey league added the vegas golden knights for the 2017-18 season. the las vegas management confirmed that the organization would also have an ahl affiliate in their first season, although it was not stated whether the ahl team would be an expansion or relocation. the organization looked into adding an affiliate on the west coast with the leading candidates being salt lake city, reno, or fresno. however, as the season went on, they looked into co-affiliations with a pre-existing ahl team since the new nhl team would likely not have a large amount of drafted talent to fully stock an ahl roster. in february 2017, ahl commissioner david andrews later stated that there was a "50-50 chance" of a 31st team being established for the 2017-18 season.  other than the golden knights adding a team, there were also reports in november 2016 of the st. louis blues adding an expansion team in kansas city. this would later be denied by the announced potential owner in kansas city, lamar hunt jr., in a press release from his echl team in the area, the missouri mavericks, and further denied by ahl commissioner, david andrews, after the january 2017 board of governors meeting. in may 2017, the 30 team alignment was confirmed and there would be no expansion for 2017-18. the golden knights signed a multi-year affiliation with the chicago wolves, replacing the blues as their primary affiliate. the blues also announced that they would continue to send players to the wolves for that season, as well as to the san antonio rampage, the ahl team that they would affiliate with for 2018-19.  the league confirmed after the 2017 board of governors meeting that it had made a commitment to an expansion applicant for a 31st team for the 2018-19
season later revealed to be the colorado eagles. the eagles had been a member of the echl prior to the promotion and the affiliate of the colorado avalanche. the eagles join other recent echl markets in the ahl such as bakersfield, charlotte, ontario, and stockton.  relocations the albany devils relocated to become the binghamton devils to replace the binghamton senators. the binghamton senators were purchased by their parent club, the ottawa senators, and relocated to belleville, ontario, as the belleville senators. the montreal canadiens' ahl franchise, then operating as the st. john's icecaps, was relocated to the montreal suburb of laval, quebec, as the laval rocket. danny williams, owner of the icecaps team but not a franchise holder, announced on the same day his intentions to find another ahl franchise to replace the canadiens' owned franchise. a separate ownership group bought an echl expansion team called the newfoundland growlers a season later.  affiliation changes  standings  final standings:   indicates team has clinched division and a playoff spot  indicates team has clinched a playoff spot  indicates team has been eliminated from playoff contention  eastern conference  western conference  statistical leaders  leading skaters  the following players are sorted by points, then goals. updated as of april 15, 2018.  gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; +/- = plus-minus; pim = penalty minutes  leading goaltenders  the following goaltenders with a minimum 1440 minutes played lead the league in goals against average. updated as of april 15, 2018.  gp = games played; toi = time on ice (in minutes); sa = shots against; ga = goals against; so = shutouts; gaa = goals against average; sv% = save percentage; w = wins; l = losses; ot = overtime/shootout loss  calder cup playoffs  playoff format the 2018 calder cup playoffs format was retained from the divisional format of the 2017 calder cup playoffs. the playoff format was finalized at the annual board of governors meeting that took place july 2017. during the regular season, teams receive two points for a win and one point for an overtime or shootout loss. the top four teams in each division ranked by points percentage (points earned divided by points available) qualify for the 2017 calder cup playoffs.  the 2018 calder cup playoffs features a divisional playoff format, leading to conference finals and ultimately the calder cup finals. the division semifinals are best-of-five series; all subsequent rounds are best-of-seven.  bracket  ahl awards
all-star teams first all-star team garret sparks (g) - toronto jacob macdonald (d) - binghamton sami niku (d) - manitoba mason appleton (f) - manitoba chris terry (f) - laval phil varone (f) - lehigh valley  second all-star team michael hutchinson (g) - manitoba t. j. brennan (d) - lehigh valley zach redmond (d) - rochester austin czarnik (f) - providence andreas johnsson (f) - toronto ben smith (f) - toronto  all-rookie team ville husso (g) - san antonio filip hronek (d) - grand rapids sami niku (d) - manitoba mason appleton (f) - manitoba daniel sprong (f) - wilkes-barre/scranton dylan strome (f) - tucson  see also list of ahl seasons 2017 in ice hockey 2018 in ice hockey  references  external links ahl official site    american hockey league seasons 2017-18 in american ice hockey by league 2017-18 in canadian ice hockey by league
the 2016 copa libertadores finals was the two-legged final that decided the winner of the 2016 copa libertadores de america, the 57th edition of the copa libertadores de america, south america's premier international club football tournament organized by conmebol.  the finals were contested in two-legged home-and-away format between ecuadorian team independiente del valle and colombian team atletico nacional. the first leg was hosted by independiente del valle at estadio olimpico atahualpa in quito on 20 july 2016, while the second leg was hosted by atletico nacional at estadio atanasio girardot in medellin on 27 july 2016. the winner earned the right to represent conmebol at the 2016 fifa club world cup, entering at the semifinal stage, and also to play against the 2016 copa sudamericana winners in the 2017 recopa sudamericana. they also automatically qualified for the 2017 copa libertadores group stage.  atletico nacional defeated independiente del valle 2-1 on aggregate to win their second copa libertadores title.  teams  these finals were the first ones without either an argentine or a brazilian team since the 1991 edition between paraguayan team olimpia and chilean team colo-colo.  road to the finals  note: in all scores below, the score of the home team is given first.  format  the finals were played on a home-and-away two-legged basis, with the higher-seeded team hosting the second leg. if tied on aggregate, the away goals rule would not be used, and 30 minutes of extra time would be played. if still tied after extra time, the penalty shoot-out would be used to determine the winner.  matches  first leg in the 35th minute, orlando berrio opened the scoring for atletico nacional with a low right foot shot from outside the penalty box to the right corner of the net.	 arturo mina got the equalizer for independiente del valle in the 86th minute when his header from a free-kick into the penalty box was saved but not cleared he hit the rebound low to the net.  second leg miguel borja got the only goal of the game in the 8th minute with a low right foot shot from twelve yards out after macnelly torres's chip into the box came back to him off the post.  references  external links     copa libertadores 2016, conmebol.com   finals 2016 atletico nacional matches c.s.d. independiente del valle matches 2016 in colombian football 2016 in ecuadorian football 2016 2016 july 2016 sports events in south america 21st century in quito
norethisterone acetate oxime (developmental code names orf-5263, so-36), or norethindrone acetate oxime, is a steroidal progestin of the 19-nortestosterone group which was developed as a postcoital contraceptive but was never marketed. it is the c3 oxime and c17β-acetate ester of norethisterone.  see also  list of progestogens  list of progestogen esters  references  abandoned drugs acetate esters androgens and anabolic steroids estranes progestogen esters progestogens steroid oximes ketoximes
the swedish union for performing arts and film, () is a swedish trade union and professional association for professional practitioners of authors, artists, technicians, administrators and students in theater and film. the union was formed in 1894 and was originally called the swedish theatre union.  the chairman is simon norrthon.  the union has 8,700 members and is affiliated with the swedish confederation of professional employees (tco), the  (ptk), ofr, klys, and kulturskaparna.  references  swedish confederation of professional employees trade unions established in 1894 trade unions in sweden
kurt capewell (born 12 july 1993) is an australian professional rugby league footballer who plays as a  forward and  for the brisbane broncos in the nrl.  he previously played for the cronulla-sutherland sharks and penrith panthers in the national rugby league, and queensland in the state of origin series.  background capewell was born in charleville, queensland, australia. he is the younger cousin of former south sydney rabbitohs, gold coast titans and brisbane broncos player luke capewell.  capewell played his junior rugby league for charleville and the norths ipswich tigers. after playing some rugby union and being chosen to train with the ipswich jets in the queensland cup, he was signed by the brisbane broncos.  playing career  early career in 2012 and 2013, capewell played for the brisbane broncos' nyc team. in 2013, he had a stint with the sydney roosters' nyc team, before returning to queensland to play for the ipswich jets. on 27 september 2015, he played for the jets in their 2015 queensland cup grand final win over the townsville blackhawks. he then went on to play for the jets in their 2015 nrl state championship win over new south wales cup premiers newcastle knights on 4 october that same year. on 29 october 2015, he signed a 1-year contract with the cronulla-sutherland sharks starting in 2016.  2016 in round 18 of the 2016 nrl season, capewell made his nrl debut for cronulla against the penrith panthers. in september 2016, he was named on the interchange bench in the 2016 intrust super premiership nsw team of the year.  2017 capewell made his first appearance of the 2017 nrl season in round 2 against the canberra raiders, playing at centre in cronulla's 42-16 victory.  2018 capewell made 19 appearances for cronulla in the 2018 nrl season as the club finished 4th on the table.  capewell played in cronulla's preliminary final defeat against melbourne at aami park.  2019 capewell made 25 appearances for cronulla in the 2019 nrl season as the club finished 7th on the table and qualified for the finals.  capewell played from the bench in cronulla's elimination final defeat against manly at brookvale oval. on 26 november, capewell signed a two-year deal to join penrith starting in the 2020 nrl season.  2020 capewell missed the first two games of the season with a quad injury before returning from injury and debuting for the penrith panthers after the covid shutdown in round 3 against the newcastle knights scoring a try in a 14
-14 draw. in round 5, capewell injured his mcl in the first minute of the game against the parramatta eels, in a 16-10 loss missing 12 weeks. capewell returned in the round 17 game against the brisbane broncos scoring a try in the 25-12 win. capewell played off the interchange bench in the 2020 nrl grand final in penrith's 26-20 loss against melbourne. on 4 november, capewell made his origin debut for queensland debuting in the centres.  2021 in round 3 of the 2021 nrl season against melbourne in the grand final rematch, he scored the match winning try in a 12-10 victory.  on 1 july, capewell signed a three-year deal with brisbane. on october 3, capewell played his last game for penrith in their 14-12 grand final victory over south sydney.  personal life in december 2020, capewell revealed that several years earlier, he had been involved in a pornographic film with another man where he performed a sexual act. capewell, who at the time was 20 years old and playing for the ipswich jets, was taking part in a photo-shoot for a sports clothing and underwear company before it turned to nude photos then an adult movie. capewell reflected on the incident saying "the organiser used inducements and extra money for being involved in the adult film. i take full responsibility for what happened".  references  external links  penrith panthers profile cronulla sharks profile cronulla-sutherland sharks profile  1993 births australian rugby league players cronulla-sutherland sharks players ipswich jets players newtown jets nsw cup players penrith panthers players queensland rugby league state of origin players rugby league second-rows rugby league centres rugby league wingers living people rugby league players from queensland
stephen timothy maar (born 6 december 1994) is a canadian volleyball player, member of the canada men's national volleyball team and italian club allianz milano.  career  national team in june 2021, maar was named to canada's 2020 olympic team.  sporting achievements  college  national championships  2015/2016  cis championship, with mcmaster marauders  clubs  cev challenge cup   2020/2021 - with allianz powervolley milano  individual awards  2015: pan american cup - best spiker  2015: pan american cup - best outside spiker  2016: cis championship - tournament all-stars  2017: norceca championship - best outside spiker  2019: norceca championship - best outside spiker  references  external links  player profile at volleyball.ca  player profile at cev.eu  player profile at worldofvolley.com  player profile at legavolley.it  player profile at volleybox.net  mcmaster marauders 2015-16 roster - stephen maar  2017 fivb world league - team canada  1994 births living people sportspeople from aurora, ontario canadian men's volleyball players canadian expatriate sportspeople in italy expatriate volleyball players in italy canadian expatriate sportspeople in russia expatriate volleyball players in russia blu volley verona players power volley milano players volleyball players at the 2020 summer olympics outside hitters
events from the year 1703 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   kronstadt  peter and paul fortress  sankt-peterburgskie vedomosti  saint petersburg  births  deaths  references    years of the 18th century in russia
pedro silva is a former portuguese footballer who played as a half-back.  he is mostly known for his five-year spell at benfica, where he won two major honours.  career silva arrived at benfica in 1929 and made his debut on 17 february, against belenenses. he played 10 games in all competitions, scoring seven goals, helping the club win the campeonato de portugal. the following season, he scored once in five games in the same competition, with benfica retaining the trophy. in 1931-32, he played alongside guedes goncalves, but benfica only reach the semi-finals of the campeonato de portugal.  a year later, he played three games in the campeonato de lisboa, scoring once, as benfica won a competition. in his last year at benfica, he only played twice in the campeonato de lisboa, subsequently leaving the club with 24 goals in 50 appearances and winning three honours.  honours benfica campeonato de portugal: 1929-30, 1930-31 campeonato de lisboa: 1932-33  references general    specific  year of birth unknown year of death unknown portuguese footballers association football midfielders s.l. benfica footballers
ahmad yadgar was a mughal-era author of the tarikh-i-salatin-i-afghaniyah, a history of the afghan monarchs of india. the history of india, as told by its own historians by henry miers elliot and john dowson provides a translation of the work. in his preface, yadgar claims to be "an old servant of the sur kings" and states that the work was commissioned by daud shah, the last afghan ruler of bengal. the book covers events from the time of bahlul lodi with the final chapter detailing the defeat and subsequent execution of hemu at the second battle of panipat.  modern critical scholarship, however, considers his book to very likely be spurious. yadgar's claims of having witnessed the dying days of the sur empire and of serving under daud shah have been rejected as fabricated. his book, was very likely composed to be sold by booksellers to gullible customers curious about the afghans who had by then passed out of history. much of its contents have been copied verbatim from works written during akbar and jahangir's reigns.  references  external links  tarikh-i-salatin-i-afaghana, a translation from volume v of the history of india, as told by its own historians, 1867  historians in the mughal empire historians of india indian historians
joe conroy (born july 24, 1934) is a democratic former member of both houses of the michigan legislature, representing parts of genesee county for two decades.  prior to his election to the house, conroy was active in real estate and building in the flint area. he was also a member of the city's charter review commission and the county board of commissioners. he was elected to the michigan house of representatives in 1976 and served three terms. he sought and won election to the michigan senate in 1982 and served there for four terms. while in the senate, he served on the appropriations committee.  conroy was governmental operations director under former mayor don williamson of flint for four and a half years, resigning in 2008.  references  members of the michigan house of representatives michigan state senators 1934 births living people
the 2016-17 russian national football league was the 25th season of russia's second-tier football league since the dissolution of the soviet union. the season began on 11 july 2016 and ended on 19 may 2017.  teams  stadiums, personnel and sponsorship  league table  results  statistics  scoring  first goal of the season: vadim minich for luch-energiya against mordovia saransk (11 july 2016)  top goalscorers  last updated: 21 may 2017  references  external links official website  2016-17 in russian football leagues russian football national league seasons rus
chanice chase-taylor (born august 6, 1993 in toronto, ontario) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the hurdles.  in july 2016, she was officially named to canada's olympic team in the 400 metre hurdles and 4x400 meters relay events.  chase-taylor is majoring in sport administration with a concentration in sport leadership at louisiana state university.  references  1993 births living people athletes from toronto canadian female hurdlers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada black canadian female track and field athletes
middletown bridge, also known as shelby county bridge #149, is a historic stone arch bridge located in liberty township, shelby county, indiana. it was built in 1903, and is a four-arch bridge constructed of indiana limestone.  it measures 140.8 feet long and 20 feet wide, including the parapet walls. the bridge was torn down by the county in the summer of 2018.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2009.  references  road bridges on the national register of historic places in indiana bridges completed in 1903 transportation buildings and structures in shelby county, indiana national register of historic places in shelby county, indiana road bridges in indiana stone arch bridges in the united states
type 343 radar is a chinese fire control radar installed on type 051 destroyer, and has been since retired from active service.  type 343 radar is the first generation chinese fire control radar for large caliber guns, with development begun in 1968, with 720th research institute assigned as the develop in october of the same year. sea trials begun in july 1970 and design completed in 1976, with state certification received in 1979. a total of 12 sets were produced, with first five built by 720th institute, and production subsequently transferred to plant 410 in guizhou in 1982. the radar operates in two bands, x-band is usually used, with ku-band as backup. the radar can detect and track medium-sized surface target around 30 and 20 km away respectively.   type 343 is a 2-d air search radar with mtbf of 40 hours, and in addition to control guns, it is also used for anti-ship missile fire control. as a 2-d air search radar, type 343 can only provide bearing and range, and to provide altitude information on the target, a large optical ranging set is needed, which requires an operator. therefore, an operator's cupola is attached to the radar, immediately behind the antenna. an improved version type 343-gai (改), has the operator cupola deleted and the bulky complex optical ranging set replaced by a compact, but far more capable electro-optical sensor (eo) that is only a tiny fraction size of the original equipment it replaced. as more advanced radars available, type 343 has been phased from active service in chinese navy.  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china military equipment introduced in the 1970s
the suzuki let's is a scooter manufactured by suzuki motorcycle india limited, a subsidiary of japanese motorcycle company suzuki. the scooter was showcased by the company at the 2014 auto expo.  technology  sep the suzuki let's is powered by a brand new engine made by suzuki which uses sep (suzuki eco performance). the technology involves use of lighter rocker arms and alterations to the valve angle, in an effort to increase the combustion efficiency of the engine.  references  indian motor scooters motor scooters let's motorcycles introduced in 2014
the county of eyre is one of the 49 cadastral counties of south australia. it was proclaimed by governor george grey in 1842 and named for the explorer edward john eyre. it covers a portion of the state between the adelaide hills in the west and the murray river in the east from robertstown and mannum on the northern boundary to sedan and swan reach on the southern boundary.  hundreds  the county of eyre is divided into the following 13 hundreds:  hundred of english (robertstown, point pass, australia plains, rocky plain)  hundred of bower (bower, geranium plains)  hundred of beatty (beatty, mount mary)  hundred of eba (eba, morgan)  hundred of neales (eudunda, neales flat, peep hill, sutherlands)  hundred of brownlow (brownlow)  hundred of hay (mcbean pound)  hundred of dutton (dutton, frankton, dutton east)  hundred of anna (annadale, steinfeld, sandleton)  hundred of skurray (blanchetown)  hundred of jellicoe (truro, keyneton, towitta)  hundred of bagot (south australia) (sedan)  hundred of fisher (fisher, punyelroo)  references  eyre
phanthog, also known as phantog and pan duo (), was a tibetan mountaineer. she is known for being the first woman to summit mount everest via its north face route, the first chinese woman to summit everest, and the second woman to reach the summit, after junko tabei.  biography phanthog was born in 1939 into a serf family in rural tibet. after her father died when she was eight, she was forced to help her mother support the family by working long days performing backbreaking manual labor.  while working in a factory, phanthog was chosen to be part of the chinese female mountaineering team at the age of 20 because of her excellent physical condition. her 1959 ascent of muztagh ata in xinjiang, with an elevation of , broke the record for the highest altitude reached by a female mountaineer.  after summiting everest in 1975, phanthog served as a deputy in the national people's congress for five terms and became vice director of the wuxi sports administration in 1981. she returned to everest in 2008 at the age of 70 by hiking to everest base camp to celebrate the 2008 summer olympics in beijing. she was also one of eight former athletes chosen that year to carry the olympic flag into the olympics opening ceremony. in 2009, she was honored by china's state general administration of sports as one of the 60 most influential chinese athletes since the founding of the people's republic of china in 1949.  she died on march 31, 2014, at the age of 75 due to complications related to diabetes.  1975 everest climb alongside eight other members of a chinese-tibetan expedition, phanthog summited mount everest on may 27, 1975. she became the second woman to successfully climb everest, reaching the summit only 11 days after junko tabei's ascent via the southeast ridge route, and the first woman to climb it from the tibetan side.  the nine summiters were part of an 18-person "victory team," of which phanthog was deputy leader, that had set out from everest base camp 10 days prior. although two other women had climbed to , they began suffering from altitude sickness and had to be evacuated (along with seven men), leaving phanthog as the only woman remaining in the team.  the team was at the summit of everest for 70 minutes. while at the top, phanthog spent seven minutes performing an ecg test as a medical experiment. lead i of her test, which showed nothing unusual, was then sent to base camp via telemetry
.  phanthog lost three of her toes to frostbite as a result of the climb. she recognized the example that she set for women and for female mountaineers, later saying: "chinese women have a strong will; difficulties can't stop us. we climbed the highest peak in the world; we really hold up half the sky."  personal life phanthog was married to deng jiashan, the political commissar of the chinese national mountaineering team and later a middle school headmaster in wuxi. her husband accompanied her on the 1975 everest expedition, although he did not reach the summit. the couple had three children.  see also list of 20th-century summiters of mount everest  notes  1939 births chinese mountain climbers female climbers chinese summiters of mount everest tibetan women 2014 deaths
agrocybe retigera is a species of mushroom in the genus agrocybe. the first known sighting of the species was in the early 1950s. it was first described by author speggazini singer in 1950. the mushroom has since been found in common areas, especially grassy ones, such as gardens, meadows and parks. agrocybe retigera is most commonly found in tropical and sub-tropical areas around the globe. the size of the cap is usually between 17 and 44 millimetres, and it is generally pale in colour. the colour of the mushroom itself ranges from cream to pale-brown.  references  fungi described in 1950 strophariaceae
cylindrepomus filiformis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1938.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1938
the 2015 world aesthetic gymnastics championships, the 16th edition, was held in torshavn, faroe islands, from may 25 to september 7, 2015 at the itrottarhøllin a halsi.  participating nations  medal winners  results  senior  the top 12 teams (2 per country) and the host country in preliminaries qualify to the finals.  references  external links http://www.ifagg.com/competition/new-results/   2015 in faroese sport 2015 in gymnastics world aesthetic international gymnastics competitions hosted by denmark world aesthetic gymnastics championships international sports competitions hosted by the faroe islands sport in torshavn
aujla banwali is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located 5 km away from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of aujla banwali village. the village is administered by sarpanch, an elected representative of the village.  history aujla banwali, kapurthala, is over 200 years old and was founded by two brothers of the aujla clan, sardar joga singh aujla and sardar banwal singh aujla. they were the grandsons of sardar jassa singh ahluwalia who had conquered kapurthala decades before their birth. sardar joga singh aujla had 12 sons and sardar banwal singh aujla had 10 sons.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, aujla banwali has a total number of 110 houses and population of 510 of which include 246 males and 264 females. literacy rate of aujla banwali is 80.46%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 34 which is 6.67% of total population of aujla banwali, and child sex ratio is approximately 1000 higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the smart connect interchange, also known as the harbor link interchange and the mindanao avenue interchange, is a two-level cloverleaf interchange in valenzuela, metro manila, the philippines which serves as the junction of north luzon expressway (nlex) between its main segment and its harbor link project, particularly segments 8.1 and 9, components of circumferential road 5 (c-5). built as part of the  nlex segment 8.1 of the harbor link project extending the expressway to mindanao avenue, which has since been incorporated into the c-5 system, it is the philippines' largest cloverleaf interchange in terms of land area.  history construction of nlex segment 8.1, including the smart connect interchange, broke ground on april 2, 2009, with actual construction work beginning 19 days later.  the entire segment was opened to traffic on june 5, 2010, with president gloria macapagal arroyo and manuel v. pangilinan, chairman of the manila north tollways corporation, the concessionaire of the north luzon expressway, leading the inauguration along with public works and highways secretary victor domingo and high-ranking officials from valenzuela.  with some 30,000 vehicles estimated to use the new road daily during its first year of operation, since its opening it has helped to relieve traffic on the older balintawak interchange connecting epifanio de los santos avenue (edsa) to nlex, which is three times smaller.  although the smart connect interchange was opened to traffic in 2010, it originally only carried traffic between valenzuela and eastern metro manila via nlex segment 8.1, with the westbound ramps closed to traffic. work on a connection between the interchange and western metro manila would only be realized with the construction of the  nlex segment 9 between the interchange and the macarthur highway in karuhatan, which was opened on march 19, 2015. a further extension from karuhatan to the port of manila, known as nlex segment 10 or nlex harbor link, was opened gradually from february 28, 2019 to june 15, 2020.  on november 16, 2012, smart communications bought the naming rights to the interchange, giving it its current name.  references  road interchanges in the philippines
the 19th district of the iowa senate is located in southern iowa, and is currently composed of polk county.  current elected officials jack whitver is the senator currently representing the 19th district.  the area of the 19th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 37th district (represented by john landon) the 38th district (represented by garrett gobble)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  norman goodwin, 1983-1990 sheldon rittmer, 1991-2002 chuck larson, 2003-2006 rob hogg, 2007-2012 jack whitver, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  19
shanxi (山西) is a province in north china.  shanxi may also refer to: shaanxi (陕西), a neighboring province to the west of shanxi shanxi, zhejiang (珊溪镇), a town in wencheng county, zhejiang, china shaanxi circuit (陜西路), a circuit or province of the song dynasty
george lennox barrow (1921-1989) was a colonial administrator, irish historian, philosopher, geographer, archaeologist, economist and writer. in the 1970s his name was circulated in the media as academician.  biography  george lennox barrow was the youngest son of major ronald barrow, who was originally from a london-based family of military and property owners. his grandfather, sir edmund barrow was commander of the british section of the expedition force which occupied peking in 1900. his mother, cecily woolsey-butler was the inheritor of milestown house, castlebellingham, co. louth, which, through her marriage, the barrow family inherited.  lennox was born in the original milestown in 1921 and went to cambridge to study history.  in 1943 he was called up to military service in the pacific islands where the japanese were beginning to retreat. he described his experience in 'jungle-jangle'- an unpublished account.  after the war, he joined the british colonial service and served as administrator on the island of tana. in 1951, he was transferred to nigeria where he remained until 1957.  as nigeria prepared for independence (which was to come in 1960), lennox and his second wife viola molteno, left, returned to ireland and bought a residence in sutton cross, co. dublin for £9,000, where they settled for the rest of their lives.  they appeared to be perfectly content with each other and required nothing more, as some would say a "perfect marriage".  lennox barrow graduated from the university of london in 1970 with a doctorate of philosophy (phd).  death  in the spring of 1988 lennox was knocked down by a car and was hospitalised.  he died after eighteen months.  his remains buried on glasnevin cemetery, dublin.  family life  viola molteno, who had married lennox in 1954, was totally at one with him in almost everything.  she also yearned for a simple life and they were united in creating a sense of peace.	her first husband had been a soldier in hong kong at the time of the japanese attack and she and their son robert had been imprisoned in a japanese camp in the philippines.  lennox had previously married margaret stevenson, already a widow with two children, vicky and derek, who had been recently bereaved.  they were married for about two years, finally divorcing acrimoniously in 1953.  they had son ronald, who spent his early life living with his granny in milestown house.  legacy  lennox barrow
has left a huge legacy as an irish historian, geographer, archaeologist, economist and writer. in his lifetime, he wrote four books: "jungle - jangle" - an unpublished account of his wartime service in the solomon island. "glendalough and st kevin" (1972). "the emergence of the irish banking system (1825 - 45)".  gill and macmillan, (1975). "round towers of ireland" gill & macmillan, 1979, reprinted by buvinda publications, 1994.  lennox barrow charitable foundation  following his father's death, and inheritance of the lennox barrow estate, ronald barrow decided to establish from part of it a foundation in memory of his father with the sole purpose of helping others.  in 1992 a hundred thousand pounds was set up as capital with the purpose of becoming as self-generating investment.  ronald barrow found a charitable foundation chy: 10574 in memory of the man who meant a lot to him.  publications  references   r.o. verkhola.  from milestown to serve the world in perpetuity. the history of the lennox barrow charitable foundation.  chy: 10574,  2015, dublin.  1921 births 1989 deaths colonial administrative service officers british expatriates in vanuatu british expatriates in nigeria british expatriates in ireland alumni of the university of cambridge
kazero was a french pop duo (eric casero and veronique segaud) from toulouse (occitania) 1986-1987.  discography    1986  thai nana  1987  whoopy machine  references  french musical duos
when we first met is a 2018 american romantic comedy film directed by ari sandel, written by john whittington, and starring adam devine, alexandra daddario, shelley hennig, andrew bachelor and robbie amell. it was released worldwide on netflix on february 9, 2018.  plot noah ashby falls in love with avery martin after meeting her at a 2014 halloween party, but she regards him as a friend. avery meets her fiance, ethan, the day after she and noah met. three years later, noah remains distraught at not having been able to win her over.   when he becomes intoxicated at ethan and avery's engagement party, noah winds up in the photo booth he used with her on their first meeting and drunkenly operates it before falling asleep. awakening in bed, noah discovers the photo booth brought him back to the day they met and he resolves to change the events of the day to ensure he and avery end up together.  noah uses his pre-existing knowledge of avery to his advantage in his first attempt to win her over, but avery and her roommate carrie grey suspect him of being a stalker, and he returns to a new version of 2017 where he and avery do not know each other. for his second attempt traveling back to 2014, noah follows his friend max's advice of being a rude alpha male and successfully beds avery, but he develops a self-absorbed personality and when he returns to the present, his relationship with avery is purely sexual.   recognizing that avery and ethan are still attracted to each other, noah has a conversation with carrie and deduces that avery is attracted to stable and dependable men. noah gets a job at max's company and presents himself in a more mature manner to avery for his third attempt. when he returns to 2017, he and avery live in a big house and are engaged.  however, his friendship with max has soured because he took the senior vice president position that max was working towards, his job commitments prevent him from spending time with avery, and ethan is now distraught over avery marrying someone else. following another conversation with carrie, noah recognizes that avery does not love him and she is meant to be with ethan. he also realizes that, having bonded with carrie during his time travel adventures, he is meant to be with her.  traveling back to 2014 for a fourth time, noah arranges for avery and ethan to meet at the halloween party while he pursues carrie, whom he discovers he has more in common with than avery. his actions restore ethan and avery's
engagement and his friendship with max, but noah learns that he did not win carrie's love and she resumed dating her ex-boyfriend, phil. noah finally realizes that he needed to first become friends with avery in order to meet carrie, and he travels back one last time to meet avery the way he did originally. with the present fully restored, noah initiates a conversation with carrie at the engagement party and the two begin their own relationship.  cast   adam devine as noah ashby  alexandra daddario as avery martin  shelley hennig as carrie grey  andrew bachelor as max  robbie amell as ethan  dean j. west as josh  tony cavalero as the angus young partygoer  chris wylde as mr. costigan  noureen dewulf as margo  production  in may 2016, ari sandel was set to direct the film from a script by john whittington and adam devine, while producers on the film are adam saunders of footprint features, mason novick of mxn entertainment, with mary viola and mcg of wonderland sound and vision.  principal photography on the film began in mid-july 2016 in new orleans.  reception  on the review-aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of  based on  reviews, with an average rating of . the critical consensus reads: "much like its protagonist, when we first met struggles in the cinematic 'friend zone' -- and will face a slew of viewer breakups before finding much in the way of true love." on metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 36 out of 100, based on six critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".  decider writer lea palmeri said, "devine's ability to be charming and endearing shouldn't be underestimated here and you'll be rooting for him before you know it." ravi teja of age of the nerd stated that he "carries the whole movie on his shoulders with perfection."  references  external links     2018 romantic comedy films 2018 films american films american romantic comedy films films directed by ari sandel films set in 2014 films set in 2017 films shot in new orleans english-language netflix original films films about time travel films with screenplays by john whittington (screenwriter) american films about halloween wonderland sound and vision films films produced by mason novick
i am the guilty one (turkish: suclu benim) is a 1953 turkish drama film directed by semih evin and starring zeynep sirmali, sadri alisik and kemal edige.  cast  zeynep sirmali   sadri alisik   kemal edige   settar kormukcu   hayri esen   muazzez arcay  feridun colgecen   melih kaya  cetin yilmaz  references  bibliography  turker inanoglu. 5555 afisle turk sineması. kabalcı, 2004.  external links    1953 films 1953 drama films turkish-language films turkish films turkish drama films turkish black-and-white films
princess mariya elimovna meshcherskaya (; 1844-1868), was a russian lady in waiting. she is known for her love affair with the future alexander iii of russia, who attempted to renounce his place as heir to the throne in order to marry her, a plan he was forced to abandon. she married pavel pavlovich demidov, 2nd prince of san donato in 1866.  early life  princess maria elimovna meshcherskaya was born in the family of the diplomat, prince elim petrovich meshchersky and varvara stepanovna (1819-1879), the daughter of the writer s.p. zhikharev . in 1844, when mary was not yet a year old, her father died. maria elimovna spent her childhood in paris and nice, constantly moving between her mother and grandmother. abroad, varvara stepanovna led such an eccentric lifestyle that empress alexandra feodorovna took her daughter to and placed varvara in an institute.  the empress was forced to turn for help to her relative princess elizaveta nikolaievna chernysheva (widow of the minister of war alexander chernyshyov ) and asked her to take maria in. when she was eighteen years old maria, was received in the house of her aunt, princess elizabeth baryatinskaya (daughter of chernyshyov). but she was jealous of her niece because her husband was particularly attached to her, some sources even say in love."it cannot be said that princess baryatinskaya spoiled her. on the contrary, she rather kept her in a black body. she took the last place in the house..."  - count sergei dmitrievich sheremetev  romance with grand duke alexander  not long after, her relitives petitioned and maria became a lady-in-waiting to empress maria alexandrovna and settled in the winter palace.  in the spring of 1864, at the court, maria met with the grand duke alexander alexandrovich, the second son of the empress. her name appeared in the grand duke's letters. in june of the same year, he wrote to his mother: "we went with the company to pavlovsk to the farm and drank tea there. m. e. meshcherskaya also rode with us on horseback and often visited pavlovsk with us ".gradually she is included in the company formed at the court from the representatives of the "golden youth". in addition to the grand duke alexander, it included: tsarsevich nicholas, grand duke vladimir, and their cousins nikolai
leuchtenberg , nikolai konstantinovich, prince meshchersky , count illarion vorontsov-dashkov, prince vladimir baryatinsky, and lady-in-waiting alexandra zhukovskaya. the youth had fun, danced, played cards, and more and more often alexander tried to choose maria as a partner. according to a contemporary, the princess was "extraordinarily beautiful, wonderfully built, rather tall, her black eyes, deep and passionate, gave her graceful face an extraordinary charm. the sound of her voice was methodical, and the stamp of some mysteriously restrained sad feeling, very charming, was imposed on her whole being." in 1865, tsarevich nikolai alexandrovich died, and alexander became the heir to the throne. in the same year, the feelings of the grand duke also changed: from friendly to something more serious. on june 7, he wrote in his diary: "every day is the same, it would be unbearable if it were not for m." they allegedly met by chance on a walk in the park, but soon the emperor and empress learned about this relationship. maria alexandrovna found this behavior of her son "indecent". on june 19 on the english road from tsarskoe selo to pavlovsk, the tsarevich said that "they can no longer be in such a relationship as they were up to now" as a souvenir, marie presented her photo with sasha zhukovskaya with the inscription: " in remembrance of the last day in dear tsarskoe ." on november 4 of the same year, the princess gave alexander her self-portrait.   maria's cousin, vladimir meshchersky, stole the letters to her from the heir to the throne and handed them over to the empress, after which a scandal erupted in the imperial family though they continued to meet. they were helped by alexandra zhukovskaya, who delivered notes, settled disagreements, and guarded the peace during walks. the tsarevich was not sure of maria's feelings, he was afraid that she might accept someone elses proposal, so he offered his close friend and heir to a huge fortune, count illarion vorontsov-dashkov, to marry maria. however, the count soon married countess elizaveta shuvalova.  the meetings became more frequent, and meshcherskaya was reprimanded. countess catherine tiesenhausen claimed that the maria was behaving indecently, openly running after the heir. and in order to avoid 'serious consequences' she must
stop seeing the tsarevich. in november 1865, alexander ii expressed a desire for the tsarevich and nikolai's former bride, the danish princess dagmar of denmark, to marry. the tsarevich felt conflicted between his feelings for meshcherskaya and duty. he wrote in his diary on march 15: "i really love her, and if i were a free man, i would certainly marry, and i am sure that she would completely agree".  at a ball on april 18,  meshcherskaya informed the heir that prince wittgenstein had proposed to her. the tsarsevich's parents insisted on a trip to denmark, and in may the he wrote in his diary: "i only think now about giving up my plight and, if possible, marrying sweet m.e. i want to refuse to marry dagmar, which i cannot love and do not want ... maybe it will be better if i renounce the throne ... i do not want another wife, like m. e." at the same time, the grand duke feared that "when the decisive moment comes, she will abandon me, and then everything was lost".  in may 1866 the emperor announced that an article was published in danish newspapers that the tsarevich did not want to marry dagmar because of his feelings for meshcherskaya. christian ix of denmark sent a letter to the imperial family asking them to confirm the heir's plans for his daughter. there was a major quarrel, during which alexander declared his desire to abdicate the throne and marry 'dear dusenka', which was not understood by alexander ii, who threatened to expel the maria. after explaining himself to maria, alexander decided to go to denmark. the only thing he asked his father about was not to punish the girl. the empress reassured her son that meshcherskaya would go to paris with her aunt princess chernysheva.   the engagement of tsarevich alexander and princess dagmara of denmark took place on june 17, 1866, and a wedding followed on october 28. princess meshcherskaya saw the heir again in 1867 in paris, where he came with his father at the invitation of emperor napoleon iii.  later life  after leaving the imperial court, maria lived with princess chernysheva. in march 1867, at the austrian court, she met the secretary of the russian embassy in vienna, the wealthy pavel pavlovich demidov (1839-1885). soon, on june 7, 1867, their wedding was solemnly celebrated. the guarantors for the groom were prince
a. i. baryatinsky and baron a. f. budberg ; the guarantors for the bride are count d. k. nesselrode and count i. i. vorontsov-dashkov . the young couple spent their honeymoon near florence at the villa san donato . demidov adored his young wife, and surrounded her with luxury. maria elimovna had the most beneficial influence on her husband. according to a contemporary, after marriage, demidov became a completely different person, his crazy spending and evenings in the casino stopped.  in the spring of 1868, before the birth of her son, maria and her husband moved to vienna in order to be able to use the advice a famous professor. in vienna, she often went to church, where she was seen praying in tears. her pregnancy was difficult, aurora karlovna came to vienna from finland in order to support her son and daughter-in-law. both women became very friendly and spent a lot of time together.   on july 25, 1868, maria elimovna gave birth to her son elim, named after her father, and died the next day from eclampsia . the doctors managed to save the boy who was also in danger.  on the eve of her death, maria elimovna confessed to her friend a. zhukovskaya that "she never loved anyone except the tsarevich". her husband found a letter in his own name, in which she said goodbye to him and thanked him for the happiness that he gave her and which lasted less than a year.  grief-stricken demidov refused to see his son for several months, and considered himself the culprit of his wife's death. he starved himself and was on the verge of suicide. after meeting with the jesuit fathers from the catholic order "heart of jesus" pavel came to his senses and became very religious. he lived modestly, walked often, no longer wore a tailcoat, and spent a lot of money on charity work. in memory of his wife, he established the mariinsky needlework workshop in paris.  princess maria demidova was buried in vienna at the orthodox cemetery of st. mark. allegedly, her ashes was later transported to the family tomb of the demidov's at the pere lachaise cemetery in paris. though according to the diary of grand duke alexander alexandrovich in 1880, her ashes were still in france.  references   1844 births 1868 deaths ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire deaths
in childbirth russian princesses
this article presents a list of the historical events and publications of australian literature during 1966.  major publications  books    james aldridge  my brother tom  the statesman's games  jon cleary  the high commissioner  the pulse of danger  peter cowan - seed  elizabeth harrower - the watch tower  shirley hazzard - the evening of the holiday  morris lurie - rappaport  peter mathers - trap  christina stead - dark places of the heart  arthur upfield - the lake frome monster  judah waten - season of youth  patrick white - the solid mandala  short stories    james hackston - father clears out  elizabeth harrower - "the beautiful climate"  d'arcy niland - pairs and loners  patrick white - "the full belly"  judith wright - the nature of love  children's and young adult fiction    mavis thorpe clark - the min-min  max fatchen - the river kings  elyne mitchell - silver brumby kingdom  ruth park  the muddle-headed wombat at school  the muddle-headed wombat in the snow  joan phipson - the crew of the merlin  judith wright - the river and the road  poetry    vincent buckley - arcady and other places : poems  bruce dawe - "the not-so-good earth"  william hart-smith - the talking clothes: poems  dorothy hewett - "legend of the green country"  a. d. hope - collected poems 1930 - 1965  les murray - "evening alone at bunyah"  oodgeroo noonuccal - "no more boomerang"  judith wright - the other half : poems  biography    hal porter - the paper chase  clement semmler - kenneth slessor  non-fiction    geoffrey blainey - the tyranny of distance  awards and honours  literary  children and young adult  poetry  births   a list, ordered by date of birth (and, if the date is either unspecified or repeated, ordered alphabetically by surname) of births in 1966 of australian literary figures, authors of written works or literature-related individuals follows, including year of death.   3 june - kate forsyth, novelist  unknown date   delia falconer, novelist  anna funder, novelist  malcolm knox, novelist  andrew mcgahan, novelist (died 2019)  deaths   a list, ordered by date of death (and, if the date is either unspecified or repeated, ordered alphabetically by surname) of
deaths in 1966 of australian literary figures, authors of written works or literature-related individuals follows, including year of birth.   16 april - eric lambert, novelist (born 1918)  28 may - edward harrington, bush balladist and short story writer (born 1896)  18 august - myra morris, author and poet (born 1893)  see also   1966 in poetry  list of years in literature  list of years in australian literature  1966 in literature  1965 in australian literature  1966 in australia  1967 in australian literature  references    australia years of the 20th century in australia  australian literature by year years of the 20th century in literature 20th-century australian literature
the swan 57 was designed by olin stephens and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1977. 49 boats were built during a production run that started in 1977 and ended in 1984. the swan 57 was one of the last boats designed for nautor of finland by sparkman & stephens. the boat was offered in both sloop and ketch configurations and later a centerboard option was added.  references  external links  nautor swan    sailing yachts keelboats 1970s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by olin stephens sailboat type designs by sparkman and stephens
vladimir fyodorovich chernyshov (, born 5 november 1948) is a retired russian heavyweight boxer who won the european championships in 1971. in 1972 he was about to retire and got injured at the national championships; he was therefore not selected for the 1972 olympics.  references  1948 births living people russian male boxers heavyweight boxers
cylindrepomus uniformis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1938.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1938
"this happy madness" (aka "estrada branca", portuguese for "white road") is a bossa nova song composed in 1958 by antonio carlos jobim with lyrics by vinicius de moraes. english-language lyrics were added later by gene lees.  according to jobim's sister, helena, he composed "estrada branca" in their parents' home in the village of poco fundo, and it was one of several songs inspired by the rain.  gene lees, who wrote the english lyrics, said, "the melody is one of antonio carlos jobim's early ones, and the song is, again, very difficult to sing." music writer doug ramsey praised lees' work on the song: "'this happy madness' is one of the finest sets of lyrics to grace a jobim song in any language."  the first recording of the song was in april 1958 by elizete cardoso for her album cancao do amor demais, which bossa nova historian ruy castro says "inaugurated the bossa nova sound."  recorded versions  elizete cardoso - cancao do amor demais (1958)  lenita bruno - por toda minha vida (1959)  alaide costa - gosto de voce (1959)  frank sinatra - sinatra & company (rec. 1969, released in 1971)  dexter gordon - more than you know (1975) - with vocal by dexter gordon  antonio carlos jobim - terra brasilis (1980)  carlos barbosa-lima - carlos barbosa-lima plays jobim & gershwin (1982)  joe henderson - double rainbow: the music of antonio carlos jobim (1995)  edu lobo - meia noite (1995)  kenny rankin - here in my heart (1997)  carol saboya & nelson faria - interpretam cancoes de antonio carlos jobim (1999)  chico buarque - olha que coisa mais linda: uma homenagem a tom jobim (2001)  jaques morelenbaum, paula morelenbaum, and ryuichi sakamoto - casa (2001)  phil woods & barbara casini, with stefano bollani - voce e eu (2001)  karrin allyson - imagina: songs of brasil (2008)  diana panton - to brazil with love (2011)  stacey kent - the changing lights (2013)  references  songs with music by antonio carlos jobim songs with lyrics by vinicius de moraes frank sinatra songs brazilian songs 1958 songs
corusichthys megacephalus is an extinct pycnodontid that lived during the lower cenomanian of what is now lebanon.  c. megacephalus is known from a 34 mm long fossil.  it had plates arranged like a helmet around its head, and had a massive, triangular spine on its dorsal side.  c. megacephalus is closely related the genera trewavasia and hensodon, as well as coccodus.  see also   prehistoric fish  list of prehistoric bony fish  references  cretaceous bony fish pycnodontiformes genera late cretaceous fish of asia
assiya ipek (born december 5, 1993) is a turkish weightlifter competing in the 69 kg division.  ipek earned a quota spot for the 2016 summer olympics.  references  living people 1993 births place of birth missing (living people) turkish female weightlifters weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics olympic weightlifters of turkey
hystopia is a 2016 novel by david means. the novel was described by literary critic christian lorentzen as "a counterfactual narrative by a vietnam veteran about his experience in a therapeutic, psychedelics-based trauma recovery program initiated by an unassassinated john f. kennedy."  in july 2016, it was longlisted for the 2016 man booker prize.  awards  2016 man booker prize, longlistee.  references  2016 american novels
the loving women (spanish: las carinosas) is a 1953 mexican comedy film directed by fernando cortes and starring amalia aguilar, lilia del valle and silvia pinal.  cast  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films mexican comedy films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by fernando cortes mexican black-and-white films
the bloody money (turkish: kanlı para) is a 1953 turkish adventure film directed by orhon m. ariburnu and starring ayhan isik and nedret guvenc.  cast  ayhan isik   nedret guvenc   orhon m. ariburnu   aliye rona   lale oraloglu  refik kemal arduman   tevhid bilge   adil guldurur   huseyin kemal gurmen   muharrem gurses   atif kaptan   sadri karan   mucap ofluoglu   necmi oy   salih tozan   kadri ogelman  references  bibliography  giovanni scognamillo & metin demirhan. fantastik turk sineması. kabalcı yayınevi, 1999.  external links    1953 films 1953 adventure films turkish-language films turkish films turkish adventure films turkish black-and-white films
was a japanese baseball player and manager who was a member of the japanese baseball league. he was a manager for six seasons for the kintetsu pearls of the japan pacific league. in 1988 he was elected to the japanese baseball hall of fame.  references  japanese baseball players japanese baseball coaches managers of baseball teams in japan osaka kintetsu buffaloes managers waseda university alumni 1903 births 1987 deaths
igor yakovlevich grichanov (; born 10 september 1958) is a russian entomologist and ecologist. as a taxonomist, he specialised on diptera notably dolichopodidae. he joined the staff of the all-russian institute of plant protection in 1981. from 1990 he is the head of the laboratory of phytosanitary diagnostics and forecasts. he wrote over 470 scientific papers (1979-2016). не has described 26 new genera and over 400 new species of flies.  selected works  sigvald r., grichanov i. ya. (eds.). crop protection conference - pests, diseases and weeds, may 28-30, 2002. conference report 01, uppsala: slu, 2003. 292 p.  grichanov i. ya. review of afrotropical dolichopodinae (diptera: dolichopodidae). st.petersburg: vizr, 2004. 245 p.  grichanov i. ya. a checklist and keys to north european genera and species of dolichopodidae (diptera). st.petersburg: vizr, 2006. 120 p.  grichanov i. ya. a checklist and keys to dolichopodidae (diptera) of the caucasus and east mediterranean. st.petersburg: vizr, 2007. 160 p.  grichanov i. ya. an illustrated synopsis and keys to afrotropical genera of the epifamily dolichopodoidae (diptera: empidoidea). priamus supplement, ankara, 2011, v. 24. 98 p., 305 figs.  grichanov i. ya., negrobov o. p. (eds.). fauna and taxonomy of dolichopodidae (diptera). collection of papers. st.petersburg: vizr, 2013. 96 p.  grichanov i. ya., negrobov o. p. palaearctic species of the genus sciapus zeller (diptera: dolichopodidae). st.petersburg, vizr, 2014. 84 p..  grichanov i. ya. alphabetic list of generic and specific names of predatory flies of the epifamily dolichopodoidae (diptera). st.petersburg, vizr, 2014. 544 p..  references   foreword. in: grichanov i. ya. russian-english and english-russian vocabulary for entomologists. saint-petersburg: vizr, 2004, 116 p. [russian]  to the jubilee of grichanov i. ya. plant protection news, 2008, no 3, p. 78 . [
russian]  external links  profile, voronezh state university [russian]  profile, all-russian institute of plant protection [russian]  profile, google scholar  eol new taxa described by grichanov  living people russian entomologists 1958 births 21st-century russian zoologists soviet entomologists voronezh state university alumni 20th-century russian zoologists people from voronezh
dr. nell jackson (july 1, 1929 - april 1, 1988) was an olympic sprinter and track coach. in 1956, she was the first african-american be named head coach of the u.s. olympic women's track and field team. she also served as the head coach in the 1972 olympic games.  early life  nell jackson was born in athens, georgia, to burnette l. jackson and wilhemina g. jackson, and was the only daughter of three children.  education jackson earned her college degree from tuskegee institute in 1951, a master's degree from springfield college in 1953, and a ph.d. at the university of iowa in 1962.  athletics in 1944, at the age of 15, jackson competed in the us national championships. in 1945, she competed in the aau indoor and outdoor championships, placing second each time to stella walsh in the 200 meters.  while she attended tuskegee institute, she was a member of the 1948 us olympic team. lead by tuskegee's hall of fame head football coach cleveland abbott, jackson won two national collegiate titles in 1950, in the 200 meters and the 400 meter relay. she competed at the 1951 pan-american games, placing second in the 200 meters and first as a member of the us 400 meter relay team.  jackson set the american record for 200 meters in august 1949, running 24.2 seconds.  jackson was inducted into the us national track and field hall of fame in 1989, a year after she died in vestal, new york.  championship results 1945 aau: 200 m (2nd) 1945 aau indoors: 200 m (2nd) 1951 pan-am games: 200 m (2nd) 1951 pan-am games: 400 m relay (1st) 1950 ncaa: 200 m (1st) 1950 ncaa: 400 m relay (1st)  coaching and athletics administration in 1953, jackson returned to tuskegee to work as the women's track and field coach, later also serving as the first men's swimming coach after creating the tuskegee swimming program in 1958. she subsequently coached track and field at four universities: iowa, illinois state, illinois, and michigan state. she was the head coach of the 1970 national champion track team at the university of illinois.  in 1956, jackson was the first black head coach for a us olympic track and field team. she served as the head coach of the women's team at the 1956 and 1972 olympics.  from 1973 to 1981, she served as the first assistant director of athletics for women
at michigan state university (msu), and also served as msu's women's track and field head coach for six seasons. she coached 13 athletes to all-america honors at msu.  after leaving michigan state in 1981, jackson director of physical education and intercollegiate athletics at the state university of new york (suny).  nell c. jackson award  national girls and women in sports (nagws) established the nell c. jackson memorial award. this award is presented annually to minority women who have demonstrated outstanding leadership in sports.  notes  references  1929 births 1988 deaths sportspeople from athens, georgia american female sprinters olympic track and field athletes of the united states athletes (track and field) at the 1948 summer olympics american track and field coaches pan american games medalists in athletics (track and field) pan american games gold medalists for the united states pan american games silver medalists for the united states athletes (track and field) at the 1951 pan american games medalists at the 1951 pan american games 20th-century american women olympic female sprinters
hassane fofana (born 28 april 1992) is an italian athlete specialising in the high hurdles. he is of ivorian descent. he competed at the 2020 summer olympics, in 110 m hurdles.  biography his personal bests are 13.44 seconds in the 110 metres hurdles (+1.5 m/s, turku 2019, and also +1.1, geneva 2021) and 7.66 seconds in the 60 metres hurdles (ancona 2018). he won six times the national championships.  achievements  national titles  italian athletics championships  110 metres hurdles: 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2019 italian athletics indoor championships  110 metres hurdles: 2015, 2017, 2018  see also  italian all-time lists - 110 metres hurdles  references  external links    1992 births living people italian male hurdlers sportspeople from the province of brescia italian people of ivorian descent italian sportspeople of african descent athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games world athletics championships athletes for italy athletes (track and field) at the 2019 european games european games medalists in athletics european games gold medalists for italy athletics competitors of fiamme oro italian athletics championships winners mediterranean games competitors for italy athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of italy
the 2016-17 season is fudbalski klub partizan's the 70th season in existence and the club's 11th season in competing in the serbian superliga.  season overview on 14 july 2016, partizan opened season with a 0-0 home draw against zagłebie lubin in second qualifying round for the uefa europa league. a week later, in lubin, after penalty drama partizan was eliminated. three days later, partizan opened season in serbian superliga with another draw (0-0) against novice in superliga (backa) at karađorđe stadium. in next round, partizan has lost against napredak at mladost stadium. in that match, partizan has scored first goal in the season, after 388 minutes. that goal was scored by valeri bojinov from penalty spot. after that match, coach ivan tomic resigned from the position. on 4 august 2016, coach marko nikolic returned to partizan on a two-year deal. on 10 august, partizan made first victory in the season, by beating javor 2-0 in ivanjica. on 17 september 2016, partizan beat red star 1-0 at home in eternal derby. the winning goal has scored leonardo in 89th minute. the difference on the standings with reduced from nine to six points. partizan made six consecutive wins before he draw (1-1) against radnicki nis at home, on 22 october. after that match, partizan made four more consecutive wins before he draw (0-0) against vojvodina at karađorđe stadium, on 30 november. on 15 december, in the last match of the year, leonardo's goals in 54th minute and in 63rd minute (second goal was from a free kick) was enough for partizan to beat spartak 2-0 at home. partizan finished a year at second place, six points behind red star.  on 19 february, partizan made first victory in 2017 (1-0 away), against rad. on 4 march, partizan drew 1-1 at rajko mitic stadium, in eternal derby, against red star. red star take the lead in 34th minute (the ball has leave the pitch, but referee did not see). uros đurđevic has scored equalizer in 88th minute for partizan. after that match, partizan made six consecutive wins before play-off. on 18 april, in first match of play-off, partizan made a huge victory at rajko mitic stadium, in eternal derby, against red star. leonardo scored the leading goal, from a free
kick in 21st minute, red star equalized in 48th minute. partizan take the lead again, leandre tawamba scored a goal in 68th minute. leonardo score one more goal, in 79th minute for a 3-1 away victory. after that match, partizan and red star had the same number of points, but red star had the advantage because had more points before play-off. four days later, partizan beat vojvodina 1-0 at home. uros đurđevic has scored a goal in 34th second of the match. on 6 may, after red star's defeat partizan erupt on 1st place. partizan was on the 1st place for the first time after 637 days. on 13 may, partizan made very important victory (2-1 at home) against vozdovac. four days later, partizan made a key victory for title. leonardo has scored in 47th minute and uros đurđevic in 60th and 73rd minute for 3-1 away victory over radnicki nis. on 21 may, partizan beat mladost lucani 5-0 at home in front of 26,785 fans and won 27th title.  on 27 may, in the serbian cup final, in his last match for partizan, nikola milenkovic scored a header against partizans' biggest rival, red star which won the game 1-0 and clinched partizans' double of the season, winning both the league and cup competitions. after a great season, miroslav vulicevic, bojan ostojic, everton luiz, leonardo and uros đurđevic was named in the serbian superliga team of the season due to his performances throughout the season. uros đurđevic was named for the serbian superliga player of the season and coach marko nikolic was named for the serbian superliga coach of the season.  transfers  in  out  players  squad  friendlies  competitions  overview  serbian superliga  regular season  league table  results by matchday  results  championship round  table  results by matchday  results  serbian cup  uefa europa league  qualifying rounds  squad statistics  appearances and goals  |- |colspan="14"|players away from partizan on loan: |- |colspan="14"|players who left partizan during the season:  |}  goal scorers  disciplinary record  references  external links   partizanopedia 2016-17  fk partizan seasons partizan partizan serbian football championship-winning seasons
konigswarter () is a jewish austrian-hungarian noble family originating from konigswart, bohemia. in the middle of the eighteenth century, their ancestor jonas hirsch konigswarter emigrated to furth, bavaria, where he established a business that made him wealthy. at his death (1805) he left five sons, who founded banking houses successively in frankfurt, vienna, amsterdam, and hamburg.  family tree    jonas hirsch konigswarter ( 1740-1805)  hermann hirsch konigswarter (1767-1847)  markus konigswarter (1770-1850)  jonas von konigswarter (1807-1871)  fanny von konigswarter (1830-1852)   (1837-1893), married to charlotte edle von wertheimstein (1841-1929)  heinrich konigswarter (1861-1931)  hermann konigswarter (1864-1915)  wilhelm konigswarter (1866-1927)  zacharias markus konigswarter (1812-1872)   (1818-1877)   (1778-1854), married to lisette lamelsfeld von lamel ( 1778-1814), sister of simon von lamel (1766-1845)  fanny konigswarter (1804-1861), married to  (1807-1866)   (1809-1887)  moritz konigswarter (1780-1829)  josefine konigswarter (1811-1861), married to her cousin jonas von konigswarter  julius jonas konigswarter (1783-1845)   (1814-1878)  jules kœnigswarter (1844-1919)  louis de kœnigswarter (1870-1931)  jules de kœnigswarter (1904-1995), married to pannonica rothschild (1913-1988)  helene josephine kœnigswarter (1873-1922), married to gaston calmann-levy (1864-1948)   (1878-1963), married to fernand halphen (1872-1917)  wilhelm konigswarter (1816-1857)   (1854-1918)   (1890-1966)   (1817-1878)  maurice de kœnigswarter (1858-1938)  henri kœnigswarter (1819-1876)  jules kœnigswarter (1848-1882)  references      bohemian jews jewish-german families jewish-hungarian families noble families
duong thuy vi (born may 11, 1993) is a wushu taolu athlete from vietnam. she is one of the most renowned southeast asian athletes of all time, having won numerous medals at the world wushu championships, asian games, southeast asian games, and the asian wushu championships.  early life  thuy vi was born to a father who practiced shaolinquan and a mother who was a wing chun fighter, and started training in the martial arts under her parents at the age of three. when he was seven, one of her cousins was taken by her father to practice wushu to lose weight and thus thuy vi eventually discovered modern wushu taolu.  career  junior  thuy vi made her international debut at the 2005 asian junior wushu championships where she won a silver medal in jianshu and a bronze medal in qiangshu. she then was a silver medalist in jianshu at the 1st world junior wushu championships in 2006. the following year, she won silver medals in changquan qiangshu at the 2007 asian junior wushu championships. two years later, thuy vi was the asian junior champion in changquan and a bronze medalist in jianshu after competing in the 2009 asian junior wushu championships. her last junior competition was at the 2011 asian junior wushu championships where she was the asian junior champion in jianshu and qiangshu and also won a bronze medal in changquan.  senior  thuy vi first competed in the 2011 southeast asian games where she won the bronze medal in women's jianshu and qiangshu combined. she then competed in the 2011 world wushu championships where she won a silver medal in duilian and a bronze medal in jianshu. in 2012, she competed in the asian wushu championships in hanoi and won a silver medal in jianshu and a bronze medal in duilian with hoang thi phuong giang. the following year, the won a gold medal in jianshu and a silver medal in qiangshu at the 2013 southeast asian games. shortly after, thuy vi became the world champion in qiangshu and a silver medalist in jianshu at the 2013 world wushu championships. these repeated victories prepared her for the 2014 asian games where she was the gold medalist in women's jianshu and qiangshu, thus achieving vietnam's first gold medal in wushu at the asian games and only gold at the 2014 games. this victory led thuy vi to be the first vietnamese athlete to be featured in a cnn publication in the united states.    at the 2015 southeast asian games, thuy vi won medals of all colors with a gold victory in jianshu. shortly after this, she was a
double silver medalist in her weapons events and a bronze medalist in changquan at the 2015 world wushu championships. this qualified her for the 2016 taolu world cup where she won the silver medal in jianshu. she then competed in the 2016 asian wushu championships and was a bronze medalist in qiangshu. a year later, she was a double gold medalist in jianshu and qiangshu at the 2017 southeast asian games, and was the world champion in qiangshu once again at the 2017 world wushu championships. thuy vi then competed in the 2018 asian games and won the bronze medal in women's jianshu and qiangshu. her most recent competition was at the 2019 world wushu championships where she won two silver medals in jianshu and qiangshu. she has expressed interest in competing in the 2021 southeast asian games.  see also   list of asian games medalists in wushu  references  1993 births living people vietnamese wushu practitioners asian games gold medalists for vietnam asian games bronze medalists for vietnam asian games medalists in wushu wushu practitioners at the 2010 asian games wushu practitioners at the 2014 asian games wushu practitioners at the 2018 asian games medalists at the 2014 asian games medalists at the 2018 asian games southeast asian games gold medalists for vietnam southeast asian games silver medalists for vietnam southeast asian games bronze medalists for vietnam southeast asian games medalists in wushu competitors at the 2011 southeast asian games competitors at the 2013 southeast asian games competitors at the 2015 southeast asian games competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games competitors at the 2013 world games world games medalists in wushu
valentina yevpak (born 29 may 1960) is a soviet former cyclist. she competed in the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1960 births living people soviet female cyclists olympic cyclists of the soviet union cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
ana-sira is a village in southwestern norway, sitting mostly in sokndal municipality in rogaland county, but a small portion lies in flekkefjord municipality in agder county.  the village is located at the mouth of the river sira where it flows south into ana fjord (hence the name of the village).  the fjord and river form the county border with rogaland and agder counties.  the ana-sira bridge crosses the river connecting the two parts of the village.  the village is the southernmost village in rogaland county.  about 200 people live in ana-sira, about two-thirds of the residents living on the north side of the river in sokndal, and the rest living on the south side of the river.  ana-sira church is located in the sokndal side of the village.  there is a shrimp factory in the village as well as the ana-sira power station.  media gallery  references  villages in rogaland sokndal flekkefjord villages in agder
krishnarao ganesh phulambrikar (1898-1974), popularly known as master krishnarao, was an indian vocalist, classical musician and composer of hindustani music. he was credited with the creation of three hindustani ragas and several bandishes. phulambrikar, a recipient of the sangeet natak akademi fellowship, was also the music composer of several movies, including dharmatma, a 1935 hindi film starring bal gandharva, a renowned marathi singer and padosi, a 1941 directorial venture of v. shantaram. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1971, for his contributions to music.  biography  krishnarao phulambrikar was born in 1898 at devachi alandi, a town in the periphery of pune, in the western indian state of maharashtra to the deshastha brahmin couple ganesh phulambrikar and mathura bai. he also ventured into marathi theatre as a child artist by performing as an actor-singer in sant sakhu, a musical drama produced by natyakalapravartak mandali. he also acted in other musical dramas produced by this drama company. and at this drama company, he first got a chance to learn indian classical music from sawai gandharva who used to act in the musical dramas of this company. later, he approached the renowned singer, bhaskarbuwa bakhale in 1911 who trained the young boy in gwalior, agra and jaipur gharanas of hindustani music and their guru-shishya relationship lasted till bakhale's death in 1922. the tutelage under bakhale also gave him opportunity to meet and get associated with bal gandharva, who would later go on to become a noted marathi singer. his first solo concert was when he was 14 years of age (he was awarded the title of sangeet kalanidhi in 1933 by shankaracharya), which preceded several concerts in india and abroad, including a trip to china as a government of india delegate in 1953.  phulambrikar served as the director of pune bharat gayan samaj, a music academy founded by his mentor bhaskarbuwa bakhale in pune. besides his career as a classical vocalist and as a film music composer, he scored music for several plays which included menaka, savitri, "asha nirasha", amritasidhhi, kanhopatra, nand kumar and vidhi likhit for gandharva sangeet natak mandali, a drama company founded by bal gandharva, during the period 1915-1933 and acted
in a few of them. later, he also composed music for a few plays such as kulavadhu, ek hota mhatara, kone eke kali and bhagyoday for jyotsna bhole. on the academic front, he compiled the compositions taught to him by bakhale as well as his own compositions and published them as a 7-volume book, raag samgraha. besides his notations are available in print under the titles, rashtra sangeet, shishu sangeet, amar sangeet, mohan maal, natya geet notations and chitra geet notations. he also tutored several musicians, film and drama artists. ram marathe, yogini joglekar, saraswati rane, haribhau deshpande, anjanibai kalgutkar, madhusudan kanetkar, jaymala shiledar, dr.pabalkar, bapurao ashtekar, dattopant bhope, pitre buwa, suhas datar, sudhakar joshi, ravindra joshi, mohan karve, rangnath karkare, shivram gadgil and his daughter, veena chitko are some of his notable disciples.  hindustani music career  phulambrikar was known to have had expertise in khayal and thumri traditions of classical music rendition and was aligned to the agra gharana. he created several ragas by merging the nuances of different ragas; thus he created tilak kedar based on tilak kamod and kedar ragas, mangal todi on todi and madhyam, shiva kalyan on kalyan and shivaranjani, bilvabibhas on bilaval and bibhas and jaunkali based on jaunpuri and ramkali ragas. he was reported to have initiated the practice of creating new natyapadas and composed many bandishes such as ratiya mein jagi (rag nayaki kanada), lalan tumabina kaun (rag kaunsi kanada), rang rang mukhape (rag adana), chahu barasan lagi (rag bhopali), kahu ki reet (rag malkaush), hori khela! bahar (rag patdeep), e ma badal aye (rag malhar), mai ri aaj (rag hindol bahar), mai pritam karo dulhan pe (rag shiv kalyan). tori binati, dekho mori churiya, shamamohan pyare, khelat hai giridhari, ho sham bajayetore
gharame muraliya, all in rag bhairavi, were some of his notable thumris in bhairavi, earning him the sobriquet, bhairavi ke badshah and the style he developed came to be known as khayali thumri or madhyamgram thumri. he tuned the indian national song, vande mataram,  in raag jhinjhoti and tried unsuccessfully to promote the song as the national anthem. on special request made by dr.babasaheb ambedkar, he composed music for buddha vandana.  film career  soon after he received the sangeet kalanidhi title from dr. kurtkoti, the shankaracharya of karvir peeth, he was contracted by prabhat film company owned by v. shantaram and other partners, to compose music for its forthcoming film, dharmatma, where he was re-united with his old associate, bal gandharva, who played the role of sant eknath, the protagonist of the movie. the film which was released in 1935 had sixteen songs, many of them sung by bal gandharva. a year later, his next film was released under the name, amar jyoti, again a prabhat film company production. the film was reported to have been critically acclaimed and was the first indian film to be screened at the venice film festival. wahan, another prabhat production released in 1937, this time with a new director, k. narayan kale, was his next film, followed by the musical gopal krishna in 1938 directed by damle and s fattelal. he composed music for 15 films which included padosi, another shantaram film and the film featured a ten-minute song, lakh lakh chanderi, reportedly with complex choreography. he played the lead role of sant savata mali in the movie bhakticha mala released by rajkamal kalamandir. he composed the music for this movie and also sang his own songs in this movie. many aspiring composers of that period - vasant desai, c.ramchandra, sudhir phadke, purushottam laxman deshpande, snehal bhatkar and gajananrao watve got inspired by his school of musical thought.  honors and later years  phulambrikar received the vishnudas bhave gold medal of the government of maharashtra in 1969 and the government of india awarded him the civilian honor of the padma bhushan in 1971. he was the first recipient of the balgandharv gold medal. the sangeet natak akademi honored
him with the sangeet natak akademi ratna puraskar in 1972. in 1968, he suffered a facial paralysis which forced him to abandon his career as a singer. on his 60th career anniversary, a 9-day long music conference was staged in pune in which many notable musicians took part. he did not survive much longer and the death came on 20 october 1974, when he was 76 years of age. the story of his life has been documented in his biography, bola amrit bola which was published posthumously in 1985. every two years an award in his memory is presented to a music critic or author of music book by maharashtra sahitya parishad, pune. since his family is originated from phulambri in marathwada, a drama theatre has been named "master krishnarao phulambrikar natyagruha" in jalna, marathwada in his honour. every year pune bharat gayan samaj celebrates his birth anniversary and death anniversary. his daughter, veena chitko, who died in september 2015, was a notable light classical musician.  filmography  see also    bal gandharva  bhaskarbuwa bakhale  list of marathi people  references  external links         recipients of the padma bhushan in arts recipients of the sangeet natak akademi fellowship 1898 births 1974 deaths people from pune district marathi people hindi film score composers 20th-century indian male classical singers indian classical composers marathi-language singers hindustani singers hindustani composers singers from maharashtra indian male film score composers
prof. rajendra singh (rajju bhaiya) university, formerly  allahabad state university, is a state university established on 17 june 2016 by the government of uttar pradesh in allahabad (prayagraj), uttar pradesh, india.  allahabad state university was established by then chief minister of uttar pradesh akhilesh yadav on 17 june 2016 with the efforts of member of parliament kunwar rewati raman singh, after the change of power in the state, the newly appointed chief minister yogi adityanath renamed allahabad state university to sarsanghchalak of rss rajendra singh (rajju bhaiya) university. professor rajendra prasad yadav was its first vice chancellor.  it is a  residential-cum-affiliating university. university began its first season in 2016-17 at 562 colleges of allahabad, kaushambi, fatehpur and pratapgarh. these 562 colleges of allahabad, kaushambi, fatehpur and pratapgarh were formerly affiliated to chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university, kanpur and dr. ram manohar lohia avadh university, faizabad.  see also   university of allahabad  sam higginbottom university of agriculture, technology and sciences  motilal nehru medical college  motilal nehru national institute of technology  indian institute of information technology, allahabad  uttar pradesh rajarshi tandon open university  chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university, kanpur  dr. ram manohar lohia avadh university, faizabad siddharth university, kapilvastu, siddharthnagar  deen dayal upadhyay gorakhpur university  references  external links  official website  allahabad universities in uttar pradesh educational institutions established in 2016 2016 establishments in uttar pradesh
om prakash dhurve (born 13 may 1964) in rusa village, dindori district is an indian politician from madhya pradesh. he is a member of bharatiya janata party and a member of madhya pradesh legislative assembly at shahpura constituency from 2013 to december 2018. he lost the 2018 madhya pradesh assembly election from shahpura against the candidate of congress.  political life he was served as food, civil supplies and consumer protection, social welfare, sc and st welfare, women and child development and later tribal welfare, labour, sports and youth welfare minister of the state under uma bharti, babulal gaur and shivraj singh chouhan. he was inducted to cabinet ministry of shivraj singh chouhan as minister of food, civil supplies and consumer protection, labour in june 2016.  references  bharatiya janata party politicians from madhya pradesh state cabinet ministers of madhya pradesh living people 1964 births people from dindori madhya pradesh mlas 2013-2018 madhya pradesh mlas 1990-1992 madhya pradesh mlas 1998-2003 madhya pradesh mlas 2003-2008
"cruel" is a song by british production duo snakehips featuring english singer and songwriter zayn. it was released as a single on 15 july 2016 by sony music uk and columbia records. the song was written and composed by oliver lee and james carter of snakehips, along with cass lowe, erik hassle and zayn. "cruel" received critical acclaim, with nme ranking the song at number 50 on their "50 best tracks of 2016" list, and muumuse ranking it at number 88 on their "top 100 singles of 2016" list.  music video  an accompanying music video for "cruel" premiered on youtube on 9 august 2016 and stars zayn as he sings the song inside a building in an asian town. the video was directed by alex southam.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  2016 singles 2016 songs snakehips (duo) songs songs written by cass lowe songs written by zayn malik songs written by erik hassle sony music uk singles columbia records singles torch songs
kim jin-sol (born november 3, 1993) is a south korean beauty pageant titleholder who was crowned miss korea 2016.  personal life kim jin-sol was born in seoul, south korea and majored in vocals at sookmyung women's university.  miss korea 2016 kim jin-sol was crowned miss korea 2016 during the miss korea 2016 competition held on july 8, 2016.  references  external links    2016 miss korea profile  1993 births living people miss korea winners people from seoul sookmyung women's university alumni
charlie semine (born october 28) is an american actor, known for braindead, mercy and the following.  life and career born in marblehead, massachusetts to christian and deborah, semine is a graduate of marblehead high school, tufts university and yale school of drama. he lives in new york city with his wife roxanna hope raja.  in 2017 he performed in the broadway premiere of junk by ayad akhtar at lincoln center theater.  filmography  references  external links    living people american male film actors american male television actors people from marblehead, massachusetts american male stage actors 21st-century american male actors yale school of drama alumni tufts university alumni marblehead high school alumni 1979 births
nauman niaz (born 19 november 1969) is the director sports & syndication of the ptvc, cricket correspondent, writer, anchorperson and avid memorabilia collector. he is a recipient of the tamgha-e-imtiaz, pakistan's civil award for his contributions to sports journalism and broadcasting.  he has written articles for various newspapers and has anchored numerous live shows about cricket. he authored pakistan cricket 'the story of betrayal' (2010) and is the official historian of pakistan cricket. his book 'the fluctuating fortunes' commissioned by the pakistan cricket board and launched in 2005.  early life and education niaz was born in lahore, west pakistan. he was the third child of mrs nusrat hamid and lieutenant general hamid niaz (retd.) of pakistan army. he started his schooling in  st mary's academy, rawalpindi in 1975 before enrolling in aitchison college, lahore. after completing his bachelors in medicine and bachelors in surgery (mbbs) from army medical college, he worked at the holy family hospital in rawalpindi. soon afterwards, he completed his post graduation in the field of endocrinology. he is a member of the royal college of physicians (uk)  and is also a fellow of the royal college of physicians (edinburgh). he holds phd from university of western australia and a post doctorate from the university of oxford.  introduction to cricket  while he was a post graduate trainee at the holy family hospital in 1999 he joined the pakistan cricket board as media coordinator and was promoted to manager coordinator of the asian cricket council. soon afterwards, niaz was appointed as the pakistan cricket board's media manager.  controversy  on 28 october 2021, nauman niaz (along with shoaib akhtar) was taken off air by the ptv following spat on the popular show 'game on hai' with former fast bowler. in response to questions about it in an interview nauman niaz expressed regret and said, "i had no right. to err is human and for that, i apologize. not only once, but a million times. shoaib has been a rock star. whatever happened on camera was unbecoming." whereas pakistan television corporation (ptvc) sent rs100 million recovery notice to shoaib akhtar in damages and demanded to reimburse three months' salary for violating clauses of their contract in response to recent verbal spat on live tv show with nauman niaz.  references  1969 births living people cricket historians and writers people from lahore pakistani sports journalists pakistani cricket commentators
pakistani endocrinologists aitchison college alumni university of western australia alumni
, also known as htv-8 is the 8th flight of the h-ii transfer vehicle, a robotic cargo spacecraft to resupply the international space station. it was launched on 24 september 2019, 16:05:05 utc.  spacecraft  major changes from previous kounotori are:  replacement of earth sensor with star tracker for spacecraft attitude control  new cargo racks developed for htv-x which allows 30% more cargo transfer bags (ctb) to be carried in the pressurized logistics carrier (plc). (316 ctbs for kounotori 8, compared to 248 ctbs of kounotori 6)  cargo  kounotori 8 carries about 5300 kg of cargo, consisting of 3400 kg in the pressurized compartment and 1900 kg in the unpressurized compartment.  cargo in the pressurized logistics carrier (plc) include:  jaxa experiment cell biology experiment facility-left (cbef-l)  jaxa experiment sony optical link for iss (soliss), a satellite optical communication demonstration co-developed with   jaxa experiment hourglass, which will investigate the behavior of soil and rock particles under low gravity conditions  gas bottle for jaxa experiment  experiment materials for electrostatic levitation furnace (elf)  cubesats to be deployed from iss: narsscube-1, aqt-d, rwasat-1  nasa system supply cargo: new water tank for water storage system (wss)  nasa system supply cargo: tank for nitrogen oxygen recharge system (nors)  in the unpressurized logistics carrier (ulc), kounotori 8 carries six lithium-ion batteries orbital replacement units (orus) for replacing the iss's existing nickel-hydrogen batteries. the transportation of replacement batteries is a continuation from the previous kounotori 6 and 7, and will continue through to kounotori 9.  operation  launch  the h-iib launch vehicle carrying kounotori 8 was initially scheduled to be launched at 21:33:29 utc, 10 september 2019. during launch preparation, a fire broke out at the launch pad at around 18:05 utc (t minus 3.5 hours), and the launch was called off. the cause of fire was attributed to the static electricity on the heat resistant material under the mixture of liquid oxygen and gas oxygen for the engine pre-cooling.  after the modification to the mobile launch platform to suppress static electricity, a new launch
was scheduled at 23 september 2019, 16:30 utc, but the collision avoidance check revealed that the 2nd stage of the launch vehicle might approach near the soyuz ms-15 which was scheduled to be launched on 25 september 2019. a revised launch schedule was set for 16:05 utc, 24 september 2019. on 24 september 2019, 16:05:05 utc, the kounotori 8 aboard h-iib was launched successfully.  operation while berthed to the iss  kounotori 8 was captured by the space station remote manipulator system (ssrms) at 23:13 utc, on 27 september 2019, and berthed at harmony's nadir common berthing mechanism (cbm) by 17:55 utc, on 28 september 2019.  the external palette (ep8), which carries the lithium-ion battery orbital replacement units (oru), was extracted from the kounotori 8's unpressurized logistics carrier (ulc) by the ssrms (canadarm2) on 29 september 2019.  the external palette of kounotori 7 (ep7) was placed in the kounotori 8's ulc. ep7 was left on the iss after the departure of kounotori 7 due to the schedule change of extravehicular activity after the launch failure of soyuz ms-10.  departure and reentry to the earth atmosphere  on 1 november 2019, kounotori 8 was detached from harmony's cbm by the ssrms (canadarm2), and it was released into orbit at 17:20 utc.  it was disposed by the destructive reentry to the earth atmosphere at around 02:09 utc, on 3 november 2019.  references  external links   jaxa htv page  h-ii transfer vehicles 2019 in japan spacecraft launched in 2019 spacecraft which reentered in 2019
bobby livingston (born february 10, 1965) is an american former cyclist. he competed in the 1 km time trial event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people american male cyclists olympic cyclists of the united states cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from cleveland
daye jack is a nigerian-american hip hop artist from atlanta, georgia. he is best known for his single "hands up" featuring killer mike which peaked at #14 on the billboard twitter emerging artists chart.  early life and education  jack was born in port harcourt, the capital and largest city of rivers state, nigeria 1 february 1996. he grew up in atlanta. his father was originally from nigeria but grew up in california. his father later returned to nigeria to marry jack's mother and then moved back to atlanta. jack got involved in programming while in high school and went on to attend new york university. it was during his time at nyu that he began his music career.  career  jack released his first mixtape, hello world, at the age of 18 while attending nyu. he released it on soundcloud and was soon contacted by numerous blogs who asked him to submit new music. jack was contacted by producer mike elizondo and he flew to los angeles to perform some demos, eventually leading to a contract with warner bros. records. in 2015 he released the ep soul glitch under the warner bros. label.  after the release of soul glitch, jack collaborated with killer mike in 2015 for the release of the single hands up. the video was released exclusively on billboard which called it "emotionally charged" with a "powerful message of solidarity." the video was released on the first day of black history month in 2016 and the song peaked at #14 on the billboard twitter emerging artists chart.  in addition to his collaboration with killer mike, jack has worked with numerous other artists. in 2015 he was featured on the song expensive from tori kelly's album unbreakable smile. jack also sang background vocals for ariana grande's 2016 album dangerous woman. in early 2016, jack toured nationally with pell on the only in your dreams tour, and also toured with lukas graham.  jack released his first full-length project no data in march 2017.  musical style  jack attributes his musical style to his family background and has been described as a "hip-hop singer." he describes himself as making experimental hip-hop with rapping, singing, and speaking all being part of it. jack cites some of his influencers as being andre 3000 and 50 cent.  discography  albums  ep's  mixtapes  as a lead artist  references  external links  daye jack official  living people 1996 births african-american male rappers rappers from atlanta american people of nigerian descent warner records artists rappers from port harcourt 21st-century american rappers 21st
-century american male musicians 21st-century african-american musicians
frauke kreuter is a german sociologist and statistician. she is a professor of the joint program in survey methodology (jpsm) of the university of maryland, college park and a professor in statistics and data science at the ludwig maximilian university of munich, germany. her research in survey methodology includes work on sampling error and observational error.  biography kreuter earned a diploma in sociology from the university of mannheim in 1996. she received her doctorate (dr. rer. soc.) in 2001 from the university of konstanz under the supervision of . after postdoctoral research and an adjunct position at the university of california, los angeles, she moved to maryland in 2004 and joined jpsm as an assistant professor. from 2010 to 2014 she was university professor of statistics at the ludwig maximilian university of munich, while maintaining her position at maryland as an associate professor. she also became head of the statistical methods research department at the institute for employment research (iab) in nuremberg, germany in 2010. in 2014 she was promoted to full professor at maryland and moved her german position to the university of mannheim. from 2016 to 2020, she was director of jpsm in maryland.  publications she is the author or co-author of several books, including data analysis using stata (3rd ed., stata press, 2012, with u. kohler) and practical tools for designing and weighting survey samples (springer, 2013, with richard valliant and jill dever).  awards and honors kreuter was the 2013 winner of the gertrude cox award, given jointly by the washington statistical society and rti international. in 2014 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for outstanding contributions to research in the field of survey methodology; for excellence in mentoring of junior researchers in social statistics and survey methodology; and for extensive international research collaborations." she was awarded the warren mitofsky innovators award of the american association for public opinion research in 2020.  references  external links home page  year of birth missing (living people) living people german statisticians women statisticians german sociologists german women sociologists university of mannheim alumni university of konstanz alumni university of maryland, college park faculty ludwig maximilian university of munich faculty fellows of the american statistical association
the haug range () is a mountain range in far northwestern greenland. administratively this range is part of avannaata municipality. the range is located in hall land, one of the coldest places in greenland.  this mountain chain was named after ivar haug, who compiled the first gazetteer of greenland. the area of the range is characterized by tundra climate.  geography the haug range is an up to almost 1,100 m high little glaciated mountain range in hall land. it runs roughly from east to west across the peninsula, from the shores of the nares strait to the shores of the newman bay, separating the unglaciated polaris foreland in the north from the southern part of hall land.  high kayser mountain, the highest elevation of the range, is located at its northeastern end. the area of the haug range is uninhabited.  pentamerus fossils dating back to the lower silurian have been found in this mountain range. they belong to the hauge bjerge formation.  see also list of mountain ranges of greenland peary land group  bibliography greenland geology and selected mineral occurrences - geus  references  external links geological map of greenland - 1 : 500 000 - polygon legend - geus  mountain ranges of greenland
the 2018 nebraska gubernatorial election took place on november 6, 2018, to elect the governor of nebraska, concurrently with the election of nebraska's class i u.s. senate seat, as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various nebraska and local elections.  incumbent republican governor pete ricketts won re-election to a second term.  republican primary  candidates  declared  krystal gabel, writer, candidate for metropolitan utilities district in 2016 and candidate for omaha city council in 2017  pete ricketts, incumbent governor running mate: mike foley, incumbent lieutenant governor  declined  mike flood, former speaker of the nebraska legislature  bob krist, state senator (running as a democrat)  endorsements  results  democratic primary  candidates  declared  tyler davis, university of nebraska, omaha instructor  bob krist, state senator  running mate: lynne walz, state senator  vanessa gayle ward, activist  declined  chuck hassebrook, former regent of the university of nebraska and nominee for governor in 2014 (running for the legislature)  steve lathrop, former state senator (running for the legislature)  endorsements  results  independents state senator bob krist announced in september 2017 he left the republican party in order to mount a third party challenge against governor ricketts. krist planned to create a new party in order to run, which will require submitting 5,000 signatures to qualify the party for the ballot. however, in february 2018 he abandoned the independent candidacy and became a democrat.  candidates  withdrawn  bob krist, state senator (running as a democrat)  general election  predictions  debates  results  see also nebraska elections, 2018  references  external links  candidates at vote smart   candidates at ballotpedia  official campaign websites  bob krist (d) for governor  pete ricketts (r) for governor  gubernatorial 2018 2018 united states gubernatorial elections ricketts family
the pizza box or pizza package is a folding packaging box made of cardboard in which hot pizzas are stored for take-out. the "pizza box" also makes home delivery and takeaway substantially easier. the pizza box has to be highly resistant, cheap, stackable, thermally insulated to regulate humidity and suitable for food transportation. in addition, it provides space for advertising. the pizza packages differ from those of frozen pizzas, which contain the frozen product in heat-sealed plastic foils as is the case with much frozen food.  history   containers to deliver freshly baked pizzas have existed at least since the 19th century, when neapolitan pizza bakers put their products in multi-layered metallic containers known as stufe (singular stufa, "oven") and then sent them to the street sellers. the aerated container was round and made of tin or copper. disposable packaging started to be developed in the united states, after the second world war. at that time pizza was becoming increasingly popular and the first pizza delivery services were created. in the beginning they attempted to deliver pizzas in simple cardboard boxes, similar to those used in cake shops, but these often became wet, bent or even broke in two. other pizza chefs tried to put pizzas on plates and transport them inside paper bags. this partly solved the problem. however, it was almost impossible to transport more than a single pizza inside one bag. in this way, the pizzas on the top would have ruined the surface of the others.  the first patent for a pizza box made of corrugated cardboard was applied in 1963 and it already displayed the characteristics of today's pizza packaging: plane blanks, foldability without need of adhesive, stackability and ventilation slots. the combination of such slots along with water vapour absorbing materials (absorption agent) prevented the humidity build-ups that characterized traditional transport packaging. it is assumed by brand historians that the pizza box was invented by domino's pizza, even if they did not file a patent application. until 1988, this chain employed a type of packaging whose front side was not directly connected to the lateral sides, but rather the flaps fixed to the lateral sides were folded inward under the lid. this design is also known as "chicago folding". domino's was the first pizza producer which employed pizza boxes on a large scale and in this way expanded its delivery range beyond the area immediately close to the pizzeria. towards the end of the 1960s, the delivery service was further developed thanks
to the introduction of heat-insulating bags.  in october 2019, restaurant chain pizza hut announced that it was trying out a new high-tech round design of pizza box.  requirements  stability and stackability   most packaging for the transport of pizzas is made of cardboard, as this is both cheap, easy to work with and lightweight while maintaining adequate structural integrity to hold and deliver pizzas. both solid fibre board and single wall corrugated board are used. the corrugated cardboard in use is often of the e flute size (micro or fine waves with a flute pitch of 1.0 to 1.8 mm), but thicker b flute cardboard with a flute pitch of 2.2 to 3.0 mm are also used. not only the geometric construction of the cardboard determines the stability of the box, but also especially the type of paper and its grammage. for the liner mostly containerboard is used on the inside of the box. this does not only make the box stable, it becomes more resistant against humidity and oil as well. to reduce the space needed to store the packaging to a minimum, the pizza boxes are folded just before use out of flat blanks. the required storage space depends very much on the different thickness of the material.  pizza boxes made from solid fibre board take up about half the space the boxes with e flute size cardboard need, and a quarter of the space of those made of b flute size cardboard. apart from the material itself, the stability of the box is determined by the form it is folded into. the type of pizza box with flaps firmly attached to the side walls that are folded into the front wall has established itself as the standard. in this case, the walls of the box are connected at the edges and this increases its stability. the traditional way of folding the box is an example of this folding type. its disadvantage is that the walls of the box rise vertically which makes cutting the pizza in the box with a pizza cutter more difficult.  heat insulation and humidity regulation   the pizza box is supposed to allow the transport of a baked pizza with the minimum loss in quality possible. this means the box has two tasks to fulfill that are not easy to combine: on one hand, the box should insulate as well as possible against the cold air outside, the occasional wind and heat radiation, in order to keep the pizza warm. to reduce heat flow the box has to close as firmly as possible to keep the warm air inside. consumers consider a temperature between 70 and 85°c to be ideal for
pizza consumption. on the other hand, the box should keep the pizza from getting soggy, so that the crust and the covering are crisp on arrival. to ensure this, the condensation caused by the pizza must be let out (airing holes and some diffusion through the cardboard) or absorbed by the box. pizza boxes made of single wall corrugated board that are not equipped with additional insulation cool the transported pizza down too far after just ten minutes.  the oil in the pizza dough can extract some of the essence in the cellulose when in contact with untreated corrugated cardboard. to prevent a change in the taste of the pizza through the material of the pizza box, and simultaneously to stop the cardboard from getting soggy, the pizza boxes have a thin coating of aluminum foil on the inside. another possibility is to lay the pizza on either aluminum foil, a mixture of corrugated cardboard and blotting paper, or waxed paper. however, this changes the thermodynamic properties of the pizza box considerably. the pizza crust cannot give up any humidity downwards, meaning the layer beneath does not only impedes fat from trickling down but also steam.  for pizza delivery  pizza saver   in the us, many pizza boxes include a spacer made of heat-resistant plastic (usually polypropylene) placed in the middle of the pizza called the pizza saver (also known as "package saver", "box tent", "pizza table", or "pizza lid support"). this stops the box lid from touching the pizza and prevents cheese and toppings from sticking to the lid when it is being delivered. the pizza saver's origin goes back to a 1985 patent by carmela vitale. the pizza saver is often criticized for being a waste of resources as it is only used once and then thrown away.  bags and boxes for transport   there are special padded transport bags and boxes for delivery. some of these bags can be heated in order to keep the temperature at the desired level. mostly, they can either be plugged to a socket or powered by the 12 volt car battery. this means that the insulation of pizza boxes themselves is less important. carry bags insulate best when their lid is connected to the rest of the bag on one side and the remaining three sides can be attached to lid by a zip. a bag can contain about three to five pizza boxes.  pizza box with thermometer  the pizza boxes by pizza hut in morocco and other countries have a thermometer indicator on the outside which color codes the temperature
of the pizza inside. when the pizza is hot, the indicator shows the words "hot" in red letters on a white background. however, if the temperature of the pizza goes below a certain value, the "hot dot" turns black and the words are no longer legible.  reuse and recycling    one variation to the traditional cardboard pizza box is the reusable box. it is made out of recyclable plastic, is round or square has a variety of cover options with vents. they can be hand-washed, by dishwasher or commercial cleaning to be used over and over again. an advantage to this new variation is that there is no taste absorption from corrugated cardboard.  another variation is biodegradable or compostable boxes mostly made out of sugarcane or bamboo or plant based materials. there are several variations in the marketplace as with their cardboard counterpart.  most variations noted of pizza boxes support the same carry methods, stackable and nestable both unused and with enclosed pizza. there are no known differences when using a transport bag or warming bin. where cardboard is usually delivered flat requiring 2 storage areas for unassembled and assembled boxes, most of the new variations only require a single area of storage.  possible contaminations  dipn is a solvent in carbonless copy paper used in diverse commercial paper. foods can absorb dipn.  references  food packaging paper products pizza
gobindpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gobindpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gobindpur has total number of 126 houses and population of 676 of which include 333 males and 343 females. literacy rate of gobindpur is 77.45%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 64 which is   9.47% of total population of gobindpur, and child sex ratio is approximately  1207, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
rhododendron rarum is a rhododendron species native to the central and bismarck ranges of papua new guinea. it is a compact prostrate shrub with tubular, red flowers and narrowly elliptic leaves.  this species does not tolerate frosts (rhs hardiness rating h2), so must be grown under cover in temperate climates. its small size and prostrate habit make it an ideal subject for a hanging basket or similar.  references   bot. jahrb. syst. 55: 150 1918.  vireya.net  rarum
edouard sarasin (20 may 1843 - 22 july 1917) was an independent scientist in geneva. born in a wealthy family, he established a private laboratory where he collaborated with other researchers. his studies included those on the properties of waves, resonance, radiowaves, radiation and geophysics.  sarasin came from a family of french descent who had settled in geneva in the early sixteenth century. sarasin studied physics at paris, heidelberg and berlin and in 1867 he established a private laboratory on rue de l'hotel-de-ville, and worked with other collaborators including auguste de la rive (1801-1873) and his son lucien de la rive. they made studies on ionization and discharge in vacuum tubes. sarasin was later also mayor of the town of le grand-saconnex (1871-1916), member of the parliament of geneva (grand conseil genevois), president of the societe helvetique and editor of the archives des sciences physiques et naturelles. sarasin's experimental work developed on the ideas of maxwell and hertz on resonance and radiowave reception. he also conducted work on radiowaves and radio-activity, some of the work being done along with thomas tommasina. sarasin was also interested in geophysics and conducted studies at lake leman on light penetration through water. he also studied circular polarization in quartz with jacques-louis soret from 1875. after soret's death, sarasin became director of the archive of geneva. he received an honorary doctorate from the universities of basel in 1885 and geneva in 1909.  references  swiss scientists 1843 births 1917 deaths
izn-e-rukhsat () is a pakistani drama serial that first aired on geo tv on 11 july 2016. it is produced by abdullah kadwani and asad qureshi. it on air every monday at 8:00pm only on geo tv.  plot  sundus comes from a broken family. she is raised by her mother after the painful separation of her parents. although her father's absence has taken a toll on her personality, she pretends to belong to a happy family in front of her love interest, haider.  this camouflage is far from reality, but she has built this cover story over the years to avoid speculations. sundus's world is shaken when haider's mother (a single parent, but a widow) shows interest in meeting her parents.  at this point, sundus's parents, tehreem and ehtishaam, get in touch after years of separation and decide to live together for a few months to maintain a facade of a happy family- deciding that they will move on with their own lives after their daughter's wedding.  this brings ehtisham some struggle to face his second wife and son, while tehreem has to fight with her own emotions to live with ehtisham again despite all the baggage she has been carrying from the times they lived together. above all, sundus will experience family life for the first time with both her parents together- which will hopefully shape her as a better individual.  cast  faisal rehman as ehtishaam sabreen hisbani as ehtishaam's second wife faiza hasan as tehreem ehtishaam's first wife sonia mishal as sundus ehtishaam's daughter  shehzad sheikh as haider humaira bano as haider's mother haroon kadwani as shayaan naeem as daniyal ghulam mohiuddin (actor) faiza gillani  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  references  external links  7th sky entertainment pakistani drama television series 2016 pakistani television series debuts 2017 pakistani television series endings urdu-language television shows geo tv original programming
the rossanderska kursen ("rossander course"), also called froknarna rossanders larokurs for fruntimmer ("the miss' rossander courses"), and jenny rossanders larokurs for fruntimmer ("jenny rossander's learning course for women"), was a female seminary in stockholm, sweden in 1865-1882. it played an important part in the history of the developing women's education in contemporary sweden.  history in 1859, the  larokurs for fruntimmer ("learning course for women") was founded in stockholm after the herthadiskussionen ("hertha discussion"), about women's legal status and right to education which was caused by fredrika bremer's novel hertha. the courses proved so popular that a permanent female seminary, the royal seminary, was founded in 1861, employing many of the teachers of the learning course.  in 1865, the rossanderska kursen or rossander course was founded, inspired by its predecessor. the rossander course was founded by the sisters jenny rossander (1837-1887) and alida rossander (1843-1909), and named after them. jenny rossander was a personal friend of fredrika bremer and a contributor of the  tidskrift for hemmet, were she agitated in favor of the view that education for women would benefit society when they became mothers and raised their children: alida rossander was a pioneer as the first female bank official when she became employed at the stockholms enskilda bank the year prior.  the rossander course was organized in the same manner as its predecessor and role model, learning course for women. the school was ruled by a board composed of rossander, fredrika limnell, anna wallenberg and the noblewoman ebba lind af hageby. among its teachers were some of the teachers previously engaged at the learning course for women and royal seminary, such as professor alfred fock, louise sunden, ebba gregerson, professor lorentz dietrichson, frans hultman, doctor christian loven, emil key as well as the rossander sisters themselves.  the subjects were the same as in the learning course for women: religion, natural science, mathematics, history, grammar, literature, french, personal hygiene, and drawing, but in contrast to its predecessor, it also offered language, which had been excluded by learning course for women because it was the only serious subject normally provided by conventional girl schools. the students were divided in "students" (who studied with the purpose of
graduating) and "listeners" (who wished to hear the lectures for recreational reasons), and the method of education were lectures, home assignments and interrogations. the course was almost free, with only an almost symbolic fee, used to finance the upkeep of the localities.  the rossander course was popular and mentioned as a valuable opportunity for adult women to complete their education, particularly female teachers. many students were to become well known figures in swedish society, such as the feminist ellen key, the educators eugenie steinmetz, hilda myrberg and hildur djurberg, and the suffragist anna whitlock.  in 1879, jenny rossander married the swiss doctor baron friedrich von tschudi and left the school, but her sister alida rossander managed the school until it was closed in 1882.  references  heckscher, ebba, nagra drag ur den svenska flickskolans historia: under fleres medverkan samlade, norstedt & soner, stockholm, 1914  ulf wittrock: ellen keys vag fran kristendom till livstro, appelberg, 1953  ronny ambjornsson: ellen key: en europeisk intellektuell  1865 establishments in sweden 1882 disestablishments in europe former women's universities and colleges defunct universities and colleges in sweden educational institutions established in 1865 educational institutions disestablished in 1882 higher education in stockholm
carlsberg architectural prize () was an architecture award founded by the danish new carlsberg foundation in 1991. it was awarded three times between the years 1992-1998 "to recognize excellence in lasting architectural design".  her majesty the queen of denmark acted as the patron of the prize. at the time of its foundation in 1991 the prize, being worth $235,000 was the biggest in the field of architecture. the first recipient, tadao ando, donated the prize money for the osaka prefectural government, later used to establish the ando fund administered by the osaka foundation of international exchange.  laureates   1992 - tadao ando  1995 - juha leiviska  1998 - peter zumthor  references   architecture awards awards established in 1991 1991 establishments in denmark awards disestablished in 1998 danish awards carlsberg group
miklos somogyi (born 19 august 1962) is a hungarian former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1962 births living people hungarian male cyclists olympic cyclists of hungary cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics cyclists from budapest
"what i'm for" is a song recorded by american country music artist pat green.  it was released in april 2009 as the third single and title track from the album what i'm for.  the song reached #28 on the billboard hot country songs chart.  the song was written by marc beeson and allen shamblin.  chart performance  references  2009 singles 2009 songs pat green songs songs written by marc beeson songs written by allen shamblin song recordings produced by dann huff bna records singles
moga assembly constituency (sl. no.: 73) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in moga district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  moga district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india moga district
carl sundquist (born november 24, 1961) is an american former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links  1961 births living people american male cyclists olympic cyclists of the united states cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from indianapolis pan american games medalists in cycling pan american games gold medalists for the united states cyclists from indiana american track cyclists cyclists at the 1987 pan american games
lepturonota inconspicua is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
the 2011 italian census is the fifteenth and most recent italian national census. the reference day used for the census was october 9, 2011. the population was counted at 59,433,744.  a census of the whole population has taken place in italy every 10 years since 1861.  references  censuses in italy census italy
taryn suttie (born december 7, 1990 in saskatoon, saskatchewan) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the shot put. she competed in the shot put event at the 2015 pan american games in toronto, where she finished 10th.  in july 2016, she was officially named to canada's olympic team.  references  1990 births living people athletes (track and field) at the 2015 pan american games athletes from saskatoon canadian female shot putters athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for canada pan american games track and field athletes for canada
la vie en lilali is the debut studio album by the belgian eurodance singer kim kay, released on 20 november 1998. the album was produced by phil sterman and lov cook. it features the artist's singles: "oui oh oui", "poupee de cire, poupee de son", "bam bam", "iniminimanimo", and perhaps the artist's most well-known hit, "lilali".  track listing  references  external links      1998 debut albums kim kay albums emi records albums french-language albums
huai ket railway station is a railway station located in ngiu rai subdistrict, taphan hin district, phichit. it is located 324.915 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references       railway stations in thailand
carlos nine (21 february 1944 - 16 july 2016) was an argentinian cartoonist, painter, and sculptor.  biography  between 1983 and 1990 nine drew several covers for the magazine humor, directed by his colleague andres cascioli.  he made illustrations for the magazines fierro, l'echo des savanes, il grifo, co & co, noticias and for the american, argentine and italian editions of playboy . his drawings appeared regularly in the daily newspapers clarin and le monde. nine illustrated the first editions of the chronicles of the grey angel and the book of the ghost, of alejandro dolina. in france edited, among others, the books crimes and punishments (1991) and fantagas (1995), with texts and own drawings.  in 2005 he made an adaptation of the chapter 16 of the first part of don quijote in the collective work lanza en astillero.  in 2012 carlos nine received the platinum konex award as best illustrator of the decade in argentina.  he died on 16 july 2016 at the age of 72.  he also drew donjon monsters 8 heartbreaker, written by lewis trondheim and joann sfar.  books  text and drawings   meutres et chatiments (1991).  fantagas (1995).  keko el mago (1996).  le canard qui aimait les poules (1999).  oh merde, les lapins! (2002).  gesta dei (2003).  it was a dark & silly night (2003).  prints of the west (2004).  siboney (fantagas 2) (2008).  keko le magicien (2009).  rapport visuel sur la ville de buenos aires et ses environs (2014).  tropikal mambo (2016).  fantagas: l'integrale (2016).  buster mix (2020).  illustration only   cronicas del angel gris (1988), by alejandro dolina  la edad del pavo (1990), by elsa bornemann  much ado about nothing (1995), by william shakespeare.  swan lake (1999), by piotr chaikovski.  le lac des cygnes (1999), by piotr chaikovski.  el libro del fantasma (1999), by alejandro dolina.  pampa (three volumes, 2003-2005), with jorge zentner.  l'amirale des mers du sud (2019), with jorge zentner.  references  bibliography  external
links   sitio oficial  entrevista en tv  entrevista en pagina/12  nine, por el mismo  1944 births 2016 deaths argentine sculptors male sculptors people from moron partido 20th-century argentine painters 20th-century male artists argentine male painters
good morning aman (also spelled good morning, aman) is a 2009 italian  drama film directed by claudio noce, at his feature film debut.  the film premiered at the international film critics' week of the 66th venice international film festival. for this film noce was nominated for david di donatello for best new director.  plot  cast     valerio mastandrea as teodoro  anita caprioli as  sara   said sabrie as  aman   amin nur as  said   giordano de plano as  brando   adamo dionisi as  bruno  see also     list of italian films of 2009  films about immigration to italy  references  external links  2009 drama films 2009 films italian films  italian drama films films about immigration to italy
5 in 1 is a ,  painted corten steel sculpture by tony rosenthal, installed at 1 police plaza in lower manhattan, new york. commissioned by the government of new york city in 1971 at a cost of $80,000, it was created between 1973 and 1974, and installed on the brick paved pedestrian mall of 1 police plaza.  rosenthal titled "5 in 1" as a metaphor for each of new york city's five boroughs: the bronx, brooklyn, manhattan, queens, and staten island. he created the  sculpture with five interlocking discs representing each of the boroughs.  each of the five interlocking discs weighs . at the time of its installation in 1974, "5 in 1"  was the largest metal public art sculpture installed in new york city.  see also   1974 in art  plop art  references  1974 establishments in new york city 1974 sculptures outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures by tony rosenthal steel sculptures in new york city
kong he (), (622 bc-548 bc) also known as shuliang he (), was an officer and physician in the lu state military. he was the son of the lu political figure ba xia and the father of kong pi and confucius.  history on the 69th day of the fourth lunar month of the year 563 bce, kong he was supposedly responsible for holding open the gates of bi yang (偪阳), so that soldiers from his side who had already entered bi yang could escape. meng xianzi, then leader of the mengsun clan of lu (one of the three huan), praised him by saying, "this is what the classic of poetry meant by 'having the strength of a tiger'."  in the autumn of 556 bc, duke ling of qi's army attacked the border of lu state, with gao hou besieged zang wuzhong's defense line and captured him. shuliang he, zang chou and zang jia led 300 soldiers to attack the qi army at night and helped escort zang wuzhong to safety. they then return back to battle qi army. qi retreated soon after.  shuliang he's first wife lady shi had given birth to nine children, all were daughters.  kong also had a son, named kong pi (孔皮). however, as kong pi's mother was a concubine and pi himself was said to have deformities in his feet, he could not become his father's successor. thus, the aged he was heirless until he married yan zhengzai (顏徵在), the third and youngest daughter of the yan family.  it is generally thought that confucius was born on september 28, 551 bc. his birthplace was in zou, lu state (near present-day qufu, shandong province).  kong he died when confucius was only three years old, and confucius was raised by his widow in poverty. after yan's death, his son managed to locate his tomb and buried her with him.  references  548 bc deaths lu (state) confucius
imperial iranian army's second bureau (; rokn-e-dovvom) was an iranian military intelligence agency during the pahlavi dynasty from 1926 to 1979.  establishment and structure  second bureau was one of the four main bureaus operating in the army alongside first bureau, responsible for human resources, third bureau, responsible for operations and fourth bureau responsible for logistics. it was active since reign of reza shah and received information from military attaches in target countries. modeled after the deuxieme bureau, the french elite officers who were teaching at war university and officers' school before world war ii were founders of iran's military intelligence service. the service was later contributed by british secret services.  on 7 september 1955, the "intelligence bureau of imperial iranian army headquarters" () was established.  during reign of mohammad reza shah, the agency directly reported to him.  role  alongside acting as the military intelligence apparatus of the army and conducting counterintelligence operations, it was responsible for internal security and surveillance work involving military personnel, as well as civilians.  the unit's operations was parallel to those of shahrbani and ministry of interior. until 1953 iranian coup d'etat, it was considered iran's sole intelligence agency.  after organization of intelligence and national security (savak) was established, it had close ties to the military. although some of army intelligence officers were transferred to savak and some simultaneously served in both agencies; an interservice rivalry emerged between the two and even became an open secret to people.  see also    intelligence protection organization of islamic republic of iran army  references   imperial iranian armed forces iranian intelligence agencies iranian security organisations military intelligence agencies
james stephen zapp (april 18, 1924 - september 30, 2016), nicknamed "zipper", was an american baseball outfielder who played baseball in the negro leagues and minor leagues from 1945 to 1955. spending the majority of his career with the baltimore elite giants, zapp is described as an above-average power and contact hitter. when zapp began playing in integrated baseball with the paris lakers of the mississippi-ohio valley league, he broke the league's rbi record total for a single-season, which still stands today.  early life and military service  born in nashville, tennessee, zapp, as an adolescent, attended a catholic school which did not provide a baseball program. although he occasionally played softball as a teenager, his relationship with baseball began by an unusual approach-after he enlisted in the united states navy in 1942, zapp joined a segregated military team while stationed in pearl harbor, hawaii. impressed with his performance on the field, coach edgar "special delivery" jones-a former running-back in the nfl-transferred zapp to his white team, making him and first baseman andy ashford the only two black players to join the integrated line-up. during his stint, zapp contributed to back-to-back titles in the 1943 and 1944 seasons. zapp remained active in navy baseball until 1945, when the second world war came to a close and he was honorably discharged.  baseball career  while stationed at staten island, new york, zapp was signed by the baltimore elite giants as a backup corner outfielder, initially on a weekend basis, then full-time for the winter season. in 1946, he returned home and joined the nashville cubs. the following year, zapp played for the atlanta black crackers, showing a hint of his power hitting by knocking 11 home runs in half a season. frustrated by the team's inability to pay its players, zapp abandoned the black crackers, jumping off the team bus in new york city to share housing with family. incidentally, zapp was branded as temperamental although he "didn't call it temperamental," he told reporter brent kelly, "if i didn't think the owners was treating me right, i'd quit, ask for my release, or whatever, as long as they didn't give me my money. sometimes they did not". zapp surmises his decision later denied him an opportunity to play in integrated major league baseball. as he stood in front of a nightclub in new york city, zapp was recognized by a
talent scout, and signed to join the birmingham black barons in 1948.  entering his fourth professional season, zapp earned the position of the barons' starting left-outfielder, playing alongside willie mays. although accurate statistics were not kept, zapp is considered as an above-average power and contact hitter, batting over .300 for the duration of his career. when norm robinson, the center-outfielder before mays, returned to the black barons after recovering from a leg injury, he was inserted into left field to utilize his defensive prowess, briefly displacing zapp from the everyday line-up. despite his diminished role, he played a crucial part in leading the team to winning negro american league pennant in seven games against the kansas city monarchs. zapp, in what he considers the highlight moment of his career, hit a walk-off home run in the bottom of the ninth inning of game 3. the black barons, however, were overpowered by the homestead grays, who won the negro world series in five games. in the black barons' only victory of the series, zapp knocked a game-tying home run in the bottom of the ninth on the way to an extra-innings victory.  during the next two seasons, he played with semi-professional organizations, the morocco stars in 1949 and the nashville stars in 1950. he returned to the elite giants for the 1950 and 1951 seasons. as the mid-season of 1951 approached and the negro league all-stars were selected, zapp was left off the list, even though he was arguably playing the best baseball of his career thus far. disgruntled, zapp departed the team. a recommendation by fellow former negro leaguer butch mccord in 1952 persuaded club owner josh gibbons to sign zapp to the paris lakers of the mississippi-ohio valley league. zapp hit .330 with 20 home runs, the league's most of the season, (low-power environment) and 136 rbis for a league record which still stands today. he attributed his high rbi total to teammate mccords, who batted in front of zapp with a lofty .390 batting average.  the following season zapp joined the danville dans, briefly playing in just 11 games with a .286 average. he enjoyed two productive years with the big spring broncs in 1954 and 1955, batting .290 with 32 home runs in 90 games and .311 with 29 home runs in 89 games. with the 32 home runs, the last of which was earned after suffering an eye injury, zapp lead
the league. in between seasons, zapp returned to the barons and then the elite giants for a month just as the negro leagues were beginning to fold. for his second season with the broncs, zapp struggled defensively after being shifted to first base and was traded to the port arthur sea hawks, adding eight home runs and 37 rbis during his stint. after the conclusion of the 1955 season, zapp retired from baseball to work as a civil service worker for 24 years. in the early to mid 1970s he was the athletic director at webb air force base in big springs, texas.  later life  afflicted with alzheimer's disease since the late-2000s, zapp had been in declining health. in january 2016, his family made a public statement notifying fans he was in the final stages of the disease and could no longer respond to fan mail. he still was actively umpiring high school baseball games and lived in harkers heights, texas. he died on september 30, 2016.  references  external links  and seamheads jim zapp biography from society for american baseball research (sabr) jim zapp at negro leagues baseball museum  1924 births 2016 deaths african-american baseball players united states navy personnel of world war ii atlanta black crackers players baltimore elite giants players baseball players from nashville, tennessee big spring broncs players big spring cosden cops players birmingham black barons players danville dans players  nashville cubs players nashville stars players paris lakers players people from bell county, texas people with alzheimer's disease port arthur sea hawks players united states navy sailors 20th-century african-american sportspeople 21st-century african-american people african americans in world war ii african-american united states navy personnel
testosterone propionate/testosterone phenylpropionate/testosterone isocaproate/testosterone caproate (tp/tpp/tic/tca), sold under the brand name omnadren or omnadren 250,  is an injectable combination medication of four testosterone esters, all of which are androgens/anabolic steroids, which is no longer marketed. its constituents included:   testosterone propionate (30 mg)  testosterone phenylpropionate (60 mg)  testosterone isocaproate (60 mg)  testosterone caproate (100 mg)  see also  testosterone propionate/testosterone phenylpropionate/testosterone isocaproate  testosterone propionate/testosterone phenylpropionate/testosterone isocaproate/testosterone decanoate  list of combined sex-hormonal preparations § androgens  references  abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes combined androgen formulations prodrugs testosterone
maniatyn () - a small village in shepetivka raion (district) of khmelnytskyi oblast (province) in ukraine, that is located in the north of khmelnytskyi oblast, on the border from the zhytomyr oblast. it belongs to berezdiv rural hromada, one of the hromadas of ukraine.   area of the village is only 1.91 km2, and the population of the village is about 520 people. local government is administered by maniatynska village council.  geography  the village is located at a distance of  from the highway in european route e40  connecting lviv with kyiv (the road to the nearest town korets). distance from the regional center of khmelnytskyi is  and  from the district center of slavuta.  history  the village of maniatyn was first mentioned in 1577 as property konstanty wasyl ostrogski. after world war i the village was part of the ukrainian people's republic (1917 - 1919). after the 1919 of treaty of versailles and by 1991 - in composition of ussr.  until 18 july 2020, maniatyn belonged to slavuta raion. the raion was abolished in july 2020 as part of the administrative reform of ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of khmelnytskyi oblast to three. the area of slavuta raion was abolished and merged into shepetivka raion.  references  external links    weather.in.ua, maniatyn (khmelnytskyi region)  історія славутського раиону  literature   історія міст і сіл украінськоі рср. хмельницька область. - к.: головна редакція уре ан урср, 1971., славутськии, адм. устріи, манятинська сільська рада, с. манятин   villages in khmelnytskyi oblast
lloyd roberts may refer to:   mooseman (lloyd roberts, 1962-2001), american bassist  lloyd roberts (american football), college football and basketball player and coach  lloyd roberts (politician) (1907-1961), australian politician
(born september 2, 1970) is a former professional baseball player based in japan. he played second and first base for the seibu lions of the japan pacific league.  references  living people 1970 births japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball infielders seibu lions players
vladimir vladimirovich kenigson, or konigson () was born november 7, 1907 in the family of barrister vladimir petrovich kenigson in simferopol, the russian empire. swede by birth.  biography and career vladimir kenigson graduated from the school at simferopol drama theatre in 1925 and was admitted to the theater group. then he played at the theater in kuibyshev, dnepropetrovsk and other cities. he was noticed on the stage by alexander tairov and was invited into their group.  in the years 1940-1949 kenigson worked in kamerny theatre under the direction of a. tairov, where he became a partner alisa koonen - in the performances of "madame bovary" (rodolphe) and "guilty without guilt" (neznamov). after the closure of the kamerny theatre in 1949 on the advice of tairov joined the maly academic theatre.  at the same time vladimir kenigson starred in the mikheil chiaureli's film "the fall of berlin", where he played the role of the nazi general krebs. for this, kenigson was awarded the stalin prize by joseph stalin himself, who was delighted with his performance. therefore, from the very first steps on one of the oldest russian scenes kenigson took the leading position in the company.  from 1949-1986 kenigson was a permanent member of the troupe at maly academic theatre in moscow. there his stage partners were such stars as elena gogoleva, vera pashennaya, elina bystritskaya, boris babochkin, mikhail zharov, nikolay annenkov, viktor pavlov, yury solomin and many other notable soviet and russian actors. he played over 60 roles on stage and 30 roles in film and on tv. in addition to roles in movies he worked on dubbing of foreign films and cartoons, actors who talk with his voice: jean gabin, louis de funes and toto.  vladimir kenigson is buried at the vagankovo cemetery at the 58th site, next to his son-in-law alexey eybozhenko.  personal life  daughter - natalia kenigson.  son-in-law - actor alexey eybozhenko.  grandson - tv and radio presenter alexey eybozhenko jr.  selected filmography  the fall of berlin (1950) as general hans krebs  the unforgettable year 1919 (1951) as paul dukes  problem child (1954)  miles of fire (
1957) as sergei beklemishev  major whirlwind (1967) as traub  passenger from the "equator" (1968) as pavel gabush  seventeen moments of spring (1973) as ex-minister krause  the flight of mr. mckinley (1975)  moon rainbow (1983) as charles rogan  selected foreign films  fanfan la tulipe (1952) - noel roquevert as fier-a-bras  the snows of kilimanjaro (1952) - leo g. carroll as uncle bill  les miserables (1958) - bernard blier as javert  le bossu (1959) - francois chaumette as philippe de gonzague inherit the wind (1960) - frederic march as matthew harrison brady  the mysteries of paris (1962) - raymond pellegrin as baron de lansignac  the black tulip (1964) - robert manuel as prince alexandre de grassillac de morvan-le-breau  lemonade joe (1964) - milos kopecky as horace badman, alias "hogofogo"  fantomas (1964) - louis de funes as commissioner juve  the saragossa manuscript (1965) - gustaw holoubek as don pedro velasquez  the sucker (1965) - louis de funes as leopold saroyan  fantomas se dechaine (1965) - louis de funes as commissioner juve  old surehand (1965) - larry pennell as general jack o'neil  strike first freddy (1965) - martin hansen as dr. pax  the sons of great bear (1966) - jiri vrstala as jim fred clark  the big restaurant (1966) - louis de funes as mr. septime, boss of a big parisian restaurant  fantomas contre scotland yard (1967) - louis de funes as commissioner juve  oscar (1967) - louis de funes as bertrand barnier  romeo and juliet (1968) - antonio pierfederici as lord montague  l'homme orchestre (1970) - louis de funes as mr. edouard, alias evan evans  la horse (1970) - pierre dux as investigating magistrate  the married couple of the year two (1971) - pierre brasseur as gosselin  tecumseh (1972) - wolfgang greese as governor william harrison  the tall blond man with one black shoe (1972) - bernard blier as bernard milan  oklahoma crude (1973) - jack palance as hellman  zorro (1975) -
stanley baker as colonel huerta  three days of the condor (1975) - john houseman as wabash  concorde affaire '79 (1979) - joseph cotten as milland  selected cartoons  gena the crocodile (1969) as salesman  flying phantom ship (1969) as kuroshio kaichou  the blue bird (1970) as rich man  the mystery of the third planet (1981) as chatterbird  awards  stalin prize (1950)  festival prize of czechoslovakia (1973)  order of the red banner of labour (1974)  people's artist of the ussr (1982)  winner of the iii festival of dramatic art of czechoslovakia in the ussr (1983)  references  external links  1907 births 1986 deaths soviet male film actors soviet male stage actors soviet male voice actors russian people of swedish descent people's artists of the ussr stalin prize winners burials at vagankovo cemetery
alexander white walker (15 november 1881 - 12 may 1916) was a scottish professional footballer who played in the scottish league for heart of midlothian and motherwell as an inside right. he also played for brentford in the southern league.  personal life  walker was the younger brother of fellow heart of midlothian footballer, bobby walker. he served as a private in the royal scots during the first world war and died on 12 may 1916 from tuberculosis. walker was buried in north merchiston cemetery, edinburgh and his mother and brother were later interred in the same plot.  career statistics  honours  heart of midlothian   rosebery charity cup: 1899-00  references   1881 births 1916 deaths 19th-century scottish people 20th-century scottish people 20th-century deaths from tuberculosis scottish footballers brentford f.c. players association football inside forwards southern football league players scottish football league players heart of midlothian f.c. players motherwell f.c. players british army personnel of world war i royal scots soldiers british military personnel killed in world war i tuberculosis deaths in scotland
agustin sebastia (born 30 august 1964) is a spanish former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people spanish male cyclists olympic cyclists of spain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from valencia
sandreani is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alessandro sandreani (born 1979), italian footballer, son of mauro mauro sandreani (born 1954), italian footballer and manager  italian-language surnames
the vauziron is a stream that flows through chateldon in puy-de-dome, france. it is a right tributary of the river dore. it is  long.  references  rivers of puy-de-dome rivers of france rivers of auvergne-rhone-alpes
the san jose apaches were a professional american football team based in san jose, california. the apaches were formed as a semi-professional team in 1962 and were members of the northern california semi-pro football league and pacific football league (sometimes known as the pacific coast football league). in 1967 the apaches and other members of the pacific league joined the continental football league as the new pacific division. their head coach and general manager for the 1967 season was future pro football hall of famer bill walsh. walsh led the apaches to 2nd place in the pacific division.  prior to the start of the 1968 cofl season the apaches ceased all football operations.  season-by-season  references  continental football league teams defunct american football teams in california apaches american football teams established in 1962 american football teams disestablished in 1968 1962 establishments in california 1968 disestablishments in california
baby constance irene theresia huwae (22 november 1939 - 5 june 1989) was a dutch-born indonesian film actress and singer. born in rotterdam, she had moved to indonesia by the 1950s and taken up modelling. she entered the film industry in 1958, and gained popularity following the success of asrama dara (dormitory for girls). over the next several years she acted in a further five films and established a girl group, the baby dolls. however, after she married in 1960, huwae focused on modelling. in the 1970s she worked as a fortune teller.  biography huwae was born in rotterdam, the netherlands, on 22 november 1939. she was of mixed indonesian and german heritage. by the late 1950s, she had taken up modelling in the indonesian capital of jakarta. she was drawn into film in 1958. that year, she appeared in two films. the first, asrama dara (dormitory for girls), was an usmar ismail-directed comedy which followed a group of young women who lived together in a dormitory. huwae played maria, a flight attendant caught in a love triangle with a pilot and a merchant; this became her most famous role. the second film, djuara sepatu roda (roller-skating champion),  followed a competition between schoolmates to be crowned roller-skating champion.  with rima melati, gaby mambo, and indriati iskak, huwae formed a girl group named the baby dolls in 1959;  they had all appeared together in djuara sepatu roda. that year huwae acted in three films, gembira ria (joyful), serba salah (gone awry), and tiga mawar (three roses). she also participated in tours of singapore during this time, including holding a fashion show. she was rumored to be romantically involved with president sukarno, though she denied these claims.  huwae married endang karnadi in 1960. the two had met in 1957, at a birthday party for indriati iskak. after marriage she focused on modelling and reduced her acting, taking only a single role, in amor dan humor (love and humor), in 1961. this romantic comedy saw huwae play a salesclerk who must rebuff the advances of one man whilst maintaining her relationship with her boyfriend. huwae and karnadi had seven children before divorcing in 1978. in the 1960s huwae converted from catholicism to islam, later going on
the hajj with sukarno's wife dewi sukarno. in 1966 she was a witness during a sex and embezzlement scandal involving former minister of the central bank yusuf muda dalam; the straits times reported that she had been gifted a house at the order of president sukarno.  in 1978, berita harian reported that huwae had been asked by the regent of rembang to produce a film based on the life of kartini, an indonesian women's emancipation figure. though such a film was ultimately produced in 1982, it was directed by sjumandjaja and produced by a different company. by 1979 huwae was using the name lokita purnamasari and operated a boutique. she later took up work as a fortune teller, writing several columns on the subject in jakarta-based newspapers. she was also involved in the martial arts, serving as the head of the indonesian karate do institution.  death  huwae was diagnosed with leukemia in 1986. she died in a hospital in jakarta on 5 june 1989 and was buried in menteng pulo. her funeral was attended by actors such as rima melati, rina hasyim, and ratno timoer, musicians such as idris sardi, as well as the late sukarno's wives fatmawati and hartini and sons guntur sukarnoputra and guruh.  filmography during her first three years of acting, huwae appeared in six films. after a lengthy hiatus, she had a guest appearance in the 1971 film tiada maaf bagimu (there is no forgiveness for you).  djuara sepatu roda (1958) asrama dara (1958) gembira ria (1959) serba salah (1959) tiga mawar (1959) amor dan humor (1961) tiada maaf bagimu (1971)  references  works cited  external links     1939 births 1989 deaths indonesian film actresses indo people dutch emigrants to indonesia 20th-century indonesian women singers indonesian people of german descent indonesian former christians indonesian muslims deaths from leukemia converts to islam from roman catholicism 20th-century muslims
shosse entuziastov may refer to:   shosse entuziastov (kalininsko-solntsevskaya line), a moscow metro station, russia  shosse entuziastov (moscow central circle), a moscow metro station, russia  entuziastov highway, after which shosse entuziastov (kalininsko-solntsevskaya line) is named.
count evgeny andreyevich salias de tournemire (, 25 april 1840 - 18 december 1908) was a russian writer, best known for his adventure novels based upon various episodes of russian history of the 18th and early 19th centuries.  biography evgeny salias de tournemire was born in moscow, to the french citizen, count andre salias de tournemire, and his russian wife, elizaveta vasilyevna ( sukhovo-kobylina), who later became a well-known author in her own right, writing under the pseudonym evgenya tur.  after graduating from the moscow's 3rd gymnasium in 1859 he enrolled in moscow university to study law. in 1861 he took part in the students' manifestations and was one of the three envoys chosen to be sent to saint petersburg with a petition to alexander ii. later that year for that very reason he was expelled from the university and in the early 1862 left russia for france with his mother. it was there that he started to write.  salias de tournemire debuted as a published author in 1863 as the then alexey pisemsky-led biblioteka dlya chtenya published his debut short novel xanya the weird (ксаня чудная). it was followed by darkness (тьма), the jewess (евреика) and manzhaja (манжажа), all four lauded by critics. nikolai ogaryov, writing to evgenya tur, congratulated her with her son's success and expressed delight with the birth of 'a new fine russian writer'.  having extensively travelled spain (this journey resulted in a series of sketches called "letters from spain") and italy (where he met the painter alexander ivanov), in 1869 salias de tournemire returned to russia and in 1876 received his russian citizenship. during the years that preceded it, he worked as a lawyer and state official in tula and tambov, respectively, but also wrote gavriil derzhavin's biography (the governor poet, поэт-наместник, 1871), a sentimental short novel pandurochka (пандурочка), and, most significantly, his first historical novel the pugachov men (пугачевцы), preceded by an extensive archive research, and visits to the sites of battles fought by emelyan pugachov's army. originally published by russky vestnik in 1874, the novel enjoyed enormous success with the readership, but received mixed reviews, some critics
accusing the author of choosing as a template lev tolstoy's war and peace and following it too obviously.  the same year salias accepted the offer made to him by the publisher and journalist mikhail katkov to become the head of the russian newspaper sankt-peterburgskiye vedomosti. later, in 1881, he founded his own short-lived magazine polyarnaya zvesda which focused on history and historical literature. dozens of novels he wrote in 1880s-1890s (including the orlov brothers, the foundling, the volodimir princess, the don spanyards, and free thinkers) only cemented salias de tournemire's reputation of the 'best-loved contemporary author in russia'.   salias de tournemire died after prolonged illness in his moscow house at the pokrov levshin region where he spent the last 18 years of his life. he was interred in the novodevichy cemetery.  legacy salias de tournemire's numerous best-selling novels have earned him the widely recognized reputation of the 'russian dumas'. still, the critics refused to give him credit as a serious author, finding most of his novels faulty in terms of historical facts and totally unoriginal. in 1890s the first edition of the complete salias de tournemire in 33 volumes came out. the publication of the second one which started out in 1901, was stopped in 1917, after volume xx. in the soviet times his works weren't re-issued, being deemed pro-monarchist and backward-looking.  the interest  in russia for salias de tournemire's legacy rose sharply in the 1990s, numerous of his novels (notably, million, arakcheyev's little offspring and the krutoyar princess) were re-issued in 1995, to be followed by several compilations.  references  external links the works by salias de tournemire at lib.ru  russian male novelists people from moscow russian editors 1840 births 1908 deaths
anne sender (born 1 november 1956) is a norwegian lecturer and debater.  she was born in skien. her books include var jødiske reise from 2013. she received the fritt ord award in 2014.  selected works  references  1956 births living people people from skien norwegian non-fiction writers norwegian women non-fiction writers norwegian jews converts to judaism
dr john gordon frse frcse (19 april 1786 - 14 june 1818) was a short-lived but influential scottish anatomist. in 1806 he served as president of the royal medical society. in 1815 he caused an international stir by debunking the new science of phrenology and publicly criticising its principal european exponents, johann spurzheim and franz joseph gall.  life  he was born on 19 april 1786 in forres in northern scotland the son of john gordon a wine-merchant and banker.  he studied medicine at the university of edinburgh under dr john barclay and philosophy under dugald stewart. he gained his doctorate md in 1805 aged 19. he then did further studies in anatomy in london. a prodigy, he served as president of the royal medical society in 1806 aged just 20. on return to edinburgh he taught anatomy and physiology at his anatomy school at 9 surgeons' square, one of the earliest teachers in the edinburgh extramural school of medicine. he served as a surgeon at the edinburgh royal infirmary on drummond street. he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh in 1812. his proposers were thomas thomson, john playfair and thomas allan.  in june 1815 he published "the doctorines of gall and spurzheim", which while criticising phrenology also did much to publicise this then relatively unknown "science". ironically in his criticism he gave a concise and erudite summary of the complex dimensions of phrenology, enabling it to be understood to a far wider audience. gordon instead supported the views of reil.  he lived at 19 castle street in edinburgh's new town.  he died on 14 june 1818 aged 32 and was buried in greyfriars kirkyard. the large and simple monument stands near the centre of the western extension.  family  he married the sister of andrew rutherfurd, lord rutherfurd. their son was john thomson gordon frse.  references  1786 births 1818 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh scottish anatomists alumni of the university of edinburgh burials at greyfriars kirkyard
fanna-fi-allah () is a canadian-american group which plays qawwali, a form of sufi devotional music popular in south asia.  origins  group leader tahir faridi qawwal (formerly geoffrey lyons), originally from nova scotia, studied indian classical music with the tabla maestro harjeet seyan singh in india as a teenager. at 17, he converted to islam and studied under qawwali masters rahet fateh ali khan, pashupatinath mishra, sher ali khan and muazzam qawwal in pakistan.  aminah chishti - aka jessica ripper, originally from ashland, oregon -  is a student of rahat fateh ali khan successor of nusrat fateh ali khan and ustad dildar hussain (who played with ustad nusrat fateh ali khan for more than 28 years) and is the first female tabla player to be initiated into the lineage of qawwali in 2003 .  qawwal and chishti started fanna-fi-allah sufi qawwali ensemble in 2001.  members   tahir faridi qawwal - vocals, harmonium, tabla  aminah chishti qawwal - tabla, vocals  laali qalandar - vocals, clapping  salim chishti - vocals, clapping  ali shan - vocals, clapping jahangir baba - harmonium, vocals  abrar hussain - tabla, vocals, clapping aziz abbatiello - whirling  discography  fanna-fi-allah (2018) muraqaba (released by buda musique france recorded at woodshed studios malibu courtesy of chris martin (cold play))  fanna-fi-allah (2017) - live @ great american music hall (vinyl)  fanna-fi-allah sufi qawwali (2015)  fanna_fi-allah sufi qawwali tracks:   man kunto maula (2014)  mehfil-e-sama vol. 3 (2014)  naubat nagare (2013)  ya mustafa nur-ul-khuda (2012)  fanna-fi-allah sufi qawwali party  mehfil-e-sama vol. 2 (2012)  damahama dam ali ali (2011)  mehfil-e-sama vol. 1 (2008)  baba farid (2007)  annihilation into the infinite (2005)  rizwan muazzam  amad (2014)  araj sun li jo mori (2014)  sufi sama (2007)
rizwan muazzam qawwali  karlo ganj-e-shakar (2011)  sher ali mehr ali  hamare khwaja (2013)  tahir qawwal  alif allah, pt. 1 (2013)  alif allah, pt. 2 (2013)  alif allah, pt. 3 (2013)  bhairavi thumri (ras ke bare tore nain) (2013)  temple step  alif allah (remix) (2014)  various artists  dayar-e-ishq: abode of divine love (2013)  references  external links   biography on fanna-fi-allah.com fanna-fi-allah on allmusic  american world music groups canadian world music groups harmonium players hindi-language singers performers of sufi music punjabi-language singers qawwali sufism in canada sufism in the united states tabla players urdu-language singers
kofoworola bucknor-akerele (born 30 april 1939) is a nigerian politician and a former deputy governor of lagos state. she was the deputy governor to governor bola tinubu between 1999 and november 2003.  early life she was born on 30 april 1939, and  went to cms girls school lagos before she travelled in 1949 to surrey england for her degree in law.  career  she got a diploma in journalism in 1962, and worked as a freelance journalist for bbc and von magazine.  references  1939 births living people women state deputy governors of nigeria women in lagos politics nigerian women journalists 20th-century nigerian politicians 20th-century nigerian women politicians 21st-century nigerian politicians 21st-century nigerian women politicians deputy governors of lagos state st anne's school, ibadan alumni
daredevil is a video game released for the game boy advance in 2003. it is a based on the marvel comics character daredevil and is a tie-in to the live-action 2003 film of the same name.  plot daredevil's largest role was as the title character in the game boy advance game based on the 2003 film.  stick appears as a supporting character. in the beginning of the game, he informs daredevil that the kingpin has put a price on daredevil's head. after daredevil defeats kirigi, he mentions that the kingpin has a mysterious connection to the sewer king. when daredevil beats echo, he warns daredevil that bullseye is waiting for him at a construction site.  kirigi is a boss in the game. in the game, he believes that daredevil was working for the kingpin and he has sent the daredevil to kill him, since the hand was at war with the kingpin's gang. kirigi is seemingly killed by daredevil after he defeats him.  echo is a boss in the video game. in the game, she is a villain, and she believes that daredevil was never in league with the kingpin in the first place. after chasing echo throughout the new york subway transit system, daredevil defeats her.  bullseye appears as a boss. in this game, he waits for daredevil at a construction site. daredevil reveals to bullseye that the bounty on daredevil's head was a fraud. bullseye believes this but he reveals to daredevil that he was in league with the kingpin. at the top of the construction site, daredevil defeats bullseye. unlike his movie and comics counterpart, bullseye uses a handgun as his weapon.  the kingpin is the final boss in the video game. in the game, he puts out a warrant out for daredevil's arrest to the criminal underworld (which is later revealed as a fraud). daredevil interrogates the kingpin at his penthouse, where it is revealed that daredevil eliminated his competition when he was setting up his master plan. after daredevil defeats him, the kingpin tells him that although daredevil knows his secret identity, daredevil cannot reveal wilson fisk's secret to the police. at the end, fisk lies to the reporters by saying that daredevil's arrest was a "media distortion".  publication history the game boy advance game was released on february 14, 2003, and was created by encore, a subsidiary of navarre corporation.  it was developed by griptonite games and published by thq and bam! entertainment.  references  20th
century fox video games 2003 video games daredevil (film series) game boy advance games game boy advance-only games griptonite games superhero video games thq games video games based on adaptations video games based on marvel comics films video games based on works by mark steven johnson video games based on works by stan lee video games developed in the united states video games set in new york city
the 1981 southwest texas state bobcats football team was an american football team that represented southwest texas state university-now known as texas state university-as a member of the lone star conference (lsc) during the 1981 ncaa division ii football season. the bobcats played their home games at the newly opened bobcat stadium in san marcos, texas. led by third-year head coach jim wacker, southwest texas state compiled an overall record of 13-1 and claimed the lsc title with a conference mark of 6-1. they won the ncaa division ii football championship with a win over north dakota state, 42-13, in the palm bowl.  schedule  references  texas state bobcats football seasons ncaa division ii football champions lone star conference football champion seasons southwest southwest
bruno frei (real name, benedikt freistadt: 11 june 1897 - 21 may 1988) was a political (marxist) author and journalist. he was born in preßburg which at that time was part of the austro-hungarian empire, and the family moved to vienna in 1909. following the frontier changes mandated in 1919, he spent much of his adult life and career in that city, although he spent six of the hitler years exiled in mexico.  sources most frequently name him as bruno frei, but he is also sometimes identified as karl franz, a pseudonym under which some of his work was published.  life  early years benedikt freistadt was born in preßburg (today bratislava, slovakia). his father, michael freistadt, was in business. the family was poor, although through his mother, born berta hauser, he was related to heinrich heine. preßburg was a cultural melting pot, and in an age when national identity and language had become important, it is noteworthy that his mother's first language was hungarian although fluency in german, his father's first language, was necessary outside the front door. in any case, when he was 12 the family re-located to vienna. three years later, when he was 15, he abandoned his training for the rabbinate.  journalism bruno frei made his earliest journalistic contributions in 1917. he provided material for the recently established left-liberal viennese newspaper "der abend". he was much influenced by the newspaper's thoughtfully communist proprietor, karl colbert. it was a mark of the times that on 18 march 1918 "der abend" was closed down by the authorities: it was relaunched as "der neue abend" on 10 june 1918, but reverted to its former title on 31 october 1918. frei was at this point not a full-time journalist, since in 1915/16 he also commenced his study of philosophy at the university of vienna. while at university he was able to attend lectures and presentations by sigmund freud, max adler and karl kraus. he came into contact with socialist groups and in 1918 himself joined the social democratic workers' party (sozialdemokratische arbeiterpartei deutschosterreichs / sdap)-as it was known till 1933. in the revolutionary ferment that followed national military defeat he drew close, politically, to the group around josef frey (who later became a communist party official). he was awarded his doctorate on 30 june 1920 for a dissertation entitled "the ethics of pirkei avot as a
paradigm for ethics of judaism" ("die ethik des pirque aboth als paradigma einer ethik des judentums").  berlin in 1920, he re-located to berlin to work as foreign correspondent for "der abend". according to his own writings, he was disappointed that the revolutionary events that marked germany during 1918/19 had not triggered more than a feeble echo in vienna. berlin, he stated, was a "workers' city" and as such at the heart of "events" in a way that vienna was not. in berlin, he was a frequent visitor to the romanisches cafe where he got to know politically like-minded left-wing writers including egon kisch and anton kuh. another member of the circle was stefan großmann, who was editor of a weekly cross-party political journal called das tage-buch (literally: "the diary") for which frei contributed material.  during his time in berlin, frei also set up, with leo lania, the "abc press agency". in the winter of 1923/24, with widespread destitution in germany threatening to erupt into street violence, the german communist party was banned, and the left-wing "abc press agency" came under close police scrutiny. frei published his first contribution in the political weekly, die weltbuhne in 1923. although not a mass-market publication, within the german speaking world, weltbuhne enjoyed a far higher profile with the politically aware than the newspapers and magazines for which frei had been writing up till now. after carl von ossietzky took over as editor in chief. in 1927, frei became a more frequent contributor, joining the permanent staff in 1929.  vienna in the meantime, in 1927/28, he returned for a year or so to vienna, taking on leadership of foreign policy coverage at "der abend". he stayed in austria long enough to publish, in addition, the first comprehensive study of the 1918 sailors' mutiny at the cattaro bay naval base. in 1928, he undertook a reporting visit to the soviet union, which formed the basis for a volume entitled "in the country of the red power" ("im lande der roten macht"), published in 1929.  return to berlin in 1929, he was persuaded by willi munzenberg to make a permanent return to berlin. munzenberg was setting up "berlin am morgen" a new daily newspaper, providing a communist perspective and targeting a mass readership, and he offered frei the job of managing editor. the newspaper provided a platform for a
number of leading writers of the political left, and it continued to be published until banned, in 1933.  prague exile the political backdrop changed in january 1933 when the nazi party took power and converted germany into a one-party dictatorship. frei himself was not, at this stage, a card carrying communist party member, but most of his professional friends and colleagues were. with his ear close to the ground, he was among the first to understand that the government would use the reichstag fire of 27 february to justify a round-up of communists in germany. he resolved to flee abroad in order to avoid being caught up in the programme of mass arrests that indeed ensued. he quickly arranged to flee with franz carl weiskopf, a fellow newspaper editor based in berlin who also had a home in prague. in prague they created "gegen-angriff" ("counter-attack"). the magazine, which first appeared in september 1933 and continued to appear, with bruno frei its editor in chief, till 1936, was published both as a conscious provocation and as a rejoinder to "der angriff" ("the attack"), founded as a nazi newspaper by joseph goebbels and published since 1927 in berlin.  paris exile in 1934, bruno frei belatedly joined the german communist party, which had been illegal in germany since the previous year. the party leadership had, for the most part, managed to emigrate, some to moscow and many others to paris which quickly became a de facto headquarters for the german communist party in exile. frei emigrated from prague to paris in 1936. his work was published in various antifascist newspapers and journals such as "neue deutsche blatter" (literally: "new german pages") and "nouvelle d'autriche" ("news of austria"). it was also in 1936 that he became a co-editor for the "news of germany" press agency, also serving as secretary for the paris-based protection league for german authors abroad ("schutzverband deutscher schriftsteller im ausland").  war and arrest war resumed in september 1939 when germany invaded poland and the french government (like the british government) declared war on germany. a period of eerie "normality" followed. however, in may/june 1940 the german army invaded france, rapidly occupying the northern half of the country and installing a puppet government in the south. the 1938 merger of austria with germany had left bruno frei as a citizen of hitler's germany, but in may 1940 he was stripped of both his german citizenship and of his university
doctorate because he was jewish. in june, the french authorities (like the british) responded to events by arresting large numbers of political refugees who had fled to paris a few years earlier in order to escape the nazis. frei was one of these "anti-hitler people" identified as enemy aliens and arrested. well informed, as ever, he had already prepared his little suitcase and was ready when the police arrived unannounced in the middle of the night. the french arresting officer spotted books about stalin and hitler in his apartment and appeared unable to comprehend that the books were actually unequivocally critical of the dictators in questions. it was only when he was taken to a huge room in a nearby police station that was filled with fellow german exiles from nazism that frei appreciated the colossal scale of the mass arrest in progress. they were then taken to the roland gaross sports arena.     in the arena he briefly caught sight of his fourteen-year-old son who called out to him "mummy is...", but he heard no further. after a few days the internees were transported. frei's destination was the huge camp at le vernet, in the far south.  after his arrest frei was separated from his family, and he was left unaware of whether or not they had also been arrested. it was only later that he discovered what had happened to his wife, maria. the german army had over-run paris very rapidly, and the city had suffered only a single german air-raid, but in that bombing raid maria freistadt had been killed.  camp vernet conditions at camp le vernet, which had hitherto operated as a reception centre for republicans escaping from franco following the defeat of the second spanish republic, were initially less savage than those encountered in the concentration camps in germany, but security was progressively tightened, and in 1941 the authorities prepared to separate out the many jewish-german internees for transportation to purpose built concentration camps germany where an uncertain fate would await them. supported by contacts in the international writers' associations, and with help from gilberto bosques, the heroic mexican consul in marseilles, bruno frei succeeded in obtaining release and a passage to mexico, travelling there via trinidad and the usa.  mexico exile in mexico, frei was one of many german refugees from nazism. in mexico city he co-founded and then became chief editor of the magazine "freies deutschland" ("free germany"). he also became a member of "austrian republican action in mexico" ("accion
republicana austriaca en mexico"). in 1943, he joined the exiled austrian communist party and co-founded with  another publication, "austria libre".  return to vienna he returned to vienna in april 1947. in 1948, he took over as chief editor of the newly re-established daily newspaper, "der abend", produced by the communist party publisher, globus-verlag. he switched in 1956 and a stint as foreign correspondent for the newspaper volksstimme, in beijing, followed, till  1959. during the later 1950s he was engaged in a series of journalistic projects. together with ernst fischer und viktor matejka he launched the communist oriented journal wiener tagebuch, serving as its editor in chief from 1960 till 1964.  his memoirs were published in 1972.  bruno frei died at klosterneuburg, a short distance upstream from vienna, on 21 may 1988.  family bruno freistadt was married to maria muellauer (1890-1940). their son, hans freistadt, was born in vienna on 6 september 1925. there was also a daughter, lisa freistadt.  maria freistadt was killed in an air raid on paris in june 1940. the children both crossed to the usa in 1940, though it is not clear from sources whether they crossed to north america on the same ship as their father.  once in the usa, hans freistadt was supported by jewish refugee organizations as he worked through high school and chicago university. he subsequently earned a doctorate in physics from north carolina, acquired us citizenship in 1944, and appeared all set for a distinguished career as a nuclear physicist. he then fell foul of mccarthyism, however, and after robustly refusing to recant his socialist beliefs, was stripped of his university fellowship following a (briefly) high-profile hearing before the congressional joint committee on atomic energy. he now trained successfully for an alternative career, as a physician.   hans freistadt died in 2015.  unlike her brother, lisa friestadt was able to join her father in mexico, like him later returning to vienna after the war.  references  communist party of austria politicians university of vienna alumni journalists from vienna german opinion journalists jewish emigrants from nazi germany to france workers' rights activists social democratic party of austria politicians austrian communists writers from bratislava 1897 births 1988 deaths austrian people of hungarian-jewish descent
the open or the open championship is one of the four major championships in professional golf.  the open may also refer to:  the open (band), an english indie rock band  the open group, an open software consortium  see also  open (disambiguation)  u.s. open, various us-hosted sport championships
a public transportation benefit area, abbreviated as ptba, is a type of public-benefit corporation for public transit operators in the u.s. state of washington.  description  public transportation benefit areas are defined by revised code of washington chapter 36.57a, and are described as special taxing districts created solely for the purpose of funding public transportation. within washington state, there are 31 systems that cover all or parts of 23 counties and serve 132 cities. the majority of transit systems in the state are operated by public transportation benefit areas, with the exception of king county metro (a metropolitan county system) and sound transit (a regional transit authority) in the seattle metropolitan area; as well as county transportation authorities in columbia county and grays harbor county; and city-owned systems in everett, pullman, and yakima.  ptbas are granted the authority to impose a voter-authorized sales tax of up to 0.9 percent and motor vehicle excise tax of up to 0.4 percent within its boundaries. community transit, the ptba of snohomish county, was granted a sales tax limit of 1.2 percent in 2015 after exhausting the existing 0.9 percent. ptbas with boundaries on the puget sound are also authorized to provide passenger ferry service in addition to traditional bus, paratransit and vanpool services.  ptbas are governed by a board of directors of not more than nine elected officials, supplemented by a union representative. in thurston county, the board is allowed to have citizen members; in mason county, elected officials on the board include representatives from school boards, fire districts, and hospital districts.  a special type of ptba for unincorporated areas within counties, called unincorporated transportation benefit areas. , only two utbas exist, in garfield and whitman counties.  only two ptbas serve more than one county: ben franklin transit in benton and franklin counties; and link transit in chelan and douglas counties. these systems are allowed up to 15 members on their board of directors.  history  on july 1, 1975, governor daniel j. evans signed engrossed substitute senate bill no. 2280 into law, creating the ptba. the bill had been proposed by the snohomish county transportation authority (sno-tran), who would later use the legislation to establish the state's first ptba, the snohomish county public transportation benefit area corporation, later renamed community transit, in november 1975.  list of public transportation benefit areas  , washington has 21 ptbas and two unincorporated systems.  see also public transportation in
washington (state) non-ptba transit systems in washington state: everett transit grays harbor transit king county metro pullman transit sound transit - regional transit authority of seattle metropolitan area yakima transit  notes  references  external links legal definition: rcw 36.57a public transportation systems in washington at the municipal research and services center washington transit links from the american public transportation association  government of washington (state) government-owned companies of the united states types of business entity special districts of washington (state)
hercules fighting nemean lion is a 1634 work by francisco de zurbaran. it is conserved in the museo del prado.  description  the painting depicts heracles fighting the nemean lion. the spanish art critic soria suggests a comparison with a woodcut fashioned by cornelis cort after a work by frans floris, based on the hero's position. the rocky setting was designed according to a woodcut by barthel beham: fighting versus centaur (1542).  it is one of series of 10 artworks on the labours of hercules commissioned by philip iv of spain for the decoration of the hall of realms in the buen retiro palace. the series is now on show at the museo del prado.  bibliography   juan antonio gaya nuno et tiziana frati, la obra pictorica de zurbaran, editions planeta, barcelone, 1988,  p. 131-132.  lions in art paintings depicting heracles paintings by francisco de zurbaran 1630s paintings
the 1961 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 24 june 1961 at white city stadium.    the winner palms printer received £2,000 and was trained by paddy mcevoy and owned by alf heale.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  1¼, 1¼, short head, 1½, dis (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report the racing manager selected 36 greyhounds leaving 12 remaining places. they would be gained from three afternoon trial sessions and eight qualifying heats to determine the 12 final places. qualifiers included winter bell and clopook, the latter trained by 28 year old ernie gaskin (much later known as gaskin sr.) gaskin was a new trainer only being granted his licence two months before the derby started.  the ante-post favourites list was headed by oregon prince (8-1) and spider hill (10-1). other leading contenders were litter brothers clonalvy pride and clonalvy romance; the latter had won the grand prix a month earlier. defending champion duleek dandy was also entered for the event but had suffered a broken hock in late summer.   first round casualties included both of the clonalvy brothers, duleek dandy and two other strongly supported runners careless look and prairie flash. the bookmaker's only liability was oregon prince trained by phil rees sr. who won heat two. one second round heat contained oregon prince and clopook.  in the semi-finals palms printer beat early leader clopook to win in 28.69, third spot went to spider hill. the second semi went to oregon prince who won easily in 28.74 sec.  unusually the final did not feature a runner from wembley (the first time since 1947). winter bell lined up as a first finalist for clare orton, son of sidney orton. four of the finalists had made the final without winning any of the rounds and only the two semi-final winners came into the final with winning form. it was oregon prince that led at the first but moved wide allowing palms printer room to take a decisive lead. oregon prince battled well right up until the home straight when palms printers superior stamina told. clopook was unfortunately knocked over.  see also 1961 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
parkash memorial deaf & dumb school, also referred to as the pm deaf and dumb school, is a school for deaf-mute children in the city of ropar in the panjab. it is run by the parkash memorial deaf and dumb handicapped welfare society [regd.], and mrs adarsh sharma is the current principal of the school. panjabi is the primary language of the school.  established in 2007, the school has 178 students, including 75 girls. affiliated with the punjab school education board, the school provides education up to 10th class and also some courses.  references  external links "ਗਗ ਅਤ ਬਲਆ ਦ ਸਸਥ ਦ ਅਚਨਚਤ ਦਰ", daily ajit, sunday, 14 july 2016, punjab, india "physically challenged youth gets his due ", chandigarh tribune, friday, 10 april 2009, chandigarh, india "ਚਮ ਵਲ ਸਪਚ ਥਰਪ ਕਮਰ ਦ ਊਦਘਟਨ", punjabi tribune, friday, 4 march 2016, ropar, punjab, india  schools for the deaf in india schools in punjab, india rupnagar educational institutions established in 2007 2007 establishments in punjab, india
bila (also occasionally rendered belah) is the personification of the sun among the adnyamathanha people. she is a solar goddess, as befitting the general trends among australian aboriginal peoples, which largely perceive the sun as female.  bila is said to be a cannibal, roasting her victims over a fire, the origin of sunlight. to do this she sent black and red dogs to drag her victims, resulting even in an entire village being slaughtered. in a myth the lizard men kudnu ("goanna") and muda ("gecko") were appalled by these acts and attacked, prompting her to flee and cast the world in darkness. he then used a boomerang, catching her and making her move in a slow arc across the sky as it returned, it illuminated the world. for this act of heroism lizards like goannas and geckos are respected by the adnyamathanha.  a similar, albeit likely unrelated myth, occurs in woodlark island.  see also  list of solar deities  references  australian aboriginal goddesses solar goddesses mythological cannibals
hedong subdistrict () is a subdistrict in qingyuan district, ji'an, jiangxi province, china. , it has 8 residential communities and 11 villages under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of jiangxi  references   township-level divisions of jiangxi ji'an
the 2016-17 iowa state cyclones women's basketball team represented iowa state university in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. this was head coach bill fennelly's 22nd season at iowa state. the cyclones are members of the big 12 conference and played their home games at the hilton coliseum. they finished the season 18-13, 9-9 in big 12 play to finish in fifth place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the big 12 women's tournament to kansas state. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa women's tournament where they lost to syracuse in the first round.  radio all cyclones games were carried on the iowa state cyclone radio network. not all affiliates carried women's basketball, and some affiliates only carried select games. to learn which stations will carry games, please visit the cyclone radio network affiliate list linked here. brent blum and molly parrott called all the action for the cyclone radio network and for games on cyclones.tv.  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#840a2c; color:#fec938;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#840a2c; color:#fec938;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#840a2c; color:#fec938;"| big 12 conference season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#840a2c; color:#fec938;"| big 12 women's tournament  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#840a2c; color:#fec938;"| ncaa tournament  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  see also  2016-17 iowa state cyclones men's basketball team  references  iowa state cyclones women's basketball seasons iowa state iowa state iowa state cyc iowa state cyc
yichang brt or yichang bus rapid transit, is located in yichang, china.  it is the first bus rapid transit system constructed in hubei province.  yichang brt runs in the center of the road, and has 38 stations with an average distance of 620 meters between them.  the dongshan avenue section started service on july 15, 2015, and the corridor in yiling district started service november 24, 2015.  yichang brt won the 2016 sustainable transport award.  route   b9 is the main line for the yichang brt.  it starts from yichang east railway station and stops at every station until gezhouba.  after construction of yemingzhu road, it will extend to yiling coach terminal.  buses  see also   yichang metro  references  bus rapid transit in china yichang
the archives at the american academy in rome (aar) are digitized archaeological and photographic collections assisting in the preservation and conservation of the cultural heritage of rome.  background and history  the rich cultural heritage of rome compelled a group of american architects and artists led by architectural mogul charles f. mckim to establish the american academy in the city of rome, italy. established in 1894, the american academy in rome is a research and arts institute and a member of the council of american overseas research centers.  the academy promotes intellectual and artistic freedom, interdisciplinary exchange and innovation amongst scholars and artists at the institution and around the world. the school of fine arts, the first of the academy's two main schools, exposes its fellows to literature, historic preservation and conservation, architecture, musical composition and the visual arts. its counterpart, the school of classical studies, immerses scholars in rome's exquisite history and culture both modern and ancient, mainly in the fields of archaeology and the humanities.   the united states congress under president roosevelt passed bills in 1905, marking the academy as a national institution.  archaeological archives  as an institution of the arts and classics, fellows at the academy practice the study of archaeology. the american academy in rome has consolidated documents pertaining to archaeological excavations performed at the ancient colony of cosa and the ancient roman headquarters, the regia. some of these documents were digitized to preserve and disseminate their contents.  the ancient latin colony of cosa was located in southwestern tuscany in italy. the regia was an ancient building that served initially as a royal palace to the kings of rome and was subsequently occupied by the pontifex maximus, most notably julius caesar.  the cosa archaeology archives are a collection of documents pertaining to the excavations performed at the site by frank e. brown and elizabeth fentress. the cosa collection consists of 1260 gelatin plates, 2500 film negatives and 13000 prints. frank e. brown again led the excavations of regia's forum romanum and left an archive consisting of photos, plans, notebooks, section and find cards.  the regia collection consists of 70 contacts, 97 digital images, and 7 films. the physical archives of both cosa and regia excavations are safeguarded by the academy. photographs of the cosa archives have been digitized, while the contents from brown's regia physical archive were digitized in 2014. the digitized versions of the cosa and regia archives are available in the academy's digital humanities center.  photographic archives  the photo archive of the american academy in rome contains more than eighty
thousand images. the photo archive consolidates various photographic images relating to the arts, architecture, archaeology, and history. photos collected from various donors were digitized and made accessible to researchers and scholars around the world. the majority of the photographic images in the collection were amassed during the 19th century and 20th century. only a few recent images portraying archaeological excavations and antiquities were obtained from the vermeule, aronson and knauer, ludwig and mccann collections and added to the collection since the end of the twentieth century. the archaeology archives of cosa and regia were obtained as part of the mccann collection.  digitizing the archives  the digital humanities center employs drupal software and archivespace for management of their data, which are then stored on the academy's fedora repository. archivespace enables the academy to provide online access to their repository to researchers, scholars and artists worldwide. the fedora repository system allows for the management, dissemination and preservation of the academy's digital contents.  references  online archives
makhdoom sharfuddin ahmed bin yahya maneri, popularly known as makhdoom-ul-mulk bihari and makhdoom-e-jahan (1263-1381), was a 13th-century sufi mystic.  early life sheikh sharfuddin ahmed was born on july 1264 a.d. (sha'aban 661 a.h.) at maner, a village near patna in bihar.  his father was makhdoom kamaluddin yahya maneri bin israel bin taj faqeeh from al-khaleel (palestine), a sufi saint of maner.  his maternal grandfather shahabuddin jagjotbalkhi, whose tomb is located at kachchi dargah in patna district, was also a revered sufi.  at age 12, he left maner to gain traditional knowledge of arabic, persian, logic, philosophy and religion. he was tutored by ashraf-uddin abu towama bukhari, a famous scholar from sonargaon near narainganj (now in dhaka, bangladesh) with whom he spent 24 years.  at first, he refused to marry but, upon falling ill, he married bibi badaam. he left home after the birth of his son zakiuddin in 1289 a.d. his son lived and died in bengal.  career  after completing his education he left for delhi where he met nizamuddin and other sufis. his elder brother makhdoom jaleeluddin maneri (buried at badi dargah in maner sharif) accompanied him there, and introduced him to his pir (spiritual master) sheikh najeebuddin firdausi.  in delhi, he became a disciple of sheikh najeebuddin firdausi of mehrauli and was given the title of firdausi.  to shun material comforts, sheikh sharfuddin ahmed bin yahya maneri went into the forest of bihiya (about 15 miles west of maner). he later went to rajgir (about 75 miles east of maner) where he performed ascetic exercises in the hills. a hot spring close to a place where he often prayed in rajgir is named makhdoom kund in his memory.  after 30 years in the forests, sheikh sharfuddin ahmed bin yahya maneri settled at bihar sharif.later sultan muhammad tughlaq built a khanqah for him where he taught and trained disciples in sufism (tasawwuf). he devoted his life to teaching
and writing.  bibliography  the collection of his letters (maktoobat) and sermons (malfoozat) received wide acclaim. his maktoobat is regarded as a 'working manual' amongst the highest in sufi circles. sharafuddin maneri: the hundred letters (translated by paul jackson s.j.), paulist press, 1979, 480pp.   maktubat-i-sadi, a 'series of a hundred letters' (essays on definite subjects) addressed to his disciple qazi shamsuddin in 747 hijra.  maktubat-i-bist-o-hasht, a 'series of 28 letters', replies to the correspondence of his senior disciple, muzaffar, the prince of balkh.  fawaed-i-rukni, brief notes prepared for the use of his disciple rukn-ud-din.  death he died in 1381 a.d. (6 shawwal, 782 hijri).  the funeral prayer was said according to his will, which decreed that it be led by a sufi from semnan who was on his way to pandua in malda district of west bengal to pledge spiritual allegiance on the hands of the renowned sufi  alaul haq pandavi and enter into the chishti spiritual order. accordingly,  syed ashraf jahangir semnani led the funeral prayers.  his tomb lies at badi dargah (bihar sharif nalanda), in a mosque to the east of a large tank, with masonry walls and ghats, and pillared porticos. the tomb is situated in an enclosure half filled with graves and ancient trees, on the north and west of which are three domed mosque and cloisters. his tomb is a place of sanctity for devout muslims. a five-day urs is celebrated every year from 5th shawwal with traditional zeal.  references  indian sufis people from patna district 1262 births 1379 deaths 13th-century indian philosophers 14th-century indian philosophers scholars from bihar
jagat rawat is an indian film and television actor from a strong theatre background, including his six years in  bhartendu academy of dramatic arts and national school of drama repertory company, where he acted in many classic and contemporary plays.  he has worked in films like commando - a one man army, ab tak chhappan 2, manjhi - the mountain man and many more.  filmography  films  television  references  external links  21st-century indian male actors indian male film actors indian male television actors male actors in hindi cinema indian television presenters living people 1974 births bharatendu academy of dramatic arts alumni
victor jose solarte (born 6 january 1986) is a venezuelan track and field hurdler who competed in the 400 metres hurdles. his personal best was 50.53 seconds, set in 2009. he was a twenty four-time national champion.  solarte competed at the 2003 world youth championships in athletics and 2004 world junior championships in athletics, but has never represented his country at the senior world championships in athletics. his highest level global honour was a silver behind raphael fernandes at the 2011 military world games (his time there was 50.60 seconds, among his career best).  at the south american championships in athletics he was the hurdles runner-up to tiago bueno in 2005, and won further individual bronze medals at the 2011 and 2015 editions. he also won a 4 × 400 metres relay bronze with venezuela in 2006. he was the 2005 hurdles champion at the south american junior championships in athletics, having won the youth silver behind diego venancio in 2002.  in other regional competitions, he has won minor medals at the alba games and bolivarian games. he is a four-time participant (2008, 2010, 2012, 2016) and has been a finalist at the central american and caribbean games and championships. he represented venezuela at the 2011 pan american games, failing to reach the final.  international competitions  references  external links  living people 1986 births venezuelan male hurdlers athletes (track and field) at the 2011 pan american games pan american games competitors for venezuela
gustaf axel hallstrom (july 11, 1880 - october 5, 1962) was a swedish archaeologist and photographer.  biography he was born and died on sodermalm in stockholm. both of his parents were schoolteachers.  his eldest brother was artist gunnar august hallstrom (1875-1943). another one of his brothers was the soldier, adventurer and ethnologist ivor thord-gray (1878-1964) .  he became a licentiate in philosophy in 1913 and an honorary doctor in 1944 at uppsala university.  he was an assistant professor at the state historical museum between 1909 and 1925. from 1925 until his retirement in 1945, hallstrom worked as an antiquarian at the swedish national heritage board.   in the course of his career, hallstrom documented one of the largest collections of petroglyphs in northern europe, at namforsen in angermanland. he also took thousands of photographs documenting many aspects of sami culture.   during  world war i, hallstrom was the swedish red cross' delegate in siberia in rescue operations for prisoners of war.  during the finnish civil war, he was head of the swedish brigade's expedition in stockholm. in 1942, in the midst of world war ii, he traveled by skiis across territory in finland and nazi-occupied norway. from 1925 until his retirement in 1945, he worked for the swedish national heritage board.  he has also been the subject of recent controversy over his participation in scientific racism and possible sympathies for nazi germany.  references  1880 births 1962 deaths swedish archaeologists swedish photographers 20th-century archaeologists
pierre alexandre joseph allent (1772-1837) was a french general de division (major general). he served in the chamber of deputies under the bourbon restoration and in the chamber of peers under the july monarchy. he was a knight of the order of saint louis and a commander of the legion of honour.  references  1772 births 1837 deaths members of the chamber of peers of the july monarchy members of the chamber of deputies of the bourbon restoration knights of the order of saint louis commandeurs of the legion d'honneur place of birth missing
dorothee de monfreid (born 1973) is a french author and illustrator. she worked as a graphic designer, before beginning to work on children's books. she is best known for illustrating i really want to eat a child. in addition to her work on children's books, dorothee also creates comics and is an accomplished ukulele player. she lives and works in paris.  recent english publications 2014 - the cake, 32pp.,   2015 - shhh! i'm sleeping, 24pp.,   2016 - a day with dogs, 64pp.,  references  external links  dorothee's blog english author page  1973 births living people french children's book illustrators french children's writers french women children's writers 21st-century french women writers french illustrators french women illustrators french graphic designers
the chrysler six was a series of cars that were all installed with the chrysler straight six when the company assumed operations of the maxwell automobile company in 1924, and chalmers automobile company in 1926. the chrysler six initially consisted of several models, then series designations that originally declared the approximate top speed each vehicle was able to consistently maintain, then each series number was incrementally updated every new model year, and each series was offered in several body style choices. the engines were technically advanced for their time and were entered in the 24 hours of le mans for 1925, 1928 and 1929.  history development of the b-70 began as early as 1919 for willys corporation, a holding company owned by john willys, independent of the willys-overland organization. the vehicle was originally intended to be launched as the willys six. three former studebaker engineers were responsible for the design, fred zeder, owen skelton and carl breer, who were known as "the three musketeers" when they worked for studebaker and introduced the studebaker big six.  when the willys corporation went bankrupt in 1919, william c. durant, who had been fired as president of general motors for a second time, out bid the purchase of their modern factory in elizabeth, new jersey which originally built duesenbergs, including several prototypes and the willys six, against walter chrysler who was only interested in the willys six car. for his new company, chrysler needed a bigger, more luxurious vehicle with which to compete against the buick master six, chrysler's former employer. when durant won the bidding, it led to the creation of the flint six and an attempt to create a competitor to gm called united states motor company. zeder, skelton and breer did not agree at all with the new concept, especially since many of their innovative ideas had been highlighted. chrysler brought the three to chalmers, where they resumed development from mid-1923 at the point at which it had been interrupted by durant. in january 1924, the finished product was ceremoniously presented to the public as the chrysler six model b-70 in the commodore hotel on the occasion of the new york auto show.  model b-70  the chrysler six model b-70  is a full-size car that was the first car produced by chrysler from 1924 to 1925. it was the first model produced under the chrysler brand. it replaced the cars of maxwell, whose brand was bought by walter chrysler in 1921. nine different bodies supplied from fisher body co. were offered
in the first year of production. the open cars initially had horizontally split windshields inspired by the brewster windshield and  wheels with five lug nuts attached to hydraulic four-wheel drum brakes. the success was sensational: 32,000 cars had been sold by the end of 1924, a new record for the introduction of a new model. with the introduction of the b-70, the production of the chalmers was stopped. the entry level roadster with rumble seat was available for us$1,595 ($ in  dollars ), while top model documented was the town car listed at us$3,725 ($ in  dollars ). the new chrysler offered several items, technology and body style choices that had become extra cost items from other manufacturers that chrysler included for no extra cost, while it was priced in the medium price field.  the cars with the high-performance engines reached a top speed of 70 to 75 mph (112 to 120 km/h), only about 5 mph less than the packard eight. ralph depalma won the mt. wilson hill climb driving a stripped down touring car 1,000 miles in 786 minutes on 5 january 1925. a stripped down roadster was entered at the 1925 24 hours of le mans where it finished the race, and sir malcolm campbell set a lap record of  at brooklands in a streamlined roadster.  in the following year, maxwell became the chrysler corporation. the cars continued to be built almost unchanged, only the split windshield on the open models was replaced by a one-piece, top-hinged version. from mid-1925, chrysler produced its own bodies after purchasing the kercheval body factory of detroit which became the chrysler factory at jefferson avenue. the hood ornament/radiator cap was a stylized viking winged helmet.  model g-70  in 1926, the model b-70 was replaced by the model g-70, of which 72,039 g-70s out of a total of 108,600 chryslers had been built. the g-70 was an appearance upgrade while the previous b-70 had only been manufactured for two years. there were minor changes made to the door openings, headlight design had exterior trim changes while the exterior headlight housings had lengthened. there were several body style choices offered in both two-door and four door configurations, and among them was the  chrysler touring four-door, five-passenger which was listed at us$1,395 ($ in  dollars ). there was for the first time a trim
package called royal coupe and crown sedan which in later years became model names. the only engine displacement offered was the . the g-70 was joined by the all new luxury model chrysler series e-80 which was renamed imperial for 1927 for the first time.  series 60 and series 70  the series 60 was the shorter wheelbase version of the model g-70 in 1927, while the series 70 remained with the longer wheelbase. chrysler branded vehicles were now positioned as "nicely equipped" and due to the sales successes, the company purchased dodge in 1928, while the entry level chrysler series 50 was rebranded plymouth in 1928, and desoto would be introduced in 1929. the series 60 was developed from the previous series 50 which only had a four-cylinder engine, then was changed to the plymouth model q. the series 60 had upgraded interior and the six-cylinder engine and upscale appearance items, and was offered in six, two-door body style choices to include roadsters with only two, four-door body style selections of a choice of convertible open or closed passenger compartment. the series 70 remained with the established longer wheelbase, offering seven, two-door body style choices and five, four-door body style selections. different body style choices were given "sport" or "custom sport" model names for phaeton, rumbleseat coupes and convertibles and a landau brougham. standard equipment included hydraulic brakes, one-piece glass windshields, and a delco-remy ignition system as well as a coincidental lock on the manual transmission. both the series 60 and 70 offered standard equipment wheel size of  with a choice of wooden spoke or pressed steel discs. the top level body style choice for the series 70 was the crown sedan at us$1,795 ($ in  dollars ), offering features that were extra cost on other brands as standard. one of the optional items were a removable windshield and wind wings for coupes installed with a rumbleseat. the dodge six was first introduced in 1927 and was based on the chrysler six series 60.  for 1928 the series 62 and series 72 offered appearance changes and engineering improvements, adding more standard equipment while keeping retail prices unchanged. as the flagship imperial series 80l began to offer customized coachwork choices for additional cost, the series 72 offered similar appearances and model naming conventions but modestly priced without the "imperial" name. advancements shared with the series 62 and 72 include a taller radiator, headlight posts attached to the chassis directly, tubular
front axle, rubber shock insulators on leaf springs, with throttle and headlight controls installed on the steering wheel center hub. convenience items included an electric gas gauge installed in the instrument panel, ignition lock on the dashboard, and an exterior mounted sun visor. prices listed for the series 62 four-door, five passenger landau sedan was documented at us$1,235 ($ in  dollars ) on a  wheelbase while the series 72 four-door, five passenger imperial town cabriolet by lebaron was listed at us$3,595 ($ in  dollars ) on a  wheelbase. four series 72 roadsters were entered in the 1928 24 hours of le mans. all were driven by french teams while two finished third and fourth in their class, which only consisted of two bentley 4½ litre and one stutz vertical eight bb, while two cars did not finish due to radiator and starter failure. the series 62 was badge engineered again and introduced as the desoto six in 1929.  production year 1929 introduced two series platforms as the chrysler six, with the series 65 with a  wheelbase and the series 75 had a  wheelbase. both series shared narrow profile radiators and the cowl height was increased. the ignition switch was upgraded to a keyhole, and the crown depth of the fenders over the wheels was lengthened, and built-in adjustable radiator shutters were introduced as well. the color combination of the dashboard was how the different series could be distinguished, with silver and black for the series 65 and gold and black for the series 75. delco remy lovejoy hydraulic shock absorbers were now available on all series. coachwork choices were reduced for the series 65 and added to the series 75, listing five coupe selections and seven sedan choices, listing four separate convertible sedan options. one series 75 and one series 77 roadsters were again entered in the 1929 24 hours of le mans, where both were driven by the same french teams from the previous year and finished sixth and seventh in their class, which only consisted of three bentley 4½ litres.  series cj, cm, ci, co, ca, cb the new decade 1930 saw updated styling and engineering efforts for chrysler, that introduced the chrysler six series cj, which was a downsized version of the series 66, series 70 and the series 77. the timing was not the best with the wall street crash of 1929 and the great depression beginning in september but chrysler forged ahead and updated their product line.
while cars of the 1930s shared common appearances across all manufacturers, some stylistic features were introduced to distinguish, and chrysler introduced pennon-type hood louvers on all sixes, which was replaced mid-year with vertical hood louvers that were more functional and dissipated heat more effectively. the front headlight tie-bar was updated to a curved appearance and the model number attached as a pendant to the top of the bar. in 1931, chrysler's former employer buick introduced the buick century which installed the large straight eight from the roadmaster and installed it in the entry-level special.  the series cj introduced a different chassis from the previous series 60 and 70 in that it was closer to the ground, and introduced hydraulic internal brakes, a fuel pump, rubber spring shackles and hydraulic shock absorbers, while introducing a narrow profile radiator that was slightly angled rearwards that was used by the chrysler eight and imperial. the series cj was offered as a roadster, business coupe or convertible coupe, which was listed at us$925 ($ in  dollars ) and a touring sedan or closed-body royal sedan, listed at us$845 ($ in  dollars ). the 1931 series cm was essentially the series cj with cowl lights added at the edge of the engine hood and cowl next to the front door leading edge. the series cm introduced the new cord l-29 influenced chrysler corporate appearance shared with desoto, dodge and plymouth.  for 1932 the series ci was the sole straight-six product and replaced the original series 60 and 70, and ended the naming tradition of using top miles per hour attainable in the series names and ended the original appearance body work introduced in 1925. engineering advances and appearances that were first introduced in 1931 on the imperial eight had become standard equipment on all chryslers, to include the series ci.  model year 1933 series co was largely a carryover with front fenders that extended forward and the crown of the fenders was deeper to cover the wheels. to aid entry into the front passenger compartment, the doors on both two- and four-door vehicles were hinged in the center, so that the front doors opened from the leading edge of the doors, or in a "suicide door" manner, but the rear doors opened at the trailing edge, or in a conventional manner. ventilation doors on the sides of the engine compartment were now individual doors instead of vertical louvers, sharing an appearance with the imperial.  for 1934, the chrysler airflow was introduced to replace the eight-cylinder chrysler royal
and the series ca and cb were intended to be the final version of this platform. minor changes included valanced front and rear fenders that hung from behind the wheels, horizontal hood louvers, and body colored radiator shells that concealed the radiator. an independent front suspension was introduced, vent windows and steel spoked wheels permanently replaced wood spokes. the series ca offered a  wheelbase while the series cb offered a  wheelbase but was used for sedans only with two body style choices, with one being a convertible four-door with the centrally located door hinges continued from the previous year. the series ca and cb could still be offered in chassis only for customized coachwork while the series cu airflow wasn't due to the unibody construction. the series ca roadster convertible was available for us$865 ($ in  dollars ), and the four-door sedan was listed at us$845 ($ in  dollars ) while the longer series cb was available for us$970 ($ in  dollars ) for the convertible sedan.  chrysler airstream the chrysler airstream is an automobile produced by chrysler in 1935 and 1936 and was the revised version of the chrysler six series ca and cb. the airstream outsold the airflow five to one in its first year, and nearly nine to one in 1936. when the airflow wasn't accepted due to its unusual appearance, chrysler kept the ten year old chrysler six platform in production and refreshed the appearance, while giving it the nameplate "airstream".  the 1935 airstream was available with both the straight six and the straight eight, and was given the model designation series c-6 for the six cylinder, while the airstream series cz was installed with the straight eight. the airstream deluxe series c-1 was offered with two wheelbase choices and standard straight eight.   the airstream deluxe series c-1 was a junior model to the airflow which shared the series c-1 designation and the chrysler straight eight. the airstream series c-6 was a continuation of the previous chrysler six series ca, where chrysler retrimmed the "ca", gave the car rear fender skirts, and rolled out a model that they hoped would appeal to depression-era buyers. by marketing the airstream alongside the airflow, chrysler could offer a product the public would purchase while hoping to produce enough airflows to offset their development costs. a similar car, with the same airstream name was also sold by chrysler's companion brand desoto during the
period. the "suicide door" approach was revised to the rear doors while the front doors opened conventionally, while the previous generation had the door hinged installed on the "b-pillar" providing rearward opening front doors.  for 1936, the airstream series c-7 was installed with the straight-six, while the deluxe airstream series c-8 came with the carryover longer wheelbase choices and the straight-eight engine.   chrysler discontinued the "airstream" model name for both chrysler and desoto at the beginning of the 1937 model year and reintroduced the chrysler royal series c-16 for six-cylinder and the chrysler imperial series c-14 for the eight-cylinder.  see also chrysler airflow  references  source:   cars introduced in 1924 chrysler vehicles mid-size cars roadsters coupes sedans rear-wheel-drive vehicles first car made by manufacturer
judvan lucas de almeida (born 2 august 1991) is a brazilian footballer who plays as a midfielder for brazilian club taguatinga.  references  1991 births living people brazilian footballers people from piaui association football midfielders sociedade esportiva do gama players dorados de sinaloa footballers ceilandia esporte clube players brasilia futebol clube players associacao atletica anapolina players campeonato brasileiro serie d players ascenso mx players brazilian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in mexico brazilian expatriate sportspeople in mexico
uwe preißler (born 17 june 1967) is a german former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics winning a silver medal.  references  external links    1967 births living people east german male cyclists olympic cyclists of east germany cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics medalists at the 1988 summer olympics olympic medalists in cycling olympic silver medalists for east germany people from muhlhausen
dirty heads is the fifth studio album by reggae/rock/rap hybrid band the dirty heads. the album was released on july 15, 2016.  track listing  personnel  dustin "duddy b" bushnell - lead vocals, guitar  jared "dirty j" watson - lead vocals  david foral - bass guitar  jon olazabal - percussion  matt ochoa - drums  charts  references   2016 albums dirty heads albums five seven music albums
gunter heyden (16 february 1921 - 21 january 2002) was a german professor of philosophy and a sociologist. between 1969 and 1989 he was the director of the east berlin based institute for marxism-leninism.  gunter heyden was born in stargard, a small industrial town and railway junction a short distance to the east of stettin.   his father was a qualified oven engineer.   after leaving school he trained for and  entered his father's profession.  in 1941 he was conscripted for military service.   in march 1945 he was captured by the americans and then transferred to the soviets, spending the nearly five years, till december 1949, as a prisoner of war.   during his final six months of detention, between july and december 1949, he benefitted from a period of political education at a soviet antifascist academy.  he returned early in 1950 to what had recently, in october 1949, been relaunched as the german democratic republic (east germany), a separated soviet sponsored german state with political and socio-economic structures consciously modelled on those of the soviet union itself.   he promptly joined the new nation's ruling socialist unity party ("sozialistische einheitspartei deutschlands" / sed).  in 1950/51 he taught at the trades union federation academy in beesenstedt, latterly serving as the institution's deputy head.  between 1952 and 1956 he studied at the party central committee's prestigious institute for social sciences ("institut fur gesellschaftswissenschaften beim zk der sed" / ifg) - as it was known at that time - emerging with a doctorate.   he remained at the institute, now with a succession of teaching posts, for another decade.   between 1957 and 1964, and again between 1966 and 1969, he held the top teaching chair for marxist-leninist philosophy.   in 1962 he was appointed professor of historical materialism at the institute.   from 1964 till 1966 he was also deputy director of the  party central committee's institute for opinion research, also serving during this period as a member of the politburo's agitprop commission.  from 1964 till 1968 heyden headed up the philosophy department at the (east) german academy of sciences.   in 1969 he was given a full professorship at the  berlin institute for marxism-leninism, where he served as director, in succession to lothar berthold, till 1989.   he also led the editorial commission for the marx-engels-gesamtausgabe (mega) on the german side.  between 1956 and
1987 he was a member of the editorial college of the "german philosophy journal" (der "deutschen zeitschrift fur philosophie"), and from 1976 till 1989 he was in addition a member of the editorial college of the sed newspaper, "einheit" ("unity").   between 1981 and 1989 he was also a member of the national audit commission ("zentrale revisionskommission").  heyden died in berlin on 21 january 2002 at the age of 80.  awards and honours   1968 patriotic order of merit in silver  1981 national prize of the german democratic republic  1981 patriotic order of merit in gold  1986 order of karl marx  references  1921 births 2002 deaths people from stargard people from the province of pomerania socialist unity party of germany members free german trade union federation members german sociologists recipients of the order of karl marx recipients of the patriotic order of merit in gold recipients of the banner of labor recipients of the national prize of east germany 20th-century german philosophers german prisoners of war in world war ii held by the united states german prisoners of war in world war ii held by the soviet union
olenecamptus palawanus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
osdorfer born is a major estate of prefabricated houses in the osdorf and lurup quarters of hamburg, germany. it is named after a small stream flowing into the dupenau stream.  history the major settlement with 5,000 flats for 12,000 people, including some high rises, had been planned since 1963 and was erected from 1966 to 1971. next to steilshoop and mummelmannsberg, osdorfer born belonged to the first major settlements (lit. translation of "großsiedlungen") of the city. the 21-floor high rise at the street of achtern born was dubbed "affenfelsen" (lit. "monkey rock", because of the similarity to a constructed rock in hagenbeck's tierpark).  in the center of the settlement, the mall of "born center" is located. nearby, "kl!ck kindermuseum hamburg", a museum for children, as well as mary magdalene church can be found. in 2002, the highest graffito of the world also was recorded at a wall at osdorfer born with a height of 43 m.  osdorfer born was often described as "deprived area" or "social hotspot" (german: "sozialer brennpunkt"). the proportion of welfare recipients and migrants is each about 20 percent, unemployment was rising during the 2000s. on the other hand, the district authorities recently adopted several measures to improve the quality of living and the social environment.  notable persons  andre trulsen, football player  lx, rap artist  references  external links official website  housing estates in germany buildings and structures in altona, hamburg
progress ms-08 (), identified by nasa as progress 69p, is a progress spacecraft used by roscosmos to resupply the international space station (iss).  history  the progress-ms is a uncrewed freighter based on the progress-m featuring improved avionics. this improved variant first launched on 21 december 2015. it has the following improvements:   new external compartment that enables it to deploy satellites. each compartment can hold up to four launch containers. first time installed on progress ms-03.  enhanced redundancy thanks to the addition of a backup system of electrical motors for the docking and sealing mechanism.  improved micrometeoroid (mmod) protection with additional panels in the cargo compartment.  luch russian relay satellites link capabilities enable telemetry and control even when not in direct view of ground radio stations.  gnss autonomous navigation enables real time determination of the status vector and orbital parameters dispensing with the need of ground station orbit determination.  real time relative navigation thanks to direct radio data exchange capabilities with the space station.  new digital radio that enables enhanced tv camera view for the docking operations.  the ukrainian chezara kvant-v on board radio system and antenna/feeder system has been replaced with a unified command telemetry system (ucts).  replacement of the kurs a with kurs na digital system.  launch  progress ms-08 launched on 13 february 2018 from the baikonur cosmodrome in kazakhstan atop a soyuz-2.1a rocket, at 08:13:33 utc.  docking progress ms-08 docked on 15 february 2018 with the aft docking port of the zvezda module, at 10:38 utc.  cargo  the progress ms-08 spacecraft delivered 2,494 kg of cargo and supplies to the international space station. the following is a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:   dry cargo: 1,390 kg  fuel: 890 kg  oxygen and air: 46 kg  water: 430 kg  progress ms-08 also includes two nanosatellites: tanyusha yuzgu-3 (1998-067pj) and tanyusha yuzgu-4 (1998-067pk) (a.k.a. radioskaf rs-8 and radioskaf rs-9) with a mass of 2.5 kg, which was developed jointly by rkk energia and students at the south-western state university, yuzgu, in the city of kursk. the satellites will
be launched by spacewalking cosmonauts.  undocking and decay  undocking on 23 august 2018, at 02:16 utc. and decay in the atmosphere and its debris entered the pacific ocean, on 30 august 2018.  references   progress (spacecraft) missions spacecraft launched in 2018 2018 in russia supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft launched by soyuz-2 rockets spacecraft which reentered in 2018
white county asylum, also known as the lakeview home, was a historic county home located at union township, white county, indiana. the main building was built in 1907-1908, and was a large four-level, richardsonian romanesque style brick building with limestone and brick trim.  it consisted of a central administrative section flanked by residential wings.  the building featured a high hipped roof.  also on the property is a contributing gable roofed barn (1908).  the property is a contributing site.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2010. the building was demolished in 2017, and it was delisted in 2019.  references  government buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana richardsonian romanesque architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1908 buildings and structures in white county, indiana national register of historic places in white county, indiana 1908 establishments in indiana former national register of historic places in indiana demolished buildings and structures in indiana buildings and structures demolished in 2017
victor manuel zuniga medina (born march 21, 1996 in state of mexico), is a mexican professional footballer who currently plays for cruz azul hidalgo as a winger.  honours  international mexico u17  concacaf u-17 championship: 2013  fifa u-17 world cup runner-up: 2013  references  1996 births living people mexican footballers association football forwards cruz azul footballers venados f.c. players cruz azul hidalgo footballers liga mx players ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players people from nezahualcoyotl footballers from the state of mexico
siddeswara kshetram, popularly known for  "siddeswara swamy temple", is an ancient hindu temple of lord siddeswara on the hilltop of siddeswara gutta in gurramkonda in india. it is one of the oldest temples in chittoor district.  the sanctum sanctorum of the temple has lord siddeswara along with parvathi ammavaru and nandi the temple is located on a hilltop.  history and legend  locals used to celebrate jathara at the time of shivarathri at the temple.  the practice was renewed in 2013 and three new idols were placed in the temple.  references   hindu temples in chittoor district
shashi kant is an indian policeman.  life  shashi kant is a 1977 batch, punjab cadre indian police service (ips) officer who has served in several positions in his career before retiring in 2012 as director general of police (dgp). he was the director general (prisons), punjab, india from october 2011 to june 2012. the former dgp is known for his crusade against illegal drug trade in the state of punjab and has named several senior ministers who are patronizing drugs. in 2012 he took part in the indian anti-corruption movement led by social activist anna hazare.  references  people from bareilly 1954 births living people
harlow hill may refer to:  harlow hill, harrogate, an area of harrogate, north yorkshire, england harlow hill, northumberland, a village in england  see also harlow (disambiguation) harrow hill (disambiguation)
veronica inglese (born 22 november 1990) is an italian long-distance runner. she won a silver medal at the 2016 european athletics championships.  biography in the 5,000m, she won the bronze medal at the 2009 european junior championships in athletics. she won twelve italian national titles, including four senior (5000m, 10 km road, cross-country and 10,000m track). she has been selected several times on the national team: at the 2011 world championships, at the 2013 european cross country championships where she finished 8th, and at the 2014 half marathon world championships, among others.  on 1 may 2016, she ran in palo alto the 10,000m in 31:42:02, which qualifies her for the rio olympics, a time she adds over 5,000m, 15:22:45, 25 june 2016 in rieti to win the national championship. on 6 july 2016, she finished 6th in the 10,000m european championships in amsterdam, beating her personal best, and on 10 july she won the half marathon silver medal behind sara moreira.  national titles she won four national championships at individual senior level in four different specialities.  italian athletics championships  5000 m: 2016  10,000 m: 2014  10 km road: 2103  cross-country running: 2014  references  external links    1990 births living people italian female long-distance runners athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of italy athletics competitors of gruppo sportivo esercito italian female cross country runners people from barletta sportspeople from apulia
iron moon, also known as the verse of us, is a 2015 chinese feature documentary film directed by xiaoyu qin and feiyue wu. the documentary follows working class poets in china.  awards  references  external links  2015 films chinese films chinese documentary films 2015 documentary films china film group corporation films
shane herbert (born december 29, 1988) is a professional canadian football defensive back who is currently a free agent. he was signed by the toronto argonauts in june 2011 after going undrafted in the 2011 cfl draft. he returned to the wilfrid laurier golden hawks in 2011 to complete his fifth year of play. he re-joined the argonauts and made his cfl debut on june 28, 2013 against the hamilton tiger-cats, but sustained a season-ending injury in the game. he returned to play in the 2014 and 2015 seasons, playing in a total of 24 games with the argonauts. he was part of toronto's final cuts of 2016 training camp and was promptly signed by the roughriders on june 19, 2016.  references  external links   saskatchewan roughriders bio   1988 births living people canadian football defensive backs people from ajax, ontario players of canadian football from ontario saskatchewan roughriders players wilfrid laurier golden hawks football players toronto argonauts players
the northeast siberian taiga ecoregion (wwf id:pa0605) is an area of "sparse taiga forest" between the lena river and the kolyma river in northeastern siberia, russia.  the ecoregion's internal borders form a patchwork of territory constituting the southern part of the east siberian lowland, as well as lowlands around the east siberian mountains, including the ridges and peaks of the verkhoyansk range and the chersky range.  on the southern border of the ecoregion is the north coast of the sea of okhotsk, giving the region maritime boreal forests as well as the continental forests situated inland.  the ecoregion is one of the largest tracts of virgin boreal forest in the world, due to the very sparse population and difficult access.  it is mostly in the sakha republic (yakutsk region).  location and description  the ecoregion covers an area about 1,800 km west-east by 1,000 km north-south. the western border is the lena river; beyond that is the east siberian taiga ecoregion.  the eastern edge is the kolyma river, beyond which farther east is the bering tundra ecoregion.  to the north is a strip arctic coastal tundra about 100 km wide, the northeast siberian coastal tundra ecoregion. the okhotsk sea to the south completes the outline of the ecoregion, but internally the verhkoyansk and chersky mountains (which are in the "cherskii-kolyma mountain tundra" ecoregion) confines the ecoregion into valleys and lowlands. the region is in the palearctic realm (euro-siberian region). it covers .  the verkhovyansk range is an "l-shaped" range that runs down the east side of the lena before turning west-east across the south of the ecoregion.   they chersky range runs northwest-to-southeast through the middles of the region.  their upper slopes and peaks are too cold and dry to support the forests and flora of the lowlands in the northeast siberian taiga ecoregion.  to the east and north of the mountains is the kolyma river basin.  in addition to the kolyma river, the ecoregion contains the indigirka river and the yana river.  climate  the region has a tundra climate (koppen climate classification: et), with long, very cold winters and a brief warm summer.  regions with et climate have at least one month with temperatures averaging above , and hence have a period of melted snow; but et regions also have no month
averaging above  and hence are at the northern limit of ability to support tall, closed forests.    precipitation is relatively low, ranging from 150-200 mm/year in central yakutia, to 400-500 mm/year in the mountains.  flora  the dominant trees are larix cajanderi (larch) and betula pendula (silver birch), with a ground cover of pinus pumila (siberian dwarf pine) and lichen. further development of the forest is limited by the continuous permafrost of the area, and by the harsh cold winters and relatively low precipitation. the region is a large sink for atmospheric carbon dioxide.  in the lowland floodplains there are steppe floral communities that feature fescue (festuca), wheatgrass, alpine oatgrass (helictotrichon), cinquefoils (potentilla tollii), orostachys spinosa, carex pediformis, and others. the ecoregion is one of the floral regions of the circumboreal region.  fauna  migrant waterfowl are common in the northern areas near the tundra; species include melanitta nigra (common scoter), anser fabalis (bean goose), and anas formosa (baikal teal). off the rocky coast of the sea of okhotsk are important breading areas for seabirds. over one million individuals from 15 species are seen in the area, and is one of the only breeding grounds for the little curlew and the critically endangered siberian crane.  the siberian taiga also is home to galliforms, like the willow ptarmigan (lagopus lagopus) and rock ptarmigan (lagopus muta) in areas of open tundra. populations of black-billed capercaillies (tetrao urogalloides) and hazel grouse (tetrastes bonasia) tend to inhabit forested habitat.  common mammals are elk (alces alces), siberian chipmunk (eutamias sibiricus), lynx (felis lynx), siberian weasel (mustela sibirica), red fox (vulpes vulpes) and brown bear (ursus arctos).  protections  notable protected areas of the russian federation in the west siberian taiga include:  magadan nature reserve an iucn class ia "strict ecological reserve" (a zapovednik). (area: 782 km2)  threats  the region is relatively untouched by human activities; the region is one of the largest virgin forests in the world.  there is some mining activity, and logging
.  as usual with boreal forests, wild fires are a threat in the summer.  urban areas and settlements  the area is sparsely populated; the only city is magadan on the okhotsk sea, and scattered mining and logging villages.  see also   list of ecoregions in russia  references   ecoregions of russia ecoregions of asia palearctic ecoregions taiga and boreal forests
hamdou mohamed elhouni (, born 2 february 1994) is a libyan professional footballer who plays for tunisian club esperance sportive de tunis and the libya national team as a left winger.  he has previously played for primeira liga club's victoria setubal, santa clara, benfica, chaves and aves.  international career  international goals scores and results list libya's goal tally first.  references  external links    profile at fpf (archived)      1994 births living people people from tripoli libyan footballers association football forwards al-ahli sc (tripoli) players libyan expatriate footballers libyan expatriate sportspeople in portugal libyan expatriate sportspeople in tunisia libyan expatriate sportspeople expatriate footballers in portugal expatriate footballers in tunisia vitoria f.c. players c.d. santa clara players liga portugal 2 players s.l. benfica footballers g.d. chaves players c.d. aves players esperance sportive de tunis players primeira liga players tunisian ligue professionnelle 1 players libya international footballers libyan premier league players
drei klavierstucke (three piano pieces) may refer to:  arnold schoenberg:  drei klavierstucke (1894)  drei klavierstucke (schoenberg), op. 11 (1909) franz schubert: drei klavierstucke d 459a, upon first publication appended to piano sonata in e major, d 459 drei klavierstucke d 946, a.k.a. schubert's three last impromptus (schubert)
escombreras is an islet at the mouth of cartagena's port, in spain's region of murcia. since 2011 a breakwater built for the expansion of cartagena's port hooks around the north side of the island, but does not connect to it.  the steep islet covers 4 hectares. an anchorage and lighthouse (built in 1864 at 65 metres above sea level) are present, but there is no permanent human habitation.  archeological remains from the greek and roman periods have been found on the islet.  the islet is included within a natural park.  references  islands of spain uninhabited islands of spain landforms of the region of murcia
lanark was a provincial riding in ontario, canada, that was created for the 1934 election. in 1987 there was a minor redistribution and the riding was renamed to lanark-renfrew. it was abolished prior to the 1999 election. it was merged into the riding of renfrew-nipissing-pembroke.  boundaries in 1933, in an austerity measure to mark the depression times, the province passed an update to the representation act that reduced the number of seats in the legislature from 112 to 90. the riding of lanark was created from parts of lanark north and lanark south and consisted of the townships of beckwith, bathurst, burgess north, dalhousie, darling, drummond, elmsley north, lanark, lavant, montague, pakenham, ramsay, sherbrooke north and sherbrooke south. it also included the towns of almonte, carleton place, perth, and smith's falls and the village of lanark.  members of provincial parliament  references  notes  citations  defunct ontario provincial electoral districts
the county of robe is one of the 49 cadastral counties of south australia. it was proclaimed by and named for governor frederick robe in  1846. it covers a portion of the state's south-east from the west coast at robe to the border with victoria on the east. this includes the following contemporary local government areas of the state:  district council of robe  naracoorte lucindale council (excluding north third)  kingston district council (small south portion)  wattle range council (small north portion)  hundreds  the county of robe is divided into the following 18 hundreds:  hundred of mount benson (wangolina)  hundred of bowaka (reedy creek)  hundred of townsend (avenue range)  hundred of joyce (lucindale)  hundred of spence (spence)  hundred of naracoorte (naracoorte)  hundred of jessie (hynam)  hundred of waterhouse (robe)  hundred of ross (mount benson)  hundred of conmurra (conmurra)  hundred of robertson (bool lagoon)  hundred of joanna (joanna)  hundred of bray (bray)  hundred of smith (greenways)  hundred of fox (fox)  hundred of coles (coles)  hundred of killanoola (maaoupe)  hundred of comaum (coonawarra, comaum)  references  robe
the obelisk at prague castle is a granite monolith and world war i memorial designed by joze plecnik, installed at prague castle in prague, czech republic.  it stands 16 meters high.  it is located in the third castle courtyard.  the obelisk was donated by tomas garrigue masaryk.  it was erected in late 1928 to mark the tenth anniversary of the establishment of the first czechoslovak republic. the obelisk was originally to have been much larger, but while it was being transported to its intended location in 1928, it broke in two, and only part could be salvaged.  references  external links     granite sculptures monuments and memorials in prague obelisks outdoor sculptures in prague prague castle world war i memorials
holland herald is the inflight magazine of the dutch airline klm. it is the oldest inflight magazine.  history and profile holland herald was first published on 21 january 1966. in the first year the magazine was published bimonthly and black and white. next year its frequency was switched to monthly. the magazine is published in english.  holland herald was formerly published by the ink publishing. the company began to publish it in 2009. as of 2019 hearst is the publisher of the magazine.  cnn named holland herald as the tenth best inflight magazine worldwide in 2012. the first 3d advertisement was published in the magazine. it featured a beer brand, heineken.  references  external links  official website  1966 establishments in the netherlands air france-klm bi-monthly magazines published in the netherlands english-language magazines gruner + jahr hearst communications publications inflight magazines magazines established in 1966 magazines published in amsterdam monthly magazines published in the netherlands tourism magazines
the 31st district of the iowa senate is located in northeast iowa, and is currently composed of black hawk county.  current elected officials william dotzler is the senator currently representing the 31st district.  the area of the 31st district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 61st district (represented by timi brown-powers) the 62nd district (represented by ras smith)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  lowell junkins, 1983-1985 gene fraise, 1986-1992 ralph rosenberg, 1993-1994 johnie hammond, 1995-2002 matt mccoy, 2003-2012 william dotzler, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  31
ettore ponti (26 january 1855 - 2 october 1919) was an italian politician. he was mayor of milan, and recipient of the order of merit for labour.  references  external links    1855 births 1919 deaths 19th-century italian politicians 20th-century italian politicians recipients of the order of merit for labour mayors of milan
in mid-june 2016, severe weather such as heavy rainfall, thunderstorms and hail began across southern china, triggering deadly floods. over the following month, additional rain events exacerbated flooding and affected more of the country. areas along the yangtze river and huai river have been particularly hard-hit. an estimated 32 million people across 26 provinces were affected and more than 200 people were killed.  of cropland was destroyed, with state damage estimates of around us$5.73 billion. according to aon benfield, the damage estimate has reached us$22 billion. flooding of this magnitude was last seen in the country in 1998. the floods destroyed over 23,600 houses and left 3,600 refugees homeless.  background during the late spring and early summer, a semi-permanent frontal boundary-called the meiyu front-emerges across eastern china, taiwan, and japan. this feature leads to prolonged periods of heavy rain and thunderstorms which frequently cause damage. rainfall along this boundary tends to be particularly heavy in post-el nino summers such as the summer of 2016.  cause   year 2016 has been defined as el nino year and the south part of china is largely influenced by this weather phenomena.  many lakes in cities had been turned into land in the development process of modern cities. because of the enormous demand for food and housing (china population) in china, the natural drainage system has been damaged, water logging leading to problems in inner city development.  many dams have been built along the yangtze river, reducing the amount of water which could flow through the river.  impact  heavy rainfall in south china began on 14 june, resulting in floods that killed 14 people. over the following week, flooding spread across seven provinces and claimed a further 22 lives. by 20 june, at least 3.7 million people had been affected by the disaster and 197,000 were displaced. at least 10,500 homes collapsed and damage reached ¥2.7 billion (us$410 million). on 23 june, a violent ef4 tornado devastated communities in funing and sheyang counties within jiangsu. at least 99 people were killed and 846 others were injured, making it the deadliest tornado to hit china in half a century.  by the end of june, much of eastern china suffered from flooding with areas along the yangtze river experiencing the worst effects. more than 200,000 homes were damaged and economic losses reached ¥29 billion (us$4.4 billion).  on
2 july, 23 people were killed and 7 injured when a landslide engulfed a village in bijie, guizhou. photos of two pig farmers on their submerged farm in lu'an, anhui went viral leading to 6,000 pigs being rescued from rising waters. the outskirts of liuzhou, guangxi was flooded by the swollen liu river. 35 people were killed after a landslide hit a village in the kunlun mountains, xinjiang on 7 july.  some areas in northern, central and eastern parts of china have been affected by severe weather, resulting in floods and landslides. by july 28, there were 162 missing and 417 flood deaths were recorded. as a result, the china national commission for disaster management and the ministry of civil affairs issued 16 four-level national responses. however, there is no international support.  the floods in beijing, hebei, shandong, liaoning and heilongjiang have had a major impact on china, and the persistent severe weather has affected the southern regions, such as fujian, guangdong and jiangxi. by september 19, typhoons meranti and malakas had caused damage to 16 cities and 107 counties. therefore, the china national disaster commission for disaster reduction (ncdr) and ministry of civil affairs issued four levels of emergency measures for the fujian and zhejiang regions. from september 18 to september 22, more than 8,000 people need assistance, and even 5,400 people need to be moved to temporary housing. 14 people were confirmed dead and 9 others lost contact.  hubei wuhan saw  of rainfall during the first week of july, surpassing the record that fell on the city in 1991. a red alert for heavy rainfall was issued on 2 july, the same day that eight people died after a  section of a  tall wall collapsed on top of them. the city's subway system, the wuhan metro was partially submerged as was the main railway station. in ezhou, the mingtang stadium was flooded, waterlogging the entire pitch within the bowl structure. at least 27 people were killed in the province and 400,000 required evacuation. flooding encompassed  of crops; 15,000 homes collapsed or sustained major damage, and economic losses reached ¥5.7 billion (us$850 million).  reactions on 6 july, chinese premier li keqiang toured anhui, hubei and hunan and called on local officials to prepare for more flooding. at the same time, chinese paramount leader xi jinping dispatched the chinese army and armed police to help with flood relief efforts. media reports have suggested that typhoon nepartak may
worsen the flooding when it makes landfall traveling from taiwan.  see also  2008 south china floods 2010 china floods 2011 china floods 2013 china floods 2015 china floods typhoon nepartak (2016) july 2016 north china cyclone  references  external links  china: torrential rains cause widespread flooding  china floods 2016 disasters in china yangtze river floods 2016 meteorology june 2016 events in china july 2016 events in china august 2016 events in china september 2016 events in china
alfredo gourgel pereira melao  (21 june 1921 - 30 january 1980), is a former portuguese footballer who played as a forward.  he was most known for his short four-year spell at benfica, where he won one primeira liga and two portuguese cup.  career born in portugal, from angolan parents, melao joined benfica in 1946, making his debut on 8 december in a match against vitoria de guimaraes. he battled with rogerio pipi, arsenio and julinho for playing time, but only collected 9 appearances in his first year. in his second season, he double his playing time, and scored 11 goals, but was still behind the attacking trio in the pecking order. he won his first title in the following season, helping benfica win the taca de portugal, featuring in the 1949 taca de portugal final with atletico cp.   melao continued to collect honours in 1949-50, winning his first league title after contributing with 6 goals in 11 matches. with another portuguese cup in 1950-51, melao ended his benfica career with 73 games and 34 goals, moving on to represent vitoria de setubal.  honours benfica primeira divisao: 1949-50  taca de portugal: 1948-49, 1950-51  references general    specific  1921 births 1980 deaths portuguese footballers association football forwards primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers vitoria f.c. players
angela azul concepcion caccia (born 13 august 1998 in avellaneda, province of buenos aires, argentina), known as angela torres, is an argentinian actress and singer. she is the daughter of the actress gloria carra and of the musician marcelo torres, niece of the popular singer diego torres and granddaughter of the deceased lolita torres. she has also taken part in several musical comedies such as "the sound of music" and "peter pan".  career  in 2008 she made her television debut in the series patito feo, produced by the argentinian company ideas del sur and starring juan darthes and griselda siciliani. she featured in six episodes of the series, which was carried by the channel el trece.  in april 2012 she appeared in the argentine film extranos en la noche starring her uncle, diego torres. in may 2012 she appeared in her first major television role, playing paloma cocker in the series condicionados, and her performance earned her a nomination for the tato awards.  en 2015 , elle a joue le role de lola fiore dans la serie esperanza mia . c'etait pour elle la deuxieme fois qu'elle jouait avec lali esposito,  les deux etoiles avaient deja joue ensemble dans la serie solamente vos : daniela cousteau ( lali esposito ) , mora cousteau ( angela torres ) .  personal life  angela torres is closely related to several famous artists. her mother is gloria carra, her father is marcelo torres, her uncle is diego torres, and her grandmother is lolita torres. growing up in this family influenced her to begin studying theater at eight years old.  television  movies  theater  discography  soundtracks  live albums  extended plays  singles  as lead artist  as featured artist  promotional singles  other appearances  footnotes  references   argentine film actresses argentine stage actresses argentine television actresses argentine child actresses argentine people of spanish descent people from avellaneda 21st-century argentine women singers 1998 births living people participants in argentine reality television series bailando por un sueno (argentine tv series) participants
jan muhlfeit (born january 8, 1962) is a czech manager, global strategist, coach and mentor. he spent almost 22 years working for microsoft, the last 15 of which were in top management. his last post before he left in 2014 was chairman europe of the microsoft corporation, a position he held from 2007. he acts as an advisor to a number of governmental and international organisations, such as aiesec, the world economic forum, the european commission, and the oecd.  biography muhlfeit was born on january 8, 1962 in jihlava, czech republic. in 1986 he graduated from the faculty of electrical engineering of the czech technical university in prague with a degree in information technology.  during the era of the czechoslovak socialist republic, before the velvet revolution, he worked in the scientific and technical intelligence service (first national security corps under state security) and used the cover name masopust (carnival). in july 1989 he was promoted to senior officer. in 1990 he passed an evaluation by the screening commissions and, as a person with integrity, was recommended for further service with the ministry of the interior. the minister at the time, jan langos, promoted muhlfeit to first lieutenant in 1991. then, in 1991, he left to join the czech software company software602, where he served as international sales and marketing director.  microsoft he joined microsoft in 1993 as marketing director. from february 1, 1998 until 2000 he worked for microsoft as the managing director and ceo of the czech branch. one controversial incident from his time there is the mironet vs. microsoft case, which concerns breach of copyright. according to the mironet management, muhlfeit, together with czech microsoft sales director vladimir smutny, allegedly influenced an investigation into mironet's efforts in 1999 to sell computers without microsoft windows 98 pre-installed as the operating system. mironet has not provided any evidence in this case at all since 2000.  thanks to his sales results, in 2000 muhlfeit became the director for the whole of the central and eastern europe region and a member of the company's top management worldwide. on august 19, 2002 he was appointed vice-chairman for europe, the middle east and africa (emea). under his leadership, the cee region, for which he was directly responsible, remained top in the microsoft worldwide rankings for four years. from 2005 to 2006 he was vice-chairman for public administration in the region (emea) and was later appointed chairman europe of the
microsoft corporation, a position he held until he left at the end of 2014. muhlfeit was involved in formulating microsoft's global strategies for the emerging markets and served as advisor to many governmental organisations and ngos in the region (emea). during this time he represented his firm in dealings with the governments of the various european countries, key european institutions and the firm's biggest corporate clients and trading partners.  awards and public activities muhlfeit has received numerous awards, including:  in recognition of his work, in 1994 microsoft awarded him the prestigious "presidential award for excellence". thrice he has won the title "czech computer science personality of the year", awarded at the invex international trade fair - 1994, 1999, 2002. in the same year he was declared personality of the year by the profit weekly journal. in 1996 he came top in a poll entitled most visible personalities in information technology. "czech republic best manager in 1999", awarded by the czech prime minister. "czech brain", awarded by the czech minister of foreign affairs. in 1999 he became a member of the international crt association (caux round table - the proposal to enrol him was filed by the administrative board of the pangea foundation at the request of the caux round table secretariat in the netherlands - muhlfeit is the only representative of the czech republic in this organisation).  he continues to support a number of charitable projects, including "computers against barriers", which is a joint initiative launched by microsoft czech republic and czech ngos. in addition, he is on the supervisory board of the charta 77 foundation. he has been a member of the board of directors of the european academy of business in society (eabis) and junior achievement young enterprise europe (jaye). he is still a member of the administrative board of aiesec (association internationale des etudiants en sciences economiques et commerciales - a non-political, non-profit organisation fully run by international students).  during his career he has also appeared as a guest on global talk shows on cnn, cnbc, bloomberg, euronews, and has provided a series of interviews for prestigious media such as the new york times, the washington post, the financial times, and la tribune.  references a portion of this article was translated from the corresponding article in the czech wikipedia.  external links  an article on the mironet vs. microsoft case   1962 births czech technical university in prague alumni life coaches living people people from jihlava
county of cardwell may refer to:  county of cardwell, queensland, australia  county of cardwell (south australia)
in august 2015, boye brogeland's bridge team (richard schwartz, allan graves, boye brogeland, espen lindqvist, huub bertens, daniel korbel) lost in the quarter-finals of the spingold knock-out team event to jimmy cayne's team (james cayne, michael seamon, lotan fisher, ron schwartz, alfredo versace, lorenzo lauria) by 1 imp following an appeal that lost his team 2 imps. the appeal involved lotan fisher and ron schwartz, brogeland's teammates from the previous year when they won the spingold. brogeland spent the following day reviewing the vugraph records from the quarter-final and concluded that fisher and schwartz were cheating and later that month created a web site and publicly accused them of cheating.  in september 2015, per-ola cullin, a swedish international bridge player, postulated that after removing the board from the bidding tray, fisher and schwartz placed it in particular locations as a code to indicate strength in a suit. the analysis was based on video from the european bridge team championship in croatia in 2014.  both the european bridge league and the israel bridge federation conducted an investigation into the allegations. the israel bridge federation hearings also includes an allegation related to coughing. on september 5, 2015, israel withdrew its team for the upcoming bermuda bowl in bali. they were replaced by sweden.  in may 2016 three israeli experts announced what they believe is a refinement to the cullin code. the experts include dr. netzer zeidenberg, a computer scientist and amir levin, israel's 2003 bridge champion.  fisher and schwartz responded, "we are innocent of any crime and we will fight for our innocence. we already successfully passed a polygraph that proved that we are innocent."  the decision of the european bridge league disciplinary committee was released on may 18, 2016. fisher and schwartz were banned from all european bridge league events for a period of five years, and banned from playing as a partnership for life.   on july 28, 2016, the american contract bridge league (acbl) announced that its ethical oversight committee (chair: jon brissman; other members: cheri bjerkan, dennis clerkin, lesley davis, bruce ferguson, bob glasson, hendrik sharples and eddie wold) had unanimously found fisher and schwartz guilty both of collusive cheating and of giving false information to the acbl about previous disciplinary convictions. in consequence, fisher and schwartz were expelled from the acbl
, and all their masterpoints, titles, ranks and privileges declared forfeit. further, their partners and teammates were subject to mandatory forfeiture of all masterpoints, titles and ranks earned during the four years preceding the final of the 2015 spingold trophy. on july 29, 2016, the acbl clarified and corrected that announcement: forfeiture by partners and teammates applied only to events in which they had played with fisher or schwartz, and only to the four years preceding the date of the decision, namely july 27, 2016.  on august 8, 2016, the israeli special ethics committee unanimously found fisher and schwartz guilty of signaling by means of board placement and on february 14, 2017, announced that fisher and schwartz are permanently banned from play and participation in any activities within the israeli bridge federation.  see also  cheating in bridge  fantoni and nunes cheating scandal  lotan fisher  ron schwartz  references  external links  the fisher schwartz cheating scandal a recap of the first two weeks. a youtube posting by peter hollands, september 8, 2015.  the fisher/schwartz bridge cheating scandal. a youtube posting by michael clark, september 30, 2015.  cheating scandal update convictions and appeals. a youtube posting by peter hollands, june 23 8, 2016.  cheating in bridge
diana khubeseryan (born 5 may 1994) is an armenian sprinter. in 2016, she competed in the 200 metres at the european championships and rio olympics, but failed to reach the finals. khubeseryan started as a swimmer and took up athletics aged 12. she later studied journalism at the armenian state institute of physical culture and sport in yerevan.  references  1994 births living people place of birth missing (living people) athletes (track and field) at the 2010 summer youth olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of armenia armenian female sprinters olympic female sprinters
events from the year 1720 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   gold sword for bravery   annenkrone  births  deaths  references    years of the 18th century in russia
meredith graves (born september 5, 1987) is an american musician. she was the frontwoman for the punk rock band perfect pussy. in addition to making her own music, she runs independent music label honor press and serves as director of music for the crowdfunding site kickstarter. graves is also a writer and music journalist, and has served as an anchor at mtv news.  early life meredith graves was born on september 5, 1987. graves began playing piano and guitar at age 11, and touring by age 19; her mother is also a performer, in musical theater. her father is a journalist.  graves learned to sew in high school and worked as a seamstress during and after college.  career early in her music career, graves led a band called mouse and the love & light orkestra.  shoppers graves was a guitarist and vocalist for syracuse noise rock trio, shoppers. the a.v. club described their 2011 release silver year as "a short, intense breakup album about the terrible things we're capable of when our feelings are hurt;" punk news called it "top notch noise-rock."  perfect pussy  graves next became frontwoman for the hardcore punk band perfect pussy, founded in 2012 in syracuse, new york. after shoppers disbanded, film director scott coffey asked graves to appear in his movie adult world, shooting in upstate new york. graves assembled a "fake band" and wrote a song for the film, but even after filming, the group continued performing together, and posted their first demo i have lost all desire for feeling to bandcamp in 2013.  in billboard, reggie ugwu described the demo as "purpose-filled, bone-rattling and brisk, the kind of electrically charged debut that can shock a jaded blogger out of his torpor."  ugwu noted "graves' hyper-literate, rapid-fire prose" on perfect pussy's 2014 lp say yes to love. say yes to love's release included a limited edition vinyl pressing of the record mixed with graves's menstrual blood, which quickly sold out.  perfect pussy dissolved in january 2016.  honor press in 2015, graves founded a music label called honor press. though graves's own background is in hardcore, honor press is not an exclusively punk label; instead graves describes the label's priorities as "no snobs, no phonies and no shitheads." she told new york that her positive experience making music for the label captured tracks had been the inspiration for honor press.  honor press
's first release was sacramento band so stressed's the unlawful trade of greco-roman art. released in may 2015, spin reviewed unlawful trade as a "strikingly sour premiere effort [that] comes courtesy of meredith graves' honor press label...one of the most potent post-hardcore assaults in recent memory."  graves has indicated plans to publish books through honor press as well as music. the label's second signee is los angeles rapper busdriver, also known as regan john farquhar, to produce a book and a 7". the book will be a poetry collection called hat: a movie.  honor press is located in brooklyn, new york.  writing from 2015 to 2016, graves was a columnist for the village voice, writing a food and music series called recipe for disaster. she has also written for the guardian, pitchfork, rookie, and talkhouse; racked praises her as "incredibly honest and thoughtful writer." graves has drawn particular notice for commentary on topics like authenticity and double standards for women in music.  other projects in 2014, graves announced she would put out a solo record, as well as a split with kevin devine. she debuted the solo project's first song, "take the ghost to the movies," in 2015. stereogum called it "one of those songs that you want to blast in your headphones when the world feels like it's too much and you want to block everything out, a noise dirge to silence the cacophony of the outside world."  in 2016, graves was featured as the vocalist on the house of feelings song "avatar"; in pitchfork, philip sherburne described her performance as "channel[ing] the stunned demeanor of someone who's just clocked into her first day at work and is already numb to the grind."  in 2016, graves became an anchor for mtv news.  in may 2018, graves became director of music for crowdfunding website kickstarter; the position was previously held by molly neumann of riot grrrl band bratmobile (neumann left kickstarter to join digital music rights platform songtrust).  references  external links  paper magazine: in conversation with chvrches' lauren mayberry and perfect pussy's meredith graves babe vibes: visual interview meredith graves  living people 1987 births 21st-century american women writers mtv people women essayists musicians from new york (state) 21st-century american women guitarists 21st-century american guitarists women punk rock singers feminist musicians
rosetta is a studio album by greek composer and musician vangelis, released on 23 september 2016 by decca records. it is dedicated to the rosetta space probe mission, launched in 2004, being one of his several works which were inspired by space travel (albedo 0.39), or produced in collaboration with space missions (mythodea). rosetta received a grammy award nomination for best new age album at the 59th annual grammy awards.  overview the project is a result of a 2014 video call made between esa astronaut andre kuipers and vangelis, during kuipers' mission on board the international space station. after their conversation, vangelis was inspired to write an album dedicated to the first mission. in november 2014 three videos with three compositions were released on the esa official youtube channel in celebration of the first ever attempted soft landing on a comet by the mission: "arrival", "philae's journey", and "rosetta's waltz".  vangelis dedicated the album to everyone who made esa's ongoing rosetta mission possible, and "rosetta's waltz" shows his appreciation to the mission team.  carl walker from esa commented: "when we put the mission footage images together with the music, we thought it captured how people would feel if they were to see the comet for real in close-up. with music, you can enhance emotions and create memories: i believe that what vangelis wanted to do was share a lasting memory of our rosetta mission through his music".  the music from the album was used in the digital animation chasing stars, by ross ashton and karen monid from the projection studio, which was projected onto blackpool tower as part of the blackpool illuminations lightpool show in september 2016.  release the album is available in digital download, streaming, cd, and vinyl lp format.  track listing  charts  personnel composer, arranger, performer and producer - vangelis engineer - philippe colonna liner notes - tim cooper photography - stathis zalidi art direction and design - salvador design artwork (images) - european space agency, esa/atg medialab  references  external links official website rosetta at us itunes  2016 albums vangelis albums
is a japanese magical girl manga series written and illustrated by kentaro sato. it is a spin-off of magical girl apocalypse. the series is about a severely tormented, abused and suicidal middle school student named aya, who gains the ability to become a magical girl through a mysterious website. she soon finds friends, who are also magical girls like herself, that provide her strength. aya and her friends also face enemies. the series becomes a climactic race for aya because she must keep herself and her friends alive. it was serialized on akita shoten's champion tap! website from july 2013 to october 2017 and later in the shonen manga magazine weekly shonen champion from october 2017 to august 2019, with its chapters collected in sixteen tankobon volumes. the manga is licensed for english release in north america by seven seas. an anime television series adaptation by production doa aired from april to june 2018.  plot  aya asagiri is a middle school girl who has problems both at school with almost lethal bullying and at home from her brother kaname's physical abuse. one day  a suspicious website pops up on her computer screen, showing a creepy-looking person. this person appears to take pity on her and announces that she will grant aya magical powers. later at school, aya finds a gun that mysteriously appears in her locker. she is soon cornered by bullies and with nothing to lose, aya fires the gun at them. the shot causes the bullies to disappear, but to her horror she finds out that they have somehow been killed by a train nearby. aya feels as though she had somehow killed them, and is confused to find herself with longer red hair and blood flowing out of her eyes. she later finds out that she is not alone, when a classmate reveals that she is also a magical girl. the classmate, known as tsuyuno yatsumura, becomes one of her new friends, while offering to help her get away from "magical hunters" who kill magical girls and only steal their wands. tsuyuno teaches aya about the power she has acquired and the physical changes it brings on to her body. however, the two girls do not know the reason for something that resembles a countdown clock on the website, and they fear it may be something really bad. after meeting a group of other fellow magical girls, all with different powers and abilities of their own, tsuyuno and aya attempt to discover what the countdown really means, all while trying to make sure no one knows about their powers.  media  manga magical girl
site is written and illustrated by kentaro sato. the series ran on akita shoten's champion tap! website from july 4, 2013, to october 5, 2017. the series was then transferred to akita shoten's weekly shonen champion, where it ran from october 26, 2017, to august 1, 2019. akita shoten collected its chapters in sixteen tankobon volumes, released from march 7, 2014, to october 8, 2019.  in north america, the series is licensed by seven seas entertainment, who announced the acquisition in july 2016.  a spin-off series, titled , ran on champion tap! from october 26, 2017, to august 23, 2018.  volume list  anime on september 8, 2017, an anime television adaptation was announced in the seventh volume of the manga. the series premiered on mbs, tbs and bs-tbs on april 7, 2018 and is directed by tadahito matsubayashi at production doa, with takayo ikami writing the scripts. the series is streaming on amazon prime video worldwide. keiji inai is composing the music. the idol unit i☆ris performed the opening theme song "changing point", while haruka yamazaki performed the ending theme song . sentai filmworks have licensed the anime and will release it in both digital and home video formats.  episode list  reception the english language version of maho shojo saito (magical girl site) has received various reviews from critics. brittany vincent from japanator compared the series to puella magi madoka magica, calling the former "much darker". vincent said that magical girl site takes away everything someone may find dark about madoka, and slices it "wide open" with its dark plot.  notes  references  external links   - animeindoku    at champion tap!    - anime adaptation     2018 japanese television series endings akita shoten manga animeism anime series based on manga blood in fiction bullying in fiction child abuse in fiction crime in fiction discrimination in fiction domestic violence in fiction dark fantasy anime and manga fiction about animal cruelty fiction about assassinations fiction about monsters fictional characters who have made pacts with devils japanese lgbt-related television shows magical girl anime and manga manga adapted into television series mass murder in fiction nbcuniversal entertainment japan sentai filmworks seven seas entertainment titles school life in anime and manga shonen manga supernatural anime and manga transgender in anime and manga works about murder works about rape works about sexual abuse works about sexual harassment works about torture
antoine simon, commonly known as anton simon () (5 august 1850 - 19 january 1916), was a french composer, director and pianist, who made most of his career in russia.  biography born in paris, antoine simon studied at conservatoire de paris in the piano class of antoine francois marmontel and the composition class of jules duprato.  aged 21, antoine simon left for moscow where he settled permanently. he was hired as a composer (kapellmeister) for the theatre des bouffes in moscow and taught the piano for musical classes of the philharmonic society of moscow. in 1897, he was appointed inspector of orchestras of the imperial theaters.  work antoine simon was one of the few composers in russia at the time to create works for wind instruments such as the quartet-like sonata op. 23 for two cornets, horn and trombone, or his twenty-two small pieces for ensemble, op. 26, composed in 1887. simon also composed three operas and a number of piano pieces. his piano concerto in a major, op. 19 met with some success, as did his clarinet concerto, op. 31 and his fantaisie concertante for cello and orchestra, op. 42. he also composed a piano trio in d minor, op. 16, a string quartet in a major, op. 24, etc.  simon also composed orchestrations for the ballet don quixote by ludwig minkus, in particular for the danse de mercedes and several variations, such as that of the dryads in the dream tableau. antoine simon composed his own compositions for ballet as well, like la fille de gudule, whose choreography was by alexander alexeyevich gorsky, les etoiles (1898) by khlioustine, les fleurs vivantes (1899), performed at bolshoi theatre.  simon died in moscow. his archives are kept in  in moscow.  collaboration with gorski antoine simon collaborated with the talented alexander alexeyevich gorsky from the arrival of the latter in moscow. they began working  on gorsky's version of don quixote by minkus. antoine simon worked some variations, and especially composed various dances. the premiere took place 6 december 1900 at bolshoi under the name l'espagnol (the spaniard).  by the end of 1901, they started working on la fille de gudule, ballet inspired by victor hugo's the hunchback of notre-dame. this theme was not new in the field of dance, since it was also that of la esmeralda by jules perrot. however, simon's
ballet differed from the latter because the focus was on mass scenes: real crowds moved in front of the audience, in a show of four acts and nine tableaux.  gorski has carefully prepared for this work ; he also went to paris in order to assimilate the locations of the plot of this ballet which premiered 24 november 1902 at bolshoi, on a music by simon, theatrical scenery by konstantin korovin and costumes by aleksander golovin. heinrich arends ("arends andrei fedorovich" in russian) directed the orchestra. the performers were:  esmeralda: e. grimaldi (then s.f. fiodorova)  claude frollo: vassili helzer  captain phoebus: n. mordkine  quasimodo: n.p. domachov  gringoire: k.a. beck  gudule: m.a. drougachtcheva  references  external links   musical archives of the glinka museum  1850 births 1916 deaths 19th-century classical composers conservatoire de paris alumni french ballet composers french classical composers 19th-century french male classical pianists french emigrants to the russian empire french male classical composers french opera composers male opera composers musicians from paris
blue orange is a french board game company based in pont-a-mousson, france. often called blue orange international or blue orange europe and mistaken for blue orange games.  it was founded in 2005 by jalal amraouza and timothee leroy and initially called jactalea. the name changed in 2013 for blue orange following the meeting of its owner and blue orange games' founder thierry denoual.  blue orange is a board game publisher whose games are accessible to the public, and includes games for children, teenagers, families, and adults. blue orange releases around 10 of new board games every year. these board games are usually made out of wood, tin, resin, and recycled/recyclable materials.  blue orange group  the group blue orange is constituted by three entities:  blue orange edition (france) is the engineering consulting firm of the group. they are in connection with the authors of game around the world and test more than 1,000 games a year.  blue orange games (us) is the distributor of blue orange's games in the united states, canada, australia and new zealand.  blue orange (france) which approve, validate and distribute the blue orange's games in the rest of the world: europe, south america, africa, and asia.  blue orange's games are distributed on 5 continents and in 59 different countries.  awards  2019   mr wolf: as d'or children game of the year  2018   panic mansion: kinderspiel des jahres nominee  photosynthesis: mensa select winner  2017   bubble jungle: major fun award  chickyboom: kinderspiel des jahres recommended  baobab: uk games expo best children's game winner  dr eureka: game of the year in finland  kingdomino: game of the year in germany, italia, gouden ludo best family game  queendomino: golden geek best family board game nominee  2016   dr eureka: best toy for kids award from the astra  new york 1901: mensa select winner, gioco dell'anno nominee  2015   chickyboom: uk games expo best children's game winner  battle sheep: arets spil best family game winner  king's gold: lys grand public finalist  new york 1901: vuoden peli strategy game of the year winner  2014   battle sheep: vuoden peli family game of the year winner, spiel des jahres recommended  2013   baobab: kinderspiel des jahres recommended
flash: spring parents' choice fun stuff award winner  2004   gobblet gobbler: arets spel best children's game winner  products    sherlock express  slide quest  kuala  planet  mr. wolf ?  who did it?  photosynthesis  panic mansion  kingdomino  dr eureka  new york 1901  okiya  braverats  battle sheep  kamon  pengoloo  gobblet gobblers  gobblet  gyges  mana  kameloot with illustrations by ingenious studios  references  sources  http://france3-regions.francetvinfo.fr/lorraine/emissions/chronique-l-edition-de-l-emploi-de-lorraine-matin/lundi-2-novembre-le-boom-du-jeu-de-societe.html  http://www.mylorraine.fr/article/chicky-boom-un-jeu-lorrain-a-mettre-sous-le-sapin/29854  http://www.jugamostodos.org/index.php/noticias-en-el-mundo/noticias-94262/6582-dr-eureka-en-astra  https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgamepublisher/5022/blue-orange-eu  https://www.societe.com/societe/blue-orange-484754577.html  http://www.blueorangegames.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/05/a3-historique.jpg  https://boardgamegeek.com/boardgame/331635/kameloot  https://blueorangegames.eu/en/games/kameloot/  board game publishing companies
vaughan is an unincorporated community in union township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography vaughan is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
rabindra nath chaudhuri (1901-1981) was an indian physician, medical academic and the director of the calcutta school of tropical medicine.  early life and education born in west bengal in 1901, he graduated in medicine from the university of calcutta before securing his mrcp degree from the royal college of physicians of edinburgh and the degree of tdd from wales.  career he started his career as an assistant professor at the calcutta school of tropical medicine in 1934 where he became a professor in 1945 and the director of the institution in 1950 before superannuating in 1966. he also served at carmichael hospital for tropical diseases as a superintendent and senior physician.  chaudhuri is known to have done extensive research on diseases such as cholera, malaria, amoebiasis and hypoproteinemia and was credited with contributions to chemotherapy and chemoprophylaxis of malaria. he sat in the asiatic society as a member, edited the indian medical gazette and was a member of the indian national science academy during 1968-70. he was also associated with indian medical association, indian association of pathologists and microbiologists, international congress of tropical medicine and malaria and indian association for the advancement of medical education as a member, presided over the medical and veterinary section of the indian science congress and served the royal society of tropical medicine and hygiene as its vice president during 1973-74. he was a founder fellow of the national academy of medical sciences and an elected fellow of the indian national science academy and the royal society of tropical medicine and hygiene, london.  the government of india awarded chaudhuri the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1960, for his contributions to medical science. he also received the anb prize of the royal college of physicians of edinburgh in 1968 and the kamala menon medical research award of the indian council of medical research in 1977. he died on 6 august 1981, at the age of 80.  see also   calcutta school of tropical medicine  references   recipients of the padma bhushan in medicine 1901 births 1981 deaths 20th-century indian medical doctors indian medical academics indian medical administrators university of calcutta alumni indian medical researchers fellows of the royal college of physicians of edinburgh fellows of the national academy of medical sciences fellows of the indian national science academy scientists from west bengal university of calcutta faculty
testosterone cyclohexylpropionate (tchp; brand names andromar, femolone, telipex retard) is an androgen and anabolic steroid and a testosterone ester.  see also  estradiol diundecylate/hydroxyprogesterone heptanoate/testosterone cyclohexylpropionate  list of combined sex-hormonal preparations § androgens  references  abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes testosterone esters
hedong township () is a township under the administration of dayu county, in southern jiangxi, china. , it has 5 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of jiangxi dayu county
chandgaon mosque (, ) is a mosque in chittagong, bangladesh, completed in 2007. designed by kashef mahboob chowdhury, it was shortlisted for the aga khan award for architecture in 2010.  see also  list of mosques in bangladesh  references  mosques in chittagong mosques completed in 2007
jutta lampe (13 december 19373 december 2020) was a german actress on stage and in film. she was for 30 years a leading actress at the schaubuhne founded in berlin by her husband peter stein, where she played both classical theatre such as alkmene in kleist's amphitryon, and world premieres including robert wilson's orlando for one actor, and roles that botho strauß created for her. she was also engaged at the vienna burgtheater and the schauspielhaus zurich. she appeared in more than twenty films from 1963, including lead roles in films by margarethe von trotta. lampe was named actress of the year by theater heute several times. other awards included the gertrud-eysoldt-ring and the joana maria gorvin prize for her life's work.  life and career   born in flensburg, lampe appeared on stage first at age eight in ballet. she was trained for acting by  in hamburg in 1956. she had her first engagement at the staatstheater wiesbaden, followed by the nationaltheater mannheim. in the 1960s, she was successful at theater bremen where she worked with directors including peter zadek and peter stein. she played lady milford in schiller's kabale und liebe directed by stein, alongside bruno ganz and edith clever. she appeared in shakespeare's () measure for measure directed by zadek, and the princess in goethe's torquato tasso directed by stein.  when stein founded the schaubuhne in berlin in 1970, she was one of the first leading women in the ensemble, but always regarding herself as part of the team. she worked there for 30 years. she played athene in stein's production of the orestie by aischylos. in klaus michael gruber's staging of shakespeare's hamlet in 1982, she played ophelia "as if in a trance". in his production of kleist's  in 1991, she was alkmene. she performed in several plays by botho strauß, directed by luc bondy. strauss had seen her in wiesbaden at the beginning of her career. with director robert wilson, she worked for the premiere of his play orlando, which he based on the novel by virginia woolf. as the play's only actor, she played many roles, changing gender and period on a time voyage.  from 2001 to 2002, lampe was a member of the burgtheater in vienna. she played there arkadina in chekhov's die mowe,
directed by bondy, alongside gert voss in a production also shown at the berliner theatertreffen. directed by edith clever, she played winnie in beckett's gluckliche tage, with irony and sarcasm. she performed in berlin once more in 2005, with clever in a play for two women, die eine und die andere, which botho strauß dedicated to them, staged by bondy. from 2005 to 2008 she was engaged at the schauspielhaus zurich. one of her last roles on stage was there in 2009, in shaw's major barbara which was also zadek's last premiere.  she was married to peter stein from 1967 to 1984. jutta lampe died in berlin on 3 december 2020, ten days before her 83rd birthday, after a long struggle with dementia.  theatre   source:   theater bremen  lady milford in schiller's kabale und liebe, 1967  leonore in goethe's torquato tasso, 1968  elisabeth in schiller's don carlos, 1969  schaubuhne berlin  solveig in ibsen's peer gynt, 1971  marianne in horvath's geschichten aus dem wienerwald, 1972  physician in gorki's die sommergaste, 1974  charlotte sonntag in else lasker-schuler's die wupper, 1976  athene in orestie by aischylos, 1982  k. in kalldewey by botho strauß, 1983  mascha in chekhov's drei schwestern, 1984  ranevskaja in chekhov's der kirschgarten, 1989  title role in robert wilson's orlando after virginia woolf's novel, premiere, 1989  alkmene in kleist's , 1991  madame de montreuil in mishima's madame de sade, 1996  rosie budesheimer in rudolf borchardt's der hausbesuch, 1997  title role in racine's andromache, 2004  lissie in die eine und die andere by botho strauß, 2005  salzburg festival  lilly groth in das gleichgewicht by botho strauß, 1993  ilse in luigi pirandello's , 1994  vienna  agathe / ellen seegast in die ahnlichen by botho strauß, theater in der josefstadt, 1998  arkadina in chekhov's die mowe, wiener festwochen in co-production with the burgtheater, 2000  winnie in beckett's gluckliche tage, burgtheater in co-production with the berliner ensemble, 2002
schauspielhaus zurich  ella in ibsen's john gabriel borkman, 2005  amanda in die glasmenagerie by tennessee williams, 2007 mrs. baines in shaw's major barbara, 2009  films   lampe appeared in films by margarethe von trotta, beginning in 1979 in  (sisters, or the balance of happiness), then in 1981 in  alongside barbara sukowa, and decades later in rosenstraße.  awards  lampe's awards included:  1982:   1988: , by theater heute  1990: actress of the year  1992: theaterpreis berlin, by stiftung preußische seehandlung  1998: order pour le merite fur wissenschaften und kunste  1999: knight commander's cross of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany  1998: gertrud-eysoldt-ring  2000: actress of the year  2004: stanislawski-prize of the moscow theater institute  2010: joana maria gorvin prize  references  further reading    : jutta lampe : magische krisen (= resonanzen; 3). lit, berlin/munster, 2010, .   (ed.): jutta lampe - traumen, suchen, spielen. akademie der kunste, berlin, 2010, .  external links        1937 births 2020 deaths german film actresses german stage actresses 20th-century german actresses people from flensburg recipients of the pour le merite (civil class) knights commander of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany
mary ann elizabeth heacock (1915-2011), commonly known as mary ann heacock, was an avocational botanist who collected plants and inspired the work of many horticulturists and plant societies.  she was born on 11 june 1915 in marthaville, louisiana, usa, and died on 23 july 2011 in waurika, oklahoma.  some of the plant species and cultivars heacock had a special role in identifying or developing include:   pinus ponderosa 'mary ann heacock', a dwarf pine  opuntia debreczyi, a prickly pear  penstemon grandiflorus 'p010s', prairie jewel® penstemon  references  1915 births american women botanists american botanists 2011 deaths 21st-century american women
uthaug is a village in the municipality of ørland in sør-trøndelag county, norway.  uthaug may also refer to:  hnoms uthaug (s304), submarines of the royal norwegian navy  people with the surname jørleif uthaug (1911-1990), norwegian illustrator, painter and sculptor roar uthaug (born 1973), norwegian film director
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in zhalantun, inner mongolia, china. , it has four residential communities and one village under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of inner mongolia  references   township-level divisions of inner mongolia zhalantun
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in xunyang district, jiujiang, jiangxi, china, located in jiujiang economic and technological development zone. , it has 8 residential communities and 7 villages under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of jiangxi  references   township-level divisions of jiangxi jiujiang
jagdgeschwader 138 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938
barkskins is a 2016 novel by american writer annie proulx.  it tells the story of two immigrants to new france, rene sel and charles duquet, and of their descendants. it spans over 300 years and witnesses the deforestation of the new world from the arrival of europeans into the contemporary era of global warming.  plot  the eponymous "barkskins" are indentured servants, transported from paris slums to the wilds of new france in 1693,  "... to clear the land, to subdue this evil wilderness," (p. 17) according to their master, a seigneur. the two men are contracted for three years of service to earn land of their own, but charles duquet runs away at the first opportunity, seeking to make a fortune for himself in the fur trade or by any means he can. rene sel, on the other hand, dutifully wields the axe clearing farmland for the master. later, he is forced to marry the master's cast off mi'kmaq woman, mari, a healer who gives him children. the sel family heritage is thus native american and working class.  duquet, luckily surviving his escape through the wilderness, has a fortune to make, mostly on furs and lumber, and by swindling others whenever he can get away with it. only then will he marry the daughter of a dutch business partner, open an office in boston, therefore anglicizing  the family name to duke, and father or adopt the boys who will build the duke & sons timber empire after him.  all the while, for the sel family, there is unceasing discontent. the young are always seeking their future as native americans  in a whiteman's world. indian lumbermen, for example, were always recruited for river work balancing on the longest logs rushing down a river where an awkward move could get a man crushed before he drowned.(p. 299)  major themes  nature  human struggles with nature are a recurring theme in annie proulx's books. about the forest in barkskins, proulx said, "it's the underpinning of life. everything is linked to the forest. this is but one facet of larger things, like climate change and the melting of the ice. so deforestation is part of a much, much larger package."  borders   as noted in her memoir, bird cloud,  annie proulx grew up in new england, attended college in canada, and had a lifelong practice of spending summers in newfoundland
and winters in the states. thus, she was well acquainted with the geography of the novel and familiar with national and cultural borderlands. proulx herself descended from english americans on her mother's side and french canadians on  her father's, which makes her "mixed", although not to the same degree as the sels in barkskins. for the sel family, the whiteman's cultural borders were closed to them in many ways because the borders of their homelands were never closed enough.  reception  barkskins received a 74% rating from the book review aggregator idreambooks based on 26 critics' reviews. review aggregator book marks reported three mixed and two negative reviews among 26 total, indicating "positive" reviews.  with few exceptions, reviewers praised the novel particularly with regard to the brilliance of annie proulx's prose, the intimately detailed scenes by which she reveals the complex inner lives of her characters, and/or breathtaking scenes of fearful destruction as well as awesome beauty. the forests and deforestation of the new world underlie the epic scope of the book, while human adventures range beyond the central concerns of forest ecology and the logging industry. the narrative is partitioned into books that turn the reader's attention to one family or another across generations.  some reviewers thought the sweeping epic scope of the work created a faulty or difficult structure for the novel as a whole.  several expressed disappointment that the passage of so many years seemed to shorten the time given to the portrayals of some promising characters, especially toward the end of the book. some inconsistencies were noted; for example, changes in the diction of a native american character's speech within a single episode. the didactic nature of the  theme was both applauded and faulted. a few reviewers thought it undercut the narrative perspective at times, imposing a good vs. evil dichotomy. proulx's descriptions were universally admired. most readers found verisimilitude in these observations of the uncertainty and fragility of life, while a few spoke of an overwhelming echo of doom long foretold.  publication excerpts from the novel were published in the new yorker in march 2016.  in other media  television  a dramatic television series, based on the novel premiered on may 25, 2020 on national geographic.  references  2016 american novels works by annie proulx environmental fiction books climate change novels novels set in quebec novels about survival skills novels about colonialism family saga novels american novels adapted into television shows
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in benxi as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th,  135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation were the 2nd (suifenhe) (or 3rd), 4th (hulin) border guards groups, 46th transport guards group and 77th independent mixed brigade.  action the 136th division formation was complete 31 july 1945, although the divisional numerical strength was only 60% of the required rifles, machine guns and cannons. to substitute for a lack of rifles, hand spears were issued. also, divisional medical, chemical and biological warfare units were authorized but not formed. finally, 136th division had a shortage of anti-tank explosive charges.  at the start of the soviet invasion of manchuria 9 august 1945 the division was improving fortifications at benxi. immediately orders to move were received, and majority of troops gathered in shenyang. also, airborne (assault) battalion was sent to wensheng district while two battalions of the 372nd infantry regiment were sent to liaoyang.  also, with the start of the invasion, the aritomi airborne (assault) battalion in xinmin, liaoning was assigned to 136th division. also, 10 august 1945, the mizunima detachment formerly belonging to 108th division was received and also ordered to shenyang. 13 august 1945, the divisional fortifications plans were approved and 371st infantry regiment was sent back to benxi to implement it.  the division was partially disarmed 19 august 1945, leaving about 15% of weapons for security duties. 20 august 1945, the division commander (atsushi nakayama) together with many other japanese generals was kidnapped by the red army in shenyang, resulting in his forced disappearance. the entire division was taken prisoner by soviet union forces 10 september 1945, and sent to labour camps.  majority of the men of the 136th division were taken prisoner to the soviet union in september 1945 - february 1946 period and then were housed in several labour camps, in siberia and moscow.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第136師団 (日本軍), accessed 8 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols],
allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
rene-edouard claparede (24 april 1832 in chancy - 31 may 1871 in siena) was a swiss anatomist. the claparede family was protestant and originally from languedoc. they moved to geneva after louis xiv:s edict of fontainebleau in 1685.  he received his education in geneva and berlin, where he attended lectures given by johannes peter muller. later on, he served as an assistant to francois jules pictet de la rive at the geneva academy, where in 1862 he became a professor of comparative anatomy. he was a regular contributor to the archives des sciences physiques et naturelles.  his main research dealt with the structure of infusoria, the anatomy of annelids, the histology of earthworms, the embryology of arthropods and the evolution of spiders. species with the epithet of claparedii commemorate his name, an example being the sea anemone edwardsia claparedii. claparede stressed the importance of studying and illustrating living or recently killed organisms and he did not deposit any museum specimens. he died aged 39 from tuberculosis.  selected works   anatomie und entwicklungsgeschichte der neritina fluviatilis, 1857 - anatomy and developmental history of neritina fluviatilis.  etudes sur les infusoires et les rhizopodes, 1858 (with johannes lachmann) - studies of infusoria and rhizopods.  de la formation et de la fecondation des œufs chez les vers nematodes, 1859 - the formation and egg fertilization in nematode worms.  recherches sur l'evolution des araignees, 1862 - research on the evolution of spiders.  recherches anatomiques sur les oligochetes, 1862 - anatomical research on oligochaeta.  beobachtungen uber anatomie und entwicklungsgeschichte wirbelloser thiere an der kuste von normandie, 1863 - observations on the anatomy and evolution of invertebrates from the coast of normandy.  les annelides chetopodes du golfe de naples, 1868 - on chaetopoda annelids from the gulf of naples.  recherches sur la structure des annelides sedentaires, 1873 - research on the structure of sedentary annelids.  references   article on claparede the protistologist  1832 births 1871 deaths people from the canton of geneva university of geneva faculty swiss anatomists swiss zoologists 19th-century swiss zoologists
drumgoole is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  george drumgoole coleman (1795-1844), irish architect jenny drumgoole, american video artist john christopher drumgoole (1816-1888), irish american roman catholic priest noel drumgoole (1931-1995), irish hurler  see also drumgoole plaza, a park in manhattan, new york
hassan ahmad hassan al diqqi () (born on january 3, 1957) is an emirati co-founder of al islah party in the united arab emirates and the leader of emirates al ummah party. al diqqi has been described by united arab emirates officials as an extremist islamist and has been linked to supporting terrorist activities and groups in syria and elsewhere in the middle east and north africa through his party.  al diqqi was found guilty of supporting terrorist activities in syria and attempting to overthrow the united arab emirates government and was sentenced to 10 years in prison and aed 10 million fine (approx. $2,700,000), however he has escaped to syria and is currently allegedly living in turkey.  career he attempted to form the party in uae in 2012, but was prohibited by the emirati government due to his ties with jihadist organizations. despite this, he continued his efforts and established the party in the uae. he became the leader of the uae chapter of al ummah when the former leader and party co-founder, mohammed al-abduli, was killed in 2013 by a syrian government sniper in raqqa while fighting for the al-nusra front, the syrian al-qaeda affiliate and designated terrorist group by both the u.s. and the u.n. diqqi showed his respect for the former leader as a 'martyr', posting a photo of the two of them together on his twitter page.  online publications diqqi has posted 24 controversial publications online. in his 2002 book, entitled, features, he calls u.s. and russia as the two most dangerous countries in the world and makes numerous negative ethnic and sectarian references throughout the book, including citing jihad against christians, jews, alawites, and shiites. he also discusses putting an end to uae's touristic practices.  conference in 2013, the washington post reported of the ummah conference's ties to the syrian conflict as well as diqqi's in particular. they reported that the conference has raised millions of dollars in funds which support radical groups and recruited thousands of muslim volunteers to fight for syria through promoting a recruitment campaign in which they target secular arab governments and "american terrorism" as the enemy. al diqqi was seen at the mohammed al-abduli training camp, a military training camp in syria established by al ummah and named for the party's former uae leader, in a video posted may 2013 alongside the saudi chapter's leader, mohammad saad al-mufrih, appealing for resources to assist the syrian
rebels.  twitter page furthermore, his twitter page, followed by over 30,000 accounts, has been the source of controversial posts and videos. in june 2013, he said that the syrian conflict was a way to empower muslims to challenge u.s. influence. he also uses the ummah party's statement on his twitter account, which aims to unite islamists by saying that organizations such as the muslim brotherhood, salafists, and al-qaeda should collaborate with one another for the common islamic nation. his twitter also features specific destructive references towards the harm of christians, jews, and persians.  foundation he is also associated with the al-karama foundation, a swiss-based organization which poses as a human rights advocacy group, but is in actuality a front for political islamist networks. the group publicly advocated for the release of al diqqi upon his arrest in 2008 for rape charges in sharjah, where he was eventually released and continued his activities promoting jihadism and islamists.  the group's leader, and also a senior official of the ummah party, abdul rahman omeir al-niami, is on the u.s. department of treasury's sanctions list for his work as a major al- qaeda financier in the transfer of millions of dollars in funding over the past 14 years.  fugative he has since become a fugitive from the uae, and is thought to be living in turkey.  references  living people 1957 births emirati activists emirati politicians
jacques rit (born 1949) is a monegasque orthopedist and politician. he serves as a member of the national council.  references  living people 1949 births members of the national council (monaco)
ceryloninae is a subfamily of beetles in the family cerylonidae.  genera   acautomus  afrorylon  angolon  australiorylon  axiocerylon  cautomus  cerylon  clavicerylon  coccilon  ellipsorylon  elytrotetrantus  glomerylon  glyptolopus  gyrelon  ivieus  lapethinus  lawrenciella  lytopeplus  mychocerus  neolapethus  nkolbissonia  orientrylon  oroussetia  pachylon  pakalukia  paracerylon  paraxiocerylon  pathelus  philothermopsis  philothermus  ploeosoma  pseudocerylon  pseudodacne  pseudolapethus  rostrorylon  spinocerylon  suakokoia  thyroderus  references  external links         polyphaga subfamilies
spain competed at the 1954 european athletics championships in bern, switzerland, from 25-29 august 1954.  results  men track & road events  field events  nations at the 1954 european athletics championships 1954 european athletics championships
the 2000 sparkassen cup was a tennis tournament played on indoor hard courts in leipzig, germany. it was part of the tier ii category of the 2000 wta tour. it was the 11th edition of the tournament and was held from 30 october through 5 november 2000. unseeded kim clijsters won the singles title and earned $87,000 first-prize money.  prize money  * per team  singles main draw entrants  seeds  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   jana kandarr   iva majoli   barbara rittner  the following players received entry from the singles qualifying draw:   evelyn fauth   andrea glass   janette husarova   sandra nacuk  doubles main draw entrants  seeds  other entrants the following pair received a wildcard into the doubles main draw:   elena dementieva /  jana kandarr  the following pair received entry from the doubles qualifying draw:   maja matevzic /  caroline schneider  finals  singles    kim clijsters defeated  elena likhovtseva, 7-6(8-6), 4-6, 6-4. it was the 2nd title of the season for clijsters and the 3rd title of her singles career.  doubles    arantxa sanchez vicario /  anne-gaelle sidot defeated  kim clijsters /  laurence courtois, 6-7(8-6), 7-5, 6-3. it was the 61st title for sanchez vicario and the 1st title for sidot in their respective doubles careers.  references  external links  itf tournament edition details  tournament draws  sparkassen cup sparkassen cup (tennis) german
bhullar  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bhullar.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bhullar has a total number of 179 houses and population of 873 of which include 459 males and 414 females. literacy rate of bhullar is  76.56%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 58 which is  6.64% of total population of bhullar, and child sex ratio is approximately  813, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
aharon ipale (december 27, 1941 - june 27, 2016) was an israeli-american actor, known for his roles in american and british film and television productions. his credits included fiddler on the roof (1971), innocent bystanders (1972), raid on entebbe (1977), too hot to handle (1977), the concorde ... airport '79 (1979), the happy hooker goes hollywood (1980), xanadu (1980), who dares wins (1982), eye of the widow (1991), son of the pink panther (1993), the mummy (1999), and the mummy returns (2001).  early life ipale was born in morocco on december 27, 1941. he arrived in present-day israel with his family when he was just two years old as part of the early migration of moroccan jews to israel. ipale enrolled in a theater school in london following his service in the israeli army.  career he began his acting career by appearing in british television series and theater productions, including the television mini-series, christ recrucified, in which he played the title role of jesus christ.  ipale was cast as joshua in the 1973-1974 british mini-series, moses the lawgiver, which starred burt lancaster as moses. his work in moses the lawgiver earned attention from hollywood and led to his later work in the united states. his american television credits during the 1970s and 1980s included hawaii five-o, dynasty, kojak, the love boat, macgyver, miami vice and charlie's angels.  in 1985, ipale appeared in the british dramatic film, the shooting party, which starred james mason and john gielgud. that same year, ipale appeared in the israeli film, gesher tzar me'od (1985). two years later, he co-starred in the 1987 film, ishtar, which was a notorious critical and box-office failure. more recently, ipale was best known for his recurring role as pharaoh seti i in the mummy and its sequel, the mummy returns, both of which were directed by stephen sommers. in 2007, he appeared in charlie wilson's war.  ipale returned to israel around 2012 after decades residing and working in london and los angeles. however, he was unable to recreate the professional success in israel that he had enjoyed abroad.  death aharon ipale died from cancer at sheba medical center in tel hashomer on june 27, 2016, at the age of 74.
he was being treated for the disease for several months. ipale, who was survived by his daughter, was buried in holon.  filmography  references  external links  1941 births 2016 deaths american male film actors american male television actors american people of moroccan-jewish descent deaths from cancer in israel israeli expatriates in the united states israeli male film actors israeli male television actors israeli people of moroccan-jewish descent jewish israeli male actors moroccan emigrants to israel people with acquired american citizenship
the reform party of alberta may refer to two unrelated right-wing political parties in alberta:   reform party of alberta (1989-2004), a party that did not contest general elections, but existed to nominate candidates in alberta senate nominee elections for the reform party of canada  reform party of alberta (2016-), a socially conservative political party founded by randy thorsteinson in 2016
the 2016 segundona is the 22nd season of the second-tier football league in angola. the season ran from 10 july to  october 2016.  the league comprises 2 series of 5 teams, the winner of each series being automatically promoted to the 2017 girabola while the runners-up of each group will contest for the third spot. at the end of the regular season, the three series winners will play a round-robin tournament to determine the league champion.  stadiums and locations  serie a  table and results  match details  round 1  round 7  round 2  round 8  round 3  round 9  round 4  round 10  round 5  round 11  round 6  round 12  serie b  table and results  match details  round 1  round 6  round 2  round 7  round 3  round 8  round 4  round 9  round 5  round 10  2017 girabola playoff  2016 segundona title match  see also 2016 girabola  references  external links federacao angolana de futebol  segundona segundona angola
berengere krief (born 16 april 1983) is a french actress and comedian.  filmography  theater  references  external links       french film actresses 1983 births living people 21st-century french actresses actresses from lyon french television actresses
muktsar assembly constituency (sl. no.: 86) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in muktsar district, punjab state, india.  list of mlas  chronological list of members of punjab legislative assembly from muktsar.  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  sri muktsar sahib district punjab legislative assembly  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sri muktsar sahib district
spain competed at the 1994 european athletics championships in helsinki, finland, from 7-14 august 1994.  medals  results  men track & road events  field events  combined events - decathlon  women track & road events  field events  nations at the 1994 european athletics championships 1994 european athletics championships
cule is a mountain in peru.  cule may also refer to:  cule (surname) cule, a mountain in kosovo. cule, a village in bosnia and herzegovina
the zorba was a portable computer running the cp/m operating system manufactured in 1983 and 1984. it was originally manufactured by telcon industries of fort lauderdale, florida, a company specialized in telecommunication equipment manufacturing.  the zorba was one of the last cp/m computers on the market. by the time it was introduced, the kaypro and osborne machines already dominated that market.  the introduction of the compaq portable, compatible with the ibm pc and running ms-dos, sealed the fate of the cp/m machines.  history the zorba was one of the last 8-bit portable computers running the cp/m operating system. it had features very similar to the kaypro ii.  the original sale price was $1,595.  the rights for the zorba were sold by telcon for $5 million to modcomp (modular computer systems, inc), a company which specialized in mini-computer manufacturing. modular micro group was created specifically to market the zorba. the zorba 7 was sold as the modular micros gc-200.  modular micro group sold two different models.  the zorba 7 sold for $1,595.  it had a 7" green crt screen and 2 410k floppies.  the zorba 2000 sold for $2,000.  it had a 9" green or yellow screen, 2 820k floppies, and an available 10 meg hard drive.  sales were very poor. within a year, the zorba computer stock was sold to gemini electronics, a company which specialized in selling surplus stocks.  the remaining inventory was sold at a price of about $799 per unit.  in all, only about 6,000 zorba computers were manufactured and sold.  available software the zorba computer came with several video emulations, including heathkit 19/89, zenith 19/89, and dec vt52. this allowed them to run virtually any existing cp/m software.  a "perfect software package" was available for $190.  this included the perfect writer word processor, the "perfect speller" spell checker, the "perfect filer" database manager, and the "perfect calc" program for spreadsheets.  it could also run the micropro software package (wordstar, mailmerge, spellstar, calcstar, and datastar).  features  the zorba had a detachable 95-key keyboard with 19 function keys and numeric keypad.  it
had a z80a cpu, running at 4mhz.  it came with 64 kb or ram and 4kb of rom (expandable to 16 kb).  the text-only screen had 80 characters x 25 lines.  it came with 2 serial ports, a parallel port, and an ieee-488 port.  see also  portable computer  personal computer  timeline of portable computers  references  external links  1984 telcon zorba gemini - early vintage portable computer - luggable laptop cpm pc  zorba equipment preservation society  review of the zorba, infoworld magazine, june 6, 1983  portable computers
the 1945 western michigan broncos football team represented michigan college of education (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1945 college football season.  in their fourth season under head coach john gill, the broncos compiled a 4-3 record and outscored their opponents, 147 to 105.  the team played its home games at waldo stadium in kalamazoo, michigan. tackle ned stuits received the team's most outstanding player award.  schedule  references  western michigan western michigan broncos football seasons western michigan broncos football
zhou suying (born 8 december 1960) is a chinese former cyclist. she competed in the women's sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1960 births living people chinese female cyclists olympic cyclists of china cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling asian games gold medalists for china cyclists at the 1986 asian games medalists at the 1986 asian games
green gables, also known as the wells house, is a historic home at 1501 south harbor city boulevard in melbourne, florida, united states. the house fronts the indian river. local business man william t. wells purchased the strobah property and built the green gables in 1886 with his wife nora stanford wells as a winter home. green gables is an example of queen anne style architecture, and it is believed to be the first home in the area with indoor plumbing and an indoor bathroom. on may 18, 2016, it was added to the u.s. national register of historic places. green gables was scheduled for demolition in 2015, but a group of local historians and community volunteers are working with the owners, fourth generation family members, to save the house due to its historical significance to the area. the community needed $500,000 to salvage the house as of april 2020.  william twining wells wells was from new jersey and new york, and owned the wells rustless iron company. wells managed a pineapple plantation on the beach. he also donated the land for a local park named wells park.  references and external links    brevard county listings at national register of historic places  buildings and structures in melbourne, florida houses completed in 1896 houses in brevard county, florida national register of historic places in brevard county, florida queen anne architecture in florida u.s. route 1
jandiala assembly constituency (sl. no.: 14) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india. it includes jandiala guru town.  member of legislative assembly  2012: baljit singh jalal usma, shiromani akali dal  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
tauno majuri (1907-1980) was a finnish stage and film actor. he was married to the actress kaisu leppanen.  selected filmography  the face in the mirror (1953)  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1907 births 1980 deaths finnish male film actors people from vyborg
nandrolone sulfate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-sulfate and used medically as the sodium salt nandrolone sodium sulfate (brand names keratyl, nandrol, nandain, colirio ocul nandrol), is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester which is or has been used as an ophthalmic drug in the form of eye drops in spain, denmark, switzerland, france, portugal, and belgium.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids estranes nandrolone esters ophthalmology drugs progestogens sulfate esters testosterone
mark muga ouma (10 september 1960 - 10 july 2016) was a ugandan-born kenyan athletics journalist and philosophy academic.  born in kampala, uganda, to bernadette and joseph ouma (an academic), mark ouma grew up studying in his birthplace, kenya, and also in sydney, australia. he completed a bachelor's degree in philosophy at makerere university and went on to teach advanced logic at his alma mater in the 1980s. a kenyan citizen, he taught there at egerton university in the early 1990s.  he chose to focus on his passion, sports journalism, after 1995 and took up a position at the south african broadcasting corporation as an international correspondent. he joined the daybreak africa news team for voice of america, remaining in south africa and serving as the sports editor there. a writer and a photographer, he increasingly focused more on athletics writing, becoming a regular correspondent from 1998 for the international association of athletics federations, the sport's governing body. he became one of africa's foremost athletics journalists and frequently reported from the african championships in athletics - the continent's biennial tournament. freelancing, ouma launched african athletics, a website dedicated to athletics journalism for africa. while reporting from the 2016 african championships in athletics he took ill and died shortly after at king edward viii hospital in durban. aleck skhosana, chairman of athletics south africa paid tribute to ouma's work: "[he] will always be remembered as an advocate of african athletics and a professional in his work. i met mark all over the world doing what he loved best, promoting african athletics."  references  1960 births 2016 deaths people from kampala ugandan journalists kenyan journalists sport of athletics journalists makerere university academics makerere university alumni voice of america people
the sam'al lions are a number of lion-shaped statues from sam'al, the modern zincirli, which are currently located in the vorderasiatisches museum berlin (pergamon museum), the museum of the ancient orient (istanbul) and the louvre.  pergamon lions the lions are made from dolerite. they are 1.9 metres high, 2.9-3.05 metres long and 0.85-.0.9 metres wide. the figures have the inventory numbers vag 1042, va 2719, va 2718 und va 3001. three of the lions are originals, one of them is a plaster cast.  the lions come, and have been dated between the 10th and 8th centuries bc. they probably belong to the inner part of the east gate of the city, but were discovered in a secondary deposition. all four lions differ from one another in details. the differences are so great that current scholarship argues that the outer lions must date to the 10th century bc and the inner lions to the 8th century. both statues stand nearly square with one another. the sides are only carved in shallow relief. the later lions have been created by reworking older statues. they are more detached from the walls than the older ones and details like the manes and extremities have been more starkly worked. in addition, the mouths are opened more widely and give a more threatening impression. the lions served as orthostates and thus had both a decorative and a structural role.    the lions are displayed in room 2 (syria and asia minor) of the pergamonmuseum. they form an ensemble with other parts of the city gate of sam'al and are located at the opposite end of the processional way of babylon from the ishtar gate. the statues were found by the orient-comite excavations in 1890/91 and brought to berlin as partage (which was common at the time).  istanbul lions two associated lion statues are now on display in the istanbul museum of the ancient orient.  gallery  references  bibliography   , "rekonstruktion eines burgtores (mit blick in richtung prozessionsstraße und istar-tor)," and "zwei torlowen," in liane jakob-rost et al., das vorderasiatische museum, von zabern, mainz 1992, pp. 218-221  antikensammlung berlin archaeological discoveries in turkey sculptures of lions sculptures of the berlin state museums

the women's museum of california (wmofc) is a nonprofit museum located in san diego, california and dedicated to women's history. it was first organized under the names the women's history reclamation project and then the women's history museum and educational center. it was founded in 1983. in addition to exhibits and programs offered, the wmofc also co-founded and hosts the san diego county women's hall of fame. the museum is located at liberty station and has exhibit space, archives, a library and a store that features items made exclusively by women. other museum offerings include speakers and monthly lecture series.  history  the museum had its roots with the women's rights activist, mary b. maschal who collected items from women's history in her home. the home had formally belonged to a suffragist, veronica burke. maschal had been collecting artifacts relating to women's history since the 1970s. she finally opened her collection to the public in 1983, naming it the women's history reclamation project (whrp). maschal felt a passion for collecting artifacts because of her "own disappointment over the lack of knowledge about women's history among the younger generation." maschal also received a grant in 1984 in order to conduct and collect oral history interviews.  maschal moved her collection to the art union building in golden hill in 1997. maschal died in 1998, and cindy stankowski and sue gonda took over leadership of the museum. in 2000, the museum sponsored a women's history poetry contest, which was held at the same time as an exhibit titled in our own voice: women's history through women's poetry. the museum co-created the san diego county women's hall of fame in 2001. in 2003, the project changed its name to the women's history museum and educational center (whmec).  the women's history museum and educational center changed its name again, this time to the women's museum of california (wmofc) in 2011. they concurrently updated the museum logo. wmc also moved to the liberty station promenade in point loma in 2012. the new location was three times larger than their former location at golden hill.  helen hawkins memorial library and research archive  part of the museum is a library and archive. the helen hawkins memorial library and research archive includes books and several special collections. part of the special collections is the alice park archive which collects artifacts from the women's suffrage movement from the late 19th century and early 20th century. the special collections also include papers documenting the career of
lucy killea, a collection of materials relating to the un conference on the status of women and the neff-leclair collection of period women's clothing dating from the 18th century on.  film festival   the women's museum of california offers several programs and events for the public to attend. the film festival allows females who have worked in the film industry to show their film creations and share their experiences with others. the current films of 2021 are posted and are accessible at any time with the purchase of the $5 ticket or $15 pass. the film festival includes a panel that consists of activists and filmmakers that discuss the representation and roles of women in the film industry environment.  san diego county women's hall of fame  the hall of fame was created in 2001, partly through the wmofc and other organizations. some organizations that have partnered with wmofc for the hall of fame include the girl scouts, mana, a national latina organization and executive women international. co-hosts of the hof include the museum, the san diego county commission on the status of women, san diego state university's women's studies department, and the women's center of the university of california, san diego. inductions into the hall of fame take place in march during women's history month. each year about five women are inducted.  the san diego county women's hall of fame mission is "to acknowledge and honor women who have significantly contributed to the quality of life and who have made outstanding volunteer contributions in san diego county."  list of inductees  references  additional sources  external links   official site  mary maschal (video)  1983 establishments in california museums in san diego museums established in 1983 women's museums in california
star billions is an indie adventure video game by catch & release, llc, an independent development team consisting of game designers james tillman and matthew taylor. the game's first season was released on december 8, 2015, for ios devices and later ported to android. in star billions, players observe a hopelessly lost spaceship that is piloted by four unique artificial intelligences represented by anthropomorphic animal characters. after each character presents its plan for resolving a given situation, the player must select the ideal ai to solve the problem. star billions takes place in real-time as players wait to see how their decision will affect the story. players may also reduce the wait time by playing game boy style minigames.  plot  star billions takes place in the distant future. humanity is forced to flee earth aboard the "big brother" spacecraft after a series of disasters. the humans attempt to find a new planet suitable for organic life, but soon realize that their food and fuel stores will be depleted before an ideal planet is found. an advanced artificial intelligence known as ein is placed in charge of finding a new planet while all of humanity is put into a state of cryogenic sleep. ein constructs a small scouting vessel known as the "little brother" and programs three additional ais with unique, human-like personalities designed to balance one another. these ais are sarge, rosie and lacie.  development   the game's initial design was created by james tillman just before he graduated from college in 2015. co-designer matthew taylor visited james and found a crudely drawn design document for star billions. in this early phase, the artificial intelligences were not yet anthropomorphic animals and some characters featured different names that would later change.  reception   the game received generally positive reviews with venturebeat praising the game's "presentation" and "charm" while pocket tactics described the game as "cute, funny [and] well-written." appunwrapper criticized the game's real-time elements, saying "in theory, it works. it makes it feel like the story is happening in real time, as you have to wait for the crew to travel to each destination. but it also interrupted the story every time i was getting into it."  references  2015 video games adventure games android (operating system) games ios games video games featuring non-playable protagonists indie video games video games developed in the united states
ortiz is an unincorporated community in conejos county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called ortiz was established in 1890, and remained in operation until 1943. the original proprietor, j. nestor ortiz, gave the community his name.  references  unincorporated communities in conejos county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
uppal bhupa is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 8.8 km from postal head office in nurmahal, 19.3 km from phillaur, 37.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 140 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  as of 2011, the village had a total number of 227 houses and population of 1035 of which comprised 506 males and 529 females according to the report published by census india the literacy rate was 81.24%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years was 97 which was 9.37% of total population, and child sex ratio was approximately 1205 higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 55.7% of total population in the village. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 280 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 271 males and 9 females. according to census survey report 2011, 100% workers describe their work as main work and 0% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 18.7 km away from the village. the village is 47.8 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 130 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
chris waller may refer to:   chris waller (gymnast) (born 1968), american gymnast  chris waller (cricketer) (born 1948), english cricketer  chris waller (actor), british actor  chris waller (horse trainer), (born 1973), new zealand born champion thoroughbred horse trainer
jobable formerly hiring screen is a hong kong based jobs board and career platform that lists candidate job applications for employers, and job opportunities for job seekers, in order of their suitability using algorithms and big data.  history  jobable was founded in march 2014 and is founded and led by ceo richard hanson and cpo luke byrne.  in september 2015 jobable secured funding of us$800,000.  in may 2016 jobable launched relevance scoring platform for jobs in hong kong.  references  external links  disrupting hong kong's recruitment industry employment websites business services companies established in 2014 service companies of hong kong hong kong websites
kasso chahal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of kasso chahal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, kasso chahal has total number of 61 houses and population of 305 of which include 167 males and 138 females. literacy rate of kasso chahal is 79.79%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 23 which is 7.54% of total population of kasso chahal, and child sex ratio is approximately 643, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
abena joan brown (1928-2015) was an african-american businesswoman and theater producer who founded the creative arts foundation in chicago to enable black artists to work. known as the "mother of chicago's black arts community", she received honors and awards for her work in both theater and social programs. brown was inducted into the chicago women's hall of fame and interviewed as a subject of the archival program the historymakers.  early life abena joan phillips was born on may 8, 1928 in chicago, as the only child of lueola reed. she began studying dance when she was three years old and performed in church from childhood. after she was discovered skipping school, phillips was sent to a catholic boarding school by her mother. she began her tertiary education as a dance major at the university of illinois and completed her bachelor's degree at roosevelt university. she then went on to complete a master's degree in social work at the university of chicago, after challenging the university to open its doors to black students.  career brown began her career as a social worker and became the program services director at the harriett m. harris ywca of metropolitan chicago. she was actively involved in the creation of such organizations as national association of black social workers during the civil rights movement. brown's vision was unapologetically afrocentric and she was driven to create organizations that featured and nurtured the black community. in 1969, brown and okoro harold johnson, who had met while they were students at roosevelt university came up with the idea of creating a talent organization for black actors. together, they along with al johnson and archie weston sr. created ebony talent agency (eta), as an agency to discover and place performers. eta was franchised by both the american federation of television and radio artists and the screen actors guild and later evolved into the creative arts foundation, offering training and theater performance opportunities. in 1982, she quit her position at the ywca to focus her energies full-time to the creation of eta.  after several years without a permanent home, the group found a permanent location in an abandoned factory in 1978 and began renovations of the space. over the next decade, with numerous fundraising events, including a national endowment for the arts grant, the group staged performances and completed the additions of office and classroom space, a gallery, a library, and a 200-seat modern theater in south chicago. brown served as ceo of the organization and continuously worked to expand the organization, spearheading the purchase of additional land in 1995 and again in 1998 to improve both
the courses they could offer, as well as showcase works written and performed by black artists. she also pushed efforts to create a children's theater, summer camps and training to inspire children to become involved in the arts.  in addition to her work at eta, brown spoke at many events advocating for the arts in and around chicago. she retired in 2011 after 40 years at eta. brown died on july 12, 2015 in chicago.  legacy brown, who was called by the chicago sun-times, the "mother of chicago's black arts community" was inducted into the chicago women's hall of fame in 1991 and in 1995 received a lifetime achievement award from the black theater alliance of chicago. she received the governor's award for the arts, african american arts alliance's paul robeson award, as well as many honors from local organizations. regionally, she received the hazel joan bryant award from the midwest african-american theatre alliance and was nationally recognized in 2001 as an interviewee for the black history archive project known as the historymakers. in 2011, a section of south chicago avenue, between 75th and 76th streets, was renamed in her honor.  references  citations  bibliography                and   1928 births 2015 deaths people from chicago university of illinois college of fine and applied arts alumni roosevelt university alumni university of chicago alumni american social workers theatre patrons american theatre directors women theatre directors activists for african-american civil rights 20th-century african-american activists activists from illinois
kitalya maximum security prison is a maximum security prison for both men and women in uganda.  location the prison is located in the village of kitalya, in busiro county, wakiso district, off of the kampala-mityana road, approximately  northwest of luzira maximum security prison. this is about  northwest of the central business district of kampala, the capital and largest city in uganda. the coordinates of kitalya maximum security prison are 0°26'13.0"n, 32°13'36.0"e (latitude:0.436944; longitude:32.226667).  overview ambitious construction company limited was awarded the construction contract, at a price of sh18.3 billion (approx. us$5.5 million in july 2016). the new prison is intended to relieve luzira maximum security prison, which is congested. construction is expected to conclude in 2018.  physical construction was concluded in february 2020. however, before the facility receives its first inmate, the senor staff who are going to operate the prison, including onesmus bitaliwo, the designated officer in charge, are expected to tour similar facilities abroad, to learn first-hand how such facilities are run.  the facility also needs to be equipped with furniture, bedding and security equipment, including closed-circuit television (cctv) cameras and monitoring equipment. kitalya is reported to have more than six layers of security, physical, electronic and otherwise.  facilities the new prison has common dormitory wards, 30 individual cells, a medical wing with inpatient facilities. it also has a kitchen equipped with energy-saving technology. other amenities include a  contact visitors' room and isolation rooms for contagious diseases. it has an array of recreational facilities, including a soccer field, a basketball court, a volleyball court, and a tennis court. it sits on  of land, in a rural setting.  see also  african prisons project  luzira maximum security prison  jlos house project  references  external links website of uganda prisons service 10,000 survive prison, sentenced to community service as of 18 february 2019.  prisons in uganda wakiso district buildings and structures in uganda buildings and structures completed in 2020 2020 establishments in uganda
energia is the second studio album by colombian singer j balvin. it was released on june 24, 2016, by capitol latin and universal music group. balvin received a nomination for the lo nuestro award for urban album of the year.  commercial performance  energia debuted at number 38 on the billboard 200, with 12,000 equivalent album units; selling 7,000 copies in its first week. the album was the first balvin's album to debut at number one on the billboard top latin albums.  accolades energia was listed number four on rolling stones 10 best latin albums of 2016, with the reviewer calling the album balvin's "breakthrough" continuing to praise the album's lead single "ginza", stating "with its deliciously liquid beat, is among the finest three minutes in reggaeton history."  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications and sales  energia tour balvin embarked on the energia tour in order to support the album. the tour began on september 29, 2016 in culiacan and concluded on january 28, 2018 in london.  set list this set list is representative of the show on february 25, 2017 in vina del mar, chile. it is not representative of all concerts for the duration of the tour.   "ginza"  "safari"  "tranquila"  "bobo"  "yo te lo dije"  "sin compromiso"  "sorry (latino remix)"  "6 am"  "otra vez"  "ay vamos"  "snapchat"  "travesuras"  "lean on (remix)"  "pierde los modales"  "sigo extranandote"  "acercate"  tour dates  cancelled shows  notes  references   2016 albums j balvin albums spanish-language albums capitol latin albums latin grammy award for best urban music album albums produced by pharrell williams
bertolacci is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  a. bertolacci (1776-1833), auditor general of sri lanka andrea bertolacci (born 1991), italian footballer lauren bertolacci (born 1985), australian volleyball player  italian-language surnames
the following lists events that happened in 1946 in iceland.  incumbents president - sveinn bjornsson prime minister - olafur thors  events  19 november - iceland joins the united nations.  births  26 april - vilhjalmur þormundur vilhjalmsson, lawyer and politician 14 may - sigriður anna þorðardottir, politician. 7 august - geir hallsteinsson, handball player 17 september - helgi numason, footballer 6 november - katrin fjeldsted, politician 9 december - hermann gunnarsson, footballer, handball player and media personality (d. 2013). 12 december - matthias hallgrimsson, footballer  deaths  references    1940s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
a general election was held in the u.s. state of arkansas on november 6, 2018. all of arkansas' executive officers were up for election as well as all of arkansas' four seats in the united states house of representatives. primaries were held on may 22, 2018. polls were open from 7:30 am to 7:30 pm cst. republicans retained of all statewide offices and all four seats in the united states house of representatives.  governor  republican governor asa hutchinson was elected to a second term.  lieutenant governor republican lieutenant governor tim griffin was elected to a second term.  attorney general republican attorney general leslie rutledge was elected to a second term.  secretary of state republican john thurston was elected to a first term.  state treasurer republican treasurer dennis milligan was elected to a second term.  state auditor republican andrea lea was elected to a second term.  commissioner of state lands incumbent commissioner of state lands john thurston (r) was term-limited and could not run for re-election. he successfully won his race as secretary of state of arkansas. republican tommy land was elected to a first term.  united states house of representatives  all of arkansas' four seats in the united states house of representatives were up for election in 2018. republicans held on to all four seats.  references  external links candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at national institute on money in state politics  official lieutenant governor campaign websites anthony bland (d) for lt. governor tim griffin (r) for lt. governor  official attorney general campaign websites mike lee (d) for attorney general  leslie rutledge (r) for attorney general  official secretary of state campaign websites susan inman (d) for secretary of state  john thurston (r) for secretary of state  official state treasurer campaign websites dennis milligan (r) for state treasurer  official commissioner of state lands campaign websites tommy land (r) for land commissioner larry williams (d) for land commissioner    arkansas
slaughter king is the second mixtape by atlanta-based rapper 21 savage. it was released on december 1, 2015.  release and promotion on december 2, 2015, the music video "dirty k" was released. the mixtape was re-released on all streaming platforms on may 5, 2016 along with the slaughter tape and singles "red opps" and "one foot".  track listing  references  2015 mixtape albums 21 savage albums
hnat petrovych yura (; also gnat yura;  - january 18, 1966) was a soviet and ukrainian director, actor of theatre and film, pedagogue. he directed two films, and appeared on screen six times during the soviet era. yura received titles of professor (1946), people's actor of ukraine (1930), and people's actor of the soviet union (1940).  biography yura was born in village fedvar (today pidlisne). his stage experience has started in 1904 within an amateur club, while his professional performance started in 1907 as part of the maksymovych troupe. before the world war i he emigrated to austria-hungary where in 1913-1914 performed as an actor at the ruska besida association theater in lemberg (lviv). soon after the start of the war in 1916-1919 yura was a member of the "molodyi teatr" theatre (les kurbas troupe) located in kiev. in 1919 "molodyi teatr" was added to the newly reformed first theater of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic based on the state drama theater of ukraine. in 1920 a group of former "molodyi theatre" led by yura joined "novyi lvivskyi teatr" which in vinnytsia was reformed into the franko ukrainian drama theatre and for the first few years (1920-1923) was touring ukraine.  selected filmography  prometheus (1936)  cossacks beyond the danube (1937)   shchors (1939)  taras shevchenko (1951)  the unforgettable year 1919 (1952)  martin borulya (1953)  references  bibliography   james steffen. the cinema of sergei parajanov. university of wisconsin pres, 2013.  external links       1888 births 1966 deaths people from oleksandrivka raion, kirovohrad oblast people from kherson governorate emigrants from the russian empire to austria-hungary ukrainian film directors ukrainian male stage actors ukrainian male film actors soviet film directors soviet male stage actors soviet male film actors ukrayinska besida theatre kyiv national i. k. karpenko-kary theatre, cinema and television university faculty first convocation members of the verkhovna rada of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic second convocation members of the verkhovna rada of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic third convocation members of the verkhovna rada of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic fourth convocation members of the verkhovna rada of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic fifth convocation members of the verkhovna rada of the ukrainian soviet socialist republic recipients of the title of people's artists of
ukraine people's artists of the ussr burials at baikove cemetery
karen sue pence ( batten, formerly whitaker; born january 1, 1957) is an american schoolteacher, painter, and was the second lady of the united states from 2017 to 2021. she is married to the 48th vice president of the united states, mike pence. she was the first lady of indiana from january 14, 2013, to january 9, 2017.  early life and education pence was born as karen sue batten at mcconnell air force base in kansas on january 1, 1957, the daughter of lillian (nee hacker; 1931-2004) and john m. batten (1931/1932-1988), a united airlines official. her parents divorced when she was very young, and her mother married bernard barcio in 1967. she grew up in the broad ripple village neighborhood of indianapolis, where she graduated as valedictorian from bishop chatard high school. pence attended nearby butler university where she studied to become a teacher, and minored in art. she received both a bachelor of science (b.s.) and a master of science (m.s.) in elementary education from butler university.  career pence has taught at john strange elementary, acton elementary, fall creek elementary, and the orchard school, all in indianapolis.  after the birth of her first child, pence took a class in watercolor painting. this led to a career painting portraits of houses and historic buildings. she has completed as many as thirty-five paintings a year, some on commission and selling others at local art fairs.  while mike pence was in congress, karen worked at immanuel christian school, a private christian school in springfield, virginia, as an arts teacher for twelve years.  first lady of indiana pence was the first lady of indiana during her husband's term as governor of the state from 2013 to 2017. in her first year of the role, she established the indiana first lady's charitable foundation to "promote individuals and organizations that encourage children, families, and the arts", also offering grants and scholarships.  in 2015, pence started a small business named "'that's my towel!' charm" which makes metal charms for attaching to towels so they can be more easily identified when among others.  the business was put on hold when mike pence became a vice presidential candidate.  a honey bee conservation advocate, pence had a beehive installed at the indiana governor's residence while first lady of the state.  second lady of the united states (2017-2021)  pence became the second lady of the united states on january 20
, 2017, succeeding jill biden. she hired kristan king nevins as her chief of staff; nevins had served in the same position under former first lady barbara bush. as second lady, pence worked to raise awareness of art therapy, to which she was first exposed when visiting a washington hospital during her husband's tenure as a congressman. in october 2017, she visited the campus of florida state university to highlight the university's art therapy program, which dates back to the 1990s.  pence continued to raise awareness of honey bee habitat destruction and the importance of pollination in 2017 by having a beehive installed at the official vice presidential residence, number one observatory circle.  2019 return to teaching in january 2019, it was reported that pence was returning as a part-time art teacher for immanuel christian school, and she said in a statement that she was "excited to be back in the classroom and doing what i love to do," and that she had "missed teaching art."  the school had previously been criticized and accused of homophobia for not admitting lgbt students, posting a policy wherein it is permitted to turn away students who engage in, uphold, or accept "sexual immorality, homosexual activity, or bisexual activity", with the policy also applying to parents and employees. pence was criticized in the media and by lgbt advocates and advocacy organizations in the days following the announcement. vice president pence defended his wife's profession and decision, accusing her critics of attacking religious education. he said that he and his wife were "used to the criticism", but that he was angered over the criticism of his wife, opining that "to see major news organizations attacking christian education is deeply offensive to us", and that it "should stop".  family and personal life while in high school, she met her first husband, john steven whitaker. they were married on august 4, 1978, in brewster county, texas, and later divorced. whitaker was a medical student during their marriage.  karen met mike pence while she was playing guitar at mass at st. thomas aquinas church, a catholic church in indianapolis they both attended. their first date included ice skating at the indiana state fairgrounds. after about nine months of dating, they became engaged in august 1984 and married on june 8, 1985. they were both roman catholic and later converted to evangelical christianity by 1995. the couple has three children: michael (serving in the u.s. marine corps), charlotte, and audrey. pence has lived most of her life in indiana, though the entire family moved to
washington, d.c. for the twelve years that husband mike was a congressman from indiana before his election as governor of indiana. she is a trained pilot.  pence is known for her dedication to promoting art as a way of healing. she provided the watercolor illustrations for her daughter charlotte's 2018 children's book, marlon bundo's a day in the life of the vice president, the proceeds from which are given to charities, including an art therapy program.  references  external links  |-  1957 births american evangelicals artists from indiana butler university alumni christians from indiana converts to evangelical christianity from roman catholicism schoolteachers from indiana first ladies and gentlemen of indiana indiana republicans living people pence family people from indianapolis second ladies of the united states 20th-century american educators 21st-century american educators american art educators 20th-century american women educators 21st-century american women educators
samuel ofori amponsah (born march 2, 1974), also known by the name mr. all 4 real, is a ghanaian singer-songwriter from agogo, ashanti region, ghana. he won seven awards in one night at the 2006 vgma awards, including 2005 artist of the year, and has a combined total of 17 ghana music awards nominations, making him one of the highest nominated artists. samuel ofori amponsah performed internationally in london, new york, chicago, and sierra leone. his music has a heavy r&b influence. he has collaborated with the likes of kofi nti, barosky, k. k. fosu and daddy lumba. some of his most popular songs are "asew", "lady," "emmanuella," "odwo", and "otoolege."  early life   samuel ofori amponsah was born march 2, 1974, to johnson kwadwo ofori and georgina nkansah, in agogo, ashanti region, ghana. he is known to be an advocate for education and was enrolled in school before the age required. he began his education at an agogo practice school and later attended konongo odumase senior high school, where he found his passion for writing poetry.  his poems were later used in his songs, most notably in his song "asew." he dropped out of school and later met music bigwig daddy lumba, gaining access into the music industry. at an early age, he discovered his love for music. he began writing at the age of 13 after being inspired by the talented music legend michael jackson, which may account for his r&b style of music.  music  1999-2004: early career   amponsah started working with daddy lumba in 1999. he gained entry into the music industry when he collaborated with daddy lumba on the album wo ho kyere. although he earned a shot in the limelight for this collaboration, his career did not fully launch until 2000. he released his first album with owusek productions in 2001, titled asew, which had eight tracks, plus a bonus instrumental of the song "asew." he later released the albums meprawo and rakia in 2002 and 2004.  2005-10: recognition  in 2005, amponsah released his single "otoolege," which was included in the album of the same name. he collaborated with producer appietus and musicians k.k. fosu, kofi nti, and baros
ky on the song. amponsah won big the next year at the ghana music awards with seven awards. "otoolege" won him 2005 vgma artist of the year.   in early 2006, he was set to perform for ghanaian president john kufuor, but reportedly failed to show up for the event. he made a public apology to the president and the people of ghana for the mishap. he later performed for the president's 68th birthday in december of that same year.  he performed a big show in liberia in 2007 to an overwhelming crowd of fans. some have compared his presence in liberia to the presence of michael jackson. he met with mayor ophelia huff saytumah of monrovia, agriculture minister solomon hedd-williams, and presidential special assistant madina wiesseh while in liberia. in the same year, he released three albums: the return of kofi b, emmanuella, and odwo. after 2007, he released four albums in the span of three years.  2013-16: new image  in 2013, amponsah made the decision to leave secular music.  he released a gospel album in 2014 called the gospel according to ofori. his decision included becoming a pastor. he founded the family of faith and love ministries to spread the word of god. it wasn't long before he switched back to secular music, claiming he would save souls through his love songs. after announcing his decision to go back to secular music, he began rehearsing and preparing his fans for a new experience and new image for his future performances. he was reported to have spent a month in seclusion at his home in order to focus on preparing for his stage performances.  the 2015 release of his single "alewa" earned him a nomination for 2015 highlife artist of the year and 2015 highlife song of the year. the song was in collaboration with sarkodie, a fellow ghanaian music artist and rapper. the pair performed the song at the 2015 rapperholic concert. "alewa" is featured on amponsah's album songs of solomon, which includes the hits "not falling," "serious," and "wonkoaa." the eleven-track album features music producers kaywa, appietus, and bodo staiger.  2016-present: comeback  in 2016 amponsah released several singles including "fab3gye" with paa kwasi and atom (produced by appietus), and "tintin" in collaboration with samini.  on april 21
, 2017 amponsah released yet another love song, "seventeen," featuring the vocals of kwabena kwabena.  the song was produced by kaywa.  his second release of 2017 was "dangerous," a collaboration with singer akwaboah jnr and black nayaka, produced by cedi gh.  politics in december 2017 amponsah announced that he will likely enter politics and seek a parliamentary asante akim seat in the 2020 election.  controversy  "pastor alewa"  after moving from secular music to more spiritual music, amponsah claimed making hit gospel music was more difficult than making secular music. he later returned to secular music and faced criticism for his actions. after releasing "alewa," featuring sarkodie, he has been called "pastor alewa." his manager, frank agyekum, claimed amponsah wanted to go back to making love songs.  a fellow artist, criss waddle, openly criticized amponsah, questioning his religious calling. sound engineer, morris d'voice, had a different opinion as he defended amponsah and called for more acceptance for the musician.  he performed his first show after coming back to secular music in 2015.  bible verse  more controversy and criticism ensued after amponsah failed to recite a single bible verse in an interview with bola ray on starr 103.5 in 2015. he later claimed memorizing bible verses is meant for children and that he learned bible verses from the heart.  suicide hoax  amponsah also made news on valentine's day 2015 when he was connected to a suicide hoax. his management released a statement after the false suicide report, stating amponsah was alive and claimed the report was not a publicity stunt and that they would open an investigation into the report.  collaborations  amponsah has collaborated with many artists. his earliest collaboration was with daddy lumba for lumba's album wo ho kyere. his song "odwo" from the album of the same name featured samini, formerly known as batman samini, a ghanaian reggae and dancehall artist. he also created the songs "otoolege" and "rakia" with artists k.k. fosu and kofi nti. barosky was also featured on "otoolege." other collaborations include voltage, dobble, and d-black, for the songs "chemistry," "alomo," and "aben dada." one of his 2016 singles, "alewa," which garnered much
attention, featured sarkodie.  discography  albums  videography  filmography  awards and nominations  ghana music awards  mtv africa music awards  references  living people 1974 births ghanaian highlife musicians people from agogo, ghana konongo odumase senior high school alumni
ronan rooney (born march 27, 1960) is an irish paralympic athlete in table tennis who has competed in six paralympic games.  career born in louth, ireland in 1960, he became disabled after falling off a motorbike aged 18.  formerly he was a track and field athlete who won bronze in the men's marathon 1b at the 1984 summer paralympics. from 1988 onwards he has switched to singles and teams table tennis for ireland. but not since then has he won another medal.  ronan made his official return after a 12-year absence from the paralympics in 2012, playing once again in men's singles and teams. this time, his wife, rena mccarron rooney, took part in women's table tennis, and they are believed to be the only married couple competing in the london paralympics.  references  paralympic athletes of ireland 1960 births living people athletes (track and field) at the 1984 summer paralympics table tennis players at the 1988 summer paralympics table tennis players at the 1992 summer paralympics table tennis players at the 1996 summer paralympics table tennis players at the 2000 summer paralympics table tennis players at the 2012 summer paralympics paralympic bronze medalists for ireland medalists at the 1984 summer paralympics paralympic medalists in athletics (track and field)
erskine station is an unincorporated community in center township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located outside the city limits of evansville to the north.  geography  erskine station is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
early station is an extinct town in helt township, vermillion county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  a few buildings in the community exist, and it is still cited by the usgs.  geography early station is located at .  references  former populated places in vermillion county, indiana former populated places in indiana
megan e. schwamb (born 1984) is an american astronomer and planetary scientist, and lecturer at queen's university, belfast. schwamb has discovered and co-discovered several trans-neptunian objects, and is involved with citizen science projects such as planet four and planet hunters.  biography   in 2006, schwamb graduated from the university of pennsylvania with a b.a summa cum laude with distinction in physics. she went on to study astrophysics in the california institute of technology, graduated master of science in 2008. schwamb finished her ph.d. in planetary science in 2011, also from the california institute of technology. her thesis was researching "beyond sedna: probing the distant solar system", and her advisor was michael brown.  between 2010 and 2013 schwamb was a postdoctoral fellow at yale university. she worked at the institute of astronomy and astrophysics in the chinese academy of taipei in republic of china (taiwan) from 2013 until 2016. since 2016, schwamb has held the post of assistant scientist at the gemini observatory. she is the creator and co-founder of astrotweeps, a rotation curation account on astronomy.  schwamb is involved in citizen science projects. she is a founding science team member for planet four, project intended for mapping seasonal fans on the south pole of mars. she is also part of the science team leading at planet hunters a project in which users analyze data from the nasa kepler space mission while searching for exoplanets.  awards and honors   in 2017 she received a carl sagan medal for excellence in public communication, for the creation of the astrotweeps and planet four projects. on 13 april 2017, asteroid 11814 schwamb, discovered by schelte bus at the siding spring observatory in 1981, was named in her honor ().  research discoveries  she specialized in studying sednoids, and co-discovered several trans-neptunian objects.  list of discovered minor planets   megan schwamb is credited by the minor planet center with the discovery and co-discovery of 16 minor planets during 2007-2010 (see list). in addition to the confirmed discoveries, she also participated in the first observations of the unnumbered objects ,  and .  references  external links       , seti talks 2018,   , wired, 2015  meg schwamb youtube channel  1984 births living people american women astronomers  discoverers of minor planets women planetary scientists 21st-century  american  astronomers 21st-century american women scientists people from huntsville, alabama scientists from
alabama planetary scientists
the battle of stanaford (february 25, 1903) was an armed raid against striking miners in the village of stanaford, west virginia, united states. it was the final episode of the 1902 new river coal strike.  prelude deputy united states marshall daniel webster cunningham was tasked with serving injunctions on behalf of coal operators to a group of 33 miners who had marched from quinnimont, fayette county, to atkinsville, in present-day east beckley, during the course of a strike. the miners reportedly threatened him with armed resistance.  cunningham then withdrew to beckley, and asked raleigh county sheriff harvey cook for a posse. cunningham then went to charleston, to assemble a group of detectives, while sheriff cook telegraphed governor albert b. white for troops. the governor instructed cook to summon a posse of citizens to put down the uprising. cook summoned about 500 men to appear at the courthouse with their firearms, where they were later instructed to hold themselves ready until the afternoon of that day, or until the sheriff could come to a peaceful agreement with the miners.  sam burdette, the united mine workers' attorney, accompanied cunningham and his officers back to atkinsville from charleston, and arraignments were made for the men who had violated the injunction, as well as bonds being paid by the union for the striking miners. sheriff cook returned to beckley and told the posse that the trouble had died out and that they were discharged.  however, the strikers had merely withdrawn from atkinsville and returned to their encampments along the new river at quinnimont mountain, and some marched to stanaford, where they were taken in to the homes of friends.  at lanark, cunningham assembled a posse of 50 special marshals on the morning of february 25, 1903, accompanied by sheriff cook and howard smith, a baldwin-felts detective assigned to the c&o railroad.  the raiding party's version of events  the fayette journal, owned by coal baron samuel dixon, reported that "[the posse] left lanark about 6 o'clock in the morning for the strikers' camp. the mob had taken up headquarters in a school house and had sent a challenge to the officers daring them to come near to serve any papers on the peril of getting filled up with lead."  "the officers had stationed guards around the school house in the night and were aware of the mob's intentions. it is estimated there were about 125 of the outlaws in the house and they all had guns and plenty of ammunition. the officers halted
a short distance from the school house and detective smith and two others went up to the house and called upon the party to surrender."  "for answer the outlaws began shooting at smith and four bullets were put through his overcoat. one shot struck him on the finger. when the shooting started from the building the officers opened fire and for about five minutes both sides were working every gun and over a thousand shots were fired."  "the fire was too hot for the outlaw gang and about half of them rushed out of the building and surrendered. the others took to the woods where they were pursued by officers, and many of them arrested. over 50 were arrested."  an eyewitness accounting of events  the charleston daily gazette gave a different description of the battle:  "....it was a dramatic as well as a tragic scene, according to the story of an eye-witness who took no part in the fight, but stood not far away and watched the progress, and who related it to a gazette reporter yesterday [26 february]."  "'the parties wanted had been located in certain houses in the village, said he, 'and the deputy and his posse went into the camp within a few hundred yards, so as to be ready to make an early morning charge before those wanted could get away. the posse was divided into five parties which marched to different sides of the town and then all closed in at the same time. it was not yet light enough to distinguish anything more that the shadowy outlines of the men when they had gotten a few yards into the town to where i was standing, go to a house, stop a moment then go in."  "soon afterwards i could see other forms emerge from other houses and run toward the one into which the officers had gone. a moment after i could see the men come from the house, then i saw the flash of fire and heard the boom of a gun, then came its answering boom, and the fight was on."  "'from doors and windows guns were stuck out and fired as soon as stuck. pretty soon the other four parties joined in the firing and from every side of the town came the flash of fire, the ringing of rifles and the booming of shotguns as the fight became general. soon i could see figures of men retreating to the woods and firing as they went. a line formed upon a low ridge slightly above the town, and began firing on a party of officers on lower ground. they were answered by a line from another ridge beyond the party in the low ground, but the
range was too great, and no damage was done that could be seen. the three men killed were all in one house, and in the house six others were wounded....'"  umwa accounting of the events  chris evans, a umw official, was dispatched by the organization to investigate the killing of the three black men on the day of the battle. evans reported that a coal company attorney named w. j. st. clair had agitated to have the strikers arrested and taken to charleston. this reportedly led to cunningham breaking the agreement with the umw to give bonds for the arrested men, instead opting to go to atkinsville to arrest the men.  the miners drove cunningham away from atkinsville, refusing to allow him to arrest them. evans claimed that he had sent a report to the men to submit quietly, but that the coal operators who owned all the telegraph and telephone lines in the tow refused to deliver it. evans charged that cunningham and his deputies went to stanaford and killed the miners in their beds at night, before evans could get a message to the men.  evans's report after visiting the battlefield said that he found in a house occupied by a black man named stonewall jackson, the dead bodies of william dotson, william clark and richard clayton.  "we found the wife of jackson and her four children, with eight negroes, were in the house and that about daybreak all were awakened by shots fired into the house from the outside. this shooting took place without warning and the three colored men were found dead on the floor. two were in their night clothes and the other one was partly dressed. we visited another house where joe hiser lay in bed mortally wounded, he being shot as he was dressing. hiser lived with his sister and she made the statement at the inquest that she pleaded with those shooting not to kill her children, and in reply cunningham said: 'women and children must take care of themselves'."  evans attested that at no point were the miners ordered to surrender until after the deputies began shooting at the occupants in the houses.  evan goes on to say that "we next went to the house of lucien lausen [lawson], who was considered mortally wounded[...] this man, with others, returned the fire of the posse and this is the only instance where an attempt of resistance was made by the miners...."  the labor leader mary harris jones saw the aftermath of the attack, writing in her autobiography:  "i took the short trail up the hillside to stanford mountain.
it seemed to me as i came toward the camp as if those wretched shacks were huddling closer in terror. everything was deathly still. as i came nearer the miners' homes, i could hear sobbing. then i saw between the stilts that propped up a miner's shack the clay red with blood. i pushed open the door. on a mattress, wet with blood, lay a miner. his brains had been blown out while he slept. his shack was riddled with bullets.  in five other shacks men lay dead. in one of them a baby boy and his mother sobbed over the father's corpse. when the little fellow saw me, he said, 'mother jones, bring back my papa to me. i want to kiss him.'  the coroner came. he found that these six men had been murdered in their beds while they peacefully slept; shot by gunmen in the employ of the coal company."  aftermath  between five and eleven men were killed in the battle: 3 being killed outright, and the rest dying later. casualties named in wv papers at the time include the following:   richard clayton, shot in the chest,  william dotson,  william clark, shot in the heart,  l(ucien) lawson, died 28 february of infection as a result of his wound,   joe hiser, died 6 march of his wound, nine days after the battle,  bert irvin, dying later in the mckendree hospital in fayette county,  john winchester, dying as well in mckendree hospital.  a raleigh county coroner's jury questioned the necessity of the attack: "we, the jury, find the within dick clayton and w. dotson each came to his death by gunshot wounds, and cannot tell whether lawfully or unlawfully, and we further find that the within named william clark came to his death by being feloniously shot by a body of armed men under the direction of dan w. cunningham, united states marshal, w. c. thurman, w. d. george, w. m. johnson, j. f. burgess, c. c. snuffer, w. t. shumate.  "the finding of this verdict has created a grave doubt in the minds of many good citizens as to whether or not the actions of those charged with executing the process of the law acted within reasonable limits when the lives of these men above named, were taken, were justified."  references  coal wars february 1903 events 1903 in west
virginia raleigh county, west virginia stanaford disputes and strikes
elsa harik (nee marston), (march 18, 1933 - february 16, 2017) known professionally as elsa marston, is an american author of children's books about the middle east and north africa. she died after completing her last book, "i just kept walking."  references  1933 births 2017 deaths 20th-century american women writers 20th-century american writers american children's writers 21st-century american women
kotli than singh is a village located in the jalandhar district of punjab, india.  demographics according to the 2011 census, kotli than singh had a population of 2,701. males constituted 51.43% of the population and females 48.57%. the village had a literacy rate of 73.64%: male and female literacy rate was 77.61% and 69.44% respectively. in the village, 10.3% of the population was under 6 years of age. with 57.1% share in population, the scheduled castes (scs) were the biggest community in the village.  references  villages in jalandhar district
simon rawidowicz (1897-1957) was a polish-born american jewish philosopher.  early life simon rawidowicz was born in 1896 in grajewo, poland. he was educated in germany. 1933 he emigrated to the united kingdom.  he married esther klee in 1926, the daughter of alfred klee and the maternal aunt of hanneli goslar (anne frank's best friend).  career he taught at the jews' college in london and at the leeds university (as of 1941). in 1948 he emigrated to the united states, first teaching at the college of jewish studies of chicago. rawidowicz served as the chair of the department of near-eastern and judaic studies at brandeis university. he was the author of several books and essays, some of which were published posthumously.  rawidowicz was a critic of zionism. in his essay entitled between jew and arab, he suggested that early arab refugees in israel were treated differently from jews as early as 1948. in the ever-dying people, he argued that each generation of jews was afraid of extinction.  death rawidowicz died of a heart attack in 1957 in waltham, massachusetts.  works  further reading  references  1897 births 1957 deaths polish emigrants to the united states brandeis university faculty american essayists jewish philosophers jewish emigrants from nazi germany to the united kingdom 20th-century essayists anne frank
thomas durst (born 22 june 1967) is a german former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people german male cyclists olympic cyclists of west germany cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from munich
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in zhifu district, yantai, shandong, china. , it has eight residential communities under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of shandong  references   township-level divisions of shandong yantai
wan'an () is a town under the administration of li county, hebei, china. , it has 14 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of hebei li county, hebei
vatche zadourian (born 17 july 1974) is a lebanese former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1974 births living people lebanese male cyclists olympic cyclists of lebanon cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
neste is a finnish oil refining company. neste may also refer to communes in south-western france bazus-neste la barthe-de-neste mazeres-de-neste saint-laurent-de-neste  other neste (river) in france van neste, a surname neste sommer, a studio album by norwegian rock band delillos neste barco a vela, a portuguese son
bearnstow is a summer camp on parker pond in mount vernon, maine.  the camp offers weeklong and day programs for adults and children, with an emphasis on appreciation of nature through the arts and sciences.  founded in 1946, the camp occupies  on the east side of the pond, and is centered on the former spruce point camps, whose facilities, built in the 1920s and 1930s, are listed on the national register of historic places.  setting bearnstow occupies 65 acres of mostly wooded landscape between ithiel gordon road and the eastern shore of parker pond in westernmost mount vernon.  the centerpiece of the camp is a , where most of its infrastructure is located.  its facilities include a main lodge and dining hall near one another and the lakeshore, with camp cabins sprinkled through the woods along the shore to the north and south.  near the central facilities are rock ledges facing the water, and there is a beach further south.  a small outdoor performance space is located inland near the main parking area.  history the core property was first developed as a private summer retreat around the turn of the 20th century, with the building that is now the main lodge already standing when the property was sold in 1906.  it was developed as a summer sporting camp in the mid-1910s, with the construction of four cabins just south of the lodge.  by 1922 additional cabins had been built, and the dining hall was also added about 1922.  later facilities include an employee cabin, wood shed, and toolhouse (by 1938) and the stable (1956).  the outdoor performance space is an adaptive reuse of a level area that previously served as a tennis court.  the camp was opened in 1915 as a fishing camp by charles stevens, a carpenter from fayette.  he sold the property in 1922 to webster chester, a professor at colby college, who operated the camp until 1938.  it closed in 1940 for the duration of world war ii, and was reopened under new ownership as bearnstow in 1945.  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine  references  external links bearnstow web site  historic districts on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in kennebec county, maine buildings and structures completed in 1915 buildings and structures in kennebec county, maine summer camps in maine temporary populated places on the national register of historic places
hudway is a california-based company that provides head-up displays. the company was founded in 2013 by cousins ivan klabukov and alex ostanin.  products  hudway app  hudway app is an augmented-reality app that projects driving directions onto the windshield for driving in low-visibility conditions, especially at night, in fog, snow or heavy rain. hudway app provides turn by turn directions (incl. driving speed, geographic location, upcoming curves and hills in the road and direction-giving voice assistant) and works off google, apple or openstreet maps.  hudway glass  in march 2015, the company unveiled hudway glass to address the problem of distracted driving. hudway glass is a universal vehicle accessory that turns any smartphone into a head-up display for any car; it works with any apps that support hud mode, including hudway's own.  affixed to the dashboard in drivers' line of sight, hudway glass is equipped with a semi-transparent glass that reflects navigation information off of drivers' cell phones display or screen and allows to see the road clearly nevertheless.  all that is needed is to launch any hud-based app (navigation, speedometer, trip information) and place the phone on the cradle of the device. the reflection visibility is good on the device in any weather conditions, both during the day and night.  in fall 2015, hudway ran a successful kickstarter campaign raising over $600,000 to launch manufacturing of hudway glass.  over 9,000 people all over the world backed the project resulting in over 11,000 units of hudway glass to be delivered.  in july 2016, the company began shipments to the backers. starting in august 2016, hudway glass will be available for sale.  hudway drive  hudway drive is a head-up display driving device, gesture and voice-activated that aims to make driving experience safer and more comfortable. navigation, music, phone calls, text messages and safety features are available while keeping the driver's eyes on the road at all times.  other apps  hudway has a portfolio of hud-based navigation related apps, including speedometer by hudway and hudway glass app.  awards and recognitions  in january 2016, twice magazine named hudway glass one of the most interesting products presented at ces 2016.  in february 2016, fast company named hudway as one of the top 10 most innovative companies in the automotive sector for 2016, alongside tesla and ford.
in february 2016, hudway received global startup of the year award in moscow, russia.  see also   optical head-mounted display  augmented reality  hud (video gaming)  virtual retinal display  references  external links     companies based in los angeles county, california marina del rey, california american companies established in 2013 2013 establishments in california
idiognathoides is an extinct genus of conodonts.  glen k. merrill stated in 1963 that "conodont workers have considered idiognathoides to be a junior synonym of polygnathodella but it now proves to be a junior synonym of cavusgnathus. polygnathodella and cavusgnathus are shown to form a transitional series."  use in stratigraphy  the bashkirian, the oldest age of the pennsylvanian (also known as upper carboniferous), contains six biozones based on conodont index fossils, one of which contains an idiognathoides species : the zone of idiognathoides sinuatus.  the base of the moscovian, the second stage in the pennsylvanian, is close to the first appearances of the conodonts declinognathodus donetzianus and idiognathoides postsulcatus. the gssp candidate sections are the ural mountains or in nashui, luodian county, guizhou, china.  references    considerations of the idiognathoides - declinognathodus - neognathodus complex of middle carboniferous platform conodonts. david l. dunn, lethaia, january 1971,  volume 4, issue 1, pages 15-19,  external links       conodont genera pennsylvanian conodonts fossil taxa described in 1933
pedro urbina montoya, o.f.m. or pedro de urbina y montoya (12 august 1585 - 6 february 1663) was a roman catholic prelate who served as archbishop of seville (1658-1663), archbishop of valencia (1648-1658), and bishop of coria (1644-1648).  biography pedro urbina montoya was born in berantevilla, spain on 12 august 1585 and ordained a priest in the order of friars minor on 22 february 1609. on 2 may 1644, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of coria. on 11 september 1644, he was consecrated bishop by diego arce reinoso, bishop of plasencia, with miguel avellan, titular bishop of siriensis, and timoteo perez vargas, titular bishop of lystra, serving as co-consecrators. on 30 december 1648, he was selected by the king of spain and confirmed by pope innocent x on 28 june 1649 as archbishop of valencia. he was installed on 18 december 1649. on 1 april 1658, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as archbishop of seville. he served as archbishop of seville until his death on 6 february 1663.  episcopal succession while bishop, he was the principal consecrator of: luis crespi y borja, bishop of orihuela (1652);   and the principal co-consecrator of: juan juaniz de echalar, bishop of mondonedo (1645);  domenico blanditi, bishop of umbriatico (1650);  tommaso lolli, titular bishop of cyrene (1650); and giovanni gerini, bishop of volterra (1650).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century roman catholic bishops in spain bishops appointed by pope urban viii bishops appointed by pope innocent x bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1585 births 1663 deaths people from alava franciscan bishops
red vine or redvine may refer to:   basella alba, a vegetable also known as red vine spinach  brunnichia, a genus of woody vines known as redvine  red vines, a brand of licorice  "red vines", a song from the aimee mann album bachelor no. 2 or, the last remains of the dodo  red vine, a race horse    the red vine, a painting by george bellows   siphlophis compressus, also known as red vine snake
sarah cortez is a latina poet, teacher, editor, and essayist from houston, texas. she is also a law enforcement officer who first gained acclaim for her poetry collection, how to undress a cop.  early life and career a fifth-generation texan and native houstonian, she graduated from st. agnes academy in high school, and then attended rice university majoring in psychology and religion. her first graduate degree was in classical studies at the university of texas in austin.  she began her career by teaching high school in houston, tx, then completing an m.s. in accountancy from the university of houston-central, houston, tx. an overwhelming interest in civic organizations and neighborhood safety brought her a series of volunteer positions with neartown association, ultimately resulting in citywide appointments to commissions and boards.  this civic participation spawned another burning interest: law enforcement. she enrolled in the police academy at the university of houston-downtown's criminal justice center. upon graduation, she began working as a law enforcement officer in harris county, tx. she remained an active-duty patrol police officer until 1999, when she began working as a reserve officer, so she could devote more attention to her writing and editing careers. she remains a reserve officer in harris county.  career as a writer and editor in 1999, her poems won the pen texas literary award in poetry. in 2000, her debut volume of poetry, how to undress a cop, (arte publico press, 2000) was published which won praise from publishers weekly: "by turns erotic, tender, and gritty ... powerfully direct."  during this time, she began a relationship with the university of houston, where she served as visiting scholar, 1999-2001. she is the only visiting scholar for the center for mexican studies who has been awarded two consecutive one-year appointments. there she began her work with young people fearful of writing. this experience evolved into her first anthology, urban speak: poetry of the city, which contains poems by her students.  her work on anthologies of poems, memoir, and short stories honed her skills as a trusted and prize-winning editor, producer, and public speaker. since urban speak: poetry of the city, she has conceptualized and edited seven original anthologies.  today, she is in demand as an editor for all subgenres of poetry, fiction, and non-fiction. she teaches creative writing workshops throughout the u.s. and abroad.  in 2012, her spiritual memoir, walking home: growing up
hispanic in houston (texas review press, 2012) was published. she drew on the stories overheard as a child from her parents, grandparents, and other family members. the book also highlights a deep faith centered in the catholic religion. partnered in the book are poems and short prose sections recalling her childhood and adolescence. this book received honorable mentions in the los angeles book festival awards and the great southwest book festival.  cold blue steel (texas review press, 2013) is a collection of poems reflecting on law enforcement thirteen years after how to undress a cop. she "employs frank language in sharp lyrics charged with weary passion", says diego baez in booklist. according to reviewer jeffrey c. alfier in rattle: "cortez's lines were formed in the cauldron of an american realist tradition: hard truths told with sharp fidelity by a large city beat cop." this book, according to reviewer paul david adkins says: "ms. cortez explores what it means to be female in the traditionally man's world of law enforcement, governed by violence, cynicism, and despair." one of the poems in this book won an honorable mention in rattle's annual contest in 2011, and the book placed finalist in the 2014 writers league of texas poetry awards and the 2015 pen southwest book award in poetry.  her essays, poems, short essays, and book chapters have been published worldwide. they have been short-listed for honors, such as the tucson festival of books literary awards. her poetry has been part of the poetry in motion program of the poetry society of american, and has been delivered and displayed at the united nations in new york city as part of the eighth permanent forum on indigenous issues.  works  windows into my world: latino youth write their lives (arte publico press, 2007) winner of a 2008 skipping stones honor award says school library journal: "this collection illuminates both the familiar coming-of-age experiences that transcend cultural differences and the moments that are unique to latinos in the states." says the san antonio express-news: "it should be a must-read book in every high school senior-level english class due to its thought provoking subject matter."  hit list: the best of latino mystery (arte publico press, 2009) says mystery scene: "genre-busting stories, some of them tender, some of them brutal, all of them offering an intriguing latino slant." says midwest book review: "...a highly recommended read for mystery fans everywhere."  indian country noir (akashic noir
series, 2009) says publishers weekly: "written by both naive american and non-native authors, the 14 stories in this worthy volume in askashic's noir series range geographically from northern california to puerto rice and from new york's adirondacks to los angeles." (publishers weekly, june 2010.)  you don't have a clue: latino mystery stories for teens (pinata books, 2011) finalist, 2012 international latino book award says booklist (starred review): "this excellent collection-enriched by a thoughtful foreword by ya scholar james blasingame-gives faces to latino teens in a most original way."  our lost border: essays on life amid the narco-violence (arte publico press, 2013) winner of the 2014 international latino book award in the best spanish or bilingual latino focused nonfiction book category winner of the 2013 southwest book award finalist in the anthologies category for the 2013 foreword reviews book of the year awards (now known as the foreword indies)  goodbye, mexico: poems of remembrance (texas review press, 2015) finalist for the 2014 international latino book award says reviewer octavio quintanilla in southwestern american literature: "overall, goodbye, mexico is not only a chronicle of what the poets miss and love about mexico, but it is also a collective voice that wants change, that wants healing for the country etched in our memory, the mexico we knew, the mexico we believe is still there."  vanishing points: poems and photographs of texas roadside memorials (texas review press, 2016) a 2016 southwest book of the year winner press women of texas 2016 award for editing says reviewer alyson ward in the houston chronicle, "vanishing points: poems and photographs of texas roadside memorials" pairs streck's photographs with poems by cortez and three others. it's a sobering, gorgeous collection..."  against the sky's warm belly: new and selected poems (texas review press, 2016) the poems of sarah cortez flex lean muscles to build lyric intensity and a gripping edginess often backlit by an incandescent, controlled eroticism. cortez reveals the hidden underworld of her fellow police officers, whose lives comprise the thin blue line and whose blood sometimes splashes and blackens on summer concrete.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people 21st-century american poets poets from texas writers from houston american women poets rice university alumni university of texas at austin college of liberal arts alumni 21st-century american women writers
this is who i am is the debut studio album of the russian singer-songwriter, lena katina, released on 18 november 2014. the album marks the beginning of katina's solo career as she and her former bandmate, julia volkova announced the separation of their music group, t.a.t.u. on 2011. katina has writing credits on all of the album's songs including those co-written with her husband, sash kuzma. musically, the album is a pop genre with rock influences and lyrically it mostly speaks about discovering herself.  four singles were released from the album, and her first and lead single of the album "never forget" reached no. 1 on the mtv russia top 10 and also won the said station - 2011 video of the year. the remix track of "never forget" by dave aude also reached no. 1 on the us billboard hot dance club play and reached no. 1 in greece. "lift me up" released as the second single and the track has a positive feedback from spanish audiences. the third and fourth singles, "who i am" and "an invitation", have been successful in several europe countries such as germany, italy, spain and her homeland, russia.  this is who i am received both positive and negative reviews from critics. the album was released worldwide as a digital download and the physical copy of the cd was released on katina's official website.  background and development  when katina announced the separation of t.a.t.u., she immediately left russia and went to  the united states to find a label and start her solo career. however, several label groups rejected her and katina said in an interview, "i am trying to find a label, but they don't want me, for some reason..." despite this, the singer still pursued her own career through funding it with her own money and was supported by former t.a.t.u.'s executive producer, boris renski.  katina spent a few years in los angeles, california recording and writing her first solo album with her band members, sven martin, domen vajevec, steve wilson and jorg kohring. it took almost five years to finish the entire album and katina said in an interview, "it is a good result of a hard work and a long path of becoming a solo singer and a songwriter, of finding myself... i am so happy that my fans are still waiting and i finally have a chance to share my emotions with them through my
songs"  this is who i am was released with 13 tracks. katina was highly involved with the packaging, designing the album with several photos of her with friends, parents and julia volkova with her personal handwriting as the caption.  on 15 december 2014, the album was released in italy with 14 tracks. the italian edition of the album featured the song "golden leaves" with the collaboration of italian singer, noemi smorra.  on 1 july 2016, the album was re-released under the spanish title, "esta soy yo". the reissued album contains the spanish translated tracks with three remixes such as "levantame (dave aude radio remix)", "no voy a olvidarte (maragakis remix)" and "perdida en el baile (fly_dream remix)" spanish translated lyrics were done by her friend, karina nuvo. on the same date of re-release, katina announced that she and her team are working for the russian version of the album.  critical reception  this is who i am received both positive and negative reviews from critics and fans. "for  highs, the album does have a few lows...", the pop sun said, adding, "with  bad, i would still rate this album pretty favorably because of the highs. it's definitely an album people should listen to, even if you're not familiar with lena katina."  track listing  official track listing  personnel   lena katina - lead vocals, background vocals, executive producer, writer  sven martin - executive producer, guitars, writer, keyboard, programming  jasmine ash - writer, backing vocals  erik lewander - writer, producer, keyboards, programming  iggy strange dahl - writer  jacques brautbar - writer. keyboards, guitars, bass, programming  vassy - writer  erik lidbom - writer, producer  justin gray - writer, sound mixer, producer, backing vocals, keyboards, programming, guitars, drums, bass  boris renski - producer, writer, recording  domen vajevec - guitars, writer, producer, bass, keyboards, programming  jorg kohring - drums, writer, guitars, backing vocals  sash kuzma - drums, writer, recording, producer, keyboards, programming  steve wilson - bass, drums, writer  andre recke - management  dean beckett - product manager  greg benninger - graphic designer  maria abraham - writer  steven lee - writer, producer, keyboards, programming  sammy naja - writer, producer, keyboards, programming  drew
ryan scott - writer, producer  troy maccubbin - writer, guitars  lene dissing - writer  hayden bell - writer  sarah lundbank - writer  veronica ferraro - sound mixer  mike boden - sound mixer  joe zook - sound mixer  ken lewis - sound mixer  nathanael boone - sound mixer  matt marrin - sound mixer  alan johannes - guitars  jeanette olson - backing vocals  nadia duggin - backing vocals  nicole kehl - backing vocals  pelle hillstrom - guitars  fox fagan - bass  bruno gruel - sound engineer  release history  references   2014 debut albums lena katina albums
united nations security council resolution 2115 was adopted on 29 august 2013. it extended the mandate of unifil until 31 august 2014.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions august 2013 events
hip 41378 d (also known as epic 211311380 d)  is an exoplanet orbiting around the f-type star hip 41378. it has a radius about 3.5 times that of earth.  see also  lists of exoplanets  gliese 1132 b, rocky exoplanet with a confirmed atmosphere.  mu arae c, in the constellation ara  planetary system  references  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets hip 41378 cancer (constellation)
overjoy is a los angeles, california-based indie-electronic band, comprising singer-songwriter l00ps, and the production team of metty & hoff.  career  the outfit of longtime friends unveiled their debut 'breakfast ep' last year via sweat it out. hailed by thump for its "feel-good vibrations," the two-track release displayed overjoy's range in sound design by mixing drums, synths and guitars into their electronic productions. overjoy's live performances incorporate vintage synthesizers, drum machines, midi-controllers, electric guitar and vocals by singer-songwriter l00ps. prior to their 2015 debut ep, overjoy's singles had received worldwide radio attention seeing regular plays from tastemaker stations triple j, kcrw, and berlin's nightflight.  the summer of 2016 saw overjoy self-releasing their three-track sophomore ep 'another' with accompanying music videos for each track. in 2017, overjoy released back to back new singles in "dragonfly" & "women", as well as debuting their new live show at goldenvoice's summer festival splash house in palm springs, ca. 2018 has the band releases two more new singles in the 1st quarter, "same" & "nobody dances".  discography  studio eps  breakfast (sweat it out music · 2015)  another (field notes · 2016) singles  "monstrous" (club sweat · 2014)  "stop" (club sweat · 2014)  "chase the devil" (sweat it out music · 2014)  "like a wave" (field notes · 2015)  "dragonfly" (field notes · 2017)  "women" (field notes · 2017)  "same" (field notes · 2018)  "nobody dances" (field notes · 2018)  references  external links   https://thump.vice.com/en_us/track/los-angeles-newcomers-overjoy-are-here-to-steal-your-ears-with-debut-ep-on-sweat-it-out  http://earmilk.com/2015/12/11/breakfast-with-overjoy-a-new-ep-and-exclusive-mix/  https://www.kcrw.com/@@playlists?channel=simulcast&host=&show=&hour=&advanced=on&album_song_artist=overjoy&label
=&from_date=&to_date=  http://www.abc.net.au/triplej/houseparty/blog/s4135874.htm  http://www.abc.net.au/triplej/houseparty/blog/s4119103.htm  http://www.andrelangenfeld.de/  http://kickkicksnare.com/2015/12/05/overjoy-breakfast-ep/  http://stoneyroads.com/2015/12/overjoy-releases-lush-breakfast-ep-on-sweat-it-out  http://www.magneticmag.com/2016/01/magnetic-magazine-guest-podcast-overjoy/  american electronic music groups musical groups established in 2014 musical groups from los angeles 2014 establishments in california
giorgos xydas (, born 14 april 1997) is a greek professional footballer who plays as a forward for super league 2 club olympiacos volos.  club career  xydas completed a transfer to pas giannina on 3 july 2018 by signing a three-year contract.  honours pas giannina  super league greece 2: 2019-20  references  1997 births living people olympiacos f.c. players pas giannina f.c. players association football forwards greek footballers ael kalloni f.c. players ao chania f.c. players greece youth international footballers sportspeople from chios
marissa kurtimah (born may 25, 1994 in songo, sierra leone) is a sierra leone-canadian track and field athlete competing in the sprint events, predominantly the 100m event. kurtimah fled her country of birth (due to the civil war) in 2002 at 8 years old along with her family. they settled in guelph, ontario.  references  1994 births living people black canadian female track and field athletes canadian female sprinters sierra leonean emigrants to canada sportspeople from guelph
benthofascis angularis is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family conorbidae.  these snails are predatory and venomous. they are capable of "stinging" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.  description the length of an adult shell attains 27 mm, its diameter 11.1 mm.  distribution this marine species is endemic to australia and occurs off southwestern australia.  habitat  maximum recorded depth is 30 m.  references  external links    angularis gastropods of australia
my darling clementine (spanish: mi adorada clementina) is a 1953 mexican comedy film directed by rafael baledon and starring marga lopez, joaquin pardave and antonio aguilar.  cast  marga lopez as clementina    joaquin pardave as don carlos   antonio aguilar as alfredo    elda peralta as norma    pedro de aguillon as doctor r. obon    jose jasso as gregorio    leobardo acosta  norma ancira   leon barroso as detective    victorio blanco as invitada a fiesta   angel merino   irlanda mora as invitada a fiesta    isaac norton as invitado a fiesta   jose pidal as mayordomo    maria valdealde as invitada a fiesta  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films mexican comedy films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by rafael baledon mexican black-and-white films
kunto karapaa (1913-1963) was a finnish stage and film actor.  selected filmography  substitute wife (1936)  radio tekee murron (1951)  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1913 births 1963 deaths finnish male film actors people from mantsala
king of the tenors is an album by american jazz saxophonist ben webster featuring tracks recorded in 1953 for the norgran label and originally released as the consummate artistry of ben webster (mgn 1001). the album was re-issued in 1957 on verve records as king of the tenors (mgv 8020), and has been released with that title ever since. webster is accompanied by the oscar peterson trio, and, on several tracks, by benny carter and harry "sweets" edison.  reception   allmusic awarded the album 4 stars, with reviewer ron wynn describing king of the tenors as "a series of elegant yet soulful and exuberant small group dates.... although this date is more than four decades old, ben webster's solos have a freshness and vitality that make them quite relevant to contemporary events."  the penguin guide to jazz gave king of the tenors 4 stars out of 4, saying "'tenderly' has never been more tender, 'that's all' is sheer heaven, but 'jive at six' is a good piece of studio knockabout."  in someone to watch over me: the life and music of ben webster, frank buchmann-moller writes of the album: "these recordings show a broad spectrum of ben's craft and can be heard as a summary of his artistic level at the time.... on the blues tunes 'jive at six' and 'bounce blues'... he plays with gusto and drive, and 'cotton tail' is exceptional, built up over six choruses, inspired and full of direction all the way....[i]t is the ballads that stand out, beginning with a one-and-a-half-chorus version of 'tenderly,' in a rendition perfectly reflecting the title. ellington's 'don't get around much anymore' is played at a medium slow pace... with ben at his most lyrical, presenting the theme almost seductively."  track listing  side a  side b  1993 cd reissue bonus tracks  personnel  ben webster - tenor saxophone benny carter - alto saxophone (tracks 1-4, 6 & 11) harry "sweets" edison - trumpet (tracks 1-4, 6 & 11) oscar peterson - piano herb ellis (tracks 5, 7-10), barney kessel (tracks 1-4, 6 & 11) - guitar ray brown - double bass alvin stoller (tracks 5, 7-10), j. c. heard (tracks 1-4, 6 & 11) - drums
references   1954 albums ben webster albums albums produced by norman granz verve records albums norgran records albums
maldon cutting is a 0.1 hectare geological site of special scientific interest in maldon in essex. it is a geological conservation review site.  the site is a former railway cutting which is the type locality for the maldon till, which dates to the pleistocene ice age. it was previously thought to represent a separate advance of the ice sheet, but in the light of later work it was concluded that it is an outlier of the till which covers much of central and northern essex. finds include a flint hand axe.  the overgrown site is on private land with no public access.  references   sites of special scientific interest in essex geological conservation review sites
we come during spring (finnish: me tulemme taas) is a 1953 finnish musical comedy film directed by armand lohikoski and starring tuija halonen,  tapio rautavaara and siiri angerkoski.  partial cast  tuija halonen as satu    tapio rautavaara as olli    siiri angerkoski as kaisa, the widow    aku korhonen as alpertti    anneli sauli as katri karkela    tommi rinne as minapoika, lumberjack    ake lindman as kymppi, lumberjack boss    uuno montonen as valfriiti    masa niemi as reetrikki    veikko linna as konsta karkela    armas jokio as jooseppi   kai lappalainen as eugen karkela  references  bibliography   john sundholm. historical dictionary of scandinavian cinema. scarecrow press, 2012.  external links     1953 films 1953 musical comedy films finnish musical comedy films finnish films finnish-language films finnish black-and-white films
andre grisoni (1886-1975) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1932 to 1936, representing seine.  references  1886 births 1975 deaths people from haute-corse corsican politicians radical party (france) politicians independent radical politicians national popular rally politicians members of the 15th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
the 300 series are a number of underground cars manufactured by alstom in brazil for use on the buenos aires underground. they are used on line h of the network, and more are to be introduced on line d where they will serve alongside the similar 100 series.  history  the 300 series cars were initially ordered for line h in 2012 with an initial order of 120 cars at a cost of us$ 216 million. these were to be delivered in 2015 and produced solely in alstom's plant in sao paulo, unlike the 100 series which also had components produced in argentina. these were to be put into service once cordoba, santa fe and las heras stations were opened.  on line h, the cars replaced the siemens-schuckert orenstein & koppel cars which had served on every line of the system, with the exception of line b at different times since 1934. when the line was originally opened, it was not deemed necessary to purchase new stock until it had been extended enough and passenger numbers were at a level where new rolling stock was warranted, thus the siemens o&k cars were brought out of retirement temporarily. in july 2016, 36 of the alstom cars were put into service on line h, retiring the siemens cars, while the remaining cars and those for line d are set to be put into service gradually until 2017.  in late 2014, the order was expanded by 50% to include an additional 60 cars for line d in order to replace the ageing fiat-materfer cars built in the early 1980s. unlike line h, whose entire fleet would consist of the 300 series, in line d the cars are to serve alongside the 100 series, which are also alstom metropolis cars and bear similarities.  characteristics  the cars are designed to work with communication based train control (cbtc) in order to ensure a better frequency on the lines. they come installed with security cameras, audio warnings for approaching stations and are accessible to the disabled.  the cars also have air conditioning and a system to prevent cars from stacking atop one another in the event of a collision, as well as being equipped with black boxes in the conductor's cabins.  gallery  see also  buenos aires underground rolling stock alstom metropolis buenos aires underground 100 series buenos aires underground 200 series  references  rolling stock of the buenos aires underground alstom multiple units train-related introductions in 2015
hugon, the mighty is a lost 1918 silent film northwoods drama directed by rollin s. sturgeon and starring monroe salisbury. it was produced by bluebird photoplays and released through universal film manufacturing company.  cast monroe salisbury - hugon margery bennett - marie antrim short - gabriel thomas h. pearse - priest george holt - roque sarah kernan - gabriel's  mother (*as mrs. kernan) tote du crow - ? roy watkins - ?  references  external links  hugon, the mighty at imdb.com  lantern slide(wayback machine)  1918 films american silent feature films american films lost american films universal pictures films american drama films 1918 drama films american black-and-white films films directed by rollin s. sturgeon 1918 lost films
lepturonota lifuana is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
malout is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of sri muktsar sahib district and is reserved for candidates belonging to the scheduled castes.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  sri muktsar sahib district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sri muktsar sahib district
sukli  () is the eighth studio album by filipino rapper gloc-9. it was released on june 5, 2016, under star music.  "hoy" was released last may 2016 on myx and it peaked #5 on pinoy myx countdown & #6 on myx daily top 10.  "sagwan" was released last december 14, 2016 on myx. it peaked #10 on pinoy myx countdown (as of december 25, 2016) & #9 on myx daily top 10: pinoy edition (as of december 2016).  track listing  references  gloc-9 albums 2016 albums star music albums
underground hospital is a heritage-listed former public hospital at camooweal street, mornington, city of mount isa, queensland, australia. it was designed by edward j ryan and built from march to april 1942 by mount isa mines. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 24 june 1999.  history  the mount isa underground hospital, constructed during march/april 1942 in the grounds of the mount isa district hospital, was built by off duty miners from mount isa mines. the structure was designed by dr edward joseph ryan, superintendent of the mount isa district hospital. construction work was supervised by wally onton, underground foreman at mount isa mines.  the war in the pacific reached the shores of australia on 19 february 1942. darwin was bombed by aircraft operating from four aircraft carriers in the timor sea. within days timor fell to the japanese, the australian cruiser hmas perth sank during the battle of the java sea, while broome, derby and wyndham in western australia, townsville and mossman in queensland, and port moresby in new guinea were all bombed by japanese aircraft.  the threat to mount isa seemed very real because there appeared to be little military opposition left in the north of australia after the devastation of darwin and the west australian towns. the mount isa copper mine was seen as a strategic resource of great value to the japanese, being recognised as one of the world's major deposits of copper, lead, zinc and silver. it was believed that like the japanese controlled tin fields and rubber plantations of malaya, and the oil fields of borneo, the mount isa mine was probably a target for invasion forces and air attacks.  reacting to the perceived threat, dr edward ryan decided to take precautions to protect mount isa district hospital from air raids. dr edward ryan contacted vic mann, mim mine superintendent, who offered the co-operation of the company and the services of underground foreman wally onton to supervise the project. the company supplied all the equipment for the work, which was done by mount isa miners who volunteered their time.  the drilling, blasting and mucking out was mostly done over a two-week period, with the fitting-out taking a few more weeks. the work was done during march/april 1942, during which approximately  of tunnel were excavated. three parallel adits were driven into the hill face and then connected to a crosscut level to form a large underground shelter with an "e" shaped plan. a vertical rise to the hillside above helped ventilation and was also equipped with a ladder to serve as an emergency exit. the excavation was
timbered using the contemporary mining methods of the day, then equipped with furnishings and fittings to perform all the functions of a hospital. there were male, female, and maternity/children's wards, a surgical theatre and a delivery room.  the finished underground hospital was about  from the rear of the nearest hospital building, with access along a gravelled pathway. the three entrances were secured by locked timber gates. inside the hospital was framed either with sets of round native timber or sawn oregon timber, the ceiling was sawn hardwood planks and some of the walls were lined with gidyea logs. the floor was bare earth. the hospital was equipped with electric lights and a telephone. furthermore, buckets of water and sand, stirrup pumps and shovels were present in case of an air raid.  dr ryan kept the shelter fully equipped and ready for use with linen, medical equipment, dressings and pharmaceutical stocks. once a week there was an air raid drill, and nurses and orderlies wheeled less-seriously ill patients up the steep gravel path to the underground hospital.  mount isa never experienced air raids, and it soon became apparent that the attacks on darwin and other northern towns were harassing raids rather than the prelude to an invasion. history shows that japanese resources were extended to their limit and, after the battles of the coral sea and midway, their naval power was destroyed. the threat of invasion disappeared as the japanese forces were driven from new guinea and into retreat from the pacific.  although air raid drills ceased, the underground hospital remained in use for less urgent purposes. the shelter was used as a dormitory by the nurses on hot nights, then like most unused spaces, it gradually became a store room of hospital equipment and files. after the war, lax security allowed young children to play in the tunnels, which still contained medical equipment and pharmaceutical supplies.  the shelter was finally closed sometime during the 1960s when rubble, excavated during the construction of the new four-storey hospital wing, was used to close the three entrances. the ventilation rise was also filled in. for approximately ten years the underground hospital remained closed until the fill at the north collapsed in 1977, and at the main entrance in 1988. each time an entrance opened there was debate in the community regarding the future of the site. in 1992 the main entrance again collapsed and there was considerable debate about the site because of the australia-wide interest in wwii sites during celebrations which commemorated the battle of the coral sea and the 1942 threat of invasion.  the entrance was again closed
, but reopened in 1994. while the entrance was again open and its future was being discussed in the media, a fire broke out in the southern tunnel at 1.30am on 27 august 1994. queensland fire services found water was ineffective and, not knowing the layout of the interior, or the source of the fire, they waited until daylight and filled the tunnel with high expansion foam to extinguish the fire. the mines rescue unit and volunteers later removed most of the burnt timber and stacked it at the main entrance.  in response to the fire, the hospital administration installed a locked trapdoor of heavy steel mesh over the collapsed entrance, and the entrance has remained open but secure against entry for the past three years. a public meeting in late 1995 showed that community support has swung strongly in favour of conserving and developing the underground hospital rather than again burying the entrance.  in 1996 a steering committee, representing the owners, heritage conservation organisations and corporate and community representatives, was formed to manage the future of the underground hospital. a conservation strategy, funded under the queensland heritage grants program and the national trust of queensland, was prepared at the request of the steering committee. vandals lighted a second fire on sunday 26 october 1997 causing further damage to the interior.  plans are in place for the interior of the hospital to be cleared by green corps (young people for the environment) and volunteer labour. the work will be carried out in consultation with the cultural heritage branch of the environmental protection agency. all artefacts will be documented, tagged and stored at the north west queensland museum in mount isa. re-timbering of the interior will be carried out under the supervision of mount isa mines engineers who will also provide some of the equipment required for the project.  description   the underground hospital occupies an area roughly  square in the southeastern corner of the mount isa base hospital grounds. its south tunnel lies very close to the hospital's southern boundary.  the layout of the underground hospital consists basically of three parallel east-west tunnels, joined at their eastern ends by a tunnel running north-south. all three parallel tunnels were once opened to the outside, but were blocked by rubble in the 1960s. the middle entrance is now partially opened.  the tunnels  the three parallel tunnels run almost exactly due east-west. they have been driven in from the surface by drilling and blasting. some of these drill hole are still visible around the entrance to the middle audit, and in the middle and south tunnels, the drill holes are well preserved in the roof and walls
. all the visible stone in the tunnels is a hard, light-coloured shale, which fractures along steeply dipping joint lines. the roof and walls appear to be in good condition overall. engineering advice since 1994 has indicated that the tunnels are in a sound condition although fist size rock pieces are lying on the floor of the tunnels.  all the rock surfaces in the underground hospital are slightly irregular and roughly finished, so all the following dimensions are necessarily approximate. the middle tunnel is  long from the upper lip of the entrance to the corner of the crosscut, and  wide. the south tunnel is  long from the crosscut to the last visible timber post standing in the shale mound blocking its entrance, and  wide. the north tunnel is the shortest and widest of the three, only  from the crosscut to the last timber set standing in the shale mound blocking its entrance, but  wide. the east tunnel is  long and the widest of the tunnels at . at both ends of the east tunnel, opposite the north and south tunnels, are two recesses in the wall, the same width as the facing tunnels and each about  deep. the tunnel heights are very difficult to measure, as the entire floor of the underground hospital is covered with debris, and the original floor level can only be guessed at. the roof height, near the corner of the middle and east tunnels is about  the total exposed floor area of the underground hospital is about  square.  the ventilating raise is obstructed at its base by fallen stone and timber. it is located in the intersection of the crosscut and the north tunnel, and is about a metre square in section. it appears to rise a little to the north of vertical for four or five metres, narrowing down as it rises, and is then obstructed by stone and timber. visibility up the rise is obstructed by a heavy growth of tree roots. a small tree, growing up the slope about  north-east of the buried entrance to the raise is probably the source of the tree roots.  the timbering  internally, the underground hospital was timbered like a mine, although two different techniques were used. the north tunnel was heavily timbered with three piece sets of sawn oregon posts and top lagged with hardwood planks resting on the caps. five sets were intact in october 1997. the rest of the hospital was lightly timbered with round logs of native hardwood about  in diameter. throughout most of the hospital only occasional posts were standing in 1997 and most of these were
dislodged and leaning. a few intact set survived in the north east corner, showing the construction was generally similar to the sawn timber oregon sets; having round caps and hardwood plank lagging resting on them. the sets were spaced by sprags resting on cleats nailed to the tops of the posts.  in his 1997 report, peter bell indicated that approximately three-quarters of the timber shoring in the underground hospital was missing. he also said that a portion of the remaining timber was suffering from termite damage and dry rot. unfortunately the dry rot damage has accelerated since the 1997 fire because of the amount of water and foam pumped into the structure during the fire.  wartime fittings and equipment  little remains of the furnishings and medical equipment. there is no evidence of the operating theatre equipment, beds, cupboards and other moveable equipment. some material remaining prior to the fire included benching along the eastern wall, timber shelving, light fittings and timber shoring in the north tunnel. there was also a considerable amount of post war material such as files, x-ray plates and medical equipment such as an autoclave. it is believed that the files and x-ray plates fuelled the 1997 fire.  in the south tunnel there were 1940s light shades, bed tables, as well as post war material such as unidentified machinery and furniture. at the rear of the north and south tunnels are two  recesses. each recess was fitted out with a roughly constructed cupboard, of which only the northern one was surviving in 1997. the recesses and cupboards are thought to have been constructed after wwii.  floor deposit  throughout the underground hospital, the floor is covered with a deposit of earth, fallen stone, ash, timbers, pieces of furniture, electrical equipment and other material. one conspicuous element of the floor deposit is the number of pharmaceutical bottles and ampoules it contains. several dozen bottles and a smaller number of ampoules are visible on the surface. most of the bottles are empty and unlabelled, but some contain liquids and powders. some samples removed by firemen in 1994 contained ampoules labelled sodium glycophosphate, sulphur powder and saline solution.  heritage listing  the former underground hospital was listed on the queensland heritage register on 24 june 1999 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  the former underground hospital, constructed by mount isa mines volunteer labour in response to the perceived threat of japanese invasion, is thought to have
been excavated between march and april 1942. mount isa mines provided equipment and the services of the underground foreman, wally onton.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  the hospital, built entirely underground, is currently thought to be unique in australia.  the place has potential to yield information that will contribute to an understanding of queensland's history.  as such, the site possesses considerable archaeological significance, with potential to yield evidence about 1940s medical and nursing technology and about local improvisation during wartime.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  the underground hospital, designed by hospital superintendent, dr edward joseph ryan is particularly significant as a civilian defence structure built during a period of war. it is also important as an example of mid-20th century mining technology, and the skill and speed of mount isa miners of the period.  the place is important in demonstrating a high degree of creative or technical achievement at a particular period.  it is also important as an example of mid-20th century mining technology, and the skill and speed of mount isa miners of the period.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the underground hospital has considerable social significance. community concern regarding the conservation of the underground hospital is demonstrated by the number of organisations who have become involved in the conservation project, including the mount isa hospital board and city council, the environmental protection agency, and the north west queensland branch of the queensland museum.  references  attribution  external links      queensland heritage register city of mount isa hospitals in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
leyla alev kelter (born march 21, 1991) is an american rugby sevens and rugby union player.  rugby career she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the united states women's national rugby sevens team. she also made the squad to the 2016 summer olympics in brazil.  kelter was named in the eagles squad to the 2017 women's rugby world cup in ireland.  in january 2022 the english rugby side saracens women announced that she had signed for the rest of the 2021-22 premier15s season.  soccer and ice hockey kelter played for the united states women's national under-20 soccer team and the united states women's national under-18 ice hockey team and later played both sports at the university of wisconsin from 2009-2013.  personal life  born to mark perusse and leyla kelter, she has two brothers and a twin sister, derya kelter, who also played soccer and ice hockey. before she was nine, her family had moved four times because her father was a fighter pilot in the u.s. air force. kelter attended chugiak high school in chugiak, alaska. she graduated with a degree in fine arts from university of wisconsin in 2015. kelter is a part of the lgbtq community and has spoken out against banning transgender women from playing women's rugby.  references  external links   alev kelter at usa rugby              1991 births living people united states international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for the united states rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of the united states wisconsin badgers women's ice hockey players wisconsin badgers women's soccer players american women's ice hockey defensemen american women's soccer players soccer players from alaska ice hockey players from anchorage, alaska sportspeople from anchorage, alaska pan american games medalists in rugby sevens united states women's international rugby union players american female rugby union players women's association football midfielders twin sportspeople twin people from the united states medalists at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics 21st-century american women
scellus notatus  is a species of fly in the family of dolichopodidae. it is found in the  palearctic .  references  external links images representing scellus at bold  insects described in 1781 hydrophorinae palearctic insects diptera of europe taxa named by johan christian fabricius
buglio is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  davide buglio (born 1998), italian footballer francesco buglio (born 1957), italian footballer lodovico buglio (1606-1682), italian jesuit mathematician and theologian  italian-language surnames
bethel methodist episcopal church, also known as the bethel church, is a historic methodist episcopal church located at harrison township, wells county, indiana.  it was built in 1900, and is a two-story, irregular plan, romanesque revival style brick building.  it is topped by hipped and gable roof masses.  it features a three-story bell tower at the main entrance.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1984.  references  methodist churches in indiana churches on the national register of historic places in indiana romanesque revival architecture in indiana churches completed in 1900 buildings and structures in wells county, indiana national register of historic places in wells county, indiana 1900 establishments in indiana
needhi singh is a punjabi language crime thriller women focused film directed by jaivi dhanda and produced by inder bhandaal and sumeet singh. the film is based on a true story about a village girl, needhi singh, who faces social estrangements and hardship. after which she goes takes revenge from all of the people that did wrong with her  the film was scheduled to be released on 22 july 2016.  the role of needhi singh is portrayed by kulraj randhawa. upon the film's trailer release, it received mostly positive reviews.  cast   kulraj randhawa  aman sutdhar  ashish duggal  raman dhagga  crew  chief assistant director  sahil dev 2nd chief ad  raman dhagga dop  vijay choudhary and sai raaj editor  mukesh thakur art director  nitin wable costume designer  chetna varmani assistant directors  neha sharma  puneet raajpal  sahil dua  jassi kamiria  amandeep slariya line producer  gabbar sangrur  references   2016 films indian films 2010s punjabi-language films
ahc dunarea calarasi 2014 is a handball club from calarasi, romania, that plays in the romanian handball league.  history  handbalul masculin calarasean are o veche traditie, printre cei mai cunoscuti sportivi ce au practicat acest indragit sport, in orasul de pe malul borcei, numarandu-se titel raduta si regretatul gheorghe dumitru (componenti ai echipei nationale de handbal), dar si un fost si un actual primar - mirel daniel tutuianu si daniel stefan dragulin, de numele ultimului legandu-se revirimentul handbalului, in municipiul calarasi. prin entuziasmul lui constantin francu si cu sprijinul actualului primar, echipa de handbal triumf calarasi isi facea simtita prezenta, in divizia a, rezultatele obtinute de echipa, avand la baza pasiunea si ambitia acestora de a pastra handbalul calarasean in atentia publicului local. din dorinta de a crea o stabilitate financiara clubului de handbal, acesta s-a transformat, initial, in c.s.m. triumf si, apoi, in csm calarasi, prin trecerea sub tutela unei club sprijinit financiar atat de primarie, cat si de consiliul judetean. acest fapt parea sa nu fi fost suficient, pozitia din sezonul 2013-2014 a echipei de handbal masculin c.s.m. calarasi - locul 1 in divizia a, cu sanse mari de accedere in liga nationala, a crescut interesul administratiei publice locale judetene si municipale de a finanta, exclusiv, echipa, in vederea asigurarii conditiilor necesare pentru realizarea tintei propuse: promovarea. astfel, in sedinta ordinara, din luna februarie 2014, a consiliului judetean calarasi, consilierii au aprobat proiectul de hotarare privind asocierea judetului calarasi, a municipiului calarasi si a societatii ecoaqua
sa, in vederea constituirii asociatiei handbal club dunarea calarasi 2014, asociatie ce va sustine financiar si logistic echipa de handbal masculin.  cu veche traditie pe meleagurile calarasene, handbalul la nivel de juniori, a luat fiinta in anul 1966, ca o sectie pe langa liceul nr. 2, in coordonarea profesorului neagu c. ion. in anul scolar urmator, 1967-1968, se constituie clubul sportiv scolar din calarasi, avand in componenta doua sectii: atletism si handbal (baieti) cu un numar de 120 de sportivi la cele doua sectii, fiecare cu cate 60 de sportivi. profesorul neagu, primul director al clubului, califica in acest an echipa masculina de juniori in „divizia nationala a juniorilor si scolarilor", printre handbalistii remarcati fiind tase ion si florea nicu. din 1969 se formeaza in cadrul sectiei si o echipa feminina de handbal, aceasta fiind pregatita de prof. achim ionita., care si ea, la randul ei, promoveaza in divizia nationala in anul 1970. de-a lungul timpului si-au desfasurat activitatea in cadrul acestei sectii profesorii: neagu c. ion, achim ionita, sifft aurel, voiculescu florin, ilie niculina, iorgoglu ion, bota ioan bucur, ghioalda doina, dinu viorel, stanescu mihaita, bucur savu, stanescu maria, frincu constantin. dintre cei mai buni handbalisti amintim: - masculin - tase ion, florea nicu, dumitru gheorhe, bucur savu, tutuianu daniel, deacu stefan, marocico emil, stanescu florin, toza marius, raduta emilian, raduta titel, dulce grigore, palazu marian, tanase stefan, frincu constantin, gheorghe petrisor, strejea claudiu, purcarea dan, ruseanu iulian, antonaru cristian, tanase adrian, mihal
ache ionut, dinescu laurentiu, mocanu marius, chiran stefan, militaru stefan, nitu laurentiu, paraschiv george, george selaru.  kits  team    ahc dunarea calarasi     sala polivalenta "ion.c.neagu" calarasi    1540 locuri     www.ahcdunarea.ro      instagram https://www.instagram.com/ahcdunareacalarasi/   you-tube https://www.youtube.com/channel/ucuuarn_-6bwgehusmg0thtw   twitter https://twitter.com/dunareacalarasi  current squad  squad for the 2020-2021 season  staff tehnic    gabriel armanu  (30.12.1972.bacau)    eremia piriianu  (16.10.1975.constanta)    florin iuliu dima  (5.04.1963.brasov) goalkeepers    artsem padasinau  (4.01.1989.gomel / belarus)    vlad dumitru rusu  (27.04.1998.moinesti)    cristian balasa  (9.04.2001.calarasi)    eugen stefan nicolae craciunescu  (16.04.1999. curtea de arges) wingers rw    gabriel bujor (8.11.1990.tecuci)    ionut broasca  (8.02.1998.braila)    nicolae ilies costea  (20.07.2002.calarasi) lw    florin ovidiu dospinescu  (23.03.1996.piatra neamt)    catalin sabin costea  (31.071995,baia mare) line players    dragos soare  (23.07.1989.ploiesti)    gabriel florinel dumitru  (30.01.1996.galati)    daniel panait  (6.04.2000.calarasi)    bogdan marian paunescu  (3.08.1995.calarasi)  back players lb    dragos hantaru (24.04.1998.vaslui)    amin yusefinezhad  (19.01.1996, iran) cb    mihai sebastian bujor (8.11.1990.tecuci)    andrei valeriu dragan  (6.07.1999.sf gheorghe.covas
na) rb    aleksii ganchev  (28.08.1986,zaporozhye / ucraina)    alexios karympov  (3.05.1996.astrahan / rusia)  transfers  transfers for the 2020-21 season   joining     amin yousefinezhand (iran)    artsem padasinau  (4.01.1989.gomel / belarus)    aleksey ganchev  (28.08.1986,zaporozhye / ucraina)    andrei dragan     eugen craciunescu     alexyos karimpov  (grecia)    nicolae ilies costea  (20.07.2002 / calarasi) leaving   victor vartic (csa steaua bucuresti)   roman zacaciurin (ahc potaissa turda)   george selaru (ahc potaissa turda)   bogdan moisa (csm fagaras)   ionut rotaru (ahc dobrogea sud constanta/ csm bacau)   mihai marcel sandu    mihajlo radojkovic (serbia)    florin dospinescu (csm resita)   dragos hantaru (cs dinamo bucuresti)   ionut broasca (cs hc buzau)   gabriel dumitriu (ahc potaissa turda)   vladut dumitru rusu (csm bacau)   gabriel bujor (csm bacau)   mihai sebastian bujor (csm bacau)   andrei valeriu dragan (csm focsani)  notable coaches   aihan omer   ioan bucur bota   caslav dincic   florin nicolae   adrian danut petrea   serhiy bebeshko   igor rapovers   eremia rica piriianu   gabriel armanu  external links    https://actualitateacalarasi.ro/s-a-infiintat-asociatia-handbal-club-dunarea-calarasi-2014/  https://frh.ro/clasament.php?id=475  https://handbalmania.ro/sectiune/handbal-masculin/liga-zimbrilor/  https://www.handbalvolei.ro/team/ahc-dunarea-calarasi/  romanian handball clubs calarasi handball clubs established in 2014 2014 establishments in romania liga nationala (men's handball)  https://www.prosport
.ro/alte-sporturi/handbal/bursa-transferurilor-in-handbal-masculin-dinamo-si-minaur-baia-mare-au-facut-achizitii-de-la-echipe-din-liga-campionilor-19037148
patient-initiated violence  is a specific form of workplace violence that affects healthcare workers that is the result of verbal, physical, or emotional abuse from a patient or family members of whom they have assumed care. nurses represent the highest percentage of affected workers; however, other roles include physicians, therapists, technicians, home care workers, and social workers.  non clinical workers are also assaulted, for example, security guards, cleaners, clerks, technicians. the occupational safety and health administration used 2013 bureau of labor statistics and reported that healthcare workplace violence requiring days absent from work from patients represented 80% of cases. in 2014, a survey by the american nurses association of 3,765 21% of nurses and nursing students reported physical abuse and over 50% reported verbal abuse within a 12-month period. causes for patient outbursts vary, including psychiatric diagnosis, under the influence of drugs or alcohol, or subject to a long wait time. certain areas are more at risk for this kind of violence including healthcare workers in psychiatric settings, emergency or critical care, or long-term care and dementia units.  areas of high prevalence  emergency departments  the american college of emergency physicians found that greater than 75% of emergency physicians were the victim of one or more violent incidents in the workplace, noting that the majority was by patients or their families. causes for the increased presence of violence, especially in urban settings, are related to gang activity, lengthened waiting periods to see a doctor, a failure of community medical resources, and unavailable acute psychiatric treatment. in 2011 the emergency nurses association studies the occurrence of physical violence at 54.4% and verbal violence at 42.5% among emergency room nurses. within this study, 55.7% perpetrators of physical violence were under the influence of alcohol. 46.8% were under the influence of illegal or prescription drugs, and 45.2% were being treated for psychiatric reasons. a majority of the violent behavior that occurred was during the triage process at 40.2%.  psychiatric and dementia units workers in departments that specialize in mental health are particularly at risk for patient abuse due to the psychiatric disease states, high rates of substance abuse, and previous violent patient behavior. a study of canadian psychiatric nurses noted that social stigma of psychiatric disorders plays a significant role in how nurses perceive violence. caregivers were uncomfortable with the notion that patient violence is part of the job but also that it is unfair to believe that those with mental illness should be seen as more violent in nature. osha reported
that violent injuries in psychiatric aids was 10 times higher than any other healthcare worker at 590 injuries per 10,000 full-time employees.  underreporting underreporting of patient initiated violence is common with professionals claiming that assault is a part of the job. a report from the national center for the analysis of violent crime dedicates underreporting is likely due to a fear of retaliation, or belief that it will not lead to any change. there is also a commonly held belief that violence is a part of the job. the massachusetts nurses association followed up on this common belief through a survey of three new england hospitals, finding that only 39% of participants reported all incidences of violence. the same report found that 70% of those who reported an incident found that management was supportive, however a majority noted that nothing was done to solve the problem. a study of canadian psychiatric nurses reported that not only was violence a part of the job, but its occurrence no longer warranted a reporting. the same report noted that underreporting drastically affects the ability of the occupational safety and health administration to track these occurrences. many qualitative studies done on nurses suggest that there is frequent discouragement by hospital officials and legal officers to not press charges against abusive patients or their families related to an understanding that violence is a part of the job.  lasting effects of violence the effects of patient initiated violence has been found correlate to lasting symptoms of post traumatic stress disorder, acute stress disorder, and high rates of burnout.  nurses who experience a lack of support from public officials after the event reported feelings of anxiety and frustration. osha sampled one hospital who paid for medical treatment of 30 staff members subject to patient initiated violence over a one-year period costing $94,146. it was also estimated that the costs of separation, recruitment, hiring, and training of new staff to be anywhere from 25,000 to 103,000.  a study in orebro reginal hospital in sweden suggested a link between patient initiated violence, burnout, and decreased care outcomes. it was reported that the highest indicator of care quality outcomes is a positive or negative association with an individuals work environment.  in the media in november 2014 charles logan, a 68-year-old patient at st john's hospital in mapplewood minnesota attacked nurses using a bar from his stretcher.  prevention solutions to this issues range dependent on facility and location. a common suggestions from nursing staff is for additional trainings specifically on the de-escalation of high risk situations and health professional legal rights  55
% of participants of workers in new england hospitals stated they were aware of their legal rights relating to workplace violence. the national institute of occupational safety and health (nosha) created a free online training module that went live in 2013.  the veterans health administration has reduced occurrences of assaults by flagging high risk based on previous documentation of attacks on caregivers. the american nurses association has modeled a state bill for a "violence prevention in health care facilities act" that would call for the creation of violence prevention committees, annual violence prevention training, and sufficient record keeping of violence acts.  see also violence against healthcare professionals in india workplace violence workplace safety in healthcare settings compassion fatigue occupational burnout nursing  references  occupational safety and health violence health care
manasi joshi roy (born 15 april 1968) is an indian film and television actress known for her roles in saaya, gharwali uparwali and kkusum. she is the wife of actor rohit roy, sister of actor sharman joshi and daughter of gujrati actor arvind joshi.  education and family  joshi has a bachelor's degree in psychology from mithibai college (mumbai).  she is the daughter of gujarati theatre actor, director and producer arvind joshi, and actor sharman joshi is her brother. she is married to actor rohit roy and has a daughter, kiara, with him. actor pravin joshi was her uncle and actress sarita joshi is her aunt. actresses ketaki dave, purbi joshi and poonam joshi are her cousins.  career  tv shows   saturday suspense - khauf as sheela ramani (episode 39) (1997)  saaya (1998 - 1999) as sudha   gharwali uparwali as chandni (uparwali) (2000 - 2003)  kkusum (2004 - 2005) as kkusum deshmukh  nach baliye 1 (2005) as contestant, with husband rohit roy  dhhai kilo prem (2017) as madhuri pankaj sharma  chandni (2021 upcoming) on starplus  films   alibaug  (unreleased)  references  external links         living people indian television actresses actresses in hindi television mithibai college alumni gujarati people 1968 births
hikaru mori (born 7 july 1999) is a japanese individual and synchronised trampoline gymnast.  she won the silver medal in the women's individual event at the 2018 asian games held in jakarta, indonesia.  in 2018, she also won the gold medal in the women's synchro event, alongside megu uyama, at the 2018 trampoline gymnastics world championships held in saint petersburg, russia. in 2019 she won two gold medals at this competition, in the women's individual and women's individual team events.  references  external links     living people 1999 births gymnasts from tokyo japanese female trampolinists gymnasts at the 2018 asian games medalists at the 2018 asian games asian games silver medalists for japan asian games medalists in gymnastics medalists at the trampoline gymnastics world championships gymnasts at the 2020 summer olympics olympic gymnasts of japan
the vast majority of the 16,500 churches in the church of england are dedicated to one or more people. most are dedicated to a single 'patron saint', such as saint peter or the virgin mary, or one of the persons of god, such as holy trinity, christ church, or the good shepherd. others commemorate christian events such as the assumption of mary or ascension of jesus.  history  all churches are dedicated to god, but certainly by the fourth century it was common practice to dedicate a christian place of worship to one or more patron saints. an early example of this was in 386 when saint ambrose dedicated milan cathedral to gervasius and protasius whose graves he found nearby. once the church was established in england it became practice to dedicate a new church's patron saint during the act of consecration by the diocesan bishop, and in fact mass could not be held in a building until the consecration act had taken place. there is much evidence of the dedication of churches prior to 800, with most being dedicated to saint peter or to saint mary.  during consecration the building would usually be named in honour of a "holy martyr", but sometimes instead a "confessor", "matron", or "virgin", but nonetheless many churches remained undedicated up until the thirteenth century. in 1229 the bishop of worcester william of blois mandated that all churches in his diocese display the date of dedication and name of patron saint alongside the altar, and many medieval churches would also have a painted image of their patron nearby. churches would also celebrate the feast day of their patron or patrons in what is now known as the 'patronal festival', with local parishioners taking a holiday or naming children after their patron.  the protestant reformation of the 16th century swept away centuries of church tradition; the whitewashing of sacred images led to a backlash against saints associated with the church. whilst not prohibiting them, the book of common prayer contained no text for a dedication service, and with new church builds becoming fewer the practice became less well known. by the 18th century many churches had even forgotten their dedication entirely, so that when the first books were published listing church dedications in the early 18th century (e.g. browne willis) many of them had been lost; in a modern analysis of his results on the churches of devon, around a third of the churches were listed as having unknown dedication, and a further 30% listed dedications that were incorrect, or at the very least differed from their medieval dedication. worse still
, having appeared in print, many took the dedications to be authoritative and some were thus subsequently adopted by the parish as the authentic dedication.  it was the victorian era, the first great english church-building era for centuries, that finally revived the interest in patron saints. by this stage many had rediscovered their original dedication, whereas others changed the dedication to a new patron saint for any number of reasons. others gave their dedication a more prosaic twist, giving rise to the many churches now known as "st michael and all angels", "all hallows", or "the blessed virgin mary". by the 20th century, the dedication's continued usage was once again assured, with common usage referring to "st peter's" as opposed to "newton parish church". in many cases these are names that have been used at that site for well over a thousand years, and in others they are simply 18th century mistakes or creations of the victorian age.  selection of patron saint  there was no single set of rules that governed the choice of patron saint for a church, chapel or religious foundation, but analysis of existing and historical dedications shows a number of patterns that demonstrate how patrons were often chosen. the most popular saints in terms of numbers of dedications demonstrate the influence of rome on the history of english christianity, as well as being major characters in biblical studies, with the most popular being st mary, st peter, st michael, st andrew, and st paul.  one of the clearest reasons for the choice of many dedications was that the church was founded on or near the site of a saint's activity. a large number of these give rise to the dedications of the churches of cornwall, but others where a settlement built up around a saint's oratory or residence include saint culbone at culbone in devon, saint beza at st bees in cumberland, and saint everildis at everingham in yorkshire. to these we can add churches founded in existing towns where a saint worked, such as saint cuthman at steyning, sussex, or saint congar at badgeworth, somerset, or those where the saint's remains were buried, such as saint urith at chittlehampton, devon, or saint ethelbert at marden, herefordshire. other dedications commemorate a site's founder, for example saint etheldreda at ely cathedral or saint cuthberga at wimborne minster, and the collection of relics of foreign saints seems to have inspired the dedications to saint firmin at north crawley, buckinghamshire, and saint sebastian
at great gonerby, lincolnshire. one particularly interesting pair of dedications are the churches of saint olave at either end of london bridge, whose destruction he initiated to prevent the advance of invading armies.  other saints became known across particular geographical areas, and their church dedications reflect that. saint kentigern, who reputedly originated in cumberland has ten churches dedicated to him - nine in cumberland and one in neighbouring northumberland. similarly the many churches dedicated to saint chad are clustered across mercia in the former diocese of lichfield which he was instrumental in founding.  the patronage of particular professions by saints has also influenced choices. for example, most english coastal towns have a church dedicated to saint nicholas, patron saint of sailors and fisherman, and churches dedicated to saint giles, patron saint of beggars and cripples, are often found near the medieval gates of fortified towns. in a similar fashion, the choice of saint catherine was favoured by many institutions as she is also the patron saint of educators and philosophers.  a number of churches seem to have selected their patron according to the feast day on which the church was dedicated. though these are often hard to discern, they include several churches dedicated to the ascension or the assumption.  most common dedications  the table lists the most common dedications in the church of england. note that churches with more than one patron saint are counted towards the totals of both.  among another biblical saints the following have dedications: st philip (92), st jude (37), st gabriel (29), st james the less (24), holy spirit (22), st simon (19), holy innocents (18) and st matthias (16).  a number of churches are dedicated to jesus by other names: as well as the 392 christ churches listed above, there are 80 st saviours, 69 emmanuels, 62 good shepherds, 18 christ the kings, and 12 saviours.  references  external links church of england saint dedications - searchable database of english dedications  church of england
vinodam is a 1996 indian telugu comedy film directed by s. v. krishna reddy. k. atchi reddy produced the film under manisha films banner. s. v. krishna reddy also composed the music for this film. the film stars srikanth and ravali.  plot ashta lakshmi (ravali) is the daughter of bangaram (kota srinivasa rao). he is ready to do anything to make her happy. four friends (srikanth, sivaji raja, uttej, bandla ganesh) live in a rented house owned by chintamani (tanikella bharani). they frequently deceive their owner by not paying rent to him. they lead a care free and happy life.  cast   srikanth as raja  ravali as ashta lakshmi "ala"  kota srinivasa rao as bangaram  brahmanandam as thief  babu mohan as bangaram's assistant  ali as bangaram's car driver  prakash raj as prakash, bangaram's son-in-law  tanikella bharani as chintamani  a. v. s. as a. v. subrahmanyam  sivaji raja as raja's friend  uttej as raja's friend  bandla ganesh as raja's friend  mallikarjuna rao as malli  gundu hanumantha rao as gundu  rallapalli as nageshwara rao  y. vijaya as subrahmanyam's wife  gautam raju  awards  nandi award for best male comedian - brahmanandam  soundtrack  references  external links  vinodam film on youtube  indian films indian comedy films 1990s telugu-language films films directed by s. v. krishna reddy 1996 comedy films 1996 films
the carnival tragedy of 1823 was a human crush which occurred on 11 february 1823 at the convent of the minori osservanti in valletta, malta. about 110 boys who had gone to the convent to receive bread on the last day of carnival celebrations were killed after falling down a flight of steps while trying to get out of the convent.  background  during the early 19th century, the crown colony of malta was experiencing a famine, and it had become a tradition to gather 8- to 15-year-old boys from the lower classes of valletta and the three cities to participate in a procession during the last few days of carnival. after the procession, they would attend mass, and they would be given some bread afterwards. this activity was arranged by ecclesiastical directors who taught catechism, and its main aim was to keep children out of the riots and confusion of carnival.  this activity was organized on 10 february 1823, when children attended mass at floriana and then went to the convent of the minori osservanti (now better known as ta' giezu) in valletta where they were given bread. everything went as planned, and the same procedure was planned for the following day.  disaster the same procedure took place on 11 february 1823. children were gathered and attended mass at floriana, but the ceremony lasted an hour longer than usual. the children's procession to the convent in valletta occurred at the same time as the carnival celebrations had ended, so they met with many people who were returning home. at this point, some adults and children from the crowd mixed in with the boys in order to receive free bread which was being distributed.  the boys entered one of the convent's corridors from the vestry door in the church, and were to be let out through another door on st. ursula street. the bread was to be distributed at the latter door. although the vestry door was usually locked to prevent boys from reentering to receive more bread, this time the door was left open since the boys were late. due to this, more men and boys entered without anyone realizing.  those who had entered began to push the boys queuing in the corridor, who were shoved to the end of the corridor near a half-open door. at this point, a lamp went out leaving the corridor in darkness, and the people inside began to push forward even more. the boys at the front fell down a flight of steps, blocking the door in the process.  those who were distributing the bread as well as some neighbours rushed to assist
the children after they heard screams. they managed to open the doors, and many boys got out and were revived. however, a number of boys had already died due to suffocation or being trampled upon.  the exact number of casualties is not known. records of the sacra infermeria show that 94 bodies of boys aged between 15 and 16 were brought to the hospital on 11 february, and they were buried the following day. however, contemporary records such as the gentleman's magazine, and historical chronicle reveal that "no less than 110 boys perished on this occasion".  aftermath an investigation led by the lieutenant governor, richard plasket, took place after the disaster, and a report about the findings was published a few days after the incident. the investigation concluded that it was an unfortunate accident caused by a succession of errors, and no one was accused for the deaths of the children.  further reading  malta bil chzejer tehne u li ghadda min ghaliha: it-tieni parti, volume 2  references  human stampedes in malta 1823 in malta 19th century in valletta february 1823 events 1823 disasters
krismoir rosales (born december 20, 1990) is a filipino-american professional basketball player for the nlex road warriors of the philippine basketball association (pba). he was drafted 19th overall in the 2015 pba draft by the barako bull energy.  early life and amateur career rosales started playing basketball at the age of 4 in his backyard. his father, nielon rosales, built a basketball court for him and his older brother, nayton. at the age of 7 he joined his first basketball league in the city of bellflower, california. he played a year of junior varsity and three years of varsity basketball at st. john bosco high school under coach chris madigan. after graduating high school in 2009 he accepted a scholarship from coach bill czech to play at naia division 1 school at hope international university in fullerton, california.  rosales also worked out for the toronto raptors twice, once in fullerton and the other in los angeles. he also worked out for the sacramento kings at a local high school in sacramento, where he was working out with don sellers and guss armstead. he also worked out with the los angeles clippers at their practice facility and a day later he flew to new jersey to work out with the brooklyn nets at their facility.  professional career  pba d-league on october 30, 2014 after going undrafted in the 2013 nba d-league draft and a hardluck campaign to make it to the nba d-league, rosales knew that the next step for him is not to try in other international leagues just like his peers but to go back home. rosales made his pba d-league debut as the part of jumbo plastic linoleum giants, he helped the giants to win their game against bread story−lpu smashing bakers with a score of 79-74. rosales also played for tanduay light rhum masters for four games in the 2015 pba d-league foundation cup but his team felt short at the quarterfinals.  abl / pba in 2015 rosales was recruited by the singapore slingers of the asean basketball league (abl) where he led the slingers to a runner-up finish. rosales was drafted 7th overall by the barako bull energy also known now as phoenix fuel masters during the 2015 pba draft the fuel masters were unable to sign him due to the team's heavy guards rotation. rosales signed a -year deal with the tnt katropa.  in just his second career pba game, rosales recorded 13 points on 4 for 8 shooting from the field
in just 22 minutes of playing time.  pba career statistics  as of the end of 2020 season  season-by-season averages  |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | tnt | 16 || 17.3 || .397 || .375 || .871 || 1.9 || 2.9 || .4 || .0 || 5.7 |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | tnt | 43 || 14.5 || .446 || .370 || .674 || 1.3 || 1.2 || .2 || .1 || 5.2 |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | rain or shine | 45 || 18.2 || .339 || .301 || .735 || 2.1 || 1.5 || .6 || .0 || 4.7 |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | rain or shine | 12 || 18.9 || .307 || .226 || .750 || 4.0 || 1.8 || .4 || .1 || 5.2 |-class=sortbottom | align="center" colspan=2 | career | 116 || 16.7 || .378 || .323 || .748 || 2.0 || 1.6 || .4 || .0 || 5.1  references  external links kris rosales on twitter  1990 births living people american expatriates in singapore american men's basketball players american sportspeople of filipino descent basketball players from california filipino expatriate basketball people in singapore filipino men's basketball players people from bellflower, california point guards singapore slingers players tnt tropang giga players rain or shine elasto painters players barako bull energy draft picks nlex road warriors players citizens of the philippines through descent
"let me love you" is a song recorded by french dj and electronic music producer dj snake featuring vocals from canadian singer justin bieber. the song was released through interscope records on 5 august 2016 as the third single from his debut studio album, encore (2016). the artists both co-wrote the song along with andrew watt, ali tamposi, brian lee and louis bell, while the song's production was handled by dj snake, bell and watt. its music video, directed by james lees, was released on 29 november 2016 on youtube. in 2021, the song was covered by american nu metal group love and death featuring lacey sturm. the song became popular among teenagers and young adults in 2017. it also received  a nomination for best crush  song at the disney awards.  composition "let me love you" is written in the key of c minor with a tempo of 100 beats per second common time. the song follows a chord progression of cm7ee/gae/ga.  music video the music video for "let me love you" was released on  30 november 2016 on youtube. rolling stone magazine referred to the video as "bonnie and clyde with a twist" as it shows a few scenes with a couple (played by tommy o'brien and emily rudd) engaging in a high speed chase, a run in with a head boss and a makeout session in the getaway car and their hotel room. in the end, it is revealed that the action sequences are part of a video  game and the players on the other side are in fact a kid and an unkempt and overweight adult male with virtual reality devices on. the video was directed by james lees. the official music video has over 1 billion views on youtube as of 13 september 2021. the lyric video has also racked up over 970 million views on the site.  chart performance in the united states, "let me love you" debuted at number 12 on the billboard hot 100 on the issue dated 27 august 2016. the single opened at number-one on digital songs with 113,000 downloads, becoming dj snake's first and bieber's sixth number-one on the chart. on the issue dated 1 october 2016, "let me love you" advanced at sixth place, becoming dj snake's third top 10 single in the hot 100 after "turn down for what" and "lean on" with major lazer and bieber's twelfth top 10 single. it eventually reached number four the following week.  in addition, the song reached number one in finland,
france, germany, italy, the netherlands, norway, portugal, scotland and switzerland; as well as the top 10 in argentina, australia, austria, belgium, brazil, canada, denmark, hungary, ireland, lebanon, new zealand, panama, paraguay, poland, spain, sweden, the united kingdom and the united states.  the remix of the song with the collaboration of american r&b singer r. kelly debuted at number 24 on the bubbling under hot 100 on the issue dated 14 january 2017. the remix opened at number 11 on hot dance/electronic songs with 25,000 downloads.  charts  weekly charts  original version  remix featuring r. kelly  year-end charts  decade-end charts  certifications  references  external links    2016 singles 2016 songs justin bieber songs dj snake songs songs written by justin bieber songs written by ali tamposi songs written by brian lee (songwriter) dutch top 40 number-one singles single top 100 number-one singles number-one singles in finland snep top singles number-one singles number-one singles in germany number-one singles in italy number-one singles in norway number-one singles in portugal number-one singles in scotland number-one singles in switzerland torch songs songs written by andrew watt (record producer) tropical house songs songs written by louis bell songs written by dj snake song recordings produced by louis bell interscope records singles
alexandre barety (1844-1918) was a french physician. he was the author of many medical papers. with henri sappia, he co-founded the academia nissarda, a historical society in nice, in 1904.  works  references  1844 births 1918 deaths people from nice 19th-century french physicians french medical writers
codfish falls is a series of close-knit plunges and cascades, ending in a fan, that is fed by fishers brook, in storrs, connecticut (a village in the town of mansfield). it can be accessed by a trail from a road of the same name. the falls has carved out a steep-sided gorge, averaging twenty feet deep, which is in sharp contrast to the surrounding land. it feeds into the nearby fenton river.  see also  fishers brook  fenton river  nipmuck trail  references  external links  photograph of the falls credit goes to the photographer.  waterfalls of connecticut mansfield, connecticut landforms of tolland county, connecticut tourist attractions in tolland county, connecticut
aymon de chisse was the name of two 15th-century bishops of nice and grenoble.  aymon i  aymon i (died 1428) was the nephew of ralph de chisse, also bishop of grenoble and later archbishop of tarentaise.  aymon became bishop of grenoble in 1388. as bishop and art lover he built the sanctuary of the cathedral mausoleum with its gothic sculptures.  during his episcopate, the first public clock in grenoble was commissioned (23 june 1398) and set in the steeple of the collegiate church of saint-andre, grenoble, in 1424, he had built the notre-dame hospital in the rue chenoise, grenoble.  in 1427 he exchanged bishoprics with his nephew aymon ii, bishop of nice, and died the following year.  aymon ii aymon ii (d. 1450) was the nephew of aymon i and was likewise bishop of nice and grenoble.  he was provost of the collegiate church of saint-andre, grenoble until becoming bishop of nice in 1422. he exchanged his diocese with his uncle in 1427 to become his successor as bishop of grenoble.  aymon ii attended the council of florence in 1431 where he was responsible for beginning the formalities of absence against pope eugene iv, who had refused the summons to address the council.  aymon ii died in 1450.  references  year of birth unknown 15th-century french roman catholic bishops bishops of nice bishops of grenoble
the soha junction(소하 분기점, romanised: soha bungijeom) is a junction of the seohaean expressway, suwon-munsan expressway, and the gangnamsunhwan-ro in soha-dong, gwangmyeong, gyeonggi province, republic of korea.  roads  history   july 3, 2016: the junction was opened.  references  seohaean expressway suwon-munsan expressway expressway junctions in south korea gwangmyeong geumcheon district
sema acarturk (born ) is a turkish female weightlifter, competing in the 53 kg category and representing turkey at international competitions. she competed at world championships, most recently at the 2015 world weightlifting championships.  major results  references  1993 births living people turkish female weightlifters place of birth missing (living people)
bhana  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bhana.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bhana has a total number of 12 houses and population of 58 of which include 29 males and 29 females. literacy rate of bhana is  74.51%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 7 which is  12.07% of total population of bhana, and child sex ratio is approximately  1333, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the lincoln land championship is a golf tournament on the korn ferry tour. it was first played in july 2016 at panther creek country club in springfield, illinois.  winners  bolded golfers graduated to the pga tour via the korn ferry tour regular-season money list.  references  external links  coverage on the korn ferry tour's official site  korn ferry tour events golf in illinois sports in springfield, illinois recurring sporting events established in 2016 2016 establishments in illinois
vincent gomgadja (born 19 july 1960) is a former cyclist from the central african republic. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1960 births living people central african republic male cyclists olympic cyclists of the central african republic cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
valdemar christian schønheyder møller (5 january 1864 - 3 may 1905) was a danish painter, known principally for his depictions of sunlight.  biography møller was born at  aarhus, denmark. he was the son of carl johan ferdinand møller (1815-73) and  reinholdine christiane schønheyder (1835-1904).  he began his art studies at the royal danish academy of fine arts (1883-84), then switched to the kunstnernes frie studieskoler, where he studied under the supervision of p.s. krøyer. it was there he became friends with vilhelm hammershøi (1864-1916) and took photographs that became the basis for some of hammershøi's early paintings. he was, in fact, one of the earliest danish painters to use photography as an artistic medium.  in 1891, he moved to skagen, where he became acquainted with the skagen painters, and remained there until 1893. it was in skagen that he began his intensive study of the effects of light.  in 1894, he went to paris to join his brother, tyge, who was an art collector; then settled in fontainebleau in 1896. he continued his studies of light, producing a series of over thirty works with the sun's direct light as their theme; many depicting the sun as rises, shining through the trees. sometimes, he would briefly stare at the sun, to recreate the lights and colors induced in his retina. he soon became known as the painter of the sun  (le peintre du soleil).  although largely forgotten today, he was once a familiar figure at exhibitions, including the charlottenborg spring exhibition (1885-87, 1889-92), the  salon de la societe nationale (1895-1903) and at exposition universelle (1889) and exposition universelle (1900).  throughout his life, he suffered from bipolar episodes. in 1901, he was admitted to arhus sindssygehospital, the psychiatric hospital in aarhus and remained there until his death in 1905.  references   1864 births 1905 deaths 19th-century danish painters danish male painters royal danish academy of fine arts people people from aarhus danish landscape painters people with bipolar disorder
harold melvin triggs (december 25, 1900 - july, 1984) was an american composer and pianist.  a native of denver, where his father directed a company which sold musical instruments, triggs studied at the bush conservatory under julie rive-king, and also had lessons with josef lhevinne. he had a long career as a teacher, beginning at his alma mater and continuing at the juilliard school and columbia university. concurrently he appeared as a concert pianist, both alone and as a duo with vera brodsky. most of his music is for piano; other works include the orchestral the bright land, which was taken up by leopold stokowski and howard hanson among others, and recorded by the latter. as a pianist triggs made a number of piano rolls during his career.  triggs died in thomasville, georgia. his papers are held by columbia university.  references  external links    finding aid to harold triggs papers at columbia university. rare book & manuscript library.  1900 births 1984 deaths musicians from denver juilliard school faculty columbia university faculty american male classical composers american classical composers american classical pianists male classical pianists american male pianists 20th-century classical composers 20th-century classical pianists 20th-century american pianists 20th-century american composers 20th-century american male musicians
sergio sette camara filho (born 23 may 1998) is a brazilian racing driver who currently drives for dragon / penske autosport in formula e and previously competed in formula 2 for mp motorsport, carlin motorsport and dams. he was a member of the red bull junior team, having formerly been a test and development driver for mclaren.  career  fia formula 3 european championship  2014  after he turned 16, sette camara was legally able to race in the national f3 championship (class a) in brazil. he made his debut at the fourth round at interlagos. although he could not quite match up to teammate pedro piquet, he finished the year with a strong seventh.  he also made his european f3 debut at the second-last round at imola, driving for eurointernational. driving as a guest driver and ineligible for championship points, sette camara finished 14th, 20th, and 21st respectively in the three races over the weekend.  2015  after a one-off appearance that year, sette camara made his full-time debut for the 2015 season, driving for motopark. after a rather disappointing start to the season, his luck turned for the better at spa where he achieved his first podium in europe where he finished 3rd. after that race, sette camara went on to score more consistently than not while achieving another 3rd place at red bull ring and went on to finish 14th in the championship with 57.5 points next to his name.  masters of formula 3  the annual meeting at zandvoort for the masters of f3 event was a successful one for sette camara, bagging a pole position for the qualification race. in that race, he finished in third place and also finished third in the main race.  macau grand prix  another annual meeting for formula 3 drivers, this time at macau, a circuit sette camara had not competed on before. his weekend started well by qualifying 7th, an impressive result for a rookie. in the qualification race, he improved one position to finish a respectable sixth place. in the main race, he struck trouble before finishing 22nd, last of the runners and two minutes off eventual winner felix rosenqvist. despite the disappointing result, sette camara recorded the fastest lap of the race which not only was over 1.5 seconds faster than his own fastest qualifying lap, but it is now also the outright lap record for the macau gp circuit.  2016  returning with motopark for a second season, now part of the red bull junior team, the 2016
season for sette camara started off with a tricky weekend at circuit paul ricard when he was taken out by his teammate at the first corner in race 1. but from hungaroring onwards, sette camara started to prove that he was a genuine competitor on the track by performing some top quality overtaking maneuvers and consistently finishing in the 'points paying positions' including podiums at pau and red bull ring. unfortunately, sette camara's second half of the season was less than lucky for him: he had many high grid position placings, including a pole position, taken away from him due to grid penalties and suffered other problems, including a drive-through penalty whilst running in 2nd place at hockenheim. he finished 11th in the championship at seasons end but that did not justify the pace he had all year.  masters of formula 3  like last year's event, sette camara enjoyed success at the zandvoort event. after qualifying 7th for the qualification race, he ended finishing 5th in that race and then in the main race, sette camara finished 3rd once again to top off a successful outing.  macau grand prix  returning after a record-breaking race weekend for him in last year's event, sette camara came into the event with carlin, a team he had never raced with previously. with past winner antonio felix da costa and rising stars jake hughes and lando norris as his teammates, sette camara was not going to have it easy. he showed his strong form by qualifying in 4th place, just one place behind da costa. in the qualification race, sette camara made up 1 place in the race to finish 3rd behind da costa and former red bull junior callum ilott. for the main race, sette camara held the lead for half of the race in strong fashion until nikita mazepin crashed and brought out the safety car. once the safety car came in, he was immediately pressured by da costa and lost the lead in an epic duel between them and felix rosenqvist, reigning and 2-time winner of this event, also snuck by sette camara after putting extreme pressure on and sette camara held onto 3rd place at the end of the race to take a podium in one of the most prestigious events in world motorsport, finishing behind now 2-time winner da costa and rosenqvist.  2017  macau grand prix  returning for his third attempt, sette camara had a lot more of a challenge on his plate due to being out of a formula 3 car all year as he has been racing formula 2 machinery. but, he has a lot to prove
as he still is the current race lap record holder which he set in 2015 and in 2016 he led the first half of the main race so he knows how to drive around macau in a fast manner. the start of the weekend had big downs and even bigger downs as he was the fastest in fp1 but that involved hitting the wall and in qualifying, his best lap was ruined by making contact with the wall and had to settle for 9th. that did not hamper his progress through the qualification race as he made a rapid start making his way to fifth by the end of lap 1 before reaching 3rd and pressuring joel eriksson for 2nd. unfortunately, joel held his own and sette camara finished an impressive 3rd from 9th on the grid.  the main race, however, was a race for the history books as the race itself was the perfect example of the edge of your seat entertainment and real, hard and fair racing. for sette camara however, it was a fairytale that quickly turned into his biggest nightmare. after obtaining the lead after both joel eriksson and callum ilott both ran into trouble once it went from yellow flag to green flag conditions, sette camara inherited the lead and held it until the final lap. after firstly being under immense pressure from maximilian gunther and then the fast charging and driver of the day ferdinand habsburg, sette camara looked set to take victory but he was overtaken around the outside on the final corner on the last lap by habsburg and both drivers went into the wall after carrying too much speed into the corner but only habsburg managed to make it across the line so sette camara was classified as 13th place despite not making it past the chequered flag in what was an incredible drive leading up to the moment and deserved a win or at least  a podium placement.  toyota racing series  sette camara made his debut in 2015 after replacing dzhon simonyan at taupo. he ended the season with 199 points next to his name and placed 20th overall.  fia formula 2 championship  in november 2016, camara was confirmed to be stepping up to fia formula 2 championship with mp motorsport.  2017  arriving at bahrain for round 1 of the new era of formula 2, sette camara had a challenge on his hands as he not only had to prove he can match experienced teammate jordan king, but he also had to prove that being the youngest driver on the grid was not going to hold him back, and after qualifying, he proved he can be quick from the get go as he qualified an impressive 10th for his first
ever race and qualified 1 place ahead of his teammate in the process. race 1 proved to be the real challenge however as tyre degradation played a massive role in the outcome of the race but sette camara held on nicely and took a fine 12th place at the end but got relegated to 13th after a time penalty for forcing campos driver ralph boschung off the track. race 2 did not end up too much better for sette camara as a puncture on lap 1 forced him into the pits for a tyre change and he did not help his own cause by stalling in the pits either. eager to prove his worth after a major setback, sette camara went out and while he was too far back from the rest of the field, he was lapping times quicker than most. by the end, he finished a miserable 18th but set the fastest lap of the race and was the only driver to lap a 1: 43-second lap but unfortunately did not get the 2 points for the fastest lap as he failed to finish inside the top 10.  unfortunately for sette camara, points did not get earned at either spain or monaco. struggling for genuine pace in the feature race before being forced off the track by johnny cecotto in the sprint race at spain and being to told to stop crying by his own team over the radio and retiring with a suspension failure whilst in the points in the feature race and being stuck at the back of the field due to extremely difficult overtaking opportunities in the sprint race at monaco were his problems.  baku, austria, silverstone and hungaroring were also quiet and scoreless runs for sette camara but could have had a breakthrough points score in austria after qualifying 2nd before being disqualified and sent to the back of the grid for having an irregular fuel sample in the car and to sum up his season going into the summer break, scoring 0 points from 14 races was certainly not what sette camara planned to achieve.  after the summer break, sette camara returned the famous and prestigious spa circuit where he has had much success in the past and certainly would have wanted to keep that going. he also had all the motivation in the world after brilliant driver coaching during the break by successful open-wheeled racer and former gp2 driver tom dillmann. after qualifying 11th for the feature race in a session that was undertaken in heavy rain, sette camara wasted no time in making his way up inside the top 10. he nailed the pit stop and continued to finish in 8th, his first points finish of the session, before being promoted to 6th
after the disqualifications of charles leclerc and oliver rowland. starting 3rd for the sprint race, sette camara made the best start of the season as he got away beautifully and managed to have a massive gap and clean line all to himself after turn 1. he had tough competition behind him, but sette camara managed to slowly continue to increase the gap back to 2nd place, showed no signs of being pressured, made no mistakes at all and held onto the lead until the end. a safety car with 3 laps to go to recover nobuharu matsushita who crashed heavily at raidillon cemented his 1st-place finish and took his first race win in not only formula 2, but in car racing, in general, as he had not won a race since his karting days.  1 week later at monza, sette camara came in with all of the momenta in the world after his first win and while qualifying 11th was not the best start his 2 races were top class once again. having a quiet race up until the frantic final laps of the feature race, he finished 6th after all of the penalties were set in stone and once again started 3rd for the sprint race, where once again he capitalised on his improving race pace and captured 2nd place after losing the lead to the fast charging luca ghiotto and held his own for another deserving podium.  for the penultimate round at jerez, which was a stand-alone event for f2 and gp3 to make up for the german grand prix not being able to host an event that year, sette camara was at another he was not quite familiar with, although only a handful of drivers have had previous experience at the track so sette camara's inexperience was not a massive deficit to him. he got up to speed quite quickly and was comfortably inside the top for the majority of the weekend before a string of bad luck which led to bad timing leaving him with 10th and 14th in the feature and sprint races respectively but he had better luck in yas marina, abu dhabi where he had a solid weekend that resulted in 9th and 8th in the feature and sprint races respectively to close off his rookie year in formula 2.  formula e in february 2020, sette camara, along with former european formula 3 teammate joel eriksson, joined the geox dragon formula e team as reserve driver and entrant into the march rookie test in marrakesh. in the test, his efforts saw him set the second fastest time of the day behind envision virgin racing entrant nick cassidy. in july
2020, following brendon hartley's departure from the outfit, dragon promoted sette camara to the second race seat for the season finale in berlin. in november, the team confirmed camara would join the series full time as part of the 2020-21 line-up.  formula one after impressive pace in formula 3 in 2015, red bull signed him to the red bull junior team. after his first taste of f1 machinery in a demo run at motorland aragon, he made his official test debut with toro rosso after the  at silverstone. in the beginning of 2017, sette camara was dropped from the red bull junior team program. in november 2018 he was signed by mclaren as a 2019 test and development driver and took part in the 2019 catalunya young driver test, but returned to the red bull program in 2020.  karting record  karting career summary  racing record  racing career summary   † as sette camara was a guest driver, he was ineligible to score championship points. * season still in progress.  complete fia formula 3 european championship results (key) (races in bold indicate pole position, races in italics indicate fastest race lap)  † as sette camara was a guest driver, he was ineligible to score championship points.  complete macau grand prix results  complete fia formula 2 championship results (key) (races in bold indicate pole position) (races in italics indicate points for the fastest lap of top ten finishers)  complete formula e results (key) (races in bold indicate pole position; races in italics indicate fastest lap)  * season still in progress.  complete super formula results (key) (races in bold indicate pole position) (races in italics indicate fastest lap)  references  external links  1998 births living people brazilian formula three championship drivers fia formula 2 championship drivers fia formula 3 european championship drivers karting world championship drivers sportspeople from belo horizonte toyota racing series drivers brazilian formula e drivers eurointernational drivers motopark academy drivers carlin racing drivers mp motorsport drivers dams drivers dragon racing drivers
tsukubea is a monotypic class of excavates that contains a single species, tsukubamonas globosa yabuki et al. 2011. t. globosa is a free-living flagellate that was isolated from a pond in the university of tsukuba, japan.  structure  presence of nucleus, endoplasmic reticulum, vesicles, food vacuole, mitochondria with tubular cristae, two flagellated basal bodies and two unflagellated basal bodies, three major microtubular roots, four major fibers, one microtubule organizing center (mtoc), several internal microtubules and absence of golgi apparatus.  references   excavata classes monotypic eukaryote classes
gaetano negri (july 11, 1838 - july 31, 1902) was an italian geologist, writer and politician. he was the 3rd mayor of milan. he served in the chamber of deputies of the kingdom of italy.  references  external links    1838 births 1902 deaths 19th-century italian writers 19th-century male writers mayors of milan 19th-century italian geologists deputies of legislature xiv of the kingdom of italy
adolphe-louis-emile bitard (24 february 1826 - early 1888) was a 19th-century french journalist and scientific educator.  from age 17, he enlisted in the campaigns of crimea and italy. after the  was voted, bitard participated to several parisian dailies, and then, from 1871, to science magazines such as la revue de france, le musee universel and  which he established some weeks before he died. he created two other magazines, l'exposition de paris in 1878, and l'enseignement populaire in 1881 then la science illustree in 1887. in addition to popular science books, he left a biographical dictionary and several practical encyclopedias.  main publications  1875: encyclopedie universelle des connaissances pratiques, comprenant des renseignements sur tous les sujets usuels, ouvrage indispensable aux familles, redige par a. bitard, avec le concours de savants et d'hommes speciaux 1878: dictionnaire general de biographie contemporaine francaise et etrangere, contenant les noms et pseudonymes de tous les personnages celebres du temps present, l'histoire de leur vie, de leurs actes et de leurs œuvres, ainsi que la date des principaux evenements de leur carriere, etc., etc.,text online 1878: guide pratique dans paris pendant l'exposition 1878: l'exposition de paris redigee par a. bitard avec la collaboration d'ecrivains speciaux. edition enrichie de vues, de scenes, de reproductions d'objets d'art, de machines, de dessins et gravures par les meilleurs artistes 1878: le monde des merveilles. tableau pittoresque des grands phenomenes de la nature et des manifestations du genie de l'homme dans les sciences, l'industrie et les arts 1878: le livre de la maison, comprenant des renseignements sur tous les sujets usuels). reedition : le livre de la maitresse de maison et de la mere de famille, ouvrage contenant tous les renseignements indispensables a la vie pratique, 1880. 1878: les plaisirs, les jeux et les recreations de la maison, text online 1880: principales decouvertes et inventions dans les sciences, les arts et l'industrie, text online 1880: les phenomenes de la nature. principaux produits
du sol et du fond des mers 1880: les races humaines et les grandes explorations du globe 1881: histoire des expositions et des beaux-arts, par a. bitard. ouvrage entierement revu et corrige par h. haraucourt 1884: le grand dictionnaire illustre de la langue francaise litteraire usuelle et fantaisiste, avec les regles grammaticales, la prononciation figuree, les etymologies, synonymies, etc., de la litterature et de l'histoire generales, des sciences pures et appliquees depuis les temps les plus recules 1886: curiosites du monde des insectes 1891: education des sourds-muets.  sources   catherine benedic, "le monde des vulgarisateurs", la science pour tous, sur la vulgarisation scientifique en france de 1850 a 1914, paris, bibliotheque du conservatoire national des arts et metiers, 1990, (p. 41).  external links   adolphe bitard on data.bnf.fr  19th-century french journalists french male journalists science journalists 1826 births 1888 deaths 19th-century french male writers
carolina duarte (born 8 january 1990) is a track and field athlete from portugal competing mainly sprint events. duarte has competed in both disabled and non-disabled sporting competitions. in disability sport she competes as a t13 athlete, a classification for athletes who are visually impaired.  athletics career  as an athlete in non-disability events duarte began her athletics career competing in mainstream track and field events. her early personal bests, set in 2010, were all in short distance sprints, setting a time of 12.17 in the 100 metres. as her career progressed she gravitated towards the 400 metres event and also competed in the 400 metres hurdles. in 2012, she was selected to join the portugal team that competed at the 2012 european athletics championships, competing as part of the women's 4 × 400 metres relay.  as a disability athlete due to reduced vision, duarte was able to become classified as a t13 track and field athlete. in 2016, she was selected for the portugal national team that competed at the ipc athletics european championships in grosseto. there she competed in three events, the t13 100m, 200m and 400m sprints. in her first event, the 200 metres, she was edged into second place by france's nantenin keita, who set a championship record to take the gold medal. duarte followed this with a bronze in the 400 metres. on the penultimate day she competed in the 100 metres, and despite not running a personal best, duarte set a championship record with a time of 12.87s.  notes  1990 births living people portuguese female sprinters paralympic athletes of portugal athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer paralympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer paralympics
giuseppe spinelli (21 november 1908 - 17 january 1987) was an italian politician. he was born in cremona. he was mayor of milan. he was a supporter of the italian social republic.  references  1908 births 1987 deaths 20th-century italian politicians people of the italian social republic mayors of milan
the virgin and child with four holy virgins is a 15th-century oil on panel painting by the dutch artist master of the virgo inter virgines in the collection of the rijksmuseum.  this painting is a former altarpiece of the convent of koningsveld, near delft, which was demolished in 1573. it shows the virgin mary with saint catherine, saint cecilia, saint ursula, and saint barbara in holy communion, or virgo inter virgines.  the painting is undated, but based on compositional details has been considered a "late work" by the master and therefore dates to the 1490s. this holy communion is often depicted in an enclosed garden or courtyard such as the one in this painting. this courtyard with its open gate has compositional characteristics similar to the ones in the painting by the master of the spes nostra, also in the rijksmuseum. unusual is the prominent role of saint ursula in the painting, as well as the presence of the two male figures who are difficult to identify.  the painting was attributed to the brothers jan and hubert van eyck until max j. friedlander identified it as the work of a different artist in 1903.  references   sk-a-501 painting record on museum website  pumplin, paula l, "the communion of saints: the master of the virgo inter virgines' virgin and child with saints catherine, cecilia, barbara and ursula", the rijksmuseum bulletin, pp 306-327, 2010  15th-century paintings paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum paintings of the madonna and child
liberty courthouse square historic district is a national historic district located at liberty, union county, indiana.  the district encompasses 20 contributing buildings and 2 contributing objects in the central business district of liberty and centered on the separately listed union county courthouse.  it developed between about 1854 and 1938 and includes representative examples of italianate, romanesque revival, neoclassical, and art deco style architecture. notable contributing buildings include the o'toole building (1936), masonic hall (c. 1860), odd fellows building (c. 1854), liberty opera house (c. 1878), and liberty post office (1937-1938).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2013.  see also liberty residential historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana romanesque revival architecture in indiana neoclassical architecture in indiana art deco architecture in indiana historic districts in union county, indiana national register of historic places in union county, indiana courthouses on the national register of historic places in indiana
the 2016-17 montana grizzlies basketball team represented the university of montana during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the grizzlies, led by third-year head coach travis decuire, played their home games at dahlberg arena in missoula, montana as members of the big sky conference. they finished the season 16-16, 11-7 in big sky play to finish in a tie for fifth place. as the no. 5 seed in the big sky tournament, they lost to idaho in the quarterfinals.  previous season the grizzlies finished the 2015-16 season 21-12, 14-4 in big sky play to finish in second place. they defeated sacramento state and idaho to advance to the championship game of the big sky tournament where they lost to weber state. they were invited to the college basketball invitational where they lost in the first round to nevada.  offseason  departures  incoming transfers  2016 recruiting class  2017 recruiting class  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| big sky regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| big sky tournament  see also 2016-17 montana lady griz basketball team  references  montana grizzlies basketball seasons montana montana grizzlies basketball montana grizzlies basketball
hasimta theater (, lit. the alley theater) is a fringe theater located in the old city of jaffa, israel, and known for being one of the oldest fringe theaters in israel, as it has been operating continuously since its foundation in 1982 by actor and director niko nitai, who had also served as the theater's artistic manager for a while. the theater attracts artists that work in theater and music and seek to examine theatrical form and expression outside the box. the current artistic director and ceo of the theater is irit frank.  the theater was founded by nitai with the help of tel aviv municipality, on the location of former hasimta art gallery. regular artists during the first year of the theater's operation included meir ariel. these artists did not receive proper salaries, rather were paid a certain percentage of the incomes of their shows.  the theater is active almost every day of the year, and serves as a rehearsal hall in the mornings and a stage for performances in the evenings. over 54 productions and over 200 plays are presented at the theater per year, and the theater maintains a team of around 135 actors and 96 creators. the place also serves as an exhibition center, and serves as a stage for music and jazz concerts. "the alley bar" also works at the location.  external links  hasimta theater official website  fringe theatre israeli culture theatres in jaffa 1982 establishments in israel
prensa obrera (workers' press) is the weekly newspaper edited by the workers' party (po) of argentina. the first edition went out in the year 1982. in 2010 it reached a thousand editions. it has a circulation of 15,000 copies weekly.  references  external links   archive of workers' press   weekly newspapers published in argentina creative commons-licensed works
the cheerful caravan (spanish: la alegre caravana) is a 1953 spanish musical comedy film directed by ramon torrado and starring paquita rico, tito sirgo and felix fernandez.  cast  paquita rico   tito sirgo   felix fernandez   jose nieto  manuel arbo   matilde artero  xan das bolas   raul cancio   aurora de alba  fernando fernandez de cordoba   manuel guitian  miguel gomez  antonio hernandez   luis perez de leon manuel requena  rosario royo   fernando sancho   otto sirgo   maruja vallojera  references  bibliography   de espana, rafael. directory of spanish and portuguese film-makers and films. greenwood press, 1994.  external links     1953 musical comedy films spanish musical comedy films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films films directed by ramon torrado fictional representations of romani people suevia films films spanish black-and-white films
"blessings" is a song by american contemporary christian music singer-songwriter laura story from her 2011 album blessings. it was released on february 21, 2011, as the lead single. the song became story's first hot christian songs no. 1, staying there for four weeks. it lasted 34 weeks on the overall chart. the song is played in a b major key, and 116 beats per minute. it was certified gold by the recording industry association of america (riaa).  background  laura story married her partner martin; two years later he was diagnosed with a brain tumor. story learned that despite his life-threatening illness, they saw how god never intended for people to provide for themselves and that instead of walking alone they would need to rely on jesus's help. blessings was written to describe how god will allow things that are not immediately understood to happen, but from a different perspective they are a means of spiritual growth. the song is also about how sometimes material possessions are not what god wants for believers, and it lends the idea about how character, along with what is in someone's heart, is ultimately more important. in an interview with freeccm, story learned that during the writing process she realized there was one choice to judge god based on circumstances not understood, and another based on circumstances for what was held to be true of god's nature, with her choosing to trust god. she explained that blessings is about finding the answer in "the absence of the thing [...] praying for."  release "blessings" was released on february 21, 2011, as the lead single from her second studio album, blessings. the song won multiple awards in 2012, these being: top christian song at the billboard music awards, a grammy for best contemporary christian song, song of the year and pop/contemporary song of the year at the dove awards.  track listing cd release "blessings (performance track with background vocals)" - 4:58 "blessings (performance track / no background vocals)" - 4:57 "blessings (performance track / high key / no background vocals)" - 4:57 "blessings (performance track / low key / no background vocals)" - 4:57 "blessings" - 4:57  awards  grammy awards  gma dove awards  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  2011 songs 2011 singles
onorato caetani, xiv duke of sermoneta and iv prince of teano (18 january 1842 - 2 september 1917) was an italian politician from the noble caetani-family.  he was born in rome, which was then part of the papal states, to michelangelo and calixta caetani (nee rzewuska).  he graduated in law at the university of rome in 1863 and lived for a long time in england.  political career a supporter of the historical right party, he took a moderate position which gained the respect of both catholics and non-catholics.  he was elected  for velletri to the chamber of deputies in march 1872 and remained there uninterruptedly until 1911, when he was appointed to the upper house as a senator of the kingdom of italy. he also served as the 8th mayor of rome from december 1890 to november 1892, and from march to july 1896 as minister of foreign affairs of the kingdom of italy in the government of rudini ii.  italian geographical society caetani was elected president of the italian geographical society in 1879 in succession to cesare correnti, the society's founder, who had been forced to resign for pursuing political objectives. he held the office until 1887, restoring the society's scientific objectives, promoting the teaching of geography in schools and organising the 3rd international congress of geography in vienna in 1881.  honours and awards  knight grand cordon of the order of saints maurice and lazarus  commander of the order of the crown of italy  private life he died in rome, italy in 1917. in 1867, during his time in england, he had married ada constance bootle-wilbraham, daughter of colonel the hon edward bootle-wilbraham (a son of edward bootle-wilbraham, 1st baron skelmersdale). their children included the islamist leone caetani (1869-1935), the composer roffredo caetani (1871-1961) and the diplomat gelasio caetani (1877-1934).  references   this article contains material from the equivalent article on italian wikipedia  1842 births 1917 deaths mayors of rome recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus deputies of legislature xi of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xii of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xiv of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xv of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xvi of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xvii of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xviii of the kingdom of italy deputies of
legislature xix of the kingdom of italy deputies of legislature xx of the kingdom of italy senators of the kingdom of rome corresponding fellows of the british academy
brett roberts is a former republican member of the michigan house of representatives, elected in 2014 who represented the 65th district.  early life roberts was raised in eaton county, michigan and graduated from charlotte high school.  professional career roberts is a sixth-generation farmer and owner of a dairy queen in charlotte, michigan.  political career roberts was elected to represent michigan's 65th district in the michigan house of representatives in 2014, defeating bonnie j. johnson and ronald muszynski, following the departure of mike shirkey who went to serve in the michigan senate.  electoral history  references  external links  campaign website  living people farmers from michigan people from eaton county, michigan michigan republicans members of the michigan house of representatives 21st-century american politicians people from charlotte, michigan year of birth missing (living people)
amd athlon x4 is a series of budget amd microprocessors for personal computers. these processors are distinct from a-series apus of the same era due to the lack of igpus.  "richland" (2013, 32 nm)  socket fm2  cpu: two or four piledriver-cores  gpu terascale 3 (vliw4)  mmx, sse(1, 2, 3, 3s, 4a, 4.1, 4.2), amd64, amd-v, aes, avx(1, 1.1), xop, fma(4, 3), cvt16, f16c, bmi(abm, tbm), turbo core 3.0, nx bit  powernow!  "kaveri" (2014, 28 nm)  socket fm2+, support for pcie 3.0  two or four cpu cores based on the steamroller microarchitecture  amd heterogeneous system architecture (hsa) 2.0  dual-channel (2× 64 bit) ddr3 memory controller  integrated custom arm cortex-a5 co-processor with trustzone security extensions  "carrizo" (2016, 28 nm)  socket fm2+, support for pcie 3.0  four cpu cores based on the excavator microarchitecture  dual-channel (2× 64 bit) ddr3 memory controller  "bristol ridge" (2017, 28 nm)   socket am4, support for pcie 3.0  four cpu cores based on the excavator microarchitecture  dual-channel ddr4 memory controller  mmx, sse(1, 2, 3, 3s, 4a, 4.1, 4.2), amd64, amd-v, aes, avx(1, 1.1, 2), xop, fma(4, 3), cvt16, f16c, bmi(abm, tbm), turbo core 3.0, nx bit  see also   amd bulldozer  amd piledriver  amd accelerated processing unit  list of amd fx microprocessors  references  external links   advanced micro devices x86 microprocessors
a&c mall  is a privately owned business that provides a set standard for mixed use retail shopping centres in ghana. it is located in greater accra region,  ghana at  east legon, jungle road after the american international school.  facilities a&c mall evolved into a mixed use centre after the appointment of broll property management in 2010. the mall comprises retail, offices, services, and a university. it has 30,000 square metres of mixed used space with parking for over 500 cars. a&c mall accommodates 63 businesses of which 50% are operated by ghanaian businesses. a&c mall is anchored by maxmart a supermarket chain, lancaster university a uk franchise and international ngos.  references  shopping malls in ghana greater accra region
ireland participated in the junior eurovision song contest 2016 which took place on 20 november 2016, in valletta, malta. the irish broadcaster tg4 was responsible for organising their entry for the contest through a national selection show entitled junior eurovision eire. the national final took place on 6 november 2016, while the semi-finals took place between 9-30 october. this was ireland's second appearance at the junior eurovision song contest.  on 6 november, zena donnelly was selected to represent ireland with a song she composed herself, "brice ar bhrice" (brick by brick). she placed 10th with 122 points.  background  prior to the 2016 contest, ireland had participated in the junior eurovision song contest once since its debut in . tg4 previously attempted to participate at the junior eurovision song contest 2014, but required funding from the broadcasting authority of ireland (bai), which was rejected.  before junior eurovision the irish broadcaster announced on 5 april 2016, that they would be participating at junior eurovision for the second time in their history. the mechanism for selecting their entrant and song was through the national selection show junior eurovision eire. the selection process took place every sunday starting on 9 october, in which thirty-two participants competed, and culminated into a final which was held in 6 november 2016.  jury members tg4 published details on the names of the professional jury who would determine the winner of the junior eurovision eire 2016 and the representative for ireland at the 2016 contest in november. they had all represented ireland in the eurovision song contest at least once in their careers.  the judging panel consisted of fiachna o braonain and paulien scanlon, as well as a different guest judge each week.  junior eurovision eire  semi-final 1 the first semi-final took place on 9 october 2016, in which jedward were the guest judges.  hannah mcnicholas roche and walter mccabe both advanced to the final duel stage and performed their songs for the second time. after their second performances, the jury members selected walter mccabe as the winner of semi-final 1 and advances to the grand final on 6 november 2016.  semi-final 2 the second semi-final took place on 16 october 2016, in which dustin the turkey was the guest judge.  zena donnelly and daniel gallagher advanced to the final duel where they performed their songs a second time. after their second performances, donnelly was selected by the jury to advance to the final.  semi-final 3 the third semi-final took place on 23 october 2016, in which sandie jones was the
guest judge.  rachel haughney and cliona nicdhomnail advanced to the final duel where they performed their songs the second time. after their second performances, nicdhomnail was selected by the jury to advance to the final.  semi-final 4 the fourth semi-final took place on 30 october 2016, in which niamh kavanagh was the guest judge.  lasairfhiona de brun and amy mcgrath advanced to the final duel where they performed their songs a second time. after their second performances, mcgrath was selected by the jury to advance to the final.  final the grand final took place on 6 november 2016, in which linda martin was the guest judge. two wildcard acts were entered into the final. they were hannah mcnicholas roche who came second in week 1 and lasairfhiona de brun who came second in week 4.  final duel   for the final, a sing-off was introduced between the top two contenders.  artist and song information  zena donnelly zena donnelly (born 28 august 2002) is an irish singer. she represented ireland at the junior eurovision song contest 2016 in valletta, malta on 20 november 2016 with the song "brice ar bhrice".  zena has won rte's nationwide tv talent competition show off or get off, performed for music inc., and played the lead role in annie at the national concert hall. zena was a special young guest at the cheerios childline concert in the 3arena alongside other artists including olly murs, boyzone and mcbusted. zena also took part in junior eurovision eire in 2015, coming second to aimee banks.  branching out from music, zena has started to be cast in films such as the food guide to love, cead ghra, cuckoo, dance emergency and a christmas star, where she also sings, among others, the theme song, "we can shine".  in 2017, zena took part in series 1 of the voice kids, where she was placed in judge pixie lott's team.  brice ar bhrice "brice ar bhrice" (english translation: "brick by brick") is a song by irish singer zena donnelly. it represented ireland during the junior eurovision song contest 2016, placing tenth out of seventeen contestants.  at junior eurovision  during the opening ceremony and the running order draw which took place on 14 november 2016, ireland was drawn to open the show on 20 november 2016, preceding armenia.  the final was broadcast in ireland on tg4. however it was announced on
16 november 2016 by the broadcaster that the show would not be broadcast live but that the show would be broadcast 3 hours and 30 minutes after it aired in malta.  final zena delivered a strong series of run-throughs of her mid-tempo song against a visually stunning backdrop of the night sky.  voting during the press conference for the junior eurovision song contest 2016, held in stockholm, the reference group announced several changes to the voting format for the 2016 contest. previously, points had been awarded based on a combination of 50% national juries and 50% televoting, with one more set of points also given out by a 'kids' jury'. however, this year, points were awarded based on a 50/50 combination of each country's adult and , to be announced by a spokesperson. for the first time since the inauguration of the contest the voting procedure did not include a public televote. following these results, three expert jurors also announced their points from 1-8, 10, and 12. these professional jurors are: christer bjorkman, mads grimstad, and jedward.  at the end of the voting, ireland placed 10th with 122 points, receiving 65 points from the adult jury and 57 from the kids jury. ireland received 2 sets of 12 points, from italy and malta.  references  junior eurovision song contest ireland junior
flakaberg is a village in the swedish municipality gallivare on the border with the municipality of boden. it lies on the slope of the flakaberget.  populated places in norrbotten county
"capsize" is a single by american duo frenship, released on june 18, 2016. it features the vocal collaboration of american songwriter emily warren. the song first gained prominence on the music streaming platform spotify before hitting charts around the world, reaching over 500 million streams since release, making the song a viral hit.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  external links    2016 songs 2016 singles frenship songs columbia records singles electropop songs emily warren songs songs written by babydaddy songs written by emily warren
loud hailer is the eleventh studio album by guitarist jeff beck, released on 15 july 2016 on atco records.  although initially charting in the top 50 in many countries before quickly moving down the charts, and a fair amount of record company backing, this did not equate to sales, and the album was not a commercial success. by 2018, beck had changed personnel for touring and was utilizing jimmy hall, vinnie colaiuta, and bassist rhonda smith.  track listing all tracks written by jeff beck, carmen vandenberg and rosie bones, except where noted.  "the revolution will be televised" - 3:53 "live in the dark" - 3:47 "pull it" (jeff beck, filippo cimatti) - 2:09 "thugs club" - 5:15 "scared for the children" - 6:07 "right now" - 3:57 "shame" - 4:40 "edna" (jeff beck) - 1:03 "the ballad of the jersey wives" - 3:50 "o.i.l. (can't get enough of that sticky)" - 4:41 "shrine" - 5:47  personnel jeff beck - electric guitar carmen vandenberg - electric guitar  rosie bones - vocals davide sollazzi - drums giovanni pallotti - bass  charts  references  2016 albums jeff beck albums atco records albums
tolland is an unincorporated community in gilpin county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called tolland was established in 1904, and remained in operation until 1944.  the community was named for the local toll family.  references  unincorporated communities in gilpin county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
aleksey aleksandrovich zhuravlyov (born 30 june 1962, voronezh, rsfsr) is a russian politician and member of the state duma. since september 29, 2016 he has been chairman of the rodina political party. his views are often hawkish and irridentist.  biography zhuravlyov was born 30 june 1962 in voronezh in soviet union. in 1984 he graduated from voronezh polytechnic institute majoring in "physics of metals". in 2004 he graduated from the russian academy of public administration under the president of the russian federation. in 2001-2004 zhuravlyov is an authorized representative of the governor of the voronezh oblast vladimir kulakov in the oblast duma. in 2006-2007 he participated in the preparations for the creation of the party great russia led by dmitry rogozin. from 2009 to 2011, was an advisor to the governor of the voronezh oblast alexey gordeyev.  in 2011, the results of the primaries has been nominated as a candidate for deputy of the state duma of the all-russia people's front for the party list of united russia. in the elections, he was elected to the 6th state duma.  on 29 september 2012, at the founding convention of the party rodina zhuravlev was elected as its chairman, while retaining his membership in the faction rodina in the state duma.  on december 3, 2013, zhuravlyov got into a brawl with adam delimkhanov, a fellow member of the state duma and cousin of chechen leader ramzan kadyrov, losing two teeth in the process and landing in the hospital. delimkhanov allegedly instigated the beating in zhuravlyov's 15th floor duma office after becoming irate over a letter written by zhuravlev to prosecutor general yury chaika requesting an investigation into a monument erected to female heroes of the 18th century caucasian war in the chechen village of khangish-yurt. the fight ended when staffers intervened and delimkhanov brandished a gold plated pistol.  in the 2016 parliamentary election, he headed the party list of the rodina, and ran through anna constituency. the party list of the rodina did not overcome the 5% electoral threshold, however, won in his constituency. in the state duma of the 7th convocation did not join any of the factions.  in 2021, zhuravlyov made negative comments about the participation of transgender athlete laurel hubbard in the 2020 summer olympics as a competitor in the women's +87 kg
weightlifting section, condemning hubbard's involvement in the competition as "smut and perversion." his comments were flatly condemned by news outlets from around the world, as well as the international olympic committee.  on december 15, 2021, zhuravlyov appeared on the russian television program 60 minutes, advocating for the kidnapping and imprisonment of united states congressman ruben gallego for his comments in support of providing arms and military training to ukraine in the russo-ukrainian war. gallego responded on twitter with the message "fuck around and find out".   in january 2022, zhuravlyov suggested that the russian military should place nuclear weapons in cuba and venezuela in response to nato military aid to ukraine and georgia, claiming that the alliance will use closer ties to position nuclear weapons near russia's borders with the countries.  appearing in a military uniform in a video posted to instagram in february 2022, zhuravlyov told his followers "the russian world was and will be ours" and "all of ukraine will be russian." he also claimed "the fatherland" was in danger from ukraine, urging russians to volunteer to fight in donbas, and asserting he was "the first on the list of volunteers leaving for the south-east of ukraine." following the russian government's recognition and invasion of the donetsk and luhansk people's republics, zhuravlyov called the move "a historical frontier, beyond which a fundamentally new era begins."  on february 22, 2022, zhuravlyov was sanctioned by the european union along with the other 350 members of the state duma in retaliation for the unanimous vote in favor of recognition of the separatist republics of ukraine in violation of the minsk agreements.  references  1962 births living people people from voronezh eastern orthodox christians from russia communist party of the soviet union members a just russia politicians rodina (political party) politicians sixth convocation members of the state duma (russian federation) seventh convocation members of the state duma (russian federation) eighth convocation members of the state duma (russian federation)
wakool was a ship of the blue anchor line, which commenced services between the united kingdom and australia in 1898.  references   ships of the united kingdom defunct shipping companies of the united kingdom
catherine j. kudlick is a professor of history and director of the paul k. longmore institute on disability at san francisco state university. she is also an affiliated professor in the laboratory ict university paris vii.  biography kudlick earned her ba from university of california, santa cruz in 1980 and her phd from university of california, berkeley, in 1988. she was professor of history at university of california davis from 1989 to 2012, and a visiting professor conservatoire national des arts et metiers in paris.  she was named director of the paul k. longmore institute on disability in 2012, where she led the exhibit "patient no more: people with disabilities securing civil rights" and co-leads (with bryan bashin) of the lighthouse for the blind and visually impaired in san francisco's superfest international disability film festival.  from 2005 to 2009, kudlick served as president of the disability history association and on the board of directors for both the society for disability studies and the western society for french history. while on the board of sds, she oversaw the creation of guidelines for disability studies. in 2010, along with professor susan schweik, she headed an initiative that brought together scholars to explore the future of disability studies.  kudlick spearheaded a number of initiatives related to electronic accessibility in higher education, and her scholarship explores history of medicine, history of epidemics, and the relationship between disability history and history of medicine primarily in eighteenth and nineteen-century france. the field has been shaped by her essays: "disability history: why we need another other" in the american historical review and "comment: at the borderland of medical and disability history" bulletin of the history of medicine" in the bulletin of the history of medicine (originally titled "disability history and history of medicine: rival siblings or conjoined twins?")  kudlick has also published personal thought-pieces '"black bike, white cane: timely confessions of a special self", and "the blind man's harley: white canes and gender identity in modern america", that was a notable essay in 2005's best american essays  her books include reflections: the life and writings of a young blind woman in post revolutionary france with dr. zina weygand and cholera in post-revolutionary paris: a cultural history. after the death of paul k. longmore in 2010, kudlick oversaw completion and publication of his book telethons: spectacle, disability, and the business of charity.  references  sources  french edition une jeune aveugle dans la
france du xixeme siecle eres, 2004 "our ancestors the sighted: making blind people french and french people blind, 1750-1991" in nancy hirschmann and beth linker, eds. civil disabilities:citizenship, membership, and belonging, university of pennsylvania press, 2015,143-164"smallpox, disability and survival: rewriting paradigms from a new epidemicscript" in susan burch and michael rembis, eds., disability histories university ofillinois press, 2014, chapter 9.  "guy de maupassant, louisa may alcott, and youth at risk: lessons from the newparadigm of disability" paedagogica historica international journal of the history ofeducation,45: 1-2, (february-april 2009), 37-50.  "modernity's miss-fits: blind girls and marriage in france and america, 1820-1920"in rudolph bell and virginia yans, eds., women on their own: interdisciplinaryperspectives on being single (rutgers university press) 2008. (german version,"solten blinde frauen heiraten? behinderung und ehe in modernen frankreich undin den usa," die welt als barriere: deutschsprachige beitraege zu den disabilitystudies, erich otto graf, cornelia renggli, jann weissner, eds. sozialthek, zurich,2006), 149-55.  "disability and 'divorce': a blind parisian cloth merchant contemplates his optionsin 1756," in gendering disability, bonnie g. smith and beth hutchison, eds. (newbrunswick, rutgers university press, 2004)." the outlook of the problem and the problem with the outlook: two advocacyjournals reinvent blind people in turn-of- the-century america" in paul k. longmore and lauri umansky, eds., the new disability history: americanperspectives, new york university press, 2001, 187-213; reprinted as "a historian'slook at the problem at the turn of the century," braille monitor (december 2000), 948-62.  external links  knittingclio.org  year of birth missing (living people) living people san francisco state university faculty university of california, santa cruz alumni 21st-century american historians place of birth missing (living people) university of california, berkeley alumni university of california, davis faculty disability studies academics american women non-fiction writers 21st-century american women
several ships of the royal navy have been named hms thais:  , an 18-gun sloop, sold in 1818  , a 10-gun , that became a post office packet service packet, sailing out of falmouth, cornwall. she foundered with the loss of all hands in 1833.  royal navy ship names
united nations security council resolution 2109 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions july 2013 events
pavlo moroz (born september 28, 1974 in kiev, ukraine) is the deputy minister of justice of ukraine.  in 1997, moroz graduated from the department of international law, institute of international relations at taras shevchenko national university of kyiv. he worked at various companies, including deloitte and ernst & young. in 2001, he became an attorney at law and obtained the required certificate. in february 2016, he was appointed as deputy minister of justice on state registration. he coordinates and supervises activities of the state registration and notaries department.  education  in 1997, moroz graduated from the department of international law, institute of international relations at taras shevchenko national university of kyiv. since 2012, moroz has been studying tax law from the university of alabama, us (master's program, distance learning). moroz is fluent in ukrainian, english and russian.  professional experience   2016-present - deputy minister of justice of ukraine on state registration;  2005-2016 - director, tax and legal services department, ernst & young;  2001-2005 - manager, tax and legal services department, deloitte;  2001 - obtained attorney at law certificate;  2000-2001 - lawyer, telecommunication company hellaskom a. e. international;  1997-2000 - senior lawyer, ukrainian insurance company garant-auto.  while working at the international audit companies deloitte and ernst & young, pavlo moroz provided consulting services on corporate and tax law, mergers and acquisitions, support of transactions, investment planning and development of international tax structures to multinational corporations and ukrainian companies.  pavlo moroz left ernst & young for public service.  reforms in the ministry of justice  registration of businesses and real estate on april 30, 2016, the reform of the state registration of business and real estate was accomplished. the minister of justice pavlo petrenko de-monopolized and decentralized the state registration of business and real estate.  before the reform, the functions of business and real estate registration were performed by the ministry's 529 regional offices. on may 1, 2016, these functions were transferred to more than 900 local municipal authorities. currently, the state registration services are also provided by 6,500 notaries and more than 100 certified municipal entities.  as a result of this transfer, lines for obtaining registration services and preconditions for incentive fees disappeared. local municipal authorities obtain registration fees.  the ministry of justice was then left with a supervising function, implemented through the committee on consideration of complaints in the field of state registration. for the time being, the
committee on consideration of complaints in state registration prevented more than 150 illegal corporate takeovers.  registration of civil actions  the next important reform of the ministry of justice is decentralization of the system of registration of civil actions, initiated by pavlo moroz. the ministry of justice has launched this reform and organized the respective working group. the first result is implementation of the pilot project for citizens. currently it is possible to register a marriage within 24 hours.  family and private life  pavlo moroz is married and has a daughter.  references  external links  the ministry of justice  profile on liga website  1974 births living people taras shevchenko national university of kyiv alumni ukrainian government officials lawyers from kyiv
billingsville may refer to:  billingsville, indiana, an unincorporated community in union county billingsville, missouri, an unincorporated community  billingsville school, a historic building in north carolina
the kosherswitch ( "kosher switch", "shabbos switch", "shabbat switch") is a wall switch marketed to the observant jewish market and institutions servicing this market, as a means of controlling electricity on-demand on shabbat and jewish holidays in a manner that is permissible according to some orthodox authorities, though some reject it. it is manufactured by kosherswitch technologies headquartered in new york city and was invented by andy menashe kalati.  halakha of electricity on shabbat according to orthodox halakhic authorities, the use of electricity on shabbat is forbidden in most situations. work-arounds include devices such as the shabbos timer (since a person programs the timer before shabbat, they are not doing a forbidden act on shabbat), and the kosher lamp (where the lamp is constantly lit, but can be covered so no light is visible).  the kosherswitch seeks to improve upon existing innovations by allowing light fixtures to be triggered on or off as needed by a person acting on shabbat.  according to the manufacturer, the switch is based upon "un-grama" (non grama). the basic idea is that the switch activates only sometimes, and only after a delay, making the action indirect and uncertain. several orthodox poskim have ruled as thus makes the device permissible for general consumer use. others, however, have reached the opposite conclusion.  launch in april 2015, the kosherswitch group launched an indiegogo crowdfunding campaign seeking to raise us$50,000 in support of their product.  the campaign was successfully concluded with $70,715 total funding, and several thousand kosherswitch units pre-ordered. their launch video, featuring founder andy menashe kalati, went viral among jewish viewers and had received over half a million views within the first few days post-launch.  in october 2015, the company announced that all pre-orders had been shipped and that sales of the product would shift to retailers and amazon.  debate and controversy shortly after the kosherswitch launch on indiegogo, fervent halakhic debate ensued.  many rabbis have issued rulings against use of the switch, or have ruled in favor of its use for exigent purposes only, while others continued to back its use for general consumer use.  yet others encouraged a less emotional and more calculated analysis of this invention.  the kosherswitch group also faced allegations of misrepresenting rabbinic positions by doctoring their letters of endorsements and/or their endorsement videos.  kosherswitch group has
denied this and stated that they present letters and videos unedited and in their entirety. in response kosherswitch has accused several rabbis of spreading misinformation and blatant lies. several rabbis who had initially endorsed or offered their blessings for the product later retracted their original endorsement. those retractions have also been published by kosherswitch on their website.  adding to the confusion, in some cases these retractions seem self-contradictory, and such behavior has been decried by impartial bystanders.  r. rabbi noach isaac oelbaum states in his original unedited video endorsement, "i have seen the kosherswitch, which is produced by reb menashe kalati, and have read the kuntres [collection of kosherswitch responsa & endorsements]. and all of the detail which is mentioned in the kuntres, and as far as the switch has been demonstrated, it is clear that it is not a grama [not indirect causation].  mi'tzad [with respect to] hilchos shabbos, there is no question of any melakha [forbidden act] being done by using that switch. mi'tzad sheini [on the other hand] i recommend that anyone asks their own rav to find out whether it is within the spirit of shabbos, although there is no real melakha, but ask your own rav regarding the actual, practical usage."  however, accusations of misrepresentation and wrong-doing followed:  'mrs. helen oelbaum, however, said that her husband [r. oelbaum] never gave his stamp of approval to kosherswitch. "he did not endorse it and they misrepresented what he said," said mrs. oelbaum.'  r. chaim tzvi shapiro's original endorsement responsum concludes, "therefore, there is absolutely nothing forbidden relating to it, and not even gram kibuei [indirectly caused extinguishing], and it is permitted on shabbos, l'chatchila [ab initio] according to all halachic opinions, as was analyzed and clarified above."  however, his retraction claims that his endorsement was meant for exigent uses only.  see also  activities prohibited on shabbat#the thirty-nine creative activities  sabbath mode  shabbat clock  references  external links  shabbat innovations switches
henry leopold ellison (july 10, 1903 krakow, poland - july 10, 1983 dawlish), usually cited as h. l. ellison, was a biblical scholar, professor, missionary, speaker, and author in the 1900s. his parents were leopold zeckhausen and sara jane ellison. his father, being a jewish believer, was a missionary to the jews throughout europe.  he and his brother, christian (a missionary in china), changed their last names from zeckhausen to ellison in 1925 to better assimilate into british society.  following in his father's footsteps, ellison was an anglican missionary to the jews in europe in the late 1920s and '30s. however, after receiving believer's baptism, he was kicked out of the church of england. upon his return to britain, he held many positions in the academic realm as a respected old testament scholar and became associated with the open brethren.  he was a friend and colleague of f. f. bruce.  books  men spake from god (1952) ezekiel: the man and his message (1956) the christian approach to a jew (1958) from tragedy to triumph: a study of job (1958) the household church: apostolic practice in a modern setting (1963) understanding the old testament: joshua - 2 samuel (1966) the mystery of israel: an exposition of romans 9-11 (1966) the psalms (1968) the message of the old testament (1969) the prophets of israel (1969) understanding the new testament: 1 peter - revelation (1969) understanding a jew (1972) from babylon to bethlehem (1976) fathers of the covenant (1978) understanding bible teachings: jesus as man (1978) exodus (1982)  see also  biblical studies  references  1903 births 1983 deaths old testament scholars
my days with gloria () is a 2010 argentine crime drama film directed by juan jose jusid and starring isabel sarli and luis luque. the film was the official comeback of isabel sarli from acting after a ten plus years hiatus following la dama regresa (1996). it received mixed reviews.  cast  isabel sarli as gloria saten  luis luque as roberto  nicolas repetto as teniente crinal  isabelita sarli as rita  references  external links    argentine films 2010 crime drama films 2010 films political action films argentine crime drama films
how not to be wrong: the power of mathematical thinking, written by jordan ellenberg, is a new york times best selling book that connects various economic and societal philosophies with basic mathematics and statistical principles.  summary  how not to be wrong explains the mathematics behind some of simplest day-to-day thinking. it then goes into more complex decisions people make. for example, ellenberg explains many misconceptions about lotteries and whether or not they can be mathematically beaten.  ellenberg uses mathematics to examine real-world issues ranging from the loving of straight lines in the reporting of obesity to the game theory of missing flights, from the relevance to digestion of regression to the mean to the counter-intuitive berkson's paradox.  chapter summaries  part 1: linearity  chapter 1, less like sweden: ellenberg encourages his readers to think nonlinearly, and know that "where you should go depends on where you are". to develop his thought, he relates this to voodoo economics and the laffer curve of taxation. although there are few numbers in this chapter, the point is that the overall concept still ties back to mathematical thinking.  chapter 2, straight locally, curved globally: this chapter puts an emphasis on recognizing that "not every curve is a straight line", and makes reference to multiple mathematical concepts including the pythagorean theorem, the derivation of pi, zeno's paradox, and non-standard analysis.  chapter 3, everyone is obese: here, ellenberg dissects some common statistics about obesity trends in the united states. he ties it into linear regression, and points out basic contradictions made by the original arguments presented. he uses many examples to make his point, including the correlation between sat scores and tuition rates, as well as the trajectory of missiles.  chapter 4, how many is that in dead americans: ellenberg analyzes statistics about the number of casualties around the world in different countries resulting from war. he notes that although proportion in these cases matters, it doesn't always necessarily make sense when relating them to american deaths. he uses examples of deaths due to brain cancer, the binomial theorem, and voting polls to reinforce his point.  chapter 5, more pie than plate: this chapter goes in depth with number percentages relating to employment rates, and references political allegations. he emphasizes that "actual numbers in these cases aren't important, but knowing what to divide by what is mathematics in its truest form", noting that mathematics in itself is in everything.  part
2: inference  chapter 6, the baltimore stockbroker and the bible code: ellenberg tries to get across that mathematics is in every single thing that we do. to support this, he uses examples about hidden codes in the torah determined by equidistant letter sequence, a stockbroker parable, noting that "improbable things happen", and wiggle room attributes to that.  chapter 7, dead fish don't read minds: this chapter touches on a lot of things. the basis for this chapter are stories about a dead salmon's mri, trial and error in algebra, and birth control statistics as well as basketball statistics (the "hot hand"). he also notes that poetry can be compared to mathematics in that it's "trained by exposure to stimuli, and manipulable in the lab". additionally, he writes of a few other mathematical concepts, including the null hypothesis and the quartic function.  chapter 8, reductio ad unlikely: this chapter focuses on the works and theorems/concepts of many famous mathematicians and philosophers. these include but aren't limited to the reductio ad absurdum by aristotle, a look into the constellation taurus by john mitchell, and yitang "tom" zhangs "bounded gaps" conjecture. he also delves into explaining rational numbers, the prime number theorem, and makes up his own word, "flogarithms".  chapter 9, the internationals journal of haruspicy: ellenberg relates the practice of haruspicy, genes that affect schizophrenia, and the accuracy of published papers as well as other things to the "p value" or statistical significance. he also notes at the end that jerzy neyman and egon pearson claimed that statistics is about doing, not interpreting, and then relates this to other real-world examples.  chapter 10, are you there, god? it's me, bayesian inference: this chapter relates algorithms to things ranging from god, to netflix movie recommendations, and to terrorism on facebook. ellenberg goes through quite a few mathematical concepts in this chapter, which include conditional probabilities relating back to "p value", posterior possibilities, bayesian inference, and bayes theorem as they correlate to radio psychics and probability. additionally, he uses punnett squares and other methods to explore the probability of god's existence.  part 3: expectation  chapter 11, what to expect when you're expecting to win the lottery: this chapter discusses the different probabilities of winning the lottery and expected value as it relates
to lottery tickets, including the story of how mit students managed to "win" the lottery every time in their town. ellenberg also talks about the law of large numbers again, as well as introducing the additivity of expected value and the games of franc-carreau or the "needle/noodle problem". many mathematicians and other famous people are mentioned in this chapter, including georges-louis leclerc, comte de buffon, and james harvey.  chapter 12, miss more planes: the mathematical concepts in this chapter include utility and utils, and the laffer curve again. this chapter discusses the amount of time spent in the airport as it relates to flights being missed, daniel ellsberg, blaise pascal's pense's, the probability of god once more, and the st. petersburg paradox.  chapter 13, where the train tracks meet: this chapter includes discussions about the lottery again, and geometry in renaissance paintings. it introduces some things about coding, including error correcting code, hamming code, and code words. it also mentions hamming distance as it relates to language. the mathematical concepts included in this chapter are variance, the projective plane, the fano plane, and the face-centered cubic lattice.  part 4: regression  chapter 14, the triumph of mediocrity: this chapter discusses mediocrity in everyday business according to horace secrist. it also includes discussions about francis galton's "hereditary genius", and baseball statistics about home runs.  chapter 15, galtons ellipse: this chapter focuses on sir francis galton, and his work on scatter plots, as well as the ellipses formed by them, correlation and causation, and the development from linear systems to quadratics. this chapter also addressed conditional and unconditional expectation, regression to the mean, eccentricity, bivariate normal distribution, and dimensions in geometry.  chapter 16, does lung cancer make you smoke cigarettes: this chapter explores the correlation between smoking cigarettes and lung cancer, using work from r.a. fisher. it also goes into berkson's fallacy, and uses the attractiveness of men to develop the thought, and talks about common effect at the end.  part 5: existence  chapter 17, there is no such thing as public opinion: this chapter delves into the workings of a majority rules system, and points out the contradictions and confusion of it all, ultimately stating that public opinion doesn't exist. it uses many examples to make its point, including different election statistics,
the death sentence of a mentally retarded person, and a case with justice antonin scalia. it also includes mathematical terms/concepts such as independence of irrelevant alternatives, asymmetric domination effect, australia's single transferable vote, and condorcet paradoxes.  chapter 18, "out of nothing, i have created a strange new universe": this chapter talks about janos bolyais, and his work on the parallel postulate. others mentioned in this chapter include david hilbert, and gottlob frege. it also explored points and lines, formalism, and what the author calls a "genius" mentality.  how to be right  this last chapter introduces one last concept, ex falso quodlibet, and mentions theodore roosevelt, as well as the election between obama and romney. the author ends the book with encouraging statements, noting that it's okay to not know everything, and that we all learn from failure. he ends by saying that to love math is to be "touched by fire and bound by reason", and that we should all use it well.  reception  bill gates endorsed how not to be wrong and included it in his 2016 "5 books to read this summer" list.  the washington post reported that the book is "brilliantly engaging... part of the sheer intellectual joy of the book is watching the author leap nimbly from topic to topic, comparing slime molds to the bush-gore florida vote, criminology to beethoven's ninth symphony. the final effect is of one enormous mosaic unified by mathematics."  the wall street journal said, "mr. ellenberg writes, a kind of 'x-ray specs that reveal hidden structures underneath the messy and chaotic surface of the world." the guardian wrote, "ellenberg's prose is a delight - informal and robust, irreverent yet serious."  business insider said it's "a collection of fascinating examples of math and its surprising applications...how not to be wrong is full of interesting and weird mathematical tools and observations".  publishers weekly writes "wry, accessible, and entertaining... ellenberg finds the common-sense math at work in the every day world, and his vivid examples and clear descriptions show how 'math is woven into the way we reason'".  times higher education notes "how not to be wrong is beautifully written, holding the reader's attention throughout with well-chosen material, illuminating exposition, wit, and helpful examples...ellenberg shares gardner's remarkable ability to write clearly and entertainingly,
bringing in deep mathematical ideas without the reader registering their difficulty".  salon describes the book as "a poet-mathematician offers an empowering and entertaining primer for the age of big data...a rewarding popular math book for just about anyone".  references  external links   official website  2014 non-fiction books popular mathematics books
from october 23, 2010 to march 20, 2011, the following skiing events took place at various locations around the world.  alpine skiing  october 23, 2010 - march 20, 2011 -2011 alpine skiing world cup men overall title: ivica kostelic of croatia women overall title: maria riesch of germany  january 14 - january 23 - 2011 ipc alpine skiing world championships in sestriere  february 7 - february 20 - fis alpine world ski championships 2011 in garmisch-partenkirchen  nordic skiing  february 22 - march 6 - fis nordic world ski championships 2011 in oslo  march 29 - april 11 - 2011 ipc biathlon and cross-country skiing world championships in khanty-mansiysk  ski mountaineering 2011 world championship of ski mountaineering, held in claut, italy  external links   international ski federation official website  ipc alpine skiing official website  international biathlon union official website  ipc biathlon and cross country skiing official website  skiing by year skiing skiing
the unabhangiger beirat des stabilitatsrats (advisory board to the stability council) is an independent body of experts that assists the stabilitatsrat (stability council) in monitoring compliance with the upper limit on the general government structural deficit set out in the budgetary principles act. the board produces statements and recommendations in this context that lay the foundation for the work of the stability council. the chair of the advisory board participates in stability council discussions on monitoring the general government structural deficit limit and communicates the board's opinion.  the advisory board was set up as part of germany's national implementation of the european fiscal compact. the board convened for the first time on 5 december 2013.  chair and members the advisory board's members include: one representative each from the deutsche bundesbank and the sachverstandigenrat zur begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen entwicklung (german council of economic experts); one representative from the research institutes involved in preparing the joint economic forecast; four experts appointed for a period of five years by representatives of the federation and lander on the stability council; and two experts appointed for a period of five years by the national associations of local authorities and the national organisations of the social security funds.  task in line with section 7 subsection (3) of the stability council act, the advisory board expresses its opinion on matters involving compliance with the upper limit on the general government structural deficit as defined in the budgetary principles act. if necessary, the board makes recommendations for measures to eliminate excessive deficits. the board's statements and recommendations as well as other relevant documents are published here. the board itself determines whether and which documents are published.  international coordination the independent advisory board to the stability council is part of the eu network of independent fiscal institutions (eu ifis).  see also eu independent fiscal institutions network  references  external links official website of the advisory board  government agencies established in 2013 government audit eurozone policy and political reactions to the eurozone crisis fiscal federalism 2013 in the european union multi-speed europe
united nations security council resolution 2091 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions february 2013 events
intelligence protection organization of islamic republic of iran army (), acronymed sahefaja (), is a military intelligence agency with a mission to perform counterespionage measures inside the army in order to prevent, discover and neutralize possible subversions, sabotages and coup d'etats. it has an independent command hierarchy from the army.  see also   list of counterintelligence organizations  second bureau of imperial iranian army - the agency's predecessor  intelligence protection organization of army of the guardians of the islamic revolution - similar agency  references   islamic republic of iran army iranian intelligence agencies iranian security organisations military intelligence agencies counterintelligence agencies
brian medavoy (born june 30, 1965) is an american talent manager, entrepreneur and television producer. he is the son of film producer and executive, mike medavoy.  career medavoy began his career in 1985 in the mail room at the creative artists agency.  he then moved to icm partners' mail room and eventually became the assistant to acclaimed talent agent ed limato.  in 1990, he co-founded more medavoy management with his partner erwin more.  the company grew quickly, managing bill bellamy, jason biggs, bon jovi, mariah carey, morris chestnut, jenna elfman, jimmy fallon, melissa gilbert, mariska hargitay, lucy lawless, howie long, marlee matlin, jenny mccarthy, patrick swayze, cicely tyson, maria bello, kristen bell, jason bateman, josh brolin, ryan reynolds, tobey maguire, peter berg among others during operation.  from 1994 until 2002, brian medavoy received producer credits on a slew of television movies and series including sweet justice, the single guy, since you've been gone, getting personal, ringmaster, american high, dharma & greg and just shoot me!.  in 1999, more medavoy management merged with susan bymell and evelyn o'neill becoming the talent entertainment group.  it was while working at talent entertainment group that brian medavoy received an emmy for his work on american high.  after a hiatus, medavoy and erwin more joined forces again in 2014 with a client roster that included paula patton, neal mcdonough, bella heathcote, kristoffer polaha, reno wilson, michael beach, ben koldyke and eric balfour.  filmography  references  external links  official website official tubefilter article  place of birth missing (living people) 1965 births living people american people of ukrainian-jewish descent american television producers talent agents medavoy family
moveit is a managed file transfer software produced by ipswitch, inc. moveit encrypts files and uses secure file transfer protocols to transfer data with automation, analytics and failover options. the software has been used in the healthcare industry by companies such as rochester hospital and medibank, as well as thousands of it departments in financial services, high technology, and government.  history moveit was released in 2002 by standard networks. in 2006, the company released integration between moveit and antivirus software to stop the transfer of infected files.  ipswitch acquired moveit in 2008 when the company purchased standard networks. moveit cloud was announced in 2012 as a cloud-based file transfer management software. moveit cloud was the first enterprise-class cloud managed file transfer software. it is scalable with and can share files system-to-system, group, or person-to-person.  in 2013, moveit clients were released for the ios and android platform. the release included a configuration wizard, as well as email encryption.  ipswitch analytics was released in 2015 to monitor and report data through the moveit software. the analytic data includes an activity monitor and automated report creation. ipswitch analytics can access data from moveit file transfer and automation servers. that same year, ipswitch failover was released. the software can return recovery point objectives (rpo) in seconds with a recovery time objectives (rto) of less than a minute, which increases the availability of moveit.  references   file transfer protocols
john ward  (1805-1890) was an english diplomat.  early life he was born on 28 august 1805 at east cowes, where his father, john ward, was collector of customs. his mother martha was a sister of thomas arnold of rugby. as a young man he associated with arnold, richard whately and other liberals.  in 1831 ward edited with arnold the short-lived weekly the englishman's register, of which arnold was the proprietor. he gave up the law, for which he had been trained, on his appointment in 1837 to an inspectorship of prisons. the following year, after some months as private secretary to john lambton, 1st earl of durham, became through his influence secretary to the new zealand colonization company.  diplomat early in 1841 ward was appointed british commissioner for the revision of the state tolls. in 1844 he was sent to berlin as british commissioner for the settlement, through the arbitration of frederick william iv of prussia, of the so-called portendic claims on france, arising out of a blockade by french ships of part of the african coast.  in summer 1845 lord aberdeen appointed ward consul-general at leipzig, with a commission to visit places in germany where conferences of the zollverein would be held. at the end of 1850 lord palmerston instructed him to act as secretary of legation at dresden during the diplomatic conferences held in there, and he saw the results achieved by the policy of austria, represented by prince felix of schwarzenberg. in 1854 he attended the munich exhibition of arts and manufactures, and wrote a report on the state of technical instruction in bavaria. in 1857 he was charged with a political inquiry into schleswig-holstein; but his report was left unpublished by lord clarendon.  in 1860 ward, after being made a c.b., was nominated charge d'affaires and consul-general for the hanse towns and the surrounding parts of germany. negotiating in 1865, with lord napier and ettrick, a commercial treaty with the zollverein, he was in 1866 raised to the rank of minister-resident.  later life in 1870, after the abolition of direct diplomatic relations with the hanse towns when they joined the north german confederation, ward left hamburg. the rest of his life he spent in retirement, at dover and in essex, writing his reminiscences.  ward died at dover on 1 september 1890.  works ward published in 1839 an account of the resources of new zealand, for new zealand colonization company. he wrote articles on both home and foreign affairs in the edinburgh review and british
and foreign review. experiences of a diplomatist (1872) was based on three decades of diaries from his time in germany.  family ward married caroline, daughter of john bullock, rector of radwinter, essex, who survived him until 1905. their second son was adolphus william ward.  notes  attribution  1805 births 1890 deaths british diplomats english journalists people from cowes
bagga khurd is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village  constitutes   55.60%  of schedule caste  and the village  doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
a vector voltmeter is a two-channel high-frequency sampling voltmeter that measures phase as well as voltage of two input signals of the same frequency.  references  electrical meters
the 2020 united states senate election in kentucky was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the commonwealth of kentucky, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent republican senator mitch mcconnell, who had been senate majority leader since 2015 and senator from kentucky since 1985, won reelection to a seventh term in office. he faced off against former u.s. marine fighter pilot amy mcgrath and libertarian brad barron.  the democratic and republican primaries took place on june 23, 2020. as the primaries neared, the president of the national bar association accused officials of carrying out voter suppression. compared to typical numbers of 3,700, the number of polling stations was reduced to 200 with only one in louisville. because a large number of voters voted by mail, absentee ballots were not counted until june 30. in the primary, over 937,000 people requested absentee ballots or voted early, a far greater number than usual.  despite much speculation about this race being potentially competitive and large amounts of money being poured in to try and defeat mcconnell, he wound up winning a seventh term with his largest margin of victory since 2002, defeating mcgrath by nearly 20 percentage points. he also won elliott and wolfe counties for the first time, solidifying rural kentucky's hard swing towards the gop. this was the first election in which mcconnell attained more than 1 million votes.  republican primary  candidates  nominee  mitch mcconnell, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  nicholas alsager  paul john frangedakis, chiropractor (switched to independent write-in candidacy after losing primary)  louis grider, truck driver  neren james  kenneth lowndes  wesley morgan, former state representative  withdrawn  wendell k. crow, businessman and entrepreneur (remained on ballot)  karl das  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  amy mcgrath, former u.s. marine fighter pilot and democratic nominee for kentucky's 6th congressional district in 2018  eliminated in primary   charles booker, state representative mike broihier, farmer, educator, and former marine  maggie joe hilliard  andrew maynard  eric rothmuller, small business owner  john r. sharpensteen  bennie j. smith, local business owner  mary ann tobin, former auditor of kentucky  withdrawn  jimmy ausbrooks, mental health counselor (endorsed
mike broihier) (remained on ballot)  steven cox, registered pharmacy technician (endorsed charles booker)  joshua paul edwards  kevin elliott, assistant professor of political science at murray state university  dr. loretta babalmoradi noble  declined  rocky adkins, former minority leader of the kentucky house of representatives and candidate for governor of kentucky in 2019  andy beshear, governor of kentucky, former attorney general of kentucky, and son of former governor steve beshear  steve beshear, former governor of kentucky and nominee for the u.s. senate in 1996  jack conway, former attorney general of kentucky, nominee for the u.s. senate in 2010, nominee for governor of kentucky in 2015  adam edelen, former state auditor and candidate for governor of kentucky in 2019  greg fischer, mayor of louisville  jim gray, secretary of the kentucky transportation cabinet, former mayor of lexington and nominee for the u.s. senate in 2016  alison lundergan grimes, former secretary of state of kentucky and nominee for the u.s. senate in 2014 (endorsed booker)  matt jones, attorney, media personality, and restaurateur (had formed an exploratory committee beforehand, endorsed booker)  campaign there were debates on march 5, 2020 and june 1, 2020.  polling  endorsements  results  other candidates  libertarian primary the libertarian party of kentucky did not qualify to nominate through the taxpayer-funded primary and held its own privately operated primary on march 8, 2020. anyone registered libertarian in the state of kentucky as of january 1, 2020, could participate. all candidates of the libertarian party of kentucky must defeat none of the above (nota) to obtain the nomination.  nominee brad barron, farmer and entrepreneur  reform party  withdrawn  derek leonard petteys  independents  declared  daniel cobble (as a write-in candidate)  harold h. fitzpatrick (as a write-in candidate)  paul john frangedakis (as a write-in candidate) (switched from republican candidacy after losing primary)  randall lee teegarden (as a write-in candidate)  demetra wysinger (as a write-in candidate)  withdrawn  alyssa dara mcdowell, independent candidate for president in 2016, 2018 independent nominee for kentucky house of representatives district 65  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  graphical summary  polls  with charles booker  with jim gray  with generic democrat  on whether mitch mcconnell deserves to be re-elected  with generic republican and generic democrat  results
mcconnell was announced as the winner on november 3. when pressed for a potential recount of the election amid legal disputes regarding the general, mcconnell dismissed the idea since,-"at the risk of bragging, it wasn't very close."  mcconnell flipped seven of the ten counties that he had not won in 2014, with bath, elliott, marion, menifee, nicholas, rowan and wolfe counties all flipping.  see also  2020 kentucky elections  notes partisan clients  voter samples  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    campaign websites brad barron (l) for senate  mitch mcconnell (r) for senate amy mcgrath (d) for senate  2020 kentucky united states senate
methyl green  (ci 42585) is a cationic or positive charged stain, related to ethyl green, that has been used for staining dna since the 19th century. it has been used for staining cell nuclei either as a part of the classical unna-pappenheim stain, or as a nuclear counterstain ever since. in recent years, its fluorescent properties when bound to dna have positioned it useful for far-red imaging of live cell nuclei.  fluorescent dna staining is routinely used in cancer prognosis. methyl green also emerges as an alternative stain for dna in agarose gels, fluorometric assays and flow cytometry. it has also been shown that it can be used as an exclusion viability stain for cells. its interaction with dna has been shown to be non-intercalating, in other words not inserting itself into the dna, but instead electrostatic with the dna major groove. it is used in combination with pyronin in the methyl green-pyronin stain which stains and differentiates dna and rna.  when excited at 244 or 388 nm in neutral aqueous solution, methyl green produces a fluorescent emission at 488 or 633 nm respectively. the presence or absence of dna does not effect these fluorescence behaviors. when binding dna under neutral aqueous conditions, methyl green also becomes fluorescent in the far red with an excitation maximum of 633 nm and an emission maximum of 677 nm.  commercial methyl green preparations are often contaminated with crystal violet. crystal violet can be removed by chloroform extraction.  references   biology staining dyes triarylmethane dyes
arthur cuthbertson (1888-1925 ) was an australian ice hockey player, who represented new south wales in the first two goodall cups.  biography  cuthbertson was the grandson of the rev. william cuthbertson who was a minister of the pitt street congregational church, sydney and his parents were william and edith cuthbertson of "arricca" 10 appian way, burwood. his father was a director of buzacott and co., ltd., and a deacon of the burwood congregatlonal church, where his family worshipped. cuthbertson attended newington college (1900-1906) and his headmaster, dr charles prescott, said later that he had a successful school career, and was prominent in sport: "he was a splendid footballer, cricket, too, strongly appealed to him." after matriculation he then  studied medicine at the university of sydney.  in 1909 and 1910 cuthbertson played ice hockey for the nsw team in the goodall cup. cuthbertson enlisted in june 1916 as a corporal with the second australian imperial force machine gun battalion and served at the battle of passchendaele, battle of the somme and at messines. after demobilisation he remained in britain and finished his degrees at edinburgh and glasgow. having graduated, cutherfson was appointed ship's doctor on waipara with the  british india line. he visited sydney in 1922 before his death in a motor vehicle accident in london. he was knocked down and killed by a taxicab. at the time of his death he was 6 foot in height and weighed 17 stone and was looking for a practice in london prior to his expected marriage in september to his fiance miss field.  gallery  cuthbertson's childhood home, family church, school and university  references   1888 births 1960 deaths australian ice hockey players people educated at newington college sydney medical school alumni
wolves and sheep () is a 1953 soviet comedy film directed by vladimir sukhobokov and starring vera pashennaya, igor ilyinsky and tatyana yeremeyeva. it is based on the 1875 play wolves and sheep by aleksandr ostrovskiy.  cast  vera pashennaya as murzavetskaya    igor ilyinsky as appolon murzavetsky    tatyana yeremeyeva as glafira alexeyevna     yelena shatrova  as kupavina    varvara ryzhova   as anfisa tikhonovna    vladimir vladislavsky    vladimir golovin  references  bibliography   prominent personalities in the ussr. scarecrow press, 1968.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films soviet comedy films soviet films russian comedy films russian films russian-language films gorky film studio films films based on works by alexander ostrovsky soviet black-and-white films
verticordia polytricha, commonly known as northern cauliflower, is a flowering plant in the myrtle family, myrtaceae and is endemic to the south-west of western australia. it is an erect, bushy shrub with linear leaves and dense heads of white flowers in late spring and summer.  description verticordia polytricha is a shrub with a single stem at its base but which is densely branched and bushy. it grows to a height of  and  wide. its leaves are linear in shape, semi-circular or triangular in cross-section,  long and those near the ends of the branches are crowded.  the flowers are scented and arranged in dense, corymb-like groups near the ends of the branches, each flower on a stalk about  long. the floral cup is hemispherical,  long and hairy on the upper half. the sepals are creamish-white, about  long and have a fringe of long hairs. the petals are the same colour as the sepals, spreading at first, erect later,  long and hairy on the outside. the style is  long, gently curved and hairy near the purple-coloured tip. flowering time is from late september to february.  taxonomy and naming verticordia polytricha was first formally described by george bentham in 1859 from a specimen collected by augustus oldfield and the description was published in flora australiensis. the specific epithet (polytricha) is derived from the ancient greek words poly meaning "many" and thrix meaning "hair" referring to the hairs on the sepals.  in his review of the genus in 1991, alex george placed this species in subgenus verticordia, section corymbiformis along with v. densiflora, v. brownii, v. eriocephala and v. capillaris.  distribution and habitat this verticordia occurs between binnu and kalbarri and nearby areas in the geraldton sandplains, jarrah forest and yalgoo biogeographic regions where it grows in sand, usually over sandstone in heath and shrubland.  ecology a native bee, euryglossa evansi has been observed visiting flowers of this verticordia.  conservation  verticordia polytricha is classified as  "priority four" by the western australian government department of parks and wildlife, meaning that is rare or near threatened.  use in horticulture northern cauliflower is a hardy and reliable shrub in gardens and is readily propagated from cuttings but can also be grown from seed. it has been grown successfully in full sun in a range of soils and has flowered within 18 months of
seed germination.  references  polytricha rosids of western australia eudicots of western australia plants described in 1867
migrant clinicians network (mcn) is non-profit organization dedicated to health justice for the mobile poor and the creation of practical solutions at the intersection of poverty, migration, and health. it is headquartered in austin, texas with supporting offices in california, maryland, washington, and new york.  mcn engages in research, develops tools and resources, and advocates for migrants and underserved populations and the clinicians who serve them.  mcn's goal is to improve health care for migrants by providing support, technical assistance, and professional development to clinicians at federally qualified health centers and other health care delivery sites, in order to assure "quality health care that increases access and reduces disparities." in 2015, mcn accounted for over 31,000 technical assistance encounters, 267 health center site visits, and 1,260 trained clinicians. mcn is featured as a top rated non-profit based on user reviews at great nonprofits.  organizational history  mcn was founded in 1984 by three clinicians who recognized that migrant clinicians required higher levels of support and resources directly related to the care of migrant patients. mcn now serves over 10,000 constituents, with a clinical board of directors, external advisory board, institutional review board, and a staff of 25.  programs  health network  health network is mcn's bridge case management and patient navigation system for mobile patients. health network works to provide continuity of care and treatment completion for mobile patients suffering from chronic or infectious diseases by providing case management, medical record transfer, and follow-up services. health network has served thousands of mobile patients moving within the united states or between the united states and 111 other countries since it began in 1995.  health care providers from health centers, health departments, and other health care delivery sites enroll patients who plan to move but will need follow-up at their next location for any ongoing health condition like tuberculosis, diabetes, hiv/aids, cancer, or pregnancy.  health network associates contact the patient and then link that patient to a new health care delivery site at their next location. health network associates also assure the patient's medical records are forwarded to the new location(s) and that other barriers like lack of transportation are also addressed so that the patient can continue or complete treatment. while health network initially centered on specific health conditions-including its tbnet program focused on patients with tuberculosis-it now enrolls patients on the move with any health condition.  in 2016, migrant clinicians network received the 24th annual monroe e. trout premier cares award, which includes a $100,000 cash prize, for providing
comprehensive case management, medical records transfer, and follow-up services through its health network. on world tb day in 2016, the centers for disease control and prevention (cdc) declared health network a u.s. tb elimination champion for its work in supporting tb control. in 2010, health network received the border models of excellence in tuberculosis surveillance and control award from the u.s.- mexico border health commission.  environmental and occupational health  mcn spearheads a number of projects aimed at addressing environmental and work-related health conditions. mcn's workers and environmental health program gives primary care clinicians training, tools, and resources to better recognize, manage, and prevent environmental and occupational health injuries, illnesses, and exposures in farmworkers, like pesticide exposure. seguridad en las lecherias: immigrant dairy worker health and safety is a research project in collaboration with the niosh-funded upper midwest agricultural safety and health center (umash) and the national farm medicine center that tested the community health worker model and includes a bilingual health and safety train-the-trainer curriculum for immigrant dairy workers. another program, worker safety and health in community health centers, provides trainings, tools, and resources in collaboration with health centers to workers in agriculture, janitorial services, and nail salons in vietnamese and english, with topics including heat stress, chemical safety, work-related asthma, and hazard communication. the protecting children while parents work project, a collaboration between mcn and the national children's center for rural agricultural health and safety, works with farmworkers, farmers, agricultural industry leaders, local health centers, and other stakeholders to develop safe child care for children while parents are in the fields.  senior mcn staff members are regularly consulted as experts in the field of farmworkers and occupational health.  technical assistance  mcn provides ongoing technical assistance to clinicians working with mobile patients.  mcn uses the expertise of its staff members, its advisory boards and other professional migrant health expert colleagues, and an extensive library of technical assistance material to address clinicians' concerns as they arise.  family violence prevention  mcn's hombres unidos contra la violencia familiar engages latino migrant men in a group setting facilitated by their peers to learn about sexual and intimate partner violence prevention. they define healthy relationships by acknowledging and addressing knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and beliefs about intimate partnerships.  hombres unidos received the 2013 roth award as an innovative project that specifically addresses the needs of underserved populations.  publication   mcn's quarterly clinical publication, streamline, provides articles
, information, and resources to frontline clinicians working with mobile underserved populations. mcn's senior staff contributes to the national conversation about migration health through regular publication in peer-reviewed journals. mcn regularly publishes op-eds and other articles to promote national dialogue on the needs of mobile and underserved populations. recent op-eds written by mcn staff include pieces on tuberculosis, pesticides, health care access for immigrants, and occupational health for migrant workers.  references  non-profit organizations based in texas
mitter sain meet (; born 20 october 1952) is a punjabi novelist.  books  novels below is the list of books written by meet along with their names in gurmukhi:  aag de beej () kafla () tafteesh () katehra () sudharghar () kaorav sabha ()  short stories punarwas () laam () thos saboot ()  law books trail management pro prosecution case law on custody and bails taftishi officer dee kanun diary (punjabi) faujdari kanun dee mudli jankari (punjabi)  awards 2008, sahitya akademi award for his novel sudhar ghar. in 2008,meet won pt. gobind balab pant award from bureau of police research and development, govt. of india, new delhi for his trilogy of novels ram rajya (hindi).  references  novelists from punjab, india punjabi-language writers recipients of the sahitya akademi award in punjabi 1952 births living people 20th-century indian novelists 20th-century indian short story writers indian legal writers
order of saint catherine may refer to:  order of saint catherine, awarded to women by imperial russia, 1714-1917  order of saint catherine the great martyr, awarded by the russian federation since 2012  order of saint catherine of mount sinai, purportedly awarded by the house of lusignan since 1063  order of saint catherine, founded by humbert ii of viennois in the 1330s
marie louise scudder (1854-1934) was the owner, manager and editor of the americus times. she is said to be the first woman in "the south" to own and edit a newspaper.  early life (1854 until 1875) marie louise scudder (called louise throughout her life) was born in 1854 to colonel james lockhart scudder (1823-1882) and caroline (born davidson). she was the eldest of seven children. her father was known in the city of shelbyville, tennessee as a "colorful character". col. scudder had enlisted at the outbreak of the mexican-american war where he reached the rank of first lieutenant and lost an eye in battle. upon his return home to shelbyville, he began the practice of law and worked his way up the ranks. col. scudder was the last appointed attorney general for bedford county (tn) prior to the civil war and then was the first elected attorney general following the civil war.  ancestry  marie louise was the great-great-granddaughter of dr. (colonel) nathaniel scudder (1733-1781), a prominent physician and member of the continental congress as a representative of new jersey. col. nathaniel scudder was a graduate of princeton, a physician, a patriot, and one of two new jersey delegates to the continental congress. he signed the articles of confederation, the first constitution of the united states, and was the only member of the continental congress to be killed in action during the revolutionary war, just four short months before lieutenant general lord cornwallis surrendered to gen. george washington at valley forge.  louise's maternal grandparents, george washington davidson (1800-1854) and caroline elizabeth "betsy" chilcot (1807-1835), were born in shelbyville. both of them were from large and relatively wealthy east-coast families.  marriage (1875)  marie louise married colonel john bascom myrick, of georgia, on march 30, 1875, in the episcopal church of the redeemer, which was the family's parish on belmont avenue in shelbyville. the myricks moved to their new residence in forsyth, georgia, soon after their marriage, where col. myrick pursued a career in banking. forsyth was the home of colonel myrick's family.  according to condolence letters still in the possession of the myrick family, louise suffered a miscarriage in 1876.  in 1878 they had their only child, shelby, named for louise's hometown of shelbyville.  americus, georgia  in 1891, the myricks
relocated from forsyth, georgia, to the town of americus, georgia, in the southeast corner of the state.  the location of their exact residence from their arrival until about 1892 is still unknown.  colonel myrick purchased the americus times and the americus recorder newspapers, which he consolidated into the americus times-recorder between 1890 and 1891.  americus times-recorder  in 1892 the americus times-recorder began publication, and remains in publication to this day. mr. myrick operated the times-recorder until his untimely death in 1895.  at his death, in august 1895, the newspaper was passed to his wife marie louise scudder-myrick.  mrs. myrick decided to run the paper on her own which was at the time considered one of the "best and most politically influential papers in the state."  one account of louise's tenure at the times-recorder was:she is a brilliant newspaper woman, and her work has challenged the admiration of the journalistic fraternity throughout the south.mrs. myrick is said to be the only woman "the south" to own and edit a newspaper. she was the first in georgia and an outspoken editor. she campaigned for the daughters of the american revolution and the women's press club of georgia.  she retired in 1907, when she sold the times-recorder.  the windsor hotel  on june 29, 1892, the new and very grand windsor hotel (or hotel windsor) opened in americus.  the myricks  moved into the imposing round tower on the top floor, and there they remained until about 1913. colonel myricks funeral was held out of the windsor hotel on august 10, 1895.  mrs. myrick remained in the apartment on the top of the round tower of the windsor which she was known as calling the "crow's nest".  mrs. myrick left americus, and the windsor around 1913 and relocation to savannah, georgia where she lived with her then bachelor son, shelby myrick.  savannah, georgia  upon her arrival in savannah, louise moved in with her still unmarried son, shelby myrick who was an attorney in the city.  ardsley park   with the proceeds she had received from the sale of the americus times-recorder, louis and shelby began construction of a very grand home in the new ardsley park neighborhood of the city.  at the time, only one other home was built in this new neighborhood, that of one of the developers.
the imposing red brick colonial was built on a full city block which was made up of 16 lots of the new neighborhood at 2807 abercorn street.  the home featured multi-story white columns on the three sides of the home facing abercorn street, east 46th street, and what is now known as myrick place.  the over 6000 square foot home features eight bedrooms and six baths, plus it had tennis courts on the abercorn side with stables behind on the myrick place side.  there are numerous stories of louise's exploits during her time in ardsley park, she was known as a very forthright and colorful character.  louise lived in this home until her death on june 10, 1934.  death and legacy  prior to her death, louise had the remains of her late husband relocated from oak grove cemetery in americus, georgia, to the myrick family tomb at bonaventure cemetery in savannah.  marie louise scudder myrick was interred in the myrick family tomb following her funeral in savannah.  marie louise myrick is still known in small circles throughout the country, none more than in savannah and especially at bonaventure cemetery.  her name appears on numerous maps and documents for the cemetery as one of their "notable burials", most recently, the myrick tomb is featured on the illustrated 3d map of the historic bonaventure cemetery.  tours and tour guides frequently point out the myrick tomb during tours and mention her notable contribution to journalism in both georgia as well as the nation.  see also  sarah porter hillhouse published a newspaper in georgia in 1803  zula brown toole who founded her own newspaper in miller county, georgia in 1897  references  1854 births 1934 deaths american women business executives american business executives people from americus, georgia newspaper editors of the americas women newspaper editors
the aurora green diamond is a  vivid green diamond with vs2 clarity. in may 2016, the aurora green became the largest vivid green diamond to ever sell at auction. the record was previous held by a 2.54 carat fancy vivid green vs1 diamond that was sold by sotheby's on november 17, 2009 for $1.22 million per carat according to the diamond investment & intelligence center. on may 31, 2016, the diamond, which was originally owned by scarselli diamonds was sold by christie's for a record price per carat of $3.3 million to chinese jewelry company chow tai fook, totaling $16.8 million.  current records - the largest fancy vivid green diamond ever to be offered at auction. - the most expensive green diamond in the world to be sold at auction. - the highest per carat price ever sold for any green diamond in the world at auction. - the most expensive green diamond to be sold in asia.  see also list of famous diamonds  references  diamonds originating in brazil individual diamonds green diamonds
it's not me, it's you is an album by lily allen  it's not me, it's you may also refer to:  "it's not me, it's you" (song), song by skillet it's not me, it's you (game show), british comedy panel game show it's not me, it's you!, book by jon richardson "it's not me it's you", 2001 song by prozzak  see also it's not you, it's me, a popular phrase not me (disambiguation)
the making of the mob is an american television docu-series detailing the emergence of organized crime in 20th century america. the series premiered on june 15, 2015, on amc and is narrated by actor ray liotta.  on july 31, 2015, amc renewed the series for a second season of eight episodes.  series overview  episodes  season 1 (2015)  the making of the mob: new york highlights lucky luciano and his rise in new york city's american mafia, as well as luciano's creation of the five families.  season 2 (2016)  the making of the mob: chicago focuses on the origin of al capone and his chicago outfit and their expansion into the midwestern u.s.  references  external links episode list at amc  lists of american crime drama television series episodes
the gens maecilia or mecilia was a minor plebeian family at ancient rome.  although of great antiquity, only two members of this gens are mentioned in republican times, both tribunes of the plebs in the first century of the republic.  the maecilii appear again, somewhat sporadically, in imperial times, even obtaining the consulship during the early fourth century.  one of the last emperors of the western empire was marcus maecilius avitus.  members  lucius maecilius, tribune of the plebs in 470 bc.  spurius maecilius, tribune of the plebs at least four times, the fourth occasion in 416 bc.  marcus maecillius tullus, triumvir monetalis in 7 bc.  lucius maecilius scrupus, among the veientes present at the appointment of a magistrate named gaius julius gelos in ad 26, recorded on an inscription at veii.  marcus maecilius rufus, governor of achaea some time before ad 67.  maecilius fuscus, governor of britannia inferior around ad 240.  he helped rebuild and expand a fort at what is now durham.  mecilius hilarianus, consul in ad 332, and praefectus urbi from ad 338 to 339.  marcus maecilius eparchius avitus, emperor from ad 455 to 456.  maecilius hi(larianus?), a senator named on a seat in the colosseum around the time of odoacer, possibly descended from the consul hilarianus.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography   titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  gaius sollius apollinaris sidonius, panegyrici.  hydatius, chronicon (the chronicle).  georgius florentius gregorius (gregory of tours), historiarum (histories).  joseph hilarius eckhel, doctrina numorum veterum (the study of ancient coins, 1792-1798).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated cil), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  edmund groag, arthur stein, leiva petersen, and klaus wachtel, prosopographia imperii romani (the prosopography of the roman empire
, second edition, abbreviated pir2), berlin (1933-2015).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  david braund, augustus to nero: a sourcebook on roman history, 31 bc-ad 68, routledge, oxford (1985).  anthony r. birley, the roman government of britain, oxford university press (2005).    roman gentes
samuel calland (born in 1750, he died nov. 8, 1808, callands, virginia) was born in scotland, but became an influential landowner and merchant in colonial virginia. the town of callands, virginia, is named for him.  personal life married elizabeth smith calland (1758 - 1828) on december 14, 1776, in pittsylvania county, virginia. she was the daughter of john smith, who owned the large plantation "the pocket", in a bend of the smith river. their children were: anna b. calland callaway (1780 - 1810); captain samuel c. calland (1787 - 1818); ralph smith calland (1789 - 1815); james calland (1791 - 1817).  home the calland family home had 22 rooms and was situated at the foot of the turkeycock mountain. "all that remains of the large calland home is a story and a half, six-room structure with earthen basement. still prominent is the high ceiling in the main room, pine wainscoting, a corner staircase leading to an upstairs bedroom and the tall brick chimney."  business as a merchant, calland's store sold not only the frontier necessities of the period, but also imported elegant and expensive items for the tastes of prosperous landowners in the area. his store was also used as the local courthouse and meeting place of early pittsylvania county.  church samuel calland was a strict presbyterian, and established the first presbyterian church in pittsylvania county, the "wet sleeve" congregation. this was organized soon after the revolution, when freedom of religion was instituted in virginia.  "the first presbyterian church established in the county was named wet sleeve for a nearby stream, and stood near callands. when samuel calland opened his store at the courthouse, he became a strong influence for the church, being a scotchman. in 1784 a congregation was organized and the wet sleeve church built. the reverend david barr was called to be the first minister, and marrying a young lady of the neighborhood, mary fulton, established his home on sandy river. after a few years mr. barr moved to north carolina and sold his properties here. with no resident pastor the church languished."  public office early in the american revolution, samuel calland remained loyal to the king. he was brought to court in pittsylvania county for continuing to drink tea after the boston tea party. however, he quickly turned his allegiance to the new commonwealth of virginia, and took the oath of aliegance to the united states in 1778. samuel
calland was first appointed to a justice of pittsylvania county, virginia. he was later appointed to become the high sheriff of pittsylvania county, virginia after the american revolution.  death and burial he died in 1808, and his published obituary summed up his life thus: "...that he was a man formed for the enjoyment of happiness, as a husband he was affectionate, as a father kind, as a master indulgent, as a friend warm. his hospitality was proverbial."  he is buried in the callands family cemetery in callands, virginia.  after his death, his lands were divided among his children into four plantations: the "manor plantation"; the "glebe plantation"; the "dan river plantation" fronting the dan river and the "sandy river plantation", fronting the sandy river.  references  1750 births 1808 deaths people from pittsylvania county, virginia businesspeople from virginia farmers from virginia virginia pioneers plantations in virginia
jennifer cohen may refer to:   jennifer cohen (athletic director) an athletics administrator   jennifer cohen (fitness) a fitness personality, author, and body image consultant
anna mykolayivna kornuta (; born 10 november 1988) is a ukrainian athlete specialising in the long jump. she represented her country at the 2013 world championships without qualifying for the final.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor long jump - 6.72 (+2.0 m/s, kiev 2013) triple jump - 13.70 (+1.9 m/s, yalta 2011) indoor long jump - 6.53 (sumy	2014) triple jump - 13.29 (sumy 2011)  references  0  1988 births living people ukrainian female long jumpers ukrainian female triple jumpers world athletics championships athletes for ukraine olympic athletes of ukraine athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics
the woman of death (1900) is a novel by australian writer guy boothby.  story outline  the main character in the novel, lord middlesborough, is very wealthy, but is becoming bored with life.  in monte carlo he meets madame d'espere who gives the impression that she is in possession of some sort of occult power.  in paris middlesborough is introduced to a strange, secret club whose members participate, by lot, in duels to the death each fortnight.  middlesborough subsequently meets and marries cecille de tavernae, whose father is also a member of the club. the novel reaches a climax when middlesborough is drawn to meet his father-in-law in a duel.  critical reception  a reviewer in the capricornian detected a sameness about the work: "he has fertility of invention; he devises plots cleveriy, and works them out as realistically, as possible, but the characters and incidents are becoming familiar, and he does not throw in the descriptions which give a charm to the beautiful white devil and some other of his productions."  a note in the newcastle morning herald and miners' advocate stated: "in this, his latest production, the author has abandoned his famous creation, dr. nikola, and introduces to us a female character as unreal and devilish as the former. the incidents are mainly laid in paris, and are sensational enough to satisfy the most exacting lover of literature of that kind. the volume is a good illustration of boothby's popular style, and will doubtless find many readers amongst those who read only to forget."  see also   1900 in australian literature  references  1900 australian novels novels set in paris
oos raat ke baad is a 1969 thriller movie, directed and produced by yb siraj under the banner commercial cine corporation. the movie stars sanjeev kumar, tanuja, madan puri, sailesh kumar, aruna irani, shamminder and kishore bhatt. other star casts include tarun bose, bela bose, asit sen, pravin paul sunder, amrita patel, dinesh hingoo and masterji. story-screenplay-dialogue was written by probodh joshi. mukesh, asha bhosle, bula gupta and hemant kumar rendered their voices. title song was by anil kumar and its lyrics by gohar kanpuri. music of the film is given by hemanta mukherjee and lyrics by gulzar.  plot  thakur sunder singh (sanjeev kumar) is the thakur, or lord, of a small estate. he lives in the estate's manor with his daughter sharmila (tanuja). his greedy brother madan singh (madan puri) also resides at the manor, and is constantly seeking money from sunder singh. in the past, sunder singh had an affair with a village girl, who gave birth to his illegitimate child. sunder singh refused to accept both of them as it would be against his family honor. his guilt over this situation causes him great anxiety, and he suffers from asthma and heart problems as a result.  doctor shyam attends the manor to treat sunder singh, and sharmila falls in love with him. when her uncle madan singh sees sharmila and doctor shyam flirting, he goes to sunder singh and informs him about his daughter's behavior. in a fit of rage, sunder singh quarrels with sharmila and slaps her. she continues her secret relationship with the doctor behind her father's back. the stress causes sunder singh to have a heart attack. sharmila decides to end her relationship with the doctor, wanting to prevent her father from suffering more pain.  several days later, it is sharmila's birthday party. a number of guests are at the manor, including doctor shyam. a dancing girl (aruna irani) was also hired to performing mujra, a classical kathak-style dance. the doctor goes to sharmila's room to find her, and is spotted by madan singh. madan singh reports this to his brother sunder singh, who attacks the doctor in presence of the guests, telling him never return to the manor. upset, sharmila leaves her home the next morning to stay at a hostel.  sunder singh is extremely upset by
the situation, and madan singh adds to his woes by marrying the mujra girl. sunder singh refuses to accept the mujra dancer as his sister-in-law and has another heart attack. doctor shyam is called, and he suggests that sunder singh forgive sharmila in order to ease some of his tension. however, sunder singh believes that doctor shyam is scheming to get close to sharmila again. based on this, madan singh convinces his elder brother that doctor shyam is not trustworthy and that he should be replaced by another doctor. madan singh brings in doctor lakhan and nurse veera (bela bose) to attend him.  one night, madan singh asks sunder singh to sign a new will, with terms more favorable to madan singh. shortly after, sunder singh has another heart attack. with the help of his accomplices, doctor lakhan and nurse veera, madan singh prevents sunder singh from taking any medicine, leading to sunder singh's death. madan singh then calls doctor shyam to the manor, telling him that sunder singh's condition is very serious. he accuses doctor shyam of murdering sunder singh and summons the police. doctor shyam manages to evade arrest.  madan singh has sunder singh cremated, and sends a telegram to sharmila to inform her of her father's death. when she returns, she finds that the manor is haunted by her father's ghost and informs her uncle, who has her declared insane. one of the manor's old servants gets suspicious and informs the police department. officers there ensure him that the truth will be discovered.  in the meantime, sharmila has resumed her meetings with doctor shyam, although she refuses to marry him out of respect to her deceased father, who never gave his permission. she continues to have sightings of sunder singh's spirit in the manor. some days later, madan singh finally sees the ghost of sunder singh. fearful, he insists sharmila and all others leave the manor. when sharmila refuses to leave, madan singh shoots the spirit with a gun, revealing it to be a living person. the "ghost" tries to escape but is quickly caught.  the "ghost" reveals himself to be the illegitimate child of sunder singh. he had initially come to the manor to take revenge upon sunder singh for abandoning him. instead, he witnessed madan singh preventing sunder singh from taking his heart medicine, leading to sunder singh's death. madan singh caught the illegitimate son watching the murder and threatened him, saying he would have the son's mother killed if he didn't pretend to be sunder singh's ghost
and frighten sharmila to death. prompted by his mother, he instead chooses to save his half-sister.  the plot revealed, madan singh is arrested. the police discover that "doctor" lakhan was a criminal impersonating a doctor and "nurse" veera was a cabaret dancer.  cast  soundtrack   hindi-language thriller films 1960s thriller films 1960s hindi-language films hindi-language films 1969 films indian thriller films indian films
bernardo gonzalez (7 september 1969 - 6 october 2000) was a spanish cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1996 summer olympics.  references  external links    1969 births 2000 deaths spanish male cyclists olympic cyclists of spain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1996 summer olympics sportspeople from murcia
chabbewal assembly constituency (sl. no.: 44) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in hoshiarpur district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
yves claoue (1927, le bouscat - 2001, segonzac) was a 20th-century french composer.  music   concerto for harpsichord.  three mouvements for flute and piano.  sonate baroque in trio for organ.  incidental music   1957:	caesar and cleopatra by george bernard shaw, directed by jean le poulain (theatre sarah bernhard)  1958:	 by jacques audiberti, directed by jean le poulain (theatre du vieux colombier)  la voix humaine by cocteau (theatre central du limousin)   1965:	antigone after sophocles, directed by jean-pierre laruy  patmos, oratorio by jean cocteau and yves claoue.   1966:	george dandin by moliere, directed by jean-pierre laruy 	la fleur a la bouche by luigi pirandello, directed by jean-pierre laruy  1967:	le cid by pierre corneille, directed by pierre valde 	les freres karamazov by jean-pierre laruy, directed by jean-pierre laruy  cascade by milorad miskovic (ballet) opera de monte carlo  minuterie by jean babilee  1969:	le chant du fantoche lusitanien by peter weiss, directed by jean-pierre laruy  anjou 33-93 by jean guelis   1970:	la comedie des erreurs after william shakespeare, directed by georges-henri regnier  1973:	mother courage and her children by bertolt brecht, directed by jean-pierre laruy  1984: marat-sade by peter weiss, directed by gerard laurent 1991-92: phrases et paraphrases sur la "genese", ensemble vocal, piano oblige 1992: salve regina for mixed choir  film scores   1954: buffet et son art, documentary by etienne perier   1959: bobosse, by etienne perier, with francois perier, micheline presle, jacques fabbri  1960: murder at 45 r.p.m., by etienne perier, with danielle darrieux, michel auclair, jean servais  1962: un chien dans un jeu de quilles, by fabien collin  external links     yves claoue on les archives du spectacle.net  yves claoue on data.bnf.fr  french ballet composers french film score composers 20th-century french male classical pianists 1927 births 2001 deaths
french male film score composers
alessandro pauli (1582 - 23 july 1645) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of vico equense (1643-1645).  biography luigi riccio was born in anagni, italy in 1582. on 23 february 1643, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of vico equense. on 22 march 1643, he was consecrated bishop by bernardino spada, cardinal-priest of san pietro in vincoli with lelio falconieri, titular archbishop of thebae, and alfonso sacrati, bishop emeritus of comacchio, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of vico equense until his death on 23 july 1645.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1582 births 1645 deaths people from anagni
a midsummer night's dream is a 2016 british television film based on the william shakespeare play a midsummer night's dream. it was adapted by russell t davies, directed by david kerr and produced by nikki wilson. it stars maxine peake as titania, matt lucas as bottom, john hannah as theseus and nonso anozie as oberon. the film was first broadcast on 30 may 2016 on bbc one.  the film gained attention for its gay additions to the story, including a kiss between hippolyta and titania. russell t davies said, "i wanted to have a man with a man, a man who was dressed as a woman with a man, and a woman with a woman because it's 2016, so that's the world now."  the film received positive reviews. the guardian called it "doctor who-ish but rather good" and said the ending "was infused with such a sense of sincere, undiluted joy that i found i had a lump in my throat". the daily telegraph gave it four out of five stars and said "russell t davies made shakespeare engaging, fresh and funny".  cast   maxine peake as titania nonso anozie as oberon matt lucas as bottom john hannah as theseus eleanor matsuura as hippolyta hiran abeysekera as puck prisca bakare as hermia kate kennedy as helena matthew tennyson as lysander paapa essiedu as demetrius elaine paige as mistress quince richard wilson as starveling bernard cribbins as snout  javone prince as snug fisayo akinade as flute colin mcfarlane as egeus elliot levey as philostrate charlotte dylan as cobweb varada sethu as peaseblossom tia benbow-hart as moth marlene madenge as mustardseed  references  2016 television films 2016 films films based on a midsummer night's dream bbc television shows british television films cultural history of the united kingdom british films films directed by david kerr (director)
mahatma gandhi central university (mgcu), is a central university located in motihari, bihar, india. mgcu has 7 schools and 20 academic departments. this is the second central university in bihar after central university of south bihar (cusb).  history the central universities (amendment) act, 2014 which received presidential assent on december 17, 2014, provided for the establishment of mahatma gandhi central university having its territorial jurisdiction extending to the territory in the north of the river ganges in the state of bihar. mgcu became functional on 3 february 2016. the university was started in 2016-17 with both ug and pg courses in 7 schools and 15 departments.  campus mgcu is located at motihari, bihar india. the nearest airport from the university is at patna which is approximately 170 kilometers away from motihari. motihari is also connected to all the major cities by train. the nearest railway station is bapudham motihari (bmki) which is approximately 2 kilometers from the temporary campus at zila school, motihari.  the permanent campus is in developing phase. the permanent campus is being developed at bankat-bairiya village, motihari on 310 acres of land. the nearest railway station is bapudham motihari (bmki) which is approximately 4 kilometers from the permanent campus at bankat-bairiya village. motihari is also well connected to all major cities and towns of bihar and adjoining states by road through a network of four-lane national highway.  organisation and administration  governance the university is governed by the rules set by the central universities act, 2009. the president of india is the visitor of the university. the chancellor is the ceremonial head of the university while the executive powers rest with the vice-chancellor. the court, the executive council, the academic council, the board of studies and the finance committee are the administrative authorities of the university.  the university court is the supreme authority of the university and has the power to review, the broad policies and programmes of the university and to suggest measures for the improvement and development of the university; the executive council is the highest executive body of the university. the academic council is the highest academic body of the university and is responsible for the co-ordination and exercising general supervision over the academic policies of the university. it has the right to advise the executive council on all academic matters. the finance committee is responsible for recommending financial policies, goals, and budgets.  schools and departments the university has 7
schools and 20 departments:  school of commerce & management sciences  department of commerce  department of management sciences  school of computational sciences, information and communication technology  department of computer science & information technology  department of library and information science  department of media studies  school of education  department of educational studies  school of humanities & languages department of english department of hindi department of sanskrit  school of life sciences  department of biotech and genome department of botany department of zoology  school of physical sciences department of chemistry  department of mathematics department of physics  school of social sciences  department of economics  department of gandhian and peace studies  department of political science  department of social work  department of sociology  academic profile  admission the university admits students to various ug, pg, and phd programmes through the entrance exam conducted by the university itself. entrance exam held annually on various exam centres across india.  library atal bihari vajpayee central library (a learning resource centre) of mahatma gandhi central university was established in the year 2016. the university library has more than 26000+ books, 13 magazines, 11 newspapers and 125+ donated book which providing access to scholarly information, research support and study facilities to the teaching and non-teaching staff, students and research scholars.  activism and controversy in 2017, the university terminated two assistant professors without citing any prior notice, which caused heavy protest by the students of university. in june 2018, students of the university launched heavy protest after the university increased fees. later that month, faculty members sat on hunger strike after the university issued a show cause notice to a professor.  in august 2018, sanjay kumar, an assistant professor of the university, was attacked for criticising prime minister atal bihari vajpayee in a facebook post. this led to the closure of the university for a 15-day period.  in october 2018, the vice-chancellor of the university, arvind kumar agrawal, was accused of some anomalies in his educational qualifications. this led to his resignation a week later, and the appointment of the pro-chancellor anil kumar rai for the position.  references  external links    central universities in india universities in bihar east champaran district educational institutions established in 2016 2016 establishments in bihar
hellgate is a 1989 american-south african horror film directed by william a. levey and written by michael s. o'rourke. the film stars ron palillo, abigail wolcott and carel trichardt. it follows two young couples who become embroiled in the mystery of a desolate ghost town, hellgate, where a young woman was kidnapped and murdered by a biker gang in 1959. it was released in the united states directly-to-video in august 1990 through vidmark entertainment.  plot a motorcycle gang kidnaps a young woman, josie, from a diner and brutally kills her. many years later, the girl's father finds a magic crystal that can bring the life back to dead objects.  cast  ron palillo as matt  abigail wolcott as josie carlyle  carel trichardt as lucas carlyle  petrea curran as pam  evan j. klisser as chuck  joanne warde as bobby (as joanne ward)  frank notaro as buzz (as frank notard)  lance vaughan as zonk  release hellgate was distributed on home video by new world in the united kingdom in december 1989.  reception andrew smith of popcorn pictures gave the film an abysmal score of 1/10, writing, "hellgate isn't just bad, it's on the same 'utterly terrible' plane of existence as the likes of troll and raging sharks. it's not a film you can even watch if you're curious about how awful it is. just forget it ever existed." michael weldon in the psychotronic video guide gave the film a negative review, noting: "ron palillo (from welcome back, kotter), who was nearly 40 at the time, stars in this awful, irritating teen horror movie." graeme clark from the spinning image awarded the film 1/10 stars, calling it "utter garbage" and criticized the film's script, phony special effects, and acting.  see also  list of horror films of 1989  references  external links       1989 films 1989 horror films american films american comedy horror films south african comedy horror films 1980s english-language films english-language south african films new world pictures films american zombie films films set in ghost towns south african films 1980s comedy horror films 1989 comedy films
the 2017 open championship was a major golf championship and the 146th open championship, held 20-23 july at royal birkdale golf club in southport, england. it was the tenth open championship at royal birkdale, which held its first in 1954.  jordan spieth shot four rounds in the sixties for 268 (-12), three strokes ahead of runner-up matt kuchar, for his third major title, and the second in which he led wire-to-wire (2015 masters). in the third round, branden grace scored 62 to set a new major championship record.  this was the first year that the prize money was paid in u.s. dollars, rather than british pounds.  media this was the second open championship televised domestically by sky sports. in the united states, it is the second open championship to be televised by nbc (golf channel's parent network).  venue  this was the tenth open championship at royal birkdale; the ninth in 2008 saw padraig harrington successfully defend his 2007 title from carnoustie.  course layout  lengths of the course for previous opens:  2008: , par 70  1998: , par 70  1991: , par 70  1983: , par 71    1976: , par 72  1971: , par 73  1965: , par 73  1961: , par 72  1954: , par 73  field the open championship field was made up of 156 players, who gained entry through various exemption criteria and qualifying tournaments. the criteria included past open champions, recent major winners, top ranked players in the world rankings and from the leading world tours, and winners and high finishers from various designated tournaments, including the open qualifying series; the winners of designated amateur events, including the amateur championship and u.s. amateur, also gained exemption provided they remain an amateur. anyone not qualifying via exemption, and had a handicap of 0.4 or lower, could gain entry through regional and final qualifying events.  criteria and exemptions each player is classified according to the first category in which he qualified, but other categories are shown in parentheses.  1. the open champions aged 60 or under on 23 july 2017   stewart cink (2) darren clarke (2) john daly david duval ernie els (2) todd hamilton padraig harrington (2) zach johnson (2,17) paul lawrie tom lehman sandy lyle rory mcilroy (2,3,4,5,10,12,17) phil mickelson (2,3,4,12
,17) mark o'meara louis oosthuizen (2,4,5) henrik stenson (2,3,4,5,17)  eligible but did not enter: ian baker-finch, mark calcavecchia, nick faldo, justin leonard, nick price, tiger woods. ben curtis withdrew before the tournament.  2. the open champions for 2007-2016  3. top 10 finishers and ties in the 2016 open championship  sergio garcia (4,5,9,17) bill haas (4) tyrrell hatton (4,5) j. b. holmes (4,12,17) dustin johnson (4,8,12,17) andrew johnston (5) søren kjeldsen (5) steve stricker  4. top 50 players in the official world golf ranking (owgr) for week 21, 2017  daniel berger (12) wesley bryan rafa cabrera-bello (5,17) paul casey (12) kevin chappell (12) jason day (10,11,12) ross fisher (5) matt fitzpatrick (5,17) tommy fleetwood rickie fowler (11,17) branden grace (5) emiliano grillo (12) adam hadwin billy horschel kim si-woo (11,12) kevin kisner (12) russell knox (12) brooks koepka (8,17) matt kuchar (12,17) marc leishman hideki matsuyama (12,21) william mcgirt (12) francesco molinari (5) ryan moore (12,17) alex noren (5,6) pat perez thomas pieters (5,17) jon rahm patrick reed (12,17) justin rose (8,14,17) charl schwartzel (5,12) adam scott (9,12) jordan spieth (8,9,12,17) hideto tanihara (22) justin thomas (12) jimmy walker (10,12,17) bubba watson (9,12) bernd wiesberger (5) danny willett (5,9,17) gary woodland (12)  brandt snedeker (12,17) did not play.  5. top 30 on the 2016 race to dubai  richard bland scott hend (18) david horsey thongchai jaidee martin kaymer (8,17) li haotong shane lowry joost luiten thorbjørn olesen andy sullivan (17) wang jeung-hun lee
westwood (17) chris wood (6,17)  6. last three bmw pga championship winners  an byeong-hun  7. top 5 players, not already exempt, within the top 20 of the 2017 race to dubai through the bmw international open  dylan frittelli pablo larrazabal alexander levy david lipsky fabrizio zanotti  8. last five u.s. open winners  9. last five masters tournament winners  10. last five pga championship winners  jason dufner (12)  11. last three players championship winners  12. the 30 qualifiers for the 2016 tour championship  roberto castro kevin na sean o'hair jhonattan vegas  13. top 5 players, not already exempt, within the top 20 of the 2017 fedex cup points list through the travelers championship  brian harman russell henley charley hoffman brendan steele  14. winner of the 2016 olympic golf tournament  15. winner of the 2016 open de argentina  kent bulle  16. winner and runner-up from the 2017 korea open  chang yi-keun kim gi-whan  17. playing members of the 2016 ryder cup teams  18. winner of the 2016 asian tour order of merit  19. winner of the 2016 pga tour of australasia order of merit  matthew griffin  20. winner of the 2016-17 sunshine tour order of merit  brandon stone  21. winner of the 2016 japan open  22. top 2 on the 2016 japan golf tour official money list  yuta ikeda  23. top 2, not already exempt, on the 2017 japan golf tour official money list through the japan golf tour championship  yusaku miyazato shaun norris  24. winner of the 2016 senior open championship  paul broadhurst  25. winner of the 2017 amateur championship  harry ellis (a)  26. winner of the 2016 u.s. amateur curtis luck forfeited his exemption after turning professional in april 2017.  27. winners of the 2016 and 2017 editions of the european amateur  luca cianchetti (a) alfie plant (a)  28. recipient of the 2016 mark h. mccormack medal  maverick mcnealy (a)  open qualifying series the open qualifying series (oqs) consisted of 10 events from the six major tours. places were available to the leading players (not otherwise exempt) who finished in the top n and ties. in the event of ties, positions went to players ranked highest according to that week's owgr.  final qualifying the final qualifying events were played on 4 july at
five courses covering scotland and the north-west, central and south-coast regions of england. three qualifying places were available at each location.  alternates to make up the full field of 156, additional places were allocated in ranking order from the official world golf ranking at the time that these places were made available by the championship committee.   from the week 26 (week ending 2 july) official world golf ranking:  webb simpson (ranked 61) anirban lahiri (66)  from the week 27 (week ending 9 july) official world golf ranking:  tony finau (64) james hahn (66)  round summaries  first round thursday, 20 july 2017  three americans - brooks koepka, matt kuchar, and jordan spieth - shared the lead after the first round on five under par, a shot clear of england's paul casey and charl schwartzel, with ian poulter a further shot back. reigning champion henrik stenson was one under after a 69. rory mcilroy was five over par after six holes but recovered to finish with a one-over-par 71.  second round friday, 21 july 2017  in difficult conditions, jordan spieth followed his first round 65 with a 69 to lead by two strokes from matt kuchar. only eight players scored under par for their second rounds, zach johnson's 66 being the best round of the day. alfie plant was the only amateur to make the cut. he eagled the par-five 15th on his way to a 73 and a 36-hole total of 144.  amateurs: plant (+4), syme (+9), cianchetti (+11), ellis (+12), mcnealy (+12)  third round saturday, 22 july 2017  jordan spieth shot a 65 to take a three-stroke lead over matt kuchar, who shot a 66. on an easier day of scoring, branden grace scored 62, breaking the long-standing men's major championship record of 63. there were also low rounds from dustin johnson, with a 64, and henrik stenson, with a 65, both getting into a tie for 7th place.  grace scorecard  {|class="wikitable" span = 50 style="font-size:85%; |- |  style="background:pink; width:10px;"| |birdie |}  final round sunday, 23 july 2017  beginning the round with a three-shot lead, jordan spieth bogeyed three of his first four holes to fall into a tie with matt kuchar. a
birdie at the 5th combined with a bogey by kuchar at the 6th allowed spieth to re-open a two-stroke advantage, but a bogey-birdie swing at the 9th evened the score heading to the back-nine. the score remained level until the 13th, when spieth hit his tee shot well to the right of the fairway. forced to take an unplayable lie and drop from the practice area, he managed to get up-and-down to save bogey while kuchar took the lead by making par. at the par-3 14th, however, spieth nearly holed his tee shot and converted the birdie attempt to tie kuchar. then at the par-5 15th, spieth made a  eagle putt to take the lead once again. with birdies on the next two holes spieth played 14-17 in five-under to take a two-stroke lead heading to the last. when kuchar found a greenside bunker and made bogey, spieth was able to tap in for par and win the championship by three strokes. li haotong birdied his last four holes for 63 (−7) and jump into third place at 274 (−6), the best finish for an asian player at the open championship since lu liang-huan in 1971, also at royal birkdale. with the victory, spieth joined jack nicklaus as the only golfers to win three legs of the career grand slam before the age of 24.  final leaderboard  note: top 10 and ties qualify for the 2018 open championship; top 4 and ties qualify for the 2018 masters tournament  scorecard final round  cumulative tournament scores, relative to par {|class="wikitable" span = 50 style="font-size:85%; |-  |style="background: red;" width=10| |eagle |style="background: pink;" width=10| |birdie |style="background: palegreen;" width=10| |bogey |} source:  notes  references  external links  coverage on the european tour's official site coverage on the pga tour's official site coverage on the pga of america's official site  the open championship golf tournaments in england open championship open championship open championship
this is a list of compositions by yehuda yannay  solo  twelve monophonic dances for any wind instrument (1958) music for piano (1962) permutations for solo percussion (1964) statement for flute (1964) continuum for piano op. 15 (1966) coloring book for the harpist (1969) seven late spring pieces for piano (1973) im silberwald (in the silver forest) for trombone, glass harmonica and tape (1983) between the raindrops for solo guitar (1984) tangoul mortii (tango of death) for contrabass solo (1996) tangoul mortii (tango of death) version for cello solo (1997) tangoul mortii (tango of death) version for viola solo (1997) piano portfolio i for solo piano (1994-2000) the one-legged dancer for toy piano (accordion or harpsichord (2001) three organic pieces for organ (2004) hornology for horn (2004) piano transplant (co-composed with josh schmidt) (2004) double transplant for piano (2004) three postcards from paris for piano, an excerpt from midwest mythologist (2012) incipit vita nova for accordion (2013) the exquisite viola for viola solo (2013) bits into pieces for piano and ipad electronics (2014)  chamber music  variations for 2 flutes (1960) interconnections for 14 instruments (1965) random rotated for 4 wind instruments (1965) two fragments for violin and piano (1966) mutatis mutandis for 6 players (1968) per se, chamber concerto for violin and 7 instruments (1969) prefix-fix-suffix for bassoon, horn and cello (1971) squares & symbols, exits and traps for keyboard and 1 to 3 wind and/or strings (1971) bug piece with live insect notation (1972) the hidden melody (nigun haganuz) for cello and french horn (1977) brazilian birdwhistle event for brazilian bird-whistle set (1980) trio, for clarinet, cello and piano (1982) three jazz moods, for solo trumpet and saxophone, and chamber ensemble with rhythm section (1982) nine branches of the olive tree, for recorders, bass clarinet, guitar and percussion (1984) m. my dear, a ballad for jazz violin, guitar and bass (1985) duo for flute and cello (1991) five pieces for three players for soprano saxophone, clarinet and marimba (1994) playing for peace for three-part violin ensemble (1994) loose connections for violin, clarinet
and double bass (1996) marrakesh bop for microtonal flute and guitar (1999) trio for violin, cello and piano (2001) my main squeeze for trumpet, accordion and cello (2000) visions of y for viola and piano (2002) psalm for a melody instrument and piano, completion of an unfinished composition by alexander  u. boskovich (2006) bayannayab (choral) for two bayans or accordions (2006) note traffic for violin and cello (2008) bayanette for two bayans (accordions) and piano (2009) suite for mandolin and accordion (2011) two alleys in old tel-aviv for string quartet (2013) apres rameau: les poulets de mequon/the chickens of mequon for 2 pianos (2013) apres rameau: les poulets de mequon/the chickens of mequon for bayan (accordion) and piano (2014) summer ostinato for two accordions (2015) tandem piece for horn and accordion or accordion and piano (2015) the center does not hold for saxophone quartet (2016)  chamber music with voice  rubayat, song for voice and cello, text: omar khayyam (1958) spheres for soprano and 10 instruments, text: yehuda amichai (1963) incantations for voice, keyboard, and interior piano, text: w.h.auden (1964) foregroundmusic for 6 instruments and speaker, for a poem by a. ginsberg (1965) at the end of the parade, six poems by william carlos williams for baritone and six players (1974). eros reminisced, song cycle for singer/pianist, text: constantine p. cavafy (1981) "augentanz" (eyedance) and "galgenlied" (hangman's song) from celan ensembles for tenor and instruments, text paul celan (1986) "in madness there is order" from celan ensembles, for voice, projections and synthesizers, text: paul celan (1988) "spiegeltanz" (mirrordance) from celan ensembles, for voice, horn, and 2 marimbas, text: paul celan (1989) the bogen songs, six pieces for voice, flute, clarinet in b, violoncello and accordion, text: don bogen (2010)  orchestra and concertante  mirkamim, textures of sound for large orchestra, (1967) concerto for audience and
orchestra, with audience operated portable radios (1971) five songs for tenor and orchestra text: w.c. williams.  (1976-77) seven late spring pieces for orchestra (1979) concertino for violin and chamber orchestra (1980) exit music at century's end for chamber orchestra (1995) piano concerto for solo piano and 15 instruments (2002) rhapsody for alto saxophone and wind ensemble (2005) nuances argentees (shades of silver) for recorded voice and flute orchestra of 24 players  (2006) plus avec moins (pam) - more from less(mfl) for solo accordion and 24 flutes (2012)  choir  mishnayot for solo voices and choir, text: jewish prayer book (1961). psukey dezimra for solo voices and choir, text: jewish prayer book (1961) the chain of proverbs cantata for youth, text: ibn zabara (1962) coheleth, environment with mobile choir, microphones, wireless microphones and voice controlled filters, text: ecclesiastes (1970) dawn for mixed choir, text: arthur rimbaud (1970) departure for nine voices and five instruments, text: arthur rimbaud (1972) a noiseless patient spider for women's choir or eight solo voices, text: walt whitman (1975) tombeau de satie in memory of thomas trobaugh, text: dona nobis pacem (1979) le campane di leopardi for mixed choir and tuned glasses, text: giacomo leopardi (1979) yigdal for cantor and choir followed by an organ variation, text: hebrew prayer book (1985) three hebrew aphorisms from the mishna and the talmud for five-part unaccompanied mixed choir (2007) the wheel of light(galgal haorot) for three choral or solo voices, text: rabbi naftali hertz of bacharach (2014) mayeem (water) for five-part mixed chorus (ssatb), harmonicas and melodicas (2016)  theater pieces and dance  wraphap a theatre piece for actress, amplified aluminum sheet and yannachord (1969) houdini's ninth, a theatre piece for a double bass and escape artist (1969) the urbana (il) christal lake park gathering for any number of mallet players (1968) autopiano, or piano minus pianist for an actor and piano (1970) the vestibule peep-in-pipe-out for a caged performer with an fm transmitter (1970) attic songs and betweens, electronic
music for dance (1975) american sonorama, music for a ballet by anna nassif (1975-76) the decline and fall of the sonata in b-flat, a musicule for actors and pianists (1970-76) three michael and nancy pieces for dancer and percussion (1978) genesis, music for a dance piece by anna nassif (1979) all our women, chamber opera, text: yehuda yannay (1981) tableau one:  "...in sleep one often finds solutions..." (from journey to orgonon) for actor, projections and synthesizers (1992) go fearing for solo voice for "geometry of aloneness," a multimedia work by marie mellott (1996) "traum ist von tat nicht so verschieden..." (dream and action are not so apart...) for tape and speaker (1998) insomnia in havana, a theater piece for percussionist/actor, live electronics and projections, text: virgilio pinera (2005) midwest mythologist, theater piece for a pianist, text and musical sources:steve nelson-raney (2012) beware of poison mushrooms!  seven illustrated aphorisms and short stories by roland lampe (2013)  film, video, intermedia  houdini's ninth - a film.  black and white and color, 16 mm film with sound produced in collaboration with emory j. clark (1973) charcoal and pastel music 1 to 52 visual music in form of a series of drawings (1979) jidyll, a film with music by dick blau and yehuda yannay (1984-90) windsuck, sound sculpture created in collaboration with steve pevnick (1985) the oranur experiment  part i:  "journey to orgonon", a music video, in collaboration with jerome fortier (1991) violoncello solo for "i can't fathom it"  for projection theater by marie mellott (1993) wilhelm reich: journey to orgonon a documentary opera on cd-rom in collaboration with jerome fortier (1997) percussion fountain, sound sculpture in collaboration with stephen pevnick (1998) radiant, inner light for speaker, musical saw, metal percussion, percussion fountain, projections and calligrams  percussion instruments built in collaboration with stephen pevnick, calligrams created in collaboration with marie mellott, text: rabbi naftali hertz of bacharach (1998-2000) only gestures, electronic music for a video installation piece by marie mellott (2006) a noiseless patient spider for women
's choir or eight solo voices a cappella, dance video version: peter sparling, text: walt whitman (2010)  electronic music  electronic music (1964-65).  "study #1 "study #2 "study #3 "phonomontage pour therese" milwaukee brew project,  environmental tape composition on sounds of milwaukee (1979) three visions of the age, collaborative composition for digital synthesizers and instruments with jon welstead and joel thome (1985)  references  external links recorded sound and video samples  yannay
the club swan 42 was designed by german frers and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 2006. it was initially launched and referred to as new york yacht club 42 as the design was commissioned by the club following a tendering process.  the boat has had significant racing success, both as a one-design and under rating rules such as irc and orc, and was used for the biennial rolex new york yacht club invitational cup from the event's inception in 2009 through 2017. this regatta is an invitational event for teams of amateur sailors representing yacht clubs from around the world.  external links  nautor swan  club swan 42 class association  german frers official website  references  sailing yachts keelboats 2000s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
cyphochilus is the scientific name for two genera of organisms and may refer to:  cyphochilus (beetle), a genus of insects in the family scarabaeidae cyphochilus (plant), a genus of plants in the family orchidaceae
sarbananda sonowal is the leader of bjp, who was sworn in the chief minister of assam on 24 may 2016 here is the list of ministers:  council of ministers  former ministers  references  assam ministries bharatiya janata party state ministries asom gana parishad bodoland people's front 2016 in indian politics 2016 establishments in assam cabinets established in 2016
the 2016-17 season is chaves' fourteenth season in the top flight of portuguese football. this marked chaves' return to the portuguese top tier, after a seventeen-year absence.  squad  transfers  in  out  pre-season and friendlies  competitions  overall record  primeira liga  league table  results by round  matches  taca de portugal  third round  fourth round  fifth round  quarter-finals  semi-finals  taca da liga  second round  player statistics  |- ! colspan="14" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| goalkeepers      |- ! colspan="14" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| defenders  |- ! colspan="14" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| midfielders  |- ! colspan="14" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| forwards  |- ! colspan="15" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center;"| players transferred out during the season  references  g.d. chaves seasons chaves
helene "elli" barczatis (7 january 1912 - 23 november 1955) was a typist-secretary who worked between april 1950 and january 1953 as the head secretary of the east german prime minister, otto grotewohl.   convicted of espionage, she and her lover karl laurenz were guillotined on 23 november 1955.  life  early years elli barczatis was born in berlin 1912, the daughter of a master tailor.   she attended school locally between 1918 and 1926 before embarking on a traineeship as a saleswoman with a small publishing company, "banzhaff-verlag".   she switched in 1928, working as a typist for a book dealership called karl block.   in 1929 she joined the gewerkschaftsbund der angestellten, a trades union for clerical workers, and between 1929 and 1933 attended evening classes in order to gain a higher secretarial qualification.   a succession of further secretarial positions followed, always in berlin where she lived with and looked after her mother.   on 3 february 1945 the home she occupied with her mother and two sisters was destroyed by aerial bombing.  soviet occupation zone in 1945 barczatis joined the free german trade union federation "freier deutscher gewerkschaftsbund" / fdgb), and the next year she joined the newly formed socialist unity party ("sozialistische einheitspartei deutschlands" / sed).   although it was not instantly apparent to everyone, the creation of the sed was a necessary precondition for a return to one-party dictatorship in the soviet occupied parts of germany.   there are suggestions that barczatis' own enrolment was not driven by deep political conviction, but rather can be seen as a shrewd career move at a time of savage economic destitution across germany.   she also became a member of the society for german-soviet friendship and of the democratic women's league of germany, which would cement her credentials in the eyes of the authorities as a reliable person.  in the years following the war she worked as a typist and secretary for various forms and organisations.   she was hired in january 1946 to work as a secretary for gustav sobottka, a politician who at the time was the president of the national administration for energy supplies ("zentralverwaltung der brennstoffindustrie").   it was while working here that she got to know karl laurenz.   on 4 april 1950 barczatis was switched to a job as chief secretary to otto grotewohl, the prime minister.   in 1951 she attended a course at the regional party academy.   in
january 1953 she resigned from her secretarial position in order to attend a training course at the "walter ulbricht" management college (verwaltungsakademie „walter ulbricht").    her course completed, she returned briefly in may 1953 to her secretarial work for grotewohl.   in june 1953 she moved on again, becoming a senior clerical officer in the prime minister's economic office.   she retained that post till her arrest in june 1955.   meanwhile, she continued to live with her mother and her sister, herta, at an apartment in the rudower straße in berlin-kopenick.  espionage  stasi investigation on 26 june 1951 the ministry for state security (stasi) launched what they termed group action "sylvester" against elli barczatis and karl laurenz.   the exercise involved an intensive stasi surveillance operation.  the investigation was triggered by a former colleague of elli barczatis called johanna lexow.  they had worked together at the  "national administration for energy supplies" ("zentralverwaltung der brennstoffindustrie").   lexow reported suspicious behaviour by barczatis which she said had taken place on the afternoon of 20 december 1950 between 15.30 and 18.00 in the cafe attached to the restaurant of a retail distribution centre (handelsorganisation).   lexow saw barczatis acting suspiciously with a womaniser called karl laurenz.  on arriving in the cafe lerxow had spotted laurenz sitting alone, half hidden by a pillar, in a corner:  she had assumed he was waiting to meet his longstanding girl friend, whom she identified in her statement as "miss rettschlag".   she then also noticed elli barczatis, whom she knew was now working a secretary to the prime minister, sitting at a separate table some distance away.   however, laurenz now got up from his table, paid his bill, exchanged looks with barczatis and left the cafe.   barczatis then reached into a large bag that she had with her and removed a fat bundle of papers which she placed in another bag.   she then left the cafe without paying.   she returned shortly afterwards and placed a smaller bag in the larger bag and chatted with another woman sitting at the same table as she.   lexow inferred that she had seen barczatis, the prime minister's secretary, handing over documents in a suspicious manner.  a few days later joanna lexow reported what she had seen at her place of work, and her concerns were passed on to the ministry for state security.   stasi files from this point
on identify their informant, johanna lexow, under the cover name "grunspan" (literally: "verdigris").  karl laurenz in fact, since the autumn of 1949 karl laurenz and elli barczatis had been lovers.   at the time when they were spotted behaving suspiciously in a cafe, laurenz had not been identified as a spy, although he had gained a certain notoriety because of his sometimes inappropriate behaviour with female colleagues:  this may be why johanna lexow paid particular attention when she spotted him sitting on his own at a small table behind a pillar in the cafe.   in 1950 karl laurenz was expelled from the ruling party because of "conduct damaging to the party" (wegen „parteischadigenden verhaltens"").   in 1951 he was arrested and for a period detained, after which he worked as a journalist and simultaneous translator.  from 1952 - possibly earlier - karl laurenz was working with the gehlen organization, an intelligence agency established under the auspices of the us occupation authorities in west germany.   the gehlen organization later formed the basis for the establishment of the west german federal intelligence service, but in 1952 it was still something of a maverick operation, reflecting the personality of reinhard gehlen.   elli barczatis, the trusted secretary to  prime minister otto grotewohl, was able to access secret documents, presumably including material that she had typed for her employer, and pass them to her lover, believing that he needed them for his work as a journalist.  during the early 1950s the political division of berlin was not yet matched by physical divisions, and laurenz regularly went to the western sector (later west berlin) to meet clemens laby, his contact from the west german intelligence service.   according to testimony which they gave in 1955, sometimes barczatis accompanied him, being introduced to laby simply as laurenz's girlfriend: sometimes laurenz went alone.   it seems that for barczatis, clemens laby and karl laurenz were simply old friends who liked to meet up occasionally and talk about old times.   later, when he faced trial, it would be repeatedly put to laurenz that barczatis must have been aware of the true nature of the relationship between himself and laby, but laurenz repeatedly insisted that he made a point of keeping this from her, "for her own protection".   barczatis was nevertheless given a code name by the western intelligence services who identified her as "ganseblumchen" (literally: "little daisy flower").   in return for the information that he handed over, laurenz received several thousand western
marks over the years.    barczatis was well rewarded by laurenz with gifts small and large, ranging from chocolate to a radio receiver.  a slow investigation despite having started to investigate in january 1951, at the end of 1954 the stasi investigators still had no usable evidence against barczatis.   frequently when agents were sent to follow her they lost her when she used the local railway (s-bahn) to cross into the western sector.   neither telephone surveillance nor intercepting her mail produced any compelling evidence of culpability.   in the end she was caught when the stasi planted some specially prepared documents in the minister's safe, which barczatis then took home with her.   she later testified that she had taken these papers home in order to show them to laurenz, though this detail could never be proven.  arrest and questioning her arrest was originally scheduled for 8 december 1954, but was deferred.   in the end elli barczatis was arrested at around 17.30 on 4 march 1955, while she was leaving work at her ministry office:   laurenz had already been arrested approximately six hours earlier the same day, in the street close to his home.   they were taken initially to the police station at berlin-lichtenberg.   the next six months were spent held under investigatory detention at the berlin-hohenschonhausen prison.   laurenz was interrogated by a stasi officer called .    barczatis was initially interrogated by a more junior officer called karli coburger, but after 23 march 1955 niebling took over her interrogation which now ran in parallel with that of laurenz.   laurenz confessed his guilt towards the end of march 1955, but then retracted his confession, comparing the tactics employed by the stasi with those that he had evidently experienced at the hands of the nazi security services and the gestapo.   the long hours of nocturnal interrogation broke him down.   a routine was evolved whereby he underwent twelve hour interrogation sessions through the night, and was then sleep deprived during the hours of daylight.   despite the stasi efforts to play the two off them off against one another, laurenz made great efforts to exculpate his lover, but without success.   after many hours during which they were interrogated together, barczatis confessed in full and at her subsequent trial displayed remorse.  trial and execution on 17 june 1955 the investigation was finally completed, with a recommendation to the court that the ensuing trial should be conducted in closed court.   the trial itself, thought to have taken place in berlin, was held on 23 september 1955.   it is thought to have lasted approximately 13 hours and was recorded
.   a version of the recording, reduced to approximately 320 minutes, was found among the stasi archives following the demise of the east german regime.    presided over the nbr. 1 criminal bench ("1. strafsenat") of the supreme court.   neither barczatis nor laurenz had any legal representation.   apart from the two of them, the court officers and the prosecutors, only stasi officers were present in court.  the original recommendation had been for life sentences, but the court condemned both defendants to death for "boycott agitation" under article §6 of the constitution.    these were the eighth and ninth death sentences handed out by this court in 1955.  president pieck rejected an appeal for clemency on 11 november 1955.  at around 3 in the morning on 23 november 1955 karl laurenz was taken from his cell to the execution room at the national execution facility in dresden and guillotined.   elli barczatis was guillotined approximately ten minutes later.   other sources indicate that barczatis was the first to be guillotined.   the official minutes of the event record that her execution took approximately three seconds.  the bodies were cremated.  communication it was only some months later that the public became aware of the trial, the verdict and the execution.   during the first part of 1956 the families knew nothing of the whereabouts of barczatis and laurenz.   however, on 7 march 1956 elli's younger sister, herta barczatis, told a reporter from the new york times that she had learned that her sister had been condemned to death as a "spy for the united states" and sentenced to death.   she thought it probable that elli had been executed.  rehabilitation elli barczatis was officially rehabilitated by the berlin district court on 28 november 2006.  further context and evaluation the east german media were not able to report specifically on the barczatis case, because the trial was held behind closed doors "in camera".  but they did report in more general terms a massive unmasking and the successful arrest of more than 1,000 "gehlen spies".   most of these were, of course, not spies but political detainees.  contrasting assessments exist concerning the importance of elli barczatis to western intelligence.   there are those who identify her as an important agent.   these take their lead from the former western intelligence chief, reinhard gehlen, who published his memoirs in 1971, describing barczatis as "the first important link in the other part of germany" ("der ersten wichtigen verbindungen im anderen teil deutschlands").   he thanked her, posthumously,
for her "committed and successful work" ("hingebungsvolle und erfolgreiche tatigkeit").   much subsequent comment has concluded that gehlen, whose intelligence career had been widely discredited by the time he wrote his memoirs thanks, above all, to heinz felfe, had reasons of his own to emphasize any available positive aspects of the role played by the west german intelligence service during the 1950s.  since the records of her trial have become available it has become evident that many of the "facts" which the court concluded barczatis had passed to laurenz for onward transmission to his western handler involved agenda items that could be found in the newspapers in both east and west germany, concerning matters such as the scheduling of formal visits by prime minister grotewohl.   possibly of more interest to western intelligence would have been information on economic and industrial matters, such as supply shortages of certain raw materials, or challenges involved in feeding the population, but here again, the espionage alleged seems to have been strangely trivial.   the court gave close attention to a problem in which grotewohl's office became involved that had arisen in dresden in december 1953, when bakers had been unable to produce traditional christmas bread because the authorities, ignorant of the special characteristics of christmas bread in dresden, had failed to provide sufficient raisins.  one of the panel of judges that condemned barczatis to death in 1955 was still alive in 1995, when judge helene heymann (back in 1955 judge helene kleine) found herself facing the berlin district court on charges of manslaughter, false imprisonment and legal violations.   the court determined that kleine and her fellow judges had knowingly imposed disproportionately heavy penalties, and she was herself sentenced to a five-year jail term.   the sentence was suspended, however.  references  executed people from berlin federal intelligence service informants people executed by east germany by guillotine socialist unity party of germany members 1912 births 1955 deaths executed spies
dimitrije ljubavic ( - venice, january 1519 - brasov, 1564) was a serbian orthodox deacon, humanist, writer and printer who together with german reformer philip melanchthon initiated the first formal contact between the eastern orthodox church and the lutherans in 1559 when ljubavic took a copy of the augsburg confession to patriarch joasaph ii of constantinople. he is also referred to as demetrios mysos or demetrius mysos (also demetrius of thessalonica) in lutheran and other western books.  biography he came from a distinguished family of early printers, scholars, diplomats, and humanists. he is best known as the founder of the second printing press in targoviste in wallachia in 1545. he had many apprentices, among whom were romanian deacon coresi,  the serbian monks mojsije decanac, petar, and opar (oprea). the lutheran leader philip melanchthon entrusted him with a letter addressed to the ecumenical patriarch of constantinople to join forces against the holy roman empire and the ottomans, but all came to naught.  the house of ljubavic is a great example of how printing became a family enterprise. bozidar ljubavic (1460-1527) was the head of a printing dynasty from the city and municipality of gorazde in the serbian land of bosnia-hercegovina just at the time when the turkish invasions had taken place. he was best known for printing textbooks and biblical material in church slavonic, greek and latin for the serbian orthodox church and the lutherans during the reformation.    dimitrije's grandfather was serbian printer bozidar ljubavic, who is better known as bozidar gorazdanin. in 1518, bozidar ljubavic sent his sons, đurađ and hieromonk teodor, to bozidar vukovic in venice to learn the art of printing before purchasing a printing press for gorazde. the ljubavic brothers procured a press and began printing a hieratikon (priest's service book), copies of which had been completed by 2 october 1519 either in venice or at the church of saint george, built by stjepan vukcic kosaca, near gorazde. after đurađ ljubavic died in gorazde on march 1519, it is unclear whether his brother transported the press to gorazde before or after finishing the work on the hieratikon. because members of the ljubavic family were from gorazde, they brought the printing press to their hometown. at the church of saint george, đurađ and teodor organized
the gorazde printing house, which produced, beside the hieratikon, two more books in church slavonic of the serbian recension: a psalter in 1521, and a small euchologion in 1523. books were printed by bozidar's grandson dimitrije after being edited by hieromonk teodor, his uncle.  early life when his father died on 12 march 1519, dimitrije was taken by his mother from venice to the kingdom of candia (crete), then under venetian rule. when still young he came to chios, where he was taught old greek and latin. he also received an extensive religious education while at the academy of "janus lascaris" becoming initiated in the questions of eastern orthodox and roman catholic theology. there he met iacob heraclid, who pretended to be the legitimate heir of serbian despots and prince in exile of samos and paros. heraclid was a picturesque person of dubious origin, cousin of another greek adventurer by the name of james diassorin. (as fate would have it, dimitrije would meet up with heraclid many years later, then known as despot voda, who single-handedly attempted to impose the reformation in the heart of eastern europe after becoming a self-styled despot of romania from 1561 to 1563). after completing his studies at the lascaris academy, dimitrije joined hieromonk teodor ljubavic, his uncle in venice, where he learned the family's printing trade.  from gorazde to targoviste in 1544, the printing press was transported from gorazde to targoviste, the capital of wallachia, thus becoming the second such facility in the territory of present-day romania. its relocation (and reactivation) was accomplished by dimitrije ljubavic, bozidar's grandson, who brought with him hierodeacon mojsije. in targoviste, dimitrije printed a euchologion at the beginning of 1545, and an apostolarium in 1547. this was all done under the auspices of serbian-born metropolitan anania of wallachia at the time.  travels after dimitrije ljubavic and his apprentices opar and petar completed printing  "apostol" in targoviste in 1547, dimitrije left for constantinople, where he printed books for the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople for the next three years. from there he went to mount athos and printed more books at hilandar and other island monasteries such as docheiariou, osiou gregoriou monastery, agiou
pavlou monastery, dionysiou monastery, zograf monastery, and koutloumousiou for more than two years.  on his return to transylvania in 1552, dimitrije ljubavic not only took up responsibility for running a school in brasov but also worked as a writer, printer, publisher, and illustrator of books. he also became a member of the town council. he continued to cultivate his humanist network of connections with the lutherans and his own orthodox faithful, preserving his good relations with leading figures at the residence of metropolitan anania (brankovic) of ungaro-wallachia, who reigned as hierarch from 1544 to 1558. ljubavic also helped valentin wagner compile and publish an orthodox catechesis in 1556. the town's judge, johannes benkner, and johannes honter's political patron before he died in 1549, also supported attempts to print text using the cyrillic alphabet, and books were subsequently printed in both in slavonic-serbian and in romanian.  in 1556 a church slavonic printing press was established by saxons protestants in scheii brasovului, a neighborhood of brasov, where books were printed in serbian (slavonic) and romanian in cyrillic font. it was here that the new press printed octotechos by oprea, one of ljubavic's early apprentices, along with romanian deacon coresi.  reformation: lutherans and serbs the spreading of the reformation in europe during the 16th century did not avoid the territory of transylvania, wallachia, and moldavia (now all three part of romania). reformation ideas arrived in wallachia from hungary, germany, venice, carniola, and carinthia. german noblemen, clerks and military officers also played an important role in spreading the ideas of the reformation at the grassroots level.  wallachia was in a very difficult situation in the 16th century. most of the provinces were under turkish occupation and all efforts were focused on defending the country. as a result, the turks played a role in allowing the changes of the reformation to take hold in most parts of transylvania, including brasov and targoviste. in spite of a large number of renowned protestant intellectuals who came from other lands, protestantism did not have a profound impact on the people in wallachia, only for that moment in time.  it would seem that the reform movement as understood by dimitrije ljubavic and his contemporaries was in the broadest sense-catholic/universal-a trend happening in western and now eastern europe. his relations with the protestant group of urach, led by hans von
ungnad, in 1561, for a possible printing of protestant books in church slavonic (serbian recension) may constitute a partial chapter because it is an aborted business, but whose importance for the history of the reforms among the serbs and romanians is nevertheless indisputable.  well-aware that the newly established south slavic bible institute needed the collaboration of some orthodox in the translation of protestant literature, primoz trubar and stjepan konzul istranin engaged matija popovic and jovan malesevac for some time in urach. but they were very disappointed when the plan to bring to tubingen dimitrije ljubavic could not be realized. possibly for the same reasons that his countryman matthias flacius was prevented from joining the press at urach, near tubingen.    at this time, dimitrije ljubavic was the first secretary to the voivode of wallachia alexandru lapusneanu and then spent more than three years at the patriarchate of constantinople as a deacon supervising the printing of books. after having probably become acquainted in transylvania with peter petrovics, one of temesvar's most influential magnates and a fervent supporter of the reformation, he left for northern hungary, where in eperjes (presov, slovakia) he visits the governor of the city, sigismund tordai-gelous (1518-1569). there, armed with a letter of introduction from tordai-gelous, ljubavic leaves presov in may 1559 for wittenberg, where he met david chytraeus and his teacher philip melanchthon and become familiar with the augsburg confession in a greek version. melanchthon drafted a letter for patriarch joasaph ii of constantinople which dimitrije translated into greek which read as follows: "i send you a greek version of the 'augsburg confession', which was published without my advice. however, i approve the style and have sent it to constantinople by a man of learning, a dean of that city, who has been our guest during the whole summer. he relates that there were many churches in asia, in thrace and the neighboring countries but they have been gradually diminished by oppression and bondage...." the learned orthodox serb cleric, who was called uceni srb, dimitrije serb (the learned serb, demetrius serb), carried melanchthon's letter to the ecumenical patriarch of constantinople calling for a lutheran-orthodox "unity of all true christian communities." there was no response from the patriarch whatsoever. dimitrije wrote to melanchthon giving him an account of his journey to constantinople dated october 15, 1559. for a
short time, dimitrije was able to work on this plan when a friend from the past, iacob heraclid, suddenly became ruler of moldavia. heraclid, while in exile in germany, was won over by melanchthon to the reformation. the reformation had a significant impact on brasov. during the 16th century, brasov was divided between hungary and turkey. as a result of the ambiguous political situation and the territorial division of the peninsula, the reformation came here from three different directions: venice, which was for a short while particularly favorable toward reformation ideas; wittenberg, where especially german merchants were very active; and from carniola. several serbian printers remained loyal to the serbian orthodox church, but they collaborated with the lutherans and calvinists to produce more books (with the advent of the printing press). that collaboration contributed to the spreading of the reformation in romania, hungary, and austria. dimitrije ljubavic, therefore, took part in assisting the protestants to print catechisms in the romanian and serbian languages.  iacob heraclid made lutheranism the state church, offending the native eastern orthodox who viewed him as an iconoclast due to his rhetoric against images, even though he did not, in fact, destroy any icons. this, together with despot's decision to marry another foreigner (a pole), new and increased taxes and the omnipotence of his foreign retinue led to a boyar conspiracy instigated by high dignitary stefan tomsa. in the meantime, heraclid's postponement of debt payments angered albert łaski. faced with a large-scale rebellion, heraclid retreated to the fortress in suceava and withstood a three-month siege. at the end of it, despot voda was captured and was struck to death with a mace by tomsa himself. so too, dimitrije ljubavic's fate was sealed when the previous monarch regained the throne and took revenge on ljubavic for printing protestant books, thinking that he had abandoned orthodoxy for protestantism.  dimitrije ljubavic was eventually incarcerated and killed.  see also bozidar vukovic bozidar gorazdanin đurađ crnojevic hieromonk makarije hieromonk mardarije hegumen mardarije vicenco vukovic trojan gundulic andrija paltasic jakov of kamena reka jerolim zagurovic bartolomeo ginammi who followed zagurovic's footsteps reprinting serbian books. stefan pastrovic inok sava  references   demetrius mysos (demetrius of
thessalonica):http://cyclopedia.lcms.org/display.asp?t1=d&word=demetriusofthessalonica  translated and adapted from matei cazacu's article in french: https://www.academia.edu/13615388/dimitrije_ljubavic_c.1519-1564_et_limprimerie_slave_dans_leurope_du_sud-est_au_xvie_si%c3%a8cle._nouvelles_contributions  16th-century serbian people serbian orthodox clergy serbian printers serbian writers 1519 births 1564 deaths 16th-century printers 16th-century writers venetian slavs
the 2018 kelly cup playoffs of the echl began in april 2018 following the conclusion of the 2017-18 echl regular season. the kelly cup was won by the colorado eagles, in their last season in the echl before joining the american hockey league, in seven games over the regular season champions, the florida everblades.  playoff format at the end of the regular season the top four teams in each division qualifies for the 2018 kelly cup playoffs and be seeded one through four based on highest point total earned in the season. then the first two rounds of the playoffs are held within the division with the first seed facing the fourth seed and the second seed facing the third. the division champions then play each other in a conference championship. the kelly cup finals pits the eastern conference champion against the western conference champion.  all four rounds are a best-of-seven format.  playoff seeds after the regular season, 16 teams qualify for the playoffs. the florida everblades were the first team to qualify during the regular season on february 28. the everblades were the eastern conference regular season champions and clinched the brabham cup with the best record in the echl on april 5. the toledo walleye earned the top seed in the western conference.  final seeds  eastern conference  north division adirondack thunder - division champions, 89 pts manchester monarchs - 88 pts reading royals - 87 pts worcester railers - 82 pts  south division florida everblades - brabham cup winners, division champions, 112 pts south carolina stingrays - 104 pts orlando solar bears - 75 pts atlanta gladiators - 69 pts  western conference  central division toledo walleye - division champions, 105 pts fort wayne komets - 98 pts cincinnati cyclones - 81 pts indy fuel - 78 pts  mountain division colorado eagles - division champions, 102 pts idaho steelheads - 96 pts allen americans - 78 pts wichita thunder - 76 pts  playoff bracket  division semifinals  north division  (1) adirondack thunder vs. (4) worcester railers  (2) manchester monarchs vs. (3) reading royals  south division  (1) florida everblades vs. (4) atlanta gladiators  (2) south carolina stingrays vs. (3) orlando solar bears  central division  (1) toledo walleye vs. (4) indy fuel  (2) fort wayne komets vs. (3) cincinnati cyclones  mountain division  (1) colorado eagles vs. (4) wichita thunder  (
2) idaho steelheads vs. (3) allen americans  division finals  north division  (n1) adirondack thunder vs. (n2) manchester monarchs  south division  (s1) florida everblades vs. (s3) orlando solar bears  central division  (c1) toledo walleye vs. (c2) fort wayne komets  mountain division  (m1) colorado eagles vs. (m2) idaho steelheads  conference finals  eastern conference  (s1) florida everblades vs. (n1) adirondack thunder  western conference  (m1) colorado eagles vs. (c2) fort wayne komets  kelly cup finals  (s1) florida everblades vs. (m1) colorado eagles  statistical leaders  skaters these are the top ten skaters based on points.  ''gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; +/- = plus/minus; pim = penalty minutes  goaltending  this is a combined table of the top five goaltenders based on goals against average and the top five goaltenders based on save percentage, with at least 240 minutes played. the table is sorted by gaa, and the criteria for inclusion are bolded.  gp = games played; w = wins; l = losses; otl = overtime losses; sa = shots against; ga = goals against; gaa = goals against average; sv% = save percentage; so = shutouts; toi = time on ice (in minutes)  see also   2017-18 echl season  list of echl seasons  references  external links echl website  kelly cup playoffs 2017-18 echl season
spinning queen (foaled 27 march 2003) is a british thoroughbred racehorse and broodmare best known for her emphatic victory over a top-class field in the 2006 sun chariot stakes. as a two-year-old in 2005 she won on her debut and went on to run prominently in several major races, finishing third in the cherry hinton stakes and fourth in both the albany stakes and the prestige stakes. in the spring of following year she finished second in the nell gwyn stakes and sixth in the 1000 guineas before running third in the king charles ii stakes. she showed improved form in the summer, winning the eternal stakes and the brownstown stakes. in september 2006 she ended her racing career with a nine-length over soviet song, alexander goldrun and red evie in the sun chariot stakes at newmarket. she was then sold for a record price of 3 million guineas and was retired from racing. she has subsequently become a successful broodmare.  background spinning queen is a chestnut mare with a narrow white blaze bred in england by her owners richard a. n. bonnycastle & the oxfordshire-based marston stud. she was one of the best horses sired by the outstanding miler spinning world whose wins included the irish 2,000 guineas, prix jacques le marois, prix du moulin and breeders' cup mile. his other progeny included ancient world (premio vittorio di capua), special harmony (crown oaks), thorn park (stradbroke handicap) and duff (park stakes). spinning queen's dam our queen of kings was an unraced half-sister of labeeb (hollywood derby) and fanmore (arlington handicap) and a descendant of the influential american broodmare motto.  during her racing career spinning queen was owned in partnership by marston stud and richard bonnycastle's cavendish investing ltd. she was trained at lambourn in berkshire by barry hills and was ridden in all but one of her races by the trainer's son michael hills.  racing career  2005: two-year-old season on her racecourse debut, spinning queen was ridden by eddie ahern in a six furlong maiden race at haydock park on 3 june. starting at odds of 4/1 in a seventeen-runner field she took the lead a quarter of a mile from a finish and drew away to win by four lengths from the colt mobsir. spinning queen was campaigned against top-class opposition in her six subsequent races in 2005 and although she failed to win again she produced several good efforts. in the albany stakes, run that year at york racecourse on 17 june she finished
fourth behind la chunga, vague and rumplestiltskin after leading at half way. she then finished third behind donna blini in the cherry hinton stakes at newmarket racecourse in july and fifth to nasheej when favourite for the sweet solera stakes over seven furlongs at the same course on 6 august. later that month she finished fourth to nannina in the prestige stakes at goodwood racecourse and was then moved up in distance for the may hill stakes over one mile at doncaster and finished last of the eight runners behind nasheej. on her final appearance of the season she finished sixth of the fourteen runners behind speciosa in the rockfel stakes at newmarket on 15 october.  2006: three-year-old season in her first two races of 2006 spinning queen was unsuccessfully matched against speciosa. she finished second to pam sly's filly in the nell gwyn stakes in the nell gwyn stakes on 18 april and then started a 50/1 outsider for the 1000 guineas on 7 may. she finished sixth behind speciosa but finished ahead of rumplestiltskin, la chunga, nannina and donna blini. three weeks later she was dropped in class for the listed king charles ii stakes over seven furlongs at nemarket and finished third behind the colt jeremy and the filly wake up maggie.  on 24 june spinning queen was one of nine three-year-old fillies to contest the listed eternal stakes at an evening meeting at warwick racecourse and started odds-on favourite ahead of bouboulina who had finished second in the surrey stakes. after being restrained by michael hills in the early stages, she took the lead a furlong out and won by three lengths from secret night. barry hills' assistant john burrows said "everything dropped right for her tonight, the pace, the ground and the way the race was run. she loves this quick going, and a win like this will do a lot for her confidence". on 8 july the filly was sent to ireland for the group three brownstown stakes over seven furlongs at leopardstown racecourse and started at odds of 7/2 in an eight-runner field. wake up maggie started favourite whilst the other fancied runners included violette (firth of clyde stakes) and the jim bolger-trained modeeroch. after racing towards the rear of the field, spinning queen began to make progress in the last quarter mile, took second place a furlong out and caught wake up maggie in the final stride to win by a head. michael hills commented "spinning queen has some turn of foot. she
is getting stronger all the time and is getting things together now. she goes on any ground and i'm looking forward to riding her in some good races. she's on the way up". in the oak tree stakes at goodwood on 4 august spinning queen could not recover after being hampered in the final furlong and finished fifth, four lengths behind the winner red evie.  the dubai duty free cup at newbury racecourse saw spinning queen matched against older horses for the first time. starting at odds of 14/1 she finished strongly to take second place, a neck behind the five-year-old sleeping indian. the other beaten horses included satchem (joel stakes) and cesare (royal hunt cup). fifteen days later, on 30 september, spinning queen started the 12/1 outsider in a five-runner field for the group one sun chariot stakes over one mile on good to soft ground at newmarket. alexander goldrun started favourite ahead of red evie, soviet song and the atalanta stakes winner musicanna. the field would have been even stronger but for the late withdrawal of both speciosa and peeress. in a change of tactics michael hills sent the filly into the lead from the start and spinning queen produced a career-best performance, drawing away from her opponents in the final furlong to win by nine lengths from soviet song. after the race barry hills said "she's tough, and she always runs good, solid races. but the original plan had been to go for the challenge stakes. but then we thought, 'if you're not in it you can't win it'. we did work out how to try to do it beforehand. there would have been no point at all in trying to beat classic standard horses from behind, so the only way to do it was to wind it up from the front. they were hold-up horses, we got the script right and it's nice to see artistry can still have its day".  breeding record at the end of her racing career spinning queen was put up for auction in the tattersalls december sale at newmarket. despite strong interest from the representative of darley stud she was bought by the bloodstock agent james wigan for a sale record price of 3,000,000 guineas, on behalf of the rothschild family. her first five foals all won races. her recorded offspring are:  trade commissioner, a bay colt (later gelded), foaled in 2008, sired by montjeu. won three races in europe: also raced in australia. gallipot, bay filly, 2009, by galileo. won
three races including princess royal stakes. first secretary, bay filly, 2010, by nayef. won one race. the third man, grey colt (later gelded), 2011, by dalakhani. won two races. peterhof, bay colt, 2012, by dansili. won one race. peterport, bay colt, 2014, by nathaniel  pedigree  spinning queen is inbred 3 × 4 to northern dancer, meaning that this stallion appears in both the third and fourth generations of her pedigree.  references   2003 racehorse births racehorses bred in the united kingdom racehorses trained in the united kingdom thoroughbred family 13-b
iva marija tolic (born 24 june 1974) is a croatian biophysicist, known for her work on the microtubule cytoskeleton and associated motor proteins. she is currently senior research group leader and professor of biology at the ruđer boskovic institute in zagreb, croatia.  education tolic completed her diploma in molecular biology from the university of zagreb, croatia in 1996 and her graduate studies in molecular biology in the group of prof. nenad trinajstic, ruđer boskovic institute and university of zagreb, croatia in 1999. between 1999 and 2001, she completed part of her phd work with prof. ning wang, harvard school of public health, boston, united states and was awarded her doctorate in biology in 2002 by the university of zagreb, croatia.  career upon obtaining her doctorate, tolic did her first post-doctoral training between 2001 and 2002 at the niels bohr institute, copenhagen, denmark working with prof. lene oddershede and prof. kirstine berg-sorensen on the microrheology of cells. she then joined the european laboratory for non-linear spectroscopy, florence, italy for post-doctoral research with prof. francesco pavone, working on lymphocyte movement and laser microsurgery on the mitotic spindle. following her post-doctoral training, tolic was appointed as research group leader (w1, equivalent to assistant professor) at the max planck institute of molecular cell biology and genetics, dresden, germany in 2005 and was promoted to senior research group leader (w2, equivalent to associate professor) in 2010. in 2014, she moved to the ruđer boskovic institute, zagreb, croatia, being appointed as senior research group leader and professor of biology.  research as independent investigator, tolic has carried out pioneering research in the field of cell biology pertaining to the microtubule cytoskeleton and associated motor proteins, discovering: (i) a novel mechanism of kinetochore capture during mitosis by pivoting of astral microtubules around the spindle pole, (ii) a mechanism of regulation of the motor protein cytoplasmic dynein by attachment to its anchor protein in fission yeast and most recently, (iii) 'bridging fibers' that are non-kinetochore microtubules connecting sister k-fibers and thereby balancing forces in the spindle.  in addition, her research has demonstrated that fission yeast does not undergo replicative aging, contrary to existing theories on aging.  personal life tolic's
parents are the journalist and diplomat benjamin tolic and academic dubravka oraic-tolic. she married nenad brgic in 2014 and she is the mother of two children. she has stated publicly that she sees no conflict between religion and science, and describes herself as a believer.  awards and achievements  embo membership, 2018.  lieben prize, 2017.  national science award of the republic of croatia, 2016.  croatian women of influence award, 2016.  special award of the ruđer boskovic institute for outstanding contribution to the scientific excellence and international recognition of the institute, 2015.   european biophysics societies association young investigators' medal and prize, 2015.  5000th grantee of the european research council, 2015.  mrak award for creativity in science awarded for the collaboration with the ruđer boskovic institute.   order of danica hrvatska for science, outstanding contributions to science and its promotion in the republic of croatia and the world, 2014  investigator of the year, european life science award, 2014.  featured on cell "40 under 40", 2014.  membership in professional associations and societies tolic is a member of european molecular biology organization, the croatian biophysical society, the croatian society of biochemistry and molecular biology and the croatian microscopy society. in addition, she is member of the scientific advisory board of the journal science.  references  women biophysicists croatian biologists cell biologists 1974 births living people croatian expatriates in germany european research council grantees scientists from zagreb faculty of science, university of zagreb alumni members of the european molecular biology organization
justin david phillips (born 3 february 1995) is a south african rugby union player for the  in super rugby and  in the currie cup and in the rugby challenge. his regular position is scrum-half.  rugby career  schoolboy rugby  phillips was born in pretoria and represented the  at the under-16 grant khomo week in 2011 and at the under-18 craven week in 2012 and 2013. in both 2012 and 2013, he was included in a south africa schools squad after the craven week tournament. in 2012, he started matches against france and england, while in 2013, he started against england and came on as a replacement against wales.  western province  after high school, he moved to cape town to join the western province rugby institute. he started nine matches for the  team during the 2014 under-19 provincial championship, scoring four tries. his first try came in a 21-20 win over  before scoring two tries in a 43-24 victory over the s in potchefstroom. his fourth try came in their 29-22 victory over  in the semi-finals to send them to the final, which they also won, beating phillips' old side the blue bulls 33-26.  he made his first class debut during the 2015 vodacom cup, coming on as a replacement for western province in their 32-12 victory over a . three more appearances off the bench followed during the play-offs, in victories over a  in the quarter finals and the  in the semi-finals, as well as in their 7-24 defeat to the  in the final of the competition.  phillips made twelve appearances for  in the 2015 under-21 provincial championship, scoring tries against , ,  and a brace in their return leg against the blue bulls in cape town to help his side finish top of the log. he was also in the starting line-up for their semi-final victory over the golden lions and their victory in the final over the free state to win a youth title for the second year in a row.  he appeared for western province in the 2016 currie cup qualification series, scoring tries in matches against a , the  and the .  references  south african rugby union players living people 1995 births sportspeople from pretoria rugby union scrum-halves western province (rugby union) players south african people of british descent
vladimir nikolaevich osipov (; 9 august 1938 - 20 october 2020) was a russian writer who founded the soviet samizdat journal veche (assembly). the journal is considered to be an important document of the nationalist or slavophile strand within the soviet dissident movement.  biography  vladimir osipov was born on 9 august 1938 in slantsy, leningrad oblast.  he entered studies at the history faculty of moscow state university. he was expelled in 1959 for protesting the arrest of anatoly ivanov, a fellow student, but was able to finish his studies at the moscow pedagogical institute in 1960.  as a student, osipov was involved in reviving the informal mayakovsky square poetry readings in 1960. during this time, he produced a samizdat (self-published) literary journal boomerang.  in 1961, osipov was sentenced to seven years in strict-regime labour camps for "anti-soviet propaganda". in the camps, he converted to christianity. he was released in 1968 and managed to find work as a fireman.  during the years 1971-1973, osipov produced nine issues of the samizdat journal veche (assembly). the journal was to be a "russian patriotic journal" that followed the tradition of fyodor dostoyevsky and the slavophiles, taking what osipov called a "russophile" position.  osipov also edited the samizdat journal zemlia (earth) in 1974, with a more religious orientation. zemlia carried material by russian orthodox dissenters such as anatoly levitin-krasnov.  in 1974, osipov was arrested, tried, and sentenced to a second term for engaging in "anti-soviet propaganda".  osipov took part in the defence of the parliament during the attempted hard-line coup against gorbachev in august 1991.  during the 1990s and early 2000s, osipov was active as one of the leaders of the union "christian rebirth" (ucr), which calls for the establishment of a constitutional monarchy.  his third wife was writer adel naidenovich, who also participated in the samizdat journal veche.  osipov died on 20 october 2020 in moscow.  references  external links   бумеранг [boomerang]. project for the study of dissidence and samizdat, university of toronto  1938 births 2020 deaths people from slantsy soviet dissidents russian writers soviet writers
edge of innocence (, literally "summer, the portrait of a 19 year old") is a 2017 chinese mystery thriller film directed by chang jung-chi and starring huang zitao and yang caiyu. the film is based on the novel summer, the portrait of a 19 year old, written by japanese mystery writer soji shimada.  the story revolves around kang qiao and his obsession with a mysterious woman. the film was scheduled for release in china in august 2016 but was delayed to may 27, 2017.  plot after getting injured in a motorcycle accident, kang qiao is sent to the hospital. he is accompanied by his close friends zhu li and zhao yi, who try to cheer him up. zhu li is the daughter of the hospital owner and secretly likes kang qiao. one day, he looks out the hospital window and notices a young woman. he is enticed by her beauty, and falls in love with this mysterious woman while recovering from his injury. yet one night, he sees her stabbing an old man, presumably her father. she and her mother drag the body and buried it into an abandoned area near the hospital. kang qiao witnesses this incident, but decides to keep quiet because of his crush.  one day, kang qiao receives a threat advising him not to investigate the incident. kang qiao realizes that someone might be spying on him, and that the mysterious woman might be in danger. he decides to follow her, even trespassing into her house. he desperately looks for evidence on who the spy is, but leaves after finding her in the shower. the next day, kang qiao receives a phone message from a mysterious phone number, cautioning him not to stalk her. he is alarmed, but is determined to help her stay safe. kang qiao finds out that her name is xia yingying, and she works at a big company.  to approach xia yingying, he becomes her client and they go out for dinner together. he offers to send her home, but accidentally reveals that he knows where she lives. xia yingying becomes suspicious, and kang qiao reveals that he was spying on her during his stay at the hospital. they embrace each other and she accepts his feelings. she tells him that her family is strict, and to be careful. after kang qiao and xia yingying spend a day together, kang qiao is pursued by a group of men. they are looking for xia yingying and are sent by her mother. kang qiao is beaten very hard, but he refuses to tell them about xia yingying's whereabouts.
kang qiao returns to the hospital, where he finds out that the place where xia yingying's father was buried has been dug. he is alarmed and rushes inside the hospital to find xia yingying. kang qiao witnesses zhu li attempting to give xia yingying poisoned water. zhu li tells him that she is madly in love with him and she installed a camera in his hospital room. she also admits that she was the one trying to harm xia yingying. zhao yi also reveals himself as zhu li's accomplice, because zhao yi was in love with zhu li. zhao yi was the one who dug the supposed body of xia yingying's father, but there was nothing there except for a pile of infant supplies. the police soon arrives and arrests zhu li for her actions. xia yingying is taken away by her mother, but kang qiao chases after them on his motorcycle.  kang qiao eventually confronts xia yingying, and she decides to tell him the truth. her father was still alive, and he wasn't her father, but actually her husband. she married him to repay her mother's debts, but never told anybody about their relationship. xia yingying became pregnant with his child, but the infant soon died after birth. she got into an argument with her husband, and her mother told her to make him a cup of tea. she was using a knife to cut tea leaves when her father suddenly had a heart attack. she tried to save him, which made it seem like she stabbed him. xia yingying had buried the infant's supplies into the abandoned area near the hospital, which was witnessed by kang qiao.  ten years later, xia yingying is determined to leave the old man, but hesitates after her husband is set up by his business partners. she didn't want him to face any struggles and decided to stay. her husband also had cancer, and xia yingying accompanied him throughout chemo and lawsuits. the old man soon passes away and xia yingying leaves. she reunite with kang qiao, and they wish to spend another summer together.  cast   huang zitao as kang qiao  yang caiyu as xia yingying  li meng as zhu li  du tian hao as zhao yi  controversy  before the release of the movie in theatres, ann an, ceo and founder of desen international media co., ltd, lamented the lack of screening time for "edge of innocence" at its release during the dragon boat festival national holiday.  the movie received only 5.83% of the screen nationwide and
other domestic movies released during that time were also allocated similar amount of screening time, while foreign movies like "pirates of the caribbean" received 57.3% of screening time. ann an advised "the gap is so huge, and chinese films will surely die if this continues. please give a survival chance and space for domestic films and don't let them die at the starting line!"  reception  the film grossed cn¥ 5.3 million  (us$780,162) on its opening weekend. it has grossed cn¥ 9.1 million in china.  references    http://english.sina.com/ent/mo/2016-05-23/doc-ifxsktkp9177561.shtml  external links    chinese films chinese mystery thriller films 2010s mystery thriller films films based on japanese novels films based on mystery novels mandarin-language films 2017 films
attari assembly constituency (sl. no.: 20) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  amritsar district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
the men's coxless pairs competition at the 1952 summer olympics took place at mei bay, helsinki, finland.  schedule  results  heats first boat of each heat qualified to the semifinal, remainder goes to the repechage.  heat 1  heat 2  heat 3  heat 4  repechage first boat of each heat qualified to the semifinal.  heat 1  heat 2  semifinal first boat of each heat qualified to the final, remainder goes to the repechage.  heat 1  heat 2  semifinal repechage first boat of each heat qualified to the final.  heat 1  heat 2  heat 3  final  references  external links  official olympic report  rowing at the 1952 summer olympics
rima varzhapetyan-feller (, ) is an armenian woman of jewish origin. she has been the president of the jewish community of armenia since 1996, a community which currently stands at 1,000 people, despite jews being present in armenia since the days of tigranes the great. she is also a member of the european jewish parliament, representing armenia.  she has campaigned for the recognition of the armenian genocide, especially by israel, even sending an open letter to the knesset in 2012.  controversies  refuting claims of anti-semitism in armenia  organizations like the anti-defamation league and some media outlets in the united states have reported that armenia is probably the most anti-semitic member of the former ussr countries, with over half of the population harboring anti-semitic attitudes, according to some sources. varzhapetyan has refuted those sources.  accusations of supporting the glorification of armenian nazi collaborators on apr. 28, 2015, arye gut, an israeli of azerbaijani origin, accused varzhapetyan of not denouncing the publication of anti-semitic books in armenia and the glorification of drastamat kanayan, leader of the armenian legion and collaborator with nazi germany during world war ii. this letter prompted a response sent to the jewish journal by varzhapetyan and moreover, varzhapetyan has come against israeli and u.s. jewish newspapers where these anti-armenian articles have been published, as well as criticizing the leadership of azerbaijan for whitewashing the image of azerbaijan in the eyes of israel and the u.s. jewish community.  personal life varzhapetyan-feller is a mechanical engineer, married and has two sons.  references   armenian jews jews and judaism in armenia armenia-azerbaijan relations
herman cornejo (born 13 may 1981) is an argentine-born ballet dancer and a principal dancer with the american ballet theatre. he has had leading roles created for him by alexei ratmansky and twyla tharp; his signature roles include puck in a midsummer night's dream, mercutio in romeo and juliet, and the leading male role in ratmansky's symphony no. 9.  he won a bessie award in 2013, and the prix benois de la danse in 2014. in 2004, joan acocella called cornejo "the most technically accomplished male ballet dancer in the united states." he was described by critic claudia la rocco as "not a fairy-tale prince," but "something more interesting, and more useful, really, for ballet: a believable, 21st-century hero."  career  education cornejo was born in a suburb of buenos aires. after early ice skating lessons, at the age of eight he was introduced to ballet by his older sister, erica cornejo, who later became a principal dancer with the boston ballet. cornejo enrolled in the school of the teatro colon in buenos aires at age 9. at 14, he began studying at the school of american ballet on a full scholarship, and subsequently left to join julio bocca's ballet argentino.  at 16, he placed first at the eighth international moscow competition, becoming the youngest winner in the history of the competition. in 1998, aged 17, he joined the abt studio company as an apprentice.  professional career in 1999, at the abt, cornejo was chosen for the role of the bronze idol in makarova's production of la bayadere in japan. soon after, in 2000, he was promoted to the rank of soloist, and in 2003 became a principal dancer. since then, he has danced many major roles; signature roles include puck in a midsummer night's dream, mercutio in romeo and juliet, and the leading male role in ratmansky's symphony no. 9.  cornejo has worked with a number of choreographers. major roles have been created on him by alexei ratmansky, mauro bigonzetti, trey mcintyre, jorma elo, twyla tharp, and martha clarke, among others. cornejo has also choreographed several pieces for himself.  more recently, he has collaborated with italian ballerina alessandra ferri, after they starred together in a 2013 abt production. this collaboration led to other projects, including the 2016 production "trio concertdance". in 2015, corne
jo was the artistic director of the latin american stars gala, part of the performing arts center of los angeles county's 50th anniversary celebrations.  in 2014, cornejo was awarded the prix benois de la danse for outstanding male dancer, for his portrayals of aminta in sylvia, caliban in the tempest and a leading role in symphony #9, as well as for his appearance in martha clarke's cheri.  in october 2019, cornejo celebrated his 20th anniversary with abt with a special performance at the lincoln center, including george balanchine's apollo with cornejo's frequent partner, misty copeland, el chamuyo with his sister and former boston ballet principal dancer, erica cornejo, and twyla tharp's new work, a gathering of ghosts.  cornejo has performed as a guest artist with numerous companies around the world, including ballet estable del teatro colon, la scala ballet, universal ballet of korea, national ballet of japan, kremlin ballet, dortmund ballett, new york city ballet, boston ballet, pennsylvania ballet, martha graham company, ballet hispanico, ballet contemporaneo de cuba and corella ballet castilla y leon.  selected repertoire   the title role in apollo solor and the bronze idol in la bayadere the jester in ben stevenson's cinderella franz in coppelia conrad, ali, lankendem and birbanto in le corsaire basilio and the lead gypsy in don quixote puck in the dream colas and alain in la fille mal gardee ivan in alexei ratmansky's the firebird albrecht and the peasant pas de deux in giselle des grieux and lescaut in manon the maitre d' in the merry widow the nutcracker-prince and the cavalier in kevin mckenzie's the nutcracker the nutcracker-prince in alexei ratmansky's the nutcracker other dances the title role in petrouchka abderakman and bernard in raymonda romeo and mercutio in romeo and juliet sinatra suite prince desire and the bluebird in the sleeping beauty the rose in le spectre de la rose prince siegfried, benno and the neapolitan dance in swan lake james and gurn in la sylphide  aminta and eros in sylvia the third movement in symphony in ctschaikovsky pas de deuxthe boy in whipped creamlead role in theme and variations petite mort  created roles the host in ghost catcher fortune in hereafter rabbit in rabbit and rogue caliban in the tempest "i dig love" in within you without you: a tribute to george harrison afterite the brahms-haydn variations
c. to c. (close to chuck) concerto no. 1 for piano and orchestra garden blue glow - stop i feel the earth move pretty good year serenade after plato's symposium seven sonatas symphony  critical reception cornejo has earned international recognition as a soloist. in 2005, he was appointed a "messenger of peace" by unesco and "dancer of the year" by the new york times; he won a bessie award in 2013. in 2014, he won the "best male dancer" award of the international prix benois de la danse, along with the positano prize in italy.  in a 2004 profile in the new yorker, critic joan acocella called cornejo "the most technically accomplished male ballet dancer in the united states"  even though, she noted, he is unusually short for a male principal. critic john rockwell wrote in the new york times: "what makes mr. cornejo great is that his stunts don't look like stunts but like beautiful dancing." the nyt's chief dance critic, alastair macaulay, praised his artistic range in 2016: "his jumps' height and his turns' speed matter less than their windblown, tilting ecstasy and shining, boyish fervor. how can this paragon of adolescent lyricism also be the mature prince or witty imp we see in other ballets?" in the los angeles times in 2013, susan reiter wrote: "cornejo has elegantly and boldly left expectations behind. the phenomenal technique continues to amaze, but he always uses it to express the essence of each role." critic gia kourlas called "momentum", a piece cornejo choreographed to music by philip glass, an "unpretentious exploration of his clean virtuosity." he generally attracts enthusiastic applause, indicating his popular appeal.  cornejo is  tall, unusually short for a male ballet dancer. traditional ballet roles cast short male dancers in minor or comical parts, and cornejo was given such parts early in his career; critics called for him to be given larger roles, in recognition of his technical ability and popularity, and he was eventually cast in many lead roles as his career progressed. cornejo has remarked that he feels "much bigger" than others perceive him, enjoying "big, slow" adagio choreography as well as the quicker movements generally assigned to smaller dancers.  personal life cornejo was married to carmen corella, a professional dancer from spain and the sister of angel corella, the founder and director of the corella ballet.  corne
jo is now married to an argentine journalist, they have a child and are living in the bronx, new york city.  cornejo enjoys drawing as a hobby.  references  external links  herman cornejo at american ballet theatre  1981 births living people argentine male ballet dancers american ballet theatre principal dancers bessie award winners prix benois de la danse winners
mapaseka makhanya (born 9 april 1985) is a south african middle- and long-distance runner who specializes in the marathon race, formerly in the 800 and 1500 metres.  in global events, she competed at the 2001 world youth championships and the 2004 world junior championships without reaching the final, and placed lowly at the 2011 and 2013 world cross country championships (83rd and 86th). she finished eleventh in the 1500 metres at the 2007 all-africa games and sixth in the 800 metres at the 2010 african championships. she also competed at the 2007 summer universiade without reaching the final.  makhanya shifted to road races from 2013 on, making her marathon debut in johannesburg the same year. in 2015, she finished third at the hannover marathon in a time of 2:31:02 hours.  her personal best times are 2:03.36 minutes in the 800 metres (2010); 4:08.18 minutes in the 1500 metres (2010); 9:08.87 minutes in the 3000 metres (2013); 10:58.20 minutes in the 3000 metres steeplechase (2004); 15:53.61 minutes in the 5000 metres (2013); 1:12:43 hours in the half marathon (2017); and 2:31:02 hours in the marathon (2015).  in 2013 she became south african sportswoman of the year.  references  external links  1985 births living people south african female middle-distance runners south african female long-distance runners south african female marathon runners south african female steeplechase runners athletes (track and field) at the 2007 all-africa games african games competitors for south africa
the tour des pyrenees was a road bicycle race held annually in france and spain. it was organized as a 2.2 event on the uci europe tour.  winners  references  uci europe tour races cycle races in france 1995 establishments in france 2010 disestablishments in france recurring sporting events established in 1995 cycle races in spain defunct cycling races in france defunct cycling races in spain
odense isstadion ('odense ice stadium'), also known as spar nord arena for sponsorship reasons, is an ice hockey arena in bolbro, odense, denmark. it has previously been known as vinmedkant arena, bryggeriet vestfyen arena, and albani arena for sponsorship reasons. the arena is used for ice hockey as well as figure skating and serves as the home ice of the odense bulldogs and odense ishockey klub (oik). odense isstadion has a 3,280 spectator capacity, of which 1,024 are seated.  the venue also features a secondary hall, commonly noted as , which is used for ice hockey, figure skating, and curling. the secondary rink has a total capacity of 1,250 spectators, of which 350 are seated.  references  indoor ice hockey venues in denmark sport in odense
lin hei'er (; 1871 - 1900?) was a chinese rebel during the boxer rebellion, known as the holy mother of the yellow lotus (). she was a prostitute and acrobat with martial arts knowledge who became a member of the yihetuan. during the boxer rebellion, she organized and commanded the red lantern unit of female soldiers in tianjin.  life born on a tianjin canal houseboat, lin studied acrobatics and earned a living as an itinerant entertainer with her father. she married li youchuan while still very young. li youchuan was arrested by british soldiers during a raid against the opium trade and died in prison. later, she became a prostitute in houjia, on the south bank of the south canal in the hongqiao district, tianjin. furious against foreigners because of the death of li youchuan, hei'er joined the rebels of the yihetuan. once trained in martial arts, she trained female recruits and founded the red lantern unit of young female soldiers, the name coming from the color of their clothes. with rebel's widows she formed the blue lantern unit and with the old women, the black lantern unit. in addition she formed the pan lantern unit of cooks who were in charge of feeding the rebel troops. she recruited prostitutes, beggars and peasants into her ranks and rejected well-to-do women as useless "lotus feet".  in july 1900, the combined force of the eight-nation alliance descended on beijing and tianjin and looted and pillaged the cities. lin hei'er and other leaders put up fierce resistance. lin hei'er was injured during the battle of tientsin and was captured along with the other leaders on july 14, 1900, when the imperial troops who secretly helped the rebels abandoned them to their fate. her final destination is unknown. probably she was tried and executed, although turned into a popular heroine, the popular songs proclaimed that she survived.  a monument in her honor, the red lantern monument, was erected in 1994 near her place of birth.  see also list of people who disappeared  references  bibliography  1871 births 1900 deaths year of death uncertain 19th-century chinese people 19th-century chinese women chinese acrobatic gymnasts chinese female prostitutes chinese people of the boxer rebellion qing dynasty rebels gymnasts from tianjin missing person cases in china women in 19th-century warfare
the rd-864 (grau: 15d177) is a soviet liquid propellant rocket engine burning udmh and nitrogen tetroxide in a gas generator combustion cycle. it has a four combustion chambers that provide thrust vector control by gimbaling each nozzle in a single axis ±55°. it is used on the third stage of the r-36m uttkh (grau: 15a18) and dnepr. for the r-36m2 (grau: 15a18m), an improved version, the rd-869 (grau: 15d300) was developed.  history when the soviet military developed an improved version of the r-36m icbm, yangel's okb-586 developed a new engine for the third stage, the rd-864. developed between 1976 and 1978 it flew for the first time on october 31, 1977. with the start i and start ii the some 150 r-36m and r-36m uttkh were retired and to be destroyed by 2007. so, a civilian application was looked for and during the 1990s, yuzhnoe design bureau (the r-36m designer) successfully developed the dnepr launch vehicle. it flew for the first time on april 21, 1999 and as of june 2016 it is still operational. so, while the production of the rd-864 has long since been finished, the engine is still to this day operational.  the rd-869 was an improved version for the most powerful soviet icbm ever, the r-36m2 (15a18m). it had improved efficiency, restart capability and burn life over the rd-864. as of january 2016 there are still 46 operational r-36m2 (rs-20v, ss-18) and thus the rd-869 is still in service, if out of production.  versions  there are two versions of this engine:  rd-864 (grau index: 15d177): first developed as the third stage engine for the r-36m uttkh (15a18) icbm and, by extension, on the dnepr launch vehicle.  rd-869 (grau index: 15d300): an improved version of the rd-864. it has improved efficiency, restart capability and burn life. it is used on the r-36m2 (15a18m).  see also r-36m uttkh - the most powerful ever
soviet icbm for which the rd-864/869 engines were created. dnepr - a ukrainian small rocket project that uses the rd-864. yuzhnoe design bureau - the rd-864/869 designer bureau. yuzhmash - a multi-product machine-building company that's closely related to yuzhnoe and manufactures the rd-rd-864/869.  references  external links  yuzhnoye design bureau english-language home page  rocket engines using hypergolic propellant rocket engines using the gas-generator cycle rocket engines of the soviet union yuzhnoye rocket engines yuzhmash rocket engines rocket engines of ukraine
isaac toast (), is a toast (toasted sandwich) chain based in south korea. as of 2016, the chain has over 700 retail stores in south korea. it has further expanded internationally and established branches including macau, taiwan, malaysia, and singapore. it is named after isaac, the hebrew patriarch of genesis.  references  external links     south korean brands fast-food chains of south korea
olenecamptus cretaceus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by henry walter bates in 1873.  subspecies  olenecamptus cretaceus cretaceus bates, 1873  olenecamptus cretaceus marginatus schwarzer, 1921  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1873
raymond narville russell (born may 1, 1940) is a retired american light-heavyweight boxer. he won a gold medal at the 1971 pan american games and competed at the 1972 summer olympics.  references  1940 births living people boxers from cincinnati boxers at the 1972 summer olympics olympic boxers of the united states american male boxers boxers at the 1971 pan american games pan american games medalists in boxing pan american games gold medalists for the united states light-heavyweight boxers medalists at the 1971 pan american games
the my lady of the lake is a passenger vessel operating for ullswater 'steamers' on the lake of ullswater in the english lake district, where she has spent her entire working life. she was built in 1877 as a steam vessel, but converted to diesel power in 1936. she is believed to be the oldest working passenger ferry in the world, and is a member of the national historic fleet.  the lady of the lake has a length of , a beam of  and a draught of . her gross tonnage is 43, and she can carry 200 passengers.  history the m.y. lady of the lake was ordered by the ullswater steam navigation company, a predecessor of the current owners, to a design by douglas henson of penrith. she was built by t.b. seath & co. at rutherglen near glasgow, transported in three sections by rail to penrith, and thence by horse drays to waterside near pooley bridge. she was assembled on the slipway at waterside and launched on 26 june 1877.   in 1881 the lady of the lake sank at her moorings but was re-floated by a team of divers. in 1936 she was converted from steam to diesel power. the vessel sank again in 1950 in a severe storm, but was again re-floated. in 1965 the vessel was badly damaged by fire and was out of service for 14 years, before being restored and reengined. she was re-launched on 19 may 1979 by william whitelaw.  gallery  references  ferries of england ships and vessels of the national historic fleet transport in cumbria 1877 ships
tijen karas (born 28 january 1975, ankara) is a turkish news anchor, working for state-run turkish radio and television corporation (trt). in july 2016, during the attempted coup d'etat, she was forced to read out a declaration of the coup plotter soldiers which had taken over the trt building in ankara.  karas is a graduate of hacettepe university specializing in sociology. previously, she worked on turkey's trt international avrasya channel and edited the column "sanat ve politika" for the turkish news agency.  references  1975 births living people people from ankara turkish television news anchors turkish radio and television corporation people hacettepe university alumni turkish women journalists people involved in the 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt women television journalists
cloudinary is a saas technology company headquartered in santa clara, california, with offices in israel, england, poland, and singapore. the company provides cloud-based image and video management services. it enables users to upload, store, manage, manipulate, and deliver images and video for websites and apps. cloudinary is used by 1 million web and mobile application developers at more than 8,000 companies including conde nast, dropbox, forbes, outbrain, taboola and answers.com. inc. magazine has called cloudinary the "gold standard" of image management on the web.  history  cloudinary was founded in 2011 in israel by itai lahan (ceo), tal lev-ami (cto), and nadav soferman (cpo). cloudinary grew organically, building a profitable saas service, without venture capital funding. in 2015, the company received a strategic investment from bessemer venture partners (bvp), which was bvp's 100th investment in cloud companies.  in 2014, cloudinary announced fully integrated image processing add-ons leveraging technologies by imagga, url2png, aspose, webpurify and others. in 2015, cloudinary opened its u.s. headquarters in palo alto, california, and added video management to its services. in 2019, the company moved to santa clara, california, and launched tools for responsive breakpoint generation. cloudinary was named among forbes' the cloud 100 rising stars 2019.  on 7 april 2020, cloudinary launched its upgraded wordpress plug-in for streamlined picture and video processing, and revealed its designation as a wordpress vip platform partner, a select group of partners evaluated for consistency, protection, ease of use and size.  references   software companies based in california companies established in 2011 companies based in santa clara, california software companies of the united states santa clara, california 2011 establishments in the united states 2011 establishments in california software companies established in 2011
the mombasa republic is a proposed state that encompasses the coast province of kenya. the mombasa republican council in the main organisation to raise claims that mombasa should secede from kenya to become an independent state. they argued that secession would liberate the people of the coast province from marginalization by the successive governments in kenya. the slogan they are using is pwani si kenya ("the coast is not kenya").  the mrc is an organization which seeks to restore autonomy and self-determination to the historic mombasa coastal region of east africa. the mrc is a constitutional organization and aims to represents persons of all religions and tribes living in the mombasa coastal strip. mombasa has a unique cultural identity and proud history that long predates the current colonial borders of africa.  the oeas supports the mrc program as a legitimate expression of self-determination under the african charter on human and peoples' rights. the mrc joins other front line oeas member organizations in ambazonia, azawad, biafra, cabinda, kabylie, and matebeleland seeking freedom from unjust colonial borders and national self-determination.  history the mombasa republican council was formed in 1999 to address perceived political and economic discrimination against the people of the coast province. the group traces its secession claims to the 1895 and 1963 agreements transferring the ten-mile strip of land along the coast to kenya's government from zanzibar. some critics characterize these british agreements as a form of bribery designed to facilitate colonization of the interior. the group contests these agreements as invalid because the british government enacted them without the consent of coastal stakeholders claiming that the state of kenya has failed to honor the provisions designed to protect the coastal population.  references  nationalist movements in africa political movements separatism in kenya
the following is a list of musical works by faye-ellen silverman.  opera and musical theatre   k. 1971 for narrators, tenor, bass, female chorus, chamber ensemble and electronic tape (1972); based on kafka's the trial, added texts from the kafka diaries, balzac, and the chinese poet wen yiduo.  the miracle of nemirov, opera in 1 act (1974); libretto by the composer based on a short story by i. l. peretz.  a free pen, cantata for narrator, soprano, alto, tenor, bass, chorus (8 singers) and chamber ensemble (1990); libretto compiled by the composer from texts by socrates, spinoza, zenger, and others  orchestra  madness for narrator and chamber orchestra (1972)  stirrings for chamber orchestra (1979)  winds and sines for orchestra (1981)  adhesions for orchestra (1987)  candlelight for piano and orchestra (1988)  just for fun for chamber orchestra (1994)  orchestral tides for clarinet and chamber orchestra (2012/13)  large chamber ensemble  shadings for fl, ob, alto sax, bn, hn, tuba, 2 perc, vln, vla, cb (1978)  no strings for fl/picc, ob, bcl, bn, alto sax, hn, tpt, tb, tuba, and 1 perc (1982)  passing fancies for picc/fl, ob, cl/bcl, bn, hn, tpt, tb, perc, 2 vln, vla, vc, cb (1985)  bridges in time for tpt, perc, 4 vln, 2 vla, 2 vc, cb (1986)  brass  dialogue for horn and tuba (1976)  kalends for brass quintet (1981)  quantum quintet for brass quintet (1982)  trysts for 2 trumpets (1982)  zigzags for tuba (1988)  first position for trombone and marimba (1992)  at the colour cafe for brass choir (4 c tpts, 4 hns, 2 tb, bass tb, tuba, perc) (1997)  dialogue continued for horn, trombone and tuba (2000)  from sorrow for trumpet, horn and bass trombone (2001)  triple threat for 3 trumpets (2001)  alternating currents for bass trombone and piano (2002)  double threat for two trumpets (2002)  meetings for 2 euphoniums and 2 tubas (2003)  protected sleep for
horn and marimba (2006)  stories for our time  for trumpet and piano, (2007)  edinboro sonata for tuba and piano. (2009)  combined efforts for euphonium, tuba, and piano. (2014)   custom-made shades for trombone and piano (2015)  woodwinds  three movements for saxophone alone for soprano saxophone (1971)  conversations for alto flute and clarinet (1975)  speaking alone for flute (1976)  windscape for woodwind quintet (1977)  oboe-sthenics for oboe (1980)  layered lament for english horn and electronic tape (1983); tape realized at the university of utah electronic music studio.  on four for electronic valve instrument, oboe/english horn, and piano 4 hands (1983)  restless winds for woodwind quintet (1986)  xenium for flute and piano (1992)  taming the furies for solo flute (2003)  interval untamed: five miniatures for alto saxophone (2010)   conversations continued for alto flute and clarinet (2011)  tides for clarinet and piano (2011/13)  colored tones for soprano saxophone. (2014)  strings  memories for viola (1974)  string quartet (untitled) (1976)  speaking together for violin and piano (1981)  volcanic songs for harp (1983)  azure skies for violin, cello and harp (1993)  duplex variations violin and piano (1995)  paula's song for string quartet (1996)  obsessions for cello and piano (1999)  trial balance for double bass (1999)  reconstructed music for violin, cello and piano (2002)  translations for violin and cello (2004)  let's play for string quartet (2007)  a brief conversation for violin (2012)  chamber music  for him for flute, cello and vibraphone (1975)  yet for him for flute, cello and piano (1980)  hollowed refrains for oboe, violin and piano (1987)  unquiet dreams for clarinet, violin and piano (1992)  connections for clarinet, cello and marimba (1994)  troubled repose for flute, viola and double bass (1998)  shifting colors for guitar, percussion, double bass, and piano (2012)  piano  settings for piano (1978)  gliffs for piano (1984); influenced by the dance techniques of pina bausch.  two/three (1996)  two bagatelles (2007)  three/four (2007)  fleeting moments for piano
(2011/12)  guitar  3 guitars (1980)  processional for solo guitar (1996)  pregnant pauses for guitar quartet (2005)  the mercurial guitarist for solo guitar (2012)  percussion  three by three for percussion trio (1979)  pas de deux for marimba and piano (1991)  of wood and skins for percussion duo (2003)  memories and alterations solo marimba (2008)  choral  for showing truth for female chorus a cappella (1972, revised 1978); text by john keats  hymn of compassionate love for soloists, choir, trumpet, timpani, and strings (2005); biblical text: i corintheans 13  the wings of night for mezzo-soprano and baritone soloists, satb choir, and guitar. (2008); texts by shakespeare, teasdale, dickinson, and colborne-veel, illustrate the contrasting aspects of night.  vocal  in shadow for soprano, guitar and clarinet (1972); texts by emily dickinson  echoes of emily for alto and english horn (1979); texts by emily dickinson  to love? for bass-baritone and piano (1980); settings of an elizabethan song and poems by coventry patmore and ralph waldo emerson  journey towards oblivion for soprano, tenor and chamber ensemble (1991); based on texts by christina rossetti and d.h. lawrence  mariana for mezzo-soprano, clarinet and piano (1995); text by alfred lord tennyson  love songs for soprano and flute/alto flute (1997) or mezzo-soprano and flute/alto flute (2005); texts by sara teasdale  wilde's world for tenor, viola and guitar (2000); text: "to l.l." by oscar wilde  left behind for horn and mezzo-soprano (2006); poetry by edna st. vincent millay  manhattan fixation for soprano, mezzo-soprano and cello (solo voices) or female chorus and cello (2008)  danish delights for soprano and guitar (2009); texts by sara teasdale, corinna, and thomas campion.  references  silverman, faye-ellen
hms carmen (often el carmen, or sometimes carmine), was the spanish frigate nuestra senora del carmen, built in 1770 at ferrol. the british royal navy captured her on 6 april 1800 and took her into service as hms carmen. she served in the mediterranean until she returned to britain in 1801. there the admiralty had her laid-up in ordinary. she was sold in december.  capture  in april 1800,  was on blockade duty at cadiz as part of a squadron under rear-admiral john thomas duckworth and including the 74-gun ships  and , and the fireship . on 5 april the squadron sighted a spanish convoy comprising thirteen merchant vessels and three accompanying frigates, and at once gave chase. leviathan and emerald eventually opened fire on the rigging of two spanish frigates in order to disable them; shortly afterward, both spanish frigates surrendered.  nuestra senora del carmen, captain don fraquin porcel, of 36 guns, 140 men, and 950 tons (bm), was sailing from cadiz to lima with a cargo of 1500 quintals of mercury, sundries of "cards", and four 24-pounder guns stored for foreign service. she was newly coppered and had provisions for a four month voyage. she carried as a passenger don pedro ynsencio bejarano, archbishop of buenos aires. before she surrendered, carmen had 11 men killed and 16 wounded.  santa florentina, captain don mamuel norates, of 36 guns, 114 men, and 950 tons (bm), had been traveling from cadiz to lima with 1500 quintals of mercury and sundry "cards", and five 24-pounder guns. before she surrendered she suffered 12 killed and 10 wounded, including norates and her second captains.  on 7 april, the british sailed for gibraltar with their prizes. on arrival they encountered incendiary, which had made port the previous day with two captured vessels of its own. in all, the small british squadron managed to capture nine merchant vessels and two frigates. the royal navy took both frigates into service.  royal navy service captain william selby commissioned carmen in december 1800 for the mediterranean station. she then proceeded to capture a number of merchant vessels.  3 apr 1801 the french brig gentil seconde, from bayonne bound to senegal, laden with bale goods and wine. 6 apr 1801 detained the spanish schooner san josef. 23 may 1801 the spanish mistico jean baptiste, from cadiz bound to vera cruz, laden with bale goods, wine, and sundries, and since carried into cadiz by the crew. 28 may 1801 the
spanish schooner primivera y concevida, from magadore bound to teneriffe, laden with wool and sundries. 21 jun 1801 a spanish tartane of unknown name, from algeziras bound to malaga, in ballast. 21 jun 1801 the spanish polacre nostra senora de los dolores, from algeziras bound to cartagena, spain. 21 jun 1801 the spanish tartane senora st. anna, from algeziras bound to malaga, with coals.  on 22 july 1801 letters arrived at plymouth from carmen, dated 4 june. the letters reported that she had captured four prizes, three of which arrived at gibraltar bay. also carmen,  superbe, venerable, and cambrian had chased into cadiz bay, three french frigates. the frigates had had on board two french centre admirals and seamen for the spanish squadron of 12 sail of the line fitting for sea there. the spanish squadron had had to delay its sailing because one of the storehouses full of naval stores in the dock-yard had caught fire and been totally consumed. the four british vessels were waiting for rear-admiral sir james saumarez's squadron from gibraltar to block the spaniards up.  because florentina served in the navy's egyptian campaign between 8 march 1801 and 2 september, her officers and crew qualified for the clasp "egypt" to the naval general service medal that the admiralty authorised in 1850 for all surviving claimants.  carmen and  arrived at spithead on 9 november 1801, from egypt.  fate carmen arrived at portsmouth on 2 december 1801 where she was laid up. the principle officers and commissioners of his majesty's navy offered "el carmen, 971 tons, copper-bottomed, lying at portsmouth", for sale on 24 february 1802. she sold there that month.  notes, citations, and referencesnotescitationsreferences'    1770 ships frigates of the spanish navy captured ships frigates of the royal navy
the d.c. women's hall of fame (also district of columbia women's hall of fame) was a project supported by the d.c. commission for women and meant to honor the achievements of women from the district of columbia. eight women were inducted into the hall of fame in its first year, 1988. women were chosen for making "significant contributions in the fields of community and public service, education, health or labor." the hall of fame can be seen in the dr. mildred e. gibbs lecture hall at the charles sumner school.  list of inductees  references  external links   d.c. women's hall of fame award  1988 establishments in washington, d.c. women's halls of fame halls of fame in washington, d.c. awards established in 1988 women in washington, d.c.
taylor harry fritz was the defending champion, but is no longer eligible to compete.  felix auger-aliassime won the title, defeating miomir kecmanovic in the final, 6-3, 6-0.  seeds  main draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  bottom half  section 3  section 4  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  seventh qualifier  eighth qualifier  external links   draw  boys' singles us open, 2016 boys' singles
wsmx may refer to:   wsmx (am), a radio station (1500 am) licensed to serve winston-salem, north carolina, united states  wsmx-fm, a radio station (100.3 fm) licensed to serve goshen, alabama, united states  wsmx-lp, a defunct radio station (98.3 fm) formerly licensed to serve clanton, alabama
sundelin is a swedish surname that may refer to jorgen sundelin (born 1945), swedish olympic sailor  matti sundelin (born 1934), finnish football player peter sundelin (born 1947), swedish olympic sailor, brother of ulf and peter stefan sundelin (1936-2003), swedish olympic sailor, cousin of jorgen, peter and ulf ulf sundelin (born 1943), swedish olympic sailor, brother of jorgen and peter ella sundelin (born 2007), swedish murderer, convicted of sororicide and sentenced to life in prison, she also likes the smell of her own farts  swedish-language surnames
boulia stone house is a heritage-listed detached house at pituri street, boulia, shire of boulia, queensland, australia. it was built circa 1880s to 1890s. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992.  history  it is local tradition that the building was constructed in the mid 1880s for one of three possible uses. it may have been constructed by  ernest eglington, police magistrate (and ex native police sub-inspector), as temporary accommodation for the police magistrate and court house; by james edward jones as a store for burnell and jones, merchants and storekeepers; or as a private dwelling for jones.  by the mid 1870s settlement had spread throughout north and west queensland. although wool and sheep prices improved in the early 1870s other problems, such as isolation, high carriage rates, shortage of labour and distances from markets remained serious. however, by 1873 capital for improvements became available from southern investors which led to a greater consolidation of the pastoral industry particularly in western queensland.  by 1877 a small settlement had been established on the bank of the burke river. a community of tents sprang up around a store established by ernest henry, probably in the vicinity of a former carriers camp on the boulia waterhole. by 1879 a town reserve had been proclaimed. this reserve, of , was resumed from the bulla bulla no.2 and no.4 runs.  the town developed slowly although a mail run to cloncurry started fairly quickly. the town was surveyed in 1882 by government surveyor hartnell and the first land sales took place in 1883. government facilities were established soon after. in 1883 a clerk of petty sessions was appointed and a telegraph station constructed in 1884.  the introduction of the crown land act 1884 brought some changes to the small community. part of the role of the 1884 land act was to provide for resumptions from pastoral holdings and to make "agricultural and grazing farm selection" a basic feature of permanent land settlement. while pastoralists in the western districts were not subject to this act they could apply to have their leases consolidated. many pastoralists welcomed the idea of consolidation because the new settlers would provide a stable source of labour.  by 1891 boulia had developed into a substantial community. in the queensland post office directories it was described as a pastoral town on the banks of the burke river with a population of 150. there was a police magistrate, clerk of petty sessions, one sergeant of police, three constables and a tracker, post and telegraph
office, a line repairer, two hotels, (the australian and the royal), a saddler and three storekeepers. by 1893 a school and progress association had been established.  the land on which the stone house was constructed was purchased by henry sanders shaw in march 1884. james edward jones, owner of the land for twenty years, purchased the site in 1897. the land was sold in 1917 to william thomas cobley lilley and repurchased by james edward jones' family in 1939. the property remained in the hands of the jones family until 1978 when the shire of boulia purchased it.  the date of construction is unknown, but local folklore indicates that it was constructed in the mid 1880s by either storekeeper, james edward jones or police magistrate, ernest eglington. the idea that james jones designed and constructed the building in 1885 is repeated in a news article published in 1979. another report suggests that ernest eglington built the house  as a temporary court house and barracks until the official government buildings were constructed.  yet another local story holds that three stonemasons, from armidale, new south wales, were employed to work on the building which apparently took four years to construct. the stone is believed to have been quarried from nearby limestone ridge, while the roof framing timbers were cut at a local saw pit, and the iron roof sheeting carried by rail to hughenden then by dray to boulia. the house was reputedly constructed without nails.  while the above information may be correct, james jones did not purchase the property until 1897, and, although he may have leased the land from henry shaw, there is no record of a lease on the titles information. it is known, however, that jones took out a mortgage of  eight months after purchasing the property in january 1897.  burnell and jones, merchants, appear in the queensland post office directories for boulia in 1889. they continued as storekeepers in a partnership until the 1894-95 issue of the directories after which only je jones is identified as a storekeeper. james jones remained a storekeeper until 1913 when he is identified as a butcher. from 1920 to 1933 he was a gardener in boulia.  the purchase of the block on the corner of pituri and hamilton streets and the dissolution of the partnership with burnell coincide with james jones taking a mortgage on the property. it is possible that he constructed the house at that time. a further possibility is that the building was constructed as a store, by james jones, with two entrances and a cellar for the storage of perishable
goods.  conservation work on the building was funded by a national trust grant in 1976-77. the work was planned by national trust architects and the plaster and masonry repairs were carried out by brisbane plasterer gino sandrin.  after repair works were completed the building was converted to a museum and opened in the mid 1980s. in 1987 boulia historical society was formed to assist with the running of the museum. in february 1994 the roof was damaged in a severe storm.  description  boulia is a small township in far western queensland, some  south of mount isa, with a population of about three hundred. the stone house is situated on the corner of pituri and hamilton streets, one block from herbert street, the main street of boulia.  although the majority of the surviving buildings of the town date from the 1930s or later, there are some remaining early timber structures, such as the core of the post office (1885). the only other evidence of stone construction nearby is the ruins of the native police barracks some  from the town.  the external walls of the house are of local sandstone and limestone with lime mortar weathered by the red sand. the stonework is laid as random rubble to courses, and squared at edges and openings.  the cottage has a core of four stone rooms, with a timber kitchen and enclosed verandah extending to the rear between stone blade walls. the hipped corrugated iron roof features ridge cappings of corrugated sheet beaten flat. there is an open verandah to the front of the house, paved in stone similar to the walls.  entry to the house is by a pair of glazed french doors which open onto the front verandah. there is a matching opening where a second pair of doors apparently once were. the windows to the house are double hung, with some sashes missing and an assortment of pane arrangements. other doors are low-waisted four panel doors. the joints of the roof framing are bolted, and the joints of the window frames are pegged.  the interior walls have been plastered. there is presently no ceiling, exposing the timber roof framing to view. the timber top plates show markings of being pit sawn. the front two rooms and the rear verandah have concrete floors, and the other rooms timber. through a timber trapdoor to the rear of the house, steps lead down to a basement room. it has a low head height, exposed stone walls and an earth floor.  the house presently contains a wide variety of museum artefacts and display cases, demonstrating aspects of early western lifestyle
.  the grounds are partly grassed, and have some small trees. to the rear of the site are sheds containing other museum functions. the site is presently enclosed with a high wire mesh fence. at the front of the site is a large sign introducing the museum, and giving background information on the stone house.  heritage listing  boulia stone house was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  built in the mid 1880s, the house reflects the growth of boulia and district after the consolidation of properties under the crown land act 1884, is illustrative of the boom in sheep and wool production after the drought, and is evidence of the role of boulia as a commercial centre for the district since that time.  reputedly taking four years to build, it is an example of the utilisation of local materials for construction in remote areas, and is part of the late nineteenth century stone building tradition of central australia which stretched into western queensland.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  the stone house is recognised as one of boulia's oldest surviving buildings, and is also the only stone building extant in the township. it is greatly valued by the local community as one of their few identified historic places. because of the role they the house has played in the commercial and public life of the town, this value is demonstrated by its purchase by the local council, and its establishment as the local museum.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the stone house is recognised for its aesthetic qualities, and its contribution to the character of the boulia townscape. much of the early building fabric still exists, and the external stone walls in particular reflect the colours and textures of the region.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  before being bought by the boulia shire council, the house remained in the jones family for at least 70 of its 90 years, and members of that family still live in the area.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register shire of boulia houses in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
gudbrand granum (19 september 1893 - 11 february 1984) was a norwegian politician for the communist party.  he served as a deputy representative to the parliament of norway from buskerud during the term 1945-1949. he hailed from modum and had first been elected to the municipal council in 1922.  references  1893 births 1984 deaths people from modum deputy members of the storting communist party of norway politicians buskerud politicians
meneghello is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  ezio meneghello (1919-1987), italian footballer julio meneghello (1911-2009), chilean physician luigi meneghello (1922-2007), italian writer matteo meneghello (born 1981), italian racing driver virgil meneghello dincic (1876-1944), croatian painter and art teacher  italian-language surnames
dadhibaman college, bhatli was founded in 1990. the college is located in bhatli in the district of bargarh, odisha, india amidst a serene surrounding. it is a co-educational institution with a strength of more than 380 students and is affiliated to sambalpur university.the college offers hons facility in subject like economics, history, political science, education and sanskrit. the college has a library which the students and the faculty use invariably.  courses available economics, history, political science, education, sanskrit, odiya and english hons  total seat==192,  academic staff  mr. jayasen bhoi, lect. in history  dr. mitrabhanu sahu, lect. in odia  mr. shyamlal nayak, lect. in political science  mr. biswajit hota, lect. in english  mr. rajiba sahu, lect. in sanskrit  mr. r.n. panda, lect. in economics  mrs. sonia mahakur, lect. in education  mr. prakash debta  mrs. rajashree nath, lect. in sanskrit  mrs. jayanti sahoo, lect. in economics  miss muni sahu, lect. in education  mr. ajit barik, lect. in political science  hostel accommodation nivedita hostel is for women student admitted to the dadhibaman college, bhatli  activities annual college sports, ncc, nss activities, programmes organised by government, annual function, annual college magazine programme, awareness programmes, laptop distribution.  references  external links    department of higher education, odisha universities and colleges in odisha bargarh district colleges_affiliated_to_sambalpur_university 1990 establishments in orissa educational institutions established in 1990
oliver wendell holmes (february 2, 1902 - november 25, 1981) was an american archivist and historian, and served as executive director of the national historical publications commission from 1961 to 1971.  background  holmes was born in saint paul, minnesota to swedish-born parents, and was raised on a farm in the southeastern part of the state. in 1922, he received his b.a. from carleton college in northfield, minnesota. he received a ph.d. in history at columbia university in 1956. his area of expertise was the history of transportation in the american western frontier.  while in school at columbia he began working as an encyclopedia writer and, later, staff of the national archives, delaying the completion of his degree.  career  holmes began working for the national archives when it was founded in 1935. his positions there included chief of the interior department archives from 1938 to 1941, director of research and records description from 1942 to 1945, program advisor from 1946 to 1948, chief of the natural resources records branch from 1948 to 1961, and executive director of the national historical publications commission from 1961 to his retirement in 1972.  beginning in the 1930s, he published many articles in the american archivist. he was also published in the society of american archivists' journal and the southwestern historical quarterly.  affiliations  holmes was also deeply involved in professional service, and was a founding member of the society of american archivists (saa).  he served in many capacities with the ssa and was its president in 1958 through 1959 in 1978, howard university press published his book, indian-related records in the national archives and their use.  he was a founding member of the potomac corral of westerners and a member of the western history association, the columbia historical society (now the historical society of washington, d.c.), and the cosmos club.  honors  holmes won the waldo gifford leland prize for his presidential address for the society of american archivists. in 1979, ssa created the holmes fund in his honor and to enable foreign archivist to come to u.s. repositories. in 1980, the western history association gave his an award of merit, for "his important contributions to the field."  personal  holmes was married to dorothy.  references  1902 births 1981 deaths carleton college alumni columbia university alumni american archivists 20th-century american historians 20th-century american male writers people from saint paul, minnesota fellows of the society of american archivists american people of swedish descent american male non-fiction writers
pedro suarez de deza (died 1206) was a spanish prelate, the bishop of salamanca from 1166 until his transfer to the archbishopric of santiago de compostela in 1173, where he remained until his death. in 1183 he served as chancellor of the kingdom of leon. of his stature in the leonese kingdom, roger wright claims that he "would probably be now ... widely celebrated ... if he had only had a biographer", like his predecessor, diego gelmirez, did.  a native of galicia, pedro was probably educated at the university of paris, where he earned the title of magister. letters he later received from pope innocent iii indicate that he had studied and taught theology at some point. he is in fact the only leonese bishop of the twelfth century known to have studied theology. he introduced reformed medieval latin orthography to the see of salamanca and may also have introduced in the leonese chancery. perhaps also in canon law, at compostela he patronised canon lawyers like bernardus compostellanus antiquus. by august 1162, pedro had returned from paris to compostela and was probably a canon there. he was appointed a chancellor by king ferdinand ii in 1165. by 1166 he had become an archdeacon at compostela and was working in the household of archbishop martin martinez. he was consecrated to the see of salamanca by pope alexander iii in rome.  as bishop of salamanca, pedro worked to achieve harmony with his fellow bishops. he negotiated an agreement of confraternity between the cathedral chapters of salamanca and the  neighbouring diocese of avila across the border in castile. he negotiated settlements to boundary disputes with the diocese of ciudad rodrigo, drew the diocese of salamanca into closer relations with the papacy and supported the new spanish military orders, the order of santiago and order of alcantara. so far as was possible, he maintained good relations with both his own king and the king of castile, alfonso viii, who were often at odds. it is probable, although contemporary evidence does not survive, that intellectual life first flourished at salamanca under him. in 1173, he was translated to the see of santiago. his successor at salamanca, vitalis, had perhaps been his protege. the bishop of zamora from 1193 to 1217, martin arias, was likely also a protege of pedro.  the sources for pedro's long 33-year tenure of the archdiocese of santiago are surprisingly meagre. he came to the see of decades of disruption, which culminated in the dispute with the king in 1160-61. much of the diocese
's temporalities had been annexed by the crown or usurped by the galician aristocracy, and the suffragan dioceses did not acknowledge the archbishop's authority. pedro nonetheless maintained good relations with the ferdinand ii and alfonso ix, even when the kingdom came under papal interdict because of alfonso's incestuous marriage. he also settled many disputes with the nobility. in 1176, pedro accompanied the king on his expedition against jerez.  pedro reformed the administration of the archdiocese and enacted regulations for the cathedral chapter. he secured a steady revenue through the votos de santiago, regular donations to the saint james in gratitude for his military assistance. the construction of the cathedral of saint james, suspended between 1140 and 1173, he resumed. during his episcopate the portico of glory was added.  at compostela, pedro maintained a close relationship with the papacy as he had done in salamanca. he received papal support for his reforms, and he attended the third lateran council in 1179. from innocent iii he got rulings that the dioceses of evora, idanha, lamego and lisbon were his suffragans, but he had to give up claims on coimbra and viseu. he did not receive a ruling on zamora.  notes  sources  1206 deaths bishops of salamanca archbishops of santiago de compostela
college corner is an unincorporated community in waltz township, wabash county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography college corner is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in wabash county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
prince zhi of the second rank, or simply prince zhi, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince zhi peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yunzhi (1672-1735), the eldest son of the kangxi emperor. in 1698, yunzhi was granted the title "prince zhi of the second rank" by his father. the title was passed down over three generations and held by three persons.  members of the prince zhi peerage  yunzhi (1672-1735), the kangxi emperor's eldest son, held the title prince zhi of the second rank from 1698 to 1708, stripped of his title in 1708, given a funeral befitting a beizi in 1735 hongfang (弘昉; 1704-1772), yunzhi's second son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1735 to 1772 yongyang (永揚; 1747-1777), hongfang's ninth son, held the title of a feng'en fuguo gong in 1773 but was stripped of his title within the same year, had no male heir  yongping (永㺸; 1723-1771), hongfang's son  mianliang (綿亮; 1750-1774), yongping's son  yongtuo (永𤣯; 1727-1780), hongfang's son  mianhao (綿灝; 1747-1807), yongtuo's son  yigui (奕貴; 1768-1799), mianhao's son  zaimou (載謀; 1795-1854), yigui's son  puqi (溥麒; 1825-1878), zaimou's son  yubao (毓葆; 1874-?), puqi's son and pujia's adopted son  hengyuan (恆元; 1911-?), yubao's son and yuying's adopted son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1917  pulin (溥麟; 1822-1895), zaimou's son  yuying (毓英; 1870-1915), pul
in's son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1889 to 1915, had no male heir  purui (溥瑞; 1828-1862), zaimou's son and yizhang's adopted grandson, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1848 to 1862  yuquan (毓荃; 1871-1889), purui's son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1862 to 1889  mianrong (綿蓉; 1752-1804), yongtuo's son  yixi (奕璽; 1777-1836), mianrong's son  zaima (載禡; 1813-1841), yixi's son  mianbi (綿比; 1762-1823), yongtuo's son and yongyang's adopted son  yijiang (奕江; 1793-1872), mianbi's eldest son  zaizhen (載振; 1824-1856), yijiang's son  pujia (溥佳; 1845-1876), zaizhen's eldest son  yongmou (永𤣳; 1728-1760), hongfang's son  miannai (綿鼐; 1748-1780), yong-?'s son  hongxiang (弘晌; 1718-1781), yunzhi's 12th son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1773 to 1781  yongduo (永多; 1740-1809), hongxiang's eldest son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1781 to 1809  miangen (綿亘; 1761-1803), yongduo's son  yizhang (奕章; 1796-1850), miangen's eldest son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1809 to 1848, had no male heir  family tree  see also  prince fu  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references     qing dynasty princely peerages peerages of the bordered blue banner
uuno laakso (1896-1956) was a finnish film actor. he was married to the actress rakel laakso.  he is buried in the hietaniemi cemetery in helsinki.  selected filmography  voi meita! anoppi tulee (1933)  substitute wife (1936)  soot and gold (1945)  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1896 births 1956 deaths people from hollola people from hame province (grand duchy of finland) finnish male film actors finnish male silent film actors burials at hietaniemi cemetery
the women's handball tournament of the 1987 all-africa games were held in august 1987, in nairobi, kenya, contested by 8 national teams and won by ivory coast.  draw  preliminary round  group a poule a  , qualified for semi-finals  , qualified for semi-finals    ? amongst the results, congo won 16-4 over senegal  group b  knockout stage championship bracket  for the 5th rank, algeria won 18-13 over kenya.  final ranking  awards  references  handball at the 1987 all-africa games women's handball in kenya handball at the african games 1987 in women's handball
sir arthur eric courtney drake (29 november 1910 - 31 october 1996), was a british businessman, chairman of bp from 1969 to 1975.  drake was born in rochester, kent, the son of a doctor, and educated at pembroke college, cambridge, where he received a bachelor's degree in law.  in 1975, he was by succeeded sir david steel as chairman of bp.  references  1910 births 1996 deaths british businesspeople in the oil industry british chairpersons of corporations businesspeople awarded knighthoods chairmen of bp knights bachelor alumni of pembroke college, cambridge people from rochester, kent
chaminda is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
morresi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  claudio morresi (born 1962), argentinean football player giancarlo morresi (born 1944), italian modern pentathlete  italian-language surnames
enoch nana yaw oduro- agyei, known by his stage name trigmatic, is a ghanaian musician, composer and songwriter from accra, ghana.  early life   enoch nana yaw oduro-agyei was born on the streets of flamingo, a suburb of accra. he started his early education at homecare nursery school in dansoman and later continued at st. martin de porres, also in dansoman. he completed junior high in 2000 and enrolled in st. martin de porres senior high school where he completed in 2003. he attended st. martin de porres senior high school in nsawam adoagyiri.  career  2000-2007 his musical journey begun in high school, where he contributed to all musical events organised by the school. after high school he enrolled at niit in 2005 where he studied network engineering and acquired a diploma in database administration. he later pursued a professional certificate in marketing (cimuk)from university of professional studies (upsa) and later a first degree from central university college.  however, his passion for music led him into media and entertainment on a full-time basis. just around that same period, he became the winner of vibe fm's lyricist lounge and continued to be a battle rapper.  2007-2011 in 2007, he was able to release a street mixtape called 'stain on a cloth'. he continued to discover himself and steadily brought out the dancehall and reggae vibe within. he worked at a radio station (vibe fm) in accra as a co-host on a saturday show called 'young vibes'.  in 2009, he moved to yfm, an accra-based urban radio station where he hosted a saturday show called 'y express'. under new management (gab management) in 2010 he released his first main album, permanent stains. the album included his hit singles "my life", "mefiri ghana" and "my jolly". he got seven nominations making him the highest nominee in ghana music awards (2011). he won the best rapper of the year award that year (2011). the permanent stains album recorded three nominations in the gospel music awards and four at the 4syte music video awards. he was most sought after to perform on almost every show held in ghana. he toured throughout the nation. his nationwide high school tours and other accomplishments got him awarded as mentor of the year by prempeh college. he was awarded the certificate of achievement for his diverse contribution to youth empowerment in ghana. he was appointed the head
of hip-hop for musicians union of ghana (musiga) in 2011. same year he established his own label called the da trig entertainment label, now matic multimedia. under this management his second album soul-u-tions was released. once more he got six nominations at the 2012 ghana music awards. this album also recorded top ranking hits such as "light and darkness" featuring irene logan and "ajeeii" featuring raquel. it also featured african acts like kel, hakym da dream and mocheddah. he's recorded with musicians across the length and breadth of this world.  philanthropy  in 2014 trigmatic launched his foundation, matic foundation which supports many orphanages in ghana. he is the first to attempt a world record by creating the longest charity table to feed thousands in his country ghana. and fosters a child in the orphanage. he is the food for all ghana ambassador and championed the feeding of millions in ghana. in october 2016,on world food day, he will be feeding 5000 ghanaians at the country's capital. he's currently running a music and educational program for growing kids called matic music club. club is into music research and therapy . with this club many kids have benefited as well as teachers. the club is currently in st martin de porres sch and about to start at the top class sch also in dansoman. the club got volunteers from the eu to assist in new teaching skills and music therapy in may 2018 as part of the global leaders program accra.  achievement   trigmatic won best rapper of the year (2011). 2014 record of the year- gma (ghana music awards) 2014 best dancehall song of the year- bass awards 2014 best special effect video - 4syte music video awards. 2013 best collaboration of the year vgma best practice dubai award in 2012 honorary award in recognition of outstanding recognition to entertainment in ghana (national recognition) 2014 most influential artiste- high school honors  discography  studio albums  stains on a cloth mixtape - 2007//  permanent stains - 2010//  soul-u-tions - 2011//  m.a.t.i.c - 2017  the 8th element - 2019  the pipeano ep - 2021  videography  references  living people ghanaian rappers 1984 births
dallas shooting or dallas police shooting may refer to:   assassination of john f. kennedy, u.s. president, on november 22, 1963  2001 dallas shootings, in which two people were killed  2015 attack on dallas police, in which officers were not harmed  2016 shooting of dallas police officers, in which five officers were killed and eleven other people wounded  2019 dallas courthouse shooting, in which the gunman was killed and a civilian slightly wounded while taking cover  see also  list of shootings in texas
st. joseph county courthouse may refer to:  second st. joseph county courthouse, south bend, indiana third st. joseph county courthouse, south bend, indiana st. joseph county courthouse (michigan), centreville, michigan
katherine zackary (born july 26, 1989) is an american rugby sevens player. she debuted for the united states in 2016 and for the sevens team in 2010. she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the united states women's national rugby sevens team.  zackary attended salina south high school and benedictine college where she initially played soccer. she attended college on a soccer scholarship and it was there that she saw rugby. she played rugby for the benedictine saints. in 2014 she quit her job working in a gym to train full-time with the women's eagles sevens team.  kate currently plays for the exeter chiefs women's team. exeter compete in the allianz premier 15s, the top tier of women's professional rugby in england.  references  external links   kate zackary at usa rugby      1989 births living people united states international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for the united states pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
shanmukha films is an indian film production and distribution company which start distributing films from year 2012 in regions of andhra pradesh and now is also into movie productions. it distributed various movies like sardaar gabbar singh, express raja, soggade chinni nayana, swamy ra ra, dohchay, mirchi and shirdi sai are few among them.  history praveen kumar varma is the founder of shanmukha films. after successfully distributing over 50 films in various regions of andhra pradesh and telangana. shanmukha films has taken a step forward and started acquiring rights for movies, they started this with rajinikanth's upcoming movie kabali. they acquired complete telugu rights of film in andhra pradesh and telangana.  filmography  as distributors  as producers  references  indian companies established in 2012 mass media companies established in 2012 film production companies based in hyderabad, india 2012 establishments in andhra pradesh
the now and then show was a television show based in mendocino, california which ran from 1985 to 1987 and still appears in reruns. it was a mix of talk show and sketch comedy hosted by odd bob avery.  notable guests included the band tommy tutone, artist larry fuentes, and musician joel scott hill.  external links  the now and then show on youtube  1980s american comedy television series mendocino county, california
mechling is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  edward mechling (1878-1938), american middle-distance runner gene mechling (1909-1975), american basketball player heinrich mechling (1892-1976), german footballer  see also mechlin (disambiguation)
casa grande is a heritage-listed villa at nettle street, mount isa, city of mount isa, queensland, australia. it was designed by donoghue, cusick & edwards and built in 1949. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 28 may 1999.  history  work commenced on casa grande as a home for the then general manager of mount isa mines, julius kruttschnitt ii, in 1949. it was a "grand house", designed by the prominent brisbane firm of donoghue, cusick and edwards, but reflecting the influence of kruschnitt's time spent in both arizona and mexico.  kruttschnitt, with a background of developing mines in america for asarco's mining department, had taken on the challenge in 1930, of revitalising the ailing mount isa mine at a time when the company was unable to meet outstanding financial commitments. the 1930s, a time of depression and austerity throughout australia, was reflected in the price of lead plunging to the lowest point in the history of the metal markets.  kruttschnitt tackled mount isa's problems with relentless energy and after more capital was raised through overseas financiers, ore production commenced again in 1931. in earlier years of the mine's operation, the company expended large amounts of money providing housing for employees. two-storeyed timber houses, a number of dormitories and community buildings were constructed for workers during these more buoyant years. the 1930s saw more austere housing accommodation for workers often in the form of tin huts and tent houses. the problem of a lack of financial resources for accommodation extended to kruttschnitt's own residence. initially, he was housed in a modest staff house overlooking central park and the band rotunda. kruttschnitt was reported to be unimpressed with his quarters.  the finances of the company did not improve until after world war ii. while copper had been discovered in 1930, the japanese attack on pearl harbour, and the consumption of copper in australian factories and munition works, meant that mount isa mines went into full-scale copper production during that period. by 1946, with the end of the war, and a soaring consumption of lead in the united states for assembly lines and defence stockpiles, the price of lead rose to the unprecedented height of  a ton. in 1947, for the first time, the mine was able to pay a dividend to its investors. with the mine in an increasingly healthy financial position and an influx of
workers to accommodate, the company renewed its housing program. houses of simple design were constructed, as were dormitories. the company included in its program improved recreational facilities, including tennis courts and a swimming pool.  by the late 1940s attention was also paid to providing improved housing for mine executives. the building of a house for julius kruttschnitt, now chairman of directors, was commenced in 1949 on part of special mineral lease 5589, overlooking older company housing dating from 1928-29. the name given to the house, literally "big house", reflected the prosperity of mount isa mines at that time and is a term commonly used in arizona and new mexico to describe the "boss's"house. casa grande was designed by the prominent brisbane architectural firm of donoghue, cusick and edwards, probably incorporating the ideas of their client, julius kruttschnitt.  on the 22 july 1950, a housewarming party was given at "casa grande" by mr & mrs kruttschnitt, who entertained their guests under a marquee on the lawns. small groups of people were shown over the house; certainly the largest and most elaborate house to be built in the hot, dry western district of queensland.  casa grande has been used for many social events. in 1951 when badges were presented to employees of mim who had served twenty years with the company, a dinner was arranged for the 80 men and their wives by mrs kruttschnitt. an annual new year's eve punchbowl party was just one of the functions hosted by the kruttschnitts during their time at casa grande.  julius kruttschnitt resigned as chairman of directors in 1952 but did not return to the united states, settling in brisbane at his home casa ita. he was succeeded at mount isa by george fisher who lived with his family at casa grande until 1966. during the time of the fisher's occupancy, the house was refurnished and much of this furniture remains at casa grande.  casa grande became a guest house for visiting directors of the company and vips from 1966. a suite at the house was redecorated and refurnished for queen elizabeth, who visited the town in 1970. a dining room table, with the tabletop constructed from one piece of cedar was bought by the company for the queen's visit.  casa grande reflects the period in the life of mount isa mines when the first dividend was paid, and the company, after years of struggle, was becoming profitable. by
1955 mim ltd was the largest mining company in australia and a company with a strong international reputation.  description  casa grande is spanish mission in style, built of 6" thick denaro bricks with stuccoed outer walls. the white walls contrast with the dark timber framed sash windows and doors, and the building has terracotta roof tiles and balconies.  the large, u-shaped, two storeyed house, encloses a courtyard which is overlooked by surrounding verandahs supported by roughly hewn timber posts. casa grande is built on a rise and is a landmark overlooking the mine and the remaining houses of the isa mine (mineside) settlement. it is located within well-kept grounds with a tennis court. the encircling drive and luxuriant gardens, a striking feature in such an arid area, add considerable distinction and presence to the house, emphasising the social standing of the chairman of directors within the community.  the area considered significant therefore includes the grounds and is bounded by the property fence on the western and eastern sides, by the footbridge on the southern side and by the entrance beyond the "island" bed on the northern side.  the condition of the house is excellent, and the integrity good. additions have occurred, but most have been sympathetic to the original design. the furniture complements the house and has a significance of its own.  heritage listing  casa grande was listed on the queensland heritage register on 28 may 1999 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  casa grande, built on the original mineside settlement, demonstrates the development of the mount isa as a mining industry town.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  casa grande is a late, but good, example of spanish mission style.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the house is a landmark in mount isa as a prominent and grand house reflecting the relative importance of the position of mine manager in mount isa.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the house has social value to the mount isa community as a prominent local residence and as a community gathering place.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  casa grande has a close association with mim directors, julius kruttschnitt and george fisher, both of whom are men of international
reputation. this is particularly the case with kruttschnitt, whose mexican/arizona experience may have influenced the style of construction.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register buildings and structures in mount isa houses in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
leptenicodes gracilis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
rita atik (born 22 october 1997 in casablanca) is a moroccan tennis player.  in 2013, she was the top moroccan finisher (round of 16) for the girls at the mediterranee avenir.  she has competed multiple times in the main draw of the grand prix sar la princesse lalla meryem.  itf junior finals  singles finals (5-1)  doubles finals (3-4)  references  external links        1997 births living people moroccan female tennis players sportspeople from rabat moroccan expatriates in the united states african games medalists in tennis
stella meghie is a canadian film director and screenwriter.  she is known for her feature films jean of the joneses (2016), everything, everything (2017), the weekend (2018), and the photograph (2020). meghie has also directed episodes for television series including grown-ish, insecure and first wives club.  for her debut feature, meghie was nominated for best first screenplay at the independent spirit awards.  she has also received nominations from the canadian screen awards and naacp image awards.  early life  meghie was born in toronto, ontario to jamaican immigrant parents.  she pursued a degree in writing at the university of waterloo, before beginning a career as a public relations agent in new york city's fashion industry.  in 2007, she quit her job to return to school and received a degree in screenwriting from the university of westminster.  career in 2016, meghie made her feature film debut with the indie comedy-drama jean of the joneses which premiered at the sxsw film festival. the film received a nomination for best first screenplay at the independent spirit awards and two canadian screen award nominations at the 5th canadian screen awards in 2017.  meghie was also nominated in the best original screenplay category.  after her first picture, meghie began work on studio features.  she directed the romance film everything, everything (2017), an adaptation of the new york times best selling novel everything, everything.  the film starred amandla stenberg and nick robinson and was a commercial success, grossing $61 million worldwide on a production budget of $10 million.  marking her return to indie features, meghie's film the weekend premiered at the 2018 toronto international film festival.  the indie film was shot in just under two weeks from a script meghie had written years prior.  in 2020, meghie directed her fourth feature film, the photograph.  the film was inspired by meghie's own grandmother who reconnected with a daughter she had not seen in almost thirty years. starring issa rae and lakeith stanfield, the film received generally favourable reviews and grossed $20 million.  meghie was slated to direct a whitney houston biopic for sony pictures titled i wanna dance with somebody from a screenplay written by anthony mccarten  and with naomi ackie set to star as houston. kasi lemmons ultimately took over directing duties though meghie will remain an executive producer.  filmography  feature films  television  references  external links    canadian women screenwriters canadian women film directors black canadian writers black canadian filmmakers black canadian
women living people film directors from toronto writers from toronto canadian film centre alumni year of birth missing (living people)
angelo da furci (1246 - 6 february 1327) was an italian catholic priest and a professed member of the order of saint augustine. he was a friend and student of giles of rome and served as prior provincial of the abruzzi branch of the congregation.  the recognition of his "cultus" (or popular following) allowed for pope leo xiii to preside over his beatification on 20 december 1888.  life angelo da furci was born in 1246 to adalitto and albazia. the couple was childless and begged for the intercession of saint michael the archangel for a son.  during his childhood he was sent to a benedictine convent where his maternal uncle served as the abbot. he received his education there at the convent of cornaclano until the death of his uncle in 1264, which prompted him to return home; he completed his philosophical and literary studies with high results. adalitto fell ill in 1265 and revealed to his son the truth about the circumstances of his birth while suggesting that his son become a member of the order of saint augustine; his father died not long after. the death of his father solidified his decision to do so but he did not seek admission straight after since he remained at home with his aging and despairing mother in order to care for her.  in 1266 he left his home and requested permission to join the order while starting his period of novitiate and making his profession. he underwent theological studies until 1270 when he was ordained to the priesthood. he was then sent to paris in 1271 for further studies where one of his teachers was giles of rome - the latter became a close friend as well. the priest earned a lector's degree in 1276 and then taught theological studies back in abruzzo for 5 years. officials made the unanimous decision in a meeting of 1287 to elect him as prior provincial of the abruzzese branches of the order and he refused at first before clement of osimo required him to accept the nomination. he proved competent and became well-known for his evangelic zeal and his uprightness as well as being noted for his gentleness of spirit. he was also a skilled orator.  the priest also renounced episcopal appointments to the sees of melfi and acerra that pope nicholas iv offered to him.  he retired at the age of 81 due to his declining health and died not long after in 1327. his remains were later transferred in august 1808.  beatification his beatification received the approval of pope leo xiii on 20 december 1888 in approval
of the "cultus" (or popular devotion) to the late priest.  references  external links hagiography circle  1246 births 1327 deaths 13th-century venerated christians 13th-century italian roman catholic priests 14th-century venerated christians 14th-century italian roman catholic priests augustinian friars beatifications by pope leo xiii italian beatified people people from chieti university of paris alumni venerated catholics italian expatriates in france
tonto village is a census-designated place (cdp) in gila county, arizona, united states. the population was 256 at the 2010 united states census.  geography tonto village is located in northern gila county in thompson draw, a valley south of the mogollon rim. it is  west of arizona state route 260, which leads southwest  to payson.  according to the united states census bureau, the tonto village cdp has a total area of , all land.  it includes a k-10 charter school, a southern baptist church and one restaurant.  demographics  references  census-designated places in gila county, arizona census-designated places in arizona
theresa may formed the first may ministry in the united kingdom on 13 july 2016, after having been invited by queen elizabeth ii to form a new administration. then the home secretary, may's appointment followed the resignation of then prime minister david cameron. the ministry, a conservative majority government, succeeded the second cameron ministry which had been formed following the 2015 general election. cameron's government was dissolved as a result of his resignation in the immediate aftermath of the june 2016 referendum on british withdrawal from the european union.  after the 2017 snap general election resulted in a hung parliament, may formed a new minority government with support from the democratic unionist party.  history may announced her choices for chancellor of the exchequer, home secretary, foreign secretary and defence secretary in the evening of 13 july: philip hammond, amber rudd and boris johnson were respectively appointed to the first three posts, while michael fallon continued as defence secretary. david davis was appointed to the new post of secretary of state for exiting the european union, while liam fox became secretary of state for international trade and president of the board of trade. greg clark, who was made business secretary, was mistakenly appointed as president of the board of trade by the privy council, and held the appointment for four days before the mistake was corrected.  may's choices for the remaining cabinet posts were announced on 14 july. justine greening, previously international development secretary, was promoted to education secretary, and the vacancy left by greening was filled by priti patel. liz truss, formerly environment secretary, was given the justice portfolio. andrea leadsom, previously a junior energy minister, and also the final opponent of theresa may in the 2016 conservative leadership election, was made environment secretary. james brokenshire and karen bradley, both formerly junior ministers at the home office, were given the posts of northern ireland and culture, media and sport respectively. damian green took the post of work and pensions secretary, and chris grayling was made transport secretary. finally, sajid javid was given the communities and local government brief, baroness evans of bowes park became lords leader and david lidington became commons leader.  jeremy hunt, alun cairns, and david mundell retained the posts of health secretary, welsh secretary, and scottish secretary, respectively, which they had held during the second cameron ministry. in contrast, may sacked six ministers from cameron's cabinet: chancellor of the exchequer george osborne, justice secretary michael gove, culture secretary john whittingdale, education secretary nicky morgan, chancellor of the duchy of lancaster oliver letwin and leader of the
house of lords baroness stowell of beeston.  in addition, may appointed fiona hill and nick timothy as downing street chiefs of staff. both had been political advisers to her at the home office, then worked outside government for a brief period before coming back to work on her leadership campaign.  cabinet  list of ministers  prime minister and the cabinet office  departments of state  law officers  parliament  notes  references  2010s in the united kingdom 2016 establishments in the united kingdom 2017 disestablishments in the united kingdom british ministries cabinets disestablished in 2017 cabinets established in 2016 consequences of the 2016 united kingdom european union membership referendum government ministries of elizabeth ii ministry
followers is an album by the american contemporary christian music (ccm) band tenth avenue north. it was released by provident label group, a division of sony music entertainment, under its reunion records label, on october 14, 2016. the album reached no. 5 on the billboard christian albums chart, and no. 151 on the billboard 200. three singles from the album were released: "what you want" in 2016, and "i have this hope" and "control (somehow you want me)" in 2017, all of which appeared on the billboard hot christian songs chart.  release and performance   followers was released on october 14, 2016, by provident label group llc, a division of sony music entertainment. it first charted on both the us billboard christian albums and billboard 200 on the week of november 5, 2016, peaking that week on both charts at no. 5 and no. 151, respectively.  three singles were released from the album. the first, "what you want", was released five months in advance of the album on may 13, 2016, and charted on the billboard hot christian songs list, peaking at no. 17 on september 3, 2016. the other two were released in 2017 after the album, and reached the top 10 on hot christian songs: "i have this hope" peaked at no. 5 on june 10, 2017, and "control (somehow you want me)" peaked at no. 7 on january 13, 2018.  reception   ccm magazine gave the album 4 out of 5 stars, and cited its "killer vocal work on honest, relatable lyrics paired with ... strong songwriting."  christian review website jesusfreakhideout rated the album 3.5 out of 5 stars. the review said the album was "pretty much what you would expect from a ccm release" and wrote that "what you want" was "the most energetic song on the album". it singled out the opening track as "excellent" and the closing track as "powerful", and characterized the remaining songs as "eight solid but otherwise ordinary tracks."  track listing "afraid" (3:48) "what you want" (3:37) "overflow" (3:40) "i have this hope" (3:24) "one thing" (3:28) "sparrow (under heaven's eyes)" (3:59) "no one can steal our joy" (3:40) "control (somehow you want me)" (4:08
) "fighting for you" (3:22) "i confess" (5:15)  chart performance  references  2016 albums tenth avenue north albums
"don't lie" is a song recorded by american country music artist trace adkins.  it was released in september 1999 as the first single from the album more....  the song reached #27 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by frank rogers and chet biggers.  chart performance  references  1999 singles 1999 songs trace adkins songs songs written by frank rogers (record producer) song recordings produced by paul worley capitol records nashville singles
samuela nabenia (born 9 february 1995) is a fijian footballer who plays as a striker for lautoka f.c. in the fijian national football league.  references  external links  1995 births living people fijian footballers association football forwards fiji international footballers ba f.c. players 2016 ofc nations cup players footballers at the 2016 summer olympics olympic footballers of fiji
sergei nikolaevich chernikov (11 may 1912 - 23 january 1987; ) was a russian mathematician who contributed significantly to the development of infinite group theory and linear inequalities.  biography chernikov was born on 11 may 1912 in sergiyev posad, in moscow oblast, russia, to nikolai nikolaevich, a priest, and anna alekseevna, a housewife.  after graduating from secondary school, he worked as a labourer, as a driver, as a book-keeper and as an accountant. until november 1931 he taught mathematics in a school for workers. from 1930 he was an external student of the pedagogic institute of saratov state university, where he graduated in 1933. he began graduate studies at the ural industrial institute under the outside tutelage of alexandr g. kurosh (of the university of moscow). a remarkable student, chernikov was made head of the ural mathematics department (1939-1946) immediately after earning his phd in 1938, even before defending his dsc in 1940. he went on to be head of mathematical departments at ural state university (1946-1951), perm state university (1951-1961), the steklov institute of mathematics (1961-1964), and finally the national academy of sciences of ukraine from 1964 until days before his death in 1987. during his career, he trained more than 40 phd and 7 dsc students, and published dozens of papers that remained influential 100 years after his birth.  contributions chernikov is credited with introducing a number of fundamental concepts to group theory, including the locally finite group, and nilpotent group. as with many of his other contributions, these allow infinite groups to be partially or locally solved, establishing important early links between finite and infinite group theories. later in his career, he was hailed as "one of the pioneers of linear programming", for his breakthrough algebraic theory of linear inequalities.  published works  chernikov s.n. (1939) infinite special groups. mat. sbornik 6, 199-214  chernikov s.n. (1940) infinite locally soluble groups. mat. sbornik 7, 35-61  chernikov s.n. (1940) to theory of infinite special groups. mat. sbornik 7, 539-548.  chernikov s.n. (1940) on groups with sylow sets. mat. sbornik 8, 377-394.  chernikov s.n. (1943) to theory of locally soluble groups. mat. sbornik 13, 317-
333.  chernikov s.n. (1946) divisible groups possesses an ascending central series. mat. sbornik 18, 397-422.  chernikov s.n. (1947) to the theory of finite p - extensions of abelian p - groups. doklady an ussr, 58, 1287-1289. journal algebra discrete math. m.   kurosh a.g., chernikov s.n. (1947) soluble and nilpotent groups. uspekhi math. nauk 2, number 3, 18 - 59.  chernikov s.n. (1948) infinite layer - finite groups. mat. sbornik 22, 101-133.  chernikov s.n. (1948) to the theory of divisible groups. mat. sbornik 22, 319-348.  chernikov s.n. (1948) a complement to the paper "to the theory of divisible groups". mat. sbornik 22, 455-456.  chernikov s.n. (1949) to the theory of torsion - free groups possesses an ascending central series. uchenye zapiski ural university 7, 3-21.  chernikov s.n. (1950) on divisible groups with ascending central series. doklady an ussr 70, 965-968.  chernikov s.n. (1950) on a centralizer of divisible abelian normal subgroups in infinite periodic groups. doklady an ussr 72, 243-246.  chernikov s.n. (1950) periodic za - extension of divisible groups. mat. sbornik 27, 117 - 128.  chernikov s.n. (1955) on complementability of sylow p-subgroups in some classes of infinite groups. mat. sbornik. - 37, 557 - 566.  chernikov s.n. (1957) on groups with finite conjugacy classes. doklady an ussr 114, 1177 - 1179  chernikov s.n. (1957) on a structure of groups with finite conjugate classes. doklady an sssr - 115, 60 - 63.  chernikov s.n. (1958) on layer - finite groups. mat. sbornik 45, 415-416.  chernikov s.n. (1959) finiteness conditions in general group theory. uspekhi math. nauk 14, 45 - 96.  chernikov s
.n. (1960) on infinite locally finite groups with finite sylow subgroups. mat. sbornik 52, 647 - 652.  chernikov s.n. (1967) groups with prescribed properties of a system of infinite subgroups. ukrain. math. journal 19, 111 - 131.  chernikov s.n. (1969) investigations of groups with prescribed properties of subgroups. ukrain. math. journal 21, 193 - 209.  chernikov s.n. (1971) on a problem of schmidt. ukrain. math. journal 23, 598 - 603  chernikov s.n. (1971) on groups with the restrictions for subgroups. "groups with the restrictions for subgroups", naukova dumka: kyiv 17 - 39.  chernikov s.n. (1975) groups with dense system of complement subgroups. "some problems of group theory", math. institut: kyiv 5 - 29.  chernikov s.n. (1980) the groups with prescribed properties of systems of subgroups. nauka : moskow.  chernikov s.n. (1980) infinite groups, defined by the properties of system of infinite subgroups. "vi simposium on group theory", naukova dumka: kyiv 5 - 22.  references  external links  sergei nikolaevich chernikov's entry on math-net.ru  russian mathematicians 1912 births 1987 deaths recipients of the order of friendship of peoples people from sergiyev posad members of the national academy of sciences of ukraine perm state university faculty ural state university faculty
aurantiacibacter luteus is a gram-negative and aerobic bacteria from the genus aurantiacibacter which has been isolated from mangrove sediment from the yunxiao mangrove national nature reserve in the fujian province in china.  references  further reading     sphingomonadales bacteria described in 2015
amadinone (inn), also known as 19-norchlormadinone, is a steroidal progestin of the 19-norprogesterone and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone groups that was synthesized and characterized in 1968 but was never marketed. it has antigonadotropic properties, and for this reason, is a functional antiandrogen. an acetate ester, amadinone acetate, also exists, but similarly was never marketed.  see also   chlormadinone  chlormadinone acetate  references   norpregnanes organochlorides progestogens abandoned drugs
camille seaman (born 1969) is an american photographer who applies portraiture strategies to capture the changing natural environment.  her work mainly concerns the polar regions, where she captures the effects of climate change, thus merging the realms of science and art.  she is of native american and african-american descent through her father and mother respectively.  background  camille seaman was born to a shinnecock father and african-american mother in 1969.  she studied photography with jan groover at the state university of new york at purchase, graduating in 1992.  work  seaman reached wider attention with the production of her 2003 series of photographs of the arctic ocean island of svalbard.  since then, her work has continued to engage with the effects of climate change through the depiction of icebergs, storms and other natural phenomena.  regarding a major exhibition mounted at the national academy of sciences, ralph j. cicerone noted that the academy had two goals in mind, "to encourage wider appreciation of her artistry and to stimulate focused thought about the important roles that ice formations play in climatic change."  for her work merging science with art, seaman was named a ted senior fellow and profiled in wired and on the new york times "lens" photojournalism blog.  in 2014, seaman received a john s. knight journalism fellowship at stanford university.  awards and recognition in 2006, seaman was granted a national geographic award, and in 2007 she was awarded a critical mass top monograph award by the nonprofit organization photolucida.  her work has been published in newsweek, time, the new york times and men's journal.  in 2019, two of her photographs were added to the native american art collection of the new york state museum.  solo exhibitions  2008: the last iceberg, national academy of sciences  further reading  seaman, camille. the last iceberg. berkeley, ca: fastback creative books, 2007.  external links icebergs frozen in time by a portraitist by james estrin chasing danger, capturing beauty by james estrin camille seaman's profile and talks for ted  1969 births living people
the altx east africa exchange (altx) is a stock exchange in uganda. the altx operates under the jurisdiction of uganda's capital markets authority, which in turn reports to the government of uganda.  trading its operations are entirely electronic, with all transactions completed online. the exchange lists foreign securities, bonds, and exchange traded funds. the exchange opened to trading on 13 july 2016. it accepts trades as low as us$3, targeting investors of modest means.  altx east africa exchange expanded its operations to uganda after obtaining a regulatory approval in 2014, and depository approval in 2015.  ownership altx is a demutualised exchange wholly owned by altx africa group, a mauritius based entity that also owns altx clearing. gmex technologies of the united kingdom owns 25 percent of altx africa group. other investors include joseph kitamirike, the chief executive officer and co-founder of altx east africa, and jatin jivram, director and co-founder of altx east africa.  see also economy of uganda list of african stock exchanges uganda securities exchange uganda shilling list of stock exchanges in the commonwealth of nations  references  external links altx east africa unveils exchange platform website of altx east africa exchange  stock exchanges in africa finance in uganda financial services companies of uganda kampala district 2016 establishments in uganda financial services companies established in 2016
carrizo creek and carrizo wash may refer to various streams or washes (arroyos) named carrizo, the spanish word for "reeds".  streams and washes of this name include:  salton sea tributaries carrizo creek and wash (california), a stream and arroyo in san diego county and imperial county, california  gulf of california tributaries carrizo wash, a wash under the carrizo bridges in arizona carrizo creek (arizona), which forms north of cibecue in navajo county, arizona  gulf of mexico tributaries carrizo creek (new mexico/texas), sometimes termed carrizo river, a tributary of rita blanca creek east carrizo creek, formed in colorado north of mt. carrizo west carrizo creek, formed in colorado west-southwest of kim north carrizo creek, formed in baca county, colorado, flowing into oklahoma south carrizo creek, formed near the oklahoma/new mexico state line  see also carrizo creek station, a former stagecoach station on carrizo creek in california
the wolfe-montcalm monument is in governors' garden beyond the southern side of the chateau frontenac, quebec.  the obelisk is the oldest monument in quebec city and the second-oldest war monument in canada (1827) (the first being nelson's column, montreal, 1809). the mason who made the monument was john phillips and the architect was captain john crawford young of the 79th (cameron) highlanders. the monument commemorates the gallantry of the two generals, james wolfe and louis-joseph de montcalm, who fought (and both died) in the battle of the plains of abraham; it is one of very few monuments to the victor and the defeated in the same battle. the monument was unveiled in 1828 by governor dalhousie. the translation of the latin on the monument, written by john charlton fisher reads "their courage gave them a common death, history a common fame, posterity a common memorial."  the monument was whitewashed sometime after 1987.  gallery  references  external links   history of quebec city monuments and memorials in quebec canadian military memorials and cemeteries
the inbal pinto and avshalom pollak dance company is an israeli contemporary dance company founded by choreographer inbal pinto and actor avshalom pollak, and operates in tel aviv, israel since 1992. pinto and pollak are the artistic directors of the company, and are in charge of selecting pieces to represent the company.  about the company  since 1992, the company has brought many contemporary danceworks to the stage for all sectors of the population. the uniqueness of their creators is seen through every detail in each piece, for example in choreography, staging, the selection of soundtracks, costume design, and prop design. the company has 12 regular dancers and actors, works and conducts shows at the suzanne dellal center, and is often invited to represent israel at important festivals and leading cultural events around the globe.   the company's first production was the piece a chance for 100, which was created by the company and yossi pollak-avshalom pollak's father.  apart from contemporary dance performances, the company also performs operas and musicals. for example, in 2006, they performed the opera armid by christoph willibald gluck in wiesbaden, germany, and again at the israeli opera. in 2013, they performed the play the cat that lived a million times, based on yoko sano's book, in tokyo, japan, as well as the opera the cunning little vixen by leos janacek at the opera house in bergen, norway.   throughout the years pinto and pollak cooperated with different artists, among them choreographer robby barnett, with whom they created the show rushes in 2007 for the american contemporary dance company pilobolus; the norwegian company "kitchen orchestra", created the soundtracks for trout, which was performed for the first time in stavanger, norway in 2008. other collaborations include the cooperations with choreographer talya bek, who created the works sodad in 2009 and empire in 2010.   in 2013, illustrators rony fahima and shimrit alkanti illustrated pictures and animations for the productions of the cunning little vixen and dust. moreover, in 2014, they joined the japanese musicians omitaro eba, hirufomi nakamura, and mayu ganto, who had created the music for the show wallflower and that pinto and pollak had met during their time in japan working on the cat that lived a million times. pinto and pollak cooperate regularly with french lighting designer yohan tiboli.  selected work   "a chance for a 100" 1994  "wrapped" 1998  "
oyster"  1999  "boobies" 2002  "what good would the moon be" 2004  "armide" 2003  "shaker" 2006  "armide" 2006  "rushes" 2007  "hydra" 2007  "trout" 2008  "toros" 2010  "bombyx mori" 2011  "goldfish" 2012  "the cunning little vixen" 2013  "the cat that lived a million times" 2013  "dust" 2013  "wallflower" 2014  "wrapped" 2015 (renewed production)  "slug" 2016  awards  2000 bessie award for "wrapped" 2000 israeli theater academy award for "oyster" 2004 the landau award for the arts of the stage 2007 the israeli ministry of education and culture award for creation 2011 the israeli ministry of education and culture awards for artistic achievements and performance 2014 the israeli dance critics circle award "best dance show" for "wallflower"  external links inbal pinto and avshalom pollak dance company official website inbal pinto and avshalom pollak dance company archives  contemporary dance dance in israel
cross of love (finnish: rakkauden risti) is a 1946 finnish drama film directed by teuvo tulio and starring regina linnanheimo, oscar tengstrom and ville salminen. the film was shot in parallel with the swedish-language version karlekens kors.  cast    regina linnanheimo  as riitta    oscar tengstrom  as majakka-kalle    ville salminen  as mauri holmberg    rauli tuomi  as henrik hormi   pentti viljanen as pekka    tuli arjo  as singer    lauri korpela as pilot    hilly lindqvist  as saara    senja soitso as maija   elli ylimaa  as manageress of the dressmaker's shop  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1946 films 1946 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films based on works by aleksandr pushkin films directed by teuvo tulio finnish black-and-white films finnish multilingual films
olenecamptus somalius is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948. it is distributed in the area of ethiopia, somalia, and kenya, and are also known as lamiines and flat-faced longhorned beetles.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
chuharwal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of chuharwal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, chuharwal has a total number of 176 houses and population of 802, which include 400 males and 402 females. literacy rate of chuharwal is 51,44%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 143 which is 17.83% of total population of chuharwal, and child sex ratio is approximately  907, higher than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 78.80% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
this was held on saturday 8 and sunday 9 july 2000, with 50,000 people attending. it was travis' first appearance, as an unsigned band closed the main stage. it was all saints' last scottish appearance.  a week prior to the event an accident happened at roskilde festival where nine people died.  following the incident security arrangements were reviewed while making sure the relevant safety procedures were in place to ensure a failsafe.  line-up the line up included:  main stage  stage 2  slam tent  king tut's tent  incidents  see also list of music festivals in the united kingdom  references  2000 in scotland 2000 in british music t in the park july 2000 events in the united kingdom 2000 music festivals
a localist political alliance was formed by 3 hong kong organisations - civic passion, proletariat political institute and hong kong resurgence order - to field candidates to contest the 2016 legislative election. without an official name, the alliance is informally called yit po shing () in chinese, taking one word from each of the member organisation's name or ideology. the alliance's common platform is "creating a de facto referendum in five constituencies; allow all citizens to participate in the creation of constitution".  the alliance was dissolved after the election, in which one member of civic passion was elected.  background wong yuk-man and wong yeung-tat previously contested the 2012 election under the flag of people power. while wong yuk-man was elected, wong yeung-tat suffered a narrow defeat. people power was then transformed from an electoral alliance into a political party, through a coalition of several parties. after the election, wong yeung-tat cut ties with people power and expanded civic passion, which had been established as part of his own election campaign. wong yuk-man's proletariat political institute (ppi) was a founding member of people power; however, his disagreement with people power over the 2014 electoral reform and occupy central action plans saw the breakaway of ppi in 2013.  chin wan, considered one of the pioneers of localist political thought for his "hong kong city-state theory", founded the hong kong resurgence order in 2014 with the aim of "restoring chinese civilisation".  alliance the new territories east by-election early in 2016 was the first time a candidate contesting under a localist banner. supported by many organisations in the localist camp and boosted by the mong kok civil unrest, hong kong indigenous's edward leung received 15% of the votes. despite failure in winning a seat, its better-than-expected results encouraged the localist camp to actively field candidate to contest the general election in september. on 29 february 2016, the day after the by-election, civic passion (cp), proletariat political institute (ppi) and hong kong resurgence order (hkro) jointly announced they would form an alliance to contest all of the 5 geographical constituencies.  the candidates include:  hong kong island: alvin cheng (cp), bonix chung (cp)  kowloon west: wong yuk-man (ppi), ma yu-sang (ppi)  kowloon east: wong yeung-tat (cp)  new territories west: cheng chung-tai (cp), cheung yiu-sum (cp)  new territories east: chin
wan (hkro), marco lee (cp)  ideology the ideology of the alliance is mostly based on chin's "city-state theory". instead of striving for independence from china, they advocated a constitutional reform by all citizens through a de facto referendum, in the form of a by-election triggered by one legislator resigning from each of the five geographical constituencies. after the amendment to the basic law was accepted by the communist party, the autonomy of hong kong would be guaranteed even after the original deadline of 2047.  results  of the 5 candidate lists fielded by the alliance, only one was returned to the legislative council. cheng chung-tai was elected to represent new territories west with a 9.03% support, while incumbent legislator wong yuk-man suffered a narrow defeat of 424 votes to yau wai-ching of youngspiration (allinhk). after ending again at the 6th place in the 5-seat kowloon east constituency, wong yeung-tat resigned from the leadership of civic passion, to be succeeded by cheng chung-tai.  as the movement leader, wong yeung-tat conceded defeat and admitted a lack of public support for their constitutional movement. the alliance was dissolved after the 2016 legco election, as announced by chin wan on 5 september 2016. proletariat political institute would provide political training for the youth. but in early 2017, civic passion and passion times were separated.  see also 2010 hong kong by-election (dubbed by the initiators as "five constituencies referendum") hong kong autonomy movement  references  2016 disestablishments in hong kong 2016 establishments in hong kong defunct political parties in hong kong political parties disestablished in 2016 political parties established in 2016 political party alliances in hong kong
gilles de caux de montlebert, (c.1682, ligneries, near argentan - 17 september 1733, bayeux) was an 18th-century french poet and playwright from normandy.  a descendant of pierre corneille by his mother, he was controller of the king's farms. he served as nominees to president henault for the publication in 1716 of his tragedy marius a cirthe, to which he probably worked. his tragedy lysimachus, completed by his son, was presented without success in 1737.  boileau praised one of his poems entitled l'horloge de sable. he collaborated with l'annee litteraire by freron.  works  1714: l'horloge de sable, figure du monde, moral poem 1715: marius a cirthe, tragedy, avec le president henault, premiered 15 november 1715 (published in 1716) 1725: ode au roi et a la reine sur leur mariage 1737: lysimachus, tragedy, premiered 13 december 1737 (published in 1738)  adraste, tragedy (non printed)  external links   gilles de caux de montlebert on data.bnf.fr  gilles de caux de montlebert on cesar  ,  18th-century french male writers 18th-century french poets 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights writers from normandy 1682 births 1733 deaths
benthofascis sarcinula is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family conorbidae.  these snails are predatory and venomous. they are capable of "stinging" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.  description the length of an adult shell varies between 16.6 mm and 24.7 mm. the diameter varies between 7.4 mm and 10.7 mm.  (original description) the solid shell is small and has an ovate-fusiform shape. its colour is pale yellow, with a rusty tinge at the suture. the shell contains 3½ whorls, including a protoconch of 1½ whorl. the protoconch shows fine spiral grooves, continued on the adult as broad, shallow furrows, which are broadest at the suture becoming smaller and closer anteriorly. on the body whorl are twenty-two spiral ribs, on the penultimate whorl six. the latter are latticed by fine radial riblets. the whole shell is crossed by fine, arcuate growth lines. the aperture is narrow. the sinus is deep. the outer lip is thin, straight, produced medially, edge crenulated by the sculpture. no callus on the inner lip. the columella is broad and twisted. the siphonal canal is not produced.  distribution this marine species is endemic to australia and occurs off new south wales, queensland and tasmania.  references   gatliff, j.h. & gabriel, c.j. 1922. additions to and alterations in the catalogue of victorian marine mollusca. proceedings of the royal society of victoria n.s. 34(2): 128-161  hedley, c. 1922. a revision of the australian turridae. records of the australian museum 13(6): 213-359, pls 42-56  laseron, c. 1954. revision of the new south wales turridae (mollusca). australian zoological handbook. sydney : royal zoological society of new south wales 1-56, pls 1-12.  external links    sarcinula gastropods of australia
wicki is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   alain wicki, swiss skeleton racer berenice wicki (born 2002), swiss snowboarder bernhard wicki (1919-2000), austrian actor and film director franz wicki, (born 1939), swiss politician and lawyer jean wicki (born 1933), swiss bobsledder  see also wicki-hayden note layout, a musical keyboard layout wicky (disambiguation) wiki (disambiguation)
time for 2 is a 1962 album by anita o'day and cal tjader.  reception  billboard magazine reviewed the album in their september 1, 1962 issue and wrote that "tjader kicks in with some strong instrumental choruses and his combo accompanies in high style whether playing straight or latin time".  richard s. ginell reviewed the reissue of the album for allmusic and wrote that "o'day sounds as if she is delighted with tjader's polished afro-cuban grooves, gliding easily over the rhythms, toying with the tunes, transforming even a tune so locked into its trite time as "mr. sandman" into a stimulating excursion. indeed, o'day's freewheeling phrasing becomes downright sexy on "that's your red wagon" and dave frishberg's delicious parody of a spoiled honeybunch, "peel me a grape."" ginell also praised producer creed taylor's "...obsession with good engineering and tasteful applications of reverb" which led to her voice sounding "much fuller and more attractive in his productions than on her norman granz-produced albums".  track listing   "thanks for the memory" (ralph rainger, leo robin) - 2:45  "it shouldn't happen to a dream" (duke ellington, don george, johnny hodges) - 2:59  "just in time" (betty comden, adolph green, jule styne) - 2:47  "under a blanket of blue" (jerry livingston, al j. neiburg, marty symes) - 2:22  "that's your red wagon" (gene de paul, richard m. jones, don raye) - 2:49  "peel me a grape" (dave frishberg) - 3:03  "an occasional man" (ralph blane, hugh martin) - 2:27  "the party's over" (comden, green, styne) - 2:20  "i believe in you" (frank loesser) - 2:23  "mr. sandman" (pat ballard) - 1:55  "spring will be a little late this year" (loesser) - 3:24  "i'm not supposed to be blue blues" (bob russell) - 2:23  personnel  anita o'day - vocals cal tjader - vibraphone bob corwin, lonnie hewitt - piano freddy schreiber - double bass wilfredo "
changuito" vicente - congas johnny rae - drums don gold - liner notes al schmitt - engineer creed taylor - producer  references  1962 albums albums produced by creed taylor anita o'day albums cal tjader albums verve records albums
justice ford may refer to:  thomas ford (politician), associate justice of the supreme court of illinois g. sarsfield ford, associate justice of the connecticut supreme court sam c. ford, associate justice of the montana supreme court
chen fei (simplified chinese:), born in 1983, hong tong, shanxi province, china, was trained at the beijing film academy, and in 2005, was graduated from fine arts department. his passion for and extensive knowledge of movies has influenced his choice of subjects and compositional style in his paintings.  exhibitions  2011  images of women ix, schoeni art gallery, hong kong  art stage singapore, marina bay sands, singapore  2010  bad taste, schoeni art gallery, hong kong (solo)  2009  one-track minded, star gallery, beijing (solo)  new works, star gallery, beijing  enliven - in between realities and fiction, animamix biennale, today art museum, beijing  niubi newbie kids ii, schoeni art gallery, hong kong  shcontemporary 09, shanghai exhibition centre, shanghai  from zero to hero, star gallery, beijing  my 2009 dream art exhibition, today art museum, beijing  2008  niubi newbie kids, schoeni art gallery, hong kong  cige 2008 china international gallery exposition, china world trade centre, beijing  superficiality is not our motto - post 80's art, star gallery, beijing  rebuild - china school charity's artwork donation exhibition for the sichuan earthquake, star gallery, beijing  finding oneself, minsheng art museum, shanghai  the origin - the first moon river sculpture festival, moon river art museum, beijing  2007  gathering sand castles - chinese new generation artist award exhibition, yan huang art museum, beijing  2004  chen fei solo oil painting exhibition, beijing film academy, beijing (solo)  references  external links chen fei - the franks-suss collection chen fei - artnet chen fei's first solo show in europe opens at galerie urs meile artdaily.com, accessed 2016-05-24  artists from shanxi beijing film academy alumni people from linfen 1983 births living people
gondrecourt may refer to the following communes in france:  gondrecourt-aix, meurthe-et-moselle department, north-eastern france  gondrecourt-le-chateau, meuse department, lorraine, north-eastern france  see also   gondecourt, a commune in the nord department, northern france
exam () is a 2003 romanian drama film directed by titus muntean.  cast   marius stanescu as cristi sandulescu  gheorghe dinica as dumitrascu  clara voda as nora sandulescu  gheorghe visu as stanciu  coca bloos as doina ruznici  valentin uritescu as nea grigore  alexandra dinu as alina bradean   mihai dinvale as mircea   as cosma ruznici   as maior militie  eugen cristian motriuc as capitan miliitie   emil hostina as lt. major militie  reception  exam received positive reviews in romania but was not widely distributed internationally.  references  external links   2003 films 2003 drama films romanian films romanian drama films romanian-language films
dean and dawson was a travel agency in the united kingdom.  history dean and dawson was founded in 1871 by joseph dean and john dawson. in 1890, dean founded a printing company to support the travel agency.  in 1944, in the great escape from stalag luft iii, the name dean and dawson was used as a code name by the forgers who produced counterfeit documents for the escaping prisoners of war, detailed in the book the great escape.  in the 1950s, the company was acquired by thomas cook group.  references  defunct companies based in london travel agencies transport companies established in 1871 travel and holiday companies of the united kingdom
krymskaya () is a passenger station on the moscow central circle, located on the 31st kilometer of the little ring of moscow railway. it's integrated with moscow metro by fare control system and serviced by cooperation of moscow metro and russian railways.  gallery  external links    крымская mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
mahal () is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 2.7 km (walking distance) away from goraya, 18.5 km from phillaur, 33 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 136 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , mahal has a total number of 691 houses and population of 3380 of which include 1731 males and 1649 females. literacy rate of mahal is 83.05%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 335 which is 9.91% of total population of mahal, and child sex ratio is approximately 745 lower than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 1019 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of mahal which includes 887 males and 132 females. according to census survey report 2011, 86.75% workers describe their work as main work and 13.25% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 11.3 km away from the village. the village is 48.6 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 127 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the norwegian peace council (norwegian: norges fredsrad) is the largest peace organisation in norway. it is an umbrella organisation of 20 non-governmental organisations concerned with peace. it was founded on 25 october 1945 by seven ngos.  its honorary president is fredrik s. heffermehl.  member organisations  bestemødre for fred  changemaker  cisv norway  folkereisning mot krig  ifor norge  women's international league for peace and freedom norway  internasjonal dugnad  international organisation of good templars norway  juvente  nansen peace centre  nei til nye nato  networkers south-north  student christian movement in norway  norwegian peace association  international physicians for the prevention of nuclear war norway  one-people  pbi-peace brigades international  press-redd barna ungdom  religious society of friends norway  references  external links  official site  peace organisations based in norway organizations established in 1945 organisations based in oslo
hameed () is a village in the chach valley of hazro tehsil in attock district of punjab province, pakistan.  history  liaka kusulaka was an indo-scythian satrap of the area of chukhsa (chach) during the 1st century bce.  the battle of chach was fought in 1008 ad between the ghaznavid army of sultan mahmud of ghazni and the hindu shahi army of anandapala, resulting in the latter's defeat.  geography hameed is located in western chhachh, about 4 km from the city of hazro. hameed has its own union council, which also governs other surrounding villages.  references    villages in attock district
russell p. brown was an american banker and politician who served a member of the massachusetts house of representatives and president of beverly cooperative bank.  early life brown was born on august 24, 1891 in beverly, massachusetts. he attended beverly public schools and worcester academy.  business career from 1916 to 1942, brown ran a mail-order greeting card business. in 1927 he was elected to the board of directors of the beverly cooperative bank. in 1942 he became the bank's vice president and from 1944 until his death in 1965 he was the bank's president. during his tenure as president, the bank building at 246 cabot street was destroyed by a fire. a new building was completed at 254 cabot street a year later.  political career in 1923, brown was elected to the beverly school committee. he became the committee chairman in 1940. from 1937 to 1947 he was a member of the massachusetts house of representatives.  death in january 1965, brown was admitted to beverly hospital for treatment for a heart ailment. he died there on january 19, 1965.  see also  massachusetts legislature: 1937-1938, 1939, 1941-1942, 1943-1944, 1945-1946  references  1891 births 1965 deaths american bank presidents massachusetts republicans members of the massachusetts house of representatives people from beverly, massachusetts worcester academy alumni 20th-century american politicians
uscgc donald horsley (wpc-1117) is the united states coast guard's 17th . she was commissioned on may 20, 2016.  she was the fifth of a cohort of six frcs home-ported in san juan, puerto rico.  namesake in 2010, master chief petty officer of the coast guard charles "skip" w. bowen, the u.s. coast guard's senior enlisted person at the time, lobbied for the new sentinel-class cutters to be named after enlisted coast guardsmen, or personnel from its precursor services, who had distinguished themselves by their heroism. donald r. horsley rose to the rank of master chief, retiring with eleven service stripes, indicating 44 years of service.  he served in three wars, and received multiple awards for valor.  references  external links  donald horsley 2016 ships ships built in lockport, louisiana
events from the year 1708 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   archangelgorod governorate  kazan governorate  moscow governorate  saint petersburg governorate  siberia governorate  smolensk governorate  births   - grand duchess anna petrovna of russia, elder daughter of emperor peter i, the great of russia and his wife empress catherine i. (d. 1728)  deaths  references    years of the 18th century in russia
"love and war" (stylized as "love + war") is the debut single by banks & steelz, a collaborative project created by interpol frontman paul banks and wu-tang clan member rza. featuring a rap verse from fellow wu-tang clan member ghostface killah, it was premiered on the apple music radio station beats 1 on may 19, 2016. it was subsequently released as a digital download, acting as the lead single from their debut studio album, anything but words (2016). a music video for the song, which pays tribute to the film reservoir dogs, was also released on may 20.  composition "love and war" is a rock-influenced hip hop song. it features rap verses from rza and ghostface killah as well as a sung chorus done by paul banks, where he repeats "all is fair in love and war / what you keeping score for" throughout. april clare welsh of fact stated that the song is built around "shuffling grooves, driving guitar and mariachi-style trumpet."  music video the music video for the "love and war" was released on the duo's youtube channel on may 20, 2016. directed by director group arms race, the video is a tribute to an iconic torture scene from the 1992 quentin tarantino-directed film reservoir dogs. the video has been described as "grisly" by sarah murphy of exclaim!. tom breihan of stereogum described the video, saying that it "starts out as a yakuza torture scene, and it takes some unexpected turns." banks and rza also appear in the video as hired guns; rza shares "tarantino-esque" dialogue with banks, who remains mute during the video. rza had worked with tarantino in the past; he worked on the soundtrack for his kill bill series.  track listing  personnel personnel adapted from allmusic.  banks & steelz paul banks - composing, production, vocals rza - composing, production, vocals  additional personnel beatriz artola - engineer matthew barrick - drums brandon bost - assistant engineer vira byramji - engineer greg calbi - mastering mike crossey - mixing, programming steve fallone - mastering ghostface killah - composing, vocals  jonathan gilmore - engineer, mixing engineer billy hickey - engineer john horne - assistant engineer phil joly - engineer rob moose - piano clinton patterson - trumpet brandon h. smith - assistant engineer gosha usov - assistant engineer steve vealey - engineer joe visciano - engineer  release history
references  2016 singles 2016 songs
the 2016-17 northwestern wildcats women's basketball team represented northwestern university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the wildcats, led by ninth-year head coach joe mckeown, played their home games at the welsh-ryan arena as members of the big ten conference. they finished the season 20-11, 8-8 in big ten play to finish in a tie for eighth place. they defeated iowa in the second round of the big ten women's tournament before losing to ohio state. despite having 20 wins, they were not invited to a postseason tournament first time since 2013.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#431f81; color:#ffffff;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#431f81; color:#ffffff;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#431f81; color:#ffffff;"| big ten regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#431f81; color:#ffffff;" |big ten women's tournament  rankings  see also 2016-17 northwestern wildcats men's basketball team  references  northwestern wildcats women's basketball seasons northwestern northwestern wild northwestern wild
the following are known to be, or have been, members of the athenaeum club, london.  founders  john wilson croker (1780-1857) (founder)  james burton (property developer) (1761-1837) (founder)  decimus burton (1800-1881) (founder, designer of clubhouse)  sir humphry davy (1778-1829) (founder, first chairman)  michael faraday (1791-1867) (founder, first secretary)  sir thomas lawrence (1769-1830) (designer of club seal)  sir francis chantrey (1781-1841)  henry john temple, 3rd viscount palmerston (1784-1865)  members   sir lawrence alma-tadema (1836-1912)  richard ansdell (1815-1885)  edward armitage r.a. (1817-1896)  matthew arnold (1822-1888)  thomas arnold (1895-1842)  alexander bain (1818-1903)  roger bannister (1929-2018)  sir charles barry (1795-1860)  gilbert bayes (1872-1953)  robert anning bell (1863-1933)  philip bliss (academic) (1787-1857)  edward wilmot blyden (1832-1912)   joseph edgar boehm bart., r.a. (1834-1890)  louis lucien bonaparte (1813-1891)  sir adrian boult (1889-1983)  john brett (1831-1902)  john bright (1811-1889)  sir thomas brock, k.c.b., r.a. (1847-1922)  robert browning (1812-1889)  william buckland (1784-1856)  sir edward bulwer-lytton (1803-1873)  john burdon-sanderson (1825-1925)  william burges (1827-1881)  sir edward burne-jones (1833-1896)  philip burne-jones (1861-1926)   frederick burton (1816-1900)   sir richard francis burton (1821-1890)  george busk (1807-1886)  william butterfield (1814-1900)  arthur buxton (1882-1958)  george campbell, 8th duke of argyll (1823-1900)  george canning (1770-1827)  thomas carlyle (1795-1881)  robert chambers (1802-1871)  sir francis chantrey r.a. (1781-1841)  arthur hugh clough (1819-1861)  alfred clayton cole
(1854-1920)  edward colebrooke, 1st baron colebrooke (1861-1939)  john collier (1850-1934)  charles darwin (1809-1892)  william reid dick (1879-1961)  charles dickens (1812-1870)  thomas frognall dibdin (1776-1847)  benjamin disraeli (1804-1881)  charles lutwidge dodgson (lewis carroll) (1832-1898)  arthur conan doyle (1859-1930)  richard doyle (1824-1883)  george du maurier (1834-1896)  sir alfred east (1849-1913)  griffith edwards (1928-2012)  quentin edwards (1925-2010)  edward elgar (1857-1934)  thomas faed (1826-1900)   sir luke fildes (1844-1927)  john henry foley r.a. (1818-1874)  robert james forbes (1900-1973)  john forster (1812-1876)  sir george frampton r.a. (1860-1928)  edward frankland (1825-1899)  william powell frith (1819-1909)  sir alfred gilbert r.a. (1854-1934)  sir francis grant (1803-1878)  alec guinness (1914-2000)  h. rider haggard (1856-1925)  george hamilton-gordon, 4th earl of aberdeen (1784-1860)  james duffield harding 1797-1863)  philip hardwick (1792-1870)  philip charles hardwick (1822-1892)  thomas hardy (1840-1928)  augustus hare (1834-1903)  thomas archer hirst (1830-1892)  joseph dalton hooker (1817-1911)  alfred william hunt (1830-1896)  william holman hunt (1827-1910)  thomas henry huxley (1825-1895)  john rogers herbert (1810-1890)  hubert von herkomer (1849-1914)  washington irving (1783-1859)  henry james (1843-1916)  robert banks jenkinson, second earl of liverpool (1770-1828)  william goscombe john (1860-1952)  owen jones (1809-1874)  thomas jones (1870-1955)  rudyard kipling (1865-1936)  william lamb, 2nd viscount melbourne (1779-1848)  sir edwin henry landseer (1802-1873)  andrew lang (1844-1912)  benjamin williams leader (1831-1923)  frederic
leighton, 1st baron leighton (1830-1896)  john frederick lewis (1805-1876)  john lubbock, 1st baron avebury (1834-1913)  sir charles lyell (1797-1875)  thomas babington macaulay (1800-1859)  daniel maclise (1806-1870)  frederic madden (1801-1873)  henry edward cardinal manning (1807-1892)  gideon mantell (1790-1852)  frederick maurice (1805-1872)  james clerk maxwell (1831-1879)  henry melvill (1798-1871)  yehudi menuhin (1916-1999)  diane middlebrook (1939-2007)  john stuart mill (1806-1873)  sir john everett millais (1829-1896)  henry hart milman (1791-1868)  leonard g. montefiore (1889-1961)  patrick moore (1923-2012)  william mulready r.a. (1786-1863)  john nash (1752-1835)  richard owen (1804-1892)  robert peel (1788-1850)  henry alfred pegram (1862-1937)  cooper perry (1856-1938)  st john philby (1885-1960)  thomas jodrell phillips jodrell (1807-1897)  thomas phillipps (1792-1872)  edward poynter r.a. (1821-1902)  valentine cameron prinsep (1838-1904)  richard redgrave (1804-1888)  ralph richardson (1902-1983)  george richmond (1809-1896)  sir william blake richmond (1842-1921)  david roberts (1796-1864)  samuel rogers (1763-1855)  john ruskin (1819-1900)  lord john russell (1792-1878)  owen rutter (1889-1944)  john charles ryle (1816-1900)  archibald sayce (1845-1933)  jimmy savile (1926-2011)  john liston byam shaw (1872-1919)  richard norman shaw (1831-1912)  sir martin archer shee p.r.a. (1769-1850)  john h. smythe (1844-1908)  edward george geoffrey smith stanley, 14th earl of derby (1799-1869)  solomon j. solomon (1860-1927)  william somerville (1771-1860)  herbert spencer (1820-1903)  charles villiers stanford (1852-1924)  clarkson stanfield (1793-1867)
leslie stephen (1832-1904)  robert louis stevenson (1850-1894)  george edmund street (1824-1881)  arthur sullivan (1842-1900)  john addington symonds (1807-1871)  archibald campbell tait, archbishop of canterbury (1811-1882)  frederick temple, archbishop of canterbury (1821-1903)  henry john temple, viscount palmerston (1784-1865)  alfred, lord tennyson (1809-1892)  william makepeace thackeray (1811-1863)  william turner thiselton-dyer  simon thompson (b. 1959)   william hamo thornycroft r. a. (1850-1925)  rick trainor (b. 1948)  anthony trollope (1815-1882)  joseph mallord william turner r.a. (1775-1851)  john tyndall (1820-1893)  henry vaughan (1809-1899)  gore vidal (1925-2012)  william walton (1902-1983)  john william waterhouse (1849-1917)  george frederic watts (1817-1904)  arthur wellesley, 1st duke of wellington (1769-1852)  sir richard westmacott, junior ra (1775-1856)  william whewell (1794-1866)  samuel wilberforce, bishop of oxford (1805-1873)  william wilberforce (1759-1833)  thomas woolner r.a. (1825-1892)  references  sources      athenaeum club
francis anthony mossman (14 april 1988 - 14 august 2021) was a new zealand actor based in australia. he was best known for his portrayal of stevie hughes in the horizon and vitus in spartacus: vengeance.  biography  francis mossman was born on 14 april 1988, in auckland, new zealand, to reginald mossman and maria abad. he had two brothers. in 2012, mossman migrated to sydney, australia.  mossman died on 14 august 2021, at the age of 33.  career  mossman appeared in the new zealand kids' series amazing extraordinary friends, and the new zealand soap shortland street. he also appeared in three episodes of starz series spartacus: vengeance.  mossman starred as stevie hughes in the horizon. he reprised his role as stevie in the television movie the horizon, directed by stephan elliott. mossman also featured in the australian feature film ruben guthrie.  filmography  television   shortland street (2006) - taylor  amazing extraordinary friends (2006) - nigel  spartacus: vengeance (2012) - vitus  the horizon (2013 - 2017) - stevie hughes  films   ruben guthrie (2015) - lorenzo oil  pig boy (2017) (short) - dylan  dis-connect (2020) (short) - luke  references  external links     1988 births 2021 deaths new zealand male actors new zealand male models new zealand people of filipino descent new zealand emigrants to australia 21st-century new zealand male actors 21st-century filipino male actors people from auckland people from sydney people from puerto princesa filipino male models filipino people of new zealand descent
the 2016-17 sheffield shield season was the 115th season of the sheffield shield, the domestic first-class cricket competition in australia. it started on 25 october 2016 and finished on 30 march 2017. there was a break between december and january for the big bash league. the first round of matches were played as day/night games in preparation for australia's day/night test match against pakistan on 15 december 2016. a second day/night round of fixtures took place in round five of the tournament.  victoria qualified for the final after their 8 wicket win against western australia in round 9 of the competition. victoria secured a home tie in the final, with an innings victory against queensland in round 10. however, the melbourne cricket ground was unavailable for the fixture, so it took place at traeger park in alice springs. they faced south australia in the final, for the second consecutive year. victoria won the competition with a first-innings lead in the final, after the match finished as a draw. it was their 31st tournament win and their third consecutive title.  points table  round-robin stage  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  round 6  round 7  round 8  round 9  round 10  final  statistics  most runs  most wickets  references  external links  2016-17 sheffield shield on espn cricinfo  sheffield shield sheffield shield sheffield shield seasons
qipengyuania pelagi  is a gram-negative, aerobic, rod-shaped, non-spore-forming and non-motile bacteria from the genus qipengyuania which has been isolated from the red sea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of erythrobacter pelagi at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  sphingomonadales bacteria described in 2012
radio garcia-serra was a cuban radio station founded in 1929.  history  jorge garcia-serra founded radio garcia-serra in havana, cuba in late 1929. the radio station was the second radio station established in havana, and transmitted under the call letters cmcu at a frequency of 660 kc which, at the time and throughout the 1950s, was the only frequency with a clear international frequency that could not be blocked or interfered.  in the early stages, radio garcia-serra broadcast music and on-air novellas written by distinguished cuban and spanish writers of the time.  during the late 1940s and 1950s, the children of jorge garcia-serra owned and managed the radio station, and roberto garcia-serra was named the general manager.  in the late 1940s, when studio live radio-broadcast performances were common, radio garcia-serra broadcast a program at 5 pm called "tea hour" (hora del te) where celia cruz, the world-famous singer and representative of cuba, had her beginnings.  also making a debut in radio garcia-serra in that same year was fajardo y sus estrellas. other late 1950s studio live performances included, orquesta aragon, orquesta sensacion y barbarito diez.  references  radio stations established in 1929 radio stations disestablished in 1959 radio stations in cuba
the mesopotamian social sciences academy is a co-educational university in qamishli, the capital of the de facto autonomous region, the democratic federation of northern syria. the academy opened in 2013 offering classes in criticism and self-criticism, the democratic system and kurdish language.   the school year has three terms, lasting 3-4 months each. the curriculum consists mainly of history and sociology classes. jineoloji is also taught there. teaching occurs mainly in kurdish.  there was a book donation drive organised early in the life of the university, which, amongst others, was donated to by ak press.  see also university of afrin university of rojava  references  external links official facebook page of the mesopotamian social sciences academy  educational institutions established in 2014 education in the autonomous administration of north and east syria alternative education libertarian socialism women's rights in syria 2014 establishments in syria
zindagi kitni haseen hay (zkhh) () is a 2016 pakistani romantic drama film directed by anjum shahzad, written by abdul khaliq khan while produced by rafiq ahmed choudhary, fahmeeda abdul khaliq, kamran siddiqui and jahanzaib quadir while under the banner of geo films. the film's cast include pakistani television stars sajal ali and feroze khan in lead roles.  it is the third project to feature sajal ali opposite feroze khan after blockbuster drama serials chup raho and gul e rana. the film was distributed by geo films on eid ul adha 2016. the film was the remake of the 1979 american film kramer vs. kramer.  plot  zindagi kitni haseen hay (zkhh) a remake of the indian movie 'akele hum akele tum' revolves around the story of a young couple zain (feroze khan) and mahira (sajal ali) who have raised a kid and seem to be struggling with the challenges of life since they married at a very young age. both of them have their own dreams to follow and appear to be quite passionate about what they wish to achieve in life. zain, wants to become a filmmaker. however, as their dreams affect their relationship, the two part ways at some point and so goes the story.  zindagi kitni haseen hay is an emotional roller coaster that tackles the themes of love, life, suffering and passion as the two protagonists try to find a way ahead.  cast    sajal ali as mahira khan  feroze khan as zain ahmed  nabeel zuberi as faraz   adil fayaz as mangu seth  shafqat cheema  jibraill ahmed  nayyar ejaz  rashid farooqui alyy khan  production  the film's production is part of a joint venture between an australian production company rc films and rafiq ahmed chaudhary's kingfisher films. the film's shooting was done in karachi and sydney.  release  the film's teaser was released online on 29 june 2016. whilst the film's theatrical trailer was released on 5 july 2016. the film was released on 13 september 2016 in pakistan.  home media the world television premiere was held by geo entertainment on 27 june 2017, on the occasion of eid-ul-fitar.  digital media zindagi kitni haseen hay is available on netflix as vod for streaming.  music the film's ost is composed by soch,
udan khatola and sohail haider.  box office the film earned 45 lakh on its opening day in pakistan. then at  second and third day the film grossed impressively than first day and collected 90 lakh on second day and same amount on third day. the weekend grossing of film remained 1.82 crore. the worldwide lifetime grossing of film is .  accolades  references  external links      2016 films pakistani romantic drama films pakistani films 2010s urdu-language films 2016 romantic drama films geo films films pakistani remakes of american films
zhang yuge (; born may 11, 1996 in harbin, heilongjiang, china) is a chinese singer and actress. she debuted as a member of female idol group snh48, where she was part of team sii from its formation to her graduation in 2020; in addition, she was also a member of its sub-units style-7 and 7senses.  career on 14 october 2012, zhang yuge became one of the 26 shortlisted candidates during the recruitment of snh48 first-generation members. on 12 january 2013, she made her first public appearance during snh48 research students' 1st stage, "give me power!" on april 30, she was invited to perform at the shanghai strawberry festival 2013, together with other snh48 members. on 25 may, she performed on the "blooming for you concert" with other first-generation members. on 31 december, she performed during dragon television's new year countdown 2014.  on 18 january 2014, zhang performed in the snh48 "red & white concert". during snh48's first general election, held on 26 july, zhang came in fifth with 9,061 votes, and became part of snh48's senbatsu for their 5th single.  on 17 march 2015, zhang she went to saipan to film the music video for "manatsu no sounds good!", of which she took up her first centre position. on 26 july, during snh48's second general election, she came in fifth with 32,306 votes. on 31 october, she was announced as one of the members of its sub-unit, style-7.  on 20 april 2016, it was announced that zhang would be one of the members of snh48's sub-unit, 7senses.   on 30 july, zhang was ranked eighth during snh48's third general election with 66,867.5 votes.  on 29 july, 2017, during snh48's fourth general election, zhang came in ninth with 78,345.6 votes.  on 28 july, 2018, during snh48's fifth general election, zhang came in sixteenth with 52,339.94 votes.in the same year, zhang performed in tv series "so young"  on 27 july, 2019, during snh48's sixth general election, zhang came in fourth with 965,200 votes.  in 2020, zhang participated in the reality girl group survival show idol producer 3  which aired on march 12, 2020. she was eliminated in 20th episode with the rank 23rd.
discography  singles  with snh48  eps  albums  mae shika mukanee (2014)  filmography  movies  tv series  references  external links  official member profile       zhang yuge on bilibili   1996 births living people snh48 members musicians from harbin japanese-language singers korean-language singers of china chinese mandopop singers chinese film actresses chinese television actresses 21st-century chinese actresses singers from heilongjiang
amphilius frieli is a species of fish in the family amphiliidae, first found in the upper congo basin.  references  frieli freshwater fish of central africa fish described in 2015 taxa named by lawrence m. page
jose antonio medina alvarado (born august 13, 1996 in mexico city) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a midfielder. he previously played for pioneros de cancun.  references  1996 births living people mexican footballers footballers from mexico city association football midfielders ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players club universidad nacional footballers atlante f.c. footballers venados f.c. players pioneros de cancun footballers
the 23rd district of the iowa senate is located in central iowa, and is currently composed of story county.  current elected officials herman quirmbach is the senator currently representing the 23rd district.  the area of the 23rd district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 45th district (represented by beth wessel-kroeschell) the 46th district (represented by ross wilburn)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  arthur small, 1983-1986 jean lloyd-jones, 1987-1994 mary neuhauser, 1995-1998 joe bolkcom, 1999-2002 herman quirmbach, 2003-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  23
ryszard dawidowicz (born 11 june 1960) is a polish former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1960 births living people polish male cyclists olympic cyclists of poland cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from gryfino county sportspeople from west pomeranian voivodeship
mohamed taher siala (; born 27 may 1943) is a libyan politician who served as the minister of foreign affairs of libya in the government of national accord from 2016 to 2021.  foreign minister of libya siala was one of the eighteen ministers appointed as part of the internationally-recognized government of national accord, in january-february 2016, with the objective of reuniting libya. before that he was an official in the pre-2011 government of libya.  he met with jens stoltenberg, the secretary general of nato, in june 2016 in brussels, where they discussed the security situation in libya and possible military assistance to the gna. he also met with federica mogherini, the european union's head of foreign affairs, and didier reynders, the minister of foreign affairs of belgium. they discussed issues of security, human trafficking in libya, and the appointment of a new libyan ambassador to the eu.  in march 2017, he accompanied the gna vice premier, ahmed maiteeq, to a meeting in moscow with the special representative of the president of russia for the middle east and africa, mikhail bogdanov. there they discussed the ongoing libyan crisis and solutions for resolving the conflict, including the possibility of negotiations between the gna and the tobruk-based house of representatives. this was part of an effort to improve relations between russia and the libyan gna, as currently their rivals, the house of representatives and marshal khalifa haftar, have close relations with the country.  during a press conference in algiers on 9 may 2017, siala named marshal haftar as the commander-in-chief of the libyan army, then clarified that the gna would give him that position if he recognizes the un-supported government.  siala met with a delegation of estonian members of parliament on 2 november 2017, led by former estonian foreign minister keit pentus-rosimannus. she stated that a political solution in libya was important for the eu and estonia, and also affirmed estonia's support for libyan efforts against smuggling of weapons and drugs. in the libyan foreign minister's opinion, it is necessary for a constitutional referendum as well as elections to be held to determine the country's future. at a summit held in bolivia on november 24, he met with iranian vice president eshaq jahangiri, stating that both sides want to deepen iran-libya relations.  in early 2018 he met with british ambassador frank baker to discuss reconstruction efforts in libya.  see also list of foreign ministers in 2017 list of current foreign ministers
references  living people libyan diplomats libyan politicians foreign ministers of libya 1943 births
saudi canadians ( lit. so'odioon canadioon) are canadians of saudi descent or saudis who have canadian citizenship. according to the 2011 census there were 7,955  canadians who claimed saudi ancestry.  demography  most saudi canadians speak arabic, english or french. according to the 2011 census there were 7,955  canadians who claimed saudi ancestry.  until august 2018, there were over 16,000 saudi students on government scholarships in canada. there were more than 15,000 saudi students in canada in 2007, including 800 resident physicians and specialists who provided care to the canadian population. in 2015, saudi arabian students represented 3% of total foreign students in canada. official figures provided by the saudi arabian cultural bureau in canada (sacb) indicated that in 2014 there were 16,000 saudi scholarship students in canada and 1,000 medical trainees.  notable people ensaf haidar, raif badawi's wife and children were granted political asylum by the government of canada in 2013 and currently reside in sherbrooke, quebec. haidar and her three children with badawi became canadian citizens on canada day, 2018. on the same day haidar called for the niqab to be banned.  see also   canada-saudi arabia relations  embassy of saudi arabia, ottawa  arab canadians  saudi americans  saudi australians  references  external links   arab canadian canada
avtozavodskaya (, lit. auto factory) is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro that opened in september 2016. it offers out-of-station transfers to avtozavodskaya on the zamoskvoretskaya line.  gallery  references  external links   автозаводская mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
leland hotel, also known as the leland motor inn, is a historic hotel building located at richmond, wayne county, indiana.  it was built in 1928, and is a seven-story, "u"-shaped, mission revival style reinforced concrete building sheathed in light brown brick dwelling. the building was modernized in the mid-1960s and removed or covered many of the original details. it is the tallest building in richmond.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1985.  references  hotel buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana mission revival architecture in indiana hotel buildings completed in 1928 buildings and structures in richmond, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana
jakub marek (born june 22, 1991) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for ehc waldkraiburg of the bayernliga.  marek made his czech extraliga debut playing with motor ceske budejovice during the 2011-12 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1991 births living people motor ceske budejovice players stadion hradec kralove players czech ice hockey forwards
open coding in grounded theory method is the analytic process by which concepts (codes) to the observed data and phenomenon are attached during qualitative data analysis. it is one of the 'procedures' for working with text as characterized by strauss (1987) and strauss and corbin (1990). open coding aims at developing substantial codes describing, naming or classifying the phenomenon under consideration. open coding is achieved by segmenting data into meaningful expressions and describing them in single word to short sequence of words. further, relevant annotations and concepts are then attached to these expressions.  open coding may be applied in varying degrees of detail. the codes can be linked to a line, a sentence, a paragraph or wholesome text (protocol, case, etc.). the application of the alternatives depends on the research question, on the relevant data, personal style of analyst and the stage of research. however, while coding, the main aim of coding should be in sight i.e. to break down and understand the text and develop categories to be put in order in the course of time.  the result of open coding should be a list characterising codes and categories attached to the text and supported by code notes that were produced to explain the content of codes. these notes could be striking observations and thoughts that are relevant to the development of theory.  although codes are exclusive to the research material and the style of the analyst, it is suggested researchers should address the text with the following questions :  what? - identify the underlying issue and the phenomenon  who? - identify the actors involved and the roles they play.  how? - identifying the aspects of phenomenon  when? how long? where? - time, course and location  how much? how long? - identifying the intensity   why? - identifying the reasons attached to the phenomenon  what for? - identifying intention or purpose  by which? - strategies and tactics to achieve the goal  see also   grounded theory  axial coding  selective coding  references   data analysis qualitative research
spells is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of spells edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the fourth volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in may 1985. the first british edition was issued in trade paperback by robinson in 1988.  the book collects twelve novellas, novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors, with an introduction by asimov.  contents "curses!" (introduction) (isaac asimov) "the candidate" (henry slesar) "the christmas shadrach" (frank r. stockton) "the snow women" (fritz leiber) "invisible boy" (ray bradbury) "the hero who returned" (gerald w. page) "toads of grimmerdale" (andre norton) "a literary death" (martin h. greenberg) "satan and sam shay" (robert arthur) "lot no. 249" (arthur conan doyle) "the witch is dead" (edward d. hoch) "i know what you need" (stephen king) "the miracle workers" (jack vance)  notes  1985 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
the cathedral basilica of queen of peace  (), also called san miguel cathedral, is a catholic church located in the city of san miguel, el salvador.  in 1740 the mayor of san salvador, manuel galvez del corral, reported that in san miguel there was a parish church,  two convents (san francisco and la merced) and two hermitages (san sebastian and calvary).  in 1862 the parish church, which bore the name "st michael archangel", was demolished to build a larger temple that would also serve as an oratory of veneration for the virgin our lady of peace. it is presumed that the first stone was laid by president gerardo barrios on november 21 of that year.  the first person in charge of its construction was the english engineer william kirk who had to leave the project shortly after the death of barrios. still unfinished, the temple received the rank of cathedral by papal decree of pius x, on 11 february 1913. eight years later, on november 21, 1921, monsignor juan antonio duenas y argumedo proclaimed the patronage of our lady of peace and gave papal coronation of the image on behalf of pope benedict xv. the cathedral was declared completed in 1962 with the promotion of then pastor oscar romero,  exactly a century after construction works had started.  see also  roman catholicism in el salvador our lady queen of peace  references  roman catholic cathedrals in el salvador san miguel, el salvador roman catholic churches completed in 1962 roman catholic shrines in el salvador basilica churches in central america 20th-century roman catholic church buildings
kothe kharak singh (punjabi: ਕਠ ਖੜਕ ਸਘ) or kothe kharak singh: a story of three generations (1985) is a punjabi-language novel written by ram sarup ankhi. the novel is considered as ankhi's best literary work and for this work he received sahitya akademi award in 1987.  plot  kothe kharak singh is a political novel and the main events of the plot take place in a village in punjab. the novel presents three generations and narrates the struggle for indian independence before the partition of the punjab. it also describes the socio-economic and cultural changes the state was witnessing at that time.  theme  the socio-cultural environment before indian independence and lifestyle of common people are the major theme of this novel. the story and its writing style is influenced by russian literature and fiction, translations of which were easily available in punjab at that time.  publication  the novel first published in 1985. for this novel ram sarup ankhi received sahitya akademi award in 1987. the novel has been translated into 10 languages. the work was translated into english by avtar singh judge.  references   1985 novels punjabi-language novels 1985 indian novels sahitya akademi award-winning works
hubbe is a surname of danish or german origin, which is properly anglicized as huebbe. notable people with this surname include:  edith agnes hubbe, born edith agnes cook (1859-1942), pioneering educator in south australia nikolaj hubbe (born 1967), artistic director of the royal danish ballet ulrich hubbe (1805-1892), german emigrant to south australia, associated with land titles reform  references
fokion (phokion) zaimis (1899-1967) was a greek politician. he served twice as minister of the interior (1949-1950, 1965-1966), minister of finance (march-april 1950, august-september 1950), minister of economy (march 1950, august-september 1950, 1951), minister of housing and reconstruction (1950-1951), minister of health (1950), minister of welfare (1950-1952) and minister of commerce (1947-1948).  references rulers.org  1899 births 1967 deaths ministers of the interior of greece
men.com is a producer of gay internet pornography content. it is owned by mindgeek.  the domain name was purchased in december 2003 from entrepreneur rick schwartz for $1.3 million. many porn stars have made scenes for the production company, among them are bobby clark, landon conrad, rocco reed, luke adams, william seed, and paddy o'brian.  history beginning in october 2015 with the "stealth fuckers" series, men.com began to introduce female characters into non-sexual roles, creating controversy over whether female performers belonged in gay porn. in january 2018, men.com released a controversial scene featuring heterosexual sex and created a category for "bisexual porn".  in august 2018, men.com released its first scene featuring mmf bisexual porn titled "the challenge", creating further controversy over whether bisexual porn belongs on a gay porn website. men.com stated that they decided to feature bisexual content because "after asking our users what they would like to see, a surprisingly large number asked for a fully bisexual scene." arad winwin, the star of the scene and a self-identified gay man, faced backlash from fans for acting in the scene, with some fans accusing him of being straight or of having "converted" to heterosexual or bisexual. winwin told the gay website str8upgayporn that "i'm a gay man...this was only a job, and it was nothing more. nothing personal. i was working, and it was like any other scene i've done".  in february 2019, men.com released "he's always hard for me", its first scene featuring a transgender man. the scene features transgender porn actor luke hudson and gay porn actor dante colle. in april, a second scene featuring a trans man was released. some gay men have complained about the presence of transgender men on the website, leading the gay porn reporter zachary sires to respond by defending men.com's decision, arguing that it was a smart business decision that could broaden men.com's audience and that could lead some viewers to be more tolerant of transgender men.  as of march 2019, men.com no longer features more bisexual content. after the release of the arad winwin scene "left many angry gay porn fans in complete shock", the mindgeek conglomerate decided to create a separate studio for bisexual porn called whynotbi.com.  in popular culture in january 2015, in the wake of several controversies involving justin bieber and his allegedly "out-of-control
" behavior, men.com posted an internet ad featuring its most popular actor johnny rapid inviting the singer to do a sex scene with him for us$2 million.  in july 2017, a line from a men.com scene titled "private lessons, part 3" (later renamed "right in front of my salad") became an internet meme. the scene depicts a woman eating dinner before noticing the cook is having sex with her husband in the kitchen, and exclaiming, "are you guys fucking? right in front of my salad?!". the "right in front of salad" meme is used in response to a post that is disgusting or unseemly.  ranking  as of january 2020, men.com has a traffic ranking of 31,083.  see also  list of male performers in gay porn films  list of pornographic film studios  references  external links      mindgeek american gay pornographic film studios bisexual pornography gay male pornography websites american erotica and pornography websites 2003 establishments in nevada companies based in the las vegas valley
samuli rasilainen (born 21 june 1996) is a finnish retired ice hockey goaltender who played for espoo blues of the finnish liiga.  references  external links    1996 births living people espoo blues players finnish ice hockey goaltenders
l with bar (capital ƚ, lower case ƚ) is a latin letter l with a bar diacritic. it appears in the alphabet of the venetian language, and in its capital form it is used in the saanich orthography created by dave elliott in 1978.  in unicode, both the capital and lower case are in the latin extended-b block. the capital () is part of the "additions for sencoten" (saanich), while the lower case () is noted as an "americanist phonetic usage" as an alternative to , the voiceless alveolar lateral fricative.  see also bar (diacritic)  references  latin-script letters
jaypee university refers to universities belonging to the jaypee group and may refer to:  jaypee university, anoopshahr jaypee institute of information technology, noida jaypee university of information technology, waknaghat jaypee university of engineering and technology, guna
giuseppe vigoni (9 july 1846 - 15 february 1914) was an italian explorer of africa and geographer. he was a recipient of the order of saints maurice and lazarus. he was mayor of milan. he served in the senate of the kingdom of italy.  references  1846 births 1914 deaths recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus members of the senate of the kingdom of italy italian geographers explorers of africa mayors of milan italian explorers
the ernst-schneider-preis, or ernst schneider prize, is a german journalism prize awarded for excellence in reporting in the area of economics.  it is named after the german entrepreneur and art patron ernst schneider, who was president of the german chamber of commerce from 1963 to 1969.  funded by the german chambers of commerce, the goal of the prize is to increase public knowledge and understanding of business issues.  the prize is given annually to journalists who "convey management expertise and knowledge of economic relationships in an understandable manner, and thus contribute to the representation of a liberal and social economic order."  the ernst schneider prize has evolved over the years to the largest competition for economic journalism, endowed with €52,500.  winners are chosen by a three-person jury, which evaluates the relevance of the theme, the quality of information, and the comprehensibility and attractiveness of presentation.  prizes are awarded in the following categories, as of 2016:   large business program (7,500 euros) for television and radio  short contribution (worth 5,000 euros) for television and radio  innovation / business in entertainment (5,000 euros) here competing television, radio, print and online  economy in regional print media (7,500 euros)  economy in national print media (7,500 euros)  promotion (2,500 euros)  business online (5,000 euros)  german journalism awards
ephwurd is an american electronic music project. ephwurd is best known for tracks such as "rock the party" (with jauz), "vibrations", "wildchild" (with the bloody beetroots) and "just us" (featuring liinks). in addition ephwurd has remixed some of the biggest names in dance music including the chainsmokers, major lazer, dj snake and oliver heldens. ephwurd has toured worldwide playing festivals such as lollapalooza, electric daisy carnival & veld among many others.  history ephwurd went public with a remix of major lazer & dj snake's "lean on", before revealing who was behind the duo in july 2015 as they released the single "rock the party" on the spinnin' records label. the collaborative effort between ephwurd and jauz would often get played by djs such as tiesto, axwell/ingrosso, and skrillex. the music style would later be known as "bass house", which has been described as "having a lot of classic house drums and percussion to it but it has the wobbles of dubstep at the same time".  ephwurd later released a slew of singles on labels such as spinnin records and its sub label affiliates.  on march 16, 2018, bais haus announced that "ephwurd will now operate without datsik.", due in part to the recent controversy surrounding datsik.  since moving on as a solo act ephwurd has released many singles and collaborations such as "accelerator" and "wildchild" (with the bloody beetroots).  in february 2019, ephwurd has developed his eph'd up records label releasing emerging artists in the "bass house" genre.  music style ephwurd was one of the first acts to popularize the "bass house" genre of music to a wider audience. bass house has been described as an " all-encompassing melting pot is so broad it's impossible to define what it is". the origins of bass house has been traced back to the mid to late-1990s with the work of the group basement jaxx that was melded into uk garage over time. one reviewer labelled ephwurd as a "high-flying collaboration of epic proportions", describing the music as "an exciting blend of dubstep and house music that has packed out venues around the world." ashley marro of "stoney road" magazine described ephwurd's bring it
back as being an "old school combining a heavy dose of bass with elements of classic house music".  references  american house musicians canadian house musicians club djs musical groups established in 2015 remixers 2015 establishments in the united states
a roberts mechanism is a mechanical linkage which converts a rotational motion to approximate straight-line motion.  the linkage was developed by richard roberts (1789-1864).  the roberts mechanism can be classified as:  watt-type linkage  grashof rocker-rocker  symmetrical four-bar linkage  references  see also   chebyshev linkage  linkages (mechanical)
sibogasyrinx pyramidalis is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family cochlespiridae.  description the length of the shell attains 46 mm, its diameter 15.75 mm.  (original description) the shell has a fusiform shape, with a strictly pyramidal spire and a rather long, slender siphonal canal. the shell is, thin, rather smooth and greyish-white. the protoconch is wanting, remaining 9 straight whorls. the straight line only interrupted by a row of short, fold-like, oblique tubercles at the lower part of the whorls, somewhat fainter near the aperture. they number 17 on the penultimate whorl.  the whorls have a second row of slightly oblong, bead-like tubercles, just below the suture, about 30 in number on the body whorl. the spiral sculpture consists of impressed striae, crossing the lower half of basal row of tubercles on each whorl, and 2 or 3 just above the suture. the whole basal part of the body whorl is spirally striated or grooved, the upper part of the whorls is nearly smooth, but for a few scarcely visible spirals and fine and coarse flexuous growth-lines, becoming much coarser on the siphonal canal, which by the intercrossing of this sculpture is slightly granular. the aperture is angular above, ending below in a rather long, narrow, slightly contorted siphonal canal. the peristome is thin, wdth a wide, shallow sinus above, strongly protracted in its median part. the columellar margin is strongly contorted, with a narrow, thin layer of enamel.  distribution this species occurs in the pacific ocean off eastern indonesia, borneo and the timor sea.  references  external links    j. tucker, indo-pacific mollusca; academy of natural sciences of philadelphia. delaware museum of natural history v. 2 no. 9-10 (1968-1969)  kantor yu.i., fedosov a.e. & puillandre n. (2018). new and unusual deep-water conoidea revised with shell, radula and dna characters. ruthenica. 28(2): 47-82  pyramidalis
marianne jakmides dyson is a writer of non-fiction books, mostly for children, about space science.  she grew up in canton, ohio, lives in houston and has worked for nasa.  her book space station science: life in free fall was a golden kite award winner in the year 2000. her book "home on the moon: living on a space frontier" won the american institute of physics science communications award in 2004. the first book she coauthored with apollo 11 astronaut buzz aldrin, welcome to mars: making a home on the red planet, was named a best stem book by the national science teachers association.  bibliography  fireworks in orbit (analog science fiction and fact, 1990) the critical factor (analog science fiction and fact, 1992)  the shape of things to come (analog science fiction and fact, 1996)  finding homework help on the internet (scholastic, 2000) home on the moon: living on a space frontier, ed. jennifer emmett (national geographic, 2003) the space explorer's guide to out-of-this-world science with hena khan (2004) the space explorer's guide to stars and galaxies (scholastic, 2004) space station science: life in free fall foreword by buzz aldrin (scholastic, 1999, 2nd ed. windward, 2004) twentieth-century space and astronomy: a history of notable research and discovery,ed. william j. cannon (facts on file, 2007) fly me to the moon (analog science fiction and fact, 2010)  dyson's space poems (2011) the right path and zeus's eagle (2011)  science fiction versus the real thing: what i learned on nasa's vomit comet (2012)  the callahan kids: tales of life on mars (marianne j. dyson, contributor) (2013) fly me to the moon and other stories (2015)  welcome to mars: making a home on the red planet by buzz aldrin and marianne j. dyson (national geographic, 2015)     "to the moon and back: my apollo 11 adventure" by buzz aldrin and marianne j. dyson with art by bruce foster (national geographic, 2018) trajectories (marianne j. dyson, contributor), ed. dave creek  references  external links marianne dyson's website about marianne dyson  american non-fiction children's writers american science writers american women non-fiction writers analog science fiction and fact people year of birth missing (living people) living people
21st-century american women
radmanovic () is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  davor radmanovic (born 1957), croatian footballer and manager nebojsa radmanovic (born 1949), bosnia and herzegovina politician stanisa radmanovic (born 1940), yugoslav sprint canoeist vladimir radmanovic (born 1980), serbian basketball player  serbian surnames
ilian sashov todorov (in bulgarian language - илиан сашов тодоров) is a bulgarian politician from attack. from 2011 he works as a regional coordinator in attack for south-west bulgaria. on the 2013 election he was leading the lists in two regions.  references  21st-century bulgarian politicians living people year of birth missing (living people)
mimenicodes cylindroides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1940. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1940
acanthocasuarina diminutae is a species of jumping plant lice, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it possesses rhinaria on its fourth, sixth, eighth and ninth antennal segments; the species' hind tibia has one outer and two inner spurs, while the female's proctiger carries an apical hook posteriorly.  references   triozidae insects described in 2011
palawa is a census village in mumdawar tehsil of the alwar district in the indian state of rajasthan.   it is located 64 km from alwar and 149 km from the state capital of jaipur  its palawa pin code is 301706 and postal head office is shahjahanpur.  demographics of palawa  palawa is surrounded by kishangarh bas tehsil towards the east, nimrana tehsil towards the west, bawal tehsil and kotkasim tehsil towards the north.  bawal, alwar, rewari, narnaul are the nearby cities to palawa. it is on the border of the alwar district and the rewari district.  rajasthani is the local language here.  time zone: ist (utc+5:30)  elevation / altitude: 284 meters. above sea level  telephone code / std code: 01495  schools in palawa  govt. ups(snskrit) palawa jupiter ups pubsch palawa shri krisan pub. sch. palawa govt. prvesika. ss palawa govt. ss palawa  references   villages in alwar district
eurodesk is an international non-profit association created in 1990. it is a european network of european and national information centers for young people and those involved with them. it offers youth information and international learning opportunities and is an organisation supported by the erasmus+ programme (2014-2020). in 2004, eurodesk - with the help of its financier european commission - launched the european youth portal. from 2007 to 2013, eurodesk was part of the youth in action programme. through the participation of the erasmus+ programme in the year 2014, eurodesk is already present in 5 countries. in the year 2015 eurodesk celebrated its 25th anniversary.  mission and services   eurodesk has offices in 36 countries and a network of more than 1.000 multipliers. in those centres/offices the eurodesk multipliers carry out eurodesk's mission which is 'to raise awareness among young people on learning mobility opportunities and encourage them to become active citizens.' the eurodesk network provides young people with support and information about actual mobility opportunities in the 34 countries where it operates. furthermore, they offer international training opportunities, national support and regular meeting opportunities as well as free access to learning mobility information for young people in collaboration with erasmus+ (scholarships, internships, grants, trainings, competitions).  coordination of eurodesk    european commission  executive committee  eurodesk brussels (coordination)  national partners (development)  qualified multipliers (execution)  eurodesk brussels link (ebl) is responsible for the coordination and managing of the eurodesk brand.  as well as offering information about funding, acts, publications, and answering services, they make sure the national centers comply with the organizations objectives and ultimate mission. besides that, it provides first-hand european information on youth mobility as well as tools for training, information management, quality assessment and communication. other tasks of eurodesk brussels link include: supporting the european commission in developing and maintaining the european youth portal, assessing the quality of eurodesk national centres, regularly adapting european contents and providing technical support.  references   organizations established in 1990 youth organisations based in belgium
picture this are an irish pop rock musical band based in athy, county kildare, ireland, comprising ryan hennessy, jimmy rainsford, owen cardiff and cliff deane. in 2017, they released their eponymous debut album, which entered atop the irish albums chart. in early 2019, they released their follow up album mdrn lv. their third studio album "life in colour" was released in june 2021.  biography picture this originate from athy, county kildare, ireland. the band consists of  ryan hennessy (vocals), jimmy rainsford (drums), owen cardiff (guitar) and cliff deane (bass). rainsford had previously toured with ryan sheridan, whilst hennessy had been a member of another local band. deane, cardiff and rainsford were childhood friends. deane and cardiff joined the band when hennessy and rainsford asked them to play with picture this.  history  2015-2017: breakthrough and picture this  in october 2015, ryan hennessy recorded a sample of the song "take my hand" on his iphone, which he and rainsford later recorded in the studio. the video was uploaded to facebook and youtube, and has amassed over 4 million views across all platforms. the band's debut gig was to be played in the grand social venue in dublin, which they sold out in under 30 minutes. to meet the demand, the gig was moved to the academy, which has a capacity of 850 people. the band became the first act to sell out the venue for their debut gig.  the band announced a 20-date tour of ireland in spring 2016. the tour began in leixlip on 4 june and culminated with three dates at the olympia, a 1,600 capacity venue in dublin on 1-3 november. by 22 july 2016 tickets for 16 of the shows had sold out, including two dates at the olympia. the band later announced that they would be playing a third and final date at the olympia on 3 november 2016.  in july 2016, the band announced that they would be releasing their debut self-titled ep on 12 august. the track list featured five original songs including "take my hand". the ep debuted at number 1 on the irish albums chart for the week ending 18 august 2016.  in may 2017, picture this released "never change", the lead single from their debut studio album. rainsford told billboard the song was inspired by "the feeling of loving somebody exactly how they are and never wanting them to change a thing. the video signifies that we could go anywhere in the world but
we always end up back home and will never change that."  they released their self-titled debut album on 25 august 2017.  2018-present: mdrn lv & life in colour on 23 march 2018, picture this released "this morning". on 15 june 2018, they released "when we were young". on 17 october 2018, they announced their second album, mdrn lv, and released its lead single, "one drink". following the release, they also announced their second headline tour. on 7 december 2018, they released the second single from mdrn lv, "everything or nothing". the album was released on 19 february 2019, with a performance atop the empire state building in new york city. on 18 october 2019 they released their single "one night". on 19 october they announced three concert dates in ireland in cork, dublin and belfast for june 2020.  in june 2021, the band released their third studio album, life in colour  which includes the single la house party and the album debuted at number 2 on the irish charts.  band members  ryan hennessy - vocals  jimmy rainsford - drums  owen cardiff - guitar  cliff deane - bass  discography  studio albums  extended plays  singles  other charted songs  see also  music of ireland  references  external links    musical groups established in 2015 irish pop music groups musical groups from county kildare 2015 establishments in ireland
clayton, goodfellow and co (sometimes clayton & goodfellow) of blackburn, lancashire, england, were manufacturers of stationary engines.  the company was incorporated on 9 september 1897 and remains legally extant, with company number 00054026.  references    http://www.holmesmill.co.uk  http://www.gracesguide.co.uk/clayton,_goodfellow_and_co  blackburn standard, saturday 15 march 1879  'stationary steam engines of great britain, volume 3.1: lancashire' by george watkins: landmark publishing ltd.  companies based in blackburn history of blackburn with darwen steam engine manufacturers
louis guy marie jean de lubersac (1878-1932) was a french aristocrat, landowner and politician. he served as a member of french senate from 1920 to 1932, representing aisne.  early life guy de lubersac was born on 20 january 1878 in paris, france. he studied the law and graduated from sciences po.  career de lubersac inherited the marquisate of lubersac, including land in aisne. he became a member of the jockey-club de paris. he was elected as the mayor of faverolles in 1904. he served in the french army during world war i.  de lubersac served as a member of french senate from 1920 to 1932, representing aisne.  death de lubersac died on 15 april 1932 in paris, france.  references  1878 births 1932 deaths politicians from paris sciences po alumni french military personnel of world war i french senators of the third republic marquesses senators of aisne
leif hammel (born 28 february 1935) is a danish former professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1935 births living people danish male cyclists sportspeople from copenhagen
cylindrepomus bayanii is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by hudepohl in 1987.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1987
the rif dimashq offensive (june-october 2016) is a syrian army offensive in the rif dimashq governorate that was launched in late june 2016, as part of the syrian civil war. the offensive resulted in the military's capture of parts of the eastern section of the rebel-held eastern ghouta.  the offensive  government forces capture mayda'a  on 21 june, 102nd brigade of the republican guard, backed by the palestine liberation army and hezbollah, captured al-bahariyah hill, and soon after overran the rebel defenses at al-bahariyah, capturing the entire village. in addition to capturing al-bahariyah, the syrian armed forces and hezbollah also continued their advance at the jisreen farms, where they were able to take control of several sites near the arab houses.  on the evening of 24 june, the army and hezbollah entered mayda'a, forcing the rebels from the northern part of the town towards the center. one week later, the army captured the eastern part of mayda'a. during this time, government troops also advanced in the al-bahariyah farms and towards the mayda'a-nashabiyah axis. after reaching mayda'a's center on 4 july, the following day, after nearly two weeks of fighting, the government captured mayda'a. with the capture of mayda'a, the army cut the rebel's main ammunition supply line for eastern ghouta.  on 7 july, a rebel counter-attack recaptured several blocks of mayda'a, but the following day the military managed to seize back all territory lost, securing mayda'a once again. the troops than pushed the rebels back a few more kilometers to the west and also secured the farms and road between mayda'a and al-bahariyah. later that day, the army pushed into the village of mid'anah, capturing its eastern and southern parts. on 9 july, the pro-opposition activist group the sohr confirmed the army's capture of mayda'a. three days later, the military renewed their offensive by making attempts to advance to hawsh al-farah, reportedly capturing several farms east of the village by 12 july.  interlude   by 15 july, the government had mostly suspended their offensive in the area. one week later, the army launched a new assault against hawsh al-farah, resulting in a fierce, several-days-long battle. government forces, attacking from two
directions, first targeted the eastern and southern farms surrounding the town.  meanwhile, clashes between jaysh al-islam and the al-rahman legion took place in saqba, reminiscent of the inter-rebel conflict a few months earlier. on 23 july, intense airstrikes targeted several rebel-held towns in east ghouta, while clashes between government forces and rebels occurred along the al-salam highway. furthermore, a prisoner exchange between the government and jaysh al-islam took place, with a leading syrian army colonel and a female republican guard major being freed.  renewed army advances   after capturing the surrounding farmland, the republican guard, backed by hezbollah and ndf units, stormed hawsh al-farah itself on 26 july, leading to heavy house-to-house fighting. after suffering numerous casualties, rebel forces finally retreated into the countryside on 29 july, leaving the strategically important town to the government. the fall of hawsh al-farah served as a major morale boost for pro-government forces in east ghouta, and allowed them to impose fire control over several important rebel-held cities in the area, such as mayda'anah, hawsh nasri and hawsh shalaq.  on 1 august, the army entered hawsh nasri. five days later, they seized the farms near hawsh nasri and on 9 august, took control of all or most of the town. this advance brought the army into position to attack the hilltop of tal kurdi from three different flanks.  on 13 august, the military took control of parts of hawsh al-dawahira and its surrounding farms. at the same time, the army launched an assault on the strategic tal kurdi hill.  on 15 august, jaysh al-islam launched a counter-attack to regain hawsh nasri, seizing several points and farms in the area of the town. the rebels renewed their counter-assault on 20 august, and captured further positions in hawsh nasri, but lost them later in the day. the next day, the army fully pushed the rebels out of hawsh nasri, and attacked the northern flank of hawsh dawahrah.  back-and-forth fighting   on 22 august, the rebels launched an offensive on the western frontlines of eastern ghouta, on a one-kilometer front, in order to lift the pressure off the town of darayya. however, after several hours of fighting, the rebel offensive was repelled. following this, the syrian army continued its
advances in eastern ghouta, storming the former signal army base, near al-rayhan, and capturing the storage area of the base. government forces also reportedly physically cut the rebel supply route between al-rayhan and shifuniyah.  towards the end of august, the army captured al-rayhan's farms, threatening to encircle tal kurdi. shortly after, government forces captured parts of al-rayhan itself, as well as tal rayhan hill, placing tal kurdi under fire-control. the army also made advances from hawsh al-farah towards tal sawwan, near tal kurdi. over the next three weeks, government troops captured tal sawwan twice, but subsequently lost it again both times. as of mid-september, the town was still being contested. meanwhile, on 5 september, pro-government forces stormed the east ghouta signal base, gaining a bridgehead in its southern corridor.  at sundown on 12 september, a country-wide ceasefire came into effect. in the damascus area, the ceasefire was temporarily shaken due to fighting in the suburb district of jobar.  between 18 and 19 september, a rebel counter-attack between the east ghouta signal base and al-reyhan village was repelled. later on 20 september, government forces captured the signal army base and the surrounding warehouses. in addition, between 19 and 24 september, the military captured a number of farms in the area around al-rayhan, cutting the road to tal kurdi. on 25 september, the army seized the rehba al-ishara area, including the katibat al-ishara military base. meanwhile, the rebels launched a counter-attack to regain the signal base. after the assault was repelled, government forces in turn began their attack on al-reyhan village.  after fortifying their positions at rehba al-ishara, on 1 october, government forces and hezbollah units attempted to advance towards al-reyhan. as of 3 october, they were within three kilometers of the rebel's largest stronghold in east ghouta, the town of douma. on 11 october, the army captured al-rayhan and advanced in the al-rayhan farms area. five days later, a rebel-counterattack managed to push government forces back from several positions around the town, with the rebels retaking the western part of al-rayhan. on 18 october, the army launched a renewed push in the west of al-rayhan in an attempt to cut the supply road
for tal kurdi, managing to capture the sbidaj factory area. on 25 october, the al-majd brigades seceded from the al-rahman legion due to the continued differences between jaysh al-islam and the al-rahman legion that hindered the rebel attempts to halt the government offensive.  army secures tal kurdi   on 29 october, the army captured several factory areas, imposing fire control over tal kurdi. on 30 october, after more than 50 days of continues fighting, the army had taken control of tal sawwan and tal kurdi and advanced towards shefonia and al-rayhan.  aftermath  on 8 november, the army reported it had captured the western farms of al-rayhan, encircling the rebels in western part of the town. on 12 november, an advance by the army on the town was repelled.  a new offensive was launched against al-rayhan on 14 november, while on 17 november, an attack was also started against the towns of al-dawahra and midaani. at least 30 civilians were killed in shelling by the army from 17 to 20 november, on rebel-held towns in the region.  the saa launched another attack on midaani on 20 november, capturing nine points inside the town. on the next day, the saa launched an offensive to reopen the damascus-homs highway near harasta. it also captured seven farms in midaani. a counterattack by jaysh al-islam on mayda'a was repelled on 23 november. the group claimed that 30 soldiers had been killed in the attack, while saa claimed it lost only 2.  on 29 november, it was reported the army and hezbollah had captured the town of midaani. however, the following day, government forces were confirmed to be in control of the northern and eastern parts of the town, and attempting to secure the rest of it. on 4 december, the army once again advanced in the area of midaani. the army cut off a rebel supply route between al-shifuniyah and autaya by controlling part of it near hawsh ad-dawahirah on 6 december. it also recaptured most of the farms of hawsh ash-shalaq village and captured the village itself on the next day. they captured many farms on outskirts of al-mid'aani and advanced towards hazrama on 31 december. the army captured most of the air defense battalion on 1 january 2017 near hazrama after advancing in the farmlands over the previous days.
saa captured hazrama on 19 january.  see also rif dimashq offensive (april-may 2016)  references  battles of the syrian civil war damascus governorate in the syrian civil war military operations of the syrian civil war in 2016 june 2016 events in asia july 2016 events in asia military operations of the syrian civil war involving the al-nusra front military operations of the syrian civil war involving the syrian government military operations of the syrian civil war involving hezbollah
shooting at the 2016 summer paralympics consisted of twelve events, eight for rifle and 4 for pistol, across a range of men's, women's and mixed events.  paralympic shooters were also classified according to the extent of their disability. the classification system allows shooters to compete against others with a similar level of function.  shooting classifications are: sh1 - competitors who do not need a shooting stand sh2 - competitors who use a shooting stand to support the firearm's weight  qualification  there were 140 athletes (100 male, 40 female) taking part in this sport. any athlete awarded a qualification slot in one event is permitted to enter other eligible event if they have a minimum qualification score. therefore, fields in each event are likely to be significantly larger than the qualification quotas below.  qualification slots will be allocated as follows:  ° : bipartite invitation of named athlete.  medal summary  medal table  this ranking sorts countries by the number of gold medals earned by their shooters (in this context a nation is an entity represented by a national paralympic committee). the number of silver medals is taken into consideration next and then the number of bronze medals. if, after the above, countries are still tied, equal ranking is given and they are listed alphabetically.  medalists  men  women  mixed  references  external links official site of the 2016 summer paralympics    2016 2016 summer paralympics events  paralympics shooting competitions in brazil
lomas (spanish for "hills"), also called fog oases and  mist oases, are areas of fog-watered vegetation in the coastal desert of peru and northern chile. about 100 lomas near the pacific ocean are identified between 5°s and 30°s latitude, a north-south distance of about .  lomas range in size from a small vegetated area to more than  and their flora includes many endemic species. apart from river valleys and the lomas the coastal desert is almost without vegetation.  scholars have described individual lomas as "an island of vegetation in a virtual ocean of desert."  in a nearly rainless desert, the lomas owe their existence to the moist dense fog and mist which rolls in from the pacific.  the fog is called garua in peru and camanchaca in chile.  environment   according to the koppen climate classification system, the coastal desert of peru and the atacama desert of chile feature a rare desert climate, that is abbreviated "bwn" on climate maps with the n denoting frequent fog. temperatures are mild year round and precipitation is nearly non-existent, averaging  to  per year in most locations. many years have no precipitation at all. the atacama desert of chile is commonly known as the driest non-polar place in the world.  arica, chile, in the middle portion of the coastal desert, went a record 173 months without measurable precipitation in the early 20th century.  occasional rainfall is caused by el nino. for example, in march 2015, the desert in chile received about  in one day which caused flooding. in a phenomenon called the flowering desert, after the rare rains the desert briefly blooms with flowers.  normally, with the nearly non-existent precipitation, the coastal desert is almost devoid of vegetation except in lomas and along rivers which originate in the andes and cross the desert to the pacific.   the moisture for the vegetation in the lomas comes from fog which rolls in from the nearby pacific ocean and embraces mountains which come down near the sea. the cold waters of the humboldt current run offshore. during the austral winter thick stratus clouds, the garua, creep inland to an altitude of  most days from may until november. during this season the vegetation in the lomas is lush and green and many species of flowers bloom.  in the austral summer from december to april, the weather is mostly sunny and the lomas become dryer. the moisturizing impact of the fog is increased by the mild temperatures throughout the year and high average humidity of
the coastal deserts.  for example, lima, peru, located at 12°s latitude has average monthly temperatures ranging from  to , very cool for locations in the tropics. lima's average humidity is 84 percent, more than double the average humidity in most deserts.  peru has more than 40 lomas totalling in area less than  out of a total desert area of . chile has almost 50 lomas with an area of less than  out of a total desert area of .  climate change teetering on a narrow edge of survival, the lomas are sensitive to climate change.  radio-carbon dating has indicated that, prior to 3800 bce, the peruvian desert north of lima (12° s latitude) received more seasonal precipitation and was mostly vegetated. lomas-isolated fog oases-existed only south of lima.  this is evidenced by the uniformity of plant species in present-day lomas north of lima while lomas south of lima have more endemic plant species, indicating geographic isolation. the cause of the climatic change was probably the duration and strength of el nino events.  destruction  lomas have been impacted, and in some cases destroyed, by centuries of unregulated grazing, wood-cutting, and mining.  in chile, the huasco (28°26′ s) and copiapo (27°22′ s) river valleys once supported dense stands of trees.  in the 18th century, the city of copiapo was known as san francisco de la selva (saint francis of the forest) for its extensive forests. as the branches of trees and bushes trap the fog and create more moisture for other plants, their absence reduces the viability for all the plant life in the lomas.  in many locations the lomas were over-exploited for agriculture and grazing. one example is that, in prehistoric times,  north of ilo, peru, far from any other source of water, four lomas-fed springs permitted about  of irrigated agriculture plus grazing for llamas and alpacas.  hundreds of people of the chiribaya culture benefited from this unlikely agriculture in a rainless land. later, during the 17th century, spanish colonists pastured 200 mules in these lomas.  as late as 1951, a few tara trees still lived although the lomas were by then nearly devoid of all vegetation and population.  preservation in peru, the reserva nacional de lachay (national preserve of lachay) (11°22′s) protects   north of lima.  the
lomas de atiquipa (15°48′s) is the largest and the best preserved lomas forest in peru, covering more that  with some 350 plant species, including 44 endemics.  the national university of saint augustine in arequipa has partnered with peruvian conservation groups and the nature conservancy to preserve and restore the environment of the lomas.  included in the project is the installation of fog-catching nets to capture water, thereby helping the 80 families who live within the area to expand agriculture, primarily of olives.  in chile the pan de azucar (26°09′s) and llanos de challe (28°10′) national parks and the la chimba national reserve (23°32′s, 70°21′w) preserve lomas. the richest diversity of species of lomas flora in chile, however, is near the village of paposo (25°00′s). the fog oasis near paposo occur at elevations of  to  with altitudes from  to  having the most abundant growth of vegetation. the paposo area has been declared a zone of ecological protection by the government of chile.  references  deserts of chile deserts of peru oases of chile atacama desert ecoregions of chile ecoregions of peru deserts and xeric shrublands fog
dame jean mary monica maxwell-scott, dcvo (8 june 1923 - 5 may 2004) was the laird and chatelaine of abbotsford which she and her elder sister, patricia maxwell-scott, opened to the public, restored to its former glory, and ran for nearly five decades. she was the great-great-great-granddaughter of the novelist sir walter scott, and on her death was his last direct descendant to live in abbotsford. she was lady-in-waiting to princess alice, duchess of gloucester, from 1959 to 2004.  early life jean maxwell-scott was born on 8 june 1923 at abbotsford, near galashiels, roxburghshire, the granddaughter of mary monica maxwell-scott and the younger daughter of major-general sir walter constable-maxwell-scott, 1st baronet, and his first wife mairi, daughter of lt-col stewart of lunga. her mother died when she was 15 months old. when she was five, her father married marie-louise, madame des sincay, daughter of major john logan of the us cavalry. jean was educated at the convent des oiseaux, westgate-on-sea, kent.  career her sister inherited abbotsford on their father's death in 1954, and ran the house as a visitor attraction for the rest of her life. they did not install electricity until 1962. one or both of the sisters would greet parties themselves. in the 1960s, they had 50,000 visitors a year, peaking in the 1980s at 86,000.  not long before she died, she bemoaned the ignorance of visitors to the house:"only the russians and eastern europeans seem to read any scott at school ... now it's sometimes, 'where are his antarctic things?' occasionally one has to be terribly tactful."   in 1959, she was appointed lady-in-waiting to princess alice, duchess of gloucester, who lived nearby, a role she held until her death in 2004.  patricia maxwell-scott dame jean's elder sister patricia was born in ireland at the curragh, the british military complex outside dublin, at a time when the sisters' father was a serving soldier, immersed in the troubles in ireland. when she died in 2002, her will was found to include a clause specifying that she must "adopt and use" the surname of scott of abbotsford, if she was to inherit the house. dame jean was mystified and had no idea of such a clause, but duly complied. her horse, "
sir wattie", which she co-owned with susan luczyc-wykorski, was ridden by ian stark at the 1984 summer olympics in seoul, winning two silver medals.  death dame jean maxwell-scott died at abbotsford, roxburghshire on 5 may 2004, aged 80. patricia had been briefly married; jean never married and neither sister had children.  honours she was made commander of the royal victorian order at the 1969 birthday honours, then  dame commander of the royal victorian order (dcvo) in the 1984 birthday honours.  references  1923 births 2004 deaths scott family of abbotsford people from the scottish borders dames commander of the royal victorian order daughters of baronets
this is an alphabetical list of notable male indian television actors.  list of hindi actors  list of regional language actors  bengali   tamil  telugu   kannada   marathi   malayalam  see also  list of indian television actresses list of indian film actors  and television indian television
gustav martinsen (5 november 1843 - 19 march 1920) was a norwegian industrial leader and politician for the conservative party.  he was born in drammen to merchant martin christophersen and oline gulbrandsen, and was the father of haavard martinsen. he founded the mill bjølsen valsemølle in 1884, and initiated and chaired norsk mølleforening. he was a member of the storting from 1900 to 1906. he was decorated knight, first class of the order of st. olav in 1904, and was a knight of the order of the dannebrog.  references  1843 births 1920 deaths politicians from drammen conservative party (norway) politicians politicians from oslo norwegian industrialists members of the storting knights of the order of the dannebrog
the 2016-17 iowa state cyclones men's basketball team represented iowa state university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the cyclones were coached by steve prohm, who was in his second season. they played their home games at hilton coliseum in ames, iowa as members of the big 12 conference. they finished the season 24-11, 12-6 in big 12 play to finish in a three-way tie for second place. in the big 12 tournament, they defeated oklahoma state, tcu, and west virginia to win the tournament championship. as a result, they received the conference's automatic bid to the ncaa tournament. as the no. 5 seed in the midwest region, they defeated nevada in the first round before losing to purdue in the second round.  previous season the cyclones finished the 2015-16 season 23-12, 10-8 in big 12 play to finish in a tie for fifth place. they lost to oklahoma in the quarterfinals of the big 12 tournament. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament where they defeated iona and arkansas-little rock to advance to the sweet sixteen where they lost to virginia.  offseason departures  recruiting  prep recruits  incoming transfers  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=12 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=12 style=| regular season  |- !colspan=12 style=| big 12 tournament  |- !colspan=12 style=| ncaa tournament |-  rankings  *ap does not release post-ncaa tournament rankings  awards and honors   big 12 player of the week  monte morris (november 21st) naz mitrou-long (december 19th) deonte burton (february 6th) monte morris (february 27th)  references  iowa state cyclones men's basketball seasons iowa state iowa state iowa state cyc iowa state cyc
nadia akpana assa (born 22 december 1995 in oslo) is a norwegian athlete specialising in the long jump. she won the silver medal at the 2014 world junior championships. her parents came to norway from togo in the mid-1980s.  her personal bests in the event are 6.53 metres outdoors (+0.4 m/s, copenhagen 2016) and 6.37 metres indoors (bærum 2016).  international competitions  references  1995 births living people norwegian people of togolese descent norwegian female long jumpers sportspeople from oslo
san vincenzo ferreri, also called san domenico, is a church and convent in racconigi, province of cuneo, region of piedmont, italy.  history in 1506, a dominican order convent and seminary was established in racconigi, which already had convents run by the servi di maria (c. 1460) and carmelites (1493). the convent was patronized by claudio of savoy, who commissioned the convent just outside the porta di san giovanni in the city walls. in 1604, bernardino ii di savoy commissioned enlargement of the church. it has three naves and two large chapels. on the left, the chapel of the rosary has a number of wooden paintings. on the right is the chapel of st catherine of siena.  among the lateral altars is one dedicated to caterina mattei, who became a dominican nun in this church in 1514. it was assigned after a voto for the cessation of a plague epidemic in 1630.  on the right, an altar is dedicated to st pope pius v, a former dominican, who was born in nearby bosco marengo. he is said to have preached in this church.  the ceilings and cupola are decorated with quadratura frescoes (1765-1774) by pietro antonio pozzo and gallo barelli. in the presbytery, a painting of the santissima annunziata is attributed to giovanni battista pozzo.  references  roman catholic churches in racconigi 17th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy roman catholic churches completed in 1604
the gens salvia was a minor plebeian roman family of the late republic, which came to prominence under the early empire. the first of the family known to have held public office at rome was publius salvius aper, praetorian prefect in 2 bc.  about this time, the salvii achieved equestrian rank, and thereafter held various positions in the roman state for the next two centuries, before falling back into obscurity. lucius salvius otho was raised to patrician rank by the emperor claudius, but the most illustrious of the salvii was his son, marcus, who was proclaimed emperor in ad 69.  origin the salvii were doubtless of sabellic origin, as their nomen is a patronymic surname derived from the common oscan praenomen salvius.  they probably spread throughout italy long before obtaining roman citizenship; the emperor otho was descended from an ancient and noble family of ferentinum, in etruria.  members  salvii othones  marcus salvius otho, grandfather of the emperor.  marcus salvius otho, moneyer and uncle of the emperor otho.  lucius salvius m. f. otho, father of the emperor, was consul  from the kalends of july, ad 34.  salvia, sister of otho and fiance of drusus caesar  lucius salvius l. f. m. n. otho titianus, the elder brother of the emperor, was consul in ad 52.  marcus salvius l. f. m. n. otho, emperor from january 15 to april 16, ad 69.  lucius salvius l. f. l. n. otho cocceianus, the emperor's nephew, was consul  in ad 82.  others  salvius, praefectus sociorum in 168 bc  salvius, praetor urbanus in around 76/74 bc and possibly the author of the interdictum salvianum  salvius, a centurion of the  and one of the murderers of pompey in 48 bc.  salvius, tribune of the plebs in 43 bc and the first man to be killed during the proscriptions by the second triumvirate  salvia titisenia, mistress of caesar octavian  publius salvius aper, praetorian prefect with quintus ostorius scapula in 2 bc, aper is not known to be related to the othones who were contemporary.  salvius carus, governor of crete under hadrian.  gaius salvius liberalis nonius
bassus, consul suffectus in ad 85.  he was a member of the arval brethren.  gaius salvius vitellianus, the son of gaius salvius liberalis and vitellia rufilla.  lucius octavius cornelius publius salvius julianus aemilianus, an eminent jurist, was consul in ad 148.  publius salvius l. f. julianus, consul in ad 175.  salvius tuscus became a salian priest in ad 181; he served as quindecimvir in 204.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography   gaius suetonius tranquillus, de vita caesarum (lives of the caesars, or the twelve caesars).  "salvia gens", in the dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  re - realencyclopadie der classischen altertumswissenschaft, ed. august pauly et al. (1894-1980)  george davis chase, "the origin of roman praenomina", in harvard studies in classical philology, vol. viii (1897).  paul rohden and hermann dessau, prosopographia imperii romani, berlin (1898).  h. f. jolowicz and barry nicholas, historical introduction to the study of roman law, cambridge university press (3rd edition, 1972).    roman gentes
la fan, is an american telenovela produced by telemundo, is a story written by marcela citterio and inspired by an idea of history angelica vale.  the story revolves around the life of a famous telenovelas actor and his faithful follower who is his number one fan.  the series stars angelica vale as valentina, juan pablo espinosa as lucas, and scarlet ortiz as salma.  on january 12, 2017, the first chapter of the telenovela was published with a duration of 20 minutes as a special before the premiere.  plot summary  vale (angelica vale) is a cheerful, humble, simple woman, and a fanatic of a soap opera actor, the famous lucas duarte (juan pablo espinosa). the lives of vale and lucas cross one day, by what they call destiny, luck or magic. while she is hidden inside a giant pizza outfit, handing out flyers of the place where she works, she saves her beloved actor's life, but in reality, everything is part of one of the scenes of the telenovela. that is the first meeting between lucas and vale, but not the only one. lucas's representative, gabriel (gabriel porras), comes up with the idea of creating a contest for all his fans and after cheating a little, names vale the winner. vale, delighted, has lunch with him and ends up saving his life, now for real. after this vale becomes his personal assistant and shadow, in other words, his guardian angel. vale begins to know who lucas duarte really is (is hobbies, his defects) but even so, she loves him more and more. lucas begins to realize who his real fan is...her strength, her light, her brilliance and, in spite of himself, he begins to fall in love with her. but like in every story, there is a dark past, a past that can transform their love into something impossible. even though neither of them knows, lucas is the father of tomas (emmanuel perez), the son of lucia, vale's friend, who vale has raised as if it were hers since her friend died. he is the man vale hates for abandoning her friend. vale is at a crossroads, she must decide whether to stand up for her deceased friend or to remain what she has always been: the fan.  cast  starring   angelica vale as valentina perez  juan pablo espinosa as lucas duarte  miguel varoni as justin case / el director  scarlet ortiz as salma beltran  ximena duque as adriana zubizarreta  jonathan islas as diego castro  gabriel por
ras as gabriel bustamante  also starring   omar germenos as carlos zubizarreta   gloria peralta as eloisa romero  elsy reyes as felicitas  begona narvaez as jessica gonzalez  pablo azar as benicio torres  gabriel rossi as miguel castro  josette vidal as miriam del carmen  ricardo kleinbaum as enrique julio gardiazabal / quique  lorena de la garza as natalia  gabriel valenzuela as nicolas  silvana arias as barbara blanco  maritza bustamante as lucia hernandez / ursula molina  mario espitia as agustin peterlini  freddy florez as roberto flores / bob  roberto plantier as dr. damian arevalo  fernando pacanins as victor carrizo  lalo garcia as rodrigo gomez  emmanuel perez as tomas hernandez  special guest stars   laura flores as paloma  daniel elbittar as leonardo marquez / el potro  catherine siachoque as isabel  lupita ferrer as silvia  jorge luis pila as el tuerto  jesus more as franco villar  david chocarro as ricardo ernesto / richard erneston  ligia petit as roxana  angelica maria as valentina gardiazabal / mamita  adamari lopez as carmen cordoba  wanda d'isidoro as guadalupe "lupita"  laura chimaras as renata izaguirre  eduardo serrano as pascual blanco  sandra destenave as dolores "lola" d'alessandro  fabian rios as guillermo "willy" del castillo  henry zakka as dr. machado  fernanda castillo as la parka  jose ramon blanch as rogelio gutierrez / la bestia  carlos ponce as luis alberto fontan  jorge bernal as himself  ahrid hannaley as karina  dad dager as patricia  production  the production of the telenovela was confirmed on july 5, 2016, and the production concluded on december 22, 2016. the production is mainly recorded in miami, the first scenes were made in los angeles. vale explained that the idea arose as she wanted to pay homage to all her fans and followers of the telenovela la fea mas bella.  the series is an original idea written by angelica vale in 2009, which has a promotional video uploaded to youtube that same year. the story is adapted by marcela citterio based on the idea of angelica, is directed by miguel varoni, claudio callao and otto rodriguez and as executive producers carmen cecilia urbaneja, jose gerardo guillen and david posada and as general producer angelica vale. vale said that the series will have a
bit of sitcom format.  promotion  the first advance of the telenovela was presenting during the event broadcast by telemundo entitled, la fiesta latina de iheart radio. the telenovela was presented in natpe the same day they finished the production.  casting  in may 2016 angelica vale confirmed her return to the telenovelas, after being 10 years away from the dramatic genre. on august 3, 2016, vale confirmed the participation of juan pablo espinosa as the protagonist of the story. scarlet ortiz was chosen as the main villain of the story, and marks the debut of the actress in the network telemundo.miguel varoni who besides being the director of the telenovela, his character justin case will have the same role of varoni in the production of the telenovela as it will be a character who works as director, also confirmed the participation of catherine siachoque in the production. espinosa confirmed through his instagram the participation of adamari lopez in the telenovela, the actress and presenter who was 8 years away from the telenovelas.  shows cancelled  a total of 114 episodes were confirmed for series. due to the low rating of primetime that had the series, telemundo canceled the series, despite the number of cliffhangers, and only 54 episodes were programmed to be transmitted.  ratings  episodes  the series premiered in mexico at 2pm and had a total of 65 episodes, while in its original broadcast had 54 episodes.  awards and nominations  references  external links     spanish-language american telenovelas telemundo telenovelas american telenovelas 2017 telenovelas 2017 american television series debuts 2017 american television series endings
the 2016-17 florida gators women's basketball team represented the university of florida in the sport of basketball during the 2016-17 women's college basketball season. the gators compete in division i of the national collegiate athletic association (ncaa) as members of the southeastern conference (sec). the gators, led by tenth-year head coach amanda butler, played their home games in the o'connell center on the university's gainesville, florida campus. they finished the season 15-16, 5-11 in sec play to finish in a tie for eleventh place. they advanced to the second round of sec women's tournament where they lost to texas a&m.  on march 6, the school fired amanda butler. she finished at florida with a 10 year record of 190-136.  previous season the gators finished the season 22-9, 10-6 in sec play to finish in a tie for fourth place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the sec women's tournament to kentucky. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa women's tournament where they were upset by albany in the first round.  roster  coaches  schedule and results  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#0021a5; color:#ffffff;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#0021a5; color:#ffffff;"| sec regular season  |- !colspan=12 style="text-align: center; background:#0021a5"|sec women's tournament  source:  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  see also  2016-17 florida gators men's basketball team  references  florida gators women's basketball seasons florida florida gators florida gators
the 2016-present purges in turkey  are a series of purges by the government of turkey enabled by a state of emergency in reaction to the 15 july failed coup d'etat. the purges began with the arrest of turkish armed forces personnel reportedly linked to the coup attempt but arrests were expanded to include other elements of the turkish military, as well as civil servants and private citizens. these later actions reflected a power struggle between secularist and islamist political elites in turkey, affected people who were not active in nor aware of the coup, but who the government claimed were connected with the gulen movement, an opposition group which the government blamed for the coup. possession of books authored by gulen was considered valid evidence of such a connection and cause for arrest.  tens of thousands of public servants and soldiers were purged in the first week following the coup. for example, on 16 july 2016, just one day after the coup was foiled, 2,745 judges were dismissed and detained. this was followed by the dismissal, detention or suspension of over 100,000 officials, a figure that had increased to over 110,000 by early november 2016, over 125,000 after the 22 november decree, reaching at least 135,000 with the january decrees, about 160,000 after the suspensions and arrests decree of april 29 and 180,000 after a massive dismissal decree in july 2018. collectively about 10% of turkey's 2 million public employees were removed as a result of the purges. purged citizens are prevented from working again for the government, therefore pushed into precarity and economic death.  in the business sector, the government forcefully seized assets of over 1000 companies worth between $11 and $50-60 billion, on the charge of being related to gulen and the coup. by late 2017 over a thousand companies and their assets owned by individuals reportedly affiliated with the movement had been seized and goods and services produced by such companies were subject to boycott by the public.  the purges also extend to the media with television channels, newspapers and other media outlets that were seen as critical of the government being shut down, critical journalists being arrested and the 2017 block of wikipedia in turkey, which lasted from april 2017 to january 2020. since early september 2016, the post-coup emergency state allowed a turn against kurdish groups and kurdish culture, including the dismissal of over 11,000 kurdish teachers and dozens of elected mayors and arrest of the co-chairs of the peoples' democratic party (hdp) for alleged links with the kurdistan workers' party (pkk). in august 2018
, the turkish parliament approved a new "anti-terror" law to replace the state of emergency.  background  in january 2014, during a major corruption inquiry in turkey, 96 judges and prosecutors, including the chief prosecutor of izmir, huseyin bas, were transferred to new locations, ending the investigations. bas was transferred to samsun. altogether 120 judges and prosecutors were reassigned. at the time, the daily telegraph described the events as "the biggest purge of the judiciary in [turkey's] history". from 2014 to mid-2016, repeated purges of civilian, military and judicial officials took place in turkey, mainly aimed at followers of fethullah gulen, a former colleague of the turkish president recep tayyip erdogan.  sectors affected   during the first post-coup speech erdogan could address to the nation upon landing at ataturk airport, he said, "this uprising is a gift from god to us because this will be a reason to cleanse our army".  an extensive purge of the turkish civil service began with erdogan warning his opponents that "they will pay a heavy price for this." the new york times described the purges as a "counter-coup" and expected erdogan to "become more vengeful and obsessed with control than ever, exploiting the crisis not just to punish mutinous soldiers but to further quash whatever dissent is left in turkey".  on 18 july, u.s. secretary of state john kerry urged turkish authorities to halt the increasing crackdown on its citizens, indicating that the crackdown was meant to "suppress dissent".  french foreign minister and former prime minister jean-marc ayrault voiced concern, warning against a "political system which turns away from democracy".  the united nations have been reported of being unresponsive against the purges, while at the same time also failing to condemn the coup and resulting violence, due to disagreement between egypt and other security council members on the wording of a resolution in that direction.  military   prime minister binali yıldırım announced on 16 july 2016 that 2,839 soldiers of various ranks had been arrested. among those arrested were at least 34 generals or admirals. a number of students of the kuleli military high school, enough to fill five buses, were also arrested. by 18 july 2016, a total of 103 generals and admirals have been detained by turkish authorities in connection with the coup.  yasemin ozata cetinkaya, the governor of sinop province, was removed from her duty and her husband, a colonel in the turkish army, arrested. turkish military conducted a raid
on the turkish air force academy in istanbul as well.  major general cahit bakir, who commanded turkish forces under nato in afghanistan, and brigadier general sener topuc, responsible for education and aid in afghanistan, have been detained by authorities in dubai in connection with turkey's failed coup.  general bekir ercan van, the commander of incirlik air base, which the u.s. uses to carry out airstrikes against isil, was arrested by turkish authorities for his stated role in plotting the failed military coup. he sought asylum from the united states but was denied.  police and judiciary   on 16 july 2016, the supreme board of judges and prosecutors of turkey (hsyk) removed 2,745 turkish judges from duty and ordered their detention. of these judges, 541 were in administrative judiciary and 2,204 were in criminal judiciary. this amounted to approximately 36% of all judges in turkey at the time. two judges from the constitutional court of turkey, alparslan altan and , were detained by turkish authorities for stated ties with the gulen movement, while 5 members of the hsyk had their membership revoked and 10 members of the turkish council of state were arrested on charges of being members of the parallel state. furthermore, arrest warrants were issued for 48 members of the council of state and 140 members of the court of cassation.  by 18 july 2016, the turkish government had suspended 8,777 government officials across the country for stated links to the coup perpetrators. among those suspended include 7,899 police officers, 614 gendarmerie officers, 47 district governors and 30 regional governors. , 755 judges and prosecutors had been arrested in relation to the coup attempt.  in january 2019, former chairman of turkey's judges and prosecutors association (yarsav), recipient of human rights awards and judge murat arslan have been condemned to 10 years in prison for "participation to a terrorist organisation". no violent action or call for violence was reported, the statement being based on an anonymous denunciation and the presence of bylock on his smartphone, an application he denies having installed on his phone.  politics   following the july 2016 attempt coup and first purges of the military, the turkish government used the state of emergency to introduce amendments into turkey's municipalities law. articles 45 and 57 were introduced, which allow to remove an elected mayor from his duty. before only a final conviction was reason enough to remove a mayor.  huseyin avni mutlu, ex-governor of istanbul, was dismissed on 19 july 2016. deputy
mayor of istanbul's sisli district, cemil candas (tr), was shot in the head in his office by an unidentified assailant on 18 july 2016. meanwhile, turkish parliament was evacuated due to unidentified security concerns.  elections and hdp harassment  in the 2014 turkish local elections, the sister party of the hdp, the peace and democracy party (bdp) won 97 district municipalities out of 1351 and 2 metropolitan municipalities out of 30. starting in september 2016, the purges pushed upon the largely kurdish political formations hdp and bdp. about a 1/3 of the hdp members, more than 11.000 people were detained, more than 3000 of them were formally arrested, while also 94 democratically elected mayors have been expelled from their posts.  2014's elected mayors were removed, detained, and subjected to politically motivated prosecutions. elected mayors were replaced by government's appointees. municipal councils were not formally dissolved, but were not gathered anymore to hold their democratic and managerial functions.  in october 2018, president erdogan vowed to seize all municipalities the hdp could win in the 2019 turkish local elections. by march 2020, out of the 65 municipalities won by social-democrate hdp during the 2019 turkish local elections, 46 municipalities (69%) had been seized by turkish government.  the dismissal and municipal seizures are believed to be purely politically motivated, using ill-defined accusation of terrorism. local human right activist comment that "terrorism in turkey [is] so vague, broad, and ambiguous that anybody critical of the government can easily be criminalized as a terrorist"  while dismissals, arrests, prosecutions, and condemnations are based on "trumped up terrorism charges". since 2014, over 90 municipalities have been seized. dismissed mayors, part of the hdp movement who repeatedly stated opposition to pkk-tsk violences, were later arrested on charges of "membership to a terror organization." these removals have been described as a violation of people's democratic vote.  the at the time hdp co-heads selahattin demirtas and figen yuksekdag were jailed and the prosecution was seeking up to 142 years for demirtas and  83 years for yuksekdag imprisonment. the main charge is the allegation of "managing a terrorist organization [(the hdp)]". as of may 2020, both politicians remain arrested.  civil service  following a series of arrests and purges throughout the government, prime minister yıldırım announced on 18 july 2016 that annual leave for all civil servants was
suspended, and all those on leave were to return to work. over three million civil servants were affected. in addition, public sector employees were banned from leaving the country.  by the evening of 19 july 2016, the number of public sector employees suspended had reached 49,321. in the ministry of finance, more than 1500 employees were suspended. in the prime ministry, 257 employees, including six advisers, were suspended. the presidency of religious affairs suspended 492 employees, among them three provincial muftis. the numbers of suspended personnel in the national intelligence organization and ministry of family and social policy were 100 and 393 respectively.  on 20 july 2016, the youth and sports minister akif cagatay kılıc announced that 245 personnel within his ministry had been laid off. the energy ministry reports 300 employees were let go, and the customs ministry indicated 184 employees were dismissed.  education  immediate purge by far the greatest purge was in the ministry of national education, where 15,200 education ministry officials were suspended. the licenses of 21,000 teachers in the private sector were also cancelled. the council of higher education asked all deans of state and private universities, numbering 1577, to resign. 626 educational institutions, mostly private, were shut down. for example, in burdur, one school, one cram school and four student hostels were shut down on 20 july. in addition, a travel ban was placed on academics, preventing them from leaving the country.  on 23 july 2016, turkish authorities shut down 1,043 private schools, 1,229 charities and foundations, 19 trade unions, 15 universities and 35 medical institutions in his first emergency decree under the newly adopted emergency legislation.  forced cultural changes academics have reported pre-2016 coup's changes in academic leadership, and sharp growing pressure after the 2013 gezi park protests and 2016 coup. dean and academic management have pressured professors and students to align with conservative values and teachings. activities, associations and student clubs have been closed under similar pressure. conservative students are empowered to denounce non-conservative activities. academic grants and tenures are reported to be filtered according to political affiliations and connections. teachers have reported a forced change in political, academic, and critical culture, with firing and exclusion of traditional academic profiles, with worries about the long-term effect of such change and academic purge on the expertise and tone of both turkey's researches and governmental statures, culture and policies. while private university are technically allowed to hire purged academics, many reports private university been scared to hire them,
increasing the economic exclusion. academics have been subjects to travel bans.  petitioners about one thousand scholars and human right experts who had earlier petitioned for the end of military operations in south east turkey, afrin and syria have faced systematic punitive consequences via public agencies, including interrogations, judicial prosecutions, firing from jobs, arrests, trials and condemnations for "terrorist propaganda". the signatories have been subject to 2000 routine judicial hearings with usual 15 months  suspended jail sentence, with no acquittal reported and about 30 actual imprisonments.  media   the licenses of 24 radio and television channels and the press cards of 34 journalists reported of being linked to gulen were revoked. two people were arrested for praising the coup attempt and insulting the turkish president erdogan on social media. on 25 july, nazlı ilıcak was taken into custody.  on 27 july 2016, erdogan shut down 16 television channels, 23 radio stations, 45 daily newspapers, 15 magazines and 29 publishing houses in another emergency decree under the newly adopted emergency legislation. the closed outlets include gulen-affiliated cihan news agency, samanyolu tv and the previously leading newspaper zaman (including its english-language version today's zaman), but also the opposition daily newspaper taraf which was known to be in close relations with the gulen movement.  in late october 2015, turkish authorities shut down 15 media outlets, including one of the world's only women's news agencies, and detained the editor-in-chief of the prominent secularist turkish newspaper cumhuriyet, "on accusations that they committed crimes on behalf of kurdish militants and a network linked to the us-based cleric fethullah gulen".  turkey has imprisoned more than 160 journalists, making it the world's biggest jailer of journalists. in may 2018, at a press conference with british pm theresa may, turkish president erdogan called turkey's jailed journalists  "terrorists".  traveling  government authorities had revoked almost 11,000 passports by 22 july; by 30 july, more than 50,000 passports were cancelled.  extradition in august 2016 erdogan  gave the united states an ultimatum, demanding the extradition of fethullah gulen, the cleric said to be behind the failed 15 july coup attempt. turkey demanded that greece extradite eight turkish soldiers who had fled there after the coup. on 11 august 2016, bulgaria extradited abdullah buyuk, a turkish businessman being linked with the gulen movement.  purges by numbers  initial purges  the bulk of the purges happened in the 10 days following the coup. the government releasing data documenting the issue :  later purges
, mass suspensions and mass arrests  2016  on 17 august 2016, the government dismissed 2,300 more officers from the police force, 136 military officers and 196 employees from the information technology authority.  on 18 august 2016, arrest warrants were issued for 187 suspects, including ceos of leading companies in turkey, with prosecutors also ordering the seizure of their assets.  on 2 september 2016, turkey announced a purge of about 11,500 teachers with stated links to pkk. the move was denounced by kurdish and turkish opposition parties for lacking due process and evidences. an anonymous former turkish diplomat said the move sharply weakened the pacifist wing of kurdish voices, pushing the kurdish movement toward more radical means.  on 12 september 2016, turkey removed two dozen elected mayors, members of the opposition peoples' democratic party (hdp), for stated links to kurdish militants.  on 4 october 2016, turkish authorities suspend nearly 12,800 more police officers from duty over their suspected links with u.s.-based cleric fethullah gulen.  on 29 october 2016, by decree, turkey dismissed 10,131 more civil servants, while about 15 more media outlets were closed for stated ties to terrorist organizations and cleric fethullah gulen.  in early november 2016, security forces began mass arrests of opposition peoples' democratic party (hdp) mps, including co-leaders selahattin demirtas and figen yuksekdag. internet and social web services were blocked across southeastern turkey. out of 59 hdp's mps, 15 were researched, 12 mps were detained, 2 mps were travelling abroad, and one not located.  on 22 november 2016, a decree announced 15,726 dismissals (security forces: 7,600, ministry of interior: 2,700, education: 1,200).  people were affected for being "related, belonging to or in contact with terror organizations and structures that are considered by the national security council as acting against national security." passports of these affected people were canceled. with this decree 550 associations, 9 medias, and 19 private medical structures have been closed.  the financial assets and properties of those organizations were to be seized by the turkish treasury.  on 12 december 2016, in reaction to prior istanbul double bombing and kurdistan freedom falcons (tak) states, 118 hdp officials and supporters were arrested.  on 21 december 2016, turkey suspended another 1,980 teachers and school employees for stated connections to the coup attempt.  on 25 december 2016, turkey probes around 10,000 social media users for reportedly
insulting government officials or supporting "terror-related activity."  2017  on 7 january 2017, and via three decrees, 8,390 more civil servants were dismissed (2,687 police officers, 1,699 civil servants from the justice ministry, 838 health officials, and hundreds others from other ministries, 631 academics, 8 members of the council of state).  in early february 2017, the turkish government dismissed more than 4,400 public servants from their jobs, including over 300 university teachers.  on 14 february 2017, the turkish government arrested 834 people with stated links with pkk. the mass arrest has been linked to the constitutional referendum, to which most kurdish factions are opposed.  after the april 16 referendum, 38 activists denouncing irregularities were detained.  on 26 april 2017, 1009 police officers were reported of being a secret gulenist network within the turkish police force, and were detained. 9,100 policemen have been suspended  on 29 april 2017, turkey blocked wikipedia and dismissed 3,974 more civil servants. the nyt qualified the move as "an expand[ing] crackdown on dissent and free expression".  on 5 june, the turkish interior ministry announces that 130 people, living outside the country and suspected of militant links, will lose their  citizenship unless they return to turkey within three months and meet government standards. named suspects include  u.s.-based cleric fethullah gulen, and peoples' democratic party leaders faysal sarıyıldız, tugba hezer ozturk, and .  15 june 2017, un mechanism for international criminal tribunals judge aydin sedaf akay was sentenced  to 71⁄2 years on charges of "membership in [to the gulen movement, itself] a terrorist organization", despite mr. akay having diplomatic immunity due to his position at the un mict.  on 15 july, 7,400 more police were dismissed.  on 24 december 2017, a decree announce the dismissal of 2,700 public officers.  2018   turkey detained over 800 social media users and nearly 100 politicians and journalists who opposed the turkish invasion of the kurdish-controlled enclave of afrin.  on 8 july 2018, right before erdogan new presidency with enlarged executive powers and the promised end of the state of emergency, 18,632 public officiers were dismissed by decree. among them,  9,000+ are police officers, 6,000+ are members of the turkish military, +1000 are from judiciary, about 650 are teachers and about 200 academics. three newspapers
, one tv channel and 12 associations were also shut down.  on 25 july 2018, turkey passed new anti-terrorism bill to replace emergency rule. according to the human rights watch, the new law "will allow authorities under the presidency, for the next three years, to dismiss judges and all other public officials arbitrarily. it also would allow the authorities to restrict movement within turkey, ban public assemblies, and allow police to hold some suspects for up to 12 days without charge and repeatedly detain them in the same investigation." chp parliamentary group leader ozgur ozel said that "with this bill, with the measures in this text, the state of emergency will not be extended for three months but for three years. they make it look like they are lifting the emergency, but in fact they are continuing it."  on 14 august 2018, turkish police arrested another german citizen on terrorism-related charges. german authorities said nine german nationals are currently in detention in turkey for "political reasons."  2019  on 12 february, turkey issued 1,112 more detention orders, under the charge of organizing the 2016 turkey coup.  according to turkish government data from march 2019, about 500,000 people were detained since the coup attempt, of which about 30,000 were in custody at the time of the information. erdogan reported in april 2019 of 31,000 employees of the police, as well as 15,000 members of the military, who had been removed from office since the coup d'etat. according to anadolu, in the first week of july 2019, 282 people were arrested throughout turkey. the week before, at the end of june, there were 200 arrests.  on 28 july 2019, another german citizen, osman b, was arrested on charges of running a "terror propaganda" using his facebook account. he was arrested at a turkish airport, while he was traveling for a family holiday.  in october 2019, turkish police detained more than 120 online critics of the turkish invasion of the kurdish areas in syria. turkish prosecutor opened an investigation into "terrorist propaganda" against mps sezai temelli and pervin buldan, co-leaders of the pro-kurdish hdp party. turkey arrested at least 151 members of the hdp, including district officials. turkish authorities have also detained web editor of opposition birgun newspaper and managing editor of the online news portal diken.  2020  due to the covid-19 pandemic in turkey, the turkish parliament approved a bill which could enable the release of up to 100,000 prisoners, including
people responsible for deaths. political prisoners, journalists, are excluded from the pardon despite overcrowding and unsanitary living conditions already posing a severe health threat.  the turkish interior ministry has arrested social media users whose posts were "targeting officials and spreading panic and fear" by suggesting that covid-19 "had spread widely in turkey and that officials had taken insufficient measures". several journalists, who were each reporting for local media, were detained for how they covered the pandemic.  2021  in february, following a failed operation in which 13 turkey soldiers died, turkey arrested 700 opposition members, maneuvering to shift blame onto the opposition and americans.  human rights human rights in turkey are governed by international law treaties, including the international covenant on civil and political rights that turkey signed in 2000, that take precedence over turkish legislation according to article 90 of the 1982 constitution. after protesters chanted for reintroduction of the death penalty, abolished by turkey in 2004, erdogan stated that this was a possibility that would be discussed in parliament, and that in a democracy, the will of the people must be respected. on 21 july, the turkish government announced that it would suspend the european convention on human rights during a temporary state of emergency.  on 24 july 2016, amnesty international called for the european committee for the prevention of torture to make an emergency visit to turkey to see the conditions in which the detainees were held.  identification methods  johannes hahn, the european commissioner dealing with turkey's bid to become a member state of the european union (eu), said that it appears turkey's government had prepared arrest lists of political opponents before the coup attempt and had been waiting for the right time to act. the usage of social medias monitoring is suspected.  anonymous-and-paid denunciations by secret witnesses are officially declared as the main source for identifying suspects. most of the over 140 thousands people affected by the purges were affected following denunciations by coworkers and other citizens. the system have been legalized via a 31 august 2015's decree by the ministry of interior. the rewarded anonymous denunciation's grid is public and online, divided in 5 category according to the threat, and pointing to major suspects, mainly kurds, then gulenist, then islamists (isis).  about 11 millions citizens or one in 6 adults are reported to be under investigation online.  fetometer  reports of a scoring system for turkey citizens and foreigners to assess their relationships to the gulen networks and crack down on them emerged. the system, already in use on turkey civil public servants and some military branch,
allows turkey governments to assess the relationship of citizens to gulenist networks and likelihood for them to be part of it. in the field of education, the turkish national education ministry used a fetometer software to assess the relation of 993 books used in teaching with a set of gulenist phrases and concepts. 100 books were assessed "inconvenient", 12 were "certainly gulenist" and now banned by the ministry. the phrases and concepts looked for were dialogue, respect for human beings, the golden generation, horizon man, hope and dedication.  detainees' conditions   according to amnesty international, during the july 2016 purges, detainees were denied food for up to three days and water for up to two days, were denied medical treatment, were reportedly raped with police truncheons or fingers, and were subjected to other forms of torture.  amnesty said that three hundred male soldiers held in the ankara police headquarters were beaten during their detention, with injuries including bruises, cuts and broken bones.  forty soldiers were unable to walk because of their injuries, and two were unable to stand.  amnesty also said that detainees' shirts were covered in blood during their interrogations by prosecutors and that detainees during the purges were mostly prevented from contacting their families and lawyers.  given overcrowded conditions, the turkish government published a decree on 16 august announcing that 38,000 inmates whose criminal offense pre-dated 1 july were now eligible for sentence reduction.  inmates with two years or less to serve are eligible, while inmates who have served half of their sentence can ask for parole. the decree applies to crimes committed before 1 july 2016, excluding convictions for murder, domestic violence, sexual abuse, terrorism or crimes against the state.  prosecution of lawyers  between july 2016 and june 2019, out of more than 1500 prosecuted lawyers, 599 were arrested and 311 were sentenced to an average of about six years in prison.  34 lawyers associations in turkey were shut down, and lawyers were forced to testify against their own clients. a law was enacted which forbade lawyers charged with terror related offenses to represent clients accused in terror-related offenses. communications between lawyers and their respective clients arrested in pre-trial detention was enabled to be recorded.  arrest of human rights activists  turkish human rights lawyer orhan kemal cengiz was detained for three days in july 2016. he was "provisionally released" and remains subject to a travel ban. serdar kuni, a doctor from cizre, who assisted the respected human rights foundation in documenting violations in the town,
and arrested on poorly defined charges of "being a member of a terrorist organization" for treating injured locals.  on 6 june 2017, taner kılıc, the chair of amnesty international turkey, and another 22 lawyers were detained in izmir by the turkish police on the suspicion of having links with the fethullah gulen movement and later charged with "membership of a terrorist organisation". the detention and prosecution was condemned by amnesty international and human rights watch who asked for his immediate release. hugh williamson, europe and central asia director at human rights watch, stated that "detaining kılıc on suspicion of terrorist offenses looks like a tactic aimed at discrediting his legitimate human rights work."  nightwatchmen system  the bekci or nightwatchmen auxiliary police force has been used in the 1990s to monitor the south eastern regions against pkk activities.  bekci forces have traditionally served as neighborhood watchmen in turkey.  in 2008, the 8,000 active bekcis absorbed into regular police force and the system abolished.  following the 2016 coup and a large-scale operation in southeastern regions, the turkish government reinstated the bekci force, hiring 2,400 officers to patrol the regions' kurdish-majority cities of sirnak, hakkari, urfa, mardin and diyarbakir. the bekci guards have since been gradually extended to the entire country.  nightwatchmen's are described as local young men,  with standart watchmen training.  bekci guards can be equipped with whistles, batons, and carry gun (jan. 2020).  they have the authority to check citizens' identity, body search them, and use of lethal force is under legislative discussion.  bekci guards have been qualified as the turkey version iran's islamic revolutionary guard corps.  international  the turkish government have been looking for opponents in foreign countries as well.  school closures  about 1,000 gulen movement schools exist worldwide, with 300 of them in turkey. turkey requested closure of affiliated schools in 50 countries.  somalia closed the gulen affiliated schools.  azerbaijan closed 13 education centres, 11 high schools, and also qafqaz university associated with gulen movement.  pakistan: turkey requested closure of gulen movement schools.  sudan closed gulen movement schools by turkish request.  foreign operations and abductions  turkey has led a hunt of political opponents abroad. private planes are used to illegally abduct gulenists on foreign territories, without agreements with local jurisdictions.  reactions   the purges were criticized by western governments and human rights groups
. human rights watch warned the turkish government against "[using] the coup attempt to justify a witch-hunt against those it regards as opponents". andrew gardner, amnesty international's researcher for turkey, said: "we are witnessing a crackdown of exceptional proportions in turkey at the moment. while it is understandable, and legitimate, that the government wishes to investigate and punish those responsible for this bloody coup attempt, they must abide by the rule of law and respect freedom of expression."  conversely, the purges were praised by judicial commission of indonesia chairman aidul fitriciada azhari. azhari pointed to the purges as a positive example of external oversight of a judicial system and the exercise of executive power by a judicial commission, referring to the supreme board of judges and prosecutors.  effect on turkey's eu accession bid  johannes hahn, the european commissioner dealing with turkey's bid to become a member state of the european union (eu), said that it appeared turkey's government had prepared arrest lists of political opponents before the coup attempt and had been waiting for the right time to act. eu high representative of the union for foreign affairs and security policy federica mogherini condemned the purges, saying: "what we're seeing especially in the fields of universities, media, the judiciary, is unacceptable."  horst seehofer, the minister-president of bavaria, urged the eu to suspend turkey's accession negotiations: "if one sees how turkey is dismantling the rule of law... then these (eu membership) negotiations must be stopped immediately. no democratic constitutional state acts like this."  on 22 november 2016 the european parliament voted 497 to 37 in favour of a non binding freeze on membership talks with turkey in response to "disproportionate repressive measures taken in turkey since the failed military coup attempt."  university associations the czech university council compared negatively the purges of educational institutions in turkey to events which took place under the communist regime in former czechoslovakia.  the european university association (eua) joined by the european university foundations (euf) "strongly and unconditionally" condemned the forced resignation of hundreds of deans from higher education institutions in turkey in the wake of the failed coup attempt in the country, and called on all european governments, universities and scholars to speak out against these developments and to support democracy in turkey, including institutional autonomy and academic freedom for scholars and students.  europe  belgian foreign minister didier reynders said turkish authorities' reaction to the failed coup needed to be "proportionate," and that he was alarmed by the arrests of judges and
calls for reinstatement of the death penalty against coup participants.  french foreign minister jean-marc ayrault voiced concern, warning against a "political system which turns away from democracy" in response to the purges.  british foreign secretary boris johnson described the gulen movement as a "cult" and expressed his support for the post-coup purges. johnson said: "what happened in july [2016] was deeply violent, deeply anti-democratic, deeply sinister and it was totally right that it was crushed."  united states u.s. president barack obama said he was concerned by pictures showing the rough treatment of some of the arrested coup plotters, some of whom appeared stripped to their underwear and handcuffed behind their backs. u.s. secretary of state john kerry urged turkish authorities to halt the crackdown on its citizens, expressing concern that the aim of the crackdown was to "suppress dissent."  the commander of u.s. central command, general joseph votel, said that several of the u.s. military's closest partners in the turkish military have been jailed. in response, erdogan said votel was being on the side of coup plotters. on 29 july, votel said in a statement: "any reporting that i had anything to do with the recent unsuccessful coup attempt in turkey is unfortunate and completely inaccurate. ... we appreciate turkey's continuing cooperation and look forward to our future partnership in the counter-isil fight."  on 1 august 2018, president donald trump's administration sanctioned two top turkish government officials, turkish justice minister abdulhamit gul and interior minister suleyman soylu, over the detention of american pastor andrew brunson. the indictment stated that american pastor had ties with gulen's network. daniel glaser, the former assistant secretary for terrorist financing under president barack obama, said: "it's certainly the first time i can think of" the u.s. sanctioning a nato ally. "i certainly regard it as a human rights violation to unlawfully detain somebody, so i think it falls within the scope of the global magnitsky act."  united nations in july 2016, the u.s., with the support of britain, drafted language for the united nations security council that would have expressed grave concern over the situation, called upon on all parties to "respect the democratically elected government of turkey" and the rule of law, and urged the parties to show restraint and avoid violence. however, egypt blocked the proposed statement. egyptian diplomats said that the council is "in no position to qualify, or label [
the turkish] government - or any other government for that matter - as democratically elected or not". objection by the united states and the uk - permanent members of the security council - led to egypt proposing a new statement calling for all sides to "respect the democratic and constitutional principles and the rule of law", which was rejected, preventing the condemnation of the coup attempt by the security council.  in august 2016, united nations high commissioner for human rights zeid ra'ad al hussein decried the purge. zeid said that while he opposed the coup attempt, the wide-ranging purge showed a "thirst for revenge" that was alarming. later that month, a group of experts in the office of the high commissioner for human rights issued a joint statement saying that the purges may violate international law, specifically turkey's obligations under the international covenant on civil and political rights. the statement said: "while we understand the sense of crisis in turkey, we are concerned that the government's steps to limit a broad range of human rights guarantees go beyond what can be justified in light of the current situation. turkey is going through a critical period. derogation measures must not be used in a way that will push the country deeper into crisis."  in march 2018 office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights issued a report on the impact of the state of emergency on human rights in turkey. the report indicates interference of the executive with the work of the judiciary and curtailment of  parliamentary oversight over the executive branch of government; arbitrary mass dismissals of civil servants and private sector employees; arbitrary closure of civil society organizations, including prominent human    rights ngos and media; arbitrary detention of people arrested under state  of  emergency  measures; the use of torture and ill-treatment during pre-trial detention; restrictions  of the rights to freedoms of expression  and  of movement; arbitrary expropriation of private property; and  methods  of collective  punishment targeting family members of individuals suspected of offences under the state of emergency. ohchr said that the routine extensions of the state of emergency may lead to an enduring system of governing characterized by  a  large  number  of  arbitrary  decisions  that  profoundly affect the lives of many individuals and families.  analysis  historical light  can dundar, editor-in-chief of the turkish daily cumhuriyet, described the purges as part of a historical pattern of political power in turkey shifting back and forth between the secular military versus religious institutions, with democrats in the
middle having little power to prevent the repeated oscillations, but worse than previous cycles. he described the 2016 purges as "the biggest witch-hunt in turkey's history". historians and analysts including henri j. barkey, director of the middle east program of the woodrow wilson international center for scholars, compared the 2016 turkish purges to mao zedong's cultural revolution that started in 1966 and the iranian cultural revolution in which iranian academia was purged during 1980-1987. the government of turkey has been analysed to blame western forces and raise anti-americanism in order to distract the public from real intranational tensions, as well as to take an upper ground for negotiations. according to the new york times, "searching for historical parallels, analysts have made comparisons with joseph mccarthy's anti-communist witch hunt in 1950s america, the stalinist purges of the 1930s and the cultural revolution in china in the 1960s and '70s." other comparisons have been made with hitler's use of the reichstag fire to consolidate his power, and with ataturk's use of the 1926 assassination plot on his life to purge turkey of his political opponents and rivals.  political sciences  academics are now discussing "turkey's democracy collapse" and its "authoritarian turn". it has been argued that solid political position encourage leaders to crack down and double down on oppositions parties while less secure governing groups are more inclined into deescalation and appeasement. akp's political alliances with both wealthy business world via privileged and urban poor via redistribution of public resources, providing non-competitive elections, reduced elected officials political tolerance for oppositions and reduced the costs of cracking down on them. this akp-hegemonic political landscape, associated calculations and observable room for repressive actions lead to increase authoritarianism from turkish government through "securitization of dissent, mounting repression, and systematic violation of civil liberties". turkey is described as a case of "competitive authoritarianism", a regime in which democratic elections occurs under the guidance of an authoritarian government and where the main party guaranteed to win.  see also list of arrested journalists in turkey  censorship in turkey  references  external links  reality check: the numbers behind the crackdown in turkey, bbc, 18 june 2018  turkey purge | monitoring human rights abuses in turkey's post-coup crackdown - multi-lingual (including english) detailed documentation of the purges  urls of turkish government decrees detailing purges  2016 in law 2016 in turkey 2017 in law 2017 in turkey 2018 in law 2018 in turkey 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt   turkish
purges human rights abuses in turkey judiciary of turkey turkish purges political and cultural purges recep tayyip erdogan recep tayyip erdogan controversies turkish law transitional justice ongoing events
air marshal jasbir walia pvsm, vm, vsm,  adc  was the commander-in-chief of strategic forces command of the indian armed forces from 1 august 2016 to 31 march 2019. commissioned into the indian air force in 1979, walia has held several important appointments as a commanding officer, at air headquarters, at the headquarters of various commands of the indian air force (iaf), as an attache, and has also served as an instructor and as a deputy commandant of various training academies.  personal life and education walia graduated from the national defence academy (nda), khadakwasla. he attended a staff course at defence services staff college, wellington cantonment, and also attended the air war course at the air war college, montgomery, alabama, usa.  he is married to harbinder walia; the couple has a son and a daughter.  military career walia was commissioned in the flying branch (fighter stream) of the indian air force on 15 june 1979. he flew various types of aircraft from the inventory of the indian air force including the mig-21, sepecat jaguar, and training aircraft. as well as being a qualified flying instructor, he is also a pilot attack instructor and a fighter combat leader.  his operational assignments have included commanding officer of jaguar squadron, held for a maritime strike role, and he has also served as station commander. his appointments at air headquarters included director of tactical operations. he held various apex positions at indian air force training academies including as a member of the directing staff, and as deputy commandant at tactics and air combat defence establishment, as deputy commandant of the college of air warfare (caw), secunderabad. he also served as the air attache at the indian embassy located in washington, d.c., and as the air officer commanding (aoc) of the jammu and kashmir area.  walia served as the senior air staff officer at the headquarters of the eastern air command before assuming the office of aoc-in-c of the southern air command, the 24th officer to hold the post. he held the post of aoc-in-c souther air command from 1 june 2015 to 31 july 2016, succeeded by air marshal sunderraman neelakantan.  awards and medals walia was conferred the param vishisht seva medal in january 2017, vayu sena medal in 2000 and the vishisht seva medal in 2005 by the president of india.  references   year of birth missing (living people) living people indian
air force air marshals recipients of the vayu sena medal recipients of the param vishisht seva medal
temblor, inc. is a tech company that provides information about earthquakes and enables users to both see what the seismic hazard is at their home, and learn about precautions to help lessen the risk. the company released a web app and a mobile app that can be found in the itunes and google play stores. temblor was founded in 2014 by ross stein and volkan sevilgen, both coming from the united states geological survey. together they have published research on earthquakes that have struck in 30 countries. upon release, temblor has been mentioned in several news sources, including the new york times, cbs news, sfgate, msn, and the los angeles times, in articles about earthquakes and earthquake preparedness.  features temblor displays a map is with earthquakes and faults. liquefaction and landslide data is also shown in several locations. users are able to plug in an address and get the seismic hazard rank for that location along with estimates for seismic shaking and home damage. they are also shown the extent to which these risks could be mitigated by buying earthquake insurance or retrofitting the house. these features are provided for free and without ads for the general public.  references  external links    2014 establishments in the united states geophysics organizations seismological observatories, organisations and projects
enrique ernesto corti (born 21 march 1963) is a former argentine football midfielder and recently managed for coban imperial.  after retiring as a player, he coached teams in argentina, mexico and el salvador.  references  external links  http://www.bdfa.com.ar/jugadores-enrique-ernesto-corti-1106.html  http://www.zerozero.pt/player.php?id=268631;  1963 births living people argentine footballers argentine football managers expatriate football managers in el salvador association football midfielders
ernest billiet (1873-1939) was a french politician. he served as a member of the french senate from 1920 to 1927.  references  1873 births 1939 deaths french senators of the third republic senators of seine (department)
s. calcarata could refer to one of the following species: scaphiophryne calcarata, a frog of the family microhylidae scolopendra calcarata, a centipede of the family scolopendridae scopula calcarata, a moth of the family geometridae stenodema calcarata, an insect of the family miridae
the virgin islands pledge is a  pledge of allegiance to the virgin islands, a british overseas territory. it was officially adopted by the territory's house of assembly on 23 june 2016. it's intended to be commonly recited by virgin islanders in unison at public events, especially in schools, and during public celebrations. the pledge was first publicly recited on 1 july 2016 at territory day celebrations by premier dr. d. orlando smith and members of the government. the pledge reads:  adoption of the pledge was a project of myron walwyn, the territory's minister for education and culture. he explained that its adoption was part of the government's efforts "to build a nation of citizens and residents that understand and have deep reverence for our heritage as virgin islanders". in the same vein the government adopted a  territorial song and an official territorial uniform. the government also erected flagpoles at each school and public schoolchildren now sing the territorial song as they raise the uk and vi flags each school day morning.  the pledge has received a mixed reaction. some questioned the need for a pledge at all. the reference to god in the pledge is a source of some element of controversy too. house of assembly member, alvera maduro-caines argued it was appropriate. she said she saw 'nothing wrong with god being a part of the pledge as we are a christian and god fearing society'. others felt the overtly religious reference infringed their rights. the leader of the people's empowerment party, natalio d. wheatley, said there was a "glaring problem" with the pledge: that it is "oxymoronic" to refer to a territory as a country. the use of the capitalised term "territory" suggests the word is part of the territory's name when it's not. grammatically, the reference to "these virgin islands" rather than "the virgin islands" at the end of the pledge renders the pledge ungrammatical when recited outside the territory. there was little public engagement concerning the wording of the pledge before its adoption.  references  british virgin islands culture virgin islands 2016 in the british virgin islands
the 2016-17 iowa hawkeyes women's basketball team represented the university of iowa during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the hawkeyes, led by seventeenth-year head coach lisa bluder, played their home games at the carver-hawkeye arena and were members of the big ten conference. they finished the season 20-14, 8-8 in big ten play to finish in a tie for eighth place. they lost in the second round of the big ten women's tournament  to northwestern. they were invited to the women's national invitation tournament where they defeated missouri state, south dakota, colorado in the first, second and third rounds before losing to washington state in the quarterfinals.  roster  schedule  |- ! colspan="9" style="background:#000; color:#fc0;"| exhibition  |- ! colspan="9" style="background:#000; color:#fc0;"| non-conference regular season  |- ! colspan="9" style="background:#000; color:#fc0;"| big ten regular season  |- ! colspan="9" style="background:#000; color:#fc0;"| big ten women's tournament  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#000;"| women's national invitation tournament  see also 2016-17 iowa hawkeyes men's basketball team  rankings  references  iowa hawkeyes women's basketball seasons iowa 2017 women's national invitation tournament participants iowa hawkeyes iowa hawkeyes
daburji  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of daburji. the village is administrated by a sarpanch pastor teji, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, daburji has a total number of 173 houses and population of 921 of which include 468 males and 453 females. literacy rate of daburji is 84.41%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 87 which is  9.45% of total population of daburji, and child sex ratio is approximately  933, higher than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 51.00% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the our lady of the immaculate conception cathedral  () also called cienfuegos cathedral is a religious building is located opposite the marti park in the city of cienfuegos in the province of the same name on the caribbean island nation of cuba.  the original building was completed in 1833 during the spanish colonization, but expansions and improvements occurred in 1850, between 1852 and 1861, between 1866 and 1869 and between 1869 and 1875. it became an official cathedral in on february 20, 1903, following the roman or latin rite and is the mother of the diocese of cienfuegos (dioecesis centumfocencis) that was created by pope leo xiii by the apostolic brief "actum praeclare".  the cathedral is part of the historic centre of cienfuegos and, along with other historic buildings in the city center, was designated a world heritage site by unesco in 2005, because of its outstanding neoclassical architecture.  see also list of cathedrals in cuba roman catholicism in cuba  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in cienfuegos roman catholic churches completed in 1833 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
mohammad mujeeb (1902-1985) was an indian writer of english and urdu literature, educationist, scholar and the vice chancellor of jamia millia islamia, delhi.  early life and education mujeeb was born in 1902 to mohammad naseem, a wealthy barrister from lucknow.   mujeeb studied history at oxford university. he was a close friend and associate of zakir hussain, the third president of india, and abid husain.  later, he did advanced training in printing in germany before returning to india to join jamia millia islamia in 1926 as a faculty member, along with zakir hussain and abid hussain.  career  he was a scholar of history and was involved in the cultural and educational milieu of post-independent india.  literary works  english  a glimpse of new china   ordeal 1857: a historical play  world history, our heritage  education and traditional values   social reform among indian muslims   akbar   ghalib   dr zakir hussain: a biography   islamic influence on indian society   the indian muslims   education, literature and islam   three plays  urdu dunya ki kahani  azma'ish  gazaliyat-e-ghalib  tarikh falsafa-e-siyasiyat  nigarishat  rusi adab  awards padma bhushan (1965) for his contributions to literature and education.  death and legacy mujeeb died in 1985, at the age of 83.jamia millia islamia has instituted an annual oration, professor mohammad mujeeb memorial lecture, in mujeeb's honour.  see also  jamia millia islamia  references  external links     1902 births 1985 deaths 20th-century indian writers 20th-century indian educational theorists alumni of the university of oxford english-language writers from india historians of south asia indian marxist historians 20th-century indian historians indian muslims scholars from lucknow urdu-language writers from india recipients of the padma bhushan in literature & education heads of universities and colleges in india writers from delhi jamia millia islamia faculty
androstanolone valerate (brand name apeton), also known as stanolone valerate or dihydrotestosterone pentanoate, as well as 5α-androstan-17β-3-one 17β-valerate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a dihydrotestosterone ester. it is used as an injectable and acts as a prodrug of androstanolone (stanolone, dihydrotestosterone, dht).  see also  list of androgen esters § dihydrotestosterone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes dihydrotestosterone esters prodrugs testosterone valerate esters
bryn kenney (born november 1, 1986) is an american professional poker player from long beach, new york.  poker career kenney played magic: the gathering competitively before transitioning to poker. his first live cash was in 2007 at the east coast poker championships.  kenney won his first wsop bracelet in 2014 after winning the $1,500 10-game mix six handed event, which earned him $153,220.  in 2016, kenney defeated 2015 world series of poker main event champion, joe mckeehen heads-up at the pokerstars caribbean adventure $100k super high roller event winning $1,687,800.  after placing 2nd to aaron zang in the £1,050,000 no-limit hold'em - triton million for charity event, kenney received the largest single payout in live poker tournament history of £16,890,509 ($20,563,324). the tournament had the largest scheduled single payout in poker tournament history with first place receiving £19,000,000 ($23,100,000). however, due to a prize splitting deal agreed with zang, kenney ended up receiving £16,890,509 ($20,563,324) for 2nd while zang received the smaller prize of £13,779,491 ($16,775,820) for winning the tournament. the deal was made when the tournament entered heads up with kenney holding an over 5:1 chip lead against zang. zang made a comeback and eventually won the tournament.  kenney is ranked 4th on the global poker index and 1st on the hendon mob all-time money list as of august 3, 2019. as of august 2020, his live tournament winnings exceed $55,000,000.  world series of poker  references  external links  bryn kenney hendon mob profile  bryn kenney global poker index profile  1986 births american poker players world series of poker bracelet winners people from long beach, new york living people
ngc 144 is a spiral galaxy in the constellation cetus (the whale).  the galaxy was discovered in 1886 by frank muller.  external links   seds  references   astronomical objects discovered in 1886 473- g 023 -04-02-016 001917 cetus (constellation) 0144 spiral galaxies
camping 3 is a 2016 french comedy film directed by fabien onteniente. it is a sequel to the 2010 film camping 2. the film was a box office success, having grossed over us$24.2 million in france, becoming the second highest-grossing domestic film in 2016, with 3,228,313 tickets sold.  plot every summer, the camping blue waves meet to their holiday friends, the pic, jacky and laurette, gatineau, just divorced sophia, 37, and patrick chirac. this year, patrick decided to try carpooling ... thinking through france with vanessa, he is left with three young robert charmer, benji hunk, jose the loudmouth. of course, after the carpool, patrick is forced to test the co-sleeping.  cast   franck dubosc as patrick chirac  antoine dulery as paul gatineau  claude brasseur as jacky pic  mylene demongeot as laurette pic  gerard jugnot as charmillard  michele laroque as anne so  sophie mounicot as sabrina  cristiana reali as clotilde  louka meliava as benji  jules ritmanic as jose  cyril mendy as robert  philippe lellouche as carello  laurent olmedo as the 37  leslie medina as morgane  amelie robin as charlotte  eden ducourant as aurelie  alix benezech as manon  clara antoons as linda  honorine magnier as melanie  victoria olloqui as valerie  yvick letexier as kevin  aymeric dapsence as sj shogun  dominique prudent as bressan  michel cremades as moustachu  yves de jonghe as mr. van de kerkoff   guilaine londez as the waitress  references  external links    2016 films 2016 comedy films french films french comedy films films about families pathe films films directed by fabien onteniente
burnett house is a historic building that forms part of the myilly point precinct in darwin, northern territory. it is the only remaining two storey house designed by architect beni burnett. it is managed by the national trust of australia (northern territory).  history burnett house was built in 1938. it was designed by beni burnett, architect grade one in the works and services branch of the department of the interior. it was one of several houses for senior public servants and military personnel.  burnett house survived the bombing of darwin during world war ii. two bullet holes are visible in the front fence and fragments of a bomb were also found in the garden years later  the dwelling was heritage listed as part of the myilly point precinct in 1994.  in 1999, the national trust of australia (northern territory) announced its intention to buy burnett house and the adjacent property known as mines house. it was reported that the commonwealth government had offered both properties to the national trust for $400,000. territory senator grant tambling said he would prefer they were given to the trust. in 2002 the commonwealth government, which still owned the property, called for expressions of interest for the "future ownership and management" of burnett house and others in the same area. senator nigel scullion claimed the houses had already been "gifted" to the people of the northern territory. the commonwealth government denied this.  design  burnett house is a "k type" house, designed specifically for tropical conditions. considered radical for its time, it is two storeys, with living areas downstairs and bedrooms upstairs. it is built from lightweight materials such as asbestos cement sheeting, corrugated roof cladding and a unique form of louvres with patterning by casement windows. the roof is steeply pitched with an asbestos ridge vent at the top, allowing air to circulate from open eaves through the ceiling space and out the ridge. it also incorporates asbestos louvres, glass casement windows and screened walls to allow for maximum air flow throughout. it also features three-quarter height partitions between rooms.  references  external links  buildings and structures in darwin, northern territory northern territory heritage register houses completed in 1938
estela casas (born 1961) was a news anchor in el paso, texas. she is best known for her health advocacy for cancer awareness. casas is also part of the "longest running anchor team in el paso television history." casas was inducted into the el paso women's hall of fame.  biography  casas was born and raised in el paso, texas. she attended arizona state university, where she studied voice performance, and later received a bachelor's degree from the university of texas at el paso (utep) in communications.  in 1986, she was working at kdbc, where she "spearheaded the texas breast cancer screening project." casas starting anchoring on kvia-tv with gary warner in 1993. casas has publicly and candidly shared medical procedures she underwent, including having a mammogram on television in 1993, and documenting her own experience with thyroid disease in 2010.  on january 7, 2020, estela casas left kvia for the umc foundation.  references   1961 births university of texas at el paso alumni american women journalists people from el paso, texas living people arizona state university alumni journalists from texas 21st-century american women
luca antonio fiordilino (born 25 july 1996) is an italian professional footballer who plays as a defensive midfielder for serie a club venezia.  club career fiordilino started his career at u.s. citta di palermo in the youth system.  in july 2015 he was loaned to cosenza of lega pro. in july 2016 he moved to lega pro side lecce on loan.  on 24 july 2019, he signed a 3-year contract with venezia.  references  external links  italian footballers palermo f.c. players cosenza calcio players u.s. lecce players venezia f.c. players association football midfielders footballers from palermo 1996 births living people serie b players serie c players
the goldfinch is a 2019 american drama film directed by john crowley, written by peter straughan, and adapted from the 2013 novel of the same name by donna tartt. it stars ansel elgort as theodore decker, whose life changes after his mother dies in a terrorist bombing at a museum and a dying man convinces him to take a famous painting called the goldfinch from the museum. oakes fegley, aneurin barnard, finn wolfhard, sarah paulson, luke wilson, jeffrey wright, and nicole kidman appear in supporting roles.  the novel's film rights were sold to warner bros. and ratpac entertainment, with icm partners brokering the deal. two years later, crowley was hired to direct the film adaptation, and elgort was selected to portray theodore decker. most of the remaining cast joined from october 2017 to january 2018. filming began in new york city in january 2018 and moved to albuquerque in april 2018 for the rest of the production.  the goldfinch premiered at the 2019 toronto international film festival and was theatrically released in the united states on september 13, 2019, by warner bros. pictures. it was a box-office bomb, with estimated losses for the studio as high as $50 million, and received generally negative reviews that criticised the plot and narrative, though the cinematography and performances received praise.  plot  thirteen-year-old theodore decker's mother is killed in a bombing at the metropolitan museum of art in new york city. in the aftermath of the explosion, a dying man urges him to take a painting-the goldfinch-and his engraved ring. theo hides the painting at his apartment, and later is placed into foster care with the barbours, the family of his best friend andy. theo reconnects with andy and becomes close to mrs. barbour, who encourages his interest in antiques and art.  it is revealed that theo and his mother were supposed to see theo's school principal that day because the school said he and classmate tom cable had been smoking cigarettes. they were early, so his mother took theo to the museum on the day of the explosion. theo blames himself for his mother's death. he realizes that tom was the one who "ratted him out" and, for the sake of his mother and andy, he ends his friendship with tom.  following the dying man's instructions, theo locates the antiques shop of james "hobie" hobart, whose partner welton "welty" blackwell (the dying man from the museum) gave the
ring to theo to return. hobie allows theo to visit pippa, welty's niece who was injured in the bombing, and the children bond before pippa is sent to live with her aunt in texas. theo visits hobie regularly while settling into life with the barbours; andy hints that his parents are considering adopting theo. however, theo's estranged father larry, claiming to be newly sober, arrives with his girlfriend xandra to relocate theo to las vegas. theo brings the goldfinch and keeps it hidden.  in las vegas, theo befriends boris, a ukrainian classmate, who has also lost his mother. both of their fathers are abusive. boris introduces theo to drugs and alcohol, which follow him into adulthood. larry ends up in gambling debt and tries to convince theo to transfer his education fund to a banking account, then slaps theo when he tries to understand. when larry fails to extort theo's education fund by phone, theo learns that larry has been using theo's social security number to try to do the same.  after theo and boris take lsd, theo learns that larry was killed in a drunk-driving accident. when xandra berates him for his apparently apathetic response to his father's death, theo runs away to new york, taking xandra's dog popper and the painting, but is unable to convince boris to join him. hobie allows theo to live with him.  eight years later, theo has made hobie's shop successful, selling his restored antiques. he runs into andy's older brother platt, who reveals that andy and their father were killed in a boating accident during one of mr. barbour's bipolar episodes. theo visits the ailing mrs. barbour and reconnects with her daughter kitsey. reeve, a disgruntled art dealer, confronts theo for selling him a fake. having deduced that theo stole the goldfinch, reeve accuses him of using it as collateral to finance his shop. unbeknownst to anyone else, theo keeps the wrapped painting in a storage locker.  theo becomes engaged to andy's younger sister kitsey, but harbors a secret love for pippa, who now lives in london with her boyfriend everett. theo catches kitsey cheating on him with an adult tom cable, but they remain engaged, as theo is close to mrs. barbour and kitsey is permissive toward his drug habit. theo tells hobie the truth about selling his restorations as "real" forgeries. pippa visits theo and they confess their feelings for each other,
but she tearfully rejects him, citing the instability caused by their shared childhood trauma.  seeking drugs at a bar, theo is reunited with boris, who reveals he had stolen the goldfinch from theo years prior and had used it as collateral to finance his crime career, before it was then in turn stolen from him. at his storage locker, theo discovers boris replaced the painting with a school textbook. after a visit from reeve, a heartbroken hobie confronts theo for the theft and loss of the goldfinch.  at theo's and kitsey's engagement party, boris arrives with a plan to recover the goldfinch. theo accompanies him to amsterdam, where boris seizes the painting at gunpoint, but they are ambushed by another pair of criminals. boris kills one of them but is shot. theo is forced to kill the other assailant, while another man escapes with the painting.  theo tries to commit suicide in his hotel room, but is rescued by boris. boris explains that he called in a tip to the police about the painting's location, and that during the subsequent raid, the authorities recovered the painting as well as other stolen art, including a rembrandt. boris persuades theo that it was all for the greater good.  the movie ends with a running flashback of theo and his mother in the museum intercut with two scenes - theo silently letting hobie know that the goldfinch is safe, and theo in a gallery with mrs. barbour - before the final shot of welty, pippa, theo, and his mother viewing the goldfinch prior to the explosion.  cast  production in july 2014, film rights to the novel were sold to warner bros. pictures and ratpac entertainment with icm partners brokering the deal. two years later, john crowley was hired to direct the film adaptation. in august 2017, warner bros. finalized a deal with amazon studios to co-finance the adaptation, where amazon would invest in more than a third of the project's budget and obtain streaming rights to the picture on its prime service, while warner bros. would distribute the film in theaters worldwide.  on october 4, 2017, after a two-month casting search, ansel elgort was cast in the lead role of theodore "theo" decker, following his breakout turn in baby driver. on the same day, cinematographer roger deakins revealed to variety that the goldfinch was his next project after blade runner 2049. later that month, in light of his recent performance in dunkirk, aneurin barnard was cast as boris.
on november 15, sarah paulson was cast as xandra. by late november, trevor gureckis was hired as the film's composer. in december 2017, willa fitzgerald and ashleigh cummings joined the cast. during the same month, kelley dixon from breaking bad and better call saul was enlisted to be the film's editor. in january 2018, jeffrey wright, luke wilson, finn wolfhard, and luke kleintank joined the cast. later that month, the rest of the cast was announced as principal production commenced.  principal photography began in new york on january 23, 2018, before moving to albuquerque on april 3, 2018 for the rest of production.  marketing footage from the film was first shown at cinemacon on april 2, 2019. the first official images were released on may 28, 2019, as well as the first official teaser poster of the film. the first official trailer was released on may 29, 2019. about six months prior to its release, following test screenings, warner bros. knew the film would possibly perform poorly and in turn "dramatically" trimmed their prospective marketing plan.  release the goldfinch premiered at the toronto international film festival on september 8, 2019. it was theatrically released in the united states on september 13, 2019, after previously being set for october 11.  reception  box office the goldfinch grossed $5.3 million in the united states and canada, and $4.1 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $9.4 million, against a production budget of around $45 million.  in the united states and canada, the film was released alongside hustlers and was originally projected to gross $5-8 million from 2,542 theaters in its opening weekend. however, after making just $870,000 on its first day, estimates were lowered to below $3 million. it went on to debut to just $2.6 million, the sixth-worst saturated opening of all-time for a film playing on over 2,500 screens. following its poor opening, many publications had already labeled the film a box-office bomb and estimated it would lose as much as $50 million ($25-30 million for warner bros. and $16-18 million for amazon studios). the film plunged 71% in its second weekend to $770,000.  critical response on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of  based on  reviews with an average rating of . the
site's critical consensus reads, "beautifully filmed yet mostly inert, the goldfinch mishandles its source material, flattening a complex narrative into a largely uninvolving disappointment." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 40 out of 100, based on 41 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews." audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b" on an a+ to f scale.  a.o. scott, writing for the new york times, said the film "looks and sounds like a movie without quite being one. it's more like a pinterest page or a piece of fan art, the record of an enthusiasm that is, to the outside observer, indistinguishable from confusion." peter travers of rolling stone called it "a botch job for the ages" and said it "appears to be adapting the cliff's notes version of the book instead of the book itself, producing an unplayable series of scene snippets".  references  external links    2019 films american coming-of-age drama films 2010s english-language films 2010s coming-of-age drama films american films films about grieving films based on american novels films directed by john crowley films set in amsterdam films set in new york city films shot in new mexico films shot in new york city amazon studios films warner bros. films films set in the 2000s 2019 drama films
the following lists events that happened in 1942 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - hermann jonasson, olafur thors, bjorn þorðarson  events  births  9 january - eysteinn bjornsson, writer 23 january - sighvatur kristinn bjorgvinsson, politician. 11 june - jon halldor kristjansson, politician 12 august - þorsteinn gylfason, philosopher (d. 2005) 4 october - johanna sigurðardottir, politician  21 october - ingibjorg haraldsdottir, poet and translator (d. 2016) 2 december - anna g. jonasdottir, political scientist  deaths  references    1940s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
clomegestone (inn), or clomagestone, also known as 6-chloro-17α-hydroxy-16α-methylpregna-4,6-diene-3,20-dione, is a steroidal progestin of the 17α-hydroxyprogesterone group that was never marketed. an acetate ester, clomegestone acetate, also exists, and similarly was never marketed.  references  organochlorides pregnanes progestogens abandoned drugs
laid in america is a 2016 british direct-to-video comedy film starring british and south african youtube personalities ksi and caspar lee respectively. the film was written and directed by sam milman and peter vass, and was produced by the fun group llc and max gottlieb. the film was released direct-to-video by universal pictures on 26 september 2016.  plot  two foreign exchange students duncan and jack  adventure on their goal of getting laid in their last night in america. during duncan's music class, he asks tucker if they can go to his end of the year party. tucker  tells him that they must bring two hot girls to his party to get inside. jack disapproves of this deal because he doesn't want his crush kaylee to see him with another girl. duncan and jack get advice from duncan's younger brother, freddie (oladeji "deji" olatunji), and download the blindr app to get girls, they find a match with amber and violet and they meet at a restaurant 30 minutes later.  at the restaurant, amber meets duncan and jack. she buys them drinks, drugging both of them when they are not paying attention which knocks them unconscious. she kidnaps the duo and brings them to her boyfriend goose. goose's mother walks in on them, and he lies about them being friends. kaylee calls jack; unaware that jack does not have his phone. goose impersonates jack and calls her a bitch. goose takes both of his victims to an atm. the man behind them talks trash for taking too long, and when goose talks trash back, he is knocked out by the man. duncan steals goose's car and gold watch; knocking out amber and freeing jack. jack is furious with duncan for hitting amber and not getting their phones back.  they pull over so that jack can throw up, only for a man to come inside their car mistaking it for his uber. he mentions he's going to "the pleasure palace" to have sex. duncan wants to go to this place and are granted inside. duncan is about to achieve his goal of getting laid until jack walks in panicky, after being "molested" by his principal. the police shut down the pleasure palace while duncan and jack manage to escape. on their way to the party, duncan and jack get into an argument which ends their friendship.  duncan is granted into the party by exchanging goose's watch. jack sneaks in through tucker's bedroom window but accidentally lands on tucker's cat, mr. pick
les. tucker then discovers mr. pickles dead while jack is hiding. jack finds kaylee and attempts to talk to her, but she wants nothing to do with him because she mistakenly thinks he called her a bitch on the phone earlier. duncan meets digby who believes that the way to attract girls is to insult them. jack tries to talk to kaylee again only for tucker to confront and push him to the ground, causing a scene. this angers kaylee further as she wanted to handle the situation herself, but tucker calls her a bitch and jack angrily defends her. tucker's friend, topher, discovers jack killed mr. pickles and shows video evidence when the latter denies it.   the party is interrupted by gunshots and goose arrives, confronting jack about his belongings. tucker knocks out goose for crashing his party. duncan comes from behind and knocks tucker out from smashing glass on his head. jack and duncan reconcile, becoming friends again. kaylee takes jack to tucker's room; and trie apologize for being mean to him for something he didn't actually do. jack expresses his feelings with a kiss, telling her he accepts her apology, and they have sex. duncan spots scarlett and she reveals that she is tucker's sister. duncan immediately apologizes, but scarlett reveals she is not mad at duncan for hitting him; admitting he had it coming. she offers to have sex with him because their earlier session was cut short, which he gladly accepts. jack and duncan get home in the morning and pack their bags so they can leave on time for their flight. the two friends part ways upon admitting their brotherly love for one another.  in a mid-credits scene, duncan and scarlet are shown having sex and it quickly gets awkward, with his video going viral after he posts it compared to his previously uploaded unpopular chili challenge video.  cast   olajide olatunji as duncan  caspar lee as jack  bobby lee as goose  madison iseman as kaylee  josh leyva as tucker  angela trimbur as amber  angela kinsey as lisa  melissa villasenor as ms. hopkins  gerry bednob as principal raheem  syd wilder as scarlett  heather cowles as tabitha (duncan blob)  gabbie hanna as lindsey  oladeji olatunji as freddie  tay zonday as digby  jason horton as lance  bart baker as blindr host  reception the film currently has a rating of 4.4/10 on imdb. jason best of movie talk gave the film
1 out of 5 and called it "crass and witless."  ksi expressed interest in a sequel, but no plans surfaced.  references  external links      laid in america at twitter  2016 films 2016 comedy films british comedy films british films direct-to-video comedy films british direct-to-video films ksi
ryan thomas william boot (born 9 november 1994) is an english professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for  club solihull moors.  he turned professional at port vale in april 2013 and played on loan at worcester city, norton united, newcastle town, and macclesfield town. he signed with solihull moors in july 2018 and played every league game in his three seasons at the club, winning the club's supporters' player of the season award for the 2020-21 campaign.  playing career  port vale boot attended the academy at stoke city before he was released in 2010, at which point he joined the port vale youth system. he signed a two-year professional contract with the club in april 2013. he had a trial at premier league club fulham in october 2013. he joined conference north club worcester city on loan in november 2013 and played four games. he was recalled from his loan in march 2014 due to an injury to chris neal. he played a number of friendly games in outfield positions for vale in the 2014-15 pre-season as sam johnson and chris neal battled for the starting position in goal.  he was loaned out to norton united of the northern premier league division one south in august 2014. the following month he was loaned out to newcastle town, also in the northern premier league division one south. he returned on loan to worcester city in february 2015 until the end of the 2014-15 season. he signed a new two-year contract with port vale in june 2015. on 9 september 2016, he returned to worcester city for a third loan spell. he played two games in the following four days, keeping clean sheets on both occasions. having kept six clean sheets in ten games for worcester, and then went on to join national league club macclesfield town on loan on 11 november. he played two fa trophy games for the "silkmen". he returned to port vale and made his efl league one debut for the "valiants" on 20 january, in a 2-2 draw with bury at vale park. he did not feature again in the 2016-17 relegation campaign, but was offered a new one-year contract by manager michael brown in may 2017.  on 29 august, he started his first game of the 2017-18 season, and kept a clean sheet in a 0-0 draw with oldham athletic at boundary park, before saving two penalties to help vale win the resulting penalty shoot-out. despite this, he did not get to feature in the first-team despite injuries to rob lainton,
sam hornby and emergency loan signing kelle roos, with new manager neil aspin choosing to draft in another emergency loan goalkeeper at the last minute, dimitar evtimov, rather than allowing boot to reach five appearances and thereby preventing the club from making any further emergency goalkeeping loan signings. evtimov proved to be a disappointment in his one appearance however, and boot went on to play the following game and keep a clean sheet in a 2-0 victory over oxford united on 3 november. boot retained his first-team place following lainton's return from injury, whilst hornby was allowed to leave on loan. on 16 december, he impressed with what aspin called a "a first-class display" in a 2-1 win at carlisle united. on 24 march, he kept a clean sheet in a 0-0 draw at wycombe wanderers and his performance earned him a place on the efl team of the week. however, on 2 april he dropped a routine catch to gift crewe alexandra the opening goal of a 2-2 draw before he was forced off with a foot injury; he apologised to supporters on twitter after the game. following an inconsistent season and the fact that both lainton and hornby were still under contract, boot was released upon the expiry of his contract in may 2018.  solihull moors on 3 july 2018, boot was signed by former england international goalkeeper tim flowers, now manager of national league side solihull moors. he made his moors debut on the opening day of the 2018-19 season, in a 2-1 win at eastleigh on 4 august, and his performance earned him a place in the national league team of the weekend. he signed a contract extension in february 2019 after flowers felt that boot had proven himself a more than worthy successor to max o'leary. he helped the moors to a second-place finish in the league, before they were beaten by afc fylde in the play-offs. he made 44 appearances in the 2019-20 season, which was permanently suspended on 26 march due to the covid-19 pandemic in england, with solihull in eighth-place. he kept 15 clean sheets in the 2020-21 campaign, playing every minute of the club's games, and was voted as supporters' player of the season. despite this, he was released by the club upon the expiry of his contract. however the club reversed their decision and re-signed boot in july. after keeping five clean sheets in six matches, boot was awarded the national league player
of the month award for october 2021 with manager neal ardley getting the league's manager of the month award.  style of play boot is a goalkeeper who has been praised for his kicking ability by port vale manager neil aspin and teammate tom pope.  statistics  honours individual solihull moors supporters' player of the season: 2020-21 national league player of the month: october 2021  references  1994 births living people people from rocester english footballers association football goalkeepers port vale f.c. players worcester city f.c. players norton united f.c. players newcastle town f.c. players macclesfield town f.c. players solihull moors f.c. players english football league players national league (english football) players northern premier league players
the 1968-69 new orleans buccaneers season was the 2nd season of the buccaneers in the aba. the bucs traded larry brown and doug moe to the oakland oaks in exchange for steve jones and ron franz.  in the western division semifinals, the bucs beat the dallas chaparrals in seven games. in the division finals, they were swept by the oakland oaks. this was their final playoff appearance as they stumbled to .500 next season prior to the move to memphis on august 31, 1970.  roster  10 mike butler - shooting guard  34 lee davis - power forward  11 ronald franz - small forward  25 gerald govan - center  15 jimmy jones - point guard  23 steve jones - shooting guard  -- dave lee - small forward  33 elton mcgriff - center  32 jackie moreland - power forward   12 marlbert pradd - shooting guard  21 red robbins - center  14 glynn saulters - guard  31 jasper wilson - small forward  final standings  western division  playoffs  western division semifinals  western division finals  awards, records, and honors 1968 aba all-star game played on january 28, 1969  jimmy jones   red robbins  references   buccaneers on basketball reference  new orleans new orleans buccaneers new orleans buccaneers, 1968-69 new orleans buccaneers, 1968-69
francesco de marchi (1610 - 1 nov 1667) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of krk (1660-1667).  biography francesco de marchi was born in split, croatia in 1610. on 21 jun 1660, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as bishop of krk. on june 27th 1660, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-bishop of sabina, with lorenzo gavotti, bishop emeritus of ventimiglia, with giovanni agostino marliani, bishop emeritus of accia and mariana, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of krk until his death on 1 nov 1667.  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1610 births 1667 deaths clergy from split, croatia
this page is about the irish greyhound race. for the british race, see the puppy derby.  the puppy derby also known as the juvenile derby is a greyhound racing competition held annually at shelbourne park in dublin, ireland. the event switched to shelbourne following the closure of harold's cross stadium in the city district of harold's cross.   it is a major competition inaugurated in 1943 and is an integral part of the irish greyhound racing calendar.  the event is the irish equivalent of the puppy derby held in the uk at wimbledon stadium. the competition restricted to puppies has a tradition for providing many stars of the future.  following the closure of harolds cross the event was switched to shelbourne park in 2017.  past winners  venues & distances 1943-1998	(harolds cross 525 yards) 1999-1999	(shelbourne park 525 yards) 2000-2016	(harolds cross 525 yards) 2017-present   (shelbourne 525 yards)  sponsors 1994-1994 red mills 2007-2012 harolds cross bookmakers 2013-2020 dublin coach 2021-present sis  references  greyhound racing competitions in dublin (city) 1943 establishments in ireland recurring sporting events established in 1943
sociology of sociology is an area of sociology that combines social theories with analysis of the effect of socio-historical contexts in sociological intellectual production.   for the french sociologist pierre bourdieu, the task of the sociology of sociology is to debrief accepted truths, focusing on the questioning of canons and acting towards new epistemologies.   in his book a history of sociology in britain, published 2004, british sociologist andrew halsey outlines a sociology of sociology. he suggests a connection between political economic regimes in the 20th century and the development of sociology as an academic discipline.  see also metatheory philosophy of social science  further reading  a history of sociology in britain (2004, oxford university press)  sociologia de la sociologia by francisco javier conde (spanish)  references  metatheory sociology of knowledge
exeter book riddle 27 (according to the numbering of the anglo-saxon poetic records) is one of the old english riddles found in the later tenth-century exeter book. the riddle is almost universally solved as 'mead'.  text  as edited by krapp and dobbie in the anglo-saxon poetic records series, riddle 27 runs:  ic eom weorð werum, wide funden, brungen of bearwum ond of burghleoþum, of denum ond of dunum. dæges mec wægun feþre on lifte, feredon mid liste under hrofes hleo. hæleð mec siþþan baþedan in dydene. nu ic eom bindere ond swingere, sona weorpere; esne to eorþan hwilum ealdne ceorl. sona þæt on findeð, se þe mec fehð ongean ond wið mægenþisan minre genæsteð, þæt he hrycge sceal hrusan secan, gif he unrædes ær ne geswiceð; strengo bistolen, strong on spræce, mægene binumen, nah his modes geweald, fota ne folma. frige hwæt ic hatte, ðe on eorðan swa esnas binde dole æfter dyntum be dæges leohte.  i am valuable/useful to men, found widely, brought from groves and from mountain slopes, from valleys and from hills. by day, feathers carried me up high, took me skillfully under the shelter of a roof. a man then washed me in a container. now i am a binder and a striker; i bring a slave to the ground, sometimes an old ceorl. immediately he discovers, he who goes against me and contends against my strength, that he shall meet the ground with his back, unless he ceases from his folly early; deprived of his strength, loud of speech, his power bound, he has no control over his mind, his feet, or his hands. ask what i am called, who thus binds slaves to the earth with blows, by the light of day.  interpretation  until recently there has been little work on this riddle. however, in recent years commentary has emphasised how it undermin
es the association with mead in old english heroic poetry with martial masculinity. other work has shown how the riddle not only elucidates anglo-saxons' relationships with bees, but has argued that the riddle enables us to chart the complex interrelations between humans and other ecological actors in the medieval past.  editions   williamson, craig (ed.), the old english riddles of the exeter book (chapel hill: university of north carolina press, 1977).  muir, bernard j. (ed.), the exeter anthology of old english poetry: an edition of exeter dean and chapter ms 3501, 2nd edn, 2 vols (exeter: exeter university press, 2000).  exeter book riddle 27 is edited along with digital images of its manuscript pages, and translated, in the old english poetry in facsimile project  recordings  michael d. c. drout, 'riddle 27', performed from the anglo-saxon poetic records edition (24 october 2007).  references  riddles old english literature old english poetry
destuntzia rubra is a species of truffle-like fungus in the family gomphaceae, and the type species of the genus destuntzia. the fungus was first described scientifically in 1899 by h. w. harkness as hymenogaster ruber. robert fogel and james trappe transferred it to destuntzia in 1985.  references  external links  gomphaceae fungi of north america fungi described in 1899
roberto roy is a panamanian politician, who has served as the minister of canal affairs of panama since 2012 and the director general of panama metro since january 2015.  roy graduated in mechanical engineering at the georgia institute of technology, gaining a master's degree in industrial administration at the same institute. he also graduated in civil engineering at universidad catolica santa maria la antigua roy launched his own construction company, r-m ingeneria, in 1975.  in september 2012, roy was named a knight of the french legion of honour in a ceremony presided over by french ambassador hugues goisbault. in may 2016, roy was granted the order of civil merit by the government of spain.  in his role as minister, roy oversaw the expansion of the panama canal in june 2016.  references  government ministers of panama order of civil merit members living people year of birth uncertain place of birth missing (living people) georgia tech alumni chevaliers of the legion d'honneur 21st-century politicians universidad catolica santa maria la antigua alumni panamanian engineers
events from the year 1919 in russia  events   8th congress of the russian communist party (bolsheviks)  battle of berezina (1919)  kiev pogroms (1919)  suchan valley campaign  births  december 23 - vasily reshetnikov, soviet air force pilot  deaths   july 6 - joe marqolov, soviet general  references    years of the 20th century in russia
outi marjatta ojala (28 june 1946, lappee - 16 may 2017) was a finnish politician of the left alliance. she served as a member of the parliament of finland from 1991 to 1996 and from 1999 to 2007, and as a member of the european parliament from 1996 to 1999. she was president of the nordic council in 2002.  ojala trained as a nurse and was involved in trade unions and local politics in helsinki, where she was a city councillor 1989-1996 and 2001-2012.  references  1946 births 2017 deaths people from lappeenranta finnish people's democratic league politicians left alliance (finland) politicians members of the parliament of finland (1991-95) members of the parliament of finland (1995-99) members of the parliament of finland (1999-2003) members of the parliament of finland (2003-07) left alliance (finland) meps 20th-century women meps for finland meps for denmark 1994-1999 women city councillors women members of the parliament of finland
amnesty (i), also titled amnesty i and sometimes referred to as amnesty, is the fourth and last studio album by electronica duo crystal castles, released on august 19, 2016, on fiction records and casablanca records. it is their first album since the departure of previous frontwoman alice glass in 2014, and the first to feature new vocalist edith frances. it is also their first album not titled after their band name. amnesty is also the band's shortest album to date, even with the extra runtime on the physical version. the album received lukewarm reviews by music publications, who criticized the album for having an outdated sound and not being as great as their past works.  release and promotion on april 15, 2015, ethan kath shared a new track titled "frail" on soundcloud, writing 'this is edith on vocals'. the track was released commercially to digital retailers a month later on may 11. kath shared another track titled "deicide" on july 2 on soundcloud, later seeing a commercial digital release on july 10. "deicide" was later revealed to be a demo for the outro track on amnesty (i), "their kindness is charade". in late november 2015, edith frances played her first show as the other half of crystal castles in south africa.  on february 29, 2016, the band revealed that they aimed to release the album sometime spring of that year, and confirmed that the 2015 soundcloud demos "frail" and "deicide" would make appearances on the record. for unknown reasons, the record arrived late summer instead of spring 2016.  in the last week of june 2016, the track "concrete" was leaked on korean website mnet. with the concrete leak, fans discovered information about the album via shazam, such as the title, track list, and cover art. although the shazam track list was not in order and the release date was unknown, amazon germany accidentally leaked the ordered track list and release date before the album was officially announced on july 11, 2016. the track concrete was later released as a single on july 6 with an accompanying video on the same day on youtube. on june 29, the band previewed a new track "femen" with a teaser of the music video showing birds caught and struggling in mist nets via vimeo. on july 11, the band officially announced the new record, 'amnesty (i)' along with its cover art and track list while also premiering a new single, "char", as annie mac's hottest record on bbc radio 1. the single and
pre-order for the album were made available a day later on july 12. the fourth pre-order single "fleece" was made available on august 16 at the band's itunes page. a cd rip of the album, including the bonus track "kept", leaked online the same day. the band released "sadist" on august 18, 2016 via their youtube channel, followed by the official release of the album on august 19, 2016.  the band took a similar approach to their 2008 debut for amnesty, as they revealed a majority of the tracks on both albums before they released.  track listing  notes  "femen" samples a choir cover of "smells like teen spirit" by scala & kolacny brothers.   "kept" samples "other people" and "new year" by beach house, from their 2012 album bloom.  "their kindness is charade" contains additional production by jake lee, known professionally as witch house artist 'sidewalks and skeletons'.  charts  references  external links    2016 albums crystal castles (band) albums fiction records albums casablanca records albums witch house (genre) albums
xiangyang () is a town of guanghan, sichuan, china. , it has two residential communities and 15 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of sichuan guanghan
type 514 radar is a chinese 2-d air search radar in service with both chinese ground force (plagf) and chinese navy (plan). type 514 radar is a land based, mobile 2-d air defense radar developed from earlier type 513. the radar has been retired from active service, being replaced by more advanced radars such as type 354 on plan destroyers and frigates.  when china built/converted its first generation frigates type 6601 in the 1960s, domestic chinese diesel engines to meet military standard were not ready, so civilian diesel engines had to be used, but civilian diesel engines were heavier and bulkier, especially in terms of height. compounded with the smaller size of the frigate, the land-based type 515 radar adopted for naval use onboard type 051 destroyers was too big to be installed on smaller frigates, so an alternative had to be sought. type 514 mobile 2-d air search radar already in service with planaf was more compact than type 515, and was thus selected as an emergence stopgap measure until more advanced radar became available for chinese frigates urgently needed air defense radars at the time. development of the naval version of type 514 radar begun in september 1964, and because it was based on the matured land-based version, development was very smooth and completed in the first half of the following year. in july 1965, the radar entered series production and delivered to plan. however, type 514 was only aboard these early chinese frigates for a very short period of time, when type 354 entered series production in april 1974, it soon replaced all type 514 radars on chinese ships.  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
deergha sumangali bhava is a 1998 telugu-language drama film directed by s. v. krishna reddy starring rajasekhar and ramyakrishna. this is the story of a married woman who dumps her husband for her career in the glamour world, and later realized that she has lost her good old life. s. v. krishna reddy prepared this story based on a letter received by him.  plot vani (ramya krishna) is the only daughter of a school headmaster satyanarayana a.k.a. satyam (dasari narayana rao). he brings her up with discipline. his family and friends jokingly call him  james bond because of his steadfast behavior. ramarao (rajasekhar) works in an office owned by s. p. balasubrahmanyam, who is also a close friend of satyam.  vani always dreams of living a rich life though her father advocates a simple life. one day, she happens to see ramarao in his boss's car when he goes to a bank to withdraw money. another time she finds him in a jewellery shop on behalf his boss again. she thinks that he might be a rich person and falls in love with him. meanwhile, s. p. b thinks that ramarao would be a good match for vani and inquires about his habits on behalf of satyam. later he reveals it to satyam, to which he gladly accepts. vani is also happy that she is marrying the one she loved. after the marriage, she realizes that ramarao is just a normal employee, but she somehow satisfied with married life and gives birth to a baby boy.  later she will accidentally meet her old college friend who works as an organizer for films. he advises her to leave her family life and come with him so that she can gain the name and fame which she used to dream before marriage. vani leaves the house with out the notice of her family thinking that they might obstruct her. this incident brings her family suffer a lot in the society.  how ever ramarao tries to bring her back but it is in vain. later ramarao remarries sita due to the compulsion of vani's parents and start a normal life again. during the course of time vani loses her fame due to new comers in the industry. due to lack of work and feeling lonely vani tries to go back but finds that her presence is not needed for her family.  finally realizing her lost days she attempts for suicide. feeling that none should get as
of her she writes a letter to a film director regarding her life and meets her husband to say sorry and dies in his hands. the film ends on reaching the letter to the director.  cast  rajasekhar as rama rao  ramya krishna as vani  prema as seetha  dasari narayana rao as satyanarayana  s. p. balasubrahmanyam as satyanarayana's friend  prithivee as prakash  kota srinivasa rao as kotaiah  brahmanandam as kotaiah's son  a. v. s. as devudu  ali  m. s. narayana as kotaiah's servant  annapoorna as vani's mother  subbaraya sharma  siva parvati  sana as vani's friend  soundtrack  references  external links     deergha sumangali on youtube  1998 films telugu-language films indian films indian romantic drama films films directed by s. v. krishna reddy films scored by s. v. krishna reddy indian films based on actual events 1990s telugu-language films films set in mumbai
the 2016 gimcheon open atp challenger is a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. it is the third edition of the tournament which is part of the 2016 atp challenger tour. it takes place in gimcheon, korea between 18 and 24 july 2016.  singles main draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   kim young-seok   park ui-sung   seol jae-min   shin sanhui  the following player received entry as an alternate:   sidharth rawat  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   nam hyun-woo   daniel yoo   wang chuhan   max purcell  doubles main draw entrants  seeds  1 rankings as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants  the following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:  temur ismailov /  park ui-sung  champions  singles    max purcell def.  andrew whittington, 3-6, 7-6(8-6), 5-1 retired  doubles    hsieh cheng-peng /  yang tsung-hua def.  nicolas barrientos /  ruben gonzales, walkover  references itf website  external links  gimcheon open atp challenger 2016 in south korean tennis gimcheon open atp challenger
cylindrepomus rubriceps is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by per olof christopher aurivillius in 1907. it is known from borneo, java and sumatra.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1907
andrew huang may refer to:   andrew huang (hacker) (born 1975), american hacker  andrew huang (musician) (born 1984), canadian musician  andrew thomas huang, chinese-american artist and director
satan's blade is a 1985 american slasher film directed by  l. scott castillo, jr. it follows two groups of people lodging at a mountain resort who are stalked by a mysterious killer potentially linked to a supernatural entity in the mountains. shot in 1980 in big bear, california, satan's blade was released on vhs in 1985, and later received blu-ray releases by olive films in the united states in 2015, and by arrow films in the united kingdom in 2016.  plot a pair of female bank robbers make off with $50,000 after they kill two bank tellers in cold blood. they lay low at a snowy mountain cabin resort while waiting to rendezvous with their partner, george. as they wait, one of the robbers gets greedy and shoots the other. she plans to do the same to george when he arrives, but she doesn't get the chance, as she's stabbed in the back by an unseen assailant while dragging her ex-partner's body. ben, the local sheriff, and another officer arrive at the cabin after gunfire is reported, and discover the bodies.  the next day, two married couples arrive at the resort to celebrate one of the men's (tony) graduation from law school and passing of the bar examination. simultaneously, a group of college girls also arrive with a friend whose father has recently died. despite being told of the murders and a local legend about a murderous mountain man who comes from the bottom of a nearby lake, the college girls decide to take the cabin, which is right next door to where the married couples are staying.  during the night, one of the young women has a nightmare of a man murdering her and everyone else. the following day, one of the college women, stephanie, meets tony on the lake, and the two talk. stephanie ends up spending the afternoon with tony, while her friends stay back at their cabin. that night, an unseen killer enters the girls' cabin and systematically stabs each of them to death.  stephanie returns to the cabin later in the evening and discovers all of her friends have been murdered. she retreats to tony and his friends' cabin, which the killer eventually breaches, murdering everyone inside except for stephanie, who hides under a bed. the following morning, she emerges from the cabin and meets sheriff ben, who embraces her before stabbing her in the stomach. when she asks him why, he admits that he simply wanted the money stowed in the cabin, and that he didn't want to hurt anyone; however, he alternately explains
that he is possessed and brandishes a knife that is a talisman. stephanie flees back into the cabin, but ben follows, chasing her up the staircase, where he tackles her to the floor and stabs her to death. afterwards, ben throws the knife in the lake.  later, a hand emerges from the lake and throws the knife back out, the blade sticking in the side of a tree. a man hiking through the woods notices the knife and dislodges it from the tree bark.  cast  production  satan's blade took director l. scott castillo, jr. years to finish and get released. the film was shot in big bear, california in the spring of 1980 over a period of 33 days.  release satan's blade was released on vhs in the united states by prism entertainment in october 1985. diabolique magazine stated that following the film's release, it "mostly existed as a forgotten relic of the vhs era."  olive films released satan's blade on blu-ray in the united states on may 12, 2015. this release of the film runs 82 minutes in length.  in the united kingdom, the film was submitted for approval by the british board of film classification (bbfc) in 2016. this version approved by the bbfc was cut at 79 minutes. there, it subsequently received a blu-ray and dvd combination release from arrow films, which runs approximately 83 minutes.  reception in his book the gorehound's guide to splatter films of the 1980s, scott aaron stine stated that "despite cut-rate acting, stilted dialogue, and sometimes-tedious direction, satan's blade is surprisingly engaging." his review concluded that the film was "pretty typical b-grade slasher fare, even though it's more representative of '70s horror than '80s fare." in legacy of blood: a comprehensive guide to slasher movies, jim harper notes: "despite the promise of legendary creatures and supernatural goings-on, this is standard stalk'n'slash stuff, with plenty of point-of-view shots to (unsuccessfully) obscure the killer's identity."  joe yanick of diabolique magazine wrote: "satan's blade is firmly entrenched in a genre of so-bad-their-good films and it's hard to see how many would flock to this movie without a heavy veneer of irony. this is where the film is the most charming, however, because the film's many failures work in the viewer's favors." on a scale of 1
to 10, horrornews.net awarded the film a rating of 6/10. the reviewer noted the film's poor acting, audio, lighting, and film quality; but further stated, "unless you are a fan of old school low budget slasher films, this may not be the film for you. otherwise, it is a good example of the genre and the time period." hysteria lives! rated the film a negative 1.5 out of 5 stars, stating that although the film had its moments, it was essentially a zero budget copy of the first two friday the 13th films.  references  sources  external links        1985 films 1985 horror films 1980s slasher films american films american supernatural horror films american slasher films english-language films films set in country houses films set in forests films shot in big bear lake, california
hilda gertrude abbott (; 9 september 1890 - 26 may 1984) was the wife of the former administrator of the northern territory, charles lydiard aubrey abbott. she is best known her contribution to the northern territory's red cross branch.  early life  abbott was born at eucumbene station, near adaminaby, new south wales on 9 september 1890. she was the daughter of australian grazier john joseph harnett.  life in darwin abbott arrived in darwin, northern territory in 1937 with her husband charles lydiard aubrey abbott, who was the administrator of the northern territory from 1937 to 1946. during that period she became known as the "first lady". hilda wrote numerous newspaper and magazine articles. in 1946 the red cross named one its buildings "hilda abbott cottage" in her honour.  hilda had previously worked for the red cross in cairo. after moving to darwin, she revived the local branch of the red cross, as its president.  she left for new south wales in 1946. she explored and documented on film the aboriginal cave paintings of kimberley and arnhem land in the 1950s and 1960s, and lectured on australian topics.  abbott's diaries, "good night, all about: reminiscence of life in darwin and the northern territory 1937-1946", were published in 2015 by the historical society of the northern territory.  darwin red cross in darwin the red cross is rendered war-time service to the members of the three services. besides giving comforts to men in hospital, members of the red cross emergency service and help in the hospitals. business girls de-vote several hours each evening to helping and enthusiastically attended.  references  1890 births red cross personnel 1984 deaths 19th-century australian women 20th-century australian women
vanguard was an american thoroughbred racehorse. ridden by tom costello, he won the 1882 preakness stakes.  references  thoroughbred family 4-r racehorses bred in kentucky racehorses trained in the united states 1879 racehorse births preakness stakes winners byerley turk sire line
clarence a. lamoreux (september 20, 1860 - december 5, 1945) was an american lawyer, judge, and politician.  born in portage county, wisconsin, lamoreux lived in dodge county, wisconsin from 1861 until 1880. he then moved to cumberland, wisconsin in 1880. he was admitted to the wisconsin bar in 1881. lamoreux was the editor of the cumberland herald newspaper from 1881 to 1884. he also served as postmaster for cumberland, wisconsin. lamoreux moved to ashland, wisconsin and continued to practice law. from 1897 to 1901, clarence lamoreux served in the wisconsin state senate and was a republican. lamoreux also served as the ashland county judge. lamoreux died in a hospital in ashland, wisconsin from a heart ailment.  notes  1860 births 1945 deaths people from portage county, wisconsin people from dodge county, wisconsin people from cumberland, wisconsin people from ashland, wisconsin editors of wisconsin newspapers wisconsin lawyers wisconsin republicans wisconsin state court judges wisconsin state senators wisconsin postmasters 19th-century american newspaper editors 19th-century american lawyers
the origin of violence (french title:  l'origine de la violence) is a 2016 franco-german drama film directed by elie chouraqui, based on the prix renaudot-winning novel of the same name by fabrice humbert. the film won the best narrative audience award at the philadelphia jewish film festival 36.  cast    stanley weber as nathan wagner in 2014  cesar chouraqui as david nathan wagner in 1937 / adrien fabre in 1962  richard berry as adrien fabre in 2014  miriam stein as gabi in 2014  catherine samie as clementine fabre in 2014  michel bouquet as marcel fabre in 2014  romaine cochet as virginie in 1937  christine citti as marguerite fabre in 1937  didier bezace as the father in 1937  jean sorel as charles wagner in 2014  joseph joffo as kolb in 2014  david kammenos as kolb in 1941  martin peillon as charles wagner in 1937  gabriel washer as marcel fabre in 1937  jeanne cremer as clementine fabre in 1937  lars eidinger as dr. erich wagner  nikola kastner as ilse koch  matthias gall as karl koch  vladislav grakovskiy as heinrich himmler  christopher reinhard as martin sommer  tino ranacher as deportee  references  external links     2016 films 2016 drama films french-language films german-language films french drama films french films german drama films german films films based on french novels drama films based on actual events films directed by elie chouraqui
korean reinsurance company (commonly known as korean re) is a reinsurance company based in seoul, south korea. korean re's shares are listed on the korea stock exchange. as of 2016, it ranks as the world's 10th largest reinsurer in terms of gross written premiums.  history founded in 1963 as a state-funded enterprise, korean re was privatised in 1978.   in october 2002, it was nominated as 'reinsurance company of the year' by asia insurance review. in may 2010, korean re was selected as "emerging market player of the year" by reinsurance magazine.  business korean re has a diversified underwriting portfolio that consists of personal business (long-term, motor, and life reinsurance) and commercial lines (property, marine, casualty, and bond reinsurance). over the last decade korean re has expanded into overseas markets. as of 2015, more than 22% of its gross written premiums were generated from abroad. korean re has a network of one branch office in singapore, two subsidiaries in hong kong and london, and five international liaison offices.  korean re's gross written premiums for 2015 increased by 6.6% usd 5,580.2 million, recovering from the slowing trend over the previous two years. this growth was driven by an increase in personal lines, such as long term and life insurance. a strong rebound in premium income from overseas property and casualty treaties also bolstered the overall top-line growth. korean re expected to see its net profit for 2016 hit a new high on growing demand for its reinsurance packages from top insurance companies.  korean re has been seeing an increase in the number of new contracts with top insurers after standard & poor's raised its credit rating by one notch to a from a- in 2014. s&p hiked the rating two years ago when korean re successfully increased capital by issuing $200 million worth hybrid securities for the first time.  references  reinsurance companies financial services companies established in 1963 south korean companies established in 1963 companies based in seoul companies listed on the korea exchange insurance companies of south korea
roman lyubimov (born 6 january 1992) is a russian professional ice hockey player who is currently an unrestricted free agent. he most recently played with ak bars kazan of the kontinental hockey league (khl).  playing career as a youth, lyubimov played in the 2005 quebec international pee-wee hockey tournament with a team from moscow. he later played exclusively within the development program of hc cska moscow from the age of 15. he played the first six seasons of his pro career for cska in the khl. undrafted, and following the 2015-16 season, he agreed to sign a one-year, entry-level contract with the philadelphia flyers on 11 july 2016.  in the ensuing 2016-17 season, lyubimov remained with flyers through training camp to make the opening night roster. as a depth forward for the flyers, lyubimov appeared in 47 games totaling 4 goals and 6 points. with his rights retained by the flyers, lyubimov opted to return to cska after his solitary season in north america by signing a three-year contract on july 3, 2017.  prior to the 2018-19 season, lyubimov was released from his contract with cska in order to sign a two-year deal with metallurg magnitogorsk on august 23, 2018. following the conclusion of his contract with metallurg, lyubimov continued in the khl by signing a one-year deal as a free agent with hc spartak moscow on 10 may 2020. in the following 2020-21 season, lyubimov split the season between spartak, registering 5 points in 25 games, and ak bars kazan, featuring in 9 games for 2 assists.  remaining with ak bars in the following pre-season, lyubimov left the club by mutual consent prior to the 2021-22 season on 28 august 2021.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  awards and honors  references  external links    1992 births living people ak bars kazan players hc cska moscow players metallurg magnitogorsk players hc spartak moscow players sportspeople from tver philadelphia flyers players russian ice hockey forwards undrafted national hockey league players
matthew "matt" delisi is an american criminologist, author, forensic consultant, and distinguished professor in the department of sociology at iowa state university, where he is also coordinator of criminal justice and a faculty affiliate of the center for the study of violence.  education delisi received his b.a. in policy studies from syracuse university and his ph.d. in sociology from the university of colorado.  research delisi's research focuses on multiple areas in the field of criminology, such as career criminals, homicide, temperament, inmate behavior, adverse childhood experiences, developmental psychopathology, psychopathy, and the self-control theory of crime. he has published studies on the economic costs of murders in the united states and on the relationship between violent video games and criminal behavior.  his books include:  •	matt delisi. (2005). career criminals in society. thousand oaks, ca: sage.  •	matt delisi. (2006). criminal justice: balancing crime control and due process. dubuque, ia: kendall/hunt. second edition. (2008). third edition. (2011). fourth edition. (2018).  •	matt delisi. (2013). criminal psychology. san diego, ca: bridgepoint education.   •	matt delisi. (2015). homicide. dubuque, ia: kendall/hunt. second edition. (2020).  •	matt delisi. (2016). psychopathy as unified theory of crime. new york, ny: palgrave macmillan.   •	matt delisi. (ed.). (2019). the routledge international handbook of psychopathy and crime. new york, ny: routledge.  •	robert m. regoli, john d. hewitt, and matt delisi. (2008). delinquency in society: youth crime in the 21st century, seventh edition. new york, ny: mcgraw-hill. (8th edition, 2010); 9th edition, 2013;      10th edition, 2016; 11th edition, 2021. burlington, ma: jones & bartlett.          •	robert m. regoli, john d. hewitt, and matt delisi. (2011). delinquency in society: the essentials. boston, ma: jones & bartlett.   •	chad r. trulson, darin r. haerle, jonathan w. caudill, and matt delisi. (2016). lost causes: blended sentencing, second chances, and the texas youth commission. austin, tx: university of texas
press.  •	alexander t. vazsonyi, daniel j. flannery, and matt delisi (eds.). (2018). the cambridge handbook of violent behavior and aggression, second edition. new york, ny: cambridge university press.    •	john paul wright and matt delisi. (2015). conservative criminology: a call to restore balance to the social sciences. new york, ny: routledge.   •	matt delisi and michael g. vaughn. (eds.). (2015). the routledge international handbook of biosocial criminology. new york, ny: routledge.  •	matt delisi and michael g. vaughn. (eds.). (2015). biosocial criminology: critical concepts in criminology (volumes i-iv). new york, ny: routledge. 	volume i: conceptual and empirical foundations 	volume ii: neurological approaches 	volume iii: genetic approaches 	volume iv: socio-legal and criminal justice applications  •	michael g. vaughn, matt delisi, and holly c. matto. (2014). human behavior: a cell to society approach. hoboken, nj: john wiley & sons.   •	matt delisi and kevin m. beaver (eds.). (2011). criminological theory: a life-course approach. boston, ma: jones & bartlett. second edition. (2014).  •	matt delisi and peter j. conis. (2009). american corrections: theory, research, policy, and practice. sudbury, ma: jones & bartlett. second edition. (2012). third edition. (2018).  •	matt delisi and peter j. conis (eds.). (2008). violent offenders: theory, research, public policy, and practice. sudbury, ma: jones & bartlett. second edition. (2012). third edition. (2018).  honors, awards and editorial activities delisi received numerous awards for teaching excellence and research achievement. delisi has been a fellow of the academy of criminal justice sciences since 2012.  references  external links  american criminologists iowa state university faculty living people syracuse university alumni university of colorado alumni academic journal editors year of birth missing (living people)
vojislav nanovic (1922-1983) was a serbian and yugoslav screenwriter and film director. nanovic directed the first feature film from modern-day north macedonia.  selected filmography  the magic sword (1950)  frosina (1952)  the gypsy girl (1953)  references  bibliography   cornis-pope, marcel & neubauer, john. history of the literary cultures of east-central europe: junctures and disjunctures in the 19th and 20th centuries: types and stereotypes. john benjamins publishing company, 2010.  external links     1922 births 1983 deaths film people from skopje yugoslav film directors yugoslav screenwriters 20th-century screenwriters
is a japanese former professional baseball infielder.  he played for the nippon-ham fighters in the pacific league from 1994 to 1998.  references  living people 1972 births people from nerima japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball infielders nippon ham fighters players
dfs ("dfs group") is a hong kong-based travel retailer of luxury products. established in 1960, its network consists of over 420 locations, including duty-free stores in 12 major airports and 23 downtown galleria stores, as well as affiliate and resort locations. it is privately held and majority owned by the luxury conglomerate moet hennessy louis vuitton (lvmh), alongside dfs co-founder and shareholder robert warren miller. as of january 11, 1997, dfs group operates as a subsidiary of lvmh.  dfs is headquartered in hong kong sar and has offices in australia, cambodia, mainland china, france, indonesia, italy, japan, macau, new zealand, singapore, united arab emirates, united states of america and vietnam. dfs group employs over 5,000 people, operating in 14 countries worldwide. in 2017, nearly 160 million travelers visited dfs stores.  history  beginnings  in 1960, american entrepreneurs charles feeney and robert warren miller founded tourists international, which later became duty free shoppers (dfs), in hong kong. minority owners included alan parker with a 20% stake, and anthony m. pilaro who held 2.5%. the entrepreneurs anticipated the growing spending power of military servicemen as well as the rise of international travelers from asia, following vast improvements in international air travel after world war ii. in 1962, two dfs stores were opened at the international airports in hong kong and honolulu, the first duty-free shop in the united states.  expansion and re-branding  in the 1960s and 1970s dfs group significantly expanded their operation in eurasia and north america. dfs capitalized on the rising wave of asian tourists who began to travel further overseas, opening stores in international airports and later in downtown locations where travelers have their purchases delivered before departure. in 1968, dfs opened its first downtown duty-free store in kowloon, hong kong, followed shortly thereafter by honolulu and eventually expanding to 14 locations all over the world. in 2005, branded halls opened in okinawa, japan, launching a new shop-in-shop concept for dfs gallerias.  in 2010, dfs university was established for enhancing the expertise of its sales associates.  in 2013 dfs reached 420 locations worldwide and undertook a major branding initiative setting the stage for the next generation of expansion. it re-branded its downtown galleria stores "t galleria" and moved to a strategy of localization for airports, working with local suppliers to increase its mix of "destination" products. in 2015 dfs opened its first transformational wines and spirits
duplex store at singapore changi airport, including a long bar by raffles. in the same year, it also launched t galleria beauty by dfs, a standalone beauty concept store in hong kong and macau.  in 2016 dfs expanded its operations, opening t galleria angkor in siem reap, cambodia, a significantly extended space at t galleria by dfs, city of dreams in macau, and its first european store, t fondaco dei tedeschi in venice, italy. in 2017 it announced plans to open in paris in 2020 within the renovated la samaritaine complex.  in january 2021, benjamin vuchot returned to dfs as chairman and ceo after three years as president of sephora asia. both dfs and sephora are businesses under lvmh's selective retailing division.  in january 2021, dfs opened its first downtown duty-free store in hainan island, china, in partnership with shenzhen duty free group.  within a few months, dfs also announced that it would open two new galleria stores in oceania by the end of 2022: one in brisbane, australia, and another in queenstown, new zealand.  in june 2021, despite the tourism downturn caused by the covid-19 pandemic, dfs opened its most significant and ambitious store to date, samaritaine paris pont-neuf in the heart of the french capital. the 150-year-old building, which was meticulously restored over 16 years, was inaugurated on june 21 by french president emmanuel macron and lvmh group head bernard arnault.  acquisition  in 1996, lvmh acquired the majority share of dfs group, buying out  partners feeney, parker, and pilaro and setting a new focus on the combined elements of travel and luxury. it developed a merchandising strategy based around five core "pillars" -  beauty and fragrances; fashion and accessories; watches and jewelry; spirits, wine and tobacco; and food and gifts - and a new tagline, "the traveler's luxury department store". it also created an annual "masters series", showcasing the best products across all its categories and convening leading brand representatives, top customers, media and industry analysts in a celebration of luxury. in 2004, the company moved its headquarters to hong kong from san francisco, california as part of a corporate restructure.  locations  dfs group operates approximately 420 duty-free boutiques at 12 international airports, 23 downtown galleria stores and several resort locations around the world.  greater china   times df x dfs haikou mission hills duty-free complex, hainan, china
t galleria by dfs, canton road, hong kong  t galleria by dfs, tsim sha tsui east, hong kong  t galleria beauty by dfs, causeway bay, hong kong  t galleria by dfs, city of dreams, macau  t galleria by dfs, shoppes at four seasons, macau  t galleria by dfs, studio city, macau  t galleria beauty by dfs, galaxy macau, macau  t galleria beauty by dfs, mgm cotai, macau  t galleria beauty by dfs, mgm grand, macau  t galleria beauty by dfs, wynn palace, macau  japan   t galleria by dfs, okinawa, japan  dfs, naha airport, okinawa, japan  tiat duty free, haneda international airport, tokyo, japan  jal duty free, narita international airport, tokyo, japan  asia (other)  t galleria by dfs, angkor, siem reap, cambodia  dfs, ngurah rai international airport, bali, indonesia  t galleria by dfs, bali, indonesia  t galleria by dfs, singapore  dfs, singapore cruise centre, tanah merah, singapore  dfs, singapore cruise centre, harbourfront, singapore  dfs, singapore changi airport, singapore  halong bay cruise terminal, ha long bay, vietnam  phu quoc international airport, phu quoc, vietnam  nasco duty free, noi bai international airport, hanoi city, vietnam  sasco duty free, tan son nhat international airport, ho chi minh city, vietnam  south pacific   t galleria by dfs, guam  dfs, saipan international airport, saipan  t galleria by dfs, saipan  north america   t galleria by dfs, honolulu, hawaii  dfs, honolulu international airport, honolulu, hawaii  dfs, kahului airport, kahului, hawaii  dfs, san francisco international airport, san francisco, california  dfs, los angeles international airport, los angeles, california  dfs, john f. kennedy international airport, new york city  australia and new zealand   t galleria, by dfs, cairns, australia  t galleria, by dfs, sydney, australia  t galleria by dfs, auckland, new zealand  europe   samaritaine paris pont-neuf by dfs, paris, france  t fondaco dei tedeschi, venice, italy  middle east   dfs, abu dhabi international airport, uae  awards and recognition  in 2017, dfs retained the san francisco international airport retail concession for a further  14 years. in 2015 dfs group was awarded "best technology platform" under the best
treasury and finance strategies in asia pacific category at the corporate treasurer awards. in 2017 it received the 19th duty-free news international (dfni) asia/pacific awards for travel-retail excellence.  see also  list of duty-free shops  references  external links     duty-free shops retail companies of hong kong retail companies established in 1960 1960 establishments in hong kong lvmh brands
santa toscana is a late-romanesque and early gothic-style, roman catholic church located in central verona, region of veneto, italy.  a church at the site affiliated with the benedictine order was established in the 11th century, and was adjacent to a cemetery. it was titled then santo sepolcro. in 1178 it was linked to the knights hospitaller. in 1342, they acquired the relics of santa toscana which were placed in an ark atop the main altar. the church was expanded, rebuilt and reconsecrated by 1489. the church suffered bombardment during world war ii.  references  toscana romanesque architecture in verona stefano roman catholic churches completed in 1489
mont-saint-aubert is a village of wallonia and a district of the municipality of tournai, located in the province of hainaut, belgium.   the village lies at the north side of tournai.  tournai former municipalities of hainaut (province) hainaut (province)
note: within this list, chinese encyclopedia translates leishu, a traditional chinese reference work that, unlike a modern encyclopedia with expressly written articles, consists of excerpts from primary texts arranged by categories. fascicle translates juan 卷 "scroll; fascicle; volume" for early (pre-20th century) encyclopedias and volume refers to modern encyclopedias.    encyclopedias lists of encyclopedias
luigi andreas mariano acquaviva (20 december 1812 - 29 september 1898) was an italian politician and general. he was born in naples to a noble family of the kingdom of two sicilies. he inherited the title of duke of atri from his father girolamo. he also the received the title of duke of nardo, count of conversano, castellana grotte and giulianova. he served in the senate of the kingdom of sardinia. he was a grand officer of the order of saints maurice and lazarus. he died in giulianova.  references  1812 births 1898 deaths 19th-century italian politicians 19th-century neapolitan people italian generals members of the senate of the kingdom of sardinia grand officers of the order of saints maurice and lazarus
sevenmile mountain may be a summit:  sevenmile mountain (arizona) in maricopa county, arizona  sevenmile mountain (texas) in bell county, texas  sevenmile mountain (virginia) in craig county, virginia
it began in the rain (finnish: se alkoi sateessa) is a 1953 finnish comedy thriller film directed by thure bahne and eddie stenberg and starring eila peitsalo, tauno palo and kaarlo halttunen.  the film's sets were designed by aarre koivisto.  cast  eila peitsalo as vuokko takala    tauno palo as captain kalervo karhi    kaarlo halttunen as vuokko's uncle - rural police chief   annikki arni   matti aulos as pastor    thure bahne as director    greta brotherus as herself    mauno enroth   tyyne haarla as woman waiting for an elevator    eva hellas as film star    paavo hukkinen as station manager   mauno hyvonen   ekke hamalainen  kurt ingvall   pentti irjala as police officer    kalevi kahra as soldier    eino kaipainen as chief constable    heikki kalliokoski as shadowing police officer    aarno karhilo as himself    heikki kataja as himself   kaisa kivitie as herself    valma kivitie as herself    kauko kokkonen as rompan eetu    keijo komppa as smuggler    arvo kuusla as police officer    toivo lahti as gentleman    varma lahtinen as kiosk vendor    kauno laine as film crew member    lennart lauramaa as police officer    kauko laurikainen as police officer    matti lehtela as inspector    heimo lepisto as lieutenant    leevi linko as cop    veikko linna as gentleman    esko mannermaa as soldier    uuno montonen as rural police chief of hyryla    leo nordberg as himself    otto noro as man in the train    matti oravisto as film star    esa pakarinen as third mister    martti romppanen as soldier    vilho ruuskanen as station manager    helmer salmi as antti    mikko sergejeff as cinematographer    paula talaskivi as herself    aimo tepponen   hannes veivo as cop    pentti viljanen as farmer of mattila    urho westman as newspaper vendor    eddie stenberg as liikkuva kylpyamme  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group
, 2000.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films finnish comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by eddie stenberg finnish black-and-white films
monstereophonic (theaterror vs. demonarchy) is the eighth studio album by the finnish hard rock band lordi, released on 16 september 2016. while the first half of the album includes classic lordi-style hard rock / heavy metal songs, the second half of the album, demonarchy, is conceptual and includes six or more minute songs. the band announced that the members' new costumes will be split in half, representing two sides of the album.  track listing  personnel   lordi  mr lordi - vocals, artwork, layout, guitars (tracks 9-14)  amen - guitars (tracks 2-7)  ox - bass  mana - drums, backing vocals, engineering  hella - keyboards  additional musicians  nalle - keyboards (additional)  ralph ruiz - narration (track 1)  peter lerche - lead guitars (track 14)  jonas olsson - stomp march (track 3)  tuomo saikkonen - vocals (track 6)  backing vocals  netta dahlberg  katri metso  tracy lipp  jarkko ahola  jessica love  dylan broda  production  nino laurenne - production, engineering, mixing  svante forsback - mastering  mikko rohman - engineering  miiro varjus - engineering  eero kokko - photography  charts  references   2016 albums lordi albums afm records albums
flatliners is a 2017 american science fiction psychological horror drama film directed by niels arden oplev and written by ben ripley. a stand-alone sequel to and remake of the 1990 film of the same name, it stars elliot page, diego luna, nina dobrev, james norton, and kiersey clemons. the story follows five medical students who attempt to conduct experiments that produce near-death experiences.  sony pictures released the film in the united states on september 29, 2017. it was negatively reviewed by critics, who generally remarked that it repeated the problems of the original in failing to do justice to its interesting premise, but it was a moderate box office success, grossing $45 million worldwide on a $19 million budget.  plot  a medical student, courtney, is obsessed with the idea of the afterlife. she invites fellow students jamie and sophia to join her in an experiment, in an unused hospital room: using defibrillation to stop her heart for sixty seconds while recording her brain. she assures them they would not be held responsible for any accidents. sophia is against this, but jamie does it anyway. after sixty seconds, they are unable to revive her. fellow student ray helps them resuscitate her. marlo, a rival of ray, arrives and learns of the experiment.  courtney begins to recall memories of past events such as her grandmother's recipe for bread. courtney experiences increased intelligence and euphoria, being suddenly able to play the piano after 12 years and answer questions in class perfectly. envious, jamie flatlines, but has a disturbing near-death experience as he meets his ex-girlfriend. marlo and sophia follow suit and flatline, for an increasing number of minutes. during sophia's turn they are nearly caught and flee the hospital and arrive at a party. courtney and jamie start seeing visions of past mistakes, but do not tell the others.  those who flatlined experience visions: courtney is haunted by her sister tessa, who died in a car crash she caused because she was using her phone. jamie is haunted by the baby of his ex-girlfriend whom he got pregnant and begged to get an abortion. marlo is haunted by a man named cyrus who died when she accidentally mixed up his medication, and sophia is haunted by a girl named irina whose life she ruined out of jealousy by hacking her phone and sending out her nudes. this allowed sophia to become valedictorian.  courtney, traumatised by her visions, records a message apologising for the consequences and admitting that her interest in flat
lining was due to the death of her sister, not for scientific discovery. she falls to her death from the fire escape of her apartment building after her sister's ghost pushes her off. the others are devastated when they learn of courtney's death, and realize they may be implicated if anyone discovers their experiments. after attempting to remove all notes and evidence from courtney's apartment, marlo is sent to the morgue to find courtney's phone. she is once again haunted by visions. on his boat, jamie again hears the cries of a baby and a woman weeping. he falls out of his boat and swims to the dock where a figure stabs him in his hand.  the group watches courtney's recording and find out that she had encountered similar hauntings. they come clean to the mistakes they made and come to the conclusion that the hauntings they're experiencing are hallucinations because of guilt from their sins, not paranormal beings. the only one who didn't flatline, ray, initially disbelieves what's happening.  the group takes action to stop the hallucinations by fixing their past mistakes. sophia visits irina to apologize, which irina accepts. jamie visits his ex-girlfriend and discovers she didn't get an abortion, but kept the baby; he apologizes and promises to provide for his son. ray and marlo get into a fight when ray finds out marlo covered up the real reason cyrus died and she refuses to come clean. marlo hallucinates being suffocated while driving and crashes her car. tired of being haunted by her hallucinations, marlo flatlines on her own in the hope of asking forgiveness of cyrus. ray, sophia and jamie rush to stop her. they resuscitate marlo after she sees an apparition of courtney, who tells marlo that she needs to forgive herself. later, marlo comes clean to the dean about cyrus's death and is held on probation. marlo, ray, sophia and jamie reminisce about courtney and celebrate their friendships in the little restaurant they hang out at, where there is a performance of the piano piece that courtney played. ray and jamie proposes a toast, honoring courtney.  cast  production in october 2015, elliot page was cast in the film. in february 2016, diego luna was added, with nina dobrev joining in april. in may 2016, kiersey clemons and james norton signed on for the film.  in july 2016, it was announced that kiefer sutherland, who starred in the original, would return in the new film. sutherland later disclosed that he was
reprising his role from the original film, adding that the new film is actually a sequel rather than a remake. despite the announcement, sutherland played a character with a different name than in the original, with no reference to the specific events of the previous film. in july 2016, charlotte mckinney also joined the cast.  principal photography began in early july 2016 in toronto, ontario primarily at cinespace film studios' kipling avenue facility, and concluded on september 7. the film went into post-production on october 4.  nathan barr composed the film score. the soundtrack was released by sony classical.  release  box office flatliners grossed $16.9 million in the united states and canada, and $28.1 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $45 million, against a production budget of $19 million.  in north america, the film was released alongside american made and 'til death do us part, as well as the wide expansion of battle of the sexes, and was projected to gross $8-12 million from 2,552 theaters in its opening weekend. it ended up debuting to $6.6 million, finishing 5th at the box office; even before factoring in inflation, the number was lower than the $10 million opening of the original film in 1990. in its second weekend the film dropped 42%, grossing $3.6 million.  critical response on review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 4% based on 76 reviews and an average rating of 3.53/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "flatliners falls flat as a horror movie and fails to improve upon its source material, rendering this reboot dead on arrival." on metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating to reviews, the film has a weighted average score of 27 out of 100 based 20 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "b-" on an a+ to f scale, while posttrak reported filmgoers gave it a 66% overall positive score and a 46% "definite recommend".  criticizing the repetitiveness of the scenes and lack of tension, peter travers of rolling stone called the film "even more witless and stupefyingly dull than the original." he gave it one star. ryan porter gave it one-and-a-half stars in the star, saying that like the original, it takes a solid premise and fails to develop it in an interesting or exciting way. he said the film's one
positive is the unintentional humor which results from the stupidity of several scenes and the earnestness with which the actors approach them. matt zoller seitz similarly said that "[the] premise [of the original flatliners], which could have opened the door to a visionary work of sci-fi horror, settled into a sort of gothic self-help drama groove, with the medical students realizing that the seemingly supernatural goings-on triggered by their experiments in 'flatlining' were manifestations of their past misdeeds. director niels arden oplev's remake ... sticks to that template, changing key details here and there while embracing a style that stirs every current horror movie visual cliche into a jagged paste." he also remarked that the obvious effort given by the entire cast could not overcome the contrived and cliched scares and melodrama. both travers and porter derided the visual effect of the afterlife scenes as cheap-looking and silly.  home media flatliners was released on digital hd on december 12, 2017, and on blu-ray and dvd on december 19, 2017 in canada, and on december 26, 2017 in the united states.  see also  a thousand deaths  notes  references  external links          2017 films 2017 horror films 2010s psychological drama films 2010s science fiction drama films 2010s science fiction horror films 2010s psychological horror films 2017 psychological thriller films 2010s supernatural horror films american films american sequel films american psychological drama films american psychological horror films american psychological thriller films american science fiction drama films american science fiction horror films american science fiction thriller films american supernatural horror films american supernatural thriller films columbia pictures films cross creek pictures films english-language films films about death films directed by niels arden oplev films set in 2008 films set in 2017 films produced by laurence mark films produced by michael douglas films scored by nathan barr films shot in toronto horror film remakes science fiction film remakes thriller film remakes medical-themed films near-death experiences in fiction 2017 drama films
wilhelm fenner (* 14 april 1891 in saint petersburg † after 1946)  was a german cryptanalyst, before and during the time of world war ii in the okw/chi, the cipher department of the high command of the wehrmacht, working within the main cryptanalysis group, and entrusted with deciphering enemy message traffic (cryptography). wilhelm fenner was considered an excellent organizer, an anti-nazi, an anti-bolshevik and a confirmed protestant and was known by colleagues as someone who was keen to continue working in cryptology after world war ii. to quote military historian david alvarez:  wilhelm fenner was the central figure in the evolution of the german cipher bureau between 1922 and 1939, and a major personality in the history of german communications intelligence in the interwar period. under his direction, the cipher bureau evolved into a highly professional communications intelligence service, which scored impressive cryptanalytic successes against the diplomatic and military systems of many countries.  personal life wilhelm was born on 14 april 1891 in saint petersburg. he was the sixth of seven children of heinrich gottlieb fenner and charlotte georgine fenner, born michaelsen. his father was the chief editor of the st. petersburgische zeitung, a german language daily newspaper published in saint petersburg, then the capital of the russian empire. the sixth of seven children, he was  home schooled for two years before he attended the evangelical lutheran anne school in st. petersburg from 1899, and completed his final examination with distinction in may 1909. in the autumn of 1910 he matriculated at the royal institute of technology in berlin (th) in berlin-charlottenburg and studied construction engineering, chemistry and metallurgy. in the summer of 1914, he passed his final examination.  wilhelm fenner was married on 11 january 1922 to elise sophie katharine von blanckensee, a daughter of the former prussian major general peter von blanckensee. they had two children, a son, siegwart heinrich (born 28 january 1923), who served as a lieutenant in world war ii, and was killed on 19 february 1945, and a daughter, ilse fredericki (born 24 july 1928).  first world war with the outbreak of the first world war, he had to drop out of college, and worked for a short time at siemens as an engineer, working to develop electrical systems for warships. he was drafted into military service on 1 december 1914, joining the 5th guards grenadiers, seeing service in russia, france and serbia and eventually joined the staff of the tenth army. after the armistice in november 1918, he remained under arms as
a member of one of the free corps battalions of demobilized soldiers who offered their services to political groups jockeying for political position in germany in the first months of peace. after the war, now with the rank of lieutenant, he remained in the military until 9 february 1920. when fenner returned to civilian life, he took a job as a publicist with an emigre assistance organization, but the position provided little interest and within the year, he took a position as an editor in a new press agency, which was founded by konstantin von krusenstern, who was a former colonel in the imperial russian army. the fledgling news agency collapsed, with krusenstern relocating to paris, but before he left, fenner's career took a decisive turn when the russian colonel introduced him to peter novopaschenny in the spring of 1921.  meeting novopaschenny and buschenhagen peter novopashenny was a former russian navy captain of the tsarist marine and professor of applied tactics. novopaschenny asked fenner to help him to move to berlin and confided in fenner that he had worked during the war as director of the russian cryptanalytic service working to break the ciphers of the german baltic fleet, and that he intended to make his experience available to the german general staff, under the terms of the treaty of versailles. in the same year, fenner provided him with contacts, eventually becoming an acquaintance of an officer called erich buschenhagen, who would later become a general in the wehrmacht. in 1919, buschenhagen had set up volunteer evaluation post which had been absorbed into germany's postwar military establishment as a cipher bureau of the army's troops department, which was allowed under the terms of the peace agreement.  establishment of reichswehr cipher bureau. as buschenhagen's cipher bureau was primary working on russian ciphers, he jumped at the change of using novopaschenny, but less so fenner, who knew little of russian ciphers. fenner became interested in the russian telegrams that novopaschenny was working on, and with his interest piqued, began the process of discovering the field of cryptanalysis. he was now working under the guidance of his "teacher", novopaschenny, a fruitful relationship, and together they were successful in breaking russian military ciphers. fenner's excellent command of the german and russian languages worked to his advantage, while novopaschenny, although an excellent cryptanalyst, spoke hardly any german. buschenhagen was particularly impressed when the pair decrypted a russian cipher that was
beyond the skill of the cipher bureau's own 4 person russian desk. in the autumn of 1922, he and novopaschenny were not only officially taken into the employment of the cryptanalysis group of the reichswehr (chi-point) by buschenhagen, but fenner was also appointed as head of the cryptanalysis section and assigned a staff of eleven. fenner was initially unimpressed by the cipher bureau personnel, output was modest with too narrow scope of operation, and cryptanalysts happy to decrypt three or four messages a day combined with lax work habits.  within the next years fenner changed the operation of his group significantly. from a chaotic assembly of creative "geniuses", he formed an analytical, systematic and disciplined unit of more, and more experienced, code breakers. in this process, fenner introduced a uniform, clear technical terminology into the field of cryptanalysis, laying the groundwork for further successes by his new employer. his first action was introducing formal training, conducted personal lectures describing various types of cryptographic systems. his actions bore fruit, and the number of successfully decrypted messages increased steadily. the group also grew in numbers, and fenner took the opportunity to train newcomers himself and transfer his own, now greatly developed, knowledge of cryptology to them. however, his growing leadership role caused him to start losing contact with the actual cryptanalytic work, and gained a reputation as a fearsome, arrogant pedant, which he dismissed as evidence the unit was being shaken out of its lethargy. by the mid 1920s, he had introduced a 90 training course for senior analysts which reviewed current systems and general principles. by the 1930s a fast track training course was introduced for talented newcomers that met twice a week and covered a two part course in cryptologic principles and practice.  as part of his process to professionalize the unit, he sought to gain recognition and establish career level status for his staff, as he was convinced that an staff member would serve the state loyally, if their well-being was undertaken by the state. as the arcane skills of his staff did not fit in any of the german career hierarchy, they were not considered career civil servants and so had no career progression, pensions nor job security. the process was long and arduous, beginning in the early 1920s and was fully completed until late 1939, with the outbreak of world war ii and shortly after establishment of the supreme command of the armed forces the chiffrierstelle was renamed the cipher department of the high command of the wehrmacht (okw/
chi), that the plan was approved by the chief of the supreme command of the wehrmacht, wilhelm keitel.  professionalism for fenner was always a means to an end. the whole process was about improved production and an expansion of operations.  on 4 april 1927 he was appointed a government councillor (regierungsrat). in addition to his management duties he increased contact and cooperation with friendly foreign groups in austria, hungary and finland, and later italy, spain and estonia he provided training, and wrote two treatises on cryptanalysis, namely grundlagen der entzifferung (fundamentals of code-breaking) and beitrag zur theorie der schieber (contribution to the theory of the strip cipher). he also worked on the enigma machine, then already in trial use by the reichswehr, pointing out cryptographic weaknesses, and making proposals for its improvement. by 1924, fenner had identified in the intercept traffic, 85 codes and ciphers, of which 22 has been attached and 16 had been cryptanalysed successfully. in june 1927, fenner went to finland to deliver a course of instruction to the members of the new fledgling service of the finish cipher bureau.  rivals pers z s was the civilian signal intelligence agency of the german foreign office. pers z s believed it has a monopoly on diplomatic communication traffic and was also a rival to reichswehr cipher bureau. it dealt specifically with diplomatic ciphers and relied on the german post office for diplomatic intercepts, who transmitted and received the encrypted communications from embassies located in germany, and across the world. the post service routinely retained copies of all embassy messages and passed the messages to per z s cryptanalysts for study and the post office only dealt with the foreign ministry. fenner argued that okw/chi needed diplomatic traffic as they included information of military interest and military analysts were more likely to identify such items in messages and understand their significance. he convinced his opposite number in the foreign office ministry kurt selchow, that cooperation would benefit both units. specifically, he promised selchow that as the okw/chi expanded and improved its radio monitoring network, the foreign ministry cryptanalysts would have access to all diplomatic messages intercepted. fenner also offered access to share other okw/chi materials and results. the result of the inter-agency collaboration was considered rare in a normally hostile and competitive german intelligence community.  nazi seizure of power within the reichswehr bureau, a small circle of nazi sympathizers became increasingly vocal. fenner had little patience with these people, who talked politics during extended coffee breaks and who flaunted their loyal
ties by smoking nazi party cigarettes, or occasionally missed work to participate in a jew raid.  after the seizure of power by the nazis in january 1933, the times became increasingly restless, and the situation worsened for the cipher bureau, which now felt the competition from newly established rival institutions. in 1933, for example, goering's new luftwaffe created its own intelligence agency, the forschungsamt. during this period fenner worried about the professionalism of the agency as the nazi party tried to extend their control over the intelligence and security agencies of the state.  many capable employees of the cipher bureau joined the new organisation, where they hoped for better career prospects. among these were cryptanalysts whom fenner considered excellent, their leader baron emil freiherr von reznicek, an ardent nazi and cryptanalyst assigned to the italian desk and herr weachter. reznicek was particularly annoyed that in the caste conscious world of german bureaucracy, he was a mere employee of the bureau, while fenner was a government councillor with a pensioner. gottfried schapper, a radio intelligence operator from world war i, who ran a unit in the bureau that was concerned with the location and construction of fixed intercept stations. hans schimpf was another. fenner may have been glad to see the malcontents go, but he quickly discovered he was not entirely rid of them. from either a desire to revenge themselves on their former employer or to expand their influence, schimpf and schapper informed fenner that the forschungsamt was now solely responsible for all diplomatic cryptanalysis and that the bureau should abandon all such work. this was of course a repeat of the last bureaucratic battle with the pers z s. however, fenner found an ally in kurt selchow, who realized that if successfully prosecuted, the forschungsamt's supposed monopoly on diplomatic cryptanalysis would mean the end of the foreign ministry. even though fenner managed to see off the threat, the forschungsamt staff started a campaign to have him relieved of duty, tapped his office phone, planted an informant in his office and started spreading rumours that he was jewish, and that he had ridiculed and criticized hermann goring in private conversations. fenner was forced to fill the resulting gaps with newcomers, necessarily having to forgo experience in favour of attitude in selection of candidates. fenner as a rule always recruited people who had not left the church and were not members of the nsdap.  during this time, fenner's bureau found it increasingly difficult to fend off competitors, with the german navies organization b-dienst and
the german armies intercept control station both cipher agencies. fenner actively opposed the army bureau, but could not block its creation. okw/chi was explicitly ordered to cease work on russian military ciphers, which fenner disobeyed ordering a small covert party to continue working on russian and french military systems. in the summer of 1933, he was promoted to senior councillor (). by the start of world war ii, he was a director of okw/chi () he could counteract the harmful poaching of staff, ensure suitable staff had a secure future, and place unsuitable people at the disposal of others.  the staff strength of the chiffrierstelle (okw/chi) had increased in 1939 to include over 200 employees, whereas only two years earlier there were about 40 personnel. in the ensuing war years until 1944 it quadrupled to 800. the wartime for fenner and his staff in the okw/chi was initially relatively peaceful and successful. the raw material, in the form of intercepted radio messages, was prolific; they concentrated on several hundred messages a day on the most important projects and had to ignore relatively unimportant sources. they had important decoding success (), for example, against france, in 1940, which aided the quick victory of the german armed forces in the west-"case red". also polish, russian and yugoslav messages could be deciphered.  impact of war while his section chief, colonel kettler, and the head of the main group a, major mettig, and also one of its best people, the head of the group iv, dr erich huttenhain, relocated to the north, fenner fled south with a selection of employees. on 23 april 1945, okw/chi was officially disbanded and the staff of the general of nachrichtenaufklarung (gdna) assumed their responsibilities. just before the american army reached their position (about 40 km south of salzburg), documents were burned or thrown into the salzach river. with the surrender of the wehrmacht on 8 may 1945, fenner moved to landshut and found employment as a bicycle and car mechanic in neighboring straubing.  witness at nuremberg war crimes trial in july 1946, fenner was charged as a witness for the nuremberg war crimes tribunal and in august transferred to the haus alaska, a cover name for hq 7707 european command intelligence center camp king, the us army's interrogation centre, oberursel (near frankfurt), and interned with other high-ranking germans. fenner was intensively interrogated by the army security agency (asa) and wrote a number of reports about his life
and work, including an autobiographical essay "the career of william fenner"-its english translation bearing the words top secret being filed in ticom archive: df-187. these documents were made publicly available in 2008.  literature  david alvarez: wilhelm fenner and the development of the german cipher bureau, 1922-1939. cryptologia. rose-hulman institute of technology. taylor & francis, philadelphia pa 31.2007,2 (april), pp. 152-163. issn 0161-1194.  friedrich l. bauer : decrypted secrets. methods and maxims of cryptology. 3rd revised and expanded edition. springer, berlin and others 2000 .  randy rezabek: ticom and the search for okw/chi. cryptologia. rose-hulman institute of technology. taylor & francis, philadelphia pa 37.2013,2 (april), pp. 139-153. issn 0161-1194.  references  1891 births pre-computer cryptographers german cryptographers history of cryptography history of telecommunications in germany telecommunications in world war ii year of death missing german military personnel of world war i
bruno antonio monteiro magalhaes (born 25 january 1982 in barcelos, braga district) is a portuguese former professional footballer who played as a midfielder.  references  external links  1982 births living people people from barcelos, portugal portuguese footballers association football midfielders liga portugal 2 players segunda divisao players s.c. braga b players g.d. ribeirao players g.d. chaves players s.c. freamunde players sc mirandela players
inishfarnard () meaning island of the tall fern is a small island and a townland off kilcatherine point, in county cork, ireland.  geography   near the northern tip of the island there are pleasant cliffs; the best landing place for boats (not suitable for kayaks) is located on the se side of the island, near a fish farm. freshwater, which was once available on the island, cannot be found anymore.  history  a small community of 24 used to live on the island, which is now uninhabited, with its old houses abandoned as well as the neighbouring fields.  fishing  inishfarnard is considered a good place for fishing. a fish farm now operates in the waters on the southeast of the island, it is operated by mowi.  see also   list of islands of ireland  references  islands of county cork uninhabited islands of ireland townlands of county cork
the following lists events that happened in 1947 in iceland.  incumbents president - sveinn bjornsson prime minister - olafur thors, stefan johann stefansson  events  births  20 february - eggert magnusson, businessman 4 march - gunnar hansen, actor (d. 2015) 29 june - agust guðmundsson, film director and screenwriter 24 august - olafur haukur simonarson, novelist and playwright 8 september - halldor asgrimsson, politician (d. 2015) 25 september - guðmundur sigurjonsson, chess grandmaster 26 october - gisli guðjonsson, professor of forensic psychology 31 october - gunnsteinn skulason, handball player.  deaths 12 september - thor philip axel jensen, danish entrepreneur who settled in iceland (b. 1863)  references    1940s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
ng-11, previously known as oa-11, is the twelfth flight of the northrop grumman robotic resupply spacecraft cygnus and its eleventh flight to the international space station under the commercial resupply services (crs-1) contract with nasa. the mission launched on 17 april 2019 at 20:46:07 utc. this is the last mission from the extended crs-1 (phase 1) contract; follow-up missions are part of the crs-2 contract. cygnus ng-11 was also the first mission to load critical hardware onto cygnus within the last 24 hours prior to launch, a new antares feature.  orbital atk and nasa jointly developed a new space transportation system to provide commercial cargo resupply services to the international space station (iss). under the commercial orbital transportation system (cots) program, then orbital sciences designed and built antares, a medium-class launch vehicle; cygnus, an advanced maneuvering spacecraft, and a pressurized cargo module which is provided by orbital's industrial partner thales alenia space. northrop grumman purchased orbital in june 2018; its atk division was renamed northrop grumman innovation systems.  concurrently, nepalese satellite nepalisat-1 and sri lankan satellite raavana 1 were launched as part of cygnus ng-11 as deployable payloads.  history  cygnus ng-11 is part of an extension program that enables nasa to cover the iss resupply needs until the commercial resupply services 2 contract enters in effect. the mission launched on 17 april 2019, at 20:46:07 utc from wallops island, virginia.  spacecraft   production and integration of cygnus spacecraft is performed in dulles, virginia. the cygnus service module is mated with the pressurized cargo module at the launch site, and mission operations are conducted from control centers in dulles, virginia and houston, texas. this will be the eighth flight of the enhanced-sized cygnus pcm.  the spacecraft for the ng-11 is named the s.s. roger chaffee after roger chaffee who lost his life during training for the apollo 1 mission. on 17 april 2019 at 20:46:07 utc, antares launched the ng-11 mission to the international space station from wallops island, virginia.  manifest  total weight of cargo: , consisting of  in pressurized cargo and  in unpressurized cargo.   crew supplies:   science investigations:   spacewalk equipment:   vehicle hardware:   computer resources:   northrop grumman-related equipment:   smallsats deployed during ng-11:
aerocube 10a (jimsat) and 10b (dougsat) by the aerospace corporation  aeternitas, ceres, and libertas, three cubesats in the virginia cubesat constellation, launched as part of nasa's elana-26 mission, developed by old dominion university, virginia tech, and the university of virginia, respectively.  entrysat  iod-1 gems (in-orbit demonstration - global environmental monitoring satellite)  kraksat, a cubesat created by polish students from agh university of science and technology and jagiellonian university  sassi2 (student aerothermal spectrometer satellite of illinois and indiana)  seeker, a free-flying nasa cubesat for vehicle inspection  spooqy 1  swiatowid, a cubesat by satrevolution  60 × thinsats in 12 strings, experimental miniature satellites built by school children and university students  uguisu, raavana 1, and nepalisat-1, 1u cubesats developed by students in japan, sri lanka, and nepal, respectively, as part of the birds-3 project  new hardware, known as the thermal amine scrubber, the first exploration eclss tech demonstration aboard iss, which will be activated in april 2019 and scrub additional co2 from the iss atmosphere.  see also   uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references   cygnus (spacecraft) supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft launched in 2019 spacecraft launched by antares rockets spacecraft which reentered in 2019
talk back is the debut album from american rapper kembe x. it was released on july 15, 2016 on itunes, spotify, and tidal.  background the album was produced by bentley hazelwood, hippie sabotage, the antydote, crooklin, dj fu, aaron bow, and teddy walton. guest features include long time friend, alex wiley, as well as zacari p and romeo testa.  singles on november 2, 2015, kembe x released the first single from talk back titled "buried alive", with the title track coming out the following week. on january 6, 2016, the third single "squad day (work week)" was released. in june, two more songs, "10 feet tall" and "welcome to america", were released to further promote the project.  critical reception  writing for exclaim!, leandre nawej praised the album's "distinct sense of self-awareness and social commentary".  track listing  references  kembe x albums 2016 debut albums
linda burnes bolton is an american nurse and healthcare administrator. she is the vice president and chief nursing officer at cedars-sinai medical center and has served as president of the american academy of nursing, the american organization of nurse executives and the national black nurses association. she is a member of the national academy of medicine.  biography burnes bolton grew up in tucson and became interested in nursing at the age of seven, having suffered from severe asthma and requiring frequent hospitalizations. she earned an undergraduate nursing degree from arizona state university. she completed three graduate degrees at ucla - master's degrees in nursing and public health and a doctorate in public health. she is the vice president for nursing, chief nursing officer, and director of nursing research at cedars-sinai medical center.  burnes bolton is a past president of the american academy of nursing, the american organization of nurse executives (aone) and the national black nurses association. she served as vice-chair of the institute of medicine committee on the future of nursing. she was named to the board of trustees at case western reserve university in 2007. in 2012, she was elected a trustee of the robert wood johnson foundation. burnes bolton is on the editorial board of the american journal of nursing.  before she was elected president of the aone, the organization presented her with its lifetime achievement award. in 2011, modern healthcare named her to its top 25 women in healthcare. she received an honorary doctorate from the suny upstate medical university in 2015. that year, she was elected to the national academy of medicine. she won the 2016 professional achievement award from the ucla alumni association and was the 2016 recipient of the trust award from the american hospital association.  references  living people american nursing administrators arizona state university alumni ucla school of nursing alumni people from tucson, arizona ucla school of public health alumni year of birth missing (living people) american women nurses 21st-century american women
the juvenile classic is a greyhound racing competition held annually at the kingdom greyhound stadium in tralee, county kerry, ireland.   it was inaugurated in 2007 and therefore is a relatively new event but due to the significant winners prize money on offer (€15,000 in 2016) it stands as a feature event in the irish racing calendar.  the competition is only open to juveniles.  the 2020 event was cancelled due to covid-19 and the 2021 event did not produce starting prices because of lockdown restrictions due to covid-19.  past winners  venues & distances 2007-present 	(tralee 525y)  sponsors 2007-2010 mike cronin readymix 2011-2019 gmhd (gallivan/murphy/hooper/dolan) insurances 2021-2021 greyhound & petworld  references  greyhound racing competitions in ireland sport in county kerry sport in tralee recurring sporting events established in 2007
the 2016-17 season was lille osc's 73rd season in existence and the club's 17th consecutive season in the top flight of french football.  this season lille participated in the 2016-17 uefa europa league as a result of a 5th place finish in the 2015-16 ligue 1.  lille finished mid-table this season. new manager riccardo del silva could not help the team with results, but did not get sacked.  players  squad information as of 30 august 2016  appearances and goals  last updated: 1 october 2016. source: match reports in competitive matches, ligue1.com  transfers  in  loans in  out  loans out  pre-season  competitions  ligue 1  league table  results summary  results by matchday  matches  coupe de france  coupe de la ligue  uefa europa league  third qualifying round  references  lille osc seasons lille osc
phil bateman (born 8 september 1962) is a british former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1962 births living people english male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from leeds
type 752 radar is a chinese navigational radar used by chinese merchant ships and ships of the chinese navy. developed by shanghai 4th radio factory in the mid-1960s, it's the first chinese navigational radar that utilizes transistors. the only vacuum tubes used in this radar system were in the transmitter and display. development began in 1965 and was completed in the following year. om 1969, an improved version type 752-jia (752甲) was developed. type 752 radar utilizes a slotted array antenna, which replaced the parabolic antenna previously used on earlier radars and the maximum range is 48 nautical miles. in addition to navigation and surface search, type 762 onboard chinese naval vessels is also used as low altitude surveillance radar. in addition to shanghai 4th radio factory, type 752 radar is also manufactured by shanghai 101st factory and by the end of 1990s, a total of 1705 were produced.  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
the 1967-68 houston mavericks season was the first season of the mavericks in the american basketball association. on february 2, 1967, houston was awarded a franchise for $30,000 with william whitmore, charles frazier and cloyce box being the buyers. later that year, t.s. morrow and bud adams, owner of a houston-based oil company and the afl's houston oilers bought box's interest in the team. morrow would be majority owner while adams was a minority owner. the team had less than stellar attendance, with 3,091 attending the first ever game versus the chaparrals on october 23, 1967 (losing 100-83). the lowest attended game was held on february 5, 1968, when only 575 people attended. the highest attended game was on february 29, 1968, with 4,965 attendance. despite all of this, the mavericks spiraled into the playoffs, in part due to 8 of the 11 teams in the new league being guaranteed a spot into the playoffs, with houston getting the final spot by 4 games. in the semifinals, they were swept by the dallas chaparrals in 3 games. this was their only playoff appearance in their two-year history.  roster   34 art becker - power forward   24 wilbert frazier - power forward	   20 hal hale - point guard  22 joe hamood - shooting guard  44 darrell hardy - forward  35 leary lentz - small forward  31 guy manning - small forward  14 dewitt menyard - center  44 wayne molis - center  21 jerry pettway - shooting guard  15 bob riedy - power forward  25 roger schurig - point guard  12 willie somerset - point guard  -- gary turner - forward  final standings  western division  record vs. opponents  playoffs  western division semifinals  mavericks lose series 3-0  awards and honors 1968 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 9, 1968)  art becker  dewitt menyard  references   mavericks on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1967-68 regular season and playoff results  houston mavericks page  houston mavericks houston houston mavericks, 1967-68 houston mavericks, 1967-68
steenberghe is a dutch and belgian surname that may refer to florentine steenberghe (born 1967), dutch field hockey midfielder jan van steenberghe (born 1972), belgian football goalkeeper johan van steenberghe (born 1956), belgian olympic swimmer max steenberghe (1899-1972), dutch politician  see also steenberg (surname) steenbergen (surname)  dutch-language surnames
the following is a list of characters from the mtv slasher television series scream and its third season, the vh1 series scream: resurrection, which are based on the film series of the same name. as of july 10, 2019, 30 episodes of scream have aired, concluding the series.  overview  main  recurring  main characters  scream (2015-2016)  emma duval  portrayed by willa fitzgerald, karsyn darby (young; season 1) and madison wolfe (young; season 1)   appeared in: seasons 1-2  emma duval is the main protagonist and is a student at george washington high school. she is the daughter of maggie (daisy) and kevin duval. originally a popular girl with no inhibitions, she is soon stalked by a killer, who threatens her and her friends. in the first-season finale, the killer is revealed to be emma's half-sister piper shaw, who began to terrorize emma because of her perfect life. emma manages to put an end to the rampage by shooting piper in the head, killing her. in the second season, emma returns after leaving lakewood to get psychological help and develops ptsd as a result of the first season's events. she has frequent hallucinations before again being targeted by a new killer.  willa fitzgerald's character was originally named harper but was changed when the official pilot script was written. fitzgerald was nominated at the teen choice awards for choice tv actress: summer but lost to ashley benson.  audrey jensen  portrayed by bex taylor-klaus  appeared in: seasons 1-2  the daughter of a lutheran pastor, audrey is one of emma's best friends and has a close friendship with her. she loves horror movies, and is known to be witty and bi-curious. throughout the first season, audrey was suspected of being involved in the killings. in the first-season finale, it is revealed that audrey and piper exchanged letters months prior to the murders, which indicate that she was connected to the killings. she, however, burns them, covering up her involvement. in the second season, she is stalked by the new killer who blackmails her over her involvement with piper. it is soon revealed that audrey is the reason piper first came to lakewood, but she was not involved in the killings.    taylor-klaus received critical acclaim as audrey jensen. rotten tomatoes named them as one of the most developed characters on the show.  noah foster  portrayed by john karna  appeared in: seasons 1-2  noah is
audrey's best friend and the duo are known as "bi-curious & the virgin". he is shown to be an expert on horror film tropes, and frequently applies them to his life after the killings begin. noah helps emma figure out some of the clues in the first season. in the second season, noah has a daily podcast called "the morgue", which he took over after piper shaw was unmasked as the lakewood slasher in the first season. he later begins a relationship with zoe vaughn. later, he is kidnapped and buried alive alongside zoe. while emma and audrey manage to save him, zoe dies before they can reach her. noah is devastated, and briefly considers shutting down "the morgue" before deciding to continue in zoe's memory. in the second-season halloween special, he partners with stavo to create a horror graphic novel, and goes to an island to reach the mystery of the murderess anna hobbs, where they (and the rest of the second season survivors) are stalked again by another killer.  karna received critical acclaim for his role and was especially noted for his horror dynamic.  kieran wilcox  portrayed by amadeus serafini  appeared in: seasons 1-2  kieran is a new kid in lakewood, after losing his mother and his stepfather in a car accident before the series, and grows a special bond with emma in the first season. he was suspected of being the killer but no evidence was found against him. in the first-season finale, kieran's father, clark hudson, is killed through disembowelment. kieran's cousin eli and aunt tina arrive after he is found living without an adult. in the second season, kieran is eventually revealed to be piper's accomplice in the killings. his motive is explained as he and piper were in a relationship and started a murder spree as revenge against their parents (piper for being put up for adoption while her half-sister, emma had the life piper should have had and kieran for his dad dumping him in atlanta with his mom to get high on pills). he continued to frame both emma and audrey for the murders to avenge piper. he is ultimately arrested and sentenced to life in prison; however, he is murdered by the new killer in the second-season halloween special episodes.  brooke maddox  portrayed by carlson young  appeared in: seasons 1-2  brooke is the sassy and blunt-spoken queen bee of george washington high, and is best friends with emma. she is the daughter of the town's mayor quinn maddox, with whom she has a strained
relationship (intensified after learning he had been illegally dealing with jake, and had also covered up the death of a drug addict friend of brooke's mother). initially appearing shallow, brooke is gradually shown to be more kinder and softer than her previous image suggested after her friend riley becomes a victim to the killer. during the first season, brooke is constantly attacked at a theatre stage and a bowling alley, and locked in a freezer, but manages to survive each encounter. in the first-season finale, jake becomes her new boyfriend. after his death in the second-season premiere, she develops a relationship with gustavo acosta. in the second-season finale, she was attacked by the new killer (kieran wilcox) in a movie theatre, being stabbed twice, but survived once again. following the death of her father and three months after the second-season finale, she moves in with gustavo and his father, miguel.  will belmont  portrayed by connor weil  appeared in: season 1  emma's former boyfriend, a jock who is friends with jake fitzgerald. he cheated on emma with nina patterson, an affair that lasted less than a month, resulting in their breakup. in "betrayed", he is assaulted and dragged away by the killer. in "in the trenches", emma, noah, brooke, and jake find an injured will at an abandoned bowling alley, and are later rescued. soon after, he is killed when farm equipment was rigged to slice his head open. his death causes emma, who witnessed the murder, to suffer from hallucinations of will, with his head split open, stalking her.  clark hudson  portrayed by jason wiles  appeared in: season 1  the sheriff of lakewood in the first season, as well as kieran wilcox's biological father. before the series begin, kieran moves in with him after his mother (clark's ex-wife) dies in a car crash with her new husband. he later starts dating maggie. in "the dance", he is kidnapped by the killer whilst chasing a lead. in the first-season finale, he is found dead by maggie and the police, tied to a tree. however, it turns out that he was disemboweled and quickly died from his injuries.  maggie duval portrayed by tracy middendorf, anna grace barlow (young; season 1) and caitlin ashley-thompson (young; season 2) appeared in: seasons 1-2   maggie is emma's mother, who is the town coroner. despite her closeness to her daughter, maggie
hides many secrets from her. her past is initially mysterious, but is gradually unraveled as the first season progresses. it turns out that maggie was nicknamed "daisy" and was the girl that brandon james was supposedly obsessed with, and started his killing spree because of. however, maggie is revealed to be a childhood friend and next door neighbor of brandon's. after discovering her then-boyfriend kevin duval was cheating on her, she slept with brandon. afterwards, brandon began his killing spree, murdering five students and wounding and traumatizing kevin. it is discovered near the end of the season that maggie became pregnant because of her fling with brandon, and she and her family left town to have the baby, who was given up for adoption at birth. maggie is later kidnapped by the killer and taken to a dock where brandon's killing spree ended. the killer lures emma there, and unveils themselves as piper shaw, who reveals herself to be maggie and brandon's daughter. when piper attacks emma, maggie frees herself and assaults piper, only to be stabbed in the stomach. piper is then shot and killed by audrey, who arrives at the scene, and emma. maggie survives the attack, as does emma. in the second season, she becomes involved in the investigation on the new murders. it is later revealed that she and miguel acosta discovered brandon alive after his supposed death at the dock, and hid him. later, she discovers notes placed on the tree in her backyard, and sends one back. in the second-season finale, maggie receives another one with blood on it.  zoe vaughn  portrayed by kiana brown  appeared in: season 2  first mentioned in the first season, zoe first appears in the second-season premiere. she is an intelligent student, who becomes noah's love interest. she turns out to be a fan of noah's podcast "the morgue" and is somewhat knowledgeable on horror movie tropes. however, she harbours a dark secret. she grew up with emma, but left shortly before the murders in the first season. in "let the right one in" zoe told noah her absence was because her mom bought her a therapist although she does not state why. however, it is implied that she attempted suicide as a result of feelings of loneliness and a lack of friends. she later participated in the town's teen beauty pageant, which she wins, and she later consummates her relationship with noah. soon after, she is kidnapped and trapped in a wooden box, which is dragged to the edge of wren lake. she dies
from drowning before audrey, emma, and noah could reach her. devastated yet determined to savor their time together, noah continues "the morgue" in zoe's memory.  stavo acosta  portrayed by santiago segura  appeared in: season 2  gustavo "stavo" acosta is introduced at the start of the second season, as the son of the town's new sheriff miguel acosta. the new student at george washington high school, stavo initially appears as a creepy and withdrawn student. he is shown to have a love horror comic books and obsession with serial killers. he is shown to like drawing emma and her friends covered in blood, which is revealed to be a part of a horror graphic novel he is creating. however, during a school lockdown after jake's body is found during an assembly, audrey quickly accuses him of being involved with the murders and reveals to the other students his drawings on his ipad. stavo is then assaulted by other students, and has ipad broken in the process. he then denounces audrey for her suspicions. soon, however, even stavo's father starts to suspect his involvement after finding his drawings. despite this, stavo and brooke begin a romance, despite the latter's initial resistance. later in the season, it is revealed that stavo's friend was accidentally shot and killed in front of him, which seemed to have traumatized him. in the second-season halloween special episodes, stavo is shown to have a burgeoning career in horror graphic comics, and starts a partnership with noah as a result.  scream: resurrection (2019)  deion and marcus elliot  portrayed by rj cyler and jaden robinson (young)  appeared in: resurrection  liv reynolds  portrayed by jessica sula  appeared in: resurrection  beth  portrayed by giorgia whigham  appeared in: resurrection  jay elliot  portrayed by tyga  appeared in: resurrection  kym  portrayed by keke palmer  appeared in: resurrection  amir ayoub  portrayed by c. j. wallace  appeared in: resurrection  ghostface  voiced by roger l. jackson  appeared in: resurrection  recurring characters  scream (2015-2016)  piper shaw  portrayed by amelia rose blaire  appeared in: seasons 1-2  piper was a podcaster who owned the infamous true crime podcast "autopsy of a crime". she comes to lakewood to investigate the murder spree and forms a bond with emma duval. in the first-season finale, she is revealed to be the lakewood slasher and actually emma
's half sister. during a showdown on the dock, piper managed to severely wound emma and her mother, slashing emma's stomach and stabbing maggie. as she prepared to finish emma off, saying that she had one final surprise for emma, she was shot in the chest by audrey, and fell into the water. she emerged a few seconds later and was shot in the head by emma. in the second season, it is revealed that piper has an accomplice who continues her work. in the second season, piper appears in flashbacks. her corpse has been found by her accomplice for being discovered by emma and audrey in the orphanage. they understand that the new killer has targeted them to avenge piper. piper is the main antagonist of the first season. piper's name was originally named "piper shay".  jake fitzgerald  portrayed by tom maden  appeared in: seasons 1-2  jake is a jock at george washington high who always makes crass jokes and loves being foolish, to the consternation of many people. he later grows close to brooke maddox. he was impaled through the chest in the first season, but since the blade missed all major organs, he survives the attack. in the second-season premiere, he is kidnapped, hanged upside down in a barn, and killed with a scythe, his stomach splitting open. the killer then uses jake's identity to mess around with brooke, which is successful since no one but audrey is informed of his death. this keeps going until jake's corpse, along with his blood and intestines, are dropped on brooke during a school pageant in "happy birthday to me".  seth branson portrayed by: bobby campo  appeared in: seasons 1-2  seth brandon was a teacher at gwh who had a secret (and illicit) relationship with brooke maddox. he is later suspected of the murders when incriminating evidence is discovered in his classroom, as well as the fact that he had changed his name and moved to lakewood after one of his previous students was found dead. seth is almost killed in the first-season finale, in which piper assaulted him and planned to frame him for the murders. later, when brooke attempts to find jake, seth is tricked by her into chaining himself to a bed at a hotel room, under the guise of another affair. however, brooke leaves him there after getting her information, only for the killer to find him and cut off his right hand, leaving him unconscious. he is later tortured and stabbed, and burned to death by the new killer, when
the latter attempts to kill emma and eli in a fire.  quinn maddox  portrayed by bryan batt  appeared in: seasons 1-2  mayor of lakewood and brooke's father. he allowed his daughter to throw parties at his home. in the first season, he had an affair with another woman, resulting in his wife leaving him and checking into rehab in arizona. later, he is discovered to have buried his wife's drug-addict friend's body after the man had a fatal overdose; however, this is filmed and his daughter brooke briefly suspects him of murdering her mother. in the second season, mayor maddox is revealed to be dealing with tina and jake in illegal activities. he is later led into a barn and killed after being stabbed by a pitchfork in the chest by the killer in "heavenly creatures".  riley marra  portrayed by brianne tju  appeared in: season 1  riley was one of emma's best friends and was sweet and loving. she was interested in noah foster. in "wanna play a game?", when the killer threatened brooke's life, emma texted him to not hurt her. as an indirect result of this "decision", riley is chased by the killer at the sheriff station, and cornered when she attempts to climb up the side of the station. however, the killer stabs her multiple times and quickly escapes. riley then succumbs to her wounds on the rooftop of the sheriff station, whilst noah (who called her) witnessed her death. her body is later discovered by emma.  rachel murray  portrayed by sosie bacon  appeared in: seasons 1-2  rachel was the secret girlfriend of audrey jensen and the first victim of the second killer, as well as the third victim overall. she is a victim of the prank pulled by nina patterson, involving a video of her and audrey kissing. the killer lures rachel onto the balcony and wraps a noose around her neck and throws her over the side, snapping her neck. her death is then staged to look like a suicide, but later proven to be murder. in the second season, it is revealed by audrey that piper was with her the night of rachel's murder, meaning that rachel's killer is kieran, piper's accomplice.  lorraine brock  portrayed by sophina brown  appeared in: season 1  detective lorraine brock is assigned to the 2015 lakewood murders case by mayor quinn maddox. in her investigations, she is shown to be blunt and up-in-your-face during interrogations against audrey. it
is later revealed that she and clark hudson share a tumultuous past as ex-lovers and also former narcotic addicts. possibly due to her unprofessional behavior, brock is removed from the case.  kevin duval  portrayed by tom everett scott  appeared in: seasons 1-2  emma's estranged father and maggie's ex-husband. he is first shown in a hallucination by his daughter emma, who reveals that he had been out of her life for eight years. it is later revealed that in 1994, he was one of six students attacked by brandon james, who also shared a romantic interest in maggie, and was the only survivor of the attack. as a result, he suffered psychological trauma and became an alcoholic, contributing to his departure from his family (along with the revelation that maggie had been involved with brandon before the 1994 killings). after learning his daughter emma survived another similar set of murders, kevin returns to lakewood and tries to reconnect with her. in the second-season halloween special episodes, he is shown at the grave of kieran wilcox, implying some involvement in his death.  nina patterson  portrayed by bella thorne  appeared in: season 1  nina was the second victim of the lakewood slasher and was killed in her home and then thrown into her pool. although nina was the queen bee before brooke, nina was considered a mean-spirited, promiscuous and  manipulative troublemaker. she was an antagonist of the first season, being the driving conflict of the drama half of the plot.  thorne's character re-enacted the famous drew barrymore opening scene.  miguel acosta  portrayed by anthony ruivivar  appeared in: season 2  an outspoken, competent and experienced cop, sheriff miguel acosta returns to lakewood, where he grew up. he is a devoted, if sometimes strict, family man who's very protective of his son, gustavo.  kristen lang  portrayed by austin highsmith  appeared in: season 2  kristen lang is the new psychology teacher at gwh. she teaches emma and her friends about dreamscaping and dream analysis, which providing. lang is a young, idealistic high school psychology teacher who becomes a confidant and mentor to her students. despite this, she is revealed to be in a secret relationship with seth branson, and is shown to be illegally recording her students (specifically emma and the other members of the lakewood six) for research on an unofficial book on the psychological states of the survivors of the lakewood massacre the previous year. she was thrown down the
stairs by the killer in "let the right one in". however, she survives the attack when a janitor interrupts the assault. whilst in the hospital, audrey and emma discover that kristen was a foster sister of piper shaw, though when this news is reported, kristen replies that she only knew piper for a couple of months before leaving and had little interaction with her beforehand.  eli hudson  portrayed by sean grandillo  appeared in: season 2  eli is kieran's cousin and is romantically interested in emma. appearing creepy and somewhat standoffish, eli always spies on emma and her friends. throughout the second season, he is shown to be developing some kind of obsession with emma and is discovered to have been in lakewood during the first murder spree. it is then shown that kieran had set eli up to look as if he were the killer, before he shot him multiple times, revealing himself as the true killer and piper's accomplice.  tina hudson  portrayed by karina logue  appeared in: season 2  tina hudson is the sister of the late clark hudson, the mother of eli hudson, and the aunt of kieran wilcox. tina appears proper and polite, but has a grifter's sense of self-reliance, as she only took in kieran for money she was received watching over him, and is shown to be very irresponsible. she is also an alcoholic, and was involved in quinn maddox's plan to burn down a development. tina later leaves town, while both kieran and eli stay. it is unknown how she took the news of eli's death, as well as kieran being the second lakewood slasher.  haley meyers  portrayed by mary katherine duhon  appeared in: season 2  haley is a mean girl from school who dislikes emma and her friends. she is seen pranking audrey jensen with a killer scare, resulting in audrey stabbing her male friend in self-defense. she is revealed to be working for the new killer in "the orphanage" and orchestrates a party at the abandoned children's home. after a brief encounter with what appears to be her "boyfriend", she is stabbed to death and hung below the party banner.  gina mclane  portrayed by zena grey  appeared in: season 2  gina mclane is a character who appears in the second-season halloween special episodes. she is audrey's girlfriend who works as the manager at the zenith theatre. much like audrey, gina is shown to be a fan of horror movies. she later follows the group to the island supposedly to surprise audrey, only to
get trapped on the island with the killer. gina feels that her romance with audrey cannot stand up to audrey's close friendship with emma, though later realizes that this is not the case.  alex whitten / tom martin  portrayed by alexander calvert  appeared in: season 2  alex whitten (actually tom martin) is a character who appears in the second-season halloween special episodes. he originally appears to be reginald whitten's great-grandson, and is supposedly the only survivor of the whitten family. he is later revealed to be tom martin, and had killed the real alex whitten (justin burkhamer) beforehand and took his identity. after hearing about emma and all the murder sprees she had survived, tom became obsessed with her, believing they could have a relationship. he posted about the anna hobbs legend on jeremy's website, luring the group to the island. it is later revealed that tom witnessed his family's deaths, and is implied to have been traumatized, being a four-year-old boy who stayed with the bodies for several days before being discovered. he later attempts to kill emma when she rejects his advances, though is thrown off the balcony of the whitten family mansion, resulting in his death.  jeremy blair  portrayed by alex esola  appeared in: season 2  jeremy blair is a character who appears in the second-season halloween special episodes. jeremy is the editor for noah and gustavo's comic book based on the second season's murder spree. he is the one who persuades the two to take the trip to shallow grove island to find information on anna hobbs for another book. he is very pushy about getting this new book due to investing all his savings into the project, which quickly gets him on the bad side of the lakewood gang, and is shown to be rude. he is later stabbed to death by the murderer.  scream: resurrection (2019)  luther "hook man" thompson  portrayed by tony todd  appeared in: resurrection  manny  portrayed by giullian yao gioiello  appeared in: resurrection  sherry elliot  portrayed by mary j. blige  appeared in: resurrection  earl elliot  portrayed by diesel madkins  appeared in: resurrection  t. reynolds  portrayed by gideon emery  appeared in: resurrection  avery collins  portrayed by patrick johnson  appeared in: resurrection  hawkins  portrayed by drew starkey  appeared in: resurrection  coach griffin  portrayed by terrence j  appeared in: resurrection  references  horror television characters lists
of american drama television series characters  characters
rooibos wine is a variety of wine in which wood from the rooibos (aspalathus linearis) and honeybush (cyclopia spp.) plants is used instead of the traditional oak wood during the maturation phase.  it has its origin in the western cape, south africa.  the wine has a unique flavor component and due to the anti-oxidative effect of the plants can be produced without the use of sulfur dioxide.  production fresh rooibos has a high antioxidant content (particularly vitamin c) and a relatively low tannin content, making it a potential alternative to the use of sulfur dioxide in the preservation of wine along with honeybush.  during the maturation phase of rooibos wine, the wood of rooibos (aspalathus linearis) and honeybush (cyclopia spp.) is used instead of the traditional oak. studies at the university of stellenbosch showed that treatment with rooibos and honeybush plant material protects red wine from the negative effects associated with exposure to oxygen making sulfur dioxide unnecessary. the use of rooibos and honeybush plant material as a preservative in the production of red wine has been patented. the rooibos wine product is free of so2 and has a unique flavour profile that can be ascribed to the aging of the wine in rooibos and honeybush wood.  notable brands the stellenbosch-based audacia produced the first rooibos wine - a merlot - in south africa in 2013 . their rooibos product range has since expanded to include cabernet sauvignon, shiraz, a red blend and a white blend.  kwv south africa (pty) ltd followed in 2014 with a rooibos pinotage under their earth's essence brand.  references  south african wine
victor cannella (1870-february 3, 1946) was an italian piano and xylophone player.  career  cannella played the piano in the max fleischer cartoon "mr. bug goes to town", and in baseball bugs. cannella also played the xylophone in "figaro & cleo."  death  cannella died of poliomyelitis  on february 3, 1946.  references   1870 births 1946 deaths italian pianists
liu xianping 刘先平 (1938 - 10 january 2022) was a chinese writer, best known for writing ecological literature (green literature), and children's books. he was known as the father of modern nature writing in china.  life and career liu was born in feidong, anhui province, china, in 1938. he graduated from the chinese department of zhejiang university in 1961. he was a member of the china writers association, the children's literature committee, and various government organisations in anhui province. he worked for many years as a teacher, and as editor of anhui literature (《安徽文学》). his first publications were in 1957, initially poetry, essays and theory, but stopped writing in 1963.  he resumed writing in 1978, concentrating on nature writing. he was admitted to the china writers association in 1982. he travelled extensively in china, spending long periods of time in the wilds, e.g. in xinjiang, yunnan, tibet and other areas. he died in hefei on 10 january 2022, at the age of 84.  honours and awards liu was honoured with numerous national level honours - and in 1992 the state council of china awarded him the title of "expert who has made an outstanding contribution". he received a national outstanding children's literature award on two occasions. he was on the ibby honour list 2008, and was nominated for the hans christian andersen award.  publications the following is a selection of liu's works:  《我的山野朋友：刘先平大自然探险奇遇》 my friends in the wild : liu xianping's wonderful adventure in the world of nature (bilingual edition, 2007)  《千鸟谷追踪》 a voyage of discovery through the valley of a thousand birds (in english, 2007)  《走进帕米尔高原：穿越柴达木盆地》 [going into the pamirs: through the qaidam basin] (2008)  pere david's deer king emerges in combat (in english, 2010)  golden monkeys fight vultures (in english, 2010)  the love story of black muntjacs (in english, 2010)  the mysterious francois's leaf monkeys (in english, 2010)  《和黑野猴对话
》 [dialogue with langurs]   《寻找大树杜鹃王》 [finding the king of the rhododendron trees]   《云海探奇》 [the adventure in the sea of clouds]   《大熊猫传奇》 [the story of the giant panda]  references  external links liu xianping on worldcat liu xianping website (in chinese)  1938 births 2022 deaths chinese children's writers zhejiang university alumni people from hefei
sean horan is a new zealand rugby union and sevens coach. he coached the new zealand women's national rugby sevens team. he was appointed as head coach in 2012. he previously coached the bay of plenty steamers, in the itm cup, from 2009 till his shocking departure in 2011.  horan's first achievement as head coach was winning the 2013 rugby world cup sevens in russia. in 2016 he helped new zealand qualify for the 2016 summer olympics. he stepped down as coach for the new zealand women's sevens team after the 2016 olympics.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people new zealand rugby union coaches rugby sevens in new zealand new zealand olympic coaches new zealand national rugby sevens team coaches
thomas fig (born 30 march 1977) is a danish former professional footballer who played as a defender.  career   fig made his debut for danish club vejle in the danish top division if the 1996-97 season with two appearances. he then moved to padova in the serie b. in that season, he had 28 appearances and three goals making his debut in the match against chievo (0-1) on 18 may 1997. in the 1998-99 they suffered relegation to the serie c1. this season he also suffered a serious ankle injury that would affect the rest of his career. from 1998 to 2006 he jumped between serie c1 and serie c2. from 2003 to 2005 he played for bassano with 29 appearances and 5 goals, before returning to padova. in the 2006-07 he dropped further down in the divisions into the serie d with piovese. in the following year he falls further by joining monselice. he retired in 2013.  honours padova  serie c2: 2000-01  bassano virtus  serie d: 2004-05  references  1977 births living people danish footballers denmark under-21 international footballers danish expatriate footballers danish superliga players serie b players vejle boldklub players calcio padova players expatriate footballers in italy people from vejle municipality association football defenders bassano virtus 55 s.t. players serie c players serie d players danish expatriate sportspeople in italy
huxi may refer to:   huxi, penghu, a rural township in penghu county (the pescadores), taiwan  huxi, shandong, a former prefecture in shandong province, china  huxi district, chongqing, china
beaconhouse-newlands is a private boarding school currently operating in pakistan and malaysia. it is a group of private fee-paying academic institutions located currently in 2 cities of pakistan. beaconhouse provides preschool education, primary education, secondary education and preparation for the international international general certificate of secondary education (igcse) and local secondary school certificate (ssc) examinations along with international baccalaureate (ib) program.  a-level subjects   accounting  aict  art and design  biology  business studies  chemistry  computer science  economics  english literature  environmental management (as level)  global perspective  government and politics  history  law  mathematics  media studies  physics  psychology  sociology  urdu  general paper  thinking skills  the learning tower     the learning tower is a four-storey glass and concrete building situated at the lahore campus of beaconhouse-newlands. the learning tower has more than 15,000 books on vast genres and an access to unlimited world of global e-books available online.  clubs and societies     the drama club  media and photography  music society  community work  orator's den  cooking club  mandarin club  sporting facilities     football  cricket  basketball  volleyball  martial arts  badminton  table tennis  gymnastic  aerobics  kids athletics  athletics facilities at bn and sports complex  swimming pool  football field  basketball court  cricket pitch  volleyball court  indoor gymnasium for multi-sports  fitness suite bedian sports complex  cricket ground and football ground with pavilion  400m eight lane athletics track  2 basketball courts  horse riding club  references  external links  private schools in pakistan education in lahore
pierre wissmer (30 october 1915 - 4 november 1992) was a 20th-century french classical composer of swiss origin.  biography  formed at the conservatoire de musique de geneve, he received the advice of robert casadesus before perfecting his mastery of counterpoint at the schola cantorum de paris with daniel-lesur. he also followed the course of conducting of charles munch at the ecole normale de musique de paris.  his first piano concerto was created on the radio by jacqueline blancard 10 october 1937 under the direction of henri tomasi. in 1938, his first symphony was directed in winterthur by hermann scherchen.  in 1939, pierre wissmer composed le beau dimanche, one-act ballet on an argument by pierre guerin who put him in touch with stravinski, poulenc, sauguet, and cocteau. in 1944, he was appointed professor of composition at conservatoire de geneve and head of the department of chamber music at radio geneva.  in 1948, he married the pianist laure-anne etienne, a student of marguerite long at conservatoire de paris. from 1952 to 1957, he was deputy director of programs at radio luxembourg and, from 1957, director of the schola cantorum. in 1958 he adopted french citizenship and later was appointed director of the ecole normale de musique of le mans (1969-1981).  in 1967, he was awarded the grand prix musical of the city of paris.  in 1992, he died in valcros, shortly after his wife.  works  incidental music  1945: marion ou la belle au tricorne, radio opera (geneva, radio suisse romande, 16 april 1947) 1952: capitaine bruno, opera comique (geneva, 9 november) 1958: leonidas ou la cruaute mentale, opera bouffe (paris, 12 september) 1939: le beau dimanche, ballet (geneva, 20 march 1944) 1963: alerte, puits, ballet (geneva, 1964) 1967: christina et les chimeres, ballet (french television, 7 december 1972)  orchestral music   9 symphonies (1938, 1951, 1955, 1962, 1969, 1977, 1900)  3 piano concertos (1937, 1948, 1971) 1937: mouvement, for string orchestra (geneva, 25 february 1938) 1938: divertissement sur un choral for 11 instruments (geneva, 8 december 1939) 1943: antoine et cleopatre, suite symphonique (geneva, 2 october 1946) 1952: mand
rellina, overture (geneva, 16 april 1952) 1957: concerto for guitar 1960: concerto for clarinet 1961: concerto for trumpet 1963: concerto for oboe 1966: concerto valcrosiano  1966: concertino-croisiere for flute, string orchestra and piano 1972: triptyque romand  1974: dialogue for bassoon (or cello) and orchestra 1982: symphonietta concertante, for flute, harp and orchestra  chamber music   3 string quartets (1937, 1949, 1972) 1938: serenade for oboe, clarinet and bassoon 1941: sonatine for clarinet and piano 1946: sonatine for violon and piano  1949: sonate for piano 1956: quartet for saxophones  1961: quadrige for flute, violin, cello and piano 1962: sonate for flute and guitar 1964: quintette a vent  1973: "reflexions" for organ 1975: variations sur un noel imaginaire for organ (also for orchestra, 1975)  1978: trio adelfiano, for flute, cello and piano  vocal music  1942: naiades pour recitant, soloists, choir and orchestra (geneva, 21 january) 1962: heretique et relapse, one-act mystery 1965: le quatrieme mage, oratorio (paris, 14 october 1969) 1971: cantique en l'ounour dou grand saintlouis, rei de franco et patroun de vaucros de cuers, pour choir with piano or organ 1951: chants de mars: 7  chœurs a cappella pour 3 voix d'enfants sur des poesies de rene de obaldia.(paris 1951)  selected discography  pierre wissmer left a work that is both abundant and diverse with respect to both instrumental music, chamber music, concert music and music for symphonic orchestra, vocal or choral music, opera or musical theatre, incidental music, ballets, music for radio or television and film score.   trio adelfiano for flute, cello and piano/quadrige for flute, violin, cello and piano, with genevieve ibanez (piano), anne werner-fuchs (violin), frederic werner (flute), jean barthe and alex descharnes (cellos), cd, marcal classics, ma 060201  chanson de l'orpailler. complete works for and with guitar. with philippe rayer and michel guzard (guitares), cd, quantum, qm 7016  askok for guitar and recorder. with patric ruby (guitar) and robin
troman (recorder), cd, quantum, qm 7031  trois silhouettes. with mireille saumal (piano). cd, marcal, ma 040302  bibliography  external links   official site  biography  sound recordings of works of the composer from the archives of srg ssr on neo.mx3  swiss classical composers french male classical composers french opera composers male opera composers french ballet composers ecole normale de musique de paris alumni 1915 births people from geneva 1992 deaths 20th-century french male musicians swiss emigrants to france
the 1908 news of the world match play was the sixth news of the world match play tournament. it was played from tuesday 6 to thursday 8 october at mid-surrey golf club. 32 players competed in a straight knock-out competition, with each match contested over 18 holes, except for the final which was over 36 holes. the winner received £100 out of a total prize fund of £240. j.h. taylor defeated fred robson by 2 holes in the final to win the tournament.  qualification entry was restricted to members of the professional golfers' association (pga). qualification was by a series of 36-hole stroke-play competitions; one for each of the six pga sections. the southern section had 14 qualifiers, the northern section 7, the midland and the scottish sections 4, the irish section 2 and the welsh section 1. compared to 1907 there was one extra qualifier for the northern section and one less for welsh section. in the event of a tie for places there was a playoff.  the qualifiers were:   irish section: james edmundson, harry kidd  midland section: willie aveston, george coburn, jack oke, tom williamson  northern section: tom ball, tom beck, sandy herd, ted ray, thomas renouf, fred robson, tom watt  southern section: james batley, james bradbeer, james braid, ernest gray, rowland jones, arnaud massy, charles mayo, jack rowe, james sherlock, j.h. taylor, albert tingey, sr., harry vardon, tom vardon, reg wilson  scottish section: willie binnie, willie fernie, charles neaves, ben sayers  welsh section: syd ball  format the format was unchanged. matches were over 18 holes except for the final which was over 36 holes. extra holes were played in the event of a tied match. two rounds were played on the first day, two more on the second day with the final on the third day.  results source:  w/o = walk over  prize money the winner received £100 and a gold medal, the runner-up £30 and a silver medal, the losing semi-finalists £15 and a bronze medal, while the third round losers received £10 and the second round losers received £5.  references  golf tournaments in england news of the world match play news of the world match play october 1908 sports events
andrea seccafien (born august 27, 1990 in guelph, ontario) is a canadian long-distance runner, who mostly competes in the 5000 m event.  in 2010, seccafien enrolled to the samford university in the united states. after two years she transferred to the university of guelph in canada to study economics and political sciences. in 2013, she won the national 5000 m title at the canadian championships. she missed the 2015 season due to a foot injury. in may 2016, she ran a personal best of 15:17.81 and qualified for the 2016 olympics. in july 2016, she was officially named to the canadian olympic team.  she represented canada at the 2020 summer olympics. in 2021, seccafien beat the canadian record for 10,000 m at the sound running track meet with a time of 31:13.94. she finished 15th in the athletics at the 2020 summer olympics - women's 5000 metres.  references  external links    1990 births living people canadian female long-distance runners sportspeople from guelph athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada canadian track and field championships winners athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
events from the year 1731 in russia  incumbents  monarch - anna  events   pacific fleet (russia)  births  deaths  references  1731 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
badyal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of badyal.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, badyal has a total number of 78 houses and population of 375 of which include 175 males and 200 females. literacy rate of badyal is 66.36%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 51 which is 13.60% of total population of badyal, and child sex ratio is approximately  1217 higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
jhande  is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
marian turowski (born 27 december 1964) is a polish former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people polish male cyclists olympic cyclists of poland cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from sobotka sportspeople from lower silesian voivodeship
brad parker (born 19 february 1996) is an australian professional rugby league footballer who plays as a  and er for the manly warringah sea eagles in the nrl.   he has played for the prime minister's xiii.  background parker was born in the northern beaches of sydney, new south wales, australia.    he played his junior rugby league for the manly christian brothers, before being signed by the manly warringah sea eagles.  playing career  early career in 2015 and 2016, parker played for the manly-warringah sea eagles' nyc team. on 18 august 2015, he re-signed with manly on a two-year contract until the end of 2017.  2016 in round 19 of the 2016 nrl season, parker made his nrl debut for manly-warringah against the new zealand warriors.  parker got both his first and second try in the round 24 clash with the melbourne storm at brookvale oval.  2017 on the august 8, 2017, parker signed a new deal with the club keeping him there till the end of 2019."manly is the team want to stay at, it's the team i have gone for my whole life," parker said. parker injured himself in the round 24 clash with the wests tigers. results of the scan revealed parker has a lateral meniscus tear suffered in the loss at leichhardt oval. parker sat out for the rest of the season with the injury. in the 2017 season parker played 4 games scoring 1 try with the manly warringah sea eagles.  2018 parker made 17 appearances for manly in 2018 as the club narrowly avoided the wooden spoon by 2 competition points.  2019 parker made 19 appearances for manly in the 2019 nrl season as the club finished in sixth place and qualified for the finals.  parker scored a try in manly's elimination final victory over cronulla in week one of the finals series at brookvale oval.  the following week in the elimination semi final, parker scored a try but was later sin binned for tripping a south sydney player in the club's 34-26 loss at anz stadium.  on 30 september, parker earned his first representative jersey as he was named at centre for the australia pm xiii side. on 7 october, parker was named in the u23 junior australian side.  2020 parker played 19 games in the 2020 nrl season.  manly missed out on the finals finishing a disappointing 13th on the table.  2021 in round 11 of the 2021 nrl season, parker scored two tries for manly-warringah in a 28-6
victory over parramatta. in round 14 against north queensland, parker scored two tries for manly in a 50-18 victory. parker played 25 games for manly in the 2021 nrl season including the club's preliminary final loss against south sydney.  references  external links  manly sea eagles profile manly warringah sea eagles profile  1997 births australian rugby league players manly warringah sea eagles players rugby league centres rugby league wingers living people rugby league players from sydney
the 2016-17 fc anzhi makhachkala season was the club's second season back in the russian premier league, the highest tier of football in russia, since their relegation at the end of the  2013-14 season. anzhi finished the season in twelfth, narrowly avoiding a relegation play-off thanks to their head-to-head record against fc orenburg, whilst also reaching the quarterfinals of the russian cup, where they were knocked out by fc ufa.  season events pavel vrba was appointed as the club's new manager on 30 june 2016, following the expiration of ruslan agalarov's contract on 31 may 2016.  on 28 december 2016, suleyman kerimov sold the club to osman kadiyev. two days later pavel vrba left by mutual consent, with aleksandr grigoryan being appointed as the club's new manager on 5 january 2017.  squad , according to the rfpl official website  on loan  youth squad  transfers  summer  in:  out:  winter  in:  out:  trialists:  friendlies  competitions  russian premier league  results by round  results  league table  russian cup  squad statistics  appearances and goals  |- |colspan="14"|players away from the club on loan:  |- |colspan="14"|players who appeared for anzhi makhachkala no longer at the club:  |}  goal scorers  disciplinary record  references  external links official website fans' website  a fan is a club anji  fc anzhi makhachkala seasons anzhi makhachkala
gabriel stevenson, professionally known as like, is an american record producer, rapper, dj and songwriter. a three time grammy nominee, he began working with the pacific division, a hip hop trio, better known as pac div in 2006.  in 2012, he produced kendrick lamar's "sing about me" on good kid, m.a.a.d city. he received two grammy award nominations at the 56th grammy awards: album of the year and best rap album. in 2016, he produced anderson .paak's "room in here" featuring the game and sonyae elise on the malibu album. the album received a grammy nomination for best urban contemporary album at the 59th annual grammy awards. like has production credit with artists such as mac miller, ab-soul, joey badass, nick grant, asher roth, ill camille and currensy.  like has released music as a solo artist. he released instrumental albums, zesty and lightwork in 2014 and emeralds in 2016. on september 30, 2016, he released his first solo rap album, songs made while high, which features anderson .paak, buddy, and kali uchis.  in 2017, pac div regrouped and are scheduled to release an album at the end of the year.  discography   lp (long play), ep (extended play), si (single), n/a (not available)  features group projects, solo projects, production credits and features  instrumental / solo projects  all songs produced by like  pac div studio albums  pac div mixtapes  pac div eps  production credits  guest appearances  list of features with other performing artists, showing year released and album name  nominations and awards  grammy awards the grammy awards are awarded annually by the national academy of recording arts and sciences of the united states. like has received three nomination.  references  external links  like allmusic page like discogs page  21st-century african-american male singers american male singers african-american male rappers african-american record producers american dance musicians american djs american hip hop record producers american multi-instrumentalists east coast hip hop musicians american hip hop djs rappers from los angeles living people pop rappers 21st-century american rappers record producers from california 21st-century american male musicians year of birth missing (living people)
the robert irvine show is a defunct american syndicated talk show hosted by robert irvine and produced by tribune studios and irwin entertainment. the show premiered on the cw on september 12, 2016, as part of their late afternoon timeslot, and replaced bill cunningham's self-titled show after his television retirement. like cunningham, along with irvine's food network series restaurant: impossible, it featured irvine in the traditional conflict-resolution talk format trying to work out problems between subjects who came on the series.  until the start of its second season in september 2017, it was the final program distributed by the american big five over-the-air networks to still be produced in standard definition, albeit in a widescreen format.  the show ceased production after the completion of the second season, with the last original episode airing may 24, 2018 (a clip show one day later was the final regular episode), with repeats ending september 8. it was replaced by encore and unaired original episodes of jerry springer under an arrangement with tribune media and nbcuniversal television distribution.  references  external links  official website    2010s american television talk shows 2016 american television series debuts 2018 american television series endings english-language television shows first-run syndicated television programs in the united states television series by tribune entertainment the cw original programming
spacex crs-19, also known as spx-19, was a commercial resupply service mission to the international space station. the mission is contracted by nasa and was flown by spacex on a falcon 9 rocket.  dragon capsule c106 made its third flight on crs-19 having previously flown on crs-4 and crs-11. dragon successfully returned to earth on 7 january 2020 after a month-long stay at the iss.  launch schedule history  in february 2016, it was announced that nasa had awarded a contract extension to spacex for five crs additional missions (crs-16 to crs-20). in june 2016, a nasa inspector general report had this mission manifested for december 2018. the mission was later delayed to 15 october 2019, but launched in december 2019.  on 5 december 2019, crs-19 launched successfully, followed by a successful first stage landing on the barge of course i still love you.  payload nasa has contracted for the crs-19 mission from spacex and therefore determines the primary payload, date/time of launch, and orbital parameters for the dragon space capsule. crs-11 carried a total of  of material into orbit. this included  of pressurised cargo with packaging bound for the international space station, and  of unpressurised cargo composed of the kibo-mounted hyperspectral imager suite (hisui) from japan, the robotic tool stowage (rits) platform, and a replacement lithium-ion battery for the station's solar array truss.  the following is a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:  science investigations:   crew supplies:   vehicle hardware:   spacewalk equipment:   computer resources:   external payloads:  hyperspectral imaging suite (hisui): ~  robotic tool stowage (rits)  lithium-ion battery  among the science experiments transported to the station are the anheuser-busch-sponsored germination of abi voyager barley seeds in microgravity, the confined combustion experiment, and 40 genetically engineered mice as part of the rodent research-19 experiment.  a number of cubesats were launched on crs-19. the elana-25b flight included aztechsat-1, sortie, and cryocube, while the elana-28 flight included ciris and edgecube. other small satellites launched on this mission include qarman and makersat-1.  see also  uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references  spacex dragon spacecraft launched in 2019 spacex payloads contracted by
nasa supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft which reentered in 2020
mimenicodes fractimacula is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
the 1959 dissolution honours list was issued on 19 september 1959 to mark the dissolution of the united kingdom parliament prior to the 1959 general election.  the recipients of honours are displayed here as they were styled before their new honour.  hereditary peers  viscount  rt hon. james gray stuart , unionist member of parliament for moray and nairn, 1923-1959. a lord commissioner of the treasury and scottish unionist whip, 1935-1941; joint parliamentary secretary to the treasury and government, chief whip, 1941-1945. secretary of state for scotland, 1951-1957. opposition chief whip, 1945-1948. chairman of the unionist party in scotland since 1950. for political and public services.  baron  colonel the rt hon. sir charles glen macandrew , unionist member of parliament for kilmarnock, 1924-1929; for the partick division of glasgow, 1931-1935 and for bute and north ayrshire, 1935-1959. chairman of ways and means, 1951-1959. for political and public services.  life peers  baroness  rt hon. dame florence gertrude horsbrugh , unionist member of parliament for dundee, 1931-1945 and for the moss side division of manchester, 1950-1959. parliamentary secretary to the ministry of health, 1939-1945 and to the ministry of food, 1945. minister of education, 1951-1954. for political and public services.  baron  rt hon. herbert stanley morrison , labour member of parliament for south hackney, 1923-1924, 1929-1931 and 1935-1945; for east lewisham, 1945-1950 and for south lewisham, 1950-1959. minister of transport, 1929-1931; minister of supply, 1940; secretary of state for the home department and minister of home security, 1940-1945; member of the war cabinet, 1942-1945. lord president of the council and leader of the house of commons, 1945-1951; secretary of state for foreign affairs, 1951. deputy leader of the opposition, 1951-1955. for political and public services.  references  dissolution honours 1959 in british politics 1959 awards
umarpur is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 6.7 km from postal head office in nurmahal, 26 km from phillaur, 35 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 146 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  as of the 2011 census of india, the village has 238 houses and a population of 1163, comprising 595 are males and 568 females. the literacy rate of the village was 79.48%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years was 120 and the child sex ratio was approximately 935, which was higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people were from the schedule castes, who constituted 62.34% of the population; there were no people designated as members of schedule tribes.  as per census 2011, 379 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 363 males and 16 females. according to census survey report 2011, 89.45% workers describe their work as main work and 10.55% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station. the larger phillaur junction station is 24.4 km away from the village. the village is 54.5 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 127 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the list of media portrayals of the canadian indian residential school system includes examples of works created to highlight the canadian indian residential school system, a network of schools established by the canadian government and administered by church officials to assimilate indigenous students.  film and television  published texts  stage  references  residential schools in canada first nations education education in popular culture lists of mass media works about genocide
philip louis levine (born february 18, 1962) is an american businessman and politician who served as mayor of miami beach from 2013 to 2017. a member of the democratic party, he was a candidate in the 2018 florida gubernatorial election.  background  philip levine was born to a jewish family in boston, massachusetts, and moved with his parents to south florida at the age of 10. he attended attucks middle school and hollywood hills high school in hollywood, florida. levine is a graduate of broward county's public school system and is a graduate of the university of michigan with a degree in political science. following his graduation, levine made miami beach home and has been involved in many philanthropic and community organizations.  in 2015, levine completed an advanced leadership program at the fletcher school of law and diplomacy at tufts university. in 2018, he married carolina murciano. the marriage is his first and her second. together, they have an infant son.  professional career  in 1990, with $500 in capital, levine launched onboard media in a studio apartment above the news cafe on ocean drive. conceived as a port-marketing program for the cruise industry, the company expanded to publish eighty-five in-stateroom magazines and to produce award-winning tv programming.  after growing onboard media into a multimillion-dollar company, levine partnered with berkshire partners to acquire starboard cruise services. the merger resulted in the world's largest cruise industry concessionaire, which was later sold to louis vuitton moet hennessy in 2000.  levine maintains a diverse portfolio of investments in startups, businesses, and real estate. he is also the ceo of royal media partners, an exclusive partner of royal caribbean cruises ltd. levine also hosts a regular radio show on sirius xm, "the mayor," featuring discussions with elected officials and other interesting personalities on a variety of relevant topics.  political involvement  in 2010, levine was selected by president obama's secretary of commerce to serve on a task force advising on u.s. tourism. the goals of the task force were to grow america's tourism industry. levine is a self-described "radical centrist." he criticized president trump's delayed response for hurricane relief in puerto rico after hurricane maria.  mayoral tenure  in november 2013, levine was elected mayor of miami beach, receiving 50.48% of the total vote in a four-person race. his campaign was endorsed by former president bill clinton and u.s. senator bill nelson. levine ran on a platform of "just get it done
," focusing on fixing street flooding and combating sea level rise, cleaning up government corruption, reforming the police department and city finances, and placing a priority on constituent service.  in june 2017, levine hosted the annual u.s. conference of mayors in miami beach. the event brought together over 300 mayors from across the country and was the first conference of mayors held in the city since 1962.  climate change  during his tenure as miami beach mayor, levine has advocated publicly for action and attention to the issues of climate change. levine was involved in implementing solutions to sea-level rise in miami beach such as installing new drainage systems, investing in cutting-edge pumps and physically raising roads. in 2016, he appeared in leonardo dicaprio's documentary before the flood and in an episode of the national geographic channel series years of living dangerously, hosted by jack black, to discuss the reality and impact of sea-level rise in miami beach and across florida.  before levine took over as mayor, miami beach had a begun a 20-year, $200 million program to combat sea-level rise with new pumps, drain pipes and sea walls. when levine took office, his first move to mitigate flooding was a $11 million contract for three storm pumps along alton road around the area where levine owns real estate. that area had one of the lowest sea-levels in the entire city and suffered from the most flooding. later, levine fast-tracked a plan to raise roads in the sunset harbour neighborhood where levine and partners owned real estate worth about $20 million. in levine's two terms as mayor, the city signed close to $40 million in no-bid contracts, extensions and change orders to stop flooding.  2018 gubernatorial candidacy   levine ran for the democratic nomination for governor of florida in the 2018 election but lost in a crowded primary field. his gubernatorial platform included environmentalism, living wages, better public schools, gun safety policies and social equality; he was endorsed by the miami herald. he finished third behind eventual nominee tallahassee mayor andrew gillum and former u.s. representative gwen graham. in the four-person primary held on august 28, gillum, won with 34.3% of the vote. levine came in third with 20.3% of the vote. levine spent $29 million of his own money in the race. the money spent was about one-fifth of his total net worth.  philanthropy  levine serves on the board of directors for best buddies international, the miami-based nonprofit organization that creates opportunities for people
with developmental disabilities.  see also   list of mayors of miami beach, florida  references  external links     1962 births florida democrats living people jewish american people in florida politics jewish mayors of places in the united states mayors of miami beach, florida 21st-century american politicians politicians from boston university of michigan college of literature, science, and the arts alumni 21st-century american jews
the col du berthiand is a mountain pass rising to  above sea level, situated on the montagne de berthiand in the jura mountains. it is located in the department of ain in france and joins the commune of serrieres-sur-ain with nurieux-volognat.  toponymy the name, like those of the montagne de berthiand and the hamlet of berthiand originate from bertoldingos ("with the bertoldingi") derived from the family name bertoald.  cycling the tour de france has traversed the col du berthiand on four occasions, the last being during the 2016 tour de france. the riders who crossed in the lead are shown in the table:  in the more distant past, it illustrated the skill of charly gaul, in particular during the circuit des six-provinces in 1954, but also during the tour des provinces du sud-est in 1955.  references  mountain passes of the jura landforms of ain
jiri smejkal (born 5 november 1996) is a czech professional ice hockey forward. he is currently playing with lahti pelicans of the finnish liiga.  playing career  smejkal started his career in the youth setup at hc ceske budejovice. he was picked by medvescak zagreb in the 2013 khl draft. in 2014, he headed over the atlantic to hone his skills in the western hockey league (whl), joining the moose jaw warriors. in his first year with the warriors, smejkal made 72 whl appearances, tallying 12 goals and 20 assists. he also started the 2015-16 campaign playing for the team, but was traded to fellow whl side kamloops blazers in january 2016.  on 15 july 2016, smejkal signed with medvescak zagreb of the kontinental hockey league (khl). he left for hc sparta praha on 31 january 2017.  international play smejkal has represented his country on several occasions, including the under-18 world championships in 2014, where the czech republic won silver, and the under-20 world championships in 2016.  career statistics  international  references  external links     1996 births living people czech ice hockey left wingers kamloops blazers players khl medvescak zagreb players moose jaw warriors players hc sparta praha players sportspeople from ceske budejovice tappara players lahti pelicans players ice hockey players at the 2022 winter olympics olympic ice hockey players of the czech republic
the south african bureau of racial affairs (sabra) (afrikaans: suid-afrikaanse buro vir rasse-angeleenthede) was a south african think tank based at stellenbosch university. it was founded in 1948 at the initiative of the afrikaner broederbond as an alternative to the liberal south african institute of race relations. it sought to give an academic and theoretical justification for the national party's policy of apartheid, and influenced the development of that policy during the 1950s and beyond. a number of sabra members made an important contributors to the tomlinson commission, which formulated a strategy for developing the bantustans.  references   organisations associated with apartheid apartheid in south africa politics and race stellenbosch university think tanks based in south africa
muragari primary school is the third-oldest school in embu, kenya. it was founded 1932 by the national independent church of africa near the current mukuuri township, kagaari north ward, runyenjes sub county.  it was razed by colonialists in 1952 during the mau mau uprising in embu.  muragari was rebuilt in 1955 on 24 acres as a government school, at the site where general kubu kubu was cremated after being shot dead by colonial officers.  muragari now comprises a day primary school, muragari secondary school and kubu kubu memorial boarding primary school in memory of general kubu kubu.  notable alumni  stanley nyaga kithung'a, founder of kasneb and former runyenjes mp joseph njagi mbarire, mp  cecily mutitu mbarire , mp  hon. martin wambora, embu governor  richard nyaga, former kenya airways ceo  dr. njiru nthakanio, geneticist  mohammed gakinya, long serving knut secretary general  njeru ngari, embu county chairman and long-serving councillor  sicily njiru, nominated mca, embu county  amos njiru, former nica embu bishop  external links  elementary and primary schools in kenya education in eastern province (kenya) embu county high schools and secondary schools in kenya boarding schools in kenya
maximo gonzalez and andre sa were the defending champions, but chose to compete in kitzbuhel and gstaad, respectively, instead.  martin klizan and david marrero won the title, defeating nikola mektic and antonio sancic in the final, 6-4, 6-2.  seeds  draw  draw  references  main draw  croatia open umag - singles 2016 singles 2016 in croatian tennis
knob hill is an unincorporated community in center township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of melody hill.  geography  knob hill is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
toolara forest is a locality split between gympie region and fraser coast region, queensland, australia. in the  toolara forest had a population of 0 people.  geography  the locality of toolara forest is mostly in the gympie region with only two small northern parts of the locality in the fraser coast region.  tin can bay road (from gympie to tin can bay) enters the south-west of the locality from goomboorian and kia ora and exits in the north-east of the locality into wallu and then to tin can bay. in the north-east there are two road junctions off tin can bay; the maryborough-cooloola road heads north-west towards maryborough via tuan forest, while the rainbow beach road heads south-east via cooloola to rainbow beach on the pacific ocean coast.  the land use is almost entirely dedicated to the toolara state forest with the exception of a narrow strip of land in the east of the locality bounded by rainbow beach road which contains the cooloola coast cemetery and the remainder is a small part of the great sandy national park which is mostly in the neighbouring locality of cooloola. there is no residential land.  history in the  toolara forest had a population of 0 people.  references  external links    cooloola coast cemetery  gympie region fraser coast region localities in queensland
the marxist-leninist armed propaganda unit (, abbreviated as mlspb), known fully as the people's liberation party-front of turkey/marxist-leninist armed propaganda unit (thkp-c/mlspb) is a marxist-leninist organization in turkey. the group is a split from the people's liberation party-front of turkey. it was among the founding members of the peoples' united revolutionary movement, formed in march 2016, with the kurdistan workers' party and seven other socialist organizations.  activity  1980s in april 1980, members of the group shot dead an american naval officer and his driver. chief petty officer sam novello and his driver, ali sabri baytar, were shot dead in turkey by three assailants who then were captured while trying to escape on motorcycle. one assailant was severely wounded during the capture and died later, the remaining two were sentenced to death by a military court and executed on june 25, 1981.  involvement in syrian civil war as mlspb-revolutionary front (), the group has participated in the syrian civil war through fighting alongside the kurdish people's protection units against the islamic state of iraq and the levant. mlspb-dc joined the internationalist armed organizations supporting the ypg, the united freedom forces and the international freedom battalion. a battalion was created by devrimci karargah and mlspb-dc named after alper cakas, an mlspb-dc fighter killed while fighting in rojava.  see also people's liberation party-front of turkey devrimci yol revolutionary people's liberation party/front syrian resistance  references  1975 establishments in turkey communist militant groups international freedom battalion left-wing militant groups in turkey peoples' united revolutionary movement
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  me  mead  (mead engineering co, colwich, ks)  mead adventure 100  meade  (c r meade, blackwell, ok)  meade swallow  meadowbrook  (william meadowbrook (possibly meadowcroft))  meadowbrook mc-1 chinook  meadowlark ultralight  (meadowlark ultralight corporation) meadowlark ultralight meadowlark  means  (sidney s means, san antonio, tx)  means taper wing  meckler-allen  (allen canton and john j. meckler)  meckler-allen 1912 biplane  medway  (medway microlights, rochester, kent, united kingdom)  medway av8r  medway eclipser  medway sla100 executive  medway sla100 clipper  medwecki (jozef medwecki and zygmund nowakowski)  medwecki m9  medwecki hl 2  medwecki and nowakowski m.n.5  meger  (mike meger, marinette, wi)  meger heli-star  meggitt  meggitt banshee  mehr  (ing. franz xaver mehr - erla maschinenwerk g.m.b.h.)  mehr me 1 - ultralight 12 hp dkw tl500   mehr me 2 - not built due to lack of funds  mehr me 3 1931  mehr me 4 glider  mehr me 4a motor-glider  mehr me 5  mehr me 6  meindl/van nes  (ob.-ing. erich meindl / wilhelm van nes)  meindl/van nes a.vii cadet (meindl m7)  meindl/van nes a.viii (meindl m8)  meindl/van nes a.xv (meindl m15)  meindl (ob.-ing. erich meindl / burgfalke flugzeugbau)   meindl m.15  meindl m.100  meindl m.101  meindl m.110  burgfalke m.150 schulmeister  meindl m.211  melberg-greenemeier  ((raymond) melberg, (conrad) greenemeier & (rowan) ward, 2949 columbia st,
denver co) a.k.a. melberg-greenemeier-ward  melberg-greenemeier mg-1  melberg-greenemeier mg-2 a.k.a. dga wilson or humphreys mg-2  melberg-greenemeier mg-3  melbourne aircraft corporation   mac mamba  melfe  (mike melfa, miami, fl)  melfa wca-1  melody aircraft (melody aircraft ltd.)  melody aircraft song  belite ultracub  belite procub  melton  (clarence c melton, kansas city, mo)  melton#1 (katydid)  melton#3 (sport)  melton houpisine a.k.a. k c special  mendenhall  (eugene mendenhall, los angeles, ca)  mendenhall m-1 a.k.a. special  menefee  (menefee airways inc, 2111 burgundy st, new orleans, la)  menefee crescent  mentzel  (ing buro mentzel, prinzhofte, germany) mentzel baltic fox mentzel baltic fox sea  mercep  (mihajlo mercep)  mercep 1909 biplane  mercep-rusjan 1910 monoplane - slovenia - m.mercep, e. rusjan and j. rusjan  mercep 1911 monoplane  mercep 1912 monoplane  merckle   merckle sm 67  mercury  (1920: aerial service corp (pres: henry kleckler), hammondsport, ny, 1922: aerial engr corp, 1929: mercury aviation co (harvey mummert, r w schroeder & john r wentworth). )  mercury chic t-2  mercury cw-1 junior  mercury s a.k.a. red racer  mercury s-1 a.k.a. white racer  mercury special  aerial booth bee line  aerial mercury senior  aerial standard  aerial thurston monoplane  aerial kitten  aerial dw-4 trainer  aerial arrow  mercury  (mercury aircraft corp (pres: p e crosby), fairfax ks.)  mercury mars  mercury  ( mercury aircraft corp (pres: f l bette, v pres/chief engr: j b baumann, v pres/gen mgr: dick smith), menominee, mi)  mercury b-100  mercury bt-120 aerobat
mercury air   mercury air shoestring  meridionali  (imam - industrie meccaniche e aeronautiche meridonali)  imam ro.1  imam ro.5  imam ro.10  imam ro.26  imam ro.30  imam ro.35  imam ro.37  imam ro.41  imam ro.43  imam ro.44  imam ro.45  imam ro.51  imam ro.57  imam ro.58  imam ro.63  imam ro.71  imam ag  meridionali/agusta ema 124  merkel  ( (edwin w) merkel airplane co, wichita and valley center, ks)  merkel mark ii  merckle (merckle flugzeugbau)  merkle lf 501 kiebitz  merle  (a j merle, alameda, ca, and hans p nielsen, alameda, ca)  merle 1910 biplane  merlin   merlin ez  merlin gt  merlin  (merlin autogyros, quedgeley, gloucestershire, united kingdom)  merlin gts  merrill  ((albert a) merrill aircraft co. / california institute of technology)  merrill cit-9 safety plane  merrill  (herbert j merrill, san diego, ca)  merrill 1931 monoplane  merville  (societe des helices g. merville)  merville d.63  merville sm.30  merville sm.31  messer  ((glenn) messer aeronautical industries inc. / southern aircraft co.)  messer 1927 biplane  messerschmitt  (messerschmitt ag)  messerschmitt m 17  messerschmitt m 35  messerschmitt m 36  messerschmitt bf 108 taifun  messerschmitt bf 109  messerschmitt bf 110  messerschmitt me 155  messerschmitt bf 161  messerschmitt bf 162 jaguar  messerschmitt me 163 komet  messerschmitt bf 164  messerschmitt me 208  messerschmitt me 209 racer  messerschmitt me 209 fighter  messerschmitt me 210  messerschmitt me 261  messerschmitt me 262 schwalbe  messerschmitt me 263  messerschmitt me 264 amerika  messerschmitt me 265  messerschmitt me 309  messerschmitt me 310  messerschmitt me 321 gigant  messerschmitt me 323 gigant  messerschmitt me 328  messerschmitt me 329  messerschmitt me 410 hornisse  messerschmitt me 509  messerschmitt me 609  messerschmitt c-44  messier  ( avion george messier - now messier-bugatti-dowty)  messier ct.001  messler  (
raoul messier, andover, ct)  messler snipe pt101 serial 2  metal aircraft corporation   metal aircraft corporation flamingo  metal aircraft corp g-1 flamingo  metal aircraft corp g-2 flamingo  metal aircraft corp g-2 flamingo  metal aircraft corp g-2-w flamingo  metal aircraft corp g-mt-6 flamingo  metal master  metal master lar-1  metalair  metalair 1  metalclad   metalclad airship  metcalf   metcalf 1909 helicopter  meteor   meteor fl.53  meteor fl.54  meteor fl.55  meteor bis  meteor super  meteoric  (meteoric aeroplane co)  meteoric 1911 aeroplane  methvin  (wilbur c methvin, lawrenceburg, tn & kermit parker, atlanta, ga)  methvin xp-101  meunier  (pierre meunier)  meunier pm.301 dauphin  meyer  (george w meyer, corpus christi, tx)  meyer little toot  meyer  (les k meyer, enumclaw, wa)  k-meyer aero model a  meyer  (clair o meyer, bay minette, al)  meyer p-51b (2/3 scale)  meyerhoffer  (otto meyerhoffer, oroville)  otto meyerhoffer, oroville, ca  meyers  (george f meyes, columbus, oh)  meyers 1906 orthopter  meyers  (charles w meyers, greensboro, nc)  meyers midget  meyers  ((allen h) meyers aircraft co, romulus and tecumseh, mi)  meyers otw-125  meyers otw-145  meyers otw-160  meyers mac-124  meyers mac 125  meyers mac-126  meyers mac-145  meyers mac-200  meyers me-165w  meyers 200  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
felix auger-aliassime and denis shapovalov were the defending champions, however shapovalov withdrew due to injury. auger-aliassime played alongside benjamin sigouin, but lost in the final to juan carlos aguilar and felipe meligeni alves, 3-6, 6-7(4-7).  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  external links   main draw  boys' doubles us open, 2016 boys' doubles
nong pho railway station is a railway station located in nong pho subdistrict, takhli district, nakhon sawan. it is located 211.444 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 31 october 1905 as part of the northern line extension from lop buri to pak nam pho.  train services  rapid 102 chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 109 bangkok-chiang mai  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
viktor klimov (born 10 december 1964) is a soviet former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people soviet male cyclists ukrainian male cyclists olympic cyclists of the soviet union cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from simferopol
alfred bansard des bois (1848-1920) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1881 to 1885, and from 1893 to 1914, representing orne.  references  1848 births 1920 deaths people from orne politicians from normandy republican federation politicians members of the 3rd chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 6th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 7th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 8th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 9th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 10th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
olotu community is a town in ugbo kingdom in ilaje land, nigeria.the occupational activities of the olotu people include fishing, canoe making, lumbering, net making, mat making, launch building, farming and trading.  references  populated places in ondo state
the city council of milan () is the top tier legislative body of the municipality of milan, lombardy, italy. it consists of the directly elected mayor of milan and of an elected 48-member assembly, which controls the mayor's governing actions and has the authority to enforce his resignation by a motion of no confidence.  the city council is elected for five-year terms. its seats are assigned proportionally to each party and list, with a majority bonus being awarded to the winning coalition to guarantee governability. the last election was held on 3-4 october 2021.  the city council meets at palazzo marino, located in piazza della scala, municipality 1.  composition  the political system of the comuni of italy was changed in 1993, when a semi-presidential system for the mayoral election was introduced. previously, the council was elected under a pure proportional system and the council had the power to elect and dismiss the mayor of milan; since 1993 the mayor and the council are jointly elected by citizens, with an electoral law that assures to the elected mayor a political majority in the council.  under this system, the election of the mayor is prior over the election of the council. voters express a direct choice for the mayor or an indirect choice voting for the party of the candidate's coalition and this gives a result whereby the winning candidate is able to claim majority support in the new council. the candidate who is elected mayor has always a majority of 62% of seats (29 seats) in the city council, which will support him during his term. the seats for each party of the coalition which wins the majority is determined proportionally.  in this type of system, the council is generally elected for a five-year term, but, if the mayor suffers a vote of no confidence, resigns or dies, under the simul stabunt, simul cadent clause introduced in 1993 (literally they will stand together or they will fall together), also the council is dissolved and a snap election is called.  the municipal board (italian: giunta comunale), the executive body of the city, chosen and presided directly by the mayor, is generally composed by members of the city council, but also by external members.  functions the council acts as the supreme legislative body of the city. it is convened and chaired by a speaker (president del consiglio comunale) appointed by the council itself.  the council can decide over programs and public works projects, institution and system of taxes, the general rules for the use of goods and services, forecasting and
reporting financial statements. resolution basic acts attributed by law to its competence are the municipal statute, the regulations, the general criteria on the structure of offices and services.  after the creation of the metropolitan city of milan in 2015, which with its metropolitan council has the power to coordinate the municipalities around milan in providing basic services (including transport, school and social programs) and environment protection as the old province of milan did, the 2016 municipal administrative reform delegated to the 9 administrative boroughs councils of milan some advisory functions related to local services, such as schools, social services, waste collection, roads, parks, libraries and local commerce.  city hall  the city council is seated at palazzo marino, a 16th-century palace located in piazza della scala, in the centre of milan, italy. palazzo marino has been milan's city hall since 9 september 1861. it borders on piazza san fedele, piazza della scala, via case rotte and via tommaso marino.  the palace was built for, and is named after, the genoan trader and banker tommaso marino. it became a property of the state in 1781.  the current council meeting room was inaugurated on 30 june 1953. a ciceronian inscription from the previous meeting place of the council - the notorious sala alessi on the second floor of the palace - is reported on the marble walls around the room:  without personal interests · keep the people in mind · without (using) force  presidents  this is a list of the presidents (italian: presidenti del consiglio comunale) of the city council since the 1993 electoral reform:  political composition  historical composition  current composition  |- style="background-color:#e9e9e9;text-align:center;" ! colspan="4" rowspan="1" style="text-align:left;" | parties and coalitions ! colspan="1" | votes ! colspan="1" | % ! colspan="1" | seats |- | style="background-color:pink" rowspan="8" | | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | democratic party (partito democratico) | pd | 152,200 || 33.86 || 20 |- | style="background-color:#e1354c" | | style="text-align:left;" | sala for mayor (sala sindaco) | ss | 41,135 || 9.15 || 5 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | green europe (
europa verde) | ev | 22,994 || 5.11 || 3 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | the reformers (i riformisti) | iv-az |  18,049 || 4.01 || 2 |- | style="background-color:#802152" | | style="text-align:left;" | healthy milan (milano in salute) | mis |  7,367 || 1.64 || 1 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | united milan (milano unita) | mu |  7,012 || 1.56 || 0 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | radical milan (milano radicale) | mr |  4,816 || 1.07 || 0 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | volt europa  | v |  2,052 || 0.56 || 0 |- style="background-color:pink" | style="text-align:left;" colspan="4" | sala coalition (centre-left) | 256,075 || 56.96 || 31 |- | style="background-color:lightblue" rowspan="6" | | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | lega  | l | 48,283 || 10.74 || 6 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | brothers of italy (fratelli d'italia) | fdi | 43,889 || 9.76 || 5 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | forza italia  | fi | 31,819 || 7.08 || 3 |- | style="background-color:#074a94"| | style="text-align:left;" | bernardo for mayor (bernardo sindaco) | bs | 14,055 || 3.13 || 2 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" | popular milan (milano popolare) | mp |  8,367 || 1.86 || 1 |- | style="background-color:#0000ac" | | style="text-align:left;" | european liberal party | ple | 970 || 0.22 || 0
|- style="background-color:lightblue" | colspan="4" style="text-align:left;" | bernardo coalition (centre-right) |  147,383 || 32.78 || 17 |- | style="background-color:#366a9f" | | style="text-align:left;" colspan="2" | paragone for mayor-great north  |  | 12,974 || 2.89 || 0 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" colspan="2" | five star movement (movimento cinque stelle) | m5s | 12,517 || 2.78 || 0 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" colspan="2" | milan in common (milano in comune) | mc |  7,175 || 1.60 || 0 |- | style="background-color:" | | style="text-align:left;" colspan="2" | others  |  |  12,989 || 2.99 || 0 |- | colspan="7" style="background-color:#e9e9e9" |  |- style="font-weight:bold;" | style="text-align:left;" colspan="4" | total | 449,563 || 100.00 || 48 |- | colspan="7" style="background-color:#e9e9e9" |  |- | style="text-align:left;" colspan="4" | votes cast / turnout  | 491,141 || 47.72 || style="background-color:#e9e9e9;" | |- | style="text-align:left;" colspan="4" | eligible voters | 1,029,232 ||  || style="background-color:#e9e9e9;" | |- | colspan="7" style="background-color:#e9e9e9" |  |- | style="text-align:left;" colspan="7" | source: ministry of the interior |}  notes  government of milan city councils in italy
filesonic was a file hosting service site which is now defunct.  it was once one of the most popular file locker services which was primarily a consumer based service used from homes, although in a study conducted by security vendor palo alto networks it was found to be in use on a majority of corporate networks.  filesonic used digital fingerprinting technology to detect prohibited sharing of copyrighted material on its network and had a designated dmca agent to facilitate takedown requests.  however, on the week following the government raid of the megaupload site, filesonic chose to discontinue the sharing of files and permit only retrieval of files that individual users themselves had uploaded.  eventually, the changes enacted in the wake of the megaupload scandal, which were also enacted by the similarly named competitor fileserve, resulted in  filesonic going out of business.  both filesonic and the file sharing service oron had been sued by the pornography company flava works prior to going out of business.  references  file hosting
methysos is a cypriot folk metal band formed in limassol, cyprus in 2011. methysos has remained active in the cyprus metal scene since its formation. the band has shared the stage with bands such as uriah heep (band), mnemic and grave digger (band). methysos is the first and only folk metal band from cyprus.  history the band was formed officially in november 2011 when mario kenji and george satyros decided to materialise their passion for folk metal music. the founding members also co-existed in various local bands in the past. the lyrical theme of the band entails myths, legends and folk stories from around the world. the band name is a greek word for drunkard.  in march 2012, the band released its first work, a demo titled beyond myths and legends. the three tracks of the demo, were then recorded again and included in their debut album.  following a warm welcome from the local scene methysos were called up to support bands including clepto, armageddon, mnemic, grave digger (band) and uriah heep (band).  many live shows and some band member changes later, the band took its current line-up in march 2014 when george zeus and ck madman joined forces with the band. in this form the band released in march 2016, and after almost a year of work on the album, their debut titled folkloria. an official video clip for "drink loud - drink proud" and a lyric video for "waltz with the gods" was also released to support the album. the band has released their second album, jukai, in february 2018.  members  current line-up  mario kenji - bass, vocals  george satyros - drums  george zeus - guitar   nidal guitar   ck madman- keys  discography  albums beyond myths and legends (demo album) (2012) folkloria (2016) jukai (2018)  references  external links methysos - discography, line-up, biography, interviews, photos methysos unveil upcoming album details and teaser | | metal soundscapesmetal soundscapes methysos | albums, members blogger methysos - encyclopaedia metallum: the metal archives  cypriot heavy metal musical groups folk metal musical groups
thomas simon alexander (born 10 july 1959) is a british businessman and former chief executive of orange and t-mobile.  early life alexander attended millfield, the independent school, as a day scholar from 1971-75.  career  virgin mobile alexander set up and founded virgin mobile, which was launched in november 1999 with his colleague from bt cellnet, jo steel. he left virgin mobile in 2006.  ee in september 2009, t-mobile decided to merge its uk operations with orange uk to become ee limited. he became the first chief executive in 2010.  references  1959 births british technology company founders british telecommunications industry businesspeople english chief executives people educated at millfield british telecom people people from somerset virgin mobile living people
donjet shkodra (born 30 april 1989) is a kosovo albanian professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for kf gjilani.  club career  eendracht aalst on 24 april 2013, shkodra joined eendracht aalst by signing a one-year contract with an option of a further one. he made his official debut for the club on 3 august 2013 by playing as a substitute in a 2-0 away defeat against antwerp.  deinze for the 2015-16 season shkodra signed with deinze of belgian first division b. he league debut would come on 8 august 2015 in team's 1-0 win over patro eisden, where shkodra was sent off in the 82nd minute after a second bookable offence.  flamurtari vlore on 4 july 2016, shkodra completed a move to flamurtari vlore of albanian superliga as a free agent. he was presented on the same day, where he was handed squad number 10. he made his competitive debut on 7 september in the opening league match of 2016-17 season, scoring his team's only goal in a 2-1 away defeat to skenderbeu korce. in the second matchday against the newly promoted side luftetari gjirokaster, shkodra scored two goals, both long-range strikes, in an eventual 5-0 home win for the first three points of the campaign. on 5 november, shkodra scored the first goal of the 2-0 home win against skenderbeu korce, giving the team its second consecutive league win.  on 6 december, he was again on the scoresheet, netting the winner against tirana to give the team 3 vital points. later that month, shkodra suffered an injury in right leg which kept him sidelined for about three months. he returned in action in march of the following year, making his first appearance on 11th, starting and playing the whole match against partizani tirana. he finished his first and only flamurtari season by making 30 appearances, including 26 in league, scoring 11 goals, including 9 leagues goals, as the team avoided the relegation by just one point. in june 2017, shkodra confirmed his departure from the club.  skenderbeu korce on 3 june 2017, skenderbeu korce's president ardian takaj confirmed that the club has reached an agreement with shkodra. three days later, shkodra confirmed via an open letter that he was leaving
flamurtari for skenderbeu. he was presented to the media on 7 june where he penned a two-year contract. he stated: "i'm happy to be part of the best team in albania in the recent years. i'm ready to give 100% for this team.  he played mostly as second-fiddle in skenderbeu's historic run in the 2017-18 uefa europa league qualifying rounds, becoming the first albanian club to pass four rounds. he made only four appearances, all of them as substitute, colleting 103 minutes on the field. he started the domestic season by scoring in the first leg of 2017-18 albanian cup first round against adriatiku mamurras. three days later he played his first albanian superliga match for skenderbeu in the opening matchday against flamurtari vlore, contributing in a 2-0 home win. he scored his maiden league goal in the next matchday at newly promoted kamza, finished in a 1-1 draw.  shkodra failed to make an impact and remained mostly to bench during his stint, making only 6 league appearances, collecting only 298 minutes.  kukesi on 3 january 2018, shkodra agreed personal terms and joined defending champions kukesi. he signed a contract running until 2020 worth €8,000 per month and was allocated squad number 10. shkodra made his competitive debut later on 26 january in the 1-3 win at vllaznia shkoder, assisting the second goal scored by filip zderic. his first score-sheet contributions came in his sixth league appearance for the club, netting the second in an eventual 2-2 home draw versus his ex team skenderbeu korce. he refused to celebrate in the process.  shakhter karagandy on 24 february 2019, shakhter karagandy announced the signing of shkodra on a one-year contract. on 20 june 2019, shakhter karagandy extended their contract with shkodra until the end of the 2020 season.  style of play he is famous due to his long-range strikes and free kicks.  personal life shkodra was born in pristina to kosovar albanian parents but grew up in gnjilane. he emigrated to belgium from kosovo in 1998 during the war time along with his family.  career statistics  references  external links donjet shkodra profile at deinze donjet shkodra profile at eendracht aalst  1989 births living people sportspeople from pristina kosovo albanians association football midfielders kosovan footballers k.s.
v. waregem players sportkring sint-niklaas players k.s.k. ronse players s.c. eendracht aalst players k.m.s.k. deinze players flamurtari vlore players kf skenderbeu korce players fk kukesi players fc shakhter karagandy players fc zhetysu players albanian superliga players belgian first division b players kazakhstan premier league players kosovan expatriate footballers kosovan expatriate sportspeople in belgium expatriate footballers in belgium kosovan expatriate sportspeople in albania expatriate footballers in albania kosovan expatriate sportspeople in kazakhstan expatriate footballers in kazakhstan
substitute wife (finnish: vaimoke) is a 1936 finnish romantic comedy film directed by valentin vaala and starring ansa ikonen, tauno palo and uuno laakso.  cast  ansa ikonen as kirsti leivo / latva    tauno palo as esko latva    uuno laakso as julle    kirsti suonio as sofia    kunto karapaa as tanu miettinen    sylvi palo as maija pietarinen    vaino sola as parish clerk    ruth snellman as signe    aino lohikoski as liisa    sirpa tolonen as leena    rakel linnanheimo as maila    sointu kouvo as sirkka    eino jurkka as torvela    kaija suonio as dean's wife    erwin uimonen as hoffman   siiri angerkoski as mrs. miettinen    matti aulos as porter    vilho auvinen as man in a train    arvo kuusla as man in a club    irja kuusla as maid   kyosti kayhko as man in a train    liisa nevalainen as kirsti's guest    otto noro as man in a train    rosi rinne as housekeeper    pentti saares as man in a phone booth    margareta wasenius as kirsti's guest    elli ylimaa as spinster  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1936 films 1936 romantic comedy films finnish romantic comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by valentin vaala finnish black-and-white films
annie may hurd karrer (july 28, 1893 in la conner, washington - may 15, 1984 in orange county, florida) was an american plant physiologist who worked for the united states department of agriculture.  biography annie may hurd was born in 1893 in la conner, washington. she received an a.b. degree from the university of washington in 1915 and an m.s. from that institution in 1917.  she received her ph.d. in plant physiology from the university of california, berkeley in 1918.  the same year that she received her doctoral degree, hurd joined the staff of the united states department of agriculture (usda), as a researcher for the bureau of plant industry.  she married physicist sebastian karrer in 1923.  she continued her work for usda, specializing in the improvement of cereal crops and the control of their diseases.  now as annie karrer, she rose to the position of associate plant physiologist in 1924; she was named plant physiologist in 1944, a position she held until 1949. karrer published 16 papers in the usda series of reports.  her articles appeared in journals including the american journal of botany, plant physiology, the journal of general physiology, and soil science.  three papers on the effects of selenium appeared in science in the 1930s.  karrer made a gift to the university of washington that established the sebastian karrer prize, in honor of her husband.  first given in 1947, it is awarded to a senior or graduate student in the department of physics on the basis of need, scholarship, and good character.  selected publications  notes  references  bibliography    1893 births 1984 deaths american women botanists 20th-century american botanists people from la conner, washington plant physiologists university of washington alumni university of california, berkeley alumni united states department of agriculture people 20th-century american women
trump: how to get rich is a 2004 non-fiction book by donald trump and meredith mciver. like trump's 16 other publications, it was to an unknown extent ghostwritten. the book was published to take advantage of media attention related to the apprentice tv series, which trump hosted from january 2004. the book is focused on trump's fame and public image, and makes statements such as "emphatically and categorically, no: i do not wear a rug. my hair is 100 per cent mine." while the book forms part of trump's success creed, it more describes how trump got richer than being a "how to get rich" guide. the book contains 53 short business "commandments", and finishes with a section dedicated to trump's role in the apprentice.  see also  bibliography of donald trump  references  external links   google books  2004 non-fiction books books by donald trump
my best enemy () is a 2011 austrian / luxembourgian comedy film directed by wolfgang murnberger.  cast   moritz bleibtreu as victor kaufmann  georg friedrich as rudi smekal  ursula strauss as lena  marthe keller as hannah kaufmann  udo samel as jakob kaufmann  uwe bohm as standartenfuhrer widriczek  rainer bock as ss-hauptsturmfuhrer rauter  karl fischer as ss obersturmbannfuhrer maier  hans-michael rehberg as karel brinek  merab ninidze as moritz haiden  mirko roggenbock as ss-untersturmfuhrer gruber  christoph luser as ss-scharfuhrer weber  klaus manchen as staatssekretar leipold  references  external links   2010s historical films austrian films luxembourgian films austrian historical films
maksim aleksandrovich amfiteatrov (february 27, 1907 in paris - december 19, 1990 in levanto), known as massimo amfiteatrof, was a russian-born italian cellist, dubbed as the "cellists' caruso". (italian: il caruso dei violoncellisti)  biography amfiteatrof was born maksim aleksandrovic amfiteatrov (russian: максим александрович амфитеатров) from a russian family. his mother, ilaria vladimirovna amfiteatrova, was an actress and a singer, while his father, alexander amfiteatrov, was a writer and a journalist. his brother, daniele amfitheatrof, became an orchestra conductor. he lived in st. petersburg until 1917. when the russian revolution outbroke, his family escaped to italy and settled in liguria, first in cavi (a frazione of lavagna) and then in levanto, in the province of la spezia.  in levanto the amfiteatrof family gave hospitality to other russian refugees, especially artists, and made its house a well-known cultural and intellectual circle. having a culturally strong background, massimo amfiteatrof began to study cello and moved to milan to attend the local conservatory. in 1924 arturo toscanini appointed him principal solo cello at la scala at the age of 17, a role with whom he worked first with the eiar orchestra in turin and then with the rai orchestra in rome.  as a soloist, amfiteatrof toured all europe and america, sometimes together with pianist marisa candeloro. during the 1940s, he had formed a trio with violinist arrigo pelliccia and pianist ornella puliti santoliquido. the trio turned into the quartetto di roma as the violist bruno giuranna joined the group. massimo amfiteatrof also taught at the conservatorio santa cecilia in rome and at the naples conservatory and made some records (many of them published by decca records) together with the virtuosi di roma string quartet in which violinists such as renato fasano and luigi ferro did participate.  although he was a classical musician, massimo amfiteatrof provided his talent to pop music artists and records. one of his best efforts has been his contribution to fabrizio de andre's album non al denaro non all'amore ne al cielo: amfiteatrof played cello in two songs, "un ottico" (an optician) and "un blas
femo" (a blasphemous one), under the baton of nicola piovani and together with violinist/violist dino asciolla.  after his retirement, amfiteatrof continued to live in levanto and died there in 1990. in 1992, two years after his death, the ligurian town inaugurated the amfiteatrof music festival, known until 2016 as festival massimo amfiteatrof, a classical and chamber music festival that has reached the 25th edition in 2016.  see also  aleksandr amfiteatrov  daniele amfitheatrof  levanto  amfiteatrof music festival  references  external links  russi in italia (italian biography)  mon musee musical  (french biography)  festival massimo amfiteatrof (festival massimo amfiteatrof official website)    1907 births 1990 deaths musicians from paris 20th-century russian musicians 20th-century italian musicians italian classical cellists russian classical cellists emigrants from the russian empire to italy emigrants from the russian empire to france white russian emigrants to france white russian emigrants to italy 20th-century classical musicians
events from the year 1786 in russia  incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events  court riding arena in saint petersburg begins construction  creaking pagoda completed in tsarskoye selo  don host oblast established  fevey - premier of opera by vasily pashkevich with libretto by catherine the great  pashkov house completed in moscow  st. catherine's cathedral completed in kherson  vodootvodny canal completed  births  dmitry begichev, civil servant, writer, senator  alexander chavchavadze, georgian poet and nobleman, russian general  auguste de montferrand, french architect who worked principally in russia  roksandra skarlatovna edling, courtier  (d. 1844)  fyodor glinka, poet and author  gavriil ignatyev, general  maria nesselrode, courtier  (d. 1803)  grand duchess maria pavlovna of russia (1786-1859), daughter of paul i of russia  pavel schilling, diplomat and inventor  ekaterina semenova, actress  roxandra sturdza, philanthropist and writer  sergey uvarov, scholar and civil servant influential in education  filipp vigel, nobleman, civil servant, memoirist  otto magnus von stackelberg, archaeologist and artist  karl gustav von strandmann, general  deaths  jovan horvat, general and founder of new serbia  thomas mackenzie (russian admiral), admiral and founder of sevastopol  julia von mengden, lady-in-waiting and confidant of grand dutchess anna leopoldovna  references  1786 in the russian empire years of the 18th century in the russian empire
sergey turanok (; ; born 23 march 1986) is a belarusian professional footballer who plays for molodechno.  references  external links      1986 births living people belarusian footballers association football goalkeepers fc livadiya dzerzhinsk players fc torpedo minsk players fc kommunalnik slonim players fc torpedo-belaz zhodino players fc gorodeya players fc khimik svetlogorsk players fc isloch minsk raion players fc belshina bobruisk players fc molodechno players
ranaweera appuhamilage leslie herbert gunawardana (17 august 1938 - 16 november 2010) was a sri lankan historian, academic, politician and government minister.  early life and family gunawardana was born on 17 august 1938 in tholangamuwa, ceylon. both of his parents died when he was young and he was brought up his uncle. he was educated at tholangamuwa central college. having won the 1956 the university entrance arts scholarship, he joined the university of ceylon, peradeniya, graduating in 1960 with a first class b.a. honours degree in ancient history. he received a phd degree from the school of oriental and african studies in 1965 for his research, guided by arthur llewellyn basham and johannes gijsbertus de casparis, on buddhist monastic institutions in ceylon during the early medieval period. his thesis was published by the university of arizona press in 1979 under the title robe and plough: monasticism and economic interest in early medieval sri lanka.  gunawardana was married to viru. they had a son - asela.  career gunawardana joined the faculty of the university of ceylon, peradeniya in 1960 as an assistant lecturer in the department of history. rising up the academic ladder, he was appointed personal chair in history in 1982 and dean of the faculty of arts in 1991 before serving as vice-chancellor (1997-00) of the university of peradeniya. he also served as chairman of the association of commonwealth universities.  gunawardana was a long-standing member of the communist party of sri lanka, having joined in 1960. he was appointed as one of the people's alliance's national list mp in the sri lankan parliament following the 2000 parliamentary election. he was appointed minister of science and technology after the election. he lost his ministerial position in september 2001 following a cabinet reshuffle.  gunawardana died on 16 november 2010 following a prolonged illness.  references  1938 births 2010 deaths academics of the university of ceylon (peradeniya) academics of the university of peradeniya alumni of soas university of london alumni of the university of ceylon (peradeniya) cabinet ministers of sri lanka communist party of sri lanka politicians members of the 11th parliament of sri lanka people of british ceylon sinhalese academics sinhalese historians sinhalese politicians sinhalese writers sri lankan buddhists vice-chancellors of the university of peradeniya historians of sri lanka
kaurna plains school is an aboriginal school in elizabeth, a northern suburb of adelaide, south australia. it includes the teaching of the kaurna language in its curriculum.  history and description established in 1986 and taking classes from 1987, it caters predominantly for aboriginal students from reception to year 13.  its aim is to provide aboriginal children with an academically focused curriculum which respects aboriginal culture. the school was created as a response to the "widespread educational disadvantage identified within the northern adelaide region resulting in aboriginal learners not meeting national and state educational benchmarks".  people principals have included alitya rigney, who introduced the teaching of the kaurna language at the school and was the first aboriginal woman to become a school principal in australia.  references  external links  high schools in south australia public schools in south australia aboriginal schools in south australia
this page is about the irish greyhound race. for the british race, see select stakes (greyhounds).  the select stakes is a greyhound racing competition held annually at kilcohan park greyhound stadium located in the south of waterford, ireland. ireland.    it is a prestigious event targeted by many of ireland's leading greyhounds and is an integral part of the irish greyhound racing calendar.  the competition today is sponsored by gain feeds but in the past sponsors have included waterford glass and red mills.  past winners  venues & distances 1970-2003 (waterford 525y) 2004-2011 (waterford 550y) 2012-2021 (waterford 525y)  sponsors 1965-1965	waterford glass international 1970-1975	marquis of waterford cup 1976-1978	truboard gold cup 1979-1997	waterford glass stakes/waterford crystal stakes 1998-1998	waterford masters 1999-2000	kearns waterford masters 2002-2003	westside business park waterford masters 2004-2005	michael meade waterford masters 2006-2008	gain waterford masters 2009-2011	red mills waterford masters 2012-2019	gain select stakes  references  greyhound racing competitions in ireland sport in waterford (city) recurring sporting events established in 1965
mansa is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of mansa district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022         -->  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  mansa district, india  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india mansa district, india
tej parkash singh is an indian politician from the state of punjab.  constituency singh represented the payal, ludhiana constituency from 2002-2007 and 2007-2012.  posts singh was the transport minister in the government of punjab.  political party   singh is from the indian national congress.  family singh's father  beant singh was the chief minister of punjab from 1992-1995.  references   living people indian national congress politicians people from punjab, india indian national congress politicians from punjab, india year of birth missing (living people)
tripylella mexicana is a species of nematodes, first found in mexico. it can be distinguished by its rather short body (averaging  in length); having a short pharynx; its short tail; possession of an excretory pore as well as setae distributed throughout its body; having body pores; its striated cuticle carrying several anastomoses; non-protruding vulval lips, as well as other characteristics.  references   enoplia
olenecamptus ethiopicus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1977.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1977
yu kau wai (born 23 march 1965) is a hong kong former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1965 births living people hong kong male cyclists olympic cyclists of hong kong cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
greg meehan is an american swimming coach, as well as the women's head coach for the stanford swim team. in 2016, meehan was selected to be an assistant coach for the us women's olympic swimming team. meehan coached katie ledecky, maya dirado, simone manuel, and lia neal to eleven golds, seven silvers, and two bronzes. he was associate head coach at cal. and prior to cal, meehan was the head men's and women's coach at university of the pacific. as an athlete, meehan swam at rider university, in new jersey, as a backstroker.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people american swimming coaches
jesus "jess" gestuveo dureza (born december 24, 1947) is a filipino lawyer, consultant, journalist and politician from davao city, philippines. he was the adviser on the peace process to president rodrigo duterte from 2016 to 2018 and is the founding chairman of advocacy mindanow foundation, a group advocating for peace in mindanao. he has held various appointive positions in past administrations including the chairmanship of the mindanao development authority, the chairmanship of the government peace negotiating panel for talks with the moro islamic liberation front, and presidential assistant for mindanao. he is also a former representative of the 1st district of davao city in the philippine house of representatives.  early life and education  dureza was born in guimbal, iloilo on december 24, 1947. his father, martin dureza, hails from janiuay and took part in the local guerrilla warfare against the japanese army during world war ii. he was one year old when his family migrated to davao. he finished elementary as the class valedictorian at guihing elementary school in hagonoy in 1959. he attended the holy cross of digos high school (now cor jesu college) in digos where he was classmates with the future president rodrigo duterte and graduated with honors in 1963.  dureza then enrolled at the ateneo de davao university in davao city where he graduated cum laude with a bachelor of arts degree in 1967. he earned his law degree from the same university in 1973. he placed 10th in the philippine bar examination the same year.  career  dureza had a career in journalism before entering politics. in 1972, while a law student at the ateneo, he worked as a radio host for rmn davao and as davao correspondent for the manila times. after finishing law, he was hired as an editor for mindanao times, as a correspondent for manila bulletin, and as television presenter of "brainstorm" in davao city. he was also president of the davao press club.  dureza then joined politics in 1987 after being elected as congressman of the newly established first district of davao city. he served in the corazon aquino administration after his term in congress as director of the philippine coconut authority in 1989. in 1992, he was again elected as davao city representative.  dureza was appointed by fidel ramos as his presidential assistant for mindanao and chairman of the mindanao economic development council. from 1998 to 2000, he served as the official spokesperson for the former president. in 2002, he founded the advocacy mindanow foundation.  during
the gloria arroyo administration, he was appointed as chairman of the grp panel for talks with the moro islamic liberation front in 2003, chairman of mindanao economic development council in 2006, presidential adviser on the peace process in 2008, press secretary in 2009, and presidential adviser on mindanao also in 2009. his last appointive position with the arroyo government was as chairman of the mindanao development authority in 2010.  before returning to government service in 2016, dureza was a senior partner at the rama dureza abarquez law firm. he was also the publisher of mindanao times, chairman of the philippine press institute, director of maple tree foundation for mountain communities, and consultant for sm investments corporation.  dureza was awarded the presidential medal of merit by president fidel ramos in june 1998. he is also a recipient of the datu bago award (1983), the highest award given to a davaoeno.  he served as presidential adviser on the peace process of the philippines under the rodrigo duterte administration from june 30, 2016 to november 27, 2018.  references   1947 births filipino lawyers filipino consultants filipino newspaper publishers (people) filipino journalists living people presidential advisers on the peace process of the philippines presidential spokespersons (philippines) assistants to the president of the philippines members of the house of representatives of the philippines from davao city heads of government agencies of the philippines people from iloilo people from davao city laban ng demokratikong pilipino politicians ateneo de davao university alumni corazon aquino administration personnel ramos administration personnel arroyo administration cabinet members duterte administration cabinet members hiligaynon people recipients of the presidential medal of merit (philippines) secretaries of the presidential communications operations office
indian weapons may refer to:  native american weaponry  weapons of india, see indian martial arts and military history of india
valadares gaia futebol clube is a portuguese football club based in valadares (vila nova de gaia) in the grande porto.  current squad  honours supertaca de portugal de futebol feminino  champions: 2015-16  references  external links    women's football clubs in portugal campeonato nacional de futebol feminino teams
wan'an () is a town under the administration of santai county, sichuan, china. , it has one residential community and six villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of sichuan santai county
lost and won may refer to:   lost and won (1915 film), a 1915 british film  lost and won (1917 film), a 1917 american film
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 28 february 1945 in kumamoto as a square division. it was a part of the 16 simultaneously created divisions batch numbering from 140th to 160th.  action initially, the 146th division was assigned to the 57th army. after the 40th army was transferred from taiwan to kyushu, the division was reassigned to it and sent to kagoshima prefecture  the 146th division was tasked with the coastal defense. the division did not see any combat until surrender of japan 15 august 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第146師団 (日本軍), accessed 13 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
shanae greaves (born 8 april 1993) is an australian professional basketball player who played for the sydney uni flames in the women's national basketball league.  professional career  wnbl after strong showings in the seabl, greaves began gaining more attention and before long found herself on the melbourne boomers roster. greaves then made her professional debut with the boomers in 2013. she has since continued on for two more seasons with the boomers. greaves has been signed by the sydney uni flames for the 2016-17 season.  personal life shanae greaves was born in melbourne australia. she has two parents and two brothers. in 2015 shanae moved to sydney to play basketball for the sydney uni flames. it was there that she met her best friend pippa temperley with who she started a successful fitness and lifestyle instagram page. shanae attributes much of her success to pippa and notes "honestly i wouldn't be the person i am today without pippa, she is the best friend i could ever ask for".  references  1993 births living people australian women's basketball players forwards (basketball) sportspeople from victoria (australia) sydney uni flames players
13th is a 2016 american documentary film by director ava duvernay. the film explores the "intersection of race, justice, and mass incarceration in the united states;" it is titled after the thirteenth amendment to the united states constitution, adopted in 1865, which abolished slavery throughout the united states and ended involuntary servitude except as a punishment for conviction of a crime.  duvernay contends that slavery has been perpetuated since the end of the american civil war through criminalizing behavior and enabling police to arrest poor freedmen and force them to work for the state under convict leasing; suppression of african americans by disenfranchisement, lynchings, and jim crow; politicians declaring a war on drugs that weighs more heavily on minority communities and, by the late 20th century, mass incarceration affecting communities of color, especially american descendants of slavery, in the united states. she examines the prison-industrial complex and the emerging detention-industrial complex, discussing how much money is being made by corporations from such incarcerations.  13th garnered acclaim from a number of film critics. it was nominated for the academy award for best documentary feature at the 89th academy awards, and won the primetime emmy award for outstanding documentary or nonfiction special at the 69th primetime emmy awards.  it experienced a surge in viewership by 4,665 percent in june 2020 during the george floyd protests.  synopsis the film begins with an audio clip of president barack obama stating that the us had 5 percent of the world's population but 25 percent of the world's prisoners. this film features several activists, academics, political figures from both major us political parties, and public figures, such as angela davis, bryan stevenson, michelle alexander, jelani cobb, van jones, newt gingrich, cory booker, henry louis gates jr., and others.  it explores the economic history of slavery and post-civil war racist legislation and practices that replaced it. duvernay contends as "systems of racial control" and forced labor from the years after the abolition of slavery to the present. southern states criminalized minor offenses, arresting freedmen and forcing them to work when they could not pay fines; institutionalizing this approach as convict leasing (which created an incentive to criminalize more behavior). she contends they disenfranchised most black people across the south at the turn of the 20th century, excluding them from the political system (including juries), at the same time that lynching of black people by white mobs reached a peak. in addition, jim crow legislation was passed by democrats, to legalize segregation and
suppress minorities, forcing them into second-class status. following the passage of civil rights legislation in the 1960s that restored civil rights, the film notes the republican party's appeal to southern white conservatives, including the claim to be the party to fight the war on crime and war on drugs, which began to include mandatory, lengthy sentencing. a new wave of minority suppression  began, reaching african americans and others in the northern, mid-western and western cities where many had migrated in earlier decades. after their presidential candidates lost to republicans, democratic politicians such as bill clinton joined the war on drugs.  as a result, from the early 1970s to the present, the rate of incarceration and the number of people in prisons has climbed dramatically in the united states, while at the same time the rate of crime in the united states has continued to decline since the late 20th century. as late as the 2016 presidential election, the eventual winner donald trump worked to generate fear of crime, claiming high rates in new york city, for instance, which was not true according to the documentary. the documentary states that crime was lower overall than it had been in decades, but that republican candidates raised it to generate fear. private prison contractors entered the market to satisfy demand as arrests and sentences increased, forming an independent group with its own economic incentives to criminalize minor activities and lengthen sentences in order to keep prisons full. politicians and businessmen in rural areas encouraged construction of prisons to supply local jobs, and they also have had incentives to keep prisons full.  the federal bureau of prisons announced in 2016 its intention to stop contracting with private providers for prison services. according to the film, the over-incarceration of adults has severely damaged generations of black and minority families and their children.  the film explores the role of the american legislative exchange council, backed by corporations, that has provided republican state and federal legislators with draft legislation to support the prison-industrial complex. it contends that only after some of the relationships were revealed did corporations like walmart and others receive criticism and drop out of the organization.  the film explores the demonization of minority poor through these decades to serve political ends, contributing to fears of minorities by whites and to problems of police brutality against minority communities. in the 21st century, the regularity of fatal police shootings of unarmed minorities in apparently minor confrontations has been demonstrated by videos taken by bystanders and by the increasing use of cameras in police cars or worn by officers; duvernay ends the film with graphic videos of fatal shootings of
black people by police, what manohla dargis describes as, after the previous discussion, having the effect of "a piercing, keening cry."  production the film was written by ava duvernay, who wrote and directed selma (2014), and spencer averick. averick also edited the film. produced and filmed in secrecy, 13th was revealed only after it was announced as the opening film for the 2016 new york film festival, the first documentary ever to open the festival.  release the film was released on october 7, 2016, on netflix. a companion piece 13th: a conversation with oprah winfrey & ava duvernay was released on january 26, 2017, in the united states and on january 31, 2017, worldwide on the service. on april 17, 2020, netflix released the film for free on youtube.  reception  critical response on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 97% based on 102 reviews, with an average rating of 8.77/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "13th strikes at the heart of america's tangled racial history, offering observations as incendiary as they are calmly controlled." on metacritic, the film has a score of 83 out of 100, based on reviews from 29 critics, indicating "universal acclaim".  manohla dargis of the new york times praised what she called the power of duvernay's film and its meticulous marshaling of facts. she said, summarizing the film, "the united states did not just criminalize a select group of black people. it criminalized black people as a whole, a process that, in addition to destroying untold lives, effectively transferred the guilt for slavery from the people who perpetuated it to the very people who suffered through it." peter travers of rolling stone awarded the film four stars and named it one of the best films of 2016.  kyle smith of the new york post gave the 13th a negative review, stating it was riddled with falsehoods and furthermore insulting to civil rights pioneers whose contributions are minimized: "viewers (such as film critics) who don't pay especially close attention to the news pages are likely to be suckered by the misinformation in the movie." dan berger of black perspectives wrote 13th was at its best in chronicling the lives of individuals in the american prison system, but also said the film "makes several significant factual errors" such as using outdated statistical data and overstating the role of for-profit
prisons.  viewership on a panel about the future of film published in the new york times, duvernay said:   in 2020, the film saw a surge in viewership by 4,665 percent during the george floyd protests.  accolades the film was nominated for dozens of awards, winning best documentary at the british academy film awards and the primetime emmy awards, a peabody award for excellence, and receiving a nomination for the academy award for best documentary feature. duvernay received a primetime emmy award for her writing, and was nominated for directing. the song "letter to the free" was nominated for several awards with common, robert glasper, and karriem riggins winning the primetime emmy award for outstanding original music and lyrics.  see also     slavery in the united states  southern strategy  jim crow laws  the house i live in (2012 film)  references  external links            2010s english-language films 2016 documentary films 2016 films american documentary films films directed by ava duvernay american films criminal justice reform in the united states netflix original documentary films documentary films about law in the united states documentary films about race and ethnicity in the united states peabody award-winning broadcasts documentary films about crime in the united states
is a female japanese voice actress affiliated with 81 produce.  filmography  television animation 2011  sket dance as delinquent (ep 37)  battle girls: time paradox as soldier a (ep 11)  2012  duel masters victory as kyusaku  baku tech! bakugan as harubaru hinode  beyblade: shogun steel as waitress #2  2013  tokyo ravens as female teacher  beast saga as village woman a (eps 1, 3)  pokemon: black & white: rival destinies as mareep  2014  d-frag! as mob son  hero bank as kaito kosho (eps 27-31)  future card buddyfight as gao mikado  yowamushi pedal grande road as elementary school boy (ep 16); midosuji's classmate (ep 3)  2015  future card buddyfight 100 as gao mikado  doraemon as girl  2016  future card buddyfight ddd as gao mikado  2017  future card buddyfight x as gao mikado  2020  sorcerous stabber orphen as volkan  2021  sorcerous stabber orphen: battle of kimluck as volkan  ova   magi: adventure of sinbad as boy (eps 1-2)  little witch academia: the enchanted parade as thomas's friend  dubbing roles  live-action  the odd life of timothy green as rod best  deep rooted tree  animation  capture the flag as mike goldwing  references  external links     living people year of birth missing (living people) japanese voice actresses voice actresses from tokyo 81 produce voice actors
the grand prix des marbriers is a road bicycle race held annually in france. it is organized as a 1.2 event on the uci europe tour.  winners  references  uci europe tour races cycle races in france 1961 establishments in france recurring sporting events established in 1961
ed engelkes (born 21 january 1964) is a dutch football manager. he was most recently head coach of ajax women and vvog.  playing career  engelkes started playing football at amateur club alliance '22 from his hometown, haarlem. soon, he was scouted by a professional football club, hfc haarlem. however, he would only appear for their reserve team, and during his early twenties, he expressed interest in becoming a manager.  managerial career  early career  engelkes started his managerial career at hfc haarlem, where he coached young players between the ages of 14 and 18. subsequently, he moved to hbc from heemstede, where he became a youth coach as well as assistant coach of the first team. during this time, he was also responsible for the youth academy of neighbouring club vv sizo, from hillegom.  knvb  in 1990, engelkes was employed by the royal dutch football association (knvb), where he was responsible for technical affairs, such as visiting football clubs in the netherlands, the organisation of street football tournaments and the scouting of young talent for the knvb's national youth teams.  netherlands women  in 2004, engelkes became assistant coach of the netherlands women's national football team, working alongside new head coach vera pauw. in addition, engelkes worked as coordinator of all women's teams of the knvb. as assistant coach, engelkes saw the netherlands women qualify for their first major international tournament, the uefa women's euro 2009, where they reached the semi-finals. in april 2010, when pauw left her post with the netherlands women, engelkes was appointed interim head coach. on 1 november 2010, he was succeeded by roger reijners and returned to being assistant coach. he fulfilled this position until may 2012.  az women  meanwhile, in 2007, az formed a women's team to compete in the newly formed women's eredivisie, and engelkes became their manager in addition to his work as assistant with the netherlands women's team. he led az to the eredivisie title in each of his first three years in charge, from 2007-08 until 2009-10, and also won the knvb women's cup, in 2010-11. after the 2010-11 season, az's women's team ceased to exist due to financial difficulties, which ended engelkes' az tenure.  ajax women  on 30 may 2012, it was announced that engelkes would become manager of the newly formed ajax women's team from the 2012-13 season,
the start of the bene league. he said: "the chance to be working at ajax is a once in a lifetime opportunity. i am proud to do this job." in the 2013-14 season, he led ajax to victory in the knvb women's cup. in the 2015-16 season, ajax finished as runners-up in the reinstated women's eredivisie. on 26 january 2017, ajax announced that the 2016-17 season would be engelkes' last with the club. during his final season, engelkes managed ajax to the double as they finished as champions in both the eredivisie and the knvb cup.  vvog  on 18 march 2014, it was announced that engelkes was appointed manager of hoofdklasse club vvog starting from the 2014-15 season. on 10 april 2015, his contract was extended for one year, following satisfactory results. during the 2015-16 season, vvog were promoted to the derde divisie. on 7 february 2017, engelkes announced he would leave the club after the 2016-17 season.  honours   az women  women's eredivisie: 2007-08, 2008-09, 2009-10  knvb women's cup: 2010-11  ajax women  women's eredivisie: 2016-17  knvb women's cup: 2013-14, 2016-17  references   1964 births living people dutch football managers netherlands women's national football team managers afc ajax (women) managers people from haarlem
realtysouth is an alabama-based real estate company comprising over 1,000 sales associates in 27 locations across alabama. it is a member of the berkshire hathaway family of companies.  history  realtysouth was formed in 1955 by the merger of johnson-rast & hays, brigham-williams, first real estate, and ray & company.   in 2002, it was acquired by homeservices of america, a holding of berkshire hathaway. since its founding in 1955, realtysouth has served more than 125,000 buyers and sellers.  in 2014, the company was ordered to pay a $500,000 fine for alleged violations of the real estate settlement procedures act (respa), with the specific claim that realtysouth improperly urged, and in some cases, required, customers to use realtysouth's own title insurer, titlesouth. while not admitting any wrongdoing, realtysouth agreed to a consent order requiring them to pay the $500,000 fine and to alter their customer paperwork to allow for a more clear choice of title insurers.  references  external links     palm springs neighborhoods  real estate companies of the united states companies based in birmingham, alabama real estate companies established in 1955 1955 establishments in alabama
emile dubois (1913-1973) was a french politician. he served as a member of the national assembly from 1951 to 1955, representing nord.  references  1913 births 1973 deaths politicians from lille french section of the workers' international politicians deputies of the 2nd national assembly of the french fourth republic senators of nord (french department)
surinder mohan (suri) sehgal is an india-born american philanthropist with a long career as a crop scientist, seedsman, entrepreneur, and leading expert in the global hybrid seed industry. his research and professional successes in the areas of plant breeding and genetics, agbiotechnology, intellectual property, business management, and seed industry development were carried out in executive capacities in several companies in the united states, belgium, and germany. after the divestment of a group of four seed companies that sehgal founded and ran with his wife, edda sehgal, the couple created two nonprofit organizations to promote rural development in suri's country of origin: sehgal (family) foundation in 1998 in the us, and s m sehgal foundation in india. the foundations' work focuses on water security, food security, and social justice with particular emphasis on women's empowerment. a proponent of corporate social responsibility and environmental sustainability, sehgal has also provided support individually and through the foundations for projects related to agriculture research, the preservation of biodiversity and the conservation  of natural resources.  early life and education  suri sehgal was born 16 may 1934 in the town of guliana in the punjab province of india to an inter-caste family. he was the second son, and one of eight children, of a hindu father, faqirchand "shahji" sehgal, and a sikh mother, shushil kaur sehgal. shahji sehgal was an associate of mahatma gandhi in the indian national congress, and the family home was a center for community organizing for india's independence from british rule. suri was thirteen when independence brought about the partition of india in august 1947. the sehgal family home, in the region of the punjab that became part of pakistan, was along the route of the mass migration of people who were displaced amidst the violence that followed partition-hindus and sikhs to india and muslims from india to pakistan. suri ended up homeless for a time on the streets of delhi and a witness to horrific violence and bloodshed before being reunited with his family in a refugee camp in amritsar, india.  suri achieved a bachelor of science with honors and a master of science with honors in botany at punjab university, where he received silver medal, merit certificates, and scholarships for academic achievement in 1955 and 1957. he came to the united states in 1959 to study plant genetics and work with paul c. mangelsdorf at harvard university. he received the anna c. ames memorial scholarship in 1961. he attained his phd in plant genetics from harvard in 1963. he later (1982) completed
the harvard international senior management program in mont-pelerin, switzerland.  professional achievements  suri sehgal's professional career began in 1963 at a (then) regional seed company in des moines, iowa, founded by plant breeder and future vice president of the united states, henry a. wallace, called pioneer hi-bred corn company (named pioneer hi-bred international, inc., in 1970, and dupont pioneer in 2012). sehgal's tenure at pioneer lasted 24 years. he was mentored and befriended by pioneer executive bill brown (william l. brown).  sehgal served as pioneer's corn breeder for the tropics and subtropics stationed in jamaica for six years before being appointed manager of the international department. he organized and established research and development centers, production facilities, and branch offices throughout latin america and the caribbean with responsibility for hiring and training management teams. he was appointed president of pioneer's overseas division in 1973, president of pioneer overseas corporation in 1981, and corporate vice-president of pioneer hi-bred international, inc., in 1984. until 1988, sehgal traveled extensively through russia, ukraine, western and eastern europe, latin america, the caribbean, africa, china, and india for the development, management, and administration of international research and business ventures. his east-west business strategy in europe was the first of its kind in the seed industry, resulting in unprecedented profits for pioneer. sehgal introduced high-technology/high-profit concepts in brazil, a global sourcing concept in europe, and innovative ideas in the company's worldwide operations. sehgal left pioneer in 1988 and launched a seed company in india with edda sehgal called proagro seed company ltd. which became a leading private seed company on the indian subcontinent over the next ten years. during the same period, sehgal served as chairman and ceo of global technologies, inc., des moines, iowa, providing agribusiness consulting and advisory services globally; for seven years as chief operating officer at plant genetic systems, belgium, (in 2002 became bayer cropscience);  for seven years as senior advisor at kws kleinwanzlebener saatzucht ag (kws saat), einbeck, germany; and until 1997 on the board of directors for great lakes hybrids, ovid, michigan, usa. sehgal spent three years as senior advisor at hoechst schering agrevo gmbh (named aventis cropscience in 1999, and bayer cropscience in 2002), frankfurt, germany, where he helped develop the forward integration of plant genetic systems technology into agrevo seed businesses. he
served on the board of trustees for international institute of tropical agriculture (iita), ibadan, nigeria, and on the board of directors for diversity, a news journal for the international genetic resources community, usa. suri and edda sehgal divested proagro seed company ltd. in 1998 and used the bulk of the profits to create the philanthropic foundations in the united states and in india. that same year, the sehgals established global investors lllp, headquartered in des moines, iowa, as an investment company. the only shareholders are suri, edda, and their four children. the sehgal (family) foundation is based in des moines, iowa, as a private donor foundation with the primary intent of making a positive contribution to the development of india, but also providing support to philanthropic ventures in the united states and elsewhere. suri serves as chairman. edda and the couple's four children serve as trustees. the recipients of their funding support include individuals and organizations making a difference in health, education, and conservation.  personal life  suri sehgal met edda gudrun jeglinsky (born december 25, 1941, in breslau, silesia) a few weeks after she first came to the united states from germany in 1962 to live as an au pair in the home of henry kissinger, a professor at harvard at the time. suri and edda shared a refugee past as children. edda's family had been forced to flee from their country of origin, german silesia, near the end of wwii. the jeglinskys escaped to bavaria in 1945 and later settled in goppingen, germany. when suri completed his phd at harvard, he moved to des moines, iowa, to work with bill brown at pioneer hi-bred corn company. after the completion of her two-year commitment to the kissingers, edda moved to des moines, iowa. suri and edda were married in the home of bill and alice brown in 1964. the sehgals raised four children, helped raise two nephews, and opened their home to other relatives who emigrated from india to the united states. the creation of their foundations and the sehgals' ongoing commitment to philanthropy was rooted in the violence and loss they each experienced during their childhoods as fleeing refugees from their countries of origin. both are proud americans who want to share their good fortune.  current work  suri sehgal is chairman and trustee of sehgal foundation and s m sehgal foundation. edda sehgal is a trustee. the s m sehgal foundation  mission is to strengthen community-led development initiatives to
achieve positive social, economic, and environmental change across rural india. the headquarters building in gurgaon, now called gurugram, in the state of haryana, received platinum-level certification for leadership in energy and environmental design (leed) from the us green building council (usgbc).  sehgal is chairman of two seed companies. misr hytech seed international s.a.e. in cairo (which he helped establish with other shareholders), is a leading seed company in egypt, breeding and developing high-yielding corn, sorghum, and squash. the other seed company, hytech india, which sehgal founded in 2004,  develops high-yielding hybrid seeds in hyderabad, india.  sehgal is a trustee emeritus of the missouri botanical garden in st. louis, having helped to establish the william l. brown center of economic botany at the missouri botanical garden in 2001.  sehgal has served as a trustee or board member of several other nonprofit organizations including the ashoka trust for research in ecology and the environment (atree) and the trust for advancement of agricultural sciences (taas).  honors, awards and international recognition  suri sehgal received the pride of india gold award in 2007 from nri institute, washington, d.c. chapter and the bharat samman lifetime achievement award for contributions to the development of india in 2009, also from the nri institute for promoting cultural, academic, and socioeconomic interests of indian diasporas. for sehgal's contributions to water management in semiarid regions, suri sehgal lake was named by icrisat patancheru in 2009. sehgal received the leadership in philanthropy award in 2011 from the american india foundation. he was presented with the global indian karmaveer puraskaar lifetime achievement award for social justice and citizen action in 2013 from the indian confederation of ngos (icongo). a history of s m sehgal foundation's first fifteen years, published in 2016, called together we empower: rekindling hope in rural india, documented the progress and successes as well as the missteps and learnings of the work done in partnership with communities. the foundation has received multiple awards for achievements and inventions in water management, agriculture development, good rural governance, community radio, and book publishing. sehgal received the 2016 american bazaar philanthropy award for committing the bulk of his wealth to the development and empowerment of rural india. a biography titled "seeds for change: the lives and work of suri and edda sehgal", authored by marly cornell, was published in 2014.  references   1934 births living people
harvard university alumni people from gujrat district seeds
r573 road may refer to:  r573 road (ireland)  r573 road (south africa)
human uses of living things, including animals plants, fungi, and microbes, take many forms, both practical, such as the production of food and clothing, and symbolic, as in art, mythology, and religion. the skills and practices involved are transmitted by human culture through social learning. social sciences including archaeology, anthropology and ethnography are starting to take a multispecies view of human interactions with nature, in which living things are not just resources to be exploited, practically or symbolically, but are involved as participants.  plants provide the greater part of the food for people and their domestic animals: much of human culture and civilisation came into being through agriculture. while many plants have been used for food, a small number of staple crops including wheat, rice, and maize provide most of the food in the world today. in turn, animals provide much of the meat eaten by the human population, whether farmed or hunted, and until the arrival of mechanised transport, terrestrial mammals provided a large part of the power used for work and transport. a variety of living things serve as models in biological research, such as in genetics, and in drug testing. until the 19th century, plants yielded most of the medicinal drugs in common use, as described in the 1st century by dioscorides. plants are the source of many psychoactive drugs, some such as coca known to have been used for thousands of years. yeast, a fungus, has been used to ferment cereals such as wheat and barley to make bread and beer; other fungi such as psilocybe and fly agaric mushrooms have been gathered as psychoactive drugs.  many species of animal are kept as pets, the most popular being mammals, especially dogs and cats. plants are grown for pleasure in gardens and greenhouses, yielding flowers, shade, and decorative foliage; some, such as cactuses, able to tolerate dry conditions, are grown as houseplants.  animals such as horses and deer are among the earliest subjects of art, being found in the upper paleolithic cave paintings such as at lascaux.  living things further play a wide variety of symbolic roles in literature, film, mythology, and religion. sometimes a major disease like tuberculosis, caused by a bacterium, plays a role in culture, in its case being associated for some reason with artistic creativity.  context  culture  culture consists of the social behaviour and norms found in human societies and transmitted through social learning. cultural universals in all human societies include expressive forms like art, music, dance, ritual,
religion, and technologies like tool usage, cooking, shelter, and clothing. the concept of material culture covers physical expressions such as technology, architecture and art, whereas immaterial culture includes principles of social organization, mythology, philosophy, literature, and science. the term "bioculture" has been proposed to cover all the practical uses (but not the symbolic ones) of living things in culture, including agriculture, production of food and clothing, forestry, animal breeding and training, the pet trade, use of living things in science, zoos and aquariums, animal sports, and the raising of game animals for sport hunting.  three types of use  scholars of human culture have traditionally divided uses of living things into two categories: practical use for food and other resources; and symbolic use such as in art and religion. more recently, scholars have added a third type of interaction, where living things, whether animals, plants, fungi or microbes function as participants. this makes the relationships bidirectional, explicitly implying various forms of symbiosis in a complex ecology. these three types are described in turn.  practical uses  for food and materials  the human population exploits and depends on many animal and plant species for food, mainly through agriculture, an essential component of human culture, but also by exploiting wild populations, notably of marine fish. livestock animals are raised for meat across the world; they include (2011) around 1.4 billion cattle, 1.2 billion sheep and 1 billion domestic pigs.  plants provide the greater part of food for humans, and for their domestic animals. they have played a key role in the history of world civilizations. agriculture includes agronomy for arable crops, horticulture for vegetables and fruit, and forestry for timber. about 7,000 species of plant have been used for food, though most of today's food is derived from only 30 species. the major staples include cereals such as rice and wheat, starchy roots and tubers such as cassava and potato, and legumes such as peas and beans. vegetable oils such as olive oil provide lipids, while fruit and vegetables contribute vitamins and minerals to the diet.  plants grown as industrial crops are the source of a wide range of products used in manufacturing, sometimes so intensively as to risk harm to the environment. nonfood products include essential oils, natural dyes, pigments, waxes, resins, tannins, alkaloids, amber and cork. products derived from plants include soaps, shampoos, perfumes, cosmetics, paint, var
nish, turpentine, rubber, latex, lubricants, linoleum, plastics, inks, and gums. renewable fuels from plants include firewood, peat and other biofuels. the fossil fuels coal, petroleum and natural gas are derived from the remains of aquatic organisms including phytoplankton in geological time. structural resources and fibres from plants are used to construct dwellings and to manufacture clothing. wood is used not only for buildings, boats, and furniture, but also for smaller items such as musical instruments and sports equipment. wood is pulped to make paper and cardboard. cloth is often made from cotton, flax, ramie or synthetic fibres such as rayon and acetate derived from plant cellulose. thread used to sew cloth likewise comes in large part from cotton. plants are a primary source of basic chemicals, both for their medicinal and physiological effects, and for the industrial synthesis of a vast array of organic chemicals.  textiles are made from both animal fibres, including wool and silk, and plant fibres, including cotton and flax. dyestuffs too are made both from animals, including carmine from the bodies of insects, and from plants, including indigo, [madder], and lichens.  for work and transport  working domestic animals including cattle, horses, yaks, camels, and elephants have been used for work and transport from the origins of agriculture, their numbers declining with the arrival of mechanised transport and agricultural machinery. in 2004 they still provided some 80% of the power for the mainly small farms in the third world, and some 20% of the world's transport, again mainly in rural areas. in mountainous regions unsuitable for wheeled vehicles, pack animals continue to transport goods.  in science  biology studies the whole range of living things.  animals such as the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster, the zebrafish, the chicken and the house mouse, serve a major role in science as experimental models, both in fundamental biological research, such as in genetics, and in the development of new medicines, which must be tested exhaustively to demonstrate their safety. millions of mammals, especially mice and rats, are used in experiments each year. knockout mice are used to help discover the functions of genes.  basic biological research has often been done with plants. in genetics, the breeding of pea plants allowed gregor mendel to derive the basic laws governing inheritance,  and examination of chromosomes in maize allowed barbara mcclintock to demonstrate their connection to inherited traits. the plant arabidopsis thaliana is used in laboratories
as a model organism to understand how genes control the growth and development of plant structures. space stations or space colonies may one day rely on plants for life support.  for medicines and drugs  vaccines have been made using animals since their discovery by edward jenner in the 18th century. he noted that inoculation with live cowpox afforded protection against the more dangerous smallpox. in the 19th century, louis pasteur developed an attenuated (weakened) vaccine for rabies. in the 20th century, vaccines for the viral diseases mumps and polio were developed using animal cells grown in vitro.  an increasing variety of medicinal drugs are based on toxins and other molecules of animal origin. the cancer drug yondelis was isolated from the tunicate ecteinascidia turbinata. one of dozens of toxins made by the deadly cone snail conus geographus is used as prialt in pain relief.  since classical times and possibly much earlier, hundreds of species of plants have provided drugs to treat a wide range of conditions. dioscorides's de materia medica, written by 70 ad, listed some 600 medicinal plants and around 1000 drugs made from them, including substances known to be effective such as aconite, aloes, colocynth, colchicum, henbane, opium and squill. the book remained a standard reference for nearly two thousand years, and was the basis of the european pharmacopoeia until the end of the 19th century.  also since the earliest times, people have exploited some of the many psychoactive substances manufactured by plants in religious rituals and for pleasure.  among the most widely used throughout history are alcohol, produced by fermenting cereals with yeast (a fungus), tobacco, coffee, tea, chocolate, cannabis, coca (used as leaf for some 8,000 years in peru, and in recent times also purified to cocaine), mescaline (from a cactus) and psilocybin (from a fungus).  for pleasure  both animals and plants are used to provide pleasure, through a range of activities including keeping pets, hunting, fishing, and gardening.  a wide variety of animals are kept as pets, from invertebrates such as tarantulas and octopuses, insects including praying mantises, reptiles such as snakes and chameleons, and birds including canaries, parakeets and parrots all finding a place. mammals are the most popular pets in the western world, with the most kept species being dogs, cats, and rabbits. for example, in america
in 2012 there were some 78 million dogs, 86 million cats, and 3.5 million rabbits. there is a tension between the role of animals as companions to humans, and their existence as individuals with rights of their own.  many animals are hunted for sport. the aquatic animals most often hunted for sport are fish, including many species from large marine predators such as sharks and tuna, to freshwater fish such as trout and carp. birds such as partridges, pheasants and ducks, and mammals such as deer and wild boar, are among the terrestrial game animals most often hunted.  thousands of plant species are cultivated for aesthetic purposes as well as to provide shade, modify temperatures, reduce wind, abate noise, provide privacy, and prevent soil erosion. plants are the basis of a multibillion-dollar per year tourism industry, which includes travel to historic gardens, national parks, rainforests, forests with colorful autumn leaves, and festivals such as japan's and america's cherry blossom festivals. while some gardens are planted with food crops, many are planted for aesthetic, ornamental, or conservation purposes. arboretums and botanical gardens are public collections of living plants. in private outdoor gardens, lawn grasses, shade trees, ornamental trees, shrubs, vines, herbaceous perennials and bedding plants are used. gardens may cultivate the plants in a naturalistic state, or may sculpture their growth, as with topiary or espalier. gardening is the most popular leisure activity in the u.s., and working with plants or horticulture therapy is beneficial for rehabilitating people with disabilities. plants may also be grown or kept indoors as houseplants, or in specialized buildings such as greenhouses that are designed for the care and cultivation of living plants. venus flytrap, sensitive plant and resurrection plant are examples of plants sold as novelties. there are also art forms specializing in the arrangement of cut or living plant, such as bonsai, ikebana, and the arrangement of cut or dried flowers. ornamental plants have sometimes changed the course of history, as in tulipomania.  symbolic uses  in art  both animals and plants are significant in art, whether as background or as main subjects.  animals, often mammals but including fish and insects among other groups, have been the subjects of art from the earliest times, in both early history as in ancient egypt, and prehistory, as in the cave paintings at lascaux and other sites in the dordogne, france and elsewhere. major artistic depictions of animals include albrecht durer's 1515 the rhinoceros,
and george stubbs's c. 1762 horse portrait whistlejacket.  plants appear in art, either to illustrate their botanical appearance, or for the purposes of the artist, which may include decoration or religious symbolism. for example, the virgin mary was compared by the venerable bede to a lily, the white petals denoting purity of body, while the yellow anthers signified the radiant light of the soul; accordingly, european portraits of the virgin's annunciation may depict a vase of white lilies in her room to indicate her attributes. plants are also often used as backgrounds or features in portraits, and as main subjects in still lifes.  in literature and film  animals, plants, and microbes feature in literature and film.  animals as varied as bees, beetles, mice, foxes, crocodiles and elephants play a wide variety of roles in literature and film. a genre of films has been based on oversized insects, including the pioneering 1954 them!, featuring giant ants mutated by radiation, and the 1957 the deadly mantis. birds have occasionally featured in film, as in alfred hitchcock's 1963 the birds, loosely based on daphne du maurier's story of the same name, which tells the tale of sudden attacks on people by violent flocks of birds.  ken loach's admired 1969 kes, based on barry hines's 1968 novel a kestrel for a knave, tells a story of a boy coming of age by training a kestrel. parasitoids have inspired science fiction authors and screenwriters to create disgusting and terrifying parasitic alien species that kill their human hosts, such as in ridley scott's 1979 film alien.   plants too, both real and invented, play many roles in literature and film. plants' roles may be evil, as with the triffids, carnivorous plants with a whip-like poisonous sting as well as mobility provided by three foot-like appendages, from john wyndham's 1951 science fiction novel the day of the triffids, and subsequent adaptations for film and radio. j. r. r. tolkien's fictional world middle-earth features many named kinds of plant, including the healing herb athelas the yellow star-flower elanor which grows in special places such as cerin amroth in lothlorien, and the tall mallorn tree of the elves. tolkien names several individual trees of significance in the narrative, including the party tree in the shire with its happy associations, and the malevolent old man willow in the old forest. trees feature in many of ursula k. le
guin's books, including the forest world of athshe and the immanent grove on roke in the earthsea series, to such an extent that in her introduction to her collection the wind's twelve quarters, she admits to "a certain obsession with trees" and describes herself as "the most arboreal science fiction writer". james cameron's 2009 film avatar features a giant tree named hometree, the sacred gathering place of the humanoid na'vi tribe; the interconnected tree, tribe and planet are threatened by mining: the tribe and the film's hero fight to save them. trees are common subjects in poetry, including joyce kilmer's 1913 lyric poem named "trees". flowers, similarly, are the subjects of many poems by poets such as william blake, robert frost, and rabindranath tagore.  the bacterial disease tuberculosis played a role in culture, associated for some reason with artistic creativity. it was known as "the romantic disease". many artistic figures including the poet john keats, the composer frederic chopin and the artist edvard munch either had the disease or were close to others who did. tuberculosis played prominent and recurring roles in diverse fields. these included literature, as in thomas mann's the magic mountain, set in a sanatorium; in music, as in van morrison's song "t.b. sheets"; in opera, as in puccini's la boheme and verdi's la traviata; in art, as in monet's painting of his first wife camille on her deathbed; and in film, such as the 1945 the bells of st. mary's starring ingrid bergman as a nun with tuberculosis.  in mythology and religion  animals including many insects and mammals feature in mythology and religion; indeed, animals and plants appear in what has been suggested to be the world's first religion in the paleolithic era. among the insects, in both japan and europe, as far back as ancient greece and rome, a butterfly was seen as the personification of a person's soul, both while they were alive and after their death. the scarab beetle was sacred in ancient egypt, while the praying mantis was considered a god in southern african khoi and san tradition for its praying posture.  among the mammals, cattle, deer, horses, lions and wolves (and  werewolves), are the subjects of myths and worship. of the twelve signs of the western zodiac, six-aries (ram), taurus (bull), cancer (crab), leo (lion), scorpio (scorpion),  and pisces (fish)-are animals, while
two others, sagittarius (horse/man) and capricorn (fish/goat) are hybrid animals; the name zodiac indeed means a circle of animals. all twelve signs of the chinese zodiac are animals.  plants including trees are important in mythology and religion, where they symbolise themes such as fertility, growth, immortality and rebirth, and may be more or less magical. thus in latvian mythology, austras koks is a tree which grows from the start of the sun's daily journey across the sky. a different cosmic tree is yggdrasil, the world tree of norse mythology, on which odin hung. different again is the barnacle tree, believed in the middle ages to have barnacles that opened to reveal geese, a story which may perhaps have started from an observation of goose barnacles growing on driftwood. greek mythology mentions many plants and flowers, where for example the lotus tree bears a fruit that causes a pleasant drowsiness, while moly is a magic herb mentioned by homer in the odyssey with a black root and white blossoms. magic plants are found, too, in serbian mythology, where the raskovnik is supposed to be able to open any lock. in buddhist symbolism, both the lotus and the bodhi tree are significant. the lotus is one of the ashtamangala (eight auspicious signs) shared between buddhism, jainism and hinduism, representing the primordial purity of body, speech, and mind, floating above the muddy waters of attachment and desire. the bodhi tree is the sacred fig tree under which the buddha is said to have attained enlightenment; the name is also given to other bodhi trees thought to have been propagated from the original tree.  as participants  social sciences including anthropology, ethnography, and archaeology have long investigated human interactions with living things. anthropology and ethnography have traditionally studied the roles of living things in human culture in two opposed ways: as physical resources that humans used; and as symbols or concepts through totemism and animism. more recently, these scientists have also seen living things as participants in human social interactions, in what has been called "multispecies ethnography". the anthropologists s. eben kirksey and stefan helmreich wrote:   archaeology, too, has traditionally centred ecological interactions on the human side, rather than, in suzanne e. pilaar birch's words,      birch includes animals, plants, fungi, and microbes among critical interactions with humans:         whereas historically, birch states, humans saw themselves as exceptional, such as in the medieval
great chain of being, an integrated multispecies approach would assemble expertise "in diverse areas, including archaeology, human-animal studies, biology, ecology, evolutionary theory, and philosophy".  references    topics in culture
russula xanthoporphyrea is a mushroom in the family russulaceae native to north america.  see also ''list of russula species  references  external links  xanthoporphyrea fungi of north america fungi described in 1997
christophe bergeron, known by his alias, pushy!, is an electronic music composer who currently lives and works in paris, france.  biography  during the 80s, the noise/indus electro movement offers bergeron the opportunity to perfect his electronic programming, but it does not prevent him from participating in other projects with various aesthetics.  after the techno revolution, bergeron created pushy! live with yod, giving its first recognition to a breakbeat made in france that initiated many budding musicians. pushy! became a major artist of the french drum'n'bass / electro-break scene.  after the withdraw of yod in 1995, chris performed solo under pushy! two albums followed: free form (2003), then hors not (2007), and around ten maxis.  a pioneer of electro-rap with cheravif (1999), pushy! collaborated with other artists (bams, sayoko, nery, laurent de wilde & otisto 23, loan, and e komba) and developed a side project 100% dubstep under the pseudonym hupsy down.  his music is fed by its various collaborations. he has explored other paths (theater, contemporary dance, installations, fashion shows, short film, films...) along with personalities such as marc caro, christophe haleb, jean-luc testu, darja richter, kaat tilley, isabelle boutrois, viviana moin, pascale simeon and nicolas hulot.  influences  among the influences of pushy! are stravinsky for his rhythms, erik satie for his simplicity, john cage for his concept, steve reich, fred frith, the dub-hop of wordsound, and also traditional music and salsa.  pushy! is influenced by the 80s, especially bands such as residents and virgin prunes as well as cabaret voltaire and bourbonese qualk who already proposed a musical perspective similar to plastic art that prioritizes intention and gesture. french electro pioneers like le syndicat, urbain autopsy, and pierre jolivet a.k.a. pacific 231.  labels like warp or ambush contributed a lot to the evolution of a kind drum and bass and also fennesz, boris cavage and farmers manuals in another gene (electronic music and visual art).  discography  cds   2011: epiderme synthetique - album - kiosk eclectic   2007: hors not - album - kiosk eclectic / la baleine   2007: serial - live - belleville zoo
2003: free form - album - furtif records / la baleine  1999: music for films, tv, dance companies, fashion shows and art exhibitions - universal  1999: la verite est ailleurs - cheravif - 4 titles - universal  1998: worn to a shadow - live au bataclan 98 - universal  1998: pushy! - ep/cd 4 titles - hokus pokus  1997: pushy! - ep/cd 4 titles - hokus pokus  maxi vinyl   2008: hupsy down - dest pub  2007: serial decibel - belleville zoo  2004: melodie gun - ruby breakfast  2003: images in a nation - kiosk eclectic 02  2002: neon rouge (with ciao manhattan & j-f. pauvros) - sphenoide records  2000: cheravif - code mode amnesique - kiosk eclectic  2000: pushy! untitled ep - perce-oreille  2000: pushy! untitled ep - hokus pokus  2000: gnats 45 tours 2 titles  1999: antikrout - hokus pokus  1999: audiokyste live - double ep - mouse clinic  1998: pushy ! vs mouse clinic - ep abracadabra  collaborations   2009: je vais t'offrir - bams - autoproduction  2009: cheravif, global glauque live - le bison  2008: laurent de wilde & otisto 23 - pc pieces remixed by friends - dtc records  2008: future exposed - bd sonore - 1 title - iot records  2008: dosis decibel 4 - 1 title - dosis decibel  2006: sonde la bass - jungle therapy  2006: a - album "a" - isabe - together prod  2003: running dub - remix kali live dub  2002: they shout things - compilation how do you sleep - jarring effects  2001: kingsympathyrodney 2000 king (rmx ciao manhattan ft mike ladd) - kungfufighting  2001: melodie gun - compilation - hypertunez  2001: sexual manœuvre in da park - compilation mize 5 - mize records  1998: rumours of war - compilation p18 records - esan ozenki records  1997: let the revolution come - compilation avant gardism 2 - law & auder (uk)  1997: grooveboxing - compilation groovebox - distance records
1997: m'boke ya bisengo (feat e-komba) - compilation sun sun - columbia - sony  1997: le robot qui fait sentir son haleine - compilation dome - musidisc  1996: remix of lofofora - ep amne's history - virgin  1996: cop phobia - compilation avant gardism 1 - law & auder (uk)  references  external links   official site  living people electroacoustic music composers french electronic musicians year of birth missing (living people)
martinozzi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  anne marie martinozzi (1637-1672), italian noble marie-anne martinozzi, duchess of bouillon, italian-french aristocrat laura martinozzi (1639-1687), italian noble, sister of anne marie  see also    martinuzzi  italian-language surnames patronymic surnames
omar shishani may refer to mohammad omar shishani, jordanian football player  abu omar al-shishani, commander for the islamic state in syria
the kelchstein ("chalice rock") is a mushroom rock in the zittau mountains near oybin in the german state of saxony.  geology  the kelchstein consists of a cretaceous sandstone with very little cementing material. its unusual mushroom shape has been caused by wind and other erosive processes on sandstone strata of different hardness.  climbing  the kelchstein is one of the best known climbing rocks in the zittau mountains. it was first climbed before 1785, when woodcutters fixed a plaque to the summit; the plaque is no longer there. its development for sports climbing started on 3 september 1911. dresden climbers ascended the rocks with the aid of a tree at its northwestern corner. the first sports climb without any aids was up the present-day "old way" (alter weg) by siegfried schreiber on 26 june 1946. the kelch is one of the most difficult summits to climb in the zittau mountains. today there are only five routes, all at climbing grades of viic and viiic.  external links   biwak: bergsport, wandern, abenteuer about  climbers on the kelchstein in the ard mediathek  climbing areas of germany rock formations of saxony natural monuments in saxony zittau mountains gorlitz (district)
events from the year 1886 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander iii  events           the publication of crime and punishment by fyodor dostoyevsky  saint petersburg electrotechnical university  ha-yom  saint petersburg electrotechnical university  births  deaths  references  1886 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
the best job in the world may refer to:  the best job in the world, 1996 film  the best job in the world (advertising), a 2009 advertising campaign
general john ffolliott crofton (9 october 1800 - 17 july 1885) was a british army officer.  he was born in dublin, ireland, the son of revd henry crofton and frances ffolliott. educated privately, he gained a ba degree at trinity college, dublin in 1824.  he entered the army the same year as an ensign in the 6th foot. in 1832 he was appointed interpreter under brigadier-general litchfield for a military campaign in a lawless area of north-west india. he was also involved in the defence of aden in 1841. in 1846, by now promoted major, he was posted to north america in charge of an expedition to the red river settlement in prince rupert's land. the hudson's bay company had requested military assistance to protect the settlers from american incursions in the event of war over the oregon territory. by the time the regiment arrived the oregon crisis had been resolved and the troops undertook policing operations against illegal fur traders.  he returned to england in 1847 and worked at the war office. he was promoted colonel in 1854, major-general in 1861, lieutenant-general in 1870, and general in 1877.  from 1868 to 1869 he was colonel of the 95th (derbyshire) regiment and from 1869 to his death colonel of the 6th foot, now newly renamed the royal warwickshire regiment. he retired from the army in 1881 and died in london in 1885. he had married anne agnes addison of preston and had 4 sons and a daughter.  references  1800 births 1885 deaths military personnel from dublin (city) alumni of trinity college dublin british army generals royal warwickshire fusiliers officers sherwood foresters officers
the turkish local elections of 2019 were held on sunday 31 march 2019 throughout the 81 provinces of turkey. a total of 30 metropolitan and 1,351 district municipal mayors, alongside 1,251 provincial and 20,500 municipal councillors were elected, in addition to numerous local non-partisan positions such as neighbourhood wardens (muhtars) and elderly people's councils.  the governing justice and development party (akp) and the nationalist movement party (mhp) contested the elections in many provinces under a joint people's alliance. likewise, the republican people's party (chp) and the iyi party entered some of the races under the nation alliance banner. the peoples' democratic party (hdp) did not openly announce support for either alliance, but did not field candidates in some areas to improve chances of opposition candidates. the strategic voting, and fielding of candidates of the hdp in contested areas like ankara, and istanbul allowed the opposition parties to gain a majority in these cities, through cooperation. leading to erdogan's main ally the mhp to lose immense ground in the elections.  campaigning was described as distinctly negative and divisive, with the opposition criticizing the government for turkey's economic downturn, misuse of public funds and corruption. in response, the government alleged that the opposition parties were acting in the interests of 'foreign powers and terrorists'. particular controversy surrounded the akp's allegations of financial fraud against the opposition's ankara mayoral candidate mansur yavas, which later turned out to have been made by an unverifiable source. the use of video footage of the christchurch terrorist attack by akp leader and president recep tayyip erdogan during his election rallies additionally received international condemnation and caused diplomatic relations between turkey and new zealand to sour. five people were killed and two were injured during political violence on election day, in two separate incidents in gaziantep and malatya. the election was criticized by observers due to excessive media bias in favour of the governing people's alliance.  the members of the nation alliance were initially beset with issues concerning candidate selection and inner-party divisions, stemming from their general election loss in june 2018. however, both the chp and the iyi party collectively managed to outperform expectations, securing 'shock' victories in turkey's major metropolitan areas. these included winning control of both ankara and istanbul, turkey's capital and largest city respectively. the chp also held control of izmir, turkey's third largest city, and now governs 5 of turkey's 6 largest population centres (the only exception being bursa, where the governing coalition narrowly won). the
communist party won control of a provincial capital, namely tunceli, for the first time. in provinces where the akp and mhp contested as separate parties, there was a substantial swing from akp candidates to the mhp. nevertheless, akp leader and president recep tayyip erdogan claimed victory, announcing that the people's alliance had secured over 50% of the vote and thus maintained support from the majority of the electorate (final results actually gave the people's alliance just under 50%, while the nation alliance won 38%).  the election was beset by a number of controversies, including an unexplained results blackout on election night just when the opposition were on the verge of victory in istanbul. the istanbul mayoral election, where chp candidate ekrem imamoglu defeated akp candidate and former prime minister binali yıldırım by just under 14,000 votes (0.17%), remained disputed for two weeks after the vote. this result was made public after a blackout, by which point the chp candidate was up by more than 24,000 votes. numerous recounts, electoral complaints, legal disputes, alleged corruption, accusations of terrorist involvement and police operations took place after the election, initiated mainly by the akp. imamoglu was sworn in as mayor, though a new election was held on 23 june. the result was an unexpected landslide victory for imamoglu, who defeated yıldırım by over nine points, 54.2% to 45%.  background turkey holds local elections every five years in the final sunday of march. the last election, held on 30 march 2014, resulted in a victory for the governing justice and development party (akp), which won control of both istanbul and ankara, turkey's top two cities. the main opposition republican people's party (chp) came second, winning control of izmir, turkey's third largest city. the elections were the first test of support following widespread antigovernmental protests in summer 2013 and a corruption scandal in december 2013. the elections resulted in numerous allegations of electoral fraud, as well as re-runs in districts such as yalova and agrı where recounts and fraud allegations failed to return a decisive winner.  the 2019 elections followed two landmark elections that were held on 24 june 2018, namely a presidential vote and a parliamentary vote, where the incumbent president recep tayyip erdogan was re-elected with 52.59% of the vote. with his re-election, he assumed widely expanded executive powers that were approved by voters in a highly controversial constitutional referendum in 2017. his ak party lost its majority in the grand national assembly but retains its
majority with support from the nationalist movement party (mhp), together with which the akp forms an electoral alliance named the people's alliance. the 2019 local elections were the last scheduled elections to be held in turkey until 23 june 2023.  early election speculation following the election of the 27th parliament of turkey on 24 june 2018, the akp government publicly announced its intention to bring the local elections forward from march 2019 to november 2018. although the opposition claimed they were ready for a local election, they did not publicly back the government's call. it was speculated that the government's desire for an early election was related to the sharp economic downturn that took place shortly after the june 2018 elections, with fears that it would lead to a reduction in the akp's vote share.  the dates of local elections are enshrined in the constitution of turkey, meaning that any motion to hold them on a different date would require a constitutional amendment. this would require a two-thirds majority in the grand national assembly or a three-fifths majority along with approval in a referendum. the people's alliance between the akp and mhp only held 57% of the seats, making the proposal unrealistic. the government subsequently dropped plans to bring the poll forward.  positions elected the 2019 local elections were the second to be held following the 2013 turkish local government reorganisation, which merged several municipalities and substantially reduced the number of councillors and mayors elected. mayors and councillors are elected separately. district municipalities consist of two types; actual district municipalities (of which there are 921) and 397 town municipalities that serve even smaller settlements in rural provinces. the elected positions are shown below.  in addition to these partisan positions, numerous local non-partisan positions such as neighborhood presidents (muhtars) and elderly people's councils were elected. according to 2018 figures, the number of muhtars due to be elected is 50,229.  municipal changes since 2014  removal of mayors for malpractice  following the 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt on 15 july 2016, several mayors, mostly from the kurdish nationalist democratic regions party (dbp), were removed from office by the interior ministry and were temporarily replaced by government-appointed trustees. most of these mayors were removed from office due to charges of joining, aiding or conducting propaganda activities for a terrorist organisation, namely the kurdistan workers' party (pkk). several dbp district party executives were also suspended from office on terrorism charges. in addition, four akp mayors and one mhp mayor were removed after being arrested for aiding the gulen movement, which is known
by the turkish government and its supporters as the fethullah gulen terrorist organisation (feto), who were accused of perpetrating the coup.  the removal of mayors and district party executives began with a state of emergency decree on 1 september 2016, with the district kaymakam being given the role of acting mayor in some instances. as of 14 october 2018, four akp mayors, one mhp mayor and 94 dbp mayors have been removed from office.  in addition to removal on the grounds of national security, a number of mayors have been removed from office on corruption charges. in these cases, municipal councillors retained the right to appoint a successor, as opposed to the interior ministry appointing a trustee. on these grounds, the chp mayors of atasehir and besiktas, both districts of istanbul, were removed from office on 8 december 2017 and 4 january 2018, respectively. the chp slammed the decisions as politically motivated, but the chp majorities in both councils were able to elect a chp successor in their place.  'fatigue' resignations of akp mayors on 30 may 2017, shortly after a controversial declaration of victory in the 2017 constitutional referendum and election as ak party leader, president erdogan made a statement claiming that his party was suffering from 'metal fatigue' and called on poorly-performing party provincial executives to leave their posts. seven akp provincial chairmen resigned their posts by the end of 2017 in response to erdogan's call. the intention of the akp party executive to 'regenerate' the party resulted in pressure on some of the party's more controversial, long-serving or poorly-performing mayors to resign.  on 23 september 2017, istanbul mayor kadir topbas, in office since 2004, resigned. this was followed by duzce mayor mehmet keles on 2 october. on 18 october, the mayor of nigde, faruk akdogan, resigned. on 23 october, the mayor of bursa, recep altepe, announced his resignation. on 27 october, ankara mayor melih gokcek resigned after weeks of unsuccessful negotiations with erdogan to retain his office. on 30 october, balıkesir mayor edip ugur also resigned after initially refusing to heed to the party executive's pressure. making an emotional resignation statement, ugur stated that his resignation was forced and that his family had received threats in the event he continued to resist.  on 18 september 2018, the akp mayor of ordu enver yılmaz announced his resignation. his resignation was seen as non-related to the 'metal fatigue' regeneration drive but
due to personal disagreements with high-ranking party official and deputy leader numan kurtulmus, who is an mp for ordu.  defections between parties a number of mayors switched parties between 2014 and 2019. a number of these defections were down to the formation of the iyi party, which took away substantial support from the nationalist movement party. a total of 10 municipal mayors switched to iyi between the party's establishment on 25 october 2017 and 2019. the mayor of mersin, burhanettin kocamaz, switched to iyi from the mhp on 4 december 2018, becoming the party's first metropolitan mayor.  the mayor of inhisar in bilecik, ayhan odubek, joined chp in 2018 having resigned from mhp in 2016. on 9 may 2017, mayor mustafa gul of kemer, in antalya, resigned from mhp and joined chp. on 20 october 2018, mayor rasim dashan of saphane, in kutahya, resigned from chp and joined akp. on 13 november 2018, mayor gokhan demirtas of guluc, a small town in the eregli district of zonguldak, resigned from chp and joined akp.  parties and alliances due to the first-past-the-post system used to elect mayors, the elections were preceded by several inter-party negotiations and calculations of tactical voting to improve the chances of defeating the candidates of certain parties. three broad alliances were formed in the run-up to the vote. unlike in parliamentary elections where electoral alliances have legal foundations and affect the translation of votes into seats, the alliances formed for local elections do not have any legal foundations and merely consist of parties withdrawing their candidates in support for another.  the table below shows which party within the two alliances are contesting each provincial capital district. if the alliance agreement has not extended to that provincial capital and both parties of the alliance are contesting, then 'both' is shown in that alliance's column.  * the felicity party (sp) was not part of the nation alliance in this election, but both nation alliance parties supported the sp candidate in sanlıurfa due to a higher chance of winning.  ^ in igdır, the nation alliance did not exist and the iyi party supported the nationalist movement party (mhp) candidate, who was the joint candidate of the people's alliance. the iyi party announced its decision was because they would prefer the mhp candidate winning, as opposed to the hdp candidate.  people's alliance (akp and mhp)
the people's alliance was founded in february 2018 between the akp and mhp as a union of parties supporting the re-election of president recep tayyip erdogan in the 2018 presidential election. during the election campaign, the two parties were joined by the great union party (bbp) and stated that the alliance would last until the next general elections 2023.  speculation continued after the 2018 general election as to whether the people's alliance would remain for the local elections. despite initial mixed signals, mhp leader devlet bahceli announced in september 2018 that he intended to support akp candidates in key races and continue the alliance into the local election. after a series of disagreements with the akp, particularly in relation to the reinsertion of the student oath, the mhp announced that it would be contesting the elections alone. the 'temporary suspension' of the alliance was subsequently confirmed by erdogan. however, a month later after a meeting between the two leaders, the alliance was declared to have resumed, with the mhp subsequently pulling its candidates in favour of the akp in numerous provinces, such as ankara and istanbul.  nation alliance (chp and iyi)  the nation alliance was the main opposition alliance during the 2018 general election, being formed by the chp, the iyi party, the democrat party and the felicity party. the alliance was declared to have formally dissolved shortly after the elections. however, negotiations of a local election alliance between the chp and the iyi party continued in the latter months of 2018. the alliance was finalised on 12 december, with the iyi party agreeing to not field mayoral candidates in aydın, mugla, tekirdag, hatay, izmir, eskisehir, ankara, istanbul, antalya, bursa or adana. both parties would field a candidate in mersin while the chp would support the iyi party's candidate in balıkesir.  on 18 december 2018, the chp and iyi party's joint candidate in ankara was announced to be mansur yavas, who narrowly lost to the akp's candidate melih gokcek in the 2014 local election amid allegations of fraud. upon announcing his candidacy, yavas declared himself to be the 'nation alliance' candidate.  hdp-dbp alliance with the establishment of the peoples' democratic party (hdp) in 2012, the existing dominant pro-kurdish party, the peace and democracy party (bdp) restructured itself into a purely local election-based organisation and renamed itself to democratic regions party (dbp). in the 2014 local elections, the dbp contested
areas with a significant kurdish population while the hdp ran in provinces where kurdish populations were minimal. while the dbp won 100 mayors in 2014, the hdp failed to win any municipalities and won just 9 municipal councillors.  in august 2018, it was announced that the existing relationship between the hdp and dbp, where the latter would contest kurdish populated regions, would be abandoned and the hdp would contest the election throughout the whole country. the dbp announced its support for the hdp, with both parties launching a joint campaign workshop in diyarbakır on 20 october. the parties announced that other kurdish parties were welcome to join their alliance, while stating that there was no intention to form an alliance with the main opposition chp. on 6 january 2019, six kurdish parties agreed to join hdp after negotiations. the parties are communist party of kurdistan, the freedom movement, the revolutionary eastern culture associations, the human and freedom party, the kurdish democratic platform and the kurdistan democratic party - turkey.  controversies and issues due to the small number of votes needed to swing the election results in some low-population districts, local elections in turkey are known to experience more cases of alleged fraud than legislative or presidential elections. this was the case in the 2014 turkish local elections where severe cases were reported in ankara (where the 2014 mayoral vote remains disputed to this day), yalova (where the election had to be repeated) and other important provinces such as istanbul, eskisehir and antalya. the 2014 election marked the first time a ballot official was sentenced to prison for electoral fraud, having been caught transferring opposition votes to the ruling akp candidate.  'fake voters' controversy the preliminary electoral roll was published in january 2018 to allow voters to check their polling districts and make any changes during a 'complaint period'. following the publication of voter lists, many opposition politicians alleged that voters had been deliberately switched from one district to a neighbouring district as a means of tipping the result to favour a certain candidate. similar allegations have been made in the run-up to elections in the past.  on 6 january, the mayor of the chp-held istanbul district of adalar publicised some research into the changes in his district's electoral roll between the 24 june 2018 elections and 2019, where the number of voters substantially increased by 7% in the space of six months. the research found that up to 500 (56%) of the new voters had been transferred to adalar from neighbouring districts such as sultanbeyli, which are heavily pro-akp and thus have an excess of akp voters. their
addresses were recorded at either uninhabitable buildings or the local akp district offices. the move, which the mayor claimed to be an attempt by the government to engineer the result in adalar to result in his defeat, was branded 'the biggest fake voter scandal in the history of the republic'.  in an effort to identify fake voters in other parts of the country, the local chp offices in balcova, izmir announced the formation of a team of 200 people to raise awareness and locate electoral roll fraud.  burhanettin kocamaz, mersin mayor the provincial electoral council has not ratified the mayoral candidacy of burhanettin kocamaz, who is running for the southern province of mersin's metropolitan municipality on the iyi party's ticket. "iyi party, which has been encountering many difficulties and tricks, is going through another hoop today. the candidate lists, determined after months of work, have been submitted to the provincial electoral boards. but the candidacy document of mr. burhanettin kocamaz, our candidate for mersin metropolitan municipality, was not accepted by the election board on grounds that it was submitted after 5 p.m." said iyi party in a written statement on 19 february. the party's statement also stressed that kocamaz was a candidate likely to win a "landslide victory" in mersin province meanwhile, kocamaz called the incident a case of "betrayal" and "an inside job." later, kocamaz was nominated on democrat party list. however supreme electoral council (ysk) rejected his candidacy after iyi party made an objection to provincial electoral council's statement. later on 28 february, ayfer yılmaz, former minister of state was nominated as iyi party candidate on democrat party list.  mass detention camps of uyghurs  in february 2019, after many democratic countries raised concerns about china's cultural genocide against muslims for years, turkish foreign ministry spokesman and president recep tayyip erdogan condemns the systematic assimilation, arbitrary arrests, cruel torture, political brainwashing in internment camps and prisons of more than one million uyghurs and other muslim communities by china and called on to end the human tragedy. erdogan and akp break its silence on uyghurs, who share cultural and linguistic similarities with other turkic ethnic groups but suffered long-time mistreatment by china as facing pressure from the ruling coalition nationalist movement party and opposition parties such as iyi party, felicity party, great union party. large pan-turkic solidarity nationalism rallies to protest akp's inaction over the oppressive crackdown to uyghurs mounts pressure ahead of the elections.  christchurch video
at rallies during some rallies president erdogan repeatedly showed video taken by the christchurch mosque shooter to his supporters at campaign rallies for  elections and said australians and new zealanders who came to turkey with anti-muslim sentiments "would be sent back in coffins like their grandfathers were" during the gallipoli campaign of world war i.  australian prime minister scott morrison condemned the "reckless" and "highly offensive" comments made by erdogan.  violence  in puturge, province of malatya, a polling station official and an election observer by saadet party were shot dead by an akp member for stopping his attempt to make people cast open votes. in other districts violence between akp party and opposition broke out during the day of the elections and in the following week.  violence between police and opposition observer came out in south east regions. the celebration of the victory next to the main hdp buildings have been prevented by the intervention of police in many kurdish districts such diyarbakir, batman and siirt, hdp centres have been surrounded and forcefully emptied for public order.  the head of the observer mission from the council of europe's congress of local and regional authorities stated that they were "not fully convinced that turkey currently has the free and fair electoral environment which is necessary for genuinely democratic elections in line with european values and principles".  opinion polls  a number of opinion polls were conducted in the run-up to the election to gauge voting intentions. these included studies to predict overall vote shares and also the outcome of mayoral races in key cities. these can be viewed here.  nation-wide summary the below table shows nationwide opinion polls conducted to gauge overall vote shares.  results  key races mayoral races in major cities that received major coverage during and after the elections are summarised below.  changes in control the list below shows the parties governing the capitals of the 81 provinces before and after the local elections. provinces in bold denote metropolitan municipalities.  full list  maps  by district  by province  re-runs where a decisive victor could not be established due to small margins of victory and numerous formal complaints about misconduct, the supreme electoral council (ysk) annulled the elections and ordered re-runs. elections were annulled in 6 districts and 1 metropolitan municipality (namely istanbul). most of the re-runs (namely 4 of the 7 annulled elections) took place on 2 june 2019. due to the lengthy process behind the controversial decision to annul the istanbul vote, there was not enough time to schedule the re-run by 2 june, with the
ysk deciding instead to hold the fresh election on 23 june.  2 june on 2 june, elections were repeated in the honaz district of denizli province, the yusufeli district of artvin province, the keskin district of kırıkkale province and the town of kesmetepe, within the district of besni in adıyaman province.  * in the 31 march elections in kesmetepe, the chp and democrat party both won 281 votes and came joint first. the dsp candidate formally complained about misconduct at one ballot box to the ysk and successfully petitioned for the election to be re-run.  23 june  on 23 june, elections were repeated in the istanbul metropolitan municipality. the results showed a substantial swing in favour of imamoglu, who increased his margin of victory to win 54.21% of the vote against yıldırım's 44.99%.  21 july the town (belde) of demirci, in the district of gulagac in aksaray province, held re-run elections on 21 july 2019. the initial election, won by the great union party (bbp) mayoral candidate, was annulled after the ysk cancelled the winning mayor's electoral certificate, leading to the resignation of the entire town council. the re-run election was won by the same candidate, this time running under the akp banner.  4 august the town (belde) of suvarlı, in the district of besni in adıyaman province held re-run elections on 4 august 2019. the election, originally won by the iyi party, was annulled after the winning mayor's electoral certificate was cancelled due to a prior conviction that barred the elected mayor from holding office. the re-run election was won by the akp candidate, who became the first female mayor in the history of the province.  references     2019 elections in turkey election and referendum articles with incomplete results june 2019 events in turkey 2019 march 2019 events in turkey
glogova may refer to:  glogova, bratunac, bosnia and herzegovina glogova (visegrad), bosnia and herzegovina glogova, gorj, romania  see also glogovac (disambiguation)
the 1967-68 season was galatasaray's 64th in existence and the 10th consecutive season in the 1. lig. this article shows statistics of the club's players in the season, and also lists all matches that the club have played in the season.  squad statistics  players in / out  in  out  1.lig  standings  matches  turkiye kupası kick-off listed in local time (eet)  1st round  2nd round  1/4 final  1/2 final  friendly matches  tsyd kupası  attendance  references   tuncay, bulent (2002). galatasaray tarihi. yapı kredi yayınları  external links  galatasaray sports club official website   turkish football federation - galatasaray a.s.   uefa.com - galatasaray as  galatasaray s.k. (football) seasons turkish football clubs 1967-68 season 1960s in istanbul galatasaray sports club 1967-68 season
warbound is the second album by christian death metal band broken flesh.  critical reception  the metal resource writes, "as a band, the performances on this album are great. many bands in this genre end up with all their songs sounding the same by the time everything is put together, but that is not the case here, which makes this a good listen. guitar riffs are fast and show good variety; the drumming shows great speed as one would expect in the genre, but also some great variety fills, tempo changes, and double bass work; vocals are not simply all guttural death metal style and are delivered with a sense of strength; and even the bass guitar that is often largely absent from the mix in this genre contributes to the overall sound."  artwork and concept when asked in an interview with hm magazine if warbound was a concept album, guitarist kevin tubby replied  track listing  personnel broken flesh  jacob mathes - vocals  josh mathes - bass, vocals  steve giddens - guitar  kevin tubby - guitar, vocals  brandon lopez - drums  production  provo provenzano - producer, mastering, engineer, mixing  jon zig - artwork  references  2013 albums broken flesh albums
kani balavi ( or , , ) is a village in duhok governorate in kurdistan region, iraq. it is located in the district of amadiya and the historical region of barwari bala.  in the village, there is a church of mart maryam.  history kani balavi was inhabited by 20-30 assyrian families in 1850. after the assyrian genocide in the first world war, assyrian refugees from ashitha in turkey settled at kani balavi, and the village had a population of 110 people by 1933, in which year it was looted and burned by the iraqi army during the simele massacre. in 1938, 20 families populated kani balavi. the village had a small jewish community of several families until their departure in 1949.   the population increased to 190 assyrians by the iraqi census of 1957, and in 1961, there were 70 families in 35 houses. the village's population temporarily fled and took refuge elsewhere during the first iraqi-kurdish war in the 1960s, and later returned. kani balavi was destroyed by the iraqi army, and its population forcibly expelled, during the al-anfal campaign in 1988.  15 assyrian families returned and rebuilt kani balavi, but it was reported that kurds from neighbouring villages had illegally seized the village's water sources and constructed houses on villagers' land in 1992. in early 2009, 72 displaced assyrians, with 19 families, resided at kani balavi. by 2011, the supreme committee of christian affairs had constructed 39 houses, a church, and community hall, and developed the village's infrastructure.   in 2012, it was estimated that 15 assyrians, all adherents of the assyrian church of the east, inhabited kani balavi. in august 2014, the assyrian church of the east relief organisation reported there were 45 displaced assyrian families in the village, and the assyrian aid society provided humanitarian aid in november. as of 2021, 29 assyrians inhabit kani balavi.  references notes  citations  bibliography         assyrian communities in iraq populated places in dohuk province historic jewish communities in iraq
the bank of ireland £10 note is a banknote of the pound sterling. it is the second smallest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  history the bank of ireland began issuing notes in 1783, the same year as the bank's founding. early banknotes were denominations of the irish pound, but following that currency's abolition in 1826 banknotes produced by the bank of ireland were denominated in pounds sterling. these early banknotes were printed by the bank in dublin, and featured a design with a row of mercury heads across the top. this basic design remained effectively unchanged for 120 years. northern irish banknotes are fully backed such that holders have the same level of protection as those holding genuine bank of england notes. the £10 note is currently the second smallest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  the £10 note of the queen's university belfast series was first issued in 2005. this issue features a representation of hibernia on the front, alongside shields of arms of the six counties of northern ireland. the back of this note displays an image of queen's university belfast. in 2008 a new series featuring the image of the old bushmills distillery on the reverse was introduced. apart from this change of rear design the difference between this note and the preceding series is minimal. the design of the £10 note was tweaked in 2013, with slight changes of the front design taking place. the 2013 note also features an image of the bushmills distillery on the reverse.  designs  information taken from bank of ireland website.  references  external links  bank of ireland banknotes the association of commercial banknote issuers  banknotes of northern ireland ten-base-unit banknotes
the 1925 wellington city mayoral election was part of the new zealand local elections held that same year. in 1925, elections were held for the mayor of wellington plus other local government positions including fifteen councillors. the polling was conducted using the standard first-past-the-post electoral method.  background incumbent mayor robert wright did not seek a third term, but ran as a councillor once again. to replace him, the civic league initially nominated councillor thomas forsyth as their candidate for the mayoralty, but he withdrew in favour of former councillor charles norwood. sitting councillor charles chapman was the labour party's candidate.  mayoralty results  councillor results  references  mayoral elections in wellington 1925 elections in new zealand politics of the wellington region 1920s in wellington
kasamatsu (written: ) is a japanese surname. notable people with the surname include:  , japanese artistic gymnast , japanese artistic gymnast, father of akihiro , japanese artist  japanese-language surnames
old westmoreland homestead is a heritage-listed homestead at westmoreland station, nicholson, shire of burke, queensland, australia. it was designed by thomas brassey mcintosh and built in c. 1882 by thomas brassey mcintosh. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 31 july 2008.  history  westmoreland station, near the border with the northern territory and close to the gulf of carpentaria, was taken up in 1881 by thomas and robert mcintosh, robert philp and william kirk. it originally comprised . thomas brassey mcintosh managed the property for the partners, and  constructed the two-roomed stone house now known as old westmoreland homestead. it is believed by many local residents to be the oldest surviving home in the district.  when westmoreland was taken up in the early 1880s, guerrilla warfare between the indigenous owners of the land and the occupying pastoralists was being waged throughout the gulf country. there are many conflict sites in the area, including hells gate ( south-east of westmoreland), massacre inlet and battle creek. the  homestead on westmoreland station was constructed with thick stone walls, inward opening doors, and few windows, to provide security for people and property during potential attacks by aborigines.  by 1887 the south australian mortgage and land company had taken over the lease of westmoreland, which by 1891 had been transferred to the bank of australasia.  when consolidated in 1895, the station comprised westmoreland and westmoreland nos. 1 to 4, 7 and 11. the main homestead was located on westmoreland no. 3, where improvements included an iron-roofed stone homestead, kitchen, and outbuildings, the whole valued at . the block comprised , with rich creek flats, steep stony ridges and open forests of box, bloodwood and tea-tree. much of the land was thickly grassed and had permanent water, and was considered good cattle-fattening country in ordinary seasons.  in the late 1890s queensland entered a period of severe and widespread drought. the gulf country was affected and in 1897 the lease to the westmoreland consolidated run was forfeited and the run remained unoccupied for about 15 years.  from 1 october 1912 westmoreland was let on a 30 year lease to john norman mcintyre. at this time the consolidated run was estimated to comprise over . in 1913 mcintyre complained that the valuations on the property were over 20 years old and many of the improvements no longer existed. on westmoreland no.3 the roof structure to the stone homestead had been eaten by white ants and the kitchen had collapsed.  in 1916 the westmoreland pastoral company took over the lease, and conducted the westmoreland
run in conjunction with its other properties: cliffdale and patterdale in queensland and wollogorang in the northern territory.  a valuation inspection of westmoreland undertaken in 1932 valued the stone homestead and outbuildings at , the homestead stockyards at  and total improvements at . in 1937, a further appraisal noted that the stone homestead was the only extant residential structure on westmoreland; there were no huts on any of the other blocks. at this period the westmoreland board of directors comprised sir william charles angliss and walter sidney palethorpe kidman (son of sidney kidman), two well-known australian pastoralists. the lease passed to john allan fennell in 1938 and thomas staines bernard terry in 1939.  a new residence was constructed adjacent to the stone house during the second half of the twentieth century. it is not considered to be of cultural heritage significance.  description  old westmoreland homestead is located within the precinct of the present head station adjacent to dwellings, cold room, garages and workshops. it is set amongst lawns to the south of the main sheds and a dwelling, and east of the present homestead.  the original two-roomed homestead is constructed from hewn sandstone blocks using ant bed mortar and fill. it measures , inclusive of the surrounding verandah, which is approximately  wide. the hipped roof of early corrugated galvanised iron is nailed with lead-head nails to bush timber roof rafters and purlins. it is secured to the external verandah posts with wire twitches. the roof is unlined.  several of the round timber posts supporting the verandah roof have been replaced due to termite damage. the original posts appear to have been replicated in style if not in size or, possibly, timber species.  the original doors have been replaced with vj plank doors, some half- height. several have rim locks evident. the original timber door lintels are present but severely damaged by termites. the windows are voids with traces of the original joinery evident.  internally, the building is divided into two rooms by a partition of hardwood framing and single-skin corrugated iron to ceiling height, the roof space open above this. centrally positioned in this wall is the doorway connecting the two rooms. above the door is a ventilation panel in-filled with metal lattice.  the floor was originally dirt or ant bed (pers comm. g gould, owner). at some stage prior to 1980 it was concreted inside. antbed flooring remains on the north-east verandah and most of the south-east verandah. it was repaired in
the period 1980 to 2004.  the building is currently used for storage and outdoor entertainment. a later kitchen, , constructed of metal framing and cladding, is located on the south-western side of the homestead. it is not considered to be of cultural heritage significance. the original, separate kitchen, located to the north of the building, is no longer extant.  a photograph taken in 1963-1964 shows an added skillion on the northeast side extending the full length of the building. at some unknown date this has been truncated to its present size. there is no evidence to suggest whether this was part of the original homestead or, more likely, a later addition.  heritage listing  old westmoreland homestead was listed on the queensland heritage register on 31 july 2008 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  old westmoreland homestead, constructed , is important for its association with, and as rare surviving evidence of, early efforts to establish the pastoral industry in north-west queensland in the second half of the nineteenth century, during a period of frontier violence. the building shows clear evidence of being constructed with due consideration for possible conflict: thick walls (which would also have helped insulate the building), inward opening doors, and few windows.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  although there has been some adaptation the building remains a rare example of vernacular nineteenth century stone pastoral homesteads in queensland. the use of antbed mortar was once quite widespread, but few examples remain where this versatile material was put to use.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  old westmoreland homestead exemplifies the simple dwellings established during nineteenth century colonial settlement in remote parts of queensland. the simplistic form of the building, and the use of local materials, demonstrates the principal characteristics of this class of place: nineteenth century pastoral property homesteads.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the place retains a high degree of aesthetic value generated by the picturesque qualities of the simple design and the rustic materials employed in the construction: sandstone for the walls; ant bed for mortar and flooring; corrugated galvanised iron to clad the roof; and rough-cut bush timbers for the verandah posts.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register burketown homesteads in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
rafael nadal was the defending champion, but chose not to participate this year.  martin klizan won the title, defeating pablo cuevas in the final, 6-1, 6-4.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  references main draw qualifying draw  international german open - singles 2016 singles 2016 international german open
ermengarde de carcassonne (d. 1099), was a french noble, ruling vassal vicomtesse of carcassonne in 1082-1099. she is the daughter of pierre raymond de carcassonne and rangarde de la marche.  ermengarde married raymond bernard, with whom she had her son bernard ato iv. after the death of her brother, roger iii de carcassonne, in 1067, the succession of the county was disputed between ermengarde and roger ii de foix. the fight lasted for many years, because the successive suzerains, the counts ramon berenguer i, then ramon berenguer ii and ramon berenguer iii also had sights on the city and tried on several occasions to seize carcassonne. ermengarde was not recognized viscountess until 1082 and shared the government with his son bernard ato.  references  sources  dictionnaire de l'art de verifier les dates", achille francois & jouffroy d'abbans; 1854    11th-century births 1099 deaths 11th-century french people 11th-century women rulers french vicomtesses viscounts of carcassonne
the 10th district of the iowa senate is located in southwestern iowa, and is currently composed of adair, cass, dallas, guthrie, and polk counties.  current elected officials jake chapman is the senator currently representing the 10th district.  the area of the 10th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 19th district (represented by carter nordman) the 20th district (represented by ray sorensen)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by u.s. representative cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  alvin miller, 1983-1992 merlin bartz, 1993-2002 amanda ragan, 2002 donald redfern, 2003-2004 jeff danielson, 2005-2012 jake chapman, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  10
stephan spencer is a three-time author under the o'reilly media brand, search engine optimization (seo) expert, inventor, podcaster, speaker, and founder of netconcepts.  early career  spencer holds an m.s. in biochemistry from the university of wisconsin-madison. in his phd study, he worked in the institute for molecular virology and department of biochemistry where he developed improved visual representations of biological viruses. spencer served as research assistant on a project researching ways to improve communication about virology on the world wide web. he presented a paper on this topic at the second international worldwide web conference, where he met some of the team from netscape and got interested in web development. in 1994, while still in graduate school, spencer developed his first website. spencer left his phd study to pursue a career in internet marketing.  writersnet  spencer founded writersnet in 1994 while a graduate student. writersnet was acquired by crowdgather in june 2011. in january 2008, a lawsuit was filed against spencer as the founder of writersnet by literary agent barbara bauer, who simultaneously filed suit against the wikimedia foundation, the science fiction and fantasy writers of america inc, and over a dozen other parties on the legal claims of defamation, conspiracy, and tortious interference. wikimedia foundation was removed from the suit in may 2008, and the suit itself was dismissed in november 2010.  innsite  spencer also founded innsite while a grad student in 1994. innsite was an early implementer of real-time updatable user-generated content, and was featured in the book special edition: using cgi published by que in 1996. innsite was named "best inn directory of 1998" by yahoo! internet life magazine. innsite was acquired by an undisclosed party in 2010.  netconcepts  in 1995, spencer founded web design agency netconcepts  on a bootstrap budget in madison, wisconsin. the agency provided internet consulting, an ecommerce platform called gravitymarket and an email marketing platform gravitymail with automated spam scoring. however, over time it grew to specialize in search engine optimization.  new zealand  in 2000, spencer moved to new zealand to set up a second netconcepts branch in auckland. he acted as managing director from a smaller office in christchurch while the wisconsin office continued to operate as headquarters. the company used an internal intranet to collaborate between offices. netconcepts grew to over 40 employees between the two offices, with yearly revenue of over $5 million, making it one of the largest seo firms
in new zealand. however, clients were typically us-based, and included corporations such as verizon, home shopping network, and rei. the firm received recognition for its flexible hours and employee-centric working environment, including from the new zealand government. his operation in new zealand had notably high staff retention rates. spencer moved from new zealand back to the us in 2007.  acquisition by covario  netconcepts was acquired by covario in 2010. spencer worked as vice president of seo strategies at covario in 2010 for less than a year after the acquisition was finalized.  gravitystream  spencer is the inventor of the pay-for-performance seo technology platform gravitystream, was included in the acquisition of covario and now part of rio seo's toolset.  post-acquisition  spencer now works as an seo and internet marketing consultant and has worked with clients such as zappos, chanel, and sony.  spencer is on the advisory board to crowdgather, and board member to impact network, a charity that builds and operates schools in zambia. in 2008, spencer worked with jimmy carter's humanitarian organization, the carter center, to set up a successful blog.  writing  in 2009, spencer co-authored the art of seo, with rand fishkin, eric enge, and jessie stricchiola. published by o'reilly, the book was named search engine land's best seo book of 2009. spencer and his co-authors came out with the second edition of the art of seo in 2012, and the third edition in 2015. spencer is author of google power search, an advanced google search manual, published in 2011 by o'reilly. spencer co-authored social ecommerce with jimmy harding and jennifer sheahan which was published in 2014 by o'reilly.  spencer is a contributor to a number of marketing journals and blogs. he has been published in practical ecommerce, marketingprofs, search engine land, multichannel merchant, the huffington post, and cnet, among others.  bibliography   enge, eric, stephan spencer, jessie stricchiola, and rand fishkin. the art of seo: mastering search engine optimization. n.p.: o'reilly & associates, 2009.   enge, eric, stephan spencer, jessie stricchiola, and rand fishkin. the art of seo: mastering search engine optimization. 2nd ed. n.p.: o'reilly & associates, 2012.   enge, eric, stephan spencer and jessie stricchiola. the art of seo
: mastering search engine optimization. 3rd ed. n.p.: o'reilly & associates, 2015.   spencer, stephan. google power search. n.p.: o'reilly & associates, 2009.   spencer, stephan, jimmy harding, jennifer sheahan. social ecommerce: increasing sales and extending brand reach. n.p.: o'reilly & associates, 2014.  speaking  spencer has been speaking at internet marketing conferences for over 20 years, including covering seo and digital marketing topics for the american marketing association (ama), shop.org, internet retailer, smx, search engine strategies, o'reilly/techweb, pubcon, nemoa, etail, wordcamp, accm, among others.  media  spencer is the host of two podcasts, marketing speak and the optimized geek. both have appeared on itunes new and noteworthy and in 2016, spencer made multiple live television appearances on local affiliates of abc, cbs, fox, and nbc, speaking about the geek lifestyle and raising awareness for children in foster care.  family  spencer encouraged his oldest daughter at the age of 14 to start a blog, neopetsfanatic.com. he advised her on using adsense to monetize the site, earnings were up to $1,100 per month. spencer and chloe have co presented at conferences dma08 and blogpaws. chloe has spoken on her own as well, including blogher, dma, ypulse, smx west, blogworld, smoc, and ses, and has appeared live on denver 9news and the bay area's abc7 news. blogpaws has appeared on live tv as well. spencer and chloe have appeared on interviews such as blogtalkradio, as well as chloe has appeared alone on webpronews, clickz, reelseo,  and blogger stories. in addition to encouraging chloe to blog on her own site, he encouraged her to blog for the huffington post and, on his recommendation to arianna huffington, chloe became a huffington post blogger at the age of 16 in 2008.  references   living people university of wisconsin-madison alumni year of birth missing (living people) american podcasters
minister for disability services is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by stephen dawson of the labor party. the position was first created in 1991, for the government of carmen lawrence, and has existed in every government since then. the minister is responsible for the state government's disability services commission.  titles  20 august 1991 - present: minister for disability services  list of ministers  see also  minister for community services (western australia)  minister for health (western australia)  minister for mental health (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  disability minister for disability disability in australia
david eric biro (born 1964) is an american writer and physician.  education and academic career  biro was born in 1964, and grew up in brooklyn, new york, where he attended poly prep with his three sisters. he received a ba in classics from university of pennsylvania.  he went on to receive an md from columbia university in 1991, and a dphil in english literature in 1993 from the university of oxford.  biro is an associate clinical professor of dermatology and medical humanities at suny downstate in brooklyn, and a clinical assistant professor of dermatology at the nyu grossman school of medicine.  he teaches general dermatology with a focus on skin cancer.  in the medical humanities, biro's main areas of expertise are the expressibility of pain, the psychological dimensions of pain, illness narratives, and the patient experience.  writing in 1996, biro discovered that he had a rare bone marrow disease, paroxysmal nocturnal hemoglobinuria.  he was treated by a bone marrow transplant from one of his sisters.  he wrote in 2000 about his experience as a patient, and how it changed his work as a doctor, in his first book one hundred days: my unexpected journey from doctor to patient.  he also drew on this experience in his second book, the language of pain: finding words, compassion, relief, which discusses the use of language to express pain.  his first work of fiction, the magnificent dappled sea, was published in 2020.  this was followed by a second novel in 2021.  personal life biro married fashion executive daniella vitale in 1991.. the couple live in manhattan with their sons.  bibliography  books  references  external links     american male writers 21st-century american writers american dermatologists 1964 births living people
aaron wesley plyler (1 october 1926 - 23 august 2016) was an american businessman and politician.  born in monroe, north carolina, plyler went to the benton heights school and to the florida military academy. he was involved with farming and real estate. plyler was president of plyler grading and paving company. plyler served as a democratic member of the north carolina house of representatives, from 1974 to 1982 and then served in the north carolina state senate from 1982 to 2002. plyler died at his home in monroe, north carolina.  references  1926 births 2016 deaths people from monroe, north carolina businesspeople from north carolina farmers from north carolina north carolina democrats members of the north carolina house of representatives north carolina state senators 21st-century american politicians 20th-century american businesspeople
the gen. davis tillson house is a historic house at 157 talbot avenue in rockland, maine.  built in 1853, it is one of the region's finest examples of residential gothic revival architecture, and is unusual statewide for its execution in brick.  it was built for davis tillson, a militia general during the american civil war and a prominent local businessman, and was listed on the national register of historic places in 1983.  description and history the tillson house stands on the north side of talbot avenue, in a rural residential area west of downtown rockland.  it is  stories in height, with a gabled roof, brick walls, and wooden trim.  the gables are steep, in the gothic revival tradition, and the main end gables as well as dormer gables are decorated with jigsawn vergeboard.  the front facade is six bays wide, with the right three in a projecting gabled section.  two of that gables bays are recessed, forming a porch with gothic columns, and the gable edge extends to a crested railing above the first floor.  most windows are sash, with granite sills and lintels; windows near the gable peaks have gothic-arched tops and granite sills.  the house was built in 1853, and is the only major example of the gothic revival in rockland.  the house was built for brigadier general davis tillson, who led maine volunteer militia in the american civil war, seeing action at cedar mountain and elsewhere.  tillson was also a prominent local businessman, owning some of rockland's lime manufactories, and building its large city wharf.  see also tillson farm barn, an architecturally distinguished barn built by tillson in rockport national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine  references  houses on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in knox county, maine gothic revival architecture in maine houses completed in 1853 houses in knox county, maine buildings and structures in rockland, maine
ibban  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of ibban. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, ibban has total number of 325 houses and population of 1,516 of which include 776 males and 740 females. literacy rate of ibban is 80.51%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 141 which is 9.30% of total population of ibban, and child sex ratio is approximately  855, higher than state average of 846.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
dominik distelberger (born 16 march 1990) is an austrian athlete competing in the decathlon. he represented his country at the 2016 summer olympics finishing 19th.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 100 metres - 10.54 (+1.6 m/s, ostrava 2011) 200 metres - 21.41 (-0.3 m/s, villach 2010) 400 metres - 47.25 (gotzis 2010) 1000 metres - 2:56.28 (ostrava 2007) 1500 metres - 4:27.10 (ratingen 2010) 110 metres hurdles - 14.19 (+0.3 m/s, paris 2017) high jump - 2.00 (gotzis 2014) pole vault - 5.00 (gotzis 2016) long jump - 7.74 (+1.0 m/s, villach 2010) shot put - 13.76 (gotzis 2016) discus throw - 45.23 (schwechat-rannersdorf 2015) javelin throw - 61.83 (rio de janeiro 2016) decathlon - 8175 (gotzis 2016) indoor 60 metres - 6.83 (vienna 2010) 1000 metres - 2:41.01 (tallinn 2011) 60 metres hurdles - 7.80 (belgrade 2017) high jump - 2.02 (vienna 2010) pole vault - 5.10 (belgrade 2017) long jump - 7.52 (vienna 2013) shot put - 13.70 (vienna 2016) heptathlon - 6063 (belgrade 2017)  references  austrian decathletes living people 1990 births people from scheibbs district athletes (track and field) at the 2015 european games athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of austria sportspeople from lower austria
ethnos () is the name of a greek weekly newspaper first published in 1913.  history the newspaper was first published in 1913 with a venizelist political thesis. always in the progressive political spectrum, it supported later georgios papandreou and center union. in 1970, during the greek military junta of 1967-74, it was forced to stop publishing. in 1981, dimitris varos relaunched it as a colour tabloid.  the newspaper was owned for years by pegasus publishing sa. in 2017 was sold to dimera media investments, owned by ivan savvidis. from september 2017 to march 2018 publisher was dimitris maris. dimera reportedly acquired the two ethnos titles (daily and sunday editions) for 3 million euros.  on august 9th 2020 the sunday edition ceased circulation following the daily edition which stopped circulating on july 31st 2019.  references  publications established in 1913 publications disestablished in 1970 publications established in 1981 publications disestablished in 2020 1913 establishments in greece 1970 disestablishments in greece 1981 establishments in greece 2020 disestablishments in greece newspapers published in athens greek-language newspapers daily newspapers published in greece
claude colette (4 may 1929 - 20 september 1990) was a french professional racing cyclist. he rode in six editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1929 births 1990 deaths french male cyclists people from chatellerault sportspeople from vienne
radisa cubric (born 24 july 1962) is a serbian former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1962 births living people serbian male cyclists yugoslav male cyclists olympic cyclists as independent olympic participants cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from kraljevo
the women's antifascist front (, антифашистички фронт жена, abbreviated afz/aфж; ; ), was a yugoslav feminist and anti-fascist mass organisation. the predecessor to several feminist front groups in the former yugoslavia, and present-day organisations in the region, the afz was heavily involved in organising and participating in the partisans, the communist and multi-ethnic resistance to nazi occupation of yugoslavia during world war ii.  it was formed by volunteers on 6 december 1942 in bosanski petrovac at the first national conference of women.  name in its early days, the organization was called antifascist organization of women (aoz). in croatia, the organization was named the antifascist front of women of croatia. in slovenia there were a number of titles: antifascist women association, antifascist front women, antifascist front of women. it was founded under the name of slovenian antifascist women association. there was also a slovenian anti-italian women's union. in macedonia, it was called  antifascist front of women of macedonia (antifasisticki front na zenite na makedonija). in serbia there was the antifascist front of women of serbia, including the antifascist front of women of vojvodina (based in subotica).  establishment and reasons for establishing  before world war ii, many women organizations advocated for peace, fighting against the different totalitarian forces that were growing across europe. during the war however, many women organized themselves within the antifascist movement, and strengthened its position. this is confirmed by the first document of the supreme headquarters and the national liberation army volunteer yugoslavia, which at that time was the supreme authority in the liberated territories. in various documents it confirmed women's active and passive voting rights, which they already possessed prior to 1941, as outlined in the constitution, but were not allowed to exercise.  years rabia during elections for national liberation committees as the new authorities. women began to massively involve the nop as soldiers, medical staff, politicians and mps.  different female structures, which were established in 1941 under various names, have been associated in the wider areas, and as of 6 december 1942, held the first national conference of women. at the conference attended by 166 delegates from all over yugoslavia, except for macedonia, because they did not occur because of both distance and security concerns. then the conference founded antifascist front of women with the aim of mobilizing women for assisting new units, helping partisan government bodies, participation in armed and sabotage actions, and for the development of 'brotherhood and
unity' among women.  these groups were decentralized into what would later become the constituent republics of the socialist federal republic of yugoslavia:  women's antifascist front of bosnia and herzegovina women's antifascist front of croatia women's antifascist front of kosovo women's antifascist front of macedonia women's antifascist front of montenegro women's antifascist front of serbia women's antifascist front of slovenia women's antifascist front of vojvodina  world war ii afz played an influential role in the second world war, after the invasion of yugoslavia. the nla attracted about two million women. in military units, there were 110 000 women. during the war, 2,000 women became officers. afz committees were also responsible were collecting clothes for the nov, cared about children, wounded soldiers, worked as front line nurses and perform agricultural tasks.  losses of the 305,000 fallen soldiers between 1941-1945, 25000 were women, and of the 405,000 injured 40,000 were women.  after the war the issue of legal equality did not arise, because the women through their participation in the national liberation movement had arguably already achieved certain rights. all that after foca regulations on the principles of equality enshrined in the later constitutions "new" yugoslavia, and various laws, the result of the struggle of women themselves in the feminist and anti-fascist women's organizations before the war, as well as their struggle during the war. afz acted to eliminate the consequences of the war, the promotion of education, the construction of new residential buildings, cultural work and others. in particular, it was the education of the girls, and opposition to discrimination and segregation of women.  abolition antifascist front of women was abolished at its fourth congress (26 - 28 september 1953) in belgrade, when the decision on the name was changed to the women's societies of yugoslavia, and access to the socialist alliance of working people of yugoslavia. front was upbraided "superfluous political activities". instead afz in the socialist republic of croatia acted croatian union of women societies (union of women croatian), later conference for social position of women and the family within the republican conference ssrnh (conference for social activity of women croatian). there was a committee for social position of women and the family which actually keeps. in her work the yugoslav antifascist front of women (afz): legacy, lessons and some insights, andrea jovanovic explores the question of the legacy of the afz and attempts to explain how and why the afz legacy disappeared in the post-yugoslav period.  references   paramilitary organizations based in yugoslavia
linda gamble may refer to:   linda gamble (model) (born 1939), american model  linda gamble (basketball) (born 1949), american basketball player
geforce now (stylized as geforce now) is the brand used by nvidia for its cloud gaming service. the nvidia shield version of geforce now, formerly known as nvidia grid, launched in beta in 2013, with nvidia officially unveiling its name on september 30, 2015. the subscription service provided users with unlimited access to a library of games hosted on nvidia servers for the life of the subscription, being delivered to subscribers through streaming video. certain titles were also available via a "buy & play" model. this version was discontinued in 2019, and transitioned to a new version of the service that enabled shield users to play their own games.   in january 2017, nvidia unveiled geforce now clients for windows and macintosh computers, available in north america and europe as a free beta. geforce now lets users access a virtual computer, where they can install their existing games from existing digital distribution platforms, and play them remotely. as with the original shield version, the virtual desktop is also streamed from nvidia servers. an android client was also introduced in 2019.  the service exited beta and launched to the general public on february 4, 2020. it is available on windows, macos, android, ios, shield tv, and chromebook devices. geforce support for lg tvs running webos will be made available sometime in 2021.  features  geforce now consists of a network of servers based in data centers in north america and europe, that host and serve the geforce now game library to members in those regions. on march 18th, 2021, nvidia announced that they will be opening a datacenter in montreal, canada, in addition to two datacenters in australia through their partnership with pentanet. the servers utilize nvidia tesla graphics cards, and can stream games at up to 1080p resolution at 60 frames per second (sometimes even 120 frames). nvidia recommended a 50 mbit/s internet connection for the 1080/60p stream, but the service can also stream at 720p/60p for 25 mbit/s connections, 720/30p frames per second for connections higher than 10 mbit/s, and use adaptive bitrate streaming to scale the quality based on bandwidth. the server-side hardware will be upgraded over time to improve the quality of the streams.  library  the original geforce now library on shield contained over 80 games as of march 2016; at the game developers conference 2016, nvidia announced new licensing deals with sega and warner bros. interactive entertainment. a large amount of the service's library
was available for streaming with a subscription. some games were available as a "buy & play" title only, under which users have to purchase the title in order to access it. this library has since been replaced with a "bring your own games" model, which is consistent with geforce now for windows, macintosh, and android. for example, if a user wants to play fortnite on a device, it would be free as the game itself is free to play, but to play cyberpunk 2077, the user would need to sign into a steam or epic games store account that owns that game.  nvidia has been involved in a number of licensing rights disputes related to games on the service, especially in february and march 2020 when the service transitioned from its beta stage to its general release. activision blizzard pulled all their games from the service in february 2020, citing a "misunderstanding" on the terms. bethesda pulled the majority of its games shortly afterward. the developers of the long dark said that their game was improperly placed on the service without any sort of licensing agreement; nvidia agreed to remove that game as well. in the beginning of march 2020, 2k games also pulled their products from the service.  nvidia announced in may 2020 that they would change their approach to have developers and publishers require their games to be opted into use for the library on the geforce now service, starting in june 2020, though this will be a free service offered to these companies. shortly afterwards, valve announced that it was launching a beta of its steam cloud play services for its storefront that would integrate with other cloud gaming services, including geforce now.  on september 30, geforce now announced that electronic arts games, including battlefield, mirror's edge, unravel, and dragon age franchises, are available to play in the cloud.  geforce now for computers  at the consumer electronics show in january 2017, nvidia announced a version of geforce now for windows and macintosh computers. unlike the version for nvidia shield (which nvidia promoted as being similar to netflix), this is a separate offering in which users can rent access to a remote desktop with access to a windows environment with geforce gtx graphics. users can install digital distribution clients such as steam onto the remote desktop to download and run purchased or free-to-play games as they would locally. one potential pricing structure is per-minute of play time using blocks of service credits; two price tiers would be available, with gtx 1060 and gtx 1080-class performance respectively.
nvidia aimed this service towards users who want to play their own purchased games on computers that are not compatible with them, such as laptops and computers with low-end capabilities. this pricing structure was never introduced. instead, nvidia revealed two membership options - free and founder's - on february 4, 2020, when geforce now officially ended its beta period.   on march 18, 2021, geforce now changed the membership options to free and priority. in addition to the change of memberships options, geforce now also announced any one who had purchased the founders membership, on or before march 17, 2021, would automatically given founders for life membership, which would continue at $4.99/month so long as membership was kept live.  nvidia announced a planned beta of the service in march 2017, but it was silently cancelled. in an earnings report in may 2017, nvidia ceo jen-hsun huang revealed that a beta would be held "sometime soon", but that the company was "still years away from being able to find the right balance between cost and quality of service and the pervasiveness of virtualizing a gaming pc." in late october 2017, nvidia launched a free and open beta of the service limited to the macintosh platform for english users in north america and europe. in january 2018, nvidia added pcs to the geforce now service, and, on february 4, 2020, the service was launched to the general public with generally positive reviews compared to rival streaming service stadia.  references   nvidia products cloud gaming services subscription video game services
duanzhou or duan prefecture was a zhou (prefecture) in imperial china in modern guangdong, china, centering on modern zhaoqing. duan prefecture was a major production center of inkstones.  the modern duanzhou district in zhaoqing is named after the prefecture.  counties duan prefecture administered the following counties () through history (sui dynasty, tang dynasty, southern han and song dynasty): gaoyao (), roughly modern zhaoqing city proper (probably around gaoyao district). pingxing (), roughly modern gaoming district, foshan. pingxing was abolished by the song dynasty in 972. sihui (), roughly modern sihui. sihui was only under the administration of duan prefecture in the song dynasty.  references         589 establishments 6th-century establishments in china 1118 disestablishments in asia 12th-century disestablishments in china prefectures of the sui dynasty prefectures of the tang dynasty guangnan east circuit prefectures of southern han zhaoqing former prefectures in guangdong
mika hamalainen (born 15 march 1967) is a finnish former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people finnish male cyclists olympic cyclists of finland cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from helsinki
wang lutong (; born 1 september 1969) is a chinese diplomat.  biography in 1992 he entered the ministry of foreign affairs of the people's republic of china. from 1992 to 1996 he was attached the information department. from 1996 to 2000 he was third secretary in the chinese embassy in london. from 2000 to 2002 he was third secretary, deputy director of the information department. from 2002 to 2003 he was second secretary, director of the department of west europe affairs. from 2003 to 2005 he was first secretary, counsellor in the general office. from 2005 to 2007 he was counsellor and director of the office of foreign affairs leading group of the central committee of the communist party of china. from 2007 to 2011 he was associate counsel to the office of foreign affairs leading group, cpc central committee from 2011 to 2013 he was counsel of the office of foreign affairs leading group, cpc central committee in october 2013 he was designated ambassador to wellington where he is since  accredited. he is also accredited in avarua (cook islands) and alofi, niue (niue). he is married and has one son.  references  1969 births living people ambassadors of china to new zealand
rosie lowe is a british singer, songwriter and musician. she was first known for releasing her debut single "right thing" in november 2013. she released her debut extended play under the same name the following year. she subsequently released her 2016 debut album, entitled control which contains the singles "worry bout us", "woman" and "so human", featuring vocals from rapper little simz. "woman" was featured in the soundtrack for the 2017 film the last word.  after a period away from the limelight, in november 2018 she released the single "the light" and announced her forthcoming second album and some 2019 tour dates. her second album, yu, was released in may 2019.  discography  studio albums  control (2016)  yu (2019)  eps  right thing ep (2014)  now, you know (2021)  singles  as lead artist  "right thing" (2013)  "games" (2014)  "water came down" (2014)  "how'd you like it" (2014)  "who's that girl?" (2015)  "worry bout us" (2015)  "woman" (2016)  "so human" (2016)   "the light" (2018)  "birdsong" (2019)  "pharoah" (2019)  "the way" (2019)  as featured artist  "what is this" (2017)   "obsession" (2021)  references  external links  living people musicians from devon english women singer-songwriters british contemporary r&b singers english record producers 1989 births 21st-century british  women singers british women record producers english soul singers polydor records artists
capitalist  (foaled 14 september 2013) is a retired thoroughbred racehorse and active sire trained and bred in australia. he won the golden slipper stakes, a group one race. he amassed over three million dollars in winnings.  background capitalist was purchased for $165,000 at the magic millions yearling sales from the daandine stud in queensland early in 2015. he had his first trial on 21 september 2015.  racing career on 3 october 2015, capitalist competed in the listed breeders' plate at randwick racecourse, winning by 3 lengths over 1000 metres. he was said to have "toyed with his opposition" as he, "streaked away." trainer peter snowden said, "he was travelling like a winner a long way out and put paid to them in a few strides without being put under any real pressure."  after a short spell, capitalist returned to win the magic millions wyong, a lead-in race to the magic millions classic. starting as a short-priced favourite, he won by over 2 lengths, collecting $124,000 in prize money.  capitalist was again $1.40 favourite when he raced in the magic millions classic for 2-year-olds in january 2016. despite some early trouble on the fence, he kicked in the straight to win easily and collect $1,205,000 prize money. jockey blake shinn said, "it was tight, very tight. i thought for a second i was going up the fence, but he just held his position, that was it. that is his greatest asset - his attitude and speed."  capitalist then had a freshen before contesting the group 2 todman stakes in march. again a short-priced favourite, he was the 2nd placed of the four horses in the race, finishing behind the gai waterhouse-trained kiss and make up. a post-race vet examination showed the horse to be mildly sore. capitalist's sire, written tycoon, had won the same race in 2005.  capitalist next contested the golden slipper, the world's richest race for two-year-olds. after the previous loss, he was paying $8, the first time in his short career that he had not been favourite. with extreme choice badly missing the start, capitalist won the race by half a length over yankee rose. shinn said, "we never wrote this horse off after his last start defeat. you just have to have the faith and go in confident to every race. this is the best feeling ever. it is one of the greatest races
in the world and to be able to win it, i can't thank everyone enough."  after a 147-day spell, capitalist trialed twice before failing to place in the san domenico stakes on 13 august 2016. he had a freshen and another trial and then placed 3rd in the group 2 roman consul stakes.  stud record capitalist was officially retired to stud at newgate farm in november 2016, having chipped a fetlock in training. manager there, henry field, said, "australia is all about two-year-old racing, and to have a champion two-year-old standing at newgate is what everyone strives for. capitalist is the embodiment of what works in australia - he will be heavily supported by his group of owners."  he was described as "australia's busiest covering sire of 2017" when he served 229 mares for a fee of $55,000.  notable progeny  group 1 winners:  c = colt, f = filly, g = gelding  references  2013 racehorse births racehorses bred in australia racehorses trained in australia thoroughbred family c2
in nanotechnology, carbon nanotube interconnects refer to the proposed use of carbon nanotubes in the interconnects between the elements of an integrated circuit. carbon nanotubes (cnts) can be thought of as single atomic layer graphite sheets rolled up to form seamless cylinders. depending on the direction on which they are rolled, cnts can be semiconducting or metallic. metallic carbon nanotubes have been identified as a possible interconnect material for the future technology generations and to replace copper interconnects. electron transport can go over long nanotube lengths, 1 μm, enabling cnts to carry very high currents (i.e. up to a current density of 109 a∙cm−2) with essentially no heating due to nearly one dimensional electronic structure. despite the current saturation in cnts at high fields, the mitigation of such effects is possible due to encapsulated nanowires.  carbon nanotubes for interconnects application in integrated chips have been studied since 2001, however the extremely attractive performances of individual tubes are difficult to reach when they are assembled in large bundles necessary to make real via or lines in integrated chips. two proposed approaches to overcome the to date limitations are either to make very tiny local connections that will be needed in future advanced chips or to make carbon metal composite structure that will be compatible with existing microelectronic processes.  hybrid interconnects that employ cnt vias in tandem with copper interconnects may offer advantages in reliability and thermal-management. in 2016, the european union has funded a four million euro project over three years to evaluate manufacturability and performance of composite interconnects employing both cnt and copper interconnects. the project named connect (carbon nanotube composite interconnects) involves the joint efforts of seven european research and industry partners on fabrication techniques and processes to enable reliable carbon nanotubes for on-chip interconnects in ulsi microchip production.  local interconnects  while smaller dimensions mean better performance for transistors thanks to the decrease of intrinsic transistor gate delay, the situation is quite the opposite for interconnects. smaller cross-section areas of interconnect would only lead to performance degradation such as increased interconnect resistance and power consumption. since the 1990s the circuit performance is no longer limited by the transistors, thus interconnects have become a key issue and are as important as the transistors in determining chip performance. as technology scaling continues, the problem of interconnect performance degradation will only become more significant. local interconnects that are on the lower levels of the interconnect stack connecting nearby logic gates are aggressively scaled down at each generation to follow the miniaturization of
transistors and thus are mostly susceptible to performance degradation. on the local level where interconnects are most densely packed, and have pitch sizes close to the minimum feature size, we will need new interconnect materials that suffer much less from sizing effects than copper.  thanks to the measured properties of individual carbon nanotubes (cnts), such material has been proposed as future material for interconnects. particularly their current carrying capabilities are extremely high  typically around 109 acm−2 and they exhibit a ballistic length up to micrometers. however, due to the strong electron-phonon interaction in single-walled cnts, it has been discovered that electronic current undergoes saturation at the voltage bias beyond 0.2 v.  nevertheless, cnts with few nm in diameter are extremely robust compared with metallic nanowires of similar diameter and demonstrate conducting properties superior as compared with copper. to make a connection, cnts have to be paralleled in order to lower the resistance.  the resistance r of one single-walled carbon nanotubes can be expressed by  where  is an extrinsic contact resistance,  is the quantum resistance (6.5 kω) which comes from the connection of one dimensional material to a three dimensional metal,  is the cnt length and  is the mean free path of the electron. if n tubes are paralleled, this resistance is divided by n thus one of the technological challenge is to maximize n in a given area. if l is small as compared with lmfp, which normally is the case for very small vias, the technological parameters to optimize are primarily the contact resistance and the tube density.  initial works have been focused on cnt vias connecting two metallic lines. low temperature (400 °c) chemical vapor deposition growth of cnt on titanium nitride catalysed by cobalt particles has been optimized by the fujitsu group. the catalyst particles obtained by laser ablation of a cobalt target sorted by size ultimately allow to grow a cnt density around 1012 cnt cm−2 using a multistep process using plasma and catalyst particles around 4 nm. in spite of these efforts, the electrical resistance of such via is 34 ω _for a 160 nm diameter. performances are close to tungsten plugs thus at least one order of magnitude higher than copper. for 60 nm via, a ballistic length of 80 nm has been determined. for processing lines, cnt technology is more difficult because dense forests of cnts naturally grow perpendicularly to the substrate, where they are known as vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays.
only few reports on horizontal lines have been published and rely on the redirection of cnt, or the filling in existing trenches by fluidic assembly processes. the achieved performances are around 1 mωcm, which is two decades higher than the requested values.  the reasons for such discrepancy between theoretical expectations and achieved performances are multiple. one obvious reason is the packing density after integration, which is far from the requested values, and the one used in the theoretical prediction. indeed, even with the cnts, which are strongly densified and spun, low conductance remains a problem. however, a recent paper  shows that a one-decade improvement on the conductivity may be gained just by high-pressure densification of the cnt. in spite of the development of high-density cnt material  the state of the art of integrated lines is still far from the 1013 cm−2 conducting walls requested by the international technology roadmap for semiconductors. nevertheless, macroscopic assemblies with diameters of tens of microns consisting of double-walled cnts  or single-walled carbon nanotubes  have experimental resistivity performances of 15 μωcm after doping, demonstrating the potential of cnts for interconnects.  global interconnects  for current metallization technologies for high-performance and low-power microelectronics, copper is the material of choice due to its higher electromigration (em) stability (resulting from the higher melting point) and conductivity to aluminium. for downscaled logic and memory applications up to 14 nm node the increased current density and reliability requirements per interconnect line still have known material and integration solutions. thinner barrier and adhesion layers, doping of secondary metals to enhance grain boundary electromigration resistance, and integration concepts of selective cappings will be some of the adopted solutions. however, for dimensions below 7 to 10 nm nodes, the decreased volume of available conducting metal will force innovative material and integration approaches towards novel interconnect architectures. also for power and high-performance applications the most critical challenges are high ampacity, thermal conductivity and electromigration resistance. far away from bulk, copper conductors that would already melt at 104 a/cm2, current copper metallization lines can withstand 107 a/cm2 due to good heat dissipation into thermal contact to the surrounding material, optimized liner and capping as well as plating and cmp processes.  the reliability of state of the art interconnects is closely linked to electromigration . this adverse effect describes the material transport and consequently void formation especially in
thin metal lines to the anode by a combination of the electron wind force, the temperature gradient induced force, the stress gradient induced force and the surface tension force. depending on the design of the interconnect layout and the used metallization scheme, the dominance of each driving force can change. even at the current scaling node of cmos technology, these two issues are among the main reasons for the trend that the increased density scaling of transistors no longer automatically leads to "performance scaling" (i. e. increased performance per transistor).  cnts are being studied as a potential copper replacement owing to their excellent electrical properties in terms of conductivity, ampacity and high frequency characteristics. however, the performances of cnts integrated into functional devices are so far systematically much lower than those of nearly perfect cnts selected for fundamental studies worldwide. as a consequence, combinations of cnts with copper were envisioned soon after the pioneering study about cnt interconnects. initial experimental realizations focused on a "bulk" approach where a mixture of cnts and copper is deposited from a solution on the target substrate. this approach demonstrated mitigated performances for interconnect, such that focus is now almost exclusively on composite materials where the cnts are aligned with respect to the current flow (referred to as aligned cnt-copper composite). furthermore, contact resistance, mechanical stability, planarity and integration could be improved by a supporting conductive matrix. chai et al. first demonstrated the fabrication of vertical interconnects using aligned cnt-copper composite materials in 2007 by first growing vertically aligned cnts before filling the voids between cnts with copper through an electroplating method. it was shown that this material could reach low, copper-like, resistivity but was more resistant to electromigration than copper. more recently, a renewed interest for this material was generated by the work of hata group  claiming a 100 fold increase in current carrying capacity of aligned cnt-copper material compared to pure copper. several groups are now working worldwide on the integration of aligned cnt-copper composite materials in interconnect structures, present and near-future efforts are focusing on demonstrating and evaluating the performances of aligned cnt-copper composite materials for both vertical and horizontal interconnects, and to develop a cmos-compatible process flow for multilevel global interconnects.  physical and electrical characterization  electromigration is typically characterized through the time of failure of a current carrying device. the scaling of the effect with current and temperature is used for accelerated testing and predictive analysis. despite the great technological relevance of such measurements
, there exists no widely used protocol to characterize electromigration. however, certain approaches are somewhat established, such as the variation of current and temperature. one of the unresolved challenges of electromigration are self-amplification effects of electromigration through self-heating at defects in interconnect leads. the local temperature rise due to current crowding across such defects is typically unknown. since the underlying processes are typically thermally activated, the lack of precise knowledge of the local temperature makes the field of electromigration studies challenging, resulting in a lack of reproducibility and inter-comparability of different experimental approaches. a combination with in-situ temperature measurement is therefore desirable. there are numerous methods for thermometry and the measurement of thermal conductance of devices and structures on a length scale of microns to macroscopic. however, the quantitative thermal characterization of nanostructures is described as an unsolved challenge in the current scientific literature. several methods have been proposed using raman spectroscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy, infrared microscopy, self-heating methods and scanning thermal microscopy. however, on the length scale relevant to single cnts and their defects, i. e. the 1 nm-scale, no established solution exists applicable to cnt-based materials (our interconnects) and dielectrics (our insulators and matrix materials). scanning thermal microscopy and thermometry  is the most promising technique for its versatility, but restrictions in tip fabrication, operation modes and signal sensitivity have limited the resolutions to 10 nm in the most cases. to increase the resolution of such technique is an open challenge which is attracting lot of attention from the industry and scientific community.  the methodology of electrical transport measurements in single cnts, bundles and composites thereof is well established. to study finite-size effects in transport such as the transition from diffusive to ballistic transport requires the precise placement and addressing of nanoscale electrodes, typically fabricated using electron beam lithography.  structural characterization of cnts using transmission electron microscopy has been shown to be a useful method for structures identification and measures. results have been reported with resolutions down to about 1 nm and very good material contact. due to the experimental difficulties of contacting nano-objects inside an electron microscope, there have only been few attempts to combine transmission electron microscopy structural characterization with in-situ electrical transport measurements.  modelling and simulation  macroscopic from a macroscopic point of view, a generalized compact rlc model for cnt interconnects can be depicted as in,
where the model of an individual multi-wall carbon nanotube is shown with parasitics representing both dc conductance and high-frequency impedance i.e. inductance and capacitance effects. multiple shells of a multi-wall carbon nanotube are presented by the individual parasitics of each shell. such model can also be applicable to single-walled carbon nanotubes where only a single shell is represented.  the shell resistance of an individual nanotube can be obtained by computing the resistance of each shell as  where  is the ballistic resistance,  is contact resistance,  is the distributed ohmic resistance and  is the resistance due to the applied bias voltage. capacitance of nanotubes consists of quantum, cq and electrostatic capacitance ce. for multi-wall carbon nanotubes, there is the shell-to-shell coupling capacitance, cc. additionally there is a coupling capacitance, ccm between any two cnt bundles. as for inductance, cnts have both kinetic, lk and magnetic inductance, lm. there are also mutual inductances between shells, mm and bundles, mmm.  detailed simulation for signal interconnects have been performed by naeemi et al., and it has been shown that cnts have lower parasitics than copper metal lines, however, the contact resistance between cnt-to-cnt and cnt-to-metal is large and can be detrimental for timing issues. simulation on power delivery interconnects have been performed by todri-sanial et al. and shown that cnts overall lead to reduced voltage drop than copper interconnects.  the significant dependence of the current density between the cnts on the geometry between them has been proved by tsagarakis and xanthakis.  mesoscopic the macroscopic circuit simulation addresses just the interconnect performance neglecting other important aspects like reliability and variability of cnts, which can be properly treated only at mesoscopic level by means of fully three dimensional technology computer aided design modelling approaches. recently, industrial and scientific community are investing considerable efforts to investigate the modelling of cnt variability and reliability by means of three dimensional technology computer aided design approaches for advanced technological generations.  microscopic underneath the macroscopic (circuit level) and mesoscopic (technology computer aided design level) modelling of cnt interconnects, it is also important to consider the microscopic (ab initio level) modelling. significant work has been carried out on the electronic, and thermal, modeling of cnts. band structure and molecular level simulation tools can be also found on nanohub. further
potential modeling improvements include the self-consistent simulation of the interaction between electronic and thermal transport in cnts, but also in copper-cnt composite lines and cnt contacts with metals and other relevant materials.  the cnts with encapsulated nanowires have been studied at the ab initio level with self-consistent treatment of electronic and phonon transport and demonstrated to improve current-voltage performance.  a fully experimentally-calibrated electrothermal modelling tool would prove useful in studying, not only the performance of cnt and composite lines, but also their reliability and variability, and the impact of the contacts on the electronic and thermal performance. in this context, a full three dimensional physics-based and multi-scale (from ab-initio material simulation up to circuit simulation) simulation package that takes into account all aspects of vlsi interconnects (performance, power dissipation and reliability) is desirable to enable accurate evaluation of future cnt-based technologies.  see also  vertically aligned carbon nanotube arrays  electromigration  nanoelectronics  references  nanotechnology integrated circuits carbon nanotubes
hui chak bor (born 7 may 1968) is a hong kong former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics. in 1998 he won a bronze medal at invitational competition in taipei. by 2002, he had retired from international competition. he later became a manager for a taiwan-based bicycle wheel rim manufacturing company.  references  1968 births living people hong kong male cyclists olympic cyclists of hong kong cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics commonwealth games competitors for hong kong cyclists at the 1986 commonwealth games cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games cyclists at the 1994 commonwealth games place of birth missing (living people) cyclists at the 1986 asian games cyclists at the 1990 asian games cyclists at the 1994 asian games asian games competitors for hong kong
kharar assembly constituency (sl. no.: 52) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in kharar sahibzada ajit singh nagar district, punjab state, india.  kanwar sandhu of the aam aadmi party is the incumbent mla.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  mohali district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sahibzada ajit singh nagar district
sphingomonas formosensis  is a gram-negative and short rod-shaped bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from agricultural soil in kaohsiung county in taiwan. sphingomonas formosensis has the ability degrade polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon compounds.  references  further reading  external links   type strain of sphingomonas formosensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  formosensis bacteria described in 2012
ivar jerven (june 21, 1924 - april 24, 1994) was a norwegian graphic artist, painter, and drawer.  biography jerven was born at tune in østfold, norway. he studied at the norwegian national academy of craft and art industry from 1943 to 1947. he then studied for three years under per krohg at the norwegian national academy of fine arts (from 1943 to 1947), after which landscape painting became his dominant means of expression. until 1960 he mostly worked as a graphic artist, drawer, and book illustrator.  the motifs in his works were taken from østfold county, oslo, and southern norway. dramatic pictures with the ravages of winter storms became a popular motif for him. he also painted poetic pictures of trees, often fragile and bare, with an emphasis on structure and rhythm. his color scheme was the initially dark, with green, ocher, rust red, and slate blue as most prominent. later his palette became brighter and more varied and abstract.  jerven took part in the autumn exhibition five times between 1946 and 1980. he was selected to display at the southern norway exhibition () six times, with his last appearance in 1976. he also participated in a series of group and solo exhibitions in norway and abroad. he supplied decorations for the national gallery, the national museum of art, architecture and design, the norwegian arts council, and the municipal art collections of oslo (), among others. his main work is a series of 40 paintings that was purchased by norsk hydro.  jerven was part of an artists' colony that developed in flosta after the second world war. together with artists such as ellen iden, kjerstin øvrelid, knut monrad, finn strømsted, bodil cappelen, finn henrik bodvin, and liv nergaard, an artistic environment was created that drew inspiration from nature and the skerries. in the mid-1960s, six of these artists exhibited at the skien art association () as the flosta artists ().  jerven was married to the artist kjerstin øvrelid. he died in oslo.  references  1924 births 1994 deaths people from sarpsborg oslo national academy of the arts alumni norwegian landscape painters 20th-century norwegian painters norwegian male painters 20th-century male artists
franz adam veichtner, also known as "feichtner" (baptised 10 february 1741 - 3 march 1822) was a german violinist and composer of the classical era.  life  veichtner was born in regensburg, where his father, johann georg, worked as a violin maker. in his youth he studied at the jesuit school in his hometown and later with the violinist, composer and theorist joseph riepel. support from a generous benefactor enabled him to study violin with franz benda in potsdam where he performed and made acquaintances with carl friedrich fasch and carl philipp emanuel bach.  in 1763, veichtner entered into the service of count herman karl von keyserling in konigsberg and saint petersburg. in konigsberg, veichtner taught the young johann friedrich reichardt, who he called a "true artistic genius" who was despised by "all the external pomp". to show his gratitude, reichardt dedicated a violin concerto to his teacher in 1772. in 1765 veichtner became konzertmeister and kapellmeister at the court of peter von biron in mitau, courland.  he was joined in the orchestra by his brother michael who was employed first as a violinist, and later as a "contra violinist".  during his time in mitau, veichtner taught music and composed prolifically for the court.  he is known to have composed numerous singspiele, occasional works, tafelmusik and around sixty symphonies during this period, however very little of this music seems to have survived.  veichtner also married twice while resident in mitau; first to catharina maria gottsch on 26 january 1768, and again to rosanna gottsch in 1771.  in 1785, he undertook a trip with the court to italy, giving successful concerts in milan and other cities.  in 1795, veichtner left mitau, when the duchy of courland was annexed by russia, and traveled for a second time to italy. in 1798, he found employment in saint petersburg where he worked as a chamber musician at the imperial court, and concertmaster of the opera orchestra. he remained in saint petersburg until his retirement in 1820. he returned to mitau where he spent the final two years of his life with his eldest son, karl ludwig, and his family in the forstei kliewenhof (now the parish in kalnciems).  veichtner had nine children. one of his sons, heinrich konstantin, was a violinist (father of poet and editor - konstantin von
veichtner). another, karl ludwig, married to cath. constanze nott, was a step-father of baroness wilhelmine von meck - mother of an important 19th century russian businessman - karl otto georg von meck.  works   4 symphonies (published mitau: wilhelm august steidel & co., 1770)  simphonie russienne (published riga: johann friedrich hartknoch ; berlin: johann julius hummel, 1771)  2 divertimenti (published berlin: johann julius hummel ; amsterdam: au grand magazin de musique, n.d.[1775])  violin concerto in a-flat major (published riga, johann friedrich hartknoch, 1775) also in manuscript (sing-akademie zu berlin) listed in breitkopf, 1776-77  opera scipio 1778  singspiel cephalus und prokris (published berlin, 1779)  singspiel cyrus und cassandana 1784 (manuscript in staats- und universitatsbibliothek carl von ossietzky, hamburg)  oratorio erste feier der himmelfahrt jesu 1787  hymn herr gott dich loben wir 1787 (manuscript in universitats- und landesbibliothek, bonn)  6 sonatas for violin and cello (published saint petersburg: gerstenberg & dittmar, 1797)  3 string quartets, op. 3 (published saint petersburg: gerstenberg & dittmar ; berlin: johann julius hummel ; amsterdam: au grand magazin de musique, 1802)  24 fantaisies pour le violon seul, op. 7 (published milan, ricordi ; leipzig, breitkopf & hartel, 1815)  six sonates pour le violon avec accompagnement de la basse, op. 8 (published milan, ricordi ; leipzig, breitkopf & hartel, 1815)  arietta russa con variazioni e un capriccio pour violon et bass, op. 9 (published leipzig, breitkopf & hartel, 1815)  te deum betet an den großen gott 1818 (manuscript in stadtbibliothek, leipzig)  violin concerto in e-flat major (manuscript in staatsbibliothek zu berlin) listed in breitkopf, 1772  violin concerto in a major (manuscript in hochschule fur musik franz liszt, hochschularchiv, weimar) incomplete parts; violin solo and violin 1 only.  references  external links  latvian composers german classical-period composers german male classical composers
german classical violinists male classical violinists 18th-century classical composers 1741 births 1822 deaths musicians from regensburg 18th-century german composers 19th-century german male musicians
georgeville may refer to:  united states georgeville, minnesota  georgeville, missouri  canada georgeville, nova scotia
chris koberstein (born 28 may 1968) is a canadian former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics. he won a silver medal at the 1990 commonwealth games competing for canada in the team time trial.  references  external links    1968 births living people canadian male cyclists olympic cyclists of canada cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics cyclists from montreal commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for canada cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
a cartload of clay (1971) is the last unfinished novel by the australian author george johnston. it is a sequel to my brother jack and clean straw for nothing, the third in the meredith trilogy of semi-autobiographical novels by johnson.  story outline the novel follows david meredith over the period of several hours as he contemplates his life, the death of his wife and his own impending end.  critical reception john lleonart in the canberra times put the book into its context: "a cartload of clay is a mellow, often distinctly melancholy autobiographical essay. johnston had intended it to be a novel but the fact that it is structurally incomplete does not detract from it. the absence of a contrived ending is, indeed, a factor in the book's impact as a human document...there is no doubt that the johnston trilogy has reached a plane where neither the most determined parochial masochism and self-revelation can harm it. and even if, while writing this last painful episode, he was over-conscious about not being well-known outside australia, that too may serve a worthwhile purpose. any australian writer who in future can produce work of the quality of the johnston trilogy will surely know he does not have to apologise for it to anybody."  see also  1971 in literature  references  1971 australian novels unfinished novels australian autobiographical novels william collins, sons books
the swan 43 is a sailboat designed by olin stephens and built by nautor's swan and was one of the initial two models launched in the companies founding year alongside the swan 36.  external links  nautor swan  s&s blog  class swan owner association  references  sailing yachts keelboats 1960s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by sparkman and stephens sailboat type designs by olin stephens
sphingomonas glacialis  is a gram-positive, rod-shaped, psychrophilic and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from cryoconite from the stubai glacier in tyrol in austria.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas glacialis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase	  glacialis bacteria described in 2011 psychrophiles
dafydd john lewys huws (29 november 1935 - 3 july 2011) was a welsh politician and psychiatrist who was also a pioneer and advocate of wind turbines in wales.  career huws was a medical student in cardiff and spent his career as a psychiatrist in the area. he developed a special interest in how people cope with stress and adversity. huws became medical director of cardiff community nhs trust and was regularly sought for talks and media interviews about current topics in psychiatry.  politics   in 1969 huws became the first plaid cymru councillor on cardiff council, representing the plasmawr ward. he stood against george thomas in the cardiff west constituency during the general elections of june 1970, february 1974, and october 1974, and also stood for the ceredigion seat in 1979 and also cardiff in 1983. he stood for the south wales constituency in the european parliament election of 1984, winning 13,201 votes (6.8% of the total). he was national chair of plaid cymru in the 1980s and received a posthumous award given to his widow rhian in the annual conference of the party in september 2011.  wind energy   with his wife, rhian, he founded the ynni amgen cyf company and was responsible for one of the first wind farms in wales on mynydd gorddu, near tal-y-bont, ceredigion.  references  1935 births 2011 deaths plaid cymru councillors leaders of plaid cymru
rashaun simonise (born may 31, 1995) is a gridiron football wide receiver for the montreal alouettes of the canadian football league (cfl). he has been a member of the chicago eagles (cifl), cincinnati bengals (nfl), okanagan sun (cjfl), baltimore brigade (afl), bc lions (cfl), and jousters (tsl).  early years  rashaun simonise (sy-mo-ny-z) is a coach's son. he was born in vancouver, british columbia. he is the son of john simonise (who is of haitian descent). he was an elite play-maker at quarterback, running back, wide receiver, tight end, corner, safety. rashaun was known for his electrifying kick returns and punt returns and was the type of play-maker to make big plays in crucial situations. he led the vancouver college irish (christian covington also attended) through the playoffs all the way to the bchs championship where they had unfortunately came up short. simonise led all receivers in playoffs with 238 yards in 3 games with 5 touchdowns. rashaun simonise averaged 79 yards per game throughout the playoffs. on the defensive side of the ball, rashaun made 27 solo tackles, and 3 interceptions through the playoffs. rashaun had managed to play for 2 football teams throughout his high school career giving him back to back gamedays every weekend with games on friday and saturdays. simonise has dressed for every single game he has been a part of, excusing one game in college where he was ruled ineligible. simonise was also a competitive basketball star and had also dominated in track and field running all sprint and jumping events.  college career  freshman season  rashaun simonise came into the university of calgary and started every game as a true freshman (18 years old). rashaun hauled in 33 receptions and 481 yards with 1 touchdown on the offensive side of the ball, along with 111 kick return yards on the season which earned him the canada west rookie of the year. rashaun had contributed in the playoffs catching 4 receptions for 112 yards and 2 touchdowns, with 18 returns for 163 yards and 2 touchdowns. his big play ability was shown off in front of a huge showcase in the vanier cup national championship in laval, quebec where he brought in a 47-yard reception to change the momentum of the game in the dino's favour but unfortunately had torn his meniscus just a play after the catch causing him to leave the
game.  sophomore season  rashaun had brought in 20 receptions for 391 yards and 1 touchdown his sophomore regular season. in the playoffs he had 200 yards receiving on 11 receptions and 3 touchdowns in only 2 games. he also had 2 kick returns for 61 yards.  junior season  simonise had his break-out season in his junior year and tied for the lead in canada in touchdowns with 11. he also had 1,013 yards and 65 catches in only 8 games. simonise was averaging 134.9 yards per game with 22 yards per catch giving him national attention. his most notable night came against university of alberta where he racked up 9 catches for 272 yards and 3 touchdowns. simonise also had 4 receptions that were all longer than 30 yards but were called back because of penalties. rashaun was named 1st team all canadian and was the number one ranked receiver in canada. after an outstanding 2015 season he was academically ineligible for the 2016 season. six teams scouted simonise including the los angeles rams who used a supplementary pick in the 2015 nfl draft on isaiah battle.  professional career  cif  in 2016 simonise played for the chicago eagles of champions indoor football (cif). he played in 5 games catching 11 passes for 105 yards with 2 touchdowns. he then had a workout with the jacksonville sharks of the arena football league (afl), but was not signed because of his nfl pro day opportunity.  nfl  simonise signed with the cincinnati bengals after going undrafted in the 2016 nfl supplemental draft. rashaun simonise tested positive for a performance-enhancing drug during his time in cincinnati bengals' training camp. during his short time there he had accumulated 64 yards on two catches during the preseason. on september 3, 2016, he was waived by the bengals.  afl  on march 28, 2018, simonise was assigned to the baltimore brigade of the arena football league (afl).  cjfl  two weeks after being released by the cincinnati bengals simonise signed with the okanagan sun of the canadian junior football league (cjfl). he played two seasons with the sun, 2016 and 2017, playing a total of seven games, catching 23 passes for 392 yards with three touchdowns.  winnipeg blue bombers  as a result of simonise's positive performance-enhancing drug test with his time in cincinnati his cfl draft status was deferred from 2017 to 2018. heading into the 2017 draft simonise had been the no. 7 ranked prospect in september 2016 and then moved up to no. 4
in december 2016. rashaun simonise was the ninth ranked prospect entering the 2018 cfl draft. he was selected by the winnipeg blue bombers in the second round (12th overall) in the 2018 cfl draft. he dressed in all 18 regular season games for the blue bombers in 2018 where he recorded four receptions for 122 yards. he lasted just one season with the team as he was part of training camp cuts the following year on june 8, 2019.  bc lions one day after his release from winnipeg, simonise signed with his hometown bc lions on june 9, 2019 to a one-year contract. he again played in all 18 regular season games, but had only five receptions for 53 yards. he became a free agent in february 2020.  the spring league simonise was selected by the jousters of the spring league during its player selection draft on october 10, 2020.  montreal alouettes on june 30, 2021, it was announced that simonise had signed with the montreal alouettes.  stature  simonise has been compared to a mixture of a. j. green, julio jones and randy moss in stature.  references  canadian players of american football canadian football wide receivers american football wide receivers calgary dinos football players chicago eagles players cincinnati bengals players baltimore brigade players sportspeople from vancouver players of canadian football from british columbia winnipeg blue bombers players 1995 births living people bc lions players the spring league players montreal alouettes players
in tamil and malayalam languages, thaali is the name for a mangala sutra, a necklace that a groom ties around the bride's neck in a ceremony called mangalya dharanam.  thaali may also refer to:   thaali (1993 film), malayalam film directed by sajan  thaali (1997 film), tamil film directed by e. v. v. satyanarayana  see also   thali (disambiguation)
pleuronaia dolabelloides, the slab-sided naiad, slab-sided pearly mussel, or slabside pearlymussel, is a species of freshwater mussel, an aquatic bivalve mollusk in the family unionidae, the river mussels. this species was formerly classified under the genus lexingtonia.   this species is endemic to the tennessee river system in the united states.  references  molluscs of the united states dolabelloides bivalves described in 1840 esa endangered species
brunot is an unincorporated community in the northwest corner of  wayne county, missouri, united states. it is located approximately six miles east of des arc on route 143. the community is on the west bank of crane pond creek.  history the area of modern-day brunot was part of a concession given to domitille dehault by the spanish lieutenant-governor in 1800. brunot was named for felix a.r. brunot, one of the partners of singer and company who helped start the community. he also owned mineral rights in the area. brunot was originally created to be a county seat, but it is now located in greenville.  it was given the name brunot by 1860 and it officially had a post office which was designated in 1858. the post office during the american civil war was often the only one that operated in wayne county. the post office officially closed in 1957, when any stores that had existed in the town had also closed.  religion the town maintained two different churches, including a christian and methodist church, both of which are long abandoned. the christian church was founded in the 1880s and continued services until the 1950s. the longest serving pastor, reverend isaac brooks, preached there as a circuit riding pastor from 1909 to 1934.  references  unincorporated communities in wayne county, missouri unincorporated communities in missouri
the kukri peneplain is a near-horizontal and flat unconformity in the transantarctic mountains. the peneplain formed by erosion of the granitic and metamorphic basement rocks during the paleozoic (silurian to devonian). kukri peneplain dips gently to the west.  references  planation surfaces unconformities geology of antarctica paleozoic antarctica transantarctic mountains
genevieve dinand was a french pianist, born in bauge, august 10, 1927 and died on 14 november 1987 in bois-colombes(hauts-de-seine).  biography born in bauge (maine-et-loire) in 1927,  she was the great granddaughter of leon emile allix (doctor victor hugo) she married jean-pierre eustache, flute teacher at the conservatory of grenoble.  genevieve dinand began piano at age 5 and entered the paris conservatory in 1946 in the class of the prestigious master marcel ciampi. carrying a first prize in piano and music theory a medal, she managed to become the professor of piano competitions at the conservatory of grenoble.  she participated in three international piano competitions, reaching the finals on two of them. she left grenoble to follow her husband to paris, when he became flutist at the paris opera. she got a job at the conservatory of orleans as a piano teacher and a concert player in the city.  she died shortly after retirement, august 14, 1987 of a brain tumor.  references  1927 births 20th-century french women classical pianists 1987 deaths people from maine-et-loire deaths from brain tumor deaths from cancer in france neurological disease deaths in france
marzi was a pakistani drama serial that first aired on geo tv on 14 july 2016. it was produced by babar javed and written by ali moeen. it was on aired every thursday at 8pm on geo tv. rabab hashim and junaid khan played the lead in serial.  synopsis  marzi revolves around a young girl, manaal (rabab hashim) as she struggles with her unrequited love for zain (junaid khan). belonging to a middle class family, manaal and her mother are dependent on her sister afeera (jana malik) who is married to irfan (babar ali), an influential businessman. irfan's dominating and demeaning behaviour, makes him the sole patriarch of his family. while on the other hand, zain is a radio jockey and a singer in irfan's fm company. after a couple of meetings, manaal falls in love with zain while zain remains sceptical about his feelings. upon knowing about manaal's family background, zain steps back as he fears getting involved with irfan's family. irfan's vicious planning against zain and manaal makes him put zain under fake kidnapping charges of manaal. manaal being reckless and rebellious at heart asks zain to fight for themselves.  will zain ever be able to stand for his love or will he succumb to irfan's will?  cast  rabab hashim as manaal jana malik as afeera babar ali as irfan junaid khan as zain seemi raheel najia baig khalid saleem butt munazza arif abdullah ejaz'' ali sikandar  soundtrack  the original soundtrack of marzi is sung by junaid khan, the lead actor of this drama serial. the song is available on patari.  references  external links  2016 pakistani television series debuts a&b entertainment
olenecamptus nigromaculatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pic in 1915.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1915
the following is a list of indian super league coaches - including lists of current coaches and coaches with most wins. the indian super league is professional football league in india with 11 teams.  current isl coaches  list of all time coaches  the list of coaches includes all eminent football coaches & player managers  who has coached a club while they were in the isl, whether in a permanent or temporary role. interim coaches are listed only when they managed the team for at least one match in that period.  managers in bold and italics are present managers for the respective clubs.  notes  see also  list of indian super league records and statistics   list of indian super league seasons   list of indian super league owners   list of foreign indian super league players   indian super league attendance   list of indian super league hat-tricks  references    current isl coaches indian super league
there are many places of worship in the town of piravom in the indian state of kerala, catering for the hindu and christian faiths. religious festivals are also celebrated.  temples  pallikkavu bhagavathi temple  pazhoor perumthrikkovil temple of lord shiva  karavelloor mahadeva temple [108 sivalaya fame] kalampoor  narasimha swamy temple kalampoor  desadhipan amarkkulam sreekrishna swamy temple  pisharukovil temple  chalasseril kalari paradevatha kshetram and gandarva kshetram, chalasseril, piravom  pazhoor pallippattu kshethram  peringamala bala sreekrishna swami temple, thekkummoottil pady, palachuvadu  thiruveeshamkulam mahadeva temple palachuvadu mulakkulam  sree subramanya swami temple palachuvadu  sree purushamangalam sree krishna swami temple, kakkad  sree thrikka narasimha swami temple, piravom  kalampookkavu devi kshethram  parekkunnu sreedharma sastha temple  karoorkaavu temple  thaliyil ayyapa temple, kalampoor  thirumanamkunnu devi temple, thekkummoottil pady    acharya kovil devi temple, piravom  sree raja rajeswari temple, pazhoor  ittyamattel dharmadaiva kshethram, thottabhagom  churches   rajadhiraja st'marys malankara orthodox syrian cathedral, piravom(valiyapally)  holy kings knanaya catholic church, piravom (kochupally)  little flower syro malabar catholic church, piravom st. thomas orthodox syrian church, nechoor  st. mary's catholic church, mulakulam  st. luke's c.s.i. church, piravom  st. mary's malankara catholic church  mar gregorious catholicate centre  mulakulam mar yohanon ihidiyo orthodox syrian church (mulakulam valiya palli)  parumala mar gregorious shrine, palachuvadu  st.mary's syrian jacobite church, kottarakkunnu  st.peter's and st.paul's orthodox syrian church (parel pally), namakuzhy, mulakulam north  st. george orthodox syrian church, karmelkunnu, mulakkulam  st.michael's church, kol
engai  st. george jacobite syrian church, kalampoor  christian fellowship piravom, kakkad  malankara christian church piravom  mulakkulam christ marthoma church, palachuvadu  st andrew's csi church, edappallychira, palachuvadu  festivals  holy "danaha perunnal" at rajadhiraja st. mary's jacobite syrian cathedral, piravom (piravom valiya pally perunnal)  "vishudha rajakanmarude thirunnal" at piravom kochu pally.  pazhoor shivaraathri and thiruvaathira aarattu maholthsavam.  easter at rajadhiraja st. mary's jacobite syrian cathedral, piravom (piravom valiya pally)  thiruvathira mahotsavam of thiruveeshamkulam temple  pallikkavu 'meenabharani' festival   acharikovil meenabharani festival  athachamayam festival  kalamboor kaavu pana maholsavam [kalampoor], thookkam  medam rohini mahotsavam, sree purushamangalam temple, kakkad  pazhoor pallippattu temple pana maholsavam  makara vilaku ulsavam at thaliyil ayyapa temple [kalampoor]  notes  religious buildings and structures in ernakulam district
the independence raptor is a german single-place, paraglider that was designed by michael nesler and produced by independence paragliding of eisenberg, thuringia. it is now out of production.  the aircraft is not related to the skif raptor.  design and development the raptor was designed as a competition glider, with an unusually low price as a method of assisting completion pilots. the models are each named for their relative size.  company test pilot christian amon was also involved in the development as well as flight testing of the raptor.  variants raptor s small-sized model for lighter pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 75 cells and the aspect ratio is 6.34:1. the pilot weight range is . raptor m mid-sized model for medium-weight pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 75 cells and the aspect ratio is 6.34:1. the pilot weight range is . raptor l large-sized model for heavier pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 75 cells and the aspect ratio is 6.34:1. the pilot weight range is .  specifications (raptor l)  references  raptor paragliders
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed on 10 july 1945 in dunhua as a triangular division. it was one of eight simultaneously created divisions, together with the 134th,  135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th,  148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for its formation were the 77th, 79th, and 80th transport guard units.  action at the end of july 1945, the men detached from 79th division were used to form the assault (raiding, airborne) battalion. the 139th division was disarmed on 22 august 1945 without having seen any action during the soviet invasion of manchuria.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第139師団 (日本軍), accessed 11 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
block by block is a 2013 indian documentary film produced by vidhi kasliwal. a landmarc films production and presentation, it is directed by hina sayada. it explores the experiences of the construction laborers who built palais royale, the tallest building in india.  cast this film was released in english, hindi and marathi languages, known as saathi haath badhana in non-english versions. while the english and hindi versions have raj zutshi as the narrator, the marathi version was narrated by sachin khedekar.  accolades block by block won best background music at the 4th kolkata short international film festival, best cinematography at the 4th delhi short international film festival, special jury mention at the 3rd indian cine film festival, and the official selection at the 4th bangalore shorts film festival and many more.  references  external links    indian documentary films indian films
zhang mi (, born 930, date of death unknown), was a chinese ci lyric poet who lived during the later shu.  he was one of the chief poets of that group influenced by wen tingyun which became known as the "school amid flowers".  translators of his verse include herbert giles and qiu xiaolong.  notes  930 births later shu people three hundred tang poems poets year of death unknown
the iron bridge at howard hill road is a modern pony truss bridge, carrying howard hill road across the black river in southeastern cavendish, vermont.  it is a replacement for an historic 1890 pratt through truss bridge, which is now in storage.  the historic bridge was listed on the national register of historic places in 1982.  modern bridge the howard hill road bridge is located in southeastern cavendish, just south of vermont route 131, which parallels the black river on its northern bank.  the river is at that point flowing roughly eastward, and the bridge is oriented north-south on modern concrete footings.  the bridge is a low riveted pony truss structure, serving a few dead-end roads on the south side of the river.  historic bridge the historic bridge, in storage as of 2012, was a single-span pratt through truss built out of wrought and cast iron with elements connected by pins.  the bridge was  in length, with a roadway width of  (one lane), and a portal height of .  it was set on uncoursed fieldstone abutments.  the bridge was built in 1890 by the groton bridge co., and is one of a small number of 19th-century pin-connected truss bridges in the state.  the bridge was dismantled in 2007, and is in storage held by the historic bridges program of the state, which is seeking a suitable location to place it.  see also national register of historic places listings in windsor county, vermont list of bridges on the national register of historic places in vermont  references  road bridges on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in windsor county, vermont bridges completed in 1890 buildings and structures in cavendish, vermont bridges in windsor county, vermont pratt truss bridges in the united states iron bridges in the united states
francis pipelin (born 7 july 1933) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in four editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1933 births living people french male cyclists sportspeople from ille-et-vilaine
events from the year 1705 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   naval infantry (russia)  biryuch  rovenky  births  deaths  references    years of the 18th century in russia
tomaselli is an austrian family with several noted artists during the late 18th and 19th centuries.  it is descended from giuseppe tomaselli (1758-1836), who was born in rovereto in the prince-bishopric of trent, which later in his lifetime belonged to austria and which is now in italy. after studying music in milan, he immigrated to salzburg in 1781 to become a noted court chapel singer and music teacher in salzburg and later in vienna. joseph tomaselli was married to antonia honikel (1775-1846), a native of landersdorf. they were the parents of franz tomaselli (1801-1846), who was a noted actor and comedian in vienna; of karl tomaselli (1809-1887), who founded a famous coffee shop in salzburg which still exists; of ignaz tomaselli (1812-1862), who was a prominent comedian and singer; and of katharina tomaselli (1811-1857), who was an opera singer and who was the mother of the actress and theatre director josephine gallmeyer (1838-1884).  one prominent member of the family is historian sylvana tomaselli, the wife of george windsor, earl of st andrews, and daughter-in-law of prince edward, duke of kent. her father maximilian karl tomaselli was born in salzburg.  references  austrian families tomaselli family
the primetime emmy award for outstanding variety special (live) is awarded to one live television special each year. the award was presented as outstanding special class program until it was restructured for the 70th primetime emmy awards.  in the following list, the first titles listed in gold are the winners; those not in gold are nominees, which are listed in alphabetical order. the years given are those in which the ceremonies took place.  winners and nominations  1970s  outstanding classical program in the performing arts  1980s  1990s  outstanding cultural program  outstanding cultural music-dance program  outstanding classical music-dance program  2000s  outstanding special class program  2010s  outstanding variety special (live)  2020s  notes  references  external links  academy of television arts and sciences website  variety special (live)
riccardo brugnara (born 26 december 1993 in mantua, lombardy) is an italian prop who plays for rugby calvisano in the italian top12, previously he played for leicester tigers in the premiership and has played on loan for doncaster in the championship.  brugnara joined tigers' academy after attending a rugby course run by bob dwyer in his native italy.  in 2018 he was named additional player for  benetton rugby. for 2019-20 pro14 and 2020-21 pro14 seasons he also named as permit player for zebre.  in 2016 and 2018 brugnara was named in the emerging italy squad for the world rugby nations cup.  see also  riccardo brugnara's stats in premiership on premiershiprugby.com, premier rugby ltd.  leicester tigers deals after the club's development group on bbc.com/sport   it's rugby france profile  references  sportspeople from mantua living people 1993 births rugby union props italian rugby union players leicester tigers players italy a national rugby union team players
job hilliard lippincott (november 12, 1842 - july 5, 1900) was a lawyer who served as united states attorney for the district of new jersey and was an associate justice of the new jersey supreme court.  biography he was born on november 12, 1842 near mount holly, new jersey to a quaker farmer and raised on the family farm in vincentown, new jersey. he attended mount holly seminary. he is an 1865 graduate, with the degree of bachelor of laws, of the dane law school at harvard university.  he was president of the board of education of hudson city, new jersey from 1868 to 1871. he married keziah budd on august 19, 1878 and they had a son, job herbert lippincott.  judicial service lippincott was  united states attorney for new jersey from 1886 to 1887 and associate justice of the new jersey supreme court from 1893 to 1900, replacing george theodore werts.  death he died at his home, at 132 sip avenue, jersey city, new jersey on july 5, 1900. he was interred in mount holly cemetery.  see also list of justices of the supreme court of new jersey new jersey court of errors and appeals courts of new jersey  references  1842 births 1900 deaths people from southampton township, new jersey new jersey lawyers politicians from jersey city, new jersey harvard law school alumni united states attorneys for the district of new jersey justices of the supreme court of new jersey 19th-century american judges 19th-century american lawyers
dj play my blues is the sixth studio album by blues musician buddy guy, recorded in december 1981 and released on jsp records in 1982. it was the third in a trio of guy albums on jsp.  background and recordings one year after the release of the slicker and funkier breaking out, buddy guy and his band entered soto sound studio in chicago and recorded one of the most remarkable blues albums of the 1980s. buddy's brother, phil guy, was on second guitar. longtime drummer ray "killer" allison was back again, and there were two new members in buddy's band: guitarist doug williams (a member of phil guy's band), and bassist mike morrison (who had played with junior wells and willie dixon).  releases the original release includes only seven tracks. a 10-track lp was released in 1991 by music box international in greece. two of the three new tracks were previously released on phil guy's solo albums in 1982 and 1983 (the garbage man blues and mellow down), with phil singing the lead vocals on these songs. the 10-track version was released on a remastered cd by jsp in 1994 with an alternate cover. it was re-released on cd in 2004 (with another alternate cover), including two more tracks.  critical reception  allmusic gave the album four out of five stars and in the review by chris nickson, he commented:  original vinyl track listing  re-released vinyl and remastered cd track listing  cd 2004 re-release track listing  personnel   buddy guy - guitar, vocals  phil guy - guitar, vocals on "garbage man blues" and "mellow down"  doug williams - guitar  mike morrison - bass  ray allison - drums additional:  jerry soto - engineer  martin atkinson - mixing  john stedman - liner notes  notes all guitar solos were played by buddy guy on tracks 1-8 & 12. all three guitarists (buddy, phil guy & doug williams) played solos on tracks 9 & 10.  references  1982 albums buddy guy albums jsp records albums
the 15 july 2016 coup d'etat attempt () was attempted in turkey against state institutions, including the government and president recep tayyip erdogan. the attempt was carried out by a faction within the turkish armed forces that organized themselves as the peace at home council. they attempted to seize control of several places in ankara, istanbul, marmaris and elsewhere, such as the asian side entrance of the bosphorus bridge, but failed to do so after forces loyal to the state defeated them. the council cited an erosion of secularism, elimination of democratic rule, disregard for human rights, and turkey's loss of credibility in the international arena as reasons for the coup. the government said the coup leaders were linked to the gulen movement, which is designated as a terrorist organization by the republic of turkey and led by fethullah gulen, a turkish businessman and scholar who lives in pennsylvania. the turkish government alleged that gulen was behind the coup (which gulen denied) and that the united states was harboring him. events surrounding the coup attempt and the purges in its aftermath reflect a complex power struggle between islamist elites in turkey.  during the coup attempt, over 300 people were killed and more than 2,100 were injured. many government buildings, including the turkish parliament and the presidential palace, were bombed from the air. mass arrests followed, with at least 40,000 detained, including at least 10,000 soldiers and, for reasons that remain unclear, 2,745 judges. 15,000 education staff were also suspended and the licenses of 21,000 teachers working at private institutions were revoked after the government stated they were loyal to gulen. more than 77,000 people have been arrested and over 160,000 fired from their jobs, on reports of connections to gulen.  many reactions were against the coup attempt, both domestically and internationally. the main opposition parties in turkey condemned the attempt, while several international leaders-such as those of the united states, nato, the european union, and neighboring countries-called for "respect of the democratic institutions in turkey and its elected officials." international organizations expressed themselves against the coup. the united nations security council, however, did not denounce the coup after disagreements over the phrasing of a statement. unlike some middle eastern governments that supported the coup or others that waited to see the outcome of the coup, iran initially opposed the coup and advised erdogan to defeat the coup plotters.  president recep tayyip erdogan said the head of united states central command, chief general joseph votel, was "siding with coup plotters", after
votel criticized the turkish government for arresting the pentagon's contacts in turkey.  in march 2017, germany's intelligence chief said germany was unconvinced by erdogan's statement that fethullah gulen was behind the failed coup attempt. the same month, the british parliament's foreign affairs select committee said some gulenists were involved in the coup d'etat attempt but found no hard evidence that fethullah gulen masterminded the failed coup and found no evidence to justify the uk designating the gulen movement as a "terrorist organization".  background  kemalism   it is widely reported that kemalist ideology played little or no role in motivating the 15 july 2016 coup attempt, unlike all previous political interventions in the history of turkey's military coups. since the establishment of multiparty democracy in turkey in 1946, the turkish armed forces (tsk), together with the judiciary, have viewed themselves as guardians of kemalist ideals and the secular turkish nationalist state established under mustafa kemal ataturk against political parties that have promoted a larger role for islam and minorities in public life. the military and judiciary have regularly intervened in politics to block or ban popular parties representing conservative muslim turks, attempting to relax the restrictions on traditional religious practices, such as women's wearing of headscarves. the military has toppled four elected governments: by coups in 1960 and 1980, and by military decisions in 1971 and 1997. the military has also banned several major political parties. in 1998, erdogan, the mayor of istanbul, was banned for life from politics and jailed because he had read a certain poem several years before, at a public meeting. in 2007, the military expressed its opposition to the election of abdullah gul, of the justice and development party (akp), as president, by issuing an e-memorandum. still, gul was eventually elected when the akp won both a referendum on the matter. also, a snap election, and the party returned with a larger majority in the parliament.  akp-gulen alliance and "ergenekon"   as opposed to previous political interventions by the turkish military, turkey's akp government and pro-state media maintain that the 15 july 2016 coup attempt was not motivated by allegiance to kemalist ideology, but rather to the vast political, economic, and religious network led by u.s.-based muslim cleric fethullah gulen. between 2007 and 2012, high-profile kemalists, including high-ranking officers of the turkish armed forces, faced a series of trials and purges, under reports of involvement in a secret society codenamed "
ergenekon." supported by islamist (both pro-gulen and pro-erdogan) prosecutors, security officials, and media, the purges allowed lower-rank islamist officers to assume high-ranking military positions. they were seen as a bid by turkey's civilian leaders under president erdogan to establish dominance over the military. in these trials in 2013 - viewed as "sensational" and "one of the biggest in recent turkish history" - 275 people, including senior military officers, journalists, lawyers, and academics, were said to be involved in the so-called "ergenekon" conspiracy, reportedly plotting a coup in 2003/04 against then-prime minister erdogan. additionally, some military officers were said to be involved in a separate reported plot, sledgehammer. simultaneously, erdogan promoted lower-ranking officers up the chain of command, ensuring that the military chief of staff was loyal to him and thereby demoralizing the army.  the akp's alliance with gulen started to collapse during 2013 as gulenists targeted the akp using corruption charges. after the split, erdogan decided it would be advantageous to rehabilitate the army. the "ergenekon" convictions were overturned in april 2016 by the court of cassation, which ruled that the existence of the network was unproven.  role of corruption  in 2013, law enforcement efforts to fight corruption, which had led to the 2013 corruption scandal in turkey, were faulted by erdogan. the anti-corruption efforts were a source of tension between the gulenists and the akp. in political analysis in the months prior to the coup attempt, the incidence of corruption was reported to be "rife" in turkey. following the coup attempt, some coup leaders cited corruption as a reason for their actions.  immunity bill  on 13 july, less than two days before the coup was launched, erdogan signed a bill giving turkish soldiers immunity from prosecution while taking part in domestic operations. the bill requires cases against commanders to be approved by the prime minister, while district governors may sign cases against lower-ranking soldiers. the immunity bill was seen as part of the detente between the government and the armed forces. the latter has increasingly been taking over military operations in kurdish-inhabited areas from police and paramilitary units. on which the office of the united nations high commissioner for human rights, issued a report in february 2017 detailing how operations by the turkish infantry, artillery, tanks and possibly aircraft drove up to half a million people from their homes over a 17-month period from july 2015 to the end
of 2016. investigators for the united nations verified a variety of human rights abuses by the security forces, among them extrajudicial killings, summary killings, disappearances, torture, rape, violence against women and the prevention of access to medical care, food and water.  events  attempted takeover   on 15 july 2016, as reported just before 23:00 eest (utc+3), military jets were witnessed flying over ankara, and both the fatih sultan mehmet and bosphorus bridges in istanbul were closed.  turkish prime minister binali yıldırım said military action was being "taken outside the chain of command" and it was an "illegal attempt" to seize power by "part of the military". he further said that those involved "will pay the highest price." local media also reported tanks in istanbul's ataturk airport. it was reported that internet users within turkey were blocked from accessing twitter, facebook, and youtube. twitter later stated that it had "no reason to think we've been fully blocked". some hostages were taken at military headquarters, including the turkish chief of the general staff hulusi akar. at around 21:00, the coupists had invited salih zeki colak, the commander of the turkish land forces to the military headquarters. when he arrived, he was immediately apprehended.  abidin unal, head of the turkish air force, who had been attending a wedding in istanbul, was abducted from there by soldiers who descended from a helicopter. the coupists then tried to force akar to sign the coup declaration, almost strangling him using a belt in the process. he refused and was then taken to the akıncı air base and other commanders at the headquarters. the military also entered the justice and development party's offices in istanbul and asked people to leave.  early reports said president recep tayyip erdogan was safe in marmaris, south-west turkey, where he had been on holiday.  from around 23:00 to midnight, helicopters bombed the police special forces headquarters and police air force headquarters in golbası, just outside of ankara. the attacks left 42 dead and 43 injured. turksat headquarters in golbası was also attacked, killing two security personnel.  at around 23:50, soldiers occupied taksim square in central istanbul.  at 00:02, it was reported by reuters that soldiers were inside the buildings of the state broadcaster, the turkish radio and television corporation (trt), in ankara. during the coup attempt, soldiers forced anchor tijen karas to read out a statement saying
that "the democratic and secular rule of law has been eroded by the current government" and that turkey was now led by the peace at home council who would "ensure the safety of the population." the statement read in part: "turkish armed forces have completely taken over the administration of the country to reinstate constitutional order, human rights and freedoms, the rule of law and general security that was damaged. [...] all international agreements are still valid. we hope that all of our good relationships with all countries will continue." the plotters said they had "done so to preserve democratic order, and that the rule of law must remain a priority". the statement also ordered temporary martial rule, and said a new constitution would be prepared "as soon as possible". trt was then taken off air.  reuters reported on 15 july that an eu source described the coup as "well orchestrated," and predicted that "given the scale of the operation, it is difficult to imagine they will stop short of prevailing." another eu diplomat said that the turkish ambassador in his capital was shocked and "taking it very seriously".  the peace at home council was reportedly chaired by muharrem kose.  government response and conflict   the turkish presidential office said president erdogan was on holiday inside turkey and safe and condemned the coup attempt to attack democracy. a presidential source also said erdogan and his government were still in power. the first messages from erdogan were transmitted at around 00:23 at about 01:00, erdogan did a facetime interview with cnn turk, in which he called upon his supporters to take to the streets in defiance of the military-imposed curfew, saying "there is no power higher than the power of the people. let them do what they will at public squares and airports." deputy prime minister numan kurtulmus appeared on live television, saying turkey's ruling justice and development party (akp) is still in charge of the government. the mayor of ankara, melih gokcek of the akp, encouraged people to go out to the city's streets in defiance, despite a curfew imposed by the military. erdogan's plane took off from dalaman airport near marmaris at 23:47, but had to wait in the air south of ataturk for the airport to be secured. his plane landed at 02:50  the first army general command in istanbul stated in a news conference that the tsk did not support the coup and the perpetrators represented a tiny faction that were on the verge of being brought under control. istanbul ataturk airport was closed; all flights from the airport
were cancelled. there was an explosion in the trt broadcasting headquarters and gunfire was reported in ankara. soon after, it was stormed by a crowd of civilians and police, with four soldiers inside reportedly being "neutralized". the channel went back on air and karas, who had previously announced the coup, said live that she had been held hostage and forced to read the declaration of the coup at gunpoint.  by 01:00, it was reported that the military had pulled its forces from the ataturk airport and people were coming inside, but by 01:13, it was reported that tanks were inside the airport and gunfire was heard.  tanks opened fire near the turkish parliament building. the parliamentary building was also hit from the air. injuries were reported among protesters following gunfire on bosphorus bridge.  a helicopter belonging to the pro-coup forces was shot down by a turkish military f-16 fighter jet. there were also reports of pro-state jets flying over ankara to "neutralize" helicopters used by those behind the coup.  at 03:08, a military helicopter opened fire on the turkish parliament. at 03:10, turkish armed forces stated on their website that they had complete control over the country. however, at 03:12, yıldırım made a statement saying that the situation was under control and that a no-fly zone was declared over ankara and that military planes that still flew would be shot down.  it was reported that the turkish parliament had been bombed again at 03:23 and 03:33. a helicopter belonging to the pro-coup forces was also seen flying by it. half an hour following the report of 12 deaths and 2 injuries in the parliament, soldiers entered cnn turk's headquarters and forced the studio to go off air. after an hour of interruption by the pro-coup soldiers, cnn turk resumed its broadcast. later, ismail kahraman said a bomb exploded at a corner of the public relations building inside the parliament, with no deaths but several injuries among police officers.  at around 04:00 two or three helicopters attacked erdogan's hotel. according to eyewitness accounts, ten to fifteen heavily armed men landed and started firing. in the ensuing conflict, two policemen were killed and 8 were injured.  the dogan news agency reported that in istanbul several individuals were injured after soldiers fired on a group of people attempting to cross the bosphorus bridge in protest of the attempted coup.  shift in control of theatre of operations  soldiers' escape to greece in helicopter  on saturday 16 july 2016, at 00:
42 eest (utc+3), a turkish black hawk helicopter sent a distress signal and requested permission from greek authorities for an emergency landing, and landed eight minutes later (00:50) at the dimokritos airport in alexandroupoli, in greece, while two greek f-16s observed the procedure and escorted it to the airport. the first reports said that the passengers were seven military personnel and a civilian. later, it turned out that all were military personnel (two majors, four captains and two non-commissioned officers). they had removed the badges and insignia from their uniforms, making it impossible to know their rank. all were arrested after landing for illegal entry into the country. they were transferred to the local police station, while the greek authorities at the airport guarded the helicopter. the eight passengers all requested political asylum in greece as they believed they would not get a fair trial in turkey. on 21 september 2016, greece denied three out of the eight asylum. the men's lawyer stavroula tomara said they would be appealing the decision and said they had the "impression that the decision has been predetermined, and that the interview was conducted just as a formality." on 11 october 2016, four more of the eight were denied asylum. two of the men who had previously been denied asylum applied for a re-evaluation but their applications were also rejected.  after erdogan's arrival in istanbul   after erdogan flew into istanbul, he made a televised speech inside the airport at around 04:00, whilst thousands gathered outside. he addressed a crowd of supporters in the airport, at about 06:30 he said, "in turkey, armed forces are not governing the state or leading the state. they cannot." he blamed "those in pennsylvania" (a reference to fethullah gulen, who lives in saylorsburg, pennsylvania, and his hizmet movement) for the coup attempt. erdogan also said he had plans to "clean up" the army, saying that "this uprising is a gift from god to us." state-run anadolu agency named former colonel muharrem kose, who in march 2016 was dishonorably discharged for reported association with gulen, as the suspected leader of the coup. however, the alliance for shared values, a non-profit organization associated with gulen, released a statement reiterating that it condemns any military intervention in domestic politics, and saying erdogan's allegations against the movement were "highly irresponsible". gulen himself said in a brief statement just before midnight: "as someone who suffered
under multiple military coups during the past five decades, it is especially insulting to be accused of having any link to such an attempt. i categorically deny such accusations."  reuters reported that in early hours of 16 july, the coup appeared to have "crumbled" as crowds defied pro-coup military orders and gathered in major squares of istanbul and ankara to oppose it. reuters also reported pro-coup soldiers surrendering to the police in taksim square, istanbul. it was reported that by 05:18, ataturk airport had completely been recaptured by the government whilst the police had surrounded the coupists inside the turkish army headquarters, calling for them to surrender. between 06:00-08:00 a skirmish took place there. in akar's absence, umit dundar, head of the first army, was appointed acting chief of staff.  in the early hours of the morning of 16 july, soldiers blocking the bosphorus bridge surrendered to the police. according to the government-run anadolu agency, this consisted of a group of 50 soldiers. some of these soldiers were lynched by civilians despite the police's efforts, who fired into the air to protect the surrendering soldiers.  meanwhile, in the headquarters of the turkish army, 700 unarmed soldiers surrendered as the police conducted an operation into the building while 150 armed soldiers were kept inside by the police. the coupists in the trt building in istanbul surrendered in the early morning as well. chief of staff akar, held hostage at the akıncı air base in ankara, was also rescued by pro-state forces.  reasons for failure  one of the primary reasons that the coup failed was chaos among the plotters' ranks.  turkey's national intelligence organization (mit) head hakan fidan discovered the coup plot, and the plotters were forced to execute the coup five hours ahead of schedule.  one of the main organizers, general semih terzi, was shot dead by loyalist sgt. maj. omer halisdemir at the onset, demoralizing and disrupting command and control of the rebels. these two incidents resulted in the coup being carried out in an uncoordinated manner. the highest ranking staff officers opposed the coup, and publicly ordered all personnel to return to their barracks. acting outside the military chain of command, the rebels lacked the coordination and resources to achieve their goals. the conscripted soldiers that the rebels mobilized were uninformed of their mission's true purpose and became demoralized. many surrendered rather than shoot demonstrators. the commander
of the first army in istanbul, general umit dundar, personally called erdogan to warn him of the plot, persuading him to evacuate his hotel ahead of the plotters, and helped to secure istanbul for erdogan to land. the mit also mobilized its anti-aircraft guns, which the plotters were unaware existed, deterring rebel jets and commando teams.  equally important to the coup's failure, according to military strategist edward n. luttwak, was the inability of the rebels to neutralize erdogan and other high ranking government officials, either by killing or detaining them.  a unit of special forces was sent via helicopter to kill or capture the president, but missed because he had been evacuated by his security detail just minutes before.  once erdogan landed at ataturk international airport (which had been recaptured from the rebels by his supporters), the coup was doomed. according to a military source, several rebel f-16s targeted erdogan's presidential jet en route to istanbul, but they did not fire. a senior turkish counter-terrorism official later stated that the jets did not fire because the fighter jet pilots were told by president erdogan's pilot over the radio that the (flight of the) gulfstream iv was a turkish airlines flight.  according to naunihal singh, author of seizing power, the coup attempt also failed because the plotters failed to secure control of the media and shape the narrative. successful coups require that the rebels control the mass media. this allows even small rebel contingents to portray themselves as fully in control, and their victory as inevitable. consequently, they convince the public, along with neutral and even loyalist soldiers, to defect to them or not resist. the rebels failed to properly broadcast their messages effectively across the media that they controlled. they failed to capture turksat, turkey's main cable and satellite communications company, and failed to gain control of the country's television and mobile phone networks. this allowed erdogan to make his facetime call, and to speak on television.  other scholars of civil-military relations, like drew h. kinney, have said reports like luttwak and singh's miss the point of their own analysis: civil resistance thwarted the coup. luttwak argues that wayward elements of the turkish armed forces could not silence erdogan. singh says that the rebels could not project success because they couldn't control the message. kinney states that neither of these reasons on their own matter, but rather it's their effect-civil disobedience-that is important. we might find that "[gulen's movement
] ... [might] have had nothing to do with the attempted takeover in july, but civilians [nevertheless] definitely played a role in thwarting the coup," writes kinney. "... [a]n unhappy civilian populace mobilized to face down the military."  erdogan wasn't censored (luttwak's point) and was therefore able to use facetime to mobilize resistance, which in turn hindered the conspirators' ability to project success (singh's point). the result is civilian resistance to soldiers, i.e., people power. the reason singh, luttwak, and other scholars of civil-military relations miss this is, according to kinney, because they "usually do not study extra-military reasons for coup failures/successes," but rather put a premium on "the inner-workings of the [military] operation." in short, they blame the military for its failure rather than acknowledge the power of the masses and their successes.  pro-state forces sent text messages to every turkish citizen calling for them to protest against the coup attempt. throughout the night sela prayers were repeatedly called from mosque minarets across the country to encourage people to resist the coup plotters. while the sela is usually called from minarets to inform the public of a funeral, they are also traditionally performed to notify of a significant event, in this case "to rally people".  the coup plotters initiated their operation hours ahead of the planned time when they understood that their plans had been compromised. had the coup been launched at its original time, the middle of the night, much of the population would have been asleep. the streets would have been mostly empty.  reports have emerged, neither confirmed nor denied by russia or turkey that the russian main intelligence directorate intercepted signals on an imminent coup passed on to loyal turkish operatives. the intercepted plans revealed several helicopters with commandos were on the way to marmaris's coastal resort, where erdogan stayed, capturing or killing him. pre-warned, erdogan left quickly to avoid them.  aftermath  arrests and purges   an extensive purge of the turkish civil service began in the wake of the coup attempt, with president erdogan warning his opponents that "they will pay a heavy price for this." the new york times along with some other western media such as the economist, described the purges as a "counter-coup", with the times expecting the president to "become more vengeful and obsessed with control than ever, exploiting the crisis not just to punish mutinous soldiers but to further quash whatever dissent is
left in turkey,". as of 20 july 2016, the purge already had seen over 45,000 military officials, police officers, judges, governors and civil servants arrested or suspended, including 2,700 judges, 15,000 teachers, and every university dean in the country.  163 generals and admirals were detained, around 45% of the turkish military's total.  on 18 july 2016, united states state secretary john kerry urged turkish authorities to halt the increasing crackdown on its citizens, indicating that the crackdown was meant to "suppress dissent." french foreign minister jean-marc ayrault voiced concern, warning against a "political system which turns away from democracy" in response to the purges.  on 17 august 2016, turkey started releasing what was expected to eventually amount to about 38,000 prison inmates, to make more space in the penal system for  detainees, numbering about 35,000, who were arrested or detained after being involved in or suspected of association, with the 2016 failed coup.  on 28 september 2016, turkish justice minister bekir bozdag said 70,000 people had been processed and 32,000 were formally arrested.  major general cahit bakir, who commanded turkish forces under nato in afghanistan, and brigadier general sener topuc, responsible for education and aid in afghanistan, were detained by authorities in dubai connected with the failed coup.  general akın ozturk, former commander of the turkish air force, was the turkish military attache to israel. he was arrested on charges of having played a leading role in the failed coup. ozturk has denied the charges.  general adem huduti, the commander of the second army, positioned along the southern borders with syria and iraq, and general erdal ozturk, the commander of the 3rd corps, were also arrested.  rear admiral mustafa zeki ugurlu, who had been stationed at nato's allied command transformation in norfolk, virginia, sought asylum in the united states after being recalled by the turkish government.  in july 2018, istanbul's 25th criminal court sentenced 72 former soldiers involved in the coup attempt to life in prison.  on 20 june 2019,  a terrorism court in turkey sentenced 151 people to life in prison, including general akın ozturk, former commander of turkish air force most senior officer involved in the coup. 128 people received "aggravated life" sentences, which indicates harsh conditions without parole, for their role in the coup, with another 23 receiving standard life sentences.  turkish government statements about coup attempt  statements against feth
ullah gulen   fethullah gulen, whom president erdogan said as one of the principal conspirators, condemned the coup attempt and denied any role in it. "i condemn, in the strongest terms, the attempted military coup in turkey," he said in an emailed statement reported by the new york times. "government should be won through a process of free and fair elections, not force. i pray to god for turkey, turkish citizens, and all those currently in turkey that this situation is resolved peacefully and quickly. as someone who suffered under multiple military coups during the past five decades, it is especially insulting to be accused of having any link to such an attempt. i categorically deny such accusations."  president erdogan asked the united states to extradite gulen: "i call on you again, after there was a coup attempt. extradite this man in pennsylvania to turkey! if we are strategic partners or model partners, do what is necessary." prime minister yildirim has threatened war against any country that would support gulen. turkish labor minister suleyman soylu said that "america is behind the coup."  regarding the akp's statement against gulen, secretary of state kerry invited the turkish government "to present us with any legitimate evidence that withstands scrutiny," before they would accept an extradition request.  on 15 august 2016, former united states diplomat james jeffrey, who was the united states ambassador to turkey from 2008 until 2010 made the following remarks: "the gulen movement has some infiltration at the least in the military that i am aware of. they of course had extreme infiltration into the police and judiciary earlier. i saw that when i was in turkey previously, particularly in the sledgehammer case, hakan fidan case, and the corruption cases in 2013. obviously, significant segment of turkey's bureaucracy was infiltrated and had their allegiance to a movement. that of course is absolutely unacceptable and extremely dangerous. it likely led to the coup attempt."  outside turkey, in beringen, belgium, anti-coup protesters attempted to attack a building owned by the pro-gulen movement group 'vuslat'. the police brought in a water cannon to keep the attackers at bay. in news articles it was stated that the police also protected the houses of gulen supporters. people advocated on social media to go to beringen once more, and there was unrest in heusden-zolder, elsewhere in belgium. furthermore, in somalia the government ordered "the total closure of all activities" of an organization linked to the gulen movement, and gave its
staff seven days to leave the country.  on 2 august 2016, president erdogan said western countries were "supporting terrorism" and the military coup, saying "i'm calling on the united states: what kind of strategic partners are we, that you can still host someone whose extradition i have asked for?"  on 31 january 2017, british minister of state for europe and the americas, alan duncan said he believed the gulen movement was responsible for the coup attempt. duncan went on saying "the organization which incorporated itself into the state tried to topple the democratic structure in turkey".  statements against the u.s. and the west, and u.s. response   in a speech on 29 july 2016, president erdogan said u.s. central command chief joseph votel was "siding with coup plotters"; erdogan said the united states was protecting fethullah gulen, whom the turkish government blames for the coup attempt. turkish prime minister binali yildirim made similar comments. in response, votel said that the turkish government's statements were "unfortunate and completely inaccurate" and expressed concern that the mass arrests and firings of military officers would damage military cooperation between the u.s. and turkey. similarly, u.s. director of national intelligence james r. clapper said that the turkish military purges were impairing the fight against isis.  on 2 august 2016, in an escalation of tensions with the united states, erdogan questioned turkey's relationship with the united states and criticized the west, saying that "script" for the abortive putsch last month was "written abroad". erdogan stated that he had personally asked obama to extradite gulen to turkey. when the u.s. government replied it would need evidence of the cleric's guilt before extradition, to which erdogan said: "when you asked for the return of a terrorist, we did not ask for documentation. ... let us put him on trial."  yeni safak daily, a turkish pro-state newspaper, stated that the former commander of nato forces in afghanistan, now-retired united states army general john f. campbell, was the "mastermind" behind the coup attempt in turkey. campbell called the statement "absolutely ridiculous" and president obama said "any reports that we had any previous knowledge of a coup attempt, that there was any u.s. involvement in it, that we were anything other than entirely supportive of turkish democracy are completely false, unequivocally false."  on 1 december 2017, istanbul chief public prosecutor's office
issued an arrest warrant for american political analyst, former cia official and former vice chairman of us national intelligence council graham fuller, stating his involvement in the coup. a career us state department official who was once cia station chief in kabul and later went on to be a political scientist in rand corporation specializing in the middle east, turkish authorities said fuller attended a meeting in istanbul on 15 july 2016 involving organization and coordination of the botched coup. another american among the attendance, as stated by the turkish prosecutors, was academic henri barkey who was named a suspect a week after the failed coup.  incirlik air base   the u.s. consulate in turkey issued an advisory to u.s citizens to avoid the incirlik air base in southern turkey, which houses about 50 nuclear bombs, until "normal operations have been restored". they stated that local authorities were denying access to the air base and that power supplying the air base was shut off.  the incirlik base is important to the u.s.-led effort in syria to combat isil and other militants. nearly 1,500 american personnel are housed in the base.  twenty-four hours after initial reports that the air base was shut down, united states defense department officials confirmed that the base and its airspace had re-opened to military aircraft and that operations by american aircraft will resume. the turkish commander of the air base, brig. gen. bekir ercan van was arrested. after the failure of the coup gen bekir ercan van sought asylum from the u.s., but his request was denied by u.s.  following the failed coup attempt multiple media outlets have published editorials advocating the removal of u.s. nuclear weapons from incirlik air base as turkey is unstable.  social unrest   on 16 july, anti-coup protesters chanted against locals in areas of istanbul with high concentration of alevis, including okmeydanı and gazi. such incidents also occurred in a quarter of antakya with a high alevi population, where a motorcyclist stating to be a sharia advocate was lynched. in a neighbourhood of ankara, shops belonging to syrians were attacked by a mob. in malatya, sunni islamists harassed residents of an alevi neighbourhood, particularly the women, and attempted to enter the neighbourhood en masse. police intervened and blocked all roads leading there. in kadıkoy, people drinking alcohol in public were attacked by a group of religious fundamentalists.  calls to reintroduce the death penalty   following the arrests, thousands of anti
-coup protesters demanded instituting the death penalty against detainees connected with the coup, chanting "we want the death penalty". president erdogan has been open to reinstituting the death penalty, noting that "in a democracy, whatever the people want they will get." turkish authorities have not executed anyone since 1984, but legally abolished capital punishment only in 2004 as a pre-condition to join the european union.  european union officials have been vocal about their opposition to purges by turkish authorities in connection to the coup. french foreign minister jean-marc ayrault said that turkey must work within the framework of the law to uphold europe's democratic principles. furthermore, on 18 july 2016, federica mogherini, the high representative of foreign affairs of the european union, announced that no country will be admitted into the european union "if it introduces the death penalty". moreover, german press secretary, steffen seibert, stated that reinstituting the death penalty will end turkey's accession talks with the european union.  turkey is a member of the council of europe, and ratified the european convention on human rights (echr) as part of its terms of membership. the echr is an international treaty that includes the abolition of the death penalty among its terms. as such, turkey is legally bound not to reintroduce the death penalty.  state of emergency   on 20 july 2016, president erdogan announced a three-month state of emergency in response to the attempted coup, invoking article 120 of the constitution of turkey ("declaration of state of emergency because of widespread acts of violence and serious deterioration of public order"). under the state of emergency, under article 121, "the council of ministers, meeting under the chairpersonship of the president of the republic, may issue decrees having the force of law on matters necessitated by the state of emergency", with decrees subject to subsequent parliamentary approval. the state of emergency was endorsed by the parliament on 21 july by 346 votes to 115. the justice and development party and the nationalist movement party supported the state of emergency, whilst the republican people's party and the peoples' democratic party opposed it. prime minister yıldırım said at the parliament that the state of emergency was necessary to "get rid of this scourge rapidly".  as part of the state of emergency, deputy prime minister kurtulmus announced that turkey was temporarily suspending part of the european convention on human rights following the attempted coup, invoking article 15 of the convention ("war or other public emergency threatening the life of the nation"). the suspensions must be
notified to the council of europe and may not affect the right to a fair trial or the prohibition on torture.  this state of emergency in turkey as well as the hindrance of the right to protest that occurred within such framework have been layered onto a longer history of emergency rules, oppressive legislation and daily government practice that have reinforced both. we can see from this the "autocratisation" process in turkey has thrived of existing legal framework deeply associated in legacies of past "emergencies".  state of emergency extension  on 3 october 2016 deputy prime minister numan kurtulmus declared the governments intention to extend the state of emergency by a further three months raising objections from both the republican people's party (chp) and peoples' democratic party (hdp) were critical of the governments use of their emergency powers and declared that they would vote against an extension.  following the national security council's recommendation for the extension president erdogan stated that it was possible that the state of emergency could last for longer than a year prompting outcry from the opposition, leader of the main opposition kemal kılıcdaroglu said that "the president saying that the state of emergency can last longer than 12 months is strengthening the fear of a counter-coup" and that it was "raising the prospect of opportunist measures."  the akp's governmental majority allowed the three-month extension to take effect on 19 october 2016. the two-year-long state of emergency was ended on 19 july 2018.  turkish military personnel and diplomats asylum bids  applications for asylum in greece   on 16 july 2016, the media reported that eight turkish military personnel of various ranks had landed in greece's northeastern city of alexandroupolis on board a black hawk helicopter and claimed political asylum in greece. while the turkish foreign minister mevlut cavusoglu demanded extradition of "the eight traitors as soon as possible", the greek authorities stated: "we will follow the procedures of international law. however, we give severe considerations to the fact that [the turkish military men] are accused, in their own country, of violating the constitutional order and trying to overthrow democracy." the helicopter was returned to turkey shortly thereafter. the eight asylum seekers, their asylum case pending, were later transferred to athens, mainly for safety reasons. on 26 january, the supreme court of greece eventually ruled against their extradition, on the grounds that the eight were unlikely to face a fair trial if returned to their home country and due to concerns over their safety.  on 15 february 2017, five turkish commandos illegally entered greece through
the evros river. however, once they entered the country, the group split. the two of them surrendered to the police and on 20 february 2017, requested political asylum. they were being held in the city of alexandroupolis. the two men belonged to the turkish navy. the names given by the two reportedly match the names of two fugitives wanted in relation to the shadowy operation against erdogan himself. the greek government mentioned that the greek authorities will not allow the country to be dragged into the ongoing feud between the turkish state and the followers of gulen. but there were no sign of the other three. according to a lawyer there were indications that the other three have been arrested by greek authorities who were about to expel them to turkey. according to new evidence and new information these three "arrested" marines were delivered under fast and informal procedures from greek to turkish services.  turkish attaches sortie from greece to italy  after the coup attempt, two turkish military attaches in athens, staff col. ilhan yasıtlı and naval attache col. halis tunc, had reportedly disappeared along with their families. the greek foreign ministry canceled the two attaches' accreditations on 7 august 2016, upon the request of the turkish foreign ministry. greek media reported that they might have fled to italy. on 11 august 2016, the turkish foreign minister mevlut cavusoglu confirmed the reports saying that they had left greece for italy on 6 august and adding that turkey would officially ask the italian authorities to extradite the two soldiers.  rear admiral's u.s. asylum application  on 9 august 2016, the media reported that turkey's rear admiral mustafa zeki ugurlu, who had been on a united states-based assignment for nato and after the coup was subject to a detention order in turkey, had sought asylum in the united states.  asylum bids in germany and belgium  in mid-november 2016, it was officially confirmed that about 40 turkish military servicemen of various ranks stationed at nato command structures had applied for asylum in germany and belgium.  in january 2017, der spiegel magazine and ard broadcaster reported that about 40 mostly high-ranking turkish soldiers who worked at nato facilities in germany requested asylum in germany.  at the end of february 2017, germany said it had received 136 asylum requests from turks holding diplomatic passports since the july coup attempt. the figure was a total for august 2016 to january 2017; some were presumed to be military officers posted to nato bases in germany.  asylum bids in nato countries  in november 2016, nato's
secretary general, jens stoltenberg, said that turkish nato officers had requested asylum in the countries where they had been posted. he did not name the nations involved or the number of officers, saying it was a matter for those countries to decide. he said: "some turkish officers working in nato command structure ... have requested asylum in the countries where they are working. ... as always, this is an issue that is going to be assessed and decided by the different nato allies as a national issue."  as of march 2017, norway have granted asylum for four turkish soldiers and a military attache.  diplomats asylum bids  several turkish citizens with diplomatic passports have sought political asylum in switzerland.  torture reports  according to amnesty international, detainees in turkey have been denied access to legal counsel, have been beaten and tortured. they have not been provided with adequate food, water, or medical care. at least one has attempted suicide. amnesty international wanted the european committee for the prevention of torture to send people to check on detainees conditions. a person who had been on duty at the ankara police headquarters said that police denied medical treatment to a detainee. "let him die. we will say he came to us dead," the witness quoted a police doctor as saying.  also, erdogan has extended the maximum period of detention for suspects from four days to 30, a move amnesty said increased the risk of torture or other maltreatment of detainees.  turkish justice ministry denied the reports and the justice minister bekir bozdag said on his twitter account: "there has not been any torture or assault of detainees in custody," in response to reports by amnesty international. "the claims of torture and assault make up a pre-packaged misinformation campaign formed by members of feto, one which is untrue and distorted,"  anti-coup rally  on 7 august, more than a million people gathered for an anti-coup rally organized by the turkish authorities in istanbul. president erdogan and the two leaders of the major opposition parties (chp and mhp) were present.  greece: change in migration and asylum seeking  increase regarding greek islands  greek authorities on several aegean islands have called for emergency measures to curtail a growing flow of refugees from turkey; the number of migrants and refugees willing to make the journey across the aegean has increased noticeably after the failed coup. at athens officials voiced worries because turkish monitors overseeing the deal in greece had been abruptly pulled out after the failed coup without being replaced. also, the mayor of kos expressed concern in a letter to the greek prime
minister citing the growing influx of refugees and migrants after the failed coup. the association of greek tourism enterprises (sete) warned about the prospect of another flare-up in the refugee/migrant crisis due to the turkish political instability.  vincent cochetel, the director of the europe bureau of the office of the united nations high commissioner for refugees, said in august 2016 that parts of the eu-turkey deal about immigration were already de facto suspended because no turkish police were present at greek detention centres to oversee deportations.  turkish civilians  on 25 august 2016, seven turkish citizens were seeking asylum in greece. both of whom are university professors, and their two children applied for asylum in alexandroupoli after they illegally entered the country from the northeastern border. also, three businessmen have illegally reached the greek island of rhodes, and they also applied for asylum.  on 30 august 2016, a turkish judge arrived at the greek island of chios on a migrant boat, six syrian nationals, and sought asylum in the country. he told the greek coast guard and police officers that he is being persecuted in turkey for his political beliefs by president tayyip erdogan. the turkish judge had been arrested for illegally entering the country and, also, he transferred to athens for his asylum proceedings. the syrian nationals claimed refugee status.  on 11 september 2016, four turkish civilians were arrested by turkish police. an academic and a teacher attempted to escape to greece illegally by crossing the evros river, and the other two because they organized the escape attempt. the academic and the teacher paid a total of 12,500 euros in istanbul to arrange their escape to greece. before their attempt both the academic and the teacher were suspended from their duties as part of the ongoing probe into the failed coup attempt. police also seized an air raft, an oar and a pump while detaining the suspects. the court later ordered the two's release while the other two suspects, who organized the escape attempt, were arrested.  on 21 september 2016, ten turkish civilians, two men, two women and six children landed by boat illegally on the greek island of rhodes and sought asylum. they told to the greek authorities they were working in the private sector in turkey and the turkish government was persecuting them due to their political beliefs.  on 29 september 2016, five turkish nationals, a couple and their child and two other men, arrived in greece, at alexandroupolis by crossing the evros river by boat illegally and requested political asylum.  on 12 december 2016, one female turkish national, landed by
boat, full of refugees and immigrants, illegally on the greek island of lesbos. she requested political asylum.  on 24 october 2017, turkish authorities obtained information that 995 turks have applied for asylum in greece after the coup attempt.  more than 1,800 turkish citizens requested asylum in greece in 2017.  on 18 february 2018, seventeen turkish nationals, including six children, have requested asylum in greece at oinousses island.  in august 2018, the former lawmaker for the peoples' democratic party, leyla birlik, requested asylum in greece after illegally crossing the border near alexandroupolis.  germany-and turkish factions within   berlin mayor, michael muller (spd), said turkey was waging war on supporters of the gulen movement in germany. he said that turkish officials had approached him and asked him whether he would be prepared to confront the gulen movement in berlin critically and, if necessary, to support measures against it. the mayor rejected the idea and made it very clear that turkish conflicts could not be waged in the city.  der spiegel presented classified documents, which showed that turkey's secret service (mit) had asked germany's foreign intelligence agency (bnd) for help in rounding up gulen supporters in germany. the turkish secret service wanted the bnd to use its influence to spur german lawmakers into taking action against gulen supporters and extraditing them to turkey. also, turkey's government has sent german authorities requests for searches and extraditions linked to supporters of fethullah gulen in germany.  in germany businesses thought to be in support of the gulen movement have been harassed by erdogan supporters.  after the failed coup, there was a massive demonstration in cologne at germany, in late july, in support of turkish president erdogan. erdogan wanted to address the participants via video but was rejected by the local authorities and the german constitutional court due to security concerns. turkey said that the ban was unacceptable and a violation of freedom of expression.  german authorities said turkish mosques in germany were playing turkish politics and worried that turkey's internal politics spilled over into german cities. for years, german authorities had encouraged turkey's state-run religious institution turkish-islamic union for religious affairs usually referred to as ditib to provide islamic preachers and teachers and gulen movement schools for the large turkish diaspora in germany. ditib manages some 900 mosques in germany. gulen movement runs 100 educational facilities in germany.  after the failed coup ditib published a sermon praising "our noble nation" for rising against "a wretched network" that had sown "se
eds of sedition, rebellion and hostility." according to volker beck, a member of the center-left greens in germany's bundestag, "that was not a religious text. it was a declaration of obedience to mr. erdogan and his measures since the coup attempt," volker kauder, parliamentary group leader of the germany's ruling christian democrats, the christian democratic union of germany (cdu)/christian social union in bavaria (csu) faction, said turkish-germans should be loyal to germany first and foremost.  germans of turkish origin are being pressured in germany by informers and officers of turkey's mit spy agency. according to reports turkey had 6,000 informants plus mit officers in germany who were putting pressure on "german turks". hans-christian strobele said that there was an "unbelievable" level of "secret activities" in germany by turkey's mit agency. according to erich schmidt-eenboom, not even the former communist east german stasi secret police had managed to run such a large "army of agents" in the former west germany: "here, it's not just about intelligence gathering, but increasingly about intelligence service repression."  german lawmakers have called for an investigation, charging that turkey is spying on suspected gulen followers in germany.  turkish civilians asylum bids  germany's office for migration and refugees said on 18 november 2016, it had received 4,437 political asylum requests from turkish citizens up to october, compared to 1,767 for the whole of last year. "we must expect that the number of turks who are seeking political asylum in germany will continue to rise," said stephan mayer, the domestic policy speaker of the union coalition in the bundestag.  on 10 december 2016, eleven turkish nationals, 10 adults and one child, in a martial arts group have applied for asylum in germany.  as of january 2018, germany was first place and greece second as eu destinations of choice for turkish nationals requesting asylum after the coup attempt.  companies raided  turkish police have carried out simultaneous raids in 18 cities against companies associated with united states-based fethullah gulen. the state-run anadolu agency said police searched 204 premises and detained 187 businessmen for "membership in a terror organization" and "providing financial support to a terror organization". all suspects' assets were seized.  wikileaks  wikileaks released turkish emails and documents to respond to the turkish government's purges that followed the coup attempt. in turn, the turkish telecommunications communications board blocked access to the wikileaks website. on 17 july 2016 wikileaks had announced on twitter,
the leak of approximately 300,000 emails and over 500,000 documents, including those to and from akp.  wikileaks stated that it was attacked shortly after 17 july announcement of the planned publication and hypothesized that turkish authorities were responsible. wikileaks stated in a tweet, "our infrastructure is under sustained attack." tweets from wikileaks include "we are unsure of the true origin of the attack. the timing suggests a turkish state power faction or its allies. we will prevail & publish." and: "turks will likely be censored to prevent them reading our pending release of 100k+ docs on politics leading up to the coup.", "we ask that turks are ready with censorship bypassing systems such as torbrowser and utorrent"; "and that everyone else is ready to help them bypass censorship and push our links through the censorship to come."  upon the release of the email dump, it has been reported that the emails contain little to no damning information, and instead are just mails from a public mailing list, but also linked externally to "voter information on all of the women registered to vote in 78 out of turkey's 81 provinces".  renamed places  several places were renamed to commemorate the failed coup:  bogazici koprusu (bosphorus bridge) → 15 temmuz sehitler koprusu  kızılay meydanı → 15 temmuz kızılay demokrasi meydanı  ahmet taner kıslalı meydanı → 15 temmuz milli irade meydanı (reverted to original name a few days later)  buyuk istanbul otogarı → istanbul 15 temmuz demokrasi otogarı  in trt, yeni haber studyosu → 15 temmuz millet studyosu  kazan → kahramankazan about the province's local people's resistance to the coup plotters. kahraman means "hero" in turkish  nigde university → nigde omer halisdemir university  in 2018, the istanbul municipal council has decided to change the names of a total of 90 streets that included words, which could be associated with feto.  restrictions on funeral services for coupists  the presidency of religious affairs stated that it would not be providing religious funeral services to the dead coupists, except for "privates and low-ranking officers compelled by force and threats who found themselves in the midst of the conflict without full knowledge of anything".  reports of spying  a document dated 26 september 2016 showed that turkey
's directorate of religious affairs (diyanet) asked turkish missions and religious representatives abroad to profile gulen movement expatriates living in their respective foreign countries. gulen-linked schools, businesses, foundations, associations, media outlets and others were also included in the reports. turkey's directorate of religious affairs has gathered intelligence via imams from 38 countries.  belgium officials said they would withdraw recognition of diyanet mosques in the country if necessary.  german lawmakers have called for an investigation, charging that turkey is spying on suspected gulen followers in germany.  on 21 december 2016, the turkish government has recalled yusuf acar, the religious affairs attache of the turkish embassy in the netherlands, after dutch authorities said he was spying. acar collected information of people who sympathize with fethullah gulen at netherlands and passed it on to the turkish authorities. the dutch government called spying activities an "unwanted and non-acceptable interference in the lives of dutch citizens." and the attache was reportedly declared persona non grata and received a "deportation warning" by dutch authorities.  requests for help from other countries  on 26 january 2017, president erdogan, during his visit to tanzania, asked his tanzanian counterpart john magufuli to take action against the network of fethullah gulen.  museum   in april 2017 it was announced that president erdogan planned to establish a purpose-built museum dedicated to the coup events, called the "museum of the 15 july: martyrs and democracy", to be located in kahramankazan, a town near ankara. paid for by turkish ministry of culture funds, it is planned to open at the end of 2018.  third-party reactions  domestic  among the turkish opposition parties, the republican people's party (chp) issued a statement expressing their public opposition to the coup, and the hurriyet daily news reported that nationalist movement party (mhp) leader devlet bahceli telephoned prime minister binali yıldırım to express his opposition to the coup. the co-chairs of the opposition peoples' democratic party (hdp) issued a statement saying that the party was "under all circumstances and as a matter of principle against all kinds of coup." amongst the minor parties, left-wing nationalist patriotic party's dogu perincek backed democracy, when he held gulen and the americans responsible. kurdish militant separatist organization pkk, which turkey and its allies label as a terrorist organization, urged their supporters to stay away from the coup and rather defend their people, while the communist party called upon the people to overthrow
the akp government which they called an "enemy of humanity".  international   during the first hours of the coup plotters' moves of blocking istanbul's bridges and flying fighter jets low over istanbul and ankara, council of europe secretary general thorbjørn jagland tweeted against the coup attempt and underlined that "any attempt to overthrow the democratically elected leaders is unacceptable".  russia's president vladimir putin called erdogan out of solidarity before all nato member countries' heads following the coup attempt. erdogan thanked the president of kazakhstan, nursultan nazarbayev - who was the first president to show solidarity after the coup attempt - for his support in solving the 7-month crisis over downed russian sukhoi su-24 and the prime minister of greece, alexis tsipras, who was among the first nato country leaders to condemn the coup attempt, already from the early hours of saturday.  prime minister nawaz sharif, the then prime minister of pakistan, was all praise for the people of turkey and the akp government and strongly condemned what he termed as an attempt to undermine democracy in turkey."we deeply admire the resolve of the brave and resilient turkish people, who stood up against the forces of darkness and anarchy to express their support and commitment to democracy," the pm said in a statement issued from his office.  the majority of countries either expressed their support for the government or called for restraint. on 16 july 2016, however, a proposed united nations security council statement denouncing the coup was not accepted by egypt, a non-permanent member of the council at the time, due to textual disagreements. egyptian diplomats said that the council is "in no position to qualify, or label [the turkish] government - or any other government for that matter - as democratically elected or not". objection by the united states and the uk - permanent members of the security council - led to egypt proposing a new statement calling for all sides to "respect the democratic and constitutional principles and the rule of law", which was rejected, preventing the condemnation of the coup attempt by the security council. the leader of the opposition liberal democratic party of russia, vladimir zhirinovsky supported the coup attempt.  al-monitor reported that "unlike ankara's western allies, iran did not wait for the coup's failure to speak up. foreign minister mohammad javad zarif voiced support for democracy in a twitter message in the early hours of the unrest, writing "stability, and democracy in turkey are paramount". in a subsequent phone call after the failure of the coup
attempt, president hassan rouhani told erdogan the coup attempt was "a test to identify your domestic and foreign friends and enemies." an iranian official pointed out parallels between the coup attempt in turkey and the coup against iranian prime minister mohammad mussadiq in 1953: "what we know is that this attempt was triggered by foreign hands. we have experienced the same thing in the past. since mr. erdogan wants to play a more positive path in the region today, they want to overthrow him."   mustafa akıncı, president of northern cyprus, welcomed the fact that "no community in turkey ... applauded the coup as they have done in the past." azerbaijan strongly condemned the attempted military coup in turkey and considered such actions unacceptable according to a statement from novruz mammadov, deputy head of the azerbaijani presidential administration and chief of the foreign relations department.  european commissioner dealing with turkey's eu membership bid, johannes hahn, said it appears turkey's government prepared arrest lists of political opponents before the coup attempt and had been waiting for the right time to act.  in this sense, eu reported that as a main criticism to put this issue in the category of terrorism become the violation of the fundamental rights and fundamental values of the citizens. hence, it underlines a total divergence of opinions and mentality between eu and turkey which reached a deadlock here especially after the 15th of july in 2016.  on 19 july 2016, white house spokesperson josh earnest said during a press briefing that president barack obama has held a phone conversation with president erdogan: "the president used the phone call to reiterate once again the strong commitment of the united states to the democratically elected civilian government of turkey. the president pledged any needed assistance to the turkish government as they conduct and investigation to determine exactly what happened."  on 20 july 2016, nato secretary general jens stoltenberg said: "turkey has a large armed force, professional armed forces and ... i am certain they will continue as a committed and strong nato ally." on a statement released on 10 august 2016, the secretary general once more strongly condemned the attempted coup and reiterated full support for turkey's democratic institutions. he also expressed support for the elected turkish government and respect for the courage of the turkish people for resisting the coup plotters.  on 29 july 2016, the commander of u.s. central command, general joseph votel, denied statements by turkey's president erdogan that he has supported the coup attempt in turkey.  on 1 august 2016, united states joint chiefs of staff chairman, general joseph dunford, visited turkey and condemned
the coup attempt. dunford said: "the consistent theme throughout the day was a reaffirmation of the importance of the u.s.-turkey relationship - the need for us to cooperate."  greek maritime patrols for coup fugitives  on july, 20, there were reports that a group of turkish military commandos coup fugitives would try to cross from turkey to the island of symi, in the southeastern aegean, at greece. these reports put the greek armed forces on alert. also, the greek coast guard was on alert and increased the patrols in the area, especially after a group of inflatable dinghies and other vessels were seen departing from datca, on the turkish coast, in the direction of symi, they monitored the movements of the turkish vessels, which remained in turkish waters. furthermore, a contingent of the greek police was dispatched to symi to conduct checks there. athens had been anticipating a possible attempt by participants in the failed coup to come to greece and took the reports seriously. turkish f-16 fighter jets were also scrambled to check reports that missing turkish coast guard vessels had appeared in greek waters in the aegean. later on the day, the turkish interior ministry denied reports that rebel soldiers might have "hijacked" a vessel to flee to greece. the greek armed forces remained on alert the throughout the day for potential coup fugitives.  causes  according to michael rubin, from the american enterprise institute (aei), erdogan had himself to blame for the coup. following an increasingly islamist agenda, erdogan had reportedly "dropped any pretense of governing for all turks." after "fanning the flames" at the 2013 gezi park protests, he transformed the predominantly kurdish-inhabited areas of southeastern turkey "into a war zone reminiscent of the worst days of the 1980s." the biggest problem, according to rubin, might have been erdogan's foreign policy, which managed to turn the initial "no problems with neighbors" doctrine into a situation where the country has problems with almost every neighbor and has even alienated some of its allies and friends.  british middle east correspondent robert fisk warned that "too late did erdogan realize the cost of the role he had chosen for his country. it's one thing to say sorry to putin and patch up relations with netanyahu; but when you can no longer trust your army, there are more serious matters to concentrate upon." even if this coup may have failed, fisk expected another to follow in the months or years to come.  turkish professor akın unver described the
coup d'etat attempt as "more of a mutiny".  peace at home council  the name of the "peace at home council" - yurtta sulh konseyi - is derived from ataturk's famous saying 'peace at home, peace in the world'. journalist ezgi basaran said that "the statement of the junta, that was [...] read on the [...] government tv [channel] as the coup got under way, bore a strong resemblance to mustafa kemal ataturk's famous address to the turkish youth. [...] on the other hand, given that these references are too obvious, they may have been intentionally included to insinuate a kemalist junta rather than a gulenist one."  the citizen journalism site bellingcat published an analysis of the messages of a whatsapp group consisting of high-ranking military officials who had taken part in the coup covering their activities including them killing several people. the messages were cross referenced with video footage. the group was named "yurtta sulh" which refers to a peace at home speech and they seem secular and military with no references to gulen or anything related during the several hours of messaging.  news reports have suggested that the coup ringleader was adil oksuz. some believe oksuz to have been an operative with turkish intelligence.  timing  german islamic studies scholar  said the putschists tried to forestall a large-scale purge of judiciary and military, the implementation of which had already started on saturday, the day after the coup attempt. according to turkish investigative journalist ahmet sık, a list of officials to be purged had been ready compiled by the attorney-general of izmir, okan bato, and was approved by president erdogan. according to this version, the putschists had to quickly bring forward their coup attempt before being disposed and arrested.  staged coup reports  during and after the events, several politicians and commentators suggested that the government knew about the coup in advance and possibly directed it. the facts that the coup attempt began in the evening rather than at a more inconspicuous time and that the events were largely confined to ankara and istanbul contributed to doubts about the authenticity of the coup attempt. journalists and opposition politicians branded it a 'tragic comedy' and 'theatre play'. advocates of such theories pointed to how erdogan stood to gain from the coup attempt in terms of increasing his popularity and support for his calls for an executive presidency, while being able to legitimize further crackdowns on judicial independence and the opposition in general.   other elements that were reported to support the theory included
: no list of demands by the coup plotters, the organization and response of the police, the long lists of arrests that seemed to be ready surprisingly quickly (including arrests of 2,745 judges and 2,839 soldiers), and the obvious nature of the coup actions.  fethullah gulen, whom erdogan had said as being one of the principal conspirators, commented, "i don't believe that the world believes the accusations made by president erdogan. there is a possibility that it could be a staged coup and it could be meant for further accusations [against the gulenists]." journalist cengiz candar, a veteran observer of turkey's coups, said "i have never seen any with this magnitude of such inexplicable sloppiness." prominent hizmet (gulen movement) spokesman alp aslandogan said, referencing that the turkish air force commander met with erdogan before 15 july, that certain legal documentation related to the coup seemed written beforehand, arguing that within "the indictment written by a prosecutor on the night of 15 july to 16 july, there were events there that didn't actually happen. some events did happen, but those events didn't happen by the time the document started. it looks like a bigger plan was there, and part of the plan did not come to pass."  evidence of pre-planning  the organization and spontaneous synchronization by large numbers of mosques was perceived to be unachievable unless there had been prior preparation, with journalists also pointing to how erdogan could have strategically used the call to prayer to invoke religious sentiment in a political situation as a veiled attack on state secularism.  thousands of arrests and purges were conducted by turkish authorities between 16 and 18 july 2016. the sheer number of these arrests made at such a speed could only be done so if the "turkish government had all those lists ready", as suggested by johannes hahn, european commissioner for enlargement and european neighbourhood policy, on 18 july 2016. hahn also said that because these lists were already available immediately after the coup, the "event was prepared" and the lists were to be used "at a certain stage".  possible connections of the coup leaders to erdogan  mehmet disli, who was seen giving orders to the coup plotters and who was the one who put a belt around hulusi akar's neck to make him sign, is the brother of saban disli, a former vice president of the ruling justice and development party (akp) and confidant of erdogan.  possible government motives  several social media
users have compared the coup attempt to the reichstag fire in 1933, which adolf hitler used as an excuse to suspend civil liberties and order mass arrests of his opponents. politico correspondent ryan heath said that "the coup was staged to allow erdogan to purge the military of opponents and increase his grip on the country". heath used twitter to share comments from his turkish source, who called the events of friday night a "fake coup" which would help a "fake democracy warrior" (referring to erdogan). the source said: "probably we'll see an early election [in] which he'll try to guarantee an unbelievable majority of the votes. and this will probably guarantee another 10-15 years of authoritarian, elected dictatorship."  the new york times reported that some turkish citizens believed the coup attempt was staged by erdogan to improve his public image and popularity, while cracking down on political opponents and expanding his power. critics found it suspect that reportedly no government officials were arrested or harmed during the attempted coup, which-among other factors-raised the suspicion of a false flag event staged by the turkish government to crack down on opposition parties. those in turkey suggesting that the coup was staged are also being questioned by the government.  politicians and journalists who were skeptical of the authenticity of the coup plot said that in reality, a 'civil coup' had effectively been staged against the armed forces and judiciary, both of which were extensively purged of stated gulen supporters by the government shortly after the events. skeptics said that the coup would be used as an excuse for further erosion of judicial independence and a crackdown on the opposition, giving the akp greater and unstoppable power over all state institutions and paving the way for a more radical islamist agenda at odds with the founding principles of the turkish republic.  justice minister bekir bozdag said in late july 2016 that turkish social media users who said the government was staging the coup faced investigation: "just look at the people who are saying on social media that this was theatre. public prosecutors are already investigating them. most of them are losers who think it is an honor to die for fethullah gulen's command."  on 12 july 2017, stockholm center for freedom, a monitoring group with reported links to the hizmet movement that tracks turkey, published a controversial 181-pages report stating that president erdogan in fact orchestrated the coup bid as a false flag to consolidate his powers, set up his opposition for a mass persecution, and push turkish armed forces into a military incursion into syria. according to the report, it
uncovered new evidence from 11 july 2016, four days before the planned coup bid, that a secret plan was circulated among select group of armed forces to give an appearance of a coup attempt. the plan was sanctioned by intelligence and military chiefs with the approval of erdogan.  allegations of cia involvement  in early november 2017, turkish authorities issued an arrest warrant for , former director of the middle east program of the woodrow wilson international center for scholars, stating that he is an agent of the united states central intelligence agency (cia), that he was present in istanbul during the 2016 turkish coup attempt, and that he was one of the key organizers behind the coup attempt. around 1 december, the istanbul prosecutor's office issued an arrest warrant for graham e. fuller, an american author and political analyst specializing in islamic extremism after a long cia career and holding the role of vice-chair of the united states national intelligence council. the prosecutor's office based the warrant on suspicion of fuller helping to plan the coup attempt. hurriyet stated that turkish authorities believed that they had traced fuller's location before the attempted coup and afterward when he left turkey.  barkey denied his reported role in the coup, stating, "these accusations are so ludicrous that they do not even deserve the term 'science fiction'."  see also    deep state in turkey  the imam's army  list of coups and coup attempts since 2010  list of modern conflicts in the middle east  list of attacks on legislatures  references  further reading  external links     updates at bbc news  updates at the telegraph  updates at cnn  updates at al jazeera  updates at the wall street journal  updates at the new york times  july 15: a night of defiance. trt world.  the changing milestone in turkey-eu relations: the july 15 turkish coup d'etat attempt. kuresel siyaset    2010s coups d'etat and coup attempts 2010s in ankara 2016 in turkey 2016 in istanbul 2016 in turkish politics conflicts in 2016 attacks on legislatures recep tayyip erdogan istanbul ataturk airport 2016 crimes in turkey july 2016 events in turkey recep tayyip erdogan controversies military coup attempts in turkey
callogorgia is a genus of soft corals in the family primnoidae.  species   callogorgia affinis (versluys, 1906)  callogorgia americana cairns & bayer 2002  callogorgia arawak bayer, cairns, cordeiro & perez, 2014    callogorgia chariessa bayer, 1982    callogorgia cristata aurivillius, 1931    callogorgia delta cairns & bayer, 2003    callogorgia dubia (thomson & henderson, 1906)    callogorgia elegans (gray, 1870)    callogorgia flabellum (ehrenberg, 1834)  callogorgia formosa kukenthal, 1907    callogorgia galapagensis cairns, 2018    callogorgia gilberti (nutting, 1908)    callogorgia gracilis (milne edwards & haime 1857)    callogorgia grimaldii (studer, 1890)    callogorgia imperialis cairns in cairns, stone, moon & lee, 2017    callogorgia indica versluys, 1906    callogorgia joubini (versluys, 1906)    callogorgia kinoshitae kukenthal, 1913    callogorgia laevis (thomson & mackinnon, 1911)    callogorgia linguimaris bayer & cairns, 2003    callogorgia minuta (versluys, 1906)    callogorgia modesta (studer, 1879)    callogorgia pennacea (versluys, 1906)    callogorgia pseudoflabellum song, 1981    callogorgia ramosa (kukenthal & gorzawsky, 1908)    callogorgia robusta (versluys, 1906)    callogorgia sertosa (wright & studer, 1889)    callogorgia similis (versluys, 1906)    callogorgia versluysi (thomson, 1905)    callogorgia verticillata (pallas, 1766)  references  external links     primnoidae octocorallia genera
zurab pataradze (; born 12 february 1973) is a georgian diplomat and government official who was chairman of the government of the autonomous republic of adjara between 15 july 2016 and 21 july 2018.  education and diplomatic career  born in batumi, pataradze graduated from the tbilisi state university with a degree in economics in 1994 and the batumi state university with a degree in law in 2007. after working for a batumi-based bank office in the mid-1990s, pataradze joined the state service in 1996, first at an anti-organized crime unit of the ministry of internal affairs of adjara and then the ministry of foreign affairs of georgia in 2000. in 2004 pataradze became a second secretary at the georgian embassy to russia in charge of consular service; after georgia and russia cut direct diplomatic relations in 2008, pataradze served as a consular officer at the georgian interests section at the swiss embassy in moscow until 2009. pataradze was then georgia's consul general in the northern greek city of thessaloniki from 2009 to 2010, consul general to istanbul from 2011 to 2012, ambassador to turkey from 2012 to 2013, and ambassador to kazakhstan from 2013 to 2016.  government of adjara  in july 2016, zurab pataradze was nominated by president of georgia giorgi margvelashvili as the head of the government of adjara, an autonomous region on the black sea coast, after the incumbent archil khabadze announced his resignation just three months before the scheduled elections. pataridze narrowly won a confidence vote in the region's legislature on 15 july 2016. he resigned on 4 july 2018 and was replaced by tornike rizhvadze on 21 july.  references  heads of government of adjara 1973 births living people diplomats of georgia (country) people from batumi 21st-century politicians from georgia (country) heads of government of the georgian soviet socialist republic
louis wessels (; born 27 august 1998) is a german tennis player.  tennis career  on the junior tour, wessels has a career high itf junior ranking of 17 achieved in may 2016. wessels has reached the doubles semifinals at three of the four junior grand slams, including the 2015 australian open, 2015 us open and the 2016 wimbledon championships.  wessels made his atp main draw debut at the 2016 german open, where he upset steven diez in the first round. this victory made him the youngest player to win a main draw match at the 2016 atp world tour by that time.  atp challenger and itf futures finals  singles: 11 (5-6)  doubles: 8 (5-3)  references  external links      1998 births living people german male tennis players sportspeople from bielefeld people from detmold tennis people from north rhine-westphalia
state highway 26 in haryana route was gurgaon-pataudi-rewari-narnaul-singhana. it is a two-lane road without divider. the total length of state highway was 120 km.  however, the rewari-narnaul segment has been made a national highway nh 11 and is no longer a part of sh 26.  the 52 km long gurgaon-pataudi-rewari segment has also been declared a national highway and will be widened to four lanes with flyovers at several junctions.  see also list of state highways in haryana  references   haryana pwd site
as of february 2021, the international union for conservation of nature (iucn) lists 299 extinct species, 149 possibly extinct species, 14 extinct in the wild species, two possibly extinct in the wild species, eight extinct subspecies, one possibly extinct subspecies, and five extinct in the wild subspecies of mollusc.  gastropods there are 267 extinct species, 134 possibly extinct species, 14 extinct in the wild species, two possibly extinct in the wild species, five extinct subspecies, one possibly extinct subspecies, and five extinct in the wild subspecies of gastropod evaluated by the iucn.  patellogastropoda  extinct species collisella edmitchelli eelgrass limpet (lottia alveus)  stylommatophora  extinct species  possibly extinct species  extinct in the wild species  extinct subspecies  extinct in the wild subspecies  littorinimorpha  extinct species  possibly extinct species  sorbeoconcha  extinct species  possibly extinct species  extinct in the wild species  architaenioglossa  extinct species  possibly extinct species  cycloneritimorpha  possibly extinct species neritina tiassalensis  hygrophila species  extinct species  possibly extinct species thickshell pondsnail (stagnicola utahensis)  bivalvia  there are 32 extinct species, 15 possibly extinct species, and three extinct subspecies of bivalve evaluated by the iucn.  extinct species  possibly extinct species  extinct subspecies  see also   list of least concern molluscs  list of near threatened molluscs  list of vulnerable molluscs  list of endangered molluscs  list of critically endangered molluscs  list of data deficient molluscs  references   molluscs recently extinct molluscs recently extinct molluscs
k + j.j. (also released as "nuf said") is an album by american jazz trombonists j. j. johnson and kai winding featuring performances recorded in 1955 for the bethlehem label.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 4½ stars and in its review by stephen cook, he states that "the arrangements and playing are so engaging and of such high quality that categorization dilemmas disappear. a fine disc".  track listing  "out of this world" (harold arlen, johnny mercer) - 2:20  "thou swell" (richard rodgers, lorenz hart) - 2:55 	  "lover" (rogers, hart) - 5:34  "lope city" (j. j. johnson) - 3:32  "stolen bass" (johnson) - 2:56  "it's all right with me" (cole porter) - 5:06  "mad about the boy" (noel coward) - 3:32  "yes sir, that's my baby" (walter donaldson, gus kahn) - 4:06  "that's how i feel about you" (kai winding) - 3:59  "gong rock" (winding) - 3:25  "it's all right with me" [alternate take 15] (porter) - 5:31  "lover" [alternate take] (rogers, hart) - 5:39  "gong rock" [alternate take] (winding) - 3:25  "lope city" [alternate take 11] (johnson) - 3:42  "it's all right with me" [alternate take 11] (porter) - 6:24 	  "out of this world" [alternate take] (arlen, mercer) - 2:28  "that's how i feel about you" [alternate take] (winding) - 4:08  recorded in new york city on january 26, 1955 (tracks 2, 4, 6, 11, 14 & 15) and january 26 and 27, 1955 (tracks 1, 3, 5, 7-10, 12, 13, 16 & 17)  personnel j. j. johnson, kai winding - trombone dick katz - piano milt hinton (tracks 1, 3, 5, 7-10, 12, 13, 16 & 17), wendell marshall (tracks 2, 4, 6, 11, 14 & 15) - bass al harewood - drums  references  bethlehem
records albums j. j. johnson albums kai winding albums 1955 albums
riccardo astuto di lucchese (january 1, 1882 - august 25, 1952) was an italian diplomat and writer. he was born in naples. he was the italian colonial governor of eritrea for five years, from 1930 to 1935.  biography  born in a noble sicilian family but residing in naples where he was born in 1882, he graduated in law from the university of rome.  from 1913 to 1915 he was first secretary then head of the civil affairs office of the governorate of tripolitania. transferred to cyrenaica, he held several positions (secretary general in benghazi, regional commissioner in derna), including that of director (1919), until the disagreement with the governor giacomo de martino on the conciliation policy implemented with the senussi forced him to a new series of transfers: first in somalia, from 1922 in tripolitania and then from june of the following year again in cyrenaica.  after being long director general of the ministry of colonies (1924-1930), from mid-july 1930 until mid-january 1935 he was governor of eritrea. he promoted the construction of the railway from asmara to the border with sudan, but ww2 blocked this project.  placed in retirement, he continued to hold important positions, mainly of study and research. furthermore, even after the end of ww2, he was president of the italian-african institute, a member of the institute for the east and a member of the foreign policy commission of the christian democracy party.  he promoted in the late 1940s the return to italian administration of the former italian colonies in africa, but he was successful only with somalia.  he died in his villa in francavilla al mare, not far away from naples, in 1952.  writings  in his writings of the late 1920s he paid attention to africa's problems, advocating the possibility of incorporating it into the european socio-political structure ("eurafrica"), while those of the late 1930s deal with the problem of race, adhering, in line with the spirit of the fascist racial laws of the period, to the "canon" of safeguarding aryan purity in africa.  la legge organica per l'impero dell'africa orientale italiana, in rassegna italiana, xix (1936), pp. 641-651. l'impero italiano nel quadro generale dell'africa, in l'impero (a.o.i.). studi e documenti of t. sillani..., roma 1937, pp. 265-282.  l'
originalita dell'ordinamento dell'impero coloniale italiano, in civilta fascista, iv (1937), pp. 604-615.  l'impero fascista, in gerarchia, xvii (1938), pp. 163-169.  popolamento ed equilibrio economico in africa orientale italiana, in rassegna economica dell'africa italiana, xxviii (1940), pp. 421-431.  soluzione del problema dell'africa, in gli annali dell'africa italiana, iii (1940), pp. 29-45. il problema fondamentale della cooperazione europea in africa, ibid., pp. 63-77  he also edited the four volumes of the eritrean diary ("diario eritreo") of ferdinando martini in 1940.  after ww2 he wrote: linee principali di una amministrazione fiduciaria delle nostre colonie, in rassegna di studi sociali, i [1947], pp. 296-342.  l'eritrea alla commissione dei "quattro", in rivista del commercio, ii [1948], n. 1, pp. 35-44.  notes  bibliography v. clemente, astuto di lucchese, riccardo, in «dizionario biografico degli italiani», vol. 34, istituto dell'enciclopedia italiana, roma 1988.  1882 births 1952 deaths diplomats from naples 20th-century italian writers 20th-century italian male writers 19th-century neapolitan people italian governors of eritrea
donnie scott hart (born september 6, 1990) is an american professional baseball pitcher for the winnipeg goldeyes of the american association of professional baseball. he has played in major league baseball (mlb) for the baltimore orioles, milwaukee brewers, and new york mets.  career hart attended seven lakes high school in katy, texas. at seven lakes, he was a three-time all-district pitcher.  hart played college baseball at texas state university. as a sophomore, he allowed a .138 batting average to opposing hitters and, as a junior, he posted a team-leading 2.13 era. he was drafted by the baltimore orioles in the 27th round of the 2013 major league baseball draft.  baltimore orioles after signing with the orioles, hart made his professional debut that season with the aberdeen ironbirds, going 3-1 with a 2.25 era in 24 relief innings pitched. in 2014 he pitched for the delmarva shorebirds where he was 1-3 with a 3.68 era in 24 relief appearances, and in 2015, he played for delmarva, the frederick keys, and the bowie baysox, pitching to a combined 6-2 record and 1.49 era in 54.1 innings pitched out of the bullpen. he began 2016 with bowie.  hart was promoted to the majors for the first time on july 14, 2016. he made his major league debut on july 17, throwing  innings while earning his first career strikeout. he made two more scoreless appearances for the orioles the next two games before being optioned back to aa bowie on july 24. he was recalled again on august 12, where he pitched 1 perfect innings out of the bullpen. he also had one at bat in the game, striking out. on september 22, hart allowed the first run of his career, a solo home run to hanley ramirez in a game against the boston red sox. the home run ended hart's streak of 18 consecutive scoreless games to start his career and his 15 scoreless innings streak also came to an end. he ended his first year in the big leagues having pitched in 22 games while tossing 18 innings and only allowing one run (via solo home run). hart pitched to a 0.49 era and 0.98 whip while striking out 12 batters and issuing six walks. hart made the orioles wild card game roster and ended up pitching to one batter, inducing a fly out to end the seventh inning. the orioles would go on to lose in the 11th inning, 5-2.  hart made
baltimore's 2017 opening day roster. on april 7, hart earned his first career major league victory. the win came against the new york yankees after hart retired starlin castro in the seventh inning and teammate seth smith hit a go-ahead home run in the bottom half of the inning. hart was optioned to the norfolk tides and recalled to baltimore multiple times during the season. in 13 relief appearances for norfolk he was 1-0 with a 2.35 era, and in 51 appearances for baltimore, he was 2-0 with a 3.71 era.  hart began the 2018 season with norfolk. he spent most of the season in the minors, pitching in 20 games only for the orioles. he was designated for assignment when the orioles reclaimed hanser alberto on waivers on march 1, 2019.  milwaukee brewers on march 7, 2019, hart was claimed off waivers by the los angeles dodgers. on april 4, he was claimed off waivers by the milwaukee brewers. hart was designated for assignment on july 31, 2019.  new york mets on august 3, 2019, hart was claimed off waivers by the new york mets. he was designated to the minor leagues on august 8 after only one appearance with the mets. hart elected free agency following the 2019 season.  oakland athletics on february 4, 2020, hart signed a minor league deal with the oakland athletics. hart did not play in a game in 2020 due to the cancellation of the minor league season because of the covid-19 pandemic. he became a free agent on november 2, 2020.  gastonia honey hunters on may 21, 2021, hart signed with the gastonia honey hunters of the atlantic league of professional baseball. in 22 bullpen appearances, hart posted a 2-2 record with a 3.48 era and 26 strikeouts.  winnipeg goldeyes on august 2, 2021, hart was traded to the winnipeg goldeyes of the american association of professional baseball in exchange for lhp jose jose.  references  external links  1990 births living people people from bedford, texas baseball players from texas american expatriate baseball players in canada major league baseball pitchers baltimore orioles players milwaukee brewers players new york mets players texas state bobcats baseball players aberdeen ironbirds players delmarva shorebirds players frederick keys players bowie baysox players norfolk tides players san antonio missions players peoria javelinas players syracuse mets players gastonia honey hunters players winnipeg goldeyes players
misþyrming () are a black metal band from reykjavik, iceland. the band formed in june 2013 and are currently signed to the french record label norma evangelium diaboli. they released their debut studio album songvar elds og oreiðu on 7 february 2015 to widespread critical acclaim. the band have since toured europe and the united states, performed at eistnaflug, and were named an 'artist in residence' at the famous roadburn festival in 2016.  history the band started as founding member d.g.'s solo project. tomas isdal, with whom he ran the vanagandr record label, joined him. he eventually deferred his graduation date in favour of touring with the band, passing his final exams after being tutored by band-mate helgi.  their debut studio album songvar elds og oreiðu was released on 7 february 2015 to positive reviews from critics, being named one of the best metal albums of 2015 by stereogum.  later that year the band performed in brussels, belgium at the nidrosian black mass v festival. the band also performed in norway at beyond the gates iv, they were joined by arioch of funeral mist and marduk fame to perform the funeral mist song "the god supreme".  the band were one of three artists in residence at the famous roadburn festival in 2016. in a review of the band's show on april 14 for invisible oranges, described the band's performance as "incredible", writing that "these new songs were a swirl of near dissonance, levied by "blink and you'll miss it" melodies that grounded the listener just long enough to kick the floor out from under them again. it was more head spinning than head banging." later that year, metal hammer named them one of the 10 best icelandic black metal bands.  on january 10, 2017 the band released a split 10" ep with fellow icelandic band sinmara, each band contributing one song; misþyrming's song was titled "hof" while sinmara's was titled "ivory stone". the ep was released through terratur possessions.  on april 27, 2019 the band announced their long-awaited sophomore album would be titled algleymi and was released on may 24 through norma evangelium diaboli. according to d.g.; he wrote the music in 2015 after the release of the band's debut and started recording it in 2016 however due to production and mixing errors caused by cheap
equipment the album was delayed and entirely rerecorded from scratch. the band continued touring in spite of this and even played some of the new songs in concents throughout 2016, 2017 and 2018. in 2017 after extensive rehearsal of the material the band secured a professional studio to record a new version of the album which was done between autumn 2017 and 2018 and featured guest vocals by sturla viðar of svartidauði and wraath of behexen, as well as the second lyrical contribution from poet and musician kristofer pall for one of the songs. algleymi like its predecessor was very well received by fans and critics alike. the band also announced performances at ascension festival in their native iceland and la derniere messe in switzerland on june as well as headlining a european tour in support of algleymi with terratur possessions label mates darvaza and french band vortex of end.  the band continued touring and performing throughout 2019 and had various planned performances for 2020 but due to the covid-19 pandemic they were forced to reschedule their slots at festivals as well as reschedule their denmark and germany mini-tour with fellow iceland band naðra and abruptly ended their eastern europe tour, but not before the band live streamed their last show in tallinn, estonia on march 15, 2020, with the help of the venue's; "sveta baar" staff and their touring company damn loud.  discography  songvar elds og oreiðu (2015)  ivory stone / hof (2017, split with sinmara)  algleymi (2019)  band members  d. g. (dagur gislason) - guitar, bass, vocals (2013-present)  h. r. h. (helgi rafn hroðmarsson) - drums (2013-2022)  g. e. (gustaf evensen) - bass (2014-present)  t. i. (tomas isdal) - guitar (2014-present)  references  external links  facebook page  icelandic black metal musical groups musical groups established in 2013 musical quartets musical groups from reykjavik 2013 establishments in iceland
jagdgeschwader 334 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1937
gary allen wiggins, known as "detroit" gary wiggins (born 10 november 1952, inkster, mi, passed 22 november 2020 in bissingen an der teck, south germany) was an american musician.  biography while he was still an infant his family moved to the west side of detroit, on oregon street, where he was raised. his late mother, ruth russell wiggins (1920-1999), reared him in the church where he began to perform on the saxophone with brother lawhorn in 1962. he attended northwestern high school until 1970, and played in a jazz band while attending community college.  at age 14  he played in bobo jenkins blues band, detroit. wiggins made his first recorded release that good old funky feeling on 45rpm at the age of 17 with his band the impacs.  the impacs were a backing band for several of the detroit r&b vocal groups like the dramatics. after touring with the dramatics and performing in such places as the apollo in harlem, the t.p. warner theater in washington d.c. and tours through panama, and the eastern coast of north america, he headed west and camped in california for five years. during this time he performed with musicians such as eddie shaw, eddie "cleanhead" vinson, johnny heartsman, roy brown, big mama thornton, and many other musicians on the west coast music scene.  in 1982, he spent a year in the chicago blues scene where he played in the bands of the late lefty dizz, sunnyland slim, johnny littlejohn and sugar blue. and they released three vinyls.  since moving to europe in 1983 and in addition to producing several music concerts for jazz clubs and festivals, he has toured with charlie musselwhite, arnett cobb, screaming jay hawkins jimmy rogers, johnny copeland, big jay mcneely (saxomania tour, europe), katie webster,  scott hamilton, louisiana red and carey bell.  he joined the ray charles show in germany twice, and went to japan. in osnabrueck, germany, rannenberg and wiggins founded the pink piano jam sessions  (where arnett cobb's last performance was recorded) and, after moving to berlin, he continued inviting international stars to the berlin blues cafe.  wiggins played in the a-trane international jazz club berlin - that announced him as "one of the most important american saxophonists living in europe" - since more than 20 years, as well as europe's oldest jazzclub in paris le caveau
de las huchette.  the international blues duo produced and released three albums, and wiggins has recorded with, among others, bobby mcferrin, robert covington, and roy gaines.  wiggins won the berlin jazz & blues award in 2002 and the german preis der deutschen schallplattenkritik 1994 for acoustic soul, as well as the gong show in 1977 with rick murphy and david winans as the show bizz kids. in his last years he started acrylic painting and several art projects.  discography  introducing the international blues duo to the world (1984)  the international blues duo meets blues wire - truly international (1987 / 2014)  bobby mcferrin feat. detroit gary wiggins: bobby's thing & lady fair  (1988)  the international blues duo featuring katie webster (1989)  time for saxin' (1990)  detroit gary wiggins & c.c. the boogieman: acoustic soul (1992)  i got up (1996)  fabrice eulry & detroit gary wiggins: paris jook (1996)  ballads in a diplomatic lounge (2004)  zeitlos (2005)  saxin' the blues (2011)  as a side-person  lefty dizz & shock treatment: live in chicago (1982/2008)  klaus lage: schweissperlen (1985)    johnny heartsman: sacramento (1987)  roy gaines: going home to see mama (1987)  angela brown: live (1993)  the gospel messengers: lean on me (1996)    eb davis: fool for the ladies (1996) mit big jay mc neely,    siggy davis: live (2013)  jimmie smith: timemension (1983)  the cat - several albums  errol dixon: mr. boogie woogie  robert covington: the golden voice of robert covington (1987)    the dramatics: what you see is what you get (1972)  jimmy scott: a pair and a spair (1973)    rickmond, cindy: new ideas (1990)  references  external links   detroit gary wiggins - artist's website  website the international blues duo  gary wiggins at the encyclopedia of jazz musicians at jazz.com      detroit gary wiggins gary wiggins at the archives of deutsche nationalbibliothek, frankfurt a. main, germany  detroit gary wiggins at the library of congress, washington  detroit gary wiggins at the "blues archive of the university of mississippi digital collections", oxford, usa  detroit gary wiggins at the  bibliotheque nationale
de france, paris, france  detroit gary wiggins nukat, union catalog of polish research libraries, warsaw, poland  detroit gary wiggins at slub, sachsische landesbibliothek - staats- und universitatsbibliothek dresden, germany  the dgw interview from 2002.    blues blues photograph collection, the blues archive university of mississippi digital collections  press articles from us press, france, netherlands, denmark, germany   chicago reader: the  golden voice of richard covington - with "detroit gary wiggins".  ingrid montgomery-swinton, go red go, blow arnett blow: the life of arnett cobb. ingrid montgomery-swinton, lizette cobb, p. 3  gary wiggins at berlin dialogues - ces center for european studies harvard university, berlin  arnett cobbs last recorded concert at the pink piano with gary wiggins and a spoken word by arnett cobb  video of big jay mcneely & "detroit" gary wiggins   the pink piano osnabrueck 1986.   uwe manzke: blues in deutschland, bluessource.com  verlagsgruppe rhein main gmbh & co. kg: tommy schneller beim swr-summertime blues - allgemeine zeitung.   wolfgang peter: kurhaus baden-baden - the night of the saxophones.   gary at caveau de la huchette, paris   detroit gary wiggins discography at all about jazz  dany doriz, christian mars: 60 ans de jazz au caveau de la huchette. hrsg.: cabu. l'archipel, paris 2008, , s. 86-87.  interview "detroit" gary wiggins by frau julie bennett hume's podcast, berlin, 2011  1952 births living people african-american jazz musicians american blues singers american funk saxophonists american male saxophonists american jazz soprano saxophonists american rhythm and blues musicians american soul musicians chicago blues musicians detroit blues musicians jazz-blues saxophonists members of the church of god in christ musicians from chicago singers from detroit 21st-century saxophonists jazz musicians from illinois jazz musicians from michigan 21st-century american male musicians american male jazz musicians
jonatan nahuel valle (born january 26, 1993 in santa fe, argentina), is a professional argentine footballer who currently plays for cimarrones de sonora.  references  1993 births living people argentine footballers argentine expatriate footballers cimarrones de sonora players ascenso mx players association football defenders argentine expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in mexico people from santa fe, argentina
black eyed sons is a seventh studio album by english rock band the quireboys, released in 2014.  the album was released with an unplugged live album records in sweden and a dvd of a performance in london recorded during the beautiful curse tour.  track listing  black eyed sons all songs written by guy griffin and spike, except where noted. troublemaker (black eyed son) 	 what do want from me? 	 julieanne 	 double dealin' 	 stubborn kinda heart 	 lullaby of london town 	 the messenger 	 you never can tell 	 mother's ruin 	 monte cassino (lady lane) (written by guy griffin, spike, and paul guerin)  unplugged in sweden don't bite the hand that feeds you 	 there she goes again 	 devil of a man 	 mona lisa smiled 	 roses & rings 	 misled 	 have a drink with me 	 sweet mary ann 	 i don't love you anymore 	 7 o'clock  beautifully cursed in london black mariah 	 too much of a good thing 	 misled 	 there she goes again 	 homewreckers & heartbreakers 	 this is rock n roll 	 mona lisa smiled 	 diamonds & dirty stones 	 27 years 	 i don't love you anymore 	 tramps & thieves 	 hey you 	 beautiful curse 	 chain smokin' 	 i love this dirty town 	 7 o'clock 	 for cryin' out loud 	 mother mary 	 sex party  personnel  jonathan "spike" gray - lead vocals  guy griffin - lead guitar, rhythm guitar, backing vocals  paul guerin - lead guitar, rhythm guitar, backing vocals  keith weir - keyboards, backing vocals  dave mccluskey - drums  nick malling - bass guitar  references  2014 albums the quireboys albums
up in the sky is the second album of the swiss folk rock band 77 bombay street. it was released in 2011 on gadget records as their first label release. the band had released its debut album dead bird independently self-financed and released in 2009.  up in the sky with all songs written by the four brothers and produced by thomas fessler reached number 3 on the schweizer hitparade, the official swiss albums chart. it resulted in four singles "47 millionaires", "long way", the title track "up in the sky" (that made it to number 7 of the swiss singles chart" and "i love lady gaga".  lead vocals on most tracks were performed by matt buchli. but lead vocals on the track "miss you girl" was by joe buchli and simri-ramon buchli was the main performer on "i love lady gaga". the album spent 115 weeks in the swiss charts and went platinum.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2011 albums 77 bombay street albums
play party can mean:   play party (u.s. traditional), a type of traditional u.s. social event where people get together to sing and dance  play party (bdsm), a bdsm social event in which bdsm activities take place  see also   party and play  party game
jocelyn bernadette smith (born 22 august 1960) is an american jazz vocalist.  biography  born in queens, new york city, smith received classical piano training from the age of 5. in 1980 she sang in lenny white's funk / soul band twennynine and went with her on a european tour. with the group change she played in the opening act of the electric light orchestra. in 1984 she moved to berlin, where she made her first album river published 1991. in 1985 she made a guest appearance in the movie  in which she sang in the berlin club quasimodo. in 1987 she sang texts by william blake for  album tyger by tangerine dream. in 1986/87 she was on a world tour with falco as a backing singer. she toured from 1984 to 1996 with her band the married men through central europe (incl. three gdr tours).1996 she also sang a duet with udo jurgens in his song "gib niemals auf" on his album gestern-heute-morgen.  in 1999, the composer heiner goebbels invited her to participate as a soloist in his work surrogate cities. she was at the premiere and subsequent performances in 2001 in dessau, 2002 edinburgh and 2003 in brisbane, australia and in lucerne and berlin - just like, for example, the berlin philharmonic. (later performances were with the royal philharmonic orchestra in scandinavia and italy.)  as soprano she appeared in mikis theodorakis opera the metamorphoses of dionysus, sang duets with maria farantouri and released the cd margarita with his songs. at the berlin commemoration of 11 september 2001 (which was broadcast around the world including cnn) she interpreted the hymn "amazing grace".  in 2006 she performed in a television production with the 12 cellists of the berlin philharmonic. in 2008, she performed with zulfu livanelis at the turkish film festival in nuremberg and at the frankfurt book fair.  she has shown social activism in her work with choirs. she offered free singing lessons in a kreuzberg community and neighborhood center against poverty and social exclusion "gitschiner 15". since april 2008, with her music project "higher love" - children sing for children, she supports the action alliance landmine.de and advocates for a worldwide ban on cluster munitions and landmines. in july 2008 she founded the non-profit association yes we can e.v. which campaigns for the sustainable protection and assistance of victims of war children. yes we can e.v. is ambassador of beberlin campaign
of 2008.   awards  she sang the title song for the german version of the film the lion king. for her cd blue lights and nylons she received die goldene schallplatte in the category german jazz in 2003.   discography   river, 1991  born of music, 1992  live in berlin, 1997  blue lights & nylon, 1998  margarita, 2000  my christmas experience, 2001  back to soul, 2002  the faces of jocelyn b. smith - her very best, 2003  secret place, 2004  phenomenal woman, 2004 (mit till bronner und tony lakatos)  berlin for new orleans, 2005  expressionzz, live, 2006  pure & natural, direct-to-disc, 2013  here i am 2013 / blondell   boost your vocals 2014 / ep   collaborations   lenny white: 29, 1980  tangerine dream: tyger, 1987  heiner goebbels: surrogate cities, 1999 (mit david moss)  eloy: the tides return forever,1994   compilations   jo-jo'', 2003 (zounds, alle titel digital remastert, 24 karat gold-cd)  references  external links   website  musikprojekt higher love  yes we can e.v.  portrait bei laut.de    1960 births american women jazz singers american jazz singers musicians from berlin 20th-century african-american women singers american soul singers living people american expatriates in germany recipients of the cross of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany recipients of the order of merit of berlin 21st-century african-american people 21st-century african-american women
yasmeen godder (), born in 1973, is an israeli choreographer and dancer.  biography yasmeen was born and raised until the age of 14 in jerusalem. as a child, she danced at professor hasia levi-agron's class, and ballet at yaakov lipshitz's in jerusalem. her first performance was an end-of-year dance at ymca jerusalem, when she was 6 years old. in 1984, at the age of 11, yasmeen and her family moved to new york city. she graduated from the high school of the performing arts there, and received a scholarship at the martha graham school in new york city, where she would dance every saturday when she was 14 to 17. her first creation was heavily inspired off of admon zabes' letters. upon finishing her studies, she returned to israel, though returned to the united states for her academic studies, and received her ba in concert dance from the tisch school of the arts at new york university in 1997, where she presented her works for the first time, and at the same time studied in other institutions outside tisch as well, among them movement center, where many concert dance teachers and artists with diverse opinions gather and discuss controversial concert dance issues.  yasmeen finished her academic studies in 1997, and since then has been presenting her works in various places. the first place where she danced and presented her works was at gowanus arts exchange. following, she was invited to present her works at duncan center in prague, czech republic. during her final year at tisch, she worked on her piece a car and a bandage. then, she created two new pieces, the solo pieces ina's wall and ring ding round zero.  since 1999, she has been living in tel aviv. her works have regularly been presented at the suzanne dellal center in tel aviv, and extensively throughout the world, for example at lincoln center festival in new york, hebbel am ufer in berlin, the place theatre in london, montpellier dance festival in france, and many more. to date, yasmeen has created a total of 8 long works (over 1 hour long) and 6 short ones (up to 45 minutes long), including "green fields" for the batsheva ensemble and "under2", a matanicola production in berlin. the company had recently won the ministry of culture's prize for small ensemble for the performance of singular sensation. in 2014, godder created her first site-specific choreography for the petach tikva museum
of art, israel as part of the exhibition 'set in motion' (co-curated by drorit gur arie, and avi feldman). following the exhibition, the first artist book dedicated to the work of godder was published under the title: 'extremum - reflections on the works of yasmeen godder'.  yasmeen is the artistic director of her dance company, where she teaches concert dance since her return to israel. she has taught concert dance in several art schools in israel, among them the jerusalem academy of music and dance and bikurei haitim in tel aviv. in 2007, she established the yasmeen godder studio at the mendel culture center in jaffa, and to this day all of her activity is based there, as well as it being where the company's offices are situated, where the company mainly rehearses, and where she mainly teaches nowadays.  awards  2009 - rozenblum prize for the performing arts, on behalf of tel aviv municipality. 2006 - mifal hapayis landau prize for the performing arts 2004 - rozenblum prize for the performing arts, on behalf of tel aviv municipality. 2003 - ministry of culture young choreographers' prize 2002 - israel cultural excellence foundation nomination 2001 - ministry of culture young choreographers' prize 2000 - choreography grant of the new york foundation for the arts 1999 - choreography contest for hasia levi-agron (on behalf of the jerusalem academy of music and dance) in jerusalem prize for yasmeen's works ilana's wall and say goodbye nicely  further reading  avi feldman (editor). extremum - reflections on the works of yasmeen godder. asia publishers and petach tikva museum of art 2014.  external links yasmeen godder's website see her change:, on nrg by lior ben nissim (hebrew)  set in motion, dance-art-community (dates: 22/05/2014 - 06/09/2014); http://www.petachtikvamuseum.com/en/exhibitions.aspx?aid=2888&eid=2887  extremum - reflections on the works of yasmeen godder; https://market.marmelada.co.il/products/257999  dance companies in israel dance in israel israeli culture living people year of birth missing (living people)
"proposals for concerted operation among the powers at war with the pyratical states of barbary" was the title of an identic note written by thomas jefferson in 1786, when he was the american ambassador to france. it proposed an intergovernmental military alliance for purposes of instituting a naval blockade of the ottoman regency of algiers, which allowed the barbary pirates to attack ships. the alliance was opposed by congress and was never implemented.  background pirates operating from north africa, with the consent of the dey of algiers and the rulers of other barbary states, had been attacking shipping in the mediterranean since the 1600s. beginning in the 1700s, european powers negotiated treaties with the dey to control the pirates in exchange for lavish tributes. the united states first negotiated treaties with algiers and the other barbary states in 1784.  proposal  under jefferson's proposal, each state party that entered the alliance would contribute at least one frigate to a combined naval flotilla situated in the mediterranean sea, as well as tenders and other support vessels. governance of the force would be vested in a council of ministers, consisting of delegates from each state party, to be seated in versailles and in which delegates would hold votes in proportion to the contributions to the force of the states they represented. once constituted, the alliance would go to war against algiers and, upon its defeat, refocus its efforts on other barbary states. article ix of the circular suggested binding signatories to continue in the alliance even if war broke out among two or more of them.  response according to jefferson's autobiography, portugal, naples, venice, the two sicilies, france, malta, sweden, and denmark all responded favorably to the proposal, while spain and britain were "doubtful" on the question. congress, however, expressed opposition to the idea, possibly as a result of lobbying by john adams and john jay, and the matter ultimately died.  depredations against american and european shipping increased in severity in the following years, as did the size of the tributes the rulers of the barbary states demanded. in june 1800, sweden and denmark approached the united states with the idea of a tri-national naval flotilla to escort swedish, danish, and american ships during transits of the mediterranean. president of the united states john adams rejected the proposal, preferring instead to continue paying tributes. the following year, upon jefferson's ascension to the presidency, american policy changed and the united states went to war against algiers, tripoli, and tunis in the first barbary war.  see also
barbary wars  collective security  history of the united states (1776-89)  hostis humani generis  nato  references  external links  original text &   1786 in international relations barbary wars diplomatic correspondence history of the foreign relations of the united states works by thomas jefferson united states-european relations
team mtek (commonly known as bmw team mtek) is a racing team located in amsterdam, netherlands.  history team mtek was founded in 2012 by ernest knoors. after a stint with the bmw sauber squad knoors, joined scuderia ferrari. with ferrari the dutchman was responsible for the customer engines supplied to scuderia toro rosso, sauber and other teams. he returned to bmw in 2012 forming team mtek, a bmw supported dtm entry. after bmw's return to dtm in 2012, team mtek joined in the 2013 season along with bmw factory supported entry's by team rmg, team rbm and team schnitzer.  2013 season  for its debut season the team started with two rookies to the series, timo glock and marco wittmann. glock left formula 1 in 2012 to join the dtm series in 2013. wittmann was a former formula 3 euro series race winner who converted to gt racing in 2012. in 2012 wittmann ran the vln championship in a bmw supported entry.  the teams first (double) podium came at the red bull ring scoring a second (wittmann) and third (glock) finish. glock also won the season finale at the hockenheimring. team mtek finished seventh in the team championship, third out of four bmw teams.  2014 season  for 2014 the team retained glock but replaced wittmann by antonio felix da costa. bmw replaced the bmw m3 dtm with the bmw m4 dtm. the team struggled with the new car. glock's best result was a third place at the red bull ring. felix da costa struggled scoring points in his rookie season, he did so on two occasions. the team finished eleventh in the team standings.  2015 season  bruno spengler joined team mtek in 2015 coming over from mercedes' hwa team. the 2012 season champion scored six podium finishes ending fifth in the drivers' championship. glock scored a sole win at oschersleben. the team finished fourth in the team standings.  gallery  references  external links   team mtek on dtm.com  team mtek on bmw-motorsport.com  german auto racing teams bmw in motorsport deutsche tourenwagen masters teams 2012 establishments in germany companies based in munich
country club meadows is an unincorporated community in center township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of evansville.  geography  country club meadows is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
sphingomonas haloaromaticamans  is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from water and soil in the netherlands. sphingomonas haloaromaticamans has the ability to degrade 1,4-dichlorobenzene.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas haloaromaticamans at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  haloaromaticamans bacteria described in 2007
isewal is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch s. harinder singh of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india) since 2020 till now.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  history this village is famous as the birthplace of great flying officer nirmal jit singh sekhon, the recipient of param veer chakra, india's highest military honour and medal.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
bartłomiej lemanski (born 19 march 1996) is a polish volleyball player. at the professional club level, he plays for the polish team, cerrad enea czarni radom.  career  clubs in 2014-2016 he was sent on loan to azs politechnika warszawska. he was in top 10 best blockers of the 2014-15 plusliga season. in 2016 he joined asseco resovia.  national team in 2013 alongside  his national team he achieved a bronze medal of the 2013 u19 world championship. ferdinando de giorgi called lemanski up to the polish national team for the 2017 fivb volleyball world league.  sporting achievements  youth national team  2013  cev u19 european championship  2013  european youth olympic festival  universiade  2019  summer universiade  references  external links    player profile at plusliga.pl  player profile at volleybox.net  1996 births living people volleyball players from warsaw polish men's volleyball players universiade medalists in volleyball universiade silver medalists for poland medalists at the 2019 summer universiade azs warszawa players resovia (volleyball) players stal nysa players czarni radom players middle blockers
cortinarius cacaocolor is an inedible species of fungus in the genus cortinarius. it is native to north america.  references  external links  cacaocolor fungi of north america fungi described in 1944 inedible fungi
artyom vladislavovich tretyakov (; born 2 may 1994) is a russian football player. he plays for fc tyumen.  club career he made his debut in the russian football national league for fc tyumen on 11 july 2016 in a game against fc dynamo moscow.  references  external links    profile by russian football national league  1994 births sportspeople from omsk living people russian footballers association football forwards fc tyumen players fc irtysh omsk players russian football national league players russian football national league 2 players
jonah (1911) is a novel by australian writer louis stone.  story outline  jonah, a hunchback larrikin, lives in a sydney slum where he is the leader of the local "push", a street gang. but his life changes when he becomes father to a son, and he strives to break away from his previous life.  critical reception  a reviewer in the sydney morning herald understood the worth of the novel from its first publication: "in jonah, mr. louis stone has given us an excellent novel. he has taken a phase of australian life which has been rather neglected by local writers, and laid his setting in the slums of sydney of a few years ago. mr. stone knows his subject, and writes with humour and observation, and a great deal of kindliness. his theme is often squalid, and the surroundings often repellent, but the author, without idealising, does not lay undue insistence on the unpleasant."  writing about the book in the queensland times as it was about to be reprinted in 1933, aidan de brune stated: "competent critics declare that this book is a worthy successor to robbery under arms and for the term of his natural life, amongst australian novels that can properly be called "classic.""  adaptations jonah was adapted for a television series by the australian broadcasting commission in 1982. it also provided the basis for the musical jonah jones by john romeril and alan john, first produced by the sydney theatre company in 1985.  see also   full text of the novel from university of sydney  1911 in australian literature  notes  in his book, the making of the sentimental bloke, alec h. chisholm notes that louis stone was certain that c.j. dennis had stolen his larrikin ideas for his popular verse novel the songs of a sentimental bloke, though he, chisholm, was not so sure.  references  1911 australian novels novels set in sydney 1911 debut novels australian novels adapted into television shows
tsfl may refer to:   tasmanian state football league, australian football league  texas sixman football league, american football league
rikenette steenkamp (born 16 october 1992) is a south african track and field athlete who competes in the 100 metres hurdles. her personal best is 12.81 seconds, set in 2018. she ran a time of 13.16 while winning the gold medal at the 2014 african championships in athletics. she represented africa at the 2014 iaaf continental cup, taking fifth, and competed for south africa at the 2009 world youth championships in athletics.  she attended hoerskool menlopark before going on to study sports science at the university of pretoria. steenkamp missed the 2015 season as a result of a hamstring injury.  she is a three-time national champion of the south african athletics championships.  international competitions  1representing africa  references  external links  1992 births living people south african female hurdlers white south african people
neil krisralam (born 28 march 1992) is a thai television presenter and media personality.  early life  krisralam was born in thailand, and raised in sydney, australia. krisralam graduated with a bachelor's degree in media (communications and journalism), minoring in film studies and receiving top honours, from the university of new south wales as well as a master's degree in luxury brand management from the international university of monaco, at the age of only 23. he also spent the senior year of his undergraduate studies completing his degree at the university of michigan, united states.  career   krisralam began his career in public relations, working for the formula one event, amber lounge.  references  1992 births australian television presenters living people university of michigan alumni
sanapur is a village in gangavathi taluk, koppal district in karnataka, india. it has a population of 1628 according to 2011 census. a lake in the village fed by tungabhadra dam canal is a tourist attraction. it is 3km away from virupapur gaddi and 4km away from hampi.  references   villages in koppal district
kenneth røpke (born 17 august 1965) is a danish former cyclist. he competed in the 1 km time trial event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people danish male cyclists olympic cyclists of denmark cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from gentofte municipality
the tanzer 28 is a canadian sailboat, that was designed by johann tanzer and first built in 1972. the design is out of production.  production production of the boat was commenced in 1972 by tanzer industries of dorion, quebec. the company entered bankruptcy in may 1986 and production had ended by then.  design  the tanzer 28 is a small recreational keelboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. it has a masthead sloop rig, a transom-hung rudder and a fixed fin keel. it displaces  and carries  of ballast.  the boat was built with a standard keel that gives a draft of .  the boat has a phrf racing average handicap of 204, with a low of 216 and a high of 192. it has a hull speed of .  operational history in a review michael mcgoldrick wrote, "the tanzer 28 is a well built boat with what could be the largest interior of any production 28 foot sailboat anywhere. the floor plan of this boat doesn't do justice to the amount of space found in its main cabin. unfortunately, the tanzer 28 has something of an odd appearance. the kindest thing that can be said about it is that it looks like an over inflated tanzer 22."  see also list of sailing boat types similar sailboats alerion express 28 aloha 28 beneteau first 285 beneteau oceanis 281 bristol channel cutter cal 28 catalina 28 crown 28 cumulus 28 grampian 28 hunter 28 hunter 28.5 hunter 280 o'day 28 pearson 28 sabre 28 sea sprite 27 sirius 28 tanzer 8.5 tes 28 magnam viking 28  references  external links  keelboats 1980s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by johann tanzer sailboat types built by tanzer industries
the san jacinto tunnel is considered the key link in colorado river aqueduct system. the 13 mi (21 km) long, 16 ft (4.9 m) diameter tunnel runs beneath the san jacinto mountains between cabazon, california and gilman hot springs in riverside county, california.  history the $23 million project started on april 8, 1933. tunnel crews dug from four directions: the two main portals and two shafts.  on july 1, 1934, one of the tunnel crews narrowly escaped the tunnel as ground water burst in and began filling the tunnel and shafts at a rate of nearly 8,000 us gallons per minute (0.50 m3/s). metropolitan water district of southern california (mwd) chief engineer frank e. weymouth had noted in his 1930 report on the tunnel routes that the parker route "involves less risk than any of the other proposed lines." the continued intrusion of water was more than the original contractors could handle, and in february 1935 the mwd terminated the contract and took over the job. more pumps were brought in and a portion of the tunnel was re-routed. three crews of 34 men, working eight-hour shifts worked on the tunnel.  the mwd continued to encounter tunnel seepage. the amount varied but never dropped below 540 us gallons per minute (0.034 m3/s), and sometimes topped 30,000 us gallons per minute (1.9 m3/s). by 1935 the seepage had become a concern around the san jacinto valley as springs, creeks and streams began to run dry. on october 21, 1935 the riverside county board of supervisors passed a resolution calling on the mwd to prevent water from entering the tunnel or from flowing away from the place it was encountered. the mwd responded by stating that water entering the tunnel during digging is nearly unavoidable, and that lining of the tunnels near the end of construction should prevent further inflow. lawsuits were filed against mwd by nearby landowners and most of these were settled out of court, with mwd paying out over $350,000 between 1936 and 1944.  poorman contract the largest and most controversial settlement was known as the poorman contract. the poorman family owned a 1,700 acres (6.9 km2) dairy ranch on the south side of the san jacinto river, across from gilman hot springs, along with 3,600 acres (15 km2) of grass and grazing in the upper perris valley. the ranches were
managed by ed poorman, known locally as the founding president of the ramona pageant association. ed poorman's brother, samuel poorman, was an attorney for the los angeles department of water and power. in 1937, after noticing a drop in groundwater, samuel poorman negotiated a settlement with the mwd for the loss of groundwater, but instead of taking cash, the poormans took their share in water.  the settlement was negotiated in secret and included two additional landowners. the pico family of california, owners of a 3,200 acre (13 km2) ranch southwest of the poorman's ranch, also agreed to take water in return for dropping their claim against the mwd. dairy farmer clayton record sr. agreed to take five percent of the seepage water in exchange for right of way across his property. the contract was signed on february 11, 1937, turning over the entire seepage flow to the three ranchers, with 57 percent going to the poormans. the pipeline that would carry water from the west portal crossed the poorman ranch, and a safety blowout (where excess pressure could be released in an emergency) was built on the property where their share was delivered.  other local ranchers and water companies were caught off guard by the settlement. the nuevo water company had been negotiating with the mwd since 1936 to have the seepage water pumped higher up the san jacinto river where it could be allowed to sink back into the natural water table. nuevo thought it was close to a settlement when suddenly the mwd signed the poorman contract and cut off all negotiations.  seepage continues in november 1938, the two segments of the tunnel met under the mountain, no more than a few inches off. with the excavation completed, the tunnel was then grouted with concrete. this operation filled in cracks and crevices and reduced the tunnel to its finished size of 16 feet (4.9 m) tall and 16 feet (4.9 m) wide. about 24,100 tons of cement were used in the attempts to seal off the seepage, averaging about 20 sacks per foot of tunnel. as leaks were sealed, pressure would build and create a new leak elsewhere. eventually the seepage was reduced to 540 us gallons per minute (0.034 m3/s), and on october 14, 1939, the san jacinto tunnel was completed, well ahead of schedule.  as pressure increased over time, the tunnel grouting failed and seepage more than quadrupled. in february 1942,
the riverside county board of supervisors renewed its protest against exporting local water. the mwd responded by stating that local claims had been settled and that a substantial amount of the water was being used for local agriculture, indirectly citing the poorman contract.  on june 21, 1944, the water and natural resources committee of the hemet valley chamber of commerce called a meeting of concerned ranchers from hemet, san jacinto, perris, lakeview and nuevo. they organized themselves as the san jacinto river protective committee, with irwin farrar elected as chairman. the committee focused on development of the local area, and claimed that water that was being carried out of the area by the mwd could irrigate up to 4,000 acres (16 km2) each year. the committee made two demands of the mwd: stop seepage in the san jacinto tunnel, and return the estimated 150,000 acre feet (190,000,000 m3) of water than had been carried away since 1934. over $9000 was raised in donations to aid the battle with the mwd. on december 15, 1944, the committee met with the mwd water problems committee and requested that water be pumped from the west portal further up the san jacinto river and be released above the soboba indian reservation where the water could spread, and return to the local water table. the mwd agreed to study the matter, however, by march 1945, the mwd had yet to respond.  the san jacinto river protective committee arranged filings of four lawsuits against the mwd by various water users along the san jacinto river. the four plaintiffs were the nuevo water company, the hemet packing company (owners of a 1,000 acres (4.0 km2) ranch in lakeview), the centinela ranch near san jacinto, and leland houk, who had a ranch southwest of hemet. the mwd responded, maintaining that it had acted in good faith and claimed that 16,400 acre feet (20,200,000 m3) of water has been returned at the cosa loma outlet and lakeview siphon, as agreed in the poorman contract.  after further negotiations and meetings, the mwd agreed to attempt to reseal the tunnel. in december 1946, the tunnel was shut down and work was begun to remediate the leakage. the tunnel was lined with concrete varying from 19 inches to 6 feet (1.8 m) in thickness. the seepage was temporarily reduced, but pressure again built up and the seep
age then increased. by the end of 1947, the mwd and the san jacinto river conservation district (formerly the san jacinto river protective committee) agreed that it was impossible to completely stop the seepage. by the fall of 1952, all the poorman rights were acquired by the newly formed eastern municipal water district of southern california. benefit of the seepage water was conveyed to emwd customers in the form of district-wide credits against water rates.  references  tunnels in california water tunnels in the united states buildings and structures in riverside county, california san jacinto mountains water supply infrastructure in california
bethesda university is a private christian university in anaheim, california. it was founded in 1976 by dr. david yonggi cho. the university is accredited by the association for biblical higher education and the transnational association of christian colleges and schools and it is approved by the bureau for private postsecondary education of the state of california.  athletics bethesda university is a member of the national christian college athletic association (nccaa). their men's basketball team is a member of the pacific christian athletic conference (pcac). they currently have five intercollegiate sports teams made up of men and women's soccer, men and women's basketball, and baseball. the flames, as they are known, have enjoyed some success in athletics in the past few years. both women's basketball and baseball have reached the nccaa's national tournament championship game in 2015 and 2016. men's soccer has also made national tournament appearances in 2015 and 2016.  in the 2016-17 season, the men's basketball program achieved what is perhaps the most relevant feat for this young athletic program by defeating ncaa d1 opponent, cal state northridge of the big west conference. bethesda is only the third nccaa school (single membership) to have won against a d1 program in the history of the league. they are the only non-ncaa/naia men's basketball team in the western united states and the pcac to have accomplished such a feat.  the men's basketball team repeated this historic feat by defeating cal state northridge once again on december 22, 2021, during the 2021-22 season.  bethesda men's basketball coach leo balayon is the first and only filipino (born and raised in the philippine islands) to serve as a men's college basketball head coach in the united states. he is also the only men's college basketball coach in history to lead a non-ncaa/naia school to a win against an ncaa d1 program twice  references  universities and colleges in orange county, california sports teams in anaheim, california transnational association of christian colleges and schools seminaries and theological colleges in california
the 1980 spillers greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 28 june 1980 at white city stadium.   the winner was indian joe and the winning owner alfie mclean (a bookmaker) received £35,000. the competition was sponsored by the spillers.  final result  at white city (over 500 metres):  distances  ¾, 1, ¾, 1½, head (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report the 50th anniversary of the competition was marked by the first prize being increased to £35,000 and the event reverted to the previous format where all of the rounds would take place at white city stadium. there were many entries from ireland including the ger mckenna trained irish laurels champion and ante-post favourite knockrour slave. other leading irish entries were the john hayes trained irish greyhound derby finalist indian joe and matt o'donnell's fred flintstone. the 1979 finalist desert pilot was the leading british entry.  indian joe set a very fast time in round one after recording 29.19 (just three spots slower than the track record) justifying the record £25,000 that his new owner belfast bookmaker alfie mclean had paid for him. in a later heat knockrour slave recorded 29.23 but dangerous lad and desert pilot were eliminated. after the second round had been completed knockrour slave and the english bred dodford bill remained unbeaten but indian joe only qualified third from his heat.  uneventful quarter-finals were followed by the first semi-final which saw old bolshie being withdrawn leaving hurry on bran to win from corduroy and indian joe who had struggled once again but claimed the all-important third place. young breeze was a shock winner of the second semi winning from fred flinstone and iskagh ruler; knockrour slave and dodford bill both went out after encountering trouble.  in the final indian joe broke well sitting just behind corduroy but fred flinstone soon took the lead with indian joe pursuing. coming out of the second bend indian joe took a decisive lead and held off the fast finishing hurry on bran to take the trophy back to ireland.  see also 1980 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
live phish 10.31.90 is an archival live album release by the american rock band phish. the show was originally webcast on october 10, 1999. it was also released in mp3 format in 1999 through emusic, making it the first archival recording released officially online. the show was later made available when phish launched its livephish website and is currently available exclusively through that site. this archival release is also believed to have been the 1st ever commercially download release of a full, live concert by any band.  this was the 1st phish halloween show to take place outside vermont, and although this is a halloween show, it does not feature phish donning a "musical costume", as they later would do 1994, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2009, 2010, 2013, 2014, 2016, and 2018. the show was part of 5 day tour through colorado, a state where the band would tour often in the early years  it was an all-ages show on the campus of colorado college. the tickets for the show indicated "costume required". keyboardist, page mcconnell's costume consisted of pumpkin-shaped glasses and an orange shirt. before the second set began, there was a halloween costume contest on stage during which finalists had to come onstage to jump on the mini-trampolines. the song, you enjoy myself, contained a musical quote of munsters theme from mike gordon, and the end contained a vocal jam was based on night in tunisia. tweezer contained heartbreaker teases from the band.  track listing  set one   buried alive (anastasio) - 2:39  possum (holdsworth) - 9:37  the squirming coil (anastasio/marshall) - 5:59  the lizards (anastasio) - 10:12  stash (anastasio/marshall) - 8:23  bouncing around the room (anastasio/marshall) - 3:54  you enjoy myself (anastasio) - 16:27  the asse festival (anastasio) - 1:49  my sweet one (fishman) - 2:17  cavern (anastasio/marshall/herman) - 4:31  run like an antelope (anastasio/pollak) - 9:58  set two   the landlady (anastasio) - 3:45  reba (anastasio) - 10:16  runaway jim (anastasio/abrahams) - 6:26  foam (anastasio) - 8:55  tweezer (anastasio/fishman/gordon
/mcconnell) - 10:43  fee (anastasio) - 5:13  the oh kee pa ceremony (anastasio) - 1:43  suzy greenberg (pollak) - 5:34  love you* (barrett) - 5:44  mike's song (gordon) - 6:03  i am hydrogen (anastasio/marshall/daubert) 2:39  weekapaug groove (anastasio/fishman/gordon/mcconnell) - 6:36  encore   uncle pen** (monroe) - 5:32  big black furry creature from mars (gordon) 3:52  references  external links   phish.com - official site  livephish.com - 10.31.1990  phish.net - october 31, 1990  1999 live albums live phish series
the zf s5-31 transmission is a five-speed manual transmission by zf friedrichshafen. the transmission is designed for use in longitudinal engine applications. the transmission is rated for 310 nm (229 lbf ·ft) of torque. the transmission weighs ~39 kg (86 lb), and holds 1.3 litres of transmission fluid.  using different bell housings, the transmission was fitted to many different bmw engines.  designation by bmw  the zf s5-31 transmission is referred to as "s5d 310z" by bmw. the transmissions made from september 1995, were made with a reinforced design and are named "s5d 320z", and is rated for 320 nm.  breakdown of the old bmw transmission designation  applications   1995-1999 e36 328i  1992-1999 e36 m3  2001-2006 e46 325xi  2000-2006 e46 330i  1990-1992 e34 525i (m50)  1992-1995 e34 530i (m60)  1996-2000 e39 528i (m52)  1996-2003 e39 535i (m62)  2001-2003 e39 530i (m54)  1994-1996 e38 730i (m60)  1992-1994 e32 730i (m60)  1995-2001 e38 735i (m62)  2000-2006 e53 x5 3.0i (m54)  1996-2000 z3 2.8i (m52)  1996-2000 z3 3.0i (m54)  1996-2000 z3 m3.2i (s52) *canada & usa only  2001-2002 z3 m3.2i (s54)  see also   list of zf transmissions  references  general references   http://www.bilar.co.uk/saabenstein/documents/gearbox/zfs531.pdf   http://www.bmwclub.lv/files/05_e85_driveline.pdf  s5-31
during the second world war, allied logistics in papua played a crucial role in bringing the kokoda track campaign to a successful conclusion. "the great problem of warfare in the pacific", general douglas macarthur declared, "is to move forces into contact and maintain them. victory is dependent upon solution to the logistic problem."  although identified early as a vital strategic outpost, port moresby, the most significant papuan town, had just two airfields and basic port facilities in early 1942. an enormous amount of work was required to transform it into a major base for both air and land operations against the japanese. this was done in the face of frequent japanese air raids. during the course of the kokoda track campaign, the two original airfields were improved, and five new airfields were developed. to make them operational, the engineers had to construct more than just runways; taxiways, hardstands, facilities and access roads all had to be built. the operation of the base depended on shipping, but the port facilities were limited. to increase the capacity of the port, a causeway was built to tatana island, where pontoon docks were emplaced. engineers also built roads, warehouses, and a water treatment plant. they ran the town's electricity and water supply, and quarried stone for the roads and airstrips.  the allies were confronted with an interior covered with rainforest and tall mountains where wheeled vehicles could not operate. the australian army was forced to rely on air transport and native carriers, two modes of transportation that it had never used before. the techniques and technologies to deliver supplies by air were in their infancy. there were few aircraft available, and these were of a variety of different types, complicating maintenance. air operations in new guinea were restricted by the weather. transport aircraft were vulnerable in the air, and required fighter escorts. they were also subject to destruction on the ground by japanese air raids. the loss of the airstrip at kokoda led to the adoption of air dropping. due to a shortage of parachutes, supplies often had to be dropped without them, and loss due to breakages and unrecoverable goods was high.  thousands of papuans were conscripted to help the war effort. trucks and jeeps carried stores, ammunition and rations only part of the way; pack animals and a flying fox took them a bit farther. the rest of the journey was completed on the backs of papuan carriers, who struggled over the mountains lugging heavy loads. the environment posed the danger of endemic tropic diseases, particularly dysentery, scrub typhus and malaria
. medical units had to combat these, while caring for the sick and wounded, many of whom had to walk back to the base area along the kokoda track. often the papuan carriers had to carry the wounded on the way back, earning them the sobriquet of "fuzzy wuzzy angels".  background  geography  in 1942, papua was a territory of australia. around  in area, it occupied the south eastern part of the island of new guinea. the vegetation is largely rainforest; higher altitudes are covered in moss. the climate is mostly hot and humid with high rainfall, although the higher parts are cold, particularly at night. tropical diseases, including malaria, scrub typhus, hookworm and dysentery were endemic. the native population also suffered from tropical ulcers, yaws and vitamin deficiencies, mainly beri beri.  the population was about 300,000, of whom 1,800 were europeans; there were very few asians owing to australia's immigration policy. the main exports were copra and natural rubber, of which it contributed about one-eighth of australia's supply. there had been little development and it was largely devoid of infrastructure except around the administrative centre of port moresby on the southern coast, which had two airfields and basic port facilities. port moresby was relatively dry, with a rainfall of less than  per annum, mostly as a result of the north eastern monsoon, which comes between december and april. by air, it was  from the nearest allied airbase at townsville, although there was a small airfield on horn island in the torres strait, whereas the japanese airfields at lae and salamaua were less than  away.  the kokoda track is a foot track that runs roughly south west from kokoda  overland through the owen stanley range toward port moresby. it was used before the war as a mail route. while there is a main track that is associated with the fighting during the campaign, there are many parallel, interlocking tracks that follow much the same general course. the track reaches a height of . the terrain rises and falls with regularity, up to . this markedly increases the distance to be traversed, although there are flat areas, particularly around myola. the higher elevations are frequently above cloud level resulting in fog.  strategy in the first six months of the pacific war japanese forces overran the dutch east indies. rabaul was captured on 23 january 1942, singapore fell on 15 february, lae and salamaua were occupied on 8 march, and java surrendered on 9 march. lieutenant general george
brett, the american commander in australia, feared that the japanese would invade north western australia. the australian chiefs of staff disagreed. in an appreciation drafted by major general sydney rowell, then the australian deputy chief of the general staff, on 5 march they argued that the japanese would attempt to cut australia's communications with the united states by moving against port moresby, new caledonia and fiji. by mid-april, allied intelligence was warning of an imminent japanese seaborne attack on port moresby, which was repulsed in the battle of the coral sea on 5-8 may.  general douglas macarthur arrived in australia on 17 march, and was appointed supreme commander of the newly established south west pacific area (swpa) on 18 april. ultra intelligence picked up japanese plans for an overland advance on 19 may, and on 9 june he informed the commander of allied land forces, general sir thomas blamey, that the evidence was mounting that the japanese might attempt to attack port moresby overland from buna via kokoda. on 20 june, blamey ordered brigadier basil morris, the commander of the 8th military district, in charge of all the troops in papua and new guinea, to prevent such an attempt. in the wake of the battle of midway on 4-7 june, macarthur began planning to recapture rabaul. on 15 july, the joint chiefs of staff ordered the first phase of the advance, the capture of guadalcanal, despite macarthur's warning that inadequate aircraft, airbases and shipping resources on hand made the operation extremely risky. a first step was to secure the buna area, where airfields could be established from whence the japanese bases could be attacked without aircraft having to overfly the owen stanley range.  organisation the australian chiefs of staff identified port moresby as an important outpost early in the war. a company of the 15th infantry battalion was sent to port moresby in july 1940 and in october was transferred to the 49th infantry battalion. in february 1941, the chiefs of staff decided to reinforce the garrison by sending the rest of the 49th infantry battalion, a militia unit, but specially enlisted for service in the tropics.  on 8 december, warned that the japanese might attack rabaul and port moresby, the chief of the general staff, lieutenant general vernon sturdee decided to reinforce the garrison, sending the 39th and 53rd infantry battalions, and other units of the 30th infantry brigade, and the guns of the 13th field regiment and the 23rd heavy anti-aircraft battery. in january 1942, the royal australian air force (raaf) at port moresby consisted
of six hudson light bombers, four wirraway general purpose aircraft and two catalina flying boats. no fighters were available.  the first japanese air raid on port moresby occurred on 3 february 1942, and the anti-aircraft gunners shot down their first japanese aircraft on 28 february, during a raid in which two raaf catalinas were destroyed. the february 1942 raids touched off panic, disorder and looting which morris did not have the provost resources to control. the first fighter aircraft, kittyhawks of no. 75 squadron raaf under the command of squadron leader john francis jackson, reached port moresby on 21 march, flying by way of horn island because they lacked the range to fly directly from townsville. they soon became involved in the battle of port moresby, taking heavy losses, and were relieved by the bell p-39 airacobras of the us 35th and 36th fighter squadrons on 30 april. port moresby experienced its one-hundredth air raid on 23 january 1943.  the first unit of the second australian imperial force (aif) to arrive, the 2/3rd light anti-aircraft battery, disembarked on 11 april 1942, having returned to australia from the middle east just four weeks before. the us 101st coast artillery (anti-aircraft) battalion followed on 5 may, and its commander, lieutenant colonel joseph b. fraser, took charge of port moresby's anti-aircraft defences. morris's command became new guinea force on 15 april. by the end of june the ground forces in new guinea consisted of 1,098 aif, 12,273 militia and 2,208 american troops.  on 24 june, morris ordered the 39th infantry battalion (less one company) and the papuan infantry battalion, as maroubra force, to defend kokoda. the japanese landed in the buna area on 21 july. at this point, b company of the 39th infantry battalion was at kokoda, with c company advancing along the track, departing ilolo on 23 july. the remainder of the battalion was poised to move and most of it had arrived at deniki by 4 august. maroubra force was run out of kokoda on 29 july. macarthur was sanguine about this, believing that the landings on guadalcanal on 8 august would cause the japanese to withdraw to buna. blamey was not so sure, and ordered the aif 7th division, under the command of major general arthur allen, to port moresby to reinforce maroubra force.  on 12 august 1942, rowell assumed command of new guinea force. morris remained as commander of
the australian new guinea administrative unit (angau), which was responsible for civil affairs in papua and new guinea. united states army services of supply (usasos) units in papua were initially part of base section2 in far north queensland, but on 20 august 1942, the us advanced base, new guinea, was established under the command of colonel a. j. matthews. at first there was no australian equivalent. blamey suggested that one was required. rowell demurred, but agreed to a port moresby base sub area commander with a small staff. he emphasised that what he wanted was not some "officer wallah type" but a "practical man with commonsense". so blamey sent major charles moses, who possessed the requested attributes, being a former officer of the 8th division who had escaped from singapore.  blamey superseded rowell in command of new guinea force on 23 september. macarthur visited blamey in port moresby on 4 october 1942 and the two agreed to establish a combined operations service command (cosc) to co-ordinate logistical activities. to command it, macarthur appointed brigadier general dwight johns, the deputy commander of usasos in swpa, an expert on airbase construction. he was given an australian deputy, brigadier victor secombe, who had directed the rehabilitation of the port of tobruk in 1941. all australian and american logistical units were placed under cosc, which also controlled a fleet of small craft and luggers.  shipping  since new guinea is an island, logistic support of the defenders ultimately depended on shipping. australia started the war at a disadvantage because the bruce-page government sold the government line at a loss in 1928, leaving the country without shipping under national control. australian ships were requisitioned by the shipping control board, and by the end of 1942 almost all australian coastal vessels had been taken up by the board, the armed services, or the americans. the board resorted to chartering ships, but few were obtainable, as the british ministry of war transport and the american war shipping administration were in control of almost all the world's shipping. some 24 ships were on charter on 1 january 1942; 22 were on 1 january 1943. some "refugee" ships-ships from occupied countries-reached australian ports in 1942, although many of these were already on charter.  an important role in the upcoming campaign was played by 21 dutch koninklijke paketvaart-maatschappij (kpm) refugee ships of . these, along with two other refugee
ships and six vessels originally intended for the shipping control board, were transferred to american control. during 1942,  of cargo was carried by chartered ships, of which  was coastal cargo. lacking other options, resort was made to using ships on overseas voyages to carry coastal cargo. between april and november 1942, this averaged  each month. in addition, the australian army operated five troopships: the  and , which could each carry 1,500 troops; and the smaller gorgon,  and ormiston, which carried between 590 and 650 troops each. having separate american and australian shipping organisations saved the two armies from having to learn each other's procedures while still trying to master their own, but it created inefficiencies through the need for coordination.  twenty merchant ships were lost in axis naval activity in australian waters in 1942. in an air raid on port moresby on 17 june 1942, the   was hit and set ablaze; three crewmen and a member of the army working party were killed. a second air raid the following day scored more direct hits on the ship, which burned fiercely, and was a total loss. five more members of the crew were killed and one fatally injured. another 63 men were injured in the attack, including the master, captain james campbell. two ships were attacked by japanese submarines in the gulf of papua. the  sank the   by gunfire on 6 august 1942, and machine gunned survivors in the water. of mamutus 142 passengers and crew, 114 were lost. ro-33 struck again on 29 august, torpedoing the  mv malaita, which was returning to cairns after delivering troops and supplies to port moresby. although listing ten degrees to starboard, malaita remained afloat, and was taken in tow by  and . their escort, the destroyer , picked up an asdic contact on the ro-33, and delivered a series of depth charge attacks and sank it.  port moresby became congested in september 1942. this represented a dangerous situation, as ships there were subject to japanese air attacks, so procedures were instituted whereby ships would wait at townsville until called forward. due to lack of capacity at port moresby, it made no sense for ships to travel in convoy, so they sailed to and from port moresby individually or in small groups. convoys to new guinea did not commence until december 1942. turnaround time for ships from townsville to port moresby was 11 to 13 days, of which five to seven were spent awaiting discharge in port moresby. some 125 ship voyages were made to port moresby between
may and november 1942. during 1942, 3,033 vehicles, 199 guns and  of stores were shipped to new guinea.  the standard ocean-going cargo ship was the liberty ship. they were not ideal for logistical purposes. with a maximum speed of , they were slow, but this was considered less important than their ability to be turned out cheaply and in large numbers. they were deliberately built small, which reduced the loss when one was sunk, but limited the cargo capacity to . critically, their draft was  when fully laden. they had five small holds, each with its own hatch. their curved sides made them wider at the top than the bottom, and wider amidships than fore and aft. containerisation of shipping did not begin until a decade after war, so most wartime military shipments were break bulk cargo, with goods in bags, boxes, crates, barrels and drums. this was very efficient in terms of shipping space, but loading and unloading was consequently slow and manpower intensive. it also meant that ships could be unloaded with their own tackle, without special port facilities. loading a ship was something of an art form. the ideal was to make best use of irregular spaces. goods had to be stowed so as to wedge everything together tightly, as items that shifted at sea could break open and cause damage to their contents and other items. a load that shifted could even cause the ship to capsize.  loading at australian ports was frequently disorganised and sloppy. manifests were not flown ahead, so new guinea force did not know the contents of a shipment beforehand. some ships arrived without manifests. the labelling of contents was also poor, and boxes often had to be broken into to determine their contents. even then it was not always apparent who the intended recipient was. much of the problem was poor staff work by the inexperienced movement control staff at advanced allied land forces headquarters (lhq) in brisbane. the australian army had never had to handle such work before. men with experience in the shipping industry were appointed as movement control officers, but it took time for them to learn about military cargoes and procedures.  base development  port  in early 1942 port moresby had only one deepwater wharf and two small jetties. another pre-war wharf had existed at bootless inlet but in the panic, had been demolished and the inlet mined without recording the location of the mines. the timber wharf had an approach that was  long and  wide and a t-section  long and  wide. as such
, it could accommodate only one liberty ship at a time. the jetties, one stone and one timber, were just  long, and could be used only by lighters and shallow draft vessels.  to increase the rate of discharge, the tug and lighter company, a unit which had served in the siege of tobruk, was sent to port moresby. on arrival on 23 august, it found only two lighters and no tugboats. it improvised, repairing the wharf's crane and salvaging tackle from the wreck of the macdhui. harbour craft arrived on liberty ships over the next couple of months, but no more than one tug and ten lighters were available at any time during 1942. the african-american 611th port company arrived in june, and the australian 2/1st docks operating company in mid-september. major r. c. ballantyne, who had been in charge of wharf operations at tobruk, was appointed docks superintendent. unloading was still slowed by the lack of storage space in the wharf area. the dumps had been dispersed in the hills up to  from port moresby, the roads were poor, and there was a serious shortage of trucks to move stores from the wharf to the dumps.  eight ships bound for port moresby were lying idle off townsville or cairns on 12 october, waiting to be called forward. general headquarters (ghq) swpa estimated that at the current rate of discharge it would take two weeks before they were called forward. ironically, five of them were carrying equipment and stores needed to upgrade the port facilities. extending the wharf required pilings and heavy timbers that were not immediately available. matthews decided on a bold plan. tatana island, about  west of port moresby, had deep water off its northwest side. about  offshore, it was separated from the mainland by shallow water with a coral reef bottom. he proposed taking the 2nd battalion, 96th general service regiment off its work on aerodrome maintenance and refuelling and rearming aircraft, and use them to construct a causeway from the mainland to tatana island, where pontoon docks could be built. the materials required were immediately available, but doubts were expressed about whether a causeway could withstand the force of storms and tides. lacking boats for a hydrographic survey, one was conducted by wading during an exceptionally low tide in late september.  work commenced on 5 october. equipment and personnel were ferried across to tatana island so it could proceed from both ends. some  of fill totalling  was required to establish a roadway
long and  wide  above the high tide mark. work was completed on 30 october and the first ship berthed there on 3 november. port capacity was increased from  per day. however, the project did not proceed without controversy. a heavy downpour on 21 october confirmed the airmen's worst fears, and lieutenant general george c. kenney, the commander of allied air forces (aaf), sent a letter to macarthur on 26 october informing him that while work to upgrade the airfield runways before the wet season was nearly completed, aircraft could not operate from them without taxiways, hardstands, facilities and access roads, all of which were far from ready. he warned that he might have to withdraw at least two squadrons back to australia. major general richard sutherland, macarthur's chief of staff at ghq, and brigadier general hugh j. casey, his chief engineer, reassured kenney everything possible would be done to keep the airfields operational in the wet season. additional engineer units were ordered to port moresby, and work on the port and the nine mile quarry was handed over to the australians.  airfields  on 31 march-just a fortnight after his arrival in australia-macarthur sent casey and his air officer, brigadier general harold h. george to survey the situation in port moresby. they drew up plans to develop it into a base to support future operations. they recognised that to secure the area required work far beyond its environs. they called for the airfield at horn island to be upgraded, and new airfields to be constructed on the cape york peninsula north of townsville around mareeba, cooktown and coen. this would allow ships to have fighter cover crossing the torres strait. to protect port moresby's eastern flank, ghq decided to establish an airstrip in the abau-mullins harbour area. milne bay was subsequently determined to be a better location, and a garrison was sent by sea from port moresby on 22 june. another strip, at merauke on the south coast of dutch new guinea, was authorised on 22 june to protect the western flank.  the airfields in the port moresby area were initially known by their approximate distance from port moresby. in april 1942, there were only two operational airfields: seven mile drome, an airfield developed by the raaf with a single  runway, and three mile drome (also known as kila airfield), a pre-war civilian airfield. work had commenced on two more: fourteen mile, also known as laloki, and five mile, which had originally been developed as an emergency landing strip
. four more were subsequently developed: twelve mile, fourteen mile, seventeen mile and thirty mile.  on 10 november, the port moresby airfields, except for kila, were renamed after men who had been killed defending them. seven mile was renamed after jackson, who was shot down over port moresby on 28 april; fourteen mile after charles schwimmer, one of four american p-39 pilots who was lost in an attack on lae on 4 may; and five mile after lieutenant colonel kenneth ward, the commander of the 53rd infantry battalion, who was involved in its construction, and was killed in the fighting on the kokoda track on 27 august. twelve mile was renamed berry after major jack w. berry, the commander of the 39th fighter squadron, who was killed on a practice bombing mission on 4 august when his bomb exploded directly underneath his aircraft, causing it to flip and crash into the sea. seventeen mile was renamed durand after first lieutenant edward d. durand, the first american fighter pilot shot down over new guinea. after being forced down near salamaua on 30 april, he was captured and executed by the japanese. thirty mile drome, also known as rorona, was renamed rogers after major floyd (buck) rogers, the commander of the 8th bombardment squadron, whose a-24 banshee dive bomber was shot down over gona on 29 july.  engineer units in port moresby at the end of april were the 7th field company, 1st army troops company, the field stores section of the 61st field park company, a section of the 1st mechanical equipment company, and the 1st bomb disposal section. the 14th field company arrived with the 14th infantry brigade in may. the first us troops to be stationed in new guinea were an advance party of the african-american 96th engineer battalion on 28 april, but the battalion was not complete until june. they were followed by company e of the 43rd engineer general service regiment and a dump truck section of the 576th engineer company. the 808th engineer aviation battalion arrived in july. the 96th engineer battalion was reorganised as the 96th engineer general service regiment in september. in response to kenney's 26 october warning to macarthur, the 46th and 91st engineer general service regiments and the rest of the 576th dump truck company were ordered to move to port moresby in november.  the main mission of the 96th was patching jackson drome's runways after japanese bombing, but they also assisted with refuelling aircraft and loading them with
bombs, and unloading ships in the harbour. it was found that craters could not be repaired simply by filling the holes with rubble. they would quickly fill with water, settle, and become a bog hole. a proper repair required that the water be pumped out, and the crater filled with stone, which had to be compacted, rolled and re-surfaced. in addition to the craters, bombing sprayed fragments that could puncture tyres, causing accidents on takeoff and landing. a visual search for fragments had to be made after each raid.  the engineers discovered that they had much to learn about airfield construction in papua, particularly the importance of proper drainage. the arrival of the 808th engineer aviation battalion permitted extensive rehabilitation work on jackson. the runway had been sealed with an excess of bitumen, which became soft in the heat, and parked aircraft tended to sink into it. when the bitumen was removed to be re-laid, hydroscopic clay under parts of the runway became supersaturated through seepage, and springs developed. the engineers were forced to install underground drains, and put down a new  base of crushed rock, which was sealed with bitumen. although air operations were curtailed, the airfield remained operational.  kila drome was originally considered too poorly-located to be more than an emergency strip, because a high ridge  from one end of the runway, restricted air operations. however, the airfield was seldom fogged in, and could often operate when all the other airfields were closed. it was therefore decided to increase the runway to . the first coat of bitumen was applied in november 1942, but before the final coat could be applied, heavy rains came and saturated the subgrade. the runway rutted and became more hazardous than ever. the 96th engineer general service regiment dug a ditch along the length of the runway, but this became another aviation safety hazard. the ditch was then filled in with rock to create a french drain.  bulldozers carved schwimmer drome out of the jungle. only a few feet above the normal level of the laloki river, it was susceptible to periodic flooding. the base material used for the  runway was laid over alluvial sand and gravel, and marston mat used for the surface. the resulting runway was not capable of all-weather operation, so a second runway was constructed parallel to the first. this time gravel dredged from the laloki river was used as a base. it was spread while wet and then rolled to form a firm base. marston mat was
removed from the original to provide a surface for the new  all-weather runway, which was ready for use in november 1942. a low trestle bridge over the laloki river provided access. it was understood that the bridge might be washed away by floods, so pontoon equipment was provided for this eventuality. this was needed; a downpour on 21 october swept away the bridge, and rendered three mile, seven mile and thirty mile non-operational. the bridge was replaced by a high steel structure.  berry was located on higher ground south east of schwimmer. casey and george assigned it a high priority, and the 96th engineer general service regiment was assigned to the task. the existing dry weather strip was cleared and grubbed for a  runway. the short runway restricted air operations to fighters and transports, but it could not be extended without extensive earth removal. it was ultimately surfaced with  of crushed rock and gravel.  to enable heavy four-engine bombers to fly long-range missions, longer all-weather airfields were required. casey designated two sites for development: the emergency airstrip at wards, and a new site at seventeen mile. the work at wards was assigned to no. 1 mobile works squadron raaf, which had been working on wards since 17 august, surfacing it with gravel. it received its orders to construct a new  runway west of the old one on 11 september. the runway was provided with a  compacted gravel surface to hold the weight of heavy bombers. as the squadron also had to construct a water pipeline from the waigani swamp, the schedule slipped. following a visit on 3 november by colonel leif sverdrup from ghq and matthews, now the head of construction at cosc, additional resources were allocated. b company of the 2/1st pioneer battalion arrived on 13 november to assist with laying the marston mat and the water pipes. the 46th engineer general service regiment assisted with the dispersal areas and revetments. the original runway was then upgraded to all-weather standard too. the other site designated for heavy bombers was seventeen mile. the 808th engineer aviation battalion cleared and grubbed the area, and laid out the  runway. this was surfaced with  of clay-bound shale, and sealed with tar to create an all-weather surface. this did not prove satisfactory, and marston mat had to be laid down.  the thirty mile site on galley reach, an inlet  north west of port moresby was accessible by water transport through a channel through the coral reef. a dry
weather airstrip was constructed by company e, 43rd engineer general service regiment, with help from large numbers of papuan labourers who loaded the river gravel into trucks. this was ready for use on 20 july, but to make it into an airbase required the construction of two docks on galley reach. in september, work was halted by the tactical situation, with japanese patrols reported not far from rorona. air warning equipment was removed, and marston mat earmarked for thirty mile was allocated to other projects. by the end of november, the runway had been extended to , with  sections at each end topped with marston mat. work continued on all the other airfields in 1943, but rogers was abandoned.  infrastructure  the 1st army troops company was responsible for port moresby's utilities: the power house, freezers, electrical installations, lighting and water supply. by june 1942 the water supply was close to its maximum capacity, with the pumping station at bomana pumping water from the laloki river 24 hours a day. the main  water main ran under the south eastern end of the jackson drome, a prime target for japanese air raids, and the water pipe was consequently prone to damage. from one cause or another there were 40 to 50 breaks per month. by october 1942 the reservoir level was falling, indicating that usage was exceeding pumping capacity. a new intake and pumping station was constructed near schwimmer drome to bring water from the laloki river to a treatment plant and concrete reservoir on twin peaks mountain. the 1st army troops company assumed responsibility for its operation upon its completion in march 1943.  depots were established inland rather than in the vicinity of the port because the japanese threatened a landing on the coast. a  speed limit was imposed to minimise damage to the main road. this was covered with  of dust that turned to mud when it rained. the surface soon broke up under heavy military traffic. the road was only wide enough to allow for one-way traffic and had a number of hairpin bends that required 3-ton trucks to make three-point turns. the 10th advanced ordnance depot was established at 17 mile in prefabricated huts, erected by papuan labour, while the 8th advanced ammunition depot handled the ammunition depots at 12 mile and 19 mile. in the crisis days of early 1942 some  of ammunition was dumped where it was unloaded off the trucks and covered with tarpaulins, with only one storeman on hand to receive it. soon, no one knew what lay under the tarpaulins. this was hard to
rectify as there was an acute shortage of ordnance personnel due to the low priority accorded to service units. the 19 mile site was poor and a new depot was developed on a better site at 12 mile.  the depots and airbases depended on an efficient road network, so the engineers gave this a high priority. a major effort was made to bring the roads up to all-weather standard before onset of the 1942 wet season. new roads were also built. one of the first was the by pass road, which was designed to divert traffic from the main road, which ran around the south eastern end of jackson drome, and was therefore an operational hazard. the by pass road ran between jackson and wards dromes, and was later extended to berry, schwimmer and durand dromes. the opening of the new wharf at tatana island in october caused a sudden increase in road traffic, so a new barune road was opened in november, providing a loop to jackson and wards dromes. fortunately, the local red shale contained clay and rock fragments, and when laid on a prepared subgrade and watered, either by sprinklers or rain, became hard like concrete. this could take motor vehicle traffic, although it became dusty when dry and slippery when wet. surfacing material was obtained from the nine mile quarry. wood was found to be unsuitable for culverts, as it was quickly destroyed by the action of climate and insects. oil drums were found to be superior, but they rusted, and using them for culverts depleted the drum supply.  there were no facilities in port moresby for the bulk storage of petroleum products, so they were shipped and distributed in 44-gallon drums, as they were known in swpa, where food and fuel distribution was through the australian army, which used the imperial gallon. a shortage of 44-gallon drums developed in late 1942. some 150,000 went north but only 10,000 returned. new production was ordered from rheem in australia, and civilian holders of 44-gallon drums were urged to empty and return them. unserviceable drums were either repaired by the bulk issues petrol and oil depot (bipod) or handed over to salvage. a well-organised collection effort was undertaken by the port moresby base sub area which resulted in over 20,000 empty drums being returned to australia in november.  crucial to road and airfield development was the output of the nine mile quarry. initially it was run by the 1st army troops company, which installed suspended
electric lighting, allowing the quarry to be worked around the clock from 30 april 1942. companies a and c of the 96th engineer battalion took over the running of the quarry in june. in turn, they were relieved by c company of the 2/1st pioneer battalion in november. work went on in three eight hour shifts per day, seven days a week. the face of the quarry was drilled from the top and dropped to the floor by blasting. knapping hammers were used to break the stone into small pieces that could be lifted onto trucks by hand. there were two rock crushers on hand; an old model and a modern mobile diesel crusher supplied by the us army.  support of combat operations  overland supply  when the campaign began, the kokoda track started at mcdonald's corner, just beyond ilolo. from there, the track slowly rose about  to what later became known as owers' corner. the road from port moresby was sealed as far as seven mile, and from there a gravel surface was laid to provide an all-weather road as far as sogeri, roughly  from port moresby. on 24 june, ghq queried whether it would be possible to upgrade the track to one that could handle animal transport or, better still, motor vehicles. there were multiple tracks leading to kokoda, and in addition to the main track, there was interest at new guinea force hq in a route along the brown river that had been partially surveyed in 1912.  on 5 july, there were 1,140 motor vehicles with new guinea force. of these, 300 had arrived with the garrison in 1941, 120 were local vehicles that had been taken over, and 600 had arrived in april and may. the state of the available motor vehicles at this time was poor. many of the impressed vehicles were odd types for which spare parts were scarce. most vehicles had been in constant use, and maintenance had been neglected. many were missing log books or had never had them, so what maintenance had been performed was uncertain. moreover, the 30th brigade had no light aid detachment (lad) to work on them. major p. a. billis, the deputy assistant director of ordnance services (dados) for engineering recommended that 200 new vehicles be sent as a matter of urgency. more vehicles arrived with the 7th division, and the 21st brigade section of the 2/7th division workshop established itself at ilolo on 19 august, mainly to service engineer equipment used for road work.  owers' corner was named after lieutenant noel ow
ers, who was given the task of surveying a new route from ilolo to nauro. the project of constructing a jeep track to nauro was pushed aggressively by the chief engineer at new guinea force, brigadier john main. lieutenant colonel sidney bleechmore was placed in charge, and was given the 7th and 2/14th field companies and a section of the 2/1st mechanical equipment company. work commenced on 19 august. removing the trees allowed the sun to dry out the ground, and by adding drainage, a track was created passable by light vehicles, allowing plant and equipment to be brought up. owers' corner was reached in early september.  at this point the route owers surveyed departed from the mule track. the track descended down the ridge on a grade too steep for motor vehicles, so the road then proceeded along the ridge line. the 7th field company then encountered  of rock, which had to be drilled and blasted. the jeep track was abandoned at this point, but work continued on a mule track, which was advanced about  per day until mid-september, when the engineer units were withdrawn to port moresby due to the deteriorating tactical situation, with the japanese closing in on ioribaiwa. work resumed on 28 september, but was abandoned in early october. units working on the road were supplied by pack transport. improvements to the road allowed 3-ton trucks to reach owers' corner on 28 september. the jeeps were then moved to a new line of communications running from itiki through subitana.  the 1st independent light horse troop was a small mounted unit consisting of one officer and twenty other ranks. it was raised at koitaki on 1 april 1942, using the horses from the station there. it was originally engaged in patrolling and locating crashed aircraft around port moresby, but on 26 june it was assigned to the pack transport role on the kokoda track. a remount sub section of six men impressed mules, horses and pack saddlery from the plantations around sogeri, and rounded up and broke brumbies from the bootless inlet area. it was found that the mules were best-suited for the task, with the brumbies next. because the tracks were narrow, they trained the animals to walk in single file, led by a mounted rider at the front and trailed by one at the rear of the column. each animal carried  of stores, which were packed in bags to facilitate their transfer to papuan carriers. the goldie river was bridged on 2 july,
and the mule track was extended to uberi. pack transport hauled  of supplies in june,  between 3 and 16 july,  between 17 july and 16 august, and  between 17 and 29 august.  the steep descent near owers' corner to the goldie river crossing at uberi involved a steep ascent for the animals on the return trip. the 2/6th field company constructed a flying fox, which went into operation on 26 september. descending , it was  long, with an intermediate station. the empty tackle was returned by the weight of the cargo, which was up to . in late august, the 1st light horse troop was reorganised as a pack transport section, with six sub sections. one prepared the loads, weighing them to ensure that there was  on each side. the other five were each under the command of a non-commissioned officer, with five other ranks, three riding horses and ten to twelve pack horses or mules. with a call for more supplies to be delivered, the remount unit was recalled, and 29 other ranks were added from the 55th infantry battalion in september, bringing the total strength to one officer, 81 other ranks, 39 mules and 63 horses, and allowing four more sub sections to be formed. the 1st independent light horse troop struggled with epidemics of strangles and infectious nasal catarrh among horses imported from australia, and the saddlery became increasingly worn until 60 new saddles arrived from australia in september.  meanwhile, the 1st pack transport company was formed at royal park in melbourne on 25 august. it had entrained for queensland on 25 september, and arrived in port moresby on 7 october. in late october it began relieving the 1st light horse troop. by the end of october, the 1st pack transport company had one officer and 110 other ranks with 43 mules and 135 horses working on the track. the 1st light horse troop was relieved on 5 november, and was reorganised as the new guinea force pack transport company. it was later renamed the 7th pack transport company. in all, some  of supplies were moved forward of the jeephead by animal transport.  the acting commander, 7th division australian army service corps (aasc), lieutenant colonel gordon richardson, assumed control of logistics on the track on 10 september. supplies were then brought from the base supply depots at sogeri and ilolo to newton's depot in 3-ton trucks by the 2/5th aasc company. the 2/4th aasc company moved them by jeep to the road
head at owers' corner. the flying fox was used to take them to the floor of the goldie river valley, from whence the 1st independent light horse troop carried them to uberi. from there, they were carried on the backs of papuan porters, known as carriers. if there were more stores than the animals could carry, they would assist with that too.  since the number of pack animals and carriers was limited, the requirements for stores and supplies of all types, including rations, ammunition, ordnance, signals equipment and medical supplies, were submitted to 7th division headquarters, which allocated movement priorities. one of richardson's first actions was to obtain more saddlery for the pack horses. he also acquired five more american jeeps to augment the five that had been working the jeep track. the original five were found to be in poor condition, and needed overhaul. while the 25th infantry brigade was conducting operations in the imita ridge area, the carry was short, and despite the fact that there were no suitable air dropping zones, the supply situation was good. as the australians began advancing toward kokoda again in october, the supply line became steadily longer, and the demand for carriers more acute.  from uberi, the track ran to ioribaiwa. the first  involved a gruelling  climb. sappers cut steps to create what became known as the "golden stairs". in many ways this made it harder, as it forced the walker to lift his feet higher. this was especially so for the papuans who were the most frequent users of the track, and who were not used to stairs. the technique would not be used in 1943. the papuan carriers moved supplies forward from uberi, often under arduous conditions. the pre-war plantation economy of the australian territories of papua and new guinea was based on a system of indentured labour. on 15 june 1942, morris issued the employment of natives order under the national security (emergency control) regulations. this provided for the conscription of papuan labour to support the australian war effort.  about 800 papuan civilians were working in the port moresby area in april 1942. responding to increasing calls for carriers, angau conscripted 2,033 papuans in june, 3,354 in july, and 4,947 in august. on 9 october, angau was maintaining 9,270 papuan workers. casting such a wide net created problems. although all spoke motuan, the prevalence of different dialects meant that they could not all communicate with one another. angau representatives sorted
them into groups who spoke the same dialect. taking away so many able-bodied men caused hardship for their families and villages, as jobs they normally performed went undone, and food production fell away. however, atrocities committed by the japanese against papuan and new guinea civilians proved a persuasive recruiting tool.  a carrier could carry about 13 days' worth of food, and traversing the track took eight days. a carrier load was assessed at , but the water-logged wrapping caused it to weigh more. since the carriers could not carry more, angau had to take this into account when preparing the loads. the initial movement of the 39th infantry battalion to kokoda was supported by 600 carriers under lieutenant h. t. (bert) kienzle from angau. along the track, kienzle and sergeant major maga of the royal papuan constabulary established way stations, which they stocked with food gathered locally, and were manned by angau, who were responsible for both the carriers and the stores.  the 39th infantry battalion was able to travel light because it did not have to carry heavy stores or equipment. morris arranged for an old thursday island schooner, the gili gili, to take  of stores and equipment by sea. these included vickers machine guns and lewis guns. gili gili departed port moresby on 4 july, and arrived at buna on 19 july. captain thomas grahamslaw, the local angau district officer, arranged for 1,500 carriers to take the stores to kokoda.  the allied retreat from kokoda in august and september was a trying time for the carriers, who were pushed to their limit, hauling supplies up to the front, and then carrying the wounded back. not only did it take eight men to move each casualty, but they were far slower, taking three times as long to traverse the track. it was intended that there would be separate carrier lines for supply and casualty evacuation, but this could not be adhered to. each non-walking casualty meant three fewer bundles of supplies delivered per day for each carrier employed evacuating wounded. by 30 august, all the carriers had been drafted into evacuating the wounded except those reserved for carrying the 3-inch mortars. the retreat and the sight of the wounded depressed the morale of the carriers, who repeatedly asked kienzle why the australians could not defeat the japanese.  on 13 september, there were 310 carriers working in the forward area, and 860 at uberi. overwork and illness took its toll on them. captain geoffrey (doc) vernon,
a deaf veteran of the great war, was sent by angau as medical officer for the carriers. he was greatly disturbed at what he saw in august:  newspaper reports, photographs, and newsreel films soon appeared of papuan carriers tending to australian wounded while struggling over towering mountains and across raging torrents of rivers. this produced an outpouring of gratitude among the civilian population in australia, who called them "fuzzy wuzzy angels"; it would affect the way that australians viewed their neighbour for many decades to come.  air supply the first air transport unit in swpa was the air transport command, a united states army air forces (usaaf) unit which was formed at raaf base amberley in queensland on 28 january 1942. it was equipped with five c-53s originally bound for the philippines, and two b-18s and a c-39 that had escaped from there. only two of the original 14 pilots were fully qualified on transports; the rest had to be retrained. of the 19 airmen, 12 were trained as aircrew members. it was redesignated the us 21st transport squadron on 3 april. on the same date, the us 22nd transport squadron was formed at essendon airport in victoria with former royal netherlands indies airways (knilm) and royal netherlands east indies army air force (rneiaaf) aircraft that had arrived in australia from java. the two squadrons were redesignated the 21st and 22nd troop carrier squadrons on 26 july.  on 21 may, the 21st transport squadron had a b-18, two c-39s, a c-47, three c-53s, two ex-knilm dc-2s, two ex-knilm dc-3s, three ex-knilm dc-5s, two ex-knilm l14s, and three o-47s. the 22nd transport squadron had a b-17, two c-39s, a c-47, a b-18, an ex-knilm l-14, and eleven ex-rneiaaf c-56s. the 21st transport squadron flew its first mission in new guinea on 22 may, flying from port moresby to wau and bulolo with supplies for kanga force, the small australian garrison there. thereafter missions were frequently flown; but the two squadrons were still based in queensland, not port moresby, and would not relocate there until the following year. the raaf formed four transport squadrons in february and march 1942, and no. 33
squadron raaf began flying a regular passenger and freight service from townsville to port moresby on 5 march. it received avro ansons in september and a detachment was sent to port moresby the following month. aircraft of no. 36 squadron raaf also made occasional trips to new guinea in 1942, and twenty raaf pilots were seconded to us troop carrier squadrons.  the difficulties of operating in new guinea soon became apparent. two attempts to reach wau on 23 may 1942 failed due to bad weather. on 26 may, five transports were flying to wau when they were attacked by 16 mitsubishi a6m zeroes, which were engaged by the escorting p-39s of the 35th, 36th and 39th fighter squadrons. the transports delivered their loads successfully, but one p-39 was lost. the transports always took off in daylight; weather reports were not available before dawn, and the fighter escort could not operate in darkness. weather was a constant hazard over the owen stanley range, and clouds could build up faster than an aircraft could climb. poor flying weather, either over port moresby or over the target, could ground the transports for a week or more at a time.  weather and rough airstrips increased the amount of maintenance required to keep the planes flying. so too did the climate. the high humidity encouraged the growth of fungus which shorted out electrical components; metal surfaces were subject to corrosion; and lubrication oils evaporated in the high temperatures. critical spare parts were often out of stock, and their delivery was an important role of the intra-theatre air transport. availability did not just mean the transports; there was also the fighter escorts, which were normally based at another field. if they could not fly, or were required for another mission, then the transports could not fly. for planning purposes, a c-39 planeload was reckoned at  with  of fuel, while that of the larger c-53 was reckoned at  with  of fuel; but loading charts were not available in 1942, and aircraft were sometimes overloaded.  the first air transport mission to the kokoda front was flown on 26 july, when a dc-3 from the 21st troop carrier squadron landed 15 troops of the 39th infantry battalion and some stores. a c-53 followed that afternoon with another 15 men and some stores. the flight time to kokoda was about twenty minutes. an air supply run the following day by a c-53 and a dc-2 found the airstrip barricaded. the barricades were removed, but the aircraft were recalled by a radio
message that the kokoda drome could not be held. the loss of the airstrip meant a switch to air dropping supplies. an aircraft was sent that afternoon, but was recalled. on 28 july, a dc-5, a dc-3 and a dc-2 dropped supplies near kokoda. three transports dropped supplies near kagi on 29 july, and one on 30 july. no more missions were flown until 6 august.  morris formed a good working relationship with the air commander in new guinea, brigadier general martin f. scanlon, but in early august scanlon was replaced by brigadier general ennis c. whitehead, who sent the two dc-3-type transport aircraft back to australia. by 18 august, some  of vital supplies had piled up in townsville, awaiting air transport to port moresby. this left only a single dc-2 at port moresby; a lodestar arrived on 8 august. an urgent message from morris to advance lhq resulted in ghq despatching four dc-3-type aircraft to port moresby. advance lhq reminded new guinea force of the procedure for requesting transport aircraft, to which colonel frederck chilton, the gso1 at new guinea force hq, protested that it was "too slow and has already cost us kokoda".  techniques for air dropping had yet to be developed. following the loss of the airstrip at kokoda, the aaf concluded that the only way to get supplies to a company, 39th infantry battalion in the kokoda area was to adopt a suggestion from the army to put them in fighter drop tanks. the tanks were slit, along the bottom, and they were filled with supplies. the first attempt on 11 august was called off due to bad weather, but four fighters dropped a total of  on 12 august. by then it was too late; the area was in japanese hands. a forward supply dump was established at myola, in a dry lake bed that kienzle found on 3 august. the lake bed was flat and treeless, making it a good candidate for a supply drop zone. several days of good weather after 9 august allowed the transport aircraft to concentrate on dropping at myola.  when he assumed command, rowell was informed that 25 days' supply of food and ammunition for 2,000 men was stored there, but on checking it was found that there were only four days' rations, with two days' reserves held forward of myola. the official historian, dudley mccarthy, suggested that "the rations were never dropped at all, and that the explanation lay in faulty work
by an inexperienced staff". in his memoirs, rowell maintained that the missing rations had been sent, and must have fallen outside the target area. on 21 august, kienzle discovered a second, much larger, dry lake bed at myola. the two lake beds came to be called myola1 and2, but the maps issued to air crews showed only one. drops may have been made at the wrong one.  but there are other explanations for the missing rations. the inexperienced new guinea force staff assumed that the supplies they despatched would arrive, but this was far from the case with air dropping, the techniques for which had yet to be properly developed. kienzle picked what he thought were good drop zones, but the air crews sometimes found them restricted or dangerous. the aircraft had to fly low over the drop zone, at about , and slow, at about . they had to take the wind into account, as it might cause parachuted packages to miss the drop zone. the load would be placed in the doorway, and three or four men would push it out when the pilot gave the signal. the pilot would fly level or with the nose slightly down, so that cargo would not hit the tail of the aircraft. the pilot would retract the landing gear if it was down, and climb to gain altitude. multiple passes over the drop zone might be required. heavy loads were not practical for air dropping missions, since the aircraft had to arrive low and slow over the drop zone, but higher speed was required for greater weight. nor could an overloaded aircraft climb or dive quickly. the 21st and 22nd troop carrier squadrons were still based in queensland and not at port moresby, so the aircrew were there on short rotations. their learning process was therefore fitful and slow. men from various army and raaf units assisted the aircrew in the task of pushing stores out of the aircraft.  packaging was primitive and inadequate in 1942, even for normal handling under new guinea conditions. cardboard boxes disintegrated, cans rusted, and wooden boxes rotted or were eaten by insects. parachutes for air dropping were in short supply.  orders for parachutes were placed in australia, the united states and india. a request for 5,000 cargo parachutes with containers was made to washington on 21 july. on 22 september it was decided to send 1,000 without containers by air, while the rest went by sea. due to the shortage of parachutes, most supplies had to be "free-dropped"-dropped without parach
utes-so the rate of breakage was high. as the contents of the packaging usually burst, they were encased in two or more sacks, the outer being much larger than the inner, so it could contain the contents when the inner burst, and prevent them from scattering. three layers was found necessary. items such as sacks and blankets were preferred as packaging, as these were useful to the troops. about 12,000 blankets were used in the five weeks up to 12 october. the earlier adoption of blankets as packaging would not only have saved supplies from breakage, but would also have increased the volume of supplies delivered over the track, as thousands of blankets were sent by carrier. without a well-organised effort, less than half of what was dropped was recovered with perhaps 70 per cent of that still usable.  on 16 august, whitehead promised to deliver  of ammunition,  of rations and  of supplies, a total of , to maroubra force daily to maintain three battalions in the kokoda area; but the following day there was a disastrous air raid on jackson drome. a large force of japanese 25 mitsubishi g4m (betty) bombers escorted by 22 zero fighters reached port moresby undetected. no air raid warning was sounded and no fighters took off to intercept before the attack. they caught ten martin b-26 marauders of the 22nd bombardment group on the ground armed and fuelled. four were destroyed, as were three transports of the 21st and 22nd troop carrier squadrons, a dc-5 and two c-56s. another eight aircraft were badly damaged: four b-26s, a c-39, a c-49 and two c-53s. the two c-53s were patched up and flown back to australia for more extensive repairs.  rowell pressed blamey for more aircraft. he wanted to build up 20 days' reserves over and above maroubra force's daily requirement of , which would require the movement of another  of stores and ammunition. even spread over 20 days, this would require an additional 2,000 carriers. blamey went to macarthur, who arranged for six a-24 dauntless dive bombers, a b-17 and two transports to be made available. macarthur reminded blamey that: macarthur and kenney did prevail on washington to provide more troop carrier aircraft. in july, swpa was given a high priority for transport aircraft, with six additional squadrons earmarked to bring it up to two groups. they were scheduled to
arrive in november and december, but their movement was expedited, and the first new squadron, the 6th troop carrier squadron, reached port moresby on 14 october. part of the 33rd troop carrier squadron was held up in the south pacific area, which also had urgent needs. in the meantime, ten dc-3s were converted into c-49s and c-50s at the sacramento air depot and flown out to australia, where they were allocated to the 21st troop carrier squadron in september. ten c-60 lodestars were also despatched, which joined the 22nd troop carrier squadron.  when the 17 august raid occurred, two battalions of the 21st infantry brigade under brigadier arnold potts were moving forward to retake kokoda and prepare for operations to recapture buna. upon being informed by potts that only 10,000 instead of the anticipated 40,000 rations were at myola, rowell took immediate steps to ease the supply situation. he held back the third battalion of potts' brigade, the 2/27th infantry battalion, and ordered allen to return the 39th infantry battalion to port moresby. kienzle had 933 papuans working between myola and isurava. not all were carriers; some collected supplies from the drop area, and others were engaged in other work, such as building huts and shelters. rowell turned down a request from potts for 800 more carriers to move supplies forward from myola, allowing him only another 300 from the port moresby-myola carrier line until stocks at myola were built up. potts' role was to be a defensive one until then, and the 2/14th and 2/16th were to remain in the myola area. on 23 august, an aircraft dropped rations, medical supplies, two 3-inch mortars and 120 mortar bombs. another four loads were dropped the following day before clouds closed in over myola. allen reported that 5,000 emergency rations and 1,500 balanced rations had been dropped, along with  of biscuits and  of other ration components, and 21,000 quinine tablets. some 237,000 rounds of .303 ammunition for the rifles, 140,000 rounds of .45 for the thompson submachine guns, and 1,050 hand grenades had been sent to myola.  the japanese landing at milne bay on 25 august caused allen to retain the 2/27th infantry battalion in the port moresby area in case of a seaborne attack, and he ordered potts to expedite the return of the 39th infantry battalion. as late
as 25 august, potts still intended to recapture kokoda with the 2/14th, but his plans were overtaken by events. the japanese attacked at isurava, and although his force, which still included the 39th battalion, slightly outnumbered the japanese, potts was defeated. myola was lost on 5 september, along with 10,000 rations. in his report, potts noted that due to the delay caused by the shortage of supplies at myola, "at no time were the 2/14th and 2/16th australian infantry battalions ever intact and available for a concerted operation, wholly and solely due to delays occasioned by supply".  from 16 september, the aasc officer at each depot reported the stock levels at 18:00 each day. demands for supplies were forwarded from the q branch at new guinea force headquarters to the deputy director of supplies and transport. this was matched up with the number and type of available aircraft. trucks drew the stores from the depots, where they were packaged and prepared for dropping, and took them to the aerodrome, usually jackson or kila. as time went by, standard load lists were developed. packages of rations were "balanced"-arranged so they contained a complete set of commodities-so that the loss of some packages would not result in surpluses of one commodity and shortages of another. one truck was allocated to each plane, plus one additional truck in case another aircraft became available. each plane would be loaded with the contents of one truck. planes might return with some or all of their load, or not take off at all. at the end of the day, stores remaining on aircraft would be loaded back onto the trucks, and would be returned to the depots. some  were despatched by air supply in august,  in september, and  in october. new drop zones were developed around efogi, nauro and manari. myola was recaptured on 14 october, and myola1 and2 were developed as drop zones.  medical support  the first medical unit to arrive was the 3rd field ambulance, which left adelaide on 25 december 1941, and moved into the murray barracks in port moresby on 3 january 1942. the base hospital became the 46th camp hospital, and moved to king's hollow, a site on the laloki river  from port moresby. a red cross convalescent home at rouna became the 113th convalescent depot. on 3 june the hospital ship  brought the 14th field ambulance and the 5th casualty clearing station.  the 2/9
th general hospital arrived from south australia on the hospital ship manunda on 23 august. it moved to a site at rouna,  from port moresby. it was the only general hospital in new guinea until the 2/5th general hospital arrived in january 1943. due to the prospect that port moresby might fall, it was sent without its nurses or australian army medical women's service physiotherapists. staffed as a 600-bed hospital, it held 732 patients on 6 october. its commanding officer, colonel a. h. green, suggested that it be expanded to a 1,200-bed hospital, or that another 600-bed hospital be sent from australia. authorisation was given to expand to 800 beds on 29 september, and the nurses and physiotherapists were sent. between when it opened in september and the end of december, the 2/9th general hospital admitted 10,083 patients.  malaria was a concern, as it was endemic in new guinea. there was no plasmoquine to cure it, and the main drug used to combat it was quinine, which was not fully effective. the recommended dosage of  per day was found to be insufficient to give protection against the disease in highly malarious areas. quinine was also in short supply, as java, which had been overrun by the japanese, accounted for 90 per cent of the world's supply. moreover, many failed to take the required dose with regularity, insect repellents were not available or not used, protective clothing was not issued to all the troops, and some still went around at night in short sleeves and shorts.  colonel neil hamilton fairley, the australian army's director of medicine, and major ian murray mackerras visited port moresby in june 1942. both were experts on tropical medicine. they noted that the garrison had suffered 1,184 cases of malaria, an infection rate of 149 per thousand. they recommended that to conserve quinine, men could be taken off it during the dry season, and observed for relapses. fortunately, the climate in the owen stanley range was not favourable to mosquitoes, and most cases were relapses by men infected in port moresby or syria. potts therefore decided on 24 august that anti-malarial precautions were no longer necessary.  an epidemic of dysentery broke out on the kokoda track that threatened the entire force. some 1,200 casualties, mostly dysentery, reached ilolo in september. simple hygiene procedures involving the disposal of rubbish and excrement
were required, but were neglected in the early stages of the campaign. lieutenant colonel edward ford, the assistant director of pathology at new guinea force headquarters, arranged for supplies of a new drug, sulphaguanidine, to be shipped from australia. the widespread use of a scarce drug was a gamble, as it used up all the stocks in australia, but one that paid off; it arrested the epidemic, and allowed sick men to travel, thereby saving lives. when the australians advanced on kokoda in october, special details constructed latrines, buried the dead, and, in extreme cases, burned villages that the japanese had fouled beyond redemption.  scrub typhus is spread by mites that live in the soil. soldiers walking through mite-infested areas were fairly safe, but if they sat or lay down or stood still for long enough, the mites could attach themselves. although the incidence of typhus was much less than that of malaria or dysentery, it was more lethal. of 2,839 australian servicemen affected in swpa, 9.05% died. scrub itch, a skin irritation caused by mite bites, was a more common but far less serious ailment. tinea was also a problem, due to the inability of men to keep their clothes or boots dry, or to wash them. a shortage of fresh fruit and vegetables caused vitamin-deficiency-related problems. to save weight and simplify the distribution of rations, the 7th division staff cut back the number of commodities in the ration from thirteen (bully beef, biscuits, tea, sugar, salt, dried fruit, jam, butter, milk, cheese, tinned fruit, tinned vegetables and bacon) to just the first six. inevitably, both the troops and the carriers began to suffer from vitamin deficiencies as well as exhaustion and illness. to supplement the carriers' vitamin b intake, marmite was air dropped for them, but only  was available.  major j. r. magarey, the senior medical officer of the 2/6th field ambulance, initially instituted an unusual casualty evacuation plan, under which casualties were evacuated forward instead of rearward, as potts expected to be able to recapture the airstrip at kokoda, which would allow casualties to be flown out. in forward areas where the carriers could not go, the men of the papuan infantry battalion pitched in, making four teams of stretcher bearers available. during potts' retreat to ioribaiwa, casualty evacuation had to be along the track. medical care was available at each way
station. magarey recalled that:  war correspondent osmar white saw wounded men on the track:   those with more serious injuries had to be carried down the track. the usual decision as to whether it was safe to move someone was simplified by the japanese, who killed all the wounded they encountered. only those near death were abandoned. casualties were held at the aid posts and dressing stations until they could walk, or the japanese threatened. it took eight or ten papuan carriers to move each man. army stretchers rotted and fell apart; the papuans improvised stretchers from blankets, copra bags and timber cut along the track. the pace of the withdrawal was dictated by the rate at which casualties could be evacuated.  when myola was recaptured in october, a main dressing station (mds) was established there, manned by the 2/4th field ambulance and a surgical team from the 2/9th general hospital. on 1 november, 438 patients were held at myola. three days later, kokoda was back in australian hands and an mds established there. it was hoped that aircraft could land at myola and evacuate the sick and wounded, but myola was  above sea level, and the pilots reported that a fully loaded aircraft would not be able to take off or land at that altitude, and would have trouble clearing the surrounding hills. risking the precious transports seemed inadvisable. five light aircraft were made available: three stinson l-1 vigilants, a de havilland dh.50, and a ford trimotor. two stinsons evacuated 35 patients, and the ford another eight from myola, but the ford and a stinson crashed while attempting to land at the port moresby end of the lake bed, which had become soft after recent rains, on 22 and 24 november respectively. over time, more than 200 patients recovered sufficiently to return to their units. walking wounded were sent down the track, while those unable to walk were carried to kokoda by papuan carriers, and flown out from there. the last seven walking cases left for ilolo on 16 december, and the last four stretcher cases for kokoda on 18 december; the mds at myola closed the following day.  outcome the australian army had entered the second world war with inadequate resources due to severe cutbacks at the hands of conservative governments in the 1920s and 1930s. this was compounded by a lack of interest and appreciation of logistics on the part of its civilian and military leadership. there was an assumption that the
australian army would form part of an expeditionary force that would fight overseas in a larger british force. this was indeed the case in the great war, and again in the second world war in the middle east and malaya, but not in swpa, where the australian army had to provide not only its own logistic support but its allies' as well.  in an environment where motor transport could not operate, the australian army was forced to rely on air transport and native carriers, two modes of transportation that it had never used before. the australian army had many lessons to learn, but it proved capable of adapting to the circumstances it found itself in. the fighting along the kokoda track was but the start of the effort to drive the japanese from new guinea that would continue in 1943.  john coates, a chief of the general staff and an historian of the new guinea campaign wrote that:  notes  references                                                                                                                   1942 in papua new guinea territory of papua south west pacific theatre of world war ii papua new guinea in world war ii battles and operations of world war ii involving papua new guinea battles of world war ii involving australia battles of world war ii involving the united states battles of world war ii involving japan military logistics of world war ii military supply chain management military logistics of australia military logistics of the united states
possenti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  benedetto possenti (17th century), italian baroque painter giovanni pietro possenti (1618-1659), italian baroque painter marcello possenti (born 1992), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
brockwell meadows is a 4.3 hectare local nature reserve in kelvedon in essex. it is owned by kelevdon parish council and managed by the council together with a group of local residents called the brockwell group.  this site has water meadow, woodland, a pond and hedgerows. the river blackwater runs along the eastern boundary.  there is access from riveside way.  references  local nature reserves in essex meadows in essex
heath arthur davidson,  (born 9 may 1987) is an australian quad wheelchair tennis player. he represented australia in at the 2016 rio paralympics, where he teamed up with dylan alcott to win the men's quad doubles gold medal. at the 2020 tokyo paralympics, he teamed with alcott to win the men's quad doubles silver medal.  early life davidson was born on 9 may 1987. he contracted viral transverse myelitis at the age of five months and this led to paraplegia. he attended parkdale secondary college in melbourne.  tennis davidson started playing wheelchair tennis at the age of 14. in 2001, at the australian disabled games in queensland he won a bronze medal in wheelchair tennis and two silver medals for table tennis. after ten years he retired from the sport.  after davidson returned to wheelchair tennis, he teamed with dylan alcott to win the prestigious bnp paribas world team cup held in tokyo, japan in may 2016. they upset great britain in the final. davidson and alcott won the men's quad doubles gold medal at the rio paralympics. they defeated the reigning champions david wagner and nick taylor in the gold medal match 4-6, 6-4, 7-5. in the men's quad singles, davidson lost to andy lapthorne (gbr) 0-2 (1-6, 2-6) in the quarter-finals.  in may 2017, davidson won his first international quad singles title by winning the korea open. in 2019, davidson and his partner niels vink won the 2019 wheelchair tennis masters in quad doubles.  at the 2020 tokyo paralympics, he teamed with alcott to win the men's quad doubles silver medal. he lost in the men's quad singles quarter final.  recognition davidson won the variety australia young sports achievers award in 2003 with dylan alcott. in 2016, he shared tennis australia's most outstanding athlete with a disability with doubles partner dylan alcott. he was awarded the medal of the order of australia in 2017.  grand slam tournament finals  quad doubles  references  external links          1987 births living people australian male tennis players australian wheelchair tennis players wheelchair category paralympic competitors paralympic wheelchair tennis players of australia paralympic gold medalists for australia paralympic silver medalists for australia paralympic medalists in wheelchair tennis medalists at the 2016 summer paralympics medalists at the 2020 summer paralympics wheelchair tennis players at the 2016 summer paralympics wheelchair tennis players at the 2020 summer paralympics people with paraplegia recipients of the medal of the order of australia tennis people from victoria (australia)
united nations security council resolution 2095 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions march 2013 events
the professor of the environment at gresham college in london, england, gives free educational lectures to the general public. the college was founded for this purpose in 1596 / 7, when it appointed seven professors; this has since increased to nine and in addition the college now has visiting professors.   the gresham professorship of the environment was established in 2014, thanks to sponsorship by the frank jackson foundation. it is only the second professorship to have been created at the college since its establishment in 1597. the first person appointed to the chair was carolyn roberts.  gresham professors of the environment  references  further reading    law 1596 establishments in england
xiangyang () is a town of jiancaoping district, taiyuan, shanxi, china. , it has one residential community and 11 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of shanxi taiyuan
the associated press nfl most valuable player award is presented annually by the associated press (ap) to a player in the national football league (nfl) deemed to have been the "most valuable" in that year's regular season. while there have been many selectors of nfl mvps in the past, today the mvp award presented by the ap is considered the de facto official nfl mvp award and the most prestigious. since 2011, the nfl has held the annual nfl honors ceremony to recognize the winner of each year's ap mvp award, along with other ap awards, such as the ap nfl offensive player of the year and ap nfl defensive player of the year. the most recent ap nfl mvp is quarterback aaron rodgers of the green bay packers.  the ap has presented an award recognizing the nfl's top player since 1957. the award is voted upon by a panel of 50 sportswriters at the end of the regular season, before the playoffs, though the results are not announced to the public until the day before the super bowl. the sportswriters chosen regularly follow the nfl, and remain mostly consistent from year to year. they are chosen based on expertise and are independent of the league itself. voters for the award have included troy aikman of fox sports; cris collinsworth and tony dungy of nbc sports; and herm edwards of espn. only two players in the history of the award have won it unanimously: new england patriots  quarterback tom brady in 2010 and baltimore ravens quarterback lamar jackson in 2019.  due to voters' tendency to favor offensive positions, the award has been overwhelmingly dominated by offensive players; of the 57 undisputed winners, 54 played an offensive position: 38 quarterbacks and 16 running backs. two defensive players have won the award: alan page in 1971 as a defensive tackle, and lawrence taylor as a linebacker in 1986. the sole special teams player to be named ap nfl mvp was mark moseley, who won as a placekicker in 1982.  thirteen awardees also won the super bowl (or nfl championship game prior to 1966) in the same season. however, this has not occurred since 1999, when mvp kurt warner won super bowl xxxiv with the st. louis rams. since then, nine ap nfl mvps have led their team to the super bowl and were defeated each time. this has led to tongue-in-cheek claims in recent years that there is a "curse" preventing the awardee's team from winning the super bowl.  seven nfl franchises have not produced an mvp, the new york jets (not counting joe nam
ath's two afl mvps), houston texans, jacksonville jaguars, chicago/st. louis/phoenix/arizona cardinals, philadelphia eagles, new orleans saints, and the tampa bay buccaneers.  the green bay packers have the most overall winners with ten; if including disputed awards (see below), the colts would be tied with ten. the green bay packers also have the most unique winners with five players winning the award.  discrepancies the ap has presented an award recognizing the nfl's top player since the 1957 season, although the pre-1961 awardees are recognized in the official nfl record and fact book as winning the ap's "nfl most outstanding player award", and the 1962 winner was recognized as the ap's "player of the year". the ap considers 1961 to be the first year in which it presented a "most valuable player" award. thus there are numerous inconsistencies among sources regarding each of the first four awards, and whether or not the winners are included in the overall list of ap mvp winners at all. the discrepancies include 1958's winner being either jim brown or gino marchetti; the 1959 winner as johnny unitas or charlie conerly; and whether or not norm van brocklin shared the award in 1960 with joe schmidt.  mvp super bowl curse  in recent years, if a player that won the mvp makes it to the super bowl, the mvp often loses the super bowl in the year they won the mvp. that includes brett favre in 1997, kurt warner in 2001, rich gannon in 2002, shaun alexander in 2005, tom brady in 2007 and 2017, peyton manning in 2009 and 2013, cam newton in 2015, and matt ryan in 2016.  ten players have won the super bowl and mvp in the same season: bart starr in 1966, terry bradshaw in 1978, mark moseley in 1982, lawrence taylor in 1986,  joe montana in 1989, emmitt smith in 1993, steve young in 1994, brett favre in 1996, terrell davis in 1998, and kurt warner in 1999. in these ten cases, all but four regular season mvp winners were also the super bowl mvp for their respective games - with moseley, taylor, favre, and davis not completing the duplicate mvp year.  winners  multiple-time winners  see also  national football league most valuable player award for an overview of similar awards from other organizations  associated press nfl offensive player of the year award  associated press nfl defensive player of the year award  associated press nfl coach of the year award  super bowl most valuable
player award  references general        footnotes  national football league trophies and awards most valuable player awards
rojava university (, , ), is a university in syria.  the university was founded in july 2016 with curricula for medicine, engineering, sciences, arts, and humanities. additionally, the university offers programmes for primary school education and kurdish literature the university maintains a partnership with paris 8 university in saint-denis, france and california institute of integral studies in san francisco. in august, the university  opened registration for students in the academic year 2016-2017. an opening ceremony was held on 20 november 2016.  beginning in october 2017, its second academic year, the university added a jineology programme. 711 students attend the university liberal arts, jineology, petrochemistry, agriculture, fine arts, and pedagogy with courses taught in kurdish (the primary instructional language), arabic and english. in 2019, the university also launched a programme for women to learn to overcome sexism within the family and society.  due to operation olive branch many students from the university of afrin have been allocated seats at the university of rojava to continue their studies.  in 2020, the university moved some of its courses online due to the covid-19 pandemic.  see also university of afrin mesopotamian social sciences academy  references  external links  video of the opening of the university of rojava, 21 november 2016  educational institutions established in 2016 education in the autonomous administration of north and east syria rojava qamishli 2016 establishments in syria
democratic people's federation (, fpd) was a christian democratic political organization created in 1975 by jose maria gil-robles, heir of the christian social democracy of jose maria gil-robles y quinones.  the federation was composed of the democratic people's federation, basque christian democracy, democratic party of andalusia, castilla democratic people's party and the western people's association. it held its first and only congress on 29 and 30 january 1977.  it formed, along with democratic left of joaquin ruiz-gimenez, the federation of christian democracy on march 27, 1977, which was part of the christian democratic team of the spanish state. in the 1977 general elections, where it only obtained 1.18% of the votes, so soon after both were dissolved.  members the democratic people's federation was composed of the following parties:   christian democracy of castile.  basque christian democracy.  murcian christian democracy.  western christian democracy.  aragonese christian democracy.  andalusian democratic people's party.  references  1975 establishments in spain 1977 disestablishments in spain christian democratic parties in europe defunct political party alliances in spain political parties disestablished in 1977 political parties established in 1975
ghungrana is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by sarpanch major singh pehlwan's wife who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india). the village has a very old railway station. the towns of dehlon and ahemdgarh are in close proximity to the village. ghunghrana is surrounded by villages kalakh, jartauli and rangian. it falls under pakhowal block and police station jodhan.   the village in the region is known to be the village of sardars. the ex chairman of punjab agro industries punjab sardar jagjit singh dhillon belongs to the village. most residents of ghunghrana belong to the jatt clan dhillon. dry port has been constructed in the land of the village and adjoining village khera.  child sex ratio details the village population of children with an age group from 0-6 is 329 which makes up 9.99% of total population of village. average sex ratio is 865 per 1000 males which is lower than  the state average of 895. the child sex ratio as per census is  552, lower  than  average of 846 in the state of punjab.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
agni ips is a 1997 indian kannada-language action film directed by anand p. raju, written by r. selvaraj and produced by rockline venkatesh. the film stars saikumar and ranjitha, with b. saroja devi playing a supporting role. the film has musical score by ram chakravarthy, and the cinematography was by j. g. krishna.  the film, upon release, met with hugely positive reviews and catapulted actor saikumar's career to greater heights. the film's success led the makers to dub the film into tamil, retaining the same title and also inspired pavan m.k nayak (pammi) to do ips.  plot agni (saikumar) is an honest and short-tempered police officer who clashes with a dangerous gangster called kotwal (satya prakash), while clearing a riot created by him on the streets, agni loses his friend baasha khan (rockline venkatesh). agni marries ranjitha after being stalked and troubled by her. the three students raghupathi, raghava, and rajaram, who are responsible for ruining the college, are arrested by agni.  kotwal and a corrupt politician (sudheer) create a lot of troubles in which baasha khan's mother gets killed, and ranjitha suffers a miscarriage, which leads to divorcing agni by blaming him for the mess. in the end, ranjitha and the lawyer (saroja devi) gets kidnapped, agni saves them and kills kotwal.  cast   saikumar as agni ips  ranjitha as sneha   b. saroja devi   umashri as baasha khan's mother  satya prakash as kotwal  sudheer  mandeep roy  shakti prasad  lakshman rao   param gubbi   rockline venkatesh as baasha khan  vasudev rao  b. jayamma   rathnakar  soundtrack  the music was composed by ram chakravarthy, with lyrics by s. keshavamurthy.  references  external links     1997 films indian films 1990s kannada-language films indian action films fictional portrayals of the karnataka police 1990s masala films indian police films 1997 action films 1990s police films
dalimil mikyska (born 16 august 1999) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc karlovy vary in the czech extraliga (elh) on loan from hc kometa brno.  mikyska made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc kometa brno during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  references  external links  1999 births living people czech ice hockey defencemen hc karlovy vary players hc kometa brno players people from breclav sk horacka slavia trebic players
tapirus cristatellus is an extinct species of tapir from the pleistocene of south america. remains are known from brazil, specifically the states of minas gerais and bahia.  the now extinct tapirs of pleistocene north america may have been derived from t. cristatellus.  references  prehistoric tapirs pleistocene mammals of south america pleistocene odd-toed ungulates
bertarelli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  camillo bertarelli (1886-1982), italian cyclist dona bertarelli (born 1968), swiss businesswoman and billionaire ernesto bertarelli (born 1965), italian-born swiss businessman, billionaire and philanthropist kirsty bertarelli (born 1971), british billionaire  italian-language surnames
the typhoon h is a 6 rotor multicopter or uav produced by yuneec international which was launched in april 2016.  significant features of the typhoon h may be summarized as follows  ready to fly  3-axis anti-vibration gimbal camera with full 360° rotation, up to 4k resolution  retractable landing gear  front facing ultrasonic collision detection with optional intel realsense collision avoidance  folding rotor arms  remote control incorporating built in 7" android tablet  22 minutes flight time  choice of 5.8 ghz or 2.4 ghz radio transmission  st16 radio transmitter with built in video streaming feed directly from typhoon h  cgo3+ 4k lens camera  autonomous flight with way points, orbit mode, follow me mode, and tracking mode  gps (global positioning system)  return to home feature which enables the pilot to press return to home and the typhoon h will fly and land back at its starting point  altitude and position holding  5 rotor mode which enables the pilot to land safely if one motor is damaged during flight  durable and quality carbon fiber/hard plastic material  the typhoon h is considered an upgrade to the dji phantom 3 and 4 and spreading wings model line as well as the dji inspire pro and is designed specifically for aerial photography and cinematography.  an upgraded version of the typhoon h that includes a vision based collision avoidance system called 'intel realsense' was demonstrated at the ces 2016 trade show.  a key reason why the typhoon h has been successful in the aerial cinematography world and is often preferred to models like dji's phantom and inspire, is because of the built in android tablet to the 2.4ghz transmitter. this provides built in telemetry and direct camera streaming. the drone is also known for its unusually high camera quality out of the box which companies such as dji have lacked. although the range on the typhoon h is not as far as the dji phantom lineup, many professional cinematographers have said they prefer the low latency transmission which dji does not offer. both drones do operate with full control well beyond eyesight.  yuneec is now employing mike mcconville, a very famous and long time employee of horizon hobby. he is a world famous radio control pilot who is decorated with many awards and accomplishments in the radio control hobby. mcconville is one of the first people to use and develop 2.4ghz radio bandwidth in rc technology. he is responsible for the creation of many rc models and drones. he is currently a senior employee at yuneec
international.  yuneec announced on 1/9/2018 a big brother to the typhoon h called the typhoon h plus. it will be the same design as the original, but with an improved camera, larger frame, and longer flight times.  references  external links   http://www.yuneec.com/typhoon-h  yuneec aircraft unmanned aerial vehicles of china unmanned helicopters radio-controlled helicopters
events from the year 1813 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander i  events  births  deaths         elizabeth divov, courtier  (b. 1762)  references  1813 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
concepts in blue is an album by jazz trombonist j. j. johnson recorded in 1980 for the pablo today label and originally released as a cd in 2002.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow stated "this is a fun set of straightahead jazz. the colorful frontline obviously enjoyed playing the blues-oriented repertoire and the solos are consistently rewarding. nothing all that innovative occurs but the results are pleasing".  track listing all compositions by j. j. johnson except where noted.  "blue nun" - 5:03  "nermus" - 6:10  "village blues" (john coltrane) - 5:07  "azure" - 6:00  "coming home" (kevin johnson) - 7:10  "concepts in blue" - 7:56  "mohawk" - 6:01  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone clark terry - trumpet, flugelhorn ernie watts - tenor saxophone, alto saxophone victor feldman - vibraphone, keyboards (tracks 1 & 5)  billy childs (track 6), pete jolly (tracks 2-4 & 7) - keyboards  ray brown (tracks 3, 6 & 7), tony dumas (tracks 1, 2, 4 & 5) - bass kevin johnson - drums  references   1981 albums pablo records albums j. j. johnson albums
olenecamptus lumawigi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1980.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1980
fehim spaho (13 february 1877 - 14 february 1942) was the grand mufti of yugoslavia and one of the most prominent bosniak cultural figures of his time. his younger brother was politician mehmed spaho.  spaho worked in varying positions in sarajevo and belgrade's local governments between 1901 and 1920. at his own request he was returned to sarajevo where he was a senior government adviser on faith. he served as the president of the higher sharia court in sarajevo from 1936 until 1938. he was appointed the grand mufti of yugoslavia in 1938, holding the position until his sudden death four years later.  grand mufti on 20 april 1938 spaho was among three candidates for the reis-ul-ulema, or grand mufti, of yugoslavia. he was appointed on 26 april 1938 and his inauguration ceremony occurred in the emperor's mosque on 9 june 1938.  personal life fehim spaho was born 13 february 1877 in ottoman-controlled sarajevo to a coppersmith family. his father, hasan spaho was an expert of the sharia law, and before the austrian-hungarian occupation in 1878, he was a judge in jajce, sofia, damascus and cairo. his mother was fatima (nee bicakcic). spaho had two brothers, mehmed and mustafa and three sisters, behija, aisa and habiba. spaho was educated in sarajevo and attended sharia law school.  fehim spaho died unexpectedly on 14 february 1942 in war-torn sarajevo, one day after turning 65.  references  |-  1877 births 1942 deaths bosniaks of bosnia and herzegovina bosnia and herzegovina imams people from bosanska krupa 20th-century imams grand muftis of yugoslavia
badshahpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of badshahpur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, badshahpur has a total number of 145 houses and population of 817 of which include 419 males and 398 females. literacy rate of badshahpur is 69.71%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 104 which is 12.73% of total population of badshahpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 1167 higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the sarria capuchins are a community of the capuchins that settled in barcelona in 1578 after a request of the consell de cent (ancient city rulers of barcelona), and against the will of the king philip ii.  history  beginnings   after a request of the consell de cent (ancient city rulers of barcelona) in 1578, some capuchins from italy came to barcelona, and they settled in the hermitage of santa madrona near montjuic. after a short period, they stayed for another short period in sant gervasi de cassoles, but just in the same year the friars moved to a place called the desert of sarria (in this context desert means uninhabited place), where there was a chapel for saint eulalia, that had been built during the 15th century. it had been traditionally considered the birthplace of this martyr of barcelona. thus, in 1578, this place was given to the capuchin friars so that they could found a convent of their order. this convent was the first one from their order in the iberian peninsula. this first capuchin convent coexisted with the one of montcalvari, that was also founded during those years outside the walls of barcelona. during the 1714 siege in the war of the spanish succession the convent was taken by the army, but most of the capuchins could remain in order to fulfil its religious duties, and the place was respected.  the convent of sarria was therefore the first one of the capuchins in the iberian peninsula, and it disappeared in 1835 with the seizure of goods from the church during the ecclesiastical confiscations of mendizabal. the lands were acquired by the italian enrico sisley. he got them in a rather not fully legal way and without any logical explanation.  restoration   after some years and failed attempts, the ponsich family from sarria donated the present lands, where the convent began to be built in 1887. since 1900, it became the center of the provincial curia and studies center. it became also a center of culture, that was frequently visited by important intellectuals in the beginning of the 20th century in catalonia, such as josep carner, carles riba, jaume bofill, francesc pujols and francesc cambo. the convent was also an important center of biblical studies, with leading figures such as antoni m. de barcelona or marc de castellvi. miquel d'esplugues was president of the catalan biblical foundation, which, among other works, made the translation into catalan from the original texts
, which was almost contemporary of the other version made in montserrat by bonaventura ubach. this tradition of biblical studies has continued until now, with present experts such as frederic raurell, enric cortes and jordi cervera.  miquel d'esplugues also founded and was the director of the review estudios franciscanos in 1907. this review is still published, after a short period after the spanish civil war, in which it was not published. he also founded in 1925 the first catalan review on philosophy, criterion (1925-1936).  in 1936 the convent was burned and saccaged by the anarchist militia, but the neighbours helped to save part of the library. in 1939 the restoration began, under the direction of the architect pere benavent. the review estudios franciscanos was published again since 1948. the new director was basili de rubi. criterion was also published again in 1959, but now it was a collection of philosophical and religious matters. basili de rubi was also the new director, and during a short time, alvar maduell. the collection was going to be at first a review, but the laws of the francoist minister manuel fraga iribarne did not authorize that, and the review was closed in 1969.  during the 1950s, basili de rubi founded the association franciscalia. it was an association with the aim of fostering spirituality and culture. it had laymen collaborators such as roc llorens, josep maria pinol, jordi maragall and tomas carreras artau, among others.  in 1966 the convent held a meeting of students, which was known as the caputxinada, where there was an assembly in which the sindicat democratic d'estudiants de la universitat de barcelona (sdeub - democratic students union of the university of barcelona) was founded. the police surrounded the convent during three days, and it caused a state of sympathy, even at an international level.  under the altar of one chapel, inside a vase, there are the remainders of nine out of the twenty-six capuchin martyrs of the beginning of the spanish civil war. the rest has not been found. these martyrs were beatified on 21 november 2015 in the cathedral of barcelona.  nowadays, the convent of sarria hosts the missions ethnographic museum, the hispano-capuchin library and the provincial archive of the capuchins of catalonia and the balearic islands, among others. in 2006 it received the medal of honor of barcelona.  distinguished capuchins  missionaries  josep
busquets i quintana  camil placid crous i salichs  maties sola i farell  francesc xavier vila i mateu  philosophers  miquel d'esplugues  jordi llimona i barret  historians  basili de rubi  nolasc del molar  marti de barcelona  valenti serra de manresa  theologians  joan botam  esteve blanch i busquets  bible researchers  antoni maria de barcelona.  marc de castellvi.  frederic raurell.  enric cortes.  jordi cervera.  publications   estudios franciscanos (franciscan studies). it is a review about church and franciscan studies, which was founded, with an apologetic aim, by miquel d'esplugues in 1907. it ceased to be published in 1936 and it was published again since 1948. nowadays it is a scientific media of research of all the capuchin provinces of spain and portugal. it publishes articles in all the languages that are spoken in the iberian peninsula.  catalunya franciscana (franciscan catalonia). it was born in 1926, linked with the secular franciscan order. the present director is josep manuel vallejo.  external links    christian community of the sarria capuchins  bibliography   barraquer roviralta, cayetano. las casas de los religiosos en cataluna, durante el primer tercio del siglo xix. barcelona. imp. altes. 1906 (2 volumes).   barraquer roviralta, cayetano. los religiosos en cataluna durante la primera mitad del siglo xix. barcelona. imp. altes. 1915-1917 (4 volumes).    basili de rubi. un segle de vida caputxina a catalunya (1564-1664). aproximacio historico-bibliografica. barcelona, caputxins de sarria, 1978.   basili de rubi. els caputxins a la barcelona del segle xviii. aproximacio historico-bibliografica. barcelona, caputxins de sarria, 1984.   marti i marti, c. j. estadistica de la provincia de frares menors caputxins de catalunya. 1900-1975. barcelona. curia provincial. 1975.   serra de manresa, valenti. els framenors caputxins a la catalunya del segle xix. represa conventual, exclaustracions i restauracio (1814-1900). facultat
de teologia de catalunya, barcelona 1998.   serra de manresa, valenti. la provincia de framenors caputxins de catalunya: de la restauracio provincial a l'esclat de la guerra civil (1900-1936). facultat de teologia de catalunya, barcelona 2000.   serra de manresa, valenti. el terc orde dels caputxins. aportacions del laicat francisca a la historia contemporania de catalunya (1883-1957). facultat de teologia de catalunya. barcelona. 2004.   serra de manresa, valenti. els frares caputxins de catalunya: de la segona republica a la postguerra, 1931-1942. facultat de teologia de catalunya. barcelona. 2014.  references     convents in spain
the fenton river is a major water source for the university of connecticut that runs through mansfield, storrs, and willington, as well as small parts of windham, all but the latter in tolland county, connecticut. spanning 18.895 miles (about 30.408 kilometers). it feeds into mansfield hollow reservoir at its end, making it a tributary to the mount hope, natchaug, and willimantic rivers. the fenton river is fed by several smaller brooks, streams, and creeks. it is used as a water source by the university of connecticut storrs campus, and is as thus relatively shallow. the stone gristmill on the intersection of stonemill and gurleyville roads was once functional, and now is protected by the joshua's tract conservation and historic trust. along its shores are huge swaths of protected land, mainly belonging to the university, joshua's trust, nipmuck trail, or other such preserve. soil erosion is a small problem along some stretches. the usgs has a river flow and height monitoring station posted in the fenton on old turnpike road, in storrs. it is currently not being pumped due to drought.  name and lore fenton river is said to have been named after francis "the money maker" fenton, who manufactured counterfeit silver coins and escaped a police officer by hiding at the bottom of the river, breathing through a hollow reed. later he was arrested and brought to trial, but since the counterfeit coins were spanish dollars (found to be made of pure silver), and there was no law against counterfeiting foreign currency, he was acquitted.  flora and fauna the animal life that is found here is much like that of any river in northeastern connecticut. great blue heron sightings are common, as are those of snapping turtles and bobcats on the shore. occasionally, a loon may be spotted, though this is rare, and often dismissed as a duck. it is a renowned fishing spot among local anglers, providing rainbow trout and salmon. many of the trout are placed in the river by the deep and by uconn. many mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians are found here, and it is a breeding ground for dragonflies and other insects.  a good selection of plants grow along the banks. trees such as birch, pine, beech, and willow abound. oaks and maples are found in smaller numbers. there is enough moisture and shade for several species of fungi to grow in.  see also  nipmuck trail  mansfield hollow  mount hope river  natchaug river
willimantic river  references  sources  rivers of connecticut tributaries of the thames river (connecticut) rivers of tolland county, connecticut
jacob chaplin-saunders (born april 15, 1992 in halifax, nova scotia) is a canadian sailor. along with his partner (and brother) graeme saunders, competed at the 2016 summer olympics in the 470 event. they finished in 22nd place.  he represented canada at the 2020 summer olympics.  references  external links official website    living people canadian male sailors (sport) 1992 births sportspeople from halifax, nova scotia sailors at the 2016 summer olympics - 470 olympic sailors of canada sailors at the 2020 summer olympics - 470
the 1949 honduran amateur league was the third edition of the honduran amateur league.  c.d. hibueras obtained its 1st national title.  the season ran from 10 april to 30 october 1949.  regional champions  known results  national championship round played in a single round-robin format in tegucigalpa between the regional champions.  also known as the triangular.  results  hibueras's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1949 in honduras
vera nikolaevna zavadovskaya (nee apraksina, november 2, 1768 - november 22, 1845) was a russian courtier. she served as maid of honour to empress catherine the great. she was married to pyotr zavadovsky and known for her love affair with prince ivan baryatinsky and for being the mistress and muse of the poet sergey marin.  references   в апреле 1785 года у п. п. нарышкина умерла его первая жена графиня мария николаевна салтыкова (1766-1785), второи женои его стала в 1786 году екатерина николаевна опочинина (1766-1851).  1768 births 1845 deaths ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire
residential surveillance at a designated location (rsdl) (chinese: 指定居所监视居住) is a form of detention regularly used by authorities in the people's republic of china against individuals accused of endangering state security. rsdl is usually carried out at special facilities run by the public or state security bureaus of china, often euphemistically called "training centers," or even hotels that have been converted into black jails. laws regulating rsdl contain exceptions that allow the state to not inform the family members of the detained about their loved one's incarceration, while also denying detainees access to a lawyer. on the surface, the measure appears to be a softer form of detention like house arrest; but in practice the measure allows for what one journalist calls "the disappearing" of suspects into secret detention."  the measure has been used heavily since 2015 against human rights lawyers, falun gong practitioners and dozens of others accused of political offences, including foreigners.  those under residential surveillance may be held for up to six months and may only speak with other parties with permission of the police; in effect this means that they may be denied legal counsel and visitation.  residential surveillance at a designated location became available to police in 2012 when article 73 of china's criminal procedure law was amended to allow it. articles 72 to 77 of the criminal procedure law describe residential surveillance being for investigation of crimes relating to "endangering state security," "terrorism" or "serious crimes of bribery." this form of residential surveillance does not occur at the home of the suspect, but at a place designated by the police.  background the history of residential surveillance at a designated location traces its heritage back to a related form of detention named "residential surveillance." in 1954, the law on detention and arrest was enacted in china which included a clause that regulated residential surveillance. the law established residential surveillance as an alternative to arrest applied to those who met the requirements for arrest but could not be arrested because they were seriously ill, pregnant, or nursing a newborn. this form of detention was very rarely used by authorities; when used, the police often held people in specialized facilities as opposed to their own residences.  by 1979, residential surveillance was included in the first criminal procedure law, which included a rough definition of the measure. according to article 38(2) of the law, residential surveillance prevents the suspect or defendant from leaving a "designated area." the vague nature of residential surveillance, regarding who it targeted and how it
was enforced, resulted in a series of abuses of the system during the 1980s and 1990s. these abuses ranged from the police using residential surveillance to pressure individuals to repay debts, to the defining of the "designated area" as a room in a police station or, even a detention center. these abuses were severe enough to warrant a ruling from the supreme people's court in 1984, that admonished the public security apparatus for improperly enforcing residential surveillance outside the domicile of the suspect.  in the lead up to 1996 revision of the, criminal procedure law many scholars suggested that residential surveillance should be abolished. yet lawmakers chose to keep residential surveillance due to its usefulness in "certain investigation" and utility in arrests. the new revision of the criminal procedure law established clearer rules for the implementation of residential surveillance, set guidelines governing when it could be applied as well as setting explicit limits on its duration. the revision to the law notably obliged the person under surveillance to remain in their home until given permission to leave and decreed that those without a "fixed domicile" could be confined to a "designated residence." another addition of the 1996 reform was an attempt to differentiate between residential surveillance and bail, by setting different degrees of restriction on the civil liberties and mobility of the targeted person. individuals who posted bail would be limited to the city or country they resided in while those under residential surveillance would be limited to their own domicile and be unable to meet with other people without permission. one significant oversight of 1996 reform was the failure to define "fixed domicile." this term went undefined until 1998 when the ministry of public security issued regulations that defined it as being a legal residence in the jurisdiction of the public security organ investigating the suspect.  the most recent revision of the criminal procedure law in 2012 again reformed residential surveillance resulting in the legal separation of residential surveillance into two forms: residential surveillance and residential surveillance at a designated location. the 2012 criminal procedure law allowed for the application of rsdl, when the suspect lacked a "fixed domicile," or was accused of either endangering state security or engaging in serious bribery. another major addition in the criminal procedure law of 2012 was the crediting of time that a suspect spent under residential surveillance for any future sentences. for every two days a suspect spent in residential surveillance, one day would be subtracted from a sentence of imprisonment or penal servitude.  prominent persons detained under rsdl michael korvig and michael spavor are both canadian citizens who were detained in 2018 using rsdl
. the detention of these two canadians was allegedly in retaliation for the arrest of huawei executive meng wenzhou by canadian authorities and her resulting extradition to the united states. in a press conference on march 19, of 2021 foreign ministry spokesman zhao lijian asserted that china's judicial organs handle cases independently in full accordance with china's own laws and the vienna convention on consular relations. he went on to further state that since the case involves state secrets it will not be heard in an open court, and canadian diplomats will be unable to sit in on the trial.  cheng lei, prominent australian television anchor and journalist working in china was detained on august 14, 2020, and was being held under rsdl. in september 2020 it was revealed by chinese officials that she was accused of supplying state secrets overseas, and thus endangering china's national security.  well known victims have included artist ai weiwei, nobel peace prize-winning poet liu xiaobo, swedish bookseller gui minhai, and women's tennis star peng shuai.  see also  forced disappearance  references  further reading  caster, michael. the people's republic of the disappeared: stories from inside china's system for enforced disappearances. safeguard defenders, 2017.    social issues in china enforced disappearance
sunnymede is an unincorporated community in noble township, wabash county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of wabash.  geography sunnymede is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in wabash county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
george charles galster (born 1948) is the clarence hilberry professor of urban affairs in the department of urban studies & planning at wayne state university in detroit, michigan, usa.  education galster received his b.a. in economics summa cum laude from wittenberg university, his b.s. in organizational science, also summa cum laude, from case western reserve university, and his ph.d. in economics from the massachusetts institute of technology.  career galster joined the urban institute in 1993 as a principal research associate, and was its director of housing research from 1994 to 1996, when he joined wayne state university.  research galster is known for studying urban housing markets, economic segregation in american cities, and housing discrimination against african americans.  views galster has been critical of the detroit light rail program, qline, arguing that it will benefit property owners in the city, rather than those who are too poor to live near the woodward avenue corridor. he has also criticized blight removal programs in detroit for not addressing the root causes of the problem, and has compared them to "putting a band-aid on a wound" in this regard. he argues that the root causes of this problem include the construction of thousands of excess homes in detroit since the 1950s due to the city's deregulated housing market.  references  1948 births living people wayne state university faculty mit school of humanities, arts, and social sciences alumni wittenberg university alumni case western reserve university alumni 21st-century american economists
grenada was an american thoroughbred racehorse. he won the 1880 preakness stakes, belmont stakes, and travers stakes. he is one of only seven horses to have won these three races.  background  grenada was bred in kentucky at woodburn stud by alexander john alexander. he was sired by king alfonso, a successful sire of several stakes winners. his dam was mattie gross, a daughter of the famous lexington. when he was a yearling, grenada was sold at the 1878 woodburn yearling sale for $1,300 to george l. lorillard.  racing career  two-year-old season  grenada started 11 times as a two-year-old. he won the club purse at long branch, as well as the windsor hotel stakes. he came second six times, and placed third once. he was unplaced in his remaining two races.  three-year-old season  grenada started 19 times as a three-year-old, winning ten. he started the season by winning the potomac stakes on may 19th.  references  1877 racehorse births racehorses bred in kentucky racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners belmont stakes winners thoroughbred family a20
kotara high school is a government-funded co-educational comprehensive secondary day school, located in adamstown heights, a suburb of newcastle, new south wales, australia.  established in 1968, the school enrolled approximately 1,070 students in 2018, from year 7 to year 12, of whom three percent identified as indigenous australians and eleven percent were from a language background other than english. the school is operated by the new south wales department of education and its current principal is mark sneddon.  description kotara high school has four main buildings, named a, b, c and d "blocks" respectively. other major buildings include the administration building (built in 2018) which houses administrative staff as well as the senior leadership team, and the multi-purpose centre used for assemblies, performance, and sporting activities. in the centre of the school is the quadrangle with a cola structure used for shade at one end. the school also features two basketball/netball courts, a field, and a canteen building equipped with facilities to play net sports as well as change rooms and shower amenities.  the school's colours are green, black, yellow and white.  school organisation the school is divided in to eight main academic faculties. these are english, science, mathematics, human society and its environment, technology and applied sciences, personal development and health, support unit, and the language, art and music faculty. each faculty is led by a head teacher, there is also a head teacher of administration, and a head teacher of teaching & learning. until recently, the school had a social science faculty and a history faculty, however these have now been merged.  the school is led by the principal and two deputy principals. student representation is an important aspect of the school's culture. the student representative council (src) is the main body through which students are able to have an input in to the leadership of the school. kotara high's src consists of three elected members from each year group from year 8 to year 10, and six elected members from year 11. the src is led by its executive year 12 members who consist of one male and one female captain, one male and one female vice captain, and a president.  curriculum the school delivers the mandated curriculum developed by the new south wales education standards authority. students in the junior school (years 7-10) study the core subjects of english, mathematics, science, history, geography, language, music, visual art, metalwork, woodwork, cooking, textiles,
physical education and health.  from year 8, students are able to select a certain number of their subjects based on their personal interests and aspirations. examples of subject choices include commerce, photography, drama, multi-media and film, conspiracies in history, law and you, travel and tourism, architectural design, japanese language, french language, timber technology, engineering, electronics, aboriginal studies, drama, life and the universe, metal technology, child studies, marine and aquaculture technology, and european language and culture.  in the senior school, students work towards a higher school certificate, and other vocational qualifications to suit their post-school aspirations.  school events highlights of the school calendar include annual swimming, athletics, cross country carnivals and more recently, the "big day out". the big day out is an event in which performing arts students from the school showcase a mini concert.  see also    list of government schools in new south wales  education in australia  references  external links  nsw schools website  public high schools in new south wales education in newcastle, new south wales 1968 establishments in australia educational institutions established in 1968
adolfo sormani (born 11 august 1965) is an italian retired footballer and current head coach. he is the son of former footballer and coach angelo sormani.  playing career a napoli youth product, he has mostly played in the minor divisions of italy, except for a short stint at avellino.  coaching career following his retirement as a player, sormani became a coach and served in the youth teams of juventus and napoli as well.  he briefly served in 2016 as head coach of albanian team partizani tirana. successively he was appointed in charge of danish second division club vejle boldklub, guiding them to promotion before leaving in 2019.  after a short return at partizani tirana in 2020, he was named new head coach of serie d club lavello before being fired in november 2021.  references  1965 births living people footballers from naples italian footballers association football midfielders serie a players serie b players s.s.c. napoli players u.s. avellino 1912 players italian football managers f.c. sudtirol managers fk partizani tirana managers vejle boldklub managers kategoria superiore managers italian expatriate football managers expatriate football managers in albania italian expatriate sportspeople in albania expatriate football managers in denmark italian expatriate sportspeople in denmark
this page details statistics of the leinster senior hurling championship.  general performances  by county  teams  by decade the most successful team of each decade, judged by number of leinster senior hurling championship titles, is as follows:   1880s: 1 each for kilkenny (1888) and dublin (1889)  1890s: 4 for kilkenny (1893-95-97-98)  1900s: 6 for kilkenny (1900-03-04-05-07-09)  1910s: 4 for kilkenny (1911-12-13-16)  1920s: 5 each for dublin (1920-21-24-27-28) and kilkenny (1922-23-25-26-29)  1930s: 7 for kilkenny (1931-32-33-35-36-37-39)  1940s: 5 for kilkenny (1940-43-45-46-47)  1950s: 5 for kilkenny (1950-53-57-58-59)  1960s: 4 each for wexford (1960-62-65-68) and kilkenny (1963-66-67-69)  1970s: 7 for kilkenny (1971-72-73-74-75-78-79)  1980s: 6 for offaly (1980-81-84-85-88-89)  1990s: 5 for kilkenny (1991-92-93-98-99)  2000s: 9 for kilkenny (2000-01-02-03-05-06-07-08-09)  2010s: 5 for kilkenny (2010-11-14-15-16)  2020s: 2 for kilkenny (2020-21)  other records  biggest wins   the most one sided leinster finals since 1896 when goals were made equal to three points:  21 points - 1901: wexford 7-6 (27) - (6) 1-3 offaly  19 points - 2008: kilkenny 5-21 (36) - (17) 0-17 wexford  18 points - 1896: dublin 4-6 (18) - (0) 0-00 kilkenny  successful defending  all 6 teams of the 6 who have won the leinster championship have successfully defended the title. these are:  kilkenny on 40 attempts out of 71 (1898, 1904, 1905, 1912, 1913, 1923, 1926, 1932, 1933, 1936, 1937, 1940, 1946, 1947, 1958, 1959, 1967, 1972, 1973, 1974, 1975
, 1979, 1983, 1987, 1992, 1993, 1999, 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, 2006, 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2015, 2016, 2021)  wexford on 5 attempts out of 19 (1891, 1955, 1956, 1977, 1997)  dublin on 4 attempts out of 23 (1920, 1921, 1928, 1942)  offaly on 4 attempts out of 8 (1981, 1985, 1989, 1990)  galway on 1 attempts out of 3 (2018)  laois on 1 attempts out of 2 (1915)  gaps   the longest gaps between successive leinster titles:  52 years: dublin (1961-2013)  34 years: laois (1915-1949)  33 years: wexford (1918-1951)  19 years: wexford (1977-1996)  longest undefeated run  the record for the longest unbeaten run stands at 15 games held by kilkenny. it began with a 6-28 to 0-15 win against offaly in the semi-final of the 2005 championship and finished with a 2-21 to 0-9 defeat of dublin in the leinster semi-final of the 2012 championship. the 15-game unbeaten streak, which included no drawn games, ended with a 2-21 to 2-11 loss to galway in the 2012 leinster final.  players  top scorers  all time  this is a list of players who have scored a cumulative total of 100 points or more in the leinster championship.  by year  single game  finals  all-time appearances  leinster final appearances  see also  all-ireland senior hurling championship records and statistics  munster senior hurling championship records and statistics  references  hurling records and statistics records
george pistereanu  born 13 november 1990 is a romanian actor. he is an actor, known for the films if i want to whistle, i whistle (2010), loverboy (2011) and you're ugly too (2015).  selected filmography  references  external links   1989 births living people romanian male film actors caragiale academy of theatrical arts and cinematography alumni actors from bucharest
the 1907 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1907 college football season.  in their first season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 4-2-1 record and shut out five of seven opponents.  after losing to albion (0-5) and olivet (0-3), the team did not allow a point to be scored by its opponents in the final four games against central normal (29-0), ferris state (0-0), michigan state normal (6-0), and kalamazoo (40-0).  halfback tubby meyers was the team captain for the second of three consecutive years.  the 1907 season marked the beginning of a 15-year tenure by william h. spaulding as the school's head football coach.  spalding had played college football at wabash college in 1906. he coached the western state football team from 1907 to 1921, compiling a 62-25-3 record, and later served as head football coach at minnesota (1922-1924) and ucla (1925-1938).  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
the parvenus (slovene: jara gospoda) is a 1953 yugoslav historical drama film directed by bojan stupica and starring vladimir skrbinsek,  elvira kralj and ljudevit pristavec. it is based on a novel by janko kersnik portraying life amongst the slovenian elite of trieste, then part of the austro-hungarian empire, during the 1890s.  partial cast  vladimir skrbinsek as tine pl. mali    elvira kralj as tercijalka    ljudevit pristavec as sodni pisar    ciril medved as sitna kmetica    janez cesar as pravdarski kmet    metka bucar as postarna gospodicna    masa slavec as postarana gospodicna    drago zupan as pl. orel    ivan mrak as pianist    luce florentini as pepe - zozef    lojze drenovec as penzionist    stane sever as pavle    stane potokar as mozakar    marija nablocka as madam lili    mila kacic as kuharica   josip danes as komodni dunajcan    france kosmac as komi z zobotrebcem    tina leon as julija    ante gnidovec as gostilnicar    nezka gorjup as gospa z deznikom    lili novy as dunajcanka   dusa pockaj as blondinka    helmut turzansky as baron herbert    zvone sintic as avskultant    bojan stupica as dr. andrej vrbanoj    mira stupica as ancka  references  bibliography   steve fallon. slovenia. lonely planet, 2010.  external links     1953 films 1950s historical drama films yugoslav films yugoslav historical drama films slovene-language films films set in trieste films set in the 1890s 1953 drama films yugoslav black-and-white films
the girl from moon bridge (finnish: tytto kuunsillalta) is a 1953 finnish drama film directed by  matti kassila and starring tyyne haarla, ansa ikonen and paavo jannes.  cast   tyyne haarla  as eva boman    ansa ikonen  as pepi varala    paavo jannes  as professor    kullervo kalske  as mr. puranen    arvo lehesmaa  as prof. anttila    kaisu leppanen  as margit    kerstin nylander  as flora ramberg    ilmi parkkari  as silja varala    matti ranin  as juhani varala    sven relander  as mr. alvenius    joel rinne  as erik ramberg    eero roine as judge lindman    kaarlo saarnio as dean    vilho siivola  as erland varala  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by matti kassila finnish black-and-white films
the electricity use in portugal (gross production + imports - exports - losses) was 51.2 twh in 2008. portugal imported 9 twh electricity in 2008. population was 10.6 million. in 2018 electricity was generated by 23% hydroelectricity, 26% natural gas, 22% wind, 20% coal, 5% biomass, 2% solar and 2% oil. in 2019 electricity was generated by 19% hydroelectricity, 32% natural gas, 26% wind, 10% coal, 6% biomass, 2% solar, 2% oil and 1% other combustibles.  main power stations  hydro  the pumped-storage hydroelectricity plant at frades works as 880 mw for generation and 780 mw for pumping.  wind power   portugal produced 20% of electricity with wind power in 2017. and had the average year capacity of 14% of wind power in the end 2010. wind power capacity was 3,357 mw in end 2009 and 3,702 mw in end 2010.  solar power   in lisbon the energy  payback time (see also eroei) in the roof top solar photovoltaic (pv) technology  is less than 2 years and less than in sydney, munich, athens or barcelona, but some more than in madrid, los angeles or ankara.  transmission   redes energeticas nacionais manages the high voltage power lines.  in 2014, portugal had an electricity interconnection level (international transmission capacity relative to production capacity) of 7%, below the recommended 10% level.  references  electric power in portugal
great turnstile, little turnstile and new turnstile are alleys between high holborn and lincoln's inn fields in london.  they originally had turnstiles to prevent cattle from straying.  they later became busy lanes and were built up with shops and housing.  numerous businesses were established there including booksellers, publishers and makers of scientific instruments.  names great turnstile, little turnstile and new turnstile link the highway of high holborn and the open ground of lincoln's inn fields.  they are named after the turnstiles which were put there in tudor times to prevent cattle grazing on the fields from escaping into holborn.  the new turnstile is so-called because it was created later in 1685.  other names for the great turnstile include turngatlane, turnstile alley, turningstile lane and turnepike lane.  it was recorded as turngatlane in 1522 and records show that it was not built up with shops and housing until after 1545.  shops shops and other businesses set up in the great turnstile.  these included a bookseller, milliner, printer, sempster and shoemaker.  in 1829, brayley wrote that the great turnstile's businesses then included a butcher, cutler, fruiterer, pastry-cook, tobacconist and manufacturer of bonnets, dresses and gloves, while the little turnstile had brokers and petty chandlers, and the new turnstile had a variety of small shopkeepers.  scientific instruments in 1750, the first civil engineer, john smeaton, made philosophical instruments at the great turnstile.  another instrument maker to set up business there was william ford stanley, who rented number 3, great turnstile in 1854 and made wooden drawing instruments.  this business was not successful initially but stanley was a resourceful inventor and became a pioneer of making such instruments from aluminium with accurate scales, and expanded his product line to include surveying instruments such as theodolites.  in ten years, he had several factories in the area and two more shops in the great turnstile.  the business went on to become the largest instrument maker in the world so that, in 1914, the american machinist acclaimed his first shop as a landmark in engineering.  booksellers and publishers both the great and little turnstiles were well known for their booksellers and publishers.  in 1636, george hutton was at the "sign of the sun within the turning stile
at holborne" and published works such as europæ speculum by sir edwin sandys.  john bagford was a shoemaker in the great turnstile who went on to become a bookseller and collector there.  he made two great collections - one of ballads and another of title pages and other parts of books, which was to form a history of printing.  the latter collection of fragments caused him to be suspected, perhaps unfairly, of breaking up books and so he was excoriated as a "wicked old biblioclast" in william blades' the enemies of books.  other booksellers included crozier in the little turnstile and tregaskis on the corner of the new turnstile and high holborn.  for much of the 20th century, the new statesman magazine was published from offices at number 10, great turnstile.  this progressive periodical, which had been founded by the webbs and other fabians, was often referred to by its location as "great turnstile".  number 10 has since been redeveloped and is now used by the mary ward centre to provide adult education and legal advice.  references  footpaths in london holborn streets in the london borough of camden
the 2018 united states senate election in texas was held on november 6, 2018, along with other elections to the united states senate and elections to the united states house of representatives in additional states. incumbent republican u.s. senator ted cruz ran successfully for re-election to a second term against democratic candidate beto o'rourke. the primary for all parties was held on march 6, 2018, making it the first primary of the 2018 season. as cruz and o'rourke both won majorities in their primaries, they did not participate in the may 22 runoff primary that was held for some nominations in texas.  no democrat has won a general election for statewide office in texas since bob bullock was reelected as lieutenant governor in 1994, with election forecasters declaring it a safe republican seat at the beginning of the 2018 cycle. however, o'rourke gradually closed the gap, and leading up to the election, the race was considered unexpectedly competitive.  on election day, cruz defeated o'rourke by a margin just short of 215,000 votes, or 50.9 to 48.3 percent; the race was the closest u.s. senate race in texas since 1978.  background  in 2012, after a stunning upset victory in the republican primary, then-solicitor general of texas ted cruz defeated former member of the texas house of representatives paul sadler by a 16-point margin (56%-40%). texas has not elected a democratic senator since 1988. as conservatives began turning to the republican party in once strongly democratic areas, democratic voters became concentrated in southern texas (which hold majority minority counties) and large metropolitan cities, such as houston, austin, san antonio, and dallas, as well as the far western majority-minority city of el paso, which o'rourke represented in the u.s. house.  since 1990, texas has voted for republican statewide candidates in all elections, whether it be presidential, gubernatorial, or senatorial, often by large margins. in 1998, governor george w. bush won re-election by 37 points over his democratic challenger, garry mauro. in 2000, governor bush won texas by 21 points over vice president al gore. in 2004, president bush won texas over senator john kerry by 23 points, winning rural areas by landslide margins, capturing urban zones, and coming very close to winning the latino vote (49% to kerry's 50%). democrat barack obama was defeated by margins of 12 points in 2008, against john mccain, and 16 points in 2012, against mitt romney, respectively. however, in
2016, donald trump defeated democrat hillary clinton by only a 9-point margin, demonstrating a possible shift away from the safe republican status it had held for over a decade. this has led democrats to begin targeting texas as a potential future swing state. it should also be noted that ted cruz defeated donald trump in the texas republican primary for u.s. president in 2016.  as of june 2018, senator cruz held a 49%-44% approval rating among texans in a state donald trump won by 9 points against hillary clinton in 2016. among groups that tend to affiliate themselves more with the democratic party, senator cruz held a 29% approval rating among hispanics, 37% among females, and 42% among college-educated voters.  republican primary  candidates  nominee  ted cruz, incumbent u.s. senator and former candidate  for president in 2016  eliminated in primary bruce jacobson, television producer  mary miller, cpa  geraldine sam, former mayor of la marque  stefano de stefano, attorney  failed to qualify  thomas dillingham, businessman  withdrew  dan mcqueen, former mayor of corpus christi  declined  george p. bush, texas land commissioner (running for re-election)  michael mccaul, u.s. representative  dan patrick, lieutenant governor of texas (running for re-election)  rick perry, secretary of energy, former governor of texas and candidate for president in 2012 and 2016  katrina pierson, national spokesperson for the donald trump's presidential campaign in 2016 and candidate for house district tx-32 in 2014  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  beto o'rourke, u.s. representative  eliminated in primary sema hernandez, activist and organizer for the poor people's campaign, baseball coach and small business owner edward kimbrough  declined  joaquin castro, u.s. representative  julian castro, former u.s. secretary of housing and urban development and mayor of san antonio  wendy davis, former state senator and nominee for governor in 2014  endorsements  polling  results  libertarian nomination  candidates  nominated  neal dikeman, businessman  independents  candidates  declared  carl bible, nurse  jonathan jenkins, tech entrepreneur  bob mcneil, businessman (american citizen party)  declined  matthew dowd, former strategist for president george w. bush  notes  general election  predictions   notes  debates  complete video of debate, september 21, 2018 complete video of debate, october 16, 2018  endorsements  fundraising  in the third quarter of 2018, o'
rourke raised $38.1 million. this amount was the largest quarterly total raised by a u.s. senate candidate until jaime harrison raised $57 million in the third quarter of 2020 in the south carolina election. cruz and o'rourke combined to raise a record-setting total of $126 million during the 2018 campaign.  polling  results  on november 6, 2018, ted cruz defeated beto o'rourke. however, o'rourke gave democrats their best performance in a texas statewide election since ann richards was elected governor in 1990. in addition, o'rourke flipped several counties in texas that donald trump carried in 2016, including williamson (includes round rock and georgetown), historically conservative tarrant (includes fort worth and suburbs within the dfw metroplex), jefferson (includes beaumont and port arthur), nueces (includes corpus christi), sparsely populated brewster (includes big bend national park), and hays (includes san marcos). cruz only flipped one county that voted for hillary clinton in 2016, sparsely populated kenedy (coastal region south of corpus christi).  by county  by congressional district cruz won 20 of 36 congressional districts.  notes  references  external links  candidates at vote smart   candidates at ballotpedia   campaign finance at fec   campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites ted cruz (r) for senate neal dikeman (l) for senate bob mcneil (am. citizen) beto o'rourke (d) for senate  ted cruz beto o'rourke united states senate texas 2018
the 2016-17 richmond spiders men's basketball team represented the university of richmond during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. richmond competed as a member of the atlantic 10 conference under 12th-year head coach chris mooney and played its home games at the robins center. they finished the regular season 19-11, 13-5 in a-10 play to finish in a tie for third place. due to tiebreaking rules, they received the no. 3 seed in the a-10 tournament, where they defeated george washington in the quarterfinals before losing to vcu in the semifinals. they received an invitation to the national invitation tournament, where, as no. 6 seed in the iowa bracket, defeated no. 3 seed alabama and no. 7 seed oakland before falling to no. 4 seed tcu in the quarterfinals.  previous season the spiders finished the 2015-16 season with a record of 16-16, 7-11 in a-10 play to finish in ninth place. they defeated fordham in the second round of the a-10 tournament to advance to the quarterfinals where they lost to dayton.  preseason  richmond was picked to finish in sixth place in the preseason a-10 poll. t. j. cline was selected to the preseason all-conference first team while shawndre' jones was named to the third team.  departures  incoming transfers  recruiting  recruiting class of 2017  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=12 style=| atlantic 10 regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| atlantic 10 tournament  |- !colspan=9 style=| nit  source:  references  richmond spiders men's basketball seasons richmond richmond spiders men's basketball richmond richmond spiders basketball, men spiders basketball, men
habenaria heyneana is a species of orchid. this species of orchids found in high attitude hills places like kaas plateau, panchagani, matheran.  heyneana
boiling down works is a heritage-listed boiling down works at truganinni road, burketown, shire of burke, queensland, australia. it was built from 1891 to 1901. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 august 1992.  history  the first boiling down works was established in 1867. the plan was to cure beef in brine for export to batavia. however, the business was not successful and closed in 1870.  construction of a new boiling down works commenced in november 1891 and was operational in july 1892. however, it closed for a period around 1893-4 due to the drought. in february 1896 it shut down again after a quarantine order to prevent the spread of disease and cattle tick.  in april 1898 it was announced that the endeavour meat export agency would re-open the burketown meatworks. however, the meatworks burned down in june 1898 and had to be rebuilt in order to re-open in june 1899.  in february 1901, the works was doing well, processing 20,000 cattle in a season. however, the business had losses from its decision to own and operate its own ships. in october 1901, the works closed temporarily due to a shortage of cattle because of the high prices being paid for cattle by kidman brothers and elder, smith & co. in november 1902, the queensland government withdrew its meat inspectors from the works because of "the closing down of the meatworks and the uncertainty of about their reopening".  in 1911, in a bid to get a railway link from burketown in order to ship cattle for processing on the east coast, it was claimed that it was no longer possible to process the cattle in burketown as "the white ants are making havoc with all that remains of the burketown works".  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register burketown industrial buildings in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register meat processing in australia
annmariya kalippilannu (english: annmariya is angry) is a 2016 indian malayalam language children's film directed by midhun manuel thomas, and written by thomas and john manthrichal. the film stars sara arjun, sunny wayne, and aju varghese. along with a cameo appearance by dulquer salmaan. it was later dubbed into telugu as  pilla rakshasi  and in tamil as  annmariya . the film was box office success.  the film narrates the story of friendship of a schoolkid (sara) and an easygoing youth (wayne) and the changes this relationship brings about in their life. it was released on august 5, 2016. the plot of the film has some similarity with the 2008 film drillbit taylor.  plot  annmaria aka ann is the 10-year-old daughter of dr. roy and his wife dr. teresa roy. roy tells ann of how he went to kakkadan mala, a hill in his hometown and prayed for an angel. an angel appeared and blessed him, thus he got a medal in long jump. ann dreams of meeting the angel and winning a medal in long jump.  ann overhears her mother advising their domestic help to call a goon and beat up an unwanted suitor. one day, she sees her english teacher being harassed by david, the pt master. she informs the principal, who then questions david. but david, who has political influence, escapes easily. he then begins to have a grudge on ann.  on the day of the sports trials, david deliberately disqualifies ann as revenge. a heartbroken ann plans revenge. she recalls what her mother said about hiring a goon. she approaches her friend avinash for help. avinash, although initially stunned, agrees to help. he approaches his friend sarath, a boaster. sarath arranges a goon, named poombatta gireesh, who is a relative of sarath. gireesh is actually a fraudster working with his good-for-nothing con friend ambrose. ann offers him an i-phone 6s, as his fee, which he takes. he and ambrose take the phone to sabu, who owns a mobile shop. sabu however cheats them and only pays 2000 in place of the real amount of 50,000.  ann and avinash is eagerly waiting for girish to beat up pt master, they confronts girish and ambrose who laughs the matter off. ann seeks the help of her
uncle who is a sub inspector in police. her uncle procures the iphone from sabu and give it to ann. she confronts girish again and says that she is ready to give iphone provided he does the deed. to her luck there was a local goon whom girish owes some money. he forces girish to confront pt master and take the iphone.  with no other way girish faces david and is knocked out in single kick. ann seeks her mother help and hospitalises girish. he later wakes at hospital and teresa realises that it's through her conversation ann got the idea of hiring a goon. ann feels bad for girish as he is badly beaten up. she gives all her savings plus some borrowed money from teresa to girish. this act of ann deeply influence girish and he wants to repay her by getting the iphone back.  meanwhile, the relationship between teresa and roy is on a low note. she is contemplating a divorce and roy hurries back to meet his family. ann is exciting on meeting roy and wants to spend some quality time with parents. she overhears discussion of her parents about divorce and is shattered.  girish gets to know from sabu that he has sold iphone to baby, a self made millionaire realtor. he meets baby and ask him to give back the iphone. as baby has the policy of not selling once bought items, girish had to leave empty handed. but girish is persistent and keeps bothering baby. finally late night when baby is fully drunk and unable to drive, girish drives baby back to home. on reaching home baby was impressed with honesty of girish and offers him a full-time job as his driver.  girish, now a changed man develops good relationship with baby and shares the story of iphone. baby gives back iphone to girish as token for his efforts. girish returns the iphone back to ann and become good friends with her.  ann is in double mind to participate for long jump in annual school meet. girish offers to ride her to kakkadan mala and arranges a person to role-play as angel. baby shares tragic death of his daughter, and encourages girish to make happen ann's dream of meeting angel. girish gets the permission of teresa and drives her to the mountain top. girish is worried if arranged person would show up on time. by coincidence someone comes as an angel. ann is elated and tells her innermost wish. on their return journey david sees them and make out it's ann who arranged to get him beaten up.  during sports meet, david approaches ann and shows the photograph and
threaten her to get dismissed. she is shaken and while preparing for the jump she collapses. girish knowing this musters the courage to challenge david and beats him black and blue.  a little while later ann is shown to be participating in a zonal level meet. her first two jumps were fouls and is very disappointed. suddenly the person whom she met at mountain top and mistook for angel shows up and encourages her,who was indeed and angel. with a new found confidence she takes the jump and comes first. girish reveals that her parents have reconciled and her father going to stay always with her thus giving a happy ending to the story.  cast   sara arjun as annmariya / ann sunny wayne as gireesh a.k.a. poombatta gireesh aju varghese as ambrose shine tom chacko as suku siddique as baby perumkudy saiju kurup as dr. roy, annmariya's father dharmajan bolgatty as saabu leona lishoy as dr. teresa roy, annmariya's mother john kaippallil as david, pt master sethu lakshmi as gireesh's mother master vishal krishna as avinash, ann's wannabe boyfriend althaf manaf as sarath, avinash's boaster friend bijukuttan as vellichapadu/ angel for hire anjali aneesh upasana as megha, english teacher dulquer salmaan as photographer who comes as an angel (cameo)  saranya sasi  divya m nair as advocate  production  the film is jointly scripted by midhun manuel thomas and john manthrichal. while vishnu sharma handles photography, songs are composed by shaan rahman and while the score is composed by sooraj s. kurup.  in june 2016, dulquer salmaan released the first look poster of the film and announced that he will make a special appearance in it. "his character is integral to the development of the plot" said midhun thomas in an interview. this is midhun's second feature film, unlike his first venture, this film is all about soul, freshness and unadulterated fun which could be enjoyed as a family.  music  release  annmariya kalippilannu released on august 5, 2016. sethulakshmi won the asianet film award for best supporting actress for this film in 2016.  references  external links    2010s malayalam-language films indian children's films child characters in film fictional children indian sports films indian children
indian films films shot in thrissur
slovakia has participated at the youth olympic games in every edition since the inaugural 2010 games and has earned medals from every edition.  medal tables  medals by summer games  medals by winter games  medals by summer sport  medals by winter sport  list of medalists  summer games  medals awarded to participants of mixed-noc (combined) teams are represented in italics. these medals are not counted towards the individual noc medal tally.  winter games  medals awarded to participants of mixed-noc (combined) teams are represented in italics. these medals are not counted towards the individual noc medal tally.  flag bearers  see also slovakia at the olympics slovakia at the paralympics slovakia at the european games slovakia at the european youth olympic festival slovakia at the universiade slovakia at the world games    nations at the youth olympic games
prince xun of the second rank, or simply prince xun, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince xun peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yongzhang (永璋; 1735-1760), the qianlong emperor's third son. yongzhang was posthumously honoured with the title "prince xun of the second rank" by his father in 1760. the title was passed down over six generations and held by six persons.  members of the prince xun peerage   yongzhang (永璋; 1735-1760), the qianlong emperor's third son, posthumously honoured with the title "prince xun of the second rank"  mianyi (綿懿; 1771-1809), yongxing's second son and yongzhang's adopted son, inherited the prince xun peerage as a beile in 1787, demoted to second class zhenguo jiangjun in 1804, promoted to beizi in 1805, posthumously restored as a beile  yixu (奕緒; 1791-1809), mianyi's eldest son, held the title of a zhenguo jiangjun from 1799 to 1809, promoted to beizi in 1809  zaiqian (載遷; 1849-1899), yixu's second son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1858 to 1899  pukui (溥葵; 1873-1926), zaiqian's eldest son, held the title of a third class zhenguo jiangjun from 1898 to 1899, promoted to feng'en fuguo gong in 1899  puquan (溥荃; 1878-?), zaiqian's second son, held the title of a first class fuguo jiangjun from 1903  yugui (毓桂; 1906-?), puquan's eldest son  yusen (毓槮; 1913-?), puquan's second son and pukui's adopted son, held the title of a feng'en fuguo gong from 1926  yijing (奕經; 1791-1853), mianyi's second son, held the title of a second class zhenguo jiangjun from 1816 to 1843, stripped of his title in 1843  yiji (奕紀; 1797-
1863), mianyi's third son, initially a second class fuguo jiangjun, promoted to second class zhenguo jiangjun in 1832, stripped of his title in 1840  zaixiao (載䥵; 1821-1872), yiji's son  pugu (溥顧; 1844-1902), zaixiao's son  yubin (毓邠; 1870-?), pugu's son  zaijian (載鏗; 1826-1871), yiji's son  pudui (溥㟋; 1848-1903), zaijian's son  yuping (毓平; 1881-?), pudui's son  hengyin (恆蔭; 1909-?), yuping's son  family tree  see also  prince cheng (成)  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages
the 178th infantry regiment is an infantry regiment of the united states army, illinois army national guard.  it traces its history back to the illinois state militia and has served in several american wars since its founding.  the regiment is unique because its original members were part of a segregated "colored" unit.  the regiment's 1st battalion (1-178 infantry) still exists today as an air assault battalion.  history the 178th infantry regiment traces its history back to the formation of the 16th battalion, illinois state militia, on 1 april 1878. a and b companies were recruited from chicago. the clark county guards from marshall became c company, and the cumberland county guards from greenup became d company. elements of the 178th have been reputed to extend back to 1871, with the formation of the hannibal guard, but federal and state recognition did not come until 1878. the illinois general assembly removed the 16th from the military roster in 1882, but it was reactivated soon after in 1883 as the chicago light infantry until its disbanding in 1887. in 1890, the unit was reactivated as the 9th infantry battalion, and was accepted into the illinois state guard in 1894. after expanding in size and funds, it was redesignated the 8th illinois volunteer infantry regiment (colored troops). on 28 june 1898, the unit was called into service in the spanish-american war with a strength of 43 officers and 1,126 enlisted men. the regiment served in cuba from 16 august 1898 to 10 march 1899, and suffered no casualties. the unit returned to chicago and was demobilized on 3 april.  the eighth infantry regiment was federalized on 30 june 1916, in springfield, and served briefly during the mexican border war. it was discharged from service at springfield on 27 october 1916. on 3 august 1917, the 8th was called to serve in world war i, and was renamed the 370th infantry regiment, and was placed in the 185th infantry brigade as part of the provisional 93rd infantry division on 5 january 1918. the 178th, which had not yet been activated, traces much of its history to the service of the 370th in france during world war i. upon returning to illinois, the regiment was disbanded on 11 march 1919.  the 370th was reorganized as the 8th illinois again in june 1919, and conducted state duties, including intensive training and maneuvers until 6 october 1940, when it was redesignated as the 184th field artillery regiment (155mm howitzer. after receiving many new recruits in preparation for world war ii. the 184
th trained intensely at fort custer, michigan and eventually deployed to the eto, earning campaign streamers for the rhineland campaign and the central europe campaign.  while training in michigan, men of the regiment were detached to form the 795th tank destroyer battalion in february 1942. on 16 january 1943, further restructuring followed as men of the regiment were detached to furnish new "colored" units for the army. the 930th and 931st field artillery battalions were created, and were subsequently converted into the 1698th and 1699th combat engineer battalions, respectively, by 20 march 1944. these men reported to the 92nd infantry division and served in the north apennines campaign and the po valley campaign.  after world war ii, the 184th field artillery was redesignated as the 178th regimental combat team on 31 march 1947. the rct contained the 178th infantry regiment (the parent unit), the 184th field artillery battalion, the 1698th engineer company, the 184th medical collecting company, and the 154th army band. on 26 july 1948, president harry truman issued executive order 9981 in order to desegregate the us military, and although the units of the illinois national guard were no longer split by race, the 178th remembers its proud history as a segregated african-american unit. at the outbreak of the korean war in 1950, the 184th medical collecting company was detached from the 178th and did not return until the war ended, four years later.  after reorganizations in 1959, 1963, and 1965, the first battalion, 1-178, was assigned to the 33rd infantry division on 1 february 1968 and assisted in riot control in chicago during the 1968 democratic national convention.    since 1968, 1-178 has performed state duties in riot control, natural disaster relief, and overseas training missions. in the winter of 2008, as a part of the 33rd infantry brigade combat team, the battalion was deployed to several provinces across afghanistan to perform secfor missions and assist in provincial reconstruction teams, including paktia province, afghanistan in support of operation enduring freedom, where they relieved elements of the 27th ibct, new york army national guard.  the heavy mortar platoon, consisting of four 120mm mortars and four 81mm mortars were placed at command outpost (cop) najil, lagman province and in forward operating base (fob) metar lam. they returned home in 2009.  current structure 1st battalion, 178th infantry regiment (il arng) headquarters and headquarters company; chicago a company: bartonville b company
: elgin c company: kankakee detachment 1: joliet d company: woodstock g company, 634th brigade support battalion (forward support company): joliet  references  178 178
the calgary dinos football team represents the university of calgary in the sport of canadian football in u sports. the program has been in operation since 1964, winning the vanier cup national championship five times (1983, 1985, 1988, 1995, 2019), the most out of any of the canada west teams. the dinos have also won the hardy trophy conference championship 18 times, including six consecutive wins from 2008 to 2013. the team appeared in the 2013 and 2016 vanier cup, but lost both years to the laval rouge et or.  recent regular season results  national award winners hec crighton trophy: greg vavra (1983), don blair (1995), erik glavic (2009), andrew buckley (2014, 2015), adam sinagra (2018) j. p. metras trophy: scott mcarthur (1980), chris konrad (1992), garret everson (1998) presidents' trophy: darcy kopp (1985) peter gorman trophy: dalin tollestrup (2006), linden gaydosh (2009), eric dzwilewski (2010), tyson philpot (2018) russ jackson award: elio geremia (1987), lincoln blumell (2002), andrew buckley (2013, 2014) lieutenant governor athletic award: don blair (1996), erik glavic (2010), andrew buckley (2016) frank tindall trophy: peter connellan (1977, 1985), wayne harris, jr. (2015)  calgary dinos in the cfl as of the end of the 2021 cfl season, 22 former dinos players were on cfl teams' rosters: treshaun abrahams-webster, ottawa redblacks jeshrun antwi, montreal alouettes logan bandy, saskatchewan roughriders elie bouka, saskatchewan roughriders sukh chungh, bc lions darius ciraco, hamilton tiger-cats carter comeau, calgary stampeders tanner doll, bc lions mike edem, saskatchewan roughriders jake harty, saskatchewan roughriders michael klukas, ottawa redblacksadam konar, bc lions grant mcdonald, edmonton elks sean mcewen, calgary stampeders connor mcgough, calgary stampeders charlie moore, calgary stampeders peter nicastro, toronto argonauts ryan sceviour, calgary stampeders rashaun simonise, montreal alouettes richard sindani, calgary stampeders nick statz, calgary stampeders micah teitz, saskatchewan roughriders  references  external links      sports clubs established in 1964 1964 establishments in alberta
mercedes marin del solar (september 11, 1804 - december 21, 1866) was a chilean poet, school reformer, and women's rights activist.  del solar hosted a literary salon in her home and advocated for women's right to education in chile.  references    mercedes marin del solar (1804-1866). obras reunidas. compilacion, estudio preliminar y notas criticas de joyce contreras villalobos. santiago: centro de investigaciones diego barros arana/ dibam, 2015.  1804 births 1866 deaths 19th-century chilean poets chilean salon-holders chilean feminists chilean women poets 19th-century chilean women writers
pollibetta is a small village in kodagu district of karnataka state, india.  location pollibetta is a small beautiful town in sothern part of kodagu dist. this town comes under virajapet taluq. located between gonikoppal,siddapura and ammathi towns. the distance to gonikoppa is 9.4 kilometers, the distance to ammathi is 8.8 km, the distance to siddapura is 11 kilometers and distance to virajpet is 27.8 km.  post office there is a post office in polibetta village.  the pincode is 571215.  history a british company called pollibetta coffee estates company limited, london managed by matheson and company started a tea company ikn pollibetta in 1943.  in 1960, the company sold the shares to indian public.  in 1966, the company was renamed consolidated coffee limited.  tata tea limited acquired the company in 1992.  in 2000, the company was renamed tata coffee limited.  references  education institutions government schools: government model primary school and namma high school. private school: lourdes hill convent school mekur hosakeri  hindu temples ganesh temple: situated on siddahpur road, mekur hosakeri. sri muthappan temple: situated in hart of the pollibetta town, this temple is situated in private propriety.  villages in kodagu district
joru ka ghulam is a pakistani drama television series that aired on geo tv from 13 july to 21 october 2016. it was produced by babar javed.  synopsis  the story is about a strict man, moazzam, and his family. moazzam is strict because of the people who attacked his family when his sister left her house due to her love. moazzam began to hate women. he argued with his second wife, uzma, over small matters. his children ignore his misbehavior.  moazzam has four sons, sarbuland, balaj, waleed and saadi. moazzam's anger causes unhappiness among his sons' wives, who then pressure the sons to leave home so they might enjoy a peaceful life. the men are unwilling to go against their mother, uzma, and she does not want them to leave.  elder son sarbuland is initially married to an educated lady, sharmeen. they move away from the father's house because of moazzam. sharmeen dies shortly thereafter in a car accident prompting sarbuland to return to his father's house. he returns to the way he lived before the marriage.  second son balaj married his college love, suhaina, without moazzam becoming aware this is the son's love. when he discovers this, he forces balaj to divorce suhaina. after the divorce, suhaina marries an uneducated boy mitho, the cousin of naghma (waleed's wife). balaj comes to realize his mistake in divorcing suhaina, and goes to mitho's house to ask suhaina to marry him once. however, suhaina refuses, as she is happy with mitho. after this, balaj ended up alone, while mitho and suhaina move to dubai.  third son waleed who was forced to marry an uneducated, greedy and traitorous woman. uzma is not happy with this marriage, as waleed is in love with his business partner, beena.  waleed obeyed his father's order and married his servant's daughter naghma. naghma's conservative background made her greedy and she wants that either waleed or herself should own the entire moazzam's property. for this purpose she made evil plans to irritate moazzam about the rest of his family. her husband waleed went to lahore in order to marry beena, but she did not agree. waleed came back home
when naghma bore a baby boy raza and started taking interest in his father's business.  fourth son saadi, who is mentally ill, married natasha. natasha, annoyed by his husband behavior, left him but soon saadi brought her back.  all the sons get on a single platform when doctor says that moazzam has terminal cancer. moazzam realizes that he did wrong with his family and begs their forgiveness. in the end, moazzam died.  cast  mehmood aslam as moazzam ghazala butt as uzma kanwar arsalan as balaj fatima effendi as suhaina kamran jilani as sarbuland asad siddiqui as waleed hadi firdous as saadi sadia ghaffar as naghma minal khan as natasha natasha ali as sharmeen salahuddin teeno anam tanveer sarfaraz ashraf as mitho shehzad ali khan rozin ulfat khalid zafar raeed muhammad alam as ghazali shazia qaiser  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  references  external links  2016 pakistani television series debuts a&b entertainment
guinwa zeineddine is a tv host and reporter, former miss arab usa, and entrepreneur.  early life  zeineddine's family is of lebanese origin; she was born in canada on october 30th and raised in the united arab emirates.  at the age of 16, guinwa moved to the united states with her family consisting of her parents and 3 younger siblings. she graduated from the university of nevada las vegas with a dual degree in biological sciences and communications. in 2015  career  guinwa zeineddine, recently named the best arab figure for 2016, is acknowledged by many as an influential public figure across the united states and the middle east. her work is highlighted by many media outlets and involves women empowerment, reporting on beauty and entertainment, and advocating for various causes through her non-profit and community involvement.   this ambitious lebanese american converted her passion for women and youth empowerment, media, and public speaking into a 501c3 non-profit organization that is currently operating in the state of nevada. through her non-profit, hawiyati (my identity), guinwa aims to provide disenfranchised women and youth with educational resources and empowerment workshops.  she was successful at establishing and implementing various programs that granted her support from various celebrities such as adel imam, ragheb alameh, hicham abbass, farrah youssef, anwar el amir, the lebanese ministry of tourism and many others.   in 2014, guinwa was crowned miss arab usa with elegance and grace. a pageant that is held annually with a mission to project a positive image of arabs worldwide. her work as the reigning queen inspired many others to view guinwa as a role model and a great example of an arab american. till this day, her work is still highlighted in the media.  miss arab usa was not the only pageant that guinwa was able to win. she has been competing in pageants since the age of 16 and succeed at winning multiple awards from various pageants such as miss nevada usa, national american miss, miss silver rose, miss black and rose, etc.  references    al arabiya news, guinwa zeineddine, miss arab usa 2014. en.alarabiya.net (2014-09-18). retrieved on 2016-07-19.  miss arab usa, miss arab 2014, guinwa zeineddine missarab.org(2016). retrieved on 2016-07-19.  guinwa zeineddine, biography retrieved on 2016-07-19.  hawiyati. retrieved on
2016-07-19.  blog. retrieved on 2017-10-09.  living people year of birth missing (living people) american beauty pageant winners
"hey, mister sun" is a song by bobby sherman released in 1970. the song spent nine weeks on the billboard hot 100 chart, peaking at no. 24, while reaching no. 3 on billboards easy listening chart. in canada, the song reached no. 19 on the "rpm 100", and no. 7 on toronto's chum 30 chart.  chart performance  references  1970 songs 1970 singles bobby sherman songs
dhingana  (), is a village/ town of mankera tehsil, of bhakkar district, in the punjab province of pakistan. it is situated about 280 kilometers west of the city of lahore.  bhakkar is located in the west of punjab. the mighty indus river flows on the western side of the district which plays havoc during monsoon season and the jehlum and chenab rivers both flow on the eastern side they also sometimes plays havoc during monsoon season. one third of the land is sandy of which small portion is irrigated by thal canal. rest of the sandy land is cultivated and is entirely dependent upon rains. people mostly depend on agriculture which is highly dependent on rain. and north side shah wala  pir mehr imam shah   pir mehr imam shah shrine is located in center of dhinaga city.  an annual urs festival celebrated there with great fervour on shrine. people come from far off places to join the celebrations every year.  transport  the nearest airport to dhingana is dera ismail khan  and shah wala garwah bhiradhri  nearest 9 kilometer - travellers used to be able to catch a flight either lahore, faisalabad, multan, islamabad, peshawar to this city and then onto dhingana. these airports are functional for national and international flights, however the other way to get there is by bus. the bus takes 6 hours from lahore to reach dhingana and 7 hours from islamabad and 4 hours from multan. from dera ismail khan it takes three hours to reach hyderabad thall and from hyderabad it takes a drive of 30 minutes.  the direct bus service is also available from lahore. dhingana  is 285 km away from lahore and it is located on main lahore-dera ismail khan road.  one can easily get to dhingana through a fast apv car service from bharerhi wala. the distance between bharerhi and dhingana only 9 km the transport for dhingana available 24 hours. the direct bus service is also available from jhang and direct raksha bike, taxi service is also available 24 hours.  references  external links  mankera on bigblueball  map of mankera  wasib | ancient riasat mankera  populated places in bhakkar district
sallustio pecolo or sallustio pecoli (1600 - 7 jan 1651) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of venosa (1640-1651).  biography sallustio pecolo was born in terni, italy in 1600 and ordained a priest on 28 october 1640. on 3 december 1640, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of venosa. on 9 december 1640, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna, with leonardo mocenigo, archbishop of candia, and lelio falconieri, titular archbishop of thebae, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of venosa until his resignation on 13 march 1648.  he died on 7 january 1651.  while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of pietro paolo russo, bishop of nusco (1649).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1600 births 1651 deaths
william nicholson (25 december 1781 - 16 august 1844) was a british painter of portraits and other subjects. he was among the founding members of the scottish academy of painting, sculpture, and architecture in 1826, and was its first secretary.  life  nicholson was born at ovingham, in northumberland, on 25 december 1781, to james nicholson, a schoolmaster from that village, and his wife elizabeth, nee orton. he was probably educated at the grammar school in newcastle-on-tyne where his father taught. when he left school, he studied painting under the italian painter boniface muss (or musso) in newcastle. he received some commissions to paint portrait miniatures, both in newcastle and in hull. he also painted larger works, and first exhibited at the royal academy in london in 1808.  in 1814 he moved to edinburgh, where he painted portraits both in oil and in water-colour, but also painted landscapes and animal, architectural and genre subjects. with the architect thomas hamilton, nicholson was among the founding members of the scottish academy of painting, sculpture, and architecture in 1826, and from that year until 1830 was its first secretary.  work   in 1818, nicholson began publishing his portraits of distinguished living characters of scotland, a series of etchings based on his own paintings and those of other artists; it was not completed. he later published some other etchings of his portrait paintings. his subjects included sir william allan, james hogg (the "ettrick shepherd"), lord jeffrey, professor john playfair, sir walter scott, george thomson, james watt and john wilson; there were also etchings of a portrait of robert burns by alexander nasmyth and of a self-portrait by sir henry raeburn.  references  external links       1781 births 1844 deaths british portrait painters british landscape painters british etchers
andrеy v. sinitsyn (18 may 1939 - 27 december 2014) was a soviet/russian geologist, geochemist and philosopher. through the re-examination of exotic rocks that had been discovered but neglected by other geologists, sinitsyn identified these rocks as kimberlites and that the archangel region of the soviet union was diamondiferous. based on this research he led teams that discovered the lomonosov and grib diamond mines, the latter considered to be one of the largest diamond mines in the world.  early life and education  sinitsyn was born in leningrad, may 18, 1939 to a family of scientists and geologists and as a child lived in china and central asia. in 1956 he enrolled at the geological department of the leningrad state university and graduated with honors in 1961. he completed his phd in two years on the "petrology of dolerite of the east murmansk coast (kola peninsula)" and went to work for sevzapgeologiya, kola peninsula as part of their cartographic detachment (white sea). in 1974 at leningrad state university he defended his grand phd (dsc equivalent) dissertation on the topic of  "south-eastern part of the baltic shield (problems of the structure and development)". he was the youngest person to be awarded a grand phd in geological-mineralogical sciences in the history of the soviet union.  notes  1939 births 2014 deaths soviet geologists russian geologists saint petersburg state university alumni
ataturk and serife bacı monument is a monument in kastamonu, turkey.  geography the monument is in the cumhuriyet square in front of kastamonu governor's office at .  ataturk and serife bacı ataturk (1881-1938) was the founder of the turkish republic. he was also the high commander of the turkish army in the turkish war of independence (1919-1923).  serife bacı (literally sister serife) (1900-1921) was a heroine in the turkish war of independence. she was a village woman from seydiler, who took part in the arms transportation service. any weapon or ammunition from istanbul to inebolu port  (kastamonu province) had to be forwarded to ankara by ox wagons (). since most of the men were drafted women were responsible in transportation. in 1921 december serife with her new born baby volunteered to drive a wagon in the convoy.  but she froze to death in the harsh winder conditions. later it was revealed that  she had laid her own coat over the ammunition. her baby was rescued.  the monument in 1985 kastamonu governor decided to erect a monument about serife bacı. the monument was created by professor tankut oktem (1940-2007) of the marmara university in 1990. in 2005 the dais was renewed by using a basalt platform. the monument is actually a group of figures. these are ataturk,  serife bacı, ox wagon and various soldiers.  see also ataturk monuments and memorials  references  kastamonu statues of mustafa kemal ataturk 1990 establishments in turkey monuments and memorials to women monuments and memorials to the turkish war of independence
bulanov () is a russian masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is bulanova. it may refer to aleksandr bulanov (born 1989), russian shot putter igor bulanov (born 1963), russian footballer maria bulanova (born 1998), russian bowler tatiana bulanova (born 1969), russian singer vyacheslav bulanov (born 1970), russian ice hockey referee  russian-language surnames
david bowie owned an extensive private art collection which included paintings, sculpture and furniture. he started collecting art in the mid-1970s and continued through the end of his life. his collection included paintings that he himself painted.  bowie as an art collector and supporter of art bowie reportedly began appreciating and collecting art in the mid 1970s, when he moved to berlin to escape his cocaine addiction. artist and writer matthew collings characterized the collection as "bohemian, romantic, expressive, emotional art". bowie was described by an art advisor as "a true collector. his acquisitions were not commercially motivated; he cared about the art, not the market. his was a deeply personal, eclectic collection, reflecting his british roots and his real passion for art." he was frequently featured in artnews' "top 200 collectors" lists. bowie's collection of contemporary african art, was described as "[demonstrating] an appreciation that goes far beyond the all-too-frequent exoticism and 'othering' of art from the continent." in 1995, bowie pushed for an exhibition of south african art, and he wrote about the 1995 johannesburg biennale for the magazine modern painters. by 1998, bowie was a board member of modern painters, and he participated in the nat tate art hoax.  notable artists and works in the collection  notable artists included in bowie's collection included:   outsider art from the gugging group  frank auerbach - 1965 head of gerda boehm (l.)  jean-michel basquiat - 1984 air power - year unknown "a bruit secret"  david bomberg  achille castiglioni and pier giacomo castiglioni - 1960s stereo cabinet record player  patrick caulfield  marcel duchamp  harold gilman - a london interior  romuald hazoume  erich heckel  damien hirst  ivon hitchens  peter howson  leon kossoff  peter lanyon  wyndham lewis  memphis milano  henry moore  odd nerdrum  winifred nicholson  meret oppenheim  francis picabia  peter paul rubens  egon schiele  william scott  ettore sottsass  stanley spencer  graham sutherland  tintoretto - altarpiece of saint catherine  william turnbull  euan uglow  john virtue  jack butler yeats  basquiat's air power, estimated at us $3.5 million to be the most expensive single piece of art in bowie's collection, sold for $8.8 million in 2016. tintoretto's altarpiece, which
was one of bowie's earliest art acquisitions back in 1987, was sold for £191,000.  bowie himself was a painter and sculptor, and works by his own hand are part of his collection. this includes a series of self-portraits he painted in 1995, one of which he used as the cover to his album outside. bowie would also attend gallery openings, often with his wife iman, such as in 1999 when visiting an opening with artist damian loeb.  2016 auction  around 350 pieces of art from bowie's collection were put up for auction in november 2016. none of bowie's own art was part of the auction, and the proceeds from the sale went to bowie's family. an estimate by sotheby's auction house estimated the value of the collection for sale at around us $13 million. prior to the auction, some of the pieces were shown in los angeles, new york and hong kong. the pieces up for auction represented about two-thirds of bowie's entire art collection.  bowie's family sold the collection because they "didn't have the space" to store it.  the auction exceeded expectations, and the entire collection was sold over two days for £32.9 million (app. $41.5 million), while the highest-selling item was jean-michel basquiat's graffiti-inspired painting air power, sold for £7.09 million. exhibitions of the works in london alone attracted over 51,000 visitors, the highest attendance for any pre-sale exhibition in london. the auctions themselves were attended by 1,750 bidders, with over 1,000 more bidding online.  2021 auction in the mid- to late-1990s, bowie painted a series of paintings entitled "dhead", typically followed by a roman numeral. these paintings were often of friends, bandmates, and self-portraits. one such dhead was used as the album cover for his 1995 album 1. outside. in june 2021, "dhead xlvi" was put up for auction by a canadian company, and fetched a price of ca $108,120 (or roughly usd $87,800).  references  see also david bowie is  citations     bowie art collection
the 1901 argentine primera division was the tenth season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on may 19 and ended on august 30.  the season saw english high school changing its name to "alumni athletic club", due to a regulation from the association stating that football teams were not allowed to name the same as the schools they belonged to. the new denomination was inspired by the alumni associations of the united states, formed by ex-students who wanted to keep the ties of friendship with their old schoolmates. under its new name alumni retained the argentine championship by winning all six of its games.  the championship continued with the 4 team league format, with each team playing the other twice.  final standings  references  argentine primera division seasons 1901 in argentine football 1901 in south american football
irreprochable (english: faultless) is a 2016 french thriller film written and directed by sebastien marnier. the film stars marina fois, jeremie elkaim, josephine japy, and benjamin biolay.  plot  out of job for over a year, constance returns to her hometown when she learns that the real estate agency where she first began her career is hiring again. her former boss prefers audrey, a candidate who is much younger than constance. but constance will do anything to reclaim the position that she considers to be her own.  cast   marina fois as constance  jeremie elkaim as philippe  josephine japy as audrey  benjamin biolay as gilles  jean-luc vincent as alain  jeanne rosa as nathalie  veronique ruggia saura as lawyer  accolades  references  external links     2016 films 2010s thriller films 2010s psychological drama films french-language films french thriller films french films 2016 directorial debut films 2016 drama films
wild desire (turkish: vahsi arzu) is a 1953 turkish drama film directed by enver burckin and starring ayhan isık, mesiha yelda and ahmet tarik tekce.  cast  ayhan isık   mesiha yelda   ahmet tarik tekce   zeki alpan  references  bibliography  turker inanoglu. 5555 afisle turk sineması. kabalcı, 2004.  external links    1953 films 1953 drama films turkish-language films turkish films turkish drama films turkish black-and-white films
breckenridge brewery is an american brewing company based in littleton, colorado. select beers can be found in 42 us states. the company was purchased by anheuser-busch inbev in 2016.  history  founding breckenridge brewery was founded in breckenridge, colorado, by richard squire in 1990. it was colorado's third craft brewery. in 1991, squire brought on todd usry, who took over as brewmaster in 1994. usry became director of production and sales in 2008, and was ultimately named the company's president.  expansion in 1992, the brewery expanded operations beyond breckenridge, opening a manufacturing facility in denver adjacent to what would become coors field, home of the colorado rockies. in 1996, breckenridge moved the brewing, kegging and bottling of its beer to a new facility south of downtown. the original denver location, breck on blake, remains open, with brewing no longer taking place there. in 2010, wynkoop announced a merger with breckenridge to form the holding company breckenridge-wynkoop llc. the company also owns the wynkoop brewing company, phantom canyon brewing, and several restaurants. in january 2013, breckenridge brewery announced that its facility, by then producing 64,000 barrels of beer per year, was at max capacity and would be moving to a new brewery complex. in june 2015, breckenridge brewery left denver and moved into its new $36 million, 12-acre, 85,000-square-foot campus in littleton, colorado, which includes three buildings: a brewhouse and office building, a building for fermentation and packaging, and its 300-seat farm house restaurant and beer garden.  breckenridge brewery ranked #50 on the brewers association's 2014 list of the largest us craft breweries, and #47 on the 2015 list. the brewers association ranked breckenridge brewery as colorado's fifth-largest craft brewer by barrels produced in 2015. early on, breckenridge brewery produced roughly 1,000 barrels of beer per year. by 2015, the company was producing over 70,000 barrels of beer, with its beers sold in 35 states in the us.  purchase by anheuser-busch inbev on december 22, 2015, anheuser-busch inbev announced its intent to purchase breckenridge brewery from breckenridge-wynkoop llc, as part of its high end craft and import beer brand unit. the acquisition, completed in 2016,
included breckenridge brewery's production brewery and farm house restaurant in littleton, as well as its brewpub in breckenridge. in an open letter to breckenridge brewery consumers, usry said the brewery would continue to make its own decisions regarding the beer it creates.  partnerships every year since the inaugural 2012 denver comic con, breckenridge brewery has collaborated with the convention to brew and sell a limited edition beer, with a comic-themed name chosen through an annual contest.  since 2013, breckenridge brewery has regularly collaborated with never summer industries for the creation of limited edition artist series snowboards and special release beers.  list of beers brewed  references  external links official website  american beer brands beer brewing companies based in colorado anheuser-busch beer brands ab inbev brands american companies established in 1990 food and drink companies established in 1990 1990 establishments in colorado
legendary dudas is an american comedy television series created by kevin jakubowski that aired on nickelodeon from july 9 to august 13, 2016. the series stars theodore barnes and devion harris.  premise  sam and tyler duda, two brothers who couldn't be more different, end up in the same homeroom in middle-school when younger brother sam skips sixth grade and is promoted to seventh grade with older brother tyler.  cast  main   theodore barnes as sam duda  devion harris as tyler duda  recurring   jackson a. dunn as elmer  mylo gosch as neiderprum  pearce joza as logan  dallas liu as carter  meyrick murphy as dallas  daniella perkins as sophia  megan richie as gigi  laura harman as miss tolomeo  kelly perine as principal platt  production  the series, which was previously titled homeroom and the dudas, was picked up by nickelodeon in march 2016.  episodes  ratings    }}  references  external links     2010s american children's comedy television series 2010s nickelodeon original programming 2016 american television series debuts 2016 american television series endings english-language television shows middle school television series television series about siblings
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  mi  miag-dietrich   miag-dietrich md 12  miami maid  (miami aircraft corp (pres: joseph m smoot), miami, fl)  miami maid amphibian mm-200?  miami maid mm-201 flying boat  miazga  (michael miazga, glenville, ct)  miazga b-185  micco  (micco aircraft co (fdr: chief james billie; pres: f dewitt beckett), fort pierce, fl)  micco sp20  micro aviation  micro aviation bat hawk  michelstadt  (flugzeugbau michelstadt)  michelstadt maikafer (dfs)  michigan  (michigan aircraft co, 13210 french rd, detroit, mi)  michigan aircraft 1 a.k.a. breese-dallas x  michigan tm-5 a.k.a. breese-dallas x  micro aviation  (micro aviation new zealand limited, hamilton, new zealand) micro aviation b22 bantam  micro-aviation   micro-aviation rg.501 air club  microjet  (microjet sa)  microjet 200  microleve   microleve corsario  microleve echo 2000rg  microleve p96 golf  microleve p92 echo  microleve ml 450  microleve ml-500 t  microlight aviation   microlight aviation vampire-mki  microlight aviation super genie  micronautix  micronautix triton  midwest  (midwest engineering & design) (shawnee, ks)  midwest hornet  midwest questar arrowstar  midwest questar open aire  midwest questar sport  midwest questar xls  midwest zodiac talon-turbine  midwest microlights   midwest 1  midwest 2 mercury  midwest tomcat  miettaux  (lucien miettaux)  miettaux ortolan  mignet  (henri mignet)  mignet hm-1-1  mignet hm-1-2  mignet hm.2  mignet hm.3 'the dromedary'  mignet hm.4  mignet hm.5 planeur brouette  mignet hm.6  mignet hm.7  mignet hm.8  mignet hm.14  mign
et hm.16 pou-bebe (baby pou)  mignet hm.18  mignet hm.19  mignet hm.210  mignet hm.280 pou-maquis  mignet hm.283  mignet hm.290  mignet hm.293  mignet hm.296  mignet hm.310 estafette  mignet hm.320  mignet hm.330 cerisier en fleurs  mignet hm.350  mignet hm.351  mignet hm.360  mignet hm.380  mignet hm.390  mignet hm.1000 balerit  mignet hm.1100 cordouan  mihail  (filip mihail)  mihail stabiloplan iii  mihail stabiloplan iv  mikoyan   mikoyan project 1.44  mikoyan mig-at  mikoyan mig-110  mikoyan-gurevich   mikoyan-gurevich mig-1  mikoyan-gurevich mig-2  mikoyan-gurevich mig-3  mikoyan-gurevich mig-4  mikoyan-gurevich mig-5  mikoyan-gurevich mig-6  mikoyan-gurevich mig-7  mikoyan-gurevich mig-8  mikoyan-gurevich mig-9 (1st use) (mig-3 m-82a)  mikoyan-gurevich mig-9  mikoyan-gurevich mig-11  mikoyan-gurevich mig-13  mikoyan-gurevich mig-15  mikoyan-gurevich mig-17  mikoyan-gurevich mig-19  mikoyan-gurevich mig-21  mikoyan-gurevich mig-23 (1st use) (ye-2a "faceplate")  mikoyan-gurevich mig-23 (2nd use) (ye-8 and mig-23m - ye-8 deriv.)  mikoyan-gurevich mig-23 (3rd use) ("flogger")  mikoyan-gurevich mig-23pd (izdeliye 23-01 "faithless")  mikoyan-gurevich mig-25  mikoyan-gurevich mig-25 pu foxbat  mikoyan-gurevich mig-27  mikoyan-gurevich mig-29  mikoyan-gurevich mig-31  mikoyan-gurevich mig-33  mikoyan-gurevich mig-35  mikoyan-gurevich a  mikoyan-gurevich 2a  mikoyan-gurevich 3a  mikoyan-gurevich 4a  mikoyan-gurevich 5a  mikoyan-gurevich a-144  mikoyan-gurevich d  mikoyan-gurevich 2d  mikoyan-gurevich dis  mikoyan-gurevich dis-200  mikoyan-gurevich f  mikoyan-gurevich ff
mikoyan-gurevich fk  mikoyan-gurevich fl  mikoyan-gurevich fn  mikoyan-gurevich fp  mikoyan-gurevich fr  mikoyan-gurevich fs  mikoyan-gurevich ft  mikoyan-gurevich i-1  mikoyan-gurevich i-2  mikoyan-gurevich i-3  mikoyan-gurevich i-5  mikoyan-gurevich i-7  mikoyan-gurevich i-75  mikoyan-gurevich i-200  mikoyan-gurevich i-210  mikoyan-gurevich i-211  mikoyan-gurevich i-220  mikoyan-gurevich i-221  mikoyan-gurevich i-222  mikoyan-gurevich i-224  mikoyan-gurevich i-225  mikoyan-gurevich i-230  mikoyan-gurevich i-231  mikoyan-gurevich i-240  mikoyan-gurevich i-250  mikoyan-gurevich i-260  mikoyan-gurevich i-270  mikoyan-gurevich i-300  mikoyan-gurevich i-301  mikoyan-gurevich i-302  mikoyan-gurevich i-305  mikoyan-gurevich i-307  mikoyan-gurevich i-308  mikoyan-gurevich i-310  mikoyan-gurevich i-312  mikoyan-gurevich i-320 (mig-9)  mikoyan-gurevich i-320  mikoyan-gurevich i-330  mikoyan-gurevich i-340  mikoyan-gurevich i-350  mikoyan-gurevich i-360  mikoyan-gurevich i-370  mikoyan-gurevich i-380  mikoyan-gurevich i-410  mikoyan-gurevich i-500  mikoyan-gurevich ip-201  mikoyan-gurevich izdeliye 23-01 (correct designation for mig-23pd)  mikoyan-gurevich ikh  mikoyan-gurevich ish  mikoyan-gurevich it  mikoyan-gurevich kh  mikoyan-gurevich khs  mikoyan-gurevich m  mikoyan-gurevich m-15  mikoyan-gurevich m-17  mikoyan-gurevich m-19  mikoyan-gurevich m-21  mikoyan-gurevich n  mikoyan-gurevich pbsh-1  mikoyan-gurevich pbsh-2  mikoyan-gurevich r  mikoyan-gurevich s  mikoyan-gurevich sa  mikoyan-gurevich samolyot ye  mikoyan-gurevich sd  mikoyan-gurevich sdk  mikoyan-gurevich sf  mikoyan-gurevich sg  mikoyan-gurevich si  mikoyan-gurevich sl  mikoyan-gurevich sm-1  mikoyan-gurevich sm-2  mikoyan-gurevich sm-9  mikoyan-gurevich smr  mikoyan-gurevich sn  mikoyan-gurevich so  mikoyan-gurevich sp-
1  mikoyan-gurevich sp  mikoyan-gurevich sr  mikoyan-gurevich ssh  mikoyan-gurevich st  mikoyan-gurevich su  mikoyan-gurevich sv  mikoyan-gurevich sya  mikoyan-gurevich sye  mikoyan-gurevich t  mikoyan-gurevich ye-1  mikoyan-gurevich ye-2  mikoyan-gurevich ye-4  mikoyan-gurevich ye-5  mikoyan-gurevich ye-6  mikoyan-gurevich ye-7  mikoyan-gurevich ye-8  mikoyan-gurevich ye-9  mikoyan-gurevich ye-23dpd  mikoyan-gurevich ye-23ig  mikoyan-gurevich ye-26  mikoyan-gurevich ye-33  mikoyan-gurevich ye-50  mikoyan-gurevich ye-66  mikoyan-gurevich ye-150  mikoyan-gurevich ye-151  mikoyan-gurevich ye-152  mikoyan-gurevich ye-152a  mikoyan-gurevich ye-152m  mikoyan-gurevich ye-152p  mikoyan-gurevich ye-155  mikoyan-gurevich ye-166  mikoyan-gurevich ye-266  mikoyan-gurevich zh  mikoyan-gurevich 1.42  mikoyan-gurevich 1.44  mil   mil a-10  mil mi-1  mil mi-2  mil mi-3  mil mi-4  mil mi-6  mil mi-8  mil mi-9  mil mi-10  mil mi-14  mil mi-17  mil mi-18  mil mi-24  mil mi-26  mil mi-28  mil mi-30  mil mi-34  mil mi-36  mil mi-38  mil mi-42  mil mi-54  mil mi-58  mil mi-60  mil v-5  mil v-7  mil v-12  mil v-16  mil mi-x1  miles happy  (miles happy, 43387 mannix road, newberry springs, ca)  miles happy adventurer 2+2  miles  (philips and powis aircraft, miles aircraft ltd, fg miles ltd)  southern martlet  metal martlet  miles m.1 satyr  miles m.2 hawk  miles m.2 hawk trainer  miles m.2 hawk major  miles m.3a falcon major  miles m.3b falcon six  miles m.4 merlin  miles m.5 sparrowhawk  miles m.6 hawcon  miles m.7 nighthawk  miles m.8 peregr
ine  miles m.9 kestrel  miles m.9a master  miles m.11 whitney straight  miles m.11c  miles m.12 mohawk  miles m.13 hobby  miles m.14 magister  miles m.14 hawk trainer iii  miles m.15 trainer  miles m.16 mentor  miles m.17 monarch  miles m.18  miles m.19 master ii  miles m.20  miles m.24 master fighter  miles martinet  miles m.26 'x'  miles m.27 master iii  miles m.28 mercury  miles m.30 'x minor'  miles m.33 monitor  miles m.35 libellula  miles m.37 martinet trainer  miles m.38 messenger  miles m.39b libellula libellula  miles m.50 queen martinet  miles m.52  miles m.57 aerovan  miles m.60 marathon  miles m.64 l.r.5  miles m.65 gemini  miles m.68 boxcar  miles m.69 marathon ii  miles m.71 merchantman  miles m.75 aries  miles m.76  miles m.77 sparrowjet  miles m.100 student  miles m.218  miles m.242 taken on by beagle as the beagle m.242  hurel-dubois miles hdm.105, with societe des avions hurel-dubois  miles & atwood  (leland miles & leon atwood (built by larry brown), los angeles, ca)  miles & atwood special miss tulsa  milford  (dale milford, tx)  milford buckaroo  milholland   milholland legal eagle  military aircraft  (miller aviation corporation)  military aircraft hm-1  militi  bruno militi()  militi m.b.1  militi m.b.2 leonardo  militi mb.3 leonardo  militi mb.4  militky-brditschka (fred militky / h.w. brditschka ohg)  militky-brditschka mb-e1  mill basin  (mill basin aircraft corp, brooklyn, ny)  mill basin aircraft super gull w-1  millennium aircraft  (compact compositi srl)  millennium master  millennium helicopter  (united states)  millennium mh-1  miller  (aeroneering inc, savannah, ga)  miller lil' rascal
miller red bare-un  miller  (lestere miller, dallas, tx)  miller 1910 biplane  miller  (dewey f miller, denver, co)  miller 1926 biplane  miller  (eugene m miller, longmont, co)  miller m-1  miller  (henry miller, farmington, mi)  miller special  miller  (w f miller, oneida, ny)  miller 1928 monoplane  miller sport  miller  (e miller, genesee, id)  miller b  miller (horrie miller, melbourne, australia)  miller biplane  miller  (john miller corp, new brunswick, nj)  miller mc-a1  miller  (r f miller, 611 sampson st, houston, tx)  miller 1930 biplane  miller  (lewis miller, bourbon, in)  miller model v  miller  (erven a miller, milwaukee, wi)  miller 1938 monoplane  miller 2  miller m-5 belly flopper  miller m-6 twin  miller  ( (howell w) miller aviation corp, springfield, ma)  miller hm-1 a.k.a. hawks hm-1  miller hm-2  miller hm-3  miller hm-4 aerovel a.k.a. moonship  miller hm-5  miller z-1  miller z-2  miller z-3 zeta  miller mac-1  miller  (james w miller, springfield, ma)  miller gem-260  miller jet profile twin comanche 200  miller jm-1 ole tiger  texas gem  miller jm-2  miller special  miller  (paul k miller, los angeles, ca)  miller m-1  miller  (international aircraft mfg inc (inter-air))  miller 260a  miller  (ray miller, tulsa, ok)  miller special a.k.a. fly rod  miller  (william y miller, mesa, az)  miller wm-2 a.k.a. sport plane  miller  (paul k miller, los angeles, ca)  miller m-1  miller-bohannon  (jim w miller and bruce bohannon)  miller-bohannon jm-2 pushy galore  miller-brown (roy g. miller and d. t. brown / naval aircraft factory, navy yard, philadelphia, pa)  miller-brown turkey buzzard  miller-ybarra  (
guy miller & guy ybarra, pittsburgh, pa)  miller-ybarra model 1  millet-lagarde   millet lagarde ml-10  millicer   millicer m10 airtourer  milliken  (william milliken jr, old town, me)  milliken m-1  mills  (frank mills, south beach, staten island, ny)  mills 1915 biplane  milon  (pierre milon / aero-club de brive)  milon-brive pmb.78 le faucon  minie  (societe minie aeronautiques)  minie emouchet escopette  minie  (societe d'etudes victor minie aeronautiques) see: sevimia  mini-fly gmbh (kirchardt, germany) mini-fly set  minges  (richard minges)  minges m-30 special  minina  (gerard minina)  minina mg.2 harmattan  minina mg.3 harmattan  mini-hawk  (mini-hawk intl (thomas e maloney, william b taylor, e y treffinger), santa monica, ca)  mini-hawk i  mini-hawk tiger-hawk  minty  (e.r. minty)  minty skyhook mini chopper  mip (gustaw mokrzycki, ludwig moczarski, jan idzkowski & jerzy ploszajski / warsaw technical high school)  mip smyk  mira  (virgilio mira)  mira golondrina i  mira golondrina ii  mira golondrina iii  mira golondrina iv  mirage  (mirage aircraft corporation (pres: larry burton), prescott valley, az)  mirage celerity  mirage marathon  mirouze  (alain mirouze)  mirouze am.1 pulsar  von mises   mises r.i  mississippi state university   mississippi az-1 marvelette  mississippi v-11 marvel  mississippi ma-18b marvelette  msu-honda mh-01  msu-honda mh-02  mit  (massachusetts institute of technology, cambridge, ma, aeronautics and astronautics department)  mit daedalus (human powered aircraft)  mit light eagle  mit daedalus 87  mit daedalus 88  mit monarch  mit monarch-b  mit chrysalis  mitchell  (
mitchell aircraft corp, porterville, ca)  mitchell wing a-10  mitchell wing b-10  mitchell u-2 superwing  mitchell wing p-38  mitchell  (grover mitchell, manchester, ct)  mitchell kitalina  mitrovic  (milenko mitrovic-spirta)  mitrovic mms-3  mitsubishi  (mitsubishi kokuki kk - mitsubishi aircraft corporation) (mitsubishi shokai (三菱商会))  mitsubishi 1mf1  mitsubishi 1mf1a  mitsubishi 1mf2  mitsubishi 1mf3  mitsubishi 1mf4  mitsubishi 1mf5a  mitsubishi 1mf9  mitsubishi 1mf10  mitsubishi 1mt  mitsubishi 2mb1  mitsubishi 2mb2  mitsubishi 2mr  mitsubishi 2mr7  mitsubishi 2mr8  mitsubishi 2mrt  mitsubishi 2mr5  mitsubishi 2ms1  mitsubishi 2mt  mitsubishi 3mt  mitsubishi 3mt5  mitsubishi 3mt10  mitsubishi 4ms1  mitsubishi-hanriot 28 trainer  mitsubishi igo-1-a  mitsubishi r-1.2 trainer  mitsubishi r-2.2 trainer  mitsubishi r-4 survey aircraft  mitsubishi f3b1 trainer  mitsubishi tora long-range aircraft  mitsubishi t-1.2 converted aeroplane  mitsubishi hibari trainer  mitsubishi tombo trainer  mitsubishi ka-8  mitsubishi ka-9  mitsubishi ka-12  mitsubishi ka-14  mitsubishi atd-x  mitsubishi f-1  mitsubishi f-2  mitsubishi f-3  mitsubishi x-2 shinshin  mitsubishi h-60  mitsubishi mc-1  mitsubishi mc-20  mitsubishi mh2000  mitsubishi ms-1  mitsubishi hato survey aircraft  mitsubishi hinazuru passenger transport  mitsubishi ohtori  mitsubishi regional jet  mitsubishi spacejet  mitsubishi mu-2  mitsubishi mu-300  mitsubishi rp-1  mitsubishi sx-3  mitsubishi t-2  mitsubishi a5m  mitsubishi a6m zero rei-sen  mitsubishi a7m reppu  mitsubishi a7m3-j reppu kai  mitsubishi b1m  mitsubishi b2m  mitsubishi b4m  mitsubishi b5m  mitsubishi c1m  mitsubishi c5m  mitsubishi d3m  mitsubishi f1m  mitsubishi g1m  mitsubishi g3m  mitsubishi g4m  mitsubishi g4m1 bomber  mitsubishi g6m  mitsubishi g7m taizan
mitsubishi j2m raiden  mitsubishi j4m senden  mitsubishi j8m shusui  mitsubishi k3m  mitsubishi k6m  mitsubishi k7m  mitsubishi l4m  mitsubishi q2m taiyo  mitsubishi ki-1  mitsubishi ki-2  mitsubishi ki-7  mitsubishi ki-14  mitsubishi ki-15  mitsubishi ki-18  mitsubishi ki-20  mitsubishi ki-21  mitsubishi ki-30  mitsubishi ki-33  mitsubishi ki-39  mitsubishi ki-40  mitsubishi ki-46  mitsubishi ki-51  mitsubishi ki-57  mitsubishi ki-67 hiryu  mitsubishi ki-69  mitsubishi ki-71  mitsubishi ki-73  mitsubishi ki-83  mitsubishi ki-95  mitsubishi ki-97  mitsubishi ki-103  mitsubishi ki-109  mitsubishi ki-112  mitsubishi ki-200  mitsubishi experimental type r.2  mitsubishi experimental taka-type carrier fighter  mitsubishi experimental washi-type light bomber  mitsubishi experimental tobi-type reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi experimental hayabusa-type fighter  mitsubishi experimental short-range reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi experimental special-purpose carrier reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi army experimental 9-shi fighter  mitsubishi army type ko 1 trainer  mitsubishi army type ki 1 trainer  mitsubishi army type 87 light bomber  mitsubishi army type 92 heavy bomber  mitsubishi army type 92 reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi army type 93-1 heavy bomber  mitsubishi army type 93-2 heavy bomber  mitsubishi army type 93-1 twin-engine light bomber  mitsubishi army type 93-2 twin-engined light bomber  mitsubishi army type 97 reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi army type 97 heavy bomber  mitsubishi army type 97 light bomber  mitsubishi army type 99 assault aircraft  mitsubishi army type 100 transport aircraft  mitsubishi army type 100 command reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi army type 100 operations trainer  mitsubishi army type 100 air defence fighter  mitsubishi army type 100 assault aircraft  mitsubishi army type 4 heavy bomber  mitsubishi army type 4 special attack aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 7-shi carrier torpedo bomber  mitsubishi navy experimental 7-shi carrier attack aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 7-shi carrier attack bomber  mitsubishi navy experimental 7-shi twin-engine carrier aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 7-shi carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 8-shi two-seat fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 8-shi special reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 8-shi carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 8-shi land based medium attack aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 9-shi carrier single-seat fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental
9-shi single-seat fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 9-shi carrier attack bomber  mitsubishi navy experimental 9-shi carrier torpedo attacker  mitsubishi navy experimental 9-shi land-based attack bomber  mitsubishi navy experimental 10-shi carrier torpedo attacker  mitsubishi navy experimental 10-shi observation seaplane  mitsubishi navy experimental 11-shi carrier bomber  mitsubishi navy experimental 11-shi crew trainer  mitsubishi navy experimental 12-shi carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 12-shi land-based attack aircraft  mitsubishi navy experimental 14-shi interceptor fighter  mitsubishi navy experimental 16-shi attack bomber taizan  mitsubishi navy experimental 17-shi ko (a) type carrier fighter reppu  mitsubishi navy experimental 17-shi otsu (b) type interceptor fighter senden  mitsubishi navy experimental 19-shi rocket-powered interceptor fighter shusui  mitsubishi navy experimental 19-shi patrol aircraft taiyo  mitsubishi navy experimental 20-shi ko (a) type carrier fighter rifuku  mitsubishi navy type 10 carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy type 10 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 10 carrier reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi navy type 13-2 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 13-3 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 87 light bomber  mitsubishi navy type 89-1 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 89-2 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 90-1 crew trainer  mitsubishi navy type 90 land transport  mitsubishi navy type 93 attack bomber  mitsubishi navy type 93 land-based attack bomber  mitsubishi navy type 96 model 11 carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy type 96 fighter - trainer  mitsubishi navy type 96 land-based attack aircraft "rikko"  mitsubishi navy type 97-2 carrier attacker  mitsubishi navy type 97 attack bomber  mitsubishi navy type 98 reconnaissance aircraft  mitsubishi navy type 0 carrier fighter  mitsubishi navy type 0 fighter-trainer  mitsubishi navy type 0 observation seaplane  mitsubishi navy type 0 transport  mitsubishi navy type 1 attack bomber  mitsubishi navy type 1 wingtip convoy fighter  mitsubishi navy type 1 large land trainer  mitsubishi navy type 1 transport  mitsubishi navy type 2 training fighter  mitsubishi navy training fighter  mitsubishi navy interceptor fighter raiden  mitsubishi navy torpedo bomber yasukuni  mix  (arthur "bert" mix, chicago, il)  mix flying arrow  mizuno   mizuno type 1 suicide rocket glider shinryu  mizuno type 2 rocket interceptor shinryu  mizuno mxz1  mizuno navy 17-shi experimental plane  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aer
onefs (i-m)
mehrab hossain can refer to:   mehrab hossain (cricketer, born 1978), bangladeshi cricketer  mehrab hossain (cricketer, born 1987), bangladeshi cricketer  mehrab hossain (cricketer, born 1991), bangladeshi cricketer
huang lu (fl. 1769-1829), was a chinese scientist. she was the first woman in china to work with optics and photographic images.  huang lu was the daughter of the education officer huang chao, who encouraged her to educate herself. she studied science such as astronomy and arithmetic. she became acquainted with zheng fuguang, who had studied the western optics which had at that time been introduced in china. she constructed a type of telescope and a prototype of a camera, as well as a type of thermometer.   chen wenshu (1775-1845) described her as "an extremely talented woman in every aspect of art and technology" in his poem "tianjing ge yong huang yingqin".  see also  timeline of women in science  references   1829 deaths 18th-century chinese people 19th-century chinese people 19th-century chinese women 19th-century women scientists 19th-century chinese scientists 18th-century chinese scientists 18th-century chinese women
fabrizio trezzi (born 7 july 1967) is an italian former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people italian male cyclists olympic cyclists of italy cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
is a japanese economist. he is a professor at kobe university.  career kamiya took his b.a. from kyoto university in 1981, his m.a. from osaka university in 1983, and his ph.d. from yale university in 1986.  he received the nakahara prize in 2000.  selected publications  references  external links  faculty profile at kobe university  1957 births living people people from hamamatsu japanese economists 20th-century economists 21st-century economists general equilibrium theorists kyoto university alumni osaka university alumni yale university alumni osaka university faculty university of tokyo faculty kobe university faculty
tommaso carafa (1588 - 7 december 1664) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of capaccio (1639-1664) and bishop of vulturara e montecorvino (1623-1637).  biography tommaso carafa was born in 1588. on 20 november 1623, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of vulturara e montecorvino. on 26 november 1623, he was consecrated bishop by cosimo de torres, cardinal-priest of san pancrazio, with paolo emilio santori, archbishop of urbino, and giuseppe acquaviva, titular archbishop of thebae, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of vulturara e montecorvino until his resignation in 1637. on 11 july 1639, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of capaccio. he served as bishop of capaccio until his death on 7 december 1664.  episcopal succession while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of:  see also catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1588 births 1664 deaths
martin muntor is a fictional character and cult hero in the thriller novels gasp! and the re-written version, find virgil, by frank freudberg.  character information muntor is a broken-down news editor in philadelphia whose diagnosis of terminal lung cancer (manifested from second-hand smoke in the find virgil version) spurs him to take revenge on the u.s. tobacco industry. muntor's plan is to kill 400 innocent people with cyanide-laced cigarettes in an effort to gain publicity and destroy the businesses that make tobacco products. muntor also targets nick pratt, the ceo of tobacco, inc. when muntor launches his attacks, they are many times more effective than he had anticipated. the nation becomes obsessed with the unfolding events, muntor taunts the fbi and news organizations, and issues ultimata to tobacco industry leaders. nick pratt, in turn, dispatches a private investigator (unwittingly backed up by an assassin) to find the man who identifies himself as "virgil." as muntor's advancing cancer lessens his ability to continue his campaign, he offers a deal to the fbi and the industry: if the cigarette manufacturers put up $100 million for cancer research then he will stop the murders. in the end, as the authorities close in, muntor corners pratt. but instead of killing pratt as planned, muntor commits suicide by taking a deep drag on the poisoned cigarette he was going to force pratt to smoke.  creator frank freudberg (born april 12, 1953 in philadelphia) is a novelist, journalist and ghostwriter. his novels gasp (barricade books, new york, 1996), find virgil (inside job media, philadelphia, 2013) and baby please don't go (inside job media, philadelphia, 2015) examine underdogs and their battles with forces seemingly more powerful than they are. freudberg lives in wayne, pennsylvania near philadelphia.  he has contributed to or been written about by reuters, associated press, the los angeles times, usa today, der spiegel and others. his work has been mentioned in many notable publications including time, newsweek, and the guardian.  fbi investigation in the spring of 2000, an fbi agent and police arrived at freudberg's residence. freudberg was told that they were following up on a report that had come into attorney general janet reno's office and he was questioned. freudberg explained that the novel was fiction, not a memoir. at the conclusion of the interview, freudberg autographed a hardback copy of the novel for
the agent.  references  external links  frank freudberg  literary characters introduced in 1996 fictional newspaper editors fictional characters with cancer
nordgren may refer to:  characters george nordgren from arthur  people adam nordgren, midfielder for assi if alexander nordgren, member of christoffer sundgren's team andie nordgren, coiner of relationship anarchy and producer for eve online anna nordgren, painter annika nordgren christensen operator at tv4 newsmill becky nordgren (born 1961), american politician brian nordgren, rugbyist erik nordgren, musician gosta "snoddas" nordgren, entertainer hampus nordgren hemlin former member of kate boy hannes nordgren, member of olofstroms ik ingemar nordgren, historian researcher of the ring of pietroassa joseph nordgren, physicist leif nordgren, biathlete loran nordgren, co-proposer of unconscious thought theory mats nordgren, swedish international footballer matt nordgren, cast member in most eligible dallas and quarter back in the 2005 texas longhorns football team niklas nordgren, hockey forward born in 1979 niklas nordgren (born 2000), competed in finland at the 2016 winter youth olympics olivia nordgren, typographer olov nordgren, coach of assi if otto nordgren, member of olofstroms ik pehr henrik nordgren, composer per nordgren, member of grotesque (band) peter nordgren, gold medalist in shooting at the 2013 island games pontus nordgren, gold medalist in shooting at the 2013 island games sharon nordgren, politician sune nordgren, former director of the national museum of art, architecture and design tyler nordgren, astronomer who worked on the marsdial design team, researched chi cassiopeiae  see also nordegren (disambiguation)
george constantin (; 3 may 1933 - 30 april 1994) was a romanian actor. he appeared in more than fifty films from 1960 to 1994.  selected filmography  references  external links  biography  1933 births 1994 deaths romanian male film actors male actors from bucharest burials at bellu cemetery
the 2018 united states senate election in florida was held on november 6, 2018, alongside a gubernatorial election, elections to the u.s. house of representatives and other state and local elections. incumbent democratic senator bill nelson ran for re-election to a fourth term, but was narrowly defeated by republican governor rick scott. the election was the closest senate race in the state's history.  the results of the race were in dispute for 12 days following the election. the results showed that nelson was narrowly trailing scott, but the margin remained below 0.5%, triggering an automatic recount under florida law. a controversial recount ensued, with both campaigns claiming irregularities. following the recount, florida elections officials confirmed scott's victory on november 18, 2018. scott received 50.05% of the vote, while nelson received 49.93%; the margin of victory was 10,033 votes out of 8.19 million votes cast, or 0.12%. both in terms of raw vote margin and by percentage of difference, this was the closest senate election in the 2018 cycle. scott's victory marked the first time since the reconstruction era that republicans have held both senate seats in florida.  background incumbent democratic sen. bill nelson sought re-election in the 2018 u.s. senate election in florida. the election was expected to be a key race in determining which party would control the u.s. senate in 2019.  as of the second quarter of 2018, nelson had a 44%-34% approval rating among his constituents. despite having won re-election in 2012 by a 13% margin, nelson was considered potentially vulnerable; he had been the only statewide elected democrat in florida since 2011, and his previous opponents, connie mack iv and katherine harris, were seen as much weaker challengers than scott. additionally, he was one of 10 incumbent democratic senators running in states that had been carried by donald trump in 2016. nelson was described as a "low-key centrist" that might not be able to energize progressive voters.  after being encouraged by president trump to enter the senate race, republican governor of florida rick scott announced his candidacy on april 9, 2018. as of the first quarter of 2018, scott held a 54%-35% approval rating among his constituents, with a majority of florida voters believing the state was moving in the right direction under scott's administration. republican president donald trump also held a positive approval rating of 49%-47% in florida as of august 2018. trump had won the state in 2016 by 1.2% over democratic nominee hillary
clinton. scott had put more than $86 million of his own money into his successful 2010 and 2014 gubernatorial bids.  republican primary the republican primary was considered merely a formality, as governor scott's lone challenger was a perennial candidate who was running for senate seats in eight other republican primaries across the country. no other notable republicans entered the race before or after scott announced his candidacy.  candidates  nominee  rick scott, incumbent governor of florida  eliminated in the primary  rocky de la fuente, businessman and perennial candidate; american delta and reform nominee for president in 2016  withdrew  virginia fuller, registered nurse; republican nominee for u.s. representative from ca-11 in 2012  alexander george, businessman, political activist, and minister; candidate for u.s. senate in 2012  augustus sol invictus, far-right activist; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016  lateresa jones, life coach; independent candidate for lieutenant governor in 2014 and u.s. senate in 2016 (running as a write-in candidate)  martin mikhail  mike pompura  joseph smith, chiropractor; candidate for u.s. senate in 1988 and fl-19 in 1996; republican nominee for fl-16 in 1988  marcia r. thorne, pastor (ran as an independent)  angela marie walls-windhauser, candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 (ran as a write-in candidate)  declined  jeff atwater, chief financial officer 2011-2017  carlos beruff, real estate developer and republican donor; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016  pam bondi, attorney general since 2011  richard corcoran, state representative (district 37) since 2010; speaker of the florida house since 2016  john delaney, mayor of jacksonville 1995-2003  ron desantis, u.s. representative from fl-6 2013-2018; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 (running for governor)  hulk hogan, semi-retired  professional wrestler, actor, television personality, entrepreneur, and musician  david jolly, u.s. representative from fl-13 2014-2017; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016  carlos lopez-cantera, lieutenant governor since 2014; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016  tom rooney, u.s. representative from fl-17 since 2009  polling  results  democratic primary as both of senator nelson's primary opponents failed to qualify for the ballot, no democratic primary was held.  candidates  nominee  bill nelson
, incumbent u.s. senator since 2001; u.s. representative from fl-11 1979-1991  declined  randolph bracy, state senator (district 11) since 2016  tim canova, law professor; candidate for fl-23 in 2016 (running for fl-23)  pam keith, navy veteran, labor attorney; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 (running for fl-18)  failed to qualify  tamika lyles  randy white  libertarian party  candidates  withdrew  joe wendt, janitor  declined  augustus sol invictus, far-right activist; candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 (ran as a republican)  roger stone, political consultant, lobbyist, and strategist  american independent party  candidates  withdrew  ed shoemaker, psychologist (ran for fl-15)  independents and write-ins  candidates  declared  lateresa jones, life coach; candidate for lieutenant governor in 2014 and u.s. senate in 2016 (write-in)  howard knepper, businessman and real estate developer; candidate for president in 2012 (write-in)  michael s. levinson, candidate for fl-13 in 2014 and the 2014 special election (write-in)  charles frederick tolbert, pastor (write-in)  david weeks (write-in)  withdrew  edward janowski  scott mccatty (write-in)  marcia r. thorne, pastor  angela marie walls-windhauser, republican candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 (write-in)  general election according to the cook political report, the race was one of the 10 most competitive u.s. senate races in the nation. it was also described as the most expensive u.s. senate race in the country.  scott's involvement in a large medicare fraud case stirred controversy during the general election campaign. scott responded with ads accusing nelson of having cut medicare benefits and stolen from medicare; fact-checkers found that both of scott's assertions were "mostly false." during the campaign, scott characterize[s] nelson as a "socialist"; politifact described the assertion as "pants-on-fire" false.  gun control was a key issue in this race. the election came less than nine months after the stoneman douglas high school shooting in parkland, the deadliest school shooting in american history. nelson also mentioned the orlando nightclub shooting that occurred in june 2016 and killed 49 people, asserting that -"nothing was done" by
scott's administration. in the wake of stoneman douglas, scott raised the age to purchase a gun from 18 to 21, set a three-day waiting period to purchase assault-style weapons, and banned bump stocks--moves that nelson described as "doing the bare...minimum". the national rifle association opposed scott's legislation.  environmental issues also took on a prominent role in the race. scott and his administration had been heavily criticized for weakening regulations designed to protect the environment, even going as far as to instruct the fdep not to use the words "climate change" or "global warming" in official reports. because of this, scott was blamed for the state's worsening algae blooms, even being dubbed "red tide rick" on social media. scott blamed the toxic blooms on nelson and on congress' general inefficiency.  during the campaign, scott sought to avoid mentioning president trump and at times criticized or distanced himself from actions of the trump administration. prior to the campaign, he had used his friendship with trump to boost his profile, had been an early and vocal supporter of trump in 2016, and reportedly spoke to president trump every one or two weeks. trump endorsed scott in his senate bid.  both nelson's and scott's responses to hurricanes irma and michael (which made landfall in september 2017 and october 2018, respectively) were closely watched during the campaign season.  scott made nelson's age an issue in the campaign.  debates  complete video of debate, october 2, 2018  endorsements  predictions  fundraising  polling  with pam bondi  initial results and recount the results of the race were in dispute for 12 days following the election. because scott's lead over nelson was less than 0.5% of the vote, an automatic recount was triggered under florida law. a controversial recount ensued, with both campaigns claiming irregularities.  nelson and scott traded accusations of voter suppression and voter fraud. two lawsuits were filed by the scott campaign after the election against the supervisor of elections in both palm beach and broward counties while the nelson campaign filed one against the secretary of state in florida. on november 9, the scott campaign won both of their lawsuits.  notably, election officials in broward county had to receive police protection after accusations of voter fraud were made by a few members of congress.  additionally, a number of mail-in ballots were found in a mail distribution center in the city of opa-locka three days after the election. the miami-dade elections department considered the votes uncountable because they had not
arrived at the department by the time the polls closed.  the deadline for all ballots to be machine-counted was 3:00 pm est on thursday, november 15, 2018. the revised totals triggered a statewide hand-recount of rejected ballots. at least three counties (broward, hillsborough, and palm beach county) missed the deadline. during machine counting, 846 votes from hillsborough county were lost, presumably due to a power outage. machines purchased from sequoia voting systems broke down, creating delays in the count of palm beach county votes.  results florida elections officials announced on november 18, 2018 that scott had prevailed. scott received 50.05% of the vote, while nelson received 49.93%; the margin of victory was 10,033 votes out of 8.19 million votes cast. nelson then conceded the race to scott.  by county final results from florida division of elections.  edison research exit poll  notes  see also  2018 united states senate elections  2018 florida gubernatorial election  references  external links  candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia  campaign finance at fec  campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites  bill nelson (d) for senate  rick scott (r) for senate  2018 florida united states senate
mugal chak  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of mugal chak. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, mugal chak has total number of 96 houses and population of 505 of which include 276 males and 229 females. literacy rate of mugal chak is 79.57%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 45 which is 8.91% of total population of mugal chak, and child sex ratio is approximately 607, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
wanquan township () is a township under the administration of wanrong county, shanxi, china. , it has 15 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of shanxi wanrong county
paratapirus is an extinct genus of tapir known from the late oligocene and early miocene of europe.  taxonomy two species are considered valid:   p. helveticus  p. intermedius  the species p. moguntiacus and p. robustus are considered synonyms of p. intermedius. members of this genus were originally described under the name palaeotapirus along with several other tapir genera, but that name is now considered abandoned since it was described from poor diagnostic material.  description  paratapirus was among the earliest known tapirs, and probably evolved from protapirus which had migrated into eurasia from north america near the end of the oligocene.  in comparison to protapirus it had more derived dentition, such as molar-like premolars..  references  prehistoric tapirs oligocene odd-toed ungulates oligocene mammals of europe miocene odd-toed ungulates miocene mammals of europe
k2-72 (also designated epic 206209135) is a cool red dwarf star of spectral class m2.7v located about  away from the earth in the constellation of aquarius. it is known to host four planets, all similar in size to earth, with one of them residing within the habitable zone.  nomenclature and history k2-72 also has the 2mass catalogue number j22182923-0936444. its epic (ecliptic plane input catalog) number is 206209135.  the star's planetary companions were discovered by nasa's kepler mission, a mission tasked with discovering planets in transit around their stars. the transit method that kepler uses involves detecting dips in brightness in stars. these dips in brightness can be interpreted as planets whose orbits move in front of their stars from the perspective of earth. the name k2-72 derives directly from the fact that the star is the catalogued 72nd star discovered by the k2 mission to have confirmed planets.   the designation b, c, d, and e derives from the order of discovery. the designation of b is given to the first planet orbiting a given star, and e to the last. in the case of k2-72, there were four planets, so only letters b to e are used. at first the planets were all thought to be smaller than earth. however, in 2017, new analysis by martinez et al. and courtney dressing found that k2-72 was significantly larger than previous estimates, and found that the planets were all larger than earth, although all are still expected to be rocky.  stellar characteristics k2-72 is a m-type star that is approximately 27% the mass of and 33% the radius of the sun, according to the analysis done by dressing et al. the results found by martinez et al. suggest a larger star, with about 36% the radius and mass of the sun. both give a luminosity estimate between 0.013 and 0.015 solar luminosities. it has a surface temperature of between 3360 and 3370 k and its age is unknown. in comparison, the sun is about 4.6 billion years old and has a surface temperature of 5778 k.  the star's apparent magnitude, or how bright it appears from earth's perspective, is 15.309. therefore, it is too dim to be seen with the naked eye and can only be observed with a telescope.  planetary system  the star is known to host four planets, all
likely to be rocky. only one (k2-72e) is currently known to reside inside the habitable zone, although k2-72c may straddle the inner edge.  references   planetary systems with four confirmed planets planetary transit variables m-type main-sequence stars j22182923-0936444 aquarius (constellation)
oxogestone (), also known as 20β-hydroxy-19-norprogesterone, is a progestin of the 19-norprogesterone group which was synthesized in 1953 and was developed as an injectable hormonal contraceptive in the early 1970s but was never marketed. a c20β phenylpropionate derivative, oxogestone phenpropionate, also exists.  references  abandoned drugs diketones hormonal contraception norpregnanes progestogens
lloyd chukwuemeka is a state house of assembly member representing owerri-north state constituency in the imo state house of assembly.  following the power tussle that plagued the imo state house of assembly on may 16, 2019 which brought about the resignation of the deputy speaker, ugonna ozurigbo, lloyd chukwuemeka was elected as the new majority leader of the imo state house of assembly.  on june 10, 2019 lloyd chukwuemeka decamped to the people democratic party  following a mass defection at the valedictory session of the 8th imo assembly in owerri, imo state.  references  imo state politicians living people members of the imo state house of assembly year of birth missing (living people)
gwadar east bay expressway (, ) is a municipal expressway currently under construction in gwadar, balochistan, pakistan. the six lane expressway was initially planned to be complete by 2018  but has been delayed to oct 2021. it will connect gwadar port to the makran coastal highway. the gwadar port authority is supervising the project.  the project is being developed as part of the "early harvest" scheme of china pakistan economic corridor, and is part of a wider  development package for the city and port of gwadar.  the cost of the project is approximately , and will be financed by interest-free loans extended by china's state owned banks. pakistan will be required only to repay the principal value of the loan. as a condition for receiving a zero-interest rate loan, bidding for the project was limited to chinese state-owned companies, and the contract was awarded on a government-to-government basis.  references  china-pakistan economic corridor economic development in pakistan infrastructure investment nawaz sharif administration proposed transport infrastructure in pakistan expressways in pakistan roads in balochistan, pakistan
bath row, also known as the theodore bath historic district, are four buildings in laramie, wyoming, built in 1883 by theodore bath and his brothers. the houses were built to be rented to employees of the union pacific railroad. as brother henry had previously done at the bath ranch, bath row was built of local limestone with red brick window arches. three of the houses are single-story shotgun-style houses with a central doorway flanked by narrow windows, extending back from the street. the fourth building is a two-story structure with three windows on the ground floor facing the street, two above, and a round window into the attic. the side windows in all of the buildings align from one building to the next.  bath row was placed on the national register of historic places on may 8, 1986.  references  external links  bath row historic district at the wyoming state historic preservation office  155, 157 and 159 n. fifth st. at visitlaramie.com  national register of historic places in albany county, wyoming buildings and structures completed in 1883 historic districts on the national register of historic places in wyoming
nh narayana superspeciality hospital  is a hospital located at shalimar in shibpur, howrah, west bengal. its sister hospital is nh narayana multispeciality hospital (formerly westbank hospital) that was acquired by the narayana health group, headed by renowned cardiac surgeon dr. devi prasad shetty in the year 2014. it is a unit of the narayana health group and treats patients from the twin cities of howrah and kolkata in west bengal, india. the hospital, established by dr. devi prasad shetty, is a centre for oncology and cardiac sciences facilities in eastern india. its tertiary care services including cardiac surgery, neurology, neurosurgery and orthopaedics.  the hospital also treats patients from parts of the north eastern states of india and neighbouring countries such as bangladesh, bhutan and nepal. the cancer treatment is aligned with the treatment of organ specific cancers and is backed by integrated oncology facilities including radiotherapy, haemato oncology, paediatric oncology, pain and palliation oncology, gynae oncology and advanced brachytherapy.  the hospital provides an aggregate of 41 services along with a cancer support cell, which aims to raise funds for cancer patients, physiotherapy, nutrition, preventive health checks, counselling, emergency services and trauma care.  references  hospitals in west bengal narayana health 2004 establishments in west bengal hospitals established in 2004
the olimpiada de matematica do grande abc (english:grande abc mathematical olympiad), or omabc is a mathematical competition for pre-collegiate brazilian students of grande abc region, composed by the following cities:       santo andre   sao caetano do sul    sao bernardo do campo   diadema   maua   ribeirao pires   rio grande da serra  the faculdade de ciencias exatas e tecnologicas da universidade metodista de sao paulo is the main organizator of this event, who create the tests and correct then. the main purpose of this olympiad is improve the mathematical knowledge, encouraging the study and research in scientific areas., and contributing to participate in national mathematical competitions, like olimpiada brasileira de matematica das escolas publicas and olimpiada brasileira de matematica. the first edition was held in 2004.  awards  students   the participants are ranked based on their individual scores. medals are awarded to the highest ranked participants, such that slightly less than half of them receive a medal. subsequently, the cutoffs (minimum scores required to receive a gold, silver or bronze medal respectively) are chosen such that the ratio of gold to silver to bronze medals awarded approximates 1 : 2 : 3.    gold medal   silver medal   bronze medal  schools   special prizes are awarded for the schools:    trophy: for the schools whose students received at least a  golden medal.   honorable mention: for the schools at least one student received an award.  champions of omabc  schools awarded with trophies  references  external links   omabc - olimpiada de matematica do grande abc  umesp - universidade metodista de sao paulo  impa - instituto de matematica pura e aplicada  mathematics competitions
the 1990 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1990 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their 13th season under head coach herb deromedi, the chippewas compiled an 8-3-1 record (7-1 against mac opponents), tied with toledo for the mac championship, lost to san jose state in the california bowl, and outscored their opponents, 283 to 146.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 121,270 in six home games.  led by a strong defense, the team shut out cincinnati (34-0), bowling green (17-0), and kent state (42-0), and held nine of twelve opponents to fewer than 14 points. on september 22, 1990, the defensive unit set a school record, holding bowling green to only two first downs in a 17-0 victory. the following week, the defense set another school record with six interceptions in a 31-7 victory over miami (oh). the team also set a school record with 83 punts forced over the course of the 1990 season.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback jeff bender with 1,978 passing yards, tailback billy smith with 1,047 rushing yards, and flanker ken ealy with 916 receiving yards. ealy's 916 receiving yards was a single season school record until 1996 when the record was broken by reggie allen. bender received the team's most valuable player award and also received the mac's vern smith leadership award and the mac offensive player of the year award. eight central michigan players (wr ken ealy, og paul jacobson, qb jeff bender, rb billy smith, dl j.j. wierenga, ilb rich curtiss, db david johnson, and db ken strong) received first-team all-mac honors.  coach deromedi received the mac coach of the year award.  schedule  references  external links  official program, september 8, 1990  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons mid-american conference football champion seasons central michigan chippewas football
charles magauran, the third, (gaelic- cathal mag samhradhain) was chief of the mcgovern clan and baron or lord of tullyhaw barony, county cavan including the period 1641 to 1657.  ancestry  his ancestry was charles son of brian magauran son of feidhlimidh mag samhradhain (d. 1622) son of brian son of tomas (d. 1532) son of maghnus (d. 1497) son of tomas og (d. 1494) son of tomas na feasoige (d. 1458) son of fearghal (d. 1393) son of tomas (d. 1343) son of brian 'breaghach' mag samhradhain (d. 1298). his father brian magauran was his predecessor as chief of the clan. cathal was the eldest son and his younger brothers were domhnall (anglicised daniel) magauran and feidhlimidh (anglicised phelim) magauran.  chieftainship  on the death of the mcgovern chief, his father brian magauran, some time after 1628, charles took the chieftaincy and lived in ballymagauran castle.  1641 rebellion  charles joined the irish rebellion of 1641 against british rule and he led the mcgovern forces in the wars that followed.  the surviving british settlers later made depositions about the rebels activities, some of which mentioned charles and the other mcgoverns.  county cavan depositions  william reynolds of lisnaore made a deposition about the rebellion in lissanover as follows:  george butterwick of drumlane parish stated:  thomas hedges of cavan town stated:  martin kilhare of drumlane made depositions about the rebellion in munlough south and drumlane:  dorothy ward of drumlane stated:  arthur culme of cloughoughter castle stated, inter alia:  robert simmons of killeshandra stated:  james gardiner of aghabane stated:  audrey carrington of ballyness, bofealan townland stated:  county leitrim depositions  ralph carr of oughteragh parish stated:  the aforesaid ralph carr made a further statement:  thomas lewis of oughteragh parish stated:  nicholas ward of ballinamore stated:  george bowker of ballinamore stated:  edward bisphum of drumreilly stated:  elizabeth kiddier of county leitrim stated:  mary carr of oughteragh stated:  peter lewis of ballinamore stated:  sergeant scott of the garrison in manorhamilton castle published a diary in 1645. one entry states:
county fermanagh depositions  thomas leysance of mackan stated:  siege of croaghan and keilagh  the castles of croaghan and keelagh, killeshandra belonging to sir james craig and sir francis hamilton were besieged by the mcgoverns and o'reillys when the 1641 rebellion started. the inhabitants held out until 15 june 1642 when they surrendered and went to drogheda. however they occasionally made forays for food during the siege and one of them on 22 april 1642 was made in tullyhaw when several mcgoverns were killed. dr. henry jones relates the incident:  eleanor reynolds of lissanover also made a deposition about the siege of croaghan as follows:  john simpson of killeshandra also made a deposition about the siege of keelagh:  when croaghan and keelagh surrendered, charles magauran was one of the signatories to the surrender agreement:  battle of benburb  at the battle of benburb on 5 june 1646, the mcgoverns fought beside owen roe o'neill, probably under the leadership of charles magauran. his great-great grandson major edward magauran refers to this event in his autobiography wherein he states- "i was born in 1746 at the residence of the m'gauran family, called from them balli m'gauran. it is a market town of some note, wherein four considerable fairs are annually held. during their prosperous days, a stately castle reared its head, adjoining to the town, and was the abode of the barons, but it was dismantled by order of oliver cromwell, and now lies in ruins. my great grandfather having thus involved himself in o'neil's rebellion, and thereby forfeited his estates, they remained in the crown till the reign of king james the second".  cromwellian confiscations  in 1657 a list of the papist proprietors names in the county of cavan, as they are returned in the civill surveys of the said county gave the names of 20 landowners whose property was confiscated in the barony of tullyhaw. these were cormock macbryan macgowran; bryan oge macgowran; thomas macgowran; ffarrell machugh macmarcus oge macgowran; bryan oge macgowran; daniell macgowran; philemy oge macgowran; gilderneve macgowran; charles macgowran; nicholas o'gowean; william macgreame, gent.; william gryme; daniell macgourke; philip mac mullmore o
'rely; charles o'rely; shane reagh o'rely; hugh o'rely; owny sherridan; james talbott, esq.  references  irish lords 17th-century deaths people from county cavan 17th-century irish people
the estadio zamora is a multi-use stadium in zamora, michoacan, mexico.  it is currently used mostly for football matches and is the home stadium for real zamora.  the stadium has a capacity of 7,200 people.  references  external links  sports venues in michoacan zamora athletics (track and field) venues in mexico
marcus hamilton may refer to:   marcus hamilton (angel), a character from the tv series angel  marcus hamilton (american football) (born 1984), american football cornerback
leana is an feminine given name. notable people with the name include:   leana de bruin (born 1977), south african and new zealand netball player  leana wen (born 1983), american physician and public health advocate  see also  lena (name)  estonian feminine given names
alexandru repan (; born 26 february 1940) is a romanian actor. he appeared in more than forty films since 1963.  selected filmography  references  external links   1940 births living people romanian male film actors
platoro is an unincorporated community in conejos county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called platoro was established in 1888, and remained in operation until 1919.  platoro is a name derived from spanish meaning "silver and gold".  see also platoro dam  references  unincorporated communities in conejos county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
abdul basit is a retired pakistani diplomat who served as the former high commissioner of pakistan to india. he was appointed to his position in 2014 and was based at the pakistani high commission in new delhi. previously, he served as pakistan's ambassador to germany from may 2012 to march 2014. during his career, he has been posted at moscow, new york, sana'a, geneva and london.  work  references  ambassadors of pakistan to germany high commissioners of pakistan to india pakistani expatriates in russia pakistani expatriates in the united states pakistani expatriates in yemen pakistani expatriates in switzerland pakistani expatriates in england year of birth missing (living people) living people quaid-i-azam university alumni
wally taylor (july 14, 1930 - october 7, 2012) was an american actor known for rocky iii (1982), escape from new york (1981) and the golden child (1986). he also starred in the arena stage production of before it hits home.  filmography  references  external links  1930 births 2012 deaths african-american male actors american male film actors american male television actors people from maywood, illinois 20th-century african-american people 21st-century african-american people
the adventures of puss in boots is an american computer-animated web television series. it stars the character puss in boots from the dreamworks animation shrek franchise. the series debuted on january 16, 2015, on netflix, when the first five episodes of the first season were released. the sixth and final season was released on january 26, 2018.  series overview  episodes  season 1 (2015)  season 2 (2015)  season 3 (2016)  season 4 (2016)  season 5 (2017)  season 6 (2018)  specials  interactive special (2017)  references  lists of american children's animated television series episodes
gilberto gonzalez (1906 - 21 march 1954) was a mexican actor. he appeared in more than ninety films from 1933 to 1954.  biography gilberto gonzalez was born in 1906 in mexico city, mexico. after several attempts, in 1933 he found a spot as an extra in the film [[ su ultima cancion]]. in his third film (janitzio (1935)) he gets the antagonistic role, which made life impossible for the protagonist, played by emilio "indio" fernandez. it is thanks to this role that he is offered multiple films, where he usually appeared as the main villain. he has appeared in more than nighty films form 1933 to 1954.   among the films in which he acts, rebel souls (1937) stands out, where three of the future pillars of mexican cinema made their debut: raul de anda, alejandro galindo and victor manuel mendoza, as producer, director and actor respectively; the bandits of cold river (1938), sota, horse and king (1944), in which luis aguilar made his debut, canaima (1945), alternating with the most famous couple of that time: jorge negrete, gloria marin and with the queen of melodrama charito granados, which thanks to them he receives the ariel award for the best actor in a minor role, la selva de fuego (1945) with the diva dolores del rio and arturo de cordova, the pearl (film) (1947) with pedro armendariz, although he didn't play a big role in this film, it is arguably the most famous movie he appeared in. the pearl is about a mexican driver, named quino, who discovers a very valuable pearl that is worth thousands at the bottom of the ocean. in the village they live, multiple people try to retrieve that pearl but dealers continuously rip them off, and others try and aggressively steal it. quino's brother suggest they leave the village, but quino struggles with the decision because he is trying to give his son an education. captain from castile (1947), his first experience in hollywood in a small role, la voragine (1949), la malquerida (1949), which stands out for the duel of divas: dolores del rio - columba dominguez, la possession (1950) with jorge negrete and miroslava, vino el remolino y nos alevanto (1950), el suavecito (1951), victor parra's consecrating film, subida al cielo (1952) in which it is directed by luis bunuel, now i'm rich (1952
), an intense drama starring pedro infante and marga lopez, el bombero atomico(1952), one of his few comedy appearances, which is about a clumsy fireman, named cantinflas, who gets a visit from his goddaughter, whose mother recently died in the jungle. the firemen becomes a policeman for safety reasons, and there life is smooth until gangsters kidnap his goddaughter. next are cantinflas and el rebozo de soledad (1952), for which he would get his last ariel nomination.  his last film appearance would be in the littlest outlaw (1954), a film directed by roberto gavaldon in the united states for disney. the film is about a peasant boy who steals an abused and beautiful stallion. together they go through an adventure filled journey full of tense confrontation and danger. this journey portrays mexicos rugged beauty. he died on march 21, 1954, due to a heart attack in palenque (chiapas), mexico.  awards  ariel award  selected filmography  references   https://movies.disney.com/the-littlest-outlaw https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0037981/plotsummary?ref_=tt_ov_pl  external links   1906 births 1954 deaths mexican male film actors
kieran collins (born 14 december 1997) is a former australian rules footballer who played for the western bulldogs in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the western bulldogs with their second selection and twenty-sixth overall in the 2015 national draft. he made his debut in the twenty-five point loss against  in round 9, 2016 at the spotless stadium.  collins was delisted at the end of 2018.  he signed to play with the northern blues in the victorian football league in 2019.  references  external links  1997 births living people people educated at haileybury (melbourne) western bulldogs players dandenong stingrays players australian rules footballers from victoria (australia)
pulgarcito (in spanish, literally "little thumb") may refer to: pulgarcito, the spanish variant of the folktale tom thumb pulgarcito (spain), a spanish weekly illustrated magazine, 1921-1987 pulgarcito (mexico), a children's magazine of the mexican government, 1925-1932 manuel ramos (boxer) (1942-1999), mexican boxer
jo yon-jun (born september 28, 1937) is a north korean politician. jo is a candidate member of the politburo of the workers' party of korea (wpk) and former first deputy in the organization and guidance department (ogd) of the central committee of the wpk.  in 2016, in a round of sanctions targeted at human rights abuses in north korea, he was placed under sanctions by the united states as the man who is responsible for the execution of defectors from the country.  references  north korean politicians people from south hamgyong 1937 births living people 21st-century north korean people alternate members of the 6th politburo of the workers' party of korea members of the 6th central committee of the workers' party of korea
drut is the concluding section of a vocal raga performance in hindustani music. drut may also refer to guy drut (born 1950), french hurdler and politician  drut (river), a river in belarus, a right tributary of dnieper
miyuki matsuhisa-hironaka (松久-広中 ミユキ, born august 15, 1945) is a retired japanese artistic gymnast who competed at the 1968, 1972 and 1976 summer olympics. she had her best results in 1968, when her team placed fourth and she shared ninth place on the balance beam.  references  1945 births living people gymnasts at the 1968 summer olympics gymnasts at the 1972 summer olympics gymnasts at the 1976 summer olympics olympic gymnasts of japan japanese female artistic gymnasts
giuseppe maria scotese (1916-2002) was an italian screenwriter and film director.  selected filmography  fear no evil (1945)  the models of margutta (1946)  the great dawn (1947)  carmen (1953)  the red cloak (1955)  pirate of the half moon (1957)  questo amore ai confini del mondo (1960)  miracles still happen (1974)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1916 births 2002 deaths italian film directors 20th-century italian screenwriters italian male screenwriters 20th-century italian male writers
jagdgeschwader 70 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  bibliography  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1939 military units and formations disestablished in the 1940s
ayya  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of ayya.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, ayya has a total number of 23 houses and population of 119 of which include 70 males and 49 females. literacy rate of ayya is 66.36%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 9 which is 7.56% of total population of ayya, and child sex ratio is approximately 1250 higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
paula harumi ishibashi (born february 14, 1985) is a brazilian rugby union player. she is the current captain of brazil's women's sevens team and will be leading them at the 2016 summer olympics.  ishibashi was introduced to rugby sevens through friends and has been a veteran of the team for 10 years. in 2013, she was awarded the athlete of the year award by the brazilian olympic committee. in 2015, she also was awarded the best rugby player of 2015 by the brazilian olympic committee.  she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's rugby sevens team.  references  external links     1985 births living people brazilian female rugby union players brazilian female rugby league players brazil international rugby sevens players brazil women's national rugby league team players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
woo hye-mi (; april 6, 1988 - september 21, 2019), also known by her stage name miwoo (), was a south korean singer. she was known as one of the final four contestants on the 2012 talent show series the voice of korea.  on september 21, 2019, woo was found dead in her home.  discography  extended plays  singles  filmography  references  external links    1988 births 2019 deaths k-pop singers south korean women pop singers south korean female idols the voice of korea contestants 21st-century south korean singers 21st-century south korean women singers
montezuma station is an extinct town in helt township, vermillion county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  a few buildings in the community exist, and it is still cited by the usgs.  geography montezuma station is located at .  references  former populated places in vermillion county, indiana former populated places in indiana
united nations security council resolution 2106 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions june 2013 events
bhawanipur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bhawanipur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  demography according to the 2011 census of india, bhawanipur had 487 houses and a population of 2,472, comprising 1,317 males and 1,155 females. the literacy rate was 75.52%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years was 266 and the child sex ratio was approximately 750, lower than state average of 846.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
farouk achmad (4 june 1938 - 13 april 2003), often credited as farouk afero, was a pakistani-born indonesian film actor. after making his feature film debut in 1964, he rose to fame in 1970 with bernafas dalam lumpur (breathing in mud). afero ultimately appeared in more than sixty films.  biography afero was born farouk achmad in pakistan on 4 june 1938. he was the son of asgar ali and sarifah bibi. by the 1950s the family had migrated to the indonesian archipelago. farouk achmad took the name farouk afero while working as an amateur boxer. he was later cast in the film ekspedisi terakhir (the last expedition, 1964), a film produced by ermina zaenah and directed by alam surawidjaja and sjahril gani. over the next five years he appeared in several roles, including in wim umboh's sembilan (nine, 1967) and laki-laki tak bernama (man without a name, 1969).  afero's star-making role only came in 1970, when he appeared in turino djunaidy's bernafas dalam lumpur (breathing in mud). this film was a commercial success, spawning two sequels, and sparking the revival of the flagging indonesian film industry. over the next decade he appeared in more than forty films - mostly as the antagonist. these included roles as the titular fighter in  si gondrong (1971), the nihilist poet anwar in atheis (atheist, 1974) and the gang member majid in laila majenun (1976). for this last role, afero received a citra award for best supporting actor at the 1976 indonesian film festival.  afero also actively promoted the development of the cinema of indonesia; in 1973, for instance, he shaved his head in protest of movie theatres' lack of interest in showing domestic productions and attempted to meet jakarta governor ali sadikin. he was also an active member of the , or parfi.  after completing tapak-tapak kaki wolter monginsidi (the footsteps of wolter monginsidi, 1982), a biopic of the revolutionary robert wolter monginsidi, arefo went on hiatus from acting. he made his last feature film appearance a decade later, in bernafas dalam lumpur, a remake of the 1970 production. he did not, however, leave acting, and in the
1990s he appeared in several television series, including duren duren (1994), abunawas (1995), ujang & aeeng (1996), biang kerok (troublemaker, 1996), and di bawah purnama aku berdoa (i pray beneath the full moon, 1997).  towards the end of his life, afero was diagnosed with lung cancer. on 13 april 2003, at 21:50 indonesia western time (utc+7), he died of cancer at the pondok indah hospital in jakarta. he was buried at tanah kusir cemetery in the same grave as his mother at a funeral attended by numerous indonesian actors and filmmakers, including the screenwriter misbach yusa biran and actresses nani wijaya and widyawati. he was survived by his wife, oktorina suryaningsih, as well as five children, and six grandchildren. speaking with kompas, biran described afero:  awards afero was nominated for best actor at the pwi awards, held by the jakarta branch of the indonesian journalists association, in 1971 and 1972, winning second and third runner-up, respectively. during the 1976 indonesian film festival in bandung he was named best supporting actor for his role in laila majenun. at the 1979 festival he was again nominated for the best supporting actor award, receiving second place (the kompas award) for his performance in rahasia perkawinan (the secret of marriage).  filmography during his nearly career, afero acted in almost seventy films. biran writes that this includes starring roles in most of indonesia's domestic productions in the 1970s. he was also part of the crew of four productions, serving as story writer.  crew  lorong hitam (1971) lingkaran setan (1972) ibu sejati (1973)  setitik noda (1974)  cast  ekspedisi terakhir (1964) madju tak gentar (1965) segenggam tanah perbatasan (1965) hantjurnya petualang (1966) kasih diambang maut (1967) sembilan (1967) sendja di djakarta (1967) djakarta - hongkong - macao (1968) laki-laki tak bernama (1969) orang-orang liar (1969) bernafas dalam lumpur (1970) dibalik pintu dosa (1970) noda tak berampun (1970) tuan tanah kedawung (1970
) air mata kekasih (1971) biarkan musim berganti (1971)  lorong hitam (1971) kekasihku ibuku (1971) matinja seorang bidadari (1971)  si gondrong (1971) tiada maaf bagimu (1971) tjinta di batas peron (1971) kabut bulan madu (1972) lingkaran setan (1972) mutiara dalam lumpur (1972)  ratu ular (1972) intan berduri (1972) takkan kulepaskan (1972) tjintaku djauh dipulau (1972) jimat benyamin (1973) kutukan ibu (1973) akhir sebuah impian (begitu kehendak tuhan) (1973) cucu (1973) ibu sejati (1973) percintaan (1973) perempuan (1973) si manis jembatan ancol (1973)  si rano (1973) atheis (1974) batas impian (1974) setitik noda (1974) pacar (1974) pengakuan seorang perempuan (1974) ratapan dan rintihan (1974) krisis x (1975) laila majenun (1975) liku-liku panasnya cinta (1976) bungalow di lereng bukit (1976) kampus biru (1976) ganasnya nafsu (1976)  si doel anak modern (1976) selangit mesra (1977) kuda-kuda binal (1978) rahasia perkawinan (1978) bulu-bulu cendrawasih (1978) karena dia (1979) milikku (1979) ach yang benerrr... (1979) kabut sutra ungu (1979) cantik (1980) bukan sandiwara (1980) putri giok (1980) irama cinta (1980) fajar yang kelabu (1981) gadis marathon (1981) tapak-tapak kaki wolter monginsidi (1982) bernafas dalam lumpur (1991)  explanatory notes  references  works cited     1939 births 2003 deaths indonesian male film actors indonesian people of pakistani descent people from jhelum citra award winners deaths from lung cancer deaths from cancer in indonesia
bong kee chok (; born 1937) is the main leader and member of the clandestine communist organisation (cco), also known as the north kalimantan communist party (nkcp).  as bong was opposed to the formation of malaysia, he was arrested on 22 june 1962. after his release, bong formed the nkcp on 19 september 1965 in pontianak, west kalimantan, indonesia. after a series of insurgencies, and the indonesians' decision to stop aiding the communists, bong decided to surrender and signed an agreement to lay down arms to sarawak chief minister abdul rahman ya'kub on 20 october 1973 which signified the end of further major battles in the sarawak communist insurgency.  references   1937 births living people malaysian communists
nicola dalmazzo, o.s.a. or nicola dalmatico (died 20 april 1653) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of fossano (1648-1653).  biography nicola dalmazzo was ordained a priest in the order of saint augustine. on 23 november 1648, he was appointed during the papacy of pope paul iii as bishop of fossano.  on 29 november 1648, he was consecrated bishop by giovanni battista maria pallotta, cardinal-priest of san silvestro in capite, with ranuccio scotti douglas, bishop of borgo san donnino, and patrizio donati, bishop emeritus of minori, serving as co-consecrators.  he served as bishop of fossano until his death on 20 april 1653.  see also catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope paul iii 1653 deaths
barry jekowsky is an american musician and music director who founded the california symphony.  jekowsky has played with the national symphony, the detroit symphony, and the reno philharmonic orchestra.  jekowsky left the california symphony in 2010 after 24 years. he resides in marin county, california with his wife and 3 children.  references  year of birth missing (living people) american classical musicians living people music directors place of birth missing (living people)
damian walczak (born 29 july 1984) is a polish cyclist.  palmares 2008 1st gp san giuseppe 2012 1st puchar ministra obrony narodowej 1st stage 3 tour of bulgaria  references  1984 births living people polish male cyclists place of birth missing (living people)
villegailhenc-aragon xiii are a semi-professional rugby league team based in villegailhenc, aude in languedoc-rousillon in southern france. they currently play in the second tier competition the elite two championship. their home stadium is the stade jerome rieux.  history originally being an amateur club they competed in the french rugby league amateur competition the federal championship. in 1987 they reached their first 'federal championship' final, now called national division 2, but lost out to le barcares 9-16. in 1993 they once again reached the final but lost again this time to le lauquet-palaja 15-18. by the first decade of the millennium they were still  playing in the national division 2 but that changed when in season 2011/12 they once again reached the final but this time they won beating le soler 11-6 and thus clinching promotion. the next two seasons brought success in the paul dejean cup then in season 2014/15 they won through to the national division 1 play-off final and despite losing to us ferrals xiii they were promoted to the 2nd tier for the very first time, they struggled at the higher level and finished the season bottom with no wins, but they escaped relegation when the top two tier leagues were increased. they also became top flight club as carcassonne's official feeder team.  current squad 2019-20 squad; mohand ait ouaret vinnie anderson louis anderson patrick ah van loic banquet maxime banquet stefanos bastas nicolas bertolas enzo chaumond gregory delarose anthony delgado alex durou robin escanuela  djamel remok  clement cartier antonine gau douglas gauvin thomas limongi saia makisi yann marchio valentin marot alexandre mickalezyk victor monclus denis montero quentin nicol tyrone pau maxime peault romain peault tely pelo dorian percheron nicolas puyal ludovic renu benjamin tiquet kevin tisseyre  honours  elite two championship (1): 2017-18  national division 2 (1): 2011-12  paul dejean cup (2): 2013,2014  references  external links  french rugby league teams sport in aude
natalia weronika szroeder (born 20 april 1995) is a polish singer-songwriter and tv presenter. she is most known for her works with rapper liber, of which she appeared with in his songs wszystkiego na raz and nie patrze w doł in 2013. the singer also has a solo career: her debut single titled jane  was released in 2012.  biography  szroeder was born on 20 april 1995 in bytow. she grew up in the pomeranian village of parchowo in a musically inclined family. her mother, joanna, is a singer for the folk band modraki, which was founded by her grandfather waldemar kapiszka. three of her siblings were part of the rusland trio. her father jaromir was the founder of the dialogus theater, in 2004/2005. in childhood, szroeder appeared in the tvp1 program, od przedszkola do opola.  in 2011, she was a part of an episode of szansa na sukces. she sang the song "cicha woda" by maryla rodowicz. on 24 march 2012, she released a video on youtube for the song "potrzebny je drech" (in the kashubian language), of which she wrote , as advised by tomasz fopke. in july of that year, she released their debut single jane. the music and the lyrics were written by , a former member of . in the same year, she teamed up with rapper liber, with whom she recorded the song wszystkiego na raz. the composition was ranked 5th in airplay - top, and also hit the charts of radio stations such as rmf fm and radio zet. the song "wszystkiego na raz" was the second single released in may of the same year in the liber album duety. the album also shared the second track of the two, nie patrze w doł, whose music video was produced by cam-l studio dl promotion. on 3 august of that year, szroeder performed a duet with liber at the eska music awards 2013 gala, during which they were nominated for best debut. in the same month, szroeder appeared on the russian song festival in zielona gora, where she performed the song "kukuszka" from the repertoire of zemfira. on 2 december 2013, she released her second hit single, teczowy.  on 11 february 2014, she released her third single "nie
pytaj jak  (young stars festival)". in april, she appeared alongside  and dawid kwiatkowski at the young stars festival 2014, at the hws arena in poznan. in june of that year, she took part in a concert to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the careers of  and ryszard rynkowski, which took place in the framework of li festival of polish songs in opole. during the concert, she sang the song "za młodzi, za starzy", in a duet with cygan. in june, she took part in carpathia festival 2014, organized in rzeszow. on 27 july 2014, during a concert at lata zet i dwojki in torun, together with liber, she won in the category of best performance for the performance of the song nie patrze w doł. in the same year, on 24 august, they released their first single, teraz ty, which heralds the two as a duo.  on 9 february 2016, szroeder confirmed on the radio show rmf fm that she would attempt to represent poland via a national final for the 61st edition of the eurovision song contest in 2016 with the song lustra. she had been a jury member for poland in the eurovision song contest 2015. a few days later, she was on the list of artists qualified for the final. she got 5th place with 4.20% of the votes. in august 2016, she released her second single domek z kart for her debut album natinterpretacje. szroeder is a co-author of lyrics and music from the album. the album debuted at the 15th place of the polish olis charts.  from 3 march to 12 may 2017, she took part in the seventh edition of the polish version of dancing with the stars, dancing with the stars: taniec z gwiazdami with her dance partner jan kliment. the couple won the competition, beating cichosz and  in the finals. along with rafał brzozowski and , she was an interval act for the national selection for the polish national final for the junior eurovision song contest 2017.  in january 2018, in an interview with plejada.pl, she confirmed the beginning of work on a second studio album, which she plans to premiere in autumn of 2018.  in january 2020, the premiere of the movie jak zostałem gangsterem. historia prawdziwa, took part in which she played magda, the wife
of the main character. she was the host of a tv program of the talent show broadcast on polsat the four. bitwa o sławe.  inspirations  among her inspirations, szroeder mentions above all michael jackson. she is also inspired by the music of artists such as justin timberlake and rihanna.  discography  singles  as featured artist  videos  awards and honors  references  external links   official website  21st-century polish pianists polish women pianists polish violinists polish lyricists kashubians 1995 births living people people from bytow county 21st-century polish women singers 21st-century violinists
(born april 8, 1939) is a former japanese baseball player. he played for the hanshin tigers from 1962 to 1973.  references  1939 births living people japanese baseball players hanshin tigers players managers of baseball teams in japan hanshin tigers managers place of birth missing (living people)
frigocanthus is a genus of extinct tetraodontiform marine fishes.  species  frigocanthus margaritatus  frigocanthus stroppanobili  fossil record fossils of frigocanthus are found in the pliocene and pleistocene of italy and in the pliocene of greece.  description the filefishes of the genus frigocanthus have 21 vertebrae and show a remarkable enlargement of scales. furthermore, they have a strong first dorsal spine with large, prominent barbs. the species frigocanthus margaritatus can reach a length of about .  bibliography sorbini, c. & tyler, j.c. (2004) review of the fossil file fishes of the family monacanthidae (tetraodontiformes), pliocene and pleistocene of europe, with a new genus, frigocanthus, and two new species related to the recent aluterus. bollettino del museo civico di storia naturale di verona, 28, 41-76. geologia paleontologia preistoria  references
enrichetta alfieri (23 february 1891 - 23 november 1951) - born maria angela domenica alfieri - was an italian roman catholic professed religious and a member of the sisters of charity of saint jeanne-antide thouret.  alfieri earned the monikers of the "mother of san vittore" and the "angel of san vittore" due to her extensive work in the san vittore prison in milan. she worked there during world war ii when the nazis arrested her on the charge of espionage. the intervention of the cardinal archbishop of milan alfredo ildefonso schuster secured her release.  pope benedict xvi approved her beatification and delegated cardinal angelo amato to preside over the beatification celebration at the milan cathedral on 26 june 2011.  life maria angela domenica alfieri was born in 1891 in borgo vercelli to giovanni alfieri and rosa compagnone. she was the eldest and her two sisters were angela and adele while her brother and final sibling was carlo.  her parents educated her as a child before she attended school. she excelled in art and in needlework. she also tended to the fields at home and aided her mother with housework.  from her childhood it was clear to her that she was to enter the religious life and tried to do so in her adolescence much to the chagrin of her parents who asked her to remain at home until she turned 20. she became a postulant of saint jeanne-antide thouret's congregation on 20 december 1911. she received a diploma in education on 12 july 1917. alfieri worked as a kindergarten teacher in vercelli but was forced to relinquish her position in 1917 after it was found that she had diagnosed pott's disease.  alfieri was cured - in what was deemed a miracle - on 25 february 1923 after having gone on a pilgrimage to lourdes in france. in april 1920 she had gone to milan for tests and treatment - without results - and was later found to have degenerating spondylitis. her condition deteriorated in vercelli and she was often immobilized with great pain. in may 1922 her superiors had sent her to lourdes for a pilgrimage in the hopes that a miracle would be performed; nothing happened and she instead took a bottle of water from lourdes with her. she would sip from it when feeling great pain. in january 1923 doctors diagnosed her as being incurable and she received the anointing of the sick on 5 february 1923. on 25 february 1923 at 8:00pm she sipped the water and briefly fainted and
heard a voice: "get up". she rose from bed after feeling no pain and later wrote of this moment: "the doors of heaven are closed; those of life are opened up again."  she recovered so well that on 24 may 1923 she was assigned to administer to prisoners in milan at the prison of san vittore. she became well known amongst prisoners for her tender care and affection and was as such given the two monikers of the "mother of san vittore" and the "angel of san vittore"; she was appointed as its superior in 1939.  the prison later became an s.s. headquarters for the nazis during world war ii and the prison later housed priests and nuns in addition to jewish people and resistance fighters. alfieri and her fellow religious helped to smuggle supplies and messages out to jews and others fleeing persecution and she also worked with church authorities to intervene for those that needed desperate aid; she also worked with the cardinal archbishop of milan alfredo ildefonso schuster. on 23 september 1944 the nazis intercepted a message directed to her and so she was arrested on the charge of espionage and was sentenced either to death or imprisonment in the third reich at a concentration camp; she spent eleven days in detention. ecclesiastical figures - like cardinal schuster - intervened and so she was released and moved to brescia where she wrote a memoir of her imprisonment; schuster had also written to benito mussolini asking him for a pardon of alfieri. on 7 may 1945 she was reassigned to san vittore prison and administered to prisoners of war and their former jailors.  alfieri fractured her femur after a fall outside the milan cathedral in the piazza in september 1950 and she also fell ill due to bad liver functioning and a tired heart; she once said of her impending death: "i didn't believe it was so nice to die". she died at 3:00pm on 23 november 1951. inmates at san vittore went to visit her remains prior to her funeral as a mark of respect to the "angel of san vittore". she was exhumed on 1 march 2011.  beatification the beatification process was opened under pope john paul ii after she became titled as a servant of god on 22 november 1994 when the congregation for the causes of saints issued the official "nihil obstat" ('nothing against') to the cause being opened. cardinal carlo maria martini inaugurated the diocesan process on 30 january 1995 and closed it on 20 april 1996; the c.c.s. validated the process on 6 december 1996.  the c.c.s.
received the positio in 2001 and passed it to a congress of theologians on 6 march 2009 for their official approval. the latter's positive verdict allowed for the c.c.s. themselves to also vote in favor of the dossier on 17 november 2009. pope benedict xvi proclaimed alfieri to be venerable on 19 december 2009 after he confirmed that the late religious had lived a model life of heroic virtue.  the process for investigating a miracle opened on 28 may 2002 in a diocesan process that cardinal martini inaugurated in the archdiocese of milan and closed on 29 june 2002. the process received c.c.s. validation on 12 march 2004 and received the approval of the medical board on 28 october 2010. theologians also approved the miracle on 14 january 2011 and the c.c.s. also voted to approve the miracle on 1 march 2011. pope benedict xvi approved the healing to be a credible miracle on 2 april 2011. the miracle involved the 1990s cure of stefania copelli.  benedict xvi delegated cardinal angelo amato to preside over the beatification outside of the milan cathedral on 26 june 2011.  the current postulator assigned to the cause is sr. anna antida casolino.  see also catholic church in italy chronological list of saints and blesseds list of beatified people  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn enrichetta alfieri  1891 births 1951 deaths 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century italian people beatifications by pope benedict xvi catholic resistance to nazi germany italian anti-fascists italian beatified people italian nuns nazi persecution of the catholic church people from borgo vercelli venerated catholics by pope benedict xvi
edward clifford anderson sr. (november 8, 1815 - january 6, 1883) was a naval officer in the united states navy, mayor of savannah, georgia and a colonel in the confederate states army during the american civil war. he commanded fort james jackson near savannah before its capture in 1864. he was elected mayor of savannah eight times, before and after the war, and on december 6, 1865, he became the first mayor to be elected after the war.  early life and the us navy  anderson was the ninth child of george anderson and eliza clifford wayne. one of his brothers was john wayne anderson, who commanded the republican blues for over thirty years. his grandfather, captain george anderson served in the american revolutionary war and died aboard his ship, georgia paquet on a trip to great britain in 1775. growing up around the docks of savannah, he dreamed of being a famous naval officer much against his father's wishes. he attended the round hill school in massachusetts from 1824 to 1830 before returning to savannah, georgia. fulfilling his dream, he was appointed acting midshipman by secretary of the navy levi woodbury on october 20, 1833, he served on  for a year. on november 24, 1834, was commissioned midshipman and was assigned to 'old iron-sides', . he began keeping a diary during his tenure aboard constitution, and added to it over the years, documenting his life and those of his shipmates. he later served on the frigate , and on the sloops-of-war warren, vandalia, and falmouth. during the years he cruised from newfoundland to south america, europe, the caribbean sea and the gulf of mexico. on may 16, 1840, he was promoted to passed midshipman, and became acting master of .  he married sarah mcqueen williamson of savannah on february 10, 1841. their first child, mary, called nina, was born on april 6, 1842, followed by a son, edward maffitt, born august 6, 1843. that year anderson was assigned acting master for  before she departed for a cruise of the western atlantic and the mediterranean. later he served as sailing master on the coastal steamer uss general taylor,  recording his thoughts and adventures in his diary that was later published as a book, 'florida territory in 1844, the diary of master edward clifford anderson, usn'.  mexican-american war in 1846, he was assigned to uss mississippi, flagship of the west indian squadron serving under commodore matthew c. perry. during the mexican-american war, he
took part in expeditions against alvarado, tampico, panuco, and laguna de terminos, all successful in tightening american control of the mexican coastline and interrupting coastwise commerce and military supply operations. the ship returned to norfolk for repairs on 1 january 1847, where anderson was promoted to lieutenant. mississippi then returned to battle, arriving at veracruz on 21 march 1847, carrying perry to take command of the american fleet. at once she and her men plunged into amphibious operations against veracruz, supplying guns and their crews to be taken ashore for the battery which fought the city to surrender in four days. through the remainder of the war, mississippi contributed guns, men, and boats to a series of coastal raids on mexico's east coast, taking part in the capture of tabasco in june 1847.  after the war, anderson was assigned to the coast survey department. he resigned from the navy on october 25, 1849, after 15 years of service and returned to savannah. he became one of georgia's most distinguished citizens, involved in agriculture, finance, politics and civic affairs. he was elected mayor of savannah for the first time in 1854, and won re-election in 1855.  civil war at the outbreak of the civil war, anderson was sent to richmond by governor joseph e. brown, to purchase ordinance from the tredegar iron works for the state of georgia. soon after, anderson was personally summoned to montgomery, alabama, by the president of the confederacy, jefferson davis, who commissioned him a major in the corps of artillery. he was ordered at once to set sail for europe, as a confidential agent to buy war material for the confederacy, arranging for its transfer to the confederate states, through the union blockade by way of blockade runners. in england, he was stalked continually by spies hired by the united states consul general, charles francis adams. anderson described his position as the secretary of war in england. he and fellow georgian james d. bulloch negotiated with the british for the sale of warships and blockade runners to the south. upon learning of the southern victory at the first battle of bull run, anderson raised a confederate flag upon the rooftop of a friend's house in liverpool. their success in both exporting arms, and running the blockage prompted other british firms to begin blockade-running efforts. returning home in november 1861, aboard the newly purchased merchant steamship fingal with bulloch, they delivered much needed arms and ammunition. anderson was promoted, and served as "commander of the river batteries" as a part of general robert e. lee's staff
. he was a member of the confederate high command at savannah until the end of the war. at this time, anderson was placed in command of fort james jackson, becoming the confederate headquarters for river defenses, including the confederate navy.  the construction of fort james jackson (also called old fort jackson) was authorized by president thomas jefferson between 1808 and 1812. the fort, on the savannah river a mile east of the city, was built on top of an old earthen battery dating from the revolutionary war. at the time, war with great britain or france seemed likely, and fort jackson was the best site from which to protect savannah from attack by sea. in the american civil war, it was one of three forts protecting savannah, the others being fort pulaski and fort mcallister standing in confederate defiance of the union naval blockade. fort mcallister was commanded at different times by two of his nephews, general robert h. anderson and major george wayne anderson, who commanded the fort when it was overrun by sherman's forces in december 1864. the loss of fort mcallister opened the way to the sea for general sherman, allowing him to link up with the union navy, resupply his forces, and bring the city of savannah to its knees.  supervising the forts under his command, he was constantly sought out for his artillery expertise. during general sherman's march to the sea, anderson led the city of savannah's evacuation after its surrender and was subsequently placed in charge of the city of charleston in december 1864. he was involved in the planning and execution of that city's evacuation before his transfer to augusta, georgia.  within a month, a state convention of elected delegates was called to the state capitol in milledgeville by the provisional governor of georgia, james johnson. edward clifford anderson was one of the chatham county representatives at the convention, where a unique resolution was passed calling for a special election for a mayor and a board of aldermen for the city of savannah. on december 6, 1865, in the only balloting which had been allowed in the city since its surrender, anderson was elected the first postwar mayor of savannah.  politics and government service  anderson's third term of mayor began on october 15, 1865. the city was enduring many tribulations during the reconstruction era, including an outbreak of cholera. mayor anderson personally responded to many pleas for help and assistance, with the city council eventually reimbursing him for money he paid out personally to charity. anderson levied taxes on sales, freight, and the banks to enlarge and reorganize the police force, under the command of his now
famous nephew, general robert h. anderson. the city market and jail were made usable once more, with streets, sidewalks and sewers restored.  in march, 1866, the savannah board of education was inaugurated to educate the children of savannah, under the direction of the mayor. business and commerce were among the top priorities for the new mayor, along with removing obstructions from the river, expanding the docks, and finishing the georgia central railroad.  to improve the lives of ordinary citizens, anderson held a "mayor's court" each day, to hear and decide cases related to drunkenness, theft, wife-beating, murder, rioting and other public disturbances. this good governance served the city well, as it recovered from the damages of the war. at the end of his third term in office, anderson did not offer himself up for re-election. on the afternoon of october 20, 1869, the police force, in full dress uniform marched to anderson's home to salute their former commander. he served on the board of directors of the southern bank, was director of the atlantic and gulf railroad, and on the board of directors of the central railroad and banking company. the savannah city council sent anderson in secret to washington, d.c., to protest governor rufus bullock and his efforts to have georgia remanded back to military control. during that time, he met with both president ulysses s. grant and general william tecumseh sherman in an attempt to have the governor removed, to no avail.  anderson was convinced to run for mayor once again, winning his seventh election to the office. on january 28, 1873, the savannah news published a story detailing anderson's political career, stating that "he is justly regarded as one of savannah's most useful and honored citizens, and his election... at this crisis in our public affairs is hailed as a good omen of the future." during this term in office, he succeeded in passing bonds to cover the city's debt, and working with the united states government to dredge the savannah river channel, and expanded telegraph lines to locations like tybee island. his focus on business and commerce secured re-election for a second two-year term in 1875.  in 1877, anderson did not offer himself for reelection, now being 62 years of age. his health slowly began to deteriorate, but he continued his civic interests, serving as president of both the savannah board of education and the chatham academy board of trustees. he was also a member of the governing board of the georgia historical society
, the hospital for negroes, the chamber of commerce and other organizations. his name was submitted twice for appointment as secretary of the navy. in 1881 his nomination was recommended to president garfield by the commanding general of the u.s. army, william tecumseh sherman, and several admirals suggesting the high esteem in which anderson was held, even by former enemies. in november 1882 he became ill and was confined to home. he died on january 6, 1883, at the age of 67.  the savannah morning news printed a long obituary emphasizing anderson's career as an officer in the united states navy and the confederate states army. the article stated that "this community has lost one of its most highly respected and useful citizens". a week later, the savannah board of education published a separate eulogy to his memory, extolling their former president's unselfish devotion to the encouragement of learning. his funeral was attended by the mayor and aldermen of the city, the board of education, the united states navy, the police and fire departments and many others. he is buried in savannah's laurel grove cemetery, near the anderson family vault in lot 540.  gallery  see also    blockade runners of the american civil war  fingal/css atlanta/uss atlanta  old fort jackson  chatham artillery  sinclair, hamilton and company - british arms dealer through whom anderson secured arms for the confederacy  9 drayton street, formerly owned by anderson  citations  references anderson, edward clifford, florida territory in 1844: the diary of master edward clifford anderson, university of alabama press, 1977,  anderson, edward clifford, afloat and ashore: the confederate diary of colonel edward clifford anderson, university of alabama press, 1977 smith, derek, civil war savannah, frederic c. beil, 1997,  dixon, william daniel and durham, roger s, the blues in gray - the civil war journal of william daniel dixon and the republican blues daybook, university of tennessee press, 2000,  durham, roger s., guardian of savannah - fort mcallister, georgia, in the civil war and beyond, the university of south carolina press, 2008,  external links  http://www.georgiahistory.com  http://www.todayingeorgiahistory.org  hathi trust. georgia historical quarterly  1815 births 1883 deaths confederate states army officers mayors of savannah, georgia
the darkest universe is a 2016 black comedy film by will sharpe and tom kingsley. the film premiered at the london comedy film festival (loco) in april 2016, and subsequently screened at the east end film festival in july 2016. the film was written by tiani ghosh and will sharpe and was shot over a three-year period from 2013 to 2015. it is set on the canals of london and tells the story of the disappearance of a young couple on a narrowboat.  plot zac (will sharpe) is a lonely, highly strung city trader on the edge of a psychological breakdown. he has lost everything-his job, his girlfriend eva (sophia di martino) and, most devastatingly, his weird and wayward younger sister alice (tiani ghosh), the only family he had left. alice is now a missing person, having disappeared on a narrowboat trip along with her kindred drifter and boyfriend toby (joe thomas). zac becomes increasingly frustrated with the futile attempts of the police to find them and, eventually, decides to take matters into his own inexpert hands by starting a terribly executed video blog and scouring the dark canals of the uk in a desperate, perhaps even deluded, search for clues. struggling for information and fast losing hope, zac reflects on his past and the difficult relationship he had with alice. wracked with guilt and regret, his sanity starts to unravel as he fights with memories of her in the weeks leading up to her disappearance. as he remembers her sweetly burgeoning relationship with the mysterious toby, however, he begins to wonder if there may in fact be a grander, wilder, much stranger explanation for their disappearance.  references  external links   interviews at east end film festival  british films 2016 comedy-drama films british comedy-drama films british black comedy films british independent films 2016 independent films 2016 films 2016 black comedy films films set in london films about missing people
stefano de vicari, o.p. (died 1620) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of nocera de' pagani (1610-1620).  biography stefano de vicari was ordained a priest in the order of preachers. on 4 november 1610, he was appointed during the papacy of pope paul v as bishop of nocera de' pagani. on 27 december 1610, he was consecrated bishop by girolamo bernerio, cardinal-bishop of porto e santa rufina, with vincenzo bonincontro, bishop of agrigento, and giovanni canauli, bishop of fossombrone, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of nocera de' pagani until his death in 1620.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope paul v 1620 deaths
giovannini is an italian surname, derived from the given name giovanni. notable people with the surname include:  andrea giovannini (born 1993), italian speed skater attilio giovannini (born 1924), italian footballer caesar giovannini (1925-2017), american pianist, band arranger and composer carlo cesare giovannini (1695-1758), italian baroque painter carlotta giovannini (born 1990), italian artistic gymnast enrico giovannini (born 1957), italian economist and statistician gianluca giovannini (born 1983), italian footballer  italian-language surnames patronymic surnames
theodula of anazarbus was an early christian saint and martyr who lived in the city of anazarbus (asia minor) during the reign of the  roman emperors diocletian (284-305) and maximian (305-311).  little is known of her life. her vita records, however, that when brought forward to sacrifice to the roman gods she merely blew and the statue of the deified hadrian fell to dust before her. she also survived many tortures and that the roman governor pelagius died while watching one of these being administered. tradition also holds that she converted her torturer to christianity before both she and he were executed. she was believed to have been put to death along with boethus, evagrius and macarius.  she is considered a saint of the roman catholic and  orthodox churches. with a feast day celebrated on january 18 and february 5.  references  saints from roman anatolia 3rd-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown
sally rice is a professor of linguistics at the university of alberta, where from 2007 to 2011 she was the landrex distinguished professor in the faculty of arts. rice is known for her scholarship on the indigenous languages of canada, especially those of the athabaskan language family. she was one of the founding directors of cilldi, the canadian indigenous languages and literacy development institute, which since 2000 has been an annual tri-faculty summer institute to provide training in canadian first nations languages development.  awards and distinctions   rice was the landrex distinguished professor in the university of alberta faculty of arts from 2007 to 2011.  rice was a mccalla research professor in the university of alberta faculty of arts in 2008-2009.  rice was awarded a grant from the social sciences and humanities research council of canada (sshrc) in 1999 for "the daghida project: language research and revitalization in a first nations community (cold lake, alberta)."  rice was awarded a grant from the social sciences and humanities research council of canada (sshrc) in 2003 for "7th conference on conceptual structure, discourse, and language ."  rice and fellow linguist joyce mcdonough were awarded a grant from the us national science foundation in 2009 for "an interactive speech atlas of dene speaking communities in the mackenzie basin" (award 0853929).  canadian indigenous languages and literacy development institute (cilldi)  sally rice was part of a collective of language advocates and educators which including donna paskemin and heather blair, who established cilldi in 1999 with its first summer institute held on the onion lake first nation,  saskatchewan offering one course entitled "expanding cree language and literacy". cilldi, which is hosted at the university of alberta in edmonton, is an intensive annual "summer school for indigenous language activists, speakers, linguists, and teachers." it is a "multicultural, cross-linguistic, interdisciplinary, inter-regional, inter-generational" initiative. rice is on the   cilldi advisory council.  publications  2011. newman, john, sally rice, and harald baayen (eds.). corpus-based studies in language use, language learning, and language documentation. amsterdam: rodopi.  2011. rice, sally and john newman (eds.).  experimental and empirical methods in the study of conceptual structure, discourse, and language. stanford: csli/university of chicago press.  2010. ives, john w., sally rice, and edward vajda. "dene-yeniseian
and processes of deep change in kin terminologies." in kari, j. and b. potter (eds.), anthropological papers of the university of alaska (apua), vol. 6 (1-2): 161-187. fairbanks: uaf press.  2007. rice, sally and kaori kabata. "cross-linguistic grammaticalization patterns of the allative." linguistic typology 11: 453-516.  2004. newman, john and sally rice. "patterns of usage for english sit, stand, and lie:  a cognitively-inspired exploration in corpus linguistics." cognitive linguistics 15: 351-396.  1999. rice, sally. "patterns of acquisition in the emerging mental lexicon: the case of to and for in english." brain and language 68:268-276.  1995. sandra, dominiek and sally rice. "network analyses of prepositional meaning: mirroring whose mind-the linguist's or the language user's?" cognitive linguistics 6:89-130.  references   linguists women linguists living people linguists of na-dene languages year of birth missing (living people)
watch, hope and wait little girl: i'm coming back to you is a world war i song written by lew brown, and composed by will clayton. the song was first published in 1918 by broadway music co. in new york, ny. the sheet music cover was designed by e.e. walton, and features a young woman in a heart of red, white, and blue, flowers are gathered at her knees  it was written for voice and piano.  initially the song was titled, "(watch, hope and wait) little girl (until i come back to you)." it was altered to the more positive title, "(watch, hope, and wait) little girl ('i'm coming back to you')."  a version of the song was recorded on november 8, 1918, by tenor charles h. hart with conductor josef pasternack. it was released by victor records.  the lyrics' tone is positive and hopeful. a soldier is telling his girlfriend that "all the world looks bright." the war is over and he is returning home. he proclaims that "happy days" are in their near future, and even promises that wedding bells will soon ring. the chorus is as follows:  the sheet music can be found at pritzker military museum & library.  references   songs about hope songs about soldiers 1918 songs songs of world war i songs with lyrics by lew brown
the hungarian water polo federation (, mvlsz) is the governing body of water polo in hungary. it was founded in 1989, and is the successor to the magyar uszo szovetseg, with the swimmers.  the hungarian water polo federation is a member of the ligue europeenne de natation (len) and the federation internationale de natation (fina). its headquarters are in budapest.  hosted tournaments world championships 2017 world aquatics championships - budapest, july 14-30  european championships 1926 men's european water polo championship - budapest, august 18-22 1958 men's european water polo championship - budapest, august 31 - september 6 2001 men's european water polo championship / 2001 women's european water polo championship - budapest, july 15-24 2014 men's european water polo championship / 2014 women's european water polo championship - budapest, july 14-27 2020 men's european water polo championship / 2020 women's european water polo championship - budapest, january 12-26  honours men's  olympic games:  winner (9 times - 1932, 1936, 1952, 1956, 1964, 1976, 2000, 2004, 2008);  runner-up (3 times - 1928, 1948, 1972);  third place (3 times - 1960, 1968, 1980)  world championship:  winner (3 times - 1973, 2003, 2013);  runner-up (6 times - 1975, 1978, 1982, 1998, 2005, 2007);  third place (1 time - 1991)  european championship:  winner (13 times - 1926, 1927, 1931, 1934, 1938, 1954, 1958, 1962, 1974, 1977, 1997, 1999, 2020);  runner-up (6 times - 1970, 1983, 1993, 1995, 2006, 2014);  third place (6 times - 1981, 2001, 2003, 2008, 2012, 2016)  fina world league:  gold medal - 2003, 2004;  silver medal - 2005, 2007, 2013, 2014;  bronze medal - 2002  fina world cup:  gold medal - 1979, 1995, 1999;  silver medal - 1993, 1995, 2002, 2006;  bronze medal - 1989, 1997 universiade:  gold medal - 1963, 1965, 2003, 2013, 2015;  silver medal - 1959, 1977, 1993, 1995, 1997, 2005;  bronze medal - 1961, 1970, 1999, 2001, 2007  women's  world championship:  winner (2 times - 1994, 2005);  runner-up (1 time - 2001);
third place (1 time - 2013)  european championship:  winner (3 times - 1991, 2001, 2016);  runner-up (5 times - 1985, 1987, 1989, 1995, 2003);  third place (6 times - 1993, 2006, 2008, 2012, 2014, 2020)  fina world league:  silver medal - 2004  fina world cup:  gold medal - 2002;  silver medal - 1988;  bronze medal - 1989, 1993, 1995 universiade:  silver medal - 2009, 2013  divisions  men's hungary men's national water polo team hungary men's national junior water polo team hungary men's national youth water polo team  women's hungary women's national water polo team hungary women's junior national water polo team hungary women's youth national water polo team  current head coaches  competitions  magyar vizilabda szovetseg is responsible for organising the following competitions:  men's water polo orszagos bajnoksag i (tier 1) orszagos bajnoksag i/b (tier 2) - two sections orszagos bajnoksag ii (tier 3) - four sections (south-east, north-east, central, west)  women's water polo orszagos bajnoksag i (women) (tier 1) orszagos bajnoksag i/b (women) (tier 2)  cups magyar kupa - men magyar kupa (women) - women  presidents  denes kemeny (2012-2018)  attila vari (2018- )  current sponsorships e·on - official main sponsor volvo - official sponsor vodafone - official sponsor huawei - official sponsor soproni - official sponsor univer - official sponsor unicum - official sponsor diapolo - official sponsor m4 sport - official sponsor volanbusz - official sponsor benu - official sponsor omv - official sponsor marriott budapest - official sponsor  see also hungarian water polo league system  external links  magyar vizilabda szovetseg (official website)  water polo in hungary hungary water polo 1989 establishments in hungary sports organizations established in 1989
basil papademos (born 1957 in toronto, ontario) was a canadian writer. he is best known for his 2012 novel mount royal, which won the award for best erotic novel at the 2013 bisexual book awards and was a nominee in the novels category at the 2013 relit awards.  after his bisexual book awards win, he was detained by the canada border services agency for several hours upon his return to canada, under suspicion of importing obscene materials. he was later cleared without charges.  he has also published the novels the hook of it is (1989) and how to fuck your psychiatrist (2015).  references  external links  21st-century canadian novelists canadian male novelists canadian erotica writers canadian people of greek descent writers from toronto canadian lgbt novelists bisexual writers living people bisexual men 21st-century canadian male writers 1957 births 21st-century lgbt people
jose rodriguez garcia (born 30 april 1966) is a spanish former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  major results  1991 1st overall vuelta a castilla y leon 1st stage 2 2nd clasica internacional de alcobendas 2nd national road race championships 1992 2nd memorial manuel galera 1993 1st trofeo masferrer 1994 3rd overall vuelta a aragon 3rd circuito de getxo 1995 1st stage 4 vuelta a burgos 1997 1st gp llodio  references  1966 births living people spanish male cyclists olympic cyclists of spain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from madrid
microlenecamptus signatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by per olof christopher aurivillius in 1914, originally under the genus cylindrepomus. it is known from laos and myanmar.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1914
limpia creek, originally known as the rio limpia, is a stream that heads in jeff davis county, texas and its mouth is in pecos county, texas.  limpa is the spanish word for "clear or clean water".  the creek has its head in the davis mountains at an elevation of 7,160 feet, at location  on the northeast slope of mount livermore.  the creek flows 42 miles down limpia canyon past fort davis and wild rose pass to the canyon mouth, where it turns eastward to its mouth at its confluence with barrilla draw, where it disappears into the ground at an elevation of 3,533 feet / 1,077 meters.  history limpia creek was a water and forage stop on the san antonio-el paso road for freighters, and stage companies like the san antonio-san diego mail line that had a stop at a camp 32 miles west of hackberry pond and 18.86 miles from fort davis.  the butterfield overland mail located their limpia station near the mouth limpia canyon 18 miles from fort davis, 10 miles west of barela springs station farther down limpia creek.  see also list of rivers of texas  references  bodies of water of jeff davis county, texas bodies of water of pecos county, texas pecos river rivers of texas san antonio-el paso road san antonio-san diego mail line butterfield overland mail in texas stagecoach stops in the united states
the 2016 itf men's circuit is the 2016 edition of the second tier tour for men's professional tennis. it is organised by the international tennis federation and is a tier below the atp tour. the itf men's circuit includes tournaments with prize money ranging from $10,000 up to $25,000.  key  month  july  august  september  external links  international tennis federation official website  2016 itf men's circuit
iona caroline heath  is an english medical doctor and writer who was president of the royal college of general practitioners (rcgp) from 2009 to 2012.  iona retired from medical practice aged 60years in 2010,  she was the only person ever to have applied for and anticipated taking up the post of president of rcgp 2009-2012 when she was no longer a practicing doctor for the majority of the term of office, i.e. during 2010-2012.  career heath graduated from cambridge university in 1974. she worked as a gp in kentish town in london from 1975 to 2010.  she was first elected a member of rcgp's council in 1989. in june 2009 she was elected president of the rcgp. she was on the wonca world council of general practice. she developed a second career by becoming a speaker at national and international events and acting as an adviser to practising doctors.  iona chaired a controversial dispute over the calls to retract a publication on statins in the bmj  the conclusion not to retract in full was disputed the lancet queried the independence of the panel in 2014 she chaired a panel looking into the side-effects of statins.  honours she was made commander of the order of the british empire (cbe) in the 2000 new year honours for services to the care of elderly people.  publications  matters of life and death: key writings,  routledge,  2007   the mystery of general practice, nuffield trust, 1995  references  living people 20th-century english medical doctors 21st-century english medical doctors british general practitioners english women medical doctors fellows of the royal college of general practitioners commanders of the order of the british empire alumni of the university of cambridge place of birth missing (living people) 20th-century women physicians 21st-century women physicians year of birth missing (living people) 20th-century english women 20th-century english people 21st-century english women
nandrolone furylpropionate (nfp) () (brand name demelon), also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-(2-furanyl)propanoate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester. it was developed and marketed by mochida pharmaceutical in japan in the 1960s.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids estranes furans nandrolone esters progestogens carboxylate esters testosterone
the swan 51 was designed by german frers built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1981.  external links  nautor swan  german frers official website  references  sailing yachts keelboats 1980s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
gerald leroy fowler was a veteran of world war ii, the lead technician in the field emission laboratory at the pennsylvania state university and was a master technician in the surface science division at sandia national laboratories in albuquerque, new mexico. he was the author or co-authored of nine technical publications in refereed journals.  life gerald leroy fowler was a veteran of world war ii, serving with the 1570th engineering heavy shop company and the 562nd engineering boat maintenance battalion. he received the philippines liberation ribbon with one bronze star, the asiatic-pacific campaign medal with 2 bronze stars, and the world war ii victory medal.   at the end of world war ii "gerry" was hired by erwin muller as the lead technician in the field emission laboratory at the pennsylvania state university where he designed and constructed scientific instruments and helped to educate a cadre of undergraduate and graduate physics students. he was instrumental in the design and construction of the atom probe and was recognized for his contribution in the first atom probe publication.  gerry retired from penn state in 1975 and was immediately hired in the surface science division at sandia national laboratories in albuquerque, new mexico where he published several technical papers  and received the "department 1110 technical excellence award" from sandia national laboratories in may 1990 and the "outstanding lifetime contribution" award for vacuum science and technology from the new mexico chapter of the american vacuum society in april 1994. jerry received the 1988 shop note of the year award from the journal of vacuum science and technology for his publication "coaxial helium leak detection probe". he retired from sandia in 1994. in 1995 gerry published his autobiography: my little corner of the world.  fowler was a charter member of new mexico military vehicle preservation association - roadrunner convoy in albuquerque and the proud owner of "henrietta" (an original military jeep) that he exhibited in parades and veteran events in new mexico and pennsylvania. gerry died peacefully on october 21, 2010 at the age of 81.  references  american scientific instrument makers 2010 deaths sandia national laboratories people
dialpur (ਦਆਲਪਰ)  is a village in kapurthala district as well as jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of dialpur. the village is unique as it is one of the few villages that falls into two districts of punjab. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, dialpur has a total number of 918 houses and population of 3,995 of which include 2,240 males and 1,755 females. literacy rate of dialpur is 80.29%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 398 which is  9.96% of total population of dialpur, and child sex ratio is approximately  785, lower than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 28.89% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population,  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the sea has risen (hungarian: foltamadott a tenger) is a 1953 hungarian historical drama film directed by laszlo ranody, mihaly szemes and kalman nadasdy. it stars janos gorbe, zoltan maklary and lajos basti. the film portrays sandor petofi and the events of the hungarian revolution of 1848.  cast  janos gorbe as petofi sandor  zoltan maklary as bem jozsef  lajos basti as kossuth lajos  miklos szakats as gorgey artur  violetta ferrari as petofine, szendrey julia  adam szirtes as hajdu gyurka, parasztlegeny  gabor madi szabo as kicsi gergely, szekely kozhuszar  janos domsodi as ifj. szarazberky, koznemes  references  bibliography   liehm, mira & liehm, antonin j. the most important art: eastern european film after 1945. university of california press, 1977.  external links     1953 films 1950s historical drama films hungarian historical drama films hungarian films hungarian-language films films directed by laszlo ranody films directed by kalman nadasdy films set in the 19th century 1953 drama films
agnes headlam-morley (10 december 1902 - 21 february 1986) was a british historian and academic. from 1948 to 1971, she was montague burton professor of international relations at the university of oxford. upon her appointment in october 1948, she became the first woman to be appointed to a chair at oxford.  early life and education headlam-morley was born on 10 december 1902 in cambridge, cambridgeshire, england, the only daughter of james wycliffe headlam, an academic and civil servant who was involved in drafting the treaty of versailles, and else (nee sonntag), a musician and composer who was born and brought up in germany. in 1918 her father changed his name to headlam-morley. unlike others of her generation, she had "no secret sense of shame in being half-german".  headlam-morley was educated at wimbledon high school, an all-girls independent school in wimbledon, london. she studied modern history at somerville college, oxford, graduating with a second class bachelor of arts (ba) degree in 1924. she then undertook research in modern european political history, and completed a bachelor of letters (blitt) degree in 1926. as per tradition, her ba was promoted to a master of arts (oxon) degree.  academic career in 1932, headlam-morley was elected a fellow of st hugh's college, oxford. until her retirement, she was a tutor in history and politics at st hugh's. in october 1948, she was appointed montague burton professor of international relations, which made her the first woman to be appointed a chair at the university of oxford. she specialised in anglo-german relations and diplomatic history. she belonged to the traditional school of international relations in which the subject was considered a subfield of history and not a social science. in 1971, she stepped down from the chair and retired from full-time academia.  in 1948, headlam-morley was made an honorary fellow of somerville college, oxford (her alma mater). she was made an honorary fellow of st hugh's college, oxford in 1970; the year before her retirement.  headlam-morley died on 21 february 1986, aged 83 years.  personal life headlam-morley was a convert to roman catholicism and was received into the catholic church in 1948. she was a member of the conservative party, and stood as a candidate in the 1936 election to durham county council.  references  1902 births 1986 deaths 20th-century british historians british women historians montague burton professors
of international relations (university of oxford) fellows of st hugh's college, oxford people educated at wimbledon high school alumni of somerville college, oxford converts to roman catholicism from anglicanism conservative party (uk) people 20th-century british women writers
dynamic intelligent currency encryption (dice) is an ai-controlled security technology, which devaluates banknotes and assets remotely that have been stolen or are illegal. the cash security system that is based on identifiable banknotes, was invented and first introduced in 2014 by ai-specialised british-austrian technology company edaqs. the system claims that its mrc or rfid-equipped banknotes and other securities are registered to a centralized and safe system and can be considered as unforgeable, which contributes to solve cash-related problems and helps in the fight against the black economy, crime and terrorism. one of the main goals of dice is that the whole banking and retail sector, as well as all entities with regular cash circulation will participate in this passively controlled cash system. in a second note, the dice procedure is meant to be an alternative to the abolition of cash by offering all benefits of a cashless economy, while driving down the global crime of violently obtaining cash. similar to the ibns, registered dice banknotes that have been neutralized, cannot be brought back into circulation and can be directly linked to a crime related issue.  concept  the concept relies on the registration of banknotes through connected readers called dice clouds. a fast registration of the banknote through the dice-cloud device, which does not influence the day-to-day business in terms of time delay, offers a full protection of the registered cash assets for the dice user. during the registration-procedure, the dice user will be informed about the legitimacy of the incoming banknote and warned, whether the banknote is part of a crime, is forged or has been degraded for a certain reason. once the banknote has been successfully assigned to the user's account, a robbery but also a destruction of the banknote through other catastrophes, such as a fire or a flood, would result in an executive remote devaluation of the notes. the victim would receive new banknotes. dice is also considered as an effective technology to limit the circulation of black money and combat the black economy.  technology  the basic process consists of an identifiable banknote, which carries the identification module (machine readable code or microrfid-chip), a blockchain-enabled cloud device, which scans, reads and registers the banknotes as well as a composition of ai-driven automated systems that are based on several sub-systems.  the mechanism of the systems is based on a proprietary consortium blockchain that provides a centralized registry of banknotes (cedire hyperledger), a digital dye pack system that deactiv
ates or re-activates illegal and degraded banknotes remotely (renode) and in the further course the dice automated security unit, whose task is to monitor the system's functionality.  rfid-banknotes  in addition to mrc-equipped banknotes, dice also introduced banknotes that use a specifically designed microchip that was developed for high security application and is perfectly suited for paper currencies, as the chip will not be damaged by any harsh handling in daily use as well as during the intaglio process. edaqs claims that the so-called rfit microchip, which is developed by australian partner rfit limited, is the most secure and robust development in rfid tagging technology to date as well as the smallest on chip antenna (oca) uhf rfid tag in the world.  with an overall size of only 0.45mm x 0.45mm x 0.2mm, the patented technology places the antenna directly onto the chip silicon. every other aspect of the rfit chip conforms to electronic product code (epc) class 1, gen2 iso 18000-6c. as both the epc and data areas are programmable, the rfit inlay offers individualized secure electronic tracking. requiring a specially designed near field antenna (nfa) to activate the passive uhf rfit tag, the read range is limited up to 3mm, which in itself provides a security feature when compared to standard rfid tags. as an additional level of security, a normal uhf rfid reader is not able to activate and read the tag.  reception  the dice banknote system would allow central and national banks to supervise and analyze the entire registered cash circulation. while this is one of the main reasons that have caused the trend for national banks to favor a cashless economy, it is also a serious issue in terms of privacy.  edaqs affirmed that the citizen's privacy rights are not being touched with their system  and that anonymous circulation data would open a wide range of new development models not only for the governments and national banks, but also for economic analyses and stability research. the public response on the introduction of dice ranged from a tremendous fear about chip-equipped banknotes to a strong support in improving public safety.  the keesing journal, an opinion leading publication in the document security industry, called dice-equipped banknotes as the "banknote of the future", despite harsh critics from different political parties, including the german and austrian pirates party.  in another note, the dice benefits cover and solve
almost all cash-related issues that are seen by governments to be a motivation for the progressive abolition of cash.  see also  intelligent banknote neutralisation system banknote  references   security engineering crime prevention
the denver times was a daily newspaper in denver, colorado during 1872 to 1926.  it was merged into the rocky mountain news in 1926.  references  defunct newspapers published in colorado daily newspapers published in the united states publications established in 1872 publications disestablished in 1926
adventure in odessa or inseparable friends () is a 1953 soviet comedy drama film directed by vasily zhuravlyov and starring mikhail kuznetsov, evgeniy samoylov and viktor dobrovolsky.  cast  mikhail kuznetsov as professor belov    evgeniy samoylov as gleb's father    viktor dobrovolsky as school director    aleksandr antonov as chairman of the collective farm   ivan pelttser as old fisherman    grigori pluzhnik as captain of the fishing ship    misha mokrinsky as gleb    volodya lushchik as vadim    volodya sudin as kolya    anatoli shimanyuk as vasya    natasha morel as nina    yuri kritenko as boatswain  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy-drama films soviet comedy-drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films
the wind (also known as the edge of terror and terror's edge) is a 1986 american slasher film co-written, produced, co-edited and directed by nico mastorakis. it stars meg foster, wings hauser, robert morley, and david mccallum. the film follows a novelist who is under attack by an assailant during a windy night in monemvasia.  plot american novelist sian anderson travels to the solitude greek island monemvasia from her los angeles home to write her newest mystery book. she rents a home owned by elias appelby, an eccentric elderly man, who advises her that a strong and massive wind will occur throughout the night, and that he recommends she stay indoors while the wind blows from the sea. after elias leaves, sian is met by phil, a gruff handyman and fellow american who also lives on the property.  that night, phil murders elias after he attempts to fire him. sian later witnesses phil burying something from a distance. when she goes to investigate, she finds elias's corpse. terrified, she phones her boyfriend, john, back in los angeles, and asks him to report the crime, as she does not know the emergency number in greece. she also tries to call elias's wife, whose phone number she locates, but is unable to communicate with her as she does not speak english. phil, realizing that sian knows what happened, breaks into the house through the basement. armed with a sickle, phil attempts to attack sian, but sian thwarts him by closing the basement hatch and pouring kerosene on him. in the basement, phil taunts sian by toying with the generator, causing the lights to go on and off.  hiding in an upstairs room of the home, sian later hears elias's wife arrive at the house, calling out for her husband. as she wanders toward the entry, phil stabs her to death. sian manages to phone john again, who tells her he has two operators attempting to reach greek authorities. soon after, the local police station on monemvasia receives a call about a woman in distress at the appleby estate. kesner, an american marine captain stranded on the island due to the weather, offers to go help sian, who has locked herself in the house. she allows him in and is momentarily at ease, until kesner is murdered by phil, who has infiltrated the house. sian discovers kesner stabbed to death in an upstairs bedroom, along with the corpses of elias and his wife stuffed inside a
closet.  cornered and helpless, sian recalls that elias had mentioned several locked closets in the home, which he used to store his son's hunting weapons, and had requested she leave them unbothered. sian locates the closets and breaks into them, arming herself with a rifle. she begins to shoot at phil from a second-story window, as he raves maniacally below. phil then proceeds to scale a wall, reaching a balcony on the second story of the home, where sian has created a booby trap on one of the door shutters by pulling it against the wind current with a piece of rope; as phil approaches her, she slashes the rope with a knife, forcing the door to swing out and strike phil, causing him to impale himself on his sickle before falling to the ground below.  presuming phil dead, sian flees the house, stumbling through stone pathways toward the villa. in a corridor, the ground gives out and she falls into a cavern beneath the street, where she finds a man skeleton. at dawn, sian finds a way out of the caverns, and ends up on a rock wall along the coast, where she sees a young honeymooning couple driving down the road. she calls out to them, but they do not hear her. she is then met by phil, who survived his earlier fall. he begins chasing sian, who flees through the winding cliffside pathways. phil eventually corners sian and attempts to strike her with the sickle, but a gust of wind forces him to lose his footing, and he falls to his death.  cast  release the wind was released on vhs in the united states by lightning video in 1987, and by polygram video in the united kingdom as the edge of terror. simitar entertainment released the film on dvd on june 29, 1999, with image entertainment later releasing the film on march 25, 2003. on january 31, 2020, arrow video announced that they will be issuing the wind on blu-ray, which was released on april 14.  references  external links      1986 horror films 1986 films 1980s slasher films american slasher films american films films about writers films scored by hans zimmer films scored by stanley myers films set in greece films set in los angeles films shot in greece films shot in los angeles films directed by nico mastorakis
the revue des etudes byzantines is an annual peer-reviewed academic journal covering the study of greek christianity and especially byzantine civilization. it was established in 1897 as echos d'orient, renamed etudes byzantines in (with volume numbering restarting at 1), and obtaining its current title in 1946. the journal is published by peeters on behalf of the institut catholique de paris and the editor-in-chief is olivier delouis.  abstracting and indexing the journal is abstracted and indexed in:  references  external links  publications established in 1897 history journals multilingual journals peeters publishers academic journals annual journals
j. j. in person! is an album recorded "in concert" by the j. j. johnson quintet which was released on the columbia label. this is a studio recording, but some release of the album, including the original release, feature over-dubbed applause and faked bandstand announcements.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 3 stars.  track listing  "tune up" (miles davis) - 5:40  "laura" (david raksin, johnny mercer) - 4:57  "walkin'" (richard carpenter) - 6:51  "what is this thing called love?" (cole porter) - 6:30  "misterioso" (thelonious monk) - 6:57  "my old flame" (sam coslow, arthur johnston) - 3:45  "now's the time" (charlie parker) - 8:11  personnel j. j. johnson - trombone nat adderley - cornet (tracks 1-5 & 7) tommy flanagan - piano wilbur little - bass albert heath - drums  references  columbia records albums j. j. johnson albums 1958 albums albums produced by george avakian
john thomson gordon frse (1813-1865) was a scottish advocate who served as rector of marischal college 1849-50 and sheriff of aberdeen 1847-48 and edinburgh 1848->1852.  life  he was born on 19 march 1813 at 14 buccleuch place in edinburgh the son of dr john gordon. his mother was the sister of andrew rutherfurd, lord rutherfurd. the family moved to 19 castle street in the new town when he was five.  he was educated at edinburgh academy then studied law at edinburgh university. he became an advocate in 1835. he was sheriff of aberdeen in 1847-48.  in 1849 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposer was john gordon of cairnbulg.  from 1848 he became sheriff of edinburgh based at midlothian chambers in edinburgh.  he died in caen in northern france on 21 september 1865.  family  in 1837 he married mary wilson (d.1873), daughter of john wilson. her sister, jane emily wilson, was married to william edmondstoune aytoun.  references  1813 births 1865 deaths lawyers from edinburgh alumni of the university of edinburgh fellows of the royal society of edinburgh rectors of the university of aberdeen
flor de luto, flor de loto or torre de cristal, is a mountain located in lauricocha province in the region of huanuco in peru. it has an elevation of . it belongs to the raura mountain range which is part of the peruvian andes.  references   mountains of peru mountains of huanuco region
nicolas-thomas barthe (1734, marseille - 17 june 1785, paris) was an 18th-century french poet and playwright.  works  theatre 1764: l'amateur, one-act comedy in verse, paris, hotel de richelieu, 1 march 1768: les fausses infidelites, one-act comedy in verse, paris, theatre de la rue des fosses saint-germain, 25 january, text online 1771: la mere jalouse, three-act comedy in verse, paris, salle des machines, 23 december, text online 1778: l'homme personnel, five-act comedy in verse, paris, comedie-francaise, 21 february varia 1762: epitres sur divers sujets, text online 1766: lettre de l'abbe de rance a un ami, ecrite de son abbaye de la trappe, par m. barthe, text online 1769: la jolie femme, ou la femme du jour, text online 1779: theatre complet et œuvres diverses, text online 1810: choix de poesies by nicolas thomas barthe and claude-marie-louis-emmanuel carbon de flins des oliviers 1811: œuvres choisies, text online  sources  notice sur la vie et les ouvrages de barthe in œuvres choisies de barthe, firmin didot, paris, 1811, (p. 15-13) philippe le bas, l'univers. france : dictionnaire encyclopedique, firmin didot, paris, 1840-1845, t. 2, (p. 159)  external links   nicolas thomas barthe on data.bnf.fr  nicolas thomas barthe on cesar  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers writers from marseille 1734 births 1785 deaths
william fowler (1 august 1824 - 3 february 1906) was a 19th-century scottish architect closely linked to the northern town of golspie and the surrounding area.  life  he was born at 28 jamaica street in edinburgh's second new town the son of george fowler (1798-1862) a builder, and his wife margaret kirk. his uncle alexander fowler was also a builder. he was apprenticed as an architect to david bryce.  he received employment with the 2nd duke of sutherland as his estate surveyor (working with the architect george devey), and later overseeing the vast building project at dunrobin castle, designed by sir charles barry. during this period he began living in golspie where he thereafter had a lifelong connection. from 1881 he lived at 7 duke street in golspie. in 1891 he retired and moved to greenend in liberton, edinburgh. in 1900 he moved to mount chasse (now 11) broomieknowe in lasswade, south of edinburgh.  he died at mount chasse on 3 february 1906. he is buried with his parents at new calton cemetery in edinburgh.  known works  flagstaff lodge, dunrobin castle (1850) parish school new pitsligo (1855) houses, new pitsligo (1856) belfry on helmsdale chapel of ease (1857) inveran inn (1857) belfry on st callan's church rogart (1857) remodelling of dornoch castle (1859) conversion of girnal house into 5 houses, littleferry (1859) school and schoolhouse, embo (1859) strathsteven lodge (1864) clynelish house, golspie (1865) co-operative society shop, golspie (1867) golspie railway station and post office (1868) rhifail house  (1868) helmsdale railway station (1871) culag lodge, lochinver (1873) hope lodge, eriboll (1875) bank, golspie (1877) manse, rogart (built 1882)  references  1824 births 1906 deaths architects from edinburgh people from golspie
cylindrepomus albicornis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by nonfried in 1894. it is known from the sunda islands.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1894
martine audet (born october 15, 1961) is a canadian poet from montreal, quebec. she won the governor general's award for french-language poetry at the 2020 governor general's awards for her poetry collection la societe des cendres.  she was previously a nominee at the 2000 governor general's awards for orbites, at the 2007 governor general's awards for les manivelles, at the 2011 governor general's awards for je demande pardon a l'espece qui brille and at the 2015 governor general's awards for tete premiere / dos / contre dos, and won the prix alain-grandbois in 2001 for les tables.  selected works  poemes du lendemain (1993)  les murs clairs (1996)  doublures (1998)  orbites (2000)  les tables (2001)  les melancolies (2003)  que ferais-je du jour (2005)  les manivelles (2006)  l'amour des objets (2009)  je demande pardon a l'espece qui brille (2010)  le ciel n'est qu'un detour a bruler (2010)  des lames entieres (2011)  des voix stridentes ou rompues (2013)  tete premiere / dos / contre dos (2015)  see also  canadian literature canadian poetry list of canadian poets list of canadian writers list of quebec writers  references  living people 1961 births 20th-century canadian poets 21st-century canadian poets 20th-century canadian women writers 21st-century canadian women writers writers from montreal canadian women poets canadian poets in french prix alain-grandbois governor general's award-winning poets
the following lists events that happened in 1977 in iceland.  incumbents president - kristjan eldjarn prime minister - geir hallgrimsson  events  births  25 march - andri sigþorsson, footballer. 16 may - emiliana torrini, singer and songwriter 10 june - hugi gudmundsson, composer 20 august - ivar ingimarsson, footballer 22 august - heiðar helguson, footballer 5 october - hugleikur dagsson, artist  full date missing hossi olafsson, musician  deaths  references    1970s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
piero parini (13 november 1894 - 1993) was an italian journalist, politician and soldier. he fought in world war i and the second italo-ethiopian war. he rose through the ranks of the italian political establishment through his work as diplomat and director of the fascist newspaper il popolo d'italia. during world war ii, he became the de facto ruler of the annexed ionian islands in greece, and later supported the italian social republic, becoming the mayor of milan.  early career piero parini was born on 13 november 1894 in milan, into a family of a railway official. during world war i he fought as an officer of corpo aeronautico militare. following the end of the war he became a foreign correspondent and later director for the fascist flagship newspaper il popolo d'italia. in 1928, he was appointed coordinator of fascist organizations of the italian diaspora. he later worked as the italian ambassador in aleppo. in 1936, he founded and commanded a unit of italian expatriates in the second italo-ethiopian war, capturing the city of dire dawa. in 1937, he visited japan and china as part of a diplomatic mission. in 1939, he became an advisor of the prime minister of the puppet albanian kingdom, shefqet verlaci.  later career following the battle of greece and the axis occupation of greece, the ionian islands came under italian control. on 22 april 1941, after discussions between the german and italian rulers, adolf hitler agreed that italy could proceed with a de facto annexation of the islands. on 5 june 1941, parini arrived at corfu as the new chief of the political affairs bureau of the ionian islands, a political body ruling the islands. parini accommodated the bureau headquarters in the mon repos villa, enacting a rigorous italianization campaign. on 10 august, the ionian islands, except kythira, were annexed by italy as part of the grande communita del nuovo impero romano (great community of the new roman empire). on 16 august, parini replaced corfu mayor spyridon kollas with lawyer gerasimos tryfonas, to sever all administrative ties between the islands and the greek mainland and the collaborationist government in athens. parini ruled as de facto dictator imposing new laws or ignoring existing ones as he pleased.  parini encouraged the migration of italians to the islands, expanded and legalized the underground fascist organizations, and promoted his policies through a radio station and the official newspaper jonica, later replaced by gazzetta jonica. pictures of the heroes of the
greek war of independence were removed from public schools as were book chapters dealing with modern greek history. the italian language became a mandatory school subject and shop owners were forced to use bilingual signs. on 25 march 1942, the circulation of the greek drachma was outlawed and replaced by the italian ionian drachma. greek stamps were replaced in a similar manner. the ionian islands did not manage to escape the horrors of the great famine of 1941-42, partially due to parini's refusal to allow the red cross to distribute aid in the region.  following the fall of the fascist regime in italy, parini departed corfu in late august 1943 on the yacht aspasia, while a second ship carried 40 crates of looted art he had collected. he supported the italian social republic and was appointed mayor of milan. in april 1945 he escaped to switzerland with forged spanish papers along with his second wife melpo fafaliou, whom he had married in 1944 following the death of his first spouse rozetta colombi. the authenticity of the papers was soon questioned and parini was deported to italy, where he was given a 12-year prison term by a military tribunal for war crimes committed during his spell as mayor of milan; he was released in 1946 in an amnesty. a second trial regarding war crimes committed in the ionian islands ended in his acquittal. he then emigrated to south america with his wife, where he died in 1993.  footnotes  references     1894 births 1993 deaths mayors of milan italian military personnel of world war ii journalists from milan italian male journalists diplomats from milan italian military personnel of the second italo-ethiopian war 20th-century italian politicians people of the italian social republic italian military personnel of world war i italian occupation of greece during world war ii history of the ionian islands 20th-century italian journalists 20th-century italian male writers
the history of sexual slavery in the united states is the history of slavery for the purpose of sexual exploitation as it exists in the united states.  african-american slaves were systematically raped or forced to make children with other slaves.  early american colonists were largely male, and some men resorted to force to procure wives. native american women were often captured to be traded, sold, or taken as wives. currently, under federal law, a prostitute is considered a victim of human trafficking if he or she is either under 18 or is being controlled through force, fraud or coercion. however, this is not fully implemented, and in many states, prostitutes who are considered victims under federal law are still arrested and prosecuted under state law.  early americas   it is contended by some, that as early as the 1490s, christopher columbus established trade in sex slaves on hispaniola, which included sex slaves as young as nine years old.  within 25 years of being colonized, the population of hispaniola natives declined, dying from enslavement, massacre or disease.  however, others consider this contention to have arisen from a misreading of primary documents. columbus does mention the selling of slaves, but as atrocities of a rebelling faction. he continues with this comment, "i declare solemnly that a great number of men have been to the indies, who did not deserve baptism in the eyes of god or men, and who are now returning thither."  under chattel slavery   from the beginning of african slavery in the north american colonies, slaves were often viewed as property, rather than people. placage, a formalized system of concubinage among slave women or free people of color, developed in louisiana and particularly new orleans by the 18th century.  slave breeding was the attempt by a slave-owner to increase the reproduction of his slaves for profit. it included forced sexual relations between male and female slaves, encouraging slave pregnancies, sexual relations between master and slave to produce slave children, and favoring female slaves who had many children. the historian e. franklin frazier, in his book the negro family, stated that "there were masters who, without any regard for the preferences of their slaves, mated their human chattel as they did their stock." ex-slave maggie stenhouse remarked, "durin' slavery there were stockmen. they was weighed and tested. a man would rent the stockman and put him in a room with some young women he wanted to raise children from."  concubine slaves were the only female slaves who
commanded a higher price than skilled male slaves.  in louisiana   the placage system developed from the predominance of white men among early colonial populations, who took women as consorts from native americans and enslaved africans. in this period there was a shortage of european women, as the colonies were dominated in the early day by male explorers and colonists. given the harsh conditions in louisiana, persuading women to follow the men was not easy. france sent females convicted along with their debtor husbands, and in 1719, deported 209 women felons "who were of a character to be sent to the french settlement in louisiana." france also relocated young women and girls known as king's daughters () to the colonies of canada and louisiana for marriage.  through warfare and raids, native american women were often captured to be traded, sold, or taken as wives. at first, the colony generally imported male africans to use as slave labor because of the heavy work of clearing to develop plantations. over time, it also imported african female slaves. marriage between the races was forbidden according to the code noir of the eighteenth century, but interracial sex continued. the upper class european men during this period often did not marry until their late twenties or early thirties. premarital sex with an intended white bride, especially if she was of high rank, was not permitted socially.  white male colonists, often the younger sons of noblemen, military men, and planters, who needed to accumulate some wealth before they could marry, took women of color as consorts before marriage. merchants and administrators also followed this practice if they were wealthy enough.  post-emancipation  after the enslaved people were emancipated, many states passed anti-miscegenation laws, which prohibited interracial marriage between whites and non-whites. but this did not stop some white men from taking sexual advantage of black women by using their social positions under the jim crow system and white supremacy, or in other parts of the country by ordinary power and wealth dynamics.  the chinese tanka females were sold from guangzhou to work as prostitutes for the overseas chinese male community in the united states. during the california gold rush in the late 1840s, chinese merchants transported thousands of young chinese girls, including babies, from china to the united states and sold them into sexual slavery within the red light district of san francisco. girls could be bought for as cheap as $40 (about $1104 in 2013 dollars) in guangzhou, and sold for $400 (about $11,040 in 2013
dollars) in the united states. many of these girls were forced into opium addiction and lived their entire lives as prostitutes. anglo-american doctors claimed that opium smoking led to increased involvement in prostitution by young white women and to genetic contamination via miscegenation by chinese men. anti-chinese advocates believed america faced a dual dilemma: opium smoking was ruining moral standards and chinese labor was lowering wages and taking jobs away from european-americans. slummers often frequented the brothels and opium dens of chinatown in the late 1880s and early 1890s. however, by the mid-1890s, slummers rarely participated in chinese brothels or opium smoking, but instead were shown fake opium joints where chinese actors and their white wives staged illicit scenes for the benefit of their audiences.  a few captives from native american tribes who were used as slaves were not freed, when african-american slaves were emancipated. "ute woman," a ute captured by the arapaho and later sold to a cheyenne, was one example. used as a prostitute for sale to american soldiers at cantonment in the indian territory, she lived in slavery until about 1880 when she died of a hemorrhage resulting from "excessive sexual intercourse".  white slavery   by the 19th century, most of america's cities had a designated, legally protected area of prostitution. increased urbanization and young women entering the workforce led to greater flexibility in courtship without supervision. it is in this changing social sphere that the panic over "white slavery" began. this term referred to women being coerced, lured, or kidnapped for the purposes of prostitution.  numerous communities appointed vice commissions to investigate the extent of local prostitution, whether prostitutes participated in it willingly or were forced into it and the degree to which it was organized by any cartel-type organizations. the second significant action at the local levels was to close the brothels and the red light districts. from 1910 to 1913, city after city withdrew this tolerance and forced the closing of their brothels. opposition to openly practiced prostitution had been growing steadily throughout the last decades of the 19th century. the federal government's response to the moral panic was the mann act. the purpose of the act was to make it a crime to coerce transportation of unwilling women. the statute made it a crime to "transport or cause to be transported, or aid to assist in obtaining transportation for" or to "persuade, induce, entice or coerce" a woman to travel.  according to historian mark thomas connelly, "a group of books and pamphlets appeared
announcing a startling claim: a pervasive and depraved conspiracy was at large in the land, brutally trapping and seducing american girls into lives of enforced prostitution, or 'white slavery.' these white slave narratives, or white-slave tracts, began to circulate around 1909."  such narratives often portrayed innocent girls "victimized by a huge, secret and powerful conspiracy controlled by foreigners", as they were drugged or imprisoned and forced into prostitution.  this excerpt from the war on the white slave trade was written by the united states district attorney in chicago:  suffrage activists, especially harriet burton laidlaw and rose livingston, worked in new york city's chinatown and in other cities to rescue young white and chinese girls from forced prostitution, and helped pass the mann act to make interstate sex trafficking a federal crime. livingston publicly discussed her past as a prostitute and claimed to have been abducted and developed a drug problem as a sex slave in a chinese man's home, narrowly escaped and experienced a christian conversion narrative. other groups like the woman's christian temperance union and hull house focused on children of prostitutes and poverty in community life while trying to pass protective legislation. the american purity alliance also supported the mann act. in new york city, the travelers aid society of new york provided social services to women at train stations and piers in order to prevent trafficking.  in 1910, the us congress passed the white slave traffic act of 1910 (better known as the mann act), which made it a felony to transport women across state borders for the purpose of "prostitution or debauchery, or for any other immoral purpose". its primary stated intent was to address prostitution, immorality, and human trafficking particularly where it was trafficking for the purposes of prostitution, but the ambiguity of "immoral purpose" effectively criminalized interracial marriage and banned single women from crossing state borders for morally wrong acts. as more women were being trafficked from foreign countries, the us began passing immigration acts to curtail aliens from entering the country. several acts such as the emergency quota act of 1921 and immigration act of 1924 were passed to prevent emigrants from europe and asia from entering the united states. following the banning of immigrants during the 1920s, human trafficking was not considered a major issue until the 1990s.  the 1921 convention set new goals for international efforts to stem human trafficking, primarily by giving the anti-trafficking movement further official recognition, as well as a bureaucratic apparatus to research and fight the problem. the advisory committee on the traffic of women and children was
a permanent advisory committee of the league. its members were nine countries, and several non-governmental organizations. an important development was the implementation of a system of annual reports of member countries. member countries formed their own centralized offices to track and report on trafficking of women and children. the advisory committee also worked to expand its research and intervention program beyond the united states and europe. in 1929, a need to expand into the near east (asia minor), the middle east and asia was acknowledged. an international conference of central authorities in asia was planned for 1937, but no further action was taken during the late 1930s.  sex trafficking   act 18 u.s.c. § 1591, or the commercial sex act, the us makes it illegal to recruit, entice, obtain, provide, move or harbor a person or to benefit from such activities knowing that the person will be caused to engage in commercial sex acts where the person is under 18 or where force, fraud or coercion exists.  under the bush administration, fighting sex slavery worldwide and domestically became a priority with an average of $100 million spent per year, which substantially outnumbers the amount spent by other countries. before president bush took office, congress passed the victims of trafficking and violence protection act of 2000 (tvpa). the tvpa strengthened services to victims of violence, law enforcements ability to reduce violence against women and children, and education against human trafficking. also specified in the tvpa was a mandate to collect funds for the treatment of sex trafficking victims that provided them with shelter, food, education, and financial grants. internationally, the tvpa set standards that governments of other countries must follow in order to receive aid from the u.s. to fight human trafficking. once george w. bush took office in 2001, restricting sex trafficking became one of his primary humanitarian efforts. the attorney general under president bush, john ashcroft, strongly enforced the tvpa.  the act was subsequently renewed in 2004, 2006, and 2008. it established two stipulations an applicant has to meet in order to receive the benefits of a t-visa. first, a trafficked victim must prove/admit to being trafficked and second must submit to prosecution of his or her trafficker.  in 2011, congress failed to re-authorize the act.  the state department publishes an annual trafficking in persons report, which examines the progress that the u.s. and other countries have made in destroying human trafficking businesses, arresting the kingpins, and rescuing the victims.  see
also  enslaved women's resistance in the united states and caribbean  marriage of enslaved people (united states)  children of the plantation  references  human trafficking in the united states united states forced prostitution in the united states
esuperanzio raffaelli (died 24 march 1668) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of penne e atri (1661-1668).  biography  on 21 november 1661, esuperanzio raffaelli was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as bishop of penne e atri. on 30 november 1661, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-bishop of sabina, with ottaviano carafa, titular archbishop of patrae, and emilio bonaventura altieri, bishop of camerino, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of penne e atri until his death on 24 march 1668.  see also  catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (chronology of bishops)   (chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1668 deaths
a leadership election was held by the people's justice party (keadilan) on 10 november 2001. it was won by incumbent president of keadilan, wan azizah wan ismail.  central executive committee election results source  permanent chairman  deputy permanent chairman  president  deputy president  vice presidents  central executive committee members  references  2001 elections in malaysia political party leadership elections in malaysia november 2001 events in asia national justice party leadership election
rafael suvanto (june 28, 1909 in turku - march 9, 1940 in karstilanjarvi) was a finnish astronomer.  suvanto was the assistant of yrjo vaisala. he died in the winter war. his rank was lieutenant.  the minor planet center credits him with the discovery of the asteroid 1927 suvanto, dedicated to him posthumously, carried out on march 18, 1936.  references  discoverers of minor planets 1909 births 1940 deaths finnish astronomers finnish military personnel killed in world war ii
dewi safitri (born 10 february 1993) is an indonesian weightlifter, competing in the 53 kg category and representing indonesia at international competitions.   she competed at world championships, including at the 2015 world weightlifting championships, and the 2016 summer olympics.  major results  references  external links    1993 births living people people from bekasi sportspeople from west java indonesian female weightlifters weightlifters at the 2010 summer youth olympics weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics olympic weightlifters of indonesia
crippa is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  dante crippa (born 1937), italian footballer edward d. crippa (1899-1960), american politician maddalena crippa (born 1957), italian actress martina crippa (born 1989), italian basketball player  massimo crippa (born 1965), italian footballer salvatore crippa (1914-1971), italian road cyclist nekagenet crippa (born 1994), italian athlete yemaneberhan crippa (born 1996), italian athlete  italian-language surnames
ismail lleshi (born 2 october 1947) is an albanian politician. he served as the minister of defence of albania from 8 november 2000 to 12 september 2001. he was appointed defence minister following the promotion of ilir gjoni to the position of interior minister. he was a veteran of the socialist party of albania at the time of his appointment, and was listed in the party leadership as far back as 1993. he was also a senior leader of the labour party, the predecessor to the socialist party. as defence minister, he frequently met with foreign military leaders.  references   year of birth uncertain living people government ministers of albania defence ministers of albania 1947 births
seven mountains may refer to:  seven mountains, bergen, seven mountains surrounding the norwegian city of bergen  seven mountains (album), 2015 album by swiss band 77 bombay street "seven mountains" (song), title track and 2015 single by 77 bombay street from the same titled album seven mountains  bay nui, also known as that son, both of which mean "seven mountains" in vietnamese  see also seven devils mountains, notable peaks in west central idaho in the hells canyon wilderness suzuka seven mountains, main peaks of the suzuka mountains in japan suite for the seven mountains, 2008 debut album by norwegian saxophonist marius neset seven mountains media, american media company owning number of country music radio stations mostly in pennsylvania the seven storey mountain, 1948 autobiography of the trappist monk thomas merton
peter hertel (born c. 1944) is a retired west german rower who won the 1966 world title in the eights. earlier in 1965 he won the national title and a european silver medal in coxed fours.  after retiring from competitions hertel became a prominent physician specializing in knee injuries. since 1991 he heads the trauma section of the berlin martin luther hospital and personally performs about 800 surgeries per year. the hospital is annually visited by ca. 10,000 patients.  hertel is married to jutta stock, an olympic sprinter and daughter of olympic javelin champion gerhard stock. they have one daughter and two sons; one of the sons, ole hertel, competed nationally in shot put and discus throw.  references  1944 births living people west german male rowers place of birth missing (living people) world rowing championships medalists for west germany european rowing championships medalists
tiptree parish field is a 2.2 hectare local nature reserve in tiptree in essex, england. it is owned and managed by tiptree parish council.  the site is on a field adjacent to park lane, an ancient road between tiptree and tolleshunt knights. in 1976 the council purchased the land for sports facilities, but these were never constructed due to shortage of funds, and in the 1990s the area became a nature reserve. it has acid rough grassland with young oak woodland, and a pond which was created by widening layer brook.  there is access to the site from park lane, off newbridge road. tiptree parish field is the eastern half of the larger park lane nature reserve.  references  local nature reserves in essex tiptree
malathi madhavam is a 1940 telugu film directed by c. pullaiah.  plot bhurivasu, devarata and kamandaki were great friends when studying at a gurukul. the two boys promised each other that one of their sons should marry the daughter of the other to cement their friendship. kamandaki is a witness for that.  after a few years, bhurivasu becomes the minister of a kingdom padmavathi, and he has a daughter named malathi. devarata becomes the minister of another kingdom kundina, and he has a son named madhav. kamandaki becomes a buddhist monk and lives in padmavathi. devarata sends his son madhav along with friend makarand, and a servant kalahamsa to study politics under the guidance of kamandaki.  in padmavathi, king chitraketu becomes almost mad because his son, heir to the throne is missing. though bhurivasu consoles the king to his level best, his army commander nandana influences the imbecile king. nandana wanted to marry malathi, but is refused by bhurivasu. when he was returning from the minister's house in a state of anger, a blind beggar comes in his way. nandana beats him severely. nobody dares to stop him. madhava and his friends who happen to pass by that way interfere with nandana and start fighting with him. when the situation becomes too critical for madhava and his friends, kamandakini comes and rescues them by reprimanding nandana. seeing all the affair from balcony, malathi falls in love with madhava.  sensing the danger from nandana to madhava, kalahamsa decides to join nandana's service as a secret agent. madhava and makarand go to kamandakini ashram for studying. nandana promises the king that he would bring back his son, and makes him make a promise from bhurivasu to marry his daughter malathi to him. nandana arranges an entertainment show with the help of kalahamsa as part of his birthday celebrations. kalahamsa invites malathi, and madayanthi, sister of nandana for the show. he smuggles in madhava and makarand as entertainers. as a result of that, madhava falls in love with malathi and makarand falls in love with madayanthi. when the marriage of malathi and nandan is announced by the king, madhava and malathi
are plunged into despair.  on the outskirts of padmavathi, a kapalik names aghoraghanta worships the terrible deity karalasakthi. he want to offer her human sacrifice to fulfill his wishes. he summons his chief disciple kapalakundala to bring a virgin lady of high birth. when goes out searching for such a lady, he finds malathi, who is about to commit suicide in a state of despair. he kidnaps her with the help of kapalikas. when they are taking her to the cave, madhava happens to see them and follow them. when she is about to be sacrificed, he rescues her and hands her over to her parents.  on the day previous to the marriage, malathi goes to the temple of durga, where she has to wear bridal robes presented by nandana's house. kamandaki unites malathi and madhav in wedlock, and sends them away through a secret tunnel. makarand is dressed up as malathi and married to nandana. after the marriage, nandan goes to the bridal chamber to eagerly meet his wife and is repulsed by makarand, who is in disguise as malathi. nandan sends his sister madayanthi to pacify malathi. madayanthi finds that malathi is none other than his lover makarand and they both run away from there. nandan and his soldiers follow them. makarand fights them and sends madayanthi with the help of kalahamsa to the place where malathi and madhava are waiting. madhava leaves the ladies in charge of kalahamsa and goes to help makarand. meanwhile, kapalakundala, who has taken a vow of vengeance again kidnaps malathi and madayanti to give sacrifice to the goddess.  the remaining story is about how madhava and makarand rescue their lovers from the danger and marry them.  references  external links  indian films 1940s telugu-language films indian musical drama films 1940s musical drama films indian black-and-white films 1940 drama films 1940 films films directed by c. pullaiah
alison piepmeier (december 11, 1972 - august 12, 2016) was an american scholar and feminist, known for her book girl zines: making media, doing feminism. she was director of women's and gender studies and associate professor of english at the college of charleston.  education  piepmeier was a third-generation graduate of tennessee technological university, having completed her bachelor's degree in 1994. she earned her ph.d in english from vanderbilt university.  career and research   following her ph.d studies, piepmeier held the position of associate director of vanderbilt's women's studies program. while there, she published the book out in public, which chronicles the lives of women who worked in public in the nineteenth century.  in 2005, she moved to charleston and became the first full-time director of the college of charleston's women's and gender studies program.  piepmeier was known for her research on third wave feminist activism. her 2009 book girl zines: making media, doing feminism was the first book-length academic study of zines and women as zine creators. she co-edited the 2003 anthology catching a wave: reclaiming feminism for the 21st century, a collection which is frequently taught in women's studies courses.  in her work at the intersection of feminism and disability studies, piepmeier explored how women make reproductive decisions when prenatal testing reveals their fetus has down syndrome, and analyzed memoirs by parents of children with disabilities. in 2013 she presented at conferences for genetics counsellors and genetics educators, raising questions around the value of eradicating disability from the human population.  in addition to her academic writing, she contributed a column for the charleston city paper and had written editorials for the new york times motherlode blog. in these writings piepmeier covered topics such as same-sex parents, women's rights, raising disabled children and the black lives matter movement. she also wrote about personal experiences, such as her and her husband's decision to decline pre-natal foetal testing during her pregnancy in 2012, and her fight against cancer from 2015.  piepmeier was president of the southeastern women's studies association (sewsa) from 2006 to 2008 and was a member of the governing council of the national women's studies association (nwsa).  recognition and honors  in 2014, she was named as one of the 50 most progressive people in charleston by online magazine charlie. in 2014, she also gained attention for leading the efforts to host performances of the musical fun
home on the campus of the college of charleston.  in september 2016, the southeastern women's studies association (sewsa) established a $500 "outstanding student award" in piepmeier's honor, and in december 2016, the nwsa established the $1,000 alison piepmeier book prize.  death on august 12, 2016, piepmeier died from brain cancer after a seven-year battle with the disease. three weeks before her death, piepmeier wrote a farewell column in the charleston city paper. the column was picked up by mainstream outlets including us weekly and abc news.  selected publications   catching a wave: reclaiming feminism for the twenty-first century, co-edited with rory cooke dicker, 2003, northeastern university press  out in public: configurations of women's bodies in nineteenth-century america, 2004, university of north carolina press   girl zines: making media, doing feminism, 2009, new york university press unexpected: parenting, prenatal testing, and down syndrome with george estreich and rachel adams, published posthumously in 2020 by new york university press.  references  external links  personal blog of alison piepmeier    1972 births 2016 deaths american feminists vanderbilt university alumni writers from tennessee people from cookeville, tennessee 21st-century american writers 21st-century american women writers tennessee technological university alumni college of charleston faculty deaths from brain tumor deaths from cancer in south carolina american women academics
raja sansi assembly constituency (sl. no.: 12) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency that includes rajasansi in amritsar district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017 }}  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  amritsar district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
mamuka gongadze (born 21 october 1963 in tbilisi) georgian heraldry specialist, architect, artist. the author of the georgian state coat of arms. deputy chairman of the state council of heraldry at the parliament of georgia.  biography mamuka gongadze () was born on october 21, 1963 in tbilisi, georgia. he was studying at tbilisi 48th secondary school. graduated from the tbilisi state academy of arts in 1988. became a member of the union of georgian designers in 1988. same year 1988 he became a founder and a head of the design studio "oshki". in the period of 1989-1992 he was employed by the "tbilkalakproekti" ltd and "kurortpoekti" ltd as an architect. starting from 1993 he was working for the ministry of defense of georgia , where, in 1995, he became a chief of the military design department. in 1995 he became a member of the georgian state heraldry commission. in 1999 he became one of the founders and the chairman of the board of the ngo "georgian heraldry association". in the period of 2005-2008 he is a member of the georgian state heraldry commission at the president's office. in 2000 - a founder and a chairman of the board at the ngo "studia re". starting from 2008 up to date - deputy chairman of the state council of heraldry at the parliament of georgia.  list of works 1992 :file:1992 %e1%83%91%e1%83%90%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%9c%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a2%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%94%e1%83%a1%e1%83%99%e1%83%98%e1%83%96%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98.jpg;:file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%93%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d %e1%83%ab%e1%83%90%e1%83%9a%e1%83
%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%9b%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%94%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a3%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90.jpg;  1993;  1995 :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%96%e1%83%a6%e1%83%95%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d %e1%83%ab%e1%83%90%e1%83%9a%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%9b%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%94%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a3%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90, %e1%83%94
%e1%83%9b%e1%83%91%e1%83%9a%e1%83%94%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90%e1%83%a2%e1%83%98%e1%83%99%e1%83%90 %e1%83%93%e1%83%90 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%98%e1%83%9b%e1%83%91%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98%e1%83%99%e1%83%90.jpg; 1997 :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%93%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d %e1%83%93%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a8%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98.jpg; 1999 :file:%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a5%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ac%e1%83%9b%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%93%e1%83%94%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98, %e1%83%94%e1%83%a1%e1%83%99%e1%83%98%e1%83%96%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98.jpg; 2000 ;  2001 :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1
%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%96%e1%83%a6%e1%83%95%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d %e1%83%ab%e1%83%90%e1%83%9a%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%93%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a8%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98.jpg; 2002 ; 2004 the georgian state coat of arms (the initial version for the competition).:file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%99%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98 2004 - 1.jpg :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%
9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%99%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98 2004 - 2.jpg :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%99%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98 2004 - 3.jpg :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83
%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%99%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98 2004 - 4.jpg :file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%99%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%99%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98 2004 - 5.jpg; 2005 :file:%e1
%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98 - 1.jpg:file:%e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ae%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9b%e1%83%ac%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d %e1%83%92%e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%91%e1%83%98 - 2.jpg; 2005 :file:%e2%80%9e %e1%83%ac%e1%83%9b%e1%83%98%e1%83%9c%e1%83%93%e1%83%90 %e1%83%92%e1%83%98%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%92%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%92%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%af%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e2%80%9c %e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%93%e1%83%94%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98 2005 st. george%27s victory order 2005.jpg; :file:%e2%80%9e %e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%
e1%83%9d%e1%83%95%e1%83%9c%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98 %e1%83%92%e1%83%9b%e1%83%98%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e2%80%9c %e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%93%e1%83%94%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98 2005 order %e2%80%9c national hero%e2%80%9d 2005.jpg; 2006 :file:%e1%83%9e%e1%83%90%e1%83%a2%e1%83%a0%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a-%e1%83%98%e1%83%9c%e1%83%a1%e1%83%9e%e1%83%94%e1%83%a5%e1%83%a2%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a3%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98%e1%83%a4%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90.jpg; 2006-2009 :file:%e1%83%9b%e1%83%9d%e1%83%9c%e1%83%94%e1%83%a2%e1%83%90-2 %e1%83%9a%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98, 50 %e1%83%97%e1%83%94%e1%83%97%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98.jpg:file:%e
1%83%9d%e1%83%a5%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%a1%e1%83%90%e1%83%ac%e1%83%9b%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98.jpg :file:%e1%83%98%e1%83%9a%e1%83%9d%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98, %e1%83%a1%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%a2%e1%83%98%e1%83%aa%e1%83%ae%e1%83%9d%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98.jpg :file:%e1%83%95%e1%83%90%e1%83%9f%e1%83%90-%e1%83%a4%e1%83%a8%e1%83%90%e1%83%95%e1%83%94%e1%83%9a%e1%83%90, %e1%83%a5%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%97%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98 %e1%83%95%e1%83%90%e1%83%96%e1%83%98, %e1%83%af%e1%83%95%e1%83%90%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98, %e1%83%94%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%95%e1%83%9c%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98 %e1%83%91%e1%83%90%e1%83%9c
%e1%83%99%e1%83%98 - %e1%83%9e%e1%83%a0%e1%83%9d%e1%83%94%e1%83%a5%e1%83%a2%e1%83%98.jpg :file:%e1%83%91%e1%83%90%e1%83%a5%e1%83%9d-%e1%83%97%e1%83%91%e1%83%98%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1%e1%83%98-%e1%83%af%e1%83%94%e1%83%98%e1%83%b0%e1%83%90%e1%83%9c%e1%83%98, %e1%83%9a%e1%83%94%e1%83%ae %e1%83%99%e1%83%90%e1%83%a9%e1%83%98%e1%83%9c%e1%83%a1%e1%83%99%e1%83%98, %e1%83%aa%e1%83%94%e1%83%99%e1%83%95%e1%83%90 %e1%83%9b%e1%83%97%e1%83%98%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a%e1%83%a3%e1%83%a0%e1%83%98.jpg; 2007- 2013; 1999-2009; 2012 :file:%e1%83%a3%e1%83%aa%e1%83%ae%e1%83%9d%e1%83%94%e1%83%97%e1%83%a8%e1%83%98 %e1%83%9b%e1%83%aa%e1%83%ae%e1%83%9d%e1%83%95%e1%83%a0%e1%83%
94%e1%83%91%e1%83%98 %e1%83%97%e1%83%90%e1%83%9c%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%94%e1%83%9b%e1%83%90%e1%83%9b%e1%83%a3%e1%83%9a%e1%83%98%e1%83%a1 %e1%83%9b%e1%83%9d%e1%83%ac%e1%83%9b%e1%83%9d%e1%83%91%e1%83%90.jpg  references http://heraldika.ge/index.php?m=2/&lng=eng  1963 births living people
the 2016 fiba u18 european championship division b was the 12th edition of the division b of fiba u18 european championship. the competition took place in skopje, from 29 july to 7 august 2016.  participating teams          (16th place, 2015 fiba europe under-18 championship division a)    (14th place, 2015 fiba europe under-18 championship division a)    (15th place, 2015 fiba europe under-18 championship division a)  first round in this round, the 24 teams are allocated in four groups of six teams each. the best two teams of each group will advance to the quarterfinals.  group a  group b  group c  group d  classification round  17-24th classification  17-24th place quarterfinals  21-24th place semifinals  23rd place game  21st place game  17-20th place semifinals  19th place game  17th place game  9-16th classification  9-16th place quarterfinals  13-16th place semifinals  15th place game  13th place game  9-12th place semifinals  eleventh place game  ninth place game  5-8th classification  5-8th place semifinals  seventh place game  fifth place game  final round  quarterfinals  semifinals  third place game  final  final standings  references  external links fiba european u-18 championship - division b  fiba u18 european championship division b b 2016-17 in european basketball 2016-17 in republic of macedonia basketball international youth basketball competitions hosted by north macedonia sports competitions in skopje july 2016 sports events in europe august 2016 sports events in europe 2010s in skopje
roseland is a historic mansion located at 916 huntington stadium fisherman south drive, ferriday. the house is located in a  area along southwestern shore of lake concordia, about  southeast of ferriday. it was built between 1832 and 1850 and was moved twice, in c.1965 and in 1977, before reaching its actual position. despite the movements and a certain number of alterations, the mansion retains its historical integrity.  the house has been listed on the national register of historic places on october 10, 1985.  see also national register of historic places listings in concordia parish, louisiana  references  houses on the national register of historic places in louisiana greek revival architecture in louisiana houses completed in 1842 buildings and structures in concordia parish, louisiana
the canada men's national junior volleyball team is the men's national under-21 volleyball team of canada. the team is controlled by volleyball canada, which represents the country in international competitions - junior norceca championship and fivb u21 world championships. the canadian junior national team is ranked 7th (as of september 2015) in the fivb world ranking.  international competitions  junior norceca championship    1998 guatemala --  gold medal   2000 cuba -- 4th place   2002 canada --  gold medal   2004 canada -- 4th place   2006 mexico --  bronze medal   2008 el salvador --  silver medal   2010 canada --  silver medal   2012 united states --  silver medal   2014 el salvador --  silver medal   2016 canada --  bronze medal   2018 cuba --  bronze medal  junior pan-american cup   2011 panama --  silver medal   2015 canada --  bronze medal  2017 canada --  bronze medal  2019 peru --  bronze medal  u21 world championship    1977 brazil -- 10th place   1981 united states -- 13th place   1985 italy -- did not qualify   1987 bahrain -- 12th place   1989 greece - did not qualify   1991 egypt -- did not qualify   1993 argentina -- did not qualify   1995 malaysia - did not qualify   1997 bahrain - did not qualify   1999 thailand - 5th place   2001 poland - did not qualify   2003 iran - 9th place   2005 india -- did not qualify   2007 morocco -- did not qualify   2009 india - 12th place   2011 brazil -- 11th place   2013 turkey -- 13th place   2015 mexico -  8th place   2017 czech republic - 8th place   2019 bahrain - 12th place    2021 italy bulgaria - 10th place  current squad the following is the canadian roster in the 2016 men's junior norceca volleyball championship.  head coach: gino brousseau  external links official website  references     national men's volleyball teams national junior team volleyball
salvation lassie of mine is a world war i song written by jack caddigan and chick story. the song was first published in 1919 by leo feist, inc. in new york, ny. the sheet music cover features a photo of a salvation army nurse with soldiers entering a salvation army hut. this song was in the top 20 charts in march and april 1919, reaching number 18 in april.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music vol 2. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .  vogel, frederick g. world war i songs: a history and dictionary of popular american patriotic tunes, with over 300 complete lyrics. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 1995. .   1919 songs songs of world war i songs with lyrics by jack caddigan
john lee "squint" phares (december 31, 1915 - august 16, 1974) was an american professional basketball player. he played college basketball, baseball, and football for west virginia university. phares then played in the national basketball league for the pittsburgh pirates during the 1938-39 season and averaged 6.9 points per game.   in his post-basketball life, he and his wife ran a nursery school in columbus, ohio.  references  1915 births 1974 deaths american men's basketball players baseball players from columbus, ohio baseball players from west virginia basketball players from columbus, ohio basketball players from west virginia forwards (basketball) guards (basketball) people from elkins, west virginia pittsburgh pirates (nbl) players players of american football from columbus, ohio players of american football from west virginia west virginia mountaineers baseball players west virginia mountaineers football players west virginia mountaineers men's basketball players
in mathematical optimization, the proximal operator is an operator associated with a proper, lower semi-continuous convex function  from a hilbert space  to , and is defined by:     for any function in this class, the minimizer of the right-hand side above is unique, hence making the proximal operator well-defined. the  of a function enjoys several useful properties for optimization, enumerated below. note that all of these items require  to be proper (i.e. not identically , and never take a value of ), convex, and lower semi-continuous.  a function is said to be firmly non-expansive if  .  fixed points of  are minimizers of : .   global convergence to a minimizer is defined as follows: if , then for any initial point , the recursion  yields convergence  as . this convergence may be weak if  is infinite dimensional.  it is frequently used in optimization algorithms associated with non-differentiable optimization problems such as total variation denoising.  if  is the  0- indicator function of a nonempty, closed, convex set, then it is lower semi-continuous, proper, and convex and  is the orthogonal projector onto that set.  see also  proximal gradient method  references  mathematical optimization  external links  the proximity operator repository: a collection of proximity operators implemented in matlab and python.  proximaloperators.jl: a julia package implementing proximal operators.  odl: a python library for inverse problems that utilizes proximal operators.
carmen (, ) is a 1953 italian-spanish drama film directed by giuseppe maria scotese and starring ana esmeralda, fausto tozzi and mariella lotti. it is based on prosper merimee's novel carmen.  cast  references  bibliography  external links     1953 drama films italian drama films spanish drama films 1953 films italian films spanish films italian-language films films based on carmen films directed by giuseppe maria scotese suevia films films spanish black-and-white films italian black-and-white films
peder kofod ancher  (14 june 1710 - 5 july 1788) was a danish jurist, and with  and  one of the most influential jurists in denmark in the 18th century.  after studies of theology and law at the sorø academy, kofod ancher was appointed professor of law there in 1741. he defended the danish absolutist monarchy against enlightenment criticism, writing a polemic against montesquieu's de l'esprit des lois in 1765. his principal work is the first history of danish law, in which he emphasized the view that danish law had original roots and was subject to limited influence from other traditions.  kofod ancher also held several government offices, including auditor-general of the navy since 1753. he was appointed in the same year a judge of the danish supreme court.  references    1710 births 1788 deaths danish jurists danish judges
northern border (spanish: frontera norte) is a 1953 mexican crime film directed by vicente orona and starring fernando fernandez, evangelina elizondo, and victor parra.  cast   fernando fernandez  as carlos gomez   evangelina elizondo as rosaura    victor parra as el baby    dagoberto rodriguez  as roberto gomez    gloria mestre  as gloria    arturo martinez as esbirro del baby    raul de anda jr. as cato   elisa aspero  as sra. gomez, madre de carlos   antonio bravo  as abogado    gilberto gonzalez as el zurdo    jaime fernandez as jimmy   federico curiel as detective policia    roberto g. rivera as teodoro    julio sotelo as comandante    maria gentil arcos  as madre lolita    manuel donde    jorge arriaga   as ronco    enrique del castillo as policia secreto    agustin de anda  as bolero / policia secreto   lupe carriles as sirvienta en tijuana    manuel casanueva  as jefe duran    arturo cobo as bailarin   enedina diaz de leon as sirvienta    agustin fernandez  as esbirro del baby    jaime gonzalez quinones as pablito    juan jose hurtado  as juan, contrabandista    jose l. murillo as leo garcia, agente 19   jose munoz  as comandante en tijuana  roberto y. palacios as wong lee  references  bibliography   andrea noble. mexican national cinema. psychology press, 2005.  external links     1953 films 1953 crime films mexican crime films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by vicente orona
carl froch vs. george groves, billed as the battle of britain, was a professional boxing match contested on 23 november 2013 at the manchester arena. carl froch, the defending unified wba (regular) and ibf super-middleweight champion, defeated george groves via technical knockout in the ninth round, although the ending was mired in controversy.  background  carl froch began 2013 by successfully defending his ibf super-middleweight title against wba (regular) champion mikkel kessler on 25 may, which was a rematch of their first fight on 24 april 2010, at the time part of the super six world boxing classic tournament. having unified the titles and become a two-time world champion, froch considered several options for his next fight. his preference was a third fight with kessler, based on the resounding critical success of the second, as well as a rematch with former super six rival andre ward, who defeated froch in the tournament final on 17 december 2011.  george groves had won three fights in 2013, including a victory on the undercard of froch-kessler ii. by june, he was ranked number two at super-middleweight by the wba and was installed as the mandatory challenger by the ibf. the rivalry between him and froch had already begun prior to the kessler fight, when groves joined kessler's training camp as a sparring partner. this drew furious criticism from froch a week before that fight, who branded groves a traitor for helping out his danish opponent and not staying loyal to his countryman. in response, groves maintained that he had gained invaluable experience by sparring against a multiple-time world champion veteran in kessler.  build-up once groves became the mandatory contender for the ibf title, froch began considering him as a serious opponent for later in the year. matchroom boxing promoter eddie hearn had mentioned a potential froch-groves fight as early as march, which turned into more serious discussions in july, during which time froch declared his intention to defend his title rather than vacate it for the sake of a potentially bigger fight with kessler or ward. hearn officially announced the event on 30 august, to take place on 23 november at the manchester arena (then known as the phones4u arena). matchroom had promoted froch since 2011, and groves was signed in march 2013.  throughout the latter half of the year, froch and groves engaged in an intense war of words, rife with trash-talk, in a rivalry likened to that of nigel benn vs. chris eub
ank in the early 1990s. on 8 november, both boxers appeared on sky sports' boxing talk show ringside. during the show, groves insisted on referring to froch by his second name only, while froch refused to even look at him. neither accepted the offer of a handshake. in groves' training camp, preparations hit a major stumbling block when he and trainer adam booth split acrimoniously in september. groves would reveal in december 2015 that he felt booth had abandoned him at the most important stage of his career, before a world title fight. with ten weeks to go before the fight with froch, paddy fitzpatrick was hired by groves to replace booth.  at the weigh-in on 22 november, which culminated in both boxers having to be pulled apart by security and personnel, froch was highly animated during the customary staredown as he taunted an "uncharacteristically quiet" groves. froch came in at , a pound under the super-middleweight limit of ; groves was a full 2 pounds under the limit at .  fight details groves entered the arena to "spitfire" by the prodigy, and froch to "morning glory" by oasis. the crowd was overwhelmingly in support of froch, but groves would ultimately win them over by the end of the night after his performance in the ring. in the opening round, groves surprised observers by charging at froch, who was normally considered the more natural aggressor in his fights. froch, too, was evidently surprised by this tactic and chose to fight more cautiously than usual until the final moments of the round. sensing that he was about to lose the round having fought too defensively, froch opened up and tried to land punches of his own. groves responded by catching him with a quick, hard overhand right which knocked down froch for only the second time in his career (the first being against jermain taylor in their 2009 fight). despite being known for his iron chin, froch was seriously hurt and only just made it out of the round.  the ensuing rounds saw groves-who was eleven years younger than froch-outboxing him and consistently landing clean punches, as the prospect of a major upset was brewing. in round six, both boxers exchanged heavy punches with the harder-hitting froch focusing on body shots, while the quicker-handed groves targeted the head. more of the same followed in the seventh and eighth rounds, but one reporter noted that referee howard foster was intervening too often with the
action when it appeared that groves was running out of steam. this came to a head in round nine when froch landed several right hands to groves' head and body, making him stumble around the ring on unsteady legs. groves momentarily tried to clinch, but was sent back against the ropes by more straight right hands from froch. it was at this point that foster jumped in to stop the fight at 1 minute 33 seconds, grabbing groves in a headlock to pull him away from froch. all three judges had groves ahead on their scorecards: 78-73, 76-75, and 76-75.  aftermath  immediately the result was heavily protested by groves, his team, and onlookers alike, in what was seen as a hugely controversial ending to an exciting fight. the crowd in the arena, who had earlier booed groves, instead directed their vitriol towards froch. afterwards, the latter said: "he was a tough, tough fighter. but when he started getting hit, he started to fall apart. i broke him down in seven and eight, and i stopped him in round nine." regarding the stoppage, froch said: "howard foster did a fantastic job in stopping it and saving his career. ... george groves turned his back on me and was slumping down to the floor, his arms were collapsed and his head was hanging and he wasn't defending himself. so i don't think the referee had any choice but to stop the fight."  groves disagreed vehemently: "it was a terrible, terrible, decision. at no point was i on shaky legs, my head was clear. ... the referee is supposed to stop the fight when you're in a dangerous position and can't protect yourself. if i'm making the guy miss and i'm still firing back that means i'm still conscious that i'm in the fight and that i'm doing the right things." the british boxing board of control expressed their support for foster in his decision to stop the fight when he did.  demand for a rematch was immediate, with froch expressing willingness to give groves another chance: "i'm happy to honour the fans, honour the crowd, honour george groves with a rematch if my promoter and my trainer both agree that it makes sense. i don't swerve or duck anybody, everybody knows that." groves said, "i'd love a rematch. carl sat down ringside [in a joint post-fight interview] and said let's have it, but watching it back
i think he said it because he was hoping for a cheer from the crowd. he probably doesn't want one. i deserve a rematch, for everything i put into the build-up to this." the rematch took place the following year.  undercard scott quigg defeated diego oscar silva -  2 rocky fielding defeated luke blackledge - tko 1 anthony crolla defeated stephen foster -  6 stephen smith defeated sergio manuel medina -  8 jamie mcdonnell defeated bernard inom - tko 7 scott cardle defeated krzysztof szot -  6 andy lee defeated ferenc hafner - tko 2 luke campbell defeated chuck jones - pts 4  see also carl froch vs. george groves ii  references  external links  professional record at boxrec  professional record at boxrec  2013 in boxing boxing matches sky sports boxing in england november 2013 sports events in the united kingdom 2010s in manchester
in 1999, the campaign for muslim school holidays began when shujaat khan's children had to choose between celebrating the eid holidays or going to school.  in 2006, the first muslim school holiday campaign to successfully pass the muslim school holiday resolution was launched by the new york civic participation project followed by its allied coalitions. the resolution, numbered 1281 passed unanimously by elected officials in 2008. mayor michael bloomberg vetoed resolution 1281.  five years after the veto, mayor bill de blasio, who was then new york city public advocate, promised to recognize the two muslim holidays, eid ul-fitr and eid ul-adha.  in 2015, after 16 years of working with various institutions, political figures, religious leaders, and coalitions, shujaat khan, nycpp, la fuente, 32bj seiu were successful in recognizing the school holidays in the new york city public school calendar.  at a speech celebrating the victory, shujaat khan mentioned how the struggle for equality and recognition is not over but a huge step forward had been made.  references  new york city department of education islam in new york city
sir william hody (born before 1441, died 1524) of pilsdon in dorset, was an english lawyer, judge and politician who served as attorney general of england and chief baron of the exchequer under king henry vii.  origins he was born before 1441, the second son of sir john hody (d.1441), chief justice of the king's bench. his sister, elisabeth hody, married sir robert strode of parnham house, dorset which they re-built from 1522.  career he was a member of parliament for  in 1472, and for  in 1483. his name is first mentioned in the year-books in 1476. he procured a reversal of the attainder of his uncle, sir alexander hody of bowre, somerset, who had been attainted at edward iv's accession for adherence to the house of lancaster during the wars of the roses. in 1485, shortly after the accession of king henry vii, hody became attorney general for england and wales. on 29 october 1486 he was appointed chief baron of the exchequer. he retired as a judge in 1522.  marriage and children william hody married (1st) eleanor malet, daughter of sir baldwin malet of 'corypool' (now curry mallet) in somerset, solicitor general to king henry viii, who was the second son of thomas malet (died 1502) by his wife joan wadham, daughter of sir william wadham. by his wife he had two sons and two daughters: reignold hody, eldest son; william hody of pilsdon, 2nd son, who married twice: (1st) to margery keyne, daughter and heiress of anthony keyne, of kent, by whom he had three sons: richard, john and william; he married (2nd) anne strode,  daughter of john strode, of chalmington, dorset, by whom he had a daughter mary hody (d.19 november 1588), wife of sir thomas carew (1518-1586) of haccombe in devon. the separate monumental brasses of mary hody and her husband survive in haccombe church. mary's brass shows the arms of carew impaling hody and is inscribed in latin as follows: hic jacet maria carew uxor thomae carew de haccombe, arm(igeri) & filia will(elmi) huddye de com(itatu) dorset,
arm(igeri), quae obiit 19 die nov(embris) a(nno) d(omini) 1588 ("here lies mary carew, wife of thomas carew of haccombe, esquire, and a daughter of william huddye from the county of dorset, who died on the 19th day of november in the year of our lord 1588"). joan hody, wife of sir richard warre (died 1601) of hestercombe; eme hody, wife of lawrence wadham, a son of sir william wadham of merryfield, ilton in somerset and of edge, branscombe in devon.  death hody died on 18 june 1524.  notes  attribution  |-  |-  1524 deaths english lawyers english judges english mps 1472 chief barons of the exchequer attorneys general for england and wales william year of birth uncertain english mps 1483 members of the parliament of england (pre-1707) for totnes
gypsy devils (slovak ciganski diabli) is the slovak orchestra, which was founded in 1991. classical music in their submission is enriched with elements of gypsy music, folk music, jazz, ethno, flamenco and more. they use their own unique arrangements and virtuosic elements.  remelting different styles brought them success on concert stages in 35 countries on five continents.  they performed in the concert halls of the berlin philharmonic, komische oper - berlin, kozerthaus - berlin, royal opera house in london, hans max saal - munich, smetana hall - prague, concert and kongressaal - luzern, concert hall - melbourne, goldener saal musikverein - vienna, is sanat hall - istanbul, palace of culture - novosibirsk, expo 2008 zaragoza expo 2010 shanghai.  they represented slovakia at the olympics: the 2010 winter olympic games and summer olympic games 2012. they performed at music festivals kissinger sommer bad kissingen, beethovenfest bonn, parnu david oistrakh festival, liszt festival raiding, euroclassic pirmasens, jeju world arts festival "prague spring" sziget fesztival budapest, mondial des cultures drummondville, khamoro prague and the festival de martigues and cooperates with many leading orchestras, conductors, singers and instrumentalists from around the world. gipsy kings, paul gulda and the vienna string quartet, chamber philharmonic bremen, the moravian philharmonic orchestra, philharmonic b.martinu zlin, slovak radio symphony orchestra are just a few of them.  projects   gypsy-baroque, unconventional version of songs from the baroque to the present, cooperation with barocco sempre giovane  gypsy devils & the 100-member hungarian gypsy orchestra budapest  gypsy devils & katka knechtova, concert tour - fusion of gypsy music, classical music, pop, folk and ethno  gypsy devils & rock music, fusion of ethno and rock music, in cooperation with slovak rock band desmod  gypsy devils & symphony orchestras: chamber philharmonic bremen, symphony orchestra athens, symphony orchestra nicozia  gypsy devils & paul gulda, concerts liszt-roma rhapsodie a haydn a la zingarese, fusion with austrian piano virtuoso paul gulda  gypsy devils & jaroslav sveceny, fusion with the czech violin virtuoso  gypsy devils & lucie bila, unconventional fusion with multi-genre czech singer  gypsy devils & totti ovidiu, music-dance show: gypsy devils & dancers from cirque du soleil  members  ernest sark
ozi - arrangements and cymbalo, silvia sarkozi - cello and solo singing, stefan banyak - 1st violin, emil hasala - 2nd violin and lyrics, zoltan grunza - clarinet and tarogato, jozef farkas - manager and viola, robert feher - doublebass  slovak orchestras musical groups established in 1991
michael kibbe (born 1945) is an american contemporary classical music composer born in san diego, california. he has composed over 240 concert works and created numerous arrangements. his writing covers many musical styles, encompassing tonal, modal and non-diatonic languages. his style often incorporates modern structures but is still accessible to the popular classical listener. some of his works come right of the romantic era  yet his style in some writings has been compared to prokofiev.  there are influences of american composer gershwin in the serenade number 2 for two clarinets that seem at once blues, jazz and classical. his music can often reflect themes that bring to mind different cultures.  compositions  at the core of his creative output are the 14 wind quintets, several works for solo woodwind with strings, and numerous other chamber music pieces for winds, strings, keyboards and percussion. three sonatas for bass clarinet and piano have also proven popular with clarinetists.  his work also encompasses larger forms: over a dozen concertos and works for band, orchestra and chorus. as a testament to his versatility, his humboldt currents brass octet (3 trumpets in b flat, horn, three trombones, and tuba), is a substantial work in three movements proving his ability to produce pieces other than for woodwinds and strings. sophisticated and idiomatically written, michael kibbe's octet is an accessible contemporary work perfectly suited to collegiate or professional recitals and concerts, and is a welcome addition to the brass chamber repertoire.  his works have been played throughout the united states, europe, russia, mexico, china and israel by both professional and university orchestral and chamber groups. recent performances have been by the san fernando valley symphony, the eureka symphony orchestra, humboldt state university concert band  and the university of texas pan american cello festival. many of his works have been performed on radio and published on music cds.  commissioned pieces  michael kibbe has written pieces on commission for the cultural affairs department of the city of los angeles, humboldt state university concert band, pacific serenades (los angeles), the jewel city flute choir (glendale, ca) and the buffalo-niagara concert band, among others. in 1988, kibbe won the debussy trio award for best composer by the national association of composers in a national competition.  performances  kibbe is an accomplished performer on most of the standard woodwind instruments, and holds a performing degree in oboe and bassoon from new mexico state university and a composition degree from california state university, northridge. his composition teachers include  david ward-stein
man, warner hutchison, aurelio de la vega, henri lazarof and roy travis. kibbe is currently an oboist and music librarian for the eureka symphony orchestra in northern california.  for four decades he worked with the los angeles film and recording industry in roles that included instrumental performer and music copyist for films, radio, tv and live venues (such as barbra streisand and charlie sheen weddings). for 17 years he was oboist with the north wind quintet  which did numerous public (including radio) and school performances and performed concert tours of mexico three times. he was also principal oboist of the symphonic winds of los angeles for five years. kibbe has performed as an artist on numerous published classical music cd's.  michael kibbe continues to compose and perform in northern california.  his wife is vanessa kibbe, a professional violinist with the eureka symphony orchestra. his son victor kibbe is a recording engineer and his son peter kibbe is a professional cellist.  discography masks, selected chamber works, a compilation of chamber music works composed by kibbe for winds, string and mixed ensembles. includes, six preludes for solo cello, wind quintets #1 and #7, a string duo and the atmospheric "death in the backyard" for soprano and small ensemble. 2017.  debussy trio plays harp, flute, and viola trios. michael kibbe is composer of one piece entitled, trio op. 99.  fantastic voyage by north wind quintet. kibbe is oboist and arranger of the pieces.  fantasy for wizards performed by wizards! kibbe is composer of divertimento op. 39  trio indiana kibbe is composer for ebony suite for 3 clarinets opus 116  string of pearls by luminarias includes a 3 movement piece by kibbe called malibu music for violin and viola.  dance of the renaissance, with kibbe playing oboe and recorder  bozza nova by mariinsky clarinet club with kibbe works: ebony suite and shtetl tanzen  bassics music for bass clarinet and piano,  henri bok, sonata, opus 40 by michael kibbe  references  external links   the complete list of his works may be found at www.michaelkibbe.com  1945 births living people music librarians american male classical composers american classical composers 20th-century american composers 20th-century american male musicians 21st-century american composers 21st-century american male musicians musicians from san diego classical musicians from california
cochlespira cavalier is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family cochlespiridae.  description  distribution  references   garcia e.f. (2010) description of four new species of cochlespira (gastropoda: turridae) from the new world. novapex, 11(4): 107-113  external links  cavalier gastropods described in 2010
the 22nd district of the iowa senate is located in southern iowa, and is currently composed of dallas and polk counties.  current elected officials sarah trone garriott is the senator currently representing the 22nd district.  the area of the 22nd district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 43rd district (represented by jennifer konfrst) the 44th district (represented by kenan judge)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  merlin hulse, 1983-1984 beverly hannon, 1985-1992 patrick deluhery, 1993-2002 larry mckibben, 2003-2008 steve sodders, 2009-2012 charles schneider, 2013-2021 sarah trone garriott, 2021-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  22
gas attack is a 2001 drama created and produced by samantha kingsley and directed by kenny glenaan. the film presents a futuristic fictional scenario in which kurdish asylum seekers are attacked with biological weapons in a glasgow suburb.  the film details the results on the community affected, the council team supporting them, the local authorities and emergency services involved in the crisis, the greater public impact and the medical staff that struggle to cope with the influx of victims.   the film attracted much controversy, with glasgow council considering a ban on the broadcasting of the film, but won three awards for its screenplay, including the british independent film awards.  plot  on a pig farm in scotland, a recording is made of the livestock present at the farm, of which a large number are dead or dying from an unknown illness.  nationwide, britain is experiencing an intense period of racial tension, with extremist groups clashing with police forces across the country and rioting taking place in major cities, the most severe being in glasgow. some scottish politicians attribute the deteriorating relations to a recent influx of kurdish asylum seekers in glasgow, supported by local authorities and handled by the asylum seeker resettlement project, which they claim is unwanted by the british public and has resulted in a backlash by disaffected citizens.  one such asylum seeker, sherko hussein (sherko zen-aloush) struggles to make a living with his illegally underpaid job, having moved from iraq with his daughter resa (benae hussein) to northern glasgow. while in a shopping centre with resa, he notices that resa has developed a bad cough and is unwell. he asks asrp worker robina dhoody (robina qureshi), assigned to the husseins, to watch his daughter while he goes out to work, to which she reluctantly agrees. noticing the poor conditions in which they are living, robina becomes concerned about resa's health, and convinces sherko to take her to broomyhill infirmary.  doctor annie millbrook (morag calder) diagnoses resa with acute influenza and prescribes antibiotics to her and admits resa to the ward. robina notices that the hospital is inundated with large numbers of other asylum seekers from the same block of flats that the husseins live in, all presenting with similar flu-like symptoms. however, she is met with a cool response when she encourages sherko to complain to the authorities, who is fearful he will be discriminated against because of his migrant status and deported back to iraq, and he implies
that robina does not care or understand their plight, which offends her.  glasgow central police receive an anonymous email with imagery of dead livestock and other threatening media. the force ignores the email.  meanwhile, a neighbour of the husseins, hamaz mohammed, suddenly deteriorates and despite attempts to revive him, dies from his illness. this concerns the kurdish community, who worry a similar fate awaits their affected members, and confuses the medical staff treating the asylum seekers, who order a postmortem and hold a meeting with the families of the asylum seekers to reassure them. robina becomes suspicious about the circumstances of hamaz's death and becomes convinced that the conditions in which the asylum seekers live is attributable to hamaz's death. however, she is warned by her superior bill grigson (laurie ventry) to fall in with the official angle and that investigating her "wildcat" theories will be both fruitless and unhelpful to the situation. despite this, she becomes determined to act when at the public meeting, millbrook and other officials accidentally reveal that hamaz died of an unknown infection and that it could be a serious viral pathogen such as tb, exacerbated by robina mentioning tb which is picked up by the interpreter and disseminated to the community.  robina is convinced that the asylum seekers contracted tb by way of infectious animal ash being blown from an incinerator north of the high-rise flats the kurdish live in. she attempts to break into the compound discreetly, but is caught by the security firm guarding the facility and removed. grigson asks her to focus on her job of integrating asylum seekers and to allow the medical staff to treat the contagion without her interference, warning that the council will not tolerate repeated maverick actions. however, robina ignores this and immediately returns to broomyhill to interrogate millbrook.  overnight, police and racial groups and protesters clash in heavy riots across the uk, particularly in the glasgow area, and emergency services struggle to maintain order as the social unrest escalates.  at broomyhill, patients begin to make decisive recoveries and millbrook begins to discharge the asylum seekers. however, she remains concerned at the unusual pathology and the death of hamaz. while waiting for the postmortem results, she investigates possible causes of the illness experienced by the kurdish. she eventually reaches an alarming conclusion; it is possible that hamaz has been killed by anthrax bacteria. this is confirmed by the postmortem of hamaz. grig
son learns of robina's illegal activity in investigating the illness and warns that further scaremongering regarding the epidemic will result in her being sacked. more emails are sent to glasgow central, which fails to act despite the threats communicated to them in the email.  an emergency outbreak control team is assembled consisting of personnel from all of the relevant departments; however, the nhs chief executive is adamant that the mounting threat of an anthrax attack be censored from the press, worrying at the public panic and the resulting collapse of the already overstretched infrastructure, and the team are ineffectual in responding to the threat of the illness, treating the potential outbreak as an isolated case and investigating nearby agricultural facilities for sources of anthrax outbreaks, believing that hamaz may have contracted the virus from moonlighting cheap farm labour. however, this is leaked to the media, which begins to make a connection between the kurdish epidemic and the illness  references  2001 films 2001 drama films films set in glasgow biological weapons in popular culture
tom o'neill-thorne (born 8 april 1997) is a 3.0 point wheelchair basketball player from australia. he was part of the rollers team that won the 2014 incheon world wheelchair basketball championship. he was a member of the  rollers team that competed at 2020 summer paralympics, his second games.  biography  tom o'neill-thorne was born on 8 april 1997, with arthrogryposis multiplex, a congenital condition, which he describes succinctly as: "my legs didn't grow properly". by the time he was two years old, he required a wheelchair, but watching the 2000 summer olympic games in sydney on television, he decided that he wanted to become an athlete.  basketball  o'neill-thorne took up wheelchair basketball when he was nine, when a local competition was established. he became a member of the queensland junior team, then the development squad at the australian institute of sport, and, in 2012, at age 14, of the queensland spinning bullets in the national wheelchair basketball league, where he was coached by tom kyle. as a 16 year old, in 2013, he averaged 17.1 points per game (eight in the league), 6.5 rebounds and 5 assists per game (sixth in the league).  that year o'neill-thorne was selected for his first international tournament, with the u23 team (the spinners) in dubai, where the team won gold. in 2013, he was part of the spinners team at the iwbf u23 world wheelchair basketball championship in adana, turkey, where they won bronze. later that year he made his debut with the  senior national team (the rollers) at the 2013  asia-oceania zone championships in bangkok, and the following year was part of the rollers team that won gold at the 2014 incheon world wheelchair basketball championship. he was the youngest ever roller to play in a world championship.  by 2016, o'neill-thorne was averaging 25.86 points per game with the spinning bullets. in june 2016, he toured great britain for the 2016 continental clash against canada, great britain, japan, the netherlands and the united states. the rollers were defeated by the united states, and won silver. in july, he was selected for the 2016 summer paralympics in rio de janeiro. he was one of five rollers selected for their first paralympics  where they finished sixth.  in 2018, he was a member of the rollers that won the bronze medal at 2018 wheelchair basketball world championship in hamburg, germany
where he averaged 14.5 points, four rebounds and three assists per game.  at the 2020 tokyo paralympics, the rollers finished fifth with a win/loss record of 4-4.    o'neill-thorne was awarded the northern territory government sportsperson of the year at the 2017 northern territory sports awards.  references  external links paralympics australia profile basketball australia profile twitter  1997 births living people paralympic wheelchair basketball players of australia wheelchair basketball players at the 2016 summer paralympics wheelchair basketball players at the 2020 summer paralympics point guards
chen jialiang (chinese: 陈家亮; 27 october 1933 - 28 january 2016) was a chinese international football player and former vice chairman of the chinese football association.  biography chen jialiang was born in dalian. he worked at the jinzhou textile factory when he was 17 years old and began his football career in the factory football team. he then joined the dalian youth football team. chen represented in the 1953 national youth football match, where he won third place. in 1954, chen was elected to the china youth football team to hungary for football study. after he back china, chen joined the beijing sports college football team and was called up to china national football team.  in 1964, chen retired from football because of a broken leg. he went back to dalian to help with youth player training work. later, chen came to beijing to work as assistant coach of china national football team. after the 1970s, he had successively served as section chief of football of the sports department of china, the head of football departments of the sports department of china, chen served as vice chairman of the chinese football association from 1979 to 1985.  on 28 january 2016, chen died in a traffic accident in beijing, age 82.  references  external links team china stats  1933 births 2016 deaths chinese footballers china international footballers beijing guoan f.c. players footballers from dalian road incident deaths in the people's republic of china association football forwards
falls mill is a historic textile factory in belvidere. it was built in 1873. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since february 23, 1972.  the mill is now a museum that is also known as the museum of power and industry at falls mill. displays include antique machinery, historic photos, mill stones, broom-making equipment, a printing press, and a dog-powered butter churn. there is a weaving exhibit room with hand looms, spinning wheels and a collection of 19th-century power looms and wool carding machines.  references  external links  falls mill - official site  national register of historic places in franklin county, tennessee commercial buildings completed in 1873 museums in franklin county, tennessee textile museums in the united states industry museums in tennessee commercial buildings on the national register of historic places in tennessee textile mills in the united states
calcaxonia is a suborder of soft corals in the order alcyonacea.  references    taxonomic study of suborder calcaxonia (alcyonacea: octocorallia: anthozoa) from king sejong station, antarctic. song jun-im, hwang sung-jin, moon haewon and an in-young, animal systematics, 30 apr 2012, evolution and diversity volume 28, issue2, pages 84~96,  external links          alcyonacea cnidarian suborders
lean launchpad is an entrepreneurship methodology created by steve blank to test and develop business models based on querying and learning from customers. it is based on the scientific method and combines experiential learning with the three building blocks of a successful lean startup:  alexander osterwalder's "business model canvas", steve blank's "customer development model", and agile engineering.  students of lean launchpad propose and immediately test business hypotheses. they get out of the building to talk with prospective customers and partners, using this customer feedback acquired in these interviews to refine their product or service; ensure their product or service meets a customer need or solves a customer problem; and validate that they have created a repeatable, scalable business model.  methodology   lean launchpad pedagogy combines three elements: a flipped classroom, experiential learning and team-based learning. during the course, students interview potential customers in order to validate or invalidate their hypotheses, as expressed in the business model canvas. students listen to recorded lectures and presentations before each class, and use class time to present what they learned from customer interviews the previous week. students present their findings which creates the basis for discussion, critiques, and brain-storming by both professors and students.   as of 2021, the lean launchpad has been taught in more than 300 universities worldwide to over 20,000 teams. more than 300,000 people have signed up for a free online version of the class.  beyond the classroom  the course is core to the u.s. national science foundation innovation corps program, which since 2011 has been the standard for commercializing science in the u.s.   two other versions of the class - hacking for defense and hacking for diplomacy -address national defense and foreign policy challenges. piloted at stanford in 2016, these classes connect the silicon valley innovation mindset with islands of innovation inside the u.s. department of defense, intelligence community and u.s. state department.   hacking for defense immediately began to scale after its pilot in spring 2016. in 2017, it will be taught in more than 15 other universities across the country.  references   business education entrepreneurship business models
the 1997 fiba under-19 world championship for women (portuguese: campeonato mundial feminino sub-19 da fiba 1997) took place in brazil from 5 to 13 july 1997. it was co-organised by the international basketball federation (fiba) and brazilian basketball confederation.  twelve national teams competed for the championship. united states came away with the gold medal by defeating australia 78-74 in the final.  venues natal  competing nations  except brazil, which automatically qualified as the host nation, the 11 remaining countries qualified through their continents' qualifying tournaments:  fiba africa (1)   fiba asia (2)      fiba americas (4)   (host)       fiba oceania (1)    fiba europe (4)  preliminary round  ''times given below are  in utc-03:00  group a  group b  knockout stage  bracket  5th place bracket  9th place bracket  classification 9-12  classification 5-8  semifinals  eleventh place game  ninth place game  seventh place game  fifth place game  third place game  final  final standings  awards  references  external links  official web of 1997 fiba world championship for junior women.  fiba under-19 women's basketball world cup world championship for women 1997 in brazilian sport international women's basketball competitions hosted by brazil 1997 in brazilian women's sport
augustin-louis, marquis de ximenes (28 february 1728, paris - 1 june 1817) was an 18th-century french poet and playwright.  biography  born in a family from the kingdom of aragon, he began his career in the army, where he joined the grey mosqueters gris, and later the gendarmes od french flanders. after he was appointed  marechal de saxe's aide de camp, he fought at his side in the battle of fontenoy, and then retired from the service with the rank of mestre de camp.  ximenes had his first tragedy, selim, presented in 1746. the second, epicaris, ou la mort de neron, was hissed to the bitter end and had only one performance. the third, amalazonte , had no more success and earned him the epigram imitated from boileau: "after epicaris / laughters; / after amalazonte / shame."  the failure of don carlos, which he presented at his own expense in lyon in 1761 ended his stage career.  known for his loose morals and for his gallantry, he was equally famous for his ugliness and his extraordinary uncleanliness. having won the favor of voltaire, he was familiarly received in ferney, until ximenes stole the manuscript of his histoire de la guerre de 1741. voltaire nevertheless consented to receive him again a few years later, on condition that he would sign for him a pamphlet against jean-jacques rousseau. this pamphlet was long considered to be ximenes'  in 1768, he married angelique honoree jourdan, daughter of the writer jean-baptiste jourdan.  he proclaimed to be a supporter of the revolution and during the reign of terror took the name of dean of sans-culottes poets, which he later changed into that of dean of the tragic poets. an occasional poet, he successively published verses to the republic, to bonaparte, who gave him a pension, and louis xviii, who gave him the cross of order of saint louis. during his long career, he continuously, but in vain, was a candidate to the academie francaise.  augustin-louis de ximenes authored the expression perfidious albion. it is to be found in his poem l'ere des francais, published in 1793, where there is that verse: let us attack perfidious albion in her waters !  publications  poetry 1750: les lettres ont autant contribue a la gloire de louis xiv qu'il avoit contribue a
leurs progres, poeme (1750) 1759: lettres portugaises en vers  1759: cesar au senat romain 1769: poeme sur l'amour des lettres  1784: discours en vers, a la louange de m. de voltaire, suivi de quelques autres poesies et precede d'une lettre de m. de voltaire a l'auteur 1792: codicille d'un vieillard, ou poesies nouvelles 1806: choix de poesies anciennes ou inedites  1807: aux manes de voltaire undated:stances sur le mariage de napoleon, empereur des francais et roi d'italie, avec l'archiduchesse marie-louise d'autriche theatre 1746: selim, tragedy, paris, theatre de monsieur, 8 december 1752: epicaris, ou la mort de neron, tragedy, paris, theatre-francais, 2 january 1754: amalazonte, tragedy, paris, theatre-francais, 30 may 1761: dom carlos, tragedy in 5 acts and in verse, theatre de lyon, 5 may varia 1750: electre vengee, ou lettre sur les tragedies d'oreste et d'electre  1758: lettre a monsieur rousseau sur l'effet moral des theatres text online 1759: le peche originel, ou reponse d'un rabbin aux doutes de la belle allemande, traduite par elle-meme  1768: l'examen impartial des meilleures tragedies de racine 1787: de l'influence de boileau sur l'esprit de son siecle  1787: mon testament, en vers et en prose  1810: nunc dimittis d'un vieillard  references  sources  pierre larousse, grand dictionnaire universel du xixe siecle, vol. xv, 1876, (p. 1401).  external links   augustin louis de ximenes on bnf.fr  augustin louis de ximenes on a biographical dictionary of modern rationalists  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers grand crosses of the order of saint louis writers from paris 1726 births 1817 deaths french people of spanish descent occasional poets
mark bradshaw (born 1983 in sydney, australia) is an australian composer known for his work in film and television.  early life bradshaw studied experimental music at the college of fine arts (cofa) in sydney, australia and later attended the university of sydney.  career bradshaw is best known for his work in several of jane campion's movies and tv series, including bright star and top of the lake. bradshaw has composed for a variety of ensembles including string quartet, orchestra, and a cappella chorus.  personal life as of a 2010 interview, bradshaw was living in london.  in august 2012, in sydney, bradshaw entered into a civil partnership with british actor ben whishaw. whishaw and bradshaw met around 2009 on the set of bright star where whishaw played the role of english poet john keats. the relationship remained private, until it was made public in 2013.  work  the water diary (short film), 2006  chacun son cinema ou ce petit coup au coeur quand la lumiere s'eteint et que le film commence, "the lady bug" segment, 2007  the mirage (short film), 2008  8, the water diary segment, 2008  bright star, 2009  a passionate woman (tv series), 2 episodes, 2010  resistance, 2011  top of the lake (tv series), 7 episodes, 2013  from the bottom of the lake (documentary), 2013  the daughter, 2015  top of the lake: china girl (tv series), 7 episodes, 2017  o holy ghost (short film), 2019  the furnace, 2020  you won't be alone, 2022  awards  references  external links  1983 births 20th-century lgbt people 21st-century lgbt people australian film score composers australian television composers gay musicians lgbt film score composers lgbt musicians from australia living people male film score composers male television composers people from sydney
the tomlinson report was a 1954 report released by the commission for the socioeconomic development of the bantu areas, known as the tomlinson commission, that was commissioned by the south african government to study the economic viability of the native reserves (later formed into the bantustans). these reserves were intended to serve as the homelands for the black population. the report is named for frederick r. tomlinson, professor of agricultural economics at the university of pretoria. tomlinson chaired the ten-person commission, which was established in 1950. the tomlinson report found that the reserves were incapable of containing south africa's black population without significant state investment. however, hendrik verwoerd, minister of native affairs, rejected several recommendations in the report. while both verwoerd and the tomlinson commission believed in "separate development" for the reserves, verwoerd did not want to end economic interdependence between the reserves and industries in white-controlled areas. the government would go on to pass legislation to restrict the movement of blacks who lived in the reserves to white-controlled areas.  background  the south african government established native reserves in the 1913 natives land act as areas designated for black citizens to live in. as a result of the 1913 act, blacks could no longer own land outside of the native reserves. the 1923 native (urban areas) act authorized local governments to establish residential areas designated for black citizens, leading to the development of low-wage laborer migration to urban areas from the native reserves. while the government had intended to strictly control any limited presence of native laborers in urban areas, by world war ii declining conditions had led to an outflow from the native reserves and the number of black urban residents had surpassed the number of white urban residents.   in 1948, the national party, which had campaigned on establishing an apartheid regime, came to power. the newly-elected government began to engage in dialogue over the state of the native reserves and how increased black urbanization affected the apartheid vision. the south african bureau for racial affairs (sabra), a conservative think tank at stellenbosch university founded in september 1948, emphasized the need for "vertical" segregation, a system which would enforce total segregation for blacks from the broader political sphere but allow for political advancement within the native reserves. verwoerd, who became head of the native affairs department in 1950, stated in a 1948 speech to parliament both that south africa was a "white man's country and that he must remain master here," but that, in the reserves, "we are prepared to allow the natives to be the masters." ver
woerd stated in 1950 his belief in the importance of separate political development for the reserves, stating there was "no policy of oppression here, but one of creating a situation which has never existed for the bantu; namely, that, taking into consideration their languages, traditions, history and different national communities, they may pass through a development of their own." verwoerd did not fully align with sabra in his views; he belonged to a faction in the national party that sought to enforce racial segregation to pursue grand apartheid and believed in the principles of vertical segregation, but did not want to negatively impact business interests that depended on black labor by enforcing a complete separation between the black population and the white population. in 1951, the year after the tomlinson report was commissioned, the government passed the bantu authorities act. the bantu authorities act abolished the natives representative council and created a new hierarchy for tribal, regional and territorial authorities.  creation and composition in 1950, the federal mission council of the dutch reformed church passed a resolution that called on the government to examine "native life," particularly with regards to socioeconomic development in the native reserves. that same year, the government appointed the commission for the socioeconomic development of the bantu areas to devise "a comprehensive scheme for the rehabilitation of the native areas with a view to developing within them a social structure in keeping with the culture of the native and based upon effective socio-economic planning." the commission was created with support from sabra and included sabra members.   the commission was composed of 10 members, included four academics (including tomlinson) and two afrikaner farmers:     frederick r. tomlinson    chris prinsloo of the urban affairs section, native affairs department    m. c. de wet nel of the native affairs group, native affairs department    c. b. young, under-secretary for the native areas, native affairs department    j. h. j. van rensburg, commander-general for the ossewabrandwag.    g. j. badenhorst    c. h. badenhorst   j. h. r. bisschop, professor of veterinary science (replacement f. x. laubscher, who resigned) j. h. moolman   f. h. botha (secretary)    in the process of drafting the report, the commission enlisted research specialists.  contents of the report the tomlinson report was presented to the government in october 1954 and ran, in its unabridged form, to 3,755 pages published in 17 volumes. the report included 589 tables and
66 maps. the report stated that the government could pursue either integration or total segregation, and strongly emphasized that the government pursue total segregation by industrializing the reserves to make them "economically viable." the report recommended that land additional to the land set aside in the 1936 land act be purchased and annexed to the reserves, and that the state develop industries in the reserves to create an additional 300,000 jobs. even then, the report said, the reserves would only be able to include 15 million of south africa's projected black population by the year 2000; the commission projected that 6.5 million blacks would be residing in the "european areas." the report also concluded that the traditional 'tribal' authorities used to rule the reserves were not adequate for industrialized areas. in the report, the commission reiterated their commitment to separate development in the reserves to achieve racial harmony. one section stated that "welfare should be measured by the standards of the people whose welfare is envisaged," and that africans "should not be ignored nor treated as inferior, merely because they [scale of values] are different."  funding recommendations  the commission concluded that if the reserves were to support the growing black population the government would need to invest at least £104 million over the following decade to ensure fully diversified economies in the reserves. the commission offered the following prospective allocations for the £104 million:   agricultural development - £33,886,000  soil reclamation - £27,400,000  credit facilities - £3,000,000  sugar-cane production - £370,000  fibre production - £116,000  irrigation - £3,000,000  forestry development - £3,000,000  mining development - £1,000,000  manufacturing and tertiary activities - £30,000,000  urban development - £12,000,000  transport and other basic facilities - £13,000,000  health services - £5,000,000  educational services - £3,000,000  welfare services - £3,600,000  total estimated expenditure: £104,486,000  development scheme  the commission was critical of existing development efforts within the native reserves, stating that "individually and collectively the existing organisations do not comply with the new requirements set by the development programme. the deplorable conditions which prevail in the bantu areas today also testify to their present incapacity to bring about any significant development, and even to prevent deterioration." the commission suggested that the native affairs department undergo a re-
organization to better support development progress. specifically, the commission called for establishing a development council that would advise the minister of native affairs on native reserves by conducting research on trends and needs in the reserves. the commission also called for the creation of a development corporation that would both promote black enterprises in the reserves and create enterprises that would be transferred to black ownership. as part of development activities, the commission stated that church activities should be seen as integral to the development process.  policy recommendations  the report offered three major recommendations for the government's economic policies in the reserves.  first, the commission advocated for an agricultural rehabilitation scheme. the scheme would separate peasant farmers from workers. in coming to this conclusion, the commission surveyed 111 peasant farmers and stated, based on the results, that "£56 p.a. is large enough to attract a bantu to full-time farming in mixed farming and pastoral areas, and to bind him permanently to the land."  second, the commission recommended that native reserve land be divided into "economic farming units" under individual ownership.  third, the commission recommended that the government push for industrialization in the reserves to incorporate those who, as a result of land reform, would become dispossessed. the commission called for investment in "european capital" and in education, particularly through the previously mentioned development corporation.  reception verwoerd refused to implement several of the report's recommendations despite accepting the report "in principle". verwoerd's objection focused in part on certain items that were allocated funding in the budget, expressing his wish to limit spending at £36.6 million. he rejected the idea of allowing, as the report suggested, white industrialists to enter the reserves; therefore, he stated that funding allocated for the development corporation, which was "presumably based upon the principle ... of the admission of large european privately owned industries into the bantu areas," could be excluded from the budget. instead of creating a program for "white capital" to enter the reserves, verwoerd advocated for establishing "border industries." verwoerd also argued that the amounts set aside for agricultural development and urban development could be brought down dramatically. finally, he rejected the idea of eliminating communal ownership of land. verwoerd stated that the native affairs department would rely on "other considered views based upon much wider practical experience of administrative affairs" to determine proper financial funding for the reserves. verwoerd's opinions reflected the opinions of others in the national party who did not want to curb dependence on african labor.    some faculty members from sabra received
the report well, viewing it as evidence that "apartheid could and must be made to work." some members of sabra voiced their displeasure with verwoerd's refusal to implement most recommendations in the report. j.l. sadie, a professor at stellenbosch university, wrote an article in january 1957 for the south african institute of race relations that criticized verwoerd's decision to not allow for private industry in the reserves. sadie argued that foreign capitalists had already invested heavily in south africa without making the country any less "south african." attendees at a june 1956 congress organized by the dutch reformed churches, sabra and the federation of afrikaans cultural organizations commended the tomlinson commission for its report without directing any criticism at the government.  in 1956, more than 400 delegates to the interdenominational african ministers' federation (iamf) conference in bloemfontein voted to reject the tomlinson report.  impact  the recommendations of the tomlinson report aligned with the government's belief in "separate development" for whites and blacks. even though the government did not follow several recommendations in the report, the government still sought to confine blacks to the reserves as much as they could without curtailing dependence on black labor.   parliament passed several pieces of legislation that defined the segregated nature and structure of the reserves in the following years. under verwoerd, who became prime minister in 1958, the legislature passed the promotion of bantu self-government act of 1959. this act created "bantustans," or separate homelands for blacks, that were established based on linguistic and cultural differences. the act intended to develop self-government for the bantustans. in 1970, parliament passed the bantu homelands citizenship act, and in 1971, the legislature passed the bantu homelands constitution act. the bantu homelands citizenship act designated blacks as citizens of their bantustans, and the bantu homelands constitution act gave the president the power to create tribal, regional and territories authorities. the bantu homelands citizenship act designated black workers as "foreign visitors" in white areas and led to the government forcibly resettling blacks in the bantustans. the tomlinson report had recommended that "all-union bantu" be regarded as foreigners. as the tomlinson commission had concluded, the reserves as they existed could not provide economic opportunities for most black residents beyond agriculture; blacks that migrated to the bantustans were concentrated in border areas and commuted into white areas for their jobs. in 1986, the government abolished pass laws and in 1994, the end of apartheid also led to the end of the bantust
ans.  references   apartheid in south africa politics and race 1954 documents
juris luzins (; born june 22, 1947) is a retired american middle-distance runner of latvian descent. he won the national 800 m title in 1971 and placed second in 1969. he missed the 1972 olympics due to an injury, and later raced professionally.  luzins married in 1973, divorced in 1975, and remarried later. in december 1976 he earned a master's degree in architecture from the university of florida and later worked as an architect in gainesville, florida.  references  1947 births living people american people of latvian descent american male middle-distance runners university of florida alumni track and field athletes from virginia florida gators men's track and field athletes american architects
the knudsen paradox has been observed in experiments of channel flow with varying channel width or equivalently different pressures. if the normalized mass flux through the channel is plotted over the knudsen number based on the channel width a distinct minimum is observed around . this is a paradoxical behaviour because, based on the navier-stokes equations, one would expect the mass flux to decrease with increasing the knudsen number. the minimum can be understood intuitively by considering the two extreme cases of very small and very large knudsen number. for very small kn the viscosity vanishes and a fully developed steady state channel flow shows infinite flux. on the other hand, the particles stop interacting for large knudsen numbers. because of the constant acceleration due to the external force, the steady state again will show infinite flux.  see also vlasov equation  fokker-planck equation navier-stokes equations vlasov-poisson equation lattice boltzmann methods list of paradoxes  references  partial differential equations statistical mechanics transport phenomena fluid dynamics physical paradoxes
the symphony no. 3 in a major, op. 55, is a four-movement orchestral composition by the finnish composer leevi madetoja, who wrote the piece from 1925-26 while vacationing in paris, before returning to helsinki, finland to complete the work. optimistic and pastorale in character, the symphony is today considered one of the finest symphonies in the post-sibelian, finnish orchestral canon; indeed, a "masterpiece ... equal in stature" to sibelius's seven essays in the form. although technically his penultimate symphonic composition (a fourth symphony was lost and thus never completed), the third is nonetheless-due to its successor's fate-madetoja's final addition to the repertoire.  the helsinki philharmonic orchestra premiered the new symphony in helsinki on 8 april 1926 under the composer's baton. although madetoja received the usual praise, the new piece admittedly perplexed its audience, which had expected a dramatic, patriotic statement similar to those its two monumental predecessors, the second symphony (1918) and the ostrobothnians (1924), had made; the third symphony's (subsequent) significance thus eluded nearly everyone.  history  after the success of the ostrobothnians, madetoja departed for france, staying for six months in houilles, a small town just outside of paris. here, in the quiet of the parisian suburbs, madetoja began to compose his third symphony, op. 55, and upon returning to finland in october (due to financial worries), his work on the project continued. the new symphony received its premiere in helsinki on 8 april 1926, and although madetoja received the usual praise, the audience and critics found the new work somewhat perplexing: with the monumental, elegiac second symphony having set expectations, the optimism and restraint of the third came as a surprise, its (subsequent) significance eluding nearly everyone. some years later, the french music writer, henri-claude fantapie, described the cheerful, pastorale third symphony as a "sinfonia gallica" in spirit and explained the premiere as thus: "the listeners expected the opera [the ostrobothnians] to be followed by a nationalistic anthem and were disappointed to hear something that seemed to them to be hermetic and that, to crown it all, was lacking in pomposity and solemnity ... the properties the majority of finnish music-lovers always expect in a new work." nevertheless, today the third symphony is widely regarded as madetoja's "masterpiece", the rare
finnish symphony equal in stature to sibelius's seven essays in the form.  structure  the symphony is in four-movements:  andantino-allegretto  adagio  allegro non troppo pesante, tempo moderato-allegretto  discography  thus far, madetoja's third symphony has been recorded only by nordic orchestras, usually as a component piece of a larger recording project of madetoja's major orchestral works, such as those by  and the iceland symphony orchestra (1991-92), arvo volmer and the oulu symphony orchestra (1998-2006), and john storgards and the helsinki philharmonic orchestra (2012-13).  references   symphonies by leevi madetoja 1926 compositions compositions in a major
rytis rimdeika (born 2 may 1966) is a lithuanian medical doctor, scientist and professor.  biography  1984-1990 started studying in kaunas medical academy  1995-1999 continued with his phd studies in kaunas university of medicine's surgical department  1990 became a surgeon, plastic and reconstructive surgery doctor in kaunas academy of medicine hospital (plastic and reconstructive surgery department)  2001-2006 - head of the plastic surgery and burns department in kaunas university of medicine hospital  starting from 2006 - head of the plastic and reconstructive surgery department  1997-2007 coordinator of surgery,  2007-2013 director of surgery in lithuanian university of health sciences hospital.  dr. r. rimdeika 1999 defended his thesis for a medical degree „chirurginiu metodu veiksmingumas gydant riboto ploto gilius nudegimus".  prof. rimdeika started his pedagogical job as an assistant lecturer in kaunas university of medicine (currently known as lithuanian university of health sciences) in 1995,  got a lecturer's degree in 1999 and associate professor's in 2002. he works as a professor from 2006.  2016-2020 president of the lithuanian plastic and reconstructive surgery society.  work  dr. r. rimdeika created many medical treating technics, gathered a group of qualified doctors and is a manager and consultant of 15 phd's so far.  as he started working in lithuanian university of health sciences hospital kauno klinikos, the department of plastic surgery and burns became a place, which is known and valuable in european union countries.  dr. r. rimdeika is an active scientist. he organises and leads medical studies related to the reconstructive surgery and wounds, participates in many international projects and researches. while participating in international events, dr. rytis rimdeika has read over 300 lectures.  dr. rytis rimdeika is a member of editorial office and reviewer of scientific journals such as  medicina (elsevier), european journal of plastic and reconstructive surgery (springer), lietuvos chirurgija (vilnius,nvi), novosti khirurgii (vitebsk), ewma journal (copenhagen).  member of international organisations  the european society of plastic, reconstructive and aesthetic surgery (espras) member of the board 2008-2018 european wound management association (ewma) member of the board 2008 - 2014 president of the lithuanian society of plastic and reconstructive surgery 2016 - 2020  a representative of lithuanian
society of plastic and reconstructive surgery in many international events president of the lithuanian wound healing association 2005 - 2015 member of european burns association (eba)  member of international society of burn injuries (isbi)  pupillage  vishnevsky institute of. surgery (russia)  beverwijk hospital and euro skin bank (netherlands)  linkoping university (sweden)  bochum university hospital (germany)  vejle hospital (denmark)  ghent university hospital (belgium) and many other medical centers.  other activities  2000-2014 a member of the board in kaunas university of medicine and member of the senate in lithuanian university of health sciences.  a member of numerous working groups in the ministry of health of the republic of lithuania.  an adviser in health-related questions to the mayor of kaunas.  awards   1999 and 2015 was awarded honorary diplomas by the minister of health in lithuania.  2002 received "gerumo plyta" ( "gerumo kristalas" ) award.  2006 received "sveikatos riteris" award in kaunas.  2012 was awarded as an honoured doctor in lithuania by the ministry of health of the republic of lithuania.  external links   https://archive.today/20160615205400/https://lt.linkedin.com/in/rytis-rimdeika-2568509a  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=idvfarwffgs  http://www.yrasalis.lt/desimt/gydytojai/prof-dr-rytis-rimdeika/  http://stilius.lrytas.lt/-11691570011168871469-laikinosios-sostin%c4%97s-riteriai.htm  http://kauno.diena.lt/naujienos/kita/kita/plastinei-ir-rekonstrukcinei-chirurgijai-kaune-40-metu-417072  lithuanian plastic surgeons 1966 births living people physicians from kaunas
annalena is a given name. notable people with the name include:   annalena baerbock (born 1980), german politician   annalena mcafee (born c. 1952), british children's author and journalist  annalena tonelli (1943-2003), italian lawyer and social activist  see also  anna-lena, given name  analena, croatian-slovenian post-hardcore band  feminine given names
frederic barbier (15 november 1829 - 12 february 1889) was a 19th-century french composer.  biography frederic barbier was born in metz, lorraine, and was the son of felix henri barbier and adelaide josephine rosalie rousseau. barbier pursued a career in literary studies at bourges college, while taking lessons in solfege, piano, harmony and counterpoint with henry darondeau, an organist in one of the churches of the city. his father, an engineer officer, wanted to see him join the ecole polytechnique, of which he himself had been a pupil. but in 1848, the de gasperi v cabinet had created a new school, and the young barbier preferred to compete for the latter and was admitted. this school was disbanded soon after and he began to study law. but music attracted him more and more.  in 1852, frederic barbier had already written and presented in bourges a small one-act opera comique, le mariage de colombine, but considered moving to paris. presented by influential figures to edmond seveste, then director of the theatre lyrique, he met adolphe adam. thanks to his advice and lessons of the latter, his first work une nuit a seville,a one-act opera comique, was played at the theatre lyrique on 14 september 1855 and was warmly welcomed. two months later, on 21 november, frederic barbier gave the same theatre a new one act work entitled rose et narcissus, in which was also very successful.  within 20 years, barbier had over sixty more or less important works presented in every small opera house of paris and in cafes-chantant, most of them in one act and approaching more and more the genre of comic operettas. he composed for the eldorado, the alcazar, the ba-ta-clan, the folies-belleville, the theatre des bouffes du nord, etc., a great many number of operettas, saynetes, pantomimes and ballets.  besides his opera production, barbier wrote about 300 duets, romances, vocal melodies, many dance music pieces, concert marches and orchestral fantasies on opera motifs, choirs for men voice, galops, valses, mazurkas, polkas, etc. in 1867, he was conductor at theatre international, and from 1873, he directed the orchestra at l'alcazar d'ete, a position he shared with henry litolff. he collaborated as a critic to some small newspapers such as l'avenir musical (
1853), and l'independance dramatique.  main works  operettas and operas comiques  1852: le mariage de colombine, one-act opera comique, theatre de bourges 1855: une nuit a seville, one-act opera comique, libretto by charles nuitter and beaumont, theatre-lyrique, 14 september  1855: rose et narcisse, one-act opera comique, libretto by charles nuitter and beaumont, theatre-lyrique, 21 november 1858: le pacha, one-act operetta, libretto by charles nuitter, folies-nouvelles, march 1858: francastor, one-act operetta, libretto by gustave labottiere and achille eyraud, folies-nouvelles, 22 may 1858: le page de madame malborough, one-act operetta, libretto by e. vierne (jules verne), folies-nouvelles, 28 october 1858: le faux faust, operette parodie in 3 acts [composed under the pseudonym stephan], folies-nouvelles, november  1859: le docteur tam-tam, operetta bouffe in 1 act, libretto by francis tourte, folies-nouvelles, 5 march 1859: monsieur deschalumeaux, twwo-act operetta, libretto by gustave peree, theatre dejazet, october 1861: panne aux airs, parody in 1 act, libretto by clairville, theatre dejazet, 30 march 1861: flamberge au vent, one-act operetta, libretto by charles nuitter and sejour (victor marcou) 1862: versez, marquis !, one-act operetta, libretto by alexis bouvier and edouard prevel, folies-marigny, 19 april 1862: la cigale et la fourmi, one-act operetta bouffe, libretto by achille eyraud (1821-1882), folies-marigny, 28 may 1862: le loup et l'agneau, one-act operetta, libretto by etienne hippolyte chol de clercy and hippolyte messant, theatre dejazet, october 1863: madame pygmalion, one-act operetta bouffe, libretto by jules adenis and francis tourte, bouffes-parisiens, 6 february 1863: les trois normandes, one-act operetta, libretto by pol mercier, folies-marigny, 21 march 1863: la gamine du village, operette en 1 acte, livret d'alexis bouvier (folies-mar
igny, 15 juillet 1863) 1863: simon terre-neuve, one-act operetta, theatre dejazet 1864: deux permissions de dix heures, one-act operetta, libretto by pol mercier and henry currat, theatre dejazet, may 1864: achille chez chiron, one-act operetta, libretto by amedee de jallais and vulpian, folies-marigny, 14 october 1864: le miroir, one-act operetta, libretto by charles nuitter, october 1864: un souper chez mademoiselle contat, one-act operetta, libretto by armand liorat, eldorado 1865: un congres de modistes, operette bouffe in 1 act, libretto by marc michel and laurencin, bouffes-parisiens, 16 february 1865: la nourrice d'hercule, one-act operetta, eldorado 1866: les oreilles de midas, one-act opera comique, libretto by neree desarbres and charles nuitter, fantaisies-parisiennes, 21 april 1866: don juan de fantaisie, four-act operetta, fantaisies-parisiennes, 9 june 1866: une femme qui a perdu sa clef, one-act operetta, libretto by leonce and alexandre de bar, bouffes-parisiens, 21 october 1867: les legendes de gavarni, three-act opera comique, libretto by hippolyte lefebvre, bouffes-parisiens, 29 january 1867: gervaise, one-act opera comique, libretto by hippolyte lefebvre and alexis bouvier, theatre-international, 17 june 1867: le nez de carton, one-act operetta, eldorado 1867: l'orchestre des danoises, operetta, alcazar 1868: le soldat malgre lui, two-act opera comique, libretto by henri chivot and alfred duru, theatre des fantaisies-parisiennes, 19 october 1868: le souper d'arlequin, one-act operette bouffe, libretto by jules perrin, eldorado, 28 november 1869: balladine et casquenfer, one-act operette bouffe, libretto by charles blondelet and felix baumaine eldorado, 15 february 1869: faust et marguerite, saynete bouffe in 1 act, libretto by felix baumaine and charles blondelet, ambassadeurs, 23 july  1869: mam'zelle pierrot, one-act operetta, libretto by amedee de
jallais and henry de kock, folies-bergere, 26 september 1869: don ferocio, saynete bouffe in 1 act, libretto by charles blondelet and felix baumaine, eldorado, 23 october 1869: ferme le dimanche, saynete in 1 act, libretto by etienne hippolyte chol de clercy, eldorado, 13 december 1869: le beau chasseur, one-act operetta, eldorado 1869: un mariage au gros sel, one-act operetta, libretto by armand liorat, eldorado, 10 july 1869: millionnaire!, one-act operetta, eldorado 1870: un proces en separation, saynete in 1 act, lyrics by hippolyte bedeau, eldorado, 12 january 1870: l'acteur omnibus, fantaisie lyrique in 1 act, libretto by jules perrin and jules pacra, eldorado, 12 march 1870: lucrece d'orgeat, parody in 1 act, eldorado 1870: on demande un pitre, one-act operetta, eldorado 1871: un lendemain de noces, one-act operetta, eldorado 1872: les points jaunes, saynete in 1 act, libretto by jules pacra and fetre, eldorado, 17 august 1872: la bonne de ma tante, saynete bouffe in 1 act, libretto by hippolyte bedeau, eldorado 1872: une cause celebre, one-act operetta, eldorado 1873: le barometre parisien, monologue by a. philibert and alphonse siegel, eldorado 1873: le coq est mort !, one-act operetta, eldorado 1873: m'ame nicolas, one-act operetta, libretto by louis gaston villemer, eldorado 1874: mam'zelle rose, one-act operetta, libretto by adrien decourcelle and eugene bercioux, after their comedie en vaudeville, theatre des varietes 1874: monsieur l'alcade, one-act operetta, eldorado 1875: pierrot et la belle enchantee, one-act operetta, eldorado, 22 may 1875: un scandale a l'alcazar, bouffonnerie musicale in 1 act, libretto by m. duvert, alcazar d'ete, may 1875: les deux choristes, one-act operetta, eldorado, 11 september 1875: le champagne de ma tante, one-act operetta, libretto by hippolyte bedeau, eldorado 1875: la fermiere et son garcon, one-act operetta, libretto by auguste jouhaud, eldorado 1875
: la fete de madame denis, one-act operetta, libretto by jules de rieux and louis gaston villemer, alcazar d'ete 1875: marion de l'orme, parody, eldorado 1876: les cent mille francs du tenor, one-act operetta 1877: la baronne de haut-castel, one-act operetta, libretto by laurencin, eldorado 1877: le carnaval des epiciers, three-act opera comique, bouffes-du-nord, 6 april 1878: les deux parfaits notaires, one-act operetta, libretto by louis pericaud and louis gaston villemer, bouffes-parisiens 1879: le verrou, one-act operetta, libretto by louis battaille, eldorado, 31 october 1880: la noce a suzon, one-act operetta, libretto by jouhaud and louis gaston villemer, alcazar d'ete 1880: atchi!, bouffonnerie musicale in 1 act, libretto by hermil and numes, eldorado 1881: le supplice de tantale, one-act operetta, libretto by e. durafour  la chaumiere indienne, one-act opera comique  corinne, three-act opera comique  les incroyables, three-act opera bouffe  la poupee automate, one-act operetta  la sainte catherine, one-act operetta, eldorado  la veuve omphale, one-act operetta  ballets 1859: le grand roi d'yvetot, three-act vaudeville-pantomime, libretto by louis-emile vanderburch and albert guinon, theatre dejazet, december  1875: les pifferari, ballet, alcazar d'ete, may  la balle enchantee, pantomime (eldorado)  les cascades de pierrot, pantomime (eldorado)  le tresor de cassandre, pantomime (eldorado)  melodies  la revolte des noirs, lyrics by francis tourte  le roi david, lyrics by francis tourte  toinon, lyrics by francis tourte  tout ca c'est a moi, lyrics by francis tourte  external links  frederic barbier, un compositeur d'operettes on vocalises.net  frederic barbier on http://www.artlyriquefr  le petit monde on gallica  frederic barbier on data.bnf.fr  1829 births 1889 deaths 19th-century classical composers french ballet
composers french male classical composers french operetta composers people from metz 19th-century french male musicians
ajnala assembly constituency (sl. no.:11) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india.  notable politicians  notable politicians from ajnala constituency are freedom fighter achhar singh chhina, s.harcharan singh ajnala ex(speaker and education minister), and former member of lok sabha dr. rattan singh  list of mlas  members of punjab legislative assembly ajnala.  election results  2022  2017  previous results  see also  punjab legislative assembly  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
armando leon bejarano valadez (april 11, 1916 - july 6, 2016) was a mexican orthopedic surgeon, physician, politician, and member of the institutional revolutionary party (pri). he served as the governor of morelos from 1976 until 1982.   bejarano was born in cuautla, morelos, on april 11, 1916, to jesus bejarano nunez and carmen marcia valadez lizarraga. he was the youngest of his brothers. bajarano studied at the medical school of the national autonomous university of mexico (unam) from 1933 to 1938 and received his degree on july 18, 1939, becoming a surgeon and midwife. he specialized in orthopedics and trauma.  bejaranos was the medical director of the olympic village during the 1968 summer olympics in mexico city.  bejarano was appointed the pri candidate for governor of morelos to succeed outgoing governor felipe rivera crespo. his candidacy proved controversial, as bejarano had no political experience in morelos at the time. bejarano's friendship and connections with then-president of mexico jose lopez portillo allowed him to jump from a position at the office of food and beverages at the federal secretariat of health directly to the gubernatorial candidacy of morelos state without opposition. bejarano, a candidate for the governing pri, was elected governor and served in that office may 1976 until 1982. he was succeeded by lauro ortega martinez, a former president of pri.  bejarano later served as a judge within the morela state judiciary.  armando leon bejarano died at his home in cuernavaca, morelos, on july 6, 2016, at the age of 100 due to old age. his survivors are his son and daughters armando berjarano almada, gloria bejarano almada and maria de lourdes bejarano almada  references  1916 births 2016 deaths governors of morelos mexican centenarians mexican surgeons institutional revolutionary party politicians men centenarians national autonomous university of mexico alumni people from cuernavaca people from cuautla politicians from morelos mexican judges
jan henrik kayser (20 february 1933 - 24 april 2016) was a norwegian classical pianist.  he was born in bergen. he made his concert debut in 1953, and is known as performer of harald sæverud's compositions. he was awarded griegprisen in 1978.  references  1933 births 2016 deaths musicians from bergen norwegian classical pianists
haiyang (), abbreviated as hy, is a series of marine remote sensing satellites developed and operated by china since 2002. , eight satellites were launched and two more are planned (haiyang 3a and 3b).  the haiyang series is operated by the nsoas (national satellite ocean application service), a subordinate agency of the state oceanic administration.  current and previous satellites  data applications   satellite products, nsoas  aviso+ programme, cnes  see also    state oceanic administration  eoportal directory satellite missions-h part  references  external links   haiyang satellite programme (in chinese)  earth observation satellites of china state oceanic administration oceanographic satellites satellite series
supercry is the second studio album by australian recording artist emma louise, released on 15 july 2016. the album debuted at number 14 on the aria albums chart.   emma louise toured the album throughout october and november 2016.  singles "underflow" was released as the lead single on 7 november 2015. the music video premiered on 14 december 2015. the song placed second at the 2016 vanda & young global songwriting competition.  "talk baby talk", was released as the second second on 18 march 2016. paul mcbridge from music feeds called it "an emotion-charged last roll of the relationship dice."   "west end kids" was released as the third single on 8 july 2016. its video premiered in august 2016 which sosefina fuamoli from the music au described as "creepy, hypnotic and captivating".  "illuminate" was released in october 2016 as the fourth and final single. a video was released to promote the single. emma louise said about the song "it's about coming out of a dark time and being determined to turn yourself around for good."  a video for "i thought i was a ship" was released in july 2016 to promote the album, with auspop saying "it's clear that 'i thought i was a ship' isn't single material, but it's an utterly beautiful sub-five minute advertisement for the album."  reception    clare armstrong from the music said "supercry is the kind of thoughtful pop that has you still thinking about the songs days later."  natalia morawski from the brag said "the top half of the album is radio-ready, with its catchy hooks and big production, but the back end is where louise shines." calling the album "a pleasure to hear".  claire arnold from the au review said "supercry is exquisitely produced, articulating intimate emotions with immense vulnerability and competence. fusing hauntingly beautiful vocals with delicate keys, emma louise continues to craft blissful indie pop that is earnest and relatable."  paul mcbridge from music feeds said "supercrywill soothe your tortured soul and ease you into a state of transcendence within no time at all. by the end of a first listen it's still not clear exactly what a supercry is, but with this collection of songs, emma louise has cemented her place as one of australia's finest young songwriters."  track listing  charts  release history  references    2016 albums emma louise albums liberation records albums
united nations security council resolution 2116 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions september 2013 events
jean-baptiste-maurice quinault (9 september 1687, verdun - 30 august 1745, gien) was an 18th-century french actor and musician.  the eldest son of actor jean quinault, he made his debut at the comedie-francaise 6 may 1712 in the part of hippolyte in racine's phedre. received on 25 june, he played leading parts from 1718 only.  after he created numerous roles, he retired in 1734.  he also composed entertainments and interludes for theatre, including those of the nouveau monde, which were a great success. in 1729, he had les amours des deesses, ballet heroique on a libretto by louis fuzelier played at the academie royale de musique  the regent granted him letters of nobility.  external links    jean-baptiste-maurice quinault on data.bnf.fr  his plays and roles on cesar  18th-century french male actors french male stage actors societaires of the comedie-francaise french classical composers french male classical composers 1687 births people from verdun 1745 deaths
tccu may refer to:  transitional cell carcinoma of urothelial tract  teachers college, columbia university   thuringian customs and commerce union
joseph v. sakran is an american trauma surgeon, public health researcher, gun violence prevention advocate and activist. his career in medicine and trauma surgery was sparked after nearly being killed at the age of 17 when he was shot in the throat. he is currently an assistant professor of surgery at the johns hopkins university, director of emergency general surgery at johns hopkins hospital. he also serves as the associate chief for the division of acute care surgery.  early life and education  sakran was born in falls church, virginia to immigrant parents. he attended high school in burke, virginia. as a high school senior, at a local playground after attending a football game at lake braddock secondary school, he was struck in the neck from a stray bullet fired into a crowd. with his windpipe ruptured and carotid artery severed, he was saved by trauma surgeon dr. robert ahmed and vascular surgeon dr. dipankar mukherjee at inova fairfax hospital. dedicating himself to become a surgeon while still in recovery, he attended george mason university and gained experience as a medic and firefighter at the city of fairfax fire & rescue department.  sakran earned an undergraduate degree in biology and minor in chemistry from george mason university in 1999. he graduated with a doctor of medicine from ben-gurion university of the negev medical school for international health in 2005, and earned a master of public health from the johns hopkins bloomberg school of public health in 2003. he also holds a master of public administration from the harvard kennedy school of government. he completed his general surgery residency training at inova fairfax hospital, and then fellowship at the university of pennsylvania in traumatology, surgical critical care, and emergency general surgery.  advocacy  in 2016, sakran's activism first achieved national recognition when he founded doctors for hillary, supporting the candidacy of hillary clinton, who had made reduction of gun violence in america a central tenet of her campaign. he was recognized by secretary clinton for his work in fighting to end gun violence.  his research in public health and specifically firearm injury prevention has been recognized by the agency for healthcare research and quality (ahrq) and academy health. a recent study published in health affairs, emergency department visits for firearm-related injuries in the united states, 2006-14 was given an honorable mention as one of the 2017 outstanding article of the year award by health cost and utilization project (hcup).  on november 7, 2018 the national rifle association's comment telling doctors to "stay in their lane" resulted in response on twitter from sakran, telling them
that "as a trauma surgeon and survivor of #gunviolence i cannot believe the audacity of the @nra to make such a divisive statement. we take care of these patients every day. where are you when i'm having to tell all those families their loved one has died". the tweet went viral and resulted in a robust response from healthcare professionals. a few days later sakran established the twitter account @thisisourlane as a way to unite the medical community who care for gun violence victims.  sakran has also written numerous opinion pieces for the atlantic and cnn. he was also interviewed on npr by terry gross, the host and co-executive producer of fresh air, on november 28, 2018.  in february 2019, congressman mike thompson (d-ca), chairman of the gun violence prevention task force invited sakran as his guest to the state of the union, recognizing his commitment to ending gun violence as both a survivor and now trauma surgeon.  on february 6, 2019, congressman jerrold nadler (d-ny) and chairman of the house judiciary committee invited sakran to testify at the hearing on preventing gun violence.  in 2019, sakran was also selected for the presidential leadership scholars program, where his project focused on safe storage of firearms. in the same year, sakran was selected as one of the robert wood johnson foundation health policy fellows by the national academy of medicine. he is currently working on health-related legislative and regulatory issues.  in early 2020, sakran tweeted a photo of a flyer showing a clipart style hand holding a gun, which was a flyer left under his windshield wiper.  media  2018: featured in cnn, "victim of gun violence returns to the e.r., this time as the surgeon" 2018: featured in msnbc, "dr. joseph sakran on gun violence: we are facing a public health crisis" 2018: featured in cnn town hall with chris cuomo, "armas de fuego: ¿enfrenta estados unidos una crisis de salud publica?" 2018: "cnn interview dr. joseph sakran; gun violence victim responses to nra" 2019: house judiciary testimony 2019: story in the public square 2019: featured in the atlantic, "why doctors are taking on the nra"  selected publications  references  external links  official profile  people from fairfax, virginia 21st-century american physicians living people george mason university alumni ben-gurion university of the negev alumni gun control advocates harvard kennedy
school alumni johns hopkins university alumni american firefighters 1977 births
tafwid () is an arabic term meaning "relegation" or "delegation", with uses in theology and law.  in theology   in islamic theology, tafwid (or tafwid al-amr li-llah, relegation of matters to god) is a doctrine according to which the meanings of the ambiguous verses of the qur'an should be consigned to god alone. those who follow this school do not utilize metaphorical interpretation, rather they leave problematic texts uninterpreted, believing that the reality of their meaning should be left to the one who said them, implying their unknowability.	  the doctrine of tafwid, which was held by a number of classical scholars such as al-ghazali and whose origin they attributed to the salaf (exemplary early muslims), states that the quranic expressions such as 'god's hands' or 'face' do not carry the literal meanings like their counterparts in human beings. rather they are attributes or qualities of god and not organs like the face or hands of human beings. other classical figures who subscribed to this doctrine were ibn qudamah, suyuti, ahmad ibn hanbal and ibn kathir. the latter discusses tafwid as follows:people have said a great deal on this topic and this is not the place to expound on what they have said. on this matter, we follow the early muslims (salaf): malik, awza'i, thawri, layth ibn sa'd, shafi'i, ahmad ibn hanbal, ishaq ibn rahwayh, and others among the imams of the muslims, both ancient and modern that is, to let (the verse in question) pass as it has come, without saying how it is meant (min ghayr takyif), without likening it to created things (wa la tashbih), and without nullifying it (wa la ta'til): the literal meaning (zahir) that occurs to the minds of anthropomorphists (al-mushabbihin) is negated of allah, for nothing from his creation resembles him: "there is nothing whatsoever like unto him, and he is the all-hearing, the all-seeing" (qur'an 42:11)  the precise nature of tafwid has been subject to debate among muslim scholars. the followers of ibn taymiyya, including contemporary salafis, hold that only the modality of the attributes should be consigned to god (tafwid al-
kayfiyya), while the literal sense of the attributes should be accepted according to their lexical meaning in the arabic language. thus they argue that the salaf accepted that god has a hand, because the meaning of the word "hand" (yad) was known, but without assuming that god's hand is comparable to a human hand, or asking how or why that is. in contrast, anti-salafi scholars reject this distinction and accept tafwid without qualification.  divorce  in islamic personal status law, tafwid refers to a sub-type of divorce (talaq al-tafwid or tafwid al-talaq) in which the power of talaq (the type of divorce normally initiated by the husband) is delegated to the wife. this delegation can be made at the time of drawing up the marriage contract or during the marriage, with or without conditions. classical jurists differed as to the validity of different forms of delegation. most modern muslim-majority countries permit this type of divorce in some form.  other uses  the term tafwid has also been used in law with various other meanings related to delegation of power, authorization of an act, or issuance of a warrant for arrest.  references   islamic terminology islamic theology allah conceptions of god arabic words and phrases in sharia islamic jurisprudence divorce law divorce in islam
obed ngaite (born 9 july 1967) is a former cyclist from the central african republic. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people central african republic male cyclists olympic cyclists of the central african republic cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
buena vista is a plantation with a historic mansion located about  southeast of stonewall, louisiana, u.s.. it was built in 1859 for boykin witherspoon by m. robbins.  the house has been listed on the national register of historic places on january 19, 1989.  see also national register of historic places listings in desoto parish, louisiana  references  houses on the national register of historic places in louisiana greek revival architecture in louisiana gothic revival architecture in louisiana houses completed in 1859 buildings and structures in desoto parish, louisiana plantations in louisiana
tony's chocolonely is a dutch confectionery company founded in 2005 which produces and sells chocolate. in 2018, the company's market share in the netherlands was 18 percent, making it one of the country's largest chocolate manufacturers.  history  in 2002, dutch television producer and journalist teun van de keuken began producing programmes about the abuses within the cocoa industry on his show keuringsdienst van waarde after discovering that almost none of the chocolate produced at the time was slave-free. along with this, he also requested to be prosecuted for knowingly purchasing an illegally manufactured product, although the prosecutors chose not to do so.  after three years of unsuccessful attempts to change the industry through investigative efforts, van de keuken decided to start producing chocolate bars himself. the product quickly became a success, selling 20 thousand bars in a span of two days.  in 2007, after the company was sued by a dutch importer of swiss chocolates, a court in amsterdam ruled that there was sufficient evidence that the company's products were manufactured without the help of slaves. in the same year, the dutch media authority (comissariaat voor de media) found that the excessive advertising tony's chocolonely received in seven shows of keuringsdienst van waarde generated the company "more than normal profits", and fined the broadcaster of the programmes 20 thousand euros.  when a hazelnut milk chocolate bar was added to the lineup in 2010, dutch tv show een vandaag reported that 9-year-old children participated in the turkish hazelnut harvest. the company responded by immediately switching to a local hazelnut supplier from the netherlands. the same year, the market-share of the brand exceeded 4.5 percent in the netherlands.  in 2011, henk jan beltman became a majority shareholder and moved the company to a new location near westergasfabriek.  tony's cocoa mass has been fully traceable since 2013, and the cocoa butter since 2016.  with production steadily increasing, the company decided in 2015 to expand their business to the united states, opening their first international office in portland, oregon.  by the end of 2018, in addition to its home country of the netherlands, tony's chocolonely was also on sale in belgium, denmark, finland, germany, sweden, and the united states. in the netherlands its market share was 19% in 2018, with which it surpassed multinationals verkade, mars and nestle.  in 2019, tony's launched their chocolate bars in the united
kingdom, with sainsbury's, waitrose, ocado, mega image and whole foods being some of the first stores to stock their products.  the chocolate bar was made available in ireland from 2019 in a limited capacity. , it has become more widely available in leading food stores such as supervalu.  in 2021, the company received backlash after the american organisation slave free chocolate removed tony's from their list of ethical chocolate companies. while there were no confirmed instances of child labour within the supply chain of tony's, their collaboration with another chocolate manufacturer, barry callebaut resulted in the removal due to issues of child labour within the supply chain of barry callebaut's own products.  products  the number of available bar flavors varies by country and distribution channel. for example, over a dozen flavors are available in the netherlands. the chocolate bars are unevenly divided, symbolizing the inequal distribution of incomes in the chocolate industry.  in the united states, the available flavors of the chocolate bars are (in order of introduction):   milk chocolate 32%  extra dark chocolate 70%  milk caramel sea salt 32%  dark almond sea salt 51%  dark milk pretzel toffee 42%  dark pecan coconut 51%  milk hazelnut 32%  milk honey almond nougat 32%  white raspberry popping candy 28%  while types of products vary in a similar fashion to flavor count, most regions have:   large bars (180 grams)  small bars (50 grams)  tiny tony's (9 grams)  seasonal items (including holiday bars and chocolate easter eggs)  items unavailable outside of europe include:   personalized chocolate bars  chocolate milk  chocolate letters  the company introduces three new chocolate bar flavors each year between october and december. the most popular of the three limited editions is then added to the exclusive collection, and sometimes the permanent collection. the company also produces limited edition 'relay' bars for the supermarket chain albert heijn, with exclusive flavors corresponding to winter and summer tastes. these flavors rotate every six months. some bars have entered the permanent collection from there.  awards   in 2020, the company was named the most sustainable brand in the netherlands for the third time by the sustainable brand index. however, this award does not measure brands' actual sustainability, rather, it is based on consumers' perceptions of it.  references  external links  products introduced in 2005 dutch chocolate companies contemporary slavery in africa benefit corporations certified b corporations in the food & beverage industry
the gens laceria was a minor plebeian family at rome.  it is known primarily from gaius lacerius, one of the tribunes of the plebs in 401 bc.  a few other lacerii are known from inscriptions.  origin the nome lacerius appears to be derived from the cognomen lacer, meaning "torn, mangled", suggesting that its original bearer was deformed or withered in some way, either by birth or injury.  members  gaius lacerius, tribune of the plebs in 401 bc.  he and marcus acutius were co-opted by three of their colleagues, apparently through of the patricians, and in violation of the lex trebonia.  quintus lacerius, a name inscribed on a tablet found in a columbarium at rome, and taken to the library at forum cornelii.  quintus lacerius q. l?, a name inscribed on a tablet found in a columbarium on the banks of the tiber, and now stored at the baths of diocletian.  quintus lacerius, the former master of quintus lacerius dionysius and laceria prima.  quintus lacerius q. l. dionysius, freedman of quintus lacerius.  commemorated on a second century marble funerary tablet found at rome between the via salaria and the via pinciana.  laceria q. l. prima, freedwoman of quintus lacerius.  named on the same funerary tablet with quintus lacerius dionysius.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  dionysius of halicarnassus, romaike archaiologia.  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated "cil"), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  john c. traupman, the new college latin & english dictionary, bantam books, new york (1995).  roman gentes
the 2016 copa sudamericana final stages were scheduled to be played from 20 september to 7 december 2016. a total of 16 teams competed in the final stages to decide the champions of the 2016 copa sudamericana.  qualified teams  the 15 winners of the second stage (eight from winners of the first stage, four from brazil, three from argentina) and the defending champions qualified for the final stages.  seeding  the qualified teams were seeded in the final stages according to the draw of the tournament, with each team assigned a "seed" 1-16 by draw.  format  in the final stages, the 16 teams played a single-elimination tournament, with the following rules: each tie was played on a home-and-away two-legged basis, with the higher-seeded team hosting the second leg (regulations article 3.2). in the round of 16, quarterfinals, and semifinals, if tied on aggregate, the away goals rule would be used. if still tied, extra time would not be played, and the penalty shoot-out would be used to determine the winner (regulations article 5.1). in the finals, if tied on aggregate, the away goals rule would not be used, and 30 minutes of extra time would be played. if still tied after extra time, the penalty shoot-out would be used to determine the winner (regulations article 5.2).  conmebol confirmed that the bracket would remain the same as the draw of the tournament regardless of the nationality of the semifinalists. in previous seasons, if there were two semifinalists from the same association, they had to play each other.  bracket the bracket of the final stages was determined by the seeding as follows: round of 16: match a: seed 1 vs. seed 16 match b: seed 2 vs. seed 15 match c: seed 3 vs. seed 14 match d: seed 4 vs. seed 13 match e: seed 5 vs. seed 12 match f: seed 6 vs. seed 11 match g: seed 7 vs. seed 10 match h: seed 8 vs. seed 9 quarterfinals: match s1: winner a vs. winner h match s2: winner b vs. winner g match s3: winner c vs. winner f match s4: winner d vs. winner e semifinals: match f1: winner s1 vs. winner s4 match f2: winner s2 vs. winner s3 finals: winner f1 vs. winner f2  round of 16 the first legs were played on 20-22 september, and
the second legs were played on 27-29 september 2016.  |}  match a  tied 3-3 on aggregate, independiente medellin won on away goals and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s1).  match b  san lorenzo won 4-1 on aggregate and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s2).  match c  tied 0-0 on aggregate, chapecoense won on penalties and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s3).  match d  atletico nacional won 3-1 on aggregate and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s4).  match e  tied 3-3 on aggregate, coritiba won on penalties and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s4).  match f  tied 0-0 on aggregate, junior won on penalties and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s3).  match g  tied 2-2 on aggregate, palestino won on away goals and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s2).  match h  cerro porteno won 4-3 on aggregate and advanced to the quarterfinals (match s1).  quarterfinals the first legs were played on 18-20 october, and the second legs were played on 25-27 october 2016.  |}  match s1  cerro porteno won 2-0 on aggregate and advanced to the semifinals (match f1).  match s2  san lorenzo won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the semifinals (match f2).  match s3  chapecoense won 3-1 on aggregate and advanced to the semifinals (match f2).  match s4  atletico nacional won 4-2 on aggregate and advanced to the semifinals (match f1).  semifinals the first legs were played on 1-2 november, and the second legs were played on 23-24 november 2016.  |}  match f1  tied 1-1 on aggregate, atletico nacional won on away goals and advanced to the finals.  match f2  tied 1-1 on aggregate, chapecoense won on away goals and advanced to the finals.  finals  the first leg was scheduled to be played on 30 november, and the second leg was scheduled to be played on 7 december 2016.  the finals were suspended on 29 november following the crash of lamia flight 2933. conmebol awarded the title to chapecoense on 5 december 2016.  |}  references  external links copa sudamericana 2016, conmebol.com   2
waffle street is a 2015 american drama/comedy film directed by eshom nelms and ian nelms and starring danny glover and james lafferty. it is a film adaptation of james adams' memoir of the same name, published by sourced media books in 2010. the riches-to-rags story follows adams' journey of self-discovery and redemption after losing his job as vice president of a multi-billion dollar hedge fund and finding work as a server at a local 24-hour diner.  waffle street was filmed in lehi, utah in 2014, with most of the scenes being filmed in a local diner called one man band. it was named winner of best narrative feature at the 2015 hollywood film festival, the audience award best feature at the 2015 red rock film festival, and the andretta carpe diem award for best film at the 2015 woodstock film festival. it initially released on september 24, 2015.  plot  in the aftermath of the 2008 market crash, james "jimmy" adams (james lafferty) gets laid off from his wall street hedge fund manager job. feeling a sense of guilt for his role in the financial crisis, adams decides to find a more honest and gratifying job than his previous profession.  after several unsuccessful efforts applying to a variety of blue-collar jobs, adams is hired as a graveyard shift server at papa's chicken and waffles, a local 24-hour diner chain (the restaurant was renamed in new versions of the book and in the film).  though many of his coworkers are ex-convicts, he begins to find unlikely friendships, especially with short-order cook edward collins (danny glover). collins becomes somewhat of a mentor for adams, teaching him valuable life lessons about hard work and finance from a fresh perspective. adams soon sets his sights on owning the papa's franchise and works relentlessly to meet the 1000-hour minimum required. tensions build between adams and his wife, becky (julie gonzalo), as he downgrades their house and cars to finance his goal.   overall, his time working at papa's offers adams new insights both professionally and personally. after six months at papa's chicken and waffles, adams returns to the finance industry, this time focusing on financial planning and wealth management. he is seen assisting his former papa's colleagues with financial planning and business start-up advice.  cast  danny glover as edward collins james lafferty as james "jimmy" adams julie gonzalo as becky adams dale dickey as crazy kathy
adam johnson as matthew linslow marshall bell as miles drake iii ernie lively as wright adams yolanda wood as jaqui white aubrey reynolds as mary lynn parks michelle lang as nancy linslow  awards and selections  winner best narrative feature, hollywood film festival 2015 winner audience award best feature, red rock film festival 2015 winner andretta carpe diem award, woodstock film festival 2015 winner screenwriter award, coronado island film festival 2016 official selection, closing night film, tallgrass film festival 2015 official selection, people's choice competition biff year 'round 2015 official selection, cucalorus film festival 2015 official selection, macau international movie festival 2015 official selection, heartland film festival 2015 official selection, on location: memphis film festival 2015 official selection, ojai film festival 2015 official selection, beloit international film festival 2016  references  external links
eugene pereire (1 october 1831 - 	21 march 1908) was a french financier and politician of sephardic jewish origin. the son of isaac pereire of the prominent pereire brothers, he founded banque transatlantique in 1881.  in 1857, pereire married juliette fould of the fould family. they had two daughters:  alice pereire (1858-1931), married to salomon halfon, president of banque transatlantique 1909-23  marie pereire (1860-1936), married to jules halphen, son of eugene halphen of the halphen family  pereire was a member of parliament for the department tarn from 1863 to 1869.  references   1831 births 1908 deaths french financiers 19th-century french sephardi jews pereire family fould family
eduard kalantaryan (born 25 may 1980) works as a sports commentator in armenia tv and atv.  biography  in childhood eduard had uneasy character, but his love towards sport has been discovered since childhood. his father has had great influence on it, as he is a great fan of sport. and that was of the reasons why eduard played tennis for 16 years. after returning from the army, he decided not to continue his career, as he didn't see any future in it. then one of his friends made a suggestion to him, to work in the news department of public television.  from 2004 to 2013 he worked in public television as an editor-commentator in the departmend of sport. he has commented olympic games, football and other competitions from different kinds of sports. since 2013 he has been working in armenia and atv tv stations as a sports commentator.  in atv, he comments the matches of la liga. in armenia tv, he works as a sports commentator in the program (ժամը), as well as he is the founder of the program "live football": he also comments uefa champions league matches in armenia tv and premium armenia. from 10 june - 10 july 2016, eduard kalantaryan commented euro-2016 matches in armenian public television.  personal life  in 1996 he finished number 121 secondary school, situated in yerevan. from 1997 to 2001 he studied in the armenian state institute of physical culture and received the qualification of the coach-pedagogue. in his opinion, in his relationships with his elder sister has helped him a lot, as he was the youngest in the family. in the family eduard has been the youngest child. in 2007 he married to narine zakharyan. he has two children, natalie who was born on 12 august 2008, and david, who was born on 24 september 2015.  references  1980 births living people
frank clayton may refer to:  people frank clayton (otago cricketer) (1866-1944), new zealand cricketer frank clayton (canterbury cricketer) (1866-1941), new zealand cricketer frank clayton (american football) in 1955 nfl draft  fictional characters frank clayton (emmerdale), fictional character from the british soap opera emmerdale frank clayton, character in saratoga (film) frank clayton, character in pleasures of the rich  see also francis clayton (disambiguation)
the 1995 edition of the women's handball tournament of the african games was the 4th, organized by the african handball confederation and played under the auspices of the international handball federation, the handball sport governing body. the tournament was held, in harare, zimbabwe, contested by 7 national teams and won by angola.  incident with the egyptian team an egyptian player was accused of being a man and therefore ordered to undergo some tests. in the aftermath, the organization had to apologize to her and her family.  draw  preliminary round  knockout stage championship bracket  final ranking  awards  references  external links  official website  handball at the 1995 all-africa games women's handball in zimbabwe 1995 in women's handball handball at the african games
percival "percy" hubert hickey (28 april 1899 - 21 december 1943) was a new zealand rugby union player who represented the all blacks in 1922. his position of choice was wing three-quarter.  career   hickey was born in rahotu in 1899. he made the  provincial side in 1919.  he was selected for the north against south island match in 1922. he scored a try. he was then selected for the national side on their tour of new south wales.  hickey played in two of the possible five matches. he played both of these games out of his regular position. in his second match against new south wales, hickey was judged to have committed an obstruction offence and conceded a penalty try. this was considered a part of the 14-8 defeat.  hickey did not again play for taranaki nor be chosen for the all blacks.  however, in 1925 hickey moved down to wellington and joined the poneke club. he made the  provincial team that same year.  he later moved further south to dunedin and then double bay, australia.  personal  hickey's wife's name was winnifred. she worked as a barman in wellington.  references   1899 births 1943 deaths new zealand international rugby union players new zealand rugby union players rugby union players from taranaki
dreams in flower (1901) was the only collection of poems by australian poet and author louise mack. it was released in hardback by bulletin publishers in 1901.  the original collection includes 26 poems by the author that are reprinted from various sources. only 550 copies of the book were printed, of which 500 were offered for sale.  contents   "of this city"  "on the wharf"  "the lagoon at manly"  "illusion"  "away beyond the belt of blue"  "the song of the dead"  "vows"  "of a wild white bird"  "little golden hair"  "on wairee hill"  "an easter song"  "leaf music"  "i take my life into my hands"  "i dreamed of italy"  "in the attic"  "oh, to begin again!"  "song of black nights"  "horse o' gold"  "bury it deep"  "after parting"  "to sydney"  "land i love!"  "chopin, chopin, ah, wanderer"  "as long as any may"  "no place for dreamers"  "before exile"  critical reception  a reviewer in the queenslander  noted that "her poetry, so far as this booklet is concerned, is almost purely personal, her own impressions scored in a minor key, with the dominant note always that of the aching pain of unfulfilled dreams and ideals. she is aworshipper of nature, and she fits the moods of the great earth-mother to her own thoughts - and they are sad ones."  a short review in the australian town and country journal stated that the poems "amply demonstrate the possession by her of true poetic feeling... many of these verses possess that ring only to be found in such as are evidently part of a writer's life, and therefore approach most closely the art-in-itself."  see also   the full text of the collection is available from the harvard university library  1901 in poetry  1901 in australian literature  references  australian poetry collections 1901 poetry books
sir hugh steuart gladstone of capenoch  frse fsa fzs mbou dl ll (1877-1949) was a scottish ornithologist and landowner. he served as lord lieutenant of dumfries 1946 to 1949.  life  he was born on 30 april 1877 the son of samuel steuart gladstone of capenoch and his wife sophia musgrave. he lived his life at capenoch house in penpont in dumfriesshire a major country house designed by david bryce. he was sent to eton college and then studied at cambridge university graduating ma.  in the  second boer war (1900-1902) he served in the kings own scottish borderers in south africa as a lieutenant winning two campaign medals and five clasps.  on return to britain he served as a county councillor 1904 to 1946. he served numerous senior roles in the dumfries council. in 1909 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were james cossar ewart, henry harvey littlejohn, james geikie and cargill gilston knott.  in the first world war he rejoined the kosb as a captain and was mentioned in dispatches. he later moved to the general staff in the war office in london serving administrative functions.  in 1920 he became chairman of the wild birds advisory (scotland) committee, serving this role until death.  in 1933 he was one of eleven people involved in the appeal that led to the foundation of the british trust for ornithology (bto), an organisation for the study of birds in the british isles.  he was knighted in 1941.  he died at capenoch house on 5 april 1949.  publications  birds of dumfriesshire (1910)  family  he married cecil emily chetwynd-talbot in january 1907. they had one daughter, jean cecil gladstone (who married roderick barclay), and two sons, john gladstone of capenoch (his heir) and david steaurt gladstone (an architect).  artistic recognition  his portrait by herbert james gunn is held by dumfries museum.  notes  references  external links    1877 births 1949 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh lord-lieutenants of dumfries british ornithologists scottish landowners scottish non-fiction writers
titan winged aerobot (twa) is a new aerobot exploration vehicle (under creation) to enter the surface of saturn's largest moon titan. nasa has given this contract to global aerospace corporation and northrop grumman collectively on july 6, 2016. under the contract of 2016 nasa small business innovation research, both the teams will develop the twa concept and produce a proof of concept prototype for earth-based testing.  titan winged aerobot features will be its ultra-low power requirement and extended vertical range, both of which is inspired by northrop grumman's titan lifting entry atmosphere flight (t-leaf) platform. titan's atmosphere is denser than earth's atmosphere, with the atmospheric pressure of 1.45 atm. its atmosphere contains 98.4% nitrogen with remaining 1.6% is composed of 1.4% methane and 0.1-0.2% hydrogen. titan's cold and harsh environment can cause problems to any lighter-than-air exploration. twa will be designed in the way that it can overcome those challenges.  design  twa is the vehicle with 3-d directional control so that it can complete its objectives of researching titan's environment, while using minimal power from a single radioisotope power source. constantly moving in an atmosphere will facilitate long lived flight at low altitudes and target delivery to the surface.  titan is the only moon with an atmosphere, and its atmosphere is the only known nitrogen-rich atmosphere in the solar system. the observations from voyager and cassini-huygens shows that its atmosphere is denser than earth with the atmospheric pressure of 1.45 atm . it is 1.9 times as massive as earth overall.  references  proposed nasa space probes missions to saturn titan (moon)
elok (russian and tajik: элок) is a village in fayzobod district, districts of republican subordination, tajikistan. at the 2010 census, its population was 2049, in 524 families.  references   populated places in districts of republican subordination
the lloyd 40.15 was an experimental triplane fighter that was designed and built in the austro-hungarian empire during world war i.  specifications (lloyd 40.15)  references  external links world war one aviation: austrian experimental aircraft  1910s austro-hungarian fighter aircraft aircraft first flown in 1917
david spears (born 21 december 1963) is a canadian former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1963 births living people canadian male cyclists olympic cyclists of canada cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from greater sudbury commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for canada cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
mario rui sousa e silva (born 27 march 1925), known as mario rui, is a retired portuguese footballer who played as a forward.  he is most known for his five-year spell at benfica, where he scored 24 goals in 59 games, winning the taca de portugal in 1943-44 and the primeira liga in 1944-45.  career mario rui arrived at benfica at age 16 to play for their youth team. after three years there, on 14 may 1944, he made his debut for the first team in a cup match against academica. he played again a week later, helping benfica qualify for the cup final, which he missed.  the following year, he played eight games and scored five goals, being part of an offensive line that included julinho, espirito santo, rogerio pipi and arsenio and was dubbed the os cinco diabos vermelhos (five red devils). mario rui's breakthrough happened in 1945-46, when he scored 15 goals in 28 matches, being a vital part of the first team that finished second to belenenses in the league. however, the appearance of vitor baptista, corona and alfredo melao in the following seasons, removed him of the first team and he became a fringe player.  mario rui played for belenenses from 1950 to 1952, amassing 40 games and nine goals, which helped him return to benfica in 1952, where he was once again, a rarely used player, with two games in two seasons. after benfica, he played for oriental de lisboa until 1956  honours benfica primeira liga: 1944-45 taca de portugal:  1943-44  references general    specific  1925 births possibly living people portuguese footballers association football forwards primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers c.f. os belenenses players clube oriental de lisboa players
chrysogorgia is a genus of soft corals in the family chrysogorgiidae.  species   chrysogorgia abludo pante & watling, 2011    chrysogorgia acanthella (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia admete bayer & stefani, 1988    chrysogorgia agassizii (verrill, 1883)    chrysogorgia anastomosans versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia antarctica cairns, 2002    chrysogorgia arborescens nutting, 1908    chrysogorgia artospira pante & watling, 2011    chrysogorgia averta pante & watling, 2011    chrysogorgia axillaris (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia bracteata bayer & stefani, 1988    chrysogorgia calypso bayer & stefani, 1988    chrysogorgia campanula madsen, 1944    chrysogorgia cavea kinoshita, 1913    chrysogorgia chryseis bayer & stefani, 1988    chrysogorgia comans kinoshita, 1913    chrysogorgia constricta hiles, 1899    chrysogorgia cupressa (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia curvata versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia debilis kukenthal, 1908    chrysogorgia delicata nutting, 1908    chrysogorgia desbonni duchassaing & michelotti, 1864    chrysogorgia dichotoma thomson & henderson, 1906    chrysogorgia dispersa kukenthal, 1908    chrysogorgia electra bayer & stefani, 1988    chrysogorgia elegans (verrill, 1883)    chrysogorgia excavata kukenthal, 1908    chrysogorgia expansa (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia fewkesii verrill, 1883    chrysogorgia flavescens nutting, 1908    chrysogorgia flexilis (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia fruticosa (studer, 1894)    chrysogorgia geniculata (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia herdendorfi cairns, 2001    chrysogorgia indica thomson & henderson, 1906    chrysogorgia intermedia versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia irregularis thomson & henderson, 1906    chrysogorgia japonica (wright & studer, 1889)    chrysogorgia laevorsa cairns, 2018    chrysogorgia lata versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia midas cairns, 2018    chrysogorgia minuta kinoshita, 1913    chrysogorgia mixta versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia multiflora deichmann, 1936    chrysogorgia octagonos versluys, 1902    chrysogorgia okinosensis kinoshita, 1913    chrysogorgia orientalis versluys, 1902   chrysogorgia papillosa kinoshita, 1913 chrysogorgia pellucida kukenthal, 1908 chrysogorgia pendula versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia pentasticha versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia pusilla versluys
, 1902 chrysogorgia pyramidalis kukenthal, 1908 chrysogorgia quadruplex thomson, 1927 chrysogorgia ramosa versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia rigida versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia rotunda kinoshita, 1913 chrysogorgia scintillans bayer & stefani, 1988 chrysogorgia sibogae versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia sphaerica aurivillius, 1931 chrysogorgia spiculosa (verrill, 1883) chrysogorgia squamata (verrill, 1883) chrysogorgia stellata nutting, 1908 chrysogorgia tetrasticha versluys, 1902 chrysogorgia thyrsiformis deichmann, 1936 chrysogorgia tricaulis pante & watling, 2011 chrysogorgia tuberculata cordeiro, castro & perez, 2015 chrysogorgia upsilonia cordeiro, castro & perez, 2015 chrysogorgia versluysi kinoshita, 1913  references    van ofwegen, l.; grasshoff, m.; van der land, j. (2001). octocorallia (excl. pennatulacea), in: costello, m.j. et al. (ed.) (2001). european register of marine species: a check-list of the marine species in europe and a bibliography of guides to their identification. collection patrimoines naturels, 50: pp. 104-105  external links        chrysogorgia duchassaing & michelotti, 1864 at world register of marine species  chrysogorgiidae octocorallia genera
outreach offshore ltd is a supplier of hydraulic cranes, lifting and access equipment. the company was founded in 1990 and its headquarters are in falkirk, scotland. formally a division of outreach ltd.   in may 2018 outreach ltd disbanded and outreach offshore ltd was created. the outreach truck element of the business was acquired by t h white ltd as part of its lorry cranes division, which was rebranded as palfinger uk.  history  formed in 1990 from the engineering division of james jones & sons in larbert, outreach ltd continued the partnership with palfinger which started in 1976. it is the scottish supplier for palfinger and the uk supplier for palfinger epsilon.  investment and growth  outreach access was launched in 2011, offering a range of truck, van, specialist mounted access platforms, scissors and booms.  outreach ltd, on 31 july 2014, acquired norfolk based tech safe systems ltd specialists in the design, engineering and manufacture of lars, control cabins and workshops for rovs, used most commonly in deep water industries such as oil and gas and offshore renewables.  sectors  outreach ltd operates both nationally and, for some of its products, internationally. it is involved in a wide range of industry sectors such as:   offshore oil and gas  marine  renewable energy  construction  transport and distribution  timber  waste management and recycling  emergency services  local authorities and roads  general industrial  products  outreach ltd supplies and installs a range of products manufactured by palfinger and palfinger marine. outreach ltd are the scottish suppliers of the palfinger products including:  knuckle-boom cranes  epsilon timber and recycling cranes  hook and skip loaders  marine cranes  offshore cranes  davit systems  boats outreach ltd is a dealer and importer for alucar oy timber bunks and superstructures with whom it has worked for 30 years.  training  outreach ltd provide training courses including:  international powered access federation (ipaf)  association of lorry loader manufacturer's and importers training (allmi)  prefabricated access suppliers and manufacturers association training (pasma)  references   manufacturing companies of scotland companies established in 1990 companies based in falkirk (council area)
charge of the uhlans is a music score for piano composed by carl bohm. the song was published around 1905 by eclipse pub. co., in philadelphia, pennsylvania.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum and library as well as temple university's library.  references   1905 compositions 1905 songs
moods of crime (hindi: मडस ऑफ करइम) is a 2016 hindi crime thriller featuring ayaz ahmed, anima pagare and upekha jain. directed, edited and produced by sunil shah, it was released on 5 august 2016.  synopsis the story is based on the intricacies of the phenomenal capabilities of a human mind. the plot begins with an experiment on criminal psychology and intensifies as this experiment triggers a series of unprecedented crimes which are seemingly motiveless.   ayaz ahmed as zubin modi  anima pagare as nivedita bhattacharya  uppekha jain as pooja desai  hemant dedhia   partho das  nilima kadhe  shyamal ganguly  references   movie review   director's interview  external links  https://www.imdb.com/title/tt4839000/  2016 films indian films hindi-language films indian crime thriller films 2016 crime thriller films
i've got the world on a string is a 1960 album by louis armstrong, arranged by russell garcia.  the album was recorded on the same day as armstrong's 1958 album louis under the stars; the previous day he had finished recording ella and louis again with ella fitzgerald.  in 1999 i've got the world on a string was reissued with louis under the stars with bonus material and outtakes.  reception  billboard magazine reviewed the album in their march 14, 1960 issue and wrote that "satchmo plays it soft and romantic on this listenable collection of standards...prime jockey wax".  richard s. ginell reviewed the reissue of the album for allmusic and wrote that these "once-overlooked albums...are finally being appreciated as prime samplings from the autumn of armstrong's recording career" and that "even in the pressure cooker of a marathon session, even when confronted with standards not often associated with him, armstrong finds the essence of each tune, bending and projecting them with his patented joie de vivre and gravel-voiced warmth every time". ginell described armstrong's trumpet playing as "pithy, soulful, [and] belonging to no one else" and praised arranger russell garcia's arrangements for big band or strings as "...among the most atmospheric ever accorded to armstrong. in particular, "when your lover is gone" is sublime, with its signature riff of blase, sighing horns and responding, rising string tremolos, and garcia frames "body and soul" with a lovely string chart whose penultimate stroke is a perfectly placed blue note".  track listing   "when your lover has gone" (einar aaron swan) - 4:42  "you're the top" (cole porter) - 2:33  "you turned the tables on me" (louis alter, sidney mitchell) - 2:38	  "don't get around much anymore" (duke ellington, bob russell) - 3:41  "little girl blue" (richard rodgers, lorenz hart) - 5:45	  "nobody knows the trouble i've seen" (traditional) - 4:56  "we'll be together again" (carl t. fischer) - 4:07  "i've got the world on a string" (harold arlen, ted koehler) - 2:52  "do nothing 'til you hear from me" (ellington, russell) - 4:16  "i gotta right to sing the blues" (arlen, ko
ehler) - 4:05  personnel  louis armstrong - trumpet russell garcia - arranger, conductor norman granz - producer john altoon - cover art  references  1960 albums albums arranged by russell garcia (composer) albums produced by norman granz albums recorded at capitol studios louis armstrong albums verve records albums
professor johannes jacobus "jan" smith (5 october 1883 − 18 june 1949) was a leading figure in the afrikaans language movement and the compiler of the first standard afrikaans dictionary. he was an important member of the committee which first attempted to standardize afrikaans spelling, and was made the founding editor of die huisgenoot, the family magazine of the nasionale pers, in which early afrikaans literature was discussed. he was a professor of languages at stellenbosch university from 1919 until his retirement in 1945. his nephew was the politician, judge and afrikaans writer henry allan fagan.  references  linguists from south africa stellenbosch university faculty 1883 births 1949 deaths 20th-century linguists
thomas cole (born 28 may 1997) is an australian rules footballer playing for the west coast eagles in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the west coast eagles with their second selection and thirty-sixth overall in the 2015 national draft. he made his debut in the seventy-seven point win against  in round 10, 2016 at domain stadium. in round 19, 2018, cole was nominated for the afl rising star after recording 18 disposals, 11 intercept possessions and 5 rebound 50s in a 40 point loss to north melbourne.  statistics statistics are correct to the end of round 7, 2019  |- style="background-color: #eaeaea" ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2016 |style="text-align:center;"| | 28 || 2 || 0 || 0 || 13 || 13 || 26 || 8 || 2 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 6.5 || 6.5 || 13.0 || 4.0 || 1.0 |- ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2017 |style="text-align:center;"| | 28 || 4 || 0 || 0 || 17 || 16 || 33 || 7 || 10 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 4.3 || 4.0 || 83 || 1.8 || 2.5 |- style="background:#eaeaea;" |style="text-align:center;background:#afe6ba;"|2018† |style="text-align:center;"| | 28 || 21 || 0 || 1 || 151 || 124 || 275 || 73 || 51 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 7.2 || 5.9 || 13.1 || 3.5 || 2.4 |- ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2019 |style="text-align:center;"| | 28 || 7 || 0 || 0 || 54 || 31 || 85 || 31 || 23 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 7.7 || 4.4 || 12.1 || 4.4 || 3.3 |- class="sortbottom" ! colspan=3| career ! 34 !! 0 !! 1 !! 235 !! 184 !! 419 !! 119 !! 86 !! 0.0 !! 0.0 !! 6.9 !! 5.4 !! 12.3 !! 3.5 !! 2.5 |}  references  external links  1997 births living people west coast eagles players west coast eagles premiership players australian rules footballers from victoria (australia) bendigo pioneers players west coast
eagles (wafl) players east perth football club players one-time vfl/afl premiership players
sven martin skagestad (born 13 january 1995) is a norwegian athlete specialising in the discus throw. he won the bronze medal at the 2014 world junior championships.  his personal best in the event is 65.20	metres set in wiesbaden in 2016.  international competitions  references  1995 births living people norwegian male discus throwers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of norway place of birth missing (living people) world athletics championships athletes for norway
kusala rajendran is an indian seismologist and currently a professor at the centre for earth sciences, indian institute of science, bengaluru, india. she prefers to call herself an earth scientist. she has primarily worked on earthquakes and their source mechanisms. she has worked extensively on earthquake patterns in india and is considered to be one of the pioneers in this field.  research fields  rajendran has been working in the following areas:  seismotectonics, crustal processes  role of water in faulting process  paleoseismology, earthquake recurrence and active tectonics  tsunami recurrence and hazard evaluation  education and career  rajendran has completed her master of technology in the field of applied geophysics from the indian institute of technology, roorkee in 1979. she graduated from university of south carolina, usa with a doctor of philosophy in seismology in the year 1992. owing to the growing demand for well qualified seismologists at the time, she returned to india after completing her phd. additionally, as her son had become old enough then, she could travel around the world studying earthquakes with greater ease . she has worked extensively in gujarat, maharasthra and the himalayas. she believes that india is a great potential earth science destination, considering that the himalayas constitute of one of the most active plate collision boundary in the world. she has published around forty research papers in collaboration with her husband c.p. rajendran, a reputed indian geologist, over the years. she has led several projects as the principal investigator. most of her projects are funded by the seismicity program of the ministry of earth sciences (moes) or the indian national centre for ocean information services (incois).  rajendran has been a professor at the center for earth sciences, iisc bengaluru, india since 2007. she develops her own teaching philosophy and methodology as there are hardly any prescribed textbooks in geophysics for undergraduates. they also work on earthquake recurrence, tsunami recurrence and hazard evaluations. her work combines field observations and models developed in the lab. for field visits, she usually travels in groups to earthquake prone areas and places that have recently experienced an earthquake.  family and personal life  rajendran grew up in a conservative family where the children were usually married off after a bachelor's degree. the only reason the young kusala, fresh out of her chemistry degree, was sent all the way from trivandrum, kerala, to roorkee, then-uttar pradesh, was that her sister was working there. though she was sent there to
do her masters in chemistry, a chance encounter with a professor at the iit-roorkee campus led kusala to the field of science that she would come to master over the next thirty years, geophysics. kusala is married to the renowned indian geologist c.p. rajendran, son of famed malayalam writer pavanan. her son rahul pavanan is married to the tamil actress abhirami.  awards   in 1993 she was awarded the krishnan gold medal by the indian geophysical union for her geophysics work.  she received the tabor award in 1992 from the department of geological sciences, university of south carolina.  ranked as one of the top ten young researchers in the country by the "outlook" magazine (18 july 2005)  memberships  rajendran is a member of various professional and scientific societies:  seismological society of america  american association for the advancement of science   american geophysical union  geological society of america  geological society of india  journal of indian geophysical union  current science  references   indian seismologists scientists from bangalore year of birth missing (living people) living people indian women earth scientists indian institute of science faculty women scientists from karnataka 20th-century indian earth scientists 20th-century indian women scientists 21st-century indian women scientists 21st-century indian earth scientists
fuchsia regia is a plant species in the genus fuchsia native to brazil.  subspecies  fuchsia regia subsp. regia  fuchsia regia subsp. reitzii  fuchsia regia subsp. serrae  references  external links      regia flora of brazil
changan is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
william thomas gordon frse fgs fgse fls fga (1884-1950) was a scottish palaeontologist and palaeobotanist in the early 20th century. he was also an expert on diamonds and gemstones and assisted hatton garden in the testing of rare stones.  life  he was born in glasgow on 27 january 1884, the son of mary (nee patterson) and william gordon a marine engineer and surveyor. the family moved to edinburgh when he was young, living at 89 ferry road in the leith district. he was educated at george heriot's school, then studied sciences at the university of edinburgh, graduating with an ma bsc. he received his dsc. from the university of edinburgh in 1911 for his thesis the fossil flora of the pettycur limestone. this included studying geology under professor james geikie. from 1910  to 1912 he undertook postgraduate research at the university of cambridge, gaining a further ma.  in 1912 he returned to the university of edinburgh as a lecturer in palaeontology. in the same year he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were james geikie, john horne, sir isaac bayley balfour, robert kidston and ben peach. he won the society's makdougall brisbane prize in 1922.  in 1914 he took up a post of lecturer in geology at king's college london. in 1920 he became a full professor and remained until his retiral in 1949.  he died on 13 december 1950. he was unmarried and had no children.  positions and awards  makdougall brisbane prize 1920-22 british geological society's lyell prize 1923 vice president of the geological society of london 1937-39 fellow of the mineralogical society of america 1938 onwards  publications  discovery of gold in devon (1922) preparation of thin rock sections (1926) gem stones (1933) the chemistry of gemstones (1943)  references  1884 births 1950 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh british non-fiction writers 20th-century british geologists people educated at george heriot's school alumni of the university of edinburgh academics of the university of london
the 2016 copa sudamericana elimination stages were played from 9 august to 15 september 2016. a total of 46 teams competed in the elimination stages to decide 15 of the 16 places in the final stages of the 2016 copa sudamericana.  draw  the draw of the tournament was held on 12 july 2016, 20:00 clt (utc−4), at the espacio riesco convention and events center in huechuraba, chile.  for the first stage, the 32 teams were divided into two zones: south zone: the 16 teams from bolivia, chile, paraguay, and uruguay were drawn into eight ties. north zone: the 16 teams from colombia, ecuador, peru, and venezuela were drawn into eight ties.  teams which qualified for berths 1 were drawn against teams which qualified for berths 4, and teams which qualified for berths 2 were drawn against teams which qualified for berths 3, with the former hosting the second leg in both cases. teams from the same association could not be drawn into the same tie. for the second stage, the 30 teams, including the 16 winners of the first stage (eight from south zone, eight from north zone), whose identity was not known at the time of the draw, and the 14 teams which entered the second stage, were divided into three sections: winners of the first stage: the 16 winners of the first stage were drawn into eight ties, with the order of legs decided by draw. teams from the same association could be drawn into the same tie. brazil: the eight teams from brazil were drawn into four ties. teams which qualified for berths 1-4 were drawn against teams which qualified for berths 5-8, with the former hosting the second leg. argentina: the six teams from argentina were drawn into three ties. teams which qualified for berths 1-3 were drawn against teams which qualified for berths 4-6, with the former hosting the second leg.  format  in the elimination stages (first stage and second stage), each tie was played on a home-and-away two-legged basis. if tied on aggregate, the away goals rule would be used. if still tied, extra time would not be played, and the penalty shoot-out would be used to determine the winner (regulations article 5.1). the 15 winners of the second stage (eight from winners of the first stage, four from brazil, three from argentina) advanced to the round of 16 to join the defending champions (santa fe).  first stage the first legs were played on 9-11 august,
and the second legs were played on 16-18 august 2016.  |- !colspan=6|south zone  |- !colspan=6|north zone  |}  match g1  cerro porteno won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o8).  match g2  tied 1-1 on aggregate, sportivo luqueno won on away goals and advanced to the second stage (match o16).  match g3  bolivar won 3-2 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o4).  match g4  real potosi won 4-2 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o8).  match g5  tied 1-1 on aggregate, blooming won on penalties and advanced to the second stage (match o6).  match g6  tied 2-2 on aggregate, sol de america won on penalties and advanced to the second stage (match o13).  match g7  tied 0-0 on aggregate, montevideo wanderers won on penalties and advanced to the second stage (match o11).  match g8  palestino won 4-0 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o10).  match g9  emelec won 6-1 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o2).  match g10  tied 2-2 on aggregate, real garcilaso won on away goals and advanced to the second stage (match o10).  match g11  junior won 5-2 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o6).  match g12  deportivo la guaira won 1-0 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o2).  match g13  tied 2-2 on aggregate, zamora won on penalties and advanced to the second stage (match o11).  match g14  independiente medellin won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o16).  match g15  tied 2-2 on aggregate, sport huancayo won on away goals and advanced to the second stage (match o13).  match g16  atletico nacional won 6-0 on aggregate and advanced to the second stage (match o4).  second stage the first legs were played on 23-25 august, and the second legs were played on 31 august and 13-15 september 2016.  |}  match o1  santa cruz won 1-0 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match a).
match o2  deportivo la guaira won 4-2 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match b).  match o3  chapecoense won 3-2 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match c).  match o4  atletico nacional won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match d).  match o5  belgrano won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match e).  match o6  junior won 3-1 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match f).  match o7  tied 5-5 on aggregate, flamengo won on away goals and advanced to the round of 16 (match g).  match o8  cerro porteno won 7-0 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match h).  match o10  palestino won 3-2 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match g).  match o11  montevideo wanderers won 2-0 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match f).  match o12  tied 2-2 on aggregate, coritiba won on away goals and advanced to the round of 16 (match e).  match o13  sol de america won 2-1 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match d).  match o14  independiente won 3-0 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match c).  match o15  san lorenzo won 4-3 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match b).  match o16  independiente medellin won 3-2 on aggregate and advanced to the round of 16 (match a).  notes  references  external links copa sudamericana 2016, conmebol.com   1
adam basanta (born 1985) is a montreal-based artist and experimental composer whose practice investigates manifestations of technology as a meeting point of concurrent and overlapping systems. he uses various media (installation, kinetic sculpture, sound, computational image-making) and creates participatory and multi-sensory performances.  biography  adam basanta was born in tel-aviv in 1985. he was raised in vancouver and lives and works in montreal since 2010. he holds a bfa in music composition from simon fraser university (vancouver) and an interdisciplinary research-creation master in fine arts from concordia university (montreal).  since 2015, his works have been exhibited in galleries and institutions internationally. he is represented by ellephant gallery, montreal, and his work can be found in the institutional collections of the musee d'art contemporain de montreal, the musee national des beaux-arts du quebec, the musee des beaux-arts de montreal, and the ville de montreal, amongst others.  remaining active as an experimental composer and performer, his concert music, live performances, and sound recordings are presented worldwide. his music has been released on kohlenstoff records (canada), farmacia901 (italy), important records/cassauna (usa), and kasuga records (germany).  adam basanta is the recipient of numerous awards, including the sobey art award in 2020, one of the most prestigious awards in canadian art. in 2018, he received the pierre-ayot prize for the best contemporary artist under 35 years of age working in montreal.  work basanta is known for his sound sculptures and sound installation works. his artistic process is intuitive and relies on finding a poetic union between the technical and the conceptual. he focuses on the organisation of changeable choreographies using found technologies, including microphones, speakers, kinetic systems and customised software.  art survival station (2020)  artist survival station is a 60-day performance and a series of youtube videos created in response to the financial, social, and emotional context of the covid19 pandemic in 2020. it is a living sculpture that pays tribute to the process of diy microgreens from building, seeding, harvesting, and even personal bicycle deliveries to members of montreal's artistic community. this project, as a long-term performance, is an exercise of "re-commitment to sustainability in an era of late capitalism, knowledge gathering, and sharing in the atmosphere of online saturation, and to care and exchange with people in a moment where physical contact is not possible". the
system uses a capitalistic logic in terms of efficiency, growth, and sustainable production while letting go of profit and power.  landscape past future (2019)  landscape past future offers a new perspective to landscape paintings. each artwork is created from the pixels of existing digitized landscape paintings or photographs sourced from the online permanent collections of major museums. the collected pixels are then arranged as a mosaic by means of custom software and machine learning to recreate the aura of an artistic period. this process reveals "specific details of historically significant works as well overarching statistical features" in the new image. in an era of overflowing digital images, landscape past future highlights the pressing digital preservation of a disappearing natural world. basanta's impressions are summaries of artworks made into art.  all we'd ever need is one another (trio) (2018)  all we'd ever need is one another (trio) is a mixed-media installation composed of three flatbed scanners laid on their side and facing each other. the trio generates digital images independently of human input by scanning each other's surface. the ambient light and shadows produced by the environment or the audience impacts the scanning result. a software then randomizes contrasts, luminosity, saturation, and colors (cyan, magenta, and yellow).  every newly generated image is studied by a series of deep-learning algorithms and compared to 1.5 million artworks issued from the database of artsy, the metropolitan museum of art, and the museum of modern art of new york. when it matches an existing artwork beyond a 80% match, it is uploaded to a twitter page and a dedicated website. this experimental photographic installation touches on issues of copyright because the protection is granted according to justifications that cannot be applied to machines or ai.  curtain (white) (2016)  curtain (white) is a sound installation made of 240 pairs of white earbud headphones arranged as a 3 meters high curtain or waterfall. patterns of white noise move across the curtain evoking "organic memories of waves, wind, rain, and insects." in this sound installation basanta reorganises the ubiquitous earbuds, without altering their materiality, and creates a context where ready-made technologies allow the audience to retreat from the external world into a single sound instance of temporality.  career  major solo exhibitions  2019   the unknown future rolls towards us. hbk braunschweig, braunschweig, germany.  all we'd ever need is one another (trio). arsenal contemporary art toronto, canada.  landscape past future. elleph
ant gallery, montreal, quebec, canada.  ballet pathetique. galerie sans nom. moncton, new brunswick, canada.  a large inscription, a great noise. optica centre d'art contemporain. montreal, quebec, canada.  2018   all we'd ever need is one another. ellephant gallery, montreal, quebec, canada.  variations on a theme. galerie bon accueil, rennes, france.  2017   variations on a theme. fofa gallery. montreal, quebec, canada.  five lines, crossing. galerija sc. zagreb, croatia.  2016   a room listening to itself. gallery 1c03, winnipeg, manitoba, canada.  inversion as literary device. galeria skolska28. prague, czech republic.  principle of distance. museum of transitory art. ljubljana, slovenia.  2015   the sound of empty space. carroll/fletcher gallery. london, uk.  louder than a beating heart. titanik galerie. turku, finland.  a room listening to itself. centre for contemporary arts - santa fe, new mexico, usa.  the sound of empty space. galerie b-312, montreal, quebec, canada.  significant group exhibitions  2021-2022   possible futures. maison des arts de laval, salle alfred-pellan. laval, quebec, canada.  a truly magical moment. "data dating" curated by valentina peri. imal, brussels, belgium.  2021   ecran total. centre de design de l'uqam, montreal, quebec, canada.  artist survival station. parallel lines, phi centre, montreal, quebec, canada.  2019   joueuses / joueurs. musee des beaux-arts de montreal. montreal, quebec, canada.  nemo biennial. cite internationale des arts, paris, france.  2018   robot love. van abbemuseum, eindhoven.  post-fail. fotomuseum winterthur, switzerland.  collections    collection of the musee des beaux-arts de montreal (mbam), quebec, canada.  collection of the musee d'art contemporain de montreal, quebec, canada.  collection of the musee national des beaux-arts du quebec (mnbaq), quebec, canada.  collection majudia, montreal, quebec, canada.  collection of the ville de montreal, quebec, canada.  munich re: art collection.  collection of the museum of transitory art (mota), ljublijana, slovenia.
awards   winner ex-aquo, sobey art awards 2020 (quebec region), ottawa, canada.  winner, prix pierre ayot 2018. ville de montreal - association des galeries d'art contemporain, montreal, quebec, canada.  longlisted (quebec region), sobey art awards 2018, ottawa, canada.  winner, aesthetica art prize 2017, aesthetica magazine, york, uk.  excellence prize, 19th japan media arts festival. tokyo, japan, 2016.  winner, edith-russ-haus awards for emerging media artists 2014, oldenburg, germany.  finalist, stephen and claudine bronfman fellowship, montreal, quebec, canada.  honourable mention. prix ars electronica 2013, hybrid art category.  references  living people 1985 births canadian sound artists canadian composers canadian male composers place of birth missing (living people)
auguste-jacques lemierre d'argy (1 march 1762, paris - 12 december 1815, paris) was an 18th-19th-century french writer and translator.  life  an interpreter and translator, among others by ministries and courts (conseil des prises maritimes, codirecteur du bureau de legislation etrangere ... ), but also a bookseller in paris, auguste-jacques lemierre d'argy is mostly known for his popular dramas. he is often mentioned for his drama in four acts in prose calas, ou le fanatisme dealing with the calas affair, premiered in paris 17 december 1790 at the theatre du palais royal and published in 1791. he was also the nephew of antoine-marin lemierre (1723-1793), a poet and playwright, member of the academie francaise.  works  1788: l'eleve du plaisir, with samuel jackson pratt. 1791: calas, ou le fanatisme 1798: poesie de gray, by thomas gray and auguste-jacques lemierre d'argy (coauthor and translator), notes and explanations by m. lemierre d'argy. 1814: relation authentique... de l'assaut donne, le 6 juillet 1809, au palais quirinal et de l'enlevement du souverain pontife le pape pie vii.... 1814: le chateau de l'indolence, poem in 2 chants (with james thomson).  translations  1787: nouveau code criminel de l'empereur, published in vienna in 1787, hardouin and gatey publishers, paris. 1814: memoires de la reine d'etrurie marie-louise de bourbon, written by herself, translated from italian, editions chaumerot jeune. 1815: la femme errante, by frances burney, translated from english by j.-b.-j. breton de la martiniere and auguste-jacques lemierre d'argy.  references   writers from paris 1762 births 1815 deaths french translators italian-french translators english-french translators 18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french translators
during the 2004-05 german football season, fc energie cottbus competed in the 2. bundesliga.  season summary energie escaped relegation to the 3. bundesliga by the slimmest of margins, with their goal difference only 1 goal greater than 15th-placed eintracht trier.  first-team squad squad at end of season  left club during season  references  notes  fc energie cottbus seasons german football clubs 2004-05 season
ngc 143 is a  spiral galaxy in the constellation cetus. it was discovered by frank muller in 1886.  references   barred spiral galaxies -04-02-015 0143 001911 cetus (constellation)
shelbyville commercial historic district is a national historic district located at shelbyville, shelby county, indiana.  the district encompasses 149 contributing buildings, 1 contributing site, and 2 contributing objects in the central business district of shelbyville. it developed between about 1822 and the 1930s, and includes notable examples of italianate, second empire, beaux-arts, classical revival, and art deco style architecture. notable contributing resources include the shelbyville central schools administrative offices (1912), carnegie library (1902), first baptist church (1903), st. joseph catholic church and school (1908), civic center (1932), melton jewelry store (1886), blessing-deprez building (1869), knights of pythias (1901), cherry building (1889), i.o.o.f. building (1895), old high school building (1886), and a statue of charles major (1929).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1984.  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana second empire architecture in indiana beaux-arts architecture in indiana neoclassical architecture in indiana art deco architecture in indiana buildings and structures in shelby county, indiana national register of historic places in shelby county, indiana
the 2015 hungaroring gp2 and gp3  series rounds were a pair of motor races that were held on 24 and 26 july 2015 at the hungaroring in the hungary as part of the gp2 series and gp3 series. it was the sixth round of the 2015 gp2 season and the fourth round of the 2015 gp3 season. the race weekend supported the 2015 hungarian grand prix.  report  gp2 series  qualifying  feature race  sprint race  gp3 series  qualifying  feature race  sprint race  references  external links   official website of gp2 series  official website of gp3 series  hungaroring gp3 series round reports gp2 and gp3 2015 in formula three
wan'an () is a town under the administration of jiangle county, fujian, china. , it has one residential community, 8 villages, and one stock farm area under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of fujian jiangle county
peter clausen (born 13 april 1964) is a danish former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people danish male cyclists olympic cyclists of denmark cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from rødovre
edwinsford is a small hamlet situated about the historic edwinsford estate and fishery on the river cothi, a tributary of the river tywi, in carmarthenshire, wales. it lies to the north of talley, at the confluence of roads toward llansawel and crugybar.  the manor house, established in the 1680s by sir rice williams, high sheriff of carmarthenshire, is now derelict. there is however an active fishery.  see also   list of places in carmarthenshire  references  villages in carmarthenshire
kamala krishnaswamy is an indian scientist in nutrition. she was the director of the national institute of nutrition. she was also president of the nutrition society of india.  biography she earned her mbbs and md in internal medicine from osmania university. she did training in clinical pharmacology in the karolinska institute in sweden under a world health organization fellowship. she joined the national institute of nutrition in 1964 and became its director in 1997.  references  living people indian nutritionists‎ 20th-century indian women scientists 20th-century indian biologists year of birth missing (living people) osmania university alumni
we'll never let our old flag fall is a world war i song written by albert e. macnutt and composed by m. f. kelly. the song was first published in 1915 by chappell & co., in new york, ny. the sheet music cover was illustrated by starmer and features words with an eagle on a shield.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .   1915 songs songs of world war i
arsov () is a bulgarian masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is arsova. it may refer to dzordze arsov (born 1946), mayor of kisela voda, macedonia  elena arsova (born 1975), bulgarian volleyball player lilcho arsov (born 1972), bulgarian football goalkeeper  ljupco arsov (1910-1986), macedonian communist politician milan arsov (1884-1908), bulgarian revolutionary  petar poparsov (1868-1941), bulgarian revolutionary slaveyko arsov (1877-1904), bulgarian revolutionary yoncho arsov (1929-2011), bulgarian football player and manager   bulgarian-language surnames
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  mv  mven   mven farmer-2  mvp (mvp - most versatile plane)  mvp model 3  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
archipterygium (or ancient fin) is the concept of a primitive limb from which the limbs of tetrapod animals evolved. the idea was proposed by karl gegenbaur in 1878, sometimes termed the gill septum hypothesis and it consisted of a series of rays, one ray large with the remaining small ones attached to the sides of the large one. gegenbaur based this idea on the fin of ceratodus and its similarity to the  gill-region in elasmobranchs. he suggested that the pentadactyl limb of modern tetrapods was derived from one side of the archipterygium. thomas huxley examined the idea and argued against it. he suggested that the tetrapod limb or cheiropterygium differed in its origins from that of the lungfish and that the two may have diversified from a true ancestral archipterygium. an alternate origin for tetrapod limbs was identified in the lateral fins by francis balfour. these were followed by several other modified hypotheses. although the idea of the archipterygium is outdated, it was one of the first major applications of evolutionary morphology and development.  see also   limb development  references  evolution by phenotype
puente alto-el volcan railway is a small military railway between puente alto and el volcan in chile. the railway had a narrow gauge of 600 mm (1 ft  in), and was constructed in 1906 under chile's ministry of railways. as each section was completed, it was inaugurated:  on march 1, 1910 (from puento alto to el canelo); in 1911 (from el canelo to el melocoton); and on june 9, 1914 (from el melocoton to el volcan). the railway was built at a cost of $2,335,630 and remained operational until 1985.  planning  objectives  the railway's main objective was not to unite chile and argentina (as claimed by chile), but to monitor the border and prevent any attacks from argentina on chile. originally, when the state railway company commissioned an engineer to explore the area (who recommended the railway's construction), the idea was not taken seriously due to the lack of interest shown by the chilean and argentine governments. however, once the military expressed the importance of this railway as a means of defence against a possible conflict, the chilean government authorized its construction.  its functions were to ensure practical training of military personnel and to provide strategic protection of the mountain passes. the military was responsible for the operation, management and repair of the railway.  engineering studies multiple studies were performed before the development of the railway:   in 1895, the chilean engineer alberto lira orrego studied the part of the road between puente alto and san jose.  in 1899, there were reconnaissance missions covering the maipo river to its source.   in 1901, the english engineer josias harding established that the route via the maipo river was the most appropriate one   in 1902, the chilean engineer santiago munoz issued a report noting the enormous benefits that the railway would bring to the whole community, both in agriculture and trade (paper mills, coal, and tissues).  responsibilities  the state railway administration mainly supervised the desk work done before the construction (for example, making the inventory of material required for the construction and operation, regulations and cost estimates), though their decisions were subject to approval by many others (including the ministry of railways, the army, the ministry of public works and later the state railway company).  operation at first, the engines used to test the line were small german locomotives made by koppel. these pulled flat bed and freight cars, narrow passenger cars made of wood, or sometimes a small buscarril.  as the train traveled on
very steep terrain, the size of those german locomotives was sometimes insufficient for the climb. therefore, in some cases, more than one engine was used; one at the front pulling the train and another at the back pushing the train. in other cases, just one small but powerful locomotive was used to push a shorter train up the slope.  transporting copper concentrate, gypsum and limestone, livestock and agricultural products by train became safer and more economical. railway passenger traffic from cajon del maipo and santiago also started, thanks to those services, with the main intent being going on vacation in the andean villages in the mountains.  it took 45 minutes for the 13.5 km journey from puente alto to el canelo by steam train, 2 hours for the 35.8 km journey to el melocoton, and 3½ hours for the 61.9 km journey to the terminus at el volcan.  closure  since 1950 the use of the railway decreased as rail transport began to be replaced by higher tonnage road trucks, whose travel time and freight costs were lower.  many factors led to the suspension of the railway and the use of roads as the main form of transport: the closure of llano del maipo railway in the late 1940s, the earthquake in las melosas in 1958 (which caused damage to infrastructure), severe storms in the mid-1960s and the end of mining activity in the volcano in 1976.  in 1978, with the approval of the policy of self-financing state railway, the railway ceased regular public use, maintaining only internal operations for investigation. jung diesel locomotives were delivered a few months before the closure, but too late to show their benefits.  in 1985 the railway was closed, after seventy years of operation. the railway was dismantled by order of the ministry of public works and carried out by the same men who drove the locomotives. the abrupt manner in which the procedures occurred remained in the memory of the inhabitants of the area.  heritage status  railroad puente alto (high bridge) to el volcan (the volcano) and its associated infrastructure were declared a national historic landmark by the ministry of education decree no. 432 in 1991. from that date, a series of restorations of the tracks and stations were performed. the 21.12.2002 agreement between the chilean army, the national tourism service (sernatur), the national history museum, the ministry of national heritage and the national monuments council, was signed for the implementation of a restoration project on the grounds of the el manzano
station, in order to build a cultural center that would include the museum of military railways. by the end of 2004, after the closure of puente alto regiment, the steam locomotive "panchita", together with some cars and trucks, was moved to el melocoton station, where they are safely stored.  references   railway lines in chile railway lines opened in 1910 railway lines closed in 1985 600 mm gauge railways in chile
the following lists events that happened in 1956 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - olafur thors, hermann jonasson  events  births  21 april - johann sigurðarson, actor and singer 16 may - þorbergur aðalsteinsson, handball player 29 may - bjarni friðriksson, judoka 30 july - arni sigfusson, politician 15 august - helgi olafsson, chess grandmaster 27 august - magnus bergs, footballer 21 september - jon gunnarsson, politician.  deaths  references    1950s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
the big 5 is the largest construction event in the middle east, africa and south asia. it is held annually in dubai in late november and attracts in excess of 67,000 construction professionals (audited by bpa worldwide).   the big 5 runs alongside six specialised events enabling industry professionals to source products for every stage of the construction projects: the big 5 heavy, middle east concrete, hvac r expo, middle east stone, the big 5 solar, and the urban design & landscape expo.  history  the big 5 has its origins in an event known as arab water and came about from an amalgamation of five separate product-focused events that all had a link to the construction sector - such as hvac and building materials. with the building of the dubai world trade centre, which began to develop in the late 1970s, the event found a permanent home and has expanded in size along with the venue. when dmg events acquired the exhibition in 2000, the event covered some 12,000m²: this has risen to over 100,000m² in gross floor space.   government support for the event has come from both international and local institutions. in 2007, the event was one of the first in the region to welcome a prime minister when the then italian leader romano prodi visited the exhibition with his minister for international trade. in 2012, british prime minister david cameron also visited the event in support of his nation's export businesses. the visits reflected both the value of bilateral trade with the uae but also the rise in importance of the persian gulf region as a whole to european export manufacturers.  educational events and special features   since 2010 there has been an increasing emphasis on education within the events - in the form of conferences, seminars and workshops - to support continued professional development among audiences. the educational programmes are presented by a wide selection of the industry's architects, consultants, contractors and sub-contractors who volunteer their time and expertise to further the development of the construction sector. these free education components also include certification, overseen by the uk-based cpd certification service, so attendance can contribute to a person's membership standing in organisations such as rics or the ciob.  in 2018, the big 5 launched the women in construction forum & awards initiative, aimed at promoting diversity and inclusion in the workplace in the construction industry. also worth mentioning is the start-up city feature dedicated to startups with a viable product for the construction industry.  references   trade fairs in dubai
pasi mbenza (born 12 december 1966) is cyclist from the democratic republic of the congo. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1966 births living people democratic republic of the congo male cyclists olympic cyclists of the democratic republic of the congo cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
the 1961 honduran amateur league was the 14th edition of the honduran amateur league. club deportivo olimpia obtained its 4th national title.  the season ran from 9 march 1961 to 19 november 1961.  regional champions  known results  national championship round played in a double round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the cuadrangular.  known results  olimpia's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1961 in honduran sport
the 1933 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1933 college football season.  in their fifth season under head coach mike gary, the hilltoppers compiled a 3-3-1 record and outscored their opponents, 66 to 64. center maurice tingstad was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
lil uzi vert vs. the world is the third mixtape by american rapper lil uzi vert. it was released on april 15, 2016, by generation now and atlantic records, serving as his second commercial release with atlantic.the mixtape features production from cubeatz, don cannon, lyle leduff, maaly raw, metro boomin and wondagurl. a sequel was released on march 13, 2020.  singles the lead single from the mixtape, called "money longer" was released on february 6, 2016. the track was produced by don cannon and maaly raw.  the other two singles from the mixtape, "you was right" and "ps & qs" were released on april 15, 2016 with the rest of the mixtape. the first track was produced by metro boomin, and second by don cannon.  cover art  the artwork was designed by 20-year-old st. louis artist fvrris, sourcing the art of bryan lee o'malley, whose scott pilgrim vs. the world is referenced in the album's title. the cover art transforms lil uzi vert into an anime style character in reference to scott pilgrim. he is featured with a depiction of his own love interest, brittany byrd, lying atop his head, in reference to ramona flowers. the background is filled with a mob of people, who appear to be enviously gazing at uzi, emulating his "haters". uzi, however, seems to only be bothered about the girl on his head. one person is spinning a basketball on his finger. this is an allusion to brittany, who played basketball before meeting uzi, as revealed by nardwuar in an interview. two cameras flash directly at uzi in order to portray the newfound fame uzi has accumulated. in front of the two girls kissing, there is a bass guitar that has "rage" engraved on its side, altogether alluding to uzi's previous project luv is rage. the use of a colourful, psychedelic background highlights the cloud rap genre uzi uses in the mixtape.  commercial performance lil uzi vert vs. the world peaked at number 37 on the us billboard 200 and spent a total of 55 weeks on the chart. it also peaked at number 18 on the us top r&b/hip-hop albums chart. the mixtape was eventually certified platinum by the recording industry association of america (riaa) for combined sales and album-equivalent units of over 1,000,000 units in the united states.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications
references  2016 mixtape albums albums produced by don cannon albums produced by wondagurl albums produced by metro boomin albums produced by cubeatz atlantic records albums lil uzi vert albums
the 1914-15 sk rapid wien season was the 17th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  references  1914-15 rapid wien season rapid
the 2020 united states senate election in minnesota was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of minnesota, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and other state and local elections. some republican pundits and strategists believed minnesota to be a potential pickup opportunity due to its increasingly favorable demographics and unexpectedly close result in the 2016 presidential election, along with potential backlash from the 2020 george floyd protests, originating after the murder of george floyd in minneapolis. however, every poll taken showed incumbent democratic senator tina smith in the lead by varying degrees.  smith ended up winning re-election to a full term in office by a margin of 5.2 points, making this the closest senate election in minnesota since 2008. some have attributed this to two pro-marijuana legalization parties (legal marijuana now party and grassroots party) taking a combined 7.69% of the vote. the filing deadline for all candidates was june 2, 2020. the primary took place on august 11.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee tina smith, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary steve carlson, candidate for u.s. senate in 2018 and write-in candidate for president in 2016 ahmad hassan paula overby, green party nominee for u.s. senate in 2018 christopher seymore, sr.  withdrawn w.d. "bill" hamm alexandra marie holker  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee jason lewis, former u.s. representative for minnesota's 2nd congressional district  eliminated in primary john l. berman bob carney jr. cynthia gail, art teacher james reibestein  withdrawn rob barrett jr., assistant professor at north central university christopher chamberlin, candidate for governor, u.s. senator, and u.s. house of representative in 2018 and libertarian activist forest hyatt, republican candidate for the 2018 united states senate special election in minnesota theron preston washington  declined donna bergstrom, nominee for lieutenant governor of minnesota in 2018 kurt daudt, minority leader of the minnesota house of representatives bill guidera, attorney and former 21st century fox executive karin housley, state senator and republican nominee for u.s. senate in 2018 mike lindell, ceo of my pillow doug wardlow, former state representative and republican nominee for attorney general of minnesota in 2018  endorsements  results  other candidates  grassroots - legalize cannabis  nominee oliver steinberg
results  legal marijuana now  nominee kevin o'connor  primary results  independent write-in candidate  declared george dennis jr. josh d. ondich, perennial candidate  general election  debate  two general election debates were held. the first on october 2, 2020, was hosted by minnesota public radio and was attended by smith and lewis. the second debate was hosted by twin cities pbs on october 23, 2020, and was attended only by lewis.  predictions  endorsements  polling  with generic democrat and generic republican  results   counties that flipped from democratic to republican  beltrami (largest municipality: bemidji)  kittson (largest municipality: hallock)  koochiching (largest municipality: international falls)  mower (largest municipality: austin)  norman (largest municipality: ada)  see also  2020 minnesota elections  notes  partisan clients  references  external links elections & voting - minnesota secretary of state       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  jason lewis (r) for senate  tina smith (dfl) for senate  2020 minnesota united states senate
sivakasi railway station is a railway station in the town of sivakasi, virudhunagar district in tamil nadu.  jurisdiction it is belongs to the madurai railway division of the southern railway zone of virudhunagar district in tamil nadu. the station code is svks.  line the station falls on the line between  and  notable places nearby  badrakali amman temple, sivakasi  ninra narayana perumal temple  ayyanar falls  references  external links  railway stations in virudhunagar district madurai railway division
baran hara is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village  constitutes   46.92%   of schedule caste  and the village  doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
"not going down" is a song recorded by american country music artist jo dee messina.  it was released in december 2005 as the third single from the album delicious surprise.  the song reached #28 on the billboard hot country songs chart.  the song was written by kevin savigar and shaunn bolton.  chart performance  references  2005 singles 2005 songs jo dee messina songs songs written by kevin savigar song recordings produced by byron gallimore curb records singles
yang wei-fuu () is a taiwanese politician, who has been the vice minister of economic affairs of the republic of china since january 2015.  education yang earned his bachelor's degree in civil engineering from national chung hsing university and master's degree in the same field from colorado state university in the united states.  early careers yang was the director  general of water resources agency (wra), director of wra central regional water resources office, wra deputy chief engineer and wra section chief.  references  living people 1952 births political office-holders in the republic of china on taiwan
elena raffalovich (1842-1918), was a russian educator. a noted figure within the pioneers of the kindergarten, she was foremost active in italy.  references   duilio gasparini, adolfo pick. il pensiero e l'opera, 3 voll., biblioteca nazionale pedagogica, firenze, 1968  1842 births 1918 deaths 19th-century russian educators russian educators
the 3rd china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting were held at the gimcheon stadium in gimcheon, korea on july 3, 2016.  medal summary  men  women  score table  overall  men  women  results  men  100 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:06 -  wind: +1.6 m/s  400 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:00 -  110 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:24 -  wind: +1.7 m/s  4 x 100 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:28 -  4 x 400 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:43 -  pole vault prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:40 -  long jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:50 -  javelin throw prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:42 -  women  200 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:55 -  wind: +0.7 m/s  800 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:44 -  400 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:30 -  4 x 100 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:23 -  4 x 400 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:36 -  high jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 15:00 -  triple jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 16:10 -  javelin throw prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 14:45 -  references   reports (2016-07-05). 김천시, 2016 한중일친선육상대회 성료. asia today. retrieved on 2016-07-07. results full results. kaaf. retrieved on 2016-07-07
.  external links korean association of athletics federations  china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting international athletics competitions hosted by south korea china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting
kk av ohrid () was a basketball club based in ohrid, north macedonia. they played in the macedonian first league from 2014 until 2019.  history  beginnings av ohrid is a rather new club on the basketball map of the region, as well as macedonia, as it has been founded only in 2015 by milco doneski. with steady organization and high ambitions, the club has qualified for the top-tier macedonian domestic club league in their first season.  glory days the club took one of the spots in the 2nd division of the aba league in the 2017/18 season, its first international appearance.  honours  league achievements  macedonian second league champion - 2015-16  notable players   slobodan mihajlovski  branko janeski  marjan mladenovic  stevan gligorijevic  filip bakoc  stefan mladenovic  milojko vasilic  sasa đorđevic  luka milojevic  emir zimic  stanislav tsonkov  devin brooks  kaylen shane  phil henry  k.c. ross-miller  dmitri nekrasov  liam thomas  remi barry  martin junakovic  mirza ahmetbasic  notable coaches  petar cocoroski  references  external links  official website  web & live video for season 2015/2016  eurobasket.com kk av ohrid page    basketball teams in north macedonia ohrid municipality
emanuele luigi galizia (7 november 1830 - 6 may 1907) was a maltese architect and civil engineer, who designed many public buildings and several churches. he is regarded as "the principal maltese architect throughout the second half of the nineteenth century".  biography  galizia graduated as a civil engineer and architect from the university of malta, and in 1846 entered government service as an apprentice of william lamb arrowsmith. he became government perito in 1856 and, four years later, the chief perito, being responsible for all the government's public works. he became superintendent of public works in 1880, which came with a seat on malta's legislative council.  galizia was made a knight of the order of st. gregory the great by pope leo xiii, and he became a member of the order of the medjidie during sultan abdulaziz's visit to malta in 1867 in recognition of galizia's completion of the turkish military cemetery in marsa, which was commissioned by the sultan.  he became a member of the institution of civil engineers in 1886, and a fellow of the royal institute of british architects in 1888. that year, the government sent him on a tour of italy, france and england to broaden his knowledge of gothic revival architecture, and possibly also to provide advice on tower bridge in london (completed in 1894), and the victorian restoration works at the brighton pavilion.  galizia was also an examiner at the faculty of civil engineering at the university of malta.  he was also commissioned by the imperial government to visit cyprus soon after the british occupation of the island and report upon its possible colonisation. the first visit was made in conjunction with sir adrian dingli and professor schinas; subsequently he travelled in the company of marquis testaferrata olivier. the reports of the visits and surveys were printed and published under the authority of the government at the time.an institute of civil engineers obituary published in 1907 praised his "tact and affability [which] endeared him to the whole community, whilst the ability and thoroughness which he displayed in all his work gives him a permanent place in the record of professional achievement in malta."   according to derek moss, galizia   adopted an exotic and flamboyant arabesque style with horseshoe arches and carvings which he applied to building three large terraced single storey houses (alcazar, pax, alhambra) in rudolf street on the main access into the heart of sliema. these were the first scheduled houses in sliema, surrounded by fields, which dominated the rural landscape, and
were seen from afar. he also designed the police station at the ferries landing place and st. gregory's church. the diana fountain erected in st anne square to commemorate the supply of fresh water to sliema is also by galizia's hand. today this stands in balluta square.  personal life  his eldest son james galizia became superintendent of public works, like his father before him, and then treasury secretary in malta's imperial administration.  his second son godwin galizia, also an architect, was known for his neo-romanesque architecture such as the church of saint peter in birzebbugia and the church of saint gregory in sliema, but his works until recently received less attention than those of his father. godwin was also appointed by private families to design chapels and mausoleums at the addolorata cemetery, which was designed by his father. he also designed the second britannia circus in floriana and two art nouveau villas in st. paul's bay, villino chapelle and villa preziosi.  giovanna galizia married the constitutional lawyer and civil law professor john caruana, son of maltese archaeologist a.a. caruana. their eldest son anton, a prominent lawyer killed in an air raid in malta in world war ii, took the surname caruana galizia, followed by his siblings.  buildings attributed to galizia  the following is a list of notable buildings which are known to have been designed by emanuele luigi galizia or are attributed to him:  ta' braxia cemetery, pieta (1855) addolorata cemetery and chapel, paola (1860) prince of wales road (1862) rinella polverista (1864) armier aqueduct between qormi and the three cities (1867) ta' qali reservoir (1867) some granaries at floriana (1869) second carmelite church, balluta (1871) turkish military cemetery, marsa (1873-74) bugeja institute technical school, ħamrun (1880) vincenzo bugeja institute aqueduct of sliema and birkirkara (1882) victoria gate, valletta (1884-85) our lady of lourdes church, mgarr, gozo (1888) st. alphonse church and convent, birkirkara (1893-95) marsamxett police station, valletta marsa police station sliema police station marsaxlokk quay marsamxett quay villa alhambra, sliema (1880s), moghul and moorish exterior - baroque and victorian interior, designed
by and summer residence of galizia. galizia family chapel at the addolorata cemetery, where he is buried. the church of our lady of sorrows, st paul's bay (1902)  the valletta market (1859-61) and st. vincent de paule hospital (1886) were built under galizia's direction, although they were designed by other architects.  references  1830 births 1907 deaths 19th-century maltese architects maltese civil engineers knights of st. gregory the great fellows of the institution of civil engineers fellows of the royal institute of british architects alumni of the university of malta university of malta faculty gothic revival architects architects of roman catholic churches recipients of the order of the medjidie
pala ganesh temple is a hindu temple of lord ganesh, situated near gulab bagh area in udaipur. this temple was built around 500 years ago, and is considered one of the ancient temples of lord ganesh in udaipur.  general it is situated near the junction point of gulab bagh, and doodh talai lake. this temple is under control of devasthan department. at the entrance, there is a large courtyard, with some seating capacity. inside the temple, the statue of lord ganesh is kept inside a central shrine. there is sufficient space for deities to walk around the central shrine (called 'parikrama' of the lord). there are two gates to the main temple, one is called riddhi pole, which is usually the entrance gate and second one is siddhi pole, which is the exit.  access and timings  the pala ganesh temple is around 1 km from city center surajpole, and 3.5 km from udaipur city railway station.  visitors can take private vehicle, or a taxi or auto-rikshaw to visit the place. this is located in between the gulab bagh and zoo and doodh talai lake, having its entrance adjacent to one of the parking stands of gulab bagh and zoo.  references  tourist attractions in udaipur hindu temples in udaipur ganesha temples
the miller bridge is a historic structure, originally located northeast of winterset, iowa, united states. it spanned an unnamed stream for . the madison county board of supervisors contracted with king and twiss of des moines to supply the wrought iron pratt pony truss. local contractors h.p. jones and g.k. foster built the iron tube substructure and erected the truss manufactured by the king iron bridge & manufacturing company of cleveland.  the total cost of the project was $2,197.55.  the bridge was listed on the national register of historic places in 1998.  the span was moved in 2008.  references  bridges completed in 1884 road bridges in iowa bridges in madison county, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa road bridges on the national register of historic places in iowa truss bridges in iowa wrought iron bridges in the united states pratt truss bridges in the united states
lifford greyhound stadium is a greyhound racing track located in lifford, county donegal, ireland.  racing takes place every saturday evening and the facilities include the champion stakes restaurant, fast food facilities, a number of bars, totalisator betting and seating.  race distances were 350, 525, 550, 575, 750 and 820 yards.  history the lifford greyhound stadium was built in 1959 when cattle dealer james magee decided to convert some more of his grazing land from a schooling track into a professional 495 yard circumference circuit. magee died in 1971 and his sons cathal and seamus took over the track as the racing and general managers around the same time that a new stand was erected at the venue.   the main event originally held at the track was the irwin cup but it did not feature highly on the irish racing calendar and during the late 1970s an event called the abraham david trophy was contested featuring significant prize money. many top greyhounds have appeared here including yellow printer who began his career at lifford as a puppy.   after 32 years association the track was put up for sale by the magee family in 1991 and was eventually bought by new owners in 2001 when willie, hugh and patrick duffy formed the lifford greyhound racing company. on 11 september 2003 the track re-opened after undergoing a €12m refit with a new grandstand, two restaurants and improved facilities.  closure & reopening during 2018, the stadium was put up for sale at a price of 1.9 million euros. the following year it was announced that the last race meeting would be on saturday 17 august 2019 before the stadium was closed. racing manager matthew duffy blamed the lack of support from the irish greyhound board.  during october 2021 it was confirmed that the track would reopen on sunday 6 march 2022. the racing was brought back by a syndicate called the lifford greyhound racing club - canaradzo ltd headed by harry findlay.  track records  current records  former records  references  external links irish greyhound board  greyhound racing venues in the republic of ireland
el alamein international airport  (arabic:  matar el ʿalamein el dawli) is an international airport located in el dabaa, matrouh governorate, egypt. the airport is located at the northern coast,  west of alexandria.  operations  overview  el alamein international airport is owned and operated by international airports company which is kato investment subsidiary. on 1999 a bid for build-operate-transfer (bot), was won by international airport company of 50-year extendable concession.  the airport occupies an area of  with a single terminal which can handle 600 passengers per hour.  runways el alamein international airport has a single runway , suitable for a380-800 operations.  airlines and destinations  as of august 2021, there are no scheduled flights to the airport.  see also  list of airports in egypt  transport in egypt  references  external links       airports in egypt transport in egypt
pslv-c3 was the third operational launch and overall sixth mission of the pslv program. this launch was also the forty-sixth launch by indian space research organisation since its first mission on 1 january 1962. the vehicle carried three satellites which were deployed in the sun-synchronous low earth orbit. the vehicle carried technology experiment satellite (indian experimental earth observation satellite), bird (german earth observation satellite) and proba (experimental satellite from belgium). this was india's and isro's second commercial spaceflight. pslv-c3 was launched at 10:23 a.m. ist on 22 october 2001 from satish dhawan space centre  (then called "sriharikota launching range").  mission highlights third operational launch of the pslv program. overall sixth mission of the pslv program. second commercial launch by isro. three satellites injected in sun-synchronous low earth orbit.  mission parameters  mass:  total liftoff weight:   payload weight:   overall height:   propellant:  first stage: solid htpb based (138.0 + 54 tonnes)  second stage: liquid udmh +  (40 tonnes)  third stage: solid htpb based (7 tonnes)  fourth stage: liquid mmh + mon (2.0 tonnes)  engine:  first stage: s139  second stage: vikas  third stage:   fourth stage: 2 x ps-4  thrust:  first stage: 4,430 + 677 x 6 kn  second stage: 724 kn  third stage: 324 kn  fourth stage: 7.4 x 2 kn  altitude:   maximum velocity: (recorded at time of fourth stage ignition)  duration: 1,658 seconds  payload pslv-c3 carried and deployed total three satellites. technology experiment satellite (tes) was the main payload and bird and proba were two auxiliary payloads that were mounted on pslv-c3. in the flight sequence, tes was injected first, followed by bird and then proba.  launch & planned flight profile  pslv-c3 was launched at 10:23 a.m. ist on 22 october 2001 from satish dhawan space centre  (then called "sriharikota launching range"). the mission was planned with pre-flight prediction of covering overall distance of . following was the planned flight profile.  see also  indian space research organisation  polar satellite launch vehicle  references   spacecraft launched in 2001 polar satellite launch vehicle
"i cried" is a song by michael elias and billy duke that was first recorded in 1954 by patti page.  i cried may also refer to:  "i cried" (james brown song), a song by james brown and bobby byrd; first recorded by tammy montgomery in 1963  see also "i cried for you", a 1923 pop and jazz standard "i cried for you" (katie melua song), single by katie melua from her album piece by piece  i cry (disambiguation) cry (disambiguation)
tommaso imperato (1596 - 7 october, 1656) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of vico equense (1647-1656).  biography tommaso imperato was born in naples, italy in 1596. on 27 may 1647, he was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent x as bishop of vico equense. on 2 june 1647, he was consecrated bishop by pier luigi carafa, cardinal-priest of santi silvestro e martino ai monti, with ranuccio scotti douglas, bishop of borgo san donnino, and alessandro vittrici, bishop of alatri, serving as co-consecrators.  he served as bishop of vico equense until his death on 7 october 1656.  see also  catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent x 1596 births 1656 deaths 16th-century neapolitan people 17th-century neapolitan people
supermen is an anthology of science fiction short stories edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the third volume in their isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in october 1984. the first british edition was issued in paperback by robinson in 1988.  the book collects twelve novellas, novelettes and short stories by various science fiction authors, together with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction: super" (isaac asimov) "angel, dark angel" (roger zelazny) "worlds to kill" (harlan ellison) "in the bone" (gordon r. dickson) "what rough beast?" (damon knight) "death by ecstasy" (larry niven) "un-man" (poul anderson) "muse" (dean r. koontz) "resurrection" (a. e. van vogt) "pseudopath" (philip e. high) "after the myths went home" (robert silverberg) "before the talent dies" (henry slesar) "brood world barbarian" (perry a. chapdelaine)  notes  1984 short story collections science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
maikay ki yaad na aaye is a pakistani drama soap that first aired on geo tv on 6 july 2016 (first day of eid). it is produced by babar javed. it aired every monday to friday at 7:00 pm only on geo tv, but after 28 episodes, the soap was shifted to the 10:30pm slot as mera dard bayzuban took its place.  cast  munawar saeed yasir ali khan nida mumtaz anoushay abbasi kanwar nafees faria hassan arez uddin ahmed darzana shafiq majida hameed farzana shafiq touqeer ahmed paul jahan ara kehkashan faisal hafza butt  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  external links    a&b entertainment 2016 pakistani television series debuts
the northern argus, first published on 19 february 1869, is a newspaper printed in clare, south australia. it was later sold to rural press, previously owned by fairfax media, but now an australian media company trading as australian community media.  history the northern argus newspaper (as distinct from the southern argus published in strathalbyn) was founded by alfred clode and his brother-in-law henry hammond tilbrook (c. 1848- 9 september 1937). the first issue was greeted with polite silence by other newspapers, most saying nothing more than it was "the same size as the wallaroo times". the kapunda herald observed that it had been produced under difficulties, and would refrain from criticism.  in 1870 henry's brother alfred tilbrook (c. 1847 - 10 july 1913) was taken on and clode left the partnership to found an english-language newspaper in japan. robert kelly succeeded clode as editor, to be followed by robert's father william kelly (6 february 1827 - 30 january 1913) when robert left to become a minister of religion. william kelly served as editor for 13 years (and was a longtime mayor of clare), followed by alfred tilbrook. henry retired in 1889; the partners then becoming his son reginald henry tilbrook (16 december 1870 - 4 november 1944) and alfred tilbrook. ownership and management of the business passed to reginald's three sons: eric hammond hanley tilbrook (1895-1966), maurice henry tilbrook (1897-1963), and godfrey vincent tilbrook (1901-1975).  the blyth agriculturist (6 november 1908 - 25 june 1969) was begun as an offshoot of the northern argus newspaper and ran until 1969, covering news for blyth and nearby regions.  distribution like other rural press publications, the newspaper is also available online.  digitisation issues from vol.1 no.1 of 19 february 1869 to vol.lxxxv no.5832 of 22 december 1954 have been ocr digitised from photographic copies by the national library of australia and may be retrieved using trove.  references  external links northern argus website  newspapers published in south australia publications established in 1869 1869 establishments in australia
sphingomonas polyaromaticivorans  is a gram-negative, aerobic, short-rod-shaped and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from water from the botan oil port in xiamen in china. sphingomonas polyaromaticivorans has the ability to degrade hydrocarbon compounds.  references  external links type strain of sphingomonas polyaromaticivorans at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  polyaromaticivorans bacteria described in 2012
katra sambili is a kenyan writer, thinker and poet. she is passionate about the empowerment of youth and women across africa.  personal life sambili is from mogotio constituency in baringo county in kenya  education sambili has a bachelor's degree from usiu-africa. she earned a master of science in international development from the school of public policy in university of birmingham, uk in 2007. she is also a graduate of harvard kennedy school of government and an edward s. mason fellow. while studying at harvard, sambili continuously sought opportunities to promote the voice and agency of women. she established the harvard africa women's network (hawn) for her organizing people, power and change class with professor marshall ganz. hawn is a peer support network that facilitates skills training in public speaking, media and campaign management and policy analysis. hawn's membership consists of a diverse group of 50 women who continue to support each other's growth and ideas through the mentorship program as well as the public speaking series which was launched in april 2016.  sambili, who believes in the power of voice to generate agency among vulnerable groups, used the public speaking skills she gained from professor steve jarding as a panelist and speaker at the 7th african development conference at harvard.  career  before attending harvard, sambili served as the founding head of secretariat for the national council on the administration of justice (ncaj). ncaj is kenya's foremost justice sector coordinating mechanism. it formulates policies, reviews strategies  and mobilizes resources for the administration of justice. ncaj works with 30 state and non-state agencies including the judiciary of kenya, the kenya national police service, the kenya prisons services, the office of the attorney general, and the office of the director of public prosecutions, as well as a host of government ministries, national commissions, and ngos focusing on human rights, gender equality and land reform. she also worked with various funds and programs of the united nations including un women, undp, unicef and the united nations millennium campaign. she is currently a research and communications consultant with the united nations headquarters in new york city.  poetry in april 2011, while attending bishop td jakes' inaugural pastors and leadership conference in orlando, florida, ms. sambili learnt the importance of a leadership that listens. it was at this conference that she was greatly motivated to listen to the unspoken needs of her people and inspired to continue to write poetry for the overlooked and the downtrodden. a particular poem, "
i am strong" was of growing importance to her family and friends who drew courage and encouragement from it.  sports with a goal africa  in october 2010, sambili launched sports with a goal africa (swaga). she rolled out "our talent for our targets" and "amani-nyumbani" programmes for youth. this initiative drew its ideology from the harnessing power of sports to unify communities embroiled in conflict. sports played an important role in unifying the members of warring communities in kenya following the devastating violence that erupted after the disputed kenya presidential election results in 2007. this was most exemplified by the patriotic reception of kenyan athletes and champions of the 2008 beijing olympic games.  references  living people people from baringo county harvard kennedy school alumni alumni of the university of birmingham year of birth missing (living people)
the following is a list of the number-one music videos of 2016 on the weekly billboard china v chart. the chart ranks weekly most viewed music videos using data from chinese video-sharing site yinyuetai (yyt).  chart history  references  yinyuetai china v chart china v chart chinese music industry v chart 2016 china videos 2016
liberata masoliver (1911-1996)  was a spanish novelist who wrote extensively during the period of the francoist state from the perspective of a conservative ideology. the themes of her work include the spanish civil war, the spanish colonial experience in equatorial guinea and ethiopia, and life in francoist spain.  bibliography her books include   efun (1955)    los galiano (1957) selva negra, selva verde (1959) el rebelde (1960) la bruixa (1961) barcelona en llamas (1961) la mujer del colonial (1962) maestro albanil (1963) pecan los buenos (1964) nieve y alquitran (1965)  un camino ilega a la cumbre (1966) la retirada (1967) casino veraniego (1968)  hombre de paz (1969) telon (1969) dios con nosotros (1970) estes donde estes (1972) los mini-amores de angelines (1972)  references  1911 births 1996 deaths 20th-century spanish novelists
biruk abebe (born 16 november 1969) is an ethiopian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1969 births living people ethiopian male cyclists olympic cyclists of ethiopia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
is a japanese musician from osaka who is signed to sony music entertainment japan. she made her debut as a professional artist in 2011 with the release of her first single "atashi, kyo, shitsuren shimashita". her music has been used as theme songs to various anime television series such as kimi to boku, kill la kill, akame ga kill, and saekano: how to raise a boring girlfriend.  biography  sawai was born in osaka on september 16, 1993. she wrote several poems for school beginning in her elementary years, but after becoming a fan of the singer yui in her junior high school years, she decided to become a singer-songwriter. she auditioned with sony music entertainment japan in 2009, which lead to her being called to tokyo. she recorded four songs at their studio and was offered a contract, while she was still studying in high school. she made her major debut in 2011 with the release of her first single  on may 11, 2011; the single charted at 110 on the oricon weekly charts. due to her work as a singer, she had to transfer to a high school in tokyo in order to continue her studies. she released her second single  on november 16, 2011; the single's title track was used as the ending theme to the 2011 anime television series kimi to boku.  in 2012 she released two singles:  and .  she released her first album sentimental on june 5, 2013. she then released the single , whose title track was used as the first ending theme to the 2013 anime television series kill la kill; the single peaked at 37 on the oricon weekly charts. she released the single  on august 13, 2014, whose title track is used as the first ending theme to the anime television series akame ga kill!. she released the single  on january 28, 2015; the title track is used as the ending theme to the anime television series saekano: how to raise a boring girlfriend.  on march 25, 2015, she released her second album. later, on march 2, 2016, she released the single "wake me up"; the title song was used as theme song for sugoi japan award 2016, while the second track of the song "tsukiakari" (ツキアカリ) is a self-cover of a song she originally wrote for sora amamiya second single.  discography  studio albums  references  external links      official blog     living people musicians from osaka 1993 births anime musicians

justice randall may refer to:  edwin m. randall, chief justice of the florida supreme court jonathan randall (rhode island), associate justice of the rhode island supreme court samuel randall (rhode island), associate justice of the rhode island supreme court
events from the year 1814 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander i  events             treaty of fontainebleau (1814)  treaty of chaumont  eight articles of london  treaty of fontainebleau (1814)  births  deaths  references  1814 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
joao capistrano maria bussotti neves junior (born 10 may 1993, in maputo) is a mozambican and italian of mozambican descent middle-distance runner competing primarily in the 1500 metres. he won five times the national championships.  biography of mozambican and later acquired italian citizenship, bussotti neves emigrated to italy with his mother claudine in 2002. his step father is from livorno where joao lives and trains. he took up athletics in 2007. he was cleared by iaaf to compete for italy since may 2012.  personal bests outdoor 800 metres - 1:47.55 (orvieto 2016) 1500 metres - 3:37.12 (marseille 2017)  indoor 1500 metres - 3:42.82 (prague 2015)  achievements  national titles bussotti won five national championships.  italian athletics championships  1500 metres: 2017, 2018, 2020 (3)  italian indoor athletics championships  800 metres: 2015  1500 metres: 2015  see also naturalized athletes of italy  references  external links  1993 births living people people from maputo italian male middle-distance runners italian sportspeople of african descent athletics competitors of gruppo sportivo esercito naturalised citizens of italy mozambican emigrants to italy athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for italy italian athletics championships winners
merck mercuriadis (born october 2, 1963) is a british-canadian music industry executive and entrepreneur. he is the founder of hipgnosis songs fund, a publicly-traded music ip investment company, and the founder and ceo of hipgnosis songs limited, the investment advisor to the fund, and an artist management and music publishing firm.  mercuriadis has managed artists including nile rodgers, beyonce, elton john, guns n' roses, iron maiden, morrissey, pet shop boys, macy gray, mary j. blige, joss stone, jane's addiction, and catherine wheel. he served as the director and ceo of sanctuary group plc from 1986 to 2007.  early life mercuriadis was born in schefferville, quebec, canada. his family moved to middleton, nova scotia where he attended local public schools.  at the age of 12, he traveled  from his home town to see kiss play in halifax. the concert inspired him to pursue a career in the music industry.  career  virgin, sanctuary group at 19, after bombarding his favorite label, virgin records, with letters, mercuriadis was hired as a marketing director at virgin canada. with virgin thriving, he moved to the uk office, where his position was expanded to include a&r.  in addition to working on records by ub40, the human league and xtc, mercuriadis was involved with signing mary margaret o'hara. her debut album, miss america was released five years after she was signed, and although the album was universally acclaimed, mercuriadis found the process of representing the label, rather than the artist, difficult. realizing that his passion was for musicians-not labels-he left virgin shortly after the record's release.  in october 1986, mercuriadis joined rod smallwood and andy taylor, the founders, at sanctuary music (overseas) limited, a management company based in the united kingdom. over 20 years, he helped build the sanctuary group plc encompassing sanctuary artist management, sanctuary records group limited, rough trade records, helter skelter agency and bravado merchandise, twenty first artists and trinifold management. during this time, mercuriadis moved from london to new york to build the north american base in 2000. in addition, mercuriadis and sanctuary group relaunched rough trade records with founder geoff travis and jeannette lee in 2001. this initiative included several artists such as the strokes, the moldy peaches, the libertines, arcade fire, antony
and the johnsons, and the kills. in new york, mercuriadis served as chief executive officer of  sanctuary group north america until december 2004. then, sanctuary reorganized its management team and named mercuriadis ceo of the entire group for his substantial contribution in the global revenues overseas.  during his tenure at sanctuary group, mercuriadis oversaw the management of destiny's child, beyonce, nelly, mick fleetwood, tommy lee, the who, and robert plant. he also managed the recordings of megadeth, kiss, gene simmons, paul stanley, lynyrd skynyrd, the allman brothers band, earth, wind & fire, the blue nile, simple minds and lou reed. he was recognized for his creative marketing strategies, contributing to the success of morrisey's ringleader of the tormentors-a #1 album-and you are the quarry, which hit #2. he was also noted for the #1 success of "changes" with ozzy and kelly osbourne, "elton john's electricity", antony and the johnsons' mercury music prize-winning i am a bird now, and several #1 iron maiden albums.  in 2005, mercuriadis was featured on the cover of billboard magazine with elton john. he also delivered the  keynote speech at the pollstar cic awards in 2005. in a 2017 article published by music business international mercuriadis wrote: "our job as managers isn't to do what we want to do, it's to do what the artist wants to do. our job is to facilitate their vision for themselves and to help bring it to fruition."  mercuriadis resigned from sanctuary music group on october 31, 2006, after 20 years of service. he continued to manage guns n' roses and morrissey.  he worked with guns n' roses over several years, during which their much-anticipated and much-delayed album, chinese democracy, was released.  he also oversaw morrissey albums including you are the quarry, first of the gang to die, ringleader of the tormentors, and greatest hits.  his work with morrissey resulted in ten top 20 singles.  hipgnosis songs fund  mercuriadis is the founder of hipgnosis songs fund limited, a music ip investment company. in a 2019 interview with the journal thought economics, he stated: "i have always believed that hit songs and music, art in general, has real value to it.  what people don't really recognise is that when a song becomes a proven
song, the earnings pattern to it becomes very predictable and reliable, and is therefore investable.  and these songs are as valuable as gold, or oil." he later said "in the music business, without the song we don't exist - it's the energy that makes the world go round."    the company raised more than us$300 million to fund the acquisition of copyrights in june 2018, and began trading on the london stock exchange as song in july. its first acquisition was a majority stake in the-dream's 302-song catalogue, which included hits such as justin bieber's "baby",  beyonce's "single ladies (put a ring on it)" and rihanna's "umbrella." at the close of its first full year as a publicly traded company, its catalogue totaled  more than 5,000 songs; of those, approximately 2,000 had been #1 hits somewhere in the world, and 4,000 had reached the top 10. five songs co-owned by hipgnosis songs fund appeared in the top 10 on the billboard hot 100 of the decade chart.  as of january 2021, hipgnosis songs fund partially or fully owned more than 57,000 songs. in july, the fund was valued at $2.2 billion. in october 2021, the blackstone group announced a partnership with hipgnosis songs management backed by $1 billion in funds managed by blackstone.  it also acquired an ownership stake in hipgnosis.  hipgnosis songs fund submitted written evidence for the department for digital, culture, media and sport's december 2020 inquiry into the economics of streaming. in an interview with music week, mercuriadis said: "once they peel away the layers of that onion, what they're going to get into is investigating the business practices of the major labels and the publishing companies that they own and control.  the reason songwriters are not being paid what they should be getting paid is that the three biggest publishing companies are not advocating for songwriters, because they're owned by the three biggest recorded music companies in the world."  see also royalties  references  external links     1963 births british music industry executives british music managers british record producers living people music promoters people from cote-nord
the gens helvia was a plebeian family at ancient rome.  this gens is first mentioned at the time of the second punic war, but the only member of the family to hold any curule magistracy under the republic was gaius helvius, praetor in bc 198.  soon afterward, the family slipped into obscurity, from which it was redeemed by the emperor pertinax, nearly four centuries later.  praenomina the helvii of the republic are known to have used the praenomina gnaeus, gaius, and marcus.  in imperial times we also find lucius and publius.  all of these were amongst the most common praenomina throughout all periods of roman history.  branches and cognomina the surnames of the helvii under the republic included blasio, cinna, and mancia, but several of the family appear without a cognomen.  under the empire, a number of helvii are found with the surname rufus, but it is not apparent whether they constituted a distinct family of the helvia gens.  members   gnaeus helvius, a military tribune who was slain in battle against the gauls and carthaginians near mediolanum in 203 bc.  gaius helvius, praetor in bc 198, with cato the elder, his colleague as plebeian aedile the previous year.  he accompanied the consul sextus aelius paetus into cisalpine gaul, and received command of one of the consul's armies.  nine years later, in 189, he was legate to the consul gnaeus manlius vulso in galatia.  marcus helvius blasio, plebeian aedile in bc 198, and praetor in 197, assigned the province of hispania ulterior.  on his return home in 195, he was attacked by an army of 20,000 celtiberi near the town of illiturgi in hispania citerior; his guard of 6,000 defeated the celtiberi and took the town.  he was awarded an ovation, and in 194 was one of the commissioners for founding the colony of sipontum in apulia.  helvius mancia, an orator of some cleverness, whose poor appearance was mocked by either gaius julius caesar strabo, with whom he was engaged in a lawsuit, or (according to pliny), by lucius licinius crassus, the orator, about 90 bc.  helvius blasio, a friend of decimus junius brutus albinus, for whom he tried to set
an example by taking his own life, when brutus was captured by his enemies.  gaius helvius cinna, a celebrated poet, friend of catullus, and tribune of the plebs in 44 bc.  he was lynched at julius caesar's funeral after being mistaken, on account of his name, for the praetor lucius cornelius cinna, who had just delivered an incendiary speech in support of the dictator's assassins.  marcus helvius rufus, a soldier who was recognized for his bravery in battle against tacfarinas.  he might be the same person as marcus helvius rufus civica.  marcus helvius m. f. rufus civica, a centurion , named in a dedicatory inscription from varia in latium, dating from the reign of tiberius.  helvia, the wife of seneca the elder, and mother of seneca the younger.  marcus helvius geminus, raised to the patriciate by claudius, was governor of macedonia, and proconsular legate of asia.  lucius helvius agrippa, proconsular governor of sardinia from ad 68 to 69.  helvia procula, the wife of gaius dillius vocula, commander of the twenty-second legion.  when her husband was slain during the batavian rebellion in ad 70, helvia dedicated a monument at rome commemorating his military and political career.  gnaeus helvius sabinus, a candidate for aedile of pompeii shortly before the eruption of mount vesuvius in ad 79.  over one hundred notices for his election have been found.  helvius successus, father of the emperor pertinax, was a freedman, who worked as a wool merchant and charcoal-burner at alba pompeia.  marcus helvius clemens dextrianus, equestrian governor of raetia during the reign of commodus.  publius helvius pertinax, emperor from january to march, ad 193.  after an illustrious military and political career, he was proclaimed emperor following the murder of commodus, and embarked upon a series of reforms; but in his haste he quickly made enemies, and was soon dispatched by the praetorian guard.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  polybius, historiae (the histories).  fasti triumphales.  marcus tullius cicero, de oratore.  gaius valerius catullus carmina.  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (
history of rome).  publius ovidius naso (ovid), ibis.  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  lucius annaeus seneca (seneca the younger), de consolatione ad helviam.  publius cornelius tacitus, annales.  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  gaius plinius secundus (pliny the elder), naturalis historia (natural history).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  marcus fabius quintilianus (quintilian), institutio oratoria.  gaius suetonius tranquillus (suetonius), de vita caesarum (lives of the caesars, or the twelve caesars).  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith (ed.), john murray, london (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated cil), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  paul von rohden, elimar klebs, & hermann dessau, prosopographia imperii romani (the prosopography of the roman empire, abbreviated pir), berlin (1898).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  edward courtney (ed.), [ the fragmentary latin poets], oxford university press (1993), .  alison e. cooley and m.g.l. cooley, pompeii and herculaneum: a sourcebook, 2nd ed., routledge, london (2014).    roman gentes
friedrich wilhelm opelt (9 june 1794 - 22 september 1863) was a musicologist, a mathematician, and an astronomer. at one point, he held the title of geheimrat (the title of the highest advising officials at the imperial, royal or principal courts of the holy roman empire).  biography friedrich opelt was the son of a weaver who specialized in fustian and owned a weavery mill. after he successfully completed his education at the city school of his home town in rochlitz, he learned the trade of a weaver as his father wished. during this time, a musical autodidact, he could often accompany, on organ, the church service at the  (city church). through further autodidactic studies, he learned french and russian, in addition to several other languages. his financial successes at trade shows (leipzig, frankfurt) gave him the idea to expand his businesses, which were eventually halted during the napoleonic wars.  occupation after the german campaign of 1813, opelt became employed in the municipality of dresden as a tax auditor, and a few years later he was appointed as tax collector in radeberg. in 1824 he became the county tax collector for wurzen, and eight years later he was appointed as county tax collector to plauen. the peak of opelt's tax-auditing career was in 1839, during which he became a high-ranking member of the county council in dresden.  in 1847, opelt became the second director of the saxon-bavarian railway company in leipzig. the following year, he became a privy financial adviser to the royal treasury in dresden. in the spring of 1863, he resigned from all his posts and retired into private life.  opelt died at the age of 69 years on september 22, 1863 in dresden.  works as an author:  uber die natur der musik. plauen 1834.  allgemeine theorie der musik auf dem rhythmus der klangwellenpulse und durch neue versinnlichungsmittel erlautert. leipzig 1852.  as a translator:  louis-benjamin francoeur: elementar-lehrbuch der mechanik. arnold, dresden 1825.  references  francois-joseph fetis: biographie universelle des musiciennes, band 6. paris 1864, p. 371.  1794 births 1863 deaths people from rochlitz german musicologists 19th-century german mathematicians 19th-century german astronomers geheimrat
fem3 is a television channel operated by the tv2 group that broadcasts in hungary. it is an entertainment channel, primarily dedicated to talk shows, reality series involving lifestyles, and family life.  it was originally launched on new year's day 2010. on 5 september 2016 at 05:00 cet, the old fem3 was replaced by prime, and a new fem3 started its test broadcasts on a new frequency. both channels officially launched at 21:00 cet.  prior to the launch, since 2008, the channel was planned with several names. first, they wanted to bring fem to hungary, the name then changed to tv3, as a reincarnation of an entertainment channel which closed down on 21 february 2000. the name was finalized in december 2009.  programming  talk shows fem3 cafe micsoda nok (varkonyi andreaval) joshi, a legjobb barat (joshi the best friend)  imports  logos  external links official website   central european media enterprises television networks in hungary television channels and stations established in 1997 1997 establishments in hungary
the 2010 wimbledon championships are described below in detail, in the form of day-by-day summaries.  day 1 (21 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  marin cilic [11],  ivan ljubicic [17],  stan wawrinka [20],  tommy robredo [30]  ladies' singles:  francesca schiavone [5],  kateryna bondarenko [34] schedule of play  day 2 (22 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  fernando verdasco [8],  juan carlos ferrero [14],  nicolas almagro [19],  marcos baghdatis [24]  ladies' singles:  samantha stosur [6],  lucie safarova [25] schedule of play  day 3 (23 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  nikolay davydenko [7]  ladies' singles:  shahar pe'er [13],  yaroslava shvedova [30],  melanie oudin [33]  gentlemen's doubles:  łukasz kubot /  oliver marach [5] schedule of play  day 4 (24 june) seeds out:  ladies' singles:  aravane rezai [18],  svetlana kuznetsova [19],  zheng jie [23],  daniela hantuchova [24]  gentlemen's doubles:  mardy fish /  mark knowles [13]  ladies' doubles:  chan yung-jan /  zheng jie [9] schedule of play  day 5 (25 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  mikhail youzhny [13],  gael monfils [21],  feliciano lopez [22],  john isner [23],  albert montanes [28],  philipp kohlschreiber [29],  victor hanescu [31]  ladies' singles:  nadia petrova [12],  yanina wickmayer [15],  alisa kleybanova [26],  maria kirilenko [27],  alona bondarenko [28]  gentlemen's doubles:  lukas dlouhy /  leander paes [3],  frantisek cermak /  michal mertinak [9]  ladies' doubles:  maria kirilenko /  agnieszka radwanska [10],  alicja rosolska /  yan zi [15] schedule of play  day 6 (26 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  thomaz
bellucci [25],  gilles simon [26],  philipp petzschner [33]  ladies' singles:  flavia pennetta [10],  victoria azarenka [14],  anastasia pavlyuchenkova [29],  alexandra dulgheru [31],  sara errani [32]  gentlemen's doubles:  daniel nestor /  nenad zimonjic [1],  mariusz fyrstenberg /  marcin matkowski [6],  marcelo melo /  bruno soares [15]  ladies' doubles:  vera dushevina /  ekaterina makarova [13],  monica niculescu /  shahar pe'er [14],  chuang chia-jung /  olga govortsova [17]  mixed doubles:  mahesh bhupathi /  liezel huber [3],  oliver marach /  nuria llagostera vives [4],  robert lindstedt /  ekaterina makarova [13] schedule of play  middle sunday (27 june) middle sunday in wimbledon is traditionally a rest day, without any play, and this was the case in 2010.  day 7 (28 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  andy roddick [5],  david ferrer [9],  lleyton hewitt [15],  jurgen melzer [16],  sam querrey [18],  julien benneteau [32]  ladies' singles:  caroline wozniacki [3],  jelena jankovic [4],  agnieszka radwanska [7],  marion bartoli [11],  maria sharapova [16],  justine henin [17],  gentlemen's doubles:  mahesh bhupathi /  max mirnyi [4],  julian knowle /  andy ram [8],  simon aspelin /  paul hanley [10]  ladies' doubles:  nadia petrova /  samantha stosur [3],  cara black /  daniela hantuchova [11],  hsieh su-wei /  alla kudryavtseva [16]  mixed doubles:  andy ram /  elena vesnina [15],  marcin matkowski /  tathiana garbin [16] schedule of play  day 8 (29 june) seeds out:  ladies' singles:  venus williams [2],  kim clijsters [8],  li na [9]  gentlemen's doubles:  marcel granollers /  tommy robredo [11],  julien
benneteau /  michael llodra [14]  ladies' doubles:  iveta benesova /  barbora zahlavova-strycova [12]  mixed doubles:  daniel nestor /  bethanie mattek-sands [6],  max mirnyi /  alisa kleybanova [8] schedule of play  day 9 (30 june) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  roger federer [1],  robin soderling [6],  jo-wilfried tsonga [10]  gentlemen's doubles:  bob bryan /  mike bryan [2]  ladies' doubles:  serena williams /  venus williams [1],  kveta peschke /  katarina srebotnik [6],  lisa raymond /  rennae stubbs [7]  mixed doubles:  nenad zimonjic /  samantha stosur [1],  mark knowles /  katarina srebotnik [5],  mariusz fyrstenberg /  yan zi [8] schedule of play  day 10 (1 july) seeds out:  gentlemen's doubles:  wesley moodie /  dick norman [7]  mixed doubles:  paul hanley /  chan yung-jan [12] schedule of play  day 11 (2 july) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  novak djokovic [3],  andy murray [4]  ladies' doubles:  gisela dulko /  flavia pennetta [4],  liezel huber /  bethanie mattek-sands [5]  mixed doubles:  lukas dlouhy /  iveta benesova [9],  marcelo melo /  rennae stubbs [10] schedule of play  day 12 (3 july) seeds out:  ladies' singles:  vera zvonareva [21]  gentlemen's doubles:  robert lindstedt /  horia tecau [16] schedule of play  day 13 (4 july) seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  tomas berdych [12]  mixed doubles:  wesley moodie /  lisa raymond [11] schedule of play  wimbledon championships by year - day-by-day summaries
sherman building is a historic commercial building located at sullivan, sullivan county, indiana. it was built between 1926 and 1915, and is a three-story, rectangular, brick building with terra cotta trim. the building housed the sherman theater on the first and second floors and offices on the third floor.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1986.  references  external links cinema treasures: sherman theatre  commercial buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana commercial buildings completed in 1915 buildings and structures in sullivan county, indiana national register of historic places in sullivan county, indiana
winsnesbreen is a glacier on nordaustlandet, svalbard. it is named after geologist thore schanke winsnes. the glacier is situated between etonbreen and helvetesflya. the lake of branevatnet is located between winsnesbreen and oxfordhalvøya at the head of wahlenbergfjorden.  references  glaciers of nordaustlandet
thadeus wierucki (23 december 1934 - 8 march 2015) was a belgian professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1959 and the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1934 births 2015 deaths belgian male cyclists sportspeople from liege
peggy blumquist is a fictional character in the second season of the fx television series fargo and is portrayed by kirsten dunst. dunst received widespread critical acclaim for her performance, which was widely lauded as one of the best performances of 2015. she won the critics' choice television award for best actress in a movie/miniseries, and was nominated for the golden globe award for best actress - miniseries or television film and primetime emmy award for outstanding lead actress in a limited series or movie.  character overview in 1979, peggy blumquist is a hairdresser in luverne, minnesota who is married to her high school sweetheart, local butcher ed blumquist. she is dissatisfied with small-town life and wants to take a $500 lifespring course in "self-actualization" (which is implied to be a scam) so she can better herself.  this conflicts with ed's plans to use the money to buy the butcher shop where he works.  one night, she accidentally hits rye gerhardt after he wandered onto the road after spotting a ufo. peggy panics and drives home with rye on her hood, stuck through her windshield, instead of calling the police (a reference to the murder of gregory glenn biggs). when he regains consciousness in their garage and attacks ed, ed kills him in self-defense. they dispose of the body and wreck peggy's car to make it look like ed crashed it.  unbeknownst to peggy, rye is a member of the gerhardt crime family who has just murdered three people before being distracted by the ufo. state trooper lou solverson figures out what happened and tries to persuade the blumquists to come forward so the police can protect them, but peggy tells him to leave. peggy at first wants to flee to california, but ed convinces her to stay. she sells her car so ed can buy the butcher shop, only for that to fall through as gerhardt enforcer virgil and bear's son charlie try to kill ed in the shop. in the course of the attack, virgil is killed, charlie wounded, and the shop burns down.  when the gerhardt family matriarch, floyd, learns that rye was killed by "the butcher", she mistakenly assumes that ed is a hitman and sends her eldest son dodd to kill him. peggy and ed manage to subdue dodd, tie him up and hold him prisoner in their home, planning to give him to a rival crime family in kansas city, missouri in return for money and protection. dodd
gets loose of his bindings, however, and attacks peggy. just as dodd is about to kill peggy and ed, however, traitorous gerhardt enforcer hanzee dispatches him. moments later, the police arrive and hanzee opens fire on them; peggy stabs him in the back with a pair of scissors, and she and ed are taken into police custody.  the south dakota state police strong-arm peggy and ed into wearing wiretaps when meeting with the kansas city mob in return for reduced jail time, and place them under protective custody in a hotel. the gerhardts attack the hotel, tricked by hanzee into thinking that ed has taken dodd there, and peggy and ed flee during the resulting gunfight between the gerhardts and the police. ed sees a ufo as they run away, but peggy dismisses it as "just a flying saucer".  hanzee runs after them and mortally wounds ed, but peggy manages to drag him into a grocery store and hole up in the walk-in freezer. as peggy frantically tries to figure out a means of escape, ed says that their relationship has been irreparably damaged by all that has happened; he then dies in her arms. lou arrests her and takes her to jail. on the way there in lou's police car, peggy laments that she just "wanted to be somebody".  production noah hawley has stated that when he started writing season two, he initially planned the season out as being more focused on ed and peggy instead of being an ensemble drama, saying "this idea of a couple, played by jesse plemons and kirsten dunst, who are caught between these two rival crime organizations, the gerhardt family and the kansas city mafia. well, suddenly you have two rival crime organizations that need characters, and you also need your cops who are going to interject themselves between these people. so suddenly you have four or five huge moving pieces that have to be serviced."  during filming, dunst purposely did not read any of the non-ed and peggy related storylines, saying "peggy's so in her own world, i didn't want to be influenced by anything else that was happening in the story. so i just would read things that were happening with ed and peg. she's so tunnel-visioned about her goals and what needs to happen that i didn't want to think about the whole show. it makes it more fun for me now, because i can watch and enjoy it myself and not know what everyone's going to say."
reception  dunst received widespread critical acclaim for her performance, which was often cited as one of the best performances of 2015.  accolades for her performance, dunst won the critics' choice television award for best actress in a movie/miniseries, and was nominated for the golden globe award for best actress - miniseries or television film and primetime emmy award for outstanding lead actress in a limited series or movie.  references  television characters introduced in 2015 fictional hairdressers fictional murderers fargo (tv series) characters fictional kidnappers
the town of lunenburg was incorporated in 1888. there have been 19 mayors of the town as of 2020.  mayors augustus j. wolff 1888-1891 s. watson oxner 1891-1895 augustus j. wolff 1895-1899 daniel j. rudolf 1899-1902 allan r. moreash 1902-1910 augustus j. wolff 1910-1911 john james kinley 1911-1914 j. frank hall 1914-1916 william duff 1916-1922 arthur w. schwartz 1922-1930 wallace e. knock 1930-1934 arthur w. schwartz 1934-1946 l.l. hebb 1946-1948 douglas f. adams 1948-1952 f. homer zwicker 1952-1956 roy m. whynacht 1956-1958 r.g.a. wood 1958-1971 sherman zwicker 1971-1979 laurence mawhinney 1979-2012 rachel bailey 2012-2020 matt riser 2020-present  references  lunenburg lunenburg county, nova scotia
buckeye valley is a valley on the north side of the great bend in the gila river, in maricopa county, arizona. its mouth is at an elevation of 853 feet / 260 meters. its head is at an elevation of 922 feet at .  references  landforms of maricopa county, arizona
dmitri igorevich belov (; born 31 march 1995) is a russian football player.  club career he made his debut in the russian football national league for fc shinnik yaroslavl on 11 july 2016 in a game against fc baltika kaliningrad.  references  external links  profile by russian football national league  1995 births sportspeople from yaroslavl living people russian footballers fc shinnik yaroslavl players association football forwards fc dynamo saint petersburg players fc znamya truda orekhovo-zuyevo players fc chernomorets novorossiysk players fc torpedo vladimir players
robert bonfils (february 25, 1922 - february 8, 2018) was an american illustrator, known for his covers for erotic, pulp fiction paperbacks.  biography robert bonfils was born in 1922 in kansas city and grew up there. after finishing high school, he attended the kansas city art institute, where thomas hart benton was among the teachers. in his classes were future artists like bill and jim teason, jackson pollock, and others.   after doing his service in the army, bonfils moved to chicago and continued his studies at the art institute of chicago.  his first  job was at the art agency of stevens/hall/biondi, from where he emerged as professional commercial artist and a paperback cover painter. he started doing covers and illustrations for children's books, covers for mercury records and ads for miller high life beer.  stanley schrag of playtime books and the sorren brothers of merit books recruited bonfils to paint covers for their sex-novel paperbacks. when harold w. mccauley retired from nightstand books, william hamling hired bonfils to replace mccauley and assigned him with setting up a new publishing operation out of san diego, which was to become greenleaf classics, with bonfils as its art director and earl kemp as the editor-in-chief.  during the heyday of sex publishing, bonfils was producing some fifty covers every month. he retired from the book cover illustration business in the mid-1970s and continued to paint within the gallery community of san diego. the original art for most greenleaf covers has been lost, with only a few pieces having survived.  see also pulp magazine lesbian pulp fiction erotic art clandestine literature sexual arousal  notes  external links official website earl kemp's online memoirs greenleaf books website  american illustrators 1922 births 2018 deaths united states army personnel of world war ii
the operations research society of south africa (orssa) (afrikaans: die operasionele navorsingsvereniging van suid-afrika (onsa)) is the national, professional body tasked with furthering the interests of those engaged in, or interested in, operations research (or) activities in south africa. the society is affiliated to the international federation of operational research societies and its subgrouping, the association of european operational research societies, and is the main national society for operations research in the country.  orssa is a nonprofit organization. the society is continually involved in matters which concern operations researchers, such as organising conferences at which papers on or-related topics are delivered, drawing up guidelines for or education, presenting short courses on specialist topics in or, marketing or at secondary school level, providing information to the public on the nature of or, and providing information to students at tertiary level on career opportunities in or.  history  on 18 april 1968 a meeting of individuals interested in or was held at the gatehouse at the sunnyside hotel in johannesburg, as a result of initiatives taken by dave masterson, jonathan miller, alan h. munro and john c. joslin with the support of dr. h.s. sichel. the attendance at this multi-disciplinary meeting was in excess of 180. the guest speaker was prof. b.h. patrick rivett of england, an excellent speaker and at that time one of the best known operations researchers in the world. out of this meeting a national steering committee was formed which would be responsible for the organisation of the possible establishment of an operations research society in south africa. the committee consisted of dr. h.s. sichel (chairman), profs. g.j. rudolph of rhodes university, h.j. venter of the university of potchefstroom and c. jacobs of the csir, and messrs. h.i.d. du plessis and j.w. grobbelaar of unisa, and peter c. pirow, r.t. rozwadowski and j.c. joslin of johannesburg. orssa was then founded in johannesburg on thursday, 20 november 1969. about 150 individuals were present, coming from all parts of south africa and the rhodesia of that time (zimbabwe). the following office bearers were elected in terms of the newly adopted constitution: dr. h.s. sichel (president), mr. j.w. grobbelaar (vice-president), mr. j
.c. joslin (secretary), mr. d.d. masterson (treasurer), mr. m.c.f. (mike) king (editor), and profs. g.j. rudolph and c.g. troskie (additional members). the new society was privileged to get an excellent management team under the leadership of dr. sichel, who was known internationally for his work in mining statistics.  tom rozwadowski was one of the main driving forces behind the founding meeting of orssa, and he also made major contributions at the founding meeting itself. he worked for control data corporation (cdc). in 1970 cdc transferred him to their head office in minneapolis to enable him to work towards a ph.d. in computer science. he and his wife and children went on a weekend outing to annandale, near minneapolis, where he was to address a meeting of the roman catholic church on south africa. due to a tragic gas leak, the entire family died at their stopover place. at the annual general meeting of orssa in 1970 it was announced that in memory of him an annual tom rozwadowski medal would be made available for a paper of outstanding merit delivered by a member of orssa [8]. this coveted and prestigious medal of orssa was first awarded in 1971, to dr. gerhard rudolph.  the johannesburg branch was the first chapter of orssa. a new pretoria chapter was founded on 19 march 1970. the western cape branch was founded on 14 august 1972. branch chairmen also served on the national executive committee of orssa. one of the main tasks of the executive committee in its first year was to decide on membership issues. by 16 june 1970 membership had been granted to 75 individuals, of which 47 were for full membership and 28 for associate membership. the second annual congress of orssa was held in november 1970 at iscor in pretoria, where jos grobbelaar was elected as the new president. the other members of the new executive committee were d.d. masterson (vice-president), dr. h.s. sichel (past president), dr. j.d. roode (secretary), dr. g.j. rudolph (treasurer), m.c.f. king (editor), and j. buttery and j.c. joslin (additional members). in the new term of office two new branch chairmen also served in the executive committee, namely dr. d.m. hawkins (johannesburg) and dr. r.j. van den
heever (pretoria).  since 1969 the society has had the following presidents: dr h sichel (1970), mr jw grobbelaar (1971), mr d masterson (1972), dr gj rudolph (1973), mr j miller (1974), mr k sandrock (1975), mr hid du plessis (1976), mr r eales (1977), prof tj stewart (1978), prof js wolvaardt (1979), dr mj venter (1980), dr ah money (1981), mr m splaine (1982), mr d masterson (1983), dr lp fatti (1984), mr dw evans (1985), mr ma de vries (1986), mr hw ittmann (1987), prof g erens (1988-1989), ms a pachyannis (1990-1991), mr la visagie (1992-1993), ms e ferreira (1994-1995), dr e dixon (1996-1997), prof jw hearne (1998-1999), dr pdut fourie (2000-2001), mr hw ittmann (2002-2003), prof wr gevers (2004-2005), ms km harmse (2006-2007), prof vss yadavalli (2008-2009), mr dw evans (2010-2011), prof jh van vuuren (2012-2013), prof ha kruger (2014-2015), mrs wc pelser (2016-2017), dr d lotter (2018-2019), ms gemma dawson (2020), mr dw evans (2021) and mr d clarke (2022-2023).  governance   at a national level the society is managed by an executive committee (ec), which is elected annually at an annual general meeting (agm) of the society. the various members of the ec each have a specific portfolio for which they are responsible. the portfolios entail, inter alia, membership aspects, finances, the publications of the society, interaction with international societies, the different chapters of orssa, the website, etc. the ec consists of the following office bearers: (i) president, (ii) vice-president (either elected to become the next president or the past president who last held office), (iii) secretary, (iv) treasurer, (v) head of digital, (vi) head of news, (vii) head of marketing, (viii) head of events (viii) head of external liaison (ix) orion journal editor-in-chief, and (x) orion journal manager. ec members manage a number of subcommittees related to their
specific portfolio.  membership   orssa has about 350 members - individuals (students, professors and researchers from university and research institutions, as well as professionals from industry) and corporate affiliates. the society offers the following membership grades: student, full, fellowship, retired, honorary life as well as corporate membership. the first two membership grades are open for application by individual persons. the corporate membership is open for application by companies or institutions. the third and fifth membership grade are by invitation only, and finally, a full member may apply for retired membership status.  publications   orion is the official scholarly journal of orssa and has been published biannually since 1985. the journal enjoys accreditation by the national department of education and hence qualifies for government subsidies to authors employed by academic institutions. an interesting mixture between theoretical and applied work is published in orion, which welcomes contributions in the following four broad categories:  new or-related theory or methodologies,  success stories in or,  or case studies, and  or methodological reviews. members of the society automatically receive paper copies of this journal.  the society also publishes a quarterly newsletter. apart from snippets of or-related news, general or articles and advertisements which are of interest to members, notices of forthcoming activities and reports on recent conferences are contained in the newsletter. news items from the ec meetings and or umbrella-organisations, such as ifors and euro, may also be found in the newsletter.  in 2019, the book operations research in south africa: the first 50 years, was published by the society, with editors prof jh van vuuren and prof ha kruger. both van vuuren and kruger are fellows of orssa, an award given to members of orssa who served the society or the science and profession in an exemplary manner over a considerable period of time. the volume contains a concise history of operations research in south africa from its local inception during the late 1950s until 2018. it is both a comprehensive record of the activities of the operations research society of south africa during its first fifty years of existence and a compendium of operations research as practised locally in the public, private and tertiary education sectors.  social media   orssa has three accounts on social media, and frequently updates the facebook, twitter and linkedin pages with the latest news.  conferences   a national conference is organised by the society at different venues annually, usually during the month of september, to serve as a forum for communication about or. an international expert or a prominent local operations researcher is usually invited as the keynote speaker.
this is the premier annual meeting of the society, and apart from a rich and varied programme of presentations by both practitioners and academics, the conference usually also boasts a very enjoyable social component.  awards   the society awards a number of prizes and awards annually to recognise outstanding achievements in the field of operations research. the tom rozwadowski medal is the society's premier award and has been awarded on an almost annual basis since 1971. the medal is awarded for the best written contribution to operations research published by a member of the society during the previous year. the nominating committee invites nominations or submissions for consideration for this award.  the executive committee may also invite long-standing full members of the society to become fellows of the society. these would include individuals who have served the society in an exemplary manner for a considerable period of time, or who have served the science and profession of operations research over a considerable period of time. the society also makes recognition awards to individuals who have served the profession of operations research in an exemplary fashion. a recognition award is a prestigious distinction and is reserved only for outstanding achievements and/or contributions typically over a long period of time.  the society also hosts two student competitions on an annual basis. tertiary institutions may nominate candidates, based on a written operations research project of honours or masters (or similar) level. these projects are evaluated by a panel of experts, and then a cash prize is awarded to the winner at the annual conference each year. nominations usually close around june.  in 2019 and 2020, the society hosted a science communication competition. entries consisted of three-minute science communication videos based on a research project, and were evaluated by a panel of experts. cash prizes were awarded to the top entries each year. the top 5 video's are available on orssa's youtube channel.  references  external links     operations research societies professional associations based in south africa organizations established in 1969 1969 establishments in south africa
nina semyonovna youshkevitch (7 december 1920 - 3 november 1998) was a franco-russian ballet dancer and teacher.  she was born in odessa, soviet ukraine, on 7 december 1920, the daughter of the playwright and novelist semyon yushkevich and his second wife, anastasia solomonovna youshkevitch, nee selinger. her sister was lyric soprano natalia semyonovna youshkevitch. the family left war-torn ukraine in 1921, settling in paris where they became french citizens. youshkevitch trained with former ballerinas of the mariinsky theatre olga preobrajenska, and lubov egorova, and with french choreographer and ballet master leo staats. she also studied at the ecole du louvre; and graduated in piano from the conservatoire de paris.  youshkevitch was a protegee of bronislava nijinska, who in 1930 brought her into the corps de ballet of the opera russe a paris. staats also employed her in works that he staged for the summer season on the cote d'azure, including ballets on a floating, open-air stage; and in the walpurgisnacht ballet in faust, at the nice opera. in 1934, youshkevitch joined the theatre de la danse nijinska where she made her debut as la dame en bleu in the ballet les biches; performed as the bride in le baiser de la fee; and danced en travesti among the men in nijinska's bolero. along with other members of nijinska's company, youshkevitch went on to join the ballets russes for its 1934 monte carlo season. there she danced the waltz in les sylphides, and appeared among the amazones and russian peasants in nijinska's variations.  youshkevitch was a principal dancer on the ballets russes' first tour of australia and new zealand in 1936-1937. here she starred as the princess in nijinska's ballet les cent baisers, as odette in le lac des cygnes, and as aurora in aurora's wedding. she danced the role of the principal nymph in vaslav nijinsky's l'apres-midi d'un faune; appeared as action in leonide massine's les presages; and played leading roles in massine's les contes russes and in michel fokine's carnaval and les sylphides. british dance critic arnold haskell, who accompanied the tour, wrote of her: "as a dancer the most astonishing was nina youchkev
itch...she has an unusual sense of music and the grand manner that made her performances in aurora's wedding and the swan lake absolutely unforgettable...among the younger dancers of this company she is the one obvious hundred percent classical ballerina."  she followed her mentor, nijinska, to poland in 1937, where the latter founded the balet polski aka les ballets polonais aka the polish ballets. in this company, which won grand prix for performance and for choreography at the exposition internationale in paris that year, youshkevitch created principal roles in the ballets concerto de chopin, apollon et la belle, and le rappel. the troupe went on to perform in london and in berlin. youshkevitch remained with the company after nijinska's departure, performing with them at the 1939 world's fair in new york city.  narrowly escaping from poland before the nazi invasion, youshkevitch returned to paris. nijinska invited her to reprise her role in chopin concerto at the hollywood bowl in 1940. though nijinska's telegram did not reach her until the concert had already taken place, it enabled youshkevitch to receive a visa to travel to america; and she performed again in chopin concerto at the jacob's pillow dance festival in 1942. in the united states, she toured with the polish company of felix sadowski; and performed with the metropolitan opera ballet. she appeared as aurora in the sleeping beauty, sponsored by the san francisco russian opera and ballet association in 1945. billed as the first full-length production of petipa's ballet in the united states, in three acts and a prologue; it was the first full-length sleeping beauty on the west coast.  after retiring from the stage because of an injury, youshkevitch began teaching at nijinska's hollywood dance studio; and at the carnegie hall studios in new york. she founded her own concert group called the nina youshkevitch ballet workshop, in new york city. after her marriage, she taught for 13 years at wayne state college, in wayne, nebraska. she opened her own dance school, also called the nina youshkevitch ballet workshop, in new york city in 1978; and continued to teach there until shortly before her death. among her students was jennie somogyi, later a principal with new york city ballet.  in 1990, youshkevitch assisted irina nijinska, in reviving the bride's variation from le baiser de la fee, at the new york public library for the performing arts. in 1995, working from notations,
youshkevitch revived bronislava nijinska's ballet bolero for the oakland ballet, in california. she went on to revive chopin concerto for the students of goucher college, in towson, maryland, in 1995-1996; and staged the ballet's second movement pas de deux for the oakland ballet in 1997. she was preparing to stage the full chopin concerto for the oakland ballet when she died.  she married robert johnson, and they had one son, who in 1998 was dance critic for the newark star-ledger. she died in manhattan, at roosevelt hospital, on 3 november 1998.  references  1920 births 1998 deaths 20th-century french ballet dancers people from odessa soviet emigrants to france 20th-century russian ballet dancers
door kickers is a real-time tactics video game developed and published by romanian indie studio killhouse games. the game was released for microsoft windows on october 20, 2014, and later for the ipad and android on june 24, 2015 and september 4, 2015 respectively. a nintendo switch version was released on december 26, 2020, published by qubicgames.  a sequel, door kickers 2 - task force north, which follows special operations forces in a fictional middle eastern country, was released in 2020.  the player controls an elite squad of swat operatives who are pitted against several varieties of criminals and terrorists.  gameplay   door kickers allows the player to create a squad of up to ten playable characters, each of which is able customized with classes, weapons, armor, utilities, and gear. every class has a unique variety of weapons, each of which caters to particular situations and playstyles. as the team completes missions they will level up, both as a squad and individually.  the five available classes are pointman, assaulter, breacher, stealth, and shield. pointmen are equipped with just pistols and no primary weapon, but have the highest mobility out of all five. assaulters can choose between submachine guns and rifles, and breachers are allowed to have shotguns. the stealth class allows players to silently dispatch enemies with suppressed weaponry, and the shield is equipped with a riot shield and a sidearm, with no other gear.  as the team levels up, the player will earn doctrine points which can be allocated to improve the squad with abilities and perks. leveling up a character individually will also improve their experience in the field: marksmanship, assault shooting, and field skills will all be upgraded upon leveling up.  campaigns and single missions  the game has six main campaigns, each with a different amount of missions. as a player completes a level they will be rewarded with up to three 'stars' depending on their performance during that mission-stars are used to purchase weapons and equipment for the operatives. single missions are missions not tied to a campaign and can be completed at one's own leisure without having to worry about permanent squad casualties. door kickers also features mapping and modding support.  missions can be of eight varieties: clear hostiles, hostage rescue, bomb defusal, stop execution, protect the vip, arrest warrant, dope raid, and robbery in progress.  game mechanics  the player views the game from a top-down view. areas not in view of
the squad are marked with a blue or black fog-of-war. in some missions there are multiple points at which one is allowed to deploy operatives, allowing for strategical collaboration between the group. the player is able to manually draw out walk paths for their officers and plot out orders along the path with their mouse, as well as specifically manipulate where they look. a pause feature allows the player to path several characters at the same time and have them simultaneously perform their orders.  hence the name, door kickers relies heavily on breaching rooms. the game gives players several options in doing so, however, and allows them to fine-tune every detail due to the pathing mechanic. players are able to order operatives to breach rooms in a variety of ways, such as with breaching charges or just kicking it. they are also able to order their characters to throw flashbangs or other grenades into the room before allowing their operatives to rush in. once again, the player is able to map out specific paths for the operatives to follow, allowing them to finely control exactly what each operative does at any given point: they can be ordered to cover each other and engage enemies through simply adding look orders to their path.  the team also has the ability to handcuff enemies with arrest warrants, rescue hostages, defuse bombs, and escort and control a vip; these actions can be performed by the player by simply issuing the relevant instructions on an operative's path.  in some missions, off-map sniper support is offered.  reception  reviews  door kickers was positively received by critics. rock, paper, shotgun stated "door kickers is a smashing top-down tactical masterclass, with enough missions to shake a nightstick at, randomised enemy placements to add further variety, and a bundled level editor allows devious designers to create their own maps and missions...door kickers is a complete package of planning, panicking and policing." indie statik proclaimed that "...it's a thing of beauty and manages to capture the planning and satisfying execution of more complex strategy games, as well as the gung-ho and the popping-off of growly man in military shooters. (...) it's probably the best man-shootery game i've played in years." in a giant bomb quick look, matt rorie praised it and said he liked the game quite a bit.  awards  rock, paper, shotgun: best tactics of 2014  sequels and spin-offs  door kickers 2 - task force north a sequel, door kickers 2 -
task force north, was released through steam early access on november 3, 2020. while the game was initially planned for a q4 2016 release, the game received substantial delays and was trapped in development hell for several years. an official release trailer debuted on february 4, 2020, teasing a q2 2020 release date ― however, this too was pushed back several months.   door kickers 2 is set in the middle east and features improved weapon variety, equipment, ai, and various new gameplay features in a 3d environment. many of the features that were criticized in door kickers were improved in the sequel, such as the stealth mechanics.  door kickers: action squad door kickers: action squad is a spin-off created on behalf of killhouse games by another studio, pixelshard. the game was first teased on august 1, 2017 in a comic on the khg website. a day later, an official trailer was released. the game strays from the series' traditional top-down gameplay in favor of a side-scrolling action game.  references  external links     2014 video games real-time strategy video games android (operating system) games indie video games ios games linux games video games about police officers video games developed in romania windows games nintendo switch games cooperative video games multiplayer and single-player video games
on march 12, 1992, in the rivercrest area of fort worth, texas, intruders attacked jack koslow and caren courtney koslow, a husband and wife, in their house. caren koslow's throat was slashed, killing her, while jack escaped the house and survived.  crime authorities initially suspected jack koslow. they ultimately found that two people, jeffrey dillingham and brian dennis salter, had attacked the koslows, with dillingham beating them and salter slashing their throats. after the attack they stole a wristwatch worth $1,600 and $200 in cash from a wallet.  kristi anne koslow, the daughter of jack koslow and stepdaughter of caren koslow, had conspired with dillingham and salter in order to get inheritance money. kristi had provided them with the alarm codes so they could sneak into the koslow residence. kristi koslow had promised them $1 million if they carried out the attack.  background at the time of the murder, jack koslow, a helicopter pilot, was 48. caren koslow, a member of a family of petroleum businesspeople, was 40, and kristi koslow was 17. mike cochran of the associated press stated that the koslows were at the "periphery" of the "social whirl" of fort worth.  dillingham, born march 6, 1973, was an employee at a video store. salter was born on april 30, 1972. dillingham and salter were both 19. salter was the boyfriend of kristi koslow.  legal consequences salter received a life sentence as part of a plea agreement. in 1994 kristi koslow was convicted of murder. she also received a life sentence. dillingham refused a plea agreement, was convicted, and received the death penalty.  dillingham, texas department of criminal justice (tdcj) #999071, was received by the prison system on august 31, 1993 at age 20. dillingham was initially located in the ellis unit, but was transferred to the allan b. polunsky unit (formerly the terrell unit) in 1999. the site of his execution was the huntsville unit. dillingham was executed at age 27, by lethal injection, on november 1, 2000.   kristi koslow, tdcj #00677795, is located at the hobby unit. salter, tdcj #00678090, is located at the alfred hughes unit
.  aftermath the fort worth library maintains a collection of newspaper clippings related to this case under "koslow, kristi". due to the prominence of the case, in 2015 tarrant county authorities chose to keep the paper court documents of the case as historical documents even though they have been digitized.  the case was documented in "family plot," episode 6 of season 7 of power, privilege & justice and "please kill for me," episode 12 of season 3 of killer kids and in the season 15 episode 8 of "killer couples".  see also  capital punishment in texas  capital punishment in the united states  list of people executed in texas, 2000-2009  references  external links  history of fort worth, texas 1992 murders in the united states murder in texas march 1992 events in the united states march 1992 crimes female murder victims deaths by blade weapons
forbes 30 under 30 is a set of lists of people under 30 years old issued annually by forbes magazine and some of its regional editions. the american lists recognize 600 business and industry figures, with 30 selected in twenty industries each. asia and europe also each have ten categories for a total of 300 each, while africa has a single list of 30 people. forbes hosts associated conferences and a section of its website called 30 under 30.  history forbes launched its 30 under 30 list in 2011 under the direction of randall lane. by 2016, the nominations for the list had reached more than 15,000, with forbes editors selecting 30 winners for each of 20 categories.  over time, forbes has expanded the feature to establish continental lists for asia, europe (launched in 2016), and africa.  forbes also uses the under 30 name for a dedicated channel on its website, associated with a 30 under 30 social media app. the washington post reports the channel aims to provide "millennial-focused programming to the magazine's many influential consumers." the social media app is a collaboration with tinder via previous 30 under 30 honoree sean rad, cofounder and president of tinder.  conferences in addition to the magazine feature, forbes hosts an annual 30 under 30 summit. in 2014 and 2015, the summit was held in philadelphia, with monica lewinsky making headlines at the first summit for her address on cyberbullying. the 2016 and 2017 summits were both held in october in boston. organizers include previous 30 under 30 honorees chef chris coombs, boston mayoral aide dan koh, and pediatric oncology professor cigall kadoch.  in april 2016, forbes held its first 30 under 30 international summit, focused on europe, the middle east and africa and taking place in tel aviv and jerusalem. speakers included monica lewinsky, shimon peres and okieriete onaodowan. onaodowan was a 2016 honoree on the 30 under 30 hollywood & entertainment list for his portrayal of hercules mulligan and james madison in hamilton.  on december 9, 2020, forbes hosted the virtual "2020 forbes power women's summit" to recognize women who lead major movements and build billion-dollar businesses.  criticism the 30 under 30 list has drawn some criticism, including for under-recognition of young racial minorities and women. the root observed that 29 of 30 journalists honored on the inaugural media list in 2011 were white, and none black or latino. elle south africa noted the gender imbalance of the 2014 lists, asking, "where are the women?" demographics of
the forbes selections have continued to draw interest; poynter reported the 2015 media list had 18 women, the most in the list's five-year history.  in response to criticism, forbes launched in 2020 "power rising: these are the women to watch" along with publishing a list of the world's 100 most powerful women. in 2021, forbes published "black futures month: 8 black entrepreneurs to watch" and launched forbes eq (equity quotient), a platform where businesses, entrepreneurs and nonprofit organizations from underrepresented groups share their experiences.  see also fortunes 40 under 40 the business journals forty under 40  references  external links    forbes lists 2011 introductions
rotaprint was a company manufacturing offset litho printing presses located in berlin, germany from 1904 to 1989. at the height of its activities it employed about 1,000 workers making it one of the largest employers in the wedding district of berlin.  references  external links    printing press manufacturers manufacturing companies based in berlin manufacturing companies established in 1904 german brands
san paolo in campo marzio is a roman catholic church in verona, region of veneto, italy.  history the church was originally built by the umiliati order in 1188 and dedicated to st paul apostle. it was refashioned in 1763 by alessandro pompei. in 1948, after much damage during world war ii, it again was rebuilt. the second altar on the right has a canvas depicting saints anne, joseph, young john the baptist before the madonna with two donors by girolamo dai libri. in the marogna chapel near the presbytery, are frescoes by paolo farinati and an altarpiece depicting the madonna, john the baptist, and st anthony of padua with two donors of the marogna family (circa 1565) by paolo veronese. the apse has a painting depicting the madonna with saints peter and paul (1516) by  giovanni caroto. the fourth altar on the left has a canvas depicting st francis of paola by felice brusasorci. the second altar on the left has a canvas depicting the madonna in glory with saints nicolo and francis (1588) by paolo farinati. in the sacristy is a canvas depicting the madonna with st anthony abbot and mary magdalen by francesco bonsignori.  references  roman catholic churches in verona 12th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy churches completed in 1188 roman catholic churches completed in 1763
erik prekop (born 8 october 1997) is a slovak football forward who currently plays for fc hradec kralove. he was previously loaned to lower division teams.  club career  as trencin prekop made his professional fortuna liga debut for as trencin against zemplin michalovce on 16 july 2016. trencin lost the away game 2:1. prekop came on in the 65th minute, replacing denis janco.  references  external links  as trencin official club profile  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1997 births living people slovak footballers association football forwards as trencin players fk inter bratislava players fc petrzalka players fc hradec kralove players expatriate footballers in the czech republic slovak super liga players sportspeople from trencin
the morning watch is a short autobiographical novel which author james agee began writing in 1947. completing the text in 1950, agee wrote to john huston that the protagonist was a "12-year-old boy (roughly myself) at edge of puberty, peak of certain kinds of hypersensitive introversion, isolation, and a certain priggishness."  plot  the morning watch explores the thoughts and feelings of 12-year-old richard, a student at an unnamed episcopal boarding school (based on agee's schooling at st. andrew's-sewanee school in sewanee, tennessee), over the course of a few hours in the early morning of good friday in 1923. part i opens with richard waking up to participate in the 4 am shift of a nightlong prayer vigil in the school's chapel; in part ii he goes to the chapel, prays, and decides to attend the 4:30 shift as well; in part iii he leaves the chapel at 5 am with two other boys, and they all run off to swim in the lake rather than go straight back to their dormitory, knowing they will be punished for this infraction. on their way to the lake, richard discovers the intact shed skin of a locust, clinging to a tree; at the lake, the boys swim and then kill a snake; as they head back to school, richard takes the locust shell with him.  editions the text of the morning watch first appeared in the rome-based literary journal botteghe oscure in 1950 and was published by houghton mifflin the following year. subsequent editions include ballantine books (1966), avon books (1980), and library of america (2005).  references  1951 american novels american autobiographical novels culture of knoxville, tennessee american novellas houghton mifflin books
andrew whitford (born 17 march 1965) is a new zealand former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people new zealand male cyclists olympic cyclists of new zealand cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from manchester commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for new zealand cyclists at the 1986 commonwealth games
emanuele greppi (27 november 1853 - 9 january 1931), 6th count of bussero and corneliano was an italian lawyer, politician and historian. he was mayor of milan. he served in the senate of the kingdom of italy.  references  1853 births 1931 deaths italian lawyers 19th-century italian politicians members of the senate of the kingdom of italy mayors of milan
the following lists events that happened in 1991 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - steingrimur hermannsson, davið oddsson  events 20 april - icelandic parliamentary election, 1991  births  26 february - bjorn bergmann sigurðarson, footballer. 16 march - arnar darri petursson, footballer 8 april - drofn haraldsdottir, handball player 10 may - ægir steinarsson, basketball player 28 june - johanna maria sigmundsdottir, politician. 2 august - hrafnhildur luthersdottir, swimmer. 10 august - dagny brynjarsdottir, footballer 1 september - haukur heiðar hauksson, footballer 15 november - helga margret þorsteinsdottir, heptathlete  deaths 1 september - hannibal valdimarsson, politician (b. 1903).  4 april - palmi jonsson, businessman and entrepreneur (b. 1923)  references    1990s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
mediterranean wetlands comprise the wetlands of the mediterranean region.  wetlands are ubiquitous and they may briefly be defined as transitional spaces between land and water. in a more detailed sense, according to the ramsar convention on wetlands, wetlands are defined as: "areas of marsh, fen, peat land or water, whether natural or artificial, permanent or temporary, with water that is static or flowing, fresh, brackish or salt, including areas of marine water the depth of which at low tide does not exceed six metres [.....] and may incorporate riparian and coastal zones adjacent to the wetlands, and islands or bodies of marine water deeper than six metres at low tide lying within the wetlands".  the ramsar classification of wetland types includes 42 types which can be broadly divided into:  marine and coastal wetlands  inland wetlands  human-made wetlands  among the richest ecosystems in the world, wetlands have an exceptional value, but are also the most threatened. in the mediterranean, they support high concentrations of birds, mammals, reptiles, amphibians, fish and invertebrate species that cannot be found anywhere else in the world.  key figures on biodiversity in med region  furthermore, these ecosystems insure directly - and for free - services for millions of people. as natural infrastructures, they play a number of roles in the environment, principally water purification, flood control, carbon sink and shoreline stability.  unfortunately, wetlands continue to be among the world's most threatened ecosystems; 50% of the mediterranean wetlands disappeared during the 20th century, and those that remain have been degraded or artificialized. there are 15 to 22 million hectares of wetlands in the mediterranean region, a fourth of which are artificial, such as dam reservoirs and fish-farming ponds.  the mediterranean region is also a hotspot of global biodiversity, but the greatest direct threat to that biodiversity is the disappearance of these ecosystems. plants and animals combined, one out of three mediterranean wetland species is endangered.  a scientific survey of 314 mediterranean coastal wetlands shows that human activities, such as agriculture, have converted 71% of mediterranean natural coastal wetland habitat into farmland, 21% by artificialization, and 8% by urban expansion.  one of the greatest threats to the mediterranean wetlands is water extraction. irrigated agriculture is the greatest water consumer in the region, accounting for 2/3 of total consumption. rivers flow rates are falling due to water extraction, retention by dams, and the effects of climate change.  types of mediterranean wetlands  wetlands lie at the interface between land and water, and are thus
very diverse. the ramsar convention classified wetlands into three main types:   marine/coastal  brackish lagoons  estuaries and deltas  chotts  sebkhas  dayas  garaet  continental  salt and brackish marshes  freshwater marshes  natural lakes  temporary pools  riparian woodlands  peat-bogs  wadis  gueltas  artificial  saltpans  fishponds  reservoirs  temporary pools  ricefields  oases  regions in the mediterranean basin  the mediterranean region is unique because of its special type of climate and its very long history of human use. wetlands in the mediterranean basin are varied, and there are many different types in every country. for example:   africa  algeria (chott ech chergui)  egypt (wadi el rayan protected area)  libya (ain elzarga)  morocco (oasis du tafilalet)  tunisia (chott el jerid)  asia  israel (hula nature reserve)  jordan (azraq oasis)  lebanon (palm islands nature reserve)  syrian arab republic (sabkhat al-jabbul nature reserve)  europe  albania (lake shkodra and river buna)  bosnia and herzegovina (livanjsko polje: livno karst field)  bulgaria (belene islands complex)  croatia (lonjsko polje and mokro polje including krapje dol)  cyprus (larnaca salt lake)  france (camargue)  greece (messolonghi lagoons)  italy (valli residue del comprensorio di comacchio)  macedonia (lake prespa)  malta (ghadira)  monaco (reserve sous-marine du larvotto)  montenegro (skadarsko jezero)  portugal (estuario do sado)  serbia (gornje podunavlje)  slovenia (lake cerknica & its environs)  spain (donana)  turkey (lake burdur)  values of mediterranean wetlands  man benefits from wetlands' natural functions and services, which help to meet the needs of millions of people - to cultivate soil, to fish for food, to cut trees for building, to hunt the waterfowl for leisure activities, to organize ecotourism programs in remarkable sites, to use their water for our domestic or agricultural needs, etc.   cultural value  some cultural values developed in wetland areas are non-material and have become part of the
life cycle and livelihood of local residents, such as rituals, beliefs, the seasonal work calendar, and different traditional techniques.   ecological value  the mediterranean wetlands have a high percentage of endemic species. they not only provide breeding and wintering for millions of birds, they also play a role as a stopping place for an even larger number of birds during migration periods.   economic value  environmental economics assumes that by giving a monetary value to nature, it would allow us to better take into account its importance in development choices. the millennium ecosystem assessment gave wetlands a value of us$15 trillion in 1997.    hydrological value  wetlands greatly influence the flow and quality of water, thus providing benefits to humans. they store and slowly release surface water, rain, snowmelt and flood waters, maintaining soil humidity during dry periods. but the most important service is the supply of clean water for drinking, agriculture, and industries. scientists have estimated that a 2,500 acre wetland in georgia saves $1 million in water pollution control costs annually (ota 1993).  pressures on mediterranean wetlands  despite all the services they provide to human societies, mediterranean wetlands continue to face many pressures from human activities. their loss and degradation, started centuries ago, are often considered to be an unfortunate but unavoidable effect of the human development process and needs.  these negative impacts result from a number of pressures such as agriculture, urbanization, industry, fishing, tourism development, energy, transport and hunting. each kind of pressure may impact several types of wetland services. for example, agricultural development may impact wetland surfaces, hydraulic regimes, water quality, and wetland types/ landscapes.  the ramsar convention and the mediterranean wetlands initiative  the convention on wetlands, called the ramsar convention, is an intergovernmental treaty concerning the wetlands. ramsar's 15 regional initiatives support cooperation and capacity-building on wetland-related issues in specific regions or sub-regions. there are two types of regional initiatives: ramsar regional centres for training and capacity building, and networks for regional cooperation. in 2016 there are 15 ramsar regional initiatives covering regions of the mediterranean, asia, africa and south america. those regional networks provide a platform for collaboration between governments, technical experts, international ngos, local communities and private companies.  the mediterranean wetland observatory (mwo) was established in 2008 at the request of the mediterranean wetlands committee (medwet/com) as a multi-partner project coordinated by tour du valat (tdv), the research institute for the conservation of mediterranean wetlands, based in arles,
france. founded more than 50 years ago by luc hoffmann, the tour du valat has since then developed its research activities for the conservation of mediterranean wetlands with a major mission:  "better understanding of wetlands for better management".  the main objective of the mwo is to act as a wetland management tool serving the medwet initiative's countries. the ultimate aim of this regional tool, in collaboration with medwet, is to help to improve political decisions regarding the conservation and sustainable management of wetlands, particularly in terms of legislation, governance and best practices.  references   publications of the mwo  scientific articles developing a wetlands observatory: the mediterranean case, findings and lessons existing areas and past changes of wetland extent in the mediterranean region: an overview  external links ramsar convention on wetlands medwet, the mediterranean wetlands initiative tour du valat, a research centre for the conservation of mediterranean wetlands  wetlands
this is a list of characters in the television series criminal minds: beyond borders, an american police procedural drama that premiered march 16, 2016, on cbs in the united states.  main characters  jack garrett   played by gary sinise, unit chief ssa jack garrett is a 20-year veteran agent with the fbi. jack is the unit chief of the international response team (irt), which specializes in solving cases that involve american citizens on international soil. through his job, he shares personal history with aaron hotchner and david rossi of the fbi's behavioral analysis unit and clara seger from his own team. in his personal life, garrett is married to his wife karen (sherry stringfield) and together they have six children, ryan, josie, r.j., millie and emma. his son ryan recently got into the fbi academy which concerned him, as ryan would therefore be putting himself in harm's way as an agent. his daughter josie recently went away to college. garrett takes his job seriously and hopes to make the world a safer place for his family to live in.  clara seger   played by alana de la garza, ssa clara seger is a smart, well-traveled and multi-lingual cultural anthropologist and special agent with the irt. before rejoining the irt in 2016, seger was married to a man named brad who was a fellow agent and, like her, knew jack. seger is fluent in 13 languages, including thai, french and creole. in 2013, she took a sabbatical from the fbi after her husband brad died from unknown causes, which clara struggled to cope with. she later, reluctantly, returned to the irt in 2016.  the character did not appear in the series' backdoor pilot (criminal minds "beyond borders"), but instead replaced anna gunn's "law expert and linguist lily lambert" in the first episode (march 16, 2016).  when de la garza spoke to yahoo! in march 2016, she raved about the ease and comfortableness of the character's wardrobe: flat-heeled shoes, cargo pants, and loose-fitting t-shirts.  seger is a cultural anthropologist, returning to the federal bureau of investigation's international response team in the first season after taking a two-year sabbatical following the death of her co-worker and husband.  she speaks 13 languages fluently, including french and thai, a feat that complicated de la garza's performances: "that was tricky for me, to kind of swallow it and make it sound authentic. [...]
in thai, there was a line i had to say that i kept saying like a question but it was actually a statement. i was like, 'this feels awkward.' it's like retraining your brain."  matt simmons   played by daniel henney, ssa matthew "matt" simmons is a special operations agent and special agent with the irt. simmons is married to his wife kristy (kelly frye) and has a total of four young children, including sons jake and david and twin daughters. like garrett, simmons' full and fulfilling family life was a deliberate choice. through his job, simmons has some prior history with derek morgan and jj of the fbi's behavioral analysis unit. he was a former member of a special ops unit, and his experience with the unit allowed him to hone his profiling skills.  russ montgomery   played by tyler james williams, russ "monty" montgomery is a technical analyst with the irt. monty has some prior history and friendship with penelope garcia, the tech analyst of the fbi's behavioral analysis unit. much like garcia, he upholds a positive attitude, though he shows it in a different way. in addition to his job as a technical analyst, he liaises with the families of victims on the american homeland while the rest of his group is away.  mae jarvis   played by annie funke, mae jarvis is a medical examiner and special agent with the fbi's international response team (irt). young and spunky, mae has a fun-loving big bro-little sis relationship with simmons and was in the fbi purely as a medical examiner before being brought onto the irt as a resident medical examiner to bypass the bureaucratic red tape in various countries. jarvis was briefly engaged to a man but later called off the wedding due to her devotion to her job with the irt.  recurring  karen garrett  played by sherry stringfield, karen garrett is the wife of jack garrett and the mother of their five children.  josie garrett  played by brittany uomoleale, josie garrett is the middle daughter of jack and karen garrett's five children.  kristy simmons  played by kelly frye, kristy simmons is the wife of matthew simmons and the mother of their four children.  jake simmons  played by ezra dewey, jake simmons is the son of matthew and kristy simmons and david's twin brother.  david simmons  played by declan whaley, david simmons is the son of matthew and kristy simmons and jakes's twin brother.  ryan garrett  played by matt cohen, ryan garrett
is jack's and karen's oldest son who is currently training at the fbi academy and following in his father's footsteps.  characters from criminal minds  david rossi - portrayed by joe mantegnarossi appeared in the first episode of season one "the harmful one". in the opening scene of the episode, rossi is at the fbi firing range with jack garrett. he later reappeared in the season two episode "il mostro", in which he aided the irt while they were on a case in florence, italy.  penelope garcia - portrayed by kirsten vangsnessgarcia appeared in the third episode of season one "denial". in the opening scene of the episode, garcia is looking for her octopus coffee mug that russ montgomery took. she later returned in the season two premiere "lost souls", in which she helped monty track down victims' families while the irt were investigating a mass abduction in tanzania.   emily prentiss - portrayed by paget brewsterprentiss appeared in the season two episode "type a", in which she aided the irt track down an unsub active in new york city and taiwan.  mateo "matt" cruz - portrayed by esai moralescruz appeared in the season two episode "la huesuda", in which he called jack regarding information about his son, ryan.  references    chicago fire criminal minds: beyond borders characters
royal pier may refer to:  royal pier, southampton royal pier, aberystwyth royal suspension chain pier
kate wallach (1905-1979) was a legal scholar and librarian in baton rouge, louisiana, known for her work research in louisiana law.  education kate wallach was a jewish woman born to ludwig wallach and berta wallach (nee schonbeck) on may 17, 1905 in krefeld, germany. her father was a partner in a silk wholesale firm, but lost his position following the rise of the nazis.  wallach attended a girls' high school in krefeld, and attended a lyzeum in dahlem after moving to berlin. unsatisfied with the level of education, she then continued to attend classes established by helene lange. she passed her abitur (a final examination taken at the conclusion of secondary education) in september 1924. wallach studied law at berlin, freiburg, wurzberg, and bonn universities and passed her first state examination in january 1930 at cologne university. she then passed her second state examination in 1933, but was not allowed to work as a lawyer or assessor following the law for the restoration of the professional civil service, that targeted jews in civil service.  in 1938, wallach enrolled at the university of wisconsin-madison, where she graduated with an ll.b in just two years. she was also admitted to the order of the coif, was an honorary editor of the wisconsin law review, and was in the kappa beta phi sorority. in 1942 wallach received a b.a. in library science. she passed the bar exam in 1942 and was admitted at court.  career in 1935, wallach obtained a temporary visa to emigrate to the united states, and worked as a secretary and taught german. after being rejected from studying law, she worked without pay for a patent lawyer to learn about the american legal system. she moved to new haven, connecticut in 1937 to work as a secretary for harry shulman at yale university. after completing law school, wallach worked as a cataloger at the law library at the university of michigan. she became a us citizen in 1942.  she worked as a lawyer in washington d.c. with the office of price administration and then the national labor relations board. she was also a member of the wisconsin state bar association. after world war ii, wallach was an advisor on international legal aspects of war crimes. in 1947, she returned to librarianship at the university of north carolina at chapel hill.  in 1949 wallach moved to baton rouge to be an assistant professor for the louisiana state university law school. also
a member of the library at the law school, she increased the number of books from 75,000 to 205,464 by her retirement. she also conducted academic research, and published bibliographical history of louisiana civil law sources, her most important work, in 1955, along with research in louisiana law in 1958, and union list of basic latin american legal materials in 1971. she became a chair of the library in 1964, and received a jd in 1966. she resigned from administrative work with the library in 1970.  wallach was a member of the soroptimists, and became director in 1951 and president in 1954.  personal life wallach's younger brother ernst came to the us in 1937. in the process of getting their parents out of germany, they lost their father in 1941 to a heart attack, their grandmother in 1942 after she was sent to theresienstadt, and their mother in 1944, who was sent to auschwitz. wallach died on december 27, 1979 due to cancer.  selected works  "nichtige kundigungen nach deutschem arbeitsrecht. ein beitrag zur lehre vom bestandsschutz des arbeitsvertrages." diss. koln: 1931  "designations of super-employer unit under national labor relations act." wisconsin law review (1940): 556-567  "postwar problems of the law library equipment and quarters." law library journal (1948): 329-334  manual for legal bibliography. baton rouge: 1951; oil and gas bibliography. baton rouge: 1953  bibliographical history of louisiana civil law sources. baton rouge: 1955  research in louisiana law. baton rouge: 1958  union list of basic latin american legal materials. south hackensack, new jersey: 1971  louisiana american legal research manual. baton rouge: 1972  co-author of comparative coastal zone management. baton rouge: 1977.  references  1905 births 1979 deaths university of wisconsin law school alumni jewish women american legal scholars university of michigan staff jewish american attorneys people from krefeld jewish emigrants from nazi germany to the united states louisiana state university faculty university of cologne alumni american women librarians university of north carolina at chapel hill staff naturalized citizens of the united states 20th-century american women lawyers 20th-century american lawyers american women academics 20th-century american jews
jinghu subdistrict () is a subdistrict in ningjiang district, songyuan, jilin province, china. , it has three residential communities under its administration: jinghu community jing'an community () wanghu community ()  see also   list of township-level divisions of jilin  references   township-level divisions of jilin songyuan
basil george watson (12 october 1894 - 28 march 1917) was an australian aviation pioneer.  born in bendigo, the only son of mr and mrs james i. watson, and grandson of john boyd watson, he died when his aeroplane crashed in port phillip bay on 28 march 1917, and was buried at boroondara general cemetery, kew, two days later.  footnotes  references    anon, "mr basil watson killed: well-known bendigo aviator: falls on seashore at laverton: death instantaneous", the bendigonian, (thursday, 29 march 1917) p.23.  anon, funeral of basil watson, the argus, (monday, 2 april 1917), p.11.  kingsley, terri-anne, dashing test pilot to flying mailman and barnstormer: meet bendigo's basil watson, abc central victoria, monday, 11 july 2016.  trove list: basil george watson.  winter, carol, basil watson: pioneer aviator, penfolk publishing, (blackburn), 2015.   1894 births 1917 deaths australian aviators aviators killed in aviation accidents or incidents in australia people from bendigo victims of aviation accidents or incidents in 1917
muslin, a cotton fabric of plain weave, was hand woven in the region around dhaka, bengal (now bangladesh), and exported to europe, the middle east, and other markets, for much of the 17th and 18th centuries.  origins  bengal has manufactured textiles for many centuries, as recorded in ancient hand-written and printed documents. the periplus of the erythraean sea mentions arab and greek merchants trading between india and the red sea port of aduli (in present-day eritrea), egypt and ethiopia in the second century ce. cloths including muslin were exchanged for ivory, tortoiseshell and rhinoceros-horn at that time. muslin was traded from barygaza - an ancient port of india located in gujarat - to different parts of indian subcontinent before european merchants came to india.  the romans prized muslin highly, using bullion and gold coins to buy the material from deccan and south india. they introduced muslin into europe, and eventually it became very popular. a chinese voyager, ma huan, wrote about five or six varieties of fine cloths after visiting bengal in the early fifteenth century; he mentions that bengal muslin was highly priced in china at that time.  mughal era  under mughal rule, bengal was a center of the worldwide muslin, silk and pearl trades. during the mughal era, the most important center of cotton production was bengal, particularly around its capital city of dhaka, leading to muslin being called "daka" in distant markets such as central asia. bengal also exported cotton and silk textiles to markets such as europe, indonesia and japan. bengal produced more than 50% of textiles and around 80% of silks imported by the dutch from asia, for example.  sixteenth century in the early sixteenth century, a portuguese apothecary named tomes pires mentioned that bengal muslins were traded to thailand and china. bengali muslin was also traded throughout the muslim world, from the middle east to southeast asia. by 1580, some portuguese traders settled at dhaka and sripur, from where they started exporting muslin, cotton and silk goods to europe and southeast asia.  during ottoman rule from the sixteenth century onwards, large quantities of muslin was exported to the middle east. muslin turbans were favoured by the ottomans. in the sixteenth century, portuguese started trading textiles from the indian subcontinent through the persian gulf including high quality of muslins.  in the seventeenth century, the portuguese trade declined.  seventeenth century in the early seventeenth century, british and
dutch merchants arrived at the indian subcontinent sailing via the red sea. at the same time, armenian merchants from iran came to the indian subcontinent travelling on land through qandahar and isfahan. they traded textile goods including muslin from bengal to aleppo of syria. in an official inventory of istanbul market dated from 1640, 20 types of muslins were found and the highest value found there is 1600 silver pence. as the business expanded, european companies became interested in founding their own factories in dhaka.  the dutch made their factory in dhaka in 1663, the british in 1669 and the french in 1682.  eighteenth century the ostend company came to bengal at the beginning of the eighteenth century. they purchased textiles through agents and their own officials. when they found the business very profitable, they also made settlements in dhaka.  available statistics show that in 1747 the trade of dhaka cotton goods (primarily muslin), including local trade valued twenty-eight and a half lakh rupees.  decline bengal was conquered by the british east india company after the battle of plassey in 1757 and the british bengal presidency was founded in 1765. british colonization forced open the bengali market to british goods, while at the same time britain implemented protectionist policies such as bans and high tariffs that restricted bengali imports to britain. raw cotton was also imported without taxes or tariffs to british factories, which used them to manufacture textiles, many of which were exported back to bengal. british economic policies led to deindustrialization in bengal. british colonization was also followed by the great bengal famine of 1770, which killed a third of the bengali population.  from 1787 to 1788, dhaka suffered from severe natural calamities - especially heavy rainfall - and famine broke out. after the disaster, more emphasis was given on agriculture to reduce the effects of the famine. tax was revoked on the exportation of grains. so, people became more interested in agricultural works than weaving as the wages of labourers and other people working in agriculture suddenly rose.  from 1782 to 1787 the industrial revolution began in britain, and fine cotton was produced locally. during british colonial rule, the muslin industry declined due to various colonial policies, which supported imports of industrially manufactured textiles from britain. a heavy duty of 75 percent was imposed on export of cotton from bengal. these measures ultimately led to the decline of muslin trade in bengal.  in 1811, bengal was still a major exporter of cotton cloth to the americas and the indian ocean. however, bengali exports declined over the course of the early 19th century, as british imports to bengal
increased, from 25% in 1811 to 93% in 1840.  revival muslin saree was woven in bangladesh by a group of researchers under a government project.  the research team has woven six muslin sarees in 2020. it is expecting to launch the muslin saree in the market for everyone in the next two years.  see also  textile industry in bangladesh  history of bengal  notes  references  further reading                    history of bengal cotton industry cotton industry in india economic history of bangladesh economic history of india economy of british india heritage of bengal history of dhaka
sunil kumar kohli (s. k. kohli) (born august 17, 1958), a senior bureaucrat of indian civil services, was the financial advisor to defence services (fads). s.k kohli was the 46th controller general of defence accounts cgda, ministry of defence, of the republic of india. he is from 1981 batch idas (indian defence accounts department )cadre. he was addl cgda, and principal controller at delhi  and before that he served as joint secretary in ministry of water resources and is a  graduate from d.a.v college amristar, guru nanak university and holds a llb degree from  university of punjab. he holds a degree from national defence college, new delhi on defence strategic studies. he, as fads, was mandated to advise the ministry of defence regarding both capital and revenue expenditures and defence budget of govt. of india.he is a maverick defence finance analyst. he superannuated on 31 august 2018, succeeded by smt.madhulika p. sukul, idas(1982).  references  see also  indian defence accounts service  1958 births living people people from punjab, india indian civil servants alumni of the national defence college, india
samuel m. bay (june 1, 1810 - may 29, 1849)  was an american lawyer who represented dred scott in the 1847 scott v. emerson case. he was known for his prosecution of dedimus buell burr, who had put ground glass in his ill wife's food over time. he practiced law in jefferson and st. louis, missouri. bay served in the missouri legislature beginning in 1836 and was appointed as missouri attorney general from 1839 to 1845.   his father and grandfather were attorneys and his uncle dr. joseph lovell, was surgeon-general of the united states army. he studied under salmon p. chase, who was later secretary of the treasury under president abraham lincoln, and chief justice of the supreme court.  early life  samuel mansfield bay was born in hudson, new york in 1810. he attended hudson academy, where he studied latin, greek, and math. bay's father and grandfather were both lawyers. his father was a contemporary of martin van buren and his grandfather worked at the firm of ambrose spencer, who was a judge on the supreme court of new york for many years. samuel bay had a brother, william van ness bay.  bay often visited his uncle, dr. joseph lovell in washington, d.c., who was surgeon-general of the united states army. bay stayed in washington for about two years, where he attended a private school and was taught by salmon p. chase. chase held many political offices, including governor of ohio, united states senator, secretary of the treasury under president lincoln, and chief justice of the supreme court.  after finishing school, bay returned to new york and became a clerk in a large french importing house. the firm sent him to europe on business for five or six months. while away, bay decided to study law.  legal career  when bay returned to the united states from europe, he traveled to ohio, where judge swayne, a supreme court justice, asked bay to read law (study) with him in his office. shortly after his return he also visited columbia, south carolina, where he met his grand-uncle, judge elihu h. bay who spent forty-nine years as a judge on the south carolina supreme court. president jefferson offered judge bay a seat on the united states supreme court, but he declined. according to bay's brother william, samuel bay's visit with his uncle strongly influenced his desire to become an attorney.  after completing his studies, bay moved to union, missouri. he was elected to the missouri legislature in 1836
. when his term in the legislature ended, bay moved to jefferson city, where he established a law practice. he was appointed to the position of missouri attorney general by governor boggs. bay held the position of attorney-general from 1839 to 1845.  bay earned a wide reputation for his prosecution of dedimus buell burr (1813-1842), who was convicted and executed for the murder of his wife sally. sally, burr's third wife, had fallen ill and died after suffering from a fever for several weeks. doctors were unable to explain the illness, but there was no suspicion of foul play until one of burr's apprentices in his blacksmith shop said he believed burr had been putting pounded glass in his wife's medicine, eventually killing her. although the funeral procession for burr's wife was already underway, the body was returned to the city for a post mortem examination, where the examiner found a large quantity of pulverized glass in the woman's stomach. burr was arrested, but many thought he would be acquitted. bay found that burr refused to have anyone else administer medicine to his wife and had also had two previous wives die under similar conditions. the defense could not overcome this argument and burr was convicted. before being executed, burr admitted that he was guilty of this murder and the other two and said he was simply tired of each wife and wanted another.  bay had a partnership with abiel leonard in jefferson city until 1846 or 1847. around that time, bay moved the practice to st. louis and was appointed attorney for the state bank.  the dred scott case   in 1847, dred scott made his first legal contest for freedom in st. louis, missouri. judge alexander hamilton presided over the case and samuel m. bay acted as scott's attorney. francis b. murdoch was the scotts' original attorney and filed three suits against irene emerson, dred and harriet's former owner for trespass and false imprisonment. murdoch was replaced by charles d. drake. more than a year passed from the time of scott's first petition filed with the court and by the time the case was ready for trial, drake had left st. louis, in may or june 1847. drake prepared the case, but bay handled the proceedings in court.  to argue his case, bay needed to prove that scott had been taken into a free state and that he was presently a slave owned by irene emerson. bay established that scott had been a slave taken into free territory, brought back to missouri, and was being held there as a slave. testimony attested to this fact
, establishing that scott was irene emerson's slave in missouri and had accompanied her to forts armstrong and snelling. it was also established in testimony that mrs. emerson still claimed scott as her slave in missouri. bay thought at this point he had all the evidence to secure scott's freedom. however, the defense argued that scott had not legally proven that mrs. emerson was claiming him as a slave. during cross examination of samuel russell, who had testified that he hired scott from mrs. emerson, thus establishing her ownership of scott, russell admitted that it was in fact his wife who had hired scott. russell's testimony was dismissed as hearsay. the scotts lost their case. irene emerson was allowed to keep dred and harriet as slaves because no one could prove that they were her slaves. after waiting on the case for a year, the scotts were ultimately denied their freedom.  although the dred scott case is well known today, dred scott v. irene emerson did not incite much reaction in st. louis or any other part of the country. the litigants involved were not well known, nor did the case involve controversial principles of law. only one st. louis newspaper mentioned the case, and only in a daily list of cases in the city courts.  later life and death  bay died relatively young and was survived by a widow, three sons, and a daughter. he died of cholera in the 1849 epidemic.  references   1810 births 1849 deaths new york (state) lawyers 19th-century american lawyers united states slavery case law
kalanemi is a demon in hindu purana. he was the son of hiranyaksha and brother of andhaka. in this birth as hiranyaksha's son, he was slain by lord vishnu while his brother was killed by lord shiva. in one of his rebirths as per his karmic deeds, he was born as kansa, son of ugrasena the king of mathura. his sister was devaki and her son krishna was an avatar of vishnu. krishna eventually killed kansa in this birth.in the epic ramayana kalanemi was maricha's son  and minister of ravana and was assigned to kill hanuman. jalandhara's wife, vrinda, was kalanemi's daughter.  etymology kalanemi is a compound word made up of 'kala' which means "time", and 'nemi' which means "the felly of a wheel or a portion". it represents the time segment of the wheel of time that denotes "the afternoon leading to sunset". 'kala' also means "black", perceived to be the asura kalanemi who represents the period of darkness that "increases as the day move toward night and as the dvapara yuga moves towards kali yuga."  previous birth of kansa  according to hinduism's karma principle for the cumulative actions of bad and good deeds resulting in "blessings or punishments". his elder brother was andhaka. kalannemi had a daughter, vrinda who was married to jalandhara. kalanemi had six sons who in their previous birth had been the sons of marichi, a manasputra (mind son) of brahma, considered a demigod being associated with indra and believed to be one of the maruts with "powers of storm and battle". marichi was also considered to be a prajapati ("progenitor or grandfather") or even as one of the seven saptarishis who also represented seven cosmic principles.  in another birth, the six brothers were sons of kalanemi, and being pious they received a boon from brahma that no one would kill them. but hiranyakashipu cursed them to sleep in patala (the netherworld). after much pleading, the curse was moderated and they were to be reborn as the first six sons of devaki. in that birth, kalanemi would be reborn as kamsa, son of ugrasena, and would be their uncle who would eventually kill them all.  the six brothers made fun of brahma. this infuriated brahma who
cursed the brothers to be born as asuras, and thus they were reborn as the six sons of kalanemi. the rebirth cycle continued over the eons and kalanemi was then born as kamsa. kalanemi's six sons had to have two earlier rebirths before they were born as kamsa's nephews. narada had informed kamsa that his birth was the result of a rape of his mother by a gandharva, called dramila, and that was the reason that kamasa's mother disliked her son and had cursed that he would be killed by a member of his own family. when his sister devaki was married to vasudeva, a divine voice told him that their eighth son would kill him. kamsa wanted to kill his sister then only before she could bear any children. but her husband prevailed on kamsa with the promise that he would surrender to him all sons born to them.  devaki and her husband lived in confinement and as soon as a child was born to them, kamsa would kill the child. after killing the first six sons of devaki, he thought that their seventh child died before he took birth but actually devi mahamaya put the seventh child in the garbha of the first wife of vasudeva, rohini who was staying in gokul. when krishna was born as the eighth son then a divine voice told vasudev to put his son in gokul at the house of nanda and yashodha and take their daughter who was born at that night, with him. everyone thought that the eight children is a girl but kamsa did not spare her. trying to kill the girl child, she flew away, being an incarnation of mayadevi, and before disappearing announced that kamsa's death would happen soon. kamsa's efforts to kill the child failed, and finally, krishna killed him during an ambush. as kamsa was killed by krishna, a divine person, he attained moksha due to his constant thoughts on krishna.  in skanda purana  according to the skanda purana, after the churning of the ocean of milk when the divine nectar of immortality was denied to the daityas and  danavas by vishnu taking the form of mohini, a battle ensued between the devtas who had received the nectar and the asuras who hadn't. the devtas were led by indra, the king of gods, and the asuras were led by sons of virochana, initially by bali, the chief of asuras, and later by kalanemi
. after indra had slain bali with a thunderbolt, his deputy vrishparva who attacked indra was also killed. then kalanemi, riding a lion as his mount, fiercely attacked indra and his followers which unnerved the suras. they were then advised by narada to seek the help of vishnu as he only could kill kalanemi who had immense powers acquired by meditation. on the request made by the devtas, vishnu riding his mount garuda, attacked kalanemi and felled him unconscious. regaining consciousness kalanemi realized that he was confronting vishnu, accepted his defeat and requested vishnu to grant him "beatitude" as he was defeated by a divine being. thus, shree maha vishnu got to be known as kaalanemi-nihaa.after kalanemi was killed, indra continued slaying kalanemi's soldiers but narada advised him to stop and let them go because it is a sin to kill brahmins.  references  bibliography         danavas  characters in the mahabharata  rakshasa in the ramayana
leonardo figueroa (born april 17, 1990) is a chilean footballer who currently plays for deportes colchagua as a goalkeeper.  career  youth career  figueroa started his career at primera division de chile club universidad de concepcion. he progressed from the under categories club all the way to the senior team.  o'higgins on 10 june 2016, figueroa firm for 1 year on loan from universidad de concepcion with o'higgins.  honours  club universidad de concepcion copa chile: 2014-15  references  external links    1990 births living people chilean footballers association football goalkeepers o'higgins f.c. footballers universidad de concepcion footballers cobresal footballers everton de vina del mar footballers san luis de quillota footballers
jorge parra sanchez (born march 14, 1994 in guadalajara, jalisco) is a mexican professional footballer who last played for inter playa del carmen. he made his professional debut with guadalajara during a copa mx victory over mineros de zacatecas on 5 august 2015.  references  1994 births living people mexican footballers association football defenders c.d. guadalajara footballers coras de nayarit f.c. footballers inter playa del carmen players ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from guadalajara, jalisco
this is a list of stunt performers nicknamed by themselves or others as the "human fly."   harry gardiner  "steeplejack" charles miller  george polley  henry roland  john ciampa  george willig  references  urban climbers stunt
david loucka is an american screenwriter, active in the comedy and horror genres.  writing credits monsters (tv episode "holly's house", 1988) the dream team (1989) working tra$h (tv 1990) eddie (1996) borderline (2002) dream house (2011) house at the end of the street (2012) rings (2017)  references  external links    year of birth missing (living people) living people american screenwriters
leticia quezada (born july 12, 1953) is a mexican-american politician and educator. she was the first latina member of the los angeles unified school district board, later becoming president of the board of education, and is known for her advocacy of bilingual education and  non-citizen voting.  early life and career quezada was born in chihuahua, mexico, where her father was a copper miner, and grew up in ciudad juarez. she immigrated to pittsburg, california, as a teenager after the death of her father from tuberculosis. she struggled in a school district that did not make a strong effort to help her transition from a solely spanish-speaking school into an english-speaking one.  quezada pursued her bachelor's degree in psychology at the university of california, santa cruz, graduating in 1975 with honors, and received her master's from cal state sacramento. despite earning a teaching credential, she was unable to get a job as a teacher in the los angeles school district, as the district did not consider her specialty, bilingual education, to be needed.  before joining the school board she worked for the chicana service action center in los angeles and as a community relations manager for the carnation company. she also served as president of the comision femenil mexicana nacional in 1981, chaired los angeles county californios for fair representation, and worked as a coordinator and delegate for the 1984 presidential campaign of  walter mondale.  school board service in 1985, the trustees of the los angeles community college district appointed quezada to its board, after another member resigned to become city controller. although another latino, j. william orozco, had previously served on the board, quezada became its first latina. she left the board again in 1987, when she secured a seat on the los angeles unified school district board, becoming its first latina.   as a lausd board member, quezada pushed for an improved bilingual education program, increased parent control in local education, year-round schooling, and allowing non-citizen parents to vote in school board elections. during her time on the board, quezada opposed lowering academic standards for student athletes and served as a strong advocate for latinos and immigrants in lower socioeconomic classes.  during quezada's first year in office, "the master plan" was adopted into the school district. the plan called for an increase in the number of bilingual teachers and teacher training plans for bilingual assistants to eventually become teachers. in addition to being a voice for "the master plan," quezada also advocated
for a $5,000 salary incentive for bilingual teachers and college programs for bilingual teachers in training.  in 1992, quezada was elected as the president of the board of education, and was the first latina to hold that position. as president, she recruited teachers from mexico to make up for a shortage of bilingual teachers. she led the board through some of its most chaotic years, which included a battle against state school vouchers (proposition 174), teacher strikes, attempts to break up the district, a controversial redistricting effort that ensured greater latino representation on the board at the expense of the san fernando valley, and $700 million in damage to district facilities caused by the 1994 northridge earthquake. two years after her election to president, quezada announced that she would step down from the school board. her departure coincided with  the passage of proposition 187, which forced public schools to bar undocumented children.  later work in 1992, quezada ran for a seat in the united states house of representatives, for california's 30th congressional district, but she lost in the primary to xavier becerra. her campaign had been hurt by losing the support of united teachers los angeles, the local teachers union which was unhappy with her over a contract dispute. from 1995 until 2002 quezada was the director of the mexican cultural institute of los angeles. in 2003 she joined california state university, san bernardino as the program manager for the osher lifelong learning institute in palm desert, and in 2008 she became the university's interim director of extension programs in their college of extended learning.  references  1953 births living people people from chihuahua (state) california state university, sacramento alumni university of california, santa cruz alumni school board members in california mexican emigrants to the united states
forbidden: undocumented and queer in rural america is a 2016 documentary about moises serrano, who grew up queer and undocumented in yadkinville, north carolina.  produced by director tiffany rhynard and editor heather mathews, the immigration reform documentary had its world premiere in los angeles at outfest on july 12, 2016.  moises serrano   the subject of forbidden is moises serrano.  when he was an infant, serrano's parents fled mexico in search of the american dream. forbidden to live and love as an undocumented gay man in the country he calls home, serrano saw only one option-to fight for justice.  he is just like the thousands of other young people growing up in the united states with steadfast dreams, however being gay and undocumented in the rural south presents tremendous challenges. this film chronicles serrano's work as an activist, traveling across his home state of north carolina as a voice for his community, and trying to forge a legal path for their future.  serrano's journey illustrates the intersection of queer and immigrant issues, highlighting the challenges facing lgbt people growing up in the rural south, where racism and homophobia are not uncommon.  part of the film takes place in the spring of 2016, when presidential candidate donald trump invoked heated anti-immigrant rhetoric.  at the same time north carolina passed discriminatory laws against the lgbt community.  forbidden humanizes the issues of immigration and gay rights, demonstrating how one individual has the power to combat the destructive oppression of an entire group of people.    in claiming his identity as undocumented, serrano risked deportation for himself and his family.  his story demonstrates courage, conviction and an unyielding quest to challenge the circumstances in which he was born.  forbidden has inspired many other undocumented people to speak out, tell their stories, and join with like-minded politicians to affect change to u.s. immigration policy.  awards    outfest: los angeles gay and lesbian film festival, freedom award, 2016  southern poverty law center's social justice film award at the 2016 charlotte film festival, 2016  television academy honors  references  external links    twitter facebook hollywood reporter review  2016 films 2016 documentary films 2016 lgbt-related films films shot in north carolina lesbian-related films documentary films about american politicians documentary films about lgbt topics american films lgbt politics in the united states films about activists american documentary films english-language films television academy honors winners
kandrat ilich karsalin, or kondraty ilyich korsalin (belarusian: кандрат ільіч карсалін; 21 march 1809, slutsk - c.1883, slutsk?) was a belarusian portrait painter.  biography  born to a middle-class family, he received his primary education at home. around the age of twelve, he taught himself to paint and worked as an assistant to the local icon painters. he was twenty before he had lessons from a professional artist; thomas hesse (1807-c.1870), a baltic-german painter from vilnius who had settled in slutsk to become an art teacher at the gymnasium.  after 1830, he lived in oryol and, in 1835, presented his portraits of local notables at an exhibition given by the imperial academy. the following year, he was able to begin auditing classes at the academy, but he had insufficient means to pursue his studies there, failed to find financial support, and was forced to quit. nevertheless, in 1839, he was awarded the title of "free artist".  that same year, he enlisted as an artist with the 12th russian spiritual mission to china; arriving in beijing in 1840. he remained there for only three years; having to leave before his contract expired, due to illness. his only known work on a chinese theme is a view of a country palace near the city, painted in 1860 and preserved at the russian museum.   he returned by way of irkutsk, where he lived for several years, where he was engaged to paint portraits of the local officials, then settled in saint petersburg in 1846 after being dismissed. in 1854, he was named an "academician". he provided icons for the church in the new russian consulate at hakodate in 1861. he also participated in decorating the cathedral of st. mary magdalene, warsaw, which opened in 1869.   in the 1870s, he began to suffer from an eye disease and, through the intercession of grigory gagarin and fyodor bruni, was awarded a state pension. little is known of him beyond that point. he is last mentioned as a homeowner in a document from the national historical archive of belarus, dated 1883.  references  external links   1809 births 1880s deaths belarusian painters portrait painters people from slutsk
tore sandberg (born 23 april 1944) is a norwegian journalist, non-fiction writer and private investigator.  he was born in asker. from 1968 to 1982 he worked as news presenter for the norwegian broadcasting corporation, for dagsnytt  and dagsrevyen . he is known for his engagement in cases of miscarriage of justice, including the liland affair and the fritz moen case. his awards include zola-prisen (2005), amnestyprisen (2006), olav selvaag-prisen, and rettssikkerhetsprisen (2011).  selected books øksedrapene i lille helvete (1992) narrespill (2002) overgrepet : justismordene pa fritz moen (2007)  references  1944 births living people people from asker norwegian journalists nrk people norwegian non-fiction writers norwegian investigative journalists private detectives and investigators
the tanzer 14 is a canadian sailboat, that was designed by johann tanzer and first built in 1970. the design is out of production.  production the boat was built by tanzer industries in canada, but production had ended by the time the company went out of business in 1986.  design the tanzer 14 is a small recreational sailing dinghy, built predominantly of fiberglass. it has a fractional sloop rig, a transom-hung rudder and a centreboard keel. it displaces .  the boat has a hull speed of .  see also list of sailing boat types  references  dinghies 1970s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by johann tanzer sailboat types built by tanzer industries
aleksey belevich (; ; born 26 january 1995) is a belarusian professional footballer who plays for ostrovets.  career he made his professional debut in 2013, playing for fc minsk against st johnstone in uefa europa league match.  references  external links       1995 births living people people from grodno belarusian footballers association football midfielders fc dinamo minsk players fc minsk players fc bereza-2010 players fc torpedo-belaz zhodino players fc granit mikashevichi players fc baranovichi players fc chist players fc naftan novopolotsk players fc ostrovets players
the 1950-51 sk rapid wien season was the 53rd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  zentropa cup  references  1950-51 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
chris nielsen (born april 2, 1955) is a canadian country singer, who recorded both as a solo artist and as a duo with her husband r. harlan smith. her singles included "you know i want you", "baby pictures", "i'd love you like nobody dared to", "everyone's laughin' but me" and "second chance".  born in aalborg, denmark, nielsen is a two-time juno award nominee for best country female vocalist at the juno awards of 1977 and the juno awards of 1978, and a nominee for most promising female vocalist in 1977, and smith and nielsen were nominated together as best country group or duo at the juno awards of 1981.  she also worked as an administrator for royalty records, smith's country music record label.  discography lady from virginia (1975) let me go down easy (1977) chris nielsen (1979) stolen moments (1979, with r. harlan smith) my way or the highway (1988)  references  external links    entry at thecanadianencyclopedia.ca  entries at 45cat.com  1955 births canadian women country singers danish emigrants to canada people from aalborg musicians from edmonton living people 20th-century canadian women singers
we don't want the airwaves is a 7" ep by israeli punk band useless id. it was released on may 6, 2016, and is the band's second release on fat wreck chords.  the ep was recorded between december 3-9, 2015, at the blasting room in fort collins, colorado, during the sessions for the band's eighth studio album state is burning, and features that album's first single "we don't want the airwaves", as well as an album b-side that didn't make the cut for the album ("tension"), and two acoustic outtakes, one of which is for the album's title track "state is burning".  on april 15, 2016, the 15-year anniversary to joey ramone's death, "we don't want the airwaves" was released as the first official single from state is burning through the fat wreck chords youtube channel. on april 20, 2016, the band announced on their facebook page they'll be making a music video for the single, which will be composed of fan footage that will be sent to them by fans, giving tribute to the ramones, as the song is the band's tribute to the ramones.  the ep's title track is the band's tribute to one of their favorite and most influential bands - the ramones. the single's name is a play on the ramones song "we want the airwaves", and its lyrics referencing many ramones albums such as leave home, road to ruin, end of the century, pleasant dreams and others, as well as referencing the band's friend brandon carlisle of teenage bottlerocket, who died on november 3, 2015.  the song also features brandon's brother, ray,  performing vocals for the final verse.  "tension" was originally a yotam ben horin solo song that he has been performing live acoustically, as well as with his solo band since 2012. the band started performing the song together during rehearsals in 2015 and decided to record the song for their eighth studio album state is burning. following the album's eventual focus on heavier, faster and shorter songs, the song didn't make the cut, and was released on the 7" ep that preceded the album instead.  track listing  personnel  yotam ben horin - lead vocals, bass  ishay berger - lead guitar, backing vocals  guy carmel - rhythm guitar, vocals  gideon berger - drums, percussion  production bill stevenson - production, engineering, arrangement jason livermore - production,
engineering, mastering  references  2016 eps useless id albums albums produced by bill stevenson (musician) fat wreck chords albums
breaking point is a 1975 swedish adult thriller film written and directed bo arne vibenius.  plot   a man named bob bellings rapes a woman in her apartment, then fatally bludgeons her with an ashtray. the next day, bob goes to work at his office, where he watches a newscast in which a psychiatric expert explains that women should not resist being sexually assaulted, as that is what most predators want, and that 89% of surveyed women admitted to wanting to be raped at least once in their lives.  one of bob's fellow employees (who are all female) later teases him in a sexual manner, which prompts bob into going out for his break, during which he stalks and has sex with a woman. bob returns to work and watches another newscast, which announces that the government will be issuing requisition cards that authorized citizens can take to gun shops and exchange for side arms. after another encounter with his promiscuous coworker, bob leaves work, rents a car, and follows another woman to her home and rapes her. she responds by stabbing him with a pair of scissors during the act. when the woman tries to escape, bob uses his car to knock hers off of the road and into a house, causing a fiery explosion. bob then goes home and masturbates into a coffee cup, which he tricks the employee who had been taunting him into drinking from.  bob proceeds to turn his requisition card in for a handgun, which the overzealous clerk provides explosive "fragmentation ammo" for. upon leaving the munitions shop, bob snatches a young girl from a playground, and eats candy with her in the woods before dropping her off at her house. afterward, bob practices with his gun, and picks up and has sex with a female hitchhiker, who at one point rides the gear shift of bob's rental car (which bob later returns, sans the gear shift's knob).  bob is subsequently mugged, and then taken hostage by a trio of bank robbers, who decide to execute him. bob uses his fragmentation rounds to kill the thieves before shooting down a police helicopter and escaping in a hijacked car. the film ends with bob going to an airport and reuniting with his wife and daughter, who were away on a trip. when his wife asks him what he has been up to in her absence, bob replies, "oh, you know nothing ever happens in this shit town".  cast    andreas bellis as bob bellings  barbara
scott	as woman in subway  jane mcintosch  susanne audrian  bertha klingspor  marlyn inverness  liza june  adolf deutch  joachim bender  per-axel arosenius as guns and ammo dealer  release   created primarily for foreign markets, breaking point, like vibenius's previous film thriller - a cruel picture, was banned in its home country of sweden.  reception   jack stevenson, the author of scandinavian blue: the erotic cinema of sweden and denmark in the 1960s and 1970s, noted that the film was "even more bizarre" than thriller - a cruel picture, and was "tasteless, violent, pornographic and some would certainly say misogynist - all meant no doubt to reflect the sickness endemic in society at large". daniel ekeroth, author of swedish sensationsfilms: a clandestine history of sex, thrillers, and kicker cinema, similarly categorized breaking point as "completely crazy" and "one of the sickest and slowest films ever made". in a review written for trash cinema: a celebration of overlooked masterpieces, michael harris opined that the film "creates a fantastic sense of insecurity" and is "a wonderful achievement in simplicity and confrontationalism without being confrontational".  references  external links      1975 films 1970s heist films 1970s erotic thriller films swedish films films about rape adultery in films 1970s black comedy films swedish crime thriller films swedish horror films english-language swedish films 1970s english-language films mass murder in fiction swedish erotic thriller films films set in stockholm 1975 independent films 1975 horror films films shot in stockholm 1970s pornographic films pornographic horror films swedish independent films 1970s crime thriller films crime horror films office work in popular culture 1970s psychological thriller films 1970s avant-garde and experimental films swedish avant-garde and experimental films films scored by ralph lundsten 1970s erotic drama films 1975 comedy films 1975 drama films
pretto is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  adao pretto (1945-2009), brazilian politician alby sabrina pretto (born 1985), italian ballet dancer mario pretto (1915-1984), italian footballer and manager olinto de pretto (1857-1921), italian industrialist and geologist rino pretto (born 1959), australian rules footballer satcha pretto (born 1980), honduran journalist
the white rock may refer to: the white rock: an exploration of the inca heartland , 2001 travel book by hugh thomson   the white rock (novel), 1945 novel by denys val baker  see also white rock (disambiguation)
the 2016 croatian cup final was a one-legged affair played between dinamo zagreb and slaven belupo. the final was played in osijek on 10 may 2016.  road to the final  final  external links  official website   2016 final gnk dinamo zagreb matches cup final
kurzawa (polish pronunciation: ) is a polish surname. it may refer to:  jozef kurzawa (1910-1940), polish roman catholic priest  layvin kurzawa (born 1992), french footballer  rafał kurzawa (born 1993), polish footballer  see also    polish-language surnames
nosal (lit. 'the nose') is a mountain in the tatra mountains of poland, and is 1,206 metres amsl at its highest. it is a popular tourist destination located near the polish town of zakopane, particularly for skiing and gliding.  references  external links  mountains of poland mountains of the western carpathians western tatras
edward henry buehrig (october 4, 1910 - august 31, 1986) was an american political scientist who spent most of his career at the indiana university bloomington. he was known as a leading authority on the foreign policy of woodrow wilson.  early life and education buehrig was born in minier, illinois, and attended illinois state university where he served as an editor of the vidette student newspaper. he subsequently transferred to the university of chicago, from which he graduated. buehrig went on to receive a m.a. in international relations, also from chicago, with a thesis titled "why the united states took the philippines islands", and later earned a ph.d. from the same institution with his dissertation, "american intervention in europe, 1917".  career in 1934 buehrig began teaching at indiana university, where he would remain - except for three, short interludes - until his retirement in 1981. during world war ii buehrig worked in the united states department of state and served as secretary-general of the italo-yugoslav boundary commission; after the war he again departed indiana to spend a year at princeton university researching the foreign policy of woodrow wilson. a third hiatus came in 1957 when he spent one year teaching at the american university of beirut (aub). according to elsa marston, she met her husband iliya harik at an aub lecture given by buehrig.  buehrig served as acting president of the midwest political science association during 1955. on being appointed chair of the political science department at indiana in 1980, elinor ostrom recalled that she "realized that professor buehrig would be retiring within a year [and] i shuddered to think of all the memory and insight about the department that might be lost to future generations". at ostrom's request, buehrig wrote "political science at indiana: an historical essay", chronicling the history of the department up to that point.  in may 1986, three months before his death, illinois state university awarded buehrig an honorary degree.  selected publications  buehrig, e (1950). "wilson's neutrality re-examined". world politics, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-19  buehrig, e (1950). "the united states, the united nations and bi-polar politics". international organization, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 573-584  buehrig, e (1955) woodrow wilson and the balance of power bloomington: indiana university press.  buehrig
, e (1957) wilson's foreign policy in perspective bloomington: indiana university press.  buehrig, e (1965). "the international pattern of authority". world politics, vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 369-385  buehrig, e (1966) essays in political science bloomington: indiana university press.  buehrig, e (1986) the perversity of politics dover, n.h.: croom helm.  references  1910 births 1986 deaths people from tazewell county, illinois university of chicago alumni american political scientists indiana university faculty international relations scholars writers from illinois writers from indiana illinois state university alumni
aleksei shvachko (1901-1988) was a ukrainian film director.  selected filmography  martin borulya (1953)  far from the motherland (1960)  nina (1972)  references  bibliography   joshua first. ukrainian cinema: belonging and identity during the soviet thaw. i.b.tauris, 2014.  external links     1901 births 1988 deaths burials at baikove cemetery ukrainian film directors
the eugene bombers were a professional american football team based in eugene, oregon. the bombers played their home games at bethel park in eugene. the team was founded in 1966 as a member of the pacific football league. the bombers qualified for the postseason in 1966 but opted to forfeit as they did not expect to draw enough spectators to meet the cost of playing. after one season in the pacific league the bombers moved to the continental football league's newly formed pacific division.   for both seasons, the bombers were head coached by jack crabtree with jack morris acting as the defensive coordinator. the bombers became inactive in 1968 due to the lack of a suitable stadium and never reactivated.  season-by-season  references  continental football league teams 1966 establishments in oregon sports in eugene, oregon 1968 disestablishments in oregon american football teams established in 1966 american football teams disestablished in 1968 defunct american football teams in oregon
thomas hesketh (1548-1605), of whitehill  and preston, lancashire and of heslington, yorkshire, was an english politician.  he was a member (mp) of the parliament of england for preston in 1586 and 1589, lancaster in 1597 and 1604, and lancashire in 1601.  references  1548 births 1605 deaths members of the parliament of england (pre-1707) for lancashire people from preston, lancashire politicians from york english mps 1586-1587 english mps 1589 english mps 1604-1611 english mps 1601
uppal khalsa is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3 km from postal head office in nurmahal, 25 km from phillaur, 32 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 146 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  as of 2011, the village has a total number of 329 houses and population of 1476 of which include 769 are males while 707 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of the village is 77.62%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 329 which is 9.49% of total population of the village, and child sex ratio is approximately 944 higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 40.24% of total population in the village. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 504 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 437 males and 67 females. according to census survey report 2011, 93.06% workers describe their work as main work and 9.94% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 24.5 km away from the village. the village is 53.5 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 122 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
chief secretary may refer to:  current posts  chief secretary (india), a senior civil servant in the states and union territories of india chief secretary (pakistan), the highest-ranking civil servant in the provinces and administrative units of pakistan, including: chief secretary balochistan chief secretary khyber pakhtunkhwa chief secretary punjab chief secretary sindh chief secretary (sri lanka), a senior civil servant in the provinces of sri lanka chief secretary for administration, the head of the government of hong kong chief secretary of the isle of man, the head of the isle of man civil service chief secretary of tobago, the leader of the tobagonian government chief secretary to the government, the most senior officer in the malaysian civil service chief secretary to the treasury, a senior minister in the cabinet of the united kingdom chief secretary of asanteman, the title of the administrative officer of the ashanti traditional kingdom in ghana, held by the father of joe appiah  defunct posts  chief secretary (british empire), civil-servant title in colonies of the british empire chief secretary, singapore, a high-ranking government civil position in colonial singapore chief secretary of new south wales, an office in the colonial and state administration in new south wales chief secretary of south australia, an office in the colonial and state administration in south australia chief secretary, second name for the former colonial secretary of western australia chief secretary for ireland, an office in the british administration in ireland  see also   chief of staff  chief secretary's building (sydney, australia)  general secretary permanent secretary private secretary  provincial secretary  principal private secretary  principal secretary (disambiguation)  secretary (disambiguation)
optus sport is an australian group of sports channels, owned by optus launched on 13 july 2016.  the channels are available through optus' yes tv by fetch iptv platform, or through an optus decoder on the vast satellite network, as well as through companion apps and the optus sport website.  the network was launched after optus outbid the incumbent foxtel for the english premier league television rights, and the 24/7 channel optus sport 1 rebroadcasts the img world feed.  history in the beginning of optus television, optus had used sports rights as a key differentiator between it and rival foxtel. they carried c7 sport on their subscription television network until march 2002, when optus replaced them with fox sports (australia), rebranded as 'optus sports' until october of that year. in 2009 optus television ceased to be offered to new subscribers and the service was eventually ceased.  in july 2010, malaysian backed fetch tv launched in australia, available through optus. in 2015, new ceo allen lew, who had launched parent company singtel's epl coverage, laid out a three-year plan (2016-18) for optus to transition from a telecommunications provider to a multimedia company, as a 'content aggregator'.  optus began trialling their own content delivery network in march 2015, and in november 2015 it was announced optus had purchased the rights for the english premier league in australia until the conclusion of the 2018/19 season. in march 2016 it was announced the channels would be available through fetch tv from optus (rebranded as 'yes tv'), as well as through a dedicated app and website, with satellite coverage available for those without appropriate internet speeds or for commercial venues. this announcement also included the fact that one match per round would be sub-licensed to a free-to-air channel. it was revealed by sbs that they had traded their fifa world cup licence for this sub-licence.  optus announced pricing for the epl coverage in may, which was revised after being poorly received by customers, with new pricing, including a period of 'free' coverage, announced in june.  optus also announced they had done a deal with the nine network to share the international champions cup rights, with optus showing all games played outside of australia. nine would share the china leg and retain exclusive rights to the australian matches. this was the first live sport broadcast on the channels, with manchester united playing borussia dortmund in shanghai on 22 july 2016 as the first live event. optus also added a friendly west ham united pre
-season match, and would later show their unsuccessful europa league qualifier against astra giurgiu.  initial controversy the news that optus had secured the premier league rights was not received well by existing supporters. most were locked into plans with either foxtel or other telecommunications providers, and were skeptical of how australia's poor network infrastructure could handle 'live' broadcasts over iptv. the first three rounds were mired with complaints on social media and in other media outlets.  foxtel response incumbent rights holder fox sports (australia) reacted quickly to the news they had lost the rights, removing the $15/month add-on bein sports pack, and adding the channels to the existing sports package. club tv channels for chelsea fc, liverpool fc and manchester united were also added, as were agreements to show arsenal, manchester city and tottenham hotspur games on delay.  foxtel claimed optus had threatened legal action over the new 'free' channels, and so added a 1 cent per channel per year charge to each.  growth optus began to gradually add regional football competitions featuring australian national teams, the 2016 fifa futsal world cup and the 2016 aff u-19 youth championship. they also screened the semi finals and final of the 2016 fifa u-17 women's world cup.  in october 2016, optus sport 2 began broadcasting ads with the tagline: 'this summer is going to be big', announcing the launch of a 24/7 cricket channel on the channel for november 1, 2016, running until 28 february 2017. this was an extension of the existing optus agreement with cricket australia that saw all optus customers eligible for a cricket australia live pass. the channel showed highlights and full match replays from ongoing matches, and original content such as '#stumps', which had previously been available on the defunct optus cricket app. it also showed classic matches from the cricket australia archives.  live content was available by linking the optus sport mobile app with the cricket australia app, but no live cricket content was available on the linear optus sport 2 channel.  optus struggled to find further new sports to add to the service given that most major australian sporting codes were signed to long-term broadcast contacts. they bid for exclusive rights to the a-league but balked at the added cost of technical and equipment fees. as of may 2017, ceo allen lew considered the rights acquisition and launch of optus sport a success, and hinted that further similar offerings may be added to the 'yes tv' platform in the near future, although they would be 'non-sport related' and 'family
oriented.' it was later revealed that lew was discussing the launch of the national geographic app.  2018 fifa world cup and relinquishing rights to sbs optus sport purchased exclusive broadcast rights to broadcast 39 live matches of the 2018 fifa world cup in a deal with the public broadcaster sbs, who were awarded the original broadcast rights by fifa. the remaining 25 matches would be simultaneously broadcast live on optus sport and sbs. the first game of the tournament that was broadcast exclusively on optus sport, egypt vs. uruguay on 15 june 2018, was marred with technical difficulties including buffering issues and failed connections. the negative reception and continued broadcasting problems resulted in a temporary arrangement made between optus and sbs to broadcast all games on 18 and 19 june throughout a 48-hour period on sbs. this arrangement with sbs was extended on 20 june 2018 to include all group stage games, with optus additionally leaving their app and streaming services free for the duration of the world cup and until 31 august 2018 while refunding all current paid subscriptions. on 28 june 2018, optus subsequently extended this arrangement to include all remaining matches at the world cup.  channels and content optus sport operates eleven multiplex channels: optus sport 1  optus sport 1 is the main channel, which predominantly shows premier league however also shows uefa champions league, uefa europa league and internationals. it broadcasts the international feed produced by img. the 24/7 premier league coverage was moved to optus sport 3 for the 2018 fifa world cup. it also shows scores on sunday, a 90 minute show dedicated to the week in football both domestically and internationally, male and female.  optus sport 2 optus sport 2 is the first overflow channel, and also shows selected international fixtures. during the 2018 fifa world cup, it was a secondary dedicated channel for the event, showing simultaneous live matches, replays, and highlights.  optus sport 3-6  channels 3-6 are the remaining overflow channels and broadcast simultaneous live events of the premier league or other competitions shown on optus sport.  on-air presenters cricket 2016-18   richard bayliss (host)  lisa sthalekar (host)  damien fleming (host)  jason bennett (host)  glenn mcgrath (analysis)  dean jones (analysis)  michael hussey (analysis)  james anderson (international analysis)  jason gillespie (analysis)  ian healy (analysis)  chris rogers (analysis)  john emburey (international analysis)  dirk nannes (analysis)  ryan harris (analysis)  simon katich (analysis)  fifa women's world
cup 2019   richard bayliss (host)  amy duggan (host)  mel mclaughlin (host)  heather garriock (expert)  alicia ferguson (expert)  mark schwarzer (expert)  john aloisi (expert)  catherine cannuli (expert)  ash sykes (expert)  georgia yeoman-dale (expert)  amy chapman (expert)  tal karp (expert)  dean heffernan (expert)  ante juric (expert)  jules breach (reporter)  niav owens (reporter)  michelle escobar (reporter)  fifa world cup 2018   richard bayliss (host)  jules breach (host)  mel mclaughlin (host)  mark schwarzer (analyst)  michael bridges (analyst)  tony popovic (expert)  john aloisi (expert)  brett emerton (expert)  paul okon (expert)  shane smeltz (expert)  luke wilkshire (expert)  alex wilkinson (expert)  tony vidmar (expert)  amy harrison (expert)  sasa ognenovski (expert)  michael zappone (reporter)  kelly somers (reporter)  copa america 2021   richard bayliss (host)  michelle escobar (reporter and host)  thomas sørensen (host and analyst)  david weiner (host)   michael bridges (analyst)  john aloisi (expert)  scott mcdonald (expert)  craig moore (expert)  mark schwarzer (reporter and analyst)  uefa euro 2020   richard bayliss (host)  jules breach (host)  paul okon (host)  michelle escobar (reporter and host)  thomas sørensen (host and analyst)  adriano del monte (host)   david weiner (host)   mel mclaughlin (host)  michael bridges (analyst)  john aloisi (expert)  kevin muscat (expert)  mark milligan (expert)  carl robinson (expert)  scott mcdonald (expert)  craig moore (expert)  mark schwarzer (reporter and analyst)  michael zappone (reporter)  kelly somers (reporter)  david davutovic (reporter)   max rushden (reporter)  ollie geale (reporter)  max merrill (reporter)  alicia ferguson (reporter)  tony popovic, brett emerton, paul okon, shane smeltz, luke wilkshire, alex wilkinson, tony vidmar, amy
harrison and sasa ognenovski.  sports  football  club leagues fa women's super league (2019-2022)  j-league (2020-2022): four matches per week live and exclusive  english premier league: (2016-2021): all matches live and exclusive from 2019  premier league asia trophy (2017, 2019, and 2021)  international competitions  fifa club world cup (2019 and 2020): all matches live and exclusive copa america 2021: all matches live uefa euro 2020: all matches live uefa european qualifiers (2018-2022): all matches live and exclusive uefa nations league (2018-2021): all matches live and exclusive  selected international friendlies played in europe by uefa teams (2018-2022): live and exclusive uefa women's euro 2022 fifa women's world cup 2023: host broadcaster, all matches live  former sports  2018 fifa world cup  2017 fifa confederations cup  2017 fifa u-20 world cup  2017 fifa beach soccer world cup  2016 fifa futsal world cup  2016 fifa u-20 women's world cup  2016 fifa u-17 women's world cup  2016 aff suzuki cup  2016 aff u-19 youth championship  international champions cup (2016) australian cricket team tests, odis and twenty20 matches.  big bash league cricket australia tv   women's big bash league (2016/17)  see also  list of sports television channels internet television in australia list of internet television providers  references  external links  optus television channels and stations established in 2016 2016 establishments in australia english-language television stations in australia sports television networks in australia
xiangyang township () is a township under the administration of luxi county, yunnan, china. , it has eight villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of honghe hani and yi autonomous prefecture luxi county, yunnan
paradigm is a point-and-click adventure video game developed by jacob janerka.  plot the game follows paradigm, a genetically grown person that was horribly mutated in the process, who was dumped in a post-soviet town to grow up on his own. paradigm then adventures through his past of dupa genetics only to find out he is a mutated prodigy child and that he must defeat olof, a talking sloth who is the head of dupa genetics.  development the game was crowdfunded through kickstarter which ended on october 7, 2014, having raised $36,557 aud by 1,387 backers, 250% over its initial funding goal of $14,000 aud. to help crowd-fund the project, the game's designer jacob janerka quit his job.  themes the game's aesthetic features an eastern european 1970s and 1980s post-apocalyptic future look.  marketing and release together with the kickstarter, an alpha demo of the game was available to download and play. the game was originally slated for release in mid-2015.  on august 4, 2016, the game was chosen as one of six winners to be showcased at the pax aus indie showcase 2016. in march, 2017, a trailer was released on the developer's youtube channel with a release date reveal of april, 5th, 2017 for steam and humble bundle.  reception  reviews for the game had been generally positive, with the game currently holding an average score of 89.83% on gamerankings and an 86 on metacritic. destructoid gave the game a 9 out of 10, praising its offbeat sense of humour, engaging story, distinctive world and diverse characters. ign gave the game an 8.0 out of 10, praising its voice acting and comedy and saying that it "offers a fresh and memorable entry" for the genre. press start gave the game a 9 out of 10, praising its humor, well thought out puzzles, the game's world and for avoiding the tropes of the genre.  awards paradigm was one of the winners of the "australian game of the year" award at the 2017 melbourne international games week.  references  external links  official site  2017 video games crowdfunded video games kickstarter-funded video games macos games point-and-click adventure games video games developed in australia windows games
saginaw trail is a 1953 american western film directed by george archainbaud and starring gene autry and connie marshall. it is set in michigan in the 1820s, and takes its name from the saginaw trail.  plot  cast  gene autry as gene autry    champion as gene's horse    connie marshall as flora tourney    eugene borden as jules brissac    ralph reed as randy lane    henry blair  as phillipe brissac    myron healey as miller webb    mickey simpson as frenchy    smiley burnette as smiley  references  bibliography  dick, bernard f. the merchant prince of poverty row: harry cohn of columbia pictures. university press of kentucky.  external links    1953 films 1953 western (genre) films english-language films american films 1950s historical films american historical films american western (genre) films films directed by george archainbaud columbia pictures films films set in the 1820s films set in michigan american black-and-white films
tamim ahmed chowdhury (25 july 1986 - 27 august 2016), known by his kunya abu ibrahim al-hanif, was a bangladeshi-canadian alleged to be the emir of the islamic state (is) in bangladesh. he was the alleged mastermind of the july 2016 dhaka attack at the gulshan cafe, which resulted in 29 deaths. he was killed in a raid on an is safehouse in dhaka by bangladeshi forces on 27 august 2016.  history he was born on 25 july 1986 in sylhet, bangladesh. chowdhury was formerly a resident of windsor, ontario, canada.  he attended j.l. forster secondary school in windsor. he competed for the school in a variety of track and field activities in 2004. he graduated from the university of windsor in spring 2011, with an honours degree in chemistry.  amarnath amarasingam, post-doctoral fellow with the resilience research centre at dalhousie university, said of chowdhury's time in windsor, "there were a few [people] who knew him from the mosque and from the social circles" and "he was a shy, skinny kid."  the windsor islamic association (wia) commented, "we can confirm that tamim chowdhury was from windsor, though he was not a well-known individual in the community," wia spokesperson lina chaker said.  islamic state he may have travelled to syria at some point in 2012-13. he returned to bangladesh sometime afterwards.  he was described as the "prime architect" and "one of the masterminds" of the july 2016 dhaka attack.  in april 2016, an interview with him was featured in the 14th edition of dabiq, the official publication of the islamic state. in the article, he was described as the "amir of the khilafah's soldiers in bengal" and was quoted as saying, "bengal is an important region for the khilafah and the global jihad due to its strategic geographic position. bengal is located on the eastern side of india, whereas wilayat khurasan is located on its western side." "thus, having a strong jihad base in bengal will facilitate performing guerilla attacks inside india simultaneously from both sides and facilitate creating a condition of tawahhush (fear and chaos) in india along with the help of the existing local mujahidin there."  bounty on 2 august 2016, it was reported that the bangladeshi police had offered a reward of 200,000 bangladeshi taka ($2,500) for information leading to his capture.  death three militants,
including chowdhury, were killed during a joint forces raid at a house in narayanganj sadar upazila on 27 august 2016. monirul islam, chief of dhaka metropolitan police counter-terrorism unit, confirmed his death in an announcement reported in the bangladeshi newspaper.  references  1986 births 2016 deaths islamic terrorism in bangladesh canadian muslims bangladeshi muslims bangladeshi emigrants to canada bangladeshi islamists
the 4th beijing college student film festival () was held in 1997 in beijing, china.  awards  best film award: the day the sun turned cold, on the beat  best actor award: zhu xu for the king of masks  best actress award: ning jing for the bewitching braid  best visual effects award: the sorrow of brook steppe  best first film award: huo jianqi - winner  artistic exploration award: love talk  committee special award: the king of masks  special recognition award: xie jin  references  external links  beijing college student film festival 1997 film festivals 1997 festivals in asia bei
erik schoefs (born 4 january 1967) is a belgian former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics. he also acted as a pacesetter during his sporting career.  references  external links    1967 births living people belgian male cyclists olympic cyclists of belgium cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from tongeren sportspeople from limburg (belgium) pacemakers
the 40th district of the iowa senate is located in southeastern iowa, and is currently composed of appanoose, mahaska, marion, monroe, and wapello counties.  current elected officials ken rozenboom is the senator currently representing the 40th district.  the area of the 40th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 79th district (represented by dustin hite) the 80th district (represented by holly brink)  the district is also located in iowa's 2nd congressional district, which is represented by mariannette miller-meeks.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  adolph elvers, 1965-1966 robert rigler, 1967-1970 james w. griffin, 1971-1972 elizabeth orr shaw, 1973-1977 edgar holden, 1978-1982 george kinley, 1983-1992 albert sorensen, 1993-1996 jerry behn, 1997-2002 richard f. drake, 2003-2004 james f. hahn, 2005-2012 ken rozenboom, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  40
sanah moidutty (born 1 july 1991) is an indian singer songwriter. she sings indian classical, pop music. she has been trained in carnatic and hindustani classical music as well as western vocals. in november 2017, she was awarded "best singing sensation" for the year 2017 at the asia vision movie awards 2017 for the song afeemi from meri pyaari bindu.  early life   sanah was born in mumbai in a malayali family from kerala. sanah started singing at the age of 5 and since wanted to be a singer. her talent was identified by her mother, who encouraged her to learn music. she has been trained in carnatic classical music for 6 years under sundari gopalakrishnan, hindustani classical music for 7 years under madhuvanti pethe and western vocals from samantha edwards. sanah was also briefly trained under ustad ghulam mustafa khan sahab.  her first stage show was at the age of 7. in a year's time she started singing with the children's troupe "bacchon ki duniya" and few other groups. she did over 500 stage shows with the troupe or solo by the time she turned 18. she stood to be the 1st runner up in hindustan times voice of mumbai in 2007.  career  she graduated from a computer engineering course in 2013 from st francis institute of technology, mumbai. in 2011, she got her first break in bollywood while still pursuing engineering. sanah was noticed at a talent hunt in college after which she went on to sing for films. in 2012, sanah decided to start her youtube channel. she uploaded the first video of her rendition of the song manmarziyan in 2013. it was recorded at the terrace of her residence and the song got a fair response. this was followed by o rangrezz from bhaag milkha bhaag. "shankar -ehsaan-loy, who had composed the original, liked sanah's version. she also shared the link with ar rahman who happened to listen to the song and like it. this led to the 3 songs sanah sang for a r rahman in the following year." sanah has rendered her voice in hindi films like always kabhi kabhi, gori tere pyaar mein, the attacks of 26/11, 24, mohenjo daro. her popularity in the film industry & youtube is on a rise ever since.  she has also sung for ad films like cinthol and eva deos. an episode of the musical tv show sound trek
features sanah with achint thakkar on fox life where they recreate a 70's bollywood song "kitna pyaara vaada hai". in 2016 sanah was also commissioned to create a cover of "counting stars" for the bombay festival. she actively releases music on her youtube channel in her name. the malyalam renditions released by sanah have been very well received.  she has done live shows across the globe, solo as well as with vishal-shekhar, band sanam, keerthi sagathia  and ash king. the multilingual singer can confidently sing in english, hindi, marathi, tamil, malyalam, telugu, bengali, punjabi, gujarati and kannada. as a part of jammin, a digital music collaboration, sanah has done a collaboration called "ishq abhi bhi" with bollywood composer clinton cerejo, and a collaboration called "yaara" composed by a r rahman.  in 2017, sanah moidutty performed at across the world including almaty kazakhstan at a two-day "star of asia" international festival that had the best, voices, sounds and rhythms from the asian region. she is currently learning hindustani classical with sunil borgaonkar ji.  discography  filmography  independent singles  collaborations  awards    awarded "singing sensation of the year" for afeemi from meri pyaar bindu at the asiavision movie award 2017 in sharjah  awarded "best female singer" on digital platforms at red fm malayalam music awards 2019  external links    ndtv news. with always kabhi kabhi, pritam has brought forward a young, campus soundtrack. may 2011   eeroji news. tu hai song from mohenjo daro movie. 6 july 2016   deccan chronicle. attagirl! sanah is the voice behind three of ar rahman's songs in mohenjo daro. 15 july 2016    this soulful cover of a.r rahman's 'kehna hi kya' is just as magical as the original one. by shriya joshi. 10 august 2016. story pick.    sanah moidutty on facebook   sanah moidutty on youtube  references     living people 1991 births indian women singer-songwriters indian singer-songwriters bollywood playback singers kannada playback singers tamil playback singers malayalam playback singers indian women playback singers telugu playback singers 21st-century indian women singers english-language singers from india hindi-language singers marathi-language singers singers from mumbai indian women pop singers women musicians from maharashtra 21st-century indian singers
said rasad was a mayor of padang, indonesia. he was appointed after the previous mayor bagindo azizchan was killed by a dutch military attack,  he was followed by abdoel hakim when he was appointed as mayor by the dutch.  references  external links     mayors of padang minangkabau people mayors of places in indonesia
beuttler & arnold was an architectural firm in sioux city, iowa that designed several works that are listed on the national register of historic places for their architecture.  william buettler (1883-1963) and ralph arnold (1889-1961) both worked for architect wilfred w. beach in sioux city.  the two began their partnership in sioux city in 1912, and dissolved it when the advent of world war ii stopped almost all non-military construction.  works include: florence crittenton home and maternity hospital (1913), 1105-1111 28th st. sioux city, iowa, nrhp-listed hartington carnegie library (1914-15), 106 s broadway, hartington, nebraska trimble block (1915), 6th & pierce, sioux city, iowa sachse, bunn & company block (1920; colonial revival), 201 s. 5th st., sioux city, iowa, a contributing building in the cherokee commercial historic district sioux city masonic temple (1921-22; spanish colonial revival), nrhp-listed le mars central high school, (1924, 1952 additions; colonial revival), 335 1st ave., sw., le mars, iowa, nrhp-listed first baptist church of vermillion (1925), 101 e. main st. vermillion, south dakota, design of second wing (1925), adding to first wing designed by wallace leroy dow and built during 1889-90. united states post office and courthouse (1934; moderne and art deco) 316-320 6th st., sioux city, iowa, nrhp-listed  also the nrhp-listed milo public library, at 4 pleasant st., milo, maine, built in 1922, which has frederick a. paterson of bangor recorded as its architect, is almost identical in design to beuttler and arnold's hartington, nebraska library.  both appear generally to follow the type f plan provided by james bertram's notes on library buildings (1910).  the milo library's building committee inquired about, and may have purchased, beuttler and arnold's detailed plans.  references  external links beuttler & arnold, architects, within place makers of nebraska: the architects, edited by david murphy, edward f. zimmer, and lynn meyer, part of the nebraska state historical society's encyclopedia of nebraska history  architecture firms based in iowa sioux city, iowa american companies established in 1912 defunct architecture firms of the united states year of disestablishment missing defunct companies based in iowa
the bangalore-arsikere-hubli line is a major railway line in the indian state of karnataka connecting state capital  bangalore with city of hubli in north-central karnataka. it traverses across karnataka and links several cities of karnataka, including tumakuru, davanagere, haveri and hubballi. currently, 29 pairs of trains operate in this route, out of which 8 are daily services. apart from this, this route also links karnataka with other states, such as goa, maharashtra, gujarat and rajasthan. this route is also a major feeder line for iron ore, coal and steel hauling freight trains originating from  ballari district towards the  mangaluru port.  the maximum operating speed of this route is 100 km/h for passenger trains and 75 km/h for freight trains. the fastest passenger service in this line is bengaluru-hubli jan shatabdi express, which covers the two cities in 7h 15m, at an average speed of 64 km/h.  main line and branches the main line which is of bangalore-arsikere-hubli section is 469 km in length. this line has five branches  first branch line which is from chikkabanavara to arsikere via shravanabelagola hassan is 211 km in length.  second branch line which is from kadur to chikkamagluru is 45 km in length.  third branch line which is from birur to talguppa is 160 km in length.  fourth branch line which is from chickjajur to bellary is 185 km in length.  fifth branch line which is from davangere to hosapet is 135 km in length.  doubling and electrification  indian railways intends to convert this line into a fully electrified double trunk route. as of feb 2022, about 74% (348 km out of 469 km) of the route is doubled. this includes the stretch between bengaluru-devaragudda (348 km). recently, electrification of the route has been completed between bengaluru-tumakuru.  references  5 ft 6 in gauge railways in india rail transport in karnataka transport in hubli-dharwad transport in bangalore urban district transport in bangalore rural district
sphingomonas morindae  is a gram-negative, aerobic, short rod-shaped, non-spore-forming and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from the inner tissue of the plant morinda citrifolia in sanya on hainan in china.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas morindae at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  morindae bacteria described in 2015
cryptotaxidae is an extinct family of conodonts in the order ozarkodinida. it includes the extinct genus cryptotaxis.  references  external links   ozarkodinida families devonian conodonts devonian first appearances devonian extinctions
nicolas "nico" brussino (born 2 march 1993) is an argentine professional basketball player for herbalife gran canaria of the spanish liga acb. he also represents the senior argentine national basketball team. standing at , he mainly plays as a small forward.  professional career  regatas corrientes (2012-2015) after two years playing for san martin de marcos juarez, brussino joined regatas corrientes on july 22, 2012. prior to the 2012-13 season, it was discovered that brussino had a heart problem, a congenital disease that saw an abnormal electrical connection between the atria and ventricles. despite this, he still managed 29 games for corrientes, averaging 1.9 points and 1.1 rebounds per game, while helping corrientes win the 2012-13 lnb championship.  in 2013-14, brussino averaged 6.0 points and 2.6 rebounds in 55 games, and in 2014-15, he again played in 55 games and averaged 9.4 points, 3.2 rebounds and 1.3 assists per game.  penarol (2015-2016) on august 1, 2015, brussino signed with penarol. in 2015-16, he averaged 14.6 points, 5.5 rebounds, 3.1 assists and 1.5 steals in 59 games.  dallas mavericks (2016-2017) on july 15, 2016, brussino signed with the dallas mavericks. he made his nba debut in the mavericks' season opener on october 26, 2016, recording one assist in 34 seconds of game time in a 130-121 overtime loss to the indiana pacers. on march 15, 2017, he scored eight of his season-high 11 points in the fourth quarter of the mavericks' 112-107 win over the washington wizards. he also had nine rebounds in the game while playing 23 minutes off the bench. on april 4, 2017, he had a season-high 13 points along with seven rebounds and five assists in a 98-87 loss to the sacramento kings. during his rookie season, he had multiple assignments with the texas legends of the nba development league. on july 20, 2017, he was waived by the mavericks.  atlanta hawks (2017) on july 22, 2017, brussino was claimed off waivers by the atlanta hawks. on december 8, 2017, he was waived by the hawks after appearing in four games. he also appeared in eight contests with the erie bayhawks, atlanta's nba g league affiliate.  herbalife gran canaria (2018) on
31 december 2017, brussino signed with spanish club herbalife gran canaria for the rest of the 2017-18 season.  iberostar tenerife (2018-2019) on july 26, 2018, brussino signed a one-plus-one deal with iberostar tenerife of the liga acb.  basket zaragoza (2019-2021) on july 5, 2019, brussino signed a two-year deal with basket zaragoza of the liga acb. he averaged 9.8 points and 4 rebounds during the 2019-20 season. on june 12, 2020, brussino re-signed with the team.  return to herbalife gran canaria (2021-present) on july 1, 2021, he has signed with herbalife gran canaria of the spanish liga acb.  national team career brussino is a member of the senior argentine national basketball team. with argentina's senior national team, he won a silver medal at the 2015 fiba americas championship. he also played at the 2016 summer olympics, and at the 2017 fiba americup, where he won a silver medal, and was named to the all-tournament team.  in 2019, he took part in the team that won the pan american gold medal in lima. he was included in the argentine squad for the 2019 fiba basketball world cup and clinched silver medal with argentina which emerged as runners-up to spain at the 2019 fiba basketball world cup.  nba career statistics  regular season  |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | dallas | 54 || 2 || 9.6 || .369 || .305 || .773 || 1.7 || .9 || .3 || .1 || 2.8 |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | atlanta | 4 || 0 || 2.5 || .000 || .000 || .000 || 0.8 || .0 || .0 || .0 || .0 |- class="sortbottom" | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"|  career | 58 || 2 || 9.2 || .364 || .299 || .773 || 1.7 || .8 || .3 || .1 || 2.6  personal life brussino, who has italian ancestry (the surname was originally bruscino), received italian citizenship. brussino's brother, juan, also plays basketball in argentina.  references  external links nicolas brussino at acb.com   nicolas brussino at eurocupbasketball.com nicolas brussino at basquetplus.com   1993 births living people 2019 fiba basketball
world cup players argentine expatriate basketball people in spain argentine expatriate basketball people in the united states argentine men's basketball players argentine people of italian descent atlanta hawks players basketball players at the 2016 summer olympics basketball players at the 2019 pan american games basketball players at the 2020 summer olympics basket zaragoza players cb canarias players cb gran canaria players dallas mavericks players erie bayhawks (2017-19) players italian expatriate basketball people in spain italian expatriate basketball people in the united states italian men's basketball players liga acb players national basketball association players from argentina olympic basketball players of argentina pan american games medalists in basketball penarol de mar del plata basketball players people from iriondo department regatas corrientes basketball players shooting guards small forwards sportspeople from santa fe province texas legends players undrafted national basketball association players pan american games gold medalists for argentina medalists at the 2019 pan american games
john william livock (30 july 1814 - 15 march 1883) was an architect based in england, best known for his railway stations constructed for the london and north western railway.  family  he was born on 30 july 1814 in hampstead, the son of john livock (1781-1840) a coal merchant, and mary millican (1792-1865). he was baptised on 25 september 1814 in st john's church, hampstead. he married julia barker (1823-1867) and they had two children john edward livock (1848-1858) mary livock (1850-1914)  he died on 15 march 1883 in london.  career  he constructed many of the stations on the blisworth to peterborough railway line which was built by the london and north western railway, and the trent valley line and the southern part of the north staffordshire railway.  list of works  gallery  references  19th-century english architects 1815 births 1883 deaths people from hampstead railway architects architects from london london and north western railway people
kemal arıkan  (1927-1982) was a turkish diplomat assassinated by two us citizens of armenian origin in los angeles, united states.  early life he was born on 1927 in iskilip, corum province. after completing his education at ankara university, law school and harvard university, he began serving in turkish government offices. in 1955 he transferred to the ministry of foreign affairs. he was married and had two children.  professional life while working with the ministry of foreign affairs, he served at the embassies in prague, chicago, canberra and sydney, in addition to various offices in turkey. in 1978 he was appointed as the consul general in los angeles. los angeles had become a critical location for turkish representatives, after another consul general, mehmet baydar, and vice consul, bahadır demir, were assassinated there in 1973. arıkan left his two children in canberra, australia, which was one of his former places of duty. in an interview with the los angeles times, he was asked about the risks of living in los angeles, and responded by saying, "you take precautions."  assassination on 28 january 1982, at about 9:30 am, arıkan was driving from his home to his office. when he stopped at a red stoplight, two armed men began shooting at him. he was hit 14 times. the two men were harry sassounian (also known as hampig sassounian) and krikor saliba. although saliba disappeared without a trace, sassounian was arrested, and in 1984 he was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.  in 2002, prosecutors agreed to drop the so-called "national origin" special circumstance of the case, making sassounian eligible for parole, in exchange for his admitting his guilt and formally apologizing. sassounian said, "i participated in the murder of kemal arikan. i renounce the use of terrorist tactics to achieve political goals. i regret the suffering of the arıkan family." the california prison parole board denied sassounian's parole in 2006, 2010 and 2013. on 14 december 2016, the california board of parole granted parole for sassounian. turkey's ministry of foreign affairs condemned the decision of his release and turkish american groups urged california governor jerry brown to deny parole. brown denied the parole in may 2017, vetoing the board's decision. in a statement, brown said he believes sassounian would still pose "an unreasonable danger to society if
released," adding that "the killing was a deliberate, planned assassination of a diplomat, plotted at least two weeks in advance."  references  1927 births 1982 deaths people from iskilip ankara university alumni harvard university alumni deaths by firearm in california terrorist attacks attributed to armenian militant groups turkish people murdered abroad assassinated turkish diplomats assassinated turkish civil servants
the black mountains () are part of the high rhon in germany, in particular of the southern high rhon, which lies south of the kreuzberg group and is thus the southernmost part of the high rhon. since 1993, most of the region has been protected by the black mountain nature reserve (naturschutzgebiet schwarze berge), the second largest in bavaria outside of the alps, in order to counteract its afforestation by coniferous forest.  natural region grouping  the name schwarze berge was defined as a natural region in 1968 as part of the natural regional classification of germany in the 1960s at a scale of 1:200,000 (sheet 140 schweinfurt) and grouped as follows: (part of 35 east hesse highlands) (part of 354 high rhon) (part of 354.0 southern high rhon) 354.01 black mountains (schwarze berge)  boundaries   in the north is the municipality of wildflecken. from there the natural region's boundary with the kreuzberg group runs east-southeast along the valley between the feuerberg and kreuzberg in order finally to follow the kellersbach after the guckas pass. north of langenleiten the boundary runs southwards in order to leave the valleys of the tributaries of the kleiner steinach. continuing westwards, the boundary of the natural region runs through the villages of platz and geroda.  between the kellersbach and geroda the black mountains border on the adelsberg forest, part of the schondra-thulba-south rhon, which in turn is part of the hammelburg south rhon. the latter is part of the south rhon which in turn belongs to the major natural region unit of odenwald, spessart and south rhon, which is part of the south german scarplands and not the central uplands.  the natural regional boundary with the bruckenau kuppenrhon, which is part of the kuppenrhon, follow the milzbach as it flows north past schildeck. after its confluence with the sinn the boundary follows the river downstream heading northwards. north of oberbach the region is bounded by the dammersfeld ridge to the west as far as wildflecken.  geology   as well as the black mountains, the southern high rhon also includes the kreuzberg group and the dammersfeld ridge. all three mountain ridges consist of a basalt shield, which is occasionally intruded, and thus are different from long rhon and, to a lesser
extent, the wasserkuppenrhon, even if they clearly differ from the individual summits of the kuppenrhon (see adjacent map).  in terms of its rock composition, the region compares to the kreuzberg group. the black mountains consist of two mountain ridges, which are formed of individual domed summits or kuppen. the basement is formed of red clays and marls overlaid by rocks of the lower muschelkalk. the summits are mostly composed of basalt. in most places the rock s covered by a layer of loam soil.  mountains   totnansberg (839 m; central location; with youth campsite; was named in 1968)  schwarzenberg (832 m; north of the totnansberg; with its spur, the feuerberg, kissinger hut and feuerberglifte ski area)  erlenberg (826 m; south of the totnansberg)  farnsberg (786 m; west of the totnansberg; wurzburger haus, farnsberg recreation area and ski lifts on the farnsberg)  loserhag (765 m; in the north; geotope)  platzer kuppe (737 m; in the south)  schindkuppel (659 m; in the west)  knorzchen (643 m; in the southwest)  natural region  the natural region is drained to the east by the thulba and aschach into the franconian saale. no noteworthy streams flow into the sinn. in 1968, at the time of the publication of sheet 140 "schweinfurt", the annual precipitation was 1000-1100 mm, on 90-110 days of the year there was a continuous layer of snow. in addition, extensive pastures characterised the area and there were deciduous woods on the mountainsides. since then, over half the area has become colonised by coniferous forest.  references   mountain ranges of bavaria rhon mountains natural regions of the east hesse highlands rhon-grabfeld bad kissingen (district)
brian boner (born december 10, 1984) is an american politician and a republican member of the wyoming state senate, representing the 2nd district since march 19, 2015.  elections  2014 incumbent republican state senator jim anderson resigned on march 3, 2015, after moving out of state.  boner was one of three names submitted to both platte and converse county commissions, along with republicans timothy millikin and kerry powers.  he received 85.3% of the vote to finish anderson's term.  2016 boner ran for a full term, and defeated darek farmer in the republican primary.  farmer had been a candidate for the u.s. house seat being vacated by cynthia lummis.  boner defeated democrat bill cullen with 86% of the vote.  2020 boner ran for a second full term and third overall. he ran without any major opposition in both the republican primary and general election; he won the republican primary with 99.1% of the vote and won reelection in the general election with 98.6% of the vote.  references  external links official page at the wyoming legislature profile at ballotpedia  1984 births living people wyoming state senators wyoming republicans university of wyoming alumni university of nebraska alumni 21st-century american politicians people from douglas, wyoming
harrison george himmelberg (born 8 may 1996) is a professional australian rules footballer playing for the greater western sydney giants in the australian football league (afl).  early life himmelberg was born in wagga wagga, new south wales and spent 1 year of his childhood living in new york city where his american father was working. upon returning to wagga, he began playing australian rules football for mangoplah - cookardinia united - eastlakes in the riverina football league but moved to canberra at 17 years of age to further his development with the gws giants developmental academy and the nsw/act rams in the elite tac cup under-18 competition. he was drafted by greater western sydney with their third selection and sixteenth overall in the 2015 national draft.   he was educated at wagga wagga's materi dei primary and mater dei catholic college.   his younger brother elliott also plays professional football for the adelaide crows.  afl career himmelberg made his afl debut in the seventy-nine point win against the  in round 17, 2016 at the gabba.  references  external links  1996 births living people greater western sydney giants players australian rules footballers from new south wales eastlake football club players sportspeople from wagga wagga australian people of american descent
mike jackson is the former president and chief operating officer (coo) of supervalu.  early life and education jackson was born in 1954 in oconto, wisconsin.  as a teenager, he worked part-time at the a&p store in oconto.  while attending the university of wisconsin-green bay, jackson worked the midnight to 8 a.m. shift at the red owl store in green bay, wisconsin. in 1976, jackson graduated from the university of wisconsin-green bay with a degree in managerial systems.  career soon after graduating college, jackson became a store manager for red owl.  in 1979, jackson became a retail counselor for the green bay division of supervalu.  in 1995, jackson became president of the northwest region of supervalu.  in 1999, jackson was named senior vice president of operations for retail food companies at supervalu.  in 2001, jackson was named executive vice president and president of distribution food companies of supervalu in 2001.  in 2005, jackson was named president and chief operating officer (coo) of supervalu. while serving as ceo, jackson also served on the iga board of directors and as chairman of the board of the national grocer's association.  in 2007, the university of wisconsin-green bay awarded jackson the distinguished alumni award for his work with supervalu.  in 2009, mike jackson announced his retirement from supervalu.  in 2010, jackson became the president and chief executive officer (ceo) of the national grocer's association (nga).  in 2011, jackson joined the board of directors for icontrol systems. he will also serve senior advisor to icontrol president and ceo tal zlotnitsky.  references  living people people from oconto, wisconsin university of wisconsin-green bay alumni businesspeople from wisconsin 1954 births
itheum villosum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by oke in 1932. it is known from australia.  references  lamiinae beetles described in 1932
butterfield pass is a gap in the range of the maricopa mountains in maricopa county, arizona.  the pass lies at an elevation of 1,755 feet / 535 meters.  history this pass was originally known as pima pass during the years the butterfield overland mail route ran through it. later it was renamed to memorialize the stage line.  references  landforms of maricopa county, arizona
vratislav sustr (born 24 july 1959) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in the sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1959 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from prostejov
the fjaderholmarna (english: feather islands) are a group of small islands in the stockholm archipelago close to downtown stockholm, sweden. the fjaderholmarna consist of the four named islands of stora fjaderholmen, angsholmen, libertas and rovarns holme, together with a number of smaller islets. the fjaderholmarna are located within the municipality of lidingo, and are administered as part of the royal national city park.   stora fjaderholmen can be reached by regular boat services from various locations in central stockholm, with a voyage duration of about 20 minutes. the island is home to a number of craft workshops and stores, as well as several restaurants and cafes.  references  external links  fjaderholmarna official web site  islands of the stockholm archipelago islands of lidingo municipality
katsiaryna netsviatayeva (born 28 june 1989) is a belarusian athlete who specialises in the heptathlon. she competed in the heptathlon event at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands.  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links     1989 births living people belarusian female athletes belarusian heptathletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of belarus
give me take you is the debut studio album by english singer-songwriter and musician duncan browne. it was released in 1968 through andrew loog oldham's immediate records. on the record, browne employs a folk music sound that is informed by rock, pop, and classical elements, with baroque-inspired arrangements. the album spawned the single, "on the bombsite," which failed to chart.  background and history prior to his solo career, browne was a member of the folk rock band lorel, which was signed to immediate records. after their single, "a whiter shade of pale", was rejected by the label, the band dissolved. andrew oldham, who was impressed by browne's arrangement work for other immediate records acts, wanted a solo album from him. david bretton served as a lyricist for the record and the two composed a dozen songs together.  the album's commercial failure coincided with immediate records' financial collapse. following the company's collapse in 1970, browne was presented with a bill for 2,000 pounds to cover the recording cost of the album. as with most of the immediate library, the master tapes to browne's work for the record are considered as lost.  the record was reissued mid-'70s on the canadian-based daffodil label. in 1991, sony music special products issued a cd edition that was mastered from three different vinyl sources, due to lost master tapes. castle records reissued the cd for the first time in the united kingdom, with five bonus tracks. in 2009, grapefruit records released an expanded reissue, containing rehearsal recordings, demos, and an unfinished track.  critical reception  despite its commercial failure, the album was received positively and gained attention, particularly from musicians from the respective music scenes at the time of its release. the village voice critic richard goldstein described the record as an example of "pre-raphaelite rock." billboard magazine regarded the record and its lyrics as auspicious and notable, respectively. over the decades following its release, the album drew comparisons to the works of paul mccartney, the moody blues, van morrison and nick drake.  in a retrospective review, allmusic critic bryan thomas described the record as "one wonderfully tender album".  track listing all tracks are written by duncan browne and david bretton.  "give me take you" - 3:23  "ninepence worth of walking" - 3:27  "dwarf in a tree (a cautionary tale)" - 3:11  "the ghost walks" - 5:
55  "waking you (part one)" - 1:09  "chloe in the garden" - 5:07  "waking you (part two)" - 0:57  "on the bombsite" - 3:10  "i was, you weren't" - 2:02  "gabilan" - 4:03  "alfred bell" - 4:30  "the death of neil" - 4:30  personnel album personnel as adapted from album liner notes.  andrew loog oldham - production  duncan browne - composition, arrangements, cover design, vocals, guitar  david bretton - lyrics, harmony tenor vocals, cover design  nicky hopkins - harpsichord, keyboards  irish - engineering  derek burton - cover design  max edwards - photography  gered mankowitz - photography  references  external links    1968 debut albums duncan browne albums immediate records albums albums produced by andrew loog oldham
the hungarian basketball federation (, mkosz) is the governing body of basketball in the hungary.  it is a member of the international basketball federation (fiba).  hosted tournaments men's eurobasket 1955, 7-19 june 1955 1992 fiba europe under-18 championship, 16-23 august 1992 1987 fiba europe under-16 championship, szekesfehervar & kaposvar, 8-15 august 1992  women's eurobasket women 1950, 14-20 may 1950 eurobasket women 1964, 6-13 september 1964 eurobasket women 1983, 11-18 september 1983 eurobasket women 1997, 6-15 june 1997 eurobasket women 2015 (with ), 11-28 june 2015 2006 fiba europe under-20 championship for women, sopron 2012 fiba europe under-20 championship for women, debrecen, 16-26 august 2012 1981 fiba europe under-18 championship for women, eger & kecskemet 2005 fiba europe under-18 championship for women, budapest 2016 fiba europe under-18 championship for women, sopron, 23-31 july 2016 1980 fiba europe under-16 championship for women, zalaegerszeg & pecs, 6-15 august 1980 1997 fiba europe under-16 championship for women, sopron 2012 fiba europe under-16 championship for women, miskolc, 12-22 july 2012 2014 fiba europe under-16 championship for women, debrecen, 31 july-10 august 2014  honours men's  european championship:  winner (1 time - 1955);  runner-up (1 time - 1953);  third place (1 time - 1946) universiade:  bronze medal - 1965  women's  european championship:  runner-up (2 times - 1950, 1956);  third place (5 times - 1952, 1983, 1985, 1987, 1991) universiade:  bronze medal - 1965  divisions  men's hungary national basketball team hungary national under-20 basketball team hungary national under-18 basketball team hungary national under-16 basketball team hungary national 3x3 team  women's hungary women's national basketball team hungary women's national under-20 basketball team hungary women's national under-18 basketball team hungary women's national under-16 basketball team hungary women's national 3x3 team  current head coaches  competitions  magyar kosarlabda szovetseg is responsible for organising the following competitions:  men's basketball nemzeti bajnoksag i/a (tier 1) nemzeti bajnoksag i/b (tier 2) - two sections (east, west)  nemzeti bajnoksag ii (tier 3) - four sections (east, central a
, central b, west)  women's basketball nemzeti bajnoksag i/a (women) (tier 1) nemzeti bajnoksag i/b (women) (tier 2) - two sections (east, west)  cups magyar kupa - men hepp-kupa magyar kupa (women) - women hepp-kupa (women)  presidents  ferenc szalay (2010- )  see also hungarian basketball league system  external links  magyar kosarlabdazok orszagos szovetsege (official website)  basketball in hungary basketball organisations based in budapest 1947 establishments in hungary sports organizations established in 1947
biharipur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of biharipur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, biharipur has a total number of 208 houses and population of 954 of which include 486 males and 468 females. literacy rate of biharipur is  79.96%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 61 which is 6.39% of total population of biharipur, and child sex ratio is approximately  694, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the 1913 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1913 college football season.  in their seventh season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 4-0 record and outscored their opponents, 59 to 15. end graham barker was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal hilltoppers western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
acanthoptychoceras is an extinct genus of ammonites belonging to the family ancyloceratidae.  species  acanthoptychoceras spinatocostatum manolov, 1962  fossil record fossils of acanthoptychoceras have been found in the cretaceous of france, italy, bulgaria and colombia (age range: from 130.0 to 125.45  million years ago.).  references  ancyloceratoidea ammonitida genera paja formation
devils is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of devils or demons edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the eighth volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in june 1987. the first british edition was issued in trade paperback by robinson in 1989.  the book collects eighteen novellas, novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors, with an introduction by asimov.  contents "the devil" [introduction] (isaac asimov) "i'm dangerous tonight" (cornell woolrich) "the devil in exile" (brian cleeve) "the cage" (ray russell) "the tale of ivan the fool" (leo tolstoy) "the shepherds" (ruth sawyer) "he stepped on the devil's tail" (winston k. marks) "rustle of wings" (fredric brown) "that hell-bound train" (robert bloch) "added inducement" (robert f. young) "the devil and daniel webster" (stephen vincent benet) "colt .24" (rick hautala) "the making of revelation, part i" (philip jose farmer) "the howling man" (charles beaumont) "trace" (jerome bixby) "guardian angel" (arthur c. clarke) "the devil was sick" (bruce elliott) "deal with the d.e.v.i.l." (theodore r. cogswell) "dazed" (theodore sturgeon)  references   1987 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
farnoosh moshiri is an iranian-born novelist, playwright, and librettist. she teaches creative writing and literature at university of houston-downtown. moshiri has published five books of fiction: at the wall of the almighty (interlink, 1999), the bathhouse (black heron press, 2001, beacon press, 2002), the crazy dervish and the pomegranate tree (black heron press, 2004), against gravity (penguin, 2006), and the drum tower (black heron press and sandstone press {u.k}, 2014).  among other grants, fellowships, and literary awards, moshiri is the recipient of barthelme memorial award, c. glenn cambor/inprint fellowship: presented by inprint, inc., two barbara deming awards (a grant for feminist writers whose work speaks of peace and social justice, two consecutive black heron awards for social fiction, and valiente (courage) award from voices breaking boundaries for artists who have taken risks to speak out and act as advocates. her third novel, against gravity, was chosen by barnes and noble for discover new writer series and by borders books in original voices selections.  moshiri has spoken about her work and writing in exile at columbia university, west carolina university, syracuse university, bronx community college, university of houston campuses, rice university, lone star college campuses, houston community college campuses, san jacinto college, university of the incarnate word (san antonio), asia society, awp conference, voices breaking boundaries, and more.  in 2012, in collaboration with the composer, gregory spears, she created a chamber opera by the name of "the bricklayer" commissioned by the houston grand opera. the world premier was on march 16, 2012.  moshiri has been a professor of literature, drama, and creative writing in college of dramatic arts of tehran, houston community college, lone star college, kabul university, syracuse university, and the university of houston-downtown. she lives and writes in houston.  early life and education  moshiri grew up in a literary family. her uncle, fereydoon moshiri was one of the most prominent and popular poets of iran.  moshiri wrote fiction and poetry since she was a child. her first short  story was published in "sokhan" (one the prestigious literary periodicals of pre-revolutionary  iran)  when she was eighteen-years old. she was also a ballet dancer and a member of the national iranian
ballet company, where she danced in major classical ballet performances in the 60s and the early 70s.  moshiri  left the ballet company to study playwriting at the college of dramatic arts. during the 70s, she wrote plays and short stories and went onstage as actress.  in 1977, with a scholarship, she entered the graduate studies of drama at the university of iowa. in 1979, after receiving master's degree in dramatic literature, she returned to iran to teach at the college of dramatic arts. in this period, she wrote plays and short stories, and published translated literature from english into persian. in 1983, the rehearsals of her full-length play were interrupted by the guards and the director and actors were arrested. she was purged from her job as a professor and a dramaturg and had no way other than exile.  she left the country on foot, living in the refugee camps of afghanistan and india. in the summer of 1986 she received right of asylum from the u.s. and a few months later entered the graduate program of creative writing at the university of houston, where she received mfa in fiction. she published novels and stories, taught literature, and held fiction workshops for the decades to come.  works   novels  at the wall of the almighty (1999) (novel)  the batthouse (2001) (novel)  against gravity (2006) (novel)  the bathhouse (2007) (audio book)  the drum tower (2014) (novel)  story collections  the crazy dervish and the pomegranate tree (2004) (short story)  opera  the bricklayer (opera libretto) (2012) (opera)  short stories in anthologies  a world between (1999) (short story)  red boots & attitude (2003) (short story)  coloring book (2004) (short story)  let me tell you where i've been (2006) (short story)  at the shepherd's (2007) (short story)  i go to the ruined place (2009) (short story)  white torture (2013) (short story)  foreign language translations  the bathhouse (2001) (novel), translated into portuguese, spanish, italian, and indonesian  awards and reviews  awards won  black heron press award for social fiction  for the drum tower (2014) barbara deming award for feminist writers (2013), for the novel in progress, gazelle winner of the florida review's 2008 editor's prize in
creative non-fiction the 2006 valiente award of voice breaking boundaries black heron press award for social fiction for the crazy dervish and the pomegranate tree (2003) black heron press award for social fiction for the bathhouse (2001) barbara deming award for peace and social justice (1999) barthelme memorial fellowship for non-fiction (1997) the prose award of the university of houston-clear lake, houston (1996)  reviews and literary criticism  j. g. stinson, foreword reviews: august 2014. a review of the drum tower eric mayrhofer, curious animal, december 7, 2014: a review of the drum tower kirkus reviews (starred review), september 18, 2014: a review of the drum tower publishers weekly, august 25, 2014: a review of the drum tower kate wilson, book trust, november 6, 2014: a review of the drum tower alan caruba, bookviews-december 2014: a review of the drum tower azadeh moaveni, financial times, december 5, 2014: a review of the drum tower london times, january 4, 2015: a review of the drum tower susan bethany, the midwest book review: a review of the drum tower wall street journal: "a glimpse behind the wall." a review of "the bricklayer" (operetta) by heidi waleson. march 20, 2012. payvand iran news: "iranian exile experience on stage." culture map: a review of "the bricklayer" (operetta) by joel luks. march 25, 2012 minnesota review: republics of the imagination (issue 68, 2007) new york times, houston chronicle, washington post, boston globe, etc. on against gravity. (2006) nasrin rahmineh (mcmaster university-canada): the bathhouse, a review in iranian studies: journal of the international society for iranian studies. volume 37. number 4. dec. 2004. margaret atwood: "resisting the veil: reports from a revolution": a review of the bathhouse in walrus, jan. 2004. alan cheuse: all things considered. a review of the bathhouse. may 2003. gloria emerson: the nation. a review of the bathhouse. june 2003. melanie jennings: writers monthly. a review of the bathhouse. june 2003.  references   american writers of iranian descent people from tehran 1951 births living people american women short story writers 21st-century american women
sir alan stanley collins, kcvo, cmg (; born 1 april 1948), is a retired british diplomat and former consul general in new york city (2007-11), high commissioner to singapore (2003-07) and ambassador to the philippines (1998-2002).  collins joined the foreign and commonwealth office in 1981 as a desk office after working in the ministry of defence for around 11 years. he had served in a number of diplomatic positions in ethiopia and the philippines before he became head of aviation and maritime department in 1993. from 1995 to 1998, he was director-general of the british trade and cultural office in taipei (predecessor of the british office taipei). between 2002 and 2003, he was seconded to royal dutch shell as vice-president for international relations.  collins took a keen interest in the welfare of children when he was ambassador to the philippines. as high commissioner to singapore, he took part in arranging queen elizabeth ii's third state visit to that country in 2006, for which he was made a knight commander of the royal victorian order. in singapore, he also served in the delegation that won the 2012 olympics for london. in 2011, he was further associated with the preparation of the olympic games when he was appointed managing director of olympic legacy under the uk trade & investment.  after retiring from the diplomatic service in 2011, collins has held a number of directorships, including those of prudential assurance singapore, icici bank uk and jp morgan american investment trust, etc. he has been director-general of the commonwealth business council since 2012.  biography  early years  collins was born in london, the united kingdom, on 1 april 1948. he is the son of stanley arthur collins and rose elizabeth gimble. he was educated at strand grammar school before entering the london school of economics, where he studied international relations and obtained a bachelor of science degree in economics. in 1970, he joined the ministry of defence (mod), serving in junior positions including those related to personnel, resource management, defence policy and the north atlantic treaty organisation.  between 1973 and 1975, he was private secretary to the vice chief of the air staff.  career diplomat  in 1981, collins left the mod to join the foreign and commonwealth office (fco). his first position was a desk officer for the nordic countries in the western european department. two years later, he became a desk officer for iran and iraq in the middle east department. between 1986 and 1990, he was posted to the british embassy in addis ababa, ethiopia, where he worked
as first secretary, head of chancery and deputy head of mission successively. in 1990, he was posted to the british embassy in manila, the philippines, where he was counsellor (commercial) and deputy head of mission. he returned to the united kingdom as head of aviation and maritime department in 1993.  in 1995, collins was selected, among a pool of five to six fellow diplomats, to succeed philip morrice, who was to become consul general in sydney, australia, as director-general of the british trade and cultural office in taipei, taiwan (i.e. the republic of china). since taiwan and the united kingdom did not have formal diplomatic relations, the office functioned as a de facto embassy to represent british interests in taiwan.  after he took office in august 1995, collins proactively fostered economic and cultural ties between the two countries. during his tenure, united kingdom-taiwan bilateral trade reached 5 billion united states dollars (usd), in which 2 billion usd was british investment in taiwan, while the number of taiwanese visiting the united kingdom increased to 14,000. in recognition of his diplomatic work in taiwan, he was appointed a companion of the order of st michael and st george in the 1998 new year honours list.  from 1998 to 2002, collins was appointed ambassador to the philippines, where he got involved in a number of livelihood projects and paid particular attention to children welfare. he worked with save the children, a united kingdom-based non-governmental organisation, to provide medical services to children by setting up mobile clinics on the streets of the malate district in manila. he also assisted in organising training on handling child abuse cases for the philippine national police.  in 2002, collins was seconded to royal dutch shell as vice-president for international relations, responsible for the company's global relationships with governments. upon returning to the fco in 2003, he was appointed high commissioner to singapore, where he took part in arranging queen elizabeth ii's third state visit to singapore in 2006. for that he was appointed a knight commander of the royal victorian order. when he was in singapore, he also served in the delegation that won the 2012 olympics for london.  in september 2006, it was announced that collins would take up the dual position of consul general in new york and director-general of trade and investment in the united states.  having assumed the dual capacity in january 2007, he oversaw a team of 250 staff members in the united states and in london and he was responsible for strengthening bilateral relationships between the united kingdom and new york city, promoting british export
interests in the united states and attracting high-value inward investment to the united kingdom. in 2009, he also supported prince harry's official visit to new york city.  in new york, collins continued to be associated with the preparatory work of the 2012 olympic games. in 2011, he was appointed the senior responsible officer of the london olympics 2012 co-ordination unit to oversee the fco's contribution to the games. he was also managing director of olympic legacy under the uk trade & investment (ukti) to take in charge of the strategic direction of london 2012 work in the fco and the ukti. collins retired from the fco in 2011 after serving four years as consul general in new york, but he continued to hold the offices related to the olympic games until 2012.  post-fco career  after retiring from the fco, collins has held a number of directorships. he is a non-executive director of prudential assurance singapore, icici bank uk and jp morgan american investment trust, as well as a director of prudential hong kong.  since 2012, he has been director-general of the commonwealth business council.  personal life  collins was married to ann dorothy roberts in 1971. the couple have one daughter and two sons. their daughter was born in 1985 and their two sons were born in 1988 and 1995 respectively. collins is a member of marylebone cricket club and the royal commonwealth society. his hobbies include sports, antiques, reading and walking. he is also a supporter of british arts and culture and the life patron of the british theatre playhouse, a singaporean theatre and live entertainment company.  honours   companion of the order of st michael and st george (new year honours list 1998)  knight commander of the royal victorian order (13 march 2006)  freeman of the city of london  see also   2012 summer olympics  british office taipei  save the children  footnotes  references  english materials   diaz, natalia f., "her majesty's man in manila", sunday inquirer magazine, 24 march 2002.   "ministry of foreign affairs press statement", singapore government press release, 28 january 2003.   "change of her majesty's british consul-general in new york", government news, 29 september 2006.   "prince harry to visit new york city", the royal family, 13 may 2009.   "fco public diplomacy: the olympic and paralympic games 2012 - foreign affairs committee", the parliament of the united kingdom, 6 february 2011.   "sir alan collins appointed to the amlin plc board", amlin,
29 september 2011.   "collins, sir alan (stanley)". who's who 2013. london: a. & c. black. 2012.   briggs, fiona, "commonwealth business council appoints new director general", retail times, 1 february 2012.   "board members", icici bank united kingdom, retrieved on 1 april 2016.   "advisory council", london philharmonic orchestra, retrieved on 8 april 2016.   "births jun 1948: collins, alan s.", freebmd, retrieved on 10 july 2016.  chinese materials   "英駐華代表下月易人牟理士調識、外交部司長柯林斯接任", united daily news, 26 march 1995, p. 2.  "英國新任駐華代表六日抵台履新。柯安龍：推廣經貿交流與兩岸情勢無關", united daily news, 3 august 1995, p. 4.  "致力推動中英雙邊貿易投資，英國貿易文化台北辦事處處長柯安龍獨領c.m.g.獎", economy daily news, 2 february 1998, p. 32.  external links    uk and taiwan  british embassy manila  british high commission singapore  british consulate general new york  a directory of british diplomats  1948 births living people civil servants in the ministry of defence (united kingdom) ambassadors of the united kingdom to the philippines high commissioners of the united kingdom to singapore representatives of the united kingdom to taiwan british businesspeople knights commander of the royal victorian order companions of the order of st michael and st george alumni of the london school of economics people educated at the strand school
steven w. carabatsos (born october 2, 1938) is an american screenwriter, who was also the story editor on star trek between the tenures of john d. f. black and d. c. fontana.  early life steven w. carabatsos grew up in manhattan, where he attended hunter college on the upper east side. following his graduation, he attended cornell law school.  screenwriting career while at cornell, he wrote a spec script for the medical drama ben casey. producer jack laird purchased the script for use, and when he moved onto the college-based drama channing, he hired carabatsos to ensure that the scripts remained college oriented. carabatsos described himself as "technical adviser in charge of rah-rah", and corresponded with his younger brother (then at college) as well as visiting colleges in the los angeles area in order to keep up with current trends.  following the departure of john d. f. black as story editor, carabatsos was hired as his replacement in august 1966. to welcome him to the production team, the show's creator, gene roddenberry, decided to prank him. when carabatsos arrived for his first day, roddenberry had arranged for a weather balloon to be inflated inside his office, preventing him from opening the door and getting inside. the joke was only revealed after carabatsos struggled with the door for a while.  while his contract stipulated that he would be allowed to write one episode in addition to his re-writing duties as story editor, carabatsos found it difficult to fit his own writing around his main duties. his first job on the show was to re-write harlan ellison's script for "the city on the edge of forever" in order to bring it within budget. ellison later accused carabatsos of "taking a chainsaw" to the script, with multiple changes made including the addition of the guardian of forever and the change to initial setup wherein doctor leonard mccoy is overdosed with cordrazine. roddenberry did not like carabatsos' version, and asked ellison to conduct a further re-write.  during the production of "court martial", carabatsos was told by producer gene l. coon to write an entirely new script, using the same ideas and the same sets. the alternative script was later merged with the original, earning carabatsos a co-writer credit alongside don mankiewicz. carabatsos' tenure as story editor on star trek did not last long, and he was replaced by d. c.
fontana, but his departure left him able to write his own script as previously contracted. carabatsos credited roddenberry for the idea for "operation: destroy!", and he turned in the first version of the outline on december 15, 1966. a second draft was dated january 19, 1967, but after it was sent to the executives at nbc, they responded that they wanted to see faster pacing. the script was subsequently re-written, first by fontana, and later by roddenberry, becoming "operation -- annihilate!" in the process.  following his departure, carabatsos worked on several different television series as a writer and wrote the screenplays for films such as the last flight of noah's ark, a walt disney live-action film released in 1980, and hot pursuit, a 1987 film starring john cusack.  filmography  films  television  notes  references  external links    1938 births living people writers from manhattan cornell law school alumni hunter college alumni american science fiction writers american television writers american male television writers screenwriters from new york (state)
ghug  is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of ghug. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  demography according to the 2011 census of india, ghuga had 117 houses and a population of 612, comprising 318 males and 294 females. the literacy rate was 67.03%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years was 57 and the child sex ratio was approximately  1036, higher than state average of 846.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
mohammad noman (died on 6 september 1996) was a bangladeshi academic. he was awarded ekushey padak in 1994 by the government of bangladesh for his contribution to education.  education and career noman completed his bachelor's degree and master's from the department of english at the university of dhaka.  noman debuted his teaching career as a lecturer in the university of dhaka at the department of english. he then moved to government service and joined chittagong college in 1951 and then to rajshahi college in 1952. he was transferred to dhaka college in 1954 and stayed in the position until 1985. he worked at murari chand college in sylhet during 1960-1962. he served as the principal of dhaka college for five years.  noman was appointed the treasurer and vice-chancellor of jahangirnagar university.  awards  presidential gold medal (1970)  ekushey padak (1994)  references  1996 deaths university of dhaka alumni university of dhaka faculty dhaka college faculty vice-chancellors of jahangirnagar university recipients of the ekushey padak
mariano de jesus euse hoyos (14 october 1845 - 13 july 1926) was a colombian roman catholic priest ordained in 1872 for the diocese of santa rosa de osos. he worked in his parish as a staunch defender of the poor and of rural laborers - he himself came from rural origins - and encouraged popular devotions amongst the colombian faithful.  his beatification received the approval of pope john paul ii who presided over the celebration on 9 april 2000.  life mariano de jesus euse hoyos was born on 14 october 1845 as the eldest of seven children to pedro euse and rosalia de hoyos echeverri during an uncertain period of anti-religious sentiment. he was baptized on 15 october and received the sacrament of confirmation in 1847. his great-grandfather pedro euse hailed from france.  in 1860 he entered the college of saint joseph of marinilla where he studied mathematics and passed all his studies with excellent results. from the age of sixteen in 1861 he harbored the desire of becoming a priest and was then entrusted to the care of his priest uncle firmino hoyos - the parish priest of girardota - and received from him a cultural and spiritual formation. he commenced his studies for the priesthood on 3 february 1869 at a new seminary opened in mendellin and was ordained as a priest on 14 july 1872. he began his clerical career as a curate to his uncle until his uncle died in january 1875 and he was transferred to yarumal in 1876.  in 1878 he was assigned as a parish priest in angostura and spent the remainder of his life there. it was there that he became well aware of the parish difficulties such as the construction of an appropriate parish church. he then became the parish priest on 21 january 1882 after the death of the old and frail priest rudesindo correa. he became well noted for being a simple and effective preacher and tended to the social and spiritual needs of the poor of the region with a particular emphasis on rural laborers; he often called the poor "christ's nobles". his particular parish was in an area that civil war often plagued - in which neither side favored the faith - so he had to several times hide in caves in the area to escape the fighting. the priest also encouraged popular devotions such as the sacred heart and encouraged recitation of rosaries amongst families.  he became bedridden in mid-june 1926 with a serious infection and later died in the first few hours of 13 july 1926 due to u.t.i. he had been stricken - on 12 july - with enteritis.
he said on his deathbed: "i have already lived long enough. now my greatest desire is to be united to my jesus.  beatification  the beatification process opened in santa rosa de osos on 2 april 1982 after the congregation for the causes of saints granted the official "nihil obstat" ('nothing against') to the cause and titled the late priest as a servant of god. the cognitional process commenced and concluded following this declaration and received c.c.s. validation in rome on 21 december 1984.  the positio then was submitted to roman officials for further assessment while theologians voiced their approval to the dossier's contents on 9 may 1989 and the c.c.s. themselves following suit on 19 december 1989. the late priest became titled as venerable on 3 march 1990 after pope john paul ii confirmed his life of heroic virtue.  the miracle required for possible beatification received diocesan investigation and then c.c.s. validation on 11 october 1996 while a medical commission met on two occasions - on 5 february 1998 and 4 april 1998 - to discuss and approve the miracle. the c.c.s. had their consulting theologians to evaluate the miracle and approve it on 25 september 1998 while the c.c.s. themselves voiced their assent to the miracle on 2 february 1999. the pope granted his final approval to the healing as being a credible miracle on 26 march 1999 and beatified the priest on 9 april 2000 in saint peter's square.  the current postulator that is assigned to the cause is antonio saez de albeniz.  miracle the miracle that led to his beatification involved the cure of the priest rafael gildardo velez saldarriaga (b. 1912) from medellin who underwent an operation for his prostate in 1970 though developed cancer on the scar in 1982. he had operations and also underwent cobalt and estrogen therapies and seemed to recover from his ailment - in march 1987 he contracted oedema of the legs that transcended to elephantiasis.  metastasis of the spinal column followed and the situation was pronounced terminal for him. in september 1987 he began to demonstrate signs of improvement and within two months the oedema was reduced and the cellulitis and bone metastasis all but disappeared. doctors and scientists examined him in june 1991 and declared that there was no scientific explanation for the cure. additional evaluations were done in 1997 in which it was declared he had recovered in full from his condition.  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn  1845 births 1926 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century colombian people 19
th-century roman catholic priests 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century roman catholic priests beatifications by pope john paul ii venerated catholics by pope john paul ii
the lunalilo mausoleum (also called lunalilo's tomb) is the final resting place of hawaii's sixth monarch king lunalilo and his father charles kanaʻina on the ground of the kawaiahaʻo church.  history lunalilo died from tuberculosis on february 3, 1874, after a short reign of a year. on his deathbed, lunalilo had requested a burial at kawaiahaʻo church on the church's ground instead of royal mausoleum at mauna ʻala in nuʻuanu valley, the burial site of most modern hawaiian monarchs. historians have speculated that the democratically elected king wanted to be buried in the cemetery to be closer to the common people. another reasoning for his refusal to be buried alongside his predecessors was rooted in a feud between lunalilo and the kamehameha family over his mother kekauluohi's exclusion from the list of royalty to be buried there in the 1860s. kekauluohi's remains were buried at sea by lunalilo.  after his state funeral in 1874, lunalilo's remains were temporarily interred at the royal mausoleum at mauna ʻala, awaiting the completion of the lunalilo mausoleum. the tomb was built under the instructions of his father charles kanaʻina, who survived him. robert lishman, an englishman from australia, designed and supervised the construction. on november 23, 1875, his remains were taken from the royal mausoleum to the almost completed tomb on the grounds of kawaiahaʻo church. his father requested a second funeral and a 21-gun salute from king kalakaua like during the first royal funeral. kalakaua granted the second funeral but refused to allow the 21-gun salute. during this procession, eyewitness reports stated that a sudden storm arose, and that twenty-one rapid thunderclaps echoed across honolulu which came to be known as the "21-gun salute."  the tomb was completed in 1876. his father charles kanaʻina was buried in the vault after his death in 1877. a maternal cousin of lunalilo miriam auhea kekauluohi crowningburg served as kahu (caretaker) for the mausoleum until her death in 1899. in acknowledgement of her chiefly status, she was buried in the lot outside the vault of lunalilo's mausoleum. her grandson william bishop taylor, who served as kahu for the royal mausoleum at mauna ʻala, would also later be buried within the same lot.  the interior of the mausoleum
contains the two koa wood caskets of lunalilo and his father on red-carpeted floors. three kahili encased in italian marble are set near the caskets. in 1917, albert gergbode and paul payne, two american naval sailors, broke into the tomb in search of burial goods and stole a silver crown and a silver plate inscribed with the biography of lunalilo. the culprits melted down the silver objects and tried to pawn it in key west, florida, where they were arrested for the crime.  interments  lunalilo (1835-1874), sixth monarch of the kingdom of hawaii charles kanaʻina (1801-1877), father of lunalilo miriam auhea kekauluohi crowningburg (1839-1899), cousin of lunalio, buried outside the tomb william edward bishop kaiheʻekai taylor (1882-1956), grandson of crowningburg, buried outside the tomb  see also royal mausoleum of hawaii list of burials in the royal mausoleum of hawaii  references  bibliography  buildings and structures in honolulu burial sites of hawaiian royal houses cemeteries in hawaii landmarks in hawaii mausoleums in the united states protected areas of oahu royalty of the hawaiian kingdom buildings and structures completed in 1876 1876 establishments in hawaii house of kalaimamahu
rene pavard (born 3 october 1934) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1959 and 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1934 births living people french male cyclists cyclists from paris
gaura  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gaura. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gaura has a total number of 105 houses and population of 475 of which include 239 males and 236 females. literacy rate of gaura is 64.29%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 55 which is  11.58% of total population of gaura, and child sex ratio is approximately  897, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the 2018 united states senate election in minnesota took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a united states senator from minnesota. incumbent democratic-farmer-labor u.s. senator amy klobuchar was reelected in a landslide. this election was held alongside a special election for minnesota's other senate seat, which was held by al franken until he resigned in january 2018. u.s. house elections, a gubernatorial election, state house elections, and other elections were also held.  the candidate filing deadline was june 5, 2018, and the primary election was held on august 14, 2018.  democratic-farmer-labor primary  candidates  nominated  amy klobuchar, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  steve carlson  stephen a. emery  david r. groves  leonard j. richards  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominated  jim newberger, state representative (minnesota gop convention endorsed)  eliminated in primary  merrill anderson, past candidate (mayor of minneapolis), past candidate (governor of minnesota)  rae hart anderson  rocky de la fuente, 2016 reform party presidential nominee and perennial candidate  declined  tim pawlenty, former governor of minnesota (running for governor)  endorsements  results  minor parties and independents  candidates  paula m. overby (green party) dennis schuller (legal marijuana now party)  general election  predictions  debates on august 24, mpr news hosted a debate between amy klobuchar and jim newberger at the minnesota state fair.  fundraising  polling  results  klobuchar won the election by a margin of 24.10%. she carried a clear majority of the state's 87 counties, won every congressional district, and had the biggest statewide margin of any statewide candidate in minnesota in 2018. klobuchar ran up huge margins in the state's population centers and trounced newberger in the counties encompassing the minneapolis-st. paul area. as in her 2012 victory, she also won many rural counties. klobuchar was sworn in for a third term on january 3, 2019.  by congressional district klobuchar won all of 8 congressional districts.  voter demographics  see also  2018 minnesota elections  references  external links elections & voting - minnesota secretary of state candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites amy klobuchar (d) for senate jim newberger (r) for senate paula overby (g) for senate  2018
minnesota united states senate amy klobuchar
atomic puppet is an animated television series created by jerry leibowitz and mark drop and produced by mercury filmworks, technicolor animation productions and gaumont animation for teletoon and disney xd. the series revolves around the adventures of 7th grader joey felt and his partner ap, a world-renowned superhero who's been reduced to life as a powerless sock puppet, until he's placed on joey's hand. together, they transform into mega city's newest superhero duo, atomic puppet and nuclear boy.  plot mega city's superhero captain atomic suffers a setback when, as he shaking hands with 12-year-old fanboy joey felt, his disgruntled sidekick mookie (or sergeant subatomic) transforms him into a living sock puppet. the suddenly powerless superhero quickly realizes that the only way he can regain his former powers is to team up with the boy-a dream come true for joey, but not so much for captain atomic. together, the two form an unlikely and awkward partnership that allows them to become the city's newest superhero duo-atomic puppet and nuclear boy.  characters  main  joseph "joey" felt/nuclear boy (voiced by eric bauza) - the main protagonist of the series, a 12-year-old middle-school student and comic book fan. through a chance turn of events, he develops the ability to combine with his superhero idol and together they form a new hero, atomic puppet and nuclear boy.  captain atomic/atomic puppet/ap (voiced by eric bauza) - captain atomic was a world-renowned superhero who lived his life being able to handle situations with his brute strength and endless charm. blinded by success and fame, he's suddenly transformed into a powerless living sock puppet by his jealous sidekick mookie. now he goes by the name ap and, due to his massive ego and short temper, struggles with adjusting to his new life as a puppet and the fact that he can only access his former powers when joey places him on his hand, turning them into atomic puppet and nuclear boy.  supporting  pauline bell (voiced by lisa norton) - a sassy middle school girl who is joey's best friend and the only person other than mookie and the other superheroes that knows of joey's secret identity. pauline occasionally covers for joey when he needs an excuse to become atomic puppet and has fought alongside atomic puppet if the situation called for it. she has a job at a comic book shop owned by her uncle.
phil felt (voiced by carlos diaz) - joey's burly, rugged, no-nonsense father. he's impatient, opinionated and does everything he can to counteract his wife's babying of the kids.  vivian felt (voiced by kristina nicoll) - joey's sweet but overly caring mother. she worries far too much about her children and is always concerned about what kind of trouble they could get into.  abigail felt (voiced by katie griffin) - joey's energetic 8-year-old sister who goes by the nickname "abs" or "abbie"  bubbles - the slow-witted, overweight, and flatulent family cat. ap refers to him as disastro and is convinced that bubbles is an undercover villain plotting to take down atomic puppet from the inside, while phil completely adores bubbles, describing him as "the most adorable kitty-kat in the world".  rex bordeaux (voiced by david huband) - the egotistical host of mega city news. as the city's #1 newsman, he climbed his way to celebrity status by reporting on the feats of captain atomic, but his reputation is in danger of slipping with captain atomic's "disappearance".  antagonists  sergeant subatomic (mookie) (voiced by peter oldring) - the main antagonist of the series. mookie is captain atomic's bitter and envious former sidekick and is responsible for his transformation into a puppet, done in an attempt to replace him as mega city's protector. while mookie does have a wide assortment of gadgets to use, by himself, he's nothing more than a glory hound that lives in his mother's basement. he frequently tries to force the citizens of mega city to accept him as their hero, but his incompetence and lack of superpowers fail to win them over.  professor tite-gripp (voiced by rick miller) - a cunning and ruthless criminal with massive mechanical hands that give him superhuman strength. he was originally captain atomic's archenemy and is now atomic puppet's most dangerous foe.  naughty kitty (voiced by heather bambrick) - a female thief who wears a black cat costume and steals cats. she is a parody of catwoman.  zorp (voiced by robert tinkler) - a green-skinned alien invader who intends to capture the citizens of mega city and eat them. he is often accompanied by a smaller alien of his species known as flert.  mud
man (voiced by robert tinkler) - a humanoid creature made entirely of mud who has the abilities to change his shape and possess others by smothering himself over them. he has a cousin named dirtbag, a large sack-like creature able to breath blasts of soil who has  also tangled with joey and ap.   ms. erlenmeyer/queen mindbender (voiced by kristina nicoll) - joey's bitter science teacher who is driven to madness by ap when he attempts to stop her from putting joey in detention. afterwards, she marries a mysterious alien entity and is transformed into a green-skinned telepath named queen mindbender.  heroes  justice alliance - a superhero team that protects the galaxy at large. prior to his transformation, captain atomic was a member, and he has rejoined as atomic puppet.  commander cavalier (voiced by robert tinkler) - a superman-like hero with heat vision powers. he is extremely obsessed with his appearance to the point where showing him a mirror will always cause him to stop and admire himself much like the arrogance of booster gold.  robo-ron (voiced by martin roach) - the cyborg (comics) superhero who only speaks in beatbox and printed messages. although he possesses a wide range of gadgetry and is incredibly intelligent, he is considered the least powerful member of the alliance. he also carries some weapons like robocop.  crimson beacon - a mute superhero with flaming hair. he has the same powers as green lantern and firestorm (comics).  princess war tickle (voiced by kristina nicoll) - a superheroine similar to wonder woman who dwells in a magical castle in the sky. she has an ongoing rivalry with captain atomic as she is the only hero who rivals captain atomic in power and fame.  others  rudolph mintenberg (voiced by scott mccord) - an eccentric billionaire who lives in a hilltop mansion outside of mega city. he is constantly bored and entertains himself by with a variety of dangerous gadgets and experiments, forcing joey and ap to step in and save the day.  warren beasley (voiced by mark edwards) - a nosy nerd who lives next door to joey. his hobby is spying on his neighbors and classmates.  the mayor (voiced by kevin hanchard) - the mayor of mega city. he often tries to replace atomic puppet because he dislikes the collateral damage they cause in their battles against their various foes.  episodes  music music composed and performed by ama
ury bernier & david gana of d&a factory  broadcast the first season is designed as 52 11-minute segments with 2 two-part specials. atomic puppet debuted on disney xd in the united states on july 18, 2016. the series aired on teletoon in canada on september 11, 2016, and disney xd in australia. in latin america, it began airing on disney xd on october 27, 2016. soon it will start airing reruns on disney xd in canada.  reception the series was nominated in 2017 for two annie awards: outstanding achievement in character animation in an animated tv/broadcast production and outstanding achievement in storyboarding in an animated tv/broadcast production. it was also nominated for a reuben award in the category of television animation, alongside the loud house and the simpsons, in 2016 by the national cartoonists society.  dawn m. burkes of the dallas morning news spoke positively on the series, calling it "a hoot of a superhero show". she praised its premise as fresh, unique, and entertaining, and its execution as making for a fun, humorous, and interesting take on the "old-school" superhero dynamic of the hero and his young sidekick.  references  external links      2010s canadian animated television series 2016 canadian television series debuts 2010s french animated television series 2016 french television series debuts 2017 canadian television series endings french children's animated action television series french children's animated adventure television series french children's animated comic science fiction television series french children's animated superhero television series canadian children's animated action television series canadian children's animated adventure television series canadian children's animated comic science fiction television series canadian children's animated superhero television series anime-influenced western animated television series gaumont animation teletoon original programming disney xd original programming canadian television shows featuring puppetry french television shows featuring puppetry animated television series about children english-language television shows
aldo bolzan (6 september 1933 - 21 october 2013) was a luxembourgian professional racing cyclist. he rode in six editions of the tour de france. italian by birth, he was naturalized on 22 july 1960.  references  external links    1933 births 2013 deaths luxembourgian male cyclists sportspeople from esch-sur-alzette
"somewhere in the night" is a song originally recorded by the oak ridge boys on their 1981 album fancy free.  the song was later recorded by american country music group sawyer brown.  it was released in august 1987 as the first single and title track from the album somewhere in the night.  the song reached #29 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by rafe van hoy and don cook.  chart performance  references  songs about nights 1987 singles 1981 songs the oak ridge boys songs sawyer brown songs songs written by don cook songs written by rafe van hoy song recordings produced by ron chancey capitol records singles curb records singles
francois marie d'aboville (january 23, 1730 - november 1, 1817) was a french general de division (major general). he was the father of augustin gabriel d'aboville and augustin-marie d'aboville. he was born in brest. he fought in the seven years' war. he fought in the american revolutionary war against the british at the battle of yorktown (1781). he fought at the battle of valmy in the war of the first coalition. during the hundred days of 1815 and after the bourbon restoration, he served in the chamber of peers. he was a grand officer of the legion of honour and a recipient of the grand cross of the order of saint louis.  references  1730 births 1817 deaths french military personnel of the american revolutionary war members of the senat conservateur grand officiers of the legion d'honneur members of the chamber of peers of the bourbon restoration members of the chamber of peers of the hundred days grand crosses of the order of saint louis
tungsten is a ghost town in boulder county, in the u.s. state of colorado. the former townsite is north of middle boulder creek.  history a post office called tungsten was established in 1916, and remained in operation until 1950. the community took its name from a nearby tungsten mine. facts-such as the population, precise location, and descriptions of the town-are disputed as one frequently quoted book on the subject, colorado ghost towns (1959), is inconsistent with contemporary news reports on the town. in 1916, 600 people are reported to have lived in the town.  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of boulder county, colorado
kim young-hee (), also spelled kim yeong-hui, is a korean name consisting of the family name kim and the given name young-hee, and may also refer to:   kim yeong-hui (speed skater) (born 1955), south korean speed skater  kim yeong-hui (rower) (born 1962), south korean rower  kim young-hee (basketball) (born 1963), south korean basketball player  kim young-hee (comedian) (born 1983), south korean comedian  see also  kim yong-hee (disambiguation) ()
the 1949 western michigan broncos football team represented michigan college of education (later renamed western michigan university) in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1949 college football season.  in their eighth season under head coach john gill, the broncos compiled a 4-4 record (2-3 against mac opponents), finished in fourth place in the mac, and outscored their opponents, 148 to 123.  the team played its home games at waldo stadium in kalamazoo, michigan.  guard bob carlson was the team captain. safety george dunn received the team's most outstanding player award.  schedule  references  western michigan western michigan broncos football seasons western michigan broncos football
the our lady of the rosary cathedral  () also called puyo cathedral is a religious building that is located in the central district 12 de mayo in the city of puyo, pastaza province, in the south american country of ecuador.  the temple follows the roman or latin rite and functions as the headquarters of the apostolic vicariate of puyo (apostolicus vicariatus puyoensis) which was created in 1964 with the bull apostolica praefectura of pope paul vi and whose current name dates from 1976.  its construction took four years and was blessed and inaugurated on may 10, 1972 with the design of architect reinaldo flores. as its name implies was dedicated to the virgin mary in her title of our lady of the rosary of pompeii. it highlights its stained glass by an american nun.  see also roman catholicism in ecuador our lady of the rosary  references  roman catholic cathedrals in ecuador puyo, pastaza roman catholic churches completed in 1972 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in ecuador
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the , after mount aso. it was formed on 2 april 1945 in kumamoto as a triangular division. it was one of a batch of eight divisions composed of the 201st, 202nd, 205th, 206th,  209th, 212th, 214th and 216th divisions created as part of the reaction to the battle of okinawa.  history on 11 june 1945, the 206th division was deployed in western kagoshima prefecture. the 510th infantry regiment was in hioki, the 511th in fukiage-cho tajiri , and the 512th infantry regiment was sent to higashiichiki-cho yuda . some of its other units were deployed at fukiage. it did not see any combat by the time of the surrender of japan on 15 august 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第206師団 (日本軍), accessed 14 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
bishop is an extinct town in whitman county, in the u.s. state of washington.  a post office called bishop was established in 1913, and remained in operation until 1925. the community was named after the bishop brothers, local settlers.  references  ghost towns in washington (state) geography of whitman county, washington
chandanda nikkin thimmaiah (born 18 january 1991) is an indian field hockey player who plays as a forward. he was named in the indian squad for the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links player profile at hockey india  1991 births living people people from kodagu district indian male field hockey players field hockey players from karnataka field hockey players at the 2014 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2014 asian games field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of india commonwealth games medallists in field hockey commonwealth games silver medallists for india asian games gold medalists for india medalists at the 2014 asian games asian games medalists in field hockey
this is a list of americans in pakistan. it includes american immigrants or expatriates who have lived in pakistan, as well as pakistani people who are of american descent. the list is sorted alphabetically by the individuals' professions or fields of activity to which they have notably made contributions, such as academia and education, the arts, business, crime, diplomacy, literature and journalism, military or intelligence, music, politics, religion, science and technology, and social work.  to be included in this list, the person must have a wikipedia article or references implying notability, as well as showing that they are american and have resided in pakistan.  academia and education  jonathan curiel, journalist; lived in lahore from 1993 to 1994, teaching journalism at the university of the punjab as a fulbright scholar.  charles william forman, presbyterian minister and missionary; founder of the forman christian college in lahore in 1864 (then british india).  eugene gardner, physicist; taught the first graduate physics class at the university of peshawar in 1955-56.  debra lobo, educator and missionary; vice-principal of jinnah medical and dental college.  ralph randles stewart, professor and researcher of botany in pakistan, based in rawalpindi.  arts and entertainment  kate brooks, photojournalist who covered u.s. foreign policy in the region.  brian kershisnik, painter; spent early life in pakistan.  amy stein, photographer; raised in karachi.  faran tahir, pakistani-american actor; raised in pakistan.  business and economics  yasin anwar, banker and 17th governor of the state bank of pakistan; a dual u.s.-pakistan citizen.  zia chishti, pakistani-american business executive  sanzar kakar, afghan-american entrepreneur and business leader; raised in peshawar.  crime  the d.c. five, five american citizens imprisoned on charges of terrorism.  erik aude, american actor and stuntman imprisoned for drug trafficking.  raymond allen davis, former u.s. army soldier and cia contractor who shot dead two civilians in lahore.  khalil al-deek, jordanian-american charity worker who lived in peshawar; extradited to jordan for charges of militancy-related conspiracy.  adam yahiye gadahn, al-qaeda operative and spokesperson, of jewish descent, who converted; killed by u.s. drone strike in waziristan, near the afghan border.  zahir jaffer, pakistani-american citizen involved in the murder of noor mukadam in islamabad.
john walker lindh, irish-american convicted for militancy in afghanistan and pakistan.  jose padilla, puerto rican-american convicted for militancy.  stephen paster, arsonist and member of jamaat ul-fuqra who moved to lahore after release from prison.  ahmad khan rahami, afghan-american detained for terrorism; lived for a year in quetta, where he had relatives.  bryant neal vinas, hispanic-american convicted for militancy.  diplomacy   richard e. hoagland, deputy u.s. ambassador in pakistan from 2011 to 2013; also worked in the country from 1986 to 1989, coordinating resistance efforts during the soviet war in afghanistan.  christopher van hollen, sr., diplomat and foreign service officer; served in pakistan.  james howard holmes, member of the foreign service; served at the u.s. consulate general in lahore from 1968 to 1970.  dennis kux, diplomat; served in pakistan from 1957 to 1959 and 1969 to 1971.  donald lu, diplomat; served as a political officer at the u.s. consulate general in peshawar.  joseph melrose, diplomat; served as consul-general at the u.s. consulate general in karachi during the 1980s and 1990s.  leon b. poullada, mexican-american career diplomat; served in pakistan.  howard bruner schaffer, diplomat and academic; served as political counselor to the u.s. embassy in islamabad from 1974 to 1977.  thomas w. simons jr., diplomat and academic; raised and attended school in karachi  health and medicine  zaheer ahmad, pakistani-american physician; founded the shifa international hospital.  john harland bryant, physician; professor and chairman at the community health sciences department of aga khan university from 1985 to 1993.  adil haider, pakistani-american trauma surgeon; moved to pakistan in the 1980s, where he completed his schooling and medical education.  joseph b. mccormick, physician and scientist; served as chairman of the community health sciences department at aga khan university from 1993 to 1997.  literature, activism and journalism   steve levine, journalist and writer; based in pakistan as a foreign correspondent from 1988 to 1991.  greg mortenson, mountaineer and humanitarian in northern pakistan; author of the bestselling books three cups of tea and stones into schools.  daniyal mueenuddin, pakistani-american author; spent early life in pakistan.  steven naifeh, arab-american author and artist; spent early life in pakistan.  as
ra nomani, indian-american journalist and writer; worked as a correspondent in karachi.  cynthia d. ritchie, american blogger and filmmaker based in pakistan.  muhammad syed, pakistani-american atheist writer, speaker and activist who grew up in pakistan.  military, intelligence and law enforcement  jonathan bank, cia station chief in pakistan; removed in 2010.  milton bearden, cia station chief during the late 1980s.  karl clark, police officer who served in pakistan with icitap.  robert grenier, cia station chief in 2001.  howard hart, cia station chief from 1981 to 1984.  marc sageman, cia operations officer; based in islamabad from 1987 to 1989, working with anti-soviet resistance in afghanistan.  chuck yeager, u.s. advisor to the pakistan air force from 1971 to 1973.  music  brian o'connell, multi-instrumentalist and producer; member of the pakistani sufi rock band junoon.  politics   nasim ashraf, pakistani-american physician; served as minister of state, and chairman of the national commission for human development and pakistan cricket board during the musharraf government.  daniyal aziz, pakistani politician and member of the national assembly; of american descent through his mother.  amna buttar, pakistani politician and member of the provincial assembly of the punjab; dually holds american citizenship.  hoddy hildreth, lawyer, conservationist and politician who served as a member of the maine house of representatives; lived and studied in pakistan where his father horace hildreth was the u.s. ambassador.  chris van hollen, democratic party member and u.s. representative from maryland; born in karachi and son of diplomat christopher van hollen, sr. who served in the country; first pakistan-born member of the united states congress.  fauzia kasuri, pakistani politician; previously held american citizenship.  dale kildee, democratic party member and u.s. representative from michigan; pursued graduate studies in history and political science under a rotary foundation fellowship at the university of peshawar from 1958 to 1959.  azam khan swati, pakistani politician formerly serving as a senator and federal minister; previously held american citizenship.  religion  hobart baumann amstutz, christian missionary and methodist bishop of pakistan from 1964 to 1968.  maryam jameelah, muslim writer and historian; converted from judaism to islam and emigrated to pakistan in 1962.  k. gunn mckay, mormon missionary and u.s. congressman.  j. dudley woodberry,
christian missionary and teacher.  norman wray, roman catholic missionary and social worker based in karachi.  science and technology  mark schaller, psychological scientist; spent early life in pakistan.  curt teichert, german-american palaeontologist and geologist; worked in quetta from 1961 to 1964 studying paleontology and geology of the salt range, and conducting stratigraphic research.  sports  bashir ahmad, pakistani-american mixed martial artist.  social work   ann dunham, cottage industries development consultant for agricultural development bank of pakistan (adbp) in gujranwala; mother of u.s. president barack obama.  louis dupree, professor, archaeologist and anthropologist of afghan history; spent time in pakistan as fulbright scholar and assisting afghan immigrants in peshawar.  nancy dupree, archaeologist of afghan history; spent time in peshawar running a resource centre for afghan immigrants.  marla ruzicka, activist and aid worker; initially based in peshawar to cover the afghan war.  john solecki, unhcr officer based in quetta; taken hostage and released in 2009.  warren weinstein, development contractor based in lahore; taken hostage by militants and later killed in a u.s. drone strike near the afghan border.  see also   list of pakistani americans  pakistan-united states relations  references  pakistan americans american
the 2016-17 copa federacion de espana was the 24th edition of the copa federacion de espana, also known as copa rfef, a knockout competition for spanish football clubs in segunda division b and tercera division. atletico baleares was the defending champion.  the champion would win the trophy, a cash prize of €90,152 and the qualification for the next year tournament. the runner-up would receive a cash prize of €30,051 and every semifinalist €12,020. additionally, each winner of autonomous community tournament would receive €3,005.  the competition began in late july 2016 with the first games of the asturias, castile-la mancha and extremadura tournaments and finished on 6 april 2017 with the final of national phase.  atletico saguntino achieved its first national title ever after defeating fuenlabrada in the finals.  autonomous communities tournaments  west andalusia and ceuta tournament four teams of the group 10 of tercera division registered for this tournament. semifinals were drawn on 3 august 2016.  semifinals first leg  second leg  final first leg  second leg  east andalusia and melilla tournament two teams registered to play the tournament. the andalusia football federation determined the order of the games on 3 august 2016.  final first leg  second leg  aragon tournament  quarter-finals  semifinals  final  asturias tournament as usual in asturias, the twelve best teams between segunda division b and tercera division who did not qualify for the copa del rey played this tournament. the draw was held on 20 july 2016 in the prince felipe auditorium in oviedo. the champion would get a prize of €3,000 and the 50% of the income in the final game, played in a neutral venue.  preliminary round  group a  group b  group c  group d  final bracket  semifinals first leg  second leg  final  balearic islands tournament  first round first leg  second leg  semifinals first leg  second leg  final first leg  second leg  basque country tournament four teams of the group 4 of tercera division registered for this tournament. semifinals were drawn on 5 september 2016 by basque football federation.  semi-finals first leg  second leg  final first leg  second leg  canary islands tournament  final first leg  second leg  cantabria tournament the draw of the cantabrian tournament was held on 1 july 2016 at the headquarters of the cantabrian football federation. it was the third edition with the current format: a single-game knockout tournament between the eight best teams of segunda division b and tercera division
that did not qualify to the copa del rey.  the winner received a prize of €3,000 and each team earned €500 per game played.  quarter-finals  semifinals  final  castile and leon tournament on 9 september 2016, the castile-leon football federation confirmed that three teams will join the tournament. they will play a round-robin group with one match at home and another away to determine the regional champion, who will play the national stage.  castile-la mancha tournament the copa cervantes, reinstated by the castile-la mancha government, also acts as copa rfef qualifier for castile-la mancha teams. the draw was held in toledo the 11 july 2016.  albacete, conquense, socuellamos and toledo are ineligible to qualify to the national stage as regional champions, as they participate in the copa del rey.  first round first leg  second leg  quarter-finals first leg  second leg  semi-finals first leg  second leg  final  catalonia tournament the draw was held at the headquarters of the catalan football federation on 24 august 2016.  semi-final first leg  second leg  final first leg  second leg  extremadura tournament with a record of participants in the regional competition, the games of the first round, drawn on 1 july 2016, will be played at the pitch of the worst qualified team in the 2015-16 season.  first round don benito received a bye  second round the second round was drawn on 1 august 2016.  third round the third round was drawn on 8 august 2016. jerez received a bye for the fourth round while the winner between amanacer and cacereno would qualify directly for the final.  semifinal cacereno received a bye to the final in the previous draw.  final  galicia tournament the draw was held at the headquarters of the galician football federation on 5 august 2016. the matches will be played at home of team in lower division.  round of 16  quarter-finals  semi-finals  final  la rioja tournament the draw was held at the headquarters of the regional federation on 20 july 2016.  quarter-finals  semifinals  final  madrid tournament on 16 august 2016, the madrid football federation confirmed that only four teams will join the tournament. they played a round-robin group to determine the regional champion.  murcia tournament the draw was held at the headquarters of the region of murcia football federation on 25 august 2016.  quarter-finals  semi-finals  final  navarre tournament  qualifying tournament  group a  group
b  final bracket  semifinals  final  valencian community tournament castellon, orihuela and torre levante  played the tournament, consisting in 3 matches of 60 minutes each (2 halves of 30 minutes) in a neutral venue.  national tournament the national tournament began 23 november 2016.  qualified teams  defending champion  atletico baleares (3)  teams losing copa del rey first round  andorra (4)  atletico mancha real (3)  atletico saguntino (3)  boiro (3)  burgos (3)  conquense (4)  laredo (4)  lorca deportiva (4)  murcia (3)  ponferradina (3)  prat (3)  real union (3)  san sebastian de los reyes (3)  socuellamos (3)  ud logrones (3)  villa de santa brigida (4)  zamora (4)  zamudio (3)  winners of autonomous communities tournaments  alaves b (4)  arandina (3)  arosa (4)  badajoz (4)  badalona (3)  fuenlabrada (3)  linares (3)  madridejos (4)  orihuela (4)  pena sport (4)  poblense (4)  racing santander b (4)  san fernando (3)  sporting gijon b (4)  tenisca (4)  teruel (4)  ucam murcia b (4)  varea (4)  (3) team playing in 2016-17 segunda division b (third tier) (4) team playing in 2016-17 tercera division (fourth tier) slashed teams withdrew from the competition.  round of 32 the draw for the first round was held on october 28. the matches were played between 23 november and 15 december 2016.  |}  first leg  second leg  round of 16 the draw for the round of 16 was held on 16 december 2016. the matches were played between 11 and 25 january 2017.  |}  first leg  second leg  quarterfinals the draw for the quarterfinals was held on 20 january 2017.  |}  first leg  second leg  semifinals the draw for the semifinals was held on 10 february 2017.  |}  first leg  second leg  final  |}  first leg  second leg  references  2016-17 3 2016-17 segunda division b 2016-17 tercera division
meregalli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  guido meregalli (1894-1959), italian racing driver luca meregalli (born 1991), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
type 342 radar is a chinese fire control radar for hq-61 sam, and since has been retired from active service from chinese navy (plan) when hq-61 sam is replaced by more advanced sam systems.  type 342 is a centimeter wave, mono-pulse tracking radar for hq-61 sam. the radar was installed on type 053k jiangdong class frigate. each radar is capable of engage a single target, and a maximum of three type 342 radars can be installed on type 053k frigate. type 342 has been replaced by more advanced type 345, as in the case onboard type 053h2g frigate.  see also  chinese radars  naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
the a.d. xenopol institute of history () in iasi is an institution of research in the field of history under the auspices of the romanian academy. the institute was named in honour of romanian historian alexandru dimitrie xenopol.  the institute was founded in 1941 by professor ilie minea as the "a.d. xenopol institute for the history of romanians" within the alexandru ioan cuza university, and became an independent entity in 1943, as the "a.d. xenopol institute of national history". in 1970 it was renamed the "a.d. xenopol institute of history and archaeology", and placed under the authority of the academy of social and political sciences of the socialist republic of romania.   after the fall of the communist regime and the disbandment of the academy of social and political sciences, the institute passed under the aegis of the romanian academy. the archaeology section split off, forming the iasi institute of archaeology, and the institute acquired its present name.  see also romanian academy iasi institute of archaeology  external links adxenopol.academiaromana-is.ro - official website  references  institutes of the romanian academy anthropological research institutes historical research institutes buildings and structures in iasi 1941 establishments in romania
amfiteatrof music festival (previously known as festival massimo amfiteatrof) is a classical and chamber music festival based in levanto, an italian comune in the ligurian riviera,  between genoa and la spezia, since 1992.  the festival pays tribute to massimo amfiteatrof (born maksim aleksandrovich amfiteatrov), one of the greatest cellist of the 20th century, dubbed as the "cellists' caruso" (italian: "il caruso dei violoncellisti"), who moved from st. petersburg to italy in the early 1920s, settling first in cavi, a frazione of lavagna, and then in levanto, where he died in 1990. during his lifetime amfiteatrof worked with arturo toscanini and fabrizio de andre and collaborated with eiar and subsequently with rai.  the festival has been being organized by associazione festival massimo amfiteatrof levanto since its beginning and the administrative board is currently led by president angela fenwick  the festival  founded two years after amfiteatrof's death, amfiteatrof music festival offers every summer, from july to september, a considerable number of concerts and music performances. the festival is well known for the architectonic, historic and geographic hallmarks of the sites where they are held: old churches, castles, noble houses, small scenic squares (the so-called "piazzettes"), old towns and convents, gardens, parks and amazing heights and cliffs overlooking the ligurian sea. partly due to these features, a large number of tourists, including foreigners, regularly attend the concerts during the summer season in the levanto area, near to the cinque terre towns.    all the concerts are free entry with the exception of those requiring an early reservation, such as premieres, debuts, theatre shows and very famous musicians' recitals, often located in prestigious sites (for example, the gardens of villa agnelli in levanto, which belonged to gianni agnelli).    amfiteatrof music festival features classical and chamber music performances by many internationally renowned soloists and ensembles. formative and didactic workshops, cultural lectures, children theatre and contemporary experimental performances, which blend music with other arts, also make the event. many musicians and orchestra conductors collaborated with amfiteatrof during his lifetime or were tied with him from caring relationships and that's one of the main reasons why they frequently come back in levanto to perform again. during the early years the major place of the festival was the convento della santissima annunziata in
levanto. later on, it has been moved to the outside yard of st. andrew's church (chiesa di sant'andrea). nowadays there are more locations than before - both internal and external ones - in levanto, but also in the nearby villages of the province of la spezia, such as framura, bonassola (on the riviera) and brugnato (within the inner province)  artists and performers  popular and recurrent performers of the festival are: camerata rco (soloists of the royal concertgebouw orchestra), ensemble-in-residence from 2009 to 2015, dynamis ensemble, elena denisova, moni ovadia, alexander lonquich, the chamber musicians of maggio musicale fiorentino, palo alto chamber orchestra, andrea bacchetti, mariangela vacatello, domenico nordio, bruno canino - antonio ballista piano duo   and many other popular artists  main locations  amfiteatrof music festival locations are in levanto and in the nearby comuni.  in levanto: st. andrew's church (chiesa di sant'andrea), st. jack's oratory (oratorio di san giacomo), clarisse's convent (convento delle clarisse), the gardens outside villa agnelli, piazzetta della loggia, piazzetta della compera, convento della santissima annunziata and frazioni of montale and chiesanuova  in bonassola: st. catherine of alexandria's church (chiesa di santa caterina d'alessandria), st. erasmus's oratory (oratorio di sant'erasmo)  in framura: st. martin's church (chiesa di san martino) in the frazione of costa.  amfiteatrof music festival concerts or musical events also take place in the pedestrian paths and in the cliffs upon the ligurian sea, near to the aforementioned comuni.  see also  massimo amfiteatrof  levanto  liguria  references  external links  festivalamfiteatrof.com (festival massimo amfiteatrof official website)  liguria music of liguria chamber music festivals classical music festivals in italy cultural festivals in italy music festivals established in 1992
{{displaytitle:c27h34o3}} the molecular formula c27h34o3 (molar mass: 406.56 g/mol) may refer to:   nandrolone phenylpropionate (npp), or nandrolone phenpropionate  testosterone phenylacetate  molecular formulas
juan carlos morales hernandez (born november 27, 1992 in mexico city) is a mexican professional footballer who currently plays for potros uaem.  references  external links    1992 births living people mexican footballers association football midfielders potros uaem footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from mexico city
lank fc vilaverdense  is a portuguese football club based in vila verde in the district of braga. the team plays in portugal's top-division league, campeonato nacional de futebol feminino.  current squad  as of 21 august 2021  note: flags indicate national team as defined under fifa eligibility rules. players may hold more than one non-fifa.''  references  women's football clubs in portugal campeonato nacional de futebol feminino teams
smartpak is a business headquartered in plymouth, massachusetts. smartpak was founded in 1999 by two harvard business school graduates, founders becky minard, and her husband paal gisholt.   smartpak provides custom-packed nutritional supplements in daily-dose packages for horses and dogs. in addition to its patented feeding system that provides convenient administration of supplements and medications, smartpak has since expanded into selling equestrian apparel and gear, and added products for dogs, including dog supplies.  history  becky minard got the idea for smartpak in 1999, after recognizing that the stable where she kept her horse was having trouble keeping up with feeding and supplementation.  she had asked the stable to add supplements to her horse's food to help with a degenerative eye disease he suffered from that could lead to blindness. when she discovered that her horse's supplementation was inconsistent, the stable manager explained how it was a challenge for workers to feed and keep track of multiple supplements for 30 horses.  in response to this problem, minard invented smartpak, creating a way to preselect, premeasure, and prepackage medications and supplements for individual horses.  in october 2005, inc. magazine named smartpak equine the 106th fastest-growing business in america in its annual list of america's 500 fastest growing private businesses, marking the first time an equine business was named to the list.  smartpak has been named to the inc. 500/5000 list nine times.  in spring 2007, smartpak recalled its livesmart weight management chicken and brown rice dog food after being notified by one of its suppliers that the weight-control formula might contain melamine.  certain chinese exporters were suspected of using melamine to increase protein levels in particular pet foods. pet food tainted with melamine was linked with making thousands of dogs and cats sick nationwide, even leading to the death of some pets that had consumed other brands of pet food.  smartpak commissioned its own independent tests that showed the subject of its original recall did not contain melamine. however, the company issued a recall in may 2007 for its adult lamb and brown rice dog food. independent testing conducted for all of its livesmart brands showed that this product had tested positive for melamine due to cross contamination at chenango valley pet foods, which manufactured smartpak's brands in addition to other pet food brands.  smartpak responded immediately by calling every customer who had ordered the affected food and informing its entire customer base of the recall by letter, email and its website.
smartpak also made changes to its already "rigorous evaluation process" for selecting vendors, by requiring notification if one of chenango valley's suppliers were to change vendors. the company also added another layer of chemical analysis in its testing of its finished products.  smartpak provides several horse related videos, including a series entitled "if horses were people" that features horse behavior.  in late 2007, smartpak secured a $25 million equity investment from north bridge growth equity of waltham, massachusetts, in order to help the company expand its offerings as well as strengthen its technology and its management team. this was the fourth round of funding the company had received.  smartpak opened its first retail outlet in 2006 in natick, massachusetts.  in july 2014, henry schein, inc. (nasdaq: hsic) announced that its u.s. animal health business, henry schein animal health, had completed its acquisition of a 60 percent ownership position in smartpak. ownership in the remaining 40 percent stake was held by private equity firm, oak hill capital partners and smartpak's existing management team. the balance of the transaction was not disclosed.  smartpak's business model was featured in the 2007 book outsmart! how to do what your competitors can't by jim champy, who most recently served as chairman emeritus, consulting for dell services.  smartpak also was featured in the 2015 business book, above the noise - creating trust, value & reputation online using basic digital pr by carrie morgan.  references  food and drink companies of the united states companies based in plymouth county, massachusetts companies based in massachusetts american companies established in 1999
perspective is the second studio album released by four-piece british band lawson. the album was released on 8 july 2016. the album was preceded by the singles "roads", "money" and "where my love goes". the album was recorded over the course of two years. initial recording took place between march 2014 and april 2015; with additional recording sessions taking place between january and march 2016. the album introduces a more progressive and adult sound for the band, incorporating elements of synthpop amongst a heavier selection of electronic guitars.  background singer andy brown said of the album title; "the word "perspective" was the perfect album title, you know with everything i've been through personally over the last few years health-wise and changing perspective on life, so couldn't have been more perfect for me." the standard version of the album was released via itunes while an exclusive version of the album containing seven bonus tracks was released as part of a box set through the band's official store.  singles  "roads" was the first single to be released from the album on 24 may 2015. the single reached number 11 on the uk singles chart.  "money" was released as the album's second single on 18 march 2016. the single did not chart as well as its predecessor, and did not peak inside the top 100.  "where my love goes" was released as the album's third single on 13 may 2016. the music video was released on 19 may, and depicts andy proposing to his girlfriend, joey mcdowall.  track listing  charts  release history  references  2016 albums polydor records albums lawson (band) albums
pimp master is the second studio album by pioneering jazz group soil & "pimp" sessions, from japan. it was released on june 23, 2005.  track listing  credits performed and arranged by soil & "pimp" sessions toasting [agitator] - shacho saxophone - motoharu trumpet - tabu zombie piano - josei bass - akita goldman drums - midorin mastered by yasuji maeda recorded and mixed by shinjiro ikeda executive producer - akira sekiguchi (victor), katsunori ueda (victor) assistant engineers - yoshiyuki watanabe (victor studio), yasuhiro shirai (sound city), kanako hayashi (innig), naoya tokunou (heart beat), seiji toda (heart beat) a&r, director - yuichi sorita (victor) artist promotion - toyonobu hatayama (victor) sales promotion - yasuhiro kanabo (victor) photography - keisuke sanada artwork by [art direction] - schnabel effects styling - kenji koizumi (screaming mimi's) layout - hiroshi yano (vdc) visual direction - tomoro watanabe (vdc)  references  2005 albums soil & "pimp" sessions albums
the 16th district of the iowa senate is located in southern iowa, and is currently composed of polk county.  current elected officials nate boulton is the senator currently representing the 16th district.  the area of the 16th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 31st district (represented by rick olson) the 32nd district (represented by ruth ann gaines)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  dale tieden, 1983-1992 lyle zieman, 1993-2000 mark zieman, 2001-2002 julie hosch, 2003-2004 tom hancock, 2005-2012 dick dearden, 2013-2016 nate boulton, 2017-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  16
mystikal ebony is a south african based, dj, poet, journalist, radio host and film maker. she is popularly known in the afro beat, reggae, dancehall, dub drum and bass and jungle music circles in south africa. her style of music is not genre specific as she comfortably moves between music from different countries and eras.  life and career  ebony was born and raised in south africa to a ndebele mother and tsonga father whose roots are from mozambique. she has an older brother were both raised by her their single mother. ebony grew up in a small town called nelspruit, nestled in the sleepy mountains of the mpumalanga province. there she attended her primary school and high school before moving to johannesburg and enrolling at the university of the witwatersrand where she obtained her master's degree in film and media studies.  her dj career kicked off in university where she hosted her own radio show on the campus station voice of wits (vow) for two years. while at wits in 2005, she entered a dj competition hosted by a local reggae sound system, flames of fire, and she won 2nd prize. that was her foot in the industry, and she took advantage of that opportunity and left her radio show to pursue a career as a club dj and film-maker. she has written and directed documentaries and films for local television stations such as sabc and mzansi magic as well as worked on international sets as an assistant director on movies shot in south africa such as kite starring samuel l jackson. as a poet her poem 'a chant for my sisters'  was  published in one of the powa (people opposing women abuse), anthologies of breaking the silence.  notable performances   mystikal ebony has opened up for many notable acts including jamaican stars lucianio, and sizzla. in 2015 her mixes featured monthly on one of south africa's national radio station 5fm. for two consecutive years, she was nominated for best female selktor / dj on the local reggae music awards mzansi reggae music awards.  2015 saw her move from club djing to international festivals which lead to her own tours. 2016 she commenced her west african tour in ghana and 2017 saw her sitting as ambassador for a clothing brand in south africa as well as the first ever africa reggae music awards (arma)2019 she embarked on her european tour.  references    http://thefemininetouchseries.blogspot.co.za/2014/08/guest-dj-mystikal
-ebony.html  http://allevents.in/pretoria/mystikal-ebony-ragga-jungle-mix/791635720915130  https://books.google.com/books?id=ksq_mokplfac&pg=pa10&lpg=pa10&dq=powa+a+chant+for+my+sisters&source=bl&ots=yaorlvprnd&sig=0hxpmciblaigaj6e31vqayp2ydq&hl=en&sa=x&ved=0ahukewiivetb-d_nahwhdmakhqzjdzaq6aeiizab#v=onepage&q=powa%20a%20chant%20for%20my%20sisters&f=false  http://www.mzansireggae.co.za/woman-in-reggae/  http://chillimag.co.za/poolside-maboneng-precinct-with-sizzla-kalonji-reggae-spring-jam/  http://www.jhblive.com/events-in-johannesburg/live-music/pussy-party/97550  http://joburgnorth.getitonline.co.za/2015/04/10/the-scarf-is-art/  http://www.zkhiphani.co.za/event/faya-uman/  https://boomingin.wordpress.com/2012/09/27/mystikal-ebony/  1985 births living people south african reggae musicians south african drum and bass musicians dancehall musicians
anton schneeberger (1530, zurich - 13 march 1581, cracow) was a swiss botanist, doctor, and book collector based in poland.  life schneeberger began his studies at basel under the doctor and natural scientist conrad gessner. he later studied at basel, before arriving at the jagiellonian university in cracow in 1553. three years later he left for france, studying at montpellier and paris, where he earned the title of doctor of medicine and philosophy.  in 1559 schneeberger returned to poland. he kept an active travel schedule, however, visiting lithuania and spending time at the university in konigsberg. he returned to cracow in 1561 and soon established himself among the local doctors and scholars. he counted copernicus' student jerzy joachim retyka and the german doctor and book collector matthias stoius among his friends.  schneeberg married twice. his first wife, katarzyna, daughter of the royal doctor jan antonin, died young in 1569. his second wife, anna, was the daughter of the wealthy apothecary mikołaj alantsee. they had one son together named anton, who later became a doctor himself. the younger anton studied in padua, but died relatively young.  works  catalogus stirpium latine et polonine conscriptus. cracow: drukarnia łazarzowa, 1557.  one of the first works about the flora local to the region of cracow.   catalogus medicamentorum simplicium sive evporiston pestilentiae ueneno aduersatium. zurich: gesner, 1561. digitzed by bayerische staatsbibliothek.  de multiplici salis usu libellus. cracow: łazarz andrysowicz, 1562. digitized by dolnoslaska biblioteka cyfrowa.  de bona militum valetudine conservanda liber. ksiega o zachowaniu dobrego zdrowia zołnierzy. cracow: drukarnia łazarzowa, 1564. reprinted with additional material, warsaw, 2008. digitized by bayerische staatsbibliothek.  medicamentorum facile parabilium adversus omnis generis articulorum dolores enumeratio. frankfurt: andreas wechelus, 1580. digitized by bayerische staatsbibliothek.  see also  simon syrenius, zielnik  references  notes  bibliography  hajdukiewicz, l. "schneeberger (schneberger) anton
". in polski słownik biograficzny, vol. 35, no. 4, pp.568-71. cracow, 1994.  hryniewiecki, "b. anton schneeberger (1530-1581) ein schuler konrad gesners in polen". veroffentlichungen des geobotanischen institutes rubel in zurich 13 (1938): 1-64.  ilnicki, s. "zycie i działalnosc antoniego schneebergera". in a. schneeberger, de bona militum..., pp. viii-xii.  ilnicki, s., and r. a. sucharski, "zalecenia doktora antoniego schneebergera dotyczace snu i czuwania zołnierzy". lekarz wojskowy 69, no. 7 (1993): 414-18.  konopka, s. "antoni schneeberger i jego dzieło o higienie wojskowej." archiwum historii medycyny. xxvii, nos. 1-2 (1964): 49-54.  kosminski, s. słownik lekarzow polskich, pp. 445-46. warszawa, 1888.  kozluk, m. and sz. sułecki. "une petite perle de cracovie: la bibliotheque medicale d'anton schneeberger (1530-1581)". histoire des sciences medicales''. xlvi, no. 4 (2012): 441-52.  nierzwicki, krzysztof. "warszawski egzemplarz de humani corporis fabrica andreasa vesaliusa (bazylea 1555) ze zbiorow biblioteki narodowej: przyczynek do dziejow recepcji anatomii wesalianskiej w polsce."    rostafinski, jozef. "nasza literatura botaniczna xvi w oraz jej autorowie lub tłumacze". cracow, 1888.  szostak, jan. "farmakognozja, farmacja galenowa i aptekarstwo w renesansowych zielnikach polskich". warszawa, 2006.  1530 births 1581 deaths 16th-century latin-language writers polish historians polish male non-fiction writers 16th-century polish physicians polish male writers pre-lin
naean botanists
the 1911 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1911 college football season.  in their fifth season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 2-3 record and outscored their opponents, 110 to 59. fullback glenn mayer was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal hilltoppers western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
the gens luscia was a minor family at ancient rome.  members of this gens are first mentioned in the early part of the second century bc.  they were of senatorial rank, but few of them achieved the higher offices of the roman state.  the only known consul of this gens was lucius luscius ocrea, during the flavian dynasty.  origin the nomen luscia appears to be formed from the cognomen luscus, referring to someone with but one eye.  branches and cognomina the only cognomen known to have been borne by this family was ocrea, which appears from cicero's time to the late first century ad.  members  lavinius luscius, a comic poet, and a contemporary of terence.  lucius luscius, a centurion in the years following sulla's return to rome.  he participated in the sullan proscriptions of 81 bc, from which he became very wealthy.  in 64 bc he was convicted of three murders in connection with his actions during the proscriptions, and condemned.  gaius luscius ocrea, a senator mentioned by cicero.  lucius luscius ocrea, consul suffectus during the reign of vespasian.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography   publius terentius afer (terence), eunuchus, heauton timorumenos (the self-tormenter), phormio.  marcus tullius cicero, pro gaio rabirio postumo.  quintus asconius pedianus, commentarius in oratio ciceronis in toga candida (commentary on cicero's oration in toga candida).  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  aulus gellius, noctes atticae (attic nights).  lucius cassius dio (cassius dio), roman history.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  george davis chase, "the origin of roman praenomina", in harvard studies in classical philology, vol. viii (1897).  paul a. gallivan, "the fasti for a. d. 70-96", in classical quarterly, vol. 31, pp. 186-220 (1981).    roman gentes
area of ecological interest may refer to: area of relevant ecological interest (brazil), a type of conservation unit in brazil area of special conservation interest, part of the emerald network of conservation units in europe and north africa site of special scientific interest, a type of conservation unit in the united kingdom site of special scientific interest (hong kong), a type of conservation unit in hong kong zone naturelle d'interet ecologique, faunistique et floristique, a type of conservation unit in france
may nights () is a 1952 soviet comedy film directed by aleksandr rou and starring nikolai dosenko, tatyana konyukhova and aleksandr khvylya. it is based on nikolai gogol's may night, or the drowned maiden and the subsequent opera version by nikolai rimsky-korsakov.  cast  nikolai dosenko as levko makogonenko    tatyana konyukhova as hanna petrichenkova    aleksandr khvylya as evtukh makogonenko, village leader    liliya yudina as the officer's daughter    galina grigoreva as the witch-stepmother    georgiy millyar as the village clerk   e. cheoarskaya as evtukh's sister-in-law    aleksandr zhukov as karpo, a villager    g. nelidov as a beekeeper    anton dunajsky as a distiller   vasili bokarev   georgi gumilevsky  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1952 films 1952 comedy films soviet comedy films russian comedy films russian films soviet films russian-language films films directed by aleksandr rou gorky film studio films films based on works by nikolai gogol films based on fairy tales
san bartolomeo is a baroque-style, roman catholic church located in the neighborhood of loggio, in the territory of the commune of valsolda, province of como, region of lombardy, italy.  this church was founded in 1262, located between loggio and drano. accessible by a set of stairs, the church was refurbished last in 1736, when the belltower was re-erected and granted a golden globe.   on the counterfacade is a large fresco depicting the triumph of the eucharist, a favorite theme of the counter-reform, by giovanni battista pozzi, based on a tapestry by rubens located in turin.  references  18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy roman catholic churches completed in 1736 churches in the province of como
the 2016 boss gp season is the 22nd season of the boss gp series. the championship began on 17 april at hockenheim and finished on 10 october at imola.  teams and drivers  calendar  championship standings  points for both championships were awarded as follows:  drivers standings  external links    boss gp boss gp
cuauhtinchan archeological zone or malinalco archeological zone, located just west of the town center on a hill called cerro de los idolos, which rises 215 meters above the town. on its sides are a number of pre-hispanic structures built on terraces built into the hill. the main structures are at the top. this is one of the most important aztec sites and was discovered in 1933, and explored by jose garcia payon in 1935. the visible complex dates from the aztec empire but the site's use as a ceremonial center appears to be much older. the sanctuary complex was built from the mid 15th century to the beginnings of the 16th. to get to the cerro de los idolos one must climb 426 stairs up 125 meters. along the stairway leading to the site, there are signs with area's history written in spanish, english and nahuatl. the site contains six buildings. the cuauhcalli or house of the eagles, which dates from 1501, is the main building, which is significant in that it is carved out of the hill itself. the building is in the shape of a truncated pyramid, built this way due to the lack of space on the hill. the monolithic cuauhcalli has been compared to the ellora in india, petra on the shores of the dead sea and abu simbel in egypt. this was a sanctuary for the eagle warriors for rites such as initiation. a thirteen-step staircase leading into this temple is flanked by side struts. and two feline sculptures that face the plaza in front. the cuauhcalli consists of two rooms, one rectangular and the other circular, with an opening in the wall between the two. after being carved out of the rock, the walls and ceiling were covered in stucco and painted with murals, most of which are almost completely gone. in the upper part, the entrance is symbolized by the open jaws of a serpent, complete with fangs, eyes and a forked tongue, which was painted red. this upper portion is covered by a thatched roof of the grass the area is named for.  architecture  just inside of the entrance, on the east side, there is a sculpture of a serpent's head on which rests the remains of a statue of an eagle warrior. to the west, there is another sculpture in the shape of a large pedestal, symbolizing a tlapanhuehuetl (war drum). above this is a sculpture of a cipactli, which is a primeval
being, occasionally called a "monster of the earth." the cipactli is holding up a person, of which only the sandals remain. it is thought the two statues functioned as standards. further inside is a bench that surrounds a space similar to a hemicycle. the horseshoe bench has four sculptures, the most outstanding one being an eagle that faces the entrance. two others are also of eagles while the fourth is a jaguar. the jaguar statue has its skin spread out as if it were a mounted trophy. behind the eagles there is a cuauhxicalli or sacred vessel in which to put the hearts of sacrifice victims, who then turn into messengers of the sun. the orientation of the building relates to the movement of the stars. before it was covered with a thatched roof to preserve it, openings in the walls provoked light phenomena at certain times such as at the summer solstice.  from here was found a large wooden huehuetl or ceremonial war drum, which is now in the museum of anthropology and history in the mexiquense cultural center in toluca. at the spring and fall equinoxes some 5,000 to 7,000 people visit the site. the conical thatched roof that covers the main building is a reproduction of the kind of roof it probably had in antiquity, but the shed-like porch is less faithful to the original. despite acts of vandalism, the interior of this building is still in good condition.  cuauhtinchan  see also   teotenango  xochicalco  references  external links   archaeological site map   aztec sites 1933 archaeological discoveries malinalco archaeological sites in the state of mexico
bashar al-sayegh (, born 29 january 1977) is a kuwaiti journalist and politician.  detention   on august 18, 2007 al-sayegh was arrested  by the state security services after comments that insulted kuwait's ruler, emir sheikh sabah al-ahmed al-sabah, were posted on his personal website, www.alommah.org, although the comments were posted anonymously and deleted by alsayegh 15 minutes later.  kuwait's interior ministry  has said the arrest of journalist bashar al-sayegh, over comments about the country's amir, was lawful and denied press claims the reporter had been kidnapped. acting interior undersecretary major general ahmad al-rujaib said in a press conference that the comments were punishable by law.  "this is a national security crime" he said, referring to article 25 of criminal law which states a prison term "not exceeding five years will be handed down to anyone who publicly challenges the rights or authorities of the amir or insults him - whether in speech, writing, drawing, or any other means of expression."  al-sayegh was released days later after being interrogated.  journalistic work   al-sayegh worked in alanba newspaper from 2001 to 2007 as it journalist, then he moved to aljarida newspaper since march 2007 till now as parliament journalist.  in 2009 he was promoted as head of parliament department in aljarida newspaper and it manager. in 2021 bashar was appointed as general manager of aljarida newspaper.  political work   al-sayegh is a member of national democratic alliance (altahalof); a liberal party in kuwait since 2003. in 2015, alsayegh was elected as general secretary for the party for two years.  kuwaitnews   al-sayegh established an online newspaper portal in 2009. the newspaper was sold in october 2016 for $2.2 million.  dark politics   in 2017, al-sayegh founded dark politics, a political and media consultancy in kuwait. the company publishes an electronic magazine containing political reports on the kuwaiti national assembly and the government. the company also offers a verification service for news and political statements.  it is one of the first kuwaiti companies specialized in political consultations, after the ministry of commerce allowed this work to be licensed.  tv interviews  almajles channel in april 2015 almajles channel, "hashtag show" in december 2014 alyoum channel, "180 degree show" in september 2013 alyoum channel, "180 degree show" in april 2014  references
1977 births living people kuwaiti journalists
avantika shetty is an indian actress and advertiser working primarily in kannada cinema. she made her film debut in rangitaranga (2015) which found a worldwide release and declared a blockbuster, earning her a nomination at the filmfare awards for best supporting actress. prior to films, shetty acted in a few television series and short films in mumbai.  early life and career  avantika shetty was born in a tulu-speaking tuluva bunt community in mangalore. she made her big screen debut with debutante anup bhandari's directorial kannada thriller-drama rangitaranga (2015), playing the role of sandhya bhargav, a journalist on the search of a mysterious writer with the pen name anashku played by another debutante, nirup bhandari. upon release, the film was a sleeper hit which went onto become a blockbuster through the word-of-mouth reviews. the film was released across many countries and won favorable reviews. the film was declared as one of the highest-grossing films in kannada cinema. shetty earned a nomination at the filmfare awards for her portrayal as the supporting actress. following this successful debut, she signed her second assignment for r. anantharaju's forthcoming horror-comedy film kalpana 2 opposite upendra. a remake of raghava lawrence's successful tamil film, kanchana 2, shetty reprises the role played by tapsee pannu in the original. she has reportedly teamed up yet again with the bhandari brothers for their upcoming project titled rajaratha which was unveiled on the dancing stars 3 reality show by actor v. ravichandran.  filmography  films  all films are in kannada, unless otherwise noted.  television  short films  references  external links  avantika shetty celebrity biography facebook page  living people mangaloreans tulu people actresses in kannada cinema indian film actresses actresses in tamil cinema indian television actresses 21st-century indian actresses actresses from mangalore indian radio presenters indian internet celebrities indian women radio presenters 1986 births
xiangyang () is a town of tian'e county, guangxi, china. , it has 15 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of guangxi tian'e county
paul cooper is the current editor in chief of the australian journal of zoology. he is also currently associate professor, in the college of medicine, biology and environment of australian national university (1987-present).  background he received his phd from ucla by investigating water balance in desert beetles. he obtained postdoctoral positions at university of tennessee-knoxville, university of arizona and university of british columbia and la trobe university. directly following this last position, in 1987 he was appointed as a contract lecturer at australian national university. dr. cooper has lectured in physiological, behavioral and introductory ecology; invertebrate and vertebrate zoology; entomology; and present day courses in physiology. he has received a 2015 award for excellence in education, awarded by the anu colleges of science. dr. cooper's areas of expertise are: life histories, crop and pasture protection (pests, diseases and weeds), invertebrate biology, comparative physiology, animal neurobiology, animal physiology biophysics, as well as animal physiology systems.  references  australian scientists university of california, los angeles alumni australian national university faculty australian zoologists living people year of birth missing (living people)
zbigniew buczkowski (born 20 march 1951 in warsaw) is a polish film actor and entertainer.  biography  he is a son of marian buczkowski, a pilot at lot polish airlines who died in a plane crash in 1951.  he lived next door to a film studio where his neighbor worked as a film extra. with her help at the age of twelve he gained his first appearance as an extra in a film. in 1970 he graduated from the technical school of mechanical and electrical engineering in warsaw. by chance janusz kondratiuk cast him in his film  dziewczyny do wziecia in 1972. after being cast in the film, buczkowski decided to drop his profession and devote himself to acting. he attempted to get into an acting school, but was unsuccessful. on 17 december 1983 he made his debut on the stage of the comedy theatre in warsaw, in the play koniec ery menelikow directed by janusz kondratiuk and written by andrzej kondratiuk (as a scientist and violinist stasio). in 1986 he passed his exams as an extra.he gained notoriety through his appearances on dom, graczykowie and swieta wojna.  in 2014, he published his autobiography entitled "pisz pan ksiazke!"  personal life  he has two brothers. since 1981 he has been married to jolanta. they have a daughter, małgorzata (an economist) and a son michał (a lawyer). he lives in piaseczno. on 7 october 2010 he was fined six thousand złote by the district court in suwałki for fraudulently obtaining a certificate of completion of a driving training course.  awards    2003 - imprinting his hand on the promenade of stars during the viii festival of stars in miedzyzdroje  2004 - crystal pomegranate for winning the best comedy actor audience choice award at the eighth comedy film festival in lubomierz  2009 - monidło award for best actor (non-professional) awarded during the festival of john himilsbach in minsk mazowiecki  references  external links     zbigniew buczkowski on filmweb.pl (pol.)  zbigniew buczkowski on  filmpolski.pl (pol.)  zbigniew buczkowski on e-teatr.pl (pol.)  zbigniew buczkowski on stopklatka.pl (pol.)  zbigniew buczkowski na zdjeciach on the national film
archives "fototeka" (pol.)  polish male film actors polish male stage actors 1951 births living people
dynamic recordings is a canadian electronic music record label based in montreal founded in 2004 by two brothers, olivier sellier and damien sellier aka dynamic rockers. mostly focused on a house music sound influenced by soul, funk and disco, the label achieved significant popularity in the mid-2000s as part of the french touch house movement. dynamic recordings also have a sublabel entitled stamina recordings.  history  2004-2005: dynamic recordings damien and olivier sellier aka dynamic rockers start producing records during their teenage years for vox,  a french touch label based in paris, side-label of vertigo. after six eps under different monikers and genre, dynamic rockers brothers end their collaboration with vox. damien and olivier sellier decide to launch their very own label dynamic recordings in june 2004.  since dj falcon (roule), play paul (crydamoure), daft trax & kitsune manager gildas loaec and fred falke (vulture) support dynamic recordings first ep with music,  the release is originally mistaken by the audience and dj stores for a side-project by some daft crew members. the track with music by dynamic rockers quickly leads to recognition via supports and airplays on radio fg.  dynamic recordings second release entitled summertime, a pure french house record, is also supported and played on radio fg. the summertime ep includes two tracks by dynamic rockers and the title brickster by german artist manuel tur. endorsed by worldclass djs like sebastien leger, manuel tur and his track brickster appear on techno pioneer dave clark's compilation world service vol. 2.  summertime is shortly followed by the neighbouring eps mysterious date and thinking of you, also endorsed by radio fg. once set together, the four first releases on dynamic recordings make a 48" long futuristic tokyo panorama in the colors of the label. this represents an added value for dj stores and record shops which can display the whole set as a banner.  stamina recordings  2004-2005: french-touch era in the meantime, november 2004, dynamic rockers set their second label stamina recordings. while dynamic recordings release only eps with elaborated artworks complementing one another, stamina recordings is a playground for spontaneity and publish only maxi singles with a straightforward cover artwork and a reduced turnaround.  stamina recordings first release contains tonight by dynamic rockers and in the air by manuel tur. annie mac supports tonight and plays it several times as a favourite and starter for her show annie mac on bbc radio 1.  march 2005, dynamic rockers release the third stamina recordings maxi single
entitled don't be surprised. the title don't be surprised receives some support by roger sanchez who plays it three times in his weekly awarded radio show release yourself.  only one month later, in april 2005, stamina recordings release feel the music by dynamic rockers. the three track ep also contains kartenfrust and cobra clouds both produced by manuel tur. feel the music is once again supported by roger sanchez who plays it for three months in his radio show but most of all plays it for the release yourself opening party at pacha, ibiza. finally, feel the music catches the attention of the trendsetter pete tong who announces it as an essential in his essential mix on bbc radio 1.  from there, dynamic recordings and stamina recordings establish themselves in the scene thanks to their distinctive funky sound a la daft punk or alan braxe and untraceable disco samples, hallmark of the french touch sound. stamina recordings take part in the second french touch generation alongside vulture music, diamondtraxx or kitsune.  2006-2008: electro-house era in 2006, the house music trend evolves from a funky filtered sound to a more electronic flavour labelled electro house. after having released more than ten ep of nu-disco music, dynamic rockers expend new musical horizons in this direction, using more synth sounds as well. dynamic rockers then refocus all their productions on stamina recordings.  the first ep of dynamic rockers' new sound is entitled life released in march 2006. life contains a remix by terry johnson jr and french artist muttonheads. life is once again played by international djs like roger sanchez in his radio show.  june 2006, stamina recordings release a new record containing back to basics and this is my house by dynamic rockers. it's an electro house ep with an old-school house music twist, hence the title. back to basics is buzz-charted twice in the update section of the dmc magazine and played by judge jules in his show on the electronic music authority bbc radio 1. back to basics is then followed by three other electro house eps, feedback, back again and keep the groove on.  licensed on third party record companies, dynamic rockers put a hold on their in-house productions for stamina recordings in 2008.  2016: dynamic recordings relaunch after several years of retreat and different musical projects, 21 june 2016, dynamic rockers announce their musical comeback on their different social media profiles. they talk about the rebirth of their label dynamic recordings abbr. dyrec and their forthcoming projects.  discography  dynamic recordings  2004
-06-14: dynamic rockers - with music [dyrec01]  2004-10-01: dynamic rockers, manuel tur - summertime [dyrec02]  2004-11-22: dynamic rockers, terry johnson jr. - mysterious date [dyrec03]  2005-02-04: dynamic rockers - thinking of you [dyrec04]  stamina recordings  2004-11-15: dynamic rockers, manuel tur - tonight [stamina01]  2005-01-03: dynamic rockers - for your love [stamina02]  2005-03-14: dynamic rockers - don't be surprised [stamina03]  2005-04-25: dynamic rockers, manuel tur - feel the music [stamina04]  2005-06-14: dynamic rockers, terry johnson jr. - good times [stamina05]  2006-03-13: dynamic rockers, terry johnson jr., muttonheads - life [stamina06]  2006-06-19: dynamic rockers - back to basics [stamina07]  2006-09-01: dynamic rockers - feedback [stamina08]  2006-11-07: dynamic rockers - back again [stamina09]  2007-06-12: dynamic rockers - keep the groove on [stamina10]  references  external links        french house electronic dance music record labels canadian independent record labels quebec record labels record labels established in 2004 2004 establishments in quebec
peter khalil (born 23 march 1973) is an australian politician and the labor member for wills in the australian house of representatives. prior to entering parliament, khalil worked as a consultant, the victorian multicultural commissioner, the director of strategy at the special broadcasting service, and a national security policy adviser to prime minister kevin rudd.  early life, education and tennis  khalil's parents migrated to australia from egypt in 1970 and their experience has significantly affected his later political outlook, "they were striving to seek a better life in australia. they were seeking a life of security, and opportunity and prosperity." he gave credit to bob hawke for the opportunity his family was given in australia." as a child, he lived in public housing. after leaving school, khalil competed on the international tennis circuit and was once ranked no 25 domestically for singles. in 1996 khalil gained the degrees of ba and ll.b. from the university of melbourne and in 2001 graduated as a master of laws in the field of international law at the australian national university. he is a coptic christian.  professional life  outside of the government service, khalil has worked as a political risk and strategy consultant to government agencies and the corporate sector. khalil worked as a policy analyst in the strategic policy and intelligence group of the department of defence, the director of national security policy of the coalition provisional authority in iraq, and an assistant director of the iraq task force of the department of foreign affairs and trade. he then worked as national security adviser to kevin rudd as both leader of the opposition and prime minister in 2007 and as senior adviser to minister for defence joel fitzgibbon in 2008. on the issue of asylum seekers coming to australia, reports from the us embassy in 2009 show that khalil actively advised rudd to "calmly and rationally put the issue in perspective", specifically "that there were about 60,000 cases of visa over-stayers per year, while only 1000 asylum seekers entered australian waters by boat by that stage in 2009."  khalil was a visiting fellow at the centrist think tank, the brookings institution and an adjunct associate professor at the university of sydney centre for international security. while working at the brookings institution, khalil was an informant for the embassy of the united states about internal labor party disputes surrounding refugee policy.  after leaving the private sector, khalil worked as the executive director for corporate affairs, strategy and communications for the special broadcasting service and as the victorian multicultural commissioner.  parliamentary service   khalil was preselected as the australian labor party candidate for the federal division of wills at the 2016 federal
election. khalil's endorsement for the safe seat over scientist anna-maria arabia raised criticisms that the australian labor party's affirmative action targets were being ignored by the victorian branch. he assumed office as the new member for seat in the 2016 australian federal election and succeeded the previous member, kelvin thomson, and became the first coptic christian to be elected to federal parliament in australia. he later revealed that he had been smeared by greens activists at that election as a "war criminal", due to his involvement in the iraq task force. he was re-elected to his seat in the 2019 australian federal election increasing his primary vote by 6%.  housing  khalil is proud of having been raised in public housing, writing in 2020 of how "affordable housing helped level the playing field, it offered us real equality of opportunity" and "helped me and others rise out of disadvantage." he is critical of federal government that it has allowed the level of public housing stock to slip since the 1990s. equally, he was critical of state government authorities for the heavy handed lockdown that seemed to target public housing estates in melbourne in july 2020 would only "entrench disadvantage."  economy and energy  khalil conforms to classical labor concerns for australia, particularly that its "...wages have been stagnant under this government, there's been underemployment and a lack of investment." however, he was an early supporter of government tax cuts after the 2019 election. on energy, khalil has withdrawn support from adani's carmichael coal mine because "it doesn't stack up commercially and environmentally." he sees gas differently, believing that as australia moves towards a less carbon intensive future, "gas is a good transitional source."  multi-ethnic australia  from his parliamentary position, khalil advocates for a welcoming posture towards immigrants. when an assistant minister for multicultural affairs jason wood, suggested that "most migrants when they come here don't know what it means to be australian, khalil countered that:our values of freedom, of equality of opportunity, of a fair go are why new migrants have made and are making a commitment to australia as their home. this understanding is in fact what has driven the tremendous contributions of millions of migrants who have come to call australia home...during the early months of the outbreak of coronavirus disease, he spoke up for detainees who have cleared security checks, saying, "releasing them will both protect the physical and mental health of these refugees and asylum seekers, and assist in the nationwide efforts to slow the spread of coronavirus." when an iranian refugee under australia's protection, amir, was
blocked from returning to australia, khalili's intervention, saw border force change its decision.  global democracy  in an article co-written with michael danby and carl ungerer, khalil has argued that, "bowing to beijing would be the modern equivalent of the munich agreement". he went on to argue for a containment of chinese totalitarian threats to democratic nations, saying: it is in australia's most vital strategic interest that the us presence in our region is not weakened or undermined. this is not because we seek to thwart china's legitimate aspirations and interests. it's because we are a liberal democracy whose interests are best served by a stable, prosperous region in which all countries evolve towards more democratic forms of government, as is indeed happening, most notably in indonesia.khalil was appointed the deputy chair to the joint standing committee on treaties in mid 2019, working alongside dave sharma. he has stated himself to be "a very strong supporter of the us alliance." khalil expresses great concern about the health of global institutions that once could be expected to follow democratic principles. he has been critical of the world health organization when it allowed the re-opening of chinese wet markets, saying he was, "flabbergasted." recently it's said he has been approached to join parliamentary friends of democracy with fellow labor colleague senator kimberley kitching and several coalition figures. khalil has contributed to the tocsin  the official publication of the social democratic think tank, john curtin research centre. in may 2020, khalil joined 20 other australian parliamentarians, from several parties, in making a statement against the chinese communist party's decision to assume greater over hong kong, the message read, in part, "this is a comprehensive assault on the city's autonomy, rule of law, and fundamental freedoms. the integrity of one-country, two-systems hangs by a thread."  awards  khalil was awarded the humanitarian overseas service medal for his service in iraq.  references  1973 births living people australian labor party members of the parliament of australia labor right politicians members of the australian house of representatives for wills members of the australian house of representatives australian people of egyptian descent australian people of coptic descent 21st-century australian politicians australian expatriates in iraq
the 2016-17 daytime network television schedule for four of the five major english-language commercial broadcast networks in the united states covers the weekday daytime hours from september 2016 to august 2017. the schedule is followed by a list per network of returning series, and any series canceled after the 2015-16 season.  affiliates fill time periods not occupied by network programs with local or syndicated programming. pbs - which offers daytime programming through a children's program block, pbs kids - is not included, as its member television stations have local flexibility over most of their schedules and broadcast times for network shows may vary. also not included are stations affiliated with fox (as the network does not air a daytime network schedule or network news), mynetworktv (as the programming service also does not offer daytime programs of any kind), and ion television (as its schedule is composed mainly of syndicated reruns).  legend   new series are highlighted in bold.  schedule  all times correspond to u.s. eastern and pacific time scheduling (except for some live sports or events). except where affiliates slot certain programs outside their network-dictated timeslots, subtract one hour for central, mountain, alaska, and hawaii-aleutian times.  local schedules may differ, as affiliates have the option to pre-empt or delay network programs. such scheduling may be limited to preemptions caused by local or national breaking news or weather coverage (which may force stations to tape delay certain programs in overnight timeslots or defer them to a co-operated station or digital subchannel in their regular timeslot) and any major sports events scheduled to air in a weekday timeslot (mainly during major holidays). stations may air shows at other times at their preference.  monday-friday  notes:  cbs owned-and-operated and affiliate stations have the option of airing let's make a deal at either 10:00 a.m. or 3:00 p.m. eastern, depending on the station's choice of feed.  (†) today aired its last edition as a standard four-hour broadcast on september 22, 2017. afterwards, it was split into three structurally differing programs with the fourth hour turning into kathie lee & hoda.  saturday  sunday  by network  abc  returning series: abc world news tonight the chew general hospital good morning america the view  cbs  returning series: the bold and the beautiful cbs evening news cbs this morning let's make a deal the price is right the talk the young and the restless cbs dream
team lucky dog the henry ford innovation nation with mo rocca chicken soup for the soul's hidden heroes the inspectors dr. chris: pet vet  not returning from 2015-16: cbs dream team game changers with kevin frazier  the cw  new series: the robert irvine show one magnificent morningrescue me with dr. lisadinner spinnerunlikely animal friendsvacation creationsave to winreturning series:one magnificent morningdog whisperer: family editioncalling dr. polsave our shelternot returning from 2015-16:the bill cunningham showone magnificent morningdog town, usadream questhatchednbc  returning series:days of our livesnbc nightly newstodaynew series:the more you knowthe voyager with josh garciathe champion within with lauren thompsongivewilderness vet with dr. oakleyjourney with dylan dreyernaturally, danny seonot returning from 2015-16 nbc kids (continues on sprout and telemundo)astroblast!noodle and doodlethe chica showclangersnina's worldearth to luna!floogalslazytownruff-ruff, tweet and daveterrific truckstree fu tomkc  new seriesangry birds toonsmax steelmiraculous: tales of ladybug and cat noirpac-man and the ghostly adventurespink panther and palsrobocop: alpha commandorocket monkeysscary larrysonic xsuper 4''  see also 2016-17 united states network television schedule (prime-time) 2016-17 united states network television schedule (late night)  references  sources        united states weekday network television schedules 2016 in american television 2017 in american television
tran quoc cuong (born 27 july 1974 in hai duong) is a vietnamese sport shooter. he has qualified to represent vietnam at the 2016 summer olympics in the 10m air pistol and 50m pistol disciplines.  references  external links    issf pistol shooters living people vietnamese male sport shooters olympic shooters of vietnam shooters at the 2016 summer olympics shooters at the 2002 asian games shooters at the 2006 asian games shooters at the 2010 asian games shooters at the 2014 asian games shooters at the 2018 asian games asian games bronze medalists for vietnam medalists at the 2006 asian games medalists at the 2014 asian games medalists at the 2018 asian games asian games medalists in shooting southeast asian games gold medalists for vietnam southeast asian games bronze medalists for vietnam southeast asian games medalists in shooting competitors at the 2007 southeast asian games competitors at the 2011 southeast asian games competitors at the 2013 southeast asian games competitors at the 2015 southeast asian games competitors at the 2019 southeast asian games 1974 births people from hai duong province
noel or noel martin may refer to:  noel martin (1959-2020), british assisted suicide activist noel martin (1922-2009), american graphic designer noel martin (british army officer) (1892-1985), british army officer
the 2016-17 liga nacional de futbol de guatemala season is the 19th season in which the apertura and clausura season is used. the season began on 2016 and will end in 2017.  format the format for both championships are identical. each championship will have two stages: a first stage and a playoff stage. the first stage of each championship is a double round-robin format. the teams that finish first and second in the standings will advance to the playoffs semifinals, while the teams that finish 3-6 will enter in the quarterfinals. the winner of each quarterfinal will advance to the semifinals. the winners of the semifinals will advance to the finals, which will determine the tournament champion.  apertura the 2016 torneo apertura began in july 2016 and will end in december 2016.  personnel and sponsoring  table  standings  positions by round  results  playoffs  quarterfinals  first leg  second leg   comunicaciones won 2-0 on aggregate.  malacateco won 1-0 on aggregate.  semifinals  first leg  second leg   municipal won 2-1 on aggregate.  1-1 on aggregate. antigua gfc progresses as the higher seed.  finals  first leg  second leg   2-2 on aggregate. antigua gfc wins 5-4 on penalties.  managerial changes  beginning of the season  during the season  list of foreign players in the league this is a list of foreign players in 2016-2017 season. the following players: have played at least one apertura game for the respective club. have not been capped for the guatemala national football team on any level, independently from the birthplace  a new rule was introduced a few season ago, that clubs can only have five foreign players per club and can only add a new player if there is an injury or player/s is released.  antigua gfc   victor bolivar   jorge zaldivar   manfred russell  coban imperial   francisco ladogana   orlando moreira   victor solalinde   alvaro garcia  csd comunicaciones     juan barrera   diego estrada   joel benitez   emiliano lopez  guastatoya    ' deportivo mictlan   juan aguirre   marlon negrete   william negrete   ricardo romero  deportivo malacateco   juan carlos meza   jhon jairo palacios   carlos diaz    ricardo rocha   (player released during the season)  deportivo marquense   matias triofini  csd municipal    dario flores    carlos kamiani   janderson pereira   jaime alas   gaston puerari  deportivo petapa
juan lovato   adrian apellaniz   matias quinteros  cd suchitepequez   francisco ladogana    mauricio gerni    omar salazar   david monsalve  carcha   pablo pereira   cesar ivan garcia   luis rene rodas   kamar kayode oshioke  club xelaju mc   cristhian lagos   juliano rangel de andrade   juan baena   jose mendoza  clausura the 2017 torneo clausura is expected to begin in january 2017 and end in may 2017.  personnel and sponsoring  table  standings  positions by round  results  playoffs  quarterfinals  first leg  second leg   guastatoya won 4-2 on aggregate.  suchitepequez won 1-0 on aggregate.  semifinals  first leg  second leg   municipal won 3-1 on aggregate.  guastatoya won 5-4 on aggregate.  finals  first leg  second leg   municipal won 2-0 on aggregate.  aggregate table three teams would have qualified for concacaf club competitions, but due to fifa's suspension of guatemala, these spots were given to other central american countries.  external links  http://www.prensalibre.com/deportes/futbolnacional  https://web.archive.org/web/20150813211930/http://lared.com.gt/pages/sec_noticia/113  liga nacional de futbol de guatemala seasons 1 guatemala
barbara elefant-raiskin (october 11, 1930 - june 18, 2013) was a jewish american-israeli educator, university lecturer, poet, painter, author of children's literature and textbooks.  early life  elefant-raiskin was born in mukachevo, then in czechoslovakia, to joseph-meir and sarah elefant. her father was an orthodox rabbi and teacher. in 1936 her family moved to ada, serbia. while staying there they became stateless, since the part of czechoslovakia they had lived in had been taken over by nazi allied hungary. the family managed to emigrate to the u.s. in 1939, just before the outbreak of world war ii. on the way to the u.s. they stayed in england for several months, and while in liverpool, she had fallen asleep on a suitcase and was photographed by john albok and the photo of a refugee child asleep on her luggage was printed in local newspapers as well as jewish newspapers in the u.s. after graduating from brooklyn college and nyu she was a kindergarten teacher at several jewish institutions, the last of which was the east side hebrew institute. her numerous academic degrees were in the fields of education, judaism, history, art and psychology. in 1957, she married rabbi max d. raiskin, and then began teaching history in high schools, while still maintaining the position of supervisor at the kindergarten of the east side hebrew institute. after taking several years off to raise her 8 children and complete her doctorate, elefant-raiskin emigrated to israel in the 1970s, where she began teaching at tel aviv university, maintaining the position of lecturer for nearly 25 years. she authored two textbooks at the university.  selected works     english conversation through literature : intermediate level, tel aviv university (textbook) english conversation through literature : intermediate and advanced levels, tel aviv university (textbook)  velvety blackness (selected poems & paintings)  about the wind (an illustrated children's book, english)  a visit to the pet shop, (an illustrated children's book, english)  a discussion about god (an illustrated children's book, english)  jaffa's little red-striped lighthouse (an illustrated children's book, english)  ma osa haruach?, (an illustrated children's book, hebrew)  habikur shel gan hayeladim bachanut lechayot machmad, (an illustrated children's book, hebrew)  post datal depression lccn 2005
423665 (illustrated by elefant-raiskin)  geva eino ro'e kol tzeva (illustrated by elefant-raiskin)  sahar hu bachur saharuri (illustrated by elefant-raiskin)  awards   mother of the year 1979 - a tel aviv municipal award.  woman of valor award 1998.  references   1930 births 2013 deaths american children's writers american emigrants to israel israeli children's writers american women children's writers israeli women children's writers jewish american writers jewish women writers tel aviv university faculty brooklyn college alumni american women academics 21st-century american jews 21st-century american women
zavoi may refer to the following places in romania:  zavoi, a commune in caras-severin county zavoi, a village in stefanesti town, arges county zavoi, a village in salasu de sus commune, hunedoara county zavoi (river), a tributary of the hartibaciu in sibiu county
filip gilissen (born 1980 in brussels, belgium) is a belgian artist. he has had solo exhibitions at museum of contemporary art, antwerp (muhka)  and etablissement d'en face  (brussels). he has participated in group exhibitions at life sport (athens)  panicz (ostend), fotomuseum winterthur, bucharest biennale, liste performance project (basel), witte de with center for contemporary art,  kunsthalle nurnberg, liverpool biennial, and marta herford. gilissen is the co-curator of cosmopolitanissimo.  references  external links  sources    living people 1980 births artists from brussels digital artists belgian performance artists
boshra salem is a professor, founder and the chair of the department of environmental sciences at alexandria university in  alexandria, egypt. she is president of unesco's man and the biosphere (mab) international coordinating council (icc) and serves on the international council for science (icsu)'s committee for scientific planning & review. she has received a number of awards, including being recognized as an outstanding female scientist in the women in science hall of fame by the embassy of the united states in cairo, egypt.  education  boshra salem was awarded her ph.d. jointly by the university of alexandria and imperial college london in 1989.  she studied land use in arid lands using remote sensing techniques. as a post-doctoral fellow at the university of london (1994) and the university of maryland (1996) she worked with computational tools and databases for geographic and environmental information management.  research salem's major fields of interest are land degradation and desertification in arid environments, and the use of remote sensing, gis applications and electronic databases to monitor and model changes. she is involved with the development of protected areas and biosphere reserves for biodiversity conservation, environmental impact assessment and strategic environment assessment, and alternative solar energy sources.  she developed an international solar desalination project for bedouin communities. she is team leader for egypt's omayed biosphere reserve project, which received the 1997 sultan qaboos prize for environmental preservation for its work in egypt's western desert.  and has worked with caroline king-okumu and others on the sustainable management of  marginal drylands (sumamad) project.  awards  1990, unesco mab young scientist award, for "detection of temporal environmental changes in arid lands by remote sensing. case study: north coastal desert of egypt"  1997, sultan qaboos prize for environmental preservation, to the department of environmental sciences, faculty of science, university of alexandria (egypt) for its work with the omayed biosphere reserve  2009, unesco young scientists awards: michel batisse grant for biosphere reserve management case studies  2013, women in science hall of fame, embassy of the united states, cairo, egypt, to honor outstanding female scientists throughout the middle east and north africa  references  environmental scientists living people year of birth missing (living people) women earth scientists egyptian scientists egyptian women scientists 20th-century women scientists 21st-century women scientists
the moscow school of the order of st catherine () was a girls' school in moscow, russia, between 1802 and 1918. it was a fashionable girl school for students from noble and rich burgher families (divided in different classes until 1842), which was the moscow equivalent to the smolny institute of st petersburg. it belonged to the first educational institutions in moscow.  references   московское училище ордена св. екатерины 1803-1903 гг.: историческии очерк. составлен по поручению совета училища комиссиеи преподавателеи под общеи редакциеи инспектора классов в. а. вагнера. м., [печатня а.снегиревои], 1903. viii, [4], 560 с.; 3 л. портретов.  charities based in russia social welfare charities 1802 establishments in the russian empire 1918 disestablishments in russia 19th century in moscow schools in moscow educational institutions established in 1802 girls' schools in russia
marina torres (1901-1967) was a spanish stage and film actress.  selected filmography  daughter of the sea (1917)  carnival figures (1926)  the village priest (1927)  agustina of aragon (1929)  goyescas (1942)  lola leaves for the ports (1947)  service at sea (1951)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1901 births 1967 deaths film actresses from catalonia spanish film actresses spanish silent film actresses actresses from barcelona
chorispora is a genus of plant in the family brassicaceae.  chorispora tenella, known by several common names, including purple mustard, blue mustard, musk mustard, and crossflower is native to eurasia but is well known in other parts of the world, particularly in temperate regions, as an introduced species and a noxious weed.  species   chorispora bungeana fisch. & c.a. mey. enum. pl. nov. 1: 96 1841   chorispora compressa boiss. ann. sci. nat., bot., ser. 2 17: 385 1842   chorispora exscapa bunge ex ledeb. fl. ross. 1: 169 1842    chorispora gracilis ernst notizbl. bot. gart. berlin-dahlem 14: 348 1939   chorispora greigii regel trudy imp. s.-peterburgsk. bot. sada 6: 296 1878   chorispora hispida regel bull. soc. imp. naturalistes moscou 43(1): 266. 1870   chorispora iberica dc.       chorispora insignis pachom.       chorispora macropoda trautv. bull. soc. imp. naturalistes moscou 33(1): 109 1860   chorispora pamirica pachom.       chorispora pectinata hadac       chorispora pectinata hadac feddes repert. 81: 464 1970   chorispora persica boiss. ann. sci. nat., bot., ser. 2 17: 384 1842   chorispora purpurascens eig j. bot. 75: 189 1937   chorispora sabulosa cambess. 1844   chorispora sibirica (l.) dc. syst. nat. 2: 437 1821   chorispora songarica schrenk ex fisch. & c.a. mey. enum. pl. nov. 2: 57 1842   chorispora stenopetala regel & schmalh.       chorispora stricta (fisch. ex m. bieb.) dc.       chorispora syriaca boiss. ann. sci. nat., bot., ser. 2 17: 384 1842   chorispora tashkorganica al-shehbaz, t.y. cheo, l.l. lu & g. yang novon 10(2): 106, f. 1 2000   chorispora tenella (pall.) dc. syst. nat.
2: 435 1821   chorispora tianschanica z.x. an in fl. xinjiangensis 2(2): 378 1995   chorispora tianshanica z.x. an   names brought to synonymy  chorispora elegans cambess., a synonym for chorispora sabulosa cambess. 1844  references  external links    brassicaceae genera brassicaceae
safia nolin is a french canadian folk-pop singer-songwriter from quebec city, quebec.  her debut album limoilou was released in 2015 via bonsound. modestly successful at first, her album sales increased significantly in 2016 after she appeared on tout le monde en parle, opening up about her teenage struggles with anxiety and bullying. she has toured france as an opening act for lou doillon, and quebec as an opening act for louis-jean cormier.  in june 2016, she won the prix felix-leclerc at the francofolies de montreal. her song "igloo" was shortlisted for the 2016 socan songwriting prize, and limoilou was named a longlisted nominee for the 2016 polaris music prize.  her second album, dans le noir, was released in 2018.  she is out as lesbian. she dated the french singer pomme.  in 2019 she released the ep xx3m0 $0ng$ 2 $!ng @l0ng 2xx. it included a duet with john k. samson, on a cover of taking back sunday's "cute without the e".  in 2020 she coordinated saint-jeanne, an lgbtq-inclusive saint-jean-baptiste day livestream scheduled for june 24. the event was hosted by kiara, a montreal drag queen who also competed in the first season of canada's drag race, and the performance lineup included comedians tranna wintour and karl hardy, actress and writer gabrielle tremblay, songwriter and producer annie sama (apigeon), rapper backxwash, singer-songwriter floraa, and drag queens matante alex and gisele lullaby.  discography limoilou (2015) reprises, vol. 1 (2016) dans le noir (2018) reprises, vol. 2 (2019) xx3m0 $0ng$ 2 $!ng @l0ng 2xx (2019) seum (2021)  references  canadian indie pop musicians canadian women singer-songwriters canadian singer-songwriters songwriters from quebec musicians from quebec city writers from quebec city living people french quebecers french-language singers of canada lgbt singers from canada canadian lesbian musicians 21st-century canadian women singers 1992 births 20th-century lgbt people 21st-century lgbt people
the texas a&m aggie ring is one of the various well-known symbols of texas a&m university and a visible way to distinguish aggies all over the world. the texas a&m ring was formally adopted in 1889, and its design has remained relatively unchanged since then. the only major change that has been done on the original design was a result of the renaming of the university from "agricultural and mechanical college of texas" to "texas a&m university" in 1963. the current aggie ring was designed by e. c. jonas in 1894. the aggie ring has distinct physical features, is surrounded by various unique traditions, and has very specific requirements for eligibility.  appearance   the top of the ring depicts an eagle and a shield with five stars and thirteen stripes. the eagle denotes agility, power, and ability to reach great heights. the shield symbolizes the duty to protect the reputation of the alma mater; the five stars within the shield refer to the facets of student development: mind, body, spiritual attainment, emotional poise, and integrity of character while the thirteen stripes represent the thirteen original colonies and symbolize patriotism. on one side of the ring, there is a five-point star borrowed from the seal of the state of texas while the surrounding oak leaves symbolize strength. on the other side of the ring are a cannon, a saber, and a rifle, which symbolize aggies' preparedness and valor in defending their land. the crossed flags of the united states and texas symbolize allegiance to both nation and state.  traditions  there are several traditions centered around the aggie ring. one main tradition refers to the way students wear their rings at different points in their lives. current students who have not yet graduated wear their aggie ring with the class year facing them to signify that their time at texas a&m university has not yet concluded. then, at the annual ring dance or at the graduation ceremony, students turn their rings around in such a way that the class year faces away symbolizing readiness to "face the world". another unofficial tradition, though unsanctioned and discouraged by the university, is referred to as the aggie ring dunk. it consists of students dropping their newly acquired aggie rings in a pitcher of beer followed by drinking the beer to its entirety as fast as possible in a single action and catching the aggie ring between their teeth. it is commonly done as a race or game among friends and peers who receive their aggie rings around the same time.  students receive their rings on what
is known as aggie ring day, a special time for aggies, their families, and their friends to celebrate being a part of the aggie network. this celebration is held at the clayton w. williams, jr. alumni center three times a year.  requirements and eligibility  for students to receive their aggie rings during their time at texas a&m university, students are required to meet specific qualifications. current undergraduate students must be in good academic standing with a minimum 2.0 gpa on a 4.0 scale; students must also complete 90 credit hours of course work with a minimum of 45 credit hours earned at texas a&m university. graduate students are eligible to receive their aggie rings once 75% of their graduate course work is completed. if a student's graduate degree requires a thesis, his or her aggie ring will be delivered once the thesis has been defended by the specified university deadline. if the thesis has not been defended by this deadline, the student's aggie ring will be held until this qualification is met. post-doctorate students are eligible to receive their aggie rings once all formal course work has been completed with a minimum 3.0 gpa; students must also complete their residency requirement, pass their preliminary exam, and have an approved research proposal on file. finally, if students are unable to meet these requirements throughout their time at texas a&m university, an aggie ring can be purchased upon graduation.  references   texas a&m university rings (jewellery)
"country star" is a song co-written and recorded by american country music artist pat green.  it was released in february 2009 as the second single from the album what i'm for.  the song reached #32 on the billboard hot country songs chart.  the song was written by green and brett james.  critical reception a review at www.countrymusicuniverse.net said the song is gimmicky, bland and altogether misses the mark.  it shameless namechecks artists such as faith hill, kenny chesney, tim mcgraw, big & rich, brooks & dunn, vince gill, willie nelson, carrie underwood, keith urban and alludes to a toby keith song with not even so much as a gesture toward originality.  along with its vapid lyrics, the production is unbearably stale.  the progressive decay of green's once quality and fresh-sounding material is overtly purposeful, so it is impossible to feel sorry for him.  it, nevertheless, is depressing to witness all the same.  to completely sell out, as green has no doubt done, is a sad price to pay, all for the sake of being a "country star".  chart performance  references  2009 singles 2009 songs pat green songs songs written by brett james song recordings produced by dann huff bna records singles songs written by pat green
hugo arellano (born march 5, 1998) is an american soccer player who most recently played for la galaxy in major league soccer.  career  arellano began playing with la galaxy ii during their 2016 season after a stint with their academy.  arellano made his professional first team debut for the la galaxy on june 17, 2017.  international career born in the united states to mexican parents, arellano is a youth international for the united states.  references  external links   usmnt profile    1998 births living people american soccer players american sportspeople of mexican descent la galaxy ii players la galaxy players orange county sc players association football defenders people from norwalk, california soccer players from california usl championship players united states men's youth international soccer players united states men's under-20 international soccer players major league soccer players homegrown players (mls)
marie waife (nee marusi solomonovna rabinovich; october 29, 1892 - november 30, 1985) was an american writer best known for writing the 1968 biography, my father, sholem aleichem, about the brilliant yiddish author and playwright.  biography marie waife was born in odessa, russian empire (now ukraine), in 1892 as the fifth child of sholem aleichem and his wife olga (nee loyeva). she lived in various locations throughout europe including switzerland, germany and italy due to financial insecurity until 1914 when she and her family migrated to the united states, residing in the lower east side of new york city.  she married the writer and journalist benjamin waife (known by his pen name ben-zion goldberg) in 1917 and had two sons, sholom and mitchell. in 1968, waife published a biography of her father titled my father, sholem aleichem, the first complete biography of the famous writer. she was known for holding meetings at her new york residence on the anniversary of aleichem's death to read his works. waife died in 1985 and was survived by her sons.  references  1892 births 1985 deaths odessa jews emigrants from the russian empire to the united states 20th-century american women writers writers from new york city jewish writers jewish women writers
tor lian (13 june 1945 - 14 july 2016) was a norwegian sports official.  lian was the president of the norwegian handball federation from 1985 to 1999 and the european handball federation from 2004 to 2012. he was the vice president of the norwegian olympic committee from 1990 to 1996 and board member of the norwegian confederation of sports from 1991 to 1996. he became an honorary member of the norwegian confederation of sports in 2010. he died in july 2016.  references  1945 births 2016 deaths norwegian sports executives and administrators handball in norway
"easy come, easy go" is a song written by jack keller and diane hildebrand that was a hit single for bobby sherman in 1970.  the song was first released by mama cass elliot on july 5, 1969, on her album bubblegum, lemonade, and... something for mama. bobby sherman's version was released as a single in january 1970, and appeared on the album here comes bobby, which was released in march of the same year.  sherman's version spent 14 weeks on the billboard hot 100 chart, peaking at no. 9, while reaching no. 2 on billboards easy listening chart. in canada, the song reached no. 6 on the "rpm 100", no. 7 on rpms adult contemporary chart, and no. 2 on toronto's chum 30 chart.  the song earned sherman a gold record.  chart performance  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  1969 songs 1970 singles bobby sherman songs cass elliot songs songs written by jack keller (songwriter) songs written by diane hildebrand
this is a list of the archers who will be participating for their country at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, brazil from  august 5-21, 2016. 128 archers in the olympic standard recurve discipline are set to participate at the games.  male archers  entry list at 1 august 2016  female archers  entry list at 1 august 2016  external links https://worldarchery.org/competition/14870/rio-2016-olympic-games https://www.olympic.org/athletes http://www.ianseo.net http://www.yosstory.com/2016/07/panahan-olimpiade-2016-rio-de-janeiro.html  references  lists of archers archery at the 2016 summer olympics archers
abbott and costello was a comedy team of film, vaudeville, radio and television.  abbott and costello may also refer to:  the abbott and costello cartoon show, a 1960s television program the abbott and costello show, a 1950s television program the abbott and costello show (radio program), a 1940s radio program
ayali kalan is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village constitutes 36.85% of schedule caste and the village doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
the siege of zadar (12 august 1345 - 21 december 1346) was a successful attempt of the republic of venice to capture zadar (or zara), a croatian coastal city in northern dalmatia. it was a combined land and sea offensive by the venetians, consisting of many separate battles and operations against the citizens of zadar, who refused to accept venetian suzerainty and demanded autonomy. despite receiving military aid from croato-hungarian king louis the angevin, zadar was unable to resist the siege and was finally defeated.  background   the siege resulted from the long-term complex political relations between the city of zadar and the republic of venice as well as from the change of policy of the croato-hungarian ruler after the young louis of angevin ascended the throne in 1342. the king wished to maintain full control over the territory of the kingdom of croatia, including cities and towns of dalmatia, most of which were in the hands of the venetians. the citizens of zadar rebelled against the rule of the serenissima repubblica in 1344, asking king louis for help. he launched military campaigns to the south of croatia in september 1344 and in july 1345, but they did not bring the desired breakthrough.  in the meantime the venetians decided to protect their interests in dalmatia, gathered troops (some 20,000 - 25,000) and sent them in the summer of 1345 to the area of zadar. they had both naval and land forces at their disposal, whereas king louis commanded only land forces.  siege   on 12 august 1345 venetians started to besiege the city and the surrounding castles. their land army was commanded by marco giustiniani and their marine forces were under the command of pietro de canale.  the siege consisted of many separate operations, movements, battles and other military activities, that can be divided into three phases. the first phase ended at the end of january 1346 with the venetians' breaking of the harbour chain which from the beginning of siege prevented venetian galleys from entering the zadar port. the breaking enabled the besiegers to come closer to the city walls and to control the movements of zadar ships. in the meantime, pietro civrano took over supreme command of the venetian forces as capitaneus generalis.  the second phase was marked by the king louis' army entering the conflict. in late springtime the king's forces attacked the venetian fortress (bastida) built near zadar at the beginning of the siege, but without success. although large in number (according some sources
up to 100.000 men), they were compressed in the narrow passage between the fortress and the sea, so they could not come closer strong enough to capture the fortress. besides, they were under heavy fire from two sides - from the venetian ships and from ballistic devices in the fortress. the major attack of the croato-hungarian forces took place on 1 july 1346, but at the end the venetians carried the day. louis the angevin decided to retreat and ordered his troops to move northwards.  in the third phase zadar's defenders remained alone. they were short of food and water and without new supply lines, but they fought on until december. finally, on 21 december 1346 the venetian troops marched into town and took control of it.  aftermath   the city of zadar remained under venetian control until king louis the angevin invaded venetian territories and captured all dalmatian cities and islands in 1357. on 18 february 1358 the treaty of zadar was signed in the city, in which the republic of venice renounced the territory between the gulf of kvarner and the city of durres in favour of louis.  zadar remained a self-governing community under croato-hungarian kings and queens until 1409, when it was sold, together with all of dalmatia, to the republic of venice by the king ladislaus of naples. he was about to be defeated by his opponent for the crown, sigismund the luxemburgian, and took the opportunity to sell his "regal rights" over dalmatia for the sum of 100.000 ducats.  see also   timeline of croatian history  timeline of the republic of venice  list of sieges  treaty of zadar  siege of zadar (998)  siege of zadar (1202)  siege of zadar (1813)  military history of croatia  military history of the republic of venice  kingdom of croatia (1102-1526)  references  external links  siege of zadar - a long siege launched by the venetian land and naval forces   siege of zadar showed the naval power of venice  siege of zadar - one of the longest sieges in croatian history (16 months) (croatian)  diplomatic activities  of the citizens of zadar during the siege 1345-1346 (croatian)  zadar zadar zadar 1340s conflicts venetian period in the history of croatia 1345 in europe 1346 in europe zadar zadar 1345 conflicts in 1345 conflicts in 1346 history of zadar zadar 1345 zadar 14th century in the republic of venice
juan nepomuceno zegri moreno (11 october 1831 - 17 march 1905) was a spanish roman catholic priest and the founder of the mercedarian sisters of charity (1878). moreno was ordained as a priest in 1855 and was accused of misconduct in 1888 and the holy see ordered him to leave the congregation as an investigation took place; he was vindicated in 1894.  pope john paul ii presided over moreno's beatification on 9 november 2003.  life juan nepomuceno zegri moreno was born in spain on 11 october 1831 to antonio de leon zegri abril martin (b. november 1808) and josefa moreno escudero.  his siblings were:  francisca josefa de leon zegri moreno   antonio zegri moreno   maria josefa zegri moreno  maria de las mercedes zegri moreno  enriqueta zegri moreno juan felt a call to the priesthood during his childhood and he commenced his studies to become a priest at the san dionisio seminary in granada. he was ordained as a priest on 2 june 1855 in the granada cathedral and became the parish priest at huetor santillan and later at san gabriel de loja; he also served as a canon of the malaga cathedral. moreno also served as a spiritual director to seminarians and as a preacher and chaplain to queen isabel ii until her deposition. he went to malaga following the deposition of the queen and began finalizing his plans for the establishment of a new religious order. before he was ordained he had been a friend of bishop juan nepomuceno cascallana ordonez.  the order - titled the mercedarian sisters of charity - was founded on 16 march 1878 and was aggregated to the mercedarians on 9 june 1878. the congregation later received the decree of praise on 25 september 1900 and full papal approval from pope leo xiii on 24 april 1901.  moreno was embroiled in a scandal in 1888 when the religious of his order accused him of misconduct and it resulted in a decree from the holy see on 7 july 1888 demanding he leave and keep his distance from the congregation. an extensive investigation followed in which moreno kept silent and adhered to the orders of his superiors until a decree from the holy see on 15 july 1894 vindicated him of all false allegations. some sisters however were not inclined to accept this verdict which resulted in some in the order refusing to acknowledge moreno as its founder.  he died on 17 march 1905. he was re-recognized as the congregation's founder in 1925. his order now operates in nations such
as the dominican republic and south korea and as of 2005 had 1234 religious in a total of 156 houses.  beatification the beatification process opened in an informative process that spanned from 5 july 1958 until it was closed on 7 june 1962. the formal opening of the cause on 5 july 1958 under pope pius xii conferred the title of servant of god upon the late priest. the congregation for the causes of saints validated the process in rome on 7 february 1992. the c.c.s. received the positio at the beginning of 1993 and passed it onto a board of historians who granted their assent to the continuation of the cause on 26 january 1993. theologians approved it on 14 november 2000 and the c.c.s. also approved it on 4 december 2001.  moreno was declared to be venerable on 20 december 2001 after pope john paul ii recognized that he had lived a life of heroic virtue.  the miracle required for beatification was investigated and later received c.c.s. validation in rome on 12 february 1993 which allowed for a team of medical experts to approve the miracle in a meeting on 18 april 2002 and for theologians to follow suit on 18 october 2002. the c.c.s. voted in favor of the miracle on 7 january 2003 and the pope himself did so as well on 12 april 2003.  john paul ii beatified moreno on 9 november 2003.  references  external links hagiography circle  1831 births 1905 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century spanish people 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century spanish people beatifications by pope john paul ii founders of catholic religious communities people from granada spanish beatified people spanish roman catholic priests venerated catholics by pope john paul ii 19th-century roman catholic priests
dolors lamarca y morell (granollers, valles oriental, 19 october 1943) is a catalan librarian and philologist. she has led the service of libraries and bibliographic heritage of the generalitat de catalunya, and has directed the national library of catalonia.  biography  lamarca studied classical philology at the university of barcelona, and library science at the library school. on 5 november 1974, she joined the faculty of archivers, librarians and archaeologists (library section) at the university of barcelona.  lamarca led the service of libraries and bibliographic heritage of the generalitat de catalunya from 1 august 1980 until 2 march 1983. during these years, she established the bases of the current catalan library system, adapting the normative catalog through the catalan institute of bibliography, and opening new libraries to give more service to the population.  later, she was director of the library of the university of barcelona (1984-2000), achieving important milestones as the head of this network of libraries, like the modernisation of the structures and buildings, as well as computerisation.  from 12 february 2004 until june 2012, she directed the national library of catalonia. during these seven years, she managed a fund of more than three million diverse documents. she created digitalisation processes to allow heritage diffusion at a global level for the library of catalonia. under her direction, she made numerous purchases, and improved internal processes  selected works  references   spanish librarians women librarians 1943 births people from granollers spanish philologists women philologists women writers from catalonia spanish non-fiction writers university of barcelona alumni university of barcelona faculty living people
irene eisinger (8 december 1903 - 8 april 1994) was a german and british opera singer and film actress. her career was closely linked to the foundation and the early years of the glyndebourne festival opera.  life and career  irene eisinger was born in the small silesian town cosel, belonging to the german empire at the time of her birth; today, the town is in poland. she was trained as a soubrette soprano and studied acting with paula mark-neusser in vienna and piano with g. schonewald.  operas and films  her debuts - both in opera and film - took place in 1926. she played a minor role in frederic zelniks silent movie die forsterchristl and started singing leading roles in operas and operettas at the stadttheater basel in the north of switzerland. already in 1928 she was called to berlin and within a short period became one of the favourite singers of conductor otto klemperer - firstly at the kroll opera house, later on at the prestigious staatsoper unter den linden. although best remembered for her soubrette roles in mozart operas, especially despina and blonde, and as annchen in webers der freischutz, she achieved also great successes and admiration in strauss operetta roles, particularly as arsena in der zigeunerbaron and as adele in die fledermaus. musicologist elizabeth forbes describes her singing in this words: ″her voice, bright-toned, light and very flexible, and her charming, diminutive appearance, invariably drew adjectives such as 'enchanting' and 'winsome' from the critics.″  the year 1930 can be considered as her break-through in both germany and austria as she debuted as adele in max reinhardts version of die fledermaus, as cherubino in mozarts le nozze di figaro at the salzburg festival and again as adele at the vienna state opera. furthermore, in this year her first sound film was released, the light comedy two hearts in waltz time - with eisinger as anni lohmeier and with famous and popular actor willi forst in a leading role. this film was the first foreign language film to be released with subtitles in the united states. two further leading film parts followed in 1931: leopoldine in die lustigen weiber von wien and the title role in another zelnik-version of die forsterchristl, now with sound and singing.  cherubino in salzburg was hers until 1933, and in 1931 she added another role to
her salzburg repertory: papagena in die zauberflote - again with repeat invitations until 1933. in 1932, eisinger performed in the cabaret opera rufen sie herrn plim by mischa spoliansky and sang luise matthes in the kurt weill opera die burgschaft next to  and lotte lenya at the stadtische oper berlin. the conductor was fritz stiedry.  she appeared in two short films (kabarett-programm nr. 4, 1931, and eine johann-strauss-fantasie, 1933) and did several recordings with grammophon, hmv/electrola, ultraphon and orchestrola. her singing covered a broad repertory spanning from mozart and auber to c. m. weber, albert lortzing, puccini, lehar and strauss, including works of leo fall, bruno granichstaedten, ralph benatzky and robert stolz. her male partners in duets were siegfried arno, paul morgan, joseph schmidt, erik wirl and richard fritz wolf.  emigrantion, glyndebourne, roh  although very popular with the berlin audience, eisinger was forced to leave germany because of her jewish origins shortly after the machtergreifung by the nazi party in 1933. she could not sing any longer in any theatre of the german capital. she took refuge in czechoslovakia and went to sing in the opera houses of prague, amsterdam and bruxelles - and once again at the salzburg festival. in 1933, in addition to cherubino and papagena she was invited to sing a role in a richard strauss opera. it would be her last appearance in salzburg. she sang hermione in the first production of the second version of die agyptische helena.  eisinger continued to sing at prague state opera until 1937, but already in 1934 she was invited by german emigrants fritz busch and carl ebert to participate at the first glyndebourne festival. unknown to british audiences, she sang despina in mozarts cosi fan tutte and scored a great personal success. thereafter she became a firm favourite at the festival, debuting as blonde in die entfuhrung aus dem serail and as papagena in die zauberflote in 1935, returning there each year but one, until the outbreak of the second world war forced the festival to close down. the 1935 glyndebourne recording of cosi fan tutte, conducted by fritz busch, gives a very idea of eisinger's voice, her stylish singing and her delightful personality
. although she did not appear at the festival in 1936, the artist sang the aquarellen waltz, op. 258, by josef strauss at a concert in glyndebourne this year - with 600 of john christie's employees and tenants present, to commemorate the birth of christie's son george on 31 december 1934. due to its success, the concert had to be repeated.  in 1936 the impresario c. b. cochran, who had been entranced by her papagena in glyndebourne, engaged her for the revue follow the sun at the adelphi in london. there she sang the always much applauded song love is a dancing thing, a popular number by howard dietz and arthur schwartz. cochran was praised to engage miss eisinger by the sunday times: ″a beautiful little lady [with a] small but charming voice″. her partner was the baritone gerald nodin. in december of the same year, eisinger debuted at the royal opera house as gretel in humperdincks hansel und gretel, with maggie teyte as hansel, sung in german language. a week later she sang adele in die fledermaus (in english), ″winning a particular triumph″ with the song mein herr marquis.  for the next three seasons the singer returned to glyndebourne, adding susanna and barbarina in le nozze di figaro to her glyndebourne repertory, while still continuing to sing her other roles. by now she was permanently living in england. in 1939 eisinger sang ilya in a university production of mozarts idomeneo at cambridge and acted in beatrice saxon snell's musical georgian springtime at the embassy theatre in london - with geoffrey dunn, frederick ranalow, and george skillan in the cast. in 1940, when glyndebourne toured the beggar's opera, she took over polly peachum from audrey mildmay who had contracted rubella during the london run. furthermore, she participated in the movie comedy young man's fancy and was invited by bbc to sing in die fledermaus and in arlecchino, a single act opera by ferruccio busoni.  when glyndebourne closed down, eisinger withdrew from the stage.  her last operatic performances were a series of seven performances of cosi fan tutte in the original glyndebourne production of carl ebert at the edinburgh international festival in august and september 1949 - together with a prominent cast consisting of suzanne danco (fiordiligi), sena jurinac (dorabella), petre
munteanu (ferrando), marko rothmuller (guglielmo), john brownlee (don alfonso) and the royal philharmonic orchestra conducted by hans oppenheim. she sang despina.  thereafter she was only heard in broadcast concerts on bbc.  private life  the singer married gerhard schonewald, called gert, a physician from london of german origin who had emigrated from bad nauheim. the couple had two daughters, susanne (born in 1944) and emily-ruth (1946). the couple later divorced.  irene eisinger died on 8 april 1994, in weston-super-mare, somerset, great britain.  recording   cosi fan tutte (wolfgang amadeus mozart), role of despina. glyndebourne festival opera company conducted by fritz busch. hmv db 2652 bis db 2673 - glyndebourne, june 1935  filmography  sources  elizabeth forbes: obituary: irene eisinger. in: the independent, 30 april 1994.  josef kaut:  die salzburger festspiele 1920-1981, mit einem verzeichnis der aufgefuhrten werke und der kunstler des theaters und der musik von hans jaklitsch, salzburg: residenz verlag 1982, , pp. 258, 261, 265, 268 and 269.  jurgen kesting: die großen sanger. volume 2. verlag hoffmann und campe, hamburg 2008, p. 700.  further reading   tobias becker: das blaue wunder, pp. 294-295 (rezension von stahrenberg 2012) http://homepage-nico-thom.de/das_blaue_wunder.pdf   peter cornforth: mischa spoliansky : a brief history. . therin about the cabaret opera: "... the music was delightful, and the book and lyrics witty and satirical. it also contained a trio, the first lines of which were sie kommt, sie naht! (she comes, she's getting nearer!) but with 'a clever shift of musical accents,' the astute listener would hear sie naht, sie kommt - the exact pronunciation of 'nazi.' (viii)"   irene eisinger. in: gunter j. gajda: bedeutende schlesier.  wulf konold: deutsche oper, einst und jetzt: uberlegungen und untersuchungen zu geschichte und gegenwart des deutschen musiktheaters. verlag barenreiter, 1980, , .  wilhelm kosch among others (editors):
deutsches theater-lexikon. biographisches und bibliographisches handbuch. vol. 1: a - hurk. verlag ferd. kleinmayr, klagenfurt/ wien 1960, dnb: 551896833.  karl-josef kutsch, leo riemens (editors): großes sangerlexikon. francke, bern 1987.  erganzungsband i, 1991, .  erganzungsband ii; bern: francke, 1994, .  eisinger, irene. in: themusicsack. (engl.)  karl-j. kutsch, leo riemens (editors): unvergangliche stimmen. sangerlexikon. 2nd revised and extended edition. online, p. 151.  berthold leimbach: tondokumente der kleinkunst und ihre interpreten 1898-1945. self-published, gottingen 1991, unpaginiert.  eisinger irene, verehel. schonwald: sangerin. in: hans morgenstern (ed.): judisches biographisches lexikon: eine sammlung von bedeutenden personlichkeiten judischer herkunft ab 1800. lit verlag munster, 2009, , .  irene eisinger., online-filmdatenbank  carolin stahrenberg (ed.): "hot spots von cafe bis kabarett: musikalische handlungsraume im berlin mischa spolianskys 1918-1933 (= vol. 4 of populare kultur und musik, ). waxmann verlag, 2012. , 336 pages, specifically pp. 244-265. description of cabaret opera on pp. 245-246, note 437 (see spoliansky, goodbye trouble, p. 84, i.e. unpublished autobiography)  thomas staedeli: irene eisinger. portrait of the artist with a photograph.  eva weissweiler: ausgemerzt! das lexikon der juden in der musik und seine morderischen folgen.'' dittrich, berlin 1999, .  references  external links     opera vivra, short biography of irene eisinger (with a portrait)  vocal classics, portrait of irene eisinger  , a song by robert stolz, recorded by irene eisinger in the 1930s  1903 births 1994 deaths german operatic sopranos british sopranos 20th-century british women opera singers people from kedzierzyn-kozle county jewish opera singers 20th-century german women opera singers
the nice synagogue is a historic synagogue in nice, alpes-maritimes, france. it was built in 1885, and dedicated in 1886. it has been listed as an official national monument since april 17, 2004.  references  synagogues completed in 1886 monuments historiques of nice synagogues in france
boxing competitions has been in the universiade only at 2013 summer universiade as optional sport.  medal table  medal table  current events  men   light flyweight  flyweight  bantamweight  lightweight  light welterweight  welterweight  middleweight  light heavyweight  heavyweight  super heavyweight  external links  2013 summer universiade - boxing    sports at the summer universiade universiade
fisher ministry may refer to:   first fisher ministry  second fisher ministry  third fisher ministry
the indian super league is a professional league for association football clubs in india. at the top of the indian football league system, it is the country's primary football competition along with the i-league, and is contested by 11 clubs. this page details the records and statistics of the league since its inception.  team records  titles  most championship titles: 3, atk most league winners shield titles: 1  goa mumbai city biggest league winning margin: 5 points, 2019-20; goa (39 points) over atk (34 points) smallest league winning margin: 0 points, 6 head-to head points, 2020-21; mumbai city (6) over atk mohun bagan (0). both finished on 40 points, but mumbai city won the title on head-to-head points.  points  most points in a season: 40 bengaluru (2017-18) mumbai city (2020-21)  atk mohun bagan (2020-21) most home points in a season: 25, atk mohun bagan (2020-21)   most away points in a season: 22, mumbai city (2020-21)  most points in a season without winning the league: 40, atk mohun bagan (2020-21) fewest points in a season: 9, chennaiyin (2018-19) fewest home points in a season: 5 chennaiyin (2018-19)   odisha (2020-21) fewest away points in a season: 2, pune city (2015)    fewest points in a season while winning the league: 39, goa (2019-20)  wins  most wins in total: 61, goa most wins in a season: 13, bengaluru (2017-18) most home wins in a season: 8, atk mohun bagan (2020-21) most away wins in a season: 7 bengaluru (2017-18) mumbai city (2020-21) fewest wins in a season: 2 chennaiyin (2018-19) kerala blasters (2018-19) hyderabad (2019-20) northeast united (2019-20) odisha (2020-21) fewest home wins in a season: 0, chennaiyin (2020-21)  fewest away wins in a season: 0 mumbai city (2014) pune city (2015) most consecutive wins: 6, bengaluru (22 october - 30 november 2018) most consecutive matches without a win: 14 hyderabad (6 november 2019 - 13 february 2020) northeast united (27 november 2019 - 25 february 2020)
defeats  most defeats in total: 56, northeast united  most defeats in a season: 13  northeast united (2017-18) chennaiyin (2018-19) most home defeats in a season: 7, odisha (2020-21) most away defeats in a season: 8, hyderabad (2019-20)  fewest defeats in a season: 2, atk (2016) fewest home defeats in a season: 0  odisha (2016) bengaluru (2018-19) fewest away defeats in a season: 1 atk (2016) mumbai city (20146) pune city (2017-18)  goa (2020-21)  hyderabad (2020-21) northeast united (2020-21) most consecutive matches undefeated: 15, goa (23 december 2020 - 8 march 2021) most consecutive defeats: 6, odisha (26 november - 29 december 2017)  draws  most draws in total: 49,  kerala blasters most draws in a season: 11 hyderabad (2020-21) chennaiyin (2020-21) most home draws in a season: 7, chennaiyin (2020-21)   most away draws in a season: 6  jamshedpur (2018-19) hyderabad (2020-21) northeast united (2020-21) fewest draws in a season: 1 chennaiyin (2015) bengaluru (2017-18)  fewest home draws in a season: 0 chennaiyin (2015) atk (2015) northeast united (2016)  pune city (2017-18)  mumbai city (2017-18) fewest away draws in a season: 0 odisha (2015) bengaluru (2017-18) hyderabad (2019-20)    most consecutive draws: 6, goa (17 january - 13 february 2021)  goals  most goals scored in a season: 51, goa (2019-20) fewest goals scored in a season: 11, northeast united (2014) most goals conceded in a season: 44, odisha (2020-21) fewest goals conceded in a season: 11, mumbai city (2016) best goal difference in a season: 23, goa (2019-20) worst goal difference in a season: -19, odisha (2020-21) most goals scored at home in a season: 25, goa (2018-19) fewest goals scored at home in a season: 4, kerala blasters (2014) most goals conceded at home in a season: 26, odisha (2020-21) fewest goals conceded at home in a season: 2, kerala blasters (2014) most
goals scored away in a season: 23, goa (2019-20) fewest goals scored away in a season: 3, mumbai city (2014) most goals conceded away in a season: 26, odisha (2019-20) fewest goals conceded away in a season: 5, mumbai city (2016) most consecutive matches without scoring: 7, chennaiyin (15 february - 10 november 2019) most goals scored in total: 261, goa most goals conceded in total: 224, odisha  disciplinary  most yellow cards in total: 295, mumbai city most red cards in total: 19, goa most yellow cards in a season: 61, mumbai city (2020-21) fewest yellow cards in a season: 17, kerala blasters (2014) most red cards in a season: 4 goa (2016, 2019-20, 2020-21)  atk (2016)  odisha (2017-18) chennaiyin (2019-20) east bengal (2020-21) jamshedpur (2020-21)  awards  most golden boot winners: 3 chennaiyin (2014, 2015, 2019-20) goa (2017-18, 2018-19, 2020-21) most golden glove winners: 2, bengaluru (2018-19, 2019-20)  attendances  highest attendance, single match: 80,294, kerala blasters 1-1 (3-4) atletico de kolkata (at jawaharlal nehru stadium (kochi), 18 december 2016) lowest attendance, single match: 1,121, northeast united 0-1 kerala blasters (at indira gandhi athletic stadium, 17 february 2018) highest season average attendance: 52,008 - jawaharlal nehru stadium (kochi), kerala blasters (2016) lowest season average attendance: 4,981 - mumbai football arena, mumbai city (2018-19)  player records  appearances  most indian super league appearances: 125, mandar rao dessai (from 1 november 2014) most different clubs played for: 6, subhashish roy chowdhury (atk, delhi dynamos, goa, kerala blasters, jamshedpur and northeast united) oldest player: david james, 44 years and 141 days (for kerala blasters v. atletico de kolkata, 20 december 2014) youngest player: alfred lalroutsang, 16 years and 239 days (for northeast united v. hyderabad, 20 february 2020) most indian super league playoff final appearances: mohammed rafi (2014, 2016, 2018)    bold denotes players still playing in the indian super leagueitalics denotes players still playing professional football
.  goals   first indian super league goal: fikru teferra (for atletico de kolkata v. mumbai city, 12 october 2014) most indian super league goals: 50, sunil chhetri most indian super league goals at one club: 48, coro (for goa) oldest goalscorer: 41 years and 15 days, robert pires (for goa v. delhi dynamos, 13 november 2014) youngest goalscorer: 18 years and 43 days, komal thatal (for atk v. bengaluru, 31 october 2018)  bold denotes players still playing in the indian super league.italics denotes players still playing professional football.  fastest goal: 12 seconds, david williams (for atk mohun bagan v. hyderabad, 5 january 2022) longest goal: 59 meters, alvaro vazquez (for kerala blasters v. northeast united, 4 february 2022) most goals in a game: 4, modou sougou (for mumbai city v. kerala blasters, 16 december 2018) w 6-1 most hat-tricks: 3  iain hume (for atk (2) and kerala blasters)  bartholomew ogbeche (for northeast united, kerala blasters and hyderabad) oldest player to score an indian super league hat-trick: 37 years and 184 days, diego forlan (for mumbai city v. kerala blasters, 19 november 2016) youngest player to score an indian super league hat-trick: 21 years and 73 days, kiyan nassiri (for atk mohun bagan v. east bengal, 29 january 2022) fastest hat-trick: 7 minutes, coro (for goa v. kerala blasters, 9 december 2017)  assists   bold denotes players still playing in the indian super leagueitalics denotes players still playing professional football.  goalkeepers  match records  scorelines  biggest home win: 7-0, goa v. mumbai city (17 november 2015) biggest away win: 5-0, goa v. jamshedpur (19 february 2020) 6-1, mumbai city v. odisha (24 february 2021) 5-0, hyderabad v. northeast united (31 january 2022) 5-0, goa v. chennaiyin (9 february 2022) biggest aggregate win: 10-1  5-1, hyderabad v. northeast united (13 december 2021) and 0-5, northeast united v. hyderabad (31 january 2022) highest scoring: 6-5, odisha v. east bengal (27 february 2021) highest scoring draw: 4-4, odisha v. kerala blasters
(23 february 2020)  coaches  most championships: 2, antonio lopez habas (atk, atk mohun bagan) - 2014, 2019-20 most premierships: 2, sergio lobera (goa, mumbai city) - 2019-20, 2020-21 most clubs managed: 3, steve coppell (kerala blasters, jamshedpur, atk) longest spell as a coach: 54 games, sergio lobera (goa) shortest spell as a coach (excluding caretakers): 3 games, miguel angel portugal (pune city) oldest coach: stuart baxter,  (for odisha v. jamshedpur, 1 february 2021) youngest coach: gerard nus,  (for northeast united v. mumbai city, 21 november 2020)  most wins in total: 43, sergio lobera most defeats in total: 23, john gregory most consecutive matches undefeated: 15, juan ferrando (goa), 23 december 2020 - 8 march 2021 most consecutive wins: 6, carles cuadrat (bengaluru), 22 october - 30 november 2018 most consecutive defeats: 6, miguel angel portugal (odisha), 26 november - 29 december 2017 most consecutive matches without a win: 11 robert jarni (northeast united), 27 november 2019 - 10 february 2020   phil brown (hyderabad), 6 november 2019 - 24 january 2020  all-time indian super league table  the all-time indian super league table is a cumulative record of all match results, points and goals of every team that has played in the indian super league since its inception in 2013. the table that follows is accurate as of the end of the 2020-21 season. teams in bold are part of the 2021-22 indian super league. numbers in bold are the record (highest either positive or negative) numbers in each column.  status in 2021-22:  notes  see also  list of indian football champions  list of indian football first tier top scorers  list of foreign indian super league players   list of indian super league seasons   list of indian super league owners   list of indian super league head coaches   indian super league attendance   list of indian super league hat-tricks  references  external links  worldfootball.net  soccerway  records and statistics all-time football league tables super league
mario da rosa (1917 - deceased), is a former portuguese footballer who played as a goalkeeper.  he was most known for his thirteen-year spell at benfica, where he the league titles.  career born in vila real de santo antonio, rosa joined benfica in 1937, making his debut on 8 may 1938 in a match against academica. it was his only appearance all season, as amaro was undisputed starter. nonetheless, it was enough for him to be a part of the league title. the following season, new signing martins surpassed him and amaro to take the goalkeeper position, holding it tightly for six seasons, with rosa relegated to about handful of appearances.  in 1944-45, he finally overtook martins and played 21 games, 13 in the league, to help benfica win the league.  however, he could not retain his place in the next season, with martins appearing again to be the first choice. in 1946 and then in 1947, benfica signed pinto machado and contreiras, which further complicated his opportunities to play. still, in 1949-50, rosa overtook them all to be the most used goalkeeper in the league, winning his third league title.  honours benfica primeira divisao: 1937-38, 1944-45, 1949-50  references general    specific  1917 births year of death missing people from vila real de santo antonio portuguese footballers association football goalkeepers primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers
martin "frosty" beedle (born 18 september 1961) is a british musician who plays, produces and composes music. he plays drums, percussion, programs keyboard parts using high quality plugins and sings all types of genres. he plays various styles of music covering many genres including jazz, jazz fusion, rock, pop, blues, r&b and orchestral. he was the original drummer of cutting crew, remaining with them during their most successful period. he has also played in numerous west end musicals, as has been the principal drummer for mamma mia! since it opened in 1999.  he has played, recorded and toured with boy george, sinead o connor, midge ure, zucchero, jason donovan, kiki dee, sarah brightman, jimmy somerville, gloria gaynor, clannad, harold melvin, kim wilde, abc, and steve coogan to name a few and was an original member and co-producer of the progressive rock band lifesigns. he has also been playing with friends in a group called the two pianos a rock and roll band for four years.  he has been and is touring worldwide with queen symphonic / the queen rock and symphonic show which features international singers, a rock band and symphony orchestra. their last tour before covid-19 saw them playing in japan with the tokyo philharmonic orchestra at the beginning of 2020. touring and west end shows being postponed he is currently working on his first solo album and has been collaborating with a number of musicians on individual projects and writing of music.  variations of name: beedle, frosty beadle, frosty beedle, martin "frostie" beedle, martin "frosty" beedle, martin (frosty) beedle, martin beadle  biography (short)  frosty was born into a musical family. his father loved big band music and his mother loved to sing. he had singing lessons from the age of six and started playing drums aged 9. he gained permission from the local authorities to play in pubs and clubs from the age of eleven and spent his youth playing semi professionally in anything from jazz trios to big bands.  he eventually turned professional aged seventeen joining the qe2 transatlantic liner and travelled the world completing three world cruises by the time he was twenty one. he moved to london in 1984. in 1985 he joined the pop group cutting crew. (i just) died in your arms was a top ten hit in many countries.  he left the band after six years in 1991 and
went on to work with various acts, touring with some of them but also recording (singles/songs) with sarah brightman, zucchero, russell watson and more.  at the same time he has been holding the drum chair in the mamma mia show, the seventh longest running show in the london west end from year 2000.  discography (selection)  studio albums  with cutting crew  broadcast (1986)  the scattering (1989) with zucchero sugar fornaciari  miserere (1992)  with marie claire d'ulbado  the outside (of the other side)(1994) with russell watson  reprise (2002)  with never the bride  never the bride (1995)  vancouver 97 (2009) with sarah brightman  la luna (2000)   harem (2003)  with gregorian  the dark side (2004)   chapter v (2004)  with lifesigns  lifesigns (2013)  cardington (2017)  with the boaters project  the boaters project (2016)  with mari wilson  mari wilson - pop deluxe (2016)  live album/dvd  with cutting crew  in concert-405 (live 1987) with lifesigns  under the bridge - live in london (dvd - 2015)  singles  with cutting crew  (i just) died in your arms (1986)   i've been in love before (1986) with boy george  my sweet lord (1992)  references (selection only)  interview: jacqui hicks (new cd with simon carter, phil mulford and 'frosty' beedle - the boaters project) retrieved 19 july 2020  the voxtet and band at ronnie scott's retrieved 19 july 2020  cutting crew official video (i just) died in your arms  cutting crew official video the scattering  frosty beedle on the arts show interview with michael madden, 17 march 2020. retrieved 19 july 2020.  external links  queen symphonic   mamma mia the production band   frosty beedle, official site (from september 2020)  1961 births living people musicians from yorkshire lifesigns members drummers
catenicella elegans is a species of bryozoans in the genus catenicella. it is found in new zealand.  references  external links     catenicella elegans at the world register of marine species (worms)  cheilostomatida animals described in 1852 invertebrates of new zealand
miss latina australia 2016 was an australian national beauty pageant run by e & e events management. it took place on july 23, 2016, in the historical regent ballroom in northcote, victoria. 12 finalists participated in the gala event. at the conclusion of the final event georgette psarreas (chilean & greek) was crowned miss latina australia with daniella seoane (uruguayan) second place and miss charity. jessica bustamante (el salvadorian)  won title of people's choice, tatiana castiblanco (colombian) winning miss photogenic. miss america latina international beauty contest was chosen for georgette psarreas to represent australia and was flown all expenses paid to the occidental xcaret resort in mexico.  history   miss latina australia beauty pageant was first held at the golden star receptions in epping, victoria on june 13, 2015 and designed for women of latina descent who are australian permanent residents or citizens. the miss america latina international beauty contest was chosen for the winner of the 2016 australian pageant to be a part of. eva giollo in 2015 was the first title holder and delegate for australia on the international stage. the miss latina australia pageant has received extensive coverage through national spanish newspapers such as the latin australian times and el espanol and is a highlight for the spanish speaking community in australia.  charity   estela tapia is the national director of miss latina australia pageant which supports the "hogar maria auxiliadora" orphanage in cochabamba bolivia. several of the finalists fundraise for this cause, and the most successful fundraiser receives the miss latina australia charity award, this year it was uruguayan born daniella seoane  results  see also  list of beauty contests  miss latina australia  miss lindeza 2017  references  external links official website  2016 beauty pageants 2016 beauty pageants for people of specific ethnic or national descents
events from the year 1725 in russia  events  births  pyotr rumyantsev (died 1796)  deaths   peter i, monarch (born 1672)  references  1725 in the russian empire years of the 18th century in the russian empire
marina melnikova and laura pous tio were the defending champions, but chose not to participate.  due to the violent situations in turkey caused by the 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt, the tournament was abandoned without finishing the final. ekaterine gorgodze, sofia shapatava, akgul amanmuradova and natela dzalamidze were the four players left in the final.  seeds  draw  references   draw  bursa cup - doubles bursa cup
eva brewster (december 28, 1922 - december 3, 2004) was a german-born canadian writer.  the daughter of wealthy jewish parents, she was born eva levy in berlin. the nazis seized her father's business in 1938; he died the following day. brewster married freddy raphael in 1939; the couple had a daughter reha. brewster was arrested while serving in the german resistance. in april 1943, with her husband, daughter and mother, she was sent to the auschwitz concentration camp. her husband and daughter died there. when the survivors were liberated, she helped the british track down escaping nazis. in 1947, she married a british officer ross brewster.  after completing training as a veterinarian, her husband served with the british government in africa. in 1962, the family settled in southern england, later moving to scotland, where they took over the operation of her husband's family's farm. they moved again to alberta, canada, living first in edmonton and then, in 1970, in coutts. her husband worked there as a veterinary inspector. she began writing a weekly column for the lethbridge herald. she also contributed to various magazines, lectured on journalism at the lethbridge community college and served as deputy mayor of coutts from 1986 to 1995.  in 1984, she published vanished in darkness; an auschwitz memoir. brewster published a revised version progeny of light; vanished in darkness in 1994; it received a canadian jewish book award.  her story was presented in a 2007 exhibit "auschwitz: the eva brewster story" at the galt museum in lethbridge.  references   1922 births 2004 deaths writers from alberta canadian memoirists auschwitz concentration camp survivors canadian columnists canadian people of german-jewish descent 20th-century memoirists canadian women memoirists german emigrants to canada
john a. cherry (born ca. 1941) is the recipient of the 2016 lee kuan yew water prize, awarded at singapore international water week in july 2016 for his work in groundwater research, protection and management. in 2020, cherry received the stockholm water prize. he is a distinguished professor emeritus from the university of waterloo in ontario, canada. he undertook research on the migration of contaminants in groundwater and he participated in the development of technologies for groundwater monitoring and remediation thus "revolutionizing groundwater research". his research resulted in a "paradigm shift in groundwater pollution control measures", leading to new groundwater remediation guidelines to be adopted in the united states and other countries in the 1990s.  career  he holds geological engineering degrees from the university of saskatchewan and university of california berkeley, and earned a phd in geology with specialization in hydrogeology from the university of illinois. in 1967 he joined the university of manitoba in winnipeg, canada, as the country's first groundwater professor. he then joined the faculty at the university of waterloo in 1971 where he held the research chair in contaminant hydrogeology from 1996 to 2006. in 1978 he led a group of researchers in setting up the borden groundwater field research facility on a landfill located within a military base. the field research at borden demonstrated the behavior of contaminants and the remediation process in a way that non-scientists and policy-makers could understand and accept. this research formed the basis for criteria for selecting sites for safe waste disposal. these criteria were subsequently incorporated into regulatory frameworks all around the world.   his career choice was influenced by his parents who had experienced a severe drought in of saskatchewan in the 1930s and who became documentary filmmakers, making films about water, reminding their son how important water scarcity was.  according to cherry, "the biggest cause of groundwater pollution and of water use not being sustainable is agriculture". out of concern for environmental sustainability, he became a vegan in 2010. noting that 80 percent of all freshwater is used for food production, cherry said in his acceptance speech of the lee kuan yew water prize that "eating meat is the largest single contributor to the global water crisis. diet changes could reduce per capita water consumption in the industrialized countries by up to 40 percent." he also noted that 50 percent of drinking water supplies globally depend on groundwater." cherry has also urged governments to devote more of their budget to groundwater monitoring, noting that unlike sewage treatment, it is not as politically popular because its benefits appear only over the long term.  books  in
1979 he co-authored the first edition of the seminal textbook "groundwater" with professor r. allan freeze. the book helped readers see how the "pieces are connected" and get a more holistic understanding of the complicated subject. in 1987, he founded the university consortium for field-focused groundwater research which consists of 26 principal investigators and 12 core corporate sponsors. currently comprising 16 universities, it gives graduate students the chance to conduct research on contaminated industrial sites, much as john cherry had done himself before.  awards and patents  in 2020, cherry received the stockholm water prize.  cherry plans to use the s$ 300,000 (usd 222,000) prize money of the lee kuan yew water prize to update the "groundwater" textbook, translating it into different languages and putting it online as a "wiki book".   he was elected a member of the national academy of engineering in 2013 for contributions to understanding contaminant migration and development of engineered systems for groundwater remediation.  he co-holds several patents, is a fellow of the royal society of canada, and a fellow of the geological society of america.  references  1940s births living people university of waterloo faculty hydrogeologists
francesco boncompagni ludovisi (20 october 1886 - 7 june 1955) was an italian politician. he was born in foligno. he was the 3rd fascist governor of rome from 1928 to 1935. he served in the senate of the kingdom of italy. he died in rome, italy.  references  external links    1886 births 1955 deaths 19th-century italian politicians 20th-century italian politicians mayors of rome members of the senate of the kingdom of italy
manish grover (born 24 june 1951) is a bharatiya janata party (bjp) politician and a former member of the legislative assembly, representing rohtak constituency in the vidhan sabha.  personal life  manish grover was born to wazir chand and seeta devi grover on 15 july 1954 in rohtak. he joined jan sangh in 1971. in 1987, he successfully contested the municipal corporation elections from ghani pura, rohtak.  he married veena grover on 3 february 1982. they have two children himanshu and rashmi. himanshu is married to somya khurana and lives in rohtak. rashmi is married to gaurav ahuja, and lives in delhi.  references  1954 births living people hindu activists indian hindus people from rohtak district rashtriya swayamsevak sangh pracharaks haryana mlas 2014-2019 punjabi people bharatiya janata party politicians from haryana
roman cermak (born 11 september 1959) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in the individual pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1959 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from prague
pete is a nickname of:   russell "pete" ashbaugh (1921-2009), american football player  pedro pete astudillo (born 1963), mexican american songwriter  darrel pete brewster (1930-2020), american former national football league player and coach  wilson pete burness (1904-1969), american animator and animation director, two-time academy award winner  clarence pete carpenter (1914-1987), american jazz trombonist, musical arranger and composer for television shows  charles "pete" conrad (1930-1999), american naval aviator and astronaut  richard pete cooper (golfer) (1914-1993), american pga golfer  ulise joseph pete desjardins (1907-1985), american diver, double gold medalist at the 1928 olympics  pietro pete domenici (1932-2017), american politician and six-term senator from new mexico  pierre s. du pont iv (born 1935), american lawyer, politician and former governor of delaware  dee pete hart (american football) (born 1933), american football player  wilbur pete henry (1897-1952), american national football league player and coach  william j. knight (1929-2004), american aeronautical engineer, politician, vietnam war combat pilot, test pilot and astronaut  ralph pierre pete lacock, jr. (born 1952), american former major league baseball player  warren "pete" moore (1938-2017), american singer-songwriter, original bass singer for motown group the miracles and record producer  george pete morrison (1890-1973), american silent western film actor  linton pete muldoon (1887-1929), canadian hockey coach, first coach of the chicago black hawks  charles pete orr (racing driver) (1956-2002), american stock car racing driver  harding william pete peterson (baseball) (1929-2019), american retired major league baseball player and general manager  harold patrick pete reiser (1919-1981), american major league baseball player  alvin pete rozelle (1926-1996), longtime commissioner of the national football league  james pete runnels (1928-1991), american major league baseball player  petros pete sampras (born 1971), american retired tennis player  kenneth pete shaw (american football) (born 1954), american former national football league player  alonzo pete tillman (1922-1998), american football player and coach  see also  henry ole pete peterson, american folk legend  lists of people by nickname
the diocese of deva and hunedoara () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the saint nicholas cathedral in deva and its ecclesiastical territory covers hunedoara county. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of transylvania. it has five archpriests' districts, around 230 parishes, two monasteries, eight sketes and a seminary for nuns. it was established in 2009, the year gurie georgiu became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  external links official site  deva 2009 establishments in romania deva hunedoara county
the winkelman bridge is a historic bridge over the gila river in winkelman, arizona, u.s.. it was built in 1916. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since september 30, 1988.  references  road bridges on the national register of historic places in arizona bridges completed in 1916 buildings and structures in pinal county, arizona bridges over the gila river road bridges in arizona concrete bridges in the united states arch bridges in the united states
lize feryn (born 4 march 1993) is a belgian actress, model and author of flemish descent.  biography  lize feryn earned a degree in artistic secondary education in 2011 in drama & diction at the leuven lemmens institute. she also had a part-time arts education in diction at the peter benoit academy in harelbeke. she stopped full-time training in art history as it was incompatible with her work as a model for imm models in new york city and milan.  feryn played the lead role of marie boesman in the drama in flanders fields by jan matthys. her character is a 15-years old girl who quickly matures amidst the horrors of the first world war. she was cast in 2011 and performed the role in 2012. the ten-part series aired in january 2014 on the vrt-owned een. based on the series, she wrote the book dagboek van marie (diary of marie), published in 2014 by manteau. her second book, dagboek van marie : brieven van marie verschenen (diary of marie: letters of marie) was published in 2014.  additionally she guest starred in aspe (as nathalie creemers), vermist (as denise klaessens), in the short film andromeda and in the bbc-historical drama the white queen as princess bona from france. she worked in several musical productions for harelbeke amateur company arte del sueno.  as a model she participated in several fashion shows for calvin klein, united colors of benetton, carlo pignatelli, natan and joanne vanden avenne and posed for magazines such as verena, marie claire, glam*it, pure and velvet.  feryn starred in 2015 in the flemish een television's comedy series "voor wat hoort wat", directed by christophe van rompuy, about young criminals who must do community services in a nursing home as part of their "reform".  in september 2016 the dutch period drama a real vermeer premiered starring feryn playing leading lady to dutch actor jeroen spitzenberger.  feryn can currently be seen this fall from august to november 2017,  in #hetisingewikkeld, the flemish remake of the popular danish dramedy "splitting up together" directed by lenny van wesemael. here she plays a young married mother of three.  in 2018 feryn will hit german big screens for the first time playing opposite german stars,
katja riemann, oliver masucci and samuel finzi in the highly anticipated film subs. directed by germany's acclaimed director oskar roehler, feryn plays in german with a russian accent.  besides being an actress and model feryn designs leather goods. in october 2015, together with her sisters yanne and mira she grounded their label "feryn" which produces hand crafted handbags, backpacks, wallets and other such goods.  filmography  publications  references  external links     1993 births living people 21st-century flemish actresses belgian people of dutch descent belgian female models flemish film actresses flemish stage actresses flemish television actresses people from deerlijk
sharir is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  avraham sharir (born 1932), israeli politician limor schreibman-sharir, israeli writer and politician, and 1973 miss israel micha sharir (born 1950), israeli mathematician and computer scientist  hebrew-language surnames
sugar hill, also known as sugar hill: home of the blues was a blues and jazz club in san francisco's broadway in the north beach district of san francisco, california. it was established by barbara dane, in may 1961, with the idea of creating a venue for the blues in a tourist district where a wider audience could hear it. there dane performed regularly with her two most constant musical companions:  kenny "good news" whitson on piano and cornet and wellman braud, former ellington bassist. among her guest artists were jimmy rushing, mose allison, mama yancey, tampa red, lonnie johnson, big mama thornton, lightnin' hopkins, t-bone walker, brownie mcghee and sonny terry.  carmen mcrae performed at the club in 1963, recording a live album there with pianist norman simmons, bassist vic sproules and drummer stew martin. a billboard review wrote of it: "miss mcrae sings up a storm, exhibiting not only her highly polished and formidable style but much warmth, humor and that little something extra that makes for an inspired performance".  lonnie johnson, who appeared at the club in early 1962, wrote a song, "fine booze and heavy dues", in honor of his appearance there.  the song appears on his 1962 album lonnie johnson:another night to cry.  references  jazz clubs in the san francisco bay area 1961 establishments in california north beach, san francisco
vincenzo alberto annese (born 22 september 1984 in bisceglie) is an italian association football manager and former player who currently is the head coach of gokulam kerala fc in the i-league.  annese is a uefa pro licence coach, which allows him to coach football at the highest levels. he had experiences as youth coach in italian academies and clubs (mostly affiliated to big italian teams) and international experience as a professional head coach for senior teams.  career  annese began his football career as a central midfielder for venezia f.c./s young football team. it was in serie a (from 1999 to 2001). he played in a.s. martina franca 1947 (from 2001 to 2002), noicattaro termoli (from 2002 to 2003) and a.s.d. leonessa altamura (from 2003 to 2004).  early life annese wanted to follow in his father's footsteps an ex football player in molfetta sportiva and joined the belenenses youth team. at age 23 he chose to focus on becoming a football coach, attended the higher institute of physical education (isef) at the universita degli studi di foggia and in 2006 got his second degree at the university of verona, focussing on the adaptation of sports to disabled people. in 2008, annese sought to extend his school experience to the role of coach in football by mixing the coaching grow model with motivational and psychological techniques.  coaching career  annese started his professional head coaching career in s.s. fidelis andria 1928 youth team (from 2010 to 2012). he was promoted as coaching staff in the italian third division 2012-13 lega pro prima divisione  afterwards continuing in foggia calcio 2013-14 lega pro prima divisione. since then annese was head coach in many countries at top level, including latvia, estonia, ghana, palestine, indonesia kosovo and armenia. he was a tactical/technical coach of junior national teams (under 14, 15, 16, 17, 19) in football federation of armenia.  he achieved the qualification to become a teacher in physical education for primary school, secondary school and university. he worked as a teacher with italian national olympic committee in 2013 and as an instructor in swimming pool in molfetta and as personal trainer.  bechem united in january 2017, the ghanaian premier league club bechem united f.c. appointed annese as their 2017-18 season manager.  under annese, bechem united played against mc alger in the 2017, africa
's secondary club competition organized by the confederation of african football (caf).  ahli al-khaleel on july 25, 2017, annese signed a one-year contract and became the new first-team head coach of palestine premier league ahli al-khaleel for the 2017-18 season.  psis semarang on march 24, 2018, annese was engaged by psis semarang and became the new first-team head coach for the 2018 season.  football federation of belize on june 17, 2019, annese signed a one-year contract with belize national football team and became the new first-national team head coach for the football federation of belize. coach annese with belize became to near to have a historic result for the country.  gokulam kerala fc on august 19, 2020, annese signed a contract for session 2020/21 with gokulam kerala fc in indian professional football club based in calicut, kerala.  annese became the first italian coach in the team history of gokulam kerala fc.  under his coaching, gokulam kerala fc was crowned champions of the i-league with 29 points in 15 games and sealed their berth at the 2022 afc cup group stage.  managerial statistics  honours  annese won the hero i-league 2020-2021 with gokulam kerala fc  references  external links   1984 births living people italian footballers association football midfielders italian football managers italian expatriate football managers s.s. fidelis andria 1928 managers calcio foggia 1920 s.s.d. managers gokulam kerala fc managers belize national football team managers expatriate football managers in estonia expatriate football managers in armenia expatriate football managers in latvia expatriate football managers in ghana expatriate football managers in the state of palestine expatriate football managers in indonesia expatriate football managers in india
elisabet spiegelberg, also called denner-spiegelberg, nee denner (nuremberg 1681 - hamburg, 1757), was a german actress and theater director. she was one of the first actresses to become famous in scandinavia, and later became the leader of one of the most known theater companies touring in scandinavia prior to the establishment of a local theater there.  life elisabet spiegelberg was the daughter of the german actor known as denner the elder and sister of the harlequin actor known as denner the younger. the whole family was engaged at the famous velthen company, who often toured scandinavia in denmark, sweden and norway from at least the late 1690s onward. the company were pioneers in these countries were there was yet no local theaters: the velthen company became famous in scandinavia, and elisabet denner became the perhaps first actress famous among the scandinavian public, known particularly for her role as eve in der gefallene mensch, and she is described as the leading lady of the company.  in 1710, she married her colleague johann christian spiegelberg, who formed his own company and where she continued as its leading lady. the speigelberg company succeeded the velthens company as the perhaps most famed in denmark, norway and sweden: they are known to have toured denmark 1718-19 and norway 1732-33. after the death of her spouse in 1732 elisabet spiegelberg took over the leadership of the company, and are known to have toured the swedish cities: she is mentioned in norrkoping in 1735 and gothenburg in 1737.  in 1740, she dissolved her company and returned to germany, where she was engaged at the schoneman company in luneburg until her death.  references   wilhelm berg: anteckningar om goteborgs aldre teatrar / band 2. 1794-1816 (1896-1900)  k. g. saur verlag gmbh & company,walter de gruyter incorporated: dictornary of german biography volume 9. schmidt - theyer  h.j. huitfeldt: christiania theaterhistorie sid. 35-37 (1876)  1681 births 1757 deaths 18th-century german actresses german stage actresses 17th-century german actresses women theatre directors german theatre directors 18th-century theatre managers women theatre managers and producers 18th-century businesswomen 18th-century german businesspeople
chris benard (born april 4, 1990) is an american track and field athlete who competes in the triple jump. he holds a personal record of , set in 2016. he was a finalist at the 2016 iaaf world indoor championships.  professional  benard made his international debut for his country at the 2012 nacac under-23 championships in athletics. there, he took the silver medal behind fellow american chris phipps.  personal records  outdoor triple jump - (wind: -0.0 m/s) (2017) long jump - (wind: +1.6 m/s) (2014)  indoor triple jump -  (2020) long jump -  (2014) 60-meter dash - 7.05 seconds (2015) all information from iaaf  us track and field championships at the 2019 usa outdoor track and field championships chris benard placed fourth in the triple jump turned into a tough competition with winner donald scott who won on his first jump in wet conditions.  at the 2018 iaaf diamond league final memorial van damme in brussels, belgium chris benard placed fifth in the triple jump after jumping .  at the 2018 usa outdoor track and field championships chris benard placed second in the triple jump turned into a tough competition with winner donald scott who won on his last jump.  at the 2018 usa indoor track and field championships chris benard moved from 7th to 4th in the last jump of the triple jump.  at the 2017 usa outdoor track and field championships chris benard was again in the top three of the triple jump.  at the start of 2016 he took third at the usa indoor championships. this earned benard his global debut for the united states, as he was entered into the 2016 iaaf world indoor championships and finished eleventh. he repeated his same position nationally at the 2016 united states olympic trials, achieving a personal record of  to earn his first selection for the united states olympic team.  at the 2015 usa indoor track and field championships he was again in the top three of both horizontal jumps. he was short of seventeen metres at the 2015 usa outdoor championships and beaten into fourth place (marquis dendy took the final spot on the team for the 2015 world championships in athletics).  bernard took second place in both the long jump and triple jump at the 2014 usa indoor track and field championships, which included a long jump lifetime best of  in qualifying. at the 2014 usa outdoor track and field championships he set another best, this time in the triple jump with a mark of  -
his first beyond seventeen metres. that brought him third place behind the top two at the last olympics, christian taylor and will claye.  personal biography born to fay and thomas benard in tustin, california, he grew up in nearby corona and attended santiago high school.  ncaa benard earned his place among america's top triple jumpers after graduation from arizona state. bernard earned eight all-american as a college student-athlete. he gained an athletic scholarship to attended arizona state university and competed for the arizona state sun devils track team.  in his last appearance at ncaa level, chris benard placed tenth overall at the 2013 ncaa indoor meet.  chris benard competed well at ncaa taking the runner-up spot at the 2012 ncaa men's division i indoor track and field championships.  chris benard competed well at ncaa level, coming 19th in his debut at the 2011 ncaa men's division i outdoor track and field championships.  competing for riverside city college, bernard earned two all-american awards in 2010 from national junior college athletic association.  benard won the 2009 community college edition mt sac relays as a freshman in a then personal best in the triple jump with a jump of  to place first.  references  external links  iaaf diamond league profile for chris benard arizona state university february 2012 highlight profile of chris benard 2016 flotrack interview of team usa olympian triple jump  chris benard after qualifying for rio olympics  living people 1990 births people from tustin, california track and field athletes from california american male triple jumpers african-american male track and field athletes arizona state sun devils men's track and field athletes riverside city college alumni sportspeople from orange county, california athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states olympic male triple jumpers athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics 21st-century african-american sportspeople
paul epstein was a german mathematician.  paul epstein may also refer to:  paul sophus epstein, russian-american mathematical physicist paul a. epstein, member of relache (musical group)  see also paul eppstein german sociologist
r v lee is the leading case in england and wales concerning erroneous professional dispensing of a controlled medicine. the case was considered by foremost judges with a conviction in the central criminal court of england and wales in front of its president, the recorder of london, (where a not guilty plea would, if it had occurred, have been determined by the empanelled jury) and its partly successful appeal in the binding precedent-level court of appeal.  the case confirmed that a serious error in giving a vulnerable customer a potent drug that does not match in any way the prescription, where such action is not the primary causation of any death or suffering, can result in a prosecution of the responsible pharmacist, with up to 2 years imprisonment, depending on the circumstances.  later guidance and regulation has protected responsible pharmacists able to prove they have adequate, strict safeguards in place and also laid out principles to help to foster those safeguards.  summary a patient suffering from cancer with poor respiratory health died three days after elizabeth lee, a pharmacist, dispensed or co-dispensed the wrong drug. a full investigation of facts followed and lee reported the error, which was, before trial, found not to have been the primary cause of death. lee was given a three-month suspended prison sentence at the old bailey. this was reduced to a fine of £300 on appeal at the court of appeal. her case provoked a campaign led by pharmacists and certain leading academics to decriminalise such errors. the defence was led by glassbrooks solicitors and the pharmacists' defence association between 2007 and 2010. the case has been used since in pharmacy education and research to explain the english and welsh law of the supply of medicines. many professional groups wish the government or parliament to end the fear of criminal prosecution following a pharmacist's inadvertency, leading to a motion to table a private member's bill. error reporting was not an issue in this case (lee was commended for not seeking to avoid responsibility for the error from the outset). decriminalisation of single, inadvertent dispensing errors can be construed as a public safety measure on the basis of encouraging self-reporting transparency, so that pharmacists know that they could report non-deliberate errors of their unit without any fear of gaining a criminal record, and a feedback loop be embedded to any error, however slight (a "just culture" instead of "strict liability in extreme cases" approach). lee's sanction confirmed the likelihood of conviction for inadvertent dispensing errors where a patient's
health deterioration is deeply probed, such as through proximity of death or age of the patient. it prompted pharmacy bodies and a range of mps to lobby for decriminalisation of non-deliberate errors.  dispensing error the percentage of prescription items supplied to patients with an error (the error rate) in the uk is estimated at 0.04 to 3.32%. the human error involved was that the wrong drug was selected, which is a recognised type of error among those made by pharmacists and very few lead to criminal prosecution. however, the details are publicly available in this case and provide an insight into the circumstances.  on thursday, 30 august 2007, lee was working as a locum at tesco pharmacy, west windsor. a written prescription was brought in to the pharmacy for 72-year-old carmel sheller. it was for amoxicillin capsules (an antibiotic) for a chest infection and 40 prednisolone tablets 5 mg (a steroid) at a dose of eight per day, to be taken for wheezing and lung inflammation. the pharmacist or an assistant printed the labels for the items; but affixed that for prednisolone onto a box of propranolol pills (used to treat high blood pressure, angina or heart arrhythmias).  it was fairly busy - the pharmacy dispensed about 300 prescription items. lee was amid a 10-hour shift, from 9 am until 7 pm, without a break, save for the time taken to eat lunch in a corner between checking and approving prescriptions. the pharmacy could not function without her presence. the usual pharmacist and a dispensing assistant were on maternity leave.  the prescription labels were produced at 2:41 pm. a spokesman for tesco said:  it is not known who labelled, assembled or handed out the prescription, but lee's signatures were on the dispensing label, showing that she had checked the item.  events after the error sheller took eight of the propranolol pills, following the dose prescribed (which her doctor wrote up for prednisolone). she recovered from the effects of taking them.   her underlying poor physical condition deteriorated and she died in hospital, 3 days after the prescription. the post-mortem examination found that the cause of death was heart failure, chronic bronchitis and lung cancer.  upholding of a conviction the crown prosecution service (cps) prosecuted lee for the dispensing error. she was originally arrested for gross negligence manslaughter but then charged under the medicines act offences.
this was through early lack of useable evidence of that degree. the death also was, per the post mortem, one of natural causes - the dosage in sheller's blood evincing it was not the primary cause of the death.  on 2 april 2009, before the case went before the president of the crown courts of london (and of the old bailey) who heard the arguments as to law only and not as to fact in relation to the medicines act 1968, as the facts were not contested. lee admitted both charges. the charge under section 85 (5) (supplying a label which falsely describes the product or which would likely mislead as to the product's uses or effects) and charge under 64(1) (selling of any medicinal product not of the nature or quality specified in the prescription) of the act.   the defence argued that section 85 (5) could only be breached by a person carrying on a business - i.e. the owner of a business and, unsuccessfully, that section 64 (1) was designed in the 1960s to be used where an adulterated product or a product of a poor quality was supplied - not for dispensing errors. the judge made it clear that these arguments were unlikely to succeed (though on appeal, the arguments in relation to section 85 (5) were accepted; the arguments in relation to section 64 (1) were not heard. following the judge's opinion on the law, lee pleaded guilty to the s.85 (5) charge. had she not done so and was found guilty, she could have received a harsher sentence up to a maximum of two years in prison. the single judge granted leave to appeal. in doing so, he said that the issue concerning the proper scope and application of section 85(5) of the medicines act 1968 was sufficiently arguable and important to merit consideration by the court of appeal; the latter agreed when it made its final decision.  she was sentenced on 2 april 2009 by  the recorder of london to three months in prison suspended for 18 months, supervised by the probation service for 12 months. the charge against section 64 (1) of the medicines act (sale of a medicinal product not of the nature or quality demanded by the purchaser) was allowed to 'lie or remain on file' per section 3a of the act. in uk law, this means that the judge has decided that there is enough evidence for a case to be made, but that it is not in the public interest for the
prosecution to continue, usually because the defendant has pleaded guilty to other charges.  the recorder of london said lee bore "no factual or legal responsibility for mrs sheller's death". he said he was impressed that she had not sought to avoid responsibility for the error from the outset, and noted that she had resigned from the rpsgb and determined not to work as a pharmacist again. he said a prison sentence was needed to 'mark the gravity of the offence' but the circumstances had persuaded him to suspend it.  royal pharmaceutical society involvement lee resigned from the royal pharmaceutical society of great britain (rpsgb) register of pharmacists in late 2008. this was remarked upon by the judge in her sentencing on 2 april 2009. however, on 23 april 2009, the rpsgb refused to rule out disciplinary action and confirmed it bore lee's name on the non-practising register.  on 8 may 2009, the rpsgb registrar granted her request to leave the register voluntarily, because it was not in the public interest to pursue a fitness to practice case.  coroner's inquest on 5 march 2010, the local coroner found that the dispensing error made by lee was not to blame for sheller's death. the verdict was recorded at windsor guildhall. post-mortem blood samples showed trace amounts of propranolol and the coroner said the effects were likely to have been "so minimal" at the time of death that they could be "discounted as having any material effect".  appeal lee sought permission to appeal from the court of appeal. the permission hearing and appeal itself was heard at the royal courts of justice on 26 may 2010. lee was represented by orlando pownall qc. the wording of section 85(5) of the medicines act 1968 indicated that it could only be breached by a person who was carrying on a business. the court ruled that lee was not the person 'carrying on a business', and so the convictions under section 85(5) must be quashed. in addition, lee appealed against sentence, which resulted in a fine of £300 being substituted for the suspended prison sentence.  in 2008, the pharmacists' defence association commenced discussions with the department of health, cps and the director of public prosecutions about a cps protocol relating to prosecutions under the medicines act 1968. in late 2009, before lee's appeal, the publication was expected imminently. it was expected that it would state that where gross negligence manslaughter charges had been excluded, the police and cps should pass the case to the regulator and not pursue prosecution
. this was intended to be an interim solution until parliament agreed to amend the medicines act 1968 to decriminalise dispensing errors.  at the appeal hearing, lee's defence raised the issue of the new protocol, hoping it to inform the appeal, if rescheduled. however, the prosecution counsel, having conferred with a cps legal representative, stated that talks on the protocol had reached an impasse. the prosecution team could not give a timeframe for its publication and indicated that it could take up to a year; the judges were left with the impression it could take several years.   the appeal began to be heard. the prosecution asked the judge to substitute the conviction under 85(5) of the medicines act 1968 for a conviction under section 64(1), which had been allowed to 'lie on file' during the initial hearing.  lee's defence team asked for the section 64(1) charge to continue to lie on file since she had not pleaded guilty to it and the cps protocol, when published, would likely mean that the cps would no longer pursue a prosecution. the prosecution stated, however, that they would pursue a fresh prosecution for that breach if the issue was left to lie on file.  the judges considered ordering a retrial as to the section 64 charge but lee had no desire for further court appearances. her legal team said "it would be like returning to the scene of a road traffic accident". lee thus accepted the substituted (on-file) charge. she was ordered to pay a fine of £300.  the appeal judge noted the large impact of events on the sheller and lee families, and also the 'very many letters which speak of her [lee's] good character and many good works'. by the time of the appeal lee had taken a job as a cleaner in her church, having decided never to resume as a pharmacist, cancelling registration (kept by the rpsgb).  ministerial comment and early day motion shadow minister for health and pharmacy, lord howe, said in june 2009 that  the all-party parliamentary group for pharmacy met on 16 june 2009 in the house of commons to investigate the impact of the lee case on community pharmacists. the chairman, howard stoate mp, tabled an early day motion calling for a change in the law. he said  aftermath and impact on pharmacy in the uk the main code for prosecutors was updated in february 2010 and the similar, more detailed, protocol was published three weeks after the appeal hearing, on 21 june 2010.  this added the factor strongly indicating against prosecution
of: "has regulatory or remedial action been taken (against a pharmacist or technician), or is it likely to be taken?".  lee's prosecution caused concern that it would lead to non-reporting and under-reporting of dispensing errors by pharmacists, impacting patient safety and the ability to learn from mistakes.  in june 2009, well before lee's appeal hearing, the rpsgb carried out a survey which found that almost half the pharmacists questioned would reassess whether they would record dispensing errors in an error log. more than 12,000 pharmacists signed a petition calling for the law to be repealed. issues with workplace pressure also surfaced, with 4% of pharmacists in a survey carried out by chemist and druggist saying that they had contemplated suicide as a result of the stress.  a national effort to decriminalise dispensing errors was catalyzed by the case. one report said of lee, "it's up to us to complete the job and ensure her legacy is as the pharmacist who brought an end to criminal prosecutions for dispensing errors." this backstop law has not changed and can be applied, in heavily investigated, extreme cases, where on the facts, a prosecution can be seen to be in the public interest, as confirmed by the court of appeal.  responsible pharmacist regulations at the heart of the guidance (protocol) is the regulation that it is the responsible pharmacist (rp) who is now required to establish, maintain and keep under review procedures to ensure that a pharmacy is operating in a safe and effective manner. the rp will need to  reality sometimes differs. many community and hospital pharmacists have employers extremely reluctant to allow their rps to have this level of control. a pharmacy, in which they work, might be controlled by their employer or by someone other than the rp. the defence association has cases where rps confront discipline by employers, or dismissal because the employer does not allow them to exercise their statutory duties under the rp regulations.  notes and references footnote  references  tesco medical error british criminal case law
theo wanne (born 1967) is an american saxophone manufacturer and saxophone mouthpiece designer.  biography theo wanne was born in 1967 in california, us. from 1980 to 1986, wanne was an apprentice of joel jensen of da da bicycles in bellingham, wa.  he designed and hand-built custom bicycle frames, developing metal-working skills.  in 1987, he attended macalester college for a year, where he studied music composition. he then travelled to thailand, staying in a buddhist monastery, and studied meditation in india. upon his return to the us, he studied at western washington university, followed by california institute of the arts where his focus was jazz studies on the saxophone. from 1987 to 1997, wanne bought and sold vintage musical instruments to finance his schooling. he also studied the history and repair of saxophone mouthpieces with the help of randy jones of tenor madness in iowa, and bob carpenter from seattle, wa.  in 1997, he graduated from the naropa institute, completing a ba in musical improvisation. in 1998, wanne relocated to philadelphia, pa and repaired musical instruments with master repairman bret gustafson of gustafson music. at the same time, wanne bought and sold hundreds of his own custom mouthpieces though his internet store, saxophone mouthpiece heaven. in 2007, he began manufacturing his own line of mouthpieces alongside his brother, tom wanne. they incorporated as wanne, inc., doing business as theo wanne. saxophone mouthpiece heaven became inactive, its database moved to his current website. in 2009, he released his first fully machined mouthpiece using aerospace cad cam technology. he has five patents/patents pending. in 2013, tom wanne left wanne inc. to pursue other business opportunities.  in 2012, wanne's first tenor saxophone, the mantra, was released. in 2013, the mantra soprano saxophone was released. in 2014, wanne moved his company to new facilities to enable further development and innovation in mouthpiece design. a full re-design of his mouthpiece line came in at the beginning of 2015, with the introduction of the durga3, followed by the gaia2, shiva2, ambika2 in 2016.  saxophone mouthpiece heaven  wanne bought and sold hundreds of his own custom mouthpieces, leading to the inception of his store, saxophone mouthpiece heaven, in 1999. saxophone mouthpiece heaven became the world's most comprehensive resource for information on the design and history of saxophone mouthpieces, and wanne's mouthpiece
work was becoming acclaimed around the globe.  paul haar, of jazz times magazine said, "wanne's web site was and is a historian's vault filled with information."  wanne worked with many musicians here, such as joshua redman, chris potter, eric alexander, jan garbarek, and tim price, and quickly became known as the leading expert in his field.  mouthpiece models   wanne's line of mouthpieces is vast, and has undergone a number of changes throughout its history. each model falls into one of four categories: true large chamber, core sound, classic series or artist series.  notable clients  mindi abair gerald albright eric alexander jeff coffin jan garbarek courtney pine chris potter tim price joshua redman grover washington, jr. george young  references  external links theowanne.com  1967 births living people american musical instrument makers american saxophonists american male saxophonists musicians from california 21st-century saxophonists 21st-century american male musicians
jon jakobsen venusinus (c. 1558 - 1608) was a danish theologian, naturalist and historian.  he was born on the island of ven as the son of the local pastor, jakob jonsen.  the father was transferred to landskrona in 1563, where jon jakobsen assumed the surname coronensis, which he changed to venusinus after the island of ven became widely known due to the observatories built there by tycho brahe. he visited the school at frederiksborg, and later studied in copenhagen and rostock. in 1579 david chytræus recommended him to frederick ii, who granted him an annuity to support his studies. venusinus spent some years travelling in europe, visiting germany, austria, switzerland and italy, and completed a master's degree in wittenberg. returning to denmark, he was made parish priest in herfølge and sædder and dean of bjæverskov herred in 1584, a position in which he was succeeded by claus christoffersen lyschander in 1587.  venusinus married  agathe, the daughter of professor john sascerides  in 1585, and after the death of his first wife in 1589 he married karine dankertsdatter, widow of canon hans leiel in roskilde. it appears that both marriages remained childless, but he adopted the son of his second wife, dankert leiel.  the position in herfølge was one of the most lucrative in the country, but venusinus appears to have preferred life in the capital, and he moved to copenhagen in 1587 where he was made pastor of the church of the holy ghost. he was accused of holding crypto-calvinist sympathies, due to his refusal to perform baptismal exorcism,  and he was suspended from office in 1588. he petitioned christian iv to abolish baptismal exorcism; his request was not granted, but in a partial success for venusinus, the king himself had one of his children baptized without the ceremony.  although venusinus was not on good terms with the copenhagen academy, he was appointed professor of physics (i.e. natural sciences) "by royal command" in 1600, under which title he undertook the construction of a botanical garden. he was among the first at copenhagen university to accept the copernican worldview and he held lectures on magnetism. after the death of niels krag in 1602, he was also appointed royal historian. in 1603 he switched from the chair of physics to that of rhetoric and held lectures on danish
antiquity (antiquitates rerum danicarum). in 1606 he accompanied christian iv to england on the king's visit to  his brother-in-law james i of england, where his erudition attracted considerable attention. in 1607, venusinus was endowed with soro abbey, which allowed him to retire from all paid academic work, and he intended to focus on compiling a history of denmark, but he died, around the age of fifty, on 30 january of the following year.  references  carl frederik bricka, dansk biografisk lexikon 18 (1904), p. 393.  danish historians danish lutheran clergy 1550s births 1608 deaths year of birth uncertain
nasekheperensekhmet was an ancient egyptian vizier who officiated most likely during the reign of pharaoh psamtik i of the 26th dynasty.  biography  nasekheperensekhmet is known only from a block statue depicting him. from it, it is known that his mother was called shepamuntashepet, and that he also held the charges of priest of amun and governor of the city, beside being a vizier. during the 26th dynasty there were two viziers at the same time, one for the north and one for the south of the country (lower egypt and upper egypt respectively); since the statue was found in saqqara, it is likely that nasekheperensekhmet was a vizier of the north. the head of the statue is modern, made indeed during the 18th or 19th century when such "restorations" were not uncommon. the statue is nowadays exhibited at the liebieghaus, in frankfurt (inv. no. 1449).  references  ancient egyptian viziers people of the twenty-sixth dynasty of egypt
s4000p - international specification for developing and continuously improving preventive maintenance is a specification developed jointly by a multinational team from the aerospace and defence industries association of europe (asd) and aerospace industries association (aia). s4000p is part of the s-series of ils specifications and is integrated in the global ils process defined by sx000i - international guide for the use of the s-series of integrated logistics support (ils) specifications.  the main purpose of this specification is to assist all parties, including regulatory authorities, involved in the analysis process developing and releasing initial pmtr and intervals for new products prior entry into service. s4000p analysis methodologies remain applicable for later optimizations/modifications of the product design and/or of product structure and/or of product zones. once developed, authorized and packaged into interval clusters in a product omp, the s4000p in-service maintenance optimization (ismo) process enables continuously improving product maintenance during its in-service phase.  every development or improvement of a preventive maintenance task requirement for a product supports at least one of the following aspects:  ensure/maintain product safety, including safety/emergency systems and/or emergency equipment  avoid any conflict with law and/or significant impact on environmental integrity (ecological damage) during product mission/operation and/or maintenance  optimize mission/operational capability/availability of the product  optimize product economy (life cycle costs = lcc)  rationale for s4000p  for a new product or for a new product variant, the maintainability of the intended product design must be assessed by maintainability specialists providing engineering support. accumulated in-service experience with other products must also be taken into account. in parallel to the product design process, preventive maintenance task requirements (pmtr) with intervals and/or redesign requirements must be assessed on an analytical basis and be determined if applicable and effective. results must be available prior to product development milestones, latest prior to the critical design review (cdr) for the product.  according to the overall asd scope, the specification s4000p must cover all types of products including any complex technical platform, system, equipment or facility (e.g. on air/sea/land, under the sea-/ground-level, in space). the s4000p analysis methodologies allow a structured, traceable and complete determination of pmtr with intervals for a product, which become the basis to elaborate and document a product maintenance program/operators
' maintenance program (omp) prior to starting the product in-service phase.  during the product in-service phase, s4000p provides an additional process that allows reviewing the completeness and effectiveness of preventive maintenance tasks from a product omp, taking into account product in-service experience and the state-of-the-art analysis methodologies. such a review of the omp is to be fully traceable and applicable for all products types.  every s4000p analysis methodology or process must be tailored for the product under analysis in an analysis guideline or handbook to be acceptable to regulatory authorities (if involved), maintainers, operators, manufacturers and suppliers.  s4000p main advantages and innovations  s4000p builds on the know-how accumulated over many years on different maintenance analysis techniques such as reliability-centered maintenance but has simplified and extended to those methodologies:  in comparison to other known analysis methodologies, the application of asd s4000p is not limited to any pre-defined product type, like military or civil aircraft only. the s4000p analysis principles are developed by industry to be applicable to any complex technical product. this comprises products in air, on ground, under the ground, on sea, under the sea level or even in space for civil and/or military usage.   to cover the whole product life cycle, s4000p provides the innovative ismo methodology to prove and optimize the product maintenance during its complete in-service life. this is in addition to the product maintainability analysis that has to take place during the design and development phase to provide engineering/design support.   when defining preventive maintenance task requirements, the s4000p product system analysis takes into account product-integrated test- and condition monitoring technology being widely used in modern products.   the s4000p product structure analysis covers all kind of existing and future product structure materials and material combinations.   the s4000p product zonal analysis is based on a modular analysis concept to cover the zonal analysis of all kind of product types.  s4000p development  s4000p development work started in 2013.  european experts from the following international companies and organizations have participated in the developed s4000p:  airbus defence and space (germany/spain)  airbus helicopters (germany/france)  bae systems (united kingdom)  dassault aviation	france  logistics command of the bundeswehr (germany)  lsc group ltd. (united kingdom)  ministry of defence (united kingdom)
saab group (sweden) issue 1.0 (current issue) was published in may 2014.  availability  s4000p can be downloaded for free from its project website  references  aerospace engineering
the calmar passenger depot is a historic building located in calmar, iowa, united states.  it was built by the chicago, milwaukee & st. paul railroad in 1915 to replace the depot hotel that had been destroyed in a fire.  the single-story building originally featured a  canopy on its east side that was removed by the railroad in 1970.  it was reconstructed in 1998.  the passenger trains were on a line that ran between madison, wisconsin and south dakota.  they were discontinued in the 1960s.  the former depot now houses restrooms for the prairie farmer bike trail, which is adjacent to the building, farmers and flea markets, and other small community events. it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2011.  references   railway stations in the united states opened in 1915 former chicago, milwaukee, st. paul and pacific railroad stations former railway stations in iowa neoclassical architecture in iowa railway stations on the national register of historic places in iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa transportation buildings and structures in winneshiek county, iowa
william de chair baker (21 april 1823 - 20 february 1888) was an english cricketer and cricket administrator who played for and was involved with kent county cricket club throughout his life. baker played first-class cricket for kent and for cambridge university from 1841 to 1853. he was credited as one of the originators of canterbury cricket week and was secretary of kent at the st lawrence ground in canterbury from its establishment in 1847 until his death in 1888.  life and cricket career baker was born at the deanery in canterbury in kent and was educated at blackheath proprietary school. he went up to trinity college, cambridge, although there is no record of his having received a university degree.  baker played in 22 first-class cricket matches for kent and cambridge university, making his debut for kent in 1841, before the foundation of the county club in 1842. he played in the new county club's first match in august 1842 against the all-england xi. he played a few games for the amateur gentlemen of kent side from 1842, and in 1843 he appeared twice for cambridge university, though he did not play in the university match against oxford university.  baker was credited as the manager of the kent cricket team from around 1847 to his death and as one of the instigators of canterbury cricket week which moved from the beverley ground to the st lawrence ground in 1847 and remains the world's longest running cricket festival. he was also responsible for a series of annual rural fetes in canterbury.  references  external links  1823 births 1888 deaths english cricketers kent cricketers gentlemen of kent cricketers cambridge university cricketers english cricket administrators people educated at blackheath proprietary school alumni of trinity college, cambridge 19th-century british businesspeople
biraghi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  cristiano biraghi (born 1992), italian footballer guglielmo biraghi (1927-2001), italian film critic and festival director luigi biraghi (1801-1879), italian roman catholic priest  italian-language surnames
louise linton (nee hay; born 20 december 1980) is a scottish actress. she has appeared in the horror films cabin fever and intruder, in minor roles in the television series csi: ny and cold case, and wrote, directed, produced and starred in the 2021 film me you madness. linton is married to steven mnuchin, the former united states secretary of the treasury.  early life louise hay was born in the murrayfield area of edinburgh, scotland, the youngest of three children of william and rachel hay. her family owns melville castle outside edinburgh, where she used to spend weekends.  linton was educated at st george's school for girls and fettes college. she was interested in acting from an early age; after observing students from pepperdine university participating at the edinburgh festival, she vowed to her father that she would one day attend "pepperdine and be an actress." she trained in edinburgh with a private coach from the london academy of music and dramatic art, from which she gained honours after an exam.  linton's mother died of breast cancer, aged 53, when linton was 14 years old. after boarding school, louise spent part of her gap year as a volunteer in northern zambia, before attending university in the united states.  career linton has stated that she adopted her stage surname from her grandfather, partly to protect her family and partly to avoid confusion with the author louise hay.  her first role was as a guest star in csi: ny playing simone de lille, a french au pair to a new york teenager played by shailene woodley. the episode aired in 2007.  her first film was 2007's lions for lambs, directed by robert redford, starring tom cruise and meryl streep, in which linton played miss m, but her scenes were dropped from the final release. in 2008, she portrayed katie in the roy lee horror film the echo. according to the film's director, yam laranas, linton was not his first pick of actress but he agreed to give her the role because her then-husband ronald richards paid him $200,000.  her first lead role was in the sci-fi film scavengers. in 2016, she appeared in cabin fever, a remake of the 2002 film of the same name and played the lead role of elizabeth in the thriller intruder. in 2009 linton appeared in the cold case episode "wasp" in which she played louise patterson, a 1940's women air force service pilot. she also appeared in the film crew 2 crew. linton was featured
in the 2003 reality tv series hopelessly rich.  in 2009, she was honored at the scottish style awards as the country's 'most stylish woman'.  linton posed for maxim in 2009. maxim dubbed her "the hottest thing to come out of scotland since microwaved haggis."  in interviews from 2009 to 2011, linton recounted volunteering during her 1999 gap year in what she described as "war-torn zambia", and the night she spent "hiding in the bush as hutu rebels attacked the village she was working in". in 2016, she self-published her memoir about her experiences in zambia, titled in congo's shadow, co-authored by wendy holden.  in february 2017, linton succeeded her fiance, steven mnuchin, as the interim ceo of dune entertainment. mnuchin had founded dune in 2004 but stepped down as part of his ethics agreement to divest his business roles in preparation for his appointment as secretary of the treasury. linton publicly announced her new role in early may, which immediately drew the attention of senator ron wyden (d-oregon), a member of the senate finance committee. wyden questioned whether the appointment of linton meant mnuchin had fully divested from the company. although the treasury replied that she was serving in an uncompensated capacity, linton resigned as interim ceo later in may.  linton is involved in the rockshiel trust, a scottish legal entity, which applied to develop townhouses and apartments in the upmarket area of murrayfield in edinburgh close to the hay family's edinburgh home. the plans for 9 kinellan road were objected to by the local community and the plans submitted to edinburgh city council in january 2019 were later withdrawn.  linton's production company stormchaser films acquired serial daters anonymous and completed the film's production and post production. linton stars opposite sam page. the film has not yet been released.  in 2019, linton wrote, directed, produced, financed, and starred in the feature film me you madness opposite ed westwick in which she plays a murderous, sex-addicted hedge fund manager. the movie was released on 12 february 2021.  memoir in 2016, she drew widespread criticism for her memoir. an excerpt from the memoir, published in the telegraph, drew intense scrutiny, with many readers objecting to her portrayal of zambia, as well as linton's claim that she was a "central character" in the events. "i tried not to think what the rebels would do to the 'skinny white muzungu with long angel hair'
if they found me." - louise linton in her memoir, in congo's shadow.  the zambian high commission in london and others criticised the book for its inaccuracies and promotion of the false narrative of "the white saviour". her representative, mike sitrick, says she was targeted unfairly. "had her critics checked," he stated, "they would have found that articles written contemporaneously with the events reported in louise's book, by among the most respected media in the world, were consistent with louise's reporting of those events, as was a united nations high commissioner for refugees briefing in march 1999."  shortly after the telegraph published its extract from the book, linton withdrew her book from sale. she later apologised for causing offence and promised to donate all profits from the book to an appropriate charity, which she founded. the telegraph withdrew the published extract and also apologised for any inaccuracies in linton's text.  criticism  in august 2017, linton was criticised for posting a photo on instagram of herself accompanying her husband on a trip to fort knox on a united states government plane, using hashtags to highlight the designer clothing and accessories she wore. in her reply, she called the critic "adorably out of touch", and suggested that she contributed more to the us economy and paid more in taxes than the woman criticising her. following extensive publicity, linton apologised for both her initial post and her response to criticism released by her publicist, saying "it was inappropriate and highly insensitive". the couple reimbursed the government for the travel costs. citizens for responsibility and ethics in washington filed a freedom of information act request for the authorisation and costs of the trip, noting the trip "seems to have been planned around the solar eclipse." later, linton said she was a "bozo" for the instagram post.  the treasury's office of inspector general reviewed the 2017 flight taken by mnuchin and linton. abc news reported in september 2017 that the office had opened a second inquiry following reports that mnuchin had requested use of a government jet to take him and linton on their honeymoon in scotland, france and italy.  in november 2017, linton and mnuchin sparked a new wave of criticism when they were photographed holding a sheet of dollar bills - the first to include mnuchin's signature - at the bureau of engraving and printing.   in january 2018, linton was one of many celebrities, sports stars, journalists and politicians that was outed by the new york times for allegedly purchasing fake followers - some of whom used information copied from real people - on various types of
social media in order to overstate her following.  personal life linton was married to los angeles defense attorney ronald richards from 2006 to 2009.  linton met mnuchin through mutual friends at a 2013 wedding reception in los angeles. the pair were engaged in 2015 after dating for two years. on 24 june 2017, linton married mnuchin. the civil ceremony, at which vice president mike pence officiated, took place at the andrew w. mellon auditorium in washington, d.c.  linton serves on the board of mattel children's hospital ucla and the old fettesian's us board of trustees for fettes college in edinburgh. she was an ambassador for erskine wounded warriors scotland from 2010 to 2012, and is an ambassador for the scottish butterfly trust for cystic fibrosis.  filmography  film  television  references  further reading  external links       1981 births 21st-century scottish actresses actresses from edinburgh british expatriates in zambia living people people educated at fettes college people educated at st george's school, edinburgh pepperdine university alumni scottish actresses
the following lists events that happened in 1935 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - hermann jonasson  events  births  26 january - friðrik olafsson, chess player, former president of fide 22 august - arni bergmann, writer 27 august - oli þorbjorn guðbjartsson, politician. 7 september - guðrun helgadottir, children's writer and politician. 24 september - bjorn helgason, footballer 31 october - hjorleifur guttormsson, politician.  full date missing eyvindur p. eiriksson, writer  deaths  20 march - jon þorlaksson, prime minister of iceland 1926-1927 (b. 1877). 31 july - tryggvi þorhallsson, politician (b. 1889).  references    1930s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
the national training school of cookery was a teaching organisation in london from 1873 to 1962. it changed its name to the national training school of cookery and other branches of domestic economy in 1902 and, in 1931 became the national training college of domestic science.  origins  following the success of the great exhibition of 1851 a series of small international exhibitions were held in south kensington, organised by the commissioners for that of 1851. the 1873 exhibition included cookery lectures and demonstrations in a specially equipped building- free to the public but charging for copies of the recipes demonstrated. the project was a big success and sale of recipes netted £1765. largely because of the enthusiasm of one of the commissioners, sir henry cole, the committee overseeing the lectures continued in being as the executive committee for the creation of a national cookery school. money was raised, the school was granted permission to occupy the corrugated iron building used for the 1893 lectures, and it was loaned all the equipment used by the demonstrators. from the start, the ′national′ as it was loosely known, was conceived as a national institution, not just a london organisation- the 1873 prospectus envisaged the school to ′be in alliance with the school boards and training schools throughout the country′. ′in the mornings........pupil teachers and others engaged in public education will be instructed at fees as moderate as possible.′ ′in the afternoons... a lecture and demonstration will be given, at which the public will be admitted upon payment...′  the first lady superintendent of the national was lady barker who lasted little more than a year. she was succeeded in 1875 by one of the early pupils of the school, miss edith nichols, soon to be married and henceforth known as mrs charles clarke. her term of office lasted 45 years and she was succeeded by her daughter. eventually the unsuitable corrugated iron buildings were abandoned and the school moved into purpose-built premises in buckingham palace road in 1889. the school was renamed 'the national training school of cookery and other branches of domestic economy' in 1902 to reflect an expanded curriculum which by then included many domestic skills although cookery remained at the heart of the curriculum.  19th century  objectives and operation the objectives as set out in 1873 reflected these arrangements. the school was to train teachers to teach cookery in ′training schools, school board schools, poor schools and similar institutions′ and to send out teachers, with equipment, to give lessons nationwide if suitable payments were made. the school also was to teach fee-paying ′persons desirous of acquiring
a knowledge of the principles of cookery′. the cookery taught at the school was, broadly, either plain cookery, intended to instruct pupil teachers who would disseminate these recipes to working-class women and more particularly, to the next generation of them in schools, or high class cookery, intended to instruct both those intending to work in the households of the middle and upper-classes and the women in these classes who would be their employers.  on occasion, celebrity chefs, such as herman senn, were invited to lecture. plain cookery classes assumed no knowledge of cookery and the recipe cards with such classes went through every step in minute detail. ingredients are set out at the start, costed to the nearest farthing. for instance, shepherd's pie was costed in 1875 at  old pence (4p). the objective of plain cookery teaching was, according to mrs clarke ′to insure for the working-man a wholesome meal nicely prepared, which will supply the nourishment he requires to enable him to do a hard day's work. the lassitude produced by bad food and hard work is a constant source of the craving for stimulants which drives the working-man to the public-house. this teaching will end to lessen this evil and improve the health of the people.′ one suspects that mrs clarke had little experience of the life led by ordinary londoners at this time!  mrs clarke's book of high class recipes was a more lavish production than the former book, with much gold-blocking on spine and cover.  the recipes are often complicated and the majority have french names. she explained that the recipes ′are intended for the use of both ladies and cook'.  the emergence of a national cookery and domestic science school at this time is explainable by the changes in society in the late nineteenth century. industrialisation had produced a large urban working-class, many of whom had not been taught cookery by their mothers and some of whom had only rudimentary cooking facilities in their homes. the spread of elementary schools gave an opportunity to educate working-class girls in basic cookery. at the other end of the social scale, more and more middle-class households were taking on live-in servants. these were the lower-middle classes, able often to afford just one servant, often a young girl, who had to do all the household tasks as well as cook. the servant was often a novice cook and her mistress was a novice servant-employer, so both could benefit from lessons at the school.
the range of the school's activities, and the different social classes catered for, is reflected in its revised list of fees of 1921. most expensive was the cordon bleu course at £60. other courses included: household management; housekeeping; ladies' short cookery course; plain cookery; superior household cookery; cook's certificates in plain and high class cookery; lessons in needlework, dressmaking, laundry, millinery, tailoring, and 'odd jobs demonstrations'.  throughout its existence this was essentially a women's college- women ran the institution day-to-day, led by a lady superintendent. they formed the teaching staff (all were women, in neat uniforms, in a group photograph of 1912). and almost all the students were women, either trainee teachers, school girls, domestic servants, or middle- and upper-class women. the many photographs included in dorothy stone's history of the school rarely include men. a group photograph of all staff and pupils in 1945 depicts a group of over 150 women and no men. in contrast, the executive committee, responsible for major decisions on the future of the institution and its financial health, was long dominated by men. the original committee formed in 1873 was chaired by the hon. f. leveson-gower, m.p. eight other members included a viscount and two military officers. not until 1905 was a woman appointed to the executive committee - she became 'chairman' in 1915. in 1930 there were five women members in a committee of 15.  some of the early staff members were authors of cookery books as well as teachers and administrators. the first lady superintendent, lady barker, wrote first lessons in the principles of cookery, (1874), and the long serving holder of that post, mrs charles clarke, wrote many books, including many of the various editions of the school handbook. the woman credited by charles dickens, jr. with devising the first curriculum of the school, miss mary hooper,  wrote at least 7 cookery books as well as a number of novels. to support the war effort, a book thrift for troubled times was ′compiled by the staff of the national school of cookery during the great war′. the ′national′ had recurring financial problems, no patron had endowed it with a secure financial 'cushion' and every few years the problem of money resurfaced until it was finally forced to close in 1962. a letter to the tablet in 1881 from the chairman of the executive committee sets out what the ′national′ had achieved in the first 10
years of operation but the real purpose of the letter is an appeal for money.  in 1879 dickens's dictionary of london gives the following description of this institution:  20th century  in 1931 the school became the national training college of domestic science.  inadequately funded, it closed in 1962. some of its assets were transferred to the department of nutrition at queen elizabeth college.  references   charles dickens (jr.), dickens's dictionary of london, 1879, cookery schools.  cooking schools in the united kingdom
the 1956-57 sk rapid wien season was the 59th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  european cup  mitropa cup  references  1956-57 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
thursday island customs house is a heritage-listed customs house at 2 victoria parade, thursday island, shire of torres, queensland, australia. it was designed by harold barker and built in 1938. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 7 february 2005.  history  this two stored masonry and stucco building was constructed on thursday island for the australian government's customs department in 1938. it was designed by the head architect of the commonwealth department of works, harold barker, and replaced an earlier customs house built in 1885.  thursday island can lay claim to unique long-term historical, cultural and strategic links with the nation's heritage. the island was first known as "waiben island" to the indigenous people of the region, who did not permanently inhabit the island to any great extent. europeans first visited the area in march 1606, in the dutch ship "duyfken". a spanish voyage visited soon after, followed by captain cook, bligh and flinders in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries.  the islands in the torres strait were annexed by the colonial government of queensland in 1872. the northernmost town on the mainland at the time was somerset, established in 1861. this settlement was abandoned in 1877 in favour of a settlement on thursday island. there was great hope for growth of this settlement as it was a vital link in the shipping routes between australia and asia and england, and served the pearl-luggers and the beche-de-mere harvesters which thrived in the area. there is also evidence that the settlement was established to provide a government presence in the region to stall imperialist tendencies of the germans and the french in the late nineteenth century.  it was of strategic importance at this time, for the colonial government (and later the federated colonies) to establish a chain of customs control points at all the main harbours along the coastline. the customs service was responsible for the collection of duties in australia, which provided funds for the necessary infrastructure in the early settlements. each of the colonies were furnished with a customs service upon responsible government from the 1850s and onwards, which provided an important source of revenue, including the imposition of duties on goods traded between colonies. the collection of customs was consequently central to the development of the colonial governments, and was an important mechanism by which the colonies conducted their affairs. upon federation the collection of customs became a commonwealth responsibility.  customs service records indicate that in 1877 a "port of entry and clearance" was gazetted at thursday island on 24 november. mr h.m. chester was appointed
customs sub-collector and harbour master in 1877 and by 1884 the port was gazetted as a warehouse facility. "the port flourished in its early years and a staff of up to six officers was necessary. in 1885 the first customs house was erected at a cost of £797. in 1890 the sub-collectors residence was built at a cost of £1,076." the building was constructed of timber on a platform on short stumps. it was single storeyed, with a verandah on all sides and contained a public counter and "long room" office, a private sub-collectors office and a public office with cashiers window. this customs house was located on the corner of douglas and hastings streets. accommodation for a growing staff was provided by removing four cottages from sea hill near rockhampton to thursday island in 1895. a tidewaiters cottage was built in 1897.  the main activity in the port was pearl handling. there were numerous asian and japanese pearl luggers active in the waters of torres strait and it was the customs officers' duty to track and control these and the many trading vessels which stopped at port kennedy to refuel with coal, trade and bring immigrants. the ports activities can be gauged from the fact that revenue for the financial year 1879/80 was £2,493 while twenty years later in 1899/1900 it had grown to £19,411. after world war i, the pearling industry quickly returned to its former activity level with sixty luggers active in the strait. customs records show reference to "... the important port of thursday island, with its timber customs house, provided a major gateway to australia, often being the first port of call for ships from asia."  in 1938 the importance of the port was confirmed once again when a new two storey customs house was erected. built of brick and concrete, its ground floor served as the customs office while the second storey served as the sub-collectors residence. the building cost £9,860 and was one of the most prominent landmarks on the island. it was located on the land directly beside the original timber customs house which was then removed.  shortly after construction of the new customs house in 1939, war was declared. at the end of january 1942, thursday island was evacuated of its non-essential inhabitants. stores were closing and the customs officers now had to "do our own cooking, housework, washing, messages if we require anything, nothing is delivered." gauld reported that "the office work has fallen to practically nil and will probably remain at that
from now on." late in 1942 the military, now in command of the torres strait, took control of the customs house and used it as the residence for the commander of the torres force for the remainder of world war ii.  the customs house returned to the customs service in 1946 when military control of thursday island was relinquished. the building had stood empty for some months since the torres force commander left it in 1945. early in 1946, the sub-collector for cairns, m.j. ryan, visited thursday island to inspect the buildings and general situation. he noted, "[a] number of indentured malay people continue to live in thursday island and the place is often an open door to the east." he was also of the opinion that an officer should be detailed for duty at thursday island to look after the customs interests, perform immigration duties and provide facilities under the navigation act and merchant shipping act.  over the years the customs service on thursday island has been involved in the various customs duties as determined by the governments of the day. during the years since the military's occupation of the building in world war ii, the customs house was used continuously by the australian customs service until it passed out of commonwealth ownership. the building remains a landmark on the island, being one of the few non-timber buildings constructed there.  description   thursday island is one of the many tropical islands in the region known as torres strait, lying between the northern tip of cape york and the new guinea coast. the thursday island customs house occupies a prominent site in the township of thursday island, located on the southern coastline of the island. the customs house is a two stored masonry building, located fronting victoria parade, and bordered by hastings and jetty streets. the government jetty and engineers jetty lie nearby. the building remains a landmark on the island, being one of the few non timber buildings constructed there.  the former thursday island customs house follows the neo-georgian style of the 1930s. the double-storey rendered masonry building has projecting balconies at the front and back and a hipped terracotta tile roof, executed on a domestic scale. the windows have timber shutters, a common tropical motif.  the plan form of this building is typical of the customs houses of the late nineteenth and early twentieth century period in queensland. the focus of the building was the long room where business was transacted. this is located in the centre of the ground floor which is entered through the front of the building. smaller offices are located around this room, including an office for the sub-
collector, the person in charge of the operations at the port. on the first floor was the sub-collector's residence, with bedrooms, living areas, and other rooms.  the arcades and balconies fulfilled further purposes apart from satisfying the symmetry and formality desired. upstairs, the balcony provided a protected yet airy living space, necessary in the tropical climate. double doorways from the internal rooms often opened onto the balcony, admitting cool breezes. timber shutters to the openings of the balcony have been installed in the thursday island customs house.  stripped classical was a style that retained the important classical elements such as symmetry of massing and elevations, while acknowledging the effect of modernism in design. the buildings of this style were recognisably classical buildings which were however stripped of much of the ornament usually associated with this type of building. where ornament was applied it was often in the form of art deco.  the extent of grounds around the three street frontages of the customs house allows uninterrupted views of the substantial building, enhancing the status and presentation of the building in the streetscape. the grounds are predominantly flat, comprising open lawns with a few mature trees and a line of tall palms giving added distinction to the substantial building. a concrete path extends from the front entry porch steps straight to a gate in the boundary fence. there is a path along the front of the building. garden beds fill the space from the base of the walls to this path. the path extends to a small square of concrete paving in the eastern lawn in which a flag pole and small cannon have been placed. paths extend from the two side entrances to gates at the boundaries.  in massing and proportion, the thursday island customs house is similar to the cairns customs house.  heritage listing  thursday island customs house was listed on the queensland heritage register on 7 february 2005 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  the former thursday island customs house is important in illustrating the evolution of queensland's history as it is evidence of an official government activity in a remote location such as thursday island. it has further significance as a site of strategic importance to colonial and national governments. the customs house is also a reflection of the importance of the island as a "gateway" to the colony of queensland, and later the commonwealth of australia.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  the place is a good example of the stripped classical style of institutional architecture pursued by
the commonwealth department of works in the interwar period.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the thursday island customs house has aesthetic significance for the quality of its design, in particular the way it accommodates the climate of north queensland; and for its contribution to the thursday island environment as one of the largest buildings, and as one of the few non-timber buildings on the island. the aesthetics of the thursday island customs house is strengthened by its settings, including tropical plantings.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register thursday island government buildings in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
libraries.io is an open source web service that lists software development project dependencies and alerts developers to new versions of the software libraries they are using.  libraries.io is written by andrew nesbitt, who has also used the code as the basis for dependencyci, a service that tests project dependencies. a key feature is that the service checks for software license compliance.  as of 30 november 2016, the web service monitors 1,930,496 open source libraries and supports 33 different package managers. to gather the information on libraries, it uses the dominant package manager for each programming language that is supported. the website organizes them by programming language, package manager, license (such as gpl or mit), and by keyword.  on november 14, 2017, libraries.io announced its acquisition by tidelift, an open-source software support company, with an intention to continue to develop and operate the service.  the code that runs the web service is available on github and under the gnu affero general public license.  external links  libraries.io source code  references  free software websites software metrics code search engines internet properties established in 2015
olympiacos f.c. youth academy is the football academy system of greek professional football club olympiacos consisting of six official youth teams (under-10, under-13, under-14, under-15, under-17 and under-19), based on the young athletes' age.  other age-based youth teams (e.g. under-8) are also part of the academy, however they do not appear as official youth teams.  olympiacos' u-15, u-17 and u-20 teams all play in greek superleague's youth competitions (super league u-15, u-17 and u-19 respectively), while the u19 team is a regular participant in the uefa youth league.  the latter also featured in the 2012-13 next gen series, reaching the quarter-finals of the competition.  academy personnel   as of 27 september 2021  olympiacos u-19 squad   as of 17 september 2021  olympiacos u-17 squad   as of 17 september 2021  olympiacos u-15 squad   as of 17 september 2021  honours   titles won by the olympiacos academy's teams.  olympiacos u-20   greek superleague u-20:  2009-10, 2012-13, 2014-15, 2015-16, 2016-17  u-20 torino tournament:  2009  dubai emirates cup:  2010  memoria xxviii torneo juvenil:  2012  olympiacos u-17   greek superleague u-17:  2009-10, 2010-11, 2014-15, 2016-17, 2017-18, 2018-19  u-17 shakhtar donetsk tournament:  2008  u-17 anorthosi cyprus tournament:  2010  u-17 tannenhof cup:  2013  u-17 chicago indoor soccer league champions:  2016  olympiacos u-15   greek superleague u-15:  2013-14, 2015-16, 2019-20  u-15 annual swallows cup:  2015  u-15 chicago holiday cup tournament:  2015  references  olympiacos f.c. uefa youth league teams football academies in greece nextgen series
hockeynight is a danish ice hockey program, that presents games from the danish ice hockey league, metal ligaen. the program is broadcast on tv2 sport. ice hockey expert jimmy bøjgaard and former ice hockey player, lasse degn are commentators.  ice hockey in denmark sports television in denmark
gaston revol (born november 26, 1986) is an argentine rugby union player. he plays rugby sevens for . he debuted at the 2009 london sevens. revol  captained  at the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links       1986 births living people argentine rugby union players argentine people of french descent argentina international rugby sevens players male rugby sevens players olympic rugby sevens players of argentina rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics pan american games medalists in rugby sevens pan american games silver medalists for argentina world games silver medalists competitors at the 2013 world games rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics olympic medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic bronze medalists for argentina
justin john yerbury  (born 1974) is an australian molecular biologist who was spurred to follow a career in biological research when he discovered his family has the genetic form of motor neuron disease (mnd). he holds the position of professor in neurodegenerative disease at the university of wollongong. he was diagnosed with mnd himself  in 2016 but continues to research.  education and career  by his own admission, yerbury "was not much of a scientist at school." he studied for a bachelor of commerce before playing professional basketball in the national basketball league (nbl) for the illawarra hawks in 1995 and 1996 while helping to run the family business.  in the late 1990s members of yerbury's extended family were diagnosed and died from motor neurone disease, also known as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als) or lou gehrig's disease. ninety to ninety-five per cent of cases are considered sporadic, occurring randomly in the population. the remaining 5-10% of cases are familial (genetic) with one parent carrying the gene. mutations of more than twelve genes have been found to cause the disease. using genealogical information, yerbury traced suspected cases of motor neuron disease in his family to at least 1920 and possibly further back. he was prompted to return to university studies to further understand the disease.  in 2004 yerbury obtained a bsc with 1st class honours from the university of wollongong. he received his phd from the same university in 2008 for a thesis titled: characterisation of novel extracellular molecular chaperones and their effects on amyloid formation. he worked as a research assistant, lecturer and research fellow during his studies. during 2008 and 2009 he was an australian research council (arc) international linkage fellow at the university of cambridge, uk. yerbury has been a discovery early career researcher award (decra) postdoctoral fellow at the university of wollongong since 2012. he has spent the last decade studying the disease which affects around 2000 australians, alongside his team at the illawarra health and medical research institute (ihmri), based at the university of wollongong. his team of young researchers will carry on his work.  personal life  yerbury first knew of mnd when his uncle was diagnosed in 1994. a cousin was diagnosed and died in 1997; he was 21 years old. during six-week period in 2002 his mother, grandmother and aunt died. fifty per cent of yerbury's family carry a faulty sod-1 gene. his youngest sister died from mnd at 26 years old. yerbury and his
sister, naomi, were tested for the gene; naomi was clear but yerbury's test was positive.  yerbury was diagnosed with mnd in 2016. his condition stabilised at first but he now requires around-the-clock care and has a ventilator to allow him to breathe. he was initially denied a suitable wheelchair and house modifications under the national disability insurance scheme (ndis), sparking an online crowdfunding campaign. after coming to the attention of federal labor mp sharon bird, he was provided with an appropriate wheelchair and some home modifications under the scheme. yerbury's public profile has also highlighted others who encountered difficulties with the ndis. yebury highlighted the difficulties mnd patients encounter with the ndis in an article in the conversation in november 2018.  in january 2018 yerbury's condition deteriorated significantly and he underwent a tracheostomy necessitating mandatory ventilation. to further facilitate his life support he also had a laryngectomy which means he is unable to speak. he now communicates by lip reading and using voice software coordinated by eye-gaze on his laptop computer. after this surgery yerbury spent six months in hospital recovering with complications. in november 2018 he had returned home and began attending his office two days a week to continue his research.  in april 2017 yerbury met stephen hawking, a world-famous physicist and cosmologist who had mnd for over fifty years until his death in 2018. they discussed living with the disease and yerbury's research.  yerbury is married to rachel yerbury. they have two daughters born 1996, and 1998.  in march 2019 yerbury, his family and carers were turned away from a planned cruise to new caledonia because of a perceived "disability risk". after media attention the cruise company apologised to the family and refunded fees and costs.  in december 2019 qantas airlines co-operated with the yerbury family to provide an appropriate hoist to enable him to travel by plane to perth, wa for a family holiday and to enable yerbury to present his current research at the 30th international symposium on als/mnd.  research  yerbury is researching potential effective treatments for mnd. his research interests include: protein misfolding, aggregation and neurodegenerative disease, protein aggregation and neuro-inflammation and the propagation of protein misfolding, and protein homeostasis and motor neurone disease. this video shows yerbury demonstrating the role of protein folding in the progress of mnd. his team studies single molecules of protein,
grow cells and are carrying out some drug trials. he has been active in sharing his research not only with the academic community but also with those with mnd and their families.  yerbury has 55 research articles listed in pubmed and over 100 in google scholar in addition to many conference and other presentations.  awards   the australian society for medical research young investigator award, 2004  bill gole postdoctoral mnd research fellowship, 2009  vice chancellor's emerging researcher of the year award, 2011  lorne conference on protein structure and function young investigator prize, 2012  mnd australia betty laidlaw mnd research prize for 2017 wollongong's citizen of the year, australia day awards 2019  yerbury was made a member of the order of australia in the 2020 australia day honours for "significant service to education and research in the field of biological sciences."  references  australian men's basketball players australian biologists 1974 births living people university of wollongong faculty illawarra hawks players members of the order of australia people with motor neuron disease
the 2020 european aquatics championships (also known as the 2021 european aquatics championships; 35th) were scheduled to take place in budapest, hungary, from 11 to 24 may 2020. however, on 5 may it was announced that the event had been postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic, with 10 to 23 may 2021 set as replacement dates.  schedule  a total of 73 medal events were held across 4 disciplines. competition dates by discipline are:   swimming: 17-23 may  open water swimming: 12-16 may  artistic swimming: 10-15 may  diving: 10-16 may  venues the venues of the competition will be the danube arena, in central budapest, for swimming, diving and artistic swimming events and the lupa lake, located in the town of budakalasz (part of the budapest metropolitan area) for open water swimming events. three other venues will be used for practice and training: the komjadi pool, the bvsc pool and the szechy tamas pool.  overall medal table  team trophy results:  swimming (50 m)  open water swimming  artistic swimming  diving  swimming (50 m)  medal table  men   swimmers who participated in the heats only and received medals.  women   swimmers who participated in the heats only and received medals.  mixed events   swimmers who participated in the heats only and received medals.  diving  medal table  men  women  mixed events  open water swimming  medal table  men  women  mixed events  artistic swimming  medal table  results  references  external links  official website  official len website  results book − artistic swimming  results book − diving  results book − open water swimming  results book − swimming  2020   european championships 2021 in hungarian sport swimming competitions in hungary international sports competitions in budapest international aquatics competitions hosted by hungary 2020s in budapest european aquatics championships european aquatics championships
echo lake is a small lake in the flathead valley in the u.s. state of montana. it is located five miles from bigfork and 25 miles from kalispell. the lake is filled with groundwater and a small amount of mountain runoff from echo creek, making it one of the warmest lakes in the flathead valley. the lake is next to the swan range and the jewel basin hiking area. echo lake also is connected to two smaller lakes, abbot lake and peterson lake, by a canal.   echo lake is popular among motorboaters because of its warm water. it is very common to see boats and personal watercraft in the summer. the lake is also popular among anglers due to its many coves and large numbers of fish, such as perch, pumpkinseed, largemouth bass, and northern pike.  much of the lake is surrounded by private lakefront property, including residences.  sediments echo lake is fed primarily by groundwater flow from glacial outwash gravel. this outwash comes from the swan valley sub-lobe of the flathead glacial lobe of the cordilleran ice sheet. the gravel allows for easy flow from the upper portions of the swan valley. this gravel comes to contact with the surface around the area of echo and mud lake, and ends north of lake blaine. this outwash creates a series of "pothole lakes", spill lake, lake of the woods, mcgilvary lake, double lake, and many more. while groundwater is the main source of water for echo lake, a small echo creek also fills into the lake, which is sourced by mountain runoff. despite this creek being a small part of the overall water source for echo lake, it can cause large increases or decreases in water level when the stream flows high or low respectfully. there are rumors around the lake that the creek is manipulated by upstream landowners causing floods or droughts in the lake, but these claims are unproven.  see also list of lakes in flathead county, montana (a-l)  references  lakes of flathead county, montana
the carlisle indian school digital resource center is a publicly accessible digital archive of material originating from or pertaining to the carlisle indian industrial school that operated in carlisle, pennsylvania from 1879 to 1918. the archival project has been undertaken by the archives & special collections department of the waidner-spahr library at dickinson college in carlisle, and by the community studies center at dickinson college, with the help of numerous project partners including subject-area experts and cultural advisers. the project seeks to aggregate the disparate information from various sources locally and nationally into a single digital collection representing the complicated political and ethical issues surrounding the school as well as the lives of those native americans who studied there during its existence.  mission the project is intended to be a comprehensive and searchable public archive of all available data regarding the school. though official administrative documents are included in the collection, the curators have also sought out media owned by private organizations and individuals both locally and nationally, with a stated future goal of facilitating public submission of material to the archive for review and possible curation. the specific goals of the project have been defined as follows:   digitize research material from the national archives and records administration and other repositories, including dickinson college, the cumberland county historical society, and any others who wish to collaborate.  make the digitized materials accessible via a dedicated website utilizing appropriate content management tools.  design courses that actively engage students in the digitization and research processes.  develop a comprehensive searchable database using the information contained in the digitized materials (e.g. names, dates, tribal affiliations, enrollments, outings, etc.).  create search and display functions for the database so that users can query the data and generate unique analyses. also permit sharing of the complete database to allow more thorough and detailed analyses by interested individuals.  develop the capability for user interactivity, so that individuals may contribute photos, documents, oral histories, etc.  develop teaching and learning materials utilizing the digitized content and database (e.g. data visualizations, gis, etc.).  support the creation of original scholarly and popular works based on content maintained within the resource center.  scope of the digital resource currently the digital resource center contains administrative documents associated with the students and instructors, images from the national archives as well as private institutional archives and individuals, articles from and complete editions of campus publications, lists and rosters of students and rolls for various events and campus happenings, and administrative documents pertaining to the operation of the school. as of april 2017, the archive contains:   8,297
student files and information cards digitized from the national archives and records administration. digitization of these files is complete, but posting to the site is ongoing.  933 images from student files, school publications, the dickinson college archives and special collections, the cumberland county historical society, private collections, and user contributions.  214 publications originating from the school itself, including the campus publications the red man and the indian helper. digitization of these assets is ongoing.   74 lists and rosters documenting outing records, arrivals, departures, deaths, and basic student information. digitization of these assets is ongoing.  152 documents related to the administrative and operational activities of the school, including student arrivals and departures, supplies requisitions, fundraising, and athletics. digitization of these assets is ongoing. in addition to archival material, the project includes 9 premade lesson plans about the carlisle indian school, designed for both secondary and post-secondary classrooms. the project also links out to numerous additional resources, including both primary and secondary materials of a scholarly nature.  copyright status of curated media media in the carlisle indian school digital resource center is protected under the creative commons attribution-noncommercial-sharealike 4.0 international license.  references  external links  carlisle indian school digital resource center  digital preservation native american history of pennsylvania carlisle indian industrial school
a jail tree is any tree used to incarcerate a person, usually by chaining the prisoner up to the tree. jail trees were used on the american frontier, in the territory of arizona, in the late 19th and early 20th centuries. a few of which survive to this day. jail trees were also used in australia, for example boab prison tree, derby and boab prison tree, wyndham.  examples  gleeson jail tree: a large oak tree in the ghost town of gleeson, near tombstone, arizona. a thick metal cable and chain wrapped around the trunk of the tree was used with handcuffs to chain up prisoners. in use before the construction of the original wooden-frame jail building in 1909.  paradise jail tree: pair of oak trees with a log chain stretched between them. prisoners were shackled to the chain. located in the ghost town of paradise, arizona.  ruby jail tree: mesquite trees in the ghost town of ruby, arizona, used for chaining up prisoners sometime before the construction of the current concrete jail building in 1936.  wickenburg jail tree: 200-year-old mesquite tree with a chain and handcuffs for prisoners. located in wickenburg, arizona, and in use between 1863 and 1890. preserved for its historical association with the early-day wickenburg mining camp.  similar jails   arivaca jail: a slab of concrete in the ground with two metal bars embedded in the center, where heavy log chains for the prisoners were attached. located in the historic town of arivaca, arizona.  greaterville jail: a large hole in the ground. a rope was used for letting prisoners up or down. located in the ghost town of greaterville, arizona.  tubac jail: wooden post in the ground with an attached pair of leg irons to hold the prisoner. the leg irons were originally used on board a spanish ship to chain prisoners to the mast before being used as the town jail in tubac, arizona. they are now on display in the museum of the tubac presidio state historic park.  see also  hanging tree (united states)  dule tree  one-room jail  references  history of arizona arizona territory american frontier jails in arizona trees
gombe general hospital, also gombe district hospital or gombe hospital, is a hospital in the central region of uganda.  location the hospital is located off of the mpigi-kabulasoke-maddu-sembabule road, in the central business district of the town of gombe, approximately  southwest of mulago national referral hospital. this is about  northeast of masaka regional referral hospital.  overview gombe hospital was established in 1969 by the first government of prime minister milton obote. it is a general hospital that serves the population of butambala district and that of gomba district and parts of the districts of mpigi and mityana, a population of about 250,000 human beings.  renovations in 2015, the government of uganda, with loans from international development partners, began the renovation of 25 public general hospitals, including gombe general hospital. in 2013, the hospital's laboratory, underwent renovations under a joint program by pepfar and usaid, known as sustain. in 2014, the hospital beds were refurbished and bedding supplied by the canadian ngo called canassist african relief trust, at a cost of approximately $5,000.  recent developments in 2015, the hospital adopted palliative care, as part of its vision and mission.  see also list of hospitals in uganda  references  external links   website of uganda ministry of health  website of butambala district local government  130 get free hernia surgery in butambala  gombe butambala district 1969 establishments in uganda hospital buildings completed in 1969 central region, uganda
jesse joyce (born 17 august 1997) is an australian rules footballer playing for the gold coast football club in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the gold coast football club with their sixth selection and sixty-seventh overall in the 2016 rookie draft. he made his debut in the thirty-eight point loss against  in round 11, 2016 at metricon stadium.  early life and junior football joyce was born in melbourne but moved to tweed heads on the queensland-new south wales border at the age of 2. he first played junior football on the gold coast for the coolangatta tweed heads australian football club  before switching to the palm beach currumbin australian football club and making his senior debut at the age of 16. he also attended palm beach currumbin high school in his teenage years and graduated with future suns teammate max spencer.  he joined the gold coast suns' academy at the age of 14 and was drafted to his hometown team with the 67th pick in the 2016 afl rookie draft.  afl career joyce made his afl debut for the gold coast suns against the sydney swans in round 11 of the 2016 afl season.  references  external links     1997 births living people gold coast football club players australian rules footballers from queensland sportspeople from the gold coast, queensland
carlota lucumi, also known as la negra carlota (died november 1844) was an african-born enslaved cuban woman of yoruba origin.  carlota, alongside fellow enslaved lucumi ferminia,  was  known as one of the leaders of the slave rebellion at the triunvirato plantation in matanzas, cuba during the year of the lash in 1843-1844. together with ferminia lucumi, carlota led the slave uprising of the sugar mill "triunvirato" in the province of matanzas, cuba on november 5, 1843.  her memory has also been utilized throughout history by the cuban government in connection to 20th century political goals, most notably operation carlota, or cuba's intervention in angola in 1975. little is actually known about the life of carlota due to the difficulty and availability of sources in archives (finch 88). scholars of afro-cuban history have grappled with the dearth of reliable sources that document slaves' lives, and the ability of written documents to accurately encompass the reality of slave life.  slave testimonies obtained under investigations after rebellions provide most of the information surrounding carlota and her contemporaries, making it difficult to construct a complete understanding of her involvement in the 1843 slave rebellion, much less a detailed biography.  she is considered significant by scholars due to her role as a woman in an otherwise male-dominated sphere of slave revolt, as well as the way her memory has been employed in the public sphere in cuba.  carlota and the uprising at triunvirato plantation are honored as part of the unesco slave route project through a sculpture at the triunvirato plantation, which has since been turned into a memorial and museum.  biography and importance  carlota is perhaps the most famous historical actor in the triunvirato rebellion.  she is known for her leadership in the triunvirato slave rebellion alongside eduardo, narciso, and felipe lucumi, and manuel ganga.  however, little is known about her life outside of her involvement in the rebellion.  she was an african-born lucumi woman, but the date of her birth is unclear.  she died in battle at the end of the brief revolt after it had spread to the san rafael plantation.  the triunvirato rebellion was the last in a series of slave uprisings known as la escalera in cuba in 1843 and 1844, which resulted in a violent wave of repression against enslaved people and free people of color by the spanish colonial government and other whites.  according to scholarship on the topic, carlota played a
role in the triunvirato rebellion by spreading it from the triunvirato plantation to the neighboring acana plantation by garnering the support of masses of slaves, reaching a total of five plantations by the end of the revolt.  other slaves knew her at the time for her violent attack on the overseer's daughter, which was brought up throughout many of the slave testimonies collected after the rebellion.  several cuban scholars have categorized her as a martyr who died in the fight for freedom, and whose memory has been mobilized to show slave revolts as a natural precursor to the cuban socialist revolution of 1959.  gender  carlota and another slave, firmina, were two women among a number of men who organized and executed the slave revolt at the triunvirato plantation.  scholars have generally characterized slave insurrection as a heavily masculine and violent affair.  enslaved women such as carlota and firmina disrupt the idea of slave rebellion as being only organized and carried out by men.  at the time, most other representations of slave women were usually traitorous or sexualized.  by serving as a leader, and eventually being conceptualized in the 20th century as a martyr of the triunvirato rebellion, carlota became symbolized in cuban memory as a strong woman who would eventually come to represent ideas of cubanness and revolution.  triunvirato rebellion  the triunvirato rebellion was one in a series of slave uprisings throughout cuba in 1843.  it was characterized by massive violence against white overseers and plantation owners, as well as immense property damage.  the series of uprisings of which triunvirato was a part is known as la escalera, meaning ladder in spanish.  its name derives from the most notable form of torture inflicted on slaves and free people of color during the wave of repression that followed the violent end of the rebellion.  the triunvirato rebellion, as well as la escalera more broadly, are important to cuban history in that they marked the peak of white fear of slave uprising and the end of a streak of slave revolts throughout the first half of the 19th century that wouldn't pick up again until the start of cuba's independence movement against spain in 1868.  shifting imperial and economic conditions in cuba in the first half of the nineteenth century fomented a wave of slave rebellions in the 1830s and 40s.  historians differ on where they locate the cause of the slave uprisings of the first half of the 19th century.  some cite the intensification of plantation style farming, increasing numbers of
enslaved people trafficked to cuba during the era, and the spread of rebellious news and ideology among people of color on the island as the main drivers behind the organization and execution of la escalera.  other historians have emphasized the impact of the neighboring caribbean island of haiti's independence movement and abolition of slavery, which served to intensify plantation-style sugar production in cuba as well as spread revolutionary ideas to people on the island.  still others draw a direct line between earlier cuban slave revolts of the century, like the 1812 aponte rebellion led by jose antonio aponte.  it is impossible to know exactly what conditions led to the slave revolts that constituted la escalera, but the wave of violence and repression that followed was indisputable.  the way in which la escalera has been written about since its occurrence is wrought with controversy.  many understood it as a massive conspiracy by the cuban government to justify the repression inflicted upon people of color at the time, with no actual slave resistance efforts taking place.  this served to erase any knowledge of slave movement for freedom.  however, part of la escalera and the ensuing repression's significance came from their inspiring new rebellious groups to form throughout the century in cuba.  methodological difficulties  a majority of the information gleaned about la escalera and carlota's role in inciting slave rebellion come from slave testimonies and other archival records.  historians have pointed out the issue in utilizing certain information found in the archive, particularly slave testimonies, as fact.  historian aisha finch points out the irony in trying to understand the experiences of enslaved people who suffered immense oppression and violence through the writings and records of those people who inflicted said violence.  usually, slave testimonies were taken during times of intense repression, under hierarchical (if not violent) power relations between colonial officials and slaves.  slaves frequently deployed strategic answers for survival, which then had to be taken down by a mediator with undoubtedly different goals and biases than the person whose testimony was being written.  finch refers to documents created by white officials at the time as "fictitious" due to their deeply biased and violent nature.  however, authors and historians have worked to read archival documents critically to understand a more nuanced perspective of biased material to complete a narrative of slave agency and insurrection.  in many scholarly analyses of la escalera, carlota, as well as ferminia, is only mentioned briefly or left out entirely.  for example, in cuban historian jose luciano franco's analysis of the triunvirato rebellion, carlota
takes a backseat to the male leaders of the revolt.  similarly, in other texts on the rebellion like ricardo vazquez's triunvirato - historia de un rincon azucarero de cuba and manuel barcia's seeds of insurrection, carlota is barely mentioned, although barcia has since discussed her role and that of her co-leader ferminia lucumi in west african warfare in bahia and cuba: soldier slaves in the atlantic world, from 2014.  while it is impossible to know exactly why carlota's impact has only been taken up by a relatively small number of scholars, her absence can serve to reify the traditional view of slave rebellion as a particularly masculine affair.  the most common reference to carlota throughout the literature is cuba's intervention in angola, named after her as operacion carlota. additionally, testimonies of women and about women are scant in the archive.  due to carlota's sparse mentions and perhaps misrepresentation in the archive, as well as her absence from secondary sources, it is difficult to understand a holistic picture of her life and specific role in la escalera.  the memory of carlota  long after carlota's death in the aftermath of the triunvirato rebellion, her memory was mobilized by the post-revolutionary cuban state.  cuba's intervention in angola in 1974 to aid in its independence struggle was named after the rebel slave woman, in an event known as operacion carlota.  historian myra ann houser and others have illuminated how fidel castro and his revolutionary government capitalized on cuba's enslaved and rebellious past to further their political aims.  a key tenet of this line of thinking was castro's ideology of the oppressed rising up to defeat the oppressor, as enslaved people had done in cuba throughout the 19th century. this attitude is exemplified in cuban historian jose luciano franco's analysis of the triunvirato rebellion, where he explicitly calls the slaves that incited rebellion in the 19th century "precursors" to the 1959 revolution.  franco cites fidel castro's own speeches linking cuba's slave past to his revolutionary aims.  this conceptualization of history as dialectical materialism characterized castro's vision for cuba and the thinking behind his revolutionary ideology, painting the united states as the ultimate imperial power and oppressor, and nations like cuba and angola as the oppressed rising up against it.  using the name of an african-born cuban slave woman in an intervention in africa was no coincidence, either.  castro built upon this connection to show cuba's intervention in angola as a sort of homecoming
, or vengeance, of the afro-descendant population in cuba.  the revolutionary government mobilized this "claim to roots" in justifying its intervention in the african nation.  the government tapped into its enslaved and rebellious past to highlight it as a natural precursor to the 1959 socialist revolution, and the continuous revolutionary spirit of 20th century cuba.  castro's ability to do this rested on the particular conceptualization of race relations in cuba at the time, which emphasized cubanidad, or cubanness, over racial identity. ideas of nation-building took precedence over racial divisions, allowing castro to conceptualize cuba's african past as affecting all of its citizens equally in the 20th century, and thus justifying a "return" to angola in the 1970s.  by connecting the 19th century slave struggle for freedom, cuba's 20th century fight against western neocolonialism, and africa's 20th century fight for independence, carlota's memory proved a useful tool to advance cuban revolutionary ideals.  aside from operacion carlota in angola, carlota came back onto the scene of public memory through unesco's slave route project.  a memorial was erected in 1991 at the triunvirato plantation where the rebellion took place, commemorating rebel slave leadership.  the memory site at triunvirato, according to the cuban newspaper granma, was erected to honor carlota and the legacy cuban slaves have had on cuban society and culture today.  the slave route project is intended "to break the silence surrounding the slave trade and slavery that have concerned all continents and caused the great upheavals that have shaped our modern societies".  the project's goals are to better illuminate the history of slavery, understand what global transformations came from its legacies, and contribute to an international culture of peace.  in 2015, the triunvirato memory site was used as the location to celebrate the 40th anniversary of operacion carlota.  this illuminates how carlota's image in cuban memory is intimately linked to the nation's intervention in africa.  in another granma article, the aforementioned mobilization of carlota's memory in the cuban public sphere is reified - carlota is exalted, and again referred to as a "precursor" to the socialist revolution of 1959.  carlota remains solidified in cuban public memory as an embodiment of cuban revolutionary ideals.  see also list of women who led a revolt or rebellion list of slaves  bibliography   barcia, manuel. seeds of insurrection: domination and resistance on western cuban plantations, 1808-1848
(baton rouge: louisiana university press, 2008)  barcia, manuel. west african warfare in bahia and cuba: soldier slaves in the atlantic world (oxford and new york: oxford university press, 2014).  curry-machado, jonathan. "how cuba burned with the ghosts of british slavery: race, abolition and the escalera." slavery & abolition, vol. 25, no. 1, 2004, pp. 71-93.  de jesus, ventura. "el legado de triunvirato." granma, 4 nov. 2015.  ferrer, ada, et al. the world of the haitian revolution. indiana university press, 2009.  finch, aisha k. rethinking slave rebellion in cuba: la escalera and the insurgencies of 1841-1844. university of north carolina press, 2015.  franco, jose luciano. la gesta heroica del triunvirato. editorial de ciencias sociales, 1978.  garcia rodriguez, gloria. conspiraciones y revueltas: la actividad politica de los negros en cuba (1790-1845). ed. oriente, 2003.  george, edward. the cuban intervention in angola: 1965-1991: from che guevara to cuito cuanavale. frank cass, 2005.  hartman, s. "venus in two acts." small axe: a caribbean journal of criticism, vol. 12, no. 2, jan. 2008, pp. 1-14.  houser, myra ann. "avenging carlota in africa: angola and the memory of cuban slavery."atlantic studies, vol. 12, no. 1, feb. 2015, pp. 50-66.  paquette, robert l. sugar is made with blood: the conspiracy of la escalera and the conflict between empires over slavery in cuba. wesleyan university press, 1988. barcia, manuel. seeds of insurrection: domination and slave resistance on western cuban plantations, 1808-1848. louisiana state university press, 2008.  peters, christabelle. "crossing the black atlantic to africa: research on race in 'race-less' cuba," new perspectives on the black atlantic. definitions, readings, practices, dialogues. eds. benedicte ledent and pilar cuder-dominguez. new york: peter lang, 2012. pp. 83-104  redaccion digital. "celebran acto central por el aniversario 40 de la operacion carlota (+fotos)." granma, 5
nov. 2015.  "the slave route." slave route | united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization, unesco, www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/slave-route/.  vazquez, ricardo. triunvirato: historia de un rincon azucarero de cuba. comision de orientacion revolucionaria del comite central del pcc, 1972.  references  1844 deaths 19th-century cuban people cuban slaves women in war in the caribbean rebel slaves year of birth unknown women in 19th-century warfare cuban people of yoruba descent yoruba slaves 19th-century slaves 19th-century rebels yoruba women female revolutionaries
herve dagorne (born 30 january 1967) is a french former cyclist, who currently works as a directeur sportif for uci continental team . he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links  1967 births living people french male cyclists olympic cyclists of france cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from l'hay-les-roses french track cyclists sportspeople from val-de-marne
josette altmann borbon (born february 17, 1958 san jose, costa rica) is a costa rican historian, public figure and politician. she previously served as the first lady of costa rica from 1994 to 1998 during the tenure of her ex-husband, former president jose maria figueres. in june 2016, altmann was elected secretary general of the latin american social sciences institute (flacso), an inter-governmental organization dedicated to researching and teaching of the social sciences in latin america and the caribbean. she is the first woman to become secretary general of flacso.  biography  altmann borbon holds a bachelor's degree in history and a master's degree in political science from the university of costa rica. she received her doctorate in humanities from leiden university in the netherlands.  she has served as a post-graduate professor at the university of costa rica's department of education and social sciences.  on june 3, 2016, altmann was elected secretary general of flacso. she will take office on july 31, 2016. altmann had previously worked as a regional coordinator of international cooperation for flacso's general secretariat from 2006 to 2012.  references  living people 1958 births first ladies and gentlemen of costa rica costa rican historians costa rican academics citizens' action party (costa rica) politicians national liberation party (costa rica) politicians university of costa rica faculty leiden university alumni university of costa rica alumni 20th-century costa rican writers 21st-century costa rican writers people from san jose, costa rica
anita mai tan is a canadian jewelry designer who is currently the owner and main designer of algems. she has designed  rings, necklaces, smartphone cases, wine decanters and luxury pens. anita has designed products for charitable causes, including a dragon and spider iphone case necklace that was valued at approximately $880,000 for a charity auction to help youth with low income to remain at school . her dragon decanter contains 2,000 grams of 18k gold and encrusted with diamonds and gemstones for a total of 72 carats. her work has been carried by one of the japan's international department store mitsukoshi ltd.  in 2010, she designed her first luxury pen cover in diamond and gold. the body of the pen is made of gold and adorned with 48 carats of diamonds (1,888 gems). the pen is priced at €688,000 (approximately $1.01 million). she also designed a pair of luxury iphone cases, the dragon and spider phone case. both cases are made in 18k gold. the dragon case consists of 2,200 colorless and colored diamonds (cognac, brown, champagne) with total weight of 32 carats while the spider case covered with an array of 2,800 colorless and black diamonds for a total weight of 38 carats.  in many of her works, anita uses animal figures (dragon, horse, spider) as well as floral patterns. the numbers of stones deliberately match certain numbers with auspicious connotations in chinese culture such the numbers nine (leadership, the ability to see clearly), 22 (easy), 28 (easy gaining wealth), 32 (born lucky) or 38 (worn wealth).  references  external links algem website  living people canadian jewellery designers gemologists year of birth missing (living people)
aura (in memoriam witold lutosławski) is a composition for orchestra by the finnish composer magnus lindberg.  the work was commissioned by suntory for the 1994 suntory international program for music composition.  its world premiere was given on june 11, 1994 in tokyo by the tokyo symphony orchestra under the direction of kazufumi yamashita.  the piece is dedicated in memoriam of the polish composer witold lutosławski, who died partway through its composition.  composition  background aura has a duration of roughly 40 minutes and is cast in four movements played without pause.  lindberg described the piece in the score program notes, writing, "aura is in many ways the synthesis of the different approaches i have had to the orchestra in my earlier works. evidently when working on a large scale work one is more concerned with formal problems. the architectonical large form and the balance between material and form become much more important to control."  lindberg credited much of the music's form to the polish composer witold lutosławski, writing, "one of the composers of our century who has renewed the relation between form and content is witold lutoslawski. his idea of a two part form with a presentation of a material and its qualities without any directional tendencies in the first movement, continued by a second movement where the material grows to an entity, is a genuine and clear approach to form today."  lutosławski died in february 1994 during the composition process, prompting lindberg to dedicate the piece in his memory.  he wrote, "i wanted to contribute somehow to his memory and felt that the least i could do was to dedicate aura to the memory of this great composer."  regarding the designation of the work, lindberg remarked, "i believe the overall form of aura would make it appropriate to call the piece a symphony. still it is not a symphony. the piece could more easily be called a concerto for an orchestra, yet it isn't that either. instruments and instrumental groups are often treated in a very virtuosic way, but this is more the result of a certain treatment of the material than an instrumental approach."  instrumentation the work is scored for a large orchestra consisting of two flutes, piccolo, two oboes, cor anglais, three clarinets (3rd doubling e-flat clarinet), bass clarinet, two bassoons, contrabassoon, four horns, three trumpets (3rd doubling bass trumpet), three trombones, tuba, timpani, three percussionists, harp, piano (doubling cel
esta), and strings.  reception aura has been heralded by music critics as one of lindberg's finest compositions.  john allison of the daily telegraph called it a "masterpiece."  reviewing a 2002 performance by the philharmonia orchestra, andrew clements of the guardian described it as "arguably lindberg's finest work" and wrote, "aura is an astounding enough experience on disc, but heard live in a performance as vivid as this one, the sheer detail and virtuosity of lindberg's invention and the unerring logic of his harmonic scheme are overwhelming.  it becomes one of the most exhilarating journeys that contemporary music has to offer."  calum macdonald bbc music magazine similarly observed, "lindberg's ability to impart purposeful harmonic direction to complex textural invention is one of his most impressive compositional strengths; nowhere is this quality more magisterially displayed than in aura, with its strong and surprising cadential gestures emerging from roiling clouds of constellated heterophony."  gramophone wrote:  references  compositions by magnus lindberg 1994 compositions compositions for symphony orchestra commissioned music funerary and memorial compositions
leavitt falls is a , multi-tiered waterfall in the sierra nevada of mono county, california. the falls are located on leavitt creek, a tributary of the west walker river, and are formed where the creek drops off the edge of a hanging valley into leavitt meadow.  a turnout on highway 108 provides a view of the falls and meadow. the falls themselves are not accessible by trail, as they are located in a steep narrow box canyon. the waterfall and other nearby features are named for hiram leavitt, an early settler in mono county.  see also list of waterfalls of california  external links  leavitt falls at world of waterfalls leavitt falls vista point at sierra nevada geotourism  waterfalls of california landforms of mono county, california
this is a list of science fiction thriller films.   0-9   the 5th wave  10 cloverfield lane  2012 (2009)  24 (2016)  a   air  alien hunter  aliens  the andromeda strain  the astronaut's wife  b   bombshell  a boy and his dog  the butterfly effect 2  the butterfly effect 3: revelations  the butterfly effect  c   captain america: civil war  cell  chain reaction  children of men  chronicle  the cloverfield paradox  colossus: the forbin project  coma  cypher  d   the darkest hour  the day of the dolphin  deja vu  district 9  doom  doomwatch  doppelganger  e   ex machina  f   final fantasy vii: advent children  the final programme  firestarter  frequency  friend of the world  g   ghost in the shell  geostorm  gravity  h   the host  the hunger games  the hunger games: catching fire  the hunger games: mockingjay - part 1  the hunger games: mockingjay - part 2  i   in time  inception  infected (2008)  the invasion  interstellar  j   jurassic park  k   the kindred (1987)  kingsglaive: final fantasy xv (2016)  knowing (2009)  l   life  the lobster  looper  m   marooned  the matrix  the maze runner  maze runner: the death cure  maze runner: the scorch trials  megaville  minority report  o   okja (2017)  otherlife (2017)  p   pandemic  pitch black  project almanac  project x (1987)  r   race to witch mountain  red planet  robocop (2014)  s   s. darko (2009)  the signal (2014)  signs (2002)  silent warnings (2003)  skyline (2010)  songbird (2020)  a sound of thunder (2005)  source code (2011)  southbound (2015)  storm (1999)  super 8 (2011)  t   terminator 2: judgment day  terminator 3: rise of the machines  the terminator  the thirteenth floor  they crawl  time renegades  time teens  timing  v   vanilla sky  venom (2014)  w   westworld  wxiii: patlabor the movie 3  x   xchange (2000)  references  see also   list of comic science fiction films  list of
science fiction films  lists of thriller films  list of science fiction horror films  list of science fiction action films  science fiction thriller films
gielis panhedel or gielis van den bossche (c.1490 - after 1545) was a flemish renaissance painter.  he is considered a follower of jheronimus bosch but little is known of his life. panhedel was born in brussels as the son of aert van den bossche (considered the man behind master of the legend of st. barbara). his father became a member of the bruges guild of st. luke in 1505 as 'harnoult van den boske' with a son named 'gilken van den booeske'. during the years 1521-1523 he was mentioned in the archives of the lieve-vrouwe-broederschap in 's-hertogenbosch for working on doors of the same maria reredos that jheronimus bosch had worked on before him. later he was mentioned again in 1545/46 as 'gielis van den bossche tot bruessel woenende' (living in brussels).  references  1490s deaths 1550s deaths artists from brussels 16th-century flemish painters
a shot timer is a shot activated timer used in shooting sports, which starts the competitor by an audible signal and also records the competitor's time electronically by detecting the sound of each shot together with the time from the start signal. when the competitor is finished the timer will show the time from the start signal until the last shot. the time is usually recorded to hundredths of a second (centisecond), which is required by competitions in the international practical shooting confederation.  history  in 1924 ed mcgivern set a world record by firing six shots from a double-action revolver in four-fifths of a second. this time was measured with a complicated timing contraption attached to the revolver. this timing system was too complicated to be adapted in every day shooting or shooting sports.   shooters began using stopwatches to time shooting, often paired with a "stop plate" (a steel target engaged at the end of a shooting stage) to try to measure the total shooting timer.   in 1981, popular shooter and holster maker bill rodgers invented a new timing device that provided a start signal and an adjustable preset "par" end time. the goal being making all the required shots between the start and end signals of the timer.   soon after ron bailey of competition electronics built a timer with an included microphone that was able to mark the time of each shot fired.  in 1982, ronin colman created the pact championship timer. throughout the next two decades, shooters would transition from the stopwatches to shot timers and a new market was created.  outside of competitive shooting, the adaptation and use of a shot timer are still relatively low. a study conducted in 2019 showed 82% of shooters surveyed do not use a shot timer at all, and 14.5% did not know what a shot timer was.  common features and functions   some timers come with additional functions:  par times: the timer first gives a start, then a stop signal after a pre-programmed time.  instant or delayed start signal: the start signal can either come instantly by the push of the start button, or by a delay of a programmed number of seconds or within a range of seconds.  big board display: the possibility for direct connection to a big board display for instant audience feedback.  integration with an application on a mobile device such as rangetech or practiscore via bluetooth.  the possibility for scoring points on target in addition to the time, with automatic hit factor calculation, making for a
complete scoring solution. the results can be loaded to a computer, i.e. by bluetooth or rf.  splits between shots fired  memory storage of previous runs  auxiliary jack for external loud horn, visual starts or target turning  adjustable shot detector sensitivity  audible preparatory commands: an audible command to prep the shooter for the start signal. often the words "shooter ready, standby."  mobile app shot timers  a number of shot timer apps can also be downloaded for smartphones, although they are generally less reliable than dedicated standalone units. traditional mobile phones and tablets lack the necessary style and quality of microphone to pick up gunshots; especially in a gun range where there are multiple shooters or at an indoor gun range where the sound is greater and the echo can also create a false positive on the timer.  however, many shooters use a mobile app-based shot timer only for its par function when conducting dry fire practice in which there is no need to pick up the sound of gunfire.  see also   gun chronograph  references   shooting sports firearm terminology time measurement systems
coastal risk consulting, llc. (commonly referred to as coastal risk or crc) is an american startup climate adaptation technology and consulting company with headquarters in plantation, florida. coastal risk provides individuals, businesses, and local governments with climate impact modeling technology, available as an online software-as-a-service (saas), that allows property owners to assess their vulnerability to flooding related to sea level rise and climate change impacts and assists in adaptation and resiliency decision-making.  coastal risk uses data from the national oceanic and atmospheric administration, the federal emergency management agency, the national flood insurance program, the u.s. army corps of engineers, high-resolution lidar, local tide gauges, and various other geographic information systems to create their cloud-based climate impact risk analyses. however, coastal risk's risk scores differ from fema flood maps by including sea level rise projections into their flood risk calculations.  fema flood maps simply fail to provide comprehensive flood risk assessments for your property:   fema flood maps cannot identify an individual property's flooding risks from heavy rainfall. coastal risk's reports model heavy rainfall flood risks for every property in the us.  fema flood maps do not include coastal tidal flooding risks to your home or business. tidal flooding becomes a "threat multiplier" if a hurricane comes ashore at high tide. coastal risk's report shows a property's vulnerability to tidal flooding and to even more severe king tides.  fema flood maps underestimate the height of hurricane storm surge. the higher the surge, the greater the damage. coastal risk's reports incorporate more reliable noaa models, providing realistic intelligence about water heights higher than fema's "base flood elevations".   fema flood maps treat all properties in a flood zone alike in terms of flood risk. in fact, different properties in the same fema flood zone can have vastly different flood risks. coastal risk's reports show accurate flood risks based on a specific property's elevation and location.  fema flood maps do not visualize where on a property flooding will occur and how deep it will be. coastal risk's reports do.  fema flood maps are "backward looking", basing their risk assessments on historical data. coastal risk's reports are "forward looking", taking into account rising sea levels and changing climate impacts for decades ahead.  fema cannot help individuals or businesses make informed decisions to "buy, sell, protect or insure" a property. coastal risk's accurate and comprehensive flood risk modeling and risk communication services help match your property
's specific flood risks with cost-efficient flood mitigation products and services.  the company has partnered with international business machines corporation, battelle, tetratech, and trexin. the company's clients include scores of businesses and individuals in coastal as well as inland locations throughout the u.s., as well as local governments  coastal risk has received a number of awards, including two stevies® at the 14th annual american business awards for "startup of the year" and "tech startup of the year," a finalist in the miami herald business plan challenge 2015, and named "3rd coolest startup" by broward palm beach new times.  history  coastal risk was founded in august 2014 by former environmental attorney and law professor albert slap and former florida atlantic university climate scientist and director of the florida center for environmental studies leonard berry. over the years, slap used america's environmental laws to protect public health and the environment by fighting water and air pollution, toxic waste dumping, and by forcing local governments to replace aging and polluting sewer infrastructure. his citizen suits against the city of philadelphia, cincinnati, and miami-dade county brought billions of dollars of investment in wastewater treatment plants and tens of thousands of new construction jobs in those cities. mr. slap was senior counsel to biscayne bay waterkeeper in the first lawsuit in the nation to force local government to make critical public infrastructure climate ready and storm safe. co-founder dr. berry was a lead author on the united states 3rd national climate assessment in 2015. other key members of the coastal risk scientific team include university of miami professor and lead author of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, brian soden, and fau geoscientist keren bolter.  references   american companies established in 2014 companies based in florida climate change organizations based in the united states risk management companies
anid travancic (born 30 september 1993) is a bosnian professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for nk vis simm-bau.  club career he started playing in the youth team of a minor club, nk borac jelah, from where he moved to croatia and joined the youth team of nk zagreb. then, after a short come-back to bosnia where he played with celik zenica, he played with other croatian youth teams, namely, of the giants hnk hajduk split, and of dinamo zagreb satellite club, nk lokomotiva.  then he returned again to bosnia and herzegovina and signed with celik zenica, only that this time he was added to the senior squad and he made his senior debut in the 2011-12 premier league of bosnia and herzegovina. he made two solid seasons with celik and in summer 2013 he was on the spotlights of many clubs from the region. the first one was serbian former 1991 european and world champions red star belgrade which brought him for trials, but he failed. after failing to sign with red star, he was brought by the bosnian powerhouse fk sarajevo, which was in the rise after recently being acquired by the malaysian businessman and investor vincent tan and was strongly investing to form a strong side.  travancic won with sarajevo the 2013-14 bosnian cup, but the squad failed to achieve the desired exhibitions so the team went under total restoration. travancic left sarajevo and during the next season he played the first half with nk tosk tesanj in the second league of the federation of bosnia and herzegovina, and the second half of the season with proleter teslic in the first league of the republika srpska. the two leagues he played that season are the two leagues forming the second level of the bosnian league system.  in the summer of 2016, he signed a contract with novi pazar. he made his debut in the 2016-17 serbian superliga as a starter on july 30, 2016, in an away first-round game against javor ivanjica, which ended in a 1-1 draw. after novi pazar, travancic also played for fk radnicki nis and austrian club sc team wiener linien.  on 2 july 2019, travancic returned to and signed a contract with tosk tesanj. he played his first match since his return to tosk on 24 august 2019, in a 3-0 away league loss against fk gorazde. only two months after returning to tosk, on 30 september 2019, travancic left the club again after only playing in two
of tosk's eight league games since the beginning of the season.  in february 2020, travancic signed with nk usora.  international career travancic made 10 appearances and scored 1 goal for the bosnia and herzegovina u17 national team. after the under-17 team, he made three appearances for the bosnia and herzegovina u19 national team in 2010.  finally, from 2012 to 2013, travancic played 2 times but did not score a goal for the u21 national team.  honours  player  club sarajevo bosnian cup: 2013-14  references  external links anid travancic at sofascore  1993 births living people people from tesanj bosnia and herzegovina footballers bosnia and herzegovina expatriate footballers bosnia and herzegovina youth international footballers bosnia and herzegovina under-21 international footballers association football midfielders premier league of bosnia and herzegovina players first league of the federation of bosnia and herzegovina players serbian superliga players nk zagreb players hnk hajduk split players nk lokomotiva players nk tosk tesanj players nk celik zenica players fk sarajevo players fk proleter teslic players fk novi pazar players fk radnicki nis players nk vis simm-bau players bosnia and herzegovina expatriate sportspeople in croatia bosnia and herzegovina expatriate sportspeople in serbia bosnia and herzegovina expatriate sportspeople in austria expatriate footballers in croatia expatriate footballers in serbia expatriate footballers in austria
archambault is a surname. notable people with the name include:   alexandre archambault (1829-1879), lawyer and political figure in canada east   charles archambault ( 1812-1838), surveyor and political figure in lower canada  francois-xavier archambault (1841-1893), lawyer and political figure in quebec  george f. archambault (1909-2001), pharmacy liaison officer for the united states public health service   gilles archambault (born 1933), canadian novelist  gilles archambault (canadian football) (born 1934), canadian football player  jacques archambault (c. 1604-1688), french colonist in montreal  jacques archambault (politician) (1765-1851), farmer and political figure in lower canada  jean archambault (1780-c. 1831), farmer and political figure in lower canada  jean-jacques archambault (died 2001), canadian engineer  joallyn archambault (born 1942), american cultural anthropologist  john archambault, american children's book author  joseph archambault (1879-1964), canadian politician and lawyer  joseph-eloi archambault (1861-1916), canadian politician  larry archambault (born 1919), canadian ice hockey player  lee archambault (born 1960), american astronaut  louis archambault (1915-2003), quebec sculptor  louise archambault, canadian film director and screenwriter  louise archambault greaves, film co-producer and director with husband william greaves  maurice archambault (1914-2002), canadian lawyer and judge  michel archambault (born 1950), canadian ice hockey left wing  nico archambault (born 1984), canadian dancer and choreographer  pierre archambault, judge on the tax court of canada  pierre-urgel archambault (1812-1871), quebec businessman and political figure  stephen archambault, american politician from rhode island  theophile archambault (1806-1863), french psychiatrist   timothy archambault (born 1971), american native american flautist, architect, and composer  yves archambault (born 1952), canadian ice hockey goaltender  see also  archambeault, surname  archambault (disambiguation)
an ansible is a category of fictional devices or technology capable of near-instantaneous or faster-than-light communication.  ansible may also refer to:   ansible (software), open-source software provisioning, configuration management, and application-deployment tool  ansible (magazine), a newsletter by david langford
esa "flies" to kuopio (finnish: lentava kalakukko, swedish: esa "flyger" till kuopio) is a 1953 finnish comedy crime film directed by ville salminen and starring esa pakarinen, mai-brit heljo and siiri angerkoski.  the film takes place in february 1946. viski-ville, laski-leevi and kello-kalle, the members of kulaus-ramperi's bandit, make an unfortunate burglary and flee from helsinki to kuopio on a train express called the flying kalakukko (). the police get a clue about the bandits' escape route. the fast-paced conductor samuli saastamoinen (esa pakarinen) is also a train detective who trying to capture them. masa niemi plays a small crook, laski-leevi, who has an annoying myokymia.  cast  esa pakarinen as samuli saastamoinen, train detective    mai-brit heljo as pretty-molly    siiri angerkoski as jenni    kullervo kalske as yrjo   armas jokio as aleksi    leo lahteenmaki as kulaus-ramperi / detective saastamoinen    matti aulos  irja rannikko as taimi toikka  hannes veivo as kello-kalle    masa niemi as leevi lindroos / laski-leevi   pentti irjala as lumberjack in train    eino kaipainen as chief constable raikkonen    kauko kokkonen as police    nestori lampi as hungry passenger    heimo lepisto as lumberjack in train    veikko linna as conductor laitinen    esko mannermaa as station-master    lasse pihlajamaa as accordionist    holger salin as train constable    ville salminen as vilho adolf napoleon rotko / viski-ville  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1953 films 1950s crime comedy films finnish crime comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by ville salminen 1953 comedy films finnish black-and-white films
toby gold (born 27 september 1994) is an english wheelchair racer. he is classified as a t33 athlete and competes primarily in sprint events, winning the 100m gold in the 2016 european championships and silver at the 2016 paralympic games.  personal history gold was born in england in 1994. he was educated at wimbledon college and st mary's university, twickenham, both roman catholic schools. he studied sports science at st mary's.  athletics career gold first became involved in athletics after being spotted playing wheelchair basketball in 2011. he was invited to try out at kingsmeadow athletics stadium in kingston, and subsequently joined the wheelchair training squad. by 2012 he was classified as a t33 disability athlete and began competing at national meets, mainly in sprint events.  during 2013 and 2014 gold kept competing at national competitions winning gold medals at iwas world junior games. in may 2014 he travelled to notwill in switzerland to compete at his first overseas event, where he collected gold in both the 100m and 200m events. gold first represented great britain in a major international meet at the 2015 ipc athletics world championships in doha.  due to the absence of any 200m and 400m events, gold only contested the 100m race, where he finished third to collect the bronze medal. the following year, in the buildup to the 2016 summer paralympics, gold appeared at the european championships in grosseto. in a limited field, gold finished first, beating fellow british athlete dan bramall into second place. gold's finishing time of 17.64 was more than a second a half faster than his result the year previous in doha. gold won a silver medal at the 2016 paralympic games.  references  living people 1994 births english male wheelchair racers alumni of st mary's university, twickenham people educated at wimbledon college
bigwala is a genre of ceremonial music and dance of the busoga kingdom in uganda centered around gourd trumpets.  typically a solo trumpet is joined by four or more other trumpets, which produce a melody through playing in hocket, these are then joined by singers and then by dancers, both of which circle the instrumentalists while swaying.  originally performed during royal celebrations such as coronations and funerals, and more recently during social occasions, but less frequently: "at present...there are only four remaining older master bearers with skills in bigwala making, playing and dancing, and their recent transmission attempts have been frustrated by financial obstacles."  the genre contributes to busoga unity and identity, with lyrics primarily narrating the history of the kingdom, focusing on the king himself (a symbol of busoga identity), as well as addressing other social issues. godfrey alibatya, who helped promote bigwala to the unesco list, argues that, "the apparent extinction of bigwala might contribute to the weakening of the kingship," and kingdom. david pier argues that alibatya is helping preserve the genre despite its obscurity, unlike most items on the list, which are cherished by the local community.  references  external links musinguzi, bamuturaki (2013). "gourd trumpets face threats of extinction", theeastafrican.co.ke. vision reporter (2013). "bigwala: busoga's royal music, dance", newvision.co.ug.  dance in uganda ugandan music intangible cultural heritage in need of urgent safeguarding
alfredo siniscalchi (22 february 1885 - 3 march 1954) was the 2nd italian governor of addis ababa. he was born in naples, kingdom of italy. he died in rome, italy.  references  1885 births 1954 deaths 19th-century neapolitan people
the 2016-17 panathinaikos season is the club's 58th consecutive season in super league greece. they are also competing in the uefa europa league and greek cup.  players  out of team with contract  transfers  in  total spending:  2,550,000 €  out  total income:  €580,000  pre-season and friendlies  competitions  super league greece  regular season  league table  matches  uefa play-offs  league table  matches  greek cup  group c  round of 16  quarter-finals  semi-finals  uefa europa league  qualifying phase  third qualifying round  play-off round  group g  references  external links  panathinaikos fc official website  panathinaikos panathinaikos f.c. seasons panathinaikos
huluzhen station (; fuzhounese: ) is a metro station of line 1 of the fuzhou metro. it is located at the intersection of zexu avenue and gaowang road in cangshan district, fuzhou, fujian, china. it started operation on may 18, 2016.  references   railway stations in china opened in 2016 fuzhou metro stations
zpm may refer to:   mixtepec zapotec (iso 639-3 code: zpm), an oto-manguean language of oaxaca, mexico  zero-propellant maneuver, an optimal attitude trajectory used to perform spacecraft rotational control without the need to use thrusters  zyvex technologies (previously zyvex performance materials), a molecular engineering company headquartered in columbus, ohio
haji essa khan bhurgri (حاجي عيسا خان ڀرڳڙي) is a village of talhar taluka, located 7 km east of rajo khanani.  populated places in badin district
solar photovoltaic energy research, development, and demonstration act of 1978 is a united states statute authorizing the research and development of photovoltaic systems utilizing solar energy or sunlight as a source for electricity generation. the act of congress promotes energy conservation by the displacement of conventional energy systems dependent upon alternative fuel and fossil fuel resources.  the h.r. 12874 legislation was passed by the 95th u.s. congressional session and enacted into law by the 39th president of the united states jimmy carter on november 4, 1978.  provisions of the act title 42 united states code chapter 71 and subchapter iii was compiled as fourteen code of law sections based on u.s. congressional findings regarding potential benefits of solar power and declaration of a renewable energy policy.  42 u.s.c. § 5581 - congressional findings and declaration of policy  42 u.s.c. § 5582 - definitions  42 u.s.c. § 5583 - establishment and promotion of research, development, and demonstration programs 42 u.s.c. § 5584 - federal assistance application procedures; selection of applicants; agreements; financial assistance; observation and monitoring of photovoltaic systems; reports; projects and activities 42 u.s.c. § 5585 - contracts, grants and arrangements 42 u.s.c. § 5586 - test procedures and performance criteria  42 u.s.c. § 5587 - supervision of research, development, and demonstration programs 42 u.s.c. § 5588 - solar photovoltaic energy advisory committee  42 u.s.c. § 5589 - promotion and facilitation of practical use of photovoltaic energy 42 u.s.c. § 5590 - submittal to congressional committees of plan for demonstrating applications of photovoltaic systems and facilitating use in other nations; encouragement of international participation and cooperation; coordination and consistency of plan and international activities with similar activities and programs 42 u.s.c. § 5591 - participation of small business concerns  42 u.s.c. § 5592 - priorities 42 u.s.c. § 5593 - construction with national energy conservation policy act  42 u.s.c. § 5594 - authorization of appropriations  see also energy conservation in the united states growth of photovoltaics national energy conservation policy act renewable energy in the united states solar cell solar power in the united states timeline of solar cells  references  external links            1978 in law 1978 in american law 95th united states
congress united states federal energy legislation electric power in the united states solar power in the united states presidency of jimmy carter 1978 in the united states
uhuru mobile is a secure android-based operating system.  an operating system is the principal program allowing smartphones, tablets and pcs to run. this central tool connects and coordinates all the components such as kernel, computers programs, software or device drivers, letting users managing their devices.  uhuru mobile is a solution composed with its application encryption market, a modified android-based os, a virtual private network and a sms encryption solution.  the purpose of uhuru mobile is to prevent physical attacks.  history  the name uhuru comes from the swahili language and means freedom and independence.  uhuru mobile is the result of a research and development project initiated in 2012 to promote digital sovereignty.  as an android-based operating system, uhuru mobile focuses on security and privacy for end-users, individuals or businesses, on mobile devices.  the operating system is currently developed by a software editor company called teclib'.  system architecture  software overview  multi-layers protection   kernel: the system core is protected against malicious or unknown code as well as physical attacks or access.  system protection: critical resources are dynamically protected from malware and vulnerability exploits ensuring the integrity of the operating system's components.    data protection: user's data on the device are encrypted. user's authentication resources are protected by using certificates.  application protection: the applications that can be installed on the device are exclusively coming from a market of certified applications.   all those applications are validated and certificated before being available within the uhuru applications market.  additional features   to ensure the os protection and security while using applications, a dedicated market has been installed (replacing the google play store). uhuru mobile's applications market only provides apps approved and certified by a team of security experts. companies can also customize the uhuru marketplace providing their in-house applications.  uhuru mobile is provided with a deception system, sending fake gps location coordinates to applications. this decoy geolocation tool allows users to fool some applications using geolocation. it administrators can define the redirecting coordinates. for example in the demo version, the nsa headquarters coordinates were sent by the deception system.  a mobile device management tool for the administration of mobile devices is provided without any additional setup. it administrators have access to a web-console in order to manage the uhuru mobile fleet and all linked applications (such as the remote apps installation/suppression or the set up of user accounts).  see also   operating system   mobile device management
security-focused operating system  references  external links   teclib edition/uhuru mobile   uhuru mobile  bibliography    .  .  .  . .  mobile operating systems
jean-baptiste-thomas-victor cochinat (19 january 1819 - october 1886) was a 19th-century french lawyer, journalist and man of letters. he authored political articles under the pseudonyms maxime leclerc, louis de roselay etc. he was chief editor of the figaro-programme in 1856 and of le foyer from 23 april 1858 to 2 february 1859.  works  1853: la chaine 1858-1859: le billard   1859: le guide des fumeurs 1859: hygiene des fumeurs  external links   victor cochinat on data.bnf.fr  1819 births 1886 deaths martiniquais journalists martiniquais lawyers 19th-century french lawyers 19th-century french journalists french male journalists 19th-century french male writers
matt and ross duffer (born february 15, 1984) are american film and television writers, directors, and producers. they created and serve as executive producers of the netflix science fiction horror drama series stranger things. they also wrote and directed the 2015 psychological horror film hidden, and wrote and produced episodes for the fox mystery-science fiction series wayward pines.  they are identical twin brothers and have had a close relationship since childhood. they work on all their projects as a pair.  career after the brothers had written and directed several short films, their script for the post-apocalyptic horror film hidden was acquired by warner bros. pictures in 2011. the brothers would go on to direct the film hidden, which was released in 2015. next the duffer brothers were hired as writer/producers for the fox television series wayward pines.  stranger things  with experience in television, they began pitching their idea for stranger things, which dan cohen eventually brought to shawn levy. backed by levy's 21 laps production company, the show was quickly picked up by netflix. the show is set in 1980s indiana and is an homage to '80s pop culture, inspired and aesthetically informed by the works of steven spielberg, john carpenter, stephen king, and george lucas, among others.  it was released on july 15, 2016, to overwhelming praise, specifically for its characterization, pacing, atmosphere, acting, soundtrack, directing, writing, and homages to 1980s genre films. it began to develop a cult following online. review aggregator rotten tomatoes gave the series an approval rating of 95%, based on 82 reviews, with a weighted average score of 7.96/10. the site's critical consensus states, "exciting, heartbreaking, and sometimes scary, stranger things acts as an addictive homage to spielberg films and vintage 1980s television."   on september 30, 2019, netflix announced they had signed the duffers for additional films and television shows over multiple years, sources have said the deal is in the nine-figures.  personal life the duffer brothers were born and raised in durham, north carolina. they began making films in the third grade, using a hi8 video camera that was a gift from their parents. they attended the duke school for children from grades k-8, a private suburban school, and then the charles e. jordan high school, a large durham public school. they relocated to orange, california, to study film at chapman university's dodge college of film and media arts, where they graduated in 2007
.  ross duffer married director leigh janiak in palm springs, california in december 2015. the couple met in 2006 at a production company in los angeles, where she was an assistant to the producer and he was an intern.  in march 2018, the duffer brothers were accused on social media of verbal abuse on the stranger things set by a grip who worked on the show. she said that she would not return for season 3 because the duffer brothers created a hostile work environment for women. the brothers denied this claim, and an investigation by netflix found no wrongdoing. the brothers had previously been criticized for coaxing teenage actress sadie sink into performing an unscripted kissing scene that she'd been uncomfortable with the idea of. sink later said she had no objection.  filmography  film  television  awards  references  notes  external links      1984 births american horror writers american male screenwriters american science fiction writers american television directors american television writers chapman university alumni horror film directors living people place of birth missing (living people) american male television writers writers from durham, north carolina science fiction film directors twin people from the united states screenwriting duos sibling filmmakers film directors from north carolina screenwriters from north carolina 21st-century american screenwriters 21st-century american male writers
the african union passport is a common passport document that is set to replace existing nationally issued african union member state passports and exempt bearers from having to obtain any visas for all 55 states in africa. it was launched on july 17, 2016, at the 27th ordinary session of the african union that was held in kigali in rwanda by rwandan president paul kagame and the late chadian president idriss deby. as of june 2018, the passport was planned to be rolled out and ready for use at borders worldwide by 2020, however the rollout has since been delayed into 2021.  types   there are three types of african union passport that will be issued:  ordinary passport  these passports are issued to citizens and are intended for occasional travel, such as vacations and business trips. they contain 32 pages, and are valid for 5 years.   official/service passport  these passports are issued to officials attached to government institutions who have to travel on official business.   diplomatic passport  issued to diplomats and consuls for work-related travel, and to their accompanying dependents.  design  the passport has inscriptions in arabic, english, french, portuguese, and swahili. the african union anthem's lyrics are printed on the page immediately after the picture page.  references  see also interpol travel document  african union (staff) passport information on prado  passports african union 2016 introductions
"800 pound jesus" is a song recorded by american country music group sawyer brown.  it was released in january 2000 as the third single from the album drive me wild.  the song reached number 40 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by billy maddox and paul thorn.  content the song is about a man who purchases a statue of jesus. he attempts to commit suicide by hanging himself, but his attempt is thwarted by landing in the statue's arms. co-writer paul thorn previously recorded the song on his 1997 album hammer and nail; when sawyer brown lead singer mark miller heard the song on that album, he contacted thorn and asked for permission to record it.  history in 2000, the song was nominated by the christian country music association for both song of the year and video of the year.  critical reception billboard published a positive review of the song, which described both mark miller's lead vocals and the production as "on target". the review also called the song "quirky but extremely likable" and "an amusing little ditty with a deeper message".  chart performance  references  2000 singles 1999 songs sawyer brown songs curb records singles songs about jesus songs about suicide
oligodon annulifer, also known as the ringed kukri snake, is a colubrid snake endemic to the island of borneo.  taxonomy o. annulifer has a poorly known classification. a number of other species were originally listed as subspecies of it. a 1999 paper suggested that o. annulifer, which at that point was only known from four juvenile specimens, was actually only a juvenile of a different oligodon species. however, a 2010 paper confirmed the existence of o. annulifer as a distinct species, based on the recent capture of an adult specimen. the species name annulifer derives from the latin word anus which means "ring," and the word fero, which means "carry." oligodon annulifer is a member of the genus oligodon, a genus common throughout central and tropical asia. the genus belongs to the snake family colubridae, the largest snake family, with member species being found on every continent except antarctica.  description the species is brown on the back, with black rings that contained oval yellowish-brown spots. a specimen described in 1893 had 26 such rings. the sides of the snake are black, with yellowish lines, and the head is also yellowish brown. it has a dark bar across the forehead, and a dark inverted y shape above the nape of the neck. the underside of the snake is white, with small black dots. the 1893 specimen, which was a young snake, was 16 centimeters long.  habitat and ecology oligodon annulifer is oviparous, or egg-laying. the species is known to eat the eggs of other reptiles, and it has teeth which are adapted for this purpose; they are sharply edged, to slit eggs easily. it primarily lives in lowland rainforest, and it is a terrestrial, or ground-dwelling, species.  distribution o. annulifer is found on the island of borneo, where it is thought to be endemic. specimens have been caught at five different locations across the island, including at bukit-baka national park in indonesia and the ulu temburong national park in brunei. it is not thought to be very abundant. it has been observed at up to 100 meters above sea level.  oligodon annulifer has been described from five scattered locations in borneo, including from inside two protected areas. this broad distribution has led to the iucn classifying it as a species of "least concern." the habitat that it occupies, lowland rainforest, is under threat from human activity, specifically agricultural activity for the production
of palm oil. however, the effect of this activity, which also includes logging and mining, on the snake is not known.  references  annulifer endemic fauna of borneo reptiles of brunei reptiles of indonesia reptiles of malaysia reptiles described in 1893
uma rosa com amor is a brazilian telenovela produced and broadcast by rede globo. it premiered on 23 october 1972 and ended on 29 june 1973, with a total of 221 episodes. it's the eleventh "novela das sete" to be aired at the timeslot. it is created by vicente sesso and directed by walter campos.  cast  references  external links     1972 telenovelas brazilian telenovelas tv globo telenovelas 1972 brazilian television series debuts 1973 brazilian television series endings portuguese-language telenovelas
type 757 radar is a chinese navigational radar designed for small boats such as chinese fishing boats and small auxiliary vessels of the chinese navy. developed by the shanghai 4th radio factory in the early 1980s. a total of 657 was produced by the end of 1990s, and the radar earned two awards, the first was in 1984 for municipal quality and ministry award,  and the second time in 1985 for national award. the range of this small radar is 24 nautical miles.  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
the apui mosaic () is a protected area mosaic in the state of amazonas, brazil.  location  the apui mosaic is divided between the municipalities of apui (91.85%) and novo aripuana (8.15%) in the state of amazonas. it covers an area of . the mosaic is accessible by air to apui, by land via the br-230 trans-amazonian highway or by boat via the madeira river to the city of novo aripuana and then to the conservation units via the aripuana river.  the mosaic contains the guariba and sucunduri state parks; bararati and aripuana sustainable development reserves; guariba extractive reserve; and sucunduri, aripuana, apui and manicore state forests. the mosaic, together with the juruena and campos amazonicos national parks, forms a contiguous block of  of protected areas known as the southern amazon ecological corridor, which covers parts of southern amazonas, northern mato grosso and southwestern para. these are areas with strong deforestation pressure due to expansion of the agricultural frontier into the brazilian amazon.  history  the apui mosaic was created by decree 55 of 12 march 2010 under the responsibility of ceuc in the border region between the states of amazonas, mato grosso and para. the advisory board was created by the same decree. the management plan was approved on 22 september 2010. the plan was treated as the plan for each of the nine conservation units as well as for the mosaic as a whole, on the basis that the units represented a pre-zoning of the mosaic into areas with different objectives and types of use. the integrated plan would help correct errors in delimitation of the units as better information was obtained, and would prevent actions in one unit having negative effect on another unit.  environment  the mosaic includes terra firma forest, flooded forest, campos rupestres, campina and campinarana. it contains the headwaters of the acari and sucunduri rivers. the monte cristo rapids and the  falls (saltos do rio sucunduri) are well-known attractions. the region has more than 13 endemic species of primates. surveys of the west of the mosaic have identified 850 tree species, 46 mammals, more than 300 birds, 27 reptiles, 30 amphibians and almost 100 species of fish.  notes  sources  2010 establishments in brazil protected area mosaics of brazil protected areas of amazonas (brazilian state)
alma bell wilson (may 25, 1917 - july 27, 1999) was an oklahoma attorney who was appointed as the second female district judge in the state of oklahoma in 1975. in 1982, she was elevated as the first woman to serve on the oklahoma supreme court and between 1995 and 1997 was the first woman chief justice. wilson was honored by many awards in her lifetime including induction into the oklahoma women's hall of fame, the oklahoma hall of fame and was named appellate judge of the year in both 1986 and 1989.  early life alma bell and her twin sister wilma were born on may 25, 1917 in pauls valley, oklahoma to anna and william r. bell. from age eight, bell had decided to become a lawyer and after graduating as valedictorian of the class of 1935 from pauls valley high school, she attended principia college in elsah, illinois, completing her ba degree. bell then attended oklahoma city university where she obtained her bachelor of laws before enrolling at the university of oklahoma college of law. she was one of six women in a class of 100 students, who graduated with a juris doctorate in 1941.  career after completing her law degree, bell returned to pauls valley and began her practice as a tax attorney. after world war ii ended, she met a veteran, who was also a practicing attorney in pauls valley. she and bill wilson married in 1948 and had their daughter lee ann in 1951. after taking a few years to raise lee ann and earn her pilot's license, wilson returned to the court in 1960 with an eye to pursuing a judgeship. her first appointment was as a municipal judge in pauls valley, but she also continued to practice law in both oklahoma city and pauls valley.  in 1969, when the oklahoma court system was reorganized and both county judges and justices of the peace were abolished in favor of a district trial system, wilson was appointed as the special judge in charge of minor cases for garvin county. in 1975, she was appointed as the second woman district judge in the state, when governor david boren appointed her to serve for the 21st district, encompassing cleveland, garvin, and mcclain counties. judge margaret lamm mccalister, of tulsa county was the first female district judge and simultaneously with wilson's appointment, judge patricia m. hoebel was appointed for district 15, which included pawnee and part of tulsa counties. wilson also served on the court of tax review for six years and was an appointee by the governor to the commission on the status of women.
wilson was appointed by governor george nigh in 1982 as the first woman justice on the oklahoma supreme court, becoming the first female chief justice in the state in 1995. she served until 1997 as chief justice and also served the presiding judge of the appellate jurisdiction of the judiciary. though she was involved in many notable cases, like the southwestern bell rate refund case, legislative appropriations and school funding, one of wilson's special interests was juvenile justice. in 1998, she co-founded the seeworth preparatory academy in oklahoma city to help 6th- through 9th-graders, overcome issues like poverty or dysfunctional family situations which impact children's ability to learn. wilson died after a short illness at her home in oklahoma city, on july 27, 1999.  legacy wilson received numerous awards and honors both during her lifetime and posthumously. in 1974, she received the guy brown award to recognize outstanding alumni from the university of oklahoma and the following year inducted into the ou hall of fame. she was inducted into the oklahoma women's hall of fame in 1983 for her service as president of the oklahoma association of women lawyers, as well as her appointment to the oklahoma supreme court. wilson was recognized with the pioneer woman award in 1985 and named appellate judge of the year in both 1986 and 1989. in 1994, she was named woman of the year and in 1996 she was inducted into the oklahoma hall of fame. the oklahoma bar association annually awards the alma bell wilson citation to bar members who have made contributions to improve children's lives. in 2001, bob burke and louise painter published justice served: the life of alma bell wilson, the biography of wilson's life.  see also list of female state supreme court justices  references  citations  bibliography  external links  2012 tribute to alma wilson from the university of oklahoma  1917 births 1999 deaths chief justices of the oklahoma supreme court people from pauls valley, oklahoma principia college alumni oklahoma city university alumni university of oklahoma college of law alumni women chief justices of state supreme courts in the united states american women judges 20th-century american judges 20th-century american women lawyers 20th-century american lawyers 20th-century women judges
"mr. greg" is the eighth episode of the third season of american animated television series steven universe, which premiered on july 19, 2016 on cartoon network. it was written and storyboarded by joe johnston and jeff liu. the episode was viewed by 1.549 million viewers. it is the series' first fully musical episode, and features seven songs, more than any other steven universe episode.  the episode shows steven traveling to empire city with pearl and his father greg, who received a check for $10 million in the previous episode "drop beat dad" after one of his songs became a success. however, pearl still heavily resents greg since rose, steven's mother and the love of her life, chose him over her. to improve their relationship, steven tries to show pearl and greg that they have more in common than they think.  plot steven (zach callison) and greg (tom scharpling) are in awe to discover that greg's song "comet" has been used as the basis of a successful burger commercial jingle ("like a burger"). the two debate what they should do with the $10 million greg received for the jingle, mutually believing the best things in life to be free ("don't cost nothin'"). eventually, they decide to take a vacation to empire city, and steven suggests that pearl (deedee magno hall) accompany them ("empire city"). pearl and greg are reluctant to vacation together, but steven is optimistic.  in empire city, the trio book a stay at le hotel, where the staff joins them in a song about the hotel's opulence and the fun they are having there ("mr. greg"). greg asks pearl to dance with him, but she refuses, abruptly ending the song. later that night, while steven and greg are asleep, pearl sings about her feelings for rose quartz and her jealousy for rose and greg's love, expressing her regrets and her inability to move on since rose ultimately chose greg and created steven ("it's over, isn't it"). steven and greg awaken during the song, and greg, lamenting that his relationship with pearl is beyond repair, flees to the hotel bar.  steven reveals to pearl that he invited her along so that she and greg could work out their differences. getting them together, he plays a song on the piano, urging them to talk to each other about their feelings about rose ("both of you"). once they have discussed their feelings, they are cheered by the hotel staff, and greg is presented
with the bill for their service. the three depart from empire city; greg and pearl chat amiably while steven happily observes that they are on better terms ("don't cost nothing (reprise)").  production  episodes of steven universe are written and storyboarded by a single team. "mr. greg" was written and storyboarded by joe johnston and jeff liu, being johnston's final episode as a storyboarder before he became the show's supervising director full-time, while ki-yong bae and jin-hee park provided animation direction and jasmin lai served as art director. the scene during "it's over, isn't it?" in which the camera spins around pearl was inspired by a similar scene during "crazy world" from the film victor/victoria. shelby rabara, voice actress for peridot, provided the audio of pearl and steven tap dancing during the song "mr. greg".  music the episode is a musical featuring seven songs: "like a burger", "don't cost nothing", "empire city", "mr. greg", "it's over, isn't it?", "both of you" and a reprise of "don't cost nothing". "mr. greg" was written by joe johnston, ben levin and jeff liu, with liu playing guitar and levin playing bass. "it's over, isn't it?" and "both of you" were arranged by aivi & surasshu, the music team for the series, and written by series creator rebecca sugar, with strings performed by jeff ball. sugar had to rewrite "it's over, isn't it?" several times during production, calling it "the hardest song i've written to date".  broadcast and reception "mr. greg" premiered on july 19, 2016 on cartoon network. its initial american broadcast was viewed by approximately 1.549 million viewers. it received a nielsen household rating of 0.43, meaning that it was seen by 0.43% of all households. this was the third episode of the "steven's summer adventures" event, where a new episode aired every weekday for four weeks of the summer vacation.  this episode received universal acclaim from critics. eric thurm of the a.v. club, while feeling the episode was "a little on the nose, even for steven universe", described it as "delightful" and gave it an a- grade. kk bracken and laura b of thegeekiary.com praised the episode for "the catchy music, the bombastic animation, the great one-
liners and the hilarious visual humor". nd medina of idigitaltimes called the songs in the episode "some of the catchiest tunes this side of hamilton", and singled out "it's over, isn't it?" as "the most magnificently gay thing steven universe has done since ruby and sapphire got their own episode".  in 2017, the episode was nominated for a primetime emmy award for outstanding short form animated program.  references  2016 american television episodes steven universe episodes musical television episodes american lgbt-related television episodes lgbt-related animated television episodes
the culture of el paso, texas is influenced both heavily by american and mexican cultures due to its position as a border town, its large hispanic population, and its history as part of spanish america and mexico. el paso is home to a number of cultural events and festivals. el paso also hosts various theaters, museums, and other cultural sites.  annual cultural events and festivals  amigo airsho amigo airsho is one of el paso's premier events, and is ranked as one of the top ten air shows in the country. the show is filled with air entertainment and ground activities. acts include the franklin's flying circus, where performers walk on the wings of an airborne plane. ground activities include the jet powered school bus. after 31 years of being held at biggs army airfield, the show will move to dona ana airport in 2014.  klaq great river raft race  the klaq great river raft race is an annual event celebrated on the second to last saturday of june. participants are encouraged to ride the river and float the rio grande with family and friends. the organizers encourage the building of unique rafts that will get you down the river with prizes and trophies awarded for the most points earned, best looking crew, and best decorated raft. the race starts at the vinton bridge and ends three miles downstream at the canutillo bridge.  southwestern international prca rodeo the southwestern international prca rodeo is the 17th oldest rodeo in the nation and el paso's longest running sporting event. consistently ranked as one of the top 50 shows in the country by the professional rodeo cowboys association, this charitable event is a true celebration of western culture and heritage.  fiesta de las flores fiesta de las flores is the oldest hispanic festival in the southwest. the three-day fiesta is held each year during the labor day weekend and emphasizes el paso's hispanic heritage and culture. the festival attracts 20,000 to 30,000 visitors from el paso county,  new mexico, west texas and the state of chihuahua, mexico.  activities included in the fiesta are crowning of the queen, a fiesta parade, senior appreciation dance, military appreciation day, and live entertainment. the fiesta is also well known for the authentic regional cuisine, arts and craft wares, games, and services available for the enjoyment of all segments of the attendees. over 80 booths, sponsored by local vendors and nonprofit organizations create the hispanic ambience and culture.  neon desert music festival the annual neon desert music festival is a two-day event usually held on the last saturday and sunday
of may on five stages in downtown el paso stretching from san jacinto plaza to cleveland square.  the festival brings over 30 acts from the worlds of indie rock, latin and electronic dance music.  the texas showdown festival the texas showdown festival is an annual event celebrating musicians and  tattoo artists under one roof. dubbed as the world's largest tattoo and musical festival, the event is held usually the last weekend of july at the el paso county coliseum.  sun city music festival the only el paso musical festival not held downtown; instead it is held at ascarate park.  the  sun city music festival is a two-day event dubbed as the largest electronic dance music festival in texas.  plaza classic film festival  the plaza classic film festival is the world's largest festival dedicated to classic cinema.  all classic films are shown at the el paso plaza theater during the first week of august.  el paso balloonfest the el paso balloonfest is an annual event celebrated on memorial day weekend and is self described as "3 days of hot air balloons filling the el paso skies, 3 afternoons of concerts and fun in the sun at wet n' wild waterworld in anthony, texas." over 60 balloons take to the air annually from tfcu launch field which is adjacent to the water park. after the balloons launch, visitors have a weekend of water rides, swimming, concerts, and grilling. the concert aspect of the event features local bands, starting at noon, and different headlining artists in the afternoon. overnight camping has been added for 2014.  el paso downtown street festival the annual el paso downtown street festival is held during the last weekend of june in downtown el paso near the el paso convention center.  it is the oldest musical festival in the city and brings local, regional and nationally known acts.  music under the stars the outdoor concert series, started in 1983, is held annually at the chamizal national memorial and draws over 60,000 attendees. it features local and international performers with musical genres ranging from classical, country, tejano, rock and others. the evening concerts are showcased every sunday afternoon and start in early june and end in the middle of august.  cool canyon nights a free summer concert series which takes place outdoors at the mckelligon canyon amphitheater on thursday nights may-july.  alfresco fridays a free concert series at the downtown convention center plaza featuring jazz, latin, reggae, classic rock, salsa, funk, and mariachis on fridays may-september.  performing arts  el paso playhouse el
paso's longest running theater in entering now into its 54th season. located at 2501 montana near el paso's five points area, the playhouse performs a variety of favorite popular plays year-round. when productions are running, performances are held fridays and saturdays at 8:00 pm with sunday matinees at 2:00 pm.  viva! el paso the outdoor musical extravaganza viva! el paso is performed  in the mckelligon canyon amphitheatre. it is locally produced and chronicles the 400-year history and cultural evolution of the el paso region. the show is performed each friday and saturday night in june, july, and august. viva! el paso has entertained local residents and out-of-town visitors for over 35 years.  el paso symphony orchestra the el paso symphony was established in the 1930s, it is the oldest performing arts organization in el paso and the longest continuously running symphony orchestra in the state of texas.  it has received both national and international recognition as a result of its very successful tours of germany in 1996 and turkey in 2000, and continues to represent the el paso region with pride and distinction. the el paso symphony orchestra association season is anchored by 12 classical concerts. special events serve as outreach toward new audiences.  broadway in el paso broadway in el paso at the plaza theater presents broadway shows including wicked, jersey boys, rock of ages, mamma mia!, and many other performances.  utep dinner theater utep dinner theater history includes 30 years and over 130 productions. past productions include annie, evita, jesus christ superstar, chicago, rocky horror show and many others.  ballet in el paso ballet was largely nonexistent in el paso until the arrival of ingeborg heuser, a professional ballerina from germany, in the 1950s. heuser taught ballet at the university of texas at el paso for 47 years and founded the city's first professional ballet company, firstly known as texas western civic ballet and eventually as ballet el paso. the company dissipated due to financial trouble in 1997 and heuser retired from utep soon after.  the el paso youth ballet was founded in 2009 by heuser's previous student, marta katz, following heuser's departure from the university. with students from the youth ballet, heuser staged her last nutcracker in 2006. the youth company continues to perform the nutcracker and other pre-professional pieces in and around the el paso area. the company provides the only platform for young ballet dancers to train and perform at such a level within the city since the folding of ballet el paso.
el paso city ballet is a current professional ballet company in el paso, providing local employment for professional dancers in the field of ballet. the company performs a variety of classical and contemporary works choreographed by artistic director lisa skaf and artists from the us and latin america. it has been active since 2005, performing yearly productions.  theaters  the abraham chavez theatre, adjacent to the el paso convention and performing arts center, welcomes patrons with a three-story-high glass-windowed entry and unique sombrero-shaped architecture, making it a distinct feature on el paso's southwestern landscape.  the plaza theatre is a historic building located at 125 pioneer plaza. the theater stands as one of the city's most well-known landmarks. it shows various broadway productions, musical concerts, and individual performers. it has a seating capacity of 2,100.  mckelligon canyon is a  park, located in the franklin mountains, open to hikers and picnickers. in the canyon, mckelligon canyon amphitheatre is surrounded on three sides by dramatic canyon walls; the 1,500-seat amphitheatre is used for concerts and special events, such as viva el paso!  the el paso playhouse the 105-seat theatre has gone through several incarnations as well as several locations. originally conceived as the festival theatre at the 2501 montana street, is the longest running theater in el paso coming up on 55 years.  area museums  the centennial museum and chihuahuan desert gardens, located on the grounds of utep, includes a comprehensive collection of el paso brown, native american pottery, as well as educational exhibits for students.  the el paso museum of archaeology is located on the eastern slope of north franklin mountain, west of gateway south blvd. on transmountain rd. its grounds include native plants of the american southwest, as well samples of native american shelters, in an unspoiled location. the museum includes dioramas for school children which illustrate the culture and geology of the american southwest, such as hueco tanks in el paso county. one diorama (see image to the right) is of the cueva de la olla (cave of the pot) which is located in the sierra madre of chihuahua, an example of the paquime culture.  the el paso museum of art is located next to the plaza theater adjacent to san jacinto plaza, the public square downtown. it contains works of southwestern artists such as tom lea.  other area museums include:  el paso holocaust museum and study center  international museum of art
el paso  el paso museum of history  fort bliss museums and study center  insights el paso science museum  the magoffin homestead, dating from 1875, is now a state historic site.  the national border patrol museum is located adjacent to the el paso museum of archaeology.  railroad and transportation museum of el paso  war eagles air museum, santa teresa, new mexico  the gene roddenberry planetarium  lynx exhibits  sites within the city limits   ysleta mission is recognized as the oldest continuously operated parish in the state of texas.  cathedral of saint patrick erected in 1916 is the seat of the roman catholic diocese of el paso.  el paso zoo  magoffin home state historic site  plaza hotel  union depot  bowen ranch  el paso high school  scenic drive   university of texas at el paso the university's distinctive style is a type of fortress architecture, dzong, found in the present and former buddhist mountain kingdoms of the himalayas, bhutan and tibet.  kay bailey hutchison desalination plant - the world's largest inland desalination facility.  sites within the metro and surrounding area  within driving distance from el paso are nine state parks, three national parks, one national monument, one national memorial and a national forest.   carlsbad caverns national park  guadalupe mountains national park  guadalupe peak - the highest point in texas at 8,749 feet in elevation  mckittrick canyon  white sands national park  organ mountains-desert peaks national monument  chamizal national memorial  lincoln national forest  hueco tanks state historic site  mt. cristo rey  socorro mission  san elizario chapel  western playland  wet n' wild waterworld  old mesilla  sunland park racetrack & casino  spaceport america  sunland park mall  cielo vista mall  bassett place  references  culture of el paso, texas
jack "cactus jack" neumeier (19192004) was an american high school football coach from 1946 to 1978. he invented american football's modern spread offense, also known as the one-back spread offense, and originated the phrase "basketball on grass" to describe this offense.  career neumeier was head coach at granada hills high school from 1960 to 1978 and won the los angeles city championship in 1970. he was california football coach of the year in 1970. his most famous player was john elway, who played for neumeier from 1976 to 1978.  dennis erickson, who first met neumeier through jack elway, while serving as jack elway's offensive coordinator at san jose state, learned about the spread offense directly from neumeier.  erickson, joe tiller and other coaches subsequently coached national championship teams and heisman trophy winners using neumeier's offense, which is now utilized in some form by almost every football team at every level of play, nfl, college, high school and youth football.  he continued to mentor other coaches utilizing variations of his spread offense until neumeier's death in 2004.  1919 births 2004 deaths high school football coaches in california people from van nuys, los angeles sportspeople from los angeles coaches of american football from california
the waterville main street historic district encompasses the best-preserved portions of the historical commercial downtown area of waterville, maine.  developed most intensively in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, this area was the center of commerce for waterville and the surrounding rural communities.  it encompasses 25 properties on main and common streets, including the waterville opera house and city hall.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2012, and was slightly enlarged in 2016.  description and history the downtown area of waterville is located on the west bank of the kennebec river, about  upstream from the city of augusta, the river's highest point navigable by ocean-going vessels.  waterville developed as an industrial center in the second half of the 19th century, following the arrival of the railroad in 1849.  mills were built south of the downtown area, and residential areas grew to the north and west.  the city's most rapid period of growth was between about 1890 and 1920, when many of the brick commercial buildings lining main street were built.  castonguay square, a grassy park on the north side of common street and south of city hall, was laid out in 1796, when the area was still part of winslow.  it is named for a soldier killed during world war i, and features a german cannon from that war, as well as a commemorative marker of benedict arnold's expedition to quebec, which took place during the american revolutionary war, when this area was largely undeveloped.  the district includes two blocks of main street, between temple and spring streets, as well as common street and castonguay square.  most of the buildings in this area are commercial brick buildings, and most have fairly typical late victorian commercial styling.  the opera house and city hall, a single building on the north side of castonguay square at the corner of front street, is a fine example of colonial revival architecture, and continues to serve the community as an entertainment venue and municipal center.  the krutzky block, located at the southeast corner of common and main, is a distinctive small block with spanish revival and arts and crafts elements.  the 1936 federal trust company building (25-33 main) is the district's only example of art deco architecture.  the district's oldest building is the 1836 ticonic row (8-22 main), which exhibits greek revival features overlaid by alterations made in the 1920s.  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine
references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in kennebec county, maine buildings and structures in kennebec county, maine waterville, maine
the winnipeg telegram was a daily newspaper in winnipeg, manitoba which was published from june 9, 1898 to october 16, 1920.  the paper originated as the daily nor'wester, which was founded in 1894 by william luxton who also founded the winnipeg free press. luxton sold the paper in 1896. from january 2, 1897 to june 8, 1898, a morning and evening edition were published. on june 9, the paper was renamed the morning telegram and was published every day except sunday until august 21, 1907. it was subsequently renamed the winnipeg telegram.  editors of the newspaper included:  william sanford evans (1901-1905)  mark nichols  garnet porter  evans purchased the newspaper in 1901 and continued as owner until 1920.  the telegram was closely associated with the provincial conservative party. during the winnipeg general strike in 1919, the paper published special "strike editions" which characterized the leaders of the strike as "bolshevik revolutionaries".  james h. richardson, the legendary city editor of the old los angeles examiner, got his start at the telegram upon dropping out of kelvin high school in 1912. in his memoir, "for the life of me," he devotes a chapter to his time at the telegram. as city editor, richardson oversaw coverage of the infamous black dahlia murder for the hearst-owned examiner.  the telegram merged with the rival winnipeg tribune in 1920.  the telegram building in winnipeg, where the telegram was based from 1899 to 1920, has been designated as a historic building by the city of winnipeg.  references   newspapers published in winnipeg defunct newspapers published in manitoba publications established in 1907 publications disestablished in 1920 daily newspapers published in manitoba
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the , after kikuchi, kumamoto. it was formed on 2 april 1945 in kurume as a triangular division. it was one of a batch of eight divisions composed of the 201st, 202nd, 205th, 206th, 209th, 212th, 214th and 216th divisions created as part of the reaction to the battle of okinawa.  history on 11 june 1945, the 212th division organization and deployment was complete. the 516th and 518th infantry regiments, together with service units, were in tsuno, miyazaki, while the 517th infantry regiment was in kurume it did not see any combat by the time of the surrender of japan on 15 august 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第212師団 (日本軍), accessed 20 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
straight outta oz is the second solo studio album and original musical written and produced by american singer-songwriter and youtube celebrity todrick hall with music produced by jeeve ducornet and wiidope, released on 23 june 2016. featured artists include nicole scherzinger, jordin sparks, perez hilton, joseph gordon-levitt, amber riley, raven symone and tamar braxton. it is based on the wizard of oz whilst being a semi-autobiographical account of his rise to fame in los angeles (oz).  music videos the trailer for the album was first released on may 13, 2016. todrick has released the musical in the form of an hour long piece (as well as each song separately) on his youtube channel. on april 27, 2017 the song "defying gravity" was released as a music video and digital download. the song does not appear on either the standard or deluxe versions of the album but does appear in the tour.  track listing  deluxe edition on march 21, 2017, hall released a deluxe version of the visual album on youtube as well as itunes, featuring 4 songs from the straight outta oz tour that were not present on the album, as well as re-recorded versions of other songs. this album also included the song "blah blah blah" present in the original version of the video, but not on the original album. it also includes a remix of todrick's previous 2015 single "low" with new vocals from rupaul.  behind the curtain behind the curtain, a documentary film about the making of straight outta oz, was released in select theaters on december 6 and 13, 2017. it was released for digital download and on netflix on december 12.  tour on july 7, 2016 hall began his summer tour based on straight outta oz which ended on august 12, 2016. there were 30 dates on the tour in total taking place in the us and canada.  tour dates  references  2010s musical films 2016 albums todrick hall albums concept albums lgbt-related albums visual albums
"the bastard king of england" is a bawdy english folk song commonly falsely attributed to rudyard kipling, or less commonly lord tennyson, charles dickens, walt whitman, or charles whistler. the earliest known appearance of the song was in 1927. the song depicts various sexual escapades involving the title character, an unnamed queen of spain, a french king named phillip, and the "duke of zippity-zap" who gives the king a case of the clap. the song has a number of historical inaccuracies, since the last french king to bear the name phillip died in the 14th century, but spain would not become a united kingdom until the 15th, while the last king of england to be illegitimate was william i (reigned 1066-1087), although it was alleged during the reign of edward iv (1461-1483) that edward was illegitimate. also, it would be quite impossible to drag anyone from france to england behind a horse before the channel tunnel was dug.  according to ed cray, author of bawdy ballads, "as the story goes, rudyard kipling wrote 'the bastard king of england' (pronounced en-ga-land') and that authorship cost him his poet laureate's knighthood. it is too bad that the attribution is apparently spurious; 'the bastard king' would undoubtedly be kipling's most popular work" if he had actually written it.   in the first episode of z: the beginning of everything, zelda fitzgerald sings a verse from the ballad before diving off a dock.  a very similar song with censored lyrics, called "the phony king of england", appeared in disney's 1973 animated film robin hood.  references   english folk songs songs about sexuality songs about kings songs about fictional male characters songs about england
nicolas boindin (29 may 1676 - 30 november 1751) was an 18th-century french writer and playwright.  works  theatre 1701: les trois gascons, comedy in 1 act, with antoine houdar de la motte, paris, theatre de la rue des fosses saint-germain, 4 june 1702: le bal d'auteuil, comedy in 3 acts, paris, theatre de la rue des fosses saint-germain, 22 august  1702: la matrone d'ephese, comedie, avec antoine houdar de la motte 1704: le port de mer, comedie en 1 acte et en prose, paris, theatre de la rue des fosses saint-germain, 27 may 1753: le petit-maitre de robe, comedy in one act and in prose memoires 1717-1718: lettres historiques a mr d*** sur la nouvelle comedie italienne, dans lesquelles il est parle de son etablissement, du caractere des acteurs qui la composent, des pieces qu'ils ont representees jusqu'a present, et des aventures qui y sont arrivees, text online : 1re lettre 2e lettre 3e lettre 1719: lettres historiques sur tous les spectacles de paris, text online(lettre sur la comedie francaise. lettre sur l'opera. lettre sur la comedie italienne. lettre sur les foires de saint-germain et de saint laurent.) 1752: memoire pour servir a l'histoire des couplets de 1710, attribues faussement a m. rousseau (par n. boindin). le veritable paquet adresse a m. boindin et, par consequent, le vrai corps du delit, text online 1753: memoires pour servir a l'histoire du celebre rousseau, ou l'on prouve que les fameux couplets qui lui ont ete faussement attribues sont reellement de la motte, saurin et malafer. nouvelle edition, augmentee du vrai caractere de rousseau, en deux lettres de m. racine et une de m. l'abbe d'olivet 1761: discours sur la forme et la construction du theatre des anciens collected works 1746: œuvres de theatre, text online 1753: œuvres de monsieur boindin, 2 vol., text online 2  bibliography   « notice sur boindin », in suite du repertoire du theatre francais. comedies en prose, paris, chez mme veuve dabo, tome
1, 1822, (p. 121-125)  pierre larousse, grand dictionnaire universel du xixe siecle, vol. ii, 1868, (p. 877)  external links   nicolas bouindin on   his plays and their presentations on cesar  18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 1676 births writers from paris 1751 deaths
the whitney farm is a historic farm property at 215 whitneyville road in appleton, maine.  encompassing more than  of land in appleton and searsmont, the farm exemplifies the evolutionary history of farm properties in the mid coast region, with a variety of outbuildings reflective of changing trends in agriculture, and a c. 1825 farmstead that was not fitted for electricity or indoor plumbing until 2008.  the property was listed on the national register of historic places in 2015.  description and history the whitney farm property is located in eastern appleton and western searsmont, a rural inland area of mid coast maine.  the farmstead is located in appleton, about  downslope on the north side of appleton ridge.  the farm property consists of a series of fields and woodlots, and is partly divided by whitney bog, which straddles the town line.  the farmstead is a closely grouped collection of buildings at the northeastern end of whitneyville road, the access road to the property from appleton ridge road.  the main house is a c. 1825 cape style wood frame building, with its exterior clad in a combination of clapboards and wooden shingles.  brick chimneys rise at the center of the main block, and in one of two single-story gabled ells that project from it.  north of the house stands the barn, dating to the first half of the 19th century, from which a single-story series of garage bays projects southward.  a second outbuilding was called the cooper shop by members of the whitney family; it has two sections, one dating to c. 1900, and the other of older but uncertain age.  this building also saw historical use as a chicken coop.  also to the east of the house is a long and rectangular poultry house.  two distinctive surviving outbuildings are a corn crib and ice house, both relatively unusual survivors in rural maine.  this farm property was first settled about 1825 by john tole, and was basically a subsistence farm in its early years.  it remained as a diversified farm, growing in size with the success of several owners in the second half of the 19th century, and was purchased in 1878 by martha and hezekiah whitney, whose descendants would own the property into the 21st century.  burton whitney, of the second generation, was predominantly a cooper, producing barrels for potato farming businesses of aroostook county, but specialized the farm into poultry.  see also national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine national register of historic places listings in waldo county,
maine  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in maine farms on the national register of historic places in maine federal architecture in maine houses completed in 1825 houses in knox county, maine national register of historic places in knox county, maine houses in waldo county, maine national register of historic places in waldo county, maine
ali al-abed (born 1970) is an emirati former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1970 births living people emirati male cyclists olympic cyclists of the united arab emirates cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
chrysogorgia elegans is a species of soft coral in the family chrysogorgiidae. it is found in the gulf of mexico, the mediterranean sea and the north atlantic ocean.  references  external links     chrysogorgiidae animals described in 1883
caribbean (spanish: caribena) is a 1953 drama film directed by jose baviera. it was a co-production between mexico and guatemala.  cast    armando calvo    anabelle gutierrez    jose baviera    pedro vargas   rosario gutierrez  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films guatemalan films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by jose baviera mexican black-and-white films guatemalan black-and-white films
loustalot is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  angel loustalot christophe loustalot (born 1992), french rugby union player e. v. loustalot (died 1942), united states army officer jules loustalot tim loustalot (born 1965), american golfer victoria loustalot, american writer
dynamism of a dog on a leash (italian: dinamismo di un cane al guinzaglio), sometimes called dog on a leash or leash in motion, is a 1912 painting by italian futurist painter giacomo balla. it was influenced by the artist's fascination with chronophotographic studies of animals in motion. it is considered one of his best-known works, and one of the most important works in futurism, though it received mixed critical reviews. the painting has been in the collection of the albright-knox art gallery since 1984.  description and context the painting depicts a dachshund on a leash and the feet of a lady walking it, both in rapid motion as indicated by the blurring and multiplication of their parts.  chronophotographic studies of animals in motion, created by scientist etienne-jules marey beginning in the 1880s, led to the introduction in painting of techniques to show motion, such as blurring, multiplication, and superimposition of body parts-perhaps in an effort to imitate these mechanical images. such multiplication can be seen in marcel duchamp's nude descending a staircase, no. 2, painted the same year as balla's painting.  balla's interest in capturing a single moment in a series of planes was inspired by his fascination with chronophotography. in later, more abstract works created during world war i, balla used planes of color to suggest movement.  the decomposition of movement into moments in time which balla created in dynamism of a dog on a leash likely inspired the photodynamic technique of futurist photographer anton giulio bragaglia.  provenance the painting was exhibited in the galerie der sturm's autumn salon in berlin from september to december 1913, accompanied by a photograph of the scene. it was sold by the artist in 1938 to the industrialist anson conger goodyear. upon his death in 1964, goodyear bequeathed the painting jointly to his son, george f. goodyear, with a life interest, and to the albright-knox art gallery in buffalo, new york. the gallery acquired the painting in december 1984.  critical responses in 1943, artist cornelia geer leboutillier criticized the painting, comparing it unfavorably with duchamp's nude descending a staircase (a work with which it is often compared) and picasso's portrait of daniel-henry kahnweiler, calling balla's work "more crude, less mature, almost childish indeed ... balla takes himself and his dog so seriously, so studiedly, that it is doubtful
that any pleasure has ever come out of it anywhere; certainly no movement has." writing in 1947, critic henry r. hope called dynamism of a dog on a leash "a cliche of modern art". writer geoffrey wagner declared balla's painting to be anathema to the vorticist aesthetic of british painter wyndham lewis, who criticized futurism for its "romantic excess" and dynamism. however, s. i. hayakawa credited balla's "classic" for its introduction of the time dimension in its representation of its subject.  in 2009, art critic tom lubbock declared the painting "one of the most striking" chronophotography-inspired works, pointing to several features which create a comical effect: the "abrupt close-up" on a trivial subject-a "twee prim sausage dog"-which might have been a single detail in an impressionist street scene; the bathetic juxtaposition of the word dynamism, "with its connotations of heroism, of the mighty modern machine world" against that subject; the cropping of the owner at the knee, giving a dog's view (and anticipating tom and jerry cartoons); and the apparently frenetic motion of the dog's limbs and tail coupled with the stillness of its body, suggesting little forward progress. lubbock describes balla's motion effects as "creating new sensations and new phenomena", and evoking the motion of shuffling cards and the embodiment of ghosts.  in 2014, art critic robert c. morgan declared dynamism of a dog on a leash, along with gino severini's paintings blue dancer and dynamic hieroglyphic of the bal tabarin, to be "probably the most elegant and accurate works ever painted in the futurist tradition." he credits these works with "moving status into kinesis, stillness into motion, and thus giving life to culture, bringing it back from the bucolic ornaments of the 19th century."  influence outside art a 2002 research paper on machine vision by computer scientists roman goldenberg, ron kimmel, ehud rivlin, and michael rudzsky used futurism's techniques of motion, as embodied by dynamism of a dog on a leash, to illustrate the mathematical representation of periodic motion using a small number of eigenshapes.  see also list of works by giacomo balla  references  works by giacomo balla futurist paintings 1912 paintings animal paintings dogs in art paintings in the collection of the albright-knox art gallery
major-general sir ivor thomas percival hughes,  (21 december 1897 - 16 august 1962) was a senior british army officer who fought in both the world wars. during the second world war he commanded the 44th (home counties) division during the battle of alam el halfa and the second battle of el alamein in late 1942 and later became serjeant-at-arms of the house of commons.  early life and military career ivor hughes was born in sussex, england, on 21 december 1897, the son of revt. f. g. hughes and was educated at wellington college, berkshire. he joined the british army during the first world war and, after entering the royal military college, sandhurst, graduated on 16 august 1916, being commissioned as a second lieutenant into the queen's (royal west surrey regiment). soon afterwards he was sent to the western front, where he joined the 1st battalion of his regiment, then serving in the 100th brigade of the 33rd division, later transferring to the 19th brigade. he was to remain with the battalion for the rest of the war. during his service in belgium and france he was, in addition to being twice wounded, mentioned in despatches and awarded the military cross (mc).  between the wars remaining in the army during the interwar period, hughes was posted to the 2nd battalion, queen's in 1919 and, by now a lieutenant, went with the battalion to india, where he became the battalion's assistant adjutant. during his time serving on the north-west frontier he was mentioned in despatches and awarded the indian general service medal. hughes was appointed as adjutant to the battalion in 1925 and returned with the battalion to england in 1927. hughes, by now a captain, then attended the staff college, camberley from 1929 to 1930, where his fellow students included numerous future general officers, such as neil ritchie, herbert lumsden and george erskine, reginald denning, hugh stable, kenneth crawford, temple gurdon, neil mcmicking, i. s. o. playfair, harold redman, james elliott and harold freeman-attwood.  after returning to his regiment, this time with the 2nd battalion, for a year, he was posted to scottish command as a staff officer, from 1932 to 1934, later being sent to dover, kent as a brigade major to the 12th brigade until 1935. he then left the army and became assistant serjeant-at-arms of the house of commons from 1935 to 1939. in 1937 he became
second-in-command (2ic) of the 4th battalion, queen's, a territorial army (ta) unit, and in 1938 commanded the battalion, later overseeing its conversion to a searchlight regiment of the royal artillery, whereupon it was redesignated 63rd (queen's) searchlight regiment, royal artillery. however, his duties at westminster forced him to relinquish command in early 1939.  second world war hughes rejoined the army in november 1939, two months after the second world war began, and soon became commanding officer (co) of the 1/6th battalion, queen's, another ta unit, then serving as part of the 131st infantry brigade of the 44th (home counties) infantry division, then commanded by major general edmund osborne. after several months of training in dorset, the battalion was sent overseas to france, arriving there in early april 1940 where it became part of the british expeditionary force (bef). only a few weeks later the german army launched its attack in the west, and the battalion moved up to the river escaut and was ordered to hold the line there. the germans attacked in force and hughes' battalion met them and were, for 36 hours, engaged in severe fighting, which resulted in the germans breaking through on the battalion's flanks, forcing hughes to order his battalion to retreat to avoid complete encirclement. the greatly depleted battalion eventually, along with most of the rest of the bef, made their way back to dunkirk, and were subsequently evacuated to england. hughes, for his leadership of the battalion in france, was awarded the distinguished service order (dso).  soon afterwards the battalion, along with the rest of the brigade and the division, now commanded by major general arthur percival, reorganised in oxford, later being sent to lincolnshire, and began anti-invasion duties in the event of a german invasion. hughes, in late october, was promoted to brigadier and given command of the 219th independent infantry brigade (home), one of the many newly raised units composed almost entirely of conscripts, most of whom were civilians with little to no previous military experience, created specifically for static beach defence. the brigade, woefully short of basic weaponry, served in kent under various divisions. hughes remained with the brigade until early may 1941 when he returned to the 44th division, then commanded by major general noel mason-macfarlane (but replaced in late june by major general brian horrocks) and serving in kent, this time to command the 131st brigade, fulfilling much the same role as the 219th brigade
had, that of beach defence. hughes remained with the brigade until mid-march 1942 when he was promoted to major general and became general officer commanding (goc) of the 44th division, succeeding major general horrocks, who received another appointment to become goc of the 9th armoured division. horrocks later wrote in his autobiography that he "hated having to leave this [44th] division, which i had been training for nine months, though it was some consolation to know that i was to be succeeded by ivor hughes, a 'queensman' himself, who had been commanding the 131st queens brigade. he was the perfect choice, and he would, i knew, be very popular".  the 44th division - comprising the 131st, 132nd, 133rd infantry brigades and supporting divisional troops - was serving in kent as part of lieutenant general james gammell's xii corps, part of south-eastern command under lieutenant general bernard montgomery, and, soon after hughes took command, was ordered to prepare for overseas service. the division, destined for north africa, moved to glasgow, scotland, in late may and, after being at sea for almost two months, finally arrived in egypt in late july and, moving some 60 miles east of cairo, commenced training for desert warfare.  however, in mid-august, the division was ordered by general sir harold alexander, the newly appointed commander-in-chief (c-in-c) middle east command, to join the british eighth army at el alamein. lieutenant general bernard montgomery, the new goc eighth army, who knew the division well after having it under his command in england, had specifically requested that the 44th division be sent forward. arriving on 15 august, the division was assigned to xiii corps, under lieutenant general brian horrocks, hughes' predecessor as goc of the 44th division and began relieving elements of the 5th indian infantry division on the alam halfa ridge, and the 132nd brigade was temporarily detached to lieutenant general bernard freyberg's 2nd new zealand division. the division's first engagement came over two weeks later, during the battle of alam el halfa, which saw the detached 132nd brigade under brigadier lashmer "bolo" whistler, taking part in operation beresford, suffer almost 700 casualties, with the rest of the division's losses being relatively light.  soon afterwards the much depleted 132nd brigade returned to command of the division, bringing it up to full strength of three brigades again, only for the 133rd brigade
to be transferred to major general "alec" gatehouse's 10th armoured division, again reducing hughes' division to just two brigades. towards the end of september, the 131st brigade suffered heavily in operation braganza and, in late october the division, still with just two brigades, fought in the second battle of el alamein and, still under lieutenant general horrocks's xiii corps, played a relatively minor role as a result. hughes' division was further weakened when he lost the 131st brigade in early november to the 7th armoured division, under major general john harding. although trying to retain his division, the 44th was disbanded soon after (officially on 31 january 1943), due to a shortage of infantry in north africa and the middle east, and most of the division's units were posted to other divisions, the 131st brigade remaining with the 7th armoured division for the rest of the war, the 132nd brigade being broken up, its battalions posted away to indian army units, and the 133rd brigade also being broken up.  in the aftermath of his division's disbandment, hughes was promoted to the acting rank of lieutenant general and became goc of xxv corps, then comprising only the 8th indian infantry division, in cyprus. he was then, from 1944 to 1945, a member of the military liaison mission to greece, yugoslavia, and albania, and retired from the army, with the rank of major general, in 1947.  postwar after retirement from the army, hughes returned to his duties at westminster which the war had forced him to abandon, and became chairman of the surrey territorial and auxiliary forces association from 1947 to 1949 before becoming deputy lieutenant of surrey. from 1957 until his sudden death on 16 august 1962 - exactly 46 years since he received his commission - he was serjeant-at-arms of the house of commons.  bibliography  references  external links generals of world war ii  |-  1897 births 1962 deaths british army generals of world war ii british army personnel of world war i companions of the order of the bath commanders of the order of the british empire companions of the distinguished service order deputy lieutenants of surrey graduates of the royal military college, sandhurst graduates of the staff college, camberley knights commander of the royal victorian order people educated at wellington college, berkshire queen's royal regiment officers recipients of the military cross british army generals recipients of the war cross (greece) serjeants-at-arms of the british house of commons military personnel from sussex
state highway 12 in haryana is meant for karnal-assandh-jind-hansi-tosham-sodiwas. the total length of state highway is of 192.32 km.  see also list of state highways in haryana  references   haryana pwd site
knight point state park is a day use state park off us route 2 on north hero island in north hero, vermont. opened in 1978, the park is administered by the vermont department of forests, parks, and recreation, as part of the vermont state park system. features include a sandy swimming beach and boat rentals on lake champlain, and picnic areas with cooking grills.  the park houses the island center for arts and recreation, a community-based nonprofit that promotes area cultural events.  the campmeeting point natural area is a 3-acre section of the park. it includes 2,200 feet of lake champlain shoreline of least disturbed cobble beach that supports rare plant species, and the adjacent woodland with a grove of large oaks and hickory trees.  references  state parks of vermont protected areas of grand isle county, vermont north hero, vermont 1978 establishments in vermont
the st. louis equal suffrage league was formed in 1910 in st. louis, missouri with the aim of "bring[ing] together men and women who are willing to consider the question of equal suffrage and by earnest co-operation to secure its establishment."  history  in may 1879, the st. louis branch of the national woman suffrage association was formed. the organization served as a counterpart to the women's suffrage association of missouri (founded in 1867 as the first organization in history dedicated specifically to women's suffrage) which had affiliated with the more conservative american women's suffrage association in 1871. partially due to the loss of local st. louisan and noted suffragette virginia minor, who had petitioned all the way to the united states supreme court in 1874 in the case of minor vs. happersett to guarantee women's right to vote through the citizenship clause of the 14th amendment of the united states constitution, no petitions to the missouri legislature were made between 1901 and 1911 and there were no woman suffrage conventions in the state.  a few women kept a state suffrage organization going, but there was a general sense of apathy among women about the cause. in 1901, mrs. addie johnson led the state organization, who was followed by mrs. louis werth in 1902, and mrs. alice mulkley in 1903. in st. louis, which was home to one-fourth of missourians, there was no visible presence for the suffrage movement. the largest and most influential woman's club would not allow suffrage to be discussed during its meetings. during the first decade of the 1900s, only one nationally known speaker on suffrage came to missouri, mrs. carrie chapman catt, president of the national american woman suffrage association.  the movement gained momentum when ethel arnold, a well known suffragette leader in england, made her first tour of america in 1910. a few women in st. louis (among whom there was amabel anderson arnold, director of the woman's department at the university of chicago law school, the first woman holding such office in the united states) organized a visit for edith arnold to the city and raised funds to cover her charge and the rent of a hall. her lecture took place on april 11 of that year. it was from this visit that the st. louis equal suffrage league was formed. conservative society did not talk of suffrage and even when the equal suffrage league was established, it was with a cautious tone, emphasizing education rather than action. members preferred to be called suffragists instead of suffragettes to downplay any
militant activity. ten women dared to take a stance on the suffrage movement and establish the equal suffrage league. the founding members were mrs. robert atkinson, miss marie garesche, mrs. e.m. grossman, miss lillian hetzell, miss jennie a.m. jones, mrs. d.w. knefler, miss bertha rombauer, mrs. russell, mrs. florence wyman richardson and her daughter, mrs. roland usher.  the ten original members sent out a call for those interested in equal suffrage to help in organizing a society. fifty women responded and the group first met on april 10, 1910, establishing the st. louis equal suffrage league. mrs. florence wyman richardson was elected president. the group immediately began trying to increase their membership. some of the first members were men, prominent ministers from various denominations, leading lawyers, physicians, and businessmen. branch organizations were started in public libraries around the city. at the end of the year, the league claimed a membership of 250 men and women.  in the spring of 1911, the missouri equal suffrage association was formed, after a meeting of three suffrage clubs from kansas city, warrensburg, and webster groves. the new association adopted a constitution and officers were elected. mrs. robert atkinson, who had served as president of the st. louis league was elected president. mrs. florence richardson took over the st. louis chapter. she served as president for a year and was succeeded by mrs. david o'neil.  league activity  the equal suffrage league brought many speakers to st. louis to speak on suffrage, issued press reports, organized street meetings, and established branch organizations in the st. louis area. some of the speakers that the group brought to the city were ethel arnold, the honorable and mrs. philip snowden of england, mrs. lucia ames mead of boston, professor schmidt of cornell, professor frances squire potter of chicago, and professor earl barnes of philadelphia. on november 3, 1911, the league invited emmeline pankhurst to lecture at the odeon, the largest hall in the city. the theatre nearly reached capacity. her lecture helped to assuage fears of the ill effects of suffrage regarding feminine grace and refinement.  after a few years, the league has exhausted its means of attracting attention to their cause. a new organization, a business woman's league was formed in 1912 that was called to action immediately to demonstrate at a milliner's convention in st. louis. the members supplied delegates with suffrage ideas and hats to distribute throughout missouri
. st. louis women held street meetings and demonstrated at the county fair, giving speeches from decorated automobiles. the business woman's suffrage league was led by mary mcguire, a graduate of st. louis university law school, and miss jessie lansing moller. the group started with 50 members and later grew to 250.    by 1913, the attitude towards woman suffrage seemed to be shifting, with support from the farmer's alliance, the state teacher's association, prohibitionists, single taxers, and leading papers. despite this support, missouri failed to pass a suffrage amendment in november 1914.  in june 1916, the national democratic convention was held in st. louis. seven thousand suffragists dressed in white with yellow sashes and yellow parasols lining the delegates' route to the opening morning of the convention. although the demonstration was silent, the women's voices were heard for their display of what one poem called "the golden lane." the "walkless, talkless parade" was made up of about 7,000 women who lined both sides of locust street for about ten blocks. another demonstration was staged on the steps of the st. louis art museum, with women representing states of the union arranged by their levels of support for woman suffrage. the women stood under a canopy of gold cloth, with thirteen women dressed in white to represent the twelve equal suffrage states and alaska. women dressed in gray stood further down the steps, representing states with partial suffrage. at the bottom of the steps stood women dressed in black, representing states where women were not allowed to vote. these actions converted some missourians to the suffrage movement, but had little effect on the convention delegates.  during world war i, the equal suffrage league combined their efforts towards suffrage with war efforts. they protested the repeal of the federal child labor law and investigated the high cost of milk, among other actions. president woodrow wilson supported suffrage more after their display of patriotism during the war.  by 1919, the st. louis league was successful enough to invite the national suffrage association to hold the golden jubilee in the city. the convention was held march 23-29 at the statler hotel, with evening meetings at the odeon. during the convention, miss marie b. ames, who had been in jefferson city, missouri for ninety-six days advocating for suffrage, returned to st. louis with the news that the suffrage bill had passed both houses.  passage of the 19th amendment  in the spring of 1919, the 50th missouri general assembly passed the presidential suffrage bill, which gave women the right to vote
in presidential elections. st. louis league president christine fordyce appealed to the legislature in a speech saying, "fifty years ago my grandmother came before the missouri legislature and asked for the enfranchisement of women; twenty-five years ago, my mother came to make the same request; tonight i am asking for the ballot for women. are you going to make it necessary for my daughter to appear in her turn?" ms. fordyce's daughter would not have to make the same appeal, as soon suffrage was supported at the federal level. the missouri legislature ratified the susan b. anthony amendment to the u.s. constitution during a special session in july of that year. governor gardner called a special session and then amendment passed by a vote of 125 to 4 in the house and 29 to 3 in the senate. missouri became the eleventh state to ratify the nineteenth amendment. the first eleven states ratified the amendment within a month. it would take another year for the thirty-sixth state ratified the amendment and made it a binding part of the united states constitution.  the people of st. louis wanted to celebrate the historical occasion, and a picnic supper was held in forest park, with a reception following at the municipal theatre. suffragists in st. louis requested time during the program to express their gratitude for missouri's ratification of the amendment. the ladies assembled on stage under the direction of alice martin. ten women grouped in the center of the stage to represent the ten states that had ratified the nineteenth amendment. as the lights went up in the theatre, the audience applauded. mrs. walter mcnab miller, honorary president of the missouri woman suffrage association, gave a speech and gave mrs. fred l. english, president of the equal suffrage league of st. louis, the banner of missouri.  the state suffrage organization held a convention in october 16-18 at the hotel statler in st. louis. after the passage of the suffrage bill, the organization changed its name to the missouri league of women voters.  references   missouri suffrage st. louis missouri elections
judith emilie egerton (7 august 1928 - 21 march 2012) was an australian-born british art historian and curator. she specialised in eighteenth-century british art and, particularly, the work of george stubbs.  early life and career  egerton was born in melbourne, australia as the third of five children to jean (nee muecke) and keith attiwill, a journalist. she was educated at lauriston girls' school and, from the age of 17, at janet clarke hall, then the women's college of the university of melbourne, where she read history and graduated with first-class honours in 1948. she married ansell egerton in 1949 (dissolved in 1974) and the couple emigrated to the united kingdom, briefly living in oxford.  when her husband became a lecturer in economics at queen's university belfast, she held the post of tutorial assistant in history. while in belfast, she became a close friend of the poet philip larkin, who was then a sub-librarian at the university. the egertons returned to london in 1956. while raising her two daughters, egerton worked on the british dictionary of national biography and the australian dictionary of biography.  later career in london, egerton came into contact with the watercolour specialist dudley snelgrove with whom she worked in the late 1960s, cataloguing the sporting art pictures being bought by paul mellon. it was during this period that egerton became interested in the work of george stubbs.  egerton was appointed as a research assistant grade i of the british school at the tate gallery in 1974, being promoted to assistant keeper grade i by  1980. she was responsible for curating the exhibition george stubbs, anatomist and animal painter, which opened in august 1976, and concerned his anatomical drawings. egerton wrote the catalogue raisonne on stubbs, published by the paul mellon centre in 1984, and curated the major exhibition on the artist which was held from 1984 into 1985 at the tate and the yale centre for british art in connecticut. she remained at the tate until 1988.  egerton also worked on well-known british artists joseph wright of derby and william hogarth. she curated a show at the tate gallery in 1990 on wright of derby and worked with hogarth expert, elizabeth einberg, on compiling a catalogue of the tate's permanent collection of hogarth artworks titled the age of hogarth. she also wrote hogarth's marriage-a-la-mode, which was re-published by yale university press in 2011 with an accompanying dvd narrated by
alan bennett.  egerton was employed by the national gallery from 1988 to 1998 to revise the british school catalogue and became a senior research fellow of the paul mellon centre for studies in british art from 1997 until 2007.  archive  the judy egerton archive was donated to the paul mellon centre by her daughters in 2012.  it contains the research notes, correspondence and images she compiled during the course of her work on the publications and exhibitions concerning the artists stubbs, hogarth, turner and wright of derby. the archive is available for public consultation.  exhibitions   george stubbs, anatomist and animal painter, tate gallery, 1976  stubbs, tate gallery & yale centre for british art, 1984-5  joseph wright of derby, tate gallery, 1990  the age of hogarth, tate gallery  publications   george stubbs, painter: catalogue raisonne (paul mellon centre by yale university press, 2007)  the british school (national gallery, 1998)  d. davies, f. luard & j. egerton, hogarth's marriage a-la-mode (national gallery, 1997)  turner: the fighting temeraire (national gallery, 1995)  wright of derby (tate gallery, c1990)  j. egerton & e. einberg, the age of hogarth: british painters born 1675-1709 (tate gallery with the assistance of j. paul getty trust, 1988)  j. egerton & c. newall, george price boyce (tate gallery, 1987)  british watercolours (tate gallery, 1986)  british sporting paintings: the paul mellon collection in the virginia museum of fine art (virginia museum of fine art, c1985)  stubbs: portraits in detail (tate gallery, 1984)  george stubbs 1724-1806 (tate gallery, 1984)  the ingenious mr seymour: james seymour, 1702-1752 (british sporting art trust, 1978)  j. egerton & d. snelgrove, british sporting and animal drawings c.1500-1850 (tate gallery for yale center for british art, 1978)  british sporting and animal paintings 1655-1867 (tate gallery for yale center for british art, 1978)  drawings and paintings by sir thomas monnington pra, 1902-1976 (royal academy of arts, 1977)  george stubbs: anatomist and animal painter (tate gallery publications, 1976)  references  external links   the judy egerton archive, research papers at the paul mellon centre  1928
births 2012 deaths academics from melbourne australian art historians australian expatriates in the united kingdom british art historians university of melbourne alumni university of melbourne women women art historians writers from melbourne australian women historians british women historians people educated at lauriston girls' school
loic guilvic gagnon (born 21 january 1991) is a french professional footballer who plays as a winger for championnat national 2 club granville.  career gagnon made his fortuna liga debut for spartak trnava against sport podbrezova on 17 july 2016.  on 11 january 2022, gagnon signed for french side granville.  references  external links  fc spartak trnava official club profile  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1991 births sportspeople from bondy living people french footballers association football midfielders villemomble sports players championnat national 2 players 2. liga (slovakia) players slovak super liga players liga ii players championnat national 3 players as monaco fc players ogc nice players us ivry players partizan bardejov players fc spartak trnava players cs sportul snagov players vendee poire-sur-vie football players as vitre players us granville players french expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in slovakia expatriate footballers in romania french expatriate sportspeople in slovakia french expatriate sportspeople in romania
the tent partnership for refugees, previously known as the tent foundation, is a non-profit organization founded by hamdi ulukaya, the founder and ceo of chobani yogurt. it is a coalition of businesses that have committed to take action to help refugees.  established in 2016 and headquartered in new york city, the organization brings together companies to improve the lives of the more than 25 million people around the world who have been forcibly displaced from their home countries. the tent partnership encourages businesses to play a more active role in addressing the crisis by hiring refugees, integrating them into supply chains, supporting refugee entrepreneurs, and delivering services to them.  history in 2015, chobani's ceo and founder, hamdi ulukaya, signed the giving pledge, committing to give the majority of his personal wealth to help end the global refugee crisis. he founded the tent foundation for this purpose.  in 2016, the tent foundation incorporated the private sector commitments announced in response to president obama's 2016 call to action for private sector engagement on the global refugee crisis.  the tent partnership for refugees was launched in 2016 at the world economic forum in davos. the inaugural members of the tent alliance included airbnb, becton dickinson, chobani, cotopaxi, henry schein, the ikea foundation, johnson & johnson, linkedin, mastercard, pearson, ups, and western union. since 2016, this group has grown to more than 100 companies, including companies such as salesforce,  deloitte, wework, and starbucks.  references  foundations based in the united states organizations established in 2015 charities based in new york city
christine churcher (born 21 september 1954)  is a leading politician in ghana. she was the member of parliament for the cape coast constituency in the central region of ghana in the 2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th parliament of the republic of ghana.  early life and education  churcher was born on 21 september 1954.  she attended the kwesi plange primary school also known as pere planque memorial preparaory school in cape coast from 1959 to 1965. between 1965 and 1972 she attended the mfanstiman girls secondary school. between 1975 and 1978 churcher studied english and history at the university of ghana and graduated successfully.  later, churcher obtained the master in philosophy in adult education at the university of ghana.  career  churcher is a ghanaian politician. she has held a variety of state ministerial positions in ghana. she has worked as a former minister of environment and science. she has also served on the board of directors of ghana gas company. she has also served as a minister of state for education.  politics  churcher has represented the cape coast constituency in the central region of ghana in the 2nd, 3rd and 4th parliaments of the 4th republic of ghana.  elections  churcher was first elected into parliament on the ticket of the new patriotic party during the december 1996 ghanaian general elections for  the cape coast constituency in the central region of ghana. she polled 30,496 votes out of the 56,428 valid votes cast representing 46.20%over her opponent s.valis-akyianu an ndc member who also polled 25,932 votes.  churcher was elected as the member of the 3rd parliament of the 4th republic of ghana in the 2000 ghanaian general elections for the cape coast south constituency on the ticket of the new patriotic party with a total number of votes cast of 31,573 votes representing 55.70% over her opponents.  she was also elected as the member of parliament for the 4th parliament of the 4th republic of ghana in the 2004 ghanaian general elections. she thus served as a member of parliament for the cape coast constituency from 7 january 2005 to 6 january 2009. she was elected with 36,264 votes out of 70,866 total valid votes cast. this was equivalent to 51.2% of the total valiv votes cast. she was elected over macdonald konns tongo of the people's national convention, ebo barton-odro of the national democratic congress and araba bentsi
-enchill safohen of the convention people's party. these obtained 0.8%, 44.5% and 3.5% respectively of total valid votes cast. churcher was elected on the ticket of the new patriotic party. her constituency was a part of the 16 constituencies won by the new patriotic party in the central region in that elections. in all, the new patriotic party won a total 128 parliamentary seats in the 4th parliament of the 4th republic of ghana.  see also   list of ghanaian politicians  references  external links     modern ghana mit photo  1954 births living people education ministers of ghana environment ministers of ghana science ministers of ghana women government ministers of ghana mayors of places in ghana university of ghana alumni mfantsiman girls' secondary school alumni people from central region (ghana) ghanaian mps 1997-2001 ghanaian mps 2001-2005 ghanaian mps 2005-2009 ghanaian mps 2009-2013 new patriotic party politicians
waldmeier is a german surname. notable people with the surname include:  marie-luce waldmeier (born 1960), french alpine skier max waldmeier (1912-2000), swiss astronomer theophilus waldmeier (1832-1915), swiss quaker missionary  german-language surnames
reutemann is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  carlos reutemann (1942-2021), argentine racing driver  mariano reutemann (born 1977), argentine windsurfer
type 3c diabetes (also known as pancreatogenic diabetes) is diabetes that comes secondary to pancreatic diseases, involving the exocrine and digestive functions of the pancreas.  around 5-10% of cases of diabetes in the western world are related to pancreatic diseases. chronic pancreatitis is most often the cause.  presentation the same complications that occur for other types of diabetics (type 1 and type 2) may occur for type 3c diabetics. these include retinopathy, nephropathy, neuropathy, and cardiovascular disease. patients with this condition are advised to follow the same risk-reduction guidelines as the other diabetics do and keep blood sugars as normal as possible to minimize any complications.  cause  there are multiple causes. some of which identified are:  pancreatic disease  pancreatic resection  chronic pancreatitis (caused by exocrine insufficiency, maldigestion, and malnutrition).  lacking genes in the e2f group.  in 2021, venturi reported that pancreas is able to absorb in great quantity radioactive cesium (cs-134 and cs-137) causing a severe and permanent pancreatitis with damage of pancreatic islands, and causing (type 3c) diabetes (pancreatogenic). in fact, type 3c diabetes mellitus increased in contaminated population, particularly children and adolescents, after fukushima and chernobyl nuclear incidents. at the same time, worldwide pancreatic diseases, diabetes and environmental radiocesium are increasing.  diagnosis  management  the condition can be managed by many factors.  lifestyle modifications  avoiding toxins to the body such as alcohol and smoking reduce pancreatic inflammation. also, eating a diet rich in fiber and consuming normal amounts of fat may help. oral pancreatic enzymes may be given. maintaining sufficient levels of vitamin d can also reduce symptoms and help manage the disease better.  medications medications such as insulin may be given in order to lower blood sugars. for not so high blood sugars, oral treatments in the form of a pill or capsule may be given.  see also   diabetes mellitus  pancreatitis  exocrine pancreatic insufficiency  references   diabetes pancreas disorders inflammations exocrine system
zubaida gulshan ara ( - 19 march 2017) was a bangladeshi writer. she was the chairperson of bangladesh shishu academy. she was awarded ekushey padak in 2005 by the government of bangladesh.  career ara wrote 50 books. she served as the general secretary of "sahitto bangladesh", a literary organization.  references  1940s births 2017 deaths bangladeshi women writers recipients of the ekushey padak year of birth missing burials at banani graveyard
bassi pathana assembly constituency (sl. no.: 54) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in fatehgarh sahib district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india fatehgarh sahib district
prince friedrich heinrich albrecht, prince of prussia (german: wilhelm ernst alexander friedrich heinrich albrecht prinz von preußen; 15 april 1874 - 13 november 1940) was a prussian officer, member of the house of hohenzollern, and a great-grandson of friedrich wilhelm iii of prussia, he was persecuted for being homosexual.  early life  friedrich heinrich was the oldest son of prince albert of prussia (1837-1906) and his wife princess marie of saxen-altenburg (1854-1898). he stood over six feet tall.   he studied law at friedrich-wilhelms university in bonn. in 1895, he became a member of the fraternity "corps borussia bonn," and later became an honorary member of the burschenschaft vandalia berlin.  military career  after university, he took up a career as a commissioned officer. he began as a major in the 1st guard dragoon regiment "queen victoria of great britain and ireland," and then was called to the command of the german general staff in 1902.   in 1904, he became the commander of the 1st brandenburg dragoon regiment number 2; he would rise to colonel on may 21, 1906.  homosexuality  he was relieved of his post as commander of the regiment at the beginning of 1907 and expelled from the prussian army because of his homosexuality. he was allowed to reenlist at the beginning of world war i as a private, but was denied promotion.  at the end of 1906, at the wishes of kaiser wilhelm ii and as the heir of his deceased father, friedrich heinrich was voted the herrenmeister of the order of saint john. however, due to increasing knowledge of his homosexuality, prince eitel friedrich became the herrenmeister instead. journalist maximilian harden published an article on april 27, 1907 that this change in leadership was because the prince "suffers from an inherited version of inverted sex drive." this is likely a reference to his homosexual ancestor prince henry of prussia (1726-1802).   in response to this publicity, friedrich heinrich left berlin on the advice of theobald von bethmann hollweg. he spent time in the south of france and egypt before returning to germany, where he lived in seclusion on his estates in silesia.   at the beginning of 1910, he gave up his presidency of the academy of charitable sciences at erfurt to his brother prince friedrich wilhelm of prussia.  later years  his inheritance included the towns of kamenz and zawidow (german: seidenberg) in the southeastern area of
province of lower silesia; his contributions to the economic development of the area and care for the townsfolk made him locally popular. with his own money, he established the evangelical church of the holy cross in wolfelsgrund in 1911 and the church of the resurrection in zawidow in 1913, and brought in deaconesses for local nursing homes. he also promoted local forestry.   he was never married and died without descendants, ending the paternal line of albrecht hohenzollern. he died on november 13, 1940 in zawidow and was buried in the mausoleum there.   after his death, waldemar, son of prince heinrich and the grandson of friedrich iii inherited the castle in kamenz.  honours    kingdom of prussia:  knight of the order of the black eagle, 15 july 1884; with collar, 17 january 1893  knight of the order of the prussian crown, 1st class, 15 july 1884  grand commander's cross of the royal house order of hohenzollern, 15 july 1884  grand cross of the order of the red eagle, with crown, 12 june 1892  : grand cross of the order of saint stephen, 1898  : knight of the order of saint hubert, 1898  : knight of the order of the elephant, 29 august 1903  : knight of the house order of fidelity, 1904  : grand cross of the order of charles iii, 30 may 1906  references  further reading   rohl, j. (2014). 'kings are only human, after all.' scandals at the hohenzollern court. in s. bellaigue & r. bridge (trans.), wilhelm ii: into the abyss of war and exile, 1900-1941 (pp. 522-544). cambridge: cambridge university press. doi:10.1017/cbo9781139046275.022  external links   engraving of friedrich heinrich as a child at the british museum.  carte-de-visite of friedrich heinrich and his younger brother joachim, from queen victoria's collection.  1874 births 1940 deaths 19th-century lgbt people gay history friedrich heinrich lgbt military personnel lgbt people from germany lgbt royalty people from the province of silesia people from zabkowice slaskie county friedrich heinrich lgbt and military service 20th-century lgbt people
hans grunder (born 13 june 1956 in ruderswil; in vechigen) is a swiss politician in the conservative democratic party of switzerland (bdp).  life  hans grunder lives in ruegsau. he comes from a rural family, is married and has five children. since 1987, he has been the owner of an international survey-consulting company with around 140 staff. he is also known regionally (and not uncontroversially) as the president of the scl tigers. since 2001, he has also worked with his family on his own horse breeding farm.  in 1999, grunder was elected as a representative of the swiss people's party (svp) in the grand council of bern. he was vice-president of the trachselwald district branch of the svp, from november 1999 until november 2006. after that he was president of the same branch until 2008. in the 2007 swiss federal election he won a seat in the national council.  grunder was co-founder of the bdp of the canton of bern. on 1 november 2008, he was elected party president at the inaugural general meeting of the bdp as a national party. in the 2011 federal election he was re-elected to the national council. on 5 may 2012, grunder resigned from the position of party president his successor was martin landolt.  references  external links   website of hans grunder website of grunder's horse farm der ingenieur der bdp. video feature on 10vor10 (2 june 2011)  members of the national council (switzerland) conservative democratic party of switzerland politicians swiss people's party politicians 1956 births living people
martin santos (born 20 august 1962) is a former cyclist from guam. he competed in three events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1962 births living people guamanian male cyclists olympic cyclists of guam cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics american track cyclists place of birth missing (living people)
the county of buckingham is one of the 49 cadastral counties of south australia. it was proclaimed by governor james fergusson in 1869 and named for the third duke of buckingham and chandos, richard temple-nugent-brydges-chandos-grenville who was appointed secretary of state for the colonies in 1867. it is located adjacent to the victorian border in the state's upper south east. this includes most of the contemporary local government area of tatiara district council and a small east portion of coorong district council.  hundreds  the county of buckingham is divided into the following 11 hundreds:  hundred of archibald (ngarkat, coombe)  hundred of makin (ngarkat, makin)  hundred of mccallum (ngarkat, mccallum)  hundred of shaugh (shaugh)  hundred of stirling (keith)  hundred of pendleton (sherwood, brimbago)  hundred of cannawigara (sherwood, lowan vale, northern half of cannawigara)  hundred of senior (senior)  hundred of willalooka (willalooka)  hundred of wirrega (buckingham, mundulla, southern part of cannawigara)  hundred of tatiara (bordertown, wolseley)  references  buckingham
the tanzer 16 is a canadian sailboat, that was designed by johann tanzer and first built in 1963. the design is out of production.  derived from the similar 1963 constellation 16, the tanzer 16 design was developed into the overnighter 16 in 1964, by the addition of a cuddy cabin.  production the boat was built by tanzer industries in canada and remained in production until the company went out of business in 1986.  the boat's class association acquired the tooling for the design after tanzer industries closed down, but it is unknown if more examples have been produced since then.  design the tanzer 16 is a small recreational sailing dinghy, built predominantly of fiberglass, aluminum spars and oiled teak wood trim. it has a fractional sloop rig, with a roller-reefing boom, a transom-hung kick-up rudder, a spooned stem and a kick-up centreboard keel. it displaces  and has foam flotation.  the boat has a hull speed of  and is capable of planing. its broad beam and low centre-of-gravity result in increased stability.  the design has a portsmouth yardstick racing average handicap of 98.3.  variants constellation 16 original johann tanzer design of 1963. length overall , displacement . tanzer 16 renamed constellation 16, 1900 examples were completed. in production 1963-86. length overall , displacement . it has storage available in the lazarette and in the cockpit side compartments, as well as on a shelf under the foredeck. overnighter 16 development of the tanzer 16, with the addition of sleeping accommodations in the form of a cuddy cabin, with two bunks. 550 examples were built, starting in 1964. length overall , displacement .  see also list of sailing boat types  similar sailboats balboa 16 bombardier 4.8 catalina 16.5 ds-16 laguna 16 leeward 16 nordica 16 sirocco 15 wayfarer (dinghy)  references  dinghies 1960s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by johann tanzer sailboat types built by tanzer industries
the col du perthus (in catalan: coll de pertus) is a mountain pass of the pyrenees on the france-spain border, between the pyrenees-orientales in languedoc-roussillon, midi-pyrenees and the province of girona in catalonia.  rising to an altitude of , it is one of the lowest border passes in the pyrenees. it marks the western boundary of the albera massif. the village of le perthus was founded at the col in 1836. the location is the subject of a noted engraving by gustave dore, reproduced in dore's spain.  see also  list of mountain passes  references  mountain passes of the pyrenees mountain passes of spain mountain passes of occitania (administrative region)
yiddishpiel (combination of "yiddish" and "spiel" - play), is a yiddish theatre in tel aviv, israel. the theatre was established in 1987 at the initiative of former tel aviv mayor shlomo lahat and chairman of mercantile discount bank moshe noiderfer, as well as shmuel etsyon who partook in establishing the theater and served as its chairman and artistic director until november 2011, when he was replaced by sasi keshet.  yiddishpiel's main goals are to commemorate and keep yiddishkeit alive, as it is an inseparable part of jewish history. the yiddish is still alive and used quite broadly across the jewish population today, thus the theater has a regular audience, most of which consists of relatively old people. the theater's offices are located on carlebach road 7, tel aviv.  in 1996, the knesset approved the bill of establishing a national authority for yiddish and ladino (judeo-spanish) culture, whose role is to create a strong base for the two languages and their cultures in israel.  since its establishment, the theater has performed 42 productions which were presented in front of large audiences in israel and in other countries. throughout the years the theater partook in israeli festivals as well as important foreign festivals, and has taken the stage in wiesbaden, london, frankfurt, amsterdam, vienna, los angeles, and vilnius.  the theater has a wide selection of actors, including veterans such as yaakov bodo and yaakov alperon, and younger actors, who serve as the successors of yiddish theater and culture, among them dudu fischer, gadi yagil, anat atzmon, monica vardimon, jonathan rozen, yoni eilat, and amitai kedar. actor carol marcovicz, also acted at yiddishpiel until his death in 2006.  various repertoire plays are brought to the stage at the theater, which were written by various playwrights. throughout every play, there are hebrew and russian subtitles as well as audio, for the benefit of those who do not speak yiddish.  in each theatrical season, yiddishpiel presents 4 new plays, with one each quarter. some of the plays presented were translated into yiddish and written by playwrights such as shakespeare, moliere, and others; other plays were adapted into yiddish (by shalom aleichem and others), and others are local plays (by yehoshua sobol and others).  prizes the "entertainment award of the year" 2010 for the play "sparkling stars", which was chosen as the year's
most entertaining play by members of the academy of the israeli theater prize of 2010. "comedy of the year" 2001 for the play "golden youth" by niel simon, was chosen as the year's best comedy by members of the academy of the israeli theater prize of 2001. the "theater prize" of 1999, for the theater's work in promoting and enhancing israeli theater, given by shim'on peres. "keren klor prize" 1998, given to the theater at the president's residence jubilee to the independence of israel party for bringing yiddish theater into the lives of the israeli audience and elderly. "itzik manger prize" 1997, given to the theater for their original plays in yiddish.  external links yiddishpiel official website  1987 establishments in israel ashkenazi jewish culture in tel aviv theatres in israel theatres in tel aviv yiddish culture in israel yiddish theatre
the equestrian statue of saint george is installed at prague castle in prague, czech republic. the bronze sculpture was created in 1373 by transylvanian saxon sculptors martin and georg of "clussenberch", today's cluj (martinum et georgium de clussenberch in the latin inscription, in which the dialectal saxon city name is used). the statue was probably cast in nagyvarad/großwardein, today's oradea, where two other works by the two brothers have stood in the dome square until being melted for their metal in the 17th century during the turkish wars.  according to a hungarian blog, the statue was first erected in the main church of bratislava, then moved to koniggratz, and was only brought to prague in 1471. it speculates that louis i (1342-1382) presented it as a gift to emperor charles iv.  the statue was made with the lost-wax casting method, and was turned into a fountain statue in the 16th century.  further reading  references  external links    14th-century establishments in europe 14th-century sculptures bronze sculptures in the czech republic equestrian statues in the czech republic outdoor sculptures in prague prague castle saint george (martyr) sculptures of dragons sculptures of men in prague statues in prague
richard jarusek (born august 8, 1991) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hk hradec kralove of the czech extraliga.  jarusek made his czech extraliga debut playing with bk mlada boleslav during the 2014-15 czech extraliga season. jarusek competed for czech republic at the 2016 iihf world championship.  references  external links  1991 births living people czech ice hockey forwards bk mlada boleslav players stadion hradec kralove players orli znojmo players saginaw spirit players sportspeople from brno
gudu gudu gunjam  is 2010 telugu-language comedy film, produced by v. ravi kumar reddy on sri chitra banner and directed by veeru k. starring rajendra prasad, sithara, kasturi, parthu, chahat, arthi puri  and music also composed by veeru k. the film was recorded as a flop at the box office.  plot gopalam is a famous criminal lawyer but he is a henpecked husband, his wife seeta on the other hand is blindly doting on their son parthu and the youngster is rather reckless. the story takes a turn when parthu kisses a girl in the college. the girl's mother is enraged and she vows revenge. parthu escapes to bangkok and there, he falls in love with another girl meenakshi. gopalam and sita say yes to the marriage and everything is set. here she meets meenakshi's aunt malliswari, who puts one condition to approving of parthu and meenakshi's marriage that seeta should allow malliswari to marry her husband gopalam.  cast  rajendra prasad as gopalam sithara as seeta kasturi as malliswari parthu as parthu chahat as meenakshi arthi puri  rithima  fhara suman as venkataratnam brahmanandam m. s. narayana as rama swamy venu madhav kondavalasa  krishna bhagavaan gundu sudarshan jenny telangana shakuntala surekha vani kinnera  soundtrack  music composed by veeru k. music was released on shivaranjani music company.  references  2010s telugu-language films indian films 2010 films indian comedy-drama films 2010 comedy-drama films
john a. haydon (1830 - 1902) was a prominent american surveyor and civil engineer. as a self-taught civil engineer, haydon made significant contributions to american railroading. haydon's railroad career spanned the baltimore and ohio railroad expansion to the ohio river in 1853 and several other railroads to the last transcontinental railroad, the northern pacific railway. haydon led the 1872 yellowstone river expedition, where he faced a sioux indian skirmish led by sitting bull, red cloud and crazy horse at the battle of pryor's creek, montana. he also served as a captain in the confederate army corps of engineers under generals tilghman and beauregard; captured at the battle of fort henry, early in the civil war in 1862, he was paroled at aiken, south carolina, in november 1862 to serve the rest of the war, including the richmond-petersburg campaign. in the latter part of his life, he worked locating branch railroads such as the pennsylvania railroad in maryland and for the western maryland railroad.  early life and career  haydon was born on june 21, 1830, in alexandria, virginia.  little is known of his education and early career. he married alice m mcsherry (1851-1927) on may 30, 1872, in baltimore, maryland. they had six children of which only five survived, three of which were gertrude (b1876), alice (b1883) and john (b1886).  baltimore and ohio railroad in 1850, haydon was part of the baltimore and ohio railroad's engineering corps working on the railroad's extension west of cumberland, maryland.  orange and alexandria railroad in 1852, haydon worked as a resident engineer on the construction of the orange and alexandria railroad middle section and warrenton, virginia.  louisville and nashville railroad  in 1854, haydon was again a resident engineer, in this case, the fifth division of the louisville and nashville railroad from the tennessee state line to nashville. this work, the chief engineer wrote in its annual report consisted of "some of the heaviest work in tennessee, consisting of two tunnels, and a succession of deep rock cuts, and high embankments."  haydon's work in this division was done in conjunction with the edgefield and kentucky railroad. the road was finished into nashville in november 1859.  nashville, tennessee - city engineer haydon lived in nashville, tennessee, in 1860, during this period as the civil engineer  for the city of nashville, tennessee.  american civil war service  in 1861 with the outbreak of the american civil war, haydon was appointed by tennessee governor isham
green harris in august 1861 as a captain in the provisional army of tennessee as part of the provisional army of the confederate states (pacs).  battle of fort henry and fort donelson haydon was assigned to fort henry under the command of general lloyd tilghman, another railroad engineer. with the first arrival of trained engineers in september 1861, his assignment was to assist lt. joseph dixon acting as the engineering officer, in the oversight of the construction of its works. the work had been going slow due to a number of factors such as manpower and material shortages, losses to disease as well as soldiers refusing to work alongside slaves from alabama plantations. on october 15, 1861, major jeremy francis gilmer who would later become famous for his defense of atlanta, georgia replaced lt. dixon and led the construction efforts at the fort. in february 1862, when major gilmer evacuated the fort, haydon was the senior engineering officer. they left behind a gory mess. writing after the battle, capture and release of paroled prisoners, a number of officers commented on haydon's role in the defense of the fort. colonel milton haynes, army of tennessee corps of artillery inspected fort henry the night before its surrender conducted with "captain haydon of the engineers"; he then reported to general tilghman that the fort was untenable and ought to be abandoned. colonel adolphus heiman of army of tennessee commended haydon as one of a cadre of confederate officers (including major j. f. gilmer and captain miller fellow engineers)  who deserved particular credit for their management of the fort's guns.  captain john haydon, 44th division engineers, was captured with the surrender of fort henry and sent to johnson's island in ohio, at that time, a prisoner-of-war camp for confederate officers, the only union prison camp exclusively for southern officers. haydon observed that "...at last, we shall hear no more of kentucky, virginia and missouri only, suffering from the absolute distress of actual conflict"  later, haydon would write that "the war will have reached every southern state both in the seaboard region and exposed river regions."  haydon was paroled for the first time in november 1862 at aiken, south carolina  engineer bureau of the confederate states following his parole in late 1862, haydon reported to col. walter stevens in the department of richmond and worked on rebuilding the pocahontas bridge over the appomattox river near petersburg, virginia as well as performing reconnaissance on the potomac river near point of rocks, maryland. the following year in 1863, he was
reporting to col. alfred l. rives, acting chief of the engineer bureau of the confederate states. later, he was again reporting to general tilghman and supported the removal of four miles of railroad iron from the rogersville branch of the east tennessee and virginia railroad as part of the east tennessee campaign. the next year in 1864, haydon reported to colonel gilmer, engineers in the defense of charleston (south carolina) harbor.  aftermath in april 1865, haydon was serving with the 25th engineer corps in alston, south carolina  when he was paroled a second time as part of general johnson's army's surrender in north carolina on april 26, 1865.  postbellum activities haydon became chief engineer for the edisto and ashley rivers canal company in south carolina in 1866 as part of a scheme to provide the city of charleston with a fresh water supply. during this same period, haydon also served as chief engineer for the greenville and columbia railroad company.  frederick and pennsylvania line railroad  in 1868, haydon became chief engineer of the frederick and pennsylvania line railroad in frederick, maryland. haydon completed construction of the railroad in june, 1872.  northern pacific railway as of summer 1871, the railroad had only surveyed its route from duluth, minnesota westward to bismarck, north dakota. on the western leg, the railroad had been located from tacoma, washington east to bozeman, montana. this left chief engineer william milnor roberts with the task of locating over 600 miles of railroad in western dakota and eastern montana  what was known at that time as the "middle division" of the northern pacific.  roberts planned surveys that included crossing the bitterroot mountain passes into missoula, montana, as well as a yellowstone river survey. robert's plan was for this last survey to start at fort ellis, a united states army fort, east of present-day bozeman, montana, cross over bozeman pass and follow the yellowstone river down stream. roberts chose edward d. muhlenberg to head up this 1871 railroad survey party for the yellowstone river portion. muhlenberg ran into numerous difficulties executing the plan and producing maps. in november 1871, roberts joined the effort and reached muhlenberg's camp on november 8, 1871. roberts continued the survey to the edge of the lakota hunting grounds near pompey's pillar on november 11, returning to fort ellis on november 20, 1871. muhlenberg, however, didn't return until november 28, where the military escort under captain edward ball reported 57 soldiers injured by freezing weather. the same winter storm trapped 65 men in another army
unit, the 7th infantry, resulting in 22 amputations.  the following year, 1872, roberts was not able to start recruiting for the 1872 western survey until june. haydon had just completed the construction of the frederick and pennsylvania line railroad and was hired by roberts. on july 23, 1872, haydon led the railroad survey party from fort ellis, a united states army fort, east of present-day bozeman, montana, consisting of haydon, chief of party, two principal assistants, in charge of the compass and level, together with rodmen, chainmen, and others (altogether 20 men). haydon supply train consisted of almost seventy wagons with rations for 105 days and a small herd of beef cattle. haydon's military escort, commanded by major eugene baker, second cavalry, consisting of four companies, 187 men, of the second cavalry, and four companies, 189 men, of the seventh infantry. haydon's mission was to follow the yellowstone river down stream to the mouth of powder river a distance of 310 miles. haydon to meet up with another survey party coming in from fort rice in north dakota on the missouri river, a distance of over 240 miles to powder river. haydon was to return from the powder via the musselshell river following this river to its source.  the survey party and military escort proceeded without the benefit of crow indian scouts, largely due to rumors of a sioux-cheyenne attack or preparations for multiple river crossings with ferry boats. given these difficulties, haydon had progressed only 155 miles from fort ellis, he was still short 125 miles of his destination of the powder and had not yet gone beyond where muhlenberg had finished the year before.  battle of pryor's creek, montana on august 13, there were as many as two thousand lodges of lakotas, cheyennes, arapahos and kiowas gathered on the powder river under sitting bull, red cloud and crazy horse. after performing an annual sun dance ceremony, a war party was formed with as many as a thousand warriors to go upstream on the powder to locate and fight their enemy, the crows. the peace treaty of fort laramie of 1868 was still in effect, but sitting bull found himself just miles from hundreds of horses and cattle and the railroad surveyors led by john haydon. sitting bull attacked in the early hours of august 14, 1872, but by mid-morning the attack was over. during the battle, sitting bull, in a personal show of bravery, took four others with him to within two hundred yards of baker's forces and sat down with pipe and
tobacco. he was untouched by any of the soldiers' shots. in similar manner, crazy horse mounted a pony and rode in front of the soldiers only to have his horse shot out from underneath of him. by eight o'clock in the morning, the battle was over. no one in haydon's party was hurt, and that afternoon haydon's party surveyed another three miles. haydon, as a confederate officer who fought and then had to surrender in an untenable military battle (the battle of fort henry, tennessee, february 6, 1862) realized that his party was probably outnumbered by the sioux and cheyenne and led by an individual with a questionable military command ability. although they continued on until august 18, at time, haydon, exhausted and apprehensive about the safety of the survey party from raids as well as knowing his work with the railroad was ended, requested baker to return to fort ellis. sitting bull's defeat had become a strategic victory. for the northern pacific railroad, it was a "...stinging, unmitigated defeat, more damaging than any other event to date." (npr asst. superintendent r. a. crofton, 1873 letter cited in lubetkin.)  the pattern repeated itself in  the yellowstone expedition of 1873, resulting in the battles of honsinger bluff and pease bottom. full-scale war might have come to the northern plains in 1873 had the northern pacific railroad surveys been successful.  return to fort ellis on august 20, 1872, haydon's party left the yellowstone river to march towards the mussellshell river as planned by chief engineer roberts. haydon became ill on the trip and was temporarily replaced by lt. edward john mcclernand, who studied surveying at west point.  with haydon resuming as party chief, the surveyors reached the south fork, 20 miles west of harlowton, montana, on september 15. over the next two weeks, marching through snow and bitter cold, haydon's party crossed over the pass separating the mussellshell from the missouri river by way of sixteen mile creek. on september 26, baker left haydon, who went on to the npr's offices in helena, thus ending the 1872 yellowstone expedition and survey. unlike the other 1872 npr survey party leader, thomas rosser, who was also a former confederate officer and fellow engineer under general beauregard, haydon didn't have rosser's experience in cavalry raids or efficiency in handling combat troops. baker, unlike the other military escort commanders, ball, whistler and stanley, moved his camp only once after the august 14 skirmish
. baker's refusal to furnish more than one company of soldiers to support haydon in the face of a large sioux force forced haydon to turn back. shortly after baker returned to fort ellis, general hancock placed him under arrest.  pennsylvania railroad in maryland  in 1873, the baltimore and ohio railroad had purchased a majority of the consolidation coal company's stock, thereby controlling coal exports out of the georges creek valley near cumberland, maryland, principally the maryland coal company and the american coal company,  and effectively the "entire output of coal in (the state of maryland)."   cumberland interests formed the pennsylvania railroad in maryland to escape that control. in january 1878, the railroad engaged haydon to be its chief engineer  and started construction the next year in may 1879.  the road commenced passenger service to washington and new york on december 15, 1879.  the pennsylvania railroad with access to the georges creek valley could then transport maryland coal and american coal companies' "soft coal" products to one of the three export piers the railroad controlled in south amboy, new jersey.  central railway company of baltimore maryland (1880)  the central railway company was formed as a competitor to the baltimore city passenger company. in 1880, along with abraham patterson, william graves, george grafflin and baltimore real estate developer john t. ford, haydon petitioned the city council for permission to lay streetcar tracks from boundary avenue to the western maryland's station on fulton street thence over howard street, thence to camden and connections with the baltimore and ohio railroad and then to the light street wharf.  patents haydon received two patents for his work:  patent no. 241,359 in 1881 for a stock car feeding device.  patent no. 185,795 in 1876 for an roadway pavement consisting of a stone substratum, formed by slabs set into the road-bed at an angle, an intermediate layer, of concrete and a top dressing.  death haydon died in frederick, maryland,  on september 26, 1902, and is interred in st. john's cemetery in frederick, maryland.  references  sources  american surveyors american civil engineers american railroad pioneers people from frederick, maryland 19th-century american railroad executives confederate states army officers american civil war prisoners of war 1830 births 1902 deaths people from alexandria, virginia engineers from virginia
filomena valenzuela goyenechea (1848-1924) was a chilean soldier, known as la madrecita. originally a cantiniere, she came to participate directly in combat in the battle of pisagua, battle of dolores and battle of los angeles during the war of the pacific.  references   1848 births 1924 deaths 19th-century chilean people women in 19th-century warfare women in war in south america
the strategic banking corporation of ireland (sbci) is a national bank that was established in 2015, and in the wake of the irish banking crisis of the late 2000s, to provide finance for small and medium-sized businesses. at the time it was set up, many of ireland's main banks were unable or unwilling to provide to businesses. the strategic banking corporation of ireland does not provide loans directly to businesses themselves, but instead provides finance to the main banks at low cost, with the idea that the money is then loaned on to business. as of 2016, the bank had provided €347m small business. its chief executive is nick ashmore.  references  external links  government agencies of the republic of ireland government-owned companies of the republic of ireland banks established in 2015 2015 establishments in ireland banks of ireland financial services in the republic of ireland economic history of ireland post-2008 irish economic downturn
greg fraine (born 12 october 1962) is a new zealand cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1962 births living people new zealand male cyclists olympic cyclists of new zealand cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from sydney commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for new zealand cyclists at the 1986 commonwealth games
edward s. spotovich (may 6, 1916 - september 7, 2002) was an american professional basketball player. he played college basketball and football for the university of pittsburgh. in football, the 1937 team went undefeated and were named national champions in the ap poll. spotovich then played in the national basketball league for the pittsburgh pirates during the 1938-39 season and averaged 4.3 points per game in three games played.  spotovich then played semi-professional basketball in connecticut and massachusetts. he served in world war ii, then worked as a schoolteacher for 42 years at connellsville high school.  references  1916 births 2002 deaths american men's basketball players united states coast guard personnel of world war ii basketball players from pittsburgh centers (basketball) forwards (basketball) high school basketball coaches in the united states pittsburgh panthers football players pittsburgh panthers men's basketball players pittsburgh pirates (nbl) players players of american football from pittsburgh
south dakota state highway 224 (sd 224) is a  state highway located in south-central south dakota. it connects the town of alpena to sd 37.  route description  sd 224 begins at willow avenue in the town of alpena in jerauld county. the highway travels due east on 221st street, crossing over a railroad and leaving the town, into sanborn county. from the county line, sd 224 continues  to a junction with sd 37, where the highway ends.  history  sd 224 was designated in 1976 on a segment of former south dakota highway 32.  major intersections  references  224 transportation in jerauld county, south dakota transportation in sanborn county, south dakota
established in 2008, the lichter filmfest frankfurt international is a film festival taking place in frankfurt, germany and the rhine-main region every year in spring. aside from regional film productions in competition for best short and feature film, the festival also presents international films. the 14th lichter filmfest takes place from 27 april to 2 may 2021. both the international film program as well as the accompanying program in 2021 will address the key topic "change" ("wandel").  history   under the name of lichter filmtage frankfurt/rhein-main, the festival now known as lichter filmfest frankfurt international was initiated by festival director gregor maria schubert in 2008. the festival was founded by gregor maria schubert, stephan limbach, mark liedtke, alexander dumitran, and cordula mack. the festival was founded by gregor maria schubert, stephan limbach, mark liedtke, alexander dumitran, and cordula mack. currently, it is headed by gregor maria schubert and johanna suss, supported by a team of volunteers.  the festival made its debut as a show for regional film productions. in the years to follow it developed into a show featuring international productions as well as a film competition. the festival changed its location from the former atelierfrankfurt near the frankfurt main station to the former cinema frankfurter turmpalast in the inner-city of frankfurt. the attendance increased from 3,300 visitors in 2008 to 12,000 visitors in 2015. so during the festival and beyond, lichter plays films and other events at vacant buildings in the city, such as the former diamond exchange or the office building vau. the lichter art award (founded in 2008 under the name "kunstlichter," curated by saul judd) awards a prize for video art. in the festival center, installations and panel shows present new perspectives and approach the featured topic from a theoretical standpoint.  in 2012, lichter filmfest frankfurt international was distinguished as a "motion sensor" (bewegungsmelder) by the federal government's "initiative kultur- und kreativwirtschaft." in 2013, the festival took place under the patronage of volker schlondorff, in 2014 under the patronage of leander haußmann and in 2016 under the patronage of edgar reitz. since 2014, in cooperation with the hessische film- und medienakademie and under the direction of bert rebhandl, the "lichter kritikerblog" offers students the opportunity to discuss the medium of film journalistically. on the initiative of edgar reitz, a conference
addressed the future of german cinema. approximately 100 filmmakers developed a concept which recommends pivotal changes in funding and financing, education, distribution and cinema culture - the frankfurt positions on the future of german cinema.  the festival is financed by public grants, donations and sponsors. in the years 2012, 2016, 2017 and 2018 the festival even used crowdfunding.  beyond the festival week, the lichter filmkultur e.v. hosts the „frankfurter sequenzen", „essenkochenfilme" and a movie picnic at the schwanheim ferry terminal in hochst. since 2014, the association hosts the „freiluftkino frankfurt". additionally, in 2019, the „sommerkino im altwerk" in russelsheim was founded.  program  beyond the regional film competition, the festival presents an international film program. since 2012 this program addresses a certain thematic focal point. in 2013, the key topic was "city", while in 2014 the films addressed the topic "humor, comicality, and comedy." in 2015, the festival presented films from around the world focusing on "money" and in 2016 on "frontiers". in 2017, the international program was focused on the topic "truth", in 2018 everything revolved around "chaos" and in 2019 "nature" was the main topic for the international program. in 2020, the main topic is "power" and in 2021, the festival revolves around the topic of "change".  in addition to the film screenings, the program includes discussion panels and talk shows for the filmmakers of the rhine main area. aside from film screenings, the year-round events include concerts and talk shows and discussion forums. in addition, the lichter filmfest regularly guest in the cinemas both of the region and of frankfurt's twin cities.  branches   regional competition (short film, feature film)  films beyond the competition (short film, feature film)  international films (key topic)  vr storytelling competition (international competition)  topical accompanying program (lectures, panels, business talk)  lichter art award (international competition and exhibition)  congress "zukunft deutscher film"   in april 2018, around 100 filmmakers came together during the lichter filmfest in frankfurt. moved by their belief in cinema, the directors, producers, cinema and festival organizers, sponsors, distribution executives, actors and critics worked on a conceptual changes for the funding and financing, training and film education, distribution and cinema culture that could enliven german film: the "frankfurter positionen
".  one year after starting the "frankfurter positionen", they still made for many discussions. a debate on the future of german film funding followed at the berlinale. during the 12th lichter filmfest, a day of talks between representatives from politics took place. in the wake of lichter-on-demand in the year 2020, the festival initiated a podcast series dealing with the results of right-wing populism and the corona pandemic on the film sector. the second congress "zukunft deutscher film" on the 29th and 30th of april intends to keep the debates of the past up to date.  attendances  starting out with an improvised cinema and 3,300 visitors in its first year, the lichter filmfest has evolved into a festival with more than one hundred films and events and 13,000 visitors in 2016.  awards and laureates  the diverse film culture in hessen and the rhine-main region is being lauded with the regional feature film and short film awards. since 2011, the lichter art award honors contemporary video art from all around the world. in the internationally advertised vr storytelling award, the festival organisers have been searching for extraordinary virtual reality films since 2017.  the winners are awarded the "lichter-bembel," a typical frankfurt earthenware apple wine pitcher. the best regional feature film award, sponsored bei dr. marschner stiftung, is endowed with 3,000 euros. for the best regional short, the lichter art award and the vr storytelling award, 1,000 euros are awarded in cash. in addition, the binding audience award with a prize money of 2,000 euros is awarded. from 2016 to 2018, the festival also honored the best contribution to the international program with the international feature award, which included 1,500 euros.  2008 regional feature film: video kings by daniel acht and ali eckert regional short film: der jager und der bar by joachim brandenberg 2009 regional feature film: endstation der sehnsuchte by sung-hyung cho regional short film: adamsapfel by johannes baptista ludwig and sascha geerdts 2010 regional feature film: das schreiben & das schweigen by carmen tartarotti regional short film: t.r.a. by eva becker special reference of the jury: marivanna by olga petrova and riverrun & touchdown by gunter deller 2011 regional feature film: im alter von ellen by pia marais regional short film: n gschichtn by eva becker laudatory reference of the jury: die allerletzten
by otmar hitzelberger lichter art award: caja tarro silla marco by luciana lamothe  2012 feature film: babycall by pal sletaune short film: die alte frau by ariane mayer lichter art award: dear what's your face by oliver husain lichter art award: sent pa jorden by john skoog 2013 regional feature film: im land dazwischen by melanie gartner regional short film: misguided by lukas rinker audience award: die meta-morphose. leicht verstimmt ins rampenlicht by daniel siebert laudatory reference of the jury: wildwechsel by gunter deller 2014 regional feature film: erhobenen hauptes by docview regional short film: bahar im wunderland by behrooz karamizade and re50 richtung wachtersbach by leslie bauer audience award: the scrapbox by daniel herzog (director) and robin wissel (creative leader) laudatory reference of the jury: meine beschneidung by arne ahrens, peter rist - idealist by michael schwarz, and qasbegi by michel klofkorn lichter art award: unmanned distances by bertrand flanet 2015 regional feature film: sin & illy still alive by maria hengge and conduct! jede bewegung zahlt by gotz schauder regional short film: ein bisschen normalitat by michael schaff and thomas toth audience award: carlo, keep swingin' by elizabeth ok lichter courage award: x-x-xx-x-gewobenes papier by michel klofkorn laudatory reference of the jury: gezeitentumpel by pablo zinser, and warum ist der tisch schrag!/warum mag jeder geld! by stefan vogt lichter art award: the second of august by jonathan van essche 2016 regional feature film: meine bruder und schwestern im norden by sung-hyung cho regional short film: in the distance by florian grolig international feature award: les sauteurs by abou bakar sidibe, estephan wagner, and moritz siebert and masaan by neeraj ghaywan audience award feature film: auf einer skala von 1-10 by katharina uhland audience award short film: in the distance by florian grolig and "the old man and the bird" by dennis stein-schomburg laudatory reference of the jury: der langstreckenlaufer by zuniel kim lichter art award: b-roll
with andre by james n. kienitz wilkins 2017 regional feature film: a gravame - das stahlwerk, der tod, maria und die mutter von tamburi by peter rippl regional short film: uber druck by sebastian binder and fred schirmer international feature award: i am not madame bovary by feng xiaogang audience award feature film: ghostland by simon stadler und catenia lermer lichter art award: simba in new york by tobi sauer vr storytelling award: sergeant james by alexandre perez 2018 regional feature film: mannerfreundschaften by rosa von praunheim regional short film: horizont by peter meister international feature award: blue my mind by lisa bruhlmann audience award feature film: women of the venezuelan chaos by margarita cadenas lichter art award: waiting for record by jakob engel vr storytelling award: i, philip by pierre zandrowicz  2019 regional feature film: khrustal by darya zhuk regional short film: we will survive by nele dehnenkamp audience award feature film: the watson's hotel by peter rippl, ragunath vasudevan und nathaniel knop lichter art award: weight by andrew de freitas virtual reality storytelling award: the real thing by benoit felici 2020 regional feature film: live by lisa charlotte friederich regional short film: nachtschicht by david dybeck audience award short film: die verganglichkeit des bernd hasselhuhn by max rainer lichter art award: fossil place by florencia levy vr storytelling award: aripi by dmitri voloshin 2021 regional feature film:  regional short film:  audience award short film: lichter art award: motor by the art collective frankfurter hauptschule vr storytelling award: replacements - penggantian by jonathan hagard  juries  a jury of filmmakers and film experts decides on the winners of the regional categories "best feature film" and "best short film." since 2016 there is also the category "best international feature." former jury members: 2008 birgit lehmann (director), bahman kormi (cinematogropher), sebastian popp (film producer) 2009 rudolf worschech (film editor), rembert huser (film scholar), martina elbert (director) 2010 astrid rieger (director), christiane von wahlert (managing director freiwillige selbstkontrolle der filmwirtschaft), michael wiedemann (department head at film- und medienstiftung nrw and head of kinofests lunen) 2011 maryam zaree (actress), cyril tuschi (
director), daniel kothenschulte (film critic) lichter art award: judith hopf, saul judd, matthias ulrich 2012 bettina buchler (acting director filmbewertungsstelle), peter dorfler (director), anke sevenich (actress) lichter art award: mike bouchet, saul judd, sophie von olfers 2013 pia marais (director), florian koerner von gustorf (film producer), matthias luthardt (director) lichter art award: saul judd, felix ruhofer, simon starling 2014 feature film: hans robert eisenhauer (film producer), jakob preuss (documentary filmmaker), gaby babic (director of "goeast - festival des mittel- und osteuropaischen films") short film: toby ashraf (film journalist), oona lea von maydell (actress), tidi von tiedemann (producer) lichter art award: peter gorschluter, karola gramann, saul judd 2015 feature film: christoph thoke (film producer), tatjana turanskyj (director, film producer, screenwriter and actress), anne ratte-polle (actress) short film: martina valentina baumgartner (film producer), stefan kriekhaus (screenwriter), achim forst (film editor) lichter art award: katharina dohm, saul judd, tasja langenbach 2016 short film: isabel berghout, lili kobbe, hendrik schmitt feature film: stipe erceg, linda soffker, nico sommer international feature award: max linz, barbara schweizerhof, hermann vaske lichter art award: saul judd, fabian schoneich, vivian trommer 2017 short film: robert hertel (film producer), sylve hohlbaum (director), christel schmidt (film editor) feature film: numan acar (actor), reza brojerdi (actor and film producer), pepe danquart (film director), mischka popp (film director) international feature award: niko apel (film director), nicole baum (film editor), betty berr und rainer wothe (festival directors) lichter art award: saul judd, olaf stuber, mathilde ter heijne vr storytelling award: astrid kahmke, eckart koberich, kay meseberg, marco heutink, ralph benz 2018 short film: andreas heidenreich, lilo mangelsdorff, peter rippl feature film: uwe b. carstensen, carolin weidner, julia zange international feature award: giacomo abbruzzese, uri aviv, simon stadler lichter art award
: stefanie bottcher, sergey harutoonian, saul judd vr storytelling award: tomislav bezmalinoviv, vanessa kincaid, eckart koberich 2019 short film: isabel gathof, jonatan schwenk, ralph forg feature film: birgit gamke, jenny schily, susanne heinrich lichter art award: tamara grcic, christina lehnert, saul judd vr storytelling award: benoit felici the real thing  venues  the lichter filmfest frankfurt international plays at several cinemas in frankfurt and the rhine-main region. the following cinemas and locations have been used since 2008:   atelierfrankfurt  caligari filmbuhne  cantate-saal / volksbuhne im großen hirschgraben  cinestar metropolis  comoedienhaus wilhelmsbad  e-kinos  erster stock  filmklubb offenbach  hafenkino offenbach  harmonie kinos  kino im deutsches filmmuseum  kino im lederpalast  kunstlerhaus mousonturm  mal seh'n kino  mmk vortragssaal  murnau-filmtheater wiesbaden  naxoshalle  praunheimer werkstatten  pupille - university cinema  rex-programmkino  tor art space  turmpalast  zoo-gesellschaftshaus  key subjects  since 2012, the international program and the accompanying program of the lichter filmfest focus on a specific key subject in its lectures, talk show panels, performances and experimental formats of discussion forums.  2012: revolutions (revolutionen) 2013: city (stadt) 2014: humor, comicality, and comedy (humor, komik und komodie)  2015: money (geld) 2016: frontiers (grenzen) 2017: truth (wahrheit) 2018: chaos (chaos) 2019: nature (natur) 2020: power (macht) 2021: change (wandel)  honorary patrons  2013: volker schlondorff 2014: leander haußmann 2016: edgar reitz 2017: doris dorrie  references  external links   official website  press clippings lichter filmfest 2012 (pdf; 3,6 mb)  film festivals in germany culture in frankfurt tourist attractions in frankfurt
dina nagar assembly constituency (sl. no.: 5) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency covering dina nagar in gurdaspur district, punjab state, india.  member of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india gurdaspur district
maria magdalene is a circa 1530 oil on panel painting by the dutch renaissance artist jan van scorel in the collection of the rijksmuseum.  painting mary magdalene is shown seated, holding a richly decorated pot of ointment in a fantasy landscape. her bodice is embroidered with hebrew lettering and her shawl shows the same pattern of haarlem damast material that can be seen in saint luke painting the virgin by maarten van heemskerck.  provenance this painting was in the collection of the commanderij van sint jan in haarlem and was appropriated in 1572 (as a work by van scorel) after the beeldenstorm for the haarlem city hall. it was again appropriated by the national collection in 1804 (as an anonymous  work) and has remained in the national collection on show in amsterdam ever since, though it was on loan to the frans hals museum for many years during the renovation of the rijksmuseum.  exhibitions  this painting has been considered a highlight of the collection since it was acquired in 1804 and has been included in all highlights of the rijksmuseum catalogs.  references   sk-a-372 painting record on museum website  1530s paintings paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum paintings depicting mary magdalene
the 2018 united states senate election in north dakota took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of north dakota, concurrently with other elections to the u.s. senate, as well as other federal, state and local elections in north dakota.  incumbent democratic-npl senator heidi heitkamp ran for reelection to a second term. the candidate filing deadline was april 9, 2018, and the primary election was held on june 12, 2018. u.s. representative kevin cramer won the republican primary to challenge heitkamp, who ran unopposed in the democratic primary.  on november 6, 2018, cramer defeated heitkamp in the general election, becoming the first republican to win this seat since 1958.  background  many observers cited heitkamp as a vulnerable incumbent democrat in 2018, as she balanced cooperation with her democratic colleagues in the u.s. senate with pleasing her constituents in deeply republican north dakota; donald trump won in north dakota by about 36 points. the race was expected to be extremely competitive and some projected it would be the most expensive race in north dakota history.  voter id law and native americans disenfranchisement  on october 9, 2018, the supreme court of the united states upheld north dakota's voter id law, called hb 1369. this law requires voters to use an id which lists a street address, and doesn't allow po boxes as valid addresses. however, many native american reservations don't use a conventional address system and their inhabitants tend to use po boxes instead, making a large share of the ids used by native americans invalid. although both natives and non-natives are affected, native americans are disproportionately more likely to be affected by hb 1369, and the law has been criticized for disenfranchising native americans.  the republican-held state government of north dakota argued that the law was created to prevent voter fraud, but has been accused of passing the law because native americans are likely to vote democratic. hb 1369 had previously been found to be invalid by the court of appeals for the eighth circuit, for which reason it didn't affect the primary elections earlier in 2018, but the supreme court decision meant that many people didn't have the right id and were ineligible to vote in the general election.  democratic-npl primary the democratic-npl party held their state convention march 16 and 17, during which delegates voted to endorse  heitkamp for re-election. although general election ballot access is actually controlled by a primary
election, challenger dustin peyer did not challenge heitkamp in the june 2018 primary.  candidates  declared  heidi heitkamp, incumbent u.s. senator  withdrew  dustin peyer, firefighter and candidate for the state senate in 2016  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  declared  kevin cramer, u.s. representative  thomas o'neill, former mayor of niagara  withdrew  tom campbell, state senator (endorsed kevin cramer)  gary emineth, businessman and former chairman of the north dakota republican party  paul schaffner  declined  rick becker, state representative and candidate for governor in 2016  rick berg, former u.s. representative and nominee for u.s. senate in 2012  tammy miller, businesswoman  kathy neset, member of the north dakota state board of higher education  ed schafer, former united states secretary of agriculture and former governor of north dakota  kelly schmidt, north dakota state treasurer  wayne stenehjem, north dakota attorney general and candidate for governor in 2016  endorsements  polling  results  general election  debates   complete video of debate, october 18, 2018  predictions  fundraising  polling graphical summary  with tom campbell  with kelly schmidt  results  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites heidi heitkamp (d) for senate kevin cramer (r) for senate  2018 north dakota united states senate
soren baker is an american journalist who has spent his career covering hip-hop. best known for his six years as one of the main editors of the source, baker has had more than 3,500 articles published in such publications as the new york times, los angeles times, chicago tribune, xxl, the source, hiphopdx and redbullusa.com.  the maryland native has penned liner notes for albums by 2pac, ice cube, n.w.a, gang starr and others. he has also worked on television programs for vh1 and fuse. baker has also written extensively about sports, specifically the nfl and published books about the baltimore ravens. baker has written, produced and directed multiple dvds including tech n9ne: the psychumentary. from 2014 to 2016 he also co-hosted open bar radio with xzibit on kday in los angeles.  baker has been interviewed multiple times, including by rolling stone, espn, and tv one, among others. from 2013 to 2016 he served as the news editor of hiphopdx. in march 2016 he founded unique access entertainment which delivers original, exclusive video content with a-list entertainers, including mc ren, nice & smooth, g perico, t. rodgers, mc eiht, skeme, dana dane, cj mac, big tray deee, rbx, mitchy slick, and slink johnson. the network has aired more than 270 videos.  soren baker's book the history of gangster rap: from schoolly d to kendrick lamar, the rise of a great american art form was published october 2, 2018 by abrams books.  author baker has authored or co-authored more than 10 books.  references  american male journalists american music journalists american music critics hip hop people
anicka newell (born august 5, 1993 in denton, texas) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the pole vault.  professional newell placed 1st at 2018 canadian athletics championships in ottawa & cleared  to qualify for the august 11 2018 nacac championships in  toronto but she did not clear a height (nh).  newell placed 7th in athletics at the 2018 commonwealth games - women's pole vault cleared .  anicka newell placed 12th in women's pole vault at 2017 world championship cleared  on the second attempt.  newell cleared  at texas state university san marcos in june 2017 which is the second highest athlete all-time in athletics canada behind alysha newman.  in july 2016, she was officially named to canada's olympic team. newell placed 29th at athletics at the 2016 summer olympics - women's pole vault cleared . anicka newell is eligible to compete for canada as her mother was born in the country.  anicka has enjoyed a nice progression over her career as a track and field athlete in the pole vault:  ncaa anicka newell earned an honorable mentioned all-america award in the pole vault at 2015 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships. anicka newell is a two-time sun belt conference outdoor track and field champion in pole vault for texas state bobcats.  high school anicka newell won a new mexico activities association state individual title in the pole vault for highland high school (albuquerque, new mexico) in 2009.  references  external links  anicka newell all-athletics profile anicka newell texas state results texas state anicka newell - 2015 track and field profile olympic.ca profile  1993 births living people canadian female pole vaulters canadian people of american descent american people of canadian descent sportspeople from denton, texas athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada track and field athletes from texas texas state bobcats athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for canada athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
bronze and moon (spanish: bronce y luna) is a 1953 spanish film directed by javier seto and starring jose suarez, ana esmeralda and isabel de castro.  cast    francisco albinana    barta barri    enrique borras    jesus colomer    isabel de castro    maria victoria dura    ana esmeralda   manuel gas   ramon hernandez    jorge morales   ramon quadreny    jose suarez    francisco tuset  references  bibliography   crusells, magi. directores de cine en cataluna: de la a a la z. edicions universitat barcelona, 2009.  external links     1953 films spanish films spanish-language films films directed by javier seto films scored by augusto alguero
streets of fire is the fourth studio album by english singer-songwriter and musician duncan browne. it was released in 1978 through logo and sire records. the album features contributions from saxophone player dick morrissey, as well as previous contributors tony hymas and john giblin. the record retains browne's distinguishable art rock influences while muting and subsuming the progressive rock elements of the preceding record, the wild places (1978), to its synthesizer work.  streets of fire achieved moderate commercial success. it was reissued on cd in japan in 2000.  critical reception  at the time of its release, billboard magazine regarded the record as "an interesting followup to browne's 1978 hit album the wild places," due to "his self-penned tunes and musical ability." nevertheless, billboard also criticized the "mixed down vocals," deeming browne's vocals as "worth hearing". nevertheless, the new rolling stone album guide critic dave marsh panned the record and its predecessor, dismissing them as "synthesizer pop that hardly lives up to the promise of the album titles." marsh further wrote: "fire and wildness, not to mention human passion, is just what this mechanical marvel [browne] lacks."  in a retrospective review, allmusic's bruce eder wrote that "the album's first half was even better than its predecessor, with its music easily accommodating his melodies and a rocking beat," describing it as "some of the prettiest music of his career". nevertheless, eder thought that the side two was "slightly less engaging and had fewer memorable melodies."  track listing all songs are written by duncan browne, except "(restless) child of change" by peter godwin. "nina morena" features lines from pablo neruda poem "en su llama mortal".  "fauvette" - 3:54  "american heartbeat" - 3:39  "she's just a fallen angel" - 5:08  "streets of fire" - 8:09  "nina morena" - 4:56  "things to come" - 5:52  "(restless) child of change" - 3:35  "cancion de cuna: street echoes (for m.)" - 3:58  personnel album personnel as adapted from album liner notes.  duncan browne - vocals, guitar, production  tony hymas - keyboards  john giblin - bass guitar  simon phillips - drums, percussion  dick morrissey - alto saxophone (3)  dennis weinreich - engineering
ray hendriksen - engineering  jean luke epstein - graphics  vince loden - photography  references  external links    1978 albums logo records albums sire records albums duncan browne albums synth-pop albums by english artists
edwin stevens may refer to:  edwin stevens (missionary) (1802-1837), american protestant missionary in china  edwin stevens (actor), 1860-1923), american stage and film actor  arthur edwin stevens (1905-1995), welsh inventor who designed the world's first wearable electronic hearing aid  edwin a. stevens (1794-1868), american inventor and entrepreneur  edwin a. stevens jr. (1858-1918), american soldier, engineer and architect  see also  edwin a. stevens hall (built in 1870) in usa  edwin s. lines (1845-1927), american clergyman, bishop of newark
joseph palamara (born september 26, 1963) is a current democratic member of the wayne county commission and a former member of the michigan house of representatives.  education during his undergraduate career at michigan state university where he was an evans scholar, palamara was a walk-on member of the baseball team. he led the spartans in hitting in his senior year, won the team's sportsmanship award, and was all-big ten and all-america at second base. palamara received his juris doctorate in 1985 from the detroit college of law.  philanthropic work palamara is a former member of the board of directors for the henry ford wyandotte hospital and a former member of the aerotropolis executive board.  references  1953 births living people people from wyandotte, michigan michigan state university alumni michigan state university college of law alumni michigan democrats county commissioners in michigan members of the michigan house of representatives people from grosse ile, michigan
an ecological corridor () in brazil is a collection of natural or semi-natural areas that link protected areas and allow gene flow between them.  definition  the national system of conservation units (snuc) law recognises ecological corridors as portions of natural or semi-natural ecosystems linking protected areas that allow gene flow and movement of biota, recolonization of degraded areas and maintenance of viable populations larger than would be possible with individual units. the federal ecological corridor project has its roots at least as far back as 1993. it has identified seven major corridors, with focus on implementing and learning from the central amazon corridor and the central atlantic forest corridor.  examples  references  sources       nature conservation in brazil ecological connectivity natural history of brazil protected areas of brazil types of protected area of brazil
arnett is an unincorporated community in harmon county, oklahoma, united states. it is located five miles northwest of hollis. a rural school was located in arnett on route 2. the school, along with harmon county's other rural schools, was annexed into the hollis school district.  references  unincorporated communities in harmon county, oklahoma unincorporated communities in oklahoma
nathan aspinall (born 15 july 1991) is an english professional darts player currently playing in professional darts corporation (pdc) events. he won the 2019 uk open with a 170 checkout in the final leg against former world champion rob cross.  career aspinall began playing in pdc development and challenge tour events in 2012. his first semi-final in those came in 2013, where he lost 4-2 to max hopp. he won a two-year pdc tour card in 2015 through the q school order of merit and qualified for the uk open, where he beat chris dobey 5-1 and james richardson 9-4, before losing 4-9 to james wade in the fourth round. aspinall's first european tour appearance was at the dutch darts masters and he squeezed past jamie robinson and vincent van der voort both 6-5. in the third round justin pipe eliminated him 6-4. aspinall won the seventh development tour event of 2015 with a 4-2 victory over benito van de pas. he also lost in the final of two other events during the year. aspinall made his first televised appearance in the final of the 2015 pdc world youth championship, where he played the german max hopp. after 10 legs of holding throw, the final deciding leg was thrown by aspinall, and despite having match darts, it was hopp who won 6-5.  aspinall was beaten 6-5 by stuart kellett in the second round of the 2016 uk open. at the sixth players championship he reached his first quarter-final on the main tour and narrowly lost 6-5 against vincent van der voort. aspinall qualified for his first grand slam of darts, but could not get a win out of his group fixtures with raymond van barneveld, mensur suljovic and danny noppert to finish bottom of his group.  aspinall won his first ranking pdc title in september 2018, beating ryan searle 6-4 in the final of the 18th players championship of the year, in barnsley. this victory helped him qualify for his first world championship, the 2019 pdc world darts championship. at the championship, aspinall, a 500/1 outsider before the tournament, defeated world number six gerwyn price, kyle anderson, devon petersen and brendan dolan on his way to the semi-finals, where he lost 6-3 to michael smith.  following gary anderson's withdrawal from the 2019 premier league, aspinall was selected
as one of nine 'contenders' to replace him. he would play a one-off match against michael smith on night six in nottingham.  aspinall won his first pdc major at the 2019 uk open, defeating toni alcinas, christian kist, madars razma, steve lennon, ross smith and gerwyn price to reach the final, where he defeated rob cross 11-5 to take the title, securing the final leg with a 170 checkout. the win took aspinall into the top 16 of the pdc order of merit for the first time in his career.  aspinall won the 2019 us darts masters, the first event on the 2019 world series of darts. it was aspinall's first world series event, and the only one he was selected to compete in during the 2019 edition.  aspinall averaged 107 in defeating michael smith 8-4 in the final. in the previous rounds, he beat shawn brenneman, rob cross, and peter wright. aspinall won £20,000, and the win was only his second televised tournament win, after the 2019 uk open.  he played in the 2019 world matchplay for the first time, losing to mervyn king 10-5 despite averaging 103, and he was also seeded, made him the first player to make his world matchplay debut as a seed since simon whitlock in 2010.  world championship results  pdc 2019: semi-finals (lost to michael smith 3-6) 2020: semi-finals (lost to michael van gerwen 3-6) 2021: third round (lost to vincent van der voort 2-4) 2022: third round (lost to callan rydz 0-4)  career finals  pdc major finals: 2 (1 title, 1 runner-up)  pdc world series finals: 1 (1 title)  performance timeline  references  external links  1991 births living people english darts players professional darts corporation current tour card holders world series of darts winners uk open champions sportspeople from stockport
ian lee (ian james lee) is an american journalist based in britain for cbs news. prior to working for cbs, he worked for cnn, and, before that, lee was also the multimedia editor at the daily news egypt from 2009 to 2011. during that time, he also was a freelance video journalist for time magazine and spent a year as a package producer for reuters. lee has covered the 2011 arab spring, euromaidan, sochi winter olympics, 2013 egyptian coup d'etat in egypt, 2014 gaza war, 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt, and 2017 north korea crisis, among other things.  early life lee was born in lander, wyoming, usa. lee graduated in 2007 from the walter cronkite school of journalism and mass communication at arizona state university with a bachelor's degree in journalism, along with certificates in islamic studies and arabic. he was accepted into an internship program funded by the carnegie-knight carnegie-knight initiative on the future of journalism education a. in 2008, lee received a fulbright scholarship, among 12 arizona state university graduates selected for a fulbright that. he spent a year at american university in cairo, egypt, studying the reporting differences between newspapers written in english and those written in arabic.  career lee began working for cnn after a church bombing in alexandria, egypt, on new year's eve 2010. one of lee's tweets during the january 25 revolution is cited in the book a twitter year: 365 days in 140 characters by kate bussmann. lee's tweets are also preserved in an archived collection maintained by the american university in cairo's rare books and special collections library as part of the blogs, twitter feeds, local and regional media coverage, and other sites related to the january 25th revolution. lee is also quoted in news now: visual storytelling in the digital age by susan green, mark lodato, b. william silcock, and carol schwalbe.  while covering the libyan revolution of 2011, lee was injured in sirte by a rocket-propelled grenade (rpg) that exploded next to him. it killed an ambulance driver and sent shrapnel into his leg.  during the 2013-15 detention of al-jazeera journalists by egypt, cnn's lee reported several times on the al jazeera english news channel in a show of solidarity with the imprisoned journalists. lee's coverage of the al jazeera trial is documented in the book, the marriott cell: an epic journey from cairo's scorpion prison to freedom by mohamed fahmy.  lee was on board the royal caribbean oasis of the
seas in the atlantic ocean to cover the solar eclipse of august 21, 2017. he was on anderson cooper 360° while experiencing totality on the cruise liner.  personal life lee married holly dagres on july 1, 2016, in a private ceremony on a ranch in wyoming. the couple met in cairo, egypt.  awards  2008 - fulbright scholarship. 2011 - emmy award for revolution in egypt: president mubarak steps down. 2011 - investigative reporters and editors' tom renner award for death in the desert. 2011 - peabody award.  references  american television reporters and correspondents american male journalists american war correspondents cnn people news & documentary emmy award winners peabody award winners walter cronkite school of journalism and mass communication alumni arizona state university alumni american expatriates in egypt people from wyoming 1984 births living people
vera g. luth (born 1943) is an experimental particle physicist and professor emerita at stanford linear accelerator center (slac), stanford university, in the united states. a senator of the helmholtz association, she has worked in particle physics at slac since 1974. she is a fellow of the american physical society.  early life and education  luth completed her undergraduate education at mainz university institute of physics from 1963-1966. in 1969 she completed a master of science in physics at heidelberg university; her dr. rer. nat. work in particle physics was also completed there from 1966-1974, based on research at cern. her 1974 dissertation, titled measurement of the charge asymmetry in the decay k0 --> pi+- e-+ neutrino as a function of the k0 decay time, was advised by jack h. steinberger and heinz august adolf wilhelm filthuth.  in 1977 she married karl l. brown (1925-2002) in santa clara county, california.  career  luth was hired at slac as a postdoctoral researcher from 1974-1984.  she returned to cern as a scientific associate from 1984-1985, working with jack steinberger and others to measure charge-parity violation in neutral kaon decay. by 1984, luth had joined the permanent faculty at slac. between 1992-1994, she was deputy associate director of research at the superconducting super collider (ssc) laboratory in texas. when construction of the ssc was cancelled, she returned to slac as the first technical coordinator for the babar detector, with responsibilities for overseeing the detector's design and construction. upon its completion, she turned her efforts to measuring decay of b mesons. according to kelen tuttle, writing for slac today, "luth was one of the leading physicists on both the magnetic detector built by slac and lawrence berkeley national laboratory and the mark ii detector, which recorded data at spear, the positron electron project and the stanford linear collider. luth was also the driving force to build the first detector using silicon microstrips at a colliding beam machine."  in 2004 she was promoted to professor of research at slac.  luth served as a permanent member of the helmholtz association's senate commission from 2008 to 2011, and in 2011she was appointed a senator of the helmholtz association for the research field of the structure of matter. she has participated on numerous advisory committees and panels, including the german wissenschaftsrat's large facilities panel, and the department of energy and national science
foundation high energy physics advisory panel.  research  luth has conducted research at cern in switzerland, heidelberg university in germany, and slac. according to slac theoretical physicist joanne hewett, "right from the beginning, vera showed that every experiment she contributed to was the definitive experiment at the time." burton richter said she proved her worth early, "playing an important role at the stanford positron electron accelerating ring (spear) during the 'november revolution,' which launched a new era of particle physics with the discovery of the charm quark". her research interests have included fundamental symmetries, heavy flavor particle weak decays, silicon vertex detectors, and precision tracking.  in addition to co-authoring more than 700 publications on particle physics, luth has contributed a historical biography of wolfgang k. h. panofsky to the annual review of nuclear and particle science.  honors  luth was elected a fellow of the american physical society in 1984, and cited "for contributions to the discovery of new particles and to the determination of their properties."  she was honored as professor emerita at slac in 2010.  references  external links  what physicists do video, 1:02:16.  1943 births living people particle physicists stanford university faculty german women physicists 21st-century german physicists people from menlo park, california johannes gutenberg university mainz alumni heidelberg university alumni fellows of the american physical society people associated with cern 20th-century german physicists
the following lists events that happened in 1965 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - bjarni benediktsson  events  births  27 february - bjarkey gunnarsdottir, politician. 20 march - vigdis hauksdottir, politician. 17 april - andres guðmundsson, strongman 14 july - þordis gisladottir, children's writer, poet, novelist and textbook writer 21 july - guðni bergsson, footballer 24 july - disa eythorsdottir, bridge player 1 november - bjork, singer-songwriter  deaths  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
jofra chioke archer (born 1 april 1995) is a barbadian-born english cricketer representing england and sussex. in april 2019, archer was selected to play for the england team in limited overs fixtures against ireland and pakistan. he made his international debut for england in may 2019, and was part of the england squad that won the 2019 cricket world cup. he then made his test debut later that summer, against australia in the 2019 ashes series. in april 2020, archer was named as one of the wisden cricketers of the year.  early life jofra chioke archer was born on 1 april 1995 in bridgetown, barbados. his father frank archer is english and his mother joelle waithe is barbadian. he holds british citizenship through his father. he moved to england in 2015, and initially would not have been eligible to play for england until the winter of 2022. the england and wales cricket board (ecb) rules stated that as he did not live in england until after his 18th birthday, he needed to complete a seven-year residency period. archer played for west indies under-19s three times in 2014, but had signalled his intention to make himself available to england once his residency period was complete. however, in november 2018, the ecb announced a change to its rules, reducing the eligibility period from seven years to three to bring it into line with icc regulations.  domestic and franchise career archer made his first-class debut for sussex during pakistan's tour of england in july 2016, and his list a debut later that month against gloucestershire, in the 2016 royal london one-day cup.  archer was bought by the khulna titans in the 2017 bpl season. archer played for hobart hurricanes in both the 2017-18 and 2018-19 big bash league seasons.  he was signed by the quetta gladiators as a replacement for carlos brathwaite in the 2018 pakistan super league draft. he made his psl debut against karachi kings and took 2 wickets. he played two matches in total and pulled out of the remaining tournament due to a side strain.  he was bought by the rajasthan royals in the 2018 ipl auction for £800,000. archer then made his indian premier league (ipl) debut on 22 april 2018, against the mumbai indians when he took three wickets and was named the player of the match.  during a 2018 t20 blast match against middlesex in august 2018, archer took a hat-trick in the final over of the game.  in 2020, archer won the ipl most valuable player award despite his
team, rajasthan royals, finishing bottom of the league. in february 2022, he was bought by the mumbai indians in the auction for the 2022 indian premier league tournament.  international career  in april 2019, archer was named in england's squads for the limited overs series against pakistan and the one-off one day international (odi) against ireland. he made his odi debut for england against ireland on 3 may 2019. he made his twenty20 international debut for england against pakistan on 5 may 2019.  archer was not included in england's preliminary squad for the 2019 cricket world cup. former england cricketer andrew flintoff said he would drop "anyone" from the squad to include archer. on 21 may 2019, england finalised their squad for the world cup, with archer named in the final fifteen-man squad. he played in all england's matches, as they went on to win the cricket world cup, with archer bowling the super over, after the match ended in a tie in the final against new zealand. following the world cup, the international cricket council (icc) named archer as the rising star of the squad. the icc also included archer in their cwc 2019 team of the tournament, praising his new ball bowling and his bowling at the death of the innings.  in july 2019, the england and wales cricket board (ecb) named archer in england's fourteen-man test squad for the first match of the 2019 ashes series. however, he was omitted from england's final eleven for the match, after continuing rehabilitation from an injury.  archer was again named in the twelve-man squad for the second ashes test, and made his test debut in the match. he took his first wicket in test cricket, dismissing australia's opener cameron bancroft. on the first day of the third test, archer took his first five-wicket haul in test cricket, finishing with figures of 6 for 45, with australia being dismissed for 179 runs. following the conclusion of the ashes, archer was handed his first central contract by the ecb. in april 2020, archer was named as one of the five wisden cricketers of the year.  archer was included in england's 30-man squad to start training behind closed doors for the 2020 test series against the west indies, and was part of the england team for the first test match of the series. however, on the morning of the second test, archer was dropped from england's squad for the fixture, after he breached biosecurity protocols. as a result, he was placed in isolation for five days,
fined, and given a written warning by the ecb. he returned to the team for the third test, and for two of the three tests against pakistan.  in may and december 2021, archer underwent two operations for an elbow injury, ruling him out of the international team for twelve months.  references  external links    1995 births living people english cricketers england test cricketers england one day international cricketers england twenty20 international cricketers barbadian cricketers hobart hurricanes cricketers sussex cricketers khulna titans cricketers rajasthan royals cricketers quetta gladiators cricketers cricketers from bridgetown barbadian emigrants to the united kingdom naturalised citizens of the united kingdom black british sportspeople barbadian people of english descent cricketers at the 2019 cricket world cup wisden cricketers of the year
rajauri is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 10 km from nagar, 17.6 km from phillaur, 60.8 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 114 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  bhattian railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 17.4 km away from the village. the village is 47.2 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 152 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
mariana barbosa ramalho (born august 17, 1987) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team.  references  external links       1987 births living people brazil international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for brazil olympic rugby sevens players of brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
"go off" is a song by british recording artist m.i.a. from her fifth studio album, aim (2016). the track was written by m.i.a., skrillex, and blaqstarr. production was handled by the latter two, alongside tom manaton. the song premiered on annie mac's eponymous radio show on 14 july 2016 and was self-released worldwide the following day as a digital download under exclusive license to interscope records. the track was met with mixed reviews.  music video the music video for the song was directed by m.i.a. herself. it only consists of a series of surface mining site explosions as m.i.a. has revealed she did not want to feature any human beings in the video.  charts  release history  references  2016 singles 2016 songs electronic songs interscope records singles m.i.a. (rapper) songs song recordings produced by skrillex songs written by m.i.a. (rapper) songs written by skrillex
guppy is a 2016 indian malayalam-language drama film written and directed by johnpaul george. it stars chethan jayalal and tovino thomas in the lead roles, along with sreenivasan, rohini, sudheer karamana, dileesh pothan, and alencier ley lopez in supporting roles. the film was released on 5 august 2016 to positive reviews, but had a moderate performance in the box office.  the film revolves around the unexpected rivalry that starts between a teenager, guppy and the engineer who comes for the construction of the village dream project. centered on the theme of hope.  plot named after the angel, michael (rather known as guppy) is the sole support to his ailing mother. a talented artist, the teenager earns a living by rearing and selling the ornamental fish - guppy. he takes great care of his disabled mother and aspires to gift her a fully automatic wheelchair, someday. the little mischiefs that his friends get into and the occasional glimpses from the neighborhood teenage beauty, amina, makes his day. their small fishing village is, lately, under a lot of excitement. their village dream project just got sanctioned - a railway over-bridge to bypass the railway gate en route. people await the engineers from road and bridges development corporation.  meanwhile, somewhere in the himalayas, a rider starts his journey leaving his dear ones and 'malu', heading for the village. he arrives at the small roadside stall where the boy works, stopping for a tea. like the others present, guppy gets prejudiced with the unconcerned lifestyle of a rider, for the people here strive hard to subsist. gaps in communication and probably with his biased views, he offend the individual with the tea given. the experience end on a bad note for the two, with both their egos getting hurt. little did guppy know that the rider was here to stay, for he was the engineer thejus varkey in charge of building the over-bridge. a near miss accident the next day give guppy his upper hand and the teen gang loot the engineer for damages, when there actually is none.  days pass by and the rest of the team arrive. works start with initial planning and sketching. the engineer befriend the local village officer and convince him to slash the price per pair for the guppy fish that the office pays to the boy. being forced an apology, guppy's self-esteem urge him otherwise. the engineer
find the boy near his office jeep with flat tires, waiting for him. instincts send the boy running, while the engineer chase after him and slap him, driving the rest of his gang to attack in defence. with a stone guppy smash that hand of the engineer that slapped him. later thejus find their tent vandalized - burnt to ashes, leading him to send back his team till he finish the unresolved task.  thejus takes his time off, studying the canals and former civil undertakings. his secret plan takes shape. the illegal pisciculture of the boy in the blocked drainage, causing floods during rain, along with the roadside stall where he works are to be destroyed by the police as part of the expansion of roads for the bridge. giving him no time to shift, the tank is mercilessly destroyed sending the fish down the drain. the engineer's revenge is complete and the harm is done. from his meagre savings, guppy hire an outlaw to hurt the man in return. the engineer is stabbed, from the front, horrifying the kid.  guppy now know that things spiraled out of hand. the engineer's silence to the police frighten him even more, for the revenge will be something worse. left all alone, helplessly watching his dreams slipping away and awaiting his assured fate, all his pride and courage drain out. his fear does not go unnoticed by his mother, to whom he reveal nothing. thejus on the other hand, lonely on the hospital bed, is in pain but not physically. he too await to regain strength, to meet the boy.  amina, the girl fancied by the guppy, lives with her grandparents as her parents are both dead. the grandfather (whom she calls uppooppa) works as the temporary gate operator at the railway gate, hoping to make her an engineer one day. once the over-bridge is commissioned he will lose his job and at his age, is unable to find another. his mannerisms always irritated the team and he couldn't make friends with any. the solution to the poor man's problem, thought out by his slender perspective, was to drive the team away. he was the one who punctured the tires of the office jeep and destroyed their tent. when nothing seemed to work, at the end of his pitiful rope, face covered, he stabbed the engineer. but now the thoughts scare him. he too is admitted in the hospital with chest pain and regrets his actions.
the engineer having seen the one who stabbed him, now realize that his very presence chocked the lives of two innocent souls and their dependents. the bridge on the other hand, is just a political stunt targeting the vote bank; with nothing fruitful coming out of it for the society. stating the project as 'technically unfeasible', he stops the million-rupee project; delaying it for at least another ten years. he meets uppooppa to say that he understands and he will help with amina's dreams; forgiving him for his insanity. revealing the courage to correct his deeds, he rebuilt guppy's tank and gift it in grandiose; before leaving the place empty-handed. guppy, relieved from his worries, run home to his mother with the happy news. leaving him all alone, he finds her having breathed her last; while another gift, the long-awaited wheelchair is still on its way.  it has now been days since the boy left the village. the old man, tinku as he is fondly called, come back after weeks of caring for an old lady who might have been his long-lost mother. he happened to have read about thejus varkey, who filled the news some years back. he was the engineer who constructed the much anticipated omallur bridge. on the day of the inauguration, his family met with an accident that killed his parents, his wife and his 7-year-old daughter, malu. riding was his way out of his grief. to him every child that he met was his daughter malu, refusing to leave her with the dead. this railway over-bridge was likely the only work he undertook since.  thejus is shown once again riding through the himalayas with his dear malu, never having been so relieved and content, with the happy child michael in his care. like an answer to the prayers of his mother, michael will never be left alone and so will be thejus.  cast    chethan jayalal as guppy (michael)  tovino thomas as engineer thejus varkey  sreenivasan as upooppa  rohini as guppy's mother  nandhana varma as aamina  vijilesh karayad as pappoy  vishnu purushan as christy  arun paul as abu  sarath jayan as jaffer  alencier ley lopez as paappan  sudheer karamana as lalichan  dileesh pothan as krishnan,
village officer  sudhi koppa as chink divakar  pauly valsan as molly  noby as oanachan  k. l. antony kochi as tinku  poojappura ravi as chinnappan   devi ajith as aamina's  grandmother  anand bal as police inspector  production the film is jointly produced by e4 entertainment and a. v. a. productions, in association with yopa cinemas.  soundtrack   the soundtrack features songs composed by vishnu vijay. the lyrics were penned by vinayak sasikumar, rafeeq ahamed and johnpaul george. the background score was also produced by vishnu vijay and orchestrated by sushin shyam.  release guppy was originally scheduled to release on 29 july 2016, but due to some procedural issue in getting the film censored, the release was postponed to and released on 5 august 2016. the film was released in 72 theaters across kerala.  critical reception  the film received positive reviews from critics.  times of india gave a rating of 3/5 and mentioned that director and scriptwriter johnpaul george deserves credit for weaving the beautiful tale  the hindu mentioned that in guppy director johnpaul george is visibly eager to bring on screen everything he ever wanted to shoot and ends up packing in just a little too much.'  malayala manorama gave a rating of 3/5 and said that 'while it's a thumbs up for the maiden directorial venture, one is too tempted to sing 'beauty, beauty everywhere, but a good number of edits short of being a fine film'  entertainment website sify with its inherent honesty, debutant director johnpaul george's guppy is a good film that has its fine moments  the power of the screenplay in getting the audience involved, choosing between sides and later making them regret their choice is worthy of mention.  awards  47th kerala state film awards the film won 5 awards for 2016 47th kerala state film awards which was announced on 7 march 2017.  best child artist - chethan jayalal best background music - vishnu vijay best male singer - sooraj santhosh best costume designer - stephy savier special mention -	girish gangadharan  home media 'guppy' garnered excellent reviews after the dvd release which prompted lead actor tovino thomas asking through facebook about re-releasing the movie in theaters again. the lead actor said that after the release of the dvd, he has been receiving a lot of messages from people who regret missing out on the movie in theaters.  see also
guppy  references  external links   guppy fish  2016 films indian films 2010s malayalam-language films
the  was an army of the imperial japanese army during the final days of world war ii.  history the japanese army of tokyo bay was formed 19 june 1945, under the 12th area army as part of the last desperate defense effort by the empire of japan to deter possible landings of allied forces in kanto region. the army of tokyo bay was based in tateyama, chiba. it consisted mostly of poorly trained reservists, conscripted students and volunteer fighting corps home guard militia. it was demobilized at the surrender of japan on august 15, 1945, without having seen combat.  references and notes this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 東京湾兵団, accessed 22 july 2016  army of tokyo bay military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945
oluremi comfort sonaiya (born march 2, 1955), is a nigerian politician, educationalist and writer. she was nigeria's only female presidential candidate in the 2015 general election under the platform of the kowa party. but recently lost her bid to dr. adesina fagbenro byron in representing the party again in 2019 election.  early life and education sonaiya was born in ibadan, the capital of oyo state, where she completed her primary and secondary school education at st. luke's demonstration school, ibadan and st. anne's school, ibadan. in 1977, she graduated from the university of ife (now obafemi awolowo university), where she studied french.  she later obtained a master of arts degree in french literature from cornell university in the united states, and another master's degree in linguistics from a university in nigeria in 1984. she returned to cornell in 1988 to pursue a phd programme in linguistics.  career in 1982, she was employed as an assistant lecturer in the department of foreign languages, obafemi awolowo university before she rose to the position of professor of french language and applied linguistics in 2004. she is a fellow of the alexander von humboldt foundation where she went on to be appointed the body's ambassador scientist from 2008 to 2014.  in 2010, she retired from her position at obafemi awolowo university and became politically active, joining the kowa party where she was voted its national public relations officer, and went on to be the party's candidate for the 2015 presidential election. at the election, sonaiya received 13,076 votes and finished in 12th place.  publications sonaiya is a columnist for the niche, a nigerian online newspaper, sonaiya has published several books including:  culture and identity on stage: social-political concerns and enactments in contemporary african performing arts (2001)   language matters: exploring the dimensions of multilingualism (2007)  a trust to earn - reflections on life and leadership in nigeria (2010)   igniting consciousness - nigeria and other riddles (2013)   daybreak nigeria - this nation must rise! (2014)  personal life she is married to babafunso sonaiya, a professor of animal science, and they have one son, one daughter and grandchildren.  references  external links    1955 births living people nigerian women writers yoruba women writers nigerian women in politics yoruba women in politics people from ibadan people from oyo state obafemi awolowo university alumni cornell university alumni st anne's school, ibadan
alumni
amana bank is a commercial bank in tanzania. it is  licensed by the bank of tanzania, the central bank and national banking regulator.  location the headquarters and main branch of amana bank are located in golden jubilee tower, along garden avenue, in the central business district of the city of dar es salaam, the largest city and financial capital of tanzania. the geographical coordinates of golden jubilee tower are: 06°48'49.0"s,  39°17'21.0"e (latitude:-6.813611; longitude:39.289167).  overview the bank is a fully licensed islamic banking institution.  , the bank had over 34,000 customers, served through seven branches, of which five were in dar es salaam, one in mwanza and one in arusha. as of 31 december 2017, the bank's total assets were valued at tzs:204 billion (us$89.7 million), with shareholders' equity of tzs:23.7 billion (us$10.43 million).  history amana bank was established in 2011 with paid-up capital of tsh27 billion (approx. us$12.6 million in 2016 money). it is the first fully sharia-compliant bank in tanzania. the discussions to establish this bank date back to october 2009, among prominent tanzanian business personalities.  branch network as of september 2018, the bank maintained branches at the following locations:   headquarters branch: 2nd floor, golden jubilee tower, ohio street, dar es salaam main branch  nyerere branch: drtc house, nyerere road, dar es salaam   lumumba branch: lumumba street, kariakoo, dar es salaam  mbagala branch: mbagala zakhem, mbagala, dar es salaam   tandamti branch: tandamti street, opposite kariakoo market, dar es salaam   arusha branch: ground floor, hugo plaza building, corner of wapare street & majengo street, arusha  mwanza branch: ground floor, plot no 231, block t, kenyatta street, mwanza tanga branch - north east side of uhuru park, market street, tanga  zanzibar branch - zanzibar (in development)  pemba branch - pemba (in development)  see also  references  external links  amana bank disburses tzs:36 billion in loans, as of june 2016  tanzania: amana bank loan portfolio surges  website of amana bank
limited  website of bank of tanzania  banks of tanzania companies of tanzania economy of dar es salaam banks established in 2011 2011 establishments in tanzania dar es salaam
belinda bencic and kristina mladenovic were the defending champions, but chose not to participate this year.  monica niculescu and yanina wickmayer won the title, defeating shuko aoyama and risa ozaki in the final, 6-4, 6-3.  seeds the top three seeds received a bye into the quarterfinals.  draw  references draw  citi open - women's doubles 2016 women's doubles
sakari halonen (1923-1992) was a finnish singer and stage, film and television actor.  selected filmography  the general's fiancee (1951)  the millionaire recruit (1953)  external links     1923 births 1992 deaths people from kuopio 20th-century finnish male singers finnish male stage actors finnish male film actors finnish male television actors
an off-season south pacific tropical cyclone is a tropical cyclone that exists in the south pacific basin outside of the official tropical cyclone season. the world meteorological organization currently defines the season as occurring between november 1 and april 30, of the following year, with approximately 96% of all activity occurring between these months. if a tropical cyclone should develop during the off-season, it is more likely to develop during may or october than any other month of the off-season. as of 2018, there have been 91 tropical cyclones known to have occurred off-season, with 54 of these occurring since the satellite era started during the 1969-70 season.  off-season cyclones are most likely to occur in the coral sea, with most impacting either the solomon islands, vanuatu and new caledonia. the most recent off-season storm is tropical depression 01f, which developed during september 2018 and impacted the solomon islands. the strongest tropical cyclone to exist during the off-season in terms of wind speed was severe tropical cyclone donna of 2017, with maximum 10-minute sustained winds of 125 mph (205 km/h), while the most intense by central pressure was severe tropical cyclone xavier of 2006, with an estimated value of . the deadliest and most damaging system was severe tropical cyclone namu, which caused over 100 deaths, when it impacted the solomon islands during may 1986.  background  tropical cyclones are considered to be non-frontal, low pressure systems that develop, within an environment of warm sea surface temperatures and little vertical wind shear aloft.   within the south pacific basin to the east of 160°e, the cyclone season is defined as running between november 1 and april 30 of the following year. during the off-season a total of 90 tropical cyclones have been recorded during the off-season, with a total of 53 of these systems occurring after satellite imagery became regularly available during the 1969-70 season.  the first system to exist in the off-season on record was active during may 17, 1868 and was located near vanuatu, according to records compiled by stephen sargent visher. the most recent systems to exist in the off-season were severe tropical cyclone donna and tropical cyclone ella, which both developed during may 2017. the strongest tropical cyclone to exist during the off-season in terms of wind speed was severe tropical cyclone donna of 2017, with maximum 10-minute sustained winds of 125 mph (205 km/h), while the most intense by central pressure was severe tropical cyclone xavier of 2006, with a minimum value of 930
hpa (27.46 inhg). the deadliest and most damaging system was severe tropical cyclone namu, which caused over 100 deaths, when it impacted the solomon islands during may 1986.  of the 57 known tropical systems that have been recorded during the off-season, a total of 33 tropical cyclones have been recorded in may or have persisted into the off-season after developing in april. a total of 18 tropical cyclones have developed during october, while three systems have been recorded in both june and july, while two have been recorded in september. the three systems recorded in june were all named tropical cyclones, with gina and keli considered to be a category 3 severe tropical cyclones on the australian tropical cyclone intensity scale. in addition tropical cyclone raquel developed in june 2015 and was considered, to be the latest system to develop in the south pacific ocean. in addition as the system persisted into july 2015, it was unofficially considered to be a part of two tropical cyclone years. off the two systems recorded in july, tropical depression 17f in july 2002 was designated 17f, despite being the first system of the 2002-03 season. tropical depression 01f/01p of july 2015, which subsequently persisted into august 2015. the first system that developed during september, was an unnamed system that occurred in 1924, which according to a report published by greenpeace, caused damage to some ships to the west of new caledonia. the other system was declared to be a tropical depression by the fiji meteorological service during september 1999, but was more likely to be a hybrid system rather than a proper tropical depression.  the season with the most off-season systems was 1999-2000, which had a total of six tropical depressions existing during the off-season. the 1997-98, 2004-05 and 2013-14 seasons had four tropical cyclones during the off-season each, while the 1988-89 and the 1996-97 season had three off-season tropical cyclones.  systems the wind speeds listed are maximum ten-minute average sustained winds, while the pressure is the minimum barometric pressure, both of which are estimates taken from the archives of either the australian bureau of meteorology, the fiji meteorological service, and new zealand's metservice. if there are no known estimates of either the winds or pressure then the system is listed as "not specified" under winds or pressure, if there is no known estimated winds or pressure. for deaths and damages "none" indicates that there were no reports of fatalities or damages, although such storms may have impacted land. where it
the damage totals are the united states dollar of the year of the storm.  |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bcolor=#| || norfolk island || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || unknown || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || unknown || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || french polynesia || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || unknown || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || unknown || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || unknown || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 05u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji || minor || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 06u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland
|| none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 01p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 02p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 01u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 32p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, new caledonianew zealand || none || none || |- | 18u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 24p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 32u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, queensland || none || none || |- | 35u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatunew caledonia || none || none || |- | 53p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 37u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 38u ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | esther ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || papua new guinea || none || none || |- | 32p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | nora ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji || minor || none || |- | ida ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatunew caledonia ||  ||  || |- | bebe ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji, kiribati, tuvalu ||  ||  || |- | 01p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || new caledonia || none || none || |- | 02p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 01p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | claudia ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon
islands || none || none || |- | joti ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu || minor || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | namu ||  || bgcolor=#| ||  bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands ||  ||  || |- | blanch(e) ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | meena ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#|  || cape york peninsula || minor || none || |- | ernie ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | unnamed ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji || none || none || |- | lisa ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatu || none || none || |- | innis ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatu || none || none || |- | june ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji ||  || none || |- | 37p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu || none || none || |- | keli ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || tuvalu, fiji, samoan islands ||  || none || |- | lusi ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu, fiji || none || none || |- | 03p ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | martin ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || cook islands, french polynesia ||  ||  || |- | bart ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || french polynesia || minor ||  || |- | 26f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland, new zealand || none || none || |- | 20f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 21f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || queensland || none || none || |- | 22f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 23f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |-
| 24f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 14f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 15f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 17f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 01f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu || none || none || |- | gina ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 01f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 14f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 17f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 18f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | xavier ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatu || extensive || none || |- | 02f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 01f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 17f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || none || |- | 22f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || fiji || none || none || |- | 01f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 02f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu || minor || none || |- | 03f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 04f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | raquel ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || significant ||  || |- | 01f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || none || |- | 02f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || vanuatu || none || none || |- | donna ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands, vanuatune
w caledonia, new zealand || significant ||  || |- | ella ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || samoan islands, tongawallis and futuna, fiji || minor || none || |- | liua ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || solomon islands || none || 0 || |- | 12f ||  || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || bgcolor=#| || none || none || 0 || |}  records and statistics according to records compiled by stephen sargent visher and the vanuatu meteorology service, the first tropical cyclone on record to occur outside of the current season was located near vanuatu and was active during may 17, 1868. however, the official database provided by the international best track archive for climate stewardship, which dates back to 1892, shows that the first storm to occur in the basin outside of the current season was in 1912. the database shows that 55 tropical cyclones have existed in the basin during the off-season between may and october, while in addition 36 other systems that are not included in ibtracs have monitored by the warning centres.  off-season systems are most likely to occur in may with a total of 43 systems developing or persisting into the month, compared with 20 developing during october. out of all systems recorded only four systems have developed in either august or september, and were all recorded before the satellite era started during the 1969-70 season. the latest tropical cyclone to exist in the basin on record was tropical cyclone raquel, which was named during june 30, 2015. raquel was also unofficially considered to be the earliest a tropical cyclone, after it persisted into july 2015 when the tropical cyclone year changed.    the charts below both show during which month a tropical cyclone developed during the off-season. the statistics for april are not complete and only show those systems that formed during the month and either dissipated on april 30, or persisted into may and the off-season. the charts are also split with red showing those systems that developed within the satellite era, while those in red developed, before the satellite era started during the 1969-70 season.  notes  see also list of off-season atlantic hurricanes list of off-season australian region tropical cyclones list of off-season pacific hurricanes  references  external links  south pacific cyclones off-season  list south pacific cyclones
nicoleta catalina dascalu (born 19 december 1995 in pitesti) is a romanian professional tennis player.  dascalu has a career-high wta singles ranking of no. 266, achieved on 2 march 2020. she also has a career-high wta doubles ranking of 240, set on 21 october 2019. so far, she has won five singles titles and four doubles titles on the itf circuit.  dascalu made her wta tour main-draw debut at the 2016 brd bucharest open, in the doubles competition partnering irina bara.  itf circuit finals  singles: 8 (5 titles, 3 runner-ups)  doubles: 11 (4 titles, 7 runner-ups)  external links      1995 births living people romanian female tennis players sportspeople from pitesti
antenen is a swiss surname. notable people with the surname include:  charles antenen (1929-2000), swiss footballer georges antenen (1903-1979), swiss cyclist meta antenen (born 1949), swiss pentathlete  surnames of swiss origin
the stabilitatsrat (stability council) is a joint body of the german federation (bund) and the federal states (lander). it was established in 2010 as part of the second stage of germany's federal reforms and is enshrined in article 109a of the basic law (grundgesetz), germany's constitution. the stability council strengthens the institutional framework for safeguarding the long-term sustainability of public budgets on the federal and lander levels.  history in 2010, the stability council replaced the finanzplanungsrat (financial planning council), founded in 1969.  legal basis the legal basis of the stability council is set out in article 109a of the basic law. its work is also governed by provisions in a number of other laws, including the stability council act, the consolidation assistance act, the financial equalisation act and the budgetary principles act.  organisation the stability council is composed of the federal minister of finance, the lander finance ministers and the federal minister for economic affairs and energy. the federal minister of finance and the chair of the lander finance minister conference co-chair the stability council.  tasks the stability council's main task is to monitor the budgets of the federation and lander. the council's purpose is the early identification of coming budgetary emergencies so that appropriate counter-measures can be initiated in a timely manner. the stability council plays an important role with regard to compliance with the eu requirements for budgetary discipline. the council monitors the budgets of the federation, lander, local authorities and social insurance funds, to make sure that they, comply with the upper limit for the general government structural deficit of 0.5% of gdp, as stipulated in the budgetary principles act.  advisory board the stability council advisory board is an independent body of experts. it assists the stability council in carrying out its task of monitoring compliance with the upper limit on the general government structural deficit. it represents germany in the eu independent fiscal institutions network set up by the eu in september 2015.  see also unabhangiger beirat des stabilitatsrats, the advisory board of the stability council  references  external links  official website of the stabilitatsrat  government audit eurozone policy and political reactions to the eurozone crisis fiscal federalism 2015 in the european union multi-speed europe
the istanbul lutheran church (ilk) is small national turkish-speaking lutheran church body in turkey. it was officially founded december 22, 2004. the parish is led by council of elders together with presiding pastor ville typpo. istanbul lutheran church have two parishes in turkey: istanbul parish and izmir parish. and two parishes in bulgaria: peshtera parish and chapel parish in krushevo village (belongs to parvomay city). november 2006 turkish-speaking lutheran parish in mannheim, germany, joined istanbul lutheran church. istanbul lutheran church has approximately 120 members. lutheranism has been in turkey since 1709, when sweden sent first lutheran priest to constantinople. istanbul lutheran church's weekly activities are church services, bible study groups, sunday schools and bible classes.  doctrine in brochure of istanbul lutheran church is following statement: "istanbul lutheran church confesses the christian faith based on the holy bible, the witness of the old and new testaments to the triune god, the father, the son and the holy spirit. this faith is expressed in three ecumenical creeds and in the lutheran confessions."  external links official websites in english official websites in turkish prochure of istanbul lutheran church sharing the faith in turkey: an interview with the head of the istanbul lutheran church  references  lutheran denominations
brigham county park is a county park located in western dane county, wisconsin near the village of blue mounds. the park encompasses  and includes 25 campsites. other amenities in the park include nature and snowshoe trails, a picnic area, a playground, and volleyball and horseshoe courts. a  bicycle trail connects the campground to the military ridge state trail.  the park was named for ebenezer brigham, the first permanent european resident of dane county. brigham served as a colonel in the black hawk war and played a prominent role in wisconsin's territorial politics. he and his family owned a large amount of land in the area, and the park was formed when the family donated its land to the county. a state historical marker in the park commemorates brigham and his family's role in forming the park. nearby blue mound state park was also formed from brigham's land.  the park is the site of east blue mound, the highest point in dane county at . the mound is the partner of the taller blue mound, which is the highest point in southern wisconsin, and one of the two mounds that gives the village of blue mounds its name.  references  external links brigham county park  county parks in wisconsin protected areas of dane county, wisconsin
stebbing studios is a recording studio in auckland, new zealand. artists who have had their work recorded over the years, include: ray columbus & the invaders, bill & boyd, gary havoc & the hurricanes, the human instinct, and waves.  background the studio was founded by eldred stebbing, who also founded zodiac records. he originally set up a recording studio in the basement of the family home in the auckland suburb of herne bay. he built the stebbing recording centre in 1970, which is located in jervois rd, where it is still in operation today.  1970s in 1970, they were the first to have eight track recording facilities.   during 1974 - 1975, john hanlon recorded at the studio. in december 1974, dragon recorded their scented gardens for the blind album there. also during 1974 - 1975, human instinct recorded tracks for their peg leg album. unfortunately the master tapes went missing, and weren't found until more than a couple of decades later. australian jazz musician don burrows had his album the tasman connection recorded there, which was released on the cherry pie label in 1976.  1980s by 1981, stebbing studios were one of four new zealand recording studios with twenty four track recording facilities.  1990s in 1999, the studio entered into a cd production venture with hargon international, but then bought them out. they invested $10 million in a new cd production plant that was to open that year.  2000s by the 2000s, as per their advertisement in the november 30 issue of billboard, the main studio could accommodate up to sixty musicians.  recorded artists  partial list  waves - waves - 1975  gary havoc & the hurricanes - havoc! - 1979  bill & boyd - the very best of bill & boyd - 2003  royal new zealand navy band - he waita moana (ocean songs) - 2014  remastering, duplication etc  the yardmen -  bricks and mortar - (2010) (duplication)  ray woolf - ray woolf - the sixties collection - 2012 (remastering)  references  recording studios in new zealand recording studios in auckland, new zealand
rajshri is an indian actress who has predominantly appeared in south indian films. she made her malayalam cinema debut in, pithavinum puthranam parishudhatmvinum in 2013. she gained acclaim for being the only south indian actress to be featured on outlook magazine's cover. in addition to acting in movies, rajshri has launched her own production house to produce regional cinema and has won acclaim as a theatre actress.  early life rajshri was born in coorg, karnataka to mm ponnappa, businessman, and jyothi mp, . she is a trained bharatnatyam dancer. the eldest of three children, rajshri has a younger brother and sister who are twins.  she completed her schooling from clarence high school, jp nagar, bangalore and went on to study in jyoti nivas college, bangalore completing her graduation in bachelors of mass communication. during her time in college, she was an all-rounder. she also completed her honors programme in human resource management from st. joseph's college, bangalore.  it was during this time that she started doing voice-overs for radio mirchi and was also an outdoor broadcasting radio-jockey for radio one.  as a college student, she studied film-making and participated in the making of 3 documentaries, out of which one was made on traffic awareness and was screened by the chennai city traffic police.  career she rose to prominence when she became the face of zee kannada after winning multiple reality tv shows and soon after, she was offered her first movie pithavinum puthranam parishudhatmvinum. the film did not release due to religious conflicts but earned her enough fame and popularity to be featured on the cover page of outlook national magazine, after which she was offered various films.  she made an impact with a pivotal role in film vasundhara which was directed by national award winner t. s. nagabharana.this was followed by a role in rocket with sathish ninasam and achyuth kumar. she made her telugu film debut with srikanth in mental police and won audience acclaim. in 2017, she acted alongside b. c. patil, saikumar, vijaya raghavendra, diganth, dhananjay, sudharani, shruthi hariharan, sonu gowda, margarita and srushti patil in kannada anthology drama - happy new year which was directed by pannaga bharana. while working with t.s. nagabharana, rajshri was introduced to theatre and soon after, shifted to mumbai to pursue it.
she made her theatre debut with surnai theatre and folk arts foundation's namaste which is an adaptation by ila arun of tom dudzick's popular play greetings! (1990) and is directed by k.k. raina. the play has been received well by audiences and has been performed in multiple cities across india including shimla, delhi, jaipur, hyderabad and the iconic prithvi theatre in mumbai.  she has appeared in advertisements for leading brands such as kalyan jewellers (with shiva rajkumar), nature's basket and lipton tea.  she has also co-produced namo bhootatma, a kannada horror comedy film directed by murali, it is a remake of the 2014 tamil film yaamirukka bayamey (which itself was based on the korean movie the quiet family)  philanthropy she participated in the vanity trunk sale, bangalore along with kavya shetty, manvitha harish, meghna gaonkar, meghana raj, neetu shetty and other actresses from the south film industry - a cause which had them donating clothes and accessories from their personal wardrobe. the proceeds of which went to her mother's charitable organization jp foundation and aadya foundation.  filmography  references  external links    living people actresses in telugu cinema indian film actresses 21st-century indian actresses actresses in malayalam cinema year of birth missing (living people) actresses from bangalore actresses in tamil cinema
sean lewis (born april 17, 1992) is an american soccer player who currently plays for fc tulsa in the usl championship.  career  club in january 2015 lewis signed for olympia warriors of the national premier league in australia where he led olympia to a national premier league top four finish, victory league championship, summer cup championship, and a victory league cup championship . in february 2016, lewis signed for jacksonville armada fc in the nasl.  after two seasons with penn fc, lewis joined usl side tulsa roughnecks ahead of their 2019 season.  references  external links armada profile  1992 births living people american soccer players western michigan broncos men's soccer players oakland golden grizzlies men's soccer players panama city beach pirates players jacksonville armada fc players penn fc players fc tulsa players north american soccer league players association football goalkeepers people from rockford, michigan soccer players from michigan american expatriate sportspeople in australia american expatriate soccer players expatriate soccer players in australia usl championship players
gowran (; ) is a barony in the east of county kilkenny, ireland. the size of the barony is . there are 35 civil parishes in gowran. the chief town today is gowran. the barony contains the ecclesiastical sites of kilfane and duiske abbey the barony of gowran is situated in the east of the county between the baronies of fassadinin to the north (whose chief town is castlecomer), the baronies of kilkenny, shillelogher and knocktopher to the west (whose chief towns are kilkenny,  bennettsbridge and knocktopher), and the barony of ida is to the south. it borders county carlow to the east. the m9 motorway bisects the barony.  geography   gowran contains the towns of thomastown, paulstown, bennettsbridge, goresbridge, gowran, graiguenamanagh, and inistioge, and the settlements of ballyfoyle, maddockstown, whitehall, castlewarren, dungarvan, rathgarvan or clifden, skeaghvasteen, and johnswell.  there are 35 civil parishes in the barony (see map). they are: blackrath, blanchvilleskill, clara, columbkille, dunbell, dungarvan, famma, gowran, graiguenamanagh, grangesilvia, inistioge, jerpointabbey, jerpointwest, kilderry, kilfane, kilkieran, killarney, kilmacahill, kilmadum, mothell, pleberstown, powerstown, rathcoole, shankill, st. john's, st. martin's, st. maul's, thomastown, tiscoffin, treadingstown, tullaherin, ullard, wells, and woolengrange. three of which are split between the barony of gowran and the baronies of fassadinin and ida (mothell, kilmadum and inistioge). most of the eastern boundary of the barony of gowran is formed by the river barrow.  history the barony was part of the territory of the  historic kingdom of osraige (ossory). that kingdom was almost co-terminus with the still extant catholic diocese of ossory . in the church of ireland, the diocese has been merged into the diocese of cashel and ossory. gowran is currently administered by kilkenny county council. gowran was recorded in the down survey (1656), and
on griffith's valuation (1864). parts of the barony were in the poor law unions of castlecomer, kilkenny, and thomastown.   territory of o'carroll and o'dunphy. given to theobald fitzwalter (butler ). dobbyn family based there in the 15th century. richard fitzpatrick was created lord gowran in 1715, and his son was created earl of upper ossory in 1751. both titles became extinct in 1818.  contains the ecclesiastical sites of kilfane and duiske abbey.  kilbline castle and woodstock castle are also located in gowran.  see also   list of baronies of ireland  list of townlands of county kilkenny  list of irish local government areas 1900 - 1921  notes  references  external links         gowran
tommaso d'aquino, c.r. (10 september 1657 - 15 october 1732) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of vico equense (1700-1732).  biography tommaso d'aquino was born in caramanico terme, italy on 10 september 1657 and ordained a priest in the congregation of clerics regular of the divine providence. on 21 june 1700, he was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent xii as bishop of vico equense. on 24 june 1700, he was consecrated bishop by pier matteo petrucci, cardinal-priest of san marcello, with gerolamo ventimiglia, bishop of lipari, and domenico belisario de bellis, bishop of molfetta, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of vico equense until his death on 15 october 1732.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    18th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent xii 1657 births 1732 deaths theatine bishops
etienne leenhardt (born 25 july 1962) at montpellier, in the department of herault, is a french tv host, journalist, editor, and executive. beginning march 2004, etienne was deputy director of information for france 2. from september 2008 to the end of 2015, he was the presenter of the magazine un œil sur la planete before going to samah soula.  biography   leenhardt was born on 25 july 1962 in montpellier, to nicolas leenhardt (1931-1986), professor of mathematics, and francoise boucomont (born 1932), secretary to the protestant institute of theology.  he has three brothers and a sister.  career   after receiving a degree in languages from universite paul valery in montpellier, leenhardt studied at the school of journalism in paris. previously chosen to host variety shows by la cinq, he presented from 1990 to 1991 at telematin, on france 2. leenhardt presented the news show 20 heures of france 2 from 1994 to 1995. placed in special operations,  he then become the correspondent of france 2 for washington, d.c., and then london.  in 2003, he became editor of the service enquetes et reportages (investigations and reports), then in march of the following year, he became deputy director of information of france 2, alongside arlette chabot. at the start of september 2008, he succeeded thierry thuillier in presenting  the quarterly magazine on geopolitics un œil sur la planete and took over the management of investigations and reporting, while remaining deputy director of information.  on the eve of 14 july 2010, which saw delegations of armies of thirteen african countries participating, as guests of honor, at the parade on the champs elysees, the reporter said on the set of 20 heures of france 2:  sur le plan politique, il n'y a pas de dictature en afrique francophone ("politically there are no dictators in french speaking africa")  personal life   in september 1988, leenhardt married nathalie senneville,  editor-in-chief of the protestant weekly reform. he is the father of three children, hugo (1991), jeanne (1993), and emma (1997).  references    1962 births living people french television presenters television executives french journalists
jagdgeschwader 143 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938 military units and formations disestablished in the 1940s
jo-ane van dyk (born 3 october 1997) is a south african track and field athlete who competes in the javelin throw.  competition record  references  external links  1997 births living people place of birth missing (living people) south african female javelin throwers athletes (track and field) at the 2014 summer youth olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2015 african games african games bronze medalists for south africa african games medalists in athletics (track and field) white south african people athletes (track and field) at the 2019 african games african games silver medalists for south africa competitors at the 2017 summer universiade competitors at the 2019 summer universiade athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of south africa
ernst stotzner (born 1952) is a german actor. he has appeared in more than sixty films since 1983.  selected filmography  references  external links   1952 births living people german male film actors
clonmel greyhound stadium is a greyhound racing track located in clonmel, county tipperary, ireland.  racing takes place every friday and sunday evening and the facilities include a grandstand restaurant, fast food facilities, a number of bars, totalisator betting and seating.  race distances are 300, 525, 550, 575, 790 and 1,015 yards and the feature competition at the track is the national produce stakes.  competitions current and former national produce stakes oaks st leger  history  opening the first race held at clonmel took place on 20 march 1931. the track is situated on the old waterford road just off davis road and is also the headquarters of the irish coursing club (icc). the icc moved into the town of clonmel in 1921 and the secretary tom morris became the first managing director of the greyhound racecourse. in 1931 the horse show society agreed with the greyhound racing club of clonmel to lease the grounds for £250 per year. the racing manager was tim rice and the circuit was 480 yards in circumference running the standard main distance of 525 yards.  the oaks was held here in 1932 and the clonmel public were lucky to see the magnificent bitch queen of the suir win the race. the following year the track was selected to host both the oaks and st leger. the running of the irish st leger was the one and only time at the track and resulted in a victory for the legendary brilliant bob. the may 1931 whelp was introduced to track racing in 1933 and after finishing runner-up in the easter cup won the st leger over 550 yards in 31.53.  the premier racing event to be held at clonmel would be the national sapling stakes (which would become the national breeders produce stakes). the first running was in 1939 and was claimed by sporting fancy. a year later in 1940 tanist became the first greyhound to break 30 seconds at clonmel recording 29.85 over 525 yards. the track renamed the national sapling stakes to the national puppy cup before it became the national breeders produce stakes in 1947.  post war the next milestone came in 1946 when in the second round of the national puppy cup a greyhound called quare times clocked an amazing 29.75sec to set a new track record. in 1947 the icc moved into new headquarters so that they could administer the sport in addition to housing 'the sporting press' a newspaper owned by the icc. the struggling racecourse known as powerstown park had also been acquired by the icc which used the venue for coursing inside the horse racing circuit
. they retained some horse racing meetings maintaining the park as a going concern.  the track would come under the control of the bord na gcon in 1960 that purchased the track from the morris family. there were no major developments over the next couple of decades except for the introduction of a new event called the munster cup and the 1979 retirement of christy mulcahy the racing manager. one event that was not welcome was the regular flooding of the track from the nearby river suir.  in 1986 the track was closed to allow a complete renovation with the re-opening in spring 1987, the track underwent major changes as well going all-sand and introducing the controversial australian noel bramwich hare. the track improvements changed the expected times recorded and balalika set a new track record of 28.68 over 525 yards on a circumference of 593 yards.  the lease for clonmel was bought out by the clonmel leisure group from the bord na gcon in 1991 but the track closed down in 1998 following an ongoing dispute over the lease and freehold agreements between the clonmel leisure group and the clonmel agricultural show.  recent history in 2000 it was hoped that a new track could be constructed at powerstown park. meetings were held between the irish coursing club (tenants at powerstown park), the irish greyhound board, the tipperary county council, government minister noel davern, and clonmel's mayor, tom ambrose but the problems continued and a solution was not found. eventually it was agreed that the greyhound track section of the showgrounds would be sold to the davis road greyhound racing company.  before re-opening in 2003 the stadium was upgraded and modernised signalling a new start with red mills becoming sponsors of the national produce stakes and barry coleman becoming racing manager. the former racing manager gus ryan retired in 2009 after 42 years in racing.  in 2012 clonmel earned contributions from greyhound racing ireland and received a €1 million investment allowing the owners to knock down the old stand and rebuild a new modern grandstand.  current track records  former track records   1937 track record holder monarch of all was sold for a record price at the time of 350 guineas at the harold's cross stadium sales.  references  greyhound racing venues in the republic of ireland 1931 establishments in ireland sport in county tipperary sports venues in county tipperary
nadja kather (born 29 september 1988) is a german athlete who specialises in the long jump. she competed at the 2010 european championships and 2016 european championships.  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links      1988 births living people german female long jumpers
the following lists events that happened in 1992 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - davið oddsson  events  vigdis finnbogadottir is re-elected as president  births  30 march - olafur karl finsen, footballer 15 april - guðmundur þorarinsson, footballer. 18 may - haukur palsson, basketball player 25 may - jon daði boðvarsson, footballer 27 may - frida einarsdottir, artistic gymnast 2 june - þorgerður anna atladottir, handball player 1 july - asgeir trausti, musician 5 august - guðmundur holmar helgason, handball player 12 august - arna asgrimsdottir, footballer 8 october - agnes suto, artistic gymnast 18 october - dominiqua belanyi, artistic gymnast  deaths  1 september - arni boðvarsson, educator, grammarian, and dictionary editor (b. 1924) 26 december - sigriður hagalin, actress (b. 1926) 31 december - kristjan vattnes, athlete (b. 1916).  references    1990s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
lonah korlima chemtai salpeter (, , born 12 december 1988) is a kenyan-israeli runner. she competed in the marathon for israel at the 2016 summer olympics, and won the 10,000 metres 2018 european athletics championship. her personal best time for the marathon is 2:17:45, which when she ran it in 2020 made her the 6th-fastest woman in the marathon in history, the second-fastest european all-time, and a new israeli national record. she represented israel at the 2020 summer olympics.  early and personal life chemtai was born in kenya, a member of the tribe of the kalenjin, and grew up in a small village without electricity or running water in west pokot county in western kenya.  she came to israel in 2008, to work as a nanny for the children of kenya's ambassador to israel residing in herzliya, israel.  chemtai met israeli running coach dan salpeter in 2011, and the two fell in love, and married in 2014.  the couple's son, roy, was born in december 2014. the family resided in moshav yanuv, in central israel, and now resides in shoham in central israel. chemtai became an israeli citizen in march 2016 on account of marriage to an israeli citizen, eight years after she began residing in israel, and a few days before the cut-off to qualify for the 2016 summer olympics.  running career her husband, an israeli former middle-distance and mountain runner, is also her coach. in her youth she ran shorter distances, and she began running the marathon only after 2014. her club is maccabi tel aviv.  2016-17 chemtai came in first among the women in the 2016 tel aviv marathon in 2:40:16, almost five minutes below the qualification time for the 2016 olympics.  chemtai competed for israel at the 2016 summer olympics in the marathon. by the 30th kilometer, her time put her in the top half of the runners, ranking her approximately 90th. she left the race at the 33rd kilometer. she explained on facebook: "unfortunately, i was forced to stop by a shoulder problem. as you all know, i'm still nursing my 20-month-old son. during my training in kenya, i tried to stop, but it caused me pain and a shoulder problem due to running with breasts full of milk. this limited me in the european championships in amsterdam (a half-marathon) and happened again today. i promise
to attain respectable achievements in the future and am going forward with head held high."  in the 2017 london world championship marathon, she ran a 2:40, coming in 41st.  2018-20  in may 2018 she won the 2018 european 10,000m cup in london, with a time of 31:33.03, a new israeli national record. in july 2018 she won the 1500 m at the israeli national championships with a time of 4:11.69.  on 8 august 2018, chemtai won the 10,000 meters 2018 european athletics championships in berlin with a time of 31:43.29.  she became the first israeli athlete to win a gold medal at the championships.  on 12 august 2018, chemtai miscounted the number of laps in a race and stopped a lap early by mistake in the final of the 5,000 meters 2018 european athletics championships in berlin in which she had been in close second place, depriving her of a medal.  on 25 november 2018, she won the florence marathon, setting an israeli national record and course record of 2:24:17. it was only her fifth marathon. as of november 2018 she also held israeli national records for 1,500, 3,000, 5,000, and 10,000 meters, as well as the half marathon.  in march 2019, she won the roma-ostia half marathon in rome, italy, with a time of 1:06:40. in april 2019 she came in second in the sportisimo prague half marathon in prague, with a time of 1:06:09. on 5 may 2019, she won the prague marathon, with a course record 2:19:46 time, clocking the 24th-best time for a woman in that distance in history, the third-best european time ever, and a new israeli national record.  in july 2019 she won a silver medal in the 2019 european 10,000m cup in london, with an israeli national record of 31:15.78. in september 2019, she broke the european record in 10k by 17 seconds, with a time of 30:05, which is the second-best time in history  on 28 september, she ran the women's marathon at the iaaf world championships in doha.  in march 2020, chemtai won the women's event at the tokyo marathon with a time of 2:17:45, setting a new record in the women's race. she will represent israel at the 2020 summer olympics
.  2021 in february 2021, chemtai won the tuscany camp half marathon in siena, italy, with a time of 1:07:09.  on march 14, 2021, she won the agmon hahula marathon in hula valley with a time of 2:22:37 and qualified for the tokyo olympics.  on august 6, 2021, chemtai stood 66th in the women's marathon 2021 tokyo olympics marathon at the tokyo olympics with a time of 2:48:31. she was in the front pack of runners with four kilometers to go when she had to pause due to menstrual cramps.  "women - we struggle sometimes with this kind of situation, not every day is good for us because every month we receive this period and some ladies, they're ok with it, and some are not good with it. this is our nature, so [some women], they don't feel comfortable to say it. i also feel uncomfortable saying it, but i say it's nature, i don't have to hide anything just because the men cannot feel the way we feel."  achievements  see also list of israeli records in athletics  references  external links             1988 births living people people from west pokot county israeli female marathon runners israeli female long-distance runners kenyan female long-distance runners kenyan female marathon runners olympic athletes of israel athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics european athletics championships winners israeli people of kenyan descent kenyan emigrants to israel naturalized citizens of israel athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
jay michael conroy (born 2 march 1986) is a semi-professional footballer, model and actor who plays for isthmian division one south side three bridges.  having started his footballing career as a trainee at crystal palace, he spent almost 10 years in non-league football with his most notable spells coming for afc wimbledon, chelmsford city, lewes and farnborough. he has won the isthmian league division one and conference south during his career.  as a part-time model, conroy has worked alongside brands including nivea, gillette and abercrombie & fitch, while fronting a national breast cancer campaign and featuring on men's health, men's fitness and gq fitness magazine covers.  he also appeared in series 1 of the only way is essex, building a close relationship with tv personality amy childs.  football career  crystal palace  conroy began his career as a trainee at crystal palace, but was unable to break into the first team and failed to make his professional debut. on 11 may 2004, he lined-up at selhurst park as part of a crystal palace xi for steve kember's testimonial.  afc wimbledon (loan)  after appearing for afc wimbledon during pre-season, conroy joined the club on loan during the 2004-05 season. extending his initial short-term deal with the dons, he totalled 22 appearances for the club in the season which saw them crowned champions of the isthmian league division one.  his successful spell at the club was hindered in his final game before being recalled by iain dowie, which saw the youngster suffer a broken fibula, fractured tibia and ruptured ankle ligaments against croydon. the injury kept conroy out of action for 11 months.  canvey island  in august 2005, conroy completed a move to canvey island following his release from crystal palace. despite lining-up for aldershot town on trial during the summer, he signed a one-year deal with the gulls in the conference national. however, after struggling to break into the first team the 19-year-old was placed on the transfer list in november. he managed 10 appearances before his release at the end of the season.  sutton united (loan)  unable to seal a permanent move away from park lane, conroy joined conference south club sutton united on a one-month loan in december 2005.  chelmsford city  he later signed for chelmsford city, where he spent the complete 2006-07 season. netting his first and second goals in senior football, the defender made 31 appearances as he finished third in the isthmian
league premier division.  lewes  conroy joined lewes ahead of the 2007-08 season, and went on to make 35 appearances as his side clinched the conference south title.  on 20 october, conroy was involved in an incident which saw lewes manager steven king "fear for his player's life". playing in a 3-0 defeat to eastleigh, conroy was knocked unconscious and suffered convulsions following an aerial challenge with striker paul sales.  havant & waterlooville  in may 2008, conroy became one of five players to join havant & waterlooville from lewes. however, his contract was terminated by mutual consent in january 2009, having made 15 appearances in his second season with the club.  northwich victoria  shortly after his departure from west leigh park, conroy agreed terms with northwich victoria and completed a move on 23 january. he remained with the club for two months as the vics were later relegated to the conference north at the end of the 2008-09 season.  afc wimbledon  conroy then re-joined afc wimbledon on a permanent basis in march 2009, after luke garrard and andy sambrook were ruled out of action due to injury. he made eight appearances in the closing weeks of the conference south winning season, before become a first-team regular during the 2009-10 season.  making 37 appearances for the first team, as well as a single game for the reserves, he picked up two red cards during the club's inaugural season in the conference national. during his time at the club, he also worked as a fitness coach and nutritionist for the first team.  in april 2010, manager terry brown announced that conroy would be one of 12 players released by the club at the end of the season. following his departure, he admitted he would have liked to have remained with the club. conroy also thanked brown for "rescuing his career" after his former club's financial difficulties.  farnborough  he joined farnborough for the 2010-11 season, but suffered a broken ankle in the opening weeks of the campaign. after a short spell on the sidelines, conroy returned and went on to make 28 appearances for boro. his final appearance came in a 1-0 victory over woking in the conference south play-offs.  sutton united  conroy then made a return to conference south side sutton united for the 2011-12 campaign, and saw the club finish fourth before falling to welling united in the play-off semi-finals.  modelling career  joining select model management in december 2009
, conroy has gone on to model for a variety of tv advertisements and health magazines. he has worked alongside nivea, gillette and abercrombie & fitch.  in 2013, he was selected as jeff banks' pink pants breast cancer campaign model. he featured on the cover of uk men's health in january and february 2013, as well as the italian men's health cover in may 2013. in september 2013, conroy was the cover model for uk men's fitness, and worked as a gq fitness model between august 2013 and january 2014.  acting career  conroy featured in series 1 of the only way is essex, and first appeared in episode 2.  he also played the role of roger in 2012 indian romantic drama film jab tak hai jaan.  personal life  conroy is the older brother of footballer dion conroy. following the success of his modelling career, he has over 100,000 followers on social networking application instagram. conroy was named surrey national golf champion between 2001 and 2004, and also won the  south england brighton open swimming champion 100m breaststroke in 2003. he completed the uk london triathlon in 2013.  references   1986 births living people association football defenders english footballers crystal palace f.c. players afc wimbledon players canvey island f.c. players sutton united f.c. players chelmsford city f.c. players lewes f.c. players havant & waterlooville f.c. players northwich victoria f.c. players farnborough f.c. players walton casuals f.c. players national league (english football) players isthmian league players
the ligue des contribuables was an organization arguing for the repeal of the income tax in france, mostly active in the 1930s. it was founded by jules roche as early as 1899. the organization strongly opposed the official establishment of the income tax in 1914. roche compared the income tax to a "civil war" waged on the french population.  references  taxation in france income taxes tax resistance in france 1899 establishments in france 1930s in france
pavel kantor (born august 17, 1991) is a czech professional ice hockey goaltender. he is currently playing for czech extraliga side hc dynamo pardubice. kantor previously spent a short stint in 2019 with elite ice hockey league (eihl) side sheffield steelers. kantor also previously iced for bk mlada boleslav of the czech extraliga.  kantor made his czech extraliga debut playing with motor ceske budejovice during the 2011-12 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1991 births living people czech ice hockey goaltenders sk horacka slavia trebic players motor ceske budejovice players lhk jestrabi prostejov players hc ocelari trinec players sportspeople from ceske budejovice ihc pisek players sportovni klub kadan players stadion hradec kralove players hc vitkovice players sheffield steelers players hc dynamo pardubice players
t.p. sundararajan  (20 april 194117 july 2011) was an indian lawyer.  sundararajan was a born in the town of ambasamudram in tirunelveli district of tamil nadu. 	he was a prolific student and earned his indian police service, ips. he went on to graduate in law from government law college, trivandrum. early in his career he had held key positions in the national intelligence bureau and ministry of home affairs.  life and education he was born into an orthodox brahmin hindu family living in trivandrum, kerala. born to seshalakshmi and t.k. padmanabha iyengar, he was the youngest of four children. he had one older brother and two older sisters. he was mentored by his father who was a school headmaster from a very early age. he was prolific in sanskrit, tamil, malayalam & english. he remained a bachelor throughout his life, living along with his brother tp krishnan and his family.  he was recruited into indian police service, ips on the basis of all india services, ias etc. examination in 1963. he worked as an indian police service, ips for over 5 years in the state. he was the assistant director of intelligence bureau (india). he also worked in the ministry of home affairs (india), government of india. he later resigned from ministry of home affairs, ips to be closer to family and to take care of his ailing father. he enrolled as an advocate in 1970. he obtained his master's degree in law (ml) majoring in crimes and torts. he also went on to obtain another master's degree in law (llm) in constitutional law and international law.  academic career sundararajan taught law in trivandrum for over 15 years as a part-time lecturer and as a visiting professor.  judicial career sundararajan's career as a lawyer spanned three decades. he practiced as an advocate in the courts of thiruvananthapuram, in the high courts and in the supreme court of india. he was registered as an advocate on record of the supreme court of india. he was familiar with all branches of law at the original, trial, appellate and special-leave jurisdiction in all courts and tribunals. he has been on the panel of advocates for the canara bank and syndicate bank. he fought on the side of nalini netto on the famous sexual harassment case in 1999, against transport minister neelalohitadasan nadar, when the former was the transport secretary, leading to the resignation of the latter, though nadar was later acquitted in
the case.  religion and belief sundararajan was known for his simple living and strong beliefs. his faith and belief in the foundation of ancient hindu scriptures was remarkable. his devotion to lord padmanabha at padmanabhaswamy temple, thiruvananthapuram was unshakable. it was oftentimes quoted that the lord would only wake up to his smiling face.  he was born in a higher upper middle class tamil brahmin scholarly family.  having learnt the sanskrit texts and ancient philosophies from his parents at an early age, he held it his utmost duty to follow them in all circumstances. he would go days on a fast without water or food while continuing his routine seamlessly.  he belonged to the hindu subsect of sri vaishnavism, whose roots are based on the teachings of bhagawad ramanuja.  sundararajan maintained the austerities of a sage throughout his life in thought, discipline, simplicity and truth.  he was well-versed and fluent in scriptures of vedanta desika as he was in law.  later years, illness and death travel throughout india for professional and religious reasons coupled with religious austerities had weakened sundararajan over the years. although he had delegated his professional work to his junior and nephew t.k. ananda padmanabhan he was occasionally traveling despite ailing health. rigorous fasting and being on a meager diet slowly lead him to his death. he suffered from fever for over a couple of days followed by a heart attack in the early hours of 17 july 2011 when he breathed his last amidst his family members.  references  1941 births 2011 deaths 20th-century indian lawyers
bluff nature reserve is a 45 hectare protected pan and forest in the suburb of the bluff, durban, south africa.  the park was proclaimed in 1974, making it durban's oldest nature reserve, and is managed by ezemvelo kzn wildlife.  the nature reserve has bird watching facilities which overlook the pan.  there is a self-guided trail throughout the reserve.  flora and fauna the pan section of the park contains the remnant of a large swamp that once covered the area, while the forest section comprises a small patch of coastal lowland forest.  birds  the following birds are found in the reserve:  cormorants  crakes  spoonbills  warblers  mammals  the following mammals are found in the reserve:  banded mongoose  common rodent mole  giant musk shrew  grey climbing mouse   hottentot golden mole multimammate mouse  slender mongoose  vervet monkey  references   nature reserves in south africa
alphonse du conge (or duconge) dubreuil (19 june 1734 - 22 february 1801) was an 18th-century french poet and playwright.  in 1777, he wrote an opera libretto on the theme of iphigenie en tauride, which he proposed to christoph willibald gluck but the text was eventually set in music by niccolo piccinni.  works  1776: la pucelle de paris, poeme en douze chants 1781: iphigenie en tauride, opera, music by niccolo piccinni, premiered at academy royale de musique 23 january 1790: l'amant travesti ou les muletiers, two-act opera bouffon, after jean de la fontaine, music by marc-antoine desaugiers, premiered in paris,  theatre de monsieur, 2 november 1794: paul et virginie ou le triomphe de la vertu, three-act drame lyrique, after jacques-henri bernardin de saint-pierre, music by jean-francois lesueur, premiere at academy royale de musique 13 january  external links   alphonse dubreuil on cesar  alphonse dubreuil on data.bnf.fr  1734 births 1801 deaths 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers french opera librettists
street light (also known as the street light: study of light and street lamp (suffering of a street lamp)) (italian: ) is a painting by italian futurist painter giacomo balla, dated 1909, depicting an electric street lamp casting a glow that outshines the crescent moon. the painting was inspired by streetlights at the piazza termini in rome.  history lamp posts were a subject of balla's work as early as 1900-1901. the iconography of a stylized street lamp appeared in a commercial poster in 1910, though it is not known if this work influenced balla or vice versa. other sources state that he was inspired to paint after seeing rome's first electric street lights, the design of which were then universally regarded as looking passeist.  though dated 1909, street light was most likely painted in the latter half of 1911, following balla's rejection from an art exhibition in milan. fellow futurist umberto boccioni encouraged balla to continue his efforts in futurism, with an eye to the 1912 futurist exhibition at the bernheim-jeune gallery in paris. though the work is mentioned in the catalog for that exhibition, it was not actually displayed there. the painting was later exhibited by balla in 1928.  the acquisition of the painting by the museum of modern art in new york was publicly announced on october 17, 1954. the painting, catalogued as object number 7.1954, was included in exhibitions in 1954-55, 1961, 1964, 1971, 1984, and 2012-13. , it was not on permanent display. the museum also houses a pencil-and-ink study that balla made for the painting.  context painted around the time of the organization of the futurist artists, the work may be seen as a response to filippo tommaso marinetti's 1909 manifesto  (let's kill the moonlight!), in which marinetti writes, "" ("three hundred electric moons wiped out with their dazzling rays of plaster the ancient green queen of love.") balla's painting is an analytical study of the patterns and colors of a beam of light; it typifies his exploration of light, atmosphere, and motion as a member of the italian divisionism movement, in which he was inspired by the neo-impressionism of georges seurat and paul signac. balla stated of his painting, decades later, that it "demonstrated how romantic moonlight had been surpassed by the light of the modern electric street light. this was the end of romanticism in art. from my picture came the phrase (beloved
by the futurists): 'we shall kill the light of the moon'."  critical responses the work is described in the encyclopædia britannica as a "dynamic depiction of light", conveying "a sense of speed and urgency that puts [balla's] paintings in line with futurism's fascination with the energy of modern life." it is said to reflect balla's fascination with artificial light. art critic donald kuspit describes the painting as a "crypto-scientific" study of the emotionally neutral sensation of light and color.  in the end of night: searching for natural darkness in an age of artificial light, author paul bogard contrasts the painting with van gogh's 1889 the starry night, also at the moma; while the latter depicts a deep and dynamic night sky, the sky in balla's street light is submerged into the background by his celebrated artificial light.  see also list of works by giacomo balla pointillism positivism  references  works by giacomo balla futurist paintings 1909 paintings 1900s paintings architecture paintings still life paintings street lighting paintings in the collection of the museum of modern art (new york city) moon in art
juan de castilla (1460-1510) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of salamanca (1498-1510) and bishop of astorga (1494-1498).  biography juan de castilla was born in palencia, spain in 1460. in 1494, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vi as bishop of astorga. in 1498, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vi as bishop of salamanca. he served as bishop of salamanca until his death in 1510. while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of pascual rebenga de ampudia, bishop of burgos (1497).  see also catholic church in spain  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)               15th-century roman catholic bishops in castile 16th-century roman catholic bishops in spain bishops appointed by pope alexander vi  1460 births  1510 deaths
anisomastia is a medical condition in which there is a severe asymmetry or unequalness in the size of the breasts, generally related to a difference in volume. in other words, when one of the breasts is much larger than the other. in contrast to anisomastia, a slight  asymmetry of the breasts is common. anisomastia may be corrected by surgical breast augmentation or reduction.  see also  micromastia  breast hypertrophy  references  external links   breast diseases medical terminology
thammanwal is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 2.5 km from mao sahib, 12.9 km from phillaur, 40.6 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 133 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  as of 2011, the village has a total number of 143 houses and population of 647 of which include 340 are males while 307 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of the village is 69.84%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 80 which is 12.36% of total population of the village, and child sex ratio is approximately 1222 higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 80.22% of total population in the village. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 178 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 162 males and 16 females. according to census survey report 2011, 94.38% workers describe their work as main work and 5.62% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  bilga railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 12.2 km away from the village. the village is 41.2 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 136 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
wolkentanz (1991 - 15 october 2010), also known as wolkentanz i, was a champion hanoverian stallion who stood at stud at the celle state stud in germany.  he was noted as a leading sire of dressage horses.  background wolkentanz was bred by gerd luhr, and foaled in borgholzhausen in 1991.  he was chestnut in colour and stood  at maturity.  the sire of wolkentanz, weltmeyer, was a major influence on the hanoverian breed. he had been champion stallion at the verden licensing in 1986 and won the 1987 performance test at adelheidsdorf as well as being named the top three-year-old.  ultimately, weltmeyer was named the hanoverian stallion of the year in 1998 and his offspring included 70 licensed stallions.  as a young horse, wolkentanz was noted for having correct conformation, but he was considered a bit small in height for a warmblood.  however, he was also recognized for having excellent gaits.  he changed ownership two times and was owned by a youth rider prior to his stallion evaluation. following the evaluation, the evaluator, burchard bade of the celle state stud, obtained the young stallion for the celle program.  accomplishments  in 1993, as a two-year-old, wolkentanz was named champion at the verden stallion licensing. in 1994, he was named champion three-year-old riding horse at the federal championships of german riding horses. in 1995, at age four, wolkentanz completed the stallion performance test with an overall score of 133.78 and was rated the best stallion of his age group.  in 1996 he was reserve champion (bundeschampion), ridden by  ole kohler. he became known as a performance horse at celle as part of the celle dressage quadrille, recognized for having a very good-quality trot.  wolkentanz became known as one of the best sires of dressage horses in germany.  among his many offspring, he produced 21 colts who became licensed stallions, five ranked premium, and 102 mares that were rated as states' premium.  in 2005, the deutsche reiterliche vereinigung (german equestrian federation) gave him a breeding value index of 157 points, and a 97% heritability rating.  his dressage breeding value was also very high, at 152.  he was stabled at aurich when he
became ill and was taken to an equine hospital. there he had to be euthanized on 14 october 2010, due to an ulcer that led to an intestinal perforation. the celle state stud issued a statement at the time of his death, saying, "wolkentanz was of great significance as [a] foundation sire at the state stud."   the progeny of wolkentanz had won over  €497,252 in prize money.  he also had a younger full brother, named wolkentanz ii, who was exported to canada in 2009 and died in 2015. additional crosses of weltmeyer and sps lovely also produced two full sisters, weiße rose and wolkentanzerin.    denotes inbreeding  references  hanoverian horses individual male horses borgholzhausen
lieutenant general danilo errico (born 11 august 1953) is an italian army officer, who was chief of staff of the italian army from 27 february 2015 to 27 february 2018.  he served as deputy chief of the defence staff from february 2013 to february 2015. he became chief of the army on 27 february 2015 and handed over command to lieutenant general salvatore farina on 27 february 2018.  references  external links  italian generals 1953 births military personnel from turin living people knights grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic chiefs of staff of the italian army
laingbuisson is a business intelligence provider across health, care and education, headquartered in angel, london. it provides insights, data and analysis of market structures, policy and strategy and is the chosen provider of independent sector healthcare market data to the uk government's office for national statistics.  the company was founded in 1986 by the executive chairman william laing, a healthcare economist and commentator on health and social care. prior to setting up laingbuisson, he worked at the association of the british pharmaceutical industry and was a deputy director at the office of health economics. henry elphick was the ceo from 2016-2021 and he and the former secretary of state for health, stephen dorrell, are non executive directors.  the business provides market intelligence, consulting, data and patient acquisition tools.  market intelligence includes market reports, journals, events  and awards, including the laingbuisson awards. its international business includes market reports, consulting and the 2 journals healthcare markets international and the international medical travel journal, of which keith pollard is the editor in chief   it also organises medical travel summits - the conference in athens in may 2018 was organised in conjunction with elitour, the greek medical tourism council.  consulting includes work for investors and government. it was awarded a contract by the department of health and social care in october 2018 to review the nhs-funded nursing care rate, which determines payments by the nhs for nursing home care in england. and has assisted the competition and markets authority in investigations.  references  health care companies of england companies based in the london borough of islington 1986 establishments in england
itheum lineare is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by francis polkinghorne pascoe in 1864. it is known from australia.  references  lamiinae beetles described in 1864
fantl is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  jan fantl (born 1954), german film producer richard fantl (1903-1961), american film editor thomas fantl (1928-2001), german film director and screenwriter  see also fanti
darom adom is an annual israeli festival, held usually from mid-january till the end of february, during the anemone flower's blossoming season in the northern negev region of israel.  the festival is mostly based on the developing village tourism in the area, and combines agriculture with tourism. the festival offers agricultural tours, farmers' markets, and countryside lodging, as well as sports activities such as marches, race, and bike tours through the red fields of the northern negev, and other activities such as artistic performances. the local tourism association "shikma besor" is responsible for the festival and its yearly activities.  the festival is held thanks to cooperation between locals and government offices (ministry of agriculture and rural development, ministry of tourism, ministry for the development of the negev and galilee, ministry of culture and sport, ministry of environmental protection) and with the funding of keren kayemet leisrael and mifal hapayis.  history  the initial idea of the establishment of the festival dates back to 2007, when locals realized that travelers coming to the northern negev for the anemone blossoming are unaware of the many places they can go to in the area, and the wide selection of activities and excursions that the area has to offer.  the festival is called darom adom (literally red south) because of the color of the red color of the anemone flower blossoming in the area, dyeing acres after acres of the land in red.  the festival takes place from mid-january until the end of february, due to the fact that the blossoming of the anemone culminates at this time of the year in the area.  today, the festival is known as one of the largest festivals in israel, due to the large geographical areas it covers and the length of the festival (1.5 months).  location  the festival takes place in areas where the red anemone flower blossoms, such as be'er marva, dvira forest, shokda forest, be'eri forest, and ruhama. during the festival one can see the blossoming flowers spread across vast areas, dyeing the ground red.  the anemone's blossoming season is during the israeli winter, from december to march, and usually lives up to just one week. the flower is very common in all parts of israel, and comes in various colors such as white, pink, purple, and blue, yet the most common one is red.  external links darom adom festival official website  festivals in israel negev winter events
in israel
idlewild is a historic house in port gibson, mississippi, u.s.. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since july 22, 1979.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in mississippi greek revival houses in mississippi houses completed in 1830 national register of historic places in claiborne county, mississippi houses in claiborne county, mississippi
the 2016 adrian flux british fim speedway grand prix was the fifth race of the 2016 speedway grand prix season. it took place on 9 july at the principality stadium in cardiff, wales.  riders  for the fifth successive grand prix first reserve fredrik lindgren replaced jarosław hampel, who had injured himself during the 2015 speedway world cup and was not fit to compete. the speedway grand prix commission also nominated danny king as the wild card, and robert lambert and steve worrall both as track reserves.  results  the grand prix was won by antonio lindback, who beat world champion tai woffinden, bartosz zmarzlik and greg hancock in the final. piotr pawlicki jr. had initially top scored during the 20 qualifying heats, but was eliminated in the semi-finals. by finishing second, and scoring 15 points, woffinden closed the gap on hancock at the top of the world championship standings to just three points.  heat details  the intermediate classification  references  see also   motorcycle speedway  great britain speedway grand prix speedway grand prix speedway grand prix of great britain
chotisuh sazo is a politician from nagaland, india. he is a current member of npf nagaland.in 2018 general election npf had lost their seat to their main ally bjp. in 2008 and 2013. he was elected to the legislative assembly of nagaland, representing various parties. candidate in the constituency chozuba constituency (st).  in the 2008, he won the seat against vaprumu demo. sazo got 8754 votes. sazo contested as a nagaland people's front candidate.  references   nagaland mlas 2008-2013 naga people's front politicians 1962 births living people speakers of the nagaland legislative assembly nagaland politicians nagaland mlas 2013-
galina alexandrovna chesnokova (;  motoraeva (); march 12, 1934july 12, 2016) was a soviet volleyball player for the ussr national team from 1962 to 1963. chesnokova was a silver medalist at the 1962 world championship, the european champion in 1963, and champion of the ussr in 1963; she was named master of sports of the ussr in 1958, and honored master of sports of russia in 2003. she played for burevestnik of moscow until 1960 and for cska from 1960 to 1964.  chesnokova was married to yuri chesnokov, a soviet volleyball player, coach and master of sports, from 1933 to 2010.  after her playing career, chesnokova worked as an engineer.  chesnokova died on july 12, 2016, after severe and prolonged illness.  references  further reading    soviet women's volleyball players 1934 births 2016 deaths
bent ole retvig (15 may 1936 - 15 august 2004) was a danish professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1959 and 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1936 births 2004 deaths people from nakskov danish male cyclists
gura is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 8.3 km away from goraya, 19 km from phillaur, 36.6 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 127 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , gura has a total number of 231 houses and population of 1108 of which include 603 males and 505 females. literacy rate of gura is 80.16%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 105 which is 9.48% of total population of gura, and child sex ratio is approximately 750 lower than state average of 897.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 69.49% of total population in gura. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 380 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of gura which includes 340 males and 40 females. according to census survey report 2011, 95% workers describe their work as main work and 5% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station. however, phagwara junction train station is 13.5 km away from the village. the village is 50.3 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 131 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
mycoplasma bovis is one of 126 species of genus mycoplasma. it is the smallest living cell and anaerobic organism in nature. it does not contain any cell wall and is therefore resistant to penicillin and other beta lactam antibiotics.  mycoplasma bovis mainly affects cattle and has little effect on other production animals. it does not affect horses and or pet animals, but other animals can be carriers for mycoplasma bovis. wyoming game and fish is reporting that the north american pronghorn is now affected by the disease with very high mortality. mycoplasma bovis causes a constellation of diseases, including mastitis in dairy cows, arthritis in cows and calves, pneumonia in calves, and various other diseases likely including late-term abortion. not all infected cows get sick - some shed the disease without becoming ill, allowing for transmission between farms if apparently healthy cows are moved.  signs and symptoms  mastitis  mastitis can cause a decline in potassium and lactoferrin. it also results in decreased casein, the major protein in milk. as most calcium in milk is associated with casein, the disruption of casein synthesis contributes to lowered calcium in milk. the milk protein continues to undergo further deterioration during processing and storage. milk from cows with mastitis also has a higher somatic cell count. generally speaking, the higher the somatic cell count, the lower the milk quality.  bovine respiratory disease  in early bovine respiratory disease (brd) cases, the lungs and airways are generally painful, so the animal will try to clear the airway with mild, tentative, soft coughing. fever of over  is one of the earliest signs of brd.  depression  lack of appetite  dullness  respiratory signs:  rapid, shallow breathing  coughing  arthritis cattle effected by arthritis have difficulty in moving, including getting up and swelling in joints. some outbreaks have many lame calves while others have no effected calves. some calves have swollen joints that are so painful that they will reluctant to walk to the feed and water bunks. in rare cases calves can have spinal issues, tiredness, irritability, muscle atrophy, licking, chewing and biting.  prevention there are many ways by which cattle can be prevented from catching mycoplasma bovis and other pathogenic bacteria.  transport of animals animal transport vehicles should be cleaned with disinfectants before and after use. environmental swabs
should be taken and samples sent to a microbiology lab. if any harmful bacteria are detected, further action should be taken.  visitors only authorized people should be allowed to visit a farm. visitors should arrive with clean clothing and footwear. disinfectant on arrival and departure can reduce the spread of bacteria. for example, a water mat with disinfectant can be used in the entrance of the farm.  weekly inspection and maintenance weekly cleaning of all the areas and equipment reduces the chances of animals getting sick. also, it is important to clean the feedlot container and keep the feed dry. doubling the boundary fence with a 6-inch gap prevents the animals contacting neighbouring animals.  diagnostics mycoplasma bovis can be analyzed with culture, pcr (polymerase chain reaction) or serology. it is difficult to culture because of slow growing and special agar is needed. therefore pcr is most commonly used and also serology. a collaboration between six different european laboratories (covetlab) showed that the different in-house pcr that were used worked well a european interlaboratory trial to evaluate the performance of different pcr methods for mycoplasma bovis diagnosis  the covetlab project also evaluated three different serological methods and found that two of them were performing well a european inter-laboratory trial to evaluate the performance of three serological methods for diagnosis of mycoplasma bovis infection in cattle using latent class analysis  history and taxonomy mycoplasma bovis was first isolated in the united states from the milk of a mastitic cow in 1961. it was initially described as mycoplasma agalactia var bovis by hale and colleagues, on the basis of biochemical reactions and its association with bovine mastitis. later work, based on serological responses  and dna homology studies confirmed that the new mycoplasma was a different species and renamed it mycoplasma bovis   as of june 2017, only two oecd nations (new zealand and norway) were considered to be free of mycoplasma bovis, but in july 2017 some cattle near oamaru, new zealand were found to be mycoplasma bovis positive; see 2017 mycoplasma bovis outbreak.  loss to economy there are only estimated economic losses in two continents due to mycoplasma bovis. the estimated loss in europe due to mycoplasma bovis is approximately €576 million per year. the total loss in the united states is estimated to
be $108 million. us losses due to mastitis, lack of the weight gain and diminished carcass value are valued at $32 million. it is very  expensive for the government and the farmers to control mycoplasma bovis. also, it affects the production of milk and the cost for treatment is high. because cows are the main source of income to most of the farmers, many governments have to reimburse the farmers for loss of income and stock value, which affects the economy.  treatment mycoplasma species have unusual characteristics for bacteria. unlike other bacteria they can live in cultures outside cells and they lack a cell wall. some antibiotics work by damaging cell walls so these do not work on mycoplasma species. however, they can be killed by antibiotics such as tetracyclines, macrolides or erythromycin which do not act on the cell wall. draxxin (tulathromycin) and resflor gold  are the only drugs approved for treating mycoplasma bovis in cattle but florfenicol (nuflor) and batril can also be used. the normal duration of the treatment is 10-14 days by antibiotic therapy.  vaccination several vaccines are available: pulmo-guardmpb, mycomune mycoplasma bovis bacterin, and myco-bactm b.  references  further reading  mycoplasma bovis mpi new zealand  external links type strain of mycoplasma bovis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  bovine diseases bovis
maurice cesar joseph pelle (18 april 1863 - 16 march 1924) was a french general de division, leader of the french military mission to czechoslovakia and first chief of staff of czechoslovak army from february 1919 to january 1921.  early life and education  he was born on 18 april 1863 to charles henri joseph pelle, french artillery officer and later general, and his wife celine virginie aimee augustine pelle (nee bruneau). he studied at douai lycee, from october 1882 to july 1884 at ecole polytechnique and to july 1885 at ecole d'application de l'artillerie. in 1888-1889 he studied at ecole d'application de cavallerie.  military career  in september 1885 he was assigned to 12th artillery regiment as a platoon commander. in december 1888 he became an instructor at ecole d'application de l'artillerie. in november 1891 he was appointed to 11th artillery regiment as a first officer and in april 1892 to 16th artillery regiment as a deputy commander.  between 1900 and 1903, he was chief of staff of colonel joffre in madagascar. as a colonel, pelle was the french military attache in berlin, in the service of ambassador jules cambon between 1909 and 1912. in this period he met many german personalities and became an expert on the german empire.  in 1913, he was transferred to morocco, as chief of staff to general hubert lyautey.  at the outbreak of world war i, he commanded the 2nd moroccan brigade, but was right away called by joffre to serve in the bureau for external theatres of war of the grand quartier general. in december 1916 he was placed at the head of the 153rd infantry division with which he distinguished himself at the second battle of the aisne. promoted to general de division on 2 may 1917, he took command of the 5th army corps (france) until january 1919. with this corps he participated in the german spring offensive and hundred days offensive (noyon, marne and argonne).  czechoslovakia and constantinople   after the war he was leader of the french military mission to czechoslovakia and one of the fathers and first chief of staff of the new czechoslovak army.  in 1921, he becomes french high commissioner for the orient and ambassador in constantinople. he signed the armistice of mudanya for france and was leader of the french delegation at the conference of lausanne, which led to the treaty of lausanne signed on 24 july 1923, which defined the borders of the modern turkish republic.  he died the next year, only 60 years
old. he is buried in the batignolles cemetery in paris.  decorations awarded by belgium:  order of leopold (grand officer)  order of the crown (grand officer)  croix de guerre  awarded by czechoslovakia:  order of the white lion (grand cross)  war cross 1918  awarded by france:  legion d'honneur (grand cross)  croix de guerre 1914-1918 (thrice)  ordre des palmes academiques (officer)  awarded by italy:  order of saints maurice and lazarus (grand officer)  awarded by japan:  order of the rising sun (2nd class)  awarded by marocco:  order of ouissam alaouite (2nd class)  awarded by persia:  order of the lion and the sun (1st class)  awarded by romania:  order of the star of romania (grand cross)  awarded by russia:  order of st. anna (1st class)  awarded by serbia:  order of the white eagle (2nd class)  awarded by spain: order of military merit (2nd class)  awarded by tunisia:  order of glory (5th class)  awarded by united kingdom:  order of the bath (knight commander)  external links    french generals 1863 births 1924 deaths people from douai college stanislas de paris alumni ecole polytechnique alumni french military personnel of world war i recipients of the croix de guerre 1914-1918 (france) recipients of the croix de guerre (belgium) grand officers of the order of the crown (belgium) grand officers of the order of saints maurice and lazarus recipients of the order of the rising sun, 2nd class grand crosses of the order of the star of romania honorary knights commander of the order of the bath grand croix of the legion d'honneur recipients of the order of st. anna, 1st class chiefs of the general staff (czechoslovakia) recipients of the order of the white lion french military attaches burials at batignolles cemetery
the xxi international aids conference was held in durban, south africa from 18 to 22 july 2016 at the inkosi albert luthuli international convention centre.  it was organized by the international aids society (ias). about 18,000 scientists, campaigners and politicians were expected to attend. prominent speakers included charlize theron, elton john, prince harry and bill gates.  references  external links    international aids conferences international conferences in south africa 2016 in south africa 2016 conferences july 2016 events in africa
"holdin' her" is a song recorded by american country music singer chris janson. it was released in may 2016 the third single from his album buy me a boat, which was released in late october 2015. janson co-wrote the song with james otto.  critical reception the song debuted on the country airplay chart at no. 58 for chart dated may 21, 2016, but did not enter the hot country songs chart until september 10, 2016. it has sold 168,000 copies in the united states as of march 2017.  music video the music video was directed by edgar esteves and premiered in april 2016.  chart performance  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2015 songs warner records nashville singles chris janson songs 2016 singles songs written by chris janson songs written by james otto song recordings produced by byron gallimore
naresh uttam patel (born 10 january 1956) is a leader of the samajwadi party and member of uttar pradesh legislative council. he first became an mla as a janata dal candidate in 1989 and is one of the founding members of the samajwadi party. currently, he isuttar pradesh state president of samajwadi party, second only to chief minister akhilesh yadav in the organisational setup in party state unit. with his clean image and educated background (post-graduate from kanpur university, he has earned a reputation of grass-root leader with wider following among the dominant kurmi caste voters. his elevation to such an important position indicates party's new inclusive agenda that can help change image of the party. he was the minister in first mulayam government from 1989 to 1991 and three times member of up legislative house. he was member of the backward class commission and also member of the janeshawar mishra trust. he was appointed deputy state president when up cm akhilesh yadav was uttar pradesh state president of samajwadi party, however when shivpal singh yadav became up state president of sp, he was removed. he belongs to kurmi obcs caste of up and has been considered to be close to mulayam singh yadav .  he is also one of the founding mlas of samajwadi party. being a loyalist and stalwart leader of obcs, he has been entrusted with the screening of candidates for the 2017 state elections.  references  people from fatehpur district samajwadi party politicians uttar pradesh mlas 1989-1991 members of the uttar pradesh legislative council chhatrapati shahu ji maharaj university alumni living people 21st-century indian politicians 1956 births
tom monroe may refer to:   tom monroe (disc golfer) (born 1947), american disc golfer  tom monroe (actor) (1919-1993), american actor  see also  thomas monroe (disambiguation)
budhuwala  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of budhuwala.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, budhuwala has a total number of 32 houses and population of 207 of which include 101 males and 106 females. literacy rate of budhuwala is 82.35%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 20 which is 9.66% of total population of budhuwala, and child sex ratio is approximately  1000, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
moses owoicho ogbu (born 7 february 1991) is a nigerian footballer who plays as a forward for k league 1 side pohang steelers.  ogbu has spent the majority of his professional career platying in sweden and has had spells with ik sirius, jonkopings sodra and mjallby aif. he has also played in england with grimsby town and in saudi arabia with al-ain.  career  growing up in nigeria, ogbu arrived in sweden in february 2009, when he joined for djurgarden 's under-21 team on trial , with whom he played a few games, always at a youth level. during the same calendar year he also played in the fifth swedish series with gimo if.  in october 2009 he joined ik sirius on trial , a team that a few days later would be relegated to division 1 but managing to secure a contract for the following season. during the 2013 season he was the top scorer in division 1 with his 18 goals, as sirius won be promotion to superettan. at the end of the 2015 season, sirius lost in the play-off's against falkenbergs ff with ogbu scored a brace in the 2-2 home match of the first leg.  ogbu signed for jonkopings sodra at the beginning of the 2016 season following the clubs promotion to the allsvenskan. ogbu made 12 appearances in the swedish top flight without scoring.  in the summer transfer window he returned to the sirius on loan, helping his team with three goals to find that promotion to allsvenskan. following the end of the loan, ogbu remained with sirius on a permanent deal following a mutual decision with jonkopings to terminate his contract. in the 2018 season he scored with 7 goals in 28 games, but chose to renew his contract at the end of the year   on 3 february 2019, ogbu signed a half-year contract with saudi arabian second division club al-ain.  on 25 june 2019, ogbu signed for efl league two side grimsby town on a one-year deal. on 14 january 2020, ogbu was released from his contract at grimsby, with manager ian holloway stating "i believe that he needs to go back to where he came from and see if he can be happy again. the boy took it brilliantly. he admitted that he hasn't seen his family in nigeria for over a year, so we had a big hug at the end of it and i told the lads that." ogbu had scored four goals in twenty-five appearances for the mariners in
all competitions  ogbu returned to sweden on 9 march 2020 signing with mjallby aif. during the spell he was the third top scorer in the league with 14 goals in 25 appearances as his side finished 5th in sweden's top flight.  on february 26, 2021 ogbu signed with china league one side wuhan three towns.  on 15 february 2022, ogbu signed with k league 1 side pohang steelers.  personal life ogbu holds dual-nationality and has both nigerian and swedish passports.  references  external links  1991 births living people nigerian footballers association football forwards  ik sirius fotboll players jonkopings sodra if players al-ain fc (saudi arabia) players grimsby town f.c. players mjallby aif players wuhan three towns f.c. players pohang steelers players  superettan players allsvenskan players saudi first division league players english football league players china league one players k league 1 players  nigerian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in sweden nigerian expatriate sportspeople in sweden expatriate footballers in saudi arabia nigerian expatriate sportspeople in saudi arabia expatriate footballers in england nigerian expatriate sportspeople in england expatriate footballers in china nigerian expatriate sportspeople in china expatriate footballers in south korea nigerian expatriate sportspeople in south korea
arthur william wansbrough (20 august 1877 - 3 september 1949) was an australian trade unionist and politician who was a labor party member of the legislative assembly of western australia from 1924 to 1936, representing the seat of albany.  wansbrough was born in york, western australia, to matilda (nee massingham) and joseph wansbrough. he was raised in beverley, where his parents were among the first settlers, and after leaving school worked in a post office for a period. in 1896, wansbrough joined western australian government railways (wagr), eventually becoming the senior guard on the great southern railway (based out of albany). he and his brothers purchased a farming property at bally bally (near beverley) in 1898, but he relinquished his share in 1904. wansbrough first stood for parliament at the 1921 state election, but lost to the sitting country party member for albany, john scaddan (who was a former labor premier). the following year, at the 1922 legislative council elections, he contested south-east province, but was defeated by the country party's alfred burvill.  at the 1924 state election, which saw the election of a labor government, wansbrough successfully re-contested the seat of albany. he remained in parliament until the 1936 election, when he was defeated by a country candidate, leonard hill. after leaving parliament, wansbrough returned to the railways. he attempted to reclaim his seat at the 1939 election but was unsuccessful. wansbrough died in albany in september 1949, aged 72. he had married ada louise cooper in 1903, with whom he had four children. wansbrough's older brother, charles wansbrough, was also a member of parliament, representing the country party in the seat of beverley. they served together from 1924 to 1930, and are the only brothers in the history of the parliament of western australia to have represented different parties while sitting together.  references  1877 births 1949 deaths australian labor party members of the parliament of western australia australian people in rail transport members of the western australian legislative assembly people from york, western australia conductor (rail)
sarık arıyak (3 march 1930 - 17 december 1980) was a turkish diplomat killed by an organization named justice commandos of the armenian genocide in sydney, australia.  early life sarık arıyak was born on 3 march  1930 in istanbul, turkey. after finishing sivas high school and faculty of political science of ankara university he traveled to switzerland for further studies at the university of lausanne. he served in the ministry of finance and then he transferred to the ministry of foreign affairs in 1959. in 1969, he married to demet guloz. during his youth he played football in genclerbirligi s.k. he was also a 400 metres track runner.  professional life in the ministry of foreign affairs he served in the nato department. later he served in the embassies in roma and seoul. next  he was appointed as the chief secretary of paris embassy. in 1975 he returned home to serve in the culture department of the ministry. on 30 november 1978 he was  appointed as the consul general in sydney.  assassination  on 17 december 1980 at 9:45am local time, arıyak was assassinated by two unknown men in portland street, dover heights, while he was about to leave his home for his office. arıyak and his bodyguard, engin sever, were leaving the residence in separate vehicles when they were attacked by two men on a motorcycle, who were wearing motorcycle helmets. one kept the engine running as the other shot at close range sever, and then arıyak. arıyak died on the scene and sever died soon after at a hospital. a secret organization, the justice commandos of the armenian genocide, claimed responsibility for the assassination via telephone messages. arıyak was survived by his wife and his 8-year-old daughter, who both were the witnesses to the assassination. the killers were not apprehended.  re-investigation  on 17 december 2019, it was announced that new south wales joint counter terrorism team established strike force esslemont to re-investigate the murders. the reward for information that leads to an arrest and conviction was increased from $250,000 to $1 million, which is the first ever million-dollar reward offered in australia for an act of terrorism. the investigators released computer-generated images of the suspects, based on witness descriptions. in august 2020 joint counter terrorism team revealed that information gathered since the 2019 announcement of the reward resulted in investigators retrieving a number of items of interest from the bottom of sydney harbour, which would undergo forensic examination.
legacy a street in istanbul was named after sarık arıyak.  see also melbourne turkish consulate bombing list of turkish diplomats assassinated by armenian militant organisations  references  1930 births 1980 deaths ankara university faculty of political sciences alumni university of lausanne alumni assassinated turkish diplomats turkish people murdered abroad people murdered in sydney people from istanbul terrorist incidents in australia terrorist incidents in australia in the 1980s
timo benitz (born 24 december 1991 in engen) is a german middle-distance runner competing primarily in the 1500 metres. he took a surprise victory in the 800 metres at the 2014 european team championships in braunschweig where in front of home crowd he beat among others adam kszczot and pierre-ambroise bosse. in 2017 he competed at the world championships reaching the semifinals and later won the gold medal at the 2017 summer universiade.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 800 metres - 1:46.24 (braunschweig 2014) 1000 metres - 2:16.90 (pliezhausen 2014) 1500 metres - 3:34.94 (dessau 2014)  indoor 3000 metres - 8:02.62 (leipzig 2014)  references  1991 births living people people from engen german male middle-distance runners world athletics championships athletes for germany universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade gold medalists for germany medalists at the 2017 summer universiade
dimcho nenov (; born 19 may 1967) is a bulgarian football manager and former footballer. he was managing neftochimic burgas. however, due to poor results, he was sacked from managing the club.. he is currently employed as an assistant manager of lokomotiv go.  references  1969 births living people bulgarian footballers bulgarian football managers association footballers not categorized by position
telipogon diabolicus is a species of orchid in the genus telipogon. only a single population of 30 plants are known to exist, on the border between the putumayo and narino departments of southern colombia. accordingly, it is classed as "critically endangered" in the international union for conservation of nature's red list.  the name diabolicus refers to the way its wine-red or maroon gynostemium looks like the head of the devil.  adult plants are 5.5-9 cm tall.  references  external links       oncidiinae plants described in 2016
sir john walker stephenson (1888 - 15 may 1960) was a british trade unionist.  born in northumberland, stephenson completed an apprenticeship as a plumber and joined the united operative plumbers and domestic engineers association of great britain and ireland.  he was active in the union for many years before winning election as its general secretary in 1929.  as general secretary, stephenson was prominent in the wider trade union movement, serving as the trade union congress' delegate to the american federation of labour in 1938, as president of the confederation of shipbuilding and engineering unions from 1939 to 1941, and as president of the national federation of building trade operatives from 1941 until 1947.  alongside his trade union roles, stephenson was an adviser to the ministry of aircraft production during world war ii. he was made a commander of the order of the british empire in 1944 and a knighthood in 1948.  in 1949, he stood down from his trade union posts to serve on the southern gas board, then later became chairman of the eastern gas board, retiring in 1959. in 1957, he was master of the worshipful company of plumbers.  references  1888 births 1960 deaths trade unionists from northumberland
the australian is a defunct english language newspaper that was published monthly in perth, western australia, between 1907 and 1908 under the patronage of the australian natives' association (ana).  history  the australian was first published on 18 april 1907 by the colortype press, printers and publishers in hay street, for the proprietors a.h. o'connor and h. hornby of the western australian branch of the australian natives' association. the newspaper served to support the ana's nationalistic aims including the advancement of the commonwealth, protectionism, compulsory military training, the development of a strong home naval program, and the maintenance of the white australia policy.  the australian encouraged the consumption of australian products and contained articles on manufacturing, politics, literature reviews, artistic submissions as well as ana events including meetings and conference proceedings.  availability  issues of the australian (1907-1908) have been digitised as part of the australian newspapers digitisation program, a project of the national library of australia in cooperation with the state library of western australia.  hard copy and microfilm copies of the australian are also available at the state library of western australia.  see also   list of newspapers in australia  list of newspapers in western australia  references  external links     defunct newspapers published in perth, western australia publications established in 1907 publications disestablished in 1908 newspapers on trove
the 2003 edition of the women's handball tournament of the african games was the 6th, organized by the african handball confederation and played under the auspices of the international handball federation, the handball sport governing body. the tournament was held in abuja, nigeria, contested by 8 national teams and won by cameroon.  draw  preliminary round  group a  group b  knockout stage 7th place match  5th place match  championship bracket  final ranking  awards  references  external links  official website  handball at the 2003 all-africa games women's handball in nigeria 2003 in women's handball handball at the african games
thuliadanta is an extinct genus of ceratomorph perissodactyl closely related to modern tapirs that is known from the early eocene of arctic canada (nunavut and northwest territories).  paleogeographic significance thuliadenta is known from the highest northern latitudinal region of any extinct tapiroid, indicating a possible north american origin for tapiroidea. judging from the use of the mountain tapir as an analogue, thuliadanta may have been a year-round inhabitant in the mild temperate lowland forests of the eocene high arctic.  references   fossil taxa described in 2005 tapirs odd-toed ungulates
chen bochui (陈伯吹) (1906-1997) was a famous chinese writer and literary translator, particularly of children's literature. he translated the wizard of oz, don quixote, pushkin's children's tales and heidi into chinese. he left all of his savings to set up a children's literature award, the chen bochui children's literature award. he is known in china as the "andersen of the east" and as one of the fathers of chinese modern children's literature.  chen bochui was born in luodian, a small town in baoshan, jiangsu province. he began working as a school teacher in 1922, and in 1931 was editor of children's magazine. he was also a journalist, a translator and writer of poetry and novels. after the sino-japanese war of 1937-1945, he began to focus on writing and translating children's literature, and in 1946 he helped to establish the association of children's book authors in shanghai. after the founding of the people's republic of china, in 1949, he was deputy director of the chinese children's publishing house and director of the shanghai children's publishing house. he was also a professor at beijing normal university, and a member of the chinese writers association.  in 1981, chen bochui donated his lifetime savings - 55,000 chinese yuan - to establish the "children's literature gardener award", a yearly prize meant to encouraging the creation of children's literature in china. this award, in which lay the foundations of the present cicla, rewarded most of the prominent chinese children's writers of the late 20th century.  publications chen bochui published over 70 books, including a cat that wants to fly, and on children's literature.  he engaged in creative writing and in literary criticism.  legacy in 1981, chen bochui donated 55,000 yuan as seed money for a literary foundation, and in 1983 the chen bochui children's literature award (cicla) was established. a memorial featuring his work can be visited at the baoshan district public library.  references  edward l. davis, "encyclopaedia of contemporary chinese culture" (new york 2005) xi chun, gao hongbo, "a biographical dictionary of chinese authors" (beijing, 1999).  1906 births 1997 deaths poets from shanghai chinese editors republic of china journalists republic of china translators republic of china poets republic of china novelists chinese children's writers people's republic of china writers beijing normal university faculty educators from shanghai 20th-century chinese translators
portlick motte  is a motte and national monument located in county westmeath, ireland.  location  portlick motte is located on the eastern shore of lough ree,  west of tubberclare.  references  archaeological sites in county westmeath national monuments in county westmeath
tea times is an album by the jazz pianist junko onishi, recorded and released in 2016.  track listing    miho hazama - horn section arrange (m5)  ryoji ihara - transcription、horn coordinat (m4)  naruyoshi kikuchi - edit  personnel   junko onishi - piano  terreon gully - drums  yunior terry - bass  horns  tokuhiro doi - alto saxophone, clarinet  kazuhiro kondo - alto saxophone  ryoji ihara - tenor saxophone, flute  masakuni takeno - tenor saxophone  kei suzuki - baritone saxophone  eijiro nakagawa - trombone  nobuhide handa - trombone  ryota sasaguri - trombone  koichi nonoshita - bass trombone  eric miyashiro - trumpet  koji nishimura - trumpet  masahiko sugasaka - trumpet  atsushi osawa - trumpet yosuke miyajima - guitar  naruyoshi kikuchi (n/k from jazz dommunisters) - rap (m8)  omsb (from shimi lab) - rap (m8, m9)  juma (from shimi lab) - rap (m9)  saya yoshida - chorus (m9)  ayumu yahaba - chorus (m9)  m4  ryoji ihara - tenor saxophone, flute  tokuhiro doi - alto saxophone  kei suzuki - baritone saxophone  eijiro nakagawa - trombone  nobuhide handa - trombone  ryota sasaguri - trombone  eric miyashiro - trumpet  koji nishimura - trumpet  masahiko sugasaka - trumpet  atsushi osawa - trumpet  production   producer - naruyoshi kikuchi  recording director & coordinator - tomohiro oya (mimi-tab.)  recording and mixing engineer - takashi akaku (mimi-tab.) recorded at sony music studios tokyo, studio favre mixed at studio favre  assistant engineer - takemasa kosaka, yuta yoneyama  mastering engineer - koji suzuki (sony music studios tokyo) mastering at sony music studios tokyo  piano tuniner - megumi omamiuda  pre production - kei maruyama, shiro tanaka  cover photo - naruyoshi kikuchi  booklet photo - hiroshi nirei  hair and make-up artist - eiichi ikeda (zeno)  art direction - tadashi kitagawa  coordination - yuki kaihori taboo label label producer - hiroshi fujiy
oshi label administration - miyuki adachi, masahiro komai business affairs - hisae seki international affairs - sanpei yamaguchi, eri komazaki  executive producers - akira takahashi, michihiko nakayama, kenichi hirose  release history  references  external links    2016 albums junko onishi albums
nasrullah bridge, also known locally as the hunchback bridge, ( or kambur kopru) is a 16th-century stone arch bridge in kastamonu, turkey.  the bridge is located in the city center over karacomak creek, a tributary of gokırmak, connecting western and eastern parts of the city. nasrullah mosque is to the west and the kastamonu governor's office is to the east. it was endowed as a waqf in 1501 by kadı nasrullah, who was a judge in the ottoman empire.  the ashlar-constructed bridge had originally five arches. it was  long and     wide. the main arch span was  and the others  in length. it underwent three major reparations, the last two times in 1709 and in 1946. during the last reparation, a staircase was added to each end of the bridge when the west-most one arch and the east-most two arches were ripped off. today, the bridge has two arches only. the two original stone alms pots and the curbstones on the bridge are still preserved. due to its unusual appearance, it is dubbed by the citizens the hunchback bridge ().  the minister of forestry veysel eroglu announced in 2016 that the bridge will be reconstructed to its original form.  references  kastamonu bridges completed in the 16th century arch bridges in turkey ottoman bridges in turkey buildings and structures in kastamonu province pedestrian bridges in turkey stone bridges in turkey deck arch bridges
manny pacquiao (born 1978) is a filipino professional boxer and politician.  pacquiao may also refer to:  pacquiao: the movie, 2006 action-drama film based on a true story of filipino boxer manny pacquiao bobby pacquiao (born 1980), filipino boxer, brother of manny pacquiao jinkee pacquiao (born 1979), former vice governor of sarangani, in mindanao, philippines, wife of manny pacquiao
the 2016 austrian motorcycle grand prix was the tenth round of the 2016 motogp season. it was held at the red bull ring in spielberg on 14 august 2016.  motogp race report andrea iannone took his first victory in motogp and the first since moto2 italy 2012 and also was the first ducati rider other than casey stoner to win a race since loris capirossi's win at the 2007 japanese grand prix. this race marked ducati's first 1-2 finish since the 2007 australian grand prix and also the first win for a manufacturer other than honda or yamaha since the 2010 australian grand prix.  classification  motogp   hector barbera was black flagged for ignoring the jump start ride-through penalty.  jack miller crashed during sunday morning warm-up and suffered a broken right wrist & fractured vertebra.  moto2  moto3   romano fenati was suspended by his vr46 team following disciplinary issues.  championship standings after the race (motogp) below are the standings for the top five riders and constructors after round ten has concluded.  riders' championship standings  constructors' championship standings   note: only the top five positions are included for both sets of standings.  references  2016 motogp race reports motorcycle grand prix 2016 austrian motorcycle grand prix
the plebeian (spanish: el plebeyo) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by miguel m. delgado and starring rosita arenas, raul martinez and chula prieto.  cast  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by miguel m. delgado mexican black-and-white films
allegory of the dutch defeat of the spanish fleet in gibraltar, 25 april 1607 (dutch: allegorie op de overwinning van de hollandse op de spaanse vloot bij gibraltar) is an oil painting on panel of the dutch painter adam willaerts.  description  the painting has dimensions of 38.4 x 55.9 centimeters. painted between 1615 and 1630 in the city of utrecht, the painting is in the collection of the rijksmuseum of amsterdam.  analysis  the painting is an allegory of the dutch victory against the spaniards during the battle of gibraltar, that took place on 25 april 1607 in the context of the eighty years' war.  the painting shows in the foreground a dutch and a spanish struggling between them by a wooden bar, while an english and a venetian observe them. in the background one can observe the naval battle in the vicinity of the rock.  see also   battle of gibraltar (1607)  references  external links   page of the picture in the catalogue of the rijksmuseum (in english)  paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum naval war paintings 17th-century allegorical paintings allegorical paintings by dutch artists
the following lists events that happened in 1967 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - bjarni benediktsson  events  births  2 january - jon gnarr, actor, comedian and politician 19 march - bjorgolfur thor bjorgolfsson, businessman 17 april - birgitta jonsdottir, politician 9 june - helgi hjorvar, politician. 29 august - jon stephenson von tetzchner, programmer and businessman  deaths  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
afrin university () was an unrecognized university in the city of afrin in northern syria, when afrin was a part of the autonomous administration of north and east syria (aanes). it was the second university to open in the aanes (after the mesopotamian social sciences academy which opened ten months before) and the first university to open in the afrin district.  it opened on 26 july 2015 to an intake of students said to be anywhere from 250 to 850. in august of the same year it had 22 professors (who were required to have a master's degree or doctorate) on their staff. six additional labs (for engineering and medicine) opened at the start of the new term. in august it ran programs in literature (including in kurmanji), journalism, engineering, medicine, and economics. it included institutes for medicine, topographic engineering, music, theatre, business administration and the kurdish language. the university had a five-year engineering program and four-year programs for all other specializations; and a two-tier fee system for local and international students, with price primarily dependent on the course of study chosen.  the university was shut down after the beginning of the turkish military operation in afrin in january 2018, and students were transferred to the university of rojava in qamishli. during the subsequent turkish occupation, ahrar al-sharqiya (a faction of the syrian national army) arrested dr abdul majeed izzat sheikho, the dean of kurdish literature at the university of afrin.  see also rojava university mesopotamian social sciences academy  references  external links  dossier "the impact of the military campaign against afrin university", 24 february 2018  educational institutions established in 2015 education in the autonomous administration of north and east syria 2015 establishments in syria
black orpheus was a nigeria-based literary journal founded in 1957 by german expatriate editor and scholar ulli beier that has been described as "a powerful catalyst for artistic awakening throughout west africa". its name derived from a 1948 essay by jean-paul sartre, "orphee noir", published as a preface to anthologie de la nouvelle poesie negre et malgache, edited by leopold sedar senghor. beier wrote in an editorial statement in the inaugural volume that "it is still possible for a nigerian child to leave a secondary school with a thorough knowledge of english literature, but without even having heard of leopold sedar senghor or aime cesaire", so black orpheus became a platform for francophone as well as anglophone writers.  history black orpheus was "a journal of african and afro-american literature" established in 1957 by university professor ulli beier. it was produced in ibadan, nigeria, and was groundbreaking as the first african literary periodical in english, publishing poetry, art, fiction, literary criticism, and commentary. its editors included wole soyinka and es'kia mphahlele (1960-64).  characterised by its pan-african reach, black orpheus also published in english translation the work of francophone writers, among them leopold senghor, camara laye, aime cesaire, and hampate ba, as well as playing a significant role in the careers of such notable authors and artists as wole soyinka, john pepper clark, gabriel okara, dennis brutus, kofi awoonor, andrew salkey, leon damas, ama ata aidoo, cyprian ekwensi, alex la guma, bloke modisane, birago diop, d. o. fagunwa, wilson harris, valente malangatana, and ibrahim el-salahi. many of them featured in a 1964 anthology edited by beier, black orpheus: an anthology of new african and afro-american stories, which was published in lagos, london, toronto, and new york.  black orpheus was highly influential; abiola irele - the magazine's editor from 1968 - wrote in the journal of modern african studies: "the steady development of black orpheus over the last seven years amounts to a remarkable achievement. it has succeeded in breaking the vicious circle that seems to inhibit the development of a proper reading public by its continued existence, by its very availability; more than that, it has also gone on to establish itself as one of the most important formative influences
in modern african literature....it can be said, without much exaggeration, that the founding of black orpheus, if it did not directly inspire new writing in english-speaking africa, at least coincided with the first promptings of a new, modern, literary expression and re-inforced it by keeping before the potential writer the example of the achievements of the french-speaking and negro american writers."  beier also founded the mbari club, in 1961, a cultural hub for african writers that was closely connected with black orpheus, and during the 1960s also acted as a publisher - considered to be the only african-based publisher of african literature at the time - producing 17 titles by african writers.  having earned a reputation as "the doyen of african literary magazines", black orpheus eventually ceased publication in 1975.  see also  presence africaine  transition magazine  references  further reading  mark wollaeger with matt eatough, "black orpheus, or, the rise of the little magazine in africa", in the oxford handbook of global modernisms, oxford university press, 2012, pp. 274-280.  peter benson, black orpheus, transition, and modern cultural awakening in africa, university of california press, 1986.  1957 establishments in nigeria 1975 disestablishments in nigeria defunct literary magazines defunct magazines published in nigeria magazines established in 1957 magazines disestablished in 1975 mass media in ibadan
events from the year 1682 in denmark.  incumbents  monarch - christian v  events  the french theater company la troupe du roi de danemark is opened as the theater of the royal court and the first and only permanent theater in denmark for forty years onward.  births  deaths  references    denmark years of the 17th century in denmark
metkel eyob (born 4 september 1993) is an eritrean cyclist, who currently rides for uci continental team .  prior to joining the  in 2018, asmara-born eyob rode for two years with , the development team of .  major results  2013  3rd overall tour du rwanda 1st  mountains classification 1st stage 6 2014  1st  young rider classification tour do rio  10th overall mzansi tour 2015  kzn autumn series 1st hibiscus cycle classic 3rd mayday classic  4th overall tour du rwanda 1st stage 7   6th time trial, national road championships 2016  2nd road race, national road championships  2nd overall tour du rwanda 1st stage 5  7th road race, african road championships 2017  2nd overall tour du rwanda 1st stages 4 & 6  9th overall tour de hongrie 2018  african road championships 1st  team time trial 2nd  road race  1st stage 1 tour de lombok mandalika  2nd overall tour de filipinas 1st  mountains classification 1st stage 4  3rd road race, national road championships 2019  3rd overall tour of peninsular  5th road race, national road championships  6th overall la tropicale amissa bongo  6th overall tour de indonesia 1st stage 4  9th overall tour of almaty 2021  2nd grand prix gundogmus  2nd kahramanmaras grand prix road race  3rd road race, national road championships  3rd grand prix velo alanya  3rd grand prix kayseri  3rd grand prix develi  6th overall tour of mevlana  9th grand prix erciyes 2022  10th overall tour of antalya  references  external links  1993 births living people eritrean male cyclists sportspeople from asmara
vicente castell domenech (5 may 1871, in castellon de la plana - 18 january 1934, in castellon de la plana) was a spanish painter in the costumbrista style.  biography  he was born in a lower-middle-class neighborhood where most of the residents, including his parents, engaged in handicrafts. he had a passion for drawing and, at the age of twelve, he was apprenticed at a local decorative painting workshop.  his talents eventually gained him entrance to classes being taught by the costumbrista painter and drawing professor, eduardo laforet (1850-1941), who had a home and workshop in castellon where he served as a mentor to young artists.   one of laforet's associates helped castell enroll at the real academia de bellas artes de san carlos in valencia, where he studied from 1891 to 1893, working at odd jobs and painting portraits to pay his way. while there, he came under the influence of joaquin sorolla and ignacio pinazo.  on the strength of his work, he received scholarships from the . he also found a patron in gaspar cazador, proprietor of the hotel espana. these financial sources enabled him to study at the real academia de bellas artes de sant jordi in barcelona from 1898 to 1899, followed by studies at the real academia de bellas artes de san fernando in madrid. there, he visited the museo del prado to acquaint himself with the old masters. he later visited rome, where he became ill with yellow fever and nearly died. a friend intervened, however, and brought him back home, where he recovered and was able to attend the exposition universelle in paris.  in 1901, he was awarded a bronze medal at the national exhibition of fine arts. the following year, he married the niece of one of the painters he had been apprenticed to as a boy and opened an art academy. he would teach most of the best-known painters to emerge from castellon, including ,  and .  during the war, with very little demand for art, he and a friend opened a small workshop where they made toys. after pricking the middle finger on his right hand with a large splinter, he developed an infection that required surgery and left that finger virtually paralyzed.  in 1923 the mayor, francisco ruiz cazador, appointed him a municipal councillor and he later became a deputy mayor. in 1928, he was one of the founders of the escuela de artes y oficios and was chosen to be director.  he suffered hearts attacks in
1932 and 1933 and died of one in 1934. a street and a school in castellon have been named after him.  selected paintings  references  further reading   antonio gasco sidro, el pintor castell, 1871-1934, ayuntamiento de castellon, 1987  external links   1871 births 1934 deaths 19th-century spanish painters 19th-century male artists spanish male painters 20th-century spanish painters 20th-century male artists spanish genre painters people from castellon de la plana real academia de bellas artes de san fernando alumni
switzerland county courthouse is a historic courthouse located at vevay, switzerland county, indiana. it was built between 1862 and 1864, and is a three-story, rectangular greek revival style red brick building with limestone and white painted wood trim. the building measures 52 feet by 96 feet. it features a tall, pedimented tetrastyle portico with fluted corinthian order columns.  the building is topped by a copper clad dome with cupola.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2009.  references  county courthouses in indiana courthouses on the national register of historic places in indiana greek revival architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1864 buildings and structures in switzerland county, indiana national register of historic places in switzerland county, indiana
the church of the assumption of the blessed virgin and st anthony of padua is a parish church in milejow, lublin voivodeship, poland.  history  efforts to church in milejow started with the beginning of the nineteenth century, and took it as the first helena suffczynskich chrapowicka. since, however, he died before completing the work, took the initiative and antoni stanislaw counts rostworowscy.  milejow church was built in the years 1855 - 1859, and its architect was konstanty hendiger from krasnystaw. the temple was consecrated by bishop walenty baranowski on 2 october 1859. in the sacristy is the act of consecration of the church.  in the years 1990 - 1996 the efforts of the parish priest, jan kalinowski, and expanded the church parishioners. according to the then-new layout of the church was a part of the nave, the old presbytery, a former altar of the blessed sacrament chapel. in 2006, a new section contains a stone altar, and since then the sanctuary is located in that part.  important events in the history of the church   21 april 1855 r. - commencement of construction;  1856 - completion of one of the documents (most likely); usually it is given, however, 1859; the consecration of the temple of october 2, 1859 year by the bishop valentine baranowski;  approx. 1902 - 1904 - rostworowscy return from rome, where they brought the icon of our lady of perpetual help and the baptismal font and altar stone;  1907 - insertion of three stained glass: "st. anthony","st. victor" and "mary, queen of the polish crown";  1915 - robbing bells by the austrians;  1928 - building a new tower on the site destroyed during the mating sheet galvanized;  1939 or 1940 - again robbing bells;  1946 - suspension bell "mary" - a vote milejowian the experience of world war ii;  1990 - 1996 - expansion of the church;  2006 - transfer of the altar to the new part;  2008 - 2016 - the renewal of all movable monuments located in the church thanks to the efforts of the parish priest, andrzej juzko.  art  on the ceiling of the church there are paintings - "covenant with god", probably by the brothers ferdynand and ludwik ludwig, in the old part and the new middle copy of the painting "las dos trinidades", which surround the
presentation of the four evangelists. in 2012, between the walls and ceiling, the then parish priest placed inside decorative cornice.  organ  the first organ in the church built the company from warsaw of mateusz mielczarski, and the efforts of priest andrzej juzko restored it and brought new pipes from the netherlands. the instrument has a single manual and ten votes.  bell tower  bell tower was built together with the church, in the same style. it has three arches where the bells are located. sam bell tower is behind the room (one building), which was formerly catechetical room.  1915 it hung in the arcades bells "jozef", "stanisław" and "antoni", which were looted during world war i by the austrian occupiers. the new bells were also removed during world war ii by the germans. in 1946 it was founded the bell "mary" (renovated in 2016) as a vote for the survival of the war by people from milejow, and in 1999 was given to two new "john paul ii" and "st. antony".  the crypt of the church  under the old part of the church there is a crypt with the remains of the founders of the church and the family rostworowskich.  buried in the crypts   count anthony nałecz rostworowski (b. march 10, 1789 in włoszczowa, d. 7 april 1843 in warsaw), - officer in the polish army, single orders of virtuti militari and the legion of honor, senator and member of the council of state, buried in fathers capuchins in warsaw, the heart is in this church; founder of the church;  marya nałecz rostworowska (b. 1798 in warsaw, d. march 20, 1856 in milejow) - the wife of the founder;  count antoni nałecz rostworowski (b. july 30, 1833 in lublin, 19 november 1896 in warsaw) - founder of the church and parish heir milejow;  klara nałecz rostworowska (b. october 15, 1849 in zosin, d. june 15, 1902 in milejow) - the wife of the founder;  count stanisław kostka nałecz rostworowski (b. february 26, 1901, d. september 1, 1977) - sodalis marianus, heir milejow last;  maria ludwika nałecz rostworowska (b
. december 11, 1900, d. january 12, 1972) - as wife of the last heir milejow.  łeczna county milejow
the 55th scripps national spelling bee was held in washington, d.c. at the capital hilton on june 2-3, 1982, sponsored by the e.w. scripps company.  the competition was won by 12-year-old molly dieveney from denver, colorado, correctly spelling "psoriasis" for the win. dieveney was coached by the mother of jacques bailly (her next door neighbor), who won the bee two years prior. second place went to 13-year-old uma rao of pittsburgh, pennsylvania, who misspelled "contretemps". jason johnson, 13, of st. joseph, missouri, and who placed second the prior year, placed third after missing "gauleiter".  there were 126 spellers this year, 81 girls and 45 boys, with 54 making it to the second day of competition. nine spellers left in the first round, 22 in the second, 8 in the third, and 33 in the fourth. alex cameron was the pronouncer. a total of 546 words were used.  the first place cash prize was $1,000, with $500 for second, and $250 for third. the next five finishers got $100, the next ten $75, and the remaining received $50.  references  scripps national spelling bee competitions 1982 in washington, d.c. 1982 in education
raymond "ray" campbell (born 4 april 1967) is a northern irish professional darts player who plays in professional darts corporation events.  campbell won a two-year pdc tour card on the third day of 2016 q-school. he made his european tour debut at the 2017 european darts open, losing 6-2 to john henderson in the first round.  campbell was only able to pick up £2,750 on the pdc order of merit over his two-year card and lost it after the 2017 season. campbell attempted to regain his tour card at q-school in 2018 and 2020.  references  external links  1967 births living people darts players from northern ireland professional darts corporation former tour card holders british darts organisation players sportspeople from belfast
tunisian canadians () are canadians of tunisian descent or tunisians who have canadian citizenship.  most tunisian canadians speak arabic, french or english. according to the 2016 census there were 25,645 canadians who claimed tunisian ancestry.  see also   moroccan canadians  algerian canadians  canada-tunisia relations  arab canadians  tunisian americans  references  external links      arab canadian tunisian emigrants to canada canadian african canadian
rick george has been the athletic director at the university of colorado since august 2013.   before joining the university of colorado, george worked for the texas rangers. he joined the club in october 2010. in march 2013, george was promoted from coo to president of business operations.  references  year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) living people colorado buffaloes athletic directors
zbynek fiala (born 12 july 1964) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from louny
bahadarke is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village  constitutes   44.18%  of schedule caste  and the village  doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
irini vasiliou (; born 18 march 1990) is a greek sprinter. she competed in the 400 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships. at the 2016 summer olympics and the 2020 summer olympics she competed in the 400 metres.  her twin sister anna is also a 400 metres athlete.  competition record  references  external links    1990 births living people greek female sprinters sportspeople from heraklion olympic athletes of greece athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics twin sportspeople twin people from greece athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for greece olympic female sprinters
urmar is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of hoshiarpur district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022      -->  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  hoshiarpur district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
porter is an unincorporated community in gallia county, in the u.s. state of ohio.  history porter was platted in 1830. a variant name was pine grove. a post office called porter was established in 1834, the name was changed to porter in 1923, and the post office closed in 1959.  references  unincorporated communities in gallia county, ohio unincorporated communities in ohio
the 2016 world aesthetic gymnastics championships, the 17th edition of the aesthetic group gymnastics competition, was held in brno, czech republic from june 9 to 12, at the sport hall vodova.  participating nations  medal winners  results  senior  the top 12 teams (2 per country) and the host country in preliminaries qualify to the finals.  references  external links http://www.ifagg.com/event/world-championship-brno-czech-rep/?instance_id=283 https://web.archive.org/web/20160717072442/http://wcagg2016.cz/ https://web.archive.org/web/20170503034633/http://wcagg2016.cz/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/wcagg-results-sen.pdf  world aesthetic gymnastics championships world aesthetic international gymnastics competitions hosted by the czech republic  2016 in gymnastics sport in brno
the random house encyclopedia is an english language one-volume encyclopaedia published by random house. its first edition was published in 1977 and revised edition in 1990. it was divided into two sections: colorpedia, which is made of lengthy articles and alphapedia, which has short alphabetically arranged ones. there was an electronic format made of the encyclopaedia from its 1990 edition. it was made for the ms-dos 3.3 operating system and was distributed on sixteen 5 ¼-inch floppy disks and also on eight 3 ½-inch floppy disks. it has more than 20,000 articles.  contents      preface 6  staff, contributors, and consultants 8   organization of the encyclopedia 12     colorpedia: detailed contents 16   time chart: contents 28    atlas: contents 29   colorpedia: text 30  the universe 32  the earth 160  life on earth 400   man 640  history and culture 944  man and science 1432  man and machines 1576  time chart: text 1825  alphapedia 1876   bibliography 2761   picture credits 2771   art credits 2781   atlas of the world a1   atlas index a83  references  american encyclopedias 1977 non-fiction books random house books 20th-century encyclopedias
was a japanese professional baseball player. from 1953 to 1961, he played in the pacific league as an outfielder for the mainichi orions (later renamed the daimai orions), batting .251 with 503 hits, 16 home runs and 172 rbis.  after retiring as a player, he was a batting coach for the yomiuri giants and, later, a manager of the yakult swallows in the early 1970s.  arakawa died on december 4, 2016, after suffering a cardiac arrest.  references  1930 births 2016 deaths baseball people from tokyo waseda university alumni japanese baseball players daimai orions players mainichi orions players managers of baseball teams in japan tokyo yakult swallows managers
pierre everaert (21 december 1933 - 26 may 1989) was a french professional racing cyclist between the years 1955 and 1966. he rode in eight editions of the tour de france, with a highest general classification of 32nd and a best stage finish of second, both in the 1960 edition.  references  external links    1933 births 1989 deaths french male cyclists sportspeople from nord (french department)
federation of christian democracy (, fdc) was a spanish political organization formed on april 14, 1977 by democratic left of joaquin ruiz-gimenez and democratic people's federation of jose maria gil-robles y quinones.  it was led by manuel hidalgo, juan bermudez de castro, francisco soroeta and cristobal garcia. it formed a coalition with the democratic union of the valencian country called christian democratic team of the spanish state (edcee) for the general elections of 1977. after the election failure (215,000 votes and a little more than 1% of the vote), on september 24, 1977 democratic left withdrew from the federation, and it merged with other political groups within the christian democracy in a founding congress on 4 and 5 february 1978.  members at the time of the 1977 elections, the federation of christian democracy was composed of:   democratic people's federation  christian democracy of castile  basque christian democracy  murcian christian democracy  western christian democracy  aragonese christian democracy  andalusian democratic people's party  democratic left  references  defunct political party alliances in spain 1977 establishments in spain 1978 disestablishments in spain political parties established in 1977 political parties disestablished in 1978
jordan de melburne is the first recorded archdeacon of lewes.  references  archdeacons of lewes
the society for financial studies (sfs) is a nonprofit, academic society in the field of finance. it owns and runs three academic journals: (1) the review of financial studies, (2) the review of asset pricing studies, and (3) the review of corporate finance studies. it organizes the sfs cavalcade north america and the sfs cavalcade asia-pacific, which are annual academic conferences. it financially supports and co-sponsors many independent finance academic conferences. its governing board is the sfs council.  history   the society for financial studies was incorporated as a nonprofit corporation in california in 1987. its initial purpose was to own and run a new academic journal, which was called the review of financial studies (rfs). the founding officers of sfs were joseph williams (president), george constantinides (vice president), and mark weinstein (secretary/treasurer). the founding editor of the review of financial studies was michael brennan. the founding publisher was oxford university press, which has continued to publish rfs up to the present day.  academic journals  review of financial studies   the review of financial studies is an academic journal that covers the field of finance. it began publication in 1988 with 18 regular research articles spread out over 4 quarterly issues. in 2019, it published 123 regular research articles spread out over 12 monthly issues. according to journal citation reports, it has a 2019 citation impact factor of 4.975. it is one of the top-three academic journals in finance, along with the journal of finance (issn 1540-6261) and the journal of financial economics (issn 0304-405x). its past issues are archived by jstor. the current editorial team is itay goldstein (executive editor), lauren cohen, ralph koijen, holger mueller, manju puri, philip strahan, and stijn van nieuwerburgh.  review of asset pricing studies  the review of asset pricing studies is an academic journal that covers the finance sub-field of asset pricing. it began publication in 2011. it is published by oxford university press. in 2019, it published 10 articles in two issues. it has an unofficial citation impact factor of 1.063 based on the same methodology as journal citation reports. the current editorial team is jeffrey pontiff (executive editor), hui chen, nikolai roussanov, and thierry foucault.  review of corporate finance studies  the review of corporate finance studies is an academic journal that covers the finance sub-field of corporate finance. it began
publication in 2012. it is published by oxford university press. in 2019, it published 11 articles in two issues. it has an unofficial citation impact factor of 1.938 based on the same methodology as journal citation reports. the current editorial team is andrew ellul  (executive editor), isil erel, gregor matvos, and uday rajan.  conferences  sfs cavalcade north america  the sfs cavalcade north america is an annual academic conference held in north america covering the field of finance. the inaugural cavalcade in 2011 was hosted by the ross school of business at the university of michigan with a program that contained 42 papers. the 2019 cavalcade north america was hosted by the tepper school of business at carnegie mellon university with a program that contained 135 papers. the conference chairs were antoinette schoar (chair), monika piazzesi (vice chair), ulrike malmendier (associate chair), and josef zechner (sfs advisory chair). according to a comparison of 45 academic finance conferences by reinartz and urban (2017), "the society for financial studies (sfs) finance cavalcade conference is the best large finance conference according to subsequent publication rates in top3 finance journals." the 2020 cavalcade north america will be hosted by the university of north carolina at chapel hill and the 2021 cavalcade north america will be hosted by the mccombs school of business at the university of texas at austin.  sfs cavalcade asia-pacific  the sfs cavalcade asia-pacific is an annual academic conference to be held in asia-pacific covering the field of finance. the inaugural cavalcade asia-pacific in 2017 was hosted by pbc school of finance at tsinghua university in beijing, china. the 2019 cavalcade asia-pacific was hosted by the university of hong kong in hong kong, china with a program that contained 60 papers. the conference chairs were kalok chan (chair) and jun-koo kang (vice chair).  council and member communications  the sfs council is the governing board of sfs. it includes three sfs officers, a council chair, and several councilors. the sfs officers are laura starks (president), josef zechner (vice president), and craig holden (secretary/treasurer). the council chair is raman uppal. the councilors are renee adams, alon brav, allaudeen hameed, kai li, tarun ramadorai, and karin thorburn. sfs holds an annual membership meeting each year at the sfs cavalcade north
america. at that meeting, the sfs officers, sfs journal executive editors, and the sfs cavalcade chair report on sfs activities to the membership.  references  external links     financial economics organizations established in 1987
our lady of fatima church, kallukoottam (also known as kallukoottam r.c. church), is a place of worship for the catholic christians living in the town panchayat of kallukootam. it is an active catholic parish church in the vicariate of karankadu of the roman catholic diocese of kuzhithurai.  history  our lady of fatima church, kallukoottam, traces its humble origin as a bhajan kurusady (a thatched shed for carols during christmas) in 1951. after a decade of coming together to exercise their simple faith, the community of 18 families, under the leadership of mr anthony muthu, was raised to the status of substation of st. francis xavier parish, mankuzhi, in 1960. from then on the eucharistic celebration for wedding and funeral was conducted. to bring the children up in the catholic faith, rudimentary catechism classes were organised on one of the week days. the eucharistic celebration at christmas and easter was introduced from 1963.  the administration of the substation of our lady of fatima church was shifted to st. francis xavier parish, konamkadu, in 1964. with the new administration, it gained the status of substation with sunday masses. to cater to the spiritual development of the adults, the christian life community for women  and for men were started respectively in the years 1965 and 1978. in order to help the sick and the poor, the st. vincent de paul society was started in 1979. as part of spiritual reformation, basic ecclesial communities (anbiyangal) were introduced in the substation in 1994. there was no practice of individual tax in the church until 1988 but then the majority of the people felt the need of paying an affordable tax, agreed by the faithful, for the maintenance and upkeep of the church. over the years the physical structure of the church too got  transformed from a simple thatched house to a concrete church that could accommodate about 400 parishioners. in 2008, the substation of our lady of fatima church, kallukoottam, was raised to the status of an independent parish and fr mariadasan was appointed as the first parish priest of the newly formed parish. under the leadership of fr andrews, the second parish priest of the parish, a community hall and a new presbytery were constructed in the years 2013 and 2014 respectively. from 23 may 2018 fr. jokens is serving as the parish priest of this parish. every last friday of the month charismatic prayer service with adoration to the blessed sacrament is conducted.
now, kolping society is promoting natural home garden where vegetables are cultivated without any chemical manure, which is flourishing. many families participate in the event.  references  roman catholic churches in tamil nadu
hans jaroszewicz (4 january 1935 - 22 june 2003) was a german professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 and 1961 tour de france.  references  external links    1935 births 2003 deaths german male cyclists cyclists from berlin
joseph aurele charles de bossi (15 november 1758 - 20 january 1824) was a french politician and poet.  biography  bossi studied law under professor carlo denina whom he befriended. dealing simultaneously with literature, he gave two tragedies at the age of 18, the circassians and rhea-sylvia which were well received. then he published odes on the reforms of joseph ii, on the death of the young prince of brunswick, on american independence, the pacification of holland, which increased his poet's reputation, but the philosophical sentiments contained in the odes displeased the court of turin, and undermined his advancement in a first time.  however he was appointed secretary of legation at genoa, then undersecretary for foreign affairs, before being charge d'affaires to the russian court, where he remained until the signing of the armistice of cherasco between sardinia and france, on 28 april 1796, when the tsar paul i ordered him to leave russia.  when the french invaded italy in 1796, he showed willingness to serve and participated in the negotiations of the treaty of campo formio. in 1799, general joubert appointed him a member of the provisional government of piedmont, as undersecretary of foreign affairs. after the battle of marengo, he went to holland to meet the resident functions. when he learned of the piedmont states sale that had been made to france, he went to turin and determined the heads of the italian party for the meeting. when the austro-russians penetrated in italy, he retired into the valleys of the alps, where he received the most generous hospitality. in order to recognize this welcome, bossi signaled his entry into the government by an act which gave the vaudois full freedom of worship.  he contributes a lot to the final integration of piedmont to france, and the first consul reflected his satisfaction with a flattering letter. nevertheless, he merely named him resident in moldova. bossi, who expected to be employed in the administration refused and would be forgotten for 18 months. after this time he was called to the prefecture of ain in 1805, then to that of manche 12 february 1810 until 16 july 1815.  made a baron of the empire by napoleon 9 march 1809, louis xviii kept him in office at the bourbon restoration and granted him letters of naturalization, but his eagerness to recognize bonaparte on his return from elba, led to his dismissal.  after traveling for some time in northern europe, he settled at 14 rue saint-martin (), where he died. an officier of the
legion d'honneur, he is buried at pere lachaise cemetery. from anne spanzotti, married 5 november 1806 in bourg-en-bresse, he had a daughter named heloise, born on 14 july 1809 in bourg-en-bresse, who first married with eugene leroux. widowed, she remarried with caesar-maurice de la tour d'auvergne, and had the carmel of the pater noster built in jerusalem.  his poems were collected, turin, 1801 3 small vol., and reprinted in london in 1814 to 50 copies only, with a poem entitled oromasia, and whose subject is the french revolution. despite the independence of the author, the poem was in favor of bonaparte. there is strength in ideas, but the versification is lackluster and the general effect monotonous. both editions were published under the anagrammatic names "albo crisso".  sources   .  18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights prefects of ain prefects of manche barons of the first french empire officiers of the legion d'honneur 1758 births writers from turin 1824 deaths burials at pere lachaise cemetery diplomats from turin
thursday island cemetery is a heritage-listed cemetery at summers street, thursday island, shire of torres, queensland, australia. it was established  and includes the japanese cemetery and grave of the hon. john douglas. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992.  history  thursday island cemetery was established , ten years after the formation of a permanent settlement on the island. it contains hundreds of graves, including between 600 and 700 japanese (mostly pearl-shell divers), entrepreneurs and fortune hunters of all nationalities, torres strait pilots, sailors and ships' passengers drowned at sea, as well as generations of thursday islanders. the hon. john douglas, a former premier of queensland and long-term government resident on thursday island, is buried in the cemetery.  thursday island (indigenous name: wai-ben) is located within the prince of wales (muralag) group, just off the northwest tip of cape york peninsula. although one of the smallest of the torres strait islands, thursday island is the principal port and administrative centre for the district. it is also queensland's and australia's most northern town.  the original inhabitants of the muralag islands, the kaurareg people, shared some cultural characteristics with cape york aborigines and spoke the same basic australian language, kalaw lagaw ya. however, they were a maritime people who lived from harvesting the sea, shifting camp sites regularly. wai-ben (meaning 'the dry island') had no permanent water supply, and no permanent kaurareg settlement was established there.  during the first half of the 19th century british shipping began to make regular use of torres strait, entering into a passing trade with the islanders. colonial occupation commenced in the 1860s and 1870s with the arrival of beche-de-mer crews, pearl-shellers, protestant missionaries from the southwestern pacific, and government officials.  queensland had no jurisdiction over the torres strait until its annexation in 1872 of the islands of the southern half of the strait, a measure intended largely to protect queensland interests in the pearl-shelling and beche-de-mer fisheries in the strait and along the great barrier reef, and to regulate the employment of south sea islanders in these enterprises. at annexation, torres strait islanders acquired the same official status as mainland aborigines.  the official queensland government settlement at somerset on cape york was established in 1864, but was moved in 1877 to the newly surveyed town of port kennedy on the southern side of thursday island. the new location provided a sheltered, deepwater anchorage, and was
more centrally located along the main shipping route through the inner channel of torres strait - the principal trade route to asia and the northern route to england. the first sale of crown land at port kennedy was held in april 1878. although only sections 1-3 at the southwest end of the town (closest to the government buildings) were offered for sale, allotments in these sections were eagerly purchased by queensland entrepreneurs.  in 1879, at british colonial office direction, queensland jurisdiction was extended to the islands of the northern half of the torres strait. this enabled britain to secure the torres strait shipping channel without having to annex new guinea.  by 1884 port kennedy was the principal port for cargo and passengers being trans-shipped to normanton, and was the hub of the pearl-shell and beche-de-mer fisheries in the torres strait. the town had a permanent population of about 70, and served a district of nearly 700 inhabitants. in addition, within from 3 to  of thursday island pearl-shell and beche-de-mer fishing stations were employing about 1500 people of all races (including significant numbers of south sea islanders, japanese and filipinos). in late 1884, for example, about 100 japanese divers were recorded at thursday island. at this period about 800 or 900 tons of shell were exported annually to new south wales, britain and other places, and the queensland government was collecting substantial revenue from licenses.  a local census taken  identified over 300 persons resident on thursday island, comprising "whites" (approximately 45%), malays, manilla, chinese, japanese, east indian, arabs, and "natives". further successful sales of crown land at port kennedy were held in january 1885 and september 1888, and by 1890 the island's population had grown to 526, composed of europeans, chinese, torres strait islanders and aborigines, south sea islanders, malays, filipinos, japanese, singhalese, indians, and a few thais, arabs and africans. this ethnic and cultural mix characterised the communities of the torres strait prior to the second world war.  with the expansion of non-government settlement on thursday island, the provision of a public cemetery became a necessity. it has not been established where the earliest burials on the island took place, but the earliest section of the present thursday island cemetery - 8 acres along summers and blackall streets, on a high ridge in the centre of the island - had been identified as a suitable site for a cemetery by january 1887. it was proclaimed as a permanent cemetery reserve on 8 july 1887, and in september
cemetery trustees were appointed. the trustees were drawn from amongst the town's principal "white" entrepreneurs. by the time the cemetery reserve was officially surveyed in february or march 1888, several interments had taken place and a track off summers street into the cemetery had been established. the trustees employed the same surveyor to survey the cemetery into denominational and/or nationality divisions at this time, but no record of this survey is known to have survived. in february 1888 the trustees formed regulations and by-laws for the effective operation of the cemetery, and in mid-1888 paid nearly £100 for the construction of wire fencing on the reserve. by the end of 1889 a sign-board had been erected, and work had started on the formation of paths within the cemetery. during 1893, the trustees had shade trees planted and further work on clearing and making cemetery paths was undertaken.  the trustees soon found that much of the reserve was unsuitable for burial purposes, being too steep and rocky, which escalated the cost of burials and made drainage of the site difficult. in the wet season, the cemetery paths became gullies, and had to be repaired on a yearly basis. in the mid-1890s, as the population of thursday island increased rapidly, the trustees requested two extensions to the cemetery reserve. on 11 july 1894 the reserve was doubled in size to 16 acres, with the addition of a strip of land about half the width of the existing cemetery reserve, which extended north to the military track (now aplin road) along the foreshore. this included more level, less rocky land, and also provided access along the foreshore road to the hospital on point vivien, in the southwest corner of the island. the reserve was expanded yet again on 29 april 1896 to 26 acres 1 rood 4 perches, when the northern boundary of the eastern half of the reserve was also extended as far as the military road. these extensions encompassed the area now known as the japanese (divers') cemetery, near aplin road.  japanese divers made a significant contribution to the development of the pearl-shell industry in the torres strait. europeans who established the industry in the strait in the late 1860s and early 1870s relied initially on south sea islander labour, who tended to dominate (often violently) the torres strait islanders. in the 1870s boats equipped with helmeted apparatus for divers appeared, and in the 1880s the pearl-shellers turned to a more skilled, often more daring, and less confronting labour supply - japanese divers (often ex-sailors)
recruited principally from hong kong and singapore. in the 1880s the proportion of japanese divers in the strait was no greater than any other ethnic group, but from 1891, when the japanese government removed its ban on emigration, numbers increased significantly. by 1893 the japanese were the largest ethnic group in the torres strait pearl-shell industry, and completely dominated the industry between 1900 and 1940. by 1900 all the luggers built at thursday island were crafted by japanese, and a "japanese town", with boarding houses, a public bath, stores and a brothel, had been established at the eastern end of port kennedy. this was destroyed during the second world war by american troops, who reputedly utilised the building materials for barracks.  the pearl-shell industry came to a halt during the second world war when naval authorities requisitioned most of the luggers. after the war there was a brief resurgence of the industry, but pearl-shelling declined dramatically in the 1960s when competition from the booming post-war plastics industry usurped traditional uses for pearl-shell, such as buttons and knife handles.  pearl-shell diving was a hazardous occupation and fatalities were high. one source suggests over 1,000 divers lost their lives in torres strait to "the bends", from drowning or through shark attack. thursday island cemetery contains between 600 and 700 graves bearing japanese names. one authority records that most japanese divers professed to be anglicans, so that they could be buried at the divers' cemetery within the thursday island cemetery. certainly there was a strong japanese presence within the anglican community on thursday island. a japanese school had been established by the japanese community on the anglican church precinct in douglas street by 1900, and the japanese contributed to fund-raising for building the church of england parish institute (1902-03) and various additions to the quetta memorial cathedral church in the 1890s and early 1900s.  in 1979, the monument building committee of japan erected a memorial/shrine in the thursday island cemetery, to honour the hundreds of japanese who worked, lived and died in the torres strait between 1878 and 1941. a resident of japan established a trust of about $100,000 to ensure the future maintenance of the japanese gravestones.  with the expansion of the torres strait pearl-shell industry in the early years of the 20th century the town of thursday island (formerly port kennedy) also grew, and a further extension to the thursday island cemetery was made on 9 january 1913, with the addition of about 5 acres of mostly flat, less rocky land along aplin road to
the west, bringing the area of the reserve to 31 acres 2 roods 9 perches. this remains the current extent of the thursday island cemetery reserve (12.77 hectares). the extension was intended to accommodate mostly "pagan" burials, which constituted a large proportion of burials in the thursday island cemetery at this period. (prior to 1973, all non-christian interments were recorded as "pagan", despite the large number of other religions represented on the island including shinto, buddhism and islam.) from 1912 until after the second world war, torres strait islanders were prohibited from residing on thursday island, which accounts for the smaller proportion of islander graves of this period in thursday island cemetery.  one of the more significant graves in the cemetery is that of the hon. john douglas, cmg, (1828-1904), pastoralist, liberal politician 1863-1879 (serving as premier of queensland 1877-79), and administrator (government resident on thursday island 1885-86 and 1888-1904), who died on the island on 23 july 1904. he was deeply involved in developing the settlement on thursday island. he was an active warden in the church of england and on 24 may 1893 laid the foundation stone of the quetta memorial church. he served on various local committees, and was a cemetery trustee from 1889 until his death. he won the respect of the torres strait islanders, who in the early 1900s funded construction of the west aisle of the quetta memorial cathedral church, dedicated in 1913 as the douglas memorial chapel.  although thursday island cemetery contains hundreds of burials, the earliest of which date to at least 1887, there is no surviving record of interments prior to 1939. the register of interments held by torres shire council starts on 31 march 1939. there are no entries between 22 july 1940 and 11 february 1948. most thursday island civilians were evacuated in 1942 and did not return until 1946 or later. thursday island was administered by military authorities during 1942-45, and from mid-1946 to february 1948, thursday island cemetery was managed by the local stipendiary magistrate. when local trustees were re-appointed early in 1948, they found that the cemetery was in poor repair, no maintenance having been carried out since 1940, and claimed £315 from the war damage commission to effect necessary repairs. they also discovered that the minute book, cash book and cemetery register to 1939, which in 1942 had been left on the island in a locked safe, were missing.  it took the trustees some years, but by 1952 they reported that the cemetery was in good order
, with fences, gates and roads repaired. the greatest difficulty was in securing grave-diggers. in the early 1960s the trustees attempted to persuade the thursday island town council to take on the management of the cemetery, but eventually, queensland government officials and local priests took on the role of trustees. despite the establishment of municipal government on thursday island as early as 1912, the cemetery remained the responsibility of community trustees for over a century. in 1991 torres shire council assumed control of the reserve and new by-laws were gazetted.  the cemetery contains the commonwealth war graves of four service personnel, two royal australian navy sailors of world war i (in church of england sections) and two australian army soldiers of world war ii who are buried in adjacent graves (nos. 1528 and 1529, presbyterian plot).  description  thursday island cemetery is a 12.77 hectare reserve located on the central northern side of the island, bounded on the south by summers street, from where the land slopes north/northwest down to aplin road. a track winds down a gully from summers street to aplin road, providing access to graves on either side. the main entrance is now from aplin road.  the terrain varies from steeply sloping in the southern section to flat in the northern section. the ground consists of clay and granite, and the surface is extremely rocky. vegetation is predominantly indigenous, with eucalypts and other native trees providing light tree coverage throughout the reserve, most densely along the eastern ridge. native grasses provide a dense ground cover over most of the reserve, restricting access to the graves, particularly during the wet season, when the grass is long. in addition, some areas on the western side of the track are overgrown with bean tree (leucaena sp.), which prevents access at any time of the year. the newer sections of the cemetery have a few specimen trees and shrubs such as frangipani (plumeria rubra), hibiscus (hibiscus sinensis) and crotons (codiaeum variegatum).  the grave furnishings in the cemetery are diverse in design and materials - the latter including timber, polished granite, marble, sandstone, early cast iron, and later concrete and tiles. the variety of materials used in grave marking reflect social attitudes to death, the availability of materials, cultural and religious backgrounds, and the changing socio-economic conditions of local residents. early headstones in the cemetery were imported from well known monumental masons in southern centres, mostly from melrose and fenwick (townsville), but also from firms such as john
petrie and j clements of brisbane. designs include columns, obelisks, desks and upright slabs, generally with the more elaborate decoration found on early catholic graves. there is also a range of christian cross designs.  some of the earlier graves have iron railing grave surrounds, or evidence of where this was used. the majority of graves, both marked and unmarked, retain their numeric metal cemetery markers. most of the early graves face east, as is traditional in european burial grounds. however, graves in the japanese pearl-divers' section and most of the more recent graves, tend to face west.  more recent graves have elaborate decorative tiling on a concrete base, and are extremely colourful. placing a permanent photograph of the deceased on the headstone is also very popular. these graves are illustrative of a genre of grave marking which has emerged from the unique ethnic and cultural mix to which the torres strait islands have been subject since the 1870s. although most islanders are christians, they have incorporated what is believed to be a traditional (pre-1870s) mortuary rite, the tomb-opening ceremony, within their current religious practices. this ceremony occurs 12 months or more after a burial, at which time the grave markings are installed. throughout the year there is evidence of tombstone openings in the form of decorations remaining after opening, tombstones wrapped and covered awaiting opening, or newer graves with wooden roofing constructed over them awaiting opening.  early graves appear to be grouped according to religion or ethnicity, but a clear picture of the original cemetery layout is not possible. little early documentation survives, parts of the site are inaccessible, and much of the remainder is so overgrown that the identification of graves, iron markers and headstones is difficult. a conservation plan for the thursday island cemetery, completed in may 2000, identified 21 distinct groupings of graves (areas a-t), but there were sections of the reserve which were inaccessible at time of survey, and unable to be recorded.  from what can be discerned, the original layout of thursday island cemetery reflects the social structure and hierarchical patterns established on thursday island in the late 19th century, with the most influential social groups located at the top of the hill near summers street, and the least influential located near aplin road on the flats.  the southern and highest end of the cemetery was the earliest section of the reserve to be established. on this section, at the top of the hill adjacent to summers street and overlooking ellis channel (area l), are the graves of some of
thursday island's early european "elite", including the hon. john douglas, premier of queensland 1877-79 and long-term government resident on thursday island 1885-86 and 1888-1904, who died on the island in 1904. his grave is marked by a tall obelisk in polished blue granite. all the graves in this area face east.  on the southern and western slopes of this hill, closer to summers street, is the original protestant section (most likely mainly anglican), which includes the earliest metal cemetery plot marker (area m). there were burials in this section from at least 1887, and the earliest marked graves date to the late 1800s and early 1900s. also in this section of the cemetery is an early monument to seven pilots in the queensland pilot service who died in the strait between 1894 and 1917. some of the graves on the western slope of this hill face west, and those on the southern slope mostly face south. the conservation plan records evidence of a track leading west around the hill and providing access to graves in the area, which is now overgrown and inaccessible.  the early catholic burial ground is located a little further down the hill, to the west of the cemetery track, in the steep southwest section of the cemetery (area n). graves here face east. most have concrete grave surrounds, and many also have metal railings embedded in the concrete. most have marble headstones, crosses or cairns. much of this section is overgrown and access is difficult, but at the crest of the hill are the graves of at least three catholic nuns, and these appear to have been specially maintained. a marble memorial to william conroy, a senior constable of police who died in the line of duty in 1895, has also been maintained. two of the most prominent and decorative of the catholic headstones are those marking the graves of thomas and ellen mcnulty, who established the thursday island hotel in 1879, and who were important in the establishment of the catholic church on thursday island in the 1880s.  on the steep slopes east of the cemetery access track, still in the southern part of the reserve but north of the protestant section near summers street, are a large number of overgrown graves, mostly of japanese origin (area k). some have granite cairns engraved with japanese lettering. still on the eastern side of track, but further toward the centre of the cemetery and closer to the track, are the graves of muslim indonesians and malays, and some torres strait islanders (areas i-j). these are on relatively flat land and are generally well
maintained. wherever muslim or shinto burials have taken place, there are likely to be offerings of food and toys.  graves in the central section of the cemetery, on flatter but still elevated and sloping land, and on both sides of the access road, are predominantly christian, both european and islander (areas e-g, o-q). there are no immediately discernible denominational divisions, but family groupings are evident. area p is inaccessible due to an infestation at bean tree (leucaena sp.). area h, adjacent to the christian graves on the eastern side of the access track in the central part of the cemetery, contains a small grouping of graves which appear to be of islamic origin. two early graves in this section face east.  closer to the northern end of the cemetery reserve, on gently sloping land east of the access track, is a section of mainly early 1900s european graves (area d). the denomination is not evident. two substantial stone cairns have been built here in memory of two servicemen. these have concrete grave surrounds with artillery shells standing at each corner. the majority of graves in this section retain their metal cemetery marker.  north of this area, still on the eastern side of the track, is a section of older european graves mixed with later mostly islander graves (area c). all graves face west. the graves in the southern and eastern sections of this area are inaccessible due to an infestation of bean tree (leucaena sp.) to the north of area c is a grouping of more recent, mostly torres strait islander christian graves. this area is very well maintained.  at the northeast end of the reserve, on the flat land beside aplin road, is the japanese pearl-shell divers' burial ground (area a). this area is reasonably well maintained. most of the graves in this section have raised mounds covered with stone, concrete, or a combination of both. many are marked with granite or concrete columns, usually consisting of three sections, and a few have european-style marble and concrete headstones. graves without such markers are marked either with wooden posts painted white with japanese characters lettered in black; or with unpainted timber posts with engraved inscriptions of japanese characters. a few graves remain as mounds but are otherwise unmarked. on some of the japanese graves are small concrete birdcages, housing food for the spirits of the departed divers, and on some graves, frangipani (plumeria rubra) have been planted. the majority of graves in this area contain a metal
cemetery grave marker.  to the northwest are the graves of mainly torres strait islanders (areas r-t). the most recent graves are located here, in area b and in some of the central sections of the reserve, and generally are well maintained. however, there is a dense infestation of bean tree (leucaena sp.) in area s, on the western side of the access track.  heritage listing  thursday island cemetery (incorporating the japanese cemetery & the grave of the hon. john douglas) was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  thursday island cemetery, established  and still open for interments, is important in illustrating the rich diversity of culture and custom on thursday island and in the torres strait in general, which is one of the most ethnically diverse parts of queensland. the cemetery contains the graves of hundreds of people from many nationalities, cultures and religious backgrounds (including christianity, buddhism, shinto and islam). the large japanese (divers') cemetery within the reserve is illustrative the role of the japanese in the development of the pearl-shell industry in the torres strait, the dangerous nature of this work, and the close cultural and economic connections which the people of the torres strait have had with the sea and maritime industries.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  thursday island cemetery is significant as a unique historical record, illustrating important aspects of the island's history including its pearling industry, the first and second world wars, its social structure from the late 19th century, and attitudes towards religion and burial practices. the names on the headstones in the cemetery illustrate the high degree of ethnic intermarriage in the strait since the 1870s. the degree of cultural diversity and the existence of a substantial and early japanese cemetery within the reserve is rare in queensland.  the place has potential to yield information that will contribute to an understanding of queensland's history.  the place has potential to reveal further information about the history of this most northern part of queensland, and of late 19th century cemetery layouts, particularly if the ground cover were cleared to reveal the full extent and diversity of burials and burial customs.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the place has strong aesthetic appeal, engendered by the variety and detail of the headstones and other grave markers which range from the 1880s to the present day (contemporary islander graves
are particularly colourful and dynamic), and the romantic island setting, with views to the water from most parts of the reserve.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the place is highly valued by the community of thursday island and by those outside of the community who have relatives buried in the cemetery. it is also a popular tourist destination.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  the place is significant as the resting place of a former queensland premier and government resident of thursday island, the hon. john douglas (1828-1904), whose grave is located at the top of the highest hill in the cemetery, overlooking ellis channel and the islands of the southern torres strait. the cemetery contains a number of other significant memorials, including a large monument to the japanese, and an early memorial to torres strait pilots who lost their lives in the execution of their duties.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register thursday island cemeteries in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
giovanni barbo (died 16 january, 1547) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of pedena (1526-1547).  biography on 16 april 1526, giovanni barbo was appointed during the papacy of pope clement vii as bishop of pedena. he served as bishop of pedena until his death on 16 january 1547. while bishop, he was principal co-consecrator of pietro paolo vergerio, bishop of modrus (1545).  see also  catholic church in italy  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope clement vii 1547 deaths giovanni
ani etgabaer  ( ) is 1970 hebrew novel by israeli author dvora omer. the book's plot line follows the path of a young girl with cerebral palsy, gila, as she grows up. it shows her struggles through childhood, adolescent, and beyond.  references  external links     simani   20th-century israeli novels 1970 novels novels set in israel
i want to live (spanish: quiero vivir) is a 1953 mexican crime film directed by alberto gout and starring jorge mistral, meche barba and julio villarreal.  the film's sets were designed by manuel fontanals.  cast  jorge mistral as ruben iturbe    meche barba as mercedes rios    julio villarreal as comandante rodolfo saldivar    victor alcocer as angel    lupe llaca as alicia    celia viveros  as angelica    roberto galvez as el ronco gomez    charles rooner  as doctor    alberto mariscal as secuaz de angel    andrea palma as andrea   daniel arroyo as invitado a fiesta    manuel de la vega as tomas    enrique diaz indiano as samuel, mayordomo    salvador godinez as esbirro de angel    alvaro matute as agente de policia   angel merino as agente de policia   luis mussot hijo  as manuel    salvador quiroz as invitado a fiesta    acela vidaurri as clara, empleada cabaret  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 crime films mexican crime films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by alberto gout mexican black-and-white films
in greek mythology, antianeira (ancient greek: αντιανειρης 'a match for men') may have been mother of the argonaut idmon by the god apollo. the scholiast on apollonius rhodius, however, calls asteria the mother of idmon.  notes  references    apollonius rhodius, argonautica translated by robert cooper seaton (1853-1915), r. c. loeb classical library volume 001. london, william heinemann ltd, 1912. online version at the topos text project.  apollonius rhodius, argonautica. george w. mooney. london. longmans, green. 1912. greek text available at the perseus digital library.  the orphic argonautica, translated by jason colavito. © copyright 2011. online version at the topos text project.  women in greek mythology argive characters in greek mythology characters in greek mythology
battery "g" 1st regiment of artillery was a light artillery battery that served in the union army during the american civil war.  service the battery was stationed at fort pickens, florida, january to may 1861. it moved to fort hamilton, new york harbor, may 13-26, then to washington, d.c., july 8 where it was attached to richardson's brigade, tyler's division, mcdowell's army of northeastern virginia, to august 1861. richardson's brigade, division of the potomac, to october 1861. artillery reserve, army of the potomac (temporarily attached to batteries e and k, 1st u.s. artillery, february to may 1862. 2nd brigade, artillery reserve, v corps, army of the potomac, to september 1862. artillery, 2nd division, v corps, to october 1862. artillery, 3rd division, v corps, to may 1863. 2nd regular brigade, artillery reserve, army of the potomac, to june 1863. 2nd brigade, horse artillery, army of the potomac, to june 1864. 1st brigade, derussy's division, xxii corps, to october 1865.  detailed service reconnaissance from alexandria on fairfax, richmond and mt. vernon roads july 14. advanced on manassas, va., july 16-21. occupation of fairfax court house july 17. blackburn's ford july 18. first battle of bull run july 21. duty in the defenses of washington, d.c., until march, 1862. moved to the virginia peninsula. siege of yorktown april 5-may 4. battle of seven pines, may 31-june 1. seven days battles before richmond june 26-july 1. golding's farm june 27. savage's station and peach orchard june 29. white oak swamp and glendale june 30. malvern hill july 1. at harrison's landing until august 16. moved to fort monroe, then to centerville august 16-28. pope's campaign in virginia august 28-september 2. battle of groveton august 29. second battle of bull run august 30. maryland campaign september 6-22. crampton's pass september 14. battle of antietam september 16-17. shepherdstown ford september 19-20. at sharpsburg, md., until october 30. moved to falmouth october 30-november 19. battle of fredericksburg, va., december 11-15. at falmouth until april 1863. chancellorsville campaign april 27-may 6. battle of chancellorsville may 1-6. gettysburg campaign june 11-july 24. al
die june 17. middleburg june 19. upperville june 20-21. ashby's gap june 21. battle of gettysburg, july 1-3. shepherdstown july 16. bristoe campaign october 9-22. advanced to line of the rappahannock november 7-8. mine run campaign november 26-december 2. custer's raid into albemarle county february 28-march 1. near charlottesville february 29. stannardsville march 1. rapidan campaign may 4-june 5. battle of the wilderness may 5-7. spotsylvania may 8-21. milford station may 21. chesterfield may 23. north anna may 23-26. totopotomoy may 28-31. machump's creek may 31. cold harbor june 1-5. sharp's farm june 3. moved to washington, d.c., june 18. garrison duty at fort willard and fort strong, defenses of washington, d.c. until october 1865.  commanders  captain alanson merwin randol  1st lieutenant peter conover hains - commanded at the first battle of bull run  1st lieutenant egbert w. olcott  1st lieutenant frank s. french  see also   list of united states regular army civil war units  1st air defense artillery regiment  references  dyer, frederick h. a compendium of the war of the rebellion (des moines, ia: dyer pub. co.), 1908. attribution  external links  battery e, 1st u.s. light artillery monuments at gettysburg battlefield  united states regular army civil war units and formations u military units and formations established in 1861 military units and formations disestablished in 1865
longford greyhound stadium is a greyhound racing track located on the south side of longford, county longford, ireland.  the stadium is a ten-minute walk from the town centre and has a large customer car park. racing takes place every monday and friday evening and the facilities include a fast food bar and totalisator betting.  race distances are 525, 550, 750 and 805 yards.  history longford greyhound stadium is accessed via earl street and is just about the most centrally located track you can get in ireland. the south longford venue has a circumference of 485 yards and opened in may 1939. the track hosts the longford derby & longford puppy derby and other events to have taken place previously here are the padian cup and smithwicks 550.  one of the pioneers of the track was m. j. lyons (a local businessman), and john dorris (managing director) and jim conroy (former racing manager) have been long service personnel at the track.  in 1966 the track closed for the winter break and looked unlikely to re-open, but the owner thomas packenham sold the site to longford sports ltd.  the small track remains a tight circuit and in recent times has battled for survival during a hard financial climate. the management including current racing manager patrick farrington and the voluntary committee continues to work hard to achieve a safe surface and environment for the greyhounds to run in. in july 2014 the sale of the park road track was agreed to scottish-based greyhound owner howard wallace.  competitions longford derby longford puppy derby  track records current     former  references  external links irish greyhound board  greyhound racing venues in the republic of ireland
the lancaster memorial in beuningen, netherlands is a memorial that commemorates the crew of the british avro lancaster lm325 sr-j that crashed on the spot during the night of 22 to 23 june 1943 in world war ii. the bomber belonged to the no. 101 squadron of the raf. six of the seven crew lost their lives.  background    the lancaster was part of a formation of 557 planes that were heading to the ruhrgebied for a large-scale attack on the war industry around the german city of mulheim. two-thirds of mulheim was estimated to be destroyed in this attack. the plane took off during the night of 22 june 1943 from the raf ludford magna airbase in lincolnshire. its crew consisted of seven airmen:   sgt. jack osborne, flight engineer, 21 years old  sgt. ted williams, bomb aimer (pow)  sgt. ron cooper, mid upper gunner, 20 years old  sgt. vin sugden, rear gunner, 21 years old  flight officer beavan tomkins, navigator, 30 years old  sgt. ted smith, wireless operator, 22 years old               sgt. roy waterhouse, pilot, 20 years old.  at 1:38 am on 23 june the plane was intercepted above the village of beuningen, near the city of nijmegen, netherlands by a messerschmitt bf 110 night fighter. the lancaster was hit and caught fire immediately. heavily burning, it circled a few minutes around beuningen. the crew managed to drop their bomb load in the fields around the village, preventing the loss of civilian lives. at 1:45 am the plane crashed aside the de steeg, the road from beuningen to the neighboring village of wijchen, 3 km south of the village center. many people witnessed the incident. the burning wreckage was soon closed off by german soldiers. a dutch constable also arrived. in his report, the wrote that he saw five crew members and concluded that none of them had survived the crash.  the only survivor   ted williams, the bomb aimer of the plane, survived because he lay horizontally in the nose of the plane, close to the escape hatch. he was able to leave the plane in time and jumped with his parachute. williams fainted while jumping, and due to the strong wind from the west, he drifted east towards nijmegen. when he became conscious again, he landed in a garden in the village of heesch, today a residence area of nijmegen. he was offered help by the owner of the house and
was given medical attention by a doctor for cuts and burn wounds. but soon the germans found out that williams had landed in the area, so he was escorted to the local police station and arrested. he was sent as a prisoner of war to stalag luft vi near the polish-lithuanian border. williams would remain imprisoned until the end of the war.  beavan tomkins also escaped from the plane, but he did not survive the jump. he was found dead in heesch and was later united with his deceased comrades. the six victims are buried in uden war cemetery.  williams suffered all his life from having been a pow. he could not understand why just he survived. in 1950, he visited beuningen for a commemorative ceremony. after that he intended to never return. by an extraordinary coincidence, 31 years later on a vacation in mallorca, he met an old inhabitant from heesch. that person's family doctor happened to be the doctor that treated williams for his wounds after his jump. they became close friends, and in 1983 williams revisited nijmegen and beuningen after all. he met, amongst other people, the doctor and owner of the house where he landed at that time. ted williams died in 2004.  the wreckage   the wreckage was later recovered and shredded. only one propeller has been saved because the part fell off just before the plane hit the ground. it was overlooked by the german soldiers because it was lying in a ditch. the landowner hid the part in a shed and turned it over the municipality after the war.  the german pilot   the german pilot who shot down lancaster lm325 was oberleutnant werner baake. he was a member of the i. nachtjagdgeschwader 1 of the german luftwaffe (1st group of the 1st nightfighter squadron) and was stationed on gilze-rijen air base. that night he downed two more bombers. during the war baake flew 195 nightly missions in which he shot down 41 planes. for his actions he was decorated several times by the nazis. on 2 october 1944 he was promoted to commander of i./njg1. after the war he became a civil pilot at the lufthansa. eventually he suffered the same fate as the crew members of all the planes that he shot down: baake died on 15 june 1964 when he crashed in an aircraft accident with a boeing 720. during a test flight, the crew made a successful barrel-roll, although this was not allowed by the lufthansa for this kind of
airplane. on a second attempt the airplane broke down due to overloading. it crashed near the village of ansbach. all three crew members including baake died in the accident.  the erection of a memorial   in 1946 a black cross was erected close to the point of impact. during the first years after the war, this was the place where on 4 may the local remembrance of the dead was held. people used to walk in a silent march from the town hall to the place of the crash. on 17 september 1950 a memorial for the allied pilots was unveiled in the park next to the town hall. ted williams was present at the ceremony as well as ten surviving family of the victims. the propeller of the plane has been processed in the monument. since then the 4 may remembrance is taking place at this memorial. due to an extension of the town hall, the memorial was moved to the park next to the st. cornelius church in beuningen in 1984.  in due course of time the crash site came a bit forgotten. until in 2013 the local liberation committee took initiative to mark the site with a small sign. it was unveiled in the middle of the night on 1:45 hours, exactly 70 years after the incident. the sign started to serve as a small memorial where annually two remembrances take place. the first is on 4 may, preceding the national and local remembrance of the dead. at 18:30 hours there is a ceremony where the crew is honored. every year on the fourth wednesday of july, the international four days marches nijmegen pass through beuningen. on this day there is a ceremony by soldiers from the british military who take part in the marches.  in 2014 the memorial has been adopted by the local scouting branch. they maintain the memorial and keep the location tidy during the year, and they assist with the organisation of the ceremonies.  every year the ceremonies and also the 4 may remembrance at the church are visited by more and more people. that is why in 2016 the scouts and civilians took the initiative in founding a real memorial, together with the municipality. it was unveiled on 23 june 2016 by ab bruisten, eyewitness of the crash at the age of 11, and tim barlow, grandnephew of flight engineer jack osborne.  the memorial has been designed by the artist hein van houten.  description  the memorial is consisting of a bluestone base with an embedded square tablet. on this tablet there is an image made by artist hein van houten that is inspired by the eyewitness account of
ab bruisten. it shows an impression of the crashed airplane and the sole crew member that lands with his parachute. the tablet lists the crew's names and their pictures.  the pedestal is the center of a circle on the ground made from square cobblestones and filled with gravel. within the scouting the circle with a dot in the centre "ʘ" is the symbol for 'end of trail', but also for 'death'. the tablet reads:  see also  world war ii memorials and cemeteries in the netherlands  notes  references   content is translated from the existing dutch wikipedia article at lancastermonument (beuningen); see its history for attribution.      world war ii memorials in the netherlands beuningen 1943 in the netherlands
alamgir is a village located in kapurthala district, punjab.  demography  as per population census 2011, the alamgir village has population of 4952 of which 2583 are males while 2369 are females. the village is administrated by sarpanch an elected representative of the village.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 469 which is 9.47% of total population of alamgir, and child sex ratio is approximately 818 lower than state average of 846.  population data  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the 2005 ford 400 was a nascar nextel cup series race held on november 20, 2005, at homestead miami speedway in homestead, florida. contested over 267 laps on the 1.5 miles (2.4 km) speedway, it was the 36th and final race of the 2005 nascar nextel cup series season. greg biffle of roush racing won the race and tony stewart of joe gibbs racing won the championship.  background homestead-miami speedway is a motor racing track located in homestead, florida. the track, which has several configurations, has promoted several series of racing, including nascar, the verizon indycar series, the grand-am rolex sports car series, and the championship cup series.  since 2002, homestead-miami speedway has hosted the final race of the season in all three of nascar's series: the sprint cup series, xfinity series, and the camping world truck series. ford motor company sponsors all three of the season-ending races; the races have the names ford 400, ford 300, and ford 200, respectively, and the weekend is marketed as ford championship weekend.  entry list  qualifying  carl edwards would win the pole with a 30.673, beating out ryan newman by 2 thousandths of a second.   there were numerous qualifying crashes throughout the day. the first would occur when during carl long's qualifying run, long's car would get loose heading into turn 1, causing his car to go into a tailspin. the car went up the track and eventually, the rear of the car hit the middle of the turn 1-2 wall, severely damaging his car. long would not get a qualifying time, and since the 80 car, owned by hover motorsports was not top 35 in owner's points, did not get a provisional and thus long would not qualify. morgan shepherd would also suffer a spin on his warmup lap. shepherd would pull into pit road, with his team scrambling to get back out on track. his car was not able to get out within the 5 minute clock shepherd was forced to qualify in, classifying shepherd as a did not start (dns). shepherd would not qualify. the third accident of the day was when michael waltrip suffered a similar crash to carl long earlier in the day, totaling waltrip's car. the rear of the car was extremely damaged, forcing waltrip to take a provisional and to be in a backup car. the last accident of the day happened when hamlin also entered into a tailspin and hit the turn 1 wall, ironically with
the crash being the same as both long's and waltrip's crashes. although hamlin had only competed in very select races that year, the no. 11 team was top 35 in the points that year. hamlin would take a provisional and start 42nd. eerily, hamlin's crash was about the same as the one as he had suffered in the busch series race he was qualifying for.  race greg biffle won the race and leading roush racing 1-2-3-4 finish, a feat not repeated until the 2021 drydene 400 at dover. meanwhile, carl edwards, greg biffle, tony stewart, and jimmie johnson each had a mathematical chance to win the championship. however, johnson crashed out at lap 127 with a blown tire in turn three. despite the fact that edwards and biffle finished upfront while stewart finished 15th, stewart still won the championship. the race was also the last for rusty wallace as he retired afterward, having competed in nascar cup racing for 25 years.  race results  race statistics  time of race: 3:02:50  average speed:   pole speed:   cautions: 8 for 37 laps  margin of victory: 0.017  lead changes: 21  percent of race run under caution: 13.9%           average green flag run: 25.6 laps  references  ford 400 ford 400 nascar races at homestead-miami speedway
dawlance is a pakistani home appliances brand which is a subsidiary of turkish company arcelik. it is based in karachi. founded in 1980, it was acquired by istanbul-based arcelik in 2016.  dawlance has three factories, two sites in karachi and one in hyderabad, with a total of 4,000 employees. it manufactures washing machines, freezers, split air conditioner and microwave ovens.  in 2015, dawlance had revenues of $220.6 million selling product's in pakistan and middle east. similarly, its ebitda earnings amounted to $45 million. it has 37 branches in addition to 750-plus franchises across the country   it was acquired by arcelik in november 2016 for $258m, and since then function's a wholly owned brand for arcelik.  references  external links  dawlance - official website   - steady business growth in home appliances  manufacturing companies based in karachi electronics companies established in 1980 consumer electronics brands home appliance manufacturers of pakistan pakistani brands pakistani subsidiaries of foreign companies mergers and acquisitions of pakistani companies 2016 mergers and acquisitions pakistani companies established in 1980 electronics companies of pakistan
pierre morel (born 10 september 1930) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1930 births living people french male cyclists
kauo-ld, virtual channel 15 (uhf digital channel 14), is a low-powered country network-affiliated television station licensed to amarillo, texas, united states. owned by hc2 holdings, it is a sister station to estrella tv affiliates klkw-ld (channel 22) and knkc-ld (channel 29).  history the station's construction permit under the callsign k14no-d was originally owned by eicb tv, llc. the construction permit was granted by the fcc on february 25, 2010.  the station sale to dtv america corporation was instituted in early 2016. dtv america signed on kauo-ld upon the station's callsign change in june 2016. it became a bounce tv affiliate. the doctor television channel (drtv) returned to the amarillo area through kauo-ld2, and the katz broadcasting-operated comedy network laff became available on the third subchannel (the network can also be seen on nbc affiliate kamr-tv's third digital subchannel). drtv was previously available via klkw-ld2 until december 2015. in march 2018, the station added quest programming to its seventh digital subchannel. in june 2018, the station's fourth digital subchannel replaced cozi tv with justice network.  digital channels the station's digital signal is multiplexed, as of july 16, 2021, as follows:  references  external links     dtv america       true crime network affiliates low-power television stations in the united states dtv america auo-ld 2016 establishments in texas television channels and stations established in 2016
chai jingyi (17th-century), was a chinese poet and painter. she produced two collections of poems, and was also known for her paintings of flowers. she was a member of the aristocracy and the daughter of chai yunqian, sister of chai zhenyi, spouse of shen hajia, and mother of shen yongji and shen zazhi. she was the chairperson of the famous women's literary club jiaoyan qizi (banana garden).  references     17th-century births 17th-century deaths 17th-century chinese poets qing dynasty painters chinese women poets qing dynasty poets 17th-century chinese women artists 17th-century chinese painters 17th-century chinese women writers
faraway how is a nunatak in king christian x land, east greenland. administratively it falls under the northeast greenland national park zone.  this geographic feature was named by the 1926 cambridge expedition to east greenland led by sir james wordie.  geography faraway how is located in the wordie glacier north of steno land and 9 km to the west of c. h. ostenfeld nunatak's northern end.  faraway how is 7.8 km in length and its maximum width is 3.2 km; the highest elevation is located at the western end and is  high.  see also list of mountains in greenland list of nunataks of greenland  bibliography  references  faraway faraway
bootle is a civil parish in the borough of copeland, cumbria, england.  it contains twelve listed buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  of these, two are listed at grade ii*, the middle of the three grades, and the others are at grade ii, the lowest grade.  the parish contains the village of bootle and the surrounding countryside.  the listed buildings comprise houses and associated structures, churches and associated structures, a school, and a village cross.   key  buildings  references  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria listed buildings
big deer state park is a state park in groton, vermont. the park is a campground located in groton state forest close to the groton nature center, boulder beach state park and stillwater state park.  the park features 23 tent/rv sites and 5 lean-tos. there is a restroom with hot showers. a sanitary dump station is available at stillwater, but no hookups.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of caledonia county, vermont groton, vermont
siete caballeros is a mountain in the raura mountain range in the andes of peru with several peaks reaching approximately  above sea level. it is located in the province of lauricocha, in the region of huanuco. siete caballeros lies north of puyhuanccocha.  references  mountains of peru mountains of huanuco region
teufelsbruck (devil's bridge) is the name of the area around the mouth of flottbek stream into river elbe in hamburg, germany. it is located in the local subdistrict of klein flottbek and today belongs partly to the quarters of othmarschen and nienstedten. initially, teufelsbruck was the name of the bridge of the street of elbchaussee over the flottbek stream, later it was used for the area itself including nearby ferry pier and marina. the area lies south of the jenisch park.  name the name goes back to an old legend. at the ford of the flottbek stream, wagons frequently had accidents caused by broken wheels, so the inhabitants blamed the devil for it. a carpenter was assigned to build a bridge. but he made a pact with the devil and promised him the soul of the first creature crossing the bridge. on the day of inauguration, after a priest had blessed the bridge and the devil was looking forward for a human victim, the county councillor and the priest had a debate who should cross the bridge first. meanwhile, a rabbit accidentally crossed it and the disappointed devil disappeared into the river.  this legend exists in similar form also for other bridges in germany (see :de:brickegickel), as well as for the teufelsbrucke in schollenen gorge, switzerland.  a statue made of stone refers to the legend at teufelsbruck. earlier statues at this place were made of wood, but were stolen several times.  references  external links  bridges in hamburg altona, hamburg
urbano cioccetti (26 november 1905 - 9 may 1978) was an italian christian democrat politician. he was mayor of rome (1958-1962). he died in rome, italy.  references  1905 births 1978 deaths 20th-century italian politicians christian democracy (italy) politicians knights grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic mayors of rome
istanbul attack may refer to the following terrorist attacks:  before 2015  istanbul pogrom  1999 istanbul bombings (shopping center, bahcelievler district)  blue market massacre  2001 istanbul suicide bombing  2003 istanbul bombings (synagogues, hsbc and british consulate)  2004 attack on istanbul restaurant (kartal district)  2008 united states consulate in istanbul attack  2008 istanbul bombings (gungoren district)  2010 istanbul bombing (taksim square)  2012 istanbul suicide bombing  2015  2015 istanbul suicide bombing (sultanahmet district)  istanbul justice palace siege  2015 istanbul metro bombing (bayrampasa district)  2015 sabiha gokcen airport bombing  2016  january 2016 istanbul bombing (sultanahmet district)  march 2016 istanbul bombing (istiklal avenue)  june 2016 istanbul bombing (vezneciler district)  2016 ataturk airport attack  october 2016 istanbul bombing (yenibosna district)  december 2016 istanbul bombings (vodafone arena)  from 2017  istanbul nightclub shooting (besiktas district)
artur ferreira teixeira is a portuguese footballer who played as a full back.  career silva arrived at benfica in 1943, making his debut at the hands of janos biri on 6 february 1944, against salgueiros. it was his only appearance in 1943-44. after playing only once in 1944-45 for the second time, he finally had his breakthrough season in 1945-46, amassing 25 games alongside cerqueira, as he gain his place in the starting eleven in exchange for an aged gaspar pinto.  in 1946-47, felix and fernandes displaced him and cerqueira out of the first team, and teixeira saw his appearances drop to 18, nine in the league and nine in the lisbon championship. he left the club in 1947, having played 45 games in four years.  honours benfica primeira divisao: 1944-45  references general    specific  year of birth missing possibly living people portuguese footballers association football defenders primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers place of birth missing
the 2016 state of the nation address was the first state of the nation address delivered by president rodrigo duterte.  seating and guests three former presidents, fidel ramos, joseph estrada, and gloria macapagal arroyo attended the sona. this was the first time that arroyo attended congress after being detained for four years at the veterans memorial medical center in quezon city, after the supreme court voted 11-4, dismissing the plunder case filed against her in connection with the alleged misuse of the philippine charity sweepstakes office's p366-million intelligence fund.  among those who also attended were vice president leni robredo, chief justice maria lourdes sereno, and papal nuncio and head of the diplomatic corps, giuseppe pinto. former president and duterte's predecessor, benigno aquino iii skipped the event.  preparations  independent film director brillante mendoza has accepted the offer by pco secretary martin andanar to direct the first state of the nation address of president duterte. andanar held a meeting, with mendoza, director and tv host jun sabayton and pco assistant secretary for strategic communications ramon cualoping iii to discuss several details of the sona.  mayor herbert bautista announced that there will be no classes in all levels in quezon city on the day of the state of the nation address itself, particularly in schools near the batasang pambansa.  program president duterte arrived at the session hall of the house of representatives at 4:00pm (pst). after the president's arrival, senate president koko pimentel and house speaker pantaleon alvarez convened the joint session of both houses. the national anthem was sung by folk singer bayang barrios, followed by an interfaith unity prayer led by representatives from the catholic church, protestants, muslims and the iglesia ni cristo.  the original speech of the president was intended to last for about 38 minutes, but due to additional ad libs of duterte, the first state of the nation address ran for 1 hour and 33 minutes.  after the joint session was adjourned, militant groups who just finished a demonstration rally outside the batasang pambansa to show their support to the duterte administration went on a meeting with president duterte.  address content and delivery president duterte began his first sona that he will not resort into fingerpointing against the past administration.  references  external links transcript of president duterte's state of the nation address full video of the 2016 state of the nation address  state of the nation address 2016 speeches 2016 presidency of rodrigo duterte
modern primitive is the ninth studio album by american guitarist steve vai, released on epic records on june 24, 2016. according to his website, the material on the album was "based on song sketches and works-in-progress penned and recorded by vai following the release of flex-able, his debut album, in january 1984." he sees this material as a link between the stylistically different flex-able and passion and warfare (1990). the name of the album refers to his "modern" finishing of some of his oldest, most "primitive" works (when he was then in his mid-20s).  track listing  personnel  steve vai - guitars  mohini dey - bass (1)  jeremy colson - drums (2, 7)  alvin chea - backing vocals (3, 6-8, 10-13)  antonio sol - backing vocals (3, 6-8, 10-13)  fletcher sheridan - backing vocals (3, 6-8, 10-13)  mandy vajar - backing vocals (3, 6-8, 10-13)  nayanna holley - backing vocals (3, 6-8, 10-13)  stu hamm - bass (3-6, 9-13)  chris frazier - drums (3-6, 9-13)  devin townsend - vocals (4)  philip bynoe - bass (7-8)  mike mangini - drums (8)  mike keneally - keyboards (8)  dave weiner - sitar (8)  tommy mars - keyboards* (11-13)  jazz james - vocals (11-13)  greg wurth - "performer" (5)  marpran cassiopeia vai - "performer" (11-13)  charts  references  2016 albums steve vai albums epic records albums hard rock albums by american artists progressive metal albums by american artists
take care utah is a network of nonprofit organizations and individuals across the state of utah focused on helping people access health insurance coverage.  overview take care utah consists of over 100 enrollment specialists across the state. the network is led by the utah health policy project (uhpp), united way of salt lake, 2-1-1, and the association for utah community health (auch). the organization provides assistance with signing up for health insurance through the marketplace (obamacare), medicaid, and the children's health insurance program (chip). all services are provided free of charge. many of the people who utilize take care utah's services are referred by 2-1-1 operators who can locate the nearest enrollment specialist to a person's location.  funding take care utah's organizations receive funding from several sources, including the competitive federal navigator grant which is awarded annually.  annual summit take care utah holds a summit every year in september for all patient navigators and certified application counselors across the state to receive required trainings and set goals.  references  external links   official website  health insurance in the united states 2012 establishments in utah non-profit organizations based in utah
faeries is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of fairies edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the twelfth and last volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by roc/new american library in 1991. it was reprinted in trade paperback by barnes & nobel books in 2000. the book has also been translated into italian.  the book collects eighteen novellas, novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors, with an introduction by asimov.  contents "fairyland" (isaac asimov) "how the fairies came to ireland" (herminie templeton) "the manor of roses" (thomas burnett swann) "the fairy prince" (h. c. bailey) "the ugly unicorn" (jessica amanda salmonson) "the brownie of the black hags" (james hogg) "the dream of akinosuke" (lafcadio hearn) "elfinland" (johann ludwig tieck) "darby o'gill and the good people" (herminie templeton) "no-man's-land" (john buchan) "the prism" (mary e. wilkins) "the kith of the elf-folk" (lord dunsany) "the secret place" (richard m. mckenna) "the king of the elves" (philip k. dick) "flying pan" (robert f. young) "my father, the cat" (henry slesar) "kid stuff" (isaac asimov) "the long night of waiting" (andre norton) "the queen of air and darkness" (poul anderson)  notes  1991 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
cylindrepomus bivitticollis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1947.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1947
divij sharan and ken skupski were the defending champions but chose not to defend their title.  kevin krawietz and albano olivetti won the title after defeating ruben bemelmans and adrian menendez-maceiras 6-3, 7-6(7-4) in the final.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  guzzini challenger - doubles guzzini challenger
laguna water official the laguna aaawater corporation is a public-private partnership. it is a piped-water service provider created through a joint venture of the provincial government of laguna (pgl) and manila water philippine ventures (mwpv), a wholly owned subsidiary of the ayala-led water industry leader, manila water company. mwpv holds 70% of the company's shares while pgl owns the remaining 30%. pgl oversees the company's compliance with the prescribed service levels.  laguna water's operations began as early as 2004; however, it was only in september 2009 that its operations took off en route to becoming laguna's largest water service provider when mwpv acquired the stake of then aaawater corporation.  prior to the takeover, laguna water had been plagued by limited service coverage, high system losses, dilapidated infrastructure, and poor water quality and service; residents had to endure the high cost of drinking water.  in 2014, laguna water started providing used water services to industrial customers as it took over the operations of the sewerage treatment system of the country's premier industrial estate, laguna technopark, inc.  used water services will be made available to the residents of laguna from the recent amendment to the concession agreement authorizing laguna water to provide waste water and related services throughout the province. the septage management project is underway and is expected to be completed by 2017. furthermore, laguna water is coordinating with the toilet board coalition for the development of the portable toilet solution, an initiative aimed at providing laguna's poorest with access to hygiene and sanitation services.  business area  laguna water is a manila water philippine ventures company, a wholly owned subsidiary of the manila water company. it provide services on the east zone of laguna mainly binan, santa rosa, and cabuyao with a total of 60 barangays and a population of about 900,000 as of end of 2014, and eventually to the entire province of laguna. laguna water also provides used water services but are limited to the locators within the laguna technopark inc. complex.  see also   ayala corporation  laguna  manila water company  references  external links   official website of laguna water  official website of the province of laguna  water companies of the philippines companies established in 2004 companies based in santa rosa, laguna
ludwig berwald (8 december 1883 - 20 april 1942) was a german mathematician best known for his contributions to differential geometry, especially finsler geometry. he taught in munich and prague for 32 years, publishing 54 papers, before being deported by the german secret police to the łodz ghetto, where he and his wife hedwig died within a year.  biography ludwig was one of three children of max berwald, an east prussian owner of a famous bookstore, and friedericke fischel. they were "jewish with max coming from east prussia and his wife being a native of prague." in 1900, the family moved to munich, where ludwig matriculated at ludwig maximilian university in 1902. there he studied mathematics under aurel voss, alongside notable mathematicians hugo dingler and fritz noether, and received his phd in 1908 for his thesis entitled uber die krummungseigenschaften der brennflachen eines geradlinigen strahlsystems und der in ihm enthaltenen regelflachen (on the properties of curvature on the internal surfaces of rectilinear systems, and surfaces contained therein). due to sanatorium treatment for pulmonary illness, he was unable to continue his work in munich. through friends, he eventually became a lecturer at the german university (now charles university) back in prague, achieving full professorship in 1924. there, he developed friendships and successful collaborations with fellow mathematicians georg pick, paul funk, and elie cartan, publishing some 54 articles which significantly advanced the field of finsler geometry, pioneering important concepts which still bear his name such as berwald curvature, berwald spray, and the berwald-moor metric function. for extending the concept of riemann curvature to finsler spaces, berwald has been credited as the founder of differential geometry of finsler spaces. on 22 october 1941, the day after submitting his last article, the sickly 57 year old berwald was deported to the łodz ghetto in poland in the third transportation of jews by the german secret police. the berwalds were two of 55 people who lived in 48 marysinska stree5 in a room approximately 20 feet square with no beds. hedwig, eight years older than her husband, died 27 march 1942; ludwig followed 23 days later.  selected works  berwald, l. "untersuchung der krummung allgemeiner metrischer raume auf grund des in ihnen herrschenden parallelismus," mathematische zeitschrift, 25 (1) (1926), pp. 40-
73.   "uber eine charakteristische eigenschaft der allgemeinen raume konstanter krummung mit geradlinigen extremalen," monatshefte fur mathematik und physik, 36 (1929), pp. 315-30.   berwald, l. "on the projective geometry of paths." annals of mathematics second series 37.4 (1936): 879-98. doi:10.2307/1968625  references  german people of czech-jewish descent 20th-century german mathematicians 1883 births 1942 deaths ludwig maximilian university of munich alumni charles university faculty german jews who died in the holocaust
"time is money, efficiency is life" () is a well-known slogan of chinese economic reform. it was initially a quote from yuan geng who made it public in 1981 as the director of shekou, shenzhen. the slogan is often associated with the "shenzhen speed". after deng xiaoping made an inspection tour to shenzhen in 1984, the slogan became widely known in china.  see also   time is money (aphorism)  shenzhen speed  shekou  references  economy of shenzhen political catchphrases
bob and mike bryan were the defending champions, but chose not to participate this year.  andres molteni and horacio zeballos won the title, defeating johan brunstrom and andreas siljestrom in the final, 7-6(7-2), 6-4.  seeds  draw  draw  references  main draw  2016 us open series bbandt atlanta open - doubles 2016 doubles atlanta
albert gray thompson (dec 5, 1928 - may 29, 2016) was an american educator and philanthropist. he spent the bulk of his academic career at marquette university, although he also spent several years teaching and researching in central america. after his retirement in 1988, he and his wife established a small coffee plantation outside antigua guatemala. they used the plantation as an educational tool, a fund-raising project (to provide scholarships and employment for local youth), and a tourist destination.  finca los nietos at his 1988 retirement from marquette university, thompson and his wife traveled to the small town of san lorenzo de cubo, 7 km southwest of antigua guatemala. they reclaimed a patch of mountainous land which had been used as a trash dump, and turned it into a coffee-producing tract. they created small artisanal bags of coffee, selling them to shops in town, shipping them to the states, and giving tours to tourists. they became a cherished part of their small community, sent many guatemalan girls to school, employed the local teens, became part of the community, and were considered family by many of the locals. in addition to his work on the coffee plantation, thompson painted, explored silversmithing, and designed the house that they had built on the plantation. he became a self-taught expert on the local fauna, and cultivated several species of orchids.  by 2003 their small plantation boasted 2000 coffee trees, with an annual production of 400 lb (180 kg) of red coffee beans. they also purchased neighbors' crops, and provided a roasted product for market. they sought ways to "localize" their product, bagging their coffee with local weavings, making and affixing small hand-made dolls on the bag cincture, and hiring a woman to hand-dip coffee beans (as well as peanuts and pretzels) in chocolate.  in addition to growing and processing coffee, the finca became a small cultural center. beginning in 1996, visitors were invited to enjoy dr. thompson's "coffee class". they learned of soil composition, harvesting, processing and roasting coffee; observed the art of orchid growing; and toured gardens with over 150 different flowers, bushes and trees. by 2003, some 4000 visitors had been logged at the center.  in 2008 the project was sold to a cuban-american family, raul and christina keilt. the new owners built on the foundation provided by the two decades of effort from the thompsons, continuing the plantation's reputation as a
combination resort/tourist-education site.  scholarships in nearby san antonio aguas calientes is the hermano pedro catholic school (k-9th grades). the thompsons spearheaded a scholarship fund for students, that was used to support 8 girls each year in the school. they also worked with donors from the states to construct a carpentry shop classroom at the school.  published works detours: from classrooms to a guatemalan coffee farm (2003)  personal thompson married carolyn. they had five children.  references   finca los nietos (facebook)  1928 births 2016 deaths american academics coffee production marquette university faculty american expatriates in guatemala
khalij (, the gulf) or khalij-e fars ( persian gulf), is a studio album by iranian singer, ebi, released in 1990 on the label of taraneh records.  track listing  references  1990 albums ebi albums
keitha rachelle adams (born february 13, 1967) is an american college basketball coach who is currently the head women's basketball coach at wichita state.   prior to the 2006-07 season, adams was known as keitha green.  coaching career adams began her coaching career in 1987 as a girls' basketball assistant coach at belle plaine high school in belle plaine, kansas while studying at southwestern college, from which she would ultimately graduate in 1989. after graduating from southwestern, adams joined winfield high school in winfield, kansas and coached softball, volleyball, and track before ultimately settling on basketball full-time in 1991.  in 1994, adams became a women's basketball  assistant coach at independence community college; she was also a men's and women's tennis coach in the 1994-95 season. independence promoted adams to head coach in 1996. in five seasons as head coach, adams had a cumulative 127-37 record and two kansas jayhawk community college conference titles in 2000 and 2001.  utep (2001-2017) the university of texas at el paso (utep) hired adams as head women's basketball coach on april 20, 2001. adams coached at utep for 16 seasons and accumulated a 284-209 record, three conference usa regular season titles (2008, 2012, 2016), one c-usa tournament title (2012), two ncaa tournament appearances (2008 and 2012), and two wnit appearances (2014 and 2016)-the only such titles and postseason bids in program history.  following a 24-7 season in 2013-14 and appearance in the 2014 wnit, utep signed adams to a six-year contract extension.  in her final season as head coach, utep went 8-23 season in 2016-17.   at utep, adams created a mentorship program that helped ensure a high graduation rate among her players. adams is credited with building a successful women's basketball program that also "encourages interaction between players and fans." she was inducted into the el paso women's hall of fame in 2010. in 2016, she was recognized as the conference usa coach of the year.  wichita state (2017-present) adams resigned from utep to become head coach at wichita state on march 29, 2017.  head coaching record the following table shows adams' head coaching record at the ncaa division i level. source:  references  external links   wichita state biography  utep biography  1967 births living people basketball coaches from kansas basketball players from kansas high school basketball coaches in kansas junior college women's basketball coaches in the united
states junior college women's basketball players in the united states people from sumner county, kansas southwestern college (kansas) alumni university of texas at el paso people wichita state shockers women's basketball coaches
cossi houegban (born 11 july 1964) is a beninese former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1964 births living people beninese male cyclists olympic cyclists of benin cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
the result in favour of brexit of the 2016 united kingdom european union membership referendum is one of the most significant political events for britain during the 21st century. the debate provoked major consideration to an array of topics, argued up-to, and beyond, the referendum on 23 june 2016. factors including sovereignty, immigration, the economy and anti-establishment politics, amongst various other influences. the result of the non-legally binding referendum was that 51.8% of the votes were in favour of leaving the european union. the formal withdrawal from the eu took place at 23:00 on 30 january 2020, almost three years after theresa may triggered article 50 of the lisbon treaty on 29 march 2017. this page provides an overarching analysis of the different arguments which were presented by both the leave and remain campaigns.  sovereignty  on the day of the referendum lord ashcroft's polling team questioned 12,369 people who had completed voting. this poll produced data that showed that 'nearly half (49%) of leave voters said the biggest single reason for wanting to leave the european union was "the principle that decisions about the uk should be taken in the uk". ("in the uk." meaning: "by the uk." logically implying: "on behalf of 66 million uk citizens not 508 million eu residents.") the sense that eu membership took decision making further away from 'the people' in favour of domination by regulatory bodies - in particular the european commission, seen as the supposed key decision-taking body, is said to have been a strong motivating factor for leave voters wanting to end or reverse the process of eu influence in the uk. immediately prior to the vote, ipsos mori data showed that the european union was the third most highly ranked problem by britons who were asked to name the most important issues facing the country, with 32% of respondents naming it as an issue.  two years later, in december 2018, pollsters from survation asked 1,030 people whether they approved or disapproved with the brexit deal negotiated by eu leaders and the british government in relation to sovereignty. 35% of participants approved while 24% of participants didn't, leaving 41% either neutral or didn't know. this suggests that the majority of people either didn't have an opinion on the issue, or could be fed up with the brexit process dragging on.  however, pollsters from 'uk in a changing europe', which conducts independent and authoritative uk-eu relations, conducted a poll in july 2018 which surveyed over 7,000 participants showing the differences between
conservative and labour's remain and leave forces within the party. leave voters, for the most part, regarded control of british laws and regulations as the most important factor in the next 5 years, with the ability to strike trade deals independently as the second most important factor. leave voters would prioritise control and trade over immigration by 67% to 33%, and 59% to 41% respectively. they also preferred control and trade over strong economic growth by 69% to 31% and 61% to 39% respectively. yet in the same poll, remain voters strongly favoured economic growth over immigration, control and trade deals by margins of 77% vs 23%, 79% vs 21% as well as 84% vs 16% respectively. such large margins here comparatively to leave voters slimmer favour of control and trade, and in relation to how close the referendum result was, shows that actually there is no overall majority for a hard brexit and that economic growth is the most important to all voters.  immigration lord ashcroft's election day poll of 12,369 voters also discovered that 'one third (33%) [of leave voters] said the main reason was that leaving "offered the best chance for the uk to regain control over immigration and its own borders..  in 2015, net immigration to the uk from other eu countries was approximately 172,000, compared to 191,000 from non-eu countries. the population of the eu was around 500 million at the time of the referendum  while the population of the world was 7.4 billion.  based on these figures, a mere 6.7% of the world's population accounted for 47% of immigration to the uk (or 49% according to a bbc report from 2016).  commentators have pointed out that this is unfair on non-eu immigrants, since it caused the uk visa and immigration service to bring in restrictions on non-eu immigration in order to keep immigration to a manageable level.  immediately prior to the referendum, data from the university of oxford's the migration observatory stated, "between june 2015 and june 2016, immigration was consistently named as the most salient issue facing the country, peaking at 56% in september 2015"  in the decade before the brexit referendum there was a significant increase in migration from eu countries, as outlined by the migration observatory: 'inflows of eu nationals migrating to the uk stood at 268,000 in 2014, up from 201,000 in 2013. eu inflows were mainly flat for the 1991-2003 period, averaging close to 61,000 per year.'  according
to the economist, areas that saw increases of over 200% in foreign-born population between 2001 and 2014 saw a majority of voters back leave in 94% of cases. the economist concluded 'high numbers of migrants don't bother britons; high rates of change do.' consistent with that notion, research suggests that areas that saw significant influx of migration from eastern europe following the accession of 12 mainly eastern european countries to the european union in 2004 saw significant growth in support for ukip and more likely to vote to leave the european union. academic research investigating differences in brexit vote among local authorities concluded that the brexit vote was bigger in areas that had seen a large rise in the proportion of immigrants between 2004 and 2011.  goodwin and milazzo said that "in areas where there were previously few migrants, increases in immigration will have a more noticeable effect - and will be more likely to influence political behaviour" whereas ethnically diverse areas will perceive additional immigration as having little effect. they go on to explain that the non-british population of boston in lincolnshire became 16 times larger between 2005 and 2015, rising from 1,000 to 16,000. boston also had the highest vote in favour of 'leave' in the uk, at just over 75% in favour of leaving the eu, which they believe is due to the effects of immigration seeming sudden and intense. they also argue that their data suggests that if boston had experienced the british average level of demographic change then the vote in favour of 'leave' would have been reduced by nearly 15% and they even suggest that areas such as west lancashire may have had a majority for 'remain' if residents had experienced the average rate of demographic change.  furthermore, immigration has long been a contentious issue in britain, with scepticism over the inherent value of immigration going back to well before the uk joined even the eec in 1973 (which would later be incorporated into the eu in 1993). britain had faced a surge in immigration in the post war period due to the influx of people arriving from former british colonies (immigration rules had been relaxed as a way of increasing the labour supply after the war). by the mid to late 1960s, there was concern from some people that the new immigrant population were arriving in excessively large numbers and were not integrating into british society sufficiently well. this concern is most widely recognised in former british mp enoch powell's famous rivers of blood speech made in 1968, in which he warns of the dangers of mass immigration. powell's subsequent surge in popularity is often seen as a contributing factor in the conservative
party's surprise victory in the 1970 general election. powell was influential on prominent brexiteer nigel farage, who lists the politician as one of his political heroes. although he specifically stated that it was not powell's rivers of blood speech that inspired him. the ukip leader told the press association: "you can agree or disagree with much of the powell doctrine, but his belief in the state having less of a say over our lives, in us not having our laws made in brussels and having sensible controls over our borders - whilst his language may seem out-of-date now, the principles remain good and true."  demographic and cultural factors  eu integration  from the early days many in politics in the uk have been unsettled and skeptical of how integrated the uk should be in the european project and the effect it would have on uk sovereignty. according to macshane author of 'brexit: how britain will leave europe': "no one could decide if britain should join a limited europe, at best a common market but not a union or accept the full implication of sharing sovereignty. thus, since 1945, there has never been a moment when leaders of british politics or the formers of public opinion have been calm and settled on europe."  at a macro-level avoiding demographics, the united kingdom was widely considered to be more detached from european union than other countries for a number of reasons. this manifested in terms of geography as an island country with few shared land borders, numerous opt-outs (such as currency and schengen), historical links to the anglosphere and commonwealth from which diaspora had settled in the uk. for these reasons, the uk would always be an "awkward partner" in the european union and which filtered into the mentality of voters.  academics james dennison and noah carl argue that "the most important phenomenon to be explained vis-a-vis the referendum result in our view is that a sizeable eurosceptic faction has remained extant in britain over the last four decades". using data from the eurobarometer survey they showed that fewer britons considered themselves european than any other eu nationality. furthermore, they show that british trading patterns, capital flows and emigration patterns were the least europeanised of any eu member state.  john curtice says that if voters "felt that membership of the eu undermined britain's distinctive identity were more likely to vote for leave" and goes on to report that the same was true for voters "with a weak sense of european identity". such research implies that how attached voters felt to either britain
or to the eu influenced their decision, voting in favour of whichever identity they felt more strongly attached to.  furthermore, in terms of integration, britain had developed a reputation of being "an awkward partner" in europe. britain's reluctance to integrate itself with europe was reaffirmed by the position it was in following the conclusion of the second world war. its distinct sense of 'otherness' was reinforced by the fact that it was one of the only european states not to be occupied during the war. its empire, while exhausted, remained intact, and senior civil servants still regarded britain as a major global power. a foreign office assessment following the war's end noted that "great britain must be regarded as world power of the second rank and not merely as a unit in a federated europe".  once britain joined the eec, this reluctance towards integration was seen further. the uk had the most opt-outs of any member state, and along with ireland was the only member to acquire an opt-out of the schengen area agreement. it has notable opt-outs from the european monetary union, and individual pieces of european legislation regarding justice and home affairs. it has been suggested that britain's reservations about european integration, as well as its unique historical position within europe and stance of remaining less integrated than other eu states, laid the groundwork for the potential that britain would decide to exit the bloc.  taylor posits the idea of britain being enmeshed in a 'post-imperial crisis'. taylor writes britain is defined by being at the centre of relations, whether from the special relationship or in the commonwealth. therefore, belonging to a collection of member states on equal footing does not fit into the ideal of british 'exceptionalism'. he suggests that britain still viewed the eu from an 'imperial lens' as rivals; begetting the historically negative british opinion of the eu.  age of voters it has been argued that the result was caused by differential voting patterns among younger and older people. according to opinium, 64% of eligible people aged 18-24 voted, whereas 90% of eligible individuals over 65 voted.  it is argued that older voters were more likely to vote 'leave' due to having experienced life in the uk prior to 1973, when the uk joined the european economic community which later became the eu, and this memory as well as any potential nostalgia may have influenced their decision. it is also argued that national identity is another reason older people voted leave. additionally, it is argued that some older people view immigration as a threat
to national identity and culture, which is speculated to be why older people were more in favour of leave than remain. furthermore, polls by ipsos-mori, yougov and lord ashcroft all assert that 70-75% of under 25s voted 'remain'. therefore, it has been argued that a higher turnout of older people and a lower turnout of younger people affected the overall result of the referendum as the older generation was more in favour of 'leave' than the 'remain' favouring younger voters. additionally according to yougov, only 54% of 25-49 year olds voted 'remain', whilst 60% of 50-64 year olds and 64% of over 65s voted 'leave' meaning that the support for 'remain' was not as strong outside the youngest demographic. also, yougov found that around 87% of under-25s in 2018 would now vote to stay in the eu.  harald wilkoszewski argues that even if the youth vote (18-24) had achieved a 100% turnout, this would not have been enough to allow for a 'remain' victory, as while the majority of youth voters would vote for 'remain', the minority of youth voters that would vote for 'leave' would still be enough to secure a 'leave' victory. even if the voting age was lowered to 16 and there was a 100% turnout amongst the youth vote, 'leave' would still win by a slim margin. if all age groups had a 100% turnout and the voting age was lowered to 16, 'leave' would again still win.  education level multiple sources have found a correlation between having a higher level of education and voting 'remain', as well as a correlation between having  lower educational level and voting 'leave'. yougov found that, among those who voted in the referendum, 68% of voters with a university degree voted 'remain', whereas 70% of voters educated only to gcse level or lower voted 'leave'. similarly, curtice reports that "university graduates voted by around three to one in favour of remain, whereas nearly four in five of those without any educational qualifications voted to leave".  in fact according to a study carried out by the peer-reviewed journal, 'world development', they estimate that an increase of about 3% of british adults accessing higher education in england and wales could have reversed the referendum result.  it is proposed that those with higher education and higher occupational skills are more likely to value the economic benefits of
globalisation, the single market and european membership, and so would be more inclined to vote 'remain'. typically, educated urban professionals tend to have more liberal views on issues such as immigration that were highly debated during the referendum.  additionally, studies have shown that those with lower educational qualifications are more likely to be socially conservative and feel that european membership brings about constant and dramatic change to the uk, which would be an incentive to vote 'leave'.  social attitudes academic eric kaufmann notes the relatively strong positive correlation between a voter's support for the death penalty and their choice to vote 'leave'. he says that this highlights a social division that he calls 'order versus openness'. he further argues that 'the order-openness divide is emerging as the key political cleavage, overshadowing the left-right economic dimension'.  as it states in the academic article: 'confounding and collinearity in regression analysis: a cautionary tale and an alternative procedure, illustrated by studies of british voting behaviour', "the united kingdom independence party's (ukip) success at recent british elections- notably for the european parliament in 2014 and in the 2015 general election-is generally linked to the attractiveness of its right-wing populist appeal to those who have gained least from globalisation over recent decades in particular among: older people (especially males); those with few, if any, formal educational qualifications; and those living in areas with high levels of economic and social deprivation.  this also links with educational factors, those who are educated to a lower level, generally, feel left behind by globalisation and 'favour a 'drawbridge up' policy of less european integration, closed borders and fewer migrants, whereas the latter group are in favour of greater openness and international cooperation.'  such social attitudes are argued to have stemmed from individuals with exclusive identities, whether british, english, welsh or scottish, tended to be more eurosceptic than individuals with 'nested identities 'such as a 'nested' english, british, european identity.  it is argued that data from the british election study suggests that support for the death penalty is an example of how valuing 'order' over 'openness' could have affected voting behaviour in the referendum. those who valued 'order' were more likely to support the death penalty and vote 'leave' than those who were 'pro-remain' and against the death penalty, which are stances considered to value 'openness' more.  left behind matthew goodwin and rob ford coined the term 'the left
behind' to refer to 'older, white, socially conservative voters in more economically marginal neighbourhoods'. analysing data the day after the referendum, ford concluded that 'such voters had turned against a political class they saw as dominated by socially liberal university graduates with values fundamentally opposed to theirs, on identity, europe - and particularly immigration.' this was described as "if you've got money, you vote in... if you haven't got money, you vote out". in looser terms, these groups' wider dissatisfaction with the major political parties also had a significant impact on the vote - with a particular focus placed on labour's decline in support in the working class heartlands where it saw a significant number of votes lost to ukip and the conservatives in 2015. this was exemplified in 2019 when labour lost several more seats to the conservatives in their traditional heartlands, including seats such as burnley who hadn't had a tory mp for more than a decade.  many other academics have also suggested the link between voting 'leave' and a rejection of neoliberalism and globalisation and the sense of economic insecurity that some members of society have felt as a result of these economic processes. bateman suggests that today's globalised world has contributed to the feeling of fast-paced changes in society and the economy, leading to the sense of being 'left behind', which she argues motivated some voters to vote 'leave'. in a similar manner to the arguments of goodwin, ford and bateman it has also been suggested that both economically and socially 'left behind' groups "are united by a general sense of insecurity, pessimism and marginalisation", increasingly feeling as though liberalised society as well as the british and european establishments do not represent their interests or share their concerns.  the left-behind hypothesis is furthered using data on the eu referendum result across electoral wards level as well as across local authorities, suggesting that especially areas with high degrees of social deprivation and low educational attainment strongly voted in favour of leaving the eu.  since the result of the 2016 referendum, it is argued that euroscepticism has only increased, treating the notion as a consequence of the 'left behind' as opposed to a cause.  furthermore, the brexit referendum is seen to have been a reaction against the austerity measures and the fact that people are living in poverty despite being in employment. more specifically, brexit has also managed to further divide between those living in london and other cities that are in a strong economic position and those who live in small towns or the countryside where most votes to leave the eu were
recorded. similarly, support for ukip was propped up because of austerity, and the eu referendum could have resulted in a remain victory if it wasn't for the austerity programme that was implemented. calculations suggest leave support could well have been 6 percentage points lower. consequently, the overall picture suggests that those affected by reforms in welfare, showed greater support for ukip, and therefore voted leave in 2016.  many of the same areas that voted for brexit would later go on to vote for the conservative party in the 2019 general election showing with most conservative voters saying they chose that party due to their referendum position. this was particularly true in labour to conservative switchers in 2019.  nevertheless, what is most striking economically, is that most people thought that brexit would be bad for the economy and their own finances. however, they thought it would ensure lower immigration levels and the ability to claim back national sovereignty, even though most were not wary of the repercussions or did not think it would make any difference at all.  identity and change the widening of the north-south divide and the increased concentration of wealth held by (usually london-based) financial and educated elites, is also thought to have played a role in the referendum outcome. de-industrialisation in northern england left many feeling economically left behind and forgotten about compared to the south east in particular, a feeling intensified by the globalisation associated with eu membership. it is believed that this  feeling of change happening elsewhere in the country whilst there was economic stagnation in the north was an incentive for many to vote 'leave' and indeed much of northern england voted strongly in favour of brexit. a more nuanced analysis shows that a north-south division is too simplistic, as many great northern cities (liverpool, manchester, leeds, newcastle, york) voted 'remain' whereas many small towns and rural areas in the south voted 'leave'.  feeling as though the uk has been rapidly changing and feeling negatively towards that change is considered to have been a reason that many voters backed 'leave'. goodwin and milazzo report that identity and preventing a loss of national identity as a result of national change, were highly important to many leave voters. furthermore, they found that among those who felt that during the preceding ten years britain had gotten 'a lot worse' the average leave vote was 73%, compared to 40% among those who felt the country had gotten 'a lot better'.  additionally, it is thought that the rise in liberal social movements and an increase in social change played a role in leading some
voters to vote 'leave' as a rejection of such change. polls conducted by lord ashcroft showed that "of those who think that feminism, the internet and the green movement are bad for us were, respectively, 22%, 6% and 26% of those polled, and of those groups, 74%, 71% and 78% respectively were leave voters".  ward-level polling data revealed that significant pockets of asian british voted leave.  this was seen in luton (56.5% leave), hillingdon (56.4% leave), slough (54.3% leave) and bradford (54.2% leave) (these jurisdictions had south asian populations of 25% or greater), and boroughs in london with stronger south asian concentrations voted leave in greater numbers than in predominantly whiter neighbouring boroughs.  it was suggested that many british south asian voters did not feel european, were attracted to the pro-commonwealth messaging of the leave campaign, and considered that ending the "freedom of movement" provisions provided by brexit was one way to level out the perceived unfairness that denied south asians the same entry and work rights as europeans.  english national identity  the world economic forum 2016 acknowledged in its global risks report that "the brexit and president-elect trump victories featured (...) appeals to sovereignty rooted in national identity and pride" and that it would "be challenging to find political narratives and policies that can repair decades-long cultural fault-lines".  it has been argued that english nationalism played a key role in shaping the result of the referendum. as the largest constituent country within the united kingdom, england provided the largest share of 'leave' voters, 15,188,406 to 'remain's' 13,266,996, and saw the largest margin of victory for 'leave' at 53.4% to 46.6% slightly larger than the 52.5% to 47.5% leave result produced by wales. in scotland and northern ireland, on the other hand, a majority of voters supported 'remain' by 62.0% to 38.0% and 55.8% to 44.2% respectively. some academics have argued that "england's choice for brexit was driven disproportionately by those prioritising the english national identity", and that english nationalism is a "cluster point" for other attitudes and concerns, such as "hostility to european integration, the sense of absence of political voice, concern about immigration, and support for parties of the right". polling conducted in the immediate aftermath of the referendum suggested that people
in england who put more emphasis on the idea of being english as opposed to the idea of being british as a part of their identity were more likely to vote leave.  however, a binomial logit analysis was conducted to determine the factors of voting to leave the eu and it was determined that national identity was not directly involved with the decision to vote for leave or remain. although, people who identified as scottish were less likely to vote leave than people who identified as british.  locational identity  although the united kingdom as a whole voted to leave the eu on a narrow majority of only 4%, what was most influential was the staggering leave support from england that had a 7-point majority lead over the remain support. although not the most influential factor, the support for the leave campaign came most predominantly from england compared to other regions of the uk such as scotland that voted (62.0%-38.0%) in favour of remaining. this phenomenon has been argued by experts such as henderson a, jeffery c, wincott d, wyn jones r, to be driven heavily by national identity in england that makes up 84% of the uk population and therefore holds the most sway over referendums that support the populous vote.  some brexit supporters found the west lothian question to be a heavy driver for the leave vote as ongoing disputes between the uk and scotland over issues arguable in both the westminster and scottish parliament became a leading cause of weakened national identity and a challenge to parliamentary sovereignty.  this factor was argued several times by tom standage to be a driver for politicians in england to push for the leave campaign over nationalist beliefs that also drove the scottish independence campaign in 2014. this argument of national identity was central to the entire campaign for scottish independence. this was crucial in shaping the debate until the referendum was called, culminating on the failed 18 september 2014, ballot. this same scenario was reflected through the entire uk against the european union with calls for greater sovereignty and national devolvement from the union as campaigners argued the restrictions imposed by the union were a more significant deficit to the country over the benefits of staying.  economy  some brexit supporters viewed the eu as an economic opportunity for britain. this contradicted the remain campaign's warnings of a potential 'economic black hole'. those who saw economic opportunity tended to be sympathetic towards free market and free trade ideas, viewing the regulatory nature of the eu as imposing on personal market freedom. proponents of free trade post-brexit hoped to strike trade deals with nations outside of the eu. for instance, nigel farage argued
that brexit needed to happen in order for britain to be free to make trade deals with countries such as the united states. he also stated that this negotiation is key for britain as "trump is the best ally in the world" and the negotiation of this trade deal would only take 48 hours.  budget negotiations in 2013 led to both labour party and conservative eurosceptics voting against the government in favour of passing an amendment calling for a real term cut in eu spending.  in addition to this, it was argued that the uk being away from eu regulations would boost britain as a market, because policies such as the common fisheries policy would be no longer applicable to the uk. politicians such as boris johnson and jacob rees-mogg were associated with this point of view.  additionally, the 2008 financial crash and the eurozone crisis of late 2009 may have encouraged others to want to move the uk's economy further away from the eu's increasingly integrated economy as a means of protecting it.  according to a 2019 study in the american economic review, austerity reforms introduced in 2010 may have contributed to a leave victory in the brexit referendum by raising political dissatisfaction. the combination of immigration and austerity may have also increased sympathy towards the leave campaign because due to the cuts in public services and welfare, and the increase in population immigration had brought, there was a perceived fear public services such as the nhs would collapse due to this increase in pressures immigration brought.  many academics have since pointed to a public survey identified how "people's subjective judgments of their surrounding economic conditions were more important predictors of attitudes towards the eu" compared to "how the economy was actually performing [as a whole]". when we consider this relative to geographical area, we see a clear correlation between localised economically poorer areas - such as parts of the midlands and the north-west of england - and voting 'leave'  anti-establishment populism the idea of voting in favour of brexit was seen by many as a way to protest against the establishment and the elite who were seen to have ignored "the will of the people" for too long. the result of the referendum was branded as such by nigel farage, who claimed it to be a victory against "big merchant banks" and "big politics". many voters saw the referendum itself as an example of power being given back to the citizens to make decisions and not the elites, with many voters harbouring discontent for these elites and the power they hold. for some voters, voting 'leave' defied the establishment that was seen to be pro-
remain. the populist nature of the referendum was an incentive for many to take the opportunity they felt they had to have their voices heard over those of the elite and vote 'leave'.  it has been argued that anti-politics played a part in the referendum. marsh argues that 'the distrust of the political elite' is an important feature of anti-politics. furthermore, marsh relates this to populism, stating that the 'distrust in the political elite was particularly evident in the campaign'. according to jennings and lodge, david cameron made arguably a futile attempt to reduce the impact that anti-politics was having on british politics by calling the referendum, which ultimately did not succeed. iaknis et al. conduct a survey which shows how the vote to leave the european union was influenced by nativism and anti-establishmentarianism. this survey gives an indication as to how anti-politics influenced the brexit vote. baldini et al. discuss how during the 2015 and 2017 general elections, voters were more likely to change their vote, which was then linked to the rise of anti-politics.  role and influence of politicians  decision to call referendum the referendum was first announced by then-prime minister david cameron on 23 january 2013. cameron announced that he would attempt to re-negotiate britain's terms with the eu before holding an in-out referendum no later than two years after the next general election - should he still be prime minister. this was seen as a move to appease eurosceptics within his own party as well as an attempt to regain voters who had been switching allegiance to ukip since the previous election. upon the conservatives surprise majority victory in the 2015 general election, cameron upheld his pledge and announced the date for the referendum to be 23 june 2016.  effect on voters boris johnson and cabinet minister michael gove becoming leading figures in the leave campaign is a factor considered to have given the pro-brexit side a wider appeal and greater credibility. johnson is believed to have been heavily influential during the campaign, with polling results revealing that the public trusted the words of boris johnson on brexit more than any other politician, including david cameron.  in regard to the labour party, there was some perceived ambiguity as to the party's stance with only 52% of voters believing labour mps were in favour of remain, according to polling. in actuality it is thought that as many as 96% of labour mps backed remain. party leader jeremy corbyn is known to have been a longtime eurosceptic, having voted against staying
in the common market. furthermore, the chair of the official leave campaign was labour mp gisela stuart. it is thought that the perceived lack of clear direction from the party may have played a role in some labour voters backing 'leave' despite most of its mps backing 'remain'.  establishment euroscepticism despite many perceiving the establishment as being pro-remain, the british establishment has historically contained a significant eurosceptic fraction that has cut across both the labour and conservative parties. it is thought that the existence of such euroscepticism within britain's elite has helped ensure that eurosceptic thoughts, voices, opinions and sometimes policies have had somewhat of a platform, consequently influencing public opinion. during the 2016 eu referendum campaign, 45% of conservative mps were in favour of leaving the european union - a considerable amount which held significant influence over public opinion. historical examples of euroscepticism within the labour party include the 1975 referendum on european membership, the position and influence of tony benn and hugh gaitskell's famous 1962 speech in which he said joining the eec would be "the end of a thousand years of history".  presentational factors during the campaign  information interpretation  michael dougan, professor of european law at the university of liverpool, in a viral video of one of his lectures prior to the referendum, described the leave campaign as peddling "dishonesty on an industrial scale".  perhaps the most commonly criticised claim by the leave campaign was that voting to leave the eu would allow for increased spending on the nhs of £350m a week. vote leave claimed that the uk sends £350 million to the eu every week. the office for national statistics, quoting analysis from the european commission, states the uk's actual net average annual contribution to the eu budget, taken from a five-year average from 2014 to 2018, when its annual rebate and public and private sector receipts are excluded, is £7.7 bn. divided by 52, this equates to £150 million per week.  sir john major claimed that vote leave had deliberately misled voters by using the gross contribution to the eu before the automatically deducted uk rebate. the gross contribution is the amount the uk would pay under the standard formula before any discounts and rebates. at the time of the brexit vote, the uk received a 40% discount from the gross contribution which was negotiated by margaret thatcher in the 1980s (worth about £144 million) plus various agricultural, economic development and scientific research 'rebates' (worth approximately a further £96
million).  elements of the leave campaign have been identified as exemplifying "post-truth politics", in which debate is framed largely by appeals to emotion rather than the details of policy or objective factual analysis.  this potentially deliberate attempt to mislead the public finds relevance with hobolt's theory, that campaigns prey on voters' insecurities. individuals with low education levels will be less likely to be able to separate factual and false information, thus forming the existential link between educational and campaigning factors. this makes voting behaviour hard to analyse because it uses the incorrect assumption that all citizens vote rationally and have the ability to critique policy.  the remain campaign was also urged by andrew tyrie, chair of the commons treasury select committee, to remove the 'intellectually dishonest' claim that eu membership was worth £3,000.  branding and wording choices it has been argued that the 'leave' brand was stronger and more effective than the 'remain' brand. according to mike hind, a marketing professional, "the britain stronger in europe brand was stillborn. on the basis of preparation, presentation and messaging, it deserved the kicking it got." additionally behavioural practitioner warren hatter argues that 'leave' as a word places a lower cognitive load on observers than 'remain a member of'.  prospect theory economics writer chris dillow has argued that, among other factors, prospect theory may explain the willingness of many voters to take a path that he sees as the more risky of two (change vs status quo). in his words prospect theory 'tells us that people who feel they've lost want to gamble to break even. this is why they back longshots on the last race of the day or why they hold onto badly performing stocks. people who had lost out from globalization, or felt discomforted by immigration, voted leave because they felt they had little to lose from doing so.'  the role of vote leave dominic cummings, campaign director of vote leave wrote in the spectator in january 2017 on "how the brexit referendum was won".  he wrote: "leave won because 1) three big forces [the immigration crisis, the 2008 financial crisis and the euro crisis] created conditions in which the contest was competitive, and 2) vote leave exploited the situation imperfectly but effectively, and 3) cameron/osborne made big mistakes. if just one of these had been different, it is very likely in would have won."  "pundits and mps kept saying 'why isn't leave arguing about the economy and living standards'. they
did not realise that for millions of people, £350m/nhs was about the economy and living standards - that's why it was so effective. it was clearly the most effective argument not only with the crucial swing fifth but with almost every demographic. even with ukip voters it was level-pegging with immigration. would we have won without immigration? no. would we have won without £350m/nhs? all our research and the close result strongly suggests no."  "if boris, gove, and gisela had not supported us and picked up the baseball bat marked 'turkey/nhs/£350 million' with five weeks to go, then 650,000 votes might have been lost."  the regional economic inequalities are critical to explain the cultural grievances that influenced a 'leave' vote. people who live in districts that have suffered from long periods of economic decline have grown to adopt anti-immigrant and eurosceptic views, which leads to support for brexit.  dominic cummings also has discussed how the leave campaign that he spearheaded, was able to mobilise as well as appeal to two vast groups of the electorate; the traditional labour industrial voter and the more middle class older conservative-leaning voter. cummings stated that the campaign that focused on turkey/nhs mainly appealed to labour voters living in the north of england. the attention of these issues was at the top of the policies that these voters feared (immigration and the lack of resources). the ability to mobilise these voters appeared to pave the way for a leave-win in the north.  the ability and decision making of the leave campaign to choose to hand-pick policies in certain areas of the country resulted in the campaign having vast support in the two ends of the country. this was different from that of remain who campaigned around solely on the economic argument across the country. this worked well with the southern voters, yet the northern voters who had seen the brunt of de-industrialisation and austerity did not agree with the premise that the european union was the height of economic prosperity.  shortcomings of the remain campaign whilst the leave side may have made good tactical decisions during the campaign, part of its success came from the remain campaign failing to provide convincing enough counter arguments or arguments of their own. a lot of the remain's campaign was built around spreading the notion that brexit would weaken britain, yet curtice notes that the campaign offered little explanation as to "how the uk economy might be strengthened further by continued eu membership". he goes on to argue that the leave
campaign were offering such explanations, exemplified by the claim that £350 million a week could be spent on the nhs, regardless of whether or not this was a valid claim.  one analysis of the remain campaign has concluded that the campaign did little to counter vote leave's arguments surrounding immigration, an area that was considered one of leave's biggest pulling factors in attracting voters. furthermore, the official leaflet supplied by the government to make the case for remaining in the eu failed to address the issue of sovereignty, which was another area that vote leave was gaining a lot of support. in addition, the remain campaign focused very heavily on the 'risk' posed by brexit, but analysis in the time since shows this may have been a mistake. analysis carried out by harold d. clarke, matthew godwin and paul whiteley, appears to show that those who had an unfavourable view of immigration and felt that too much decision making had been taken away from the british government, were much more likely to minimise the risk of brexit, partially because they perceived they had little to lose.  policy decisions  decision not to impose tougher migration restrictions it has been claimed that the role of migration as a key factor in driving voting behaviour at the referendum originates from the relatively high levels of net migration into the uk in the last decade. in particular it is claimed that the decision not to impose restrictions on eu migrants after the addition of the 'a8' (eastern european) countries to the eu in 2004 (at a time when other european countries did impose such restrictions) contributed to a spike in migration levels that underpins contemporary voter attitudes.  european migrant crisis  u.s. president donald trump stated that german chancellor angela merkel's decision to open her country's borders for more than a million refugees and illegal immigrants was a "catastrophic mistake" and "the final straw that broke the camel's back", allowing the leave campaign to win.  furthermore, nigel farage and long-term eurosceptic party ukip used images from the refugee crisis during their campaign to increase the anxiety about immigration that the crisis caused, prompting criticism from some "leave" and "remain" supporters. leading leave campaigner michael gove said that it was "the wrong thing to do", whilst then-chancellor george osborne of the remain side stated that the poster "had echoes of literature used in the 1930s" in germany.  role of the media  at the heart of the political debates seen across the british media in the run up to june 2016, we saw two specific subjects
dominate; the economy and immigration. as highlighted in a report by the centre for the study of media, communication and power, "the economy was the most-covered political issue during the campaign...appearing in 48% of all "4,383 articles [referring] to immigration during the campaign"[explicitly brexit related] articles the guardian journalist jane martinson noted that many of the uk's biggest selling newspapers, the sun and the daily mail in particular, but also including the daily telegraph and daily express, have been eurosceptic for many years. the implication of this as supported by academic author of 'media definitely do matter: brexit, immigration, climate change and beyond', 'neil t. gavin', is that the political stance of the print media could have shaped the public's opinion before the referendum.  the guardian accused the bbc of not supporting remain strongly enough, purporting so-called false balance which helped provide visibility to the leave campaign. this was despite the bbc being strongly criticized by leave voters for its perceived remain bias.  leading up to and during the eu referendum campaign, daily mail, the daily telegraph, daily express and the sun'' were all pro-leave. curtice argues that as these were "more popular" newspapers, their support not only provided credibility to the leave campaign but also meant that there would be "sympathetic coverage" for its pro-brexit arguments.  research carried out by loughborough university found that the daily express was the most in favour of leave while the financial times was most pro-remain. moreover, it was discovered that the guardian provided the most balanced coverage of the referendum while the daily express was the least neutral. however, while there was an even split of support for leave and remain in the newspapers analysed when circulation numbers and the strength of their endorsements were factored in, leave had an 82% advantage to remains 18%. the newspaper bias towards pro-brexit reporting is further evidenced by levy, aslan and bironzo  whereby a sample of 1558 articles, from nine national newspapers, found that 41% were in favour of leaving and only 27% in favour of remaining.  seaton explains that long-term anti-eu reporting, demonisation of foreign nationals and the working class in mainstream media could have made the public more susceptible to pro-brexit arguments, as well as having "shaped the debate". seaton also comments on the effect of social media on the referendum, which played a much more prominent role in the campaign and the vote than in
previous votes in the uk. seaton argues that social media was highly influential in shaping voters' opinions as social media enables users to "get more of what you like" whilst being able to "avoid exposure to what you disagree with" on a platform that is "driven by popularity".  another element of media which has yet to be mentioned is the role of social media which arguably was the most effective platform. media democracy is the way journalists were more concerned by the entertainment factor of news content, rather than being informative. some accused printed media of being too "politically correct", whereas the same limitations were not shared by social media.  there have been concerns about opinions manipulation by the spread of political misinformation through social media. the degree of message influence is highly dependent on how much the content of the message is consistent with the human priory. m. ahmadi devised series of metrics on quantitatively evaluating the effectiveness of generated messages by robots. factors like message polarity, threats to the core values, and causal arguments constitute the main metrics incorporates with the potential of message in changing one's beliefs.  twitter was the most utilised social media platform and the campaigns were led through the use of 'hashtags'. llewellyn and cram conducted a study that involved tallying how often certain 'hashtags' were used and concluded by noting that overall there were more 'leave' hashtags than 'stay' even though 'stay' equated to the largest percentage. this referendum also saw the intense use of 'twitter bots'. gorodnichenko et al. analysed two types of social media agents - real (human users and bots) and social bots (composed of algorithm). social media platforms such as twitter supported ideas such as 'echo chambers' and therefore enhanced ideological segmentation and made information more fragmented to separate rather than unite people.  in turn twitter became known as the best platform for spreading 'fake news'. on the other hand, others claim that the sentiment results always indicated a likely 'leave' result but it is not pinned down to bots or any dark loitering propaganda systems, instead it was lack of 'remainers online mobility' that caused the outcome. on the day of the referendum, 'remain' activity reached an all-time high of 38.5% on twitter, but also instagram came into play almost as much as twitter did but due to it being a less direct platform, was not as noticed.  see also  2016 united states presidential election 2016 philippine presidential election 2005 french european constitution referendum
, french referendum on the european constitution, resulting in a surprise "no" vote. 2005 dutch european constitution referendum, dutch referendum on the european constitution, resulting in a "no" vote. arron banks  references  2016 united kingdom european union membership referendum causes of events
t in the park 2016 was a three-day music festival organised by df concerts, which took place between 8-11 july 2016 and for the second time was held at strathallan castle, which is 20 miles away from the festival's previous location at the disused balado airfield, kinross-shire. strathallan castle camp site opened from 7 to 12 july, while the overall number of attendances was lower than 2015 after df concerts reduced the number of daily tickets by 15,000.  strathallan castle location in 2014, plans were drawn up to allow the festival to be relocated to strathallan castle. this was due to a section of the festival grounds at balado being situated over the forties pipeline causing the health and safety executive (hse) to request for the festival to be relocated away from its previous site at balado. according to hse, an accident could result in a large number of casualties and people receiving a dangerous dose of thermal radiation.  the 2015 event resulted in the traffic chaos, with claims of up to five hour delays, which were partly blamed on the wet conditions which resulted in tractors hauling hundreds of vehicles onto the exit road people taking to social media    in january 2016, t in the park announced it had restructured the festival's operational team as part of dealing with problems which arise from 2015 event. former t in the park police event commander, colin brown, become the security manager, and former road police inspector ian martin took over control of traffic manager, while apl events were appointed to look after site management.  colin rodger, event manager of t in the park, said: "we've had a full de-brief on the 2015 festival with all relevant agencies including police scotland, traffic scotland and perth and kinross council as well as festival goers and local residents.  we have listened to every single comment and we thank everyone for their valuable input. we're now focused on delivering the 2016 festival and we know where we need to improve. by restructuring the management of key areas, such as the site and security, we will solve issues from last year's event.  in march, t in the park bosses were ordered to provide further details on their plans for the music festival by perth and kinross council which triggered a second public consultation period looking at traffic management and how wildlife such as red squirrels, ospreys, bats and otters would be protected during the festival.  in april 2016, df concerts announced new traffic plans with new separate road access for buses and cars, along with
a "well managed" pick-up and drop-off area, while a new bus depot and station with more than 40 stances with one way bus lane has been built. perth and kinross council received eight letters of objection. however, ian martin, traffic manager at t in the park and a former road police inspector, described the changes to the transport set up as "significant." "we've not tweaked last year's, we started with a blank piece of paper and after months of testing and liaising with our partner agencies, including transport scotland, perth and kinross council and police scotland as well as local community councils, we have a solid plan in place," he said. and inspector david hynd, head of road policing with police scotland, added: "the organisers have taken on board the issues from last year and, in conjunction with its partner agencies, produced a new on-site transport set up which should bring benefits to not only those people attending the event but also to those in the local community who are directly affected by it."  on 30 april, t in the park was finally granted a public entertainment licence, after five hours of discussions with perth and kinross council. the licensing committee refused the request for a three-year licence, instead granting permission for only that summer's event. df concerts reduced the number of daily attendances from 85,000 to 70,000.  line-up  main stage  radio one summer of dance stage/radio 1 stage  king tut's wah wah tent  slam tent  t break stage  incidents in the early hours 8 july 2016, police scotland were investigating the deaths of a 17-year-old male from the west of scotland and a female of the same age from the north of england. it was not believed the deaths were linked but may have been related to drugs.  an atm containing a significant amount of cash was stolen from the campsite. a number of reports appeared about anti-social behaviour, including pitched battle. on monday 11 july, an investigation started into the rape of an 18-year-old woman at the festival. a number of green fake ecstasy pills were recovered with many found to contain the dangerous stimulant paramethoxyamphetamine, known as pma.  police scotland stated 429 crimes were reported at the festival, compared with 414 last year. although the number of arrests were down from 57 in 2015 to 54.  the traffic chaos from the 2015 events was not repeated with reports of cars and buses moving freely.  see also
list of music festivals in the united kingdom  references  external links  http://www.pkc.gov.uk/titp  http://www.dailyrecord.co.uk/entertainment/music/park-2016-live-updates-first-8377228#qkvprlov9l3smmzw.97  2016 in scotland 2016 in british music t in the park july 2016 events in the united kingdom 2016 music festivals
janet akinrinade (1930 - 1994) was a nigerian politician who was minister of state, internal affairs during the administration of president shehu shagari. in the elections to the 1977 nigerian constituent assembly, she was the only woman elected.  early life born in iseyin to a family of four children, akinrinade was the only girl and last child of her parents. she lost her parents at a young age and an elder brother took care of funding her primary education. she did not attend secondary school but through self-tutorship she passed her gce o'levels exam. akinrinade got married in 1950, to t.a. akinrinade, a tobacco company executive and was a housewife for some period. in 1957, she took courses in secretarial studies, cookery and dress making in london. in 1964, when her husband's firm, the nigerian tobacco company had a scuffle with local tobacco farmers, akinrinade played an important part in orchestrating a peace agreement. due to her role in the crisis, the soun of ogbomosho gave her and her husband a chieftaincy title.  political career she started her political career in 1970, when she became a councillor in iseyin, she was in that position for seven years. in 1977, akinrinade won election to the constituent assembly, a year later, she joined the nigerian people's party and was the party's deputy governor candidate for oyo state in 1979. an alliance between her party and the governing party, npn led her to be nominated as a minister during the nation's second republic.  in 1982, she left her ministerial post and became a commissioner in plateau state under the leadership of solomon lar.  references  1930 births 1994 deaths nigerian politicians
garha is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  child sex ratio details the village population of children with an age group from 0-6 is 11 which makes up 6.25% of total population of village. average sex ratio is 956 per 1000 males which is higher than  the state average of 895. the child sex ratio as per census is 2667, higher than average of 846 in the state of punjab.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
under the city (hungarian: a varos alatt) is a 1953 hungarian film directed by janos hersko.  cast    janos bagyinszky as biczo    ferenc bessenyei as geza    jozsef bihari as hollo    elma bulla  as varadine, geza anyja    lucy cziraky    sandor deak    zoltan gera    laszlo gyorgy  as holub    janos galcsiki  teri horvath as jozsa    tivadar horvath  as zederspitz    laszlo kemeny  as varadi, geza apja    ferenc kallai  as vadasz    istvan palotai  as komor    sandor peti  as friedmann    imre pongracz  as fuge    sandor pecsi  as varga    lajos rajczy as tomor    janos rajz  as vihar    imre sinkovits  as dobsa    istvan somlo  as forba    sandor szabo as zilahi    vera szemere   endre szemethy as deres    adam szirtes  as balogh    maria sivo    sandor tompa  as toronyi    ilus vay  references  bibliography   desi kegl bognar & katalin szentpaly. hungarians in america: a biographical directory of professionals of hungarian origin in the americas. afi publication, 1971.  external links     1953 films hungarian films hungarian-language films films directed by janos hersko hungarian drama films 1953 drama films
sara kaljuvee (born february 7, 1993) is a canadian rugby sevens player. she is a two time gold medalist at the 2015 pan american games and the 2019 panamerican games in lima, peru as a member of the canada women's national rugby sevens team. in 2016, she was also named to  canada's first ever women's rugby sevens olympic team (travelling alt.)  kaljuvee was a part of the first ever commonwealth games tournament in 2018. member of the 2018 world cup team.  references  external links  sara kaljuvee at rugby canada    sara kaljuvee at the 2018 commonwealth games  1993 births living people canada international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players pan american games gold medalists for canada pan american games medalists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2019 pan american games sportspeople from toronto medalists at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for canada
mauricius or mauritius of trier (fl. c. 398-407 or after 419) was bishop of trier from 398/399 to at least 407, and possibly as late as 419.  virtually nothing is known about the life of bishop mauricius.  following the resignation of bishop felix, he was elected bishop in 398/399. his episcopate coincided with a time of political upheaval. at the end of the 4th century the roman city of augusta treverorum (today known as trier) ceased to be a residence of the emperor and from 410 the area was invaded by the germans. the significance of the church in trier paled against this background, but it doubtless retained a local importance.  mauricius is held to be the recipient of a letter from pope boniface i concerning the church in arles.  it is unclear for how long mauricius remained bishop: his successor may have been appointed in 407, or he may have been still in post in 419.  references  gallo-roman saints saints of germania 5th-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown 5th-century bishops in germania 5th-century christian saints roman catholic bishops of trier
eczacıbası sk men's basketball team (english: eczacıbası sports club), commonly known as eczacıbası, was the professional basketball department of eczacıbası sk, a sports club based in istanbul, turkey. the team competed in the turkish basketball super league.  history the men's basketball team of eczacıbası sk was established in 1968 as the basketball section of the turkish industrial group of companies eczacıbası holding, and began to compete in the lower turkish basketball divisions. the club soon became one of the most successful teams in turkey, having won two times the 2. turkish basketball league (1974, 1991) and most importantly eight times the turkish basketball super league afterwards. eczacıbası also won the presidential cup in 1988 against fenerbahce.  at the start of the 1992-93 season the board of eczacıbası sk took the decision that ended their basketball department activities on 3 august 1992 (1992 because of falling for the second time), and the team was disbanded by announcing its withdrawal from the league.  honours  turkish super league  winners (8): 1975-76, 1976-77, 1977-78, 1979-80, 1980-81, 1981-82, 1987-88, 1988-89  runners-up (1): 1978-79  turkish presidential cup  winners (1): 1988  runners-up (1): 1989  turkish league 2  winners (2):1973-74, 1990-91  head coaches   aydan siyavus: (1975-83)  references  turkish basketball super league teams defunct basketball teams in turkey basketball teams established in 1968 sports clubs disestablished in 1992
is a japanese former cyclist. a graduate of kochi university, she competed in the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1963 births living people japanese female cyclists olympic cyclists of japan cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) kochi university alumni
scanel hockey arena (also known as iscenter nord) is an arena in frederikshavn, denmark. it is used by frederikshavn white hawks. the old ice rink from 1970 was demolished and in 2014 the scanel hockey arena was built. it has a capacity of 4000 with 750 seats.  indoor ice hockey venues in denmark
scott gordon borek is an american ice hockey player and coach who has been involved with college hockey for over 35 years. currently, borek is the head coach at merrimack college.  career borek started his college playing career at dartmouth in 1981 and had nearly tripled his point production in his sophomore season when a neck injury forced him to end his playing days prematurely. he remained a member of the big green by becoming a student assistant the following year and after graduating with a degree in english. he became a full-time coach with providence becoming his next stop. after seven years in rhode island (3 with the friars and 4 more with brown) got his first head coaching gig with division iii colby. borek was back at the division i level three years later as an associate coach for lake superior state and then head coach a year later.  borek was taking over from jeff jackson after a brief but historic career that saw the lakers win two national titles in three years. predictably the results weren't as great as they had been under his old boss but after five years the team appeared to be mired in mediocrity and was fired following the 2001 season. after a year behind the bench at new england college borek became an assistant at new hampshire for dick umile. he remained with the wildcats until 2015 when he returned to his old stomping grounds as an associate coach for providence.  borek was hired as the head coach at merrimack college on april 9, 2018.  personal life scott's son gordon was killed in a single-car accident on may 28, 2016. he married jill mccune on august 18, 2017. together they have a total of seven children.  head coaching record  references  external links  official biography, merrimack warriors    1962 births living people american ice hockey coaches american men's ice hockey forwards brown bears men's ice hockey coaches colby mules men's ice hockey coaches dartmouth big green men's ice hockey coaches dartmouth big green men's ice hockey players ice hockey players from massachusetts lake superior state lakers men's ice hockey coaches new england college pilgrims men's ice hockey coaches new hampshire wildcats men's ice hockey coaches people from swampscott, massachusetts providence friars men's ice hockey coaches sportspeople from essex county, massachusetts ice hockey coaches from massachusetts
the girls is a 2016 debut novel by american author emma cline. it is loosely inspired by the manson family and the murder of actress sharon tate.  the majority of the novel is set in 1969 and focuses on 14 year old evie boyd who feels isolated and unloved and ends up spending the majority of that summer with a group of teenage girls on a ranch who are all devoted to an aspiring musician named russell hadrick.  synopsis in the present day evie boyd is a middle-aged woman with few ties. an old friend of hers named dan allows her to stay in his home as a caretaker while he's away on vacation. while there she thinks that house is being broken into and comes to realize it is only dan's teenage son julian and his girlfriend sasha who have arrived unannounced. julian does not remember evie at first but eventually recalls that evie was involved in a famous cult. this makes evie recall the summer of 1969, when she was 14.  it's 1969 and evie's parents have divorced with evie's father moving in with his young assistant, tamar, and evie's mother dating a married man named frank. at this time, evie spent most of her days with her best friend, connie, being bored in their hometown of petaluma, california. meanwhile, evie ends up falling in love with connie's older brother, peter.  all of this boredom is finally put to rest when evie sees a group of ragtag girls hanging around the town and dumpster diving. after peter runs off with his pregnant girlfriend, connie and evie have a falling out with connie accusing evie of only being there for her brother. evie later runs into one of the girls she had seen, suzanne, and buys her toilet paper she was trying to shoplift. later on, after getting into a fight with her mother, evie runs into suzanne and the girls again. this time they bring her to the ranch on edgewater road where they live where they introduce her to russell hadrick, their enigmatic leader. evie realizes that all the girls have sex with russell. during her first visit russell also forces her to perform oral sex on him.  evie continues to visit the ranch and the girls over the course of the summer, stealing money from her mother to give to them and pretending that she is spending time with connie. evie is drawn more to suzanne than russell and continues to do what she can to spend more time with her. she also learns that mitch lewis, a famous singer, is a patron of russell's and has promised to help
him obtain a record deal. one day, when mitch visits the farm russell has suzanne and evie return to his home with them. evie watches suzanne and mitch have sex and is later pressured into a threesome with them which she reluctantly goes along with as she is attracted to suzanne.  after the threesome evie returns home, but finding her life dull and tired she eventually returns to the farm. to cheer her up suzanne takes her to break into an empty home. evie suggests they break into her neighbour's home, but her neighbour arrives home early and catches her. evie is punished by her mother and sent to go live with her father in palo alto. evie has a surprisingly good time there, spending most of her time with her father's young girlfriend, tamar, who treats her like a younger sister.  eventually though, evie decides to return to the ranch. running away from home evie hitch-hikes and is driven to the ranch by a young university student named tom, who is intrigued by evie's description of the place. when they arrive tom is disgusted by the air of decay while evie is surprised to find the atmosphere of the ranch changed and depressed. tom eventually leaves. suzanne prepares to go out on an errand and evie, chasing after her, is allowed to come along. as they are driving to mitch lewis's home suzanne sees evie looking at her with love and desperation and kicks her out of the car. evie phones home and is picked up by tamar. the following morning she learns that the group went to mitch's house and, not finding him, killed his groundskeeper, the groundskeeper's girlfriend, an ex-girlfriend of mitch's and her five year old son. evie later learns this was because mitch was unable to procure a record deal for russell.  evie finishes out the rest of the summer and is sent to a boarding school in carmel, loosely based on santa catalina school. she settles down into student life but is visited once by her "sister" who turns out to be suzanne. a few months later the girls and russell are arrested and put on trial where they become infamous.  evie continues to wonder whether she would have joined in the murders if suzanne had not forced her out of the car. she also feels that suzanne had been trying to get her to live a normal, ordered life, though she feels as though her life as an adult has been boring and unfulfilling while suzanne was given multiple opportunities and infamy after her stint in prison.  reception the washington post wrote
a favorable review, praising cline's writing. npr and the new york times also reviewed the work, the former of which wrote that "emma cline's thoroughly seductive debut novel, the girls, re-imagines the world of charles manson's female followers, and does so with a particularly effective literary device." it was winner of the shirley jackson award for best novel 2016.  references  2016 american novels 2016 debut novels novels set in california novels set in the 1960s fiction set in 1969 random house books
the manso dam () is a hydroelectric dam on the manso river, a tributary of the cuiaba river, in the state of mato grosso, brazil. completed in 1999, it generates enough electricity for 300,000 people, and the reservoir is a tourist attraction. the dam displaced many families from the area now covered by the reservoir, and the submerged, decaying vegetation has had negative impact on water quality in and below the dam, affecting edible fish stocks.  location  the dam impounds the manso river in the upper paraguay sub-basin of the parana basin. the reservoir is in the municipalities of chapada dos guimaraes and rosario oeste in the midwest region of mato grosso. it is the largest in the paraopeba system. the dam is  from cuiaba, the state capital, along good roads. it is about  above sea level. the lake has become a tourist attraction.  structure  the dam project was launched in 1974, when a flood of the cuiaba river left more than 20% of the population of the state capital homeless. the objective was to control flooding while generating electricity, developing tourism and supporting irrigation. construction began in 1988 and was completed in 1999. the dam has a height of .  of concrete were used in construction. total cost was r$340 million. the reservoir covers an area of . it was full in 2001.  the operating contract is 70% owned by eletrobras furnas. installed capacity is 212 mw, with guaranteed output of 92 mw. it can meet the power demands of 300,000 people. after an extended drought, in december 2015 the water level had fallen to 28.7% of capacity. however, record rainfall raised it to 76% by june 2016. at 70% capacity the water line is  above the minimum operating level.  social and environmental impact  relatively little information was provided about the dam to the affected people in mato grosso. 109 properties were requisitioned for the project, and between 652 and 1,065 families were displaced. the displaced families were settled in areas with sandy soil, unsuitable for agriculture, and given insanitary straw shacks as homes.  the reservoir submerged a significant quantity of biomass, which was not cleared before construction started. this reduces dissolved oxygen levels as it decays and encourages proliferation of water weeds. rather than use a surface-level channel to divert excess water downstream, the design uses a drain from the reservoir bottom, feeding the worst-quality water downstream. this has had a
negative effect on edible fish stocks in the cuiaba river. by reducing flooding the dam affects the mato grosso pantanal environment, which depends on seasonal floods, but does not fully protect cuiaba from floods when the reservoir is full.  notes  sources  dams in mato grosso dams completed in 1999 gravity dams 1999 establishments in brazil hydroelectric power stations in brazil
the gens lentidia was a minor family at ancient rome.  none of its members is known to have held public office.  members  gaius lentidius augustalis, found on a sepulchral tablet in a house at pisaurum.  lucius lentidius saturninus, a veteran of either legio vii or xi, whose name was found at brekovica in dalmatia.  lentidius, a partisan of publius clodius pulcher, who helped lead a mob of slaves and gladiators against clodius' supporters in 57 bc.  they attacked publius sestius, the tribune of the plebs, and left him for dead in the temple of castor and pollux in the forum.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  marcus tullius cicero, de domo sua, pro sestio.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated "cil"), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  roman gentes
trevor mark evans (born 28 august 1981) is an australian politician who has been a member of the house of representatives since the 2016 federal election, representing the division of brisbane. he is a member of the liberal national party of queensland, and sits with the liberal party in federal parliament. in may 2019, evans was appointed assistant minister for waste reduction and environmental management in the morrison government.  early life evans was born on 28 august 1981 in tweed heads, new south wales. he is one of four children born to norm and carol evans. he was educated at government schools in mitcham, victoria; elimbah, queensland; and beerwah, queensland. evans holds the degrees of bachelor of economics and bachelor of laws (hons.) from the university of queensland. he was the first member of his family to attend university.  professional career evans was an investigator with the australian competition and consumer commission from 2004 to 2007, an economist with the queensland competition authority from 2008 to 2009, the chief of staff to then shadow minister for health peter dutton in 2010, and an economist with seqwater from 2011 to 2012. before his election in 2016, evans was the chief executive officer of the national retail association from 2012.  parliamentary career in 2016, evans was preselected as the lnp candidate for brisbane, replacing the retiring teresa gambaro. the contest for brisbane in 2016 was the first time both major parties had put forward openly gay candidates in a single electorate: evans and his labor opponent, pat o'neill.  evans retained brisbane for the lnp at the 2016 federal election and was re-elected in 2019. he was subsequently appointed assistant minister for waste reduction and environmental management in the second morrison ministry, under environment minister sussan ley.  political positions evans is a member of the moderate/modern liberal faction of the liberal party.  evans opposed the australian marriage law postal survey, a policy of the turnbull government, preferring that the issue of same-sex marriage be put directly to a parliamentary vote.  personal life evans announced his engagement to obstetrician roger martin in 2021. he is queensland's first openly gay federal mp. he has a border collie named bella.  references     1981 births living people liberal national party of queensland members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for brisbane members of the australian house of representatives australian chief executives australian economists lgbt legislators in australia gay politicians 21st-century australian politicians
jakub kotala (born june 15, 1996) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for az havirov of the czech 1.liga.  kotala made his czech extraliga debut playing with bk mlada boleslav during the 2014-15 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1996 births living people bk mlada boleslav players az havirov players czech ice hockey forwards
the 1970-71 st. john's redmen basketball team represented st. john's university during the 1970-71 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the team was coached by frank mulzoff in his first year at the school after lou carnesecca left to become the head coach of the new york nets in the american basketball association. st. john's home games are played at alumni hall and madison square garden.  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#ff0000; color:#ffffff;"| regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#ff0000; color:#ffffff;"| nit tournament  references  st. john's red storm men's basketball seasons st. john's st. john's st john st john
domino was a brazilian boy band created by television presenter gugu liberato that had its heyday in the 1980s and then in the late 1990s. this band sold about 6 million copies in brazil in the 1980s. its original lineup had afonso nigro, nill, marcos quintela and marcelo rodrigues. the biggest hits were "ela nao gosta de mim," "companheiro", "'p. da vida", "manequim" and "com todos menos comigo."  between 1992 and 1995, the actor and television presenter rodrigo faro was part of the group. with the formation of rodrigo phavanello, rodriguinho, cristiano garcia and eber albencio, the band achieved national fame in 1997 with the song "baila, baila comigo", which became a great commercial success and sold over three million copies in this period in brazil.  history  beginnings (1984)  designed along the lines of puerto rican boy band menudo (band), domino appeared in 1984 with the hit "companheiro". when menudo broke out in brazil, augusto liberato, through his promoart agency, decided to form a nationalized version of the group. for the formation of the group, several boys aged between 14 and 15 years underwent auditions in which they had to learn to sing and dance. the selected boys were affonso celso lucatelli nigro (afonso nigro), lenilson dos santos (nill), marcos roberto quintela (marcos) and marcelo henrique rodrigues (marcelo). in 1984, the group released a cbs compact disc with two versions of successes of the mexican group timbiriche, "ela nao gosta de mim" and "companheiro", which was the first song to break out on the radio, complemented by a video clip released on globo's program fantastico.  international success and "dominomania" (1985-1988)  in 1985, when domino was already a fever, the group released their first lp on cbs which included, in addition to the famous "companheiro" and "ela nao gosta de mim", the  single "ainda sou voce" from that album. moreover, it had the special participation of the turma do balao magico group on the tracks "chega mais um pouco" and "fim de semana". in 1986, in addition to being a constant presence on tv shows, especially the tvs, domino gained a special station at a resort. in the same year, the domino released
a record in spanish and broke into the latin market. this lp had a remake of "lindo balao azul" by guilherme arantes. here, the second album was followed by hits "guerreiros", "maria", "amor e musica" and "jura de amor".  in 1987, domino had already spent three years on the road and was a success with the public and critics. the third lp was the culmination of "dominomania" plaguing the country. this album featured hits like " 'p. da vida," which sold much at its launch, followed by "manequim" and "medusa". that same year, they participated in the film os fantasmas trapalhoes along with his godfather and entrepreneur gugu liberato. in 1988, the "black album", as it is known, showed the group maturing and brought more reflective character songs. this lp brought the hits "com todos menos comigo," "bruta ansiedade" and "as palavras" with the special participation of angelica, who at the time was presenter of clube da crianca and milk shake programs in rede manchete. that same year the quartet also participated in two films: os herois trapalhoes - uma aventura na selva and os trapalhoes na terra dos monstros, where they sing the "paradise" song. they have sold about 6 million copies throughout brazil.  nill's exit, the appearance of the thumb and new formations (1989-1995)  all went well until nill left the group and started a solo career. the farewell was on the viva a noite program on 19 october 1989. promoart preferred to follow the group's career with only three members and released in 1990, the fifth lp that was accompanied by bands "maria", "felicidade ja" and "leilao". however, since the departure of nill, the group had lost much of its popularity and its media presence.  this was also due to the formation of the polegar (youth band also released by promoart shows) group. unlike domino, polegar did not use choreographies but musical instruments, and stood out for being the first youth band launched at a national level, formed by alan frank, alex gill, rafael ilha and ricardo costa.  the domino group also released another self-titled album in 1992, but no longer had its main member and vocalist afonso nigro, who left the group few months before
the lp was recorded. promoart and sony music, which had bought cbs records, chose to reactivate the quartet, choosing two new members: a boy named italo coutinho and the host of the children's program zyb bom of the rede bandeirantes, rodrigo faro. the single "sem compromisso" was the only success of the album, which was sung by marcelo rodrigues and had the special participation of his girlfriend at the time, the host of the sbt, mara maravilha. then came "o que eu te ponho," a song that was well-publicized on tv and had early success.  in 1993, marcos quintela left the group and was replaced by fabio. in this same year, it was marcelo rodrigues' turn to bid farewell on the sabadao program, in which he recalled the old hit "manequim". valmir was introduced in his place. the lineup became: rodrigo faro, italo coutinho, fabio and valmir.  in 1995, there was more training, this time with members rodrigo phavanello, eber albencio, valmir and ricardo. the group launched the provocative album that came with the single "oh carol," a version of neil sedaka song.  without promoart, forgetfulness and return (1997-2006)  soon after 1992, the group was forgotten, but in 1997, the group reappeared and returned to make success, thanks to the song "baila, baila comigo". this lineup consisted of rodrigo phavanello, eber albencio, rodriguinho and cristiano garcia. the album comvido! sold 290,000 copies in france, and the group performed in countries such as turkey, tunisia, and lebanon. this same formation also recorded an album called "give me love" in 1999 and that same year they recorded a clip of the music diz que sim in jordan of the same album.  in 2001, with the departure of rodrigo phavanello, klaus hee joined the group and they recorded the album "la bomba". as the name says, the single "la bomba" was the flagship and recorded in spanish but in brazil was also recorded by the band braga boys, but in portuguese.  after a few years, the group returned in 2003 with new members and new proposals but no longer belonging to promo art. the businessman paid just the right when using domino marks to gugu liberato. the training consisted of maike eversong, ricky fell, diego pompeu, and leandro lemos
. then maike eversong exited (in 2002) and two members entered. one was julio street (official cover of backstreet boys), who was known from 1999 to 2002 for playing shows throughout brazil and opening for the backstreet boys, doing shows on tv, and who is now a photographer. the other was a former model and actor arthur cezar, who currently is in the production of his first solo cd career with music copyright, in addition to directing the company boulevard productions, producer of musical shows and blockbusters of musical de sao paulo. the group appeared a few times on television programs, such as the domingo legal, sbt, in july 2003, superpop and bom dia mulher programs of the redetv!. the songs were composed by the members and the singles were "coracao parou" and "baby", but the success did not last long. but this lineup was considered by the producer as the last official formation of the domino group and the following, only as a test phase.  bmd and more lineup changes (2008-2009)  in 2008, the former members arthur cezar, leandro lemos, alexandre albertoni and the new member isaac decided to form a new group called dmo. the group did not last and ended soon after. earlier in 2007, alexandre albertoni (who is a cousin of model and presenter gianne albertoni) posed for the g magazine.  in february 2008 there was a new selection to choose the new members in rio de janeiro and rafael pires, vinicius, thalis and jojo were chosen to integrate the new formation. they were sharing an apartment in barra da tijuca and rehearsing and recorded the first album that would have four new songs and eight remakes of the first formation. but this formation was considered as a testing phase by the productors and didn't last. in march, the singer rafael pires suffers a lightning-kidnapping and then is released; at the time the news reverberated on tv stations.  according to the newspaper o globo, the group would until, by april 2008, perform on the domingo legal (sbt) program with afonso nigro and rodriguinho, but then there were no more group news.  in late 2008 they launched the new formation at the expobauru-sp agricultural inaugural party, for an audience of more than 60 thousand people. the group launched by the sbt tv network had members joao paulo damazio, leandro naiss, rachid camargo and thiago ruffineli. the group disbanded in
2009.  media   on 22 august 2009, the domino was remembered in the "lata velha" of the rede globo's program caldeirao do huck and had the appearance of afonso nigro and actress and model luciana vendramini, who participated in the 1987 music video "manequim".  on 22 may 2010, aired the program rede record's program o melhor do brasil with rodrigo faro doing an imitation of domino. the songs were remembered "manequim", "companheiro" and "" p.da vida".  on may 31, 2010, former members nill and marcelo appeared in programa do gugu on rede record along with two former members of polegar, alex gill and alan frank, and also with two former members of the boomerang group.  nill, former member and now lawyer, gospel singer and pastor was interviewed by tv fame redetv!. the interview was broadcast on 12 june 2010.  on february 18, 2012, rodrigo faro has a stake in legendary program with marcos mion, which mimicked the domino group and danced the song "manequim" while faro singing.  in the film odeio o dia dos namorados, there's a scene that appears a poster of the first album in the room of the protagonist deborah (heloisa perisse) set in the '80s.  in 2014 by rede record, premiered the domingoke framework in their programs of rodrigo faro, o melhor do brasil and a hora do faro. the band of the table is led by afonso nigro.  in 2015, the domingo show program of record television network, presenter geraldo luis made a tribute to rodrigo faro, taking the stage of the program four different seasons of members of the domino group, with highlights to rodrigo faro and rodrigo phavanello.  former members  original lineup   afonso nigro (1984-1991)  nill (lenilson dos santos) (1984-1989)  marcos quintela (1984-1993)  marcelo rodrigues (1984-1993)  others   rodrigo faro (1992-1995)  italian coutinho (1992-1995)  fabio (1993-1995)  ricardo (1995)  valmir (1995)  rodrigo phavanello (1995-2001)  eber rodrigues albencio (1995-2001)  cristiano momense garcia (1996-2001)  rodrigo lazaro de paula (rodriguinho) (1997-2001)  klaus hee (2001-2003)  maike evers
ong (2001-2003)  ricky fell (2003-2008)  pompey diego (2003-2008)  arthur cezar (2003 - 2008)  julio street (2003 - 2008)  leandro lemos (2003-2008)  alexandre albertoni (2008)  isaac (2008)  rafael pires (2008)  vinicius (2008)  thalis (2008)  jojo (2008)  john paul damazio (2008-2009)  leandro naiss (2008-2009)  rachid camargo (2008-2009)  thiago ruffineli (2008-2009)  discography  studio albums   domino (1985)  domino (1986)  domino (1987)  domino (1988)  domino (1990)  domino (1992)  provocante (1995)  ritmos latinos (1996)  comvido! (1997)  give me love (1999)  domino (2001)  vem ver (2003)  collections   hits (1988)  20 supersucessos (1997)  brilhantes (1999)  singles   "ela nao gosta de mim"  "companheiro"(tambem lado b de "ela nao gosta de mim")  "ainda sou voce"  "a moto" (tambem lado b de "companheiro")  "vem pra mim"  "ei! garota"  "guerreiros"  "maria"  "jura de amor"  "amor e musica"  "nada que eu quero mais"  "dancando com ela"  "p. da vida"  "manequim"  "medusa"  "tudo a ver com o teu olhar"  "linha e carretel"  "com todos menos comigo"  "as palavras" (com angelica)  "dono de mim"  "nada pra mim"  "bruta ansiedade"  "maria"  "felicidade ja"  "leilao"  "o que eu te ponho"  "sem compromisso" (com mara maravilha)  "bum bum"  "vem provar"  "oh! carol"  "poe, poe"  "baila, baila comigo"  "estoy queriendo contigo"  "diz que sim"  "la bomba
"  "nao diga nao"  "coracao parou"  "baby"  other songs   "chega mais um pouco" (with the turma do balao magico)  "fim de semana" (with the turma do balao magico)  "lindo balon azul" (released only in spain and  venezuela)  filmography  video clips   companheiro (1985)  ela nao gosta de mim (1985)  nem romeu, nem julieta (1985)  ei, garota (1985)  ainda sou voce (1985)  jura de amor (1986)  guerreiros (1986)  manequim (1987)  "p" da vida (1987)  com todos menos comigo (1988)  maria (1990)  o que eu te ponho (1992)  vem provar (1993)  baila, baila comigo (1997)  estoy queriendo contigo (1997)  diz que sim (1999)  shows and movies  references  external links  https://www.discogs.com/artist/1214550-domin%c3%b3  http://www.last.fm/pt/music/domin%c3%b3  http://www.letras.com.br/#!domino  brazilian boy bands musical groups established in 1984 musical groups disestablished in 2009 musical groups from sao paulo (state) musical quartets brazilian pop rock music groups
henri borghi, o.s.m. (1609 - november 1658) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of alife (1658).  biography henri borghi was born in castelnovo di serivia, italy in 1609 and ordained a priest in the order of friar servants of mary. on 25 february 1658, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as bishop of alife.  on 10 march 1658, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-bishop of sabina, with patrizio donati, bishop emeritus of minori, and ambrogio landucci, titular bishop of porphyreon, serving as co-consecrators.  he served as bishop of alife until his death in november 1658.  see also  catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1609 births 1658 deaths servite bishops
dante manuel osorio villanueva (born august 7, 1993 in valle de bravo, state of mexico) is a mexican professional footballer who last played for correcaminos uat.  references  external links      1993 births living people mexican footballers association football forwards potros uaem footballers club celaya footballers correcaminos uat footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from the state of mexico
william raymond healy (march 28, 1924 - september 22, 2010) was an all-american college football player for the georgia tech yellow jackets. he graduated from baylor school in 1942 and served in the 88th cavalry reconnaissance squadron in the european theater during world war ii. he was awarded the silver star and the bronze star for gallantry in action. at georgia tech, he was a five-sport letterman.  he was a member of the chattanooga sports hall of fame, georgia tech hall of fame and the georgia sports hall of fame. healy was selected by the associated press for an all-time sec team in 1950.  references  1924 births 2010 deaths all-american college football players american football guards georgia tech yellow jackets football players sportspeople from new brunswick, new jersey united states army personnel of world war ii
michel jacques francois achard (14 october 1778 - 6 january 1865) was a french general de brigade (brigadier general).  he was a member of the chamber of peers under the july monarchy, a member of the national legislative assembly of the french second republic and a member of the senate of the second french empire.  honours   grand cross of the legion of honour  knight of the order of saint louis  1833: commander of the order of leopold.  references  books      1778 births 1865 deaths grand croix of the legion d'honneur knights of the order of saint louis members of the chamber of peers of the july monarchy french senators of the second empire members of the national legislative assembly of the french second republic place of birth missing
international fiberglass was a company founded in venice, california in about 1963, and best known for their large moulded fiberglass roadside advertising sculptures commonly called "muffler men".   the company was formed when steve dashew purchased prewitt fiberglass animals and acquired all of the molds created by bob prewitt. one of the molds which dashew acquired in the transaction was a 20-foot human figure, which prewitt had used in 1962 to create an oversized statue for the paul bunyan cafe in flagstaff, arizona. the company had made fiberglass boats, but dashew decided to use the mold to create some business during slow boat-building periods.   he began advertising his outsize figure-making capability, and began selling his giant figures in 1964. the outsize figures eventually included a female, who could be fitted either with a bikini swimsuit or a dress. in 10 years of production, international fiberglass sold hundreds of oversized figures, including cowboys, indians, astronauts, giant chickens, dinosaurs, yogi bears, and tigers- selling each for $1,800 to $2,800 (or as low as $1000 when ordered in bulk, as when the texaco company ordered a batch of 300).  dashew ceased production in 1974, and sold the company assets in 1976. the outsized molds were destroyed after the sale.  references  fiberglass design companies established in 1963 manufacturing companies based in california manufacturing companies established in 1963 1963 establishments in california design companies disestablished in 1974 manufacturing companies disestablished in 1974 1974 disestablishments in california
the second woman (spanish: la segunda mujer) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by jose diaz morales and starring rosa carmina, antonio aguilar and freddy fernandez.  plot a couple with preteen children breaks up. the husband (played by antonio aguilar) meets a new woman and they marry. as the children grow up, the film analyzes the impact of their parents' separation on their lives.  cast  references  bibliography   pedro lopez garcia. alicantinos en el cine. cineastas en alicante. editorial club universitario, 2013.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by jose diaz morales mexican black-and-white films
the encounter of a lifetime (russian: навстречу жизни) is a 1952  soviet film directed by nikolay lebedev and starring nadezhda rumyantseva,  vladimir sokolov and georgi semyonov.  plot one of leningrad vocational schools charge a complicated order for production of the party machines. not all workers are equally serious about the assignment. there is a failure. it seems that the perpetrators are found. but to punish is always easier than to help correct the mistakes.  cast    nadezhda rumyantseva as marusya rodnikova     vladimir sokolov as pasha sychev    georgi semyonov as semyon ilyich    sergei gurzo  as vasov    vasili merkuryev    anatoly kuznetsov   as marusya's father  viktor khokhryakov as chairman of the graduation committee  references  bibliography   peter kenez. cinema and soviet society: from the revolution to the death of stalin. tauris, 2001.  external links     1952 films soviet films 1950s russian-language films lenfilm films
the 1936-37 season was the sixth season of competitive association football in the football league played by chester, an english club based in chester, cheshire.  it was the club's sixth consecutive season in the third division north since the election to the football league. alongside competing in the league, the club also participated in the fa cup and the welsh cup.  football league  results summary  results by matchday  matches  fa cup  chester along with port vale and luton town were given a bye to the third round.  welsh cup  season statistics  references  1936-37 english football clubs 1936-37 season
is a japanese multimedia project created by toei company, dentsu and bandai namco holdings, under the pseudonym akiyoshi hongo. the series' theme revolves around technological singularity and artificial intelligence, a theme shared with the appmons and the dangers of technology when used unwisely.  an anime series, the seventh overall in the digimon franchise, was produced by toei animation and dentsu and began airing on all txn stations in japan from october 1, 2016, to september 30, 2017. the series was directed by go koga and written by yoichi kato, with character designs by kenichi onuki. it was also the first series that does not have an english dub, and it got taff2018 best of 100 no.12.  plot  in the year 2045, technology has finally evolved to a degree of prosperity for the world. the world wide web has become a world for  or "appmons", artificially intelligent beings born within mobile apps. the series focuses on haru shinkai, an everyday junior high student. one day, he discovers an appmon lurking in his smartphone, which reveals himself to be gatchmon and the two become partners. haru also learns from gatchmon that the artificial intelligence leviathan is creating viruses to turn all appmons evil, and the two join forces to stop them. as the series progresses, haru gains the help of the rookie idol eri karan, the famous apptuber torajirou asuka, the prodigy hacker rei katsura, who is in search for his younger brother that was kidnapped by leviathan, and haru's best friend yujin ozora, each one partnered with their own appmon to help in the fight to defeat leviathan and restore the balance between their two worlds.  media  anime  the anime adaptation of the series began airing on all txn stations in japan on october 1, 2016, replacing time travel girl on its original timeslot, and aired until september 30, 2017. the series's opening theme from episodes 1 to 25 is "dive" by amatsuki and from episodes 26 to 52, "gatchen!" by symag. the ending theme from episodes 1 to 13 is  by riho iida, from episodes 14 to 25,  by ami wajima, from episodes 26 to 38, "little pi" by ange☆reve and from episodes 39 to 52,  by traffic light.  manga two manga adaptations were released by shueisha. the
first one was illustrated by naoki akamine and was serialized in v jump from september 21, 2016, to august 21, 2017. the second manga, titled  is illustrated by katsumi hirose and was serialized in saikyo jump from october 1, 2016.  references  external links        https://animefestival.jp/ja/post/8468/  artificial intelligence in fiction works about mobile phones bandai namco franchises digimon anime and manga shonen manga toei animation television tv tokyo original programming animated television series about teenagers television series set in the 2040s
pearl is an unincorporated community in jackson county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called pearl was established in 1889, and remained in operation until 1919.  the community has the name of pearl burnett.  references  unincorporated communities in jackson county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
sir peter fenwick holmes (27 september 1932 - 8 march 2002) was a british businessman, chairman of royal dutch shell from 1985 to 1993.  holmes was born in athens, and lived in hungary for a time, as his father had a company there, and his mother was american. his grandfather and great grandfather lived in turkey, where they worked for the levant consular service.  holmes was educated at malvern college, and trinity college, cambridge, where he received a bachelor's degree in history.  holmes also wrote, under the name peter fenwick.  references  1932 births 2002 deaths alumni of trinity college, cambridge people educated at malvern college shell plc people
testosterone hexahydrobenzoate (thhb), or testosterone cyclohexanecarboxylate (tchc), sold under the brand names testormon depot, sterandryl retard, tardosterandryl, and testosteron-depot among others, is an androgen and anabolic steroid medication and a testosterone ester. it is used by intramuscular injection and is provided in the form of ampoules containing 100 mg thhb in oil solution. thhb has comparable pharmacokinetics to those of testosterone cypionate and testosterone enanthate. the medication is no longer marketed. it was previously available in great britain.  see also  nandrolone cyclohexanecarboxylate  references  abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes testosterone esters
the 1911 argentine primera division was the 20th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on april 30 and ended on november 26.  the championship featured 9 teams, with each team playing the other twice. racing club made its debut.  alumni regain the championship for the third time in succession, by beating porteno in a championship playoff. it was the team's 10th title in 12 seasons and was also its last tournament disputed so the football team was disbanded at the end of the season due to financial problems.  standings  championship playoff alumni and porteno finished level on points at the top of the table, being necessary the dispute of a playoff match, won by alumni.  match details  references  argentine primera division seasons 1911 in argentine football 1911 in south american football p p
carnett is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   eddie carnett (1916-2016), american baseball player  john berton carnett (1890-1988), american surgeon  carnett's sign, a medical sign  see also  carnet (disambiguation)
richard a. bandstra is a former member of the michigan house of representatives and a judge on the michigan court of appeals.  career formerly an attorney in private practice with the prestigious warner, norcross and judd law firm, bandstra was elected as a mi state representative for the grand rapids area in 1985.  he served through 1994 and was the republican co-floor leader after the 1992 election resulted in an equally split house, with 55 members from each party.   bandstra was elected to the court of appeals in 1994, serving through his retirement in january 2010. he was chief judge of the court from 1998 through 2001. while on the bench, bandstra travelled extensively in slovakia, working on a project to develop legislation pertaining to independence for judges in the newly freed country.  charitable work bandstra served from 2013 through 2017 as the volunteer executive director of the association for a more just society (ajs), a christian organization working with a sister organization in honduras, seeking to assure better government services and just policies for the poor and powerless in that country.  references  1950 births living people politicians from chicago politicians from grand rapids, michigan calvin university alumni university of chicago law school alumni michigan republicans members of the michigan house of representatives michigan court of appeals judges
the san carlo borromeo-class ships of the line were a class of two 66-gun third rates built by the venetian arsenal from 1750 to 1793.  design the san carlo borromeo class ships had a deck length of , a keel length of , and were  wide. being built to hold 66 guns, by venetian standards were considered vascelli di primo rango, or first rate ship of the line. by contemporary royal navy standards, though, this number would make them third rate ships of the line.  the namesake ship of the class, the san carlo borromeo, originally was armed with 28 40-pounds guns on the lower gundeck, 26 20-pounds guns on the upper one and 12 14-pounds guns on the quarterdeck. in 1750 this gave a broadside of 904 venetian pounds, or .  on the vulcano, launched in 1793, of the 66 guns 26 were 40-pounds cannons, 28 were 30-pounds cannons, and 12 were 14-pounds cannons, located on the lower, upper, and quarterdecks, respectively. this gave a broadside weight of 1024 venetian pounds, equal to .  the namesake ship, the san carlo borromeo, was haunted by a recurring problem: in stormy seas, it had a tendency to lose the rudder. this problem eventually led to its wreck. the only other ship made with the same plans was subsequently modified in 1788 while still in the dockyard, resulting in a great improvement in maneuverability and sailing speed.  this class was prone to the same drawbacks of its contemporary leon trionfante class, which affected most of the sailing ships of the venetian navy at the time.  history little is known of the commanders of either ships, as none took part in important events. it is known, however, that vulcano  was captained by zuanne balielo from 30 april 1793 to the end of 1793.  ships  references  citations  websites  see also  venetian navy    ship of the line classes ships built by the venetian arsenal 18th century in the republic of venice charles borromeo
the 18th district of the iowa senate is located in southern iowa, and is currently composed of polk county.  current elected officials janet petersen is the senator currently representing the 18th district.  the area of the 18th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 35th district (represented by ako abdul-samad) the 36th district (represented by marti anderson)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  robert carr, 1983-1989 mike connolly, 1990-2002 mary lundby, 2003-2008 swati dandekar, 2009-2011 liz mathis, 2012 janet petersen, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  18
jamarr sanders (born august 2, 1988) is an american professional basketball player for derthona basket of the italian serie a2 basket. he played college basketball for alabama state, northwest florida state college and uab. as a senior at uab, sanders was named to the first team conference usa. on december 18, 2016, he signed a one-week tryout with the italian team.  career on january 29, 2017, sanders signed with the german club telekom baskets bonn.  on july 12, 2018, sanders signed with the italian club pallacanestro trieste.  on july 3, 2019, he has signed 1-year deal with gaziantep basketbol of the turkish basketbol super ligi.  on january 20, 2020 he signed a deal with the italian club derthona basket. sanders extended his contract with the team on july 26, 2021.  references  external links  uab bio  jamarr sanders at sports reference  lagabasket profile  1988 births living people alabama state hornets basketball players american expatriate basketball people in germany american expatriate basketball people in greece american expatriate basketball people in italy american men's basketball players aquila basket trento players austin toros players basketball players from montgomery, alabama gaziantep basketbol players k.a.o.d. b.c. players lega basket serie a players northwest florida state raiders men's basketball players pallacanestro trieste players shooting guards telekom baskets bonn players uab blazers men's basketball players veroli basket players
the 1912 western state state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1912 college football season.  in their sixth season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 3-2-1 record and outscored their opponents, 86 to 49. end edgar roper was the team captain.  attendance at western state reached 650 students in the fall of 1912.  schedule  references  western state normal hilltoppers western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
"fake it" is a song by english indie pop band bastille. despite being released before their second studio album wild world, it is not a single, as confirmed by lead singer dan smith on twitter.  video an official video was released august 19, 2016 to promote the song.  personnel dan smith - lead vocals, keyboards, piano, percussion, string arrangements, production, programming kyle simmons - keyboards, percussion, backing vocals will farquarson - bass, keyboards, acoustic guitar, electric guitar, backing vocals chris "woody" wood - drums, percussion, backing vocals charlie barnes - guitar, keyboard, additional drums  charts  references  2016 songs bastille (band) songs songs written by dan smith (singer)
usher's passing is a gothic historical fiction novel by american writer robert mccammon. it was published in 1984 by holt, rinehart, and winston. it focuses on the divide between an aristocratic family (the ushers) (much like the vanderbilts) and a community of hill people near asheville, north carolina. both are drawn into a plot surrounding a string of child disappearances, a mysterious serial killer, and ghouls and monsters that lie buried deep within the ushers' family history, and the answers to which lie deep within the sprawling, creaky mansion they call home.  references  american historical novels american gothic novels ghost novels 1984 american novels novels set in north carolina asheville, north carolina
view of the cannaregio canal was painted by  francesco guardi  around 1770. it is a small oil on canvas painting measuring 48.9 × 77.5 cm. it now hangs in the reading room of the frick art reference library alongside  the regatta in venice. both paintings were gifted to the frick collection by helen clay frick after her father's death. in the painting, guardi captures a typical scene of venetian life on the canals. in this particular veduta, guardi depicts a section of the northern bank of the cannaregio canal, one of venice's largest canals, located in the cannaregio sestiere (district) of the city.  the palazzo surian bellotto is the most prominent building in the painting, named after the two different families who owned the palace: first the surian family and then the bellotto family.  the ponte dei tre archi connects the northern bank with the small fragment of the southern bank. the bridge's arch acts as a viewfinder, focusing the viewer's gaze onto the tiny patch of pure blue, breaking up the otherwise entirely urban landscape.  another building that features in this view is the santa maria delle penitenti. it is recognizable by its circular window below the roof and placement behind the ponte dei tre archi. this church was designed by giorgio massari in 1725 and the facade was never completed. guardi takes care to ensure its recognizability despite its modest appearance.  references  http://www.venicethefuture.com/schede/uk/242?aliusid=242  1770 paintings paintings by francesco guardi paintings in the frick collection cityscape paintings of venice
alfred john henry watts (14 october 1873 - 3 august 1954) was an australian politician who was a labor party member of the legislative assembly of western australia from 1904 to 1905, representing the seat of northam.  early life watts was born in lowan county, victoria, to caroline rokasky and alfred watts. he moved to western australia in 1896, initially living in perth and later moving to northam in 1901, where he ran a land agency.  political career watts was elected to parliament at the 1904 state election, replacing the retiring george throssell (a former premier). he was one of a number of labor mps elected in previously non-labor seats, a situation which allowed the labor party to form government in western australia for the first time. however, watts's time in parliament was short-lived, as he was defeated by james mitchell (a future premier) at the early 1905 election. he recontested the seat unsuccessfully at the 1908 and 1911 elections, and in 1907 also ran for the labor party in a legislative council by-election, losing to george throssell in east province.  personal life watts moved to waeel (near cunderdin) in 1922, and eventually retired to safety bay (on the southern outskirts of perth), where he died in 1954 at the age of 80. he had married twice, having a daughter by his first wife and eight children by his second.  references  1873 births 1954 deaths australian labor party members of the parliament of western australia members of the western australian legislative assembly people from victoria (australia)
jawahar navodaya vidyalaya, gadag is a cbse affiliated school in gadag district of karnataka under the hyderabad region of navodaya vidyalaya samiti (nvs). jnv gadag is located near village korlahalli of mundargi taluka. this school is a residence school and all facilities to the students is free of cost.  references  external links   schools in gadag district jawahar navodaya vidyalayas in karnataka educational institutions established in 1999 1999 establishments in karnataka
aim is the fifth studio album by english rapper and record producer m.i.a. it was released on 9 september 2016 by interscope and polydor records in the uk.  prior to its release, the rapper claimed that it would be her final album.  m.i.a. worked on the composition and production of the album with a range of collaborators, including blaqstarr, diplo and skrillex. as with m.i.a.'s earlier releases, the album mixes eastern and western musical influences. lyrically, a number of tracks on the album contain themes of borders and refugees.  aim received mixed to positive reviews from music critics, with some praising certain songs but arguing that the overall album lacked focus.  it spent just one week on the album charts in both the uk and us.  in the us, the album peaked at number 66 and was her first album not to reach the top 40 on the billboard 200 since her debut release in 2005, although like her previous three albums aim topped the magazine's dance/electronic albums chart.  composition and recording  m.i.a. released her fourth album matangi in november 2013.  although it received generally positive reviews,  it failed to match the commercial performance of her previous two albums.  early reports indicated that the rapper's next album would be titled matahdatah and have the concept of an audio-visual series filmed around the world, but on 14 july 2016, m.i.a. confirmed that the album would actually be entitled aim.  she considered it her most positive work, saying that there were "no complaints" on it, and claimed that it would be her last album.  tracks for the album were recorded in various locations around the world.  m.i.a. used several different studios in jamaica to record five songs which appear on the recording, including "foreign friend", which features a guest appearance by jamaican singjay dexta daps.  "swords" was recorded during a trip to india.  the rapper worked with a number of producers on the album, including reuniting with american producer diplo.  the pair had collaborated previously, including on m.i.a.'s biggest hit, "paper planes", but had subsequently experienced a personal dispute which included m.i.a. attacking diplo in interviews, and led to matangi being the first of the artist's albums to include no input from diplo.  in june 2016, however, m.i.a. visited the parklife music
festival in manchester, where diplo was performing with the act major lazer, and the pair worked on the track, reportedly in the festival's car park.  diplo characterised the recording of the track, which included m.i.a. sending a new section of vocals to him at the last minute, as "done very much in [m.i.a.'s] style: complete chaos".  m.i.a. reportedly wrote "borders" in two hours, the quickest she had ever written a song.  the track "freedun" features vocals by former one direction member zayn malik, although the two did not actually meet during its recording.  m.i.a. stated that she had written the song at a much earlier date but had previously deemed it "a bit too mainstream sounding" for her to record, but that it was well-suited to the collaboration with malik.  she also stated that she had spoken to popcaan and rihanna about collaborating on the album, but that neither opportunity had come to fruition.  music and lyrics  as with m.i.a.'s earlier releases, the album mixes eastern and western musical influences.  the track "swords" uses the sound of clashing swords, recorded in india, as percussion.  in its earliest form, the song "visa" sampled elton john's song "circle of life" from the film the lion king, but m.i.a. later announced via periscope that she had replaced the "circle of life" sample with a sample of her own early single, "galang", claiming that she had received legal threats and that if she used her own song, no one would be able to "stop it".  lyrically, a number of tracks on the album contain themes of borders and refugees.  the song "freedun" sparked a brief controversy when many listeners believed that the lyrics contained the word "rape", however the rapper was insistent that the word was actually "rate".  the lyrics of "bird song" consist mainly of puns centred on the names of species of bird.  two versions of the track appear on the album.  the version produced by blaqstarr focusses heavily on sounds which have been likened to that of a kazoo, while the version produced by diplo features more guitar sounds and less kazoo.  release and artwork in may 2016, m.i.a. stated that the album would be released in july of the same year
, but in july the release date was pushed back to september.  the official track listing of the deluxe edition was announced on 18 august 2016. the album's cover was revealed on the same day and features a cropped photograph of the rapper on an orange and black background.  the album's artwork also includes the slogan "m.i.a. - uniting people since 2003" and images of flowers, books, and hands making a bird-like shape.  promotion a number of the songs from the album were made available ahead of the album's release, either as singles or through other media.  the first teaser of the project came in may 2015, when m.i.a. shared the demo version of the track "platforms" on her soundcloud page.  "the new international sound pt. 2" was first released in june 2015, as part of french producer surkin's project gener8ion. "swords" and "borders" were both released later the same year.  in march of the following year, m.i.a. debuted "mia ola" (later renamed "visa") via her soundcloud.  the complete album, consisting of 12 tracks, was previewed on periscope on 17 may 2016.  "go off" was released on 15 july 2016 as the lead single from the album. the blaqstarr-produced version of "bird song" was released on 12 august 2016 and the diplo version of the same song six days later. "freedun" was released as the fifth single on 2 september 2016 and "foreign friend" was previewed in an internet podcast on 7 september.  critical reception  aim received mixed to positive reviews by critics. at metacritic, which assigns a weighted mean rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 65, based on 29 reviews, indicating "generally favorable reviews".  writing in the guardian, harriet gibsone took note of the album's "vision, scope and experimentation", but described it overall as "frustratingly unfocused". will hodgkinson said the record "starts well but quickly meanders into mediocrity", in his review for the times. greg cochrane from loud and quiet magazine praised several individual tracks but described the album as sounding "disparate, like a collection of ideas rather than songs". el hunt, in diy, referred to the album "colliding jangling rhythms with brash, lane-switching pop parps", describing the music as
"abrasive" and "divisive". in the irish times, jim carroll said while m.i.a. "throws plenty of tough punches at the refugee crisis on excellent tunes such as borders, visa and foreign friend", the rest of the album finds her toning down "the polemic in favour of more user-friendly pop grooves which lack the focus or laser-guided pitch of her other work".  a more positive review came from stephen carlick of exclaim!, who was slightly critical of the album's length but believed there was "plenty here to love" and stated that overall it was "focused and purposeful, a loose collection characterized by sticky-hot swagger, political awareness and, most importantly, urgency." q magazine said it was perhaps m.i.a.'s best album since 2007's kala, while gary suarez from the quietus regarded it as one of 2017's best hip hop albums. vulture critic craig jenkins called it m.i.a.'s "dance-pop salvo" and "a welcoming blend of old-school hip-hop, dancehall, dubstep, and eastern textures". writing for vice, veteran critic robert christgau described the album as "loopy [and] simplistic" and the lyrics as "beyond basic" but considered the overall tone to be proof of the artist's more positive state of mind.  christgau ranked it as the fourth best album of the year in his ballot for the village voices annual pazz & jop critics poll. rolling stone ranked aim at number 18 on its "20 best pop albums of 2016" annual year-end list.  commercial performance the album entered the uk albums chart at number 63, one place higher than matangi, but only spent one week on the chart. on the us billboard 200 chart the album debuted at number 66, but as in the uk fell off the chart entirely the following week. it was her first album not to reach the top 40 on the billboard 200 since arular, her debut, which reached number 190.  the album debuted atop the us dance/electronic albums chart, with 6,000 copies sold in its first week, making it her fourth consecutive album to debut at number one on the chart, as well as her fifth album overall to reach the top five.  track listing credits adapted from liner notes.  notes   signifies a co-producer.   signifies an additional producer.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  external links   aim at anydecent
music? (list of collated international reviews)  2016 albums m.i.a. (rapper) albums albums produced by diplo albums produced by m.i.a. (rapper) albums produced by polow da don albums produced by richard x hip hop albums by british artists hip hop albums by english artists interscope records albums polydor records albums
queen dowager xuan (; 338-265 bc) was a chinese regent. she was a girl from the royal family of the kingdom of chu and one of the royal concubines (consorts but not the wife) of king huiwen of qin. she was the mother of king zhaoxiang of qin (r. 306-251 bc) and acted as his regent when he was young. she was the first woman confirmed to have acted as regent in china and the first politically influential women noted since lady nanzi.  empress dowager as queen dowager, she entered illicit relations with the "barbarian" yiqu king and had two sons with him, but later tricked and killed him. following that coup, the qin army marched into yiqu territory at the queen dowager's orders; the qin annihilated yiqu and thus came to possess the ordos region.  yiqu's fall rendered qin a safe northern border. since there was no more hostile forces in the north of qin, yiqu's fall ensured qin's successful expansion eastward.  queen xuan was the ruler - first a regent and then as de facto ruler - of qin starting from 307 bce until around 270s bce. she eventually lost her power due to fan sui's scheme against her. she represented qin's interests and protected and expanded qin's realm. however, she refused to fight her homeland chu when the state of han, under the attack of chu, asked qin for reinforcement.  in fiction and popular culture  portrayed by ning jing in the qin empire ii: alliance (2012) and the qin empire iii (2017)  portrayed by sun li in the legend of mi yue (2015)  references   330s bc births 265 bc deaths rulers of qin women leaders of china chinese royal consorts 3rd-century bc women rulers 4th-century bc women rulers chu (state) 4th-century bc chinese people 4th-century bc chinese women
pietro paolo febei (died 4 august 1649) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of bagnoregio (1635-1649).  biography on 9 july 1635, pietro paolo febei was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of bagnoregio. on 15 july 1635, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, bishop of fano. he served as bishop of bagnoregio until his death on 4 august 1649.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1649 deaths
edwin h. stern (born june 10, 1941) is a lawyer and judge who served as acting justice on the new jersey supreme court (judge of the appellate division, temporarily assigned to the supreme court).  stern grew up in south orange, new jersey, graduating from rutgers university in 1963 and from columbia law school in 1966. he has lived in west orange and monroe township.  stern was a law clerk to a judge on the appellate division and from 1967 to 1970 worked as a private practice lawyer. he later joined the hudson county prosecutor's office, where he worked as first assistant (1970-73) and then as acting prosecutor (1973-74). after that, he worked as the director of criminal practice in the administrative office of the courts (aoc) until 1977. he worked as a deputy attorney general in the department of law and public safety until 1980, when he returned to the aoc, where worked as the assistant director for legal services.  new jersey governor brendan byrne appointed him to the superior court in 1981.  stern became an appellate judge on september 1, 1985, on the new jersey superior court, appellate division, and on september 1, 1998, becoming the presiding judge of appellate division part h.  on may 3, 2010, governor chris christie declined to re-nominate john e. wallace, jr., whose term expired on may 20, 2010. he was the first justice of the supreme court to be denied tenure in more than a half-century since the adoption of the 1947 state constitution. chief justice stuart rabner appointed stern to the supreme court in september 2010 during a period of controversy and conflict with the new jersey senate about its political composition. he sat on the court until his mandatory retirement in 2011 after which he took a position at gibbons p.c.  see also courts of new jersey mary catherine cuff ariel a. rodriguez dorothea o'c. wefing list of justices of the supreme court of new jersey  references  external links ballotpedia  1941 births living people rutgers university alumni columbia law school alumni new jersey state court judges justices of the supreme court of new jersey people from monroe township, middlesex county, new jersey people from south orange, new jersey people from west orange, new jersey
summer songs 2 is the second commercial mixtape by american rapper lil yachty. it was released on july 20, 2016, exclusively on apple music, with other streaming services following the release. the mixtape features guest appearances from thegoodperry, g herbo, jban$2turnt, byou, big brutha chubba, offset, tyler royale, k$upreme and cook laflare, among others. the production from the mixtape was handled by thegoodperry, wizard beatz, d33j, misogi, iloveupeter, chris fresh, khalil byous, earl, 1mind, sage and free school.  critical reception  writing for exclaim!, chris dart called it a "mix of likeability and being at the right place at the right time," and praised the production, which he stated "runs the gamut from chillwave to experimental keyboard soundscapes to something best described as what would happen you force fed trap music through an '80s soft rock band." pitchfork wrote that "yachty is delivering an aesthetic, which is catnip to some (mostly those 25 and under) and repellent to others. but if you're locked in, summer songs 2 can be a lot of fun."   tiny mix tapes highlighted the mixtape in their monthly roundup, describing it as "another mega ray of light to a chorus of auto-tuned cheers and boat ad-libs," describing the songs as "fresh air in a stiff room, and damn if this world doesn't need more of it."  track listing  charts  references   2016 mixtape albums hip hop albums by american artists lil yachty albums southern hip hop albums sequel albums quality control music albums
quintin theodore petroc molesworth riley (27 october 1905 - 25 december 1980) was a british arctic explorer who was awarded the polar medal.  biography quintin riley was educated at lancing college, where he met gino watkins (1907-1932). he continued his education at pembroke college, where he graduated in 1927.  in 1930-31 riley joined the british arctic air route expedition as a meteorologist. this expedition consisted in a team of fourteen men led by watkins with the mission to survey and monitor weather conditions in the little explored east coast of greenland. barely a year later riley returned to greenland with the smaller 1932-33 east greenland expedition, led by watkins as well. he was one of the only three remaining team members following watkin's untimely death at tuttilik fjord.   riley next joined the 1934-1937 british graham land expedition led by his former greenland teammate john rymill. in 1938 riley joined the royal naval volunteer reserve and became active in norway and iceland - among other places - during world war ii. towards the end of ww2, riley was appointed commanding officer of no. 30 commando - the brainchild of commander ian fleming.   riley died in a road accident on christmas day 1980 while he was living in retirement in essex.  honours the riley glacier in palmer land, antarctica, was named after him.  further reading   courtauld, simon, the watkins boys, london, michael russell, 2010. .  scott, j.m., the land that god gave cain, london, chatto and windus, 1933.  see also arctic exploration freddie spencer chapman  references  external links essex chronicle - quintin relished adventuring but he found 'normal' home life difficult archives - riley, british arctic air route expedition  1905 births 1980 deaths fellows of the royal geographical society people educated at lancing college explorers of the arctic english explorers english polar explorers recipients of the polar medal
eunice yung hoi-yan (; born 7 june 1977) is a hong kong barrister and pro-beijing politician. she is a member of the new people's party (npp) and the civil force (cf). she became member of the legislative council of hong kong for new territories east in 2016 and for election committee in 2021.  early life yung was born in hong kong in 1977 and was educated at st. francis' canossian college and rosaryhill school. she went on to study computer science at the university of british columbia (ubc) and graduated in 2001. unsuccessful in her bid to begin her chosen career as a gaming programmer, she stayed on as a research assistant and helped develop a journal research programme at ubc. after she returned to hong kong in the summer of 2003, she studied law at the city university of hong kong and qualified as a barrister in 2008.  political career yung became a volunteer legal consultant of the new home association, a pro-beijing non-governmental organisation that helps mainland chinese immigrants and ethnic minorities integrate into hong kong society. she was also founding member of the hong kong professionals and senior executives association, a pro-beijing professionals' association where she broadened her social circle by meeting with political and business figures. in 2015, she founded the youth and professional network to help young people with start-ups.  yung joined civil force (cf), a pro-beijing sha tin-based political group that formed an alliance with the new people's party (npp) in february 2014, effecting the expansion of regina ip's party from hong kong island to new territories east.  in 2016, yung became the npp-cf candidate in the legislative council election, leading a seven-member ticket in new territories east and won a seat with 36,183 votes.  political views in securing her legislative council seat, yung is widely considered to have received support from the central government's liaison office based in sai wan, with which she has confessed a "working relationship", earning her the nickname, "goddaughter of sai wan".  she is best known for her interest in the promotion of e-sports and her statement that "there should not be too much politics inside or outside of the legislature".  she considers regina ip her political mentor.  in may 2018, eunice yung caused controversy by stating that domestic workers in hong kong often gather in large groups in public areas, thus they affect the hygiene and daily lives of other members of the public and nearby shops. she suggested the government should segregate them by providing
additional activity centres for them. several groups representing hong kong's domestic workers including the international migrants alliance, asian migrants coordinating body and hong kong confederation of trade unions condemned the remarks as racist against migrant domestic workers in hong kong, saying it contributed to discrimination against ethnic minorities. a few days later, around 150 people from the same groups held a protest outside the new people's party headquarters calling yung to retract her remarks and apologise. yung met with the protesters briefly, saying "i didn't intend to offend any domestic helpers, and if they felt disrespected, i am sorry."  in february 2021, yung voiced concerns that the 2019-20 hong kong protests had protestors who were recruited with drugs, a claim that police commissioner chris tang said there was no evidence for.  in march 2021, yung said that shows at west kowloon cultural district's m+ museum caused "great concern" to her and the public, and claimed that they are "spreading hatred" against mainland china. yung also claimed that "if you point your middle finger towards tiananmen square, it means you want to show your anger against it, or you want to subvert the government with your artwork," to which ai weiwei responded "all artworks, if they are of value, raise questions and challenges. challenging authority is one of the core values of art" and "if she thinks artworks are just ornaments, then i'd say she doesn't understand art."  also in march 2021, yung asked commerce secretary edward yau about what the government would do to implement supervision of rthk.  in march 2021, yung also expressed her support for cotton from xinjiang, after several companies stopped purchasing the cotton due to concerns about human rights violations. yung claimed that companies were boycotting the cotton based on erroneous information, and that "i will not pay for lies. we should firmly safeguard our national image and interests."  in april 2021, yung criticized martin lee, margaret ng ngoi-yee, and albert ho, claiming that they should be disciplined by the law society of hong kong because they had incited others to participate in an illegal antigovernmental protest.  on 13 august 2021, the pro-beijing newspaper wen wei po published an article which quoted yung as saying that the hong kong journalists association had continuously spread "anti-government" views.  personal life yung is an avid gamer, describing herself as a "tech girl".  yung married derek yuen mi-chang, the policy director of new people's party, in august 2018. mimi
and erica yuen, executive directors of mi ming mart, are yung's sisters-in-law. erica is also the former chairwoman of people power, a pro-democracy political party and a candidate for the 2016 legislative council election.  in september 2018, she announced that she was four months pregnant. her daughter was born 23 january 2019, making yung the first sitting hong kong legislator to give birth.  on 5 january 2022, carrie lam announced new warnings and restrictions against social gathering due to potential covid-19 outbreaks. one day later, it was discovered that yung attended a birthday party hosted by witman hung wai-man, with 222 guests.  at least one guest tested positive with covid-19, causing all guests to be quarantined. yung was warned by legislative council president andrew leung to not attend any meetings until after finishing her last mandatory covid-19 test on 22 january 2022. however, she decided to attend the meeting on 19 january 2022, against leung's orders.  references  1977 births living people university of british columbia faculty of science alumni alumni of the city university of hong kong barristers of hong kong new people's party (hong kong) politicians civil force politicians hk legco members 2016-2020 hk legco members 2020-2024 members of the election committee of hong kong, 2021-2026 members of the legislative council of hong kong hong kong women in politics hong kong pro-beijing politicians
cylindrepomus malaccensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
the 2018 united states senate election in tennessee took place on november 6, 2018, concurrently with other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent republican senator bob corker opted to retire instead of running for a third term. republican u.s. representative marsha blackburn won the open seat, defeating former democratic governor phil bredesen.  republican primary  candidates  nominee  marsha blackburn, u.s. representative  eliminated in primary  aaron pettigrew, truck driver  withdrawn  bob corker, incumbent u.s. senator  rolando toyos, ophthalmologist and candidate for the shelby county commission in 2010  larry crim, perennial candidate  andy ogles, former director of the tennessee chapter of americans for prosperity  stephen fincher, former u.s. representative  declined  mae beavers, former state senator (formerly ran for governor)  diane black, u.s. representative (unsuccessfully ran for governor)  randy boyd, former commissioner of the department of economic and community development (unsuccessfully ran for governor)  tim burchett, knox county mayor (running for tn-02)  joe carr, former state representative, candidate for u.s. senate in 2014 and candidate for tn-06 in 2016  chuck fleischmann, u.s. representative (running for reelection)  mark green, state senator (running for tn-07)  beth harwell, speaker of the tennessee house of representatives (unsuccessfully ran for governor)  bill haslam, governor of tennessee  david kustoff, u.s. representative (running for reelection)  bill lee, businessman (ran for governor)  peyton manning, retired football player  randy mcnally, lieutenant governor of tennessee  ron ramsey, former lieutenant governor and candidate for governor in 2010  speculation surrounding senator corker on september 26, 2017, republican senator bob corker announced that he would not seek reelection in 2018. without corker running, it was widely believed that the republican party would have a much harder time keeping the seat. many called on corker to reverse his decision to retire. former u.s. representative fincher dropped out of the race, calling on corker to jump back in and challenge u.s. representative blackburn for the gop nomination. fincher said in a statement that the gop should unite "behind a candidate who can win" the general election. blackburn said she would remain in the race even if corker reversed his decision. amid the
speculation about corker's decision, many of tennessee's republican politicians, including many in the tennessee general assembly, reiterated their support for blackburn. corker's chief of staff announced on february 27, 2018, that corker would stick with his plan to retire.  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  phil bredesen, former governor of tennessee and former mayor of nashville  eliminated in primary  gary davis  john wolfe jr. attorney and perennial candidate  withdrawn  james mackler, attorney and veteran  bill bailey, teaching assistant and retired ups trailer mechanic  declined andy berke, mayor of chattanooga megan barry, former mayor of nashville  jim cooper, u.s. representative and nominee for u.s. senate in 1994  karl dean, former mayor of nashville (running for governor)  craig fitzhugh, minority leader of the tennessee house of representatives (unsuccessfully ran for governor)  bill freeman, businessman and candidate for mayor of nashville in 2015  lee harris, minority leader of the tennessee senate  jeff yarbro, state senator  raumesh akbari, state representative  john ray clemmons, state representative  tim mcgraw, country musician, songwriter and actor  results  independents  dean hill, us army veteran, ex-government, business owner, realtor  general election the election was expected to be among the most competitive senate races in 2018. corker's retirement and bredesen's entry into the race made it one of the few potential offensive opportunities for democrats. on november 1, 2018, incumbent bob corker announced that he would not endorse either blackburn or bredesen; he added that either candidate would be a good senator for tennessee.  polls showed the race to be close until the confirmation hearings for supreme court justice brett kavanaugh in september and october, which many tennesseans believed the democratic party handled poorly. this is believed to have mobilized republican voters and cost bredesen any chance of winning. bredesen also announced his support for kavanaugh, which some believe may have cost him supporters.  predictions  debates complete video of debate, september 25, 2018 complete video of debate, october 10, 2018  endorsements  fundraising  polling  with generic republican and generic democrat  with bob corker  with stephen fincher  with clay travis  with bob corker and generic democrat {| class="wikitable" |- valign=bottom ! poll source ! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| bobcorker (r)
! style="width:100px;"| genericdemocrat ! undecided |- | public policy polling (d-our lives on the line) | align=center| august 11-13, 2017 | align=center| 663 | align=center| ± 3.6% |  align=center| 47% | align=center| 37% | align=center| 16%  with peyton manning  results on november 6, 2018, blackburn defeated bredesen in the general election, carrying all but three counties, the largest number of counties ever won in an open senate election in tennessee. although polls began to show the race in blackburn's favor following the kavanaugh hearings, blackburn won by a larger margin than all but one poll showed.  notes  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites marsha blackburn (r) for senate phil bredesen (d) for senate kris l. todd (i) for senate  2018 tennessee 2018 tennessee elections
is a japanese former professional baseball player. he played for the chiba lotte marines of the japan pacific league in 1994 and 1995.  references  1967 births living people japanese baseball players chiba lotte marines players baseball people from nagoya
|}  the sweet mimosa stakes is a listed flat horse race in ireland open to fillies and mares aged three years and over. it is run at naas over a distance of 6 furlongs (1,206 metres), and it is scheduled to take place each year in july.  the race was first run in 2003.  it was run at leopardstown until 2007, and at the curragh in 2008 and 2009. it is currently sponsored by the yeomanstown stud.  records  leading jockey (3 wins): billy lee - katia (2011), fort del oro (2016), sonaiyla (2020) johnny murtagh - elletelle (2008), bewitched (2010), miss lahar (2013)  leading trainer (2 wins):  kevin prendergast  - ulfah (2004), evening time (2007)  winners  see also  horse racing in ireland  list of irish flat horse races  references racing post:  , , , , , , , , ,  , , , , , , ,   flat races in ireland sprint category horse races for fillies and mares naas racecourse recurring sporting events established in 2003 2003 establishments in ireland
soulful road is the second and final studio album recorded by american male vocal quartet new york city, released in 1974 on the chelsea label. the album's cover art parodies that of the beatles' 1969 album abbey road.  singles the album features the song "happiness is", which peaked at  no. 20 on the hot soul singles chart. also featured are two other chart singles: "love is what you make it" and "got to get you back in my life". another single released, "take my hand", failed to chart.  track listing  personnel tim mcqueen, john brown, edward schell, claude johnson - vocals  linda creed, evette benton, barbara ingram, lucille jones - background vocals  production thom bell - producer, arranger don murray, joe tarsia - engineers michael hutchinson, jim gallagher, dirk devlin - assistant engineers  charts  singles  references  external links    1974 albums new york city (band) albums albums produced by thom bell albums arranged by thom bell chelsea records albums albums recorded at sigma sound studios
north east victoria is an australian geographical indication for a wine zone in the australian state of victoria. it includes five named wine regions:  alpine valleys  beechworth  glenrowan  king valley  rutherglen  geography the north east victoria zone includes the western slopes of the great dividing range and is bounded on the north side by the murray river. when it was defined, it it included the shires of beechworth, benalla, bright, chiltern, myrtleford, oxley, rutherglen, tallangatta, upper murray, wangaratta, yackandandah, and parts of the shires of tungamah and yarrawonga as well as the city of benalla, the city of wangaratta and the rural city of wodonga.  references  wine regions of victoria (australia)
the 2013 fc aktobe season was the 13th successive season that the club played in the kazakhstan premier league, the highest tier of association football in kazakhstan. aktobe won the league title for the first time since 2009, qualifying for the uefa champions league. aktobe also reached the semifinal of the kazakhstan cup and the play-off round of the europa league.  squad  transfers  winter  in:  out:  summer  in:  out:  competitions  kazakhstan premier league  first round  results summary  results by round  results  league table  championship round  results summary  results by round  results  table  kazakhstan cup  uefa europa league  qualifying rounds  squad statistics  appearances and goals  |- |colspan="14"|players who appeared for aktobe that left during the season:  |}  goal scorers  disciplinary record  references  fc aktobe seasons aktobe akt
ayesha akhter (born 15 august 1984, in jamalpur) is a bangladeshi women's cricketer since the 2007-08 bangladeshi cricket season. ayesha is a right-handed batter and an occasional bowler. she has represented the bangladesh women's national cricket team in limited overs internationals and twenty20 internationals. at club and division level she has played for the dhaka division women, the ansar and village defence party women, the abahani limited women, the sheikh jamal dhanmondi club women and the bagan krira chakra women.  references  external links    1984 births living people bangladeshi women cricketers bangladesh women one day international cricketers bangladesh women twenty20 international cricketers people from jamalpur district
haline leme scatrut (born august 9, 1992) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team. she was named in brazil's women's sevens team to the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links         haline leme scatrut at the [[2018 south  1992 births living people brazil international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players olympic rugby sevens players of brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics pan american games bronze medalists for brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games south american games gold medalists for brazil south american games medalists in rugby sevens competitors at the 2018 south american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics
jessica price is an american writer, editor, designer and producer of video and tabletop games; she is known for her work on the pathfinder roleplaying game and guild wars 2. she is also known for speaking about sexism in the gaming industry.  career price worked as an editor at microsoft studios before she joined paizo as a project manager in 2013. she has since contributed creatively to such pathfinder products as inner sea races and planes on power. price was also a designer on starfinder core rulebook for the starfinder roleplaying game.  in 2016, price was announced as a gen con industry insider featured presenter. after noting that the previous year's gen con included a panel titled "writing women friendly comics" during which a controversial moderator caused some women to walk out and even leave crying, price felt that her appearance as a speaker would give an opportunity to change things for women in the gaming industry. in 2017, price was again announced as a gen con industry insider featured presenter for gen con 50.  in 2018, price was a narrative designer on guild wars 2 for arenanet. price has been a writer for dungeons & dragons on sourcebooks such as mythic odysseys of theros (2020) and van richten's guide to ravenloft (2021).  views on video gaming industry  price has been a notable speaker on sexism in the broader gaming industry. in a 2013 interview on respect and sexism in the industry, price said: some of it's unintentional. male programmers will be shocked by the idea of making the default avatar female for a game intended primarily for female audiences. marketers will think that making a console pink will magically fix its branding problems with women. studios making games intended for kids and moms will refuse to give a successful female game designer an interview because she's never done a first-person shooter. [...] but some of it's very intentional. i've had every inch of my anatomy commented on by coworkers. i've had marketing guys propose that our marketing should consist of me putting on a low-cut top and talking about our product. i've had people insist that i must have slept with someone to get into the industry. [...] i've been sexually harassed, and had the people i went to for help tell me i must enjoy the attention, instruct me to deal with it because they didn't want to fire the guy, and warn me not to go to hr because i'd get fired for being a troublemaker. one guy had a history of
violence, and clenched his fists and came close to taking a swing at me when i told him he had to stop touching me and talking about my breasts. the response from my chain of command was still, basically, "deal with it yourself." katie mettler, for the washington post, reported that for the first time there would be more female than male speakers at 2016 gen con. at the event, price said "we can change things. it doesn't have to be glacial change. it can be immediate. [...] when it's half women, the pressure to be a woman in games is off. you can just be a person who works in games".  tim mulkerin, for mic, interviewed price in 2017 on why video game developers need to release diversity reports. on that topic, price said "numbers don't always tell the whole story. [...] even if video game developers did publish a diversity report ... it depends where the women are. [...] and for any woman who actually is in the creative or production side, you're still likely to be the only woman on the team, the only woman in the room". mulkerin wrote that "for example, if a company is 40% women - an optimistic stretch - but they all work in low-level admin positions and the executive boards are all still predominantly male, that company is still failing at diversity and inclusion".  firing controversy   on july 5, 2018, arenanet founder mike o'brien announced that two game developers, price and peter fries, had been fired from the company following a heated twitter exchange with a community member. megan farokhmanesh, for verge, reported that "on july 3rd, narrative designer price tweeted a 29-tweet thread dissecting the challenges of writing player characters in an mmorpg. a streamer who goes by the name deroir responded, 'really interesting thread to read! however, allow me to disagree slightly,' and shared a three-tweet explanation of how narrative design influences player expression in the sort of games that price narratively designs. price both replied directly to deroir, tweeting 'thanks for trying to tell me what we do internally, my dude,' and retweeted his response with the caption 'today in being a female game dev'". price stated she would block "the next rando asshat" who tried to explain her job.  after o'brien released a statement saying that price's and fries' "attacks on the community" were "unacceptable",
price spoke with polygon and said "let's be clear: in 2018, it's absurd to pretend ignorance of what would happen to a woman fired for speaking about sexism, because he feels she got too uppity. [o'brien] painted a target on everyone's back. he didn't just fail peter and me, or even the employees for which he was responsible. he failed the entire industry. he caved to a handful of people and an army of bots and sock puppets," she added. "now he's got almost every female developer i know - as well as some men - furious with him. i've got recruiters pinging me promising they'll steer candidates away from arenanet, and game design professors saying they're going to warn their students away. i've also had a lot of arenanet co-workers and other industry colleagues contacting me to express how afraid this has made them. [...] peter stepped in to point out that his experience as a male dev was different. he stated pretty simple facts. i had no idea he was going to step in. i adore him; he was doing the right thing, and he deserves none of this crap".  reactions to their firing and the subsequent statements from arenanet led to a mixed reaction from fans and others inside the industry. nathan grayson, for kotaku, reported that there was an uptick in online harassment of female developers after price's firing and that backlash to price originated in gamergate forums. farokhmanesh wrote that "arenanet's swift action to fire both price and fries sends a disturbing message to its fans, and especially its most toxic ones: that their power is directly correlated to how loud they yell. it's a worrying precedent for anyone interested in working for arenanet, but especially those in marginalized communities that are more likely to face blowback and harassment from the worst parts of its fanbase".  works  references  external links   rpggeek rpg designer page: jessica price  year of birth missing (living people) living people american video game designers women video game designers role-playing game designers 21st-century american women writers
edna santini (born july 15, 1992) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team. she was selected for brazil women's national rugby sevens team for the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links     1992 births living people brazilian female rugby league players brazil women's national rugby league team players brazil international rugby sevens players brazilian people of italian descent female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
perry paris moise (born september 21, 1996), better known by his stage name thegoodperry (formerly known as burberry perry), is an american record producer and hip hop recording artist. perry gained recognition for his production in lil yachty's hit debut single "one night" from his debut mixtape lil boat in 2016. in may 2016, perry released his debut self-titled ep burberry perry. on july 27, 2016, perry changed his name from burberry perry to thegoodperry because of a lawsuit filed from the british clothing-line burberry. perry frequently collaborates with lil yachty, playing a part in summer songs 2. on march 16, 2018, lil yachty explained on twitter how he and perry do not talk anymore, but they do not necessarily have beef.  legal issues on july 25, 2016, british clothing line burberry sued perry for using their name for his own personal profit. the company also sued for his cover artwork on his self-titled ep burberry perry, which featured an altered version of the burberry plaid design and knight logo. in response, perry changed his name from burberry perry to thegoodperry.  discography  extended plays  mixtapes  singles  as lead artist  guest appearances  production discography  2015    wintertime zi and lil yachty - hey honey, let's spend wintertime on a boat  01. "courtside choppas"  03. "mossed" (featuring nessly)  04. "remember december"  2016    lil yachty - lil boat  01. "intro / just keep swimming"  02. "wanna be us" (featuring thegoodperry) [produced with colby crump]  10. "one night"  13. "i'm sorry" (featuring thegoodperry)  14. "we did it (positivity song)"   lil yachty - summer songs 2  01. "intro (first day of summer)"  10. "yeah yeah"  12. "such ease" (featuring thegoodperry and tyler royale)  2017    lil yachty - teenage emotions  16. "running with the ghost" (featuring grace)  2018   els - what girls do - feat. lil pump - single  1. "what girls do" (featuring lil pump)  references  1996 births living people american hip hop record producers
the history of the book in brazil focuses on the development of the access to publishing resources and acquisition of the book in the country, covering a period extending from the beginning of the editorial activity during colonization to today's publishing market, including the history of publishing and bookstores that allowed the modern accessibility to the book.  colonial period  it is believed that printing was only introduced by the settlers and colonisers in the colonies, which had a highly developed indigenous culture that the colonial power wanted to supplant or suppress. this idea is supported by the brazilian historian nelson werneck sodre  and others. printing, in the first two centuries of portuguese and spanish colonization, was in part a result of christian evangelization. it was deployed through religious initiative, so that its production was destined to meet the clergy's needs and that of the missions.  "historia da companhia de jesus no brasil", by serafim leite, says that the library of colegio santo inacio, in o morro do castelo, rio de janeiro. (this was a landform that existed in the city of rio, the hill being one of the foundation points of the city in the sixteenth century and which housed landmarks of great importance, such as colonial forts and buildings of the jesuits. nevertheless, it was destroyed in an urban reform in 1922.) this centre is believed to have undertaken some printed jobs around 1724, the accuracy of the claim not be ascertained. it could be referring to two books of the time, "vocabulario de la lengua guarany", by antonio luiz restrepo (1722), and "arte de la lengua guarany", which were printed in a region that is currently part of brazil, but which at the time belonged to paraguay, pueblo de santa maria la mayor.  in most colonies, the necessities of governance made it an imperative to accept printing, and only in portuguese latin america did the administration remained so elementary that this need was dispensed with. this need only become imminent when the government of the colony suffered the impact of the napoleonic invasion, a few years later.  the first attempt to introduce effective printing into brazil was made by the dutch, during the period of their occupation of northeastern brazil, between 1630 and 1650.  during the dutch occupation, negotiations between pernambuco and the netherlands resulted in the selection of a printer, janszonon pieter, to be in charge of printing in recife, but he died as soon as he arrived in brazil on 3 august 1643. two years later, the dutch west
indies company was still looking out for a printer without success. at the time, maurice of nassau had already left, and the pressured dutch no longer gave priority to the subject.  the start of publishing activity  about 60 years later, recife had the first printer of brazil according to historians ferreira de carvalho and pereira da costa, but the identity of the printer is not known. serafim leite, in "arts and workshops of the jesuits in brazil,", says the printer worked from 1703 to 1706, and argues that the typesetter was a jesuit, antonio da costa, but there is no proof, however, the existence of such a printer.  in rio de janeiro, in 1747, there is definitive evidence is available that there was a printer, via leaflets printed at the time. the printer was antonio isidoro da fonseca, a recognized typographer of lisbon, who had sold his business and come to [brazil]. isidoro had problems in lisbon, with the inquisition, being considered as "the jew" editor. antonio jose da silva, of rio, was born in 1703 from a family of converted jews, and that turned out to be burned later in an auto de fe of the inquisition on 19 october 1739. at the time, the governor of [rio de janeiro] and [minas gerais], gomes freire de andrade, was interested in stimulating the intellectual life of the city of rio de janeiro. he encouraged the creation of academia dos felizes in 1736, which became the academia dos selectos in 1752, which met at the palacio do governo itself. concrete proof of the existence of printing was a leaflet, 1747, whose authorship is attributed to luiz antonio rosado, and a so-called volume "hoc est conclusiones real entity metaphysicae, praeside rgm francisco de faria" in 1747. there are two other works, referring to bishop [antonio do desterro malheyro]. as soon as the news reached lisbon, however, there was order to close the letterpress, because printing in the colony was not considered appropriate at the time.  isidoro returned to portugal, and, after three years, requested a royal license to reinstate himself as a printer in the colony, in rio de janeiro or salvador, promising never to print without the appropriate civil and ecclesiastical licenses. the request was rejected  portugal's prohibition of printing in brazil was the factor that made all brazilian documents to get to be published in europe or to remain in the form of manuscripts. there are several papers written by brazilians
and printed in portugal at the time, including the poetry of claudio manuel da costa, the work of jose de santa rita durao, jose basilio da gama (author of "uruguay", 1769), tomas antonio gonzaga (whose work marilia de dirceu was published in four editions in lisbon between 1792 and 1800).  in 1792, there were only two bookstores in rio de janeiro, and possibly one of these was run by paul martim, a native of tours (in france) and the first rio bookseller. his son, paul martim filho kept the bookstore running until 1823. the books offered were usually pertaining to medicine or religion, and most of the books that arrived in brazil at the time were smuggled in.  arrival of the royal family in brazil   in 1808, when the royal family, under pressure from napoleon's invasion, moved to brazil, it took with them 60,000 volumes of the royal library. installed in the new capital, rio de janeiro, dom joao vi and his ministers created, among other developments, the royal library, now the national library (biblioteca nacional), which was established in 1810. the impact of this development caused an increase in the number of bookstores, with two existing in 1808 (those of paul martin and manuel jorge da silva) growing to five in 1809 (in addition to the above, those run by francisco luiz saturnino da veiga, manuel mandillo-which after 1814 was associated with jose norges pine-and joao roberto bourgeois); seven in 1812 (in addition to the previous, manuel joaquim da silva porto-which in 1815 was associated with pedro antonio campos bellos-and jose antonio da silva); 12 in 1816 (the additional ones being those of fernando jose pinheiro, jeronimo goncalves guimaraes, francisco jose nicolau mandillo, joao batista dos santos), and in 1818, 3 more (antonio joaquim da silva garcez, joao lopes de oliveira guimaraes and manuel monteiro trindade coelho). the newspaper correio braziliense", run by hipolito jose da costa pereira furtado de mendonca, was produced in england. in paris, there was a development of the publishing trade in portuguese, that would last a long time, almost until 1930.  there is disagreement over whether or not a printing press existed in brazil on the occasion of the arrival of the royal family. reportedly, a press with movable type was finally brought to brazil by the government itself, which had earlier been forbidden so vehemently. antonio de araujo e azevedo, then foreign minister and later
count of barca, brought and had installed the press in rio de janeiro, on the ground floor of his own home, 44 rua do passeio. brother jose mariano da conceicao veloso, a miner religious who had been to lisbon in 1790, returned to brazil with the royal family to work in the press of rio, the imprensa regia. the new press was launched on may 13, 1808, with the publication of a 27 page booklet, accompanied by the royal charter. in the 14 years of the printing monopoly in rio over a thousand items were produced.  publishing in the province   minas gerais the first book printed in the province was in vila rica, minas gerais, later ouro preto, in 1807, before the rise of the royal press (imprensa regia). governor athayde de mello, the future earl of condeixa, was so pleased with a poem in his honor by diogo de vasconcelos, who wished to see it printed. this impression was made by father jose joaquim viegas de menezes, in a small press for domestic purposes. associated with the portuguese manuel jose barbosa pimenta e sal, he gradually set up the "typographia patriota de barbosa & cia", which was completed in 1821.  after 1807, the first books printed in ouro preto were a collection of "laws of the empire of brazil" (leis do imperio do brasil) in 1835 by a printer called silva, and the "dictionary of the brazilian language" (diccionario da lingua brasileira), by luis maria da silva pinto in 1832. later, other printing houses emerged in sao joao del rei (1827), diamantina (1828) and marian (1830).  bahia  in bahia, as soon as the royal family came to brazil, a bookseller from salvador, manuel antonio da silva serva, a native of portugal, asked permission to go to england and get a printer to bahia; such permission was granted in 1809, and began printing in 1811. one might speculate that there were two printers at that time. serva died in 1819, and the press continued with his partner and son-in-law jose teixeira and carvalho, becoming known as "typographia da viuva serva, e carvalho." later, his son manuel started working at the firm. the publication known as silva serva had 176 titles, and the publisher survived with several name changes until 1846, but lost its monopoly position in 1823. during the struggle for independence in brazil, the troops of the joint pro-
portugal junta invaded "typographia da viuva serva" to stop the publication of the nationalist newspaper "constitucional". its editors fled to cachoeira, where they installed their own graphics to continue printing the weekly "o independente constitucional". the serva press continued producing the gazeta da bahia, which was pro-portugal, but when the nationalist cause triumphed in june 1823, its publication had to be stopped.  with the death of silva serva, bahia's literary production went into decline, only recovering in the 1890s. standing out, at the time, were  "livraria j. l. da fonseca magalhaes, editores," of the lawyer clovis bevilacqua between 1895 and 1910, and livraria catilina, founded by carlos pongetti on february 2, 1835, and which lasted until 1960, when it became the oldest bookstore in brazil. in 1864, sierra teriga took over its direction, passing it to xavier catiline in 1877. the catilina was a retail house, but had an impressive editorial stint, under the romualdo dos santos, and published works of castro alves, coelho neto, ruy barbosa, xavier marques, and ernesto carneiro ribeiro. the actual printing, however, was usually undertaken in portugal or other european countries, as was customary at the time.  maranhao maranhao was one of the first provinces to have a printing press. it was one of the most prosperous of the empire, due to the production of cotton, which held value since the invention of cartwright loom in 1787. during this period of development, there was a golden age cultural and intellectual activity in the region, under the influence of the portuguese elite. the golden age of literature begins with the appearance of the first of goncalves dias poems, in the 1840s, and goes on to the departure of aluisio azevedo to rio de janeiro, in the early 1880. two printers stand out at this time: belarmino de mattos and jose maria correa de frias.  printing was introduced in maranhao in 1821, by the governor of bernardo silveira pinto da fonseca, when he installed an official printer to produce the government newspaper conciliador do maranhao. a pre "columbian", the most modern of the time, was brought in from lisbon, and then converted into the  "typographia nacional maranhense" later called "typographia nacional imperial".  the first privately owned printer in maranhao was ricardo antonio rodrigues de araujo,
whose enterprise existed from 1822 until the 1850s, and "typographia melandiana" of daniel g. de melo, who produced his first job in 1825. most important, however, was the "typographia constitucional" of clementino jose lisboa, which began in 1830. others were the "ignacio jose ferreira", founded in 1833 by joao francisco lisboa and frederico magno d'abranches; the "j. g. magalhaes pereira e manuel ramos "; the "typographia temperanca" of francisco de sales nines cascais; the "typographia monarquica constitucional" which was sold in 1848 to fabio alexandrino de carvalho reis, theophilus a. de carvalho leal and a. rego, and would produce "o progresso", the first daily newspaper of maranhao, started in 1847.  matos belarmino has been considered by many historians as one of the best printers that brazil has ever had. he created a union, the "associacao typographica maranhense", inaugurated on 11 may 1857, one of the first organizations of brazil's workers outside of rio de janeiro (it was preceded, in rio de janeiro, by the "imperial associacao typographica fluminense", founded on december 25, 1853).  pernambuco in pernambuco, recife had the first typography, the "oficina tipografica da republica restaurada de pernambuco" in 1817, which was soon closed by the government for political reasons. in 1820, governor luis do rego barreto ordered the building of a "screw press," the traditional model, in the local arsenal, or on the train, then becoming known as "officina do trem de pernambuco", and the design of french teacher jean-paul adour, was appointed to run it. when rego was dismissed, it came to be called "officina do trem nacional" in 1821 and then "typographia nacional". also in recife was the competitor manuel clemente do rego cavalcante, who settled with newly brought equipment from portugal, associating with felipe mena calado da fonseca and the englishman james prinches; former priest and portuguese professor antonio jose de miranda falcao learned the art of typography. in addition to these, two other printers were "typographia fidedigna" run by manuel zeferino dos santos, from 1827 to 1840, and typographia do cruzeiro, which began in 1829.  in olinda, manuel figueroa
de faria opened in mid-1831, the "pinheiro faria e companhia", which moved then to recife, and that may have been responsible for the first books of pernambuco; it published the "diario de pernambuco", having bought their rights of antonio jose de miranda falcao, in 1835. at the time, there were 14 printers and 4 lithographic establishments in recife. one of the most important was the "uniao" of santos e cia., founded in 1836 by the priest ignacio francisco dos santos.  perhaps the most interesting publication of pernambuco, at the time, was the work of nisia floresta (the pseudonym of dionysia goncalves pinto), "direitos das mulheres e injusticas do homens". this was a free adaptation of the work a vindication of the rights of woman, authored by feminist mary wollstonecraft godwin in 1792.  other printers of note are the canon marcelino pacheco amaral, who installed a printing press in his own house, only to publish his "compendio de theologia moral (compendium of moral theology)" in three volumes produced between 1888 and 1890, and then sold his "imprensa economica" to a local publisher, tobias barreto, in 1847. he founded in escada, in the interior of pernambuco, the "typographia constitucional", which lasted until 1888.  paraiba in paraiba, the "typographia nacional da paraiba" stands out. it printed the first provincial newspaper.  para in para, the printer joao francisco madureira manufactured his own press. already in 1822, the liberal press published the first newspaper of para, and the fifth in brazil, "o paraense", by the master printer daniel garcao de melo. the "typographia de santos e menor" of honorio jose dos santos, gave the first important publication, "ensaio corografico sobre a provincia do para", by antonio ladislau monteiro baena. then the press changed the name to "santos e filhos (santos and sons)" and later, "santos e irmao (santos and brother)."  in the other provinces after para, the picture that emerged in terms of the arrival of the press in the provinces is as follows: ceara in 1824, sao paulo in february 1827, rio grande do sul in june 1827, goias in 1830, santa catarina in 1831, alagoas in 1831, sergipe in 1832,
rio grande do norte in 1832, the espirito santo in 1840, parana in 1853 (rizzini argues that it was in 1849), amazonas in 1854, piaui in 1832, mato grosso in 1840  publishing in rio de janeiro  the new portuguese constitution, adopted on 15-16 february 1821, abolished censorship, and soon brazil saw a flood of publications emerging.  also ended was the monopoly of the government press. in 1821, the installation of "nova officina typographica" by private owners was allowed, followed by "typographia de moreira e garcez" in rio de janeiro. on the eve of the independence of brazil, the city already had about seven printing establishments. manuel joaquim da silva porto, poet and bookseller, who had introduced in brazil the dramatic tragedy phedre, by the french dramatist, one of the three great playwrights of 17th-century france, jean racine, and was a printer the royal press, started his "officina de silva porto e cia.", along with felizardo joaquim da silva moraes, making this the first bookseller in the city to have its own printing press.  the writer victoriano jose dos santos and silva set up the "officina dos anais fluminenses" (officina of fluminenses proceedings; there was also the modern "typographia astreia", which printed a newspaper with the same name, and the firm "torres e costa: innocencio francisco torres e vicente justiniano da costa", which was soon replaced by "typographia innocencio francisco torres e companhia." by along with the number of printing presses, there was also an increase in the number of bookstores in rio de janeiro.  in 1823, paulo martim filho, who had moved to the rua dos pescadores, no. 14, was best known bookseller in rio de janeiro. silva porto, at rua da quitanda, was second in importance, but in all there were 11 other bookstores, and one of them was that of francisco luiz saturnino da veiga. to remarry, francisco donated the dowry of his deceased wife to the older children, joao pedro ferreira da veiga and evaristo da veiga, who entered on their own into the book market, buying the establishment of silva porto.  the predominance of rio de janeiro in the literary market began in the 1840s and continued until 1880, despite the attempt of other provincial cities, such as the casa garraux, the famed bookstore of sao paulo, which had at the time 400 printed works in the
province i.e. 11% of all the titles in the country.  also noteworthy is the "casa do livro azul" ("blue book house"), at rua do ouvidor, which ran from 1828 to 1852; its owner, albino jourdan, lost his sight and hearing and was helped by two assistants, aged 14 and 17 years.  pierre plancher pierre rene constant plancher de la noah, became an official printer in france in 1798. after numerous political problems with the french government, went to rio de janeiro in 1824, and while waiting for the customs to release their equipment, opened his provisional shop at 60, rua dos ourives, in march 1824. in june of that year, he moved to the rua do ouvidor, initially at no. 80, then no. 95, and soon began to publish in portuguese. much of his publications were administrative. among his many publications, highlights included the "annuario historico brasiliense" in 1824, the year in an almanac, "folhinhas de algibeira e de porta", and in 1827, the "almanack plancher."  plancher published the first brazilian soap opera, "statira a zoroastes" by lucas jose alvarenga, in 1826, comprising 58 pages. previously, paul martin published some novels, but these were translated from french. plancher published the journal "spectador brasileiro", a newspaper that lasted until may 23, 1827. he later acquired the "diario mercantil", from francisco manuel ferreira and company, and changed its name to jornal do commercio, which became the oldest in the city of rio from january. it is assigned to the new plancher printing process known as lithography, which was invented in 1798 and only began to become widespread in 1815, replacing the recording on metal plates.  the printer working for plancher was hercule florence, who gave up the post to follow a journey of exploration and anthropology with baron langsdorff. the first printer in brazil, therefore, became armand marie julien palliere, who worked a while for the military archives in 1819, and was replaced by johann jacob steinmann, who arrived in rio de janeiro in 1825 and some years later returned to switzerland, where he published his collection of printed views, "souvenirs of rio de janeiro".  thanks to the apprentices of steinmann, in 1846 rio de janeiro had four lithography printers. the oldest was that of luis aleixo boulanger, founded on august 15, 1829, and
the most important was the firm "ludwig e briggs," which existed between 1843 and 1877. the main competitor of briggs was "heaton e rensburg" founded in 1840 (by englishman george mathia heaton and the dutchman eduard rensburg), whose main feature was the publication of music.  after the abdication of d. pedro i, in 1832, the book trade suffered the economic effects of political uncertainty, and plancher sold his firm to two countrymen on 9 june 1832. the buyers were junio constancio de villeneuve and reol- antoine mougenot, and july 15, 1834, mougenot sold his share to villeneuve, who has owned the first mechanical press in the southern hemisphere, after the first rotary and first linotype. its competitors were the "typographia nacional", "paula brito," "laemmert", the "typographia do diario", and the printers correio mercantil and correio da tarde. at the time, two of the oldest registered brazilian novels were produced: "o aniversario de d. miguel em 1828" by j. m. pereira da silva in 1838, and "os assassinos misteriosos (the mysterious assassins)", by justiniano jose da rocha, in 1839.  louis mongie louis mongie had a major bookstore at ouvidor street, from 1832 until 1853, the year of his death, at which time the bookstore was transferred to "pinto & waldemar," which became, around 1860, "f. l. pinto & cia., "and then to "j. barboza e irmao"- all of whom called themselves, however, "imperial library ".  paula brito in 1831, francisco de paula brito, who came from a humble family and learned to read from his sister, bought a small property of their relative silvio jose de almeida brito, in praca da constituicao (constitution square), no. 51. it was a stationery and bindery, besides selling tea. brito installed a small printing press there, which he had purchased from e. c. dos santos, and in the year 1833, brito already had two establishments: the "typographia fluminense," the rua da constituicao, 51, and "typographia imparcial" on no. 44; in 1837, he moved to no. 66 and expanded the store to number 64 in 1939. in 1848, brito already had six manual printers and mechanics, and expanded its facilities to no. 68 and 78, a "corner
shop" which became his bookstore and stationery outlet. he created branches in partnership with antonio goncalves teixeira e sousa and candido lopes, forming with the latter the "tipografia e loja de lopes e cia", in niteroi. candido lopes would become later the first printer of parana.  in his shop, francisco de paula brito created the "sociedade petalogica" which had such a name because of the "freedom" brito said that its members give to the imagination (a peta = a lie), and gathered together all the members of the romantic movement of 1840-1860: antonio goncalves dias, laurindo rabelo, joaquim manuel de macedo, manuel antonio de almeida, among others. all the elite of the time, among the politicians, artists and leaders, gathered at the "paula brito bookstore."  in 1851, brito entered the field of lithography; one of his magazines, "a marmota na corte (the marmots in the court)," included a costume. brito brought the paris lithographer louis therier, who became the lithographer for the magazine. created on december 2, 1850 the new "imperial typographia dous de dezembro," its name marking the anniversary date of dom pedro ii, who became its shareholder. paula brito was the first non-specialized genuine editor of the country, which came up with a wide variety of works and subjects, unlike their predecessors, who were devoted to more technical matters.  paula brito edited the country's first women's magazine in 1832, "a mulher do simplicio" or "a fluminense exaltada", which was printed by plancher, his friend. the magazine lasted until 1846, when it was replaced by "a marmota (the woodchuck)", which lasted, with some title changes, from 1849 to 1864, three years after his death.  there are reports of 372 non-periodical publications made by paula brito, on quite varied themes, and of those, 83 were in the medical field, usually theses, but most constituted dramas. brito encouraged the growth of the national literature, still precarious. it can be considered the first brazilian novel with some literary value has been "o filho do pescador (the fisherman's son)," by antonio goncalves teixeira e sousa, published by brito in 1843. he used the poet casimiro de abreu and the young machado de assis, who began as a proofreader of paula brito and began the literary career as a collaborator of "a
marmota fluminense".  in early 1857, dissatisfied shareholders oversaw the liquidation of "typographia dous de dezembro." his firm was reduced to "typographia de paula brito," with only one address, even that thanks to the financial support of the emperor. the publication of books fell, dropping to 12 in 1858 and 15 in 1861, the year of his death. his widow continued the business in partnership with their son in law until 1867, amidst falling production. in 1868 mrs. rufina rodrigues da costa brito was alone, transferring the business to rua do sacramento, nº 10, which survived until 1875.  garnier among the various bookstores in rio de janeiro, at rua do ouvidor, while some were owned by frenchmen, such as plancher and villeneuve, others were other branches of existing companies in france such as mongie, aillaud and bossange. prominent among these the brothers firmin didot, but in order of importance, the most prominent was the garnier freres, who worked in brazil from 1844 to 1934.  the brothers auguste (born in 1812) and hippolyte (born in 1816) garnier began working as bookstore clerks in paris in 1828, and later opened their own business, at the age of 21 and 17 years. the younger brother, baptiste louis garnier (born march 4, 1823), worked for his brother until 1844, and then went to brazil, arriving in rio de janeiro on june 24, 1844. after two years of temporary accommodation, he settled at rua do ouvidor, nº 69, and remained there until 1878, moving to no. 71 in front of its main competitor, the "livraria universal" e. & h. laemmert. by 1852, the firm was called the "garnier brothers" then "b. l. garnier "and it is believed that the brothers separated between 1864 and 1865.  in the early 1870s, garnier had its own printing press, the "tipografia franco-americana." overall, garnier is credited with 655 works by brazilian authors published between 1860 and 1890 and several translations, from the french, of the most popular novels. garnier influenced the french format of books that brazil adopted: octavo (16.5 x 10.5 cm) and 'in-doze' (17.5 x 11.0 cm, a size close to the a format paperback), an imitation of the parisian firm calmann-levy.  in 1891, in poor health, baptiste started negotiations for the sale of his company, but
dissatisfied with the price, gave up and died three years later, on 1 october 1893; the company passed on to his brother hippolyte, who resided in paris, thus returning to being the branch of the "garnier freres" in rio de janeiro.  hippolyte garnier was 77 years old when his brother baptiste died. the garnier in france ended up being in the 1890s and 1920s the leading publisher of spanish-american literature worldwide. the death of baptiste, as well as of the laemmert brothers, caused a stagnation in the brazilian book market, and the fall of the empire completely transformed the social climate. in 1898, hyppolite sent to rio de janeiro a new manager, julien lansac, and his jacinto silva became his assistant, who had great autonomy, given the difficulties of julien to speak portuguese. hippolyte was sent reform the garnier facilities, which opened with fanfare. each guest was presented with an autographed copy of the 2nd edition of don casmurro, by machado de assis. around 1904, jacinto silva left the firm and was directing the casa garraux books department, in sao paulo, and in 1920 launched his own "casa editora o livro," which was the center of the modernist movement.  garnier hippolyte died at age 95 in 1911, and lansac returned to france in 1913; the business passed to a nephew, auguste p. garnier, who sent to rio de janeiro another french manager, emile izard (born in 1874). from then, garnier went into decline, with few publications, and the end came close to 1934, when the garnier bookstore was sold to ferdinand briguiet who previously bought the lachaud bookstore, on rua nova do ouvidor.  briguiet-garnier when garnier was sold, it began to use the name bookstore briguiet-garnier, and lasted until 1951, when the "difusao europeia do livro" (difel) took the brazilian subsidiary of garnier. the garnier building was demolished in 1953 to give place to a bank, and briguiet was restricted to rua nova do ouvidor. briguiet then had been replaced by his nephew ferdinand, who died without heirs in the mid 1970. some of the firm's assets were purchased by "library itatiaia" of belo horizonte and the briguiet shop was closed in 1973.  lombaerts among the foreign bookstores in rio de janeiro, one that stood out was the belgian jean baptiste lombaerts's (1821-1875) that of and his son
henri gustave lombaerts (1845-1897), which was the largest of lithographs mounted at the time at rua do ourives, no 17. it ran between 1848 and 1904 when the store was demolished to make way for avenida central. from 1871 to 1879, the library has produced a supplement in portuguese to follow one of its main imported periodicals, the french magazine "la saison". from 1879, it began to publish its own brazilian edition of the magazine, named "a estacao".  another prominent firm was the swiss leuzinger, founded by georg leuzinger (1813-1892), who arrived in rio de janeiro in 1832, and until 1840 had saved enough to buy the oldest stationery outlet of the city, "the red book" of jean charles bouvier, at rua do ouvidor, 31. in 1852, leuzinger acquired typographia franceza, founded by jean soleil saint amand in 1837, and in 1841 published the first poems of joaquim norberto, "modulacoes poeticas", and the first two editions, in 1844 and 1845, of "a moreninha", by joaquim manuel de macedo. under the direction of leuzinger, this became one of the best equipped printing houses in the country. leuzinger had much involvement in the development of wood engraving (woodcut) in the country, and in 1843, brought from germany two talented engravers wood, eduard huslemann and r. rollenberger. in 1850, rollenberger died of yellow fever and huslemann returned to germany, but left behind many apprentices in brazil. leuzinger was responsible, among other things, for the introduction of illustrated postcards in the country, and ventured into photography too. the 54 woodcuts that illustrate the book of louis and elizabeth agassiz, "journey in brazil", 1868, are by leuzinger. as a press, the leuzinger survived under the name "grafica ouvidor".  laemmert the most important foreign bookshops was, however, laemmert; between 1893 and the turn of the century, it was the main brazilian publisher. eduard laemmert (born august 10, 1806) and heinrich (born october 27, 1812) were children of f. w. laemmert, a protestant clergyman who educated them at home and at 14 sent them to learn the book trade. leaving for paris, eduard was working in the firm of bossange martin and his son hector. two years later, bossange decided to open a branch in rio de
janeiro, and eduard, as representative of bossange, opened a company with a portuguese called souza, representative of jp aillaud. they set up shop at rua dos latoeiros (now goncalves dias), no. 88 under the souza laemmert name. when the contract expired in 1833, eduard decided to stay in brazil, married a brazilian and started his own business in quitanda street # 77, the "livraria universal". his brother heinrich came, at his request, to brazil, and formed the "e. & h. laemmert, mercadores de livros e de musica (e. & h. laemmert, dealers of books and music)" in 1838. soon began to edit and in 1839 created their "folhinha "annual. in 1844, they began the "almanack laemmert" which surpassed all competitors and, in 1875, came to have 1770 pages. they set up in 1868 at rua do ouvidor, 68. the printing press laemmert was inaugurated on january 2, 1838, and named typographia universal.  in 1877, eduard moved away from the firm, going to karlsruhe, the city where he had learned the craft, and suddenly died there on january 18, 1880. henry died four years later. all the business went over to a company formed by gustave massow, henry's son-edgon widmann laemmert and arhur sauer. in 1891 the firm was reorganized under the name of laemmert & companhia, and in 1898, had branches in sao paulo and recife. in 1903, there was another change of partners, and edgon was replaced by his son hugo and gustave by his brother hilario. laemmert had a library with a copy of each edition produced, but this was destroyed by fire in 1909, after which the library was never reopened. the copyright of their property were sold to francisco alves, who acquired the most famous of their titles, "os sertoes", by euclides da cunha, whom laemmert published in 1902 and sold three editions.  printing continued, and the property, which had been with arthur sauer, went to manuel jose da silva in 1910, who already owned the "anuario geral de portugal (general yearbook of portugal)", then the almanac changed the name to "anuario do brasil (brazil yearbook)". the new organization has undergone several ownership changes, becoming "sergio & pinto" in 1919, "alvaro pinto & cia." in 1920, alexandre henault
& cia. in 1921, and in 1925 was acquired by the jockey club of rio de janeiro, where it was called "almanack laemmerte limited". few books have been produced at that time, especially the "livro de ouro do centenario a independencia do brasil (golden centenary book of the independence of brazil)", on september 7, 1922. in 1942, another fire destroyed the almanac, and the last number was from 1943. the grafica laemmert returned to publish books by 1970.  sellos & couto the sellos & couto firm was founded in 1815, when jose goncalves agra opened a bookstore in rua do sabao, no. 22. in the 1820s, the company passed into the hands of agostinho goncalves de freitas, who was succeeded in 1852 by his nephews antonio and agostinho goncalves guimaraes, who added to it a printing workshop, "typographia episcopal". antonio began to devote himself to banking and augustine retired in 1887, selling the firm to his stepson john antonio pinto. when he died, bankrupt, the business was purchased by antonio joaquim de sellos and gaspar pereira couto, who began operating first as sellos, guimaraes & cia., then as sellos & couto.  j. ribeiro dos santos j. ribeiro dos santos, another major firm, was founded by the portuguese serafim jose alves, in 1871, at 11, praca d. pedro ii, today praca 15 de novembro. at the end of the century, it moved to the rua sete de setembro, no. 83, and soon afterwards adopted the name of the heir of alves, jacintho ribeiro dos santos. jacintho bought the francisco rodrigues da cruz bookstore, successor to the livraria cruz coutinho, the livraria popular, which was created by antonio augusto da cruz coutinho. the library jacintho ribeiro dos santos stood out for the good workmanship of its textbooks, use of images, and the high number of runs in any of its books, which reached the mark of over 100,000 copies in 1924, in a population of 1,157,141 in the city. as "livraria jacintho", it survived until 1945 when it was bought over by "editora a noite".  livraria quaresma the livraria de serafim jose alves seems to have had some connection also with the livraria quaresma.  pedro da silva quaresma was the founder of the "livraria do povo" in 1879 in
rua sao jose. the livraria quaresma lasted until the 1960s, with cheap books and those of a popular appeal, and was the training grounds for bookseller and used bookstore owner carlos ribeiro, who later founded the "livraria sao jose", active in the 1950s and 1960s.  antonio joaquim castilho the bookseller and printer castilho is also from this time, but the most important individual from this firm was his son, antonio joaquim castilho. castilho faced financial difficulties and in 1931, his firm became the "livraria america", of a, bedeschi, which lasted until the 1940s, and castilho was working at editora civilizacao brasileira.  francisco alves born on august 2, 1848,  went to rio in 1863, and got a job in a store of nautical items, and savings. he opened a used bookstore in rua sao jose, then he sold it and went back to porto. upon receiving his uncle's invitation to work at his bookstore, he went to brazil again, and was naturalized on 28 july 1883. the firm francisco alves, originally called livraria classica, was founded on august 15, 1854, at rua of braziers, no. 54 (later changed to no. 48), by his uncle nicholas antonio alves. francisco ended up buying the shares of all partners and his uncle by 1897. initially devoted to textbooks, due to the increasing of the number of schools in the country (in the last years of the empire, schools increased from 3,561 to 7,500), francisco alves came to have a near monopoly of textbooks in brazil.  livraria francisco alves opened its first branch in sao paulo, on april 23, 1893, where manuel pacheco leao, some of the education secretary and friend of francis, teofilo das neves leao, was charged with part of the shares of the company. in 1906, he opened a second branch in belo horizonte. in sao paulo, acquired the "n. falconi "and "livraria melilo"; in rio de janeiro, he acquired "lombaerts," the "livraria catolica de sauvin", the "livraria luso-brasileira" of lopes da cunha, the "empresa literaria fluminense", of aa da silva lobo, the home of "domingos de magalhaes ". he also bought the portuguese firm "a editora", formerly "david corazzi". in 1909, he acquired the "laemmert", acquiring the
rights to "os sertoes", by euclides da cunha, and innocence, taunay. he also bought a small bookstore "viuva azevedo" in rio de janeiro.  in the literary line, francisco alves published afranio peixoto, emilio de menezes, raul pompeii, among others, but most of his books were printed abroad, for economic and technical reasons which prevented the internal printing, which was the cause of criticism from many nationalists. in his spare time, francisco alves wrote his own books under the pseudonym william prado or f. d'oliveira. they were cataloged after his death, totalling some 39 books of his own.  alves was diabetic and acquired pneumonia that led to tuberculosis. when the member leo pacheco died on december 23, 1913, alves acquired the share of the widow, but himself died on june 29, 1917, after complications from a broken leg in a railway accident. in his will, he left a great legacy and a lifetime pension to a lady who had been his mistress since 1891, maria dolores braun. all the rest of his property would be left for the brazilian academy of letters, but with the condition that the academy should hold every five years, two competitions in his honor, each with a first prize of 10 short stories, a second five stories and a third of three stories. one of the contests should be for monographs on "the best way to expand primary education in brazil," and the other for monographs on the portuguese language. through the academy is statutorily prevented from managing any type of business, it sold the bookshop to a group of former employees, led by paulo ernesto azevedo pacheco, leao's successor in managing the affiliate of sao paulo, and antonio de oliveira martins. the new company adopted the name "paulo de azevedo & companhia", but continued to use the mark f. alves, and to dominate the market of textbooks until the appearance of companhia editora nacional, of octalles marcondes ferreira, in the decade of the 1920s.  paulo azevedo died in 1946 and was succeeded by his children ivo and ademar. the latter admitted as members alvaro ferreira de almeida, raul da silva passos and lelio de castro andrade, to work towards the revitalization of the bookshop. in 1972, the company was sold to admiral jose celso de la rocque maciel soares guimaraes, who changed its name to "livraria francisco alves editora"; in 1974, netumar shipping company, owned by ari
osto amado, acquired 80% of its capital and carlos leal took over its management.  other publishers other major publishers and bookstores at the end of the nineteenth century were the publishing firm editora pimenta de mello, founded in 1845 and which survived until 1937, and the livraria moderna, domingos de magalhaes e companhia, a leading publisher in the field of literature in the 1890s.  publishing in sao paulo   seculo xix sao paulo, in the early nineteenth century, formed a single province together with parana, had a small capital with less than 10,000 inhabitants, and then enjoyed little importance. in 1827, jose da costa carvalho, the future marquis of monte alegre, imported a press and a printer, and produced the first newspaper of the province, "o farol paulistano".  in 1827, the city of sao paulo was chosen to host one of the two country's law schools, and student life there transformed the city. in 1836, a sao paulo press printed the book, "questoes sobre presas maritimas," by jose maria avelar brotero. this was followed by other works, and the first of the locally produced literature emerged: in 1849, rosas e goivos, by the then student jose bonifacio, o moco and, in 1852, cantos da solidao, by bernardo guimaraes, printed in "typographia liberal" which was owned by joaquim roberto de azevedo marques.  in 1855, sao paulo had a population of only 25,000 inhabitants, while rio de janeiro had crossed a quarter million and salvador and recife were over 80,000. there were three bookstores, "fernandes de souza," "gravesnes" and "torres de oliveira," and three presses, the "typographia liberal" of azevedo marques, the "typographia dous de dezembro" (no connection with the paula brito) of antonio antunes lousada, and "typographia litteraria". there also was a bookbinder, the german u. knossel, whose business was acquired in 1880 by the german jorge seckler, and became important graphic with steam-powered printers. in the late 1860, also in operation were the "typographia litteraria", the "typographia americana" and "typographia americana" typography.  casa garraux in 1860, the french publisher baptiste louis garnier opened a branch in sao paulo and entrusted it to anatole louis garraux (1833-1904). three years later
, garraux became independent and opened the livraria academica, in partnership with guelfe de lailhac and raphael suares. this publishing house was known as "casa garraux". it was in the casa garraux that jose olympio began to build an interest in the book market, getting a job tidying and cleaning books there.  before 1920, garraux did not publish, but became a prominent bookseller, becoming the bookstore with the most updated stock of the country. from 1872, coffee was modifying the provincial scene, and in this year the garraux moved from largo da se to the rua da imperatriz (the future xv de novembro), going on to play role important in the intellectual and cultural development of the region. garraux passed on the direction of the store at that time to his son in law willy fischer, who retired in 1888, and his successor, alexander thiollier,   ran the business until 1893, then moving the direction of the hands of the partner charles hildebrand, of strasbourg.    'other sao paulo bookstores'  from three bookstores in 1850, sao paulo grew to five in 1870, one of these being the "great library paulista", which the brothers antonio and maria jose joaquim teixeira opened in 1876.  in 1893, due to italian immigration and also the trail of drought in the north east, sao paulo grew in size to have 192,409 inhabitants and at the turn of the century, it equaled rio de janeiro, with 239,820 inhabitants. the paper industry installed in the state began to grow; one of the factories was the "cia. melhoramentos de sao paulo", formed in 1890 by colonel anthony proost brill, and in 1920 joined the paper industry for books, associating with the label of "weiszflog brothers". at the end of the century, however, sao paulo still had only eight bookstores. among others, the prominent ones included "casa eclectica".  20th century   monteiro lobato  till the first world war, brazilian books were printed mostly in europe. the garnier publisher, used by machado and almost all academic, was french and had their workshops in france. coelho neto was printed on porto in portugal, and edited by lelo & brother. brazilian publishers and bookstores devoted themselves more to textbooks, and little was printed in brazil.  lobato took the initiative that changed the brazilian publishing market. printed on their own, in the newspaper presses of "o estado de s. paulo",
his book urupes, found that at the time, brazil had only 30 bookstores that were able to receive and sell books. he then wrote to all postmasters of brazil (1300 in all), requesting the names and addresses of newsagents, stationers, warehouses and pharmacies interested in selling books. almost 100% of postal agents responded, providing a network of nearly two thousand distributors across the country. lobato began publishing works of his friends and novice writers.  when the original firm of cia. grafio-editora monteiro lobato collapsed, octalles marcondes ferreira (1899-1972), who was his assistant and became his partner, encouraged him to open another publishing venture, and in november 1925, the companhia editora nacional was already established and was preparing to publish a version, supervised by lobato, of the 1st book written in brazil in the sixteenth century, the story of hans staden, "my captivity among the brazilian wild," with a print run of 5000 copies.  while octalles remained in sao paulo, lobato ran the branch of rio de janeiro; traveling to the united states, due to speculation in the stock market and the crash of october 1929, lobato had to sell to octalles his publisher's shares, and went on to contribute just as an author and translator.  the publisher began investing gradually in educational titles. in 1932, octalles acquired editora civilizacao brasileira, founded in 1929 by getulio m. costa, ribeiro couto e gustavo barroso, and now, slowly, passed on to the son enio silveira. in 1934, the brand "nacional" was almost entirely reserved for teaching and children's books. in 1943, there six teachers responsible for implementing the textbooks abandoning the company, they went on to found their own publishing house, the "editora do brasil", specializing in books relating to teaching. the assistant of octalles, arthur neves (1916-1971), left and formed editora brasiliense, which launched its own bookstore, the "livraria brasiliense."  octalles died in 1973, and presidency of the company passed on to his brother lindolfo. in 1974 livraria jose olympio editora requested financial aid to buy the publisher, however, this operation was never undertaken. "the company jose olimpio requested government aid: in this case, the total financing of the operation, so the national bank for economic development (bndes) acquired all the shares of the company [...] however, the economic situation
of jose olympio made the desired transfer impossible and the nacional eventually became property of the bnde."  in 1980, the brazilian institute of pedagogical issues (ibep) acquired companhia editora nacional, forming one of the largest publishing groups in the country. in 2009, conrad editora, specializing in comic, was bought by ibep-group company editora nacional   'jose olympio'  the publisher started in 1931, also in sao paulo, with a successful book, "know thyself by psychoanalysis," by the american j. ralph, a work that today is known as a self-help title. in the 1940s and 1950s, olympio became the country's largest publisher, publishing 2 000 titles, with 5000 issues, which in the 1980s comprised 30 million books 900 national authors and 500 foreign authors books.  the livraria jose olympio bookstore got into a crisis that began with the collapse in the stock market. in the 1970s, he tried to buy companhia editora nacional. on may 3, 1990, when he died, jose olympio was no longer owner of the publishing house that bore his name, because after being taken over by the bndes in the 70s, it was bought by record in 2001; today it belongs to grupo editorial record.   'publisher martins'  jose de barros martins decided to leave the job to open a bookstore in a small room on the first floor of a building in the rua da quitanda in sao paulo, in 1937. he organized his own editorial department, under the direction of edgard cavalheiro and his first title in early 1940 was "direito social brasileiro", dealing with the brazilian social law, and authored by antonio ferreira cesarino junior.  martins promoted the liquidation of his company in 1974, but tried to remain in the business, the most valuable negotiating publishing contracts with editora record. currently, martins editora is an imprint of livraria martins fontes.    'civilizacao brasileira'  founded by getulio m. costa, ribeiro couto and gustavo barroso in 1929, the company civilizacao brasileira had at the time few titles, and in 1932 was acquired by octalles marcondes ferreira, becoming part of the companhia editora nacional. enio silveira took part in the civilizacao brasileira, and increased its impact, and at the end of the 1950s, it had become already one of the leading publishers in the country. in 1963, enio silveira took full control of civilizacao brasileira and the
following year his book output was the same as that of the companhia editora nacional, added 46 new titles. civilizacao brasileira eventually becoming the most important channel for modern brazilian literature in the 1960s, in addition to devote to translations of both the european countries as the us, japanese and latin american.  in 1982, enio accepted an operational supply from difel, a foreign company, to cooperate with his firm. at the same time, banco pinto de magalhaes, the portuguese bank, and a portuguese entity, batista da silva, acquired 90% stake in civilizacao brasileira, and enio's share was 10%. in march 1984, it formalized the transfer of the civilizacao brasileira operations to sao paulo, maintaining a branch in rio de janeiro. silveira of enio died in 1996. currently, the civilizacao brasileira is part of grupo editorial record.   'publisher attica'  between 1964 and 1965, editora attica made an impact. on 15 october 1956, the curso de madureza santa ines was founded, for the education of youth and adults, by the brothers anderson fernandes dias and vasco fernandes dias filho and his friend antonio narvaes filho. over time, through the increasing number of students, the mimeograph became insufficient to print handouts, and 1962 saw the creation of sesil (sociedade editora do santa ines ltda. or the santa ines publishing society ltd.). anderson fernandes dias, however, backed the creation of a publishing house. thus, editora attica emerged in august 1965, and the following year, it already had 20 titles in its catalog.  in 1999, attica was bought by editora abril, in partnership with the french group vivendi. in 2002, vivendi sold its publications branch companies to the french group lagardere, but editora attica got out of that commercial transaction. in 2003, the two controlling shareholders of attica - april and vivendi - again put the publisher up for sale. after a year of negotiations, the financial assets of vivendi were acquired by editora abril, in february 2004, becoming the majority owner of editora attica, ushering in a new phase in the company's history, which became part of abril education. in early 2005, the publisher began to work on building the edificio abril on marginal tiete.   'bookstore globe'  in the 1880s, the "livraria americana", originally set up in pelotas, by carlos pinto, had several translations
of foreign authors, not always with permission of the authors. such cases, and many others, led to a reaction by the authors and the government, and began to establish laws in order to preserve those rights. the origins of editora globo belong to this time, but the publisher did not start a regular program of editions in 1928. thus, in the early 1930s, the livraria do globo emerged in porto alegre, and the beginning of the publishing industry seems to have given especially the disadvantageous position of the new government with respect to the copyright rights of others states. the magazine globo, having no money to republished materials, also resorted to piracy  the flourishing of publishing activity was also due to the development and growth of the rio grande do sul,   at the time of the old republic, 1889-1930. the editora globo started with a small stationery and bookstore, founded in 1883 by portuguese immigrant laudelino pinheiro barcellos, next to which was built a graphic workshop for custom work. jose bertaso, a boy admitted for minor services in 1890, became a partner and in 1919, the owner. bertaso predicted shortages of paper with the first world war and cared enough to profit later from the sales. the "barcellos, bertaso and co." acquired a linotype machine, the first in the state, and in 1922 began to publish books leading to a local literary revival, the counterpart of the modernist movement. mansueto bernardi, an italian and director of the publicity department, was even more ambitious, and encouraged the publication of translated titles. he has assembled a team of reviewers, translators and graphic artists, and created the magazine revista do globo.  bernardi in 1931 with the creation of the estado novo, exited the field of editorial activity and began to drive the mint. the eldest of his three sons, henry d'avila bertaso, who began in livraria globo bookstore in 1922, at age 15, took over the publishing industry, while the direction of the globe magazine was given to a young writer, erico verissimo, who became one of the main translators of the publisher. verissimo's career as an author had begun in 1928 when bernardi accepted his story "ladrao de gado" ("cattle thief") for therevista do globo magazine. his first book,  "fantoches" ("puppets") was a collection of short stories that h. bertaso accepted for publication in 1932. after a few books, the only commercial success came in 1935 with "caminhos
cruzados", which received several awards. . due to the economic situation, the brazilian book became competitive, a fact that was capitalised on by the livraria globo bookstore. in 1936, the company already had three floors, 500 employees, 20 linotype machines, and the publishing industry had about 500 titles. verissimo passed on the control of the magazine to de souza junior, and b h. bertaso became editorial consultant, allowing for the gain of the literary publisher's quality. the policy emphasized the anglo-american authors, due to the preponderance of translations from english. with the world war ii, there was a sudden prosperity in the book business, and several translators were employed, such as leonel vallandro, juvenal jacinto, herbert caro, and homero de castro as permanent employees. in the early 1950s, with the rigor in brazil over the control of remittance of foreign currency abroad, there was a decline in the production of translations of the globe. there then was a slight recovery in the 1960s, but without recovery of the old interest especially in other areas.  verissimo began to devote more to his own literary production; jose bertaso died in 1948 and in 1956, when the globo reached its 2,000th title since 1930, it was decided to transform the publishing part of the business into a legally separate development, creating editora globo. verissimo was gradually disengaging the globo, and died in 1975. henry bertaso died in 1977, having passed on his business to his sons jose otavio, fernando and claudio. in 1986 the company was sold to rio grafica editora (ger) of roberto marinho. rio graphic started using only the editora globo name since.   'national institute of books'  with the revolution of 1930, the rio grande do sul gained importance on the national scene. with the implementation of the estado novo, one of the consequences was the creation of the national book institute, the initiative of minister capanema in september / december 1937 (decree-law no. 93 of september 21 of 1937). the poet augusto meyer was the director until 1954 and again from 1961 to 1967. it was created and encouraged by getulio vargas with the objective of developing an encyclopedia and dictionary of the brazilian language and to build the identity and national memory and support the implementation of public libraries throughout brazil. until 1945, however, they had not yet completed the encyclopedia and dictionary, but the number of public libraries has grown, especially in the states of cultural scarcity, thanks to the help
provided by inl in the collection of the composition and technical training.  other prominent publishers besides those already mentioned, in the early twentieth century among the other important ones were, in rio de janeiro livraria h. antunes founded by hector antunes in 1909, and arthur vecchi in 1913, which began with publication of books and later dedicated itself to comic books. besides these, the livraria editora leite ribeiro e maurillo, founded in rio de janeiro in 1917, and in the mid-1920s was renamed as freitas bastos; livraria catolica, founded by the poet augusto frederico schmidt, in 1930, which soon became a meeting point for intellectuals of the time. those who attended became known as the "catholic circle". schmidt took later removed the 'catholic' word from its name and it became and was just livraria schmidt editora, which remained so until 1939, when the business was absorbed and the facilities acquired by zelio valverde, in whose firm schmidt became a partner. others are the gianlorenzo schettino livraria editora, which existed from 1922 to 1931;editora a. coelho branco, and editora ariel, of the writers gastao cruls and agripino grieco, which was exclusively a publisher.   publishing in other states in rio grande do sul, apart from editora globo, the oldest publisher was the "livraria e editora selbach", founded in 1931, having started its activity with "farrapos!", by walter spalding. it ended around 1960, other major publishers were "livraria sulina" founded in 1946 by the brothers leopold and nelson boeck, which specialized in law, business administration and history. the "tabajara" with textbooks, and l&pm editores, created by ivan pinheiro machado and paulo de lima, in 1974, at the time to publish a single book, "rango, historia em quadrinhos de um marginal" by edgar vasques, which had appeared before in the porto alegre newspaper "folha da manha". encouraged by the success, the two young editors began to publish a small number, but select titles, questioning the government of the time, during the military dictatorship. in the 1970s, other major publishers were editora movimento and editora-mercado-aberto.  in parana, at curitiba, in the 1930s editora guaira gained national reputation with titles like "esperanca" by andre malraux, "dona barbara" by romulo gallegos, among others. in the early 1940
s, production was 40 titles per year. it declined after world war ii. also in curitiba, editora dos professores, created by ocyron cunha in 1962, was intended to produce works of regional teachers, and is currently inactive.  santa catarina, despite having only a little publishing activity, has plenty of outlets, and most of its municipalities have bookstores, which got it the fifth national place in book sales in the 1980.  in the other cities of rio de janeiro, petropolis was noteworthy, with editora vozes created on march 5, 1901, by the local franciscan convent. it is the oldest publisher in brazil still active.  in minas gerais, at belo horizonte one initiative that stands out is the livraria itatiaia editora, as well as editora comunicacao, editora vega, interlivros and lemi (livraria editora miguilim), publisher of children's books.  in bahia, between the 1940s and 1960s, the most important editorial brand was the "livraria progresso," by aguiar and souza ltda. (not to be confused with the progresso do grupo delta). another was the edicoes macunaima, founded in 1957 by calasans neto, fernando da rocha peres, glauber rocha and paulo soares gili as macunaima editorials empreendimentos ltda. in 1974, the highlight was the editora itapua of dmeval keys and editora janaina, or jorge amado.  in recife, the highlights were the "livraria sete", and "grafica amador", which changed its name to editora igarassu, and in 1980, editora guararapes.  pocket books   there have been several attempts in brazil to produce a lower-priced book. in the  "colecao globo" of livraria do globo, in the early 1930s,  24 titles were released, including classics, adventures and police fiction, in the format 11x16 cm, cartoned. in 1942, bertaso started the "colecao tucano" with fiction of good quality, such as works by andre gide, thomas mann, and others. in the 1960s, globo launched the "colecao catavento" successfully. in 1944, there was the "colecao saraiva" of brazilian classics.  there were distribution attempts through newsagents and kiosks at airports. in 1956, editora monterrey was constituted to produce popular light fiction (pulp) in paperback format, founded by the spanish
published o coyote (the coyote) series and brigitte montfort. an example of better quality was the tecnoprint grafica, which later adopted the editorial brand of edicoes de ouro, its most famous title in the format being the series of german science fiction perry rhodan.  in the 1960, dominus editora s/a (desa) came out with pocket editions and livraria jose olympio editora launched the "sagarana" with reprints in small format. in 1970, the editora bruguera, the brazilian subsidiary of francisco bruguera, argentina, published a foreign and domestic fiction pocketbook collection, mostly in the public domain. editora artenova also worked with pocketbook. in the end of 1971, the editora edibolso started with just 14 titles and in late 1977 already launched nearly a hundred paperbacks. some of the best known pocket collections today are of l&pm (pocket guide or colecao pocket) and martin claret.  in the 1990s the editor vicente fittipaldi (editora fittipaldi and editora contato) stood out in the segment, editing over 6 million copies annually with distribution in newsstands by abril group.  current editorial overview  from the 1980s there was an upward growth trend in the brazilian publishing market, with an increase in the publishing sector. new publishers emerged, but many of the old have been replaced or incorporated into others. the companhia editora nacional, for example, currently belongs to grupo-ibep, and civilizacao brasileira, the grupo editorial record, which appeared in 1942 and marked its entry into publishing in 1957. the editora pensamento-cultrix merged into editora pensamento-cultrix while editora cortez & moraes separated, forming the editora cortez and editora moraes, which in turn became the centauro editora label. old publishers survived as editora brasiliense and editora vozes, the oldest still active in brazil, and new publishers have grown and diversified the national publishing scene as editora perspectiva (1965), editora nordica (1970), editora catedra (1970), martin clare (1970), alfa-omega (1973), editora rocco (1975), companhia das letras (1986), among others.   editora nova fronteira the editora nova fronteira was founded in rio de janeiro em1965, the political journalist carlos lacerda. before he died in 1977, he built a formal link with the editora nova aguilar, founded in 1958 by a nephew of the owner of his namesake in madrid
. with the death of lacerda, his sons sergio and sebastian took over.   editora abril  editora abril was responsible for the success of a kind of book sold on newsstands: the edition in fascicles (a section of a book or set of books being published in installments as separate pamphlets or volumes). editora abril was founded by victor civita and his friend giordano rossi in 1950, initially as a magazine publisher. it started with donald duck, working with the walt disney organization, and their first venture in the book market was in 1965, with an illustrated edition of the holy bible, in fortnightly installments, followed by others of general interest. the growth and acceptance it received were outstanding, and in 1974, its fascicles on philosophy, os pensadores (the thinkers) of which it sold 100,000 copies a week. in 1982, they launched os economistas, including 20 titles that had never been published before in portuguese.   the current situation of reading in brazil the national union of book publishers (sindicato nacional dos editores de livros, snel), the brazilian book chamber (camara brasileira do livro, cbl), the brazilian association of book publishers (associacao brasileira de editores de livros, abrelivros) and the brazilian association of pulp and paper (associacao brasileira de celulose e papel, bracelpa)  research the reading habits of brazilians and provide information for planning the market and public policies, and currently has about 659 publishers registered.  a survey by the associacao nacional de livrarias (anl), available on july 27, 2010, shows that in the country there are currently 2980 stores - 11% more than there were in 2006. the anl points out, however, that the brazilians read only 1.9 books per year, which falls short of the average in other latin american countries. vitor tavares, president of the anl, gives examples: "in argentina, we read about five. in chile, three. in colombia, reads 2.5 books a year. " also according to tavares, "more and more libraries are opened in big cities but in towns of up to 80,000 inhabitants, often there is no selling point." also according to the anl, the southeastern region has the largest number of shops; sao paulo, with 864 retailers specializing in books, has more than twice the second place, followed by rio de janeiro, minas gerais and rio grande do sul.
the parana is in fifth place in number of bookstores. bahia has the largest number of bookstores in the northeast, and the sixth in the country, tied with santa catarina; roraima, despite having only 25 bookstores has, proportionally, in the north, the best national average.  survey  on 23 july 2010, the valor economico newspaper held a poll with a group of critics and teachers to identify what is the best publisher in brazil, which resulted in the companhia das letras showing up in the first place (81%), and the cosac naify at second (76%). in the third spot were editora 34, martins fontes and record; in fourth was editora ufmg; in fifth atelie editorial, editora hedra, editora iluminuras, editora da unicamp; and in the sixth spot contraponto editora, difel, edusp, editora escrituras, editora perspectiva, unb, editora vozes, wmf martins fontes, zahar editores.  the survey conducted by the newspaper did not aim to measure business efficiency, but to focus on publishers who stand out culturally. voting started with an emphasis on artistic and literary areas and the humanities, and the ability to intervene in the cultural life and to form readers with the criteria if measuring the quality of a publisher. the 21 experts surveyed were asked to name the best three publishing houses. the more specialized areas were excluded, such as technical books, self-help, textbooks and supplementary teaching material.  nft   on 26 april 2021 "the best book of the year (according to a critic bribed by the author)", written by rodrigo policarpo, was the first book to be tokenized (nft) in brazil.  see also   collection (publishing)  list of libraries in brazil  notes and references  biographical references    alves filho, manuel. editora da unicamp e relacionada entre as melhores do pais. jornal da unicamp, 2 a 8 de agosto de 2010, p. 10    a referencia emprega parametros obsoletos (ajuda)    ferrari, marcio. valor economico. sao paulo, 23 july 2010. in: clipping  a referencia emprega parametros obsoletos (ajuda)  a referencia emprega parametros obsoletos (ajuda)  a referencia emprega parametros obsoletos (ajuda)  external links    history of brazil by
topic   book brazil brazil
karlyn pipes (born march 18, 1962), formerly karlyn pipes-neilsen, is an american swimmer from lompoc, california. in masters-level swimming she is one of the most decorated athletes in the history of the sport and was inducted into the international swimming hall of fame in 2015, and the hawaii swimming hall of fame in 2018.  early life pipes was born in 1962 in lompoc, california, and learned to swim by taking classes at the local ymca at the age of four. by the age of six, she had competed in her first race for the lompoc marlins. in 1970, pipes moved to chula vista, ca a city south of san diego and swam for the chula vista aquatic association (cvaa). at the age of 12, pipes changed teams and joined the coronado navy swim association to be coached by two-time olympic gold medalist mike troy. at the age of 15, pipes won the 400-yard individual medley at the national junior olympic swimming championships and as a result was invited to attend the first-ever junior development camp at the us olympic training center in colorado springs, co. she graduated from coronado high school in 1980. pipes was offered 15 full-ride scholarships to ncaa division i schools and accepted one from the university of arkansas.  career by the age of 19, her party lifestyle, "poor work ethic" and "lack of discipline" caused her to forfeit her scholarship at arkansas after three semesters. pipes describes the next chapter of her life as the "lost years" when her addictive tendencies took over and her life began to spiral out of control. for the next 11 years pipes dropped out of college six times, worked as a seasonal beach lifeguard, was a waitress and held other odd jobs such as a bartender at hotel del coronado. on april 16, 1993, at the age of 31, pipes entered a ten-day alcohol and drug rehabilitation program at sharp cabrillo hospital. immediately upon her release, pipes returned to the water to help her recover, heal and regain lost strength. three months later, she stepped up on the blocks to race again and began competing in u.s. masters swimming competitions. after six months of sobriety, pipes established a new fina world record in the 200-meter backstroke. by the end of her first year of masters competition, she ranked first in the u.s. in seven events and added three more world records to her cache. in 1995, she set a total
of 16 fina masters world records for the 30-34 age group, competing against many former olympians. by the time she was 35, she was ranked first in the united states in every distance and stroke in 54 official events in the 35-39 age group and came within a few tenths of a second to qualify for the 1996 us olympic trials in the 200-meter backstroke.  in 1995, she restarted her collegiate swimming career by competing for palomar junior college. over the next two years she held a 4.0 gpa, broke every women's school record but one, set 4 national and 5 state community college records and was twice named the pacific coast conference swimmer of the year. in 1997, pipes accepted a full athletic scholarship to attend cal state bakersfield, where she graduated cum laude with a bs in communications in 1999. while at bakersfield, pipes swam for coach pat skehan and helped the lady roadrunners to second place finish at the national division ii championships. pipes also became the oldest athlete, at age 36, to set an ncaa record, with a time 2:00.54 in the 200-yard backstroke, which remained the ncaa division ii record until 2001. in addition, she won three individual ncaa division ii titles in the 100-yard backstroke, 200 and 400-yard medley. her time in 400-medley was eight seconds faster than the time she posted at age 15 to win the national junior olympics. pipes was awarded division ii all-american honors in eight separate events over her collegiate career. after her college eligibility expired, at the age of 36, karlyn became a professional athlete earning prize money at competitions swimming against women half her age.  in 2002, pipes set 25 fina world records, 54 national records, achieved 6 lifetime best times and became the first woman over forty years old to complete the 500-yard freestyle event in less than five minutes with a time of 4:58.98. stunningly, this time was quicker than the record of 4:59.08, which she had set for the 30-34 age group in 1996.  she has set fina masters world records in all four strokes, as well as in the medley and at every distance offered.    pipes's records stand the test of time and currently span six age-groups reaching back over twenty five years. she also competed at four fina masters world championships starting with montreal, canada in 1994. stanford in palo alto, ca in 2006, perth, australia in 2008, and riccione, italy in 2012 winning all twenty events she entered.
as of december, 2020, pipes has set 229 fina masters records with 25 still standing, and 354 u.s. masters swimming national records, of which 64 are still current. she also owns six long-distance records and is a 20-time usms all-star achieved by earning the most #1 rankings in an age-group in a year. after over three decades of swimming in the us masters category, pipes has become one of the most decorated swimmers in the history of the sport.  "  personal life  in 1995, she married eric neilsen, a former water-polo-player turned triathlete who would serve as her swim coach for the next fourteen years.  after their wedding ceremony, more than 100 guests swam a half-mile open water race in the ocean while wearing celebratory custom swim caps that said "eric and karlyn's wedding and rough water swim." the couple divorced in 2009.  pipes is currently a competitive swimmer as well as a triathlete, inspirational speaker and swim technique expert. she lives in kona, hawaii. she owns aquatic edge, a mobile service that offers faster freestyle swim technique workshops worldwide, as well as private swim instruction and aloha swim camps in kona, hawaii.  as a writer, pipes penned a monthly column entitled "the pool's edge" for swimming world magazine from 2007 to 2012, and has been a contributor to the west hawaii today newspaper and swimmer magazine. in 2015, along with contributing author tito morales, she wrote "the do-over: my journey from the depths of addiction to world champion swimmer," an autobiography about her struggles and victories over addiction.  awards  hawaii swimming hall of fame class of 2018 international swimming hall of fame inductee class of 2015 international masters swimming hall of fame inductee class of 2007 voted top ten masters swimmer of all-time by swimming world magazine has broken 229 fina masters world records to date 354 u.s. masters national records to date 2009, 2008, 2007 & 2004 world masters swimmer of the year by swimming world magazine currently holds 25 fina masters world and 64 u.s. masters national records 611 time usms all-american achieved by earning #1 national ranking in an event female usms swimmer of the year 1997, 2002 & 2003 san diego hall of champions amateur star of the month 1995, 1997, 1998, 2000 & 2002  see also  list of members of the international swimming hall of fame  references  1962 births american female swimmers american motivational speakers women motivational speakers living people 21st-century american women
the cardboard crown (1952) is a novel by australian writer martin boyd. it is the first in the author's "langton tetralogy" (which comprises the cardboard crown, a difficult young man, outbreak of love and when blackbirds sing).  plot summary the novel follows the story of alice langton, as told by her grandson guy de teba langton, who pieces the story together from her diaries and family gossip.  alice is trapped in a life where her happiness is a secondary consideration among the rest of the family, who make continual demands on her money. alice moves constantly between her homes in australia and europe, always longing for the home she does not inhabit.  reviews geoffrey hutton in the argus noted that the author was writing a family saga of wealth and influence in melbourne with a difference. "the prod-nosed social investigators may find some interesting sidelights here on the gilded life of the governing class in the 70's or the early affluence of east st kilda before the parvenus flooded into toorak. but mr boyd's only real interest is in the contrasting strains which appear in his oddly-mixed family and in the interaction between human frailty and unearned wealth.."  gillian dooley, writing in 2004 after the book had been re-issued, stated: "boyd's subject matter is no doubt the principal reason for his neglect. by any standards, his prose is strong and luminous and his novels are beautifully crafted and immensely readable. but the late twentieth century had little patience with the scandals and vicissitudes of anglo-australian aristocratic families, with no apparent connections with convicts, sealers or whalers, or the indigenous people. boyd was admittedly something of a good old-fashioned snob."  note  text publishing re-issued the novel in 2012 as part of its text classics series with an introduction by brenda niall.  see also   1952 in australian literature  references  1952 australian novels novels by martin boyd novels set in melbourne cresset press books
abu imran ibrahim ibn yazid al-nakhai (), also known as ibrahim al-nakhai (, c. 670 ce/50 ah - 714 ce/96 ah), was a tabi'un, theologian, and jurist. he met many companions of muhammad including, anas ibn malik and aisha bint abu bakr.  notes   670 births 710s deaths year of birth uncertain year of death uncertain people from medina sunni muslim scholars 8th-century muslim theologians 7th-century muslim scholars of islam 7th-century muslim theologians tabi'un hadith narrators
the sun rises (romanian: rasare soarele) is a 1954 romanian drama film directed by dinu negreanu. it was made at the recently opened buftea studios in bucharest. the film is a sequel to negreanu's 1953 film the bugler's grandsons, and covers the second world war and post-war years.  cast  marga barbu   constantin codrescu   iurie darie   fory etterle   constantin ramadan   marieta sadova   ion talianu   george vraca as dobre racoviceanu  references  bibliography   liehm, mira & liehm, antonin j. the most important art: eastern european film after 1945. university of california press, 1977.  external links     1954 films 1954 drama films romanian drama films romanian films romanian-language films films directed by dinu negreanu
kilian frankiny (born 26 january 1994 in reckingen) is a swiss cyclist, who currently rides for uci worldteam . he was named in the startlist for the 2017 vuelta a espana. in may 2018, he was named in the startlist for the 2018 giro d'italia.  major results 2015  4th overall giro della valle d'aosta 2016  1st  overall giro della valle d'aosta 1st stages 1 (ttt) & 4  3rd overall peace race u23  7th overall tour de l'ain 2017  1st stage 1 (ttt) vuelta a espana  1st stage 2 (ttt) volta a catalunya  3rd road race, national road championships 2018  9th overall volta a la comunitat valenciana 1st  young rider classification 1st stage 3 (ttt) 2019  6th overall tour du haut var  7th trofeo laigueglia  grand tour general classification results timeline  references  external links   1994 births living people swiss male cyclists people from goms district
mauguin is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   alexandre mauguin (1838-1916), french printer, deputy and then senator in french algeria between 1881 and 1894  charles-victor mauguin (1878-1958), french professor of mineralogy inventor (with carl hermann) of an international standard notation  francois mauguin (1785-1854), french lawyer and politician
nurpur dona  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of nurpur dona. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, nurpur dona has total number of 246 houses and population of 1,179 of which include 613 males and 566 females. literacy rate of nurpur dona is 76.35%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 122 which is 10.35% of total population of nurpur dona, and child sex ratio is approximately 1033, higher than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 417 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of nurpur dona which includes 323 males and 94 females. according to census survey report 2011, 82.01% workers describe their work as main work and 17.99% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 93.38% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the 1916 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1916 college football season.  in their 10th season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 5-1 record and outscored their opponents, 389 to 38. the 389 points scored by the 1916 team was the highest single season point total for a western michigan football team until the 2011 team scored 459 points. quarterback scott burke was the 1916 team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
i am very macho (spanish: yo soy muy macho) is a 1953 mexican comedy film directed by jose diaz morales and starring silvia pinal.  cast  antonio aguilar as tony  miguel angel ferriz   silvia pinal as maria aguirre    salvador quiroz   gina romand as mercedes galan  fernando soto   miguel torruco   enrique zambrano  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films mexican comedy films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by jose diaz morales mexican black-and-white films
st. eugene's cathedral  (), also called the cathedral of saint eugene of the palma or simply cathedral of ciego de avila, is roman catholic cathedral in the city of ciego de avila, in cuba, located on independencia avenue by jose marti park.  history the first church built on the site dated to 1890. this building was demolished in 1947 to give space to a much larger church, designed by the architect salvador figueras, which opened in 1951. the church became a cathedral in 1996 as the seat of the newly-created diocese of ciego de avila. the church's most distinctive feature is its facade.  see also list of cathedrals in cuba roman catholicism in cuba  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in ciego de avila roman catholic churches completed in 1951 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
gosal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gosal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gosal has total number of 96 houses and a population of 451 of which 240 are males and 211 are females. the literacy rate of gosal is 79.86%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 34 which is 7.54% of the total population of gosal, and the child sex ratio is approximately 700, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
alrix da costa (born october 2, 1997) is a french rugby league footballer who plays as a  for the catalans dragons in the super league and france at international level.   da costa has spent time on loan saint-esteve in the elite one championship.  background da costa was born in foix, france.  club career  catalans dragons da costa came through the junior ranks at catalans and represented france at junior level. he made his super league debut in the victory at st helens on april 14, 2016.  international career on 22 october 2016, da costa made his international debut for france in their end of year test match against england in avignon.  he was selected in france 9s squad for the 2019 rugby league world cup 9s.  references  external links catalans dragons profile sl profile  1997 births living people as saint esteve players catalans dragons players french people of portuguese descent french rugby league players people from foix rugby league hookers sportspeople from ariege (department)
the pledging conference in support of iraq took place in washington, d.c. on july 20, 2016 and was co-hosted by the united states, japan, germany, the netherlands, and kuwait. the humanitarian pledging conference was announced by the united states department of state on june 22, 2016 after a humanitarian crisis unfolded in fallujah, iraq due to the military operation to rid the city of islamic state militants. secretary of state, john kerry, appealed the 26 country attendees for $2 billion us dollars to address four areas; immediate stabilization, expanding stabilization, dismantling of explosive devices, and humanitarian assistance.  references  2016 conferences conferences in the united states war in iraq (2013-2017)
the liberia women's national under-18 basketball team is a national basketball team of liberia, administered by the liberia basketball federation. it represents the country in international under-18 (under age 18) women's basketball competitions.  it appeared at the 2010 fiba africa under-18 championship for women qualification stage.  see also liberia women's national basketball team liberia men's national under-18 basketball team  references  external links archived records of liberia team participations  basketball in liberia basketball teams in liberia women's national under-18 basketball teams basketball
the swan 62 was designed by german frers and first launched in 2000s as an evolution of the swan 60 it alongside the swan 82 marked the launch of the raised saloon concept within nautor swan.  external links  nautor swan  german frers official website  references  sailing yachts keelboats 2000s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
shaindel antelis (born 1989) is an american orthodox jewish singer-songwriter and actress. she has released four studio albums and has performed throughout the united states, canada, europe, and israel.  early life shaindel antelis was born in brooklyn, new york. her father, moshe, was a guitarist and songwriter before becoming a baal teshuva, while her mother, nesha, teaches zumba classes. antelis comes from a family of musicians; in addition to her father, her brother ben is a drummer who currently plays with soulfarm, while another brother, jake, is a drummer and producer. all three have worked on her albums.  she sang and wrote poetry from a young age and wrote her first song when she was ten. the family moved from brooklyn to elizabeth, new jersey when she was 12, enrolling her in bruriah high school for girls. she later recalled that, despite an overall pleasant experience, she felt isolated in the new town and used her songwriting to cope with her tumultuous emotions.  after high school, she spent a year in israel studying at be'er miriam seminary in israel while taking night classes in cosmetology. she returned for a second year after her first album was released, during which she attended neve yerushalayim.  career upon returning from her first year in israel, she released her debut album heart & soul (2009), for which her father provided bass guitar and arrangements while her brother jake produced and played drums.  during her second year, she sought out open mic nights throughout jerusalem. she competed in the all-female wanna be a star competition hosted by the professional women's theater company, and was one of the eleven contestants invited to perform at a 2009 spotlight event at the gerard behar center. returning home, she recorded her second album, change (2010), which again featured her father and brother jake with the addition of brother ben on drums. a music video was filmed for the title track and released the following year.  in 2013, she released her third album, live today. later that year, she appeared at the lamplighters yeshivah's annual in the glow event for women, performing alongside miriam leah droz and bulletproof stockings. in 2014, she released the music video "invisible", which promoted an anti-bullying message.  artistry antelis plays jewish music with elements of pop, rock, folk, and country, describing her sound as "not borough park but also not taylor swift." unlike most
jewish singers, she sings primarily in english, saying "i want to write and sing about my real life, so i write in my native language, so that everyone can understand. i try to be positive, and convey the message that g‑d is really there and always listening. my music is for all women, jewish or not, whoever and wherever they are."  she is noted as one of the few active orthodox female musicians, as many are inhibited by the rabbinic prohibition of kol isha. early on in her career, she experienced difficulty getting judaica stores to sell her albums, as women-only music was not seen as profitable. she was encouraged and mentored by miriam leah droz, a fellow jewish singer and founder of the arts and torah association for religious artists (atara). antelis has stated that she hopes to inspire other female musicians in the religious jewish community.  discography  albums  singles  music videos  soundtracks  the heart that sings (2011) ("friends, friends, friends"; "kaddish ballet")  filmography  references  external links    living people 1989 births american orthodox jews orthodox jewish women musicians 21st-century american actresses people from brooklyn chabad-lubavitch hasidim 21st-century women musicians
kingsized is the sixth studio album from denver quartet dressy bessy. the album was released on yep roc records in february 2016.  peter buck and scott mccaughey guest on the album.  track listing all tracks composed by tammy ealom "lady liberty" "get along (diamond ring)" "electrified" "these modern guns" "pop phenom" "kingsized" "cup 'o bang bang" "giddyup" "honey bee" "make mine violet" "57 disco" "dirty birdies" "say goodbye" "in particular"  references  2016 albums dressy bessy albums yep roc records albums
aino lohikoski (1898-1981) was a finnish actress.  selected filmography  substitute wife (1936)  tree without fruit (1947)  mother or woman (1953)  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1898 births 1981 deaths actresses from helsinki people from uusimaa province (grand duchy of finland) finnish stage actresses finnish film actresses finnish silent film actresses
jiangning subdistrict (江宁街道) is a subdistrict of jiangning district, nanjing, jiangsu, china.   township-level divisions of jiangsu geography of nanjing
idrettslaget varegg is a sports club in bergen. it has sections for football, orienteering, cross-country skiing and track and field.  the club hosts 'stoltzekleiven opp', an annual fell running race up the mountain sandviksfjellet.  history  the club was founded as 'falk' in 1921, but applied to change its name to 'sparta' in 1925. the new name was not accepted by norges idrettsforbund, and the members chose the name pallas instead. in 1947, pallas merged with 'høydekameratene' and was renamed to varegg, after the mountain vardegga.  varegg played in the top division of norwegian football for three seasons in the 1950s, attracting average crowds of about 6,000. their best finish was 6th in group a in 1952/53, ahead of local rivals sk brann and arstad il, who were relegated. varegg were narrowly relegated in the 1955/56 season though beating rivals brann in both games, and have not played in the top flight since.  in the 1971 norwegian football cup varegg reached the quarter-finals, and attracted a crowd of more than 20,000 at krohnsminde against eventual winners rosenborg bk. varegg lost the match 0-1. eleven years later, in 1982, an infamous 1-9 loss at home against brann in the last round of the 1982 league season saw brann promoted to the top tier on goal difference, ahead of steinkjer i&fk, who suspected foul play between the two bergen clubs.  varegg played three seasons in the norwegian second tier division in the 1980s. until the rise of suburban teams such as fyllingen, asane, fana and løv-ham in the late 1980s, varegg was recognized as the second best club in bergen, after brann.  varegg have since played in lower divisions. as of 2016, they play in the 3. divisjon (level 4).  references  football clubs in norway athletics clubs in norway sport in bergen association football clubs established in 1921 1921 establishments in norway
leon vranken (born 1975, maaseik, belgium) is a belgian artist. he lives and works in antwerp (belgium).  biography and works leon vranken's work is radical in its simplicity and pays tremendous attention to material and finish, expressing both tension and calm. he interweaves expectation with technical expertise. with a background in landscape architecture, after his artistic education in situ at the royal academy of fine arts in antwerp, he has devoted his energies to the visual arts. his diverse works- sculptures, installations, photos or interventions - are mainly developed in interaction with space. vranken completed his education at the higher institute for fine arts in ghent in 2007, and has had international exhibitions in cities including new york, londen and toronto.  leon vranken is always able to disrupt direct visual recognisability by depriving everyday objects of their function and deliberately using various materials. one could describe his work as sculptural trompe l'oeils, alluring yet misleading configurations. geometric ensembles, sophisticated sculptures and fake ready-mades are painstakingly orchestrated in space. shape, presentation and meaning slide continuously over each other like tectonic plates. with his spatial compositions the artist defies gravity, the viewer and the medium. the image enters into dialogue with the frame, the sculpture with the pedestal.  solo exhibitions  2015  ( 1³ ) ² = 1, lls 387 ruimte voor actuele kunst, antwerp (belgium)  art geneva, geneva (switzerland)  2014  paper, scissors, stone, z33, hasselt (belgium)  2013  a cat's eye perspective, meessen de clercq, brussels (belgium)  2011  don't whistle 'till you're out of the wood, white box, new york (usa)  2010  the beauty of painting (chapter i), concertgebouw, brugge (belgium)  2009  the travelling riddle, stella lohaus gallery, antwerpen (belgium)  2007  the garden with the two-forked paths, diaz contemporary, toronto (canada)  verger barre, maes en matthys gallery, antwerpen (belgium)  references  sources  external links  official website  living people 1975 births people from maaseik belgian artists 21st-century artists
barnabe farmian durosoy,  (1745 - 25 august 1792, paris) was an 18th-century french journalist and man of letters, both a playwright, poet, novelist, historian and essayist. founder and editor of a royalist newspaper in 1789, he was the first journalist to die guillotined under the reign of terror.  author of history books, literary criticism and political philosophy, he also published poems, songs, epistles, tales in verse, fables and, above all, many plays and ballets and librettos.  works  1754: lettres de cecile a julie, ou les combats de la nature, text online 1755: le cri de l'honneur, epitre a la maitresse que j'ai eue  1756: le genie, le gout et l'esprit, poeme en 4 chants, par l'auteur du poeme sur les sens  1762: mes dix-neuf ans, ouvrage de mon cœur  1762: epitre a mon verrou, par l'auteur de mes dix-neuf ans 1765: clairval philosophe, ou la force des passions, memoires d'une femme retiree du monde (2 volumes) 1766: l'usage des talens, epitre a mademoiselle sainval, jeune debutante au theatre francais 1766: les sens, poeme en six chants text online 1769: essai philosophique sur l'etablissement des ecoles gratuites de dessein pour les arts mecaniques  1769: œuvres melees de m. de rozoi (2 volumes) 1771-1776: annales de la ville de toulouse (4  volumes) 1772: le vrai ami des hommes, reprinted in 1796 as a posthumous work by antoine leonard thomas. 1773: dissertation sur corneille et racine, suivie d'une epitre en vers  1774: le joyeux avenement, poeme  1775: dissertation sur le drame lyrique  1791: fragment sentimental en vers francais  theatre 1765:les decius francais ou le siege de calais sous philippe vi, five-act tragedy in verse, puteaux, chez le duc de grammont, 29 july 1767 1770: azor, ou les peruviens five-act tragedy in verse, text online 1771: la pomme d'or, ballet heroique in three acts  1773: richard iii, tragedy in five acts and in verse, theatre de toulouse 1774: aurore et azur 1774: henri iv ou la bataille
d'ivry, drame lyrique in 3 acts and in prose, theatre de l'hotel de bourgogne, 14 november 1775: la reduction de paris, drame lyrique in 3 acts, theatre de l'hotel de bourgogne, 30 september 1776: les mariages samnites, drame lyrique in 3 acts and in prose,  theatre de l'hotel de bourgogne, 12 june 1779: les deux amis, drame lyrique in 3 acts, in prose, mingled with ariettes, chateau de versailles, 19 february 1779: les trois roses, ou les graces, comedy in 3 acts, in prose, mingled with d'ariettes, chateau de versailles, 10 december 1780: pygmalion, drame lyrique in 1 act and in prose, theatre de l'hotel de bourgogne, 16 december. 1781: l'inconnue persecutee, comedie opera in 3 acts, chateau de versailles, 8 june 1783: la clemence de henri iv, three-act drama in prose, comedie italienne (salle favart), 14 december 1783 1786: l'amour filial, comedy in 2 acts and in prose, mingled with d'ariettes, paris, theatre italien (salle favart), 2 march 1786: stratonice, ballet heroique in 3 acts, chateau de versailles, 30 december 1788: bayard ou le siege de mezieres, comedy in three acts and in verse, comedie italienne (salle favart), 15 july 1789: les fourberies de marine ou le tuteur juge et partie, opera comique in three acts and in prose, paris, theatre de monsieur, 11 september  references  bibliography   .  pierre larousse, grand dictionnaire universel du xixe, vol. vi, 1870, (p. 1439-1440)  elphege boursin, augustin challamel, dictionnaire de la revolution francaise, paris, jouvet et cie, 1893, (p. 286).  external links    barnabe farmian durosoy on data.bnf.fr  his plays on  cesar     18th-century french journalists 18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights french opera librettists people executed by guillotine during the french revolution 1745 births 1792 deaths
this was the first edition of the tournament since 1994. lara arruabarrena and xenia knoll won the title, defeating annika beck and evgeniya rodina in the final, 6-1, 3-6, [10-8].  seeds  the top seed received a bye into the quarterfinals.  draw  draw  references  draw  ladies championship gstaad wta swiss open
dzenis kozica (born 28 april 1993) is a swedish footballer who plays for trelleborgs ff.  on 10 may 2018 he played as djurgarden beat malmo ff 3-0 in the swedish cup final.  honours  club djurgardens if allsvenskan: 2019  svenska cupen: 2017-18  references  external links     1993 births living people swedish footballers sweden youth international footballers swedish people of bosnia and herzegovina descent association football midfielders allsvenskan players ifk varnamo players jonkopings sodra if players djurgardens if fotboll players afc eskilstuna players trelleborgs ff players
joao manuel da silva moreira (; born 30 june 1970) is a portuguese former professional footballer, who played as a defender for swansea city in the football league.  club career in summer 1996 swansea city manager jan mølby spent £50,000 to bring moreira to the welsh club, then languishing in the third division. it was reported that moreira was a former benfica player who had recently had a trial with birmingham city. at swansea moreira lived with teammate jason price, near a group of students who had a jacuzzi. the duo's off-field antics and excessive partying resulted in a rebuke from coach alan curtis. quickly nicknamed "joe" moreira, a knee injury sustained in pre-season kept him out of the swansea team until november 1996, when he played in a 1-0 win over brighton. huw richards wrote in when saturday comes that "elegant but over-left-footed" moreira became rated highly by supporters at the vetch field. moreira played in the 1997 football league third division play-off final, which swansea lost 1-0 to an injury time goal from northampton town's john frain. when mølby was sacked as manager, moreira fell out of favour. he was made available for transfer in november 1997 and released in summer 1998.  honours swansea city football league third division play-offs runner-up: 1997  notes  references  external links  (soccerbase incorrectly attributes daniel moreira's four european appearances for rc lens against arsenal to joao moreira.)  portuguese footballers 1970 births living people footballers from porto association football defenders swansea city a.f.c. players english football league players portuguese expatriate footballers portuguese expatriate sportspeople in wales expatriate footballers in wales c.d. nacional players ad fafe players anadia f.c. players sc sao joao de ver players
the 2016 wisconsin fall general election was held in the u.s. state of wisconsin on november 8, 2016. one of wisconsin's u.s. senate seats and all eight seats in the united states house of representatives are up for election, as well as half of the wisconsin senate seats and all of the wisconsin assembly seats. the 2016 fall partisan primary was held on august 9, 2016.  the wisconsin republican party made large gains in the 2016 election. businessman and republican presidential nominee donald trump won wisconsin in an upset, becoming the first republican to win the state since 1984. additionally, the state gop had a strong showing in the state legislature, building their largest majorities since 1957, and republican senator ron johnson defeated russ feingold a second time for a second term. this put walker and the wisconsin gop in a strong position.  wisconsin republicans also celebrated the victory of justice rebecca bradley in the april election for wisconsin supreme court.  bradley had been appointed to the court in 2015 after the death of justice n. patrick crooks, who had been seen as a swing vote on the court.  federal  president  senate  in a rematch of the 2010 election, first term incumbent republican ron johnson ran against former democratic u.s. senator russ feingold. johnson defeated feingold in the general election with 50.2% of the vote.  house of representatives  all of wisconsin's eight united states house of representatives seats were up for election in 2016. party composition remained unchanged after the general election.  state  legislature  state senate  the 16 even-numbered districts out of 33 seats in the wisconsin senate were up for election in 2016. nine of these seats were held by republicans and seven were held by democrats. prior to the election, republicans controlled the chamber with a 19 to 14 majority, but they gained a seat in the election.  state assembly  all 99 seats of the wisconsin state assembly were up for election in november. nine assemblymen (6 republicans, 3 democrats) did not seek re-election.  judiciary  state supreme court incumbent wisconsin supreme court justice rebecca bradley defeated judge joanne kloppenburg of the wisconsin court of appeals in the april general election.  justice bradley had been appointed to the court in 2015 by governor scott walker, to replace justice n. patrick crooks, who had died in office.  justice crooks' term was already set to expire in 2016, thus no special election needed to be scheduled.  milwaukee county circuit court judge m. joseph "joe" donald was also a candidate in this
election, but did not advance from the february primary election.  though wisconsin judicial elections are nonpartisan, justice bradley's victory was seen as an important win for the republican party, as she claims a judicial philosophy aligned with conservative judges like samuel alito and clarence thomas, and she had been endorsed by republican-aligned interest groups such as the national rifle association and wisconsin right to life.  justice crooks, who she was replacing, was seen as a swing vote on the court, so this was a net gain for the conservative bloc on the court.  | colspan="6" style="text-align:center;background-color: #e9e9e9;"| primary election, february 16, 2016  | colspan="6" style="text-align:center;background-color: #e9e9e9;"| general election, april 5, 2016  state court of appeals all four districts of the wisconsin court of appeals had a seat up for election in 2016.  none of the races were contested.  in district i, judge joan f. kessler was elected to her third term without opposition.  in district ii, judge paul f. reilly was elected to his second term without opposition.  in district iii, judge thomas hruz was elected to his first full term, after being appointed to the court by governor scott walker in 2014.  in district iv, judge brian blanchard was elected to his second term without opposition.  state circuit courts forty of the state's 249 circuit court seats were up for election in 2020.  ten of those seats were contested.  three incumbent judges were defeated-milwaukee county judges paul rifelj and michelle ackerman havas, and eau claire county judge brian h. wright.  all three defeated judges had been appointed by governor scott walker.  local  kenosha  john antaramian was elected to a four-year term as mayor of kenosha.  he was returning to office after having previously served four four-year terms as mayor from 1992 through 2008.  milwaukee  incumbent tom barrett was reelected to his fourth term as mayor of milwaukee, defeating alderman bob donovan.  incumbent county executive chris abele was re-elected, defeating state senator chris larson.  references    wisconsin
hary or hary may refer to the following people given name hary suharyadi (born 1965), indonesian tennis player  hary susanto (born 1975), indonesian para badminton player  hary tanoesoedibjo (born 1965), indonesian businessman   surname armin hary (born 1937), german sprinter laszlo hary (1890-1953), commander of the hungarian air force maryan hary (born 1980), french road bicycle racer  indonesian masculine given names
return (persian: bazgasht) is a 1953 iranian drama film directed by samouel khachikian.  cast  arman   hayedeh   mehri aghili   ezzatollah vosoogh   shahin   akbar khajavi   rahim roshanian   massoud poor zanjani  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films iranian films persian-language films films directed by samuel khachikian iranian drama films 1953 drama films iranian black-and-white films
guillermo tritschler y cordova (6 july 1878 - 29 july 1952) was a mexican prelate of the catholic church.  born in 1878 to the german-born martin tritschler and rosa cordova, his he was raised mostly by his uncle, who sent him to study at the colegio pio-latino-americano pontificio and pontifical gregorian university in rome. he was ordained in 1904 and served as a seminary professor and later canon penitentiary of the mexico city metropolitan cathedral. in 1931 he was appointed archbishop of san luis potosi, where he served until 1941, when he was appointed archbishop of monterrey. he served in that position until his death on 29 july 1952.  his cause for canonization is open and the congregation for the causes of saints recently conferred on him the title of servant of god.  biography  early life and family  tritschler was born on 6 july 1878 in san andres chalchicomula, puebla, mexico. he was baptized, received his first communion, and was confirmed in the same parish church of that town.  his father, martin tritschler, grew up on a farm in schwarzenbach, germany, in what was then a region of the duchy of wurttemberg. his father came from an old family of german farmers, whose roots date back to the earliest settlements in the black forest, and who were feudal servants of the monasteries of friedenweiler, reichenau island, and saint gall. his paternal ancestors first moved into the area in 1437, and settled an area called ebenemooshof. his father was forced to leave the farm due to primogeniture laws, and he moved to mexico where he became a prosperous clock manufacturer and retailer.  his mother, rosa maria cordova y puig (1843-1881), was the daughter of spanish immigrants to a newly independent mexico. rosa's father was lieutenant joaquin de cordova y garcia, a former member of the spanish royal army who, like many others, defected to join the fledgling army of the three guarantees.  the youngest of eight children, tritschler's brother martin, the oldest of the eight, entered the priesthood and in 1900 was consecrated bishop of the diocese of yucatan, was elevated to archbishop in 1907, serving until his death in 1942. the second oldest of his siblings, joaquin, became manager of the estates of sebastian b. de mier, a mexican businessman and diplomat. his sister rosa maria joined religious servants of the sacred heart of jesus and of the poor, a young religious order founded by st. jose maria
de yermo y parres, and she went on to become mother superior of the order. his sixth oldest sibling, alfonso, graduated from the pontifical gregorian university in rome but decided not to become a priest, and pursued a career in architecture. his three other siblings died in childhood.  tritschler's mother died when he was three years old, and his father died in 1894, when he was 16.  education   tritschler's mother died when he was three, and his father was elderly, so he sent a young guillermo to be educated by his maternal uncle the rev. prisciliano cordova, a prominent cleric of the diocese of puebla de los angeles. in 1888, he and his brother alfonso were sent to rome to study at the collegio pio-latino-americano pontificio. his brother martin was at the time an advanced student at the pontifical gregorian university.  after finishing at the latin american college, he moved on to study at the pontifical gregorian university, where among tritschler's teachers were the philosopher rev. vincenzo remer, the future cardinal rev. louis billot, and the rector of the pontifical gregorian university rev. felipe sottovia. because he was sent to the college at the unusually young age of 10, a december 1932 catalog of past students records him as the pupil longest lived studying in rome, at 14 years, two months, and 27 days. he returned to mexico on 4 august 1902, with three doctorates, one each in philosophy, theology, and canon law.  priesthood  before returning to mexico, tritschler was invited by rev. manuel fulcheri y pietrasanta, on the recommendation of rev. louis billot, to serve in the archdiocese of mexico. however, fears of conscience delayed his ordination. his fears were relieved when bishop jose ramon ibarra y gonzalez, the bishop of puebla de los angeles, granted his request that he be ordained by his brother bishop martin tritschler y cordova, bishop of yucatan. on 8 may 1903, on the feast of the apparition of st. michael, he received from his brother the tonsure and minor orders. on 5 june 1904, in the church of san francisco el grande, he received the subdiaconate from bishop francisco orozco y jimenez, bishop of chiapas. on 13 june 1904 in the church of san antonio de padua, his brother martin ordained him a deacon, and he was ordained to the priesthood on the morning of 19 june 1904 in the chapel of the archbishop's palace of puebla
. he celebrated his first mass two days later on 21 june 1904, the feast of st. aloysius gonzaga, in the church of nuestra senora de ocotlan, near the city of tlaxcala.  professorship at the seminary of mexico  tritschler went to work at the seminario conciliar de mexico, which was still under construction at the time. the architect, manuel gorozpe, aware of tritschler's esteem, asked his advice of the project, and was influenced to change some of the plans of the seminary. tritschler was the chair of the philosophy department starting in 1911, and at the end of that year was also assigned to teach courses in dogmatic theology. he taught at the seminary for nearly 20 years, interrupted only by two trips to rome he made over that period. in 1916 he received the official appointment of "spiritual father," a position that entailed encouraging seminarians to pursue their vocation and complete their studies until ordination to the priesthood.  in 1929, archbishop pascual diaz y barreto, archbishop of mexico, appointed tritschler to the position of canon penitentiary of the metropolitan cathedral in mexico city, officially starting this position on 1 august 1929.  episcopacy  bishop of san luis potosi   after the death of archbishop miguel de la mora y mora in 1930, archbishop of san luis potosi, the apostolic delegate archbishop leopoldo ruiz y flores called tritschler to the apostolic delegation to notify him that pope pius xi had recommended him to be the new archbishop of san luis potosi. tritschler did not wish to have the position, and presented five reasons to the holy see against his own credit, saying:"i wrote to rome, opposing and explaining that in conscience i could not accept the post of bishop and gave five reasons, adding that if necessary i could confirm with an oath: i do not know how to preach; could one meet the duty of a bishop who does not preach? i do not know how to write, and a bishop should write pastoral letters. i have never exercised authority over any person, i have never had any minor trials of authority, not even on a waiter at the seminary. i do not know how to scold. one more, i do not know how to handle money."the holy see ignored tritschler's excuses, and l'osservatore romano published his appointment as the sixth archbishop of san luis potosi on 30 january 1931. his brother martin tritschler y cordova, who ordained him to the priesthood and whose position had since been risen to
archbishop of yucatan, was principal consecrator at his episcopal consecration, which took place on 22 april 1931 in the basilica of our lady of guadalupe, north of mexico city. bishop manuel fulcheri y pietrasanta, bishop of zamora, and bishop luis maria altamirano y bulnes, bishop of huajuapan de leon, were co-consecrators.  as archbishop of san luis potosi, tritschler reestablished religious practices that had been suspended by the mexican government, increased the number of seminarians and revamped their training and education, strengthened catholic organizations, and brought in instructors from mexico and foreign nations to educate the clergy. he also continued work on the cathedral of the immaculate conception in matehuala, the construction of which had been interrupted by the mexican revolution. shortly before the end of his tenure he directed his efforts towards the completion of the church of our lord of saucito (spanish: iglesia de nuestra senor de saucito).  archbishop of monterey  in 1940, archbishop jose guadalupe ortiz y lopez, archbishop of monterrey, and pope pius xii appointed tritschler his successor on 22 february 1941. he was installed in this position on 20 june 1941. he told members of the diocese of san luis potosi disappointed by his departure:"if it had been possible to ask the holy father to continue in this diocese, i would have done that, because i wanted to because i had been consecrated to this, and i had married her, and with her i will always remain, but it is better to accept to submit to the will of god manifested by the pope."on 25 june 1941 he officially began his work as archbishop of the archdiocese of monterrey, which he strengthened with more priests and new churches. he increased the number of seminarians in the archdiocese, reformed and strengthened their curriculum, and provided new facilities to house the seminary. he always had a deep involvement with the seminary, visiting it on the first friday of every month to celebrate mass dedicated to the sacred heart of jesus, and often coming by to hold discussions and lectures with the seminarians. the following year, on 15 november 1942, his brother martin, archbishop of yucatan, died and tritschler attended his funeral.  during his tenure as archbishop of monterrey, tritschler was principal co-consecrator of three bishops and one archbishop: archbishop fortino gomez leon in 1943, bishop jose gabriel anaya y diez de bonilla in 1947, bishop celestino fernandez y fernandez in 1948, and bishop arturo velez martinez in 1951.  in tritschler's later years, his mental alertness
declined, possibly due to an aging-associated disease. he died on 29 july 1952, at the age of 74. he was originally buried in the shrine of our lady of the oak in monterrey, and today his remains have been placed in the metropolitan cathedral of our lady of monterrey, the seat of the archdiocese of monterrey.  legacy   tritschler's perhaps best-recognized legacy is that of the ecclesiastical architecture he left behind in the dioceses he led. among these buildings are the basilica of the purisima concepcion, the matehualda cathedral, and the iglesia de nuestra senor de saucito.  his burial site at the monterrey cathedral is often visited by religious pilgrims, and he has amassed a significant following among mexican catholic devotees.  canonization  the archdiocese of monterrey has introduced tritschler as a cause for canonization, and the congregation for the causes of saints has granted him the title servant of god.  episcopal lineage   cardinal scipione rebiba  cardinal giulio antonio santorio (1566)  cardinal girolamo bernerio, op  (1586)  archbishop galeazzo sanvitale (1604)  cardinal ludovico ludovisi (1621)  cardinal luigi caetani (1622)  cardinal ulderico carpegna (1630)  cardinal paluzzo paluzzi altieri degli albertoni (1666)  pope benedict xiii (1675)  pope benedict xiv (1724)  archbishop enrico enriquez (1743)  bishop manuel quintano bonifaz (1749)  cardinal buenaventura cordoba espinosa de la cerda (1761)  cardinal giuseppe doria pamphili (1773)  pope pius viii (1800)  blessed pope pius ix (1827)  bishop jose montes de oca y obregon (1871)  archbishop prospero alarcon y sanchez de la barquera (1892)  archbishop martin tritschler y cordova (1900)  archbishop guillermo tritschler y cordova (1931)  references   1878 births 1952 deaths people from puebla 20th-century roman catholic archbishops in mexico mexican people of spanish descent mexican people of german descent pontifical gregorian university alumni servants of god
leonardo henriques coelho (born 17 may 1993), known as leo coelho, is a brazilian footballer who plays for nacional on loan from liga mx club atletico san luis as a centre-back.  club career born in rio de janeiro, leo coelho was a nacional-sp youth graduate. he made his senior debut for the club on 30 april 2011 by starting in a 1-3 home loss against jabaquara for the campeonato paulista segunda divisao championship,.   leo coelho was subsequently loaned to gremio barueri, penapolense and parana, appearing with the latter in serie b. in january 2016 he moved to rio claro permanently.  on 18 may 2016 leo coelho was loaned to santos, being initially assigned to the b-team. after being an undisputed starter during the year's copa paulista, he returned to penapolense on 6 february 2017, also in a temporary deal.  career statistics  references  external links  1993 births living people footballers from rio de janeiro (city) brazilian footballers association football defenders campeonato brasileiro serie b players nacional atletico clube (sp) players gremio barueri futebol players clube atletico penapolense players parana clube players rio claro futebol clube players santos fc players associacao portuguesa de desportos players comercial futebol clube (ribeirao preto) players uruguayan primera division players liga mx players centro atletico fenix players atletico san luis footballers club nacional de football players brazilian expatriate footballers brazilian expatriate sportspeople in uruguay expatriate footballers in uruguay brazilian expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in mexico
khoroshyovo () is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro. the station offers out-of-station transfers to polezhayevskaya of tagansko-krasnopresnenskaya line and khoroshyovskaya on the bolshaya koltsevaya line.  references  external links    хорошево mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
john stewart (c.1723-81), of york buildings, buckingham street, london and mitcham, surrey, was an english politician.  he was a member (mp) of the parliament of great britain for arundel 13 may 1771 - 1774.  references  1720s births 1781 deaths 18th-century english people people from westminster people from mitcham members of the parliament of great britain for english constituencies british mps 1768-1774
patrik niklas-salminen (born 5 march 1997) is a finnish tennis player.  on the junior tour, niklas-salminen has a career high itf junior ranking of 20 achieved in september 2015. niklas-salminen reached the semifinals of the 2015 wimbledon boys' singles event, losing to mikael ymer in the semifinal.  niklas-salminen already won one singles title and ten doubles titles on the itf men's circuit.  niklas-salminen has a career high atp singles ranking of 532 achieved on 13 august 2018. he also has a career high atp doubles ranking of 286 achieved on 30 july 2018.  niklas-salminen has represented finland in davis cup, where he has a win-loss record of 2-3.  external links  1997 births living people finnish male tennis players sportspeople from tampere
elisabetta fanton (born 26 december 1968) is an italian former cyclist. she competed in the women's sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people italian female cyclists olympic cyclists of italy cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from treviso
the total j.j. johnson is an album by jazz trombonist and arranger j. j. johnson and big band recorded in 1965 for the rca victor label.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow observed "the emphasis is on the arranged ensembles, making this project an excellent example of johnson's often-overlooked writing talents".  track listing all compositions by j. j. johnson.  "say when" - 2:54  "blue" - 5:45  "in walked horace" - 4:42  "short cake" - 2:42  "space walk" - 4:05  "euro #1" - 5:54  "ballade" - 3:47  "little dave" - 4:02  "euro #2" 5:39 recorded at rca victor's studio a in new york city on november 30, 1966 (tracks 1 & 7), december 2, 1966 (tracks 2, 3, 5 & 8) and december 5, 1966 (tracks 4, 6 & 9)  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone, arranger, conductor art farmer, danny stiles, snooky young - trumpet paul faulise, benny powell - trombone jerome richardson - alto saxophone, clarinet, flute phil bodner - tenor saxophone, clarinet, flute, oboe tommy newsom - baritone saxophone, bass clarinet, flute hank jones - piano ron carter - bass grady tate - drums  references   1967 albums rca records albums j. j. johnson albums
colantoni may refer to: andrea colantoni, quarter-finalist in men's low-kick at wako world championships 2007 belgrade -67 kg dave colantoni, singer in worthless united david colantoni, writer of i, the other enrico colantoni, actor laura colantoni, researcher of neapolitan language and rioplatense spanish marco colantoni, director of the amazing race (latin america) philippe colantoni, co-author of hyper and rgb color space researcher quintin colantoni, winner of 33rd young artist awards#outstanding young ensemble in a tv series for the yard (2011 tv series)
kadadora vihara (also known as kadadora sri priyabimbaramaya vihara) was a buddhist temple, situated in kadadora, nuwara eliya district, sri lanka. the temple was abandoned and ruined as the construction of kotmale dam in 1979 by mahaweli development programme. the ruins of vihara still can be seen when the water level of kotmale reservoir is low, but the sight is very rare.  it is said that about 57 villages and 54 religious places in kotmale were submerged with the completion of the reservoir in 1985. except kadadora vihara other shrines including thispane vihara, morape devalaya, othalawa vihara, pattini devalaya and medagoda vihara were said to have gone under water when the reservoir was built. however, many of these temple ruins no longer exist.  in order to compensate the loss of these religious shrines those were submerged in the reservoir, the mahaweli authorities started the construction of bubble shaped stupa, mahaweli maha seya which only second to the great ruwanwelisaya of anuradhapura in height.  references  buddhist temples in nuwara eliya district former buddhist temples
sally bennett (born 10 june 1979) is an australian sabre fencer. she won the gold medal at the 2013 oceania fencing championships for women's sabre., after beating her new zealand opponent 15-6 in 2014, she was inducted into the randwick city council hall of sporting champions for her lifetime commitment to sport.  personal bennett was born in sydney, australia. she attended randwick public school and randwick girls technology high school. she completed a bachelor of arts/bachelor of education at the university of new south wales and a masters in international business at the university of sydney. she trained as a language teacher in french and german, and worked in paris as a communication manager and canada as a ski instructor. she has authored five books, four of which belong to the rabs & ted travel series for children.  fencing career bennett began fencing at her current club, the university of sydney fencing club, in 2011. she was club champion in 2012, 2013 and 2014. she has been a member of the new south wales state squad 2012-2015, the australian fencing squad 2012-2013 and australian fencing team 2013-present. bennett represented australia at the 2014 commonwealth fencing championships in scotland, the 2014 world fencing championships in kazan and the 2015 world fencing championships in moscow.  she was injured for the majority of the 2015-2016 season due to torn patella tendons. operations were undertaken concurrently on both knees on 8 october 2015. since 2013, bennett has been a sports ambassador for the new south wales premier's sporting challenge, visiting schools to talk to students about the importance of exercise, healthy eating and what it takes to become a champion.  she currently lives in sydney, australia.  references  living people 1979 births sportspeople from sydney australian female sabre fencers university of new south wales alumni university of sydney alumni
angel noe alayon (born 29 october 1964) is a colombian former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1964 births living people colombian male cyclists olympic cyclists of colombia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from bogota
burlington canal lift bridge is a vertical lift bridge located to the north side of the burlington bay james n. allan skyway in burlington, ontario.  built in 1962, the  bridge is the sixth bridge to span the burlington canal since 1830.  the bridge allows vessels to enter and exit from hamilton harbour into lake ontario. the bridge does not lift during the winter months (january to late march).  the bridge carries eastport drive across the canal with two lanes for traffic in each direction, as well as a single pedestrian walkway on the west side. traffic light and signalized gates are found on both ends of the bridge. the road surface on the bridge is not paved, but rather metal grating.  in 1896 hamilton-burlington radial electric railway cars cross the 1877 bridge. before 1982 it also carried rail traffic along a cn rail (hamilton and north-western railway) route but the section of the line was removed and the bridge converted to a vehicular bridge.  the bridge is maintained and owned by public works canada.  earlier bridges  several bridges were built from 1826 to 1952 to accommodate railway, radial and vehicular traffic:   1826: wooden bridge built; damaged in storm  1830: swing bridge built; damaged by schooner elsie hope   1877: 375 foot through-truss manual swing bridge built by hamilton and north-western railway replaces scow service  1901: steel truss electric swing bridge   1921-1922: single leaf bascule bridge  1952: temporary bridge built to replace the north leaf bascule bridge  the last three bridges were demolished following the completion of the current bridge in 1962.  references  external links  bridges completed in 1962 buildings and structures in burlington, ontario buildings and structures in hamilton, ontario transport in burlington, ontario transport in hamilton, ontario rail infrastructure in hamilton, ontario road bridges in ontario lake ontario transport in the greater toronto area vertical lift bridges in canada
the mystery of the express car (spanish: el misterio del carro express) is a 1953 mexican mystery film directed by zacarias gomez urquiza.  cast  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1950s mystery films mexican mystery films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by zacarias gomez urquiza mexican black-and-white films
sokndal church () is a parish church of the church of norway in sokndal municipality in rogaland county, norway. it is located in the village of hauge. it is the main church for the sokndal parish which is part of the dalane prosti (deanery) in the diocese of stavanger. the white, wooden church was built in a cruciform design and in a louis xvi style in 1803 using designs by an unknown architect. the church seats about 800 people.  history the earliest existing historical records of the church date back to the year 1307, but the church was not new at that time. records from the 1600s refer to the church as , so it was likely dedicated to saint jacob. the medieval church stood on the site for centuries and over time it was renovated, repaired, and rebuilt. records show that from 1734 to 1740, the church underwent an extensive renovation project to repair the very old church. it is likely that by then the church bared little resemblance to the original church but rather looked like a patchwork of old an old stave church and newer timber-framed construction.  around the turn of the 19th century, the old church was torn down and a new building was constructed on the same site.  the new cruciform church was partially completed in 1803 when it was put into use. it was finished over the next four years and it was consecrated on 8 july 1807.  in 1814, this church served as an election church (). together with more than 300 other parish churches across norway, it was a polling station for elections to the 1814 norwegian constituent assembly which wrote the constitution of norway. this was norway's first national elections. each church parish was a constituency that elected people called "electors" who later met together in each county to elect the representatives for the assembly that was to meet in eidsvoll later that year.  media gallery  see also list of churches in rogaland  references  sokndal churches in rogaland wooden churches in norway 19th-century church of norway church buildings churches completed in 1803 13th-century establishments in norway norwegian election church
itheum alboscutellare is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1940. it is known from australia.  references  lamiinae beetles described in 1940
between 1958 and the outbreak of the libyan civil war in 2011, there were twelve ambassadors appointed by the libyan government to serve in france. subsequent postholders have represented the national transitional council.  references  source  legifrance | accueil | les autres textes legislatifs et reglementaires | remise de lettres de creance  ambassadors of libya to france france libya
zwei choralphantasien (two chorale fantasias), op. 40, are fantasias for organ by max reger. he composed the fantasias in 1899 on two chorales: "" and "" they were published by  in munich in may 1900.  background  reger was raised catholic but was fascinated by the variety of melodies of protestant hymns, and used quotations from them throughout his life. he composed seven chorale fantasias in weiden between 1898 and 1900, inspired by a fantasia on "wie schon leuchtet der morgenstern", op. 25 (1895) of his teacher heinrich reimann. reger's fantasias follow reimann's model of setting individual stanzas, connected by interludes. reger's works often end in a culminating fugue.  no. 1  the text of the first chorale was written and composed by philipp nicolai, published in 1599. reger composed the fantasia in erbendorf and weiden, in september and october 1899, and dedicated it to friedrich spitta. it was first performed in wesel on 24 october 1899 by karl straube. reger described his fantasia as a program music work (programmmusikwerk). it was the reger's first chorale fantasias to end with a choralapotheose (chorale apotheosis), following 19th-century symphonic conclusions.  no. 2  the text of the second chorale is a paraphrase of psalm 6 by johann georg albinus. reger composed the fantasia in weiden in november and december 1899, dedicated to paul gerhardt. it was first performed in brunn on 24 june 1900 by .  autographs  the max-reger-institute holds the autographs of both fantasias.  editions  references  bibliography  external links     max reger / 1898 ruckkehr nach weiden (in german) max-reger-orgel.de  chorale melodies used in bach's vocal works / straf mich nicht in deinem zorn, bach-cantatas.com  max reger phantasie uber den choral "straf' mich nicht in deinem zorn", universal edition  , bernhard schneider, aegidienkirche, braunschweig  , brian runnett, norwich cathedral  compositions for organ compositions by max reger 1900 compositions music with dedications
the national democracy of centre (spanish: democracia nacional de centro) was a political party founded on may 7, 1990 in chile as a result of the merger of the national advance, radical democracy and national parties. it had legal existence as such, recognized by the electoral service, until october 8, 1991, when it merged to the union of the centrist center.  history   one consequence of the limited electoral support right out of the conglomeration of democracy and progress in elections to the national congress in 1989, were the poor results of so-called "small" parties that supported the military regime, among them national advance, radical democracy and the national party. to remedy the declaration of cancellation for not having obtained 3 deputies or at least 5% of the vote, these parties merged.  the merger was carried out by the public deed of may 7, 1990, was published in the diario oficial on may 29, 1990, and was officially registered as a political party before the electoral service of chile on june 17, 1990.  he had a brief and inconspicuous life; many militants from the dissolved parties and radical democracy and national advance were migrating to the newly founded party union of the centrist center, and the former national party members renamed the national democracy of centre to national party, like its predecessor.  references   political parties established in 1990 political parties disestablished in 1991 defunct political parties in chile 1990 establishments in chile 1991 disestablishments in chile
paolo vineis (born 10 october 1951, in alba) is an italian professor of environmental epidemiology at imperial college london. his main work is on the impact of environmental changes (including air pollution and climate change) on human health and molecules. this includes the use of omics technologies in epidemiological studies, that is the quantitative measurement of global sets of molecules in biological samples using high-throughput techniques, in combination with advanced biostatistics and bioinformatics tools. in particular, the study of epigenomic changes in dna is currently one of the most promising fields for the identification of long-term environmental fingerprints. the development of the concept of exposome (with chris wild, director of the world health organization's international agency for research on cancer,  and stephen rappaport and martyn smith of university of california, berkeley's school of public health), led to professor vineis being awarded a grant from the european commission (seventh framework programme) in 2012 on exposome research (exposomics). the exposome refers to the totality of internal and external exposures which interact at a cellular and systems level to generate a metabolic/ molecular signature which can be used to gain new understanding of the transition from health to disease. paolo vineis is also the coordinator of the horizon 2020 lifepath project, whose aim is to understand the determinants of diverging ageing pathways among individuals belonging to different socio-economic groups. this is achieved by integrating social science approaches with biology, using omics measurements (particularly epigenomics). paolo vineis is also the director of the unit of molecular and genetic epidemiology, italian institute of genomic medicine  (iigm), turin, italy. professor vineis has published many research articles on environmental risks and has written several books on health, causality and the ethics of health care.  selected publications  selected articles vineis p, bartsch h, caporaso n, harrington am, kadlubar ff, landi mt, malaveille c, shields pg, skipper p, talaska g, et al.    genetically based n-acetyltransferase metabolic polymorphism and low-level environmental exposure to carcinogens. nature. 1994 may 12;369(6476):154-6  berwick m, and vineis p. markers of dna repair and susceptibility to cancer in humans: an epidemiologic review. journal of the national cancer institute 92, no. 11 (2000): 874-897. vineis p., alavanja m., buffler p., fontham e., franceschi
s., gao, y.t., gupta p.c., hackshaw a., matos e., samet j., sitas f., smith j., stayner l., straif k., thun mj., wichmann he, wu ah., zaridze d., peto r., doll r. 2004. tobacco and cancer: recent epidemiological evidence. journal of the national cancer institute, 96(2), pp. 99-106. vineis p, khan a. climate change-induced salinity threatens health. science. 2012 nov 23;338(6110):1028-9. shenker ns, polidoro s, van veldhoven k, sacerdote c, ricceri f, birrell ma, belvisi mg, brown r, vineis p, flanagan jm. epigenome-wide association study in the european prospective investigation into cancer and nutrition (epic-turin) identifies novel genetic loci associated with smoking. hum mol genet. 2013 mar 1;22(5):843-51  khan ae, scheelbeek pf, shilpi ab, chan q, mojumder sk, rahman a, haines a, vineis p. salinity in drinking water and the risk of (pre)eclampsia and gestational hypertension in coastal bangladesh: a case-control study. plos one. 2014 sep 30;9(9):e108715 vineis p, wild cp. global cancer patterns: causes and prevention. lancet. 2014; 383(9916): 549-57. vineis p. public health and the common good. j epidemiol community health. 2014 feb;68(2):97-100.  vineis p, stringhini s, porta m. environ res. the environmental roots of non-communicable diseases (ncds) and the epigenetic impacts of globalization. 2014 aug;133:424-30. fasanelli f, baglietto l, ponzi e, guida f, campanella g, johansson m, grankvist k, johansson m, assumma mb, naccarati a, chadeau-hyam m, ala u, faltus c, kaaks r, risch a, de stavola b, hodge a, giles gg, southey mc, relton cl, haycock pc, lund e, polidoro s, sandanger tm, severi g, vineis p. hypomethylation of smoking-related genes is associated with future
lung cancer in four prospective cohorts. nature communications. 2015 dec 15;6:10192. bray f, jemal a, torre la, forman d, vineis p. long-term realism and cost-effectiveness: primary prevention in combatting cancer and associated inequalities worldwide. j natl cancer inst. 2015 sep 30;107(12):djv273. stringhini s, polidoro s, sacerdote c, kelly rs, van veldhoven k, agnoli c, grioni s, tumino r, giurdanella mc, panico s, mattiello a, palli d, masala g, gallo v, castagne r, paccaud f, campanella g, chadeau-hyam m, vineis p. life-course socioeconomic status and dna methylation of genes regulating inflammation. int j epidemiol. 2015 aug;44(4):1320-30 vineis p, saracci r. conflicts of interest matter and awareness is needed. j epidemiol community health. 2015 oct;69(10):1018-20.143  books vineis paolo. health without borders. epidemics in the era of globalization. springer international publishing ag. 2017. vineis, paolo. salute senza confini: le epidemie al tempo della globalizzazione. torino: codice, 2014.  vineis, paolo, and roberto satolli. i due dogmi: oggettivita della scienza e integralismo etico. milano: feltrinelli, 2009.  vineis, paolo, and nerina dirindin. in buona salute: dieci argomenti per difendere la sanita pubblica. torino: einaudi, 2004.  vineis, paolo. nel crepuscolo della probabilita: la medicina tra scienza ed etica. torino: einaudi, 1999  references  external links http://www.iigm.it/site/anteprima.php?l=eng molecular and genetic epidemiology, hugef exposomics, about us lifepath, healthy ageing for all  living people academics of imperial college london 1951 births
the back breaker (persian: kamarshekan) is a 1951 iranian comedy film directed by ebrahim moradi.  cast  abdullah basirat   ahmad emami   reza mirfattah   ebrahim moradi   akhtar partovi   asghar simyari  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1951 films iranian comedy films persian-language films films directed by ebrahim moradi iranian films 1951 comedy films iranian black-and-white films
the 2016-17 luxembourg national division was the 103rd season of football in luxembourg. the season started on 6 august 2016 and ended on 21 may 2017.  teams the following 3 clubs left the national division before the season -  fc wiltz 71 - relegated to luxembourg division of honour  fc etzella ettelbruck - relegated to luxembourg division of honour  cs grevenmacher - relegated to luxembourg division of honour  the following 3 clubs joined the national division before the season -  un kaerjeng 97 - promoted from luxembourg division of honour  union titus petange - promoted from luxembourg division of honour  fc jeunesse canach - promoted from luxembourg division of honour  source: soccerway  league table  results each team plays every other team in the league twice, home-and-away, for a total of 26 matches played each.  relegation play-offs a play-off (on neutral ground) was played between the twelfth-placed team in the 2016-17 luxembourg national division and the third-placed team in the 2016-17 luxembourg division of honour for one place in the 2017-18 luxembourg national division.  top goalscorers  see also 2016-17 luxembourg cup  references  external links  luxembourg national division seasons 1 luxembourg
roger david edward nichols (born 6 april 1939) is an english music scholar, critic, translator and author. after an early career as a university lecturer he became a full-time freelance writer in 1980. he is particularly known for his works on french music, including books about claude debussy, maurice ravel and the parisian musical scene of the years after the first world war. among his translations is the english version of the standard biography of gabriel faure by jean-michel nectoux. nichols was decorated by the french authorities in 2006 for his contribution to french musical studies.  life and career nichols was born in the english city of ely, cambridgeshire, the son of edward nichols and his wife dorothy, nee west, who were respectively a lawyer and an accountant. he was educated at worcester college, oxford, where he studied under edmund rubbra. he studied piano in paris with magda tagliaferro. after graduating he became a schoolmaster at st michael's college, tenbury (1966-73), after which he was a lecturer for the open university (1975-76) and the university of birmingham (1978-80). he married sarah edwards, a teacher; there were two sons and a daughter of the marriage.  nichols's first book, published by the oxford university press (oup) was a study of claude debussy (1972), an 86-page work, part of the oup's "oxford studies of composers" series. later books include studies of messiaen (1974) and ravel (1977), and as editor or translator or both, collections of letters and reminiscences by and about debussy (1987), ravel (1987), berlioz (1995), satie (1995) and mendelssohn (1997). among his most substantial translations is the english version of jean-michel nectoux's gabriel faure: les voix du clair-obscur (1990), published in english by the cambridge university press as gabriel faure: a musical life (1991). in 2002 nichols produced the harlequin years: music in paris 1917-1929. the musical times said of it, "the harlequin years is a marvellous book, and  it deserves to be read by the widest possible audience. ... a classic."  for the 1980 grove dictionary of music and musicians, nichols contributed the articles on debussy and poulenc. he has contributed regularly to the musical times and the bbc music magazine.  among his broadcast on bbc radio 3 were a five-part series on the life and art of emmanuel chabrier, with clive swift speaking the composer's
words.  in 2006 the french government appointed nichols as a chevalier of the legion of honour for his forty years of service to french music.  notes  1939 births british musicologists english music critics living people opera critics
hans georg amsel (29 march 1905 - 20 october 1999) was a german entomologist with four publications ranging from 1951 to 1962. his home town was cologne, although he frequently was in kiel.  his original job was in the banking industry, and he later worked in a bookstore.  after quitting his job as bookstore worker, he decided to follow his heart and transfer to zoology, where he became an entomologist. his specific profession was studying lepidoptera. "soon after he was appointed as head of department of entomology at the colonial and overseas museum called to bremen, then rendered military service and, worked as a private scholar, he came as entomologist at the state collections of natural history in karlsruhe," states a letter for his 60th birthday from the journal of the entomological society of vienna. during amsel's career, he authored about twenty-six different lepidoptera species and genera, and published four books.  species and genera recorded  see also :category:taxa named by hans georg amsel  references  1905 births 1999 deaths german entomologists 20th-century german zoologists scientists from cologne
bruce gemmell is an american swimming coach. he is also "an engineer and inventor" with "11 american patents on which his name appears..."  in 2016 gemmell was named an women's assistant coach for the united states olympic swimming team.  gemmell is a coach at the nation's capital swim club, where he has worked with athletes including katie ledecky and andrew gemmell. gemmell has been named coach of the year by the american swim coaches association three times. gemmell is signed to the company dle. as an athlete gemmell swam at the university of michigan and qualified for the us olympic trials in 1980 and 1984.  references  6. his latest innovation: the world's best swimmer  year of birth missing (living people) living people american swimming coaches university of michigan alumni
highways in estonia are the main transport network in estonia. the estonian national classification includes several classes of highways:   main route (pohimaantee) - highway, that connects the capital with other large cities, connects large cities and the capital with major ports, railway points and border crossings.  support route (tugimaantee) - highway, that connects towns with other towns and main routes.  side route (korvalmaantee) - highway, that connects towns with boroughs, connects boroughs and villages and all of the previous with main- and support routes.  other than these, the national road classification includes the following categories which may also be referred to as highways in a general sense, with decreasing order of priority (and applicability of the term highway):  connector road (uhendustee) - constructed for traffic flow on the intersections/interchanges of highways  other (muu) - other roads in the list of the ministry of economic affairs and communications  all roads in estonia are officially marked with 1-5 digits numbers, with no official prefixes.  in addition to state highways, there are 23 920 km of local roads and around 18 398 km of private and forest roads. the total estonian road network is estimated to be almost 59 thousand km.  classification of highways in estonia  the technical classification of highways is as follows:  motorway (kiirtee) - paved highway designated for appropriately fast-traveling motor vehicles, that does not service areas directly adjacent to it. a motorway has at least two lanes in each traveling direction, separated physically. the road must intersect with railways or other roads on separate levels. the road is entered and exited via acceleration and deceleration lanes. a road must confine to the motorway standards, when the expected aadt is 30,000.  i class - paved highway with at least two lanes in each traveling direction, that intersects with railways or other roads on separate levels. the road is entered and exited via acceleration and deceleration lanes. a road must confine to the i class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 14,500.  ii class - paved highway, which may intersect with other roads at-grade. a road must confine to the ii class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 6,000.  iii class - paved highway, which may intersect with other roads at-grade. a road must confine to the iii class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 3,
000.  iv class - paved or unpaved highway, which may intersect with other roads at-grade. a road must confine to the iv class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 500.  v class - paved or unpaved highway. a road must confine to the v class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 500.  vi class - paved or unpaved highway. a road must confine to the vi class highway standards, when the expected aadt is 50.  main routes  the backbone of the estonian national route system, national main routes (pohimaanteed) make up a network of 1,602 kilometres of road, amounting to 10% of the total road network. the traffic numbers however make up nearly 50% of the estonian road network's traffic volumes. the highest aadt's are around tallinn, on the t1 between loo and maardu, on the t2 between tallinn and juri, and on the t4 between laagri and kanama (the highest aadt on estonian national routes at 31,000). a main route is defined as a highway, that connects the capital with other large cities, connects large cities and the capital with major ports, railway points and border crossings. currently there are 12 separate main routes. the main routes are marked with 1-2 white digits on a red shield. the speed limits on estonian main routes are 110 or 120 on 2+2 sections and 90 on regular roads (on newer sections of road, these are adjusted according to conditions by electronic speed limit signs).  the main routes are the only roads with i class highways. the total amount is 186.6 kilometres, found on the t1, t2, t4 and t11. this number will enlarge significantly with further upgrades of the t11 and the t2 between kose and mao to i class highway. there are currently no motorways in estonia, however 24.4 kilometres of the t2 is restricted-access i class highway. ten main routes are a part of ten-t, six routes are a part of the international e-road network. the routes e263, e67, e20, e264 and e265 run through estonia.  the highways are maintained by the estonian road administration outside city limits. inside cities and towns, the roads are maintained by the city government. the first stationary speed cameras in estonia were placed on route t2. currently there are 67 stationary speed cameras on the main routes.  list of main routes
support routes  support routes (tugimaanteed) are the second highest classification in the estonian national route system. they make up a network of 2,405 kilometres of road, amounting to 15% of the total road network.  a support route is defined as a highway, that connects towns with other towns and main routes. currently there are 77 separate support routes. the support routes are marked with 2 black digits on an yellow shield. the support roads have no special prefix, as all estonian roads have the prefix t.  list of support routes  european routes  estonia is a part of the unece, and therefore also has numerous e-roads running through it. the e-roads in estonia form a network on top of the main routes and are usually signposted on all signs. they make up a network of  of road. currently there are six separate european routes in estonia.  list of european routes  see also  transport in estonia  references    lists of buildings and structures in estonia lists of roads
barak mizrachi (born 22 march 1988) is an australian paralympic table tennis player. after playing competitive table tennis for the first time in 2001, he went on to make his international debut in 2003 at the maccabiah games. he has since represented australia at the maccabiah games in 2005, 2007 and 2009, before being selected for the 2016 summer paralympics.  personal  mizrachi was born on the 22 march 1988 in carnegie, victoria. he was born with cerebral palsy right hemiplegia which affects the right side of his body. outside of table tennis mizrachi works as a gas engineer.  table tennis  mizrachi is a class 8 table tennis player meaning that he competes whilst standing. as a child he started playing table tennis with his father. mizrachi played the sport throughout high school before getting involved with the maccabi club. after playing his first competitive game in 2001, he made his debut in 2003, whilst competing at the maccabiah games (a multi sport tournament for jewish competitors from around the world) an experience he recalls as a thrill making him never want to stop playing for australia. however, it was not until 2015 that he took his first firm steps towards the 2016 summer paralympics in rio de janeiro, when mizrachi defeated the favourite on his way to winning at the oceania para-table tennis championships. it was also in this tournament that he was awarded the best and fairest award. barak also made history in 2013 when he became the first australian with a disability to be selected in the australian team to compete at the summer universiade in russia. in 2016, barak mizrachi was selected for the 2016 summer paralympics.  at the 2016 rio paralympics, he narrowly was defeated in both matches, in the men's singles class 8 and missed the opportunity to advance.  recognition   selected for the 2016 rio paralympics  awarded best and fairest at the oceania para-table tennis championships in 2015  2012 national awd championships - dual gold medallist  2011 national awd championships - four-time gold medallist  2004 victorian junior state team member  2011 oceania paralympic championships - dual gold medallist (m8 singles/teams)  2011 asia/oceania regional championships - bronze medallist (m8 teams)  4 time australian representative to maccabiah games (2003, 2005, 2007, 2009)  references  external links       1988 births living people australian male table tennis players maccabiah games competitors for australia competitors at the 2005 maccabiah games competitors at the 2009 maccabiah games paralympic table tennis players of australia table tennis players at the 2016 summer paralympics sportspeople from melbourne

samuel watson (1662-1715), an english sculptor in wood and stone, was a native of heanor, derbyshire. he was employed at chatsworth house between 1690 or 1691 and 1711.  family and work watson was born in heanor, the son of a husbandman of heanor, and his wife, bridget, nee townsend. he was baptised there on 2 december 1662. little is known of his early life. his grandson, white watson, stated in a memoir that samuel watson "was a pupil of mr. charles oakey, carver, in the parish of st martin's in the fields."  oakey was employed by the 1st duke of beaufort on the remodelling of badminton house in 1683. watson is known to have worked at burghley house and at sudbury hall. also working at badminton, burghley and sudbury was grinling gibbons, who had a great influence on watson's work. working at chatsworth in 1690-1691, he rose to be chief carver and remained there until 1711. his contemporary, george vertue, commented favourably on "the ornaments carv'd in wood & foliages by watson sculptor in wood & stone. the boys in the chapel and other parts of his works. very fine... a most ingenious artist." other work there has also been attributed to him.  late in life, watson married katherine greensmith (c. 1679-1739) from pilsley, a chatsworth estate village. he retired and they settled at heanor. their first son died in 1711, but a second son was born in 1714 and katherine was pregnant with another when her husband died of a stroke and was buried at heanor on 31 march 1715. his sons, henry and samuel ii, both trained as carvers and so did his grandson, white watson, who designed a monument for his grandfather in heanor church.  references  1662 births 1715 deaths english sculptors english male sculptors 18th-century british sculptors people from heanor
396001-396100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396101-396200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396201-396300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396301-396400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396401-396500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396501-396600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396601-396700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396701-396800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396801-396900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  396901-397000   |-id=931 | 396931 nerliluca ||  || luca nerli (born 1954) is an amateur astronomer and active member of the gruppo astrofili montagna pistoiese. he is experienced in science communication, and deep sky and planetary imaging. he contributed to the discovery of the rings of the dwarf planet haumea. ||  |}  references   396001-397000
vladyslav vasylyovych nosov (, born 19 april 1946, sovetskaya gavan, khabarovsk krai, russian sfsr, ussr) is a ukrainian politician, lawyer, civil servant and the co-author of the declaration of state sovereignty of ukraine, declaration of independence of ukraine, regulations of verkhovna rada of ukraine and constitution of ukraine. he was a permanent representative of the president of ukraine to the constitutional court of ukraine from may 25, 1998 to january 22, 2005.  biography  early years  vladyslav nosov was born on april 19, 1946 in sovetskaya gavan, ussr to a family of civil servants. when he was a child his family moved to ukraine. in 1964 he entered radioengineering faculty of lviv polytechnic university and graduated from it in 1969. he was sent to work in poltava defense factory "znamia" by the administration of university. he held the position of design engineer, then the position of chief engineer from 1969 to 1983. from 1983 to 1986 he worked as a head of electronic systems design sector of poltava design technological institute. from 1986 to 1990 he worked as a senior electronics engineer in poltava factory of artificial diamonds and diamond tools.  while working on engineering positions he had an active civil position, particularly in defending the rights of workers for getting housing from the state. he found himself in a conflict with the party leadership of the factory, which refused to provide housing to the workers that was guaranteed to them under current law. he got a big respect of his co-workers because of this and on the following parliamentary elections he was nominated as a parliamentary candidate.  political career  on may 15, 1990 he was elected to verkhovna rada of ukraine in oktyabrskyi electoral district no.318 in poltava oblast. he received 87.38% of votes. during his work in verkhovna rada he never was a member of any party. during the first convocation he was a member of the parliamentary commission on law and order. he was the co-author of the declaration of state sovereignty of ukraine and declaration of independence of ukraine. he joined the commission on developing of constitution. he also took part in regulations of verkhovna rada of ukraine developing.  in 1994 he was reelected to verkhovna rada and became a member of parliament of the second convocation. he was appointed a member of the parliamentary commission on budget. he continued to take part in developing of the constitution as a member of the commission on developing of constitution. together with the other members of this commission he presented a draft of the
constitution to the verkhovna rada, which was later approved during the "constitutional night". during the second convocation he entered law faculty of taras shevchenko national university of kyiv and studied there combining studying with his parliamentary and legislative activities. he graduated from the university with honours in 1996.  work in presidential administration  in 1998 a new office of the permanent representative of the president of ukraine to the constitutional court of ukraine was created in the top management of presidential administration of ukraine, which was equal to deputy chief by status. vladyslav nosov was invited by president leonid kuchma to take this office. nosov accepted the proposition, but with the condition that he will be fully secured from the political influence, saying that work his will be guided only by legal principles. also he asked to be fully independent from presidential administration management with subordination only to president of ukraine. right after taking the office nosov received second rank of civil servant, and after several months the first rank.  nosov defended the position of the president of ukraine on a permanent basis in almost all cases, which were heard by the constitutional court of ukraine from 1998 to 2005, including the most profile cases, such as abolition of the death penalty, free school education, powers of the president of ukraine, etc. the work of vladyslav nosov was highly appreciated by the president. president awarded order of merit 3rd class to nosov in 2000. in 2004 nosov received an honourable status of the honored lawyer of ukraine.  in 2005 nosov retired. after leaving active public service he was often invited and appointed as an expert on the interpretation and amendments to the constitution of ukraine. in 2012 the first president of ukraine leonid kravchuk invited nosov to the scientific expert group on the creation of a constitutional assembly. nosov continues to participate as an expert in scientific events, roundtables, debates on the constitution of ukraine and the rules of the verkhovna rada of ukraine.  references   1946 births living people people from sovetskaya gavan first convocation members of the verkhovna rada second convocation members of the verkhovna rada lviv polytechnic alumni taras shevchenko national university of kyiv alumni
the international racquetball federation's 18th racquetball world championships were held in cali, colombia from july 15 to 23, 2016. this was the first time colombia has hosted worlds, and the first time worlds have been in south america since 1998, when cochabamba, bolivia hosted the event.  american rocky carson and mexican paola longoria are the incumbent champions in men's and women's singles, respectively.  longoria was also the incumbent champion in women's doubles with samantha salas and they also successfully defended their title. colombians sebastian franco and alejandro herrera will be trying to defend the men's doubles title that they won in canada two years ago.  tournament format the 2016 world championships used a two-stage format to determine the world champions. initially, players competed in separate groups over three days. the results were used to seed players for an elimination round. thus, there was no team competition. team standings were based on points earned from the singles and doubles competitions.  events  men's singles  women's singles  men's doubles  women's doubles  medal table  team results  references  external links irf website    2016 in colombian sport 2016 in racquetball racquetball world championships sport in cali international sports competitions hosted by colombia july 2016 sports events in south america
sex love & reggae is the fourth album by jamaican reggae singer gyptian. the album was released on 25 october 2013.  singles   "wine slow" was released as the first single off the album in february 2013.  "non stop" was released as the second single off the album on may 10, 2013.  "vixen" was released as the third single off the album on october 24, 2013.  "wet fete" was released as the fourth single off the album on march 24, 2014.  track listing  gyptian albums 2013 albums vp records albums
jerry's artarama is an originator of discount art supplies and materials company currently based in north carolina, united states. the art materials it provides include fine artist paints, canvas and boards, brushes and palette knives, easels, frames as well as extensive custom canvas and frame departments.  overview jerry's artarama was founded in 1968 by jerry goldstein in long island, new york, the first to introduce art supplies at discount prices to artists in the local community. he had been managing a toy store in long island, before he started the art supply shop. in addition to art materials and supplies, jerry's artarama also arranges instructional workshops, release free online video art lessons, new art supply demos and arranges special art related events across the country. they also sponsor art scholarships for student artists in universities and colleges. at present the company offers around 70,000 art materials from various art manufacturers, as well as their own product lines via an online retail store, art supply catalog and superstores. the corporate headquarters of the company is located in raleigh, north carolina.  see also  utrecht art supply  blick art materials  michaels  references  companies based in raleigh, north carolina american companies established in 1968 retail companies established in 1968 retail companies of the united states
the gens icilia was a plebeian family at ancient rome.  during the early republic, the icilii were distinguished by their unwavering support for the rights of the plebeians against the patrician aristocracy.  branches and cognomina the only surname of the early icilii was ruga, which properly belonged to many of the icilii, but they are usually mentioned without a cognomen.  members   spurius icilius, one of the plebeian envoys sent to negotiate with the senate during the first secession of the plebeians, in 494 bc.  he was elected tribune of the plebs for bc 493, plebeian aedile the following year, was probably tribune again in 481, and a third time in 470.  gaius icilius ruga, one of the first plebeian tribunes, in 493 bc.  lucius icilius s. f., tribune of the plebs in 456 and 455, carried a law assigning the aventine hill to the plebeians, and attempted to pass an agrarian law, which was blocked.  in 449, he played a key role in the deposition of the decemvirs, and was again elected tribune of the plebs.  icilius s. f., brother of the tribune of 456, informed lucius verginius of the plot against his daughter during the second decemvirate, 449 bc.  lucius icilius, tribune of the plebs in 412 bc.  he was probably one of three brothers who held the tribuneship in 409, when his college succeeded in winning the election of the first plebeian quaestors.  icilius, one of three brothers who served as tribune of the plebs in bc 409.  icilius, last of the three brothers who were tribunes of the people in 409 bc.  see also  list of roman gentes  notes  references  bibliography  titus livius (livy), history of rome.  dionysius of halicarnassus, romaike archaiologia (roman antiquities).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  roman gentes
mount livermore is a summit in the davis mountains in the jeff davis county, texas.  it reaches an elevation of 8,378 feet / 2,492 meters, and is the fourth highest and most isolated peak in texas. the peak was named for major william livermore who used it as a point of observations and placed a base monument atop it.  in october and november 1884, major livermore, of the engineer corps, was in charge of a military expedition in making a map of western texas.  when reaching the top of the bare rock he called it "old baldy", named after a general officer called baldy smith. baldy peak is an alternate name.  the livermore cache an extensive cache of arrow points and fragments was excavated by susan janes, who moved to fort davis with her husband in 1893. in 1895 the janeses' son charles, and tom merrill found a cairn on its highest point. they demolished the cairn and discovered a scattering of arrowheads underneath it.  gallery  references  landforms of jeff davis county, texas
sphingomonas vulcanisoli  is a gram-negative, rod-shaped and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from soil of the gotjawal forest in korea.  references  further reading     vulcanisoli bacteria described in 2015
takhar is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 8 km from phagwara, 19.8 km from phillaur, 30.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 133 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  as of 2011, the village has a total number of 162 houses and population of 757 of which include 389 are males while 368 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of the village is 81.64%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 76 which is 10.04% of total population of the village, and child sex ratio is approximately 520 lower than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 56.94% of total population in the village. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 219 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 187 males and 32 females. according to census survey report 2011, 89.50% workers describe their work as main work and 10.50% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  mauli railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 8.5 km away from the village. the village is 47 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 121 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the 1969-70 washington caps season was the first and only one for the franchise in the american basketball association. on august 21, 1969, the oakland oaks moved to washington, d.c., due to substantial financial losses despite winning the second-ever aba championship only weeks earlier. the franchise was purchased for $2.6 million by a group led by earl foreman, thomas shaheen and louis diamond.   however reluctantly, superstar forward rick barry was among seven members of the talented oaks team who made the move from coast to coast. it was grossly misplaced in the western division, however, which resulted in a brutal travel schedule. not only did the team have to compete against the nba's more established baltimore bullets nearby, but it lacked a modern arena to attract fans and forge a home-court advantage. it played several designated home games at neutral sites, including five in los angeles, nearly 2,700 miles from home.   despite these hardships, the caps did well to finish in third place with a respectable 44-40 record and earn a playoff berth. they faced the denver rockets in round one, losing in seven games despite barry's heroic 52-point performance in game 7 on the road. it marked the first and to date only time that a player scored as many as 50 points in a seventh game at the aba or nba level.    in anticipation of an aba-nba merger that would take years to complete, foreman was encouraged to move the team from washington to placate the bullets after the season. for the third time in as many years, the franchise played in a different state in the 1969-70 campaign, this time as a regional team known as virginia squires.  roster    20 mike barrett - shooting guard 24 rick barry - small forward 30 gary bradds - power forward 11 larry brown 34 frank card - power forward 40 george carter - small forward 42 jim eakins - center 33 ira harge - center 15 warren jabali - shooting guard 21 hal jeter - guard 12 henry logan - shooting guard 14/54 roland taylor - point guard -- ron taylor - center 31 george tinsley - small forward  final standings  western division  playoffs western division semifinals vs. denver rockets  caps lose series, 4-3  awards, records, and honors 1970 aba all-star game played on january 24, 1970  rick barry  warren jabali  larry brown  references   caps on basketball reference  washington washington caps washington caps, 1969-70 washington caps, 1969-70
ray anderson is the athletic director at arizona state university since january 2014.  he graduated from stanford university, where he lettered in football and baseball, and harvard law school.  references  external links  year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) living people african-american college athletic directors in the united states arizona state sun devils athletic directors stanford cardinal baseball players stanford cardinal football players harvard law school alumni 21st-century african-american people
nima rezaei (born in qaem shahr, iran) is an iranian scientist, a professor of clinical immunology and allergy at tehran university of medical sciences, associate dean of international affairs in the school of medicine and the director of global academic program (gap). nima rezaei is the mastermind, founder and current president of the universal scientific education and research network (usern). rezaei is known for his research in primary immunodeficiencies, characterization and treatment. he initiated the iranian primary immunodeficiency diseases registry (ipidr) in 1999 under supervision of professor  asghar aghamohammadi, which earned him the best research project award in the 4th avicenna festival.  early life and education nima rezaei was born in a well-educated family with northern iranian origin. his parents are originally from mazandaran province. he was born on june 9, 1976. he attended the prestigious junior alborz high school in tehran located at college crossroad, tehran. he entered the tums school of medicine in 1995. he received his md degree in 2002 and further studied molecular and genetic medicine, in the school of medicine and biomedical sciences, the university of sheffield, uk and further received his phd in clinical immunology and human genetics there. he received a short-term fellowship in clinical immunology and bone marrow transplantation in paediatric immunology and infectious diseases & northern supra regional bone marrow transplant unit for scid and related disorders, newcastle, uk, awarded by the esid (european society of immunodeficiency).  career  he has authored more than 2000 publications, including five books to receive the 10th, 16th and 17th avicenna festival awards for best book of the year for; "primary immunodeficiency diseases", immunology of aging" and "cancer immunology" series. he has also won the 12th and 18th razi research festival on medical sciences award as distinctive researcher in basic sciences. in 2013 he received the aaaai (american academy of allergy, asthma and immunology) international young investigator award. since 2014, his name has been listed among the world top 1% scientists by the essential indicators of science the esi.  awards he has won some awards in his research and scientific areas as well as educational work, besides the above mentioned:  -one of the best 10 scientists of the country in the last decade (2004-2013) in the 2014 festival of the national academy of medical sciences - the 3rd rank of the best article
in basic sciences in the 2012 festival of the national academy of medical sciences -the 2nd rank of the best article in clinical sciences in the 2014 festival of the national academy of medical sciences -iran young scientist scopus award 2014, by elsevier the best researcher at the 18th avicenna festival, february 2017: he was recognized and acknowledged as the distinguished scientist of the decade by national academy of medical sciences, iran and as an outstanding researcher at the 18th avicenna festival.  executive work and responsibilities nima rezaei served as the executive director of unesco chair in health education in tums from 2004 to 2006. he was also the deputy head of the children's medical center hospital, paediatrics center of excellence in iran from 2010-2015. since 2015, he has held the positions of vice dean of international affairs, school of medicine, tehran university of medical sciences, and deputy president of research center for immunodeficiencies. he is the founder of usern network and the heart (health and art) network.  he also has a 5 year experience as the executive manager of the iranian journal of allergy, asthma and immunology. since 2019 he is co-editor of advances in experimental medicine and biology.  references  iranian scientists 1976 births living people immunodeficiency university of tehran tehran university of medical sciences alumni alumni of the university of sheffield newcastle university
gang leader for a day: a rogue sociologist takes to the streets is a memoir written by sudhir venkatesh. the book chronicles the life of the urban poor and explores venkatesh's views on poverty, money, gangs, drugs, and life in chicago. in 2017, it was reported that amc networks would be developing a drama series adapted from the book.  summary   gang leader for a day recounts the day-to-day life of the urban poor, in which sudhir venkatesh, a sociology graduate student, headed to robert taylor homes.  his nearly decade-long research yielded valuable data, revealing the corporation-like workings of the street level drug trade, and serving as the basis of this book.  the book is written as a first person narrative and incorporates some of the stylistic traits of fiction. the book begins with sudhir's description of a crack den. the narrative then moves back in time, as we learn how sudhir came to study the residents of robert taylor homes. we learn that sudhir was studying at the university of chicago under professor william julius wilson. after seeing the census figures for the surrounding area, sudhir decided to take a questionnaire into a housing project run by the black kings, a chicago street gang. he met the leader of one of the gang's sub groups, who advised him to adopt more qualitative research techniques and invited sudhir to observe his lifestyle. sudhir observed jt's life managing a drug-dealing business. throughout the book, jt shows sudhir around his gang's territory and introduces sudhir to different members of the community. sudhir discovers a complex community, often more cohesive and nurturing than the predominantly white community he grew up in, but deeply affected by racism and poverty. sudhir slowly becomes accepted into the community and meets some of its key members-both male and female.  reception   gang leader for a day has garnered reviews from the new york times, the guardian, the wall street journal, chicago tribune, and entertainment weekly. the book was also mark zuckerberg's third selection in his 2015 "year of books".  references   2008 non-fiction books books about chicago south side, chicago penguin press books
fire in the blood (spanish: fuego en la sangre) is a 1953 spanish drama film directed by ignacio f. iquino and starring antonio vilar and marisa de leza. it was made by the barcelona-based ifi produccion.  the film's art director was miguel lluch.  cast conchita bautista antonio casas  modesto cid marisa de leza margarita de mayo juan gamero angelita gelan igna gil luis induni  consuelo de nieva miguel paparelli as pulpero   maria dolores pradera antonio vilar  references  external links  1953 drama films spanish drama films spanish films films directed by ignacio f. iquino films with screenplays by ignacio f. iquino films produced by ignacio f. iquino spanish black-and-white films films scored by augusto alguero
corporal kate is a  1926 silent film comedy romance directed by paul sloane and starring vera reynolds and julia faye. the film was produced by c. gardner sullivan, with production at de mille pictures corp., and released by producers distributing corporation.  plot in world war i, brooklyn manicurists kate jones (vera reynolds) and becky finkelstein (julia faye), work up a song-and-dance act that they intend to take overseas to entertain the troops. through the influence of a friend, the girls are assigned to the french front.  both girls fall in love with jackson clark (kenneth thompson), a rich playboy, who is in the american expeditionary forces, along with williams (harry allen), his valet. evelyn (majel coleman), a friend of jackson's, also goes to france as a red cross nurse  jackson falls for kate and is jealous of evelyn, but, unknown to any of them, evelyn loves an american aviator. when the germans advance, becky is killed, dying in jackson's arms.  kate loses her arm in a selfless and heroic action, and jackson, still greatly in love with her, proposes that they spend the rest of their lives together.  cast   vera reynolds as kate jones  julia faye as becky finkelstein  majel coleman as evelyn  kenneth thompson as jackson (*aka kenneth thomson)  harry allen as williams  production although not directly an aviation film, corporal kate featured a number of stunt pilots, including frank clarke and leo nomis flying a standard l 6 and thomas-morse aircraft.  reception film reviewer hal erickson, in his review of corporal kate, noted, the girls "...encounter all manner of merry misadventures. things get serious, however, when both kate and becky fall in love with the same doughboy, private jackson (kenneth thompson). this romantic triangle is rather bluntly resolved when tragedy strikes on the battlefield."  preservation status corporal kate is preserved in the library of congress collection and ucla film and television archive.  references  notes  citations  bibliography   catalog of holdings, the american film institute collection and the united artists collection at the library of congress. los angeles, california: american film institute, 1978.  .  farmer, james h. celluloid wings: the impact of movies on aviation (1st ed.). blue ridge summit, pennsylvania: tab books 1984. .  external links   corporal kate at imdb.com    dvd grapevine  1926 films american silent feature films american films american aviation films 1926 romantic comedy films producers distributing corporation
films american black-and-white films american romantic comedy films films directed by paul sloane
desmond keith dans (24 november 1924 - 2 january 2014) was an australian trade unionist and politician who was a labor party member of the legislative council of western australia from 1971 to 1989, representing south metropolitan province. he served as a minister in the government of brian burke.  dans was born in perth to mary (nee frances) and keith dans. he moved to kalgoorlie as a child, where he attended a convent school before going on to the kalgoorlie school of mines. dans enlisted in the royal australian naval reserve in 1942, and served as a stoker aboard hmas hobart. after the war's end, he joined the merchant marine, and became involved with the seamen's union. he served as state secretary of the union from 1959 to 1971. dans was elected to parliament at the 1971 state election. he was made leader of the labor party in the legislative council in 1976, and elevated to the shadow cabinet in 1978. after labor's victory at the 1983 state election, dans was made minister for industrial relations in the new ministry formed by brian burke. following a reshuffle in december 1984, he was instead made minister for racing and gaming and minister for tourism. another reshuffle occurred after the 1986 election, and dans became minister for works and services, with responsibility for the 1987 america's cup. he resigned from the ministry just over a month after the event's completion, and left parliament at the 1989 election.  references  |-  |-  1924 births 2014 deaths royal australian navy personnel of world war ii australian labor party members of the parliament of western australia australian trade unionists members of the western australian legislative council people from perth, western australia royal australian navy sailors
the moses webster house is a historic house at 14 atlantic avenue in vinalhaven, maine.  it was built in 1873 for moses webster, owner of one of vinalhaven's granite quarries, and is one of the community's finest examples of second empire architecture.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1998.  description and history the moses webster house stands on the east side of vinalhaven's downtown area, at the northeast corner of atlantic avenue and frog hollow road.  it is a large -story wood-frame structure, with a mansard roof, clapboarded walls, and a granite foundation.  its front facade is six bays wide, with a projecting two-bay section on the left side, capped by a three-story mansarded tower.  the leftmost bay has a two-story polygonal window bay with a gabled top and bracketed cornices, while a single-story porch extends across the right four bays and wraps around to the right side.  it is supported by chamfered square posts and has a low balustrade.  second-floor windows rise through the lower portion of the mansard roof as wall dormers, and are topped by bracketed and pedimented gables.  the house was built in 1873 for moses webster, who was, along with joseph r. bodwell, a leading figure in vinalhaven's highly successful late 19th-century granite industry.  the two men, both new hampshire natives, came to vinalhaven in 1851, and began the expansion of its previously small-scale granite quarries, eventually providing stone for major buildings along the atlantic coast.  the bodwell granite company, of which webster was president and co-owner, dominated the island's economy into the early 20th century.  the house served as a bed and breakfast inn in the early 2010s, and was listed for sale in 2016.  see also national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine  references  houses on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in knox county, maine second empire architecture in maine houses completed in 1873 houses in knox county, maine vinalhaven, maine 1873 establishments in maine
yulin township () is a township under the administration of linxia county, gansu, china. , it has 8 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of gansu linxia county
fawn river state fish hatchery, also known as the orland fish hatchery, is a historic hatchery located at orland and millgrove township, steuben county, indiana. it was developed between 1935 and 1937 by the works progress administration, and dedicated in 1942. contributing resources include the entrance arch, fieldstone bridge, eight rearing ponds, the property manager's residence, the colonial revival style hatchery building, a dam impounding the supply pond, four small pools, and six large rearing ponds.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1997.  references  external links indiana department of natural resources: fawn river state fish hatchery  works progress administration in indiana agricultural buildings and structures on the national register of historic places in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana buildings and structures completed in 1937 buildings and structures in steuben county, indiana national register of historic places in steuben county, indiana
arthur woodley may refer to: art woodley (died 30 may 1990, aged 84), founder of woodley airways arthur woodley (bass opera singer), sang in 2013 premiere of champion (opera)
albert james bernays (1823-1892) was a chemist. he was the son of dr. adolphus bernays (d. 22 december 1864), modern languages professor at king's college, london.  life he was educated at king's college school, and studied chemistry with c. remigius fresenius, and afterwards with justus liebig at giessen, where he graduated phd.  his doctoral thesis was probably a paper on limonin, a bitter principle which he discovered in the pips of oranges and lemons (published in buchner's repertorium fur die pharmacie and abstracted in liebig's annalen, 1841, xl. 317).   in  1845 he began his career as an analyst and lecturer on chemistry in derby, and became known for his interest in questions concerning food and hygiene.  in 1851 he served as a juror at the great exhibition.  in 1852, he published the first edition of household chemistry, a popular work, of which the fourth edition, published in 1862, was called the science of home life, and the seventh edition, published in 1869, the student's chemistry.  in 1855 bernays was appointed to the lectureship in chemistry at st mary's hospital, london; he resigned in 1860, and accepted a similar post at st. thomas's hospital, which he retained till his death. bernays was also public analyst to st. giles's, camberwell, and st. saviours, southwark, was for many years chemist and analyst to the kent water company, and sometime examiner to the royal college of physicians.  he died from bronchitis at acre house, brixton, on 5 january 1892, and was by his own desire cremated at woking.  bernays was a genial man and a capable and popular teacher; he took a great interest in social matters generally, and gave over a thousand free public lectures during his lifetime.  besides the works mentioned above he published a small manual on food in 1876, an essay on the moderate use of alcohol true temperance, published in the contemporary review and reprinted with essays by others in the alcohol question, various editions of notes for students in chemistry, and miscellaneous lectures on agricultural chemistry and other subjects. he also carried out investigations on the atmosphere of cornish mines and on dangerous trades, and made inventions in water filtration.  he was a fellow of the chemical society and of the institute of chemistry.  family he married ellen labatt, daughter of benjamin evans; she died on 6 february 1901 (times, 8
february 1901).  references  dnb references these references are found in the dnb article referred to above.  external links    1823 births 1892 deaths fellows of the chemical society people educated at king's college school, london place of birth missing 19th-century british chemists academics of king's college london
chennaiyil thiruvaiyaru is an iconic music festival, which has been conducted consecutively since 2005. it is an eight-day carnatic music festival lasting from 18 to 25 december every year at kamarajar arangam, teynampet, chennai. performances by leading carnatic and hindustani stalwarts, legends, upcoming talents, musicians, dancers, and discourses have been scheduled elaborately in this weeklong event with more than 50 enchanting shows commencing from 7:00 am to 10:00 pm daily.  history carnatic musicians and rasikas of classical music, thiruvaiyaru is also the place to go beyond the limitation of language, religion, caste, creed, and nationality and understand their true self through music. in 2005, lakshman sruthi promoted a platform for indian classical music festival in chennai in the name of chennaiyil thiruvaiyaru this festival provides a forum for established artists as well as new talent to exhibit their musical skills.  festival more than 500+ artists participated in this festival every year, and its held for about 8 days. leading exponents of carnatic music come to perform and to pay their homage to the great composer sri tyagaraja and watched by thousands of ardent fans of classical music.  this prestigious program has been inaugurated every year by eminent personalities like 'bharat ratna' dr. a.p.j.abdul kalam, padma bhushan kamal hassan. elaborate arrangements have been made to accommodate some 500+ artists to take part and render the eternal pancharatna kriti in unison. for this particular program, the stage arrangement will be a replica of the thyagaraja aradhana mandapam at thiruvaiyaru. printed copies of the kritis will be distributed to members of the audience, who can join the singing.  lakshman sruthi - the musical consortium in chennai, is conducting this event.  food festival a food festival is also being organized, along with the musical fest, within the same premises. the food fest comprises innovative, concept-oriented food stalls, exotic cuisine, competitions, vegetable carving, ice carving, organic and bio food stalls and cookery exhibits by leading chefs.  recognition and contributions  isaiyazhwar: chennaiyil thiruvaiyaru, since 2014 has been recognising and rewarding people who contributed to the field of carnatic music by honouring them with the title "isaiyazhwar" in 2014, thiruvizha jayashankar was the first person to receive the isaiyazhwar award from chennaiyil thiruvaiyaru.  in 2015, violin maestro padma shree
a. kanyakumari was honoured isaiyazhwar title by p. susheela along with the gold medal for her lifetime achievement and contribution to classical music.  awards  incredible india - best tourism event of the year 2015 award was presented by p. susheela to chennaiyil thiruvaiyaru organisation.  see also   list of indian classical music festivals  references  http://www.lakshmansruthi.com/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru/index.asp    http://www.chennaidecemberseason.com/2011/11/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru.html  http://kalakkalcinema.com/mahathi-at-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-11-press-meet/   http://sethasethach.skyrock.com/tags/76mkrwsobnf-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-2012.html       http://flickstatus.com/tamil/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-11-day-7-stills.html  http://indiapulse.sulekha.com/carnatic-music/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-9-carnatic-fest-1_post_5193  http://yellowpages.sulekha.com/articles/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru.htm   http://www.arunasairam.org/past-concerts-details.asp?cid=98   https://web.archive.org/web/20140201093911/http://www.studioflicks.com/gallery/9th-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-inauguration-stills/  http://www.nettv4u.com/events-gallery/tamil/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-11-press-meet-stills  http://tamilnadu.indiaeveryday.in/news-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-11-press-meet-stills-1201-1460889.htm  http://www.kollywoodtoday.net/news/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-press-release/   http://www.kollyinsider.com/2011/12/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-7.html   http://www.artindia.net/madras12/3.html   http://
cinemafry.blogspot.in/2012/12/meenakshi-raghavan-bharatanatyam-at.html   http://www.indiaglitz.com/kollywood-to-rule-thiruvaiyaru-tamil-news-120368.html   http://indiainteracts.in/gossip/2011/01/03/17963/tvh-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-goes-on-air-on-vijay-tv/   http://www.kollystar.com/videos/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-pressmeet-video-9136.html   http://www.tamilnow.com/movies/misc/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-food-festival-inauguration   http://juttlog.com/d-x3j0t1g.html  external links  http://www.lakshmansruthi.com/index.asp     http://www.chennaidecemberseason.com/2011/11/chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru.html  http://www.indian-heritage.org/musicseason/sch.html  http://www.eventjini.com/chennaiyilthiruvaiyaru  http://screen4tv.com/zee-tamil-to-telecast-chennaiyil-thiruvaiyaru-season-11/  http://www.lakshmansruthi.com/index.asp     carnatic classical music festivals culture of chennai music festivals in india tamil festivals
kchj may refer to:   kchj (am), a radio station (1010 am) licensed to serve delano, california, united states  kqkz, a radio station (92.1 fm) licensed to serve bakersfield, california, which held the call sign kchj-fm from 2016 to 2019
the 2016-17 uci track cycling world cup was a multi-race series over a track cycling season. it was the 25th edition of the uci track cycling world cup organised by the uci. the series ran from 4 november 2016 to 26 february 2017 and consisted of four rounds.  series  this world cup season consisted of four rounds, in glasgow (united kingdom), apeldoorn (the netherlands), cali (colombia) and los angeles (united states).  glasgow, great britain  the first round was hosted in glasgow. the racing was held on three full days between 4 and 6 november 2016 at the sir chris hoy velodrome. glasgow returned to the calendar for the first time since 2013. the venue will host the uec european track cycling championships in 2018.  apeldoorn, the netherlands  the second round was hosted in apeldoorn in the gelderland province of the netherlands. this round was held between 11 and 13 november 2016 at omnisport apeldoorn. apeldoorn has previously hosted the 2011 and 2013 uec european track cycling championships and also previously hosted the 2011 uci track cycling world championships.  cali, colombia  the third round will be hosted in cali. cali is the third most populated city in colombia and a regular site for the world cup series, with this year's meeting being the fourteenth time the city has hosted a world cup round. the racing will be held on three full days between 17 and 19 february 2017 at the velodromo alcides nieto patino. the venue recently hosted the uci track cycling world championships in 2014.  los angeles, united states  the last round of this world cup season will be hosted in los angeles. this round will be held between 25 and 26 february 2017 at the velo sports center. los angeles returns to the world cup calendar for the first time since 2008.  standings  men  sprint  team sprint  team pursuit  pursuit  madison  omnium  keirin  scratch race  points race  1km time trial  women  sprint  team sprint  team pursuit  500m time trial  madison  omnium  keirin  scratch race  points race  pursuit  overall team standings  overall team standings are calculated based on total number of points gained by the team's riders in each event.  results  men  women  note  designated a class 1 event by the uci, from which fewer ranking points are available. medals are awarded in full world cup events only.  medal table  references   world cup world cup uci track cycling world cup 2016 in british sport
2016 in dutch sport 2017 in colombian sport 2017 in american sports
wuoa-ld, virtual channel 46 (uhf digital channel 28), is a low-power television station licensed to birmingham, alabama, united states. the station is owned by hc2 holdings. wuoa-ld's transmitter is located on red mountain on the south side of birmingham.  history  the station began broadcasting in january 1988 as an owned-and-operated station of the trinity broadcasting network. the station originally broadcast on uhf channel 52 under its original callsign w52ai. it became w53az in 1990 after moving the signal to uhf channel 53. two years later, the station moved its signal again to channel 51 and changing the call letters to w51by. it remained a tbn translator until 2003. in 2003, the station moved its signal to uhf channel 46, and changed the callsign again, this time to w46dk. it was purchased by the university of alabama, whose communications department converted the station to a translator of the university-owned wvua-ca.  in 2015, the station went silent as w46ay was obligated to be converted to digital as the digital tv transition deadline for low-power stations was scheduled for september 1 of that year. the station's callsign was changed to the original wuoa-ld. in summer 2016, dtv america corporation purchased the station and converted it into an affiliate of katz broadcasting-operated laff network. this was the second dtv america-owned station to sign on in the state of alabama (the first was mynetworktv/doctor tv affiliate wdsf-ld which signed on in 2014).  the station also launched second and third subchannels to run fremantlemedia's buzzr network, and laff's sister network escape, respectively.  subchannels  references  external links       uoa-ld hc2 holdings buzzr affiliates gettv affiliates classic reruns tv affiliates television channels and stations established in 1988
the 2016-17 season was al-shorta's 43rd season in the iraqi premier league, having featured in all 42 previous editions of the competition. al-shorta participated in the iraqi premier league and the iraq fa cup.  they entered this season having finished in a disappointing seventh place in the league in the 2015-16 season. they were much better during this season, and were still in contention for the league title on the final day of the campaign, but a loss to al-minaa saw them finish in third place and miss out on continental qualification. they were knocked out of the iraq fa cup at the round of 32 stage, losing at home to lower division side al-jaish; that defeat led to the sacking of manager mohamed youssef in march, who was replaced by nadhum shaker. the former club president ayad bunyan was re-elected into office early in august, following his removal midway through the 2014-15 season.  squad  out on loan  departed during season  personnel  technical staff  management  kit supplier: adidas  transfers  in  out  competitions  iraqi premier league  iraq fa cup  references  external links al-shorta website al-shorta tv team info at goalzz.com  al-shorta sc seasons al shorta
neitiskaite (or neitiskati) is a village in the swedish municipality gallivare. together with bontrask it lies next to lake bontrasket.  populated places in norrbotten county
the milano pride is a parade and festival held at the end of june each year in milan, italy, to celebrate the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, asexual, intersexual and queer (lgbtq+)  people and their allies. until 2012, the event has been held each year but with a different name. milano pride is one of the largest gay and lesbian organized events in italy. its aim is to demonstrate for equal rights and equal treatment for lgbt people, as well as celebrate the pride in gay and lesbian culture.  history   the pride in milan is held every year but with different names each year. since 2013 pride in milan is organized by a group named "milano pride", whose members come from the main lgbt rights organizations in milan. the team organizes the entire pride parade and the so-called "pride week".  pride week   since 2013, every year at the end of june, during the week when pride parade is organized, pride week takes place in the city. during that week, many cultural events such as debate, video shooting, book presentations, take place mainly in casa dei diritti (house of rights), a building in which the city of milan hosts services for citizens linked to discriminations and human rights.  near porta venezia, which is the most attended district by lgbt people, "pride square" takes place: many vendors sell food, drinks, items and music is played in the street.  see also    lgbt rights in italy  milan  references  external links      milano pride 2016  milano pride on ilga europe site  lgbt events in milan pride parades in italy parades in milan annual events in milan summer events in italy
ban bung railway station is a railway station located in si phirom subdistrict, phrom phiram district, phitsanulok. it is located 432.750 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  local 403 phitsanulok-sila at  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  local 410 sila at-phitsanulok  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
william henry hamlyn friba (16 february 1889 - 1968) was an architect based in england noted for his buildings for the london midland and scottish railway.  he was born in wigan in lancashire. he studied architecture with reginald wynn owen in liverpool and later at the royal academy school.  he entered railway service in 1911 initially with the london and north western railway. he was elected a fellow of the royal institute of british architects in 1934 and became the chief architect for the london, midland and scottish railway company. he drew up plans with percy thomas for the rebuilding of euston railway station in 1936, but the outbreak of the second world war resulted in their cancellation  he designed a series of pre-fabricated railway stations which were built on blitz-damaged station sites from 1945 onwards. a prototype was erected at queen's park railway station and the first installation was destined for bootle new strand railway station.  he retired in 1949 and died in 1968.  list of works  references  20th-century english architects 1889 births 1968 deaths railway architects fellows of the royal institute of british architects people from wigan architects from greater manchester
amalia rubin is a westerner who sings in the tibetan language and uses a tibetan instrument.  she performed in a famous tibetan restaurant in beijing and met top-notch tibetan singer, kunga phuntsok.  her two albums are mountains and deserts and leaving home,  both of which are composed of traditional tibetan songs. she boasts of having performed in 30 different concerts with other tibetan artists from all over the world from new york city to geneva to dharamsala.  she was awarded the best international artiste for tibet in dharamsala, india.  she studied at buffalo university, new york, between 2006 and 2008.  references  21st-century tibetan women singers living people tibetan-language singers year of birth missing (living people)
albuca spiralis, commonly called the corkscrew albuca, is a species of flowering plant in the family asparagaceae, that is native to western and northern cape provinces, south africa.  description  the plant is recognizable by its distinctive leaves, which are narrow, spiral tipped with glandular hairs.  the plant bears nodding green flowers with pale yellow margins. the flowers are sweetly scented, with an aroma like that of vanilla.  references   http://www.abc.net.au/gardening/stories/s2722761.htm  spiralis
muscel county is a former first-order administrative district of romania. it was located in the southern central part of greater romania, in the northwestern part of the historic region of muntenia. its territory is now mostly part of arges county, while some communes (malu cu flori, pucheni and valeni-dambovita) now belong to dambovita county. the county seat was campulung.  the county was bordered on the west by arges county, to the north by the counties of fagaras and brasov, and to the east by dambovita county.   in 1938, the county was disestablished and incorporated into the newly-formed tinutul arges, but it was re-established in 1940 after the fall of carol ii's regime - only to be abolished on 6 september 1950 by the communist regime.  administrative organization  administratively, muscel county was originally divided into two districts (plasi):  plasa podgoria plasa radu-negru  subsequently a third district was established: plasa raul doamnei  by 1938, the county was divided administratively into six districts: plasa argesel plasa dambovita plasa podgoria plasa raul doamnei plasa raurile plasa golesti  population  according to the 1930 census data, the county population was 149,797 inhabitants, ethnically divided as follows: 97.1% romanians, 2.3% romanies, 0.2% hungarians, as well as other minorities. from the religious point of view, 99.3% orthodox, 0.3% roman catholic, as well as other minorities.  urban population  in 1930, the county's urban population was 13,868 inhabitants, ethnically divided as follows: 95.4% romanians, 1.2% hungarians, 0.9% romanies, 0.5% germans, as well as other minorities. from the religious point of view, the urban population was composed of 95.8% eastern orthodox, 2.2% roman catholic, 0.6% reformed (calvinist), 0.4% evangelical (lutheran), 0.3% baptist, 0.2% greek catholic, as well as other minorities.  industry a paper factory (campulungul s. a.)  functioned within the county seat, the town of campulung, as of 1931.  references  external links    muscel county on memoria.ro  former counties of romania wallachia 1950 disestablishments in romania 1859 establishments in romania
states and territories disestablished in 1950 states and territories established in 1859 1938 disestablishments in romania 1940 establishments in romania states and territories disestablished in 1938 states and territories established in 1940
gualicho (named in reference to the gualichu) is a genus of theropod dinosaur. the type species is gualicho shinyae. it lived in what is now northern patagonia, on what was then a south american island continent split off from the supercontinent gondwana. the fossils were found in the huincul formation, dating to the late cenomanian-early turonian age of the upper cretaceous period, around 93 million years ago.  discovery   on 13 february 2007, akiko shinya, preparator of the field museum of natural history, east of the ezequiel ramos mexia reservoir at the rancho violante, discovered the skeleton of a theropod new to science. in 2016, the specimen was named and described by sebastian apesteguia, nathan d. smith, ruben juarez valieri and peter j. makovicky. the generic name is derived from the gualichu, a demon of local folklore. the specific name honours shinya as the animal's discoverer.  the holotype, mpcn pv 0001, consists of a partial skeleton lacking the skull. it contains four vertebrae of the back, three vertebrae of the middle tail, ribs, a basket of belly-ribs, the left shoulder girdle, the left forelimb, the right lower arm, the lower ends of both pubic bones, the right thighbone, the lower end of the left thighbone, the upper ends of the right shinbone and calf bone, elements of both metatarsi and three toes of the right foot. most bones were uncovered in their original anatomical position but much of the skeleton had been destroyed by erosion.  gualicho has been suggested to be synonymous with the megaraptoran aoniraptor, also known from huincul formation and uncovered at the violante site in view of similarities in their caudal vertebrae. if found to be true, the name gualicho would have precedent and this would also add a second specimen to gualicho known as mpca-pv 804/1 to 804/25, which would consist of the last sacral vertebra, six proximal caudal vertebrae, four mid-caudal vertebrae, and five haemal arches.  description  like the well-known tyrannosaurus, to which it has been compared, the  gualicho possesses reduced arms and possibly two fingered hands, although a 2020 study suggests enough of the third metacarpal is present for a third finger. if gualicho was an allosa
uroid, this finding indicates that carnosaurs may have been subject to the same evolution of limb-reduction as tyrannosaurids and abelisaurids.  classification  phylogenetically, gualicho presents two possibilities; that megaraptorans and neovenatorids were carnosaurs, or that megaraptorans and neovenatorids were a grade of theropods more closely related to coelurosaurs than to carnosaurs.  the cladogram below follows a 2016 analysis by sebastian apesteguia, nathan d. smith, ruben juarez valieri, and peter j. makovicky.  the cladogram below follows the strict consensus (average result) of the twelve most parsimonious trees (the simplest evolutionary paths, in terms of the total amount of sampled features evolved or lost between sampled taxa) found by porfiri et al. (2018)'s phylogenetic analysis. although the results are different, the methodology analysis was practically identical to that of apesteguia et al. (2016), only differing in the fact that it incorporated tratayenia and murusraptor, two megaraptorans not sampled in the analysis of apesteguia et al.  see also 2016 in paleontology  references   neovenatorids prehistoric coelurosaurs cenomanian life turonian life late cretaceous dinosaurs of south america cretaceous argentina fossils of argentina huincul formation fossil taxa described in 2016 mapuche language
navy region mid-atlantic is one of eleven current naval regions responsible to commander, navy installations command for the operation and management of naval shore installations in wisconsin, illinois, michigan, indiana, ohio, kentucky, north carolina, virginia, west virginia, maryland, delaware, pennsylvania, new jersey, new york, connecticut, rhode island, massachusetts, vermont, new hampshire, and maine.  it is headquartered on naval station norfolk, and is commanded by rdml charles w. rock.  history of the region  navy region mid-atlantic was formed from the former territories of the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth naval districts.  the boundaries of the first naval district, headquartered at portsmouth navy yard in kittery, maine, (and later in boston, massachusetts), were established on 7 may 1903 in accordance with general order no. 128, signed by acting secretary of the navy charles h. darling. until late 1915, no personnel were assigned to the district staff. in 1945 the district was headquartered at boston and consisted of the following geographic areas: maine, new hampshire, vermont, massachusetts, and rhode island (including block island). the first naval district was disestablished on 7 october 1976 and control passed to the fourth naval district.  created with the other original districts in 1903, the second naval district was the smallest district. it was headquartered in newport, rhode island, and covered only rhode island and adjacent waters. it was disestablished and its areas incorporated into the first and third districts on march 15, 1919, after the end of world war i.  the third naval district, headquartered at new york, new york, was established on 7 may 1903 in accordance with general order no. 128, signed by acting secretary of the navy charles h. darling. puerto rico was initially part of the district, due to good communications between new york and puerto rico. in 1919 puerto rico was removed from the district and placed directly under the control of the chief of naval operations. in 1945 the district, still headquartered at new york, consisted of the following geographic areas: connecticut, new york, the northern part of new jersey (including the counties of mercer and monmouth, and all counties north thereof), and also the nantucket shoals lightship. the third naval district was disestablished on 7 october 1976 and functions were transferred to the fourth naval district.  the boundaries of the fourth naval district, to be headquartered at league island navy yard in philadelphia, pennsylvania,
were established on 7 may 1903 in accordance with general order no. 128, signed by acting secretary of the navy charles h. darling. no personnel were assigned to the district staff until late 1915. in 1945 the district, still headquartered in philadelphia, consisted of the following geographic areas: pennsylvania, the southern part of new jersey (including the counties of burlington and ocean, and all counties south thereof), and delaware (including winter quarters shoal light vessel). on 7 october 1976 this command absorbed the functions of the first and third naval districts. the fourth naval district was disestablished on 30 september 1980.  the boundaries of the fifth naval district, to be headquartered at the norfolk navy yard in norfolk, virginia, were established on 7 may 1903 in accordance with general order no. 128, signed by acting secretary of the navy charles h. darling. until late 1915 no personnel were assigned to the district staff. in 1945 the district was headquartered at the naval operating base at norfolk, virginia, and consisted of the following geographic areas: maryland less anne arundel, prince georges, montgomery, st. mary's, calvert, and charles counties; west virginia; virginia less arlington, fairfax, stafford, king george, prince william, and westmoreland counties; and the counties of currituck, camden, pasquotank, gates, perquimans, chowan, tyrrell, washington, hyde, beaufort, pamlico, craven, jones, carteret, onslow, and dare in north carolina; also the diamond shoals lightship. the fifth naval district was disestablished on 30 september 1980.  current subordinate commands  navy region mid-atlantic operates the following installations:   naval station norfolk  naval support activity hampton roads, norfolk, virginia  nsa hampton roads - portsmouth providing installation services for naval medical center portsmouth   naval support activity northwest annex  naval weapons station yorktown, yorktown, virginia  naval air station oceana & dam neck annex, virginia beach, virginia  naval support activity saratoga springs, saratoga springs, new york  naval station newport, newport, rhode island  naval submarine base new london, connecticut  naval weapons station earle, new jersey  naval station great lakes, lake county, illinois  naval support activity lakehurst, providing support services for navy personnel at joint base mcguire-dix-lakehurst  joint expeditionary base little creek-fort story, norfolk, virginia  naval support activity mechanicsburg,  naval support activity philadelphia and  philadelphia navy yard annex  norfolk naval shipyard, portsmouth, virginia  naval support activity crane, crane, indiana   portsmouth naval shipyard
, kittery, maine   surface combat systems command wallops island, virginia (support service only; installation is operated by nasa)  references  external links     regions and districts of the united states navy military units and formations established in 1999 1999 establishments in the united states
in june 2015, the national air intelligence integration office (nai2o) was appointed as the lead organization for coordinating and integrating the united states government's (usg) intelligence community (ic) perspective on air domain issues. nai20 brings together the global aviation community of interest (gacoi) to improve civil aviation safety and security through communication and intelligence/information sharing in order to produce integrated and actionable aviation intelligence. nai2o is located in southeast washington, dc on joint base anacostia-bolling (jbab).  the concept of the nai2o originated in the findings of the national commission on terrorist attacks upon the united states (also known as the [[9/11_commission), the intelligence reform and terror prevention act (irtpa), presidential directives, and additional usg and ic aviation security plans.   to expand its efforts in the air domain community, nai2o updated its title to the national intelligence managers for aviation (nim-av) in support of the office of the director of national intelligence's (odni) strategic guidance. nim-air accomplishes this, in part by orchestrating inter-agency (ia) & ic collaboration on the collection & production of all relevant and appropriate information required to fully inform usg leaders, thus enabling clear & concise policy and resource decisions to be made in an efficient manner.  initiatives   guide intelligence collection and  analysis to address current and emerging threats and vulnerabilities  integrate intelligence community (ic) and external partner efforts and capabilities to maximize the air domain enterprise's mission effectiveness  advise senior leaders to ensure decision advantage and promulgate strategic guidance to secure the air domain  synchronize the intelligence community's c-uas activities to ensure unity efforts  partners current partners include:   federal agencies  state agencies  representatives from the private aviation industry and academia  international partners  external links national strategy for aviation security remarks as delivered by the honorable james r. clapper director of national intelligence international air transportation association (iata) cyber security panel  united states intelligence agencies aviation in the united states
pachysphinctes is an extinct genus of ammonites belonging to the perisphinctidae family.  fossil record fossils of pachysphinctes are found in marine strata of the jurassic (age range: from 150.8 to 145.5 million years ago.).  fossils are known from some localities in antarctica, cuba, germany, india, madagascar and yemen.  references  jurassic ammonites ammonitida genera perisphinctidae
events from the year 1862 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events             congregation of the sisters of our lady of mercy  moscow yaroslavskaya railway station  saint petersburg-warsaw railway  new michael palace  births  deaths  references  1862 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
stu williamson (born 5 august 1956, in oadby, leicestershire, england) is a photographer based in leicestershire, uk. he grew up in england but has a mix of scottish and irish ancestry. prior to his career in photography he was drummer for the scottish pop rock group the marmalade from 1978 to 1980 and performed on their 1978 album doing it all for you. he then directed his artistic talents towards photography and has continued in this field ever since.  photography williamson specialises in monochrome photography and fine art portraiture influenced by european mediaeval artists. he has gained commissions for architectural photography in dubai from giorgio armani at the burj khalifa and the jumeriah group's burj al arab.  he is also the inventor of the tri-flector, a photographic lighting reflector intended to offer the photographer greater versatility.  williamson worked as photographer for the artwork on the 1998 cradle of filth album cruelty and the beast.  awards  williamson has won many photographic awards in europe which have included black and white photographer of the year, fine art photographer of the year and architecture exterior photographer of the year 2010  for his photograph of the burj khalifa.  most recently in 2016, he won the uk master photographer of the year 2016/17 award.  stu williamson photography williamson originally established stu williamson photography business in cornwall before moving to market harborough, leicestershire, in 1997. in 2006 williamson moved the business to dubai.  in 2013, after investment from an entrepreneur friend, williamson sold his majority stake in the dubai business and subsequently returned to the uk  where he continues his photography business from his studio in kibworth, leicestershire.  personal life williamson is also a medium and is actively involved in ghost hunting.  references  external links   1956 births living people photographers from leicestershire people from oadby people from market harborough people from kibworth
angel carrasco nolasco (1907 - 11 june 1943) was a spanish socialist workers' party politician. he fought in the spanish civil war on the side of the second spanish republic. after the nationalist victory, he was executed by the government of francisco franco.  references  nunez, mirta y rojas, antonio, consejo de guerra. los fusilamientos en el madrid de la posguerra (1939-1945), madrid, compania literaria, 1997. .  garcia marquez, jose maria: golpe militar, resistencia y represion (1936-1950). 2ª edicion, 2008. ed. fundacion fudepa. , pag. 94.  1907 births 1943 deaths spanish socialist workers' party politicians spanish military personnel of the spanish civil war (republican faction) people executed by francoist spain
fredericksburg baptist church is a historic church founded in 1804 and located in the historic district of downtown fredericksburg, virginia.  history founded in 1804, under the name of shiloh and with origins dating back to the 18th century, fredericksburg baptist church is one of a few historical churches located in the fredericksburg historic district.  its first pastor was andrew b. broaddus (1770-1848) of caroline county, virginia, who was a renowned minister of his day and "declared the most eloquent man that ever spoke within the walls of the capitol]."  see also shiloh baptist church (old site) shiloh baptist church (washington, d.c.)  references  external links fredericksburg baptist church  churches in fredericksburg, virginia 1804 establishments in virginia 19th-century baptist churches in the united states baptist churches in virginia
the rouen monumental cemetery () is the most important cemetery of the norman city of rouen, opened in 1828 and situated to the north-east of the town-centre. the entrance gate, the chapel and the monumental cross are the work of charles felix maillet du boullay.  buried people    charles angrand  henry barbet  albert beaucamp  michel beregovoy  edouard de bergevin  francois adrien boieldieu (cœur)  georges bouctot  louis bouilhet  louis auguste de bourbel de montpincon  jean-baptiste cecille  marcel couchaux  joseph-desire court  pierre chirol  jean benoit desire cochet  georges dubosc  marcel duchamp  suzanne duchamp  raymond duchamp-villon  gustave flaubert  jean pierre louis girardin  jacques hebertot  auguste houzeau  eustache-hyacinthe langlois  albert lebourg  theodore-eloi lebreton  leon-jules lemaitre  valerius leteurtre  juste lisch  ferdinand marrou  georges metayer  etienne netien  emile frederic nicolle  felix archimede pouchet  raymond quenedey  augustin pouyer-quertier  marie antoine de reiset  jean revel  louis ricard  eugene richard  antoine senard  jacques villon  francis yard  colette yver  cremated people    henri gadeau de kerville  patrice quereel  bibliography   j. rivage, le cimetiere monumental, cagniard, rouen, 1864  jean-pierre chaline, « l'art funeraire expression d'une societe ? l'exemple du cimetiere monumental de rouen », dans recueil d'etudes offert en hommage au doyen m. de bouard, annales de normandie, numero special, caen, 1982  jean-pierre chaline, « mort d'un cimetiere ? », in bulletin des amis des monuments rouennais, 1993  jean-pierre chaline (dir.), memoire d'une ville, le cimetiere monumental de rouen, societe des amis des monuments rouennais, rouen, 1997 ()  references   french cemeteries rouen
the tanzer 26 is a canadian sailboat, intended for racing, day sailing and cruising. it was designed by johann tanzer and first built in 1974. the design is out of production.  production production of the boat was commenced in 1974 by tanzer industries of dorion, quebec and 960 boats were completed by the time production ended in 1985. the company entered bankruptcy in may 1986.  design  the tanzer 26 is a small recreational keelboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. it has a masthead sloop rig, a transom-hung rudder and a fixed fin keel. it displaces  and carries  of ballast. the hinged mast is mounted on the cabin top.  the boat was built with a standard keel that gives a draft of . most examples built were powered by an outboard motor, but an inboard-mounted japanese-built yanmar diesel engine was optional.  the accommodations include a forward cabin with a "v" berth with a hatch for ventilation and a folding door for privacy. the main cabin has a settee double berth and a quarter berth. the head is on the port side of the cabin and has a ventilator, with the galley on the starboard side. there is a folding table as well, that stows against the bulkhead.  the cockpit is self-draining and can seat six or more adults, with a sail locker and outboard motor fuel tank locker. an anchor locker is mounted forward. the mainsheet traveller is mounted to the bridge deck and jib sheet tracks are installed on the side toe rails.  the boat has a phrf racing average handicap of 216. it has a hull speed of .  operational history  in a review michael mcgoldrick wrote, "these boats have a reputation as a good club racer, but they are equally well known a comfortable cruising boats that can easily accommodate an average size family. the tanzer 26 is supported by an active network of owners, and they have even come up with a new rudder design to improve the boats' handling characteristics. boats built in the 1980's (starting a little before hull # 300) have the newer window configuration and improved forward hatch. people sailing in shallow waters will be happy to note that the tanzer 26 has a draft of 3 feet, 10 inches, which isn't all that deep for a 26 footer with a fin keel."  in his description of the design, richard m. sherwood wrote, "this is a combination boat, for racing or cruising. the cockpit is large, so she is also a day
sailer, with capacity for six or more. with a fairly high ballast/displacement ratio, she can be expected to be stiff."  see also list of sailing boat types  similar sailboats beneteau first 26 beneteau first 265 c&c 26 c&c 26 wave contessa 26 dawson 26 discovery 7.9 grampian 26 herreshoff h-26 hunter 26 hunter 26.5 hunter 260 hunter 270 macgregor 26 mirage 26 nash 26 nonsuch 26 outlaw 26 paceship py 26 parker dawson 26 pearson 26 sandstream 26 yamaha 26  references  external links  keelboats 1970s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by johann tanzer sailboat types built by tanzer industries
samet agaoglu (1909, baku - 6 agustos 1982, istanbul) was a turkish-azerbaijani writer and politician. he was the son of the famous azerbaijani and naturalized turkish politician, publicist and journalist ahmet agaoglu.  early life  he was born in 1909 in baku. his father was ahmet agaoglu, his mother was sitare hanım. the family was originally from shusha.  after the fall of the azerbaijan democratic republic in 1920, the agaoglu family moved to turkey.  samet graduated from ankara university, law school in 1931. after he went to strasbourg for study phd, but returned because his father's financial situation was not well.  political career  he joined the democratic party when he began practicing law. he won the 1950, 1954 and 1957 elections and was elected a member of parliament from manisa. he was a member of the ix, x, xi parliament of turkey. he served as deputy prime minister from 1950 to 1952, minister of labor from 1952 to 1953, and minister of commerce from 1954 to 1958. he was arrested during a military coup on may 27, 1960 and sentenced to life imprisonment. he was pardoned in 1964 while imprisoned in yassiada. after that, he was not directly involved in politics.  literary career  samet agaoglu, who started writing in high school, published a magazine called "hep genclik" with friends such as behcet kemal caglar and ahmet muhip dıranas between 1929-1931.   he appeared with his first stories about his life in strasbourg. because of his political work, he published his books at long intervals, but he did not break with the literature until the end of his life. samet agaoglu, who also wrote many articles with political content, published his stories and essays in important magazines of the period such as varlık, yucel, and cıgır. he also used the signature of samet agayef in his writings.  he came to his homeland azerbaijan in 1967 and dedicated a chapter of the book "soviet russian empire" to azerbaijan.  works   stories:   1944 strassburg hatıraları  1950 zurriyet  1953 ogretmen gafur  1957 buyuk aile  1964 hucredeki adam  1965 katırın olumu  memories:  1940 babamdan hatıralar  1958 babamın arkadasları  1965 asina yuzler  1967 arkadasım menderes  1972 marmara'da
bir ada  1973 demokrat parti'nin dogus ve yıkılıs sebepleri-bir soru  1978 ilk kose  1992 siyasi gunluk:demokrat partinin kurulusu  review:   1944 kuvayı milliye ruhu  1947 iki parti arasındaki siyasi farklar  travel:   1967 sovyet rusya imparatorlugu  family  his father ahmet agaoglu was a prominent azerbaijani and naturalized turkish politician, publicist and journalist. he was one of the founders of pan-turkism. his sister sureyya agaoglu was a writer, jurist, and the first female lawyer in turkish history. his sister tezer taskıran writer, politician and teacher. she was one of the turkey's first women member of parliament. his wife neriman agaoglu was a politician too.  references   1909 births 1982 deaths ankara university faculty of law alumni burials at ferikoy cemetery writers from baku turkish writers 20th-century turkish writers soviet emigrants to turkey turkish people of azerbaijani descent deputies of manisa members of the 9th parliament of turkey members of the 10th parliament of turkey members of the 11th parliament of turkey ministers of labour and social security of turkey deputy prime ministers of turkey istanbul high school alumni agaoglu family
gustav alexander wilhelm nicolai (28 may 1795 - 21 december 1868) was a prussian writer and composer.  career   nicolai was born in berlin to friederike sophie riemer and her husband carl friedrich wilhelm nicolai, a member of the ober-finanzrat (upper finance council) and director of the prussian maritime trading company. he was educated in the gymnasium in konigsberg in der neumark, attending the gymnasium and receiving instruction from the organist gracht unterricht. he returned to berlin in 1812, spending a short time at the graues kloster and receiving piano lessons johann philipp schmidt. in 1813 he fought in the napoleonic wars and then studied under friedrich wilhelm berner in breslau. from 1820 to 1843 he was divisional auditor in berlin, before becoming a private tutor.  his friends included the composers adolf bernhard marx, gaspare spontini and carl loewe, for whom he wrote the oratorio libretto die zerstorung von jerusalem, set to music by loewe in 1833. frederick william iii of prussia rewarded nicolai with a golden box for the same libretto - the king was one of his main supporters, giving him the gold medal for art and science.  nicolai became widely known for his travelogue italien wie es wirklich ist (italy as it really is, 1834), in which he gave a critical description of the country. he was heavily criticised, including by friedrich wilhelm gubitz. nicolai unsuccessfully sued for libel against the review blatter fur literarische unterhaltung of 1 september 1834 (nr. 244) - the judgement made legal history, defining the right of literary criticism between 1835 and 1843 he corresponded with robert schumann and wrote several essays for the neue zeitschrift fur musik.  personal life nicolai's first marriage was to henriette dorothea may and after her death his second was to leopoldine concordia colestine grothe (1817 - 11 july 1852). they had four children in 1833, 1834, 1836 and 1837 (who all died in infancy), followed by arthur gustav (1845-1846), leontine catherine valerie (1848-1868) and leontine rosamunde (born 1850). he died in berlin.  publications   die geweihten, oder der kantor von fichtenhagen. humoreske in zwei theilen, berlin: schlesinger 1829; 2. aufl. 1846  jeremias, der volkscomponist, eine humoristische vision aus dem 25sten jahrhundert, berlin: wagenfuhr 1830  italien, wie es wirklich ist. bericht uber eine merkwurd
ige reise in den hesperischen gefilden als warnungsstimme (fur alle, welche sich dahin sehnen), 2 bande, leipzig: wiegand 1834 - 2. aufl. 1835 (im anhang zahlreiche rezensionen der erstauflage)  band 1 (digitalisat)  band 2 (digitalisat)  neuausgabe der erstausgabe von 1834, mit anmerkungen versehen und erganzt mit zeitgenossischen kritiken und dokumenten zum rechtsstreit wegen beleidigung. berlin 2016, .  arabesken fur musikfreunde, 2 bande, leipzig: wigand 1835 (digitalisat)  selected compositions  op. 1: die sangerfahrt, ballad to a text by ernst schulze (1836)  op. 2: das madchen am ufer (the girl on the shore), ballad after the english (1836)  op. 3-7: zwolf balladen (twelve ballads) to a text by ludwig uhland (1837)  bibliography   carl freiherr von ledebur, tonkunstler-lexicon berlin's von den altesten zeiten bis auf die gegenwart, berlin 1861, s. 396f.  martin a. volker, wo die zitronen bluhen und die flohe beißen - das sehnsuchtsland italien bei gustav nicolai (1795-1868) und eduard boas (1815-1853), in: franciszek grucza (hrsg.), akten des xii. internationalen germanistenkongresses warschau 2010. vielheit und einheit der germanistik weltweit, bd. 7, frankfurt am main: lang 2012, s. 185-190  briefwechsel robert und clara schumanns mit korrespondenten in berlin 1832 bis 1883, edited by klaus martin kopitz, eva katharina klein and thomas synofzik (schumann-briefedition, serie ii, band 17), cologne: dohr 2015, s. 473-489,  references  {  external links   genealogy  1795 births 1868 deaths german travel writers writers from berlin prussian army personnel of the napoleonic wars 19th-century german composers 19th-century german male musicians 19th-century german non-fiction writers 19th-century german male writers german male non-fiction writers german male composers german oratorio and passion librettists
babu khan () is an indian politician and a member of the 16th legislative assembly in india. he represents the shahabad constituency of uttar pradesh and is a member of the samajwadi party political party.  early life and education babu  khan was born in hardoi district. he attended the c. s. n. degree college,  hardoi and holds a bachelor's degree.  political career babu khan has been a mla for four terms. he represented the shahabad constituency and is a member of the samajwadi party political party. during his first term, he contested as an independent candidate.  posts held  see also   shahabad (assembly constituency)  sixteenth legislative assembly of uttar pradesh  uttar pradesh legislative assembly  references   1949 births living people people from hardoi district samajwadi party politicians uttar pradesh mlas 1991-1993 uttar pradesh mlas 1993-1996 uttar pradesh mlas 1997-2002 uttar pradesh mlas 2012-2017 uttar pradesh politicians
neophoca palatina, the pleistocene new zealand sea lion, is an extinct species of pinniped known from a nearly-complete adult male skull found at ohope beach on the north island in 1937. it was found in a stratum from the late castlecliffian stage, suggesting an approximate age of 400,000 years. it was not recognised as representing a new species until 1983, distinguishable from the extant australian sea lion and new zealand sea lion by the short palate (leading dr. j. a. berry to suggest the species name), lack of processes on the ethmoid bulla and the very wide basiocciptal. a more advanced morphometric analysis in 2016 strongly confirmed that the skull represented a distinct species, closely related to the australian sea lion. paleoclimate reconstructions suggest that n. palatina was more tolerant of cold water temperatures than n. cinerea, the only other known member of the genus.  references   neophoca extinct animals of new zealand pinnipeds of new zealand prehistoric mammal genera fossil taxa described in 1983
perpetua and felicity () were christian martyrs of the 3rd century. vibia perpetua was a recently married well educated noblewoman, said to have been 22 years old at the time of her death, and mother of an infant she was nursing. felicity, a slave imprisoned with her and pregnant at the time, was martyred with her. they were put to death along with others at carthage in the roman province of africa.  the passion of perpetua and felicity narrates their death. according to the passion narrative, a slave named revocatus, his fellow slave felicitas, the two free men saturninus and secundulus, and perpetua, who were catechumens - that is, christians being instructed in the faith but not yet baptized - were arrested and executed at the military games in celebration of the emperor septimius severus's birthday. to this group was added a man named saturus, who voluntarily went before the magistrate and proclaimed himself a christian. perpetua's first person narrative was published posthumously as part of the passion.  imprisonment  perpetua was imprisoned in carthage in the days leading up to her martyrdom. she described these days and all that she endured in her diary. perpetua described the physical and emotional torments that she suffered in the prison leading up to her martyrdom. perpetua suffered physically due to the heat, rough prison guards, and the cessation of regular breastfeeding. perpetua also described how the prison conditions improved after herself and the other martyrs were moved to another part of the prison. her physical torment was also eased after she was able to breastfeed her child. perpetua described bodily ailments in detail and the most common in her narrative was the cycle of pain and relief she would feel in her breasts.  veneration  in carthage a basilica was afterwards erected over the tomb of the martyrs, the basilica maiorum, where an ancient inscription bearing the names of perpetua and felicitas has been found.  saints felicitas and perpetua are among the martyrs commemorated by name in the roman canon of the mass.   the feast day of saints perpetua and felicitas, 7 march, was celebrated even outside africa and is entered in the philocalian calendar, the 4th-century calendar of martyrs venerated publicly at rome. when saint thomas aquinas's feast was inserted into the roman calendar, for celebration on the same day, the two african saints were thenceforth only commemorated. this was the situation in the tridentine calendar established by pope pius v, and remained so until the year
1908, when pope pius x brought the date for celebrating them forward to 6 march. in the 1969 revision of the general roman calendar the feast of saint thomas aquinas was moved, and that of saints perpetua and felicity was restored to their traditional 7 march date.  other churches, including the lutheran church and the episcopal church, commemorate these two martyrs on 7 march, never having altered the date to 6 march.  the anglican church of canada, however, historically commemorated them on 6 march (the book of common prayer, 1962), but have since changed to the traditional 7 march date (book of alternative services, 1985).  perpetua and felicity are remembered in the church of england with a lesser festival on 7 march.  in the eastern orthodox church the feast day of saints perpetua of carthage and the catechumens saturus, revocatus, saturninus, secundulus, and felicitas is 1 february.  see also list of christian women of the patristic age domnina, berenice, and prosdoce  references  2nd-century births 203 deaths saints duos saints from roman africa (province) ante-nicene christian female saints 3rd-century christian saints groups of christian martyrs of the roman era 3rd-century christian martyrs 2nd-century roman women felicity 3rd-century roman women carthaginian women executed roman women anglican saints
rick and morty: virtual rick-ality is a virtual reality game compatible with htc vive, playstation vr and oculus rift developed by owlchemy labs and published by adult swim games for microsoft windows on april 20, 2017. it is based on the american animated series rick and morty, whose series co-creator justin roiland aided in the development. a port for the playstation 4 was released on april 10, 2018.  gameplay  using htc vive, playstation vr or oculus rift, the player controls v.r. morty, the clone of morty smith, the grandson of mad scientist rick sanchez. the clone was created to help rick and morty with menial tasks, such as laundry and spaceship repair. he is given a wristwatch from which a hologram of rick appears to relay orders. movement from one spot to another is done by warping, and a being called mr. youseeks can be summoned to aid in unreachable chores.  plot rick creates a clone of his grandson morty in their garage, demanding that he do the laundry. with the chore complete, rick explains the clone is not of use anymore and shoots him. clone morty appears in purgatory, but is given the choice to return to the garage. the next chore is to obtain a device from outside the garage, but since the clone is not allowed to leave, he summons a being called mr. youseeks that imitates his every motion to aid in his task. the device is revealed to be faulty. rick says to order another, but the computer must be repaired to do so. the new device is delivered, which clone morty attaches to a plunger to retrieve a seed stuck in the toilet.  the seed is employed to upgrade rick's spaceship, but eventually it breaks down at a celestial nature preserve. clone morty teleports to the scene, where they are caught trespassing. rick equips clone morty with firearms to fight off the galactic federation while the spaceship is being repaired. however, clone morty is abandoned at the nature preserve and is instructed to commit suicide. in purgatory, clone morty decides once more to return to the garage. he is commanded by rick to incubate an egg found at the nature preserve until it hatches. from out of the egg hatches a childlike alien who has the clone complete a makeshift signalling device. when rick returns to the garage, he kills the alien and leaves.  the antenna summons two increasingly large members of the alien's parents which clone morty defeats, before being killed and revived again. back
at the garage, two versions of rick emerge and begin to fight. the clone must determine which of them to kill; the remaining version is run over by the spaceship of the real rick, who kills clone morty for wielding a firearm. clone morty is greeted at the garage by rick and morty after a visit to purgatory. rick reveals that the past events were a ploy for clone morty to make an omega detergent by combining the seed and baby-alien goo, and do the laundry to perfection.  development the idea for owlchemy labs to work on a virtual reality video game for rick and morty came after series co-creator justin roiland invited the development team to his residence to play games. the first drafts of dialog were written by owlchemy labs and rough voice recordings by producer andrew eiche were sent to roiland as a template for the final performance.  reception   virtual rick-ality was met with "generally favourable" reviews, according to metacritic.  destructoid's chris carter thought the game exemplified the potential of virtual reality adventure games. he appreciated the banter done at the expense of the player character, and enjoyed the finale most when it broke the fourth wall. joe jube of game informer opined that it worked best when the original show was referenced, and was more entertaining when straying from one's assigned actions. jon ryan at ign praised the pacing for the employment of puzzle solving, "environmental exploration, and the occasional shooting gallery". the variations of jobs to accomplish were found to be "interesting and enjoyable", and the manner in which one navigates the environment was lauded as "a smart solution".  conversely, carter criticized its optimization, citing issues of faulty controls, long loading screens and "severe" stuttering, all of which resulted in having to reboot the game. jube complained that the required tasks became monotonous and presented a lack of engagement overall.  the game was nominated for the coney island dreamland award for best virtual reality game at the new york game awards 2018, and for "vr game of the year" at the 2018 sxsw gaming awards.  references notes  footnotes  external links      2017 video games htc vive games playstation 4 games playstation vr games simulation video games single-player video games video games about extraterrestrial life video games based on rick and morty video games developed in the united states video games set on fictional planets windows games oculus rift games video games about cloning
philippe francois maurice d'albignac (july 1775 - january 1824), comte d'albignac, comte de ried, was a french general de brigade (brigadier general).  references  documents historiques et genealogiques sur les familles du rouergue - tome iii - par hippolyte de barrau (1857)    1775 births 1824 deaths commanders of the order of saint louis ecole speciale militaire de saint-cyr commandants
thanha rathi ranga (between yesterday and tomorrow) () is a 2014 sri lankan sinhala drama thriller film directed by nilendra deshapriya, in his directorial debut, and produced by sunil t. fernando for sunil t. films.  it was written by sarath kothalawala and kumara thirimadura and features themselves in lead roles with namal jayasinghe. the film also supported by many veteran artists like swarna mallawarachchi, anoja weerasinghe, neeta fernando and kamal addararachchi. it is the 1113rd sri lankan film in the sinhala cinema.  the film was an official entry at the julien dubuque international film festival in the united states.  plot  this story revolves around three friends, sirithunga (sarath kothalawala) a handyman and father of three young children, wimal (kumara thirimadura) a three-wheeler driver, and suraj (namal jayasinghe) an overly sensitive university student. the three friends decide following the end of the sri lankan civil war to take a road trip, to areas where the final battles were fought. they each dream of a better life, a future with freedom, love and money.  cast   kumara thirimadura as wimal  sarath kothalawala as sirithunga  namal jayasinghe as suraj  vishwajith gunasekara as wimal's uncle  sulochana weerasinghe as jacintha  kamal addararachchi as chandare  adam adamlly as peter  swarna mallawarachchi as manorani  anoja weerasinghe as wimal's mother  nita fernando as chandare's mother  sarath chandrasiri  awards  2015 signis film awards  creative direction silver award - nilendra deshapriya  2016 derana sunsilk film awards  'best film' - nilendra deshapriya.  'best actor' - sarath kothalawala.  'best screenplay' - sarath kothalawala, kumara thirimadura.  'best cinematography' - dhanushka gunathilake.  'best editing' - ravindra guruge  'best costumes' - methnuwan wijesinghe, niluka vanigaratne.  'best supporting actress' - sulochana weerasinghe.  'best makeup' - narada thotagamuwa.  'best original music score' - gayathri khemadasa, anupama
khemadasa  box office the film easily passed 50 days of screening.  references  external links   thanha rathi ranga  : internet movie database  https://www.facebook.com/thanharathirangamovie/?fref=ts  ඔබ නරඹය යතම චත‍රපටයක සනම සධවනයක  'තණහ රත රඟ' ඇසරන සනමව යළ කයවම  sri lankan films 2014 films sinhala-language films 2014 thriller drama films sri lankan drama films 2014 drama films
castiarina vegeta is a beetle (order coleoptera) in the family buprestidae, otherwise known as jewel beetles. the species was described by hope in 1847.  distribution south australia, victoria.  citation castiarina vegeta  references barker, s., 2006: castiarina: australia's richest jewel beetle genus. australian biological resources study, 2006.   notes  external links  http://bie.ala.org.au/species/castiarina+vegeta#  https://sites.google.com/site/buprestidpages/castiarina-vegeta  vegeta beetles of australia fauna of victoria (australia)
the patriot (persian: mihan-parast) is a 1953 iranian drama film directed by gholam-hossein naghshineh.  cast   ali tabesh  taghi zohouri  hamideh kheirabadi  gholam-hossein naghshineh  mohammad reza zandi  hossein mohseni  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films iranian films persian-language films iranian drama films 1953 drama films iranian black-and-white films
gaspard bobek (1593-1635) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of pedena (1631-1635).  biography gaspard bobek was born in raduliza in 1593. on 7 april 1631, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of pedena. he served as bishop of pedena until his death in 1635.  see also  catholic church in croatia  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1593 births 1635 deaths
411th engineering group of borujerd (), also called 411th combat engineering group of borujerd () is combat engineering unit belonging to the islamic republic of iran army. its headquarters is located near sarab-e zarem village, borujerd county, lorestan province, iran.  some units of the group were involved in the 1979 kurdish rebellion in iran. the 411th group was heavily involved in various operations of the iran-iraq war, most notably operation undeniable victory, operation jerusalem way, operation jerusalem, operation kheibar, operation dawn 8, and operation nasr 2.  422nd pontoon bridge group of daghagheleh, ahvaz is a subgroup of this unit.  references  military engineering of iran military units and formations of ground forces of islamic republic of iran army borujerd
steve baer is an american investor and conservative political activist.  in 2013, the national review published an article about baer titled this conservative mega-donor is the world's most successful e-mail harasser. the article said that he was known for "sending combative and colorful e-mail missives in past months to a who's-who list of power brokers in the conservative world."  a 2016 huffington post critic said, "baer's style is to liberally cc and bcc an endless stream of powerful people, and it usually has the effect of getting none of them to listen."  baer is the former president of the united republican fund of illinois. he received around 250,000 votes in the 1990 illinois republican gubernatorial primary on an anti-tax, anti-abortion and school choice platform versus gop secretary of state jim edgar, who later became governor.  after his loss, the chicago tribune wrote that "baer fancies himself as a foot soldier of the republican right. but his self-satisfied smirk and preoccupation with political pranks and hijinks are irrepressible." a more recent daily beast report said baer is "well known in conservative circles as a professional rabble rouser who delighted in taking aim at republicans whom he thinks are less conservative than his grand old party deserves."  baer and his wife, donna, are the parents of ten children.  references  living people people from chandler, arizona brown university alumni illinois republicans year of birth missing (living people)
452001-452100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452101-452200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452201-452300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452301-452400   |-id=307 | 452307 manawydan ||  || manawydan fab llyr, a scholar, magician and peaceful man in welsh mythology ||  |}  452401-452500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452501-452600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452601-452700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452701-452800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452801-452900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  452901-453000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   452001-453000
shamos is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  michael ian shamos (born 1947), american mathematician jeremy shamos (born 1970), american actor  see also shames (surname)
haridas pal () is fictional bengali character known for his greatness, stature and grandeur. he is a person who is highly respected in the society for his noble thoughts and deeds and therefore commands authority over the mass. any such highly influential person is referred to as haridas pal. the bengali phrase tumi kon haridas pal? (bengali: তম কন হরদস পল?) literally meaning "which haridas pal are you?" is often used to question his credentials when someone tries to exert his authority over matters which are apparently beyond his sphere of influence. through this question he is bluntly told that he doesn't belong to the stature of haridas pal and therefore his questioning and suggestions are unwelcome. later an alternative phrase ke tumi haridas pal? (bengali: ক তম হরদস পল?) literally meaning "who are you haridas pal?" also began to be used to address the second person as haridas pal himself and dismiss him as a non-entity. usage of such phrase began to alternatively define haridas pal as someone who is suffering from illusory superiority or delusions of greatness and grandeur. through years of misuse of the corrupted alternative the name haridas pal has alternatively become an expression of contempt and mockery.  origin  according to one theory, the name derives from that of a real person who hailed from a poor family of rishra but subsequently overcame poverty to become a successful businessman in kolkata in the first half of the 20th century. haridas was born to netaicharan pal in a gandhabanik family in the year 1876. in 1892, he moved to kolkata where he worked in a goldsmith's shop and lived in poverty. fortune struck him when he inherited his maternal uncle's property. he set up a business in glasses and lanterns in burrabazar, kolkata and subsequently expanded it to guwahati. he brought four palatial houses, set up a charitable trust and founded a school. he died in 1933 due to kidney failure. in 1965, the kolkata municipal corporation renamed college lane to haridas pal lane in his memory.  according to another theory, haridas pal hailed from haripur village in eastern bengal, now in bangladesh. he lived in the 19th century. apparently he was a wealthy gentleman who later moved to kolkata, where he squandered all his wealth and ruined himself. the proverbial name derives from the name of this gentleman
.  see also   ad hominem  average joe  dunning-kruger effect  superiority complex  references  external links   urban legends fictional bengali hindus legendary indian people slang terms for men
jofre or jofre may refer to the following people given name jofre de foixa (died c. 1300), catalan poet, musician and abbot jofre llancol i escriva (c.1390-c.1436), spanish noble jofre, jofre mateu gonzalez (born 1980), a spanish football player  surname eder jofre (born 1936), brazilian boxer joan gilabert jofre (1350-1417), spanish priest juan pablo jofre (born 1983), argentinian musician, composer and arranger oscar jofre (born 1965), canadian entrepreneur and technology specialist sara del carmen jofre gonzalez (1935-2008), cuban-american businesswoman  see also porto jofre, a settlement in southern brazil gioffre
charles didier (15 september 1805 - 7 march 1864) was a swiss writer, poet and traveller.  charles didier followed classic studies in geneva, where he published two collections of poems, la harpe helvetique (1825) and melodies helvetiques (1825).  in 1827, attracted by the myth of italy, he decided to undertake a trip to the peninsula, where he went as a tutor. in 1829 his travels took him to sicily.  on his return from italy in 1830, he moved to paris, where he became for a few years, george sand's lover, "ill-married" and divorced from casimir dudevant, along with michel de bourges and the actor bocage  prevented by impending blindness, to take the road to the east, charles didier ended his life by committing suicide march 7, 1864 in paris after long suffering.  works   poetry 1825: la harpe helvetique 1825: melodies helvetiques   novels 1833: rome souterraine 1838: chavornay 1844-45 caroline en sicile 1859: les amours d'italie  travels 1837: une annee en espagne 1842: campagne de rome 1844: promenade au maroc 1856: cinq cents lieues sur le nil  he also wrote reports for the revue encyclopedique and the revue des deux mondes.  notes  external links   charles didier on wikisource  charles didier on data.bnf.fr    rome souterraine (tome i, online)  campagne de rome, jules labitte libraire-editeur, paris, 1844 (online)  19th-century french poets 19th-century travel writers swiss travel writers 19th-century swiss poets people from geneva 1805 births 1864 deaths swiss male poets 19th-century french male writers french male non-fiction writers 1860s suicides
john jones (1835 - 6 june 1877) was an english geologist, and an official of associations and publications concerned with the iron trade in the north of england.  life jones was born in the neighbourhood of wolverhampton in 1835. while young he began to study the rocks of his local district, and published a short treatise the geology of south staffordshire. he was secretary of the south staffordshire ironmasters' association from an early age until 1866, when he was appointed secretary to the cleveland ironmasters' association, and moved to middlesbrough.  in his new position jones took an active part in the formation of the board of arbitration and conciliation for the iron trade of the north of england. he acted on this board, as the representative of the employers, until his death. he was also secretary of the middlesbrough chamber of commerce and of the british iron trade association; shortly before his death he was appointed secretary to the association of agricultural engineers.  he founded the iron and steel institute in 1868, and he continued to act as secretary and editor of its journal until his death. jones established a weekly iron exchange at middlesbrough. he founded and edited two or three newspapers connected with the iron trade, notably the iron and coal trades review. he was elected an associate of the institute of mechanical engineers in 1869, and became a full member in 1873.  jones died at saltburn-by-the-sea on 6 june 1877, aged forty-two, after a long illness. he had invested in companies in iron industries of the north of england which failed, and died penniless; a fund was raised by the members of the iron and steel institute for the benefit of his wife and children.  scientific papers jones wrote about twenty papers on scientific (mainly geological) subjects, the first of which, "on rhynchonella acuta and its varieties", appeared in the geologist in 1858. at the middlesbrough meeting of the institute of mechanical engineers in 1871 jones read a paper "the geology of the cleveland iron district" (proceedings of the institute of mechanical engineers for 1871, page 184). his other papers are mainly contained in the proceedings of the cotteswold club and in the intellectual observer.  references  attribution     1835 births 1877 deaths 19th-century british geologists people from wolverhampton
julian juliusz szymanski (10 may 1870 - 8 june 1958)  was a polish oculist and politician.  he was marshal of the senate of the republic of poland between 1928 and 1930.  1870 births 1958 deaths people from kielce people from kielce governorate nonpartisan bloc for cooperation with the government politicians senat marshals of the second polish republic senators of the second polish republic (1928-1930) senators of the second polish republic (1935-1938)
auxesis gabonicus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by thomson in 1858. it is known from gabon, the democratic republic of the congo, angola, the republic of the congo, and the ivory coast.  references  xystrocerini beetles described in 1858
kayla moleschi (born october 25, 1990) is a canadian rugby union player. she won a gold medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the canadian women's rugby sevens team. she is known as a core contributor with an explosive step.  career in 2016, moleschi was named to canada's first ever women's rugby sevens olympic team and also named rugby canada 2016 women's sevens player.  in june 2021, moleschi was named to canada's 2020 summer olympics team.  references  external links    1990 births living people canadian female rugby union players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2019 pan american games pan american games gold medalists for canada rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of canada canada international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players olympic bronze medalists for canada olympic medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2016 summer olympics pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics
the 1970-71 memphis pros season was the 1st season of the pros in the american basketball association after three seasons in new orleans as the buccaneers, with p.w. blake of mississippi buying the team on august 21, 1970 and moving the team 10 days later to memphis. due to having to reuse the bucs' jerseys with a name that would fit the four letters they had put on the home and road jerseys, the team was named "pros". however the pros had to deal with limited dates to book for games at the mid-south coliseum, with some of the games being played in jackson, mississippi. on october 20, 1970, the pros played their first ever game, playing the new york nets in memphis, losing 108-103. the biggest losing streak was 8, coming near the end of the season, with them losing 20 out of their last 30 games. however, they sneaked into the playoffs, finishing 3rd over the texas chaparrals and denver rockets by 11 games. the pros finished dead last in points scored per game with 109.2, but finished first in points allowed at 109.9 per game. in the playoffs, they were swept by the indiana pacers.   meanwhile, blake had decided to let the league take over operations of the team less than midway through the season, claiming losses of $200,000. with the threat of the team being bought and relocated somewhere else, the city of memphis attempted to save the team with a public offering named "save the pros" on february 12, 1971, in which people could buy stock certificates of either $5, $10, or $50. in total, over 4,000 people bought stock in the team. the plan worked, and subsequently the pros would now be owned by memphis area sports inc., with a 24-member board of directors.  roster       22 al cueto - center  34 lee davis - power forward  12 coby dietrick - center  25 gerald govan - center  15 jimmy jones  - point guard  23 steve jones - shooting guard  11 wil jones - power forward  33 wendell ladner - small forward  32 craig raymond - center  24 skeeter swift - shooting guard  21 bob warren - shooting guard  10 charlie williams - shooting guard  final standings  western division  playoffs western division semifinals vs indiana pacers  pros lose series, 4-0  awards and honors 1971 aba all-star game selection (game played on january 23, 1971)   jimmy jones   steve jones  wendell lad
ner  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1970-71 regular season and playoff results  memphis pros page  memphis pros memphis pros, 1970-71 memphis pros, 1970-71 basketball in tennessee
the making of the mob: chicago is an american television miniseries, and the second season of the making of the mob, based on the iconic chicago gangster al capone and his rise and fall in the chicago mafia. it is produced by stephen david and premiered on july 11, 2016, on amc in eight parts.  plot opening introduction (narrated by jeremy davidson, who narrated this season):  release the first trailer, released in june 2016, promoted the "8-part premiere event" and a july 11, 2016 release date. it featured the tagline, "they built las vegas, but they owned chicago."  cast  main the outfit:  michael kotsohilis as al capone - the boss  paolo rotondo as johnny 'the fox' torrio - the mentor  jason fitch as tony accardo - the enforcer  christopher valente as paul 'the waiter' ricca - the brains  emmett skilton as sam 'momo' giancana - the wild card  recurring  andrew robertt as frankie yale  amelia reynolds as mae coughlan  andre king as big jim colosimo  george h. xanthis as frank capone  josh harriman as ralph 'bottles' capone  stephen lovatt as dean 'dion' o'banion  kip chapman as earl 'hymie' weiss  jack barry as george 'bugs' moran  owen black as frank 'the enforcer' nitti  emmett skilton as sam 'momo' giancana  toby leach as william dever  cohen holloway as jack 'machine gun jack' mcgurn  ruth wynne as anna torrio  interviews each episode features several interviews from celebrities, authors, historians and political figures.  deidre capone - grand-niece of al capone, author, uncle al  laurence bergreen - author, capone: the man and the era jonathan eig - author, get capone, luckiest man william forsythe - actor, the untouchables, once upon a time in america and the mob doctor frank calabrese - former chicago outfit associate robert lombardo - author, organized crime in chicago john binder - author, the chicago outfit rich cohen - journalist karen abbott - author, sin in the second city t.j. english - author, paddy whacked vincent pastore - actor, the sopranos john kass - columnist, chicago tribune john russick - curator, chicago history museum frank cullotta - former chicago outfit associate  paul sorvino
- actor, goodfellas hillel levin - co-author, when corruption was king michael s. green, ph.d. - professor, (unlv) historian and board member with the mob museum michael madsen - actor, donnie brasco oscar goodman - former mayor of las vegas, cameo in casino nathan thompson - author, kings: the true story of chicago's policy kings david eisenbach - historian robert grant - former chicago fbi chief billy drago - author, played frank nitti in the untouchables  episodes  references  external links  2016 american television seasons 2010s american drama television miniseries television shows set in chicago television series set in the 1910s television series set in the 1920s television series set in the 1930s television series set in 1931 television series set in the 1940s television series set in the 1950s television series set in 1959 television series set in 1960 television series set in 1963 television series set in 1975 television series set in 1992 television series based on actual events cultural depictions of al capone cultural depictions of johnny torrio cultural depictions of sam giancana cultural depictions of frankie yale cultural depictions of hymie weiss cultural depictions of bugs moran cultural depictions of frank nitti works about the chicago outfit
"swingtown" is a 1977 hit song by the steve miller band.  it was their third and final single release from their book of dreams album, and became the second biggest hit from the lp.  "swingtown" reached  on the u.s. billboard hot 100 and spent two weeks at  on the cash box hot 100. it also peaked at  on the canadian pop chart.  reception cash box said that it "centers around an infectious drum/bass riff."  chart performance  weekly charts  year-end charts  use in media  in late 1978 and 1979, ford used an edit from the instrumental sections of the song in its television ads for the '79 ford mustang.     "swingtown" appears in the soundtrack of the film my girl 2.  "swingtown" is used in an episode of the hbo series, the sopranos.  the episode is "d-girl", during the show's second season.  "swingtown" is a popular song sung by students at the university of wisconsin madison, especially at wisconsin football games at camp randall stadium in madison, wisconsin. the wisconsin marching band plays it and the students sing the "o-ooooo-o-o-o-o-o-o-o" part of the song ending it with the word "sucks" to refer to section "o" of the student section, the "sucks" is chanted by other student sections especially section p, this is usually followed by a chant of "fuck you, eat shit" by student sections o and p. despite the song being popular among the students, several attempts to have the song banned by the uw staff and the chancellor have been attempted due to the controversial "fuck you, eat shit" chant, but the banning of the song has so far proven to be unsuccessful.  steve miller, himself a graduate of the university of wisconsin and vocalist of the steve miller band guest conducted the song with the wisconsin marching band.  it appears in promotions for the 2022 the players golf tournament.  inspiration for ozzy osbourne's "crazy train" guitarist greg leon, who initially took randy rhoads' place in quiet riot, claims that the iconic verse riff to ozzy osbourne's "crazy train" came about when he and rhoads were messing around with "swingtown". "we were hanging out, and i showed him the riff to steve miller's "swingtown". i said: "look what happens
when you speed this riff up". we messed around, and the next thing i know he took it to a whole other level and end up writing the "crazy train" riff."  references  external links  lyrics of this song     1977 songs 1977 singles capitol records singles steve miller band songs songs about dancing fictional populated places
the 1958-59 honduran amateur league was the eleventh edition of the honduran amateur league. c.d. olimpia obtained its 2nd national title.  the season ran from 23 march 1958 to 11 march 1959.  regional champions  known results  national championship round played in a double round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the pentagonal.  after their first two matches, c.d. fortuna retired from the competition and their results were annulled.  known results  olimpia's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1958 in honduras 1959 in honduras
machhipal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of machhipal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, machhipal has total number of 56 houses and population of 303 of which include 154 males and 149 females. literacy rate of machhipal is 62.79%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 45 which is 14.85% of total population of machhipal, and child sex ratio is approximately  1143, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
blueslide is an unincorporated community in pend oreille county, in the u.s. state of washington.  history a post office called blueslide was established in 1906, and remained in operation until 1926. the community was named for a landslide near the town site.  references  unincorporated communities in pend oreille county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state)
{{displaytitle:c29h46o3}} the molecular formula c29h46o3 (molar mass: 442.674 g/mol, exact mass: 442.3447 u) may refer to:   nandrolone undecanoate  testosterone decanoate  molecular formulas
natalia danielle dyer (born january 13, 1995) is an american actress. she is known for her starring role as nancy wheeler in the netflix science fiction horror series stranger things (2016-present).  early life and education  dyer was born and raised in nashville, tennessee, graduating from the performing arts high school nashville school of the arts.  career  dyer's first screen role was as clarissa granger in hannah montana: the movie in 2009. in 2011, she appeared in the greening of whitney brown. dyer then starred in the indie film i believe in unicorns, which premiered in 2014 at sxsw.  in 2016, dyer was cast as nancy wheeler in the netflix series stranger things. in 2019, dyer starred as coco in the netflix horror film velvet buzzsaw.  personal life  dyer moved to new york city and enrolled at nyu in 2013, studying at the gallatin school of individualized study. since 2016, dyer has been in a relationship with her stranger things co-star, charlie heaton.  filmography  film  television  music videos  awards and nominations  notes  references  external links     1995 births living people actresses from nashville, tennessee american film actresses american television actresses 21st-century american actresses new york university gallatin school of individualized study alumni age controversies
environment coastal & offshore (eco) is a multi-media publication focused on coastal and offshore environmental topics. published nine times a year in print format and twice in digital format, each issue of eco includes news, opinion and features. the magazine also includes a weekly digital news and a website. as of march 2016, eco was distributed to over 19,000 readers, most of whom work in marine related occupations. aside from direct mailed distribution, the eco magazine is distributed at major ocean industry events in the united states, canada, the united kingdom, and european nations.  eco is published by tsc strategic in stuart, florida. it was founded in 2012 by managing editor greg leatherman and the first issue appeared in january 2013. beginning in march 2018, the senior editor for all eco media is kira coley.  eco announced an official partnership with the intergovernmental oceanographic commission (ioc) of united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization (unesco) in october 2019.  references  external links  eco magazine  environmental magazines magazines established in 2013 magazines published in florida nine times annually magazines
dorothy f. bailey is a civic leader from prince george's county, maryland. she served on the county council for eight years, serving two terms as chairman. she has served on the boards of many national and local organizations, including the national council of negro women and the association for the study of african american life and history (asalh). she established the county's harlem renaissance festival, which has been held annually since 1999, and founded several community organizations. she was inducted into the maryland women's hall of fame in 2014.  biography  she was born in dunn, north carolina. she first became involved in civil rights advocacy while studying sociology at north carolina central university, from which she received a b.a. degree in 1962. she pursued postgraduate studies in education and gerontology at pennsylvania state university and the university of maryland. early in her career she taught in the public schools and worked in the university of maryland's upward bound program.  from 1983-1994, she held senior-level positions at several prince george's county government agencies, including executive director of the consumer protection commission, and community partnerships director at the department of family services. in 1994 she was elected to the prince george's county council, where she served for eight years. she was council chairman for two terms and vice chair for three terms. after leaving the council, bailey served as parent liaison for the prince george's county public schools.  in 2001, bailey was elected to the national executive council of the association for the study of african american life and history (asalh); she is also president of the prince george's county chapter. in 2002 she founded the harlem remembrance foundation of prince george's county, serving as its chairman of the board from 2003-2011. the foundation holds the annual harlem renaissance festival, an idea bailey conceived as a way to highlight the artistic and cultural contributions of african americans during the harlem renaissance era, and to showcase the work of county residents who continue that legacy. the festival draws thousands of visitors each year and features poetry readings, dance performances, visual art, and live jazz. notable performers have included actor clifton powell, who read the poetry of langston hughes, and jazz vocalist jean carne.  bailey was instrumental in the founding of several other non-profit organizations, including the learn foundation (landover educational athletic recreational non-profit), the kiamsha youth empowerment organization, and the royal bafokeng sister city friendship committee. she has also served on the national and local boards of the national council of negro women.  honors and awards
induction into the maryland women's hall of fame, 2014  gladys noon spellman award for public service  naacp image award for political activism, 1999  the national council of negro women's bethune recognition award  north carolina central university's 2013 alumnus of the year  induction into the prince george's county women's hall of fame, 1996  honorary doctorate of divinity from riverside baptist college and seminary, 1991  publications  references  further reading  external links   the wise women project  the harlem remembrance foundation of prince george's county  kiamsha youth empowerment  year of birth missing (living people) living people people from dunn, north carolina people from temple hills, maryland north carolina central university alumni maryland democrats women in maryland politics american women activists african-american activists activists from north carolina 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american women politicians 21st-century american politicians 21st-century american women politicians activists from maryland 20th-century african-american women 20th-century african-american politicians 21st-century african-american women 21st-century african-american politicians
biography  keji giwa (born october 28, 1977) keji giwa (born october 28, 1977) is a british-born nigerian entrepreneur with key interests and expertise in real estate, high yield short let rental income and digital technology strategy and execution to drive growth in africa's real estate sector; he is the founder & ceo of digital bananas technology uk & nigeria, a digital solutions provider and career insights, the e-workexperience platform that has helped over 9,000 nigerians in u.k., usa & canada secure high paying digital roles. both companies operate and offer services in the uk and sub-saharan africa region.  early life and education  keji giwa was born in hackney, london and spent his early primary and secondary education in nigeria. he came back to the uk at age 16 to further his education and received a degree in computer science from kingston university, in the united kingdom. he is a professional member of the british computer society.  career  he founded digital landlords in 2017, a real estate platform that uses digital technology to help nigerians at home and abroad own real estate based on affordability and has since built a portfolio of over 100 luxury homes for high yield short let rental income using shortlethomes, a sister company to digital landlords.  with a consistent 75% - 90% occupancy rate on all homes over the last 3 years, a 5 star rating on airbnb, among the top 5 short let platforms in africa and number one in nigeria, shortlethomes has generated all partners a 17% roi on their portfolio each year.  as a serial entrepreneur, he has worked on the successful deployment of a number of innovative digital products over the past years. his group gifting app, grantmywish was shortlisted for the 2012 econsultancy digital awards for innovation in customer experience. while he was working as a lead project manager at moveme, the moveme web app won an international award from yahoo for the yahoo's finds of the year.  today, keji is working on bringing nigeria to the forefront of local and international tourism using real estate and technology.   he believes the future growth of nigeria will be driven by both the real estate, tourism and recreational industry. this is why he is currently developing innovative concepts like lekki party villa, 6 purpose built villas to accommodate the growing demand for party houses, giwa gardens water park and resort, a technologically advanced & artificial extreme river, wave pool and kid water play ground resort
to rival the likes in miami & dubai.  recent achievements  keji recently completed the development of mayfair luxury apartments, lagos first wellness short let apartment estate and now developing the carnelian, a 250ft tower with 62 suites and recreational centers to provide luxury living for the modern nigerian at home and abroad.  the future is green and white. the future is nigeria.  references  living people 1977 births people from hackney central alumni of kingston university 21st-century nigerian businesspeople english people of yoruba descent nigerian technology businesspeople yoruba businesspeople
bang krathum railway station is a railway station located in bang krathum subdistrict, bang krathum district, phitsanulok. it is located 362.225 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 2 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 24 january 1908 as part of the northern line extension from pak nam pho to phitsanulok.  train services  rapid 102 chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 105/106 bangkok-sila at-bangkok  rapid 109 bangkok-chiang mai  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references        railway stations in thailand railway stations opened in 1908
lepturonota tristis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861, originally under the genus leptonota.  varieties  lepturonota tristis var. aenea (montrouzier, 1861)  lepturonota tristis var. albovittata fauvel, 1862  lepturonota tristis var. chalybaea lepesme & breuning, 1953  lepturonota tristis var. ruficollis (fauvel, 1906)  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
paul opsommer is a republican former member of the michigan house of representatives, representing an area directly north of lansing from 2007 through 2012. prior to his election to the house, opsommer was the mayor and a member of the dewitt city council.  opsommer was the vice president of action management corporation in flint and is active with many local governmental agencies and boards.  he also served on the clinton county conservation board for 12 years.  references  1952 births living people michigan republicans members of the michigan house of representatives mayors of places in michigan michigan city council members people from dewitt, michigan michigan state university alumni
hans jorg schelling (born 27 december 1953 in hohenems, vorarlberg as johann georg schelling) is an austrian entrepreneur and politician of the austrian people's party and who served as minister of finance of austria in the governments of chancellors werner faymann and christian kern.  early career a native of vorarlberg in western austria, schelling was a millionaire management consultant before entering politics. over the course of his career, he made a fortune by building two separate home-furnishing chains into market leaders.  political career during his time in office as minister of finance, schelling was in charge of managing the fallout of the 2008 financial crisis. in 2016, he closed fimbag, the agency it set up in 2008 during the crisis to oversee state aid granted to troubled lenders. he successfully pushed through legislation paving the way for the government to reach settlements with the creditors of defunct bank hypo alpe adria and remove a millstone from the country's public finances.  under schelling's leadership, austria asked france in 2015 to hand over tax data linked to leaked client data of multinational banking and financial services company hsbc which had admitted failings in compliance at its swiss private bank. he also supported state-owned utility omv in its negotiations on an asset swap with gazprom and in 2016 took part in the ceremony, in which omv agreed to exchange a stake in its norwegian business for a stake in the russian group's achimov oil and gas exploration blocks; the deal was later abandoned due to opposition from norway.  from 2015, schelling chaired the group of eu member states that want to adopt a common tax on financial transactions.  life after politics in 2019, schelling was nominated to serve as a member of the supervisory board at omv; shortly after, the nomination was withdrawn due to a potential breach of the austrian government's rules on a cooling-off period for former ministers.  other activities  corporate boards  osterreichische volksbanken-aktiengesellschaft (ovag), chairman of the supervisory board (2012-2014)  nord stream 2, adviser (2018-present)  regulatory bodies  african development bank (afdb), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2015-2017)  asian development bank (adb), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  asian infrastructure investment bank (aiib), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2015-2017)  european bank for reconstruction and development (ebrd), ex-officio member of the
board of governors (2014-2017)  european investment bank (eib), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  european stability mechanism (esm), member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  inter-american investment corporation (iic), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  multilateral investment guarantee agency (miga), world bank group, ex-officio member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  world bank, ex-officio member of the board of governors (2014-2017)  non-profit organizations  federation of social insurance providers, chairman of the board (2009-2014  personal life schelling is married and has two daughters. he is a collector of modern art and enjoys spending time on stiftsweingut herzogenburg, the vineyard he operates in his adopted province of lower austria.  references  1953 births austrian people's party politicians finance ministers of austria living people people from hohenems people from sankt polten 21st-century austrian politicians
professor tadj oreszczyn fcibse, minste, phd, ceng is the director of the bartlett school of environment, energy and resources, and director of the rcuk centre for energy epidemiology (one of six end use energy demand centres). he is also professor of energy and environment (and was the founding director) at the ucl energy institute, university college london.  academic career  oreszczyn has for over 30 years undertaken energy and building research with a particular focus around the performance gap between theory and practice and the unintended consequences (health, comfort, etc.) of building energy efficiency. his first degree was in applied physics followed by a phd in solar energy.  publications   oreszczyn has been involved in over 170 research publications. he has given evidence to the house of lords science and technology select committee on energy efficiency, co-authored two papers for special issues of the lancet on energy and health and prepared three papers for a state of science review for the office of science and innovation. he has provided research support for the development of the english and welsh building regulations and presented at invited public and academic lectures at the royal society and the royal institution.  affiliations  oreszczyn was a member of the uk department of energy and climate change (decc) scientific advisory group and advised the energy efficiency deployment office at decc. he is a member of the nhbc foundation expert panel, and a member of edge an inter-institutional ginger group involving cibse, ice, riba, istructe and the rics which seeks to promote interdisciplinary co-operation between construction professionals. oreszczyn is a fellow and vice president of cibse and sits on the cibse board.  external links    'future of energy', bbc world service, 29 december 2015  'making your bed every day might encourage mites to breed in it', zme science, 14 september 2015   'skills gap preventing low-energy technology from reaching full potential' science daily, 14 september 2015  'climate change threatens to undermine the last half century of health gains', science daily, 23 june 2015  'smartphones, the internet and the smart energy revolution', bbc business news, 9 december 2011  references  academics of university college london living people year of birth missing (living people)
human interactions with fungi include both beneficial uses, whether practical or symbolic, and harmful interactions such as when fungi damage crops, timber, or food.  yeasts have been used since ancient times to leaven bread and to ferment beer and wine. more recently, mould fungi have been exploited to create a wide range of industrial products, including enzymes and drugs. medicines based on fungi include antibiotics, immunosuppressants, statins and many anti-cancer drugs. the yeast species saccharomyces cerevisiae is an important model organism in cell biology. the fruiting bodies of some larger fungi are collected as edible mushrooms, including delicacies like the chanterelle, cep, and truffle, while a few species are cultivated. mould fungi provide the meaty (umami) flavour of fermented soybean products such as tempeh, miso and soy sauce, and contribute flavour and colour to blue cheeses including roquefort and stilton. moulds also yield vegetarian meat substitutes like quorn. some fungi, especially the fly agaric and psilocybin mushrooms are used for the psychoactive drugs that they contain; these in particular are the focus of academic study in the field of ethnomycology. fungi have appeared, too, from time to time, in literature and art.  fungi create harm by spoiling food, destroying timber, and by causing diseases of crops, livestock, and humans. fungi, mainly moulds like penicillium and aspergillus, spoil many stored foods. fungi cause the majority of plant diseases, which in turn cause serious economic losses. sometimes, as in the great irish famine of 1845-1849, fungal diseases of plants, in this case potato blight caused by phytophthora, result in large-scale human suffering. fungi are similarly the main cause of economic losses of timber in buildings. finally, fungi cause many diseases of humans and livestock; aspergillosis kills some 600,000 people a year, mainly however those with already weakened immune systems.  context  culture consists of the social behaviour and norms found in human societies and transmitted through social learning. cultural universals in all human societies include expressive forms like art, music, dance, ritual, religion, and technologies like tool usage, cooking, shelter, and clothing. the concept of material culture covers physical expressions such as technology, architecture and art, whereas immaterial culture includes principles of social organization, mythology, philosophy, literature, and science. this article describes the roles played by fungi in human culture.  practical uses
fermentation  yeasts have been used since ancient times to leaven bread and to ferment beer and wine. more recently, fungi have been used for a wide variety of industrial fermentations, whether working directly for their effects on materials such as processing paper pulp or bioremediating industrial waste, or serving as the source of enzymes for many purposes, such as fading and softening denim for fashionable blue jeans. fungi yield a wide variety of industrial enzymes including amylases, invertases, cellulases and hemicellulases, pectinases, proteases, laccases, phytases, alpha-glucuronidases, mannanases, and lipases.  food  the fruiting bodies of many larger fungi such as the chanterelle and the cep are collected as edible mushrooms. some, such as truffles, are esteemed as costly delicacies. a few species such as agaricus bisporus and oyster mushrooms (pleurotus spp.) are cultivated.  mould fungi are the source of the meaty (umami) flavour of the soybean products tempeh, miso and soy sauce. tempeh has been produced in java since the 13th century. like tofu, it is made into protein-rich blocks, but these have a firm texture and earthy flavour, since (unlike tofu) the whole beans are retained, providing a higher content of dietary fibre and vitamins. miso too is rich in protein, vitamins and minerals. it is fermented from a mixture of soybeans and cereals, forming a soft paste used to flavour soups and other japanese dishes. soy sauce has been used in china since the 2nd century ad, and is now widespread in asia. like miso, it is made by fermenting a mixture of soybeans and cereals with moulds such as aspergillus oryzae.  the mould penicillium roqueforti contributes the blue coloration and much of the flavour in blue cheeses such as roquefort and stilton. mould fungi are processed to produce vegetarian meat substitutes such as quorn.  dyes   fungi are used as natural dyes. the mushrooms are crushed and placed in a non-reactive pot to simmer for as long as desired or until you achieve a desired depth of color. mushrooms that can be used  without a mordant are called "substantive dyes", but in order to improve color and light fastness a mordant (metallic salts) can be used. protein fibers, like
wool and silk, quickly take the dye, but cotton, hemp and some synthetic fibers can be used too.  in modern medicine  fungi are the sources of many types of medicinal drug including antibiotics, immunosuppressants, and statins. major classes of antibiotics, the penicillins and the cephalosporins, are derived from substances produced by fungi. so also are the immunosuppressant macrolides, the cyclosporins.  the cholesterol-lowering drugs, the statins, were initially produced by fungi including penicillium. the first commercial statin, lovastatin, was fermented by the mould aspergillus terreus.  numerous anti-cancer drugs such as the mitotic inhibitors  vinblastine, vincristine, podophyllotoxin, griseofulvin, aurantiamine, oxaline, and neoxaline are produced by fungi.  in folk medicine  many fungi have been used as folk medicines around the world, including in europe and in india where traditions are well documented. some have been found to have useful active ingredients, though these do not always correspond with traditional uses of the fungi concerned. ergot and various cereal smuts, such as ustilago tritici (wheat grain smut) were used for disorders of pregnancy. yeasts, made into a boiled paste with wheat flour, were used in india to treat fevers and dysentery. wounds were treated in europe with moulds, using for example a slice of mouldy bread or mouldy wheat straw, with active ingredients patulin and other penicillin-like compounds. in east africa, pre-colonial practice of craniotomy involved the use of fungi to prevent the onset of sepsis.  in science  the yeast species saccharomyces cerevisiae has been an important model organism in modern cell biology for much of the twentieth century, and is one of the most thoroughly researched eukaryotic microorganisms. it was the first eukaryote whose genome was sequenced. in the twentyfirst century, the filamentous mould aspergillus has been adopted for genome studies.  in pest control  entomopathogenic fungi infect and kill insects, including a variety of pest species, so they have been investigated as possible biological control agents. a variety of ascomycetes, including beauveria, lecanicillium, metarhizium, and paecilomyces have promising features for use as biological insecticides. metarhizium in particular can help to control outbreaks of
locusts.  symbolic uses  in religion and witchcraft  some species such as the fly agaric and psilocybin mushrooms are used for the psychoactive drugs that they contain. these are the focus of academic study and intense debate in the field of ethnomycology. in the 1950s, the american banker robert gordon wasson participated in a mazatec psilocybin mushroom ritual, and wrote an influential but controversial book claiming that the soma mentioned in the rigveda was amanita muscaria, the fly agaric. the mycologist john ramsbottom however confirmed one element that allegro later wove into his theory, stating in 1953 that the tree of the knowledge of good and evil fresco in the plaincourault chapel depicted amanita muscaria.  the ergot fungi whose sclerotia appear as "black grain" in rye and other cereals are implicated in the witch trials of 17th century norway, where the hallucinations caused by ergotism, with visions of satan as a black dog or cat, caused people to be accused of witchcraft. people in other cultures such as the aztecs brewed drinks with ergot, which contains alkaloids based on lysergic acid.  in literature and art  fungi have appeared from time to time in literature, both for children and for adults. in lewis carroll's 1865 alice's adventures in wonderland, alice grows larger if she eats one side of the mushroom, and shrinks if she eats from the other side. shakespeare has prospero remark in the tempest that elves "make midnight mushrooms". poems and novels about or mentioning fungi have been written by edmund spenser, percy bysshe shelley, keats, tennyson, arthur conan doyle, d. h. lawrence, and emily dickinson. tennyson referred to the fairy ring mushroom (marasmius) with the phrase "the fairy footings on the grass".  fungi sometimes feature in works of art, such as by paolo porpora in the late 17th century. the children's author beatrix potter painted hundreds of accurate watercolour illustrations of fungi. more recently, artists such as martin belou, helen downie (alias "unskilled worker"), and steffen dam have created installations and paintings of mushrooms.  harmful interactions  food spoilage  fungi, especially moulds but also yeasts, are important agents of food spoilage.  penicillium moulds cause soft rot such as of apples, while aspergillus moulds create patches on the surface of old bread, yoghurt and many other foods. yeasts
spoil sugary foods such as plums and jams, fermenting the sugars to alcohol. scientific understanding of spoilage began in the 19th century with works such as louis pasteur's 1879 studies on fermentation, which investigated the spoilage of beer.  destruction of timber  saprotrophic wood-decay fungi are the primary cause of decomposition of wood, causing billions of dollars of economic damage each year. fungal decay, while useful in composting, is destructive of timber exposed to the weather, and in the case of dry rot caused by serpula lacrymans, also of timbers in largely dry houses. some wood-decay fungi such as the honey fungi, species of armillaria, are parasites of living trees, attacking their roots and eventually killing them, and continuing to decompose the wood when they are dead. honey fungus is a serious horticultural pest, as it can spread from tree to tree by long strap-shaped rhizomorphs in the soil.  diseases of crops  fungi are important crop pathogens, as they reproduce rapidly, affect a wide range of crops around the world, cause some 85% of plant diseases, and can create serious economic losses. the range of types of fungi involved is also wide, including ascomycetes such as fusarium causing wilt, basidiomycetes such as ustilago causing smuts and puccinia causing cereal rusts, and oomycetes such as phytophthora causing potato late blight and the resulting great irish famine of 1845-1849. where crop diversity is low, and in particular where single varieties of major crops are nearly universal, fungal diseases can cause the loss of an entire crop, as with the potato in ireland, and as with the monocultured crop of maize (corn) in the usa in 1970, where over a billion dollars' worth of production was lost. similarly, the 'gros michel' seedless banana crop was essentially completely destroyed worldwide in the 1950s by the wild fungus, fusarium oxysporum. it was replaced by the cavendish banana, which in turn was in 2015 facing total destruction by the same disease.  diseases of humans and livestock  pathogenic fungi cause a variety of diseases in humans and livestock. aspergillosis, most commonly caused by aspergillus fumigatus, kills some 600,000 people per year, mostly those with already weakened immune systems. pneumocystis causes pneumonia, again mainly in people with weakened immune systems. candida yeasts are the agents of candidiasis,
causing infections of the mouth, throat, and genital tract, and more seriously of the blood. ringworm is a skin infection that infects some 20% of the human population; it is caused by some 40 different fungi.  notes  references   01 biology and culture topics in culture
the sheketak group was created by duo danny rahum and tzahi patish in 1997. the group's productions combine contemporary dance, lively music, video, and theater. the group put on their shows in israel and in around 30 other countries worldwide.  the origin of the group's name is the blending of two words in hebrew: sheket (silence), and tak (the creation of sound). the word "sheketak" is widely used by the group's artists in order to express rhythmic and musical phrases during a work process.  sheketak won the "young creators" prize of the ministry of culture and education of 2001.  sheketak partook in various televisional and theatrical productions, such as "king solomon and shlomi the shoemaker" in habima theater, and tv shows such as kokhav nolad, nolad lirkod, and yair lapid and dudu topaz's talk shows.  the managers of sheketak created several soundtracks and choreography for many televisional productions and commercials.  selected works  elements beats in movement from street kids to street performers the nutcracker  references  external links sheketak's website  contemporary dance dance in israel israeli culture
cho beom-seok (; born 9 january 1990) is a south korean footballer who plays as midfielder for bucheon fc in k league 2.  career cho was selected by jeonnam dragons in the 2008 k league draft, but he didn't made his debut for jeonnam. he moved to fc seoul after his first professional club released him.  cho beom-seok also had an unsuccessful spell with incheon united in 2011, and joined korea national league side mokpo city.  references  external links   1990 births living people association football midfielders south korean footballers jeonnam dragons players fc seoul players incheon united fc players bucheon fc 1995 players k league 1 players korea national league players k league 2 players
andrzej szajna (born 30 september 1949) is a retired polish artistic gymnast who won two individual bronze medals at the 1974 world championships. he competed at the 1972, 1976 and 1980 summer olympics with the best individual result of sixth place all-around and on parallel bars in 1976. at the european championships he shared gold medal on the floor with nikolai andrianov in 1975 and placed second on the vault behind andrianov in 1971, 1973 and 1975.  szajna is a family man with five daughters and two sons, who had refused several offers to move to another sports club in poland or united states. he retired after winning five medals at the 1984 polish championships, including two gold medals. until 1989 he served with the polish army and later worked as a bodyguard. he remained active in gymnastics as a coach and referee.  references  1949 births living people gymnasts at the 1972 summer olympics gymnasts at the 1976 summer olympics gymnasts at the 1980 summer olympics olympic gymnasts of poland polish male artistic gymnasts sportspeople from wrocław
the fitzroy community club inc. is an australian rules football club based in the western suburbs of adelaide which was formed in 1987 as a merger between the former renown park football club, st dominic's football club and st peter's y.c.w. football club. the club has participated in the south australian amateur football league since being formed.  a-grade premierships   south australian amateur football league a3 (1)  1995   south australian amateur football league division 5 (2)  2007   adelaide footy league division 6 (3)  2019  merger history  fitzroy football club was formed in 1987 from a merger of renown park, st dominic's and st peters ycw.  renown park  the "renown park football club" was formed in 1983 as a merger of the brompton football club and the albert sports football club.  the club had three different home grounds over its four season history, renown park oval (1983), challa gardens primary school (1984) and finally sam johnson sports ground (1985-86) until it merged with the st dominic's and st peters ycw clubs to form fitzroy.  a-grade premierships  south australian amateur football league a6 (1)  1983  albert sports  the albert sports football club was formed as the albert druids football club and participated in the adelaide and suburban football association from 1939 until it shifted to the west torrens district football association 1947.  when that competition folded at the end of the 1961 season, albert druids shifted to the sturt district football association, which became the adelaide metropolitan football league (amfl) the following year. the amfl folded at the end of the 1967 season and albert druids transferred to the north adelaide district football association (nadfa), which merged into the norwood-north football association (nnfa) the following season. when the nnfa folded at the end of the 1977 season, albert druids moved to the adelaide suburban football league which folded at the end of that season.  in 1979 albert druids was renamed albert sports and joined the glenelg-south adelaide football association where they participated for three seasons before shifting to the south australian amateur football league in 1982, playing one season before merging with brompton to form renown park.  a-grade premierships  west torrens district football association (3)  1954   1958  1961  brompton  the brompton football club was formed in 1925 and joined the west torrens district football association.  initially they only lasted one season before going into recess and returning in
1927 in the ymca football association for one season and then the independent football association for two seasons before going into recess again in 1930.  the club was relaunched again in 1945 in the adelaide and suburban football association and in 1947 returned to the west torrens district football association. when that competition folded at the end of the 1961 season, brompton shifted to the sturt district football association, which became the adelaide metropolitan football league (amfl) the following year. in 1967, brompton joined the east torrens football association (etfa) and continued when that league merged into the norwood-north football association (nnfa) in 1969.  when the nnfa folded at the end of the 1977 season, brompton moved to the adelaide suburban football league which folded at the end of that season.  brompton then joined the south australian amateur football league (saafl) in 1979.  in 1981 brompton were disaffiliated from the saafl due to dissatisfaction with its management and facilities, and joined the glenelg-south adelaide football association as a result where they participated for two seasons before merging with albert sports in 1983 to form renown park.  a-grade premierships  west torrens district football association blue division (3)  1957  1959  1960  west torrens district football association gold division (1)  1949  st dominic's  the st dominic's football club was established as the north adelaide y.c.w. football club, based at blackfriars priory school and participated in the north adelaide district football association (nadfa).  in 1962 they were renamed st dominic's and the following season joined the south australian amateur football league.  in 1967 they shifted home ground full-time to park 2, now commonly known as st dominic's oval.  in 1987 it merged with the renown park and st peters ycw clubs to form fitzroy.  a-grade premierships  north adelaide district football association (2)  1959   1960  st peter's y.c.w.  st peter's y.c.w. football club were based at st paul's college and participated in the sunday ycw football association from 1959 to 1977. in 1978, st peter's y.c.w. joined the south australian amateur football league, and relocated to devitt oval the following year, where it remained until it merged with renown park and st dominic's in 1987 to form fitzroy.  references  external links    gameday website  australian rules football clubs in south australia australian rules football clubs established in 1987 1987 establishments in australia adelaide foot
y league clubs
bhoa assembly constituency (sl. no.: 2) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in pathankot district, punjab state, india. it covers bhoa village.  member of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india pathankot district
straight to dvd ii: past, present and future hearts is the second live album by american rock band all time low, after the first straight to dvd in 2010. it was released on september 9, 2016, and the footage was recorded at wembley arena.  track listing  personnel all time low  jack barakat - lead guitar, backing vocals  alex gaskarth - rhythm guitar, vocals  rian dawson - drums  zack merrick - bass, backing vocals additional musicians  bryan donahue - auxiliary guitar, backing vocals live crew  brian southall - tour management  steve hussein - tour management (assistant)  daniel nickleski - production management, monitor engineer  phil gornell - front of house engineer  jeff maker - lighting designer  kyle arndt - guitar technician  alan fraser - guitar technician  alex grieco - drum technician  adam elmakias - photographer  references  2016 live albums 2016 video albums live video albums all time low albums
events from the year 1899 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  events   1899 russian student strike  akyaka railway station  peter the great st. petersburg polytechnic university  pochvovedenie  births  deaths   varvara rudneva, physician (b. 1844)  references  1899 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
lago colina dam (spanish: presa lago colina) is a concrete and earth-embankment gravity dam on the rio conchos in chihuahua, mexico. the dam forms lake colina. its primary purpose is to divert water for irrigation, and regulate the outflow of the larger la boquilla dam upstream.  see also list of dams and reservoirs#mexico list of lakes in mexico  dams in mexico gravity dams
the diocese of covasna and harghita () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the saint nicholas cathedral in miercurea ciuc and its ecclesiastical territory covers covasna and harghita counties. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of transylvania. it has two archpriests' districts, around 110 priests in 140 churches, of which 47 are historic monuments, eight monasteries and two sketes with around 130 monks, and classes for theological education at a high school in toplita. it was established in 1994.  bishops ioan selejean (1994-2014) andrei moldovan (2015-)  notes  external links official site  covasna 1994 establishments in romania covasna harghita county covasna county
the 2016 spanish quidditch cup was the first edition of this tournament. it was played on the february 6th and 7th, 2016 in campo grande football fields in rivas-vaciamadrid, madrid. 8 teams from andalusia, basque country, galicia and madrid joined for this event where the locals, madrid wolves, won the championship beating bizkaia boggarts in the final 140-70*.  team  sistema de competicion   the teams were divided into two groups seeding by their position in asociacion quidditch espana's regional tournaments. it was tried to avoid that teams from the same region were assigned to the same group. in each group teams would play against each other to qualify to semifinals. first and second from each group would qualify.  they were ranked by:   won games.  quaffle point difference (qpd, capped to 150 points).  number of snith when it matters (swim).  quaffle points scored.  caught snitches.  fewer red cards.  fewer yellow cards.  fewer blue cards.  fastest snitch catch.  fastest first goal.  in the knockout phase, the first of group a will play against the second in group b and the first in group b against the second in group a. winners went to the final and losers to the consolation match.  champion and runner-up qualified to european quidditch cup 2016.  pool play  pool a  pool b  knockouts  final ranking  statistics   complete stats  top scorers  bookings  records  individual    more goals in a game: 9 - tono (malaka vikings) (malaka vikings 170*-40 gasteiz gamusins)  fastest goal: 7" - artur martin (madrid wolves) (madrid wolves 140-70* bizkaia boggarts)  team records    biggest win: madrid wolves 210*-30 gasteiz gamusins  game with most goals: dementores 150*-100 madrid lynx  more snitches captures: 4 - bizkaia boggarts & madrid wolves  games without receiving goal: -  games without scoring: -  most bookings: 4 blue, 4 yellow, 1 red - pontevedra q.c.  references    diario sport - la primera copa de espana de quidditch se disputara en febrero en rivas-vaciamadrid  sportyou - madrid acogera la primera copa de espana de quidditch  onda cer
o coslada - preparacion de la primera copa de espana  madridiario - el deporte de harry potter llega a rivas  el iberico - primera copa de espana de quidditch muggle  cadena cope - entrevista a rion blake y andres vargas  quidditch competitions sport in spain
beatrice keene (webber) corliss (october 21, 1910 - january 12, 1995) was an american politician who served as the first female mayor of gloucester, massachusetts.  early life and business career corliss was born on october 21, 1910 in gloucester. she graduated from simmons college. professionally, she worked as an accountant for birds eye before becoming the assistant treasurer of consolidated lobster. she also aided her husband's business by picking strawberries and raspberries.  political career corliss political involvement began as a member of the federation of business and professional women's clubs of gloucester, an organization whose activities included supporting candidates for appointed office.  in 1951, corliss attempted her first run for office as a candidate for gloucester school committee. she was successful and was reelected in 1953. in 1955, she was the highest vote-getter in the city council election and was elected mayor by her fellow councilors; at the time, gloucester employed a "weak mayor" form of government, and full time administration of the city departments was in the hands of an appointed city manager. she was reelected to the city council in 1957 and was once again chosen to serve as mayor.  in 1960, corliss was a candidate for the massachusetts house of representatives in the 2nd essex district after incumbent barclay h. warburton iii chose to retire. as the district only included three wards in gloucester, she had to branch out and campaign in the district's other municipalities (amesbury essex, georgetown, ipswich, newbury, rowley, and west newbury). she defeated six male candidates to win the republican nomination. during her tenure in the house, corliss served on the ways and means, towns, and harbors and public lands committees.  corliss was also a delegate to the 1960 republican national convention.  from 1964 to 1969, she served as the appointments secretary for massachusetts governor john a. volpe.  later life and death corliss and her husband later moved to northfield, vermont. she died on january 12, 1995 in northfield.  references  1910 births 1995 deaths american accountants women accountants massachusetts republicans mayors of gloucester, massachusetts members of the massachusetts house of representatives people from washington county, vermont simmons college (massachusetts) alumni women mayors of places in massachusetts 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american women politicians
desmodium acanthocladum, the thorny pea, is a rare species of plant in the pea family. it has pink flowers, leaves are in groups of threes. it is found near streams in the north east of new south wales, australia.  references  acanthocladum flora of new south wales plants described in 1861 taxa named by ferdinand von mueller
edaid is a funding platform for higher education. edaid partners with university and professional schools to defer tuition payment, interest-free.  history  edaid was founded by tom woolf (ceo), the former mission chief of justgiving middle east and africa and accenture financial services strategy alumni. he is also a former professional athlete and remains involved in sports as the current head coach for nike middle east. edaid received regulatory approval from the financial conduct authority (fca; formerly the fsa) in february 2016 and was launched in march 2016.  process  edaid lets students defer tuition fees, interest-free.   study now, pay later is the mechanism by which students from underrepresented communities can get fair, affordable access to higher education.   edaid ensures that students and their education provider have shared risk, shared reward model that builds greater level of equity into higher education.  edaid is regulated by the financial conduct authority and students are validated through a three-phase process that includes identity, fraud and aml checks before starting an application. students must be on a uk, us, canadian or australian accredited course with the permanent right to remain in their country of study after graduation.  edaid has offices in the united kingdom, united states of america, canada, ireland, the united arab emirates and australia.   edaid will fund 10,000 students in 2020, typically doubling household income for the students it funds.  fees  edaid charges a technology and processing fee to the education provider and zero fees to the student. from successfully funded students which cover legal, regulatory, banking and administrative costs. repayments are pegged to the rate of the consumer price index without additional interest charges. students will typically start to repay 10% of their monthly salary after they graduate and are in full-time employment, although edaid also offers some regular payment plans on certain courses.  edaid foundation  the edaid foundation is a uk-registered charity that provides matched funding from corporations, trusts, high net-worth individuals and alumni.  see also   peer-to-peer lending  higher education  crowdfunding  student loans in the united kingdom  references  external links     companies based in the london borough of islington crowdfunding platforms of the united kingdom peer-to-peer lending companies financial services companies based in london
kaichiro kitamura is a japanese vocal percussionist, singer, and music teacher who has performed vocal percussion, in both a cappella and instrumental groups. he specializes in jazz but has also done rock, pop, and rnb.  sound and style kaichiro is a pioneering figure in mouth drumming well known for his outstanding ability to realistically vocalize the sounds of a drum kit, to provide the full rhythm section necessary for his projects and groups. he's developed his own vocal percussion style characterized by his signature sound methods and usage of jazz drumming rhythms. he defines his style as "jazz vocal percussion". he is also a bass singer who can vocalize walking basslines.  early life  kaichiro has performed vocal percussion since childhood and became famous as the vocal percussionist and baritone for the japanese a cappella group "try-tone".  career kaichiro has collaborated with many groups, including the real group, the house jacks, and naturally 7 among others.  he is a member of groups, such as japanese jazz quartets, "hamojin" and "solo-duo". he is an avid jazz vocal percussion instructor who has taught workshops around the world. he is currently serving as session vocal percussionist, for australian a cappella group "the idea of north" was featured on their recent album and is currently touring with them. he is also serving as a japanese representative of 'vocal asia' -asian vocal music network in taiwan.  discography  collabs "pollen" with the house jacks. 2014 "balads" with the idea of north. 2016  with hamonjin "spain" (single). 2016  references  japanese male singers japanese music educators japanese performance artists living people year of birth missing (living people)
adavalle aligithe () is a 1983 indian telugu-language comedy film produced by akkineni srinivasa rao and yarramshetty anjineeyulu and directed by vejella satyanarayana. it stars gummadi, nutan prasad, rajendra prasad, ranganath, sai chand, devika and rajyalakshmi, with music composed by krishna-chakra.  plot the entire film runs around a joint family, subbarayudu (gummadi) is the head of the family and his wife is venkatalakshmi (devika). he has 4 brothers, ganapathi (nutan prasad), prasad (ranganath), karthik (rajendra prasad), paaru (sai chand) and their wives rajeswari (p. r. varalakshmi), sharada (vejella rajeswari), anasuya (rajyalakshmi) & jaya (vanitha sri) respectively. all of them live very happily, but the only problem is, the men ignore their wives and look them at a low profile. according to them, wives must be kept under control for a happy family. here the ladies show resent through sulk by playing a drama to change their husbands' perception with the intention of creating a happy and affectionate family in which everyone respects each other. rest of the story is how the wives execute their plan and succeed?  cast gummadi as subbarayudu nutan prasad as ganapathi rajendra prasad as karthik ranganath as prasad sai chand as paaru suthi velu as vemana potti prasad c.h.krishna murthy as yadagiri chitti babu as damodaram devika as venkatalakshmi rajyalakshmi as anasuya p.r.varalakshmi as rajeswari veejella rajeswari as sharada vanitha sri as jaya kalpana rai as vemana's wife  soundtrack  music composed by krishna-chakra. lyrics were written by dr. nellutla. music released on avm audio company.  other  vcds and dvds on - moser baer home videos, hyderabad  references  external links    1980s telugu-language films indian films
mr. man may refer to:  mr. man (website), a pornographic website any one of the mr. men, characters in a series of children's books a character in boohbah, a children's tv programme  see also mr. mann, a character in little britain
the greenwood house, now the gingerbread apartments, is a historic house on vermont route 103 in chester, vermont.  built about 1850 and restyled about 1900, it is an architecturally distinctive blend of greek revival and late victorian styles.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1985.  description and history the greenwood house stands on the north side of vermont 103, just east of its crossing of the middle branch williams river.  it is a -story wood-frame structure, with a front-facing gabled roof, clapboard siding, and granite foundation.  the front facade is dominated by elaborate victorian gingerbread styling, which adorns the gable and the wraparound porch, which has a two-story rounded projection at the right corner.  the house's greek revival past is discernible in corner pilasters rising to an entablature below the pedimented gable.  the interior of the house, despite alterations and conversion to apartments, retains a number of features from both its greek revival origin and its later queen anne redecoration.  the house is believed to have been built about 1850 by an unknown owner.  at the time, it would have marked the southern end of chester's village, and stood opposite the local district school, also a greek revival building.  the house was acquired sometime after 1870 by the haselton family, whose daughter hattie married john greenwood.  the greenwoods undertook a major renovation of the building about 1900, adding the elaborate front porch and other features.  the house and its carriage barn (which apparently dates to the haselton ownership period, but also has some greek revival features) were converted into apartments in the late 1960s.  the building is often featured in tourism-related articles featuring the town.  see also national register of historic places listings in windsor county, vermont  references  houses on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in windsor county, vermont greek revival architecture in vermont queen anne architecture in vermont houses completed in 1850 houses in windsor county, vermont buildings and structures in chester, vermont
the 67th army was a field army of the soviet union's red army. the 67th army was formed in october 1942 on the leningrad front from the neva operational group. it defended the right bank of the neva river, holding the nevsky pyatachok and covering the road of life. in january 1943 the army fought in operation iskra. in late december, the army was combined with 55th army. the 67th army headquarters was disbanded and 55th army headquarters was renamed 67th army headquarters. between january and march 1944 67th army fought in the leningrad-novgorod offensive, in which it captured mga and luga. in april the army became part of the 3rd baltic front and fought in the pskov-ostrov offensive in july and the tartu offensive in august and september. the army fought in the riga offensive in september and october. the army then fought to eliminate the courland pocket. after the end of the war the army was disbanded during the summer of 1945.  history  formation  the 67th army was formed on 10 october 1942 on the basis of a stavka directive dated on 9 october 1942. it was part of the leningrad front and was formed from the neva operational group as a result of the failure of the sinyavino offensive, in which the neva operational group was unable to capture significant bridgeheads across the neva. the operational group was reinforced with new units and redesignated the 67th army. the 67th army's first commander was major general mikhail dukhanov.  by early november, it included the 45th guards, 46th, and 86th rifle divisions, the 11th and 55th rifle brigades, the 16th fortified area, and artillery, tank, and other units. the army defended the right bank of the neva from the rapids to lake ladoga. at the same time it held the nevsky pyatachok and covered the road of life across lake ladoga. during late december the army conducted training operations in preparation for the forthcoming operation iskra, an offensive aimed at defeating the 18th army in the shlisselburg-sinyavino bulge and lifting the siege of leningrad.  1943 operations around leningrad  operation iskra began on 12 january. on 12 january, after an artillery bombardment, the army advanced along a 12-kilometer front across the ice on the neva with four rifle divisions between shlisselburg and dubrovka. the 45th guards rifle division and 86th rifle division's
attacks were repulsed by german troops. the 136th and 268th rifle divisions attacked around marino, losing 3,000 casualties. the two divisions overran forward german divisions and captured marino, capturing a bridgehead. the german 170th infantry division formed a defense line around the gorodok hospital and power plant, stopping the advance.   on 13 january, the army's 136th rifle division and the 61st  tank brigade advanced four kilometers to the east. the 170th infantry division counterattacked after the failure of the  soviet attack there, forcing the 268th division back two kilometers. for the next three days the army advanced to the northeast but was stopped at gorodok. on the morning of 18 january the army linked up with the volkhov front's 2nd shock army. the 136th rifle division and 61st tank brigade advanced into workers settlement no. 5 and the 86th rifle division captured shlisselburg. german troops established a new defensive line and the 67th army continued to attack gorodok on 20 january but was unsuccessful.  the 67th army supported the attack in the battle of krasny bor, capturing gorodok after six days on 18 february. on 22 july, the 67th army attacked the sinyavino heights from the west. its 30th guards rifle corps was stopped by german resistance. the attack continued at a lower intensity until 22 august. the attack was begun again on 15 september and the 30th guards rifle corps captured the sinyavino heights.  on 25 december, the 67th army's headquarters was disbanded and 55th army's headquarters was renamed 67th army headquarters. 55th army commander lieutenant general vladimir sviridov took command.  leningrad-novogorod offensive  on 1 january 1944, the army included the 116th and 118th rifle corps, the 291st rifle division, 14th fortified area, 81st gun artillery brigade, artillery, engineering, and other units. the army fought in the leningrad-novogord offensive. operating in conjunction with the troops of the volkhov front it defeated the mga and luga groups of german troops and captured mga on 21 january. the army attempted to surround the german xxvii army corps and xxviii army corps from the north, but its attacks were stopped by the 12th panzer division.the army captured luga on 12 february.continuing the offensive, the army reached the pskov-ostrov fortified area at the end of february. in march sviridov was replaced by lieutenant general vladimir roman
ovsky.  operations in the baltic  on 24 april the 67th army became part of the newly formed 3rd baltic front. it fought in the pskov-ostrov offensive between 17 and 21 july. the army captured ostrov on 21 july. between 10 august and 6 september it fought in the tartu offensive. the army broke through the lines of german xxxviii army corps on the first day of the offensive and captured pechory on the next day. the army captured voru on 13 august, at which point the army's advance was shifted towards tartu. tartu was captured on 25 august,after a day of heavy street fighting.between 14 september and 22 october the army fought in the riga offensive. the army helped push back the german 16th and 18th armies and captured riga on 13 october, reaching the coast. on 16 october the army became part of the leningrad front. the army then took up defensive positions to secure the coast of the gulf of riga. in march 1945 nikolai simoniak became the army's commander. the courland pocket surrendered at the end of the war in early may.  the army was disbanded between june and july. the army headquarters was disbanded on 2 august in the leningrad military district.  commanders    major general mikhail dukhanov (october 10, 1942 - december 15, 1943)  lieutenant general vladimir petrovich sviridov (december 15, 1943 - march 23, 1944)  lieutenant general vladimir zakharovich romanovsky (march 24, 1944 - february 28, 1945)  lieutenant general sergey roginsky (february 28 - march 31, 1945)  lieutenant general nikolai simoniak (march 31 - until the end of the war)  references  notes  bibliography           field armies of the soviet union military units and formations established in 1942 military units and formations disestablished in 1945
sunday edition (also known as sunday edition with peter van onselen) is a weekly australian news and current affairs television program airing on sky news live.  the program premiered on 10 july 2016 and runs from 7am to 10am (aest) on sunday mornings, breaking out for one hour at 8:30am aest to allow sunday agenda to air. the program replaces the bulk of first edition as sky news' breakfast program on sundays.  in its first season, the program was hosted by peter van onselen, and is one of four sky news formats he presents, alongside sunday agenda and his daytime programs pvo newsday and to the point. coinciding with the launch of sunday edition, flagship sunday morning talk show australian agenda retitled as sunday agenda. jaynie seal presents news updates and greg thomson presents sport.  in 2017, kristina keneally was added as co-host of sunday edition. keneally also co-hosts to the point with van onselen.  references  external links sky news official site  sky news australia english-language television shows 2016 australian television series debuts australian sunday morning talk shows 2020s australian television series
extreme choice  (foaled 6 september 2013) is a retired thoroughbred racehorse and active sire trained and bred in australia. he won the blue diamond stakes and the a j moir stakes, group one races. he amassed over a million dollars in winnings.  racing career on 12 december 2015, extreme choice made his debut in the $500,000 inglis nursery, which horses that were sold at the inglis yearling sales are eligible to enter. the horse won, but had to trial 4 days before the race to qualify. trainer mick price said, "i normally wouldn't do it, but i had to squeeze everything into him between gallops and trials and race day. you've got to have the horse to do it. shins were good, constitution was good and it was fantastic for the people involved, including myself."  extreme choice returned in the 1000m group 3 chairman's stakes in february, winning easily.  three weeks later, extreme choice won the group 1 blue diamond stakes, with another mick price-trained horse, flying artie coming second. in his first race at 1200m, he collected $914,500 in the race for two-year-olds. price said, "but all credit to extreme choice. today was the day where he had an opportunity to really stand up. i think today we got a lot of information about the horse and we're off to the [golden] slipper." as a result of the win, the horse immediately entered favouritism for the race.  in the days before the golden slipper stakes, it was announced that extreme choice would be racing in china horse club colours after they purchased a controlling interest in the horse in conjunction with aquis farm and newgate farm. the deal was to see the purchase price raise to 20 million dollars, should extreme choice have won the race. finishing eighth, jockey craig newitt said, "i don't think he went 100 metres without getting interfered with the whole race. for him to get as close as he did his run was outstanding."  after a spell, extreme choice returned in the group 1 a j moir stakes in september 2016. in his first appearance at moonee valley, extreme choice was said to have "left two of australia's greatest sprinters, chautauqua and buffering, in his wake with a devastating finishing burst to win". three weeks later he failed to place in the coolmore stud stakes and was spelled.  in february 2017, one owner listed his five percent share of extreme choice on bloodstock trading platform
g1xchange.com.  with a successful trial under his belt, extreme choice was the favourite for oakleigh plate in february 2017. finishing third, a length behind winner sheidel, price said, "he ran home well but the two winners were in the right spot - on the speed. he certainly didn't disappoint." with new jockey joao moreira onboard, extreme choice then failed to place in the newmarket handicap.  stud career  in march 2017, extreme choice was retired to stud, with a stud fee of $22,000 in 2018.  notable progeny  extreme choice has sired 1 group one winner:  c = colt, f = filly, g = gelding  references  2013 racehorse births racehorses bred in australia racehorses trained in australia thoroughbred family 12-c
sonoma-marin area rail transit, or smart, is a commuter rail service in california's sonoma and marin counties.  the line serves 12 stations: ten opened in the initial operating segment (ios) and two were added when the line was extended to larkspur. four more stations are planned to open after further construction.  the main line was built primarily by the northwestern pacific railroad and received regular service until 1958 when passenger trains were discontinued south of willits. after the decline in railway traffic in the post-wwii years, the line was eventually closed to all rail activity. the right-of-way was acquired by a special-purpose district and reopened to freight movements in 2011 and passenger service on august 25, 2017.  station platforms are  in length (the sole exception is san rafael's  northbound platform) and are high-level to provide accessible boarding. gauntlet tracks are installed at stations north of ignacio to allow freight trains to pass with proper clearance. novato downtown, san rafael, and santa rosa stations are located adjacent to former nwp station buildings (as will be healdsburg and windsor), but the buildings are used for other purposes.  stations  notes  station opened to limited preview service on june 29, 2017.  station opened to limited preview service on july 1, 2017.  station opened to limited preview service on july 8, 2017.   free street parking  future stations  suggestions have been put forward to eventually expand to napa or solano counties with connections at suisun-fairfield station, or north along the northwestern pacific right of way to ukiah or willits in mendocino.  references  external links  smart - stations  sonoma-marin area rail transit stations sonoma-marin area rail transit sonoma-marin area rail transit
samsara blues experiment is a german band founded in summer 2007 by guitarist christian peters after leaving the band terraplane.  the line-up since autumn 2008 includes hans eiselt on second guitar, richard behrens on bass and thomas vedder on drums. all members had been active in different underground bands before. samsara blues experiment plays a mixture between stoner rock, psychedelic rock and folkloristic influences, especially from raga.  after releasing the first demo the band performed on various occasions in germany, usa west coast, italy, austria, netherlands and belgium.  in november 2020, the band announced on their facebook page that they are going into an indefinite hiatus.  discography  2008: s/t demo / 2009 release us-demo / 2011 us-demo (electric magic records)  2010: long distance trip (world in sound/rough trade)  2011: revelation & mystery (world in sound/rough trade)  2012: center of the sun / midnight boogie - 12" ep (world in sound/rough trade)  2013: live at rockpalast (electric magic records)  2013: waiting for the flood  (electric magic records)  2017: one with the universe (electric magic records)  2020: end of forever (electric magic records)  references  external links  official website  world in sound records  german rock music groups stoner rock musical groups musical groups from berlin
the 1932-33 season was the second season of competitive association football in the football league played by chester, an english club based in chester, cheshire.  it was the club's second consecutive season in the third division north since the election to the football league. alongside competing in the league, the club also participated in the fa cup and the welsh cup.  football league  results summary  results by matchday  matches  fa cup  welsh cup  season statistics  references  1932-33 english football clubs 1932-33 season
the 2015 arimex atp challenger trophy was a professional tennis tournament played on clay courts. it was the ninth edition of the tournament which was part of the 2015 atp challenger tour. it took place at the tc empire in trnava, slovakia from 21 to 27 september 2015.  singles main-draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of september 14, 2015.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   martin blasko   artem dubrivnyy   alex molcan   dominik sproch  the following player received a special exemption into the singles main draw:   artem smirnov  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   riccardo bellotti   lenny hampel   miloslav mecir jr.    tristan-samuel weissborn  the following player received entry as a lucky loser:   vaclav safranek  champions  singles    robin haase def.  horacio zeballos, 6-4, 6-1  doubles   wesley koolhof /  matwe middelkoop def.  kamil majchrzak /  stephane robert, 6-4, 6-2  external links official website  trophy arimex challenger trophy strabag challenger open
berlin is in germany is a 2001 german drama film directed by hannes stohr. hannes stohr's first cinema feature, the film won the panorama audience award at the international berlin filmfestival 2001, the german critics association award, the studio hamburg award, and many others.  cast  references  external links  2001 films 2001 drama films german films german drama films
glogovac is a town in kosovo.  glogovac may also refer to:  places glogovac, bogatic, serbia glogovac, knjazevac, serbia glogovac, bela palanka, serbia glogovac, jagodina, serbia glogovac, cazin, bosnia and herzegovina glogovac monastery  people with the surname nebojsa glogovac (1969-2018), serbian actor stefan glogovac (born 1994), bosnian basketball player stevo glogovac (born 1973), bosnian serb football player and manager dragan glogovac (born 1967), bosnian serb football player
"next stage with you" (stylized as "next stage with you") is a song recorded by japanese girl group perfume. it was released as the group's first promotional single by universal music japan and the group's self-titled subsidiary label in november 2015 from their fifth studio album cosmic explorer. it was fully written, composed, arranged, and produced by japanese musician and the group's primary collaborator yasutaka nakata. musically, "next stage with you" was noted by critics as a return to the group's previous music releases such as game and triangle, incorporating elements of electropop and dance music, and features instrumentation of synthesizers and keyboards.  upon its release, the song was critically acclaimed from music critics. majority of the critics selected it as the album's strongest track, alongside them commending the composition and production. some critics have even listed it as one of the group's best track throughout their discography. despite the track not entering any record charts in japan, it was heavily promoted in the country for the japanese launch of the mercedes-benz a-class; it also received a short animation music video by yoshiyuki sadamoto and a mobile app for the song. the song has been performed on the group's 2016 world tour promoting cosmic explorer.  background and composition perfume begun recording their new studio album in mid 2015, and released additional tracks including "story", "relax in the city", and "pick me up". then on november 26, the group released the second and final promotional single titled "next stage with you"; the single was released as the theme song to the japanese launch of the mercedes-benz a-class. it was released as the group's second promotional single by universal music japan and the group's self-titled subsidiary label from their fifth studio album cosmic explorer (2016). it was fully written, composed, arranged, and produced by japanese musician and the group's primary collaborator yasutaka nakata; he had also created all the tracks from cosmic explorer. although there is no official artwork of the single, the mobile app in which the song was included on at itunes store features the mercedes-benz logo.  musically, the song is an electropop song that incorporates elements of mid-tempo dance music and dubstep, as described by j-popgo.co.uk writer paul b. according to ronald taylor at the japan times, he believed that the song, particularly its bridge section resembled the group's previous music releases such as game and triangle. shreya aiyar, writing for the daily bruin,
compared the song's composition to the work of french electronic music duo daft punk. erin smith at helloasia.com.au described it as a "very synth driven track, and uses effect-laden voices as instruments in their own right with lyric-less voice lines."  critical response upon its release, the song was critically acclaimed from music critics. paul b. from j-popgo.co.uk was positive in his review, labelling it "unabashed electropop goodness...". whilst reviewing the album, a member at selective hearing noted that "next stage with you" and three other album songs presented a "lighter flair" than majority of the album's remaining tracks; the member found it an "evolution" in the group's sound. ronald taylor from the japan times enjoyed the song and complimented nakata for transcending perfume's "classic" technopop sound into the song. taylor then talked about the album on aramajapan.com, and found that the song and another track "hold your hand" were the only material from the album that didn't show a "loss of quickness in favor for western edm music." in a similar review, shreya aiyar, writing for the daily bruin, enjoyed the song but found it complimented another album track "miracle worker" better for its composition. ian martin, who contributed in writing reviews and the extended biography of perfume through allmusic, selected the song as one of the group's best recordings in their discography.  promotion to promote the single, the group selected "next stage with you" as the theme song for the japanese launch of the mercedes-benz a-class in november 2015. a short music video commercial was directed and designed by japanese anime director yoshiyuki sadamoto; it features digitised versions of perfume dancing in a spacey-atmosphere, and ends with them driving in a mercedes-benz with a male robot. it premiered on the mercedes-benz japan youtube channel on november 25, 2015. a further presentation promoting the single and vehicle was held in tokyo, japan, with an extended version of the commercial video being shown and perfume appearing in a silver mercedes-benz; the entire project was titled "mercedes-benz x perfume". it was uploaded on their youtube channel two days later.  a special edition of the mercedes-benz a180 model, which was titled the "perfume edition", included triangular vinyl stickers that matches the color scheme of the group's outfit that was performed in the commercial. a total of 30 cars including these
vinyl stickers were manufactured in japan, and were only available through online purchase. then on january 6, 2016, a mobile app was released and distributed on itunes store by mercedes-benz ltd. in japan; the application includes the original demo version of "next stage with you", and a camera function where the customer can take a photo of the mercedes-benz a180 model and use specific parts of the car as the stage for the digitised perfume (that was used for the commercial video) to dance in. a special website was then created to host several different versions of the digitised perfume members dancing in different backgrounds and stages.  track listing digital download  "next stage with you" - 4:39  personnel credits adapted from the cd liner notes of cosmic explorer.  recording and management recorded in 2015 at the universal music japan studios.  universal music japan, perfume records, amuse inc., wrassle records - management and record labels  credits ayano omoto - vocals, background vocals yuka kashino - vocals, background vocals ayaka nishiwaki - vocals, background vocals yasutaka nakata - programming, producing, composing, arranging, songwriting, mixing masahiro kazumoto - executive producer yoshiyuki sadamoto - music video director  release history  notes  references  external links "next stage with you" at a-class mercedes-benz website.  "next stage with you" at itunes store.   2015 songs 2016 songs perfume (japanese band) songs japanese-language songs song recordings produced by yasutaka nakata songs written by yasutaka nakata
markus robam (born 11 february 1991) is an estonian composer and singer songwriter. he has released three studio albums "astir", "monogram" and "in crowds". robam has been featured on festivals "fundamento", tallinn music week, estonian music days, festival pulsar in copenhagen, festival "segnali" in perugia  and "nuova consonanza" festival in rome, italy.  robam has written original music for tv series, theatre and movies.  he was the lead singer and principal songwriter of the alternative pop band mid  and participated in the estonian song contest 2011 with their debut single "smile". robam has taken part in composing competitions in austria and the united states. robam has performed as a solo artist tojj.  he studied audiovisual composition in the estonian academy of music and theatre and is a member of estonian composers union since 2015.  in 2012, markus starred as melchior gabor in the estonian original production of the musical spring awakening. he has co-starred as markus moorits in "kutsar koputab kolm korda" by elo selirand in 2010 and as ingmar in tv series "class: life after".  robam has written original music for short movie productions in baltic film, media, arts and communication school.  he was the author of sound and music design and wrote original music for the opening ceremony of estonian national museum in 2016.  television in addition to writing the original theme song for kahekone robam also wrote the theme songs for poorijoon, rula ja ratas, lennud unes ja ilmsi, randaja laul and music for the website lastejaam. he has written original music for kanal 2 tv-series siberi vomm, and wrote the theme song for the show kontakt in the estonian public broadcasting.  theatre robam has composed original music for pruutide kool, tsepeliin, skvottimine vohikutele, karlsonson, and toeajastu lopp. he wrote original music for the 2014 rakvere theatre production must prints and a cool million: the dismantling of lemuel pitkin and vaike prints by nuku theatre. his music has been described as "minimal... sad and atmospheric ..."  robam released his second studio album "monogram", which was a compilation of original music in 2018.  notable works in 2012, robam wrote angle to angle  a composition for video, piano and
eight speakers. in 2015 piece of mind, a composition for clarinet quintet and video premiered in cinema soprus, tallinn.  in july 2017 robam won the first prize in tartu town hall competition for carillon songs with his composition "raekoja tants".  in 2019 markus robam was nominated for best music design and original music by estonian theatre union with original music productions "loodusjoud" (von krahl theatre), "uksi ja esmeralda" (theatrum), "noored hinged" (nuku theater), "sudames sundinud" (institute for health development) and "elias maa pealt" (nuku theater).  discography albums  astir (2016)  monogram (2018)  upside down (2019)  in crowds (2020)  whitewash (2020)  eps/singles angle to angle (2012) lacuna (2016)  original music for theatre pruutide kool (2011) gamaheh valem (2013) tsepeliin (2014) lemuel pitkini demonteerimine (2015) must prints (2015) skvottimine vohikutele (2015) karlsonson (2016) toeajastu lopp (2017) vaike prints (2017) eluaeg (2017) chagall: eraldikoos (2017) uksi ja esmeralda (2017) mehed (2017) loodusjoud (2018) teatripaev (2018) noored hinged (2018) sudames sundinud (2018) alice imedemaal (2018) naised (2018) elias maa pealt (2018) mulla all (2019) oopiltnikud (2019) onnelik tund (2019) kas te kaite siin tihti (2019) whitewash (2020) vapruse varinad (2020) sirli, siim ja saladused(2020) jaapuuk (2021) miks me varastasime auto (2021) rockarella (2021)' maletan/ei maleta (2021)' ninasarvik (2021)original music for film valjakutse (2012)vandenou (2013)meeleseisund (2016)mehed (2019)sinine (2020)a call above the clouds (2020)original tv themes kahekone (2013)rula ja ratas (2013)  suud puhtaks (2016)poor
ijoon (2016)kontakt (2017)eesti mustrid (2017)reis umber eesti (2018)suud puhtaks (2020)spordisangarid (2021)original music for tv series siberi vomm (2017 - 2018)''  references  external links     1991 births estonian pop singers 21st-century estonian male singers people from viljandi 21st-century estonian composers living people
dalla () is a village in phillaur tehsil in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3 km from nurmahal, 23 km from phillaur, 32 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 133 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).there is also similar name village near bholath named dalla ()  demography  as of 2011, dalla has a total number of 238 houses and population of 1247 of which 651 are males while 596 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of dalla is 80.09%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 117 which is 9.38% of total population of dalla, and child sex ratio is approximately 696 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 26.06% of total population in dalla. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 441 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of dalla which includes 387 males and 54 females. according to census survey report 2011, 95.01% workers describe their work as main work and 4.99% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmagal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 23 km away from the village. the village is 53 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 128 km away in amritsar.  places of importance   jathere of chhura's community bibi ji temple (bibi ji ka mela (fair)) is organised in the village and people from far away places visit the place.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in phillaur tehsil
jorge gaday (born 19 february 1968) is an argentine former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people argentine male cyclists olympic cyclists of argentina cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
nicolae cristea ( - february 7, 1902) was an austro-hungarian ethnic romanian orthodox priest, professor, journalist and political activist. a protege of andrei saguna, he studied in germany before returning to edit the church's newspaper for nearly two decades, a period during which he also taught at the theological seminary in sibiu. he was politically active, a stance that culminated in the early 1890s with his signing of the transylvanian memorandum and subsequent imprisonment.  biography  origins and education  born to peasant parents in ocna sibiului, in the transylvania region, he began primary school in his native village before continuing at a roman catholic school in nearby sibiu. he attended the state high school there, also catholic in orientation: from 1848 to 1850, his courses were in latin, and then in german until graduation. in 1857, he became a student at the city's theological academy, remaining there until 1859. while enrolled at the school, he met his eventual patron, archbishop andrei saguna. the latter appreciated cristea's qualities and in 1859 advised him to enter the law faculty. he consented, and at the same time became a clerk at the archbishop's chancery.  sent by saguna to the university of leipzig in order to deepen his studies of philosophy and political economy, his 1861-1863 stay of two years was too brief for a doctorate, and cristea remained with two undergraduate degrees in theology and law. while in leipzig, he was a church singer at the local romanian chapel. he also corrected some erroneous information presented by heinrich von treitschke, for which the professor publicly apologized.  teaching and journalism in 1870, he married eleftera manole, the sister of a brasov businessman, and was ordained a priest later that year. teaching church history and canon law, he was a substitute professor at the theological academy from 1863 to 1865 and a full professor of homiletics and moral theology from 1870 to 1873. at that point, he was named an archdiocesan advisor, remaining as such until his death. in 1865, he was named director of telegraful roman newspaper, remaining until 1883, when he was dismissed by metropolitan miron romanul after writing a scathing critique of prime minister kalman tisza.  during a period that saw the loss of transylvania's autonomy as a result of the austro-hungarian compromise of 1867 and a concerted magyarization effort, cristea consistently defended the rights of the province's romanians. like his mentor, he promoted an activist stance through polemical articles
, and the widely read newspaper turned a profit for the first time. in 1877-1878, he paid close attention to the ongoing romanian war of independence, devoting entire editions to the topic. he protested against the 1879 law that made hungarian a required subject in romanian church schools. after tribuna newspaper was founded in 1884, he occasionally contributed articles there. he took part in the 1881 national conference of romanian electors, where he delivered a fiery speech that emphasized the lack of political training for local romanians.  memorandum and aftermath a member of the romanian national party, and part of its leadership for a decade beginning in 1884, he helped draft the 1892 transylvanian memorandum. indicted the following year, he and party president ioan ratiu vowed to speak only romanian at their trial, held in may 1894. cristea defended himself energetically, refusing to disavow his role. he was sentenced to eight months' imprisonment, which he carried out at vac with the majority of fellow signatories. while there, he wrote a brochure detailing his political convictions. he was granted a furlough in order to bury his son. the court costs were considerable for cristea, who already had to support four children and received supplemental income from romanian political circles. upon being released, his advisor's salary was not paid for months; he was clearly not liked by metropolitan miron, whose behavior he criticized vehemently in his diary.  begun in prison in march 1895, this diary was kept until november 1901, with lengthy and frequent interruptions; it was published in 1999. dry in tone and rarely treating exceptional events, it reflects the aloof personality of cristea, marked by political battles. other topics include the romanian-language press of transylvania, his disappointment at dimitrie sturdza's suddenly conciliatory policy toward austria-hungary upon becoming prime minister of romania, criticism of the new metropolitan ioan metianu, his own gradual withdrawal from politics and his may 1898 visit to the romanian old kingdom. there, he was deeply moved upon seeing the black sea at constanta and impressed by the anghel saligny bridge.  he died in sibiu; his funeral was officiated by metianu and attended by an imposing crowd that included fellow memorandum signer rubin patitia. cristea was buried at the parish church in the iosefin neighborhood.  notes  references mircea pacurariu, carturari sibieni de altadata. cluj-napoca: editura dacia, 2002.   1834 births 1902 deaths people from ocna sibiului romanian austro-hungarians
romanian orthodox priests romanian newspaper editors romanian activists romanian diarists prisoners and detainees of austria-hungary 19th-century diarists
pedro helias (or elias; died 1149) was the archbishop of santiago de compostela from 1143 until his death. prior to becoming archbishop he was a canon of the cathedral of saint james from 1102, serving as its dean in 1122-24.  pedro and his relative bernardo-a fellow canon, engineer, archivist and royal chancellor-were both proteges of archbishop diego gelmirez, but later they fell out with him. in 1116-17 they jointed the municipal revolt of compostela against the policies of the archbishop. during the unrest, the archbishop's brother, gudesindo, was killed.  after diego's death in 1140, pedro was the candidate favoured by the chapter and the city, but king alfonso vii tried to force the election of berengar, former bishop of salamanca. the royal choice was resisted. pedro went to rome, where he received confirmation from pope innocent ii in 1141. it was not until 1143, however, that pedro was recognised by the king.  see also catholic church in spain  notes  sources  1149 deaths archbishops of santiago de compostela
a concert piece (german: konzertstuck; french: piece de concert, also morceau de concert) is a musical composition, in most cases in one movement, intended for performance in a concert. usually it is written for one or more virtuoso instrumental soloists and orchestral or piano accompaniment.  in some cases concert pieces start with a separate opening movement, or are otherwise in more than one movement or section. a piece that presents itself as a miniature concerto is rather called concertino than concert piece, although in german several such concertinos are known as konzertstucke. for instance siegfried wagner's flute concertino was published as . incomplete concerto movements by beethoven and schubert were retroactively designated as concert pieces. schumann's 1841 fantasia for piano and orchestra, in form similar to weber's konzertstuck, was later rewritten and expanded with two further movements into his piano concerto op. 54. when the soloist is a vocalist, the piece rather belongs to the concert aria genre. some concert pieces are written for instrumental soloists exclusively, while also concert pieces for orchestra without soloist exist. in this sense as well chopin's allegro de concert for solo piano as tchaikovsky's romeo and juliet for orchestra can be called concert pieces. a concert overture is an overture which is conceived as a stand-alone concert piece.  examples  arnold bax: concert piece for viola and piano  ludwig van beethoven:  konzertstuck for violin and orchestra (a.k.a. violin concerto movement) in c major, woo 5  rondo for piano and orchestra in b-flat major, woo 6  franz berwald:   max bruch: , in two movements, op. 84  ferruccio busoni: , bv 236 (op. 31a)  cecile chaminade: , op. 40  hugo distler: konzertstuck for piano and orchestra, op. post.  george enescu:   carl filtsch: konzertstuck for piano and orchestra  friedrich grutzmacher: two  for cello and piano, op. 32  paul hindemith:  konzertstuck (also known as concertino) for trautonium (or clarinet) and strings  konzertstuck for two alto saxophones  mauricio kagel:  konzertstuck for timpani and orchestra  opus 1.991 - concert piece for orchestra  felix mendelssohn: concert pieces  and  for clarinet, basset horn
and piano (or orchestra).  carl reinecke: konzertstuck for piano and orchestra, op. 33  camille saint-saens:   in e minor, op. 62   in f minor, op. 94   in g major, op. 154  franz schubert:  in d major,  345  robert schumann:  in f major, op. 86 introduction and allegro appassionato for piano and orchestra, op. 92 concert allegro with introduction for piano and orchestra, op. 134  charles villiers stanford: concert piece for organ and orchestra, op. 181  carl maria von weber: konzertstuck in f minor for piano and orchestra, op. 79, j. 282  references
euphyllia baliensis, commonly known as bubble coral, is a species of large-polyped stony coral belonging to the family euphylliidae.  description it is best distinguished from other members of the genus euphyllia by its "comparatively very small corallites (averaging 3 mm diameter) and much shorter, thinner, lightly calcified branches."  distribution & habitat it can be found at depths of 27 to 37 meters off the central eastern coast of bali, indonesia. the species has not been reported from any other locality.  references   animals described in 2012 euphylliidae
farhat hached (; 2 february 1914 - 5 december 1952) was a tunisian labor unionist and independence activist assassinated by the main rouge, a french terrorist organization operated by french foreign intelligence.  he was one of the leaders of the pro-independence tunisian national movement, along with habib bourguiba and salah ben youssef. his assassination is attributed to la main rouge (the red hand), an armed organisation that favoured a french presence in tunisia. more recently, on 18 december 2009, it was confirmed to the al jazeera news organisation, by a man called antoine melero, who claimed to be a former main rouge member, that the main rouge had been a military wing of the french service de documentation exterieure et de contre-espionnage (external documentation and counter-espionage service) or sdece.  life  early years farhat hached was born at el abassia on the islands of kerkennah, the son of mohamed hached, a sailor, and hana ben romdhane. he spent eight years at the village primary school in kellabine which was run by a french head teacher. he received his certificate of primary education which might have opened the way to further education, but his father's death obliged him to abandon his studies and take on paid work.  in 1930 he took a job as a courier with "la societe du transport du sahel", a transport company based at sousse. in the same year he established a basic trades union at the company which he affiliated to the french trades union confederation (cgt). this was the start of his career in tunisian trades unionism. he took on a range of union responsibilities locally and in the region and, later, in national administration, working with . as a result, he was dismissed from his job in 1939.  during the second world war, with tunisia subject to the french puppet government at vichy, a ban on political and trades union activity made life difficult. hached therefore volunteered for work with the red cross in order to look after the injured, a task which he undertook outside his working hours. in 1942 tunisia became a significant theatre for the fighting between principal wartime belligerents and the requirements of the vichy government lost their significance as local administrative responsibilities passed to the free french colonial government. in 1943 hached was recruited for government service which meant relocation to sfax where he was able to resume his trades union activities. the same year he married a kinswoman from kerkennah, oum el khir (emna hached).
trades union leader {{quote box|bgcolor=#ffdead|align=right|width=40%| "i do not think his bitterest enemy would ever deny the sympathetic force of his personality:  "ferhat  ... the gentleman bandit".   he is a stocky man, who greets you with hand outstretched and laughing blue eyes, set in a round face of fair complexion.   the high pitched voice from this vigorous man with the thick neck of a wrestler comes as a surprise.   a little red moustache, cut short, accentuates the resemblance to a western trades union leader."  "je ne crois pas qu'aucun de ses adversaires les plus acharnes lui ait jamais denie la force de sympathie : « ferhat, m'a dit un vieux dignitaire du maghzen, ah ! le bandit, qu'il est gentil... » c'est un homme trapu qui vous accueille, la main tendue, le regard bleu et rieur dans un visage rond au teint clair. la voix aigue surprend chez cet homme vigoureux a l'encolure de lutteur. une petite moustache rousse, coupee court, accentue le type occidental du leader syndicaliste." jean lacouture- journalist, historian and biographer, writing in 1952, a few months before hached's assassination}} as war in europe continued, at the departmental congress of the cgt in march 1944, recognising the inability of the leadership in "metropolitan france" to respond appropriately to the needs of workers in tunisia, and disappointed by the failure of communists and socialists within it to support "the legitimate aspirations of tunisians for national independence", he broke with the cgt.   in november 1944, with other tunisian trades unionists, he took the initiative to launch an autonomous tunisian trades union, starting with the "union of free trades unionists in the south" ("union des syndicats libres du sud") based in sfax. the focus was on three priorities: social justice, equality between tunisian workers and those of french provenance, and national independence. in 1945 he established, in addition, the "union of free trades unionists in the north" ("union des syndicats libres du nord"), based in tunis.  on 20 january 1946 a joint congress took place at which the "union of free trades unionists in the south", the "union of free trades unionists in the north" and the
"general tunisian labour union" ("federation generale tunisienne du travail") which had been founded back in 1936, combined together to form the tunisian general labour union ("union generale tunisienne du travail" / ugtt). in 1947, still aged only 32, hached was unanimously elected as the first general secretary of the ugtt.  from the start, for farhat hached the tunisian trades union movement was an integral part of the struggle for independence. autonomous and independent, it was an important and dependable pillar for the nationalist project, defined and directed by the neo destour "party."   the strikes, demonstrations and street protests in support of independence intensified from 1946, in parallel with demands for improvements in living and working conditions for tunisians. the ugtt, directed by hached, played a central role in triggering and choreographing episodes of unrest and in radicalising popular demands. in 1949 the ugtt signed up to the newly created international confederation of free trade unions (icftu), and hached joined the executive committee of the international body, building up international contacts within the us/western oriented labour organisation at a succession of meetings within and beyond north africa.  at the fourth congress of the ugtt, in march 1951, hached provided an account of its achievements after five years under his leadership. almost 120,000 members, from all sectors and from all regions of the country, had joined the national organisation. a real grass roots guerilla movement was being conducted against the french colonial administration. according to hached, the ugtt had already won from the colonialists important civil rights and guarantees for tunisian society as a whole. furthermore, joining the icftu in 1949 ensured an global voice for the ugtt. beyond that, the construction of a regional trades union federation for north africa was a priority for hached, to embrace embryonic union movements in algeria and morocco, and create independent trades unions in libya that could establish appropriate union structures there. finally, with its social and economic programmes, along with its precepts on freedoms and liberties, the ugtt provided the nationalist movement with a coherent national agenda for the post liberation era.  national leader in 1952 direct negotiations between the french and tunisian governments broke down. repression followed. habib bourguiba and the other leaders of the nationalist movement were arrested. salah ben youssef, the tunisian minister of justice, was sent by the tunisian government to the united nations with a request for statehood: he barely escaped arrest and deportation. on 26 march 1952 m'hamed chenik and other
leaders of the protectorate government were arrested. the french imposed a curfew and a ban on all political activity, while the foreign legion conducted mass arrests.  in this context of crisis the ugtt found itself in the front line of political and armed resistance against the french protectorate authorities. it retained a level of protection for trades union legislation and from the support of the icftu, the labour movement in the us and the democratic party, which at this time held power in the united states. as leader of the labour union and thereby head of the anti-colonial resistance, hached secretly organised groups of activists in the regional trades union offices, to head up armed attacks against symbols of french authority. he also led strike actions. the french reacted aggressively, with more than 20,000 trades unionists arrested and placed in prison and concentration camps.  in april 1952 hached travelled to brussels and new york city under the auspices of the icftu in order to represent the voice of tunisians when moroccan and tunisian issues were discussed by the united nations security council. the french government felt obliged to come up with a new reform plan. hached suggested that the bey of tunis should convene a council of forty people representing tunisian opinions that should study the french plan and present an opinion of it on 2 august:  the suggestion was rejected, however.  assassination  threats  farhat hached was marked out because of the danger he represented to the colonial interests in tunisia and across north africa more generally.  various departments and agencies of french intelligence started, in october 1952, to draw up proposals:  he could be removed from tunisian territory, imprisoned, placed under house arrest or murdered. during the next couple of months he became subject to permanent surveillance and there was a proliferation of threatening tracts and leaflets emanating from la main rouge ("the red hand"). there were also physical threats against his home and family.  calls for hached's murder became more insistent.  ambush on the morning of 5 december 1952 an ambush operation was implemented to eliminate hached. he was followed by a car as he left rades, the suburb of tunis where he lived. machine guns were fired at him from the car which then drove off at high speed. hached sustained injuries to a shoulder and a hand, but was able to get out of his car. a few moments later a second car appeared carrying three men:  observing that he was still alive they approached him and shot him in the head, before depositing his body beside the road less than a kilometer away.
the announcement of his death on the radio at midday triggered protests across the country, along with demonstrations in casablanca, cairo, damascus, beirut, karachi djakarta, milan, brussels and stockholm.   the socialist publication "nord-matin" reported "bloody riots in casablanca. 40 dead and many injured. after the assassination of farhat hached and the blunders of the governor, unrest spreads to algeria and morocco".  ("emeutes sanglantes a casablanca. 40 morts et nombreux blesses. apres l'assassinat de farhat hached et les maladresses du resident, les troubles s'etendent a l'algerie et au maroc "'').   the french liberal establishment rushed into print to denounce the assassination in newspaper articles, public declarations, petitions and demonstrations. prominent among these were daniel guerin, roger stephane, claude bourdet david rousset, rene louzon, alain savary and charles-andre julien.  hached's 22 year old widow was left with four children: noureddine (8), naceur (5), jamila (3) and samira (6 months).  the body his body was transported on a boat from the little port of la goulette to kerkennah to be handed over to his family. eventually, in 1955, the body was taken to tunis and placed in a mausoleum constructed in the kasbah, on the spot where during his life he used to harangue the crowds.  for 2002, which marked the fiftieth anniversary of the assassination, a new mausoleum was constructed to accommodate his remains. the anniversary was celebrated annually till 2012, each 5 december, by the tunisian president, representatives of important institutions and corporations, and of his family.  references  tunisian trade unionists assassinated tunisian politicians people from sfax governorate 1914 births 1952 deaths people killed in french intelligence operations deaths by firearm in tunisia
"new love" is the debut single by english singer dua lipa from her self-titled debut studio album (2017). it was written by lipa and its producers emile haynie and andrew wyatt about the singer's struggle to find her place in the music industry. the song is a synth-pop ballad with neo soul and r&b elements as well as a stomping, tribal drum beat throughout. several music critics complimented the song's showcase of lipa's vocals.  despite receiving limited attention upon its independent release on 21august 2015, "new love" became popular among music tastemakers and helped lipa receive a longlisting in bbc's sound of... critics poll for 2016. photographer nicole nodland directed the music video which is a montage of filtered footage of lipa in los angeles doing activities she enjoys. the song was performed during three of the singer's concert tours, the most recent being the self-titled tour in 2017 and 2018.  background and composition  dua lipa co-wrote "new love" with emile haynie and andrew wyatt. at the time, lipa went into many failed writing sessions trying to recreate her track "hotter than hell" and it was only after this transpired that she wrote "new love". she wrote the song about being undecided on her sound and message in a music industry that "often seems to neither want nor need you." according to lipa, the track is about "facing the fear of losing the only thing that matters to you." both haynie and wyatt handled the production. the song was written in new york and the vocals were recorded at tap studio / strongroom 7 in london. the mixing was handled by manny marroquin at larrabee north studios in universal city, california while it was mastered at london's metropolis studios by john davis.  musically, "new love" is a synth-pop ballad with neo soul and r&b elements. the song runs for 4minutes and 31seconds and has a structure of verse, refrain, bridge, chorus, verse, refrain, bridge, chorus, middle eight, bridge, chorus. it is composed in  time and the key of a-flat major, with a syncopated pop tempo of 90beats per minute. the verses have a dmaj7-e chord progression, while the chorus follows an amaj7-dmaj7-bm-e sequence. the song has a stomping, tribal drum beat throughout and lipa's deep, full-throated vocal is stretched in the production to feintly echo
. the verses build to a climax before cutting to a simpler chorus. the singer cascades around the track's two-word title and uses melisma in the chorus. her vocal range spans from e3 to c5.  release and promotion "new love" was premiered online by new york city magazine the fader on 20august 2015. it was released the following day for digital download and streaming by the singer's independent record label, dua lipa limited, as her debut single. recalling her decision to release the single, lipa said: "when i showed 'new love' to people, they'd say, 'oh, i didn't expect that'. i loved that reaction, so i went with it." remixes by jarreau vandal and para one were released on 29january 2016. the latter's remix makes use of vocoder noodling and synth streaks that give it a subtle g-funk feel, while lipa's vocals are converted into a 1980s-style with r&b-pop hooks.  "new love" was first included on the austria, germany and switzerland exclusive extended play (ep) for lipa's single "be the one" as the second track, released on 19february 2016. a live, shortened version of the song was released as the second track on lipa's 8july 2016-released extended play spotify sessions. it is also included on lipa's urban outfitters-exclusive vinyl extended play the only, released on 21april 2017 serving as the fifth and final track. "new love" serves as the lead single from lipa's self-titled debut studio album, released as the deluxe edition's fifteenth track on 2june 2017. it was originally intended to be placed as the seventh track on the standard edition of the album, and appears in that position on the austrian, german and swiss version of the album.  lipa gave her first live performance of "new love" at eurosonic noorderslag in the netherlands on 13january 2016. it was included in the set lists for lipa's 2016 uk tour and hotter than hell tour, accompanied by two keyboardists and a drummer. she also performed the track at lollapalooza on 30july 2016, her mother teresa square concert in albania on 10august 2016, and at the swr3 new pop festival in germany on 16september 2016. during the self-titled tour in 2017 and 2018, lipa performed the song backed only by a guitarist.  reception in contrast to her later singles, "new love" received limited attention. however, it proved popular
among music tastemakers and helped lipa receive a longlisting in bbc's sound of... critics poll for 2016. the 405 named it "a contender for the strongest debut of 2015." courtney buck, a reviewer from the publication, found the production "strangely haunting", but cited lipa's vocals as "the star of the show". chris martins of spin felt the production was "wisely restrained enough to cede the stage to lipa's incredible pipes, capable of belting hooks and seeping seduction in equal measure." caroline sullivan wrote in the guardian that the singer showcased a "smoke-darkened voice older and more disillusioned than her years." jocasta jones of the independent on sunday called lipa's vocals "beautiful".  for the fader, lindsey weber saw "new love" as "surprisingly heavy" and called the lyrics as "resentful, nostalgic, and always ready for a change". she went on to praise lipa's "throaty and mature" voice, comparing it to that of joss stone and lady gaga. gigwises catherine elliott deemed it an "absolute blinding pop song" and "a welcomed relief to all of the over styled, plastic tackiness of mainstream pop." writing for the line of best fit, laurence day viewed the song as "a sizzling piece of rhythmic synthpop", while nmes thomas smith named it a "trippy, soul-tinged ballad". in april 2020, christopher rosa of glamour ranked "new love" as lipa's seventh worst track criticizing its lack of longevity, but praising the song's showcase of lipa's "robust" vocals.  music video  production and release the music video for "new love" was directed by photographer nicole nodland, who also shot the single's cover art. it was edited by jackson ducasse and filmed in super 8 film format. the video was filmed in one day in los angeles. after lipa expressed disappointment for a different track's postponed music video shoot, nodland suggested to direct the clip for "new love" during a dinner with the singer. as the video was a low-budget production, lipa wrote her own treatment for it. her styling was inspired by 1990s fashion and vintage clothing. according to the singer, the concept involved activities she enjoys doing and alludes to "a life in the day of dua lipa".  some scenes were entirely improvised while nodland and lipa were driving through los angeles. among these were the inflatable slide on melrose avenue which lipa slid down before being charged
to use it, and the white-suited men who were spontaneously asked to dance after lipa spotted them taking pictures at hollywood hills. the visual shortens the song's length to 3minutes and 59seconds. the music video premiered alongside the song on 20 august 2015 on the faders website. it was released on youtube the following day.  synopsis and reception the music video uses many colour and effect filters in the style of psychedelic art. the video speed adapts to the tempo of the song with slow motion sequences playing during the chorus. lipa is shown wandering carefree through a street and eating sweets that turn her mouth blue. at tattoo mania in los angeles, keith haring drawings are tattooed on lipa's thumbs as a tribute to new york city, her "favourite place in the world after london." in another scene, lipa lights a cigarette from a candle on a birthday cake and swigs a jug of milk while shopping in a supermarket in a silk kimono. during other segments she is shown cycling in a red dress, blowing bubbles between two men, strolling with heart balloons, and twirling with sparklers.  writing for diy, jamie milton said the video "felt like a celebration in colourful, dynamic pop". eoin butler of the irish times described it as "like the big lebowski, just a little sexier."  track listings  digital download and streaming  "new love" - 4:31   '''digital download and streaming - remixes  "new love" (jarreau vandal remix) - 4:01  "new love" (para one remix) - 4:28  personnel  dua lipa vocals  emile haynie production  andrew wyatt production  manny marroquin mixing  chris galland mixing assistance  ike schultz mixing assistance  john davis mastering  release history  references  external links      lyrics of this song at metrolyrics  2010s ballads 2015 debut singles 2015 songs dua lipa songs song recordings produced by andrew wyatt song recordings produced by emile haynie songs composed in a-flat major songs written by dua lipa songs written by emile haynie songs written by andrew wyatt synth-pop ballads
ceramium is a genus of red algae in the rhodophyta.  species   ceramium abyssale petersen 1924  ceramium acanthonotum coronata kleen  ceramium acanthonotum transcurrens holmes & batters  ceramium acanthonotum typica kjellman  ceramium acrocarpum kutzing  ceramium acrocarpum zanardini  ceramium adauctum schousboe  ceramium adhaerens womersley 2003  ceramium aduncum nakamura 1950  ceramium affine originale dawson  ceramium affine peninsularis e.y.dawson 1950  ceramium affine setchell & n.l.gardner, 1930  ceramium albidum de candolle 1805  ceramium allochrous (roth) mertens  ceramium alternum schousboe  ceramium amamiense itono, 1972  ceramium annulatum schousboe  ceramium apiculatum j. agardh 1876  ceramium appendiculatum schousboe  ceramium arachnoideum patentissimum harvey  ceramium arborescens j. agardh 1894  ceramium arbuscula (dillwyn) bokry  ceramium arbuscula c.agardh  ceramium arcticum j. agardh 1894  ceramium arenarium simons 1966  ceramium areschougii kylin, 1907  ceramium armatum (kutzing) grunow  ceramium asparagoides (woodw.) roth  ceramium aspergillosum j.v.lamouroux  ceramium asperum roth  ceramium atlanticum h.e.petersen, 1911  ceramium atlanticum norvegicum petersen 1925  ceramium atrorubens liljeblad  ceramium atrorubescens kylin 1938  ceramium atrum schousboe  ceramium attenuatum australe harvey  ceramium attenuatum meneghini  ceramium attenuatum ruchinger  ceramium aucklandicum kutzing 1849  ceramium aureum (linnaeus) agardh  ceramium australe sonder, 1845  ceramium avalonae e.y. dawson, 1949  ceramium axillare a. p. de candolle  ceramium barbatum (j.e.smith) duby, 1833  ceramium barbatum minor schiffner  ceramium barbatum nanum schiffner  ceramium barbatum typicum schiffner  ceramium bertholdii funk 1922  ceramium biasolettianum (kutzing) rabenhorst  ceramium bicorne setchell & gardner, 1924  ceramium bisporum d.l.ballantine, 1990  ceramium boergesenii h.e.petersen, 1911  ceramium borneense weber-van bosse 1923
ceramium borreri (j.e.smith) c.agardh  ceramium borreri firmius c.agardh  ceramium botryocarpum a. w. griffiths ex harvey 1848  ceramium boucheri (bonnemaison) duby  ceramium boucheri mucilaginosum p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan  ceramium boucheri tenuissimum p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan  ceramium boydenii e.s.gepp, 1904  ceramium brasiliense a.b. joly, 1957  ceramium breviarticulatum pellucidum shperk  ceramium breviarticulatum shperk  ceramium brevizonatum caraibicum h.e.petersen & b¿rgesen 1924  ceramium brevizonatum h.e.petersen, 1918  ceramium bulbosum stackhouse  ceramium byssoideum alternatum d.l.ballantine & humm 1975  ceramium caespitosum maximum roth  ceramium caespitosum roth  ceramium californicum decipiens j.agardh  ceramium californicum j. agardh, 1894  ceramium callipterum mazoyer, 1938  ceramium callithamnium rafinesque  ceramium calyculatum schousboe  ceramium camouii e.y.dawson, 1944  ceramium cancellatum (linnaeus) de candolle 1805  ceramium cancellatum proliferum grunow  ceramium capense kutzing 1841  ceramium capillaceum meneghini  ceramium capitellatum de notaris  ceramium capricornu (reinsch) farlow  ceramium casuarinae de candolle  ceramium catenatum (linnaeus) de candolle, 1805  ceramium catenula (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium caudatum setchell & n.l.gardner, 1924  ceramium centroceratiforme simons 1966  ceramium ceratophyllum (roth) poiret  ceramium chalybeum (roth) c.agardh  ceramium chatamense g.feldmann  ceramium chathamense g. feldmann 1950  ceramium ciliatum (j.ellis) ducluzeau, 1806  ceramium ciliatum armatissimum schiffner  ceramium ciliatum diaphanum (kutzing) schiffner  ceramium ciliatum echinatum hauck  ceramium ciliatum julaceum schiffner  ceramium ciliatum major schiffner  ceramium ciliatum nanum schiffner  ceramium ciliatum nudiusculum (kutzing
) schiffner  ceramium ciliatum polyspermum (sperk.) woronichin  ceramium ciliatum proliferum c.agardh  ceramium ciliatum robustum (j. agardh) mazoyer  ceramium ciliatum secundatum (kutzing) schiffner  ceramium ciliatum subjulaceum schiffner  ceramium cimbricum flaccidum (h.e.petersen) furnari & serio 1996  ceramium cimbricum h. e. petersen 1924  ceramium cingulatum weber-van bosse 1923  ceramium cingulum meneses 1995  ceramium circinatum (kutzing) j.agardh 1851  ceramium circinatum boreale foslie  ceramium circinatum confluens (kutzing) ardissone 1883  ceramium circinatum decipiens schiffner  ceramium circinatum divaricatum foslie  ceramium circinatum duriusculum (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium circinatum genuinum foslie  ceramium circinatum infernecorticatum lakowitz  ceramium circinatum rigidum foslie  ceramium circinatum syntrophum kutzing  ceramium circinatum tenue foslie  ceramium circinatum transcurrens (kutzing) schiffner  ceramium cirrhosum (wulf.) c.agardh  ceramium clarionense setchell & n.l. gardner, 1930  ceramium clavaeforme poiret  ceramium clavellosum (turner) roth  ceramium clavigerum bonnemaison  ceramium clavigerum bonnemaison ex chauvin  ceramium clavigerum minus bonnemaison  ceramium clavulatum crispulum montagne  ceramium clavulatum inerme (kutzing) weber-van bosse  ceramium clavutatum inerme kutzing  ceramium cliftonianum j. agardh 1876  ceramium coccineum (ellis) de candolle  ceramium coccineum (hudson) bory  ceramium coccineum draparnaud  ceramium coccineum roth ex link 1806  ceramium coccineum zanardini  ceramium codicola j. agardh, 1894  ceramium codii (h.richards) mazoyer, 1938  ceramium comptum b¿rgesen 1924  ceramium confluens (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium congestum bonnemaison  ceramium connivens zanardini  ceramium contortum longinum (g. karsten) sournia 1966  ceramium corallinum (j.murray) bory  ceramium corall
inum delle chiaje  ceramium cormacii serio, catra, collodoro & nisi, 2011  ceramium corniculatum montagne 1861  ceramium cornutum p.dangeard, 1952  ceramium corymbosum (e.b.) c.agardh  ceramium corymbosum j.agardh  ceramium cristatum meneghini  ceramium crouanianum j.agardh, 1894  ceramium cruciatum f.s. collins & hervey, 1917  ceramium cupulatum womersley, 1978  ceramium dalmaticum meneghini  ceramium danicum petersen 1924  ceramium dasytrichum montagne  ceramium daviesii (dillwyn) bonnemaison  ceramium daviesii (dillwyn) c.agardh  ceramium daviesii secundatum (lyngbye) duby  ceramium dawsonii a. b. joly 1957  ceramium decurrens majus kutzing harvey  ceramium derbesii solier ex kutzing 1847  ceramium deslongchampsii chauvin ex duby 1830  ceramium deslongchampsii hooperi (harvey) w.r.taylor  ceramium deslongchampsii semiascendens j.luca  ceramium deslongchampsii viminarium melv.ex g.murray  ceramium diaphanoides kutzing  ceramium diaphanum (lightfoot) roth, 1806  ceramium diaphanum arachnoides c.agardh  ceramium diaphanum aucklandicum j.d.hooker & harvey  ceramium diaphanum capense simons  ceramium diaphanum capricornu (reinsch) foslie 1893  ceramium diaphanum corticatulostrictum kylin  ceramium diaphanum corticatulum h.e.petersen  ceramium diaphanum decipiens schiffner  ceramium diaphanum elegans (roth) roth 1806  ceramium diaphanum fastigiatum (roth) trevisan  ceramium diaphanum gracile ardissone  ceramium diaphanum herbaceum (roth) roth  ceramium diaphanum indicum feldmann-mazoyer 1952  ceramium diaphanum minor p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan 1865  ceramium diaphanum patentissima foslie  ceramium diaphanum pilosum (roth) c.agardh  ceramium diaphanum pulcher shperk  ceramium diaphanum radiculosum (grunow) h.e.petersen  ceramium diaphanum rigidum a.w.griffiths & harvey  ceramium diaphanum serpens montagne
ceramium diaphanum strictotenuissimum (h.e.petersen) kylin  ceramium diaphanum strictum celan & serbanescu 1969  ceramium diaphanum typicum h.e.petersen  ceramium diaphanum virescens lyngbye  ceramium diaphanum zostericola acrocarpum (kutzing) feldmann-mazoyer 1941  ceramium diaphanum zostericola h.e.petersen  ceramium dichotomum (linnaeus) roth  ceramium didymum bonnemaison  ceramium diffusum (hudson) stackhouse  ceramium digeneae denotaris  ceramium digitatum (hudson) stackh.  ceramium dillwynii (weber & mohr) roth  ceramium discorticatum heydrich 1893  ceramium divergens j.agardh 1894  ceramium dorsiventrale hommersand, 1963  ceramium dozei hariot 1887  ceramium ducluzeaui bonnemaison  ceramium ducluzeaui miniatum bonnemaison  ceramium ducluzeaui versicolor bonnemaison  ceramium dumosertum r. e. norris & abbott 1992  ceramium dumosum mertens  ceramium duriusculum (kutzing) rabenhorst  ceramium echinophorum meneghini  ceramium echionotum azoricum (meneghini) piccone 1884  ceramium echionotum j. agardh, 1844  ceramium echionotum mediterraneum mazoyer 1938  ceramium echionotum transcurrens (kutzing) piccone  ceramium edule stackhouse  ceramium elegans litorale celan & serbanescu 1959  ceramium elegans longe-articulata celan & serbanescu 1959  ceramium elegans nanum schiffner  ceramium elegans tenerior schiffner  ceramium elongatum (hudson) roth 1806  ceramium elongatum denudata (c.agardh) duby  ceramium equisetifolium (lightf.) de candolle  ceramium equisetoides e.y. dawson, 1944  ceramium erumpens meneghini  ceramium evermannii setchell & n.l. gardner, 1930  ceramium excellens j. agardh, 1894  ceramium fastigiatum pubescens (kutzing) piccone  ceramium fastigiatum roussel 1806  ceramium fastigiramosum s.m.boo & i.k.lee, 1985  ceramium felicii gaillon  ceramium ferrugineum compactius c.agardh  ceramium fibrillosum (dillwyn) mertens  ceramium fibrosum roth  ceramium fil
amentosum continuum c.agardh  ceramium filamentosum friabile p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan 1867  ceramium filiculum harvey ex womersley, 1978  ceramium flabelligerum agardh f.debray  ceramium flagellare (esper) ruchinger  ceramium flagelliferum kutzing  ceramium flavicans schousboe  ceramium flavum schousboe  ceramium floccosum (fl.dan.) roth  ceramium floribundum kutzing  ceramium floridanum j. agardh, 1894  ceramium forcipatum a.p.de candolle, 1805  ceramium forcipatum ciliatum (ellis) a. p. de candolle  ceramium forcipatum glabellum a.p.de candolle 1805  ceramium fosliei (petersen) petersen 1935  ceramium fractum elongatim (roth) bory  ceramium fragile ardissone  ceramium friabile schousboe  ceramium fructiculosum (wulfen) stackhouse  ceramium fruiticulosum roth, 1981  ceramium fruticulosum rubroides petersen 1908  ceramium fucoides (hudson) de candolle  ceramium fujiianum m.b.barros-barreto & c. a. maggs, 2006  ceramium furcatum (petersen) petersen 1925  ceramium furcellatum (linnaeus) wiggers  ceramium furcellatum kutzing  ceramium fuscum (hudson) roth  ceramium gaditanum (clemente) cremades 1990  ceramium gaditanum j (f.debray) j.cremades  ceramium gaditanum mediterraneum (debray) cremades 1990  ceramium gardneri kylin, 1941  ceramium gelatinosum schousboe  ceramium giacconei cormaci & g. furnari 1991  ceramium gibbosum meneghini  ceramium giganteum meneghini  ceramium gigartinum (linnaeus) roth  ceramium glanduliferum kylin 1938  ceramium glomeratum de candolle  ceramium gracile de candolle 1805  ceramium gracilliferum griffiths & harvey  ceramium gracillimum byssoideum (harvey) mazoyer  ceramium gracillimum c.agardh 1824  ceramium graecum lazaridou & boudouresque 1992  ceramium granulosum (e.b.) c.agardh  ceramium grateloupii bonnemaison  ceramium grateloupii duby  ceramium griffitsianum (e.
b.) j.agardh  ceramium guttatum bonnemaison, 1828  ceramium gymnogonium meneghini  ceramium hamatispinum e.y. dawson, 1950  ceramium hellenicum giaccone  ceramium helminthochortos (schwendimann) roth  ceramium heterospinum b. subramanian, 1985  ceramium hirsutum roth  ceramium hispidum schousboe  ceramium hoodii w.r. taylor, 1945  ceramium hookeri (dillwyn) c.agardh  ceramium horridulum p.c.silva, 1972  ceramium horridum meneghini 1844  ceramium hospitans zanardini  ceramium howellii setchell & n.l. gardner, 1937  ceramium hyalinum rabenhorst  ceramium hystrix (kutzing) frauenfeld  ceramium implexum schousboe  ceramium inconspicuum zanardini  ceramium incospicuum zanardini, 1840  ceramium inflexum roth  ceramium inkyui t.o.cho, s.fredericq, & s.m.boo, 2003  ceramium interruptum nigrescens c.agardh 1824  ceramium interruptum setchell & gardner, 1924  ceramium involutum kutzing 1849  ceramium irregulare kutzing 1849  ceramium isogonum harvey 1855  ceramium japonicum okamura, 1896  ceramium johnstonii setchell & gardner, 1924  ceramium jolyi (daz-piferrer) d.l.ballantine & m.j.wynne 1968  ceramium julaceum (kutzing) rabenhorst 1847  ceramium juliae a.j.k. millar, 2002  ceramium kellneri meneghini  ceramium kondoi abbreviatum nakamura 1950  ceramium kondoi ambiguum nakamura 1950  ceramium kondoi trichotomum nakamura 1950  ceramium kondoi typicum nakamura  ceramium kondoi yendo 1920  ceramium koreanum boo & i.k.lee, 1986  ceramium koronense trono, 1972  ceramium krameri g.r.south & skelton, 2000  ceramium laingii reinbold ex laing 1905  ceramium lamourouxii bonnemaison  ceramium lamourouxii duby  ceramium laterale schousboe  ceramium ledermannii pilger, 1911  ceramium lenormandii montague  ceramium lenticulare womersley 1978  ceramium lentiforme a. j. k. millar 1990  ceramium leptacanthum (kutzing) zanardini  ceramium leptocladum schiffner 1933  ceramium leptoph
loeum kutzing  ceramium leptosiphon pilger, 1920  ceramium leptozonum m.a. howe, 1918  ceramium lessonii kutzing  ceramium leutzelburgii australis a.b.joly 1965  ceramium leutzelburgii schmidt, 1924  ceramium linum (roth) de candolle  ceramium lobatum (kutzing) shperk  ceramium longissimum (s. g. gmelin) roth  ceramium longissimum flagellare (esper) roth  ceramium loureiri c. agardh 1824  ceramium loureiroi c.agardh  ceramium lucidum grateloup  ceramium luetzelburgii australe a.b.joly 1965  ceramium luetzelburgii o. c. schmidt 1924  ceramium lumbricale (roth) lamouroux  ceramium macilentum j.agardh, 1894  ceramium macrocarpum kutzing  ceramium macrogonium (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium macrotrichum feldmann-mazoyer, 1952  ceramium manorense p. anand, 1943  ceramium marshallense e. y. dawson 1957  ceramium maryae tenuior weber- van bosse  ceramium maryae weber-van bosse 1923  ceramium mauritianum feldmann-mazoyer, 1952  ceramium mertensii (turner) de candolle  ceramium mertensii (turner) roth  ceramium metcalfii c. k. tseng  ceramium microcarpon schousboe  ceramium molle roth  ceramium monacanthum j.agardh, 1894  ceramium monile crassior j.agardh  ceramium multicapsulare (dillwyn) c.agardh  ceramium multijugum jaasund, 1970  ceramium myriophyllum poiret  ceramium nakamurae e.y.dawson 1954  ceramium nanum kuehne 1946  ceramium nayalii nasr, 1941  ceramium nitens (c. agardh) j. agardh 1851  ceramium nodiferum moniliforme shperk  ceramium nodulosum continuum ruprecht  ceramium nodulosum de candolle  ceramium nodulosum ducluzeau 1850  ceramium nodulosum implexo-contortum solier  ceramium nodulosum minus ruprecht  ceramium nodulosum tenue (c. agardh) serio  ceramium nudiusculum (kutzing) rabenhorst 1847  ceramium obesum e.y. dawson, 1950  ceramium obsoletum c
. agardh 1828  ceramium opacum rafinesque  ceramium oppositum schousboe  ceramium opuntia schousboe  ceramium ornatum setchell & gardner, 1930  ceramium orsinianum meneghini  ceramium orthocladum maximum schiffner 1938  ceramium orthocladum nanum schiffner 1938  ceramium orthocladum schiffner 1926  ceramium pacificum (collins) kylin, 1925  ceramium pallens zanardini  ceramium pallidum (ngeli ex kutzing) maggs & hommersand 1993  ceramium paniculatum okamura 1921  ceramium papenfussianum simons 1966  ceramium parvulum (zanardini ex frauenfeld) grunow, 1867  ceramium pedicellatum (duby) j. agardh  ceramium pedicellatum c.agardh, 1817  ceramium pedicellatum minus desmaziares  ceramium pediculum suhr  ceramium penicillatum areschoug 1849  ceramium pennatum p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan, 1852  ceramium periconicum t.o.cho & riosmena-rodrguez 2008  ceramium personatum setchell & n.l. gardner, 1930  ceramium petitii feldmann-mazoyer  ceramium pictaviense del?tre  ceramium piliferum schousboe  ceramium pilosum (roth) naccari  ceramium pinastroides (gmelin) stackhouse  ceramium pinnulatum c .agardh  ceramium pinnulatum major c.agardh  ceramium planum kutzing 1849  ceramium pleurosporum nanum schiffner prov.  ceramium pleurosporum schiffner 1938  ceramium plicatum (hudson) roth  ceramium plicatum meneghini  ceramium plocamium (gmelin) roth  ceramium pluma (dillwyn) c.agardh  ceramium plumula subverticillatum bonnemaison  ceramium pluvinatum mertens  ceramium poeppigianum grunow 1868 '1867'  ceramium poeppigianum unilaterale hommersand 1963  ceramium polyceras (kutzing) zanardini 1847  ceramium polygonum (kutzing) shperk  ceramium polyspermum p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan  ceramium polyspermum shperk  ceramium procumbens setchell & n.l. gardner, 1924  ceramium proliferum (lyngbye) h.e.petersen  ceramium proliferum secundatum (lyngbye
) h.e.petersen  ceramium proliferum yates  ceramium prorepens grunow  ceramium prostratum e.y.dawson, 1963  ceramium pseudostrictum major schiffner  ceramium pseudostrictum minor schiffner  ceramium pseudostrictum nanum schiffner  ceramium pseudostrictum schiffner 1938  ceramium pteroma schousboe  ceramium puberulum sonder 1845  ceramium pulchellum chalybeum (roth) c.agardh  ceramium pulvereum (dillwyn) c.agardh  ceramium punctiforme setchell 1924  ceramium purpurascens wallroth  ceramium purpureum delle chiaje  ceramium purum roth  ceramium pusillum harvey 1863  ceramium pusillum lanceolatum j.agardh  ceramium pyramidatum schousboe  ceramium pyridioides g.feldmann  ceramium racemosum schousboe  ceramium radiculosum major schiffner  ceramium radiculosum venetum schiffner  ceramium ramulosum nanum schiffner  ceramium recticorticum e.y. dawson, 1950  ceramium repens saxatile bonnemaison  ceramium repens spinosissimum zanardini  ceramium reptans t.o.cho & fredericq, 2006  ceramium rescissum kylin 1907  ceramium rhizophorum (montagne) de toni  ceramium rigidum ardissone  ceramium rintelsianum g.r.south & skelton, 2000  ceramium riosmenae b.y.won & t.o.cho, 2011  ceramium rosenvingei petersen 1908  ceramium rosenvingii h.e.petersen  ceramium rosenvingii intermedium h.e.petersen  ceramium rosenvingii tenue h.e.petersen  ceramium rosenvingii transgrediens h.e.petersen  ceramium roseum majus roth  ceramium roseum viscidulum bonnemaison  ceramium rubrum ambiguum schiffner  ceramium rubrum barbata (ardissone) hauck  ceramium rubrum barbatum (ardissone) hauck  ceramium rubrum barbatum g.feldmann-mazoyer 1941  ceramium rubrum botryoides montagne 1841  ceramium rubrum corymbiferum (bonnemaison) j.agardh 1851  ceramium rubrum corymbiferum hariot  ceramium rubrum corymbiferum j.agardh 1876  ceramium rubrum decurrens (kutzing) j.agardh  ceramium rubrum diaphanum gobi  ceramium rubrum diaphanum p.l.crouan & h.m.crouan
ceramium rubrum divaricatum c.agardh  ceramium rubrum fasciculatum j. agardh  ceramium rubrum fastigiatum wollny  ceramium rubrum firmum c.agardh  ceramium rubrum genuinum kjellman  ceramium rubrum implexo-contortum (solier) feldmann-mazoyer  ceramium rubrum implexocontortum solier  ceramium rubrum irregulare h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum lineare h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum lineatum h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum maculatum s.f.gray  ceramium rubrum major c.agardh  ceramium rubrum membranaceum c.agardh  ceramium rubrum nodulosum montagne  ceramium rubrum pedicellatum (de candolle) duby  ceramium rubrum pedicellatum j. agardh  ceramium rubrum pedicellatum j. agardh  ceramium rubrum pedicellatum shperk  ceramium rubrum proliferum (lyngbye) j.agardh  ceramium rubrum proliferum hariot 1889  ceramium rubrum ramellosum ardissone  ceramium rubrum repens (zanardini) zanardini  ceramium rubrum secundatum (lyngbye) c.agardh  ceramium rubrum secundatum (lyngbye) h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum secundatum (lyngbye) harvey  ceramium rubrum secundatum (lyngbye) j.agardh  ceramium rubrum secundatum (lyngbye) kutzing  ceramium rubrum secundatum h. e. petersen  ceramium rubrum subcorticatum h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum tenue (c.agardh) ardissone  ceramium rubrum tenue c.agardh 1824  ceramium rubrum tenue kutzing  ceramium rubrum typicum h.e.petersen  ceramium rubrum typicum reinke  ceramium rubrum virgatum c.agardh 1824  ceramium rugosum j.v.lamouroux  ceramium rupestre tenuissimum j.v.lamouroux  ceramium sandrianum meneghini  ceramium saviniae feldmann-mazoyer, 1952  ceramium scandinavicum petersen 1924  ceramium scoparium (linnaeus) roth  ceramium scorpioides (hudson) roth  ceramium secundatum lyngbye, 1819  ceramium septentrionale petersen 1911  ceramium serpens setchell & n.l.gardner, 1924  ceramium setaceum (hudson)
duby  ceramium setaceum (hudson) wallroth  ceramium setaceum (wulfen) ruchinger  ceramium setchellii lucas, 1935  ceramium setosum schousboe  ceramium shepherdii womersley, 1978  ceramium shuttleworthianum (kutzing) rabenhorst 1847  ceramium siliquosum (kutzing) maggs & hommersand 1993  ceramium siliquosum acrocarpum (g.mazoyer) g.furnari 1999  ceramium siliquosum elegans (roth) g. furnari 1999  ceramium siliquosum lophophorum (feldman-mazoyer) serio  ceramium siliquosum minusculum (g.mazoyer) garreta et al. 2001  ceramium siliquosum zostericola (thuret) g.furnari 1999  ceramium simplex c.agardh  ceramium sinicola interruptum (setch.& gard.) daws. 1944  ceramium sinicola johnstonii (setchell & n.l.gardner) dawson 1944  ceramium sinicola setchell & gardner, 1924  ceramium sinicola typicum dawson  ceramium skottsbergii h. petersen 1924  ceramium spicatum schousboe  ceramium spiniferum kutzing  ceramium spinosopilosum kutzing 1863  ceramium spinosum (linnaeus) ruchinger  ceramium spinulosum (kutzing) rabenhorst  ceramium spinulosum biasoletto  ceramium spyridioides g. feldmann 1950  ceramium squamosum rafinesque  ceramium squarrosum (harvey) j.agardh  ceramium stichidiosum j. agardh, 1876  ceramium stichidiosum scopulorum laing 1909  ceramium stichidiosum smithii laing 1909  ceramium strictum acrocarpum kutzing  ceramium strictum breviarticulatum ardissone  ceramium strictum corticatulostrictum (kylin) sjstedt  ceramium strictum delicatum j. agardh  ceramium strictum divaricatum holmes & batters  ceramium strictum minusculum mazoyer  ceramium strictum nanum schiffner  ceramium strictum proliferum collins  ceramium strictum proliferum f.s.collins  ceramium strictum strictotenuissimum h.e.petersen  ceramium strictum strictum j.agardh  ceramium strictum vertebrale (h.e.petersen) h.e.petersen  ceramium strobiliforme g.w.lawson & d.m.john, 1982  ceramium
subcartilagineum j.agardh  ceramium subfuscum (woodw.) stackhouse  ceramium subsimplex schousboe  ceramium subtile j. agardh, 1851  ceramium subverticillatum (grunow) weber-van bosse, 1923  ceramium subvirgatum zanardini 1854  ceramium suhrianum p.c. silva, 1996  ceramium syntrophum (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium tasmanicum (kutzing) womersley 1978  ceramium templetonii setchell & n.l.gardner, 1937  ceramium tenellum (vahl) c.agardh  ceramium tenerrimum (g.martens) okamura, 1921  ceramium tenerrimum brevizonatum (h. e. petersen) feldmann-mazoyer  ceramium tenue (j.agardh) j.agardh, 1894  ceramium tenuicorne (kutzing) waern 1952  ceramium tenuicorticatum konno, 1974  ceramium tenuissimum divaricatum (p. l. crouan & h. m. crouan ex j. agardh) foslie 1893  ceramium tenuissimum j. agardh  ceramium tenuissimum moniliforme (sperk.) woronichin  ceramium tenuissimum pygmaeum (kutzing) hauck 1888  ceramium tenuissimum uniforme bonnemaison  ceramium tetricum pectinatum c. agardh  ceramium tetricum pectinatum c.agardh  ceramium thymifolium schousboe  ceramium tortuosum ducluzeau  ceramium torulosum roth  ceramium tranquebariense roth  ceramium tranquillum meneses 1998  ceramium transcurrens (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium transfugum (kutzing) ardissone  ceramium trichocladis c.agardh  ceramium truncatum h.petersen, 1936  ceramium tubulosum roth  ceramium tumidulum meneghini  ceramium turneri radicans bonnemaison  ceramium uncinatum harvey 1855  ceramium ungulatum (kutzing) hariot 1889  ceramium uniforme (esper) ruchinger  ceramium uniforme meneghini  ceramium unilaterale schousboe  ceramium upolense g.r.south & skelton, 2000  ceramium urceolatum (dillwyn) jrgens  ceramium uruguayense w.r. taylor, 1960  ceramium vagans p. c. silva 1987  ceramium variegatum (kutzing) ok
amura 1932  ceramium vatovai schiffner, 1938  ceramium venetum zanardini  ceramium verrucosum roth  ceramium vertebrale h.e.petersen  ceramium verticillatum (light.) ducluzeau  ceramium verticillatum (lightf.) de candolle  ceramium verticillatum delle chiaje  ceramium vestitum harvey, 1855  ceramium vietnamense pham-hong h 1969  ceramium villosum (hudson) poiret  ceramium violaceum tenuius roth  ceramium virgatum j.d. hooker & harvey, 1848  ceramium virgatum roth, 1797  ceramium viride filarszky  ceramium viscainoense e.y. dawson, 1950  ceramium wilsonii womersley 2003  ceramium womersleyi r. e. norris & i. a. abbott 1992  ceramium wulfenii roth  ceramium zacae setchell & n.l. gardner, 1937  synonymy   ceramium elegans (roth) ducluzeau 1805 is a synonym of ceramium diaphanum var. elegans (roth) roth  ceramium elegans var. diaphanoideum celan & serbanescu is a synonym of ceramium siliquosum (kutzing) maggs & hommersand  ceramium elegans var. fastigiatum celan & serbanescu 1959 is a synonym of ceramium cimbricum h.e.petersen  ceramium elegans f. longiarticulata celan & serbanescu is a synonym of ceramium siliquosum (kutzing) maggs & hommersand  references  external links     algaebase.org (retrieved 22 july 2016)    lists of algae taxonomic lists (species)
fotis kezos (born july 25, 1995) is a cypriot-greek professional footballer who plays as a centre back for asil lysi. he can also play as a defensive midfielder.  career he started his career at aek athens academy, before graduating to the first team. he followed this up with spells at othellos athienou and nea salamis before joining ermis aradippou.  on 4 july 2017, kezos joined leeds united, where he would link up with former ermis manager carlos corberan, who is the head coach of the under 23's side, with the player revealing the move on his instagram.  on 8 january 2019, digenis oroklinis announced the signing of kezos. in september 2019, he signed with aris limassol fc.  international career kezos has represented cyprus u-17 and cyprus u-19's at international level.  honours aek athens football league 2: 2013-14 (6th group)  references  external links  http://backend.cfa.com.cy/gr/players/2196795/180025  https://www.sofascore.com/player/fotis-kezos/186739  https://www.whoscored.com/players/245881/show/fotis-kezos    1995 births living people cypriot footballers greek footballers aek athens f.c. players othellos athienou f.c. players nea salamis famagusta fc players ermis aradippou fc players trikala f.c. players digenis oroklinis players aris limassol fc players cypriot second division players gamma ethniki players association football central defenders
the gateway school is an independent school on the upper west side of manhattan serving children ages 5-14 with learning disabilities. it currently enrolls approximately 180 students.  gateway students typically have had difficulty in mainstream classrooms due to a language-based learning disability (dyslexia, expressive and receptive language delays, reading and writing disorders); attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; and/or executive function disorder.  history  the gateway school of new york was established in 1965 by elizabeth freidus and claire flom. freidus was an educator at columbia university teachers college; claire flom was the mother of gateway's first student. the initial class consisted of five students in a space rented from madison avenue presbyterian church on manhattan's upper east side. the school remained in this location for 36 years.  in 2001, gateway moved into a converted brownstone at 236 second avenue near union square. with the decision to add a middle school to the existing lower school, gateway began searching for an even larger building, and it debuted its current home on west 61st street, near lincoln center, in 2008.  in the 2015-2016 school year, gateway celebrated its 50th anniversary.  awards  2009 - leed silver certification from the u.s. green building council  2010 - national center for learning disabilities' founders award for exceptional service to children and families  2011 - head of school robert cunningham named one of the top game changers in education by the huffington post  leadership  elizabeth freidus, founding director (1965-1978)  davida sherwood, ph.d., director (1978-2004)  robert cunningham, head of school (2004-2013)  carolyn salzman, head of school (2013-2020)  laurie gruhn, head of school  (2020-present)  professional organizations  gateway is a member of the following professional organizations: children and adults with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (chadd), council for exceptional children (cec), education records bureau (erb), independent schools admissions association of greater new york (isaagny), international dyslexia association (ida), learning disabilities association (lda), national association of independent schools (nais), national business officers association (nboa), new york guild of independent schools, new york state association of independent schools (nysais), and parents league of new york  head of school carolyn salzman authored an article titled "choosing a special education school" for the 2015 issue of the parents league review.  in the fall of
2015, artwork from gateway students was on display at the child mind institute in new york city, as part of the beginning with the self exhibit.  references  external links     special schools in the united states
scottsville road is a major four-lane undivided thoroughfare in bowling green, in warren county in south-central kentucky.  the road is often known as the busiest roadway in bowling green as heavy traffic volumes often use the road, especially with the presence of several businesses of all kinds, including greenwood mall. the heavy traffic on scottsville road is often a daily issue, even with the presence of the former william h. natcher parkway extension (now ky 9007), which opened in 2013.  intersections  all traffic signals within bowling green city limits are numbered.  see also  references  external links bowling green area convention and visitors bureau kentucky transportation cabinet us 231 at kentuckyroads.com  u.s. route 231 u.s. highways in kentucky streets in bowling green, kentucky transportation in warren county, kentucky
georgios maris (1882-1949) was a greek politician. he was three times minister of the interior of greece  (1924-1925, 1928, 1929-1930, 1933. he was minister of finance (1928-1932), the economy (1924), communication (1924) and agriculture (1924-1925).  references rulers.org  ministers of the interior of greece 1882 births 1949 deaths
kuttikalundu sookshikkuka is a 2016 indian malayalam-language family thriller film written and directed by kalavoor ravikumar and produced by mohanan g. it stars anoop menon and bhavana in lead roles.  plot a family that contains commando gautham keshav (anoop menon), his wife shahida (bhavana) and two school-going children niranjan (sanoop santhosh) and neeraj (siddharth ajith). the peaceful existence of the family is ousted after keshav is killed by terrorists.  as shahida puts on a brave front to lead a normal life for the children, the two children decide to retaliate for the demise of their dad after recognizing the leader of a terrorist group amid a school trip.  during the terrorists case investigation, merin (anumol) helps the family out. the boys keep  kareem ustad (makarand deshpande) prisoner, and tell him that they will get him revenge on  indian independence day. they put posters to remind him. during scenes, they cry over their dead father. they plan to hoist the flag, and burn him to death. they hoist the flag, ask him to say a line, then they salute the flag. but, kareem tries to kill niranjan. then, neeraj sprays a liquid onto kareem's face. merin, and shahida find the kids and kareem, and they are presented with an award, and are congratulated by the ones present in the room, including their grandpa and grandma, and the brother's father, that is shahida's husband, the late gautham keshav. it ends with a salute to soldiers, for protecting our nation.  cast  anoop menon  as keshav  bhavana  as shahida keshav  anumol as merin  sanoop santhosh as niranjan keshav  siddharth ajith as neeraj keshav  makarand deshpande as kareem ustaad  production the film began production in july 2016, with kalavoor ravikumar opting to direct the film, produced by mohanan g and starring anoop menon in the lead role.  choreographer of this movie is sajnanajam.  soundtrack music is composed by bijibal. "himagiri" - prabha varma "dhoore vaanil" - prabha varma  references  2016 films indian films 2010s malayalam-language films indian comedy films films scored by bijibal
shane kingston (born 25 august 1997) is an irish hurler who plays as a left wing-forward, full-forward and left corner-forward for club side douglas and at inter-county level with the cork senior hurling team.  early life  kingston was born in douglas, cork. his father, kieran, and his uncle, tom, won all-ireland medals with cork in 1986 and 1990 respectively.  playing career  st. francis college  kingston first came to prominence as a dual player with st. francis college in rochestown. having played both codes at every grade, he was a forward on both of the college's senior teams that lost the harty cup and corn ui mhuiri finals in 2015.  university college cork  on 23 february 2019, kingston lined out at centre-forward for university college cork when they faced mary immaculate college in the fitzgibbon cup final. he scored a point from play in the 2-21 to 0-13 victory.  kingston played in a second successive fitzgibbon cup final on 12 february 2020. lining out at full-forward, he ended the game with a second successive winners' medal after scoring four points from play in the 0-18 to 2-11 defeat of the institute of technology, carlow.  douglas  kingston joined the douglas club at a young age and played in all grades at juvenile and underage levels, enjoying championship success in under-14, under-15 and under-16 grades. in 2013 he was top scorer with 0-07 in the final as douglas defeated st. finbarr's to take the premier 1 mfc title. in 2015 his season was hampered by injury, however, he was introduced in the 49th minute in douglas's premier 1 mhc final victory over sarsfields. kingston subsequently progressed onto the club's under-21 teams, winning championship honours as a hurler in 2016 and as a gaelic footballer in 2017. by this stage, kingston had already made his senior hurling championship debut, coming on as a substitute in a 1-14 to 0-09 defeat of st. finbarr's on 23 may 2015.  cork  minor and under-21  kingston first played for cork at minor level in 2014. a dual player with both the hurlers and gaelic footballers, his season ultimately ended without success with defeats by limerick and dublin. kinsgton was eligible for the minor grade again in 2015 and lined out in both codes as well as being named captain of the hurling team. after playing in the early rounds of
both championships, he sustained a broken fibula and significant ligament damage in a challenge game against clare, bringing his season to an end.  on 23 june 2016, kingston made his first appearance for the cork under-21 hurling team, scoring 1-6 in cork's seven-point defeat by limerick. he also played in cork's unsuccessful championship campaign in 2017, before being named captain of the team in 2018. on 4 july 2018, kingston won a munster medal after scoring four points from play in cork's 2-23 to 1-13 defeat of tipperary in the final. on 26 august 2018, he captained cork to a 3-13 to 1-16 all-ireland final defeat by tipperary in what was his last game in the grade. kingston was later nominated for the team of the year.  senior  shane kingston, known by many as mr big nose has an exceptional ability to "sniff" out a goal. shane, is also well able to strike a free with his nose. kingston made his senior debut for cork on 2 july 2016, replacing seamus harnedy for the final 7 minutes of an all-ireland qualifier against dublin at pairc ui rinn. he made his first start in a national league defeat of clare on 11 february 2017, before making his first championship start later that season in a munster championship quarter-final against tipperary. kingston scored 1-04 from play in that game and was a regular starter for cork's subsequent championship games. on 9 july 2017, he won his first munster medal following a 1-25 to 1-20 defeat of clare in the final.  on 1 july 2018, kingston won a second successive munster medal following a 2-24 to 3-19 defeat of clare in the final.  career statistics  club  inter-county  honours  st. francis college dr. o'callaghan cup (2): 2014, 2015  university college cork fitzgibbon cup (2): 2019, 2020  douglas cork premier under-21 a football championship (1): 2017 cork premier under-21 a hurling championship (1): 2016 cork premier 1 minor hurling championship (1): 2015 cork premier 1 minor football championship (1): 2013  cork munster senior hurling championship (2): 2017, 2018 munster under-21 hurling championship (1): 2018 (c)  references  external link shane kingston profile at the cork gaa website  1997 births living people douglas gaelic footballers douglas hurlers cork inter-county hurlers cork inter-county gaelic footballers
hershey house, also known as the patrick home, is a historic home located in perry township, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built in 1856, and is a two-story, greek revival style brick dwelling, with a -story rear wing. it is three bays wide and has a gable front roof.  also on the property is a contributing fieldstone milk house.  it was the home of william hershey, son of the builder joseph m. hershey, who served with the 16th independent battery indiana light artillery in the american civil war and witnessed the assassination of abraham lincoln.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1978.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana greek revival houses in indiana houses completed in 1856 houses in tippecanoe county, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
tutikandi is a suburb located in shimla, himachal pradesh, india. it has the main inter state bus terminal of shimla.  geography  tutikandi is located along a section of national highway 5 (india). the region is surrounded by trees of deodar. the average altitude of shimla is 2206 meters. it is 7 km from the nearby railway station. this small locality has developed since an inter state bus terminal (isbt) was added. the area was once out of the way of shimla people. it has become a popular place well connected by roads. though situated on the outskirts, the transport system, isbt, makes the area easily reachable.  history   tutikandi was once an untouched part of shimla. dense, thick forest covers much of the region. for many years it served as a garbage dump. its location was one major reason for choosing it as a dumping site. with the expansion the dumping site was relocated.  today  tutikandi serves as a bypass road. abattoir house is run by the municipal corporation of shimla.  sights   jalapu house is a traditional building of shimla. it was constructed in the 1920s. this house belonged to a local farmer and was made with mud, stone and wood and covered with galvanized iron sheets.  old zoo is located in the dense forest. it has a mountain leopard as one of its residents.  the 103 railway tunnel is a significant part of shimla. the tunnel, which is often called a "ghost", is a few kilometers from the city.  see also list of educational institutions in shimla  references  geography of shimla district
campa act or compensatory afforestation fund act is an indian legislation that  seeks to provide an appropriate institutional mechanism, both at the centre and in each state and union territory, to ensure expeditious utilization in efficient and transparent manner of amounts released in lieu of forest land diverted for non-forest purpose which  would mitigate impact of diversion of such forest land.  history the ministry of environment and forest, new delhi issued a notification on 23 april 2004 describing the constitution, management and functions of the campa committee. the act was sent for examination under a standing committee. it was passed by rajya sabha on 28 july 2016.  compensatory afforestation fund this is money paid by developers who have razed forest land for their construction projects, and the idea is that such land destroyed needs to be made good by regenerating forest elsewhere on non-forest land.  purpose the legislation established the compensatory afforestation management and planning authority (campa) and the compensatory afforestation fund (caf). the proposed legislation will also ensure expeditious utilization of accumulated unspent amounts available with the ad hoc compensatory afforestation fund management and planning authority (campa), which presently is of the order of rs. 95,000 crore, and fresh accrual of compensatory levies and interest on accumulated unspent balance, which will be of the order of approximately rs. 6,000 crore per annum, in an efficient and transparent manner.  see also  the scheduled tribes and other traditional forest dwellers (recognition of forest rights) act, 2006  references  indian legislation forestry in india forestry initiatives 2016 in law 2016 in india indian forest law acts of the parliament of india 2016
when you come back to me (spanish: cuando vuelvas a mi) is a 1953 drama film directed by jose baviera. it was a co-production between mexico and guatemala.  cast    ramon armengod    lilia del valle    jose baviera    mario abularach   luis aguirre    antonio almorza    maria luisa aragon    enrique arce velez   olga de arce     mildred chavez    otto coronado    carlos figueroa   rene garcia   titina leal    jose antonio lemus    augusto monterroso   marion del valle   luis villavicencio  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films guatemalan films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by jose baviera guatemalan black-and-white films
the las vegas cowboys were a professional american football team based in las vegas, nevada. their roots can be traced to the independent quad city raiders, who joined the new professional football league of america as the rock island raiders in 1965. the raiders remained in the pfla until its merger with the continental football league in 1968. after losing their first two regular-season contests in 1968 (and drawing only 1,200 fans for a game in davenport, iowa against the chicago owls), the raiders were set to play the indianapolis capitols in indiana. instead, indianapolis businessman thomas redmond swiftly purchased the club and announced the team would be known as the las vegas cowboys (who lost to the caps, 41-0 on september 14.) (league records consider the raiders and cowboys to be separate clubs.)  at the time, there was already a las vegas cowboys franchise in the minor western football league, with las vegas holding a 1-1 record in that circuit; redmond apparently merged the two franchises, forfeited the cowboys' remaining games in the wfl, and played a continental league schedule for the rest of 1968. featuring only five players from the old quad cities team, the cowboys finished the 1968 season with a 1-11 record-which was still an improvement from quad cities' 0-12 disaster of the previous year.  in 1969, the final season of the cofl, las vegas improved drastically, both at the gate (drawing 5,068 fans per game to cashman field, about double the 1968 figures) and on the field, winning the pacific division with an 8-4 record. after routing the sacramento capitols, 31-0, in the pacific division playoffs, the cowboys were eliminated and in the second round by the eventual champion san antonio toros. it would be the cowboys' last game: after the 1969 season the franchise was again purchased, and plans for a move to memphis, tennessee were announced, with the team planning to join the trans-american football league after the cofl broke up. the move never completed and the cowboys ceased operations.  season-by-season  references  continental football league teams american football teams in the las vegas valley american football teams established in 1968 american football teams disestablished in 1970 1968 establishments in nevada 1970 disestablishments in nevada
fc dnepr smolensk () was an association football club from smolensk, russia, founded in 2004 and dissolved in 2019. another smolensk team, fc kristall smolensk, was dissolved in early 2004. it played in the russian professional football league from 2005 to 2007 and then again from 2011 to 2019.  club name history  2004-2008: fc smolensk  2008-2016: fc dnepr smolensk  2016-2018: sfc crfso smolensk sfc stands for "sport-football club" and crfso stands for "center of football development of smolensk oblast" ().  2018-2019 : fc dnepr smolensk  on 26 march 2019, the pfl announced that the club dropped out of competition voluntarily, due to lack of financing.  references  external links official website  association football clubs established in 2004 association football clubs disestablished in 2019 defunct football clubs in russia sport in smolensk 2004 establishments in russia 2019 disestablishments in russia
ramandeep singh (born 1 april 1993) is an indian field hockey player who plays as a forward. he was named in the indian squad for the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links ramandeep singh at hockey india  1993 births living people sportspeople from gurdaspur district indian male field hockey players field hockey players from punjab, india field hockey players at the 2014 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2014 asian games field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of india commonwealth games medallists in field hockey commonwealth games silver medallists for india asian games gold medalists for india medalists at the 2014 asian games asian games medalists in field hockey male field hockey forwards uttar pradesh wizards players
albert sweet (october 29, 1931 - january 3, 2021) was an american executive, entrepreneur, philanthropist and commercial real estate developer and founder and co-chairman of occidental entertainment group holdings, inc in los angeles, california.  as a philanthropist, he was active in numerous civic, political, and charitable endeavors. his dedication has always been to humanitarian causes that effect people of all backgrounds and faiths.  biography  early years  professional affiliations  civic and philanthropic honors  2015 the humanitarian torch of learning award from the american friends of the hebrew university   2014 honorary doctorate degree from the technion-israel institute of technology   2012 heroes of hollywood  2011 honorary fellowship from the technion-israel institute of technology  references  external links  occidental entertainment group holdings, inc.  albert sweet story  1931 births 2021 deaths american real estate businesspeople businesspeople from california people from malibu, california people from the bronx
mihail anastasakis (; born 3 december 1994) is a greek track and field athlete specialising in the hammer throw. he finished fourth at the 2016 european championships.  his personal best in the event is 77.72 metres set in nikiti in 2017.  international competitions  references  1994 births living people greek male hammer throwers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of greece athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
the bettoni family were a venitian noble family that would be made counts bettoni. they originated in bienno, italy, near the city of brescia, in val camonica, lombardy.  lorenzo bettoni ennobled merchant, 18 february 1684, was the first to give money  to finance the war of the republic of venice against the turks of the ottoman empire, and thus access to the venetian nobility, offering 10 000 ducats.  his uncle luigi bettoni a dominican friar, was a preacher renamed of the piazza san marco of venice.  nicolo bettoni (born 24 april 1770), printer, editor and typographer and friend of firmin didot travels in europe, where he is presented to the emperor ferdinand i of austria and to the  tsar nicholas i of russia, then in paris, where he meets the vicomte francois-rene de chateaubriand, in geneva and london with his brother giovanni bettoni from 1832 to 1846.  francesco bettoni cazzago (born 7 april 1835 in brescia; died 12 may 1898), son of giacomo and maria bettoni cazzago, writer and professor at the university of padua, brother of the future senator ludovico bettoni has written extensively on brescia.  count federico bettoni cazzago  (born in brescia on 10 february 1865; died in florence on 10 july 1923) was the president of the civil hospital of brescia, president the italian red cross, and member of the board of the italian commercial bank (1920-1923), grand officer of the order of saints maurice and lazarus and knight of the sovereign military order of malta.  his son, count alessandro bettoni cazaggo (born 7 november 1892 in brescia; died 28 april 1951 in rome), a great rider and military career, in part in olympic games of london in 1948.  from another original  related brescian branch, maria bettoni of bienno (and her husband battista panteghini) let their simoni-fe- montholon palace usufruct  to the municipality of bienno in 1988 that turned into a municipal library and acultural center.  the family of the current count bettoni cazzago still lives in the villa bettoni of gargnano on the banks of lake garda and exports franciacorta from chardonnay and pinot grapes, produced by their  azienda  of cazzago san martino all around the world.  references   italian noble families 16th-century italian nobility republic of venice people of the ottoman
-venetian wars 16th-century rulers in europe
simon duggan, ,  (born 13 may 1959) is a new zealand-born australian cinematographer.  career  duggan started his career off in australia at ross wood film studios. his first feature film was 1998's the interview starring hugo weaving. duggan frequently worked with alex proyas and len wiseman, acting as cinematographer on their films garage days, i, robot, underworld: evolution, live free or die hard and knowing. other credits include the mummy: tomb of the dragon emperor and killer elite.  duggan was director of photography on baz luhrmann's the great gatsby. this was luhrmann's first experience filming with 3d.  after the great gatsby, duggan worked on 300: rise of an empire, duncan jones' warcraft, and hacksaw ridge, which marked mel gibson's return to directing after 2006's apocalypto.  duggan was invited as a member to the australian cinematographers society in 1989, and american society of cinematographers in 2022.  filmography  references  external links     1959 births australian cinematographers living people new zealand expatriates in australia
alexandre de villeneuve (25 may 1677, hyeres - 1756) was an 18th-century french classical composer.  a priest in hyeres, he was received in 1697 as a chorister in saint-trophime d'arles and became master of music in 1701. he remained in this office until 1706 and then went to paris. in 1719 he published a book of sacred music dedicated to madame d'orleans.  see also  external links   la princesse d'elide on gallica  french classical composers french male classical composers people from hyeres 1677 births 1756 deaths
the ifaf europe champions league was a european cup-inspired tournament for european gridiron teams affiliated to ifaf europe. it has been held annually between 2014 and 2016.  history  in 2014, the ifaf europe champions league was formed in the same year the big6 european football league initiated. the format involved 13 teams from europe. the group stage format borrowed from the ifaf world championship while the final four format came from the ncaa men's division i basketball tournament.  after the 2016 season the competition was replaced by the ifaf northern european football league 2017. the number of participating teams was reduced to 5, all from northern europe.  champions  championship winners  conference champions  teams  see also big6 european football league ifaf europe  references  external links  ifaf europe online  sports leagues established in 2014 2014 establishments in europe american football leagues in europe ifaf competitions
rr auction is an auction house headquartered in boston's north end with a production office based in amherst, new hampshire. first established in 1976 and officially founded in 1980 by ceo bob eaton, the company is known for its monthly auctions of rare documents, manuscripts, autographs, and historic artifacts, often exceeding 1,000 lots per sale. the auction house has developed global recognition with a worldwide client base and publishes monthly catalogs in print and online via issuu.  history   in 1976, rr auction ceo and founder bob eaton, then 19 years old and recently graduated from newton north high school, purchased $1800 worth of sports memorabilia. the memorabilia included a babe ruth baseball and red sox world series programs, and he proceeded to sell them for ten times his original purchase price. after this, eaton established rr auction and began to sell sports cards and signed memorabilia out of his basement, until he decided in 1980 to send out a mailing list of the items he had available for sale --- thus founding the company in newton centre, massachusetts.  in 1995, rr auction switched from retail sales to auctioning and eaton decided to bring the business to amherst, new hampshire, where the company has an office to this day. the first internet auction occurred the same year. at this time the company also began including items other than autographs.  rr auction launched the option for online bidding in 2004. this has contributed to the growth of the company over the years. in 2009, rr auction brought in $8 million in annual revenue. this increased by 2014, and this same year the company opened an auction gallery in a new 1,500 square-foot facility in boston's north end community after expanding considerably after the launch of their website.  today  the auction house now focuses on artifacts from american history and pop culture, and these are often the themes of their online and live auctions, though autographs are still the most commonly featured item. their auction website remains active while they still send out monthly catalogues. the mid-sized auction house registers up to $10 million in sales every year and mails out over 1,000 monthly catalogues while their online auction system draws around 6,000 visitors per week.  in 2015, an unsuccessful attempt to bring a california class-action lawsuit against rr auction was thrown out after no other individual was found to join the class;[8] the company characterized the suit as "extortion by litigation".[9]. the california lawsuit was dismissed in 2017. in a countersuit filed in federal court in new hampshire citing the
acpa, rr auction sought to protect its reputation and trademark against online attacks by the complainant;[10] this became the basis of an article about "malicious cyber-gripers" in the new jersey law journal.[11]  notable items and auctions  historical documents connected with the alamo, including receipts signed by william barret travis and antonio lopez de santa anna's map, were featured at auction in november 2011. part of the proceeds were donated to the children's bereavement center of south texas. a pair of bonnie parker and clyde barrow's guns sold for over $500,000 in september 2012. these guns were carried on the outlaws when they were killed by officers in 1934.  president john f. kennedy's 1963 convertible sold for $318,000 in october 2013. this convertible was an official vehicle used to transport the first couple, designated "limo one", noteworthy as the last automobile to safely carry kennedy before his assassination in dallas.  over 400 items from the collection of raleigh degeer amyx, including abraham lincoln's eyeglasses, dwight d. eisenhower's rolex watch, and franklin delano roosevelt's cane, were offered at auction in september 2014.   an original white house plinth sold at auction, salvaged by joseph williamson jr. when theodore roosevelt remodeled the white house in 1902.  a george washington signed letter sent to timothy pickering (washington's secretary of state) was sold in january 2017 for over $61,000. the letter was written only one year after george washington left the office.  in march 2017 rr auction managed to sell a partly printed document signed by queen elizabeth i. the document, which carries the crisp signature of queen elizabeth at the head was in very good, almost fine condition and was sold for $36,750.  a thomas lynch jr. (signer of the declaration of independence) signature was sold in may 2017 for $24,504.90. the signature was accompanied by a series of documents meant to certify its provenance and authenticity, including a certificate of authenticity from charles hamilton dated on september 18, 1995.  john f. kennedy's diary was sold at rr auction in april 2017 for $718,750. that was the diary that john f. kennedy kept as a hearst reporter during the summer of 1945 and which included a series of remarkable comments and personal observations regarding notable historical figures of the time.  in july 2017 rr auction managed to sell two of dr. john warren's amputation kits that he used in the revolutionary war.
dr. john warren was one of the founders of harvard medical school and worked as a militia volunteer and surgeon. the amputation kits were sold for over $104.000.  music a first-issue mono pressing of sgt. pepper's lonely hearts club band signed by all four of the beatles sold at auction for $175,698 in january 2014. johnny ramone's personally owned, stage-used red mosrite guitar sold at auction for $71,875 in january 2015. a wolfgang amadeus mozart autograph letter, written in 1786 to his friend the austrian botanist nikolaus joseph von jacquin, sold at auction for $217,000 in october 2015. a hummer owned and customized by rapper tupac shakur, purchased by him just three months before his death, sold for $337,114 in may 2016. a handwritten and signed brit awards acceptance speech that prince was supposed to give during the 1993 event was sold in march 2017 for $32,129. the speech, which was read by kylie minogue was in acceptance of the award for best international artist of that year. the speech was part of a bigger batch of one of a kind items that ranged from $20,000 on an album that did not get released to $25,000 on a jacket. in april 2017 a copy of pink floyd's album the dark side of the moon signed by the band members was sold at rr auction for almost $28,000. the album did not include the record, but carried the signatures of roger waters, davis gilmour, nick manson and richard wright. in early 2017 rr auction sold a love letter signed by judy garland and addressed to none other than frank sinatra. the letter actually confirms the rumors about the two having had an affair while judy garland was still married. the 1950s love letter was sold for $5,897.15.  space  september 2011: alan shepard's letter to his parents regarding him trying out for the "man in space" program, written in 1959, was sold at auction for $106,000.  november 2014: a 1962 hasselblad camera body and zeiss lens that saw use in orbital photo experiments on nasa missions sold at auction.   april 2015: the first apollo mission's flight software, a block ii apollo guidance computer display and keyboard built by mit computer scientist margaret hamilton, sold at auction.   october 2015: the only privately owned watch worn on the surface of the moon, owned and worn by astronaut david scott on apollo 15 in 1971, sold for $1.625 million. this
was the highest bid rr auction has ever received on an item to date.  one of the most valuable items sold by rr auction in 2017 was an apollo 11 flown command module colombia rescue arrow which was attached to the crew hatch. the item was estimated at $100,000 and was eventually sold for over $147,000.  cultural  january 2012: a final letter written by the titanic's bandleader, 33-year-old wallace hartley, sold at auction for $155,000.  january 2013: a 1970s photograph showing princess diana and an unknown man sold for $18,396.   april 2014: the first email ever sent by an american president, sent by bill clinton to astronaut john glenn in 1998, sold at auction for more than $11,000.  november 2015: the white 2003 cadillac escalade used during the final three seasons of the sopranos, the interior signed by the late actor james gandolfini, sold for $119,780.  a 1924 chamonix winter olympics official's badge was put up for auction in january 2017 and sold for over $33,000, although the initial estimate was of $25,000. the badge was sold with the original light blue ribbon and it belonged to a figure skating judge.  notable figures  june 2009: an iconic photograph of albert einstein sticking out his tongue, signed by the theoretical physicist himself, sold at auction for $74,000.  2010: a charles darwin signed portrait by julia margaret cameron sold at auction for a record-setting $27,579.  2012: an edgar allan poe letter to sarah josepha hale, editor of a literary publication and author of "mary had a little lamb," sold at auction for $164,000.  august 2013: a letter written by german businessman oskar schindler, who saved nearly 1,200 jews from nazi death camps, dated august 22, 1944 and asking permission to move his factory from krakow, poland into czechoslovakia, sold for over $21,000.  april 2013: truman capote's 86 page typed hand-notated manuscript for the novella 1958 breakfast at tiffany's sold for over $300,000.[31]  in 2014, a handwritten john lennon letter sells for $28,000  february 2016: a collection of author mario puzo's papers, including multiple drafts of the godfather novel and movie screenplay, sold at auction for $625,000. the 45-box archive was put up for auction by puzo's children.  in february
2017 rr auction sold an autographed picture of marilyn monroe. the inscription reads "to tony, love & kisses, marilyn monroe." and the photo, which was taken during a press conference for the prince and the showgirl was sold for more than $19,000.  a pay order signed by isaac newton issued to "the accountant general of the south sea company," went up for auction in june 2017 and was sold for $53,805.68.  al capone's diamond watch was auctioned off in june 2017 and sold $84,375. the 14 karat white gold and platinum watch was especially made for the infamous gangster as the case bears his initials "ac" out of twenty three cut diamonds.  references  external links   rr auction's bid site  rr auction's consign site  american auction houses american companies established in 1980 retail companies established in 1980 online auction websites of the united states companies based in new hampshire
jin sato may refer to:  , japanese footballer , stage name of yuki sato, japanese actor
jorge luis ona ugarte (born december 31, 1996) is a cuban professional baseball outfielder in the san diego padres organization.  career at the copabe 18u pan american championships 2014, ona hit .636 with four home runs. in july 2015 he defected from cuba to pursue a major league baseball career in the united states.  ona signed with the san diego padres on july 21, 2016. he began his professional career in 2017 with the fort wayne tincaps of the class a midwest league and spent the whole season there, posting a .277 batting average with 11 home runs and 64 rbis in 107 games. in 2018, he played for the lake elsinore storm where he batted .239 with eight home runs and 44 rbis in 100 games. he played in only 25 games in 2019 for the amarillo sod poodles, hitting .348/.417/.539/.956 with 5 home runs and 18 rbi, due to suffering a labrum tear in his right shoulder which required surgery.  on november 20, 2019, the padres added ona to their 40-man roster.  on september 7, 2020, ona was promoted to the major leagues and made his debut that day against the colorado rockies.  on may 4, 2021, ona underwent arthroscopic surgery on his right elbow, putting him out of action for six to eight weeks. on may 9, ona was placed on the 60-day injured list.  references  external links  1996 births living people major league baseball players from cuba cuban expatriate baseball players in the united states major league baseball outfielders san diego padres players fort wayne tincaps players lake elsinore storm players amarillo sod poodles players san antonio missions players
this is a list of terrorist incidents which took place in 2013, including attacks by violent non-state actors for political motives. note that terrorism related to drug wars and cartel violence is not included in these lists. ongoing military conflicts are listed separately.  guidelines   to be included, entries must be notable (have a stand-alone article) and described by a consensus of reliable sources as "terrorism".  list entries must comply with the guidelines outlined in the manual of style under mos:terrorist.  casualty figures in this list are the total casualties of the incident including immediate casualties and later casualties (such as people who succumbed to their wounds long after the attacks occurred).  casualties listed are the victims. perpetrator casualties are listed separately (e.g. x (+y) indicate that x victims and y perpetrators were killed/injured).  casualty totals may be underestimated or unavailable due to a lack of information. a figure with a plus (+) sign indicates that at least that many people have died (e.g. 10+ indicates that at least 10 people have died) - the actual toll could be considerably higher. a figure with a plus (+) sign may also indicate that over that number of people are victims.  if casualty figures are 20 or more, they will be shown in bold. in addition, figures for casualties more than 50 will also be underlined.  incidents are limited to one per location per day. if multiple attacks occur in the same place on the same day, they will be merged into a single incident.  list   total incidents:  references   2013 conflicts in 2013     terrorist incidents  2013
m. m. manasi is a playback singer trained in hindustani vocal. she has sung more than 170 songs in tamil, telugu, kannada, malayalam, hindi and english. she completed her studies at school of management d.g. vaishnav college. her hits in tamil - "stylish thamizachi" in aarambam, "kattikeda" in kakki sattai, "semma mass" in mass, "robo romeo" in tamizhuku en ondrai azhuthavum, "sottavaala" in puli, "aatakari maman ponnu" in ilayaraja's 1000th film tharai thappattai.she won siima award for best female playback singer (telugu) for ''rangamma mangamma'' from 2018 tollywood periodic-drama film rangasthalam.  biography manasi was born to tamil speaking parents in chennai and grew up in mumbai. at the age of 2 she started learning music, her first public performances were bhajans sung during navratri and ganpati poojas. she has a sister, m. m. monisha.  manasi was introduced by ilaiyaraja to the kannada music industry for the movie drishya and by vidhyasagar in malayalam for oru indian pranayakadha. she made an entry into bollywood with "daddy mummy" in bhaag johnny for music director devi sri prasad. this song has 20 million views on youtube.   apart from singing, manasi has also done voice acting for the leading heroines in the tamil film industry: baahubali, thozha, dharmadurai, devi, kaththi sandai for tamanna bhatia, maari for kajal agarwal, anjaan for samantha, kamalinee mukherjee in iraivi, meaghamann for hansika motwani, darling and velainu vandhutta vellaikaaran for nikki galrani, tamizhuku en ondrai azhuthavum for bindhu madhavi, vai raja vai for tapsee, yaan for thulasi, idharkkuthane aasai pattai balakumara for swathi,  thirumanam enum nikkah for nazriya and oh my kadavule for ritika singh.  manasi has sung in telugu and has many charting songs to her credit like "bhelpuri" in aagadu, "notanki" in power, "private party" in sarrainodu,
"gunde aagi pothande" in shivam, "meenakshi" in masala, "om sarvani" in legend, "mara o mara" in tadakha, "lucky lucky rai" in balupu, and "rangamma mangamma" in rangasthalam.  filmography  as playback singer this is only a partial list; manasi has sung over 171 songs in telugu, kannada, tamil, malayalam and hindi  dubbing artist  television title songs  references  1993 births tamil playback singers telugu playback singers kannada playback singers living people singers from chennai tamil singers indian voice actresses indian women playback singers women hindustani musicians 21st-century indian singers 21st-century indian women singers women musicians from tamil nadu indian women classical singers south indian international movie awards winners
brownsville covered bridge was a historic long truss covered bridge located at brownsville, union county, indiana. it was built between 1837 and 1840, and was a single span covered timber bridge. it measured  long and  wide. the bridge spanned the east fork of the whitewater river.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1973 and delisted in 1974. the bridge was photographed by the historic american engineering record in april 1974 as it was being dismantled for relocation to eagle creek park in indianapolis.  see also list of bridges documented by the historic american engineering record in indiana  references  external links  bridges completed in 1840 buildings and structures in union county, indiana covered bridges in indiana former national register of historic places in indiana historic american engineering record in indiana long truss bridges in the united states wooden bridges in indiana
louise distras is an english musician, singer and songwriter from wakefield, west yorkshire. her debut album 'dreams from the factory floor' was released in may 2015. she has received media attention from bbc radio 1, the guardian, and kerrang who described her as "the most exciting voice in uk punk right now."  career  louise distras released her first single 'the hand you hold' on international women's day 2012 and was vocal in the campaign to release pussy riot.  in 2015, she released her debut full-length album 'dreams from the factory floor', a title she stole from the album of another local musician, via pirates press records picking up media attention from the guardian, the independent, and bbc radio 1. featuring mick talbot of style council the album balances propulsive, old-school punk anthems and assertive, socially-aware folk-punk. music journalist john robb called her "the most important protest singer we have" in an article on the louder than war website.  she auctioned the test pressings on ebay and donated the funds to california non-profit human rights organisation justice now and promoted their anti-violence and gender justice message on her summer usa tour. justice now co-ordinated an art project based around 'dreams from the factory floor' lyrics, where people in the central california women's facility (the world's biggest women's prison) illustrated copies of her songs 'the hand you hold' and 'love me the way i am'. the finished art pieces were displayed at various events throughout the year. in 2015, she toured across mainland europe and supported the buzzcocks, the damned and stiff little fingers on their uk tours. later that year she performed alongside mick jones (the clash) and glen matlock (sex pistols) at london's coronet theatre to raise funds for the london fire brigade in joe strummer's memory, and she also supported television at shepherds bush empire.  in december 2015, louise distras appeared live on channel 4 news to discuss the closing of kellingley colliery in wakefield with poet matt abbott and channel 4 news presenter and europe editor matt frei. both matt and louise have no links to the mining industry.  in 2016, louise distras released the hard hitting new single 'aileen' as an appetite whetter for forthcoming new material. the track was inspired by 'america's first female serial killer', aileen wuornos, and blends 60s british invasion girl-group sound with more contemporary, crunchy power pop
. 'aileen' received radio support from kerrang radio, huw stephens (bbc radio 1), john kennedy (radio x) and rodney bingenheimer (kroq). it also featured on the hugs for chelsea online benefit album for whistleblower chelsea manning. the compilation premiered on rolling stone and also included tracks from michael stipe, tom morello, thurston moore and against me.  against the backdrop of the 2017 uk general election and #grime4corbyn campaign, distras announced two punk and grime collaboration shows under the banner of nu punk. she said "the youth in the uk have been voiceless, ignored and forgotten about for too long. these shows are about more than bringing grime and punk together. these shows represent the new energy here in the uk that has seen a record number of young people registering to vote against division, hatred and austerity."  kerrang named louise distras a 'star of 2017' saying "louise distras is the most exciting voice in uk punk right now!" and she performed at glastonbury festival for a second time under the invitation of billy bragg.  in 2018 distras announced she was working on her sophomore album in oakland california with producer ross petersen (bruce springsteen).  distras returned in 2019 with the 'street revolution ep' saying "this collection of songs is a small taste of what to expect from the upcoming album, coming soon." upon its release, street revolution peaked at #10 on the itunes singer-songwriter album chart and received more critical acclaim from kerrang who said "louise distras has the kind of voice that could charm the paint from a car". the rallying title-track was immediately championed at radio x being made john kennedy's 'x-posure hot one' as well as airplay support from bbc radio london where radio dj gary crowley praised the track as "a song for our times. it leaps out of the radio". in support of the ep, louise embarked upon a solo uk tour in partnership with musicians against homelessness to raise funds for the charity crisis and roadtested tracks from the forthcoming new album.  influences distras' biggest musical influences include grunge band nirvana, citing their 1989 debut record bleach as her favourite album.  discography  album  dreams from the factory floor, street revolution records, cd/dd, 2013, pirates press records, lp, 2015  singles/eps  the hand you hold, dd, 2012  shades of hate, dd, 2012  stand strong together, dd, 2013  love
me the way i am/bullets, 7", dd, 2014  bullets, dd, 2015  aileen, cd, dd, 2016  outside of you, cd, dd, 2017  land of dope and glory, dd, 2018  street revolution ep, cd, dd, 2019  compilation appearances  "aileen" on hugs for chelsea, dd, 2016  references   http://teamrock.com/feature/2017-05-11/louise-distras-punk-rock-saved-my-life  https://www.rollingstone.com/music/news/tom-morello-thurston-moore-contribute-to-chelsea-manning-comp-w482462  https://www.billboard.com/articles/news/7800099/chelsea-manning-benefit-album-screaming-females-ted-leo  https://pitchfork.com/news/73565-thurston-moore-tom-morello-against-me-priests-more-featured-on-new-chelsea-manning-benefit-compilation-listen  https://www.loudersound.com/news/louise-distras-unveils-new-video-for-land-of-dope-and-glory  alternative rock singers
the 1967 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1967 ncaa college division football season.  in their first season under head coach roy kramer, the chippewas compiled an 8-2 record (2-1 against iiac opponents), tied for the iiac championship, held five of their ten opponents to fewer than seven points, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 207 to 84.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback gene gilin with 611 passing yards, tailback craig tefft with 1,046 rushing yards, and end greg hoefler with 292 receiving yards.  fullback wally hempton received the team's most valuable player award.  ten central michigan players (tefft, hoefler, hempton, backs chuck barker and bruce cameron, defensive ends bucky colton and mark maksimovicz, guard al mcneal, and tackles ralph sarnowski and raleigh smith) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  bill kelly retired as central michigan's head football coach at the end of the 1966 season after 16 years in the position. roy kramer, who had served as central's freshman football coach in 1966, was hired to replace him.  schedule  references  external links  1968 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons interstate intercollegiate athletic conference football champion seasons central michigan chippewas football
the commonwealth war graves commission (cwgc) aims to commemorate the uk and commonwealth dead of the world wars, either by maintaining a war grave in a cemetery, or where there is no known grave, by listing the dead on a memorial to the missing.  the majority of the memorials commissioned by the cwgc to commemorate the missing dead of world war i were erected in belgium and france along or near to the western front. the following list is of the cwgc memorials to the missing of the first world war erected elsewhere, both in the uk and other regions of the worlds, limited to those that list more than 1000 names each.  the total from the 'numbers' column below of those listed on these memorials is 138,062.  list of memorials  see also  list of war cemeteries and memorials on the gallipoli peninsula  list of commonwealth war graves commission world war ii memorials to the missing  references  commonwealth war graves
amalion is a multilingual independent academic publishing house based in dakar, senegal.  history amalion is an independent pan-african publishing house based in dakar, created in 2009. amalion publishes scholarly knowledge from various parts of africa, and across linguistic boundaries. amalion's logo is represented by the head of a lion in a plethora of colors representing the diversity of the african continent.  the first book released by amalion in june 2009 is a collection of poetry from the ugandan writer mildred kiconco barya entitled give me room to move my feet. since then, the house has published other works, including a history of the yoruba people by stephen adebanji akintoye (2010), la dette odieuse de l'afrique, by leonce ndikumana and james boyce (2013) on the links between debt, capital flight and development in africa; wala bok: une histoire orale du hip hop au senegal, (2015) by fatou kande senghor on the evolution of rap and the emergence of youth activism in senegal  and my life has a price, by tina okpara (2012), a searing story of freedom from modern slavery. amalion also published the promise of hope (2014), the last work of the ghanaian poet kofi awoonor, who died in the terrorist attack on westgate shopping mall in nairobi in 2013, within the african poetry book series project coordinated by the poet kwame dawes. in 2016, the work of the renowned nigerian historian mahmud modibbo tukur british colonisation of northern nigeria, 1897-1914 is released. amalion is also involved with jacana literary foundation and some publishing houses around africa in the creation of the new gerald kraak award and anthology for the promotion of gender and human rights launched in 2016.  amalion titles cover literary fiction, social sciences, development studies, biographies, arts and politics aimed for academics and the general public.  published authors  mildred kiconco barya  louis camara  tina okpara  ibrahima amadou niang  kofi awoonor  clifton gachagua  kevin eze  stephen adebanji akintoye  anthonia makwemoisa  enyinna chuta  leonce ndikumana  :fr:james k. boyce  :fr:jean-bernard ouedraogo  rotimi williams olatunji  beatrice adeyinka laninhun  tope omoniyi  :fr:fatou kande senghor  mahmud mod
ibbo tukur  tade akin aina  bhekinkosi moyo  fabrizio terenzio  antoinette tidjani alou  akwasi aidoo  references  2009 establishments academic publishing academic publishing companies companies of senegal mass media in senegal
veeeeeeeeery edmond (tc: 太太！太太！) is a cantopop album by edmond leung.  track listing disc 1 mrs! mrs! (太太！太太！) overnight (一夜之間) human disqualification (人間失格) the world is so k (全世界這麼k) love me now (現在就愛我)  disc 2 you and me (你和我) june day (六月天) ruqirusu (如泣如訴) paradise lost (失樂園) long term relationship (細水長流)  charts  external links  edmond leung albums 1999 albums
hashime murayama (1879-1954) was a japanese american painter and scientific illustrator.  he was best known for his exquisite paintings of birds, insects, fish, mammals, and other wildlife. employed by the national geographic society from 1921 to 1941, his work was featured in the national geographic magazine.  during world war ii he was interned for being japanese. despite this, he worked with george papanicolaou at cornell university, creating images of cancer cells that were used to train diagnosticians and prove the effectiveness of the pap smear as a life-saving cancer screening method.  life hashime murayama was born in japan in 1879, and graduated in 1905 from the kyoto imperial art industry college. he came to the united states the following year. in 1910 his teacher's daughter, nao makino, joined him, and they were married in new york city; their sons ken and sutemi were born in 1911 and 1919.  hashime murayama was employed as a technician at weill cornell medicine for several years, preparing slides, doing microscope drawings, and making models for anatomical study.  in 1914 he patented a technique for mounting biological tissues to prepare them for photography. while at cornell, he became a friend of greek-born doctor and researcher george papanicolaou.  hashime murayama also pursued a career as an artist, often visiting the new york aquarium where he painted fish among the plants and rocks of their environment. he paid close attention to details such as the exact number of scales on a fish, and combined this scientific accuracy with vivid artistic treatments of color and light.  in 1921, the national geographic society hired murayama. as an artist at national geographic, he paid meticulous attention to his drawings, adding his distinct style to them and making them instantly popular. he painted fish, which were his personal favorite, frogs, spiders, ants, honeybees, wasps, and butterflies. to get sources from which to study, he kept bug specimens in a jar and visited aquariums to look at frogs, trout and salmon. the 1926 washington directory shows that "hashime murayama, artist" was the owner of a new house at 2436 37th street, nw, in the brand-new neighborhood called glover park.  after a career of over twenty years as an artist at national geographic, murayama left (or was fired) in september 1941 because of being an immigrant. japan-united states relations were about to be severed due to the attack on pearl harbor. murayama was replaced as staff
artist by walter a. weber, who was the son of immigrants as well. weber artwork was stated to be superior to murayama's.  murayama was offered work at cornell university in new york by george papanicolaou. papanicolaou was studying cancer cells, and needed illustrations of cancer cells to train other doctors to identify diseased cells for cancer screening.   murayama used a camera lucida to project an image of the cells under the  microscope onto paper. it was essential for murayama to identify key examples in the groups of cells that could best illustrate the differences between healthy and cancerous cells, and then to accurately reproduce the structures and add the colors of the dyes. to draw fine structures such as cilia he sometimes used a brush with a single bristle.  in 1943, murayama's illustrations of cervical cells were published in a book by papanicolaou, describing what became known as the pap smear, to detect cervical cancer.  during the war, murayama was watched closely. his washington house, which he had signed over to one of his sons (a united states citizen), was searched by agents seeking signs of espionage. the alien enemy hearing board had him arrested twice, in 1942 and 1943. murayama was detained for five months on ellis island.  papanicolaou appealed to the board, on the grounds that murayama was doing essential, potentially life-saving work that no one else could do. he gained the support of u.s. attorney general francis biddle, who arranged for murayama to be freed.  in 1952, murayama's original watercolor paintings were used as models by diagnosticians in the largest screening trial to be sponsored by the national cancer institute, involving nearly 150,000 women. the use of pap smears as a cancer screening tool decreased the mortality rate from cervical cancer by 70%.  murayama continued to study cancer cells at cornell university until his death in 1954. he was survived by his wife and two children. in 1966 his widow, nao, became an american citizen.  a may 2019 google doodle of george papanicolaou shows him holding one of the illustrations of cancer cells drawn by hashime murayama.  references   1879 births 1954 deaths japanese emigrants to the united states american artists of japanese descent national geographic society cornell university staff
the 2016-17 austrian cup () was the 83rd season of austria's nationwide football cup competition. it began with a first round match between fc karabakh wien and rapid wien on 8 july 2016 and ended on 1 june 2017 with the final at worthersee stadion in klagenfurt. red bull salzburg were the defending champions.  the cup winners were entitled to participate in the third qualification round of the 2017-18 uefa europa league.  participants  a total of 64 teams will participate in the competition. clubs from the 2016-17 bundesliga and 2016-17 first league are automatically qualified but, as bundesliga reserve teams could theoretically participate in the first league, may only enter their first team. this means that first league members fc liefering, while technically an independent entity, will not participate as they are fully controlled by red bull salzburg. the remaining spots were distributed by a fixed scheme to amateur clubs from the nine austrian regional football associations:  7 teams: lower austria  6 teams each: upper austria, styria  5 teams: vienna  4 teams each: burgenland, carinthia, salzburg, tyrol, vorarlberg for each regional association, the respective cup winners and, if applicable, losing teams from the relegation play-offs between first league and the regional leagues are obliged to participate.  scheduled dates  the schedule are as follows:  first round: 8, 15-17 july 2016  second round: 20-21 september 2016  third round: 25-26 october 2016  quarterfinals: 4-5 april 2017  semifinals: 25-26 april 2017  final: 1 june 2017 at klagenfurt  matches  first round  the draw for this round was conducted on 20 june 2016 in paris, france. the reason for this rather exceptional place was that all leaders of the austrian football association were in the city due to the uefa euro 2016. the matches were drawn by actress and model davia martelli.  matches for this round were determined on regional criteria. the 45 amateur clubs from the regional leagues and below were split into two groups, with the eastern group consisting of 26 teams from vienna, lower austria, burgenland, styria and carinthia and the western group comprising 19 teams from upper austria, salzburg, tyrol and vorarlberg. in a first step, seven matches between members of the eastern group and six matches among western group participants were drawn before each of the remaining clubs were paired with one of the professional teams.  fixtures of this round will be played on 15-17 july 2016 with the
exception of the match between fc karabakh and sk rapid which had been moved to 8 july 2016 due to the opening of the allianz stadion.  (all times given in cest)  second round  (all times given in cest)  third round  (all times given in cest)  quarterfinals  (all times given in cest)  semifinals  the draw for the semifinals took place on 9 april. (all times given in cest)  final  references  external links       austrian cup seasons cup austrian cup
mikhail tikhonovich tikhanov (михаил тихонович тиханов; 1789-1862) was a russian artist who accompanied captain vasily golovnin's circumnavigation aboard the frigate kamchatka.  biography born a serf in 1789, tikhanov showed artistic talent at the age of seventeen and was sent by his master prince galitzine to the imperial academy of arts in saint petersburg. freed in 1815, he worked at the academy before being recommended by alexey olenin for the post of an expeditionary artist for captain vasily golovnin and the expedition of the kamchatka around the world.  during the voyage from 1817 to 1819, tikhanov painted at least 43 different pictures of important figures and scenes from russian north america, alaska, california and hawaii. he specialized in human portraits and painted figures including hawaiian notables king kamehameha i and high chief boki, as well as russian colonial governor alexander andreyevich baranov. hawaiian scholar david w. forbes stated his works done in hawaii were "among the most mysterious, haunting portrayals of pacific islanders ever created". his paintings done in northern california, including one of a man named balthazar, are the only known depictions of bodega bay coast miwok.  illness and death on the voyage home in 1818, tikhanov became seriously ill while the kamchatka was in manila in the philippines. afterward, he started showing signs of mental illness and was placed in a hospital in saint petersburg. despite a brief period where he showed signs of improvement, he relapsed and never recovered his sanity or worked again. he lived off a disability stipend for the rest of his life. from 1824 until his death in 1862, he spent the remainder of his life in the care of a widow of one of his colleagues. although some of his works were later published by captain golovnin in his account of the expedition, most of his works were never published in his lifetime. his works are now in the museum of the russian academy of arts in saint petersburg.  gallery  references  19th-century russian painters russian male painters 1789 births 1862 deaths russian serfs russian explorers of the pacific
ophryotrocha batillus is a species of polychaete worm, first found on deep sea whale fall and wood fall habitats in the north-east pacific, off the southern californian coast. it is very similar to ophryotrocha scutellus, yet differs from the latter genetically.  references  further reading ravara, ascensao, et al. "first account on the diversity of ophryotrocha (annelida, dorvilleidae) from a mammal-fall in the deep-atlantic ocean with the description of three new species." systematics and biodiversity 13.6 (2015): 555-570. wiklund, helena. evolution of annelid diversity at whale-falls and other marine ephemeral habitats. 2009.  external links  worms  polychaetes
ceduna waters is a locality in the australian state of south australia located on the west coast of the eyre peninsula overlooking two bays associated with great australian bight about  north-west of the state capital of adelaide and about  south-east of the town centre of ceduna.  the boundaries of the locality were created in 2011 by the exclusion of a portion of land from the locality of ceduna.  the locality's naming is reported as reflecting "the location and the new subdivision's marine focus."  ceduna waters consists of land associated with a section of coastline that includes, from west to east, part of the east coast of bosanquet bay, the promontory known as cape vivonne and part of the west coast of decres bay.  as of 2012, the majority land use within the locality was residential with the coastline being zoned for conservation purposes.  ceduna waters is located within the federal division of grey, the state electoral district of flinders and the local government area of the district council of ceduna.  references  external links ceduna online  towns in south australia eyre peninsula
frederick william lund (8 december 1874 - 4 july 1965) was a british businessman and one of the proprietors of messrs. w. lund and sons, owners of the blue anchor line shipping company.  their steamer, waratah, disappeared without a trace between durban and cape town in july 1909, while making her second voyage from australia to the united kingdom. frederick lund gave evidence to an inquiry into the disappearance at london in december 1910.  references   1872 births 1965 deaths people from lewisham british business executives british people of danish descent
navy region southwest is one of eleven current naval regions responsible to commander, navy installations command for the operation and management of naval shore installations in california, nevada, utah, arizona, colorado, new mexico. it is headquartered across from the broadway pier in downtown san diego. the command also serves as the regional coordinator for the commander, u.s. pacific fleet, headquartered in hawaii, coordinating support for bases in southern california and nevada.  the commander also serves as regional environmental coordinator for california, arizona and nevada and coordinates and oversees environmental compliance actions with local, state and federal regulatory agencies. additionally, comnavregsw is responsible for planning and coordinating department of the navy response to civil emergencies within the states of nevada, utah, colorado, arizona and california.  history  navy region southwest comprises the former areas of the eleventh and twelfth naval districts.  the eleventh and twelfth naval districts, were both established on 7 may 1903 in accordance with general order no. 128, signed by acting secretary of the navy charles h. darling.   the eleventh naval district was to be headquartered at the lake training station in lake bluff, illinois, while the twelfth was to be headquartered at the mare island in vallejo, california. both districts were part of a larger administrative unit known as the "ninth, tenth and eleventh naval districts".  in 1919 when the ninth, tenth and eleventh districts were split, the eleventh naval district, then known as commander navy southwest, established headquarters for the first commander with a staff of seven officers at naval station north island.  in 1922, when the naval supply center buildings at the foot of broadway street on harbor drive were completed, the naval base headquarters moved to its present site.  with the outbreak of world war ii, san diego's naval establishment played an important role in coordinating the supply provisioning to the war fronts in the pacific. naval bases and stations throughout the region were expanded to provide maximum support to combatant forces of the fleet. with korea, vietnam and "cold war" commitments, fleet support activities under commander naval base san diego remained at a very high level. at that time, the eleventh district consisted of new mexico; arizona; clark county, nevada; the southern part of california, including counties of santa barbara, kern, and all of the counties south of (and including) san bernardino.  when the twelfth naval district was disestablished in 1977, navy southwest assumed all its duties and responsibilities, and annexed the areas of colorado, utah, the rest of nevada, and
the rest of california  the eleventh naval district was disestablished on 30 september 1980. however, the commander, navy southwest remained as the commander of naval base san diego.  in 1999 the command was officially renamed commander navy region southwest.  subordinate commands   naval station san diego  naval base point loma (former subase san diego)  naval base coronado, including:  naval air station north island  naval amphibious base coronado  naval auxiliary landing field san clemente island  naval outlying landing field imperial beach  silver strand training complex  mountain warfare training camp michael monsoor,   warner springs training area,  naval air facility el centro, ca, including:   u.s. naval observatory flagstaff station  naval air station lemoore, ca  naval base ventura county (former naval construction battalion center port hueneme & naval air station point mugu)  naval weapons station seal beach, ca and it's detachments in fallbrook and in norco, california at naval surface warfare center corona  naval air station, fallon, nv.  nsa monterey, supporting naval postgraduate school, fleet numerical meteorology and oceanography center, and the united states naval research laboratory - monterey, monterey, california  naval air station china lake, which supports naval air warfare center, weapons division  references   regions and districts of the united states navy military units and formations established in 1999 1999 establishments in the united states
marigil is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  julio marigil (1936-2013), spanish footballer and manager rene marigil (1928-2009), spanish cyclist
sofia julia rito enocksson (born ) is an uruguayan female weightlifter, competing in the 53 kg category and representing uruguay at international competitions.   she competed at world championships, including at the 2015 world weightlifting championships, and at the 2016 summer olympics.  early life rito was born in stockholm, sweden to julio rito, who is an uruguayan. her mother lotta enocksson is a plastic artist and is the origin of one of sofia rito's surnames, enocksson. julio rito had been exiled from uruguay during the military dictatorship. sofia rito was raised in stockholm and later in strangnas, sweden.  major results  references  external links  1985 births living people uruguayan people of swedish descent swedish people of uruguayan descent uruguayan female weightlifters sportspeople from stockholm olympic weightlifters of uruguay weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics weightlifters at the 2019 pan american games pan american games competitors for uruguay
halo khan ardalan () was one of the most famous ardalan rulers in the sixteenth and seventeenth century. he ruled the autonomous ardalan state from 1590 to 1616. he is known as the most powerful ardalan ruler. he ruled over a large part of kurdistan and his state was majorly independent from safavid and ottoman empire.  references  kurdish rulers ardalan 16th-century iranian people 17th-century iranian people
sphingomonas aerolata  is a gram-negative and psychrotolerant bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas aerolata at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  aerolata bacteria described in 2003
helmut g. hinghofer-szalkay (* january 22, 1948 in graz) is an austrian physiologist. he headed the institute for physiology, karl franzens university (from 2000) / medical university graz (2005-2013), was founder and director of a non-profit research lab (institute for adaptive and spaceflight physiology, 1994-2010). he is married to the artist irma michaela szalkay and has two children/  life and career  hinghofer-szalkay started studying medicine 1966 and graduated (dr. med. univ.) from the karl-franzens-university in graz 1974. after his habilitation 1982 he was european space agency research fellow at the nasa ames research center in moffett field, california (1984-85). 1988 he was awarded tit. ao. universitatsprofessor and became full professor 1999.  hinghofer-szalkay organized the 3rd european symposium on life sciences research in space 1987 in graz and a space life sciences symposiums in vienna 1992. he was principal investigator of an austro-russian experiment on mir space station (bodyfluids, 1991) and a consecutive experiment within the frame of the rlf program (current world record of a 14-month mission) 1994. he headed the 4th international head-out water immersion symposium 1999 and the 15. international astronautical academy (iaa) humans in space symposium in graz 2005.  hinghofer-szalkay served as scientific director of the styrian academy of dietetics 1993-2000, headed the scientific society of physicians in styria 2008-2010 and the franz-lanyar-foundation 2002-2010. he was secretary of the scientific society of physicians in styria 1979-2010 and executive secretary of the austrian physiological society 1979-1983 and 1997-2012.  awards  •  hochst-award graz 1978, 1980, 1986  •  european space agency fellow 1984/1985  •  nasa space act tech brief award - arc-11686 (1986)  •  styrian research award 1993  •  member, council of trustees, international society for gravitational physiology 1998  •  juri-gagarin-decoration 1999  references  external links  •     list of publications  •     iap colloquia & symposia  •     eine reise durch die physiologie (a journey through physiology)   1948 births austrian physiologists living people people from graz in health professions
james andrew gibbons (born 16 march 1998) is an english professional footballer who plays as a full-back for  club port vale.  a graduate of the port vale youth-team, he enjoyed a short loan spell at leek town in the 2016-17 season and made his first-team debut at vale park in december 2016. he established himself in the first-team during the 2017-18 season and though he found himself frequently overlooked the following season he managed to regain his first-team place during the 2019-20 campaign.  playing career gibbons first joined port vale at the age of 11, though by the age of 15 coaches questioned whether he would make it in the game due to his small stature. he did however go on to turn professional at the club in april 2016. he joined northern premier league division one south club leek town on a one-month loan on 17 september 2016, and made his debut for the club later that day in a 2-1 defeat to sheffield. he made a total of five starts for the club. he made his senior debut for the "valiants" as a 60th-minute substitute for paulo tavares in a 4-0 victory over hartlepool united in an fa cup tie at vale park on 4 december 2016. he signed a new one-year contract in may 2017.  he did not make a first-team appearance under manager michael brown, but was selected by caretaker-managers david kelly and chris morgan for his efl league two debut on 23 september 2017, and was sent off after receiving two yellow cards during what ended as a 1-1 draw at yeovil town. new manager neil aspin said that "i don't look at him as a young lad, i just look at him as a player. he is a player who deserves to be playing and i am happy with him." he signed a two-year contract extension in november to keep him at the club until 2020. he was sent off for the second time in his career on 12 december, again away at yeovil, for committing a dangerous challenge; he was handed a four match suspension. however aspin heavily criticised referee gavin ward, and said "there is no criticism from me [for gibbons] in this instance because he is a competitive player and we want to keep that". gibbons returned to the starting eleven after serving his suspension, and though the defensive line-up changed due to the departures of gavin gunning and tom anderson he refused to accept any excuses for what he admitted was a decline in the team
's form and his own personal performances. he was named as the club's young player of the year at the end of the 2017-18 season.  he started the 2018-19 season in the starting eleven at right-back, and had only teenage loanee mitch clark as competition. however he found himself out of the starting eleven as aspin felt he was too inconsistent. a hip injury then saw him sidelined for a month. on 29 january 2019, he was sent off for the third time in his career during a 0-0 draw at newport county, but the club successfully appealed the red card. he made the last of his 19 appearances of the season in a 1-0 defeat at cheltenham town on 23 february.  he started the 2019-20 season as new manager john askey's first-choice right-back, ahead of new signing callum evans. he did, however, pick up five yellow cards in the league before october and was given a one match suspension, leading to askey to criticise him for picking up "daft bookings". after a public vote held in december 2019, he was named by the sentinel as port vale's second-best right-back of the 2010s with 27% of the vote, behind adam yates (62%) and ahead of ben purkiss (11%). on 14 january, he scored his first goal in professional football during a 2-1 defeat at morecambe. it was revealed the next month that the club had an option to extend his contract beyond the summer. however he instead signed a new contract to keep him at the club until summer 2022.  he missed the start of the 2020-21 season after picking up an injury in pre-season, which allowed new signing zak mills to begin the campaign at right-back. he then picked up a hamstring injury in his second appearance of the season and was ruled out of action for the first half of the season after undergoing surgery. he marked his 100th appearance for the club with a return to the starting eleven, in a 5-0 victory over southend united on 30 january. however he aggravated the hamstring injury in the penultimate game of the season in may. new manager darrell clarke began an overhaul of the playing squad in may 2021 but publicly praised gibbons and two other existing players (nathan smith and tom conlon); gibbons said that hearing such praise from the manager whilst injured "means the world" to him.  gibbons missed the start of the 2021-22 season with his hamstring injury, returning to fitness at the
end of august. with david worrall now established at right-wing back in a 3-5-2 formation, gibbons slotted into the side at left-wing back and formed "an impressive relationship" with left-sided centre-half dan jones. after providing an assist and a goal during a 3-2 defeat at oldham athletic on 20 november, it was reported in the sentinel that "his performances at left wing back have been a highlight of the season so far". after signing veteran left-wing back chris hussey in the january transfer window, clarke stated that gibbons would remain an important members of the squad and that he liked to have competition for all positions. however gibbons picked up another hamstring injury which saw him ruled out for a few weeks. he returned to action in mid-february and said "i trust my hamstrings now. hopefully, that is the last of them."  style of play gibbons is a right-back, though can also fill in at left-back, and has been described as a "little terrier" by former manager rob page. port vale youth coach mick ede compared his style to that of mike pejic, saying that "he plays with a lot of intensity and physicality". his physicality has led to a poor disciplinary record and therefore suspensions, though gibbons commented that "you are not going to win every tackle so it is going to happen". he is also adept at going forward and delivering crosses.  career statistics  references  1998 births living people footballers from stoke-on-trent english footballers association football fullbacks port vale f.c. players leek town f.c. players northern premier league players english football league players
this article is about the treatment of and laws concerning non-human animals in australia.  australia has moderate animal protections by international standards.  national legislation  there is little national animal welfare legislation in australia; most animal welfare regulations are at the state and territory level.  the australian animal welfare strategy developed a framework for the adoption of a single animal welfare regulation model to be adopted by each state and territory government.  this resulted in regulations for the australian animal welfare standards for the land transport of livestock, which have been implemented in every state except western australia. the advisory committee related to the strategy has been disbanded, and the responsibility for further developing the strategy has been handed over to the states and territories and national funding for animal welfare withdrawn.  in 2014 australia received a c out of possible grades a,b,c,d,e,f,g on world animal protection's animal protection index.  state legislation  new south wales  the new south wales 1979 prevention of cruelty to animals act prohibits cruelty to animals and creates a duty of care in animal users. these protections cover vertebrates as well as crustaceans invertebrates.  the act provides for the development of regulations relating to different species of farm animals, and codes for some species have been made.  south australia  the 1985 animal welfare act of south australia prohibits "intentionally, unreasonably, or recklessly causing an animal unnecessary harm", and creates a duty of care in animal owners. this applies to vertebrates except fish.  mandatory standards on specified species, transport, saleyards, and slaughter are incorporated under the animal welfare regulations 2012. it is the only state to outlaw killing dogs or cats for consumption.  victoria  victoria's 1986 prevention of cruelty to animals act prohibits cruelty to all vertebrates and all adult decapod crustaceans. there are mandatory codes on conditions for keeping domestic animals, transport, and slaughter.  australian capital territory  the australian capital territory's 1992 animal welfare act prohibits cruelty by intentionally causing pain or failing to act. the law applies to vertebrates and cephalopods, as well as crustaceans intended for human consumption.  with regard to farm animals, the act prohibits debeaking and keeping commercial laying hens and pigs in "accommodation that is not appropriate", and provides for codes of practice on issues such as transport and slaughter to be made.  tasmania  tasmania's 1993 animal welfare act prohibits doing or failing to do any act which causes or is likely to cause unreasonable and unjustifiable pain or suffering to an animal. this applies to vertebrates
.  the act provides standards and guidelines on the welfare of different species including during transport and slaughter.  northern territory  the 2000 animal welfare act of the northern territory prohibits causing unnecessary suffering and creates a duty of care. the act does not specifically address farm animal welfare. however, the northern territory livestock act 2009 regulate welfare during transport to slaughter.  queensland  queensland's 2001 animal care and protection act prohibits acts of cruelty and creates a duty of care, which applies to vertebrates and to prescribed cephalopods and malacostraca. there are compulsory codes on livestock transport and partly compulsory codes on pigs and poultry.  western australia  in western australia, the 2002 animal welfare act prohibits acts of cruelty and causing unnecessary harm, including by abandonment. the law covers vertebrates other than fish.  western australia's animal welfare (general) regulations 2003 provide guidance on the welfare of animals during transport and slaughter as well as the welfare of specific species.  animal welfare issues  animal agriculture   each year, 520-620 million animals are killed in australian slaughterhouses: 460-550 million broiler chickens, 3-5 million turkeys, 8 million ducks, 4-5 million pigs, 11-12 million layer hens, 4 million bulls, bullocks, and steers, 10 million cattle, 700,000-900,000 calves, 5-7 million sheep, and 17-19 million lambs.  a further 12 million male chicks are culled, and many more animals die on farms, including an estimated 15 million lambs who die each year within 48 hours of birth due to inadequate protection from harsh weather.  the majority of these animals (around 500 million annually) are farmed intensively.  de-beaking, de-toeing, tail-docking, tooth pulling, castration, and dehorning of livestock without anaesthetic are not illegal (though debeaking is prohibited in the australian capital territory), nor is confinement in veal crates, gestation crates and battery cages.  in 2014, australia produced 152,210 tons of wild-caught sea animals and 74,913 tons of aquaculture animals.  live export of animals   australia is the world's largest live exporter of animals for slaughter. the trade involved over three million animals in 2011 valued at approximately a$1 billion, of which the majority were cattle and sheep..  the export of live animals from australia has generated some controversy, with animal rights organisations such as animals australia asking it to be banned on the grounds that certain
countries where animals are shipped have no laws to protect them from cruelty. in 2011, the gillard government briefly suspended the trade and came close to a ban. exports have since resumed.  animal product consumption  in 2014 australia surpassed the united states as the world's highest per-capita consumer of land-animal meat (beef, veal, pork, chicken, and lamb), at 90.21 kilograms per person.  this figure has been rising over the past two decades, up from 77 kilograms per person in 1979.  annual per capita seafood consumption is approximately 25 kg.  in 2013/14 australians ate 213.3 eggs per capita and drank 105 liters of milk per capita. studys have been found that meat consumption is heavily linked with obesity, cancer and diabetes.  veganism and vegetarianism  in 2010 the vegetarian/vegan society of queensland incorporated conducted a survey of 1202 australians in which 5% identified as vegetarian and 1% identified as vegan.  however, based on respondent reports of what foods they had recently eaten, only 2% actually ate a vegetarian diet (no animal flesh) and only 1 respondent ate a vegan diet (no animal products).  as of march 2016, 11.2% of people living in australia, 2.1 million people, said "the food i eat is all, or almost all, vegetarian." the report also found that vegetarians were likely to be slimmer; while 60.7% of australian adults have a body mass index that qualifies as overweight or obese, this figure drops to 45.4% of those whose diet is mostly or totally vegetarian.  humane slaughter  animals australia and rspca victoria state that all animals should be stunned prior to slaughter because of the suffering they experience during their slaughter. according to the australian department of agriculture, "australia's state and territory governments have primary responsibility for animal welfare and laws to prevent cruelty". four abattoirs in the state of victoria, australia have government exemptions allowing them to slaughter animals without prior stunning. these abattoirs are : "hardwick's meat works" of kyneton; "ga gathercole" of carrum; "mc herd" of geelong; and "midfield meats" of warrnambool.  animals used in research  according to humane research australia (hra) approximately 7 million animals were used in research and teaching in australia in 2014, up from around 6.5 million in 2004.  statistics from four australian states indicate that 6,613 dogs, 2
,183 cats, 676,066 "native mammals" (including koalas, wallabies, possums, and wombats), 202 primates, 2,023,834 mice, 113,158 rats, 333,922 sheep, and 425,994 domestic fowl (including chickens and ducks) and 384,225 birds, 315,328 fish, 83,922 amphibians, 30,698 reptiles, and 684,107 "other aquatic animals" were used. hra notes that there is no national collection of animal use statistics, and that these are "very conservative" figures.  in 2016, following hra and the humane society international's be cruelty-free campaign, the australian government pledged to ban testing cosmetics on animals and the sale of cosmetics that have been tested on animals.  animal activism  animals australia is an organization whose activities include public advertising on issues related to farm animal welfare, undercover investigations of animal farming operations, and corporate outreach.  their corporate campaigns resulted in cage-free egg commitments from mcdonald's and subway.  animals australia is currently one of animal charity evaluators' (ace) standout organizations.  world animal protection is an organisation that works to build a world where animal welfare matters and animal cruelty has ended. their work focuses on making sure the australian government and companies operating in australia are doing their part to protect the 70 billion animals born in farming each year. the organisation also works to protect animals against abuse in the region, as well as protect sea animals from abandoned fishing nets and other threats.  animal liberation is an australian animal protection group founded in 1976 whose mission is "to work toward the end of suffering of exploited and confined animals, through legislation, consumer advocacy, action and humane education."  animal liberation victoria (alv) is a particularly active branch which has conducted highly publicized open rescues of farm animals, protests against animal farming including blocking transport trucks and ships, and vegan education.  their recent activism includes a release of undercover investigation footage showing the painful deaths of pigs killed by carbon dioxide in victorian slaughterhouses in late 2015, alongside activists chaining themselves to slaughterhouses.  alv is critical of the royal society for the prevention of cruelty to animals, for its approved farming scheme-which, according to alv, supports cruel animal farms-and serving "bbq along with the eggs of abused chickens" at fundraisers.  see also    duck hunting in south australia animal consciousness  animal management in rural and remote indigenous communities (ammric) animal rights movement cruelty to animals
list of animal rights advocates  million paws walk  timeline of animal welfare and rights  by country   animal rights by country or territory animal welfare in the united kingdom animal welfare in the united states animal welfare and rights in canada animal welfare and rights in south africa animal welfare in new zealand timeline of animal welfare and rights in europe  references
christine wolf (born 5 march 1989) is an austrian professional golfer.  wolf is a graduate of the university of tennessee at chattanooga.  wolf turned professional in 2012 and played on the let access series from 2012 to 2013, winning one event. she has played on the ladies european tour since 2014.  in 2015, wolf finished runner-up to holly clyburn at the nsw women's open, an alpg tour event.  wolf qualified for the 2016 summer olympics, finishing in the 43rd place.  professional wins  ladies european tour wins (1) 2019 hero women's indian open  let access series wins (1) 2012 crete ladies open  team appearances amateur european ladies' team championship (representing austria): 2007, 2008, 2009, 2010  professional european championships (representing austria): 2018  references  external links  austrian female golfers ladies european tour golfers olympic golfers of austria golfers at the 2016 summer olympics golfers at the 2020 summer olympics university of tennessee at chattanooga alumni people from innsbruck-land district sportspeople from innsbruck 1989 births living people
dera baba nanak assembly constituency (sl. no.: 10) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in gurdaspur district, punjab state, india.  member of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  previous years  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india gurdaspur district
the dangerous drugs (special preventive measures) act 1985 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to provide for the preventive detention of persons associated with any activity relating to or involving the trafficking in dangerous drugs.  preamble preamble of the act provides the following considerations: whereas action which is prejudicial to public order in malaysia has been taken and further similar action is being threatened by a substantial body of persons both inside and outside malaysia; and whereas parliament considers it necessary to stop such action;  structure the dangerous drugs (special preventive measures) act 1985, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 2 parts containing 25 sections and no schedule (including 4 amendments).  part i: preliminary  part ii: powers of preventive detention  references  external links  dangerous drugs (special preventive measures) act 1985   1985 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
john paulet, 14th marquess of winchester (3 june 1801 - 4 july 1887), styled earl of wiltshire until 1843, was a british peer and soldier.  life born at amport house in 1801 as the eldest son of the 13th marquess of winchester, he was educated at eton. on 10 april 1817, he was commissioned a cornet in the 10th light dragoons, bought a lieutenancy on 16 november 1820, and a captaincy in the 35th regiment of foot on 12 june 1823. he exchanged into the 8th hussars the same year. on 9 june 1826, he bought a majority in the regiment (lord brudenell, later lord cardigan, got his captaincy), and purchased an unattached lieutenant-colonelcy of infantry on 30 december 1826. on 14 april 1837, he exchanged from unattached half-pay to replace lord bingham (later lord lucan) as lieutenant-colonel of the 17th lancers, and then retired from the army the next day. on 29 june 1842, he was appointed colonel of the north hampshire militia after the death of lord rodney, much to the chagrin of the regimental lieutenant-colonel, peter hawker, who aspired to the post.  paulet succeeded his father as marquess of winchester in 1843. he was appointed a deputy lieutenant of hampshire on 31 march 1847, and succeeded the duke of wellington as lord lieutenant of hampshire in 1852.  family  on 29 november 1855, winchester married hon. mary montagu (1828-1868), daughter of henry robinson-montagu, 6th baron rokeby, at st james', westminster. together they had three children:   lord augustus john henry beaumont (6 february 1858 - 11 december 1899)  lady lillian mary (26 july 1859 - 11 november 1952): married as his first wife, randolph gordon erskine-wemyss, laird of wemyss castle and chief of clan wemyss. they had a son michael who married lady victoria cavendish-bentinck, daughter of william cavendish-bentinck, 6th duke of portland, and a daughter mary who married lt. ernest caswell of the grenadier guards.  lord henry william montagu (30 october 1862 - 28 june 1962)  he died on 4 july 1887 and was succeeded by his elder son, augustus.  references   1801 births 1887 deaths 8th king's royal irish hussars officers 10th royal hussars officers 35th regiment of foot officers british militia officers deputy lieutenants of hampshire lord-lieutenants of hampshire people educated at eton college marquesses of winchester
the adoration of the magi is a circa 1480-1485 oil on panel painting of the adoration of the magi by the renaissance artist geertgen tot sint jans in the collection of the rijksmuseum.  painting the adoration of the magi shows the three magi bearing gifts. king melchior is shown kneeling before child jesus and offering his gift of gold coins. his removed crown lies at his feet. behind him king caspar, with his crown dangling behind his head, takes his gift of frankincense from an assistant in readiness to present it. on the left king balthasar, portrayed as a dark-skinned king, still wears his crown and holds an orb of myrrh. in the background the retinue of each of the three magi can be seen above their heads. the magi are thus shown twice, once in the foreground and again in miniature in the background, arriving with their retinue from africa, europe and asia. an x-ray examination of the underdrawing shows that originally the european retinue of melchior had him riding a horse and this was later changed to a dromedary. this is surprising, because early camels in 'three kings' paintings tend to represent the retinue of balthasar, who was said to have come from ethiopia (often meant to symbolize the rest of africa).  provenance this painting is one of three paintings of the adoration of the magi by geertgen that have been attributed to him based on stylistic similarities. the provenance of this painting only goes back to its purchase in 1904. together with the other two versions, it is based on work by hugo van der goes in berlin.  references  external links  sk-a-2150 painting record on museum website  15th-century paintings paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum paintings by geertgen tot sint jans paintings of the madonna and child geertgen tot sint jans
the bereft (persian: bipanah) is a 1953 iranian film directed by george obadiah.  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films iranian films persian-language films 1953 drama films iranian drama films iranian black-and-white films
the 1910 argentine primera division was the 19th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on april 24 and ended in december. the championship was reduced from 10 to 9 teams, with each team playing the other twice.  gimnasia y esgrima de buenos aires (promoted last year) made its debut at the top division while argentino de quilmes was relegated to  segunda division.  alumni won its 9th title in 11 seasons.  final table  references  argentine primera division seasons 1910 in argentine football 1910 in south american football
samrala assembly constituency (sl. no.: 58) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in ludhiana district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022       -->  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  ludhiana district  amrik singh dhillon  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
maria paz paterno madrigal (may 4, 1915 - september 12, 2008), commonly known as pacita madrigal-warns (from 1945 to 1956), later pacita warns gonzales (from 1956 until her death), was a filipina ballet dancer, and politician. she served as the administrator of the social welfare administration under ramon magsaysay's cabinet from 1953 to 1955 and was a senator of the philippines from 1955 to 1961 during the third and fourth congresses. she was the third woman to be elected to the philippine senate.  early life and education maria paz paterno madrigal was born on may 4, 1915 to vicente madrigal lopez of albay, a filipino-spanish business tycoon and senator from 1945 to 1953 and susana ramos paterno of laguna. second of seven siblings, maria paz, or pacita, grew up in san miguel, manila.  pacita studied in philippine women's university and became colegio de san juan de letran's princess of education at the age of fifteen. she graduated class valedictorian in the same school, and later entered sorbonne university in paris. she took business administration degree at the university of santo tomas where she graduated magna cum laude. she also took finishing courses at the le college feminin de bouffemont in france, and at dale carnegie course and powers school in new york.  in 1934, she joined the manila carnival (equivalent to today's binibining pilipinas) under the sponsorship of dee tees, the country's leading publication during that era. she was defeated by clarita tankiang, a chinese mestiza, for the crown.  in 1941, pacita was in new york when the second world war reached the philippines. during that time, pacita enlisted as a volunteer nurse for the red cross and walter reed army medical center.  political career  after the war, pacita married herman warns, an executive of the manila gas corporation. in 1952, she represented the league of women voters, the triennial congress of international allience of women in naples, italy and unesco seventh general conference in geneva. from 1945 to 1953, pacita managed her husband's ballet school. later that year, she gave up the administration of their school to head the women for magsaysay movement (wmpm), which supported the candidacy of the then ramon magsaysay for presidency. upon his assumption of office, magsaysay appointed madrigal-warns as the chief of the social welfare administration (swa) in 1953. later, she re-structured
the organization of wmpm from a civic organization to a social welfare society. she also established the samahang manang pacita (manang pacita movement) which focused on community development.  in 1955, she decided to run for the senate under the nacionalista banner, where she obtained the topnotch slot garnering a total vote of 2,544,716, or 50.4% of the total vote turnouts. madrigal-warns became the second female senator of the philippines after geronima pecson. during her term, she was the chairperson of the senate committee on social justice. community development and welfare. she was also the lone woman in the upper house during the 3rd (1954-1957) and 4th congresses (1958-1961).  in 1956, pacita married gonzalo wilfrado gonzales, a lawyer, after the death of herman warns. she unsuccessfully bid for re-election in 1961, ended up being 11th, which was said to be due to the accusations of her public funds misuse in 1956.  post-political career  pacita-gonzales was charged with malversation, misappropriation and misuse of public funds of the social welfare administration during the years of 1954-1955, which was later dismissed by the supreme court in 1963.  personal life  pacita madrigal was married to herman warns from 1945 until his death in 1956. they had one issue, vicente madrigal warns, known as "bu madrigal".  at the death of warns, pacita married lawyer gonzalo wilfrado rafols gonzales, son of bienvenido ma. gonzales, an educator and president of the university of the philippines from 1939 to 1943 and 1945-1951. they had one issue, ana maria gizela madrigal gonzales.  pacita is the aunt of jamby madrigal, who also served as senator from 2004 to 2010.  she died on september 12, 2008.  legacy   pacita madrigal warns - mababang paaralan ng bagong silang (calatagan, batangas)  references   1915 births 2008 deaths senators of the 3rd congress of the philippines senators of the 4th congress of the philippines philippine women's university alumni university of paris alumni university of santo tomas alumni filipino people of spanish descent people from san miguel, manila filipino ballerinas secretaries of social welfare and development of the philippines magsaysay administration cabinet members nacionalista party politicians women members of the senate of the philippines
drunk with love (persian: masty eshq) is a 1951 iranian drama film directed by esmail kushan.  cast  alexander bijanian   hossein daneshavar   ma'soomeh khakyar   mehdi maysaghieh  habibollah morad   bahram siar  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1951 films iranian films persian-language films iranian black-and-white films films directed by esmail kushan iranian drama films 1951 drama films
ukrainian armor () is a manufacturer of personal protection equipment with headquarter and manufacturing in ukraine.  history  ukrainian armor was built on 19 february 2014 during ukraine's revolution of dignity. the founders realized that euromaidan self-defence forces catastrophically lacked bulletproof vests. within a few days, they produced 40 vests.  during the confrontation in eastern ukraine, the demand for ammunition grew and construction workers, engineers and designers joined the company. the team began to investigate foreign expertise.  in 2015, production capacities expanded to the operating department of aircraft development plant no 20. production of bulletproof helmets was set up.  products  ukrainian armor currently produces:   military bulletproof vests of nij iia, ii, iiia, iii, iv protection levels.  bulletproof vests of concealable and semi-concealable types of nij iia, ii, iiia protection levels.  bulletproof helmets of nij iiia protection level, v50 720 m/s.  bulletproof ceramic plates, light pressed made of uhmwpe and aramid, tempered steel and titan.  soft ballistic fragments protection of 1of nij iia, ii, iiia protection levels.  bulletproof vests for hunters.  bulletproof vests for military officers and police officers.  tactical ammunition: load bearing equipment, web gears, magazine carriers.  bulletproof vests for hunting and police dogs.  external links       article «рrivate bodyarmor manufacturer born on kyiv's barricades»  ukrainian brands defence companies of ukraine economy of kyiv
the gens lamponia was an obscure plebeian family at ancient rome, known from only a few individuals.  the most important was marcus lamponius, one of the leaders of the allies during the social war.  members   marcus lamponius,{{efn-lr|aponius in diodorus siculus.<ref>dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, vol. ii, p. 715 ("marcus lamponius").</ref>}} a native of lucania, was one of the italian commanders during the social war.  he defeated publius licinius crassus, who was forced to retreat into grumentum with considerable losses.  he opposed sulla during the roman civil war of 82 bc, and prudently disappeared after the battle of the colline gate together with many other persons fleeing the expected persecution.appian, bellum civile, i. 40, 41, 90, 93.florus, iii. 21.diodorus siculus, xxxvii. eclogue i.  marcus lamponius, mentioned as the father of a lamponius whose funerary monument is at maratea in lucania.  the inscription is doubtful, and perhaps is intended to refer to the lucanian general.  lamponius verus, inscribed at savaria in pannonia superior.  lamponius verinus, inscribed at savaria in pannonia superior.  notes  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  lucius annaeus florus, epitome de t. livio bellorum omnium annorum dcc (epitome of livy: all the wars of seven hundred years).  diodorus siculus, bibliotheca historica (library of history).  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  sextus julius frontinus, strategemata (stratagems).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  eutropius, breviarium historiae romanae (abridgement of the history of rome).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum'' (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated "cil"), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present).  roman gentes
the rubbenbruchsee is an artificial lake on the western side of osnabruck, germany, which comprises part of a larger local recreation area. it covers an area of roughly 24 hectares and has a length of about one kilometre. its width varies from around 100 to 300 metres, its depth from 2 to 24 metres.  geography  located roughly four kilometres north-west of osnabruck city centre, the rubbenbruchsee forms a border of sorts between the districts of westerberg and atter. in the north-east the district of eversburg borders on the local recreation area.  the lake is positioned in a north-south-oriented lowland area several hundred metres wide, known as the "rubbenbruch". in geological terms it is known as a "rift valley", formed by the orogeny which also produced the hilly area surrounding osnabruck. vestiges of the old territorial army of osnabruck are still visible around the rubbenbruch.  the lake's surroundings are characterised by widespread woodland and meadows, essentially making up an urban offshoot of the terra.vita nature park. the primarily agricultural area of atterheide, home to the eponymous airfield, lies to the west of the lake. in the east are located two wooded areas: the heger holz and the natruper holz, slightly north of the former. these are also used as recreation areas. to the south is marshland and another wooded area: the hakenhof holz, and to the south-east the osnabruck clinical centre on finkenhugel. there is also a "green link" which heads out eastwards from the rubbenbruchsee through heger holz and westerberg, almost reaching the city centre.  origins  planning for the lake was conducted by professor hartmut peucker in collaboration with the municipal parks commission in osnabruck. dredging of the sand at the rubbenbruch began in 1968; it took until 1991 before the final stage of construction of the lake was completed.  leisure activities  the rubbenbruchsee's idyllic flair and close proximity to the city make it a popular tourist attraction, especially during the summer months. the lake is surrounded by a 3.2 km footpath with numerous benches, giving the area additional appeal to joggers and cyclists. a parkrun is held at the lake every saturday morning. on the north side of the lake paddleboats can be rented - this area is also home to restaurants, a car park and a miniature golf course. to the south the land is mostly meadow; the only island on the lake is located in
this area, along with a kids' play area and spaces for grilling.  fishing is permitted on the western banks of the lake. bathing and swimming are prohibited in accordance with nature protection guidelines - for this purpose the attersee, located a few kilometres away, should be used instead.  equestrian sports  the area surrounding the rubbenbruchsee is home to a number of equestrian farms, whose riders are often seen around the area of the lake. special bridlepaths have been set up around the rubbenbruch so that riders do not obstruct walkers and cyclists; some of these run parallel to the walking and cycle paths with only a few metres of separation.  photo gallery  literature   peucker, h., der rubbenbruchsee: entstehung und entwicklung (edited by osnabruck city council - environment department) (osnabruck, 2006) ()  references   artificial lakes geography of germany
ninth street hill neighborhood historic district is a national historic district located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 88 contributing buildings and 6 contributing structures in a predominantly residential section of lafayette.  it developed between about 1850 and 1946 and includes representative examples of gothic revival, italianate, queen anne, greek revival, and second empire style architecture. located in the district is the separately listed judge cyrus ball house.  other notable contributing resources include the samuel moore house (1891), moore-porter-boswell house (1895), stanley coulter house (1890), edward bohrer house (1909), thomas wood house (c. 1850), job m. nash house (1859), and gordon graham house (c. 1900).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1997.  see also centennial neighborhood district downtown lafayette historic district ellsworth historic district highland park neighborhood historic district jefferson historic district park mary historic district perrin historic district st. mary historic district upper main street historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana gothic revival architecture in indiana italianate architecture in indiana greek revival architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana second empire architecture in indiana neighborhoods in lafayette, indiana historic districts in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
george motoi (22 january 1936 - 4 march 2015) was a romanian actor. he appeared in more than thirty films from 1962 to 2005.  selected filmography  references  external links   1936 births 2015 deaths romanian male film actors
on december 1, 1991, three-month-old baby kristie fischer died in a house fire in thornwood, new york.  fischer's family accused their au pair, a swiss woman named olivia riner, of killing the baby by arson. they stated that she had not attempted to rescue the baby, and therefore they believed she was guilty. riner originated from wettingen and was a babysitter for a swiss family for three years. she worked as a pediatrician's assistant before being hired for a one-year term to care for the fischer family, through the company ef au pair.  alex prod'homme of people wrote that "the case turned into an international cause celebre", partly because it almost coincided with the release of the film the hand that rocks the cradle and partly due to the gravity of the crime. richard lorant of the associated press wrote that the case was compared to the film and that it "frightened working mothers everywhere." william glaberson of the new york times wrote that the case "crystallized the concerns and worries parents have about leaving their children in other people's care".  incident fires started in three separate places in the fischer house: in riner's room, in kristie's, and in the one belonging to leah, kristie's adult half-sister.  prosecutor george bolen accused riner of gathering accelerants and putting paint thinner on the baby. authorities charged riner with second-degree murder and first-degree arson.  trial and verdict riner's agency hired lawyer laura brevetti one month prior to fischer's death; brevetti became riner's attorney.  riner's trial began on june 2, 1992. the authorities had insufficient physical evidence to show that riner had caused the fire. brevetti stated that the police had botched the investigation: the crime scene was not secured, and was quickly returned to the home owners. police officers - without being specifically tasked to investigate the scene and gather evidence - and craftsmen were able to enter the rooms without hindrance. a day after the fire, leah - kristie's adult half-sister - and her boyfriend, john gallagher, were recorded on video searching through leah's scorched belongings. during and shortly after the incident, the police did not properly interrogate gallagher, who was friends with several police officers and was the first person to arrive at the scene.  olivia riner's interrogation was marred by language difficulties. riner did not know what "lawyer" meant,
and could not readily indicate a distance in feet. the recording of the interrogation was of poor quality, as the microphone was behind the interrogating officer, and even after adjusting the volume, jurors had trouble understanding riner's expressions.  only after a number of days did investigators try to gather fingerprints in fischer's home (and found none that stemmed from the crime), and secured overlooked pieces of evidence - like the bag the body of kristie fischer had been found in. brevetti also explained that the police did not consider other possible suspects for the fire. brevetti stated that two men had started the fire.  george bolen's suit mainly rested on the premise that olivia riner did not notice any other person - except the baby - in the house. bolen asserted that the house was impenetrable, and that riner would have certainly noticed a foreign person entering the house. during the trial, when kristie's father was interrogated, he stated that he was able to enter the house unnoticed by olivia mere hours before the fire, and surprised her. the family usually left the main door unlocked as long as somebody stayed at home.  the jury of seven men and five women ruled that riner was not guilty after one day of deliberation. some jurors stated that the prosecution never provided a motive for riner committing the crime.  glaberson wrote that the verdict "appeared an endorsement of an aggressive defense strategy." the judge, donald n. silverman, stated his agreement with the result. fischer's family maintained their belief that riner was guilty. authorities never filed any criminal charges related to this case against anyone else.  legacy geraldo rivera, according to lorant, suggested and "all but accused" a family friend of the fischers of being the perpetrator. lorant stated that geraldo's presentation "didn't hurt" riner's case.   joyce eggington wrote the book circle of fire: murder and betrayal in the "swiss nanny" case. eggington believed that riner had perpetrated the crime. eggington stated that she initially believed riner was innocent, but that she later believed that nobody else could have set the fires.  don davis wrote the book the nanny murder trial.  after the trial riner found employment in switzerland and began working in a doctor's office. her lawyer stated that riner did not wish to give interviews.  the fischer family sued ef au pair, seeking an equivalent of 60 million british pounds.  see also  louise woodward case
murder of krim siblings, in which a nanny was convicted of killing two children in her care  literature  references  external links   egginton, joyce. "the swiss nanny murder case." good housekeeping. november 1994. vol. 219 issue 5, p. 116. see profile at ebscohost, accession#9411044845.  mount pleasant, new york 1991 murders in the united states westchester county, new york
alan forrest (born 9 september 1996) is a scottish football player. he currently plays as an attacking midfielder for scottish premiership club livingston. he began his career at ayr united, coming through the academy and making 245 appearances for the honest men.  he is the younger brother of celtic and scotland midfielder james forrest.  career  club forrest made his debut for ayr united in a scottish challenge cup match against queen's park. he came off the bench to score an 89th-minute winner at hampden park. with this goal forrest became ayr's youngest ever goalscorer aged 16 years, 321 days. during the 2019-20 scottish championship season after scoring five goals in three league games forrest was awarded the scottish championship player of the month for september.  forrest signed a pre-contract deal with livingston on 10 april 2020, making the jump from the scottish championship to the scottish premiership. forrest made his debut for livingston on the opening day of the 2020-21 scottish premiership season in a 1-0 loss against st mirren at st mirren park. he scored his first goal for livingston in a 2-2 draw against motherwell on 12 august 2020, at fir park.  international in 2016, forrest made his debut for the scotland under-21 team in a friendly against slovakia.  career statistics  honours  club ayr united scottish league one: 2017-18  individual scottish championship player of the month: september 2019  references  external links  1996 births living people people from prestwick scottish footballers association football midfielders ayr united f.c. players livingston f.c. players scottish football league players scottish professional football league players scotland under-21 international footballers sportspeople from south ayrshire
ryan abadir (born november 25, 1992), better known as freakazoid, is an american retired counter-strike: global offensive player. he has played with teams such as cloud9 and echo fox. abadir was the last player under contract with echo fox, which ended in january 2018.  career  counter-strike abadir began his professional counter-strike career in 2010 with team area 51 gaming. from 2010 to 2012, he competed with teams swole patrol and netcode illuminati. in 2012, he signed with team dynamic.  counter-strike: global offensive abadir transitioned to playing counter-strike: global offensive (cs:go) with team dynamic in july 2012.  abadir joined cloud9 on april 29, 2015, along with tyler "skadoodle" latham. on july 9-12 c9 played at eswc 2015 and finished 2nd behind natus vincere.  in february 2016 he was deducted a month's pay and attended an anti-bullying seminar after he was caught incorrectly treating team liquid player oleksandr "s1mple" kostylev during a faceit pro league online match.  abadir was dropped from the c9 roster on april 13, 2016. on april 26 he was announced was a stand in splyce for abraham "abe" fazli and got 7-8t at dreamhack austin 2016.  on may 31, 2016, abadir joined echo fox, reuniting with former c9 teammate sean "sgares" gares.  in may 2020, abadir announced his retirement from cs:go to pursue a career in valorant.  references  american esports players people from san diego counter-strike players splyce players echo fox players living people cloud9 (esports) players twitch (service) streamers 1992 births
ursula wikstrom (born 3 july 1980) is a finnish professional golfer who plays on the ladies european tour. she represented finland at the 2016 rio olympics and won the 2017 ladies finnish open.  career wikstrom played college golf with the new mexico state aggies and won six college tournaments. she married mika wikstrom, who works for the finnish golf federation, in early 2005 and changed her name from tuutti to wikstrom.  wikstrom joined the ladies european tour in 2004 and has multiple runner-up finishes. in 2008, she finished second at the finnair masters behind compatriot minea blomqvist. she was also runner-up at the 2009 open de france dames, 2012 turkish airlines ladies open as well as the 2012 and 2015 dutch ladies open.   in 2019 she had a consistent year with eight top-20 finishes, including a season-best result of fourth in the estrella damm mediterranean ladies open, and finished 17th on the order of merit.  she won the ladies finnish open, a let access series event, in 2017 and was runner-up in 2018 and 2019.  wikstrom qualified for the 2016 summer olympics where she finished in a tie for 44th.  professional wins  let access series 2017 evli ladies finnish open  team appearances amateur european ladies' team championship (representing finland): 1999, 2001, 2003  professional european championships (representing finland): 2018  references  external links  finnish female golfers new mexico state aggies women's golfers ladies european tour golfers olympic golfers of finland golfers at the 2016 summer olympics sportspeople from espoo 1980 births living people
hummingbad is android malware, discovered by check point in february 2016.  in july 2016, researchers from security firm check point software said the malware installs more than 50,000 fraudulent apps each day, displays 20 million malicious advertisements, and generates more than $300,000 per month in revenue. the research pointed out the yingmob group, previously accused of being responsible for the yispecter ios malware, as responsible for the attack.  lookout claimed the hummingbad malware was also a part of the shedun family, however, these claims were refuted.  see also  references  spyware
banana lake or is a  natural freshwater lake in southeast lakeland, florida. before 1860 this lake was called mud lake. a family homesteaded at the lake and planted bananas, amongst other types of fruit. by 1890 the lake was known by its current name. banana lake is in a suburban area. residential areas and agricultural areas surround it. to the southwest  is little banana lake. lake stahl is  to the northwest. just to the north of lake stahl is the sanlan golf course, which also borders banana lake.  on the south shore of the lake is banana lake park, which has an address of 5002 tillery road. this park contains picnic shelters and tables, a paved walking trail, restrooms, a playground, a boat ramp and a fishing pier. a parking lot is at the west side of the park. boats can reach lake stahl via a canal that connects the two lakes.  references  lakes of polk county, florida
o primeiro amor is a brazilian telenovela produced and broadcast by rede globo. it premiered on 24 january 1972 and ended on 20 october 1972, with a total of 227 episodes. it is the tenth "novela das sete" to be aired at the timeslot. it was created by walter negrao and directed by regis cardoso with walter campos.  cast  references  external links     1972 telenovelas tv globo telenovelas brazilian telenovelas 1972 brazilian television series debuts 1972 brazilian television series endings portuguese-language telenovelas
andrea kneppers (born 24 february 1993) is a dutch competitive swimmer who specializes in freestyle.  at the 2016 european aquatics championships in london, kneppers won a bronze medal in the 4 × 200 m freestyle relay, together with her teammates esmee vermeulen, robin neumann, and femke heemskerk.  she qualified for the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro. in the 4 × 200 meter freestyle relay, her team finished 14th in the heats.  references  1993 births living people dutch female freestyle swimmers olympic swimmers of the netherlands swimmers at the 2016 summer olympics european aquatics championships medalists in swimming louisville cardinals women's swimmers
wine psi phi is an african american fraternity.  it was founded in 1959 under the name hums at howard university and had the motto of we initiate new experiences   in 1962 the name was changed to w.i.n.e. psi phi. it arose out of the social activism of the 1960s during the civil rights movement.   it also came about as an alternative to many traditional black greek letter organizations.  wine psi phi was known for its ability to control student parliament.  wine psi phi was known for its performance in step shows. in 1975, pledge richard a. gowins died at northern illinois university, as a result of alcohol poisoning. in 1979 at virginia state university one pledge robert etheridge died as a result of drowning.  chapter list wine psi phi chapters include: howard university -1959 bluefield state college cheyney university of pennsylvania -1967 lincoln university (pennsylvania)- 1968. delaware state university - 1972.  kittrell college - 1969 (founded 1969, incorporated may 8, 1973 changed the colors of wine to burgundy and white) florida a&m university elizabeth city state university south carolina state university north carolina central university fayetteville state university virginia state university benedict college morris college boston college saint augustine's university shaw university morgan state university virginia state university university of wisconsin - stevens point northern illinois university southern university at baton rouge university of illinois lewis university - 1973 - akadama plum chapter  illinois state university southern illinois university bradley university eureka college illinois benedictine college chicago state university morehouse college eastern illinois university  references  student organizations established in 1962 fraternities and sororities in the united states african-american fraternities and sororities 1962 establishments in washington, d.c.
indonesia participated in the 1994 asian games held in the city of hiroshima, japan from 2 october to 16 october 1994. it ranked eleventh in medal count, with three gold medals, 12 silver medals, and 11 bronze medals in this edition of the asiad.  medal summary  medal table  medalists  references  nations at the 1994 asian games 1994 asian games
tioga is an extinct town in huerfano county, in the u.s. state of colorado. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  a post office called tioga was established in 1907, and remained in operation until 1954. tioga is a name derived from a native american language meaning "where it forks".  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of huerfano county, colorado former populated places in huerfano county, colorado
the 1913 news of the world match play was the eleventh news of the world match play tournament. it was played from tuesday 7 to thursday 9 october at walton heath golf club. 32 players competed in a straight knock-out competition, with each match contested over 18 holes, except for the final which was over 36 holes. the winner received £100 out of a total prize fund of £400. george duncan defeated james braid 3 & 2 in the final to win the tournament. this was braid's fifth final but the first time he had been beaten.  qualification entry was restricted to members of the professional golfers' association (pga). qualification was by a series of 36-hole stroke-play competitions; one for each of the eight pga sections. the southern section had 12 qualifiers, the northern section 7, the midland section 5, the scottish, welsh and western sections 2 and the eastern and irish sections 1. because of the large number of entries in the southern section, two events were run with 6 qualifiers at each venue. in the event of a tie for places there was a playoff.  harry vardon and ted ray, the 1912 finalists, were in the us and did not enter.  qualifying events:  10 july western section at came down: ernest whitcombe won by 3 strokes on 155. charles whitcombe and henry shutt tied for second place on 158 but whitcombe won the 9-hole playoff 45 to 46. 23 july eastern section at brancaster: ernest riseborough won by 3 strokes on 160.  3 september northern section at st anne's old links: sam whiting won by 1 stroke on 147. tom brace, peter rainford and thomas renouf tied on 151 and played off the next day for two places. renouf with 73 and rainford 77 qualified, while brace scored 80. 11 september irish section at royal county down: michael moran won by 2 strokes on 152. 17 september midland section at little aston: george tuck won by 1 stroke on 153. the event was also the 1913 midland professional championship. 17 september southern section at bramshot: george duncan won by 2 strokes on 145. 17 september southern section at burhill: laurie ayton, snr won by 2 strokes on 139. 18 september scottish section at carnoustie: peter robertson and willie watt tied on 151. 24 september welsh section at bangor: harry ball won by 4 strokes on 147.  the qualifiers were:  western section: charles whitcombe, ernest whitcombe eastern section: ernest riseborough northern section: bill
davies, arthur day, james douglas edgar, peter rainford, thomas renouf, harry simpson, sam whiting irish section: michael moran midland section: george buckle, harry cawsey, george tuck, edward veness, dick wheildon southern section at bramshot golf club: tom ball, james bradbeer, james braid, george duncan, fred leach, willie ritchie southern section at burhill golf club: laurie ayton, snr, james batley, jean gassiat, charles mayo, jack b. ross, reg wilson scottish section: peter robertson, willie watt welsh section: harry ball, george gadd  sandy herd, j.h. taylor and james sherlock failed to qualify from the southern section. so the only previous winners competing were tom ball and james braid.  format the format was unchanged. matches were over 18 holes except for the final which was over 36 holes. extra holes were played in the event of a tied match. two rounds were played on the first day, two more on the second day with the final on the third day.  results source:  prize money the winner received £100 and a gold medal, but the runner-up now received £40 and a silver medal, losing semi-finalists £20 and a bronze medal, losing quarter-finalists £15, second round losers £10 and first round losers £5.  references  golf tournaments in england news of the world match play news of the world match play october 1913 sports events
jane mulvagh is an irish-born journalist and social historian, specialising in british history. she is best known for her history of madresfield court, the english country house upon which evelyn waugh based his novel brideshead revisited.  early life and career mulvagh has irish roots and was educated at an english convent before going up to girton college, cambridge, to read history. her early interest in fashion history led to eight years at vogue, as a fashion historian and features writer. mulvagh completed the vogue history of twentieth century fashion (viking penguin) in 1988. she left vogue the following year and subsequently wrote a regular column in the financial times entitled "me and my wardrobe" and a monthly think-piece on style for that title.  later career from february 1990 mulvagh was a presenter and reporter for british satellite broadcasting, known as bsb, during its inaugural year.  working on the evening news and magazine show first edition, mulvagh produced three 7-minute pieces per week. she has made tv appearances on the bbc, granada, rte dublin and bbc radio 4.  mulvagh has written on the history of design, art and social history for many british and american broadsheets, including the daily telegraph, the times, the art newspaper, the evening standard, the european,  the independent, the daily mail, and magazines such as very magazine, town & country magazine, harper's bazaar (harpers & queen), the european, the spectator and apollo. she contributed over 40 obituaries for the independent.  teaching and lecturing from 1997 to 2002 mulvagh taught an ma course in fashion journalism and criticism at central st martins school of art, now part of ual. her pupils included financial times fashion editor and stylist, damian foxe, editor-in-chief of conde nast online abigail chisman, and contemporary art gallerist libby sellers.  mulvagh delivered the thirteenth annual soane lecture, on 13 november 2008, at sir john soane's museum in london  and the royal oak foundation annual lecture tour in the united states in 2009. she has lectured at oxford university (harris manchester college), cheltenham literature festival and the oxford literary festival.  published works madresfield: the real brideshead, transworld, (2008) , vivienne westwood, an unfashionable life, harpercollins, (1998)   newport houses, rizzoli usa (1989) asin b01a1m6kua - an architectural history of newport,
rhode island usa  costume jewellery in vogue, thames and hudson (1988)  the vogue history of twentieth century fashion, viking penguin, london (1988)  references  external links official website portrait of jane mulvagh by lucinda douglas-menzies harper collins publishers, australia random house publisher, australia  living people alumni of girton college, cambridge british women historians british roman catholics english journalists alumni of central saint martins english fashion journalists year of birth missing (living people)
k2-33b (also known by its epic designation epic 205117205.01) is a very young super-neptune exoplanet, orbiting the pre-main-sequence star k2-33. it was discovered by nasa's kepler spacecraft on its "second light" mission. it is located about 456 light-years (140 parsecs) away from earth in the constellation of scorpius. the exoplanet was found by using the transit method, in which the dimming effect that a planet causes as it crosses in front of its star is measured.   among known exoplanets, k2-33b is considered extremely young − a mere 9.3 million years old. only one other exoplanet is younger, with an age of 2 myr (v830 tau b).  physical characteristics  mass, radius, and temperature k2-33b is a super-neptune, an exoplanet that has a mass and radius larger than that of neptune. it has an equilibrium temperature of . it has a radius of 5.04 . while the exoplanet's mass hasn't been constrained yet, upper estimates place a mass of 3.6 .  host star  the planet orbits an (m-type) pre-main-sequence star named k2-33. the star has a mass of 0.54  and a radius of 1.05 . it has a surface temperature of 3540 k and is 9.3 million years old. in comparison, the sun is 4.6 billion years old and has a surface temperature of 5778 k. it has about the same amount of metals as the sun, with a metallicity ([fe/h]) of 0. its luminosity () is 15% that of the sun.  the star's apparent magnitude, or how bright it appears from earth's perspective, is 14.3. therefore, it is too dim to be seen with the naked eye.  orbit k2-33b orbits its host star with an orbital period of 5.424 days at a distance of 0.049 au (compared to the distance of mercury from the sun, which is about 0.38 au). the planet likely receives about 125 times as much sunlight that earth does from the sun.  age and formation  the planet is best known for its remarkably young age, which is estimated to be about 9.3 million years. given this age, the planetary system most likely formed back near the end of the miocene epoch of the earth's history. observations made on the planet
confirmed that it was in fact a fully formed exoplanet, not just a protoplanet that was still in the stages of developing. the mass and radius of the exoplanet further help constrain this statement.  k2-33b is the youngest confirmed transiting exoplanet. there are relatively few other exoplanets discovered to date with an age this young, all of which are non-transiting (with some that were detected around the hot a-type and b-type stars, such as hd 95086 and hip 78530, however these could just be brown dwarfs due to their mass). the hot jupiter exoplanet v830 tau b, published in the same issue of the journal nature as the discovery of k2-33b, is the youngest known exoplanet with an age of around 2 million years (around the time that humans evolved on earth).  the discoveries of k2-33b and v830 tau b are most notable for explaining how close-in planets form, an open question in the field of exoplanets since the discovery of the first exoplanet, 51 pegasi b, in 1995. given the young ages of these exoplanets, several theories of planetary migration can be ruled out because they take too long to form close-in planets. the most plausible formation scenario for k2-33b is that it formed further away from its star, then migrated inwards through the protoplanetary disk, although it remains a possibility that the planet formed in place. trevor david of caltech in pasadena stated on the discovery of the exoplanet "the question we are answering is: did those planets take a long time to get into those hot orbits, or could they have been there from a very early stage? we are saying, at least in this one case, that they can indeed be there at a very early stage."  understanding the young ages of such exoplanets may eventually help to lead scientists on how planetary formation works and provide some clues on the origin of the solar system and other such planetary systems discovered.  discovery in 2014, nasa's kepler spacecraft began its "second light" mission, after two of its reactor wheels had failed the previous year, ending the primary mission. from 23 august to 13 november 2014, the spacecraft collected data from the core of upper scorpius, which included k2-33. the exoplanet was simultaneously discovered by two independent research groups, one led by astronomers from the california institute of technology and the other led by astronomers from the university of texas at austin.  the star was studied on days in late january, february,
and march 2016. the observations were made with the immersion grating infrared spectrometer (igrins) on the 2.7-m harlan j. smith telescope at the mcdonald observatory.  after observing the respective transits, which for k2-33b occurred roughly every 5 days (its orbital period), it was eventually concluded that a planetary body was responsible for the periodic 5-day transits. the discovery was announced on 20 june 2016 in an announcement made by nasa.  see also v830 tau b  references  external links  nasa - kepler mission.  nasa - kepler discoveries - summary table.  nasa - k2-33b at the nasa exoplanet archive.  nasa - k2-33b at the exoplanet data explorer.  nasa - k2-33b at the extrasolar planets encyclopaedia.  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets hot jupiters 33 scorpius (constellation)
maarten vanden eynde (born in leuven, belgium, in 1977) is a belgian artist. he lives and works in brussels (belgium) and saint-mihiel (france).  works maarten vanden eynde travels constantly around the world to observe divers complexe phenomena (ecology, anthropology, archeology). vanden eynde has invented " genetology ", the science that covers several research fields and that forms the theoretical bases of his practice. his work shows us that the usual observation grid to understand our world (opposition of technique and nature / human and not-human) are more and more obsolete and that new ones should be reinvented. the hybrid composition of society, the more and more developed sociotechnical networks make slide the forces but also the power stakes. the transformations are evidently multiple and we can find this in the formal aspect of his work.  in belgium his practice has received visibility in amongst others the m - museum leuven, leuven and during manifesta 9, genk, and principally with his solo exhibition at the m hka antwerp. in 2015 his work has been shown in new orleans (usa), palazzo reale in milan, italy, and in lubumbashi, d.r. congo, but also in hangar h18 and the royal museums of fine arts of belgium in brussels, belgium.  solo exhibitions  2016   catastrophic casualties & casual catastrophes, meessen de clercq, brussels (belgium)  2014   art rotterdam, rotterdam (the netherlands)   2013   brick era a.d. 2013, special outdoor project at art brussels, brussels (belgium)   plastic reef, hordaland artcenter, bergen (norway)   in_dependance, meessen de clercq, brussels (belgium)   2012  museum of forgotten history xxx, muhka, antwerp (belgium)   europe 2006-2014, felixart museum, drogenbos (belgium)   2011 museum of forgotten history, art brussels, brussels (belgium)   2010   gravitation, kunstruimte wagemans, beetsterzwaag (the netherlands)    industrial evolution, meessen de clercq, brussels (belgium)    oil peak, art in the city, egmont park, brussels (belgium)     2009  homo stupidus stupidus, waag society, amsterdam (the netherlands)   2008   the museum of forgotten history, het pand, ugent, ghent (belgium)   2006   from russia with love, maes & matthys gallery,
antwerp (belgium)  references  external links  official website     1977 births living people artists from leuven belgian contemporary artists
viputheshwar "vip" sitaraman (born 10 september 1997) is an american designer, entrepreneur, and scientist. in may 2016, sitaraman made headlines when, at age 18, he graduated from the university of arizona and his company was funded by seed sumo, a startup accelerator in bryan, texas. sitaraman is one of the youngest people to raise a round of venture capital. he has been interviewed on forbes, entrepreneur, business insider,  the huffington post, and times higher education.  personal life  sitaraman was born in theni, tamil nadu, india in 1997 to sitaraman venkatasubramanian, a software engineer, and swarna sitaraman, an interior designer & artist. shortly after sitaraman was born, the family moved to the united states, where they settled in chandler, arizona.  through his early education, sitaraman showed a propensity for science. he competed in science & engineering fairs, collecting accolades including intel international science & engineering fair (isef) finalist, tgen helios scholar-designate, society for in vitro biology isef award, and several state and local awards. sitaraman published his research on engineered zinc finger nucleases in the world forum in biology.  in august 2014, sitaraman enrolled at the university of arizona under the flinn scholarship. within two years, he graduated with a bachelor of science degree in molecular & cellular biology, along with a minor in african american studies. sitaraman would later explain in an interview, "none of this was part of the plan. i was a pre-med student; entrepreneurship wasn't even in my vocabulary." sitaraman co-founded korkboard, a digital event bulletin mobile app striving to build stronger campus communities. following the launch on the apple store for ios, the startup was accepted to the thryve incubator spring/summer 2015 cohort in tucson, arizona and the facebook fbstart 2015 cohort.  career  draw science  draw science started as a small blog sitaraman built in high school, aimed at translating science with art. in the next year, draw science garnered over 2 million views, syndication by business insider, and invitations to conferences including arcscon in philadelphia and the lindau nobel laureate meetings in lindau, bavaria. in august 2015, sitaraman launched a crowdfunding campaign to scale draw science into an academic publishing organization focused on creation of graphical abstracts. in following months, draw science worked with prominent scientific organizations including peerj, the usda, and elsevier. graphics created by the draw science team
have been featured in newsweek, vice, and gizmodo and clientele including hillary clinton, american scientist, and soylent.  explica  sitaraman raised a round of funding from seed sumo, a startup accelerator based out of austin, texas in may 2016. during the accelerator, sitaraman launched explica, a visual news site for millennials. in november 2016, the company raised an undisclosed seed round of venture capital after growing to several million monthly readers.  recognition  sitaraman has made several press appearances including forbes, npr/public media, inc., business insider, the huffington post, and times highered education, as well as several regional news publications. he has also spoken at several conferences, including tedx and mdmc.  references   1997 births living people american graphic designers american people of indian descent american businesspeople people from tamil nadu university of arizona alumni
the wailing asteroid is a science-fiction novel written by murray leinster (william fitzgerald jenkins) and first published in 1960 by avon books.  it presents the theme of the lone inventor who saves earth from cosmic danger and introduces humanity to an unknown civilization. the novel was adapted for film as the terrornauts in 1967.  plot when satellite-tracking stations around the world begin receiving radio signals from deep space, joe burke, owner of a small engineering company, is about to propose marriage to sandy lund, a woman he has known since high school.  the signals consist of a repeated series of flute-like notes, which joe recognizes.  joe plays for sandy a tape recording he made a year earlier and it sounds just like the signal from space.  joe explains that he got the notes from a lucid dream that has come to him off and on since he was eleven.  in the dream he is on a world with two moons and trees with ribbon-like leaves and he is holding a strange weapon, a kind of recoilless pistol.  in his shop he makes a modified version of the weapon and when he tests it, it breaks loose from the workbench and slams into a wall hard enough to shatter the bricks.  meanwhile astronomers trace the signal to an asteroid, m-387, and send a radio signal to it.  in response the asteroid changes its signal.  with the help of holmes, a yacht builder, keller, an electronics expert, and several workmen, joe builds a small spaceship propelled by a reactionless drive based on his modification of the recoilless pistol.  just in time the ship is finished and, with holmes, keller, sandy, and sandy's sister pam aboard, joe lifts off just as the police arrive to end the project.  pursued by nike missiles, joe takes the ship into space and heads for asteroid m-387.  after eleven days of travel they arrive at the asteroid and see only a radio mast and the entrance to a tunnel.  when they fly their ship into the tunnel a door closes behind them, lights come on, and the tunnel fills with air and artificial gravity.  finding the air breathable, the five impromptu astronauts explore the asteroid.  they discover that it is a vast, empty fortress with unknown weapons still in their racks and a control room where the fluting signal originates.  in one room joe finds thousands of small black cubes.  when he dozes off next to one he
has a lucid dream of taking part in a weapons drill.  he understands that the dream that has obsessed him since childhood must have come from a fragment of a similar cube that had been found in a cro-magnon cave with artifacts dated to 20,000 b.c.  sandy suggests looking for cube readers, reasoning that learning from a cube by sleeping near it is inefficient.  they find a pair of reading helmets and quickly begin learning all about the fortress, its weapons, and an implacable enemy with which the garrison's civilization may have been at war for 100,000 years or more.  they also learn that the enemy has sent a new attack, one that will rip apart the solar system in a matter of days.  using a procedure that keller develops, joe, holmes, and keller modify three hundred of the torpedoes they find in the fortress and launch them.  the ten-foot spheres accelerate toward the enemy squadron at 160-gees, approaching the speed of light in little over two days.  the torpedoes obliterate the enemy's squadron and everyone breathes a sigh of relief.  then joe notes that in a few centuries humanity will have to go out into interstellar space to look for the enemy.  allusions in the wailing asteroid leinster makes tacit reference to three themes that are worth mentioning:  the story of a lone inventor devising a reactionless space drive and then, with a small team, building a spaceship around it and taking to another celestial body provides the foundation of the adventure that h. g. wells laid out in first men in the moon (1901).  in what seems a remarkable coincidence, both the wailing asteroid and edmond hamilton's the haunted stars (1960) present the human race as the descendants of an alien garrison, whose abandoned base astronauts discover on another body of our solar system.  in a small side adventure, joe burke and his team are accidentally teleported to an alien planet many light years from earth.  they infer that the people who built the base on asteroid m-387 had used spaceships cruising slower than light to carry "matter transposers" through space as a means of spreading themselves throughout the galaxy.  poul anderson used that idea as the foundation for his story, the enemy stars (1959).  publication history 1960, usa & canada, avon books (#t-483), pub date dec 1960, paperback (143 pp) 1961, spain, cenit (#19), paperback (142 pp), as el astero
ide lloroso (the tearful asteroid) 1962, italy, arnoldo mondatori editore (urania #289), pub date aug 1962, paperback digest (160 pp), as l'asteroide abbandonato (the abandoned asteroid) 1965, germany, moewig verlag (terra #416), pub date sep 1965, paperback digest (64 pp), as der ruf des asteroiden (the call of the asteroids) 1966, usa & canada, avon books (#g1306), pub date dec 1966, paperback (143 pp) 1968, uk, sphere (#54801), paperback (142 pp) 1974, italy, arnoldo mondatori editore (urania #638), pub date feb 1974, paperback digest (144 pp), as l'asteroide abbandonato (the abandoned asteroid) 1982, italy, arnoldo mondatori editore (classici urania #67), #22257-0, pub date oct 1982, paperback (180 pp), as l'asteroide abbandonato (the abandoned asteroid)  reviews the book was reviewed by s. e. cotts at amazing stories (may 1961) p. schuyler miller at analog science fact/fiction (jul 1961)  references notes  sources tuck, donald h. (1974). the encyclopedia of science fiction and fantasy. chicago: advent. pg. 244. .  listings the book is listed at the library of congress as  worldcat as  external links go to archive.org to hear a librivox recording of the story.      1960 american novels 1960 science fiction novels american science fiction novels american novels adapted into films avon (publisher) books
whatever happened to green valley? is a 1973 australian documentary directed by peter weir.  references  external links  whatever happened to green valley? at oz movies 2007 review of film at sydney morning herald  1973 films australian films 1973 comedy films english-language films films directed by peter weir
fadrique de basilea (fl. 1484-1517) was an early printer in spain. real name friedrich biel, and called also fridericus de basilea, federigo aleman, he introduced printing in burgos. previously he had worked in basel with michael wenssler.  references  spanish printers 16th-century spanish businesspeople 16th-century printers
anglin is an unincorporated community in okanogan county, in the u.s. state of washington.  history a post office called anglin was established in 1902, and remained in operation until 1921. t. s. anglin, an early postmaster, gave the community his name.  references  unincorporated communities in okanogan county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state)
ki polyomavirus (also known as ki virus, kipyv, or human polyomavirus 3) is a virus of the family polyomaviridae. it was discovered in 2007 in stored samples of human respiratory secretions collected by the karolinska institute, after which the virus is named.  discovery ki virus was discovered in 2007 in samples of human respiratory secretions being systematically searched as part of a program for identifying novel human viruses. it was identified by sequence homology to known human polyomaviruses bk virus and jc virus, and simian polyomavirus sv40. ki virus was the third human polyomavirus described and the first to be discovered since bk and jc in 1971. a very similar respiratory virus, wu virus, was also reported later in 2007.  genome  the complete genome of the ki virus has been sequenced and found to be a circular double-stranded dna genome of 5040 base pairs containing genetic material characteristic of polyomaviruses, encoding five viral proteins: three capsid components, major capsid protein vp1, vp2, and vp3; and two additional proteins involved in replication, the large tumor antigen and small tumor antigen.  prevalence the prevalence of ki virus as detected by the presence of its dna in human samples is generally estimated in the 1-5% range in various locations and populations, with some indication of age-dependence. the virus has been detected in the respiratory secretions of children with respiratory infections in multiple locations. by contrast, one 2009 study placed seroprevalence - that is, prevalence of antibodies against the virus (in this case the vp1 coat protein) - as high as 55% among a population of american adults and 56% among a population of american children. another 2009 study found around 70% seroprevalence for adults, with age patterns indicating that infants may inherit maternal antibodies against both wu and ki. a 2016 study of polyomavirus seroprevalence found wu virus in 91.3% of samples from another american population. primary infection is generally believed to occur in childhood.  disease association ki virus, like its close relative wu virus, is not known to be associated with any clinical disease despite its presence in respiratory secretions. the rate of co-infection with other respiratory viruses is high, so it is difficult to assign causality to ki virus even where clinical symptoms are present. some polyomaviruses are well known as carcinogenic, including the human polyomavirus merkel cell polyomavirus, but ki virus has also not been associated with cancer. while no clear association with clinical symptoms has been identified,
there is weak indication that wu and ki viruses may have pathogenic potential in immunocompromised patients.  nomenclature and classification ki virus got its name from the karolinska institute, the institutional affiliation of the researchers who discovered and reported the virus.  among the human polyomaviruses, ki is most similar to wu virus. a 2010 proposed classification recommended the division of the polyomaviruses into three genera, containing one genus of avian viruses and two of mammalian viruses; one of the latter was designated wukipolyomavirus to indicate its two founding members. in an updated classification system for the polyomavirus family proposed in 2016, wu virus is classified as a member of the genus betapolyomavirus along with bk, jc, and ki.  references  polyomaviridae
the south west african 0-10-0 of 1911 was a steam locomotive from the german south west africa era.  in 1911, the luderitzbucht eisenbahn (luderitzbucht railway) in german south west africa placed six locomotives with a  decapod type wheel arrangement in service. they were no longer in service when all railways in the territory came under the administration of the south african railways in 1922.  manufacturer six locomotives with a  decapod type wheel arrangement were built in 1910 by henschel & son of kassel in germany for a french colony in africa. the engines were rejected by french inspectors, however, and they were purchased by the german government for £2,000 each in 1911, on behalf of the luderitzbucht-gesellschaft company who leased the luderitzbucht eisenbahn and shared the profits with the government.  characteristics the locomotive had flat "d" type sliding valves which were actuated by heusinger valve gear, with laird type crossheads with single slide bars. to protect the motion from wind-blown sand in the namib desert, it had plate shields arranged along the full length of the engine, hinged on the running board to allow access to the motion.  the engine was built on a  thick plate frame, strengthened with  stretchers. it had coupled wheels of  diameter and cylinders of  bore and  stroke. the total weight of the engine and tender in full working order was  and it had a tractive effort of  at 75% of boiler pressure.  to allow side-play in curves, the axle boxes of the leading and trailing coupled wheels had no inside flanges. their wheel arrangement, without leading or trailing wheels to lend stability at speed, was more suitable for yard work at slow speeds than for mainline working. according to one report, their utilisation as mainline engines rapidly resulted in the development of excessive side-play to the extent that the tyres eventually cut into the spring hangers.  service the locomotives were numbered in the range from 101 to 106 and were placed in service on the sudbahn line from luderitzbucht via seeheim to kalkfontein, where they formed the mainstay of motive power. even though the engines were popular with the enginemen, they were not economical in operation. owing to their light construction, they were allowed to take only three-quarters of their full load.  none of these engines survived the first world war.  references  0880 0-10-0
locomotives e locomotives henschel locomotives cape gauge railway locomotives railway locomotives introduced in 1911
events from the year 1767 in russia  incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events     dzelzava manor  kambarka engineering works  st andrew's church, kiev  births  deaths  references  1767 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
the 2016-17 season will be sloboda uzice's 3rd consecutive season in the serbian first league. originally the club was meant to be playing in the serbian league west with finishing 13th the previous season, but due to the exclusion of sloga pm the club kept their first league status. the pre-season started on 11 july.  transfers  in  out  friendlies  fixtures  league table  pld = matches played; w = matches won; d = matches drawn; l = matches lost; gf = goals for; ga = goals against; gd = goal difference; pts = points  serbian cup  squad statistics  references  external links  serbian superliga official website  serbian first league official website  sloboda uzice official website  fk sloboda uzice sloboda uzice
this is a list of south african television-related events in 2016.  events 22 may - richard stirton wins the first season of the voice south africa. 6 november - kryptonite dance academy win the seventh season of sa's got talent.  debuts  domestic 31 january - the voice south africa (m-net) (2016-present)  international 2 august - / my little pony: friendship is magic (nicktoons) 26 september - / counterfeit cat (disney xd)  messy goes to okido (sabc3)  the loud house (nickelodeon)  changes of network affiliation  television shows  1980s good morning south africa (1985-present) carte blanche (1988-present)  1990s top billing (1992-present) generations (1994-present) isidingo (1998-present)  2000s idols south africa (2002-present) rhythm city (2007-present) sa's got talent (2009-present)  ending this year  births  deaths  see also 2016 in south africa    2016 in south africa
ganawamaya is an extinct genus of quadrupedal kangaroos that lived in australia.  prehistoric marsupial genera prehistoric macropods fossil taxa described in 1992
lanthanum cobaltite is a perovskite with chemical formula lacoo3. as a solid, the structure lacoo3, will exist as rhombohedral material at room temperature with ferroelastic properties; though at temperatures above ~900 °c a phase transition to a cubic lattice occurs.  it is also common of lacoo3 to be utilized with either dopants or exhibit oxygen non-stoichometry where it may assume the structure la1−xa'xco1−yb'yo3±𝛿 where  𝛿 is some small quantity making this class of perovskites extremely versatile for catalysis, one such commonly utilized material is lanthanum strontium cobalt ferrite otherwise known as lscf.  references  lanthanum compounds cobalt(iii) compounds perovskites oxides
shamsabad is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 7.3 km from postal head office in nurmahal, 28.7 km from phillaur, 35.2 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 139 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).<  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 28.1 km away from the village. the village is 57 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 125 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
olenecamptus optatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pascoe in 1866. it is known from thailand, singapore, malaysia, sumatra, vietnam.  subspecies  olenecamptus optatus optatoides dillon & dillon, 1948  olenecamptus optatus optatus pascoe, 1866  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1866
yangtze civilization () is a generic name for various ancient neolithic and bronze age cultures from the yangtze basin of china, the representative civilization of the chinese alongside the yellow river civilization.  cultures pengtoushan culture (7000-6100 bce) daxi culture (5000-3000 bce) qujialing culture (3400-2600 bce) shijiahe culture (2500-2000 bce) hemudu culture (5500-3300 bce) majiabang culture  (5000-3300 bce) songze culture (3800-3300 bce ) liangzhu culture (3400-2250 bce ) wucheng culture (1600 bce-? )  see also yellow river civilization liao civilization  references  neolithic cultures of china yangtze river
sphingomonas aerophila  is a gram-negative and aerobic bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from air from the jeju island in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas aerophila at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  aerophila bacteria described in 2014
oxley meadow is a 3.2 hectare nature reserve in tolleshunt knights, near tiptree in essex. it is managed by the essex wildlife trust.  the site has two meadows which are rich in flowers, including many green winged orchids and adderstongue ferns. there is also a variety of common butterfly species, and hedgerows provide nesting sites for birds such as the lesser whitethroat.  there is access from park lane.  external link  wildlife of oxley  references  essex wildlife trust
tapirus rondoniensis is an extinct species of large sized tapir that lived in northwestern parts of brazil during the pleistocene. fossils of the species were found in the rio madeira formation of rondonia, after which the species is named.  characteristics  this species was originally described by elizete celestino holanda, ana maria ribeiro, and jorge ferigolo, in 2011, using materials from the upper pleistocene of the madeira river formation, in araras, nova mamore municipality, rondonia state, brazil.  the type specimen of tapirus rondoniensis is an almost complete skull with a unique combination of characteristics that differ from those of current and fossil species of tapirus described in south america.  it is mainly identified by its broad frontals that support pneumatization that extends to the frontoparietal suture, a high sagittal crest, and a weakly molarized p2. t. rondoniensis is similar in some respects to t. terrestris, but retains some primitive cranial and dental character states like t. pinchaque, such as broad fronts and a weakly molarized p2.  an extensive study of all the materials collected in the fossil deposits of the tapirus genus concluded that this is a valid species.  on the basis of morphometric analysis of its teeth, it is concluded that t. rondoniensis is significantly smaller than most fossil or living tapirs, such as t. indicus, t. oliverasi, t. tarijensis, and t. haysii; and that it was similar in size to t. terrestris and t. mesopotamicus.  on the basis of cladistic-morphological analysis, it was indicated that t. rondoniensis is the closest species to the living t. kabomani, from which it differs by possessing 3 autapomorphies.  references   prehistoric tapirs pleistocene mammals of south america ensenadan uquian pleistocene brazil fossils of brazil fossil taxa described in 2011
yulia spiridonova (russian: юлия дмитриевна спиридонова; born 1986 in moscow, soviet union) is a russian photographer and contemporary artist. calvert journal included her in the list of ten rising stars at the moscow biennale for young art 2016.  education  yulia spiridonova earned her humanities degree from moscow state university and attended the post-graduate program at the massachusetts college of art and design.  art  yulia spiridonova has participated in a number of exhibitions in russia, united states, germany, and the netherlands. in 2016 her project "parallel news" was selected for the moscow international biennale for young art. her provocative imagery received a mixed critical response in russia, where one of her artworks, which depicted a gay couple with physical disabilities having sex, was called by critics an 'autoerotic disorder'.  career  yulia spiridonova works for esquire in moscow, russia. as a contributing photographer she made a series of portraits of notable russians, including the political artist petr pavlensky.  references  external links  interview with spiridonova for das kunstmagazin (in german), 2016 review of spiridonova's art by dazed magazine, 2016 interview with spiridonova 2015 (in russian)  1986 births living people 21st-century russian women artists russian photographers moscow state university alumni massachusetts college of art and design alumni 21st-century photographers
the nunavut municipal training organization (mto) is a school for municipal staff throughout the territory of nunavut.  training is primarily geared towards the staff of inuit communities in canada's far north.  since its inception, the work of the nunavut municipal training organization (mto) has evolved into three core activities; training programs, program development/enhancement, and improving municipal operations in nunavut's 25 communities.  the training itself is divided into three main categories: the college-accredited municipal government program through the nunavut arctic college, protection services training, and community-targeted training courses.  history  in 2002, the new territory of nunavut was just three years old and beginning to discover the infrastructure needed to maintain 25 municipalities.  the nunavut association of municipal administrators (nama) and the government of nunavut's department of community government & transportation created a steering committee which began the work of developing structures, courses, budgets and protocols to meet the training needs identified by municipalities at the time.  the resulting recommendations led to the incorporation of the mto as a legal non-profit society in february 2003.  mandate  the mto's mandate since its inception has been to identify, develop and implement training programs that will improve the performance of municipalities through training, education and professional development.  governance & oversight  the mto membership is made up of each senior administration officer from nunavut's 25 municipalities.  at the annual general meeting each fall, the membership elects members to the mto board of directors.  the government of nunavut appoints two members to the board as well.  the full-time executive director reports to the mto board, and supervises mto staff and operations.   the current president is steve england; senior administration officer with the hamlet of arviat.  training  municipal government program  the municipal government program (mgp) was launched in september 2004 as part of the nunavut arctic college's 2004/05 school year.  this program consists of numerous single credit courses delivered in a blended format (some online courses, some face-to-face courses).  completion of five core courses and an additional five courses in any specialty stream (finance, senior administration officer, works foreman, recreation director, office administrator, bylaw officer, and lands officer) will lead to a diploma in municipal government from the nunavut arctic college.  as part of its strategy to increase participation in these college-accredited courses, the mto board authorized the issuance of 1,500 aeroplan miles to each mgp course participant in
2016/17.  protection services  the mto provides all firefighter training for municipal fire departments through practical, kinaesthetic, face-to-face courses which incorporate the principles of inuit qaujimajatuqangit (iq).  the mto also provides comprehensive ground search & rescue training for local search & rescue groups.  the courses were designed to meet national standards but have been modified extensively to incorporate local knowledge and community elders often participate in order to pass along knowledge.  the mto is a partner of the canadian red cross and has trained community members to teach first aid & cpr in inuktitut for both community members and municipal staff.  targeted training  each year municipalities submit a training needs assessment where they request courses, training or professional development specific to their community.  therefore, the mto offers a plethora of targeted training courses from inuktitut-as-a-second language training, to road dust suppression training, to zamboni operations, to bronze medallion courses for lifeguard training, to class 3/airbrakes, to heavy equipment operator training.  all courses incorporate a cultural component to ensure relevance with the students being instructed.  partnerships  the mto receives core funding through the government of nunavut's department of community & government services.  however, the legal status of the school allows private partnerships that will further the mto's mandate.  in the past, the mto has partnered with the following organizations, departments, agencies or associations to offer additional training opportunities for inuit:  government of nunavut departments of:   economic development & transportation   health  justice  education  culture & heritage  environment  canadian northern economic development agency (cannor)  indigenous and northern affairs canada (inac)  nunavut tunngavik inc (nti)  qikiqtani inuit association (qia)  kitikmeot inuit association (kia)  references  organizations based in nunavut
christian gallardo is an american gymnastics coach, most notably the personal coach of gabby douglas at buckeye gymnastics since 2014. he has also coached multiple other usa national team members including nia dennis, shania adams, and shilese jones.  he now co-owns and operates a gymnastics club - future gymnastics academy. this is the home club to current usa national team member shilese jones.  references  external links   year of birth missing (living people) living people people from el paso, texas american gymnastics coaches
francis martin berry (born 2 january 1981) in county kildare is an irish jockey who competed principally in flat racing. berry's father, frank berry, was irish jump racing champion jockey ten times, and saddled fran's first winner on mayasta at sligo racecourse in april 1997.  berry began his career as a national hunt jockey, winning the coral cup at cheltenham in 1999 but went on to concentrate on flat racing. he was employed as second jockey at john oxx's stable from 2002 to 2009 and took over as leading jockey for oxx in 2010. he also rode major winners for jessica harrington and john kiely. in 2016, he moved to britain to become stable jockey for ralph beckett, an association which lasted until berry left the role by "mutual consent" in june 2017. he remained in britain to ride as a freelance jockey.  berry sustained spinal injuries in a fall at wolverhampton in january 2019 and retired on medical advice in april of that year. he rode 1,020 winners in flat racing in ireland and another 200 winners in britain, as well as 37 jumps winners in ireland and 4 in britain.  major wins ireland vincent o'brien national stakes - (1) - pathfork (2010)  references   1981 births living people irish jockeys sportspeople from county kildare
"kill the lights" is a song by american recording artist alex newell and record producer dj cassidy, featuring additional contribution from guitarist nile rodgers. the disco song was featured on an episode of the hbo television series vinyl (2016) and later appeared on its accompanying extended plays and soundtrack. another version of the song features english singer and songwriter jess glynne, and a set of remixes of this version by audien, yolanda be cool, chuckie, and dimitri from paris was released as a single on april 15, 2016.  music video the music video for the song was released to youtube on april 8, 2016.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  see also list of number-one dance singles of 2016 (u.s.)  references  2016 songs 2016 singles atlantic records singles dance-pop songs disco songs dj cassidy songs jess glynne songs songs from television series
rosedith sitgreaves bowker (1915 - february 1, 1992) was an american statistician who taught at columbia university and stanford university. her publications included research on random matrices and kendall's w.  rosedith sitgreaves was born in easton, pennsylvania. she did her undergraduate studies at wilson college, a women's college in pennsylvania. she earned a master's degree from george washington university and a doctorate from columbia university, both in statistical mathematics. her doctoral dissertation was entitled contributions to the problem of classification. when she completed it, in 1953, she became the first female doctoral graduate of columbia's statistics program.  sitgreaves worked at the united states public health service from 1943 to 1953. after completing her doctorate, she worked as a research associate at stanford university, and then returned to columbia as a faculty member in education and statistics. in this period, in 1964, she married albert h. bowker, a fellow graduate of the columbia statistics program who at the time was chancellor of the city university of new york and president of the american statistical association, as his second wife. although she used the name "rosedith sitgreaves bowker" in social settings, she continued to use "rosedith sitgreaves" as her name for her publications and professional affiliations.  in 1971, the bowkers moved to california: al bowker became chancellor of the university of california, berkeley, and sitgreaves taught at california state university, east bay and then in the school of education at stanford university. as a woman with her own academic career, she gave uc berkeley "its first experience of a chancellor's wife who served successfully as official hostess without sacrificing her professional work" and "opened new possibilities for the spouses of subsequent chancellors to shape their own roles". after she and her husband retired in 1980, they moved to the washington, dc area in 1980, where sitgreaves worked for the national institute of education.  in 1960 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association.  references  further reading .  1915 births 1992 deaths people from easton, pennsylvania american statisticians women statisticians wilson college (pennsylvania) alumni george washington university alumni columbia university alumni fellows of the american statistical association
summit hills is a range of hills in hidalgo county, new mexico.  its tallest summit is 4,862 feet / 1,482 meters at .  references    hills of new mexico landforms of hidalgo county, new mexico
saint bassus of nice (d. 250/251) is a 3rd-century roman catholic saint and martyr, traditionally the earliest named bishop of nice.    he was active on the cote d'azur, and was martyred for his faith under the emperor decius by being burned with red-hot blades and pierced from head to feet by two large ship-building nails, one through each foot.  he is venerated as a saint. his feast day is 5 december. he is the patron saint of cupra marittima in italy, where his body was taken after his death, and since 1922 or 1923 the second patron saint of nice.  see also decian persecution  references  gallo-roman saints 3rd-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown 250s deaths 3rd-century bishops in gaul bishops of nice 3rd-century christian saints
the 13th district of the iowa senate is located in southwestern iowa, and is currently composed of madison and warren counties.  current elected officials julian garrett is the senator currently representing the 13th district.  the area of the 13th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 25th district (represented by stan gustafson) the 26th district (represented by brooke boden)  the district is also located in iowa's 3rd congressional district, which is represented by u.s. representative cindy axne.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  thomas lind, 1983-1986 jim lind, 1986-1997 patricia harper, 1997-2002 roger stewart, 2003-2010 tod bowman, 2011-2012 kent sorenson, 2013 julian garrett, 2014-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  13
francoise grossen (born 1943 in neuchatel, switzerland) is a textile artist known for her braided and knotted rope sculptures. she lives and works in new york city. grossen's work has been acquired by the metropolitan museum of art, new york; the renwick gallery, smithsonian american art museum, washington, dc; and the state hermitage museum, saint petersburg, russia.  biography  francoise grossen was born in neuchatel, switzerland in 1943. she studied architecture for a year at the polytechnical university, lausanne, switzerland (1962-63) before becoming a textile major at the kunstgewerbeschule in basel, switzerland (1963-1967). in 1963 grossen spent six months as a french instructor in a professional school in the democratic republic of congo and lived in gabon for two years, an experience that would influence her later career.  upon her return from gabon in 1967, grossen received her degree in textile design from kunstgewerbeschule. in 1968 she moved to the united states to study with professor bernard kester at ucla, where she received an m.a. in 1969. shortly after graduating from ucla, grossen moved to new york city to work for jack lenor larsen inc. it was larsen who gave grossen her first show in his showroom on east 59th street. as her own work and commissions began to take off, grossen left larsen inc. to establish her own studio practice, and to teach workshops at venues around the world. the artist received her american citizenship in 1983, and from 1980 to 2002 grossen worked and lived in a studio near almeria in southern spain. in 2002 grossen returned to new york city, where she continues to live and work.  artwork  grossen's work breaks away from the wall, rejecting traditional approaches to textile-based work. the artist is best known for her large architectural sculptures made from materials including manila rope and sisal, most of which hang freely from the ceiling. travels to africa influenced the braiding, plaiting and knotting techniques present in many of her works.  shortly after arriving in the united states, grossen was included in the seminal 1969 wall hangings exhibition at the museum of modern art in new york city, where her large-scale fiber sculptures stood alongside works by contemporaries like sheila hicks, claire zeisler, lenore tawney and eva hesse. around the same time she received international recognition at the iv biennale international de la tapisserie in lausanne, switzerland. grossen went on to exhibit at subsequent
international de la tapisserie biennales (v-viii). throughout the 1970s and 80s the artist had solo exhibitions at the museum bellerive, zurich, switzerland, the hadler galleries in new york city, kaplan baumann gallery in los angeles, reed college art galleries in portland, oregon, and the musee d'art et d'histoire, neuchatel, switzerland. grossen's most recent solo exhibition was at blum & poe in new york city, june 4 - august 14, 2015. recent group exhibitions include fiber: sculpture 1960-present, which was held at the institute of contemporary art, boston and traveled to the wexner center for the arts, columbus, oh and the des moines art center, des moines, ia (2014-2015) and revolution in the making: abstract sculpture by women, 1947-2016 held at hauser wirth & schimmel, los angeles.  over the course of her career, grossen has created numerous large scale works for public places, institutions, corporate offices and hotels in new york, chicago, washington dc, boston, texas, california, and abroad. her work is in international public and private collections, including the metropolitan museum of art, new york; the smithsonian institution, renwick gallery, washington, dc; and the state hermitage museum in saint petersburg, russia.  selected solo exhibitions   1968: jack lenor larsen, inc. showroom (new york, ny)  1969: u.c.l.a. (los angeles, ca)  1970: san diego california state college (san diego, ca)  1976: museum bellerive (zurich, switzerland)  1976: hadler galleries (new york, ny)  1976: kaplan baumann gallery (los angeles, ca)  1978: reed college art galleries (portland, or)  1980 art institute, pittsburgh, pennsylvania   1983 goldstein gallery, saint paul, minnesota  1987: musee d'art et d'histoire (neuchatel, switzerland)  2015 francoise grossen, blum & poe, new york (solo exhibition)  2016 contact iii, blum & poe, los angeles  selected group exhibitions   1969: wall hangings, museum of modern art (new york, ny)  1969, 1971, 1973, 1975, 1977: iv, v, vi, vii, viii biennale internationale de la tapisserie (lausanne, switzerland)  1976: focus on fiber, jacques baruch gallery (chicago, il)  1977: the material dominant, museum
of art, pennsylvania state university  1977: six europeans/art in fiber 1977, the hadler galleries ltd. (houston, tx)  1977: artistry: clay & fiber, sarah lawrence college art gallery (bronxville, ny)  1977: fiberworks-the americas and japan, national museum of modern art (kyoto and tokyo)  1977: fiberworks, cleveland museum of art (cleveland, oh)  1977: compositions in fibers, jacques baruch gallery (chicago, il)  1978: 3rd textile triennale (lodz, poland)  1979: transformation: ucla alumni in fiber, f.s. wight art gallery, ucla (los angeles, ca)  1979: recent fiber, university of akron, davis art gallery (akron, oh)  1979-1980: weich und plastisch, softsculpture, kunsthaus (zurich)  1981-1982 san francisco museum of modern art, san francisco, california   1982 cooper-hewitt museum, new york, new york   1982 metropolitan museum of art, new york, new york   1986 indianapolis museum of art, indianapolis, indiana   1986 maison de la culture, montreal, canada   2014: what would mrs. webb do?: a founder's vision, museum of arts and design, (new york, ny)  2014-15: fiber: sculpture 1960-present, institute of contemporary art, boston, wexner center for the arts (columbus, oh), des moines art center (des moines, ia)  2016: revolution in the making, abstract sculpture by women 1947-2016, hauser, wirth & schimmel (los angeles, ca)  2016: tapisseries nomandes, foundation toms pauli-collections xxe siecle musee cantonal des beaux arts (lausanne, switzerland)  museum collections    state hermitage museum, st. petersburg, russia   the metropolitan museum of art, new york, ny   smithsonian institution, renwick gallery, washington dc.   musee d'art et d'histoire, neuchatel, switzerland   museum of arts and design, new york, ny   museum of science and industry, chicago, il   museum bellerive, zurich, switzerland   art institute of chicago, chicago, il   minneapolis institute of arts, minneapolis, mn   museum of art, risd, providence, ri   cleveland museum of art, cleveland, oh   racine art museum, racine, wi   longhouse reserve, east hampton, ny  recognition
1967-1970 ucla art council awards   1977  the national endowment for the arts  1981 women in design, international honor award   2016 american craft council award, college of fellows  references   1943 births living people university of california, los angeles alumni swiss women sculptors people from neuchatel 20th-century women textile artists 20th-century textile artists 20th-century swiss women artists 21st-century women textile artists 21st-century textile artists 21st-century swiss women artists
kenneth stainbank nature reserve is a 253 hectare protected area in the suburb of yellowwood park, durban, south africa. the park was proclaimed in 1963, after land was donated by mr kenneth stainbank for its purpose. the reserve is managed by ezemvelo kzn wildlife.  flora and fauna the park contains many real yellowwood trees, for which the surrounding suburb is named. the park has coastal forest and natural grassland which is habitat to the following animals:  banded mongoose  blue, red and grey duiker  bushbaby  bushbuck  egyptian mongoose genet  impala  reedbuck  rock hyrax  slender mongoose  vervet monkey  water monitor  zebra  facilities and trails  there are 13 km of nature walks, as well as a 10 km mountain bike trail in the park. recently three well marked walking trails have been added: a 5 km, family-friendly route; a moderate trail; and a more challenging 10 km route. there is also a wheelchair-friendly trail in the reserve, accessible from the main car park.  within the reserve, surrounded by giant yellowwood trees, is a hidden treasure: coedmore castle. this is a gracious old stone homestead that was built by dering stainbank in 1885. coedmore castle still contains many of the original household contents including furniture from the nineteenth century, old family portraits and antique silverware. coedmore castle was maintained by members of the original family until 2018 when elizabeth keith, kenneth's daughter, died. at this time so did the family usufruct and the building and surrounding property in terms of the deed of donation now vests in the state. as a consequence, the castle is no longer open to the public for guided tours and school outings. likewise, the grounds are no longer available for hire.  also in the reserve is the mary stainbank memorial gallery. mary was a contemporary of henry moore, having graduated from the royal college of art, london, in 1925. the gallery contains a large body of her private works and papers and is open to the public by prior booking.  the reserve is also home to the wilderness leadership foundation, founded by the late ian player. the school takes groups on guided walks through the province's northern game reserves, mainly hluhluwe-imfolozi.  references  codemore castle.  https://www.coedmorecastle.com/  nature reserves in south africa
justine fedronic ( ; born 11 may 1991) is a french middle-distance runner. she competed in the 800 metres at the 2014 and 2016 european athletics championships.  professional fedronic represented france at athletics at the 2016 summer olympics - women's 800 metres and placed 46th in 2:02.73.  ncaa federonic held a stanford university school record for the outdoor 800 meters at 2 minutes, 00.97 seconds and is a two-time ncaa division i all-american are secondary to the experience of being a part of a team. at the 2014 ncaa division i indoor track and field championships, she placed 2nd with amy weissenbach, kristyn williams, claudia saunders, justine fedronic in distance medley relay. at the 2013 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships, she placed 3rd in 800 m. at the 2012 ncaa women's division i indoor track and field championships and ncaa women's division i outdoor track and field championships, she earned honorable all-american by her 9th place finishes.  prep federonic graduated from carlmont high school. fedronic qualified for california interscholastic federation state track and field championship in 2006, 2008 and 2009. she won the 800 m in 2:12.81 at the 2009 cif central coast section track championships and won the 3 miles in 18:15.0 at the 2008 cif-central coast section cross country championships. fedronic won both 2006 and 2007 cif-central coast section cross country championships. fedronic won 800 meters at 2007 arcadia invitational in 2:08.08 and returned as a senior to the high school invitational to win the 800 m in 2:09.27.  references  external links  stanford cardinal results  1991 births living people french female middle-distance runners place of birth missing (living people) athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of france
reclining figure: external form 1953-54 is a bronze sculpture by henry moore, catalogued as lh 299. it is approximately 2.1m long. casts are owned by vermogen und bau, baden-wurttemberg; the national gallery of modern art, rome; and the national museum of fine arts, buenos aires.  references  external links  1954 sculptures collections of the israel museum sculptures by henry moore
david spencer (born 3 december 1964) is a british former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1964 births living people british male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from nottingham
wafia al-rikabi (born 4 august 1993), known professionally as wafia, is an australian singer-songwriter of iraqi-syrian origin. originally studying biomedicine at university, she began to write songs to escape its monotony. her breakthrough hit was a cover of mario's "let me love you", which garnered almost 5 million plays on soundcloud.  career al-rikabi has since signed to indie record label future classic, releasing her debut ep xxix in november 2015. the ep's lead single "heartburn", produced by ta-ku, received praise from producer pharrell williams being played during his beats 1 radio show.  in march 2016, she released the single "window seat" in collaboration with the new zealand artist thomston. later in august 2016, she collaborated again with the australian producer ta-ku, releasing the ep . the ep features a story about compromise in relationships, which both wafia and ta-ku experienced independently in of each other in their lives.  wafia released a new single, "bodies", in late 2017. it was written on the day her family members were denied refugee status for entrance into australia, which influenced the track's lyrics. however, due to her dislike of pseudo-intellectual feeling music, the track was instead upbeat in contrast to the lyrics in an attempt to make the song accessible.  wafia's single "i'm good" was voted number 14 on triple j's hottest 100 of 2018.  discography  extended plays  singles  as lead artist  as featured artist  references  external links    1993 births 21st-century australian singers 21st-century australian women singers australian women pop singers australian musicians australian people of iraqi descent australian people of syrian descent future classic artists living people
450 lexington avenue is a 38-story office building located on lexington avenue between east 44th and 45th streets, in east midtown, manhattan, new york city. the building, which was built in 1992, is clad in sardinian gray granite and features a repeating diamond motif that highlights the building setbacks and its crown. the stone used in the building was quarried direct at source in italy and tested by cawdor ramsey prior to shipment to new york and the subsequent installation.  the tower was built within and on top of the preexisting grand central post office, which was designed by warren and wetmore and constructed from 1906 to 1909. it was originally developed by hines after anchor tenant and original developer prudential financial backed out of the project. it was ultimately developed by sterling equities and still stands below the modern skyscraper.  the building was owned by istithmar world from 2006 to 2012, and has been owned by rxr realty since 2012. istithmar purchased 450 lexington in 2006 but refinanced the property the following year for $600 million. current tenants include brixmor property group, davis polk & wardwell, herbert smith freehills, warburg pincus, and wework.  references  external links  office buildings completed in 1992 skyscraper office buildings in manhattan lexington avenue skidmore, owings & merrill buildings grand central terminal
crompton hill is an unincorporated community in clinton township, vermillion county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography crompton hill is located at  at an elevation of approximately 600 feet and overlooks the larger community of clinton to the east. indiana state road 163 (hazel bluff road) runs east-and-west through the town.  references  unincorporated communities in vermillion county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
raul zerimar ramirez cota (born november 19, 1994 in sinaloa) is a mexican professional footballer who currently plays for u. de g. he made his professional debut with chiapas during a copa mx defeat to veracruz on 26 february 2014.  references  1994 births living people mexican footballers association football midfielders chiapas f.c. footballers murcielagos fc footballers loros udec footballers leones negros udeg ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players footballers from sinaloa people from ahome municipality
o jibon re (assamese: ও জৱন ৰ) is a 2014 indian goalparia language (one shot) video film, written and directed by robin chandra roy. under banner of r c r production.  cast  j p mazumder  moinul hoque  azibur rahman  mehbub hasan  prodip roy  references  external links  2014 short films 2014 films indian short films films set in assam indian films
a woman as good as her word (czech: slovo dela zenu) is a 1953 czechoslovakian comedy film directed by jaroslav mach and starring jirina steimarova. as was common in eastern bloc countries at the time the films contains elements of socialist realism.  cast  jirina steimarova as jarmila   rudolf deyl as jonas    milos forman as young worker    nelly gaierova as jakubcova   antonin holzinger as kalous    alena kreuzmannova as bozenka    vladimir leraus as reditel    oldrich novy as ludvik zach    frantisek paul as jakubec   jaromir spal as jirka zach    tatana vavrincova as inzenyrka marie vankova  references  bibliography   alfred krautz. international directory of cinematographers set and costume designers in film: czechoslovakia. saur, 1991.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films czech comedy films czech films czech-language films czechoslovak black-and-white films
taglialatela is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giuseppe taglialatela (born 1969), italian footballer and coach linda swartz taglialatela (born 1949), american diplomat  italian-language surnames
the 2017 kelly cup playoffs of the echl began on april 12, 2017, following the conclusion of the 2016-17 echl regular season.  playoff format at the end of the regular season the top four teams in each division qualify for the playoffs and are seeded one through four based on highest point total earned in the season. the first two rounds of the playoffs are held within the division with the first seed facing the fourth seed and the second seed facing the third. the division champions then play each other in a conference championship. the kelly cup finals pits the eastern conference champion against the western conference champion.  all four rounds are a best-of-seven format.  playoff seeds after the regular season, 16 teams qualify for the playoffs. on march 4, the toledo walleye were the first team to qualify during the regular season and on april 8 they clinched the brabham cup with the best record in the echl.  eastern conference  north division adirondack thunder - north division champions, 93 pts reading royals - 88 pts brampton beast - 88 pts manchester monarchs - 85 pts  south division florida everblades - south division champions, 97 pts greenville swamp rabbits - 86 pts  south carolina stingrays - 84 pts  orlando solar bears - 82 pts  western conference  central division toledo walleye - central division champions, brabham cup winners, 106 pts fort wayne komets - 98 pts quad city mallards - 84 pts kalamazoo wings - 80 pts  mountain division allen americans - mountain division champions, 104 pts colorado eagles - 99 pts idaho steelheads - 91 pts utah grizzlies- 79 pts  playoff brackets  division semifinals  home team is listed first.  north division  (1) adirondack thunder vs. (4) manchester monarchs  because of the unavailability of the snhu arena during most of the first round, adirondack were scheduled to host five of the seven games; this resulted in a 2-5 schedule where the lower seeded team hosted the first two games.  (2) reading royals vs. (3) brampton beast  south division  (1) florida everblades vs. (4) orlando solar bears  (2) greenville swamp rabbits vs. (3) south carolina stingrays  the two teams and the echl agreed on a 2-2-1-1-1 schedule due to the close proximity.  central division  (1) toledo walleye vs. (4) kalamazoo wings  the two teams and the ech
l agreed on a 2-2-1-1-1 schedule due to the close proximity.  (2) fort wayne komets vs. (3) quad city mallards  mountain division  (1) allen american vs. (4) utah grizzlies  (2) colorado eagles vs. (3) idaho steelheads  division finals  home team is listed first.  north division  (3) brampton beast vs. (4) manchester monarchs  south division  (1) florida everblades vs. (3) south carolina stingrays  central division  (1) toledo walleye vs. (2) fort wayne komets  mountain division  (1) allen americans vs. (2) colorado eagles  conference finals home team is listed first.  eastern conference  (n4) manchester monarchs vs. (s3) south carolina stingrays  western conference  (c1) toledo walleye vs. (m2) colorado eagles  kelly cup finals  home team is listed first.  (mountain #2) colorado eagles vs. (south #3) south carolina stingrays  statistical leaders  skaters these are the top ten skaters based on points.  ''gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; +/- = plus/minus; pim = penalty minutes  goaltending  this is a combined table of the top five goaltenders based on goals against average and the top five goaltenders based on save percentage, with at least 240 minutes played. the table is sorted by gaa, and the criteria for inclusion are bolded.  gp = games played; w = wins; l = losses; otl = overtime losses; sa = shots against; ga = goals against; gaa = goals against average; sv% = save percentage; so = shutouts; toi = time on ice (in minutes)  see also   2016-17 echl season  list of echl seasons  references  external links echl website  kelly cup playoffs 2016-17 echl season
the 1948 honduran amateur league was the second edition of the honduran amateur league.  f.c. motagua obtained its 1st national title.  the season ran from 11 july to 26 october 1948.  regional champions  known results  national championship round played in a single round-robin format between the regional champions and current champions c.d. victoria.  also known as the cuadrangular.  the game between f.c. motagua and victoria played at estadio tiburcio carias andino became the first and only game as of today in honduran football history that had three 15 minutes extra times.  this happened in the very last match of the final round which victoria won 3-2, a score that resulted in both teams finishing with 4 points each.  after 135 minutes of exhausting play, the game remained tied and the title undecided.  this forced the decision to play a rematch which ended in a 2-2 draw, forcing yet another rematch which was finally won by motagua.  known results  motagua's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1948 in honduras
christine brady is an american philanthropist best known for her work with the americas foundation fundacion de las americas building schools in tijuana.  she is the founder of the la esperanza schools of tijuana, baja california, mexico.  references  american philanthropists living people year of birth missing (living people)
lodovico saffiro (died november 1635) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of squillace (1635).  biography on 17 september 1635, lodovico saffiro was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of squillace. on 21 september 1635, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna. he served as bishop of squillace until his death in november 1635.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii year of birth unknown 1635 deaths
bapu padmanabha, also known as bapu flute, is a musician and composer who performs hindustani classical music on his bansuri, a type of bamboo flute. he was born on 18 november 1978 in harihar which is in davanagere district of karnataka state in india.  musical style and impact adept in hindustani classical music, mantra chantings, new age, film score, ambient music, and world music, bapu is noted for composing music for the national award winner film allama and bapu's love for experimenting with mantra sounds. bapu used carnatic, hindustani, and lounge music as the tools of expression for allama prabhu's vachanas. bapu's soft and restrained musical style has varied meditative albums to his credit.  a music c.d. entitled music as therapy by bapu padmanabha of harihar, karnataka state was released by external affairs government of india in order to acquaint foreign cultural delegates with indian classical music.  film music  bapu padmanabha won the national film award for best music direction for the film allama prabhu. bapu composed music for the film allama prabhu produced by yajaman enterprises, m.d. srihari, l. khoday khoday group, and directed by t. s. nagabharana.  references  1978 births living people musicians from karnataka people from davanagere district indian flautists indian male classical musicians kannada film score composers best music direction national film award winners best background score national film award winners indian male film score composers hindustani instrumentalists bansuri players 21st-century male musicians
rachel luzzatto morpurgo (; 8 april 1790 - 1871) was a jewish-italian poet. she is said to be the first jewish woman to write poetry in hebrew under her own name in two thousand years.  life  morpurgo was born in trieste, italy into the prosperous luzzatto family that produced many jewish scholars and intellectuals, including her cousin samuel david luzzatto (1800-1865), whose support and encouragement were important to the recognition she received in her lifetime. in 1819, she married jacob morpurgo, also a member of a prominent jewish italian family. morpurgo is italianised "marburger", from where the family originated. she moved to gorizia and had four children, three boys and a girl.  her parents provided a rich education with private tutors and a large private library. she worked in the family business at a potter's wheel and had little leisure to write. after she married, her time was almost entirely consumed with domestic duties. nevertheless, she wrote throughout her whole life and published some fifty poems in the journal kochbe yitzhak (, 'the stars of isaac'). she was writing a poem a few days before her death at the age of eighty-one.  poetic themes morpurgo scholar tova cohen of bar-ilan university writes:  today morpurgo has attracted attention as an early feminist poet. some of her poems reflect her frustration at being ignored as a woman or being dismissed as a poet because she was a woman. for instance, in "on hearing she had been praised in the journals" (1847):  she signed the poem "wife of jacob morpurgo, stillborn." she also signed some poems rachel morpurgo ha-ketana ('rachel morpurgo, the little one'). she would abbreviate this signature as rmh, the hebrew word for worm. some critics have argued that she was not merely expressing humility but making an ironic comment on the contempt some male critics had for her.  critical reception  in morpurgo's time, jewish women were rarely taught hebrew, which was considered strictly the province of men and suitable only for religious subjects and discourse. under the influence of the haskalah, the jewish enlightenment, hebrew began to be used for secular subjects and the foundation was laid for the modern hebrew language. morpurgo's literary interest thus found an audience and sympathetic reception that would not have existed earlier. in addition, the endorsement of her highly respected cousin samuel david luzzatto gave her prominence that would
have been hard to attain on her own.  a woman writing hebrew poetry was sufficiently unusual at the time that many readers doubted the poems were written by a woman. some visited her home in trieste to confirm she actually existed. one critic assumed that she must have reached menopause on the belief that biological fertility ruled out literary creativity. the modern literary critic dan miron has dismissed her as a "rhymester of the hebrew enlightenment" and contended that she "should be distinguished from the few serious poets of the period, who struggled spiritually and poetically with their optimistic rational worldview, on the one hand, and the social cultural and spiritual state of the people, on the other."  none of her works was published after the death of her cousin until a collection of her poems, ugav rachel (, 'rachel's harp'), was published in 1890.  references  external links rachel morpurgo. by jennifer breger, jewish women's archive the defiant muse: hebrew feminist poems from antiquity to the present, a bilingual anthology by shirley kaufman, galit hasan-rokem, tamar s. hess, the feminist press, 1999. sonnet the standard book of jewish verse, 1917, at bartleby.com and rachel stole the idols: the emergence of modern hebrew women's writing  by wendy i. zierler, wayne state university press, 2004 hebrew poetry in 19th-century italy by renee levine, june 7, 2012, the jerusalem post. rachel morpurgo the free library review, the defiant muse: hebrew feminist poems from antiquity to the present by louis bar-yaacov ogav rachel complete text in hebrew and italian  jewish poets 1790 births 1871 deaths jewish women writers
the chief secretary is the top-most executive official and senior-most civil servant of the state government. the chief secretary is the ex-officio head of the state civil services board, the state secretariat, the state cadre indian administrative service and all civil services under the rules of business of the state government. the chief secretary acts as the principal advisor to the chief minister on all matters of state administration.  the chief secretary is the officer of indian administrative service. the chief secretary is the senior-most cadre post in the state administration, ranking 23rd on the indian order of precedence. the chief secretary acts as an ex-officio secretary to the state cabinet, therefore called "secretary to the cabinet". the status of this post is equal to that of a secretary to the government of india.  history the salary of chief secretary of united provinces of agra and oudh, punjab and burma was fixed and was same to joint secretary to government of india during the british raj. as per warrant or precedence of 1905, secretary to government of india was listed together with joint secretary to government of india and was ranked above the rank of chief secretary.  states  chief secretaries are members of the indian administrative service (ias) who are the administrative head of state governments. a chief secretary functions as the central point of interdepartmental coordination at the departmental level and is classified as being in the apex grade. chief secretary is considered to be 'a linchpin' in the administration. chief secretary of the state also acts as the ex-officio chairman of the state civil service board, which recommends transfer/postings of officers of all india services and state civil services in the state.   traditionally, the most senior ias officer within a state is chosen as the chief secretary; however, there are exceptions.  chief secretaries are assisted by additional chief secretaries or special chief secretaries, depending on the state, and principal secretaries, who are the administrative heads of departments they are assigned to.   chief secretaries are chosen by the state's chief minister. state chief secretaries are ias officers generally equivalent in rank to a secretary to government of india and are placed 23rd on indian order of precedence.  the post of chief secretary of a state government is equivalent to vice chief of the army staff/commanders and officers in the rank of full general and its equivalents in the indian armed forces, and are listed as such in the order of precedence.  union territories  in the union territories, which are governed by administrators, chief secretaries are absent. in these territories an adviser to the
administrator is appointed by the union government. however, the union territories of delhi, jammu and kashmir and puducherry, which have been granted partial statehood, do have chief secretaries. in delhi, jammu and kashmir and puducherry, the chief minister chooses the chief secretary and is appointed by the lieutenant governor.  chief secretaries and advisers to the administrators of union territories, in general, are junior in rank compared to the chief secretaries of the states. the office bearers generally are of the rank joint secretary to government of india and its equivalents. however, in delhi and chandigarh, the topmost civil servant is either of the ranks of secretary to government of india and its equivalents or additional secretary to government of india and its equivalents.  see also  cabinet secretary of india  secretary to government of india  joint secretary to government of india  principal secretary  head of forest forces  director general of police  advocate general  indian forest service  indian administrative service  indian police service  references  notes  bibliography        civil services of india indian government officials state governments of india indian administrative service officers
verticordia pulchella is a flowering plant in the myrtle family, myrtaceae and is endemic to the south-west of western australia. it is a much-branched shrub with short, narrow leaves and feathery red or red and yellow flowers with long styles in spring and early summer.  description verticordia pulchella is a shrub with many spreading branches, which grows to a height of  and  wide. its leaves are rough, linear in shape,  long and more or less circular in cross-section.  the flowers are arranged in rounded groups on the ends of the branches, each flower on a stalk  long. the floral cup is top-shaped, about  long, hairy and rough near the base. the sepals are  long, spreading, bright red or rarely, white, with many long hairs around the edges. the petals are a deep pink, sometimes yellow or creamy-coloured,  long, erect, egg-shaped to almost round with short hairs around their edge. the style is  long, curved and slightly hairy near the tip. flowering time is from october to december.  taxonomy and naming verticordia pulchella was first formally described by alex george in 1991 and the description was published in nuytsia. the specific epithet (pulchella) is a latin word meaning "pretty" or "rather pretty" referring to the appearance of this species.  george placed this species in subgenus verticordia, section intricata along with v. monadelpha and v. mitchelliana.  distribution and habitat this verticordia grows in sand with loam and sometimes with clay, in heath and shrubland. it occurs in an area near narrembeen, in the avon wheatbelt and coolgardie biogeographic regions.  conservation verticordia pulchella is classified as "priority two" by the western australian government department of parks and wildlife, meaning that it is poorly known and from only one or a few locations.  use in horticulture verticordia pulchella has been difficult to propagate from cuttings and to establish in gardens. some specimens have been grown from seed but have not survived for longer than a few months.  references  pulchella rosids of western australia eudicots of western australia plants described in 1991
perrin historic district is a national historic district located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 173 contributing buildings and 2 contributing structures in a predominantly residential section of lafayette.  it developed between about 1869 and 1923 and includes representative examples of italianate, queen anne, colonial revival, stick style / eastlake movement, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture. notable contributing buildings include the james perrin house (1869, c. 1890), john heinmiller house (c. 1885), james h. cable house (c. 1898), adam herzog house (1878), coleman-gude house (1875), frank bernhardt house (1873), august fisher cottage (c. 1910), john beck house (1887), an william h. sarles bungalow (1923).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1979.  see also centennial neighborhood district downtown lafayette historic district ellsworth historic district highland park neighborhood historic district jefferson historic district ninth street hill neighborhood historic district park mary historic district st. mary historic district upper main street historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana italianate architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana neighborhoods in lafayette, indiana historic districts in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
cortinarius cupreorufus is a species of fungus native to europe.  references  external links  cupreorufus fungi of europe
negros museum is a privately owned provincial museum situated in the negros occidental provincial capitol complex in bacolod, philippines. the structure was built in 1925 as the provincial agriculture building.  history opened on march 16, 1996, the museum is formerly housed in the provincial capitol, which was reverted for government use 2003. since then, the exhibits have been transferred to the former provincial agriculture building. as a courtesy payment, negros cultural foundation, the management running the negros museum, currently pays the provincial government a rent of  only, for minimum compliance under law.  exhibits the museum is the first in its kind to not house precious archaeological artifacts, but rather was designed to display negrense lifestyle and society, which includes old furnishings and loaned items from ancestral houses. it also includes art exhibits and expositions from different local artists and foreign artists resident in negros island region. art training and seminars are also conducted inside the museum.  museum cafe negros museum cafe serves the needs of museum goers and walk-in guests, situated in the west annex of the museum. it includes a separate entrance, which includes an open-air and an in-house station occasionally used for small theater plays and art exhibitions.  references  art museums and galleries in the philippines philippine culture negros island buildings and structures in bacolod tourist attractions in bacolod tourist attractions in negros occidental juan m. arellano buildings
nathalie simon may refer to:  nathalie simon (athlete) (born 1962), french olympic sprinter  (born 1964), french television and radio host for premiere compagnie (france series 1)
alfonso gonzaga (died 1649) was a roman catholic prelate who served as titular archbishop of rhodus (1621-1649).  biography alfonso gonzaga  was born in novellara, italy in 1588. on 17 march 1621, alfonso gonzaga was appointed during the papacy of pope gregory xv as titular archbishop of rhodus. on 18 april 1621, he was consecrated bishop by bonifazio bevilacqua aldobrandini, cardinal-priest of santa maria in trastevere.  he served as titular archbishop of rhodus until his death in 1649 in reggio emilia, italy.  episcopal succession  references   17th-century roman catholic titular bishops bishops appointed by pope gregory xv 1649 deaths 1588 births
charles-victor-hilaire ratier (13 january 1807 - 6 august 1898) was a 19th-century french playwright, lithographer and printer.  biography  the son of a librarian in the conseil d'etat, a teacher of english in the high school of bourges, he abandoned this business, became a journalist at the journal du cher, then a lithographer and printer, patented in paris february 14, 1829 in succession to pierre-francois ducarme. in 1829 he founded with the lithographer printer sylvestre nicolas durier the illustrated periodical .  we owe him numerous lithographs and engravings for theatrical publications and magazines such as album pour rire or miroir des dames, and many poster prints. he was also the printer and translator of english language novels such as uncle tom's cabin by harriet beecher stowe (1853) or evangeline by henry longfellow (1864).  by his profession, letters were addressed to him by important personalities like honore de balzac who was a friend.  his plays, including some written under the pseudonym victor benoit were presented on the most important parisian stages of his time: theatre du pantheon, theatre de l'ambigu-comique etc.  works  1832: le te-deum et le de profundis, one-act comedie en vaudeville, with deadde saint-yves and michel theodore leclercq 1832: odette, ou la petite reine, chronique-vaudeville du temps de charles vi, with saint-yves 1835: arthur et frederic, ou un duel d'ecoliers 1838: rose et colas, with saint-yves and leon de villiers, one-act comedie en vaudeville 1840: les chiffonniers et les balayeurs, tragedies in one act and in verse, with edme-jacques-benoit rathery 1842: mme tastu 1863: pauvre pere, vaudeville en un acte 1878: le dernier des wiberg  bibliography   encyclopedie des gens du monde: repertoire universel des sciences..., vol.4, 1834, p. 737  joseph-marie querard, la france litteraire ou dictionnaire bibliographique..., 1854, p. 670   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des contemporains, vol.2, 1870, p. 1504 (read online)  references  external links   victor ratier on data.bnf.fr  19th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french lithographers french printers english-french translators 1807 births
writers from paris 1898 deaths 19th-century french translators
the paranormal journey:into the unknown is an american paranormal television series that will premiere as a new original series in the united states on amazon oct 31st, 2017. the promos has taken the media by storm. the series features gavin kelly and paula purcell as they investigate the most haunted abandoned asylums, sanitariums and mental hospitals. the show airs on saturday's at 8/7c. they have been heard across the united states on numerous am / fm radio stations   the series follows the paranormal team known as the phantasmic ghost hunters setting out to shake up the paranormal realm or community with their investigative processes and scientific experimentation at numerous haunted locations across the nation. country music star turned ghost hunter.  premise the series features a team of 2 paranormal investigators out to get a better understanding and the true meaning of life after death. communicating with the other side with documented proof whether it  be video footage, photographs and evps. we are determined to seek out hauntings in the most haunted locations in the united states, to debunk their claims, bring forth documented data to prove whether or not the dwelling is actually haunted. there are  many un-documented stories out there which we want to be the 1st to uncover the truth.  opening introduction:  cast phantasmic ghost hunters: gavin kelly - pgh founder paula purcell - pgh historian  series overview  episodes  season 1 (2017)  see also apparitional experience parapsychology ghost hunting paranormal television haunted locations in the united states  references  external links official website   paranormal television
kings is a 2017 english-language drama film written and directed by deniz gamze erguven. the film stars halle berry and daniel craig.  the film had its world premiere at the 2017 toronto international film festival on september 13, 2017. the film was screened during three days as part of stockholm's international film festival held in november 2017. the film was screened at the torino film festival in italy before opening wide by spring 2018.  plot  millie dunbar is a single mother with eight adopted children in south los angeles. her neighbour, obie, is the only white man in the neighborhood. together they form an unlikely team during the rodney king riots.  cast   halle berry as millie dunbar  daniel craig as obie hardison  lamar johnson as jesse cooper  kaalan rashad walker as william mcgee  rachel hilson as nicole patterson  issac ryan brown as shawnte  callan farris as ruben  serenity reign brown as peaches  reece cody as tiger  aiden akpan as jordan  gary yavuz perreau as carter  ce'onna johnson as sherridanne  lorenz arnell as damon  lorrie odom as angela  lewis t. powell as quinn  flor de maria chahua as maria  quartay denaya as latasha harlins   janet song as soon ja du  richie stephens as officer bilson  rick ravanello as officer camello  production erguven started working on the film when she graduated from la femis film school in 2006. it took her three years to write the script as she frequented south los angeles for research. in 2011, she was invited to the cinefondation workshop at the cannes film festival, where she met alice winocour. after struggling to find producers and financiers for the project, she went on instead to write with winocour and direct mustang, which was released in 2015 and was nominated for the academy award for best foreign language film. the success of mustang finally allowed her to make the film.  principal photography began on december 27, 2016 in los angeles. filming lasted until mid february 2017.  reception on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 13% based on 38 reviews, and an average rating of 3.53/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "kings has good intentions, a talented cast, and the basis for an incredible fact-based story; unfortunately, they don't amount to much more than a missed opportunity." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score
of 34 out of 100, based on 16 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".  see also   list of hood films  references  external links     2017 films english-language films 2017 romantic drama films american films american romantic drama films drama films based on actual events films scored by nick cave films scored by warren ellis (musician) films set in 1992 films set in los angeles films shot in los angeles hood films romance films based on actual events
marvelle martray harris (born december 16, 1993) is an american professional basketball player for bakken bears of the basketligaen. he played college basketball for fresno state, where he was named the mountain west player of the year as a senior in 2016.  college career harris, a 6'4" shooting guard from eisenhower high school in rialto, california, came to fresno state in 2012 and went on to have one of the best careers in school history. he finished his career as the bulldogs' career scoring leader and was named the mountain west player of the year as a senior. he also led the bulldogs to the 2016 ncaa tournament after leading the team to a mountain west championship in the 2016 conference tournament. harris was named tournament mvp after averaging 17.7 points per game.  professional career after going undrafted in the 2016 nba draft, harris joined the new york knicks for the 2016 nba summer league. on august 17, 2016, he signed with the illawarra hawks for the 2016-17 nbl season. he made his debut for the hawks in their season opener on october 7, 2016, scoring 21 points as a starter in a 122-88 win over the adelaide 36ers. six days later, he had a 23-point effort in an 88-84 loss to the sydney kings. on october 28, 2016, he scored a game-high 27 points in an 81-76 win over the perth wildcats. harris started the season strong, but an ankle injury in november saw his form drop off in december. he helped the hawks finish the regular season in fourth place with a 15-13 record, and helped them win through to the best-of-five grand final series. however, he missed game 1 of the series after returning home to los angeles to be with his critically ill father. the hawks went on to lose the series in a 3-0 sweep. harris appeared in 32 games for the hawks in 2016-17, averaging 10.8 points, 2.7 rebounds, 1.8 assists and 1.1 steals per game.  on october 9, 2021, he has signed with bakken bears of the basketligaen.  the basketball tournament  in the summer of 2017, marvelle played in the basketball tournament (tbt) for team challenge als. he averaged 10.5 points per game (ppg), while also shooting 78 percent from the free-throw line. marvelle helped take the sixth-seeded team challenge als to the championship game of the tournament, where they lost in
a close game to overseas elite, 86-83. in tbt 2018, harris averaged 16.0 points per game, 4.5 rebounds per game and 1.5 assists per game for team challenge als. they reached the west regional championship game before losing to eventual tournament runner-up eberlein drive. in tbt 2021, harris led all scorers in the tournament with 23.3 ppg, the highest of players appearing in at least three games.  references  external links fresno state bulldogs bio getting back to his marvelle-ous self  1993 births living people al ittihad alexandria club basketball players american expatriate basketball people in australia american expatriate basketball people in belgium american expatriate basketball people in egypt american expatriate basketball people in japan american expatriate basketball people in lebanon american men's basketball players basketball players from california fresno state bulldogs men's basketball players illawarra hawks players kumamoto volters players shooting guards sportspeople from rialto, california
the foteviken museum () is an archaeological open-air museum on the hollviken peninsula in southern skane, sweden. it contains a reconstruction of a large viking age settlement and a "viking reservation", and visitors participate in living history reenactments; it also performs research and functions as the municipal museum of vellinge municipality and part of fotevikens kulturcenter, a group of cultural facilities on the peninsula.  history the museum grew out of the archaeological investigation of sunken viking ships in foteviken bay and local interest in the battle of fotevik, which was fought there on 4 june 1134. a group headed by bjorn m. buttler jakobsen formed a foundation called sveg (scandinavian viking explorer group) in 1987. in 1993, the foundation started planning to open a maritime museum; in 1995, after changing their focus towards viking age living history, they opened foteviken museum, with jakobsen as its director. at the  in malmo, the group built two replica viking cogs; in 2014 the city sold these and the harbour site where they are located is now a medieval-themed tourist area called medeltidsriket malmoya.  facilities and programmes  the museum occupies an approximately  site on hollviken bay. in addition to a reconstruction of a large viking age settlement, the 'viking reserve', there are research and handicrafts buildings and three large halls, including a restaurant seating up to 200 and a feast hall. the gate to the reserve is indicated on the museum map as a "border gate" between sweden and the reserve. buildings in the reserve are built or rebuilt by staff and volunteers almost every season, with traditional methods being supplemented by modern technology in winter;  there were about 22, including a tapestry-lined chieftain's house and a hof. the reserve opens for the summer season on may day, and is intended as a recreation of a large settlement late in the viking age, during the transition to the scandinavian middle ages and the increasing influence of christianity in the north. this enables the museum to include the battle of fotevik, which clearly belongs to the medieval period. those staying in the reserve live as viking age people and are not permitted to have modern equipment or wear modern clothing. it is marketed as open to "all vikings" and attracts large numbers of viking age reenactors; many of the visitors are from outside scandinavia, particularly from germany. an international viking thing is held in the tingholl building every year;
according to the museum, in 2001 66 representatives from 22 countries were present.  the museum has a library which is available for research and makes heavy use of electronic media. it offers various educational programmes, including overnight stays; since it is also the municipal museum of vellinge, these are free to local schools. however, the reserve has no electricity and minimal signage.  seasonal programmes in midwinter the museum hosts a fire festival. a may eve bonfire is also lit to reproduce a traditional viking celebration of the return of spring. at these and other events, the director plays the role of 'king bjorn'.  summer activities at the museum climax in viking week in late june; this includes craft days and since 1997 a viking market. at the market in summer 2016, five actors in a group who travel between viking age reenactment sites, the nordic international slave trade company, reportedly threw a bag over a tourist's head and auctioned her off as a thrall. the police have said they will be speaking to people at the museum about treatment of members of the public.  gallery  references  further reading  sven rosborn. fotevikens museum: platsen dar drommar blir till verklighet. utgiven i samband med fotevikens museums 10 arsjubileum 2005. [hollviken : fotevikens museum], 2005. . pdf at academia.edu; registration required.  external links    foteviken museum  open-air museums in sweden museums established in 1993 archaeological museums in sweden living museums viking age museums
the portico of glory (spanish: el portico de la gloria) is a 1953 spanish drama film directed by rafael j. salvia and starring jose mojica, lina rosales and santiago rivero.  cast  references  bibliography   jose luis castro de paz & josetxo cerdan. suevia films-cesareo gonzalez: treinta anos de cine espanol. xunta de galicia, 2005.  external links     1953 drama films spanish drama films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films suevia films films films directed by rafael j. salvia films scored by juan quintero munoz films with screenplays by rafael j. salvia spanish black-and-white films
borel (18th-century, rouen - ? ) was an 18th-century french playwright from normandy.  already made known by some poetic essays and an epigram in latin entitled nicetas, crowned by the academie des palinods in 1749, borel borel addressed the dramatic genre with a play, le mefiant ("the distrustful"), comedy in five acts and in verse, premiered in paris at the comedie italienne, 20 december 1785, where it was well received.  despite this happy first attempt in literary career, the silence of the biographies on borel from that time suggests he stopped there.  works  1786: le mefiant, comedie en 5 actes et en vers, paris, cailleau.  sources   theodore-eloi lebreton, biographie rouennaise, rouen, le brument, 1865, (p. 46-7).  external links  borel on cesar  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights writers from normandy year of birth unknown people from rouen year of death unknown
the 1952 honduran amateur league was the sixth edition of the honduran amateur league.  club aduana deportivo obtained its 1st national title.  the season ran from 6 april to 19 october 1952.  regional champions for the first time the department of choluteca included a team to participate in the national championship.  known results  national championship round played in a single round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the pentagonal.  known results  aduana's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1952 in honduras
events from the year 1852 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas i  events             central telegraph  onega canal  simon janashia museum of georgia  births  deaths  references  1852 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
janani is a 2006 bollywood film starring bhagyashree and ayesha jhulka in the lead roles.  plot  rahul falls in love with neha, whom he meets in college. however, when his mother discovers who neha's parents are, things get complicated as rahul and neha find out that they may in fact be siblings. when rahul parents oppose their wedding, rahul insist on finding the real reason, and thinks because of neha's status rahul parents are opposing. the parents explain that neha's mother was working in their toy factory and helped them in expanding their business, and he is her biological son.  rahul gets very upset after discovering that neha is his real sister, with whom he had sex the last night. in the background they also show the full story of how rahul was adopted by urmila, and how the relationship between urmila and rahul's biological mother was spoiled, after death of rahul's elder brother who was also called by the same name due to brain tumor. although urmila and her husband had helped rahul parents financially and supported them with the treatment of elder rahul, but he could not survive for longer and that was the main reason that rahul's biological mother akansha was not willing to surrender her second son who was also named rahul.  both urmila and akansha wanted the rahul and urmila's husband beg akansha for the custody of rahul. when neha talks to rahul's biological mother she discovers that she was also adopted by rahul's real mother and they are indeed not brother and sister, but it is too late, since rahul has shot himself when they both rush to their home and he becomes injured, they both explain that neha is not rahul's real sister, and rahul also survives and they show after a year they are happily married and they have their own son, and this way it is happy ending for every one and all the family members celebrate good moments and the movie ends with a song of rahul and neha in the rain and water.  cast   bhagyashree as akanksha awasthi   ayesha jhulka as urmila  mohnish behl as raj  aman verma as tarun awasthi  vineet raina as rahul   sonica handa as neha awasthi   anjana mumtaz as mrs. awasthi, rahul's grandmother  soundtrack   singer shaan play lead role as a main playback singer in this movie.  references  external links     2000s hindi-language films indian films 2006 films

coppo is both an italian surname and a given name. notable people with the name include:  paul coppo (born 1938), american ice hockey player pietro coppo (1469/70 - 1555/56), italian geographer and cartographer vincenzo coppo (born 1905), italian footballer coppo di marcovaldo (c. 1225 - c. 1276), florentine painter  italian-language surnames
induna.com is an indian e-retail or e-commerce platform headquartered in kolkata, india launched on 21 october 2007 by agarwal brothers, aadarsh and siddhant. an online shop for indian film dvds, vcds and audio cds, it became the top three clicked websites of kolkatta in its launch year as per the google zeitgeist 2008 report. in 2009, the company added the blu-ray format as well, for regional language films along with bollywood and bengali film titles, as well as a collection of swedish films directed by ingmar bergman.  founders brothers aadarsh agarwal and siddhant agarwal, both commerce graduates from kolkata university, decided to launch their own online company as they experienced the dismal state of many online stores when they ordered movies.  see also  e-commerce in india  online shopping  references  external links    companies based in kolkata indian companies established in 2007 internet properties established in 2007 online retailers of india privately held companies of india 2007 establishments in west bengal
"sabia" (aka "the song of the sabia") is a brazilian song composed in 1968 by antonio carlos jobim, with lyrics by chico buarque. english-language lyrics were written later by norman gimbel.  in 1968, "sabia" won first place at brazil's iii festival internacional da cancao (international festival of song), where it was performed by cynara and cybele. after buarque wrote the original lyrics, he traveled to italy, and, while he was away, jobim added a last verse, which was included in the performance at the festival but was not well received. buarque convinced jobim to drop the verse, and it has not been used since.  the sabia is a songbird (rufous-bellied thrush in english) and the national bird of brazil. buarque's lyrics allude to the sabia in the famous brazilian poem "cancao do exilio," written in 1843 by goncalves dias.  sinatra & jobim recording in 1969, frank sinatra and jobim recorded "the song of the sabia" for an album entitled sinatra-jobim, but at the last minute, sinatra stopped release of the record. seven of the ten songs from those sessions were released in 1971 as side a of sinatra & company, but "the song of the sabia" was not used. it appeared as the b-side of sinatra's single "lady day" (reprise 0970) in december 1970, and was later included on portrait of sinatra - forty songs from the life of a man (1977), sinatra-jobim sessions (1979) and sinatra/jobim: the complete reprise recordings (2010).  in his book, sinatra! the song is you: a singer's art, music critic will friedwald questions why "sabia" was ever left off the original album, calling it "a soft, mystical piece on the order of the first album's 'dindi'.... revealing jobim as a brazilian billy strayhorn." he says that trombonist milt bernhart, who was on the session and had recorded with sinatra many times dating back to 1953, thought "sabia" was "one of the most gorgeous things he ever heard sinatra sing."  charles l. granata included "song of the sabia" in his list of "fifty songs that define the essence of sinatra" in his book sessions with sinatra: frank sinatra and the art of recording. (chicago review press, 1999).  other recorded versions  chico buar
que - nao vai passar (rec. 1968, released in 1990)  clara nunes - voce passa eu acho graca (1968)  francoise hardy - francoise hardy (1968) - as "la mesange"  frank sinatra & antonio carlos jobim - sinatra/jobim: the complete reprise recordings (rec. 1969, released 2010)  antonio carlos jobim - stone flower (1970), terra brasilis (1980), and inedito (rec. 1987, released 1995)  nara leao - dez anos depois (1971)  cedar walton/hank mobley quintet - breakthrough! (1972)  elis regina - saudade do brasil (1980)  billy higgins - once more (1980)  cedar walton - the maestro (1981)  gal costa & antonio carlos jobim - jazzvisions: rio revisited (1987)  eliane elias - eliane elias plays jobim (1990)  susannah mccorkle - sabia (1990)  jaques morelenbaum, paula morelenbaum, and ryuichi sakamoto - morelenbaum 2/sakamoto: a day in new york (2003)  references  frank sinatra songs songs with music by antonio carlos jobim bossa nova songs brazilian songs
kkusum is an indian television series produced by ekta kapoor's balaji telefilms which aired on set from 14 may 2001 to 30 november 2005. and directed by jasbir bhati. the show follows the journey of a young, hardworking and middle class girl, kkusum & later, after a 20 year leap on her daughter kkumud.  the show starred nausheen ali sardar in the titular role, and after a generation leap, it was played by manasi joshi roy and shilpa saklani. actor anuj saxena starred opposite her. the roles of kkumud and kali were essayed by aashka goradia and rucha gujarathi.  plot   this show is about a middle class girl, kkusum (nausheen ali sardar), everyone in her family is dependent on her. she becomes engaged to prakash chitre (prakash ramchandani), but prakash leaves her because she isn't willing to leave her family with their responsibilities. kkusum's parents are shattered.then comes nitin kapoor (nitin trivedi) , who asks kkusum's hand in marriage for his son, abhay kapoor (anuj saxena) . kkusum is shocked. but she meets him and puts forth a condition that she'll take her family's responsibilities after their marriage also. abhay agrees with her. kkusum is impressed with abhay's progressive nature. they start meeting each other regularly and kkusum gradually starts falling for abhay. he always gifts her something. they happily marry each other.on their wedding night, he shows his weird sparks. he just tells her that he really likes her and pretends to go to sleep. she is confused. weird incidents happen with the chandelier, snake, fire, etc. and kkusum does not understand anything. abhay also is having commitments with other girls. he is a playboy.  kkusum finds out abhay's truth but he always lies and saves himself. kkusum also finds out that abhay only married her because she is akhandsaubhagyavati (her husband will not die). kkusum still stays because of her parents' respect. abhay's friend aryaman oberoi (aashish kaul) befriends with kkusum. then later on, a girl named esha chopra (shweta kawatra) comes along. esha and kkusum also become very good friends. but esha starts liking abhay, abhay is also attracted to her, they get together, and have an extra-marital affair, kkusum consummates her marriage when abhay comes home intoxicated.kkusum becomes pregnant but abhay says that the
child is of aryaman. kkusum slaps esha and leaves the house when she finds out about abhay and esha. she is  alone during her pregnancy stages. but kkusum comes to the kapoor industries because her "in-laws" call her. kkusum doesn't talk to abhay. but due to some incidents, they become friends. esha leaves because she thinks that abhay is neglecting her and even abhay realizes that he likes kkusum so he proposes her again. kkusum and abhay patch up with each other. but kkusum finds out that now abhay cannot be a dad because of an accident that's why he called her back, because she's pregnant. esha also comes back and befriends with kkusum again. but kkusum miscarries and holds abhay responsible for the same. she again decides to leave the house but her mother-in-law, sarla nitin kapoor (rupa divetia) insists her to stay in so kkusum doesn't leave the house. abhay is hurt by what kkusum said so she apologizes to him. they are happy but then on abhay's birthday she goes to pick him up from a farmhouse where she hears abhay saying that he still has to act in front of kkusum that he loves her. kkusum's phone rings and abhay and esha are scared that someone heard them. then they see kkusum over there. kkusum goes away from there to the kapoor house. she goes there and waits for abhay when he comes she slaps him twice and leaves saying that she'll never come back but her mother-in-law stops her. she tells abhay to get out. abhay leaves the house for sometime.  meanwhile, there is a marriage proposal that comes to tanya kapoor (ekta sharma) who is abhay's cousin sister. (they all love kkusum and hate abhay) kkusum is supposed to do the set up of the pre-marriage  but the groom siddharth kanwar (sandeep rajora) falls for kkusum instead of tanya. kkusum marries him despite not wanting to because of some unwanted reasons. siddharth's paternal aunts, pammi (bhumika seth), natasha "tashu" (narayani shastri), maternal aunt, raima (amita chandekar), adoptive mother reema (prabha sinha) and biological mother devanshi (krutika desai khan / niyati joshi) are evil so they try to break them up but they fail because siddharth loves kkusum. kkusum also starts to love .siddharth. tashu announces that she will marry none other than abhay. tash
u and abhay marry. later, it is revealed that abhay married tashu so that he could get closer to kkusum ( because tashu is sid's paternal aunt). tashu is also interested in abhay's wealth only . now, abhay wants to cause problems with sid-kkusum but fails. sid's mother takes all of sid's property so that they're beggars. sid and kkusum leave for chawl. kkusum exposes tashu and abhay divorces her. she is kicked out of both her families. later on, abhay has brain tumor, and he changes for the good forever, and again due to a series of events, kkusum and abhay become friends. sid starts to suspect them and questions her about her character. kkusum is deeply hurt because of sid. they get divorced. sid goes back to his mom. but he finds out that kkusum wasn't lying about the brain tumor case so he calls her while driving. he crashes into a car and dies. kkusum is shattered.  a while later, everyone figures out that abhay has brain tumor and then abhay's mom comes to kkusum for her son's life. abhay's mother wants kkusum to marry abhay. after a lot of dragging, they marry and go to the states. abhay is treated there and now he is completely cured of cancer. with the help of medical sciences, he can now become a father as well. one day, they meet esha. they live with her. abhay starts to fall for kkusum (for real this time) and esha also starts liking kkusum. but kkusum can't forget siddharth. they go back, esha comes back after sometime, kkusum starts to fall for abhay again, they both don't tell each other about their feelings, esha comes to live in with them and she too falls for abhay despite knowing that he is married. she tries to get close to abhay but fails. kkusum finally confesses to abhay that she loves him and they consummate. esha is shattered. then everyone finds out that abhay accidentally killed siddharth when he was having brain tumor attack while driving. for a while, kkusum is mad at abhay but later realises that it wasn't abhay's fault at all. kkusum still forgives him. then kkusum and abhay find out about esha so they kick her out. kkusum becomes pregnant but miscarries again, esha tells the doctors to declare kkusum barren, everyone wants an heir that kkusum cannot give, so kkusum gets a surrogate mother mahi (poonam narula), she also falls for abhay. she creates such situations that
kkusum suspects mahi and abhay so she leaves without interrogating. but on the train she finds out that she's pregnant, she goes to tell abhay but mistakenly assumes  that mahi and abhay are sharing a bed. she leaves for ludhiana. but her train crashes and she's presumed dead. mahi gives birth to her daughter with abhay , kali (via surrogacy) and kkusum gives birth to a slightly younger girl, kkumud.  twenty years later kkusum (nausheen ali sardar) lives in ludhiana with kkumud (aashka goradia), her aai (savita prabhune) and her family-like neighbour madhuri behen( alpana buch) and her daughter simran( jennifer winget). kkumud secures a scholarship to study in a famous university of mumbai. kkusum doesn't allow her to go to mumbai but later agrees with her as she doesn't want to take any chance with kkumud's career. kkumud always has hated her father. she comes to mumbai along with her friend simran for the scholarship. kali (rucha gujarathi) is grown up to be a spoilt brat due mahi's evil teachings. she will go to any limit to fulfill her obsession. she also studies in the same university where kkumud has taken admission. kali tries to rag kkumud and simran but is then left shameful by them. she wreaks havoc in kkumud's life. she leaks exam papers , keeps drugs in kkumud's bag and accuses her for all these crimes. but kkumud manages to prove herself innocent. so, kali joins hands with her boyfriend nakul (karanvir bohra). they accuse kkumud of molesting him. in the courthouse, kkusum (who is now replaced by manasi joshi roy) and abay meet each other as nakul is the younger son of abhay's best friend aryaman. still, they don't reunite as mahi creates even more misunderstandings between them. nakul is proven to be lying, so abhay breaks the engagement, kali is forced to get engaged to garv (chetan hansraj), esha's godson, who loves kali, but she still loves nakul. kali still secretly meets nakul. soon, garv finds out that kali doesn't love him so he breaks the engagement. but soon kali finds that nakul is just after her wealth and she finds out that she genuinely loves garv and not nakul. abhay finds
out that kkumud is his daughter, kali feels insecure. kkumud likes kshitij (amit sareen) who is nakul's elder brother. esha plans to avenge kkusum. she drugs kkumud and kshitij and they consummate. kkumud becomes pregnant with his baby, but kshitij finds out that he has cancer, so he pretends to hate kkumud. kkumud's friend garv (who is also kshitij's friend) tells her to forget kshitij. she does so and marries garv to get away from the society and also because he offered her to help. on garv's and kkumud's wedding day kshitij finds out that he doesn't have cancer and that it was the conspiracy of his grandmother and nakul.  he goes to prove it to kkumud but is then proven guilty by garv's evil bua (sumukhi pendse). though being married, kkumud and garv still stay as best friends rather than being a husband-wife couple.they keep distance from each other. kali tries to create misunderstandings between them and succeeds, kali lies to garv saying that she's pregnant with his child, garv marries her to take on the responsibility of his child. this comes in front of everyone. kkumud starts hating garv to the core. they separate. but after a lot of trials by kali to get closer to him, garv finds out kali's truth that she's not pregnant at all. they also divorce each other. kkumud apologises to garv but he decides to move on as they are just best friends. he knows that kkumud's happiness is in kshitij. so, he goes abroad. meanwhile, nakul and kali also change into good forever. nakul realises that he also genuinely loves kali. he proposes her again but she refuses. she isn't able to forget garv. so, garv returns to india and helps nakul win kali's trust again. he succeeds in doing so, kali and nakul marry each other. kali and kkumud accept each other as sisters. kkumud also decides to marry kshitij, and she is happy with him, expecting her child. everything is going well,  but then comes a storm in her life. kshitij dies after falling from a cliff and kkumud has a miscarriage with the news of kshitij's death. she is shattered. her
life takes a huge turn as another man, karan oberoi (nasirr khan) enters her life. mahi's misunderstandings are sorted. kkusum ( who is again replaced by shilpa saklani)and abhay reconcile with each other. but sadly, abhay also dies in an accident, which worsens the condition of kkusum and the whole family. meanwhile, kkusum discovers that she has blood cancer and she, too is alive for some days only. her only last wish is that she wants to see both of her daughters happy. kali is happy in marital life but kkumud is deeply hurt and unhappy by the demise of her two closely related family members. kkusum asks kkumud to marry karan. she refuses because she thinks that it will hurt kshitij's soul. she says that she can spend the rest of her life with his memories. but due to kkusum's strong insist, kkumud agrees with her. she marries karan .initially, they aren't able to cope up with each other but gradually fall in love. kkumud is pregnant again. after seeing both of her daughters happy, kkusum dies and gets reunited with her love, abhay.  time lapses by 5 years. kkumud is shown happily living with her family and her daughter with karan, also named as kkusum. in the end, she puts a garland around the pictures of her parents and her first love, kshitij. she says that her mother is dead only for the world. but she believes that kkusum is still around her.  it all began with the tale of a simple girl, kkusum. many obstacles came along her path but she never lost her hope. she inculcated her same idealistic values in her daughter, kkumud. kkumud also faced a lot of tribulations in her life, from being an unmarried pregnant woman to losing her first love, kshitij. but with time, she learnt how to deal with situations like kkusum. everything in her life sorted when she found her second love, karan.  kkusum and abhay, being each other's soulmate died one after another, only at the gap of a few days . this brings the storyline to a full circle from the start to the end . kkumud names her daughter with karan, as kkusum. this starts the story of another "kkusum": ek aam ladki ki kahani.  cast   nausheen ali sardar / manasi joshi roy as kkusum deshmukh / kkusum abhay kapoor / kkusum siddharth kan
war  shilpa saklani as kkusum  deshmukh / kkusum abhay kapoor / swati abhinav gautam   anuj saxena / rohit roy / anuj saxena as abhay kapoor  sandeep rajora as siddharth kanwar  aashka goradia as kkumud kapoor / kkumud garv sachdev / kkumud kshitij oberoi/ kkumud karan oberoi  chetan hansraj as advocate garv sachdev   amit sareen as kshitij oberoi  akashdeep saigal as trishul kapoor   karanvir bohra as nakul oberoi  narayani shastri as natasha kanwar / natasha abhay kapoor   poonam narula as mahi abhay kapoor  mouli ganguly as vidhi chopra / vidhi trishul kapoor   aashish kaul as aryaman oberoi  karishma randhawa as sakshi aryaman oberoi   rucha gujarathi as kali kapoor / kali garv sachdev / kali nakul oberoi   eijaz khan as advocate sohan kapoor / varun raheja  shweta kawatra as esha chopra / esha puri  manav gohil / hiten tejwani as vishal mehra  tasneem sheikh as jyoti deshmukh / jyoti vishal mehra   smita singh as sonali deshmukh  savita prabhune as sumitra vishwanath deshmukh  s.k. batra / saurabh dubey as vishwanath deshmukh  nitin trivedi as nitin kapoor  rupa divetia as sarla nitin kapoor   pratim parekh as kapil kapoor  manisha kanojia / usha bachani as arundhati kapil kapoor  moon banerrjee as ruhi kapoor  mayuri kango as sakshi aryaman oberoi   bakul thakkar as lalit kapoor   raymon singh / natasha rana as nikita malhotra / nikita lalit kapoor   jennifer winget as simran  harmeet gulzar / vishal watwani as yash deshmukh  simple kaul as aastha kanwar / aastha yash deshmukh  rajesh kumar as shashank deshmukh   shalini kapoor as sakshi aryaman oberoi  chandni toor / monalika bhonsle as priyanka shashank deshmukh   smriti shetty as sonali deshmukh  vishal puri as jimmy tolani  puneet vashisht as anil nagpal / akshay  amar upadhyay as dr. abhinav gautam  abir goswami as sandeep
(sangu) gujral  vikas bhalla as monish manchandani  sonia sahni as nani maa  amita chandekar as raima  kanika kohli as ruhi kapoor  abhimanyu singh as ajay maliya  ekta sharma as tanya kapoor   amit behl as shashank deshmukh   nasir khan as karan oberoi  mandeep bhandar as sakshi aryaman oberoi   prabha sinha as reema raman kanwar  krutika desai khan / niyati joshi as devanshi narang / devanshi raman kanwar   anil dhawan as raman kanwar   karishma tanna as muskaan kanwar   sonia kapoor as naina bajaj  priya sampat as simran kanwar  shivani manchanda as meghna yash deshmukh  bhumika seth as pammi kanwar   akhil ghai as rajeev  mamik singh as a.c.p. saket sahni  anand suryavanshi as gautam  sandeep baswana as kamaljeet  chinky jaiswal as simi gautam  megha gupta as fake kkumud kapoor  vinay jain as d.k.  shakti anand as party host (episode 821)  mitalee jagtap varadkar as sharmila, kkusum's office colleague and friend  kusumit sana as suzanne  talat rekhi as mr. raichand   neelam mehra as mrs. raichand   saurabh arya as harry  deepak dutta as shabbir  preeti puri as jenny  aliraza namdar as jagmohan agarwal  anju mahendru as neelam oberoi   sudha shivpuri as jimmy's grandmother   tarana raja as sonia jhulka  shabnam sayed as mallika  kiran dubey as shivani hinduja  kuljeet randhawa as shaila khan  nilofer khan as gitika mathur  shraddha sharma as preeti mathur  kaushal kapoor as judge  sumukhi pendse as garv's aunt  rio kapadia as mr. sachdev  prakash ramchandani as prakash chitre  anuj gupta as mack  manmeet gulzar as radheshyam (guddu)  rajesh sabharwal as rahul kapoor  ritu deepak as poonam rahul kapoor  afshan khan as monica  jayant rawal as ramakant  faizan kidwai as manik  bobby bhonsle as bobby   sujata sanghamitra as vandana vishal mehra  madhur arora as agn
ivesh  anand abhyankar as priyanka's father  utkarsha naik as uma (priyanka's mother)  kishori godbole as kkusum's younger sister   rocky verma as kidnapper  adaptations  references  external links  balaji telefilms television series 2001 indian television series debuts 2005 indian television series endings sony entertainment television original programming indian television soap operas
bild may refer to:  people bild (surname), people with the surname  media bild, german tabloid bild live, german tv channel  bild am sonntag, german national sunday newspaper  auto bild, german automobile magazine computer bild, german fortnightly computer magazine bild der frau, german language weekly women's magazine hant bild, swedish celebrity magazine sport bild, german sports magazine  others "das bild" (schubert), a song composed in 1815  see also  bildt (disambiguation)
jurabek karimov (uzbek: журабек каримов, jo'rabek karimov; born 4 june 1998) is an uzbekistani tennis player. karimov began playing tennis aged 7 and he is currently coached by petr lebed and sergey arkashn.   karimov has a career high atp singles ranking of 426 achieved on 27 august 2018. on 15 april 2019, he peaked at world number 279 in the atp doubles rankings.  karimov has represented uzbekistan in davis cup, where he has a win-loss record of 4-1. he achieved his first victory in 2018 against british player cameron norrie after coming from two sets down.  style of play  jurabek karimov has a double handed backhand. he is very agile and athletic. he has the same style play than alex de minaur.  junior grand slam finals  singles  future and challenger finals  singles: 7 (3-4)  doubles 9 (3-6)  davis cup  participations: (4-1)     indicates the outcome of the davis cup match followed by the score, date, place of event, the zonal classification and its phase, and the court surface.  external links        1998 births living people uzbekistani male tennis players sportspeople from tashkent tennis players at the 2018 asian games asian games competitors for uzbekistan
baroota is a locality in the australian state of south australia located on the east coast of spencer gulf about  north of the state capital of adelaide and about  north-east of the city of port pirie.  baroota originally started as a private sub-division in the cadastral unit of the hundred of baroota.  its boundaries were created for the "long established name" on 13 march 1997.  its name is reported as being derived from "an early pastoral lease which derived the name either from the local aboriginal tribe or a corruption of the aboriginal word "nilbaroota" meaning reedy place for animals or animal food."  the locality occupies land extending from the coastline with spencer gulf in the west to the western side of the flinders ranges in the east.  the augusta highway and adelaide-port augusta railway line both pass through the locality in a north-south direction.   the southern end of the black range section of the mount remarkable national park extends into the locality from the north-east.  the baroota reservoir is located on the baroota creek in the east of the locality.  the land use within the locality is divided between agriculture and conservation of land associated with both the coastline in the west and the water catchment for the baroota reservoir in the locality's east.  the 2016 australian census which was conducted in august 2016 reports that telowie had a population of 95 people.  baroota is located within the federal division of grey, the state electoral district of stuart and the local government area of the district council of mount remarkable.  see also daniel cudmore (businessman)  references  towns in south australia spencer gulf
the 2015 sibiu open was a professional tennis tournament played on clay courts. it was the fourth edition of the tournament which was part of the 2015 atp challenger tour. it took place in sibiu, romania between 21 and 27 september 2015.  singles main-draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of september 14, 2015.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   victor vlad cornea   victor crivoi   michał dembek   dragos dima  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   steven diez   marc giner   petru-alexandru luncanu   riccardo sinicropi  the following player received entry as a lucky loser:   andrei stefan apostol  champions  singles   adrian ungur def.  pere riba, 6-4, 3-6, 7-5  doubles   victor crivoi /  petru-alexandru luncanu def.  ilija bozoljac /  dusan lajovic, 6-4, 6-3  external links official website  sibiu open sibiu open 2015 in romanian tennis
noroton yacht club (nyc) is a private yacht club in noroton, connecticut, on noroton harbor. located in the noroton bay neighborhood, the club was founded in 1928 and today hosts the best junior sailing programs in the world. youths from 8-17 years old participate in an eight-week period during the summer. nyc has a large fleet of sonars, and coordinates club races each week.  former members of the world-renowned club "have included two america's cup skippers, numerous cardiac surgeons, three investment bank presidents and one astronaut. noroton was the home yacht club of famous sailboat designer bruce kirby (laser, ideal 18, sonar, pixel). current members include 2012 us olympic laser sailor rob crane, and nyc's rick doerr, who competed on the u.s. paralympic team in a sonar at the 2016 olympics in rio. noroton yacht club hosted the 2018 sonar north american championships.  references  sailing in connecticut yacht clubs in the united states
peter mcloone (born 1950) is a former irish trade union leader.  born in ballyshannon, mcloone began working as a psychiatric nurse in 1969.  he joined the local government and public services union, and in 1978 was elected as its assistant general secretary.  this became part of the irish municipal, public and civil trade union (impact), and in 1996 he was elected as the union's general secretary.  mcloone was a leading proponent of the irish "social partnership" strategy, and generally worked closely with governments during his tenure.  in 2005, he was chosen as the chair of foras aiseanna saothair (fas).  he resigned following an expenses scandal at the body, although he claimed that he was unaware of any excessive expense claims.  mcloone served as president of the irish congress of trade unions (ictu) from 2005 until 2007, and later as chair of the ictu's public services committee.  in 2009, the social partnership agreements collapsed, and he retired from his trade union posts the following year.  he joined the labour relations commission, the irish times trust, and became a governor of the national college of ireland.  mcloone's brother, michael, served as county manager for donegal county council.  references  1950 births living people irish trade unionists people from ballyshannon presidents of the irish congress of trade unions people associated with the national college of ireland
boissard is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  adeodat boissard (1870-1938), french politician jean-jacques boissard (1528-1602), french antiquary and poet jose miguel boissard (born 1978), dominican judoka  see also  boisard
the 1957-58 sk rapid wien season was the 60th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  european cup  references  1957-58 rapid wien season rapid
"holy key" is a hip hop single by american musician dj khaled, featuring american rappers big sean, kendrick lamar and american singer betty wright. it was released on july 22, 2016, by we the best music group and epic records as the third single of dj khaled's ninth studio album, major key. the song was produced by cool & dre.  background whilst in the process of recording "holy key", khaled told sean; "yo. this record? i don't want no rules, no regulations, i don't want no regular song structure. i want you to just go bad. catch the holy ghost and just... this is your chance to spit them bars. even though you spit them all the time. big this is a special one we gonna do it on." khaled approached kendrick lamar about doing a feature on the song at a basketball game in la they were both attending. lamar responded to the idea of a possible collaboration; "no doubt, khaled. i love what youre doing right now. i love how you're inspiring the world and the kids with your music. send it through." khaled was hesitant to send the song immediately as he "wanted to make sure it was the right record", and with lamar's schedule being busy, khaled feared the record not being done on time. lamar's verse was sent two days after khaled spoke to him.  in the days leading up to the release of "holy key", dj khaled went on snapchat and teased by yelling "ay juan, did the kendrick vocals get here yet?" and that kendrick would have the most talked about verse on his album. khaled would then proceed to comment on the single: "man, we did our damn thing. those are two different rappers and guess what? they both great. that's how you make records. i'm not here just to make a record. that's not what khaled does. i'ma try to bring the best out of everybody!"  chart performance "holy key" debuted at number 84 on the billboard hot 100 for the chart dated august 20, 2016.  charts  release history  references  external links  2016 songs 2016 singles dj khaled songs betty wright songs kendrick lamar songs big sean songs songs written by dj khaled songs written by kendrick lamar songs written by big sean songs written by betty wright epic records singles
the antigonid-nabataean confrontations were three confrontations initiated by greek general antigonus i against the arab nabataeans in 312 bc. following the death of alexander the great in 323 bc, his empire was disputed between his generals, including antigonus, who for a time controlled the levant.  reaching edom, just north of petra, antigonus became aware of the wealth of the nabataeans, generated from the spice trade caravans. the three raids against the nabateans either came to nothing or ended in disaster for the greeks.  background after alexander the great's death in 323 bc, his empire split among his generals. during the conflict between alexander's generals, antigonus i conquered the levant and this brought him to the borders of edom, just north of petra. antigonus became aware of the wealth of the nabataeans, a nomadic arab tribe that lived in the nearby desert region. the source for these events is the greek historian diodorus siculus, who used commentary from one of the greek generals involved in the confrontations.  the nabataeans generated wealth from the trade route that passed through their capital, petra. frankincense, myrrh and other spices were transported in caravans from eudaemon, across the arabian peninsula, through petra and into the port of gaza for shipment to markets around the mediterranean sea. the nabataeans taxed the caravans and provided protection for which they were paid.  first confrontation  antigonus appointed one of his officers, athenaeus, to attack the nabataeans and take their herds as booty. athenaeus marched with 4000 men and 600 horsemen into petra, nabataea's stronghold, during the night time while the nabataean men were away trading. coming from judea and after 3 travel days across 160 km, athenaeus captured the place easily as only women and children were present, and the troops loaded themselves with as much frankincense and myrrh as their animals allowed and stole around 13.7 tonnes of silver.   the nabataean women and children found they were taken to be sold as slaves. athenaeus and his troops regrouped as dawn broke and set off for where they came from, making camp around 36 km away, assuming they were safely away from the nabataeans. spotted by some nomads while they were leaving, an 8,000 nabataean camel cavalry force, superior to horses in such a barren terrain, came in pursuit only hours later. a few prisoners escaped from the camp at night and managed to tip off the nabataean
force on the whereabouts of the camp. they engaged the greeks with javelins while they were asleep, and freed the families. based on hieronymus, diodorus described how "all the 4000 foot-soldiers were slain, but of the 600 horsemen about fifty escaped, and of these the larger part were wounded".  the nabataeans sent a letter of complaint in aramaic, the lingua franca of the ancient middle east, to antigonus. the letter argued that the nabataeans did not want war but were forced to attack the greeks in self-defence. antigonus replied that athenaeus had acted on his own and that nabataeans were indeed excused.  second confrontation  despite what antigonus had said to the nabataeans, he then sent his son demetrius with 4000 horsemen and 4000 infantry to march towards nabataea. the force was lightly armed and was equipped with food provisions. however, the nabataeans regarded antigonus's previous letter with mistrust and had established outposts atop a mountain. after three days, the greeks assembled for battle only to find the arabs fully prepared. they had sent away their herds and massed what remained of their wealth atop a high mountain that was held by fighters who managed to repel a number of assaults.   by the next day, demetrius, known to the greek world as "the besieger", demanded political prisoners and precious gifts to be provided as tribute. however, he did not receive the demanded tribute and withdrew. plutarch, a greek historian, later wrote that "by demetrius's cool and resolute leadership he so overawed the barbarians that he captured from them 700 camels and great quantities of booty and returned in safety".  third confrontation  after demetrius's unsuccessful engagement with the nabataeans, he stayed by the dead sea to learn more about its bitumen industry. residues of bitumen used to randomly float to the surface; inhabitants of the area, including the nabataeans, would go out in boats to collect the samples, which were a highly priced commodity in the ancient world. demetrius reported to his father on this profitable industry and how it could be harnessed to support his imperialist ambitions. antigonus sent an expedition led by hieronymus to the dead sea. the nabataeans, furious at another greek incursion, killed most of the expedition with arrow-fire. in light of this defeat, antigonus abandoned his plans, as he was occupied with more important matters.  aftermath during the battle of ipsus in 301 bc, the antigonids lost to a greek coalition
that included the seleucids. the series of wars between the greek generals ended with the lands of modern-day jordan being disputed between the ptolemies based in egypt and the seleucids based in syria. much later, the nabataeans again engaged with the greeks, but with the terminally declining seleucids this time. in the 84 bc battle of cana, the nabataeans won a decisive victory over the seleucids in which the seleucid king antiochus xii was slain.  references  s wars involving the nabataean kingdom antigonus i monophthalmus 310s bc  310s bc conflicts 312 bc
the butterfly has come to this world (tc: 蝴蝶來過這世界) is a mandopop album by edmond leung, his first album in mandarin.  track listing the butterfly has come to this world (蝴蝶來過這世界) i can't forget (我就是忘不掉) three minutes (三分鐘) i don't ask (我不問) don't kiss me (不要吻我) lonely catcher (寂寞捕手) the map vanishes (消失的地圖) fireworks hostel (煙火旅館) look for happy man (找快樂的人) you fall in love with guitarist (你愛上吉他手)  external links the butterfly has come to this world, yesasia.com  edmond leung albums 2000 albums mandarin-language albums
the 2016 prime minister's resignation honours are honours awarded following the july 2016 resignation of prime minister david cameron. the life peerages and other honours were issued as two separate lists by the cabinet office on 4 august 2016 and all honours were gazetted as one list on 16 august 2016. this was the first prime minister's resignation honours since 1997.  on 22 july 2016, it was alleged that officials in the cabinet office and the house of lords appointments commission had blocked the list, citing ethical concerns about some of the intended recipients of honours, particularly those destined for the peerage. many of the names of those honoured were leaked and published in the press on 31 july.  on 1 august, downing street spokesperson said that the incoming prime minister, theresa may, would not intervene in cameron's resignation honours.  life peerages  conservative nominations  gabrielle bertin, lately director of external relations, the prime minister's office, to be baroness bertin, of battersea in the london borough of wandsworth olivia bloomfield, lately partner at atlantic superconnection corporation, and chairman of the pump house project, to be baroness bloomfield of hinton waldrist, of hinton waldrist in the county of oxfordshire jonathan caine, lately special adviser to the secretary of state for northern ireland, to be baron caine, of temple newsam in the city of leeds camilla cavendish,  lately head of the prime minister's policy unit, to be baroness cavendish of little venice, 	of mells in the county of somerset the hon (alexander) andrew fraser, treasurer, conservative party, to be baron fraser of corriegarth, of corriegarth in the county of inverness jitesh gadhia, lately senior managing director, blackstone advisory partners, and board member of uk financial investments and uk government investments, to be baron gadhia, of northwood in the london borough of hillingdon timothy kirkhope, , member of the european parliament for yorkshire and humber, and former member of parliament for leeds north east, to be baron kirkhope of harrogate, of harrogate in the county of north yorkshire the right honourable edward david gerard llewellyn, , lately chief of staff to the prime minister, to be baron llewellyn of steep, of steep in the county of hampshire councillor mark mcinnes, ,  conservative councillor for the meadows/morningside ward, edinburgh and director, scottish conservative and unionist party, to be baron mcinnes of kilwinning, of kilwinning in the county of ayrshire councillor philippa marion roe, leader, westminster
city council, to be baroness couttie, of downe in the county of kent elisabeth grace sugg, , lately head of operations, the prime minister's office, to be baroness sugg, of coldharbour in the london borough of lambeth charlotte vere, executive director of the girls' schools association, and lately executive director, conservatives in, to be baroness vere of norbiton, of norbiton in the royal london borough of kingston upon thames laura wyld,  formerly head, the prime minister's appointments unit, to be baroness wyld, of steep in the county of hampshire  labour nomination   shami chakrabarti, , to be baroness chakrabarti, of kennington in the london borough of lambeth  crossbench nominations   sir nicholas macpherson, , to be baron macpherson of earl's court, of earl's court in the royal borough of kensington and chelsea sir peter ricketts, , to be baron ricketts, of shortlands in the county of kent  order of the companions of honour  companion (ch) the rt hon george osborne mp, for political and public service.  the most honourable order of the bath  knight commander (kcb) the rt hon michael fallon mp, for political and public service.  companion (cb) nicholas howard obe, for public service.  the most distinguished order of saint michael and saint george  knight commander (kcmg) the rt hon hugo swire mp, for political and public service.  knights bachelor  andrew cook cbe, for political service. the rt hon oliver letwin mp, for political and public service. the rt hon patrick mcloughlin mp, for political and public service. craig oliver for political and public service.  the most excellent order of the british empire  dame commander (dbe) the rt hon caroline spelman mp, for political and public service. arabella warburton mbe, for political and public service.  commander (cbe) helen bower-easton, for public service. the rt hon john hayes mp, for political and public service. the rt hon nick herbert mp, for political and public service. ramsay jones, for political and public service. tim kiddell, for public service. daniel korski, for political and public service. the rt hon david lidington mp, for political and public service. will straw, for political and public service. graeme wilson, for political and public service. the rt hon gavin williamson mp, for political and public service.  officer (obe) julian glover, for political and
public service. kathryn jenkins, for political service. neil o'brien, for political and public service. lena pietsch, for political and public service. thea rogers, for political and public service. alan sendorek, for political and public service. isabel spearman, for political and public service. sheridan westlake, for political and public service. natasha whitmill, for political service. eleanor wolfson, for political and public service.  member (mbe) adam atashzai, for political and public service. jessica cunniffe, for political and public service. martha gutierrez velez, for public service. richard jackson, for political service. giles kenningham, for political and public service. david mcfarlane, for political service. richard parr, for political and public service. caroline preston, for political and public service. jane robertson, for political service. nick seddon, for political service. nikki shale, for political service. kate shouesmith, for political and public service. sean storey, for public service. charlotte todman, for public service. laura trott, for political and public service. martha varney, for political and public service.  references   2016 in the united kingdom 2016 awards in the united kingdom prime minister's resignation honours 2016 in british politics david cameron
social immunity is any antiparasite defence mounted for the benefit of individuals other than the actor. for parasites, the frequent contact, high population density and low genetic variability makes social groups of organisms a promising target for infection: this has driven the evolution of collective and cooperative anti-parasite mechanisms that both prevent the establishment of and reduce the damage of diseases among group members. social immune mechanisms range from the prophylactic, such as burying beetles smearing their carcasses with antimicrobials or termites fumigating their nests with naphthalene, to the active defenses seen in the imprisoning of parasitic beetles by honeybees or by the miniature 'hitchhiking' leafcutter ants which travel on larger worker's leaves to fight off parasitoid flies. whilst many specific social immune mechanisms had been studied in relative isolation (e.g. the "collective medication" of wood ants), it was not until sylvia cremer et al.'s 2007 paper "social immunity" that the topic was seriously considered. empirical and theoretical work in social immunity continues to reveal not only new mechanisms of protection but also implications for understanding of the evolution of group living and polyandry.  social immunity (also termed collective immunity) describes the additional level of disease protection arising in social groups from collective disease defences, performed either jointly or towards one another. these collective defences complement the individual immunity of all group members and constitute an extra layer of protection at the group level, combining behavioural, physiological and organisational adaptations. these defences can be employed either prophylactically or on demand.  definition   sylvia cremer defined social immunity in her seminal 2007 current biology paper 'social immunity' as the "collective action or altruistic behaviours of infected individuals that benefit the colony". she laid out a conceptual framework for the topic using examples from primates and eusocial insects. cremer's definition focused on the collective benefits of behaviours and was adopted by other behavioural ecologists (e.g. wilson-rich 2009) when describing immune phenomena which were contingent on the action of multiple individuals. cremer went on to develop a series of comparisons between personal and social immune systems-she explained that her definition of social immunity encompassed "the nature of these defences that they cannot be performed efficiently by single individuals, but depend strictly on the cooperation of at least two individuals". however, in 2010, sheena cotter and rebecca kilner proposed to widen the definition of social immunity to "any type of immune response that has been selected to increase
the fitness of the challenged individual and one or more recipients", and recommended that the phenomena described by cremer be known as collective immunity. this definition places importance on the evolutionary origin of behaviours rather than on their functional role at present; cotter and kilner explained that their broader definition would include immune behaviours in both animal families and social microbes as well as situations where herd immunity exists due to investment in personal immunity, arguing that this allowed for investigations of the evolution of social immunity to have a "greater depth than would otherwise be possible". they further suggested that the evolution of social immunity be seen as one of the major transitions in evolution. joel meunier proposed a further redefinition in his 2015 paper on the role of social immunity in the evolution of group living, suggesting that cotter and kilner's definition could problematically encompass immune defences which arise not due to social life but due to shared location; meunier defines a social immune system as "any collective and personal mechanism that has emerged and/or is maintained at least partly due to the anti-parasite defence it provides to other group members".  mechanisms  upon exposure to a parasite, group members must both evaluate the threat it poses and the current level of colony infection in order to respond appropriately. mechanisms of social immunity are often categorized by the stage of the parasite attack on a group of organisms they target. some mechanisms are prophylactic (e.g. burying beetles smearing their carcasses with antimicrobials or termites fumigating their nests with naphthalene) whilst others are activated in response to a parasite challenge (e.g. imprisoning of parasitic beetles by honeybees or by the miniature 'hitchhiking' leafcutter ants who travel on larger workers' leaves to fight off parasitoid flies).  in insects for a parasite to succeed in infecting multiple members of an insect group, it must complete three key tasks:   be taken up from the extra-nest environment into the nest  establish itself within the nest  multiply and spread to many more insect group members mechanisms of social immunity are thus often categorized by which  they hinder and/or block. levels of sociality across the class insecta range from eusocial species (with cooperative brood care, overlapping generations within a colony of adults and a division of labour into reproductive and non-reproductive castes) to solitary living, with many intermediate systems in between which despite lacking full eusociality still may exhibit parental care or nest cohabitation. different systems
of social organization alter both the possibility and cost-benefit ratio of social immune mechanisms (e.g. guarding the entrance to the nest requires both division of labour, whilst allogrooming merely requires behavioural interactions), though the absence of many behaviours currently only recorded in eusocial taxa from non-eusocial taxa may simply be due to a lack of study of these group's social immune systems. for instance it seems plausible that insects living in common nest sites could evolve to remove conspecific corpses from the nest or to isolate an infected group member - and yet these behaviours (and many more) have only been recorded in eusocial species. alternatively it may be the case that whilst the three conditions of eusociality themselves are not prerequisites for the emergence of these behaviours, secondary consequences of eusociality are. perhaps the large number of individuals in eusocial colonies increases the efficiency of collective anti-parasite defences and thus their emergence begins to be selected for; or perhaps the preponderance of non-reproductive individuals is a necessary driver for the evolution of these behaviours, as when in a colony attacked by a parasite they can only increase their indirect fitness via social immunity directed at the queen's brood.  the lack of collective defences in some eusocial taxa also shows that social immunity may also not always be adaptive (due to life history costs or ineffectiveness against a particular parasite's infective strategy), and that living in a group does not necessitate the expression of any particular suite of social immunity mechanisms. for example, worker termites (zootermopsiss angusticollis) do not discriminate between infected and uninfected conspecifics, pharaoh ant colonies (monomorium pharaonis) choose to move into infected nests over uninfected ones and queen wood ants (formica paralugubris) are not repelled but actually attracted to habitats contaminated with entamopathogenic fungi.  inhibiting parasite uptake into the nest   a parasite may be passively transported into a nest by a group member or may actively search for the nest; once inside, parasite transmission can be vertical (from mother to daughter colony into the next generation) or horizontally (between/within colonies). in eusocial insects, the most frequent defence against parasite uptake into the nest is to prevent infection during and/or after foraging, and a wide range of active and prophylactic mechanisms have evolved to this end.   nest guards of honeybees (apis) guard the nest not just from predators,
but from parasites as well- bees infected with hairless-black syndrome are attacked by healthy honeybees which chew vigorously with their mandibles all over the infected bee's exoskeleton. in one study, attacks lasted up to 478 seconds (average of 62 seconds) with overall levels of attack behaviour cycling (highest levels between 12:00 and 16:00 each day, peaking every 4-12 days). bees infected with chronic bee paralysis are subject to a higher level of aggressive behaviours than intruders or hivemates.   workers of the tropical leafcutter ant bringing leaf fragments back to the nest are at risk of attack by parasitiodic phorid flies, who often land on leaf fragments and then proceed to oviposit (egg-lay) into the ant's head. to help combat this, small workers (minims) in at least seven species of atta hitchhike on the leaves, deterring parasitoid attack. many possible additional functions of hitchhiking have been proposed, some pertinent to social immunity; evidence exists that the primary function of hitchhiking minims' is actually to inspect and clean the leaf fragments prior to their entry into the colony, removing microbial parasites and contaminants.  individual foragers can also avoid picking up parasites by avoiding contaminated habitats, such as the subterranean termite reticulitermes tibialis which avoids food sources contaminated with the entomogenous nematode steinernema feltiae. another termite, macrotermes michaelseni, avoids the entompathogenic fungi metarhizium anisopliae and beauveria bassian and repellance is positively correlated with the virulence of the particular fungus (very virulent fungi also induce avoidance at some distance away).  similarly, individuals can inhibit parasite uptake by refraining from consuming infected conspecifics. argentine ants (linepithema humile) and cornfield ants (lasius alienus) both detect chemical 'ant deterrent factors' adaptively produced by entamopathogenic bacteria and thus avoid infected corpses; r. tibalis doesn't cannibalize conspecifics infected with m. anisopliae. aversion to consuming or coming into contact with contaminated material also exists in presocial species, e.g., the gregarious-phase migratory grasshoppers melanoplus sanguinipes avoids consuming conspecific corpses infected by entomoparasitic fungi. female burying beetles (nicrophorus vespilloides) choose fresh carcasses over microbe-covered degraded
ones to breed on - though this may have also evolved to allow a reduction in post-hatching competition between juveniles and microbes over the carcass.  it is currently unclear whether these aversive behaviours evolved and/or are maintained due to social interactions - the increase in direct fitness that avoiding contaminated material confers means that more research is required to tease out the indirect fitness benefits from the direct.  inhibiting the parasite establishing itself within the nest  once a parasite has entered the nest, colonies must now prevent the establishment of the parasite - this is particularly important for long-lived societies which without would accrue a high parasite load. in eusocial insects the most common mechanisms to stop establishment involve sanitising the nest and integrating substances with antimicrobial activity into nest material - nest hygiene behaviours. examples include:   in the ant lineage a unique antimicrobial thoracic gland, the metapleural gland, has evolved. its acidic secretions have antibacterial and antifungal activity are deployed by ants to protect themselves (personal immunity) and other adults, as well as the vulnerable brood and nest substrate. it has been observed in leafcutter ants and weaver ants that broods raised by adults with nonfunctional antimicrobial glands are more susceptible to metarhizium, furthermore nest material being tended by workers with nonfunctional antimicrobial glands was more likely to be overgrown with fungi. the formosan subterranean termite (coptotermes formosanus) fumigates its nest using naphthalene (known to humans as the main ingredient of traditional mothballs) and antiseptic agents to inhibit within-nest parasite growth and establishment, whilst the fecal pellets of the dampwood termite (zootermopsis angusticollis) immediately decrease the rate of m. anisopliae spore germination when they are deposited in nest chambers and galleries. the wood ant (formica paralugubris) incorporates solidified conifer resin into its nest (up to 7g of resin per litre of nest material), which inhibits the growth of bacteria and fungi. the terpenes in the conifer resin likely provide the antimicrobial activity, as they do in the antifungal secretions of soldier-caste nasutitermes termites.  the corpses of group members killed by an infectious disease present a serious hazard to colony health (as in natural environments death from disease is much more common than death from old age): one mechanism that has evolved to
help neutralize this risk is necrophoresis, the removal of corpses from the nest by workers. 'refuse piles' or 'graveyards' are common features of ant colonies, and workers remove corpses (within the hour after death) to these piles after detecting death signatures in the cuticular hydrocarbon chemistry. corpse deposition is biased towards downward slopes, which saves the corpse-transporting worker energy as well as preventing any rain washing the corpses back into the colony - necrophoretic behaviours are distinct from ant responses to foreign inanimate objects as corpses are transported further and quicker. by bringing corpses out of the nest the ultraviolet radiation in sunlight can kill emerging fungal spores; atta transport corpses to special refuse chambers rather than into the external environment. temnothorax lichtensteini ants remove the corpses of dead sisters as above, but bury newly-dead foreign corpses inside the nest - whilst one or a few individuals 'decide' to transport or bury a corpse, up to 25 workers are then involved in the undertaking of one corpse. termites commonly bury and cannabalize corpses: when c. formosanus colonies are infected with m. anisopliae, necrophagy is common when the proportion of dead individuals in an area was low (15%), but as mortality increased then so did burying behaviour up to 75%-80% mortality above which carcasses were too numerous for workers to bury and secondary rounds of m. anisopliae infection was possible. termites do occasionally remove dead from the nest but this is uncommon (leaving the nest at all is rare); refuse chambers or piles/graveyards have not been observed. research on undertaking behaviours in bees has concentrated on the honeybee (apis mellifera): 1-2% of a colony are undertaker bees, specialized for corpse removal: they inspect corpses with their antennae before rapidly dropping them from the nest.   waste material is removed continuously and deposited in refuse piles as above (or even by some atta ants into streams). the division of labour in acromyrmex echinatior leafcutter ants includes individuals who work almost exclusively in waste management: waste material (excreta, food refuse, etc.) frequently harbours escovopsis (a microfungus that is parasitic on the fungus that a. echinatior tends) as well as other parasites, so spatial separation of waste material from the fungal garden and wider nest environment is of paramount importance. this is achieved by depositing waste material on downhill and downwind piles or in
special deep underground refuse chambers. distinct waste management workers also exist in atta cephalotes and atta colombica. the risk of waste-worker ants contaminating the fungal garden/nest is lowered by other ants attacking them if they try to enter the nest, whilst attacks are more frequent in species with internal refuse chambers (this also reinforces the division of labour). on the other hand, some species retain excreta and/or anal exudates within the nest to utilize it for antiparasite purposes: c. formosanus employs its faces as building material for the nest carton, the use of faecal material promotes the growth of actinobacteria with natural antimicrobial activity (e.g. streptomyces), combating fungal parasites like m. anisopliae. colony members of the buff-tailed bumblebee (bombus terrestris) defend themselves against the virulent crithidia bombi parasite by consuming beneficial gut bacteria from the faces of conspecific after eclosing. workers of the cape honeybee (apis mellifera capensis) 'socially encapsulate' the parasitic small hive beetle (aethina tumida). a. tumida feeds on the brood, pollen and honey, but due to its robust exoskeletal armour and habit of remaining motionless in small gaps (with its head tucked turtle-like underneath its pronotum), honeybee workers find it difficult to decapitate and kill. instead, workers seal the small hive beetles in using 'bee glue' (propolis). construction of the 'propolis prisons' by some workers takes 1-4 days but is accompanied by other workers guarding the small hive beetle to prevent it escaping. guards have been observed remaining day and night for up to 57 days and attacking the small hive beetle if it tried to escape.  some non-eusocial insects also sanitize their nests: the wood cockroach (cryptocercus punctulatus) commonly defecates within the nest (this species nests in decaying wood, which often has a high microbe density), and faeces have been found to have antifungal activity against m. anisopliae, possibly mediated by microbes. the galleries constructed within spruce trees by spruce beetles (dendroctonus rufipennis) are under threat from multiple species of fungus which reduce spruce beetle fitness. upon fungal invasion, adults begin secreting orally and analysis of these secretions has revealed bacteria with antifungal activity; faecal pellets
are used to quarantine off fungally-infested sections of the gallery. a waste management strategy exists in some group living and subsocial species, such as the subsocial de geer's short-tailed cricket (anurogryllus muticus). 5-10 minutes after defecating and returning to her eggs, a. muticus females return to the fecal pellets and removes them out of the chamber - note no other items are removed from the chamber. upon discovering a carcass, subsocial n. vespilloides parents upregulate the antimicrobial activity of their anal exudates and smear them over the carcass - thus sanitizing the resource their brood will soon feast on.  inhibiting intra-group transmission  if a parasite has entered the nest and established itself, groups must now mount defences which inhibit the spread of parasites from infected to uninfected group members. the risk of infection for an uninfected individual is dependent on three factors: their susceptibility to the parasite, contact rate between infected and uninfected individuals and the infective ability (virulence) of the parasite. in eusocial insects, defences include:   allogrooming, where individuals groom other conspecifics bodies, is an extremely common mechanism of social immunity in eusocial insects. when ants allogroom they rub legs and lick each other clean; any parasites found on the cuticle are stored in a special cavity in the foregut (the infrabuccal cavity, which is found on the ventral surface of the buccal cavity) - this prevents ingestion of the parasite by the groomer. the contents of the infrabuccal cavity are then killed by the chitnolytic activity of labial gland secretions before being expelled as a pellet with other debris to refuse piles in or out of the nest. upon exposure to m. anisopliae, self-grooming rates of the dampwood termite z. angusticollis remain constant whilst allogrooming increases by up to 53-fold; allogrooming here may not only remove fungal spores as the saliva applied concomitantly could reduce spore viability, similar to the antibacterial activity of vespula wasp larvae's saliva. some honeybee workers become specialized for near-continuous allogrooming.   colony-level inhibitory strategies can also create 'organizational immunity'. for example, social insect workers tend to work initially at the centre of the nest, nursing the brood, and as they age
adopt tasks closer and closer to the periphery, e.g., foraging. this compartmentalization, termed centrifugal polyethism, means that workers of the same age interact mainly with others of the same age, who are performing the same task in the same spatial compartment: thus if a new disease arises that is transmitted through physical worker-worker contact it is limited to one section of the colony. the spatial structuring of western honey bee colonies (apis mellifera) privileges young individuals-when colonies are afflicted with diseases that have a short infectious period (the time period during which infected individuals can transmit the disease to susceptible individuals), it is confined only to the older individuals closer to the outside. in the common eastern bumblebee (bombus impatiens), workers who feed larvae tend to remain near the centre of the nest even when not performing this activity, and the converse is true for workers who forage; 11-13% of workers remain in small zones a particular distance from the nest centre throughout their life. the demographic distribution of a colony can also can be utilized for antiparasite purposes: work on z. angusticollis has shown that not only are there differences to parasite susceptibility between instars but that the demographic constitution of a group significantly affects survivorship (mixed age groups do better than single-age groups). the effect of colony structuring on disease dynamics and social immunity is also analyzed theoretically using mathematical models.   social exclusion of infected individuals can also prevent intra-group transmission. when dampwood termites (z. angusticollis) come into contact with high densities of entamopathogenic fungal spores, they perform a whole-body "vibratory motor display" which induce others who are not in direct contact with the spores to flee, increasing their distance from the infected individual. in the eastern subterranean termite (r. flavipes) infection with the same fungus also causes a vibratory alarm response; termites then aggregate around the infected individual and box it in, preventing it from moving to other areas of the colony; it is sometimes licked and bitten before subsequently being buried. individual temnothorax unifasciatus ants who are dying due to fungal infection, carbon dioxide poisoning or 'naturally' (of unknown cause in colonies which had not been experimentally manipulated) permanently leave the nest one to 50 hours before their death, altruistically ceasing all social interactions with nestmates and dying alone away from the colony. some apis mellifera workers are 'hygiene
specialists'-they detect cells in the colony containing diseased or dead brood, uncap these cells and then remove the cell contents.    the genetic homogeneity of insect colonies makes them theoretically susceptible to infection en masse; the high similarity of each group members genome means that each is susceptible (and resistant) to the same parasites, whilst experimental manipulation has demonstrated that genetically heterogenous colonies of b. terrestris have lower levels of parasite infection than homogenous colonies. to increase genetic diversity, colonies can increase the number of queens and/or increase the number of mating partners a queen has- it is thought these social immune benefits may explain the seemingly costly polyandry found in social insect colonies. social hymenoptera also have exceptionally high rates of meiotic recombination when compared against a wide range of higher eukaryote taxa which further increases genetic diversity. ongoing theoretical and empirical work is seeking to tease out the scenarios in which these immune benefits of genetic heterogeneity can be negated due to concomitant costs, e.g., the increased intra-colony conflict and/or susceptibility to an increasing number of parasites which comes with increased genetic diversity.    to combat heat-sensitive parasites, group members can elevate their temperature collectively-this defence is known as social fever and so far has only been found in honeybees (apis): upon challenge by chalk brood (ascosphaera apis), workers increase nest temperature preventatively-it is currently undetermined whether the cue for this action is due to the larvae communicating their infection to the workers or the workers detecting the parasite before symptoms develop.  allogrooming exists in presocial insects-the european earwig (forficula auricularia) grooms its eggs to prevent mold growth and wood roach (cryptocercus) nymphs spend up to a fifth of their time grooming adults (nymphs also groom other nymphs but at a lower frequency, however allogrooming is not seen in adults)- but overall the role of parasite defence in presocial taxa's allogrooming behaviour is currently unresolved.  nest abandonment is a last resort for a colony overwhelmed by an infection against which the defences listed above have not been effective-infected individuals can then be left deserted in the old nest or expelled from the group whilst the colony travels to a new nest.  other taxa   social immune systems have been observed across a wide range of taxonomic groups. allogrooming is found in many animals-for example primates frequently groom others, a behaviour which likely evolved for its hygien
ic function but has now been co-opted for its additional role in social bonding. allogrooming in the common vampire bat (desmodus rotundus) is associated with the regurgitation of food and may allow other bats to identify which individuals are capable of supplying them with food; the allogrooming behaviours of horses and birds have also been studied. a range of sometimes elaborate cleaning symbioses also exist between many different species, especially in marine fish with their cleaning stations. corsican blue tits (parus caeruleus) prophylactically line their nest with aromatic plants (such as achillea ligustica, helichrysum italicum and lavandula stoechas) to ward off mosquitoes and other blood-sucking ornithophillous (bird-targeting) insects.  after the broader definition of social immunity by cotter and kilner, numerous examples of social immune behaviours within animal families can be given: tungara frogs (engystomops pustulosus) create 'foam nests' during breeding in which embryogenesis occurs; these foam nests are imbued with ranaspumin proteins which provide defence against microbial attack and act as a detergent. the three-spined stickleback (gasterosteus aculeatus), grass goby (zosterisessor ophiocephalus), fringed darter (etheostoma crossopterum) and two species of blenny also use chemical strategies to defend their eggs from microbes. intriguingly, microbes themselves have been found to have social immune systems: when a population of staphylococcus aureus is infected with gentamicin, some individuals (called small colony variants) begin to respire anaerobically, lowering the ph of the environment and thus conferring resistance to the antibiotic to all other individuals-including those s. aureus individuals who did not switch phenotype. an analogy can be drawn here with the social fever in bees described above: a subset of individuals in a population change their behaviour and in doing so provide population-wide resistance.  using richard dawkins's concept of the extended phenotype, the healthcare systems developed by humans could be seen as a form of social immunity.  study species  the majority of studies on social immunity have been on eusocial insects. for example, sylvia cremer's work uses ants as a model system whilst rebeca rosengaus works with termites. outside of eusocial insects, one emerging model system is the burying beetle nicrophorus
vespilloides.  nicrophorus vespilloides   already a model system in evolutionary ecology due to their extensive parental care, burying beetles like n. vespilloides hunt for small vertebrate carcasses which they then bury before intricately preparing it as a resource for its larvae to breed on-these carcasses are scarce and ephemeral yet are necessary for burying beetles' reproductive success. carcasses are highly contested resources with challenges being launched by other burying beetles and other scavenging species, as well as microbial decomposers. older carcasses have a higher microbial load and thus have a lower quality as a breeding resource: larvae raised on these carcasses are smaller and in a worse nutritional state-at adulthood these beetles were also smaller, which in n. vespilloides reduces fitness. daniel rozen et al. demonstrated in 2008 that n. vespilloides preferentially chooses newer carcasses (which tend to have a lower microbial load) over old carcasses, and if it is not possible to acquire one of these higher quality carcasses that they use pre and post-hatching parental care to reduce the challenge posed by microbes. sheena cotter and rebecca kilner demonstrated that part of this anti-microbial parental care involved both parents smearing the carcass with antibacterial anal exudates: their 2009 work demonstrated that when beetles encounter a carcass they upregulate the antibacterial activity of their anal exudate by actively altering its composition (lysozyme-like activity increases, phenoloxidase activity decreases), and that the specifics of this social immune system differed between the sexes: female exudate has greater antibacterial activity than males; widowed males increased the antibacterial activity of their exudate whilst a reduction was seen in widowed females.  cotter et al. went on to show the costliness of this social immune response-by providing females with microbe-infested carcasses, they found that the upregulation of antibacterial activity that followed led to a 16% decrease in lifetime reproductive output. this significant reduction in fitness, due to both increased mortality and age-related dropoff in fecundity, explains why the antibacterial activity of the exudate is only induced and not present constitutively. further work revealed how a trade-off existed between investment in personal immunity vs investment in social immunity, i.e., upon injury, n. vespilloides upregulates its personal immune response whilst concomitantly reducing its social immune response. recently, the kilner group identified a
gene associated with social immunity in n. vespilloides: the expression rate of lys6, a lysozyme, increases 1,409 times when breeding, and goes from the 5,967th most abundant transcript in the transcriptome of gut tissue to the 14th; it was also demonstrated that expression rates of lys6 covary with the antibacterial activity of the anal exudate. social immunity efforts peaks during middle-age, in contrast to efforts in personal immunity increasing or being maintained with age in breeding burying beetles.  the exudate of the larvae themselves also contains antibacterial substances, with activity peaking at hatching and declining as the larvae age. rfemoving parents results in a downregulation of antibacterial effort, possibly due to the need to invest energy in other more important tasks that arise due to parental absence.  evolution  comparison with personal immunity  many researchers have noticed marked parallels between the more familiar personal immune systems of individual organisms (e.g. t and b lymphocytes) and the social immune systems described above, and it is generally appreciated among ecological immunologists that rigorous comparative work between these two systems will increase of understanding of the evolution of social immunity. whilst the specific physiological mechanisms by which immunity is produced differ sharply between the individual and society, it is thought that at a "phenomenological" level the principles of parasite threat and response are similar: parasites must be detected rapidly, responses should differ depending on the parasite in question, spread of the infection must be limited and different components of the individual/society should be afforded different levels of protection depending on their relative fitness contribution. cremer was the first to do this systematically, and partitioned immunological phenomena into three categories: border defence (intake avoidance), soma defence (avoid establishment within non-reproductive components of an individual/society) and germ-line defence (avoid infection of the reproductive components of an individual/society). example analogies from cremer's paper are:   border defence:     clotting in an individual's wounded blood vessels can be compared to the entrance-plugging behaviour of special ant workers in response to a parasite attack    the circulatory system of an individual can be compared to nutrient distribution in social insect colonies, where a few forage and then distribute it to the rest of the nest    cats and dog self-grooming can be compared to allogrooming    soma defence:    granulomas form to contain diseases that individual immune systems are struggling to eliminate; this can
be compared to the social encapsulation seen against small hive beetles in honeybees  apoptosis in response to disease can be compared to the killing of infected workers or the enforced suicide seen in temnothorax   germ-line defence:  the special protection afforded to reproductive organs (e.g. blood-ovary/blood-testes barrier, increased number of immune cells relative to non-reproductive organs) can be compared to the royal chamber found in social insects, where due to centrifugal polyethism the , and sometimes , are cared for by young workers who have remained inside the nest their whole life and thus have a lower probability of parasite infection  other similarities include the immunological memory of the adaptive immune system in vertebrates and the observation that a similar collective memory (operating with a yet-to-be-explained mechanism) occurs in some insect societies e.g. individual z. angusticollis survive m. anisopliae infections significantly more when they have been in contact with a previously infected conspecific, a 'social transfer of immunity' or 'social vaccination'. transplant rejection caused by non-self major histocompatibility complexes is frequently thought to be a byproduct with no evolutionary function, however cremer cites cases (such as the colonial star ascidian (botryllus schlosseri)) where recognizing foreign cells may have evolved as an adaptation - if so, then this could be analogous to the self-recognition systems in social insects which prevent brood parasitism and the worker policing behaviours which suppress 'social tumours'. specific immune cells in animals 'patrol' tissues looking for parasites, as do worker-caste individuals in colonies.  cotter and kilner argue that not only is social immunity a useful concept to use when studying the major transitions in evolution (see below), that the origin of social immune systems might be considered a major transition itself.  role in the evolution of group living   the transition from solitary living to group living (identified by john maynard smith as one of the seven major transitions in evolutionary history) brought with it many fitness benefits (increased anti-predator vigilance, foraging benefits etc.) and the opportunity to exploit a vast array of new ecological niches, but group living also has its pitfalls. numerous studies have demonstrated an increase in contact-transmitted parasite load with group size increase, and thus research has been done on the role of social immunity in the evolution of early group living. empirical evidence already exists, from both interspec
ific and intraspecific comparative studies, that an increase in population density drives an increase in personal immune effort (density-dependent prophylaxis). however, there is also good evidence that the evolution of social immunity leads to a trade-off between effort into personal immune responses vs. effort in social immune responses - physiological and genomic studies have shown that social conditions can lead to a reduction in personal immune effort. personal immunity in the australian plague locust (chortoicetes terminifera) decreases upon an increase in population density and increases when artificially isolated. genomic studies reveal that infected solitary s. gregaria express more genes involved in immunity than infected individuals in the gregarious phase, bombus terrestris workers also upregulate immune-related genes when experimentally isolated and there are three times more immune-related gene families in solitary insects than in the eusocial honeybees.  joel meunier argued that the two seemingly contradictory relationships between personal immune effort and population density were a function of two assumptions implicit in the prediction that there should be a negative correlation between personal immune effort and group living:  "group living is always associated with the expression of social immunity" - this is false; worker termites (z. angusticollis) do not discriminate between infected and uninfected conspecifics, pharaoh ant colonies (monomorium pharaonis) choose to move into infected nests over uninfected ones and queen wood ant (formica paralugubris) are not repelled but actually attracted to habitats contaminated with entamopathogenic fungi.  "social immune responses are costly for producers" - only in one species, nicrophorus vespilloides, has this assumption been tested - a bacterial challenge to the larval resource led to a social immune response by the mother, and this response did lead to a reduction in lifetime reproductive success (i.e. there was a cost). whilst advising that further studies in lots of different eusocial and non-eusocial taxa are required to better assess the validity of these assumptions, meunier notes that the existence of a trade-off between personal and social immunity could be masked or erroneously 'discovered' in a population/species due to individual variation (e.g. low-quality individuals may not be able to afford relatively high investment into both immune systems), and thus recommends that the intrinsic quality of individuals should be controlled for if valid conclusions are to be drawn.  to assess what current knowledge of social immune systems suggested about whether social immunity was a byproduct or driver of
complex group living, meunier delineated 30 different mechanisms of social immunity found in eusocial insects and looked for counterparts to these in presocial and solitary insects. supporting the hypothesis that social immunity was a driver and not a by-product of complex group living, ten mechanisms had counterparts in presocial insects and four in solitary species (though this does not imply that some mechanisms may evolve as a byproduct). evidence that social immunity mechanisms are selected for at least somewhat due to collective benefits is lacking though - possibly due to the difficulty in isolating the immune benefits from the other benefits that social immunity mechanisms often bestow (e.g. allogrooming inhibits the establishment of ectoparasites, but also improves the accuracy of nest mate recognition due to the sharing and thus homogenization of chemical signatures between group members), and the difficulty in experimentally separating direct fitness from indirect fitness, potentiated in eusocial taxa where sterile/non-reproductive individuals predominatee. more studies on presocial taxa would allow for phyletic analyses to recover the actual path of evolution that different mechanisms of social immunity took.  role in the evolution of polyandry   the origin of polyandry in nature and its adaptive value is a subject of ongoing controversy in evolutionary biology, partly due to the seemingly numerous costs it places on females - additional energetic and temporal allocation to reproduction, increased risk of predation, increased risk of sexually transmitted diseases and increased risk of physical harm caused by copulation/sexual coercion - for eusocial insects, the effects polyandry has on the colony member's coefficient of relatedness is also important, as reducing the relatedness of workers limits the power of kin selection to maintain the ultracooperative behaviours which are vital to a colonies' success. one hypothesis for the evolution of polyandry draws on the disease resistance that increased genetic diversity supposedly brings for a group, and a growing body of evidence from insect taxa supports this hypothesis, some of it discussed above.  concept  social immunity is the evolution of an additional level of immunity in the colonies of eusocial insects (some bees and wasps, all ants and termites). social immunity includes collective disease defences in other stable societies, including those of primates, and has also been broadened to include other social interactions, such as parental care. it is a recently developed concept.  social immunity provides an integrated approach for the study of disease dynamics in societies, combining both the behaviour and physiology (including molecular-level processes) of all group members and their social interactions. it
thereby links the fields of social evolution and ecological immunology. social immunity also affects epidemiology, as it can impact both the course of an infection at the individual level, as well as the spread of disease within the group.  social immunity differs from similar phenomena that can occur in groups that are not truly social (e.g. herding animals). these include (i) density dependent prophylaxis, which is the up regulation of the individual immunity of group members under temporal crowding, and (ii) herd immunity, which is the protection of susceptible individuals in an otherwise immune group, where pathogens are unable to spread due to the high ratio of immune to susceptible hosts. further, although social immunity can be achieved through behavioural, physiological or organisational defences, these components are not mutually exclusive and often overlap. for example, organisational defences, such as an altered interaction network that influences disease spread, emerge from chemical and behavioural processes.  disease risk in social groups sociality, although a very successful way of life, is thought to increase the per-individual risk of acquiring disease, simply because close contact with conspecifics is a key transmission route for infectious diseases. as social organisms are often densely aggregated and exhibit high levels of interaction, pathogens can more easily spread from infectious to susceptible individuals. the intimate interactions often found in social insects, such as the sharing of food through regurgitation, are further possible routes of pathogen transmission. as the members of social groups are typically closely related, they are more likely to be susceptible to the same pathogens. this effect is compounded when overlapping generations are present (such as in social insect colonies and primate groups), which facilitates the horizontal transmission of pathogens from the older generation to the next. in the case of species that live in nests/burrows, stable, homeostatic temperatures and humidity may create ideal conditions for pathogen growth.  disease risk is further affected by the ecology. for example, many social insects nest and forage in habitats that are rich in pathogens, such as soil or rotting wood, exposing them to a plethora of microparasites, e.g. fungi, bacteria, viruses and macroparasites, e.g. mites and nematodes. in addition, shared food resources, such as flowers, can act as disease hubs for social insect pollinators, promoting both interspecific and intraspecific pathogen transmission. this may be a contributing factor in the spread of emergent infectious diseases in bees.  all of these factors combined can therefore contribute to rapid disease spread following
an outbreak, and, if transmission is not controlled, an epizootic (an animal epidemic) may result. hence, social immunity has evolved to reduce and mitigate this risk.  components of social immunity in insect societies  nest hygiene social insects have evolved an array of sanitary behaviours to keep their nests clean, thereby reducing the probability of parasite establishment and spread within the colony. such behaviours can be employed either prophylactically, or actively, upon demand. for example, social insects can incorporate materials with antimicrobial properties into their nest, such as conifer resin, or faecal pellets that contain symbiont derived antimicrobials. these materials reduce the growth and density of many detrimental bacteria and fungi. antimicrobial substances can also be self-produced. secretions from the metapleural glands of ants and volatile chemical components produced by termites have been shown to inhibit fungal germination and growth. another important component of nest hygiene is waste management, which involves strict spatial separation of clean nest areas and waste dumps. social insect colonies often deposit their waste outside of the nest, or in special compartments, including waste chambers for food leftovers, "toilets" for defecation and "graveyards", where dead individuals are deposited, reducing the probability of parasite transmission from potentially infected cadavers. where social insects place their waste is also important. for example, leaf cutting ants living in xeric conditions deposit their waste outside the nest, whilst species living in the tropics tend to keep it in special chambers within the nest. it has been proposed that this difference is related to the likelihood that the external environment reduces or enhances microbial growth. for xeric-living ants, placing waste outside will tend to inhibit infectious material, as microbes are usually killed under hot, dry conditions. on the other hand, placing waste into warm, humid environments will promote microbial growth and disease transmission, so it may be safer for ants living in the topics to contain their waste within the nest. honeybees have evolved the ability to actively maintain a constant temperature within their hives to ensure optimal brood development. upon exposure to ascoshpaera apis, a heat sensitive fungal pathogen that causes chalk brood, honeybees increase the temperature of the brood combs, thereby creating conditions that disfavour the growth of the pathogen. this "social fever" is performed before symptoms of the disease are expressed and can therefore be viewed as a preventative measure to avoid chalk brood outbreaks in the colony.  sanitary care of group members  sanitary care
reduces the risk of infection for group members and can slow the course of disease. for example, grooming is the first line of defence against externally-infected pathogens such as entomopathogenic fungi, whose infectious conidia can be mechanically removed through self- and allogrooming (social grooming) to prevent infection. as conidia of such fungi only loosely attach to the cuticle of the host to begin with, grooming can dramatically reduce the number of infective stages. although grooming is also performed often in the absence of a pathogen, it is an adaptive response, with both the frequency and duration of grooming (self and allo) increasing when pathogen exposure occurs. in several species of social insect, allogrooming of contaminated workers has been shown to dramatically improve survival, compared to single workers that can only conduct self-grooming.  in the case of ants, pathogens large enough to be removed by grooming are first collected into the infrabuccal pocket (found in the mouth), which prevents the pathogens entering the digestive system. in the pocket, they may be mixed labial gland secretions or with poison the ants have taken up into their mouths. these compounds reduce germination viability, rendering conidia non-infectious when later expelled as an infrabuccal pellet. in the case of termites, pathogens removed during grooming are not filtered out before entering the gut, but are allowed to pass through the digestive tract. symbiotic microorganisms in the hindgut of the termite are also able to deactivate pathogens, rendering them non-infectious when they are excreted.  in addition to grooming, social insects can apply host- and symbiont-derived antimicrobial compounds to themselves and each other to inhibit pathogen growth or germination. in ants, the application of antimicrobials is often performed in conjunction with grooming, to provide simultaneous mechanical removal and chemical treatment of pathogens. in ants, poison can be taken up into the mouth from the acidopore (the exit of the poison producing gland at the tip of the abdomen), and stored in the mouth, to be redistributed whilst grooming. in the ant lasius neglectus, the poison produced by the acidopore is composed largely of formic acid (60%), but also contains acetic acid (2%). inhibition assays of the poison droplet against the fungal pathogen metarhizium found that the formic acid alone substantially reduces fungal conidia viability, but that all poison
components work synergistically to inhibit conidia viability, by as much as 96%.  dealing with infected group members  infected individuals and diseased corpses pose a particular risk for social insects because they can act a source of infection for the rest of the colony. as  mentioned above, dead nestmates are typically removed from the nest to reduce the potential risk of disease transmission. infected or not, ants that are close to death can also voluntarily remove themselves from the colony to limit this risk. honeybees can reduce social interactions with infected nest mates, actively drag them out of the hive, and may bar them from entering at all. "hygienic behaviour" is the specific removal of infected brood from the colony and has been reported in both honeybees and ants. in honeybees, colonies have been artificially selected to perform this behavior faster. these "hygienic" hives have improved recovery rates following brood infections, as the earlier infected brood is removed, the less likely it is to have become contagious already. cannibalism of infected nest mates is an effective behaviour in termites, as ingested infectious material is destroyed by antimicrobial enzymes present in their guts. these enzymes function by breaking down the cell walls of pathogenic fungi, for example, and are produced both by the termite itself and their gut microbiota. if there are too many corpses to cannibalise, termites bury them in the nest instead. like removal in ants and bees, this isolates the corpses to contain the pathogen, but does not prevent their replication. some fungal pathogens (e.g. ophiocordyceps, pandora) manipulate their ant hosts into leaving the nest and climbing plant stems surrounding the colony. there, attached to the stem, they die and rain down new spores onto healthy foragers. to combat these fungi, healthy ants actively search for corpses on plant stems and attempt to remove them before they can release their spores  colony-level immunisation  immunisation is a reduced susceptibility to a parasite upon secondary exposure to the same parasite.  the past decade has revealed that immunisation occurs in invertebrates and is active against a wide range of parasites. it occurs in two forms: (i) specific immune priming particular parasite or (ii) a general immune up-regulation that promotes unspecific protection against a broad range of parasites. in any case, the underlying mechanisms of immunisation in invertebrates are still  mostly elusive. in social animals, immunisation is not restricted to the level of the individual, but
can also occur at the society level, via 'social immunisation'. social immunisation occurs when some proportion of the group's members are exposed to a parasite, which then leads to the protection of the whole group, upon secondary contact to the same parasite. social immunisation has been so far described in a dampwood termite-fungus system, a garden ant-fungus system and a carpenter ant-bacterium system. in all cases, social contact with pathogen-exposed individuals promoted reduced susceptibility in their nestmates (increased survival), upon subsequent exposure to the same pathogen. in the ant-fungus  and termite-fungus  systems, social immunisation was shown to be caused by the transfer of fungal conidia during allogrooming, from the exposed insects to nestmates performing grooming. this contamination resulted in low-level infections of the fungus in the nestmates, which stimulated their immune system, and protected them against subsequent lethal exposures to the same pathogen. this method of immunisation parallels variolation, an early form of human vaccination, which used live pathogens to protect patients against, for example, smallpox  organisational defence  organisational disease defence - or organisational immunity - refers to patterns of social interactions which could, hypothetically, mitigate disease transmission in a social group. as disease transmission occurs through social interactions, changes in the type and frequency of these interactions are expected to modulate disease spread. organisational immunity is predicted to have both a constitutive and an induced component. the innate, organisational substructure of social insect colonies may provide constitutional protection of the most valuable colony members, the queens and brood, as disease will be contained within subgroups. social insect colonies are segregated into worker groups that experience different disease hazards, where the young and reproductive individuals interact minimally with the workers performing the tasks with higher disease risk (e.g. foragers). this segregation can arise as a result of the physical properties of the nest or the differences in space usage of the individuals. it can also result from age- or task-biased interactions. distinct activity patterns between group members (e.g. individuals with relatively higher number of interactions, or high number of interaction partners) has also been hypothesized to influence disease spread. it is further assumed that social insects may further modulate their interaction networks upon disease coming into the colony. however, the organisational immunity hypothesis is currently mainly supported by theoretical models and awaits empirical testing.  references  external links  the social immunity study page on the kilner group website  immune system
immunology evolutionary ecology
grigory mikhailovich rodchenkov (; born 24 october 1958) is the former head of russia's national anti-doping laboratory, the anti-doping center. rodchenkov is known for his involvement in the state-run doping program in russia.  in november 2015, the independent commission of the world anti-doping agency (wada) had determined that rodchenkov was "at the heart of the positive drug test coverup", and that he had been directly involved with concealing positive tests and destroying 1,417 urine samples. rodchenkov made headlines in 2016 after an interview to the new york times exposing the doping program in russia. rodchenkov said he developed a three-drug cocktail of banned substances that he mixed with liquor and provided to dozens of athletes at sochi olympics. rodchenkov's allegations  were confirmed by the independent mclaren report, leading to russia's partial bans from the 2016 summer olympics and 2018 winter olympics. since the revelations became public, rodchenkov has been living in hiding, under witness protection.  rodchenkov and his connections to russian doping were the subject of the 2017 netflix documentary icarus, which won the academy award for best documentary feature at the 90th oscars ceremony.  life and career   rodchenkov was born in moscow. his mother worked as a doctor at kremlin hospital (now central clinical hospital). throughout school he was involved in athletics and during his studies he was a member of the msu national team and met the standard of the master of sports in athletics. rodchenkov graduated from moscow state university and received his ph.d. in chemistry with a focus on chemical kinetics and catalysis. in 1985, he started working at the moscow anti-doping centre. in 1986, he worked at the 1986 goodwill games in moscow and co-discovered 14 positive samples, including those of sprinter ben johnson. however, the announcement was not made because the sports and party leaders of the ussr did not want to cause a scandal. in 1994, he moved to interlab. when he returned to russia, he worked for different petrochemical companies. he joined the anti-doping centre in calgary for the 1998 winter olympics. from july 2006 until november 2015 he worked as the director of the anti-doping center, then russia's only laboratory accredited by wada.  doping investigation in 2011   in 2011, russian authorities opened an investigation against rodchenkov's sister, champion runner , for buying and possessing banned drugs that she admitted she had intended to supply to athletes. rodchenkov was also arrested in relation to this investigation and questioned on suspicion of sourcing and selling banned drugs.  charges against him were eventually dropped,
but his sister was convicted and jailed in december 2012.  at the time, rodchenkov was the director of the russia's national anti-doping laboratory. in june/july 2013, british journalist nick harris informed international olympic committee (ioc) and wada about this criminal drug case and suspicions of rodchenkov's involvement, but this information was apparently ignored. rodchenkov claims that he was not jailed by russian authorities in 2012 because they had earmarked him to dope their athletes at 2014 winter olympics in sochi.  doping scandal after 2014   in 2015 the wada independent commission (ic) made numerous accusations against rodchenkov. the ic established that rodchenkov "not only accepted, but also requested money" from athletes in order to conceal their positive test results. "rodchenkov had personally instructed and authorized the disposal of 1,417 samples" prior to the arrival in moscow of a wada audit team, which "directly defied and violated the wada directives". besides, "rodchenkov instructed that all records showing the existence of the samples, as well as any documentation of the resulting analysis, be destroyed." rodchenkov later admitted that he destroyed the samples on purpose in order to limit the extent of wada's audit. the ic report concluded that rodchenkov was "at the heart of the positive drug test coverup".  shortly after release of the ic report, wada suspended the moscow antidoping center, which rodchenkov had headed since 2006. in january 2016, fearing for his safety, rodchenkov boarded a flight from moscow to los angeles. he settled in the united states and entered the witness protection program. two major russian anti-doping executives, vyacheslav sinyev and rodchenkov's friend nikita kamaev, unexpectedly died in the months after the doping scandal started.  rodchenkov discussed doping at the sochi olympics with whistle-blower vitaly stepanov, who recorded 15 hours of their conversations without his knowledge. rodchenkov also gave details to the new york times, alleging that russia's federal security service (fsb) was involved in covering up positive doping samples. in july 2016, the mclaren report, an independent investigation commissioned by wada, found corroborating evidence after conducting witness interviews, reviewing thousands of documents, cyber analysis of hard drives, forensic analysis of urine-sample collection bottles, and laboratory analysis of individual athlete samples, with "more evidence becoming available by the day". the moscow laboratory "operated under state oversight and control" and "personnel were required to be part of the state directed system that enabled russian athletes to compete while engaging in the use of doping substances."  on 9 december 2016 mclaren published the second part of his
independent report. the investigation found that from 2011 to 2015, more than 1,000 russian competitors in various sports (including summer, winter, and paralympic sports) benefited from the cover-up. emails indicate that they included five blind powerlifters, who may have been given drugs without their knowledge, and a fifteen-year-old.  according to mclaren's summary of the evidence provided by dr. rodchenkov, a key aspect of the doping scheme was the creation and use of a so-called "sochi duchess list". this list contained the names of 37 russian athletes "whose samples were to be automatically swapped for their own clean urine stored in the fsb command center at sochi". those athletes' samples needed to be swapped because the athletes "had been authorised to use the cocktail of oxandrolone, methenolone and trenbolone during the games". the russian olympic committee insists that the duchess list is nothing more than a competition schedule, which was prepared ahead of the sochi games for the purpose of identifying potential medallists.  during the arbitration between alexander legkov and the international olympic committee (ioc), the ioc submitted that "dr. rodchenkov's account of events is truthful and accurate", stating:  since dr. rodchenkov is no longer in russia, he is now able to speak honestly with less fear of the consequences than if he had chosen to describe the existence and detail of the scheme while he was in russia.   dr. rodchenkov's statements are precise and clear. they are also very consistent and contain "no contradictions" between the various elements of his account.   dr. rodchenkov only provided detailed information concerning particular athletes when he appears to have specific information relating to those athletes. in many cases, he simply mentions the athlete's presence on the duchess list and the objective consequence of this, without seeking to add specific details.  on every occasion when other evidence has been available, that evidence has "systematically corroborated" dr. rodchenkov's account  according to the ioc, minor inconsistencies in his testimony were considered unimportant. for example, the duchess cocktail which he developed was originally described in writing as a mixture of trenbolone, oxandrolone, and methasterone; but was subsequently described as containing metenolone, not methasterone. dr. rodchenkov stated that the word "methasterone" in the original was a "typographical error".  rodchenkov stated that he personally had never distributed the duchess cocktail, had never seen an athlete take the mixture or instruction being given either to athletes or to coaches to use the substance, and
had never seen an athlete give a clear urine sample or "tamper with a doping sample". dr. rodchenkov also stated that: (a) he "never observed first hand any bottles being opened or de-capped"; (b) accordingly, he did not know the "precise method" used to open the bottles; but (c) he did see a "table with instruments that resembled a dentist's tools".  according to the arbitral award in the arbitration between alexander legkov, russia and the ioc, dr. rodchenkov's statement is called "a bare assertion which is uncorroborated by any contemporaneous documentary evidence. as such, the probative weight of this evidence is limited and the panel is unable to find based on such evidence that the athlete committed and adrv."  reactions  following the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, russian president vladimir putin awarded rodchenkov the order of friendship. in 2016, after the doping allegations were widely reported, putin called rodchenkov a "man with a scandalous reputation".  the mclaren report stated that rodchenkov was "an integral part of the conspiracy to extort money from athletes in order to cover up positive doping test results." it also found that rodchenkov was truthful with respect to the subject matter under investigation.  in november 2017, an ioc panel concluded: "whatever his motivation may be and whichever wrongdoing he may have committed in the past, dr. rodchenkov was telling the truth when he provided explanations of the cover-up scheme that he managed."  on 5 december 2017, it was announced that russia would compete as olympic athletes from russia under a neutral flag at the 2018 winter olympics. following the announcement, jim walden, an attorney for rodchenkov, issued a statement applauding the decision by the ioc that sends "a powerful message that it will not tolerate state-sponsored cheating by any nation".  as the world has seen, dr. rodchenkov provided credible and irrefutable evidence of the russian state-sponsored doping system," walden said in a statement. "russia's consistent denials lack any credibility, and its failure to produce all evidence in its possession only further confirms its high-level complicity.  russia's doping program and rodchenkov's work were highlighted in testimony before the u.s. helsinki commission (also known as the commission on security and cooperation in europe) in washington, dc, on 22 february 2018. during that hearing, walden discussed rodchenkov's work in detail and suggested that the world anti-doping agency and the international olympic committee needed to do more to restore
integrity to international sport.  despite the information presented in the mclaren report, russia was reinstated by the ioc after the conclusion of the 2018 games. in an editorial published in the american newspaper usa today, rodchenkov expressed his dismay at the decision, calling it "catastrophic". his lawyer, jim walden, issued a statement on behalf of rodchenkov saying that the decision to reinstate russia is "the greatest treachery against clean athletes in olympic history". rodchenkov continues to fear for his life and remains in hiding under protective custody.  in russia russian state-owned news agency tass reported that sports minister pavel kolobkov said the investigative committee found no evidence to support the state operated a doping system. that committee seeks rodchenkov's extradition from the united states, where he is in witness protection. despite assertions from russian officials that no system existed, "empirical evidence is totally to the contrary", ioc member dick pound said, adding, "so i think what we're seeing in the russian press is for domestic consumption".  lawsuit by mikhail prokhorov  following russia's banning from the 2018 winter olympics and the stripping of medals from multiple russian athletes, russian oligarch mikhail prokhorov, at the time the controlling owner of the brooklyn nets basketball team, agreed to finance a defamation lawsuit in new york against rodchenkov. the suit claims that rodchenkov defamed three russian biathletes - olga zaytseva, yana romanova and olga vilukhina - when rodchenkov included them on a list of athletes who took performance-enhancing drugs as part of a state-controlled program that corrupted the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, russia. the women, who were stripped of the silver medal they won as part of a relay team, are seeking $10 million each in damages.  in april 2018, rodchenkov, through his lawyer, jim walden, countersued prokhorov under new york's anti-slapp law claiming that prokhorov's suit was frivolous and intended to limit individuals from exercising their first amendment rights to free speech. according to published reports, the countersuit is likely to seek the names of other individuals who are financing the lawsuit against rodchenkov as well as information about the assets of prokhorov."prokhorov has assets here," walden said. "we need to go about expeditiously securing them, so he doesn't go about taking them out of the country. you can expect that's what we're going to be looking at next."walden stated that he believes prokhorov's lawsuit was intentionally designed to uncover rodchenkov's
whereabouts in the united states and allow agents of the russian government to find him.  icarus  rodchenkov was featured in the 2017 netflix documentary icarus, directed by bryan fogel. in icarus, rodchenkov describes his involvement in a conspiracy to help russian athletes to beat doping tests in the olympic games. on 4 march 2018, icarus won an academy award for best documentary feature.  william hill sports book of the year  rodchenkov was the 2020 winner of the william hill sports book of the year for his book the rodchenkov affair: how i brought down putin's secret doping empire. he was, however, unable to collect the £30,000 prize money as he has been placed under a witness protection scheme in the united states.  bibliography  references   1958 births doping in russia living people people from moscow moscow state university alumni russian whistleblowers
the exorcism of molly hartley is a 2015 american supernatural horror film written by matt venne and directed by steven r. monroe. the film is a sequel to the 2008 film the haunting of molly hartley. it was released on digital hd on october 9, 2015, and on blu-ray on october 20, 2015.  plot  after causing a botched exorcism that resulted in the death of a fellow priest, father james (tom mclaren) and a pregnant woman, father john barrow (devon sawa) is committed to a catholic mental asylum. chaplain henry davies (peter macneill) informs him that the vatican has revoked his status as a priest. meanwhile, molly hartley (sarah lind), is arrested after police find the corpses of the two friends she engaged in a threesome with the night before. while interrogating molly, she hears strange noises before she begins to have a deeper voice and refers to herself as "we". she is sent to the same mental asylum for psychiatric evaluation under dr. laurie hawthorn (gina holden), but her condition worsens after an insect-like creature enters her body.  hawthorn looks through molly's past records and diagnoses molly's symptoms as her subconscious fulfilling a claim she told her high school guidance counselor that she was claimed by the devil on her eighteenth birthday and describes it as an incubation or pregnancy for six years, six months, and six days. however, after supernatural occurrences happen around molly, dr. hawthorn begins to believe in demonic possession. with limited options, she asks barrow to perform the exorcism in exchange for signing his release forms. though he initially refuses, after the suicide of an asylum employee, supernatural occurrences, and seeing molly for himself, he visits davies, who encourages him to help molly, handing him his clerical attire and the items he needs to perform the exorcism. barrow manages to perform the exorcism, trapping several insects that come out of molly's mouth in a special box, which he keeps in a container filled with holy water.   barrow returns the container to davies, who places it in his basement for safekeeping. barrow notices davies' book on satanism and how the letters on the cover match the letters on molly's forehead during the exorcism. davies explains this is "leviathan", the fourth book of the satanic bible that explains the antichrist will be born after the worst sin committed, matricide, is committed on the "mother of the devil" or the person whose body was used to incubate the devil
. barrow demands to see the box, but upon opening the container, he finds that the box has been replaced with a large stone. davies hits barrow, knocking him out.   barrow wakes up in a locked room in the asylum where he witnesses a patient commit suicide in the room next to him filled with other dead patients. an orderly comes brandishing a gun and orders him to come with him. barrow and the orderly arrive at the underground room, where davies takes part in a ritual to sacrifice molly to bring forth the antichrist and barrow, the father of the devil since he was the one who extracted the devil through an unholy ritual. before he can kill molly, dr. hawthorn stabs davies through the abdomen, dropping the box and releasing the insects, providing a distraction as molly stabs davies. barrow, dr. hawthorn, and molly escape while several of the participants are killed by the insects.barrow assures molly she is safe as she is driven away in an ambulance. meanwhile, one of the insects flies into a moving school bus, where it approaches an outcast girl at the back of the bus. it inches toward her ear as the screen goes black.  cast  sarah lind as molly hartley  devon sawa as father john barrow  gina holden as dr. laurie hawthorn  peter macneill as chaplain henry davies  daina leitold as janet jones  julia arkos as beatrice white  tom mclaren as father james  bradley sawatzky as orderly #1  steve weller as orderly #2  john cor as daryl  reception trace thurman of bloody disgusting gave the film a negative review, noting that "no one (and we mean no one) was asking for a sequel to the 2008 pg-13 horror film the haunting of molly hartley." adam lee price of fangoria was more mixed in his review, stating that "the film did have its moments" while remarking that it was "an in-title-only sequel" to the haunting of molly hartley.  references  external links      2015 direct-to-video films american supernatural horror films american direct-to-video films american films 2015 horror films 20th century fox direct-to-video films direct-to-video sequel films
rosario lufrano (lanus, buenos aires, 8 january 1962) is an argentinian journalist, broadcaster and reporter. in 2016, she had a regular programme on radio rivadavia.  career  she graduated from the lomas de zamora national university and began to work in 1983 on the popular radio belgrano, as an announcer and reporter. by 1988, she was presenting the main bulletin of the defunct cable network cablevision noticias (cvn). in 1990, under a new management, the revamped channel 11 (telefe) hired her to front the 7:00pm nightly news hour, alongside franco salomone, lasting until december 30, 1998, when she and hundreds of co-workers were sacked for a developing financial crisis in the company. between 1991 and 1993, she hosted a weekly investigative program for the same network, focused on current affairs. by the mid-1990s, added a job at radio continental, where she hosted a saturday morning chat show. lufrano appeared on the air again in 2000, providing commentaries and reading the news in a midday program that was broadcast on the america channel. in 2003, she began a long-time career as a newscaster for the public network, and since 2006 shared the duties of manager of programming, until 2008, when she resigned in the middle of a political crisis due to the agricultural strike. after leaving the public eye, rosario continued working as a manager of an online channel, focused on travelling across the globe, and since 2013, has a daily morning program on radio rivadavia.  personal life  she is a daughter of italian immigrants, who arrived to argentina in extreme state of poverty, after world war ii. her father is a tailor and her mother is a dressmaker, both still working. she has two children and is divorced from her first husband.  references  women television journalists living people 1962 births argentine television journalists
paul kauvar was an american thoroughbred racehorse. he won the 1897 preakness stakes. he was sold to louis ezell for $1,500 in 1898, but was injured before the colombia stakes in october.  references  thoroughbred family a12 racehorses bred in the united states racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners 1894 racehorse births
lieutenant colonel claude evelyn bowden (11 october 1897 - 9 october 1984) was a british military officer, rfc pilot and one of the most well-known aeromodellers in the 1920s to 1950s.  early life  bowden was born on 11 october 1897, the son of rev. h. a. bowden. he went to radley college, a boarding school in rural oxfordshire, entering in summer term 1910 and leaving to enter military service in 1914.  at radley he set up a model aeroplane club; all the members of this club went on to serve with the royal flying corps in the great war, including thomas langford-sainsbury who went on to become an air vice-marshal and commanded british air forces in egypt during world war ii.  military service he entered service in 1914, serving in france and palestine during the great war and rose to lieutenant in the duke of cornwall's light infantry. in 1918 he was promoted to captain in the royal flying corps/royal air force, where he was a single-seat scout pilot.  following the war he returned to army service. bowden served in india as a subaltern and recounted an eventful journey in his "glamorous" a v monocar with his colonel's charming daughter.  he became a major in 1938 and lieutenant colonel in 1939. during world war ii in the royal army service corps he was an acting colonel in 1942, and retired as lieutenant colonel in 1946. his military career included time at raf college cranwell, where he was a contemporary of westbury, frank whittle and t. e. lawrence (lawrence of arabia).  aeromodelling  universally known as "c.e. bowden", percival marshall said of him:  he achieved successful powered flight with a model using e.t. westbury's atom minor engine:  he went on to establish internal-combustion-powered model flight duration records, initially of seventy-one seconds in 1932 with kanga and in 1936 with his blue dragon, also powered by atom minor. the same powerplant was used in the hydroplane jildi junior to set the 15cc class c hydroplane record in 1934. in 1937 he achieved the first officially observed "rise off water" flight in great britain with a model petrol-powered flying boat.  following the second world war, he pioneered radio-controlled flight and also made significant innovations with radio-controlled boats and the design of both model and full-size yachts. he wrote prolifically on these subjects
.  in 1943 he was appointed vice-president of the smae (society of model aeronautical engineers) which later became the british model flying association. other past vice-presidents included lord brabazon.  personal life  in 1924 he married jesse grace holmes, daughter of rev. w. p. holmes. he died on 9 october 1984.  publications  model glow plug engines, percival marshall & co. ltd., london, 1949  the history and technical development of model aircraft, the drysdale press ltd. for the harborough publishing company ltd., leicester, 1946  petrol engined model aircraft, percival marshall & co. ltd., london, 1937  model jet reaction engines: with notes for suitable models for jet engines, percival marshall & co. ltd., london, 1948  model yacht construction and sailing, percival marshall & co. ltd., london, 1949;   diesel model engines, percival marshall & co. ltd., london, 1948, revised 1951  references  1984 deaths british army personnel of world war i 1897 births duke of cornwall's light infantry officers royal flying corps officers royal air force personnel of world war i royal air force officers british army personnel of world war ii royal army service corps officers
jenni pirita susanna kangas (born 3 july 1992) is a finnish track and field athlete who competes in the javelin throw. in 2016, she finished ninth at the european championships. in 2017, she won bronze at the summer universiade, throwing a personal best 60.98 m. she is coached by her father, retired javelin thrower hannu kangas.  international competitions  personal bests  references  external links     1992 births living people finnish female javelin throwers people from seinajoki universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade bronze medalists for finland competitors at the 2015 summer universiade medalists at the 2017 summer universiade
lepturonota modesta is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
communications '72 is an album by saxophonist stan getz and orchestra arranged and conducted by michel legrand which was released on the verve label in 1972.  reception  the allmusic review by stephen cook stated "as usual, getz makes it all shine with his golden tone and beguiling solo lines. a good title, but primarily recommended for getz fans".  track listing all compositions by michel legrand.  "communications '72" - 3:39  "outhouse blues" - 5:15  "now you've gone" - 4:35  "back to bach" - 3:33  "nursery rhymes for all god's children" - 4:39  "soul dance" - 4:21  "redemption" - 3:18  "flight" - 4:20  "moods of a wanderer" - 3:46  "bonjour tristesse" - 7:01  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone eddy louiss - organ christiane legrand - vocals unidentified orchestra, strings and choir arranged and conducted by michel legrand  references   1972 albums stan getz albums verve records albums albums arranged by michel legrand albums conducted by michel legrand
|}  the ruby stakes is a listed flat horse race in ireland open to thoroughbred horses aged three years or older. it is run at killarney over a distance of 1 mile and 20 yards (1,628 metres), and it is scheduled to take place each year in august.  the race was first run in 1997 and took place at tralee until the racecourse was closed in 2007, and at dundalk in 2008.  since being transferred to killarney the race title has been extended to include the name of the legendary irish trainer, vincent o'brien.  records leading jockey (5 wins):  seamie heffernan - common world (2005), steinbeck (2010), soon (2012), i can fly (2018), so wonderful (2020)  leading trainer (8 wins):  aidan o'brien - mystical lady (2008), poet (2009), steinbeck (2010), wild wind (2011), soon (2012), i can fly (2018), so wonderful (2020), horoscope (2021)  winners  see also  horse racing in ireland  list of irish flat horse races  references  racing post: , , , , , , , , ,  , , , , , , , ,  , , ,   1998 ruby stakes on youtube  1999 ruby stakes on youtube  2000 ruby stakes on youtube  flat races in ireland open mile category horse races killarney racecourse recurring sporting events established in 1997 1997 establishments in ireland
an outdoor bronze sculpture depicting the john watts by george edwin bissell is installed in the trinity church cemetery outside manhattan's trinity church, in the u.s. state of new york. it was erected by watt's grandson, john watts de peyster, in 1893.  see also   1893 in art  references  external links      1893 establishments in new york (state) 1893 sculptures bronze sculptures in manhattan financial district, manhattan monuments and memorials in manhattan outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures of men in new york city statues in new york city
veretillidae is a family of sea pens.  references  external links     eol      pennatulacea cnidarian families
the 2016-17 segunda division femenina de futbol was the 2016-17 edition of the spanish women's football second-tier league.  competition format the segunda division was divided into seven regional groups. each group played their season as home and away round-robin format. at the end of the season, the lowest three teams from each regional group (except group 6) were relegated to regional leagues. the seven group champions (for group 6, the winner of the canarian final) qualified for the promotion playoffs.  in the promotion playoffs, the seven teams were be divided by draw into two groups: one of four teams and other one of three. the group of four teams played a double-leg knockout format, while the group of three teams played with a double-legged round-robin format. the two group winners, madrid cff and sevilla fc, were promoted to the primera division.  group 1  group 2  group 3  group 4  group 5  group 6  las palmas group  tenerife group  canarian final the winner of the canarian final qualified to the promotion stage.  group 7  promotion playoffs the groups will be drawn on 8 may 2017, at the headquarters of the royal spanish football federation.  four-team group  three-team group  references  external links  spa 2 women2 segunda division (women) seasons
adefunmilayo tejuosho (nee smith) (born march 25, 1965) is a nigerian politician who is a fourth term lagos state house of assembly legislator, representing mushin constituency i. she is the chairperson of the lagos state house of assembly committee on finance.  life tejuosho was born in lagos state to the family of ademola smith an epidemiologist who worked for the nigerian government. she attended university of lagos staff school, akoka, queen's college, lagos and completed her secondary education in west virginia.  after high school, she attended west virginia university, where she studied biology. she later earned a law degree from university of buckingham. tejuosho holds a ph.d. in law from the university of lagos.   during her youth service year, she was a teacher at her alma mater, queens school, yaba. after her call to the bar, she joined the services of ademola odunsi & co. in 1996, she was a member of the grassroot democratic movement under the short-lived abacha administration and was a house of representative candidate for the party before the democratic project was cancelled. at the beginning of the fourth republic, she joined alliance for democracy.   in 2003, she was voted into the lagos state house of assembly to represent mushin constituency i. in the assembly, tejuosho sponsored the bill that later became known as the lagos state protection against domestic violence law of 2007. the law grants protection orders to victims of domestic violence from their oppressors. she was inspired to write the draft of the bill by a paper on domestic violence she wrote for her llm programme at university of lagos.   she went on to hold various posts and positions in the house including deputy chief whip, deputy speaker and chairman, lagos state house of assembly committee on finance.  she was nominated as deputy speaker in 2007 but was impeached in 2009. following her impeachment a series of investigations were conducted to ascertain the educational qualification of her successor and some of her accusers but the results of the allegations were not released.  personal life she is married to omoba kayode tejuosho of the tejuosho royal family of ogun state, nigeria. together they have four children.  references  1965 births living people all progressives congress politicians nigerian women lawyers nigerian women in politics people from lagos state university of lagos alumni queen's college, lagos alumni west virginia university alumni alumni of the university of buckingham funmi
pm2 is a process manager for the javascript runtime node.js. in 2016, pm2 was ranked as the 82nd most popular javascript project on github.  overview  pm2 or process manager 2, is an open source, production ready node.js process manager. some key features of pm2 are automatic application load balancing, declarative application configuration, deployment system and monitoring.  started in 2013 by alexandre strzelewicz. the code source is hosted on github and installable via npm.  references  further reading  external links   javascript programming tools computer-related introductions in 2013
biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma is a newly recognized, very rare, low-grade malignant tumor of the nasal cavity, which was formerly probably included in fibrosarcoma and synovial sarcoma cases. it was incorporated into the fourth edition of the world health organization classification of head and neck tumours, published in 2017.  classification  abbreviations:  biphenotypic sinonasal sarcoma (bsns)  original name: low-grade sinonasal sarcoma with neural and myogenic features (lgssnmf), but it is no longer recommended.  definitions:  a low-grade spindle-cell neoplasm of the sinonasal tract associated with overlying respiratory epithelium and showing s100 protein and actin immunoreactivity  signs and symptoms  the tumor  often affects multiple sites within the upper aerodigestive tract, frequently showing extension into the orbit (25%) or through the cribriform plate (11%) of the ethmoid sinus into the skull base. the patient presents with nonspecific findings, including difficulty breathing, facial pressure, congestion, pain, and mild epiphora. often, concurrent benign sinonasal tract inflammatory polyps are seen.  diagnosis  microscopic    infiltrative, highly cellular spindled cell neoplasm  is poorly circumscribed and unencapsulated. bone destruction or invasion is common. the cells show medium to long fascicles (nerve fibers), with a herringbone pattern. the cells are remarkably uniform with elongated nuclei. delicate strands of intercellular collagen without ropy or dense deposition are seen. a very characteristic concurrent surface-type respiratory epithelial proliferation is found from the surface or in small cystic spaces around the cancer cells, often forming glands. the background may have a rich vascularity and usually has a small number of scattered lymphocytes. extra growths or mitoses are rare, while necrosis, ulceration, and hemorrhage are usually absent.  ancillary tests  immunohistochemistry  s100 protein (a tumor marker protein) is focal, patchy to diffuse in all tumors.   smooth-muscle actin or muscle-specific actin is seen in nearly all tumors, but a strong and diffuse reaction with sma is seen in only about 50% of cases.   no reactivity occurs with other tumor markers such as sox10, myogenin, estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor, or keratins.  genetic testing  t(2;4)(q35;q
31.1): pax3-maml3 fusion protein only a few cases have shown a pax3-ncoa1 (inv(2)(q35p23)), and the tumor is negative for ss18-ssx1 or ssx2  differential diagnoses   fibrosarcoma can be very similar,  although nerve fibers and the herringbone pattern tend to be longer and more well developed.  synovial sarcoma is almost histologically identical, but genetic translocation (ss18-ssx1 or ssx2) is shown through fluorescence in situ hybridization or rt-pcr.  malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor, such as triton tumor, has distinctive alternating light and dark cellular areas, an association with peripheral nerves, and usually a high-grade tumor with pleomorphism, necrosis, and increased mitoses. generally, it shows reactivity with s100 protein and sox10, while negative for sma or msa.  leiomyosarcoma has fascicular (nerve tract) architecture, with cigar-shaped nuclei showing blunt ends, perinuclear halos (cellular nuclear shrinking), and eosinophilic cytoplasm. much stronger reactivity occurs with desmin and sma, while it is usually negative with s100 protein.  mucosal melanoma, also a spindled-cell tumor in many cases, has pleomorphism (more variety in shape/size of tumor cells), intranuclear inclusions, and prominent nucleoli. the neoplastic cells are usually strongly reactive with s100 protein, sox10, hmb45, melan-a, and tyrosinase, while negative for sma or msa.  epidemiology   as it is newly described, this tumor is probably under-reported, though it is considered to be very rare. patients present over a wide age range (24-85 years), with a mean age of 52 years. more females are diagnosed than males (3:1).  management   surgery, often accompanied by radiation, is the treatment of choice. frequent (44%) local recurrence is seen, often many years after the initial presentation. ,  no regional or distant metastases are reported, and no patient has yet died from disease.  references   cancer connective and soft tissue neoplasms sarcoma
golden dreams (, translit. khab-ha-ye talayi) is a 1951 iranian comedy film directed by moezzodivan fekri.  cast  iran daftari   moezzodivan fekri   ahmad ghadakchian   majid mohseni   shahla riahi  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1951 films iranian comedy films persian-language films films directed by moezzodivan fekri iranian films 1951 comedy films iranian black-and-white films
"our boys and girls march" is an american patriotic song written and composed by joseph j. kaiser. the song was first published in 1903 by jos. j. kaiser music pub. co. new york, ny. the sheet music cover reads, "dedicated to the school children of america."  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   1903 songs march music
the message of death (spanish: el mensaje de la muerte) is a 1953 mexican thriller film directed by zacarias gomez urquiza and starring miguel torruco, rebeca iturbide and elena julian.  cast  miguel torruco   rebeca iturbide   elena julian   jose maria linares-rivas   maruja grifell   martha lipuzcoa   joaquin garcia vargas   juan orraca   julian de meriche    pepe nava   manuel resendiz   valente quintana   yolanda montes    matilde sanchez    the nicholas brothers as themselves  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1950s thriller films mexican thriller films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by zacarias gomez urquiza mexican black-and-white films
andi alise tostanoski (born august 29, 1994) is an american soccer goalkeeper who played for seattle reign fc of the national women's soccer league (nwsl) as a non-rostered amateur player.  early life born and raised in colorado springs, colorado, tostanoski attended palmer high school where she played on the soccer team. she attended santa clara university from 2012 until 2016. in 2012, she was named to the west coast conference all-freshman team. in 2014, she was named west coast conference goalkeeper of the year and earned all conference and all academic team honors. in 2015, she was named third team west coast conference goalkeeper, all west coast conference honorable mention, was a nscaa scholar first team west coast conference, and made the west coast conference all academic team.  tostanoski left santa clara as one of the most decorated soccer players to ever play there. in four seasons, tostanoski recorded 337 saves and a 0.047 goals against average (gaa). she also had a 0.804 save percentage and played 7542.53 minutes in 84 games.  playing career tostanoski was invited to train with seattle reign fc prior to the 2016 season. she subsequently earned two one-match gk replacement contracts, before making her first appearance as for the club during a match against the western new york flash in july 2016. she has represented the united states at the under-18 and under-23 levels.  coaching  after tostanoski ended her playing career at seattle reign fc, she started as a volunteer coach for the colorado college tiger's women's team in 2016 which kicked off her coaching career. in 2017, she accepted a graduate assistant position at hawaii pacific university, and coached for two seasons before returning an assistant coach at colorado college.  references  external links  santa clara player profile  living people 1994 births santa clara broncos women's soccer players sportspeople from colorado springs, colorado ol reign players soccer players from colorado national women's soccer league players american women's soccer players united states women's under-20 international soccer players women's association football goalkeepers
tripylella quitoensis is a species of nematodes, first found in fatima, portugal. it can be differentiated by its rather short body length (averaging ); possessing short outer labial setae; its short pharynx; carrying anterior subventral teeth and a posterior dorsal tooth in the same stomal chamber; having a short tail; exhibiting body pores and somatic setae, as well as a striated cuticle and non-protruding vulval lips, among other characteristics.  references   enoplia
stroppa is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giovanni stroppa (born 1968), italian footballer and manager john stroppa (born 1926), canadian football player marco stroppa (born 1959), italian composer  italian-language surnames
this is a list of minor-planet discoverers credited by the minor planet center with the discovery of one or several minor planets (such as near-earth and main-belt asteroids, jupiter trojans and distant objects). , the discovery of 612,011 numbered minor planets are credited to 1141 astronomers and 253 observatories, telescopes or surveys (see ).  for how a discovery is made and a description of the tables below, see observations of small solar system bodies and , respectively.  discovering astronomers   back to top  discovering dedicated institutions   back to top  notes   the discovery table consist of the following fields:   astronomers and institutions: links to the corresponding article about the discovering astronomer or institution on wikipedia. if not linked, the displayed name should be a redirect to this list. for example, the page  forwards to the anchored table row  using the astronomer's mpc-name as id.  discoveries: displays the total number of discovered and co-discovered minor planets made by the discoverer (numbered bodies only). it links to the corresponding "discovery by..." category, which are subcategories of :category:discoveries by astronomer and :category:astronomical discoveries by institution, respectively. note that these categories do not contain discoveries for which no page on wikipedia exists. astronomers with only a few discoveries often do not have their own discovery-category (redlinks). for those who have discovered only one single minor planet, the link in the discovery column directly points to the corresponding entry in the list of minor planets. there are typically no linked categories for astronomers with an unknown first name.  dob-dod and observatory code: displays the date of birth and death for astronomers, and alphanumeric iau code(s) for institutions, respectively.  country: nationality of the astronomer or location of the discovering dedicated institution, respectively. some discoverers have assigned two flags, with the first being the most appropriate to allow for a sensible sorting by country.  link-label; info, links and, notes: the link-label is used for piped discoverer links, intended for a consistent usage in minor-planet object articles and in the list of minor planets (see index). after the link-label, additional information is given: this includes links to external sources (src), links to the mpc database (see here) for objects discovered or co-discovered by the astronomer, and trans-wiki links to existing articles on french, german and italian wikipedia. (note that
the link-label should be separated by a semi-colon from all other information).  name(s) at mpc: displays the name of the discoverer as used by the mpc (non-diacritical version; where the abbreviated first name is written before the family name). some discoverers have multiple names due to inconsistencies and typos.  cite: minor-planet discoverers are often honored with the naming of (one or several) asteroids by their colleges. the associated citation typically gives the discoverer's full name, his or her date of birth and additional  biographical information.  references  external links   data available from the minor planet center, (file: "numberedmps.txt", 53 mb)  discovery circumstances: numbered minor planets, minor planet center  astronomy-related lists  minor planet discoverers
the liberia men's national under-18 basketball team is a national basketball team of liberia, administered by the liberia basketball federation. it represents the country in international under-18 (under age 18) basketball competitions.  it appeared at the 2012 fiba africa under-18 championship qualification stage.  see also liberia men's national basketball team liberia women's national under-18 basketball team  references  external links archived records of liberia team participations welcome to liberia #1 online basketball portal  basketball teams in liberia men's national under-18 basketball teams basketball
jerome lewellyn babe (february 4, 1837 - april 8, 1893) was an american diamond miner and inventor.  biography babe, an american, arrived in the cape colony (modern-day south africa) circa 1865 as a sales representative for the winchester repeating arms company and also as a special correspondent for the new york world.  he arrived in colesberg, cape colony on june 12, 1870 and by july 4 was at jacobsdal, orange free state. at jacobsdal he demonstrated the 1866 .44 henry winchester rifle's quick firing by shooting 16 rounds in ten seconds, resulting in a large number of sales.  once he completed his work for winchester and the newspaper, babe found that he had several months before his scheduled return journey. he decided to enter into diamond mining, having previously had experience prospecting in california. this was soon after the first discovery of diamonds in the region. babe was unimpressed with the technique that was then in use on the diamond fields, of excavating a quantity of gravel and then removing it to the nearest water source, often some distance away, for washing and screening. he devised a type of dry sorting pan that could sort diamonds from the gravel without the use of water. this machine was first used at the vaal river field in 1871 and became known as the "yankee baby" or simply the "baby" after babe's surname. the machine became very popular and was still in use in the region in 1966. the "baby" functioned as a swinging sieve (underneath a coarser sieve which separates out the larger pebbles), which allows medium-sized pebbles (which may contain diamonds) to roll into a tub. the contents of the tub are gravitated, and the heavier stones are placed on a sorting table to allow the diamonds to be hand-picked out.  sales of the baby, income from excavating diamonds, sales of diamonds purchased from other miners, and profits from "grubstakes" (whereby he earned a cut of profits from miners to whom babe provided capital, materials or provisions) made babe a fortune. in 1872, he was in the eastern united states where he published a book titled the south african diamond fields. this work was mentioned in a discussion on potential rivals by mark twain in a letter to journalist john henry riley.  babe was robbed of $10,000 worth of diamonds from a stagecoach in york, pennsylvania in july 1872. after returning to the cape, his ventures became unprofitable and
, after losing his money, he returned to america in 1873. babe was married to elanora ray babe, who died on may 28, 1893, less than two months after him.  references   1837 births 1893 deaths 19th-century american inventors american male journalists american miners people from cincinnati
the 2016 honda indy grand prix of alabama was the 4th round of the 2016 indycar series. the race was contested over 90 laps at barber motorsports park in birmingham, alabama. it was the 7th time that the indycar series had raced on the circuit. in qualifying, simon pagenaud took pole position with a time of 1:06.7762, beating out his teammate will power. sebastien bourdais set a new track record during the second round of qualifications with a time of 1:06.6001, but was unable to match that pace in the third round of qualifying, relegating him to a fifth place start. championship contender juan pablo montoya struggled heavily in qualifying, placing 21st and last.  the race opened with an incident before it even started. as the field came off the final turn to prepare to take the green flag, carlos munoz tipped mikhail aleshin into a spin, sending aleshin and jack hawksworth off into the outside grass. all involved escaped major damage, while the rest of the field ran an extra lap under yellow before the start. it would be the only caution flag of the day. simon pagenaud held the lead when the race started, with power slotting in behind him. further back in the field, sebastien bourdais and scott dixon made contact in turn five, sending dixon into a spin and causing front wing damage to bourdais' car. both would continue, but their races were both greatly hampered due to the incident.  pagenaud dominated the majority of the race. however, in the closing laps, pagenaud was held up in lap traffic, allowing graham rahal to catch up and set a thrilling duel for the lead. on lap 82, rahal and pagenaud made contact entering turn seven, sending pagenaud off course and handing rahal the lead. the lead would be short lived, as four laps later, pagenaud caught back up and attempted to make a pass at the exit of turn six. in the middle of the move, rahal made contact with back-marker jack hawksworth, damaging rahal's front wing and ending any chance of holding off pagenaud. pagenaud would extend his lead and take victory by 13.7 seconds. it was pagenaud second consecutive victory of the season. despite his damaged wing, rahal managed to hang on and finish second. josef newgarden finished third. despite his terrible starting position, juan pablo montoya was able to charge through the field and finish in a respectable fifth place. the highest finishing rookie was alexander rossi, who came across the line in 15th, the last car on the lead
lap.  report  qualifying  source for individual rounds:  race results  notes  points include 1 point for leading at least 1 lap during a race, an additional 2 points for leading the most race laps, and 1 point for pole position.  source for time gaps:  championship standings after the race  drivers' championship standings   note: only the top five positions are included.  references  external links official pit stop data  official race broadcast  honda indy grand prix of alabama 2016 honda indy grand prix of alabama honda indy grand prix of alabama
ranwan is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4.3 km from bilga, 13.1 km from phillaur, 40.4 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 124 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  bhattian railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 12.4 km away from the village. the village is 41.7 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 136 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
is a 2017 japanese historical drama television series and the 56th nhk taiga drama. it is written by yoshiko morishita and stars ko shibasaki as ii naotora.  plot  cast  ii clan ko shibasaki as ii naotora miu arai as otowa (young naotora) haruma miura as ii naochika kanata fujimoto as kamenojo (young naochika) masaki suda as ii naomasa, the adopted son of naotora kokoro terada as toramatsu (young naomasa) tetta sugimoto as ii naomori naomi zaizen as chika shihori kanjiya as shino gin maeda as ii naohira mari hanafusa as sana takashi ukaji as ii naomitsu aki asakura as takase, naomasa's half-sister hikaru takahashi as young takase shunsuke kariya as niino chikanori yasuko mitsuura as ayame aoi yoshikura as kikyo marin as sakura tsuyoshi muro as seto hokyu, a financial advisor yuki yamada as ihara "suke'emon" tomomasa masayo umezawa as take and ume ono family issey takahashi as ono masatsugu, a.k.a. "tajima no kami" kai kobayashi as tsurumaru (young masatsugu) mitsuru fukikoshi as ono masanao, the father of masatsugu yoshio inoue as ono genba sayaka yamaguchi as natsu kai inowaki as ono manpuku taketo arai as ono inosuke (young manpuku) nakano family toshio kakei as nakano naoyoshi yuma yamoto as nakano "yukinoji" naoyuki keisuke tomita as nakano naohisa okuyama family denden as okuyama tomotoshi, shino's father mio tanaka as okuyama "rokuza" rokuzaemon monks of ryotan-ji kaoru kobayashi as nankei osho hayato ichihara as ketsuzan shigekazu komatsu as koten peasants gaku yamamoto as jinbei takashi yamanaka as hachisuke ko maehara as kakutaro takehiro kimoto (tko) as tomisuke takayuki kinoshita (tko) as fukuzo  imagawa clan shunputei shota as imagawa yoshimoto, the master of the ii clan ruriko asaoka as jukeini, the mother of yoshimoto onoe matsuya ii as imag
awa ujizane, yoshimoto's heir tsubasa nakagawa as young ujizane shiro sano as taigen sessai kenichi yajima as sekiguchi ujitsune aki nishihara as haru (lady hayakawa), the wife of ujizane and a daughter of hojo ujiyasu hidetoshi hoshida as a fake ieyasu kyusaku shimada as osawa mototane kazutoyo yoshimi as nakayasu hyobu kazuyuki aijima as yamamura shuri asahi yoshida as asahina yasukatsu iinoya triumvirate daikichi sugawara as suzuki shigetoki jun hashimoto as kondo yasumochi masanobu sakata as suganuma tadahisa  tokugawa clan sadao abe as tokugawa ieyasu nanao as sena seira niwa as young sena kinari hirano as matsudaira nobuyasu raiki komino as takechiyo (young nobuyasu) komaki kurihara as odai no kata, the mother of ieyasu seiji rokkaku as honda masanobu ozuno nakamura as ishikawa kazumasa tetsu watanabe as okubo tadayo moro moro'oka as hiraiwa chikayoshi soran tamoto as kogoro (sakai ietsugu) the four heavenly kings of the tokugawa minosuke as sakai tadatsugu masahiro takashima as honda tadakatsu toshinori omi as sakakibara yasumasa matsushita masato wada as matsushita jokei, a spy kanji furutachi as matsushita gentaro  oda clan ichikawa ebizo xi as oda nobunaga ken mitsuishi as akechi mitsuhide sora uehara as tokuhime ryota sakanishi as sakuma nobumori shozo uesugi as mizuno tadashige seiji kinoshita as hasegawa hidekazu rei tanaka as jinen, mitsuhide's son  takeda clan ken matsudaira as takeda shingen eita okuno as takeda katsuyori oreno graffiti as takeda yoshinobu mari kishi as suzu, the wife of yoshinobu and a sister of imagawa ujizane ryuji yamamoto as yamagata masakage yoji tanaka as anayama nobutada  later hojo clan shinobu tsuruta as hojo ujiyasu toru shinagawa as hojo gen'an etsuo yokobori as ogasawara yasuhiro  ryuun-maru's bandits yuya yagira as ryu
un-maru kota noura as young ryuun-maru makita sports as mogura togi makabe as rikiya kengo yoshida as kaji koki maeda as goku takashi ashida as kuwa  merchants of kiga hirotaro honda as nakamura yodayu takashi matsuo as iseya ichiro ogura as kumanoya  others takuro tatsumi as chaya shirojiro kiyonobu misaki momose as akane dankan as negi yu inaba g.g. sato moemi katayama hajime okayama as gohei mansaku fuwa yusuke kodama shodai fukuyama yoshiyuki morishita shigemitsu ogi wataru murakami  family tree  production  production credits music - yoko kanno title designer - maaya wakasugi historical research - tetsuo owada architectural research - kiyoshi hirai clothing research - hiroaki koizumi  casting ko shibasaki was announced to portray the lead role of the warlord ii naotora on august 25, 2015. the rest of the main cast was announced on may 26, 2016, which included tetta sugimoto, naomi zaizen, gin maeda, kaoru kobayashi, haruma miura, issey takahashi, and yuya yagira among others. the third cast announcement on july 12, 2016 included shunputei shota, once matsuya ii, ruriko asaoka, sadao abe, nanao, masaki suda, and hayato ichihara among others.  filming the usual taiga drama production would first have one-third of the expected number of scripts finished before shooting begins. afterwards, audience reception is taken into account as the rest of the series is written and shot. filming began in september 2016.  music yoko kanno was announced as the series composer on november 16, 2016. by december 6, paavo jarvi and lang lang were announced as the performers for the series' theme music.  marketing on november 16, 2016, the first visual poster for naotora: the lady warlord was released. a trailer for the drama was later released in december 2016.  kotobukiya released naotora-themed chopsticks in january 2017 to coincide with the series' broadcast.  tv schedule  highlight  soundtracks nhk taiga drama naotora: the lady warlord,  (january 11, 2017) nhk taiga drama naotora: the lady warlord,  (april 5, 2017) nhk taiga drama naotora: the lady warlord,  (august 23, 2017) nhk
taiga drama naotora: the lady warlord,  (december 20, 2017)  see also  sengoku period  references  external links official site   taiga drama 2017 japanese television series debuts 2017 japanese television series endings cultural depictions of akechi mitsuhide cultural depictions of oda nobunaga cultural depictions of tokugawa ieyasu cultural depictions of takeda shingen television series set in the 16th century
ioannis deligiannis (1815-1876) was a greek politician. he was foreign minister (1874-1875) and minister of the interior (1876) in the government of greece.  references rulers.org  1815 births 1876 deaths foreign ministers of greece ministers of the interior of greece
locky is ransomware malware released in 2016. it is delivered by email (that is allegedly an invoice requiring payment) with an attached microsoft word document that contains malicious macros. when the user opens the document, it appears to be full of gibberish, and includes the phrase "enable macro if data encoding is incorrect," a social engineering technique. if the user does enable macros, they save and run a binary file that downloads the actual encryption trojan, which will encrypt all files that match particular extensions. filenames are converted to a unique 16 letter and number combination. initially, only the .locky file extension was used for these encrypted files. subsequently, other file extensions have been used, including .zepto, .odin, .aesir, .thor, and .zzzzz. after encryption, a message (displayed on the user's desktop) instructs them to download the tor browser and visit a specific criminal-operated web site for further information. the web site contain instructions that demand a payment of between 0.5 and 1 bitcoin (as of november 2017, one bitcoin varies in value between $9,000 and $10,000 via a bitcoin exchange). since the criminals possess the private key and the remote servers are controlled by them, the victims are motivated to pay to decrypt their files.  operation  the most commonly reported mechanism of infection involves receiving an email with a microsoft word document attachment that contains the code.  the document is gibberish, and prompts the user to enable macros to view the document.  enabling macros and opening the document launch the locky virus. once the virus is launched, it loads into the memory of the users system, encrypts documents as hash.locky files, installs .bmp and .txt files, and can encrypt network files that the user has access to. this has been a different route than most ransomware since it uses macros and attachments to spread rather than being installed by a trojan or using a previous exploit.  updates  on june 22, 2016, necurs released a new version of locky with a new loader component, which includes several detection-avoiding techniques, such as detecting whether it is running within a virtual machine or within a physical machine, and relocation of instruction code.  since locky was released there have been numerous variants released that used different extensions for encrypted files. many of these extensions are named after gods of norse and egyptian mythology. when
first released, the extension used for encrypted files was .locky. other versions utilized the .zepto, .odin, .shit, .thor, .aesir, and .zzzzz extensions for encrypted files. the current version, released in december 2016, utilizes the .osiris extension for encrypted files.  distribution methods   many different distribution methods for locky have been used since the ransomware was released. these distribution methods include exploit kits, word and excel attachments with malicious macros, docm attachments, and zipped js attachments.  the general consensus among security experts to protect yourself from ransomware, including locky, is to keep your installed programs updated and to only open attachments from known senders.  encryption the locky uses rsa-2048 + aes-128 cipher with ecb mode to encrypt files. keys are generated on the server side, making manual decryption impossible, and locky ransomware can encrypt files on all fixed drives, removable drives, network and ram disk drives.  prevalence locky is reported to have been sent to about a half-million users on february 16, 2016, and for the period immediately after the attackers increased their distribution to millions of users. despite the newer version, google trend data indicates that infections have dropped off around june 2016.  notable incidents  on february 18, 2016, the hollywood presbyterian medical center paid a $17,000 ransom in the form of bitcoins for the decryption key for patient data.  the hospital was infected by the delivery of an email attachment disguised as a microsoft word invoice. this has led to increased fear and knowledge about ransomware in general and has brought ransomware into public spotlight once again. there appears to be a trend in ransomware being used to attack hospitals and it appears to be growing.  on may 31, necurs went dormant, perhaps due to a glitch in the c&c server.  according to softpedia, there were less spam emails with locky or dridex attached to it.  on june 22, however, malwaretech discovered necurs's bots consistently polled the dga until a c&c server replied with a digitally signed response.  this signified necurs was no longer dormant.  the cybercriminal group also started sending a very large quantity of spam emails with new and improved versions of locky and dridex attached to them, as well as a new message and zipped javascript code in the emails.  in april 2016, the dartford science &
technology college computers were infected with the virus. a student had opened an infected email which quickly spread and encrypted many school files. the virus stayed on the computer for several weeks. eventually, they managed to remove the virus by using system restore for all of the computers.  spam email vector an example message with locky as an attachment is the following:  dear (random name):  please find attached our invoice for services rendered and additional disbursements in the above-mentioned matter.  hoping the above to your satisfaction, we remain  sincerely,  (random name)  (random title)  references  ransomware 2016 in computing cryptographic attacks windows trojans
the 2016 grand prix of indianapolis, officially known as the 2016 angie's list grand prix of indianapolis for sponsorship reasons, was the fifth round of the 2016 indycar series season. the race took place over 82 laps on the infield road course at indianapolis motor speedway in speedway, indiana. the race also served as part of the festivities surrounding the 2016 indianapolis 500. the car count for the race slightly increased from other races during the season due to some entries participating in the indianapolis 500 electing to also run in the grand prix.  race recap  for the second race in a row, simon pagenaud qualified in pole position, this time with a time of 1:08.6868. chip ganassi racing driver charlie kimball surprised with a qualifying run good enough to place him second. graham rahal and josef newgarden, who had qualified third and fifth respectively, had their times disallowed and were moved to the back of the starting grid for failing to meet minimum car weight regulations in post-qualifying inspection.  the race was run in cold temperatures and overcast skies. at the start, simon pagenaud held the lead, while james hinchcliffe moved into second. as the field moved into the first turn, tony kanaan and sebastien bourdais made contact, bringing out a full course caution and bringing an end to kanaan's day before he could complete a lap. the race restarted after four caution laps with much cleaner results. on lap six, will power lost control of his car entering turn seven while trying to defend from alexander rossi. no caution resulted from the spin and power would finish a lowly 19th. the first round of pit stops came around lap 20. graham rahal would lead briefly due to extending fuel farther than anyone else, but would fall back following his own pit stop. the lead was briefly handed to charlie kimball, who had beat pagenaud out of the pits. pagenaud would not take long to find a way by, however, and was quickly back in the lead.  on lap 37, the second caution of the day came out when sebastien bourdais rolled to a halt on track. most of the leaders pitted under the caution, but helio castroneves and conor daly, who had made their first stops early and went off sequence from the leaders, stayed out, handing castroneves the lead. on the restart, daly was able to get by castroneves and take the lead, which he held for 14 laps before coming in for his final pit stop. after castroneves pitted two laps later, simon pagenaud resumed the lead and was able to gain enough of an
advantage to not lose it again after his pit stop. pagenaud took victory by roughly 4.5 seconds over his teammate castroneves, giving pagenaud his third consecutive victory and a comfortable lead in the point standings. james hinchcliffe took the final step of the podium, coming across about half a second after castroneves. graham rahal, despite starting at the back of the field, finished fourth. despite fading in the last laps of the race, conor daly still placed a respectable sixth, making him the highest finishing rookie in the race.  report  qualifying  source for individual rounds:  race results  notes all cars ran dallara chassis with aerokits supplied by their respective engine manufacturer.   points include 1 point for leading at least 1 lap during a race, an additional 2 points for leading the most race laps, and 1 point for pole position.  source for time gaps:  championship standings after the race  drivers' championship standings   note: only the top five positions are included.  references  external links  official pit stop data  official race broadcast  grand prix of indianapolis 2016 grand prix of indianapolis grand prix of indianapolis
lou solverson is a fictional character in the fx television series fargo. he first appeared as a supporting character in the first season (set in 2006-2007), played by keith carradine, and then as a main character in season two (set in 1979), played by patrick wilson.  character summary  season 1 solverson has a minor role in season one. in 2006, he is a retired police officer, and is the owner of lou's coffee shop. a widower, he appears as a wise mentor to his daughter, molly solverson who is investigating the crimes of lorne malvo and lester nygaard. he makes several references to his career, in particular the events of 1979, most notably when he describes the sioux falls massacre to malvo.  season 2 in 1979, lou solverson is a state trooper with the minnesota state police and based out of luverne, minnesota. he often works alongside his father-in-law, rock county sheriff hank larsson. one night, the two are assigned to investigate a triple murder at the waffle hut on the outskirts of luverne. he notes the strangeness of the shooter (rye gerhardt -- youngest son of the gerhardt crime family) apparently fleeing the scene in a different vehicle after parking his own car outside the diner, with another car belonging to a judge based out of fargo, north dakota. unbeknownst to lou and hank, rye was hit by beautician peggy blumquist's car after he had run into the road after seeing a ufo. peggy, not knowing what to do, returns home with rye stuck through her windshield, where he is later killed by her husband, local butcher ed blumquist, in self-defense. at home, lou is dealing with the worsening cancer of his wife betsy while also raising their 6-year-old daughter, molly.  later, while driving his family into town, lou stops by the crime scene where betsy finds rye's gun in some weeds. while at the scene, he notices kansas city mob associates mike milligan and brothers gale and wayne kitchen observing him intently, and calls ahead so hank can detain them and intimidate them into leaving the state. later that night, lou sees a light on inside the closed butcher shop and finds ed working late, as he is disposing of rye's body in a meat grinder.  lou asks to buy some bacon for molly, while ed does his best to distract lou from noticing a severed finger that had rolled under a door. lou eventually leaves
unaware of what was really happening, and ed finishes grinding rye's body as strange flashing lights illuminate the exterior of the butcher shop.  the fingerprints on the gun are later found out to be rye's, which leads to a wider manhunt for him. after identifying his suspect, lou travels to fargo and meets detective ben schmidt to collaborate on the investigation. they encounter a local typewriter salesman named skip sprang, who had enlisted rye to talk judge mundt into un-freezing an account, acting suspiciously outside of her office. they ask him some questions but decide to let him go. they then visit the gerhardt farm and have a tense encounter with the family (floyd, the matriarch in charge after her husband otto suffered a stroke -- bear, the quieter, level-headed middle child -- and dodd, the hot-tempered elder son vying for control of the family), who also know schmidt along with his mother. lou then visits skip's typewriter store on his own, only to encounter milligan and the kitchen brothers searching the place. after a tense mexican standoff, lou quickly leaves the shop.  when he returns home, he learns that betsy's cancer is spreading, but learns that betsy can take part in an experimental drug trial for a drug called xanadu, but there is a 50/50 chance that betsy would receive a placebo. lou hesitates for betsy to participate in the trial, but betsy accepts anyway. after escorting presidential nominee ronald reagan's campaign bus to the state line, lou links the blumquists to rye's death after ed and peggy stage a wreck to cover up the damage and take the car to local mechanic sonny greer, and sonny catches gerhardt enforcer hanzee dent inspecting the car. growing suspicious of the blumquists' role in rye's death, he visits their house to question them. they refuse to talk to him and ask him to leave. peggy takes lou's warning about the gerhardts' reputation for violence very seriously and plans to leave town, but ed insists on staying. the next night, the gerhardts send hitman virgil bauer, accompanied by bear gerhardt's son charlie, to kill ed in the shop. after charlie hesitates to finish the job, ed kills virgil in self-defense, charlie is wounded and arrested, and the shop burns to the ground.  while lou is interrogating ed at the police station, bear leads a lynch mob that lays siege to the station in an attempt to take charlie back. to avoid anyone from
getting hurt, lou sends out ed's new lawyer, family friend karl weathers, to tell bear and his men that he is also acting as charlie's lawyer and that he will be given a reduced sentence due to him being a minor and not actually hurting anyone. after bear accepts that it would be worse for charlie to be a wanted fugitive for the rest of his life, he and his men leave. meanwhile, lou spirits ed out the rear entrance of the police station, but ed eventually escapes with hanzee in close pursuit as lou is picked up by hank. while ed and lou are escaping, dodd and two of his men enter the blumquist home hunting for peggy after hank (who stayed behind with peggy) was knocked out by hanzee earlier. she hides in the basement and manages to bludgeon one man to death. after dodd accidentally kills the other man, she sneaks up and electrocutes him with his own cattle prod before tying him up. ed arrives and they flee in dodd's car after placing him in the trunk.   the next day, lou and schmidt arrive at the gerhardt family farm after a funeral for rye and otto (who was killed in an ambush on the farm by milligan while dodd and bear were in luverne), and take floyd in for questioning at the fargo police headquarters. she accepts a deal that will give her family amnesty for previous crimes they have committed in exchange for information about how the kansas city syndicate runs their drug operation.  ed, peggy and a captive dodd arrive at a cabin in the woods outside sioux falls that once belonged to ed's uncle in order to figure out their next move. after repeated attempts to call and make a deal with the gerhardts for the safe return of dodd in exchange for their own safety fall flat, ed calls milligan offering dodd in exchange for protection from the gerhardts, to which milligan agrees. ed informs him to meet at the motor motel the next day. hanzee eventually tracks them down, but kills dodd instead after a lifetime of being treated like his dog. hanzee asks peggy for a haircut, but just as she's about to start, lou and hank arrive. hanzee fires at them before peggy stabs him in the shoulder with her scissors. he manages to escape, but ed and peggy are captured. due to them not being in their own jurisdiction, lou and hank call in the south dakota state police.  when ed reveals his upcoming rendezvous with milligan to hand over the now-dead dodd, state police captain jeb cheney hatches a dangerous
scheme for ed and peggy to wear a wire for the meeting, hoping to implicate milligan and the kansas city mob. when lou strongly opposes this idea knowing that milligan would see right through the ruse, cheney has him escorted to the state line, though hank elects to stay behind. after ed and peggy agree to the plan in exchange for lesser criminal charges, the police set up an ambush at the motel meeting spot, only for hanzee to observe their actions from a distance. hanzee later uses this to betray the gerhardts, informing them that kansas city is holding dodd captive. meanwhile, lou, who has discovered that hanzee killed a gas station attendant, goes back to warn the other police that hanzee likely knows of their plan. at the same time, lou is unaware that betsy has fallen seriously ill back home. lou arrives at the motel too late as the gerhardts have ambushed cheney and the other officers and massacred all of them, only realizing their mistake when hank and ben begin shooting back while in uniform. he fires at bear, who is unfazed, and begins to wrestle with and strangle lou before the same ufo that rye encountered appears above them, distracting nearly everyone left alive. lou uses the opportunity to shoot a distracted bear in the head, while peggy uses a pot of boiling coffee to wound hanzee in order to escape with ed. hanzee fires at them, causing the ufo to leave. lou begins firing at hanzee, but misses and he escapes. with the entire gerhardt family and all of the south dakota cops now dead except for a wounded hank and schmidt, lou continues his pursuit of both the blumquists and hanzee.  hanzee chases ed and peggy, with lou not far behind attempting to bring an end to the madness. hanzee kills a passing motorist whom ed and peggy flag down before wounding ed as he and peggy flee down an alley. the pair take shelter in a supermarket, hiding in the meat locker. while holed up inside, ed confides to peggy that he does not think they will make it as a couple, upsetting her. he then succumbs to blood loss, causing peggy to break down mentally and hallucinate that hanzee has lit the supermarket on fire in an attempt to smoke them out, when in actuality, hanzee has fled the scene. lou, now aided by schmidt, arrives and subdues peggy. while driving her back to minnesota to be prosecuted, the two converse about life and death, with peggy finally accepting her fate. meanwhile
, betsy has recuperated from the side-effects of the experimental cancer drug she was taking. when lou returns home, he, betsy, and hank gather around as the three ponder what the future holds for each of them and for their family.  production patrick wilson was noah hawley's initial pick for the role of a younger lou solverson in season two. wilson, along with the rest of the cast, worked with a dialect coach prior to the filming of the series.  hawley purposely tried to distinguish the younger version of lou and the older version of lou, saying that "patrick wilson has a confidence and he's comfortable, but he's not keith carradine yet. this journey will get him to a place where he can finally settle into his life and really be back from the war."  reception wilson received critical acclaim for his performance. matt zoller seitz of vulture compared wilson's performance to robert de niro's academy award winning performance as a young vito corleone in the godfather part ii, writing: "it's a remarkable feat of acting continuity, in that it syncs up perfectly with carradine's performance in season one, yet it never feels like wilson is doing an impression. he's a young man, and he's in good shape, but he carries himself like an older, heavier one, as if weighed down by burdens he hasn't fully acknowledged because he's not ready yet. you get a sense of a personality, perhaps a soul, in the process of evolving. it deserves to be likened to robert deniro's work as the young vito corleone in the godfather: part ii. i don't make that comparison lightly. he's that good."  alan sepinwall of hitfix, wrote that "there's still that irrepressible sense of upper midwestern politeness, even in the face of horror and madness, and given spectacular voice by wilson. he doesn't much resemble the young keith carradine, but the role's otherwise a perfect fit for the contrast between his bland, square-jawed demeanor and the obvious intelligence that's always flashing underneath. watching lou slowly but surely untangle the mess he's been handed gives you a fine idea of where molly got her investigative gifts."  accolades for his performance in season 2, wilson was nominated for the critics' choice television award for best actor in a movie/miniseries and the golden globe award for best actor - miniseries or television film.  references  television characters introduced in 2014 fictional police officers fictional republicans (united states
) fictional united states navy personnel fictional vietnam war veterans fargo (tv series) characters
the 2016 nampala attack was an armed assault against a malian army base in the niono cercle subdivision of the segou region of mali on 19 july 2016, that left at least 17 government soldiers dead and 35 others injured. the macina liberation front, al-qaeda in the islamic maghreb and the ethnic fula (or fulani) militant group 'national alliance for the protection of fulani identity and the restoration of justice' (ansiprj) claimed joint responsibility.  background   following the 2011 libyan civil war, tuaregs fighting in the libyan arab republic's libyan army fled to northern mali with large stockpiles of heavy weapons. the ensuing insurgency quickly led to the azawadi declaration of independence and consequent armed islamist insurgency by mojwa and ansar dine against the secular mnla. this led to operation serval being launched by france in january 2013, followed by operation barkhane in 2014 once major fighting was over.  the country remained in a fragile state even after the french intervention, with militants attacking staging attacks in the capital bamako as well as in kidal during march 2015. in november of that same year a co-ordinated attack against the radisson blu hotel in bamako resulted in more than 20 casualties, most of them hostages. a week later militants attacked a minusma base in kidal, killing 3 and injuring dozens.  attacks continued at a steady pace during 2016. militants attacked and briefly captured a minusma police base in timbuktu on 5 february, killing a high-ranking malian commander, while suffering four casualties themselves. on 11 february suspected islamist militants attacked a customs post in the town of mopti, central mali, killing two civilians and a customs officer. a truck bombing at a minusma base in kidal killed at least 5 un peacekeepers and injured more than 30 others on 12 february. gunmen attacked a military checkpoint in lere on 24 february, killing at least three soldiers and wounding two others. on 12 april three french soldiers were killed and another was wounded when a bomb exploded under their vehicle near tessalit. minusma suffered two major attacks during may - five chadian peacekeepers were killed and three others wounded in an ambush near aguelhok on the 18th, while five togolese soldiers were killed and another was injured in a similar attack near sevare on the 29th. on 1 june four un mission staff were killed in two separate mortar attacks near gao, including a chinese peacekeeper, as well as a french expert and two local security guards.
two malian soldiers were killed in an attack near dinangourou on 10 july, while the deputy mayor of the ouro modi commune was shot on the following day in mopti.  attack   the attack took place in the early hours of 19 july 2016, at a malian army camp near the town of nimpala, in the rural commune of nampalari near the border with mauritania, about 500 km northeast of the capital bamako. a group of heavily armed men reportedly overran the base, and set parts of it on fire, as malian troops retreated to nearby diabaly in order to regroup, according to army spokesman souleymane maiga. the attackers also partially burned and looted the nearby town of nampala, before fleeing.  a group called the macina liberation front, reportedly linked to ansar dine, initially claimed responsibility for the attack on social media. the same group had previously claimed several attacks on the army during 2015. later a representative of ansiprj contacted the associated press and claimed they had carried out the attack in response to attacks by government forces against fula civilians. the group's spokesman oumar aldjana claimed they had gained possession of several trucks and stockpiles of ammunition, and that only three of the militants had been wounded during the assault.  malian army spokesman maiga later confirmed that three groups had staged the co-ordinated attack, with al-qaeda in the islamic maghreb attacking from the north, the macina liberation front waited in ambush outside town, and the ethnic fula group joining from the southeast.  reactions   in the immediate aftermath of the attack, president ibrahim boubacar keita called a security meeting together with the country's prime minister modibo keita and the commanders of the armed forces.  defence minister tieman hubert coulibaly later appeared on state television to confirm the death toll, saying that the armed forces will "make sure that this coordinated terrorist attack ... is met with an appropriate response".  on 20 july the government declared a three-day period of mourning for the 17 soldiers killed and extended a state of emergency for 10 days across the entire country.  see also   2015 bamako hotel attack, an attack against a radisson blu hotel in bamako in which mlf and aqim co-ordinated with al-mourabitoun.  november 2015 kidal attack, an assault against a minusma base carried out by ansar dine.  references  terrorist incidents in mali in 2016 mass murder in 2016 conflicts in 2016 islamic terrorism in mali terrorist
incidents attributed to al-qaeda in the islamic maghreb segou region july 2016 events in africa
wilfie is a nickname of:   wilf greaves (born 1935), canadian retired boxer  wilfrid reid (1884-1973), english golfer and golf course designer  wilfrid wilfie starr (1908-1976), canadian national hockey league player  see also  wilf  lists of people by nickname hypocorisms
general oscar eugene nygren (26 september 1872 - 12 january 1960) was a swedish army officer. he was chief of the general staff from 1933 to 1937 and acting chief of the army from 1936 to 1937. although retired from active service in 1937, he was called back in service after world war ii broke out, as commander of the 2nd army corps. he finally retired from the army in 1941.  career  military career nygren was born on 26 september 1872 in gavle, sweden, the son of richard nygren, a city broker, and his wife thekla (nee engelmark). he became a second lieutenant in halsinge regiment (i 14) in 1892 and studied at the royal swedish army staff college from 1896 to 1898 and was a cadet at the general staff from 1898 to 1901. nygren became a lieutenant at the general staff in 1902 and was promoted to captain in 1904. he was adjutant to the head of the ministry of land defence from 1907 to 1910 and was transferred to halsinge regiment (i 14) in 1909. nygren was major at the general staff in 1912 and was appointed chief of staff in the iii army division in 1912.  he was vice chief of the military office of the ministry of land defence in 1915 and was lieutenant colonel at the general staff in 1915. nygren was appointed head of the royal swedish army staff college in 1917 and conducted study trips to germany, bulgaria, turkey, the western front and the macedonian front in 1918. back in sweden he became colonel in the general staff in 1919. he was appointed chief of the military office of the ministry of land defence in 1919 conducted a study trip to the italian front in 1922. back in sweden he became executive officer of the svea life guards (i 1) in 1923.  nygren was appointed commanding officer of the 7th infantry brigade in 1926 and commandant in boden fortress in 1928. he was promoted to major general in 1929 and was appointed military commander of upper norrland's troops in 1930. nygren was after that chief of the general staff from 1933 to 1937 and acting chief of the army from 1936 to 1937 when he was promoted to lieutenant general. he was promoted to general upon retirement in 1937 and was placed in the reserve the year after. in 1939, when world war ii broke out, nygren was appointed commander of the newly formed 2nd army corps in upper norrland and in 1940 he became commanding officer of the same in west sweden. nygren left the position in august 1941.
other work nygren was military member of the supreme court from 1934 to 1954. he was military expert for the committee on the league of nations and for sweden's representative at the league of nations' council meeting in geneva in 1922. nygren was swedish member of the league of nations' permanent advisory military committee and assistant to the swedish representative in the league of nations' disarmament commission. he was also chairman of the board the pension insurance company allmanna pensionsforsakringsbolaget.  nygren became a member of the royal swedish academy of war sciences in 1919.  personal life in 1905 he married jenny ohgren (1886-1959), the daughter of radmannen g. a. ohgren and ina (nee granberg). he was the father of colonel hans nygren (1906-1982).  death nygren died on 12 january 1960 in stockholm and was buried in norra begravningsplatsen in stockholm.  dates of rank 11 november 1892 - underlojtnant 7 august 1896 - lieutenant 2nd class 9 november 1900 - lieutenant 1st class 31 december 1904 - captain 20 november 1909 - captain 1st class 10 january 1913 - major 17 december 1915 - lieutenant colonel 16 july 1919 - colonel 22 november 1929 - major general 1 july 1936 - lieutenant general 1 october 1937 - general  awards and decorations nygren's awards:  swedish   commander grand cross of the order of the sword   commander 2nd class of the order of vasa   knight of the order of the polar star   landstorm gold medal (landstorm-guldmedalj)   voluntary motor transportation corps' gold medal  (frivilliga automobilkarens guldmedalj)  foreign   grand cross of the order of the white rose of finland   grand cross of the order of polonia restituta   commander 1st class of the order of the dannebrog   commander with star of the order of st. olav   commander with sword of the order of saint alexander   1st class of the order of merit   commander of the legion of honour   commander of the order of the black star   commander of the order of the crown of italy   commander with sword of the order of orange-nassau   3rd class with sword of the order of osmanieh   knight 1st class of the order of the zahringer lion   knight of the 3rd class of the order of the crown   knight 3rd class of the order of saint anna   1st class of  the austrian red cross' badge of honor  references  external links article in
svenskt biografiskt lexikon   1872 births 1960 deaths swedish army generals chiefs of army (sweden) burials at norra begravningsplatsen people from gavle members of the royal swedish academy of war sciences commanders grand cross of the order of the sword commanders second class of the order of vasa knights of the order of the polar star
prince rui of the first rank, or simply prince rui, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). it was also one of the 12 "iron-cap" princely peerages in the qing dynasty, which meant that the title could be passed down without being downgraded.  the first bearer of the title was dorgon (1612-1650), the 14th son of nurhaci, the founder of the qing dynasty. he was awarded the title in 1636 by his half-brother, hong taiji, who succeeded their father as the ruler of the qing empire. after dorgon's death, the shunzhi emperor abolished the prince rui peerage. in 1778, the qianlong emperor not only restored the prince rui peerage, but also granted it "iron-cap" status. chunying (died 1800), a sixth-generation descendant of dorgon's younger brother, dodo, was selected to inherit the prince rui title. the title was passed down over 12 generations and held by eight persons.  members of the prince rui peerage   dorgon (1st), nurhaci's 14th son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1636 to 1650, posthumously honoured as prince rui zhong of the first rank (睿忠親王)  duo'erbo (多爾博; 1643 - 1673) (2nd), dodo's fifth son, adopted as dorgon's son, held the title of a beile from 1657 to 1673, posthumously honoured as prince rui of the first rank in 1778  su'erfa (蘇爾發; d. 1708), duo'erbo's second son, held the title of a beizi from 1673 to 1700, demoted to zhenguo gong in 1700, posthumously honoured as prince rui of the first rank in 1778  saile (塞勒; d. 1729), su'erfa's eldest son, held the title of a third class defender general from 1699 to 1708, promoted to bulwark duke in 1708, posthumously honoured as prince rui of the first rank in 1778  gongyibu (功宜布; d. 1746), saile's fifth son, held the title of a bulwark duke from 1744 to 1746, posthumously honoured as fuguo keqin gong in 1746 and then as prince rui keqin of the first rank (睿恪勤親王) in 1778  rusong (
如松; d. 1770), gongyibu's son, held the title prince xin of the second rank from 1762 to 1770, posthumously honoured as prince xin ke of the second rank in 1770 and then as prince rui ke of the first rank (睿恪親王) in 1778  chunying (淳穎; d. 1800) (3rd), rusong's son, held the title of a bulwark duke from 1771 to 1778, promoted to prince rui of the first rank in 1778, posthumously honoured as prince rui gong of the first rank (睿恭親王)  bao'en (寶恩; 1777 - 1802) (4th), chunying's eldest son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1801 to 1802, posthumously honoured as prince rui shen of the first rank (睿慎親王)  duan'en (端恩; 1788 - 1826) (5th), chunying's second son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1802 to 1826, posthumously honoured as prince rui qin of the first rank (睿勤親王)  renshou (仁壽; 1810 - 1864) (6th), duan'en's son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1826 to 1864, posthumously honoured as prince rui xi of the first rank (睿僖親王)  dechang (德長; 1838 - 1876) (7th), renshou's son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1865 to 1876, posthumously honoured as prince rui que of the first rank (睿愨親王)  kuibin (魁斌; 1864 - 1915) (8th), dechang's son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1876 to 1915, posthumously honoured as prince rui jing of the first rank (睿敬親王)  zhongquan (中銓; 1892 - 1939), kuibin's son, held the title prince rui of the first rank from 1915 to 1939 zhongming (中銘), kuibin's son  yinian (頤年; 1916 - 1987), zhongquan's nephew, given but abandoned and rejected the title. extinction of his line.  family tree  see also  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing
dynasty princely peerages peerages of the plain white banner extinct qing dynasty princely peerages
grace yun yi is a professor of the university of western ontario where she currently holds a tier i canada research chair in data science. she was a professor at the university of waterloo, canada, where she holds a university research chair in statistical and actuarial science. her research concerns event history analysis with missing data and its applications in medicine, engineering, and social science.  education and career yi earned bachelor's and master's degrees from sichuan university, china, in 1986 and 1989. she moved to canada and continued her studies with another master's degree from york university in 1996, and a ph.d. from the university of toronto in 2000 under the supervision of donald a. s. fraser. she came to waterloo as a postdoctoral researcher, and then continued there as an assistant professor in 2001.  recognition yi won the crm-ssc prize of the statistical society of canada in 2010. her work with xianming tan and runze li won the canadian journal of statistics award for 2016.  in 2015 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for research excellence in developing statistical theory and methods, particularly in missing and mis-measured data; for important contributions to biostatistics; and for excellence in statistical education and mentoring students." she is also a fellow of the institute of mathematical statistics. she was elected chair of the asa lifetime data science section in 2021.  selected publications  cook, r. j., zeng, l. and yi, g. y. (2004), "marginal analysis of incomplete longitudinal binary data: a cautionary note on locf imputation." biometrics, 60: 820-828.   lindsay, b. g., yi, g. y., & sun, j. (2011). "issues and strategies in the selection of composite likelihoods." statistica sinica, 71-105.   yi, g. y., & cook, r. j. (2002). "marginal methods for incomplete longitudinal data arising in clusters." journal of the american statistical association, 97(460), 1071-1080.    lang wu, wei liu, grace y. yi, and yangxin huang, "analysis of longitudinal and survival data: joint modeling, inference methods, and issues" journal of probability and statistics, vol. 2012, article id 640153, 17 pages, 2012.    cook, r. j., kalbfleisch, j. d., & yi, g. y. (2002). "a generalized mover-stayer model
for panel data." biostatistics, 3(3), 407-420.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people chinese statisticians canadian statisticians women statisticians canadian women academics york university alumni university of toronto alumni university of waterloo faculty university of western ontario faculty fellows of the american statistical association fellows of the institute of mathematical statistics
the 1959-60 sk rapid wien season was the 62nd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  references  1959-60 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
the mars (nato reporting name frog-2, grau index 2k1) was a soviet solid-fuel tactical missile system with a range of 7 to 18 km.  the chief designer was n. p. mazur.   weight of launcher: 15 tons, based on pt-76 tank  rocket engine: 3r1  missile diameter: 1.75 m  guidance: by launcher  maximum speed of launcher: 35 km/h  history  background  at 3 meters long, between 0.7 and 1.5 meters in diameter, and weighing 4-5 tons, the earliest nuclear weapons were so large and heavy that they could only be carried by strategic bombers such as the united states  boeing b-29 superfortress, convair b-36 peacemaker  and the soviet tupolev tu-4. however, use of these aircraft in the 1950s for nuclear strikes on forward positions of enemy troops in a theatre of military operations was impractical. by the mid 1950s, nuclear weapons development led to increases in their power and technical characteristics while reducing their diameters and masses, and therefore creating the possibility of using them in a variety of delivery vehicles. in particular, tactical strike aircraft became suitable carriers, but their application depended on factors including time of day, weather conditions, and the intensity of enemy air defenses. additionally, the response time of tactical strike aircraft was very large. under these circumstances, it became desirable to provide army units with their own means of delivering nuclear warheads. in the 1950s, these means included traditional artillery pieces, recoil-less rifles, and unguided tactical missiles. work was carried out on all three of these options in the united states, and, after some delay, in the soviet union too.  the available nuclear weapons technology did not allow the creation of sufficiently compact ammunition, so artillery solutions, including the american 280-mm t131 gun and soviet 406-mm sm-54 (2a3) rifled gun and 420-mm sm-58 (2b1) smoothbore mortar, became too heavy and clumsy - the 2a3 weighed 55 tonnes, the t131 weighed 75.5 tonnes. these pieces could not be towed over bridges, could not navigate urban and rural streets, and required a lot of time to prepare for firing.  in both the us and the ussr, the alternative to these too-heavy artillery shells was unguided tactical rockets as carriers of nuclear weapons. the main advantages were:   inertial
guidance systems of the 1950s and 60s at ranges of around 30 km could achieve accuracies of only around 500-1000 m (cep), comparable with the accuracy of unguided rockets.   the use of radio guidance was undesirable because it made the rocket vulnerable to interference. additionally, it required the establishment of a guidance post on the ground or in the air.  active homing systems for marine and air targets had not yet been developed in the early 1950s, let alone systems designed for ground targets.  references  rocket artillery cold war weapons of the soviet union unguided nuclear rockets of the soviet union military vehicles introduced in the 1950s
the 1989-90 league of ireland first division season was the fifth season of the league of ireland first division.  overview the first division was contested by 10 teams and waterford united f.c. won the division.  final table  first division play-off after waterford united and sligo rovers finished level on points, a play-off was held to decide the overall title winners.  1st leg  2nd leg  waterford united won 2-1 on aggregate and were declared champions.  see also  1989-90 league of ireland premier division  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2 ireland
the ghost falls in love (spanish: el fantasma se enamora) is a 1953 mexican comedy film directed by rafael portillo and starring gloria marin, abel salazar and ramon gay.  cast  gloria marin   abel salazar  ramon gay   aurora walker   arturo soto rangel   carlos riquelme  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films mexican comedy films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by rafael portillo mexican black-and-white films
leandro matias martinez montagnoli (born april 21, 1987 in buenos aires, argentina) is a professional argentine footballer who currently plays for defensores de belgrano.  references  external links    1987 births living people argentine footballers argentine expatriate footballers association football defenders defensores de belgrano footballers ferro carril oeste footballers estudiantes de buenos aires footballers club atletico atlanta footballers club atletico colegiales (argentina) players tampico madero f.c. footballers primera nacional players primera b metropolitana players ascenso mx players argentine expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in mexico footballers from buenos aires
hnlms prins van oranje () was a prins van oranje-class minelayer of the royal netherlands navy build by n.v. internationale scheepsbouw mij. 'de maas'. she was designed for service in the dutch east indies. she was sunk during world war ii by japanese forces.  construction prins van oranje was laid down on 20 september 1930. she was launched on 10 july 1931 and commissioned on 2 february 1932.  service history on 9 march 1932 prins van oranje left the netherlands for the dutch east indies.  in december 1941 she laid a minefield near tarakan.  in an attempt to reach surabaja, she was caught by japanese forces on 12 january 1942. the japanese destroyer  and patrolboat 38 sunk prins van oranje with gunfire, causing the loss of 102 sailors lives.  sources    1931 ships mine warfare vessel classes minelayers of the royal netherlands navy world war ii minelayers of the netherlands world war ii shipwrecks in the pacific ocean
marie "pandora" medina, aka pandora or pandora marie (born marie faye medina, july 25, 1981), is an american dancer, choreographer, and actress who specializes in the "tutting" and "popping" dance styles. she is a member of the style elements crew, the lxd and venus fly. pandora's career has spanned over fifteen years, primarily as part of the popping dance funk culture.  dance career  pandora marie has worked with musicians such as common and pharell, justin bieber, trey songs, flo-rida, sean kingston, david guetta, steve aoki, skrillex, lmfao and gina rodriguez. pandora is best known for the step up 3d "tutting" scene, a standing ovation on so you think you can dance, a microsoft surface commercial, her lead role as autumn in jon m chu's the lxd (the legion of extraordinary dancers), and her supporting role as karla in the youssef delara and michael d. olmos movie filly brown. the danish magazine gaffa described pandora as "one of the best electric boogie dancers in the world" after her performance in the danish show "menneske robotten" ("the human robot"). the reviewer went on to state that pandora marie, and her fellow dancer koichiro mori made the dance look easy despite being technically difficult.  in recent years pandora marie has expanded her work into the theater and other creative directions. she has performed in theatrical pieces for little box of hope and ds2dio, and has worked with cirque du soleil and cirque eloize. pandora has also held the principal role of clara in the nutcracker in tivoli, copenhagen, denmark and performed many principal roles in award-winning theatrical productions throughout the us, scandinavia, and europe.  personal life  pandora is the co-founder and artistic director of little box of hope (a production company / creative collective) alongside her fiance. she also has worked with g koop and darrick quali-d fields and has original songs, poetry and music sold on itunes, spotify and other music platforms.  pandora is both native american and mexican american. her native tribes are chickasaw and choctaw and she is a citizen of the chickasaw nation.  in 2011 pandora marie participated in the "rise up and dance" project, teaching kids to dance as a way to give them a purpose in life. she said, "dancing is what saved me from going down the wrong path. i want to help and inspire kids
just like i was inspired by the dancers in my neighborhood".  working with jon m. chu in 2009 pandora was contacted on youtube and personally cast by now you see me 2 director jon m. chu in the role of autumn in the popular online dance series the lxd: legion of extraordinary dancers. this relationship led to many other collaborations such as disney's step up film series, nasa's earth chorus, the conan o'brien show, bmw mini cooper, google zietgeist conference and more. her dancing in step up 3d was described by one reviewer by stating that pandora marie "will have you so hypnotized with her finger tuts... it'll be nothing short of bewitching".  awards and honors pandora was presented with an award for "most outstanding female popper" and has held titles in dance competitions all around the world ("battles") radiotron, uk b. supreme, freestyle style session, how the west was won, take it personal, floor wars, and more. she is considered to be an influential figure in street-dance culture.  filmography  the lxd step up 3d filly brown  television and film roles feature films  step up 3d (principal dancer, director: jon m. chu)  filly brown (actress / principal dancer, edward j. olmos productions) web series  the lxd (actress / principal dancer, director: jon m. chu) television  so you think you can dance (featured dancer, fox)  conan o'brien show (featured dancer, choreographer: chris scott) short films  s2dio city "the bell" (principal dancer, director: chris scott)  dancing with devotion (principal dancer, director: alexander mercado)  the siren (principal dancer; director: roxy shih)  music videos   justin bieber - "santa claus is coming to town" (featured dancer)  justin bieber - "eenie meenie" (featured dancer)  the mast - "upupup" (principal dancer)  david guetta / flo rida - "club can't handle me" (featured dancer)  trey songz - "already taken" (featured dancer)  common - "universal mind control" (featured dancer)  theatrical and concert stage performances  theater performances  cirque du soleil / cirque eloize "i.d." show (principal dancer, international tour)  carmen (principal dancer, denmark)  the nutcracker (principal dancer, denmark)  mennes
ke robotten  ("human robot"; principal dancer, denmark)  "awaken tour" (pandora marie solo act, national tour)  "illuminated manuscript" ("ereshkigal"; featured dancer) concerts  so you think you can dance (featured performer, los angeles)  bmw mini cooper (featured performer, china)  google zeitgeist conference (featured performer, london)  hulu upfront (featured performer, new york)  microsoft surface (featured performer, china)  roskilde festival, 2010 (featured performer, denmark)  artists: skrillex, steve aoki, afrojack, lmfao (featured performer, las vegas)  commercials  microsoft surface (featured dancer)  the cosmopolitan rose.rabbit.lie (principal dancer)  otra vez / sierra nevada (principal dancer)  references  external links style elements crew page pandora marie official website little box of hope  1981 births american female dancers american dancers living people popping dancers 21st-century american women
aurora, also known as aurora fountain, is an outdoor 1986 stainless steel fountain and sculpture by ruth asawa, installed at bayside plaza (188 embarcadero) at howard street in san francisco, california.  see also   1986 in art  references  1986 establishments in california 1986 sculptures fountains in california outdoor sculptures in san francisco stainless steel sculptures in the united states steel sculptures in california south of market, san francisco
alejandro vences villegas (born august 20, 1990 in toluca, state of mexico) is a professional mexican footballer who currently plays for potros uaem  references  external links    1990 births living people mexican footballers association football goalkeepers union de curtidores footballers club necaxa footballers tampico madero f.c. footballers alebrijes de oaxaca players potros uaem footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players people from toluca footballers from the state of mexico
events from the year 1700 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   13 july - treaty of constantinople, russian tsardom relieved from paying the annual tribute to the crimean khanate paid since the occupation of muscovy by the golden horde. 30 november - battle of narva, an early battle in the great northern war where a russian siege force was defeated by a swedish relief army under charles xii of sweden.  births   anastasija trubetskaya, courtier (died 1755)  deaths  references    years of the 17th century in russia
cylindrepomus atropos is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
carlton hardy (born july 24, 1971) is an american college baseball coach. he is the head baseball coach at savannah state university.  college  hardy played college baseball at grambling state from 1989 to 1991. at grambling state, hardy was first team all conference in 1990 and 1991. he graduated from grambling state with a b.s in computer information systems and a master of science degree in sports administration.  career  hardy played for the martinsville phillies in 1991 where he had a batting average of .133 and a fielding percentage of .921 at third base.  hardy's coaching career began in 1998 as the head coach of talladega of the naia. he coached talladega college for two seasons, leading the team to a 34-18 record (and the most wins in school history up to that point).  hardy's next head coaching job was as the head coach of olivet where he coached from 2000 to 2005 and turned around the program hardy coached olivet to a 105-123 record in his 6 seasons with the club.  savannah state hired hardy as their head coach in 2006.    in july 2006, hardy's alma mater, grambling state hired hardy as their head coach before hardy decided to stay with savannah state.   hardy is currently a member of the usa today sports board of coaches.  references  external links  savannah state profile  1971 births living people baseball third basemen grambling state tigers baseball players martinsville phillies players olivet comets football coaches olivet comets baseball coaches savannah state tigers baseball coaches talladega tornadoes baseball coaches baseball players from los angeles
susan villiers (1863-1945) was an english nurse who specialised in caring for patients with infectious diseases in fever hospitals, also known as isolation hospitals. she was a leading figure in the drive for better nursing education and a better-organised nursing profession, especially for fever nurses. as well as being matron of various fever hospitals, she was on the council of the fever nurses association from its beginning in 1908, and she played important roles in various other organisations working towards registration of qualified nurses, better training and other improvements for the profession.  family and training  susan alice villiers, born on 6 september 1863 in edmonton, middlesex, was the daughter of mary ann (nee sharp) and john fitzpatrick villiers, a barrister, and had a private education. her middle-class family with nine children was not wealthy, especially after her father died when she was eleven years old. in 1892 she began three years of training at st bartholomew's hospital (barts), london, and worked there as a staff nurse for a year after she qualified, until march 1896. the matron at barts was isla stewart who was known to believe that the best possible post-qualification training for matrons was working with the metropolitan asylums board (mab), which ran institutions catering for the sick poor of london, including isolation hospitals. this may have encouraged villiers to embark on a career with a series of mab fever hospitals. she was one of the first generation of nurses to have the opportunity to train under a matron who was fully trained herself.  career   after leaving barts, villiers spent the rest of her career specialising in fever nursing, although she took on other commitments too.  fever hospitals in london  in 1896 she took a post as night superintendent at the south eastern fever hospital in deptford, and shortly after was made assistant matron at the brook hospital, shooter's hill. by 1901 villiers was matron of the fountain fever hospital in tooting. after that she moved to the park hospital, hither green before becoming matron of the south western hospital, stockwell in 1913.  during the nineteenth century the metropolitan asylums board (mab) built a number of fever hospitals around london. while patients received medical care they were removed from crowded neighbourhoods and isolated to help prevent epidemics. these hospitals were for working-class people from poor quality urban housing. more prosperous patients would generally be nursed at home. hospital buildings had separate wards, which were often separate blocks, for different illnesses, and they were designed to provide plenty of fresh air with lofty ceilings and "air
ing courts" where patients could spend time outside, in sunshine as far as possible.  the fever nurses association  the fever nurses association (fna) was established early in 1908 and later that year villiers was elected to be on its first council. the mab decided to give the organisation its approval in 1909. one of the fna's main aims was to create a universal standard of training for fever nurses in suitable, approved uk hospitals. the fna wanted these to be large hospitals with a medical officer in residence. for trainees with no previous experience they planned a two-year training course and, for general nurses who had already trained at an approved hospital, a one-year training in fever nursing. villiers was directly involved in these proposals, which led to an fna-approved syllabus being drawn up in july 1909. villiers also wanted the association to ensure there was formal recognition for nurses who had both general and fever training when state registration of nurses was eventually established (1919). once this happened and the general nursing council (gnc) was set up, villiers was the fever nurse representative on it from 1920 to 1937. during this time her work on gnc committees helped lead it to adopt the educational curricula and other schemes drawn up by the fna.  other organisations and retirement when state registration of nurses was introduced villiers was the seventh name in the new register. she was on the matrons' council of great britain and ireland and represented it on the public health committee of the national council of women of great britain in 1926-1927. she was also a fellow of the british college of nurses, was on their council, and was their delegate supporting equal suffrage at the national union of societies for equal citizenship (previously called the national union of women's suffrage societies). she worked for the right of nurses to manage their own professional bodies, and said, "people [are] very fond of managing women's affairs, especially those of nurses."  she retired in 1927 at the age of sixty-three after two troublesome episodes with her health in 1922 and 1924. this meant moving out of hospital quarters and she went to live near some of her siblings in hertfordshire where she served as a magistrate in stevenage, as did two of her sisters and a brother.  villiers belonged to the guild of st barnabas, an anglican society offering spiritual support to nurses, and became its superior in 1935. during the second world war she was the hon. treasurer of the national council of nurses of great britain.  late in life she moved to hindhead, surrey where
she died on 29 march 1945. two weeks later the guild of st barnabas arranged a requiem mass for her at the church of st alban the martyr, holborn.  susan villiers was described as charming, able to promote "a strong professional policy with gentle persistence". and someone who "quietly supported the interests and rights of women" while rising to "the height of her profession".  references   nurses from london british women nurses 1863 births 1945 deaths people from edmonton, london
love remains is a studio album by american singer and songwriter hillary scott, a founding member of american country music trio lady a, released in collaboration with her father, lang scott; her mother, linda davis; and her sister rylee scott (credited collectively as 'the scott family'). it was released on july 29, 2016, by emi nashville and capitol nashville. the faith-based record incorporates elements of gospel, bluegrass, country, and pop genres and is produced by ricky skaggs.  upon release, love remains achieved moderate commercial success, including a top-10 debut on the all-genre billboard 200 chart. it additionally bowed atop the billboard christian albums chart and at number 2 on the country albums chart. the record's lead single, "thy will", was released in april 2016 and reached the top of the hot christian songs chart that summer.  love remains won the grammy for best contemporary christian music album and "thy will" won for best contemporary christian music performance/song at the 59th annual grammy awards.  background and recording in 2011, following the passing of hillary scott's grandfather, w.m. scott jr., the scott family leaned on their faith and used traditional hymns to comfort one another. they began recording the songs with the intention of sharing those messages of joy with friends and family. this project eventually developed into a full-length album which includes classic hymns, popular contemporary christian songs, and newly-written original tracks such as the project's lead single, "thy will". this song was inspired by a miscarriage scott experienced in 2015 while on tour. the family reached out to ricky skaggs to produce the album and skaggs additionally provided instrumentation and guest vocals. christian musicians steven curtis chapman and cheryl white also make appearances.  singles "thy will", one of three tracks co-written by scott, was released to digital retailers, country radio, and christian radio on april 22, 2016, as the album's lead single. its music video premiered june 20, 2016. the song has since reached 27 on the hot country songs chart and number one on the hot christian songs chart.  other songs "beautiful messes", "love remains", and "still" all debuted on the hot christian songs chart following the album's release at 28, 38, and 50, respectively.  commercial performance love remains debuted at number 7 on the billboard 200 with 28,000 units sold in its first week. it was the fourth best-selling album of the week. the album also debuted at numbers one and 2 on the top
christian albums and top country albums charts, respectively. the album has sold 165,000 copies in the united states as of december 2017.  internationally, the album debuted at number 69 in canada and at number 81 in australia.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year end charts  release history  references  2016 albums hillary scott (singer) albums linda davis albums universal music group albums albums produced by ricky skaggs
rabbi doniel lander is the chancellor of touro college and the rosh yeshiva of yeshivas ohr hachaim. he holds a ba from touro college an mba from new york university. he was a private student of the late rabbi joseph b. soloveitchik, from whom he has private ordination.  he is the son of rabbi dr. bernard lander.  references  touro college faculty yeshiva university alumni living people year of birth missing (living people)
transnational care refers to provision of care by family relations and friends across national borders.  defining and understanding transnational care loretta baldassar has defined transnational caregiving as "the exchange of support and care across distance and national borders." transnational caregiving has emerged in to prominence due to globalization and global aging. workforce mobility has increased not only across countries, but also with internal migration within countries. typically people move from rural to urban areas for better opportunities. there are other factors like civil unrest in certain populations that can cause similar migration (see section on displaced person). thus, the definition by baldassar is broader and more largely applicable. with increased lifespan, more children are involved in care of older parents. in addition in china, it's one-child policy has left families without siblings to share the responsibilities of caring for older parents.  some of the factors that affect transnational caregiving like gender, socio-economic class and culture are similar to factors for local care. in transnational settings, there are also factors such as travel, finances and governmental relations that have a great influence.  components of transnational care 5 models of caregiving:  economic: providing financial support to one's family back home.  accommodation: providing a place to live.  personal: providing companionship.  practical: providing direct nursing care in activities of daily living.  childcare, emotional and moral support  role of communication in transnational care information and communication technology (ict) has affected provision of transnational care. communication is an essential component in facilitating and enhancing the process of care. ict has allowed transnational care to be reciprocal in nature and communication has enhanced intergenerational contact.  recent covid-19 pandemic has brought the anxieties of immigrant community into focus, and immigrants all over the world are seeking mental health care from their home countries through international physician networks.  telemedicine through international medical organizations like www.medinexo.com are effective in bridging this gap in care of transnational care providers.  references  human migration
the county of macdonnell is one of the 49 cadastral counties of south australia. it was proclaimed in 1857 and named for the south australian governor at the time of proclamation, richard graves macdonnell. it is located in the upper south-east of the state from the limestone coast at kingston to the victorian border. this includes the following contemporary local government areas of the state:  kingston district council (excluding coastal portions at north and south)  naracoorte lucindale council (north third)  tatiara district council (small south portion)  hundreds  the county of macdonnell is divided into the following 15 hundreds:  hundred of duffield (coorong, taratap)  hundred of landseer (taratap)  hundred of peacock (keilira)  hundred of marcollat (marcollat)  hundred of parsons (padthaway)  hundred of beeamma (western flat)  hundred of geegeela (bangham)  hundred of glen roy (padthaway, keppoch)  hundred of lacepede (west range, kingston)  hundred of murrabinna (blackford)  hundred of minecrow (keilira)  hundred of woolumbool (woolumbool)  hundred of lochaber (lochaber)  hundred of hynam (cadgee)  hundred of binnum (binnum, kybybolite)  references  macdonnell
alyxandria treasure (born may 15, 1992 in prince george, british columbia) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the high jump. she competed in the high jump event at the 2015 pan american games in toronto, where she finished 7th.  in 2016, she jumped her personal best of 1.93, thereby qualifying for the olympic team. she placed 17th in the rio de janeiro olympics.  personal best  achievements  references  external links  1992 births living people athletes (track and field) at the 2015 pan american games pan american games track and field athletes for canada sportspeople from prince george, british columbia canadian female high jumpers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada world athletics championships athletes for canada athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for canada
the embassy of palestine in cairo () is the diplomatic mission of palestine in egypt. it is located at 24 al nahda street in dokki, cairo.  ambassadors  see also  list of diplomatic missions in egypt. list of diplomatic missions of palestine.  references  egypt palestine egypt-state of palestine relations
the dangerous drugs (forfeiture of property) act 1988 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to make provisions for offences in relation to property, and for the seizure and forfeiture of property, connected with activity related to offences under this act, the dangerous drugs act 1952, or any foreign law corresponding to these acts or to the provisions for offences under these acts; for assistance to foreign countries in relation to matters connected with dangerous drugs; and for matters connected with the aforesaid provisions.  preamble preamble of the act provides the following considerations: whereas action has been taken and further similar action is being threatened by a substantial body of persons both inside and outside malaysia-  to organize and carry out trafficking in dangerous drugs, including their importation into and exportation from malaysia;  to spread the dependence on dangerous drugs among various classes of people in malaysia, thereby causing widespread detriment to public health, security, safety and morals; and  to acquire property by trafficking in dangerous drugs and to utilize property for such trafficking; and whereas the action taken and threatened is prejudicial to public order in malaysia; and whereas parliament considers it necessary to stop such action;  structure the dangerous drugs (forfeiture of property) act 1988, in its current form (1 december 2011), consists of 7 parts containing 63 sections and 2 schedules (including no amendment).  part i: preliminary  part ii: offences in relation to property  part iii: forfeiture of property of liable persons  part iv: arrest, investigation and seizure  part v: forfeiture  part vi: evidence and procedure  part vii: assistance to a foreign country  schedules  references  external links  dangerous drugs (forfeiture of property) act 1988   1988 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
brunsberg may refer to:  people  arlo brunsberg (born 1940), american professional baseball player victoria brunsberg (born 1991), australian team handball player  places  brunsberg (harburg), a high hill in northern germany
rudy anthony dawson forbes (born may 8, 1988) is a costa rican professional soccer player for sporting san jose.  career  club  puerto rico fc in may 2016, dawson signed with nasl side puerto rico fc. he was released at the end of the 2017 season.  career statistics  references  external links     1988 births living people puerto rico fc players a.d. san carlos footballers association football defenders liga fpd players north american soccer league players costa rican footballers costa rica under-20 international footballers costa rica youth international footballers people from limon province
balkan elite road classics is a one-day road cycling race held annually since 2016. it is part of uci europe tour in category 1.2.  winners  references  cycle races in albania uci europe tour races recurring sporting events established in 2016 summer events in albania
suvarnavathi reservoir also called as suvarnavathi dam is located near chamarajanagar, karnataka, 14 km from chamarajanagara town. the dam is built across suvarnavathi river which is a sub-river of kaveri river. the dam is adjacent to the punajanur state forest which serve as border between karnataka and tamil nadu states.  dam  suvarnavathi  dam is located near attugulipura village, chamarajanagara taluk, karnataka, india. it is adjacent to chamarajangara to coimbatore national highway 948, 14 km from chamarajanagara town.  a reservoir across river suvarnavathi was built in 1977 on the highway between chamarajanagar-coimbatore. next to it is the chikkahole reservoir. these are called twin reservoirs. both of them are in the back drop of beautiful nature. fisheries and horticulture are the main occupation of this area. the added attraction of these reservoirs are seen in the wandering of wildlife all around. suvarnavathi reservoir has a storage capacity of 1258.78 cmtr. it was constructucted at a cost of about 299.60 lakhs in 1977.  length of the dam is 1,170 m, height of the dam is 25 m (above the river bed level), total water storage is 1.26 tmc, there is a link channel between suvarnavathi to its small brother dam called chikkahole dam, which is 3 km from suvarnavathi dam.  suvarnavathi dam is the main source of water for irrigation in nearby villages, it will be full by end of the monsoon season and dry during summer season. main water in flow to dam is from rain in the punanjanur forest area during monsoon. also it is the source of drinking water for wild animals as it is adjacent to the thick forest.  attraction  suvarnavathi dam is the main source of water for irrigation in nearby villages, it is full by end of the monsoon season and dry during summer season. main water in flow to dam is from rain in the punanjanur forest area during monsoon. also it is the source of drinking water for wild animals as it is adjacent to the thick forest.  how to reach  many bus and train services are available from bangalore to chamarajanagara town it is around 180 km, from chamarajanagara town to suvarnavathi dam many local transport bus available.  nearby places to visit   bandipura reserve forest bhavanisagar dam biligir
iranga hills himavada gopalaswamy hill k gudi reserve forest gaganachukki and barachukki falls male mahadeswara hill satyamangalam  references   waterresources.kar.nic.in karnataka.com  dams in karnataka reservoirs in karnataka geography of chamarajanagar district tourist attractions in chamarajanagar district year of establishment missing
the 1923 copa ibarguren was the 11° edition of this national cup of argentina. it was played by the champions of both leagues, primera division and liga rosarina de football crowned during 1923.  boca juniors (primera division champion) faced rosario central (liga rosarina champion) at sportivo barracas stadium. although they had won their league titles in 1923, the final was played in 1924.  qualified teams   note  venue  match details  references  i 1923 in argentine football 1923 in south american football
the rml 64-pounder 58 cwt guns (converted) were british rifled muzzle-loading guns converted from obsolete smoothbore 32-pounder 58 cwt guns.  design  when britain adopted rifled ordnance in the 1860s it still had large stocks of serviceable but now obsolete smoothbore guns. gun barrels were expensive to manufacture, so the best and most recent models were selected for conversion to rifled guns, for use as second-line ordnance, using a technique designed by william palliser. the palliser conversion was based on what was accepted as a sound principle that the strongest material in the barrel construction should be innermost, and hence a new tube of stronger wrought iron was inserted in the old cast iron barrel, rather than attempting to reinforce the old barrel from the outside.  this gun was based on the cast-iron barrel of the dundas pattern 32-pounder 58 cwt gun, which previously fired a 32-pound solid shot. the gun was bored out to 10.5 inches and a new built-up wrought iron inner tube with inner diameter of 6.29 inches was inserted and fastened in place. the gun was then rifled with 3 grooves, with a uniform twist of 1 turn in 40 calibres (i.e. 1 turn in 252 inches), and proof fired. the proof firing also served to expand the new tube slightly and ensure a tight fit in the old iron tube.  ammunition   the 64-pounder used three types of ammunition. this ammunition was common to the other natures of 64 pounder gun - the 71 cwt converted gun and the 64 cwt gun. although many guns were sited on coastal artillery positions, their effectiveness again armour of heavily armoured ships was limited.  common shell could be used against buildings or fortifications, shrapnel shell (for use any infantry or cavalry) and case shot (for close range use against 'soft' targets. ignition was through a copper lined vent at the breech end of the gun. a copper friction tube would be inserted and a lanyard attached. when the lanyard was pulled the tube would ignite, firing the gun. a number of different fuzes could be used enabling shells to either burst at a pre-determined time (and range), or on impact.  guns were fired using a silk bag containing a black powder propellant. a typical rate of fire was one round every three minutes.  deployment   this nature of gun was designed for both land and sea service, though for the latter it was increasingly obsolete not long
after introduction. it was used widely all across the british empire.  it did see naval service (ns) with the naval forces of the colony of victoria in australia aboard the ex ship-of-the-line nelson. to maintain maximum capability the gunners aboard the nelson were drilled for both smooth bore and rifled ammunition, and so the guns retained the original millar pattern sights as well as having one set of r.m.l. sights placed to the right of the centre line - otherwise the sighting arrangement normally used in british service was a single set of r.m.l. sights on the centre line. the mountings used on this vessel were wood naval standing carriages.  the gun mountings for coast defence in both british and colonial locations varied enormously. carriages in both wood and iron varied in complexity - from a simple wooden garrison carriage, right through to some guns mounted on moncrieff disappearing gun carriages. some, such as the depressing type carriages at gibraltar were unique to their location. some mountings were designed on mountings which provided some protection for their crews. many were mounted on wooden garrison carriages on open platforms and were used for gun drill, as well as range practice.  they became obsolete for coast artillery use in 1902, whereupon many were scrapped and disposed of.  gallery  see also   rml 64 pounder 64 cwt gun the equivalent new design frontline 64-pounder gun  surviving examples   gun number 70, dated 1871 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 101, dated 1873 at royal armouries, fort nelson, hampshire, uk  gun number 188, dated 1873 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 220, dated 1873 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 225, dated 1873 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 237 dated 1874, one of a pair located in digby, nova scotia, canada  gun number 255, dated 1873 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 327 dated 1874 - one of a number of examples on iron depression carriages, gibraltar - from flickr  gun number 401, dated 1874, prince edward battery, prince edward island, canada  gun number 414, dated 1874, prince edward battery, prince edward island, canada  gun number 420, dated 1874, prince edward battery, prince edward island, canada  gun number 448, dated 1874
, prince edward battery, prince edward island, canada  gun number 507, dated 1875 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 550, dated 1876 on wooden garrison standing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 577, dated 1875 on wooden garrison standing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 581, dated 1876 at royal armouries, fort nelson, hampshire, uk  gun number 611, dated 1876 on wooden traversing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 615, dated 1877 at fort cumberland, new brunswick, canada  gun number 619, dated 1875 at royal armouries, fort nelson, hampshire, uk  gun number 622, dated 1875 on wooden garrison standing carriage, royal citadel, plymouth, devon, uk  gun number 774, dated 1877 preserved at scaur hill fort, bermuda  gun number 798, dated 1877 at king's square, st george bermuda  several guns from hmvs nelson can be found scattered around the state of victoria, australia in public areas, as well as two on military premises at victoria barracks, melbourne, and one at fort queenscliff.  notes  references  bibliography   treatise on the construction and manufacture of ordnance in the british service. war office, uk, 1879  external links    handbook for the 64 - pr. r. m. l. converted guns of 58 and 71 cwt. l. s., 1887, 1892, 1898, 1902 at state library of victoria  160 mm artillery coastal artillery victorian-era weapons of the united kingdom disappearing guns
gennadi kazansky (1 december 1910 - 14 september 1983) was a sovietn film director of the soviet era.  life and career gennadi kazansky was born on november 18 (december 1), 1910 in voronezh. he studied art history at the leningrad institute of art history and graduated in 1930. he was an associate professor of the practice of cinematic arts at the russian state institute of performing arts. his film career began in 1931. he worked at the film studio lenfilm, first as an assistant director, since 1937 - as a director.  during the war, along with other employees of lenfilm and mosfilm, he was evacuated to almaty, where he worked at the film studio kazakhfilm, then at mosfilm.  in 1944 he returned to leningrad and continued to work at lenfilm. from 1946 to 1947 he was an employee of the ashkhabad film studio, then again returned to lenfilm, where he worked for the rest of his life.  in 1956 he staged a children's film old khottabych based on the fairy tale by lazar lagin, which won a number of prizes at international festivals.  the film amphibian man, codirected with vladimir chebotaryov, became the leader of soviet distribution in 1962 (65.5 million viewers). it is little-known in the west, but has become a cult classic in soviet union.  gennadi kazansky died on september 14, 1983. he was buried at the bogoslovskoe cemetery in leningrad.  selected filmography  rimsky-korsakov (1952)  an ardent heart (1953)  old khottabych (1956)  amphibian man (1962)  the snow queen (1966)  new year adventures of masha and vitya (1975)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1910 births 1983 deaths writers from voronezh soviet screenwriters soviet film directors communist party of the soviet union members burials at bogoslovskoe cemetery
plaikner is a german surname. notable people with the surname include:  michael plaikner, italian luger of austrian origin walter plaikner (born 1951), italian luger and coach of austrian origin  german-language surnames
wiehler is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   hans wiehler (1930-2003), german botanist  zygmunt wiehler (1890-1977), polish composer and director  see also  wiehle  wieler
the 2017 wimbledon championships was a grand slam tennis tournament that took place at the all england lawn tennis and croquet club in wimbledon, london, united kingdom. the main draw matches commenced on 3 july 2017 and concluded on 16 july 2017. roger federer won the gentlemen's singles title for a record eighth time, surpassing pete sampras and william renshaw, who both won the gentlemen's singles title seven times. garbine muguruza won the ladies' singles title.  the 2017 tournament was the 131st edition of the championships, the 50th in the open era and the third grand slam tournament of the year. it is played on grass courts, organised by the all england lawn tennis club and the international tennis federation and is part of the atp world tour, the wta tour, the itf junior tour and the nec tour.  andy murray was the defending champion in the gentlemen's singles but lost to sam querrey in the quarterfinals. two-time defending ladies' singles champion serena williams did not defend her title, as she ended her season in april due to pregnancy.  tournament   the 2017 wimbledon championships was the 131st edition of the tournament and was held at the all england lawn tennis and croquet club in london.  the tournament was run by the international tennis federation (itf) and was included in the 2017 atp world tour and the 2017 wta tour calendars under the grand slam category. the tournament consisted of men's (singles and doubles), women's (singles and doubles), mixed doubles, boys (under 18 - singles and doubles) and girls (under 18 - singles and doubles), which is also a part of the grade a category of tournaments for under 18, and singles and doubles events for men's and women's wheelchair tennis players as part of the uniqlo tour under the grand slam category. the tournament was played only on grass courts; main draw matches were played at the all england lawn tennis and croquet club, wimbledon; qualifying matches were played at the bank of england sports ground, in roehampton.  point and prize money distribution  point distribution  below are the tables with the point distribution for each discipline of the tournament.  senior points  wheelchair points  junior points  prize money  the wimbledon total prize money for 2017 has been increased to £31.6m. the winners of the men's and women's singles titles will earn £2.2m. prize money for the men's and women's doubles and wheelchair players were also increased for the 2017 competition.  * per team
day-by-day summaries  singles seeds  gentlemen's singles  seeds are adjusted on a surface-based system to reflect more accurately the individual player's grass court achievement as per the following formula, which applies to the top 32 players according to the atp rankings on 26 june 2017:  take entry system position points at 26 june 2017.  add 100% points earned for all grass court tournaments in the past 12 months (20 june 2016 - 25 june 2017).  add 75% points earned for best grass court tournament in the 12 months before that (22 june 2015 - 19 june 2016).  rank and points before are as of 3 july 2017. because the 2017 tournament took place one week later than in 2016, points defending includes results from both the 2016 wimbledon championships and the tournaments from the week of 11 july 2016 (hamburg, newport and bastad).  withdrawn players  ladies' singles  seeds are based on the wta rankings as of 26 june 2017.    rank and points before are as of 3 july 2017. because the tournament takes place one week later than in 2016, points defending includes results from both the 2016 wimbledon championships and the tournaments from the week of 11 july 2016 (bucharest and gstaad).  withdrawn players  doubles seeds  gentlemen's doubles   1 rankings were as of 26 june 2017.  ladies' doubles   1 rankings were as of 26 june 2017.  mixed doubles   1 rankings were as of 3 july 2017.  champions  seniors  gentlemen's singles     roger federer def.   marin cilic, 6-3, 6-1, 6-4  ladies' singles     garbine muguruza def.  venus williams, 7-5, 6-0  gentlemen's doubles     łukasz kubot /  marcelo melo def.  oliver marach /  mate pavic, 5-7, 7-5, 7-6(7-2), 3-6, 13-11  ladies' doubles     ekaterina makarova /  elena vesnina def.  chan hao-ching /  monica niculescu, 6-0, 6-0  mixed doubles     jamie murray /  martina hingis def.  henri kontinen /  heather watson, 6-4, 6-4  juniors  boys' singles     alejandro davidovich fokina def.  axel geller, 7-6(7-2), 6-3  girls' singles     claire liu def.  ann li, 6-2, 5-7, 6-2
boys' doubles     axel geller /  hsu yu-hsiou def.  jurij rodionov /  michael vrbensky, 6-4, 6-4  girls' doubles     olga danilovic /  kaja juvan def.  caty mcnally /  whitney osuigwe, 6-4, 6-3  invitation  gentlemen's invitation doubles     lleyton hewitt /  mark philippoussis def.  justin gimelstob /  ross hutchins, 6-3, 6-3  ladies' invitation doubles     cara black /  martina navratilova def.  arantxa sanchez vicario /  selima sfar, 6-2, 4-6, [10-4]  senior gentlemen's invitation doubles     jacco eltingh /  paul haarhuis def.  richard krajicek /  mark petchey, 4−6, 6−3, [10−6]  wheelchair events  wheelchair gentlemen's singles     stefan olsson def.  gustavo fernandez, 7−5, 3−6, 7−5  wheelchair ladies' singles     diede de groot def.  sabine ellerbrock, 6-0, 6-4  wheelchair gentlemen's doubles     alfie hewett /  gordon reid def.  stephane houdet /  nicolas peifer, 6-7(5-7), 7-5, 7-6(7-3)  wheelchair ladies' doubles     yui kamiji /  jordanne whiley def.  marjolein buis /  diede de groot, 2-6, 6-3, 6-0  main draw wild card entries  the following players received wild cards into the main draw senior events.  gentlemen's singles    marton fucsovics   tommy haas    brydan klein   cameron norrie   denis shapovalov   james ward  ladies' singles    katie boulter   naomi broady   zarina diyas   bethanie mattek-sands   laura robson   heather watson  gentlemen's doubles   jay clarke  /  marcus willis  scott clayton /  jonny o'mara  brydan klein /  joe salisbury  thanasi kokkinakis /  jordan thompson  ken skupski  /  neal skupski  ladies' doubles   katie boulter  /  katie swan  harriet dart  /  katy dunne  jocelyn rae  /  laura robson  mixed doubles   liam broady /  naomi broady  dominic ingl
ot /  laura robson  joe salisbury /  katy dunne  ken skupski /  jocelyn rae  neal skupski /  anna smith  main draw qualifier entries  the qualifying competitions take place in bank of england sports centre, roehampton started from 26 june 2017 and to be scheduled to end on 29 june 2017. however, due to heavy rain on the second day, it has now extended to 30 june 2017.  gentlemen's singles   gentlemen's singles qualifiers   simone bolelli   stefanos tsitsipas   taylor fritz   peter gojowczyk   andrey rublev   alexander ward   andrew whittington   lukas rosol   illya marchenko   daniel brands   sergiy stakhovsky   ruben bemelmans   christian garin   sebastian ofner   stefano travaglia   nicolas jarry  lucky losers   alexander bublik  ladies' singles   ladies' singles qualifiers   petra martic   alison van uytvanck   ons jabeur   francoise abanda   anna blinkova   aryna sabalenka   anastasia potapova   irina falconi   polona hercog   bianca andreescu   arina rodionova   marina erakovic  gentlemen's doubles   gentlemen's doubles qualifiers   johan brunstrom /  andreas siljestrom   kevin krawietz /  igor zelenay   hugo nys /  antonio sancic   hsieh cheng-peng /  max schnur  lucky losers   sander arends /  peng hsien-yin   ariel behar /  aliaksandr bury   dino marcan /  tristan-samuel weissborn   ilija bozoljac /  flavio cipolla  ladies' doubles   ladies' doubles qualifiers   natela dzalamidze /  veronika kudermetova   paula kania /  nina stojanovic   monique adamczak /  storm sanders   ipek soylu /  varatchaya wongteanchai  lucky losers   lesley kerkhove /  lidziya marozava   jessica moore /  akiko omae   ashley weinhold /  caitlin whoriskey  protected ranking the following players were accepted directly into the main draw using a protected ranking:   men's singles   ricardas berankis (pr 92)   ernests gulbis (pr 99)   andreas haider-maurer (pr 63)   jerzy janowicz (pr 94)   thanasi kokkinakis (pr 81)   john millman (pr 81)   dmitry tursunov (pr 89)
women's singles   victoria azarenka (pr 6)   sabine lisicki (pr 92)   magdalena rybarikova (pr 108)   sloane stephens (pr 26)  withdrawals  the following players were accepted directly into the main tournament, but withdrew with injuries, suspensions or personal reasons.   gentlemen's singles  nicolas almagro → replaced by  ernests gulbis  pablo carreno busta → replaced by  facundo bagnis  chung hyeon → replaced by  marco cecchinato  pablo cuevas → replaced by  alexander bublik  dan evans → replaced by  henri laaksonen  david goffin → replaced by  evgeny donskoy  yoshihito nishioka → replaced by  dudi sela   ladies' singles  vania king → replaced by  ana bogdan  yaroslava shvedova → replaced by  magdalena rybarikova  laura siegemund → replaced by  danka kovinic  samantha stosur → replaced by  hsieh su-wei  ajla tomljanovic → replaced by  chang kai-chen  serena williams → replaced by  richel hogenkamp  retirements   gentlemen's singles   steve darcis   novak djokovic   alexandr dolgopolov   denis istomin   martin klizan   nick kyrgios   feliciano lopez   dudi sela   janko tipsarevic   viktor troicki   ladies' singles   bethanie mattek-sands   anastasia potapova  references  external links       wimbledon championships wimbledon championships wimbledon championships wimbledon championships wimbledon championships july 2017 sports events in the united kingdom
ed landing  (born 10 august 1949 in milwaukee) is an american geologist and paleontologist.  education  as an undergraduate, landing studied at the university of wisconsin, where he gained his bsc, later attending graduate school at the university of michigan, earning his msc and phd.  career he held post doctoral positions at university of waterloo, ontario; u. s. geological survey, denver; and the university of toronto. he then spent his career as a new york state paleontologist and curator of paleontology at the new york state museum in albany, where he became an emeritus in 2015.  field work his field work in america and canada (as well as in mexico, argentina, england, wales, germany, morocco, israel, jordan, siberia, south china) led to over 250 publications and 11 books that focus on the origin and precise uranium-lead dating (u-pb) geochronology of the oldest metazoans, the biostratigraphy of the early paleozoic, recognition of ancient climate cycles and the proposal that high sea levels lead to heightened global warming (hyperwarming)(1,2) and reconstruction of avalonia as a separate, unified continent by the terminal ediacaran. he was a co-proposer of the ediacaran-cambrian global stratotype at fortune head, eastern newfoundland, the lowest divisions of the cambrian period (the terreneuvian epoch and fortunian age), and recovered earth's oldest bryozoan from rock sections in oaxaca state, southern mexico.  selected publications in june 2010, an article in the magazine geology for which landing was the lead author was noted for providing the first definitive proof that "all major animal groups with internal and external skeletons appeared in the cambrian geological period (543-489 million years ago)."  awards  in 1978, best paper, journal of sedimentary petrology (1977 vol., by b.h. wilkinson and e. landing).  in 1990, best paper, journal of paleontology (1989 volume, by e. landing, p. myrow, a.p. benus, and g.m. narbonne).  in 1993, he was recognized with a state of new york legislative resolution, assembly no. 479, by assemblyman englebright et al. in recognition of establishing precambrian-cambrian global stratotype.  in 2008, he received the r.j.w. douglas award for career contributions to geological synthesis of canada, the first time the award was given to u. s. citizen and
to a paleontologist.  in 2009, he was named a fellow (geology and geography section) for the american association for the advancement of science.  in 2013, he became a fellow of geological society of america.  references  external links     ed landing at new york state museum, albany (retrieved 17 july 2016)  american association for the advancement of science "global hyperwarming: a conversation with ed landing"   "why global warming will speed up-a new climate factor"  media sanctuary.  researchgate profile and publication list  1949 births living people american paleontologists conodont specialists university of michigan alumni
khao thong railway station is a railway station located in khao thong subdistrict, phayuha khiri district, nakhon sawan. it is located 235.493 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 31 october 1905 as part of the northern line extension from lop buri to pak nam pho.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
the 2016 paul hunter classic was a professional ranking snooker tournament that took place between 24 and 28 august 2016 at the stadthalle in furth, germany. it was the fourth ranking event of the 2016/2017 season.  named in honour of former professional snooker player paul hunter, this was the first time for which the event was a ranking tournament, having previously been a minor-ranking event of the players tour championship. it was also the first of the two ranking events of the season, along with the gibraltar open (also a former european tour event), which would be open to amateurs and would form the new amateur order of merit.  ali carter was the defending champion, but he was defeated 3-4 by yan bingtao in the last 32.  thepchaiya un-nooh made the 119th official maximum break in the second frame of his last 32 match against kurt maflin. it was un-nooh's first professional maximum break, having missed the final black on two occasions the previous season.  mark selby won his 8th ranking title, defeating tom ford 4-2 in the final.  prize fund  the breakdown of prize money for this year is shown below:   winner: €25,000  runner-up: €12,000  semi-final: €6,000  quarter-final: €4,000  last 16: €2,300  last 32: €1,200  last 64: €700   non-televised highest break: €  televised highest break: €  total: €125,000  the "rolling 147 prize" for a maximum break stood at £40,000.  main rounds  top half  section 1  section 2  section 3  section 4  bottom half  section 5  section 6  section 7  section 8  finals  final  amateur pre-qualifying these matches were played in furth on 24-25 august 2016. all matches were best of 7 frames.  round 1  round 2  round 3  century breaks  amateur pre-qualifying stage centuries   119  kishan hirani  109  gerard greene  106, 104  andy hicks   106  ashley hugill  105  ian glover  televised stage centuries   147, 141, 120  thepchaiya un-nooh  136, 128, 120, 102, 101  tom ford  136, 106  michael holt  132, 116  liang wenbo  132  zhou yuelong  127  mark selby
123  zhao xintong  121  ali carter  120, 101, 100  mark allen  120  matthew stevens  118, 110  kurt maflin  118, 105  david gilbert   112  joe swail  111  li hang  110  dominic dale  109  andrew higginson  107  zack richardson  104  robbie williams  104  jack lisowski  104  martin o'donnell  104  mark davis  101  mei xiwen  100  fergal o'brien  references  2016 2016 in snooker 2016 in german sport august 2016 sports events in germany
serena williams was the two-time defending champion, but withdrew before the tournament began due to injury.  angelique kerber was in contention for the world no. 1 ranking, which she would have attained had she won the title. however, by losing in the final she remained no. 2.   karolina pliskova won her sixth wta singles title, defeating kerber in the final, 6-3, 6-1.  the two would play each other three weeks later, in the final of the us open. having already claimed the no. 1 ranking following williams' defeat in the semifinals, kerber avenged her loss by beating pliskova in three sets.  seeds all seeds received a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  bottom half  section 3  section 4  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  lucky losers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  seventh qualifier  eighth qualifier  ninth qualifier  tenth qualifier  eleventh qualifier  twelfth qualifier  references  qualifying draw  external links  western and southern open 2016 western & southern open
helicopter maritime strike squadron seven nine (hsm-79) "griffins" is a united states navy helicopter squadron based at naval air station north island, california, united states.  the unit operates the sikorsky mh-60r seahawk which provides deployed aircraft and crews to ships of the sixth fleet.  the unit has a detachment deployed to naval station rota, spain, by the end of 2022 the entire squadron will permanently deploy to rota, to support european based ships.  references  helicopter maritime strike squadrons of the united states navy
the trombone sound is an album by american jazz trombonist kai winding featuring performances recorded in 1956 for the columbia label.  reception  the allmusic awarded the album 3 stars.  track listing  "whistle while you work" (frank churchill, larry morey) - 2:41  "my little girl" (richard rodgers) - 2:45  "blue room" (rogers, lorenz hart) - 2:23  "nutcracker" (wayne andre, victor feldman) - 2:49  "breezin' along with the breeze" (haven gillespie, richard a. whiting, seymour simons) - 2:22  "jim and andy's" (lou stein) - 2:58  "old school ties" (bob brookmeyer) - 2:45  "captain kut-cha" (nat pierce) - 3:14  "every girl is my valentine" (tom talbert) - 2:54  "under a blanket of blues" (al cohn) - 4:08  "sunday" (chester conn, benny krueger, jule styne, ned miller) - 3:18  "nice work if you can get it" (george gershwin, ira gershwin) - 3:11  "i want to be happy" (vincent youmans, irving caesar) = 2:58  personnel kai winding - trombone, arranger wayne andre, carl fontana - trombone dick leib - bass trombone roy frazee - piano, celeste kenny o'brien - bass jack franklin - drums  references  columbia records albums kai winding albums 1956 albums
bizzotto is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  frank bizzotto (born 1971), australian rules footballer giulio bizzotto (born 1996), italian footballer mara bizzotto (born 1972), italian politician romolo bizzotto (born 1925), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
lawrence grey is a canadian-american film and television producer.  grey launched his production company grey matter productions in 2013. grey matter's first film, lights out, was released by warner bros. and new line cinema on july 22, 2016.  career  early career  grey launched his producing career as a studio executive, serving as executive vice president and co-head of production for mandate pictures from 2009-2011 and senior vice president of production at universal pictures from 2006‑2009.  from 2000 to 2006, grey was an executive at fox searchlight pictures. during his time there, grey found the script for juno, which he packaged with director jason reitman and oversaw through production. while at searchlight, grey also oversaw the acquisition and production of the action-fantasy films night watch and day watch from russian filmmaker timur bekmambetov, who went on to direct wanted. he developed diary of a mad black woman, tyler perry's first film. additionally, he oversaw the hills have eyes from french director alexandre aja, johnson family vacation, the ringer, and 28 weeks later.  grey co-produced the 2012 film hope springs starring meryl streep, tommy lee jones and steve carell and directed by david frankel (the devil wears prada). he was the executive producer of the 2013 film last vegas, which starred michael douglas, robert de niro, morgan freeman, and kevin kline, and was directed by jon turteltaub.  grey matter productions   grey launched his production banner grey matter productions in 2013.  most recently, grey matter released its first feature film, lights out, which is based on the short film by david sandberg. sandberg also directed the feature adaptation, which was written by eric heisserer and produced alongside james wan's production banner atomic monster. the film was released by new line cinema on july 22, 2016 with a $21.6 million opening in its first weekend. as of september 7, 2016, lights out has grossed $66.3 million in north america and $70.9 million in other territories for a worldwide total of $137.2 million.  previously, grey sold section 6, a film about the untold origin story of mi6, to universal. the project will be directed by joe cornish (attack the block). grey also developed and sold winter's knight, a viking‑themed reimagining of the santa claus legend to sony pictures. the film will be directed by joachim ronning & espen sandberg, directors of the academy award®-nominated kon-t
iki and the upcoming installment of the pirates of the caribbean franchise.  in 2014, grey matter announced a partnership with the bruce lee estate to develop and produce the definitive biopic on the famous martial artist.  in 2016, stx entertainment and grey matter productions announced an upcoming thriller starring sylvester stallone. the film, written by dan casey and to be directed by jim mickle, will go into production in late 2016. grey matter also announced that it will produce a feature film about the recent panama papers scandal.  steven soderbergh is also producing with an eye to direct, alongside scott z. burns. the film is to be based on an upcoming book secrecy world that pulitzer prize-winning journalist jake bernstein is writing for henry holt and company. grey is teamed with anonymous content to develop, finance and produce. grey, michael sugar, burns and soderbergh are producing.  personal life   a native of montreal, quebec, canada, grey is a graduate of georgetown university law center. grey is active in the american israel public affairs committee (aipac).  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) canadian film producers
events from the year 1706 in russia  incumbents  monarch - peter i  events   vyshny volochyok waterway  births  deaths  references    years of the 18th century in russia
squerryes estate is a vineyard, estate, and location of squerryes court, a grade i listed building in kent, england. it is a producer of english sparkling wine.  estate  the squerryes estate consists of 2,500 acres and borders surrey to the west and greater london to the north.  all the farms on the estate have been amalgamated into a single agricultural unit. there is a 200-head dairy herd which produces milk for marks & spencer. the calves are reared on the farm; the friesian heifers join the herd, while the bull calves and cross-bred heifers are grown for beef using the natural grazing in the park. the arable land produces millet, wheat, malting barley, and oilseed rape, together with oats, barley and beans for the cattle.  one third of the estate is woodland. almost all of the traditional farm buildings have been restored and converted into offices or workshops, which are let to local businesses. some farm houses and cottages have been refurbished and let to tenants.  squerryes sparkling wine  in 2004, a champagne house visited the estate to research the possibilities of expanding their english production, finding that the lower chalk band and upper greensand bore similarities to the cote des blancs region of champagne. when the house pulled out of negotiations, the warde family decided to continue with the endeavour, planting 35 acres of grapes in 2006. the initial champagne clones planted were chardonnay, pinot noir and pinot meunier. in 2008 the vines began to fruit, and the estate took its first reserves in 2010. squerryes is one of the last vineyards in europe to harvest its crop, and the wine is left on the lees for at least 30 months.  in may 2015, squerryes' 2010 brut won two gold medals in two of the most competitive and esteemed international blind tasting competitions, the sommelier wine awards and international wine challenge. in 2016, squerryes brut 2011 won the national trophy for best english sparkling wine in tom stevenson's 'champagne and sparkling wine world championships'. the label currently sells two styles of the sparkling wines: brut and rose. the brut is composed of 45% chardonnay, 35% pinot noir, and 20% pinot meunier. the rose is composed of 75% pinot noir and 25% pinot meunier.  brewery  in 2013, the westerham brewery announced its plans to relocate to the
squerryes estate, expanding its production area to 6,000 square feet. the brewery produces the scotney range of beers using hops from the national trust's only hop garden at scotney castle, lamberhurst, kent. the westerham brewery co. ltd was established in 2004 to make craft beer in kent. established at the national trust's grange farm in crockham hill, the brewery has won multiple awards and supplies over 300 pubs in kent, london, and the south east. in a press release, the brewery indicated its intention to continue supplying spent hops from the brewery to the gardeners at chartwell and spent brewers grains to feed the squerryes dairy herd.  references  geography of kent wineries of england westerham
the days of swiss linguistics (dsl) (german: tage der schweizer linguistik (tsl), french: journees de linguistique suisse (jls), italian: giornate della linguistica svizzere (gls)) is a series of linguistics conferences held biennially at one of the swiss universities on behalf of the swiss linguistics society (ssg). it is an international conference for researchers from switzerland, europe and beyond. so far, 11 editions of the conference have been carried out, the next conference will take place in 2022 at universite de lausanne.  see also  list of linguistics conferences  references  linguistics conferences
dhawankhan nishan  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of dhawankhan nishan.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, dhawankhan nishan has a total number of 45 houses and population of 234 of which include 118 males and 116 females. literacy rate of dhawankhan nishan is  73.93%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 23 which is 9.83% of total population of dhawankhan nishan, and child sex ratio is approximately  1556, higher than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 87 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of dhawankhan nishan which includes 65 males and 22 females. according to census survey report 2011, 100.00% workers describe their work as main work and 0.00% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 2.14% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list   villages in kapurthala district
killian sanson (born 7 june 1997) is a french professional footballer who plays as an attacking midfielder for championnat national 2 club bourges. he has previously played on the professional level with evian and montpellier. he is the younger brother of fellow professional footballer morgan sanson.  club career a youth product of le mans, sanson joined ligue 1 club evian in 2013. he made his professional debut for evian in 2015, in a 2-0 ligue 2 defeat against brest.  after evian were relegated to the fourth-division due to financial issues, sanson joined montpellier in july 2016 where he signed his first professional contract, reuniting with his brother morgan. he made his only ligue 1 appearance for montpellier on 20 may 2017, as a second-half substitute in the 2-0 defeat at angers.  sanson was loaned by montpellier to championnat national side quevilly-rouen at the start of the 2019-20 season. he was released by montpellier at the end of the season, and after having a trial with neuchatel xamax in switzerland, he signed for the latest incarnation of football in thonon-les-bains, thonon evian.  references  external links  killian sanson foot-national.com profile  1997 births living people association football midfielders french footballers ligue 1 players ligue 2 players championnat national players championnat national 3 players thonon evian grand geneve f.c. players montpellier hsc players us quevilly-rouen metropole players bourges foot 18 players championnat national 2 players
the arauco basin () is a sediment-filled depression -a sedimentary basin- in south-central chile. in the context of plate tectonics it is classified as a forearc basin. the basin has an approximate area of  and at its deeper parts the surface of its sedimentary fill reaches  below sea-level. the basin is interpreted as being part of an uplifted part of the continental shelf. to the west it bounds an active accretionary prism that lies next to the chile trench and to the east it bounds metamorphic basement representing a fossil paleozoic accretionary complex that has been intruded by the coastal batholith of central chile.  traditionally the centre of coal mining in chile, large-scale coal mining in arauco basin ended in the 1990s. given a high density of geological faults that have displaced the coal beds and the thin nature of these (less than one metre) mining activity in arauco basin has proven difficult to mechanize.  stratigraphy  the sedimentary fill has a maximum thickness of ca. . parts of the basin are on land in arauco peninsula where eocene coal-bearing rocks of marine and continental origin and eocene age are exposed. on top of these rocks and toward the centre of the peninsula miocene and pliocene sedimentary rocks exists. towards the east cretaceous sedimentary rocks crop out. the sedimentary formations defined in arauco basin include:  pliocene tubul formation is the oldest formation in the basin that has not been folded.  it lies on an unconformity that cuts across all other formations of the basin. at present it reaches  above sea level in some locations and is dissected by a number of small valleys. the base of the ranquil formation is the so-called "main unconformity" which is thought to have formed by erosion during a period of tectonic inversion.  tectonic evolution  a three-stage model of evolution has been proposed for the arauco basin. first a phase of extension in the late cretaceous and paleogene. then a basin inversion lasting from the middle eocene to the miocene causing the uplift and erosion that created the "main unconformity" and finally a post-inversion phase of strike-slip faulting  in the pliocene and pleistocene. the subduction of the mocha fracture zone under the basin that begun about 3.6 million years ago is believed to have caused the uplift of the basin plus some further tectonic inversion and contraction.  see also    caldera basin  cura-mallin basin  magallanes basin  notes  references   forearc basins sedimentary basins of chile geology of
biobio region coasts of biobio region
callogorgia elegans is a species of soft corals in the family primnoidae. it is found in the north-western pacific ocean.  references  external links       primnoidae animals described in 1870
esther ijewere (formerly esther kalejaiye) is a nigerian author, advocate, women and girl child's rights activist and a columnist for the guardian. she is a key member of walk against rape (w.a.r), an advocacy initiative created to assist rape victims and seek justice.  education a graduate of sociology from olabisi onabanjo university, ago iwoye, ogun state, nigeria,  career esther is the founder of rubies ink initiative for women and children, an umbrella organization which covers several women and girl child-related projects including walk against rape, women of rubies, project capable, rubies ink media and the college acquaintance rape education workshop. at the start of her career with rubies ink, she had to self fund all projects. in 2013, her activism against rape led her to write the book breaking the silence, a book that informs about rape and its scourge.  she runs a community for men called men who inspire to celebrate the bravery in men.  advocacy esther is the initiator of project capable, a lagos state ministry of education approved programme which is a youth mentoring initiative aimed at creating a positive mindset in secondary school students. in 2015, she organised a walk against rape which attracted top celebrities like kate henshaw, ali baba, toni payne, dj jimmy jatt and others. she is a key member of walk against rape (w.a.r), an advocacy initiative created to assist rape victims and seek justice.  this initiative was endorsed by the lagos state ministry of women affairs and poverty alleviation.  this campaign led her to organise rape sensitising workshops in secondary schools across the nigeria tagged college acquaintance rape education (c.a.r.e), in partnership with the lagos state ministry of justice and the domestic and sexual violence response team (dsvrt).  awards and nominations her contributions to the nigerian society has been recognised by several institutions and governmental parastatal. on 9 july 2016, she was awarded the "young person of the year award" at the 2016 miss tourism nigeria beauty pageant. she is also a recipient of wise women awards' "christian woman in media award" which she won in june 2016. in 2018, esther won the social entrepreneur of the year award at the exquisite ladies of the year awards.  personal life esther is married with two children . in a newspaper publication, she advised and encouraged women facing domestic violence in their marriage to reconsider their long term stand in such relationship while speaking on separation from her former husband. she coordinates a
food drive to feed the aged in her spare time.  references  living people nigerian women writers yoruba women writers olabisi onabanjo university alumni nigerian activists nigerian women's rights activists nigerian women activists children's rights activists yoruba women activists sexual abuse victim advocates year of birth missing (living people)
robin-lee hall (born 1962) is a surrey-based english fine artist and former president of the royal society of portrait painters.  biography  born in 1962 in london, hall attended the central saint martins school of art and design and kingston polytechnic gaining a ba honours degree in fine art.  career  since 2004 she has painted extensively in the very ancient medium of egg tempera.  in 2008 she was elected a member of the royal society of portrait painters, having regularly exhibited in their annual exhibition since the mid 1990s.  in 2010 she won the ondaatje prize for portraiture and gold medal at the royal society of portrait painters annual exhibition. the winning portrait, 'joy', is now on permanent display at girton college, cambridge, as part of 'the people's portraits' collection.  hall has exhibited in the bp portrait award at the national portrait gallery and the royal academy summer exhibition.  her portrait of astronomer, sir patrick moore, is in the bbc's collection and her painting of past speaker of the house of commons, sir bernard weatherill, hangs in portcullis house, westminster.  in 2009, hall participated in antony gormley's 'one and other' project, where she painted for one hour on top of the fourth plinth in trafalgar square, london.  hall is a freelance lecturer at the national gallery and national portrait gallery, london.  awards   ondaatje prize for portraiture and gold medal at the royal society of portrait painters annual exhibition 2010.  external links  official robin-lee hall website  robin-lee hall artist profile: the royal society of portrait painters official website  robin-lee hall: artwork in public collections  people's portrait collection, girton college, cambridge  references  english portrait painters 1962 births living people
the derbyshire and nottinghamshire miners' association was an early union representing coal miners in parts of the east midlands of england.  the union was founded around the turn of 1863 and 1864 by two miners: william ball, and one other who died shortly after establishing the union.  the union attracted hostility from mine owners, and members risked victimisation, so it initially operated secretively.  most of its early members had previously been part of a short-lived union established in 1844, but by 1866, the new union had only 300 members.  the union affiliated to the miners' national union (mnu), and in 1866, it sent william brown to the area as a full-time organiser, intending to operate publicly and attract new members.  he was enormously successful, bringing membership up to 7,000 within a year.  he worked with local methodist preachers, who led hymn-singing at union meetings, and also organised co-operation with the neighbouring south yorkshire miners' association (syma).  in response to the newly confident union, mineowners in staveley sacked 500 workers for union membership, out of a total workforce of 1,800 in the town.  owners in hucknall and kimberley then locked out miners, and the three areas brought in strikebreakers from across britain.  the union counterclaimed for a working day of less than 12 hours, and when being paid by the ton, for this to be based on 21 cwt, not 28 cwt.  the dispute continued into 1867, with the local union receiving support from the mnu, the organised trades association of nottingham and the london trades council, but by the summer, funds were running low, and most of the strikers had either agreed to leave the union, or had moved away to find work elsewhere.  at the start of the year, the union remained strong in south derbyshire, but in february, owners started a lock-out there.  union members remained solid for over a year, but when union funds ran out in march 1868, they had to admit defeat.  by the end of 1868, union membership was down to under 500, mostly based at cinderhill.  remaining members in south derbyshire split away to form their own district of the mnu.  from 1870, membership of the union began to slowly increase, and william peach became its new secretary.  in 1873, an early conciliation board was set up with the butterley company in an attempt to avoid industrial action, but this was unable to resolve various matters, leading to a
strike in 1874 and another in 1875.  the second strike was again defeated, and the union became moribund, remaining members in derbyshire joining the syma.  although inactive, the union remained in existence until around 1880, when the new nottinghamshire miners' association and derbyshire miners' association were founded.  references  trade unions established in 1863 trade unions disestablished in the 1880s trade unions based in derbyshire mining trade unions
"rotting in vain" is a song by american nu metal band korn. written by the band and produced by nick raskulinecz, it was featured on the band's 2016 twelfth studio album the serenity of suffering. the song was also released as the lead single from the album on july 22, 2016, reaching number 4 on the billboard mainstream rock songs chart and number 26 on the uk rock & metal singles chart. it was nominated for best metal performance at the 59th annual grammy awards.  release "rotting in vain" was first revealed on july 16, 2016 when it received its debut live performance at the chicago open air concert. according to loudwire's graham hartmann, "rotting in vain" is "led by a heavy groove and chaotic atmosphere", which later "spirals into darker realms with jonathan davis' tortured vocals". jon wiederhorn for radio.com added that the song features "otherworldly guitar effects, a deep, dark groove ... downtuned, distorted guitars and circular bass lines". speaking about the inspiration for the track upon its release, korn frontman jonathan davis offered the following insight:  music video  the music video for "rotting in vain" was released on july 22, 2016, following a trailer four days before. directed by dean karr and filmed in "a rundown two-story building" in los angeles, california, it features actor tommy flanagan, best known for portraying filip "chibs" telford on the fx tv series sons of anarchy and tullk from guardians of the galaxy vol. 2, who is shown "huff[ing] gas, drink[ing] from a goblet and play[ing] with curios" as the band performs elsewhere in the building and "all but destroys his sweeney todd-styled abode". during the opening section of the song, vocalist jonathan davis emerges from underneath layers of leaves and dust in a bathtub, which the singer claimed entered his lungs and led to him "coughing up dirt loogies" afterwards. other members of the band make "similarly dramatic entrances", including guitarists james "munky" shaffer "burst[ing] from the floorboards" and brian "head" welch "crash[ing] through cement". jonathan davis getting out of a pile of leaves in a bathtub. raymond luzier "ray" getting through wooden crates and rubbish. "fieldy" reginald arvizu waking up in paper and wood.  critical reception metal hammer
's dom lawson praised the song, including its "big" chorus and "wickedly self-referential burst of davies' [sic] trademark gorilla gibberish", claiming that "korn sound newly excited and ferociously focused". the track has been dubbed by many commentators as a conscious return to the style of the band's earlier releases - lawson compared it stylistically to 1999's issues and 2002's untouchables, in part due to the presence of scat singing, radio.com's jon wiederhorn described it as "reminiscent" of life is peachy (1996) and follow the leader (1998), while graham hartmann of loudwire simply dubbed it "classic korn".  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  external links "rotting in vain" music video on youtube  2016 songs 2016 singles korn songs songs written by jonathan davis songs written by james shaffer songs written by brian welch songs written by reginald arvizu roadrunner records singles
cylindrepomus cicindeloides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by schwarzer in 1926.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1926
augustus cesare bertelli (1890-1979), known as "bert" to his colleagues or "gus" to his family, was an anglo-italian car designer, racing driver, mechanic, and businessman.  bertelli was born in genoa, italy on 23 march 1890. in 1894 the family emigrated and settled in cardiff, south wales where after leaving school he was taken on as an apprentice at a local steel works. he studied in the evenings at university college to gain technical qualifications and gained also a lifetime interest in rugby.  he returned to italy and got a job in the development department of fiat in turin and while there met racing driver felice nazzaro and was taken on as a riding mechanic winning the 1908 targa bologna. just before the outbreak of world war i he returned to the united kingdom and studied aeronautical engineering and got a job in the design office of grahame-white in hendon, north london where he remained until 1918.  after the war he was called in as a consultant to overcome problems at enfield-allday where their first car was suffering design and cost problems and was soon employed there full time as works manager but was unable to save the company which collapsed in 1923.  enfield-alldays had made a few racing cars based on their 10/20 model which bertelli had driven with some success.  even before enfield-alldays had failed bertelli was working as a consultant assisting such companies as armstrong siddeley, coventry simplex and rover. during this time he met woolf barnato and built at his lingfield, surrey house three cars based on enfiled-alldays chassis.  while working at armstrong siddeley he had met william renwick, an engineer who had inherited a great deal of money, and the two formed a company renwick & bertelli ltd in birmingham in 1924. the product of this partnership was a car called the r & b but known informally as "buzzbox". this used a four cylinder 1.5 litre overhead camshaft again mounted in an enfield-alldays chassis. the pair came to the notice of the hon. john benson whose mother lady charnwood had recently bought bamford and martin and in 1926 bertelli and renwick both joined the board of what became aston martin motors ltd. buzzbox would become the basis of a new range of cars.  aston martin went through a succession of owners and in 1928 was purchased by sidney whitehouse who also bought renwick & bertelli and merged the companies. in 1931 renwick left the company
and moved to the united states.  bertelli remained with aston martin until 1938, when following differences with r. gordon sutherland, son of the owner sir arthur munro sutherland, he resigned and returned to his previous occupation as an engineering consultant. he was then approached by wallace devereux of high duty alloys, a subsidiary of hawker siddeley, and asked to design a car but world war ii broke out before a prototype was completed and work stopped. he continued however to work for high duty alloys until he retired in 1955.   in 1940 the family had moved to a 150 acre farm at wargrave, berkshire where they raised pigs.  private life gus bertelli married vera shaw in 1920 and the couple had three children, two daughters and a son. bill bertelli (1925-2012) was an engineer who served in reme during the second world war. bill left the army aged 23 as an acting major and embarked on a career in engineering in a variety of roles,   gus's brother enrico (harry) bertelli was a coachbuilder who designed and made bodies for many pre-war aston martins in a factory next door to their works.  references  1890 births british automobile designers british automotive engineers italian emigrants to the united kingdom businesspeople from genoa 1979 deaths aston martin engineers from genoa
comets is an anthology of science fiction short stories edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the fourth volume in their isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in february 1986.  the book collects twenty novelettes and short stories by various science fiction authors, together with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction: comets" (isaac asimov) "a blazing starre seene in the west" (jonas wright) "into the sun" (robert duncan milne) "captain stormfield's visit to heaven" (mark twain) "the comet doom" (edmond hamilton) "sunspot" (hal clement) "inside the comet" (arthur c. clarke) "raindrop" (hal clement) "comet wine" (ray russell) "the red euphoric bands" (philip latham) "throwback" (sydney j. bounds) "kindergarten" (james e. gunn) "west wind, falling" (gregory benford and gordon eklund) "the comet, the cairn and the capsule" (duncan lunan) "some joys under the star" (frederik pohl) "future forbidden" (philip latham) "the death of princes" (fritz leiber) "the funhouse effect" (john varley) "the family man" (theodore l. thomas) "double planet" (dr. john gribbin) "pride" (poul anderson)  notes  1986 short story collections science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
anthony thomas smith qc (21 june 1935 - 15 september 2017) was a british lawyer and liberal party politician.  background smith was born the son of sydney ernest smith and winston victoria smith. he was educated at northampton, stafford, and hinckley grammar schools and king's college, cambridge, (exhibnr; ma). in 1959 he married letitia ann wheldon griffith. they had one son and two daughters.  professional career smith was called to the bar by the inner temple in 1958. he served as a flying officer in the raf from 1958 to 1960, then returned to his legal career. he was founder and chairman of the birmingham free representation scheme. he was made a qc in 1977 and appointed as a recorder. he was made a bencher in 1985.  political career smith was liberal candidate for the northampton division at the 1959 general election. the constituency was a labour/conservative marginal and the liberals had not run a candidate since coming a poor third in 1950. his prospects were not good and the party did not improve on its position.  electoral record  references  1935 births liberal party (uk) parliamentary candidates alumni of king's college, cambridge members of the inner temple place of birth missing 2017 deaths
cerylon fagi is a beetle species in the subfamily ceryloninae.  references  external links    cerylonidae beetles described in 1867 taxa named by charles n. f. brisout
tom milton (january 11, 1956) is a right-handed american professional bowler who amassed 5 national and 6  regional titles on the professional bowlers association (pba) tours.  early life  milton was born and raised in st. petersburg, florida, to parents sam (d. 2009) and tam (d. 2008) milton, and has two older twin sisters, tam and terry. tom graduated from lakewood high school and participated in organized baseball and basketball leagues. he initially took an interest in bowling at age 11, joining a saturday morning young america bowling alliance (yaba) junior league at skyway lanes upon being encouraged by arlene levine, the desk manager, who was also a certified coach/instructor. milton continued to develop and hone his bowling skills under levine's tutelage, garnering many yaba awards throughout his junior career, after which he joined the american bowling congress adult division (abc, now the usbc - united states bowling congress). levine served as one of tom's key coaches/mentors throughout his bowling career.  two other bowlers that also had an influence on milton as he developed his game were earl ratliff, a local standout at skyway lanes, known for his steadiness, and pba hall of famer earl anthony, for his command of the game through the smooth delivery and efficiency with which he executed each shot. milton defeated anthony in a pba finals match on national television some years later when he claimed his second national title.  in addition to his local bowling accomplishments, prior to his joining the pba, milton went on to capture the high conference bowling average while a member of the hillsborough community college bowling team. in 1979, he teamed with pete brown, also of st. petersburg, to take second place in the abc national classic championships held in tampa; they were beaten by the professional burton brothers tandem (nelson "bo" jr. and neil). tom's first thoughts of pursuing a career in professional bowling were the result of having cashed as an amateur in several pba southern regional tournaments.  pba career milton's first formal pba tournament as an official pba cardholder was the amf magicscore open held in kissimmee, florida, in february 1978.  he secured his first national title in january, 1983 at the showboat invitational.  throughout the 1980s tom was a force to be reckoned with on the lanes, as evidenced by his 5 national titles among 16 top 5 finishes before injuries forced a premature retirement at the conclusion of the 1988 season. the 1988 season
proved to be an emotional one as it marked milton's return to the tour after taking some time off to recover from a nagging injury, culminating in his capturing his fifth and final national title at the miller lite classic tournament held in miami in february, 1988.  contributing to making it an emotional and most memorable event was that tom's mother, tam, was able to attend her first pba tournament, cheering him onto victory.  unfortunately tom's wife, darlene, had to remain at home in st. petersburg as she was coordinating a local bowling tournament as a memorial tribute to george litts, milton's longtime sponsor who had died in 1986.  george had been one of tom's staunchest supporters right from the start who not only employed tom for a time being, but also served as a mentor and father figure in addition to his sponsorship on the tour.  accordingly, the litts memorial tournament held special added significance to tom, for in the prior season when tom won the miller lite open, upon darlene joining him on the lanes prior to his post victory interview, she revealed to tom that george's wife had previously advised darlene that it was george's position that tom was no longer required to split his winnings with his sponsor, making it all the sweeter as this was the largest winning purse of his career at $39,000. as a result, although tom's pba career was cut short, the one-year period between the lite beer championship in milwaukee and his final tour victory at the miller lite classic miami open in 1988 served as the pinnacle of his career.  milton was the first bowler from the tampa bay area to win a pba national bowling title, after which several other notable tampa bay bowlers matched his feat, including steve hoskins, tom crites, and tom daugherty, thereby solidifying the tampa bay area's reputation for churning out top caliber bowlers.  in addition to his national accomplishments, milton also has 6 pba regional titles to his credit, the most recent as of 2007 as a senior pba member, winning the liberty lanes regional before a hometown audience.  pba national tournament individual titles  pba national tournament second-place finishes  post-tour life milton utilized his overall bowling knowledge and experience to operate his own pro shop for a time period, then ultimately managing several local bowling centers for many years. milton still participates in local leagues and tournaments as well as participating each year in the usbc national open championships.  he has averaged as high as 240 in local leagues, and
has won a variety of local tournament sweeper events as well as typically cashing in the usbc national championships. tom and darlene's daughter, katie, was born in may 1991.  bowling awards and recognition  first team all-american (1983)  runner-up to pete weber for pba national tour rookie of the year (1983)  1983 pba 3rd leading money winner - just shy of esteemed rare $100,000 threshold at that time  second team all american (1987)  2nd place - abc (american bowling congress) national classic division doubles with pete brown (1979)  4th place - usbc (united states bowling conference) open doubles with dave taylor (2010)  gulf coast/st. petersburg usbc hall of fame (1983)  florida state bowling associate hall of fame (2012)  1st sanctioned 800 series recorded in st. petersburg bowling association and tampa bay area (november, 1978)  member of several successful winning area world team challenges, participated in grand world team championships  see also   pba bowling tour: 1983 season  pba bowling tour: 1987 season  pba bowling tour: 1988 season  references   https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=950&dat=19781201&id=66draaaaibaj&sjid=4fgdaaaaibaj&pg=6550,224952&hl=en  http://mcubed.net/bowling/zztommilton.shtml  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3oay9higrli  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ngtcwhzn_mo  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=1nwy5ya6fsw  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fjbida1i12k  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=o99zu3s_wzq  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=kpjyc7zvmru  https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fp77ebgggja  1956 births living people people from st. petersburg, florida
elizabeth a. stuart is a professor of mental health, biostatistics, and health policy and management in the johns hopkins bloomberg school of public health. her research involves causal inference and missing data in the statistics of mental health. she was a co-author on a study showing that post-suicide-attempt counseling can significantly reduce the risk of future suicide.  education and career  stuart graduated from smith college in 1997, with a mathematics major and chemistry minor. she completed her ph.d. at harvard university in 2004, in statistics, under the supervision of donald rubin. after working for two years as a researcher at mathematica policy research, she joined the johns hopkins faculty in 2006.  recognition  in 2014 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for outstanding contributions to research in the estimation of causal effects; for extensive efforts in the dissemination of statistical methods in education and mental health, including the development of widely used software; and for extensive service to the asa and the profession." in 2020, she was elected fellow of the american association for the advancement of science, in the section on statistics.  references  external links home page  year of birth missing (living people) living people american statisticians women statisticians johns hopkins bloomberg school of public health faculty fellows of the american statistical association harvard university alumni smith college alumni
redhorse osaka wheel is a  tall,  diameter giant ferris wheel at expocity in suita, osaka prefecture, japan.  references  external links  ferris wheels in japan suita amusement rides introduced in 2016 2016 establishments in japan
ahmed khan muqaddam (also: ahmad khan moqaddam ) (?-1816) was the son of haji alimohammad khan muqaddam. muqaddam was the khan or governor of the maragheh khanate. his reign began in 1799. his children were:  hasan agha husеynpasha agha  nurullah khan jafarqulu xan muqaddam, who became the next khan khrense khanum zaynab khanum  references christoph werner an iranian town in transition: a social and economic history of the elites of tabriz, 1747-1848 p. 406  khanates of the south caucasus qajar governors history of east azerbaijan province maragheh 1610 establishments in iran
gary a. rendsburg (born 1954) is a professor of biblical studies, hebrew language, and ancient judaism at rutgers university in new brunswick, new jersey. he holds the rank of distinguished professor and serves as the blanche and irving laurie chair of jewish history at rutgers university (2004-present), with positions in the department of jewish studies  and the department of history.  prior to teaching at rutgers, rendsburg taught for 18 years at cornell university in ithaca, n.y. (1986-2004) and for six years at canisius college in buffalo, n.y. (1980-1986).  education rendsburg received his b.a. degree in english and journalism from the university of north carolina at chapel hill (1975), and his m.a. and ph.d. degrees in hebrew studies from new york university (1977, 1980).  career  research interests  rendsburg's main research interests are the literature of the bible, the history of ancient israel, the historical development of the hebrew language, the relationship between ancient egypt and ancient israel, the dead sea scrolls, and medieval hebrew manuscripts. he also teaches courses and offers lectures on the whole breadth of jewish history and religion, with a special focus on the development of judaism in the post-biblical period.  hebrew dialects  rendsburg is best known for his work on israelian hebrew, the dialect of ancient hebrew used in the northern part of israel (more or less contiguous with the territory of the kingdom of israel, which existed 930-721 b.c.e.). the dialect stands in contrast to judahite hebrew, the dialect used in the southern part of the country (in judah in general and in jerusalem in particular), in which the vast majority of the biblical books are composed. while earlier scholars had postulated the existence of a northern hebrew dialect, and had offered a few lexical and grammatical features as evidence thereto, rendsburg greatly expanded our knowledge of israelian hebrew by identifying sections of the bible written in the dialect and by creating a much longer list of linguistic traits specific to this dialect. he built his case based both on internal biblical evidence and on the fact that many israelian hebrew features occur in phoenician, moabite, and aramaic, dialects and languages which border the territory of northern (and transjordanian) israel, but not judah in the south.  rendsburg further proposed that mishnaic hebrew, a hebrew dialect used in post-biblical times, especially for the composition of early rabbinic
texts, was also a northern dialect of ancient hebrew.  he noted that many israelian hebrew features continue in mishnaic hebrew; and he further observed that the mishnah and related texts were compiled in sepphoris or elsewhere in the galilee, so that the geography makes sense as well.  in his earlier work rendsburg also addressed the question of diglossia in ancient hebrew. to his mind, biblical hebrew is essentially a literary dialect, used for the composition of texts, whereas spoken hebrew in ancient israel diverged in its morphology and syntax. rendsburg used departures from the grammatical norm found in the bible, along with parallels from other spoken semitic languages (especially arabic, but also ethiopian), to reconstruct the spoken dialect of ancient hebrew.  rendsburg also has contributed to the issue of diachrony in ancient hebrew, with special attention to the differences between standard biblical hebrew (of the pre-exilic period) and late biblical hebrew (of the post-exilic period).  rendsburg's work on qumran hebrew accepts the theory advanced by william schniedewind, which holds that the main dialect of the dead sea scrolls constitutes an anti-language, a somewhat artificial construct used to distinguish the essenes' hebrew from that of other jewish groups of the time.  a challenge to the documentary hypothesis  while rendsburg accepts the obvious distinctions between the priestly and deuteronomic legal-cultic material in the torah, he has argued for viewing the prose stories in the torah as emanating from a single voice. in his view, the manifold interconnections between and among various passages within the prose accounts (for example, in the book of genesis and in the exodus account) bespeak a single narrative voice. this approach stands in contrast to the adherents of the documentary hypothesis (jedp theory), which holds that different passages in the narratives are to be ascribed to different sources (especially j, e and p).  hebrew stylistics  rendsburg has written widely on a host of ancient hebrew literary and stylistic devices, including wordplay, alliteration, style-switching, repetition with variation, and the intentional use of confused syntax.  all of these topics and more are included in his book, how the bible is written.  egypt and israel  rendsburg has contributed in two ways in this arena. first, he has addressed the question of the evidence for the sojourn-slavery-exodus account, presented at the end of the book of genesis and the beginning of the book of exodus, and the dates
thereof; and secondly, he has shown how egyptian literary, religious, and magical topoi resonate within the moses story.  medieval hebrew manuscripts  rendsburg has developed three websites devoted to medieval hebrew manuscripts:  the first (developed with jacob binstein) is devoted to the book of ben sira, whose documentary evidence ranges from qumran and masada in antiquity to the cairo genizah in the medieval period, and whose manuscripts are found in cambridge, oxford, london, paris, jerusalem, new york, and los angeles. rendsburg and binstein aggregated all of this material at a single website, so that scholars now may inspect the diverse manuscripts more readily.  the second (developed with joshua blachorsky) presents to the public an incomplete yet very valuable manuscript of the mishnah, known as jts ms r1622.1, housed in the library of the jewish theological seminary. until the development of the website, the manuscript remained unpublished, though now scholars from around the world may access it via the internet.  the third (developed with peter moshe shamah) reunites all of the documentary evidence from the cairo genizah relevant to the life of johannes of oppido = obadiah the proselyte at a single website.  the documents include the obadiah memoir, the epistle of r. barukh of aleppo, the siddur that obadiah wrote for himself, and his musical compositions (hebrew prayers set to gregorian chant).  books  the redaction of genesis (1986/2014), which argues for the literary unity of the book of genesis. diglossia in ancient hebrew (1990), which treats the colloquialisms embedded in the text of the hebrew bible. linguistic evidence for the northern origin of selected psalms (1990), which presents a detailed analysis of several dozen poems in the book of psalms. the bible and the ancient near east (1997), co-authored with cyrus h. gordon, intended for the general reader and for use as a college textbook. israelian hebrew in the book of kings (2002), a further exploration into the question of regional dialects of ancient hebrew. solomon's vineyard: literary and linguistic studies in the song of songs (2009), co-authored with scott noegel, analyzing the language and the poetry of the song of songs. how the bible is written (2019), on the nexus between language and literature in the hebrew bible.  additional publications  in addition to these books, rendsburg has published over 160 articles in scholarly journals and monograph collections in the
u.s., canada, europe, israel, australia, south africa, and japan. most of them are available at his publications website in pdf format.  rendsburg also served as one of the associate editors of the encyclopedia of hebrew language and linguistics (2013).  additional teaching and research positions  during his career, rendsburg also has served as an adjunct faculty member, as a visiting faculty member, or as a visiting research fellow at the following institutions: hebrew university, university of oxford, university of cambridge,tyndale house, university of sydney, university of california, los angeles, university of pennsylvania, colgate university, and binghamton university.  rendsburg was awarded a national endowment for the humanities fellowship for college teachers in 1986-1987, enabling him to conduct research in israel during that academic year.  rendsburg has traveled extensively in the near east, he has participated in excavations at tel dor and caesarea, and he has visited all the major archaeological sites of israel, egypt, and jordan.  multimedia  rendsburg has produced two courses for the great courses (formerly known as the teaching company), on "the book of genesis" (2006)  and "the dead sea scrolls" (2010).  in addition, he launched the rutgers jewish studies online program (free and available to the public at large) with a course entitled "the bible and history" (2006).  see also  yehezkel kaufman  umberto cassuto  joshua berman  references  external links  rutgers homepage  rendsburg publications page  rendsburg - short bio and short video about his work  1954 births living people rutgers university faculty university of north carolina at chapel hill alumni new york university alumni biblical studies american biblical scholars canisius college faculty cornell university faculty phoenician-punic studies
stephen george gasiorowicz (may 10, 1928 - june 3, 2016) was an american theoretical physicist. he was born in danzig in 1928 (gdansk, poland) and graduated from the university of california, los angeles in 1952.  from 1952 until 1960, stephen was employed by lawrence berkeley national laboratory at the university of california, berkeley, as a research staff member. in 1960 he received an offer of associate professorship from the physics department of the university of minnesota, and in 1961 he moved to minnesota where he stayed for the rest of his life. in 1963 he was promoted to full professor. gasiorowicz published over 100 papers on high-energy physics, and several well-known textbooks on the theory of elementary particles, quantum mechanics, and other subjects. best known are gasiorowicz's contributions to quark models of hadrons, theory of glueballs, and qcd confinement. gasiorowicz was one of the founding fathers of william i. fine theoretical physics institute. from 1979 to 1986 gasiorowicz was vice-president of the aspen center for physics, aspen, co, and in 1987-89 the acting director of ftpi.  biography  stephen gasiorowicz was born on may 10, 1928 into a jewish family in danzig (now gdansk, poland). between 1920 and 1939 danzig was a semi-autonomous city-state populated to a large extent by ethnic germans. stephen's father was a merchant. with the rise to power of hitler and nazis in germany in 1933 persecution of non-germans in danzig increased, and gasiorowicz's family had to move to warsaw. on september 1, 1939, the second world war began with the invasion of poland by germany. the gasiorowiczes had to flee immediately; the only open route was to the east of poland, to lemberg (currently lviv, ukraine). a few dozen miles before lviv the gasiorowiczes were met by a detachment of the soviet army, which occupied the eastern part of poland.  stephen gasiorowicz's journey to freedom started in 1939 in occupied poland ended in 1946 in the united states. it lasted for seven years; through the ussr, romania, turkey, iraq, and india. it was not until he was in india (at that time controlled by britain; the polish government in exile was its ally), that the gaziorowiczes obtained residence permits. he got his education there; first in a catholic school and then in a liceum.  in 1946 the gasiorowiczes were notified
that their application for immigration to the u.s., which they filed before the second world war, was finally approved. the same year stephen gasiorowicz sailed from calcutta, india to san francisco, california. he was admitted to ucla as a physics major; he received his ba degree in 1948 and phd in 1952. his phd adviser was robert finkelstein, and the topic of his phd thesis was a non-linear model for the composite π-mesons.  in the 1960s, 70s and 80s stephen gasiorowicz acquired a reputation as an excellent lecturer, and was sought after as a visiting professor by major research centers, such as nordita (denmark), desy (germany), the university of tokyo. gaziorowicz's legacy in physics education spread worldwide. generations of physics students studied using the textbooks written by gasiorowicz, which include elementary particle physics, quantum physics, and physics for scientists and engineers. he was a phd adviser to several prominent physicists, including stanley brodsky of slac and william a. bardeen of the fermilab.  selected books  see also    list of textbooks on classical and quantum mechanics  references  external links stephen gaziorowicz at the william i. fine theoretical physics institute  university of minnesota faculty american physicists 1928 births 2016 deaths theoretical physicists polish emigrants to the united states
the 1945-46 sk rapid wien season was the 48th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  references  1945-46 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
wolfert is an unincorporated community located within east greenwich township in gloucester county, new jersey, united states.  history an early settler was solomon lippincott, who purchased  of land at that location in 1741.  in 1756, a local branch of the society of friends used lippincott's home as a place of worship.  "solomons graveyard" (extant) was established on the property, the earliest burials dating from 1795.  a branch of the west jersey railroad was constructed in 1871, and a station was erected in wolfert.  references  east greenwich township, new jersey unincorporated communities in gloucester county, new jersey unincorporated communities in new jersey
my best enemy may refer to:   my best enemy (2005 film), chilean/argentine/spanish film  my best enemy (2006 film), italian film  my best enemy (2011 film), austrian / luxembourgian film
trombone panorama is an album by american jazz trombonist kai winding featuring performances recorded in late 1956 and early 1957 for the columbia label.  reception  the allmusic awarded the album 3 stars and stated "trombone panorama was the first of several albums kai winding was to cut during the mid-'50s and early 1960s where he was joined by a shifting cast of fellow trombone players... the flowing seamless technique employed by these top slide-instrument artists resulted in a graceful, mellifluous sound that gave these recordings a chamber jazz feel".  track listing  "trombone panorama: fanfare/lassus trombone/muskrat ramble/i gotta right to sing the blues/the sidewalks of new york/margie/i'm getting sentimental over you/kaye's melody/moonlight serenade/bijou/collaboration/it's all right with me/potpourri" (kai winding/henry fillmore/kid ory/harold arlen, ted koehler/charles b. lawlor, james w. blake/con conrad, j. russel robinson, benny davis/george bassman, ned washington/sammy kaye/glenn miller, mitchell parish/ralph burns/pete rugolo, stan kenton/cole porter/winding) - 16:44  "the party's over" (jule styne, betty comden, adolph green) - 3:33  "the preacher" (horace silver) - 3:23  "come rain or come shine" (harold arlen, johnny mercer) - 3:29  "when the red, red robin (comes bob, bob, bobbin' along)" (harry m. woods) - 3:11  "i can't give you anything but love" (jimmy mchugh, dorothy fields) - 3:13  "frankie and johnny" (traditional) - 6:59  personnel kai winding - trombone, narration wayne andre, carl fontana - trombone dick leib - bass trombone roy frazee - piano kenny o'brien - bass jack franklin, tom montgomery - drums  references  columbia records albums kai winding albums 1957 albums albums produced by george avakian
go fridge (), also known as play, fridge, is a chinese cooking show produced by tencent video. the rights were bought from south korean television series please take care of my refrigerator.  formats  seasons 1-2 in each episode, two guests bring their refrigerators to the filming studio and sit down to talk with the hosts and other chefs. at the end of examining the fridge, a guest selects two chefs to cook a dish for them to eat; they will each have 15 minutes to cook the dishes, with the winner selected by the guest alone.  season 3 in season 3, the format changed as two x-factor chefs, mainly professional chefs, joined the show alongside the six regular chefs. if they are picked to cook and win two head-to-head battles, they may be promoted as regular chefs, as with the case with jeffrey chen. in the first two seasons, the chefs must use a required extra ingredient to cook; however, in season 3, due to sponsorship with jd.com, they can order an ingredient or cooking utensil not available in the fridge or in the kitchen. the winner would not only win a badge, but also a golden spoon with jade decorations.  season 4 the show went through a repackaging and format overhaul that is unique to the chinese version. the filming area has expanded, there are 4 distinct areas, talk-show area, 2 menu-planning rooms, cooking and dining area that is behind the talk show area, while gemice ice cream remains the naming rights sponsor. 4 or 5 of the regular chefs would return every 2 episodes on a rotating basis, with 1 or 2 guest members.  the rules have changed to become a team competition, partly in response to season 3, where liu kaile and anaud (x-factor chef) were not picked to cook all of season 3.  2 permanent chefs will partner with a guest chef, or 3 permanent chefs will form a team, as well as jackson and the other guest acting as respective team captains and support people, where they will pick the head chef for each team, who will wear a scarf, and the team will make the dish of his/her idea. by the 4th round, however, jackson decided to let all chefs make their own dishes, with one main co-ordinator named as head chef because jackson was 0-4 as leader.  both teams will present one dish or a theme of a few separate dishes, and the fridge owner will pick
the preferred dish, and they cannot use the same ingredients from the other team during the initial 1-minute ingredient-picking phase for the talk show segment, which precedes the hosts actually looking through the guests' fridges. the team can ask for the team leaders to bring in additional ingredients and perform basic prep work if required.  the seating arrangements for the dining area has also changed. he jiong, as referee, will sit next to the fridge owner as hosts of the meal. team captains will gather ingredients for the head chef, then become support person for doing basic prep work, but are not involved in the actual cooking. time limit remains at 15 minutes.  the prize for the head chef would be a chef's hat badge made from gold and small diamonds. the teams are fixed for 2 episodes, but the head chefs would change each episode.  season 5  it is already confirmed in the first episode of season 5 that jackson and he jiong will become head chefs and must be in charge of making a dish within 15 minutes.  in the first episode, they are involved in a replication competition, where they must each replicate one dish from a pre-prepared six-course menu from one of the 6 of the regular chefs with only verbal instructions of the chefs. the match ended in a draw.  jackson is also the regular assistant chef in the main competition, the other assistant chef is the guest not revealing his/her fridge for the episode, it is a two-people team, because in season 4, it is proven that professional and semi-professional chefs can make a three-course meal in 15 minutes, which is well exceeding most home cooks' abilities. the fridge owner picks the head chefs based on the dishes names, the assistant chefs' assignments are based on the head chefs' picks on name tags under the lid of two small cups of gemice ice cream, which remains as naming sponsor of the show. the menu-planning rooms are no longer in use, they serve as the chefs' green rooms. if the guest only has one fridge, a 'magnifying glass' will show a part of the ingredients without opening the fridge to guess the general idea of the fridge.  guest also send in a clip of one meal a week before filming to see their eating habits. on episode 3 of season 5, chi zi violated the rules of stuffing the fridge with new items on the day of the fridge being moved, so the new items on the fridge
are isolated. on episode 5, the opposite problem occurred, as peng yuchang had no edible ingredients in the fridge, and only had instant noodles in his backpack, so the chefs are allowed to shop for ingredients at nearly mall and fresh foods supermarket for 30 minutes, and the chefs are picked based on the bought ingredients, with instant noodles being a fixed and featured ingredient.  at 21:00, there is also a tencent video vip-only extra episode (also available a day later on the youtube channel), where they show behind-the-scenes and uncut version of the full 15-minute cooks.  season 6  the show delayed filming due to timing and location constraints, and the korean version has not resumed filming for the new season. jackson wang was unable to film in china as he was stuck in south korea as border restrictions were in place due to covid-19 pandemic, then self-isolated when borders re-opened between both countries. wei daxun returns as stand-in host for the first 6 episodes. an xianmin and vinny huang also missed filming on episodes 63-64 due to self isolation from travelling cross-provinces to save their respective restaurants. the set had a more lego-like and pixelized feel, and guests enter from the side door. the fridges are limited to standardized sizes, and are hidden between the two lego mascots: popo (po-tato) and todi (pota-to, new in season 6). also: to better learn about the chefs outside of work, they will only wear the show's own aprons when chosen to cook, and hands are sanitized with sanitizers before food is served. the cooking guests and wei daxun also have an apron of their own. in terms of sponsors, all alcoholic sponsors are banned until episode 7. lipton became their primary beverage sponsor. mei yi tian milk replaces germice ice cream as the naming sponsor.  in terms of fridge reveal, a database of analysis is made pre-show to replace chefs writing tags onto the items.  in the end, the winning chef will teach the winning dish in their mother tongue (regional dialects, if applicable).  hosts  attendees  chefs  episodes  series overview  season 1  season 2  season 3  season 4 head chef in italics  season 5 head chef in italics  season 6  season 7  references  2015 chinese television series debuts chinese variety television shows chinese cooking television series chinese television series based on south korean television series chinese
-language television shows zhejiang television original programming
last of the pony riders is a 1953 american western film directed by george archainbaud and starring gene autry in his last starring feature film and kathleen case.  plot  cast  gene autry as gene autry   champion as champ  kathleen case as katie mcewen  dickie jones as johnny blair  john downey as tom mcewen  howard wright as banker clyde vesey  arthur space as jess hogan  gregg barton as dutch murdoch  smiley burnette as smiley  references  bibliography  dick, bernard f. the merchant prince of poverty row: harry cohn of columbia pictures. university press of kentucky.  external links    1953 films 1953 western (genre) films english-language films american films american western (genre) films films directed by george archainbaud columbia pictures films american black-and-white films
plagionotus astecus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae, the only species in the genus plagionotus found in the new world.  references  clytini
boskovich is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  alexander uriah boskovich (1907-1964), israeli composer john s. boskovich (1956-2006), american artist, writer, filmmaker, and teacher  see also boskovic boskovich farms
naceri is a famous treatise of hippology drafted about the year 1333, by abou bakr ibn badr eddin ibn it moundir the baitar, ordered by the mamluk sultan an-nasir muhammad, also called sultan ennacer (victorious), whence the name of naceri (relative to nacer).  of all the treatises of hippology, the naceri is probably the best known, as a result of the attention devoted to it by the french doctor nicolas perron who published, between 1852 and 1960, three volumes of comments on the translation of the manuscript n° 2814 of the bibliotheque nationale de france. this work has given to the scholars studying that period the necessary elements to strengthen the already existing belief of the high quality of the arab veterinarians of that era.  see also   veterinary medicine  arabian horse  barb horse  references  bibliography   hippologie et medecine du cheval en terre d'islam au xive siecle : le traite des deux arts en medecine veterinaire dit le naceri, ed. errance, 2006  external links   mohammed mehdi hakimi et christophe degueurce, le traite des deux arts en medecine veterinaire, ou le naceri  14th-century arabic books
jacques baudet-lafarge (1803-1867) was a french politician. he served as a member of the national assembly from 1848 to 1849, representing puy-de-dome.  references  1803 births 1867 deaths people from puy-de-dome politicians from auvergne-rhone-alpes members of the 1848 constituent assembly
astr is the solo project of american electronic r&b vocalist zoe silverman, originally formed with producer adam pallin. their debut ep, varsity, was named the twentieth best album of 2014 by spin. their second ep, homecoming, was released in 2015.  history  astr formed in 2013 after meeting at a yoga class. producer adam pallin was previously one half of little jackie alongside imani coppola, who had a top-twenty hit with "the world should revolve around me" in the uk singles chart in 2008. zoe silverman is the daughter of tom silverman, the founder of tommy boy records. in their earliest press coverage, astr were described as "mysterious" and left unnamed, and then briefly referred to only as zoe astr and adam astr. a 2013 interview with the village voice revealed their identities, explaining that the duo had not wanted to disclose their real names in order to "distance themselves" from their backgrounds.  their debut single "operate" was released through tommy boy records in may 2013, followed by a second single "razor". the duo also played several sets at cmj music marathon in the autumn. astr later released a cover of drake's "hold on, we're going home", which was a breakthrough hit on hype machine and compared favourably to the original.  in 2014 astr released their debut six-track ep, varsity, on 21 january via neon gold records. spin later named it their twentieth best album of 2014. astr performed at sxsw for the first time in march 2014, and were praised as an "aural threat" by usa today in may. astr also created a new song, "hold on me", exclusively for dj annie mac's blog, and released a remix of charli xcx's "boom clap" in the summer. astr were the first act to sign for the new independent record label 300 entertainment.  astr released their second ep, homecoming, on november 6, 2015. the track "activate me" was produced by darkchild. silverman described homecoming as "nostalgia pop" with lyrical themes around "industry sexism". astr toured nationally in the month of the release. a remix of carly rae jepsen's "run away with me" was released in the summer of 2015, and a standalone single featuring mick jenkins titled "it's over" was premiered by billboard in september. astr also performed at governors ball in june 2015.  astr released a new single, "bleeding love", in march 2016.  references   musical groups from new york
city musical groups established in 2013 2013 establishments in new york city
androstanolone propionate (brand name pesomax), also known as stanolone propionate or dihydrotestosterone propionate (dhtp), as well as 5α-androstan-17β-ol-3-one 17β-propionate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a dihydrotestosterone ester that is marketed in italy. it is used as an injectable and acts as a prodrug of androstanolone (stanolone, dihydrotestosterone, dht).  see also  list of androgen esters § dihydrotestosterone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes dihydrotestosterone esters prodrugs propionate esters testosterone
nurpur rajputan  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of nurpur rajputan. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, nurpur rajputan has a total number of 78 houses and a population of 442 of which include 239 males and 203 females. literacy rate of nurpur rajputan is 68.00%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 42 which is 9.50% of the total population of nurpur rajputan, and the child sex ratio is approximately 826, lower than the state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 138 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of nurpur rajputan which includes 129 males and 9 females. according to the census survey report 2011, 97.10% of workers describe their work as main work and 2.90% of workers are involved in marginal activity providing a livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  caste   the village has scheduled caste (sc) constitutes 40.27% of the total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the tyrrell 007 is a formula one racing car, designed by tyrrell's chief designer, derek gardner. it was used in the , ,  and  formula one seasons.  development ken tyrrell, owner of tyrrell racing needed two new drivers for  because jackie stewart retired from driving at the end of 1973 and francois cevert was killed at the 1973 season finale in the united states. the team had originally  planned to have cevert and jody scheckter as their driver line up for 1974. following cevert's death, tyrell signed patrick depailler as replacement. in the first three races of 1974, (argentina, brazil and south africa), tyrrell used the earlier 005 and 006 chassis.  racing history  elf team tyrrell  1974 the tyrrell 007 made its debut at the spanish grand prix. scheckter drove the 007 and finished fifth, depailler raced the 006 and the 005 was no longer used. two 007s raced at belgium. at the start of the race, clay regazzoni's ferrari took the lead ahead of scheckter and emerson fittipaldi's mclaren. at the end of the first lap fittipaldi passed scheckter to take second place. at the swedish grand prix, scheckter won the race and depailler finished second. at the dutch grand prix scheckter finished fifth and depailler sixth. at the french grand prix, scheckter took fourth and depailler finished eighth in the 006. in the british grand prix scheckter took the lead and won the race, engine failure took depailler out of the race. in germany, depailler through an accident caused by broken suspension. at the austrian grand prix depailler retired after an accident. peterson crossed the line less than a second ahead of fittipaldi after 12 laps of battling in italy. scheckter finished third and depailler finished eleventh.  the tyrrell team scored 52 world championship points; four points were scored by the 005 and the 007 scored 48 points, earning them third place in the constructors' championship standings.  1975  the tyrrell team scored twenty five world championship points, earning them fifth place in the constructors' championship standings.  1976  the tyrrell team scored 71 world championship points, 13 points were scored by the 007 and the tyrrell p34 scored 58 points, earning them third place in the constructors' championship standings.
complete formula one world championship results  (key) (races in bold indicate pole position; results in italics indicate fastest lap)   4 points in  scored using the tyrrell 005.   58 points in  scored using the tyrrell p34.   all points in  scored using the tyrrell p34.  non-championship results (key) (results in italics indicate fastest lap)  references  tyrrell formula one cars
lucie crain (fl. 1891), was a german women's rights activist and educator. she played a significant part in the history of women's education in germany. she is known as the founder of the crainschen anstalten in berlin, often referred to as the leading hohere tochternschulen (women's college) in the german empire.  references   gudrun wedel: lehren zwischen arbeit und beruf. einblicke in das leben der autobiographinnen im 19. jh. koln et al. 2000, 243.  19th-century german educators german women's rights activists
golden light (finnish: kultainen kynttilanjalka) is a 1946 finnish crime film directed by edvin laine and starring laine, mirjam novero, rauha puntti.  partial cast      edvin laine  as markus mantyla    mirjam novero  as asta kataja    rauha puntti  as ulla karpela    esko saha  as lauri takala   jalmari rinne as kataja    hilja jorma  as hilda kataja    matti aulos as takala    emma vaananen  as mrs. takala    kaarlo saarnio  as silmapuoli-mantyla   mirjami kuosmanen  as erna    enni rekola  as fanny    paavo jannes  as karpela    verna piponius  as stiina    laina laine  as adele    anni hamalainen  as hedvig    artturi laakso  as helmer  external links     1946 films 1946 crime films finnish crime films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by edvin laine french black-and-white films
nandrolone cyclotate () (developmental code name rs-3268r), or nandrolone ciclotate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-ciclotate, is a synthetic and injected anabolic-androgenic steroid (aas) of the nandrolone (19-nortestosterone) group which was never marketed. it is an androgen ester - specifically, the c17β ciclotate (4-methylbicyclo[2.2.2]oct-2-ene-1-carboxylate) ester of nandrolone. nandrolone cyclotate has potent and prolonged activity as an aas when administered by intramuscular injection and is reported to have a similar duration of action to that of nandrolone decanoate via this route.  see also   list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references   abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids estranes nandrolone esters progestogens
robert charles mackinnon jr. (born september 24, 1960) is an american former basketball coach.  previously, he served as the head coach of the colorado 14ers, springfield armor, los angeles d-fenders, and texas legends in the nba g league.  coaching career mackinnon began his coaching career in 1982 as an assistant coach for his alma mater king's college. he then had stints as an assistant coach at several different colleges and universities including mercyhurst college, george washington university, university of notre dame and university of north carolina. he was also head coach at the united states merchant marine academy for two seasons during which he led the team to the ncaa tournament division iii tournament twice and won coach of the year in 1999. beginning in 2008, he was a head coach mostly in the nba d-league/g league except for one season in china.  personal life mackinnon's father bob mackinnon (december 5, 1927 - july 7, 2015) was an american collegiate and professional basketball coach. he coached three different professional teams in his career: the american basketball association's spirits of st. louis, and the nba's buffalo braves and new jersey nets. he also served as the nets' general manager. he died in williamsville, new york on july 7, 2015, at the age of 87. mackinnon jr. also has four sisters.  references  1960 births living people american expatriate basketball people in china american men's basketball coaches american men's basketball players basketball coaches from new york (state) basketball players from new york (state) college men's basketball head coaches in the united states college men's basketball players in the united states colorado 14ers coaches george washington colonials men's basketball coaches idaho stampede coaches king's college (pennsylvania) alumni los angeles d-fenders coaches marshall thundering herd men's basketball coaches merchant marine mariners men's basketball coaches niagara purple eagles men's basketball coaches north carolina tar heels men's basketball coaches notre dame fighting irish men's basketball coaches sportspeople from buffalo, new york springfield armor coaches texas legends coaches
the bachelors (spanish: los solterones) is a 1953 mexican musical comedy film directed by miguel m. delgado and starring luis aguilar, rosita arenas, and andres soler.  partial cast  luis aguilar as gonzalo    rosita arenas as sebastiana    andres soler as don rafael gandia    carlos agosti as carlos    carlota solares as eva marino    eduardo alcaraz as gerente hotel    jose munoz   jose pardave   enrique diaz 'indiano' as don procopio    elisa quintanilla   pedro elviro   rafael icardo as don lauro    alvaro matute   elena luquin   carmen ignarra as magda  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 musical comedy films mexican musical comedy films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by miguel m. delgado mexican black-and-white films
the bank of ireland £100 note is a banknote of the pound sterling. it is the largest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  history the bank of ireland began issuing notes in 1783, the same year as the bank's founding. early banknotes were denominations of the irish pound, but following that currency's abolition in 1826 banknotes produced by the bank of ireland were denominated in pounds sterling. these early banknotes were printed by the bank in dublin, and featured a design with a row of mercury heads across the top. this basic design remained effectively unchanged for 120 years. northern irish banknotes are fully backed such that holders have the same level of protection as those holding genuine bank of england notes. the £100 note is currently the largest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  the £100 note of the queen's university belfast series was first issued in 2005. this issue features a representation of hibernia on the front, alongside shields of arms of the six counties of northern ireland. the back of this note displays an image of queen's university belfast. although most of the bank of ireland's banknotes were replaced by the bushmills series in 2008, new £100 notes are still issued as the queen's university belfast series.  designs  information taken from bank of ireland website.  references  external links  bank of ireland banknotes the association of commercial banknote issuers  banknotes of northern ireland one-hundred-base-unit banknotes
armandas kelmelis (born 22 march 1998) is a lithuanian rower.  in 2016 less than a month before 2016 summer olympics started a.kelmelis was selected to olympic team due withdrawal of injured rolandas mascinskas.  references  1998 births living people lithuanian male rowers sportspeople from kaunas rowers at the 2016 summer olympics rowers at the 2020 summer olympics olympic rowers of lithuania
the 1947 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1947 college football season.  in their first season under head coach lyle bennett, the chippewas compiled a 2-5-1 record and were outscored by their opponents by a combined total of 136 to 105. the team opened its season with a 34-14 loss to the detroit titans on september 19, 1947. the highlights of the season were shutout victories over northern michigan (45-0) on october 17, 1947, and michigan state normal (33-0) on november 1, 1947.  lyle bennett was hired as the school's head football coach on january 22, 1947, following the elevation of ron finch to be head of the school's department of health and education. an alumnus of central michigan, bennett had worked as a trainer for the michigan wolverines men's track and field team before accepting a position as an assistant football coach at central michigan in 1946.  schedule  references  external links  1948 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
chang chen ghost stories is a 2016 chinese romance horror thriller film directed by zhan yue. it was released in china on july 8, 2016.  plot  cast lu shan fu heng wu jinxi song hanhuan ding qi wei yun li yu  reception the film has grossed  in china.  references   chinese films 2016 horror thriller films chinese horror thriller films 2016 horror films 2010s romantic thriller films chinese supernatural horror films 2010s mandarin-language films
the 2016-17 ball state cardinals men's basketball team represented ball state university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the cardinals, led by fourth-year head coach james whitford, played their home games at worthen arena as members of the west division of the mid-american conference. they finished the season 21-13, 11-7 in mac play to finish in a tie for the west division title. as the no. 4 seed in the mac tournament they defeated western michigan in the quarterfinals to advance to the semifinals where they lost to akron. they were invited to the collegeinsider.com tournament where they lost in the first round to fort wayne.  previous season the cardinals finished the 2015-16 season 21-14, 10-8 in mac play to finish in a tie for the west division championship. they lost to miami (oh) in the first round of the mac tournament. they were invited to the collegeinsider.com tournament where they defeated tennessee state and ut martin to advance to the quarterfinals before losing to columbia.  departures  incoming transfers  recruiting class of 2016  recruiting class of 2017  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac tournament  |- !colspan=9 style=| cit  see also  2016-17 ball state cardinals women's basketball team  references  ball state ball state ball state cardinals men's basketball seasons ball state ball state
events from the year 1906 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  chairman of the council of ministers -   until 5 may - sergei witte  5 may-21 july - ivan logginovich goremykin  starting 21 july - pyotr arkadyevich stolypin pyotr stolypin, russian prime minister from 1906-1911.  events   russian constitution of 1906  1906 russian legislative election  markovo republic  białystok pogrom  bloody wednesday (poland)  siedlce pogrom  vyborg manifesto  births   19 december - leonid brezhnev, soviet statesman (b. 1906).  deaths   june 14 - sophia amirajibi, georgian poetry translator (b. 1847)  references  1906 in the russian empire years of the 20th century in the russian empire
thomas a. mensah (1932 - 7 april 2020) was a ghanaian judge, law lecturer and diplomat. he was the first president of the international international tribunal for the law of the sea (itlos) and a former assistant secretary-general at the international maritime organization and ghana's high commissioner to south africa.  mensah was the president of a five-member tribunal in that permanent court of arbitration that ruled on the case filed by the philippines against china which concerns the disputed territories in the south china sea particularly the validity of the nine-dash line claim of china. he died in london on 7 april 2020 after a short illness.  early life and education thomas mensah was born in kumasi, ghana, on 12 may 1932. he was educated at achimota school. he held a bachelor of arts from the university of ghana (1956), a bachelor of laws from the university of london (1959), a master of laws (1962) and a doctor of juridical science (1964) from yale university law school.  career he was a lecturer and dean at the faculty of law, university of ghana from 1966-1968 and also worked with the international atomic energy agency, a former president of the international maritime organization, the un environment programme (world maritime university, malmo, sweden leiden university, leiden, the law of the sea institute, university of hawaii, usa) and served as ghana's high commissioner to the south africa. he was appointed by bangladesh in the maritime boundary delimitation dispute between bangladesh and myanmar in the bay of bengal. in 2013, he was awarded the international maritime prize for 2012 from the imo council. he was a president of the imo and defended the country in a number of lawsuits at the international court on the law of the sea (itlos), the most notable one being the boundary proceedings between ghana and cote d'ivoire. he was an expedient judge who represented ghana in the "ara libertad" against argentina. he has to his credit several publications in the field of public international law, law of the sea, maritime law and international environmental law.  references   1932 births 2020 deaths ghanaian lawyers international tribunal for the law of the sea judges university of ghana faculty ghanaian expatriate judges high commissioners of ghana to south africa people from kumasi ghanaian judges of united nations courts and tribunals
dorothy shoemaker mcdiarmid (october 22, 1906 - june 8, 1994) was a teacher, real estate broker, quaker activist, and virginia legislator for nearly 26 years.  early and family life born in waco, texas to u.s. department of agriculture employee daniel naylor shoemaker and his wife frances hartley, dorothy shoemaker was raised in the washington d.c. metropolitan area (where her parents helped found the florida avenue friends meeting). she later remembered attending women's suffrage parades in which her mother marched. she attended central high school, then swarthmore college in pennsylvania, from which she graduated with a bachelor's degree in political science in 1929. her family had roots in loudoun county, virginia, ancestors having attended the goose creek meeting.  in 1932, dorothy married fellow swarthmore graduate norman hugh ("mac") mcdiarmid (1907-1993), and their marriage lasted 61 years until his death. beginning in 1939, they lived on a 50-acre farm between vienna, virginia and reston, virginia.  career dorothy mcdiarmid taught school at the sidwell friends school for a time, as well as in northern virginia. she was active in the parent teacher association (becoming president of the fairfax county federation chapter and uniting the white and black ptas) as well as the league of women voters, democratic women's club, boy scouts and vienna community activities while raising their children. she and her husband "mac" were partners in mcdiarmid realty and mcdiarmid associates.  political career in 1959, she ran for the general assembly (a part-time position) to oppose the byrd organization's plan of massive resistance to the united states supreme court decisions in brown v. board of education, which included a prince edward county, virginia case. governor thomas stanley, following the direction of u.s. senator harry f. byrd proposed to close any school or district that integrated, even those integrating pursuant to court order, as in nearly arlington as well as norfolk and albemarle county.  mcdiarmid championed public schools, as well as improved services for children and women and distribution of state budget monies according to population. several newspaper surveys ranked her among the ten most effective delegates. mcdiarmid succeeded in adding kindergarten to the public school schedule, as well as helped create george mason university and five community colleges in northern virginia. early in her political career, she proposed virginia's creation of a committee on the status of women, which was defeated legislatively, but established as an executive
branch committee by governor albertis s. harrison jr. mcdiarmid also advocated ratification of the equal rights amendment to the u.s. constitution and abolition of the death penalty, but her virginia general assembly colleagues never passed those measures (although the 1970 virginia constitution does include an equal rights section).  although temporarily defeated for re-election in 1961 and 1969 (as discussed below), mcdiarmid became one of the most influential women ever elected to the house of delegates. she was the first woman appointed to the committee on rules, ranking member of the house education committee, and from 1986 until her retirement, she became the first woman to preside over the committee that prepared the state's budget (the house committee on appropriations).  after retiring from the general assembly, mcdiarmid served as vice chair of the governor's commission on educational opportunity for all virginians. during her lifetime, mcdiarmid won the pta's lifetime member achievement award, the first annual award of the fairfax county human rights commission, and the fairfax county woman of achievement award (1971, 1972). she also received the outstanding virginian award in 1989 and the george mason medal (a lifetime achievement award) from the george mason university board of visitors in 1990.  due to the redistricting issue eventually resolved by the supreme court in davis v. mann, fairfax county only had two delegates in the 1961 election, and democrat john c. webb (another named plaintiff in davis v. mann, with arlington's c. harrison mann) and one-term republican glenn a. burklund outpolled mcdiarmid, who thus lost her seat until again elected two years later. in the republican landslide of 1969, republicans vincent f. callahan jr., warren e. barry, david a. sutherland and byron f. andrews jr., and democrat clive l. duval ii outpolled mcdiarmid for the five seats allowed fairfax county. she defeated andrews in 1971 and 1973. following the 1972 election, callahan was appointed to the appropriations committee on which mcdiarmid also served (and chaired from 1986 until her retirement in 1989); callahan would later also chair that powerful committee. complicating matters somewhat, before the 1960 census, delegate districts were not numbered. following the 1970 census, both she and callahan were delegates from the 18th house district, and other sections of fairfax were in the 19th house district, which had 3 delegates. following the 1980 census, mcdiarmid represented the 35th delegate district and callahan the 34th. other house districts including portions
of fairfax county included the 33rd and 36th through 47th, although some of the districts above the 42nd also included parts of the cities of alexandria and arlington. after mcdiarmid announced her retirement in 1989, david a. battaglia won the democratic primary to succeed her, but lost to republican real estate developer richard l. fisher in the november general election.  death and legacy mcdiarmid died of a heart attack at inova fairfax hospital on june 9, 1994, within a year after her beloved husband mac's death, though survived by their children and grandchildren. her memorial service at the washington friends meeting featured many accounts of her gentleness and strength. she and her husband are buried at the goose creek burying ground in loudoun county, virginia.  her papers are in the george mason university special collections, and are being indexed. in 2015, the library of virginia honored her service as one of its virginia women in history. in 2004, he neighbors in the ayr hill garden club of vienna, virginia established a children's garden and named it in her honor.  references  1906 births 1994 deaths members of the virginia house of delegates virginia democrats swarthmore college alumni 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american women politicians people from waco, texas people from fairfax county, virginia
the christian verlag is a german publishing house, based in munich. the publishing house belongs to geranova bruckmann publishing house since 2008. managers are clemens schussler and hans-joachim hartmann.  history  the christian verlag was founded in 1947 in bad nauheim. from 1978 it became part of the time life books group and the program priorities developed more towards enjoyment and lifestyle themes.  from 2001 until 2008 the publishing house belonged to prestel publishing group.  since summer 2008 it belongs to the publishing house geranova bruckmann. christian verlag already received awards from the french organization world cookbook and the medal from the gastronomische akademie deutschlands (gastronomic academy germany). in 2012, die vegetarische kochschule by christl kurz was awarded with the gourmand world cookbook awards in the vegetarian cooking category, and in 2013, die venezianische kuche from russell norman won in category "italian". from 2009 to 2015, christian verlag published in cooperation with the gong publishing the magazines landidee, landidee wohnen&deko, landapotheke, landfrisch and landgarten.  in addition to its emphases on cooking and gardening, as well as, home and lifestyle, the publisher is also the publisher of restaurant and wine guide gault millau.  references  external links     1947 establishments in germany book publishing companies of germany mass media in munich
isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy is a series of twelve themed paperback fantasy and science fiction anthologies edited by  isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh, a companion set to the ten volume isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction, produced by the same editors. it was published by signet/new american library from 1983 to 1991. volumes 1 and 2 were also issued in hardcover in an omnibus collection titled isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy: witches & wizards.  each volume in the series featured stories devoted to a different fantastic theme, as indicated in the individual volume titles. most volumes also included an introduction by asimov.  the series  wizards (1983)  witches (1984)  cosmic knights (1985)  spells (1985)  giants (1985)  mythical beasties (1986)  magical wishes (1986)  devils (1987)  atlantis (1988)  ghosts (1988)  curses (1989)  faeries (1991)  references  see also isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction  fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies isaac asimov anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
| lowest attendance   = 200 (x3) | tries               =  | top point scorer    =  johnny mcphillipsulster a 62 | top try scorer      =  tom williamsscarlets ps 8 | venue               = irish independent park | attendance2         =  | champions           = munster a  | count               = 2 | runner-up           = jersey reds | website             = b&i cup website | previous year       = 2015-16 | previous tournament = 2015-16 british and irish cup | next year           = 2017-18 | next tournament     = 2017-18 british and irish cup }}  the 2016-17 british and irish cup was the eighth season of the annual rugby union competition for second tier, semi-professional clubs from britain and ireland. london welsh were the defending champions having won the 2015-16 final against yorkshire carnegie 10-33 at headingley carnegie stadium, leeds on 10 april 2016. there have been six different winners and six different losing finalists in the seven seasons of its existence. the format of the competition is similar to last season with scottish clubs not competing. for the second consecutive season the four welsh teams were the reserve sides of the teams competing in the pro12 competition instead of clubs from the welsh premier division.  competition format the competition format is a pool stage followed by a knockout stage. the pool stage consists of five pools of four teams playing home and away matches. the top side in each pool, plus the three best runners-up, progress to the knockout stage. the eight quarter-finalists are ranked, with top four teams having home advantage. the four winning quarter-finalists progress to the semi-final draw. most of the matches are played on the same weekends as the european champions cup and european challenge cup. first round matches began on 14 october 2016 and the final was held on the 21 april 2017.  participating teams and locations the allocation of teams is as follows:   - twelve clubs from rfu championship   - four irish provinces represented by 'a' teams   - four welsh regions represented by premiership select teams.  pool stages  pool 1  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  round 6   postponed from 21 january due to frozen pitch.  pool 2 london welsh entered liquidation on 8 december 2016 and were disqualified from the competition and their results from rounds 1 and 2 annulled.  round 1   london welsh expelled from the competition  round 2   london welsh expelled from the competition.   match postponed due to the death of munster
rugby's head coach anthony foley and played on 7 january 2016.  round 3  round 4  round 2 (rescheduled game)   match postponed from 22 october 2016.  round 5  round 6  pool 3  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  round 6  pool 4  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  round 6  pool 5  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  round 6  knock-out stage the eight qualifiers were seeded according to performance in the pool stage. the four top seeds hosted the quarter-finals against the lower seeds, in a 1 v 8, 2 v 7, 3 v 6 and 4 v 5 format. if two teams qualified from the same group they could not be drawn together despite the seeding, therefore, jersey reds did not play against ulster a. the quarter-finals were held over the weekend of 10/11/12 march 2017, the semi-finals were held over the weekend of 31 march and 1 & 2 april 2017 and the final was played on 21/22/23 april 2017.  teams are ranked by: 1 - competition points (4 for a win, 2 for a draw) 2 - where competition points are equal, greatest number of wins 3 - where the number of wins are equal, aggregate points difference 4 - where the aggregate points difference are equal, greatest number of points scored  quarter-finals the draw for the quarter-finals was made on 23 january 2017, with the matches to be played on the weekend of 10-13 march 2017.  semi-finals  final  attendances  individual statistics  points scorers includes tries as well as conversions, penalties and drop goals. appearance figures also include coming on as substitutes (unused substitutes not included).  top points scorers  top try scorers  season records  team largest home win - 77 points 84 - 7 ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 largest away win - 49 points 68 - 19 leinster a away to richmond on 15 october 2016 most points scored - 84 points 84 - 7 ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 most tries in a match - 12 ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 most conversions in a match - 10 ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 most penalties in a match - 5 rotherham titans at home to doncaster knights on 15 october 2016 most
drop goals in a match - 1 richmond away to leinster on 20 january 2017  player most points in a match - 26  rory clegg for ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 most tries in a match - 4  rob o'donnell for yorkshire carnegie at home to bedford blues on 23 october 2016 most conversions in a match - 10  rory clegg for ealing trailfinders at home to scarlets premiership select on 11 march 2017 most penalties in a match -  5  lloyd evans for rotherham titans at home to doncaster knights on 15 october 2016 most drop goals in a match -  1  freddy gabbitass for richmond away to leinster on 20 january 2017  attendances highest - 4,813 ulster a at home to london scottish on 13 january 2017 lowest - 200 (x3) ulster a at home to jersey reds on 14 october 2016 connacht eagles at home to cornish pirates on 16 october 2016 newport gwent dragons premiership select at home to ealing trailfinders on 22 october 2016 highest average attendance - 2,180 (london irish)  lowest average attendance - 283 scarlets premiership select)  references  external links   unofficial british and irish cup website - latest news, teams etc  british and irish cup 2016-17 rugby union tournaments for clubs 2016-17 rfu championship 2016-17 in irish rugby union 2016-17 in welsh rugby union 2016-17 in british rugby union
"evil eye" is a song by scottish recording artist kt tunstall. it was released as the uk first promotional single off her fifth studio album kin. the song was released at the same time as the golden state ep along with the songs "all or nothing", "the healer", and a remix of it. it was released through itunes on 16 june 2016.  tunstall worked with tony hoffer on the song. a music video was released on 20 june 2016 on vevo, it was directed by tunstall herself. it has also been played live in the billboard building.  track listing  references  songs about eyes 2016 songs 2016 singles kt tunstall songs songs written by kt tunstall sony music singles caroline records singles
georgia - hong kong relations are bilateral relations between georgia and hong kong.  georgia and hong kong bilateral relations could be traced back to 1991 when georgia became independent from the soviet union and established diplomatic relations with the united kingdom. hong kong, by then a dependent territory of the united kingdom, followed the british in diplomacy and immediately recognized the independence of georgia as well as established relations with the nation. the friendly relations have continued even after the united kingdom withdrew from hong kong in 1997.  free trade agreements were negotiated between the two on may 9, 2016. the agreements with georgia cover, among others, several key elements, including (a) elimination or reduction of tariffs, (b) liberalisation of non-tariff barriers, (c) flexible disciplines on rules of origin which would facilitate bilateral trade, (d) customs facilitation procedures, (e) liberalisation as well as promotion and protection of investment; (f) liberalisation of trade in services, and (g) the legal and institutional arrangement and dispute settlement mechanism for the fta. the government spokesman of hong kong suggested that georgia was an emerging market and that the free trade agreements will help expand hong kong's free trade agreements network into the respective regions including eurasia.  both nations coexist in several international organizations. the relations between the two focus on economic, social and cultural aspects because hong kong is restricted by hong kong basic law from concluding military bilateral agreements with foreign countries.  see also   foreign relations of georgia   foreign relations of hong kong  china-georgia relations  references  bilateral relations of hong kong hong kong
zenetti is a surname of italian origin. notable people with the surname include:   leopold von zenetti (1805-1892), austrian composer  lothar zenetti (1926-2019), german catholic theologian, priest, and author of books and poetry  see also  zanetti  surnames of italian origin
"paradise" is a song recorded by south korean girl group hello venus as the second collaboration with producing and writing team devine channel. it was released on july 18, 2016 by fantagio music. the lyrics were written by yorkie and ryu and the music was composed by devine channel and nikki paige. a music video for the song was also released on july 18.  background and release  on july 10, 2016, fantagio music announced that a second collaboration song between hello venus and devine channel will be released. on july 11, it was reported that a music video for the upcoming song was already shot and that the collaboration is titled 'hello venus x devine channel: part 2, paradise'. on july 14, it was revealed that "paradise" will be released on july 18.  the song was released on july 18 in south korea on melon as a digital download and worldwide on itunes. the music video was released on the same day.  track listing  digital download  release history  references   2016 singles 2016 songs hello venus songs
vendaval (gale in english) is a song of the former banda calypso. it was the first single.  the song  did not have national impact, but had a good impact in belem and in cities of the northeast. the music was present in top 3 compilations of the band, os 20 super sucessos, os maiores sucessos and as 20+. also achieved considerable success in 2001, when it was re-recorded by the band sergipana calcinha preta being present in your cd volume 7, seu coracao vai a´render o que e paixao  today  according to joelma and chimbinha, the fans ask many old songs for new shows, songs like vendaval and others of the same age. on tour sweden the band did not take the repertoire of music and made a simple presentation without choreography or effects, simply joelma and the public.  1999 singles 1999 songs
ivory and bone is a prehistoric fiction novel by julie eshbaugh, published by harperteen in june 2016. it is geared towards young adults, and is an ice age "allusion to pride and prejudice".  references  novels set in prehistory 2016 american novels
battery i, 1st regiment of united states artillery was a field artillery battery of the united states army between 1821 and 1901 that notably served in the union army during the american civil war.  service history  early history  the company was organized in june 1821 at fort constitution, new hampshire under the command of captain fabius whiting.  it was posted at various east coast installations in garrison through 1836, when the company was deployed to fort mitchel, alabama and was sent into the field during the creek war of 1836.  shortly thereafter, the company was deployed to florida, where it joined the campaign during the second seminole war from 1836 until 1838.  equipped as a field artillery battery, the unit participated in the mexican-american war from 1847 until 1848, joining the campaign under the command of captain john bankhead magruder during the siege of vera cruz and engaged at the battles of cerro gordo, contreras, churubusco, molino del rey, and mexico city.  in 1850, battery i was ordered to the pacific coast to take post at san diego, california; the unit remained in california through 1855, when it was ordered to join the united states boundary survey en route to texas.  in 1857, the company returned to the atlantic coast at fort adams, rhode island.  the battery was ordered to fort leavenworth, kansas with much of the regular army in 1859, where it remained until january 1861 before moving to washington, d.c.  civil war  upon the outbreak of the american civil war, captain magruder resigned his commission and joined the confederacy. command of battery i was given to captain james b. ricketts, who led the battery at the battle of bull run; ricketts was severely wounded in action and captured, and command soon passed to lieutenant edmund kirby jr., who led the battery through the peninsula campaign, antietam, and fredericksburg before he was killed at the battle of chancellorsville.  lieutenant george woodruff led the company at the battle of gettysburg, and was killed in action.  lieutenant tully mccrea briefly commanded the battery after gettysburg, and was replaced by lieutenant francis "frank" sands french.  in october 1863, captain ricketts (absent since july 1861) was replaced with captain alanson merwin randol; randol, who had commanded battery e & g, 1st u.s. of the horse artillery brigade since 1862, trained and refitted battery i as a horse artillery battery, and in april 1864 it was merged with battery h, 1st
u.s. to create battery h & i, 1st u.s.  battery h & i served for the remainder of the war as a horse artillery battery, typically attached to the cavalry division. it was present during the wilderness campaign of 1864, including the battle of cold harbor in june 1864.   captain randol left the battery for west point in august 1864, and later accepted a volunteer commission; for the rest of the war, the company was commanded by its lieutenants.  post war  after the war, the battery was posted on garrison duty across the united states: at fort brown, texas, 1865 - 1869; at fort trumbull, connecticut, 1869 -1870; at fort delaware, delaware, 1870; at fort wood, new york, 1870 -1872; at key west barracks, florida, 1872 - 1875; at fort warren, massachusetts, 1875 - 1881.  in november 1881, the company was transferred to the department of the pacific: it was posted at fort canby, washington territory, 1881 - 1882, fort stevens, oregon, 1882 - 1883, fort canby, washington territory, 1883 - 1884, fort alcatraz, california, 1884 - 1886, the presidio, california, 1886 -1890.  in 1890, the battery returned to the atlantic coast: it was posted at fort hamilton, new york, 1890 - 1896, fort monroe, virginia, 1896 - 1898, and fort morgan, alabama, 1898 - 1901.  the company was commanded by captain william montrose graham from april 1872 until july 1879, captain john c. white from july 1879 until october 1883, captain richard shaw from october 1883 until june 1896, and captain robert patterson from june 1896 until february 1901.  in february 1901, the regimental artillery service was dissolved and reorganized as the united states artillery corps: battery i, 1st u.s. was converted to the eighth company, coast artillery.  detailed civil war service moved to washington, d.c., january 7-29, 1861, and served duty there until july. advanced on manassas, va., july 16-21, 1861. first battle of bull run july 21. moved to poolesville, md., august 7-15. duty there and at edward's ferry until march 1862. ball's bluff october 21, 1861. edward's ferry october 22. ordered to the virginia peninsula march 1862. siege of yorktown april 5-may 4. battle of seven pines, may 31-june 1. seven days battles before richmond june 25-july 1.
peach orchard and savage station july 29. white oak swamp and glendale june 30. malvern hill july 1. moved to alexandria, va., august 16-23. maryland campaign september 6-22. battle of antietam september 16-17. at harpers ferry until october 30. movemed to falmouth, va., october 30-november 17. battle of fredericksburg december 11-15. "mud march" january 20-24, 1863. at falmouth until april. chancellorsville campaign april 27-may 6. battle of chancellorsville may 1-5. gettysburg campaign june 11-july 24. battle of gettysburg july 1-3. advance to line of the rapidan september 13-17. bristoe campaign october 9-22. bristoe station october 14. advance to line of the rappahannock november 7-8. mine run campaign november 26-december 2. campaign from the rapidan to the james. battle of the wilderness may 5-7. battle of spotsylvania court house may 8-21. battle of north anna may 23-26. battle of totopotomoy creek may 28-31. battle of cold harbor june 1-7. gaines's mill, salem church, and haw's shop june 2. sheridan's trevilian raid june 7-24. trevilian station june 11-12. black creek or tunstall station and white house or st. peter's church june 21. st. mary's church june 24. at light house point june 29-july 27. at camp barry, washington, d.c. until september. arthur's swamp september 29. poplar springs church september 29-october 1. wyatt's road october 1. boydton plank road october 27-28. warren's raid on weldon railroad december 7-12. dabney's mills february 5-7, 1865. appomattox campaign march 28-april 9. dinwiddie court house march 30-31. five forks april 1. namozine church april 3. paine's cross roads april 5. sailor's creek april 6. appomattox court house april 9. surrender of lee and his army. moved to washington, d.c., may. grand review of the armies may 23.  notable commanders  captain john bankhead magruder captain james brewerton ricketts - wounded in action and captured at the first battle of bull run  1st lieutenant edmund kirby jr. - in command in ricketts' absence, mortally wounded at the  battle of chancellorsville  1st lieutenant george augustus woodruff - replaced kirby
, mortally wounded at the battle of gettysburg  1st lieutenant tully mccrea - replaced woodruff commanding battery at gettysburg after woodruff was mortally wounded; he briefly commanded the battery after the battle captain alanson merwin randol - succeeded ricketts, october 1863 to august 1864, june 1865 to 1872. captain william montrose graham  see also   list of united states regular army civil war units  1st air defense artillery regiment  references  dyer, frederick h. a compendium of the war of the rebellion (des moines, ia: dyer pub. co.), 1908. attribution  external links  battery i, 1st u.s. light artillery monument at gettysburg battlefield  united states regular army civil war units and formations u military units and formations established in 1861 military units and formations disestablished in 1865
harry lennart yrjo bergstrom (1910-1989) was a finnish pianist, conductor and composer of popular music and film scores.  selected filmography  the general's fiancee (1951)  a night in rio (1951)  after the fall of man (1953)  it began in the rain (1953)  song of warsaw (1953)  references  bibliography   kaapa, pietari: directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  virtamo, keijo (ed.): otavan musiikkitieto: a-o, pp. 46-47. helsinki: otava, 1997. .  external links     1910 births 1989 deaths finnish male composers musicians from tampere 20th-century finnish male musicians
ivana loncarek (born 8 april 1991) is a croatian athlete specialising in the sprint hurdles.  she has personal bests of 13.09 seconds in the 100 metres hurdles (-0.3 m/s, pitesti 2016) and 8.22 seconds in the 60 metres hurdles (gothenburg 2013).  international competitions  references  1991 births living people croatian female hurdlers athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games competitors at the 2015 summer universiade competitors at the 2017 summer universiade mediterranean games competitors for croatia
pietro bucalossi (9 august 1905 - 15 march 1992) was an italian physician and politician. he is remembered for his cancer research, and for his austerity and small government policies while mayor of milan in the 1960s.  biography  medical career born in san miniato, tuscany, pietro bucalossi was a graduate in medicine and surgery from the university of pisa. he became a prominent oncologist and an associate of the national institute of cancer (istituto nazionale dei tumori; int), and moved to milan in 1934. he was a lifelong member of the "italian league for the fight against cancer", and was also director of the int from 1956 to 1974. additionally, he wrote several medical books with his protege, umberto veronesi.  war record in 1940, at the beginning of world war ii, he began service as a medical captain in the italian royal army. following the events of 25 july (benito mussolini's deposition) in 1943, he left the army and entered both the italian resistance movement and the national liberation committee as a member of the action party. although a committed partisan, by the end of the war he harboured a profound distrust of the italian communists for their role in concealing the death of mussolini.  political career in 1947, the action party disbanded and bucalossi joined the socialist party of italian workers (partito socialista dei lavoratori italiani; psli), a breakaway from the italian socialist party (partito socialista italiano; psi) that later became the italian democratic socialist party (partito socialista democratico italiano; psdi). in 1958 he was elected on the psdi list to represent milan in the chamber of deputies, where he remained for six years before resigning to become mayor of milan in 1964.  known for his strong personality and short temper, bucalossi was a sincere believer in small government (despite his party's statist, social-democratic philosophy), similar to that of an american fiscal conservative. he introduced balanced budget and austerity policies, which cut the city administration's spending drastically, and opposed the creation of regional councils, sarcastically dubbing them "parlamentini" ("small parliaments"). however, he also secured enough funding to ensure the opening of several public parks, the expansion of linate airport, and the inauguration of the first milan metro underground railway line.  in 1967, he resigned as mayor due to a lack of support from his party colleagues, who were discomfited by his opposition to the pact then in place between
the psi and psdi. he was re-elected a year later to the chamber of deputies as a representative of the italian republican party (partito reppublicano italiano; pri). bucalossi subsequently became the minister of public works in aldo moro's fourth cabinet from 1974 to 1976, where he introduced a construction permit law that sought to quell the rapid increase in illegal property construction ("abusivismo"). in 1977, he left the pri in disagreement over the party's support for abortion, joining the italian liberal party (partito liberale italiano; pli) soon afterwards.  after his time as a deputy came to an end in 1979, he left italian politics and returned to his job as an oncologist. he died in 1992.  references  external links    1905 births 1992 deaths people from san miniato action party (italy) politicians italian democratic socialist party politicians italian republican party politicians italian liberal party politicians deputies of legislature iii of italy deputies of legislature iv of italy deputies of legislature v of italy deputies of legislature vi of italy deputies of legislature vii of italy mayors of milan politicians of tuscany italian oncologists university of pisa alumni italian resistance movement members knights grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic
events from the year 1779 in russia  incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events   pavlograd founded, lipetsk and sergach granted town status.  births   2 february - maria naryshkina, mistress of alexander i of russia  deaths   13 april - grigory teplov, philosopher (born 1717)  25 september - ekaterina chernysheva, courtier (born 1715)  references  1779 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
take a powder is a 1953 british comedy film directed by lionel tomlinson and starring julian vedey, max bacon and isabel george. a b film, it was made at brighton studios. the plot is set against the backdrop of the developing cold war.  cast  julian vedey as prof. schultz    max bacon as maxie    isabel george as betty    maudie edwards as matron    neville gates as bill    fred kitchen jr. as dr. fowler    alexis chesnakov as dr. stroganoff    larry taylor as spike   bobby beaumont   gordon craig   joe cunningham   mark singleton   muriel white  diana wynne  references  bibliography  chibnall, steve & mcfarlane, brian. the british 'b' film. palgrave macmillan, 2009.  external links  1953 films british comedy films 1953 comedy films english-language films british films films set in england british black-and-white films
william p. keady (april 1, 1852 - september 16, 1917) was an american politician who served in the oregon house of representatives. he was chosen to serve as speaker of that body in 1885 and 1893. he was first elected to the house to represent benton county in 1882 and served until 1885. in 1892, he was elected once again to the house, this time to represent multnomah county.  references  speakers of the oregon house of representatives 1917 deaths 1852 births businesspeople from portland, oregon oregon republicans people from washington county, pennsylvania people from benton county, oregon people from multnomah county, oregon 19th-century american businesspeople
the estadio municipal de san cristobal de las casas is a multi-use stadium located in san cristobal de las casas, chiapas, mexico.  it is currently used mostly for football matches and is the home stadium for ocelotes unach.  the stadium has a capacity of 4,000 people.  references  external links  sports venues in chiapas municipal de san cristobal de las casas athletics (track and field) venues in mexico
the ribeira grande city hall () is a medieval structure constructed to house the municipal council/authority, situated in the civil parish of matriz, municipality of ribeira grande, on the portgueese archipelago of the azores.  history  the first political authority within the region was founded on 4 august 1507, with the first official minutes conserved in the municipal archives dating to 5 january 1555.  between 1563 and 1564, there was a combined seismic and volcanological event resulting in complete destruction to the community and the original municipal hall.  work on a municipal building began in the 17th century and included a subterranean jail with successive floors. by 17 february 1796, there was a decision to construct two arches over the rua das espigas and, above them, build rooms for prison officers. the representatives also left space aside, in the most convenient place, to build a chapel for masses for the prisoners. at the same time, it was decided to construct a tower and install a clock. in this sequence, a wing was constructed forming a passageway over the public accessway and a clock tower, to shelter the prison officers and his inmates, along with bells and municipal clock. between 1860 and 1864, the public gardens were installed in front of the municipal hall.  by the 1930s, the interior of the building was remodeled, resulting in the construction of interior staircase, the placement of stained-glass window to illuminate the same, and the installation of the ceiling in the main hall. the ashlar azulejo tiles were installed in the main hall in 1936, by jorge rei colaco.  in 2006, a detailed plan to safeguard the historic center of the city was instituted, that included the medieval municipal palace/hall.  architecture  the municipal hall is situated in the city of ribeira grande, fronted by the gardens of the praca hintze ribeiro (also known as the people's garden) and alongside the walls and grade of the ribeira grande river.  immediately nearby are the church of the misericordia, church of the holy spirit and church of nossa senhora da estrela (the parochial church of ribeira grande) in the east and the ribeiragrandense theatre in the southwest.  the building is the ex-libris of the city, consisting of a three-story structure linked by archway to a right, lateral clocktower. the principal corp of the building is a rectangular plan with access by a symmetrical staircase that includes large balusters to the entrance, flanked by windows. the body is surmounted by three
windows with verandas. over the staircase is a tunnel-like passage that allows access to the subterranean floor, with an entranceway door surmounted by a lintel with the municipal coat-of-arms flanked by two diamond forms, linked to the top floor balcony console. on the facade are more contemporary windows, including rounded window (with flag and geometric motives), situated on upper left corner and window illuminating the staircase. the second, less profound, corp of the structure is situated on the right-hand side, dominated by the tower, and forming an arched "bridge". the ground floor is primarily substituted by a framed arch of grand dimensions that allows the passage of a road. on the principal facade of the upper floors are two windows with varanda and two with guillotine-style windows, while the rear have simple unframed windows.  within the main hall of the building are azulejo tiles representing the watermills, the traditional cavalhadas de sao pedro, feasts of the holy spirit, tea plantations, the former municipal coat-of-arms (dating to the constitutional monarchy) and gaspar frutuoso. in addition is the historic pillory, as well as a collection of photographs of portuguese chiefs-of-staff, beginning with queen maria ii.  references  notes  sources              municipal palace municipal palace municipal ribeira grande
adore beauty (founded 2000) is australia's first cosmetics retailer to sell exclusively online. the company is based in melbourne, australia in the suburb of northcote.  history the company was founded in 1999 by kate morris, a 21-year-old business student. morris used savings and an a$12,000 loan from her boyfriend's parents to start the business, which she ran out of her garage. she found a company in the newspaper to build the first website, which cost a$8,000 and took six months.  at first, the company only stocked two small australian brands: baiame and santalia. the first mainstream brand, bloom, signed on in 2002. clarins signed on in 2006.  the company had a $2 million turnover by the end of 2010. in 2014, the company secured a deal with estee lauder companies to become an authorized agent for clinique, bobbi brown and estee lauder brands. that same year, the company earned over $7 million in revenue and ranked 29th in the smart company 'smart50' awards. morris won the innovation award for victoria in the 2014 telstra women's business awards.  in 2015, australian retailer woolworths limited bought a 25% stake in the company for an undisclosed sum. the investment grew the company 70% over one year. morris remains the ceo.  as of 2016, the company turns over $16 million and carries 150 brands and 10,000 products. the company is an official online stockist of dermalogica, ghd, clarisonic, lancome, benefit cosmetics, aesop and kerastase. the company's findation service, which compares 22,000 foundations to find the best match, has 1.5 million users.  in 2016, the company began expanding into china through the alibaba group tmall global platform.  see also    movit  body organics  simplysiti  references  external links  adore beauty official website  companies based in melbourne cosmetics companies of australia online retailers of australia
gerhard merkl (28 february 1961 - 23 january 2016) was the domkapellmeister at the st. stephen's cathedral in passau from 2000 until 2016.  merkl was born in wallerstein, bavaria. after he finished school, he studied roman catholic church music from 1980 till 1984 at the hochschule fur musik und theater munchen. his teacher was fritz schieri. after his study he worked as a choirmaster in munich also for choirs like the "laimer kammerchor munchen" and leader and docent for several musical events.  in 2000, merkl moved to passau to work as domkapellmeister there. in this time he made himself a name as a conductor, teacher and composer. his greatest work is the „passauer pastoralmesse", with several influences of well-known german christmas carols.  at the beginning of 2016, he died in a hospital in munich due to a long-term disease.  external links   die dommusiker des bistums passau - informationen uber gerhard merkl  transeamus usque ad betlehem.  domladen passau  1961 births 2016 deaths people from donau-ries german choral conductors german male conductors (music) university of music and performing arts munich alumni musicians from bavaria
the jamia masjid, nathowal is situated in nathowal of the ludhiana district in the indian state of punjab.  location the mosque is situated in nathowal about 12 km from raikot, 54 km from ludhiana and 151 km from the capital city of chandigarh.  history in the 1947, partition of india, 10 to 12 muslim families of this village migrated to pakistan but 50 families stayed back with the sikh, who didn't allow them to leave. at that time they built a mosque for worship. now nathowal has a population of around 7,000, of which approximately 500 are muslims.  reconstruction muslims, hindus and sikhs have contributed to the repair of the mosque. of the rs2.5 million invested in the project, around rs1.5 million have been contributed by sikhs and hindus.  references  mosques in punjab, india buildings and structures in ludhiana
microsoft dynamics 365 is a product line of enterprise resource planning (erp) and customer relationship management (crm) intelligent business applications announced by microsoft in july 2016 and released on november 1, 2016.  feature applications  microsoft dynamics 365 contains 12 applications:  dynamics 365 salessales leaders, sales operations dynamics 365 customer servicecustomer service leaders, customer service operations dynamics 365 field servicefield service leaders, field service operations dynamics 365 human resourceattract, on board, core hr dynamics 365 finance & operationsfinance leaders, operation leaders dynamics 365 supply chain management - streamline planning, production, stock, warehouse, and transportation . dynamics 365 commerce dynamics 365 project service automationoperation leaders, project leaders dynamics 365 marketing-adobe marketing cloud, dynamics 365 for marketing dynamics 365 artificial intelligenceai for sales, ai for customer service, ai for market insight dynamics 365 mixed realityremote assist, layout, guides dynamics 365 business centralerp for smbs  references   accounting software american companies established in 2016 cloud applications erp software microsoft cloud services 360
liberal environmental party (, les) is a green-liberal political party in the czech republic. it was established by martin bursik as a split from green party. the party is pro-european and supports vaclav havel's legacy.  history the les participated in the 2014 european parliament election but failed to win any seats, receiving 7544 votes (0.49%).  the party announced on 12 july 2017 that it would participate in the 2017 legislative election on the electoral lists of top 09.  electoral results  european parliament  footnotes  external links official party website (in czech)  green political parties in the czech republic green liberalism liberal parties in the czech republic political parties established in 2013 pro-european political parties in the czech republic top 09 green party (czech republic) breakaway groups 2013 establishments in the czech republic
2016 hockey champions trophy may refer to:   2016 men's hockey champions trophy  2016 women's hockey champions trophy
jean-paul barety (10 march 1928 - 3 november 2018) was a french lawyer and politician. he served as a member of the national assembly from 1994 to 1997, representing alpes-maritimes.  biography after an early career as a lawyer, barety entered politics and joined the rally for the republic (rpr). he was elected mayor of nice in 1993 and served until 1995. he was also elected as a deputy in the 2nd electoral district of alpes-maritimes, replacing christian estrosi. he served until 1997.  he was also the president of academia nissarda from 1978 until his death.  barety was awarded as a knight of the legion of honour in 1993.  references  1928 births 2018 deaths chevaliers of the legion d'honneur deputies of the 10th national assembly of the french fifth republic french lawyers mayors of nice people from nice politicians from provence-alpes-cote d'azur rally for the republic politicians
gohawar is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 6.6 km away from postal head office in goraya, 20 km from phillaur, 31.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 134 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed primary school (gps gohawar), which was founded in 1947. the school provides mid-day meals as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal is prepared on school premises.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , gohawar has a total number of 515 houses and population of 2,645of which include 1320 males and 1325 females. literacy rate of gohawar is 83.19%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 259 which is 9.79% of total population of gohawar, and child sex ratio is approximately 947 higher than state average of 897.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 86.20% of total population in gohawar. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 807 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of gohawar which includes 702 males and 105 females. according to census survey report 2011, 90.33% workers describe their work as main work and 9.67% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  bhatian railway station is the nearest train station. however, phillaur junction train station is 19.8 km away from the village. the village is 49.7 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 134 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
susan gregg gilmore is an american novelist specializing in southern fiction. her first book, looking for salvation at the dairy queen, was called a "stand-out coming-of-age novel" by npr critic alan cheese. her most recent novel, the funeral dress, was described as a "revelatory novel that offers an evocative account of the lives of appalachian working women" by kirkus reviews.  gilmore lives in chattanooga, tennessee, with her husband and dog.  early life and education   the youngest of four children, gilmore was born in 1961 in nashville, tennessee. during her high-school years, her parents moved to washington, d.c., where she attended national cathedral school. she studied history at the university of virginia, serving as a reporter for the cavalier daily. following graduation, she worked as a secretary at the smithsonian institution. she earned her master's degree in american studies from the university of texas at austin.  she married her husband in 1985; they raised three daughters together.  career   following a stint as staff writer for the chattanooga news free press, gilmore relocated to pasadena, california, freelancing for such periodicals as the los angeles times, the christian science monitor, parenting, and garden & gun. her essay, "an l.a. beagle," appeared in good dog: true stories of love, loss, and loyalty (2014). her first novel, looking for salvation at the dairy queen, was published in 2008, followed by the improper life of bezellia grove (2010) and the funeral dress (2013). gilmore is currently working on her fourth novel, also set in her native tennessee.  references  external links   susan gregg gilmore - official website  books on the nightstand - book podcast  american women novelists living people 1961 births novelists from tennessee people from nashville, tennessee university of virginia alumni university of texas at austin college of liberal arts alumni 21st-century american novelists 21st-century american women writers the cavalier daily
a leadership election was held by the people's justice party (pkr) from 16 october 2010 until 25 november 2010. it was won by incumbent president of pkr, wan azizah wan ismail.  timeline 16 october 2010 - nominations open at 10:00 utc and close at 18:00 utc 20 october 2010 - deadline for making objections to nomination papers 20 october 2010 - deadline for withdrawals of nomination 24 october 2010 - finalisation of nomination list  31 october 2010 - ballots of members open 25 november 2010 - ballots of members close 28 november 2010 - results announced  central executive committee election results [ source]  president  deputy president  vice presidents  central executive committee members  references  people's justice party (malaysia) 2010 elections in malaysia political party leadership elections in malaysia people's justice party leadership election
waterman wash is a tributary steam or arroyo of the gila river, in maricopa county, arizona, united states. its mouth is at its confluence with the gila river in the buckeye valley at an elevation of 843 feet / 257 meters. its source is at  at an elevation of  on sevenmile mountain. waterman wash takes in its tributary west prong waterman wash at .  references  rivers of maricopa county, arizona washes of arizona
david kelly littleproud (born 4 september 1976) is an australian politician who was elected deputy leader of the national party in february 2020. he serves as minister for agriculture and northern australia in the morrison government and has been a member of the house of representatives since 2016, representing the division of maranoa.  littleproud grew up in chinchilla, queensland, the son of former state government minister brian littleproud. he worked as an agribusiness banker before entering politics. he was appointed to cabinet in the turnbull government in december 2017, and has served as minister for agriculture and water resources (2017-2019), water resources, drought, rural finance, natural disaster and emergency management (2019-2020), and agriculture, drought and emergency management (2020-present).  early life littleproud was born in chinchilla, queensland. his grandfather george littleproud served on the chinchilla shire council, while his father brian littleproud was a state nationals mp and government minister. he attended chinchilla state high school and toowoomba grammar school. as of 2019, he was one of the two members of the national cabinet who had no tertiary qualification.   littleproud was an agribusiness banker before entering politics. he spent 17 years with the national australia bank (nab), including 12 years based in warwick, queensland, as district manager (agribusiness and commercial). he joined suncorp in 2011 as executive manager (business and agribusiness banking) for south west queensland.  littleproud was the owner of mr rental southern downs, a rent-to-buy business that employed four people.  political career  littleproud was elected to parliament in 2016, succeeding retiring nationals mp bruce scott.  within 18 months, littleproud was elevated directly to cabinet as minister for agriculture and water resources, following a reshuffle of the second turnbull ministry. he was sworn in at government house in canberra on 20 december 2017.  in november 2018, littleproud was additionally appointed minister assisting the prime minister for drought preparation and response. following the morrison government's return at the 2019 federal election, his title was changed to minister for water resources, drought, rural finance, natural disaster and emergency management. he re-assumed the agriculture portfolio following bridget mckenzie's resignation in february 2020, becoming minister for agriculture, drought and emergency management.  deputy leadership littleproud was viewed as a potential candidate to replace barnaby joyce as national party leader in february 2018. the position was eventually won by michael mccormack. on
4 february 2020, following bridget mckenzie's resignation, he defeated keith pitt and david gillespie to become deputy leader of the national party. the ballot for the deputy leadership was held simultaneously with a leadership spill in which mccormack defeated a challenge by joyce. it has subsequently been suggested that littleproud may emerge as a compromise candidate if conflict continues between supporters of mccormack and joyce.  political positions  murray-darling basin  on 14 february 2018 labor voted with the greens to disallow a mechanism in the murray darling basin plan which would have prevented farmers in the northern basin giving up 70gl of water which otherwise would have been lost to seepage and evaporation. the disallowance motion triggered a crisis in basin states when new south wales and victoria pledged to abandon the plan as a result. it was widely considered the withdrawal of the two largest states would see the basin plan dismantled after it had taken more than a century to strike the agreement. on 7 may 2018, in the lead up to a second disallowance motion that would have blocked 36 environmental water savings projects, littleproud struck a deal with labor that both secured the works in question and the 70gl recovery reduction for northern basin farmers which had previously been disallowed. this effectively resurrected the murray-darling basin plan by reassuring basin states the plan would be fulfilled as agreed in 2012. in addition to securing the basin plan, littleproud delivered enhanced protections for aboriginal people in the basin. this included an indigenous position on the mdba board and a world-first $40 million indigenous fund so aboriginal communities could buy water for either cultural or economic purposes.  regional investment corporation  littleproud successfully negotiated with the senate cross bench for passage of legislation establishing the regional investment corporation. on 6 february 2018 the new laws passed the upper house, breaking a political deadlock that had dragged on months. on 16 may 2018 it was announced that the ric's headquarters would be set up in orange, new south wales, fulfilling in part the nationals' commitment to deliver public service jobs to regional areas.  same-sex marriage in december 2017, littleproud was one of four members of the house of representatives to vote against the marriage amendment (definition and religious freedoms) bill 2017, which legalised same-sex marriage in australia. littleproud had pledged to vote according to the majority response of his electorate of maranoa in the australian marriage law postal survey, and maranoa recorded a result of 56.1% against changing the definition of marriage.  personal life littleproud has three children
. he and his wife sarah announced their separation in 2019 following a 20-year marriage.  as on 23 october 2021, littleproud possesses a large share portfolio in the resources industry: he owns shares in bhp, mining company south32, oil and gas exploration company blue energy, iron ore company atlas and engineering company ausenco.  references  1976 births living people liberal national party of queensland members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for maranoa members of the australian house of representatives 21st-century australian politicians government ministers of australia members of the cabinet of australia turnbull government morrison government national party of australia members of the parliament of australia
jkool is a software company based in plainview, ny, that produces software for visualizing and analyzing machine-generated data, including: logs, metrics and transactions in real-time, via a web-based interface. jkool analyzes big data including both data-in-motion (real-time) and data-at-rest (historical). jkool offer its solutions through several channels including ibm bluemix and as an on-premises offering.  product  jkool was designed to be a highly scalable, saas solution leveraging open-source software that provides real-time streaming analytics for big data and was announced at all things open. the technology at jkool was built using open-source software including apache spark, apache storm, and apache kafka sitting on top of the nosql database, apache cassandra and the search engine apache solr, the last two from datastax the micro-services platform fatpipes is used as the orchestration layer to control data management, messaging and configuration.  jkool provides analytics and visualization for log files, metrics and transactions and is focused on the needs of the devops community also providing monitoring capabilities for datastax enterprise.  jkool created a query language suitable for business users called jkql.  a version of the jkool product has been integrated with the ibm cloud marketplace.  references  external links  jkool official website  jkool open source streaming collectors  software companies based in new york (state) software companies of the united states 2014 establishments in new york (state) software companies established in 2014 american companies established in 2014
respiratory protective equipment (rpe) is a form of personal protective equipment designed to protect the wearer from a variety of airborne hazards in the form of a gas, fume, mist, dust or vapour. respirators filter the air to remove harmful particles and alongside the breathing apparatus (ba) provides clean air for the worker to breathe.  rpe is covered by a number of uk laws including:  personal protective equipment regulations 2002   personal protective equipment at work regulations 1992  health and safety at work etc. act 1974  control of substances hazardous to health regulations 2002.  the health and safety executive advises that rpe should be appropriate for the needs of the wearer, the task they are undertaking and the environment in which it takes place.  see also  cartridges and canisters of air-purifying respirators  powered air-purifying respirator  respirator  references  personal protective equipment
united nations security council resolution 2113 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions july 2013 events
miss mackenzie is an 1865 novel by anthony trollope. it was written in 1864 and published by chapman & hall in february 1865. in his 1883 autobiography, trollope stated that miss mackenzie "was written with the desire that a novel may be produced without any love; but even in this attempt it breaks down before the conclusion."  plot summary after spending most of her adult life nursing first her dying father and then her invalid brother walter, margaret mackenzie inherits a significant fortune from walter at his death. very unused to mingling in society, but seeking her place in it, miss mackenzie moves to a town called littlebath (modeled after bath, somerset), and joins a group of evangelicals centered around the popular local pastor mr. stumfold and his wife. at littlebath, she meets three men who are interested in marrying her. one is samuel rubb, the business partner of her surviving brother, tom mackenzie; another is mr. maguire, mr. stumfold's curate, who is only interested in securing her wealth; and the third is her cousin, john ball, a widower with a large family to support.  she is soon asked by mr. rubb to lend him and her brother £2500 for business purposes, the amount supposedly (but not) secured against the business. mr. rubb eventually admits that the loan is not as he had described and is unlikely to ever be paid back. his honesty allows him to remain a prospective husband, though his manners are not those of the upper class, as miss mackenzie is painfully aware. she is invited for a short stay with the ball family, and while there refuses a marriage proposal from john ball. mr. maguire asks miss mackenzie to marry him when she returns to littlebath, but she is put off by a prominent, disfiguring squint. she manages to avoid giving him a definite answer when she is informed that her brother tom is dying and wishes to see her. while in london, she refuses mr. maguire by letter, as her fortune will be needed to help support tom's family.  after tom's death, miss mackenzie finds out that there is a problem with her brother walter's will, and that john ball is the rightful inheritor. she puts up no resistance to restoring the estate to him. he asks her to marry him again while the legal issues are being dealt with by their respective lawyers, and she accepts him. mr. maguire, unwilling to believe miss mackenzie has lost all her wealth, starts writing articles in
an evangelical newspaper about a lion and the lamb he intends to devour. the story of "the lion and the lamb" is picked up by newspapers across the country, causing john ball much agony, even though public opinion is on his side. the courts eventually decide in favour of john ball, who soon becomes sir john ball after his father's death. over the objections of his mother, sir john and miss mackenzie are married. mr. maguire marries a lodger in tom mackenzie's old house, miss corza, while mr. rubb becomes the acknowledged suitor of one of tom's daughters.  critical response in his 1883 autobiography, trollope stated that miss mackenzie "was written with the desire that a novel may be produced without any love; but even in this attempt it breaks down before the conclusion." critics of the day did not praise the novel, but found that it had humor and interest. early 20th century critics like michael sadleir were dismissive of it.  though critics like the young henry james found miss mackenzie vulgar and prosaic, others have found interesting aspects to the novel, including the fidelity and sympathy with which trollope depicts the lives of ordinary characters like miss mackenzie and mr. rubb, and his satirical treatment of evangelical society, of its representatives in the novel, mr. and mrs. stumfold, and of the group gathered around them. near the end of the novel there is a london charity bazaar filled with fashionable society, which some critics have found amusingly ridiculous.  references  external links 1875 edition of miss mackenzie at archive.org miss mackenzie-easy-to-read html version at university of adelaide library  novels by anthony trollope 1865 british novels chapman & hall books novels set in victorian england
ryan clarke (born 17 june 1997) is an australian rules footballer playing for the sydney swans in the australian football league (afl).  early career  prior to being drafted he attended the prestigious melbourne grammar school and was captain of their first xviii football team. at tac cup level he played for the eastern ranges, clarke was viewed as a prolific ball-winner who averaged 31 disposals a game. he was and also impressive while playing for vic metro in the nab afl under 18 championships.  afl career he was drafted by the north melbourne football club with their second selection and thirty-first overall in the 2015 national draft.  he made his debut in the thirty-two point loss against  in round 16, 2016 at domain stadium. he was rewarded with the round nomination for the rising star in the round 18, forty-point win against the collingwood football club at etihad stadium where he recorded twenty-seven disposals, twelve contested possessions, four inside-50s and three goal assists. at the conclusion of the 2018 season, clarke was traded to the sydney swans.  family clarke is the older brother of essendon's dylan clarke.  statistics statistics are correct to the end of 2019 season.  |- style="background:#eaeaea" | scope="row" text-align:center | 2016 |  | 13 || 6 || 0 || 4 || 35 || 70 || 105 || 12 || 13 ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||   ||  |- | scope="row" text-align:center | 2017 |  | 13 || 15 || 6 || 4 || 127 || 170 || 297 || 56 || 31 ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  |- style="background:#eaeaea" | scope="row" text-align:center | 2018 |  | 13 || 19 || 2 || 3 || 207 || 168 || 375 || 82 || 32 ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  |- | scope="row" text-align:center | 2019 |  | 4 || 14 || 1 || 1 || 122 || 118 || 240 || 41 || 44 ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  ||  |- class="sortbottom" ! colspan=3 | career ! 54 ! 9 ! 12 ! 491 ! 526 ! 1017 ! 191 ! 120 !  !  !  !  !  !  !  !  |}  references  external links  1997 births living people north melbourne football club players
eastern ranges players australian rules footballers from victoria (australia) werribee football club players sydney swans players people educated at melbourne grammar school
the 2016-17 toto cup al was the 32st season of the third-important football tournament in israel since its introduction and the 11th tournament involving israeli premier league clubs only.   the competition is held in two stages. first, fourteen premier league teams were divided into three groups, five teams in groups a and b and four teams in group c, the teams playing against each other once. the best three teams from groups a and b and the best two teams from group c will advance to the quarter-finals, which will be played over two-legged ties. the semi-finals and the final are then played as one-legged matches in a neutral venue.  hapoel be'er sheva won the cup by defeating hapoel kiryat shmona 4-1 in the final.  group stage groups were allocated according to geographic distribution of the clubs, with the northern clubs allocated to group a (include team from kfar saba), in group b allocated the three teams from tel aviv, one team from petah tikva and one more team from ra'anana, the rest of the teams in group c .   the matches started july 30th.  group a  group b  group c  knockout rounds all times are in israel standard time  quarter finals  semi finals  final  references  external links  official website    al toto cup al toto cup al
spring garden street station is a former train station in the poplar neighborhood of philadelphia. it was built by the reading railroad and located on the reading viaduct. service to spring garden street ended in 1984 with the opening of the center city commuter connection, which bypassed the reading terminal.  history   spring garden street was built adjacent to the old philadelphia, germantown and norristown railroad depot at ninth and green, which had opened in 1851. ninth and green had been the primary philadelphia terminal of the philadelphia and reading railroad since 1879 and the reading had outgrown the facility. to replace it, the reading constructed the reading terminal on market street, roughly  to the south. reading terminal was linked to the existing railway line by a new elevated route carried by the reading viaduct. spring garden street was built to serve the elevated route. both it and reading terminal opened on january 29, 1893, although the spring garden street station building was not completed and tickets had to be purchased at ninth and green. ninth and green would remain open as a freight-only building until 1909, when it was demolished to permit additional track elevation.  spring garden street remained in use until 1984, when the new center city commuter connection opened.  as of march 2021, there is movement underway to demolish the building. reading international, the successor company to the reading company, has filed the paperwork to demolish the building. on the other hand, arts & crafts holdings, a real estate development company, and nonprofit scioli turco in january had sought a conservatorship over the building. reading international handles the company's legacy properties and rights-of-ways. arts & crafts has spent hundreds of millions of dollars to refashion the area into an arts district called spring arts. nevertheless, philadelphia's department of licenses & inspections issued a permit to reading international to demolish the station.  references   former reading company stations railway stations in the united states opened in 1893 railway stations closed in 1984 1893 establishments in pennsylvania 1984 disestablishments in pennsylvania poplar, philadelphia former septa regional rail stations former railway stations in philadelphia
ana matawhaura hato (30 december 1907 - 8 december 1953) was a new zealand singer of maori descent (ngati whakaue and tuhourangi). she and her cousin deane waretini, snr. were two of the first new zealand singers to be commercially recorded in the late 1920s, and the acoustic recordings are prized by collectors and historians. in later life, she frequently sang at public occasions and took part in some of the earliest radio broadcasts featuring maori music.  early life hato was born on 30 december 1907 at ngapuna, a suburb of rotorua. her father was of ngati whakaue descent, and her mother was of tuhourangi descent. she grew up in the tourist destination of whakarewarewa. both her parents were singers who performed traditional maori music. the singing classes she took at the local primary school, from mrs banks, the wife of the headmaster, were the only formal music lessons she ever had. her cousin waretini also attended these lessons, and together they sang at community gatherings, church and for tourists.  career by the age of 16, hato was a member of the maori concert group run by guide rangi, and regularly performed solo at public occasions. she was a soprano and, although she did not read music, had precise pitch and played the ukelele. she toured new zealand with maggie papakura in the early 1920s, and toured australia as a soloist with a small concert party in 1925. by 1926, waretini considered her the best soprano in new zealand.  in 1927, aged 20, she performed for the duke and duchess of york, in the old tunohopu meeting house at ohinemutu, singing with waretini, with pianist te mauri meihana and with the rotorua maori choir. the performance was recorded by technicians from the australian branch of parlophone records, using small portable acoustic recording equipment. she and her cousin travelled to sydney afterwards where further recordings were made of songs such as "hine e hine" and "waiata poi", and thousands of copies were sold in new zealand and australia. in total, hato and waretini made fourteen recordings together. family members later said that it was unlikely hato and waretini received any money for their recordings, and although they became famous throughout new zealand, hato worked various jobs through her life including as a housemaid, cook, laundry worker and guide for european visitors.  on 30 may 1931 she married pahau raponi, a tu
hourangi labourer, at rotorua. he went overseas with the first maori contingent in world war ii, became a prisoner of war in germany and died on 27 october 1942. they had no children but she adopted her niece's daughter. from 1933 she led her own concert party. she was a committed roman catholic and gave concerts to raise money for the restoration of st michael's catholic church in rotorua, to help maori serving in world war ii and to help other charitable organisations. she frequently sang at public occasions such as the opening of the 1zb building in auckland in 1941, and the opening of 1yz radio station in rotorua in 1949. she also took part in some of the earliest radio broadcasts featuring maori music. it was reported that she taught gracie fields to sing "now is the hour" when fields visited new zealand in 1946.  in the last eight years of her life she suffered from cancer, but continued to travel and perform until she was forced to give up singing in 1950. she died in the rotorua public hospital on 8 december 1953, and was buried at whakarewarewa. for many years, her family and friends placed a memorial notice every december in the rotorua daily post which said: "the melody has ended, but the memory lingers on..." in 1996, some of her recordings with waretini were released on cd, although the original fragile recordings are still prized by collectors and historians. in march 2015, the organisers of a church fair in wellington found a rare 1927 acoustic recording by hato, waretini and other local musicians, in a box of items for a jumble sale.  discography  references  external links  hato singing her own composition, "he moemoea", in 1949  photograph of hato with members of the tuhourangi concert party, circa 1937  1907 births 1953 deaths 20th-century new zealand women singers new zealand maori women singers
xiangyang township () is a township under the administration of lingbi county, anhui, china. , it has 12 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of anhui lingbi county
the following lists events that happened in 1966 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - bjarni benediktsson  events  births  27 february - baltasar kormakur, actor, theater and film director, and film producer 10 march - margret vilhjalmsdottir, actress 23 may - arni pall arnason, politician. 31 august - eagle egilsson, cinematographer and television director 27 september - sigurður jonsson, footballer 12 october - hanna birna kristjansdottir, politician. 3 december - olof nordal, politician  deaths  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
novak music (; born may 27, 1998) is a serbian professional basketball player for arka gdynia of the polish basketball league.  external links   player profile at eurobasket.com  player profile at aba-liga.com  references  1998 births living people aba league players asseco gdynia players basketball league of serbia players basketball players from belgrade kk beovuk 72 players kk mega basket players kk igokea players kk podgorica players kk smederevo players okk beograd players point guards serbian expatriate basketball people in bosnia and herzegovina serbian expatriate basketball people in montenegro serbian expatriate basketball people in poland serbian men's basketball players
the 2005 league of ireland first division season was the 21st season of the league of ireland first division.  overview the first division was contested by 10 teams and sligo rovers won the division, finishing two points clear of dublin city. each team played the other teams four times, totalling 36 games.  final table  promotion/relegation play-off dublin city who finished second in the first division played off against shamrock rovers who finished eleventh in the premier division. 1st leg  2nd leg  dublin city win 3-2 on aggregate and are promoted to the premier division.  top scorers  see also  2005 league of ireland premier division  2005 league of ireland cup  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2005 league of ireland 2005 in republic of ireland association football leagues ireland ireland
paolo yrizar martin del campo (born 6 october 1997) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a forward for liga mx club guadalajara.  club career  international career  mexico u-23 yrizar was called up by jaime lozano to participate with the mexico national under-23 team at the 2019 toulon tournament. mexico won third place at the tournament. he was called up by lozano again for the 2019 pan american games. with mexico winning the third-place match, mexico received the bronze medal for the tournament.  mexico national team yrizar made his senior team debut under manager gerardo martino on 2 october 2019 in a friendly against trinidad & tobago. he started the game and was substituted in the 63rd minute. one of his shots hit the goalpost.  career statistics  international  honours queretaro copa mx: apertura 2016 supercopa mx: 2017  mexico u23 pan american bronze medal: 2019  references  external links  liga mx profile debut paolo yrizar paolo mexican selection  living people 1997 births mexican footballers mexico international footballers mexican people of basque descent association football forwards queretaro f.c. footballers liga mx players liga premier de mexico players pan american games medalists in football pan american games bronze medalists for mexico footballers at the 2019 pan american games footballers from queretaro sportspeople from queretaro city mexico under-20 international footballers medalists at the 2019 pan american games
tina leser (december 12, 1910 - january 23, 1986) was an american fashion designer.  part of a generation of pioneering sportswear designers, leser was particularly known for her global influences.  personal life  tina leser was born christine buffington. her birth parents were mary edith cox and charles buffington. cox arranged leser's adoption by her cousin georgine after she and her husband, charles shillard-smith, spent months wintering in california. her name became christine wetherill shillard-smith in philadelphia.  she studied art at the pennsylvania academy of the fine arts, the school of industrial arts in philadelphia, and the sorbonne in paris.  leser made her debut in philadelphia in 1929.  tina married marine biologist curtis leser in november 1931 and the couple moved to honolulu, where curtis worked for the academy of science. tina took up spearfishing and diving with hawaiian locals. in 1936, the lesers divorced, but tina decided to keep leser as her professional for the remainder of her career.  in 1948, tina leser married james j. howley (1920-2012).  the couple had one daughter.  in 1949, leser and howley took a round the world honeymoon that helped to develop leser's international aesthetic.  in 1982, the long island home of leser and howey was burglarized.  two million dollars worth of art and silver were stolen, including a picasso and a monet.  the thieves were caught.  leser's mother, georgine shillard-smith, founded the gulf coast art center.  leser was president of the organization from 1952 to 1954.  the gulf coast art center closed in 2009.  career  leser opened a speciality store in honolulu in 1935 called tina leser gowns, located across the street from the royal hawaiian hotel. until it closed in 1942, the store sold resort wear, primarily playsuits and coverups, designed by leser that she created with the help of a french dressmaker. fabrics used included sailcloth, hawaiian and filipino fabrics. her client base included celebrities as the dolly sisters and joan crawford. the exposition allowed to sell her designs to department stores bonwit teller and saks fifth avenue. after the attack on pearl harbor, she was required to close the shop and leave the island.  encouraged by edna woolman chase and carmel snow, leser met with buyers at saks fifth avenue who purchased 500 playsuits from leser.  les
er briefly ran her own company in new york from 1941 to 1943.  her 1941 collections included hawaiian palaka fabric, hand painted fabric, and menswear.  at that time, her business was headquartered at 1 west 47th street in manhattan.  a 1941 article describes her salon as having "hand-painted satin drapes and sea-shell chairs."  from 1942 to 1952, leser designed for the edwin h. foreman sportswear company.  while working with edwin h. foreman, leser introduced harem pants, dhoti pants, and toreador pants as "at home" clothing for american women.  in 1952, lesser again founded her own company, tina leser inc., which she headed until her retirement in 1964.  the headquarters were at 550 7th avenue in manhattan.  during this phase in her career, leser promoted hand painted hawaiian print, sarong-type play clothes, and cashmere dresses.  from 1949 to 1953, leser organized the tina leser prize for japanese designers.  leser's celebrity clients included joan crawford, joan fontaine, paulette goddard, audrey hepburn, and kim novak. leser designed costumes for the 1950 film born to be bad.  star joan fontaine said "the only acceptable art of the film was my wardrobe designed by tina leser."  leser also designed the costumes for the 1946 broadway musical park avenue.  tina leser died on january 23, 1986.  legacy  liz claiborne's began her career as a model and sketch artist for tina leser. from leser, clairborne learned "that being a designer meant hard, long, interminably long hours of work..."  tina leser's work is held by the metropolitan museum of art, museum of fine arts in boston, philadelphia museum of art, phoenix art museum, and kent state university museum,  awards   neiman marcus fashion award, 1945  coty award, 1945  outstanding designer, philadelphia museum school of art, 1955  sportswear design award, sports illustrated, 1956  references  external links  "doves," metropolitan museum of art beach cover-up, metropolitan museum of art evening ensemble, metropolitan museum of art woman's swimsuit, museum of fine arts woman's suit, philadelphia museum of art woman's ensemble, philadelphia museum of art  1910 births 1986 deaths american fashion designers american women fashion designers pennsylvania academy of the fine arts alumni 20th-century american women
all hell is the sixth and final studio album by american post-hardcore band vanna. the album was released on july 8, 2016.  track listing  personnel vanna davey muise - lead vocals  nicholas lambert - guitar joel pastuszak - guitar, vocals shawn marquis - bass seamus menihane - drums  production produced, mixed and mastered by will putney, at graphic nature studios, belleville, nj engineered by randy lebeouf mix assistant/additional engineering  by steve seid additional tracking and engineering by kevin billingslea at the halo studio art concept and direction by liz bergesch and davey muise layout design by adam toomey and liz bergesch branding and illustration by adam toomey  charts  references  2016 albums vanna (band) albums pure noise records albums albums produced by will putney
"girls talk boys" is a song by australian pop rock band 5 seconds of summer, taken from the soundtrack of ghostbusters: answer the call (2016). the song was written by john ryan, teddy geiger, ammar malik, along with ricky reed, who also handled the song's production. "girls talk boys" was released on 15 july 2016 and has charted in multiple countries, reaching a peak of 21 in australia, 6 in scotland, and 28 in the united kingdom.  composition the song is written in the key of e minor with a common time tempo of 120 beats per minute. the vocals span from d4 to d6 in the song.  music video the official music video was released on 22 july 2016 and featured scenes from the ghostbusters film. the video featured the band members in makeshift versions of costumes from the film. a spare car and props that resemble elements from the film were also used in the music video. as of may 2021, the music video has over 22 million views.  track listing digital download "girls talk boys" - 3:36  digital download "girls talk boys" (stafford brothers remix) - 4:07  personnel luke hemmings - vocals michael clifford - vocals, guitar  calum hood - vocals, bass ashton irwin - drums, vocals ricky reed - production, bass, guitar, programming john ryan - vocals, bass teddy geiger - additional vocals ammar malik - additional vocals ethan shumaker - engineer mark winterburn - engineer john delf - engineer manny marroquin - mixing chris galland - assistant mixing engineer ike schultz - assistant mixing engineer chris gehringer - mastering  source:  charts  certifications  release history  references  external links  2016 songs 5 seconds of summer songs 2016 singles capitol records singles songs written by john ryan (musician) songs written by teddy geiger songs written by ammar malik songs written by ricky reed ghostbusters music
boccaccini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  aldo r. boccaccini (born 1962), nuclear engineer and material scientist matteo boccaccini (born 1993), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
monte tre denti (italian: mount three teeth) is peak in the cottian alps, metropolitan city of turin in piedmont, north-western italy. it has an elevation of  and is located between the comuni of cumiana and cantalupa. together with the nearby monte freidour, it is part of a natural park called parco naturale di interesse provinciale del monte tre denti - freidour.      tre denti
dhandra is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
quantico is an american television series created by joshua safran and produced by abc studios. priyanka chopra stars as alex parrish, a bright fbi recruit, who after graduating from  the fbi academy, joins the agency and later becomes a prime suspect of a terrorist attack on grand central terminal.  the main cast include priyanka chopra, jake mclaughlin, yasmine al massri, johanna braddy, tate ellington, graham rogers, anabelle acosta as her fellow recruits, and josh hopkins and aunjanue ellis as their trainers at the fbi academy, quantico, virginia. in the second season, russell tovey, pearl thusi, and blair underwood were added to the main cast following the cia plot elements. in the third season, marlee matlin and alan powell were added to the main cast.  main characters  alex parrish  alexandra "alex" parrish (portrayed by priyanka chopra), a former top recruit at quantico as well as a promising fbi agent was considered a prime suspect in the grand central terminal bombing. she was later pardoned after the real mastermind terrorist behind the grand central bombing and the command center bombing in new york was revealed.  after the negative publicity to the fbi stemming from liam o'connor's treachery as well as simon asher's death at quantico, alex is fired by the organization. two months after the presidential election ended, alex is approached by cia director matthew keyes, who provides an opportunity for her to join and work for the organization. after working as a cia analyst for six months, she is given an undercover assignment by the fbi. she is tasked to pose as a cia recruit at the farm in order to expose the rogue faction within the agency called the aic.  months after leaving the farm, a hostage crisis at the g-20 summit in new york is declared by a terrorist group called the citizens liberation front. two weeks after the end of the crisis, former president claire haas and cia director matthew keyes put forth a covert joint task force, between the cia and fbi. alex was reinstated to work as an fbi agent. shortly after the task force is formed, clay haas was assigned as the leader of the group. alex and the team were tasked to expose a syndicate of eight collaborators that were secretly involved in orchestrating the hostage crisis. after a national scandal involving the resignation of president claire haas along with the disbandment of the task force, alex resorted to a final strategy. she released u.s classified intelligence to the public at the constitutional convention in philadelphia, implicating newly inaugurated president henry
roarke in a deadly conspiracy. as a result of her actions at the convention, she is branded as a fugitive of the united states. after being issued a red notice for her arrest by interpol, she leaves the country with ryan booth on a plane to thailand in order to evade the authorities.  liam o'connor  liam o'connor (portrayed by josh hopkins; season 1), a seasoned fbi agent who had a fling with miranda shaw in the past. years ago, he and alex's father had graduated from the fbi academy together and one of their first undercover operations in omaha was a blown sting killing over 200 people. years later, he worked a sting operation against some militia groups in chicago. just before the case went south, ending in a shootout with three confirmed casualties including drew's fiancee and unborn child, he had told ryan that he would take the blame and that ryan would be his replacement. however, it was later revealed that ryan took the blame for the incident, later losing his position within the bureau.  one year prior to the grand central bombing, it was revealed that liam was demoted from his position within the bureau. however, miranda pulled strings to allow him to work as an instructor at the academy. during his time at the academy, he had a one-night stand with one of the recruits, alex, on new year's eve. although miranda discovered the incident, she was shortly dismissed prior to pursuing the misconduct case with liam. sometime later liam was promoted to the position of assistant director, replacing miranda's former role at the academy.  months after alex's cohort graduated from quantico, liam was assigned to work in a field office based in washington. after the grand central bombing occurred, alex was considered a main suspect in the case. as a result, he pursued her until she managed to clear her name. three months after the command center bombing occurred, it was revealed that he testified against elias harper in the congressional hearing case. later miranda discovered that he was the true terrorist behind the two bombings in new york, right before he shot her. it was subsequently revealed that he had used hidden cameras and tracking devices to plan the bombings, and had gathered intelligence to blackmail elias and frame both alex and simon. his objective was to destroy the bureau before the organization got an opportunity to destroy the country. initially, he tried to frame miranda, but alex and the others discovered his plan to plant a bomb at the fbi academy, the day the new cohort were graduating. he was unsuccessful; the bomb was later defused
by simon's actions. subsequently, he was killed by alex and ryan.  ryan booth ryan booth (portrayed by jake mclaughlin) is a former marine and fbi special agent. during his time at quantico, ryan was undercover as a recruit, tasked to surveil alex by liam, but fell in love with her instead. liam later revealed to him that he was, in fact, in retraining. during this time, he has a relationship with alex. afterwards, he takes over miranda's role as staff counselor.  after the grand central terminal bombing, ryan is working in the new york office and is in a relationship with natalie vasquez and, along with their friends, helps alex clear her name. however, when alex persists in investigating when everyone believes elias harper was the terrorist, he becomes suspicious of her and is determined to stop her. after his ex-wife, hannah wyland, is suspended from active duty after an incident with senator haas, ryan takes over her position under liam's orders. he finally realizes alex is innocent and helps the team find the true terrorist, liam, and he and alex shoot him. he and alex reconcile thereafter, but their travel plans are thwarted by alex's cia job offer.  in the future timeline, he becomes a cia case officer after completing his training at camp peary. at the end of the second season, he is branded as a criminal and leaves the united states in order to evade the authorities.  in season 3 he marries shelby wyatt (even though he still has feelings for alex parrish), as it is revealed in the premiere of the season. in this same episode ryan tries to save shelby, who has been kidnapped by the widow (who will free her if he gives her a code alex has).  miranda shaw  miranda shaw (portrayed by aunjanue ellis; seasons 1 & 2), assistant director of the fbi academy at quantico, director of the training program at quantico and alex's mentor. she had a fling with liam o'connor when they both were married. she is removed from her prestigious role at quantico, after allowing an undercover operation involving a trainee, raina, to continue.  after the grand central terminal bombing, miranda is one of the people who believes in alex's innocence and takes great risks to help her. at the end of the first season, miranda is named deputy director of the fbi.  in the future, she is shown to be a representative of the terrorist group, the citizens liberation front. sometime later, miranda is incarcerated in a
federal prison due to orchestrating what appears to be an attempted murder of alex parrish at the constitutional convention in philadelphia.  caleb haas caleb haas (portrayed by graham rogers; season 1, main; 2, guest) was an fbi trainee who originally flunked out of the academy as an agent, but was brought back to train as an analyst, and then reinstated as an agent-trainee again. he is the son of fbi deputy director clayton haas and senator claire haas.  at 17, he joined a cult called sistemics but his father pulled him out. during his time at quantico, he uses the name mark raymond in an undercover operation to infiltrate sistemics, in an operation coordinated with his father to lure out sistemics' leader and kentucky bombing suspect dan berlin.  prior to the grand central terminal attack, caleb was stationed as an analyst in san diego, but requested a transfer to new york. during the command center bombing, his father saved his life before he died when the building fell over him. as a result, caleb became a drug addict and his mother locked him up at her home so he would not affect her election chances. caleb left with alex and he went through withdrawal, with alex and shelby's help. he later helped track down the true terrorist, liam.  in the second-season premiere, shelby mentioned that he resigned from the fbi and commenced study at a law school in uc berkeley. after the 2018 hostage crisis ended, it was revealed that caleb vacated in tulum, mexico prior to visiting his mother and brother in washington, d.c. during his visit, he gets into a brief physical fight with his brother clay haas. later, caleb agrees to a living arrangement with his brother at camp peary. caleb helps the team with their mission in order to expose the collaborators associated with 2018 hostage crisis event. after the mission ends, he goes back to ucb to continue his studies.  nimah and raina amin nimah and raina amin (portrayed by yasmine al massri; seasons 1 & 2), twins brought into the program by miranda, who masquerade as one person under nimah's name. the aggressive and secular nimah desperately wants to be a special agent but is not quite up to the physical and mental challenge, while the more religious raina is better suited to the role, but only entered training because nimah wanted it so much. eventually, they are allowed to be revealed to the nats. the main physical difference between the two is that raina wears the hijab and is a
devout muslim and nimah does not and is not.  in the future timeline, nimah and raina are working undercover in a terrorist cell. three months after the second bombing hit, nimah is working as an agent in the new york branch, and raina has left the fbi because nimah reported her for being too emotionally involved with hamza, whose terrorist cell they were infiltrating prior to the command center bombing. raina initially moved home to dearborn, michigan, but later became a high-level diplomatic translator, while nimah stayed on at the fbi.  in the future, nimah joins the terrorist organization, the citizens liberation front, while raina becomes the conference interpreter at the 2018 g-20 summit in new york. shortly after the 2018 hostage crisis event, the twin sisters are arrested. sometime later, they are freed from prison and pardoned for their earlier case arrests.  shelby wyatt shelby wyatt (portrayed by johanna braddy) is alex's best friend and an excellent markswoman. she is wealthy and her family owns the mcgregor-wyatt company. shelby's parents were supposedly killed on 9/11, when she was 16, leading her to join the fbi to try to stop future terrorist attacks within the united states.  shelby thought she had a half-sister named samar hashmi, who she sent money regularly until caleb found out she was a con artist. also with caleb's help, she later learned her parents faked their deaths after unknowingly selling weapons software to the taliban. her parents meet her in canada, but caleb discovered they were only interested in conning more money from her. though caleb tried to protect her from the truth, when she learned it, she contacted deputy director haas to bring them to justice.  she had a relationship with caleb in the academy, and later, she had an affair with caleb's father, fbi deputy director clayton haas, before he was killed in the second bombing. after the scandal, shelby was no longer considered an fbi agent because her relationship with clayton was exposed as part of the process of the congressional testimony for the command center bombing. she returned to running her family company. after she mended her friendship with alex, she tried to infiltrate the fbi computer systems, in order to help alex stop the mastermind terrorist from plotting another bombing. at the end of the first season, miranda reinstates shelby as an agent.  in the future, shelby is working on a case to prevent further threats stemming from the hostage crisis, perpetuated by the citizens liberation front. sometime later, shelby becomes a training
instructor at the fbi academy in quantico.   she is a member of clay hass's team during the second half of season 2. during that time she develops romantic feelings for him. however, knowing she's not the right woman for him (nor for any of the hass men) she convinces clay to marry his ex-fiance.  it is revealed in the premiere of season 3 that she has married ryan during the time alex was in italy.  simon asher simon asher (portrayed by tate ellington; season 1) was an fbi recruit at quantico. after graduating summa cum laude from yale university, he worked as an accountant for his family's company, and later he spent almost two years in the israel defense forces before applying to the fbi. he developed a fascination with nimah and raina, who discover that he spent part of his life in gaza. later on it is revealed that raina and him are romantically involved.  after being kicked out of the fbi academy, he worked as an it tech. when alex is framed for the grand central bombing, she reached out to him to help her. without her knowing, he was a deep cover fbi informant who had to turn her in, as an order from clayton haas. however, he believed and helped her, even falling in the hands of the terrorist, who forced him to build an atomic bomb. drew helped him escape, at the cost of his own life, and simon managed to get to alex on time.  after the exposure of liam o'connor as the perpetrator of the attacks in new york, simon tried to help his former classmates in defusing another bomb that was implanted by their former instructor at quantico. driving the truck with the nuclear bomb, he sacrifices himself in order to minimize the risk of radiation fallout.  natalie vasquez natalie vasquez (portrayed by anabelle acosta; season 1) was alex's former rival in academy standings and for ryan's heart as well. texas-born natalie was a former border cop and was involved in a custody battle for her daughter renata with her ex-husband. while at the academy, she had a relationship with brandon fletcher.  in the events after the attack, she is shown to have become an fbi agent and is one of the agents hunting down alex. she was also in a relationship with ryan. shortly after natalie helps alex discover the real terrorist, natalie is killed by an explosion. later, it was revealed that liam o'connor orchestrated the bomb that killed natalie in "clear".  harry doyle  harry doyle (portrayed by
russell tovey; seasons 2 & 3) is a mysterious character who is best described as part thomas crown, part grown-up artful dodger. after failing to complete his mi-6 sanctioned mission at camp peary, he attends the g-20 summit in new york as a private security expert for barclays. after the 2018 hostage crisis ended, harry was given an opportunity to join the task force headed by clay haas. shortly after joining the team, he leaves the task force.  dayana mampasi dayana mampasi (portrayed by pearl thusi; season 2) is a driven, disciplined, type-a lawyer working at her parents' boston firm who struggles to fit into the world of espionage. after graduating from her cia training, dayana becomes a cia case officer. after the 2018 hostage crisis ended, dayana becomes part of the covert joint task force put forth by president claire haas and cia director matthew keyes. after helping the task force with their missions, she goes back to her work life as a cover.  owen hall  owen hall (portrayed by blair underwood; seasons 2 & 3), a charming, intelligent and inspirational cia officer who every fledgling operative wishes he or she could learn from. in the future, it was revealed that he was forced out of the cia for an incident and incarcerated in a federal prison as a result. sometime later, owen was pardoned for his false arrest in relation to the jeremy miller murder case. shortly after, he was given an opportunity to serve in the role of the deputy director of the cia. sometime later, he left the agency for a position at the bureau as a deputy director.  jocelyn turner jocelyn turner (portrayed by marlee matlin; season 3), an fbi agent with a brilliant career in undercover work. she was once the best in her field until an assignment involving the arms dealer known as "the widow" left her deaf from a bombing after her cover was blown. following this, jocelyn was put to work as a quantico instructor, but is recruited by old friend owen hall to assist in the rescue of agent shelby wyatt from "the widow", and later to be a part of a special black-ops team.  mike mcquigg	 mike mcquigg (portrayed by alan powell; season 3), an "overly assertive" and adept fbi operative, with over two years of undercover work experience within a white supremacist militia in the south. he was called into action to help out the black ops team, having expertise and intelligence about the organization
, who instigated a biological attack on a restaurant in a black community with weaponized tuberculosis with the intention of committing similar attacks. following the takedown of the organization, mike was assigned to the team on a permanent basis.  recurring characters this is a list of recurring actors and the characters they portrayed in multiple episodes, which were significant roles. the characters are listed by the order in which they first appeared.  introduced in season one  elias harper elias harper (portrayed by rick cosnett) was a lawyer recruited by miranda shaw to work as an analyst at quantico. he flunked out the academy in "go". he later framed simon as the suspect of the command center bombing before committing suicide. it was later discovered that he'd been blackmailed by liam o'connor in "yes".  clayton haas clayton haas (portrayed by mark pellegrino) was an executive assistant  director of the fbi and the husband of claire haas, with whom he had three children: clay, caleb, and cassandra. he had an affair with shelby wyatt. he was killed at the command center bombing after saving his son caleb's life.  brandon fletcher brandon fletcher (portrayed by jacob artist) is an african-american fbi trainee who later becomes an fbi agent. he comes from a wealthy family. he had a relationship with natalie vasquez.  hannah wyland hannah wyland (portrayed by eliza coupe) is ryan booth's ex-wife and fellow fbi special agent. she left him because she had fallen in love with a woman. previously, she worked at the field office in new york before being suspended from active duty due to orchestrating an incident involving former senator claire haas. she was reprimanded for her actions as she caused a disturbance in the town hall where mrs. haas was at for her vice-presidential campaign and presentation. later, she is reinstated to work again as a federal agent in the 2018 hostage crisis case.  claire haas claire haas (portrayed by marcia cross) is caleb's mother and clayton haas' wife. an ambitious woman and former fbi agent, she was a senator and democratic vice presidential nominee. at the end of the first season, it was revealed that claire assisted liam o'connor in the execution of his plans so that it would politically benefit her vice presidential campaign. shortly after liam's death, claire becomes the vice president of the united states. in "lcflutter", she is sworn in as president, invoking the 25th amendment following the resignation of president todd. however, she is forced to resign in "globalreach" as
a result of a national scandal.  drew perales drew perales (portrayed by lenny platt) was a retired nfl player and fbi recruit, before leaving the academy due to a medical condition. while at quantico, he had a short-lived romantic relationship with alex parrish. he was blackmailed and later captured by liam o'connor, who used his voice to disguise his trail. he helped simon escape and warned alex, but he was killed when the fbi burst in the room that he was held in, triggering a bomb trap in "right".  iris chang iris chang (portrayed by li jun li) is a shanghai-born, queen bee-type tech maven from a wealthy family who founded six startups in college, two of which were sold to google. later, she becomes an fbi recruit at quantico. after the graduation ceremony at the end of the first season, she becomes an fbi agent.  will olsen will olsen (portrayed by jay armstrong johnson) is a former fbi trainee and cia asset. he graduated from harvard university with a ph.d. at the age of 22, who once worked in the jpl. years ago, he lost his sister in a car accident, after their parents, who were christian science followers, refused to allow a blood transfusion. he did not graduate from quantico and was later held by the cia for seven months, until alex and simon helped him escape. the terrorist forced him and simon to go with him and help him build an atomic bomb. he was later released with radiation sickness, but he recovered. afterwards, he became an it security expert at the semple institute and, later, joined the citizens liberation front.  matthew keyes matthew keyes (portrayed by henry czerny) is the director of the cia who offered alex parrish a position within the organization. shortly after the 2018 hostage crisis ended, it was revealed that he worked with claire haas in setting up the presidential covert joint task force.  introduced in season two  leon velez leon velez (portrayed by aaron diaz) was a photojournalist and cia recruit, before leaving camp peary as a result of failing a training assignment. sometime later, leon attends the 2018 g-20 summit in new york. as a photojournalist, he covered the events at the summit prior to the hostage takeover by the citizens liberation front. shortly after the crisis ended, it was revealed that he was murdered by assailants connected to the aic.  lydia hall lydia hall (portrayed by tracy ifeachor) is a cia case officer and
co-instructor at the farm. originally posing as just another recruit with the surname bates, she and owen hall revealed her true role as a lesson to the others. as co-instructor, she's pushed alex parrish really hard during the training exercises. towards the end of the 2018 hostage crisis, it was revealed that she uploaded contents of a hard drive containing top secret classified information of the united states. as a result of her actions, she was incarcerated in a federal prison.  sebastian chen sebastian chen (portrayed by david lim) is a former priest and cia recruit. after graduating from his cia training, sebastian becomes a cia case officer. sometime later, he attends the 2018 g-20 summit in new york. during the summit, a hostage crisis erupts and sebastian is later injured. shortly after the crisis ended, it was revealed that sebastian attempted to research the identities of the collaborators who benefited from the 2018 hostage crisis event.  clay haas clayton "clay" haas jr. (portrayed by hunter parrish) is a political advisory strategist, responsible for leading the presidential covert joint task force that was set up by the cia director matthew keyes and madam president claire haas. in "resistance", it was revealed that his former team members from the task force were able to implicate henry roarke by exposing his connection to the russian federal security service. during the second half of season 2 he grows emotionally involved with shelby wyatt. however shelby convinces him to marry his ex-fiance.  maxine griffin maxine griffin (portrayed by krysta rodriguez) is an intelligent, passionate and fiercely driven founder of "the roster", a network and visibility platform for professional women committed to helping one another rise. at the end of the second season, it was  revealed that she eloped with clay haas.  henry roarke henry roarke (portrayed by dennis boutsikaris) was a former u.s president and the speaker of the united states house of representatives. he was identified as one of the eight collaborators behind the group that initially planned on instigating the 2018 hostage crisis event at the g-20 summit in new york. at the constitutional convention in philadelphia, it was revealed that a scandal emerged about roarke being involved with the federal security service who provided intelligence to amend the united states constitution. shortly after the publicized scandal, roarke committed suicide by shooting himself.  introduced in season three  celine fox celine fox (portrayed by amber skye noyes) was a new recruit of an elite fbi black ops team. she was accidentally killed by
jocelyn turner when the two were pitted against each other in a blindfolded fight by a sadistic arms dealer.  jagdeep patel jagdeep patel (portrayed by vandit bhatt) was a new recruit of an elite fbi black ops team. he resigned from the team following celine's death, and due to being unable to handle the seemingly cold-blooded mentality of the veteran team members.  the widow the widow (portrayed by jayne houdyshell) took over her husband's arms dealer business after his death and made great strides in networking with various clients in the arms industry. her associates kidnapped shelby in an attempt to have her colleagues, alex and ryan, work for them in order to obtain a mysterious object called the conscience code.  references
the  is an obstacle on many obstacle courses for obstacle racing.  use  ninjasport the warped wall is used in various ninja warrior franchises, such as sasuke, kunoichi, american ninja warrior, team ninja warrior, ninja warrior uk, sasuke ninja warrior indonesia, and australian ninja warrior. the height of the warped wall varies depending on the competition. american ninja warrior used a  warped wall for its first seven seasons, before switching to a  wall in season 8. american ninja warrior also uses a "mega wall" for its all-star skills competition, where the height of the wall increases until no one can climb it. for its 2018 season 10, american ninja warrior introduced a  "mega warped wall". if they are successful in climbing it, they would win $10,000. competitors who chose the mega warped wall had only one attempt to reach the top. if unsuccessful, the competitor only got one shot at the warped wall. those who did not wish to attempt the mega wall had three chances to reach the top of the warped wall. the mega wall will only be featured in the city qualifiers. in season 11, they had three attempts at both walls. the amount for making it up the warped wall decreased with every attempt, starting at $10,000 for the first, $5,000 for the second, and $2,500 for the third. in american ninja warrior junior, the warped wall measures , and will be completed at that height by the 13-14-year-olds. the unique wall is equipped with two pocket levels, which will provide assistance to the other age groups. 9-10-year-olds have a pocket at 10 feet. 11-12-year-olds have a pocket at 11.5 feet.  obstacle racing several obstacle course races, including rugged maniac and tough mudder, have featured a similar wall albeit often with assistance available via ropes or teamwork. some obstacle training gyms also offer a warped wall for practice.  playgrounds and gyms many playgrounds and amusement gyms feature a warped wall. city museum, a playground and museum consisting largely of repurposed architectural and industrial objects, housed in a former warehouse in st. louis, includes a warped wall as well.   many workout and training gyms feature a warped wall training station.  construction the warped wall is a steeply curving tall wall obstacle with a short run-up, that the competitor must reach the top of and climb up.  several manufacturers of warped walls
exist to provide gyms and private individuals with this obstacle.  competition  ninjasport  women in american ninja warrior on american ninja warrior there have only been nineteen women who have successfully climbed the warped wall, through season 10. additionally there have only been five women who successfully climbed it during stage 1, with a shorter run up, during the national finals. during season 11, sandy zimmerman became the first mom televised to climb the warped wall, although karen wiltin was technically the first mom to ever climb the warped wall as her city finals episode was filmed a month before sandy zimmerman's qualifiers episode.  city qualifier  vegas finals  references  obstacle racing
this page is about the irish greyhound race. for the british race, see produce stakes.  the national produce stakes is a greyhound racing competition held annually at clonmel greyhound stadium in clonmel, county tipperary, ireland.  it is a competition in the irish racing greyhound racing calendar and was inaugurated in 1939. the event was held at thurles greyhound stadium from 1999-2002.  past winners  venues and distances 1939-1988 (clonmel 525y)  1999-2002 (thurles 525y)  2003-present (clonmel 525y)  sponsors 2003-2005 irish stud dog owners & red mills 2006-2013 connolly's red mills 2014-2017 bank of ireland finance 2018-present larry o'rourke  references  greyhound racing competitions in ireland recurring sporting events established in 1939 1939 establishments in ireland sport in county tipperary
matthew sheldon (born august 23, 1992) is a professional soccer player who plays for charleston battery in the usl championship.  early life sheldon was born on 23 august 1992 in bellevue, washington, united states. he grew up in portland, oregon with his brother, sister and parents. he played recreational soccer until 5th grade, when he joined his first club team. at the time, soccer was just one of many sports that sheldon played - he played basketball, baseball and american football as well  sheldon attended lincoln high school in portland, oregon. alongside high school soccer, he played for westside metros remix club (now known as westside timbers).  college career  during his senior year, sheldon received athletic scholarships from both uc davis and oregon state, and a roster spot from gonzaga. he committed to play for uc davis.  club career sheldon played college soccer at uc davis between 2011 and 2014. he spent time in the premier development league with san jose earthquakes u23 in 2014, ventura county fusion in 2015, and briefly with orange county blues u-23 in 2016, before moving to germany with sixth-tier side sg kinzenbach.  sheldon signed with united soccer league club orange county blues in july 2016, making his professional debut on july 10, 2016, in a 3-3 draw with sacramento republic.  in november 2016, sheldon announced that he would play for saint louis fc for the 2017 usl season.  in march 2018, it was announced sheldon would play for amateur club side waterside karori in wellington, new zealand.  on january 14, 2019, the tulsa roughnecks fc announced that they had signed sheldon for their 2019 season.  on december 10, 2019, it was announced that tulsa, now rebranded as fc tulsa, had re-signed sheldon to their roster for the 2020 usl championship season.  on december 15, 2020, it was announced that fc tulsa, had re-signed sheldon to their roster for the 2021 usl championship season following a successful campaign with the club in 2020.  on december 30, 2021, it was announced that sheldon had signed a contract with the charleston battery ahead of the 2022 usl championship season.  media sheldon also operates two notable youtube channels called become elite as well as the against all odds podcast which combined currently have over 485,000 subscribers. both channels give a behind the scenes look into the life of a professional soccer player.  references  external links      1992 births living people american soccer players american expatriate soccer players association football defenders charleston battery players orange county
sc players saint louis fc players san jose earthquakes u23 players soccer players from portland, oregon sportspeople from bellevue, washington fc tulsa players uc davis aggies men's soccer players usl championship players usl league two players ventura county fusion players waterside karori players expatriate association footballers in new zealand american expatriate sportspeople in new zealand american expatriate soccer players in germany american youtubers
the kielce ghetto (, ) was a jewish world war ii ghetto created in 1941 by the schutzstaffel (ss) in the polish city of kielce in the south-western region of the second polish republic, occupied by german forces from 4 september 1939. before the nazi invasion of poland in 1939, kielce was the capital of the kielce voivodeship. the germans incorporated the city into distrikt radom of the semi-colonial general government territory. the liquidation of the ghetto took place in august 1942, with over 21,000 victims (men, women and children) deported to their deaths at the treblinka extermination camp, and several thousands more shot, face-to-face.  there was a considerable jewish presence in kielce. the kehilla operated two synagogues, a beth midrash house of learning, a mikveh, the cemetery with ohalim, an orphanage, a retirement home, three elementary schools, two high schools, a talmudic college and a large tarbut library with 10,000 volumes. there were also numerous organizations and societies including two sports clubs. nevertheless, the economic crisis of the 1930 prompted many younger jews to emigrate before the war began, mostly to america.  ghetto history  on 4 september 1939, the city was bombed by the luftwaffe and occupied by the german army on the following day. kielce was made into a county seat of the newly-formed distrikt radom governed by dr. karl lasch appointed from berlin on 26 october 1939. a month later, ss-oberfuhrer fritz katzmann - a notorious holocaust perpetrator - took over policing of his district. as in all polish cities incorporated into the nazi german general government territory, the new administration ordered the creation of a judenrat in kielce. it was headed by physician and former city counsellor moshe (moses) pelc, fluent in german. on 1 december 1939 all jews were ordered to wear a star of david on their outer garments. at the same time, jewish-owned factories were confiscated by the gestapo, stores and shops along the main thoroughfares liquidated, and all wealthy houses plundered by the nazi officials. the grand synagogue was emptied and turned into a storehouse with a holding cell. in january 1940 houses of jewish prayer were made illegal.  between the onset of war in september 1939 and march 1940, the jewish population of kielce expanded from 18,000, to 25,400 (35% of all residents), with trains of dispossessed jews arriving under
the escort of ordnungspolizei from the polish areas annexed by nazi germany. pelc and the judenrat secured housing for them to the best of ability; soup kitchens were set up. due to a typhus epidemic which erupted in early 1940, a new clinic opened.  pelc used his polish contacts to help jewish families survive. the general polish population was not separated from them as of yet. also, the judenrat received material help from the krakow branch of the jewish self-help organizations jss and jdc. however, pelc found himself unable to deal with the german ransom demands, and in august 1940 proposed that the industrialist herman lewi (hermann levy) become his successor. pelc was dismissed, and a year later murdered on suspicion of "collaborating" with the poles. levy resumed his duties and imposed a heavier tax burden on the community. in october 1940 , age 36, was appointed mayor (stadthauptmann) of kielce. drechsel had already successfully ghettoised 12,000 jews in the occupied city of piotrkow trybunalski,  distance.  on 31 march 1941, reichsamtsleiter lasch ordered the creation of the kielce ghetto surrounded by high fences, barbed wire, and guards. drechsel brought in police battalion 305 to help out. the gentile poles were ordered to vacate the area and the jews were given one week to relocate. the ghetto was split in two, along warszawska street (nowowarszawska) with the silnica river (pl) running through it. the so-called large ghetto was set up between the streets of orla, piotrkowska, pocieszka, and warszawska to the east, and the smaller ghetto between warszawska on the west, and the streets of bodzentynska, st. wojciech, and the st. wojciech square. the ghetto gates were closed on 5 april 1941; the jewish ghetto police was formed with 85 members and ordered to guard it. meanwhile, further expulsions elsewhere and deportations to kielce continued until august 1942 at which time there were 27,000 prisoners crammed in the ghetto. trains with jewish families arrived from the entire kielce voivodeship, and also from vienna, poznan, and łodz. the severe overcrowding, rampant hunger, and outbreaks of epidemic typhus took the lives of 4,000 people before mid-1942.  several forced-labour enterprises were set up in the city by the ss, including hasag granat werke
with 400-500 jews manufacturing munition, as well as the ludwigshutte (prewar ludwikow foundry) with 200-300 slave labourers; the henrykow woodworking plant, and various workshops for german war economy. the jews who worked in these factories were almost the only ones who survived the ghetto's liquidation, for two more years. the jewish clandestine resistance, under the leadership of dawid barwiner (bachwiener) and gerszon lewkowicz, attempted to procure weapons, but they were largely unsuccessful. the secret production of arms and ammunition for the planned uprising failed abruptly when the chief of jewish police, wahan spiegl (spiegel), informed the gestapo on the goings-on in the german metal shops.  murder operations  the fate of ghettoised jews across occupied poland was sealed at wannsee in early 1942, when the final solution was set in motion. the kielce ghetto was eradicated in three operations in the course of only five days as part of operation reinhard, which marked the deadliest phase of the holocaust in occupied poland. the first ghetto liquidation action took place on 20 august 1942. during roundups, all jews unable to move were shot on the spot including the sick, the elderly, and the disabled. around 6,000-7,000, mostly women and children, were herded onto okrzei street and transported to treblinka extermination camp. within four days, 1,200 people including patients of the jewish hospital were shot face-to-face and 20,000-21,000 jews were led into waiting holocaust trains, sent to treblinka, and murdered in the gas chambers. by the end of 24 august 1942, there were only 2,000 people left in the ghetto.  all surviving jewish skilled workers were lodged in the labour camp at stolarska and jasna street (pl) within the small ghetto, including members of the judenrat, levy with his family, and the jewish policemen. the holocaust survivor, adam helfand, forced along with a group of jewish men to collect corpses of prisoners massacred during the ghetto liquidation, took part in the digging of mass graves at the jewish cemetery. helfand remembered stripping the bodies naked before burial on german orders and witnessed the terrorized jews yanking gold teeth from the mouths of cadavers on pain of death.  the labour camp functioned for several more months, supplying slave labour to german factories that were still running. in may 1943, some jewish prisoners from kielce
were taken to forced-labour camps in starachowice, skarzysko-kamienna, pionki, and blizyn. on 23 may 1943, the german police collected 45 jewish children who had stayed behind at the liquidated camp. they were brought to the pakosz cemetery and shot. their ages ranged from 15 months to 15 years. in september 1943, as the soviet front advanced westward, what remained of the kielce slave labour facilities was gradually abandoned. the remaining skilled workers were sent to the auschwitz complex and further to buchenwald, including future canadian artist gershon iskowitz. the soviet red army rolled into kielce on 15 january 1945. the once-vibrant jewish community that existed in kielce since the mid-1800s was all but wiped out.  during the ghetto liquidation, there were a number of jewish escapes, as well as rescue attempts by local polish gentiles. several jews who escaped the ghetto were sheltered by stefan sawa in the village zagorze near daleszyce. polish home army soldiers of the "wybraniecki" unit, commanded by  ("barabasz"), murdered the hiding jews and sawa. six jewish victims are known by name, but more than ten were probably murdered. sawa was posthumously awarded a righteous among the nations medal. other righteous who helped kielce ghetto's jews include bolesław idzikowski, and the sliwinski family.  post war  kielce was the site of the kielce pogrom of 4 july 1946 in which 37 (40) polish jews (17-21 of whom remain unidentified) and 2 ethnic poles were murdered, including 11 fatally shot with military assault rifles and 11 more stabbed with bayonets, indicating direct involvement of the stalinist troops (according to the official findings of the institute of national remembrance).  in 2007 a monument commemorating the liquidation of the ghetto and the destruction of the city's jewish community was unveiled in kielce. a menorah-shaped monument, half-sunk in the ground, was designed by artist marek cecula who is also a kielce-born holocaust survivor.  references  external links     jewish ghettos in nazi-occupied poland
louis aubert, called le fils, (15 may 1720, paris - c. 1800) was an 18th-century french painter and composer, active from 1740 to 1780. the violinist and composer jacques aubert was his father and abbe aubert (1731-1814) his brother.  works  instrumental  1750: sonates a violon seul avec la basse continue 1758: six symphonies a quatre, trois violons obliges, avec basse continue,  paintings   la lecon de lecture, huile sur bois, 323 x 227 mm, 1740, amiens, musee de picardie  interieur avec jeune femme pelotant la laine, graphite pencil, black chalk, chalk and colored chalk, pen and gray ink, 315 x 226 mm, 1746, rijksmuseum amsterdam  les deux artistes, 1747, albertina, vienna  references  bibliography   neil jeffares, the dictionary of pastellists before 1800, london, unicorn press, 2006  external links   louis aubert on arcadja  french male classical composers french baroque composers 18th-century french male classical violinists 1720 births painters from paris musicians from paris 1800s deaths 18th-century french painters french male painters 18th-century classical composers 18th-century french composers 17th-century male musicians
the 2016-17 aek b.c. season was aek's 60th season in the top-tier level greek basket league. aek played in three different competitions during that season.  transfers 2016-17  players in  |}  total spending:  €25,000+  players out  |}  total income:  €0  total expenditure:  €25,000+  preseason and friendlies  competitions  overall  overview  greek league  league table  results summary  results by round  regular season  results overview  quarterfinals  semifinals  third place  greek cup   quarterfinals   semifinals  champions league  league table  results summary  results by round  regular season  results overview  play-offs qualifiers  round of 16  references  2016-17 2016-17 in greek basketball by club
marc-antoine legrand or le grand (30 january 1673, paris - 7 january 1728) was a 17th-18th-century french actor and playwright.  biography  the son of a surgeon at the hotel des invalides, legrand started very early his acting career, first in lyon in 1692 in the company of marshall de villeroy and made a first attempt at the comedie-francaise 19 march 1694 but was not received. after a stay in warsaw at the court of john iii sobieski, he returned to the comedie-francaise 21 march 1702 and was received 18 october.  disgraced by nature, he one day harangued the audience by throwing "gentlemen, it is easier for you to accustom yourself to my face, that for me to change it."  if he never gave up the stage (he even played the role of maitre robert in his last play les amazones modernes in 1727, written in collaboration with louis fuzelier), he devoted part of his time to writing theater plays (forty in all), sometimes to the comedie francaise, sometimes to the comedie italienne, and once even for a theatre de la foire, the opera comique, les animaux raisonnables, 1717. le roi de cocagne (1718) is usually considered to be his masterpiece.  while he was composing the play cartouche ou les voleurs (1721), he pushed the sake of realism as far as visiting in prison the famous brigand to document the argot.  references  bibliography  studies on legrand   burnet, mary scott, marc-antoine legrand, acteur et auteur comique, paris, droz, 1938.  lauro, carlo, 'foire' et utopia nel teatro di m.-a. legrand, schena editore, 1985.  plays by legrand   œuvres de le grand, comedien du roi, paris, libraires associes, 1770 (4 vol.)  œdipe travesti et agnes de chaillot (en collaboration avec pierre-francois biancolelli, dit dominique) dans parodies du nouveau theatre-italien, paris, briasson, 1738 (vol. 1).  external links   marc-antione legrand on data.bnf.fr  list of his plays on cesar   biographical notice in dictionnaire portatif historique et litteraire des theatres by antoine de leris  18th-century french male actors french male stage actors 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights societaires of the
comedie-francaise male actors from paris 1673 births 1728 deaths
sphingomonas laterariae  is a gram-negative, rod-shaped and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from a dump site which was contaminated with hexachlorocyclohexane in ummari in india.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas laterariae at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  laterariae bacteria described in 2012
colin allen hart-leverton qc (born 10 may 1936) is a british former lawyer and liberal party politician. he lives in north west london  background hart-leverton was born the son of monty hart-leverton and betty simmonds. he was educated at stowe school. in 1990 he married kathi jo davidson.  professional career hart-leverton qualified in 1957 as a member of the institute of taxation, the youngest ever to have qualified. he was called to the bar by middle temple in 1957, again the youngest to have ever qualified. he was the prosecuting counsel at the central criminal court from 1974-79. he was appointed a deputy circuit judge in 1975. he was attorney-at-law at the turks and caicos islands in the caribbean in 1976. in 1979 he became a queen's counsel and served as a recorder of the crown court from 1979-2001. he was also a professional pianist with various well-known jazz bands.  political career hart-leverton joined the liberal party and was chairman of  highgate young liberals and an executive member of london league of young liberals. at the age of 22 he was liberal candidate for the bristol west division at the 1959 general election. he was liberal candidate for the walthamstow west division at the 1964 general election. he did not stand for parliament again.  electoral record  references  1936 births liberal party (uk) parliamentary candidates people educated at stowe school members of the middle temple living people place of birth missing (living people)
eric-paul stekel, (born erich stekel in vienna on 27 june 1898, died in grenoble on 11 february 1978) was a french composer and conductor of austrian origin, former director of the conservatory of grenoble.  he worked with piano teacher felicien wolff, whom he strongly encouraged his composition work, and he worked also with pianist genevieve dinand and with musicologist paul-gilbert langevin, participating in his works, le siecle de bruckner and anton bruckner, apogee de la symphonie. there is an association in grenoble called the friends of eric-paul stekel.  he was the son of viennese psychoanalyst wilhelm stekel.  references  1898 births 1978 deaths french male conductors (music) french male composers french people of austrian-jewish descent people from grenoble 20th-century french conductors (music) 20th-century french male musicians
matthew stephen turner hughes (born 17 april 1996) is an english cricketer. playing for oxford university, he scored a century in each of his first two first-class matches.  cricket career matthew hughes attended stockport grammar school before going up to hertford college, oxford. on his first-class debut, in the annual match against cambridge university in 2015, he opened the batting for oxford university and top-scored in each innings, making 41 and 116 in a losing cause. in his next first-class match, the 2016 university match, he made 116 (the top score) and 76 batting at number three, and oxford won. he also scored 132 not out in the 2018 50-over university match at lord's to take oxford to a five-wicket victory with 10 overs to spare.  since 2018 he has taught chemistry at merchant taylors' school, northwood.  references  external links  1996 births living people cricketers from manchester english cricketers oxford university cricketers people educated at stockport grammar school alumni of hertford college, oxford
an outdoor bronze sculpture of chester a. arthur by artist george edwin bissell and architect james brown lord is installed at madison square park in manhattan, new york. cast in 1898 and dedicated on june 13, 1899, the statue rests on a barre granite pedestal.  see also   1899 in art  references  external links    1899 establishments in new york city 1899 sculptures bronze sculptures in manhattan cultural depictions of chester a. arthur monuments and memorials in manhattan outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures of men in new york city statues in new york city arthur, chester a. flatiron district
conrad or kurt christoph von konigsmarck (24 march 1634 - 31 october 1673) was a dutch-swedish military leader.  he was the son of hans christoff von konigsmarck and agathe von leesten and the brother of otto wilhelm von konigsmarck and beata elisabet von konigsmarck.  career konigsmarck received an education despite the war and later joined the swedish army. he took part in the bloody battle near warsaw in 1656. in 1658 under charles x command during the crossing over the frozen great belt bridge to funen he was caught by the danes and was left free only after the peace of roskilde. in 1663 after the death of his father he became a vice-governor of the duchy of bremen-verden and commander of stade.  he served the stadthouder william iii of orange in bodegraven during the rampjaar. when 10,000 french troops under the command of francois-henri de montmorency, duc de luxembourg arrived over the frozen ice of the hollandic water line from woerden on 27 december 1672, he retreated to leiden. there the councilman cornelis hop and others kept the gates closed and ordered him back to alphen aan de rijn in order to defend the water line at gouwsluis. his retreat enabled the duke of luxembourg to murder all at bodegraven and zwammerdam and he prepared to make an attack on the hague. a sudden thaw forced them back to woerden however, but konigsmarck was seen as a coward.  konigsmarck was killed in the siege of bonn by an accidental cannon shot from friendly side on 10 october 1673 at the age of 39.  in a year his body was reburied in stade. he was known for his charitable gifts, as for example a rebuilding of burnt church in stade in 1659.  personal life he married countess maria christina von wrangel, the daughter of count hermann von wrangel and their children were:  karl johann von konigsmarck  maria aurora von konigsmarck  amalia wilhelmina von konigsmarck  philip christoph von konigsmarck  references  1634 births 1673 deaths swedish military personnel
patrik koch (born december 8, 1996) is a slovak professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc vitkovice ridera of the czech extraliga.  career koch made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc kometa brno during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  references  external links  1996 births living people des moines buccaneers players sk horacka slavia trebic players hc kometa brno players hc kosice players hc presov players hc vitkovice players slovak ice hockey defencemen sportspeople from bratislava
the following list contains a run down of politicians, individuals, constituency labour parties, trade unions (both labour party affiliated and not), socialist societies, newspapers, magazines and other organisations that endorsed a candidate in the 2016 leadership election  summary  labour politicians  jeremy corbyn mps   diane abbott, shadow health secretary since 2016; candidate for leader in 2010; mp for hackney north and stoke newington richard burgon, shadow justice secretary and shadow lord chancellor since 2016; mp for leeds east dawn butler, former minister for young citizens and youth engagement 2009-2010; mp for brent south 2005-2010; mp for brent central since 2015. ronnie campbell, mp for blyth valley stephen hepburn, mp for jarrow imran hussain, shadow minister of state for international development since 2016; mp for bradford east ian lavery, shadow minister for trade unions & civil society since 2015; mp for wansbeck clive lewis, shadow defence secretary since 2016; mp for norwich south rebecca long-bailey, shadow chief secretary to the treasury; mp for salford and eccles andy mcdonald, shadow transport secretary since 2016, mp for middlesbrough john mcdonnell, shadow chancellor since 2015; candidate for leader in 2007 and 2010; mp for hayes and harlington (campaign manager) ian mearns, mp for gateshead grahame morris, shadow communities and local government secretary since 2016; mp for easington kate osamor, shadow international development secretary since 2016; mp for edmonton angela rayner, shadow secretary of state for education and shadow minister for women and equalities since 2016, mp for ashton-under-lyne dennis skinner, former chairman of the labour party (1988-1989); mp for bolsover emily thornberry, shadow foreign secretary since 2016, mp for islington south and finsbury jon trickett, shadow secretary of state for business since 2016; mp for hemsworth  meps  lucy anderson, mep for london julie ward, mep for north west england  other labour politicians  mick antoniw, am for pontypridd jennette arnold, am for north east bill butler, former msp for glasgow anniesland neil findlay, msp for lothian mike hedges, member of the welsh assembly for swansea east cara hilton, former msp for dunfermline richard leonard, msp for central scotland ken livingstone, former mayor of london (2000-2008) murad qureshi, former london-wide member of the london assembly for the labour party alex rowley, deputy leader of the scottish labour party since 2015; msp for mid scotland and fife elaine smith, former deputy presiding officer of the scottish parliament; msp for central scotland chris williamson
, former mp for derby north  owen smith mps   meps paul brannen, mep for north east england richard corbett, mep for yorkshire and the humber seb dance, mep for london theresa griffin, mep for north west england richard howitt, mep for the east of england david martin, mep for scotland linda mcavan, mep for yorkshire and the humber catherine stihler, mep for scotland derek vaughan, mep for wales glenis willmott, leader of the european parliamentary labour party since 2009; mep for the east midlands other labour politicians  leighton andrews, former minister for education and skills (2009-2013); former member of the welsh assembly for rhondda tom copley am, london assembly member (london-wide) hefin david, member of the welsh assembly for caerphilly kezia dugdale, leader of the scottish labour party since 2015 peter hain, baron hain, former shadow welsh secretary (2010-2012) and welsh secretary (2002-2008; 2009-2010); former mp for neath sadiq khan, mayor of london since 2016 lee waters, member of the welsh assembly for llanelli stewart wood, baron wood of anfield, former co-shadow minister without portfolio (2011-2015)  angela eagle  individuals  jeremy corbyn  akala, rapper and poet attila the stockbroker, punk poet, musician and songwriter lily allen, singer, songwriter, actress and television presenter angela barnes, comedian mike barson, multi-instrumentalist, songwriter, composer, and keyboardist for madness joey barton, professional footballer billy bragg, singer charlotte church, singer-songwriter, actress and television presenter jack carroll, comedian and a runner-up on britain's got talent janice connolly, actress, comedian and artistic director manuel cortes, general secretary of the transport salaried staffs' association (tssa) miriam david, professor of education at the institute of education, university of london ivor dembina, stand-up comedian professor stephen deutsch, composer danny devito, actor, comedian and director brian eno, musician and composer jennie formby, regional secretary and former political director of unite the union george galloway, leader of the respect party (2013-2016), broadcaster and former mp for bradford west (2012-2015) janey godley, stand-up comedian and writer jeremy hardy, comedian rufus hound, comedian, actor and presenter robin ince, comedian, actor and writer selma james, feminist writer lee jasper, senior policy advisor on equalities to the former mayor of london ken livingston owen jones, journalist and political commentator shappi khorsandi
, comedian ken loach, film and television director norman lovett, stand-up comedian and actor miriam margolyes, actress francesca martinez, comedian and writer paul mason, journalist and writer len mccluskey, general secretary of unite the union ewan mcgregor, actor patrick monahan, comedian alan moore, comic book writer charles shaar murray, music journalist and broadcaster dave nellist, former labour mp and national chair of tusc jo neary, comedian, writer and actress novelist, grime mc and producer tyrone o'sullivan, former num branch secretary and trade union activist sara pascoe, stand-up comedian and actress maxine peake, actress grace petrie, singer-songwriter john rees, founder of counterfire and stop the war coalition michael rosen, novelist and poet zack sabre jr., professional wrestler bernie sanders, u.s senator and 2016 democratic party presidential candidate alexei sayle, stand-up comedian and actor ian saville, magician lynne segal, socialist feminist academic and activist mark serwotka, general secretary of the public and commercial services union arthur smith, alternative comedian and writer harry leslie smith, writer and political commentator mark steel, stand-up comedian and columnist stormzy, grime artist ava vidal, comedian holly walsh, comedian dave ward, general secretary of communication workers union matt wrack, general secretary of the fire brigades union  owen smith  tracy-ann oberman, actress frances barber, actress david blanchflower, labour economist, former member of mcdonnell's economic advisory committee (resigned in june 2016) alastair campbell, journalist, broadcaster, and former director of communications and strategy to prime minister tony blair charlie condou, actor and writer (endorsed andy burnham in 2015) william dalrymple, historian and writer robert harris, novelist konnie huq, television presenter and writer jason isaacs, actor ross kemp, actor and investigative journalist paul kenny, former general secretary of gmb nick miles, actor caitlin moran, english journalist, author, and broadcaster at the times (voted for jeremy corbyn in 2015) richard murphy, british chartered accountant and political economist (endorsed jeremy corbyn in 2015) jay rayner, journalist, writer, broadcaster and food critic tony robinson, actor, comedian and tv presenter j. k. rowling, novelist, author of the harry potter fantasy series abby tomlinson, founder and leader of the milifandom (endorsed andy burnham in 2015) robert webb, comedian, actor and writer (endorsed yvette cooper in 2015) simon wren-lewis, economist, former member of the economic advisory committee  constituency labour
parties  jeremy corbyn jeremy corbyn received the supporting nomination of 285 clps.  owen smith owen smith received the supporting nomination of 53 clps.  affiliated trade unions  jeremy corbyn unison unite the union (unite) associated society of locomotive engineers and firemen (aslef) communication workers union (cwu) transport salaried staffs' association (tssa) union of construction, allied trades and technicians (ucatt) fire brigades union (fbu) bakers, food and allied workers' union (bfawu)  owen smith general, municipal, boilermakers and allied trade union (gmb) community musicians' union (mu) union of shop, distributive and allied workers (usdaw)  undeclared broadcasting, entertainment, cinematograph and theatre union (bectu) national union of mineworkers (num)  non-affiliated trade unions  jeremy corbyn prison officers association (poa) national union of rail, maritime and transport workers (rmt)  socialist societies  jeremy corbyn disability labour  owen smith jewish labour movement labour movement for europe socialist health association (endorsed jeremy corbyn in 2015)  undeclared  bame labour chinese for labour christians on the left fabian society labour animal welfare society labour campaign for international development  lgbt labour labour finance and industry group labour housing group labour party irish society labour students  labour women's network national union of labour and socialist clubs scientists for labour socialist educational association socialist environment and resources association society of labour lawyers tamils for labour  affiliated organisations  jeremy corbyn young labour  organisations  jeremy corbyn alliance for workers' liberty (awl) campaign for labour party democracy (clpd) disabled people against cuts (dpac) rudimental, english drum and bass band labour campaign for nuclear disarmament (labour cnd) lesbians and gays support the miners (lgsm) labour party marxists labour representation committee national campaign against fees and cuts stop the war coalition (stwc) ub40, english reggae band  owen smith progress  publications  references  2016 in the united kingdom 2016 labour party (uk) leadership election labour party leadership election, 2016 labour party leadership election (uk)
giampiero borghini (born 20 april 1943) is an socialist politician and translator from russian. he was also affiliated with forza italia. he was born in brescia. he was mayor of milan.  references  1943 births mayors of milan 20th-century italian politicians 21st-century italian politicians italian translators italian communist party politicians forza italia politicians translators from russian living people
maria troncatti (16 february 1883 - 25 august 1969) was an italian roman catholic professed religious from the salesian sisters of don bosco. troncatti was from a farming family and entered her congregation in 1907; she worked as a nurse during world war i and became part of the missions in ecuador from 1922 until her death in a plane crash in 1969.  troncatti was beatified in ecuador on 24 november 2012 after pope benedict xvi approved her beatification - the pontiff had cardinal angelo amato preside over the celebration on his behalf. she was made a servant of god on 20 october 1986 under pope john paul ii and was made venerable on 12 november 2008 all prior to her beatification.  life maria troncatti was born in italy in 1883 to poor farming parents.  she attended catechism lessons in her local parish during her childhood and in obedience to her priest decided to wait until adulthood before requesting to be admitted into the salesian sisters.  troncatti joined the salesian sisters of don bosco on 15 october 1905 after having commenced her period of the novitiate and she later professed her vows on 17 1908 in nizza monferrato. her father fainted as she left due to the pain of separation. she spent this time in varazze in liguria.  troncatti suffered a serious infection in 1909 and later contracted typhoid; this prompted a visit from michele rua who blessed her. in 1915 she passed a special course in nursing and used this education during world war i as she tended to ill and wounded soldiers - she also worked for the red cross while stationed in varazze.  troncatti was sent to the missions in ecuador on 9 november 1922 for a mission of evangelization to work among the shuar tribe in the amazon forest; after she established herself there, tribal members dubbed her, "mamacita". en route to ecuador, she and her fellow religious boarded a train to marseille in france and spent over two weeks on a boat to panama; she then went to guayaquil in december and then on to ecuador. her first encounter with them threatened her life: the tribal chief's daughter was wounded from a bullet caught in the crossfire between two warring tribes, and she was threatened with death if she could not save the girl; troncatti operated and saved the girl's life in a move that bought troncatti the respect and admiration of the natives. she also served in ecuador as a catechist and nurse. before she turned 85 in 1968 she penned a letter to her relations back
home in brescia and said that - despite their wishes to reunite with her - her age made travel difficult and she could not leave due to her mission.  troncatti died on 25 august 1969 in a plane crash in ecuador. the small plane crashed not long after takeoff on the edge of the forest that she had dubbed the "homeland of the heart". two other religious were in that plane and managed to survive - the three were en route to quito for an annual spiritual retreat.  beatification the beatification process commenced in mendez under pope john paul ii on 20 october 1986 after the congregation for the causes of saints declared "nihil obstat" ('nothing against') to the cause and titled troncatti as a servant of god. the diocesan process was inaugurated on 7 september 1986 and concluded its business on 25 october 1987 while on 25 may 1990 the c.c.s. validated the process in rome.  the c.c.s. then received the positio dossier from the postulation in 1997 and passed in to their consulting theologians on 5 may 2008 for their approval while the c.c.s. themselves later approved the contents of the dossier on 7 october 2008. it all culminated on 12 november 2008 when her heroic virtue was confirmed in a move that allowed for pope benedict xvi to declare troncatti to be venerable.  the process for the investigation of a miracle attributed to her and needed for beatification opened on 21 july 2008 and concluded its work on 12 september 2008 while the c.c.s. validated this process in rome on 13 february 2009. a medical board voted in favor of the miracle on 7 april 2011 while consulting theologians also provided their assent on 22 october 2011; the c.c.s. issued their approval on 21 february 2012 and passed it to benedict xvi on 10 may 2012 for his final approval. the miracle in question came from ecuador in 2002 involving the cure of josefa yolanda solorzano pisco.  troncatti was beatified on 24 november 2012 in ecuador with cardinal angelo amato presiding over the celebration on the behalf of the pope.  the current postulator for this cause is pierluigi carmeroni.  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn  1883 births 1969 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century italian people 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century italian people beatifications by pope benedict xvi roman catholic missionaries in ecuador female roman catholic missionaries italian roman catholic missionaries italian beatified people italian nuns people from brescia venerated catholics by pope benedict xvi victims of aviation accidents or incidents in ecuador
italian expatriates in ecuador
miguel jimenez may refer to:   miguel jimenez (boxer) (born 1970), boxer from puerto rico  miguel angel jimenez (born 1964), spanish golfer  miguel jimenez (footballer) (born 1980), chilean footballer  miguel jimenez ponce (born 1990),mexican footballer  miguel jimenez (baseball) (born 1969), major league baseball pitcher
roderick chase (born 12 october 1967) is a barbadian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people barbadian male cyclists olympic cyclists of barbados cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
misrikh  assembly constituency is one of the 403 constituencies of the uttar pradesh legislative assembly,  india. it is a part of the sitapur district and one  of the five assembly constituencies in the misrikh (lok sabha constituency). first election in this assembly constituency was held in 1952 after the "dpaco (1951)" (delimitation order) was passed in 1951. after the "delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies order" was passed in 2008, the constituency was assigned identification number 153.  wards  / areas extant  of misrikh assembly constituency is kcs mishrikh, machhrehata, aurangabad  & misrikh- cumneemsar mb of mishrikh tehsil.  members of the legislative assembly  16th vidhan sabha: 2012 general  elections  see also  misrikh (lok sabha constituency) sitapur district sixteenth legislative assembly of uttar pradesh uttar pradesh legislative assembly vidhan bhawan  references   assembly constituencies of uttar pradesh politics of sitapur district
beatriz futuro muhlbauer (born february 26, 1986) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team.  she was selected to represent brazil in rugby sevens at the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links         beatriz futuro muhlbauer at the 2018 south american games  1986 births living people place of birth missing (living people) brazil international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players olympic rugby sevens players of brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics pan american games bronze medalists for brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games south american games gold medalists for brazil south american games medalists in rugby sevens competitors at the 2018 south american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 28 february 1945 in utsunomiya as a square division. it was a part of the 16 simultaneously created divisions batch numbering from 140th to 160th.  action the 151st division was assigned to 51st army in april 1945 and performed a coastal defense duties in mito, ibaraki until surrender of japan 15 august 1945 without seeing an actual combat. 433rd infantry regiment was garrisoning hitachi, ibaraki, 434th and 436th - hitachinaka, ibaraki, and 435th infantry regiment - kasama, ibaraki.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第151師団 (日本軍), accessed 13 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
alderdale is an extinct town in klickitat county, in the u.s. state of washington. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  a post office called alderdale was established in 1907, and remained in operation until 1962. in 1917 it was reported as a station on the spokane, portland and seattle railway. the community took its name from nearby alder creek.  references  ghost towns in washington (state) geography of klickitat county, washington
neomegalodon is an extinct genus of bivalve molluscs belonging to the family megalodontidae.  species †neomegalodon cornutus yao et al. 2007 †neomegalodon triqueter wulfen 1793  fossil record fossils of neomegalodon have been found in the triassic (age range: from 235.0 to 201.6 million years ago). they are known from various localities of italy, austria, china, germany, hungary, tajikistan and united states.  references   prehistoric bivalve genera bivalve taxonomy
franco donna is a retired italian rifle shooter. he won the individual european title in three positions in 1969 and the team world title in the 50 meter rifle prone in 1970.  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) italian male sport shooters
jagdgeschwader 333 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938
spacex crs-20 (crs-20), also known as spacex-20, was a commercial resupply service mission to the international space station (iss) launched on 7 march 2020. the mission was contracted by nasa and was flown by spacex using dragon. this was spacex's last flight for dragon 1 and concluded the nasa commercial resupply services (crs-1) contract extension.  the twenty (20) missions by spacex under the crs-1 contract carried more than 43,000 kg (94,000 pounds) of cargo to the international space station, and returned about 33,000 kg (74,000 pounds) of equipment and specimens to earth, according to nasa.   the second contract (crs-2) was awarded in january 2016 and began with the  spacex crs-21 in december 2020  using dragon 2.  the dragon capsule c112 used for crs-20 previously flew to the iss on crs-10 and crs-16. it arrived at the iss on 9 march 2020 at 10:25 utc and was captured by the station's canadarm2 robotic arm, the last capture of a dragon with canadarm2. cargo dragon 2 vehicles, which will replace dragon 1, will dock directly at the space station.  the 1st stage booster b1059 previously supported the crs-19 mission.  launch schedule history  in february 2016, it was announced that nasa had awarded a contract extension to spacex for five crs additional missions (crs-16 to crs-20). in june 2016, nasa inspector general report had this mission manifested for 2019, but by june 2019 the launch had been pushed back to march 2020.  payload   nasa contracted for the crs-20 mission from spacex and therefore determines the primary payload, date of launch, and orbital parameters for the dragon crs. the crs-20 mission carries 1977 kg of cargo to iss.   science investigations: 960 kg  vehicle hardware: 219 kg  crew supplies: 273 kg  spacewalk equipment: 56 kg  computer resources: 1 kg  unpressurized payloads: bartolomeo platform 468 kg  bartolomeo (named for the younger brother of explorer christopher columbus), is an external payload platform developed by airbus defence and space, german-built and operated by the european space agency. bartolomeo provides power and data transmission for up to 12 payload slots and is the first external commercial research platform to be installed on the iss.  along with bartolomeo, the dragon cargo mission delivers about a ton of scientific experiments, including biological
research investigations studying microgravity's impact on stem cells, intestinal diseases and chemical reactions. the bartolomeo platform was robotically removed from dragon's trunk section and installed outside iss on 2 april 2020. a spacewalk to route power and communication wiring to the bartolomeo facility for activation has been postponed. the eva was originally planned in mid-april 2020, but the space station will not be at full staffing level of six crew members until autumn 2020. when activated, columbus will have a new outdoor deck to host a range of materials science, earth observation and space science instruments.  interoperable radio system (iors) is the foundation element of the amateur radio on the international space station (ariss) next-generation radio system on iss. a total of 4 flight units and 10 total units are being built by the ariss hardware team. the first iors radio system shipped on crs-20 was installed in the iss columbus module by expedition 63 commander, chris cassidy on 2 september 2020. system activation was first observed at 01:02 utc on 2 september 2020 by ariss control station and amateur radio ground operators. initial operation of the new radio system began as an fm cross band repeater.  a second iors flight unit is expected to be launched on a later 2020 cargo flight for installation in the russian service module.  iss national laboratory the dragon spacecraft was also packed with spare parts and replacement hardware for the space station's research facilities and life support systems. the components included upgraded hardware for the station's urine processing system, which converts human waste into drinking water. the new components allow nasa teams to test out modifications designed to extend the lifetime of the urine processing system's distillation assembly ahead of future missions to the moon and mars, which will require longer-lasting life support equipment.  see also   columbus - external payload facility  amateur radio on the international space station  spacex crs-21  list of falcon 9 launches  references  external links   nasa  spacex official page for the dragon spacecraft  amateur radio on the iss (ariss)  bartolomeo platform - airbus  bartolomeo contract  spacex dragon spacecraft launched in 2020 spacex payloads contracted by nasa supply vehicles for the international space station march 2020 events in the united states spacecraft which reentered in 2020
the st. joseph's cathedral  () also called fort-liberte cathedral is a religious building belonging to the catholic church and is located in the city of fort-liberte (freedom fort or folibete in haitian creole), capital of the northeastern department (departement nord-est) in the caribbean country of haiti.  the cathedral follows the roman or latin rite serves as the seat of the bishop of the diocese of fort-liberte (latin: dioecesis castelli libertatis). work for its original construction was completed in 1703.  it is under the pastoral responsibility of the bishop quesnel alphonse.  see also list of cathedrals in haiti roman catholicism in haiti st. joseph's cathedral (disambiguation)  references  roman catholic cathedrals in haiti fort-liberte roman catholic churches completed in 1703 1703 establishments in the french colonial empire 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in haiti
the payra 1320 mw thermal power plant is a 1,320 megawatt coal-fired power station built in kalapara upazila of patuakhali district in southern bangladesh. it is a joint venture between the north-west power generation company bangladesh limited (nwpgcl) and china national machinery import and export corporation (cmc).  history  on 19 march 2015, a deal was signed between nwpgcl and the cmc to set up the payra power plant. the joint venture was named bangladesh-china power company limited (bcpcl). on 29 march 2016, bcpcl signed an engineering, procurement and construction (epc) contract with consortium of nepc &cecc for the installation of the power plant.  about  the plant will consist of two units, each with a capacity of 660 mw. the estimated cost is around us$1.56 billion. the plant will be built on an area of 397-hectare. the first unit came into commercial operation in 15 may 2020 and the second unit on 8th december 2020. presently it is the largest electricity generating unit of bangladesh in operation.  see also   electricity sector in bangladesh  list of power stations in bangladesh  references  external links  fossil fuel power stations in bangladesh proposed coal-fired power stations proposed power stations in bangladesh proposed buildings and structures in bangladesh coal in bangladesh coal-fired power stations in bangladesh
monsters under the bed is the fourth album by honeymoon suite.  the band was now officially a trio, consisting of johnnie dee, dermot "derry" grehan, and returning keyboardist ray coburn.  the band's rhythm section consisted of session musicians steve webster (bass) and jorn anderson (drums).  track listing  all songs written by ray coburn, johnnie dee, and derry grehan.  personnel  honeymoon suite:  johnnie dee - lead vocals  derry grehan - guitars, vocals  ray coburn - keyboards with:  steve webster - bass guitar  jorn anderson - drums  suki mars - background vocals on 1 and 11  honeymoon suite albums 1991 albums
petrus olai is a latinization of peder (per)  olsson (olsen) or  olofsson, used by a number of early modern scandinavian authors: petrus av alvastra (petrus olavi), c. 1307-1390, prior of  vadstena monastery, swedish author and translator petrus olai (peder olsen), ca. 1490-ca. 1570,   danish franciscan friar and historiographer petrus olai dalekarlus (1601-1680), swedish pastor and politician. petrus fontelius (petrus olai fontelius uplandiensis), 1622-1684, swedish mathematician, rector of uppsala university and politician. petrus stjernman (petrus olai stjernman), 1642-1692,   bishop of visby.
juliette colbert falletti de barolo (26 june 1786 - 19 january 1864) - born as juliette victoire colbert and known in italy as giulia falletti di barolo - was a french roman catholic philanthropist and the founder of both the sisters of saint anne and the daughters of jesus the good shepherd. colbert was a well-educated girl living in france during and after the tumultuous french revolution which caused her faith to deepen since she had the desire to aid the poor and neglected. her marriage to a nobleman in paris led to the two setting off to live in turin where the couple threw themselves into charitable works. the couple bore no children but rather "adopted" the town's poor. colbert was widowed some decades later and became professed into the secular franciscan order while establishing hospitals and schools as well as other charitable institutions.  her cause for canonization opened in late 1990 (she became titled as a servant of god) and culminated in mid-2015 when pope francis confirmed her heroic virtue and named her as venerable. her husband's cause was opened in 1995 and he remains a servant of god.  life juliette victorienne francoise colbert was born in maulevrier on 26 june 1786 as the second of four children to the nobles edouard victurnien charles rene colbert (15 december 1754-august 1839) and annemarie louise de crenolle (the couple married on 12 march 1782). her father served as an ambassador for maximilian franz von osterreich. her ancestor was the former finance minister jean baptiste colbert who served for king louis xiv (either the great-granddaughter or descended from his brother). in october 1793 her mother died in brussels leaving her father to care for the children. her siblings (in order) were:  elisabeth-marie (11 february 1783 - 19 april 1835)  edouard-auguste (d. november 1817)  charles-antoine (11 february 1793 - 26 july 1859) her father remarried on 19 april 1812 to pauline le clerc and she had a half-brother in rene-oliver (b. 19 march 1813). colbert studied art and music in her private studies and learnt greek and latin as well as english and italian and german when the colbert's lived there.  the french revolution forced her father to relocate with his children in 1793 to the german kingdom before settling in holland and belgium (her mother died in brussels); their return to france came after napoleon bonaparte assumed power. upon their return their castle had been burnt down and their land had been laid waste. colbert had been traumatized with the death of her aunt
and paternal grandfather at the guillotine in 1794 (during the terror) added with the death of her mother months before. in 1804 she served empress josephine in the imperial court where she first met her future husband. the two had in common a deep faith and desire to aid others though their temperaments were different: she was impetuous with a brilliant mind while he was gentle and reserved in nature. colbert married the nobleman carlo tancredi falletti di barolo in paris on 18 august 1806 and the couple later relocated to turin (it was supposed to be brief but became a permanent arrangement) in 1814 after napoleon's fall where the couple lived childless for the remainder of their lives together. prince camillo borghese helped in mediating the union between the couple. the couple bore no children (both were infertile) but viewed the poor as their adopted children. it became the norm for her to help prisoners as well as poor girls and their mothers. colbert created free schools with her husband for children and the first opened in borgo dora in 1821; she founded the istituto del rifugio for mothers in 1823 and an institute for victims of child prostitution later in 1833.  in 1814 - during the easter octave - she encountered a eucharistic procession to an ill person and knelt before the blessed sacrament. but a piercing scream broke the procession: "it is soup i need, not viaticum!" this provocation from an inmate in a prison near the procession led colbert to visit the prison where she was shocked from the degradation of the prisoners and their conditions. this moved her to help them.  in 1834 she founded the sisters of saint anne with the archbishop of turin luigi fransoni encouraging her work; she later founded the daughters of jesus the good shepherd. in 1835 she distinguished herself in aiding the ill during a cholera epidemic which saw officials award her with the order of saints maurizio and lazzaro. her husband contracted this which caused great concern granted his frail health at the time. the doctors advised that he seek treatment in austria though his condition deteriorated after contracting a violent fever forcing the pair to stop in verona. the pair moved for respite at an inn in chiari in brescia where he died in her arms on 4 september 1838. colbert later provided the former prisoner silvio pellico with an annual pension from 1834 until his death in 1854 and she provided for the french translation of his published works. pellico first served as the couple's librarian in 1834 and the two became good friends with pellico who became colbert's private aide in 1838 after
her husband died. in 1845 she opened the hospital of saint filomena for handicapped children and in 1847 established a vocational school for aspiring workers. colbert often wore a hair shirt of coarse horsehair as a penitential practice.  colbert became a professed member in the secular franciscan order at some stage after her husband died. it was around this stage that her spiritual director was giuseppe cafasso. in 1862 the election for a new superior-general was held and the sisters of saint anne saw fit to elect caterina dominici. in 1845 she travelled to rome for six months in the hopes of expediting her claim for papal recognition of her orders. colbert succeeded in this venture and pope gregory xvi provided canonical recognition in a decree on 8 march 1846 not long before the pontiff's death.  colbert was close friends with madeleine sophie barat and supported the efforts of giuseppe benedetto cottolengo in social activities. but she also came into contact with giovanni bosco and asked him to serve as a chaplain for the istituto del rifugio. but his ill health sometime after proved a challenge since he refused to abandon the girls prompting colbert to ask him to leave so as to take care of his own health.  her death came in 1864 after having fallen ill in october 1863 and her remains have been housed in the santa giulia church since 1899 after their transferral. colbert had founded not long before her death the opera pia barolo in order for that institute to be able to continue her work; she had left her entire fortune to that institute.  barolo wine the couple were both identified with the famous barolo wine. it had long been rumored that the wine had been produced in turin at their estate but at that point had never been sold on the market. once the king carlo alberto joked with her and asked if it were true that the wine was produced there. it was within the week that she sent out several ox-drawn carts to the palace with 325 barrels for the king.  colbert offered it to her guests and to reigning monarchs.  beatification process the cause for canonization opened on 17 november 1990 under pope john paul ii and she became titled as a servant of god after the congregation for the causes of saints issued an official edict declaring "nihil obstat" (nothing against the cause). the diocesan phase of investigation was inaugurated under giovanni saldarini on 21 january 1991 who later closed it on 4 july 1994; the c.c.s. later validated this process on 13 january 1995. in 2009 the postulation submitted the positio dossier for further assessment with historical advisors
issuing their assent on 27 october 2009 to the cause.  theologians affirmed their support for the cause on 1 april 2014 following their assessment of the positio with the cardinal and bishop members of the c.c.s. also approving it on 21 april 2015. colbert became titled as venerable on 5 may 2015 after pope francis confirmed that she had lived a model life of heroic virtue.  the current postulator for this cause is the capuchin friar paolino rossi.  see also carlo tancredi falletti di barolo  references  further reading  melun, armand marie joachim. la marquise de barol: sa vie et ses œuvres. paris: poussielgue, 1869, 424 pages.  external links  hagiography circle  saints sqpn  1785 births 1864 deaths 19th-century french people 19th-century venerated christians founders of catholic religious communities french baronesses french expatriates in italy french marquesses french philanthropists french roman catholics people from maine-et-loire recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus secular franciscans venerated catholics by pope francis
david pitt (born 2 september 1991) is a vincentian international footballer who currently plays for staines town.  club career pitt was an apprentice at brentford, breaking into the club's reserve team. he was loaned to worthing on work experience towards the end of the 2009-10 season. after playing for ascot united between 2015 and 2016, he signed for brackley town in the summer of 2016. he subsequently played for hayes & yeading united and barton rovers in 2017, bedfont sports in 2018-19, chalfont st peter in 2019, stratford town and broadfields united in 2020. in 2021 he signed for staines town.  international career after playing two matches for the jamaica under-18 side, pitt switched allegiance to st vincent. he was called up to the st vincent squad for the 2018 world cup qualifier matches against trinidad & tobago. he made his debut in a 3-2 defeat at home in the first match on 25 march 2016, and was an unused substitute in the return match on 29 march, which trinidad won 6-0. he won his second cap in a 2017 caribbean cup qualification match against suriname on 4 june.  references  external links  1991 births living people saint vincent and the grenadines footballers saint vincent and the grenadines international footballers association football forwards saint vincent and the grenadines expatriate footballers brentford f.c. players worthing f.c. players apep fc players ascot united f.c. players brackley town f.c. players hayes & yeading united f.c. players barton rovers f.c. players bedfont sports f.c. players chalfont st peter a.f.c. players stratford town f.c. players broadfields united f.c. players cypriot second division players expatriate footballers in cyprus
michael gardiner (born 1979) is a former australian rules footballer.  michael gardiner may also refer to:  michael gardiner (soldier) (died 1584) scottish soldier mike gardiner (born 1965), baseball pitcher michael r. gardiner (born 1978), australian rules footballer for collingwood  see also michael gardner (disambiguation)
bamuwal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bamuwal.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bamuwal has a total number of 397 houses and population of 2,054 of which include 1,099 males and 955 females. literacy rate of bamuwal is 71.66%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 233 which is 11.34% of total population of bamuwal, and child sex ratio is approximately  713 lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
primero is a ghost town in las animas county, colorado, united states. the community was a company coal mining town for the colorado fuel and iron company during the early 20th century.  description the mining community was one of the first in the region, hence the name. in 1921, the mine employed roughly 275 miners. the town eventually came to contain 175 total buildings, including one catholic and one protestant church, a high school, and other amenities. the protestant church, union protestant, was dedicated in april 1917 and hosted cultural events along with worship.  the coal produced at the primero mine was largely employed in steel manufacturing, including at the cf&i plants at pueblo-the minnequa steel works-and segundo. the closing of the steel works had an adverse effect on the demand for coal from the primero mine, playing a role in the 1921 labor dispute between cf&i miners and the company. during the duration of its operation, the mine produced 8,177,567 tons of coal.  history  a post office called primero was established in 1901, and remained in operation until 1933.   an explosion at the primero mine killed 75 miners on 31 january 1910. the mine explosion has been cited as a relevant example of the unsafe conditions prevalent in cf&i mines in the years prior to the 1913-1914 strike. on 8 november 1910, an explosion at the victor-american fuel company mine at delagua killed 76. miners from primero helped for survivors and recover bodies from the rubble.  in september 1913, a strike was called by the independent united mine workers of america union against cf&i. over the next several months, sporadic violence saw deaths, including primero. the violence escalated to 20 april 1914, when colorado national guard and company-supported militia committed the ludlow massacre against striking miners, leading to further violence in what is known as the colorado coalfield war.  following the strike, cf&i-helmed by john d. rockefeller, jr. and under the advisory of future prime minister of canada william lyon mackenzie king-implemented a series of reforms intended to promote support for the company. among these were investments in new town infrastructure in communities owned by cf&i. among the structures built was a catholic church, which, until the completion of the nearby protestant church, housed the liturgies of multiple denominations. bishop john henry tihen, bishop of the diocese of denver, visited the church in primero in may 1921. during the visit,
he confirmed 17 children in the town.  during world war i, at least 48 men from primero joined the united states military. the town also contributed $34,900 ($550,000 in 2015) in liberty bonds during the third liberty loan.  in 1921, a labor dispute over pay changes saw miners strike for several months, from 23 august through november. during the strike-referred to by the company as a "closure"-saw a large number of the mine's employees leaving primero. in part, the fight over the wages pertained to whether those at primero would be represented by their choice of the umwa-membership of which was then prohibited by cf&i-or the company union that was a part of the company's industrial representation plan. ultimate, colorado's industrial commission sided with the company in prohibiting membership to the umwa and enforcing cf&i's wages that were negotiated with the company union.  the town was depopulated in 1928, and by 1 august 1933 all assets were either sold or dismantled.  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of las animas county, colorado company towns in colorado
hawkins bolden (1914-2005) was an american artist known for his "scarecrow" assemblages made from pots, pans, leather belts, rubber hoses and other found materials.  early life  born in the bailey's bottom section of memphis, tennessee, a childhood accident left bolden blind at the age of eight.  career  in 1997, bolden participated in the show passionate visions of the american south opening at the new orleans museum of art. bolden was one of four subjects of the 2011 documentary make, which also included ike morgan, royal robertson and judith scott (artist). the american visionary art museum contains permanent collections of his works. bolden's scarecrows are included in the collections of the smithsonian museum of art, the high museum, and the philadelphia museum of art.  references  external links   hawkins bolden insight - souls grown deep  outsider artists american artists 1914 births 2005 deaths blind artists recycled art artists scarecrows sculptors from tennessee people from memphis, tennessee contemporary sculptors 21st-century american sculptors
jkt48 janken competition 2016 is jkt48's first rock-paper-scissors competition, held at balai sarbini, jakarta on 19 august 2016 to come (which coincides with the celebration of the birthday 23rd jessica veranda). this event will decide who will be the "senbatsu" members and center of the 14th jkt48 single to be released in the future.  the event featured a mini concert, and also the final round hosted by  who was an actor and presenter (including sports) and referee valda rompas, which is part of the mnc talent academy, the career event of the reality program "jkt48 story" in rcti, as well-trained talent show cooking masterchef indonesia 2015.  what is jkt48 janken competition?  to be able to senbatsu, all the members jkt48 strive to do each. with the effort, the ability will be honed. with these capabilities, the members strive to provide the best and become senbatsu. in the world of entertainment, one of the important ability is 'good luck'. what if this time senbatsu single jkt48 determined purely on luck? in the jkt48 janken competition, the members will be against each other in a match suit - or which in japanese is called janken. jkt48 janken competition held by the autumn tournament system. the outcome of each game is determined only from one suit.  when a member of the suit to win the game, he is entitled to move on to the next round. participants were followed by members of team j, kiii, and t. for training students and prospective students will have 5 members training through the preliminary round. this time all members have the same opportunity to win the seat in the single 14th jkt48.  outline  this event was announced in jkt48 theater sementara surabaya in team t stage show "sambil menggandeng erat tanganku" on july 17, 2016 in the hall of , surabaya, east java.  participants  the tournament was attended by all members of jkt48, plus a members of training students and prospective students training jkt48 who won the preliminary round local level. total participants this time as many as 53 people, much less a person than the total participants of the tournament the first time (54). jkt48 members who are automatically eligible to compete in balai sarbini without going through the local level
of preliminary round.  in the preliminary round among members of trainees and trainee candidates in this event at the jkt48 theater on july 23, 2016, there were 5 members who qualified for the finals, which were rissanda putri tuarissa (trainee candidate), gabryela marcelina (trainee candidate), tan zhi hui celine (trainee), adriani elisabeth (trainee), and made ranita devi ningtara (trainee).  at the draw ceremony of jkt48 janken, which took place on august 7, 2016, 50 members were present to determine the lottery numbers on the participants jkt48 janken competition of this year, including four members of trainees and trainee candidates, except nabilah ratna ayu azalia (team j), sendy ariani (team j), saktia oktapyani (team kiii), and rissanda putri tuarissa (trainees).  in the final round of the competition janken jkt48 this year, all members participating jkt48, except sanda (prospective trainees) who do not participate in the event due to illness. however, nabilah (team j) to re-appear at the event, although his health is not 100% fit.  rationing representative of jkt48 a commentator from calculations by angga (judges), doni (judges), and putri (assistant host).  game rules   the match was held with the knockout.  the game started call "jan-ken-pon!", without preceded call "saisho wa gu ..." ("from the stone").  both players simultaneously show signs hands on the green table in the middle of the ring. if there is any doubt, the winner is decided by looking at the video footage.  if event of a draw, the game is repeated from the starting position, without appeal "aiko desho" ("draw").  players who waited in showing hand gestures to show signs of an opponent before her own hands is declared as fraudulent.  victory canceled when the player wins because earlier had seen a hand gesture of the opponent. if there is any doubt, the winner is decided by looking at the video footage.  schedule   july 20, 2016: start selling ticket event jkt48 janken competition  july 23, 2016: preliminary round for trainee candidates and trainees in jkt48 theater  august 7, 2016: drawing even of janken in jkt48 theater (after the afternoon show "pajama
drive" show in progress)  august 19, 2016: event jkt48 janken competition in balai sarbini  bracket competition  the winner's name is written in bold.  abbreviation:  j: team j  kiii: team kiii  t: team t  tr: students training / trainees  ktr: prospective students training / candidate trainees  the preliminary round for trainees and candidates trainee  this tournament will take place on july 23, 2016 in jkt48 theater.  the final round  match results  total 'senbatsu' was an experience as a member of  senbatsu is calculated from the first single with a major label, "river" to single 13th "hanya lihat ke depan". experience singing the b side are not counted.  trivia   jkt48 member who win janken competition single to 14th, has the opportunity to participate in the tournament janken to be carried out by akb48 in kobe world memorial hall, kobe, prefecture, japan on october 10, 2016.  rezky wiranti dhike (team j) did not participate in this event due to her graduation from jkt48 in september 2016 coming.   helma sonya (trainee candidate) attended trainee and trainee candidate qualifying round for "jkt48 janken tournament" this year, but unfortunately still not active jkt48 activities.   sanda (prospective students training) did not attend the final round of janken competition is due to sickness  during the process janken competition takes place, jeje (team j) represented by michelle (cousin of jeje).  master senbatsu jkt48 losers/knocked out at this event are:  team j: ayana, beby, veranda, melody, nabilah and shania  team kiii: yupi and viny  team t: michelle  for the first time in history jkt48, lisa is a 4th generation member of student training successfully entered  senbatsu  to the main track on singles jkt48.  announcement of the other, there would be grand reshuffle (major overhaul) held at the festival to shake hands  (handshake festival)  from 13th single "mae shika mukanee (hanya lihat kedepan)" on september 11, 2016 in the granada ballroom, menara 165, jl. tb simatupang kav. 1 cilandak timur, pasar minggu, south jakarta.  sen
batsu winners will sing the 14th single jkt48 is "love trip" which is the reproduction from the 45th single love trip / shiawase wo wakenasai akb48.  references  external links   official website  jkt48 indonesian television series indonesian reality television series
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'mx'.  mx  mx aircraft   mx aircraft mx2  mx aircraft mxs  mx aircraft mxr  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
comandini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  adele comandini (1898-1987), american screenwriter federico comandini (1893-1967), italian politician gianni comandini (born 1977), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
the 2016-17 south carolina gamecocks men's basketball team represented the university of south carolina during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the team's head coach, frank martin, was in his fifth season at south carolina. the team played its home games at colonial life arena in columbia, south carolina as a member of the southeastern conference. they finished the season 26-11, 12-6 in sec play to finish in a tie for third place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the sec tournament to alabama. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament where they defeated marquette, duke, baylor and sec member florida to advance to their first final four in school history where they lost to gonzaga. 26 wins is the most wins in school history.  previous season the gamecocks finished the season 25-9, 11-7 in sec play to finish in a three-way tie for third place. they lost in the quarterfinals of the sec tournament to georgia. they were invited to the national invitation tournament where they defeated high point in the first round to advance to the second round where they lost to georgia tech.  departures  incoming transfers  recruits  roster  schedule and results source:   |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference games  |- !colspan=9 style=| sec regular season  |- !colspan=9 style= | sec tournament  |- !colspan=9 style= | ncaa tournament  rankings  *ap does not release post-ncaa tournament rankings  references  south carolina gamecocks men's basketball seasons south carolina south carolina ncaa division i men's basketball tournament final four seasons game game
rich boehne (born 1958) is an american media executive. he is the chairman of the board of the e.w. scripps company, and its former president and chief executive officer.  education boehne was born in 1958. he studied at highlands high school in kentucky. he has a bachelors in communication and journalism from the northern kentucky university (nku), by whom he was described as "one of [their] most successful alumni.  career boehne started his career selling subscriptions for the cincinnati post, while he was in high school.  having graduated school, he worked at the cincinnati enquirer as a part-time reporter. once he had his bachelor's degree, he joined a chain of community newspapers, where he progressed while suburban communications (the company owner) bought and consolidated various midwestern family-owned publications.  boehne started working at scripps in 1988 in the capacity of manager of investor relations and a year later, executive vice president.  he soon after became director of communication efforts for the firm, simultaneously participating in the group that worked on the company's long-term strategic planning and development. in 1995 he became a vice president.  boehne was appointed as the chief executive officer of e.w. scripps in 2008. he became chairman of the board in 2013, taking over from nackey scagliotti who had held the position for five years. boehne was succeeded as president and ceo by adam p. symson on august 8, 2017.  board memberships boehne sits on the board of directors of the associated press, cincinnati's external advisory board at deloitte & touche, the board of regents at northern kentucky university and is a director of cincinnati's freestore foodbank.  he is chairman of the advisory board of the cincinnati usa regional chamber of commerce's (where in the past he held the role of chairman) agenda 360 regional planning organization. within this role he solidifies the firm's commitment to public service via its adage, "give light and the people will find their own way."  philanthropy scripps donated $1 million in boehne's name to the scripps howard foundation in 2014.  references  living people 1958 births american chairpersons of corporations american chief executives american media executives american philanthropists e. w. scripps company people northern kentucky university alumni
the 2016 fiba u16 european championship division b was played in sofia, bulgaria, from 11 to 20 august 2016. 24 teams participated in the competition. russia won the tournament for the first time, with israel finishing second.  participating teams    (14th place, 2015 fiba europe under-16 championship division a)    (15th place, 2015 fiba europe under-16 championship division a)    (suspended from 2015 fiba europe under-16 championship division a)  first round  group a  group b  group c  group d  17th - 24th place playoffs  9th - 16th place playoffs  championship playoffs  final standings  awards most valuable player   alexander shashkov  all-tournament team   alexander shashkov  konstantin shevchuk  eidan alber  denys klevzunyk  nik dragan  references  b 2016-17 in european basketball 2016-17 in bulgarian basketball international youth basketball competitions hosted by bulgaria sports competitions in sofia
cueva del agua is a small village of the spanish municipality of garafia in the north-east of the island of la palma, province of santa cruz de tenerife, in the canary islands off the moroccan coast.  location, description  on the island of la palma, cueva del agua is a village 1.5 km east of the lp-114 road that links santo domingo (3 km north) to las tricias (9 km south, near fagundo and the pino de la virgen). it stands between the districts of el castillo village to the south and the town of santo domingo to the north. the north-west coast of the island is 1,600 m away (on a straight line).  the district is of mountainous type: small roads with sharp turns and deep narrow valleys, with the atajo river and its steep ravine (barranco de atajo) to the south of the village, and to the north that of the (barranco de fernando oporto or barranco oropesa, also called barranco de los hombres).  at its heart one finds the chapel of our lady of sorrows and the old school.  name of the district  the name of the village (cueva del agua or cueva de agua, in english "cave of water") comes from the existence of a natural cave inside which flows a spring. this cave, called the spring cave (cueva de la fuente), is found nearby the gr 130  population  its population has fallen considerably since the 1950s and currently counts about 120 inhabitants.  history and archaeology  chapel of our lady of sorrows  it is a small building of only one vessel and a gable roof covered with curved ceramic tiles. the facade includes a triangular pediment, crowned with a bell wall and a cross above it. the access door is made out of canarian pine wood and its top is arch-shaped.  lady of sorrows  it is a devotional image with eyes made out of crystal. it differs from the usual representations of the virgin mary generally encountered in the canaries. but as everywhere else in the nation, from the 16th century a grandeur was given to the particular type of lady of the seven sorrows, where mary remains alone after the crucifixion of her son and handed over to pain.  archaeological remains of el callejoncito  this site of cave engravings is on a rocky outcrop located on the top shore of the right bank of the ravine of the atajo. le site includes six
panels in their original position. the patterns are geometric and put the accent on spirals, fretwork and meanders. they were made by punching the stone, making marks of variable widths and lengths. its state of conservation is worsening due to the wear by erosive agents. these were made public in 1970 by dr. mauro hernandez perez in his dissertation. later they were studied during the second phase (1988) of the corpus of cave engravings of la palma.  the site stands nearby an old settlement of prehistoric origin. the troglodyte village occupies the middle area of the right bank of the ravine of atajo (barranco del atajo). in general, the caves present good conditions for habitability in regard of their size, brightness, exposure and protection against inclement weather. the caves have been intensely used in the historical epoch and some of them have been pillaged.  fragments of ceramics were found in this archaeological site, that belonged to jars from phases iii and iv. the lithic technology is includes stone chips, dikes, cores, a.s.o., of grey basalt and glassy basalt. ovine and caprine bony fragments have also been crushed as well as numerous limpet shells.  petroglyphs are quite common on the territory of cueva del agua, and indeed on that of garafia. many have disappeared, notably during the construction of the roads, but a number of petroglyphs remain scattered. for example, near cueva del agua's windmill, at a place called the calvary (el calvario) are 17 engraved panels; their dominant motive is based on circles and spirals. this locally well-known place with easy access is often visited. another petroglyph was found in 1997 among the stones used to build a wall.  el callejoncito beach  at the mouth of the atajo river is a small beach of black sand framed by tall cliffs, stretching over about 100 m. it is made of black volcanic sand dragged by the tides. a quiet beach in the winter months, it is a zone with great currents and precautions are strongly recommended for bathing.  it is reached from the lp-114 road at km 9 (starting from the south end of the lp-114, where it reaches the lp-1 near las tricias and fagundo). the lane is tarmacked up to the parking place for the vehicles. from that point onward, there is a walk of approximately 1 km up to the beach.  spring cave  this
cave, called cueva de la fuente in spanish, is on the north face of the ravine that opens into callejoncito. its mouth is under a rocky arch. it is a large cave, used a park for goats - and therefore fenced in. there are some cement- and brickworks in connection with the spring. the cave, of volcanic origin, runs parallel to the coastline - and not perpendicularly to it.  feasts  the village's feast is celebrated in september, dedicated to the patron saint of cueva de agua, our lady of sorrows. a popular street party and various cultural acts are carried out.  see also  bibliography   {{cite book  | last=garcia  | first=francisco jose herrera  | title=grabados en la memoria: catalogo de estaciones rupestres ya desaparecidas en el antiguo bando de tagalguen (garafia)] ("engraved in memory: list of rupestrian art already disappeared from the old region of tagalguen (garafia)"  | url=http://www.palmensis.com/estudios-generales/pdf/uno/0208_herrera.pdf  | year=2005  | publisher=article in revista de estudios generales de la isla de la palma, pp. 255-273  | issn=1698-014x  }}   external links   cueva del agua, some photos on islalapalma.com cueva del agua on garafia.es'', site of the municipality of garafia  references   caves of the canary islands history of the canary islands la palma
the bhartiya gau raksha dal (; :) is a hindu nationalist and right-wing federation of cattle protection movements in india affiliated with the rashtriya swayamsevak sangh and a member of the sangh parivar. it provides guidance and support in the construction of protective shelters for cattle and is supporting cattle protection movements all over india. this organization is not affiliated with any political party, its members are all volunteers and it was founded in 2012 by pawan pandit.  awards the organization has offered two different awards to be given to cattle protection movements, namely the "hindu ratna awards" and the "cattle guard honor awards" (gau rakshak samman puraskar). both awards were introduced by pawan pandit, both being given for the promotion of cattle protection and for the promotion of hinduism by volunteers.  activities  in supporting the creation of new cattle protection groups, the organization has already set up more than 32 cattle protection groups in different indian states. it has spearheaded a campaign against the killing of cattle, filling many complaints against those who were found to be killers. a member of the group was appointed to the cattle protection state committee in punjab, strengthening the group's influence. they openly participate in television debates and public meetings to support cattle protection groups, such as in the akhlaq murder case.  on june 25, 2016, two organization members were allegedly shot by cattle smugglers, and on july 27, the indian news channel, ndtv, aired a debate in which it was reported by pawan pandit that 100 volunteers in the cattle protection movement were shot by cattle smugglers. later, he further said that approximately 44,000 cases of cattle smuggling have occurred in all of india, however, the media didn't broadcast anything about it.  on july 31, 2016, ndtv has aired a report which shows a group of organization members forcibly stopping a truck on the outskirts of pune, maharashtra, yanking the driver out, snatching his phone, and pushing his truck to a police station. the report further elaborates on how the so-called "cattle protectors" and other activists can be bribed to guarantee safe passage for cattle transporters.  the bgrd founder, pawan pandit strongly condemned any violence against humanity, stating that the organization is against the violence and is working on social ground with the police, yet there's a strong media backlash stating that vigilantes don't have a right to police anyone.  see also    cow protection movement  hindutva cow vigilante violence in india  references
external links      organizations established in 2012 hindutva volunteer organisations in india hindu nationalism political organisations based in india sangh parivar 2012 establishments in india animal welfare organisations based in india cattle welfare organisations based in india hinduism-related controversies right-wing populism in india hindu organisations based in india hinduism and cattle
button bay state park is a 253-acre state park in ferrisburgh, vermont on the shore of lake champlain.  activities includes boating, swimming, camping, fishing, hiking, picnicking, wildlife watching, water sports and winter sports.  facilities include a swimming pool with lifeguards, canoe and kayak rentals, a large picnic shelter and picnic areas, a play area, 73 campsites including 13 lean-tos and 4 cabins, flush toilets, hot showers, and a dump station.  the park includes the button point natural area, a 14-acre site including the 2-acre button island and an 8-acre peninsula with a mature forest stand. the park's nature center is located here, and park rangers offer interpretive programs including night hikes, campfire programs, amphibian explorations, and nature crafts and games.  see also button bay  references  external links  state parks of vermont protected areas of addison county, vermont ferrisburgh, vermont nature centers in vermont lake champlain 1964 establishments in vermont
vikentije i stefanovic () was archbishop of pec and serbian patriarch for a short time during 1758.  during the habsburg rule in the kingdom of serbia (1718-1739), vicentije served as archdeacon of metropolitan vikentije jovanovic of belgrade (1731-1737). after ottoman reconquest of belgrade in 1739, vikentije stefanovic decided to stay in serbia, and rose through ecclesiastical ranks, becoming metropolitan of belgrade in 1753, under serbian patriarch gavrilo iii. between 1755 and 1758, patriarch gavrilo iii was challenged by several rivals and finally lost the patriarchal throne. from that turmoil, metropolitan vikentije finally emerged as new serbian patriarch. his tenure was very short. upon arriving to constantinople, he was struck with sudden illness and died. his successor was metropolitan of uzice and valjevo pajsije, who traveled with him to constantinople, becoming new serbian patriarch as pajsije ii.  references  sources  external links  official site of the serbian orthodox church: serbian archbishops and patriarchs  vikentije i metropolitans of belgrade 18th-century serbian people serbs of the ottoman empire 1758 deaths
dibromoanthanthrone is a scarlet or orange-red-hue synthetic organic colourant.  it is an anthraquinone derivative, first synthesized in 1913 as a vat dye, c.i. vat orange 3 (c.i. 59300), and later on also as a pigment, c.i. pigment red 168.  references  quinones vat dyes organic pigments organobromides polycyclic aromatic compounds
omar ali hussain (21 march 1987 -  2017), also known under the nom de guerre abu sa'eed al-britani, was a british islamic militant and member of the islamic state.  early life hussain was born in high wycombe, buckinghamshire. he attended cressex community school in high wycombe, and was employed as a security guard in the high wycombe branch of supermarket chain morrisons.   hussain was placed on the sex offenders' register when he was convicted of indecent assault after groping a woman's breasts when he was 21.  hussain tried to leave britain for pakistan in 2010 but was stopped by police on suspicion that he planned to head to afghanistan.  syria in december 2013, hussain went to the police station in the town of high wycombe and told officers that he intended to travel to syria from turkey with an aid convoy. he later boarded a flight to turkey from gatwick airport, where he was stopped by detectives. however, he told them he was going to distribute aid to syrian children, and was allowed to continue his journey. in a november 2015 interview with bbc newsnight, he said travelled successfully "by blagging it the whole way through".  on the 3 october 2014, he appeared in an is video message called message of the mujahid.  us and un sanctions the united states department of the treasury describes hussain as "of september 2015, one of isil's most prominent recruiters". according to the us treasury, as an is fighter, he offered tips on evading british security to individuals interested in leaving the united kingdom to fight with is.  on 28 september 2015, he was sanctioned by the united nations security council al-qaida sanctions committee and made subject to an interpol-un security council special notice.  the un narrative summary describes him thus, "in january 2014, omar ali hussain travelled to the syrian arab republic to fight for islamic state in iraq and the levant (isil), listed as al-qaida in iraq (qde.115), and has since demonstrated an active online presence on extremist websites and social media. hussain uses this online presence to recruit individuals for combat and for operational roles in isil "  tabloid controversies hussain has attracted a considerable level of coverage from british tabloid newspapers.  is censorship hussain has been censured by is media operatives for his open online social media presence, which is banned by the group.  possible death  hussain's nom de guerre, abu sa'eed al-britani, was found etched on the wall of a cell in the is prison
underneath the stadium at raqqa. 49 tally marks were found underneath his name, indicating that he spent 49 days in the jail. although it was reported that most captives of the prison did not survive their detention, the date beneath hussain's name is 24 february 2016 - more than a full year prior to his actual disappearance and last activity on social media. abu sa'eed spent approximately two months in isis dungeons at that time, but made it out and participated in the battle of raqqa.  on 18 august 2019 it was reported by some british newspapers, citing "security sources",  that hussain had died in an islamic state suicide attack during the battle of raqqa.  references  1987 births british islamists british people convicted of indecent assault islamic state of iraq and the levant members people of the syrian civil war 2017 deaths
alberto negrin (born 2 january 1940) is an italian film director and screenwriter, known for his historical, nostalgic and political films.  negrin started his career as a fine art photographer. in 1962 he debuted as an assistant stage director, collaborating with orazio costa and giorgio strehler.  in a career spanning over four decades, negrin has directed over 30 films and series, including the giallo film enigma rosso (1978), mussolini and i (1985), starring bob hoskins, anthony hopkins and susan sarandon, the tv miniseries the secret of the sahara (1987) (with ben kingsley), voyage of terror: the achille lauro affair (1989) (with burt lancaster), tower of the firstborn, perlasca - un eroe italiano (2002), il cuore nel pozzo (2005) and mi ricordo anna frank. negrin is also known for his long-standing association with composer ennio morricone, who composed music for thirteen negrin's feature films since 1987.  the historical drama film perlasca - un eroe italiano earned him a telegatto award for best tv movie. il cuore nel pozzo, a film about the foibe massacres and istrian-dalmatian exodus, was watched by 17 million people on its first broadcast in italy.  theater  atomo, storia di una scelta (1965)  il bandito (1966)  sentite, buona gente, peppino marotto, poeta orgolese (film-documento) (1967)  colui che dice di si e colui che dice di no (1969)  operai (film per il "piccolo") (1969)  interrogatorio alla avana (1972)  filmography  platero y yo (1968)  inchieste televisive in america latina (1968)  il gatto con gli stivali (1969)  kennedy contro hoffa (1970)  la rosa bianca (1971)  astronave terra (1971)  la risposta di peppino manca (1971)  racket (1972)   (1972, tv miniseries)  il picciotto 1973)  l'olandese scomparso (1974)  processo per l'uccisione di raffaele sonzogno giornalista romano (1975)  mayakowskji (1976)  la spia del regime (1976)  il delitto notarbart
olo (1977)  volontari per destinazione ignota (1977)  red rings of fear (1978)  la promessa (1979)  bambole: scene di un delitto perfetto (1980)  le multinazionali (1980)  la quinta donna (1982)  mussolini and i (1985)  the secret of the sahara (1987)  voyage of terror: the achille lauro affair  (1989)  missus (1994)  tower of the firstborn (1999)  nana (2001)  perlasca - un eroe italiano (2001)  ics - l'amore ti da un nome (2003)  il cuore nel pozzo (2005)  bartali: the iron man (2006)  l'ultimo dei corleonesi (2007)  pane e liberta (2009)  mi ricordo anna frank (2009)  l'isola (2012)  un mondo nuovo (2014), tv series  qualunque cosa succeda (2014), tv miniseries  tango per la liberta (2016), tv miniseries  references  external links  1940 births italian film directors living people italian screenwriters italian male screenwriters
the 18th sarawak state legislative assembly was a term of the sarawak state legislative assembly, the legislative branch of the government of sarawak in sarawak, malaysia. the 18th assembly consisted of 82 members that were elected in the 2016 state election and served from 7 june 2016 until 3 november 2021.  the legislature would, in normal circumstances, have dissolved automatically at the expiration of the five-year term on 6 june 2021 per the sarawak constitution, but it was overridden by an ongoing emergency declaration at the federal level arising from the 2020-21 malaysian political crisis and the covid-19 pandemic in malaysia. the subsequent state election has also been delayed. the emergency declaration was however ended several months earlier than scheduled and the legislature was dissolved on the same day.  background  following the state election that was held on 7 may 2016, barisan nasional was able to form the next state government with a majority of 72 seats out of 82. there were several candidates from breakaway parties such as teras and upp that had their members contest seats under the barisan banner as direct election candidates under a deal by adenan satem after their parties were prevented from joining barisan after opposition from parties such as pdp and supp. on 12 june 2018, all sarawak-based bn parties including parti pesaka bumiputera bersatu (pbb), parti rakyat sarawak (prs), progressive democratic party (pdp) and sarawak united people's party (supp) officially left barisan nasional forming a new coalition sarawak parties alliance due to barisan nasional's defeat in general elections on 9 may 2018.  officeholders  speakership   speaker: mohamad asfia awang nasar (non-mla)  deputy speaker: gerawat jala (gps-pbb)  other parliamentary officers   secretary:  semawi bin mohamad ( - 2 september 2019)  pele peter tinggom (3 september 2019 - )  deputy secretary: sharifah shazzea binti wan akil  serjeants-at-arms:  johari bin mudin  ismail bin ali  abang nasiruddin bin abang mohamad khalid  hadyan bin abdul rahman  lydwilkyn andar anak umbar  hanimasra bin hamden  party leaders   chief minister: abang abdul rahman zohari abang openg (parti pesaka bumiputera bersatu)  deputy chief ministers:  douglas uggah embas (parti pesaka bumiputera bersatu)  aw
ang tengah ali hasan (parti pesaka bumiputera bersatu)  leader of the opposition: wong soon koh (united sarawak party)  leader of the democratic action party: chong chieng jen  leader of the malaysian united indigenous party: ali biju  floor leaders   leader of the house:   shadow leader of the house:  whips   government whip:  opposition whip:  committees  the fifth session of the 18th assembly consists of 6 select committees:  members  party representation  membership changes  list  seating plan  notes  references   sarawak state legislative assembly
kahna  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of kahna. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, kahna has total number of 131 houses and population of 710 of which include 339 males and 371 females. literacy rate of kahna is 78.47%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 69 which is  9.72% of total population of kahna, and child sex ratio is approximately 1226, higher than state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
hedayat lotfian () is an iranian retired military officer who served as iran's chief of police, the chief commander of law enforcement force of islamic republic of iran, from 1997 to 2000.  references  living people islamic revolutionary guard corps personnel of the iran-iraq war iranian police chiefs year of birth missing (living people)
trump: the art of the comeback is a 1997 book written by businessman and future president of the united states, donald trump and journalist kate bohner.  synopsis in the book, donald trump writes about his bankruptcy in 1990 and how he managed to "comeback" through negotiations. in the book, trump notably revealed that he was "a germ freak" and "often thought of taking out a series of newspaper ads encouraging the abolishment of the handshake." trump also explains why he divorced ivana trump and marla maples, his first two wives; he claims that trump talked too much about work while maples wanted him to return earlier. trump's accounts were denied by both ex-wives. trump also criticizes journalist tina brown, claiming that she reneged on a promise to write favorably about him in the past. trump called brown "the worst," stating, "she's totally overrated. i think she's third-rate at best. if you look at vanity fair, it's a better magazine today than when she ran it." brown was also the wife of harold evans, who was the president of random house at the time. trump also lists the "problems [he] had with her (alicia machado)", the winner of miss universe in 1996, including her weight gain and her criticism of trump in an interview with the washington post.   the book also offers ten tips for success:  1. play golf  2. stay focused  3. be paranoid 4. be passionate  5. go against the tide  6. go with your gut  7. work with people you like  8. be lucky  9. get even  10. always have a prenuptial agreement  writing after the release of trump's 1990 book, trump: surviving at the top, he said that his next book "will be the real story, describing my comeback and the success of it all." trump said he would write the book "in a couple of years." peter osnos, the editor for surviving at the top, said, "if donald's career unfolds the way he is determined it will, his next book will make a great story." trump said he was asked by random house to write the art of the comeback, his third book, after the company was impressed by his emergence from bankruptcy.  according to trump's niece, mary l. trump, he briefly hired her as a ghostwriter for this book, but gave her little information to work with and eventually removed her from the project.   on august
1, 1997, eight hours before the deadline, the final draft of the book was turned in. kate bohner's life as trump's ghostwriter was documented by her "best friend", candace bushnell, of new york observer. while writing for trump, bohner was nicknamed "kateso".  reception fred andrews of the new york times wrote "the man combines imagination with muscle. if only he could keep his mouth shut" and noted that "trump is forever saying the obvious, as though his perceptions were original or important." meanwhile, craig offman of salon noted that trump "admits he suffers from an even greater political liability: honesty."  references  1997 non-fiction books american memoirs biographies about businesspeople books about companies books about donald trump art of the comeback collaborative non-fiction books finance books random house books self-help books
vincenzo roviglioni (died 14 september 1669) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of bovino (1658-1669).  biography on 3 june 1658, vincenzo roviglioni was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as bishop of bovino. he served as bishop of bovino until his death on 14 september 1669.  references   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1669 deaths
semliya is a small village/hamlet  east of namli in ratlam district in the indian state of madhya pradesh.  semliya is among the five most ancient pilgrimage sites for jains of malwa. it contains the temple of the 16th jain tirthankar, shri shantinath.  shri semliyaji   shri semliyaji is the temple of 16th jain tirthankar shantinath. it is one of five most ancient pilgrimages of malwa: semliyaji, bhopawar, maksi, mandav, and vai parshwanath.  the 41 inch idol of shantinath was discovered and the temple erected 2300 years ago during the rule of king samprati.  the king ordered his workers to build a tunnel from ujjain to the temple's sanctuary for the convenience of those traveling to the temple.  the tunnel is no longer in use.  the temple was first renovated 1700 years ago by shroff bhima mahajan.  evidence of these early renovations include markings of a clenched human fist on a marble pillar.  no detailed markings of temple renovation have yet been identified for other malwa pilgrimage sites.  before its first renovation, the temple reflected tapagacchiya yati tradition.  according to legend, before vir sawant (933, 1700 ad) the four foundation pillars traveled through immense skies during the tantrik war and landed on earth via yatiji. the war marks are the fist, sword, arrow and bardiche. the four pillars are still standing.  occasionally, percolation of water-milk on pillar surfaces has been observed, and since 2000 the percolation has been observed on some parts of the sanctuary as well. in 2011 the percolation of saffron water was recorded.  every year during the festival of the lord's birth, thousands of devotees come to the temple and extract some part of the percolation onto money bills, clothing, etc. in a belief that it will bring them great fortune.  the temple was famous in ancient times as well due to its presence on delhi (known at that time as  "indrarastha"), mandav route.  according to texts, acharya jinkushalsuri (founder of the clan khattargachh) marched a sangha from jaisalmer to mandav 9,000 years ago.  he rested at mandav and ordered that an idol be chiseled from a mineral rock.  the idol is still in existence.   five hundred forty five years ago
, acharya lakshmisagarsuri visited semliya with his sangha and erected three other idols, one of which is a tirthankar adinath under a kalpvraksha tree sitting on a peacock surrounded by a serpent.  when recently gacchadhipati acharya gunsagarsuri visited the temple, he stated that he had seen an identical idol at siddhanchal and offered the services of the sangha mumbai-sammetshikhar-girnar-palitana to locate the twin idol.  in order to locate and secure the site of temple, the ruler acharya envisioned in meditation an idol of a god wearing a crown and smirking while riding a lion with a drum in his right hand, an ewer in his left hand, a knife in his waistband with many ancient symbols embossed on it, a beast under its right leg and a small animal near its left foot.  it is said that the famous mughal emperor aurangzeb and his army expedition destroyed every jain and hindu temple between delhi and mandav, and although the emperor passed through a royal route while on expedition, the power of the god prevented him from noticing it before he destroyed it.  the ruins of mandav temples are proof of the expedition's destruction.  noteworthy is the agarji shantinath temple in ratlam, which was protected at the time of the expedition by those who erected towers overnight. over time due to the frequent coating of saffron, the idol's features became distorted such that pilgrims mistook it for a god manibhadra idol.  but the coating cracked in 1990 and the original features of the idol can now be clearly viewed.  as there is no description of such a god in jain manuscripts, people now worship them as god bherujis.  the idol feline cats are still intact after recent renovation, funded by 50 lakhs sadhus (the shravaks), who had provided large donations maintained in perpetuity.  the renovation of this temple was finished in 2000 on the day of chairs sudi. the idols of gautama swami, shasan devi and nirvani devi were installed, as well as a guru mandir with idols of acharya jwersagarsuriji,  anandsagarsuriji, and dharmsagarsuriji.  thirteen flags were hoisted on this occasion and since then many sadhus and sadhvis have spent choumasa at the temple.  the arrangement of this tirtha is governed by the "shri shantinath shwetambar jain mandir
trust".  this tirtha has two asylums for sadhu sadhvis, eight halls including one office and three dining halls,  a kitchen and twelve additional rooms.  over the past several years, pilgrims regularly visit the temple sight. semliya is 17 kilometers east from ratlam namli road, which connects to this road via another road approximately five minutes travel distance away.  semliya is 15 kilometers from bhopawar, 130 kilometers from mandav, 24 kilometers from vibrod and 85 kilometers from nageshwar.  the temple can be accessed hourly by bus or train from ratlam (western railway).  references  cities and towns in ratlam district 3rd-century bc jain temples
aokigahara is frequently featured in popular culture due to its historic association with "yurei" or ghosts of the dead in japanese mythology and is a notoriously common suicide site (wherein 54 took place in 2010). the forest is said to be the world's second most popular suicide spot, the first being the golden gate bridge.  the rate of suicide has led officials to place a sign at the forest's entry, written in japanese, urging suicidal visitors to seek help and not take their own lives. annual body searches have been conducted by police, volunteers, and attendant journalists since 1970. filming in the forest is not permitted by local authorities.  this page lists aokigahara in popular culture from both within japan and abroad. it is not an exhaustive list of the many games, films, manga and other cultural products that mention aokigahara.  anime and manga   in the anime series tokyo ghoul, the ghoul-only cafe anteiku uses bodies from aokigahara to feed ghouls to avoid actively killing humans for nourishment.  films   the 2015 film the sea of trees with matthew mcconaughey, ken watanabe and naomi watts also tells a story happening in this forest.  in the american film the forest (2016), a woman (played by natalie dormer) travels to a ghost-filled aokigahara to save her twin sister (also played by dormer).  games   in the fighting game akatsuki blitzkampf, the protagonist akatsuki's stage is set in the bank of lake sai and the beginning of aokigahara.  the penultimate level in the horror mystery game tokyo dark takes place in aokigahara  literature  (alphabetical by author's surname)  suicide forest (world's scariest places) by jeremy bates is a 2015 horror novel that takes place inside the forest.  the three: a novel by sarah lotz is a 2014 novel that features aokigahara as a place where several characters perished, either in plane crashes or by choice.  nami no to (tower of waves) by seicho matsumoto is a 1960 novel that refers to the popularity of the forest as a suicide spot.  the sea of trees by yannick murphy is a 1997 novel about a young girl detained in an isolation camp during world war ii.  the pine islands by marion poschmann is a 2017 german novel featuring the forest as well as numerous other infamous suicide spots in japan.  music   the 2016 ep
grey sheep ii by new orleans rap duo suicideboys contains a track called "aokigahara".  the album aokigahara (2014) by austrian black metal band harakiri for the sky was named after the forest.  the idol group bis romped around nude in the forest in a controversial video for their single "my ixxx" (2011).  "aokigahara" (2015) by dark ambient musician flowers for bodysnatchers was inspired by and named after the forest.  "electric twilight" (2021) by metalcore band erra discusses the atmosphere of aokigahara. guitarist and clean vocalist jesse cash was inspired after visiting the forest in 2019.  other media youtuber logan paul and his companions vlogged an excursion into the forest with the intention to camp there overnight on december 31, 2017. while in the forest, the group encountered a dead body hanging from a tree, the film of which was included in their video with the body's face blurred out. the video was met with considerable backlash from individuals outside paul's fan base, stating that the video showed poor taste in regards to the deceased and was disrespectful to japanese culture. paul later took down the video and issued an apology.  references   forests in fiction japanese popular culture places in popular culture suicide in fiction
this is a list of members of the european parliament for the luxembourg in the 2014 to 2019 session.  see 2014 european parliament election in luxembourg for further information on these elections in luxembourg.  list  this table can be sorted by party or party group: click the symbol at the top of the appropriate column.  references  2014 list luxembourg
mantyvaara is a village and hill in the swedish municipality of gallivare. the village lies on the south slope of the hill.  references  populated places in norrbotten county
fiske planetarium and science center is a public museum dedicated to educating the public on astronomy and astrophysics. it is a constituent of the department of astrophysical and planetary sciences at the university of colorado boulder, located in boulder, colorado. fiske was founded in 1975, by a donation from wallace franz fiske. it is located at the southeast tip of the university of colorado boulder.  in 2013, fiske underwent a major upgrade where the facility retired their 38-year-old, zeiss mark vi star projector to a megastar star ball. they also installed a 6-projector system capable of projecting fulldome 8k films and live renderings of a digital universe.  references  external links  "fiske planetarium flies into the digital age". university of colorado news center.  museums in boulder, colorado astronomy museums astrophysics science museums in colorado
the may family (also spelled maj) was a prominent danish family that belonged to the clergy and thus the legally privileged elite in denmark-norway. it was descended from the priest søren nielsen may (died 1679), a native of then-danish helsingborg in scania, and catharina motzfeldt, the daughter of the noble copenhagen wine merchant peter motzfeldt. catharina motzfeldt's sister was the mother of peder griffenfeld, the de facto ruler of denmark-norway in the early 1670s, and the may family, along with griffenfeld's other close relatives, thus rose to significant prominence with their nephew's rise to power.  søren may and catharina motzfeldt had ten children. their daughter maren may was married to the bishop of christianssand ludvig stoud; else may was married to the priest poul munkgaard; gundel may was married to the priest herman arentsen, a son of arent berntsen; cathrine marie may was married to the priest rasmus andersen montoppidan; ellen may was married to the judge poul pedersen fabritius; bertel sørensen may (died 1711) was priest in tystrup and haldagerlille.  the søren may house in holbæk, built for søren may in 1669, is currently the seat of holbæk museum.  references  danish families
armen arslanian (9 july 1960 - 18 may 2015) was a lebanese cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1960 births 2015 deaths lebanese male cyclists olympic cyclists of lebanon cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing
the department for international trade (dit) is a united kingdom government department responsible for striking and extending trade agreements between the united kingdom and foreign countries, as well as for encouraging foreign investment and export trade. the department was created by prime minister theresa may, shortly after she took office on 13 july 2016, following the united kingdom's vote to leave the european union.  dit's purpose is to develop, coordinate and deliver a new trade policy for the united kingdom, including preparing for and then negotiating free trade agreements and market access deals with non-eu countries. the new department is a specialised body with significant new trade negotiating capacity.  it took on the responsibilities of uk trade & investment, which was previously operated by both the foreign office and the department for business, innovation and skills; it also took on the latter's other relevant trade functions, as well as responsibility for uk export finance. it is overseen by the secretary of state for international trade, currently anne-marie trevelyan.   the department employed about 200 trade negotiators.  after britain left the eu, the trade remedies investigations directorate (trid) of the department for international trade was created to investigate whether new trade remedies are needed to prevent injury to uk industries caused by unfair trading practices and unforeseen surges in imports. these remedies usually take the form of additional duties on those imports.   following royal assent of the trade act 2021 trid became an independent arms-length body, the trade remedies authority (tra), on 1 june 2021.  ministers the ministers in the department for international trade are as follows:  see also asia task force  references  external links department for international trade official website history of  nos. 3-8, whitehall place    2016 establishments in the united kingdom government agencies established in 2016 ministries established in 2016 trade in the united kingdom trade ministries
the open engie porte du hainaut is a tournament for professional female tennis players played on outdoor clay courts. the event is classified as a $25,000 itf women's circuit tournament and has been held in denain, france, since 1998. the event was previously a $75,000 tournament from 2003 to 2008.  past finals  singles  doubles  external links   itf search    itf women's circuit clay court tennis tournaments tennis tournaments in france recurring sporting events established in 1998
devohn noronha-teixeira (born in mississauga, ontario) is a male field hockey player, who played for the canada national field hockey team at the 2015 pan american games and won a silver medal.  in 2016, he was named to canada's olympic team.  references  external links  1989 births living people field hockey players at the 2015 pan american games canadian male field hockey players pan american games silver medalists for canada field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of canada pan american games medalists in field hockey sportspeople from mississauga medalists at the 2015 pan american games male field hockey forwards
the 2020 united states senate in texas was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member to the united states senate to represent the state of texas, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states and elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent republican senator john cornyn won reelection to a fourth term against democratic nominee mj hegar by 9.6%.  prior to the election, most news organizations projected this race as "lean republican", and was not expected to be as competitive the contest for texas's other senate seat two years prior, when republican incumbent ted cruz defeated democrat beto o'rourke by a 2.6% margin. nonetheless, john cornyn won in what was his worst performance out of his four elections for the u.s. senate, while mj hegar's 43.9% marked the highest vote share of any of cornyn's democratic challengers. despite this being cornyn's worst performance percentage-wise, he more than doubled his 2014 vote count and received the most raw votes for a republican u.s. senate candidate in the history of the united states.  cornyn outperformed president donald trump in the state by about 4%, and was able to carry two counties won by joe biden (tarrant and williamson). while cornyn did better than trump in the texas triangle, contributing to his over performance, hegar slightly outperformed biden in the heavily hispanic rio grande valley, and was able to carry one trump county (zapata), though hegar herself vastly underperformed previous democratic margins in the region.  republican primary  candidates  nominee john cornyn, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in the primary  virgil bierschwale, u.s. navy veteran, software developer, realtor john anthony castro, attorney, author, businessman, entrepreneur dwayne stovall, bridge construction contractor, businessman mark yancey, businessman, attacca international executive, former owner of the dallas wings basketball team  declined pat fallon, state senator  dan patrick, lieutenant governor of texas (endorsed john cornyn) allen west, former u.s. representative for florida's 22nd congressional district (running for state party chair)  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee mj hegar, retired united states air force major, businesswoman, author, teacher, and democratic party nominee for texas's 31st congressional district in 2018  eliminated in the runoff  royce west,
state senator, former president pro tempore of the texas senate, attorney  eliminated in the primary cristina tzintzun ramirez, labor organizer and author annie "mama" garcia, attorney, small-business owner, and non-profit founder amanda edwards, houston city councillor chris bell, former u.s. representative for texas's 25th congressional district, nominee for governor of texas in 2006 and candidate for mayor of houston in 2015 sema hernandez, organizer for the poor people's campaign and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2018 michael cooper, pastor and candidate for lieutenant governor of texas in 2018 victor hugo harris, u.s. army reserve colonel adrian ocegueda, financial analyst and candidate for governor of texas in 2018 jack daniel foster jr., educator d. r. hunter, retiree  withdrawn john b. love iii, midland city councillor hunter darrel reece david selig  declined joaquin castro, incumbent u.s. representative for texas's 20th congressional district julian castro, former united states secretary of housing and urban development, former mayor of san antonio and former 2020 presidential candidate  beto o'rourke, former u.s. representative for texas's 16th congressional district, nominee for the u.s. senate in 2018 and former 2020 presidential candidate  endorsements  first round  debates  polling  results  runoff  polling  debates   with mj hegar and chris bell  with mj hegar and amanda edwards  with mj hegar and cristina tzintzun ramirez  results  other candidates  libertarian party  candidates  nominee  kerry mckennon, libertarian nominee for lieutenant governor of texas in 2018  withdrawn  wes benedict, former national executive director of the libertarian party  rhett rosenquest smith, libertarian nominee for the precinct 2 bexar county justice of the peace in 2020 and libertarian nominee for texas's 11th congressional district in  2018  green party  nominee  david b. collins, info tech trainer and green nominee for u.s. senate in 2012  people over politics party  withdrawn  cedric jefferson  human rights party  withdrawn  james brumley  independents  declared  ricardo turullols-bonilla, retired teacher and candidate for austin city council in 2014 (as a write-in candidate)  withdrawn  tim smith  arjun srinivasan  krisjiannis vittato, teacher and ex-filmmaker  general election  debate  predictions  endorsements  polling  graphical summary  aggregate polls  with royce west  with chris bell  with sema hernandez  with beto o'rourke
with generic democrat  with generic opponent  with generic republican and generic democrat  results  see also  2020 texas elections  notes partisan clients  additional candidates and voter samples  references  further reading  external links elections division at the texas secretary of state official website          (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  john cornyn (r) for senate  mj hegar (d) for senate  kerry mckennon (l) for senate   ricardo turullols-bonilla (i) for senate  2020 texas united states senate
388001-388100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388101-388200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388201-388300   |-id=282 | 388282 ʻakepa ||  || the ʻakepa is a small forest bird native to the hawaiian islands. ||  |}  388301-388400   |-id=370 | 388370 paulblu ||  || paul blu (born 1936) is a french astronomy enthusiast heavily involved in the protection of the night sky. he is honorary president of anpcen (association nationale pour la protection du ciel et de l'environnement nocturnes). ||  |}  388401-388500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388501-388600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388601-388700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388701-388800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388801-388900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  388901-389000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   388001-389000
mathilde danegger (real name, mathilde deutsch: 2 august 1903 - 27 july 1988) was an austrian stage and movie actress.   sources may also identify her by the pseudonym, mathilde leusch; leusch is apparently a variant of her second husband's surname (lesch).  life mathilde danegger was born and attended school in vienna. her father was an austrian  character actor and stage producer  (real name, joseph deutsch: 1865-1933) who later took over as director of the city theatre in zurich. her mother, bertha danegger (real name bertha deutsch; known professionally by her maiden name bertha muller, she was an austrian actress of stage and silent film.  like her elder brothers,  (1889-1948) and theodor danegger (1891-1959), she decided on a stage career early in life. she started her performing with children's roles, making her debut in 1912 at max reinhardt's deutsches theater in berlin, with a further youthful appearance there in 1914.  she would continue to return to the berlin stage throughout her career, but by 1919 she was, with her parents, based in zurich.   in 1919/1920 she had engagements at the city theatre in vienna.   from 1921-24, she was working, primarily, at the popular theatre in vienna, and, between 1924-28, at the theater in der josefstadt.  danegger's first marriage was to herbert waniek (1897-1949) whose theatre career during the 1920s was focused on the same vienna theatres as those of his wife. waniek had connections with the "german theatre" at brno (in the former czechoslovakia), where, until 1933, mathilde danegger was making regular guest appearances.   there were also frequent guest appearances at theatres in berlin and vienna. around this time she married her second husband, swiss drama producer walter lesch (1898-1958).  with the german change in government at the start of 1933, mathilde, a staunch antifascist, fled to switzerland where she worked at the national theatre in zurich with wolfgang langhoff, like her a political exile from nazi germany. she took part in political cabaret, between 1934-38 appearing in the "cornichon" cabaret established by her husband. in 1939, she met with herbert cruger, who subsequently became her third husband.   she was a co-founder in switzerland of the national committee for a free germany.  two years after the war ended, in 1947, mathilde danegger returned to germany. sources differ as to whether she settled in
the american occupation zone or in east berlin, which was in the central part of what had been germany, and was now administered as part of the soviet occupation zone.  in reality, it was several years before the political division of occupied germany would be matched by physical barriers.   between 1947-51, she was working at the hessische national theatre in wiesbaden. in east berlin, supported by the dramatist's wife and business manager, helene weigel, danegger was recruited by bertolt brecht to work at the berliner ensemble where she was employed between 1951-53. during these years she was active in the peace movement.  in december 1948 she joined the german communist party.   between 1948-51 she also wrote, as cultural editor, for unsere stimme, a regional communist news magazine based at villingen-schwenningen near the border with switzerland.  in 1953, four years after the foundation of two separate german states, and with the border between them becoming less permeable, she formally relocated with her husband to the german democratic republic (east germany). there followed a long period as a star of the deutsches theater in berlin.   among others, she took part in productions by wolfgang langhoff, wolfgang heinz,  benno besson and .  in parallel with her theatre work, from 1960 she built up an extensive repertoire of cinema and television roles in productions by the state-owned film studio, defa, and deutscher fernsehfunk, the state television broadcaster.   she had already undertaken a significant amount of acting work in front of the camera during her time in switzerland.   of particular note was her portrayal of frau holle in the 1963 film of the eponymous fairy tale by gottfried kolditz and her television role in "mutter jantschowa" (1968).  she remained politically engaged throughout.   in 1957 she wrote a letter to the party defending dissident wolfgang harich following his arrest.  marriages by her second husband she was the mother of the actress karin lesch.  her third husband, the university lecturer and author herbert cruger, became caught up in the political persecution that was a feature of east germany in the 1950s. in 1956, he was overheard criticising the arrest of bernhard steinberger in the aftermath of the remarkable party conference of the soviet communist party. in march 1958 cruger was himself arrested by the ministry for state security (stasi).   at a secret trial in december 1958 he was found guilty of "high treason" ("schweren staatsverrats")
and sentenced to an eight-year jail term.   in the end he was released in 1961 and rehabilitated by the high court in may 1990.  filmography (selection)   cinema films  1921: wege des schreckens - producer: mihaly kertesz  1933:  - producer: walter lesch und richard schweizer  1935:  - producer: walter lesch und leopold lindtberg  1940:  - producer: leopold lindtberg  1942: der schuss von der kanzel  1944: marie-louise - producer: leopold lindtberg  1947: madness rules - producer: leopold lindtberg  1956: lissy - producer: konrad wolf  1959: ehesache lorenz - producer: joachim kunert  1960:  - producer: konrad wolf  1962: das verhexte fischerdorf  1962: a lively christmas eve - producer: gunter reisch  1963: die glatzkopfbande - producer: richard groschopp  1963: frau holle - producer: gottfried kolditz  1964: geliebte weiße maus - producer: gottfried kolditz  1964: der fliegende hollander - producer: joachim herz  1965: solange leben in mir ist  1965:   1968: abschied  1969: zeit zu leben - producer: horst seemann  1969: seine hoheit - genosse prinz - producer: werner w. wallroth  1987:  - producer: gunter reisch  television films  1960: steine im weg - producer: wilhelm grohl  1967: kleiner mann - was nun? - producer: hans-joachim kasprzik  1970: anlauf - producer: egon gunther  1977:  (tv series)  1978:  (tv series)  1979:  (tv series) - producer: hans werner  1980: archiv des todes - producer: rudi kurz  documentary films (narrator)  1954-1956: du und mancher kamerad - producer: annelie and andrew thorndike  1962: unbandiges spanien - producer: kurt and jeanne stern  theatre (selection)    1952: nikolai pogodin: das glockenspiel des kreml (sabelins frau) - producer: ernst busch (berliner ensemble)  1953: heinar kipphardt: shakespeare dringend gesucht (frau mellin) - producer: herwart grosse  (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1953
: julius hays: der putenhirt - producer: fritz wendel (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1953: friedrich wolf: thomas muntzer, der mann mit der regenbogenfahne (mutter) - producer: wolfgang langhoff (deutsches theater berlin)  1955: johann wolfgang von goethe: faust. the tragedy, part i - producer: wolfgang langhoff (deutsches theater berlin)  1955: johann nestroy: theaterg'schichten (katharina) - producer: emil stohr (deutsches theater berlin)  1955: gerhart hauptmann: vor sonnenuntergang (mutter peters) - producer: wolfgang heinz (deutsches theater berlin)   1956: hermann bahr: das konzert (almhutten-verwalterin) - producer: robert meyn (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1957: mary chase: mein freund harvey (veta) - producer: wolfgang thal (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1958: anton tschechow: three sisters - producer: heinz hilpert (deutsches theater berlin)  1960: erwin strittmatter: die hollanderbraut - producer: benno besson (deutsches theater berlin)  1961: pavel kohout: die dritte schwester - producer: karl paryla (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1962: nikolai pogodin: der mann mit dem gewehr (jelisaweta nikitischna) - producer: horst schonemann (deutsches theater berlin)  1962: peter hacks (after aristophanes): der frieden (trygaios tochter) - producer: benno besson (deutsches theater berlin)  1963: sean o'casey: rote rosen fur mich (frau breydon) - producer: ernst kahler (deutsches theater berlin)  1964: moliere: tartuffe (madame pernelle) - producer: benno besson (deutsches theater berlin - kammerspiele)  1967: horst salomon: ein lorbaß - producer: benno besson (deutsches theater berlin)  1968: hermann kant: die aula - producer: uta birnbaum (deutsches theater berlin)  1975: heinrich von kleist: der zerbrochne krug (brigitte) - producer: adolf dresen (deutsches theater berlin)  awards and honours    1955: clara zetkin medal
1960: art prize of the german democratic republic  1963: patriotic order of merit in bronze  1969: national prize of the german democratic republic 2nd class, for arts and literature  1978: patriotic order of merit in gold  1983: patriotic order of merit gold clasp  1985: wolfgang heinz ring  1988: star of people's friendship in gold  references  1903 births 1988 deaths actresses from vienna communist party of germany members socialist unity party of germany members austrian stage actresses german stage actresses austrian film actresses german film actresses emigrants from nazi germany to switzerland recipients of the national prize of east germany recipients of the patriotic order of merit (honor clasp) radio actresses austrian emigrants to east germany 20th-century german women
hossein-ali amiri () is an iranian jurist and conservative politician who currently serves as the vice president of iran for parliamentary affairs in the cabinet of hassan rouhani.  amiri formerly held office as the deputy of ministry of interior under abdolreza rahmani fazli, a member of the guardian council and a deputy of judiciary branch under mahmoud hashemi shahroudi.  references   people from sonqor 1967 births living people iranian jurists vice presidents of iran for parliamentary affairs islamic azad university alumni members of the guardian council
inderhavnsbroen (lit.: the inner harbour bridge) is a bridge across the copenhagen inner harbour and is a  combined pedestrian and bicyclist bridge directed east-west. the bridge is joined to nyhavn (west) and christianshavn (east).  the bridge was designed by flint & neill with studio bednarski and hardesty & hanover, and opened to the public on 7 july 2016.  the design includes a bulge that requires cyclists to make a sharp turn. this feature has attracted criticism.  see also  lacey v. murrow memorial bridge, a similar bridge that also had a "bulge" associated with at least one fatal incident  references  bridges in copenhagen pedestrian bridges in denmark port of copenhagen bridges completed in 2016 2016 establishments in denmark
do eun-cheol (born 24 march 1963) is a south korean former cyclist. he competed in the points race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1963 births living people south korean male cyclists olympic cyclists of south korea cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling asian games silver medalists for south korea cyclists at the 1986 asian games medalists at the 1986 asian games
serafim batzoglou is svp of data at seer inc. prior to that he was chief data officer at insitro, vp of computational genomics at illumina, and professor of  computer science at stanford university between 2001 and 2016. his lab focused on computational genomics with special interest in developing algorithms, machine learning methods, and systems for the analysis of large scale genomic data. he has also been involved with the human genome project and encode.  background  he obtained his phd from mit in 2000.  awards   iscb fellow (2020)  iscb innovator award (2016)  sloan research fellowship, alfred p. sloan foundation  career award in computer science, national science foundation  top 100 young technology innovators, mit technology review  best paper award, ismb (2003)  references   living people stanford university faculty massachusetts institute of technology alumni computer scientists human genome project scientists year of birth missing (living people)
pasi (basilius) jaaskelainen (may 30, 1869, haapavesi - january 23, 1920, helsinki) was a finnish actor, singer, playwright and kantele player. he was one of the first recorded cuple singers in finland. in addition he was one of the first artists to produce recordings in finland, as previously they had been made in places like saint petersburg. jaaskelainen recorded dozens of songs from 1904 until 1911.  biography  basilius "pasi" jaaskelainen was born on may 30, 1869, in the municipality and town of haapavesi, grand duchy of finland. jaaskelainen studied at a private grammar school in oulu from 1879 until 1882. he then studied the organ and graduated in the year of 1887. in 1902 jaaskelainen made a trip to the united states in which he entertained the finnish emigrants. in 1904 and 1905, he made his first recordings in helsinki and was thus one of the first finnish artists to make recordings in finland. jaaskelainen's recording career lasted until 1911, when he had finished with a total of sixty-four recordings made in helsinki and copenhagen. as an actor jaaskelainen had founded an opera house in haapavesi. on january 22, 1920, jaaskelainen departed with his son on a visit to helsinki. the following day, he died from a stroke.  recordings  november 1904, helsinki, finland   satu ("kettu ja janis")/humalaisen kotiintulo  viela niita honkia... ("tukkijoella", oskar merikanto, teuvo pakkala)  tammerkosken sillalla (trad., kantele accompaniment)   merimieslaulu (estonian tune with kantele accompaniment)   kekrina (trad.)   lypsajan laulu (trad.)   joen takana (trad.)   kun mina laulaan lahden (trad.)   suomalainen runosavelma (trad.)   taall' yksinani laulelen (trad.)  september 1905, helsinki, finland   remma ja remma (trad.)  lukkari ja kukko (trad.)  varpusen olut (trad.)  kultani (trad.)  oman kullan silmat (trad.)  ja sun hoppati rallallei (trad.)  heikki se lahti heinolasta naimaan (trad.)  murrejuttu  haala
ulu/paljo olen maata kulkenut (kantele accompaniment)  olin mina nuori poika (trad.)   varpusen olut/ompa mulla (trad.)  1906, helsinki, finland   mina olen matti maailmassa (trad.)  mina lahden ameriikkaan (trad.)  kun tata suomenmaata... (trad.)  enka mina ryyppaa (trad.)  stiipeli staapeli stom pom pom (oskar merikanto, the song can be considered an adaptation of a folk song)  meripoikatte veis  kun mina laulaan lahden (trad.)  hei henttuni (trad.)  rannalla itkija (trad.)  taivas on sininen ja valkoinen (trad.)  1908, helsinki, finland   taman kylan tytot (trad.)  tule ystavani rantahan (trad.)  hei illalla (trad.)  nuku nurmen alla  ompa mulla kaunis kulta (trad.)  august 1909, copenhagen   kahden vaiheilla (emil kauppi)  tammerkosken sillalla (trad.)  varpunen (a.poppius)  humalaisen kotiintulo/satu  piirilaulu (trad.)  merimieslaulu (trad.)  paimenpojan laulu (trad.)  renk' willen naiminen  tuulen henki/viherian pellon poikki  suomalainen runosavelma (trad.)  kahden vaiheilla (emil kauppi)  tuntematon  september 1910, helsinki, finland   rauma prankori marss' (hj.nortamo)  kylla mina tiedan  paree oliki' (emil kauppi)  tukkipoikia tulossa (emil kauppi)  poika ja tytto (trad.)  kasarmilaulu (trad.)  laivakokin rallatus (trad.)  september 15, 1911, helsinki, finland   priki efrosiina - 1 (axel tornudd)  priki efrosiina - 2 (axel tornudd)  jenny  aittalaulu (emil kauppi)  voi niita aikoja... (emil kauppi, erkki melartin)
vanha juomalaulu (trad.)   kotimaani, mukaelma (trad.)   heilani kammari (emil kauppi)  references   19th-century finnish male singers finnish dramatists and playwrights 1920 deaths 1869 births finnish male actors kantele players 20th-century finnish male singers
brendan hunt is an american actor and writer known for roles in the films we're the millers (2013) and horrible bosses 2 (2014) as well as voicing two characters in the video game fallout 4 (2015). he is a co-creator of the apple tv+ sitcom ted lasso, as well as a writer and cast member on the show.  early life and education in 1996, hunt completed the theater program at illinois state university. while there, he performed at the illinois shakespeare festival and completed a week-long master class under the guidance of actress judith ivey.  career after getting his theater degree, hunt studied with the second city in chicago before heading to amsterdam and joining the boom chicago comedy troupe.  boom chicago  from 1998 to 2008, hunt was a regular writer and performer with the boom chicago comedy and improvisational troupe. hunt was the head writer and featured in the comedy central (netherlands) satirical news program comedy central news (ccn) that was produced by boom chicago. while with the group, hunt performed alongside jason sudeikis (horrible bosses, we're the millers, saturday night live), jordan peele (key and peele) and seth meyers (late night with seth meyers, saturday night live).   while boom chicago was based in amsterdam, they embarked on a "comedy exchange" with the second city performing at their chicago, illinois theater in 2003. the chicago tribune noted hunt's performance as soccer star roy keane, calling it the "best character of the night."  while with boom, hunt co-wrote and co-starred in a pair of two-man shows at edinburgh festival fringe: iconic yanks with meyers and here comes the neighborhood with peele.  five years in amsterdam  after returning to the united states, hunt developed a one-man show based on his time in the netherlands called five years in amsterdam.  in the performance, hunt takes a comedic and touching look back at five years living in europe as an american. among topics examined are relationships, drug excesses, experiences at a fetish club and his feelings about the match of the day anthem and alan hansen. he also recounts a rough childhood with "an absent father" and an alcoholic mother.  in its review, the stage said of the show, "each drop of comedy gold is lovingly extracted in a superbly crafted, unflinchingly honest and enormously enjoyable whole" and called it a "must see" at the edinburgh festival fringe.  hunt performed the play at the 2007 edition
of the comedy festival in aspen, colorado. and also took the show on the road to the second city in chicago, upright citizens brigade in new york city and io west in los angeles.  sacred fools   in 2007, hunt joined the sacred fools theater company. hunt's time at sacred fools included a turn as the lead in the musical savin' up for saturday night that proved to be an ovation awards-winning role. hunt won lead actor in a musical at the 2010 ovation awards.  absolutely filthy in 2013, hunt wrote and was the lead actor in a dark comedy parody of the charlie brown peanuts comic strip called absolutely filthy. the play has won multiple awards in both los angeles and new york.  hunt based his lead character, the mess, on an older version of the character of pig-pen, who is now homeless and trying to cope with his recent breakup from the bereaved, who is based on the peanuts character sally brown. the setting of the play is a reunion of the old gang during the funeral of the deceased (a version of charlie brown). for legal reasons, the characters were given abstract names in the program of the show, though the characters are referred to by their familiar peanuts names on stage.  to illustrate his cloud of dust, hunt keeps a hula hoop in constant motion around his body throughout the show.  hunt came up with the idea of the play while dancing alone during the burning man festival with the resulting kick-up of dust in the sunrise reminding him of pig-pen. the play was originally created as a series of 10-minute sketches for the sacred fools theater company as part of its "serial killers" late-night series. hunt was asked to turn the sketches into a single play.  the play has received overwhelmingly favorable reviews, with the new york observer saying it creates an "endorphin high that accompanies laughing until your eyes water." the la weekly gave accolades for hunt's performance, saying he "steals the show.".  hunt and the play also won several awards. the 2013 hollywood fringe festival named absolutely filthy as "top of the fringe" and best comedy. at the 2014 fringenyc, the play won three awards that included an acting award for hunt as well as prizes for overall play and theatermania audience favorite. hunt was nominated in four categories in the 2014 la weekly theater awards, winning the top prize in the categories of best male performance and comedy ensemble.  film, tv and video game work after roles in episodes of the television
series reno 911!, parks and recreation, community and how i met your mother,  hunt made his major motion picture debut as the "sketchy dude" in 2013's we're the millers, which featured his boom chicago castmate jason sudeikis.  hunt had a role in another sudeikis vehicle, 2014's horrible bosses 2, playing a sex addiction group member.  an emmy award nomination was among the accomplishments for hunt as a regular performer on the comedy central series key & peele. along with appearing in several sketches, hunt was nominated at the 67th primetime emmy awards for outstanding writing for a variety special. the nomination, with keegan-michael key, jordan peele and rich talarico, was for the key & peele super bowl special.  in 2013, hunt co-wrote a premier league advertising campaign for nbc sports featuring himself as an assistant coach to tottenham hotspur with jason sudeikis. sudeikis told gq magazine that the two drew off their years in amsterdam playing the fifa (video game series) together before and after shows. the commercials were named as the second-best tv soccer sketch by paste with the magazine saying, "brilliant though sudeikis is, the unsung hero of these sketches is brendan hunt." the campaign received a bronze award at the 2014 sports clio awards.  hunt was a writer and performer in the 2015 online comedy-documentary series thank you and sorry for google play. the six-episode series featured a mix of comedy sketches and a real-life look at musician jack antonoff and his tours with bleachers.  in 2015, hunt brought his voice as one of the main djs in the game fallout 4. hunt plays dj travis of diamond city radio, whose monotone voice reflects on the surroundings of the ruins of boston now known as the commonwealth. hunt also plays detective perry, who is seen in a holotape.  starting in 2014, hunt also made his mark in children and teen television with roles in the disney channel series dog with a blog and austin & ally, as well as disney xd's kirby buckets.  in 2016, hunt voiced the character of pancakey in the animated amazon prime pilot toasty tales.  in 2020, the series ted lasso, which hunt both co-created and is a member of the regular cast of, launched on apple tv+.  hunt has appeared in several commercials, including ads for geico, skittles, oscar meyer and volkswagen.  other work at the 2016 hollywood fringe festival, hunt debuted
the one-man play still got it. in the show, hunt plays a person reeling from making a bad toast at his friend's wedding. hunt's performance was honored for top solo performance at the 2016 hollywood fringe festival awards.  filmography  film  television  video games  online  credits  accolades  references  external links        commercials featuring brendan hunt  brendan hunt on funny or die  brendan hunt demo reel   "soccer is your friend" on facebook.  brendan hunt theater credits  1972 births 21st-century american male actors american male film actors american male television actors american male voice actors american sketch comedians american television writers american male television writers living people male actors from chicago male actors from los angeles american male video game actors comedians from california comedians from illinois screenwriters from illinois screenwriters from california 21st-century american comedians 21st-century american screenwriters 21st-century american male writers
arthur lee bentley iii (born january 26, 1959) is an american attorney who was the united states attorney for the middle district of florida from 2014 until 2017. in january 2018, he joined bradley arant boult cummings llp, a law firm which has an office based in tampa, florida.  career bentley was born in tuscaloosa, alabama, graduated from the university of georgia, and earned his juris doctor degree in 1983 from the university of virginia school of law, where he was order of the coif and an editor of the virginia law review.  following law school, bentley clerked for supreme court justice lewis f. powell jr. in the 1984 term, and for u.s. court of appeals for the fourth circuit chief judge clement haynsworth.  prior to joining the u.s. attorney's office in 2000, bentley spent ten years in private practice with hogan & hartson in washington, d.c. and was special assistant u.s. attorney in the u.s. district court for the southern district of florida, an attorney-advisor in the office of legal counsel with the u.s. department of justice.  united states attorney's office in 2000, bentley joined the u.s. attorney's office for the middle district of florida. in july 2013 when u.s. attorney robert e. o'neill resigned to take a position in the private sector with the freeh group, bentley became the acting u.s. attorney for the middle district of florida. he was formally nominated by president barack obama in june 2014 on the bi-partisan recommendation of florida's u.s. senators, republican marco rubio and democrat bill nelson. bentley was unanimously confirmed by the u.s. senate on december 16, 2014.  in july 2016, bentley's office charged democratic congresswoman corrine brown of florida with 24 counts of federal corruption, accusing brown and her chief of staff ronnie simmons of using brown's position in congress to solicit more than $800,000 for what federal prosecutors call a "sham education charity." in february 2017, simmons pleaded guilty to federal charges and agreed to testify against brown at her upcoming trial.  see also  2017 dismissal of u.s. attorneys  references  external links  u.s. attorney's office bio  video: a. lee bentley iii, u.s. attorney middle district of florida discusses brevard coaches' arrests on drug charges, floridatoday.com (part of usa today). retrieved march 11, 2017.
people from tuscaloosa, alabama united states attorneys for the middle district of florida university of georgia alumni university of virginia school of law alumni 1959 births living people place of birth missing (living people) lawyers from washington, d.c. law clerks of the supreme court of the united states united states department of justice lawyers
adelheid von rothschild (also adelaide de rothschild,  19 august 1853 - 22 june 1935) was a member of the rothschild family.  early life adelheid was born on 19 august 1853 in frankfurt. she was one of three daughters of wilhelm carl von rothschild and mathilde hannah von rothschild of the naples branch of the rothschild family.   her paternal grandparents were carl mayer von rothschild and adelheid (nee hertz) von rothschild.  her maternal grandparents were anselm von rothschild and charlotte nathan rothschild (the daughter of nathan mayer rothschild).  personal life in 1877, she married her cousin baron edmond benjamin james de rothschild (1845-1934), the youngest child of james mayer rothschild and betty von rothschild. together, they were the parents of three children:    james armand edmond de rothschild (1878-1957), who married dorothy mathilde pinto (1895-1988)  maurice edmond karl de rothschild (1881-1957), who married noemie halphen (1888-1968)  miriam caroline alexandrine de rothschild.  from the 1880s, adelheid became involved in her husband's life work in palestine. in 1954, her remains were laid to rest alongside those of her husband at ramat hanadiv in israel.  descendants through her son maurice, she was the grandmother of baron edmond adolphe maurice jules jacques de rothschild (1926-1997), who married nadine lhopitalier (b. 1932).  references  external links  1853 births 1935 deaths french philanthropists 19th-century german jews french people of german-jewish descent adelheid french zionists
burketown post office is a heritage-listed former post office at musgrave street, burketown, shire of burke, queensland, australia. it was designed by george connolly and built in 1887. it is also known as burketown tourist information centre. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 1 january 1993.  history  the burketown post office, constructed in 1887 after a cyclone devastated the town on march 5, was built to a design prepared by the queensland colonial architect's office.  pastoral settlement began in the burke district in the 1860s after explorers such as burke and wills and william landsborough reported on the good grazing land available in the region. to support the settlers in the remote district the queensland government established a supply depot on william landsborough's 1862 camp site on the banks of the albert river. this first settlement was abandoned in 1865 after robert towns established a store further downstream and closer to deep water anchorage.  the new site was surveyed soon after and the prosperity of the town seemed assured when a meatworks and the boiling down works were built and a government judicial and administrative centre was located there. unfortunately, a mystery disease caused great loss of life in february, 1866 and again in 1867 and 1868, forcing the population to virtually abandon the town.  after the threat of disease had passed burketown re-established itself as a supply depot for the pastoral industry. however, the town did not come to prominence again until the early 1880s. when government services were re-established. the post office, closed in june 1871, was reopened on 1 january, 1883 with the post master also filling the role of police magistrate, customs officer and weather forecaster.  the district was further opened up when the domestic telegraph line reached burketown in october, 1886. the queensland government had originally hoped that burketown would be the terminus for an international telegraph line from java to australia. inter colonial rivalry saw the contract for the overseas line go to south australia in november, 1872. although the queensland government was disappointed, the line was completed to normanton. however, the link to burketown was not completed until 1886 after the re-establishment of government services to the district.  the present building, constructed as a post office, was built after the 5 march 1887 cyclone which destroyed most of burketown. the building was designed in the office of the colonial architect, george connolly. during this period, an expansion in the post and telegraph translated into queensland post offices being designed with more of a public facade than
its adjoining residence, and showed a development of climatic responses such as verandahs and wide eaves. the burketown post office was an example of a post office style, popular from 1886 to 1896, featuring a triple-frontage with projecting office bay.  the new office was a combined post and telegraph office with responsibility for the issuing of mail orders and the management of land based mail contractors plying between burketown and normanton, south to hughenden and townsville and west via gregory downs to camooweal. this network was a vital link for people located on stations across the northern part of queensland. the stability of the gulf region was also enhanced by the growth in mercantile trade as shipping companies, such as australasian steam navigation company, were awarded government-subsidised mail contracts. as a result, there was a monthly shipping service into and out of the region which was made more economically viable by the introduction of parcel post in 1892. the post office was proclaimed an official post office in 1893 with the post master assuming the role of land commissioner and land agent for the department of public lands in 1897.  following the federation of australia, in march 1901, control of the postal system was transferred to the australian government, with the post office continuing to operate until 1921 when it was reclassified. the post office was downgraded again in 1949 and in november, 1964 it was reclassified as a non-official post office. in 1985 burketown post office became a post office agency and ceased functioning altogether in 1988.  in 1988, as part of a bicentennial project, the building was moved from its original site in gregory street to its present location. after the move it was used to house the office of the gulf air company.  there has been an increase in interest in tourism since the riversleigh fossil site was declared a world heritage area and since the gulf region has become more accessible with improvement to roads and transport. burketown is becoming a favourite destination particularly for people interested in fishing in gulf waters and coastal rivers. a tourist information centre has been established in the former post office to assist visitors and tourists and to promote interest in the history and culture of the area.  description   the former burketown post office (now tourist information centre) is a single-storey timber building, located on the south-eastern corner of the intersection of musgrave and burke streets, burketown. situated in the north-west of queensland, burketown lies on the northern fringe of the gulf savanna, about . from the shores of the gulf of carpentaria.  the site is
on the rim of the town's small commercial area, with the present boulia shire offices adjacent, and further to the east the hotel and shops.  the building is positioned diagonally across the site, facing north-west towards the intersection of two of the town's typically wide streets. in front of the building, at this north-western corner of the site, is the concrete war memorial backed by three flagpoles. plaques on this memorial commemorate those who served and died in the boer war, world war i and world war ii, malaya, korea, vietnam and borneo.  the building has an l-shaped plan form, with the former post office at the western end, and the remainder formerly the residence. the gabled roof, clad in corrugated iron, follows the form of the building and accentuates the projecting bay of the office. the building features three open verandahs, to the front and rear of the residence, and the side of the office. the external walls are clad in weatherboards, punctuated by vertical sliding sash windows, with timber-framed window hoods to those of the north-eastern elevation. the building is low set, now supported on steel posts, with timber steps to each verandah and the entry porch.  the principal entry is a slightly asymmetrical gabled porch attached to the front of the projecting bay of the former office. unlined internally, the porch retains the letter slot to the side of the panelled french entry doors.  the office is a rectangular room with a high boarded ceiling, horizontal beaded boards lining the walls and a boarded floor. to the public area at the front of the room is the timber counter and small timber side benches, constructed of similar beaded boards. on the rear wall is mounted several external signs from the former post office. through a pair of glazed french doors is the south-western verandah, partly enclosed at the rear, and featuring arched valance boards between the posts. behind the office is a small service room currently being fitted as a kitchen.  the north-western verandah provides entry to the former residence. opening onto this verandah are the central four-panelled entry door, a pair of glazed french doors to one side and the same missing from the other.  the residence consists of four major rooms in an l-shaped configuration, around the rear verandah. the largest of these, the former sitting room is entered through the central door, with two former bedrooms and the kitchen along the eastern wing. generally these rooms have internal linings similar to that of the office, apart
from the kitchen which has no lining boards to the walls. doors are generally low-waisted four-panelled doors, apart from a boarded door now to the recently constructed ensuite in the second bedroom, which was apparently relocated from the kitchen. on the rear verandah is a small utility room, now a public toilet. apart from the signs in the office, the building also retains a telephone exchange, now located in the former bedroom.  the site is level, well grassed and scattered with a few small trees. to the rear of the site are some machinery relics.  heritage listing  the former burketown post office was listed on the queensland heritage register on 1 january 1993 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  the former burketown post office is significant for its association with early government functions in the remote gulf and north west regions of queensland and as a base for the delivery of a range of government services to the people of the area for over a century. it represents the importance of community services such as postal services, telegraph and telephone communications and weather forecasting to a remote community.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  built in 1887, the former post office is one of few early structures surviving in the town.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  the building demonstrates the quality of government buildings erected in remote locations, with design responses to the climate such as high ceilings, window hoods and three substantial verandahs. representative of a post office building type, it features a triple-frontage with a projecting bay accentuating the office, yet retains its domestic form and scale. the majority of the layout remains intact.  it still contains some fittings from its post office function, such as timber counters and benches, signs and the telephone exchange.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  while the former burketown post office has contributed to the townscape since its construction, relocation to a larger corner site, facing the war memorial, has given the building a new prominence in the townscape.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the establishment of the tourist information centre is allowing the building to continue providing an important community function through its contribution to the burgeoning tourist industry of the region.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register burketown
post office buildings in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
many compounds of thorium are known: this is because thorium and uranium are the most stable and accessible actinides and are the only actinides that can be studied safely and legally in bulk in a normal laboratory. as such, they have the best-known chemistry of the actinides, along with that of plutonium, as the self-heating and radiation from them is not enough to cause radiolysis of chemical bonds as it is for the other actinides. while the later actinides from americium onwards are predominantly trivalent and behave more similarly to the corresponding lanthanides, as one would expect from periodic trends, the early actinides up to plutonium (thus including thorium and uranium) have relativistically destabilised and hence delocalised 5f and 6d electrons that participate in chemistry in a similar way to the early transition metals of group 3 through 8: thus, all their valence electrons can participate in chemical reactions, although this is not common for neptunium and plutonium.  general chemistry a thorium atom has 90 electrons, of which four are valence electrons. four atomic orbitals are theoretically available for the valence electrons to occupy: 5f, 6d, 7s, and 7p. however, the 7p orbital is greatly destabilised and hence it is not occupied in the ground state of any thorium ion. despite thorium's position in the f-block of the periodic table, it has an anomalous [rn]6d27s2 electron configuration in the ground state, as the 5f and 6d subshells in the early actinides are very close in energy, even more so than the 4f and 5d subshells of the lanthanides. however, in metallic thorium, the [rn]5f16d17s2 configuration is a low-lying excited state and hence the 5f orbitals contribute, existing in a rather broad energy band. in fact, the 5f subshells of the actinides have a larger spatial extent than the 4f orbitals of the lanthanides and thus actinide compounds have greater covalent character than the corresponding lanthanide compounds, leading to a more extensive coordination chemistry for the actinides than the lanthanides.  the ground-state electron configurations of thorium ions are as follows: th+, [rn]6d27s1; th2+, [rn]5f16d1; th3+, [rn]5f1; th4+, [rn].
this shows the increasing stabilisation of the 5f orbital as ion charge increases; however, this stabilisation is insufficient to chemically stabilise th3+ with its lone 5f valence electron, and therefore the stable and most common form of thorium in chemicals is th4+ with all four valence electrons lost, leaving behind an inert core of inner electrons with the electron configuration of the noble gas radon. the first ionisation potential of thorium was measured to be (6.08 ± 0.12) ev in 1974; more recent measurements have refined this to 6.3067 ev.  thorium is a highly reactive and electropositive metal. at standard temperature and pressure, it is slowly attacked by water, but does not readily dissolve in most common acids, with the exception of hydrochloric acid. it dissolves in concentrated nitric acid containing a small amount of catalytic fluoride or fluorosilicate ions; if these are not present, passivation can occur, similarly to uranium and plutonium. at high temperatures, it is easily attacked by oxygen, hydrogen, nitrogen, the halogens, and sulfur. it can also form binary compounds with carbon and phosphorus. when thorium dissolves in hydrochloric acid, a black insoluble residue, probably  is left behind, similarly to protactinium and uranium.  finely divided thorium metal presents a fire hazard due to its pyrophoricity and must therefore be handled carefully. when heated in air, thorium turnings ignite and burn brilliantly with a white light to produce the dioxide. in bulk, the reaction of pure thorium with air is slow, although corrosion may eventually occur after several months; most thorium samples are however contaminated with varying degrees of the dioxide, which greatly accelerates corrosion. such samples slowly tarnish in air, becoming grey and finally black at the surface. the impermeability of the oxide layer of thorium contrasts with that of the later actinides and conforms to the trend of increasing electropositivity and reactivity as the actinide series is traversed.  the most important oxidation state of thorium is +4, represented in compounds such as thorium dioxide (tho2) and thorium tetrafluoride (thf4), although some compounds are known with thorium in lower formal oxidation states. owing to thorium(iv)'s lack of electrons in 6d and 5f orbitals, the tetravalent thorium compounds are colourless. th3+ compounds are uncommon due to the large negative reduction potential of the th4+/th3+
couple. in 1997, reports of amber th3+ (aq) being generated from thorium tetrachloride and ammonia were published: the ion was supposedly stable for about an hour before it was oxidised by water. however, the reaction was shown the next year to be thermodynamically impossible and the more likely explanation for the signals was azido-chloro complexes of thorium(iv). in fact, the redox potentials of thorium, protactinium, and uranium are much more similar to those of the d-block transition metals than the lanthanides, reflecting their historic placement prior to the 1940s as the heaviest members of groups 4, 5, and 6 in the periodic table respectively.  in aqueous solution, thorium occurs exclusively as the tetrapositive aqua ion , which has tricapped trigonal prismatic molecular geometry: at ph < 3, the solutions of thorium salts are dominated by this cation. the th-o bond distance is (245 ± 1) pm, the coordination number of th4+ is (10.8 ± 0.5), the effective charge is 3.82 and the second coordination sphere contains 13.4 water molecules. the th4+ ion is relatively large and is the largest of the tetrapositive actinide ions, and depending on the coordination number can have a radius between 0.95 and 1.14 a. the thorium(iv) hydrated ion is quite acidic due to its high charge, slightly stronger than sulfurous acid: thus it tends to undergo hydrolysis and polymerisation, predominantly to [th2(oh)2]6+ in solutions with ph 3 or below, but in more alkaline solution polymerisation continues until the gelatinous hydroxide is formed and precipitates out (though equilibrium may take weeks to be reached, because the polymerisation usually slows down significantly just before the precipitation): this behaviour is similar to that of plutonium(iv).  large coordination numbers are the rule: thorium nitrate pentahydrate was the first known example of coordination number 11, the oxalate tetrahydrate has coordination number 10, and the  anion in the calcium and magnesium salts is 12-coordinate. due to the large size of the th4+ cation, thorium salts have a weaker tendency to hydrolyse than that of many multiply charged ions such as fe3+, but hydrolysis happens more readily at ph above 4, forming various polymers of unknown nature, culminating in the formation of the
gelatinous hydroxide: this behaviour is similar to that of protactinium, which also hydrolyses readily in water to form colloidal precipitates. the distinctive ability of thorium salts is their high solubility, not only in water, but also in polar organic solvents. as a hard lewis acid, th4+ favours hard ligands with oxygen atoms as donors: complexes with sulfur atoms as donors are less stable.  the standard reduction potentials in acidic aqueous solution for some common thorium ions are given below:  oxides and hydroxides   in air, thorium burns to form the binary oxide thorium dioxide, tho2, also called thoria or thorina. thoria, a refractory material, has the highest melting point (3390 °c) of all known oxides. it is somewhat hygroscopic and reacts readily with water and many gases, but dissolves easily in concentrated nitric acid in the presence of fluoride, like neptunium dioxide and plutonium dioxide do. when heated, it emits intense blue light, which becomes white when mixed with its lighter homologue cerium dioxide (ceo2, ceria): this is the basis for its previously common application in gas mantles.  reports of thorium peroxide, initially supposed to be th2o7 and be formed from reacting thorium salts with hydrogen peroxide, were later discovered to contain both peroxide anions and the anions of the reacting thorium salt.  thorium monoxide has been produced through laser ablation of thorium in the presence of oxygen. this highly polar molecule is calculated to have one of the largest known internal electric fields.  thorium hydroxide, th(oh)4, can be prepared by adding a hydroxide of ammonium or an alkali metal to a thorium salt solution, where it appears as a gelatinous precipitate that will dissolve in dilute acids, among other substances. it can also be prepared by electrolysis of thorium nitrates. it is stable from 260-450 °c; at 470 °c and above it continuously decomposes to become thoria. it easily absorbs atmospheric carbon dioxide to form the hydrated carbonate thoco3·xh2o and, under high-pressure conditions in a carbon dioxide atmosphere,  or . several mixed oxides are known, such as batho3, which has the perovskite structure.  halides   all four thorium tetrahalides are known, as are some low-valent bromides and iodides: the tetrahalides
are all hygroscopic compounds that dissolve easily in polar solvents such as water. additionally, many related polyhalide ions are also known. thorium tetrafluoride (thf4, white, m.p. 1068 °c) is most easily produced by reacting various thorium salts, thoria, or thorium hydroxide with hydrogen fluoride: methods that involve steps in the aqueous phase are more difficult because they result in hydroxide and oxide fluorides that have to be reduced with hydrogen fluoride or fluorine gas. it has a monoclinic crystal structure and is isotypic with zirconium tetrafluoride and hafnium tetrafluoride, where the th4+ ions are coordinated with f− ions in somewhat distorted square antiprisms. it is a white, hygroscopic powder: at temperatures above 500 °c, it reacts with atmospheric moisture to produce the oxyfluoride thof2.  thorium tetrachloride (thcl4, white, m.p. 770 °c) is produced by heating thoria in an organochloride compound such as carbon tetrachloride. the usual method of purification is crystallisation from an aqueous solution and then heating the product above 100 °c to dehydrate it. further purification can be achieved by subliming it. its melting and boiling points are respectively 770 °c and 921 °c. it undergoes a phase transition at 405 °c, with a low-temperature α phase and high-temperature β phase. nevertheless, the β phase usually persists below the transition temperature. both phases crystallise in the tetragonal crystal system and the structural differences are small. below −203 °c, a low-temperature form exists with a complex structure.  thorium tetrabromide (thbr4, white, m.p. 679 °c) can be produced either by reacting thorium(iv) hydroxide with hydrobromic acid (which has the disadvantage of often resulting in products contaminated with oxybromides) or by directly reacting bromine or hydrogen bromide with thorium metal or compounds. the product can then be purified by sublimation at 600 °c in a vacuum. the melting and boiling points are 679 °c and 857 °c. like the tetrachloride, both an α and a β form exist and both are isotypic to the tetrachloride forms, though the phase transition here occurs
at 426 °c. there is also a low-temperature form. incomplete reports of the lower bromides thbr3, thbr2, and thbr are known (the last only known as a gas-phase molecular species): thbr3 and thbr2 are known to be very reactive and at high temperatures disproportionate.  thorium tetraiodide (thi4, yellow, m.p. 556 °c) is prepared by direct reaction of the elements in a sealed silica ampule. water and oxygen must not be present, or else thoi2 and tho2 can contaminate the product. it has a different crystal structure from the other tetrahalides, being monoclinic. the lower iodides thi3 (black) and thi2 (gold) can be prepared by reducing the tetraiodide with thorium metal. (thi is also predicted to form as an intermediate in the dissociation of thi4 to thorium metal.) these do not contain th(iii) and th(ii), but instead contain th4+ and could be more clearly formulated as  and  respectively. depending on the amount of time allowed for the reaction between thi4 and thorium, two modifications of thi3 can be produced: shorter times give thin lustrous rods of α-thi3, while longer times give small β-thi3 crystals with green to brass-coloured luster. both forms are quickly oxidised by air and reduce water, quickly forming large quantities of hydrogen gas. thi2 also has two modifications, which can be produced by varying the reaction temperature: at 600 °c, α-thi2 is formed, while a reaction temperature of 700-850 °c produces β-thi2, which has a golden luster.  many polynary halides with the alkali metals, barium, thallium, and ammonium are known for thorium fluorides, chlorides, and bromides. for example, when treated with potassium fluoride and hydrofluoric acid, th4+ forms the complex anion , which precipitates as an insoluble salt, k2thf6.  chalcogenides and pnictides  the heavier chalcogens sulfur, selenium, and tellurium are known to form thorium chalcogenides, many of which have more complex structure than the oxides. apart from several binary compounds, the oxychalcogenides thos (yellow), those, and thote are also known. the five binary thorium sulfides - ths
(lustrous metallic), th2s3 (brown metallic), th7s12 (black), ths2 (purple-brown), and th2s5 (orange-brown) - may be produced by reacting hydrogen sulfide with thorium, its halides, or thoria (the last if carbon is present): they all hydrolyse in acidic solutions. the six selenides are analogous to the sulfides, with the addition of thse3. the five tellurides are also similar to the sulfides and selenides (although th2te5 is unknown), but have slightly different crystal structures: for example, ths has the sodium chloride structure, but thte has the caesium chloride structure, since the th4+ and te2− ions are similar in size while the s2− ions are much smaller.  all five chemically characterised pnictogens (nitrogen, phosphorus, arsenic, antimony, and bismuth) also form compounds with thorium. three thorium nitrides are known: thn, th3n4, and th2n3. the brass-coloured th3n4 is most easily produced by heating thorium metal in a nitrogen atmosphere. th3n4 and th2n3 decompose to the golden-yellow thn, and indeed thn can often be seen covering the surface of th3n4 samples because th3n4 is hygroscopic and water vapour in the air can decompose it: thin films of thn are metallic in character and, like all other actinide mononitrides, has the sodium chloride structure. thn is also a low-temperature superconductor. all three nitrides can react with thorium halides to form halide nitrides thnx (x = f, cl, br, i). the heavier pnictogens also form analogous monopnictides, except thbi which has not yet been structurally characterised. the other well-characterised thorium pnictides are th3p4, th2p11, thp7, th3as4, thas2, th3sb4, thsb2, and thbi2.  other inorganic compounds  thorium reacts with hydrogen to form the thorium hydrides thh2 and th4h15, the latter of which is superconducting below the transition temperature of 7.5-8 k; at standard temperature and pressure, it conducts electricity like a metal. thorium is the only element that forms
a hydride higher than mh3. finely divided thorium metal reacts very readily with hydrogen at standard conditions, but large pieces may need to be heated to 300-400 °c for a reaction to take place. around 850 °c, the reaction forming first thh2 and then th4h15 occurs without breaking up the structure of the thorium metal. thorium hydrides react readily with oxygen or steam to form thoria, and at 250-350 °c quickly react with hydrogen halides, sulfides, phosphides, and nitrides to form the corresponding thorium binary compounds.  three binary thorium borides are known: thb6, thb4, and thb12. the last is isotypic with ub12. while reports of thb66 and thb76 exist, they may simply be thorium-stabilised boron allotropes. thb6 and thb12 may be produced by heating thorium with boron. the three known binary thorium carbides are thc2, th2c3, and thc: all are produced by reacting thorium or thoria with carbon. thc and thc2 are refractory solids and have melting points over 2600 °c. thorium borides, carbides, silicides, and nitrates are refractory materials, as are those of uranium and plutonium, and have thus received attention as possible nuclear fuels.  coordination compounds  many other inorganic thorium compounds with polyatomic anions are known, such as the perchlorates, sulfates, sulfites, nitrates, carbonates, phosphates, vanadates, molybdates, chromates, and other oxometallates, many of which are known in hydrated forms. these are important in thorium purification and the disposal of nuclear waste, but most have not yet been fully characterised, especially on their structural properties. for example, thorium perchlorate is very water-soluble and crystallises from acidic solutions as the tetrahydrate , while thorium nitrate forms tetra- and pentahydrates, is soluble in water and alcohols, and is an important intermediate in the purification of thorium and its compounds.  thorium halides can often coordinate with lewis-acid solvents such as tetrahydrofuran and pyridine as follows:  thx4 + thf → thx4(thf)3  due to its great tendency towards hydrolysis, thorium does not form simple carbonates, but rather carbonato complexes such as , similarly to uranium(iv
) and plutonium(iv). thorium forms a stable tetranitrate, , a property shared only by plutonium(iv) among the actinides: it is the most common thorium salt and was the first known example of an 11-coordinated compound. another example of the high coordination characteristic of thorium is , a 10-coordinated complex with distorted bicapped antiprismatic molecular geometry. the anionic  is isotypic to its cerium, uranium, neptunium, and plutonium analogues and has a distorted icosahedral structure. particularly important is the borohydride, , first prepared in the manhattan project along with its uranium(iv) analogue. it is produced as follows:  thf4 + 2 al(bh4)3 →  + 2 alf2bh4  following which thorium borohydride can be easily isolated, as it sublimes out of the reaction mixture. like its protactinium(iv) and uranium(iv) analogues, it is a thermally and chemically stable compound where thorium has a coordination number of 14 with a bicapped hexagonal antiprismatic molecular geometry.  organometallic compounds   most of the work on organothorium compounds has focused on the cyclopentadienyls and cyclooctatetraenyls. like many of the early and middle actinides (thorium through americium, and also expected for curium), thorium forms the yellow cyclooctatetraenide complex , thorocene. it is isotypic with the more well-known analogous uranium compound, uranocene. although these f-series cyclooctatetraenyls are not isotypic with the d-series cyclopentadienyls, including the more famous ferrocene, they have very similar structures, and were named to emphasise this resemblance. it can be prepared by reacting k2c8h8 with thorium tetrachloride in tetrahydrofuran (thf) at the temperature of dry ice, or by reacting thorium tetrafluoride with mgc8h8. it is an unstable compound in air and outright decomposes in water or at 190 °c. half-sandwich compounds are also known, such as 2(η8-c8h8)thcl2(thf)2, which has a piano-stool structure and is made by reacting thorocene with thorium tetrachloride in tetrahydrofuran.  the simplest of the cyclopentadienyls are
and : many derivatives are known. the first (which has two forms, one purple and one green) is a rare example of thorium in the formal +3 oxidation state. in the derivative [thiii{η5-c5h3(sime3)2}3], a blue paramagnetic compound, the molecular geometry is trigonal planar around the thorium atom, which has a [rn]6d1 configuration instead of the expected [rn]5f1. [thiii{η5-c5h3(sime3)2}3] can be reduced to the anion [thii{η5-c5h3(sime3)2}3]−, in which thorium exhibits a very rare +2 oxidation state. the second is prepared by heating thorium tetrachloride with  under reflux in benzene: the four cyclopentadienyl rings are arranged tetrahedrally around the central thorium atom. the halide derivative  can be made similarly by reducing the amount of  used (other univalent metal cyclopentadienyls can also be used), and the chlorine atom may be further replaced by other halogens or by alkoxy, alkyl, aryl, or bh4 groups. of these, the alkyl and aryl derivatives have been investigated more deeply due to the insight they give regarding the nature of the th-c σ bond. of special interest is the dimer [th(η5-c5h5)2-μ-(η5,η1-c5h5)]2, where the two thorium atoms are bridged by two cyclopentadienyl rings, similarly to the structure of niobocene.  tetrabenzylthorium, , is known, but its structure has not yet been determined. thorium forms the monocapped trigonal prismatic anion [th(ch3)7]3−, heptamethylthorate, which forms the salt  (tmeda = me2nch2ch2nme2). although one methyl group is only attached to the thorium atom (th-c distance 257.1 pm) and the other six connect the lithium and thorium atoms (th-c distances 265.5-276.5 pm) they behave equivalently in solution. tetramethylthorium, , is not known, but its adducts are stabilised by phosphine ligands. some coordination complexes with carboxylates and
acetylacetonates are also known, although these are not organothorium compounds.  notes  references  bibliography          t
boscaglia is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  clara boscaglia (1930-1990), sammarinese politician cosimo boscaglia ( 1550-1621), italian philosopher roberto boscaglia (born 1968), italian footballer and manager  italian-language surnames
there are multiple churches known as our lady of the sacred heart church, including:  australia  our lady of the sacred heart church, randwick, new south wales  our lady of the sacred heart church, thursday island, queensland  malta  our lady of the sacred heart parish church, sliema
mukerian assembly constituency (sl. no.: 39) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in hoshiarpur district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  2019 bypoll  a by-poll was needed due to the death of sitting mla rajnish kumar babbi.  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  hoshiarpur district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
bamunka is a small village of cameroon located in the north west region along the ring road from bamenda. bamunka village is the sub divisional headquarter of ndop central subdivision and the divisional headquarter of ngoketunjia division.  bamunka village is located some 42 km away from bamenda town on the bamenda-nkambe stretch of the ring road. the village has direct boundaries with babungo, baba i, babessi, bambalang, bamessing, bamali and with the bello sub division.  history  meukoh or nkoh-chandeuh people is a village which became known as bamunka upon the arrival of the germans. being one of the villages of ngoketunjia division, the meukoh people just like other villages of ngoketunjia division have the names of their villages starting with "ba" meaning the "people of". the prefix "ba" was introduced during the arrival of the germans to mean the people of meukoh land.  ngwafuongmbie wife of mangwa (founder of present-day mbaw-yakum) had two sons and daughters. the two sons were tining and his elder brother chungpikuh who was a hunter. tining remained at home (mbaw-yakum) and succeeded their father (mangwa).   chungpikuh was a hunter and led a group of people who settled at the present land of the meukoh people (bamunka). according to tradition by then, when you kill an animal you cannot slaughter until your father gives you the right to do so. because of his distance some of the animals got rotten before he arrived bambalang to present to his father. to prevent this the father therefore gave him the "knife" i.e. the right to kill and slaughter and dry and only bring dried meat to him. his father also gave him the right to control those he was hunting with. he was also advised to judge and settle cases among his people rather than coming to mbaw-yakum for this. finally his father crowned him the fon of that village i.e. the fon of meukoh (bamunka).  once upon a time in 1484 there were two brothers, the older one called tunimangwa and the younger cheng, who lived with their parents at ndobo in the adamawa region of cameroon. apparently not being satisfied with the selection of a new fon in ndobo, following the passing away
of their father, they decided to migrate to new lands so as to establish their own fondoms where possible. the two brothers formed two groups of their followers which each led as his people. the group which cheng led comprised twelve in number and subsequently became bamunka village with cheng as their fon. as cheng became chengfong, the twelve became chengfong people and held prominent positions in bamunka under chengfong. the other group that tunimangwa led eventually became bambalang with members of his group also holding prominent positions in bambalang and the successors of these two groups have maintained their prominence in both bamunka and bambalang villages to date.   bambalang (mbaw-yakum) and bamunka (meukoh) were descendants of the males (sons of mangeh) while bafanji, bamunkumbit and bamali are the descendants of the daughters. these five villages because of their relationship have formed the mangeh family association. the formation of this association is to maintain peace and unity amongst these villages and to ensure progress of all of them. for that reason, they have created branches all over the world so as to come back home and develop their respective villages. there is also no defined boundary that exist between one mangeh village and another because they are descendants of one (sons and daughters of mangeh).  culture  the bamunka people have some cultural heritage that they hold jealously and are preserving it. unlike the gregorian calendar with 7 days of the week, there are eight (8) days of the week in bamunka including mbimbee; equivalent to the christian sunday, mbikoh: free working day, mbimboune: free working day, mbingow: free working day and main market day, mbibehkah: njangi day but otherwise free for work, mbiliteh: free working day, mbiyih: rest day and lovers day, mbikedih: free working day.  marriages  in the case of a potential marriage between the son and daughter of an ordinary meukoh citizen, an intermediary informs the father of the future bride that one of his friends intends to "steal" from his compound. this informative contact takes place a number of times and could be done even along the road, in a njangi house, at a death celebration, in the farm, in the weekly market etc. if the father of the potential bride is interested, he asks the go-between the name of the friend intending to steal from his compound;
discussions then ensue, which may end up with the revelation of the identity of the future groom. it is common for parents to initially negotiate marriages for their sons without revealing their identity until it becomes necessary to do so. after eventual clarifications of obscure issues, the father of the girl pours some palm-wine (local liquor) brought by the guests into his cup, drinks it before passing the cup to his wife (mother of the future bride) who also drinks before passing it to her daughter who drinks and hands it over to the would-be husband. this is a symbolic acceptance of the groom in the presence of the bride's parents.  the practice of a man falling in love with the sister of his wife that used to be common in bamunka has been condemned into extinction. the practice was tolerated because at first the bamunnka man was not allowed near his nursing wife until the child was at least two years old and walking about before its mother could stop breast feeding. this could be very difficult for a man who was then permitted to fall in love with his sister-in law rather than go outside the family. the theory has now evaporated and an end put to the practice.  the fon  the fon is the custodian of the custom and tradition of the bamunka people and whelms much power, is respected and honored. in the old days leprosy was rampant to the extent that many fons caught it. because of this, fons insisted that people should remove their shoes so that the fon can see that they were not lepers. lepers would be allowed far away from the fon. people in the old days did not realize that leprosy came from their unhygienic conditions. this probably explains why even up to date, people are not allowed into the fon's sitting room with shoes. you must remove your shoes as a sign of honor before entering the fon's sitting room .  when someone is enthroned fon, he sits at the entrance to kwifong's compound and for the last time in his life he greets commoners by the hand but draw away power from them which he stores in a bag hanging from writs. after the exercise he ceases to shake hands with commoners just so that they may not draw back his power. some people hold that during that exercise of laying hands the bag which he carries on his wrist becomes very heavy so that not even four people could lift up. this may also explain why there is also the interesting exercise of hands laying when a priest is ordained. sometimes it is
interesting how these things are the same although they dance round and round in different cycles.  communal  in the village of bamunka, communal is carried out on the orders of the kwifong and whoever gives orders for such work including the fon, must do so in the name of kwifon who will use his coercive powers in case of disobedience. communal labor which is called "nkheng" in bamunka is carried out in many ways. it can be done by way of levy on the whole village to pay a certain amount. it can also be done by way of delegates of quarters or by the entire village being called out to perform certain tasks such as road clearing, construction and bridge building. in each of the a fore-named every adult is expected to come out quarter by quarter and report to their quarter head to perform its share of the task. everyone in every quarter is expected to obey the call. any failure to attend entails a penalty which can be enforced using kwifong coercion injunction.  traditional injunctions vary in their gravity and source in bamunka. we have the kwifon sign of injunction, the gueiteh sign of injunction, the goeh sign of injunction, nyi or god sign of injunction by quarter heads and the commoner's sign of injunction. incidentally the quarter-head's sign of injunction is the same as the sign for peace in bamunka as well as the sign for bamunka traditional gods called "nyi". an injunction indicates that the person enjoined has failed to obey the community one way or another and that by the injunction he is required without failure to report with the injunction to his quarter-head who should explain to him what the penalty is or where to go to perform his task. injunctions are delivered in varying ways. where there is pregnant woman in the compound of the enjoined the injunction is tied to a tree and nailed on a cut plantain stem instead of on the ground in the yard as is the normal practice. when all members of an entire household fail to perform communal labor, the injunction is nailed at the middle of the yard and until all of them carry out the task or pay the fine, the injunction is not removed and the persons enjoined cannot perform even their job without first performing the communal labor. in the case of any doubt, the right place to go to the quarter-head who should either solve the problem or direct the enjoined to where he should go to have his problem resolved.  since injunctions are in descending order of authority, disobedience of an
injunction may lead to a higher one with higher fine and severer methods of enforcement. when the person enjoined does not know the fine or requirement of the injunction, he must go to the source of the injunction to find out what the fine is or what he should do.  deaths  the dead in bamunka is washed, rubbed, and dressed up with a cap to match for men. the dead is then sat on a chair in a hold in the ground and covered with soil with head turned upwards and mouth opened with a bamboo put in it for subsequent performances through the holes left by the bamboo. something commonly referred to in bamunka as "turning bamboo".   burial nowadays is in a coffin which in bamunka tradition a hole is made on the coffin for a bamboo to be put through to the mouth for the dead for the same purpose as above. this bamboo is turned round weekly or so by selected members of the deceased family until a stated number of weeks usually odd weeks of seven, nine, eleven, thirteen or fifteen weeks when this bamboo is ceremoniously removed by the successor of the dead person living the hole there for ritual offerings whenever the need arises. no burial in bamunka land may take place at mid-day. it must be before or after. the reason is not known but it has been so for time immemorial.  the practice of women mourning naked is ceasing to exist in bamunka, though women still mourn here half naked by covering the down part of their bodies only.  succession  bamunka village practice patrilineal succession where children succeed their parents directly and only men may succeed men and women as well. generally the son of a person who served the fon or kwifong in the palace is the one with priority over his brothers to succeed their father when he dies. in some rare cases a father is known to have named another son to succeed him and left out the one who served at the palace. the tradition is also that the one who succeeds takes all the landed and non landed property belonging to their late father. thereafter he carries the responsibility of looking after brothers and sisters, his late father's widows whom he is free to marry. in short he steps into his late father's shoes and become him to all concerned. they respect him, obey him and call him after just as they did to their late father. anything meant for their late father is received by him and that intended to be done by his late father is done by him. he does not however marry his own mother and that's the only exception since bamunka people
are mostly polygamists. generally, the system of succession in bamunka is an accepted traditional "will" which even the legal authorities acknowledge as well.  servants (chindas)  the usual length of serving either the fon or kwifong used to be 8 to 10 or even 15 years which has now been slashed to 4 or 5 years. the actual age of entering the palace to serve either the fon or kwifong is 8 to 10 years. of course the fon is protective of his own wives if older ones are left to stay in the palace for too long. one of the advantages that goes with either serving the fon or kwifong is that upon his graduation from the palace he who has served succeeds his own father upon his death although this rule is not invariable.  traditional societies  in bamunka the highest traditional society the "ngumba" is called "nwuseh" 	 nwoseh is the traditional prime minister of the village who is said to have emigrated from bafut leaving his children there. he virtually administers the village as his members are commoners who take their decisions to administer the village in the house of commons with the fon merely obliged to sign it for enforcement although he has chance to negotiate for its amendment. kwifong possesses coercive powers and although the fon may at certain points be forced to rule by decree, the fon must resort to the kwifong if his orders are not being accepted by the people since the fon has no coercive powers to enforce his will. in practice, the fon can only issue out orders to his people through kwifong and in the name of kwifong (nwoseh) which actually means owner of the land of bamunka. done in a way that there is no disobedience of any such order, the coercive instruments of kwifong would be activated to ensure compliance with the order. membership into this secret society is only to males and who must be only commoners and formally initiated into the kwifong society at a given age. only the fon alone from the royal family is allowed to be a member of this secret society and it is during his enthronement. a member of kwifong before initiation must take an oath promising to keep the secrets of kwifong at all times from none members. princes and their descendants down to the fourth generation cannot be member of kwifong and they may belong to other secret societies called guiteh.  princesses who must necessarily marry commoners, have their male children as members of kwifong and
not of gueiteh secret society. a few selected persons as the fon himself are members of both kwifong and gueiteh for ease of administration but not to the extent that a prince other than the fon himself can be allowed to see kwifong in bamunka. those who gain this double membership are commoners at the discretion of the fon or are of a particular class in the village according to their functions. it is an obligation that upon the death of a commoner who is member of kwifong, kwifong must attend his burial and if of gueiteh, gueiteh must attend his burial. thus if one is member of both kwifong and gueiteh, then both must attend his burial.  one day a week (on bimbee) is set aside on which kwifong can re-assert its authority over the village through its thundering sound but without actually leaving its residence. any other day that kwifong thunders in the same way is on a special occasion which the villagers must know in advance and should kwifong thunder unexpectedly the villagers must report to the fon's palace together with women and those men who are members of kwifong must go to its compound to find out why it thundered unexpectedly since kwifong does not thunder in vain. on the whole one may compare the functions of kwifong with those of the prime minister of britain in parliament, and of the fon in bamunka as head of the village, to the queen of the united kingdom as head of the british state. while the kwifong secret society is the institution of bamunka comparable to the house of commons under british system, then clearly gueiteh is in bamunka performing the functions of the house of lords under the british system. its members are princes and their male descendants with a few of them who have passed the fourth generation are privileged to be member of both kwifong and of gueiteh. the fon of bamunka as already stated is one of such privilege to be member of both houses. gueiteh is also resident in the fon's palace as is kwifong but both secret societies have their compounds well away from each other. although all princes and their descendants are potential members of gueiteh, they are not automatically admitted there unless they attend a certain age of reasoning that is when they understand what they are doing when they apply to be admitted into the gueiteh secret society. those who apply and are accepted are admitted through an initiation procedure which forces anyone to confess if he had secretly
seen gueiteh and the punishment is usually severe and they must then pay heavy finds before admission if at all. the same conditions apply to membership of kwifong. in some circumstances the applicant is refused admission altogether. spirits are supposed to befell anyone who sees either kwifong or gueiteh secretly.  in the annual rituals that take place between december and february of the following year, gueiteh follows after kwifong in the rituals but does not go to all the shrines to which kwifong must go. also in ordinary death celebrations, gueiteh attends only the death, burial and celebrations of its members but does not go out to other villages for the deaths of friendly fons and their mothers as kwifong does. however, gueiteh attends death, burials and celebrations of princes and princesses.  traditional titles of bamunka  there are several titles in bamunka among them; fon, bohboh, ntoh.   fon is the highest title in bamunka held only by the traditional ruler alone.  bohboh is a royal title given only to descendants of the fon and inherited down the line to not more than four generation before transformation. those bearing bohboh as title cannot see kwifong unless they are descendants at the 5th generation, presently reduced to 4th generation. that is the bohboh who is son of a fon cannot see kwifong. his son too cannot as well and his son's son still cannot but his son's son's son can see kwifong because he is said to have transformed into a commoner at that stage and may be permission by both gueiteh and kwifong. bohboh is the second highest title in bamunka after that of the fon. it cannot be given to any commoner like is the case with "ntoh, tatah, and nini. ironically strangers are sometimes given the title just by assumption that they were of that rank in their own village and in a way to entice him to stay and continue contributing to the development of the village.   ntoh is the third title of nobility in bamunka village. this title can be given to any commoner by the fon as he pleases but he must first find a fiction by which he will allege that at one time a certain person holding that title died childless and so left the title vacant and he install the concerned to vacant land in the village which will be alleged once belonged to that title holder and of course the new title holder will become his successor on that piece of land.
there is usually some money and gifts paid and whether the successor actually settles on that land or not seems no one's concern. also those bohbohs who have reached the level of transformation from gueiteh to also see kwifong may have both the title of bohboh as well as that of ntoh like was the case with the late bohboh ntohbientoh. any fon's wife who has given birth also gets the title of ntoh instead of chinjia for all young ladies who marry the fon. however, such "ntoh" must be indicated clearly immediately after with "woentoh".  administration   current administrative arrangements have resulted in the emergence of a peri-urban centre (popularly known as ndop or bamunka urban). the peri-urban centre is located along the bamenda-nkambe stretch of the ring road and extends a little bit from the boundary with bamali village situated beyond the ndop cooperative union to beyond saint mary's catholic comprehensive high school which stretches into babungo village.  references  further reading    j. a. mope simo, gender, agro-pastoral production and class formation im bamunka, north-western cameroon part ii : gender, agrarian change and the process of class formation, university of east anglia, school of development studies, 1992 (thesis)  godfred ntombukong wana, bamunka past and present (13th century to 21st century): bamunka detaily and ngoketunjia division generally, g.n. wana, bamenda, 2003. the degradation of raffia palms and  socio-economic and ecological consequences - the case study of bamunka ndop north west province cameroon discover ngoketunjia division with us tammy-pcdi.travellerspoint.com ccsenet.org  populated places in cameroon
shujaat khan (born 27 january 1965) is a bangladeshi activist. he is most notable for his work on recognizing muslim school holidays in new york city.  early life  born in dhaka, shujaat khan is the son of government class one officer a. w. fazlul bari khan and a. j. khaleedah.  the bangladesh liberation war had a profound effect on shujaat khan growing up. beneath the casualties, destruction, and battles, shujaat learned that the struggle for equality is very complicated and requires close participation with various political figures.  the struggle for independence, equality, and recognition influenced his muslim school holiday campaign as well.  he describes himself as always being interested in science, politics, and human behavior. his favorite writer is rabindranath tagore.  he currently lives in the united states with his wife and two kids.  beginnings of the campaign for muslim school holidays  shujaat khan has been an essential part of recognizing muslim school holidays in the new york city area.  in 1999, he was inspired to begin the campaign when his own children and relatives had to choose between celebrating the eid holidays and going to school.  principal genie calibar of p.s. 19 stated that a student who is absent for eid-related purposes would receive an excused absence however, that was considered by many to be an unfair treatment of the matter considering that school would be officially closed for christian and jewish holidays but not for islamic holidays.  attention shifted towards the students affected by the nonclosure of school during the eid holidays. muslim students attending public schools who opted out of attending class to celebrate the eid holidays missed class time, homework, and in many instances, missed exams which set them behind students of other religious backgrounds.  in 2006, the first muslim school holiday campaign to successfully pass the muslim school holiday resolution was launched by the new york civic participation project followed by its allied coalitions. the resolution, numbered 1281 passed unanimously by elected officials in 2008. mayor michael bloomberg vetoed resolution 1281.  five years after the veto, mayor bill de blasio, who was then new york city public advocate, promised to recognize the two muslim holidays, eid ul-fitr and eid ul-adha.  queens community forum  in march 2014, shujaat khan organized a muslim holiday community forum at p.s. 69 in queens, ny. at the event, new york city council member daniel dromm was in attendance.  the forum's purpose was to gain recognition,
inclusion, and respect among various political figures in new york city at the time. events like these are described as being the backbone of the campaign for muslim school holidays as they increased awareness among large, diverse groups of people, and garnered attention from the political climate of new york and, by extension, the u.s.  forums and events such as this one often focused on the best course of action in recognizing muslim school holidays in the new york city public school calendar. rallies were held in albany, meetings were held in various elected officials' offices, and forums were held in all five boroughs.  shujaat khan also wrote new york state senator jose peralta an open letter pertaining to the recognition of muslim school holidays throughout not just new york city, but also new york state.  these events focused on the students affected by the decision to choose between school and religion and focused on what an egalitarian society should look like-one that recognizes all religious groups' rights.  recognition of muslim school holidays into the nyc public school calendar  in 2015, after 16 years of working with various institutions, political figures, religious leaders, and coalitions, shujaat khan, nycpp, la fuente, 32bj seiu were successful in recognizing the school holidays in the new york city public school calendar.  at a speech celebrating the victory, shujaat khan mentioned how the struggle for equality and recognition is not over but a huge step forward had been made.  references  external links  campaign for muslim school holidays video  celebrating eid in nyc video  1965 births living people bangladeshi engineers
a fortress in the mountains () is a 1953 soviet adventure film directed by vladimir gerasimov and konstantin yudin and starring vladlen davydov, marina kuznetsova and yelena shatrova. it was made by mosfilm using the sovcolor process. it was the third most successful soviet film at the box office that year, with attendance figures of 44.8 million.  the film is an early cold war action thriller, set in central asia,  synopsis from moscow arrives senior lieutenant lunin to the frontier who is assigned as its deputy chief. due to the illness of the former chief, the lieutenant has to take command of the outpost. at the same time foreign intelligence is trying to enter the ussr territory. near the state border under the guise of archaeologists spies under the name of stanley and marrow are deployed. the local basmach gang of ismail-beg who are paid by their leadership, is trying to make an attack on soviet territory as a diversion to their main operation - their imperceptible transition to the soviet side. however, the operation fails; the gang is broken up, its remnants thrown over the border river and the violator spies are arrested and exposed.  cast  vladlen davydov as lunin  marina kuznetsova as vera alexandrovna  yelena shatrova as polina antonovna  sergei gurzo as kuleshov  stanislav chekan as martshenko  arkadi shcherbakov as prochorov  aleksandr susnin as vorobev  mikhail majorov as grachyov  vladimir popov as sledovatel  mukhamejan kasymov as ismail-beg  vladimir belokurov as marrow  aleksey krasnopolsky as bridger  oleg solyus as ben stanley  georgi chernovolenko as carter  nina agapova as marya tikhonovna  boris popov as inspector  radner muratov as akhmet  aleksey alekseev as ustinov - mayor  references  bibliography   hutchings, s. russia and its other(s) on film: screening intercultural dialogue. springer, 2008.  rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1953 films 1953 adventure films soviet adventure films soviet films russian adventure films 1950s russian-language films films directed by konstantin yudin films directed by vladimir gerasimov cold war spy films
seynaeve is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  lander seynaeve (born 1992), belgian cyclist marcel seynaeve (1933-2015), belgian cyclist maurice seynaeve (1907-1998), belgian cyclist
vroman is an unincorporated community in otero county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a variant name was weitzer.  a post office called weitzer was established in 1908, the name was changed to vroman in 1918, and the post office closed in 1954. the community has the name of one mr. vroman, a local pioneer.  references  unincorporated communities in otero county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
"are we ready? (wreck)" is a song by northern irish indie rock band two door cinema club from their third studio album, gameshow (2016). the song was released on 14 june 2016 as the album's lead single. it was featured as a track in the soundtrack for fifa 17 by ea sports.  lyrics and composition  "are we ready? (wreck)" is an indie pop song inspired by prince and david bowie whose lyrics critique the materialistic tendencies of today's society. the band's lead singer, alex trimble, said of writing the song: while i was writing this single i discovered this term weltschmertz, the german word for being at odds with the world around you. the fact that it was a fully coined term and related to so many people that have existed and do exist made me feel it was okay to not exist on the same level as everyone else, it was okay to be comfortable doing your own thing. 'are we ready? (wreck)' was me... not attacking the world around me but outlining why i don't really get it and why i don't fit in with it.  music video  a music video for the single was released on the band's official youtube account on july 6, 2016. the video, directed by new zealand duo thunderlips, depicts the members of the band in prosthetics in several retro advertisements for products which feature the lyrics of the song.  critical reception  the song was well received by critics. rhian daly of nme called the song "polished minimalism" while mentioning its commentary on consumer culture, saying "it oozes dissatisfaction, a desolate critique of a world where we're becoming zombies to materialism and technology by someone who's yet to succumb to it like those around him." in another review, paste magazine's molly morgan states that the song "encompasses all that we love already about tdcc: it's dance-y, light and fun" while the darker lyrics "hold greater meaning to the band".  charts  references  2016 singles 2016 songs two door cinema club songs song recordings produced by jacknife lee songs written by jacknife lee parlophone singles
nicholas joseph balthazar de langlade, vicomte du chayla, baron de montauroux et chambon, seigneur de champs (c. 1685 - 17 december 1754, paris), was a french general. he was a lieutenant general of the king's armies and director general of the cavalry. in 1708 he was made a knight of the royal and military order of saint louis. on 2 february 1746 he was made a knight of the order of the holy spirit. he commanded the french force at the battle of melle.  sources nicolas viton de saint-allais, nobiliaire universel de france ou recueil general des genealogies historiques des maisons nobles, vol. 8, 1816 langlade du chayla de montgros gustave de burdin, documents historiques sur la province de gevaudan, vol. 1, 1846  1685 births 1754 deaths french generals
richhill amalgamated football club is an intermediate level football club playing in the intermediate a division of the mid-ulster football league in northern ireland. the club was founded in 2016 following the amalgamation of richhill f.c. and broomhill f.c. the club is based in richhill, county armagh and competes in the irish cup where it progressed to the fifth round in their first season in the competition.  in addition to the successful irish cup run, richhill afc enjoyed a memorable debut season by winning the mid-ulster intermediate b league title and the alan wilson cup.  external links  daily mirror mid-ulster football league official website  nifootball.co.uk - (for fixtures, results and tables of all northern ireland amateur football leagues)  notes  association football clubs in northern ireland association football clubs established in 2016 association football clubs in county armagh mid-ulster football league clubs 2016 establishments in northern ireland
thora sa aasman  is a pakistani television series based on the novel of the same name written by umera ahmed. the television series is on air every saturday at 8:00 pm on geo tv.  cast   yasra rizvi as fatima zeba bakhtiyar as shaista, haroon's wife ushna shah as rakhshi babar ali as mansoor  lubna aslam as muneeza, mansoor's wife aly khan as haroon shaheen khan as ammi seher afzal as amber, mansoor's first daughter  sheen javed alizey tahir as mansoor's second daughter  kaif ghaznavi as rakhshi's mother sabahat ali bukhari as aapa qazi  parveen akbar as jagat khala imran ashraf as samar  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  external links    a&b entertainment 2016 pakistani television series debuts
sherwood colliery f.c. is an english football club based in mansfield woodhouse, nottinghamshire. they are currently members of the . the club is a fa charter standard club affiliated to the nottinghamshire county football association. the club's nickname is the wood.  history the club was formed in 2008, although a club of the same name did compete in the fa cup in the late 1940s and early 1950s. they joined the central midlands league in 2012, and entered the fa vase for the first time in 2016 where they beat both penistone church and clipstone both of higher divisions before being knocked out 3-2 by westfields. the 2017-18 season saw the club finish as runners-up in the league and subsequently gain promotion to the east midlands counties football league. the 2019-20 season saw the club enter the fa cup for the first time, getting past quorn f.c. in the extra preliminary round, before losing out to loughborough dynamo in a replay in the next round. in 2021, the club were promoted to the premier division of the northern counties east league based on their results in the abandoned 2019-20 and 2020-21 seasons.  ground  the club play their home games at debdale park.  honours central midlands football league  floodlight cup (1) 2016-17 midland amateur alliance division one (1) 2010-11  records best fa vase performance: second round, 2016-17, 2019-20 best fa cup performance: preliminary qualifying round, 2019-20  references  external links official website  football clubs in england football clubs in nottinghamshire central midlands football league association football clubs established in 2008 2008 establishments in england east midlands counties football league mining association football teams in england northern counties east football league
olena kolesnichenko (ukrainian: олена колесніченко; born 3 june 1993 in rivne) is a ukrainian athlete specialising in the 400 metres hurdles.  her personal best in the event is 55.48	seconds set in lutsk in 2016.  international competitions  references  1993 births living people people from rivne ukrainian female hurdlers athletes (track and field) at the 2010 summer youth olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of ukraine universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade bronze medalists for ukraine medalists at the 2017 summer universiade
aminu dantata (born 19 may 1931) is a nigerian businessman and philanthropist who is one of the promoters of kano state foundation, an endowment fund that supported educational initiatives and provided grants to small-scale entrepreneurs in kano. he is the head of a group of companies that manages his real estate and other business ventures.  dantata is the founder of express petroleum & gas company ltd and one of the organizers of jaiz bank in nigeria. in 1978, he was a member of the national movement, an organization that later transformed to the national party of nigeria.  life dantata was born to the family of alhassan dantata, who was from an agalawa trading family, aminu dantata's grand-father was called abdullahi while his great-grand father was called baba talatin a prosperous merchant who brought the family from katsina to madobi following the death of his father ali, aminu dantata's grand father abdullahi continued to operate from madobi until 1877 when having set out for a journey to gonja his wife delivered alhassan dantata the father of aminu at a campsite (zango) of bebeji on his return from the journey he decided to abandon madobi and moved to bebeji . aminu dantata is the fifteenth child in a family of seventeen children. from 1938 to 1945, he was educated at dala primary school and then finished his education through home studies in a private school built by his father in 1949. after his studies, he joined the family business, alhassan dantata & sons in 1948 as a produce buyer and also got married. in 1955, he became the sokoto district manager of the business. the year 1955 was also when his father died and the shares in the business were subsequently distributed to the children. in 1958, dantata became the deputy managing director of the business with his brother ahmadu, was the md. when ahmadu died in 1960, dantata became the head of the business.  over the years, dantata expanded the business holdings and his activities into various sectors of the nigerian political and economic sphere. by the beginning of the 1960s, dantata had a construction firm that received patronage from the newly independent government in nigeria, his firm was given a contract to build part of the school of aviation in zaria. in 1961, he was among three other businessmen as part of the 23 member economic mission group, the first world-wide mission sent by an independent government in nigeria. in 1964, he
was among the pioneer board members of the nigerian industrial development bank. in 1968, dantata was appointed kano state commissioner for economic development, trade and industry under the administration of audu bako, he was in the position until 1973.  during the indigenization period of the 1970s, the dantata group bought shares and held significant holdings in mentholatum, scoa, funtua cotton seed crushing co and raleigh industries.  alhassan dantata and sons group  dantata assumed executive leadership of alhassan dantata and sons in 1960. established by his father as commodity firm trading in groundnut, kolanut and a few other commodities, dantata later invested in some foreign enterprises operating in nigeria. between 1960 and 1980, it operated the following divisions: building and construction division whose contracts included defense academy in kaduna, extension to ahmadu bello university in zaria and a civil aviation training school in zaria. a merchandise division that was founded in the middle of the 1970s traded in building materials primarily in northern nigeria. northern amalgamated and marketing company limited, this unit has two main parts, a fertilizer division generally supplying governments and a technical division trading in ward generators and barford construction equipment. the firm maintained a division that held a mercedes benz dealership and another that maintained a terminal at warri port. by the 1990s, the group had changed its identity to become dantata organization with additional investment in oil exploration through express petroleum.  political career  in 1961, dantata was elected as the representative of kura district in the northern house of assembly. he was also an executive member of kano provincial council. after the first republic was truncated, dantata was nominated to be an executive member of the newly formed kano state in 1967 where he served as the state commissioner of trade and industry.  philanthropy dantata has donated funds and buildings to various institutions around kano. he donated the alhassan dantata haemodyalysis center to aminu kano teaching hospital. he was the first chancellor of al-qalam university, katsina.  see also list of hausa people  references  nigerian businesspeople 1931 births national party of nigeria politicians living people dantata family businesspeople from kano people from kano state
pietro gaudenzi (died 1664) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of arbe (1636-1664).  biography on 3 march 1636, pietro gaudenzi was appointed during the papacy of pope gregory xiii as bishop of arbe. on 24 march 1636, he was consecrated bishop by faustus poli, titular archbishop of amasea, with giovanni battista altieri, bishop emeritus of camerino, and celso zani, bishop emeritus of citta della pieve, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of arbe until his death in 1664.  while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of thomas marnavich, bishop of bosnia (1640).  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope gregory xiii 1664 deaths
katherine c. hughes (born april 6, 1995) is an american actress and singer. she has guest starred in nbc's law & order: svu, cbs's blue bloods, men, women & children, had a supporting role in the film me and earl and the dying girl. and main roles in the series my dead ex and perfect commando  career hughes competed in radio disney's next big thing, season 5 for a chance to record her own single and a guest starring role on austin & ally to perform her song. although she did not make it to the finals, she made it to third place. she has since moved to los angeles to continue to pursue acting.  filmography  film  television  references  external links  virtual international authority file  1995 births living people american television actresses american film actresses actresses from new york city 21st-century american actresses
alexandra bezekova (born 13 august 1992) is a slovak sprinter. she competed in the 100 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 100 metres - 11.87 (-0.4 m/s, zurich 2014) 200 metres - 23.55 (-0.4 m/s, ostrava 2016) 400 metres - 54.65	 (banska bystrica 2016) indoor 60 metres - 7.47 (prague 2015) 200 metres - 23.64	 (ostrava 2016) 400 metres - 55.81	 (prague 2015)  references  external links  1992 births living people slovak female sprinters athletes (track and field) at the 2015 european games sportspeople from kosice european games silver medalists for slovakia european games medalists in athletics competitors at the 2015 summer universiade competitors at the 2017 summer universiade
furostilbestrol (inn), also known as diethylstilbestrol di(2-furoate) or simply as diesthylstilbestrol difuroate, is a synthetic, nonsteroidal estrogen of the stilbestrol group related to diethylstilbestrol that was never marketed. it is an ester of diethylstilbestrol and was described in the literature in 1952.  see also  diethylstilbestrol dipropionate  dimestrol  fosfestrol  mestilbol  references  estrogen esters phenols stilbenoids synthetic estrogens abandoned drugs
minister for fisheries is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by peter tinley of the labor party. the position was first created after the 1947 state election, in the new ministry formed by ross mclarty. it has existed in every government since then, sometimes under different titles. the minister is currently responsible for the state government's fisheries within the department of primary industries and regional development. it is responsible for commercial and recreational fishing in western australia.  titles  1 april 1947 - 16 march 1965: minister for fisheries  16 march 1965 - 20 december 1974: minister for fisheries and fauna  20 december 1974 - 20 december 1984: minister for fisheries and wildlife  20 december 1984 - present: minister for fisheries  list of ministers  see also  minister for agriculture and food (western australia)  minister for the environment (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  fisheries minister for fisheries
abendlied (evening song), op. 69/3, is a sacred motet by josef rheinberger for a six-part mixed choir (ssattb). it has been regarded as his best-known sacred composition. he wrote the first version in 1855 at the age of 15.  the text is a verse from the biblical narration of the road to emmaus appearance according to   in martin luther's german version of the bible:  rheinberger wrote a first version on 9  march 1855, one month before easter and two weeks before his 16th birthday. at age 24, he revised the motet, for example eliminating repetition of notes and changing the marking. he published it in 1873 by n. simrock in berlin as no. 3 of his opus 69, drei geistliche gesange fur gemischten chor (three sacred songs for mixed choir, the others being morgenlied (morning song), on a poem by hoffmann von fallersleben, and dein sind die himmel (yours are the heavens) after .  a latin version ("mane nobiscum quoniam advesperascit, inclinata est iam dies") was written in 1878 for a performance on easter monday of 1878 at the allerheiligen-hofkirche in munich, which only permitted latin for liturgical singing. it was published by carus-verlag. carus published a recording titled abendlied, a collection of sacred vocal music by rheinberger, performed by the vancouver cantata singers conducted by james fankhauser.  the music in f major is marked andante molto. the text is mostly sung syllabically. the three upper voices begin with a f major chord, held for three beats on "bleib" (bide) and repeated for "bei" (with), changing to an a minor chord on "uns" (us), when the lower three voices begin a similar pattern.  references  external links     abendlied, op. 69, no. 3 (josef rheinberger) choralwiki  das abendlied, op. 69 nr. 3: wirklich das werk eines funfzehnjahrigen? (in german) wagners.ag.vu  motets 1855 compositions
carla salome rocha (born 25 april 1990) is a portuguese long-distance runner who competed in the 10,000 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships and 2017 world championships, finishing 28th in the latter competition with a time of 32:52.71. she finished 8th in the 2019 london marathon with a time of 2:24:47.  references  external links  profile at olympic committee of portugal   1990 births living people people from vizela portuguese female long-distance runners s.l. benfica athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of portugal
good books international is an online bookstore based in new zealand. since its foundation, the company has operated as a non-profit, donating all its proceeds to oxfam.  the profits donated to oxfam are then invested in projects throughout the world to reduce poverty. dr. jane cherrington setup good books nz in early 2006. she worked as chief executive of the mental health foundation in new zealand. she currently works in advertising as head of brand strategy for string theory.  the initial offering was an online bookstore, which donated all its profits to charity. good books international signed a partnership with oxfam recently, to donate the company's profits from book sales to joint venture projects with the charitable foundation.  the company received critical acclaim in 2012 for their viral online video, promoting the good books ethos. it compared how other large online booksellers often made huge profits on book sales while other parts of the world struggled. the advertisement went on to win a gold and bronze award at the london international awards later that year, as well as many others including the coveted d&ad yellow pencil for film advertising craft.  the digital campaign known as "good books great writers series", where each short film attempts to creatively tell the good books story in the style of the world's most famous literary talents, and hand-picked directors donate their skill and time, free of charge, to create films for the charity.  the series had a follow-up advertisement in late 2012. named 'havana heat', it was written as a steamy love letter to good books, in the bodice-ripping language made famous by mills & boon books.  in 2014, it was announced that the non-profit had begun to work on a similar project with oxfam canada, as well as oxfam new zealand. during an interview, it was stated that it had taken over five years for the deal to be reached. the reason for the project's delay was due to the innovative nature of the project.  good books again received attention in 2015 for the third installment of the good books great writers series, we need to talk about alice, an ethereal rendition of alice in wonderland, which was a finalist in the 2016 axis awards for good category.  oxfam partnership good books have run a number of schemes with oxfam to provide charitable donations to fund projects in partnership with oxfam. each time a book is purchased from good books, a percentage is given to oxfam to fund these projects. much of the work carried out by the projects has been
based in the oceanic regions of asia including, east timor, fiji and papua new guinea. their work varies dependent on the region, but includes clean water, sanitation, agriculture development and access to education.  as part of the scheme, good books international also suggests that customers sign up to oxfam's donation service.  references  bookshops of new zealand book websites online retailers of new zealand oxfam bookstores established in the 21st century
jonathan tamimi syberg (born 12 october 1994) is a professional footballer who plays as a right back. born in sweden, he represents jordan internationally.  international career tamimi debuted for the jordan national football team in a friendly 1-1 tie with libya on 25 december 2017.  honours  club hammarby if  superettan (1): 2014  jonkopings sodra  superettan (1): 2015  references  external links      1994 births living people association football fullbacks jordanian footballers swedish footballers allsvenskan players superettan players hammarby fotboll players jonkopings sodra if players gif sundsvall players mjallby aif players degerfors if players sweden youth international footballers jordan international footballers swedish people of jordanian descent jordanian people of swedish descent
frederick d'souza (4 december 1934 - 11 july 2016) was a roman catholic bishop.  ordained to the priesthood in 1961, d'souza served as bishop of the diocese of jhansi, india from 1977 to 2012.  notes  1934 births 2016 deaths 20th-century roman catholic bishops in india 21st-century roman catholic bishops in india
tercio is an extinct town in las animas county, in the u.s. state of colorado. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  a post office called tercio was established in 1902, and remained in operation until 1949. the community was the third (spanish: tercio) mining community established by colorado fuel and iron, hence the name.  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of las animas county, colorado
joaquim adrego pereira andrade (born 16 august 1969 in travanca) is a portuguese former professional cyclist.  major results  1989 1st stage 3a trofeu joaquim agostinho 1st stage 4 (itt) volta a portugal 1991 1st overall volta ao algarve 1993 3rd overall volta ao alentejo 1995 1st stage 6 volta a portugal 3rd overall volta ao alentejo 1st stage 4 3rd overall volta ao algarve 1997 1st overall tour du poitou-charentes 1st stage 4a 1998 3rd time trial, national road championships 1999 2nd time trial, national road championships 2000 2nd time trial, national road championships 2002 1st  time trial, national road championships 1st overall volta ao alentejo 2003 1st  time trial, national road championships 2004 1st stage 4 volta ao distrito de santarem 2nd overall volta ao alentejo 2005 1st  road race, national road championships 2006 3rd time trial, national road championships  references  external links  1969 births living people portuguese male cyclists
the runnymede fire hall was operated by toronto fire services, from 1928 to 2014.  then-mayor rob ford ordered the fire hall shut down, as a cost-saving measure.  toronto fire services repurposed the heritage structure, and reopened it as a public education center, on october 13, 2016.  recommendations that the fire hall be closed had been offered since at least 1987.  ford first attempted to have the station closed in 2012, but it received a brief reprieve, in 2013.  the closure stirred controversy, with local residents concerned over slower response times from more distant fire halls.  the fire hall's architecture was considered sufficiently iconic for it to be considered a heritage structure, worthy of preservation.  on october 13, 2016, the historic structure was reopened, in a public ceremony - but as a fire education centre, not an active fire station.  while it will be capable of operating a fire engine, no engine will be stationed there.  instead, a fire captain and six fire educators will conduct fire safety outreach.  local councilor, sarah doucette, celebrated its re-opening.  she echoed the views of local residents who regretted it had not been restored to fully operational status.  references  external links  buildings and structures in toronto
bhagha purana tehsil assembly constituency (sl. no.: 72) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in moga district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india moga district
skinhate () is a nu metal/hardcore band from pokrov, ukraine.  history  in fact, the history of the band began in the summer of 1994, when oleksandr kukhtin, oleksandr stepanenko, andriy diadiura, vitaliy kuznetsov and oleksandr yefymenko, changing the names ("nekropedofil", "godless", "virgin cunt") began to give concerts in small towns of ukraine. in this period it was created a number of songs that have become mega hit in the era immediately "skinhate".  in 1998, the band took the name "hate", which was later changed to "skinhate".  the first concert took place in kyiv in 1999. by this time the group has managed to record their own album called "skinhate", after rewriting moon records called "war in heads". the album is dedicated to the memory of one of andriy 'yuryk' diadiura, one of band founders who was killed in 2000.  in 2002 skinhate recorded the second album - "ticket to paradise."  in 2006 the band released their 3rd album "all around".  members active members  dmytro kustikov 'kust' (дмитро кустіков 'куст') - vocal  oleksandr stepanenko 'stepan' (олександр степаненко 'степан') - guitar  vitaliy kuznetsov 'kuzma' (віталіи кузнецов 'кузьма') - bass guitar  oleksandr kukhtin 'kyxxxtya' (олександр кухтін 'кухххтя') - drums  former members  andriy diadiura 'yuryk' (андріи дядюра 'юрик') - vocal, guitar (1999-2001)  yevhen lashko 'zh.k.' (євген лашко 'ж. к.') - vocal (1999-2006; 2008-2009)  serhiy maryshev 'banan' (сергіи маришев 'банан') - bass guitar (2004-2008)  oleksa fisiuk (олекса фісюк) - bass guitar (2008-2010)  anton yelisin 'kalyna' (антон єлісі
н 'калина') - bass guitar (2000-2002)  oleksandr yefymenko 'yefym' (олександр єфименко 'єфим') - vocal  discography studio albums  2001 - віина в головах (viyna v holovakh, war in heads)  2002 - квиток до раю (kvytok do raiu, ticket to paradise)  2003 - віина в головах + bonus (viyna v holovakh + bonus, war in heads + bonus; re-released)  2004 - hatemix   2006 - навкруги (navkruhy, all around)  2016 - неякусі (neyakusi, not like everyone else)  singles  2010 - zdaten (able)  2011 - bull-dozer  2011 - грань (hran, edge)  2015 - як усі (yakusi, like everyone else)  videography  "грань" / "hran"   "32"  interesting facts   despite the name, guys have no relation to the movement of skinheads and neo-nazis, but such name has become an obstacle to the publication of their albums in russia.  skinhate's musical style was influenced by such bands: slayer, korn, sepultura, slipknot, soulfly, biohazard, machine head and more.  nu metal musical groups ukrainian rock music groups musical groups established in 1999 1999 establishments in ukraine
gordon mackenzie johnston (born january 30, 1993) is a canadian field hockey player, who plays as a defender for dutch hoofdklasse club hgc and the canadian national team.  club career johnston joined hgc in the dutch hoofdklasse in 2021 after the 2020 summer olympics after having played for the vancouver hawks.  international career he competed at the 2015 pan american games and won a silver medal. in 2016, he was named to canada's olympic team. he was selected for the 2018 world cup, where he played all four games. in june 2019, he was selected in the canada squad for the 2019 pan american games. they won the silver medal as they lost 5-2 to argentina in the final.  in june 2021, johnston was named to canada's 2020 summer olympics team. he was the top goalscorer at the 2022 men's pan american cup with ten goals as canada won the bronze medal.  references  external links  gordon johnston at field hockey canada  1993 births living people canadian male field hockey players field hockey players from vancouver male field hockey defenders field hockey players at the 2014 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2015 pan american games field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2020 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2018 commonwealth games 2018 men's hockey world cup players field hockey players at the 2019 pan american games olympic field hockey players of canada pan american games silver medalists for canada pan american games medalists in field hockey commonwealth games competitors for canada medalists at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games hgc players men's hoofdklasse hockey players
bailiaspis  resser, 1936, is a middle cambrian (miaolingian) trilobite genus belonging to the family conocoryphidae angelin, 1854. within the acado-baltic region, the genus ranges from wuliuan into guzhangian age strata (ptychagnostus gibbus to lejopyge laevigata biozones in terms of scandinavian biostratigraphic terminology).  diagnosis a genus of conocoryphidae in which backward expansion of the anterior cranidial border and the border furrow arched sharply towards posterior (sag) combine to form a distinct medial 'plectrum'.  species  type species: conocephalites elegans hartt in dawson, 1868, by original designation. from the middle cambrian, chamberlain's brook formation (fossil brook member), eccaparadoxides eteminicus zone, of saint john, new brunswick.  other species  b. dalmani (angelin, 1854) [= conocoryphe bufo hicks, 1869].  b. glabrata (angelin, 1854) [= holocephalina agrauloides sdzuy, 1966, by ontogeny].  b. nicholasi resser, 1936, p.14 [= b. glabrata according to young et al. (1994, p.354, fig. 9 g, k, n and ?m)].  b. venusta resser, 1937 [= b. prominens resser, 1937, according to kim et al., 2002, p. 830].  b. inflata lake, 1940   b. tuberculata lake, 1940  b. cf. tuberculata lake, 1940 and b. aff. tuberculata lake, 1940  b. latigenae hutchinson, 1962  b. griffei (courtessole, 1967)  b. menneri korobov, 1973  b. bobrovi korobov, 1973  b. jakutensis korobov, 1973  b. botomensis korobov, 1973  b. picta korobov, 1973  b. curta korobov, 1973  b. senonta korobov, 1973  distribution   b. dalmani (angelin, 1854) occurs in southern sweden in the exsulans limestone and immediately adjacent shale layers at various locations (scania: brantevik and gislovshammar; kiviks-esperod; andrarum; fagelsang; also
borgholm on the island of oland at the same stratigraphic horizon. hicks collected  'conocoryphe' bufo from the ' paradoxides aurora zone' near the base of the whitesands bay formation (formerly 'upper solva beds') and ptychagnostus gibbus biozone at porth-y-rhaw, st david's, south west wales (rees et al., 2014). the whitesands bay formation is conventionally referred to the biozone of paradoxides aurora, following hicks (1881). however, that species is a probable subjective junior synonym of mawddachites hicksii, and so no independent aurora biozone can be recognized.   b. glabrata (angelin, 1854) [= holocephalina agrauloides sdzuy, 1966, and b. nicholasi resser, 1936] was originally derived from the zone of solenopleura brachymetopa (andrarum limestone) of andrarum, scania and at the same horizon on the danish island of bornholm (westergard, 1950, p. 31). the species also occurs in the manuels river formation, davidis zone of deep cove, cape st mary's peninsula, newfoundland [fletcher, 2007, p.86, (fig. 56, p. 67)], in the valtorres formation (guzhangian) at purujosa, iberian chains, ne spain (alvarez et al. 2013), and in the lower part of the jbel lmgaysmat formation in the central anti-atlas of morocco. westergard (1950, p. 31) noted that "an incomplete and somewhat distorted cranidium identified as conocoryphe cf. dalmani by nicholas (1916) and later described and illustrated by lake (1940) under the name of bailiaspis nicholasi resser ms. (1936, p.14), seems to agree with glabrata", an opinion upheld by young et al. (1994). the specimen was obtained from nicholas's (1915) 'thin calcareous grit' that spans the junction of the nant-y-big and maentwrog formations near nant-y-big, porth ceiriad, north west wales and the fauna indicates correlation with the andrarum limestone (solenopleura brachymetopa and lejopyge laevigata biozones) of andrarum, scania, sweden. poorly preserved specimens assigned to bailiaspis cf. glabrata have also been reported from the upper languedoc
ian strata of the coulouma-refescals sector of the southern montagne noire (courtessole, pillet & vizcaino, 1988; alvaro & vizcaino, 1998).   b. venusta resser, 1937 [= b. prominens resser, 1937, according to kim et al., 2002, p. 830]. collected from the fossil brook member of the chamberlain's brook formation, p. bennettii zone on manuels river (hutchinson, 1962, p. 101)   b. inflata lake, 1940. comley breccia bed (bb 1), = upper gibbus - fissus biozones comley, shropshire, england (rushton in rushton et al. 2011, fig. 12, p. 32). also recorded by fletcher (2007, p. 67, pl. 34, fig. 30) from the chamberlain's brook formation, agraulos affinis zone in wester cove of branch, st. mary's bay, newfoundland. fletcher stated (p. 74), however, that "the species close to bailiaspis inflata in this a. affinis faunal assemblage may indicate a slightly earlier occurrence than the type specimen" from comley.   b. tuberculata lake, 1940. recorded from illing's (1916) level a4 in the abbey shale formation of nuneaton, warwickshire, central england. illing assigned his level a4 to the former paradoxides aurora zone (now abandoned) which has been correlated with some reserve to the ptychagnostus gibbus biozone (rushton, 1979, 1999, 2011; rees et al., 2014). b. cf. tuberculata, b. aff. tuberculata and b. sp. occur in the mansilla formation of the iberian chains, ne spain and indicate a range from the eccaparadoxides asturianus zone (upper leonian) to the lowermost badulesia tenera zone (lower caesaraugustan), which correspond to the late wuliuan ["upper part of stage 5 of cambrian series 3"] and, probably, the lowermost drumian stages (chirivella martorell et al., 2017).   b. latigenae hutchinson, 1962 (pl. 14, figures 7a, b, 8) was collected from a loose limestone nodule at only one beach locality in deep cove, st. mary's bay. the north and west shores of deep cove expose a section through elliott cove, manuels river, and chamberlain's brook formations and judging from
the faunal association the nodule must have come from the hicksii, or the lowest part of the davidis zone within the manuels river formation.   b. griffei (courtessole, 1967) is from the middle cambrian la gardie formation, point 13, ferrals-les-montagnes, herault, languedoc-roussillon, france  b. menneri korobov, 1973 is from the middle cambrian olenek formation of the siberian platform, russia.  b. bobrovi korobov, 1973  b. jakutensis korobov, 1973  b. botomensis korobov, 1973  b. picta korobov, 1973  b. curta korobov, 1973  b. senonta korobov, 1973  notes   b. dalmani is clearly closely related to the type species, b. elegans (hartt in dawson) from the e. eteminicus zone of new brunswick. the species was redescribed and reillustrated by matthew (1885, p.1 15, figs. 18 - 34) and by kim et al. (2002, p. 831, fig. 6, 8-10) and any apparent variance may in future prove attributable to preservation. however, a close comparison of further material is required to verify whether the swedish form is actually a subjective senior synonym of elegans.  conocoryphe emarginata linnarsson (westergard, 1950, pl. 5, figs. 1-4) was originally assigned to bailiaspis by resser (1936, p. 19) but transferred to bailiella matthew, 1885, by westergard (1936, p. 58). other species previously assigned to bailiaspis and listed below have more recently been transferred by kim et al. (2002, p. 830) to bailiella matthew, 1885:  b. meridiana sdzuy, 1958.  b. howelli hutchinson (1962, pl. 14, figs. 1 - 4).  b. cf. howelli hutchinson (1962, pl. 14, figs. 5 - 6). cladistic analyses of the conocoryphidae by cotton (2000, p. 193) gave strong evidence that bailiaspis glabrata (angelin, 1854) should also be assigned to the genus bailiella, as tentatively suggested by sdzuy (1966), although subsequent authors (e.g. kim et al., 2002) have for now preferred to retain the
species in bailiaspis.  see also   list of trilobite genera  references  external links       ptychopariida genera ptychoparioidea cambrian trilobites of north america cambrian alaska paleozoic life of new brunswick paleozoic life of newfoundland and labrador cambrian trilobites of asia fossils of russia cambrian trilobites of europe cambrian france fossils of france fossil taxa described in 1936
italiencele is a 2004 romanian comedy film directed by nap toader.  cast   mara nicolescu - jeni  ana ularu - lenuta   - gigel  vlad zamfirescu - giovanni  emil hostina - fane   - girls' father  constantin draganescu - nea chitu  valentin teodosiu - police officer  references  external links   2004 comedy films 2004 films romanian films romanian comedy films
dorothy i. hokr (june 22, 1923 - march 26, 1998) was an american homemaker and politician.  born in the bronx, new york city, new york, hokr grew up in miami, florida. in 1964, hokr, her husband leroy "lee", and the family moved to minnesota. hokr was a homemaker and in the real estate business. she served on the new hope, minnesota, city council from 1976 to 1981. from 1981 to 1985, hokr served in the minnesota house of representatives and was a republican. in 1988, hokr and her husband moved to the villages in lady lake, florida. hokr served as president of the villages property owners association. hokr died of cancer in lady lake, florida.  notes  1923 births 1998 deaths politicians from the bronx people from lake county, florida people from new hope, minnesota businesspeople from minnesota minnesota republicans women state legislators in minnesota minnesota city council members members of the minnesota house of representatives 20th-century american women politicians 20th-century american politicians women city councillors in minnesota 20th-century american businesspeople
trieste () is a 1951 yugoslav drama film directed by france stiglic.  cast  mira bedenk as anda   angelo benetelli as penko    sandro bianchi as donati    vjekoslav bonifacic as burole    alessandro damiani as karlo    avgusta danilova as stara zenica    flavio della noce as piero   josip fiser as menih    eliza gerner as anamarija    franc gunzer as komisar mesta    pavla kovic as vratarjeva hci    slavica krasevec as marijeta    andrej kurent as ivan    anica kuznik as vida    marcello micheli as moro    carlo montini as oliva    lojze potokar as just    stane potokar as komandir mesta    modest sancin as galjof    stane sever as borut    zvone sintic as tadeo    pero skerl as pahor    vladimir skrbinsek as schmedke    dusan skredl as porocnik    joze zupan as sila    mirko zupancic as sergej  references  bibliography   silvan furlan. filmography of slovene feature films. slovenski gledaliski in filmski muzej, 1994.  external links     1951 films 1951 drama films yugoslav drama films yugoslav films slovene-language films films set in trieste films directed by france stiglic yugoslav black-and-white films
castiarina bella is a species of beetle in the buprestidae family, which is endemic to australia and found along the east coast of australia between melbourne and brisbane. it is a fairly common species in this area. as with other castiarina species it is typically found on flowering shrubs and trees.  gallery  references  bella beetles described in 1871
alberto delgado quintana (born 4 june 1991) is a spanish footballer who plays for cacereno as a left back.  club career  spain born in cabezon de la sal, cantabria, delgado was a racing santander youth graduate. on 8 november 2009 he made his senior debut for the reserves, coming on as a half-time substitute in a 1-1 home draw against vecindario in the segunda division b championship. he only appeared in one further match, as the b-team suffered relegation.  delgado subsequently represented barakaldo cf, sd amorebieta and sd leioa, all in the third and fourth divisions.  senica on 14 july 2016, delgado signed for fortuna liga club fk senica. he made his professional debut three days later, starting in a 0-1 home loss against slovan bratislava.  he left the club in january 2017 for signing with spanish fourth division club real aviles.  references  external links    alberto delgado at senica's official website     alberto delgado profile at futbalnet   1991 births living people spanish footballers footballers from cantabria association football defenders segunda division b players tercera division players rayo cantabria players barakaldo cf footballers sd amorebieta footballers sd leioa players slovak super liga players fk senica players spain youth international footballers spanish expatriate footballers spanish expatriate sportspeople in slovakia expatriate footballers in slovakia
dendroctonus pseudotsugae, the douglas-fir beetle, is a species of bark beetle found in western north america. three subspecies exist that correspond to the subspecies of douglas-fir. the beetles also infest downed larch trees. outbreaks often occur in conjunction with drought, root rot diseases, overcrowding, damage by insects that damage foliage, and environmental disturbance. this insect is part of the western forest ecosystem, playing a role in thinning weak trees in a stand.  adult douglas-fir beetles are light brown when young and become dark brown or black with reddish wing covers. they are somewhat hairy and range in size from 4.4 to 7 mm. the larvae are small, legless, the size of grains of rice, and white. pupae are white to cream colored. visible evidence of infestation includes patches of orange to reddish-brown boring dust in the bark or at the base of the tree. resin streamers from attacks higher in the tree may also be present. inside the bark, 6 to 30 inch egg galleries run parallel with the grain. eggs are laid on either side of the gallery and when they hatch, the larvae mine perpendicular to the galleries.  references  external links   http://www.fs.usda.gov/internet/fse_documents/stelprdb5187396.pdf  http://www.barkbeetles.org/douglasfir/dfb.html  beetles of north america scolytinae insect pests of temperate forests woodboring beetles
the 2016 los cabos open (or abierto mexicano los cabos) was an atp tennis tournament played on outdoor hard courts. it was the 1st edition of the los cabos open, and part of the atp world tour 250 series of the 2016 atp world tour. it took place in los cabos, mexico from august 8 through august 13, 2016. it took over from the claro open in bogota, colombia that had been held the previous 3 years.  singles main draw entrants  seeds    rankings are as of august 1, 2016.  other entrants  the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   pablo carreno busta    lucas gomez    tigre hank   the following player received entry as a special exempt:   reilly opelka  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   jared donaldson    noah rubin   amir weintraub   mischa zverev  withdrawals before the tournament   kyle edmund → replaced by  dusan lajovic    taylor fritz → replaced by  horacio zeballos   benoit paire → replaced by  sergiy stakhovsky   lucas pouille → replaced by  tim smyczek   albert ramos-vinolas → replaced by  thiago monteiro   diego schwartzman → replaced by  santiago giraldo   dominic thiem → replaced by  austin krajicek  retirements   dusan lajovic   sergiy stakhovsky  doubles main draw entrants  seeds    rankings are as of august 1, 2016.  other entrants  the following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:   daniel garza /  tigre hank    hans hach /  luis patino  withdrawals  before the tournament   marcel granollers /  feliciano lopez   sergiy stakhovsky (back injury)  retirements    horacio zeballos (back injury)  champions  singles     ivo karlovic def.  feliciano lopez, 7-6(7-5), 6-2  doubles     purav raja /  divij sharan def.  jonathan erlich /  ken skupski, 7-6(7-4), 7-6(7-3)  references  external links     los cabos open 2016 in mexican tennis 2016
jean-charles-julien luce de lancival (28 april 1764 - 17 august 1810). was an 18th-19th-century french poet and playwright.  biography  luce lancival made brilliant studies at the louis-le-grand college and was appointed professor of rhetoric at the college of navarre aged just 22 years (1786). the following year, under the influence of a disappointment in love, he left teaching and took orders. he was noted for his preaching talents. at the french revolution, he broke his vows and turned to theater.   around 1797, he was in charge of french literature at the french prytanee, former louis-le-grand college. he remained professor of rhetoric at the imperial high school at the time of the reorganization of the university. he was then called to the latin poetry chair at the sorbonne.  in 1805, he gave his poem in six songs achille a scyros, his best known work. imitated from the achilleid by statius, it is a book written with care, which includes interesting and ingenious features descriptions, even if the whole lacks of movement and relieves some boredom.  in theater, luce lancival won his greatest success shortly before his death, with his tragedy hector, shown in 1809 at the comedie francaise. on a topic drawn from the iliad, the play caused a sensation with a character judged by the very contemporary faithful to the spirit of ancient greece. napoleon rewarded the author by giving him a pension of 6,000 french francs.  his love of life, pushed to debauchery, was famous in his time. he was to lose a leg in an accident and used a wooden substitute. despite this weakness and failing health, he committed himself with great dedication to the teaching of literature and was an outstanding educator. stendhal wrote "luce lancival had a wooden leg and kindness". his early death was caused by syphilis.  works  1784: de pace, latin poem 1784: poeme sur le globe 1794: hormisdas, three-act tragedy, non presented 1794: mucius scaevola, three-act tragedy unpublished archibal, three-act tragedy, unpublished 1797: fernandez, three-act tragedy 1798: periandre, five-act tragedy 1802: ode sur le rob anti-syphilitique du citoyen b. laffecteur 1805: achille a scyros, poem in six songs 1809: hector, five-act tragedy given at the comedie-francaise  2 february 1812:
folliculus, satire in four chants against the critic julien louis geoffroy  le lord impromptu, four-act comedy in verse, from a novel by jacques cazotte  references  external links   jean-charles-julien luce de lancival on data.bnf.fr  his plays on cesar  people from aisne 1764 births 1810 deaths 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers 19th-century french poets 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french dramatists and playwrights
lucas simon-meslet, better known as cabochard, is a french professional league of legends player for karmine corp. he previously played for several other teams, most notably gambit gaming, ninjas in pyjamas and team vitality.  career  season 3  cabochard's first notable tournament was at paris games week 2013, where he competed with escape the ninja pandas. the team ended up finishing in third place at the tournament. soon after this, cabochard joined heavy botlane.  2014 season  after a short spell on heavy botlane, cabochard joined coreplay towards the start of the season. during his time on the roster, the team managed to make it to the semifinals at the international invitational tournament 3, losing only to cloud 9 eclipse. after the tournament, the roster disbanded and cabochard moved on to join gsi gaming.  after only a month on the team, cabochard left and rejoined heavy botlane. another short stint on the team led to him being picked up by ninjas in pyjamas. his first tournament with nip was summer series #2. the team ended up coming in 2nd in the tournament, losing to sk gaming prime in the final. he also competed with the team in the faceit challenger invitational 3, where the team came in 1st place.  nip's performance in the last summer series meant that they had secured their spot in the summer playoffs. cabochard and the team finished 4th, losing to unicorns of love in the 3rd place match. the team then played in the faceit gamescom challenge and finished 2nd, losing to h2k-gaming in the final. the team also managed a 3rd-place finish at 2014 black monster cup europe fall.  soon after this, ninjas in pyjamas disbanded and cabochard joined gambit gaming.  2015 season  after being voted in by fans, gambit gaming were invited to iem cologne. they managed to win the tournament after beating counter logic gaming in the finals and qualifying for the iem season ix - world championship.  gambit gaming had a successful 2015 eu lcs spring split, finishing 4th in the regular season, partially due to cabochard's impressive performances on kennen and morgana. in the playoffs they were beaten 3-1 by unicorns of love in the quarterfinals.  at the iem season ix - world championship, after a round 1 loss against the cj entus, gambit was eliminated after a
lost to team we in round 1 of the losers bracket.  cabochard and the team had an unsuccessful summer split, eventually finishing the regular season in 8th place, forcing the team to play in the 2016 spring promotion. cabochard and the team faced mousesports, winning the series and securing their place in the 2016 spring season.  2016 season  cabochard joined team vitality after the organization bought gambit's lcs spot. on 14 december 2016 cabochard was announced for the roster and signed a one-year contract. he was the only member of the gambit squad to be kept on vitality's roster.  with himself, shook, nukeduck, hjarnan, and kasing comprising the roster, the team was considered one of the top lineups in the lcs. vitality finished the split in third place behind the surprise first-place g2 esports and second-place h2k. in the playoffs, however, they were upset by the sixth-place fnatic and eliminated in the quarterfinals.  tournament results  gambit gaming   8th - 2016 eu lcs summer split  team vitality   3rd - 2016 eu lcs spring split  5th-6th - 2016 eu lcs spring playoffs  7th - 2016 eu lcs summer split  references  external links     living people ninjas in pyjamas players gambit gaming players league of legends top lane players french esports players team vitality players year of birth missing (living people)
the place massena is a historic square in nice, alpes-maritimes, france. it was named for andre massena. its layout was designed by joseph vernier in 1843-1844.  the place massena is the main square of the city. before the paillon river was covered over, the pont-neuf was the only practicable way between the old town and the modern one. the square was thus divided into two parts (north and south) in 1824. with the demolition of the massena casino in 1979, the place massena became more spacious and less dense and is now bordered by red ochre buildings of italian architecture.  the recent rebuilding of the tramline gave the square back to the pedestrians, restoring its status as a real mediterranean square. it is lined with palm trees and stone pines, instead of being the rectangular roundabout of sorts it had become over the years. since its construction, the place massena has always been the spot for great public events. it is used for concerts, and particularly during the summer festivals, the corso carnavalesque (carnival parade) in february, the military procession of 14 july (bastille day) or other traditional celebrations and banquets.  the place massena is a two-minute walk from the promenade des anglais, old town, town centre, and albert i garden (jardin albert ier). it is also a large crossroads between several of the main streets of the city: avenue jean medecin, avenue felix faure, boulevard jean jaures, avenue de verdun and rue gioffredo.  references  1843 establishments in france buildings and structures in nice squares in france
the barreiro rico ecological station () is a state-level ecological station (esec) in the state of sao paulo, brazil.  location  the barreiro rico ecological station is in the municipality of anhembi, sao paulo. it has an area of . the esec is classified as iucn protected area category ia (strict nature reserve). it is administered by the fundacao para conservacao e a producao florestal do estado de sao paulo. the esec is part of a forest block of .  history  the barreiro rico ecological station was created by decree 51.381 of 19 december 2006 by claudio lembo, governor of sao paulo state. the purpose was to protect a remaining fragment of atlantic forest and its primate population.  environment  the climate is koppen type cwa, with a rainy season from september to march and a dry season from april to august. altitude varies from  above sea level. the forest block contains fragments of semi-deciduous submontane vegetation. there is a closed enclave of cerrado of about  in the southeast of the forest block. the esec was created to try to preserve this enclave and the surrounding forest. thirty species of medium and large mammals have been recorded, including seven that are threatened in sao paulo.  notes  sources  2006 establishments in brazil ecological stations of brazil protected areas of sao paulo (state) protected areas established in 2006
jameel kadhem (born 25 may 1971) is a bahraini former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1971 births living people bahraini male cyclists olympic cyclists of bahrain cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
william bayliss (19 december 1886 - 12 february 1963) was a british trade unionist.  born in leicestershire, bayliss left school at the age of twelve to work at a colliery.  he joined the leicestershire miners' association, but after becoming involved in industrial action, he was sacked and, a year later, moved to nottinghamshire to find work.  there, he became active in the nottinghamshire miners' association, and also in the labour party.  bayliss became his union branch delegate in 1915, and served a year as vice-president of the union in 1927, and a year as president in 1929.  in 1932, he became the union's full-time financial secretary.  in this role he worked with herbert booth to promote reunification with the rival nottinghamshire miners' industrial union, which was achieved in 1937, whereupon he became an agent for the merged nottinghamshire miners' federated union (nmfu).  in 1943, bayliss was chosen as one of the trades union congress' two representatives to the american federation of labour.  bayliss was elected to nottinghamshire county council, becoming an alderman, and serving as its chairman from 1945.  in 1946, he was elected as president of the nottinghamshire area of the national union of mineworkers, successor of the nmfu; he served until 1952, when he retired and joined the national coal board.  references  1889 births 1963 deaths members of nottinghamshire county council trade unionists from leicestershire trade unionists from nottinghamshire labour party (uk) councillors
a list of principals of lady margaret hall, oxford. the head of lady margaret hall, university of oxford is called the principal. the current principal is the former newspaper editor alan rusbridger, since 2015.  references     lady margaret principals lady margaret hall, oxford
sanchajie station (; fuzhounese: ) is a metro station of line 1 of the fuzhou metro. it is located at the intersection of shangsan road, south liuyi road and zexu avenue in cangshan district, fuzhou, fujian, china. it started operation on may 18, 2016. sanchajie station was once the terminus of this line until the opening of northern section on 6 january 2017.  references   railway stations in china opened in 2016 fuzhou metro stations
dmitry vladimirovich sukhotsky (; born 16 may 1981) is a russian professional boxer who has challenged twice for a light-heavyweight world title, in 2009 and 2014.  professional career sukhotsky made his professional debut on 1 december 2005, stopping andrey simonov in one round. for the next four years, sukhotsky remained undefeated while fighting at super-middleweight exclusively in russia. on 19 december 2009, he travelled abroad for the first time to fight wbo light-heavyweight champion jurgen brahmer in his native germany, but lost a clear unanimous decision (ud). he would stay at light-heavyweight for his next four successful outings, all in russia, until a second ud loss to cornelius white on 14 july 2012.  a second opportunity at a world title came on 19 december 2014, this time against wbc, ring magazine and lineal light-heavyweight champion adonis stevenson. after four uncompetitive rounds, sukhotsky was brutally knocked out in the fifth.  professional boxing record  references  external links  1981 births living people russian male boxers super-middleweight boxers light-heavyweight boxers people from pavlovsk, saint petersburg sportspeople from saint petersburg
madison kennedy (born december 22, 1987) is an american swimmer specializing in sprint freestyle currently representing dc trident at the international swimming league. she is a world record holder in the 4×50 m freestyle relay. she won a gold medal at the 2015 us nationals in the 50m freestyle, and silver in 2010 and 2011.  she has competed at the us olympic swimming trials in 2008, 2012, and 2016. she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games, multiple relay medals at the 2014 sc world championships, two gold medals at the 2009 world university games. in 2016, she was the fastest swimmer in the women's 50m freestyle during the prelims at the us olympic trials. she came into the trials that year as the top seed.  references  living people 1987 births american female freestyle swimmers medalists at the fina world swimming championships (25 m) pan american games bronze medalists for the united states pan american games medalists in swimming universiade medalists in swimming swimmers at the 2011 pan american games swimmers at the 2019 pan american games universiade gold medalists for the united states medalists at the 2009 summer universiade medalists at the 2011 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games 21st-century american women
the 1969-70 new orleans buccaneers season was the 3rd and final season of the buccaneers in the aba. the team was 22-12 by the beginning of 1970 in part due to two 6 game winning streaks. but an eight-game losing streak (from february 22-march 8) plummeted the team from 31-24 to 31-32, and the team remained around .500 from there on, winning their last two games of the season to finish at exactly .500. the bucs were 10th in points scored, with 107.9 points per game, and 2nd in points allowed at 107.1 points per game. however, the team finished one game out of the final playoff spot to the los angeles stars. the team did not have as much success with attendance, and plans were made to play home games throughout the state (even renaming themselves as the louisiana buccaneers), such as shreveport, lafayette, monroe and baton rouge. but on august 21, 1970, p. l. blake bought the team, moving it to memphis, tennessee ten days later to become the memphis pros. new orleans would not have a pro basketball team until 1974 with the jazz.  roster  14 tom bowens - point forward  10 mike butler - shooting guard  34 lee davis - point forward  11 ronald franz - small forward  25 gerald govan - center  15 jimmy jones - point guard  23 steve jones - shooting guard  32 jackie moreland - small forward  12 ron perry - shooting guard  21 red robbins - point forward  22 jerry rook - forward  24 skeeter swift - shooting guard  31 jasper wilson - small forward  final standings  western division  awards, records, and honors 1968 aba all-star game played on january 24, 1970  jimmy jones   steve jones  gerald govan  red robbins (injured, did not play)  references   buccaneers on basketball reference  new orleans new orleans buccaneers new orleans buccaneers, 1969-70 new orleans buccaneers, 1969-70
koothattukulam, which had once been a part of ernakulam district, with palakuzha, thirumarady, veliyannur and elanji as the neighbouring panchayats. most people are engaged in agriculture, farming and trading. the main cash crops are: rubber, paddy, coconut, areca nut, ginger, turmeric, 'kacholam' and pepper. koothattukulam which today covers an area of 2318.71 hectares lies 17 km to the south of muvattupuzha town and 38 km to the north of kottayam town via the mc road which passes through this town.  four brahmin families it is believed that originally this area had been ruled by the four brahmin families of athiman illom, kottanadu, kattimuttam and pariyaram.  territories today the koothattukulam consists of the four distinct territories (locally known as 'karas') of koothattukulam, vadakara, edayar and kizhakombu and has a population of about 18,970.  etymology from legends there are interesting folklores connected with the current names of each of the territories. one of them relates to a lady who, while digging in an isolated hillock inadvertently hit the head of a sunken idol with her implement. immediately, blood began to ooze out of the idol's head and on seeing this the terrified lady took to her heels. this shock and terror upset her balance of mind, driving her ultimately to madness and she spent the rest of her days wandering aimlessly ('koothady') from place to place. the place thus came to be called as 'koothattakalam' which over a period of time became known as koothattukulam. the spot where the idol's blood is believed to have spilt was called chorakuzhy ('pool of blood').  annexation prior to the annexation of this area to his kingdom by the marthandavarma maharaja of travancore, the land had been ruled by the kings of vadakkumkoor. they had a weapons training centre at oonakkur, and so, this place came to be known as 'payattukalam', which is the present-day paittakkulam. it is believed that some members of the keezhekkombil family who were experts in domesticating wild elephants came over from elanji and settled over here, which is why the place came to be known as kizhakombu.  tenth century in
the beginning of the tenth century, a group of devotees from vatakara in malabar set out for the church at kuravilangad, carrying with them a statue (still disputed) of yohannan mamdana. on their way to kuravilangad, these people rested at a place near paittakulam and on account of this, the area was subsequently known as vadakara.  buddhist period in his famous book 'keralathile sthalacharithrangal', the prominent historian and researcher v. v. k. valath has pointed out that the cultural history of koothattukulam dates back to the era of buddhism and jainism. koothattukulam, thus, has an illustrious cultural history and the same is reflected in its very name, which suggests that this must have been a land of 'kooth' and 'aattam'. looking at the forays made by the current generation of this place into the arena of art and culture, such a guess is not too far off.  administrative system even about 100 years back, establishments like a quasi-judicial court, hospital, sub-registrar's office, police station, post office, rest house (circuit house), tourist bungalow, devaswam board office and an excise inspectorate, all of which normally form part of a district hqs set up, had been established here.  religions from time immemorial, koothattukulam has been a shining example of religious tolerance and comity. hindus and christians live here in complete harmony. christian churches steeped in the cultural traditions of the buddhist-jainist era are a characteristic feature of the area. though christians form the majority of the population, there are a number of places of worship belonging to both religions. the mahadeva temple at koothattukulam, the onamkunnu kavu, the shiva temple at arjunanmala, the devi temple at kizhakombu, the st. john's jacobite syrian orthodox church at vadakara, the st. john the baptist(old main catholic church) and etc...are just a few of the places of worship dating back several centuries. the st jude shrine holy family church(former bethani church founded by old kallidukkil family) is now one of the new catholic church at koothattukulam. holy family church became syro-malabar church in 1994 added to pala diocese. the church possesses the record of world's biggest oil lamp by limca book of records in 2008.  references  history of
ernakulam district
the south american under-20 women's futsal championship (spanish: campeonato sudamericano de futsal femenino sub-20; portuguese: campeonato sul-americano de futsal feminino) is the u-20 version of copa america femenina de futsal.  results  medal count  references  external links sudamericano femenino sub 20 futsal paraguay 2016  futsal competitions in south america conmebol competitions for women's national teams women's international futsal competitions
the lincoln covered bridge is a historic covered bridge, just south of u.s. route 4 in west woodstock, vermont. built in 1877, it is one of the only known examples of a wooden pratt truss bridge in the united states. it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1973.  description and history the lincoln covered bridge spans the ottauquechee river, a short way west of the village of west woodstock.  it is just south of us 4, connecting that road to bridges road and fletcher hill road on the south side of the river.  it is a single span,  in length, resting on concrete and stone abutments, and is  wide with a roadway width of  (one lane).  the bridge is supported by two arch trusses, which are sheltered by a post-and-beam structure finished with a metal standing seam roof and vertical board siding.  the trusses are a variant of the pratt truss, with laminated arches supporting the deck by a combination of wooden and iron verticals, with iron cross bracing. in 1989, the bridge was rehabilitated and strengthened by the vermont agency of transportation. the purpose of the project was to restore the structure to its original condition and increase its load carrying capacity to safely carry emergency vehicles. restoration focused primarily on rebuilding the ends of the top and bottom chords of the trusses that had deteriorated over the previous century. all of the restoration work was performed using materials and details as close to original as possible. the increase in strength was accomplished by post tensioning the two trusses below the bottom wooden chords with high strength coated steel rods. these rods, as well as other structural steel upgrades required to increase the strength are hidden from view by the wooden siding in order to maintain the historic look of the bridge. the two pratt trusses are still the fully functioning main structural supports for the bridge. in addition, skylights were added to the metal roof to allow natural light into the structure due to its long span. these skylights are made from translucent corrugated (to match the contour of the existing roofing)polyvinyl material. existing braided steel cables anchoring the upstream ends of the bridge to the shore were also removed at this time. the cables were previously installed to protect the bridge from washing away in a flood or ice flow. however, this method proved to cause the destruction of these covered wooden bridges at other locations in the country during one of these events. it was determined at the time that letting the structure move and float with the flowing water/ice would cause
the least amount of damage. after one of these events the structure could then be reset with heavy equipment and/or cranes, repaired, and put back in service in a much shorter timespan and significantly lower cost.  the bridge was built in 1877 by r.w. pinney and b.h. pinney (of bridgewater and woodstock, respectively), about thirty years after the pratt truss was patented.  according to covered bridge history richard s. allen, it is the only known surviving use of the pratt truss in wood; this form is seen much more widely in metal bridges built later.  see also national register of historic places listings in windsor county, vermont list of vermont covered bridges list of bridges on the national register of historic places in vermont  references  covered bridges on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in windsor county, vermont bridges completed in 1877 bridges in windsor county, vermont buildings and structures in woodstock, vermont covered bridges in vermont road bridges on the national register of historic places in vermont wooden bridges in vermont pratt truss bridges in the united states 1877 establishments in vermont
ethekwini municipality  the following reserves and parks are managed by the ethekwini municipality, with some forming part of the durban metropolitan open space system (d'moss):  central region    burman bush  durban botanic gardens  pigeon valley  west region    alverstone wildlife park  alfred park  giba gorge nature reserve  iphithi nature reserve (in partnership with gillits conservancy)  madwala wildlife sanctuary  mariannwood  new germany nature reserve  palmiet nature reserve  paradise valley  roosfontein  springside  st helier dam  south region    amanzimtoti bird sanctuary  ilanda wilds  illovo estuary  silverglen  north region    danville park  seaton park  umgeni river bird park  virginia bush  ezemvelo kzn wildlife  ezemvelo kzn wildlife, the provincial conservation authority in kwazulu-natal province, manages the following nature reserves within the bounds of the ethekwini municipality:  beachwood mangroves nature reserve  bluff nature reserve  kenneth stainbank nature reserve  krantzkloof nature reserve  north park nature reserve  umhlanga lagoon nature reserve  msinsi holdings  msinsi holdings, a subsidiary of water utility umgeni water, manages the following resource reserves in ethekwini:  hazelmere dam  inanda dam  shongweni dam  national ports authority  the national ports authority of south africa manages the following nature reserve:  bayhead natural heritage site  wessa  wessa (the wildlife and environment society of south africa), manages the following reserves, in some cases in partnership with other organisations:  clive cheeseman nature reserve  empisini nature reserve  glenholme nature reserve (in partnership with the spca)  hawaan forest nature reserve  (in partnership with tongaat-hulett)  msinsi nature reserve (in partnership with the university of kwazulu-natal)  references   nature reserves in south africa protected areas of kwazulu-natal
the 1903 ben akiba - cane handle camera was patented by emil kronke (dresden, germany) in england in 13 august 1902, in germany in 1903 and in the usa on 3 may 1904. it was manufactured by a. lehmann in berlin, germany. the camera is named after akiva ben yosef. the cane handle camera takes 20 exposures 13x25mm on a roll film 18mm wide and 70cm long. 35mm f/9 meniscus lens. the shutter is released by pulling a knob below the handle.  a report published in the scientific american (5 november 1904) stated:  cane-handle camera, a german inventor has recently produced a magazine camera, which is contained within the handle of a cane. cane-handle cameras were invented a dozen or more years ago and were designed especially for travellers. however they proved impractical owing to the fact that but a small supply of plates or films could be carried at the time in a cane. the camera illustrated uses rolls of film, a number of which may be stored in the hollow crook of the handle. the film passes from its roller in the magazine over a plate, which guides it in the focal plane for exposure, thence it is taken up upon the receiving spool in a chamber below. when the entire film has been exposed upon the receiving spool, the side face of the cane handle is removed. the exposed film roll is then taken out, and a new one moved to position for use immediately back of the guide plate.  references    us patent may 3, 1904  http://submin.com/large/collection/photo_oda/index.htm  eaton s. lothrop (1973), a century of cameras, p. 102.  pritchard & st denny (1993), spy camera. a century of detective and subminiature cameras, p. 158-160.  scientific american, 5 november 1904.  cameras
jade mills is an american real estate agent, president of jade mills estates, and the international ambassador for coldwell banker global luxury. in 2019, mills became the #1 real estate agent worldwide for coldwell banker, with over $6 billion in career sales. mills' clients include hollywood celebrities like britney spears, jennifer aniston, charlie sheen, and sela ward.  career mills' first sale was a home for $42,000 in van nuys. she has appeared on bloomberg tv and fox news as a real estate expert. she serves as a board member for the beverly hills chamber of commerce and on the board of governors at cedars sinai hospital.  personal life mills is the daughter of a dairy farmer from alamo, california. she has been married three times. , she has four children and seven grandchildren.  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) american real estate brokers people from beverly hills, california
schranz is a german surname. notable people with the surname include:  andreas schranz (born 1979), austrian football goalkeeper ivan schranz (born 1993), slovak football player karl schranz (born 1938), austrian alpine skier  karoly schranz (born 1952), hungarian violinist  wolfgang schranz (born 1976), austrian tennis player  see also  schranz, a musical genre (see: hardtechno)  german-language surnames
angus crichton (born 5 february 1996) is an australian professional rugby league footballer who plays as a  forward for the sydney roosters in the nrl.  he previously played for the south sydney rabbitohs in the national rugby league, and new south wales in the state of origin series.  background crichton was born in temora, new south wales, australia.  he played his junior rugby league for the young cherrypickers, before switching to rugby union in his senior school years at the scots college (sydney). in 2013 he was selected in the new south wales schools first xv and the australian schoolboys xv.  playing career  early career in 2013, crichton played for the australian schoolboys rugby union team, while attending the scots college. he spent some time back in rugby league with the sydney roosters' lower grade teams in 2014, before again playing for the australian schoolboys rugby union team that same year. on 31 october 2014, he signed a 2-year contract with the south sydney rabbitohs starting in 2015. in 2015, he played for the rabbitohs' nyc team, before re-signing with them late in the year on a 2-year contract until the end of 2018.  2016 in 2016, crichton graduated to the rabbitohs' new south wales cup team, north sydney bears. in round 19 of the 2016 nrl season, he made his nrl debut for the rabbitohs against the brisbane broncos.  2017 the 2017 season was crichton's breakout year where he earned rave reviews in an otherwise disappointing south sydney side. he finished the season with 22 appearances and 7 tries including a hat-trick against the gold coast titans.  on december 18 2017, after much speculation over his future crichton signed a 3-year deal to join south sydney's arch rivals the sydney roosters on a three-year deal starting in the 2019 season.  2018 after recurring injuries to his left middle-finger, crichton underwent surgery to amputate the top half of the digit in the preseason. on the 28th of may, 2018, crichton was named to make his debut for new south wales off the interchange bench in game 1 of the 2018 state of origin series at melbourne cricket ground.  crichton played in all 3 matches for new south wales as the blues won their first origin shield since 2014.  2019 crichton made his debut for the sydney roosters against his old club south sydney in round 1 of the 2019 nrl season at the sydney cricket ground which ended in a 26-16 loss.  crichton was involved in a scuffle with souths
player cody walker in the second half where walker called crichton a "traitor".  crichton scored his first try for the club in round 4 against brisbane at the same venue.  crichton was later selected to play for new south wales in game 1 of the 2019 state of origin series which new south wales would go on to lose at suncorp stadium.  crichton was subsequently one of the players dropped from the new south wales team for game 2.   crichton played for the sydney roosters in the club's 2019 nrl grand final victory over canberra at anz stadium.  it was crichton's first premiership victory as a player and the club's second consecutive premiership victory.  on 7 october, crichton was named at second row for the u23 junior australian side.  2020 on 22 february, crichton played for the sydney roosters in their 2020 world club challenge victory defeating st helens r.f.c. 20-12.  in round 5 of the 2020 nrl season, crichton scored two tries as the sydney roosters defeated canterbury-bankstown 42-6 at bankwest stadium.  crichton played in the 2020 state of origin series playing all three games in the 2-1 series loss, coming off the bench in the first origin and then started the next two due to captain boyd cordner suffering another head knock ruling him out of the series.  2021 during the sydney roosters shock defeat to brisbane in round 11 of the 2021 nrl season, crichton was placed on report for a high tackle. he was later suspended for two games.  crichton played a total of 20 games for the sydney roosters in the 2021 nrl season including the club's two finals matches.  the sydney roosters would be eliminated from the second week of the finals losing to manly 42-6.  references  external links  sydney roosters profile south sydney rabbitohs profile nrl profile  1996 births australian rugby league players new south wales rugby league state of origin players south sydney rabbitohs players north sydney bears nsw cup players rugby league second-rows rugby league centres living people people educated at scots college (sydney) sydney roosters players
the cunningham duncombe series is a series of pre-season friendlies between two english rugby union clubs; london irish and harlequins. the series is named in memory of two late former players, jarrod cunningham of london irish and nick duncombe of harlequins. the series was conceived in 2015 and kicked off with two matches played at twickenham stoop in back-to-back weeks. although both matches were played at the stoop. the teams took it in turns to act as the home side.   it was confirmed on 4 july, 2016 that the series would continue in 2016. staged as a single home match for harlequins at the stoop.  the 2017 event would be london irish's turn to host and would be held at their hazelwood training ground.   rugby union competitions in england london irish harlequin f.c.
pierre cassignard (19 december 1965 - 20 december 2021) was a french stage and screen actor.  early life pierre cassignard was born in sainte-foy-la-grande in grionde, france, on 19 december 1965. in the early 1980s, he moved to paris to study theater, but wound up working in a production a few days later. he landed his first role in the play house & garden in 1987. television and film followed quickly when he was cast in the tv series haute tension in 1988.  cassignard was well received. in 1996, he won the coveted moliere for best actor in the carlo goldoni play the venetian twins. he was also nominated as best newcomer for the same role. a second best actor nomination came in 2005, again for a carlo  goldoni play, the mistress of the inn.  theater  filmography  death monsieur cassignard suffered from cancer prior to his death.  he died on 20 decembre 2021, just one day after his 56th birthday.  references  external links     1965 births 2021 deaths french male film actors french male television actors french male stage actors 20th-century french male actors 21st-century french male actors people from gironde
1019 i can concert () is the first live album by taiwanese singer jolin tsai. it was released on 26 march 2000, by universal music taiwan. it chronicles tsai's 1019 i can concert at nankang 101 in taipei, taiwan on 4 december 1999.  track listing  references  2000 live albums jolin tsai live albums universal music taiwan live albums
amos fish mahlalela (born 29 august 1962) is a south african politician. since 7 may 2014 he has held a seat for the african national congress in the national assembly of south africa and is the deputy minister of tourism in south africa.  biography  mahlalela was born in the village of mbuzini in mpumalanga province. he obtained his matric certificate from nkomazi high school, and got an honors degree in governance and leadership from the university of the witwatersrand.  he has served in the government for over 21 years and is a former regional transport minister, as well a former member of the provincial executive council of mpumalanga.  in 2002, mahlalela won the african national congress chairmanship of mpumalanga.  mahlalela has been a member of the african national congress since 1980.  references  external links   mr amos fish mahlalela at people's assembly  amos fish mahlalela member page at parliament of south africa  1962 births living people people from nkomazi local municipality african national congress politicians members of the national assembly of south africa university of the witwatersrand alumni
ma wadud (august 1, 1925 - august 28, 1983) was a bangladeshi language activist and politician. he was one of the founding members of awami muslim league (later bangladesh awami league). he was awarded ekushey padak in 2013 posthumously by the government of bangladesh for his involvement in bengali language movement in 1952. he was the father of dipu moni, the current education minister of bangladesh.  political career wadud was the founder member of gonotrantik jubo league in 1948, east pakistan muslim league in 1948, east pakistan awami muslim league in 1949, weekly ittefaq in 1949, the daily ittefaq in 1953 and kendrio kachi kachar mela in 1956.  wadud was imprisoned for involvement in language movement in 1948 and 1952 and again for refusing the charge of the ministry of military government in 1978.  he was the general secretary of the student political organization east pakistan chhatra league from 1953 to 1954.  personal life his daughter dipu moni also a politician and minister who is a doctor by profession. his son jawadur rahim wadud tipu, a diabetic foot surgeon in profession.  references  1925 births 1983 deaths people from chandpur district awami league politicians recipients of the ekushey padak sheikh mujibur rahman family
the shepherd girl (persian: dokhtare choopan) is a 1953 iranian drama film directed by moezzodivan fekri.  partial cast  moezzodivan fekri   majid mohseni   taghi zohuri  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films iranian drama films iranian films persian-language films films directed by moezzodivan fekri iranian black-and-white films
faridkot is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.   it is part of faridkot district.  members of the legislative assembly   colour key for party of the member of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  faridkot district  references  faridkot district assembly constituencies of punjab, india
panormos (previously called also ano kisseli) is a village of the municipality of dorida in the prefecture of phocis, greece, built at an altitude of 90 meters. it is a small village with 88 inhabitants according to the 2011 census.  archaeological remains the architectural remains on the slopes of mt. profitis ilias at the settlement of panormos are identified with the ancient phaestino, a town of west locris where the important sanctuary of apollo in phaestino was situated. important finds from the broader region attest to the importance of the site in antiquity: a rich classical burial in pithos, found at lousa; an ancient defense tower to the northwest of the village; and a considerable number of manumission inscriptions, according to which a slave was "sold" to the god within the precinct of the temple of apollo. this "sale" of slaves in the presence of witnesses was a widespread practice of manumitting in central greece, and particularly in delphi.  references  populated places in phocis  de:panormos (fokida)
sharon douglas (born rhoda-nelle rader; october 16, 1920 - june 18, 2016) was an american film and radio actress, most active in the 1940s and 1950s.  early life the daughter of mr. and mrs. l.m. rader, douglas was born in stephens county, oklahoma. (a newspaper article about her high school graduation gives her first name as rhodanelle.) she graduated from las cruces union high school in las cruces, new mexico.  career she moved to hollywood in 1939, struck up a friendship with hedda hopper, and became her protege, with regular appearances on hopper's popular 1940s radio show. her stage name was chosen in tribute to her mother's scottish ancestry. hopper had nbc hire douglas to play lana turner in a radio biography of her early life, and later introduced her to the rko movie mogul howard hughes, who took her personally under his wing, pitching her as a rival to jane greer.  douglas's earliest roles in film were bit parts, but in 1942 was offered a lead role in a gentleman after dark, opposite brian donlevy. other good parts followed, but radio was where douglas "really found her metier", in long-running serials such as 1944's the gallant heart, and the 132-week world war ii run of the life of riley, starring william bendix and a "monumental success". she portrayed babs, riley's daughter, in the program.  other roles on television included bobby's girlfriend in the remarkable miss tuttle, millie anderson in a day in the life of dennis day, mabel in joan davis time, virginia brickel in my mother's husband, and terry burton in the second mrs. burton. her other work in radio included the abbott and costello show.  personal life on july 30, 1946, douglas married lebanese-american producer edward nassour in hollywood, california. they had four children together. in 1962, he committed suicide by stabbing himself in the heart with a steak knife. douglas had two other short marriages, both of which ended in divorce.  death douglas died on june 18, 2016, aged 95. the location was not disclosed. she was survived by her children.  filmography a gentleman after dark (1942) wedtime stories (short, 1943) the navy way (1944) fog island (1945) our hearts were growing up (1946) pretty maids all in a row (1971) the daughters of joshua cabe (1972) the vendetta (1974
) the f.b.i. (1974) jimmy b. & andre (1980)  radio the second mrs. burton (1941-43) the gallant heart (1944) the life of riley (ww2) the sky's the limit (1949) the abbott & costello show (1949-52)  references  external links  1920 births 2016 deaths 20th-century american actresses american people of scottish descent actresses from new mexico actresses from oklahoma american film actresses american radio actresses american television actresses people from stephens county, oklahoma people from las cruces, new mexico place of death unknown 21st-century american women
yulin township () is a township under the administration of yanjin county, xinxiang, henan, china. , it has 14 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of henan yanjin county, henan
willian popp (born april 13, 1994) is a brazilian footballer who plays as a striker for muangthong united.  career  he joined k league 2 side busan ipark in march 2016.  references  external links  1994 births living people brazilian footballers association football forwards brazilian expatriate footballers joinville esporte clube players mogi mirim esporte clube players busan ipark players avispa fukuoka players bucheon fc 1995 players figueirense fc players willian popp campeonato brasileiro serie a players campeonato brasileiro serie b players campeonato brasileiro serie c players k league 2 players j2 league players willian popp expatriate footballers in south korea brazilian expatriate sportspeople in south korea expatriate footballers in japan brazilian expatriate sportspeople in japan expatriate footballers in thailand brazilian expatriate sportspeople in thailand
rob aickin was new zealand's top record producer in the late 70's early 80s. he produced many gold and platinum records for artists like, patsy riggir, hello sailor, golden harvest, th dudes with dave dobbyn , toni williams , murray grindlay and many others while working for stebbing recording studios.  career  1960s in the early 1960s, he was in a band from an auckland called papakura. the band was called four quarters. later he was bass player in a group from clevedon, just outside of auckland called the clevedonaires. other members were ron and graham brown on guitar and drums and sister gaye playing keyboards. in 1966, they were signed by benny levin to his record label, impact. after releasing a few singles they were set to go to vietnam to entertain the troops. as the vietnam war was escalating their promoter didn't guarantee them return tickets. so they went to australia instead. they did quite well and eventually became a group called bitch.  aickin came back to new zealand in the mid-1970s.  in 2015, he was interviewed for the nz musician magazine about his days with the clevdonaires and bitch. it was published in the june/july issue.  producer rob aickin was the "in house" producer at stebbing studios in auckland.  in 1978, he won the producer of the year award for the hello sailor album by hello sailor.  production  references  external links  website  discogs: list of productions  new zealand record producers new zealand musicians new zealand bass guitarists male bass guitarists new zealand male guitarists new zealand guitarists
shosse entuziastov () is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro that opened in september 2016.  name the station was named for the road on which it is situated.  transfer passengers may make out-of-station transfers to shosse entuziastov station on the kalininsko-solntsevskaya line.  gallery  references  external links   mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
sant'ambrogio is a roman catholic church located in the neighborhood of albogasio superiore, in the territory of the commune of valsolda, province of como, region of lombardy, italy.  the church was erected in the 15th century, but was refurbished in circa 1500. the interior was frescoed in 1680 with the life of saint ambrose by stefano vignola.  references  16th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy churches in the province of como
helen christian sutherland (24 february 1881 - 29 april 1965), married name helen denman, was an english art patron and collector.  life she was the daughter of sir thomas sutherland, and his only surviving child. she married richard denman in 1904; the marriage was annulled in 1913. they had separated in 1909; denman married may spencer in 1914.  after her marriage failed, sutherland began to collect art. initially she took guidance from freddy mayor of the mayor gallery. from the mid-1920s she collected mainly from a group of artist friends. in 1929 she took a lease on rock hall, northumberland. she was an early patron of the ashington group.  david jones met sutherland through jim ede; ben and winifred nicholson met her through the artist constance lane, in 1925. through michael roberts and his wife janet adam smith, the poet kathleen raine was introduced to sutherland, who fostered her two children with charles madge during world war ii.  sutherland was one of piet mondrian's early english supporters, buying a picture by 1938. from 1939 she lived at cockley moor, near dockray, penrith, now in cumbria, in a house redesigned by leslie martin in modernist style.  she left her art collection to nicolete gray.  notes  1881 births 1965 deaths english art collectors women art collectors english art patrons
"the fighter" is a song by new zealand australian country music singer keith urban featuring american country music singer carrie underwood. it was released on 6 february 2017 as the fifth and final single from urban's 2016 album, ripcord. urban co-wrote and co-produced this song with busbee. the song has entered the record charts of australia, canada, the united states, belgium, and scotland, where it became urban's first song to enter the scottish and belgian charts.  content the song is set in the key of b minor with a main chord pattern of gmaj7-asus4-fm7-bm and an approximate tempo of 132 beats per minute. it is about a man promising that he will defend and support a woman.  urban said of the song's evolution as "i was working with busbee that day; we were in london. i was actually driving to the studio to work on this other song we started, and i had most of it the chorus in my head, and it felt like i had most of the song in my head - the verses just had to flesh out. i walked into the studio and played the chord progression, and he built this track really quickly, and then i could sing over the top of it". he continued and said "it was just a very quick, quick song to write, because i literally thought about nic and i and our relationship in the beginning, and some of the things we had said all went into that song."  awards and nominations  academy of country music awards  country music association awards  cmt music awards  |- | align="center"|2017 ||align="center"| "the fighter" ||align="center"|collaborative video of the year ||  teen choice awards  |- | align="center"|2017 ||align="center"| "the fighter" ||align="center"|choice country song ||  chart performance  before single release following the release of the album, "the fighter" debuted at number 25 on the hot country songs chart and also at number 18 on the bubbling under hot 100 singles chart, selling 25,000 copies in its first week. the following week, the song jumped to number 11 on the hot country songs chart and also debuted at number 69 on the us billboard hot 100, selling 50,000 copies. it debuted on the canadian hot 100 at number 75.  in australia, the song debuted at number 30 on the aria charts, becoming urban's seventh top 50 entry and also his third highest-charting song on the chart
. for the week of 10 july 2016, the song climbed from number 27 to number 19, becoming its new peak. the song has been certified platinum, denoting sales of over 70,000 copies in australia. it is urban's third top twenty hit and underwood's second entry on the aria charts and also became her highest-charting song on that chart.  after single release the song was released as the fifth official single from ripcord on 6 february 2017. it debuted at number 44 on the us country airplay chart and reached number 2, becoming urban's 38th consecutive top ten hit which is the longest running streak in that chart's history. it became underwood's 26th consecutive top ten hit, which is the second longest active streak of country airplay top tens. it re-entered the hot country songs chart at number five, selling 45,000 copies in its week of release and peaked at number two. it also re-entered the us billboard hot 100 at number 53 and has reached number 38, becoming urban's twentieth top 40 hit and underwood's twenty first, and her first since "something in the water" peaked at number 24 in october 2014. on the canada country chart, the song has reached number 2 and peaked at number 65 on the canadian hot 100. the song has been certified platinum in canada for sales of over 80,000 copies. it entered the scottish singles chart at number 52, becoming urban's first and underwood's fourth entry on that chart following "blown away", "something in the water" and "heartbeat". as of april 2018, the single has sold a total of 888,000 copies in the us. on august 23, 2019, the single was certified double platinum by the recording industry association of america (riaa), for combined sales and streaming units of over two million units in the united states.  music video on 13 may 2016, following the release of the album, a video was released on urban's youtube account. the video, shot with urban's own camera, shows him and his wife nicole kidman sitting in their car as the song plays on the radio. urban serenades kidman with the song while kidman lip-syncs to underwood's vocals.  urban shared an exclusive 24-hour first look video for the song through his vevo account. directed by john urbano, the video features the two singing the song in a boxing ring, intercut with various people dancing to the song in various outdoor locations at night. the video was later taken down from youtube after the initial 24 hours.the video
was re-uploaded to youtube on 16 february 2017.  on 2 april 2017, another version of the video (featuring only the dancing sequences) was uploaded to urban's youtube account.  live performances urban and underwood performed the song live at the 59th grammy awards on february 12, 2017. the duo later performed the song at the 52nd academy of country music awards on april 2, 2017. on june 7, 2017, the singers once more paired up and performed the song at the 2017 cmt music awards.  personnel from ripcord liner notes.   busbee - bass guitar, keyboards, electric guitar, programming, producer, engineer, editing  dave clauss - engineering, editing  serban ghenea - mixing  carrie underwood - vocals  keith urban - acoustic guitar, electric guitar, mandolin, ganjo, vocals, production  brian david willis - editing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  decade-end charts  certifications  references  2016 songs 2017 singles keith urban songs carrie underwood songs capitol records nashville singles male-female vocal duets songs written by keith urban songs written by busbee song recordings produced by busbee
katherine chloe sinsuat de castro-cruz, (born october 18, 1978) also known as kat de castro, is a filipino journalist, and tv personality, who was formerly the undersecretary of tourism advocacy and public affairs of the philippine department of tourism (dot) under the former secretary wanda corazon teo. she took her oath of office at the malacanang palace on august 15, 2016. she later resigned from her post after being asked by the secretary of the dot to do so. after a year, she was re-appointed as president & ceo of intercontinental broadcasting corporation (ibc). in february 2020, she was named as the general manager and board director of people's television network (ptv).  de castro is one of the three children of tv patrol news anchor and former vice president noli de castro and former abs-cbn current affairs executive arlene de castro, who now heads bayan productions. she was among the personalities who actively support the then-davao city mayor and now philippine president rodrigo duterte's campaign during the 2016 philippine presidential election. in fact, she is a co-organizer of the du31: one love, one nation thanksgiving party held last june 4, 2016 at the davao crocodile park.  she was the former host of the travel show trip na trip and business magazine show swak na swak, both produced by bayan productions, their own production house, and aired on abs-cbn. she was also a host for her father's own public affairs program magandang gabi, bayan and a reporter for abs-cbn news.  de castro finished communication arts degree at miriam college.  controversies  de castro was involved in several controversies in relation to her short stint as tourism undersecretary. she received overwhelming backlash from netizens who believed there was conflict of interest for allowing her boyfriend, musician pancho juanitez, to perform in dot-sponsored events. juanitez was also spotted chauffeuring de castro in official gatherings of the agency.  in may 2018, commission on audit (coa) found that there is a memorandum of agreement on file between the dot and the government-owned people's television network (ptv) requiring the latter to air a 6-minute tourism advertisement section in ptv's kilos pronto, a public service program. this has been criticized, since at the time of the agreement the department of tourism secretary was wanda tulfo teo, the sister of the producers and hosts of the show (erwin and ben tulfo). de castro was summoned at the senate for questioning
being the chair of dot's bids and awards committee, which oversees the bidding process of the contractors for the projects and activities of the department.  de castro approved an invitation to bid for the procurement of jackets to be given to birthday celebrants in the dot worth . the said practice of providing jackets was halted by the succeeding dot secretary, bernadette romulo-puyat. in august 2018, romulo-puyat requested de castro to vacate her position in relation to the irregularities that occurred in her office. she was then appointed to become a member of the board of directors of intercontinental broadcasting corporation (ibc) on august 22.  references  .  living people 1978 births filipino journalists intercontinental broadcasting corporation people abs-cbn news and current affairs people duterte administration personnel miriam college alumni
agdal can refer to the following:  morocco   agdal is a historical concept in morocco, referring to government-owned or private gardens.  agdal is an urban community in rabat, morocco.  agdal gardens is a garden area in marrakech, morocco.  agdal is an urban community in fes, morocco.  agdal is an urban community in meknes, morocco.  india  agdal, rewa, a village in india  other  nina agdal
phon thong railway station is a railway station located in takhli subdistrict, takhli district, nakhon sawan, thailand. it is located 188.650 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 2 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. some freight services operate from this station as the station is located adjacent to the chonlaprathan cement factory.  train services  ordinary 202 phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 209/210 bangkok-ban takhli-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
the nall river () () is located in the nall khuzdar balochistan نال khuzdar district, in the southwestern section of balochistan province, pakistan.  rivers of balochistan (pakistan) rivers of pakistan
zaidee jackson (december 30, 1897 - december 15, 1970) was an american-born jazz, spiritual and pop music singer, dancer and actress who was well known in france, united kingdom and romania.  early life  zaidee jackson was born in augusta, georgia in the winter of 1897 to c.j. and alice jackson, who were both sharecroppers in berrien county, georgia.  sometime after moving to europe, she began using 1900 as her birth year.  zaidee had three older siblings, ora lee, era and sol jackson. sometime in late 1900, alice left her husband and children, taking only zaidee, and moved north to boston, massachusetts, where she met and married fred williams. zaidee soon took her stepfather's last name. in 1902, alice and fred had their own child, corinna.  on july 6, 1920, zaidee married james jackson, but the unhappy marriage was brief, and on december 6, 1922, james abandoned his wife and relocated to harlem. around this time, zaidee became acquainted with pianist lawrence brown, who had been working as an elevator operator and studying in boston, and who was soon touring europe with roland hayes.  career  early career (1924-1927)  from late-1924 to early-1925, zaidee left home, travelling across the south as actress with the andrew bishop players, an extension of the old lafayette players company. the company toured tennessee and kentucky performing its play, "paid in full".  by mid-1925, zaidee became the lead performer of walter sweatman's creole revue, touring the eastern seaboard and canada.  in january 1926, director david belasco cast zaidee in broadway's latest lurid melodramatic play, "lulu belle". the mixed cast consisted of 100 black and 15 white performers, the stars being major black actresses such as evelyn preer, ollie burgoyne, mattie wilkes and fannie belle de knight. zaidee had a minor role in the beginning of the play as a harlem entertainer in the fictional elite grotto nightclub. opening february 9, 1926, at the belasco theatre, the show performed successful 461 times before closing on may 16. afterhours, zaidee was also performing at harlem's club alabam, known for its semi-nude josephine baker-esque revues.  between august-november 1926, zaidee recorded six blues records accompanied by james p. johnson, otto harwick and duke ellington. only four recordings were released.  in late-november,  zaidee and several other castmates from "l
ulu belle" were hired by black film director, oscar micheaux, to appear in his latest horror film, *the spider's web*. filming began that winter in baltimore. micheaux's *the spider's web* was released on january 6, 1927.  in february 1927, zaidee ran into her estranged husband in harlem and filed for divorce.  in april, she appeared in "desires of 1927" at the lafayette theatre. the revue was staged and produced by irvin c. miller with adelaide hall as its star.  in july, zaidee was cast as magnolia in miller & lyle's, "rang tang", which opened july 12 for 112 performances at the majestic theatre. the two-act musical comedy was set in madagascar and harlem and featured flournoy miller, aubrey lyles, daniel haynes and josephine hall.  after its broadway run closed on october 22, the show prepared to go on the road. however,  lawrence brown (who was touring europe with paul robeson) convinced zaidee to visit him in paris while robeson was away celebrating the birth of his son.  in november 1927, zaidee sailed from new york to france, leaving behind america's systematic racism and trading in on the french fascination for "negro" culture.  french and british career (1928-1933)  throughout january-february 1928, zaidee was in cannes, performing at the kitkat cabaret. her performances sparked the interest of numerous members of the british elite such as elsa maxwell, the duke of kent, and especially the countess of carnarvon, who purchased jackson's plane ticket to london in may.  in june 1928, she was the star of "playtime at the piccadilly" at london's piccadilly hotel. this annual revue was overwhelming success. every afternoon, she slipped away to perform on bbc-radio. afterhours, she also doubled at the illustrious uncles club.  on august 28, zaidee recorded two blues numbers with hmv records accompanied by pianist carroll gibbons, which were never released. in late-september, she recorded the american folk song, waterboy, twice with british duophone. each recording was rejected.  in october 4, zaidee was hired by director, albin limpus, to perform spirituals and folk songs accompanied by winifred smith's orchestra every afternoon before the curtains raised on may eginston's latest play, "deadlock" at the comedy theatre. the play ran for 17 days before closing. in-between singing daily at the comedy, nightly at the piccadilly, she also found time to record four
songs for british duophone, which were released to public with overwhelming success.  in november, once her contract with the piccadilly ended, zaidee returned to paris to perform for a week at the plantation cabaret with eddie south's orchestra. while in paris, she witnessed afro-british pianist reginald forsythe performing in local club and she quickly recruited him as her new pianist. on november 12, zaidee and reggie flew back to london on the imperial air lines for a weeks engagement at the cafe anglais. during this engagement, she recorded four more songs for british parlophone. eventually, forsythe struck up a friendship with leading harlem musical theatre tenor, walter richardson and the duo soon departed for a year-long australian tour. at the end of the month, zaidee returned to paris alone, performing at the lido des champs-elysees with eddie south's orchestra.  in january 1929, zaidee returned to london, recording one song with metropole records and four unissued songs with duophone. returning to paris on january 26, she performed at the opening ada "bricktop" smith's latest nightclub. shortly afterwards, zaidee purchased a comfortable apartment on the rue chalgrin, a small right-angle street in the chaillot district, where she held intimate cocktail parties before whisking her guests over to the bal negre cabaret to dance the biguine. on april 6, jackson converted her apartment into small cabaret (short-lived unfortunately), chez zaidee, imitating josephine baker's own french nitery. throughout the spring, she was invited to sing at countee cullen's small house party near the rue pigalle and at black dancer louis cole's birthday party at his large apartment near the trocadero.  throughout the summer of 1929, zaidee performed regularly at the famous boeuf sur le toits, chez florence and floresco's before she was left hospitalized on july 27 with a sprained ankle. in-between these engagements, she frequently flew back to london for quick radio appearances. she often traveled on guy robson's private plane, who occasionally enjoyed showing off with his stunt flying, turning flips over the channel.  in november 1929, zaidee returned to britain for an extensive 8-month provincial tour organized by her manager, e.j. bonner, appearing in manchester, birkenhead, bristol, glasgow, blackpool, sheffield and dublin.  between january-april 1930, she recorded six more songs with british parlophone.  in june 1930, towards the end of the tour, reggie forsythe returned to europe and accompanied zaidee once again. on june 13
, zaidee was back in paris, with a four month contract with russian-themed sheherazade cabaret. between june-august 1930, she returned to london to record her six final songs with british parlophone.  that fall, zaidee departed for a three-month german tour. in november, she was appearing in at berlin's famous kabarett der komiker. unfortunately, the german press wrote mixed reviews for her singing, which most german audiences felt was barely audible in their large concert halls.  in january 1931, she returned to paris for a well received months' engagement at the l'ange bleu bar. the following month, she continued her european tour, appearing in budapest at the royal hotel, accompanied by russian pianist, suponitzkaya. her performance were broadcast nightly on hungarian radio stations.  returning to paris in june, at the height of the paris colonial exposition, she appeared in a new cabaret, la jungle-montmartre, performing her intimate songs with reginald forsythe beside her with his piano. however, eventually her companion reggie was eventually whisked away with another band.  after the exposition closed in november, she moved over le miami club (quitting after they failed to pay her) and later the new marine club. that winter, george white offered her some of the music scores from his broadway production, scandals of 1931, probably with the intention of her joining the show or simply for a recording session that never materialized.  hroughout january-april 1932, zaidee relocated to cannes, opening her latest nightclub, sous le maquis, hoping to have josephine baker as her headliner. the establishment was briefly successful, but she eventually decided to return to paris.  in may, she began a six-month residence at le bosphore (another russian cabaret) and chez zelli's (an american themed nightclub). in july, she also began performing at the sheherazade cabaret as well, singing and dancing eccentrically for her friends, pizella, maurice chevalier and prince yusupov. in august, she departed for month to the resort town of st. jean de luz for a month engagement at the maxim bar. the following month, while performing a "russian act" at the sheherazade, she planned for a trip to moscow, which never came together.  in december, she returned to london, with a major role in william walker's, "ballyhoo revue", which opened december 22 at the comedy theatre. the cast included hermione baddeley, walter
crisham, phyllis clare, pearl argyle and leon morton.  the two-act revue was devised and staged by william walker and robert nesbitt. dances and ballets staged by buddy bradley and frederick ashton. zaidee made her initial appearance in act 1 in the fourth sketch, "black magic", performing a gloomy blues number (black magic), while crisham and the chorus girls danced around her. she returned again in sketch 12, "mediterranean madness", performing a much more lively number. she made her final appearance in act 2 in the slow melancholic sketch, "i've got the wrong man".  the british press was extremely critical of the revue, although the dance and ballet number were considered stellar, the singing of phyllis clare wasn't received well and zaidee's voice wasn't considered "harlem" enough for the show. often her voice would be drowned out by the singing of the chorus girls.  on march 17, 1933, zaidee returned to her regular appearance on bbc radio. she also began doubling at the blue train nightclub. in the meantime, film director andrew buchanan took her on screen, appearing in two short films with the ideal cine-magazine, *i've got the wrong man* and *black magic*. with decca records, she record several numbers from the show, such as the comedy number, pink elephants, i've got the wrong man and black magic.  once "ballyhoo" closed april 22 and reopened nine days later on may 1 at the leicester square theatre.  however, zaidee soon bailed on the show, returning to paris to perform at the robinson nightclub.  in june, she starred in joe zelli's brand new cabaret, chez les nudistes, where zaidee appeared semi-nude in an extravagant revue,"au dela... des reins" for the next four months. she also doubled at the sheherazade, le grand ecart and le bosphore cabarets. in september 1933, she took a month off to appear in saint jean-de-luz at the auberge club.  the french riviera, monaco & switzerland (1934-1935)  although the depression arrived in france in 1931, it didn't seriously affect the country until early-1934, causing the economy to fall apart and public demonstrations were sprouting everywhere. besides her occasional appearances in paris at the hotel ritz, sheherazade and le bosphore cabarets, zaidee soon began touring the french riviera, appearing in juan-les-pins, evian-les-bains,
cannes and monte carlo.  in may 1935, zaidee departed for switzerland for an eight-month tour with benny peyton's jazz kings orchestra. they appeared in ouchy, lausanne, berne, neuchatel and geneva. in-between engagements, zaidee frequently returned to france for appearances in saint jean-de-luz and paris at fred payne's bar.  romania (1936-1939)  returning to france around late-january 1936, stable employment was still difficult for african-american entertainers and zaidee possibly returned to the french riviera. around this time, as the annual rallye monte carlo came to a close, zaidee was introduced to one of the racers, 32-year old barbu neamtu, a wealthy romanian mechanical engineer who was a great sportsman and ford representative in bucharest.  barbu was born c.1904 in craiova, a city of 100,000 located in the midst of the rich agricultural territory of southwestern romania. he was the eldest of six children of eugenia albeanu and constantin neamtu. besides being wealthy landowner, 69-year old constantin neamtu had an expensive romanian and belgian education and was a professor, the director of the romanian national bank (craiova branch), director of craiova's commerce bank and a local politician.  in the early-1920s, barbu had traveled to england, studying english and economics while attending oxford university. while he was away, his father presented him with a position as a deputy of the city of craiova. in 1931, he became the director of sebar, a truck and tractor manufacturing plant (a branch of ford-romania). as early as 1934, barbu also took speed racing as a hobby, winning numerous trophies from races held in monte carlo, brasov, cluj and bucharest.  by 1936, barbu was already in an extremely unhappy marriage, from which he had a daughter. nevertheless, upon his return to craiova from the rallye monte carlo, he brought with him, his new black mistress. this caused an immediate scandal across craiova, especially as, according to the locals, zaidee was the first black woman they had ever seen in person. local children followed her around town, attempting to rub the "blackness" from her skin. while barbu began divorce proceedings with his current wife, zaidee was quickly relocated to bucharest, residing at 9 strada arcului, a comfortable metropolitan residence that her future father-in-law rarely used.  from 1936-1937, zaidee maintained a residency at bucharest's restaurant-bar zissu,
an extremely lavish and overpriced parisian-themed cabaret located at 5 strada serban voda. she danced and performed in english, french and soon began including romanian songs as well. at some point during this period, zaidee also departed for a brief egyptian tour.  on october 27, 1937, zaidee boarded the ss queen mary from cherbourg back to new york. landing on november 1 (exactly a decade since her departure), she moved into the dewey square hotel on seventh avenue and began a ten-month nightclub engagement in new york and philadelphia. upon arrival, she was met by american journalists, such as those of the pittsburgh courier: "zaidee williams jackson was singing sweet songs at chez florence in montmartre when we met her. a slim bronze young woman, who had paris by its ears. we wonder if anyone who has lived over there for ten years as she has can come back here to prejudice and hate and pick up where she left off. we don't doubt that she'll return to europe where, she says 'her work is more appreciated... and more lucrative.'"  while away in america, zaidee avoided the terribly repressive policies of the new prime minister, octavian goga, who issued numerous anti-semitic and other xenophobic laws. during bucharest's expozitie nationale, anti-semitic and even pro-fascist-themed displays were on exhibit. thankfully, it was over by the spring of 1938, after goga was dismissed as prime minister and a majority of the laws were reversed.  in march 1938, barbu traveled to new york (his divorce must've been finalized) and moved into the dewey hotel with zaidee. it's possible to couple soon became engaged and traveled to boston to meet with zaidee's relatives.  the couple returned to romania in september, where they possibly wed at "conacul neamtu", the neamtu family estate, located in the village of , an hour outside of craiova. on september 27, zaidee received her new passport and registered at craiova's police station.  as expected, the marriage marred by jealousy and racial prejudice of her husband's numerous family (and the neighbors) who felt that barbu had married beneath himself. he was accused of renouncing his family for a negro. zaidee, the 41-year old (although she claimed to be four years younger) black cabaret star who could hardly speak romanian and performed naked in paris wasn't considered an equal to 34-year old extremely well educated and privileged barbu. to make matters worse, the romanian
government made it difficult for zaidee to renew her work visa, demanding that she had be an "ethnic romanian".  in november, she returned to paris, appearing at jimmy monroe's swing club. the following month she appeared in the revue, "harlem au coliseum" at the paris-coliseum, alongside myrtle watkins and the three dukes with music provided by willie lewis' orchestra.  early 1939, despite warnings from the american embassy of impending war, zaidee remained in paris, performing at fred payne's bar. however, in february, she had returned home to craiova, registering with the national liberal party (a party her husband's family was involved with).  barbu and zaidee packed up and purchased an comfortable house in bucharest beside the liceul militar. these were halcyon days for the newlyweds. barbu was frequently away at his office in craiova, leaving zaidee alone in their new home and a chauffeur to drive her wherever she needed to go in one of barbu's many luxurious british-made automobiles. zaidee also returned to her place as the star of the restaurant zissu, alongside jean moscopol (romania's version of maurice chevalier). occasionally, she also appeared at the maxim zig-zag cabaret at 5 strada otelelisianu.  world war ii (1940-1945)  after the outbreak of wwii, zaidee's ties with the western world was completely severed. despite the progression of the war, zaidee was able to continue working and her popularity amongst romanian audiences grew.  across romania, soldiers were every corner, young men standing in long lines answering the draft. thousands of men were boarding trucks heading for their local regiment bases. in bucharest, the swastika flew beside the romanian flag as king carol made it no secret that he supported the nazis.  in july 1940, king carol handed over bessarabia and northern bukovina to the soviet union, causing uproar across romania, especially as fleeing bessarabian refugees crowded the streets of bucharest. two months later, in september 1940, the king was forced into exile and general ion antonescu seized power for the next four years. romania soon announced its new alliance with nazi germany. on october 8, german troops began crossing into romania and soon numbered over 500,000. although jackson herself encountered no real trouble, she found it expedient to stay away from certain public places. the american ford company immediately severed ties with romania, and barbu's sebar company began manufacturing military-grade vehicles for the germans.  from 1940-1944, zaidee's
life was hardly interrupted by the constant changes europe was going through. as a romanian citizen, in a country safe from nazi invasion (as long as they upheld their alliance), her career was basically unaffected.  however, she was a witness to german tourists and military personnel walking the streets and enjoying themselves in bucharest's many hotels, restaurants and cabarets.  in 1943, romania became a regular target of allied aerial bombardment, such as the attack on the oil fields of ploiesti on august 1, 1943. in october 1943, a frustrated barbu was forced to close his factory temporarily after a worker's strike.  by 1944, bucharest was subjected to intense bombing on 4 and 15 april 1944, and the luftwaffe bombed the city on august 24 and 25 after the country switched sides. windows were shattered, buildings were gutted, and walls bore the tracks of machine-gun bullets. at night, windows were shuttered and curtains tightly drawn. there must be no visible light to guide enemy aviators. the radio echoed with news of death and destruction.  theatres, cabarets, cinemas were shut down, if they weren't damaged by the bombs. escaping the capital, zaidee packed up everything and relocated to the village of olari, safely 200 miles away from the destruction.  on august 30, 1944, soviet troops occupied romania. bucharest was heavily militarized, the streets filled with soldiers, many of them looting abandoned homes. gypsies, jews and many other marginalized members of the lower class quickly rose to power in high government positions.  there were shortages of everything. of course officials with big salaries could get what they wanted. formerly well-to-do people carried their dwindling stock of goods to the immense open air market to sell for what they would bring in order to keep alive.  in 1945, sebar was reopened, this time to manufacture vehicles for the soviet union. in bucharest, the entertainment was revived as many establishments reopened. zaidee moved their belongings back into their house and resumed performing.  communist romania (1946-1956)  from 1945-1947, appeared for her final years at the restaurant zissu. initially she was unable to seek work as she was refused a work permit. after six months without work, the government relented and issued her permit. however, she was only allowed a meager worker's salary of 600 leis a month. but after much protest, she was finally upgraded to an artist's salary of 1,500 leis a month. nightly taxi cabs to and from, her jobs cost 30 leis
daily, which meant spending two-thirds of her salary for transportation. often she chose to walk two miles in the dead of night from her apartment to save money to eat since meals were no longer supplied to artists.  in september 1946, the soviet government shut down sebar and barbu remained in bucharest permanently with his wife. although engineers were in great demand, he however could get very little work as one had to be approved by the state. however, his other siblings were able to find government jobs.  on december 30, 1947, the old monarchy was abolished and romania became an republic. the director of the zissu closed down the popular establishment and fled to bulgaria. zaidee promptly found employment at the circ bucharest, appearing in a lavish revue, where in one of the scenes, the vibrant 50-year old black vedette entered the stage riding on the back of a camel before performing an exotic number.  due to the heavy censorship of western music and culture, zaidee surprisingly remained extremely popular amongst romanian audiences, even with the youth, who saw her as romania's own ella fitzgerald, billie holiday or josephine baker. despite her popularity, zaidee encountered all sorts of prejudice and discrimination from musicians and managers.  the year 1948, after the romanian communist party came to power, is when all of her troubles began. that june, all businesses and establishments became nationalized by the government. despite being an entertainer, she was still considered an employee of the state. this caused the american embassy to declare her passport void, making any possibilities of visiting the united states impossible. six months later, during christmas, the securitate (secret police) raided the neamtu estate in olari and declared it property of the state. zaidee's in-laws were left outside in the snow, surrounded by their belongings.  later, during the summer of 1949, she began corresponding with her old friend, lawrence brown, who was touring the soviet union with paul robeson at the time. she described the new way of life under the new government and her growing fears of her uncertain future in romania.  on april 14, 1951, barbu and the majority of the neamtu family were declared "bourgeois spies" arrested sent to ghencea penitentiary (a local bucharest prison) for 18 months. zaidee was unable to write or visit. later in september 1952, the family was divided up and sent to various camps such as popesti leordeni camp, pipera farm, dumbraveni penitentiary, jilava penitentiary, peninsula camp and ai
ud penitentiary where they were ill-fed and given the most arduous physical tasks. there was never a charge or a trial. after four years they were all released, broken and impoverished.  zaidee soon began petitioning the american embassy to issue a new passport to her. initially, the embassy was sympathetic but later became uncooperative due to the antagonism of a hungarian woman secretary. meanwhile, her sister, corinna williams-thomas, was working indefatigably in her behalf, although writing to president truman produced no results. zaidee wrote to paul robeson and william patterson, who were both known to be close with the communists. neither deigned to reply.  once barbu was released early-1955, he received a job in the provinces and attempted to convince zaidee to accompany him. instead, she chose to remain in bucharest, suggesting that they divorce. while in the process of divorcing, in april 1955, her sister wrote to president eisenhower who promised prompt action. after the divorce was finalized, zaidee departed for a tour romania's major cities.  later career  in january 1956, as the result of an appeal filed by the american civil liberties union with the board of immigration appeals, the us state department permitted jackson to return to the united states. from bucharest she flew to amsterdam and changed planes directly for new york, where she was greeted with an american passport. she luckily missed the red scare movement, although there was still heavy prejudice against communists (and those who had lived for several years in a communist country). jackson resumed her career on the american stage until 1959. during the summer of 1967, she gave brief interview in harlem with frank driggs.  zaidee jackson died on december 15, 1970, near her sister's family in connecticut.  references  external links  https://www.newspapers.com/newspage/40132322/  http://www.worldcat.org/title/zaidee-jackson-interview/oclc/56098170  http://gallica.bnf.fr/  https://www.imdb.com/name/nm2957662/?ref_=tt_cl_t6  1898 births 1970 deaths 20th-century american actresses 20th-century romanian actresses 20th-century french actresses american film actresses american burlesque performers cabaret singers french vedettes actresses from boston naturalised citizens of romania african-american actresses african-american female dancers american female dancers american female erotic dancers 20th-century african-american women singers music hall
performers harlem renaissance traditional pop music singers vaudeville performers american emigrants to france american emigrants to romania 20th-century american singers people from augusta, georgia 20th-century american women singers 20th-century american dancers
space shuttles is an anthology of science fiction short stories edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the seventh volume in their isaac asimov's wonderful worlds of science fiction series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in october 1987.  the book collects fourteen novellas, novelettes and short stories by various science fiction authors, together with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction: shuttles" (isaac asimov) "truck driver" (robert chilson) "hermes to the ages" (frederick d. gottfried) "pushbutton war" (joseph p. martino) "the last shuttle" (isaac asimov) "the getaway special" (jerry oltion) "between a rock and a high place" (timothy zahn) "to grab power" (hayden howard) "coming of age in henson's tube" (william jon watkins) "deborah's children" (grant d. callin) "the book of baraboo" (barry b. longyear) "the speckled gantry" (joseph green and patrice milton) "the nanny" (thomas wylde) "hitchhiker" (sheila finch) "dead ringer" (edward wellen)  notes  1987 short story collections science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
trilce (lima, 1922) is the best-known book by the peruvian poet cesar vallejo, and is considered, thanks to its lexicographical and syntactical boldness, as a major work of international modernism and a poetic masterpiece of the avant-garde in spanish.  first edition  vallejo began writing the book in 1918. for the most part it was written in 1919, and the last two poems in 1922. the first edition was printed in the workshops of the penitentiary of lima, in a short print run of 200 copies.  trilce began circulating in october 1922. it consisted of 121 pages of text and 16 of prologue, the latter written by antenor orrego, fraternal friend of vallejo. on the cover is a pencil portrait of the poet by victor morey pena.  the selling price of each copy was 3 soles. publication cost vallejo 150 soles, which he funded from his winnings in a literary contest held in lima by the cultural society "entre nous" in december 1921 (the winning story was beyond life and death, which would later form part of his book of stories escalas melografiadas).  the los angeles based poet wanda coleman mentions trilce in the second line of her poem "zed chronology," which was published originally in bathwater blues of 1998.  references      spanish-language poems modernist poems
operator is the third studio album by canadian electronic music duo mstrkrft. it was released on july 22, 2016, by last gang records.  promotion the album's first single "little red hen" featured on canadian dj a-trak's beats 1 (now apple music 1) radio program on march 5, 2006.  the band performed six songs from the album on cbc music's first play live program on july 29, 2016.  release on may 13, 2016, the band announced they were releasing their third studio album. jesse f. keeler said of the album: "the operator concept for us was essential in the creation of the music on this album, but i'm not sure what came first, the title or the idea. while browsing military related websites and blogs, mostly consisting of vets talking to each other like any civilian i suppose, i noticed repeated reference to something they called "operator culture". as we had decided to work entirely with hardware, all our old drum machines and modular synth collection, we had begun to feel more like operators than musicians"  singles on march 6, 2016, mstrkrft released "little red hen", the band's first song in five years.  the second single "party line" was released on may 13, 2016, alongside the announcement of the album. the official music video, released on may 26, 2016, was directed by brooks reynolds and produced by joe mclaren.  the third single "priceless" was released on june 9, 2016, and features english musician sonny kay. the music video, released on july 9, 2016, was directed by nick sewell.  on july 20, 2016, the band released their fourth single "runaway".  tour in support of the album, the band went on a north american tour from june 1, 2016 at the u street music hall in washington, d.c. to june 14, 2016 at the horseshoe tavern in ontario, canada.  critical reception  operator was met with "mixed or average" reviews from critics. at metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, this release received an average score of 55 based on 18 reviews. at anydecentmusic?, the release was given a 5.3 out of 10 based on a critical consensus of 22 reviews.  writing for allmusic, neil z. yeung said the release was the "most difficult listen to date, droning with hypnotic repetition and no outright bangers." he went on to say
, "much of the fun is also gone and listeners are ushered from the edm arena and into the shadowy back room for much of this affair." josh gray at clash said: "operator boasts by far the most aggressive, noise-ridden collection of tracks the pair have ever managed to grind out.  mstrkrft themselves have quit trying to mask anything about their sound or approach, electing instead to deliver the turbo-aggressive noise record they've always threatened to make." kyle eustice of consequence of sound explained: "operator drags the listener kicking and screaming into what sounds like the soundtrack to the depths of hell, where the only music available is an unrelenting, want-to-bang-your-head-against-the-wall symphony of noise. it's difficult not to imagine keeler dropping several hits of acid and then zoning out with his synthesizers and 808s. operator is overpowering enough to make a casual listen impossible and an intense listen painful."  track listing  charts  release history  references  external links  2016 albums mstrkrft albums last gang records albums
jaffer zaidi (, ) is a pakistani musician, singer-songwriter, composer and pianist. he is best known as the lead vocalist of semiclassical band kaavish. propelled to success with the release of three singles "bachpan", "choti khushiyaan", "tere pyar mein" and album gunkali, zaidi has established himself as one of leading musicians in country.  zaidi's album gunkali received two nominations at 10th lux style awards, including best artist for zaidi and best producer for faisal rafi. brought him a critical appraisal earning him a nomination at best debut award zaidi has also appeared in music reality series coke studio in three seasons, both as a musician and as a featured artist. with season 9, zaidi debut as a music director and producer leading a team of singers under his supervision.  personal life he is the son of shehryar zaidi, a pakistani television actor, and legendary singer nayyara noor who migrated to pakistan in 1957 from assam, india. he married actress yamina peerzada in 2017.  music career zaidi is best known as lead vocalist and pianist of a classical band kaavish (meaning: effort) along with maaz maudood who is a guitarist and backing vocalist, they achieved critical appraise with their music videos and singles released under band's name. there singles "bachpan". "choti khushiyaan", "tere pyar mein", "apnay watan ki mitti", "moray sayyaan" brought critical appraisal and earning him the rising star award at the musik awards 2006, and bagged nomination at 3rd jazz im awards. in 2008 the musik award he received two nominations including best ballad song and best lyrics. he received two nominations at 10th lux style awards.  jaffer has been a member of the house band on coke studio since season 2. he, along with his band-member maaz, appeared as a featured artist in season 4, and has been frequenting as a member of the house band member in season 2, season 3, season 4, season 6, season 7 and season 8, however 2016 marked his debut as a music director and producer in season 9, where he served as one of six music producers on the show, producing and recording songs with assigned artist. his team includes ali azmat, javed bashir, sanam marvi, ali khan and saieen zahoor. he returned as a music director on season 10. his
band kaavish also performed a track "faasle" featuring qurat-ul-ain balouch.  discography  television  behadd  albums  gunkali  singles  "bachpan"  "choti khushiyaan"  "tere pyar mein"  "apnay watan ki mitti"  "moray sayyaan"  coke studio  season 2: house band  season 3: house band  season 4: "nindiya re" and house band  season 6: house band  season 7: house band, (piano, synth and string session)  season 8: "neun la leya" and house band  season 9: music director  season 10: music director and "faasle"  references  external links    jaffer zaidi at coke studio  pakistani shia muslims punjabi people living people singers from karachi pakistani male singers year of birth missing (living people)
the evidence act 1950 (), is a malaysian set of laws which were enacted to define the law of evidence.  structure the evidence act 1950, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 3 parts containing 11 chapters, 167 sections and no schedule (including 9 amendments). part i: relevancy chapter i: preliminary chapter ii: relevancy of facts general admissions and confessions statements by persons who cannot be called as witnesses statements made under special circumstances how much of a statement to be proved judgments of courts when relevant opinions of third persons when relevant character when relevant part ii: proof chapter iii: facts which need not be proved chapter iv: oral evidence chapter v: documentary evidence public documents presumptions as to documents documents produced by a computer chapter vi: exclusion of oral by documentary evidence part iii: production and effect of evidence chapter vii: burden of proof chapter viii: estoppel chapter ix: witnesses chapter x: examination of witnesses chapter xi: improper admission and rejection of evidence  see also evidence act  references  external links  evidence act 1950   1950 in malaya legal history of british malaya 1950 in law malaysian federal legislation
carroll letellier (born 1928) was a us army major general and both a korean war and vietnam war combat veteran, serving with the us army corps of engineers. as a brigadier general (united states), he commanded engcom, headquartered then in frankfurt, germany. in 1976, letellier retired from the military at the rank of major general (united states) to a private civilian practice at sverdrup civil, inc., the then 6th largest architecture and civil engineering firm in the united states, which he in turn retired from as vice president in 2002.  education  the citadel, the military college of south carolina awarded major general (united states) carroll letellier a bs in civil engineering '49, mit awarded letellier a master in civil engineering, and the citadel subsequently also awarded letellier a doctorate in civil engineering (honoris causa '99).  awards and decorations letellier's military decorations include the distinguished service medal (u.s. army), 5 awards of the legion of merit, the bronze star medal, and the air medal. the major general was inducted into the mere 212 member us national academy of engineering.  see also list of members of the national academy of engineering (civil)  references  united states army generals civil engineers recipients of the distinguished service medal (us army) recipients of the legion of merit recipients of the air medal living people military personnel from charleston, south carolina 1928 births the citadel, the military college of south carolina alumni mit school of engineering alumni
this is an incomplete alphabetical list of constituency election results to the 38th parliament of the united kingdom at the 1945 general election, held in july 1945.  notes change in % vote and swing is calculated between the winner and second place and their respective performances at the 1935 election. a plus denotes a swing to the winner and a minus against the winner.  england  ignores by-election  ignores by-election in 1942  ignores by-election  ignores by-election in 1943  scotland  ignores the by-election of 1944  ignores the by-election of april 1945  wales  ignores the by-election of may 1945  ignores the by-election of may 1945  universities   ignores the by-election of 1943  references  1945 1945 united kingdom general election
surinder pal may refer to: surinder pal singh cheema - retired vice admiral of indian navy, former foc-in-c of western and southern naval commands. surendra pal - indian television actor. surinder pal ratawal - indian politician, member of bharatiya janata party.
lalila may refer to:  characters lalila, a character the novel hadon of ancient opar by philip jose farmer lalila, a character in the mouk tv series  people lalila el basiouny ranked 37 for egypt at the 2011 world aquatics championships  see also leila (name)
kingsland bay state park is a 264-acre state park in ferrisburgh, vermont, on the shore of lake champlain.  activities includes swimming, boating, fishing, hiking, picnicking, bicycling, wildlife watching, and winter sports.  facilities include boat rentals, a small beach with a snack bar, a picnic pavilion with two group grills and a smaller grill, other picnic tables, a horseshoe pit and toilets. there are several buildings available to rent for large group gatherings.  the state of vermont has designated 50 acres as the kingsland bay natural area. the area includes two peninsulas on lake champlain separated by kingsland bay that support unspoiled natural plant communities, on the shoreline as well as on and behind their bluffs. the hulburt (western) portion features a lake bluff cedar-pine forest.  references  external links  official web site  state parks of vermont ferrisburgh, vermont protected areas of addison county, vermont
david worth dennis house, also known as woodlawn, is a historic home located at richmond, wayne county, indiana.  it was built in 1895, and is a two-story, cubic, queen anne style brick dwelling.  it has a hipped roof with lower cross-gables and a two-story gabled wing designed by architect john a. hasecoster and added in 1909.  it features a two-story porch and single-story porte cochere.  it's builder's grandson was u.s. congressman david w. dennis.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana houses completed in 1895 buildings and structures in richmond, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana
vermillion county jail and sheriff's residence is a historic combined jail and sheriff's residence located at newport, vermillion county, indiana. the sheriff's residence was built in 1868, and is a two-story, italianate style brick dwelling.  it rests on a raised limestone foundation and has a steep hipped roof.  it features round and segmental arched window openings and a full-width front porch. attached to it is a two-story, vernacular romanesque revival style jail block of rusticated limestone.  the jail block was designed by architect john w. gaddis and added in 1896.  it was added to the national register of historic places in 1999.  references  jails on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana romanesque revival architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1896 buildings and structures in vermillion county, indiana national register of historic places in vermillion county, indiana jails in indiana houses on the national register of historic places in indiana
the diocese of alexandria and teleorman () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is saint alexander cathedral in alexandria and its ecclesiastical territory covers teleorman county. divided into four archpriests' districts, it has around 250 priests and churches, of which 35 are historic monuments. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of muntenia and dobrudja. it was established in 1996, the year galaction stanga became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  alexandria 1996 establishments in romania alexandria teleorman county
gitarra is a genus of trilobite in the family proetidae that lived between the late tournaisian and late westphalian of the lower-middle devonian.  history and classification the genus was described by josef gandl in 1968, who assigned it to the family phillipsiidae.  this placement was challenged by halszka osmolska in 1970, who noted the similarity of gitarra to the, then proetidae, genera griffithidella and weania.  distribution  gitarra has been found in the carboniferous of germany, and spain.  references   proetida genera proetidae
the gens hortensia was an ancient plebeian family in rome.  members of this gens are first mentioned in the fifth century bc, but from that time somewhat infrequently until the final century of the republic.  the most illustrious of the gens was the orator quintus hortensius, a man of great learning, and a contemporary of cicero.  under the empire they seem to have sunk back into obscurity.  origin the nomen hortensius appears to be derived from horto, a garden, and probably signifies that the first to bear the name was a gardener.  chase believed the name was latin, listing it among those nomina that either originated at rome, or could not be shown to have come from anywhere else.  however, ogilvie points to the town of urbinum hortense in umbria and the cult of jupiter hortensis in campania as evidence that the name could have arisen elsewhere in italy.  that the hortensii were plebeian, despite cicero's application of the word nobilis to the family, seems demonstrated by the fact that the first of the hortensii to appear in history was tribune of the plebs, and the lack of any other evidence of a patrician family.  from this it seems more likely that cicero was referring to the distinguished record of the hortensii in the service of the roman state, rather than identifying the gens as patrician.  ogilvie doubts the existence of quintus hortensius, ostensibly tribune of the plebs in 422 bc, suggesting that this story was invented at the time of the marriage of sempronia with lucius hortensius, the father of the famous orator, and concluding that the hortensii probably arrived at rome during the fourth century bc.  praenomina all of the hortensii at rome mentioned in ancient sources bore the praenomina quintus, lucius, or marcus, which were very common names at all periods of roman history.  they must occasionally have used other names, but these have not been recorded.  an inscription from ferentinum suggests aulus and sextus.  branches and cognomina the only surnames found among the hortensii are hortalus, which seems to have originated as a nickname for the orator hortensius, and corbio, probably from corbis, a basket, both borne by descendants of the orator.  members   quintus hortensius, tribune of the plebs in 422 bc, indicted gaius sempronius atratinus, consul of the preceding year, for his negligence in preparation against the volscians;
but he was dissuaded from pursuing the charge by the loyalty shown to sempronius, both by his former soldiers and by the other tribunes.  quintus hortensius, appointed dictator in bc 287, in response to a secession of the plebs occasioned, once again, by debt.  hortensius passed a measure giving the force of law to plebiscita, effectively allowing the people to pursue debt relief without first having to obtain the approval of the senate.  hortensius died before resigning his office, and was probably replaced by a dictator suffectus, the only instance of such an appointment in roman history.  lucius hortensius, praetor in 170 bc, was given the command of the fleet in the war against perseus.  when the city of abdera appealed from his demands for money and wheat, he stormed the city, had the leaders beheaded, and sold the rest into slavery.  the roman senate repudiated these acts, and ordered that the people be set free.  hortensius continued to despoil greece, and was upbraided for his harshness to the chalcidians, but does not seem to have been recalled or punished.  quintus or lucius hortensius, elected consul in 108 bc, he was tried and condemned before taking office, and exiled.  lucius hortensius, father of the orator, was praetor in sicily in 97 bc, where his administration was remembered for its honesty and justice.  he married sempronia, daughter of gaius sempronius tuditanus.  lucius hortensius l. f., elder brother of the orator, was legate under sulla during the first mithridatic war.  he acquitted himself admirably in the build-up to the battle of chaeronea, and again during the battle, despite the inferior size of his force.  quintus hortensius l. f., the renowned orator and contemporary of cicero.  he served his country in the social war, was quaestor in bc 81, praetor urbanus in 72, and consul in 69.  he withdrew from public life as the first triumvirate began to dominate the affairs of the roman state.  his wife was lutatia, daughter of quintus lutatius catulus.  hortensia l. f., sister of the orator, married marcus valerius messala.  her brother considered naming hortensia's son as his heir, in preference to his own son, from whom he was estranged.  quintus hortensius q. f
. l. n. hortalus, son of the orator, from whom he was estranged. just before the civil war, he joined caesar in cisalpine gaul, and it was hortensius whom caesar sent across the rubicon.  proscribed after the death of caesar, hortensius had gaius antonius, brother of the triumvir, put to death in revenge.  for this, he was executed upon antonius' grave after the battle of philippi.  hortensia q. f. l. n., daughter of the orator, intervened on behalf of the wealthy roman matrons when the triumvirs proposed a special tax to pay for the war against brutus and cassius.  she spoke with eloquence worthy of her father.  hortensius q. f. l. n. hortalus, second son of the orator from his marriage to marcia.  quintus hortensius q. f. q. n. corbio, grandson of the orator, described by valerius maximus "as a person sunk in base and brutal profligacy."  marcius hortalus, grandson of the orator and marcia, was impoverished, but augustus gave him sufficient income for his senatorial rank, and provided for his marriage. however, he made little of his fortune, and was once again impoverished by the reign of tiberius. his name marcius hortalus indicates that he or his father was adopted by a male relative of marcia.  aulus hortensius, father of sextus hortensius clarus.  sextus hortensius a. f. clarus, dedicated an augusteum at ferentinum during the reign of caligula.  see also  list of roman gentes  footnotes  references  bibliography   marcus tullius cicero, pro quinctio, epistulae ad atticum, in verrem, philippicae.  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  gaius plinius secundus (pliny the elder), naturalis historia (natural history).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  marcus fabius quintilianus (quintilian), institutio oratoria.  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  publius cornelius tacitus, annales.  memnon of heraclea, historiarum.  gaius suetonius tranquillus, de vita caesarum (lives
of the caesars, or the twelve caesars).  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  wilhelm drumann, geschichte roms in seinem ubergang von der republikanischen zur monarchischen verfassung, oder: pompeius, caesar, cicero und ihre zeitgenossen, konigsberg (1834-1844).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  corpus inscriptionum latinarum  george davis chase, "the origin of roman praenomina", in harvard studies in classical philology, vol. viii (1897).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952). robert maxwell ogilvie, commentary on livy, books 1-5, oxford, clarendon press, 1965.    roman gentes
roberto falaschi (9 june 1931 - 30 may 2009) was an italian professional racing cyclist. he rode in five editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1931 births 2009 deaths italian male cyclists sportspeople from tuscany
sechs lieder (six songs), op. 35, is a set of six lieder for medium voice and piano by max reger. he composed the first five of them in berchtesgaden in june and july 1899, and the last one in weiden in august that year. dedicated to different people, they were published by jos. aibl verlag in munich the same year.  the texts are poems by five authors:  "dein auge" (felix dahn)  "der himmel hat eine thrane geweint" (friedrich ruckert)  "traum durch die dammerung" (otto bierbaum)  "flieder" (bierbaum) (also in arrangement for voice and orchestra)  "du liebes auge" (otto roquette)  "wenn lichter mondenschein" (d'annunzio)  in 2008, the musicologists richard mercier and donald nold dedicated a book to reger's songs. they noted that he chose texts not by literary significance but for their theme and mood. the texts of opus 35 have in common that they are love poems by contemporary writers. some poems deal with the eye of a beloved woman, others with twilight and night. reger composed individual songs, not song cycles, and selected for his performances songs from different collections. most of his songs are through-composed, even when beginnings of stanzas at times begin with the same material. he favours syllabic rendition of the text, which helps its intelligibility. usually his melodies require the accompaniment for expression. complex harmonies support text of "unsettling" and passionate content. the first recorded performance was of #3 in heidelberg on 5 november 1899 by maria hosl and the pianist otto seelig. reger arranged #4 also for voice and orchestra, and wrote a version for voice and harmonium for 3-5.  the work is the first by reger with parts dedicated to various notable personalities, to aid publicity. however, one of them, ludwig wullner, only mentioned the songs without detailed analysis in his biography of the composer.  mercier and nold noted that the collection is "consistently on a high level with beautiful sonic textures and rich harmonies throughout", and that "the 'love' theme in these poems inspires some of reger's most magical sonorities".  in the reger-year 2016, students of the musikhochschule munchen performed the songs in a concert in berlin on 18 may. the musik
hochschule saarbrucken focused on chamber music by mozart and reger, presenting the six songs on 12 june.  references  bibliography  external links     otto seelig, pianist of the first performance  lieder compositions by max reger
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who played for duronto rajshahi in twenty20 matches held by the bangladesh premier league. the duronto rajshahi franchise was formed ahead of the 2012 bpl edition and participated in the 2012 and 2013 bpl editions, the team then becoming defunct. complying with other club lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a duronto rajshahi player.  a  abdul razzaq (pakistan; 2011-12)  abul hasan (2012-13)  ariful haque (2011-12)  asif ahmed (2011-12)  c  charles coventry (zimbabwe; 2012-13)  e  ben edmondson (australia; 2012-13)  sean ervine (zimbabwe; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  f  farhad hossain (2012-13)  fawad alam (pakistan; 2011-12)  j  jahurul islam (2012-13)  junaid siddique (2011-12)  k  chamara kapugedera (sri lanka; 2012-13)  simon katich (australia; 2012-13)  khalid latif (pakistan; 2011-12)  m  mizanur rahman (2011-12)  moeen ali (england; 2012-13)  mohammad sami (pakistan; 2011-12)  monir hossain (2011-12 to 2012-13)  muktar ali (2011-12 to 2012-13)  dilshan munaweera (sri lanka; 2012-13)  mushfiqur rahim (2011-12)  n  naeem islam (2012-13)  q  qaiser abbas (pakistan; 2011-12)  r  rizwan cheema (pakistan; 2011-12)  s  sabbir rahman (2011-12)  marlon samuels (west indies; 2011-12)  saqlain sajib (2011-12)  shahzaib hasan (pakistan; 2011-12)  soumya sarkar (2011-12)  syed rasel (2011-12)  t  taijul islam (2011-12 to 2012-13)  tamim iqbal (2012-13)  u  isuru udana (2012-13)  z  ziaur rahman (2012-13)  references  duronto rajshahi
igor olegovich gorbachyov (; 1927-2003) was a soviet and russian actor, theater director and pedagogue. people's artist of the ussr (1972). hero of socialist labour (1987).  biography  early life and education igor olegovich gorbachyov was born october 20, 1927 in leningrad in the family of a civil engineer.  upon graduation from school in 1945, he entered the philosophy faculty of leningrad university. during his studies, igor gorbachyov played in the student theater. at the all-union show of amateur talent, he took first place for the role of khlestakov in the play "the inspector general". the student was noticed, and soon was invited to the same role in the film the inspector general (1952), directed by vladimir petrov.  theatre in 1952, igor gorbachyov was accepted into the troupe of the gorky bolshoi drama theater without theatrical education. he played the role of don cesar de bazan in the play "rui blas" by victor hugo, florindo areutusi in "the servant of two masters" by carlo goldoni, shvandu in the production of "lyubov yarovaya" by konstantin trenev.  in 1954, he moved to the leningrad academic drama theater named after pushkin. at the same time, gorbachyov entered the acting faculty of the leningrad theater institute named after a.n. ostrovsky which he graduated in 1959.  virtually all of his life was connected with the leningrad drama theater. the most successful works were played by him in the performances of the classical repertoire: treplev in the seagull by anton chekhov, vaska pepel in maxim gorky's play "the lower depths", lavretsky in ivan turgenev's "noble nest", protasov in the play "the children of the sun" by maxim gorky, chichikov in "dead souls" by nikolai gogol, cyrano de bergerac in the eponymous play of edmond rostand.  between 1975-1991 igor gorbachyov was the artistic director and chief director of the theater. he staged the productions: "maria tudor" by victor hugo (1964), "while the heart beats" by daniil khrabrovitsky (1977), "veranda in the woods" by ignaty dvoretsky (1980), "field marshal kutuzov" by vladimir solovyov (1985) and others.  film in the cinema, the actor began to appear in the 1950s after a successful debut as khlestakov. he
played mainly supporting roles, until the mid-1960s, when he started to get lead roles. he starred in the film all remains to people (1964), the crime drama two tickets for the afternoon session (1966). gorbachyov participated in one of the well-known adaptations of anton chekhov, directed by joseph kheifitz on the novel "ionych" - "in the city of s" (1966).  the greatest success to gorbachyov was the role of alexander yakushev in the serial television film directed by sergei kolosov operation "trust"(1967).  in the 1970s, igor gorbachyov starred in the detective circle (1972) (sequel to the film two tickets for the afternoon session), historical-revolutionary film sveaborg (1972), historical and biographical film taming of the fire (1972) and others.  in the 1980s, the artist performed roles in the films seven happy notes (1981), mother mary (1982), for blue nights (1983), prokhindiada, or running in place (1984) and others.  from the early 1990s, the actor started to receive less roles. his last work was a role in the detective series at the knives (1998). in total, the actor has more than 50 roles in the cinema.  teaching in 1958-1975 and 1979-1991 igor gorbachyov taught at the leningrad institute of theater, music and cinematography. in 1992, igor gorbachyov founded the theater institute "school of russian drama" (now the theater art department of the school of russian drama named after io gorbachyov of the st. petersburg state university of service and economics).  death on february 19, 2003, after a long illness, igor gorbachyov died. the actor is buried at the literary bridge of the volkovo cemetery in st. petersburg.  honors in 1972 he was awarded the title people's artist of the ussr. in 1973, the actor became a laureate of the state prize of the rsfsr named after k.s. stanislavsky. in 1987 he was awarded the title of hero of socialist labor. the artist was awarded the order of the october revolution (1971), the friendship of peoples (1977), the red banner of labor (1982), the order of lenin (1987).  in 2003, the institute "school of russian drama" was named after igor gorbachyov.  personal life gorbachyov was married to actress lyudmila gorbachyova (1930-2010), with whom she lived in marriage for more than
50 years.  the actor had a son, igor.  partial filmography   the inspector-general (1952) as ivan alexandrovich khlestakov, the 'inspector general'  lyubov yarovaya (1953) as fyodor shvandya  belinsky (1953) as student  commander of the ship (1954) as plaksin  a crazy day (1956) as kostya galushkin, klava ignatyuk's husband     all remains to people (1963) as viktor morozov  returned music (1964)  as eric the light-eyed  little hare (1965) as shabashnikov  two tickets for a daytime picture show (1967) as nikolayev  in s. city (1967) as turkin  taming of the fire (1972) as yevgeniy ognev  a circle (1972) as police colonel  nikolay nikolayev  eleven hopes (1976) as nikolai ivanovich  the elder son (1976, tv movie) as sarafanovs' neighbour (uncredited)  pugachev (1979) as nikita ivanovich panin  a rogue's saga (1984) as mikhail mikhailovich  silver strings (1988) as alexander iii of russia  my best friend, general vasili, son of joseph stalin (1991) as professor serebrovsky  references  bibliography   ann c. paietta. saints, clergy and other religious figures on film and television, 1895-2003. mcfarland, 2005.  external links     1927 births 2003 deaths 20th-century russian male actors communist party of the soviet union members male actors from saint petersburg people from saint petersburg heroes of socialist labour honored artists of the rsfsr people's artists of the rsfsr people's artists of the ussr recipients of the order of friendship of peoples recipients of the order of lenin recipients of the order of the red banner of labour russian and soviet theatre directors russian male film actors russian male stage actors russian theatre directors soviet male film actors soviet male stage actors soviet theatre directors
cortinarius subcalyptrosporus is a fungus native to borneo, where it was originally collected by e.j.h. corner on the slopes of mount kinabalu in 1964 and described by meinhard michael moser in 1986. specimens from new zealand classified as this species are cortinarius kioloensis. it is poorly known.  the mushroom is wholly dark purple with slightly paler flesh, and closely resembles cortinarius violaceus.  see also list of cortinarius species  references  external links  subcalyptrosporus fungi described in 1986 fungi of malaysia
the spanish nobles maria lourdes de urquijo, 5th marchioness of urquijo and grandee of spain, and her husband manuel de la sierra, were murdered in their madrid home on 1 august 1980. their son-in-law rafael escobedo was convicted of the crime, and later committed suicide in prison. escobedo's friend javier anastasio de espona fled before being brought to trial, but much later asserted his innocence.  events the main suspect, and the only person convicted for the crime, was rafael escobedo (1955-1988). he had married miriam de la sierra y urquijo, daughter of the marquesses, on 21 june 1978. the relationship deteriorated and in 1979 miriam formed a relationship with richard dennis rew, known as "dick the american". the marquess was owner of banco urquijo, whose shares were plummeting at the time.  during the night of 1 august 1980, the marquesses of urquijo were shot to death, while they slept at their palace in somosaguas near madrid. on 8 april 1981, escobedo was arrested and confessed to police, after some pistol cartridges were discovered at a property belonging to his father and appeared identical with those used to kill the marquesses. the next day, javier anastasio de espona, a friend of escobedo, and diego martinez herrera, butler to the urquijos, separately travelled in haste to london, where juan, the son of the marquesses and miriam's younger brother, was living.  the disappearance of the cartridges complicated the progress of escobedo's trial. in july 1983, however, escobedo was found guilty and sentenced to 53 years in prison, and the sentence was confirmed by the supreme court of spain in 1985. escobedo maintained his innocence, accusing anastasio of the crime, until his death in the prison of el dueso on 27 july 1988. the proceedings arising from this event fell to the then judge of santona, fernando grande marlaska.  the gun was not found by the authorities, although it is believed to have been a .22 caliber model made by star bonifacio echeverria in eibar. this type of weapon is a collectors' item, since only a small number (estimated as 22-24) were manufactured.  javier anastasio had been detained in january 1983 and his trial as participant in the murder was set for 21 january 1988. however, a month before the trial he escaped to brazil via portugal, and since
then his whereabouts have been unknown. the only sighting of him was seven years afterwards, when he was interviewed for television by jesus quintero in brazil. in may 2010 the charges against him were withdrawn and the case was closed under the statute of limitations, 30 years having passed since the crime.  in february 1990, mauricio lopez-roberts y melgar, marquess of torrehermosa, was sentenced to ten years in prison for obstruction of justice.  in 2010 anastasio was interviewed for the first time for the magazine vanity fair in buenos aires. he denied having committed the crime.  repercussions the spanish media have accorded this murder more coverage than most other crime stories of any period. hundreds of pages of press coverage appeared after the murder, during the trial, and after the suicide of the convict. several books have been published about the case, among them con un crimen al hombro. yo mate a los marqueses de urquijo ("with a crime on my shoulder: i killed the marquesses of urquijo": 1994), a biography of escobedo by matias antolin, a personal friend.  the case also inspired the film solo o en compania de otros ("alone or in company": 1991), with juan ribo and ana alvarez, and an episode the crime of the marquesses of urquijo (2010) in the television series the footprint of the crime, on television espanola.  references  external links  murder of the marquesses of urquijo  dossier of the event, rtve.  1980 in spain assassinated nobility assassinations in spain deaths by firearm in spain 1980 murders in europe 1980s murders in spain 1980 crimes in spain
"the kiss" is the 2nd episode of the supernatural drama television series grimm of season 2 and the 24th overall, which premiered on august 20, 2012, on nbc. the episode was written by series creators jim kouf and david greenwalt, and was directed by terrence o'hara.  plot opening quote: "if a man of pure heart were to fall in love with her, that would bring her back to life."  nick (david giuntoli) is attacked by marnassier (mike dopud). he is saved by kelly (mary elizabeth mastrantonio), who kills the wesen. they then race to the hospital where monroe (silas weir mitchell) and rosalee (bree turner) have developed a potion to stop juliette (bitsie tulloch)'s deterioration. nick administers the potion to juliette.  while investigating the murders of marnassier and the agents, one of the investigators finds a phone at the scene and discovers that nick was the last person one of the agents called. they then arrest nick under suspicion of murder of the agents. however, they release him as there is not enough evidence. meanwhile, catherine (jessica tuck) gives renard (sasha roiz) a potion for him to ingest in order to wake juliette.  kelly confronts catherine, accusing her of conspiring with adalind in juliette's condition and they fight, which culminates in kelly killing catherine. meanwhile, renard drinks the potion and has to endure the painful effects. when the process finishes, he goes to the hospital where he kisses juliette. after he leaves, juliette wakes up. nick rushes to the hospital and is overjoyed to find juliette awake. however, she says, "who are you?", leaving nick in shock as she has lost her memory.  reception  viewers the episode was viewed by 4.90 million people, earning a 1.7/5 in the 18-49 rating demographics on the nielson ratings scale, ranking first on its timeslot and fourth for the night in the 18-49 demographics behind a rerun of 2 broke girls, hotel hell, and hell's kitchen. this was a 14% decrease in viewership from the previous episode, which was watched by 5.64 million viewers with a 2.0/5. this means that 1.7 percent of all households with televisions watched the episode, while 5 percent of all households watching television at that time watched it.  critical reviews "the kiss" received positive reviews. the a.v. club's kevin mcfarland gave the episode a
"b-" grade and wrote, "it's helpful to remember that two of grimms creators, david greenwalt and jim kouf, worked on buffy and angel, two shows that had a soft spot for two-part television stories within a standard season. 'the kiss' is the second half of a two-part story, and it instills a little more faith that despite some serious rocky patches, grimm has a vague idea of where it's going. it may not always deal directly with the overarching mythology - one of the writers confirmed via twitter that the case-of-the-week structure is returning - but it can stretch out a story over two weeks and make it reasonably interesting."  nick mchatton from tv fanatic, gave a 4.5 star rating out of 5, stating: "it's too bad nbc didn't premiere grimm with back-to-back episodes. because 'the kiss' kicked off right where 'bad teeth' concluded. but, when you're premiering in august and only have so many episodes to go around, this is the result. still, no complaints are needed."  josie campbell from tv.com wrote, "renard enlightenment aside, the episode was also fun. monroe and rosalee's nervous interactions with mama nick were a blast and monroe was pretty adorable in his insistence that he would have killed hexenmom for insulting rosalee (yes, i know i just described a death threat as adorable. this is grimm)."  references  external links    grimm (season 2) episodes 2012 american television episodes television episodes written by david greenwalt
the copa presidente de la nacion, also known as campeonato argentino or copa presidente, was an official argentine football cup competition established by dissident body asociacion amateurs de football in 1920. after the aamf dissolved, the competition continued being organised by current argentine football association, although the body has not officially included this competition in its list of national cups yet.  history teams from regional leagues of argentina took part of the tournament. the champion was awarded the trophy, donated by then president of argentina, hipolito yrigoyen. from 1925, the runner-up was awarded with "copa intendente municipal de la ciudad de buenos aires" trophy while the "copa comite olimpico argentino" trophy was given to the team placed third (from 1929). another trophy, the "copa adrian beccar varela" (not to be confused with copa beccar varela) trophy was awarded to the best team outside buenos aires.  between 1942 and 1958, the champion qualified to play copa ibarguren facing the primera division champion.  in the 1956-57 edition, the champion was eligible to play the "copa carlos bottaro" vs. the uruguay regional leagues champion.  by mid 1970s, the copa presidente de la nacion lost interest due to the addition of teams indirectly affiliated to afa to the primera division tournaments, with the establishment of both, torneo nacional in 1967 and primera b nacional in 1986. the copa presidente de la nacion last edition was held in 1988-89. since then, only youth teams have played the tournament.  list of champions ref:  titles by league  notes  references   p recurring events established in 1920 recurring events disestablished in 1989 1920 establishments in argentina 1989 disestablishments in argentina
the big streets (greek: megaloi dromoi) is a 1953 greek drama film directed by grigoris grigoriou and starring dinos dimopoulos, liana liapi and giannis argyris. it was neorealist in style. its failure at the box office led grigoriou to turn to making more potentially commercial films.  cast  dinos dimopoulos as nikos gerasimou    liana liapi as margarita    giannis argyris as thomas gerasimou    giorgos vlahopoulos   veatriki deligianni   giorgos dimou   popi deligianni   stavros xenidis   kostas strantzalis   nana papadopoulou    eirini koumarianou   nana viopoulou   takis mandilas   kostas kontonis   georgios mitropoulos   zoi rouhota    hristos katzigiannis   lina dadi   l. simonetos    haroula antahopoulou  marika ninou  vasilis tsitsanis as singer  references  bibliography  vrasidas karalis. a history of greek cinema. a&c black, 2012.  external links    1953 films 1953 drama films greek-language films greek films greek drama films films directed by grigoris grigoriou greek black-and-white films
redirects to wiktionary
219001-219100   |-id=067 |  219067 bossuet ||  || jacques-benigne bossuet (1627-1704), a french bishop and orator at the cathedral of meaux, is famous for his discourse on universal history (1681), written in a masterly french style ||  |}  219101-219200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219201-219300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219301-219400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219401-219500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219501-219600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219601-219700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219701-219800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219801-219900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  219901-220000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   219001-220000
fort james corporation was an american pulp and paper company based in deerfield, illinois. its products were sold under a variety of brand names, including brawny, mardi gras, and quilted northern.  at the time of its acquisition, fort james corporation was the united states' largest manufacturer of commercial tissue.  history in 1997, the fort howard paper company and the james river corporation merged to form the fort james corporation. fort howard was headquartered in green bay and james river in richmond, virginia.  by 1999, fort james was operating nine of the eleven largest  wide tissue machines in the world.  in 2000, the fort james corporation was acquired by georgia-pacific for $11 billion; gp is based in atlanta, georgia.  references  companies based in green bay, wisconsin manufacturing companies based in wisconsin pulp and paper companies of the united states defunct pulp and paper companies manufacturing companies established in 1997 manufacturing companies disestablished in 2000 georgia-pacific 1997 establishments in wisconsin 2000 disestablishments in wisconsin 2000 mergers and acquisitions
william edward raab covell (29 november 1892 - 16 august 1975) was an officer in the u.s. army from 1915 to 1940 and from 1941 to 1946. his highest rank held was major general.  early life and education covell was born on 29 november 1892 in washington, d.c. on 14 june 1911, he began his studies at the united states military academy at west point, new york. he graduated first in his class of 164 on 12 june 1915 as a member of the class the stars fell on; his cullum number is 5313.  career  pre-war covell was commissioned as a second lieutenant in the corps of engineers on 12 june 1915 upon graduating from the military academy. he served as an instructor in the department of tactics at the academy in june and july 1915 before departing on his graduation leave. in october 1915, he reported for company-level duty at fort shafter, territory of hawaii. while serving at fort shafter, covell was promoted to first lieutenant, corps of engineers on 12 january 1916.  world war i covell wrote "military roads on the island of oahu" while a lieutenant; the article was published in the november-december 1917 edition of professional memoirs. he wed vera henshaw on 16 july 1917. covell was promoted to captain, corps of engineers on 31 july 1917. he returned to the continental united states in july 1917 and reported for duty with the second engineer regiment at el paso, texas where he was temporarily promoted to major, corps of engineers on 5 august 1917. covell sailed to france with the second engineer regiment and remained with that unit until 21 october 1917.  covell spent several months in school assignments: student officer at the 1st corps schools, gondrecourt, france until 20 november 1917; instructor at the 1st corps schools until 19 january 1918; student officer at the british royal engineer school, blendecques, france until 2 february 1918; student officer at the army school of the line, langres, france until 1 may 1918; and director, 1st corps engineer school, gondrecourt, france until 21 july 1918.  he was next assigned to the duty with the g3, headquarters, 1st u.s. army through the end of the war.  inter-war years on 14 november, covell was promoted to lieutenant colonel of engineers, u. s. army. he transferred to and commanded the 2nd engineer regiment at neuwied, germany (20 november 1918 - 3 may 1919
). covell served as the district engineer of the buffalo, new york, district in 1920 and 1921.  world war ii he served as director of fuels and lubricants in the office of quartermaster general from 1943-1944.  he commanded services of supply, china burma india theater from 1944-1945.  later life, death, and legacy his papers are held by the hoover institution library, stanford university.  personal his older brother leon c. covell served as the 2nd vice commandant of the u.s. coast guard, retiring as a vice admiral after world war ii.  his works  awards  references  bibliography  external links west point assn of grads memorial seneca nation of indians since world war ii cbi history engineering cbi history services of supply annual report usc&gs school cbi newspaper dsm generals of world war ii  1892 births 1975 deaths united states military academy alumni united states army command and general staff college alumni united states army personnel of world war i recipients of the distinguished service medal (us army) american business executives  graduates of the united states military academy class of 1915 united states army generals of world war ii united states army generals
a list of principals of green templeton college, oxford. the head of green templeton college, university of oxford is called the principal. this article also includes the heads of the predecessor institutions of the college, green college and templeton college. the current principal is denise lievesley, since october 2015.  wardens of green college  sir richard doll (1979-1983)  john walton, baron walton of detchant (1983-1989)  trevor hughes (1989-1990); acting warden  sir crispin tickell (1990-1997)  sir john hanson (1998-2005)  colin bundy (2006-2008)  presidents of templeton college 1980-91: dr uwe kitzinger 1991-92: roger undy (acting) 1991-96: dr clark brundin 1996-97: dr michael von clemm 1998-2002: sir david rowland 2002-04: richard greenhalgh  2004-08: professor michael earl  principals of green templeton college  colin bundy (2008-2010)  sir david watson (2010-2015)  denise lievesley (2015-2020)  sir michael dixon (2020-present)  references        green templeton green templeton
the night is ours () is a 1930 german drama film directed by roger lion, carl froelich and henry roussel and starring marie bell, henry roussel and jean murat. it was made in berlin as the french-language version of the 1929 german film the night belongs to us. it was shot at the tempelhof studios of ufa.  cast  references  bibliography  external links     1930 films 1930 drama films german drama films german films french films films of the weimar republic french-language films films directed by roger lion films directed by carl froelich films directed by henry roussel german films based on plays german multilingual films german black-and-white films tobis film films films shot at tempelhof studios 1930 multilingual films
the primetime emmy award for outstanding cinematography for a reality program is awarded to one program each year. in 2006, the category was called outstanding cinematography for nonfiction programming - multi-camera productions. reality programs competed with documentaries prior to 2006 in a combined category for outstanding cinematography for nonfiction programming (single or multi-camera).  in the following list, the first titles listed in gold are the winners; those not in gold are nominees, which are listed in alphabetical order. the years given are those in which the ceremonies took place:  winners and nominations  2000s  2010s  2020s  programs with multiple awards  5 wins  deadliest catch  life below zero  2 wins  the amazing race  programs with multiple nominations totals include nominations for outstanding cinematography for a nonfiction program.  17 nominations  survivor  16 nominations  the amazing race  11 nominations  deadliest catch  8 nominations  project runway  7 nominations  life below zero  top chef  4 nominations  intervention  queer eye  rupaul's drag race  3 nominations  born this way  2 nominations  the apprentice  dirty jobs  references  cinematography for a reality program
kismath (from kismet; ) is a 2016 indian malayalam-language romantic drama film written and directed by debutante shanavas k bavakutty. the film stars shane nigam as irfan and shruthy menon as anita, two star-crossed lovers from different religious backgrounds (islam and hinduism). it is produced by rajeev ravi under the banner of pattam cinema company, and in association with lj films and akbar travels.  the film narrates the real-life story of two young lovers from ponnani, in kerala - a 28-year-old scheduled caste girl and a 23-year-old muslim boy - who faced backlash from society for their relationship in 2011. the screenplay was conceived by bavakutty while serving as the town's municipal councillor.  a trailer was released on 20 july 2016. the film released on 29 july 2016. the film was a commercial success.  cast   shane nigam as irfan  shruthy menon as anita  vinay forrt as sub inspector ajay c menon  alencier ley lopez as sayed bava thangal  sajitha madathil as the warden  surabhi lakshmi as saleena  p. balachandran as appu nair  sunil sukhada as assistant sub inspector nair  anand bal as plaza khaleel  anil nedumangad as mohanan  vijayan karanthoor as k t  jayaprakash kuloor as aboo  binoy nambala as shihab  abu salih as irfan's friend  binny tom  soundtrack  references  external links    2010s malayalam-language films indian films indian romantic drama films 2016 romantic drama films
founded in 1987, the middle east materials project (memp) works to provide digital and microform copies of rare, hard-to-obtain, and expensive research materials related to middle eastern studies. the main goal is to obtain delicate and deteriorating documents in order to digitally record and preserve them, so that researchers may find materials not common to other research libraries. memp is coordinated through the center for research libraries in cooperation with the middle east librarians association (mela). members participate in cooperative cataloging of materials that require specialized linguistic and cultural knowledge. memp's coverage includes arab countries, israel, turkey, iran, as well as other areas with related materials that do not have a functioning materials project.  memp's collection includes over 100 newspaper titles in arabic, turkish, and english,  a large number of sudanese and turkish papers, microfilms of documents about the middle east from the library of congress, and microfilms from the cosro chaqeri collection of iranian left-wing materials. memp has also worked with fawzy w. khoury and michelle bates to compile the "middle east in microform: a union list of middle eastern microforms in north american libraries" (university of washington libraries, 1992), a revised and expanded version of "national union catalog of middle eastern microforms" (university of washington libraries, 1989).  notes   middle eastern studies archives
splende is the fourth solo studio album of the italian singer-songwriter annalisa, published on february 12, 2015 by label warner music italy.  receptions   splende debuted at the 7th position of the fimi albums chart, also remained top 10 in the next two weeks.  track listing  credits and personnel   annalisa - lead vocals, backing vocals  enrico palmosi - piano, programming  claudio dirani - drums  andrea benassai - guitar, programming  diego calvetti - piano, synthesizer, programming  giorgio secco - acoustic guitar  rossano eleuteri - bass guitar  diego arrigoni - electric guitar  nicola oliva - acoustic guitar  emiliano bassi - drums  stefano forcella - bass guitar  enrico zapparoli - acoustic guitar  donald renda - drums  paolo petrini - electric guitar  concertmaster - angela savi, angela tomei, maria costanza costantino  violin - natalia kuleshova, roberta malavolti, teona kazishvili  viola - sabrina giuliani, valentina rebaudengo  cello - elisabetta sciotti, laura gorkoff  charts  references  2015 albums annalisa albums
dihydrotestosterone butyrate, also known as androstanolone butyrate or stanolone butyrate, as well as 5α-dihydrotestosterone 17β-butanoate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a dihydrotestosterone ester that was never marketed.  see also  list of androgen esters § dihydrotestosterone esters  references  abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes butyrate esters dihydrotestosterone esters prodrugs testosterone
serbia and montenegro originally planned to participate in the eurovision song contest 2006 with the song "moja ljubavi" written by milan peric and dalibor nedovic. the song was performed by the band no name, which had previously represented serbia and montenegro in the eurovision song contest in 2005 where they placed seventh the final with the song "zauvijek moja". the union of public broadcasters of serbia and montenegro, udruzenje javnih radija i televizija (ujrt) organised the national final evropesma-europjesma 2006 in order to select the serbian and montenegrin entry for the 2006 contest in athens, greece. the serbian national broadcaster, radio television of serbia (rts), and the montenegrin broadcaster radio i televizija crne gore (rtcg) each submitted twelve entries from their respective selections beovizija 2006 and montevizija 2006 with twenty-four entries in total competing in the national final on 11 march 2006. "moja ljubavi" performed by no name was initially selected as the winner following the combination of votes from an eight-member jury panel and a public televote, however the results were not recognized by ujrt due to controversy surrounding tactical voting of the montenegrin jury.  as one of ten highest placed finishers in the 2005 contest serbia and montenegro directly qualified to compete in the final of the eurovision song contest which took place on 20 may 2006. however, serbia and montenegro was removed from the contest on 20 march due to ujrt not being able to submit an entry by the submission deadline with the empty slot in the final being replaced by croatia.  background   prior to the 2006 contest, serbia and montenegro had participated in the eurovision song contest two times since its first entry in 2004 when they achieved their best placing in the contest with the song "lane moje" performed by zeljko joksimovic, placing second in the final. the serbian and montenegrin entry in 2005, "zauvijek moja" performed by no name, placed seventh in the final. up to this point, serbia and montenegro had featured in every final of the eurovision song contest they participated in.  the union of public broadcasters of serbia and montenegro, udruzenje javnih radija i televizija (ujrt), organises the selection process for the nation's entry with serbia and montenegro's respective broadcasters, radio television of serbia (rts) and radio i televizija crne gore (rtcg), broadcasting the event within their respective republics. ujrt confirmed
their intentions to participate at the 2006 eurovision song contest on 23 november 2005. in 2004 and 2005, the evropesma-europjesma national final had been used in order to select their entry, a procedure that continued for the selection of the 2006 entry as announced along with their participation confirmation.  before eurovision  montevizija 2006  montevizija 2006 was the second edition of montevizija. it served as the montenegrin semifinal for choosing the serbo-montenegrin entry for eurovision song contest 2006 in athens, greece. the final was held on 24 february 2006 at the rtcg studios in podgorica, presented by zoja-spahic kustudic, andrija milosevic, danilo celebic, irena ivanovic and milena ristic. twenty songs competed and nine juries - 8 jury members and a public televote determined the twelve songs to progress to the final of evropesma-europjesma.  beovizija 2006  beovizija 2006 was the 4th edition of beovizija. the final was held on 10 march 2006 in sava centar in belgrade. 23 songs competed in the beovizija 2006 contest, one song, due to be performed by nevena paripovic, was not featured, though no reason was given for this. nine juries - 8 jury members and a public televote determined the twelve songs to progress to the final of evropesma-europjesma.  evropesma-europjesma 2006  evropesma-europjesma 2006 was national final organised by ujrt in order to select the serbian and monetengrin entry for the eurovision song contest 2006. the competition took place at the sava centar in belgrade on 11 march 2006, hosted by jelena jovicic and boda ninkovic. the show was broadcast in serbia on rts1 and rts sat as well as streamed online via the broadcaster's website rts.co.yu, and in montenegro on tvcg 1 and tvcg sat.  competing entries  the two broadcasters in serbia and montenegro, serbian broadcaster rts and montenegrin broadcaster rtcg, each conducted separate selections in order to select the twenty-four entries to proceed to the national final: rts organised beovizija 2006 on 10 march 2006 where twenty-three songs competed, while rtcg organised montevizija 2006 on 24 february 2006 with twenty entries competing. from each selection, the top twelve entries qualified for the national final and
among the competing artists was no name which represented serbia and montenegro in the eurovision song contest 2005.  final  the final took place on 11 march 2006 where twenty-four songs competed. the winner, "moja ljubavi" performed by no name, was decided by a combination of votes from a jury panel and the serbian and montenegrin public via televoting. the serbian jury consisted of milan đurđevic (musician), zoran dasic (rts music editor and composer), jovan maljokovic (composer and jazz musician) and tanja banjanin (singer), while the montenegrin jury consisted of predrag kalezic (producer), milica belevic (editor and music critic), bojan bajramovic (president of the association of pop artists and performers of montenegro) and predrag jankovic (professor at the university of montenegro music academy). eurovision contestants hari mata hari, severina, brian kennedy, elena risteska and anzej dezan, which would represent bosnia and herzegovina, croatia, ireland, macedonia, and slovenia in 2006, respectively, were featured as guest performers during the show.  controversy  evropesma-europjesma 2006 once again saw the same voting pattern from the jurors from both republics. despite the public vote winners, serbian beovizija 2006 winner flamingosi featuring louis receiving over 7,000 votes more than the runner-up, beovizija 2006 runner-up ana nikolic, both of them did not receive any points from the montenegrin jurors whereas no name, which placed third in the public vote, were awarded eight points by the serbian jurors (which awarded the montenegrin acts about 1/4 of their votes) making it enough for them to score another win as all four montenegrin jurors (which awarded the serbian acts about 1/10 of their votes) awarded them maximum points. realizing that the favourites were not going to win, the audience started leaving the event with the remaining audience booing no name off the stage and throwing objects (such as bottles) at the stage during the reprise. the audience then wooed flamingosi and louis on stage as they performed their song with the other serbian acts present on stage.  withdrawal  shortly after the competition, rts held a press conference where it was announced that the two serbian jurors that awarded no name points, milan đurđevic and zoran dasic, had withdrawn their votes in dispute of the tactical voting of the montenegrin jury. the executive board of ujrt later issued a statement stating that they did not accept
the victory of no name as the voting violated the merits of the competition, albeit not being found irregular. following failed negotiations of a new national final featuring the top five entries of beovizija 2006 and montevizija 2006 with the winner selected entirely by public televoting, both rts and rtcg requested from the european broadcasting union (ebu) to intervene in accepting or annulling the competition results, however the ebu responded on 18 march by suggesting that the broadcasters find a solution on their own.  on 20 march, the deadline for entry submissions to the 2006 eurovision song contest, the ebu announced that serbia and montenegro would be removed from the contest due to ujrt failing to submit an entry in time. however, ujrt would still broadcast the semi-final and final, and only viewers in serbia would be able to vote.  at eurovision according to eurovision rules, all nations with the exceptions of the host country, the "big four" (france, germany, spain and the united kingdom) and the ten highest placed finishers in the 2005 contest are required to qualify from the semi-final in order to compete for the final; the top ten countries from the semi-final progress to the final. as serbia and montenegro finished seventh in the 2005 contest, the nation automatically qualified to compete in the final on 20 may 2006. however, following serbia and montenegro's withdrawal from the contest on 20 march an empty slot for automatic qualification was left in the final, which was given to croatia as they finished eleventh in 2005.  the semi-final and the final were broadcast in serbia on rts1 and rts sat with commentary by duska vucinic-lucic, and in montenegro on tvcg 2 and tvcg sat with commentary by drazen baukovic and tamara ivankovic. the serbian and montenegrin spokesperson, who announced the serbian and montenegrin votes during the final, was jovana jankovic. during the presentation of the points, jankovic pointed serbia to return to the contest the following year with the best possible song and thus win the contest; serbia debuted at the 2007 eurovision song contest for the first time as an independent nation, winning the contest with their entry "molitva" performed by marija serifovic. jankovic also hosted the eurovision song contest 2008 in belgrade alongside zeljko joksimovic.  voting  below is a breakdown of points awarded by serbia and montenegro in the semi-final and grand final of the contest. the nation awarded its 12 points to bosnia and herzegovina in
the semi-final and the final of the contest.  points awarded by serbia and montenegro  after eurovision on 21 may 2006, one day after the final of the eurovision song contest 2006, an independence referendum was held in montenegro, where majority of its population voted for independence. montenegro formally declared its independence on 3 june 2006, and two days later, the state union of serbia and montenegro officially ceased to exist. both countries participated in the 2007 eurovision song contest separately as independent nations in helsinki, finland, with serbia winning the contest and montenegro failing to qualify to the final until 2014.  references  2006 countries in the eurovision song contest 2006 eurovision eurovision
the 2020 united states senate election in nebraska was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of nebraska, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections.  incumbent republican senator ben sasse was challenged by democratic nominee chris janicek, who was disavowed by his party after numerous scandals; by write-in candidate preston love jr., who received the support of the state democratic party; and by libertarian nominee gene siadek.  sasse was reelected to a second term in office with 62.7% of the vote and a 38.3% margin. he outperformed president donald trump by almost 27,000 votes, or 8.9%, compared to the concurrent presidential election, the largest overperformance by any republican senate candidate in the country that year. in contrast, janicek was the worst performing democratic senate candidate in the country compared to joe biden, underperforming him by 13.1%. this was attributed to a sexual misconduct scandal affecting janicek and split-ticket voting in omaha suburbs.  republican primary  candidates  nominee ben sasse, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary matt innis, businessman and former chair of the lancaster county republican party  declined charles herbster, farmer pete ricketts, governor of nebraska  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee chris janicek, businessman and candidate for u.s. senate in 2018  on june 16, 2020, janicek lost the support of the nebraska democratic party after allegations of sending sexually explicit text messages about a female campaign staff member and allegedly using racist slurs to insult a guest at a party 20 years ago surfaced. nonetheless, janicek refused to drop out of the race and his name remained on the ballot in the general election. in september the state democratic party supported preston love jr. via a write-in candidacy.  eliminated in primary dennis frank macek larry marvin, perennial candidate angie philips, mental health advocate alisha shelton, behavioral health clinical supervisor andy stock, former candidate for lancaster county treasurer dan wik, physician  declined chris beutler, former mayor of lincoln  results  other candidates  libertarian party  nominee gene siadek, former chairman of the libertarian party of nebraska  withdrawn  eric dilliard  results  democratic write-in  declared preston love jr., first vice president of the omaha naacp chapter and
second associate chairman of the nebraska democratic party, endorsed by the party after the allegations against janicek.  withdrawn brad ashford, former democratic congressman from ne-02  general election  predictions  polling  results  notes  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  ben sasse (r) for senate  chris janicek (d) for senate  gene siadek (l) for senate   preston love jr. (d) for senate   2020 nebraska united states senate
the chateau de fromental is an historic chateau in fromental, haute-vienne, france. it was built in the 17th century. it has been listed as an official historical monument since june 8, 1925.  references  chateaux in haute-vienne monuments historiques of nouvelle-aquitaine houses completed in the 17th century
my father was at fault (spanish: mi papa tuvo la culpa) is a 1953 mexican comedy film directed by jose diaz morales and starring meche barba, antonio aguilar and oscar pulido.  cast  meche barba   antonio aguilar   oscar pulido   famie kaufman   alfredo varela   carlota solares   otilia larranaga   maty huitron   ana bertha lepe   victor alcocer   humberto rodriguez   maria alejandra  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films mexican comedy films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by jose diaz morales mexican black-and-white films
lifted bells are an american rock band from chicago, illinois. the band consists of members of the bands their/they're/there, braid, and stay ahead of the weather.  career lifted bells began in 2013 with the release of a self-titled ep, via naked ally records. in 2014, lifted bells released their second ep titled lights out via naked ally. in 2016, lifted bells signed to run for cover records and released their third ep titled overreactor.  discography eps lifted bells (2013, naked ally) lights out (2014, naked ally) overreactor (2016, run for cover) minor tantrums (2018, run for cover)  references  musical groups from chicago musical groups established in 2013 run for cover records artists 2013 establishments in illinois
felicioli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  gian filippo felicioli (born 1997), italian footballer jean-loup felicioli (born 1960), french film maker  italian-language surnames
the following lists events that happened in 1976 in iceland.  incumbents president - kristjan eldjarn prime minister - geir hallgrimsson  events  births  1 february - katrin jakobsdottir, politician 9 may - asthildur helgadottir, footballer. 24 december - sveinn runar sigurðsson, musician  deaths 22 january - hermann jonasson, politician (b. 1896) 6 december - magnus brynjolfsson, alpine skier (b. 1923).  references    1970s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
dropgun is a russian dj and production duo from tomsk, formed in 2013.  the group is best known for their collaboration with dvbbs in the single "pyramids" in 2014. the single reached 39th place on the belgian charts.  discography  charting singles  other singles  only singles and remixes released since october 2012 are listed below:   2014: shout  2014: hayao (with ralvero) [doorn (spinnin')]  2014: amsterdam [oxygen (spinnin')]  2014: angst [metanoia music (arisa audio)]  2014: pyramids (with dvbbs) [spinnin' records]  2015: cobra (with tony junior) [doorn (spinnin')]  2015: ninja [skink (spinnin')]  2015: together as one [flamingo]  2016: chronos (with jaggs) [revealed]  2016: one world (with swanky tunes) [armada music]  2016: fever (with farleon) [hexagon (spinnin')]  2016: nobody [hexagon (spinnin')]  2016: a better love (with lenx & denx) [flamingo]  2016: atlantis (with breathe carolina) [spinnin' premium]  2017: rhythm is a dancer (with breathe carolina) [spinnin' records]  2017: all i want (with xorr) [flamingo]  2017: little drop [spinnin' premium]  2017: nothing new [hexagon (spinnin')]  2017: really mine (with natan chaim) [thrive]  2018: my way (with asketa) [enhanced]  2018: krishna [dharma (spinnin')]  2018: dark sky [hexagon (spinnin')]  2018: next to me (with aspyer) [musical freedom (spinnin')]  2018: sweet dreams (with breathe carolina) [spinnin' records]  2018: uluwatu (with jesse wilde) [dharma (spinnin')]  2018: somebody [spinnin' copyright free]  2018: island (with asketa) [thrive music]  2018: fire blazing [spinnin' copyright free]  2018: earthquake [spinnin' records]  2018: tomorrow never comes [future house music]  2018: drought [hexagon (spinnin')]  2019: spirit of freedom [spinnin' premium]  2019: i'm on
my way (with sebastian wibe) [hexagon]  2019: a little more like you [dharma (spinnin')]  2019: same things (with røguenethvn and pillows) [cyb3rpvnk]  2019: falling (with asketa & natan chaim) [hexagon]  2019: darkside (with do it big and arikakito) [dharma (spinnin')]  2020: sanctuary (with bassrox) [dharma (spinnin')]  2020: confession [generation hex (hexagon)]  2020: annihilation [prophecy (hexagon)]  2020: chicken run [prophecy (hexagon)]  2020: tantsui [prophecy (hexagon)]  2020: control [prophecy (hexagon)]  2020: bai bai bai (featuring dimma urih) [prophecy (hexagon)]  2020: h2s04 [heldeep]  2020: u&i (with christopher damas) [hexagon]  2020: burnt tires" (featuring dimma urih) [hexagon]  2020: promises (with breathe carolina featuring reigns) [spinnin']  2021: fisher (featuring dimma urih) [hexagon]  2021: open up your mind (featuring boba sheshera and kiki) [doorn records]  2021: stay (with boba sheshera) [hexagon]   remixes   2014: major lazer - aerosol can (dropgun bootleg)  2017: pegboard nerds & spyker - extraordinary (dropgun remix)  2017: taku-hero & funk machine - fun lovin' (dropgun remix) [revealed recordings]  2017: breathe carolina - this again (dropgun and taku-hero remix) [spinnin' remixes]  2017: brklyn - i'm on somethin (dropgun remix) [enhanced music]  2017: galantis & throttle - tell me you love me (dropgun remix) [big beat]  2018: gryffin - winnebago (dropgun remix) [darkroom (geffen)]  2019: grey - want you back (dropgun remix) [island]  2019: superspecial - heroes (dropgun remix) [desirmont]  2019: funk machine & taku-hero - something (dropgun remix
) [revealed recordings]  2019: armin van buuren - turn it up (dropgun remix) [armind (armada)]  2019: funk machine & taku-hero - it ain't over (dropgun remix) [revealed recordings]    prophecy recordings discography   in march 2020, dropgun launched their own record label - prophecy - as a sublabel of don diablo's hexagon label, as part of the label's expansion, which also included the launch of sublabels run by king arthur, retrovision and jlv.   2020: dropgun - annihilation  2020: savage kids & lørean - dark side  2020: dropgun - chicken run  2020: gosha - get busy  2020: dropgun - tantsui  2020: vedde - best bud  2020: dropgun - control  references notes  a''' did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the walloon ultratip chart.  sources  external links official website  russian djs russian house musicians electronic music duos house musicians electronic dance music djs
assignee was an american thoroughbred racehorse. he won the 1894 preakness stakes.  references  racehorses bred in the united states racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners 1891 racehorse births thoroughbred family 2 godolphin arabian sire line
the 1st china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting was held at the jinhua sport center in jinhua, china on july 6, 2014.  medal summary  men  women  score table  overall  men  women  results  men  100 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:50 -  wind: +1.0 m/s  400 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:10 -  110 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:10 -  wind: +2.5 m/s  4 x 100 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:40 -  pole vault prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:25 -  long jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:15 -  javelin throw prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:05 -  women  200 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:30 -  wind: +1.2 m/s  800 meters prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:30 -  400 meters hurdles prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:00 -  4 x 400 meters relay prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:50 -  high jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:45 -  triple jump prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 19:15 -  javelin throw prior to the competition, the records were as follows:  final - 20:05 -  references   reports mulkeen, jon and organisers (2014-07-06). xie and gao lead china to victory at friendship meeting in jinhua. iaaf. retrieved on 2016-07-06. (2014-07-09). friendship athletic meeting concluded with crown success. caa. retrieved on 2016-07-06. results full results. caa. retrieved on 2016-07-06.  external links chinese athletic association  china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting international athletics competitions hosted by china china-japan-korea friendship athletic meeting
the four tones of chinese may be:   four tones (middle chinese) four tones (mandarin chinese)
live at new orleans house: berkeley, ca 09/69 is an album by the american rock band hot tuna.  as the name suggests, it was recorded live at the new orleans house music venue in berkeley, california in september 1969.  it was released in april 2010.  on live at new orleans house, jorma kaukonen sings and plays acoustic guitar, and jack casady plays bass guitar.  they are accompanied by will scarlett on harmonica.  the album was recorded at the same set of shows as their eponymous debut album, but includes all different performances.  critical reception  on allmusic, thom jurek said, "along with harmonica player will scarlett, the duo took kaukonen's truly amazing technical facility on the acoustic guitar... and married it to casady's funky electric basslines, coming up with a reverent though utterly contemporary interpretation of blues, rags, and folk songs.... the performance flows spontaneously and organically from start to finish, clocking in at a full 68 minutes without a weak moment."  in rolling stone, david fricke wrote, "this cd of earthy, gently swinging outtakes has acoustic spins on later electric-tuna covers ("candy man", "keep on truckin' ") and a long spell of intricate fingerpicking and dancing electric bass in kaukonen's "sea child"."  on musicoscribe, bill kopp said, "... here hot tuna really does tear it up. casady's suitably busy bass lines don't intrude on the songs; they propel them forward. the fretboard interplay between ace guitarist kaukonen and bassist casady is fiery... fans of the acoustic blues variants of rock (think of workingman's dead and american beauty era grateful dead) will find much to enjoy in this hour-plus set."  audiophile news & music review wrote, "consisting of superior outtakes and previously unreleased gems during the recording of the first hot tuna album, this newly remastered disc is a definitive treasure trove for the fans."  track listing "come back baby" (lightnin' hopkins) - 6:48 "keep on truckin'" (bob carleton) - 4:27 "death don't have no mercy" (reverend gary davis) - 6:38 "winin' boy blues" (jelly roll morton) - 5:10 "uncle sam blues" (traditional, arranged by jack casady and jorma kaukonen) - 4:39 "
know you rider" (traditional, arranged by casady and kaukonen) - 3:42 "don't you leave me here" (morton) - 3:22 "never happen no more" (blind blake) - 3:42 "how long blues" (leroy carr) - 4:56 "true religion" (kaukonen) - 4:55 "sea child" (kaukonen) - 10:27 "candy man" (davis) - 4:48 "keep your lamps trimmed and burning" (davis) - 4:42  personnel hot tuna jorma kaukonen - acoustic guitar, vocals jack casady - bass will scarlett - harmonica production produced by hot tuna mastering, liner notes: joe reagoso photographs: mike frankel  references  hot tuna live albums 2010 live albums
ahmadiyya is an islamic religious movement in liberia. founded in the year 1956, during the era of the second caliphate, the movement today represents an estimated 10% of the country's muslim population. approximately, this corresponds to 85,000 ahmadi muslims in liberia.  history  the earliest known record of an ahmadiyya missionary in liberia dates back to the 1950s, when mufti muhammad sadiq, a missionary based in sierra leone at that time, visited liberia in the spring of 1952.  staying in the country for a period of one month, sadiq took the opportunity to meet the president of liberia, william tubman and presented an english translation of the quran as well as other islamic literature. however, the ahmadiyya movement was first established four later, by muhammad ishaq sufi. as per instruction of caliph mirza basheer-ud-din mahmood ahmad, sufi arrived in the capital monrovia on 6 january 1956. a year later, on 12 june 1957, sufi met with president tubman as well, this time in his presidential palace.  journeys by caliphs  as part of his tour of west africa during the early period of his reign, the third caliph of the ahmadiyya muslim community, mirza nasir ahmad, visited liberia. invited by president tubman, the caliph arrived at the roberts international airport, just outside the nation's capital, monrovia, for a two-day visit on april 29, 1970. accompanied by a special representative of the president,  colonel henri r. gobson, and also a number of governors, the caliph journeyed to the president's executive mansion and conferred in a private audience with the president. later, the ahmadiyya mission invited the caliph for a dinner, at the now defunct ducor hotel. the following day, he returned to a dinner at the executive mansion tendered by the president in his honor, during which the president described him as "one of the greatest leaders in islam".  on may 1, 1970, the caliph left the country.  the fourth caliph, mirza tahir ahmad, visited liberia between january 31 and february 2 1988.  see also  islam in liberia  references  liberia islam in liberia 1956 establishments in liberia
the national police of honduras (founded 5 january 1888) is the uniformed police force of the republic of honduras. the force is organised into regional headquarters, municipal headquarters, headquarters of fixed or mobile stations, and police posts. there are at least 360 police centres throughout honduras. the national police of honduras has its headquarters in tegucigalpa, the capital city of honduras. the national police of honduras is the fourth largest police body in central america by number of employees (more than costa rica, nicaragua and belize). it is the sixth largest force in central america by police officers per capita. the force's patroness is the virgin of carmen. on 16 july of each year the "national police patroness day" is celebrated.  history  origins in 1866, the ruling general in honduras, jose maria medina made the "law of rural police". a group of men were given powers similar to those of a justice of the peace. this group of officers was later called the "body of the gendarmerie".  in december 1881, the president of the republic, marco aurelio soto, instituted the "police of the line" in tegucigalpa and comayaguela. there was a commandant, a sub-commander, an assistant, four sergeants, and five policemen.  on 15 january 1882, by order of president marco aurelio soto, the national police of honduras was established. on 14 september 1888, the acting president, general luis bogran, issued a decree that a port police unit be formed. the new unit became operational on 1 january 1890.  in the 1930s, the first national directorate of criminal investigation was formed and in 1933, a division of traffic policing was created.  military rule in 1957, government and military relations in honduras began to deteriorate. in june 1959, the national police of honduras was replaced by the "civil guard", a paramilitary force with policing duties.  the 1963 honduran coup d'etat led by colonel arming velasquez cerrato and oswaldo lopez arellano removed president ramon villeda morales from power. on 9 october 1963, the special security corps (ces) was formed by chief of state arellano. the first director of the ces was general alonzo flores guerra. rural and highway patrol units were formed. in 1969, during the football war (conflict between honduras and el salvador), the ces fought on the side of the honduras army. in 1974, a unit for the policing of inland revenue was created.  on 30 january 1975, the ces was disbanded and
"fusep", a public security force, was formed as a branch of the military. the officers of fusep were outfitted in green uniforms and armed with regulation 9mm browning hi-power pistols and fn fal (rifle automatique leger) 7.62×51mm calibre nato rifles.  return to civil governance from 1982, honduras returned to civil rule and the police force was to be separated from the military. however, at the time, the police force kept some military characteristics. it operated under the auspices of the office of national defense and public security (sdnsp) and under the authority of the director of the ffaa, who was a representative of the president.  there was continuation of a national directorate of investigation (dni). the commander-in-chief, a general, was a graduate of the general jose trinidad cabanas national police academy of honduras (anapo), and sometimes of the national police university of honduras (unph). on 4 january 1982, the captain jose santos guardiola centre for police instruction (cip-cjsg) (the police technical institute (itp-cjsg)) was established. in july 1984, the school for qualification of police officials (ecop) ("upper institute of police education" (isep)) was established.  in 1993, a new division, the directorate general of criminal investigation (dgic) was created. on 17 december 1996, by decree number 229-96, congress ordered the transfer of the police force to civil control. the governing body was a board chaired by hernan corrales padilla. the board members were lawyers jorge ponce turcios, francisco cardona arguelles, german leitzelar vidaurreta, felipe elvir sierra, jose zamora bados, and the engineer, alfredo landaverde.  on 28 may 1998, by decree number 156-98, the "organic law of the national police" (lopn) was created. the governing civil body was the secretariat of state in the dispatch of security. the decree was administered by hernan corrales padilla (1924 - 1999).  on 22 may 2012, the general director of the honduran national police, juan carlos bonilla valladares, known as "el tigre" was appointed. on 19 december 2013, valladares left office, replaced by ramon antonio sabillon pineda.  in 1997, during the presidency of carlos roberto reina, the fuerza de seguridad publica, fusep (public security force) changed to civilian governance.  in 1998
, the president, carlos roberto flores, and the national congress of honduras, passed legislation that would establish a new national police of honduras. the new force was formed by 2001.  accusations of involvement in drug trafficking on april 30, 2020, dea special operations division special agent in charge wendy woolcock and united states attorney for the southern district of new york geoffrey s. berman charged former chief of honduran national police juan carlos bonilla valladares, aka "el tigre," in a manhattan federal court with drug trafficking and weapons offenses involving the use and possession of machineguns and destructive devices. woolcock claimed that during his time of the chief of police, "juan carlos bonilla valladares allegedly used his high ranking position to influence those working for him and violently protect the politically connected drug traffickers who would smuggle cocaine destined for the united states." it was revealed that honduran law enforcement officials, as well as politicians, had been working with numerous drug traffickers in honduras since 2003.  organisation the national police of honduras operates under the legal framework of the "organic law of the national police". article 293 of the constitution of honduras by decree 136-1995 and decree 229-1996 in addition to article 22 of its organic law by decree no. 67-200815 defines the work of the national police.  the national police of honduras is governed by the office of the director general of the national police (dgpn). there is oversight by the office of security (one of sixteen secretariats of the executive branch of the government) headed by the minister of security.  in 2010, the office of security operated with a budget of lps. 3,129,454,629 (us$165.143 million). the main division of the force, the "direccion nacional de la policia preventiva", dnpp (preventive policing unit) had the highest expenditure at about lps. 1.333.687.852 (us$70.3 million).  the national police of honduras has six divisions or "national directorates". they are:  "direccion nacional de la policia preventiva", dnpp (preventive policing unit)  "direccion nacional de investigacion criminal", dnic (criminal investigation unit)  "direccion nacional de servicios especiales de investigacion", dnsei (investigative special services unit)  "direccion nacional de transitos", dnt (traffic policing unit)  "direccion nacional de servicios especiales preventivos", dn
sep (preventive special services unit)   "sistema de educacion policial", sep (police education unit)  the sep includes four units: the national police university of honduras (unph), the police technological institute (itp), the national police academy (anapo) and the school of sub-officers (eso).  direccion nacional de la policia preventiva the dnpp combats crimes related to organized crime, such as smuggling, fraud or tax evasion and implements police controls on taxes. it combats the production, use, possession and illegal trafficking of arms and drugs. it enforces the legal order of transportation, transit and roads, and exercises security functions in immigration matters.  the dnpp is managed by officers with a degree in police science. the officers receive an undergraduate degree from the national police university of honduras (upnh), and the rank of sub-inspector of police. the uniforms, patrol cars, galil pistols and regulation rifles of the officers are colored blue. the division also has "falcon" bell 206 jetranger helicopters at their disposal in an air unit.  direccion nacional de investigacion criminal the dnic was developed with training and instructors from scotland yard (uk), federal bureau of investigation and drug enforcement administration (us), and mossad (israel). this unit utilizes regulation weapons including the 9mm calibre glock, the remington shotgun, and the imi galil rifle. a director general and a representative of the public ministry of honduras work together as heads of the dnic.  a forensic physician from the faculty of forensic sciences is associated with the dnic.  within the dnic unit is the dgic unit (dpi). it drafts eighteen-year-old men and women who have just completed secondary or university education to become detectives. the head of the unit is an officer of the rank of  commissioner or an inspector.  each unit also has agents who are crime scene technicians, crime scene investigators, violent crime scene technicians, analysts, ballistic analysts, specialists in reconstruction, field inspection, computer crime, drug related crime and graphics and drafting.  special units  comando de operaciones especiales (coeco) the comando de operaciones especiales coeco ("special operations command" or "cobras") are an elite unit of honduran police agents skilled in managing riots and disturbances, sniper shooting, and tactical and special operations. the unit trains with american swat units.  tropa de inteligencia y grupos de
respuesta especial de seguridad (tigres)  on 26 july 2012, legislation was passed for the creation of the tigres, "intelligence troop and special security response groups" or "tigers". the tigres counters organized crime and hooliganism, in conjunction with judges and public prosecutors. the tigers are trained for several months by instructors from the us army special forces and members of the junglas unit of the colombian national police, with the support of the us government.  direccion policial de investigacion on 1 september 2015, president juan orlando hernandez formally opened a new police investigation unit, the dpi. the dpi works in regional headquarters including san pedro sula, la ceiba, santa rosa de copan, comayagua and choluteca.  police deaths  crime in honduras is related to social instability, an increase in gangs, and youth unemployment, and availability of firearms. below is a brief list of police officers who have lost their lives in the line of duty.   hector cerrato aged 40, died when confronting armed assailants inside a police bus.   on 9 january 2013, suyapa posed martinez was shot in colonia villa olimpica when his weapon was stolen.   on 4 april 2013, robin fernando espinal ponce and officer of the national direction of criminal investigation (d.n.i.c.), died while trying to detain two men who attacked a "rapidito" police bus in the guadeloupe neighbourhood of san pedro sula.  on 7 august 2013, joaquin santos arita aged 41, was a member of the traffic branch who was shot while on routine work in the boulevard centroamerica. the gunmen, jose edwin mejia bautista and jose edgardo gonzalez aguilera, were arrested.  on 21 october 2009, david orlando romero bengston aged 21, who worked at the metropolitan head office number two in san pedro sula, was on vacation in his home town of el progreso, yoro when he was kidnapped and later shot on the road leading to tela.  see also   armed forces of honduras  honduran air force  public ministry of honduras  references   law enforcement in honduras law enforcement agencies in north america
robbie crawford (born 22 june 1994) is a scottish footballer who plays as a central midfielder for partick thistle. he has previously played for ayr united, livingston and motherwell.  career after making more than 200 appearances for ayr united, on 15 june 2019 crawford joined scottish premiership side livingston on a two-year deal.  on 18 september 2020, crawford signed on loan for motherwell until january 2021. he moved to motherwell on a permanent basis on 1 february 2021.  on 2 april 2021, crawford signed a one-year contract extension with motherwell.  on 7 january 2022, crawford signed a 6-month contract with scottish championship side partick thistle.  career statistics  references  external links  1994 births living people people from irvine, north ayrshire scottish footballers association football midfielders ayr united f.c. players scottish football league players scottish professional football league players livingston f.c. players motherwell f.c. players sportspeople from north ayrshire partick thistle f.c. players
dylan taylor (born 1960) is a jazz double bassist.  early career dylan studied bass with al stauffer, dennis sandole, buster williams (under an nea jazz study fellowship) and john pattitucci at city college of new york, where he also studied composition with mike holober. in 2013 taylor's musical score for the film takao dancer was premiered at the tokyo international film festival.  debut album taylor produced his album sweeter for the struggle.  discography  as leader  sweeter for the struggle (miles, 2013)   one in mind (blujazz, 2017),  as sideman with butch ballard,  sam dockery  mozaic  with khan jamal  percussion & strings (cimp, 1997)  balafon dance (cimp, 2002)  black awareness (cimp, 2005)  fire and water (cimp, 2007)  references  1960 births living people american jazz cellists american male jazz musicians american jazz double-bassists male double-bassists 21st-century double-bassists 21st-century american male musicians
cup noodles are precooked instant noodles with flavoring powder and/or seasoning sauce sold in a polystyrene, polyethylene, or paper cup. the flavoring can be in a separate packet or loose in the cup. hot water is the only ingredient that is needed separately. cooking takes 3-5 minutes. cup noodles have been consumed in asia for many years. it has started to arise worldwide and it has made them a popular staple around the world.  history  in 1971, nissin introduced nissin cup noodles, a cup noodle to which boiling water is added to cook the noodles. a further innovation added dried vegetables to the cup, creating a complete instant soup dish.  cup noodles by country  south korea  cup noodles are known as keop-ramyeon in south korea. popular cup noodles include nongshim's bowl noodle soup, shin cup noodle soup and samyang's hot chicken flavor ramen.  south korea has the largest quantity of consumption of instant noodle or cup noodle's country per year. based on market research, males consume more cup noodle than females in south korea. cup noodle is the second largest food type after steamed rice that contributes to the overall energy intake of individuals in south korea. furthermore, the younger generation (20 to 49 years old) are more likely to consume cup noodles and the demographic of consuming bowl-type noodles are the middle class or high class.  mexico  cup noodles were introduced in 1990 by maruchan. due to its popularity, instant noodles are often referred to simply as "maruchan". today, many local brands such as "la moderna" and "herdez" have developed their own cup noodles, along nissin, which is also a newcomer.  philippines  brands available in the philippines include lucky me, payless, nissin, quickchow, maggi and ho-mi. they are sold in packets, sealed paper cups, or sealed foam food containers.  sweden  cup noodles are usually sold for 10 sek per package.  united kingdom   a common form of instant noodles in britain is pot noodle, a cup noodle first marketed by golden wonder in 1977, and acquired by unilever in 1995. these use artificial flavorings and are generally suitable for vegetarians (there is no chicken in "chicken and mushroom flavour" pot noodles, for example) and are sold by virtually every major supermarket chain, general groceries shops, and convenience stores. boiling water is added to the noodles to cook them.  united states  in
1972, nissin foods introduced "nissin cup noodles" in a foam food cup, which led to an upsurge in popularity. soon after, many other competing companies were offering similar instant noodle products.  see also   instant noodle  references  9.  noodles chinese noodles japanese inventions instant foods and drinks japanese noodles
villa north historic district is a national historic district located at bluffton, wells county, indiana.  the district encompasses 24 contributing buildings in an exclusively residential section of bluffton.  it developed between about 1891 and 1915 and includes representative examples of queen anne, colonial revival, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture. notable contributing houses include the lent williamson residence (longfields, 1891), amos king residence (1894), peter beeler residence (1899), and wiley messick residence (c. 1915).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1985.  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana houses on the national register of historic places in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana buildings and structures in wells county, indiana national register of historic places in wells county, indiana
anusmriti sarkar is an indian actress. she is known for her telugu movies ishta sakhi and heroine. and recently she is known for her debut hindi movie "one day justice delivered " and "o pushpa i hate tears".  early life and background  anusmriti sarkar was born on 23 october 1995 to animesh sarkar and anita sarkar. anusmriti started her modelling career when she was just 17 years old. her father is a businessman and her mother is a homemaker. she has two younger sisters call satasmriti sarkar and ranasmriti sarkar .they both are studying in law school.  career  anusmriti made her acting debut in the year 2011 with the bengali film bhorer alo, replacing riya sen to star opposite rohit roy. this film was directed by two time national award-winning director prabhat roy.  her next project, in the same year, was tollywood film vankai fry. the film was directed by chandra mauli, and she starred opposite a newcomer actor.  post that, she immediately signed her second bengali film bikram singha: the lion is back, directed by rajiv kumar biswas, where she starred opposite bengali superstar prosenjit chatterjee. this led to her signing telugu film ishta sakhi in 2013, where she starred opposite famous actor srihari and two other heroes. her acting was very much appreciated in ishta sakhi.  she also worked on telugu film suswagatam where she played the main lead opposite famous telugu actor raja, and two more bengali films: biporjoy starred with indronil sengupta and one more bengali movie call  moner majhi tumi.  sarkar then bagged telugu film heroine, directed by bharath parapelli where she played the lead role and was widely appreciated for her acting.  throughout the early phase of her career, anusmriti sarkar did a series of films in both bengali and telugu industry. recently anusmriti's next bollywood movie got released called "oo pushpa i hate tears" with krushna abhishek and jayraam karthik. anusmriti sarkar's debut hindi movie was "one day justice delivered " which got released on 5 july 2019. where her role was very much appreciated as shagufta. she played a muslim girl in that film . anusmriti was costarring in "one day justice delivered " with anupam kher, esha gupta and kumud mishra .  the song from that movie "khuda ka noor"
was much appreciated. anusmriti's work in "oo pushpa i hate tears' is very appropriated. her latest music video album call "regret" with rnait was a big hit. now she's shooting for two new bollywood movies and three south films .  other work  anusmriti has done many ad campaigns like khadims, bsnl, tiger biscuit, reliance sim card, marie biscuit, manyavar, chirag computer, livon hair serum and many more. anusmriti also contributes in campaigns which supports a cause to maintain a healthy environment.  filmography  references  external links    living people indian film actresses actresses from kolkata 1991 births bengali people
louis-xavier eyma (16 october 1816 - 20 march 1876) was a 19th-century french journalist and writer, author, among others, of novels, travel books and theater plays.  biography  born in martinique, an illegitimate son of louis, a french lawyer who had long worked in new orleans and victorine eyma, xavier eyma studied in france and joined the navy administration in paris in 1836. he began to write in the parisian press and in 1840 obtained a first success with his novel le medaillon.  charged with a mission to west indies in order to study education there (1845), he also traveled to the united states (1846) as french correspondent of the newspaper  la chronique , which inspired him several travel stories. an editor at the journal des actionnaires when he was back in france, he returned in 1858 to new-orleans where his father lived, and worked there as director of the french section of l'abeille (1858-1859). among several american personalities, he engaged into a friendship with washington irving and visited the plains of ohio, mammoth cave, leavenworth and philadelphia.  in new orleans, he attended the arrival of the rest of the tribe of seminole on their way to deportation in arkansas. although an admirer of the united states, eyma condemned slavery and the massacre of indians in his writings.  he then visited cuba and after he returned to france in 1861, he worked for many newspapers including le figaro and la liberte.  his plays were presented on the most important parisian stages of the 19th century including theatre du vaudeville, theatre des varietes, and theatre de la porte-saint-martin.  director of nouvelliste de paris (1874-1876), he also translated american authors such as ralph waldo emerson (les lois de la vie 1864, the conduct of life) and washington irving (histoire de la conquete de grenade 1865, chronicle of the conquest of granada).  works   1840: ecrivains et artistes vivants, francais et etrangers, biographies, 3 vols. 1840: le medaillon, novel 1841: emmanuel, poems 1842 introduction a une politique generale 1842: l'abandon !, song 1849: album de 10 melodies pour voix et piano, with charles delange and francis tourte 1849: le croiseur, sea song 1849: dolorita, chanson catalane 1850: capitaine... de quoi ?, one-act comedie en vaudeville, with amedee de jallais 1851: le renard et les rais
ins, comedie en vaudeville en 1 acte, with de jallais 1852: les cent ecus de claude, feuilleton 1853: les deux ameriques, histoire, mœurs et voyages, report 1853: le mariage au baton, one-act comedie en vaudeville, with deadde saint-yves 1853: les femmes du nouveau monde 1854: les peaux-rouges, scenes de la vie des indiens, report 1857: les peaux-noires, scenes de la vie des esclaves, report 1860: le roi des tropiques 1860: le trone d'argent 1861: aventuriers et corsaires, michel levy 1861: le canal maritime du darien, etat de la question 1861: la republique americaine, ses institutions, ses hommes 1862: le roman de flavio (naples en 1798), novel, michel levy 1862: scenes de mœurs et de voyages dans le nouveau-monde 1862: la vie dans le nouveau-monde, recit, poulet-malassis 1862: les trente-quatre etoiles de l'union americaine 1863: legendes, fantomes et recits du nouveau-monde, 2 vols. 1863: les poches de mon parrain, roman, 2 vols. 1864: de la circulation libre des coupons a revenu fixe 1865: nice et les alpes-maritimes, sites pittoresques, monuments, description et histoire des arrondissements de nice, de puget-theniers et de grasse composant ce nouveau departement, texte descriptif et historique, with joseph dessaix 1866: la chasse a l'esclave, novel 1867: la mansarde de rose, followed by therese lorrain, novel, a. faure 1868: tobine, bolero 1874: 20 melodies, piano et chant, with victor hugo 1874: les gamineries de mme riviere 1876: la vie aux etats-unis, notes de voyage, plon 1877: les amoureux de la demoiselle, novel, dentu undated: les deux manoirs undated: excentricites americaines undated: le grand cordon et la corde undated: mademoiselle topaze undated: le masque blanc undated monrose...  bibliography   jack corzani, litterature antillaise (poesie), 1971,   edward larocque tinker, les ecrits de langue francaise en louisiane au xixe, 1975,   numa broc, dictionnaire des explor
ateurs francais du xixe siecle, t.3, amerique, cths, 1999,   dominique chance, histoire des litteratures antillaises, 2005,  external links   xavier eyma on data.bnf.fr  19th-century french journalists french male journalists 19th-century french novelists 19th-century french dramatists and playwrights french chansonniers english-french translators 19th-century french poets 1816 births martiniquais dramatists and playwrights 1876 deaths 19th-century french male writers martiniquais journalists martiniquais novelists 19th-century french translators
the 3rd beijing college student film festival () was held in 1996 in beijing, china. the accused uncle shangang was the biggest winner, receiving two awards, including best film award and best actor award.  awards  best film award: the accused uncle shangang  best director award: li shaohong for red powder  best actor award: li rentang for the accused uncle shangang  best actress award: none  best visual effects award: narrow escape  committee special award: a mongolian tale  special jury award: long live soldiers  references  external links  beijing college student film festival 1996 film festivals 1996 festivals in asia bei
a modular aircraft or pod plane  is a design principle for an aircraft where the payload carrying section can be routinely detached from, and reattached to, the rest of the aircraft. it can be compared to the function of intermodal shipping containers.  one advantage of an aircraft with such a configuration is that the loading and unloading processes can be greatly accelerated; instead of emptying a plane of its payload and then reloading, the entire payload can be swapped out as a single action. this approach also allows for an aircraft to be rapidly changed between different configurations, such as to carry different cargoes, passengers, or specialised equipment payloads. so-called 'pod planes' can be divided into two main sections: the flying component that consists of the airframe, cockpit and engines; and the detachable pods, which would contain the cabin or cargo hold. the flying component and the individual capsules can be detached from each other and combined in different ways. several experimental aircraft have flown to trial the concept, but this modular approach has remained in limited use at best through to the present day.  history  twentieth century  the concept was explored amid the second world war as various nations endeavoured to improve their logistical situations through air power. in nazi germany, the fieseler fi 333 was an prototype transport aircraft developed amid the conflict that was supported by the luftwaffe. as intended, the aircraft was to carry detachable pods of varying sizes for transporting cargo; it was believed that this arrangement was capable of allowing rapid turnaround times on the ground.  in november 1950, the fairchild xc-120 packplane, an experimental military transport developed for the united states air force, performed its maiden flight. described as a futuristic "pod plane", it was a development of the conventional c-119 flying boxcar, although the aircraft underwent evaluation flights including of its logistical capabilities, the project was ultimately canceled without any further production or direct follow-on effort.  during the 1960s, the sikorsky ch-54 tarhe, a heavy-lift helicopter crane, could also be outfitted with exchangeable cargo pods; it was adopted in limited numbers by the united states army and deployed during the vietnam war for logistics purposes. nasa also made some use of the type. the ch-54 tarhe would serve as the basis for the sikorsky s-64 skycrane.  around the same period, work begun on the kamov ka-26, a soviet helicopter furnished with an interchangeable modular pod. it was designed to carry a passenger module
capable of seating up to 7 passengers when fitted, or two stretcher-bound patients and two seated patients with a medical attendant; in a cargo capacity, up to  of physical goods or liquid chemicals could be conveyed. the platform was capable of crop dusting with the appropriate module installed, and could also carry underslung payloads. the ka-26 was succeeded by multiple derivatives, including the ka-126 and ka-226, although these rotorcraft were relatively conventional and did not pursue a modular philosophy.  twenty-first century  during the 2000s, the air force research laboratory proposed a similar concept for military and civilian use in the configurable air transport: a blended wing body aircraft with multiple detachable, ground-mobile pods. the afrl also performed proof-of-concept demonstrations under its modular aircraft support system (mass) program, which aimed at reducing the deployment footprint and increase supportability levels for aerospace ground equipment.  since 2009, the clip-air has been proposed  by the ecole polytechnique federale de lausanne. in terms of its basic configuration, it consists of a 60 m wide flying wing that includes the cockpit, engines and fuel; the aircraft is envisioned to lift up to three 30 m long, 30 tons modules for freight, fuel or 150 passengers.  the airbus a³ vahana was an electric-powered eight-propeller vtol personal air vehicle prototype. the vehicle employed a modular cabin concept, known as transpose, which was promoted as, amongst other benefits, allowing for new entertainment and commercial modules to be rapidly installed and removed from aircraft dependent on demand. the transpose modular design is reportedly compatible with the airbus a320 family of narrowbody airliners, and can be provisioned at customer preference following the completion of a two year certification programme.  during 2017,  proposed its own modular aircraft concept. around the same time, the carpinteria, california-startup dorsal aircraft promoted its efforts to produce light standard iso containers part of its unmanned freighter structure where the wing, engines and tail are attached to a dorsal spine fuselage. interconnecting  long aluminum containers carry the flight loads, aiming to lower overseas airfreight costs by 60%, and plan to convert a c-130h with the help of wagner aeronautical of san diego, experienced in passenger-to-cargo conversions.  see also   flying tank, conceptualised in the early 1930s  fieseler fi 333 (world war ii), design studies only  savoia-marchetti sm.105, post-world war
ii italian project with detachable fuselage  miles m.68 boxcar  fairchild xc-120 packplane (1950), one prototype flown  sikorsky ch-54 tarhe (1962), heavy-lift helicopter crane, also used with exchangeable cargo pods  kamov ka-26 (1965), a piston light helicopter with a modular pod, succeeded by the single turbine ka-126 (1988) and the twin-turbine ka-226 (1997)  references  citations  bibliography     taylor, john w. r. jane's all the world's aircraft 1982-83. london:jane's yearbooks, 1982. .  external links      aircraft by design configuration
reidar bøe (7 may 1921 - 9 august 1969) was a norwegian singer and composer.  he was born in bergen, and is known for his collaboration with kurt foss. he made his stage debut at den nationale scene in 1939, and also participated in radio shows. bøe and foss made their record debut in 1947 with the song "grønlandsvisa". the song "blaveispiken", with lyrics by arne paasche aasen, recorded in 1950 by bøe and accompanied by foss, sold more than 100,000 copies, and was frequently played in the radio show ønskekonserten (listeners' choice).  references  1921 births 1969 deaths musicians from bergen 20th-century norwegian male singers norwegian male composers
lucy dorothy ozarin (august 18, 1914 - september 17, 2017) was a psychiatrist who served in the united states navy. she was one of the first women psychiatrists commissioned in the navy, and she was one of seven female navy psychiatrists who served during world war ii.  early years and education ozarin was born in the brownsville neighborhood of brooklyn, new york, on august 18, 1914, the youngest of four children. her parents were russian immigrants who had met and married in the united states.  when she was seven years old, her family moved to inwood on long island, new york. her family was the only jewish family in the town. while attending school, she and her siblings all worked at their father's general store in inwood. she excelled throughout school, graduating from lawrence high school at the age of sixteen.  ozarin attended new york university, just as each of her siblings had. during her first year of college, ozarin played for the school's women's varsity basketball team and worked as an umbrella salesperson at macy's on saturdays. she was a member of the lambda gamma phi sorority and aesclepiad, a woman's pre-medical honor society. after three years at new york university, ozarin entered medical school at new york medical college. ozarin was one of six women enrolled in a class of one-hundred. ozarin earned a doctor of medicine degree in 1937.  civilian career ozarin worked as a resident at harlem hospital in pediatrics for two years. during five months of that time, ozarin worked on an ambulance, which she found exciting.  given the choice between treating patients with tuberculosis or mental illness, ozarin chose the latter because it was not a communicable disease. ozarin then worked as a resident at westchester county hospital's small psychiatric unit.  seven months into the position, her father suffered a stroke, and she decided to move near buffalo, new york, where he was living at the time. ozarin worked at the gowanda state hospital for three years. ozarin began in the acute ward and then later transferred to the chronic ward. ozarin had five-hundred patients under her care. finding that the hospital's chronic psychiatric patients were being kept in very poor conditions, ozarin tried to improve their conditions while she was there.  military career when the united states entered world war ii, the hospital's male psychiatrists left, and ozarin found herself the only physician for a thousand patients, most of whom had schizophrenia. ozarin felt it was impossible to perform her job well when she was spread so thin.  legislation established
women accepted for volunteer emergency service as a branch of the united states naval reserve in 1942. inspired in part by her brother's decision to join the military as an engineer in 1942, ozarin decided she join as well. the hospital's superintendent would not approve ozarin's request for leave, so ozarin resigned her position instead.  ozarin temporarily worked as assistant to the superintendent at new york's metropolitan hospital for six months until she was sworn into the navy. the navy's commissioning document was intended to be used for a man, and the form referred to ozarin using male pronouns. ozarin's title was assistant surgeon, lieutenant junior grade. ozarin was one of the first seven female psychiatrists with commissioned officer status in the united states navy.  without undergoing any military training at all, ozarin was immediately assigned to bethesda, maryland, in october 1943, reporting to captain forrest martin harrison. ozarin spent four months working in a military hospital until she received orders to report to camp lejeune.  at the time, there were 33,000 men and 3,000 women stationed at camp lejeune. it had two female physicians who were both assigned to the dependents clinic located outside the base. the commander of the hospital gave ozarin the impression that he respected neither women nor the field of psychiatry. ozarin was told to do physical examinations on applicants for employment at the hospital, which ozarin found to be waste of her skills, particularly when doctors with just ninety days of psychiatric training were treating psychiatry patients.  after a few weeks, a colleague in bethesda helped ozarin secure a transfer to the waves training station at hunter college in new york city. ozarin was one of three woman physicians at hunter college. ozarin conducted psychiatric examinations of the women entering waves and spars.  in february 1945, ozarin was given orders to return to bethesda to treat waves who were suffering from anxiety and other issues. when she was not seeing patients, ozarin studied at st. elizabeth's hospital in washington, d.c. at the end of world war ii, ozarin thought the navy would soon no longer require her service, and she began to look elsewhere. she applied for a child psychiatry fellowship, but she was not accepted. she passed the american board of psychiatry and neurology in psychiatry later that year in order to increase her worth on the job market.  post-military career following the end of world war ii, the navy began discharging its physicians in 1946. ozarin returned to new york state to live with her parents, while remaining in the naval reserves. looking for work, she networked with a fellow navy orient
ee mike spotswood who recommended she apply to work at the veterans administration. it took brief interviews with dr. harvey thompkins and dr. daniel blain to secure a position as assistant chief of hospital psychiatry. within a year, ozarin was promoted to chief of hospital psychiatry. while working at the veterans administration, ozarin asked thompkins why so many patients were in the hospital for ten years, and thompkins responded with an assignment. ozarin visited all of the veterans administration's mental hospitals and about seventy of its general hospitals to investigate the backlog for mental health services and monitor the care provided to patients with mental illness. ozarin wrote an article for reader's digest about chronic psychiatric patients who never received visitors, but the veterans administration would not allow its publication. reader's digest paid $200 to ozarin for the article, which she then donated to a patients' fund at tuskagee hospital, a greatly underfunded hospital.  in the early 1950s, ozarin traveled to bethel, maine, for the national training laboratories' two-week t-group training, led by sociologists. when ozarin returned, she set up t-groups and other new programs for the psychiatric patients at the veterans administration's hospitals. ozarin also started a training institute at coatsville va medical hospital where the veterans administration's clinical directors would discuss advances in psychiatry.  ozarin decided to give up her military commission and the navy reserves in 1957. she joined the united states public health service the same year. for three years, ozarin worked as the medical officer of its regional office in kansas city, where she stimulated mental health activities and made sure funding was spent in accordance with rules and regulations. ozarin advocated for treating psychiatric patients for their illnesses, and preserving the patients' freedom, dignity, and equality as psychiatric necessities as part of the treatment. ozarin attended the harvard university school of public health, earning a masters in public health in 1961. she returned to the kansas city regional office after graduation.  when president of the united states john f. kennedy signed the community mental health act of 1963, the national institute of mental health chose ozarin as one of five people to write the regulations and establish community mental health centers across the country. in order to determine what form a community mental health center should have, ozarin traveled around the country, evaluating psychiatric services provided by medical facilities to determine what was effective. after writing the regulations, ozarin evaluated and approved applications for grants to replace long-stay psychiatric hospitals with less-isolated community mental health centers for people with a mental illness or a developmental disability.
ozarin said the costs of building of local psychiatric treatment centers was costly "just as all medical care is costly" but she asked "what is the alternative? it is also costly for families to be disrupted and for people to be disabled for long periods of time." ozarin was a proponent of the deinstitutionalization of psychiatric patients, and she advocated for the eliminating the social stigma of psychiatric treatment.  ozarin returned to the national institute of mental health, where she developed new programs to help people with mental illness. ozarin helped bring psychiatrists and social workers to medical facilities in rural areas, making it easier for people with mental illnesses living in rural areas to receive treatment.    around 1972, ozarin was based in copenhagen, denmark, researching treatment programs for drug and alcohol addiction in nine european countries for the world health organization. as part of her research, ozarin met with officials at each country's ministry of health and visited each country's mental health facilities. after writing a report about each country's mental health services, ozarin convened a meeting on improving alcohol and drug programs that was attended by people from 21 countries. in the early 1980s, the world health organization selected ozarin to serve as its drug-abuse officer, based in copenhagen, for nine months.  ozarin worked until her retirement in 1983.  retirement beginning in the mid-1980s and continuing for about 25 years, ozarin began volunteering for the american psychiatric association. ozarin went over every single book in the american psychiatric association's melvin sabshin library and archives and made sure they were all entered into its online catalog.  ozarin volunteered for the national library of medicine in the history of medicine division from 2004 to 2013. during the civil war, the surgeon general john shaw billings had collected every medical book published in the country and every publication about public health and state medicine. ozarin took it upon herself to catalog them, about twenty- to thirty-thousand documents and publications so that medical researchers would be able to find and learn from them. during this project, ozarin learned a great deal about the history of medicine in the united states.  ozarin sorted and cataloged hundreds of medical dissertations from the 18th century. it was during this project that ozarin discovered the medical dissertation of benjamin rush, one of the founders of american psychiatry and a signer of the united states declaration of independence.  ozarin wrote most of the text and selected images for the national library of medicine's web site, diseases of the mind: highlights of american psychiatry to 1900. she sorted through its collection of 20,000 items as part of
her research. for her work, ozarin received a director's honor award in 2008. she also received the distinguished service award from the american psychiatric association in 2007.  during her late nineties, ozarin wrote over fifty biographies of notable psychiatrists on wikipedia. for twenty years, ozarin spent saturday afternoons volunteering at the kitchen of suburban hospital in bethesda, maryland, after the end of her synagogue's shabbat services. ozarin was an active member of the senior citizen's group at her synagogue. she represented her apartment house at the national institutes of health community council in order to stay connected to the national institutes of health and to maintain access to its campus and facilities. ozarin read medical journals every week, something she started doing in medical school.  ozarin considered physical activity, a good diet, and a modicum of religion and faith to be her key to a long life. looking back, ozarin was grateful for the opportunities she had, as well as for her courage, intelligence, and creativity that led her to take advantage of opportunities when she saw them. asked during an interview what message she wanted to leave to young people for their future, ozarin said, "take advantage of your advantages. be willing to take risks. ... if you have a question, and you know who to go to, don't call them up, go to see them because you never know what else you're going to learn. ... look for openings. look for places where you can go. and dream."p. 45  ozarin died in september 2017, at the age of 103.  in fall 2019, dr. ozarin's student microscope was donated to the nih stetten museum in bethesda, maryland.  it is a 1932-3 bausch and lomb type h, model ha.  it has been accessioned by the museum's curator, and it is searchable through the museum's online archive.  works  ozarin, lucy d.; thomas, claudewell s. "advocacy in community mental health programs". american journal of public health. april 1972. 62 (4). 557-559.  ozarin, lucy d. "the community mental health center-a public health facility". american journal of public health and the nation's health. january 1966. 56 (1). p. 26-31.  ozarin, lucy d.; levenson, alan i. "community mental health centers program after four years' experience". public health reports. november 1967. 82 (11). p. 941-945.  ozarin, lucy. "daniel
blain: founder of this journal". psychiatric services. 50 (12). december 1999. p. 1563.  ozarin, lucy d. existing patterns of services for alcoholism and drug dependence: report. world health organization. 1973.  ozarin, lucy. "kirkbride: hospital innovator". psychiatric news. american psychiatric association. october 6, 2000.  ozarin, lucy d.; feldman, saul. "implications for health service delivery: the community mental health centers amendments of 1970". journal of american public health. september 1971. 61 (9). p. 1780-1784.  ozarin, lucy d. mental health services in rural america. hospital & community psychiatry. 34 (3). march 1983.  ozarin, lucy. "moral insanity: a brief history". psychiatric news. american psychiatric association. may 18, 2001.  ozarin, lucy. "pioneering psychiatrist made connection between mind, body". psychiatric news. january 19, 2001.  ozarin, lucy d. "the pros and cons of case management" in j.a. talbott (editor) the chronic mental patient: problems, solutions, and recommendations for a public policy. american psychiatric association. 1978. p. 165-170.  ozarin, lucy. "a psychiatric pioneer remembered". psychiatric news. american psychiatric association. march 3, 2006.  ozarin, lucy. "psychiatry during the u.s. civil war". psychiatric news. american psychiatric association. january 21, 2000.  ozarin, lucy d.; samuels, michael e.; biedenkapp, john. "need for mental health services in federally funded rural primary health care systems". public health reports. july-august 1978. 93(4). p. 351-355.  ozarin, lucy d.; sharfstein, steven s.; albert, mathieu. "integrating mental health and general health care". the hillside journal of clinical psychiatry. 3 (1). 1981. p. 97-105.  williams, richard h.; ozarin, lucy d. community mental health: an international perspective hardcover. jossey-bass. 1968.  references  1914 births 2017 deaths american centenarians jewish american military personnel american military doctors american psychiatrists american women psychiatrists harvard school of public health alumni military personnel from new york city new york university alumni new york medical college alumni people from bethesda, maryland people from brownsville, brooklyn people from crown heights, brooklyn people from nassau county, new york physicians from new york (state) united states navy officers waves personnel women centenarians wikipedia people burials
at wellwood cemetery 21st-century american jews 21st-century american women united states navy personnel of world war ii
woods island state park is a state park on lake champlain in vermont. the park comprises the 125-acre woods island, and is located off st. albans point in franklin county, vermont.  it is administered by the vermont department of forests, parks, and recreation, as part of the vermont state park system. the park can only be reached by boat, and visitors must make their own arrangements to get there. there is no dock.  woods island features five primitive campsites, with minimal sanitary facilities and no potable water supply. reservations are necessary for camping.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of franklin county, vermont landforms of franklin county, vermont islands of vermont st. albans, vermont protected areas established in 1985 1985 establishments in vermont
adam frank froese (born august 13, 1991) is a canadian field hockey player who plays as a defender or midfielder for india club and the canadian national team.  international career froese played for the canada national field hockey team at the 2015 pan american games and won a silver medal. in 2016, he was named to canada's olympic team. in june 2019, he was selected in the canada squad for the 2019 pan american games, which will be his third pan american games. they won the silver medal as they lost 5-2 to argentina in the final.  references  external links            adam froese at field hockey canada  adam frank froese at the 2019 pan american games  1991 births living people people from petaling district canadian male field hockey players malaysian male field hockey players male field hockey defenders male field hockey midfielders field hockey players at the 2010 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2011 pan american games field hockey players at the 2014 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2015 pan american games field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2018 commonwealth games field hockey players at the 2019 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for canada olympic field hockey players of canada pan american games medalists in field hockey canadian people of malaysian descent medalists at the 2011 pan american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games commonwealth games competitors for canada
andreas vlachomitros (, born 3 july 1997) is a greek professional footballer who plays as a left winger for super league 2 club niki volos.  club career born in the greek capital athens, vlachomitros came from the youth ranks of aek athens where he scored over 60 goals in four years.  he made his debut for the main team of aek against pannaxiakos on the last match day of 2013-14 football league 2 season, scoring the final 3-1 score with a header.  vlachomitros made his professional debut against panionios at a uefa playoff match in the last game of the 2015-16 season.  on july 7, 2016, vlachomitros signed a one-year loan deal with serbian superliga side fk javor ivanjica. at the beginning of 2017, the deal was terminated and vlachomitros returned to his home club without official caps for javor.  personal life vlachomitros' younger brother, anestis, is also a professional footballer.  honours aek athens football league 2: 2013-14 (6th group) greek cup: 2015-16 ionikos super league greece 2: 2020-21  references  external links  andreas vlachomitros at aek official website  andreas vlachomitros at superleague greece official website  1997 births living people sportspeople from athens greek footballers association football forwards aek athens f.c. players super league greece players fk javor ivanjica players greek expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in serbia apollon pontou fc players sparta f.c. players aiginiakos f.c. players ionikos f.c. players niki volos f.c. players
railroad wash is a seasonal stream or wash and a tributary of the gila river.  its mouth is at its confluence with the gila river, at an elevation of 3,839 feet / 1,170 meters.  its source is located at an elevation of 4,237 feet on the west side of the summit hills, in hidalgo county, new mexico, at .  references  railroad wash (gila river) rivers of arizona railroad wash (gila river) rivers of new mexico
scalzone is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alfonso scalzone (born 1996), italian rower angelo scalzone (1931-1987), italian sports shooter  roberto scalzone (1962-2019), italian sports shooter  oreste scalzone (born 1947), italian marxist intellectual  italian-language surnames
langrian () is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 12.2 km away from phillaur, 35.9 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 122 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed primary school (gps langrian). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1970.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , langrian has a total number of 62 houses and population of 337 of which include 173 males and 164 females. literacy rate of langrian is 75.17%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 39 which is 11.57% of total population of langrian, and child sex ratio is approximately 500 lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 94.96% of total population in langrian. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 63 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of langrian which includes 58 males and 5 females. according to census survey report 2011, 28.57% workers describe their work as main work and 71.43% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  bhattian railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 11.6 km away from the village. the village is 42.6 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 134 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
ivkov () is a slavic masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is ivkova. it may refer to borislav ivkov (1933-2022), serbian chess grandmaster  kiril ivkov (born 1946), bulgarian football player  bulgarian-language surnames serbian surnames
burksville may refer to:  burksville, illinois burksville, missouri
lee grodzins (born july 10, 1926) is an american professor emeritus of physics at the massachusetts institute of technology (mit). after work as a researcher at brookhaven national laboratory, grodzins joined the faculty of mit, where he taught physics for nearly four decades.  he was also head of r&d for niton corporation, which developed devices to detect dangerous contaminants and contraband. he has written more than 150 technical papers and holds more than 60 us patents.  education and early life grodzins was born in lowell, massachusetts, the son of david melvin grodzins and his wife taube grodzins, jewish emigrants, with roots in poland and grodno, belarus. the family settled in manchester, new hampshire. he graduated with a bs degree in engineering in 1946 from the university of new hampshire. he began his career with general electric as an assistant in the nuclear physics group at their research laboratory in schenectady, new york. he earned his phd in physics at purdue university in 1954 and taught for a year afterwards at purdue.  career and research  from 1955 to 1958, grodzins was a researcher with the nuclear physics group at brookhaven national laboratory, probing the properties of the nuclei of atoms. in 1956 he married a biologist whom he met at brookhaven, lulu  anderson (1929- 2019). the same year, together with maurice goldhaber and , grodzins performed an experiment that determined that neutrinos have negative helicity. this work was important in our understanding of the weak interaction. grodzins joined the faculty of the physics department of mit in 1959 and was a professor of physics there from 1966 to 1998. in 1985, he carried out the first computer axial tomographic experiment using synchrotron radiation.  meanwhile, in 1987, he co-founded and led research and development at niton corporation, which developed, manufactured and marketed test kits and instruments to measure radon gas in buildings and toxic elements, such as lead. there he also developed handheld devices that use x-ray fluorescence to determine the composition of metal alloys and to detect other materials. in 1998, he left mit to work full-time directing the r&d group at niton, and in 2005, he and his family sold niton. his sister ethel was the president and ceo of niton. he also developed devices to detect explosives, drugs and other contraband in luggage and cargo containers. four of his devices have earned r&d 100 awards, given
annually by r&d magazine to the 100 most innovative technical products in the us.  grodzins has written more than 150 technical papers and holds more than 50 us patents. he was a guggenheim fellow in 1964-65 and in 1971-72, and a senior alexander von humboldt fellow in 1980-81. he is a fellow of the american physical society and the american academy of arts and sciences. he received an honorary doctor of science degree from purdue university in 1998. he is a founding member of the union of concerned scientists and was its president in 1972. in 1999, he founded cornerstones of science, a public library initiative to help children and adults explore science. he serves as its president. mit has named the lee grodzins postdoctoral fellows lecture award for him.  personal life his sister anne grodzins lipow was a librarian and library science expert, and his sister ethel grodzins romm was an author, project manager, ceo and co-chair of the lyceum society of the new york academy of sciences.  references  external links  grodzins describes cornerstones of science's vision (2015)  1926 births brookhaven national laboratory staff massachusetts institute of technology school of science faculty university of new hampshire alumni purdue university alumni members of the united states national academy of sciences 21st-century american physicists american nuclear physicists living people
the 1988 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1988 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their 11th season under head coach herb deromedi, the chippewas compiled a 7-4 record (5-3 against mac opponents), finished in a tie for third place in the mac standings, and outscored their opponents, 287 to 176.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 86,177 in five home games.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback jeff bender with 1,309 passing yards, tailback donnie riley with 1,128 rushing yards, and mark hopkins with 433 receiving yards. bender received the mac's freshman of the year award, and linebacker george ricumstrict received the team's most valuable player award. four central michigan players (offensive guard chuck pellegrini, tailback donnie riley, linebacker mark dennis, and defensive lineman scott alferink) received first-team all-mac honors.  schedule  references  external links  official program, october 1, 1988  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
nathalie michelle sinclair (born 1970) is a canadian researcher in mathematics education who holds the canada research chair in tangible mathematics learning at simon fraser university in vancouver.  early life and education sinclair was born in grenoble, the daughter of canadian academics who were on sabbatical there; she grew up in calgary. she began her undergraduate studies at mcgill university in business, but quickly switched to mathematics, and then earned a master's degree with len berggren at simon fraser on the history of mathematics and mathematics in medieval islam.  she became a middle school teacher of mathematics and french on bowen island, sinclair then earned her ph.d. in 2002 from queen's university at kingston, under the joint supervision of peter taylor of the department of mathematics and statistics and william higginson of the faculty of education.  career  in 2003, sinclair accepted a joint appointment in the college of natural sciences and the college of education at michigan state university.  in 2014, sinclair and nicholas jackiw developed a mathematical app targeted at children ages three to eight. the purpose of the app is to teach children math through "hands-on" learning. two years later, she was named a tier 2 canada research chair in tangible mathematics learning.  in march 2017, sinclair was named canada's mathematics ambassador by partners in research for her contributions to the field of mathematics. later that year, sinclair was elected a member of the college of new scholars, artists and scientists of the royal society of canada. in 2019, sinclair was awarded the svend pedersen lecture award.  selected publications . winner of the janet duffin award for the best paper of the year in research in mathematics education. . honourable mention for innovations in curriculum studies, american educational research association, 2015.  references  external links home page google scholar profile  1970 births living people mathematics educators mcgill university faculty of science alumni simon fraser university alumni queen's university at kingston alumni simon fraser university faculty canada research chairs canadian women mathematicians 21st-century mathematicians 21st-century canadian mathematicians 21st-century women mathematicians
qazaq khan cherkes was a safavid military commander of circassian origin, who also served as the governor (beglarbeg) of shirvan (1624-1633) and astarabad (1639-1640). a high-ranking member of the gholam military corps, he was furthermore appointed head of the qaramanlu and keneslu qizilbash troops by then incumbent king abbas i (r. 1588-1629) as part of the latters' policy to diminish the political influence of the qizilbash. in 1632, during king safi's (r. 1629-42) bloody purges, his relative, the prominent circassian courtier yusuf agha was murdered, while qazaq khan cherkes was deposed and imprisoned in 1633. he nevertheless later returned on the political scene in the last years of safi's reign, when he was given a new governorship in 1639. his son najafqoli khan cherkes would hold several influential positions as well.  sources         safavid governors of shirvan iranian people of circassian descent ghilman safavid generals prisoners and detainees of safavid iran safavid governors of astarabad 17th-century people of safavid iran safavid slaves
sphingomonas gei  is a gram-negative, strictly aerobic and motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas with a single polar flagellum which has been isolated from roots of the plant geum aleppicum from the mount taibai in the shaanxi province in china.  references  further reading     gei bacteria described in 2015 gram-negative bacteria
three stories (polish: trzy opowiesci) is a 1953 polish drama film directed by konrad nalecki, ewa petelska and czesław petelski. it is an anthology film, with three separate stories by different directors and casts. it was made in the style of socialist realism, at a time when this stalinist method was at its height in polish and eastern european cinema.  the film's sets were designed by wojciech krysztofiak.  cast  marian rułka as wladek kulesza (segment "cement")  zygmunt listkiewicz as stefan 'franek' korsak (segment "cement")  adam kwiatkowski as wacek (segment "cement")  ignacy gogolewski as derka (segment "cement")  władysław staszewski as molenda (segment "cement")  henryk dudzinski as lt. malewicz (segment "cement")  juliusz lubicz-lisowski as engineer (segment "cement")   wiktor sadecki as nowak (segment "cement")   szczepan baczynski as director (segment "cement")  roman kłosowski as boy-scout (segment "cement")  leon luszczewski as old man (segment "cement")  marian stanisławski as boy-scout (segment "cement")  antoni wichura as worker (segment "cement")   julian wroczynski as railwayman (segment "cement")  teresa szmigielowna as nurse (segment "cement")  lech pietrasz as jacek kowalski (segment "jacek")  tomasz zaliwski as jedrek (segment "jacek")  bogumił kobiela as grzes (segment "jacek")  jan bratkowski as stefan makowski (segment "jacek")  antoni lewek as kuzma (segment "jacek")  jerzy kaczmarek as hooligan (segment "jacek")  ryszard karpinski as party boy (segment "jacek")  zbigniew korepta as party boy (segment "jacek")   stanisław michalski as adam (segment "jacek")  roman polanski as genek 'the little' (segment "jacek")  irena szramowska as party girl (segment "jacek")  ryszard ostromecki as party boy (segment "jacek")   ferdynand matysik as adam (segment "sprawa konia")
kazimierz sus as kazik martyniak (segment "sprawa konia")  katarzyna laniewska as maryna (segment "sprawa konia")  wanda szczepanska as wierzbicka (segment "sprawa konia")   jozef pilarski as wojciech wierzbicki (segment "sprawa konia")  kazimierz opalinski as nowicki (segment "sprawa konia")  janina draczewska as bobrowa (segment "sprawa konia")  jerzy antczak as rafal (segment "sprawa konia")  włodzimierz kwaskowski as karolak (segment "sprawa konia")  stanisław libner as clerk (segment "sprawa konia")   jan machulski as boy-scout (segment "sprawa konia")  references  bibliography   mark betz. beyond the subtitle: remapping european art cinema. university of minnesota press, 2009.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films polish drama films polish films polish-language films films directed by ewa petelska films directed by czesław petelski polish black-and-white films
the 2016 uk & ireland greyhound racing year was the 91st year of greyhound racing in the united kingdom and ireland and commenced with the category 2 coronation cup at romford greyhound stadium which was shown live on sky sports. the final event was the olympic at brighton & hove greyhound stadium.  the year was overshadowed by the ongoing saga regarding the uncertain future of the greyhound racing association operated tracks of wimbledon stadium and hall green stadium. an announcement was made that wimbledon would close after the running of the 2016 english greyhound derby before a six-month reprieve arrived. however it was announced that the stadium would close in march 2017.  wimbledon's sister track hall green remained in danger of being closed following the 2014 sale to euro property investments ltd.  the premier competition of the year, the english greyhound derby, was won by jaytee jet  and the irish derby was taken by rural hawaii. kevin hutton secured his second successive trainers championship. mark wallis won the champion trainer trophy for a record eighth time passing the previous record of seven set by john 'ginger' mcgee sr.  the year ended with two notable successes for towcester, the first was being crowned bags/sis track champions (greyhound racing's equivalent to footballs fa cup and within days it was announced that the track would host the english greyhound derby for five years.  roll of honour  principal uk finals  principal irish finals  uk category 1 & 2 competitions  irish feature competitions  references   greyhound racing in the united kingdom greyhound racing in the republic of ireland 2016 in british sport 2016 in irish sport uk and ireland
the 2016-17 baylor bears basketball team represented baylor university in the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. this was head coach scott drew's 14th season at baylor. the bears competed in the big 12 conference and played their home games at the ferrell center in waco, tx. they finished the season 27-8, 12-6 in big 12 play to finish in a three-way tie for second place. they lost to kansas state in the quarterfinals of the big 12 tournament. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament where they defeated new mexico state and usc before losing in the sweet sixteen to south carolina.  previous season the bears finished the 2015-16 season 22-12, 10-8 in big 12 play to finish in a tie for fifth place. they defeated texas in the quarterfinals of the big 12 tournament to advance to the semifinals where they lost to kansas. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament as a no. 5 seed and lost in the first round to no. 12-seeded yale.  departures  incoming transfers  recruits  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#; color:#;"|regular season  |- ! colspan=9 style="background:#;"| big 12 tournament  |- ! colspan=9 style="background:#;"| ncaa tournament  rankings  *ap does not release post-ncaa tournament rankings  references  baylor baylor bears men's basketball seasons baylor
the 1917 kentucky wildcats football team represented the kentucky wildcats of the university of kentucky during the 1917 college football season. the season ended on a high note with the 52-0 defeat of florida.  schedule  references  kentucky kentucky wildcats football seasons kentucky wildcats football
khatwa is the name given to applique works in bihar, india. khatwa is about designing by cutting of one fabric and stitching the pieces to another fabric. khatwa is mainly used to create designer tents, canopies and shamianas. in textiles, applique is sometimes confused with patchwork. though both techniques derive from the recycling of old fabrics by sewing different fabrics to create one piece, they are quite distinguishable. patchwork refers to a variety of fabrics sewn together to create a single textile pattern. on the other hand, applique refers to a variety of coloured fabrics and ornaments, such as small round mirrors, layered on top of one another in order to create elaborate designs by means of various forms of stitching. there is no restriction to the type of fabrics used in the creation of applique items, and may even be of varying textures. it is often found alongside embroidery and can be sub-divided into two techniques. the simple 'play by ear' technique consists of the open use of an assortment of materials of various shapes and sizes, stitched together without much preparation. the more complex technique involves thorough planning of the design before any work is done with the materials. khatwa is about designing by cutting of one fabric and stitching the pieces to another fabric. khatwa is mainly used to create designer tents, canopies, shamianas and much more. making of such tents involves work by both men and women. while cutting of clothes is done by men, women use their expertise in stitching part. khatwa is also used in designing women garments as well. this is where the real talent of bihar people is seen in the work. the designs created are more sharp, intricate and highly appealing. most of the garments shop sell these highly artistic clothes. people in some villages of bihar are involved only in art works and it is their main source of income. since the same skills are passed down to generations, the expertise and innovations are immaculate.  it is believed that applique work made its way into western india either from europe or arabia in the middle east through trade contacts. it involves creation of designs by cutting one fabric and stitching the pieces onto another. "khatwa" is used to craft decorative tents, canopies, shamianas, etc. a thick fabric and geometric patterns are used while making the tents on important occasion or functions.  references  culture of bihar needlework
byron robinson (born may 10, 1995) is an american track and field athlete who competes in the 400 metres hurdles. he holds a personal record of 48.58 seconds for the event. he was the runner-up at the united states olympic trials in 2016.  born in chesapeake, virginia, he attended western branch high school and ran track there. he won two relay events at the new balance outdoor nationals in 2013. he attended penn state university and competed for their penn state nittany lions track team in 2014. after one year, he switched to university of texas at austin and ran for the texas longhorns instead, having heard the penn state coach was going to leave.  at the 2015 big 12 conference indoor championship he was runner-up in the 600 meters, then helped texas to third in the 4 × 400-meter relay at the 2015 ncaa division i indoor track and field championships. he faltered in the outdoor season, only managing eighth in the 400 m hurdles at the big 12 outdoor meet. in 2016, he ran three events at the big 12 indoors, winning the 600 m title, taking runner-up in the relay, as well as seventh in the 200-meter dash. at the 2016 ncaa indoor championships he ran the preliminaries of the 400-meter dash and was fourth in the relay.  robinson greatly improved in the 2016 outdoor season, setting the fastest time for an american that season with 49.10 seconds in april - over a second improvement on his 400 m hurdles personal record. he won the hurdles at the big 12 conference in 49.39 seconds, but withdrew from the ncaa qualifiers for undisclosed reasons. working with coach tonja buford-bailey, robinson entered the 2016 united states olympic trials and improved further to 48.79 seconds to finish runner-up to former world champion kerron clement. he beat olympic silver medalist michael tinsley in the process and gained a place on the united states olympic team. at the olympics, robinson advanced to the semifinals but did not qualify for the finals despite running a personal best.  personal records outdoor 400-meter hurdles - 48.65(2016) 100-meter dash - 10.69 (2013) 200-meter dash - 20.94 (2016) 400-meter dash - 46.12 (2014) 300-meter hurdles - 36.24 (2012)  indoor 55-meter dash - 6.86 (2011) 200-meter dash - 21.36 (2016) 400-meter dash - 46.27 (2016) 500-meter
dash - 1:01.60 (2017)  all information from all athletics  references  external links  living people 1995 births sportspeople from chesapeake, virginia american male hurdlers african-american male track and field athletes penn state nittany lions men's track and field athletes texas longhorns men's track and field athletes track and field athletes from virginia athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states 21st-century african-american sportspeople
emphytoecia alboliturata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by blanchard in gay in 1851. it is known from chile.  references  pteropliini beetles described in 1851 endemic fauna of chile
hangingstone hill, is a hill in north dartmoor in the southwest english county of devon. at 603 metres high, it is the joint third highest peak in devon and dartmoor, together with cut hill, which lies around 4 kilometres to the southwest.   the hill lies within the military training area on dartmoor and is not accessible to the public except at certain times. there is a military road to the summit, which is marked by an army observation post and flagpole. on clear days, the views are "superb", extending to exmoor, the quantocks, the river teign estuary and many of dartmoor's peaks.  the name of the hill is derived from a logan rock on the northwest hillside, which, however, no longer rocks. it was formerly known as newtake hill.  hangingstone is one of dartmoor's thirteen deweys and the tenth highest in england.  about 600 metres almost due south is the summit of whitehorse hill which is a subpeak or twin peak of hangingstone hill. it has a drop of less than 10m.  references   hills of devon dartmoor
the museum of money of the national bank of ukraine  was officially launched on 24 march 2004 as the museum of the ukrainian branch office of the state bank of the ussr. the museum's collection (numismatic or notaphilic items) reflects the history of money circulation in ukraine from the ancient times to nowadays. the museum is housed at the national bank of ukraine in kyiv.  location: 9 instytutska street (entrance 5).  history  the decision to establish the museum of money was taken in late 1988. the exhibits of the museum of the ukrainian branch office of the state bank of the ussr, which was founded in 1981, formed the basis for the collection.  in accordance with resolution of the cabinet of ministers of ukraine no. 1766 of 29 november 2000 the nbu museum of money is listed as a museum whose collection and exhibits are state property and form part of the state museum fund of ukraine.  the nbu museum of money officially opened its doors to the public on 24 march 2004. the museum was launched to mark the tenth anniversary of the printing of first banknotes of independent ukraine at the nbu's banknote paper mill.  the museum was launched by nbu governor serhiy tihipko, who was in office at that time. mr. tihipko, along with 10th grade students from kyiv international relations lyceum 51, joined an excursion to the museum.  collections  the museum's exposition is arranged in chronological order, starting from primitive commodities that served as money to the national monetary unit of ukraine - the hryvnia. the museum's exhibits reflect over thousand-year-long history of the hryvnia and other monetary units that were in circulation at different times in the territory of ukraine.  the museum of money contains the following exhibits (both originals and replicas): 	coins of the northern black sea coast inhabited by the greeks; 	coins of the roman empire in ukraine (1st and 3rd centuries ad); 	dirhams of the caliphate and coins of the byzantine empire in the ukrainian land that circulated during the period when trade flourished with byzantium and other eastern countries; 	first coins of kyiv rus - gold and silver coins (zlatnyky and sriblianyky); 	coinless period of the 12th-14th centuries, silver hryvnia ingots as a means of payment; 	coins of western europe of the 15th - 17th centuries; 	kopiykas of the tsard
om of moscovy, metal and paper money of the russian empire; 	money of the ukrainian people's republic (1917-1920); 	russian rubles and ukrainian karbovanets that circulated during the first years of ukraine's independence; 	hryvnias of independent ukraine  (1996-2016); 	full collection of commemorative and jubilee coins of ukraine; 	monetary units of other countries.  the colorful stained-glass windows of the museum feature the most important milestones in the history of ukraine that are reflected in the numismatic exhibits displayed in the museum showcases. these include pre-monetary forms of money (the bronze age and the trypillya culture), money of kyiv rus,  the kozak epoch, the ukrainian people's republic of 1917-1920 and present-day ukraine.  present   the modern museum of money not only offers visitors an opportunity to view the valuable exhibits, but also raise the level of financial literacy among its visitors. special trainings on savings, the protection of deposits, banknote security features are arranged for schoolchildren and students. these trainings are intended to provide a grasp of basic financial awareness.  training sessions end with interactive learning which offers visitors an opportunity to strike a coin using a manually operated a coin-minting press and a hammer, a minting technique similar to that used in the middle ages.  visitors are encouraged to pre-register for excursions online through the nbu's website. the pre-registration procedure involves filling in an application form. the excursion schedule is compiled based on the submitted applications.  the museum's collection can be viewed online by taking a virtual tour, available on the nbu's official website. the 3d virtual tour offers viewers an opportunity to explore all the showcases.  references   virtual tour  national bank of ukraine - where the history originates  facebook  the nbu museum of музеи opened its doors to the public  "the footage shot by the kyiv tv channel. "doors open day at the nbu"  the national bank of ukraine joins the global money week celebrations  numismatic museums in ukraine museums in kyiv
leptonota sepium is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
raul "tinajon" feliciano rodriguez (july 31, 1930 - july 17, 2016) was a puerto rican professional basketball player and lawyer. he played basketball professionally in puerto rico in the baloncesto superior nacional (bsn).  basketball career  feliciano made his debut in the baloncesto superior nacional (bsn) league in 1947 with the upr of rio piedras, averaging 7.78 points in 14 games. he was the bsn scoring champion from 1948 to 1952 before fufi santori became the scoring champion in 1953. his scoring ability began a media coverage not seen before in the baloncesto superior nacional (bsn) and prompted a new record assistance of 114,468 paying fans for the bsn league. he finished his career with 4,719 points in the baloncesto superior nacional. in the process he became the first player in the bsn to score 40 or more points in a basketball game, a feat he achieved with the gallitos de la upr on september 5, 1949, scoring 46 points in the triumph, 83-66, against the cardenales de rio piedras. similarly, he was the first to average over 20 points per game in a season in the bsn league.  feliciano became the first puerto rican basketball player to receive offers from national basketball association teams such as the baltimore bullets and the new york knicks. his offensive profile included two main shots: a right hook shot and the jumpshot.  personal life  feliciano was born in ciales, puerto rico on july 31, 1930. at an early age, he became interested in basketball and played at the escuela superior de rio piedras. in 1945 feliciano began his studies at the university of puerto rico, rio piedras campus. at age 18, he graduated in business administration and two years later as a lawyer. feliciano died on july 17, 2016 at his home in san juan, puerto rico.  references  external links  statistics in bsn  stats and teams  interview of raul feliciano in 2010  1930 births 2016 deaths baloncesto superior nacional players people from ciales, puerto rico puerto rican men's basketball players puerto rico men's national basketball team players central american and caribbean games bronze medalists for puerto rico competitors at the 1954 central american and caribbean games centers (basketball) central american and caribbean games medalists in basketball
this is a list of the divers who will be participating for their country at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, brazil from  august 5-21, 2016. 136 divers are set to participate at the games across four events.  male divers  female divers  references  http://www.fina.org/athletes  list lists of acrobatic divers divers
"i love this land" is a 1982 song by vera lynn that was released as a single in the aftermath of the falklands war. the song was written by andre previn, and credited to "vera lynn and the victory group". the b-side was "the victory theme". it was released on state records.  lynn performed "we'll meet again" and "i love this land" at portsmouth harbour upon the return of the troops from the war. lynn also performed the song at close of the berkleley square ball in july 1982.  in his 2011 book a patriotism for today, theologian keith clements described the song as a "syrupy number" and that "i love this land" was "...the final confirmation, if any were needed, that an exercise in nostalgia for the emotional certainties of the past was taking place rather than an encounter with the global realities of the 1980s". the song was also critiqued as an act of nostalgia in the glasgow media group's book the glasgow media group reader, vol. ii: industry, economy, war and politics who wrote that upon the release of the song "...the bbc not only treated this as news" but "also gave us an historical introduction and extracts from her song accompanied by wartime stills of the 'forces' sweetheart' and current film of her wandering through an english country garden".  the glasgow media group noted that other songs released for the falklands war such as crass's "how does it feel (to be the mother of 1000 dead?)" that "lack the patriotic element" of "i love this land" and "...do not make news in quite the same way".  references  1982 singles 1982 songs british patriotic songs falklands war media songs with music by andre previn vera lynn songs
the waianae sugar company, founded in 1878, was the first major sugar plantation on oahu, hawaii.  history   in 1878, judge hermann widemann planted his first crop in wai'anae, eleven years before the creation of the oahu railway and land company, and seventeen years before the or&l would reach the sugar mill. waianae sugar company's plantation cultivated land in three valleys, makaha, lualualei, and wai'anae. having a  narrow gauge railway line, it was the only sugar plantation on the island whose tracks could not connect to the or&l's tracks. despite struggles for water, this company lasted 69 years, closing down in 1947, the same year as the oahu railway's closure.  by 1890, sugar cane was planted on 600 acres with a yield of 2,500 tons. the company had 350 workers and three locomotives to transport the cane over 12 miles of narrow gauge track.  locomotives  the first locomotive was imported from john fowler & co. at leeds, england. it had to be disassembled and re-assembled to get it ashore. only then it was noted that it did not match the  narrow gauge track. the undercarriage had to be dismantled, machined to size, and then commissioned.  references   sugar companies of the united states defunct companies based in hawaii waianae range transportation in honolulu county, hawaii defunct hawaii railroads sugar mill railways narrow gauge railroads in hawaii 2 ft 6 in gauge railways in the united states food and drink companies established in 1878 food and drink companies disestablished in 1947 railway companies established in 1878 railway companies disestablished in 1947 1878 establishments in hawaii 1947 disestablishments in hawaii
vicnet (victoria's network) was a business unit of the state library of victoria, australia operating between 1994 and 2014. it was an early australian internet service provider that provided website space and training. it was australia's largest web host for community organisations and projects such as skills.net and libraries online. the state library of victoria closed vicnet on 31 january 2014.  history  the state library of victoria and the royal melbourne institute of technology (rmit) established a joint project to build a web-based publishing service and internet access provider for community organisations in 1993.  vicnet worked with the state and federal government, private providers, the victorian public library network and community based organisations across victoria to address digital divide issues. through a range of ict programs vicnet drove the roll out of public access internet points across victoria and in the process connected every library in victoria to the internet for public access. to facilitate access, vicnet staff delivered extensive training/community development programs across victoria through government funded programs such as the skills.net program (a program that was responsible for training more than 100,000 victorians).  additionally vicnet developed an online publication platform and an extensive web directory for community and other organizations, as well as for members of the general population. among many hundreds, vicnet published and trained in the editing for the first web sites for the melbourne international comedy festival, the melbourne formula one grand prix, the indigenous flora and fauna society, the council on the ageing (victoria), the age newspaper, and the victorian department of premier and cabinet.   with government assistance from multimedia victoria, vicnet provided internet access to regional victorian communities then out of the reach of any internet service, such as mallacoota and apollo bay. with other early internet service providers it formed the victorian internet exchange, an innovative network peering organisation, designed to put pressure on the cost of data.  by 2009, vicnet was recognised for its work in culturally and linguistically diverse communities, and its digital inclusion services provided for 62 community language groups.  awards   1999 finalist for skills.net program in the global bangemann challenge  2009 australia and new zealand internet best practice awards - best diversity initiative  references   internet-related organizations defunct internet service providers
the 1994 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1994 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their first season under head coach dick flynn, the chippewas compiled a 9-3 record (8-1 against mac opponents), won the mac championship, lost to unlv in the las vegas bowl, and outscored their opponents, 400 to 315.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 104,144 in five home games.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback erik timpf with 1,315 passing yards, tailback brian pruitt with 1,890 rushing yards, and flanker terrance mcmillan with 398 receiving yards. pruitt's 1,890 rushing yards remains a central michigan record, as do his 1994 totals of 132 points scored, 20 rushing touchdowns, and 22 total touchdowns in a season.  his tally of 435 yards of total offense against toledo on november 5, 1994, remains a school record, and his total of 356 rushing yards in the same game was a school record until robbie mixon rushed for 377 yards in a game in 2002. pruitt was selected by the associated press as a first-team all-purpose player on the 1994 college football all-america team. he was also named the mac player of the year and central michigan's most valuable player. pruitt, tight end jerremy dunlap, offensive guard matt nastally, and safety quincy wright were selected as first-team all-mac player.  dick flynn was named mac coach of the year in his first year as head coach. flynn took over as central michigan's head football coach in march 1994, after herb deromedi became the school's athletic director.  schedule  references  external links  official program, las vegas bowl, december 15, 1994  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons mid-american conference football champion seasons central michigan chippewas football
the clarks grove cooperative creamery is a historic creamery in clarks grove, minnesota, united states.  it was established in 1890 as one of the first cooperative creameries in minnesota.  the clarks grove cooperative creamery used new technology and a well-organized cooperative system. it became a model for the minnesota dairy industry. ten years later, there were more than 550 cooperative creameries in the state.  the original building burned down and was replaced with a new facility in 1927 which included a second-floor meeting hall.  still standing, this building was listed on the national register of historic places in 1986 for having local significance in the themes of agriculture, architecture, commerce, and social history.  it was nominated for its seminal status and influence on the state's cooperative creameries, as well as its association with the small local community of danish americans and their outsized success in dairy farming, its role as a social center, and being minnesota's best example of its type architecturally.  background in the 1870s and 1880s, farmers in southern minnesota were turning their wheat fields into dairy farms. yet making butter on the farm was difficult. it required a lot of labor, mostly done by women. and many people did not like farm butter, because it took on the flavors of other food from the farmer's kitchen.  after an 1884 visit to denmark, farmer hans peter jensen came back to minnesota with the idea for a cooperative creamery. in denmark, jensen learned about innovations in butter-making that could transform the dairy industry in minnesota. but these new technologies would be difficult for individual farmers to access. minnesota farmers typically owned only a dozen cows and small dairy farms were not very profitable.  cooperatives, or "coops," helped by pooling farmers' resources. farmers brought their milk to the coop. at the coop, butter was made in large batches using the new technology of cream separation. cooperative farmers benefited from the efficiency of the factory, and they shared the profits and losses with each other rather than investors.  impact the clarks grove cooperative creamery became a model for the rest of the state. it was made famous by theophilus levi (t.l.) haecker. haecker was a dairy science professor at the university of minnesota, and he was known as the "father of minnesota dairying."  in 1892, haecker traveled around the state to inspect creameries. he was disappointed by the poor conditions that he found. but when haecker found the clarks grove creamery, he was impressed. he spoke across
the state and told farmers about the creamery's principles. in 1894, he published a popular bulletin that showed farmers how to found a cooperative creamery. the bulletin was based on the constitution and bylaws of the coop in clarks grove.  with clarks grove as a model, cooperative dairying in minnesota grew. by 1898, more than 550 cooperative creameries existed in minnesota. the state became known for its butter and for its cooperative agriculture system. in 1928, nearly half of the cooperative creameries in the united states were in minnesota. these included important cooperative associations like the minnesota co-operative dairies association (founded in 1911) and land o'lakes, incorporated (founded in 1921).  the clarks grove creamery was also important for the local area. it was the first building and the first business in the clarks grove community. in the early 20th century the cooperative expanded, adding a cooperative grain elevator, a general store, and a lumber yard. for decades the creamery was a community center. it hosted talks, meetings, and school recitals. in 1956 it became a temporary school after the local schoolhouse burned down.  closure in 1996 the clarks grove cooperative creamery closed. as dairy farmers retired there was no longer a need for the coop.  see also  national register of historic places listings in freeborn county, minnesota  references  1890 establishments in minnesota 1996 disestablishments in minnesota agricultural buildings and structures on the national register of historic places in minnesota agricultural cooperatives in the united states buildings and structures completed in 1927 buildings and structures in freeborn county, minnesota dairy products companies of the united states national register of historic places in freeborn county, minnesota
olenecamptus lineaticeps is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pic in 1916.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1916
the 2016 european junior swimming championships were held from 6-10 july 2016 in hodmezovasarhely, hungary. the championships were organized by len, the european swimming league, and were held in a 50-meter pool. the championships were for girls aged 14-17 and boys age 15-18.  results  boys  girls  mixed events  medal table  references  external links    results  2016 in swimming european junior swimming championships international aquatics competitions hosted by hungary 2016 in hungarian sport swimming competitions in hungary
bruceport is an unincorporated community in pacific county, in the u.s. state of washington.  history  the settlement was founded in december 1851 by the crew of the schooner robert bruce, which had burned on willapa bay while transporting oysters. the settlement, initially named bruceville in 1854, grew into a trading post for oysters and was settled. from 1854 to 1860, bruceville was the county seat of chehalis county (later grays harbor county) and had a population of 25 families by the 1870s.  a post office called bruceport was established in 1858, and remained in operation until 1895. the community was named after robert the bruce, king of the scots.  references  unincorporated communities in pacific county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state) populated places established in 1851 1851 establishments in oregon territory
gustav friedrich dinter (1760-1831) was a german pedagogue, theologian and author.  biography he was born at borna. he studied theology and pedagogy at leipzig; held several pastorates, was appointed director of the teachers' seminary at dresden in 1797, and became professor of theology at the university of konigsberg in 1822.  he was liberal in his religious views, and practical in his methods of education. his lectures and writings were distinguished by remarkable clearness of exposition. the seminary at dresden flourished under his management.  works he was a prolific author and wrote more than sixty distinct works. they include: die vorzuglichsten regeln der katechetik ("the best rules for teaching religion," 1802; 13th ed. 1862) malwina, ein buch fur mutter ("malwina, a book for mothers," 1818; 5th ed. 1860) unterredungen uber die hauptstucke des lutheranischen katechismus ("discussions of the main points of the lutheran catechism," 1806-23; frequently reprinted)  references  external links    1760 births 1831 deaths german non-fiction writers leipzig university alumni university of konigsberg faculty german educational theorists 19th-century educational theorists german lutheran theologians
markus peter gilli (born 30 may 1955 in zurich) is a swiss radio and television journalist and member of the governing board of the television arm of . gilli began his career in 1980 on , which was the first swiss private radio station. he was employed there as an editor and presenter until 1999 and than as a head editor and program director.  in 1992 and 1994, markus gilli won the tele-prize for a 24-hour report on the zurich drug scene at the platzspitz, as well as the zurich radio prize for a report on the heavy impact of that drug scene on the residents of the surrounding areas of zurich. in august 1997, gilli took over as editor and presenter of the talk-show, sonntalk on tele 24 and telezuri.  from 1999 until 2014, he was program editor and editor-in-chief at telezuri. since 1 april 2014, he has been editor in chief of the various channels of az medien (telezuri, , , ). he also presented sonntalk and talktaglich on telezuri. in 2013 he was honoured with the "journalist of the year" award.  references  external links   interview with markus gilli in medienwoche  interview with markus gilli in tagblatt der stadt zurich:   swiss television presenters swiss radio presenters swiss journalists swiss radio journalists people from zurich 1955 births living people
the performing arts building is located on the reed college campus in southeast portland, oregon, in the united states. it opened in september 2013.  references  external links    2013 establishments in oregon performing arts in oregon reed college buildings university and college buildings completed in 2013
streptomyces alfalfae is a bacterium species from the genus streptomyces which has been isolated from rhizosphere soil from an alfalfa field in jingyang in china.  see also   list of streptomyces species  references  further reading  external links  type strain of streptomyces alfalfae at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  alfalfae bacteria described in 2016
oil nut bay is a coral reef bay situated on the northeast coast of virgin gorda in the british virgin islands, about  west of pajaros point.  location oil nut bay is a coral reef bay, which is described as "headland attached linear reef". the beach at oil nut bay stretches for about . the coastline extends  to leverick bay, along a stretch which is characterised by its mangroves. during an excursion in the 1970s, roughly 160 trees and large shrubs were identified in the area, including eugenia sessiliflora.  commercial development a resort community, intended for the wealthy with multi-million dollar villas, is developing at oil nut bay, led by american developer david johnson and his company, victor international. the firm was given the planning permission to build 400 villas, but decided on building 88 of them, set in 300 acres.  a may 2016 article by caribbean journal announced that the resort is still expanding, focusing on the development of four to six bedroom villas. the development is being built with underground utilities and is powered by solar energy. the resort has a double helipad and luxury tennis courts.  to the southwest of oil nut bay is the yacht club costa smeralda (yccs), which accommodates  38 slips for yachts up to . the clubhouse was inaugurated in january 2012. the oil nut bay and the yccs development  had together employed over 200 people.  threats the major project at oil nut bay is decreasing the amount of dry tropical forest and increasing traffic of people and materials within and between the islands and other locations, creating a threat to the local herpetofauna. oil nut bay is particularly vulnerable to anchor damage due to its scenic appeal.  references  sources  external links  multimedia all about oil nut bay  geography of the british virgin islands populated places in the british virgin islands virgin gorda
steve tsang (born 1959; ,  or tsang yu-sang) is a political scientist and historian whose expertise includes politics and governance in china, taiwan and hong kong, the foreign and security policies of china and taiwan, and peace and security in east asia. he is the current director of the soas china institute at the soas university of london.  early life and education born in hong kong, tsang received a b.a. at the university of hong kong in 1981 and d.phil. at st antony's college, oxford in 1986.  career  in september 2016, tsang was announced as the new director of the soas china institute, part of the school of oriental and african studies (soas), university of london, a role he began in december 2016. tsang was previously a professor of contemporary chinese studies at the university of nottingham, where he also served as head of the school of contemporary chinese studies (2014-2016) and director of the china policy institute (2011-2014).  before joining the university of nottingham, he spent his career at the university of oxford, where among other positions, he served as director of the pluscarden programme for the study of global terrorism and intelligence (2005-2011), dean of st antony's college (2002, 1996-98), director of the taiwan studies programme (2001-2011), director of the asian studies centre (1997-2003), and director of the oxford university hong kong project (1987-1994).  tsang's most recent books are "taiwan's impact on china" (2017) and "china in the xi jinping era" (2016). tsang is also the author of a modern history of hong kong (2004), which the last british hong kong governor chris patten described as "authoritative and well-researched". he is also the author of governing hong kong: administrative officers from the 19th century to the hand-over of china, 1862-1997 (london: i.b. tauris, 2007); the cold war's odd couple: the unintended partnership between the republic of china and the united kingdom, 1950-1958 (london: i.b. tauris, 2006); hong kong: an appointment with china (london: i.b. tauris, 1997); democracy shelved: great britain, china and attempts at constitutional reform in hong kong (oxford university press, 1998). he is the author of numerous articles in refereed journals, including most recently "chiang kai-shek's 'secret deal' at xian and the start
of the sino-japanese war"; "the u.s. military and american commitment to taiwan's security"; "ma ying-jeou's re-election: implications for taiwan and east asia", and "consultative leninism: china's new political framework".  tsang is an associate fellow at chatham house, associate editor of palgrave communication (2014-), serves on the editorial advisory board for several academic journals and was editor of the nottingham china policy institute series for palgrave macmillan (2011-2017). he regularly contributes to public debates on issues related to the politics, history, and development of east asia, particularly china, hong kong, and taiwan. he is a frequent commentator in print media and on television and radio, particularly the bbc, where he has appeared on newsnight, bbc news at ten, world news, bbc news, news 24, the talk show, today, pm, newshour, what if, and various world service programmes in english, mandarin, and cantonese. his op-ed contributions have appeared in the new york times, foreign policy magazine, jane's intelligence review, time, wall street journal, forbes, south china morning post, china daily, taipei times, the straits times, the globe and mail, chicago tribune, and the new statesman amongst others. he has provided expert opinions to parliamentary committees in the british house of commons, the european parliament, and the united states congress.  selected works  governing hong kong: administrative officers from the 19th century to the hand-over to china, 1862-1997 (london: i.b. tauris, 2007) (chinese edition published by hong kong university press). the cold war's odd couple: the unintended partnership between the republic of china and the united kingdom, 1950-1958 (london: i.b. tauris, 2006). a modern history of hong kong (london: i.b. tauris, 2004). hong kong: an appointment with china (london: i b tauris, 1997) (choice's outstanding academic book for 1998). democracy shelved: great britain, china and attempts at constitutional reform in hong kong 1945‑1952 (oxford university press, 1988).  personal  his wife is english writer rhiannon jenkins tsang. they studied at oxford university but did not meet until years later in a seminar on the 1997 hong kong handover.  references  external links  biography-soas, university of london curriculum vitae-european parliament  living people 1959 births academics of soas university of london fellows of st antony's college,
oxford hong kong academics historians of hong kong date of birth missing (living people) hong kong historians
live bait, vol. 02 - summer 2010 leg 2 is a live download by band phish. this download features highlights from the second half of their 2010 summer tour, including the songs "twenty years later" and "light" from phish's 2009 album, joy. it was available for free on the official phish website for a short time. it is now available for purchase from phish's livephish website.  track listing   "wilson" (anastasio, marshall, woolfe) - 4:27 (2010-08-07 greek theatre, university of california berkeley - berkeley, ca)  "light" (anastasio, marshall) - 17:14 (2010-08-07 greek theatre, university of california berkeley - berkeley, ca)  "twenty years later" (anastasio, marshall) - 7:17 (2010-08-07 greek theatre, university of california berkeley - berkeley, ca)  "down with disease" (anastasio, marshall) - 16:54 (2010-08-14 alpine valley music theatre - east troy, wi)  "what's the use" (anastasio, gordon, mcconnell, fishman) - 6:22 (2010-08-14 alpine valley music theatre - east troy, wi)  "possum" (holdsworth) - 9:53 (2010-08-17 nikon at jones beach theatre - wantagh, ny)  "n02" (gordon) - 1:28 (2010-08-12 verizon wireless music center - noblesville, in)  "kung" (fishman) - 2:04 (2010-08-12 verizon wireless music center - noblesville, in)  "bug" (anastasio, marshall) - 9:24 (2010-08-14 alpine valley music theatre - east troy, wi)  references  external links  phish.com - official site  livephish.com - live bait vol. 02  2010 live albums phish live albums livephish.com downloads
heparan sulfate 6-o-sulfotransferase 2 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the hs6st2 gene.  function  heparan sulfate proteoglycans are ubiquitous components of the cell surface, extracellular matrix, and basement membranes, and interact with various ligands to influence cell growth, differentiation, adhesion, and migration.   this gene encodes a member of the heparan sulfate (hs) sulfotransferase gene family, which catalyze the transfer of sulfate to hs. different family members and isoforms are thought to synthesize heparan sulfates with tissue-specific structures and functions. multiple transcript variants encoding different isoforms have been found for this gene.  references  further reading
blood conflict (spanish: conflicto de sangre) is a 1953 chilean film directed by vinicio valdivia.  cast  marcela benitez   carmen bunster   eugenio guzman   hector marquez  claudio tait  references  bibliography    terry ramsaye. motion picture and television almanac. quigley publications, 1954.  external links     1953 films chilean films 1950s spanish-language films
ask laftan anlamaz  (love doesn't understand words) is a turkish romantic comedy television series broadcast on show tv. the series premiered on june 15, 2016. it stars burak deniz as murat sarsılmaz and hande ercel as hayat uzun. the story is set in istanbul and follows a workplace romance at a multinational fashion company, sarte. the series has aired in over 30 countries worldwide and has reached millions of views on youtube.  plot hayat uzun, a native of giresun village and daughter of a fisherman is under pressure to secure employment in istanbul or she will have to return to her family in the countryside and would be forced into an arranged marriage by her strict conservative father. she currently lives with her best friends ipek and asli, with her mother, emine, visiting them. a case of mistaken identity gets her a job at multinational textile company sarte, as personal assistant to the assistant of murat sarsılmaz, sarte's head. originally, the job was reserved for suna pektas a family friend of sarsilmaz's.  murat is drawn towards hayat. this provokes jealousy from murat's ex-girlfriend, didem, the lead model for the company. didem causes misunderstandings that make murat push hayat away, but he then pursues her and apologizes, eventually firing didem for her plotting. murat's personal chauffeur and best friend, kerem falls for ipek, and she later returns his advances. murat brings hayat to his home to recover from a panic attack caused by didem, and they bond over the weekend, but didem then arrives claiming to be pregnant. murat is distraught but accepts his responsibility to marry didem for the baby's sake. both the families meet and decide their wedding. murat clarifies to them that the marriage is just a formality to legitimize the child and he won't live with didem. hayat learns from asli, who is a nurse, that didem faked her pregnancy tests. murat's stepmother derya, also learns the truth and helps didem to fake a miscarriage before her truth is discovered, which releases murat from his presumed responsibility. murat's brother, doruk meets asli, and they become friends which later turns into love.  meanwhile, hayat's landlord fadik's nephew ibhrahim enters the plot. hayat with the help of her friends ipek and asli decides to make murat suffer a bit because he continues to maintain distance from her. she pretends to
be in a romantic relationship with ibrahim which sparks murat's jealousy. later on due to a series of events murat learns the truth.  on hayat's (actually suna's) birthday, murat welcomes hayat in his life in the same place where he presumably lost his mother, leyla sarsılmaz. both begin a very happy relationship. but hayat is in constant despair due to her false identity.  meanwhile, didem brainwashes ibrahim into believing that murat is cheating on hayat. murat proposes marriage to hayat but is still unaware of her true identity. hayat feels sad but is unable to disclose this to him fearing she might lose him. kerem learns hayat's truth and breaks up with ipek because she knew all along about hayat/suna. murat's grandmother stops kerem from telling the truth to murat to save his happiness. ibrahim confesses his feelings to hayat and tells her about murat's infidelity which causes misunderstandings between them. murat takes her to didem to clarify her doubts and they reconcile.  murat learns of didem's fake pregnancy and throws her out of his company for lying. hayat is frightened of her own lies and decides to tell the truth. however, derya discloses the truth to murat before hayat can and he's heartbroken. hayat loses her job and her grandfather, hasmet, who has arrived in istanbul, decides that she must return home.  afraid of losing hayat, murat goes to stop her and asks for her hand from mr. hasmet. later, when her grandfather does not agree for their union due to their families' past history, he elopes with hayat. on the day of the wedding murat discovers a letter written for his grandma from his mother leyla which reveals that she is alive and had left him for her career and the truth was kept from him. he confronts his grandma and tells her he'll never forgive them and hayat. both get married in front of their friends. however, murat, unable to forgive hayat, is cold towards her.  murat becomes jealous when emre, a contractor to sarte, flirts with hayat and the company suffers. murat and hayat fall more in love and friction in their relationship increases at the same time. derya disapproves of doruk's relationship with asli. she is also always worried that doruk will not get his rightful share in sarte. however, doruk does not let her influence him against his brother.  murat's mom returns with nurse hazal in a series of events. hayat realizes that their relationship is
not working and decides to get divorced after murat misbehaves with her. when his mother is hospitalized from an accident, murat contemplates hayat's desire to separate and realizes that he has to fight for her. kerem and ipek reunite. murat tries to mend his relationship with hayat, but she spurns his efforts being very hurt. emre sends an unusual message to hayat confessing his love murat is angry on hayat and he leaves her saying the marriage is over. but then murat returns to save hayat from a fire, saying that he cannot live without her. emre and derya together plot to separate hayat and murat in order to destroy murat.  hayat and murat get married again in front of her brother according to all rituals and go on their honeymoon. nejat sells his shares of sarte to emre. emre interrupts the honeymoon when he reveals to hayat that murat is not a sarsilmaz.  later hazal kills murat's mom in a revengeful act. murat is angry with hayat on finding a gift box in their room from emre which derya had kept there. he believes hayat is lying to him again due to her suspicious behavior during the honeymoon as well. emre, on the other hand black-mails hayat to tell the truth to murat or start working with emre. hayat is so distraught that she tries to kill herself in emre's office. this shakes emre who changes his mind. he decides to return his shares and tells derya to end all scheming and plotting. then he calls hayat for a last meeting to return the shares which ends up in their accident with murat's car because derya had goons tamper with emre's brakes to kill him. emre has some serious injuries in the accident and goes into a coma. seeing this derya gets a chance and explains everything to murat without proving herself guilty.  doruk's ex-girlfriend, gicik returns and wants to get back with him. asli witnesses gicik kissing doruk and thinks doruk cheated on her so she end things with him. he tries to stop her but in vain. to get revenge, she flirts with hayat's brother, cemil and pretends to be in a relationship with him which causes doruk to become jealous. this is also hers and cemil's plan to make tuval jealous as cemil is in love with her.  murat is angry with hayat that she is hiding something, so hayat decides to tell the truth to murat. murat is devastated on this news but then
hayat does another dna test which reveals that murat is the heir of the sarsılmaz family and doruk is not. but murat doesn't tell this to doruk for peace in their family. murat gives all his shares to doruk and convinces the staff at sarte to accept him as their boss.  murat plans on starting a new company and hayat finds out that she is pregnant and the whole family is elated. doruk's mother, derya, argues with the house servant and hayat gets in the middle of it, in hopes to end the brawl, but ends up falling down the stairs whilst pregnant. she later learns that the baby is unharmed. derya, unaware of the baby's condition, packs her belongings and tries to take doruk with her as she is worried that she will get the blame for hayat falling down the stairs. but doruk stays and derya leaves. cemil & asli's plan succeeds when tuval starts developing feelings for cemil. on valentine's day, murat reveals to hayat his plans about the company and to name it "hyt" after her and they embrace.  five years later, hayat and murat have four-year-old twins and she is expecting again. kerem and ipek have a newborn and doruk and asli are back together. the series ends happily.  cast  main cast  burak deniz as murat sarsılmaz: owner of sarte; nejat and leyla's son; derya's stepson; doruk's half-brother; hayat's husband  hande ercel as hayat uzun sarsılmaz: emine's daughter; cemil's sister; aslı and ipek's best friend; murat's wife  oguzhan karbi as doruk sarsılmaz: nejat and derya's son; murat's half-brother; asli's husband  ozcan tekdemir as aslı sarsılmaz: hayat and ipek's best friend; doruk's wife  merve cagıran as ipek: hayat and aslı's best friend; kerem's wife  suleyman felek as kerem: murat's best friend; ipek's husband  bulent emrah parlak as cemil uzun: emine's son; hayat's brother; tuval's love interest  demet gul as tuval yanıkoglu: sarte's head designer; cemil's love interest  ismail ege sasmaz as ibrahim: fadik's
nephew who loved hayat  sultan koroglu kilic as emine uzun: hayat and cemil's mother  evren duyal as fadik: emine's friend; hayat and cemil's aunt  birand tunca as emre azatoglu: a contractor to sarte  betul cobanoglu as derya sarsılmaz: nejat's wife; murat's stepmother; doruk's mother  cem emuler as nejat sarsılmaz: head of sarte; azime's son; derya's husband; murat and doruk's father   nazan diper as azime sarsılmaz: nejat's mother; murat and doruk's grandmother; hasmet's fiancee  metin akpınar as hasmet uzun: hayat and cemil's grandfather; azime's fiance  nurseli tırıskan as leyla sarsılmaz: nejat's ex-wife; murat's mother  recurring cast  elif dogan as suna pektas: murat's childhood friend who proposed to him   metehan kuru as gokce  oguz okul as kamal pektas: suna's father  gozde kocaoglu yagmur as cagla: murat's assistant  tugce karabacak as didem: murat's ex-girlfriend; lead model of sarte.  alp navruz as cenk: didem's friend  international airing  in the philippines, the airing was also known as simply hayat, it was aired on etc on the etcerye block from february to june 2021. in the pakistan, the airing was also known as pyaar lafzon mein kahan, it was aired on ltn family.  see also television in turkey list of turkish television series turkish television drama  references  external links     2016 turkish television series debuts turkish drama television series turkish romantic comedy television series show tv original programming television series produced in istanbul television shows set in istanbul television series set in the 2010s burak deniz
ray looze is an american swimming coach. he was born on may 12, 1967, in the bay area of california. he began his coaching career after finishing 3rd at his last olympic trials. already at texas university, he volunteered there learning the ropes before heading off to the peddie boarding school in new jersey. after that, he ended up in phoenix, arizona. while at phoenix he met the love of his life kandis perry, who now goes by kandis looze (and was born may 10, 1966), at the olympic training center as they both had kids on their swim clubs make the national team. after quickly marrying kandis they moved to stockon, ca where looze was the head coach at the university of the pacific (uop). since june 2002, he has been the head coach for the indiana hoosiers. he runs both the men's and women's swimming programs.  in 2016 looze was a women's assistant coach for the 2016 usa olympic swimming team. he also served as a coach for the usa team to the 2014 short course worlds.  at the 2016 olympic swimming trials, looze coached cody miller, blake pieroni, and lilly king who all qualified for the team.  looze is also a former national-team swimmer for the usa. he was a medalist at the 1991 pan american games, and swam for usc trojans in college, from 1986 to 1990.  awards and recognition  in 2016, he was named big 10 coach of the year, an honor he has received ten times in other years as well. in 2018, he was named cscaa national swimming coach of the year.  family  looze is married to kandis looze and has one daughter and one son. his daughter, mackenzie, was born in stockon, ca on january 13, 2000. currently, she swims for coach looze at indiana and his son, bryce, born on july 30, 1998, and currently attends wabash college in crawfordsville, in. mackenzie was also coached in high school by her mother who is one of the top swimming coaches in the country.  looze met kandis at the olympic training center (aka the otc) where they both had swimmers on the national team. it was love at first sight for this pair of coaches and they were quickly married just five and a half months later.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people american swimming coaches american male medley swimmers swimmers at the 1991 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for the
united states pan american games medalists in swimming indiana hoosiers swimming coaches usc trojans men's swimmers medalists at the 1991 pan american games
a leadership election was held by the democratic action party (dap) on 15 december 2012.  central executive committee election results [ source]  references  2012 elections in malaysia political party leadership elections in malaysia democratic action party leadership election
i was so sad is the fourth full-length studio album by seirom, independently released on july 8, 2016.  track listing  personnel adapted from the i was so sad liner notes.  maurice de jong (as mories) - vocals, instruments, recording, mixing, mastering, cover art  franscesca marongiu - vocals (4)  release history  references  external links   i was so sad at bandcamp  2016 albums seirom albums
the promotion a (doctor of an academic field) was an academic qualification in the ddr. it was introduced in the 3rd higher education reform with the "regulation of academic grades" of 6 november 1968 and was governed by the doctoral ordinance of 21 january 1969. the qualification required the production of a dissertation. while the faculties of universities and tertiary institutes in west germany each had their own doctoral and habilitation regulations, all doctorates in the ddr were governed by the promotion a regulations. the award of the promotion was granted to the academic councils of the tertiary institutions. at the same time, the  (doctor of science) was introduced in imitation of the soviet model, in order to replace the habilitation.  in the ddr, special degrees and training programmes were created systematically and on demand in order to control academically inclined youth. the requirements for the promotion a were the possession of an academic degree from a university or tertiary institute of the ddr, systematic knowledge of the theoretical underpinnings of the chosen subject and of marxism-leninism, as well as "active participation in the development of the socialist society." the promotion a was achieved through work as a wissenschaftlicher assistent,  and the ordinary or extraordinary . work as an assistant at a ddr tertiary institution was professional employment, which was usually combined with further study and, as a rule, was limited to four years. the forschungsstudium, by contrast, was devoted entirely to study and usually lasted three years. it was devoted exclusively to preparation for the doctorate and was linked to a stipend. the academic aspirantur was introduced in 1951 as part of the second education reform. as a postgraduate degree it was intended mainly to meet the need for officers qualified in economics. the ordinary aspirantur lasted three years and placed a stipend at the benefit of the student in order to free them from the need for employment. in a single year a partial aspirantur with stipend could be granted to a student or officer for the accelerated completion of a dissertation.  after a positive assessment of the dissertation and a successful thesis defense (which could be waived), the candidate received the promotion a. the dissertation was assessed not only on subject-based criteria but on "its theoretical substance and its social value." this was judged on the basis of its assumed value for practice and its contribution to the further development of marxism-leninism. this often meant that doctoral candidates, even in medicine and natural sciences, had to include chapters on marxism-leninism in their dissertations. results which contradicted the official doctrines of
the ddr were sometimes suppressed. at any rate, dissertations were not published and a few copies were generally accessible only in university libraries.  it is estimated that a total of 101,654 people received the promotion a between 1951 and 1985 - that is an average of 2,904 per year (compared to 9,420 per year in west germany between 1950 and 1982). these exclude the so-called "geheimarbeiten" (secret works), which were not published for political reasons. the value of the "geheimdissertation" (secret dissertation) was at 30% in the social sciences and at 10% in the natural scholarship.  references  bibliography   dieter voigt et al.: "zur fragwurdigkeit akademischer grade und titel in der ddr." "der primat der kommunistischen ideologie von der wissenschaft. eine analyse von doktorarbeiten und habilitationsschriften der jahre 1950 bis 1990." in heiner timmermann (ed.): ddr-forschung. bilanz und perspektiven. duncker & humblot, berlin 1995, .  external links   verordnung uber die akademischen grade vom 6. november 1968 on documentarchiv.de  anordnung zur verleihung des akademischen grades doktor der wissenschaften - promotionsordnung a - vom 21. januar 1969 on documentarchiv.de  academic degrees education in east germany
jamil smith (born september 23, 1975) is an american print and television journalist. his reporting and commentary deal with a range of political and cultural topics, including race, gender, national politics, and pop culture. he has been a senior editor at the new republic, and a senior national correspondent at mtv news, and a senior writer for rolling stone magazine. in april 2021, he joined vox as a senior correspondent.  while a television segment producer for nfl films, smith won three sports emmy awards, in 2006, 2009, and 2010. he has also served as a producer for the rachel maddow show and melissa harris-perry.  early life  born september 23, 1975, in cleveland, ohio, smith attended hawken school through eighth grade, then graduated from shaker heights high school in 1993. while attending shaker heights high school, smith wrote for the student newspaper, the shakerite, for four years, as well as participating in the wrestling and track teams and the school's minority achievement community program, where black upperclassmen with high grade point averages mentor black freshman and sophomore boys with lower gpas.  smith then attended the university of pennsylvania and graduated with a bachelor's degree in english in 1997. while in college, smith wrote for the campus student newspaper, the daily pennsylvanian, and participated in students together against acquaintance rape. he also studied abroad at kings college london.  career   after four years as an assistant at the william morris agency, smith began his career in television and film production in 2002 as a production assistant with cnn. he next went to hbo sports, then nfl films, where he worked on production teams that won three sports emmys, two for inside the nfl and another for the cincinnati bengals installment of the hard knocks series. in 2010, smith joined msnbc, serving as a producer for both the rachel maddow show and melissa harris-perry.  as a journalist and commentator, smith has drawn notice for work on a range of political and cultural topics, including race and racism, police brutality, feminism and gender roles, and national politics.  smith joined the new republic in january 2015, part of a wave of new hires following the 2014 removal of editor-in-chief franklin foer, which prompted the departure of 55 staff members and contributors. foer's replacement, gabriel snyder, hired smith as a senior editor covering race, politics and gender. with the magazine facing criticism both from those upset by changes at the long-standing institution and also from those critical of the magazine's history
, particularly its treatment of race-related topics, smith described his role, with colleagues, as aiming "to help usher this magazine into a different era." while at the new republic, smith also launched and hosted the magazine's first podcast, intersection.  in 2016, smith became a senior national correspondent for mtv news, hired alongside writers and editors including ana marie cox, jessica hopper, charles aaron, meredith graves, doreen st. felix, and ira madison iii as part of a significant expansion of mtv news programming. among other on-air appearances for mtv, smith served as a co-host, with charlamagne tha god, marc lamont hill and franchesca ramsey, of the joint mtv-bet townhall "what now", following the police shooting deaths of alton sterling and philando castile and the shooting of police officers in dallas that all took place in the first week of july 2016. at mtv, smith also hosted the racket, a youtube series on politics, especially the us presidential campaign. he also appeared on the mtv news podcast the stakes, including hosting an episode commemorating the 25th anniversary of the 1992 los angeles riots.  after layoffs at mtv news in june 2017, smith became a freelance reporter and opinion writer, writing (among other works) "the revolutionary power of black panther," the cover story for time magazine's february 19, 2018 issue; this made black panther the first marvel cinematic universe film to be featured on time's cover. in his analysis, smith argued the film was culturally significant as proof that african-american narratives can be commercial successes with all audiences, as well as that "making movies about black lives is part of showing that they matter."  smith joined rolling stone as senior writer in march 2018. in addition to his regular columns, smith has profiled, among others, u.s. senator and presidential candidate kamala harris and interviewed rep. john lewis, los angeles mayor eric garcetti, and georgia gubernatorial candidate stacey abrams.  smith contributed an essay entitled "she can't breathe" to the anti-rape anthology believe me: how trusting women can change the world, published in january 2020 by seal press.  honors  while a segment producer at nfl films, smith was part of teams that won the 2006 and 2009 outstanding studio show - weekly sports emmy for inside the nfl and the 2010 outstanding edited sports series/anthology sports emmy for hard knocks: training camp with the cincinnati bengals.  smith has repeatedly been named to the root 100 list of leading black influencers, including in 2011 for his
work on the rachel maddow show, in 2013 for his work on melissa harris-perry, and in 2015 for his work at the new republic, where, the root wrote, he "hits on cultural touch points from campus rape to the rev. al sharpton, banging out a nice mix of opinion, headlines and original reporting."  for his time cover story on black panther, smith received the arts reporting award in may 2019 from the deadline club, the new york city chapter of the society of professional journalists. according to the judges' comments, "jamil smith's time cover story 'a hero rises' managed to approach an extremely well-covered topic from a fresh angle and in an intimate voice. smith employed unique use of the first-person voice (and even the second-person "you") to bring in his own perspective while also addressing the reader. and he placed "black panther" in both current and historical political perspective. wakanda forever!"  personal life  in 2017, smith moved from brooklyn, new york, to los angeles, california.  see also  rachel maddow  melissa harris-perry-  chris hayes  gene demby  joy-ann reid  larry wilmore  references  external links  jamil smith on twitter  jamil smith on instagram    jamil smith archive at the new republic  jamil smith archive at mtv news  jamil smith archive at rolling stone    american television reporters and correspondents university of pennsylvania alumni living people the new republic people television producers from ohio 1975 births nfl films people rolling stone people african-american journalists african-american writers 21st-century american non-fiction writers sports emmy award winners mtv people writers from cleveland journalists from ohio american magazine journalists american opinion journalists american political journalists people from shaker heights, ohio 21st-century african-american writers 20th-century african-american people
grand isle state park is a 226-acre state park in grand isle, vermont on the shore of lake champlain.  activities includes boating, swimming, camping, fishing, hiking, picnicking, bicycling, wildlife watching, water sports and winter sports.  facilities include a boat launching ramp, sand-court volleyball, horseshoes, a play area, 117 tent/rv sites, 36 lean-to sites, 4 cabin sites, restrooms with running water and hot showers, and a trailer sanitary station.  the park features a nature center and park rangers offer interpretive programs including night hikes, campfire programs, amphibian explorations, and nature crafts and games.  references  state parks of vermont protected areas of grand isle county, vermont grand isle, vermont nature centers in vermont lake champlain 1959 establishments in vermont
pop tate may refer to:   pop tate (archie comics), an archie comics character  pop tate (baseball) (1860-1932), major league baseball catcher
giuseppe salvago raggi (17 may 1866 - 28 february 1946) was an italian diplomat, born in genoa. he was ambassador of italy to china (1899-1901) and france. he was the italian colonial governor of somaliland (1906-1907) and eritrea (1907-1915). he is best known for signing the boxer protocol on behalf of the kingdom of italy.  references  1866 births 1946 deaths ambassadors of italy to france ambassadors of italy to china italian diplomats
rajendra bhaskarrao shingne is an indian politician and a member of 9th, 10th, 11th, 12th and 14th legislative assembly of maharashtra. currently he serving as cabinet minister for food and drugs administration in the government of maharashtra.  early life and education shingne was born 30 march 1960 in buldhana district of maharashtra to his father bhaskarrao shingne. in 1988, he had completed h.s.c. from shivaji high school, buldhana (maharashtra state board) and he got b.a.m.s. degree in 1993, from shri gurudev ayurvedic college, mojhari (nagpur university).  political career shingne is a prominent leader of the nationalist congress party (ncp) from vidarbha and is now the state vice-president of nationalist congress party. shingne served as a member of legislative assembly from sindkhed raja constituency, the birthplace of rashtramata rajmata jijabai bhosale. shingne was elected to the buldhana district cooperative credit society in 1991. started his journey in maharashtra assembly in 1995 when elected from sindkhed raja as an independent candidate. joined nationalist congress party in 1999 along with prominent leaders like rajesh tope jayant patil manohar naik and r. r. patil as well. re-elected mla in 1999 from nationalist congress party. shingne was a minister of state for education and in 2004 served as the minister of state for revenue. he was appointed cabinet minister for health and family welfare in 2008 and 2009.  post held  references  nationalist congress party politicians from maharashtra politicians from nagpur living people 1960 births
nicholas friton (died 1597) was a roman catholic prelate who served as archbishop of nakhchivan (1560-1597).  biography on 20 october 1560, nicholas friton was appointed during the papacy of pope pius iv as archbishop of nakhchivan. he served as archbishop of nakhchivan until his death in 1597.  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in the ottoman empire bishops appointed by pope pius iv 1597 deaths
"don't be a fool" is a song performed by british contemporary r&b group loose ends, issued as the lead single from their fifth studio album look how long. produced by band member carl mcintosh, it is the first single from the band to not feature original members jane eugene and steve nichol; they both left the band following their previous album the real chuckeeboo and were subsequently replaced by linda carriere and sunay suleyman. suleyman co-wrote the song with mcintosh.  "don't be a fool" peaked at #10 on the billboard r&b chart in 1990.  chart positions  references  external links      1990 songs 1990 singles loose ends (band) songs mca records singles virgin records singles
coptaspis elegans is an australian species of bush cricket in the tribe agraeciini.  references  external links      conocephalinae insects described in 1966
dzianis mihal (born 5 october 1985) is a belarusian rower. he won the silver medal in the coxless four at the 2016 european rowing championships.  references  external links  belarusian male rowers 1985 births living people olympic rowers of belarus rowers at the 2008 summer olympics rowers at the 2012 summer olympics rowers at the 2016 summer olympics european rowing championships medalists
herve claude (born 19 november 1945 in paris) is a french television journalist and writer.  biography   herve claude was a news anchor for antenne 2 and france 2 from 1975 to 1994. he has worked since this date on arte. he hosted the religious program agape one sunday a month, on france 2 in connection with the religious show the day of the lord until january 2010 and from may 2010 in a shorter form (the show shortened from 52 to 26 minutes).  herve claude wrote a dozen novels. requins et coquins  is the second in the noir book series after riches, cruels et fardes. in september 2007, he released the last volume of the trilogy mort d'une drag-queen. he also published a noir crime novel collection under the title number 24 entitled cocu de sac. a television journalist, he mainly works for arte and he lives several months a year in australia.  herve claude was married from 1972 to 1976 to francoise kramer since then he is in a civil union with sculptor matei negreanu.  works  novels    conduite a gauche, ramsay, 1984 reedition le livre de poche  4366  l'enfant a l'oreille cassee, ramsay, 1986 reedition j'ai lu  2753  le desespoir des singes, flammarion, 1989 reedition j'ai lu  2788  le jeu de la rue du loup, flammarion, 1992  les amnesiques, flammarion, 1995  le journaliste, le hasard et la guenon, seuil, 1996  une image irreprochable, ramsay, 1998  riches, cruels et fardes, gallimard,  "serie noire", 2002 reedition gallimard,  "folio policier"  511  requins et coquins, gallimard,  " serie noire", 2003  pique-nique a maree basse, 2007  mort d'une drag-queen, actes sud,  "babel noir"  12, 2007  cocu de sac, la branche,  "suite noire", 2008  nickel chrome, actes sud,  " actes noirs", 2009  les ours s'embrassent pour mourir, actes sud,  " actes noirs", 2010  mort d'un papy voyageur, baleine,  "le poulpe"  271, 2010  les machoires du
serpent, actes sud,  "actes noirs", 2012  other    matei negreanu, vers les arts, 1993 cowritten with dominique narran and helmut ricke.  notes and references  external links    archive ina   : newscast of antenna 2 of 14 august 1983 presented by herve claude  1945 births living people french television presenters french crime fiction writers 21st-century french novelists 20th-century french novelists 20th-century french male writers french journalists 21st-century french male writers french male non-fiction writers
ammathi is a small town in kodagu district of karnataka state in india.  ammathi  ammathi is located between siddapura and virajpet towns of kodagu district.  demographics the people of this town speak kodava,kannada and malayalam.  references  villages in kodagu district
ryan evans (born 27 march 1987) is an english professional golfer. in 2017 he won the turkish airlines challenge on the challenge tour.  amateur career evans won the 2014 lake macquarie amateur, was runner-up for the 2013 st andrews links trophy, and medalist at the 2014 australian amateur.  professional career evans was invited to play in some events on the challenge tour in 2015.  he finished the year at 28th in the rankings, with a best finish of t-3 at the karnten golf open. he earned his 2016 european tour card through qualifying school.  evans qualified for the 2016 open championship through final qualifying; he finished in 58th place. later in the season he finished tied for third place in the d+d real czech masters.  evans returned to the challenge tour in 2017 and won the turkish airlines challenge by four strokes from tapio pulkkanen. he finished the season 8th in the rankings to earn a place on the european tour in 2018. he qualified for the 2018 u.s. open as an alternate, after missing out at the fourth extra hole of a playoff in sectional qualifying at walton heath.  amateur wins 2012 south of england amateur 2013 berkshire trophy, biarritz cup 2014 lake macquarie amateur, avondale amateur medal  source:  professional wins (1)  challenge tour wins (1)  results in major championships  cut = missed the half-way cut "t" = tied  team appearances amateur european amateur team championship (representing england): 2014 eisenhower trophy (representing england): 2014 st andrews trophy (representing great britain and ireland): 2014 (winners)  bonallack trophy (representing europe): 2014 (winners)  see also 2015 european tour qualifying school graduates 2017 challenge tour graduates  references  external links  english male golfers european tour golfers sportspeople from kettering people from corby 1987 births living people
events from the year 1882 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander iii  events             tcherny railway accident  may laws  pavlovka (meteorite)  peasants' land bank  births january 4 - aristarkh lentulov, painter and set designer (died 1943) june 17 - igor stravinsky,  composer, pianist, and conductor (died 1971)  deaths    - friedrich benjamin von lutke, russian navigator, geographer, and arctic explorer. (b. 1797)  references  1882 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
uwe nepp (born 1 december 1966) is a german former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics. two years later, nepp placed 21st at the 1990 tour of belgium.  references  external links    1966 births living people german male cyclists olympic cyclists of west germany cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from krefeld
arlecdon and frizington is a civil parish in the borough of copeland, cumbria, england.  it contains seven listed buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  of these, one is listed at grade ii*, the middle of the three grades, and the others are at grade ii, the lowest grade.  the parish contains the villages of arlecdon, rowrah and frizington, and the surrounding countryside.  the oldest listed building is a medieval cross, which is also a scheduled monument.  the other listed buildings are a church and associated structures, a country house and its gate piers, and a former stable block.   key  buildings  references  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria
the 2016 matador bbqs one-day cup was the 47th season of the official list a domestic cricket competition in australia. it was played over a three-week period at the start of the domestic season to separate its schedule from the sheffield shield season. the tournament was held in sydney, brisbane and perth, with 13 of the 23 matches broadcast live on free-to-air television on 9gem. in the final, new south wales, who qualified for the final through a victory in an elimination final against victoria, were successful over queensland, who won every round robin game except for one.  points table  result points:   win - 4  tie - 2 each  no result - 2 each  loss - 0  bonus point - 1 (run rate 1.25 times that of opposition.)  additional bonus point - 1 (run rate twice that of opposition.)  fixtures  elimination final  final  statistics  most runs  most wickets  references  external links  matador bbqs one-day cup 2016/17 on cricket.com.au  tournament home at espn cricinfo  matador bbqs one-day cup australian domestic limited-overs cricket tournament seasons matador bbqs one-day cup
jorge antonio padilla leal (born 6 september 1993) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a defender for liga mx club mazatlan.  references  1993 births living people mexican footballers association football defenders leones negros udeg footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from guadalajara, jalisco
tyler dietrich (born july 2, 1984, in vancouver, british columbia) is a canadian professional ice hockey coach. he is currently working for team canada.  career  dietrich played whl hockey with the moose jaw warriors, the medicine hat tigers and the everett silvertips, interrupted by a stint at bchl teams salmon arm silverbacks and trail smoke eaters.  in 2005, he enrolled at the university of british columbia, before transferring to the university of new brunswick one year later. dietrich was significantly slowed down by injuries throughout his playing career. he spent the final season (2009-10) of his playing career at st. thomas university and subsequently turned to coaching, standing behind the bench of the hollyburn huskies at the midget a1-t1 level during the 2010-11 season.  in 2011, he accepted a position as coach in the youth ranks of hungarian club szekesfehervar, enjoying great success in the following years. in 2015, he took over the head coaching job at the club's second men's team and prior to the 2016-17 campaign, was named head coach of the club's first squad, which competes in the austrian elite league ebel. during the pre-season in august 2016, dietrich asked the club to cancel his contract. he then worked for team canada in different positions, including video coach during the 2016 deutschland cup and manager, hockey operations for the national junior team. in this position, he helped canada win the 2017 spengler cup.  external links   tyler dietrich at eliteprospects.com  references   1984 births living people canadian ice hockey coaches ice hockey people from british columbia sportspeople from vancouver
deirdre byrne (born 21 september 1982) is an irish middle- and long-distance runner. she represented her country in the 1500 metres at the 2009 world championships without advancing from the first round.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 1500 metres - 4:08.89 (heusden-zolder 2008) 5000 metres - 15:39.45 (watford 2016) indoor 800 metres - 2:06.00 (boston 2003) 1500 metres - 4:15.82 (belfast 2010) one mile - 4:37.76 (boston 2007) 3000 metres - 8:58.94 (doha 2010)  references  1982 births living people irish female middle-distance runners irish female long-distance runners competitors at the 2007 summer universiade competitors at the 2009 summer universiade
the president of the united states, detective is a science fiction/mystery short story by h. f. heard. it was originally published in ellery queen's mystery magazine in march 1947, and subsequently republished in ellery queen's mystery magazine in april 1969 and february 1991, in the 1949 anthology the queen's awards, and in the 1975 anthology ellery queen's the golden 13; as well, an extended version, named "the thaw plan", was published in heard's 1948 collection the lost cavern and other stories of the fantastic.  synopsis  when aerial photography reveals that the soviet union is constructing multiple inland harbors, the president of the united states realizes that the soviets are planning to use nuclear weapons to melt the arctic ice pack and tundra, thereby causing a sea level rise at the end of which all the new soviet harbors will be coastal-and all non-soviet territories will be flooded. to counter this, the president orders that antarctica and greenland be bombarded with nuclear weapons as well, to remove the ice and enable the western world to relocate to the now-temperate continents.  reception  "president" won the ellery queen's mystery magazine annual contest for best short story, an award which came with a $3,000 prize - although frederic dannay later admitted that "(a)lmost without exception, readers and critics disapproved of the story". the glasgow herald called it a "stand-out" and "stupendous"; however, the encyclopedia of science fiction considers it "eccentric".  the story has been cited as an early example of geoengineering in fiction.  references  1947 short stories mystery short stories fiction about nuclear war and weapons
davide biraschi (born 2 july 1994) is an italian professional footballer who plays as a defender for turkish club fatih karagumruk, on loan from genoa.  club career on 17 january 2022, biraschi joined fatih karagumruk in turkey on loan until the end of the 2021-22 season.  personal life on 2 october 2020, biraschi tested positive for covid-19.  references  external links  1994 births footballers from rome living people association football defenders italian footballers italy under-21 international footballers u.s. avellino 1912 players f.c. grosseto s.s.d. players genoa c.f.c. players fatih karagumruk s.k. footballers serie a players serie b players serie c players italian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in turkey italian expatriate sportspeople in turkey
william andrew licon ( ; born august 25, 1994) is an american competitive swimmer who specializes in breaststroke and medley events. he currently competes for the professional team la current in the international swimming league. licon is a three-time world championship medalist, a two-time pan american games gold medalist and has been a member of the united states national team since 2015. he is the current american record-holder in the 200-yard breaststroke with a time of 1:47.91.  licon competed for the texas longhorns from 2013 to 2017 under head coach eddie reese where he was an 11-time ncaa champion, a 15-time all-american, and a 12-time big 12 conference champion. additionally, licon helped lead the longhorns to three consecutive national championships in 2015, 2016, and 2017. he is only the fourth swimmer in collegiate history to win four individual ncaa titles in four different events. concluding his collegiate career, licon was voted the 2017 big 12 male athlete of the year.  early life will licon was born in el paso, texas on august 25, 1994. there, he lived with his parents robert and nancy, as well as his younger siblings michael and elizabeth; all three of them were raised together as competitive swimmers. in the summer of 2001, licon began his competitive swimming career by joining the el paso tennis club "fighting frogs" summer league swim team at the age of six. after one season of summer league swimming and winning multiple city championship events, will's father advanced his now seven-year-old son to year-round club swimming. in the fall of 2001, robert created the usa swimming club team west texas typhoons (wett), where licon swam for the next seven years of his career, breaking 50 individual border local swim committee (lsc) records during his tenure.  in 2009, licon left el paso and moved with his family to plano, texas. there, he joined the club team city of plano swimmers (cops), where he swam for 2 years (2009-2011). while living in plano, licon attended jasper high school (2009-2011) and swam for plano senior high school during his freshman year (2009-2010). at the 2010 5a texas state championships as a freshman, licon placed third in the 200-yard medley relay, third in the 200-yard im, and third in the 100-yard breaststroke. this would be the only time licon would participate in high school swimming as he elected to forgo his remaining three years of eligibility. he still
currently holds the plano senior high school record in the 200-yard medley relay.  in 2011, licon moved to austin, texas at the age of 16 to swim for nitro swim club, while the rest of his family moved back to el paso. for his final two years of high school, licon boarded with multiple host families in the surrounding austin area to maintain an elite level of training that would best set him up for future athletic and academic success. "it was very hard the first couple of months. i was scared. i was on my own," licon said. "it forced me to grow up on a whole new level."  only months after moving cities, licon won the 200-meter breaststroke at the 2011 jr. national championships, posting a 2:16.09. with this time, he finished ahead of his rival and future olympic gold medalist gunnar bentz. in austin, licon attended westlake high school for one semester before briefly moving back to el paso. for two months in el paso, he attended el paso high school before moving back to austin for the final time in 2012. back in austin, he enrolled into, and eventually graduated from vista ridge high school.  that summer, licon competed in the 2012 united states olympic trials, finishing 19th in the 200-meter breaststroke which qualified him for the 2012 jr. pan pacific swimming championships in honolulu, hawaii. in hawaii, licon posted a 2:14.53 in the 200-meter breaststroke to take fourth place. individually, licon also placed sixth in the 100-meter breaststroke (1:03.85) and competed in the preliminary swims of the 100-meter butterfly and the 200-meter individual medley. he concluded the meet with a silver medal performance in the 4×100-meter medley relay alongside future longhorn teammates jack conger and matt ellis with a 1:02.86 breaststroke split. this silver medal became licon's first international medal of his swimming career.  on october 19, 2012, licon gave his verbal commitment to swim at the university of texas at austin and signed his letter of intent on november 14, 2012.  college career  2014 ncaa championships in his debut season as a freshman at the 2014 ncaa division i men's swimming and diving championships, licon placed fifth in the 400-yard individual medley, setting a school record for the longhorns with a time of 3:40.84. he also finished 12th in the 200-yard breaststroke and 14th in the 200-yard individual medley.  the longhorns finished second to the california golden bears for
the men's ncaa team title, scoring 417.5 points to cal's 468.5.  2015 ncaa championships  at the 2015 ncaa championships during his breakout sophomore year, licon won two individual titles, one relay title, and earned a second place finish. in his first event, licon was runner-up to stanford's david nolan in the 200-yard im while producing a lifetime-best by over a second and a half, going 1:40.09. this made licon the third-fastest performer of all time in the event. nolan's time of 1:39.38 was a new american record.  licon then joined kip darmody, joseph schooling, and jack conger to win the 4×100-yard medley relay in a new ncaa and u.s. open record time of 3:01.23, just out-touching the california golden bears (3:01.60) for gold. the longhorns were ineligible for the american record because schooling represented singapore internationally. licon also won the 400-yard individual medley in a shocking upset with a time of 3:36.37, defeating the american record-holder chase kalisz by 3.14 seconds. licon became the fourth fastest performer of all time in this event, and it was the first time in history that a texas longhorns swimming and diving male athlete had won the 400 im at the ncaa championships.  in his last race of the meet, licon went head-to-head against american record-holder and reigning ncaa champion kevin cordes in the 200-yard breaststroke. continuing the theme of dethroning an american record-holder, licon edged out cordes by 5-hundredths of a second (1:49.48 to 1:49.53) in a thrilling finish. with this swim, licon became just the second swimmer in history to break 1:50 in the 200-yard breaststroke.  licon's breakout performance at the 2015 ncaa division i men's swimming and diving championships helped the longhorns win their first team title since 2010. it was the longhorns' 11th ncaa men's team title overall.  2016 ncaa championships  competing at the 2016 ncaa championships in his junior season, licon won the 200-yard individual medley with a 1:40.04, ahead of future olympic silver medalist josh prenot (1:40.14) and future 3-time olympic gold medalist and world record-holder ryan murphy (1:40.27). licon's time broke the pool record previously held by 12-time olympic
medalist ryan lochte (1:40.08), which was the former american record just over a year prior.  licon won the 200-yard breaststroke with a 1:48.12, beating second place prenot by 1.26 seconds. his time broke the ncaa, american, and u.s. open record previously owned by kevin cordes (1:48.66) by over half a second. licon's first 100-yard split of 51.81 surprisingly broke brendan hansen's school and conference record in the 100-yard breaststroke of 51.96 in the process. licon also earned second place in the 400 individual medley behind josh prenot, with a 3:37.40 effort, and a third place finish in the 4×50-yard medley relay.  licon joined john shebat, joseph schooling, and jack conger to help texas win the 400-yard medley relay for the second straight year with a new ncaa and u.s. open record of 3:00.68, splitting a 50.69 on the breaststroke leg. licon's efforts helped texas win the 2016 ncaa division i men's swimming and diving championships, winning back-to-back team titles.  2017 ncaa championships  as he wrapped up his senior year, licon went out with a bang at the 2017 ncaa championships by going undefeated in all of his races. in his first event, licon won the 200-yard individual medley, tying university of florida's mark szaranek for top of the podium at 1:40.67. later that same night, licon joined shebat, schooling, and conger in the 4×100-yard medley relay one last time to crush their previous ncaa and u.s. open record with a sensational time of 2:59.22, accompanied by a blazing 49.75 breaststroke split from licon. that swim marked the first time in history that any team had cracked the 3-minute barrier in the 4×100-yard medley relay, and licon's 49.75 split was only the second time in history that a swimmer had cracked the 50-second barrier on a rolling start.  licon followed up his wins in the 200-yard individual medley and the 4×100-yard medley relay with another victory in the 100-yard breaststroke (50.68) over missouri's fabian schwingenschlogl (50.77). that time made licon the second-fastest performer in history behind kevin cordes. later that session, licon joined teammates shebat, schooling and brett ringgold in the
200-yard medley relay, splitting 22.91 on the breaststroke leg to take first place in a new ncaa and u.s. open record of 1:21.54.  on his final night of collegiate swimming, licon took down his own american, ncaa, and u.s. open records in the 200-yard breaststroke with a 1:47.91, beating second place anton mckee by 3.31 seconds. licon's opening 100 split of his 200 breaststroke (51.42) was so quick that it would've been only two-hundredths slower than the third place finisher in the individual 100 breaststroke race (51.40). licon became the first swimmer in history to break the barrier of 1:48.00 in the 200-yard breaststroke.  licon's undefeated performance was a significant factor in helping the texas longhorns swimming and diving team dominate the 2017 ncaa division i men's swimming and diving championships, secure the longhorns' third consecutive team title, and win the longhorn men's 13th national championship in total.  collegiate accolades licon finished his career at the university of texas with 11 ncaa titles (7 individual, 4 relay), 18 all-america honors, 16 big 12 conference titles, 6 school and big 12 conference records, and was named the big 12 men's swimmer of the year twice (2015, 2017). he became the fourth swimmer in collegiate history - and first in 17 years - to win 4 ncaa individual titles in 4 different events during his career.  big 12 male athlete of the year concluding his ncaa career in 2017, licon "joined a rare group that includes ricky williams, derrick johnson and vince young" by becoming the first swimmer ever and the fifth longhorn to win the big 12 male athlete of the year award. licon shared the award with kansas jayhawks point guard and 2017 ap player of the year, frank mason iii.  big 12 men's swimmer of the year (2015) licon was voted the big 12 conference men's swimmer of the year by league coaches after his breakout sophomore season where he defeated a pair of american record-holders back-to-back en route to his first individual ncaa titles in the 400 im and 200 breaststroke. he was also a member of the ncaa and u.s. open record-setting 4×100 medley relay that placed first. he placed second in the 200 im behind another american record-holder, which brought his ncaa championship medal haul to three golds and one silver. licon was also a factor in the longhorns' sweep of the 2015 big 12 championship, claiming event titles in
the 200 im, 400 im and 200 breast.  big 12 men's swimmer of the year (2017) after his senior campaign, licon was voted the big 12 conference men's swimmer of the year for a second time. he became the first big 12 swimmer in history to win 3 individual events at a single ncaa championships, doing so in the 200 im, 100 breast, and 200 breast. licon broke his previous ncaa, american, and u.s. open records in the 200 breast, as well as the ncaa and u.s. open records in the 4×50 and 4×100 medley relays. the senior completed his college career with big 12 and program records in the 100 and 200 breast, the 200 and 400 im, and the 200 and 400 medley relays. in his ncaa career, licon became the fourth swimmer in the history of college swimming and the first big 12 swimmer to win four separate individual events at the ncaa championships.  el paso athletic hall of fame on may 2, 2018, only a year after his collegiate career had ended, licon was inducted into the el paso athletic hall of fame, being amongst the company of don haskins and bobby joe hill from the legendary 1965-66 texas western miners men's basketball team, national collegiate basketball hall of famers nolan richardson and nate archibald, professional golfer lee trevino, and former american record-holding swimmer lara jackson.  international career  2014 u.s. summer nationals after his first year of collegiate swimming, licon placed seventh in the 200-meter breaststroke at the 2014 phillips 66 summer national championships with a time of 2:11.68. he also placed 13th in the 200-meter individual medley (2:01.44) and 13th in the 400-meter individual medley (4:20.79).  2015 u.s. summer nationals  following a breakout ncaa season, but recovering from mononucleosis that took five weeks out of his training, licon entered summer nationals in san antonio, texas as a threat to win multiple events.  after swimming the fastest overall time in the preliminaries of the 200-meter individual medley, licon was seeded a spot ahead of michael phelps headed into the finals, but ultimately got silver behind phelps with a personal best time of 1:58.43.  in the 200-meter breaststroke, licon placed second, behind great britain's craig benson with a personal best time of 2:10.02. despite the loss, licon finished ahead of michael phelps who swam in the same race.  2016 u.s
. olympic trials  following a stellar ncaa season just a few months prior, licon entered the 2016 u.s. olympic trials in omaha with heavy momentum to make the olympic team. his best bet on claiming a roster spot was in the 200 breaststroke, due to the 200 im spots being dueled between olympic icons michael phelps and ryan lochte. despite just breaking the american record in the short course 200-yard breaststroke, licon wasn't the favorite to win the event going into trials. kevin cordes was coming off a silver medal-performance in the 200-meter breaststroke from the 2015 world championships in kazan, and he had been producing the fastest times among u.s. swimmers in both breaststroke events since 2013. in the eyes of the media, everyone was jockeying for second place behind cordes.  at the start of the race, cordes took it out like a rocket, splitting first at the 100-meter mark with a 1:00.77, 3-quarters of a second ahead of licon's 1:01.45 split, and almost a second under the world record pace. at the 150-meter mark, licon turned in third place behind cordes and just behind josh prenot, with all 3 swimmers still under the world record pace. as they were heading down home stretch, prenot began to surge ahead of licon and cordes, with licon gaining ground on cordes. as he approached the last five meters, licon's only hope at an olympic berth laid with out-touching cordes for silver. they both lunged for the wall, but cordes managed to touch second, just 14-hundredths ahead of licon. licon settled for third place (2:08.14) behind cordes (2:08.00), being shut out of the olympic team in heart-breaking fashion. licon also finished eighth in the 100-meter breaststroke final, recording a 1:00.61.  2017  u.s. summer nationals  after a heartbreaking third place finish in the 200-meter breaststroke at the olympic trials the previous year, licon entered summer nationals with high expectations as a newly-minted professional athlete. in the 200-meter breaststroke, licon ultimately swam a 2:09.68 for fifth place, well off his personal best time that he set the year prior. he also placed sixth in the 100-meter breaststroke with a 1:00.67 and sixth as well in the 200-meter individual medley with a 1:58.90. his swims in the 200-meter breaststroke
and the 200-meter individual medley qualified him for the 2017 world university games in taipei, taiwan.  world university games  at the 2017 world university games, licon was named co-captain of team usa, alongside teammates ryan held, ella eastin, and ali deloof. he finished seventh in the 200-meter breaststroke with a time of 2:10.75 and ninth in the 200-meter individual medley with a 2:01.44, just missing the a final in the latter.  2018 u.s. summer nationals  licon came in third place in the 200-meter breaststroke, posting a time of 2:08.72. andrew wilson placed second with a time of 2:08.71, finishing 1-hundredth of a second ahead of licon, which ultimately kept licon from competing in the 2018 pan pacific swimming championships by the slimmest of margins. licon also placed eighth in the 100-meter breaststroke (1:00.53) and ninth in the 200-meter individual medley, winning the b final in 1:59.39. his times in the 200 breaststroke and the 200 individual medley qualified himself for the 2019 pan american games in lima, peru.  2019 pan american games  with his first international breakout swim meet of his career, will licon produced a lifetime-best in the 200-meter breaststroke, winning his first major international medal in 2:07.62 over countryman nic fink (2:08.16) to annihilate the previous pan american games record of 2:09.82. that time vaulted licon to seventh in the world in 2019 for that event, as well as making him the fastest american in 2019.  in his second event, he matched his previous gold medal with another gold in the 200 im by taking down brazilians caio pumputis and leonardo coelho santos with a time of 1:59.13. licon's gold in the 200-meter individual medley was the first time that a united states male swimmer won this event at the pan american games since ron karnaugh's victory in 1991.  2020  covid-19 pandemic  due to the rapid spread of the coronavirus pandemic, the international olympic committee (ioc) and tokyo organising committee elected to postpone the 2020 summer olympics to 2021. this additionally postponed the 2020 u.s. olympic trials to june of the following year, effectively cancelling the rest of the 2020 long course season.  2021  2020 u.s. olympic trials  a year following the postponement of the olympic trials, licon looked to redeem
his third place finish from 5 years prior and make his first u.s. olympic team. holding the top seed nationally in the 200 m breaststroke, he was a presumptive favorite to make the team in that event. reminiscent to the same race in 2016 however, licon finished in 3rd place again behind nic fink and andrew wilson, swimming a 2:08.50. in an added cruel twist, licon's time of 2:08.14 from 2016 would've made the olympic team in 2021. licon also placed 6th in the 100 m breaststroke.  2021 world championships  resulting from his third place finish at the 2020 olympic trials, licon was selected to compete at the 2021 short course world swimming championships in abu dhabi.  in the 200 m breaststroke prelims, he placed fourth overall to advance to the finals. in the finals, licon won bronze with a time of 2:02.84 behind nic fink (2:02.28) and arno kamminga (2:02.42).  licon competed in the preliminaries of the 4×50 m and the 4×100 m medley relays, tying for gold with the russian swimming federation in 1:30.51, and grabbing silver behind italy in 3:20.50 respectively.  international swimming league on june 18, 2019, licon announced his commitment to swim professionally for the la current in the newly-formed international swimming league, which would be swum exclusively in short course meters.  2019 season  in the inaugural isl season and his isl debut in lewisville, texas, as well as his debut in short course meters swimming, licon competed in four events. on day 1, he finished sixth in the 50 m breaststroke and second in the 200 m breaststroke with a 2:04.33, just behind london roar's matthew wilson (2:03.93) in the latter. in the 4×100-meter medley relay, licon, alongside olympians ryan murphy and tom shields, finished second to the london roar while splitting a 57.32 on the breaststroke leg. on the second day, licon finished fourth in the 100-meter breaststroke. licon elected to opt out of the isl match in budapest to continue training stateside.  at the isl american derby in college park, maryland, licon finished third in the 100 and 200-meter breaststrokes, going 57.33 and 2:04.09 respectively, which improved upon both of his times from the previous month. his 4×100 m medley relay was disqualified due to an exchange error between licon and
backstroker shane ryan.  at the isl finale, hosted at the mandalay bay in las vegas, the current entered as a dark horse to win the team title. licon competed in the 50 breast next to long course world record-holder, adam peaty. not known for his sprinting abilities, licon got sixth place, but still managed to beat out iconic sprint sensation caeleb dressel. in his next individual race, the 200 breaststroke, licon was slated to swim his best event amongst a historically stacked field that included short course world record-holder kirill prigoda, long course world record-holder anton chupkov, long course american record-holder josh prenot, former long course world record-holder matthew wilson, ilya shymanovich (second-fastest long course 100-meter breaststroker of all time behind adam peaty at the time), andrew wilson (eventual olympic gold medalist), and nic fink (eventual olympic qualifier in the 200 m breast and american record-holder in the 200 scm breast). licon took out the race hard, hitting the 100-meter mark almost 8-tenths of a second ahead of the next swimmer. on the last lap, licon began to fatigue and fink stormed down the last length to just out-touch licon for first. licon's time of 2:02.42 was a new personal best and just 9-hundredths off the american record. licon and his 4 × 100 medley relay got sixth place with licon splitting a 56.64. the la current wound up settling for a distant fourth place team finish.  2020 season  due to the covid-19 pandemic, the entire 2020 season of the international swimming league was staged in a bio-secure bubble in budapest, hungary at the danube arena from october 16 - november 22, 2020. all athletes and personnel stayed at three separate hotels on margaret island for the duration of the season.  in match 1 of the 2020 season, licon got 2nd in the 200-meter breast in 2:04.28 to marco koch of the new york breakers. he earned his first win of the season in the 4×100-meter medley relay alongside ryan murphy, tom shields, and maxime rooney. in match 3, licon got 4th in the 200 breast (2:03.96), 6th in the 50 breast (26.88), and 6th in the 100 breast (58.00). in match 5, licon got his first individual win of his isl career over london roar's kirill prig
oda in 2:03.92. in the la current's last regular-season match, licon earned another win in the 200 breast in 2:04.12.  during the isl's second semifinal from november 15 - 16, licon earned his third victory in a row in the 200 breaststroke, going 2:02.47 to out-touch toronto's anton mckee. in the 100 breaststroke, he earned second place behind team iron's emre sakcı, going a personal best time of 57.07. the la current placed second behind the cali condors and ahead of  toronto and iron, thus advancing themselves to the final match.  at the 2020 isl grand finale, licon swam the 50, 100, and 200 breasts, as well as the b relay of the la current's 4×100 medley. in the 200 breast, licon placed 3rd in 2:02.27 behind prigoda and fink. with the london roar winning the men's 4×100 medley relay, they elected to swim the men's skins race in breaststroke. in his first skins race, licon swam a personal-best time in 26.61, despite finishing in 8th place. the la current finished fourth overall in the finals for the second consecutive year.  education and personal life licon attended the university of texas at austin from 2013-2018 and graduated with a bachelor's degree in sport management and a minor in business. during his career at ut, licon was a member of big 12 commissioner's honor roll (fall 2013), 2-time athletic director's honor roll (2015, 2017), 2013-14 academic all-big 12 rookie team, 2015 academic all-big 12 (first team), 2016 academic all-big 12 (first team), and 2017 academic all-big 12 (second team). in 2017, licon was selected by the university of texas to be featured on the "big 12 champions for life" campaign. the recipients, consisting of student athletes, express how their opportunity to earn a scholarship and compete in their chosen sport embodies the defining characteristics of a champion.  from 2016-2018, licon was a member of the texas cowboys student organization at the university of texas. in 2017, licon was inducted into the friar society, which is the "oldest and most prestigious" honor society at the university of texas.  personal bests  national records  national/u.s. open records: short course yards  see also   ncaa division i men's swimming and diving championships  list of united states records in swimming  list of university of
texas at austin alumni  texas longhorns swimming and diving  texas longhorns  texas cowboys  references  external links       will licon at texassports  will licon at swimswam  will licon at swimcloud  1994 births living people american male swimmers american male breaststroke swimmers american male medley swimmers medalists at the fina world swimming championships (25 m) pan american games medalists in swimming pan american games gold medalists for the united states swimmers at the 2019 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games competitors at the 2017 summer universiade texas longhorns men's swimmers sportspeople from el paso, texas sportspeople from plano, texas sportspeople from austin, texas swimmers from texas westlake high school (texas) alumni
2016 eneos 1006 kilometru lenktynes (eneos 1006 km race) will be a 17th running of eneos 1000 kilometru lenktynes, a touring car and gt endurance racing event held in lithuania, at palanga circuit, 2 kilometers away from resort town palanga on july 21-23, 2016.  background  on june 6, 2016, it was announced that race distance will be increased from 1000 kilometers to 1006 kilometers to honor new event promoter tv6. this marked a renewed partnership between race organisers and uab tele-3, a lithuanian television company that owns both tv6 and tv3 brands in lithuania. tv3 was a race promoter from 2005 to 2008 and the race was then known as 1003 kilometers race.  42 teams entered the race. multiple and defending race winner jonas gelzinis joined benediktas vanagas and sebastiaan bleekemolen in general financing by pitlane team, while his brother and 2015 event winner ignas gelzinis moved to newly formed team hot wheels. another last year's race winner tautvydas barstys did not return to defend the title.  lithuanian racing legend stasys brundza crashed his marcos mantis during first practice session and was forced to replace his car to bmw m3. however, it failed technical commission.  qualifying  qualifying took place on july 22. ramunas capkauskas took pole position for carre & mvp by algirdai team, with best effort of 1:09.724. it was his third pole position with aquila cr1 prototype. capkauskas previously took pole positions in 2012 and 2013 edition of 1000 kilometru lenktynes. marius stabosevicius, representing brum brum sport, was second with bmw m3. jonas gelzinis took third, driving for general financing by pitlane team. robertas kupcikas was fastest in diesel powered car class and took eight on the grid with a lap time of 1:14.606.  qualification: top 10 shootout results  race race will be held on july 22, 2016.  references  eneos 1006 kilometru lenktynes eneos 1006 kilometru lenktynes
arun bhatt (1934-2001) was an indian film director and producer active in hindi and gujarati cinema. he was an active filmmaker in gujarati cinema in the 1970s and 1980s.  biography  arun bhatt was born on 26 september 1934. he was the eldest son of the movie producer and director vijay bhatt, founder of prakash pictures.  career bhatt started his career as an assistant to his father. in the early 1960s he made short films and documentaries as "vijay films", a production company started by bhatt and his brother-in-law kishore vyas. he produced several documentary films for the government of gujarat.  in 1971, he founded vijay films international. his first film was verno vaaras, a dramatization of a folk tale in gujarati, starring arvind joshi and usha solanki. therefater, he made vardaan in hindi with vinod mehra, reena roy and mehmood. mehmood received a filmfare award for his role as a gujarati businessman.  in may 1977, the gujarati film maa baap was released, and ran for more than 25 weeks in cinemas, a so-called "silver jubilee". throughout the 1980s, bhatt produced several gujarati films, including mota ghar ni vahu which was also a silver jubilee, lohi ni sagaai, ghar ghar ni vaat, and hiro ghoghe jai aavyo.  in hindi, bhatt directed ghar jamai for producer rajkumar shahbadi which starred mithun chakraborty, varsha usgaonkar and kadar khan, and jawani zindabad for jay mehta starring aamir khan, farha and kadar khan.  bhatt worked with music directors such as avinash vyas and his son gaurang vyas to write songs for his films.  awards the documentaries poet saints of gujarat and industries in gujarat, produced for the government of gujarat, won awards as best documentary film 1962-63 and second best documentary film 1962-63 respectively, from the government of gujarat.   bhatt also won several awards from the government of gujarat for best director: for pooja na phool, sona ni jaal, ghar ghar ni vaat, shetal tara oonda pani and lakhtar ni laadi ne vilayat no var.  his last completed film lakhtar ni laadi won 11 gujarat state awards including the best screenplay and second best director award.  death bhatt died on 17 april 2001 leaving his last gujarati film, rangaai jaane rangma, incomplete.  family bhatt's son, chirantan bhatt is
a music composer working in bollywood and in telugu cinema.  filmography  references  external links https://www.arunbhatt.com    http://archive.indianexpress.com/news/westward-ho-/998253/  film directors from gujarat 20th-century indian film directors gujarati-language film directors hindi-language film directors 1934 births 2001 deaths
dr beyers naude local municipality is a new local municipality that was established by merging the camdeboo, ikwezi and baviaans local municipalities in the sarah baartman district of the eastern cape in south africa. the decision to merge the municipalities was taken by the municipal demarcation board in 2015 but only took effect after municipal elections on 3 august 2016. the new municipality is named after the afrikaner cleric and anti-apartheid activist beyers naude. its seat is in graaff-reinet.  geography and people  the new municipality covers an area of  at the western end of the eastern cape province, from the sneeuberge in the north to the baviaanskloof in the south. it is a sparsely populated area, with a population of 79,291 giving a density of only .  80.3% of residents of the municipality speak afrikaans as their home language, while 14.8% speak xhosa and 3.2% speak english. 66.9% described themselves as "coloured", 23.6% as "black african", and 8.7% as "white".  the principal town in the municipal area is graaff-reinet, with a population of approximately 35,000. other towns include willowmore, aberdeen, jansenville, steytlerville and klipplaat.  government and politics  the municipal council consists of 24 members elected by mixed-member proportional representation. 12 councillors are elected by first-past-the-post voting in 12 wards, while the remaining 12 are chosen from party lists so that the total number of party representatives is proportional to the number of votes received. in the election of 1 november 2021 no party won a majority of seats on the council. on 23 november 2021, a da-led coalition took control of the municipality.  the following table shows the results of the election.  references  local municipalities of the sarah baartman district municipality
gowanda state hospital was a hospital located in gowanda, new york. its building is now part of gowanda correctional facility.  history  in 1894, the erie county legislature passed an act that gave rise to the homeopathic state hospital, later known as the gowanda psychiatric center, in gowanda and collins, new york. land purchased for the state hospital by erie county included 500 acres and was known as the taylor tract.  when the state care act was effected in 1894, the land was transferred to the state of new york, which then conveyed it to the state hospital. the hospital was located taylor hollow road, which was named for the farmer who used to own the land.  in 1982, 40% of the original 500 acres of the gowanda psychiatric center was utilized for the collins correctional facility. the gowanda correctional facility was built using the remaining acreage and opened its doors in 1994. the two prisons are separated by a fence, and they are administered independently. gowanda correctional facility houses more than 2,300 inmates, and is the second-largest prison in new york state.  references  external links  gowanda correctional facility history  buildings and structures in erie county, new york hospitals in new york (state) defunct hospitals in new york (state)
k2-72b is a small exoplanet orbiting around the red dwarf star k2-72 approximately 227.7 light-years away. k2-72b completes an orbit in 5.57 days, and it has a radius of only 75% of that of the earth.  references  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets 72  aquarius (constellation)
the holy kinship is a circa 1495 oil on panel painting of holy kinship by the workshop of the renaissance artist geertgen tot sint jans in the collection of the rijksmuseum.  painting the holy kinship shows the virgin and child in the left center with saint elizabeth and john the baptist slightly more prominently positioned center right. the "kinship" members have been further identified as saint anne with a book on the left with her husband joachim behind her and behind him saint joseph holding a lily towards his wife as a gesture of the immaculate conception. three young cousins of the infants, the later disciples simon, jacob and john, pour wine into a chalice in the centre of the painting which is a reference to the eucharist, and beyond them a sculpture of abraham's sacrifice of isaac on the altar represents god's sacrifice of jesus. a young judas stands lighting the candles of the choir gate. in the doorways of the choir gate stand the other two former husbands of saint anne, the fathers of the other two marias who are positioned behind st. elisabeth.  provenance this painting is a former altarpiece of an unspecified church, though it is tempting to imagine similarities to the commanderie van sint-jan where geertgen is known to have lived and worked: janskerk, haarlem. the provenance of this painting only goes back to a brussels sale in 1797 however, and indeed the painting was purchased in 1808 as a work by jan and hubert van eyck. it wasn't until 1888 that it was identified as a work by the haarlem master. since then several attempts have been made to determine the origins of the painting. in his translated schilder-boeck, hessel miedema reported that geertgen died somewhere between 1486 and 1492, while recent dendrochronology, on the other hand, places the painting around 1496 at the earliest. the painting has many similar details in common with albert van ouwater's circa 1445 lazarus and the tiled floor is similar to a contemporary painting by the master of alkmaar:  exhibitions  this painting has been considered a highlight of the collection since it was bought in 1808 and has been included in all highlights of the rijksmuseum catalogs. it was the subject of a mini-exhibition after 17 years were spent 1983-2000 restoring 12 centimeters of water damage at the bottom of the painting.  references   sk-a-500 painting record on museum website  15th-century paintings paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum paintings by geertgen tot sint jans paintings of the madonna and
child paintings depicting john the baptist tot sint jans books in art paintings of children churches in art paintings of elizabeth (biblical figure) altarpieces
filip mangen ingebrigtsen (born 20 april 1993) is a norwegian middle distance runner who represents sandnes idrettslag. in 2016, ingebrigtsen became european champion at 1500 meters during the european championships in amsterdam, and took bronze over the same distance at the world championships in 2017 in london. he previously held the norwegian 1500m record with the time 3:30.01, set at a diamond league meet in monaco on 20 july 2018.  at the 2019 london diamond league ingebrigtsen finished second to samuel tefera in the mile. with a time of 3:49.60 ingebrigtsen ran a national record and new personal best.  ingebrigtsen was born in sandnes. his older brother henrik ingebrigtsen and younger brother jakob ingebrigtsen (born 2000) are also middle distance runners and european champions at 1500 meters. they are trained by their dad gjert ingebrigtsen.  career 2011 season:  at the norwegian championship  2011 he finished fifth in the 800 meters with time 1.56.18. at the same meeting, he also was on the sandnes idrettslag team that won gold in the junior class. the others on the team were kjartan løvoll, per magne florvaag and marius bakken støle. in the terrain race he received nm medal, and won silver in the short run in nm in terrain race. in the long run (6 km) he finished fifth, and also got bronze in the relay, together with teammates asle rønning tjelta and ragnar stølsmark.  2012-2015 seasons:  in july 2012 he won gold at 1500 meters in junior nm in athletics in sigdal. in august he finished third at 800 meters in the 2012 [[norwegian athletics championships ]], with thomas roth winning and older brother henrik finishing second. in the 2013 norwegian athletics championship he won the 1500 meters, and also won gold on the 4 × 1500 meter relay in the nm.  at the 2014 european athletics championships, where he ran 3.41.06 for 1500 meters in the opening session, but did not reach the final.  the following week he won  two medals in the norwegian championship, coming  second in the 1500 meters and third at 800 meters.  in the 2015 european athletics championships he finished second in the 1500 meters behind snorre holtan løken.  2016 season:  in the 2016 european athletics championships, he won the 1500 meters, with his older brother henrik in third
place. the week after, at the diamond league meet in monaco, and lowered his personal 1500 meters record to 3:33.72, finishing in 10th place. ingebrigtsen represented norway during the rio olympics in august, but was disqualified during the trial heat of the 1500 meters.  2017 season:  in the 2017 world championships in athletics, ingebrigtsen took the bronze medal at 1500 meters with time 3.34.53.  2018 season:  at  the diamond league in monaco on 20 july 2018 ingebrigtsen set a record of 1500 meters with a time of 3:30.01, which was the best time in europe that year, and he became a favorite at that distance for  the european championship in berlin. in the semi-finals, he fell and broke a rib, but got up, took the field again and qualified for the final. his injury affected his performance in the final, and he also had to withdraw from the 5000 meters final. his younger brother jakob took gold at both distances, and his older brother henrik took the silver at 5000 meters. the injury also troubled ingebrigtsen during the nm a few weeks later, but he won the silver medal at 800 meters behind thomas roth.  2019 season:  some of ingebrigtsen's performances during the 2019 season were controversial. in the 2019 european athletics indoor championships, he was disqualified in his 1500 meters heat for running off the track. his brother jakob remarked that "it was the stupidest thing i'll see all year". a few months later, at the 2019 world athletics championships, ingebrigtsen was seen to push another runner, tedesse lemi, causing him to fall, but he was not disqualified and proceeded to the semifinals.  2020 season:  at the millrose games, ingebrigtsen ran a 3:56.99 indoor mile to set a new national record. he also set personal bests in the 1500 meters (3:36.32) and 800 meters (1:49.56). ingebrigtsen opened his outdoor season in the impossible games, running the 1000 meters in a national record of 2:16.46 and a 2000 meters in 4:56.91 just behind his brothers henrik (4:53.72) and jakob (4:50.01), running both events on the same day. he ran an 800 meter personal best of 1:46.74 3 weeks later. in august, ingebrigtsen ran the 1500 meters at the monaco diamond league in 3:30.35 season best.
2021 season:  ingebrigtsen's 2021-2022 season was placed into jeopardy due to a reaction to receiving the covid-19 vaccine but said he would do it again. he struggled in training leading up to the 2020 summer olympics and failed to qualify for the olympic men's 1500 m final after finishing tenth in his heat.  international competitions  1did not finish in the final  references  external links    1993 births living people people from sandnes norwegian male middle-distance runners norwegian male cross country runners olympic athletes of norway athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics world athletics championships athletes for norway world athletics championships medalists european athletics championships medalists norwegian athletics championships winners ingebrigtsen family european cross country championships winners athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
the tempest, also known as the tempest (prospero and miranda), or simply prospero and miranda, is an outdoor bronze sculpture depicting prospero and miranda from william shakespeare's the tempest by milton hebald, installed outside delacorte theater in manhattan's central park, in the u.s. state of new york. the work, which was donated by george t. delacorte, jr. and unveiled in 1966, is a companion piece to romeo and juliet (1977).  see also   1966 in art  references  1966 establishments in new york city 1966 sculptures bronze sculptures in central park outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures in central park sculptures of men in new york city sculptures of women in new york city statues in new york city statues of fictional characters works based on the tempest
john white (? - 22 august 1692, in st. andrews), was acting governor of jamaica in 1692.  previously president of the council, white was acting governor during the 1692 earthquake that destroyed port royal. the historian william james gardner wrote of him:  john bourden succeeded him for a brief time as governor.  notes  1692 deaths governors of jamaica jamaican people of english descent 17th-century jamaican people
tillie is a feminine given name, a nickname and a surname. it may refer to:  given name or nickname  women  tillie anderson (1875-1965), swedish road and track cyclist, member of the united states bicycling hall of fame  tillie baldwin (1888-1958), born anna mathilda winger, american rodeo contestant and performer, member of the national cowgirl hall of fame and the national cowboy hall of fame  tillie ehringhaus (1890-1980), first lady of north carolina  tillie k. fowler (1942-2005), american politician  tillie hardwick (1924-1999), pomo indian woman instrumental in reversing the california indian rancheria termination policy of the u.s. government  ottilie tillie klimek (1876-1936), polish-american serial killer  tillie lewis (1901-1977), american businesswoman and entrepreneur  tillie moreno (born 1953), filipino r&b/soul/pop singer  tillie olsen (1912-2007), american writer and early feminist  tillie paul (1863-1952), tlingit translator and christian missionaries  tillie s. pine (1896-1999), american children's writer  tillie taylor (1922-2011), canadian judge and social activist, first female magistrate in the province of saskatchewan  tillie walden (1996), american cartoonist  tillie pierce (1848-1914), author of at gettysburg, or what a girl saw and heard of the battle: a true narrative.  men  henry tillie lamar (1865-1891), american college football player  taldon tillie manton (1910-1991), american national football league player  arthur tillie shafer (1889-1962), american major league baseball player  walter tillie voss (1897-1975), american national football league player  surname a family of french sportspeople:  laurent tillie (born 1963), volleyball player and coach; father of:  kim tillie (born 1988), basketball player  kevin tillie (born 1990), volleyball player  killian tillie (born 1998), basketball player  see also  tillie (disambiguation)  tilly (disambiguation)  feminine given names lists of people by nickname
the council of toulouse (1229) was a council of the roman catholic church called by folquet de marselha the bishop of toulouse in 1229 ad. the council forbade laity to read vernacular translations of the bible.  background the council was called by the local bishop to address the perceived threat from the rapid growth of the albigensian movement in 13th century southern france. the council resolved that a search in each parish was to be made for heretics (albigensian and cathar) and that if found their houses should be destroyed and that non-latin translations of the bible be destroyed and likewise for other unauthorised copies.  the council pronounced: "we prohibit also that the laity should be permitted to have the books of the old and the new testament; unless anyone from the motives of devotion should wish to have the psalter or the breviary for divine offices or the hours of the blessed virgin; but we most strictly forbid their having any translation of these books."  legacy folquet de marselha, bishop of toulouse died two years later in 1231, but in 1234 another council was held at tarragona to regulate the procedure of the inquisition, which was already in toulouse in 1233 and to also ratify the findings of the toulouse council.  canon two of this tarragona council restated: "no one may possess the books of the old and new testaments, and if anyone possesses them he must turn them over to the local bishop within eight days, so that they may be burned"  references  toulouse toulouse 13th-century christianity
irene alfonso garcia (born 6 february 1981) is a retired spanish middle distance runner who specialized in the 800 and 1500 metres.  in her early career, she competed at the 2000 world junior championships without reaching the final, and placed lowly in the junior races at the 1999 and 2000 world cross country championships (53rd and 41st). she later finished ninth at the 2003 european u23 championships before reaching full senior age.  alfonso then won the gold medal at the 2004 ibero-american championships, finished seventh at the 2005 mediterranean games, fifth at the 2009 mediterranean games (all 1500 metres) and competed in the 800 metres at the 2010 european championships without reaching the final.  her personal best times are 2:01.54 minutes in the 800 metres, achieved in june 2009 in huelva and 4:08.06 minutes in the 1500 metres, achieved in july 2009 in athens.  references  1981 births living people spanish female middle-distance runners athletes (track and field) at the 2005 mediterranean games athletes (track and field) at the 2009 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for spain
battery e, 1st u.s. artillery was a united states army field artillery battery that was in service between 1821 and 1901, most notably in extensive service with the union army during the american civil war.  during the civil war, the battery was present at the siege of fort sumter in april 1861 under the command of captain abner doubleday. returned to the artillery defenses of washington, d.c. and rearmed as a field artillery battery, the unit was merged with battery g, 1st u.s. artillery in february 1862. consolidated and renamed battery e & g, 1st u.s. artillery, the unit continued with this designation until the end of the war.  the unit is also known for its participation in the wounded knee massacre in 1890.  service battery e, 1st u.s. artillery was formed by a reorganization of the u.s. army artillery service in 1821. the battery saw service in the second seminole war and the early engagements of the mexican-american war.  from 1856 through 1858, the battery was stationed in florida during the third seminole war.  at the outbreak of the civil war, the battery was stationed at fort sumter, charleston harbor, south carolina in january 1861, where it was present during the battle of fort sumter in april which sparked the war. following the surrender of that post, it moved to washington, d.c. where it was attached to patterson's army to october 1861, in the field but not present at the first battle of bull run. its new commander, captain jefferson c. davis, was absent on detached service throughout the duration of the war; under the command of subaltern battery officer lieutenant alanson merwin randol, the battery was merged with battery g, 1st u.s. artillery in february 1862, serving as battery e & g with the artillery reserve, army of the potomac, to may 1862; 2nd brigade, artillery reserve, v corps, army of the potomac, to september 1862; artillery, 2nd division, v corps, to october 1862; artillery, 3rd division, v corps, to may 1863; 2nd regular brigade, artillery reserve, army of the potomac, to june 1863; 2nd brigade, horse artillery, artillery reserve, army of the potomac, to june 1864; 3rd brigade, derussy's division, xxii corps, to july 1864; and 1st brigade, derussy's division, xxii corps, to october 1865.  on garrison duty along the east
coast post-war, the battery also participated in the indian wars at wounded knee.  detailed service defense of fort sumter, charleston harbor, april 12-13, 1861. evacuation of fort sumter april 13. reached fort hamilton, new york harbor, april 19. moved to chambersburg, pennsylvania, june 3. ordered to washington, d.c., august 26, 1861. duty at the federal arsenal and at camp duncan, defenses of washington, until march 1862. moved to the virginia peninsula. siege of yorktown april 5-may 4. battle of seven pines, may 31-june 1. seven days battles before richmond june 26-july 1. savage's station and peach orchard june 29. white oak swamp and glendale june 30. malvern hill july 1. at harrison's landing until august 16. moved to fortress monroe, then to centerville august 16-28. pope's virginia campaign august 28-september 2. battle of groveton august 29. second battle of bull run august 30. maryland campaign september 6-22. battle of antietam september 16-17. shepherdstown ford september 19-20. at sharpsburg until october 30. movement to falmouth, virginia, october 29-november 19. battle of fredericksburg, december 11-15. at falmouth, virginia, until april 1863. chancellorsville campaign april 27-may 6. battle of chancellorsville may 1-5. gettysburg campaign june 11-july 24. aldie june 17. middleburg june 19. upperville june 21. ashby's gap june 21. battle of gettysburg, july 1-3. near harpers ferry july 14. shepherdstown july 16. bristoe campaign october 9-22. advanced to line of the rappahannock november 7-8. mine run campaign november 26-december 2. custer's raid into albemarle county february 28-march 1, 1864. near charlottesville february 29. stannardsville march 1. rapidan campaign may 4-june 8. battle of the wilderness may 5-7. spotsylvania may 8-21. milford station may 21. chesterfield may 23. north anna river may 23-26. on line of the pamunkey may 26-28. totopotomoy may 28-31. mechump's creek may 31. cold harbor june 1-5. sharp's farm june 3. moved to washington, d.c., june 18. garrison duty at fort willard and fort strong, defenses of washington, d.c. until october 1865.  later service
one of the most notable actions of battery e, 1st u.s. artillery was in support of the colonel james w. forsyth's 7th u.s. cavalry at the now-controversial engagement at wounded knee on december 29, 1890. the battery was commanded by captain allyn capron and equipped with four hotchkiss m1875 mountain guns which were used against the wounded knee encampment with devastating effect after the fight broke out. some estimates report that as many as 200 lakota indians were killed or wounded in the engagement, the majority of whom were women and children.  the battery participated in the spanish-american war in cuba in 1898, under the command of captain capron.  in 1899, the battery was deployed to the philippine islands during the philippine-american war; it remained there until 1901, when the unit was dissolved and reorganized as the first battery, field artillery in the newly-organized artillery corps of the united states army.  commanders  captain sylvester churchill  captain henry saunders captain ebenezer sibley  captain james henry prentiss  captain william henry french  captain abner doubleday captain jefferson c. davis  lieutenant samuel sherer elder  captain alanson merwin randol  1st lieutenant egbert worth olcott  1st lieutenant frank sands french  lieutenant edward alexander duer  captain franck eveleigh taylor captain tully mccrea  captain allyn capron captain henry merritt andrews  see also    list of united states regular army civil war units  1st air defense artillery regiment  notes  references  buel. clarence c. and robert u. johnson. battles and leaders of the civil war. vol. 1. new york: the century company, 1887. dyer, frederick h. a compendium of the war of the rebellion. des moines, ia: dyer pub. co., 1908. haskin, william l., ed. the history of the first regiment of artillery. portland, me: b. thurston and company, 1879. haskin, william l. "the first regiment of artillery." in haskin, william l. and theophilus f. rodenbough. the army of the united states. new york: maynard, merrill, & co., 1896. heitman, francis b. historical register and dictionary of the united states army. washington, d.c.: government printing office, 1903. randol, alanson m. "from january, 1862, to august, 1864" in haskin, william l., ed. the history of the first regiment of artillery. portland
, me: b. thurston and company, 1879.  external links  battery e, 1st u.s. light artillery monuments at gettysburg battlefield  united states regular army civil war units and formations u
salvador "sal" san buenaventura panelo (born september 23, 1946) is a filipino lawyer who served as president rodrigo duterte's chief presidential legal counsel (2016-2021) and presidential spokesperson (2018-2020). he was also the legal adviser during duterte's 2016 presidential campaign. as a private lawyer, he has handled cases involving politicians and other controversial personalities. he is a former director of the integrated bar of the philippines (ibp).  early life and education salvador panelo is a native of naga, camarines sur. he studied elementary school at the murphy elementary school and high school at the roosevelt memorial high school (ay 1959-1962). he earned his bs in political science and ba english degrees at university of nueva caceres. he moved to manila to go to the university of the philippines college of law for his law education. as a student at the university of the philippines diliman and a member of the sigma rho fraternity, he was involved in student activism during the pre-martial law period. he stayed at the university of the philippines and completed law school in 1974. he passed the philippine bar examination the same year.  career  early works panelo first practiced law at united laboratories where he served as the company's legal counsel from 1977 to 1987. he  assumed the directorship of the integrated bar of the philippines (ibp) in 1983 and presidency of the ibp rizal chapter in 1985. in 1987, he was hired as a radio anchor at dzec radyo agila where he worked for one year. it was also in 1987 when he started his private law practice.  panelo ran in the 1992 philippine senate election; with the top 24 candidates winning the election, panelo, who was running under the kilusang bagong lipunan, finished 125th.  notable cases in his 40 years of law practice, he served as the defense lawyer of prominent politicians such as datu unsay mayor andal ampatuan jr. who was implicated in the 2009 maguindanao massacre, calauan mayor antonio sanchez who was tried for the 1993 eileen sarmenta and allan gomez murder, and the family of former president ferdinand marcos in relation to recovering their ill-gotten wealth.  panelo also lawyered for former commission on elections chairman benjamin abalos who was embroiled in the 2007 elections scandal, philip medel who was convicted in the murder of actress nida blanca, and the family of slain racing champion enzo pastor. his other clients include celebrities such as deniece cornejo in her 2014 rape case
against actor vhong navarro, and dennis roldan who was convicted of kidnapping a filipino-chinese boy in 2005.  other works panelo is a member the rotary club of makati southwest chapter, a member of the board of trustees of the san beda law alumni association, and secretary general of the asean law association golfers' club. he was an unsuccessful candidate of the kilusang bagong lipunan in the 1992 senate election. prior to joining the government of rodrigo duterte on june 30, 2016, he was his legal counsel and defense lawyer on the charges of hidden wealth by vice presidential candidate antonio trillanes during the presidential campaign. he eventually served as the president-elect's transitional spokesperson before being designated as chief presidential legal counsel. on may 1, 2020, panelo began hosting a talk show on people's television network titled counterpoint with secretary salvador panelo, produced by the presidential broadcast staff - radio television malacanang (rtvm). panelo created the program for the purpose of "discussing the issues affecting our country," as well as to "analyze, dissect issues raised by certain critics and others against certain policies of the government".  personal life panelo resides in marikina. he had a son, carlo, who died of heart complications from down syndrome on january 6, 2017, at the age of 27.  references  living people advisers to the president of the philippines duterte administration cabinet members filipino lawyers filipino radio journalists kilusang bagong lipunan politicians people from naga, camarines sur university of the philippines diliman alumni 1946 births people from marikina pdp-laban politicians
akhorwal () is a town in darra adam khel in frontier region kohat of the federally administered tribal areas of pakistan. akhorwal has a population of 22,559 according to the 2017 census of pakistan. it is home to fata university.  history after coal mines were discovered in akhorwal, people of the region disputed how the income from mines should be distributed. on july 23, 2017 an official decision was made for the pirwal khel sub-tribe to receive 27 percent of the income, the bulaki khel to receive 36.5 percent, and the gadiya khel to receive 36.5 percent.  see also darra adam khel fata university  references  populated places in frontier region kohat
prospero colonna, duke of rignano, prince of sonnino (18 july 1858 - 16 september 1937) was an italian politician and aristocrat. he was twice mayor of rome (1899-1905, 1914-1919). he served in the chamber of deputies and senate of the kingdom of italy.  biography prospero was born in naples, son of giovanni andrea i colonna, a landowner, and isabella alvarez di toledo. he descend from the house of colonna, an ancient aristocrat family.  in his youth, he married maria ignazia massimo, and they had 3 children: , piero (future fascist politician) and fabrizio.  in 1895, colonna was elected for anagni in the chamber of deputies, supported the historical right. he resigned his charge in 1900.  in the same year, colonna became senator and mayor of rome yet.  during his term, rome completed the streetcar line, including a passage under the quirinal hill.  on june 1904 the ioc's president pierre de coubertin designate rome to organised the iv olympic games, but colonna refused for the difficult status of the city treasure. despite the help request to the government, the prime minister giovanni giolitti refused to help the city. finally, colonna resigned his office.  when the first world war started, colonna joined in the italian royal army as cavalry colonel. however, he never participated in battles, like he was appointed "military" mayor of rome. in 1919, he resigned the office again and retired from politics. he died in 1937.  references  external links  1858 births 1937 deaths 20th-century italian politicians mayors of rome deputies of legislature xix of the kingdom of italy
the 1989 copa libertadores final was a two-legged football match-up to determine the 1989 copa libertadores champion.  qualified teams  venues  match details  first leg  second leg  external links conmebol's official website  1 copa libertadores finals copa libertadores final 1989 copa libertadores final 1989
operation big ben was the title given to the dive-bombing british spitfire missions against german mobile v-2 rocket launch sites in holland between october 1944 - april 1945, during world war ii. the code word 'big ben' meant 'v2 rocket' and was used by the filter room at fighter command and by the pilots of the mission; but the phrase 'operation big ben' was not used in official documentation (none found since the release of former top secret papers from the national archive from january 2004), even though pilots (such as flt lt raymond baxter, who went on to become the voice of the farnborough air show and bbc tv's technology programme tomorrow's world) identified the sorties under the name 'operation big ben'.  description  the missions were specific: spitfire mark xvi's with clipped wings, flew in formations of four aircraft (some mark ix and some mark xiv were also used occasionally) and dive-bombed the sites, sometimes through breaks in heavy cloud. each spitfire carried a 250lb bomb under each wing and a 500lb bomb under the fuselage. very occasionally they would just carry the two 250lb bombs or just the 500lb bomb, if they were pin-pointing locations further away (this way they could save on fuel).  although the operation has been the subject of two extensive books, the extent of the success of the missions is still not known. it is considered successful because it is appreciated that the spitfires did destroy some of the mobile v2 launch sites, along with bridges, roads and railway tracks, which were crucial supply lines; but the operation didn't completely stop the rocket attacks.  in interview about 'operation big ben', flt lt raymond baxter said that it was the most difficult operation he ever took part in during the second world war and insisted that unequivocally, the operation was called 'operation big ben'.  over the ten years since the operation has been appreciated by aviation historians, a short cgi film has documented the missions, a limited edition model of raymond baxter's mark xvi spitfire was produced (which he signed the plinth of each model) and two respected non-fiction books have become available.  references  notes  sources    irene younghusband bbc learning  operation big ben - the anti-v2 spitfire missions 1944-45 (spellmount, 2004)  wee bit and glenn films  operation big ben - the anti-v2 spitfire missions (tempest, 2016)  v-weapons
enemies (russian: vragi) is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by tamara rodionova and starring vasili sofronov, elena granovskaya and nikolai korn. it is based on the 1906 play of the same name by maxim gorky.  cast  vasili sofronov as zakhar bardin   elena granovskaya   nikolai korn   valentina kibardina   nina olkhina   ivan yefremov   vladislav strzhelchik  aleksandr larikov  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films soviet drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films films based on works by maxim gorky soviet black-and-white films
emayla, also known as emanuela bellezza is an italian-american singer, songwriter, guitarist and pianist, who gained popularity with her original music, after appearing on television networks mtv tres, univision, rai, telefutura and tv azteca. in 2012, she won a nationwide contest by mtv tres and was chosen by colombian singer juanes to sing a duet with him for inclusion on the deluxe edition of his album juanes mtv unplugged. emayla won the contest by performing a cover of juanes' song fotografia. the album won a grammy in 2013 as best latin pop album category. it also won two latin grammys: album of the year and best long form music video. the video of their performance counts over a million and a half views on youtube. as a result of these achievements, emayla's song titled ella se va was played in different main radios in venezuela and reached the top 40 national music charts in the same country.  early life emayla was born in san remo, a small town in the italian riviera (north of italy) and started taking music lessons when she was three years old. at age seven she took her first piano lesson, at age fifteen her first guitar lesson and at age eighteen her first vocal lesson. she began songwriting as a teenager, and aspired to a music career in los angeles.  at age sixteen she wrote her very first song, which was in english and it was called fly away. she studied foreign languages in high school and she graduated at the university la sapienza of rome in foreign languages and modern cultures. during the high school and university years, she kept writing songs and she continued her musical studies. at age eighteen, bellezza joined her first band and started having live performance experience. she participated to various italian music competitions and festivals with her original songs and she was one of the finalists at castrocaro and singing for life music contest.  in 2007, at age twenty-three, bellezza decided to move to los angeles, california where she attended musicians institute and graduated for the vocal program in 2009.  career  in 2009, emayla song "stay with me" was nominated for best r&b/soul song by the hollywood music in media awards  and she was featured on music connection magazine where she earned a recognition as hottest unsigned artist of the year.  in august 2010, emayla and her band were finalists at the competition called battle of the bands, at the hard rock cafe, in las vegas. she was also finalist as a
songwriter and singer at the italian contest called demo d'autore, that went live on italian radio called radio rai, which is part of italian main tv station, rai.  she was a finalist in the 2011 john lennon songwriting contest with her own song esperanza de amor.  in 2012, besides performing with juanes at the mtv unplugged on mtv tres, emanuela also performed in duet with singer franco de vita at the gibson amphitheater and opened for italian singer jovanotti, at the el rey theatre, in los angeles.  in 2013, emayla released her album ella se va, which was produced by multi-grammy award winner gustavo borner.  in 2013, her song "lo que se da regresa" made her the finalist at the u.s.a. songwriting competition. on february 18 of that year, emanuela appeared on italian national television rai and specifically on rai gulp, during the program "la tv ribelle".  in july 2014, emayla songs, "eres tu" and "emilia" were featured in a season 2 episode of hulu's series, east los high.  at the 2015 rumi awards in las vegas, bellezza was the winner of "best artist - europe" and "best singer - duet".  in 2016 emayla worked with bass player nathan east on the song "i love to dance", composed by the group "80's dna reloaded". in 2019 emayla released her album titled "new freedom", written by herself and produced by darryl swann. and herself.  2007-09: los angeles and first single strong  emayla's music career starts blooming when she moves to los angeles, in 2007. it is at musicians institute where she meets guitarist, music producer and videographer, jean luis contreras, who did many collaborations with the artist, produced her songs, recorded her music videos and became the guitar player of her band.  they work together on her first single, called strong, released in 2009. the music video was shot in miami and was produced by jean luis contreras and pablo pagan.  2009: rain and sunshine of heart  later in 2009, emayla released her first ep, called rain and sunshine of heart.  the ep was produced by troy laureta (music producer and keyboard player of ariana grande, jordan pruitt, jordin sparks and brother of the voice contestant cheesa laureta). the record includes all the r&b/soul influences bellezza had during her first 2 years living in the united states. her single stay with me
was nominated for the hollywood music and media awards as best song for the r&b/soul category in 2009.  in the same year, bellezza meets beto cuevas, ex-singer of the musical group la ley. after listening to her cd, beto describes emanuela as "a glass of water in the middle of the desert, with the capability of immediately capturing the heart of the listener".  2010-11: battle of the bands and the beginning of latin experience  in august 2010, emayla and her band were finalists at the competition called battle of the bands, at the hard rock cafe, in las vegas.  perceiving the difference of cultures and traditions that los angeles embraces, in 2011 emanuela feels the need of starting to write in spanish, besides english and italian. she started learning spanish and writing her first songs in the new language generating the birth of a new album, called matices de amor.  2011: matices de amor and the john lennon songwriting contest  matices de amor, literally translated as shades of love was entirely produced by jean luis contreras and was released in late 2011.  the album, that contains ten songs (seven in spanish, two in english and one in italian) has all the latin influences that emayla absorbed during her spanish immersion and experience and reflects jean luis' latin origins (venezuela). the title summarizes the meaning of the whole album which, with each song, describes all the different kinds all love. all the songs are based on emanuela's life experience.  emayla made different paintings, each of them representing a different song of the album. almost all of the songs in the album have a painting that represent them.  biggest part of the album talks about the romantic kind of love, while the very last one, a song for my father, is a song that emanuela dedicated to her father, when he died. it is a nostalgic song and she sings about all the things she could not say to him, since when he unexpectedly and prematurely died in italy she was already living in los angeles and never had a chance to say "goodbye".  one of the songs of that album, called esperanza de amor, was finalist at the john lennon songwriting contest, for the latin category  2012-13: mtv unplugged with juanes, performance with franco de vita and opening for jovanotti  in early 2012, emayla won the contest created by mtv tres in 2012 called unplug with juanes, where she had the opportunity to perform in duet
with colombian multiple grammy winner juanes at his mtv unplugged. juanes himself hand-picked emanuela as the winner of his contest and they performed the song fotografia, originally sang in duet by juanes and singer nelly furtado.  emanuela performed with juanes a second time in los angeles and this time at the nokia theater. in one of his interviews, juanes defines emanuela as "a super-star with a great talent and with an extraordinary voice".  in summer 2012, emanuela opened for italian pop star jovanotti at the el rey theater in los angeles.  besides performing with juanes, emanuela also had the chance to perform in duet with franco de vita at the gibson amphitheater. the artists performed the song tan solo tu, originally performed by franco and alejandra guzman.  2013: ella se va  during the time bellezza was in miami for the juanes mtv unplugged, she met multiple grammy winner and producer gustavo borner. back in los angeles, after unplugged, they started working together towards an ep, that was later called ella se va.  the ep includes three songs written by emayla herself and one song written by multiple grammy winners draco rosa, george noriega and claudia brant. it was recorded in los angeles and features the musicians jimmy johnson, dean parks, aaron sterling, jon gilutin and jean luis contreras. the single ella se va has been played on different radio stations in venezuela, like la romantica 88.9 and has been in the top 40 music charts in the same country.  the release of the ep was also featured on magazine people en espanol, for the october edition.  early that year, on february 18, emanuela also made her appearance on rai, the italian national television channel, during the program "la tv ribelle", on rai gulp.  rumi awards 2015  emayla took part and performed at rumi awards 2016 in las vegas, where she won two awards: "best artist europe" and "best duet singer".  2019: the new name "emayla" and album release: "new freedom"  in june 2019, emayla decides to change her name from her real name emanuela bellezza to emayla.  on december 5, 2019, emayla finally released her latest album, named "new freedom", symbol of a new era of her life and reborn after a hard time of her life.  present  emayla just released her 4th album, produced with notable music producer darryl swann.
she also keeps performing in the los angeles area.  emayla was recently featured in a single called "i love to dance", where she collaborated with notable bassist nathan east and other musicians. the single was written and produced by ferdinando mongelli in sanremo, italy.  discography  studio albums   2011 matices de amor 2019 new freedom  eps   2009 rain and sunshine of heart  2013 ella se va  songs appearing in film and television   2009 tu estilo - univision 34  2011 lanzate - telefutura  2012 lanzate - telefutura  2013 primer impacto - univision 34  2014 east los high - episode #3  2014 east los high - episode #8  television appearances   2009 tu estilo - univision 34  2011 lanzate - telefutura  2012 lanzate - telefutura  2012 mtv unplugged with juanes - mtv tres  2013 news - cnn en espanol  2013 news - tv azteca  2013 despierta america - univision 34  awards and nominations  youtube recognition  because of her notability on youtube, emayla has been mentioned on italian magazine idea web as "one of the most talented and beautiful musicians on youtube".  musical style and influences  emayla describes her music as a fusion of pop and soul. she cites aretha franklin, joss stone, jhene aiko and tracy chapman as influences when she was younger. some of her early stages' work has been compared to laura pausini.  references  external links official website youtube channel instagram page facebook page  1984 births italian pop singers italian women singer-songwriters italian singer-songwriters spanish-language singers of italy english-language singers from italy italian expatriates in the united states living people 21st-century italian singers 21st-century italian women singers
lothar friedrich (11 december 1930 - 19 april 2015) was a german professional racing cyclist. he rode in four editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1930 births 2015 deaths german male cyclists people from volklingen
jagdgeschwader 231 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938
flosard malci (born 23 december 1994) is an albanian professional footballer who plays as a right winger for greek super league 2 club kallithea.  external links      1994 births living people association football wingers albanian footballers aek athens f.c. players a.o. nea ionia f.c. players a.o. glyfada players ilisiakos f.c. players asteras magoula f.c. players kf laci players kf bylis ballsh players albanian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in greece albanian expatriate sportspeople in greece
robert james douglas graham frse (1884-1950) was a scottish botanist.  life  he was born on 20 july 1884 in perth, the son of dr john thomas graham. his family lived at 4 athole crescent in perth. he was educated at perth academy then attended the university of st andrews, graduating with an ma in 1904.  from 1910 to 1914 he served as economic botanist to the indian agricultural service. in the first world war he served as a lieutenant colonel in the indian army reserve. in 1919 and 1920 he was director of agriculture for mesopotamia. in 1921 he went to the university of edinburgh as a lecturer in botany.  in 1924 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were sir william wright smith, frederick orpen bower, sir d'arcy wentworth thompson and robert campbell. he served the society as secretary 1939 to 1944 and vice president 1944 to 1947.  in 1934 he became professor of botany at the university of st andrews.  he died in st andrews on 3 september 1950.  family  he was married to johanna (oona) m. reid.  references  1884 births 1950 deaths people from perth, scotland scottish botanists alumni of the university of st andrews academics of the university of st andrews fellows of the royal society of edinburgh
emma straub is an american novelist and bookstore owner. her novels include modern lovers, the vacationers, laura lamont's life in pictures and all adults here. she is the author of a short story collection entitled other people we married.  personal life straub is the daughter of horror and suspense writer peter straub. she is married to michael fusco-straub, a graphic designer, with whom she has two sons. a graduate of the cathedral school of st. john the divine, saint ann's school, oberlin college, and the university of wisconsin-madison, she lives in brooklyn and owns the book store books are magic.  works  references  external links    year of birth missing (living people) living people novelists from new york (state) 21st-century american women writers 21st-century american novelists american women novelists saint ann's school (brooklyn) alumni oberlin college alumni university of wisconsin-madison alumni people from brooklyn
the gens lusia was a minor family at ancient rome.  members of this gens are mentioned from the end of the second century bc to the second century of the empire.  members  gaius lusius, a nephew of gaius marius, under whom he served as military tribune during the cimbric war.  he became enamoured of one of his subordinates, by the name of trebonius, and after several unsuccessful attempts to seduce him, he summoned trebonius to his tent and attempted force; but trebonius slew him.  tried for murdering his superior, trebonius explained what had happened, and was acquitted; marius himself honoured the young soldier.  lucius lusius geta, praetorian prefect under the emperor claudius in ad 48.  when the empress messalina was arrested, claudius placed his freedman, narcissus, over the affair, in preference to lusius, whom he believed too loyal to the empress.  lusius retained his position until 52, when agrippina the younger had him replaced, in order to prevent him from protecting britannicus, messalina's son.  lusius quietus, originally a moorish chief, who served in the roman army with a body of moorish cavalry.  trajan employed him against the dacians in ad 101, and during the parthian war, he took the cities of edessa and nisibis, and was then sent against the jews, whom he subdued.  he was appointed governor of judea, and raised to the consulship in 116 or 117.  but after trajan's death, hadrian viewed him with suspicion, and he was murdered.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography   marcus tullius cicero, pro milone.  scholia bobiensa (bobbio scholiast), pro milone.  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  publius cornelius tacitus, annales.  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  eusebius of caesarea, historia ecclesiastica.  aelius spartianus, "the life of hadrian", from the historia augusta.  ammianus marcellinus, res gestae.  themistius, orationes.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates
of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).    roman gentes
the advanced structures and composites center is an independent research unit at the university of maine that provides research, education, and economic development encompassing material sciences, manufacturing and engineering of composites and structures. the center was founded in 1996 with support from the national science foundation by dr. habib dagher, p.e. annually, the center employs a staff of 180, inclusive of 140 undergraduate and graduate students from a range of academic backgrounds.  the center is housed in a 100,000 ft2, iso 17025 testing laboratory accredited by the international accreditation service.  in 2014, the center was designated as a "signature research area" of the university of maine.  the center has gained national and international recognition for major research and development projects such as the volturnus 1:8, the first grid-connected floating offshore wind turbine in the us and the first in the world made out of concrete and composite materials, the inflatable composite arch bridges "bridge-in-a-backpack" technology now approved in the aashto code, the first modular ballistic protection system (mbps) approved by the us army to protect troops in tents from blast and ballistic threats, development of coated wood technology for blast and hurricane resistant wood buildings, and the longest carbon-fiber composite vessel built for the us navy.  dr. habib dagher, p.e.    habib dagher is the founding executive director of the advanced structures & composites center at the university of maine. dr. dagher is an advocate for developing advanced structural systems which simultaneously optimize structures, materials, and construction.  dagher holds 25 u.s. and international patents with 8 additional patents pending, and has received numerous awards including the 2015 white house transportation champion of change, awarded for the development of composite arch bridge system technology; the carnegie foundation maine professor of the year; the distinguished maine professor award, the highest award given to a faculty member at umaine; and the american society of civil engineers charles pankow innovation award.  dagher earned his ph.d. in structural engineering from the university of wisconsin-madison, as well as two master's degrees in structural engineering and engineering mechanics and joined the university of maine faculty in 1985.  research and development projects  volturnus 1:8  in summer 2013, the center deployed the first grid-connected offshore wind turbine in the united states and the only floating turbine with a concrete hull in the world. the patented volturnus technology is the culmination of collaborative research and development conducted by the university of
maine-led deepcwind consortium. volturnus 1:8 is a 65 foot tall floating turbine prototype; 1:8th the scale of a 6 megawatt (mw), 425-foot rotor diameter design. funding for this research was provided by the u.s. department of energy, the national science foundation, and others.  maine aqua ventus, i, gp, llc, is pursuing a 12 mw demonstration project off the coast of monhegan island, me, using the volturnus floating platform technology.  deepclidar  deepclidar is an advanced metocean buoy outfitted with lidar, created with funding from the us department of energy and the maine technology institute. deepclidar can be used in remote marine environments to provide high quality, low-cost offshore wind resource data, metocean monitoring, and ecological characterization capabilities. developed in partnership with dr. neal pettigrew of the umaine physical oceanography group, aws truepower, and nrg renewable systems.  composite arch bridge system  the composite arch bridge system, commonly known as bridge-in-a-backpack, is a lightweight, corrosion resistant system for short to medium span bridge construction using composite arch tubes that act as reinforcement and formwork for cast-in-place concrete. the center's innovative composite bridge system is american association of state highway and transportation officials approved, lowers construction costs, extends structural lifespan up to 100 years, and is a greener alternative to concrete and steel construction. advanced infrastructure technologies is a privately held company licensed by the university of maine to produce these bridges.  in january 2017, advanced infrastructure technologies signed a distribution and marketing agreement for north america with terre armee group/reinforced earth company which aims to expand adoption of the composite arch bridge system technology.  longest composite bridge in the world  longterm durability of bridges is a major concern for transportation departments across the country. in response to this concern, the umaine composites center validated a hybrid composite beam designed by hc bridge company, llc, that was fabricated by harbor technologies in brunswick, maine. the hybrid composite beam, made of fiber-reinforced polymer, is lightweight, corrosion-resistant, and strong enough to be used for bridge construction. the knickerbocker bridge, over back river in boothbay, me, is the longest composite bridge in the world at 540 feet long and is 32 feet wide. the bridge opened to traffic in 2011.  mako  designed in partnership with hodgdon defense composites and
maine marine manufacturing, the umaine composites center performed testing on a special operations boat with a fully composite hull to replace the aluminum hull craft currently used by us navy seals. this 83-foot long, impact-resistant prototype is the result of a $15 million research and development project that resulted in the first all-composites hull for the us navy.  secure hybrid composite shipping container  funded by the department of homeland security, the umaine composites center developed a patent-pending shipping container that mitigates security risks associated with marine cargo. georgia tech research institute designed the security system for the container, featuring embedded sensors to detect intrusions,  door opening sensors to monitor access to the container, and a communication system capable of reporting the security status from anywhere in the world. this technology is now in field trials toward commercialization.  modular ballistic protection system (mbps)  mbps, developed in partnership with the us army natick soldier rd&e center, provides soldiers with enhanced ballistic protection in the field. the patent-pending mbps is a quickly erectable, re-deployable, and lightweight ballistic protection system. mbps provides ballistic protection for personnel and equipment in expeditionary base camps where mobility and rapid deployment requirements prevent the immediate use of heavyweight systems like sandbags and concrete barriers. mbps requires no tools to up-armor a standard issue 20 ft x 32 ft tent and can be deployed in less than 30 minutes by 4 soldiers.  blast resistant structures  in partnership with the us army corps of engineers erdc, the umaine composites center developed blast-resistant structures with coated wood framing members, panels and subassemblies. these blast-resistant materials are economically coated to enhance the construction material's ductility and energy dissipation capacity. in addition to superior blast resistance, benefits of these structures include: cost-efficiencies, ease of assembly, environmental durability, rapid deployment, high strength to weight ratios, and protection from moisture absorption, termites, ants and biodegradation.  advanced engineered wood composites (aewc) center   in 1996, the center was opened as the advanced engineered wood composites center. in 2012, the organization formally underwent a name change as approved by the university of maine system board of trustees to the advanced structures and composites center. this name change was a reflection of research foci expanded beyond wood composites to include other areas such as: ocean energy, defense and aerospace composites, civil infrastructure, and nanocomposites.  notable awards  2000 - 2015   on october 13,
2015, dr. habib dagher, founding director of the university of maine's advanced structures and composites center, was recognized as a "2015 white house transportation champion of change." dr. dagher is the primary inventor of the composite arch bridge system.  american society of civil engineers pankow award for innovation, presented to the advanced structures and composites center for its development of bridge-in-a-backpack, march 31, 2011.  american composites manufacturers association, most creative product award to the advanced structures and composites center's bridge-in-a-backpack™, february 2010.  american composites manufacturers association, most creative product to the advanced structures and composites center's blast resistant panels, january 16, 2009.  american composites manufacturers association (acma) people's choice award for exhibiting the highest degree of design, innovation, creativity and the best use of composite materials  to modular ballistic protection system. oct 15, 2007.  american composites manufacturers association (acma) best of show award, recognized as the highest composites industry award, for being the year's finest product, to modular ballistic protection system. oct 15, 2007.  references  university of maine
theodosio de stefani perez (6 february 1853 in santa ninfa, trapani - 25 february 1935 in giacalone, palermo) was an italian naturalist and entomologist who specialised in hymenoptera and diptera.  the via teodosio de stefani perez in palermo honours him. his collection of coleoptera is held by the zoology museum of the university of palermo.  biography theodosio de stefani perez was born in the family castle in santa ninfa (trapani) in southwestern sicily.  he was a son of don mariano de stefani falco and donna ippolita perez. he was the fourth of seven children. the father was the scion of a wealthy family of landowners, while the mother was  a descendant of the prince of carloforte and heir to great wealth, but not the noble title.  he completed his primary studies at the college of san rocco, later he served voluntary military service until 1873 and at the end of this period he finished his studies.  he became professor of entomology at the university of palermo and in 1889 was appointed chief of phytopathology for sicily. he was a member of many scientific academies and entomological and environmental associations.  he learned the art of embalming and preservation of animals and contributed to establish the university museum of zoology and comparative anatomy of palermo.  he openly professed secularist, libertarian and antifascist ideas and adhered to freemasonry, where he held the highest degree of worshipful master, facts that led to his being ostracised by the fascist regime.  not interested in money, he did not draw his university salary for almost thirty years. later he withdrew all his money at one time, but it was not enough to save him from the economic collapse, with the loss of almost all of the family assets.  he died in giacalone, palermo, aged 82.  the entomologist theodosio de stefani perez mainly applied himself to the study of hymenoptera chalcididae and their galls, with particular attention to their relation with the host plants and the agricultural processes.  he produced more than 180 works between 1881 and 1929, published in various italian and foreign magazines, especially german.  he was a pioneer in the study of the hymenoptera, but this was not confined to their external descriptions and systematics, as was the common practise of the scientists of his time. in fact he was seeking an understanding of biological phenomena and function of species in their natural environment, dealing with their biology, ecology and behaviour. among his works, about 40 deal with the hymenoptera chalcididae and
the production of galls. he described about one hundred species of hymenoptera, many of them still considered valid species.  he also devoted himself to the study of coleoptera and orthoptera, and to the ornithology and fauna of sicily.  in 1893 he produced the first descriptive catalog of the european species of hymenoptera. in the early 1900s he also devoted himself to the study of the hymenoptera of tripolitania and east africa.  works partial list  1882  notizie imenotterologiche. il naturalista siciliano, 2: 55-58.  1883 miscellanea imenotterologica. il naturalista siciliano, 2: 280-284.  1884 imenotteri nuovi o poco conosciuti della sicilia. il naturalista siciliano, 3: 153-158.  1885 imenotteri nuovi o poco conosciuti della sicilia. il naturalista siciliano 4: 185-189.  1886 raccolte imenotterologiche sui monti di renda e loro adiacenze. il naturalista siciliano 5: 181-186.  1887 un nuovo genere di crabronidi ed altri imenotteri nuovi o poco cogniti raccolti in sicilia. il naturalista siciliano, 6: 85-90. 1887 due nuovi ichneumoni di sicilia. il naturalista siciliano, 7: 53-54.  1889 miscellanea imenotterologica sicula. il naturalista siciliano 8: 140-145   1889 i cinipidi e le loro galle. in 4to, offp., pp. 6. atti reale accademia di scienze, lettere e belle arti di palermo, nuova serie vol. 10. teodosio de steafno fu un insigne naturalista e geologo 1894 imenotteri di sicilia raccolti nel territorio di santa ninfa in provincia di trapani. il naturalista siciliano,13: 199-203; 211-219. 1895 catalogo degli imenotteri di sicilia. il naturalista siciliano, 14: 169-182  1898 miscellanea entomologica sicula. il naturalista siciliano (2) 2: 249-256. riggio g., de stefani-perez t. 1888. sopra alcuni imenotteri dell'isola di ustica. naturalista siciliano 7: 145-150. importante cattura ornitologica f
atta in sicilia.palermo 1905 cavallette, loro invasioni e lotta contro di esse in sicilia. osservazioni fatte durante l'invasione della provincia di palermo negli anni 1901-1911 published by palermo, colonia agricola s. martino, palermo, colonia agricola s. martino (1913)  references  conci, c. & r. poggi. 1996. memorie della societa entomologica italiana 75: 24-225, portrait. world diptera taxonomists  italian entomologists hymenopterists 1935 deaths 1853 births
st john the baptist anglican church is a heritage-listed church at crawford street, richmond, shire of richmond, queensland, australia. it was built in 1909 by mr moore of hughenden. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 25 february 2000.  history  st john the baptist church, richmond, was constructed in 1909 by mr moore of hughenden.  richmond developed in the late nineteenth century on the banks of a waterhole on the flinders river, primarily as a service centre for the extensive merino sheep and cattle grazing pastoral activities of the region.  by 1878 the anglican church had established a presence in north queensland under the leadership of george frodsham, the bishop of north queensland.  in order to serve the isolated northern and western areas the members of the anglican synod of north queensland proposed the establishment of the bush brotherhood of st james. this was probably the first time in australia that a diocese planned to establish the bush brotherhood in its area. although the proposal was approved, nothing happened until 1903 when a bush brother was appointed to herberton as a mission priest. in 1909, at cloncurry, edward travers crozier was installed as head of the north queensland bush brotherhood.  a report in north queensland 1878-1958 80 years of anglican progress says that the brotherhood of st barnabas also worked in the richmond parish. despite the fact that there was no church building, bishop frodsham held services in a dance hall attached to a hotel and later in the richmond court house where he used the magistrates bench as a pulpit.  during a tour of the west in 1904 bishop frodsham was reported to be advising the richmond church community about the construction of a church. in the northern churchman, december 1906, reference was made to the efforts of the community to double the amount of £105 in the church building fund. by 1907 plans and specifications had been approved for the erection of an anglican church at richmond. the church was to be called after st john the baptist and was to be erected on land donated by thomas cox of hughenden.  in 1908 the society for the promotion of christian knowledge granted £30 towards the construction of an anglican church at richmond. reverend canon walter williams, returning to north queensland from england, reported to the richmond congregation that he had been given a silver chalice and paten for the yet-to-be-constructed church in the town. when bishop frodsham visited richmond in july 1909 he dedicated the newly constructed church. monthly services were held in the new st john the baptist church, with
the rector travelling from hughenden. in 1911 the church building committee reported that the debt on the building was still being paid off. further reports indicated that the congregation expected to start painting and fencing the church and also that the belfry had been erected and a bell installed. the church could boast a small organ by 1911.  by 1909 hughenden had one priest and one deacon to serve 80,000 square miles. to overcome the shortage of priests the anglican synod sought young, unmarried priests from outside the region to serve in north queensland. by 1913 a bush brother had been appointed to richmond and a large room and verandah added to the vestry for his accommodation.  while the richmond community continued to depend on sheep and cattle for its livelihood, it received a boost during world war two when an airstrip was constructed outside the town. during the wool boom of the 1950s the richmond district was host to large teams of shearers and station workers, creating a vibrant economy. during this period there was a building boom including the construction of housing commission homes. the construction of the rail extension from hughenden to richmond and mt isa in the 1960s also gave the local economy a boost.  during those years the anglican church continued to play a significant role in the richmond community. a front fence and steel entrance gates were dedicated in 1951, and a steel-framed bell tower in 1981. the church building was clad with metal sheeting and two stained glass windows were added in the front facade in 1988; two stained glass windows were installed in the side walls to the sanctuary .  description   st john the baptist anglican church, richmond is a small, rectangular, single-storeyed timber building with a gabled corrugated iron roof. attached to the rear of the building is a skillion-roofed extension accommodating several rooms, and there is a skillion-roofed open verandah across the front facade. the church stands in the front half of a flat, grassed block fronting crawford street, which is parallel to, and one block from goldring street, the main street of richmond. apart from backing onto the commercial properties of the main street, the area has mainly residential buildings.  the church is approached via a set of decorative wrought steel gates, and a pathway flanked by two trees. to the north-west of the church is a steel bell tower.  the exterior cladding of the building is chamferboard, which has been covered with aluminium sheeting of a similar profile. the building sits on low concrete stumps.  the front entry door has two leaves with stop-chamfered rails and tongue-and-
groove boarding, and decorative early iron hinges.  internally, the nave and sanctuary combined measure approximately . most of the internal finishes of the building are silky oak, including the varnished v-jointed tongue-and-groove boards lining the walls and raked ceiling; the timber scissor trusses of the roof framing, which are exposed internally; the arch of the sanctuary; and the altar rails.  the nave is furnished with eight silky oak pews with pegged joints, and the table used as the altar is also silky oak. mounted on the wall of the nave is a memorial board, which includes plaques commemorating the dedication of the altar rails in 1906, the gates and fence in 1951, and the bell tower in 1981.  to either side of the entry doors are two tall stained glass windows signed by oliver cowley and dated 1988, one depicting john the baptist and the other the baptism of christ. to the side walls at either side of the sanctuary are two further stained glass windows, installed in the 1990s, in commemoration of pioneering men and women.  the extension to the rear is centrally divided, with bathroom facilities added at the south-east corner. its walls and raked ceiling are lined with fibrous cement sheets. furniture in this extension includes wardrobes, a lectern, a bellows organ and an iron bed.  heritage listing  st john the baptist anglican church in richmond was listed on the queensland heritage register on 25 february 2000 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  st john the baptist church at richmond, constructed in 1909, is important in demonstrating the expansion of the work of the anglican church in small western queensland communities in the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, particularly the influence of the bush brotherhood in establishing parishes and church buildings in remote towns.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the interior of the building, which remains highly intact, has a strong aesthetic appeal generated by the clear varnished silky oak lining boards, joinery, furniture and memorials. this interior remains important in demonstrating the aesthetic possibilities of simply-designed, small timber churches of this era.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  the place has a special association with the bush brotherhood movement in western queensland.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register shire of richmond anglican churches in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
ana-sira church () is a parish church of the church of norway in sokndal municipality in rogaland county, norway. it is located in the village of ana-sira, on the northwest shore of the river sira on the border with agder county. it is one of the two churches for the sokndal parish which is part of the dalane prosti (deanery) in the diocese of stavanger. the white, wooden church was built in a long church style in 1888 using designs by the architect jacob wilhelm nordan. the church seats about 100 people. the church was consecrated on 16 march 1888.  media gallery  see also list of churches in rogaland  references  sokndal churches in rogaland wooden churches in norway 19th-century church of norway church buildings churches completed in 1888 1888 establishments in norway
yan yinhua (born 12 august 1968) is a chinese former cyclist. she competed in the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1968 births living people chinese female cyclists olympic cyclists of china cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
el granero dam (spanish: presa del granero, also known as the luis l. leon dam) is an embankment dam on the rio conchos in north-central chihuahua, mexico. the dam was completed in 1968 to provide irrigation and flood control for the lower rio conchos valley.  see also list of dams and reservoirs#mexico list of lakes in mexico  dams in mexico embankment dams dams completed in 1968
john kennedy (23 may 1931 - 13 july 1989) was a british professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1931 births 1989 deaths british male cyclists cyclists from glasgow
graham betchart (born april 30, 1978) is a sports psychology mental skills coach and current director of mental training for lucid performance. he is known for the concept "play present," which teaches that an athlete needs to stay focused on the task at hand and immediately move on to the next play despite results or outcomes. he is also noted for the "mvp" program (mediate, visualize, positive affirmation), a sports psychology mental training tool, as well as "win" (what is important now), which asserts that a player can only control attitude, effort, and focus. notable athletes betchart has coached include andrew wiggins, karl-anthony towns, and ben simmons, the first overall picks for the 2014, 2015, and 2016 nba drafts, respectively.  references  further reading        1978 births living people sports psychologists american sports coaches
claude guimond de la touche (17 october 1723 - 14 february 1760) was an 18th-century french playwright and poet.  life  after completing his studies in rouen, la touche entered the society of jesus where he remained until the age of fourteen. after leaving, he devoted himself to poetry and began with an ode on the birth of the duke of burgundy entitled mars au berceau (1751, in-8°).  the only tragedy that he made and which made his name live, iphigenie en tauride, was presented at the theatre-francais 4 june 1757. if one believes mademoiselle clairon, the fifth act, which the actors were not satisfied with, was re-built this very day by the author, yet the curtain rose at half past five.  the success of iphigenie en tauride was all enthusiasm. guimond asked again loudly, let himself get on stage and fainted with joy as he withdrew. his play, remarkable in several respects and remained as one of the best second-rate tragedies, however, was abused by freron, grimm and geoffroy who called it a "burlesque farce," an "extravagant hodgepodge."  in imitation of the greeks, or simply following the example of colle, the author fulfilled his subject, without introducing any love episodes, and maintaining the simplicity of euripides' plan failed not of interest nor pathetic. many loans were reported: the scene of recognition was drawn entirely from the opera iphigenie by duche in 1704 ; the one where iphigenie asks orestes about the fate of the family of atreus, whose background is in euripides, recalled by some details oreste et pylade by lagrange-chancel (1697), but improving it. the author was also criticized for exaggerating thoas' stupid ferocity uselessly for the action, and for not having enough prepared nor motivated the outcome. as for style, it was said that the heavy, monotonous, versification, the declamatory pieces and iphigenie en tauride language mistakes were saved by the energy and heat that animated all of the work that was printed several time (paris, 1758, 1784, 1811, 1815, 1818, in-8°).  guimond de la touche also left an epitre a l'amitie (london, 1758, in-8°) ; les soupirs du cloitre, ou le triomphe du fanat
isme (1765, in-8°), a satire against his former colleagues, the jesuits.  sources   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des litteratures, paris, hachette, 1876, p. 958  external links   claude guimond de la touche on data.bnf.fr  claude guimond de la touche on cesar  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers 1723 births people from chateauroux 1760 deaths
the old waterville high school, also known historically as the gilman street school, is a former school building at 21 gilman street in waterville, maine.  opened in 1912 and enlarged in the 1930s with works progress administration funding, it is locally distinctive for its collegiate gothic and art deco architecture, and for its importance to the city's education system.  the building, now converted to residences, was listed on the national register of historic places in 2010.  description and history the old waterville high school stands on the north side of gilman street, between burleigh and west streets, in a residential area just west of the city's downtown.  the school consists of three major sections, consisting of its original main section and two flanking wings.  the central block is a three-story masonry structure, built out of brick with cast stone trim.  it has a raised basement, and a pair of entrances set in gothic arched openings.  its center bays project, and its upper-floor windows are grouped in tall panels, accentuating the building's height.  to the west stands the 1936 training wing, which has a more streamlined design with echoes of the original, and to the east stands the 1938-39 gymnasium and auditorium wing, which is more ornate than the first wing but less so than the original block.  both wings are built using similar materials to the original block.  the main block was built in 1909-13 to a design by freeman, funk and wilcox, an architectural firm based in brookline, massachusetts, and is one of its few known examples of educational architecture.  the collegiate gothic style they chose is also uncommon in maine, and typically appears only on college campuses.  the wings were both designed by the augusta firm of bunker and savage, specialists in educational architecture.  funding for the additions was provided by the federal works progress administration.  it was the city's second high school (and first after incorporation as a city), the first having been opened in 1876.  it served as the city's high school until 1964, and then as its junior high school.  the junior high was moved to new facilities in the 1970s, after which the building housed administrative offices and other education-related uses.  it has since been redeveloped to primarily house low-income residents.  notable alumni jane muskie (1927-2004), first lady of maine  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine  references  school buildings on the national register of historic places in maine
national register of historic places in kennebec county, maine school buildings completed in 1912 buildings and structures in waterville, maine 1912 establishments in maine
bernhard hirschel (15 january 1815 - 15 january 1874) was a german physician, writer and liberal activist who lived and worked in dresden.   he became a pioneer of homeopathy.  life  provenance and boyhood bernhard baruch hirschel was born in dresden.   his father, abraham hirschel (1787-1830), was a clothes retailer.   his mother, bella (1794-1845), also worked in the clothing trade.   from the age of four berhard attended the cheder (jewish junior school) where he was able to learn hebrew.   he would later recall this period as "not particularly nice" ("nicht besonders schon"), complaining about the untutored fellow students, bad teachers and inadequate lessons.   from 1823 he was tutored by marcus david landau, a private tutor who was also a cantor in the dresden synagogue.   hirschel believed that this was his first experience of a valid spiritual education.   with fellow pupils who included jacob nachod - later notable as a leipzig merchant and philanthropist - he received an academic grounding in geography, history and mathematics.   at easter 1825 he switched to dresden's prestigious school of the cross, having previously, at his mother's instigation, taken private tuition in latin and greek.   his time at the school left him with good memories.   teachers and others at the institution treated him with fairness, but attending a christian school exposed him to hostility from members of the jewish community.   he was an industrious pupil and passed the school leaving exam (abitur) in 1832, which opened the way to university level education.  university in order to save money he now embarked on a study course at the royal saxon medical-surgical academy ("koniglich chirurgisch-medicinische akademie") in dresden, housed in the :de:kurlander palaiskurlander palais building.   however, at this time the institution was not authorised to issue academic degrees, and in 1834 he moved on to leipzig university where he studied and received his doctorate medicine.   this involved leaving his parents' home.   according to one source, the scholarship to which his parents' limited financial means would otherwise have entitled him was not available to hirschel because he was jewish.   his studies at leipzig were in large measure funded by the dresden-based mendelssohn foundation.  physician and author in 1838 he returned to dresden, where he worked as a physician till he died.   his studies concluded, he also embarked on a career as
a writer, primarily at this stage focusing on medical history.   his first publications date from 1839, and deal with medical societies and hydrotherapy.   he also wrote reviews on french news publications, covering a wide range of medical themes.   in 1840 his first major publication appeared, returning to the subject of hydrotherapy, a theme in which he would involve himself for the rest of his life.   in 1843 the first volume of his ambitious work on medical history, "steps in the development of the history of medicine" ("geschichte der medicin in den grundzugen ihrer entwickelung") appeared   followed in 1846 by his long planned first volume of "the history of medical schools and the nineteenth century systems in monographs" (die "geschichte der medicinischen schulen und systeme des neunzehnten jahrhunderts in monographien").   in addition, from about 1843/44, after five or so years after he started work as a physician, his interest in homeopathy began to develop.   along with his other responsibilities, between 1846 and 1849 he held the post of deputy coroner for the central part of dresden.   in the years since his return from leipzig, hirschel had by this stage become highly respected as a physician.  marriage and politics it was in part a measure of his professional success that in 1844 bernhard hirschel married cacilie levi, who came from one of dresden's leading commercial families.   the marriage would produce five recorded children.  during the later 1840s there were no more books on medical matters, however, reflecting hirschel's growing political preoccupations.   with chancellor metternich in vienna over 70, and a less reactionary king in berlin since 1840, there was a growing belief that winds of change were in the air.   in the context of saxon politics, hirschel was a strong advocate for the evolving liberal agenda.   in 1846 he published "an evaluation of saxony's government and its people" ("sachsens regierung, stande und volk"), which provides valuable and unusual insights with its analysis of the various political groupings in the saxon legislature ("landtag").   the work also sets out the conditions under which the press was operating in pre-1848 saxony and complains, in particular, about the repression of magazines.   when it appeared the volume was published anonymously because the author feared punishment for publishing criticism of the political situation in saxony   furthermore, it was published not within saxony, where press censorship was in force
, but in mannheim.   it was only in 1849, three years later, that hirschel acknowledged his authorship, writing in another book, "saxony's recent past: a contribution to the assessment of the present" ("sachsens jungste vergangenheit: ein beitrag zur beurtheilung der gegenwart").   he also now took the opportunity to characterise the march uprisings as the "glorious rising of the german people", thereby aligning himself unambiguously with the liberal revolutionaries.  his position was also clear from his political activism during the period of the uprising.  in 1848 hirschel joined the "dresden patriotic union" ("dresdner vaterlandsverein"), becoming one of the committee's leaders.   in 1849, following changes that allowed jews equal legal status with christians, he was elected dresden's first jewish city councillor.  on 9 may 1849 hirschel was arrested in connection with the may uprising and spent two and a half months in detention.   prescise details of his involvement are unclear, but there is reason to believe that he was not himself a participant in street fighting, but was arrested for applying his medical skills to treating wounded protesters.   while he was in detention hirschel wrote his "prisoner's diary" ("tagebuch eines gefangenen"), describing his incarceration as very depressing.    he seems to have been ill at this time, and repeatedly stated his intention to withdraw from all political activities.  after politics bemoaning the way that when, during the revolutionary uprising, decisive moments had arrived, he had not been in a position to play a public role, he does indeed appear to have retreated into private life.   he was released on 25 july 1849, but was required to pay a surety.   on his release he also resigned from his senior post within the jewish community.   from 1850 there is no indication in available sources of any further political activism by hirschel.  medicine and proselatising for homeopathy he now again devoted himself fully to his work as a physician, now completely integrating homeopathy into it.   in 1851 he published his first written contribution on  the subject, and in october of the same year founded the "journal for homeopathic clinical therapy" ("zeitschrift fur homoopathische klinik"), which was renamed in 1856 as the "new journal for homeopathic clinical therapy" ("neue zeitschrift fur homoopathische klinik").   hirschel was the journal's
publisher till his death.   in 1858 circulation reached 7,000 copies.   readers included the queen of spain as well as the king and queen of hannover.  1856 saw the publication of what was probably his best known book, "the homeopathic doctor's treasure chest and its uses at the sickbed" ("der homoopathische arzneischatz in seiner anwendung am krankenbette").   by 1874 the book had appeared in 17 editions, and it was translated from german into several languages including spanish, french and danish.   in this way hirschel became internationally respected as an expert on homeopathy.   in 1867 at vienna he was elected vice chairman of the international homeopathy congress.  during the next few years he published extensively on the subject, often becoming embroiled in controversy because of the passionate nature of his advocacy.   the effectiveness of the homeopathic approach was not universally accepted by the medical establishment, but despite this during the second half of the nineteenth century it was rapidly gaining supporters across the world.   that is partly because, despite great progress in diagnosis and treatment, doctors were all too often powerless to provide effective treatments using mainstream methods.   bernhard herschel proved a case in point:  on his fifty-ninth birthday neither "conventional treatments" nor homeopathy were able to prevent his death from peritonitis.  beyond professional life alongside his professional and literary work, throughout his entire life hirschel contributed actively in the jewish community.   after his withdrawal from politics in the wake of the march uprisings he became a teacher at the dresden synagogue, supported various zionist associations and for several years was an elder of the community.   he also organised financial support for the widows of deceased colleagues.   in obituaries of the time he was frequently commended for his tireless commitment to his patients:  he clearly inspired affection.  references  19th-century german physicians german homeopaths german medical historians people of the revolutions of 1848 19th-century german jews politicians from dresden physicians from dresden 1815 births 1874 deaths
mohamed salmene lahouaiej-bouhlel (;  muhammad lahwiyyij-buhlal; 3 january 1985 - 14 july 2016) was a tunisian terrorist living in france who carried out the 2016 nice truck attack, in which he drove a truck into a crowd celebrating bastille day on the promenade des anglais in nice, france, killing 86 people and injuring another 434. immediately after the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel was shot dead by responding french police officers.  life lahouaiej-bouhlel was born in m'saken, tunisia, a small town about  outside the coastal city of sousse. according to police reports, he had a french residency permit and moved to nice in 2005, where he worked as a delivery-truck driver. he trained in martial arts, frequented salsa night clubs, and had an "unbridled sex life". lahouaiej-bouhlel was married, and had three children, but was in the process of divorce. he was reported to have had financial difficulties and to have worked as a driver, acquiring a truck permit less than a year before the attack. in january 2016, he fell asleep at the wheel of a van, and was subsequently fired.  his parents are divorced. his father, who lives in the family's native town, told an international news agency that lahouaiej-bouhlel suffered from depression, drank alcohol and was a drug user: "from 2002 to 2004, he had problems that caused a nervous breakdown. he would become angry and he shouted ... he would break anything he saw in front of him." lahouaiej-bouhlel's sister rabeb said that his family handed over documents to the police showing that he had been seeing psychologists for several years. his father and his younger brother insisted that the attack "had nothing to do with religion", stating that lahouaiej-bouhlel did not pray and never observed the holy month of ramadan. his brother claimed that lahouaiej-bouhlel did not know people, never sent his family presents, and never said hello. he married a french-tunisian cousin, living in nice, with whom he had three children. according to his wife's lawyer, he was repeatedly reported for domestic violence and the couple separated.  the times of india described lahouaiej-bouhlel as "mentally unstable", with a tumultuous personal life, which included drug use and consumption of violent online content. police examination of his phone revealed what sky news described as a "string" of relationships with both men and women, including an affair with a 73-year-old man.  in the days before the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel
let his beard grow and told people "the meaning of this beard is religious." french authorities stated that lahouaiej-bouhlel showed a passion for religion only recently; "mohamed only started visiting a mosque in april," a witness stated.  french investigator francois mulins stated "bouhlel had expressed support for the islamic state."  molins also found that from 1 july, lahouaiej-bouhlel made more or less daily internet searches for verses of the quran and "nasheeds". he also researched the islamic holiday of eid al-fitr. investigators found photos of dead bodies and images linked to radical islamism on his computer, including the flag of the islamic state; the cover of an issue of the french satirical magazine charlie hebdo, which had been attacked by gunmen in january 2015; and photos of osama bin laden and algerian jihadist mokhtar belmokhtar. he also told friends he did not understand why is could not hold territory and showed them a video of a beheading on his mobile phone. in response to their shock, he said he was "used to it". in addition, he had searched the internet for the terms "terrible mortal accidents", "horrible mortal accidents" and "shocking video, not for sensitive souls" and consulted news articles on fatal accidents, including on 1 january 2016 an article or a photo from a local newspaper about a car incident with the caption: "he deliberately crashes onto the terrace of a restaurant".  according to media reports, lahouaiej-bouhlel was known to police for five prior criminal offenses, notably regarding armed violence. on 27 january 2016 he was put on probation for attacking a motorist with a wooden pallet after a traffic accident. he was convicted on 24 march 2016 and given a six-month suspended sentence on charges of violence with a weapon. lahouaiej-bouhlel was last arrested less than a month before the attack after a traffic accident in which he had been asleep at the wheel, and he remained subject to judicial supervision. he was, however, not registered as a national security risk (fiche "s") with french authorities.  reports say that lahouaiej-bouhlel often visited tunisia, saying the last time he did so was eight months prior to the attack.  money transfer  just days before the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel sent €97,000 - €100,000 to his family in tunisia.  suspected affiliations the newspaper nice-matin published an interview with an eyewitness who recounted hearing "allahu akbar" ("god is greatest") during the attack from his balcony, with similar
reports being circulated by other news organizations and on social media. officials have not confirmed these reports, while the bbc has characterised the claim that this can be heard on a video as a false social media rumour.  a french prosecutor claimed that the attack "bore the hallmarks of jihadist terrorism." however, a preliminary investigation by french officials has not connected lahouaiej-bouhlel to any international terror groups. amaq news agency, an online presence said to be affiliated with the islamic state of iraq and the levant (isil), called lahouaiej-bouhlel "one of the soldiers of islamic state." it cited a "security source" which said lahouaiej-bouhlel "carried out the operation in response to calls to target nationals of states that are part of the coalition fighting islamic state".  lahouaiej-bouhlel was not known by tunisian authorities to have been involved in any terrorism activities on tunisian soil. his name was not in the french database of suspected islamic militants. according to a cousin of lahouaiej-bouhlel's wife, lahouaiej-bouhlel was not a religious person and did not attend a mosque. the guardian noted that his lack of religious piety is typical for the french and belgian subjects involved in terrorist rampages earlier in 2016.  french prime minister manuel valls proclaimed that lahouaiej-bouhlel was "probably linked to radical islam in one way or another", and put the attack in the context of a "war" against terrorism and "extremist" islam both outside and within france. this allegation was initially cautioned by the french interior minister bernard cazeneuve, who said "we have an individual who was not known to intelligence services for activities linked to radical islam" and who could not confirm lahouaiej-bouhlel's motives were linked to radical jihadism. the next day, cazeneuve said "it seems that he [lahouaiej-bouhlel] radicalized himself very quickly," early investigations had found.  bouhlel's uncle, sadok bouhlel, stated his nephew was indoctrinated about two weeks prior to the attack by an algerian member of the islamic state group in nice. according to authorities, bouhlel watched many isis beheading videos and researched in depth omar mateen, perpetrator of the orlando nightclub shooting.  after the attack, newspapers reported, on the authority of unspecified investigators, that evidence found on lahouaiej-bouhlel's cellphone showed he may have been in contact with individuals in his neighborhood, who were known to the french intelligence agencies as islamic radicals. however, an intelligence source cautioned this "could just be a coincidence, given the neighbourhood where he lived. everyone knows everyone
there. he seems to have known people who knew omar diaby", a known local islamist believed to be linked with al-nusra front.  2016 attack in nice and death   lahouaiej-bouhlel's mobile phone, discovered in the truck after he was shot by police, provided information to the police about his preparations. on 12 and 13 july 2016, bouhlel returned several times to the promenade des anglais, the site of the attack, surveying the area in the rented truck. on 12 july, he took some selfies on the promenade, as molins confirmed on 18 july. lahouaiej-bouhlel's brother said he received images of lahouaiej-bouhlel laughing among the holiday crowds in nice hours before the attack.  lahouaiej-bouhlel was shot dead by french police officers who were attempting to force him to stop the truck. the french prosecutor said the attack "bore the hallmarks of jihadist terrorism" but that no group had claimed responsibility for the attack, and a preliminary investigation by french officials has not connected lahouaiej-bouhlel to any international terror groups.  however, on 16 july 2016, the amaq news agency, called lahouaiej-bouhlel "a soldier of the islamic state." it cited an "insider source", which said lahouaiej-bouhlel "executed the operation in response to calls to target citizens of coalition nations, which fight the islamic state". later that same day, isil's official al-bayan radio station said lahouaiej-bouhlel executed a "new, special operation using a truck" and "the crusader countries know that no matter how much they enforce their security measures and procedures, it will not stop the mujahideen from striking."  see also   list of islamist terrorist attacks  list of rampage killers (religious, political, or ethnic crimes)  references  1985 births 2016 deaths 21st-century tunisian criminals tunisian mass murderers islamist mass murderers tunisian murderers of children people from sousse governorate people shot dead by law enforcement officers in france tunisian emigrants to france tunisian muslims bisexual men lgbt muslims
jugovic (, ) is a serbo-croatian family name the origin of which can be traced back into the 14th century. it is more common among ethnic serbs than croats and can be found throughout the successor states to the former yugoslavia. now this is commonly a bosnian family name.    notable people with this name include:   dragana jugovic del monaco (born 1963), serbian mezzo-soprano opera singer  igor jugovic (born 1989), croatian football midfielder  jovan jugovic (1886-1926), serbian aviator and fighter  marjan jugovic (born 1983), serbian footballer  sofronije jugovic-markovic (18th century), habsburg serb writer and activist in russian service  vedran jugovic (born 1989), croatian footballer  vesna jugovic (born 1957), serbian television author, journalist and writer  vladimir jugovic (born 1969), serbian former footballer  see also   jugovic brothers  rk jugovic  jugovici (disambiguation)  references   croatian surnames serbian surnames
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  md  md helicopters   md 500c (369h)  md 500m defender (369hm)  md 500c (369hs)  md 500c (369he)  md 500d (369d)  md 500e (369e)  kh-500e  nh-500e  md 520n  md 530f (369f)  md 600  md 600n  md explorer  md 900 explorer  md 901 explorer  md 902  mh-90 enforcer  md combat explorer  mdg  (materiel-denis-gruson / louis delasalle)  mdg ld.26 midgy-club  mdg ld.261 midgy-club  mdg ld.45  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
benthofascis pseudobiconica is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family conorbidae.  these snails are predatory and venomous. they are capable of "stinging" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.  description the length of an adult shell varies between 12.8 mm and 42.4 mm, its diameter between 5.7 mm and 14.9 mm.  distribution this marine species is endemic to australia and occurs off northern queensland.  references  external links    pseudobiconica gastropods of australia gastropods described in 2011
the 1967 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 24 june 1967 at white city stadium.   the winner was tric trac and the winning owner nat pinson received £6,750.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  1, 4¾, 1¼, 4¾, 5 (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report spectre ii was the ante-post favourite leading into the 1967 derby and his owner nat pinson refused a £5,000 offer for the greyhound before the competition started. pinson also owned tric-trac and put the pair with owlerton trainer jim hookway. other leading entries included irish greyhound 'the grand silver' trained by paddy dunphy and silver hope one of a strong team of four for clapton trainer paddy keane.  neither tric-trac or spectre ii won their first round heats but all of the main contenders safely progressed to the second round with the exception of monalee champion who had been the ante post favourite at 10-1, back in january when the first lists had been compiled. irish interest ended in the second round and despite a troublesome race both spectre ii and silver hope survived the same heat to progress. both were drawn together again in the semi-finals.  after taking a bump in the first semi-final tric-trac ran on well to claim third behind mels talent, ambiguous another son of crazy parachute qualified in second place. the second semi-final was a repeat of the first with crowding affecting the race, shady parachute a daughter of crazy parachute won it with the pair of silver hope and spectre ii qualifying second and third respectively.  the final had four siblings, two full brothers, one half-brother and one half-sister, as well as two hookway trained and two keane trained runners. the hookway pair had suffered problems after the semis with tric-trac having a split web and spectre ii suffering with a minor muscle strain, the injury with spectre ii was a concern because he had been pulled out of the gold collar with the same injury. however, by the day of the final both were reported fit and well. during the final both mels talent and shady parachute swung wide baulking silver hope and ambiguous and forcing spectre ii wider. tric-trac missed the trouble by slipping through on
the rails followed by mels talent and spectre ii. tric-trac held on to the win from his fast finishing brother spectre ii in a time of 29.00 sec.  see also 1967 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
susanta singh (born 17 march 1973) is an indian politician from bhatli constituency. he is a member of biju janata dal and current mla.  references  1973 births biju janata dal politicians living people members of the odisha legislative assembly
jagdgeschwader 331 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938
the eastlink hotel is a sculpture designed by callum morton. it was unveiled on 27 november 2007 and cost $1.2 million (aud) to construct. it is situated along connecteast, a section of the eastlink (toll road), located in victoria, australia.  popular culture in april 2019, american folk punk band the violent femmes announced their album hotel last resort which features a photograph of the hotel on its cover.  references  external links  public art in victoria (australia) 2007 sculptures outdoor sculptures in australia
jealousy (finnish: mustasukkaisuus) is a 1953 finnish drama film directed by teuvo tulio and starring regina linnanheimo, eero paganus and assi raine. it was a remake of restless blood (1946). the film was shot in parallel with the swedish-language version tva kvinnor.  cast    regina linnanheimo  as riitta maras    eero paganus as jyri maras    assi raine as anja    annie mork  as grandmother    paavo jannes  as doctor    lauri korpela  as owner of the sawmill    kyosti eramaa  as inspector    onni hannukainen as jacklighter    f.e. sillanpaa as man at the dances    helvi jarvelainen  as woman at the dances  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by teuvo tulio remakes of finnish films finnish black-and-white films
, nicknamed "t-ga", is a professional japanese baseball player. he plays infielder for the chiba lotte marines.  career he was the first draft pick for the marines at the 2015 npb draft.  hirasawa signed with the auckland tuatara of the australian baseball league to play the first 5 weeks of the 2018/19 abl season.  references  external links   npb.com  1997 births living people auckland tuatara players japanese expatriate baseball players in new zealand chiba lotte marines players nippon professional baseball infielders nippon professional baseball outfielders baseball people from miyagi prefecture
savage mode is a collaborative extended play by atlanta-based rapper 21 savage and american record producer metro boomin. it was released on july 15, 2016. the ep was self-released. the ep received acclaim from critics, with rolling stone including it in its list of the 40 best rap albums of 2016. a sequel album, savage mode ii, was released on october 2, 2020 to further acclaim.  critical reception  pitchfork called the project 21 savage's "strongest and bleakest work" and praised the "brooding, eerie production" by metro boomin. complex called it "a minor masterpiece in sound design", noting that "for as merciless as 21 savage's writing can be, the album borders on ambient." hotnewhiphop stated that "its style unequivocally trumps its substance, which is par for the course in this school of arty street rap, but its form a compact, impeccably-curated product is sorely missing from the genre." exclaim! called the album "a grim, pearl clutching narrative straight from the south." in a positive review, craig jenkins of vulture called it "gleefully ultraviolent and pridefully indulgent", stating that "this music is built from the same casual hopelessness that shocks us cold whenever we awake to fresh news of mass murder or police brutality."  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  2016 albums 21 savage albums metro boomin albums albums produced by metro boomin albums produced by southside (record producer) albums produced by cubeatz albums produced by sonny digital albums produced by zaytoven collaborative albums
the 2016-17 danish 2nd divisions was divided in three groups of eight teams in the autumn. in spring there was a promotion play-off and a relegation play-off. the top two teams of the promotion play-off group were promoted to the 2017-18 danish 1st division.  ik skovbakken merged with vejlby ik as of 1 july 2016 to form vsk aarhus.  participants  group 1  league table  group 2  league table  group 3  league table  promotion group  league table  the top 4 teams from each group competed for 2 spots in the 2017-18 danish 1st division. the points and goals that the teams won in the autumn group against other participants in the promotion group were transferred to the promotion group.  relegation group  league table  the bottom 4 teams from each group competed to avoid the 4 relegations spots to the denmark series. the points and goals that the teams won in the autumn group against other participants in the relegation group were transferred to the relegation group.  references  3 danish 2nd divisions danish 2nd division seasons 2016-17 in danish football leagues
this is a list of international presidential trips made by bill clinton, the 42nd president of the united states. bill clinton made 54 international trips to 72 different countries (in addition to visiting the west bank and gaza) during his presidency, which began on january 20, 1993 and ended on january 20, 2001.  clinton visited six continents: africa, asia, australia, europe, north america, and south america. he took an active role in the balkans, where he worked to promote peace and stability in and around the former yugoslavia, and in the middle east peace process, where he worked to promote peace between israel and the palestinians, as well as with the governments of neighboring nations.  summary the number of visits per country where he travelled are:  one visit to argentina, australia, bangladesh, barbados, belarus, botswana, brazil, brunei, bulgaria, chile, china, colombia, costa rica, croatia, czech republic, denmark, el salvador, finland, ghana, greece, guatemala, haiti, honduras, india, indonesia, kosovo, kuwait, latvia, macedonia, morocco, netherlands, new zealand, nicaragua, nigeria, norway, oman, pakistan, palestinian authority (west bank and gaza), portugal, romania, rwanda, saudi arabia, senegal, slovenia, south africa, syria, tanzania, thailand, turkey, uganda, vatican city, venezuela, and vietnam  two visits to belgium, hungary, jordan, mexico, philippines, poland, and spain  three visits to  bosnia and herzegovina, ireland, south korea, and ukraine  four visits to egypt and israel  five visits to canada, france, japan, russia, and switzerland  six visits to germany  seven visits to united kingdom  eight visits to italy  1993  1994  1995  1996  1997  1998  1999  2000  multilateral meetings multilateral meetings of the following intergovernmental organizations took place during bill clinton's 1993-2001 presidency.  see also  foreign policy of the bill clinton administration  foreign policy of the united states  list of international trips made by warren christopher as united states secretary of state  list of international trips made by madeleine albright as united states secretary of state  references  external links  presidency of bill clinton 1990s politics-related lists 2000s politics-related lists clinton, bill, international geography-related lists bill clinton-related lists
the nerul-uran line which is also known as trans-harbour link line of the mumbai suburban railway is a railway line serving between cbd belapur and nerul in navi mumbai with uran in navi mumbai of india, which is attached to the harbour line. it was inaugurated on 11 november 2018. daily services started on 12 november 2018.  this railway line will help to accelerate the growth of navi mumbai, jawaharlal nehru port, and the newly developed areas of mumbai and also will cater to the passenger traffic demands generated by jawaharlal nehru port, port-based industries, ongc, the defence establishment and other residential, industrial, and warehousing complexes in uran.  technical specifications the total length of the corridor is 27 km and consists of 10 stations; 4 major bridges; 5 roads over bridges, 15 roads under bridges, 1 track under bridge. the 270 mt platforms for two broad gauge (bg) tracks to cater 12-car electric multiple unit rakes with double discharge.  the railway track structure shall comprise 60 kg/m i-class rails laid on monoblock prestressed concrete sleepers to 16660/km sleeper density. the bridges will be built to the modified broad gauge (mbg) standard of loading. stone ballast 65mm gauge with ballast cushion of 300mm below the underside of sleepers will be provided and also provisions are made for one arm of the railway line to go to cbd belapur.  in this railway line project, it divided into two phases :  the phase i starts from nerul and cbd belapur to kharkopar with stations are seawoods, sagar sangam, targhar, bamandongari and kharkopar.  whereas, phase ii starts from kharkopar to uran with stations are gavhan, ranjanpada, nhava-sheva and dronagiri.  status  in phase-i, bamandongari and kharkopar are fully operational and targhar station is still under construction. but the construction of sagar sangam railway station is temporarily postponed due to completing the railway line within the time limit of october 2018 till the later phase.   in phase-ii, the construction of all stations lying between kharkopar and uran is currently going on.  history the city and industrial development corporation of maharashtra (cidco) was appointed as a new town development authority in 1970. the government acquired land from 95 villages and handed it over to cidco for the development of towns. to decongest the mother city, mumbai,
cidco developed 14 nodes in navi mumbai. the development of navi mumbai international airport and 6 railway corridors in navi mumbai were meant for increasing connectivity between the towns, nodes and mega establishments. the major features of the rail corridor are direct access from residential to railway station by foot, convenient interchange facility from one corridor to another, double discharge platforms at every station, easy to follow routes and comfortable and pleasant journeys from the key features of the commuter railway system in navi mumbai.  for that purpose, the railway project between nerul and belapur- seawood-uran was approved by ministry of railways and the cidco board. the work on the project began in july 1997. however, due to various unforeseen reasons, the work was delayed and hence stalled, until recently when the project was revived after the tripartite agreement between railways, cidco and govt. of maharashtra was executed on 29 july 2011.  the original estimate cost for the project was 495 crore in 1997, which escalated to 1,782 crore. the cost is being shared by cidco and the indian railways (67:33).  construction of phase-i on this route was begun in the first week of march 2017. after completion of phase-i, it was commissioned by crs on the 1st november 2018 and after, was inaugurated on 11 november 2018 through video conferencing by railway minister piyush goyal and chief minister of maharashtra devendra fadnavis. first more than 3000 tickets were sold, with earnings of  during inauguration day of phase-i.  stations  see also  mumbai suburban railway  list of mumbai suburban railway stations  cst-panvel fast corridor  central railway  references  external links harbour line timetable (july 2010) all about travelling in mumbai, including harbour railway, local train timetable harbour railway local train timetable  rail transport in mumbai transport in navi mumbai mumbai suburban railway lines 2018 establishments in maharashtra railway lines opened in 2018
s.s. memorial educational academy, saifai is a private teacher training college located in saifai, etawah district, uttar pradesh, india. it was established in 2011 and first batch take admission in 2012 after ncte approval.  academics s.s. memorial educational academy offers a two-year btc course which is now known as diploma in elementary education (d.el.ed.). in 2012, the institute was recognized for 50 btc seats by national council for teacher education (ncte) for 2012-13 session.  references  external links  official website  universities and colleges in saifai colleges of education in india educational institutions established in 2011 2011 establishments in uttar pradesh
the district office manual of tamil nadu state government, india  is the  manual  which contains compendium of instructions to all tamil nadu state government offices as how to transact business in the government offices. general public are unaware of the office procedure followed in government offices and this leads to friction, heartburns, frustration and disappointment. this manual, a public document, published by government of tamil nadu and available for sale in government book depots and some private book stalls, gives complete details of how to transact business in government offices with very clearly delineated accountability and responsibility norms  with citations of government orders.  details are available  about the instruction given to government officials as  how to receive a petition, how to write a petition to government offices and what government officers should do on receiving them etc. it also gives details of various registers to be maintained,  who should maintain them and for what purpose. it also codifies the behaviour mode  between superior and subordinate officers in the conduct of official business. it has two parts. the first part deals with attendance, general discipline, organisation of office, the office system, how letters received to be accounted for in the office, etc. the second part deals specifically with collectors office, revenue divisional office etc.  introduction  the introductory paragraph says that every member of the establishment will be supplied with a copy of this book and he must make himself thoroughly conversant with the rules contained in it. the plea of ignorance will never be accepted as an excuse for disobeying them. the contents of the manual is backed by various government orders issued from time to time appropriately referenced.  the manual says that it is the duty of head of office to see that every member in his office knows and understands the rules, keeps his copy of them corrected, updated and hand it over to his successor on leaving office  hours of attendance  all members of establishment are expected to attend office from 10:00 am to 5:45 pm. (corrected to include latest orders) on all weekdays except recognized holidays. heads of officers must set an example for the others by themselves attending punctually.  lunch interval of half an hour is given between 1 and 3 pm. but they should leave only in turns after making suitable  arrangements and they should not leave all at a time.  attendance register  an attendance register in the prescribed form will be maintained and kept in the custody of the manager. there will be a late attendance register.  the staff are, on no account to take papers out of office in order
to work at home. as a general rule work on sundays and other holidays is prohibited. for handling urgent work on holidays proper arrangements will be made.  casual leave  casual leave  will be granted under such rules and conditions as laid down from time to time. it will not be granted on vague  and general grounds such as 'urgent private affairs' or 'for a certain ceremony'. the purpose for which leave is required must be stated definitely. application for leave must be made and orders on them obtained before the leave is taken. the casual leave register should be maintained in the prescribed form. pages should be allotted to each  official. compensatory holidays and optional religious holidays should also be mentioned in the casual leave register in a separate portion under separate headings.  general discipline  while in office all members of establishment  must behave in a quiet and dignified manner. they  must address other members of establishment courteously. they must attend to their work and not waste the time. they must try to maintain perfect silence and if they have occasion to talk, they will do in low voice so as not to disturb others. they are particularly warned against heinous offence of divulging to outsider any information that may have come to their  knowledge in their  official capacity.  they must, of course, not accept any presents or remuneration from any visitor or party  nor lay themselves under obligation  to such persons in any other way.  tidiness and cleanliness of office. a waste paper box must be kept within a convenient distance of every member of the staff. waste paper must be thrown into this and not on the floor. stationery and records  must be put away tidily in the shelves, are not left lying on the tables and on the top of the shelves  exposed to dust. all rubbish and obsolete forms of publications must be cleared  away, not left to liter office  organisation of office  the manual suggest the first step to be taken in order to introduce the "tottanham's system" into any office is to divide the office into convenient sections and draw a clear distribution list showing the subjects dealt with by each staff member. to each section, a section letter will be assigned and to each group, subjects dealt with the staff member, a number will be allotted. fair copying and dispatching section must also be organised under a competent supervisor.  the system followed in government office is called "tottanham's system". there will be an office manager who is otherwise called as "the
sarishtadar"  will exercise supervision and control over all sections and the heads of sections.  he must periodically inspect the personal registers and see that they are punctually, neatly and properly maintained. the office manager must check any tendency to delay and bring it to the notice of superior officer. he must also find out whether there is any indication that any member of the establishment is obviously unsuited for his work. if any serious delay or other irregularity  comes to light, it is not a sufficient  excuse for the supervisor to say that he  repeatedly warned the offender or urged to deal promptly  with the  file that has been delayed. the supervisor's duty in such cases is to report immediately to superior officer as soon as  he found that his own  admonitions are not proving effective. should he fail to do so, he cannot be held to have discharged his responsibility. the office system followed in government offices is called "tottanham's system" it deals with all arrangements with regard to "routine work" i.e., to such branches of work  as the opening letters, registering, indexing, fair copying and dispatching of correspondence, the receipt of papers into the record room, their arrangement in the record room to store in  safe custody, retrieval when required and destruction when no longer required and so on.  the manual describes various registers to be maintained in government offices. some of the important registers are : distribution register, personal register, new case register, fair copy register, special registers etc. all letters received in any government office are serially  numbered and they are registered in the distribution register, duly indicating to whom and to which staff members such a letter is assigned for initiating action. personal register is to be maintained by every staff member, which will have complete details of all the letters he has received and the dates of action taken by him. finally how this letter is disposed of is also indicated in the personal register. this is an important register to assess the performance of every staff  member.  periodical register is another register which is helpful in monitoring whether the reports to be sent to various superior officers are promptly sent. this register has the details of the periodical reports, their subjects, the periodicity and to whom they are to be sent.  the special register will have details of important references marked as special by head of office  and to be dealt with separately.  opening of letters  it is desirable that whenever possible the letters received  should be opened in the presence of head of
office. the letters will then be sorted out and distributed to the concerned sections after duly registering them in the distribution register. the staff member who receives these letters should register them at once in their personal register. they should take action immediately if the letter received is new. the letter received will be kept in the current file i.e. along with the original letters received.  he will put up a note to his superior officer indicating what is the reference received and what action need to be pursued. in case the letter received relates to already existing file, he must record this in his personal register  and restore the letter in the appropriate file and pursue action.  disposals  how long should a government office retain a closed file?. there are different kinds of disposals in government system. certain files need not be retained at all whereas certain others need to retained. depending on the importance of the matter, government has evolved a system retaining them with proper classification. "n. dis" indicates nil disposal which means that it need not be retained and the original can be returned. if it is marked as " k. dis" it means, it has to be kept for three years and later it can be destroyed. "l. dis." means it can be destroyed after 1 year . once the letter is approved by competent authority it'll be fair copied in the fair copying section and immediately dispatched. there is a register in which all these entries are made then and there. the arrangements for storing these records also to be made in every office. there will be a record clerk who is in charge of storing files and retrieving them.  the system evolved and practiced in governmental offices is comprehensive. its efficiency depends on the person implementing it. it ensures that every single paper received in government office is accounted for properly.  references  external links   https://www.apct.gov.in/apportal/others/distofficemanual.pdf ( seen on 18-07-2016 )  https://web.archive.org/web/20160708153208/http://www.forests.tn.nic.in/publicutilities/departmental%20books.html ( seen on 18-07-2016)  https://archive.org/details/district-office-manual-part-i-and-ii-tamilnadu (seen on 2021-02-13)  government of tamil nadu
francesco colonna (1597 - 29 jun 1653) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of castro di puglia (1642-1653).  biography francesco colonna was born in milazzo, italy in 1597. on 16 jun 1642, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of castro di puglia. on 29 jun 1642, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna. he served as bishop of castro di puglia until his death on 29 jun 1653.  see also catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (chronology of bishops)   (chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1597 births 1653 deaths
zak waters (born january 22) is an american musician, singer-songwriter and record producer from los angeles, california, also known as pretty sister. waters began his music career forming the band blueskyreality. after the group disbanded, waters started his solo music career, releasing his debut extended play (ep), new normal (2011).  he featured on madeon's 2012 multi-platinum single "the city", to positive acclaim, charting at number 20 on the us hot dance club songs chart and number 16 on the uk dance chart. he released his debut studio album, lip service, on september 9, 2013. the following year, he released his second ep, now // later on rostrum records. he collaborated on adventure club's single "fade", which became certified gold by the riaa. he also collaborated on other popular singles including adventure club and david solano's "unleash (life in color 2014)" and alex gaudino and manufactured superstars's 2015 single "lights go out". he appeared on the american songwriting competition series songland in 2020.  as pretty sister, he has released one studio album, catalina (2021), and three extended plays, z funk era, vol. 1 (2018), poolside vibe (2019), and 20 (2020). he has featured on other artists' singles including nause's platinum-selling 2015 single "dynamite" and keljet's "love at first site" and ldn noise's "tears", which was released in august 2016. he has collaborated and produced for numerous other music artists such as betty who, breathe carolina, nathan sykes, superfruit and jojo, among others.  music career  2007-12: beginnings and new normal  zak waters was born and raised in los angeles, california. he first started writing and recording music with the pop rock group blueskyreality, who signed to universal republic records in 2008. after the group's departure, waters began writing music as a solo artist. he released his debut single "unstoppable" on june 21, 2011. he wrote, recorded, and mixed his debut ep album, new normal, with friend and record producer jarrad kritzstein. the album was released on august 2, 2011 and was recorded at the room of requirement and the woods studios in los angeles.  waters released the single "skinny dippin' in the deep end" on june 18, 2012. the music video for the single was released the following day. on august 24, 2012, french
electronic music producer madeon released his collaborative single "the city", featuring zak waters. to date, "the city" has been waters' most popular single achieving chart success worldwide, charting at no. 74 on the u.k. singles chart, no. 20 on the u.s. billboard hot dance club songs chart, no. 16 on the u.k. dance singles chart, and no. 13 in hungary.  in october 2012, waters released a remix of adam lambert's single "trespassing".  2013-14: lip service and now // later ep  he released another solo single, "runnin' around", accompanied with its music video, on january 22, 2013. waters collaborated with the electronic music duo candyland and released the single "not coming down" on july 8, 2013 through beatport. a remix ep, not coming down (the remixes), was later released in april 2014.  on august 27, 2013, waters released the single "penelope" and revealed that he would release his debut full-length studio album, lip service, on september 9 exclusively on spotify. in support of the album, he performed with his full live band at the satellite in los angeles for a month-long free residency every monday night beginning september 2.  on october 31, 2013, the collaborative single "show more love", with house music producer lenno, was released to soundcloud.  on january 28, 2014, waters released the single "over you". canadian electro house music duo adventure club released the collaborative single, "unleash", featuring zak waters and david solano, as part of the life in color 2014 celebration on april 2, 2014. waters released his first edm-produced single "out of my head", featuring codi caraco, on april 17, 2014. zak toured as a supporting act on betty who's slow dancing tour with cardiknox from march 22 to april 18, 2014.  waters released his cover of r&b singer ginuwine's 1996 single "pony", on june 3, 2014 to criticism. he released his second ep, now // later, on june 17, 2014 through faux and rostrum records. the ep features five tracks, two of which are covers and three being previously released singles; "sleeping in my t-shirt", "over you", and "said and gone", featuring audra mae (previously titled dear john"), all of which were featured on waters' studio album lip service.  on december 31, 2014, waters released the
single "by the end of the night".  2015-18: z funk era  alex gaudino released the collaborative single, "lights go out", featuring zak waters and manufactured superstars on april 18, 2015.  zak waters released his second full-length studio album, z-funk era, through manhattan records exclusively in japan on september 9, 2015. it was led by the international single "galactic appeal", featuring dragonette, which was released on august 18, 2015.  pretty sister, zak waters' solo musical endeavor, was introduced in 2015. pretty sister released its first single "drive" on february 6, 2016. speaking about the single with popology now, waters says:  another single, "come to la", was released on march 18, 2016. a third single, "west coast", was released on june 12, 2016. pretty sister and ldn noise premiered the collaborative single, "tears", on july 1, 2016 through goodmusicallday.  netherlands based nu-disco producer keljet released the joint-single "love at first sight", featuring pretty sister, on august 5, 2016.  on november 28, 2016, pretty sister released the single "thirsty".  swedish electronic house duo nause released the dance-pop single, "dynamite", featuring pretty sister on august 30, 2016. "dynamite" has achieved international mainstream success charting at no. 13 on the swedish music charts, becoming 3x platinum. it also peaked at no. 30 in poland and became 1x platinum in norway and certified gold in the netherlands and canada. a music video for the song premiered on november 1, 2017.  waters produced and composed the songs "sexy ladies" and "guy.exe" on web show duo superfruit's debut studio album, future friends, released on september 15, 2017. he also co-wrote and produced american singer liz huett's single "h8u", which was released on october 27, 2017.  on october 27, 2017, a new song titled "feelin good", which samples the 1981 single "never too much" by american singer luther vandross, was released for free on soundcloud. he toured as support on betty who's party in the valley tour from february 24 to march 31, 2018 and on sup3rfruit's future friends tour from may 23 to june 13, 2018.  waters produced betty who's single "taste", which was released on may 18, 2018.  pretty sister released the single
"ten$ion", featuring american rapper white gold, on june 1, 2018. the music video for "ten$ion" features an appearance from singer betty who. he released another single, entitled "new fire", featuring american singer marclo, on july 27, 2018. on august 27, waters revealed he would be releasing a new ep in 2018. waters had recording sessions with betty who, scott hoying, and rozzi crane throughout the summer of 2018, resulting in the single "lose us" by rozzi featuring scott hoying, released on october 12, 2018, which was produced and co-written by waters.  pretty sister announced its debut ep, z-funk era, vol. 1, released on november 2, 2018. the following year, betty who released her third studio album, betty, on february 19, 2019, in which nine tracks off the album were produced and co-written by waters.  2019-20: poolside vibe and 20  on may 17, 2019, pretty sister released the single, "kingdom in the valley". the following month, he released a studio cover of christina aguilera's 2000 single "come on over baby (all i want is you)", alternatively titled "come on over", on june 21.  on july 17, 2019, he released the single "poolside vibe", featuring marclo. the duo released another song, "tequila", on september 13. pretty sister and marclo released a collaborative ep, poolside vibe, on october 10.  in march 2020, it was revealed that waters would serve as a songwriter on the nbc's songwriting competition tv series, songland. on march 31, 2020, pretty sister released a dance-pop cover of sam hunt's single "house party". the following month, he released a four-track extended play, aptly titled 20, on april 10, 2020.  in may 2020, waters appeared on nbc's songland where he performed his original track "bad things", to which he later uploaded a stripped down version on youtube.  on october 16, the single "more than friends" by edm duo love thy brother and pretty sister was released. the following week, french house duo lemaitre released the single "day 4", also featuring pretty sister. he released the christmas themed single "xxx" on december 25, which served as the lead single from his studio album, catalina.  2021-present: catalina  swedish dance music duo nause released "crystal vision", a collaboration which
features pretty sister and middle milk, on january 15, 2021. a lyric video was uploaded on spinnin records on january 27.  on january 22, 2021, pretty sister released the song "flirting with disaster", which serves as the second single from his debut studio album as pretty sister, catalina. the third single, "convenience", was released as the third single from the album on march 5. the fourth and fifth singles "pull me back" and "diamonds in the ring" were each released in april and june, respectively.  television appearances  zak waters appeared on the seventh episode of nbc's songwriting competition show songland, performing his original song "bad things", which progressed him into the top-three. onerepublic frontman ryan tedder produced and co-wrote the new version of "bad things" to which waters also performed on the television show.  musical influence and sound  zak waters has been noted for "blending the futuristic funk of jamiroquai, the pulsing electro-beat of daft punk, and the classic groove of earth, wind, and fire." he has been labeled as a dj, record producer, and a pop artist. waters incorporates elements of neo-funk, g-funk, electronic dance music, and r&b into his music often identifying as "z-funk".  discography  as solo artist studio albums  lip service (2013) (exclusive to spotify, limited physical cds)  z-funk era (2015) (exclusive to manhattan recordings in japan)  eps  new normal (2011)  now // later (2014)  limited (2014)  singles  "unstoppable" (2011)  "skinny dippin' in the deep end" (2012)  "runnin' around" (2013)  "penelope" (2013)  "over you" (2014)  "out of my head" featuring codi caraco (2014)  "pony" (ginuwine cover) (2014)  "by the end of the night" (2014)  as featuring artist  "the city", performed by madeon from the album the city (2012)  "not coming down", performed by candyland (2013)  "show more love", performed by lenno from the album never stop (2013)  "unleash (life in color 2014)", performed by adventure club and david solano (2014)  "fade", performed by adventure club (2014)
"lights go out", performed by alex gaudino and manufactured superstars (2015)  as pretty sister studio albums  catalina (2021)  eps  z-funk era, vol, 1 (2018)  poolside vibe (2019) (with marclo)  20 (2020)  singles  "pony" (2015)  "drive" (2016)  "come to la" (2016)  "west coast" (2016)  "tears" (2016)   "galactic appeal" (2016)   "thirsty" (2016)  "tension" (2018)   "new fire" (2018)   "kingdom in the valley" (2019)  "come on over" (2019) (cover of "come on over baby (all i want is you)" by christina aguilera)  "poolside vibe" (2019) (with marclo)  "tequila" (2019) (with marclo)  "convenience" (2021)  as featured artist  "dynamite", performed by nause (2016)  "love at first sight", performed by keljet (2016)  "more than friends", performed by love thy brother (2020)  "day 4", performed by lemaitre (2020)  "flower baby", performed by abhi the nomad (2021)  with blueskyreality eps  the ep (2007)  the cabin sessions (2009)  as songwriter and producer  remixes  references  21st-century american singers american male singer-songwriters american pop rock singers american rock songwriters living people american male pop singers singers from los angeles american male pianists 21st-century american pianists 21st-century american male singers year of birth missing (living people) singer-songwriters from california
new discovery state park is a state park near marshfield, vermont in the united states. it is one of seven state parks located in groton state forest. the park is on vermont route 232, offering camping, picnicking, and access to forest trails.  the park was developed in the 1930s by the civilian conservation corps; its major ccc-built facilities, located mainly in western peacham, were listed on the national register of historic places in 2002.  features new discovery state park is located in the northernmost portion of groton state forest, the second-largest state forest in the state of vermont.  its principal geographic features are the  osmore pond, and owl's head mountain, at  its highest peak.  it encompasses nearly , extending eastward to peacham pond and martins pond in central peacham, and south to jannison mountain and deer mountain.  the park has a campsite divided into two areas, with 46 tent/rv sites and 15 lean-to sites. seven sites are specifically designed to accommodate horse campers. restrooms include hot showers.  there are picnic areas at lake osmore and on owl's head mountain, which has a ccc-built access road to the summit area. facilities in these areas include a play area, horseshoe pits, picnic pavilions, and access to miles of hiking trails. there are remotely placed leanto campsites around lake osmore, which are accessible either by boat or by a trail that circles the lake.  the park is open seasonally between memorial day weekend and columbus day weekend; admission is charged for day use, and there are charges for camping.  history the state began acquiring land for the creation of groton state forest in the 1910s, but much of it was occupied by leaseholders.  it was not until the 1920s that most of the leases were closed out, and the state did not have the funds to develop the forest for recreation, although it made plans for such facilities.  when the civilian conservation corps was established by the federal government in the 1930s, the state used its crews and funding to develop this state park and others.  the ccc crews that worked on the various state parks (now numbering seven) in groton state forest were based at a camp whose foundational remnants remain in this park.  these crews built out the road network serving the campground and the picnic areas at lake osmore and owl's head, although the latter two were at first separately administered.  they built a small campground (now eight sites within area b of
the present campground), and the picnic facilities at lake osmore and owl's head, as well as the small stone observation tower on owl's head.  they were also responsible for cutting much of the early trail network through the northern part of the forest, and building part of the maintenance facilities used by the state forest today.  because of the state of preservation of these areas, the park was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002.  see also  national register of historic places listings in caledonia county, vermont  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of caledonia county, vermont peacham, vermont national register of historic places in caledonia county, vermont historic districts on the national register of historic places in vermont
aref al-khodja is a libyan political leader who was the minister of interior of libya in the government of national accord. he is an islamist and held the post of interior minister in the tripoli-based government, the general national congress. al-khoga has a police background.  references  libyan politicians living people year of birth missing (living people)
ian caple is an english recording engineer, record producer, programmer and mixer.  history caple's career began at emi music in 1979. after training at abbey road studios, he became an engineer at emi's kpm studios in denmark street london. he worked with shriekback on their early albums at kpm as well as kate bush simple minds and adam & the ants. he left in 1984 to work as a freelance engineer/producer/programmer and mixer.  through the 1980s he worked again with shriekback as well as many other indie artists including the pale fountains, jah wobble, the colourfield, julian cope, the mekons, the chameleons, the wolfhounds, and east village  in 1989, he produced the mekons rock 'n roll album which features in pitchfork's top 100 albums of the '80s  and is number 272 in spin magazine's ' 300 best albums of the past 30 years '  in the early 1990s, he co - produced the debut album for tindersticks. the album - tindersticks, was released in 1993 and was voted album of the year by melody maker magazine.  he went on to work with them for the next 16 years, either recording, co-producing or mixing 14 albums and movie soundtracks. the second tindersticks album tindersticks was recorded at conny plank's studio in cologne and at abbey road studios, it was released in 1995 and reached number 13 in the uk albums chart.  in 1995 he was asked to remix the single "black steel" for tricky and this led to a long term collaboration with the artist. caple programmed & mixed more singles with tricky including hell is round the corner the hell ep which went to number 12 in the uk singles chart and with tricky remixed "where do we go from here" by yoko ono for her album rising remixes. he also recorded and mixed tricky's nearly god album, featuring guest vocals from terry hall of the specials, alison moyet, neneh cherry, bjork and martina topley-bird. soon after, he went to jamaica with tricky to record, program and mix the next album - pre-millennium tension which went on to sell 450,000 copies worldwide and was featured in q magazine's list of the "50 heaviest albums of all time"  he worked again with tricky in 2012 when he mixed his 9th studio album false idols it reached number 15 in the uk indie albums chart and number
5 in the us dance/electronic albums chart  in 1996 he recorded and co-produced the debut album attack of the grey lantern by mansun which spent 19 weeks in the uk albums chart and reached number one in february 1997, selling over 100,000 copies in the uk and achieving gold status. it was ranked at number 12 in melody maker's ' best 50 albums of the year 1997 ' two singles from the album, "stripper vicar" and "wide open space" made the uk top 40 singles chart.  in 1997 he produced the fantaisie militaire album for alain bashung in france. it was released in 1998 and went to number one in the french albums chart and spent 36 weeks in the top 50 it went on to be certified platinum, winning the best album of the year at the 1999 victoires de la musique - the french music awards, and in 2005 it received the award for the best album of the past 20 years at victoires de la musique.  in 2010 rolling stone magazine voted it number 9 in the 100 best french rock albums of all time  in 1999 and 2000, he produced and mixed the album bulle(s) for the french band loeil.  in 2000 he produced the debut album for irish rock band jj72 which reached number 16 in the uk albums chart and spent 35 weeks in the irish album chart, peaking at number 7, it has gone on to sell over 500,000 copies worldwide and has achieved gold status in the uk. also in 2000 he mixed the album gratte poil for french band tetes raides, it spent 61 weeks in the french album charts, reaching number 23 and achieved gold status  in 2001, he mixed the album l'absente for french composer yann tiersen which spent 41 weeks in the french album charts, reaching number 8 it sold over 100,000 copies in france and went on to sell 250,000 copies worldwide also in 2001 he produced tracks on the lifelines album for a-ha. it went to number one in germany and norway, achieving gold status.  in 2008, he mixed the debut album for greek singer-songwriter monika christodoulou (monika), it sold over 30,000 copies in greece, achieving platinum status.  in 2009, he produced the where the oceans end album for french band cocoon. it was released in 2010 and spent 49 weeks in french album charts, peaking at number 6 selling over 100,000 copies and achieving platinum status also in 2009 he produced the debut album - until the
earth begins to part for scottish indie band broken records  in 2006, he mixed the album amor doloroso for french star jacques higelin, in 2010 he mixed the next jacques higelin album coup de foudre which spent 48 weeks in the french album charts and peaked at number 2. it sold over 50,000 copies and achieved gold status also in 2010 he recorded and mixed higelin's live album - paris/zenith 2010.  in 2012, he mixed the album le dernier present for french singer-songwriter alexis hk it reached number 22 in the french album chart  in 2013, he recorded and co produced emilie simon's album mue. it was released in 2014 and went to number 16 in the french album chart in 2014 he recorded and mixed the debut album by danish singer/songwriter broken twin which reached number 8 in the danish album charts in 2016 he mixed the last jacques higelin album 75 which spent 12 weeks in the french album charts and reached number 6  in 2015, he produced the debut album too many gods for english rock band cats in space the success of the album led to him producing the second one scarecrow in 2017  & the latest cats in space album atlantis in 2020  in 2018, he produced the album ceux qui dorment dans la poussiere with french artist and songwriter david assaraf. it was recorded in paris at motorbass studio and featured matthieu chedid on vocals and guitar  in 2020 he mixed tricky's album fall to pieces it reached number 3 in the uk independent charts  in 2021 he mixed the 'pure heart' ep & 'forever i wait' album for martina topley-bird featuring collaborations with robert del naja of massive attack  selected discography mansun - attack of the grey lantern and singles including: "taxloss" and "wide open space" jj72 -	jj72	 tricky - pre-millennium tension, nearly god, false idols, fall to pieces and singles including: "black steel", "makes me wanna die", "christiansands", "tricky kid", "pumpkin", "hell is round the corner ( the hell ep), poems, nothings changed. starving souls (tricky ) - i be the prophet martina topley-bird - pure heart ep & forever i wait album	 tindersticks - 14 albums and 25 singles 1992-2008 tindersticks - claire denis film scores 1996-2009 broken records - until the earth begins to part	 the chameleons - what does anything mean
? basically pale fountains - from across the kitchen table	(engineer) a-ha - lifelines (producer) screaming blue messiahs - bikini red (engineer) the damned - not of this earth (engineer) compulsion - comforter shriekback - care, tench, jam science, the infinite, sacred city, oil & gold, having a moment, without real string or fish, new album (2017)  and singles inc. "my spine is the bass line",  "lined up"	 the mekons - honky tonkin, curse of the mekons, the mekons rock 'n roll, fun '90, natural, heaven & hell, ancient & modern	 	  suede - sci fi lullabies the boo radleys - kingsize spiritualized - anyway that you want me remix faithless - don't leave remix	 simple minds - seeing out the angel remix	 monika christodoulou (greece) - avatar  our broken garden (denmark) - when your blackening shows and the golden sea the creatures - turn it on and prettiest thing david bridie  (australia) - hotel radio, act of free choice and the wisdom line (2018) stina nordenstam (sweden) - people are strange	 broken twin (denmark) - may cats in space - too many gods, scarecrow, day trip to narnia, atlantisfrench albums:' alain bashung - fantaisie militaire  cocoon - where the oceans end  yann tiersen - l'absente  tetes raides - gratte poil  thomas fersen - triplex autour de lucie - faux mouvement  the fitzcarraldo sessions - we hear voices emilie simon - mue jeanne balibar - paramour kat onoma - kat onoma jacques higelin - amour doloroso, coup de foudre, paris zenith live & higelin 75 a singer must die - venus parade and more songs beyond love  santa cruz - now & here - new album (2017) loeil - bulle(s) david assaraf - ceux qui dorment dans la poussiere  references  external links  flam music  catherine haridy management  soundcloud  allmusic  page 113 scribd  the mojo collection: 4th edition  english audio engineers english record producers living people year of birth missing (living people)
gaunspur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gaunspur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gaunspur has a total number of 8 houses and population of 43  of which include 14 males and 29 females. literacy rate of gaunspur is 86.49%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 6 which is  13.95% of total population of gaunspur, and child sex ratio is approximately  5000, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
petrus olai (peder olsen, ca. 1490-ca. 1570) was a  danish franciscan friar and historiographer. no details about his life are known. he refers to himself as petro olavo saneropio minoritano  in a colophon of his collectanea ad historiam danicam pertinentia. a later note in the same manuscript by anders sørensen vedel (fol. 171v) suggests that he was dead by c. 1570.  he was presumably a monk in roskilde monastery, for which reason lyschander (ca. 1620) refers to him as petrus olai roschildensis. the byname saneropius refers to sonnerup parish (now in lejre municipality), some 10 km west of roskilde.  petrus likely began his collectanea in c. 1515, when he was still a young monk, as a personal notebook. from c. 1522, he was employed by his order to write a chronicle about the franciscans in scandinavia. after the reformation  (in 1537) the order was dissolved in denmark, but petrus continued his work on danish history until c. 1560, as danorum gesta, not to be confused with the earlier work gesta danorum.  the manuscript of collectanea ad historiam danicam pertinentia (am 107 8°, 172 folia) is a notebook with complicated structure, extended by numerous extra pages and loose slips of paper, and numerous interlinear and marginal notes, and has never been edited in its entirety.   the danorum gesta, on the other hand, is a coherent text. it is extant in  the manuscripts uppsala university library dg 37, 86 folia, and copenhagen, royal library, gks 2461 4° (92 folia). it treats the history of denmark from 1191 to 1559, but it contains little original information. the two manuscripts contain the same text from 1319, with only the uppsala ms. containing the portion of 1191 to 1318. both are near-contemporary copies but not autographs. the greater part of the text consists of excerpts from the collectanea; the gesta is, in fact, the systematic synthesis of the material collected over the years in his notebook. it represents  the first effort at a coherent "continuation of saxo", as presented with more lasting influence (and in print) by arild hvidtfeldt in 1600.  the colectanea were extensively used by other historians already during petrus' lifetime,
notably by paulus helie for his skiby-chronicle, by hans svaning and by anders sørensen vedel who inherited the colectanea ms. after petrus' death. arne magnusson acquired the ms. in 1726 and  partial editions of the texts were published in scriptores rerum danicarum by jakob langebek beginning in 1772.  the danorum gesta was translated in part (for the period 1448-1559) into danish, as the roskilde-arbogen, which would be very influential in the decades leading up to the publication of arild hvidtfeldt's danske krønike in 1600.  references  e. jørgensen, 1931: historieforskning og historieskrivning i danmark indtil ar 1800, 82-85. e. jørgensen, 1939: dansk biografisk lexicon 17 (2nd ed.), 447. e. jørgensen, 1975: dansk biografisk lexicon 8 (3rd ed.), 45. jørgen nybo rasmussen, 1976, broder peder olsen som de danske franciskaneres historieskriver (skrifter udgivet af det historiske institut ved københavns universitet 6)  jørgen nybo rasmussen, 2012, petrus olai,  medieval nordic literature in latin  (eds borgehammar, friis-jensen, mortensen, ommundsen)  rørdam, h.f. 1899: dansk biografisk lexicon 8 (1st ed.), 437-38.  danish historians 1570 deaths year of birth uncertain
season 2 of dance plus premiered on 2 july 2016 on star plus. it was created and produced by varun trikha productions, urban brew studios and frames production and aired for 25 episodes. this time there were two talents from nepal who progressed to the grand finale (wild ripperz crew and sushant khatri). mokshda jailkhani was the first contestant to get the double plus. wild ripperz set the record by gaining double plus for 8 consecutive time. auditions were conducted across several cities of india from 3 may 2016 to 26 may 2016. this show was hosted by raghav juyal.  winner tanay malhara of team dharmesh is india's new dance icon. wild ripperz crew of team dharmesh are the first runners-up. piyush bhagat of team shakti is the second runner-up. sushant khatri of team shakti is the third runner-up.  super judge remo d'souza was the super judge for this season also. he is well known and reputed choreographer and film director. he has directed movies like f.a.l.t.u., any body can dance (abcd 1 and abcd 2), a flying jatt and race 3. he was also judge on jhalak dikhla ja and dance india dance (season 1, season 2 and season3). he has judged many dance shows previously.  mentors there are three mentors on the show dharmesh yelande  shakti mohan  punit pathak  all the three mentors have their own team consisting of contestants selected in auditions. only one winner is chosen from all the teams at the end of the competition.  teams  top 8 progress  top 4   piyush bhagat - 11 september 2016  wild ripperz crew from nepal - 18 september 2016  sushant khatri - 18 september 2016  tanay malhara  final results 1st tanay malhara from jalgaon. 2nd wild ripperz crew from nepal. 3rd piyush bhagat from jammu  4th sushant khatri from nepal.  celebrity guests  references  2016 indian television seasons
stefan mihailescu-braila (; 3 february 1925 - 19 september 1996) was a romanian actor. he appeared in more than fifty films from 1959 to 1984.  selected filmography  references  external links   1925 births 1996 deaths romanian male film actors
duelyst was a free-to-play digital collectible card game and turn-based strategy hybrid developed by counterplay games, who initially self-published the title but was later published by bandai namco. it had been released in an open beta period in 2015, and the full game was released on april 27, 2016, due to declining player counts, servers for duelyst were shut down on february 27, 2020.  gameplay   in duelyst, two players battle across a tactical battlefield, taking turns in which they play and position minions and spells, represented by cards drawn from a custom built deck, until one of the players eliminates the enemy general. there are six factions in duelyst, each with its own unique characteristics that affect strategy and gameplay of the decks the player builds.  the game offers a practice mode, puzzle-like challenges, a ranked season ladder and a draft-style tournament mode.  development duelyst development was led by keith lee, a former lead producer at blizzard entertainment, who co-founded counterplay games.  lee cites the fire emblem and front mission series as inspirations for the game.  duelyst was designed to accommodate short play sessions, a game lasting around ten minutes on average.  the game was part funded through a kickstarter crowdfunding campaign, raising $137,707 in april 2014.  originally intended to follow an up-front pricing model, the game switched to a free-to-play model in 2015.  the developers believed that a free-to-play model would allow for ongoing updates to the game rather than relying on less regular expansion packs.  the game entered open beta testing in october 2015, and was released in april 2016 , 2016 on both microsoft windows and os x platforms. the ios version, however, was subsequently removed, and the game exists only for windows. the first major expansion "denizens of shim'zar" was released in august 2016.  a second expansion, "rise of the bloodborn" was released in december 2016.  a third, "ancient bonds" followed in march 2017.  the fourth, "unearthed prophecy" was released in july 2017. the fifth, "immortal vanguard" was released in november 2017. the sixth and latest expansion, "trial of mythron" was released in november 2018.  originally self-published, it was announced in july 2017 that the game would henceforth be published by bandai namco entertainment, who would take on responsibilities for marketing and customer support.  counterplay
announced in january 2020 that due to declining player counts, the online servers for duelyst will be shut down on february 27, 2020 at 3pm pst, and the game will become unplayable after that.  reception   the game was well received and holds a rating of 82/100 on reviews aggregation website metacritic, based on 14 reviews. tom marks, writing in pc gamer, described duelyst as his favourite card game after hearthstone and awarded the game 84% in his review. matt cox, in his review for rock, paper, shotgun, praised duelyst in comparison to its competitors, adding that the game "does so much more by slapping on a whole other game to the tried and tested ccg formula".  references  external links    2016 video games products and services discontinued in 2020 bandai namco games card battle video games crowdfunded video games digital collectible card games fantasy video games free-to-play video games kickstarter-funded video games multiplayer online games macos games playstation 4 games video games developed in the united states windows games xbox one games eric m. lang games
bartholomeus gabriel le roux (born 28 january 1994) is a south african rugby union player, who most recently played for the  in the currie cup. he usually plays as a tighthead prop.  rugby career  schools rugby  le roux was born in pretoria, but grew up in port elizabeth, where he represented the  at youth level. in 2011, he was a member of a south africa schools academy that lost to a france b team in durban.  sharks  after school, he joined the sharks academy, representing the side at under-19 and under-21 level. he also played for university side  in the 2014 varsity shield competition.  leopards  he moved to potchefstroom for 2015 to join the . he made his first class debut in a currie cup first division match against the , the first of six appearances in the competition. he scored tries in victories over the  and swd eagles in the final of the competition to help the leopards to win the competition for the first time in their history.  he represented  in the 2016 varsity cup, scoring tries in their matches against  and  on the way to winning another competition, with his side beating  7-6 in the final. he then made eight starts for the leopards in the 2016 currie cup qualification series, but could not help the team to secure a spot in the premier division, instead qualifying to the first division.  zebre  le roux moved to italy to join pro12 side zebre before the 2016-17 season. le roux played 6 games, starting 2 and coming on as substitute for 4 for zebre, playing 222 minutes in the pro12  references  south african rugby union players living people 1994 births sportspeople from pretoria rugby union props leopards (rugby union) players
pando is an extinct town in eagle county, in the u.s. state of colorado. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  history a post office called pando was in operation from 1891 until 1942. pando is a name derived from spanish meaning "slow".  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of eagle county, colorado
the second season of saravanan meenatchi began airing on 21 october 2013 and finished on 15 july 2016. it consisted of 700 episodes.  plot  season 2  begins with shakthi saravanan, son of saravanan and meenatchi, coming to india from canada to find a bride like his mom. he comes to his mom's village kallidaikurichi in tirunelveli where his maternal uncle, tamizh, and family live. shakthi saravanan disguises himself and lives in tamizh's house where he meets tamizh's daughter, thanga meenatchi, and falls for her. after all oppositions from tamizh, ultimately she too falls for shakthi saravanan. tamizh is strongly against thanga meenatchi and sakthi saravanan's love due to tensions between the families in the previous generation. because of this, tamizh decides to marry his daughter thanga meenatchi to his other sister sudha's son saravana perumal a.k.a. vettaiyan.  shakthi saravanan promises to save thanga meenatchi from the wedding and vettaiyan promises not to marry her if saravanan comes. unfortunately, he never shows up (he gets deported back to canada because of his visa expiration) and vettiyan and meenatchi get married. meenatchi develops a strong hatred towards vettiyan because of this sudden marriage. meenatchi meets a guy at her college named inba who promises to take her to canada to meet saravanan. his real intention is to kidnap her and rape her. vettaiyan saves meenatchi from inba and his gang, and vettaiyan himself promises meenatchi that he will take her to canada and unite her with saravanan. they get really close and meenatchi starts developing feelings for vettaiyan without even realizing it. although meenatchi develops feelings for vettaiyan, she tries to deny it.  she decides to break ties with vettaiyan if she wants to live with saravanan. when  meenatchi is on the way to the temple to break all ties with vettaiyan, she meets with an accident and loses her memory.  meenatchi meets vettaiyan again and starts to develop feelings for him not remembering their marriage or her previous love with shakthi saravanan. vettaiyan and meenatchi start dating, and vettaiyan hides the truth about saravanan from meenatchi. soon meenatchi gets to know that vettaiyan is her husband and goes home to happily live with him.  then she learns about her past with shakthi saravanan and is angry with vettaiyan.
after learning more about the sacrifices and hardships vettaiyan faced for and because of her, she heartily accepts him and they start to live together. after a few months, they bump into a lady who shares meenatchi's name and appearance, beginning season 3.  cast main cast   kavin as saravana perumal aka vettaiyan (male lead)   rachitha mahalakshmi as thanga meenatchi saravanan perumal  (female lead)   myna nandhini as revathi aka mynaa (meenatchi`s best friend)  mohamed irfan/prem kumar as shakthi saravanan (former cast)  recurring cast    deepa nethran as sudha (vettaiyan`s mother, thamizh`s younger sister)  kumara moorthi as douglas (vettaiyan`s best friend)  v. j. chitra as kalaiyarasi (vettaiyan`s friend)  alagesh as thamizh (meenatchi`s dad, vettaiyan`s maternal uncle)  lakshmi vasudevan as soundharya (meenatchi`s mother, daughter of rajasekar and sharadha)  siddharth as vaitheeswaran (meenatchi`s brother)   pavithra janani as thulasi (meenatchi`s sister-in-law, vaitheeswaran's wife)   karthik  as  pandi    kuyili as sharadha    rajasekar as rajasekar  divya prabhu / pavithra as tulasi vaitheeswaran/ tulasi anbarasu (vaitheeswaran`s ex-wife)  raghavan as arunachalam  priya as priya  inba as inba  shyam as gautham  raju jeyamohan as vettaiyan's friend  awards and nominations season two was also awarded 'best male actor' to kavin, 'best female actor' to rachitha, 'best comedian' to nandhini, 'best director' to praveen bennett, and 'best serial' at vijay television awards 2015.  international broadcast the series was released on 21 october 2013 on vijay tv and vijay tv hd. the show was also broadcast internationally on channel's international distribution.   it was aired in sri lanka, singapore, vietnam, japan, hong kong, united states, europe, malaysia, mauritius and south africa on vijay tv.   in canada, the drama airs on tamil canadians-oriented channel on asian television network 9:30 hours after its original tamil nadu broadcast.  the drama is episodes on their app hotstar
. with english subtitle.  see also  saravanan meenatchi  saravanan meenatchi (season 3)  references  external links official website on hotstar  2013 tamil-language television seasons
yellow peril: reconsidered was a contemporary asian art exhibition that toured across canada from september 8, 1990 to july 24, 1991.   curated by paul wong, yellow peril: reconsidered was the third project out of a series of work that focused on "asians in the new world". the exhibition explored the diverse and multidisciplinary ways in which asian communities within north america experience and understand heritage, identity, racial politics, gender and sexuality, and globalization.   twenty-four artists were included in the six city tour, traveling through montreal, toronto, winnipeg, halifax, vancouver and ottawa. the exhibition pieces focuses on new media such as photography, film and video. often considered as "media of truth" the objective of the photographs, films and videos were to "re-present" history, and using new media as an alternative narrative to popular historical discourse surrounding asian identity in north america. yellow peril: reconsidered, was the first exhibition that focused on asian-canadian identity, and what is considered to be the marginalization of asian diaspora communities in canada.  yellow peril: reconsidered included twenty-five artists of chinese, japanese, korean, filipino, and vietnamese-canadian descent: taki bluesinger, melanie boyle, anthony chan, benjamin chou, richard fung, jay hirabayashi, roy kiyooka, nobuo kubota, l'amitie chinoise de montreal, laiwan, daisy lee, helen lee, brenda joy lem, lui/samwald, chi chung mak, nhan nguyen, marlin oliveros, midi onodera, chick rice, rubly truly, henry tsang, tamio wakayama, jim wong-chu, jin-me yoon, and saryn yuen.  the curator, paul wong, is a canadian multimedia artist and curator. wong is known for his engagement with issues surrounding race, gender, and sexuality.  references  art exhibitions in canada
battery c, 1st pennsylvania light artillery was a light artillery battery that served in the union army as part of the pennsylvania reserves infantry division during the american civil war.  service the battery was organized at philadelphia, pennsylvania and mustered in for a three-year enlistment on august 5, 1861 under the command of captain john george simpson.  the battery was attached to w. f. smith's division, army of the potomac, october 1861 to march 1862. artillery, 1st division, iv corps, army of the potomac, to september 1862. artillery, 3rd division, vi corps, army of the potomac, to may 1863. artillery brigade, vi corps, to june 1863. camp barry, defenses of washington, d.c., xxii corps, to july 1863. 1st brigade, lockwood's division, department of the susquehanna, to august 1863. maryland heights division, department of west virginia, to october 1863.   battery c, 1st pennsylvania light artillery ceased to exist on october 23, 1863 when it was consolidated with battery d, 1st pennsylvania light artillery.  detailed service duty at camp barry and in the defenses of washington until march 1862. ordered to the virginia peninsula march. siege of yorktown april 5-may 4. battle of williamsburg may 5. battle of fair oaks or seven pines may 31-june 1. seven days battles before richmond june 25-july 1. james river road near fair oaks june 29. savage station june 29. charles city cross roads and glendale june 30. malvern hill july 1. at harrison's landing until august 16. movement to fort monroe, then to alexandria august 16-24. maryland campaign september. battle of antietam september 16-17. duty in maryland until october 29. movement to falmouth, va., october 29-november 19. battle of fredericksburg december 12-15. "mud march" january 20-24, 1863. chancellorsville campaign april 27-may 6. operations at franklin's crossing april 29-may 2. maryes heights, fredericksburg, may 3. salem heights may 3-4. banks' ford may 4. ordered to washington, d.c., june, and duty there until july. moved to maryland heights july 9. duty at harpers ferry. w. va. until october.  commanders  captain john george simpson - discharged december 9, 1861; assigned command of battery a, 1st pennsylvania light artillery  captain jeremiah mccarthy - discharged october 8, 1863  see also   list of pennsylvania civil war units  pennsylvania in the civil
war  references  dyer, frederick h. a compendium of the war of the rebellion (des moines, ia: dyer pub. co.), 1908.    military units and formations established in 1861 military units and formations disestablished in 1863 units and formations of the union army from pennsylvania p
wentworth was a provincial riding in ontario, canada, that was created for the 1934 election. it was abolished prior to the 1987 election. it was merged into the ridings of wentworth east and wentworth north before 1987 election.  members of provincial parliament  references  notes  citations  defunct ontario provincial electoral districts
prince cheng of the second rank, or simply prince cheng, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince cheng peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yunzhi (1677-1732), the third son of the kangxi emperor. in 1698, yunzhi was granted the title "prince cheng of the second rank" by his father. the title was passed down over eight generations and held by eight persons.  members of the prince cheng peerage   yunzhi (1677-1732), the kangxi emperor's third son, initially a junwang (second-rank prince), demoted to beile in 1699, promoted to qinwang (first-rank prince) in 1709, demoted to junwang again in 1728, restored as a qinwang briefly in 1730 before being stripped of his title, posthumously restored as a junwang under the title prince chengyin of the second rank (誠隱郡王)  hongsheng (弘晟; 1698-1732), yunzhi's third son, designated as yunzhi's shizi (heir apparent) from 1720 to 1724, stripped of his title in 1724  hongjing (弘暻; 1703-1777), yunzhi's seventh son, initially made a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1728 to 1730, held the title of a beizi from 1730 to 1777  yongpo (永珀), hongjing's second son, held the title of a second class fengguo jiangjun from 1749 to 1760, stripped of his title in 1760  yongshan (永珊; 1746-1797), hongjing's third son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1777 to 1797  miance (綿策; 1780-1800), yongshan's third son, held the title of a feng'en fuguo gong from 1797 to 1800, had no male heir  honghuang (弘晃; 1713-1749), yunzhi's tenth son  yongheng (永珩; 1739-1778), honghuang's son  miandao (綿道; 1764-1825)  yigu
o (奕果; 1791-1870), miandao's second son and miance's successor, held the title of a buru bafen fuguo gong from 1801 to 1870  zailing (載齡; 1812-1883), yiguo's eldest son, held the title of a buru bafen fuguo gong from 1870 to 1883, had no male heir  hongxian (弘暹; 1710-1771), yunzhi's eighth son  yongbian (永玣; 1739-1803), hongxian's son  mianxie (綿爕; 1764-1793), yongbian's son  yongjie (永介; 1741-1793), hongxian's son  mianchao (綿超; 1765-1817), yongjie' son  yiguang (奕光; 1791-1830), mianchao's son and mianxie's adopted son  zaishuang (載雙; 1836-1878), yiguang's son  puyuan (溥元; 1870-1927), zaishuang's eldest son and zailing's successor, held the title of a buru bafen fuguo gong from 1884 to 1927  yupeng (毓彭; 1893-?), puyuan's eldest son, held the title of a buru bafen fuguo gong from 1927 to 1928, stripped of his title in 1928  henghai (恆海; 1915-?), yupeng's son  family tree  see also  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages peerages of the bordered blue banner
the jericho rural historic district encompasses a rural agricultural landscape of northern hartford, vermont, extending slightly into neighboring norwich.  the area covers  of mainly agricultural and formerly agricultural lands, as well as associated woodlots, and includes nine historically significant farm complexes.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  description and history the jericho street area is a rural upland, roughly bounded on the south by the white river and the east by the flood plains of the connecticut river.  to the west it is roughly bounded by jericho brook, and the north by the east-west town line between norwich and hartford, except for one associated farm complex just over the line on joshua street.  the area is served by roads whose routes were laid out in the late 19th century, when the area was first settled.  jericho street runs north-south through the district, turning eastward near the northern end, with wallace and sugartop roads running westward, and jericho road eastward.  all but two of the historic farm complexes are found along jericho street; in addition to the one on joshua, another is located on the west side of sugartop, just south of the norwich line.  the distribution of wooded and open areas is relatively unchanged since about 1940.  the town of hartford was first settled in the 1760s, with its early settlements along the connecticut river.  the jericho hill area was settled beginning in 1781, and the last of its historic farmsteads was built in 1841.  all of the early farmsteads were simple cape style houses, and were soon accompanied by agricultural outbuildings.  the jericho hill area contains a remarkable set of contiguous historic farm properties, in which a relatively large number of outbuildings have survived, although not always in the best of condition.  the district also includes a district schoolhouse, built in 1849, which still stands near the junction of jericho street and jericho road, and functions now as a local community center.  see also  national register of historic places listings in windsor county, vermont  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in windsor county, vermont federal architecture in vermont greek revival architecture in vermont historic districts in windsor county, vermont hartford, vermont
in pakistan, the position of chief secretary (urdu: ) is occupied by the highest-ranking civil servant in each of the four provinces and two administrative units. the chief secretaries are the administrative heads of their respective provinces.  provincial  the four provincial chief secretaries in pakistan are:  chief secretary balochistan chief secretary khyber pakhtunkhwa chief secretary punjab chief secretary sindh  autonomous territories  there are two autonomous territories in pakistan which are also each headed by a chief secretary respectively i.e. chief secretary gilgit-baltistan and chief secretary azad jammu kashmir.  chief secretary azad kashmir chief secretary gilgit-baltistan  see also  cabinet secretary of pakistan secretary to government of pakistan principal secretary advocate general attorney-general for pakistan inspector-general of police  references   pakistani civil servants government of pakistan
sidlo, sidło or sidlo is a slavic surname. notable people with the surname include:  janusz sidło (1933-1993), polish javelin thrower josef sidlo, czech cyclist  slavic-language surnames
wolfgang buttress (born 1965) is an english artist.  he creates multi-sensory artworks that draw inspiration from our evolving relationship with the natural world.  buttress explores and interprets scientific discoveries, collaborating with architects, landscape architects, scientists and musicians to create human-centred experiences.  biography buttress was brought up in birmingham and cumbria and currently lives in and works from a studio in nottingham.  receiving his early education in cumbria, including an arts foundation course, buttress took a fine arts degree at nottingham trent.  on 1 july 2019, he appeared on the podcast trees a crowd with david oakes and his long term collaborator, dr martin bencsik.  work buttress has produced artworks on four continents including europe, australia, japan and the u.s. he is well known for the uk pavilion (milan expo 2015) and the hive, a collaboration with physicist dr martin bencsik, bdp, hoare lea and simmonds studio, currently installed at royal botanic gardens, kew, london, england. the project has won over 25 awards including the gold medal for best in show at the 2015 expo in milan.  the hive is a 17 metre aluminium lattice cuboid that highlights the decline of the honey bee.  by measuring the activity of a living bee colony at kew gardens, accelerometers feed live signals to 1000 led lights which line the interior of the sculpture.  the energy informs an ever-changing and fluid soundscape created by a selected ensemble of musicians who now write and perform under the name of be.  rise is a large spherical public art work in belfast.  other scientific collaborations include una (2013), in canberra, australia and lucent (2015), in chicago, both these project express the star mapping research of astrophysicist dr daniel bayliss.  corona (2017) is a collaboration with dr martin bencsik; two nasa satellites monitor the sun's activity which is expressed in real time as an ever-changing light array onto a 1,000m facade of the new science research hub in nottingham, england.  current projects include sculptures in taiwan, the us, australia and the united kingdom.  selected works  notable works include:  rise  belfast  a spire for mansfield  golden in stoke-on-trent  uk pavilion milan expo 2015"  angel wings, islington  lucent. chicago   the hive at kew, royal botanic gardens, kew, london  references  external links    1965 births living people english artists
pasabahce spor kulubu (english: pasabahce sports club) (more commonly known as pasabahce) was a professional basketball club that was based in istanbul, turkey.  history pasabahce was founded in 1950 as a basketball section of the sisecam a.s., an industrial group with the main activity fields of glass and chemicals production. at the end of the 1991-92 season pasabahce has withdrawn from the league due to financial reasons.  honours  turkish league  runners-up (2): 1989-1990, 1991-1992  turkish cup  winners (1): 1992  notable players   efe aydan (1987-1988)   kemal dincer    orhun ene (1989-1992)   harun erdenay (1990-1992)  references  defunct basketball teams in turkey basketball teams established in 1950 1950 establishments in turkey sports clubs disestablished in 1992
coccolo is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  dante coccolo (born 1957), french bicycle racer luca coccolo (born 1998), italian footballer
alipur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of alipur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, alipur has a total number of 17 houses and population of 110 of which include 57 males and 53 females. literacy rate of alipur is 74.47%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 16 which is 14.55% of total population of alipur, and child sex ratio is approximately 1667 higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
ghaniaki  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of ghaniaki. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, ghaniaki has a total number of 102 houses and population of 517 of which include 277 males and 240 females. literacy rate of ghaniaki is 74.62%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 52 which is  10.06% of total population of ghaniaki, and child sex ratio is approximately  857, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
this is a record of israel's results at the european baseball championship. israel came in fourth in the 2019 european baseball championship.  honors during the 2016 c-level qualifier, dean kremer was named the euros' most valuable pitcher and simon rosenbaum was named mvp. during the 2016 b-level qualifier, kremer once again won the most valuable pitcher award.  israel led teams at the 2016 competition in almost every statistic possible during the c-level qualifiers. they led in hitting with a .309 average, .450 on base percentage, .509 slugging percentage. they also were the leaders in runs with 53, home runs with 9 and hit by pitch with 20. in addition to hitting they led in era with 1.05, strikeouts with an average of 11.5 per nine innings, opponents batting average with .140 and fielding percentage of .973. israel was tied for stolen bases with 23, which romania led with 26. the only other statistics israel did not lead in were walks and doubles.  record  record by team  2010 european baseball championship - qualifier pool 3 israel competed in the qualification for the 2010 european baseball championship, in july 2008. israel went 2-2 and finished in 3rd place, based on the tiebreaker stat of runs against per 9 innings. israel lost their first two games, against bulgaria and croatia, before coming back to win their final two games, against serbia and lithuania.  2012 european baseball championship - pool tel aviv israel competed in the qualification for the 2012 european baseball championship. in addition to competing, israel hosted one of the qualification pools from july 26-29, 2011. israel was eliminated from the tournament after going 2-1, finishing in second place behind great britain who went 3-0. israel won their first game against georgia, lost their second game against great britain, before coming back to beat lithuania in their final game. israel went on to compete in the home/away finals against great britain, where they won the first game but lost the second, with great britain advancing to the main tournament.  going into the round, great britain was expected to come win, being ranked 21st, followed by lithuania at 48 and israel at 57.  2016 european baseball championship israel competed in the qualification for the 2016 european baseball championship.  during the c-level qualifier, dean kremer was named the euros' most valuable pitcher. during the two games he pitched, he pitched 13 innings, giving up only 6 hits, no runs, one walk, and struck out 20.  simon rosen
baum was named mvp after hitting .529, along with four homeruns, giving him a 1.294 slugging percentage, in addition to scoring ten runs, collecting 10 rbis and had three stolen bases.  israel led teams at competition in almost every statistic possible during the c-level qualifiers. they led in hitting with a .309 average, .450 on base percentage, .509 slugging percentage. they also were the leaders in runs with 53, home runs with 9 and hit by pitch with 20. in addition to hitting they led in era with 1.05, strikeouts with an average of 11.5 per nine innings, opponents batting average with .140 and fielding percentage of .973. israel was tied for stolen bases with 23, which romania led with 26. the only other statistics israel did not lead in were walks and doubles.  2016 c-level qualification  at the 2016 european baseball championship israel entered the qualification at the c-level. after finishing in first place during the group b round, israel moved on to the c-level finals. israel was placed in group b for the c-level qualifier, where they won all three games they played, against slovenia, finland and latvia, outscoring their competitors 31-4. advancing to the c-level semifinals, israel faced romania who they beat 8-3. in the finals, israel beat slovenia 14-0. during the c-level finals stage, the top two teams move on to the b-level qualification. as the first-place finisher, israel moved on to b-level qualification.  2016 b-level qualifier  after qualifying for the b-level qualifier after finishing in first place during the c-level qualifier, israel competed in the group a. the top team from each of the two groups would move on to the tournament. with israel placing third in their group, they were eliminated. israel started the round with victories over belarus, poland and austria, before losing to lithuania and sweden. despite outscoring their opponents 44-26, israel was eliminated from the tournament, as sweden and austria went 4-1, leaving israel one game back from advancing.  source:   source:  2019 european baseball championship  based on team israel's performance in the 2016 competition, israel did not need to compete in the c-level qualifier and competed instead in the b-level qualifier in 2017. israel played in pool 1, in belgrade, serbia, from 24 to 29 july 2018. during the tournament, israel played switzerland, bulgaria, austria, greece, and serbia. they
went 3-2, which was enough to qualify them for the group championship game against austria, which they lost 12-2.  they were then sent to another group stage with teams from the c stage and other teams that did not yet qualify. they were assigned to pool b, which featured 12 teams competing in two groups of 6. the two group winners faced off in a playoff for the last qualifying spot for the 2019 european championship. in their pool, team israel competed against russia, ireland, serbia, bulgaria, and greece.  the team played in the 2019 european baseball championship - b-pool in early july 2019 in blagoevgrad, bulgaria, winning all of five of its games and advancing to the playoffs against team lithuania in the 2019 playoff series at the end of july 2019 which it won and thus qualified for the last qualifying spot for the 2019 european baseball championship.  in preparation for baseball at the 2020 summer olympics, 10 american baseball players made aliyah in 2018 in order to qualify under the citizenship requirement for the 2019 european baseball championships and the olympics. the players were corey baker, gabe cramer, blake gailen, joey wagman, alex katz, eric brodkowitz, jonathan de marte, jon moscot, jeremy wolf (who lives in tel aviv), and zack weiss. they were followed in 2019 by danny valencia, ty kelly, nick rickles, ben wanger, and jeremy bleich.  in round 1 of the 2019 european baseball championship, israel went 4-1 (defeating the czech republic, sweden, germany, and great britain while losing to the netherlands). the team thereby advanced to the championship's eight-team playoffs, with mitch glasser leading all championship batters in runs with 7, and blake gailen tied with germany's marco cardoso for the lead in hits, with 8. in the championship playoffs, israel defeated team france in the quarterfinals, lost to team italy in the semi-finals, and came in fourth.  b pool final  2019 playoff series israel won the best-of-three playoff series, and thus qualified for the 2019 european baseball championship. the playoff host was lithuania.  pool a  play-offs quarter finals:  2021 european baseball championship  group stage  play-offs  quarter-finals  semi-finals  final  see also israel at the world baseball classic  references  european baseball championship european baseball championship
ed pryor (born september 7, 1989) is an american music video director and record producer.  early life  at an early age he experimented with a growing interest in music production and film - influenced by his father, whom had worked as a dj. raised in winchester, tennessee a small town in southern middle tennessee. pryor graduation from franklin county high school before attending and graduating from middle tennessee state university later moving to nashville, tennessee to pursue a career in the music industry.  career  music videos  pryor's experience in a variety of genres and subject matter have helped him develop a unique style. his vision is synonymous with maximizing potential with creative solutions. .  his work has been featured on television channels/programs such as the late show with stephen colbert, today with hoda & jenna, the kelly clarkson show, nbc, bet jams, cmt, cmt music, fox sports 1, gac, music choice, and axs tv.  in addition, his work has been featured in many publications. these include: billboard (magazine), people (magazine), rolling stone, et online, the tennessean, fox news, entertainment weekly, cmt (u.s. tv channel), sirius xm radio, worldstarhiphop, affliction clothing, the source magazine, the tennessean, taste of country, nashville scene, dj booth, 2dopeboyz, and more.  music production  pryor has produced songs for artists such as project pat, bubba sparxxx, jellyroll, and rittz.  his production is featured on many albums spanning several genres - rap album's such as lil wyte and jellyroll's (2013) no filter, to average joes entertainment's country compilation series (2014) mud digger 5, to electronic inspired hip-hop on chancellor warhol's (2014) paris is burning and more. many of these albums have appeared in the billboard 200 and various other charts.  pryor is also frequent collaborator with the country rap duo redneck souljers and has produced all four of their albums in entirety. 2015's firewater, debuted at no. 8 on billboard's heatseeker's chart, #19 on billboard's rap albums chart, #37 on billboard's independent chart, and #42 on billboard's top country albums chart.  videos directed  television  film  awards and nominations  references   1989 births living people american music video directors record producers from tennessee people from winchester, tennessee
santa rita de cassia futebol clube is an angolan sports club from the city of uige. the team made its debut in the gira angola (angola's second division championship) in 2016 after winning the uige province football championship.  the club is named after italian saint rita of cascia in whose honor a sanctuary was built at the village of casseche, uige city, where an annual pilgrimage is held.  in 2016, its debutant year in the second division, the club managed to be promoted to angola's top flight division, the girabola.  2017 disaster on february 10, 2017, shortly after the inaugural match of the 2017 girabola between home team santa rita de cassia and recreativo do libolo, one of the access gates of estadio 4 de janeiro collapsed as access was made free and attendants tried to force their way into the stadium. as a result, 17 people were trampled to death and 76 injured, 5 of whom with life-threatening injuries.  achievements angolan league: 0  angolan cup: 0  angolan supercup: 0  gira angola: 1  2016 uige provincial championship: 1  2015  league & cup positions  recent seasons santa rita de cassia's season-by-season performance since 2011:   pr = preliminary round, 1r = first round, gs = group stage, r32 = round of 32, r16 = round of 16, qf = quarter-finals, sf = semi-finals, ru = runner-up, w = winner  players and staff  staff  players  manager history  see also girabola gira angola  references  external links  facebook profile  santa football clubs in angola sports clubs in angola
seth clabough is an american fiction writer and author of the novel all things await, which was nominated for the 2017 library of virginia literary award for fiction.  clabough was born in richmond, virginia in 1982, grew up on a farm in appomattox county, virginia, and has lived in hawaii, costa rica, and the uk. clabough's work has been published in anthologies, journals, and magazines ranging from blackbird: an online journal of literature & the arts and aesthetica magazine to the chronicle of higher education and new writing: the international journal for the practice and theory of creative writing.  he has literary representation through inkwell management in new york and currently works at randolph-macon college as an english professor and director of the communication center after holding similar positions at sweet briar college and longwood university.  nominations and awards ploughshares - national 'best short story of the week' selection ("und so weiter") 2017 smokelong quarterly - editor's selection ("story with a gallinule's wing in it") 2017 queen's ferry press award - editor nominated 2016 best of the net 2016 - editor nominated 2016 alternating current - luminaire award for best prose ("it won't always be like this") 2015 storysouth - million writer award: notable story ("to become immortal") 2015 luigi bonomi & associates (london) - lba prize for fiction (uwa)  education university of wales, aberystwyth (phd) university of south carolina (ma) randolph-macon college (ba)  references  living people randolph-macon college faculty american fiction writers sweet briar college faculty longwood university faculty people from appomattox county, virginia writers from richmond, virginia randolph-macon college alumni university of south carolina alumni alumni of aberystwyth university novelists from virginia year of birth missing (living people)
benthofascis lozoueti is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family conorbidae.  these snails are predatory and venomous. they are capable of "stinging" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.  description the length of an adult shell attains 21.5 mm, its diameter 9.1 mm.  distribution this marine species is endemic to the norfolk ridge and found at a depth of 530 m; also off new caledonia.  references   sysoev a. & bouchet p. (2001) new and uncommon turriform gastropods (gastropoda: conoidea) from the south-west pacific. in: p. bouchet & b.a. marshall (eds), tropical deep-sea benthos, volume 22. memoires du museum national d'histoire naturelle 185: 271-320. page(s): 290  external links    bouchet, philippe, et al. "a quarter-century of deep-sea malacological exploration in the south and west pacific: where do we stand? how far to go." tropical deep-sea benthos 25 (2008): 9-40  holotype at the mnhn, paris  lozoueti
john george baillie-hamilton, 13th earl of haddington (21 december 1941 - 5 july 2016), was a british peer and politician of the conservative party. he was also a photographer and explorer of the paranormal.  baillie-hamilton was born in december 1941, the son of george baillie-hamilton, 12th earl of haddington, and his wife sarah nee cook (died 1995), born the younger of two children. he was the only son. he attended ampleforth college, trinity college, dublin, and the royal agricultural college. he worked as a photographer and published the magazine the bird table. he also worked with the lebanese tourist board and the centre for crop circle studies. in 1998, he founded the charitable organization save our songbirds, now songbird survival.  after his father's death in 1986, baillie-hamilton inherited the title of earl of haddington, aged 44 years. thus, he acquired the then associated seat in the house of lords. this he lost due to the house of lords act 1999. he applied for an elected seat, but only came 91st place on his party list. of these 42 seats were awarded.  baillie-hamilton lived on the estate of mellerstain house in berwickshire.  on 19 april 1975, baillie-hamilton married prudence elizabeth hayles. they divorced in 1981. he married again on 2 december 1984 to jane heyworth. the marriage produced three children, two daughters and a son: george edmund baldred baillie-hamilton (b. 1985), who is now the 14th earl of haddington  lady susan moyra baillie-hamilton (b. 1988) lady isobel joan baillie-hamilton (b. 1990)  references  1941 births 2016 deaths 13 people educated at ampleforth college alumni of trinity college dublin alumni of the royal agricultural university john
"woman in black" is the 22nd episode and the first-season finale of the supernatural drama television series grimm, which premiered on may 18, 2012, on nbc. the episode was written by series creators david greenwalt and jim kouf, and was directed by norberto barba.  plot opening quote: "it shall not be death, but a sleep of a hundred years, into which the princess shall fall."  hank (russell hornsby) is having nightmares after his encounter with the wesen. nick (david giuntoli) and monroe (silas weir mitchell) are discussing whether to tell hank about the wesen. they are being photographed by a man while leaving.  the photographer brings the photos to akira kimura (brian tee), who then kills him. his body is then found by a woman in black (mary elizabeth mastrantonio). adalind (claire coffee) prepares a potion for her cat and then goes to juliette's (bitsie tulloch) clinic, where the cat scratches juliette. nick and hank discover the photographer took pictures of nick, hank, monroe and renard (sasha roiz).  renard is attacked in his house by kimura, who is looking for the coins. he escapes when wu (reggie lee) shows up. nick and hank save renard while juliette confronts nick about adalind. nick decides to take juliette to his aunt's trailer in an attempt to show her the grimm world but she stays skeptical. he decides to take her to monroe to show her his blutbad face. before seeing it juliette faints.  nick takes her to the hospital where she lies in a coma. monroe takes adalind's cat to rosalee's (bree turner) shop so they can find out what happened to the cat. hank arrives home to discover it wrecked as the woman in black leaves. juliette wakes up with her eyes turned black in the same way adalind's cats eyes did. nick returns home and is attacked by kimura, who is looking for the coins. he is saved by the woman in black, who incapacitates kimura. nick holds her at gunpoint. she calls him "nicky" and a shocked nick replies, "mom?"  reception  viewers the episode was viewed by 5.10 million people, earning a 1.6/5 in the 18-49 rating demographics on the nielson ratings scale, ranking first on its timeslot and tying first for the night in the 18-49 demographics with shark tank. this was a 14% increase in viewership from the previous episode
, which was watched by 4.45 from an 1.2/4 in the 18-49 demographics. this means that 1.6 percent of all households with televisions watched the episode, while 5 percent of all households watching television at that time watched it.  the episode was a 23% decrease in viewership from the season premiere, which was watched by 6.56 from an 1.2/4 in the 18-49 demographics. the season averaged 6.35 million viewers, ranking 89th of all shows.  critical reviews "woman in black" received mixed-to-positive reviews. the a.v. club's kevin mcfarland gave the episode a "c+" grade and wrote, "instead of picking one serialized element and providing some kind of conclusion or any answer, this finale introduces even more new questions. sure, nick's mom being alive can be construed as kind of an answer to nick's sudden interest in his parents' murder case that started a few weeks ago with juliette as instigator and lead investigator. but really it just opens a door to tons of new queries, none of which the show seems interested in committing to, since we still have no idea what renard is, what kind of hierarchy is in place, who the reapers are, or any of the other overarching mythology. grimm is now densely layered, with the portland cases, nick's past and his parents murder, and international wesen issues building outwards, but in shooting for a big, ambitious design, the small things are getting lost in the shuffle."  nick mchatton from tv fanatic, gave a 4.5 star rating out of 5, stating: "if there is one gripe i have about tonight's episode it's the time limit. so much of the episode felt rushed, as we hurried from one character to the next, and from one quick burst of story to the next, and if given room to breathe, the plot might have been better served. it felt like akira, renard, adalind, and team nick all got pushed to the side for the big reveal of mama burkhardt. there's nothing wrong with that, but there was just too much to tell and not enough allotted time to do it."  shilo adams from tv overmind wrote, "a lot of good stuff got introduced in 'the woman in black', stuff that i have the fullest confidence in saying will pan out beautifully in season two, but the finale was a missed opportunity, to me. it could have been a major revelation, an
episode that laid all the cards out on the table, but instead, we have a confession that didn't really count, a reveal that was good (but not great), and a one-note villain that only left the most ancillary of bodies in his wake."  references  external links    grimm (season 1) episodes 2012 american television episodes television episodes written by david greenwalt
jake joseph paul (born january 17, 1997) is an american social media personality and professional boxer. he initially rose to fame on vine, before playing the role of dirk mann on the disney channel series bizaardvark for two seasons. throughout his career, paul has become the subject of many controversies due to his behavior including engaging in risky stunts, sexually suggestive behavior, featuring age-inappropriate material for youtube, getting fired from bizaardvark, and being charged with criminal trespass and unlawful assembly.  paul's boxing career began in august 2018 when he defeated british youtuber deji olatunji in an amateur contest via tko in the fifth round. turning professional, paul beat the youtuber anesongib in january 2020, via tko in the first round. between 2020 and 2021, paul won his following fights against retired basketballer nate robinson by second round ko, retired mixed martial artist ben askren by 1st round tko, and former ufc champion tyron woodley twice by sd and 6th round ko.  early life jake paul was born on january 17, 1997, in cleveland, and grew up in westlake, ohio, with his older brother logan, who is also a youtuber and internet personality. their parents are pamela ann stepnick (nee meredith) and realtor gregory allan paul. paul began his career in september 2013 posting videos on vine. by the time vine was discontinued by twitter inc., paul had amassed 5.3 million followers and 2 billion views on the app.  entertainment career  2014-2016: youtube and bizaardvark  paul launched his youtube channel on may 15, 2014. his channel is known for pranks, controversies, and features his rap music.  after gaining acclaim on vine and youtube, paul was hired onto the set of the disney channel series bizaardvark, playing a character who accepted dare requests that he would then perform. on july 22, 2017, during the middle of filming the second season of bizaardvark, the disney channel announced that paul would be leaving the series. the announcement followed a news report from ktla about public complaints from paul's neighbors regarding the noise generated by paul's pranks, parties, fire hazards and the large crowds of paul's fans congregating in their neighborhood. paul later confirmed the news on his twitter page, saying he would now focus more on his personal brand, his youtube channel, his business ventures, and more adult acting roles. paul later revealed in an interview with the hollywood reporter that he was
actually fired from bizaardvark by disney, which wanted to expedite the process of weaning him off the show due to the ktla segment.  2017-2018: music and team 10 on january 17, 2017, which was paul's 20th birthday, it was reported he had launched an entertainment collaborative, titled team 10, with $1 million in financing to create influencer marketing management and creative agency around teen entertainment. investors include danhua capital, horizons alpha, vayner capital, sound ventures & a-grade investments, and adam zeplain.  paul released the single titled "it's everyday bro", featuring team 10, alongside the music video, on may 30, 2017. it featured vocals from members of the team at the time, consisting of nick crompton, chance sutton, ivan and emilio martinez, and tessa brooks. the video accumulated over 70 million views in one month and became the third most disliked video on the website. the song debuted and peaked at number 91 on the billboard hot 100 and was certified platinum by the recording industry association of america (riaa). its title refers to how paul at the time posted a video every single day. in 2017, paul released and later deleted singles including "ohio fried chicken," "jerika," "no competition," "that ain't on the news," and "litmas." the singles were deleted for various reasons including his 2018 break-up with erika costell.  on november 22, 2017, paul released a remix of "it's everyday bro," featuring american rapper gucci mane in place of team 10, alongside the new music video for it.  on april 27, 2018, paul released the single malibu with now-former team 10 member chad tepper, along with the music video.  on may 11, he released another single titled my teachers, featuring now-former team 10 members sunny malouf and anthony trujillo, along with the music video. on may 24, he released two singles, randy savage and cartier vision. the former song features team 10 and hip-hop duo jitt & quan, featuring vocals from team 10 members at the time, consisting of anthony trujillo, sunny malouf, justin roberts, erika costell, and chad tepper; it was released along with the music video. the latter song features anthony and the duo as well; the music video was released later on september 12.  on august 15, 2018, paul released another single titled "champion," with a music video. the song was a diss track towards paul's boxing opponent
deji olatunji (comedyshortsgamer), the younger brother of british youtube star, internet personality, boxer, and rapper ksi, in which their fight happened ten days later on august 25. throughout the summer of 2018, paul and team 10 went on a tour within the united states, performing songs. gradually, the team 10 members all left one by one from the beginning of the year until the end.  2019: business enterprises and new group on march 1, 2019, paul released the single "i'm single", which was released along with the music video. the song focused on paul's feelings about being single and his breakup with erika costell. on july 12, it was reported that paul had started a new group after team 10 had disbanded. the group consisted of adam quinn, lauren dascalo, brandon amato, and payton and mikahl caci. on december 13, 2019, paul released another single "these days", but deleted it from streaming services less than a year later.  2020-present: more focus on music on july 24, 2020, paul released the single "fresh outta london", which was released alongside the music video. for the video shoot, he threw a party at his home in calabasas, california thirteen days before, on july 11, in which he garnered national attention after being criticised by calabasas mayor alicia weintraub after videos and pictures of the party surfaced online. on september 10, paul released another single titled "23", alongside a music video at his house, which only starred his older brother logan and also featured clips of him and a few of his friends. the title of the song refers to his age at the time, as well as american former basketball player michael jordan's jersey number. on october 15, paul released the single "dummy", featuring canadian rapper tvgucci, who is signed to fellow canadian rapper drake's record label, ovo sound. the lyric video was published to paul's youtube channel six days later, on october 21.  2021: boxing bullies, anti fund and mvp  in 2021 paul founded an organization named 'boxing bullies' to help the youth combat bullying.  paul started venture capital branded as the 'anti fund' in 2021 with serial entrepreneur geoffrey woo. it enables investors and fans to raise money through a quarterly subscription by using angel list's rolling funds platform. later, anti fund led investment in sports gambling firm simplebet inc. raising $30 million in a financing round in august 2021.
paul founded 'most valuable promotions' (mvp) with his adviser, nakisa bidarian in 2021 and signed amanda serrano to a promotional deal in september 2021.  boxing career  amateur career  paul vs. deji   on august 25, 2018, jake paul and his brother logan paul fought ksi and his younger brother, deji olatunji, in a pair of amateur white-collar boxing matches. jake paul's fight against deji was the chief undercard bout before the main event, ksi vs. logan paul. paul defeated deji via technical knockout in the fifth round.  professional career  paul vs. anesongib  on december 21, 2019, it was announced that paul would be making his professional boxing debut against the youtuber anesongib (known as gib) on january 30, 2020, in miami. the match between paul and gib was the co-feature to the wbo world middleweight title bout between professional boxers demetrius andrade and luke keeler. paul won the fight via tko at 2:18 in the first round.  paul vs. robinson   in july 2020, it was announced that jake paul would be venturing into the ring for a second professional bout, facing professional basketball player nate robinson as part of the undercard for the mike tyson vs. roy jones jr. exhibition match. the event was initially scheduled for september 12 at the dignity health sports park in carson, california; however, in august, tyson revealed the event had been pushed back to november 28 to maximize revenue. paul won the fight via ko at 1:24 in the second round.  paul vs. askren   after a back-and-forth on social media, it was announced on december 22, 2020 that paul's third pro bout opponent would be the former bellator mma and one welterweight champion ben askren, on march 28, 2021, in los angeles. after askren accepted paul's challenge, rumors of a proposed march 28 date in los angeles started circulating. on february 26, 2021, it was announced that the fight would be held on april 17 in atlanta. paul defeated askren via tko at 1:59 in round 1. the event reportedly made 1.45 million pay-per-view buys as per triller, however, the legitimacy of both the match and the numbers of the event have been heavily questioned by multiple personalities, fans, mma fighters and boxers alike.  paul vs. woodley  before the jake paul vs. ben askren main event took place, paul and one of his corner
men j'leon love were involved in a backstage confrontation with former ufc welterweight champion tyron woodley, where woodley was mocked due to his inexperience in boxing and the result of paul's bout against woodley's long-time teammate ben askren was discussed. after knocking out askren, paul was called out by woodley. on may 31, 2021, news surfaced that paul was scheduled to face woodley in a boxing bout on august 29, 2021. he won the fight by split decision. one judge scored the fight 77-75 for woodley, while the other two judges scored it 77-75 and 78-74 in favor of paul.  paul vs. woodley ii   tommy fury was originally scheduled to fight paul, but pulled out of the bout due to medical issues. it was announced that tyron woodley would replace fury in the fight, a rematch of their previous bout in ohio back in august. the pair fought the rematch in tampa, florida on december 18, 2021.  paul defeated woodley via ko at 2:12 of the 6th round. at the time of the stoppage, paul was winning the bout with the scores of 49-46 (twice) and 48-46. the knockout was awarded ko of the year by both dazn and espn.  controversies and legal issues  content controversies  on january 3, 2018, paul uploaded a video to his youtube channel titled "i lost my virginity" which used a thumbnail of himself and his then-girlfriend erika costell posing semi-nude on top of each other. the video was age-restricted by youtube as a result, and critics such as keemstar criticized the thumbnail as being inappropriate for his younger audience. the thumbnail was later changed with both paul and costell fully clothed and not touching each other. two days later, on january 5, tmz revealed a video in which paul used the racial epithet "nigga" multiple times while freestyle rapping.  on november 29, 2020, paul sparked frustration after stating he paved the way for content house creation and boxing matches between high-profile social media stars. many objected to paul's claim, observing that he did not create the first content house, nor was he the first youtube star to fight in a boxing match.  scam allegations  on january 3, 2018, paul started the website edfluence, a program claiming to teach younger people how to be successful, learn life skills, and earn money online. the course cost us$7 per user, which would allow the user
to unlock a series of videos for a "roadmap" to success as an influencer. however, the seven dollars did not unlock the entire program, but only gave a few basic tips. paul also promised his audience that if they joined the course, they would get to join "team 1000", which did not happen. following the situation, paul was accused of scamming young followers and stealing their money. then, two years later, on january 31, 2020, edfluence was shut down, which stopped the course permanently. on february 15, paul announced that he would partner with los angeles-based brand development group genz holdings inc. to create a $19.99 per month platform aimed at teaching children how to build an online presence. "the financial freedom movement" promises to give subscribers access to "jake paul's personal experience, rituals and secret formula" and "cutting edge mentorship, coaching, and training". the program has been criticized by some, with one interviewer questioning whether it would send a dangerous message to his young fanbase.  on january 3, 2019, paul, along with fellow youtuber ricegum, came under fire for promoting mysterybrand, a website that offers the chance to open a digital "mystery box" of pre-selected items with a promise to win one in real life at random. many users have said they have not received prizes they won through the site.  party complaints, public nuisance lawsuits, and covid-19 in addition to the 2017 public complaints that eventually led to paul's dismissal from bizaardvark, paul's neighbors in the beverly grove neighborhood of los angeles filed a class-action public nuisance lawsuit against paul. this came after paul made his home address public, leading crowds of fans to gather outside paul's residence, and noise complaints by neighbors. on april 24, 2018, it was reported that paul was being sued by cobra acquisitions, the company that owns the house, for $2.5 million.  on february 23, 2020, in las vegas, nevada, paul was involved in an altercation with british singer zayn malik at westgate, the hotel near the mgm grand garden arena at which the two were staying. paul and malik's rooms were right across from each other and when paul's older brother, logan, went to paul's hotel room, an argument broke out between malik and paul because paul believed malik was using a rude tone. following the interaction, paul posted about it on twitter, which drew attention from malik's girlfriend and american model gigi hadid.
paul later deleted his tweets which criticized malik and then posted another tweet stating that he tweeted about the incident since he was drunk, acknowledging the fact in a tweet later in the day, writing, "someone needs to take my phone when i'm drunk because i am a fucking idiot". logan released the video footage on the 161st episode of his podcast, impaulsive, in which he explained the whole situation.  on july 11, 2020, paul threw a large party at his home in calabasas, california, despite the ongoing covid-19 pandemic. dozens of people attended without wearing masks and maintaining social distancing. after complaints from neighbors and videos surfaced on social media, calabasas mayor alicia weintraub expressed outrage, saying, "they're having this large party, no social distancing, no masks, it's just a big huge disregard for everything that everybody is trying to do to get things back to functioning." she continued, saying, "it's really just a party acting like covid does not exist, it's acting that businesses aren't closed". she later added that the city was looking into "all of our options" regarding penalties for paul and the attendees of the party.  on november 25, 2020, paul attracted further covid-related controversy due to statements in an interview with the daily beast. when interviewer marlow stern asked paul if he regretted his words and actions regarding the july 11 party, paul responded by saying that covid-19 was a "hoax", also stating that "98 percent of news [about covid-19] is fake", and that he believed the measures against covid-19 in the united states should end, calling them "the most detrimental thing to our society." he then incorrectly stated that the flu had killed as many people in the united states in 2020 as covid-19 did, and claimed that "medical professionals have [recently] also said that masks do absolutely nothing to prevent the spread of coronavirus"; he later referred to said professionals as "dozens of my medical friends." when stern tried to question his claims, paul told stern "you're arrogant. you're very arrogant", "you want clickbait", and "i've never even heard of you." the interview sparked condemnation from various individuals and media outlets, such as page six, and fellow youtuber tyler oakley, who called paul "aggressively ignorant" and "embarrassing."  attending a riot at an arizona mall and fbi raid on may 30, 2020, paul and a few of his
friends came to have dinner at p. f. chang's outside of scottsdale fashion square in scottsdale, arizona, as part of the george floyd protests, where it escalated quickly and people began looting the mall. multiple instances of footage show paul and his friends outside of a p. f. chang's witnessing the riot and they made their way inside the mall where they documented the incident. people on social media criticized paul for entering the mall and standing in the middle of the mall witnessing people looting stores. paul later apologized on social media condemning the violence, and also denied the accusations of looting, instead saying he was filming as a public service for a future video. paul said, "we filmed everything we saw in an effort to share our experience and bring more attention to the anger felt in every neighborhood we travelled through; we were strictly documenting, not engaging." on june 4, 2020, paul was charged with criminal trespass and unlawful assembly, both misdemeanor charges, for being in the mall during the riot. on august 5, 2020, paul's calabasas mansion was raided by the federal bureau of investigation (fbi). in a statement to the los angeles times the fbi stated, "the fbi is executing a federal search warrant at a residence in calabasas in connection with an ongoing investigation. the affidavit in support of the search warrant has been sealed by a judge and i am, therefore, prohibited from commenting as to the nature of the investigation." on the same day, the charges were dismissed without prejudice, the scottsdale police department said it was "in the best interest of the community" and would allow a federal criminal investigation to be completed. paul also explained in a now-deleted video that the raid was "completely related to the looting controversy". in august 2021 it was reported paul would not face federal charges over the incident.  sexual assault allegations  on april 9, 2021, a video was released by tiktok personality justine paradise who alleged that paul forced her into oral sex and touched her without her consent during an incident at the team 10 house in 2019. paul responded to the accusations, saying, "sexual assault accusations aren't something that i, or anyone should ever take lightly, but to be crystal clear, this claim made against me is 100% false."  in a later video paradise stated she received harassment and death threats over the accusation.  on april 22, 2021, an article about paul in the new york times featured a second accusation by model and actress railey lollie, who had previously worked for paul beginning
when she was 17, alleged that paul often called her jailbait and commentated on her appearance, and after production of a video in 2017, groped her.  investigated in puerto rico on may 15, 2021, paul was investigated by the puerto rico department of natural and environmental resources for riding a motorized vehicle on puerto rico's beaches, seen on a video which was posted online but then removed. it is illegal to ride motorized vehicles on puerto rico's beaches in order to protect natural wildlife such as sea turtles. paul apologized stating he had intended no harm.  personal life  paul has english, irish, scottish, welsh, jewish and german ancestry. paul has a net worth of approximately $17-30 million.  in november 2016, paul started dating fellow american youtuber and internet personality alissa violet. they broke up in february 2017. in april 2018, paul started dating american model erika costell. the couple announced the end of their relationship in november 2018.  paul began dating fellow american youtuber and internet personality tana mongeau in april 2019. in june 2019, the couple announced that they were engaged, although many fans and commentators did not believe that the engagement was legitimate. on july 28 of that year, paul and mongeau exchanged vows in las vegas. intouch later reported that the couple had not obtained a marriage license prior to the ceremony and that the officiant was also not licensed by the state of nevada. as a result, the marriage was not legally binding. buzzfeed reported that paul and mongeau left the ceremony separately. the ceremony, which was available on pay-per-view for $50, was recorded by mtv for the show no filter: tana mongeau. on an episode of the show, mongeau stated that the ceremony was something "fun and lighthearted that we're obviously doing for fun and for content." the couple announced their break-up in january 2020.  later that month, paul started dating american model julia rose. the couple have an on-and-off relationship but confirmed that they are dating as of february 2022.  professional boxing record  amateur boxing record  filmography  discography  extended plays  singles  bibliography paul, jake. you gotta want it, , gallery books 2016 (memoir)  awards and nominations  references  further reading     fehr, kaitlyn (april 21, 2021). "a contentious timeline of jake paul's controversies and crimes". berkeley beacon. akintoye, dotun  (august 27, 2021). is jake paul bad for boxing? next question.
espn.com.  external links       1997 births 21st-century american comedians american male boxers american conspiracy theorists american male child actors american male comedians american male film actors american male rappers american male television actors american people of english descent american people of german-jewish descent american people of irish descent american people of welsh descent american tiktokers american youtubers boxers from ohio cruiserweight boxers internet-related controversies living people male actors from cleveland male bloggers male youtubers mass media people from ohio music youtubers musicians from cleveland rappers from cleveland rappers from ohio video bloggers vine celebrities youtube controversies people from westlake, ohio
"shape of my heart" is a song by british musician sting. it was released in august 1993 as the fifth single from the album ten summoner's tales. the song was co-written by guitarist dominic miller. it was used for the end credits of the film leon starring jean reno, gary oldman and natalie portman, and within the 1993 film three of hearts.  despite failing to reach the top 50 in the uk upon its release, it has become a pop classic and one of sting's works most closely associated with his solo career. it currently has more than 190 million plays on the streaming platform spotify.  larry adler played the harmonica section in the song. the song's guitar figure was interpolated by juice wrld on the worldwide hit "lucid dreams" (2018).  background and writing sting explained that through "shape of my heart", he wanted to tell the story of a "card player, a gambler who gambles not to win but to try to figure out something; to figure out some kind of mystical logic in luck, or chance; some kind of scientific, almost religious law."  charts  certifications  references   songs written by sting (musician) sting (musician) songs 1993 songs 1993 singles songs composed in f-sharp minor
ludhiana south assembly constituency (sl. no.: 61) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in ludhiana district, punjab state, india. before, it was called ludhiana city south assembly constituency.  it is part of ludhiana district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  ludhiana district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
mimenicodes granulum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
minister for women's interests is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by simone mcgurk of the labor party. the position was first created after the 1983 state election, for the government of brian burke, and has existed in every government since then. until 1992, the position was always held by the premier (male or female), who appointed an assistant minister to administer the portfolio. the women's interests portfolio falls within the state government's department of local government and communities.  titles  25 february 1983 - present: minister for women's interests  list of ministers  list of assistant ministers  see also  minister for planning (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  women minister for women
refuge is an unincorporated community located in washington county, mississippi, united states.  refuge landing was located west of the settlement, directly on the mississippi river.  history francis griffin purchased land in 1831 on a high ridge bordering the mississippi river where he established "refuge plantation".  by 1850, griffin had 150 slaves working on his plantation.  the refuge plantation house, shaded by oak trees and protected from the river by a levee system, was erected with a view of the river, and remains today one of the best examples of a mid-nineteenth-century plantation house in washington county.  refuge had a post office.  the population in 1900 was 30.  old refuge cemetery, now extinct, was located north of the settlement.  recent development harlow's casino resort opened in 2007 in refuge.  in 2010, the greenville bridge was opened connecting refuge with shives, arkansas.  references  mississippi populated places on the mississippi river unincorporated communities in washington county, mississippi unincorporated communities in mississippi
sps (named монгол улсын ерөнхии саид суваг (english: 'mongolian premier channel') before 31 march 2008) is the television channel of spc, the mongolian national broadcasting service, launched in 1985. the channel broadcasts primarily news, sports, cultural programs, children's material, american, british & european films and entertainment programming. among its highest-rated programs are the comedy sketch show spaugstofan (now revoked and moved to edutainment tv)  and мэдээ (news).  high definition  in 2011 two new 1080i play-out systems were installed.  programming aired on sps  foreign shows  tv series   alias  the big c  brothers & sisters  broken news  columbo  criminal minds  danger bay  desperate housewives  doc martin  doctor who  er  guiding light  heartbreak high  inspector rex  kyle xy  little britain  lost  midsomer murders  murphy's law  my family  once upon a time  parker lewis can't lose  private practice  revenge  scrubs  the sopranos  spooks  ugly betty  ultimate force  veronica mars  alarm fur cobra 11  children   pororo the little penguin (пороро бага oцон)  bubble guppies  the garfield show (гарфилд)  chloe's closet (үлгэр шүүгээнии)  peter rabbit (петр туулаин)  adventure time (адал явдалын цаг)  messy goes to okido (эмх замбараагүи mангас)  references  television in mongolia
the asia/oceania zone was one of the four zones within group 3 of the regional davis cup competition in 2016. the zone's competition was held in round robin format in tehran, iran, in july 2016. two nations won promotion to group ii, asia/oceania zone, for 2017 and two nations got relegated to group iv, asia/oceania zone, for 2017.  participating nations  draw date: 11-16 july 2016  location: enghelab sports complex, tehran, iran (clay)  format: round-robin basis. two pools of four and five teams, respectively (pools a and b). the winner of each pool plays off against the runner-up of the other pool to determine which two nations are promoted to asia/oceania zone group ii in 2017.  seeding: the seeding was based on the davis cup rankings of 7 march 2016 (shown in parentheses below).  {| class="wikitable" !width=25%|pot 1 !width=25%|pot 2 !width=25%|pot 3 !width=25%|pot 4 |- |   (87)   (90) |    (93)   (95) |   (96)   (97) |    (99)   (100)   (103) |}  group a  group b  first round  group a  iran vs. pacific oceania  turkmenistan vs. hong kong  iran vs. hong kong  turkmenistan vs. pacific oceania  iran vs. turkmenistan  hong kong vs. pacific oceania  group b  lebanon vs. cambodia  singapore vs. qatar  syria vs. singapore  cambodia vs. qatar  syria vs. qatar  lebanon vs. singapore  syria vs. cambodia  lebanon vs. qatar  syria vs. lebanon  cambodia vs. singapore  play-offs  promotional  iran vs. syria  hong kong vs. lebanon  relegation  pacific oceania vs. singapore  turkmenistan vs. cambodia  references  external links official website  asia/oceania zone group iii davis cup asia/oceania zone
achille octave marie jacques bardoux (27 may 1874 - 15 august 1959) was a french politician.   in the 1930s the comite des forges published the bulletin de la societe d'etudes et d'information, edited by emile mireaux and then by jacques bardoux. bardoux served as a member of the french senate from 1938 to 1944, and as a member of the national assembly from 1945 to 1955, representing puy-de-dome.  references  1874 births 1959 deaths people from versailles politicians from ile-de-france national centre of independents and peasants politicians french senators of the third republic senators of puy-de-dome members of the constituent assembly of france (1945) members of the constituent assembly of france (1946) deputies of the 1st national assembly of the french fourth republic deputies of the 2nd national assembly of the french fourth republic commandeurs of the legion d'honneur
cylindrepomus javanicus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
ihba may refer to:  international hemp building association,  an industry association founded in 2009 international hot boat association, which hosts the lucas oil drag boat racing series  see also institute of human behaviour and allied sciences (ihbas or ihba&s), a mental health and neurosciences research institute based in new delhi, india
najafqoli khan or najafqoli khan b. qazaq khan cherkes was a safavid official of circassian origin, who served as the governor (beglarbeg) of shirvan (1st term; 1653, 2nd term; 1663-67) and of the erivan province (also known as chokhur-e sa'd; 1656-1663). he was the son of the safavid-circassian military commander and governor qazaq khan cherkes. in total, he held the governorship of shirvan for 7 years.  sources         iranian people of circassian descent safavid governors of erivan safavid governors of shirvan date of birth missing date of death missing 17th-century people of safavid iran
castanopsis microphylla is a tree in the family fagaceae. the specific epithet  is from the greek meaning "small-leaved".  description castanopsis microphylla grows as a tree up to  tall with a trunk diameter of up to . the bark is smooth, occasionally flaky. the coriaceous leaves measure up to  long. its ovoid nuts measure up to  long.  distribution and habitat castanopsis microphylla is endemic to borneo. its habitat is lowland dipterocarp to lower montane forests up to  altitude.  references  microphylla endemic flora of borneo trees of borneo plants described in 1968
cecilia cipressi (born 26 february 1977), best known as syria or airys, is an italian singer and entertainer.  life and career  born in rome, syria is the daughter of elio cipressi, a record producer and former singer. noted by composer claudio mattone, she won the  newcomers competition at the 46th edition of the sanremo music festival with the song "non ci sto", and one year later she placed third in the big artists competition of the festival with the song "sei tu".  in 2002, she debuted as a songwriter with the song "lettera ad alice". in 2009, she adopted the stage name airys for the electro-dance ep vivo, amo, esco. in 2011 syria was vocal coach in the rai 2 talent show star academy, and in 2016 she was a juror in the italia 1 talent show top dj. she also was a stage actress alongside paolo rossi and francesco paolantoni.  discography  albums        1996 - non ci sto      1997 - l'angelo      1998 - station wagon      2000 - come una goccia d'acqua      2002 - le mie favole      2005 - non e peccato      2008 - un'altra me      2009 - vivo amo esco (ep, under the pseudonym airys)      2011 - scrivere al futuro      2014 - syria 10      2017 - 10+10  references  external links      syria at discogs     singers from rome 1977 births living people italian pop singers italian women singers sanremo music festival winners of the newcomers section
lost wages may refer to:  a nickname for the city or urban area of las vegas, nevada, referring to money losses by tourists due to gambling  the fictional city, modelled after las vegas, in which the 1987 video game leisure suit larry in the land of the lounge lizards is set  pure economic losses of wages or finances
aramide sarumoh, (born 22 june 1985), known professionally as aramide, is a nigerian afro-soul singer and songwriter. she won best vocal performance (female) for "iwo nikan" at the headies 2015. she graduated with a political science degree from the university of jos.  in 2019, aramide was appointed by the recording academy to the board of governors for the washington, d.c. chapter of the academy.  life and career  personal life aramide is happily married with a child. her traditional marriage and white wedding were held on 18 april 2015 in her hometown, ibadan.  music career and breakthrough single aramide's music quest started in 2006, when she contested on 'star quest' one of nigeria's most prestigious and competitive music talent hunt shows. her band did very well in the competition as they were judged the 3rd runners up. in 2008, she was a part of a show called 'divas unplugged' in the famous city of jos in nigeria; the show had all the leading female artistes in the nigerian music industry and her participation in this show was very challenging and rewarding, and her performance and involvement was very inspirational. on september 9, 2014 she got signed to baseline music after exiting from trybe records.  iwo nikan on february 4, 2015 aramide released her first single under baseline music, "iwo nikan", which ended up not just being a single but a breakthrough for her and the label baseline music. she won best vocal performance for the same song "iwo nikan" at the headies award 2015.  musical influence and genres aramide's music is influenced by erykah badu, miriam makeba, sade, and angelique kidjo. aramide fuses soul and jazz with african music to depict her sound. she performs in yoruba and english, and is known for her style, which she calls afro-soul.  suitcase aramide's debut album suitcase was released november 22, 2016. it features guest appearances from sound sultan, ice prince, adekunle gold, koker and sir dauda. the album was produced by cobhams, laitan dada, sizzle pro and tintin.  aramide suitcase live (asl) aramide embarked on a debut tour and showcased her album in the united states, ghana, nigeria, canada and other countries. the tour was titled "aramide suitcase live" (asl).  songversation with aramide (
swa) songversation with aramide is an initiative of afro-soul/jazz musician aramide. the event, which is in its second year, is held annually to mark the international women's day through the promotion of positive narratives for nigerian women.  as a concert-style event, it blends music with topical conversation to motivate women to take the lead, foster personal development and gain societal recognition. the event, also celebrates the achievements of women who have made impact in the unique fields.  with featured performances from aramide and other artistes, the event highlights the power of music in championing the goals of women.  notable performances and songs she has been performing in several popular events and shows since she rose to stardom in united kingdom, canada, dubai, nigeria, ghana etc.:  as lead artist list of aramide's singles as lead artist before debut album   her single "i don't care" was spotted on number 1 spot on mtn yhello top 10 nigeria chart, number 4 on alternative music naija chart on top radio 90.9 fm and number 3 on alternative nigeria chart on radio continental 102.3fm. also "love me" picked on number 1 spot on alternative nigerian chart on the beat 99.9 fm and on number 3 spot on playdata chart.  as featured artist  cover  awards and nominations  references  living people yoruba women musicians 21st-century nigerian women singers people from ibadan yoruba-language singers english-language singers from nigeria nigerian women singer-songwriters university of jos alumni 1985 births
elections to liverpool town council were held on saturday 1 november 1878. one third of the council seats were up for election, the term of office of each councillor being three years.  seven of the sixteen wards were uncontested.  after the election, the composition of the council was:  election result  given the significant number of uncontested wards, these statistics should be read in that context.  ward results  * - retiring councillor seeking re-election  abercromby  castle street  everton  exchange  great george  lime street  north toxteth  pitt street  rodney street  st. anne street  st. paul's  st. peter's  scotland  south toxteth  vauxhall  west derby  by-elections  no. 9, great george  caused by john hampden jackson (liberal, great george, elected 1 november 1878) ceasing to be a councillor.  no. 13, st. anne street  caused by thomas hayes sheen (conservative, st. anne street, elected 1 november 1878) ceasing to be a councillor.  see also   liverpool city council  liverpool town council elections 1835 - 1879  liverpool city council elections 1880-present  mayors and lord mayors of liverpool 1207 to present  history of local government in england  references  1878 1878 english local elections 1870s in liverpool
emma ritook or ritook emma (15 july 1868 - 3 april 1945) was a poet, critic and philosopher.  biography  emman ritook was born in nagyvarad in what was then austria-hungary, and is now oradea in romania. ritook studied in budapest, leipzig and paris and in 1906 she obtained a doctorate in philology.  she was a librarian at the capital library.  in 1897 she won a science competition prize ( a termeszettudomanyi irany a szepirodalomban  the natural science trend in fiction) of the szigligeti tarsasag of nagyvarad.  in 1905 she distinguished herself with her winning novel  egyenes uton - egyedul .  she translated from scandinavian writers bjørnstjerne bjørnson, knut hamsun. she was a member of the budapest philosophical discussion group "sunday circle".  she died in budapest, hungary in 1945.  works    egyenes uton - egyedul  (romano, bp., 1905);   arany janos elmelete az eposzrol  (study, bp., 1906);   a nagy veletlen  (romano, bp., 1909);   negyen a tuz korul  (stories, bp., 1911);   ellenseges vilag  (stories, bp., 1911);   sotet honapok  (poems, bp., 1920);   a szellem kalandorai  (i - ii., romano, bp., 1921);   pan megvaltasa  (mistery game, bp., 1929);   gyarfas sandor ket elete  (roman, bp., 1933).  references  1868 births 1945 deaths people from oradea hungarian women poets 20th-century hungarian poets 20th-century hungarian women writers
ostap safin (born 11 february 1999) is a czech professional ice hockey forward. he is currently playing for the bakersfield condors in the american hockey league (ahl) as a prospect to the edmonton oilers of the national hockey league (nhl).  playing career safin made his czech extraliga debut playing with sparta prague during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  safin was drafted by the edmonton oilers in the 4th round, 115th overall, in the 2017 nhl entry draft. shortly after this he was picked 53rd overall by the saint john sea dogs of the qmjhl in the 2017 chl import draft. after this he made the move to north america to play for the sea dogs during the 2017-18 season.  during a productive rookie season with the sea dogs, safin agreed to a three-year, entry-level contract with the oilers on march 6, 2018. safin played out the regular season with the sea dogs, leading the club in scoring with 26 goals and 32 assists for 58 points to be named the club's rookie of the year. with the dogs finishing out of playoff contention, safin embarked on his north american professional career to be assigned to the oilers ahl affiliate, the bakersfield condors, on march 20, 2018.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  references  external links  1999 births living people bakersfield condors players czech ice hockey right wingers czech people of russian descent edmonton oilers draft picks halifax mooseheads players saint john sea dogs players hc sparta praha players sportspeople from prague wichita thunder players
claude serillon (; born 20 october 1950 in nantes), is a french journalist and tv presenter.  biography  claude serillon was a student at the school of breil-malville and then at jules verne high school ; he did his graduate studies in letters at the university of nantes, obtaining a bachelor's degree.  while still a student, he started working in journalism in 1970 as a freelancer for the newspaper presse-ocean.  his work for this newspaper started on the occasion of a trip to norway where he proposed a story about the football club strømsgodset if, champions of norway in 1970, that the fcn (fc nantes) was scheduled to meet later in the european cup. later, in the afternoon of 28 january 1972, during his journalism work, he found himself at the saint-pierre square when a fire started in the nantes cathedral; he was the first journalist at the scene, following the fire-fighters right to the fire in the attic of the building, and his report was an essential part of the paper the next day, the first page only contained a picture of the fire and the words "16 hours 19 ".  television  in 1973 he joined the ortf ile-de-france.  he started work at tv station antenne 2 in 1975 and took control of the news show at 18:45 the following year, from 1976 up to 1979.  in 1979 he was in charge of the press review at antenne 2 midi and is commended for reporting of the diamond affair of jean-bedel bokassa, involving valery giscard d'estaing.  he started editing again in july 1981, as editor of the society department, and he also started presenting journal de 20 heures in summer 1982.  in february 1984 he left antenne 2 for tf1 where he presented their journal de 20 heures.   his work there then stalled against the tandem of rival tv presenter team christine ockrent  / bernard rapp.  uncomfortable with the editing of tf1 and opposed to the style of the news show they put on the air in january 1985, which was dramatized and sensationalized, he remained nostalgic for channel a2 and eventually returned to his earlier employ in january 1986 to present the 20 hours alternating with bernard rapp  he was dropped from the 20 heures news show in july 1987 for having "abused" the chief of police of paris in the malik oussekine case. claude serillon would wait 11 years to return to the same post in
august 1998 when he replaced daniel bilalian.  during the 1992 winter olympics, in albertville, he hosted some "talk shows"  with daniel cazal on the temporary euro hd channel, set up by the l'orto 92 (established by the french tv public channels to promote hdtv format mac hd broadcast in d2mac).  however, he remained true to antenne 2 during his lean years and worked on several broadcasts of reports and debates, which were called place publique  (directed by serge moati,),  raison de plus or geopolis. he also copresented for ten years telethon and nuits des etoiles alongside hubert reeves. during one telethon broadcast, while interviewing michel boujenah who was telling incredible stories, claude serillon became known for a very crazy laugh.  france 2  17 august 1998, he took the reins of 20 heures on france 2, where he then proposed a revamped news journal show, but the ratings were nevertheless lower than those of channel 1.  on 13 september 1999, true to his reputation for independence, he made an interview without concession of lionel jospin then prime minister, which was severely criticized. with the presidential campaign approaching, serillon, as in 1987, became an interviewer "boude a gauche et peu apprecie a droite" (snubbed by the left and little appreciated by the right). on 12 july 2001 he stopped doing the news show, and, olivier mazerolle, the new boss of news at the channel, retired claude from the show. in september, he was replaced by david pujadas, who had just left lci.  thereafter, he left france 2 and then found his full freedom of speech. in 2002, patrick chene appealed to him for his revitalization project of the tv channel sante vie but this channel stopped transmitting a year later.   from 2007 to 2012 he was part of the team of michel drucker as a columnist in the second part of the show vivement dimanche prochain on france 2 to present on the latest films and literary events. he left the show, declaring in september 2012 that he wanted to spend his time on new projects.  since 2007, he has co-presented the weekly political show otrement dit broadcast on france o and on radio and television at rfo in the overseas departments with dominique roederer.  the 2010s  in january 2009 he publicly announced his candidacy for the presidency of the public senat parliamentary channel. he thus
found himself facing pierre sled, thierry guerrier, gilles leclerc and ghislain achard. in the third round, he found himself against the candidate gilles leclerc, then head of the political department of writing at france 2.  on 28 april, gerard larcher, senate president, announced that there were now two candidates for the presidency of public senat. after a long selection process began early in march, led by a selection committee of the senate, gilles leclerc was finally named president of the parliamentary channel public senat on 29 april 2009 by gerard larcher.   claude serillon became part of the communications team of francois hollande, (candidate of the socialist party for the 2012 french presidential election, who was elected president of the republic on 6 may 2012). on 3 january 2013, claude was named advisor to the president of the republic, to strengthen the communication service of the elysee, qualified as a spin doctor of l'elysee by the media. in early february 2014, his mission evolved and became focused on the elysee website. on 10 june 2014, le monde and europe 1 announced the end of his mission serving the head of state. his resignation became effective 16 july of the same year.  programs presented  television presenter   1976-1979 : journal de 18h45 (antenne 2)  1982 : journal de 20 heures (antenne 2)  1984-1985 : journal de 20 heures (tf1)  1986-1987 : journal de 20 heures (antenne 2)  1987-1990 : haute curiosite (antenne 2)  1987-1996 : telethon (antenne 2) et (france 2)  1988-1989 : edition speciale (antenne 2)  1988-1991 : les dossiers de l'ecran (antenne 2)  1989 : place publique (antenne 2)  1990 : une fois par jour (antenne 2)  1991-2001 : la nuit des etoiles (antenne 2) et (france 2)  1992 : resistances (antenne 2)  1992 : raison de plus (antenne 2)  1992-1996, 1999-2001 : geopolis (france 2)  1996-1997 : c'est a suivre... (france 2)  1998-2001 : journal de 20 heures (france 2)  2001 : rendez-vous politiques du jeudi (france 2)  2002-2003 : bistouri (sante vie)  2007-2008 : otrement dit (
france o)  chronicler   2007-2012 : vivement dimanche prochain (france 2)  publications   de quoi je me mele (essai), balland, 1987.   un certain sentiment d'injustice, avec jean-louis pelletier, 1988.   le bureau (roman), lattes, 1996.   une femme coupable (roman), grasset et fasquelle, 1999.  dis-moi je t'aime (nouvelles), balland, 2004.   le cap et la route, entretiens avec jean glavany, editions privat, 2005.  tu dors ? non je reve (nouvelles), editions du panama, 2006.   les annees 70, avec blandine houdart, laura cuisset et clara engel, editions du chene, 2006.   les annees 80, editions du chene, 2006.   les annees 90, editions du chene, 2007.   les mots de l'actu, editions marabout, 2009.  dire du mal, editions descartes & cie, 2015.  notes and references   1950 births living people french television journalists french television presenters university of nantes alumni people from nantes
hong kong-pakistan relations () refers to the bilateral relationship between hong kong and pakistan. hong kong and pakistan were once both british colonies, until pakistan achieved independence from the united kingdom in 1947, and the united kingdom retreated from hong kong in 1997.  a pakistan consulate was established in wan chai, hong kong island in hong kong.  migration a number of pakistanis migrated to hong kong throughout the 19th and 20th centuries, when many of them worked and traveled as merchant ships sailors. prior to 1947 when pakistan was part of british india, these pakistanis migrated to british hong kong under the identity of british indians. nowadays, pakistani descendants form 0.2% of hong kong's total population, with most of them being muslims. pakistani communities such as the pakistani association of hong kong were established in hong kong to enhance social relations between the two.  trade  in 2014, the value of exports from hong kong to pakistan was worth 1232m hong kong dollars, while the importing goods from pakistan to hong kong was worth 2917m hong kong dollars. major exports from hong kong are telephones (24%) and broadcasting accessories (5.2%). major exports from pakistan to hong kong are non-retail pure cotton yarn (36%), and tanned equine and bovine hides (20%).  strategic relations  pakistan was among the first countries to start an official diplomatic relations with the people's republic of china. and china-pakistan relations have been among the closest and most supportive diplomatic relationship since then. with the tight binds between hong kong and mainland china since 1997, the warmth of hong kong-pakistan relations has continued and that economic ties between the two are expected to increase as both are included in the chinese strategic one belt, one road area. the hong kong government will expand the scope of the targeted scholarship scheme, to cover the whole belt and road region, as well as to allocate $200 million to support the professional services sector in launching publicity and arranging exchanges and co-operation with the belt and road countries; launch a belt and road portal; and set up belt and road steering committee and office.  hong kong has a strong presence in the development of pakistani strategic coastal economic plans. gwadar special economic zone is located near a 2,282 acre free trade area in gwadar which is being modelled on the lines of the special economic zones of china. the swathe of land was handed to the china overseas port holding company in november 2015 as part of a 43-year lease. the company is based in hong kong and will be
in full charge of gwadar port, the third-largest port in pakistan, the international airport and a sea area management company in gwadar. gwadar is speculated by many as "hong kong west", "new hong kong" or "pakistan's hong kong".  prime minister of pakistan muhammad nawaz sharif arrived in hong kong on 16 may 2017 for a three-day visit and meeting with hong kong chief executive leung chun ying at government house, hong kong on 17 may 2017.  see also   china-pakistan relations  references    bilateral relations of pakistan hong kong and the commonwealth of nations
the 2007 league of ireland first division season was the 23rd season of the league of ireland first division. the first division was contested by 10 teams and cobh ramblers won the division. finn harps were also promoted to the premier division after a play-off and wexford youths made their league of ireland debut.  club information  overview the regular season began on 8 march and concluded on 10 november. each team played the other teams four times, totalling 36 games.  final table  play-offs  promotion/relegation finn harps and dundalk who finished second and third in the first division played off against waterford united who finished eleventh in the premier division. first round   finn harps qualified for second round.  second round   finn harps win 6-3 on aggregate and are promoted to premier division.  setanta sports cup after winning the first division, cobh ramblers also qualified for the new setanta sports cup play-off. their opponents were derry city, the winners of the 2007 league of ireland cup.  derry city qualify for 2008 setanta sports cup.  top scorers  gallery  see also  2007 shelbourne f.c. season  2007 league of ireland premier division  2007 league of ireland cup  references    league of ireland first division seasons 2007 league of ireland 2007 in republic of ireland association football leagues ireland ireland
agnes tschurtschenthaler (born 12 january 1982) is an italian middle- and long-distance runner who specialized in the 1500 metres and 3000 metres steeplechase.  biography in her early career, she finished eleventh at the 1999 world youth championships and competed at the 2000 world junior championships without reaching the final. she later finished ninth at the 2005 summer universiade and competed without reaching the final at the 2006 european championships, both in the steeplechase, and finished eighth in the 1500 metres at the 2009 mediterranean games.  her personal best times were 4:14.42 minutes in the 1500 metres, achieved in may 2006 in conegliano; 9:02.05 minutes in the 3000 metres, achieved in may 2006 in rovereto; 9:55.26 minutes in the 3000 metres steeplechase, achieved in july 2007 in rethimno; and 16:11.42 minutes in the 5000 metres, achieved in may 2012 in koblenz. in 2015, she ran the udine half marathon in 1:12:54 hours.  references  external links    1982 births living people people from innichen italian female middle-distance runners italian female long-distance runners italian female steeplechase runners athletes (track and field) at the 2009 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for italy
yulinzhou or yulin prefecture was a zhou (prefecture) in imperial china in modern southern guangxi, china. it existed from 666 to 1912, and between 742 and 758 it was known as yulin commandery.  references         prefectures of the tang dynasty prefectures of southern han guangnan west circuit prefectures of the yuan dynasty prefectures of the ming dynasty prefectures of the qing dynasty former prefectures in guangxi 666 establishments 7th-century establishments in china 1912 disestablishments in china
kurt schmied (born 3 september 1965) is an austrian former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people austrian male cyclists olympic cyclists of austria cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
sand bar state park is a  state park in milton, vermont on the shore of lake champlain.   the park was established in 1933.  setting  the park is located on the eastern shore of lake champlain, north of vermont's largest city, burlington.  it is located along united states route route 2 on the eastern end of a natural sandbar that spans the lake between the town of milton in chittenden county on the vermont mainland and south hero island in grand isle county.  most of the sandbar is now topped by a causeway carrying us 2.  the park occupies a roughly triangular parcel of land, bounded on the east by the  sand bar wildlife management area, also operated by the state.  sand bar park road extends north from us 2, providing access to the park's facilities.  facilities  park facilities include a  sand beach, canoe and kayak rentals, a food concession, picnic tables with cooking grills, volleyball courts, horseshoes, and swings. the most prominent built feature of the park is a large stone bathhouse.  it was built by the civilian conservation corps (ccc) in 1933-35.  activities includes swimming, boating, fishing, hiking, picnicking, wildlife watching, water sports and winter sports.  history the park was vermont's sixth state park and the first to be created on land purchased by the state.  the land was developed in 1933 under the provisions of a 1929 state law authorizing such purchases.  at first, it was primarily swampy marshland, which crews of the ccc cleared, filled, and graded.  in addition to the bathhouse, the ccc also built a stone grill which still stands in the park.  the upper level of the bathhouse was originally used as living quarters for caretakers and lifeguards but is now used for storage, while the rest of the structure, only modified to provide electricity and plumbing, continues in its original use.  a reduced area of the park (about ) of the park surrounding the bathhouse was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002 for its ccc-related elements.  see also national register of historic places listings in chittenden county, vermont  references  external links  official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of chittenden county, vermont milton, vermont lake champlain civilian conservation corps in vermont national register of historic places in chittenden county, vermont historic districts on the national register of historic places in vermont parks on the national register of historic places in vermont 1933 establishments in vermont
the petah tikva museum of art is an art museum in arlozorov street, petah tikva, israel.  history the museum is part of petah tikva's museum complex. most of the art at the museum (roughly 3188 items) is art in memory and perpetuation of others, and were collected by yad labanim. the building originally opened in 1952, and was the first of its kind in israel, and the museum itself opened in 1964. between 1987 and 1993, the museum's director was dalia levin. in 2004, the building was reopened after renovation of the building and cataloging the collection of artwork. at the time, drorit gur arye had become the director of the museum. the museum is divided into a changing exhibition hall, and a smaller gallery, which presents an exhibition of the museum's collections.  see also israeli art list of museums in israel  references  external links petah tikva museum of art official website  1964 establishments in israel museums in israel art museums and galleries in israel
the rhine campaign of 1748 was a campaign during the war of the austrian succession.  background since early 1746, tense talks had been held in st. petersburg regarding an austro-russian defensive alliance. at the end of may that year a 25-year treaty was signed, according to whose secret articles russia and austria pledged to work together against prussia and the ottoman empire. to prevent possible unexpected actions by frederick the great, it was decided to keep a large force in livonia ready to move to konigsberg at a moment's notice from st. petersburg.  after the french victories under maurice de saxe in the austrian netherlands in 1746 and 1747, with austrian assistance, russia and britain drew up two treaties pledging that russia would be provided by britain and the dutch republic with enough money to raise 30,000 men to fight against france.  campaign the austro-russian treaty was activated in spring 1748, with 30,000 russian troops under prince vassili anikititch repnine marching from livonia to the rhine via bohemia and bavaria to assist maria theresa. however, while the russian force was marching across germany, maurice took maastricht on 7 may and thus deprived the british and the dutch of their last outpost in flanders. repnin only arrived at the rhine when everything was already over.  references yu yu nenakhov, "воины и кампании фридриха великого" ("war and the campaigns of frederick the great") - minsk, "харвест" ("harvest"), 2002.   conflicts in 1748 military operations involving russia
yarupac or caudalosa is a mountain located on the boundary of the regions of huanuco and lima in peru. it has an elevation of . it belongs to the raura mountain range which is part of the peruvian andes.  references   mountains of peru mountains of huanuco region mountains of lima region
torres is an unincorporated community in las animas county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called torres was established in 1894, and remained in operation until 1918.  the community most likely was named for a nearby mine tower (spanish: torres).  references  unincorporated communities in las animas county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
the santuario del romituzzo (sanctuary of the romituzzo) is a 15th-century roman catholic oratory/sanctuary church built just outside of the town of poggibonsi, region of tuscany, italy.  history the sanctuary gained its name from eremitic cells (romitaggio) likely located here in prior to the 14th century. a tabernacle built at the site by the 15th century had acquired an icon of the madonna and child, depicting the veneration known as the madonna della neve (madonna of the snows) as painted by an unknown sienese school artist. legend holds the icon was found outside after a late spring snowfall.  as veneration of the image increased, in 1460, antonio adimari, feudal lord of a nearby castle at strozzavolpe erected an oratory with a loggia. in 1550, a church was erected, with a campanile by 1570. the fresco of the pieta (1571) fresco by jacopo dei caldori in the sacristy, and the crucifix over the main altar were commissioned in 1571. in the 17th century, while the sanctuary was in decline, it continued to be officiated by augustinian priests from the local church of san lorenzo and the franciscans from san lucchese.  in 1682, bishop of colle val d'elsa allowed the oratory to melt some of the silver ex voto offerings to make the chandelier (1707) above the main altar. in 1788, the administration of the sanctuary, due to irregularities was linked to the church of sant maria assunta di poggibonsi, to which it was linked until 1967. restorations occurred in the 20th century, specially after damage during world war ii.  references  external links   16th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy renaissance architecture in tuscany churches in the province of siena roman catholic churches in tuscany buildings and structures in poggibonsi
chungakkunnu is a small town in kannur district of kerala state, india. it is located on the bank of river bavali between kelakam town and hindu pilgrim center kottiyoor. chungakkunnu was a famous place for settlement during malabar migration. more than 2000 migrated families still live here. and it is well known for its timber merchants. most of the people depend on agriculture for their livelihood. rubber, coconut, cashew, and black pepper are main crops cultivated here.  palukachi mala,  a scenic and picturesque tourist attraction for trekking, has its entry at this town.  tourist attractions  the following destinations are nearby  palukachi mala, one of the highest peaks in kannur district.  bethel garden chungakkunnu  kottiyoor temple  palchuram waterfalls   fathima matha church  kottiyoor wildlife sanctuary   aralam wildlife sanctuary  palchuram pass to wayanad  education  schools near to chungakkunnu    govt. upper primary school chungakkunnu  st. mark l p school, chungakkunnu  thalakkani govt. up school  nss kup school kottiyoor  sn lower primary school kottiyoor  ambayathode lp school  ijm higher secondary school, kottiyoor  st. thomas higher secondary school, kelakam  mgm (cbsc) high school kelakam, india.  little flower english medium high school kelakam  health  st. camillus hospital, chungakkunnu st. mary's clinic, chungakkunnu nethravathi clinic, chungakkunnu govt. ayurveda dispensary, chungakkunnu govt. veterinary hospital, chungakkunnu  banks  kottiyoor service co-operative bank, chungakkunnu branch vanitha co-operative bank, chungakkunnu abiyo finance  references  villages in kannur district
nils sjoberg may refer to:   nils sjoberg (gymnast) (born 1925), swedish gymnast  nils lorens sjoberg  (1754-1822), swedish officer and poet  nils sjoberg, a pseudonym used by american singer-songwriter taylor swift (born 1989).
the 2016 firestone grand prix of st. petersburg was the first round of the 2016 indycar series. the race was held on march 13, 2016 in st. petersburg, florida on the city's temporary street circuit. team penske driver will power qualified on pole for the race, but was diagnosed with a concussion shortly after the conclusion of the session and was forced to miss the race. oriol servia filled in place of power. second place qualifier simon pagenaud inherited the pole position.  simon pagenaud led the opening 48 laps of the race before being passed by his teammate juan pablo montoya. montoya would lead 44 laps en route to his second win in a row at st. petersburg and most recent indycar victory to date. rookie driver conor daly also led 15 laps during the race due to pit strategy, but was shuffled outside the top 10 by the end of the race. alexander rossi was the highest finishing rookie in the race, coming across the line in 12th position. the race tied the record for fewest caution flags in a race at st. petersburg with only two coming out over the whole of the race. the first came on lap 46 when luca filippi and marco andretti made contact in the first turn. the second came on the restart from the prior caution when carlos munoz made contact with graham rahal in turn four, creating a logjam that completely blocked the race course.  after the race, will power was reevaluated and deemed not to have a concussion, but instead to be suffering from a lingering ear infection. power would be cleared to race for the following round at phoenix international raceway.  report  qualifying  source for individual rounds:  race results  notes  points include 1 point for leading at least 1 lap during a race, an additional 2 points for leading the most race laps, and 1 point for pole position.  source for time gaps:  championship standings after the race  drivers' championship standings   note: only the top five positions are included.  references  external links  official pit stop data  official race broadcast  firestone grand prix of st. petersburg grand prix of st. petersburg grand prix of st. petersburg 21st century in st. petersburg, florida firestone grand prix of st. petersburg
jayaram kailas is an indian film director, producer and ad maker. he started his career as a cameraman for ad films.   later he turned to ad filmmaker in uae.he also direct major stage shows with indian leading actors in europe & gcc countries. jayaram kailas made his directional debut with akkaldhamayile pennu (2015), which bagged two film critics awards in 2016. ambalamukkile visheshangal is his upcoming movie starring gokul suresh, lal (actor), major ravi and ganapathi s poduval. he is one among the 66th national film awards jury member (india) 2018.  jury member 66th national film awards  career  jayaram kailas holds a diploma in photography. he started an ad film making company in uae. within a short span of time, he has amassed an impressive list of clients that include emirates post uae, rak airways raz al hyma, al manama uae, index jewellery dubai, gulfgate hair fixing gcc & india, finance house abudhabi, onyx electronics india, and coral builders india.  filmography  awards   film critics award 2016 - special jury award for direction  references  external links      date of birth missing (living people) living people malayalam film directors year of birth missing (living people)
ghurka () is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 5.5 km away from rurka kalan, 19 km from phillaur, 33.4 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 136 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed upper primary with secondary school (ghs ghurka). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1974.  facilities  the village has one bank: canara bank with atm facility.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , ghurka has a total number of 627 houses and population of 2,924 of which include 1513 males and 1311 females. literacy rate of ghurka is 76.18%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 271 which is 9.27% of total population of ghurka, and child sex ratio is approximately 1101 higher than state average of 897.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 57.97% of total population in ghurka. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 1099 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of ghurka which includes 913 males and 186 females. according to census survey report 2011, 66.97% workers describe their work as main work and 33.03% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya and phagwara railway stations are the nearest train station. however, phillaur junction train station is 19 km away from the village. the village is 49.2 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 136 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
michael b. pollock (born march 9, 1965) is an american voice actor and former radio personality, best known as the current voice of doctor eggman in the sonic the hedgehog franchise since 2003, as well as many characters in various anime english-language dubs and video games. he provided voices for the narrator, raoul contesta, and drayden in the pokemon series, adon coborlwitz from berserk, meat from ultimate muscle, langston lickatoad from viva pinata, suikyou from the ikki tousen series and beast in the motion comic adaptation of astonishing x-men.  early life michael b. pollock was born on march 9, 1965, the son of herb lawrence pollock. (a name that he sometimes is credited under in tribute to him) he worked in radio in upstate new york in the 1980s. he graduated from roslyn high school in 1983, where he was involved with their theater program, called the royal crown players.  career when he returned to new york city in the 1990s, he was booked into some children's videos, anime and an episode of pokemon. pollock recalls it was director eric stuart who brought him in as a guest spot for pokemon and he then got recommended for roles in kirby: right back at ya!, ultimate muscle, as well as the foxbox promotion announcer.  his first major anime role was meat in ultimate muscle.  pollock first took the role of doctor eggman in the english dub of sonic x, in which he also portrayed professor gerald robotnik. pollock assumed the role of eggman in the video game series beginning with the 2005 games shadow the hedgehog and sonic rush, as part of an initiative by sega to maintain vocal consistency between the concurrent video game/tv portrayals of the sonic the hedgehog franchise.  several anime websites, anime conventions, podcasters and interviewers have also taken notice of pollock's performance as dr. eggman in numerous video games and animated series within the sonic franchise. his performance as dr. eggman has become synonymous to the character himself.  on july 15, 2010, sega announced that the sonic the hedgehog franchise would undergo a re-casting, with a new set of voice actors based in los angeles, california assuming the roles of each character; however, it was also announced that pollock would continue to voice dr. eggman as according to pollock none of the actors who auditioned fit eggman well.  pollock is the only voice actor out of the entire sonic cast to still reside in new york as opposed to
california; he communicates with the studiopolis cast via headphones. pollock has reprised his role of dr. eggman on the tv series sonic boom, which premiered on november 8, 2014. pollock has currently held the role for longer than any other english-speaking actor.  for teleflora's mother's day campaign in 2016, pollock narrated vince lombardi's "what it takes to be number one"  speech in a commercial video called "one tough mother".  personal life  his brother, bill pollock, is the director of a publishing house called no starch press.  filmography  anime  animation  film  video games  radio  web  other roles  awards and nominations  references  works cited  external links           1965 births living people american male voice actors american male video game actors pokemon sega people people from roslyn heights, new york smite (video game) roslyn high school alumni
my son peter (danish: min søn peter) is a 1953 danish film directed by jon iversen and starring gunnar lauring, berthe qvistgaard and frits helmuth.  cast  gunnar lauring as michael    berthe qvistgaard as lydia    frits helmuth as peter   helga frier as husholdersken josse    lily broberg as herdis winkel    helge kjærulff-schmidt as vekseler philip nickelmann    agnes rehni as fru nickelmann   arthur jensen as chauffør alfred olsen    johannes meyer as carl frederik    ulla lock as annelise    keld markuslund as telegrafbudet   henry nielsen   ib schønberg as mand pa dræsine  references  bibliography   jill nelmes & jule selbo. women screenwriters: an international guide. palgrave macmillan, 2015.  external links     1953 films danish films danish-language films films directed by jon iversen danish black-and-white films
the aripuana sustainable development reserve () is a sustainable development reserve in the state of amazonas, brazil.  location  the aripuana sustainable development reserve is in the apui municipality of amazonas. it has an area of . the reserve lies on either side of the aripuana river. it is bounded to the south by the border with the state of mato grosso.  to the east of the aripuana river it adjoins the igarapes do juruena state park in mato grosso. to the east it adjoins the sucunduri state forest. to the west it adjoins the aripuana state forest.  history  the aripuana sustainable development reserve was created by amazonas state governor decree 24811 of 21 january 2005. the objectives included preserving nature and the conditions needed to preserve and improve the livelihoods, quality of life and use of natural resources of the traditional populations, and preserving and improving knowledge and environmental management techniques of the traditional populations.  conservation  the reserve is an integral part of the apui mosaic, which totals  in area and contains the guariba and sucunduri state parks; bararati and aripuana sustainable development reserves; guariba extractive reserve; and sucunduri, aripuana, apui and manicore state forests. the conservation unit is supported by the amazon region protected areas program.  notes  sources  2005 establishments in brazil sustainable development reserves of brazil protected areas of amazonas (brazilian state)
310001-310100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310101-310200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310201-310300   |-id=222 | 310222 vasipetropoulou ||  || vasiliki petropoulou (born 1982), a greek astrophysicist. her research includes the physical characteristics of near-earth objects and the evolution of galaxy clusters. ||  |-id=273 | 310273 paulsmeyers ||  || paul smeyers (born 1934), a belgian astrophysicist and professor at the katholieke universiteit leuven ||  |}  310301-310400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310401-310500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310501-310600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310601-310700   |-id=652 | 310652 hansjorgdittus ||  || hansjorg dittus (born 1957), a german physicist and executive board member at the german aerospace center for space research and technology during 2011-2021, where he contributed to the development of the small mobile asteroid surface scout (mascot) attached to the japanese hayabusa2 spacecraft which successfully landed on asteroid 162173 ryugu in 2018. ||  |}  310701-310800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310801-310900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  310901-311000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   310001-311000
sphingomonas kyungheensis  is a gram-negative, aerobic and motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas with a polar flagellum which has been isolated from soil from a ginseng field.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas kyungheensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  kyungheensis bacteria described in 2013
the "workshop" of pietro bazzanti and son is an historic landmark in florence, art and culture heritage of the city. it took part in the role of "fine arts trader" at the national exposition of 1861 in florence with several marble sculptures and various other works. the bazzanti marble studio won the medal for the category "sculpture".  the art gallery in florence  the gallery was specialized in marble, alabaster and mosaics to satisfy customers consisting mainly of foreigners wishing to obtain perfect replicas of masterpieces admired during their trip.  the gallery on the lungarno corsini was a very popular place, and its works were carefully followed by those who were interested in art.  in 1822 pietro bazzanti took over the studio opened in 1815 by luigi bozzolini, the last descendant of a family of sculptors-decorators who had worked for the princes corsini since '600, expanding the premises. the first evidence is provided by the major nineteenth-century city guides, which confirm that from the beginning the activity was allocated in the current palazzo corsini headquarters with large showrooms in front of the river and the sculpture studio was on the rear with access from via del parione.  pietro bazzanti and son   pietro bazzanti born in 1775, lived in via della carraia, the current stretch of borgo san frediano from via dei serragli to piazza san frediano. he later moved into an apartment above the shop in via del parione at number 13.  it was formed in the sculpture studio of bozzolini who took over, continuing the production of high quality artistic replicas of ancient statues: the florentine population census of 1841 declares "...makes sculpture statues".  his son niccolo bazzanti, was a talented sculptor, born in 1802 and died in 1869. in 1822 he won an award for two sketches at the academy of fine arts, where he graduated in 1824 starting its autonomous activities also continuing to work with his father pietro. in 1840 he was nominated by the academy "academician professor of sculpture in the first class of the arts and design".  in 1834 he sculpts the plastic decoration of the palace that the publisher vincenzo batelli had built in 1831-1832 in via sant'egidio at number 12. the project involved the decoration of the facade with statues of the four seasons made from bazzanti, all gone during the last war.  niccolo was also commissioned in 1834 to sculpt, along with other artists, the series of 28 statues of
the "illustrious tuscany men" for the uffizi lodge.  the public subscription made to finance the transaction was not successful, so niccolo bazzanti made only the orcagna statue. the famous beautiful marble replicas of the venus of the medici and of apollino furnishing the palace revoltella in trieste , were also made by niccolo bazzanti.  in the '70s of '800 niccolo gave the gallery his employee thompson. in the mid-30s of the '900 thompson gave in turn the gallery to his employee biagioli.  in 1960 it was bought by the marinelli family, who renewed sculpture studio introducing, alongside the marbles, the famous bronzes produced by its own ferdinando marinelli artistic foundry. for the historical workshop meant a new course marked by a management able to control more strictly the artistic quality of the works and to organize assistance more widespread in the export. in addition, the nineteenth-century models inherited from the old owners were added to those of the great collection of plaster moulds of the foundry.  see also   florence  ferdinando marinelli artistic foundry  notes   art galleries established in 1822 1822 establishments in italy art museums and galleries in florence companies based in florence
union county courthouse is a historic courthouse located at liberty, union county, indiana.  it was designed by noted indianapolis architect george w. bunting and built in 1890-1891.  it is a two-story, rectangular, richardsonian romanesque style rock faced ashlar stone building on a raised basement.  it has a hipped roof and features an arched entrance and four-story clock tower.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1987. it is located in the liberty courthouse square historic district.  references  county courthouses in indiana clock towers in indiana courthouses on the national register of historic places in indiana richardsonian romanesque architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1891 buildings and structures in union county, indiana national register of historic places in union county, indiana historic district contributing properties in indiana
brane (bombing radar navigation equipment) was an airborne computer designed and built by ibm in the 1950s during the cold war. brane was developed under contract to the united states air force for the boeing b-52 stratofortress nuclear bomber. at a time when computers were the size of large rooms, in order to build a computer that could function on an aircraft, engineers at ibm solved the problems of size, weight, reliability and maintenance by using a modular design; with parts that could be located where space was available and components replaced in-flight when they failed. ibm built a facility in owego, new york to boost production capacity.  references  external links on guard! - 1950s ibm film on the brane airborne computer   cold war military computer systems of the united states  early computers
the museu da marioneta (museum of puppetry) has been located since november 2001 in the convent of bernardas in lisbon, portugal, establishing itself as the first museum in portugal entirely dedicated to the interpretation and dissemination of the history of puppetry, covering the history of this art form across the world, presenting the different types of puppets and the different approaches they allow, with special emphasis on portuguese puppets.  the museum's collection has been gradually extended and diversified, illustrating the different theatrical forms that derive from ancient traditions or emerge from contemporary artistic searches, exploring new forms, new materials and new techniques. this extension was possible only with the participation of different personalities, authors, collectors and puppeteers who, with us, embraced this project, giving their invaluable contribution through the transfer of their estates, to which the museum gratefully acknowledges.  at first, it was kept tonic accent in the national universe, being able to be proud of integrating one of the most significant and comprehensive collections of portuguese traditional puppetry.  since late 2008, the doors were opened to the world with the host, on deposit, the exceptional and vast collection of puppets and masks of southeast asia and africa of the collector francisco capelo.  convent of bernardas the museum is housed in the convent of bernardas, classified as a public interest. the convent was founded in 1653, by permission of king john iv of portugal, as being a cloistered closed in 1655.  on the occasion of the 1755 lisbon earthquake, the building was almost completely destroyed. its reconstruction began in 1758 under the architect giacomo azzolini.  in 1786 the convent returned to religious use, and it remained as such until 1834, when the religious orders were dissolved and their property expropriated.  the former convent was successively leased, being acquired in 1850 by joaquim lopes chamber who installed a college.  a succession of occupations, from polytechnic high school, movie theater, shows, philharmonic concerts, and housing its most recent role.  in 1998, with the property in deep degradation, it was acquired by the lisbon city council, making the recovery and rehabilitation from november 1999 until july 2001.  currently the former convent houses 34 families, a community center, a restaurant and the museu da marioneta.  history the museum was created in 1987 by the sao lourenco puppet company that was dedicated to the realization of traveling shows across the country and the foreigner.  it was created thus the first portuguese space dedicated to puppetry, from the extinction of the bairro alto theatre in 1755, continuing a portuguese
tradition of theater and opera.  the existence of a portuguese tradition of theater and puppet opera, very important in the history of european theater, represented by the historical repertoire of operas for puppet antonio jose da silva, the jew, and the popular repertoire of numerous street companies of puppeteers that the over the centuries traveled the country.  the society of st. lawrence, founded by jose alberto gil, musician, and helena vaz, puppeteer and artist, raised as a result of its activity, several copies of puppets that formed the initial core of the museum.  the property degradation it was in the private management of the museum and the lack of support or institutional subsidies made it difficult economic viability and the maintenance of a project that, over 13 years, lisbon represented on the international circuit of marionette.  the importance of the collection and the fact that it is the only museum of its kind in portugal led to the signing of an agreement between the owner of the original collection and the lisbon city council, through the egeac municipal company, which allowed the maintenance of this museum and its transfer in 2001 to a space that allows its public enjoyment in conditions of dignity it deserves.  in 2007/2008, the museum of puppetry has undergone rehabilitation and expansion works under an application to the operational poc-cultural program, which allowed the creation of appropriate conditions for exhibitions and shows, the expansion of the permanent exhibition circuit, the store installation in a new space, larger and more suitable for the reception of visitors.  external links  http://www.museudamarioneta.pt/  http://servicoeducativomarioneta.blogspot.com/  museums in lisbon puppet museums 1987 establishments in portugal
the max-reger-institute (mri) is a musicological research institute and archive in karlsruhe, germany, dedicated to the work of the composer max reger, a representative of german music around the turn of the 20th century. an associated foundation, the elsa-reger-stiftung, is named after his wife, elsa reger, who founded the foundation and the institute. it has a substantial archive of manuscripts and documents related to reger.  history  reger's widow and biographer, elsa reger, installed in 1947 a foundation, run by the max-reger-institut in bonn. a main objective was to collect the autographs which had been dispersed during two world wars, and to establish an archive as a base for research. the institute moved to karlsruhe in 1996, first to the building of the . the state baden-wurttemberg and the town karlsruhe have funded the institute since. in 1998 it moved to the karlsburg in durlach. it collaborates with the musikhochschule and with the baden state library.  archive  the archive holds autographs of sketches, scores and corrections from all periods and genres of reger's composions, also many of his handwritten letters and postcards to friends, publishers, performers and notable contemporaries. it also keeps the correspondence of his widow, and documents, photos, paintings, caricatures, concert programs and other memorabilia. from 2003, the bruderbuscharchiv, an archive of the brothers fritz busch and adolf busch with many documents related to their work is part of the mri. the library holds prints of first editions as well as later ones, international literature about reger and related topics, sound documents, and copies of manuscripts that are not part of the mri's archive.  publications  the mri is the centre of research of the composer, publishing research in its own schriftenreihe (monographic series), including dissertations written with scientific guidance by the mri. a new edition of reger's works, the reger-werk-ausgabe, was begun in 2008. the new reger-werk-verzeichnis appeared in 2011, funded in part by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft.  other activities  a focus of the mri has been to provide access to the material related to reger, to researchers, musicians and music lovers. the institute organizes regularly exhibitions, conventions, lecture concerts, and concert series in collaboration with international music schools and universities. in 2005 the mri established a biennial european chamber music competition, the , together with karlsruhe and the hochschule fur musik karlsruhe
.  references  external links     immer reger / geschichte und aufgaben des max-reger-instituts carus-verlag  max-reger-institut in karlsruhe / "neue fulle" (in german) swr  vortrag von prof. dr. susanne popp (max-reger-institut/elsa-reger-stiftung, karlsruhe) / max reger. werk statt leben humboldt university berlin  research institutes in germany musicology
clef was a san francisco-based technology company, known for developing a mobile app that created a two-factor authentication for websites. it allowed users to access sites with a single login password management service which stores encrypted passwords in private accounts. it had a standard verification method that requires access to data on the mobile phone to confirm the user's identity. the application required a wi-fi or mobile network, and the user could log in by scanning the computer screen with their phone.  history  clef was founded in 2013 by mark hudnall, b. byrne and jesse pollak. it raised $1.6 million in seed funding in november 2014. clef integrated with many websites and applications, including wordpress. on march 17, 2017, clef announced they would no longer support the plugin after june 6, 2017; clef was acquired by authy, another 2fa service, which later got acquired by twilio.  references   companies based in san francisco mobile applications
the 2016 fsp gold river women's challenger was a professional tennis tournament played on outdoor hard courts. it was the fifth edition of the tournament and part of the 2016 itf women's circuit, offering a total of $50,000 in prize money. it took place in sacramento, california, united states, on 18-24 july 2016.  singles main draw entrants  seeds    1 rankings as of 11 july 2016.  other entrants  the following player received a wildcard into the singles main draw:   claire liu   ellie halbauer   sabrina santamaria   karina vyrlan  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   lizette cabrera   chanel simmonds   valeria solovyeva   alexandra stevenson  the following player received entry by a lucky loser spot:   caroline romeo  champions  singles   sofia kenin def.  grace min, 4-6, 6-1, 6-4  doubles   ashley weinhold /  caitlin whoriskey def.  jamie loeb /  chanel simmonds, 6-4, 6-4  external links   2016 fsp gold river women's challenger at itftennis.com  official website  2016 itf women's circuit  fsp gold river women's challenger 2016 in sports in california 2016 in american tennis
rupowal is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 5.2 km from rurka kalan, 15 km from phillaur, 41 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 126 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  bilga railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 14.5 km away from the village. the village is 44.3 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 137 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
frances mary "fanny" wimperis (1840 - 19 may 1925) was a new zealand artist.  early life wimperis was born in chester, england, in 1840. she was the fourth in a family of eight children born to mary (nee morison) and edmund wimperis. her father was a school drawing teacher and later a manager at a leadworks. of her siblings, edmund, susanna and ann (jenny) also became artists. she and her sisters were members of the naturalists field club, of which charles kingsley, of the water babies fame, was the leader.  adult life wimperis studied art at the slade school in london, and exhibited with the royal society of british artists and the royal watercolour society.  wimperis emigrated to new zealand in 1880 with her sister jenny, to join their married sister susanna. they joined susanna's household in mornington, dunedin, and continued to paint and exhibit. wimperis' work was shown at the otago art society, the new zealand industrial exhibition in wellington and the south seas exhibition in dunedin. one of her oil paintings won first prize at the south seas exhibition. her work was also included in the centennial exhibition in wellington in 1940.  wimperis also became an art teacher, first in a private school and then at otago girls' high school from 1891 to 1906. one of her most notable pupils was ella spicer, who began exhibiting when she was just 15 years old.  legacy  in 2002, the hocken library staged an exhibition featuring the work of wimperis and her two sisters, susanna and jenny, and her niece, susanna's daughter eleanor joachim.  references  1840 births 1925 deaths people from chester people from dunedin 19th-century new zealand people new zealand artists english emigrants to new zealand alumni of the slade school of fine art
the oka-don lowlands () (also: oka-don plain), is a flat plain in european russia, bounded on the north by the oka river (and the meshchera lowlands), on the south by the don river, on the west by the central russian upland, and on the east by the volga upland. the area is part of the larger east european plain. the terrain is flat, with altitude averaging 160 meters above sea level, and the rivers meander on broad floodplains. agricultural use of the plain is high, mostly for grain growing - wheat, barley and rye. the plain provides a flat south-north route for transportation, situated between uplands. until a line of forts was built across the territory by the russian government in the 1640s (the belgorod line), the plain was a route for tatar invasion from the south.  topography the plain is about 250 km west-east, and 500 km north-south. the central and southern parts are sometimes called the "tambov plain", and are mostly contained in tambov oblast. the lowlands also includes portions of lipetsk oblast on the west, ryazan oblast to the north, penza oblast to the east, and voronezh oblast to the south. the soil includes widespread chernozym ("black earth"), with more podzolic ("under-ash") soils towards the north and some sandy regions in the south.  hydrography because it is flat, the major rivers meander on broad floodplains. the main river in the north is the tsna, which runs north through the city of tambov and into the moksha river, a right tributary of the oka in the volga basin. in the south, the plain narrows along the khopyor river, flowing south into the don river, and the medevista, which is also in the don basin. the floodplains can be up to 20 km in width, with up to three terraces.  vegetation in modern times, the plain is heavily developed for agriculture. the primary grains are wheat, barley and rye, with 'industrial' crops such as sunflower seeds, sugar beets, and potatoes. before modern development, the plain was forb meadow-steppe, with forest groves of pine, oak, and black alder along the river banks. the oka-don lowlands include two federal-level nature reserves: the voronina nature reserve in the southeast, and the voronina nature reserve, both featuring forest-steppe habitat along rivers.  references  east european plain european russia geography
of russia plains of russia
andrea longo (born 16 november 1971) is a retired italian nordic combined skier. he competed at the 1994 and 1998 winter olympics and placed in 44th and 22nd.  references  1971 births living people nordic combined skiers at the 1994 winter olympics nordic combined skiers at the 1998 winter olympics olympic nordic combined skiers of italy italian male nordic combined skiers
"pride" is a song by american indie rock band american authors. the song was written by band members zachary barnett, david rublin, matthew sanchez and james shelley with producers aaron accetta and shep goodman. the track was released by mercury records and island records as second single from their second album what we live for.  promotion after the huge success achieved with their latest single "go big or go home", american authors have finally returned with the awaited follow-up. "pride" was released on digital retailers on december 11, 2015 via island records as the second taste of the band's upcoming second studio album and follow-up to 2014's debut oh, what a life. the music video directed by rosco guerrero and filmed in denver was premiered through vevo later the same day of its release. "pride" was written by zachary barnett, matt sanchez, james adam shelley, shep goodman, aaron accetta and dave rublin. a special american sign language video to support the radio mix version of the single was premiered through vevo on march 11, 2016. it was directed by brendan walter and mel soria.  track listing  charts  references  2015 singles 2015 songs american authors songs island records singles song recordings produced by aaron accetta songs written by aaron accetta songs written by shep goodman
oscar jackson may refer to:   oscar jackson (baseball) (fl. 1887-1906), african-american baseball outfielder and first baseman  oscar lawrence jackson (1840-1920), u.s. representative from pennsylvania and union army commander  oscar b. jackson jr. (born 1947), american civil servant from the state of oklahoma  oscar jackson, former producer of the new zealand radio show the edge afternoons with guy, sharyn & clint
lund church () is a parish church of the church of norway in lund municipality in rogaland county, norway. it is located in the village of moi. it is the church for the lund parish which is part of the dalane prosti (deanery) in the diocese of stavanger. the white, wooden church was built in a long church style in 1808 using designs by an unknown architect. the church seats about 420 people.  history the earliest existing historical records of the church date back to the year 1409. the first church was likely a stave church. in 1618, the church was described as a small long church when records show that major roof repairs were carried out. then in 1630, the nave of the church was renovated and enlarged. in 1808, the church was torn down and a new, larger church was constructed on the same site using many of the same materials that were salvaged from the old church. the new church was consecrated on 23 september 1812 by the bishop christian sørenssen.  see also list of churches in rogaland  references  lund, norway churches in rogaland wooden churches in norway 19th-century church of norway church buildings churches completed in 1808 14th-century establishments in norway
gilles (ægidius) (died before 1193), was count of montaigu and clermont, count of duras, son of count godefried of montaigu, and his wife juliane, daughter of count otto of duras. gilles was also seigneur of rochefort, seigneur of jodoigne and advocate of saint-trond.  in 1174, gilles married laurette de looz, daughter of louis i, count of looz, and his wife agnes von metz. they divorced childless in 1176.  gilles contracted leprosy, giving up most of his lands to his brothers conon and pierre.  gilles was succeeded as count of montaigu, clermont and duras by his brother conon, possibly as early as 1175.  in a charter dated 1175 donating property to the knights hospitaller, gilles is referred to as former count and his brothers pierre and conon as counts of montaigu and duras, respectively. he kept the lordship of jodoigne and was then at least once referred to as count of jodoigne. (his mother had also referred to herself as countess of jodoigne.  leprosy, however, was not the end of his military life, as gislebert of mons as he and his brother conon fought the duke of louvain, for seizing duras and jodoigne, his only remaining allod. they were able to recover duras. moreover, he writes of his capture in the town of namur by baldwin v, count of hainaut, who held him captive for a long time. gilles and his brothers prepared to go on crusade, though gilles probably never went ahead with this plan. none of the brothers had heirs, and so arrangements were made for their possessions.  references  sources  hanon de louvet (1941) histoire de la ville de jodoigne  wolters, joseph mathias, notice historique sur l'ancien comte de duras en hesbaie, gyselinck, 1855 (available on google books) .  external link  medieval lands project, comtes de montaigu  12th-century deaths counts
the queen mary cathedral  () also called metropolitan cathedral of queen mary is a cathedral church of catholic worship dedicated to the blessed virgin mary. the cathedral is located in the central area of barranquilla, colombia, western side of the plaza de la paz (peace's square), where the zero point of the city is located. the cathedral is located within the roman catholic archdiocese of barranquilla, seat of the archbishop and the parish cathedral.  description it is a building of modernist style whose construction took 27 years and was designed by the italian architect angelo mazzoni grande (better known as angelo mason grande), redesigned by the antiochian firm "vasquez and cardenas' which carried out construction . the building has 4,274 square meters of built area, 92 m long, 38 m high at the top; 38 meters at the widest part because the cathedral has a bell-shaped plant that tapers in the apse of the presbytery and can accommodate 4,000 people seated.  see also roman catholicism in colombia  references  roman catholic cathedrals in colombia buildings and structures in barranquilla roman catholic churches completed in 1969 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in colombia
moreshwar ramachandra walimbe (; 30 june 1912 - 21 march 1992) was an educator and a grammarian of the marathi language. he wrote style guides and textbooks on the grammar of marathi.  early life and education walambe was born at ramadurg in the state of karnataka, india. after completing his primary education at mudhol, he obtained his bachelor of arts degree from rajaram college, kolhapur. he served in various capacities as a school teacher, educator and editor of textbooks at several educational institutions in maharashtra, including a fifteen-year stint at the new english school in satara and another of equal length at the new english school in pune. he was also instrumental in the compilation of marathi dictionaries for tilak smarak mandir, pune.  career walambe's interest and command of the rules governing the stylistic aspects of written marathi led him to work as a proofreader for marathi publishing houses, and as a pro bono consultant for printing presses. his treatise  'सगम मरठ वयकरण व लखन' has become a standard reference in this area.  walambe was an avid reader of marathi literature. he nurtured close personal friendships with several prominent marathi writers, such as v.s. khandekar, g. d. madgular, n. s. phadke and malati bedekar. he served as the secretary of the marathi sahitya parishad as well as the vasant vyakhyanmala for many years, and maintained a prolonged association with the marathi granthalaya parishad.  works    आगल भषच अलकर (figures of speech in the english language)   ड. बळकषण यच चरतर (a biography of dr balakrishna)   वनरण एलस (a translation of joy adamson's book born free)  शकरचय सतयकथ (an account of walambe's own experiences with hunting)   सबध वचन: भग १, २, ३   शदधलखन परदप (a style guide for marathi writing)   सगम मरठ वयकरण व लखन (a school textbook on marathi grammar)    apart
from these, walambe was also a regular contributor of scholarly articles to many periodicals such as सतर, करलसकर, मनहर and कसर.  references  1912 births 1992 deaths scientists from karnataka 20th-century indian linguists
the curse of sleeping beauty is a 2016 american fantasy horror film directed by pearry reginald teo and written by teo alongside josh nadler. the film stars ethan peck, india eisley and natalie hall. it is based on a comic book of the same name by everette hartsoe and the story little briar rose by the brothers grimm and charles perrault.  filming took place in los angeles, california. the film was released by 2b films on may 13, 2016.  plot thomas kaiser, a painter, has recurring dreams in which he sees a beautiful sleeping girl (india eisley), but is unable to wake her. when he attempts to kiss her, he is always distracted by a vision of a strange building and wakes in sleep paralysis. one day, he receives a phone call from a law firm informing him of an inheritance from his estranged uncle, clive.  thomas is informed his uncle committed suicide, leaving him a letter and a property known as kaiser gardens. the letter tells him to never go to the lower levels of the building and that the family is cursed. thomas is startled to find out the inherited property is the very same building from his dreams. while at kaiser gardens, thomas runs into a realtor linda (natalie hall) who gives him the keys and asks him a series of questions. that night while sleeping at the property he dreams of the sleeping girl and this time is able to kiss and awaken her. she tells him her name is briar rose and that they can communicate now that they are close in the physical world. he has a false awakening to an attack from the veiled demon. he wakes up from the nightmare to billings (scott alan smith) an appraiser knocking on the front door. the appraiser tells him many people went missing in the house, but the police found nothing. thomas explores the house and finds mannequins and an unmovable door shrine.  later, while researching the property, thomas collapses. he discovers a note from linda regarding a prior appraisal attempt. he confronts her and she informs him her brother went missing in the house. thomas collapses again and dreams of rose. she tells him he must awaken her and the property belongs to his bloodline. thomas awakens, linda informs him that based on her research he is now bound to the property supernaturally and will die if he leaves kaiser gardens too long. they return to the property and open the shrine door and, using thomas' blood, revealing a room. they open a book with seals and are
attacked by the mannequins in the house. they escape the house with the book and are rescued by richard meyers (bruce davison), a paranormal investigator, who is friends with linda.  richard tells thomas they were attacked by a djinn and that the djinn can possess inanimate objects. thomas believes he must wake rose in order to break the curse. they hired daniel (james adam lim), an acquaintance of linda to decipher the book found in kaiser gardens. billings returns to the property and is killed by the veiled demon. they discover that the family curse dates back to the crusades and a djinn put rose in an eternal sleep. the group deduces that iblis wants her and they must kill the veiled demon and awaken rose.  thomas, linda and richard return to kaiser gardens and open a second door behind the shrine room. linda and richard distract the veiled demon while thomas finds and attempts to wake rose. unable to wake rose with a kiss, thomas uses his blood. rose awakens then kisses and attacks thomas. rose kills the veiled demon, but before doing so, it tells them that thomas' bloodline 'stores' many demons, which rose will summon to unleash upon the world. rose states she will not kill them so they can see the darkness to come and begins to awaken the demons in thomas' bloodline. meanwhile, after the full text from the book is deciphered daniel reads the curse that awakening the demons in thomas' bloodline will trigger the apocalypse.  cast  ethan peck as thomas kaiser  natalie hall as linda coleman  india eisley as briar rose  bruce davison as richard meyers  james adam lim as daniel  zack ward as nathan  scott alan smith as billings  cyd strittmatter as dr. wessley  mim drew as katherine braxton  dallas hart as luke coleman   madelaine petsch as eliza  ryan egnatoff as the veiled demon    elizabeth knowelden as the voice of the veiled demon    t.j. vindigni as mannequin   anna harr as young briar rose    olya lvova as assistant to katherine    jacqueline goehner as female clerk    pearry reginald teo as shadow djinn    marc bowen as doctor    alexandra bard as sunken woman  release the film was released on may 13, 2016 (friday the 13th) in the united states.  reception the film has been received mostly negative reviews. on rotten tomatoes, the film has a rating of 15% based on 13 reviews and an
average rating of 3.9/10. the film holds a 4.2/10 on imdb. luke thompson of forbes panned the film stating it "fractures more than a fairy tale". frank scheck of the hollywood reporter reviewed the film as a "cheesy horror film ... enough to put anyone to sleep".  television series in october 2017, a television series based on the film was announced is in development.  references  external links      2016 films 2016 horror films american films american dark fantasy films american supernatural horror films american haunted house films supernatural fantasy films demons in film religious horror films english-language films films based on american comics films based on sleeping beauty films shot in los angeles live-action films based on comics
tristan lamasine was the defending champion but chose not to defend his title.  kimmer coppejans won the title after defeating aslan karatsev 6-4, 3-6, 7-5 in the final.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references  main draw  qualifying draw  tampere open - singles 2016 men's singles
slugs () is a 2004 austrian comedy film directed by michael glawogger.  cast   raimund wallisch - johann  michael ostrowski - max  pia hierzegger - mao  iva lukic - mara  sophia laggner - martha  georg friedrich - schorsch   - reini  brigitte kren - anita  elisabeth holzmeister - julia   - gerhard  faris rahoma - zejlko  august schmolzer - zuhalter   - grissemann  references  external links   2004 comedy films 2004 films german films austrian films austrian comedy films
feliciano barbosa (deceased) is a retired portuguese footballer who played as a half-back.  he joined benfica in 1933 but was seldom used in six years there. he won the league in 1937-38.  career barbosa joined benfica in 1933 and made his debut on 4 february 1934, against sporting. it was the only time that ribeiro dos reis used him that season. in 1934-35, he only competed in the campeonato de lisboa and the next two seasons did not play at all, returning only on 7 november 1937 with beleneses. he did play twice in the primeira liga, enough to win him the championship with benfica.  his breakthrough season was in 1938-39, when he played 28 games in all competitions, scoring four goals, but benfica failed to win any silverware. he left the club in 1939 with 45 games played and 8 goals scored.  honours benfica  primeira liga: 1937-38  references general    specific  year of birth unknown year of death unknown portuguese footballers association football midfielders primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers
łukasz grzeszczuk (born 3 march 1990 in warsaw) is a polish athlete specialising in the javelin throw. he represented his country at the 2013 world championships without qualifying for the final.  his personal best in the event is 84.77 metres set in riga in 2014.  international competitions  seasonal progression  2009 - 73.55 2010 - 76.65 2011 - 80.58 2012 - 79.40 2013 - 83.98 2014 - 84.77 2016 - 83.60  references  external links           1990 births living people polish male javelin throwers world athletics championships athletes for poland athletes from warsaw athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of poland competitors at the 2011 summer universiade competitors at the 2013 summer universiade
david s. holmes jr. (11 august 1914 - 21 may 1994) was a member of both houses of the michigan legislature between 1959 and his death in 1994.  a native of kentucky, holmes graduated from virginia state college and studied at the university of michigan. he was an aide with the uaw/afl-cio. holmes was elected to the michigan house of representatives to fill a vacancy caused by the death of charline white in 1959. when coleman young was elected mayor of detroit and resigned from the michigan senate, holmes won election to fill the seat and moved from the house to the senate in march 1974 where he served for two decades until his death. on his passing, his daughter patricia was elected in november 1994 to fill the seat for the remaining month of session.  holmes was a delegate to the 1968 and 1988 democratic national conventions.  references  1914 births 1994 deaths michigan democrats 20th-century american politicians 20th-century african-american politicians michigan state senators members of the michigan house of representatives african-american state legislators in michigan virginia state university alumni 20th-century american episcopalians african-american episcopalians university of michigan alumni people from covington, kentucky
john percival gulich (also gulich) (26 december 1864 - 11 december 1898) was a british illustrator, engraver and artist.  biography  gulich was born in wimbledon in 1864, the son of hermann gulich, a london merchant of german origin, and eleanor. he was educated at charterhouse school. he lived in bremen for five years, working in his father's office. he became art editor of the illustrated newspapers the pictorial world and the graphic, and also contributed to harper's magazine. in 1897, he was elected as a member of the royal institute of painters in water colours. one year later, on 11 december, he died of typhoid fever in west hampstead at the age of 33.  works  arguably gulich's best known work is a watercolour entitled "a violin concerto" (1898), given to the tate gallery by sir henry tate in 1899. four of his works were exhibited at the royal academy of arts between 1893 and 1898. four of his drawings are held in the british royal collection.  references  1864 births 1898 deaths people educated at charterhouse school 19th-century british artists english watercolourists
stillwater state park is a state park located on lake groton in groton, vermont. the park is located in groton state forest close to the groton nature center, boulder beach state park and big deer state park.  the park offers camping, picnicking, and access to water-related activities on lake groton.  the park was developed in the 1930s by crews of the civilian conservation corps (ccc).  it is open to the public between memorial day weekend and columbus day weekend; fees are charged for day use and camping.  features the park is located in northern groton, between vermont route 232 and lake groton off boulder beach road.  the park is  on the west side of the lake, which is ringed by vacation cottages and the facilities of the groton nature center, boulder beach state park and big deer state park, also state parks.  from the contact station a short way off boulder beach road, the camp road divides to provide access to camping and recreational areas on either side of stillwater creek.  to the left is a campground loop, originally built as a picnic area by the ccc.  to the right is a second, larger campground loop, which includes day use facilities near the ranger's house at the northern end. the campground has a total of 62 tent/rv sites and 17 lean-tos. all rest rooms include hot showers. a sanitary dump station is available, but no hookups. there is a swimming beach, boat launch/dock facility, play area, shelter, and access to hiking trails.  history the park facilities were developed in 1938 by the ccc, on state forest land the state began purchasing in 1919.  the ccc was also responsible for building vermont route 232, which provides access into the forest.  crews built the park access roads, a picnic area on the north side of the creek, and a camp loop (about half the extant loop) on the south side.  surviving elements of their work include the ranger's house, the picnic shelter in the north loop, numerous stone fireplaces, and several leanto camping shelters.  the north loop was converted into a campground in the late 1960s, when the southern loop was also enlarged.  the park was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002 for its well-preserved ccc architecture.  see also  national register of historic places listings in caledonia county, vermont  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of caledonia county, vermont groton, vermont national register of historic places in caledonia county,
vermont historic districts on the national register of historic places in vermont
legislative elections were held in the russian soviet federative socialist republic on 26 june 1938, the first after the establishment of the soviet union.  background the constitution of the ussr was adopted on 5 december 1936, in accordance with which elections were held for new bodies at all levels from local councils and ending with the supreme council of the soviet union.  results  references  1938 elections in the soviet union legislative elections in russia russian soviet federative socialist republic one-party elections june 1938 events
ulric de fonvielle, brother of wilfrid de fonvielle, (11 february 1833, paris - 1 july 1911, paris) was a 19th-century french journalist and writer.  biography  after studying painting, he took part as a volunteer to the expedition of the thousand in 1860 then, as a reporter, to the american civil war.  chief editor of la ligne directe in dieppe (1868), he actively participated to the campaign against the empire led by la marseillaise of henri rochefort. on january 10, 1870, he was chosen as a witness by their colleague paschal grousset for victor noir to attend the duel between noir and prince pierre bonaparte and accused the pronce of attempted murder on his person after the death of victor noir: assassin , dare to face me! you cowardly murdered my friend, assassin, assassin! to death ! he then got ten days in jail for insulting the court.  in april 1870, he was candidate to the paris commune  works  1861: souvenirs d'une chemise rouge  1865: lincoln, 1806-1865  1878: populus, drama in five acts and huit tableaux, with eugene hubert 1879: le puits du diable  bibliography   jules claretie, histoire de la revolution de 1870-71, 1872, read online on gallica  references  external links   ulric de fonvieille on data.bnf.fr    idref  ulric de fonvielle's grave at pere lachaise cemetery  french political journalists 19th-century french journalists french male journalists 1833 births writers from paris 1911 deaths burials at pere lachaise cemetery 19th-century french male writers
salvatore rebecchini (21 february 1891 - 21 november 1977) was an italian christian democrat politician. he was born in rome, kingdom of italy. he was the 1st mayor of rome under the republic. he died in rome, italy.  references  1891 births 1977 deaths 20th-century italian politicians christian democracy (italy) politicians mayors of rome grand officers of the order of merit of the italian republic
spain competed at the 1958 european athletics championships in stockholm, sweden, from 19-24 august 1954.  results  men track & road events  field events  nations at the 1958 european athletics championships 1958 european athletics championships
the three-hand effect (or three-hand technique) is a means of playing on the piano with only two hands, but producing the impression that one is using three hands. typically this effect is produced by keeping the melody in the middle register, with accompanying arpeggios in the treble and bass registers.  history the effect had been prefigured by composers including francesco pollini (1762-1846), a pupil of mozart, whose 32 esercizi for the piano (1829), based on techniques found in the keyboard music of johann sebastian bach and jean-philippe rameau, included music written on three staves, and using interlocking hand positions, to generate the impression of three, or even four, hands. another early example exists in an 1817 caprice in e-flat major by alexandre pierre francois boely. this four-voiced composition has two melodies in bass and treble, with a third melody harmonized in sixths played simultaneously between them.  in paris of the 1830s, bravura piano technique became very fashionable. various intricate problems in piano playing were solved during this period, and unusual techniques invented. advances in piano technology also enabled innovative techniques. sigismond thalberg employed a three-hand effect in his fantasy on don juan (1833-34) and subsequently gained great success using it in his fantasy on rossini's moise (1835). thalberg primarily used the technique in settings of other composers' works. arthur loesser describes his style as "drawing scarves of quick arpeggios" above and below a melody. he adds "[thalberg's] clever shading that helped make this device convincing: since the accompanying arpeggios were very soft, the resonance of the well brought out melody tones...could seem to 'sing'." moriz rosenthal alleged that thalberg had adapted this effect from the harp technique of elias parish alvars (1808-1849). a contemporary review of thalberg playing in london mentioned "myriads of notes sounding from one extremity of the instrument to the other without disturbing the subject, in which the three distinct features of this combination are clearly brought out by his exquisite touch." carl czerny noted that the technique also required careful novel use of the piano pedals, especially the sustaining pedal; normally having been used to sustain notes in the bass register, thalberg applied it "to the notes of the middle and higher octaves, and thereby [produced] entirely new effects, which had hitherto never been imagined." thalberg's entry in grove music online
is more circumspect, explaining that "thalberg's basic compositional method was relatively simple, consisting of placing the melody in the centre of the keyboard first in one hand, then in the other (the thumbs and the sustaining pedal used in particular to prolong the sound), and ornamenting it with florid counterpoint and chords above and below", and concluding that "thalberg's compositions are of questionable value". douglas bomberger has commented "thalberg has come to represent the excesses of the romantic period, when bigger was better and two hands could sound like three."  franz liszt, initially condemning thalberg's use of this technique, later adopted it himself, for example in his grandes etudes on themes of paganini. by 1840, felix mendelssohn, inspired by hearing thalberg play, was occasionally using this technique in his own compositions. the style became part of the repertoire of many virtuoso pianist-composers of the 19th century.  ferruccio busoni composed six studies for three hands, "book 4: 'for three hands'" of the second edition of his klavierubung (published posthumously in 1925), which exhibit different versions of three-hand effect. the studies include transcriptions of music by bach, beethoven, schubert, offenbach, and busoni himself.  kenneth hamilton comments that "[thalberg's] inheritance is still with us today, as anyone will testify who has ever heard a cocktail pianist wreath a slow popular tune in elegant arpeggios."  three-hand effect pieces this is a partial list of two-hand piano compositions intended or arranged to create the illusion of three hands playing simultaneously.   alexandre pierre francois boely: caprice op. 2, no. 12 in e-flat major, allegro non troppo (1816)  sigismond thalberg: fantasia on rossini's moses, op. 33 (1837)  felix mendelssohn: prelude in e minor, from op. 35, no. 1(1840); prelude in b-flat minor op. 104b, no. 1.  franz liszt: "reminiscences de norma", s.394 (1841); concert etude no. 3 "un sospiro" (1845-49)  references notes  sources              harding, rosamond e. m. (1978). the piano-forte: its history traced to the great exhibition of 1851 (2nd edition). woking: gresham books.   kim, taeseong (2007). the piano etudes of a. p. f. boely (
1785-1858): a stylistic analysis. doctoral dissertation in piano pedagogy, university of south carolina.   loesser, arthur (1990). men, women and pianos: a social history. new york: dover publications.   rosenthal, moriz, ed. mark mitchell and allen evans (2005). moriz rosenthal in word and music: a legacy of the nineteenth century. bloomington: indiana university press.   rowland, david (2004). a history of pianoforte pedalling. cambridge: cambridge university press.   todd, r. larry (2004). nineteenth century piano music (2nd edition). london: routledge.   musical performance techniques piano
brayan eduardo garnica cortez (born 27 may 1996) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a winger for liga mx club atlas.  club career garnica made his professional debut with atlas on 30 september 2015, during a liga mx draw with cruz azul.  garnica made the move to santos laguna ahead of the 2019 clausura season.  honours atlas liga mx: apertura 2021  references  external links    1996 births living people mexican footballers association football midfielders atlas f.c. footballers santos laguna footballers liga mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from the state of mexico
frederic bertley is a canadian immunologist and science educator. he is currently the president & ceo of cosi (center of science and industry), a science museum   in columbus, ohio. prior to cosi, bertley worked as senior vice president for science and education at the franklin institute in philadelphia.  career  bertley earned a bachelor's degree from with a focus in physiology, mathematics, and the history of science in 1994 and a ph.d. in immunology in 1999, both from mcgill university. in 2003, he went on to receive his post-doctoral fellowship at harvard medical school.  after his postdoctoral fellowship, bertley worked as a scientist at millennium pharmaceuticals before joining wilmerhale llp as a technology specialist in 2004, returning to harvard medical school as a science professor in 2008. that same year, he became the vice president of the center for innovation in science learning at the franklin institute. in late 2016, bertley left the franklin institute to become the president and ceo of cosi.  recognition    honorary doctorate degree in public service from otterbein university, 2018 george washington carver award, temple university/the academy of natural sciences, 2017  minority business leader of the year award philadelphia business journal, 2014  mid-atlantic regional emmy for the franklin institute awards program: declaration of progress: mid-atlantic chapter of the national academy of television and science, 2013 dell inspire 100 world changers, 2012 40 under 40 philadelphia business journal, 2010  references  external links   thehistorymakers.com biography  the franklin institute official website  scientists from montreal franklin institute living people mcgill university faculty of science alumni harvard medical school alumni american immunologists hiv/aids activists african-american scientists science communicators year of birth missing (living people) american chief executives wilmer cutler pickering hale and dorr people
onorato onorati was a roman catholic prelate who served as the first bishop of urbania e sant'angelo in vado (1636-1683).  biography on 22 september 1636, onorato onorati was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of urbania e sant'angelo in vado. on 28 september 1636, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna, with pietro antonio spinelli, archbishop of rossano, and alexandre della stufa, bishop of montepulciano, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of urbania e sant'angelo in vado until his resignation in august 1683.  episcopal succession while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of: gerolamo pellegrini, bishop of melfi e rapolla (1645); niccolo albergati-ludovisi, archbishop of bologna (1645); camillo baldi, bishop of nicotera (1645); domenico cennini, bishop of gravina di puglia (1645); francisco suarez de villegas, titular bishop of memphis (1649); giovanni mastelloni, bishop of vieste (1654); pietro frescobaldi, bishop of san miniato (1654); and paolo squillanti, bishop of teano (1654).  references   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope urban viii
juan paolo s. taha (born december 5, 1990) is a filipino basketball player for the northport batang pier of the philippine basketball association (pba). he was drafted 29th overall by the kia sorento in the 2014 pba draft.  professional career on february 9, 2022, taha signed a three-year contract extension with norhtport.  pba career statistics  as of the end of 2020 season  season-by-season averages   |- | align=left |  | align=left | globalport | 25 ||	6.5 || .361 || .286 || .647 || .9 || .2 || .1 || .0 || 1.6 |- | align=left |  | align=left | globalport / mahindra | 35 ||	19.0 || .517 || .200 || .792 || 3.4 || .9 || .3 || .3 || 7.8 |- | align=left |  | align=left | barangay ginebra | 37 ||	5.2 || .419 || .429 || .800 || 1.1 || .3 || .2 || .1 || 2.2 |- | align=left |  | align=left | barangay ginebra / globalport/northport | 25 ||	13.3 || .522 || .200 || .826 || 2.0 || .5 || .2 || .3 || 5.5 |- | align=left |  | align="left" rowspan="2" | northport | 40 || 19.5 || .439 || .261 || .704 || 2.9 || 1.1 || .7 || .1 || 7.6 |- | align=left |  | 11 ||	25.8 || .417 || .150 || .893 || 2.4 || 1.1 || .6 || .0 || 8.9 |-class=sortbottom | align=center colspan=2 | career | 173 || 13.9 || .461 || .244 || .767 || 2.2 || .7 || .3 || .2 || 5.4  references  1990 births living people barangay ginebra san miguel players basketball players from metro manila filipino men's basketball players terrafirma dyip players benilde blazers men's basketball players northport batang pier players people from marikina shooting guards small forwards terrafirma dyip draft picks
bangiwal is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 19.4 km from nakodar, 53.1 km from kapurthala, 43.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 153 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, jalandhar city train station is 46 km away from the village. the village is 68 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 126 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
sanjiang (三江) is a town in xupu county, hunan, china. , it had 23 villages under its administration.  it was formed in 2015 by combining the administrative areas of gangdong township (), liangjiang township (), and shanxi township ().  references  township-level divisions of hunan xupu
maria tumarkin is an australian cultural historian, essayist and novelist, and is senior lecturer in the school of culture and communication at the university of melbourne, teaching creative writing.  biography tumarkin was born and raised in kharkov, then part of the soviet union, now in ukraine. she left her home country in 1989 when she was a teenager, before the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991. she holds a ba (hons) and a phd in cultural history from the university of melbourne.  she writes books of ideas, reviews, essays and pieces for performance. she was an honorary artistic outreach associate (2015-2016) at the arc centre of excellence for the history of emotions and a co-creator, with moya mcfadzean, of "the unending absence" project.  works  books  traumascapes: the power and fate of places transformed by tragedy (2005)  courage (2007)  otherland: a journey with my daughter (2010)  axiomatic (2018)  essays (selected) this narrated life (griffith review, 1 may 2014) no skin (2 september 2015) against motherhood (20 october 2018)  awards  otherland was shortlisted for the victorian premier's literary awards, the age book of the year, and nsw premier's literary award. no skin was one of five finalists for the 2015 melbourne prize in writing for essays shorter than 20,000 words. axiomatic won the 2018 melbourne prize for best writing and was shortlisted for the 2019 victorian premier's prize for nonfiction. it was also shortlisted for the 2019 stella prize. and the 2019 nsw premier's literary awards, douglas stewart prize for non-fiction. winner of the 2020 windham-campbell literature prize  references  external links  personal site  living people university of melbourne alumni 20th-century australian historians 21st-century australian historians year of birth missing (living people)
the 1972 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university during the 1972 ncaa college division football season.  in their sixth season under head coach roy kramer, the chippewas compiled a 5-5-1 record and outscored their opponents, 265 to 190.  on november 4, 1972, the team played its first game at its new stadium, r. perry shorts stadium. the dedication game drew a crowd of 17,000. the new facility was built at a cost of $2 million and had a seating capacity of 19,875. the chippewas defeated illinois state, 28-21, in the dedication game.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback gary bevington with 834 passing yards, tailback chuck markey with 1,513 rushing yards, and matt means with 603 receiving yards. markey received the team's most valuable player award.  means set a school record with 10 receptions in a 34-0 victory over indiana state on september 30, 1972.  schedule  references  external links  1973 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
aaseji nagar is a small village located in phalodi tehsil of jodhpur district, rajasthan, india. it has a population of 308 according to the 2011 indian national population survey.  there are several temples and schools in the village.  aaseji nagar has no railway station, but there are bus services. the pin code of the village is 342311.  the village is in the thar desert, and the inhabitants make their living mainly by agriculture. crops include millet, moong, and wheat. there is a large number of prosopis cineraria trees. prosopis cineraria or khejri is the state tree of rajasthan state.  references  villages in jodhpur district
the following lists events that happened in 1979 in iceland.  incumbents president - kristjan eldjarn prime minister - olafur johannesson, benedikt grondal  events  births  11 february - hanna guðrun stefansdottir, handball player 26 february - bjarni guðjonsson, footballer 26 february - daniel bjarnason, composer and conductor 11 june - helgi sveinsson, paralympian athlete 15 july - edda garðarsdottir, footballer 28 july - birgitta haukdal, singer 8 august - guðjon valur sigurðsson, handball player. 25 october - bjorn thorfinnsson, chess player 28 november - johannes asbjornsson, tv and radio show host  deaths 22 february - þorsteinn þorsteinsson, economist (b. 1880)  references    1970s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
ivan valkov (, 31 january 1875, kazanlak, ottoman empire - 20 april 1962, stara zagora, people's republic of bulgaria) was a bulgarian general of infantry who fought in world war i and later held the post of minister of war (1923-1929).  early life  ivan valkov was born in kazanlak, in what was the ottoman empire at the time, where he finished school. he later graduated from the sofia military school (1896), and later the nikolayev academy of general staff (1909) in st. petersburg, russia. valkov also graduated from an artillery academy and at the beginning of the 20th century was the only bulgarian army officer who attended two higher education institutions.  military career  1896-1906: staff officer in the 6th artillery regiment. 1911: military school instructor. 1912-1913: during the balkan wars, served on the 2nd army staff, and chief of staff of the eastern sector of the siege of odrin.  1913-1915: military school instructor. 1915-1916: with bulgaria's entry into world war i, chief of the operations department of the 2nd army staff.  from 1916: commander of the 44th infantry regiment. 1917-1918: chief of staff of the 7th and later 10th infantry divisions. 1919-1923: director of the cartographic institute.  from 1919: military academy professor, taught geography at sofia university.  1922-1928: at the same time, editor of the "yearbook of the geographic institute of the ministry of war."  bulgarian war minister  in 1919 he was one of the founders, and in 1920-1928 was the chairman of the military union, an officers' organization. as its head, valkov took part in the bulgarian coup d'etat of 9 june 1923, in which they overthrew prime minister aleksandar stamboliyski. from 10 june 1923 until 11 january 1929, valkov was the minister of war in the governments of prime ministers aleksandar tsankov and andrey lyapchev. he oversaw the repression of leftist organizations after the september rebellion in 1923 and the assassination attempt on tsar boris iii of bulgaria two years later. valkov was also one of the founders of a military factor in kazanlak.  in october 1925, at the time of the greco-bulgarian conflict in the petrich district, general valkov used diplomatic rather than military means to restore the status-quo. he gave the order to not open fire and appealed to the league of nations for
support. as a result, greece was recognized as the aggressor and was forced to pay bulgaria compensation for casualties and damage. the results of the conflict are regarded as a success of bulgarian diplomacy.  in the second half of the 1920s, valkov was accused of backing ivan mihailov and his faction of the internal conflict within the internal macedonian revolutionary organization. his actions were criticized by former prime minister aleksandar tsankov and the minister of foreign affairs, atanas burov, but valkov received support from boris iii at the time. it was because of this that the general remained in the government.  in 1928 valkov declared the dissolution of the military union due to it being divided as a result of internal bickering and political differences. at a time when neogitations were underway regarding bulgaria's representation in international organizations, the government demanded the valkov resign because of his reputation of being an opponent of democracy. prime minister lyapchev agreed to this, and valkov was removed from his post as war minister.  later career  in 1929-1934, he was the plenipotentiary minister of bulgaria in italy. valkov played a key role at this time during negotiations to conclude a marriage between boris iii and the princess giovanna of italy, daughter of king victor emmanuel iii. from 19 may 1934, he remained in the army reserve and was no longer involved in political activities. in 1943 valkov became the editor of the publication "bulgarian military idea."  after pro-soviet and communist forces rose to power as a result of the bulgarian coup d'etat of 1944, he was arrested on 17 june 1946. he remained in prison for years before being sentenced to death in 1954 for his use of terror against the far left opposition in april 1925. however, valkov's sentence was changed to 20 years in prison due to his old age (life imprisonment, according to other sources). died in prison in 1962.  rank history  awards    order of bravery (2nd class)  order of saint alexander (3rd and 4th class with swords, 1st class)  order of military merit (1st and 2nd class)   order of saint stanislaus (3rd class)   iron cross (1st and 2nd class)   order of the iron crown (3rd class)  cross for military merit (3rd class)  order of the iron crescent  sources  bulgarian wikipedia russian wikipedia  1875 births 1962 deaths ambassadors of bulgaria to italy bulgarian generals bulgarian military personnel of the balkan wars bulgarian military personnel of world war i
government ministers of bulgaria recipients of the order of bravery recipients of the order of saint stanislaus (russian), 3rd class recipients of the order of military merit (bulgaria) defence ministers of bulgaria
max emerson (born september 7, 1988) is an american actor, model, author, director and youtuber. he is known for his modelling and social media profile, particularly on instagram, and he wrote and directed the movie hooked. he has appeared on tv in small roles, including the season 5 finale of glee.  early life and education  emerson was born in vero beach, florida and studied for a bfa in performance and directing at the university of miami, from which he graduated in 2009.  career  modeling  emerson began modeling while he was a student, when he signed up with the agency wilhelmina models. he works with agencies including wilhelmina (new york), la models, established models (london), heffner management (seattle), next management (miami) and factor chosen (chicago).  filmmaking  he wrote, produced, co-directed and acted in two short films, dipspit and earwig, which were shown for the first time at the miami gay and lesbian film festival on april 26, 2011. earwig is a drama about a closeted gay college student, while dipspit is a comedy about two straight male models who get kicked out and move in with a gay college student.  in october 2015, emerson announced his intention to produce an independent film called "hooked" for which he had written the story, telling the story of a homeless gay prostitute called jack and addressing the problems faced by homeless lgbt youth. he aimed to raise $150,000 for the project via indiegogo and give half of any profits made to charities benefiting lgbt people. the launch video for the indiegogo campaign featured todrick hall and musician tom goss. as part of it he released a single with goss called "not enough". the campaign was supported by out magazine.  hooked had its world premiere at newfest: the new york lgbt film festival on june 26, 2017, and its european premiere at the 7th homochron film festival in cologne on october 20 the same year. the los angeles times gave it a negative review, however, audience review scores remain high  acting  as well as acting in earwig and dipspit, emerson has appeared in single episodes of the tv series glee (the season 5 finale the untitled rachel berry project), hit the floor, the real o'neals and eastsiders, and of the web series coffee house chronicles and the movie made from it.  from september 7 to september 24, 2017, he starred as mitchell in douglas carter beane's comedy play the
little dog laughed at the red house arts center in syracuse, new york. a local reviewer said each of the four actors in the play "brings a memorable, engaging performance", and that emerson "delivers the role of a sweet, confused, and occasionally thoughtless young star with sensitivity and kindness".  writing  emerson wrote an autobiography, hot sissy - life before flashbulbs, describing his teenage years growing up in a "redneck" area of florida. hot sissy was released as an e-book and in a limited print run of 500 hardcover copies in december 2014. the limited editions were each signed and came with an original polaroid picture.  personal life  in june 2016, he publicly introduced his boyfriend, andres camilo, an officer in the us army, in a youtube video. emerson has an active social media presence and posts regularly on youtube where his username is "themaxvicious".  he has 1 million followers on instagram (@maxisms) and 19,500 on twitter (@themaxisms). on youtube and on social media, emerson is known for his humor and for showing off his body.  in may 2017, french comic tv presenter cyril hanouna used one of emerson's torso pictures to set up a catfishing profile on a gay dating site, and tricked the men who responded to the profile into revealing sexual fantasies to him while he was live on his show touche pas a mon poste !. the segment triggered nearly 20,000 complaints to regulators and condemnation from lgbt groups.  filmography  references  external links       1988 births living people male models from florida people from vero beach, florida american gay actors male actors from miami gay models lgbt youtubers lgbt people from florida male youtubers 20th-century lgbt people 21st-century lgbt people
tomas rousek (born september 9, 1993) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for ehc waldkraiburg of the regionalliga.  rousek made his czech extraliga debut playing with motor ceske budejovice during the 2011-12 czech extraliga season. he also played for mountfield hk.  references  external links  1993 births living people czech ice hockey forwards bk havlickuv brod players motor ceske budejovice players sportspeople from ceske budejovice ihc pisek players stadion hradec kralove players hc tabor players
elizabeth michael (lulu) (born april 16, 1995) is a tanzanian actress. in 2013, she won the zanzibar international film festival award for best actress for "woman of principles". she also won 2016 africa magic viewers choice awards for best movie eastern africa. in august 2017, africa youth awards named her among the 100 most influential young africans. in november 2017, she was convicted of involuntary manslaughter for the 2012 death of steven kanumba and sentenced to two years in prison. on april 26, 2018, on tanzanian union celebration, she was among of the prisoners who were pardoned by president john pombe magufuli where her sentence was reduced. she was later released on may 9, 2018 after serving six months in prison to do community services for the remaining time after showing good behavior while she was in prison. on 12 november 2018 she completed her probation.  early life and education michael was born and raised in dar es salaam, tanzania. her father is michael kimemeta, and her mother is lucrecia kalugira. she attended remnant academy for her primary education, and perfect vision high school, st mary's high school for her secondary education. she then joined tanzania public service college where she obtained her  diploma in human resource management.  career  acting career michael started her acting career as a child actor when she was only five years old. actor mahsein awadh (dr cheni) was the one who discovered her during his talent search. he took her to kaole sanaa group, where she appeared in many television soap operas where she first appeared in dira  where she played nemu, she appeared in other soap operas including zizimo, baragumu, gharika, taswira, and demokrasia that were well known during the 2000s. she performed under the name lulu, a name under which she is commonly known today. in 2005, she made her film debut in the action film called misukosuko.  michael has participated in many big projects such as wahapahapa radio drama of 2009 that was produced by media for development international tanzania. she played mainda in the story that tells the importance of parent-child communication in protecting youth as they navigate through the difficult period of adolescence. the project was directed by jordan riber from mfdi. her subsequent movies include family tears, ripple of tears, oxygen, house boy, and woman of principles. she has appeared in more than 30 films.  in august 2013, she launched the movie foolish age, which
was her first effort as a producer. the event took place at mlimani city conference hall in dar es salaam, tanzania. the movie was screened at the 2014 zanzibar international film festival, foolish age was nominated as favourite movie at the 2014 tanzania people's choice awards (tuzo za watu) and michael won favourite actress for her performance in the film.  in 2015, she released her second movie as producer called mapenzi ya mungu (god's love) which she also played as a leading character . the movie was screened at the 2015 zanzibar international film festival and the movie won the 2016 africa magic viewers choice awards as the best movie eastern africa.  in july 2016, she launched her another movie called ni noma which she produced and starred as a leading character . the movie was sold via a mobile app called proinbox.  brand associations, endorsements and ambassadorship in 2013, michael was selected as official ambassador for dar es salaam film festival dff in dar es salaam. her film, foolish age, was also screened at that festival. in february 2014, she signed with airtel tanzania to be the host of the tv show airtel yatosha tv show. in 2015, she signed a brand ambassadorship deal with paisha tanzania to be the brand ambassador of the mobile app paisha that deals with online business. in 2016, she was named by hengan baby products and sanitary co. ltd. (tanzania) to be the ambassador of freestyle pads (napkins). in october 2017 she was named by azam media tanzania through their channel of cinemas, sinema zetu, to be the official ambassador of the sinema zetu international film festival (sziff).  in march 2019 she was the official host of sinema zetu international film festival (sziff2019) in february 2020 she signed a contract with multichoice tanzania to become a brand ambassador of dstv  in 2020 she signed a contract with azania company ltd  to become a brand ambassador of azania flour from 2020-2021 she was a brand ambassador of tecno mobile in tanzania  manslaughter conviction, pardoning, and probation  on 13 november 2017, michael was convicted in high court of tanzania for involuntary manslaughter and sentenced to two years in prison for the 2012 death of actor steven kanumba, whom she had been dating when she was a juvenile (17 years old).  michael was alleged to have caused the death of 28-year old kanumba. the death was said to have occurred after kanumba confronted michael for talking to
another man in front of him. michael was arrested and stayed in remand for almost a year for investigation. later, the charges were amended to involuntary manslaughter. member of parliament halima mdee arranged for lawyers peter kibatala and kennedy fungamtama to represent michael, because she believed she was innocent. in january 2013 michael was granted bail.  in october 2017, michael testified to the high court that after kanumba confronted her for talking to another man, he took her to his room by force and starting beating her with a sword while he was intoxicated. she admitted during her testimony that she was the last person to be with kanumba, and claimed that kanumba began breathing fast and collapsed while beating her, hitting his head. she said after kanumba fell down she used the opportunity to escape, unaware that he had died. she left the area and was later arrested without knowing what she was being arrested for. she said she found out the second day after her arrest by oysterbay police in dar es salaam. the officers that arrested michael found that she had injuries consistent with sword wounds as they were arresting her. a postmortem report from muhimbili national hospital of tanzania concluded that kanumba's death was caused by brain concussion as the result of difficulty in breathing in conjunction with excessive drinking.  on april 26, 2018 michael was among the prisoners who were pardoned by president john pombe magufuli whereby she was deducted 1/4 of her imprisonment. in may 2018 she was released from the prison by the high court of tanzania under the tanzania community services act of 2002, and the remaining time by doing community services after showing good behavior when she was in prison. in november 12, 2018 she completed her probation.  humanitarian work on january 23, 2019 michael started the campaign called "save my valentine" which aimed to raise money for helping people with special needs. through the campaign michael sold part of her clothes so as to collect a certain amount of money, she sold her 62 clothes and the money obtained were taken to the some of the orphanage centers in iringa tanzania during the valentine's day  filmography  television  radio drama series  movies  awards and nominations  references  external links          1995 births living people tanzanian film actresses people from dar es salaam people convicted of manslaughter 21st-century tanzanian actresses tanzanian television actresses tanzanian radio actresses
is a japanese media mix franchise by sunrise, pony canyon, and broccoli. a playstation vita game was released on september 21, 2016, a manga series began serialization in the november 2016 issue of sylph, which began serialization on september 22, 2016, and an anime television series produced by sunrise began airing on october 2, 2016 and ended on december 25, 2016.  characters  main characters   (anime) the protagonist of the series. a second year student who wanted to transfer to hoshigei high to be like her mother, sakura aigasaki. she is kind, friendly, and an amateur in making ikebana flower arrangements, but is working hard.   (child) a result-oriented, stoic singer who is a second year student. he is known as the "king" with the top singing skills in the school. he acts cool, but underneath his facade, he carries a passionate heart. he is under pressure from his father and his two older brothers to live up to the noble ichijoji family name. he is childhood friends with aoi, but at hoshigei high, they are rivals fighting for the top spot. in episode 1, he declares kohana as his rival due to their families' history, but as the story progresses, his feelings change.  an aloof calligrapher who goes his own way. he is a second year student who slouches, rarely talks, and is a genius in his own world. he is usually indifferent towards other people and the finer details, but once he becomes interested in something, he will become completely absorbed in it. he is childhood friends with teika, but they are rivals fighting for the top spot at school.   (child) a handsome sculptor who makes everyone around him happy. he is a third year student who is cheerful, energetic and attentive, and popular with his classmates. despite his small size frame, he is able to make giant sculptures with a chainsaw or chisel. his hobby is cooking. he respects and looks up to his grandfather, a master sculptor. he looks after monet, his younger cousin whom he bakes sweets for.   (child) a sexy dancer who loves to flirt. he is a third year student who is indiscriminately kind to everyone and puts those around him in a good mood. he is always making jokes, but he hides his anguished feelings. he hardly ever takes things seriously and has dancing abilities that captivate anyone that watches.  an up-and-
coming painter full of wisdom. a confident and slightly cheeky first year student, he is shy and sensitive to the words of others, but once he's opened his heart to someone, he gets needy. he is known as the "monochrome prince" for his monochrome paintings. although he is still a student, his paintings are highly regarded. he has an older twin brother who is also a painter. he is rintaro's cousin and has a pet hedgehog named rin.  a kind-hearted cellist who is accepting of everyone. he is friendly and can't leave those in need alone. he is a first year student, an athlete, and he loves basketball. he is the oldest among the five of his siblings. his music has a warm tone to it.  supporting characters  a second year student who is kohana's roommate and friend. she is an actress and also writes plays.   a teacher at hoshigei high. he is the teacher of kohana, juri, teika, and aoi's class. when he was a student at hoshigei, he participated in the art session with sakura aigasaki and masana ichijoji.   (game)  monet's twin brother who is also a painter.   (game)   teika's older brother. when he was a student at hoshigei, he participated in the art session with sakura aigasaki and chieri todo. he is a trustee of the school.   (anime)  teika's older brother. he is a trustee of the school.   (anime)  kohana's mother who specialized in ikebana flower arranging and died in an accident when kohana was a child. academy principal  (anime)  although a name has never been given or mentioned, he is the principal of the hoshigei academy. he is solely responsible for picking the members of the hoshigei festival committee. he also is responsible for choosing who comes into, stays, and/or leaves the hoshigel academy.  media  video game a cero c playstation vita game was released on september 21, 2016. the game was developed by hunex and produced by broccoli. in the game, the player takes the role of kohana aigasaki, whose name can be changed. the game features full voiced characters except for kohana. the opening theme for the game is titled "magical flower" and is sung by yuichiro umehara, kenn, yuki ono, wataru hatano, shouta aoi
, and takuya eguchi under the name artistars.  anime a 13-episode anime television series produced by sunrise began airing on october 2, 2016 on tokyo mx, sun tv, kbs kyoto, tv aichi, and bs11. the anime is directed by mitsue yamazaki with an original concept by sunrise's hajime yatate. kairi yura serves as the original character design with kumi ishii adapting the designs for the anime. the opening theme is titled  and the ending song is titled "please kiss my heart". both songs are sung by artistars. crunchyroll holds the rights to stream the anime.  episode list  manga a manga written by hajime yatate and drawn by junta mio began serialization in the november 2016 issue of sylph. a gag, 4-koma manga version of series, titled  is serialized online for free at ponimaga official website and is drawn by imouto.  notes  references  external links   official game website   anime with original screenplays bandai namco franchises gungho online entertainment franchises male harem anime and manga ikebana sunrise (company) 2016 anime television series debuts
ban takhli railway station is a railway station located in takhli subdistrict, takhli district, nakhon sawan, thailand. it is located 193.017 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 1 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 31 october 1905 as part of the northern line extension from lopburi to pak nam pho.  train services  rapid 102 chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 105/106 bangkok-sila at-bangkok  rapid 108 den chai-bangkok  rapid 109 bangkok-chiang mai  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 209/210 bangkok-ban takhli-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lopburi-phitsanulok-lopburi  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand railway stations opened in 1905 1905 establishments in siam
the 2016-17 czech extraliga season was the 24th season of the czech extraliga since its creation after the breakup of czechoslovakia and the czechoslovak first ice hockey league in 1993.  regular season as of march 3, 2017  chl qualification to champions hockey league  playoffs  play-in round  hc vitkovice steel - hc skoda plzen 2:3 (3:1, 3:2 ot, 3:5, 2:5, 1:2 ot)  pirati chomutov - bk mlada boleslav 3:2 (1:7, 1:6, 5:1, 2:1, 6:1)  play-off final: hc bili tygri liberec - hc kometa brno 0:4 (3:4, 3:4 ot, 0:3, 2:5). hc kometa brno has won its first czech league title (and 12th overall title; first since 1966).  relegation  references  external links     czech 2016-17 in czech ice hockey leagues czech extraliga seasons
the 2016-17 kategoria superiore was the 78th official season, or 81st season of top-tier football in albania (including three unofficial championships during world war ii) and the 17th season under the name kategoria superiore. skenderbeu were the defending champions. the season began on 7 september 2016 and concluded on 27 may 2017.  on 20 may 2017, kukesi defeated the reigning champions skenderbeu 2-0 to clinch their first-ever league title, in only their fifth season in the top-flight.  teams  changes ten teams competed in the league - the top eight teams from the previous season, as well as two teams promoted from the kategoria e pare. korabi defeated ada 1-0 at the reshit rusi stadium on the final matchday of the regular season in group a of the kategoria e pare to secure promotion to the kategoria superiore after a 54-year absence. luftetari were then promoted back to albanian superliga after a three-year absence as they defeated apolonia fier on the final matchday of the regular season in group b of the kategoria e pare. the two promoted clubs replace bylis and terbuni.  locations  stadiums  league table  results each team plays every opponent four times, twice at home and twice away, for a total of 36 games.  first half of season  second half of season  positions by round the table lists the positions of teams after each week of matches.  season statistics  scoring  top scorers  hat-tricks  note 4 player scored 4 goals  clean sheets  discipline  player  most yellow cards: 12 alfred zefi (korabi) vangjel zguro (lufetari)  most red cards: 2  arjan sheta (korabi) entonio pashaj (kukesi) stefan cicmil (vllaznia) erjon vucaj (tirana/laci)  club  most yellow cards: 104 luftetari  most red cards: 7 luftetari  korabi  references  external links   superliga at uefa.com livescore  2016-17 2016-17 in european association football leagues 1
chitham is an english surname, a variant of cheetham, probably derived from cheetham in lancashire, now part of manchester.  notable people sir charles carter chitham (1886-1972), a british policeman who served mostly in india claire chitham (born 1978), a new zealand actress robert chitham, a british architect and writer  see also chetham cheetham (surname) cheatham (surname)  chitham
established in 2011, the renminbi qualified foreign institutional investor (rqfii) program is a policy initiative that allows foreign investors who hold the rqfii quota to invest directly in mainland china's bond and equity markets. the program represents a continued loosening of china's capital controls and departure from its predecessor qfii. the rqfii program relaxes existing restrictions on currency settlement, adds permissible asset classes, and expands investor eligibility. the current rqfii relevant jurisdiction applies to financial organizations registered in hong kong, singapore, the united kingdom, france, korea, germany, australia, switzerland, canada, the united states and luxembourg.  history as the second largest economy in the world, china represents a key driver of global growth. although the renminbi has been elevated to reserve currency status, only 10.3% of global trade is done through the currency (as of 2015).  because of this imbalance, the chinese government has undertaken measures in recent years to open the country's capital account.  the qualified foreign institutional investor (qfii) program was launched in 2002. primary aims were letting financial institutions outside china invest in china's stock and bond markets. however, it was limited to certain financial institutions such as commercial banks, securities companies, insurance companies, and securities with no less than $500 million usd.  acknowledging that further action was necessary, rqfii was jointly established in december 2011 by the china securities regulatory commission, the people's bank of china, and the state administration of foreign exchange. it allows subsidiaries of domestic fund management companies and securities companies in hong kong to invest in the mainland securities market. initially, rmb 20 billion of quota was divided among 21 selected financial services firms in hong kong. the available quota was increased steadily throughout 2012 during the rollout of phases ii and iii of the plan, rising from rmb 50 billion to rmb 70 billion in quota and topping out to 270 rmb billion by the year's end. launching phase iv of the program in 2013 allowed for inclusion of firms based in singapore and london. 2014 saw inclusion of firms based in paris and taiwan.  available instruments the rqfii scheme applies to the following instruments:   exchange-listed or transferred a-share (not including the new third board)  bonds, warrants, and inter-bank market fixed income products (not including repo, abs, etc.)  mutual funds and aggregate asset management plans issued by mutual fund managers or brokerage houses (not including subsidiaries of these institutions or priority-infer
ior funds, etc.)  stock index futures   stock ipos, issuance of convertible bonds, placements and additional offerings, etc.  other instruments approved by csrc  eligible applicants  the rqfii program is open to two categories of investors:  applicants in the relevant jurisdictions that are subsidiaries of chinese fund management companies, chinese securities companies, chinese commercial banks, and chinese insurance companies  financial institutions that are registered in a relevant jurisdiction and with a principal place of business in a relevant jurisdiction  the rqfii eligible jurisdictions are currently hong kong, singapore, the united kingdom, france, korea, germany, australia, switzerland, canada, the united states, and luxembourg.  rqfii vs qfii  top 20 rqfii quota holders  references  investment in china institutional investors 2011 establishments in china
sinop archaeological museum, or sinop museum ( or sinop muzesi), is a national museum in sinop, turkey, exhibiting archaeological artifacts found in and around the city.  background  one of the earliest museum activities in turkey began in 1921, in sinop. artifacts and other objects of historical and cultural importance, found at different locations in the city, were initially conserved in a high school () building. in 1932, the items were transferred to the pervane medrese, a former religious school, where they formed the core of the sinop museum. the building was established as a museum and opened to the public in 1941. in 1947, a museum director was assigned to the site.  a joint team of german and turkish archaeologists, led by ludwig budde and ekrem akurgal, carried out excavations in the center of sinop and at kocagoz tumulis in demircikoy between 1951 and 1953. akurgal proposed the construction of a special museum building in sinop to hold the numerous artifacts. in 1968, the city municipality donated property in downtown sinop, which incorporated a seljuk empire-era tomb and the ruins of a serapeum uncovered during the excavations.  the two-story museum building, which is located in okullar cad. 2, in the center of sinop, was completed in 1970. a building renovation in 2001 allowed the museum to incorporate modern museology concepts. its re-opening took place in april 2006.  museum exhibits  open-air section  the ruin of a serapeum, a temple dedicated to the combined hellenistic-ancient egyptian deity serapis, is situated in the southwestern corner of the open-air museum section. it was unearthed, on-site, during excavations in 1951. inside the rectangular temple ruin, terracotta artifacts, architectural elements and figures of serapis, dionysus, heracles, isis and kore were found. the date of the edifice is unknown, however, an inscription indicates that it was dedicated to serapis.  the sultana's tomb (), also in the museum yard, is known locally as the "aynalı kadın turbesi", (literally: "tomb of the lady with mirror"). according to an inscription attached above the tomb's arched gate, it was constructed in june 1395. it contains three sarcophagi, including one belonging to the daughter of suleyman pasha. pasha was the eldest son of orhan i, the second bey of the newly established ottoman empire. his daughter, who died in 1395, was the spouse of
candaroglu bey suleyman pasha. the square-plan tomb is constructed of ashlar. it is topped with a wooden roof covered with turkish tiles instead of a dome, compared with buildings of that era, and has windows on three sides.  other exhibits, including architectural elements, milestones, headstones, sculptures made of stone or marble, large earthenware jars and mosaics, are on display in the northern part of the yard. islamic headstones erected to the south and west of the sultana's tomb give the impression of a cemetery.  indoor exhibits  the hallway off of the entrance contains sculptures and busts. a stone inscription featuring an agreement signed between sinope and heraclea pontica (today: karadeniz eregli) in 4th-century bc is also exhibited here.  the small artifacts room features utensils, metallic tools, vases, terracotta figurines and architectural elements from the serapeum, and glassware and artifacts from graves, all displayed in chronological order from the early bronze age (3300-2100 bc) to the end of the byzantine empire (1453). a mosaic panel depicting seven muses of the arts, uncovered at excavations in sinop's meydankapı neighborhood, decorates the center of this section's floor.  the stone works hall, reserved for the veneration of the dead, contains examples of the oldest steles from the archaic period in anatolia. a marble sculpture depicting two lions savaging a dee,r and a sarcophagus of a seaman are on display in this hall.  in the coinage section, the collection features examples of the first silver coins minted in sinop, city coins, and coins from the treasures of ordu and gelincik, as well as byzantine and seljuk coinage are on display.  the icon hall contains icons from eastern orthodox churches of byzantine-era sinop. the icons were painted and gilded fresco on plastered cloth or chestnut wood panel. they are similar to icons found in the churches of russia and cyprus.  amphora hall  during the french-turkish excavation carried out between 1994 and 2000 in the center, karakum and demircikoy areas of sinop, many amphora-manufacturing workshops and furnaces were unearthed. the findings revealed that the manufacturing of amphora, brick and roof tile was the main economic sector of sinop in the hellenistic, roman and byzantine periods. amphora from these excavations are exhibited in the amphora hall, as well as a replica of an amphora furnace, and a map showing the commercial distribution area of amphora from
sinop.  access the museum is located in okullar cad. 2, in the center of sinop. it is open everyday, except mondays, between 8:30 and 17:30 local time.  references  external links photo gallery of sinop museum at museum's official website  archaeological museums in turkey buildings and structures in sinop, turkey tourist attractions in sinop, turkey museum museums established in 1941 1941 establishments in turkey
dynasty is a live album by saxophonist stan getz recorded in london and originally released on the verve label in 1971 as a double album.  reception  the allmusic review by michael g. nastos stated "dynasty represents an interesting period in the artistic life of getz, well out of pure bop, in between his commercial successes with brazilian music, and on the verge of another phase of his life with fusion pioneers like chick corea. this is highly recommended, a solid effort from top to bottom".  track listing all compositions by eddy louiss except where noted.  "dum! dum!" - 13:18  "ballad for leo" (rene thomas) - 9:15  "our kind of sabi" - 17:08  "mona" (albert mangelsdorff) - 8:30  "theme for emmanuel" (thomas) - 11:25  "invitation" (bronisław kaper, paul francis webster) - 4:37  "ballad for my dad" (louiss, thomas) - 3:12  "song for martine" - 10:52  "dynasty" - 9:42  "i remember clifford" (benny golson) - 5:24  (bonus track - on 1989 cd reissue only)  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone eddy louiss - organ rene thomas -  guitar  bernard lubat - drums  references   1971 live albums stan getz live albums verve records live albums albums produced by george martin albums recorded at ronnie scott's jazz club
wayne burgess (born 1 september 1971) is a south african former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1971 births living people south african male cyclists olympic cyclists of south africa cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
hasselback potatoes or potato a la hasselbacken (swedish: hasselbackspotatis) are a type of baked potato that is cut about halfway through into thin, fan-like slices.  they can be served as a main course, side dish, or canape. various toppings can be added, such as caraway seeds, paprika, and bread crumbs.  origins hasselback potatoes were created in 1953 by leif elisson, a trainee chef at hasselbacken restaurant on djurgarden, stockholm.  references  potato dishes swedish cuisine
thavarumane udugore is a 1991 indian kannada-language drama film directed by b. subba rao and produced by d. rama naidu under suresh productions. the film stars sridhar, sunil and malashri. the film was received well and was declared a superhit at the box office. the film was a remake of the 1988 rajasthani film bai chali sasariye - the only rajasthani film remade in kannada.  the film's music was composed by upendra kumar and the audio was launched on the lahari music banner.  cast   malashri as lakshmi sridhar sunil rajesh hema choudhary viji chandrasekhar srinath umashree vaishali kasaravalli mysore lokesh balaraj mandeep roy keerthiraj veena  soundtrack  the music of the film was composed by upendra kumar, with lyrics by chi. udaya shankar.  references   1991 films indian films 1990s kannada-language films indian drama films films scored by upendra kumar kannada remakes of rajasthani films films directed by b. a. subba rao 1991 drama films suresh productions films
yulin township () is a township under the administration of jian'an district, xuchang, henan, china. , it has two residential communities and 29 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of henan xuchang
robattle, stylized robattle (a portmanteau of robot and battle), is a modular military robot unmanned ground vehicle developed by israel aerospace industries.  it is designed to undertake certain tasks otherwise done by infantry soldiers, such as convoy protection, armed reconnaissance and others. it moves on six wheels, but these can be replaced with tracks. the robot is capable of traversing uneven terrain and going over some obstacles such as low walls. robattle's modularity allows it to be fitted with robotic arms, radars and weapons, allowing it to engage in combat. as such, sensitive systems in the robattle are redundant to allow it to operate after taking damage.  the robattle weighs 7 tons and has the capability of carrying up to 3 tons. it communicates using 4g cellular technology (lte).  see also  guardium  avantguard  references   iai products unmanned ground combat vehicles
the 2016 premier futsal was the inaugural tournament of premier futsal. the season featured six teams, each playing four matches before culminating to the finals. the league started on 15 july 2016 and ended on 24 july 2016.  mumbai won the inaugural season by defeating kochi 3-2 on penalties via sudden death.  teams  stadiums and locations  marquee players  list of marquee players:   ronaldinho was replaced by cafu as the marquee player for goa.  squads  rules note: premier futsal tournament does not follow all the rules of international futsal.  rules of 2016 premier futsal  4 quarters, 10 minutes each.  no offsides.  throw-in instead of kick-in when ball goes out of play.  throw-in, penalty, keeper's release will have to be completed within 5 seconds.  5 players per team, unlimited rolling substitutes.  specially designed ball - size 4.  after 5, each foul lead to a penalty.  penalty shootout  5 penalties each.  penalty taker has 5 seconds to score.  unlimited touches of the ball.  deliberate foul by goalkeeper or preventing a goalscoring chance is a goal.  foul by attacker is a miss.  group stage  group a  group b  knockout stage  semi-finals  final  tournament team rankings premier league futsal       |}  season statistics  most goals  hat-tricks  awards  player of the match  end-of-season awards  telecast sony pictures networks india pvt. ltd. acquired exclusive rights to broadcast premier futsal. as part of the agreement, all premier futsal matches will be televised live on sony six, sony espn and sony aath. matches will also be available to live stream on sony liv.  see also   2016 premier futsal season squads  premier futsal  references   2016 2016 in indian sport
together 2016 was an ecumenical christian event held at the national mall in washington, d.c. on july 16, 2016.  the event was scheduled to feature over 40 speakers, including pope francis, the leader of the catholic church, who made a video address to the attendees of the event. other prominent speakers included the christian apologist ravi zacharias and evangelist samuel rodriguez, as well as musicians lecrae and hillsong united. the event is the largest christian event in the history of the united states. the organizer of the event nick hall, stated that "we believe it's time to lift up a message of hope. there's all kinds of division, so we're praying for healing and we're praying for change".  although the event was originally scheduled to conclude at 9 p.m., it ended at 4 p.m. due to excessive heat. officers reportedly responded to 350 medical calls for heat-related injuries. the large number of people who lost consciousness because of heat syncope overwhelmed emergency medical technicians.  2016 speakers  apologists  ann voskamp ravi zacharias josh mcdowell nabeel qureshi  clergy  francis chan christine caine luis palau mark batterson pope francis ronnie floyd samuel rodriguez  musicians  andy mineo (cancelled) casting crowns christine d'clario crowder hillsong united jeremy camp kari jobe kb kirk franklin (cancelled) lacey sturm (cancelled) lauren daigle lecrae  matt maher matthew west michael w. smith nick hall passion tasha cobbs tedashii trip lee  references  external links   christian ecumenism 2016 in christianity 2016 in washington, d.c.
andrew peebles aitken frse fbse (1843-1904) was a scottish agricultural chemist remembered primarily for his research into fertiliser response times. he laid the foundations of modern understanding of increased crop yields through the use of artificial fertilisers.  life  he was born at 122 rose st edinburgh on 30 april 1843, the son of mary ann (nee smith) (1819-1890) and john aitken (1814-1886) a cabinetmaker, the 3rd child of 12. he studied at both the university of edinburgh and the university of heidelberg in germany, graduating ma in 1867 and bsc in 1871. he received a doctorate in chemistry (dsc) in 1873.  his career began as assistant to prof alexander crum brown at the university of edinburgh in 1875 he then moved to william dick's veterinary college as professor of chemistry and toxicology. this was then based at 8 clyde street in the city centre. he also continued to lecture on agricultural chemistry at the university. he was elected a fellow of the botanical society of edinburgh in 1871.  in 1878 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were alexander crum brown, sir thomas richard fraser, john hutton balfour and andrew douglas maclagan. only from 1884 is he listed as a homeowner (probably indicating his marriage) living at 18 dublin street in edinburgh's new town.  he was president of the botanical society of edinburgh from 1895 to 1897.  he died at home, 38 garscube terrace in the coltbridge district of edinburgh on sunday 17 april 1904. he is buried in rosebank cemetery in north edinburgh.  family he was married to georgiana burnett brown (1855-1922). they had three daughters, katharine, helen and jessie.  references  1843 births 1904 deaths scientists from edinburgh alumni of the university of edinburgh scottish chemists fellows of the royal society of edinburgh
minister for planning is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by rita saffioti of the labor party. the position was first created after the 1953 state election, for the government of albert hawke, and has existed in every government since then. the minister is responsible for the state government's department of planning, which includes the western australian planning commission.  titles  23 february 1953 - 3 march 1971: minister for town planning  3 march 1971 - 12 october 1971: minister for decentralisation and town planning  12 october 1971 - 8 april 1974: minister for town planning  8 april 1974 - 25 february 1983: minister for urban development and town planning  25 february 1983 - 16 february 2001: minister for planning  16 february 2001 - 23 september 2008: minister for planning and infrastructure  23 september 2008 - present: minister for planning  list of ministers  see also  minister for heritage (western australia)  minister for housing (western australia)  minister for lands (western australia)  minister for state development (western australia)  minister for transport (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  planning minister for planning
the 1936 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1936 college football season.  in their eighth season under head coach mike gary, the hilltoppers compiled a 2-5 record and were outscored by their opponents, 80 to 60. halfback george ockstadt was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
the 2020 united states senate election in oregon was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of oregon, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. incumbent democratic senator jeff merkley won reelection to a third term in office. although this senate seat was largely expected to be one of the safest for the democrats, the race received national attention due to the republican nominee jo rae perkins's promotion of the unfounded qanon conspiracy theory.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee jeff merkley, incumbent u.s. senator (also nominated by the oregon independent party and the working families party)  withdrawn michael david, activist and ethnographer  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee jo rae perkins, former chairwoman of the linn county republican party  eliminated in primary paul romero, refrigeration repair technician and candidate for oregon's 2nd congressional district in 2016 and 2018 robert schwartz, dance teacher john verbeek, financial executive and nominee for oregon's 1st congressional district in 2018  withdrawn matthew kulow  declined knute buehler, former state representative for district 54, nominee for oregon secretary of state in 2012 and governor of oregon in 2018 (running for oregon's 2nd congressional district)  endorsements  results  other candidates  pacific green party  nominee  ibrahim taher, philosopher, anti-war activist, current member state coordinating committee in the pacific green party (also nominated by the oregon progressive party)  endorsements  libertarian party  nominee    gary dye, former refinery operator and engineer  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  results  perkins flipped five counties that went for merkley in 2014, four of which were won by small margins: columbia, coos, jackson, polk, and yamhill counties.  notes  general  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  jeff merkley (d) for senate  jo rae perkins (r) for senate  ibrahim taher (g) for senate  united states senate oregon 2020
zhekov () is a bulgarian masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is zhekova. it may refer to aleksandra zhekova (born 1987), bulgarian snowboarder  andrey zhekov, bulgarian volleyball player  nikola zhekov (1864-1949), bulgarian statesman  petar zhekov (born 1944), bulgarian football player  slavi zhekov (born 1976), bulgarian football player stanislav zhekov (born 1980), bulgarian football player  bulgarian-language surnames
the book and author luncheon was created in 1938 by the american booksellers association. the program provided a prominent forum for authors to speak to the public about their works in one of the largest markets for books in the united states, new york city.   the aba partnered with the new york herald tribune early in its first year, and with wnyc in its 11th season, in 1948. it would air on wnyc until the luncheon's end, in 1974. the book and author luncheon produced 8 events per year, each with 2 to 4 speakers. it was held at a variety of locations in manhattan, most frequently at the waldorf astoria. though it predominantly featured authors as speakers, it drew from a wide variety of notable figures during its 31-year run. some of its famous guest speakers include vladimir nabokov, james a. michener, jane jacobs, robert moses, rachel carson, john kenneth galbraith, sammy davis jr., arthur m. schlesinger jr. and marian anderson, among many, many others. it was hosted for the majority of its run by new york herald tribune book review editor irita bradford van doren.  external links book and author luncheon at the wnyc archives  american talk radio programs book promotion
classically handsome brutes was a british experimental rock trio from leeds, england, formed in 2012 by harry reynolds, will cook and jack scarlott.  discography  albums  singles  music videos  members harry reynolds - guitar, vocals (2012-2020) jack scarlott - bass, vocals (2012-2020) will cook - drums, percussion, vocals (2012-2020)  musical style the band's musical style has been described as noise rock, math rock, mathcore,and hardcore punk by critics.  references  2012 establishments in england british noise rock groups musical groups established in 2012 post-hardcore groups hardcore punk groups from leeds mathcore musical groups
sadqa hussein (; in ashkenazi hebrew: tzadka chutzin; ) february 3, 1876 - february 17, 1961) was a sephardi dayan, mohel, and spiritual leader to the iraqi jewish community in iraq and israel. he taught thousands of students in baghdad, and led the iraqi expatriate community in jerusalem. he was the founder and rosh mesivta of the shemesh sedaqah synagogue in the geula neighborhood of jerusalem.  early life  sadqa hussein was born in baghdad, ottoman iraq, to rabbi moshe hussein, and grew up in a prosperous family. he was a fifth-generation descendant of the 18th-century rabbi sadqa bekhor hussein, the author of the halakhic responsa sedaqah u-mishpat. in his youth, he studied at midrash bet zilkha, the foremost yeshiva of its day, under the tutelage of rabbi elisha dangour, av beit din of baghdad. he later studied under the ben ish hai, who would count him among his favorite students. hussein's financial situation allowed him to pursue his studies uninterrupted, allowing him to achieve a high degree of torah scholarship.  educator  hussein founded midrash talmud torah, the community heder in baghdad, which accepted hundreds of children regardless of their parents' ability to pay tuition. funding for the school was arranged by way of a luxury tax that was imposed on the sale of meat. during his years in baghdad, hussein personally taught upwards of 4,000 children. every evening he gave a shiur in halakha to householders that went four or five hours. from those years he earned the title "hakham sadqa", which he was known by the rest of his life.  as a result of world war i, the ottoman empire lost control of iraq to the united kingdom. at first, the material situation of the local jews improved. the british, who found themselves in control of a vastly enlarged empire, needed clerks who were familiar with the local language and customs to help them with their bureaucracy, and found the jews to be suited to the task. the jewish community would go on to take a commanding role in the banking and insurance sectors of the economy. this period also saw many young students seeking to advance their education abroad at the great universities of england.  as a result of these events, the jews began to drift away from their traditional customs, taking on a more modern approach to their daily lives. eventually, certain people in the laity began to challenge some of hussein's education policies, especially
in regards to the unpopular meat tax, and his decision to omit most secular studies from the talmud torah's curriculum. he stood virtually alone against his adversaries, who did not refrain from trying to implicate him to the authorities on account of his perceived antiquated positions. by calling for public protests, fasting, and the reading of kinnot (dirges), he eventually succeeded in blocking the reformers' initiatives, refusing to give in to his opponents' disregard for the traditions that had been bequeathed to him by his mentors.  move to jerusalem  having absorbed from his master the ben ish hai a longing for jerusalem, hussein had made a pilgrimage there in 1904 together with rabbi yaakov chaim sofer (the kaf hahayyim) and rabbi yehezkel ezra rahamim (the asei haya'ar), where they held communion in the court of rabbi yaakov shaul elyashar. in 1924, with his family and a few close disciples, hussein made aliyah and settled in jerusalem, then part of british mandatory palestine.  shemesh sedaqah synagogue   in 1929 hussein established the shemesh sedaqah synagogue on rechov haggai in the geula neighborhood of jerusalem. the name of the congregation was derived from the verse "and the sun of righteousness shall arise with healing in its wings" (malachi 3:20). hussein both led the synagogue as rabbi, and taught shiurim in the synagogue to students and local householders.  hussein endeavored to fulfill many of the mitzvot particular to the land of israel (mitzvot hateluyot ba'aretz). to that end, he planted wheat in the backyard of the synagogue, separating from it the terumah and ma'aser, and relinquished the pe'ah. he would then harvest it for use in his own specially prepared passover matzo, which he then distributed. he also kept a donkey for the fulfillment of the petter hamor.  hussein demanded this kind of scrupulousness from his peers as well. one time in the 1950s, he asked his student mordechai eliyahu to arrange a meeting for him with  grand rabbi yoel teitelbaum of satmar, who was visiting jerusalem at the time. hussein ordered teitelbaum to desist from his practice of riding in a car on friday afternoon after sundown; teitelbaum based this practice on the rulings of rabbeinu tam, but hussein deemed it a violation of the shabbat.
sefardi edah haharedith  hussein refused to receive any benefit from his status in the community, recusing himself from any formal rabbinic position, although he did serve as dayan in the sephardi edah haharedith. he set up free torah lectures for young and old, and either paid for tutors out of his own pocket, or taught the lessons himself. an expert mohel, hussein performed circumcisions on thousands of infants, sometimes to a fourth generation in the family.  family  hussein married no'am, his first cousin, the daughter of rabbi avraham sadqa, who bore him one son. his grandson, rabbi menashe sadqa, is a pulpit rabbi in queens, new york.  death and legacy  hussein died at the age of 85, and was buried in the sanhedria cemetery in jerusalem.  among hussein's students were sephardi chief rabbis of israel yitzhak nissim and mordechai eliyahu; deans of porath yosef yeshiva yehuda tzadka and ben zion abba shaul;  works  meqitz nirdamim a collection of exhortations delivered on rosh hashanah in jerusalem during the holocaust (2 volumes, published in jerusalem in 1943 and 1944)  see also   history of the jews in iraq  references  sources  external links   photograph of sadqa hussein; breslev-midot.com  gravestone of sadqa hussein; mytzadik.com  1876 births 1961 deaths 19th-century rabbis 20th-century rabbis people from baghdad iraqi rabbis iraqi emigrants to mandatory palestine sephardi rabbis in mandatory palestine sephardic haredi rabbis in israel rabbis in jerusalem mohels burials at sanhedria cemetery
david cook (born 12 january 1969) is a british former cyclist. cook competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics. he also represented england in the road race, at the 1990 commonwealth games in auckland, new zealand.  references  external links    1969 births living people british male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from darlington cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for england
prateek baid is an indian model, actor, automobile engineer and beauty pageant titleholder. he hails from the city of bikaner in the indian state of rajasthan.  biography prateek baid was born on 15 september 1991 in bikaner, a city in rajasthan. he went to central academy bikaner school. he graduated with a degree in mechanical engineering from manda institute of technology college bikaner. he won the glam icon 2015 held on 22 november 2015 at kurla, mumbai organized by phoenix market city mumbai. he made his television debut with maharakshak: devi aired on zee tv. later in 2016 he won rubaru mr. india 2016 contest held on 24 april 2016 at anya hotel in gurugram (previously gurgaon) and represented india at mister global 2016 contest held at central plaza in chiang mai, thailand and won the best  model award and placed as the top 15 semi-finalist.  awards and honours •	below is the list of awards won by prateek baid.  see also rohit khandelwal puneet beniwal  references  external links prateek baid: mister global india 2016 mister global website rubaru mister india 2016 winners rubaru mister india 2016 winners (photos) mister global 2016 contestants in swimwear asian contenders in mr global 2016 mister global - pageantopolis prateek baid official facebook  living people 1991 births indian male models male actors from rajasthan indian male television actors indian beauty pageant winners male beauty pageant winners beauty pageant contestants from india people from bikaner
kcjz (105.3 fm, "bob fm") is a commercial radio station that is licensed to cambria, california and serves the san luis obispo county area. the station is owned by adelman broadcasting and airs a variety hits format.  history kcjz began broadcasting in 2013. in june 2014, adelman broadcasting adopted a variety hits format for the station with the branding "bob fm".  references  external links  2013 establishments in california bob fm stations mass media in san luis obispo county, california cjz radio stations established in 2013
sam schachter (born may 8, 1990) is a canadian olympic  beach volleyball player.  schachter was born in north york, ontario and now lives in richmond hill, ontario. his parents jon and doris schachter, and he has an older brother nathan. he attended westmount collegiate institute for high school. he earned his bachelor of arts in communications studies at wilfrid laurier university.  in 2014 he and his then partner josh binstock were canadian national champions and also won a gold medal at the parana open, an fivb (international volleyball federation) world tour event. in 2015 they competed at the 2015 pan american games in toronto, and finished 8th. schachter competed along with binstock at the 2016 summer olympics.  references  1990 births living people canadian men's beach volleyball players sportspeople from north york sportspeople from richmond hill, ontario volleyball players from toronto beach volleyball players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic beach volleyball players of canada beach volleyball players at the 2015 pan american games university of toronto alumni jewish canadian sportspeople beach volleyball players at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games competitors for canada pan american games competitors for canada commonwealth games silver medallists for canada
this is a list of moths of the family erebidae that are found in india. it also acts as an index to the species articles and forms part of the full list of moths of india.  subfamily acontiinae  acontia marmoralis (fabricius, 1794)  subfamily arctiinae spilarctia bifascia hampson, 1891 spilarctia casigneta (kollar, 1844) spilarctia castanea (hampson, 1893) spilarctia coorgensis kirti & gill, 2010 spilarctia lutea (hufnagel, 1766) spilarctia mona (swinhoe, 1885) spilarctia obliqua (walker, 1855) spilarctia todara (moore, 1872)  subfamily boletobiinae  araeopteron fasciale (hampson, 1896)  araeopteron goniophora hampson, 1907  araeopteron griseata hampson, 1907  araeopteron nivalis (hampson, 1907)  araeopteron pictale hampson, 1893  araeopteron poliophaea (hampson, 1910)  araeopteron proleuca hampson, 1907  araeopteron rufescens (hampson, 1910)  araeopteron xanthopis (hampson, 1907)  cretonia vegetus (swinhoe, 1885)  lophoruza lunifera (moore, [1885] 1884-1887)  metaemene atriguttata (walker, 1862)  zurobata vacillans (walker, 1864)  subfamily herminiinae  bertula partita hampson, 1891  hydrillodes abavalis (walker, [1859] 1858)  hydrillodes hemusalis (walker, [1859] 1858)  hydrillodes lentalis guenee, 1854  mixomelia albapex (hampson, 1895)  mixomelia duplexa (moore, 1882)  mixomelia relata (hampson, 1891)  naarda calligrapha  toth & ronkay, 2015   naarda fuscicosta (hampson, 1891)  naarda inouei  toth & ronkay, 2015  naarda molybdota (hampson, 1912)   naarda numismata  toth & ronkay, 2015  nodaria externalis guenee, 1854  nodaria fusca
hampson, 1895  nodaria simplex hampson, 1898  polypogon fractalis (guenee, 1854)  simplicia butesalis (walker, 1858)  simplicia mistacalis guenee, 1854  simplicia niphona (butler, 1878)  simplicia robustalis (guenee, 1854)  simplicia xanthoma prout, 1928  subfamily hypeninae  acidon albolineata (hampson, 1895)  acidon evae lodl, 1998  acidon hemiphaea (hampson 1906)  acidon nigribasis (hampson, 1895)  acidon steniptera (hampson, 1902)  acidon rectilineata (hampson, 1896)  anoratha paritalis (walker, [1859] 1858)  catada bipartita (moore, 1882)  hiaspis fuscobrunnea (hampson, 1895)  hypena albisigna moore, 1882  hypena ciaridoides moore, 1882  hypena iconicalis walker, [1859] 1858  hypena indicatalis walker, [1859] 1858  hypena labatalis walker, [1859] 1858  hypena laceratalis walker, [1859] 1858  hypena nocturnalis swinhoe, 1896  hypena occatus hampson, 1882  hypena ophiusoides moore, 1882  hypena rhombalis guenee, 1854  hypena thermesialis walker, [1866] 1865  itmaharela basalis moore, 1882  lysimelia alstoni holloway, 1979  lysimelia neleusalis walker, [1859] 1858  sarobela litterata (pagenstecher, 1888)  rhynchina obliqualis (kollar, 1844)  subfamily rivulinae  rivula basalis hampson, 1891  rivula bioculalis moore, 1877  rivula curvifera (walker, 1862)  rivula niveipuncta swinhoe, 1905  rivula ochracea (moore, 1882)  rivula pallida moore, 1882  rivula striatura swinhoe, 1895  references    x m
the international racquetball federation's 18th racquetball world championships were held in cali, colombia, from july 15 to 23, 2016. this was the first time worlds were in colombia, and the first time a south american country hosted the event since 1998, when cochabamba, bolivia, was the host city.  mexican paola longoria won her third world championship in women's singles, which ties her with cheryl gudinas and michelle gould for most world championships in women's singles. ana gabriela martinez of guatemala was longoria's opponent in the final, and she was a surprise finalist, as she was only 16 years old, although she was the world junior champion in girl's u16. also, neither american player - michelle key nor rhonda rajsich - made the podium, which was the first time a usa woman had not finished in the top three in world championship history.  tournament format the 2016 world championships used a two-stage format with an initial group stage that was a round robin with the results used to seed players for a medal round.  round robin  pool a  pool b  pool c  pool d  pool e  pool f  pool g  pool h  medal round source  references  women's singles
fort howard paper company was an american pulp and paper company based in green bay, wisconsin. its products were sold under a variety of brand names, including envision, fort howard, mardi gras, and soft'n gentle.  the company merged with james river corporation in 1997 to form the fort james corporation; it became part of georgia-pacific in 2000.  history  austin e. cofrin founded the fort howard paper company in 1919. it was named after fort howard, a 19th century u.s. army fortification located along the west bank of the fox river in green bay.  in the 1930s, the company began experimenting with recycled paper production.  in 1960, austin e. cofrin stepped down as ceo, and handed control of the company to his son, john p. cofrin.  in 1971, the company was taken public, and common stock was offered.  in 1976, the company began construction on its second facility in muskogee, oklahoma.  in 1980, the company acquired the harmon group of new york city. they also expanded internationally by acquiring the sterling group of manchester, england.  in 1983, they purchased the maryland cup corporation, the largest manufacturer of paper and plastic food products.  in 1988, the company was taken private, and in 1989 they sold their cup operations, because it was not cost effective.  in 1997, the company merged with another green bay paper company, the james river corporation. the new company became the fort james corporation. three years later, the fort james corporation was acquired by georgia-pacific.  awards in 1990, the fort howard paper company was recognized with the environmental protection agency administrator's award for recycling leadership.  in 1991, they received the national recycling coalition award for recycling innovation as well as the american paper institute's environmental and energy achievement award.  legacy the historical records of the fort howard paper company are housed at the area research center at the university of wisconsin-green bay.  references  companies based in green bay, wisconsin manufacturing companies of the united states pulp and paper companies of the united states defunct pulp and paper companies manufacturing companies established in 1919 manufacturing companies disestablished in 1997 georgia-pacific 1919 establishments in wisconsin 1997 disestablishments in wisconsin
ngc 6412 is a spiral galaxy located in the constellation draco. it is designated as sbc in the galaxy morphological classification scheme and was discovered by the british astronomer william herschel on 12 december 1797. ngc 6412 is located at about 76.6mly away from earth.  see also   list of ngc objects (6001-7000)  list of ngc objects  references  external links     barred spiral galaxies draco (constellation) 6412 10897 060393
benoit paire was the defending champion, but chose to compete in hamburg instead.  albert ramos vinolas won his first atp title, defeating fernando verdasco in the final, 6-3, 6-4.  seeds the top four seeds receive a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  references  main draw  qualifying draw  swedish open - singles 2016 men's singles
a marine thruster is a device for producing directed hydrodynamic thrust mounted on a marine vehicle, primarily for maneuvering or propulsion. there are a variety of different types of marine thrusters and each of them plays a role in the maritime industry. marine thrusters come in many different shapes and sizes, for example screw propellers, voith-schneider propellers, waterjets, ducted propellers, tunnel bow thrusters, and stern thrusters, azimuth thrusters, rim-driven thrusters, rov and submersible drive units. a marine thruster consists of a propeller or impeller which may be encased in some kind of tunnel or ducting that directs the flow of water to produce a resultant force intended to obtain movement in the desired direction or resist forces which would cause unwanted movement. the two subcategories of marine thrusters are for propulsion and maneuvering, the maneuvering thruster typically in the form of bow or stern thrusters and propulsion thrusters ranging from azimuth thrusters to rim drive thrusters.  positioning thrusters   positioning thrusters come in applications, bow thrusters at the forward end of the vessel, and stern thrusters mounted aft on the boat. their purpose is to maneuver or position the boat to a greater precision than the propulsion device can accomplish. their positioning along the length of the vessel allows for directed lateral thrust ahead and astern of the centre of lateral resistance so that the vessel may be maneuvered away from obstructions in its path, or towards a desired position, especially when coming to or away from a dock. these positioning thrusters are usually significantly smaller than the main propulsion thrusters because they only have to do small adjustments rather than moving the whole vessel at speed. both bow and stern thrusters may be housed in through-hull tunnels. depending on the size of the motors driving these propellers, they could draw an insignificant amount of power or a large amount of power that requires much caution to operate. another smaller subset of positioning thrusters is those used for maneuvering unmanned aquatic vehicles like guanay ii auv tested by scientists from spain (masmitja, 2018).  propulsion thrusters   propulsion thrusters are those thrusters which provide longitudinal motion for vessels as an alternative to traditional propellers. there are a variety of types of propulsion thrusters but the most common form is the azimuth thruster, that can rotate 360 degrees on a vertical axis to optionally produce thrust for maneuvering. (lindborg, 1997). the amount of thrust produced is controllable. there are variants of azimuth thrusters such as crp thrusters which have two contra-rot
ating azimuth thrusters or swing-up azimuth thrusters that can be retracted when not in use to reduce drag on the vessel (wartsila encyclopedia). other propulsion thrusters like outboard thrusters which can be easily put in and out of service, rim drive thrusters that are driven via the external ring with the blades mounted on the inner face of the ring with their tips towards the center, or tilted thrusters pointed away from the hull to minimize interaction with the ship and increase thruster efficiency. the choice between using thrusters or traditional propellers to propel marine vessels is a compromise between versatility and efficiency. propellers are designed to work in-line with a propulsion plant and produce one-directional thrust while thrusters are more customizable and have a more versatile application. they have this versatility at the cost of complexity and lower efficiency - they are not as robust as propellers and typically have applications on smaller vessels that don't require as much power.  reference list   propulsion marine engineering
lexicase is a type of dependency grammar originally developed beginning in the early 1970s by stanley starosta at the university of hawaii. dozens of starosta's graduate students also contributed to the theory and wrote at least 20 doctoral dissertations using lexicase to analyze numerous languages of asia (japanese, mandarin, vietnamese, thai, khmer, tagalog, etc.), europe (greek, russian, etc.), and africa (swahili and yoruba).  lexicase is a monostratal x-bar grammar (i.e. it is not a transformational grammar) in which words are the heads of their own phrases (i.e. there are no assumed empty phrases). in lexicase, words have features that determine the morphosyntactic distribution of their dependents. a primary goal of lexicase is to provide a simple, transparent, disprovable means of testing cross-linguistic tendencies.  as a lexically focused theory, lexicase has been used to identify verb subcategories in korean, russian, thai, and vietnamese, and noun subcategories in khmer and thai and to provide an overall language description of pacoh in central vietnam. regarding arguments and clause structure, it has been used to explore case in greek and mandarin chinese and transitivity and ergativity in amis, an indigenous language in taiwan and in proto-central pacific austronesian, among other topics.  references  external sources alves, mark j. (2000). a pacoh analytic grammar. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. bender, byron w. (2002). in memoriam, stanley starosta 1939-2002. oceanic linguistics volume 41, number 2, december 2002. 255-274. clark, marybeth. (1978). coverbs and case in vietnamese. pacific linguistics, the australian national university.  indrambarya, kitima. (1994). subcategorization of verbs in thai. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. jeong, hy-sook rhee. (1992). a valency subcategorization of verbs in korean and russian: a lexicase dependency approach. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. kikusawa, ritsuko. (2000). reconstructing the actancy systems of proto-central pacific and its daughter languages: ergativity, accusativity and their diachronic development. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. liao, hsiu-chuan
. (2004). transitivity and ergativity in formosan and philippine languages. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. sak-humphrey, channy. (1996). khmer nouns and noun phrases: a dependency grammar analysis. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. savetamalya, saranya. (1989). thai nouns and noun phrases: a lexicase analysis. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i. starosta, stanley. (1985). mandarin case marking: a localistic lexicase analysis. in journal of chinese linguistics, 13, 215-266. starosta, stanley. (1988). the case for lexicase: an outline of lexicase grammatical theory. open linguistics series, ed. by robin fawcett. london: pinter publishers. starosta, stanley. (2001). dependency grammar and monostratal transfer. in language matters: in honour of professor c. ramarao, ed. by b. vijayanarayana, k. nagamma reddy, and aditi mukherjee, 127-154. hyderabad: centre for advanced study in linguistics, osmania university, and booklinks corporation. starosta, stanley. (2006). lexicase revisited. encyclopedia of languages and linguistics. pergamon press. starosta, stanley. (2008). dependency grammar and lexicalism. in an international handbook of contemporary research, ed. by vilmos agel, ludwig m. eichinger, hans-werner eroms, peter hellwig, hans jurgen heringer, and hening lobin. berlin and new york: walter de gruyter. trask, r. l. 1993. a dictionary of grammatical terms in linguistics. london: routledge. wilawan, supriya. (1993). a reanalysis of so-called serial verb constructions in thai, khmer, mandarin chinese, and yoruba. ph.d. dissertation. honolulu: university of hawai'i.  external links   stan starosta's home page  dependency grammar natural language parsing
the 1931-32 season was the first season of competitive association football in the football league played by chester, an english club based in chester, cheshire.  chester was elected to the football league in the second round of voting surpassing nelson after the first voting ended in a draw.  football league  results summary  results by matchday  matches  † - wigan borough later resigned from the league, record expunged  fa cup  welsh cup  season statistics  references  further reading  external links   1931-32 english football clubs 1931-32 season
castanopsis fulva is a tree in the beech family fagaceae. the specific epithet  is from the latin meaning "tawny", referring to the indumentum.  description castanopsis fulva grows as a tree up to  tall with a trunk diameter of up to . the bark is smooth or fissured. the coriaceous leaves measure up to  long. its ovoid or conical nuts measure up to  long.  distribution and habitat castanopsis fulva grows naturally in borneo, peninsular malaysia and sumatra. its habitat is hill dipterocarp and kerangas  forests up to  altitude.  references  fulva trees of borneo trees of peninsular malaysia trees of sumatra plants described in 1914
enrico cruciani alibrandi (9 july 1839 - 8 november 1921) was an italian politician who served as senator and mayor of rome.  early life alibrandi  was born in rome, in what was then the papal states. he obtained an engineer degree from the scuola d'applicazione per gli ingegneri, in his native city.  politics after the 1870 capture of rome by the italian army, commanded by raffaele cadorna, alibrandi became a member of the provisional government council. following italy's unification, he served as rome city councilor for public education and as  acting mayor between december 1904 and 10 july 1905, whereupon he was appointed mayor of rome. he served as mayor until 10 july 1907, remaining thereafter on the city council until 1914, while also serving  on the italian senate where he was elected on 21 january 1906.  he died in 1921 in rome.  references  1839 births 1921 deaths 20th-century italian politicians mayors of rome
james drane (1808-1869) was an american politician.  early life james drane was born in 1808 in columbia county, georgia.  career drane served in the mississippi house of representatives from 1836 to 1850. he went on to serve in the mississippi state senate from 1850 to 1865, including as its president from 1858 to 1865.  drane also ran for governor of mississippi in 1857 and 1859.  death drane died in 1869.  references  1808 births 1869 deaths people from columbia county, georgia people from choctaw county, mississippi members of the mississippi house of representatives mississippi state senators 19th-century american politicians
the strata management act 2013 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to provide for the proper maintenance and management of buildings and common property, and for related matters.  preamble whereas it is expedient for the purposes only of ensuring uniformity of law and policy with respect to local government to make laws relating to the maintenance and management of buildings and common property within peninsular malaysia and the federal territory of labuan  structure the strata management act 2013, in its current form (8 february 2013), consists of 11 parts containing 153 sections and 4 schedules (including no amendment).  part i: preliminary  part ii: administration of the act  part iii: dealings in building or land intended for subdivision into parcels  part iv: strata management before existence of management corporation  chapter 1: general  chapter 2: management by developer before joint management body is established  chapter 3: management by joint management body  chapter 4: miscellaneous provisions applicable to this part  chapter 5: transitional and saving provisions due to the repeal of the building and common property (maintenance and management) act 2007  part v: strata management after existence of management corporation  chapter 1: general  chapter 2: management by developer before first annual general meeting of management corporation  chapter 3: management by developer after first annual general meeting of management corporation  chapter 4: subsidiary management corporation and limited common property   chapter 5: miscellaneous provision applicable to this part  chapter 6: transitional and saving provisions due to consequential amendments to the strata titles act 1985  part vi: managing agent  part vii: deposit to rectify defects  part viii: insurances  part ix: disputes and strata management tribunal  chapter 1: general  chapter 2: establishment and organization  chapter 3: jurisdiction of tribunal  chapter 4: conduct of proceedings  chapter 5: awards of tribunal  chapter 6: miscellaneous provisions applicable to this part  part x: enforcement  part xi: miscellaneous  schedules  management responsibilities  the developer is responsible to maintain and manage the building intended for strata title subdivisions during the first year after vacant possession (developer's management period). within that one year, the developer shall call for an annual general meeting of all proprietors, during which, the joint management body (jmb) is formed. the jmb comprises the proprietors and the developer. the committee members appointed by the proprietors during the general meeting and the developer forms the joint management committee (jmc). the jmc acts on behalf of the jmb who has the responsibility to maintain and manage the building pending the issuance of
individual strata titles. after strata titles are issued by the land office, the developer is responsible to call for the first annual general meeting of the management corporation. the corporation appoints its committee members during the general meeting known as the management committee (mc). the management corporation and the management committee do not include the developer.  references  external links  strata management act 2013   effect of the new strata management act 2013 on upcoming strata developments, adzman shah mohd ariffin  2013 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
yogi aaron is a canadian yoga teacher and author of the book autobiography of a naked yogi. under the name aaron star he founded the naked yoga movement in new york city, which incorporates elements of both partner and tantric yoga and is performed while being nude.  early life and career  at 18, star began working out at a vancouver community center. he realized that keeping in shape was a lifelong responsibility and became a student of yoga in 1991 and a teacher in 1997. he travelled across the world visiting numerous yoga ashrams and retreat centers, studying with yoga teachers including bryan kest, rod stryker, swami rama, as well as with other spiritual masters in the himalayas.   star arrived in manhattan in 2001 and within a short time was offering retreats in different countries. it was during a retreat in hawaii that star and his longtime student, adam, first discussed creating "a community that is yoga-based... and where people can heal their spirits." six years later, they purchased property in costa rica and formed what is today known as blue osa.  star popularized the idea of practicing hot nude yoga which garnered a large following of men in the gay community of new york. since then it has spread out in chicago, los angeles and boston. he started the hot nude yoga movement in chelsea, new york in 2001 in the building on the southwest corner of 23rd street and sixth avenue.  star speaks on various topics, most commonly on freedom of oneself and how to be free along with being comfortable with oneself. fulfillment of life's purpose is another common topic he speaks and writes about.  autobiography of a naked yogi  star wrote autobiography of a naked yogi in 2015. in it, he details how an upbringing in 70's british columbia, canada along with a confrontational childhood and a brutal boarding school education set him on an altogether different trajectory. however instilled with determination and a love for the great outdoors he strove to understand himself in landscapes. reviewing the book, broadwayworld wrote that "yogi aaron's narrative is one of empowerment, imbued with a sense of adventure."  criticism  star's hot nude yoga classes received criticism for its heightened sensuality. the book yoga in the modern world: contemporary perspectives calls hot nude yoga "a promotion of sexual expression that would have scandalized the likes of swami sivananda", while it was also defined as "soft-core pornography" by stewart j lawrence in the guardian. joshua stein, editor  for out magazine, who has attended the class wrote that the quality of yoga was
diminished by heightened sensuality and according to the associated press, hot nude yoga seems to be a "form of sensualized tantric yoga practiced nude."  references  yoga teachers 1972 births living people
gunther birkenfeld (9 march 1901 - 22 august 1966) was a german writer.   his books were banned during the nazi years but he remained in the country and was conscripted for aircraft monitoring during the war.   during the postwar period, in what had become the soviet occupation zone, he was a co-founder, in 1948/49, of the anti-communist combat group against inhumanity ("kampfgruppe gegen unmenschlichkeit").  life gunther birkenfeld was born in cottbus and grew up in berlin.   he received his doctorate in 1923, and went on to work as an editor with the  publishing house.   between 1927 and 1930 he was general secretary of the  (schutzverband deutscher schriftsteller). his youthful novel dritter hof links (published in english as a room in berlin) appeared in 1929, and was well received, also appearing in translation.  the political backdrop changed savagely in january 1933 when the nazi party took power and converted germany into a one-party dictatorship.  birkenfeld's first novel was banned in germany (although the english language translation appears still to have been available in london). dritter hof links appeared again on the list of banned books, together with his subsequent novel liebesferne (1930), when the list was updated and reissued in 1938. during the twelve years the nazis were in power, birkenfeld (as he later explained to  in 1947) managed to carry on in what was termed inner emigration in a low profile lectureship, also producing several popular biographical novels including one on johann gutenberg and another on the emperor augustus. he was also conscripted, during the second world war, for aircraft monitoring.  war ended in may 1945 and berlin was divided into zones of occupation between the principal victor nations. birkenfeld obtained a licence from the us occupation zone to edit and produce a twice monthly newssheet entitled horizon:  newssheet for the younger generation (horizont: zeitschrift der jungen generation). the title defined its target readership. contributors were for the most part also from the younger generation, writing about problems of reorientation and training for a transformed postwar era. under the leadership of the 45 year old birkenfeld the young journalists rejected any form of intellectual suppression of important themes. that was particular criticism of the energetic ideological kidnapping of youth by the new socialist unity party (sozialistische einheitspartei deutschlands / sed) and its youth wing, the free german youth (freie deutsche jugend / fdj) across
berlin, most notably in the soviet occupation zone which incorporated what would become known as east berlin. the newssheet dealt primarily with political and social matters, but also featured a section headed "the arts of the future" and, from 1948, an "experiments" section which provided a forum for established younger literary contributors such as wolfdietrich schnurre (1920-1989),  (1925-2015) and ingeborg euler (1927-2005). horizon ceased to appear in september 1948 after newsprint (paper) ran out due to the berlin blockade.  on 9 november 1945 the protection association of german authors was reinstated under authority from the soviet occupation forces in the eastern part of berlin, now as a division of the free german trade union federation, and birkenfeld was installed as a member of its executive. he retained this function, as the political and economic division of the city (and of the country) progressively became more visible and permanent, till 1949. in his approach to former nazis, birkenfeld took a hard line. this was on display in the "hausmann debate" in april 1947 at which gunther weisenborn argued for a more nuanced position, whereby there should indeed be a very harsh approach to former nazi activist criminals, but otherwise "display generosity". for weisenborn this meant that despite recent reproaches to thomas mann, the author should nevertheless be invited to the 1947 writers' congress; birkenfeld rejected this.  the first german writers' congress took place between 4 and 8 october 1947 in the eastern sector of berlin, and was addressed by birkenfeld on the theme of "collaboration of writers' organisations" (zusammenarbeit der schriftstellerorganisationen). on the morning of 7 october he was elected to chair the day's proceedings. the morning was dominated by a keynote speech from melvin j. lasky who was deeply critical of censorship in the soviet union and the persecution of the soviet writers mikhail zoshchenko and anna akhmatova. this, in turn, drew strong protests from soviet guest delegates at the congress, in a session choreographed by birkenfeld.  birkenfeld was one of twenty german writers nominated to found a german section of pen international, based on a resolution of the international organisation at its twentieth congress in copenhagen. this followed consultation with pen international's general secreatary hermon ould, and with wilhelm unger representing the london exile group. the group of twenty fulfilled their mandate with a launch congress at gottingen on 18-20 november 1948, under
the leadership of hermann friedmann.  as it became apparent that the ground was being cleared, especially within the soviet occupation zone, for a return to one-party dictatorship under the socialist unity party of germany,  birkenfeld was taking am increasingly public position against communism, at least from the launch of the berlin blockade in june 1948, and possibly earlier.  on 19 september 1948 he was a co-founder of the "league for spiritual freedom" (liga fur geistesfreiheit). early in 1949 he was a co-founder of the anti-communist combat group against inhumanity (kampfgruppe gegen unmenschlichkeit). in 1950, together with theodor plievier and , birkenfeld called for the separation of the german pen organisation from the "becker group" which represented the organisation in what had become, formally in october 1949, the separate german democratic republic (east germany).   this led directly to the establishment in 1951 of a separate west german pen organisation under the presidency of erich kastner.  birkenfeld worked as a political commentator with the broadcasting service in the american sector (rias) (of berlin). and as an editor with the publishing house suhrkamp verlag. at suhrkamp he became embroiled in controversy when he demanded that the author anna seghers should at least mention somewhere in her novel die toten bleiben jung that german soldiers involved in the invasion of the soviet union had not been universally hostile to the civilian communities - there had been some who had befriended the population. in the dispute that ensued, the proprietor peter suhrkamp distanced himself from birkenfeld's demands, and it was left to the company's publishing director  to negotiate a solution with a determined author.  references  people from cottbus german non-fiction writers german opinion journalists 20th-century german literature german lexicographers social democratic party of germany 1901 births 1966 deaths 20th-century german translators 20th-century german journalists 20th-century lexicographers
john perkins sr. (1781-1866) was an american judge and planter.  biography perkins was born on may 17, 1781, in somerset county, maryland. his father was an english-born immigrant. he was the owner of a plantation in vidalia, louisiana, from 1807 to 1811. he eventually became the owner of "somerset", an 18,000-acre estate in madison parish and tensas parish. he married mrs. bynum, a widow, in 1818. they had two sons, including john perkins jr., a politician, and william perkins, who died at sea in 1854. after he was widowed, he married mrs. seaton of port gibson, mississippi. they resided at "the briars" in natchez. perkins died on november 30, 1866, in adams county, mississippi.  references  external links  the john perkins family of northeast louisiana at rootsweb.com  1781 births 1866 deaths american people of english descent american planters burials in mississippi people from somerset county, maryland 19th-century american judges
funworld magazine, stylized as funworld magazine, is a trade journal for the global attractions industry. the magazine was launched in 1985. it is published monthly in both print and digital version by the international association of amusement parks and attractions (iaapa). iaapa also produces "news flash", a daily e-newsletter that provides industry news stories from around the world.  references  external links website  1985 establishments in florida business magazines published in the united states magazines established in 1985 mass media in orlando, florida monthly magazines published in the united states professional and trade magazines
madam noor zehra kazim is a pakistani musician and sagar veena player. she is the daughter of lawyer and activist raza kazim who invented sagar veena - a stringed instrument similar to vichitra veena and chitra veena. together with her father she runs sanjan nagar institute of philosophy and arts, and is the only performer of sagar veena since its creation in 1971. with a career spanned over four decades, she has performed both domestically and internationally, achieving critical appraisal for instrument, as well as her indian style of music being a non-indian.  she made her coke studio debut in season 3 and returned in season 9,  as a part of team noori. she is the mother of noori's lead vocalist ali noor and guitarist ali hamza.  early life noor zehra kazim was born in lahore, punjab to a prominent lawyer, politician, philosopher and activist raza kazim. she is married to ali kazim who is a singer. she is the mother of ali noor and ali hamza of band noori. zehra kazim together with her father, runs sanjan nagar institute of philosophy and arts, where the instrument sagar veena was developed, it is inspired by the indian strings instruments, vichitra veena and gottuvadhyam. noor zehra, taught herself while the instrument being developed at apa.  musical trainings and career zehra started her formal training during 1971, when she learns rajeshwari datta, head of the indian department at school of oriental and african studies (soas) teaches similar instrument in london, england. kazim then went to berkeley, california in us, and studies at the ali akbar college of music. in pakistan she learn under ustad shareef khan poonchwala for a few years and established herself as the only veena player of pakistan.  noor zehra has played the sagar veena for a number of audiences, and has even travelled to japan and norway for performances. currently, she is still undergoing her musical journey, in which she eventually seeks to discover and create "sanjan sangeet". she regularly performs at sanjan nagar sangeet sammelan, and performed at various music conferences, festivals and classical occasions. she appeared in season 3 of music reality television series coke studio where she performed as a veena player with her son,  along with musician rohail hyatt. in 2016, she returned to coke studios season 9, under team supervisions of noori and strings (band) as a sagar veena player for the song "paar channa de".  references
external links    1951 births living people instrumental gharanas pakistani musicians veena players pakistani women classical musicians pakistani women composers
fjellenstrup halt is a railway halt serving the settlement of fjellenstrup near gilleleje on the north coast of zealand, denmark.   fjellenstrup halt is located on the gribskov line from hillerød to gilleleje. the train services are currently operated by the railway company lokaltog which runs frequent local train services between helsingør station and gilleleje station.  references  external links  lokaltog  gribskovbanen on jernbanen.dk  railway stations in denmark buildings and structures in gribskov municipality
tevaughn shaquele campbell (born june 14, 1993) is a canadian professional football cornerback for the los angeles chargers of the national football league (nfl). he played four seasons in the canadian football league (cfl) before moving to the united states to play in the nfl.  university career campbell played cis football for the regina rams from 2011 to 2014.  professional football career  canadian football league campbell was originally drafted by the calgary stampeders in the third round, 22nd overall, in the 2015 cfl draft. after playing in five games in 2015 with the stampeders, campbell was traded to the roughriders on february 11, 2016 in exchange for a fourth-round pick in the 2017 cfl draft.  on august 15, 2017, campbell, along with the roughriders' third round picks in the 2018 cfl draft and 2019 cfl draft, was traded to the montreal alouettes for vernon adams and a fifth round pick in the 2018 cfl draft.  new york jets (nfl) on january 4, 2019, campbell signed a reserve/future contract with the new york jets of the nfl. he was waived on august 31, 2019.  los angeles chargers (nfl) on september 11, 2019, campbell was signed to the los angeles chargers practice squad. he was promoted to the active roster on october 29, 2019, but was waived four days later and re-signed to the practice squad. he was promoted back to the active roster on november 25, 2019. he was waived on december 9, 2019 and re-signed to the practice squad. he signed a futures contract with the chargers on december 30, 2019.  in week 11 against his former team, the new york jets, campbell intercepted a pass thrown by joe flacco and returned it for a six yard touchdown during the 34-28 win.  this was campbell's first nfl interception and touchdown.  rugby career campbell trained with the canada national rugby sevens team during the 2016-17 world rugby sevens series stops in hong kong and singapore.  references  external links   los angeles chargers bio  saskatchewan roughriders bio  1993 births living people canadian football defensive backs sportspeople from scarborough, toronto players of canadian football from ontario saskatchewan roughriders players regina rams players calgary stampeders players montreal alouettes players new york jets players footballers who switched code canadian players of american football american football cornerbacks los angeles chargers players
"frail" is a song by canadian electronic music band, crystal castles. it is the first single of the band's 2016 album, amnesty (i). on april 17, 2015, it was made available for free download on the duo's soundcloud page.  history on april 17, 2015, ethan kath shared a new track titled "frail" on soundcloud, writing 'this is edith on vocals'. the track was released digitally on itunes a month later on may 11.  personnel  ethan kath - production, mixing  edith frances - vocals  alex zelenka - engineer  samuel jacob - engineer  patrick mundy - mix  brian gardner - master  au vyst - artwork  references  external links    2015 singles 2015 songs crystal castles (band) songs polydor records singles fiction records singles songs written by ethan kath
alexandra bech gjørv (born 1965) is a norwegian lawyer and businesswoman.  she is the daughter of journalist toppen bech, and a daughter-in-law of politician inger lise gjørv. she was assigned with norsk hydro from 1993 to 2007, and with statoil from 2007 to 2010. she chaired the governmental commission appointed after the 2011 norway attacks, which presented their findings in the gjørv report. in 2015 she became the chief executive of sintef.  gjørv graduated as cand.jur. in 1990 from the university of oslo, received further education at the university of oxford (1991) and the suffolk university in boston (1993), and passed the new york state bar exam in 1994.  references  1965 births living people norwegian lawyers norwegian businesspeople place of birth missing (living people) people educated at atlantic college
franck hueso, better known by his stage name carpenter brut, is a french darksynth artist from poitiers, france. he has released three eps, ep i (2012), ep ii (2013) and ep iii (2015) which were collected and released together as the album trilogy (2015). he later released two additional studio albums, leather teeth (2018) and blood machines ost (2020), along with one live album, carpenterbrutlive (2017). he has also contributed original music to a variety of soundtracks, both for film and video games.  carpenter brut claims his relative anonymity is a deliberate artistic choice in order to place more importance on the music itself, rather than the identity of the musician behind it. he started writing music as carpenter brut with the intention of mixing sounds from horror films, metal, rock, and electronic music. in live performances carpenter brut is joined on stage by guitarist adrien grousset and drummer florent marcadet, both from the french metal band hacride and in 2016 brut toured the united states with the swedish heavy metal band ghost. in a 2018 interview with loudwire, tobias forge, lead singer of the band ghost, stated that hueso was also the producer for the band deathspell omega, a french black metal band known for the anonymity of its members.  history  origins hueso describes the beginnings of carpenter brut as "a joke," and contends that the name carpenter brut is a play on words, derived from the surname of filmmaker and composer john carpenter and the champagne charpentier brut. the idea to make electronic music stemmed from wanting to write music alone, rather than being in a band. hueso explained in 2017 "electro music is perfect for that [writing alone], especially when you're not a good musician like me. i don't know how to play guitar; it would have been a poor decision."  eps & trilogy (2012-2015) carpenter brut's 2012 and 2013 ep's were released on blackbvs records. the third ep, in 2015 (and all subsequent releases, ), were released on hueso's own no quarter prod label. the label was created with the intention of allowing hueso to remain independent and maintain control over his own image and art. additionally, two songs from trilogy (le perv and roller mobster) were used in the soundtrack for hotline miami 2: wrong number. the track "escape from midwich valley" was used in one of the game's trailers.  leather teeth (2018) carpenter brut's second
full-length album was released at midnight on february 22, 2018 with no pre-release promotion. a press release accompanying the release read: "leather teeth is the soundtrack to a movie envisioned by carpenter brut, one that tells the story of a shy american teenager, bret halford, who can't get the girl and will do anything he can to win her over, including becoming the singer of one of the most talked about bands in mid-'80s glam-metal, leather patrol." the press release included a quote from carpenter brut, describing the album as "pure frenzy like master of puppets, or any of the good old metal albums." leather teeth features kristoffer rygg of ulver and mat mcnerney of grave pleasures on vocals.  in a december, 2018 interview, hueso explained that leather teeth was inspired by "judas priest, and the glam rock of the '80s." it is the first album in a trilogy and tells the story of "[a] main character [who] is still a young student in love, and not yet the serial killer he will become in the second part of the trilogy. even if he has tantrums as in "monday hunt" or "hairspray hurricane," he is still convinced that he can conquer kendra, the cheerleader." hueso described himself, in a 2018 interview, as being "tired of this race to whoever makes the darkest or most brutal music, it's just bullshit," while describing leather teeth'''s sound as being "softer" and "more glamorous" than trilogy "while flirting with a dark side that will be developed in the next album," a sequel which he intends to be "darker and more violent."  blood machines ost (2020) carpenter brut's blood machines ost was released in april, 2020. it is the soundtrack to a 50-minute film directed by seth ickerman, director of the "turbo killer" music video. the idea came from online response to "turbo killer" and requests for a sequel; the film was devised by ickerman while hueso describes himself as being "in charge of the soundtrack."  leather terror (2022) hueso has suggested that a new carpenter brut album may be released by the end of 2020 "at the very earliest." on may 19, 2021, he announced on twitter that leather terror would be out early 2022, which was later dated for release on april 1, 2022.  the album will involve a "reinvention
" of carpenter brut and taking the music "on a darker path." it will be a continuation of the leather teeth trilogy and will involve a story of "a character who wants to take revenge on the cheerleader who's been making fun of him 'serial killer style'." the album will include 12 tracks, with a north american and european tour to follow. hueso described one track off the album as "really long, really violent, and which will have much more of a black metal vibe to it. the ending will go on for about five minutes and will consist of only blast beats." hueso suggested ben koller of converge would perform on the track.  other appearances hueso also wrote music for the 2016 video game furi, a process which he described as being "a lot less free" than composing music for carpenter brut. hueso explained that he was required to work with scenes that the video game designers sent, while also working with loops that can go on for several minutes if the player decided to stay in the same place. ultimately, hueso described it as "a good experience," but wasn't sure he would attempt it again, citing a greater affinity for soundtracks for film than video games.  in 2019 hueso appeared in the documentary film the rise of the synths which explored the origins and growth of the genre. hueso appeared alongside various other composers from the synthwave scene, including john carpenter himself who also starred in and narrated the film.  music videos music videos when working on a trailer for festival de l'etrange, director duo  raphael hernandez and savitri joly-gonfard (working under the name seth ickerman) approached hueso with the request to use the track "hang'em all" for the trailer's soundtrack. having been aware of the duo and liking their "diy and smart" approach to their work, hueso allowed use of the track and ickerman went on to direct all of carpenter brut's music videos for the first three ep's.  for the music video to "turbo killer," hueso gave "carte blanche" to the directors, with the only stipulation that they "give birth to certain characters" he had in mind. hueso saw the video two weeks before its wide release and described his reaction to it as "thrilled [...] like a kid opening his christmas presents," and wondering "how the fuck did they do that?"  the music videos for the album leather teeth were directed by silver strain, who also created the visuals projected
during carpenter brut's live performances.  blood machines (2020) blood machines is a film project with seth ickerman as director and scored by carpenter brut. a trailer for the film was released to kickstarter backers on 20 may 2020 and on shudder the following day. the official synopsis reads:  cast the cast consists of:  history and overview ickerman had wanted to make a feature length film using a carpenter brut soundtrack prior to the release of the turbo killer music video, and due to the success of turbo killer and fan requests for a follow-up, blood machines entered development. a successful kickstarter campaign saw the film jump from an estimated run time of 30 minutes to 50 minutes; it is expected to be released in 2020 and will be a sequel to the turbo killer music video. as with their earlier collaborations, ickerman have "free rein" in terms of the visuals, with hueso describing himself as being "in charge of the soundtrack." in december, 2016, david sandberg, director of kung fury (2015), signed on to blood machines as producer; a press release for the announcement described the film's plot as "following two space hunters chasing the female ghost of a machine through the galaxy."  influences "at the very beginning," hueso commented, carpenter brut was influenced by justice, but by 2017 he would be "much more inspired by prog rock artists," like toto and supertramp along with iron maiden, meshuggah, ulver, nine inch nails, type o negative, pink floyd and the beatles. in a 2019 interview with kerrang!, hueso stated that his early musical influences included iron maiden, metallica, megadeth, cannibal corpse and napalm death. hueso claimed in 2016 to not listen to horror movie soundtracks, but noted there were "themes that stand out," such as creepshow, maniac cop and friday the 13th and that he does enjoy the compositions of john williams, john carpenter, alan silvestri and james horner.  cinematically, hueso's influences include 1980s "slasher/horror/b-movies as well as blockbusters," and hueso has specifically noted, "everything from steven spielberg" along with star wars, the terminator, robocop, predator, the thing, street trash, bad taste, the texas chain saw massacre, the evil dead, nekromantik and maniac cop, commenting, "not only did i find that these films were totally badass, but their soundtracks were too. music
was an integral part of the movies, that's what i enjoyed." ultimately he concluded that, "those influences run through everything carpenter brut does: the desire to give you something violent, cinematic and fun!"  hueso bases his live performances on those of trent reznor of nine inch nails, stating "i didn't like playing live at the beginning [...] i just wanted to make music in my room. when it became clear that people wanted me to play i worked hard to put on a real show. it's the same as trent reznor with nine inch nails: if i'm going to play live, it needs to be huge."  discography albums  trilogy (2015) a compilation of the three carpenter brut eps.  leather teeth (2018)  blood machines ost (2020)leather terror (2022)   eps  ep i (2012)  ep ii (2013)  ep iii (2015)  live albums  carpenterbrutlive (2017)  remixes  le couleur - vacances de 87 (carpenter brut remix) (2013)  scattle - remorse (carpenter brut remix) (2014)  gunship - tech noir (carpenter brut remix) (2015)  m|o|o|n - dust (carpenter brut remix) (2015)  ghost - dance macabre (carpenter brut remix) (2018)  league of legends - phoenix (carpenter brut remix) (2019)  ulver - machine guns and peacock feathers (carpenter brut remix) (2021)  single track releases  "chew bubblegum..." (2014) - bandcamp subscriber exclusive track  "the good old call" (2014) - bandcamp subscriber exclusive track  "mandarin claws" (2014) - bandcamp subscriber exclusive track  "hush sally, hush!" (2019) - bandcamp subscriber exclusive track  "maniac feat yann ligner" (2020)  "fab tool" feat david eugene edwards (2020)  "imaginary fire" feat greg puciato (2022)  other appearances  perturbator - dangerous days (2014) (track, "complete domination (feat. carpenter brut)")  soundtracks  rage (2013) (contributor; "warzone")  hacknet (2015) (contributor; "roller mobster")  night fare (2015) (contributor; "le perv", "wake up the president")  furi (2016) (contributor; "time
to wake up", "enraged", "what we fight for", "you're mine")  the rise of the synths (2017) (contributor; "night stalker")  hotline miami 2: wrong number (2015) (contributor; "le perv", "escape from midwich valley", "roller mobster")  hotline miami 2: wrong number - digital special edition (contributor; "m|o|o|n - dust (carpenter brut remix)", "scattle - remorse (carpenter brut remix)")  blood machines ost'' (2020)  references  external links      c french electronic musicians place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people) living people
zaw lin (born 14 may 1992) is a burmese professional footballer who plays as a defender for ayeyawady united f.c. and myanmar national football team.  references  external links   1992 births living people burmese footballers myanmar international footballers association football midfielders
liaoning university of traditional chinese medicine or lnutcm () is a university in liaoning province, china, with its main campus in huanggu district, shenyang and a branch campus in dalian and an additional campus in benxi. it was founded in 1958.  references  external links   liaoning university of traditional chinese medicine {fee structure}  liaoning university of traditional chinese medicine {facebook page}  1958 establishments in china educational institutions established in 1958 universities and colleges in shenyang universities and colleges in dalian traditional chinese medicine
323001-323100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323101-323200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323201-323300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323301-323400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323401-323500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323501-323600   |-id=552 | 323552 trudybell || 2004 tb || trudy e. bell (born 1950) is a prolific science writer and former editor for scientific american and contract writer and editor for nasa. among her many awards is the david n. schramm award of the american astronomical society. ||  |}  323601-323700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323701-323800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323801-323900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  323901-324000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   323001-324000
timucin lam (born timucin fabian kwong wah aluo; 25 july 1987), known professionally as jax jones, is an english dj, songwriter, record producer and remixer. he rose to fame in 2014 by featuring on duke dumont's number-one single "i got u". he followed this up with his own singles "you don't know me" featuring raye and "instruction" featuring demi lovato and stefflon don in 2016 and 2017, respectively. jax's debut studio album, snacks (supersize), was released on 6 september 2019. it was preceded by the single "one touch" featuring jess glynne.  personal life jax grew up in a multi-ethnic household and was exposed to a wealth of influences. his father is turkish and gave him the name timucin. he is also of chinese malaysian descent. after his nigerian stepfather introduced him to afrobeat via fela kuti and rap with a tape of a notorious b.i.g. album, jax listened to hip hop, r&b, gospel and traditional african music. his malaysian mother was into music ranging from kylie minogue to luther vandross and also influenced him. producers like the neptunes, timbaland and rodney jerkins shaped his musical horizons and his fascination with the anatomy of a rhythm section. having initially studied classical guitar from a young age, jax took up beat-making at 15 after discovering cubase on his friend's atari.  on 18 september 2020, jax announced on his instagram that his wife had given birth to their daughter, lawana.  music career  early beginnings performing at open mic clubs around london, jax eventually came together with ripperman, a grime producer from mitcham, at brixton's raw materials studio, and worked on releases for big narstie and roadside gs, among others in the scene. his parents encouraged him to go to university at 18. opting to stay closer to raw materials, he declined an interview at the university of oxford to attend brunel university in uxbridge. despite a two-hour trip, jax went from lectures to the studio daily to work on his craft, posting beats regularly on myspace. after graduation, jax rented a studio in sydenham after not being allowed back in the family home, bought a mac tower from gumtree and worked daily to hone his craft.  2014: breakthrough after meeting duke dumont, he developed an interest in house music and together they co-wrote and produced "i got u", "won't
look back" and "ocean drive". jones features on the single "i got u", the song peaked at number one on the uk singles chart in march 2014, leading to his breakthrough as an artist.  2015-2019: snacks on 24 july 2015, he released the single "yeah yeah yeah". in july 2016, he released the single "house work". jax says of the track, "at the end of the day, i started making beats on a four-track, so it feels right to put that diy energy into my music". in december 2016, he released the single "you don't know me" based on the sampling of the bassline of m.a.n.d.y. vs. booka shade's 2005 hit "body language". the song became his biggest success, reaching number three in the uk and top five status in several european countries, including germany, ireland, belgium and norway. jones continued to release songs wherein he collaborated with the likes of demi lovato and years & years. he released his debut extended play, snacks, on 28 november 2018. the ep was later expanded into jones' first album, snacks (supersize), which was released on 6 september 2019.  2020-present: europa, i miss u, and deep joy jax also collaborated with fellow dj martin solveig to create the musical duo europa. their first song together, "all day and night" (featuring madison beer), was included jones' 2018 ep snacks and was released as single in march 2019. they released their next single, "tequila" (featuring raye), in february 2020.  on 9 october 2020, jones released the single "i miss u" alongside antiguan-german singer au/ra. the song peaked at #25 on the uk singles chart, and a subsequent acoustic version followed. upon its release, jones tweeted about the song's message in relation to the covid-19 pandemic, and an inability to see family and friends due to national lockdowns. he said "i miss u is finally out in the world we all miss something right now and i miss u is supposed to highlight that and remind ourselves that it's ok to feel this way sometimes."  on 4 june 2021, jones released the song "feels", the lead single off his second ep deep joy, which was released on 2 july 2021.  13 august 2021 saw the release of "out out", a collaborative single with fellow english dj joel corry and featuring the vocals of singer charli xcx and rapper
saweetie. the song peaked at #6 on the uk singles chart.  discography   snacks (supersize) (2019)  references  1987 births living people english house musicians english multi-instrumentalists english djs english songwriters english record producers english people of turkish descent english people of malaysian descent english people of chinese descent musicians from london djs from london electronic dance music djs remixers
population research and policy review is a bimonthly peer-reviewed academic journal covering demography. it was established in 1982 and is published by springer science+business media on behalf of the southern demographic association, of which it is the official journal. the editors-in-chief are kara joyner and corey sparks (both at the university of texas at san antonio). according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2020 impact factor of 2.051.  references  external links  demography journals springer science+business media academic journals publications established in 1982 bimonthly journals english-language journals
the ricardian contract, as invented by ian grigg in 1996, is a method of recording a document as a contract at law, and linking it securely to other systems, such as accounting, for the contract as an issuance of value. it is robust through use of identification by cryptographic hash function, transparent through use of readable text for legal prose and efficient through markup language to extract essential information.  a ricardian contract places the defining elements of a legal agreement in a format that can be expressed and executed in software. the key is to make the format both machine-readable, such that they can easily be extracted for computational purposes, and readable as an ordinary text document such that lawyers and contracting parties may read the essentials of the contract conveniently.  from a legal perspective, the use of markup language embedded within a mostly legal prose document leads to reduced transaction costs, faster dispute resolution, better enforceability and enhanced transparency. from a computing perspective, the ricardian contract is a software design pattern to digitize documents and have them participate within financial transactions, such as payments, without losing any of the richness of the contracting tradition. publication of the content and reference to that content by the unique cryptographic message digest eliminates frauds based on multiple presentations.  the method arises out of the work of ian grigg completed in the mid-1990s in contributions to ricardo, a system of assets transfers that was built in 1995-1996 by systemics and included the pattern. the system and the design pattern was named after david ricardo in honour of his seminal contribution to international trade theory.  definition  diagram the ricardian contract separates the agreement of parties across time and domain. on the left of the "bowtie" representation, the negotiation and formation of a legally binding contract leads to a single parent document that defines all of the intent of that agreement.  on the right, the performance of that agreement might involve many transactions to be accounted for, logically separated from the meaning of the issue. the join between the legal world and the accounting world is formed by the hash - each transaction locks in the terms and conditions of the precise deal of the parties by including the hash of the contract in every relevant transaction record, yet the operation of the transactions and the issuance of the contract are cleanly separated and thus perverse incentives are eliminated.  legal relationship the role of the ricardian contract is to capture the contractual relationship between contracting parties to assist later performance of that contract by programs.  in its contractual form, it is
the recording of an offer from an issuer to a holder.  the offer is signed digitally within the format by the offerer, typically using a plaintext digital signature such as provided by openpgp.  the acceptance of the contract is typically formed by signing/agreeing to a transaction that refers to the hash of that contract.  within the context of a high-performance payment system, a secure payment will cite the hash of the contract of the instrument being paid, as well as paying and payee parties and a quantity of units.  in a smart contracts system, the acceptance would be performed by operating the contract's code to move the state of the agreement forward.  signing and intent typically, the signing of the contract by any party is overtly performed by use of a private key. the original offerer's signature is typically over the original document, and is then appended to form a fully binding, readable offer for the assets described in the document.  later participation by parties in the contract such as payments or smart contract performance will typically sign over a hash identifier (as generated by a cryptographic hash function) over the signed original document.  in contrast to the initial signature, the use of the hash of the contract within following transactions also signals intent, and forms a covert signature over the contract. although private key signatures are well studied and are subject of legal frameworks such as the european digital signature directive, grigg suggests that the trail of hashes - entanglement - forms a more effective evidence of intent than a private key signature.  programming pattern as a pattern in design, the ricardian contract is like a reference-object tuple from the tradition of object-oriented programming.  the reference is a cryptographic hash function, and the object is formed by writing classes that handle the type of contract needed; a factory would typically read enough of the text of the document to figure out which class type is involved, and then construct an object of that specific class over the text.  once an object is constructed, it can be interrogated for contents:  the hash, name of issuer, nature of issue, keys and signature status.  variations if the agreement is more complicated than a single document can describe, the documents can be chained: an acceptance of an offer can be a ricardian contract that includes the hash of the offer, or the acceptance can include the entire contents of the earlier phase, a design pattern known as russian dolls used by both opentransactions and openbazaar.  these referral
patterns can be conducted multiple times to create a chain or hierarchy of elements.  formats a relevant decision is choosing a representation of the text such that markup can be included to assist the software agent while maintaining readability. to be a ricardian contract, it has to be parsable both by the program and by a human reader.  "readability" is necessarily defined relative to some viewing interface. embedded markup systems such as xml are commonly viewed not as "raw source", but with much richer formatting applied. jurists need not view "raw" json, latex, or xml any more than web users must view raw html or hexadecimal png images. some visually impaired readers necessarily use very different interfaces. even "plain text" editors differ in the treatment of [character sets] and [character encodings], os-specific line-ends, fonts, tabs, wrapping of long lines, etc. even a simple text editor can be hacked to mis-display text in a desired way, just like any other software can. but with standard, non-binary data representations underneath users can compare multiple viewing solutions, and with text-based representations as opposed to binary files it is practical to check the source document directly when desired (or, as commonly done, to view fully-formatted and raw views simultaneously).  an ideal document format should also support a canonical form hash (cryptographic hash function), that is, have a way of delivering a hash over contents that does not change due to common serialisation and transmission artifacts.  latex and xml are suitable because their source is generally readable by humans, and they have widely-available renderers. xml also has a standardized canonical xml form which is specifically designed to facilitate cryptographic hashing, and neutralizes minor syntactic variations such as insignificant whitespace, platform-specific line-ends, order of attributes, etc.  popular formats such as json and semantic web formats are often, though not always, much less readable in raw form to non-programmers such as jurists, and much more subject to unbounded syntactic but not semantic variation.  relationship to smart contracts smart contracts, as defined in the work of nick szabo are an abstract concept relating to the automated performance of an already agreed contract, whereas the ricardian contract is a design pattern to capture the intent of the agreement of the parties, before its performance.  by means of hashes within as references or links to external documents, above, the ricardian contract form easily extends
to refer to code. the explicit referral to the code can pass legitimacy from overarching legal prose to the code, thus implementing the concept of the smart contract.  refactoring to describe blockchains and to integrate references to smart contract logic created a hybrid version of the ricardian contract. this form proposes a tuple of {prose, parameters, code} where the parameters can particularise or specialise the legal prose and the computer code in order to create a single deal out of a template or library of components. also known as a ricardian triple, it can describe blockchains, smart contracts, iot devices and persons.  implementations  there are several explicit extant implementations of the ricardian contract design pattern and there are some projects which do so implicitly and others which are heading in that direction. amongst those explicitly using the pattern are:  intellectual property the ricardian contract is free of any intellectual property restrictions, other than the request that any implementations cite the author and link to the paper. it was fully published as design and implementation in 1996, and was described in an academic paper presented in 2004.  no patent or other intellectual property mechanism was ever asserted by its inventor, ian grigg nor by systemics.  references  financial cryptography cryptocurrencies financial technology decentralization
zavarov () is a russian masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is zavarova. it may refer to oleksandr zavarov (born 1961), ukrainian football midfielder  valeriy zavarov (born 1988), ukrainian football midfielder, son of oleksandr  russian-language surnames
the gens maecia was a plebeian family at ancient rome.  members of this gens are rarely mentioned before the time of cicero, but in imperial times they rose to prominence, achieving the consulship on at several occasions.  members  octavius maecius, according to some accounts, leader of the allied cavalry in 293 bc, during the third samnite war.  he employed a clever ruse to make his forces appear far more substantial than they in fact were, alarming the samnite army.  spurius maecius tarpa, a contemporary of cicero, whom pompeius hired to select the plays performed at his games in 55 bc.  at a later date, octavian relied on him for his opinion of drama.  quintus maecius, a roman poet, known only from his twelve epigrams in the greek anthology, which are some of the finest in the collection.  marcus maecius rufus, proconsul of bithynia, and consul suffectus during the reign of vespasian.  lucius maecius postumus, consul suffectus in ad 98.  lucius roscius aelianus maecius celer, consul suffectus in ad 100.  marcus maecius celer, consul suffectus in ad 101.  maecius marullus, named by the historia augusta as the father of the emperor gordian i.  quintus maecius laetus, consul in ad 215; he had previously been consul in an uncertain year.  marcus pomponius maecius probus, consul in ad 228.  marcus maecius memmius furius placidus, consul in ad 343.  rufius achilius maecius placidus, consul in ad 481.  footnotes  see also list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  marcus tullius cicero, epistulae ad familiares.  quintus horatius flaccus (horace), satirae (satires), ars poetica (the art of poetry).  julius capitolinus, "the lives of the three gordians", in the historia augusta.  jan gruter, inscriptiones antiquae totius orbis romani, heidelberg (1603).  johann albert fabricius, bibliotheca graeca, sive notitia scriptorum veterum graecorum (the greek library, or knowledge of ancient greek writers), christian liebezeit & theodor christoph felginer, hamburg (1718).  analecta veterum poetarum graecorum (
fragments by ancient greek poets), richard francois philippe brunck, ed., bauer and treuttel, strasbourg (1772-1776).  anthologia graeca sive poetarum graecorum lusus, ex recensione brunckii (the greek anthology, or works of the greek poets, or the collection of brunck), friedrich jacobs, ed., dyck, leipzig (1794).  poetarum latinorum reliquiae (surviving works of latin poets), m. augustus weichert, ed., b. g. teubner, leipzig (1830).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  paul gallivan, "the fasti for a. d. 70-96", in classical quarterly, vol. 31 (1981).    roman gentes
kelantan fa president are the under-21s team of kelantan football association that competes in the piala presiden (english: president cup). they have won the cup 7 times, in 1985, 1995, 2005, 2011, 2013, 2015 and 2016 and ended being runners-up in 1988, 2003 and 2006-07. the team mainly consists of under-21 players at the club, and some of the players also registered for the senior team. the under-21 team is coached by mohd hashim mustapha.  kelantan fa youth are the under-19s team of kelantan football association that competes in the piala belia (english: youth cup). they have won the cup 2 times in 2008 and 2014 and ended being runners-up in 2013. the under-19s is coached by sazami shafi'i.  development squads  registered for the senior team   (under-21s)  (under-21s)  (under-21s)  (under-21s)  (under-21s)  (under-21s)  under-21s  the kelantan fa u21 team plays in the piala presiden and a number of local cup competitions.  under-19s  the kelantan fa u19 team plays in the piala belia and a number of local cup competitions.  staff   u21s manager: dato' shaari mat hussain  u21s assistant manager: mohd ausri husin  u21s head coach: kamaruddin mohammad  u21s assistant coach: abdul aziz mustafa  u21s fitness coach: ghazali hussin  u21s physiotherapist: ahmad faris musa   u21s goalkeeping coach: mohd azam othman  u21s security officer: normizal ismail  u21s media officer: ab ghainizan ab bakar   u21s kitman: shamsudin deraman   u19s manager: tan sri dr. zaliman sauli  u19s assistant manager: sanusi osman  u19s head coach: coach: mohd anizam daud  u19s assistant coach: mohd sideek samsudin  u19s goalkeeping coach:  mohd halim bin napi  u19s physiotherapist: wan mohd aiman wan zain   u19s media officer: fazuny mohd noor  u19s kitman: noor azmi mohd noor  coach history  u21s   anizan daud (2010)   zahasmi ismail (2011)   mohd hashim mustapha (2011
-2012)   mohd sideek shamsuddin (2012-2014)   mohd nafuzi mohd zain (2015)   mohd hashim mustapha (2016-2017)   zahasmi ismail (2018-)   kamaruddin mohammad (2020)  u19s   tengku hazman raja hassan (2013-2016)   sazami shafi'i (2016-2017)   zahariman ghazali (2018-)   mohd anizam daud (2020)  notable former players the following is a list of players who have played in the kelantan fa youth team (u19-u21). players who are currently playing at kelantan fa, or for another club on loan from kelantan fa, are highlighted in bold.   mohd farisham ismail  ramadhan hamid  khairul fahmi che mat  mohd shahrizan ismail  ahmad syihan hazmi mohamed  nik shahrul azim abdul halim  mohd qayyum marjoni sabil  mohd daudsu jamaluddin  zairul fitree ishak  mohamad faris shah rosli  faizol nazlin sayuti  mohamad azwan aripin  mohd rozaimi azwar  mohd badhri mohd radzi  muhamad fadhilah mohd pauzi  fakhrul zaman  mohd khairul izuan rosli  danial ashraf  amir zikri pauzi  nik azli nik alias  muhammad syazwan yusoff  mohd zafran akramin abdul razak  wan zaharulnizam zakaria  tuan muhamad faim tuan zainal abidin  mohamad faiz suhaimi  mohd zamri ramli  mohd shakir shaari  rizal fahmi rosid  muhd izuan salahuddin  norhadi ubaidillah  mohamad aris zaidi  mohd nurul azwan roya  ramzul zahini adnan  mohd nizad ayub  azlan ismail  khairan eroza razali  wan zaman wan mustapha  zul yusri che harun  khairan ezuan razali  nicholas chan  ahmad ezrie shafizie  nik ahmad fadly nik leh  halim napi  mohd faiz mohd nasir  afiq saluddin  top scorers  u21s  u19s  captainship  u21s  u19s  honours  u21s piala presiden  winners (7): 1985, 1995, 2005, 2011, 2013, 2015, 2016  runners-up : 1988, 2003, 2006-07  u19s piala belia  winners (
2): 2008, 2014  runners-up : 2013  references  external links  the president warriors official website  youth and academy malaysian reserve football teams football academies in malaysia 1985 establishments in malaysia
heine araujo (born ) is a retired brazilian female artistic gymnast, who represented her nation at international competitions.  she participated at the 2001 world artistic gymnastics championships in ghent, belgium.  eponymous skill  araujo has one eponymous skill listed in the code of points.  references  1984 births living people brazilian female artistic gymnasts gymnasts at the 1999 pan american games originators of elements in artistic gymnastics pan american games bronze medalists for brazil pan american games medalists in gymnastics medalists at the 1999 pan american games
nuruddin ahmed (1904-1975) was an indian lawyer and three-time mayor of delhi. born in 1904 in delhi in a wealthy family to  principal mushtaq ahmed zahidie, of sadiq eggerton college, bhawalpur, india, he did his early education at st. xavier's school, delhi and completed his pre-graduate studies from st. stephen's college. subsequently, he did classical tripos from cambridge university before studying law at the inner temple from where he was called to the bar. returning to india, he started his career as a junior to muhammad shafi where fakhruddin ali ahmed, who would later become the fifth president of india, was his colleague, and started practice at lahore high court. then, he went to delhi to continue his practice and became known for his prowess in criminal trials. he was also involved in civic administration and during his four terms as a member of the delhi corporation, he served as the mayor of delhi for three terms, from 1960 to 1965. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1964, for his contributions to public affairs. ameena ahmad ahuja, a noted artist, was his daughter. ahmed died in 1975, at the age of 71.  references  external links     recipients of the padma bhushan in public affairs 1904 births 1975 deaths 20th-century indian lawyers mayors of delhi st. stephen's college, delhi alumni indian barristers alumni of the university of cambridge members of the inner temple date of birth missing date of death missing
the solid waste and public cleansing management act 2007 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to provide for and regulate the management of controlled solid waste and public cleansing for the purpose of maintaining proper sanitation and for matters incidental thereto.  preamble whereas sanitation is a matter within the concurrent list in the ninth schedule to the federal constitution: and whereas matters relating to the management of controlled solid waste and public cleansing are now administered by the various local authorities: and whereas it is expedient for the purpose of ensuring uniformity of law and policy to make a law for the proper control and regulation of matters relating to the management of controlled solid waste and public cleansing throughout peninsular malaysia and the federal territories of putrajaya and labuan: and whereas it is also expedient that provisions be made to confer executive authority on the federation for matters relating to the management of controlled solid waste and public cleansing throughout peninsular malaysia and the federal territories of putrajaya and labuan:  structure the solid waste and public cleansing management act 2007, in its current form (30 january 2007), consists of 12 parts containing 112 sections and no schedule (including no amendment).  part i: preliminary  part ii: administration  part iii: approval for the construction, alteration or closure of prescribed solid waste management facilities  part iv: licensing provisions  part v: charges  part vi: tribunal for solid waste management services  part vii: assumption of control  part viii: control of solid waste generators and persons in possession of controlled solid waste  part ix: enforcement provisions  part x: reduction and recovery of controlled solid waste  part xi: general  part xii: savings and transitional  references  external links  solid waste and public cleansing management act 2007   2007 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
olha holodna (ольга анатоліівна голодна; born 14 november 1991 in mryn, nosivka raion) is a ukrainian shot putter.  career in her early career she finished eighth at the 2010 world junior championships and won the 2013 european u23 championships. she later competed at the 2013 world championships and the 2014 world indoor championships without reaching the final, before finishing ninth at the 2016 european championships.  her personal best is 18.72 metres, achieved in june 2013 in kyiv.  references  1991 births living people people from nosivka raion ukrainian female shot putters world athletics championships athletes for ukraine athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of ukraine ukrainian athletics championships winners athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
artemides zatti (12 october 1880 - 15 march 1951) was an italian roman catholic professed religious of the salesians of don bosco and a noted pharmacist that emigrated to argentina in 1897. zatti became a professed salesian in 1911 and became well known for his ardent faith and commitment to the sick.  his nephew was the eighth rector of the salesians - juan edmundo vecchi.  zatti was beatified on 14 april 2002.  life artemides zatti was born in reggio emilia on 12 october 1880 as one of three sons of luigi zatti and albina vecchi. he had seven siblings: three brothers and four sisters. zatti was baptized in 1880.  zatti dropped out of school in 1889 due to the poorness of his parents and he commenced work for a rich neighbor. zatti's parents believed the current economic climate was not appropriate and that their fortunes were too low. they decided to move elsewhere and arrived in argentina at a port in buenos aires on 9 february 1897, settling in bahia blanca. an uncle of his lived in argentina prior to their arrival. he worked in a hotel and also in a brick factory.  he met the priest carlos cavalli around this time who encouraged him to become a member of the salesians of don bosco; he entered on 19 april 1900 to commence his novitiate as a secular member. he made his first profession on 11 january 1908. he made his solemn profession as a secular member on 11 february 1911.  zatti contracted tuberculosis in 1901 as he tended to the priest ernesto giuliani - in casa di bernal - who had the disease and died of it on 4 january 1902; he looked after giuliani since 1900. sometime in 1902 he also cared for ceferino namuncura. zatti's ailment saw him move for recuperation to viedma where he recovered after turning to the intercession of the blessed virgin mary. on 5 march 1903 he became a manager of a chemist in the hospital of san jose.  he attended frequent mass and learnt the spanish language in order to assimilate into his new home nation. his routine included morning mass and meditation as well as a bike ride to the sick. he would also entertain the ill with a game of bocce and from 2:00 pm to 6:00 pm would visit hospital patients. he would read spiritual texts in the night following work. zatti's work schedule spanned from 4:30 am until 11:00 pm. he also gained a diploma in nursing. one doctor said: "
i believe in god since i know mr. zatti". he secured argentine citizenship in 1914 in la plata and on 23 may 1915 he began the publication "flores del campo" which was issued each week as a christian publication.  he had a hospital constructed in 1913 and was most disappointed and displeased when it was torn down in 1941 and rebuilt into something else.  zatti fell off a ladder on 19 july 1950 as he climbed to the roof to fix a water tank. he recovered in the hospital where he was not long after diagnosed with liver cancer after his livid skin color was assessed. he remained in the hospital from january 1951 until his death.  zatti died due to liver cancer on 15 march 1951 in videma. his remains were housed in a salesian chapel in viedma.  beatification  the beatification process commenced after "nihil obstat" was granted to the cause from the congregation for the causes of saints on 1 june 1979 when he was titled as a servant of god. the diocesan process opened on 22 march 1980 and concluded not long after, which allowed for the c.c.s. to validate the process on 14 december 1984 and later assume possession of the positio in 1991.  theologians approved the cause on 25 october 1996 and the c.c.s. followed this on 8 april 1997. zatti became titled as venerable - on 7 july 1997 - after pope john paul ii confirmed the fact that the late religious had indeed lived a model christian life of heroic virtue.  the process for investigating a miracle opened in buenos aires after jorge mario bergoglio - the future pope francis - inaugurated the process on 14 april 1998 and closed it one month later on 14 may 1998. the c.c.s. validated this process in rome on 20 november 1998. a medical board approved the miracle on 9 march 2000 and theologians followed this decision on 27 october 2000. the c.c.s. voted in favor as well on 6 february 2001 which led to papal approval on 24 april 2001.  zatti was beatified on 14 april 2002 in saint peter's square.  the current postulator of this cause is pierluigi cameroni.  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn  1880 births 1951 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century italian people 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century italian people beatifications by pope john paul ii deaths from liver cancer italian emigrants to argentina argentine beatified people italian beatified people people from reggio emilia salesians of don bosco venerated catholics by pope john
paul ii beatified roman catholic religious brothers
the institute of mathematical problems of biology ras () is a research institute specializing in computational biology and bioinformatics. the objective of the institute is elaboration of mathematical and computational methods for biological research, as well as implementation of these methods directly addressing the problems of computational biology.  since 2016, it has been renamed into the institute of mathematical problems of biology ras - the branch of keldysh institute of applied mathematics of russian academy of sciences (impb ras - branch of kiam ras).  the institute publishes the scientific journal "mathematical biology & bioinformatics".  structure of the institute affiliated to the institute are:  laboratory of macromolecular crystallography  laboratory of quantum-mechanical systems  laboratory of molecular dynamics  laboratory of neural networks  laboratory of applied mathematics  laboratory of bioinformatics  laboratory of computational ecology  laboratory of data processing  department of prospective information technologies  group for computer modelling of nanostructures and biosystems  department of computing and informational resources  scientific activity  research directions  theoretical development;  theoretical foundations of nanobioelectronics;  development of spectro-analytical methods of data processing of results of biological experiments;  development of numerical methods of data processing of results of biological experiments;  analytical solutions of integro-differential equations;  methods of analysis of dynamical systems.  data processing   analysis of the activity of the human brain;  development of methods for assessing biodiversity of vegetation cover;  development of algorithms and programs for the study of genomic sequences;  development of computer methods of research of the primary structures of biopolymers;  development of novel methods of deciphering the structure of complexes of biological macromolecules on the basis of data on the scattering of x-rays and neutrons;  development of methods for obtaining, processing and analysis of digital image in biology and medicine.  computational biology   simulation of dynamics of biomolecular systems;  neural network models of information processing in the brain structures;  growing random graphs and their application in mathematical neurobiology;  study of models of voltage-gated ion channels in excitable biomembranes;  software for studying cell metabolism;  mathematical models in biomechanics;  numerical solution of problems of cardiophysics.  synergetics (including topics such as: dynamic system, chaos theory, nonequilibrium thermodynamics, systems biology)  study of nonlinear models of autolocalized states in condensed matter;  asymptotic methods and numerical modelling in the study of excitation waves;  the
theory of bifurcation in functional differential equations and phenomena bifurcation memory.  bioinformatics  concurrent computing    development of high-performance computer cluster;  cuda technology.  specialized research projects  the project "mathematical cell";  the project "generalized spectral-analytical method" (gsam).  teaching and social activities  on the basis of the institute, the mathematical faculty of the pushchino university was founded in 1994.  starting from 2006, every two years institute holds a conference "mathematical biology and bioinformatics".  history  milestones the institute of mathematical problems of biology ras (impb ras) was founded in 1972. when organized, the institute received the name of the research computing centre (rcc) of the ussr academy of sciences. in 1992 the research computing centre was reorganized into the institute of mathematical problems of biology ras.  as a result of the reorganization in ras of 2015-16 impb has become a branch of kiam since 15 february 2016.  principals  1972-98 molchanov, albert makarievich, director, mathematician.  1998-2016 lakhno, viktor dmitrievich, director, mathematician.  since 2016 lakhno, viktor dmitrievich, branch manager, mathematician.  famous faculty and alumni  dedus, florence fyodorovich  molchanov, albert makarievich  shnol, emmanuel el'evich  references  external links  institute web site  educational institutions established in 1972 mathematical institutes institutes of the russian academy of sciences universities and institutes established in the soviet union research institutes in the soviet union 1972 establishments in the soviet union
angel chavarria rivas (born june 18, 1991 in mexico city) is a mexican professional footballer who last played for loros de la universidad de colima. he made his professional debut with cruz azul hidalgo during an ascenso mx defeat to correcaminos uat on 20 july 2012.  references  1991 births living people mexican footballers cruz azul hidalgo footballers loros udec footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from mexico city  association footballers not categorized by position
ellen nordan lund iden (january 24, 1897 - november 12, 1961) was a norwegian painter known for her landscapes, pictures of flowers, interior paintings, and portraits using finely tuned coloring.  biography ellen nordan lund iden was born in kristiania (now oslo), the daughter of major ivar johannessen lund (1861-1936) and the painter jacobine nordan lund (1867-1941). she studied under othon friesz at the former academie moderne in paris in 1920, and then at the norwegian national academy of fine arts under axel revold from 1931 to 1932. she also studied under leon aurdal.  she married the sculptor johannes iden in 1938, who died in the sinking of the m/s ronda one year later. her first solo exhibition coincided with a memorial exhibition for him, held at the artists' association gallery () in 1943. she achieved a major breakthrough in 1955 with a solo exhibition at the oslo art association gallery (). the exhibition was a traveling exhibition that was shown in several cities, and it received much attention in the press. ellen iden served as the first head of the rogaland art school (), which was established as a workshop for those wishing to enter the norwegian national academy of craft and art industry. during her active years as an artist, she took part in a number of exhibitions. she exhibited twelve times at the autumn exhibition (the last time posthumously in 1962). her paintings studie av gertrud (a study of gertrud, 1960), kobberfjellet (copper mountain, 1954-1955), and bergknaus etter regn (hilltop after the rain, 1960) were purchased by the national museum of art, architecture, and design. the painting oldemors blomster (great-grandmother's flowers) was purchased by the stavanger art gallery ().  in 1946, iden purchased a summer home in holmsund near flosta in the municipality of arendal. iden was part of an artists' colony that developed in the postwar years in flosta. together with others, including ivar jerven, kjerstin øvrelid, knut monrad, finn strømsted, bodil cappelen, finn henrik bodvin, and liv nergaard, an artistic environment was created that drew inspiration from nature and the skerries. a number of her landscape motifs draw upon this background. in a letter to agnes hiorth from her summer home in holmesund, she wrote the following:         ellen nordan lund
iden died in oslo.  references  1897 births 1961 deaths 20th-century norwegian painters 20th-century norwegian women artists artists from oslo norwegian women painters landscape artists
jutland was a canadian beam trawler based out of liverpool, nova scotia. built in 1918 by the boehner bros., she was owned by lahave fishing company.  disappearance on march 10, 1920, jutland left halifax, nova scotia, with a crew of 21 heading to the western bank fishing grounds. on the morning of march 11, the halifax steam trawler lemberg discovered two dories approximately 160 kilometers (86 nautical miles) southeast of halifax. both dories were damaged and full of water. the body of john r. ellison, a mate of jutland, was discovered aboard one of the dories. the bodies of the 20 other crew members were never found. various theories on what happened to jutland have been examined, from an explosion to a collision.  references  maritime history of canada fishing vessels shipwrecks of the nova scotia coast shipwrecks in the atlantic ocean maritime incidents in 1920 missing ships ships lost with all hands 1918 ships
jung eun-bi (born may 30, 1997), better known by her stage name eunha, is a south korean singer and actress. she was the lead vocalist of the girl group gfriend, and a current member of the trio viviz.  early life  eunha was born may 30, 1997, in seoul. she was a child actress, and had a role in the 2007 television drama the clinic for married couples: love and war.  when she was seven years old, she was diagnosed with langerhans cell histiocytosis (lch). she then took on treatment for the disease and had regular blood tests until she was in the sixth grade of primary school. it was successfully cured and it was said that there is no possibility of recurrence.  career eunha debuted as a member of south korean girl group gfriend in early 2015 with the song "glass bead". she was featured on pro c's single "han river at night", released on october 21, 2015. eunha's first solo release was the song "don't come to farewell", recorded for the soundtrack of the television drama six flying dragons. it was released on march 7, 2016.  she played a role in mbc mbig tv's web show oh my god! tip with block b's park kyung. eunha was then featured on park kyung's single "inferiority complex", released may 25, 2016.  her second solo release was the song "love-ing", recorded for the soundtrack of the television drama temperature of love. it was released on october 2, 2017.  on october 6, 2021, it was announced that eunha, along with former gfriend members, sinb and umji, have signed a contract with bpm entertainment to debut as a trio. on october 8, 2021, it was announced their new group name would be viviz.  viviz debuted on february 9, 2022 with the extended play beam of prism.  discography  singles  soundtrack appearances  composition credits all song credits are adapted from the korea music copyright association's database unless stated otherwise.  filmography  television series  web show  awards and nominations  notes  references  external links      living people 1997 births singers from seoul school of performing arts seoul alumni gfriend members viviz members k-pop singers south korean women pop singers south korean female idols 21st-century south korean singers 21st-century south korean women singers 21st-century south korean actresses hybe corporation artists bpm entertainment artists
julie michelle palais (born september 2, 1956 in massachusetts) is an american polar glaciologist who has made significant contributions to climate change research studying volcanic fallout in ice cores from both greenland and antarctica. for many years, starting in 1990, she played a pivotal role working at the national science foundation (nsf) as program director of the antarctic glaciology program in the division of polar programs, including many trips to both north and south polar regions. both the palais glacier and palais bluff in antarctica were named in her honor and she has received many further recognitions for her distinguished career.  early life and education  palais attended newton north high school in massachusetts, graduating in 1974. in 1978, she received her bachelor of arts (ba) cum laude in geology/earth science from the university of new hampshire. she attended ohio state university between 1978 and 1985, where she earned both a master of science (ms) and a doctor of philosophy (phd) in geological and earth sciences/geosciences. her graduate research focused on the study of volcanic fallout in snow and polar ice cores from both greenland and in samples from the byrd ice core and from shallow ice cores near mt. erebus on ross island in antarctica.  career and impact  for over 26 years palais directed polar glaciology research as program director for the division of polar programs antarctic glaciology program at nsf. in an effort to understand the history and dynamics of the antarctic and greenland ice sheets, nsf research programs focus on various glaciology aspects including the use of ice cores as global paleoclimate indicators. palais made more than 27 trips to antarctica and 3 to greenland.  palais is a member of numerous professional societies including the american geophysical union, the international glaciological society, the american polar society, the explorers club and the animals and society institute.  encore career  after her retirement from the national science foundation in 2016 she began a new career in the field of animal welfare. after completing a post graduate certificate in 2017 from the university of edinburgh (royal dick school of veterinary medicine) in international animal welfare, ethics and law (iawel) she did a master of science degree in anthrozoology (human-animal studies), at canisius college in buffalo, n.y., graduating in the spring of 2019. during her graduate degree in anthrozoology she interned at the animal welfare institute (awi) in washington, d.c. and she began looking at the data being collected by the fbi (since 2016) on animal cruelty in the u.s.  after graduating
she continued her work looking at the animal cruelty data in the national incident-based reporting system (nibrs) of the fbi. the analyses included not only state to state differences in the numbers of incidents reported but also the demographics of offenders, and the other criminal offenses co-occurring along with the incidents of animal cruelty. in addition, she noted the location, time of day and monthly variations of incidents of animal cruelty. she published her findings in four magazine articles in 2020, including an article in public management (international city/county management association); an article in animal care & control today (national animal care & control association), an article in sheriff & deputy magazine (national sheriff's association) and one in police chief magazine (international association of chief's of police). palais continues to do scholarly research on publishing a paper in the journal social sciences on the trends in animal cruelty from law enforcement agencies and how that relates to the potential for other crimes.  in august 2021, palais (under her pen name julu) published (vajra publications, kathmandu, nepal) the bilingual (english-nepali) children's book, "sathi: the street dog from kathmandu, nepal".  the book is based on the true story about a street dog who was abused by a woman who found the dog a nuisance. the book is one of the first of its kind in nepal to share the concept of kindness to animals and which is now being used in schools to teach humane education.  awards and honors  palais glacier and palais bluff are two features in antarctica named in her honor by the advisory committee on antarctic names  (us-acan), palais glacier in 1995,  and palais bluff in 2000.  in 2007, the explorers club named her co-recipient of the lowell thomas award for her contributions to breakthroughs in glaciology and climate science.  in 2017, the international glaciological society awarded palais the richardson medal for 'for insightful and steadfast service to the u.s. and international glaciological and ice core science communities by enabling discoveries that have impacted the course of climate science and enlightened understanding of the important role of glaciology and the polar regions in global climate change'.  in 2019, the university of new hampshire (unh) awarded palais an honorary degree at its may 18 commencement ceremony: "...for her contributions to climate change research, studying volcanic fallout in ice cores from both greenland and antarctica. she served as program director of the antarctic glaciology program at the nsf's division of polar programs making
many trips to antarctica and greenland to understand the history and dynamics of the antarctic and greenland ice sheets. ..." on september 27[7], the college of engineering and physical science at unh further honored palais by naming her as its 2019 recipient of the distinguished alumni award in recognition of her outstanding contributions to society. in presenting the award dean zercher said that "julie's service at nsf positioned her as a leader of the glaciology scientific community,  her impact on the science and on the profession has been impressive...."  in reply julie remarked that the part of her career of which she was the most proud was her role in the development of the u.s. ice core community that analyzes ice cores for the evidence of climate change. early in her career, there were in the us few labs and a lack of groups that could properly collect, analyze and sample ice cores. as program manager of the glaciology program at nsf, she was responsible for helping build the infrastructure and personnel in the united states, and it is now the u.s. science community at the top when it comes to the ability to plan and execute cutting-edge ice coring programs and contribute to the important dialogue about how climate is changing. then, in october the byrd polar and climate research center announced that "dr. palais would receive the 2019 goldthwait polar medal in recognition of her distinguished record of scholarship and service polar science. she is among the pioneers of ice core science and, particularly, in studies of the geochemical signatures of volcanic deposition and other processes within the ice record. despite her success as a scientist, she left academia to serve for at the national science foundation (nsf), guiding the antarctic glaciology program through a critical time of expansion. in her role at nsf she also helped launch the successful careers of many young polar scientists and actively increased the inclusion of women and other underrepresented groups in antarctic research."  references  external links     west antarctic ice sheet divide ice core photo gallery  1956 births living people american glaciologists american women geologists american antarctic scientists marie byrd land explorers and scientists newton north high school alumni ohio state university alumni university of new hampshire alumni women antarctic scientists women glaciologists 21st-century american women
mullah nasr al-din is a 1953 iranian film directed by and starring iraj doostdar.  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films iranian films persian-language films nasreddin iranian black-and-white films
the type 31 frigate or inspiration class, and formerly known as the type 31e frigate or general purpose frigate (gpf), is a planned class of frigate intended to enter service with the united kingdom's royal navy in the 2020s alongside the submarine-hunting type 26 frigate. designed by babcock international, it is also marketed under the name arrowhead 140 and was based on the hull of the  frigate.  it is intended that the type 31 frigate will replace some of the general-purpose type 23 frigates. the type 31 is part of the british government's "national shipbuilding strategy".  development the 2010 strategic defence and security review (sdsr) authorised the global combat ship (gcs) programme which would replace the royal navy's thirteen type 23 frigates. earlier that year, bae systems was awarded a four-year, £127 million contract by the ministry of defence to design the new class. it was planned that two variants of the class would be built: five general purpose frigates and eight anti-submarine warfare frigates. there was to be little difference between the two variants, except for the sonar 2087. initial expectations were that construction would start in 2016 and the ships would gradually replace the type 23 frigates by the mid-2030s. the 2015 defence review decided that only the eight anti-submarine warfare type 26 frigates would be ordered and five general purpose frigates to an altogether different design would be ordered to give at least 13 frigates in rn service.  general purpose frigate the resultant general purpose frigate (gpff) was to be a lighter, flexible and more affordable general purpose frigate class. according to the 2015 sdsr, the lower cost of these frigates could lead to the royal navy acquiring more than five, therefore increasing its overall numbers of frigates and destroyers. during a defence and security lecture in july 2016, gpff was referred to as the type 31 frigate by the first sea lord, admiral sir philip jones,. who also stated that type 31 frigates could permanently operate "east of suez"; from the persian gulf region to the asia-pacific. during the same month, bae systems revealed two general purpose frigate designs: the "avenger class" which was based on the "amazonas-class/river-class batch 2 offshore patrol vessel" and the "cutlass class" that was described as a "significantly stretched and enhanced derivation of the al shamikh-class corvette design".  the sunday times stated that babcock international and bmt had also submitted one design each.  national shipbuilding strategy in october 2017 the financial
times stated that "..officials inside the ministry of defence, the treasury and royal navy have long resented the obligation, set a decade ago, to maintain skills and shipbuilding capacity at bae's shipyards on the clyde regardless of naval needs." it quoted francis tusa, a defence analyst, who argued that the competition appeared to be designed to break bae's hold on naval shipbuilding; "were they to have bid as bae systems, they wouldn't win. that is absolutely obvious. the fact is that the type 31 is slanted probably to exclude any bid that includes bae." however, this was denied by the mod which stated that the competition was designed to improve speed of delivery and reduce cost.  in order to maintain national shipbuilding capacity, the 2017 national shipbuilding strategy proposed ordering an initial batch of five type 31e frigates with an initial in-service date in 2023, with their cost limited to a maximum of £250m each, to be followed by a second batch order of type 31 for the royal navy. the type 31 is projected to be built in modular form as with the  carriers at several commercial shipyards, and assembled in one central yard.  design tenders throughout 2017 several designs from different companies were suggested as contenders for the type 31. bae submitted two designs, "avenger", essentially an improved batch 3 river-class opv, and "cutlass", a significantly stretched and enhanced derivation of the al shamikh-class corvette. bmt submitted a design called "venator 110", with steller systems putting forward project "spartan" and babcock offered a design named "arrowhead 120".  in october 2017, bae systems announced that it would withdraw from the type 31e competition as a main contractor, citing the capacity constraints of its shipyards on the clyde, which were full with the work on the new s and type 26 frigates. instead, bae announced a partnership with cammell laird, whereby bae would provide its expertise in design and systems integration, while cammell laird would be the prime contractor and be responsible for the assembly of the ships at its yard at birkenhead. the planned design was named "leander", a reference to three previous classes of ship in the royal navy.  in november 2017, it was announced that bmt and babcock signed a co-operation agreement for the type 31. they did not choose between their respective "venator 110" or "arrowhead 120" designs, but instead would explore their designs to determine the best possible option. in late may 2018, babcock, partnered with bmt
and thales group announced the "arrowhead 140" design, based on the hull of the danish s.  the competition was suspended on 20 july 2018 due to 'insufficient compliant bids' being received, however the times claimed this was due to a "funding crisis". the competition was restarted in august 2018.  competitive design phase selection  on 10 december 2018, three groups were selected for the competitive design phase:   bae systems/cammell laird with their planned leander design  babcock/bmt/thales with their arrowhead 140 design  atlas elektronik uk/thyssenkrup marine systems, which was likely to be based on the meko a-200 design  both the bae systems and babcock led entrants had already been put forward when the competition was temporarily suspended. the third bid was submitted by the atlas elektronik uk-led team. both the babcock and atlas proposals included ferguson marine on the clyde and harland & wolff in belfast. by august 2019 both of these companies announced that they were in financial difficulties.  it was announced on 12 september 2019 that the arrowhead 140 design had been selected for the type 31 frigate. a contract was formally awarded to babcock on 15 november 2019, for an average production cost of £250 million per ship and an overall program cost set to be £2 billion with £1.25 billion value to babcock.  on 20 january 2020, the public accounts committee was informed by the permanent secretary for defence that the first ship will be launched by 2023 but the in-service date will be in 2027. this is in contrast to earlier statements that the in-service date would be in 2023.  characteristics during a july 2016 defence select committee hearing, first sea lord admiral sir philip jones described the gpff as "to be a much less high-end ship. it is still a complex warship, and it is still able to protect and defend and to exert influence around the world, but it is deliberately shaped with lessons from wider industry and off-the-shelf technology to make it... more appealing to operate at a slightly lower end of royal navy operations." ihs janes described it as a "credible frigate" that will cover "maritime security, maritime counter-terrorism and counter-piracy operations, escort duties, and naval fire support... [sitting] between the high-end capability delivered by the type 26 and type 45, and the constabulary-oriented outputs to be delivered by the five planned river-class batch 2 opvs."
a september 2017 graphic released by the royal navy stressed modular adaptability and flexible construction of the design for export opportunities. core requirements of the type 31e frigate include a medium calibre gun, point defence systems, hangar and a flight deck for wildcat or ten tonne helicopter operated by a crew of around 100 with space for 40 more personnel. the british government released a request for information (rfi) in september 2017, detailing the desired characteristics of the type 31e. the rfi provides greater details such as a "medium calibre gun" of greater than , a point defence anti-air missile system and the optional ability to launch and recover unmanned aerial vehicles. forces news reported that the design will contain sea ceptor missiles, an advanced air and surface surveillance and target indication radar such as the thales ns100 and be able to operate either an agustawestland wildcat hma2 or an agustawestland merlin hm2. on 1 october 2020, bae systems announced it was under contract to supply five bofors 57 mk3 medium calibre guns and ten bofors 40 mk4 small calibre guns to the royal navy for the first five type 31 frigates.  on 2 november, 2021, first sea lord tony radakin stated that type 31 frigates will be fitted for but not with the mark 41 vertical launching system.  exports on 30 june 2021, it was reported that babcock was in discussions with greece, indonesia, poland and two other countries about potential type 31 contracts.  on 16 september 2021, babcock announced that it had signed an agreement with pt pal indonesia allowing it to design two type 31 derivatives for the indonesian navy.  ships of the class together, the five ships will be known as the "inspiration class". in may 2021, the names of the five type 31 ships were announced by the first sea lord; these were selected to represent key themes of the future plans of the royal navy and royal marines.  active, named after the type 21 frigate which served in the falklands war and in support of britain's overseas territories, symbolising forward deployment of ships overseas.  bulldog, named after the world war ii  , which escorted shipping convoys in the atlantic, was chosen to represent operations in the north atlantic.  bulldog  captured the  and its top-secret enigma machine.  formidable, named after the world war ii-era aircraft carrier , represents carrier operations. formidable took part in the war in the mediterranean, atlantic and pacific.  venturer, named after the world war ii submarine , which while underwater
, destroyed an enemy submarine, symbolising technology and innovation.  campbeltown, named after , which was involved in the daring st nazaire raid was chosen to symbolize the future commando force.  as of 2021, all ships are planned to be service by february 2030.  list of ships  see also   future of the royal navy  notes  references  bibliography  frigate classes future surface combatant ship classes of the royal navy united kingdom defence procurement 2020s ships
hothian  is a village in tarn taran district of punjab state, india. it is located  from khadoor sahib, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of hothian. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, hothian has total number of 108 houses and population of 560 of which include 286 males and 274 females. literacy rate of hothian is 72.78%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 75 which is 13.39% of total population of hothian, and child sex ratio is approximately 630, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the exilles fort (pronounced : egzil - italian: forte di exilles french: fort d'exilles) is a fortified complex in the susa valley, metropolitan city of turin, piedmont, northern italy. together with the nearby fort of fenestrelle and the forte albertino (at vinadio, in the province of cuneo) it was part of the defensive line between the house of savoy lands (later of the kingdom of italy) and france: both these states held it in different phases depending on the outcome of the various wars. it is located on a spur commanding one of the narrowest sections of the susa valley, along the main road connecting turin to france.  history the first mention of a fortified structure in the place dates from the 7th century, when a chronicler of the abbey of novalesa wrote of a fortification on the spur overlooking exilles, perhaps destroyed by the franks. starting from 1155, the fort was held by the bermond family of besancon, counts of albon, who owned the road passing near it and leading to the monginevro pass.  the first description of the castle dates from 1339: it had a quadrangular plan with more towers, quite different from the massive structure visible today. between 1494-1496 it was used as an ammunition depot by charles viii of france, who enlarged the main entrance and enrolled peasants of the area to defend it. in the 16th century it was further reinforced with more towers under charles ii of savoy. in 1541 it was again under french rule, though, according to the treaty of cateau-cambresis (1559), it was reacquired by emmanuel philibert of savoy. in 1591 it was recaptured by the french after a short siege, but two years later charles emmanuel i of savoy took it back and strengthened it, in particular on the side facing the upper susa valley.  in 1595, after a month-long siege, it was again in french hands. the savoyards would receive it back only in 1708, after the war of the spanish succession. in this century the french strongly rebuilt the fort. in 1720 the piedmontese revised it under the direction of military engineer ignazio bertola. in 1745, during the war of the austrian succession, the french attacked the fort, but were pushed back.  when napoleon bonaparte conquered italy in the early 19th century, the fort was demolished. it was rebuilt in 1818-1829, updating the pre-existing architecture to more modern
military concepts. the fort belonged to the italian army until 1943, after which it was abandoned.  in 1978 the piedmontese regional authority acquired it and launched a restoration program. the fort was opened to the public in 2000, housing the museo nazionale della montagna (national mountain museum) and occasional exhibitions.  the famous historical character known as l'homme au masque de fer (the man in the iron mask) spent some years captive in the fortress jail.  see also man in the iron mask  references  sources  external links official website  castles in piedmont museums in piedmont buildings and structures in the metropolitan city of turin metropolitan city of turin
maggie civantos (; born 28 december 1984) is a spanish actress, best known for her starring role of macarena ferreiro in the prison series locked up (vis a vis). she has since starred in series such as cable girls, malaka, vis a vis: el oasis or express.  biography born in malaga on 28 december 1984, her mother is a singer and her father is a sound technician. she was named after the character maggie gioberti, played by susan sullivan, in the tv series falcon crest.  career she began her career in escenas de matrimonio replacing mar saura, hospital central and yo soy bea. in 2008 she starred the tv series eva y kolegas by antena 3. she played angelica in the canal sur television tv series arrayan.  in 2014 she had her first important role as fanny in bienvenidos al lolita. her biggest role was as macarena, the main character in the 2015 tv series vis a vis. in 2017 she appeared in the first spanish netflix original series cable girls (las chicas del cable) alongside blanca suarez, ana fernandez and nadia de santiago.  she returned as macarena in the spin-off vis a vis: el oasis, starring with najwa nimri. she appears along salva reina in malaka.  filmography  films  television series  awards and nominations  {| class="wikitable sortable plainrowheaders" ! year ! award ! category ! work ! result ! scope="col" class="unsortable"|  |- | align = "center" | 2015 || 3rd  || best drama actress || rowspan = "4" | locked up ||  || align = "center" |  |- | align = "center" | 2016 || 25th actors and actresses union awards || best television actress in a leading role ||  || align = "center" |  |- | align = "center" | 2017 || 4th feroz awards || best leading actress in a television series ||  || align = "center" |  |- | align = "center" | 2017 || 26th actors and actresses union awards || best television actress in a leading role ||  || align = "center" |  |- | align = "center" | 2021 || 71st fotogramas de plata || best television actress || vis a vis: el oasis ||  || align = "center" |  references  external links          21st-century spanish actresses living people 1984 births people from malaga
spain competed at the 2012 european athletics championships in helsinki, finland, from 27 juneto 1 july.  medals  results  men track & road events  field events  women track & road events  field events  athletics championships 2006 european athletics championships nations at the 2012 european athletics championships
ribnikar is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  darko f. ribnikar (1878-1914), serbian journalist vladislav f. ribnikar (1871-1914), serbian journalist, brother of darko  (1912-2007), serbian writer
the 2016 iraqi super cup was meant to be the 8th iraqi super cup and the first edition after it was discontinued in 2002. the super cup is an annual iraqi football match played between the winners of the previous season's iraqi premier league and iraq fa cup. the match was meant to be contested by 2015-16 iraq fa cup winners al-quwa al-jawiya, and al-zawraa, champions of the 2015-16 iraqi premier league.  it was originally meant to be held at al-shaab stadium on 22 august 2016, almost a month before the start of the league season kicked off. however, al-quwa al-jawiya's matches in the 2016 afc cup and iraq's matches in fifa world cup qualifying clashed with this date so the game was postponed to 10 september. finally, on 9 december 2016, iraq football association member yahya karim announced that the match was cancelled altogether.  background al-zawraa qualified as champions of the 2015-16 iraqi premier league. they secured their record 13th title with a 1-1 draw against al-naft at al-shaab stadium on 22 may 2016. it would have been their 6th iraqi super cup appearance, having won a record of three titles.  al-quwa al-jawiya qualified as winners of the 2015-16 iraq fa cup. they defeated al-zawraa, the league champions, in their last match together 2-0 on 29 may 2016 to win their fourth title. bashar rasan scored the first goal in the 58th and the second was scored by humam tariq in stoppage time. it would have been their 5th iraqi super cup appearance, having won two titles. al-quwa al-jawiya's coach, basim qasim would have faced the club he led to achieve last season's league.  references  2016-17 in iraqi football iraq fa cup
f85 or f-85 may refer to:  durango f-85, an early personal computer   mcdonnell xf-85 goblin, an american experimental fighter aircraft  oldsmobile f-85, an american automobile  spanish frigate navarra (f85), a santa maria-class frigate  volvo f85, a medium size truck
the province of canary islands (in spanish: provincia de canarias) is the name of the former province formed by the canary islands. this province had its capital in the city of santa cruz de tenerife. after the provincial division in 1927 this province was composed of the province of santa cruz de tenerife that encompassed the western islands of the canaries, while the province of las palmas covered the eastern islands.  history  on november 30, 1833 the province of the canary islands was created, which the cadiz constitution of 1812 established with its capital in santa cruz de tenerife. however, there arose a rivalry with the island of gran canaria, due to the fact that the capital was established on the island of tenerife, although so far, the city exercised for three centuries as de facto capital of the canary islands was the city of san cristobal de la laguna located in tenerife.  in 1912, there was created ley de cabildos (the law of town halls) to try to satisfy both sides. this did not please those who asked for the provincial division, especially from gran canaria, and those who advocated regional autonomy, mostly from tenerife.  in 1927, during the dictatorship of general primo de rivera until then province of the canary islands was divided into two: the eastern half would result in the province of las palmas, leaving the western called since then with the name of province of santa cruz de tenerife. from here, the capital of the archipelago would be shared between the cities of santa cruz de tenerife and las palmas de gran canaria, which is how it remains today.  it is the only province that has been divided from the project, raising the number of provinces from 49 to the 50 that currently exist in spain.  references   1927 in spain 1833 in spain canary islands politics of the canary islands history of the canary islands
the unfaithful (spanish: las infieles) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by alejandro galindo and starring irasema dilian, armando calvo and maria douglas.  cast  references  bibliography   mora, carl j. mexican cinema: reflections of a society, 1896-2004. mcfarland & co, 2005.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by alejandro galindo mexican black-and-white films
events from the year 1758 in russia  incumbents  monarch - elizabeth  events  births   euphrosinia kolyupanovskaya, courtier (d. 1855)  ekaterina orlova (courtier), courtier (d. 1781)  deaths  references  1758 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
paul kipkemoi chelimo (born october 27, 1990) is an american track and field athlete. he is the 2016 olympic silver medalist and the 2020 olympic bronze medalist in the 5000 meters.  career in 2010, chelimo initially went to the us to run for shorter college where he won the 3000 meters and was part of their winning distance medley relay team as shorter won the 2011 naia national indoor championship.  later that year, shorter won the naia men's outdoor track and field championship as chelimo won the 5000 meters and 10000 meters at the championships.  he transferred to the university of north carolina at greensboro, taking 2nd place in the 2012 ncaa championships 5000 meters and repeated the place in 2013.  chelimo found his path to citizenship by joining the united states army through the military accessions vital to national interest (mavni) program as a water treatment specialist, then entering their world class athletic program in 2014.  he represented the united states in the 3000 meters at the 2016 iaaf world indoor championships held in portland, oregon.  he qualified to the world championships by taking second place at the usa indoor track and field championships on the same track a week earlier, setting a personal record of 7:39.00.  later in 2016, he finished third in the 5000 meters at the olympic trials. running aggressively, chelimo was the first to cover an early breakaway, which was eventually swallowed by another breakaway by previous trials winner galen rupp.  again, chelimo led the last lap charge to run down rupp, and after catching him, chelimo held the lead onto the final straightaway.  chelimo was eventually run down by the sprint finish of 41-year-old kenyan american bernard lagat, followed closely by hassan mead. but chelimo was able to hold his position to the finish, beating eric jenkins to the line by 0.06 of a second and qualifying for the 2016 summer olympics.  2016 olympics chelimo ran a personal best 13:19.54 in the prelim of the 5000 metres at the 2016 summer olympics.  during the final he stayed near the lead the entire race, withstanding every attack three ethiopian teammates were trying to throw against eventual winner mo farah.  when farah launched his final kick to win the race, chelimo was the last to follow farah, looking, for a few moments at the head of the final stretch, like he would be the only one able to outsprint farah to the
line.  farah pulled away and chelimo followed him across the finish line.  on the scoreboard, he was initially announced as the silver medal winner.  then his name was removed from the results, along with canadian mohammed ahmed and ethiopian muktar edris.   chelimo had exchanged elbows with both of them during the final turn.  video showed chelimo stepping inside of the track.  hagos gebrhiwet was elevated to second place, american bernard lagat was elevated to third.  the united states appealed and the medal was reinstated, with edris, the initiator of the contact remaining disqualified. he set a new personal best of 13:03.90 in the race. chelimo's medal was the first for the us in the event since bob schul and bill dellinger in the 1964 summer olympics, held in tokyo.  2017 world championships now an american star, he won the national championships by seven seconds in record time.  at the world championships, it was a set of familiar faces on the last lap.  this time though, edris and his teammate yomif kejelcha got the jump on farah and chelimo going in to the final lap and chelimo was running virtually even with farah.  in their pursuit of eventual winner edris, both had to weave around kejelcha then sprint for the line.  in his last championship track race, farah again beat chelimo across the line, but this time it was much closer, barely a half meter separating the two, chelimo getting bronze.  2018 usa indoor track and field championships  chelimo participated in the 3000m of the 2018 usa indoor track and field championships held in albuquerque, new mexico. he won the race with a time of 7:57.88, thereby qualifying for the 2018 world championships.  in the heats of the world indoor championships, he was one of many victims of a spate of disqualifications at that meet.  after appeal, he did not get to run in the final.  major competitions  references  external links  all-athletics paul chelimo biography u.s. army profile  living people 1990 births people from elgeyo-marakwet county american male long-distance runners kenyan male long-distance runners athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics unc greensboro spartans men's track and field athletes shorter hawks men's track and field athletes kenyan emigrants to the united states united states army soldiers medalists at the 2016 summer
olympics olympic silver medalists for the united states in track and field universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) world athletics championships medalists world athletics championships athletes for the united states olympic male long-distance runners universiade silver medalists for kenya iaaf continental cup winners usa indoor track and field championships winners usa outdoor track and field championships winners medalists at the 2013 summer universiade athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics medalists at the 2020 summer olympics kalenjin people olympic bronze medalists for the united states in track and field
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of the cricketers who have played for the bangladesh national under-23 cricket team in first-class, list a and twenty20 cricket.  a  abdur razzak  abu jayed  arafat sunny  ariful haque  asif ahmed  d  dhiman ghosh  f  faisal hossain  g  gazi alamgir  i  imran ahmed  k  kamrul islam rabbi  l  liton das  m  mahmudul hasan  mizanur rahman  mohammad mithun  myshukur rahaman  n  naeem islam  nasiruddin faruque  nazimuddin  mohammad nazmul islam  noor hossain  nurul hasan  r  rony talukdar  rumman ahmed  s  sabbir rahman  shahriar nafees  soumya sarkar  syed rasel  t  taijul islam  references  under-23
cicely elizabeth mayhew, baroness mayhew (nee ludlam; 16 february 1924 - 8 july 2016) was a british diplomat. she was the second woman to work for the british foreign office, and its first female diplomat.  early life she was born on 16 february 1924. her father, c.s ludlam, was a metallurgist and artisanal miner who made his money in copper in northern rhodesia, now zambia. he mined and produced around 1,523 tonnes of blister copper containing about 70,000 oz. (2,170 kg) of silver in the mumbwa district. she grew up in kenya, tanzania and south africa. she attended loreto convent school, pretoria from 1929 to 1932. her formal education was interrupted for two years while she and her mother accompanied her father on prospecting expeditions in tanzania and uganda, helping him to pan for gold near entebbe.   at age 10 she returned to britain to be educated and did not see her mother again until her twenties. she attended sheffield high school, living with her aunts. she then won a scholarship to cheltenham ladies college, where one of the teachers was a german jewish refugee; she went on to read french and german at lady margaret hall, oxford, graduating after only two years in 1944 with a first.  career in 1944, near the end of world war ii, she was recruited by british naval intelligence and worked at bletchley park, in hut 8, translating decoded german navy signals. after the war she was appointed as the uk's first woman diplomat. her first posting as 3rd secretary at the foreign office was to yugoslavia, and then to geneva. on her marriage in 1949 she was required to leave the service and her pension was converted to a dowry under rules which the foreign office maintained until 1973.  mayhew created a crucial pathway for women by becoming "the kings first female emissary" in 1947. mayhew came up against previous barriers during her time spent at bletchley park decoding crucial messages, encountering issues which women faced during the wartime, which were hard to overcome. one of the main issues mayhew encountered was in regards to "being paid significantly lower and being ranked beneath men," who as mayhew stated "could not boast a first from oxford."  personal life in 1949 she married christopher mayhew, the politician, broadcaster and writer, whom she met when they were both in the diplomatic service, and they had two sons and two daughters. he died in 1997.  she
spent her later years in a care home in wimbledon, and died on 8 july 2016.  legacy in march 2019, the mayhew theatre at the foreign office's diplomatic academy was opened by prince william, duke of cambridge. the theatre was named after mayhew following a vote amongst foreign and commonwealth office (fco) staff in which she was the runaway winner.  published works  references  1924 births 2016 deaths alumni of lady margaret hall, oxford british women diplomats british diplomats british baronesses bletchley park people people educated at sheffield high school, south yorkshire people educated at cheltenham ladies' college bletchley park women spouses of life peers
maldare is a small village in kodagu district of karnataka state, india.  location maldare is located on the forest road between piriyapatna and siddapura.  distance madikeri, 31 km virajpet, 26 km mangalore, 175 km bangalore, 223 km  post office there is a post office at maldare village.  the pincode is 571523.  suburbs and villages  mekur hosakeri - 12 km  nanjarayapatna - 12 km  valnur thyagathur - 12 km  thithimathi - 13 km  ammathi - 17 km  demographics the village of maldare has a population of 2,027  and there are a total of 525 houses.  the people here speak kannada and malayalam.  schools ekalavya vasathi school balugodu st annes school minority  school   maldare school  references  villages in kodagu district
norther is an offshore wind farm in the belgian north sea, within the exclusive economic zone of belgium, approximately 23 kilometres from the belgian port of ostend. the concession was granted at the end of 2009, which is when the actual development of the project began.  the wind farm has a total of 44 vestas v164-8.4 mw turbines on monopile foundations for a nameplate capacity of 369.6 mw with a projected annual production of 1,394 gwh, corresponding to a capacity factor of 43.1% and the average consumption of almost 400,000 households. the wind farm spans an area of 38 km2 with water depths up to 33 m. a seaweed farm is planned between the turbines.  the norther offshore wind farm was developed through a joint venture between elicio nv, a belgian renewable energy producer operating internationally; and the dutch utility company eneco, who is a major producer and supplier of renewable electricity, natural gas and heat in the netherlands and belgium; and diamond generating europe ltd, is a fully owned subsidiary of mitsubishi corporation and cover power and water generation projects, as well as power downstream business in europe, middle east and africa.  offshore wind is expected to be a key element of belgium's future energy mix and is projected to represent around 10% of total generated electricity by 2025. norther wind is operational since 2019.  see also    wind power in belgium  energy in belgium  list of offshore wind farms  references  external links     elicio  eneco  offshore wind farms in the north sea wind farms in belgium 2019 establishments in belgium energy infrastructure completed in 2019
alexandria league 1924-1953 & 1952-53, is an old egyptian football tournament. before the start of egyptian premier league in its current form, the main competition was the egypt cup which started 1921. egyptian federation started its 1st league competition (1938) in the form of regional leagues (cairo, alexandria, bahary & canal). the competition was played along with the new league form (1948-1953) then finally stopped. five teams participated in this league el ittihad alexandria, el-olympi, teram & other clubs.  honours   the past winners are:  performances  references  external links  defunct football competitions in egypt
"i'm gonna love you anyway" is a song recorded by american country music artist trace adkins.  it was released in july 2000 as the third and final single from the album more....  the song reached #36 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by stacy dean campbell and dean miller.  chart performance  references  2000 singles 1999 songs trace adkins songs songs written by dean miller capitol records nashville singles
the 1918-19 sk rapid wien season was the 21st season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  references  1918-19 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
mitha  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both its district and sub-district headquarters. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  demography according to the 2011 census of india, mitha had 45 houses and a population of 209, of which 106 were males and 103 females. the literacy rate was 71.82%, lower than the state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 was 28, being 13.40% of total population, and the child sex ratio was approximately 474, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  villages in kapurthala district
chevreulia acuminata is a plant species in the genus chevreulia. it is found in south america (argentina, bolivia, brazil, ecuador, peru and venezuela).  references  external links     chevreulia acuminata at tropicos  gnaphalieae plants described in 1830
gary o'donnell (born 6 january 1988) is an irish sportsperson, who plays inter-county gaelic football for galway. he is a first cousin of double all-ireland-winning former galway footballer and two-time all star jarlath fallon. o'donnell's parents are both from county mayo and he has uncles who have played football for that county at a number of levels.  o'donnell, who first played football with st colman's, gort, also played hurling in his youth and was on the same under-age teams as later galway senior inter-county players aidan harte and greg lally. gort's football team disbanded in 2009 and o'donnell moved to tuam stars, as it was the club his cousins, the fallons, played for.  having been an unused substitute in galway's 2008 connacht final victory over mayo, o'donnell made his inter-county debut with in 2009. in 2016, o'donnell was named galway captain by kevin walsh, having previously captained the side on occasions when paul conroy wasn't available. on 17 july 2016, galway won the connacht championship, and o'donnell became the first galway player since padraic joyce in 2008 to receive the j. j. nestor cup.  references  gaelic football backs galway inter-county gaelic footballers living people 1988 births tuam stars gaelic footballers
tachytes is a genus of predatory, solitary wasps, containing about 300 species.  etymology the name of the genus derives from the greek ταχυτης (tachytes), meaning swiftness or speed.  distribution these wasps have a worldwide distribution throughout temperate and tropical regions.  description adults are typically black, with light or clear wings, and sometimes a red or brown gaster or legs. they are about 12 mm long, but can range from 4 mm to 24 mm. many species have green eyes, which is distinctive of the genus. they often possess short golden hairs and a round build, which can give them a bee-like appearance.  biology tachytes generally predates on orthoptera (grasshoppers and katydids, especially those of the families acrididae, tettigoniidae, tetrigidae, and tridactylidae), though tachytes bidens reportedly predates on geometer moths. like other hunting wasps, the female captures a prey item, stings to paralyze it, and seals it in a burrow along with an egg that consumes the prey during development. the sting often paralyzes the prey completely, though in a few species, it only appears to prevent them from attempting to escape. their burrows can be very long, up to one meter in tachytes praedator. jean-henri fabre devotes a chapter to their predacious behavior in his more hunting wasps, comparing it with the genus sphex.  some tachytes species exhibit hilltopping behavior, in which males will perch near and territorially defend points of high elevation, such as the tops of hills and mountains. in other cases, males apparently guard burrows with developing females, waiting for them to emerge.  selected species  references   crabronidae apoidea genera hymenoptera of asia hymenoptera of south america
marcantonio durando (22 may 1801 - 10 december 1880) was an italian roman catholic priest and a professed member of the congregation of the mission in an effort to follow the teachings of vincent de paul - an ardent focus of his life and pastoral career. durano was also the founder of the daughters of the passion of jesus the nazorean (1865) - or nazarene sisters - and founded that order with the assistance of luigia borgiotti (1802-1873).  durando was made a servant of god on 23 march 1941 under pope pius xii once the beatification process started and pope john paul ii both declared him as venerable on 1 july 2000 and beatified him on 20 october 2002.  life marcantonio durando was born in 1801 in mondovi as one of ten children to angela vinaj (d. 1822); two siblings died as infants. the home overlooked the main square and near the mondovi cathedral. he was baptized in 1801. durando's mother was religious and instilled faith in her children while his father possessed liberal ideas and was of agnostic tendencies.  durando had as brothers giacomo (4 february 1807 - 21 august 1894) - the foreign affairs minister of the 1862 rattazzi government - and giovanni (23 june 1804 - 27 may 1869) - a papal soldier and general who refused the orders of pope pius ix in 1848 and moved his soldiers past the po river to defect. his brothers were therefore involved in the risorgimento.  in 1841 he commenced his studies for the priesthood in mondovi. in 1816 he desired to join the missions in china. durando made his perpetual vows as a member of the congregation of the mission in 1818 after completing his philosophical studies and having had received the tonsure and the minor orders. after his time in the novitiate he was sent to resume his theological studies in sarzana. the vincentian superior who oversaw his novitiate reported to the superior of his theological studies: "brother durando is someone of the highest quality in every way, and is clearly sent by god for the current needs of the congregation ... he is calm, he is sympathetic, is respectful and humble; so i hope you will be very pleased with him".  his studies were suspended in 1822 due to the ill health he faced and the death of his mother. durando was ordained to the priesthood on 12 june 1824. his superiors refused to send him to the missions despite his requests.  he remained in casale monferrato until 1829 when he relocated to turin. he remained in
turin until his death and was made superior of the turin branch of the congregation in 1831. in 1837 he was appointed as the major superior of the vincentians in the north and held that post until his death. this forced him to reduce his workload due to the greater work he had to undertake. nevertheless, he continued to organize priests for the missions and preached spiritual retreats that attracted numerous people. he re-established the ladies of charity in 1835 for the noblewomen of turin. durando supported the new work of the propagation of the faith - created in france in 1822 that pauline-marie jaricot founded - and in 1855 instituted the brignole-sale school for those wanting to join the foreign missions in which he oversaw the formation of priests who applied for missions.  luigi fransoni - the archbishop of turin - entrusted him with the spiritual direction of the sisters of saint joseph and contributed to the writing of the rules for the sisters of saint ann. he also became a spiritual guide for the poor clares. tancredi falletti and his wife juliette colbert were the founders and heads of those two orders branched for the two genders.  durando tried in his mission as a priest to oppose the rigors of jansenism that plagued the times. he saw the usefulness in introducing the vincentian sisters from france to the italian peninsula and so petitioned king carlo alberto to welcome them; the king did so in 1833 and the sisters assumed charge of hospitals with an emphasis on those with soldiers in places such as genoa and turin. the first two religious came on 16 may 1833 with more arriving in august. in 1855 he sent the sisters to the frontlines during the crimean war to help the wounded. around this time the bishop giustino de jacobis invited durando to serve with him in ethiopia but the latter refused for his obligations tied him to turin.  on 21 november 1865 he founded an order for women - the nazarene sisters - alongside luigia borgiotti who became one of the new order's first postulants.  he also spread the message of the miraculous medal of catherine laboure and to that effect established the children of mary in 1856. this caused an increase in vocations so much so that carlo alberto in 1837 granted them the convent of s. salvario in turin to use for their work.  in 1857 he wrote to his brother giacomo during the period of anti-clerical sentiment and greater conflict: "with all my heart i want peace between the government and the church, and that there should be
an end to this uneasiness in which we find ourselves all the time, and an end, in short, to this attacking of the church and its institutions and its rules, and, in short, that we be allowed to live and breathe". durando wrote a long letter again to his brother in 1870 to explain his puzzlement at the hostile situation that also saw the loss of the papal states.  durando died on 10 december 1880. giovanni rinaldi - the superior of the casa della pace branch in chieri - said of durando's death: "we have lost another st. vincent".  beatification the beatification process opened in turin after cardinal giuseppe gamba inaugurated the informative process in 1928. maurilio fossati closed the process in 1930 which received validation from the congregation of rites in 1951. fossati also inaugurated the beginning of an apostolic process that started in 1940 and concluded not long after. the formal introduction to the cause came on 23 march 1941 after he became known as a servant of god under pope pius xii.  the official positio then was submitted to rome at which point theologians voiced a favorable response to the dossier on 12 january 1971 while a historical commission met and approved the cause on 21 september 1978. the members of the congregation for the causes of saints voiced their approval as well on 27 march 1979 though met for a second time to discuss the cause further on 20 june 2000. durano became titled as venerable - on 1 july 2000 - after pope john paul ii confirmed the fact that the late priest had in fact lived a life of heroic virtue.  the process for a miracle opened in turin in 1936 and concluded not long after in which all interrogatories and medical documentation was collected. the c.c.s. validated this process decades later on 13 january 1995 while a medical board approved the healing to be a miracle on 19 february 2001. theologians followed this verdict on 12 october 2001 while the members of the c.c.s. did so as well on 20 november 2001. the pope approved the miracle on 20 december 2001.  john paul ii beatified durando on 20 october 2002. the miracle in question involved the cure of mrs. stella ingiani who grew ill and later was comatose after the 28 november 1932 birth of her daughter in her home. durando's order begged for their founder's intercession and ingiani awoke from her coma to a rapid cure.  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn  1801 births 1880 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 19th-century italian roman catholic priests
beatifications by pope john paul ii congregation of the mission founders of catholic religious communities italian beatified people people from mondovi venerated catholics by pope john paul ii vincentians
louis-francois metra (1738 - 11 december 1804) was an 18th-century french journalist.  banker and correspondent of prussian king frederick the great, metra mismanaged his business and took refuge in neuwied, where he printed his weekly review  for which he is mostly known. the french journalist de beaunoir also wrote for the review.  metra also collaborated with nouvelliste politique d'allemagne published in cologne in 1780.  references  bibliography    karin angelike, louis-francois mettra ein franzosischer zeitungsverleger in koln (1770-1800), bohlau, 2002 ()  monica hjortberg, « correspondance litteraire secrete 1775-1793 : une presentation », acta universitatis gothoburgensis, 1987 ()  antoine alexandre barbier, joseph-marie querard, dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes, paris, fechoz et letouzey, 1882, p. 775  external links   louis-francois metra on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french journalists 1738 births 1804 deaths
antje schmidt (born 1967) is a german actress. she appeared in more than sixty films since 1989.  selected filmography  references  external links   1967 births living people german film actresses
yellow river civilization or huanghe civilization (), hwan‐huou civilization is an ancient chinese civilization that prospered in the middle and lower basin of the yellow river. agriculture was started in the flood plain of the yellow river, and before long, through flood control and the irrigation of the yellow river, cities were developed and political power found reinforcement. one of the "four major civilizations of the ancient world", it is often included in textbooks of east asian history, but the idea of including only the yellow river civilization as one of the four biggest ancient civilizations has become outdated as a result of the discovery of other early cultures in china, such as the yangtze and liao civilizations. the area saw the yangshao and longshan cultures of the neolithic era and developed into the bronze ware culture of the shang and zhou dynasties.  cultures nanzhuangtou (9500 bc) peiligang culture (7000 bc - 5000 bc)  cishan culture (6500 bc - 5000 bc) dadiwan culture (6000 bc - 5000 bc) beixin culture (6000 bc - 5000 bc) yangshao culture (5000 bc - 3000 bc) dawenkou culture (4300 bc - 2400 bc) longshan culture (3000 bc - 2000 bc) erlitou culture (2000 bc - 1600 bc)  see also yangtze civilization liao civilization  references   neolithic cultures of china yellow river
the conquest of oran by the spanish empire took place on may 1509, when an army led by pedro navarro on behalf of the cardinal cisneros seized the north-african city, which was controlled by the kingdom of tlemcen.  background  the spanish captured the city of mers-el-kebir after a successful expedition against the local algerian dynasty, the zayyanids. in 1507, the zayyanids ambushed the city of mers-el-kebir, with about 11,000 cavalry, gaining a decisive victory against  the spanish forces.  the siege  preparations for the expedition began in september 1508. the crown invested 39.6 million maravedis in the expedition. in comparison, the armada to castilla del oro in 1514 would cost 14 million and the armada of maluco led by hernando de magallanes cost 8.35 million.  a fleet left port from cartagena on 16 may and sailed towards mers el-kebir, a city located near oran and already (since 1505) under spanish control. the fleet had 80 naos and 10 galleys, plus additional small boats. they carried around 8000-12,000 infantry-men and 3000-4000 cavalry-men. the army spent the night of 17 may in mers el kebir. the christians stormed the city of oran, then part of the kingdom of tlemcen, combining the use of the fleet with a ground assault on 18 may. after breaking through the walls of the city the casualties numbered less than 30 on the assaulting side, while the 12,000 defenders suffered 4,000 casualties.  on 20 may, cisneros entered the city, already conquered.  the city remained a part of the spanish empire until 1708, when it was seized by the ottoman dey of algiers taking advantage of the war of the spanish succession. the city was conquered again by the spanish in 1732. after the 1790 oran earthquake, they abandoned oran and mers el-kebir in 1792.  references  bibliography       conflicts in 1509 military history of spain military history of algeria amphibious operations involving spain
lukas chalupa (born december 28, 1993) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for sk horacka slavia trebic of the chance liga.  chalupa has previously played in the czech extraliga for hc slavia praha, hc plzen and pirati chomutov.  references  external links  1993 births living people hc berounsti medvedi players czech ice hockey defencemen stoczniowiec gdansk players hc kobra praha players pirati chomutov players hc plzen players rytiri kladno players hc slavia praha players sk horacka slavia trebic players hc slovan ustecti lvi players sportovni klub kadan players hc stadion litomerice players people from chomutov district
theodore lajarte (10 july 1826 - 20 june 1890) was a french musicologist, librarian, and composer.  early years  lajarte was born in bordeaux. his full name has been given as theodore edouard dufaure de lajarte. he studied at the conservatoire de paris under aime leborne and soon thereafter composed a large number of operettas, none of which have survived.  librarian and musicologist  he is best remembered for his position as an archivist at the paris opera. after his appointment in 1873 as second librarian at the paris opera library, he organized the theatre's historical scores and parts, publishing a chronological inventory of scores under the title bibliotheque musicale du theatre de l'opera in 1876 with a corrected and completed edition in 1878. he continued working at the library until 1890. as a musicologist, he contributed articles on music to newspapers and published reductions for piano and singing of old french operas and ballets, with the first being a reduction of lully's opera thesee. overall sixty-two books in nine series under the title chefs-d'œuvre classiques de l'opera francais were issued.  composer   he was a composer of several works for the theater, including monsieur de floridor, a one-act opera comique in two tableaux, lyrics by charles nuitter and etienne trefeu after louis anseaume, first performed on 11 october 1880 by the opera-comique at the second salle favart with belhomme (mathurin), grivot (floridor) and mlle ducasse (therese). he gave the opera the one-act ballet-pantomime les jumeaux de bergame, first performed on 26 january 1886 at the palais garnier, with words after florian by nuitter and merante and choreography by merante, with mlle subra (caroline), very well received. his other works include le secret de l'oncle vincent (24 november 1855, theatre lyrique), mam'zelle penelope (3 november 1859, theatre lyrique), le neveu de gulliver (22 october 1861, theatre lyrique), le portrait (18 june 1883, opera-comique) and le roi de carreau (26 october 1883, theatre des nouveautes).  lajarte died in paris at the age of 63 and is buried at montmartre cemetery.  notes  sources   ferrari, gustave and marie louise pereyra (1954). "lajarte, theodore (edouard dufaure) de", vol. 5, p. 18, in grove's dictionary
of music and musicians, fifth edition, edited by eric blom. new york, st. martin's press. .  huebner, steven (1992). "lajarte, theodore (edouard dufaure de)", vol. 2, p. 1081, in the new grove dictionary of opera, edited by stanley sadie. london: macmillan. .  lajarte, theodore (1878). bibliotheque musicale du theatre de l'opera, two volumes, corrected edition. paris: librairie des bibliophiles. volumes 1  and 2  at hathitrust; volumes 1 and 2  at gallica.  lavignac, albert and lionel de la laurencie (1931). encyclopedie de la musique et dictionnaire du conservatoire, paris, c. delagrave, vol.3, pp. 1788-9 "theodore de lajarte (1826-1890)".  pitou, spire (1990). the paris opera: an encyclopedia of operas, ballets, composers, and performers. growth and grandeur, 1815-1914. new york: greenwood press. .  1826 births 1890 deaths musicians from bordeaux french classical composers french male classical composers 19th-century french musicologists french music critics french librarians burials at montmartre cemetery 19th-century french male musicians
tanrui is a village located extreme west of ukhrul district, manipur. the village is connected by an inter village road and is about 45 kilometers from the district headquarters. tanrui is flanked by champhung & tuinem in the east, zingshong in the north senapati district in the west and sinakeithei in the south. the inhabitants talk tanrui dialect which belongs to the tibeto-burman language family.  population according to 2011 census, tanrui has 202 households with the total of 1007 people of which 508 are male and 499 are female. of the total population, 144 were in the age group of 0-6 years. the average sex ratio of the village is 982 female to 1000 male which is lower than the state average 985. the literacy rate of the village stands at 85.63% which is higher than the state average 76.94%. male literacy rate stands at 89.75% while female literacy rate was 81.37%.  people and occupation agriculture is the main occupation of the settlers. the main crops grown in the village are rice, corn, and pulses of many varieties. tanrui is well known in ukhrul district for potato and chilli cultivation. the village also is home to various flora and fauna. majority of the inhabitants are christians.  references  villages in ukhrul district
giuseppe "pippo" maiani (5 november 1924 - 12 may 2016) was captain regent of san marino from 1 october 1955 to 1 april 1956, and again from 1 april 1982 to 1 october 1982.  he was a member of the sammarinese communist party .  references  1924 births 2016 deaths captains regent of san marino members of the grand and general council sammarinese communist party politicians
vincenzo saporiti (1606 - 2 january 1664) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of nebbio (1646-1664).  biography vincenzo saporiti was born in 1606 in monte rosso, italy. he was doctor in utroque iure (civil and canon law), pisa. on 3 december 1646, vincenzo saporiti was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent x as bishop of nebbio. on 21 december 1646, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna. he served as bishop of nebbio until his death on 2 january 1664.  references   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent x 1606 births 1664 deaths
stolen life (original title: voleur de vie) is a 1998 french drama film directed and co-written by yves angelo and starring emmanuelle beart and sandrine bonnaire. it is based on a novel by icelandic author steinunn sigurðardottir.  cast   emmanuelle beart as alda  sandrine bonnaire as olga  andre dussollier as jakob  vahina giocante as sigga  eric ruf as yann  andre marcon as steindor  bulle ogier as the woman in cemetery  francois chattot as the father  rudi rosenberg as peter  nathalie richard as yann's wife  references  external links     1998 films 1998 drama films 1990s french-language films french drama films french films films directed by yves angelo films based on icelandic novels
oriental evil is a 1951 american film directed and produced by george breakston.  plot sheryl banning, an american woman, has come to tokyo to seek information on why her brother killed himself. she hopes to find his former business partner, thomas putnam, to gain some kind of understanding or explanation.  in the meantime, roger mansfield, a british businessman, marries a japanese girl who is pregnant with his child. roger one day encounters sheryl and, after listening to her, volunteers to use his contacts in the city to help her locate putnam if he can. roger expresses his desire for sheryl, who is unaware that he has a wife.  a blackmailer turns up wanting money from roger, threatening to reveal that he and putnam are one and the same. sheryl overhears him being called "tom" and suspects the truth. roger goes on a rampage, beating his wife, causing her to lose the baby and driving her to suicide. roger burns down the house and flees, but, when caught, falls on his own knife.  cast  martha hyer as sheryl  byron michie as roger  references  external links      http://orientalevil.pro  1951 films films shot in japan 1951 drama films american black-and-white films american films english-language films films produced by george breakston films directed by george breakston films scored by albert glasser films set in japan japan in non-japanese culture american drama films
macedonia blas flores (born 1958) is a mexican human rights activist of hnanu origin. she was a candidate for the nobel peace prize in 2005, because of the activism she wages against the violence suffered by the women of her tribe, the otomi. since 1997, she has headed the civil association fotzi nahno, which aids otomi.  biography blas flores is from el bothe, san ildefonso tultepec, municipality of amealco, queretaro. the mother of 12 children spent decades selling handicrafts. since 1997, she has worked for fotzi nahno, where she speaks on human rights and gender violence against hnanu. her work at the association features workshops for women regarding gender violence, prevention of violations among indigenous girls, prevention of women's alcoholism. she is also involved in projects for planting vegetables and she supports women's economic development. she says, "what i do is fine because i do it for all women who suffer violence."  in 2003, she was falsely accused by two women (mother and daughter) of adultery. the punishment in her rural indigenous village included being held down and having chili paste applied to her genitals, causing injury. the activist, advised by the human rights commission of the state of hidalgo, filed a criminal complaint against the aggressor, becoming the first indigenous woman to do so. she traveled to mexico city and informed members of congress about her ordeal, a fact that caught the attention of activists and media. from this, blas flores decided to engage more actively in the defense of the rights of women hnanu, which earned her recognition as a candidate for the nobel peace prize in 2005. this also spurred her to learn to read and write, and perform basic mathematical operations through instituto nacional para la educacion de los adultos.  in 2005, blas flores was part of the proposed candidacy of association of 1000 women for the nobel peace prize because of her activism supporting women in her community.  references  1958 births living people people from queretaro mexican women's rights activists otomi people mexican women activists indigenous mexican women 20th-century native americans 21st-century native americans
amy block joy is an emerita professor at the university of california, berkeley. she is best known for exposing fraudulent activity in a california nutrition education program. she specializes in nutrition and health disparities of diverse populations, nutritional ecology, and ethics. she is an author and advocate for whistleblowers and employee rights. joy was formerly a cooperative extension specialist, emeritus at the university of california, davis  career amy block joy earned a bachelor's degree in biochemistry and bacteriology from the university of california, berkeley in 1974 and a ph.d. in nutritional sciences from the university of california, berkeley in 1979. the following year she was hired as a university of california, berkeley campus specialist in nutrition. she took a sabbatical to the london school of hygiene and tropical medicine in 1992. there she developed a proposal to help poor families improve their economic and nutritional well-being, which was subsequently funded by the us department of agriculture.  upon her return to the us, she joined the university of california, davis faculty in the department of nutrition. from 1994, joy was director of the uc food stamp nutrition education program, which provided nutrition education to low-income families throughout california. in 2007, joy stepped down as director of the program.  she was reassigned to a one-woman department, nutritional ecology, exploring topics including nutritional controversy, health impacts on the environment, nutritional policies, and food safety. joy is now a professor emerita at the university of california, berkeley, where she also serves as the president of the uc berkeley emeriti association.  whistleblower report  in august 2006, joy filed a whistleblower report over fraudulent activities within the uc food stamp nutrition education program. uc davis reached a settlement with joy over retaliation for whistleblowing, paying her $89,611. an investigation by the university and the us department of agriculture verified many of her allegations. as a result, the california department of social services withheld $2.3 million in funding from uc davis and the program's participating counties, and one of her colleagues was charged with theft. she claims that the theft was covered up by administrators that looked to the perpetrator for help in acquiring equipment for the faculty. the retaliation included trying to scapegoat joy for the incident.  in 2010, she received a settlement from uc davis. she has since published several books on her experience, including whistleblower published in 2010 by bay tree press, in addition to two further self-published works. the routledge edited volume fight the tower: asian american women scholars' resistance and renewal in the academy called
her experience "one of the most well-known cases of whistleblowing in academia".  published work in 1985, she published "california efnep evaluation study" at berkeley. it was the first experimentally-designed study of the effectiveness of nutrition education and discussed in the book new directions for evaluation.  in 2006, she published the first cost-benefit analysis to measure cost effectiveness of nutrition education in california. the analysis is discussed in the 2016 version of community health nursing: caring for the public's health.  joy has authored three books about her whistleblower experience:    whistleblower (bay tree publishing, )  retaliation (self-published by createspace, )  blowback: the unintended consequences of exposing a fraud (self-published by createspace, )   she began writing books in order to educate future whistleblowers.  she is an associate editor of california agriculture, a peer reviewed journal. she has also published articles in compliance and ethics professional.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people american women writers uc berkeley college of natural resources alumni university of california, davis faculty 21st-century american women
marzouq al-muwallad (; born august 6, 1992 in medina, saudi arabia) is a saudi arabian professional basketball player.  he currently plays for the al-ansar sports club of the saudi premier league.   he has been a member of saudi arabia's national basketball team on many occasions. at the 2013 fiba asia championship, he was saudi arabia's best passer and stealer.  he was the match-winner in the game against thailand, when he scored 20 points and handed out 10 assists.  external links  asia-basket.com profile  references  1992 births living people saudi arabian men's basketball players people from medina point guards basketball players at the 2014 asian games asian games competitors for saudi arabia
wylarah is a heritage-listed homestead at south burrandowan road, ironpot, south burnett region, queensland, australia. it was built in 1891 by j gibbs. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 august 1992.  history  wylarah was selected in 1890 by alfred greenup who was manager of "maryland" near stanthorpe from 1868. he named the property after the aboriginal word for black cockatoo. it comprised a grazing lease of 9,000 acres (3,600 ha) and an agricultural farm of 1,267 acres (506 ha) which were part of the resumption of burrandowan station.  in 1891 work on the main homestead commenced by j gibbs, a victorian, with assistance from greenup. a slab hut was erected for use while the homestead was built. the hut's hearth survives. the bricks were made from clay on the property while the timber was milled at chinchilla. some of the furniture was also built by gibbs at this time.  originally planned to be u-shaped, the internal courtyard was considered too small, and so was covered and floored to form a central hall. an innovative feature was the integration of the kitchen into the house.  although they visited the property in 1891, it was 1897 before the greenup family moved to wylarah. alfred greenup continued as manager of "maryland" until 1905. wylarah's hall was the venue for the district's church services and other community activities for many years.  after greenup's death in 1915 the property was run by his son harold. the lease area was halved in 1924. following harold greenup's death in 1957 wylarah was left to his daughter frances, whose son now runs the property. he has undertaken considerable repairs including replacing the side verandah's floor and lining the service rooms at the rear.  description   wylarah is a pastoral property located approximately  west of kingaroy.  the homestead is a single-storeyed, single-skinned timber building with a corrugated galvanised iron roof. the plan is unusual. it has a verandah on three sides, and a u-shaped hipped roof, encircling a double pitch over the central hall.  the central hall is encircled by bedrooms to the east and west, a large lounge to the north, a dining room to the north east, kitchen to the south east and several smaller service rooms to the south, the latter including the southern entry vestibule. the more formal entrance to the house
is located on the northern frontage, which also features a metal belfry and weathercock flanked by two red brick chimneys.  an unpainted panel system is used throughout the interior as well as the exterior; it consists of an ironbark frame which is expressed, internally and externally, with vertically-jointed (probably cypress) infill panels trimmed with cavetto-section pine mouldings.  the central hall, which measures approximately , has a polished beech floor, and a double-pitched, timber-lined ceiling with exposed rafters. a valley beam running north-south has two intermediate chamfer post supports, and two timber ties run east-west. the southern gable ends are glazed with yellow patterned glass. similarly patterned glass is used in the fanlights above doors opening onto the central hall. the doors have clear glazed panels.  the rooms surrounding the central hall to the north, west and east have timber-lined ceilings, and french doors with arched upper panels opening onto the verandah and fanlights. brick fireplaces with timber mantelpieces serve six of these rooms. the verandah has chamfered timber posts with cross-braced timber balustrades, and a timber-lined ceiling with exposed rafters.  the grounds include lawns and gardens to the east and north, and remnants of the original orchard to the west. to the south of the homestead are several original service buildings: to the immediate south east is a corrugated iron bath house, with a corrugated iron water tank on its roof and a steel windmill immediately adjacent; a timber and corrugated iron blacksmith's shed sits further out to the south, and contains early blacksmithing and carpentry tools; to the west is a double-storeyed corrugated iron coach house, with the coachman's residence above and two coach bays; a timber hoist approximately  high sits between the coach house and the timber and corrugated iron stables.  most of the original buildings survive, and wylarah stills functions as a pastoral property.  heritage listing  wylarah was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 august 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  wylarah is significant in demonstrating rare aspects of queensland's cultural heritage, namely: it is an uncommonly intact example of a late 19th century homestead complex which served a medium-sized pastoral property; and the homestead is unusual and idiosyncratic in its construction, plan form, distinctive central hall, unpainted interior and exterior, and varied use of timber. w
ylarah demonstrates the principal characteristics of a 19th century homestead complex on a pastoral property and its layout, unpainted materials, setting and harmonious colours of buildings and landscape exhibit aesthetic characteristics which are valued by the community.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  wylarah is significant in demonstrating rare aspects of queensland's cultural heritage, namely: it is an uncommonly intact example of a late 19th century homestead complex which served a medium-sized pastoral property; and the homestead is unusual and idiosyncratic in its construction, plan form, distinctive central hall, unpainted interior and exterior, and varied use of timber.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  wylarah demonstrates the principal characteristics of a 19th century homestead complex on a pastoral property.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  the layout, unpainted materials, setting and harmonious colours of buildings and landscape of wylarah exhibit aesthetic characteristics which are valued by the community.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register south burnett region homesteads in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
the cronulla sutherland leagues club, known as sharkies, is a licensed club that was established for the purpose of promoting the development of the cronulla-sutherland sharks and rugby league. the leagues club sits beside the sharks home ground, endeavour field and is located on captain cook drive at woolooware.  development plans  proposals to develop the land assets of the leagues club which owns the stadium and land around endeavour field stumbled for many years prior to arrival of renowned businessman damian irvine. in partnership with his head of finance craig douglas the plans finally became more tangible, as details of a residential and shopping centre were released. in august 2012, the club received final approval for their plans solving a 40-year-old problem of financial instability.  in an opportunistic political grab amongst the publicity surrounding the supplement scandal implicating coach shane flanagan, irvine and douglas were replaced after their resignations in early 2013 by a local junior rugby league club ticket. the ticket used the shamed coaches' popularity to garner public support over the two men who are credited with saving the clubs life in 2009-2013. former basketball player damian keogh was used as a high-profile chairman however he lacked knowledge of history with the club. since the departure of irvine and douglas the club has floundered from one disaster to another with player sackings, suspect refinancing deals, governance issues, poor media relations and perception, and finishing last in the league for the first time in decades.  only the arrival of respected ceo lyall gordon has seen 2016 be a watershed year off and on-field for the sharks.  see also  list of pubs in australia list of restaurants in australia  references  external links  cronulla-sutherland sharks drinking establishments in australia restaurants in new south wales 1977 establishments in australia licensed clubs in new south wales
valeron's "monastery" (in spanish cenobio de valeron) is an archaeological site on the spanish island of grand canary, in the municipality of santa maria de guia, on valeron's cliff. it is the largest pre-hispanic collective granary built before roman times and used by the island's inhabitants until the conquest of the island at the end of the 15th century.  close to galdar painted cave, it is one of the emblematic sites of grand canary and is listed as a spanish property of cultural interest.  location   it is located  (in direct line) south of the northern coast of the gran canaria island, on the small gc-291 road, near las palmas ( east) and agaete ( south-west) (see § "access" for more details). galdar is about  west in direct line. the site overlooks the san felipe ravine, a north-orientated funnel-shaped valley crossed over by a large bridge for the gc-2 motorway.  the place was chosen for its easy-to-dig tuff, for the fact that it is hidden from the sea and for its extremely steep access slopes that make good natural defences.  description  the collective granary known as "cenobio de valeron" is a complex system of caves on several levels: 298 compartments with surfaces between one and three square meters, distributed on 8 levels. altogether with silos, rooms, caves and cavities, there are more than 350 storage places. they were excavated with stone and wood tools in the soft tuff - cemented volcanic tephra - in the north-west face of the mountain known nowadays as mountain of the galician ("montana del gallego"). the easy defence of the site, the natural shelter offered by a natural arch in the mountain and the conditions of temperature and dampness were making it ideal for its use.  the caves or silos are of varied forms and sizes, communicating somewhat with each other, and they are grouped on several superposed levels. the steps excavated in the rock still exist and they may have been complemented with stairs or scaffoldings and ropes, of which there are no archaeological remains.  the caves were shut with doors made of unknown material, which left traces. these are believed to have been made of wood, stone slabs or soft materials like textile or leather. a few stone slabs have remained and it seems that when wooden doors were used they received a seal (pintadera) to indicate the owner.
their holes, as well as other grooves, were sealed in addition by an ashen mortar. all this aimed at preserving the crops.  within the site are found idols, paintings, ceramics, human bones and ashes, which are believed to have belonged to those who were guarding the granary.  accounts dating from the spanish conquest mention towers framing the caves.  the sheer size of the caves complex is witness to the importance of agriculture on gran canary, for subsistence but also for the society's socio-political structure; and of the power of its governing casts. alone on that among the canary islands that all favoured stock-breeding, gran canary's agriculture was dominated by plantations, with much of these being grains.  origin of the name  the name of "monastery" comes from the roman belief that herein had lived some celibate priestesses called "harimaguadas", with whom young women of noble class came to live until their marriage (this society was matrilineal). the above-mentioned vision prevailed up to the 20th century, when guy marcy, a french archaeologist, was the first to recognize its real use as being obviously similar to that of other structures of the island and of north africa. in addition, some of the chronicles mention the practice of preserving the food in crags of difficult access. the north african granaries or agadirs often have a common storage area, guarded by the community to which it belongs, with chambers used and maintained by individuals.  similar structures  other similar granary structures on the island are :   king's caves (cuevas del rey) and  (sp. roque bentayga) in tejeda  caves of the granary (cuevas del posito) near temisas, aguimes  el alamo site near acusa, artenara  the numerous caves (sp. cuevas muchas) in the guayadeque ravine (sp. barranco de guayadeque), ingenio  anzofe site near galdar  la montaneta near moya  caves of the dove (cuevas del palomar) near tabuco, ingenio  la isleta near las palmas  barranco de silva near telde   (cuevas del draguillo) in el gamonal (telde), between telde and ingenio  los pilares cave in the four doors cave site, telde complex near telde  tara site in telde  temisas in aguimes
rosiana site in san bartolome de tirajana  cueva de la audiencia in the four doors cave site on bermeja mountain, telde  birbique in roque bermejo, agaete  all are located in the north-west, north and north-east of the island. although a few caves were dug in isolated locations, most of them are near the sea coast and are concentrated, often in large groups. the largest structures are near the two towns that were the main population centres in pre-hispanic times: telde and galdar.  some of the main artificial cave sites of the island are located in the relative vicinity of the painted cave (cuevas del hospital, huertas del rey or the audience cave at the four doors cave site).  protection  valeron's monastery was declared historical artistic monument on october 14, 1978, by royal decree 2.756/78. due to the current law, 16/85 of june 25, 1985 on historical spanish heritage, it became a property of cultural interest in the category of "archaeological site". the site belongs to the santa maria de guia's municipality, being inscribed in the municipal inventory of built properties, and in the land registry of property of urban nature.  in 2010 was undertaken a large restoration program that included the rehabilitation of the historic san felipe footpath used of old by the locals to access the caves. the site was shut for 2 years.  nowadays the site is open to the public as archaeological park, and is included in the network of archaeological parks of grand canary. the latter also includes the archaeological sets of arteara necropolis in fataga, the necropolis in agaete, the canada de los gatos by mogan's beach, bentayga rock (roque bentayga) in tejeda, the guayadeque ravine (barranco de guayadeque) in ingenio near aguimes, the painted cave (cueva pintada) in galdar, and the four doors cave site (cuatro puertas) in telde.  access  the main access to the gc-291 road is immediately east of albercon de la virgen, from exit 20 on the 2 x 2 lanes "carretera variante de silva" gc-2 highway that goes from agaete (11 km north-east) and las palmas (23 km west); or indirectly from exit 21 (llano parra, gc-292, gc-70, gu
ia, artenara) of the same gc-2 highway. at exit n° 20 on both directions are indicated the felix santiago melian factory, the gc-291 and the cenobio de valeron - the latter being about 4 km from exit 20. the other end of the gc-291 road (eastways) joins again the gc-2 road near san felipe in the direction of las palmas (not that of agaete), but the traffic cannot exit the gc-2 either way.  the site is open for visits all year round from tuesday to sunday, except for a few special days (boxing day, xmas, new year,...). the caves themselves are off-limits for reasons of security and preservation, and the site is fenced in and shut at night.  since the recent rehabilitation works, the site now offers a discovery circuit with information panels along the path, maquettes and other media for visitors.  see also  connected articles  painted cave, galdar  bibliography  external links   official website of valeron caves  list of archaeological heritage sites, grand canary  cenobio de valeron caves archaeological site - gran canaria. video detailing the views from outside the caves.  notes and references  notes  references   valeron history of the canary islands valeron valeron prehistoric sites in spain agricultural buildings in spain bien de interes cultural landmarks in the province of las palmas tourist attractions in the canary islands
hms garland was a schooner that the royal navy purchased in the west indies in 1798 to act as a tender to , the flagship of the commander-in-chief on the leeward islands station. garland captured a privateer of greater force than herself, as well as two small prizes. she was sold in march 1803, during the peace of amiens.  career garlands commander was mr. francis banks, masters mate. in april 1796 garland captured the french privateer jeune nantaize near dominica. garland was armed with six guns, and had a crew of 18. jeune nantaize was armed with four guns, and had a complement of 39 men. the 39 men included a detachment of 13 soldiers from the french garrison at roseau, and ten volunteer seamen from merchant ships there, all sent by dominica's governor. capturing the privateer cost garland one man killed and two wounded.  banks received a commission as a lieutenant and in august an appointment to command garland, an appointment he still held in 1799.  on 9 april 1800, the tenders  and garland recaptured the schooner hero. hero had a crew of seven men and was 136 tons (bm). she was out of guadeloupe, sailing from pointe petre to saint bartholomew with a load of cordwood. a week later, pickle and garland captured the dutch schooner maria. maria had a crew of 19 men, armed with small arms, and was of 35 tons (bm) burthen. she was from curacao, sailing from curacao to guadeloupe with a cargo of dry goods.  on 15 january 1801, while the 20-gun post-ship , 18-gun ship-sloops  and , and schooner garland (tender to daphne), were at an anchor in the harbour of the saintes, they observed a convoy of french coasters, escorted by an armed schooner, sailing towards vieux-fort, guadeloupe. at midnight garland, accompanied by two boats from each of the three ships, under the command of lieutenants kenneth mackenzie of daphne, and commander of garland, and francis peachey, of cyane, attempted to capture or destroy the convoy. the vessels, however, except one, succeeded in getting under the guns of basse-terre. one vessel, which had anchored near vieux-fort, they boarded and brought off under a heavy but apparently harmless cannonade.  two days later, in the afternoon, the british observed the french schooner eclair, of four long 4-pounders, twenty 1½ pounder brass swivels, and 45 men, the escort of
the convoy in question, put into trois-rivieres, and anchor under the protection of one principal battery and two smaller flanking ones. mackenzie and peachey volunteered to attempt cutting her out. for this purpose mackenzie, with 25 seamen and marines, went on board garland. the next day, 18 january, which was as early as the breeze would permit,  garland ran alongside eclair and mackenzie and peachey, with 30 men, boarded and carried the french schooner in the face of the batteries.  garland had two men killed and three wounded. the french had one man killed and two drowned, and nine men wounded, including the lieutenant de vaissau commanding eclair.  although eclair carried only four guns, she was pierced for 12 and was large enough to carry them. she was on her way to pointe petre to complete her armament of twelve 6-pounders and 20 brass swivels. the british took her into service  and armed her with twelve 12-pounder carronades. mackenzie became eclair's first british commander.  fate the navy sold garland in march 1803.  notes, citations, and references notes  citations  references  1790s ships schooners of the royal navy
the 2016 algarve football cup was a summer football friendly tournament. it was hosted at the estadio algarve in the algarve in portugal, between the 14 and 16 july 2016. it involved benfica and vitoria de setubal of the portuguese primeira liga and english championship side derby county.  overview  participants  standings each team will play two matches, with three points awarded for a win, one point for a draw, and zero points for a defeat. in the first two matches of the 2016 algarve football cup, a penalty shoot-out took place afterwards. that's despite vitoria de setubal beating derby county in game 2. a shoot-out did not take place after benfica's match against derby.  matches  goalscorers  media coverage  references  2016-17 in english football 2016-17 in portuguese football
mallace is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  calum mallace (born 1990), scottish-born american soccer player craig mallace (born 1985), scottish-born american soccer player and coach, brother of calum  see also wallace (surname)
brahman majra is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
students for trump (s4t) is an american criminal group whose mission is to re-elect president donald trump. the group was founded in 2015 by two college students, ryan fournier and john lambert. in july 2019, charlie kirk, ceo of turning point usa, became chairman of students for trump.  history   students for trump was founded in 2015 by ryan fournier and john lambert, students at campbell university in north carolina, united states, who started tweeting positive information about donald trump. the houston chronicle reported that george lombardi, a new york city real estate developer and friend of donald trump who-among hundreds of trump-supporting facebook groups-had set up a "students for trump" facebook group, acted as an advisor. on august 6, 2015, fournier and lambert were impressed by then high schooler alexander chalgren, who appeared as a questioner on the first fox news republican primary debate. alexander asked a question of the candidates concerning isil, which was cited as the "most important" question of the evening. the question sparred an intense debate between then mr. donald trump and senator ted cruz. students for trump founders reached out to mr. chalgren via instagram inquiring as to his political affiliation, and found him to be an early supporter of donald trump. after a brief interview and screening process, chalgren was offered an integral early position within the organization as south carolina director, but eventually rose to the post of national director. mr. chalgren is south carolina governor henry mcmaster's adopted cousin. alexander made his second debut onto the national scene in his this american life interview with zoe chace in 2016. according to the new york times, chalgren was the most famous young trump supporter in america.  fournier's first television appearance for the organization was on tbs. students for trump activities were highlighted in a bbc documentary, "trump's unlikely superfans," and an nbc news exclusive titled "students for trump: meet the millennials who want him to win." in 2016, the organization switched from a traditional campaign model with regional, state, and chapter coordinators, to a model with campus ambassadors that perform roles similar to that of a campaign field intern. in august 2016, the chronicle of higher education reported that the organization "had nearly 300 campus chapters and a bevy of social-media followers - 29,000 on twitter, 59,000 on instagram, thousands more on facebook."  the campaign however, had numerous problems before and after the election. in april 2016, a students for trump florida
chapter placed a "make america great again" ball cap on a statue of martin luther king jr. just days after the anniversary of his death, prompting widespread outrage. salon magazine reported that ryan fournier worked with white nationalists when he was head of students for trump. media matters said that fournier hired white nationalist james allsup as director of the campus ambassador program. allsup was a member of the american identity movement and marched at the unite the right rally in charlottesville.  by march 2017, following trump's election as president of the united states, the college fix reported that the organization's chapters had "largely disbanded or halted meetings." in february 2018, the daily beast reported that students for trump had never correctly complied with making reports to the federal election commission as a political action committee. the fec wrote nine letters to the organization requesting information about donors without response, but ultimately decided to take no action other than to warn the political action committee.  on june 23, 2020, students for trump held their arizona convention at the dream city church in phoenix with featured speaker president donald j. trump. the event occurred during the covid-19 pandemic that peaked in the region. phoenix mayor kate gallegos said that masks would not be required for the event and officials of the dream city church claimed that air ionizers would protect participants, despite the lack of evidence for its efficacy.  acquisition by turning point action  on july 2, 2019, charlie kirk, founder and ceo of turning point usa and turning point action, reported that the latter had acquired students for trump along with "all associated media assets." he became chairman and launched a campaign to recruit one million students for the 2020 trump reelection campaign. the unsuccessful effort led to tpusa and the trump campaign blaming each other for an overall decline in youth support for trump.  later in july 2019, fournier was invited to the white house to discuss liberal bias in social media.  co-founders fournier and lambert  ryan fournier  the organization's co-founder, ryan fournier, is from long branch, new jersey. fournier became politically active following his volunteer work for the mitt romney 2012 presidential campaign. prior to launching students for trump, fournier was involved in various local and state political campaigns within north carolina. along with being the co-chairman of students for trump, fournier also serves as the president of openpoll and xstrategies.  in 2015, fournier and john lambert launched students for trump as a twitter account while they were studying at campbell university in buies creek, north carolina. fournier graduated from campbell university
in may 2019 with a degree in political science. he is also a member of the kappa alpha order fraternity, zeta psi chapter. fournier is a recipient of the red alert politics 30 under 30 award.  in july 2018, fournier launched a boycott against walmart for selling shirts labeled "impeach 45," which resulted in the hashtag #boycottwalmart trending on twitter. walmart pulled the items from its online store, issuing the following statement: "these items were sold by third-party sellers on our open marketplace, and were not offered directly by walmart. we're removing these types of items pending review of our marketplace policies."  john lambert lambert, a tennessee native, was arrested in tennessee in april 2019 on federal charges of wire fraud for posing online as a corporate and patent lawyer from 2016 to 2018, swindling consumers and businesses out of more than $46,000. he pleaded guilty in 2019 and signed a plea deal in 2019 whereby he will forfeit $46,654 and not appeal any sentence of up to 21 months of imprisonment. in may 2021, he was sentenced to 13 months in prison.  projects  "trump wall" events  on may 9, 2016, a group of students at the university of washington constructed an 8'x10' "trump wall" out of plywood and lumber in the center of the red square courtyard. the event, led by uw college republicans president jessie gamble, uw students for trump president chevy swanson, and s4t senior advisor james allsup, lasted for approximately an hour and a half, and was met with 10 trump supporters and over 100 protestors. the wall was painted with a brick design, with "trump wall" written on it. at one point, a student attempted to scale the wall. shortly after this, the organizers were asked by the university police to take the wall down, which they did. portland state university students for trump, a group unaffiliated with the s4t national organization, hosted a similar event on june 10, 2016.  references   2015 establishments in north carolina donald trump 2016 presidential campaign organizations established in 2015 political organizations based in the united states political youth organizations conservative organizations in the united states political youth organizations in the united states student political organizations in the united states
anton widiastanto (born in yogyakarta, january 30, 1979 ; age 41 years old) is a former drummer of one of indonesia's top bands, sheila on 7. while still joined in the band, anton held the position as drummer, anton left sheila on 7 after eight years, on 18 october 2004.  he began his music career with the debut album sheila on 7 (1999), which was followed by four albums kisah klasik untuk masa depan (2000), anugerah terindah yang pernah kumiliki (2000, released in malaysia and singapore), 07 des (2002) and ost. 30 hari mencari cinta (2003). after leaving sheila on 7, he resumed his plan to build a music studio.  references  indonesian pop musicians indonesian rock musicians anugerah musik indonesia winners 1979 births living people
john holloway sanders friba (1825 - 16 october 1884) was an architect based in england and chief architect of the midland railway until 1884.  his date of appointment as chief architect to the midland railway is not known, but he is recorded as working for them in 1845. he is particularly noted for his station buildings on the settle to carlisle railway which were all built in a similar style, they became known colloquially as midland gothic or derby gothic.  he was appointed fellow of the royal institute of british architects on 22 april 1872.  on his death in 1884, the position of chief architect of the midland railway went to charles trubshaw.  list of works  references  19th-century english architects 1825 births 1884 deaths railway architects fellows of the royal institute of british architects
uckfield school, founded in 1718, later called uckfield grammar school, grew from a small local charity school at uckfield into a grammar school with about 160 boys, including boarders. it closed in 1930.  at various times the school was also called dr saunders's school and the saunders foundation school.  beginnings the school was founded by the rev. dr anthony saunders, rector of buxted (died 1719) to teach reading, writing, arithmetic, and the elements of the church catechism to "six poor boys of buxted and six poor boys of uckfield". the first master of the school was the rev. john lloyd. in his will dated 31 october 1718, saunders left a house in church street, uckfield, which provided a house for the schoolmaster, his library of some six hundred books, and an income of £10 a year charged on rocks farm, buxted. he also left bequests for founding a separate school for girls at buxted and for providing apprenticeships for local boys.  development in the middle and second half of the 18th century, uckfield school flourished under the mastership of the rev. robert gerison, formerly margerison, who probably held the mastership from 1738 until his death in the late 1790s. born about 1712, he was a scholar from peterhouse, cambridge, who had graduated ma in 1737. there is some obscurity about who attended the school under the will of dr saunders and who was a private pupil, but gerison's pupils at uckfield included james stanier clarke and edward daniel clarke. early in the next century, under the rev. william rose, curate of little horsted, who became master of the school in 1800, boys were again taught to a high standard, including rose's sons hugh and henry rose.  in a charity commissioners' report of 1819, it was noted that the schoolmaster of the day had invested about £1,000 of his own money in improving the school and had transferred the twelve scholars provided for under the will of dr saunders to a recently established national school, paying it £20 a year to educate them.  in 1855, after there had been an accumulation of funds, the charity commissioners approved an improved scheme for funding the school by a charity called the buxted and uckfield saunders foundation, and in 1865 the worthies of sussex noted that the school was then devoted to "middle class" education. in 1876 a scheme of management was approved by queen victoria under which the
master of the school must be a graduate of a british university. in 1880, the saunders foundation sold rocks farm and paid for the building of dormitories for sixteen boarders and a gymnasium.  closure the school was closed in july 1930, as a result of a new county school for boys being about to open at lewes in september of the same year, and some boys transferred to the new school. the last headmaster was c. r. mcgregor williams (1889-1954), who in 1931 became the first head of the new chislehurst and sidcup grammar school.  aftermath the school's main building can still be seen in church street, uckfield, and is called the old grammar school. the saunders educational charity still exists, using its income to assist church of england schools and to provide scholarships for local children.  at least one old boy of uckfield school was still living in july 2015, in the shape of arthur walter james, whose connection with the school was reported when he reached the age of 103, but he died shortly afterwards.  notable old boys edward clarke (1730-1786), clergyman and author  james stanier clarke (1766-1834), clergyman and author edward daniel clarke (1769-1822), clergyman, naturalist, and traveller william nevill, 4th earl of abergavenny (1792-1868), landowner and peer  hugh james rose (1795-1838), clergyman and academic henry rose (1800-1873), clergyman sir ewart smith (1897-1995), engineer  arthur walter james (1912-2015), journalist and politician  notes  1930 disestablishments in england defunct schools in east sussex boarding schools in east sussex boys' schools in east sussex educational institutions established in 1718 educational institutions disestablished in 1930 grammar schools in england   1710s establishments in great britain uckfield defunct boarding schools in england
father demo square is a  triangular park and piazza bounded by sixth avenue, bleecker street, and carmine street in the south village neighborhood of lower manhattan, new york city. the park is named for father antonio demo, who was the pastor of the neighboring our lady of pompeii church from 1897 to 1935. the church was relocated to carmine street in 1926-1928 to accommodate an extension of sixth avenue south of bleecker street, which created the triangular plot of land. the park, located opposite carmine street from the church, was established in 1923 with the sixth avenue extension and the land was improved as a park, being named in a tribute to demo.  the square was renovated in 2007, which entailed the installation of the current stone fountain, the low fence around the square, and the expansion of the sidewalk into bleecker and carmine streets.  see also   italian americans in new york city  list of new york city parks  references  1923 establishments in new york city fountains in new york city parks in manhattan west village
tetrasphaera  is a bacterial genus from the family of intrasporangiaceae.  references  further reading         micrococcineae bacteria genera
klukowski is a polish masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is klukowska. it may refer to  jozef klukowski (1894-1944), polish sculptor jozef klukowski (swimmer) (born 1946), polish swimmer michael klukowski (born 1981), canadian professional footballer yan klukowski (born 1987), english professional footballer zygmunt klukowski (1885-1959), polish physician  polish-language surnames
g.s. ergotelis basketball (), also known simply as ergotelis, is a greek amateur basketball club, part of the multi-sport club gymnastics club ergotelis, that is based in heraklion, crete. the club's basketball department currently competes in the greek c basket league, and was officially founded in 1968, the same year it joined the registers of the greek federation of sporting clubs. in 1983, ergotelis was one of the clubs that signed the establishment of the cretan basketball associations union. currently, both men's and women's basketball departments are amateur clubs, that host home games at the lido indoor hall in heraklion, a basketball court with a capacity of 1,400 spectators. ergotelis currently holds the record for most regional titles won in crete, having won a total of 16 regional championships and 3 cretan cups, since the cretan local basketball committee, the governing body of basketball on the island, was founded in 1968 (and replaced by the cretan basketball associations union in 1983).  club history  creation on 15 october 1968, ergotelis' basketball department was the first in heraklion to join the registers of the greek federation of sporting clubs (the  governing body for basketball in greece, the hellenic basketball federation became an independent organization in 1970). this was at a time when the club's football department officials were accused by the greek military junta of 1967-1974 for «deviating from the purposes for which they were elected, turning the club into an instrument servicing political, and sometimes unpatriotic objectives».  in the summer of 1968, and after aek b.c. won the fiba european cup winners' cup, the greek federation of sporting clubs sent out representatives to heraklion to promote the sport of basketball in the city. in a meeting held at the offices of the heraklion union of football clubs, the decision was made for prominent sport clubs operating in the city, ergotelis, g.e. heraklion, ofi and irakleio o.a.a. to form basketball departments. similarly, clubs a.o. kydon and o.a. chania representing the nearby city of chania were also invited to participate in the discussions.  key members in the establishment of the club's basketball department were n. papadogiannis, t. sinopoulos, v. kokkinis, d. giannoulakis and i. myrtakis, who was also appointed first president of the cretan local basketball committee. the very first training sessions were held behind the spectators' seating area and subsequently on the sidelines of ergotelis f.c. home ground martinengo
stadium. charis evangelinos was appointed first head coach of the club, being subsequently replaced in 1969 by former panathinaikos athlete, kimonas agathos.  1969−1977: first steps   in april 1969, ergotelis organized its first tournament, in which sporting and olympiacos represented the capital, athens. as the cretan local basketball committee gradually became the governing body of basketball in crete, ergotelis participated in may 1969 in the first eastern cretan local basketball committee championship, and subsequently won its first title. during the next decade, ergotelis won the regional championship an additional 6 times, in 1970, 1971, 1974, 1976, 1977 and 1979.  after winning the 1975-76 cretan championship, and under coach vangelis karkanakis, ergotelis participated in the provincial championship, attempting to promote to the national competitions, and in particular, the greek b basketball league. the goal was met during the next season, 1976-77, during which the club once again won the regional title in crete. the club appointed giannis ioannidis, a man who would later become one of the most successful basketball coaches in greece, as head coach and travelled to athens to participate in the provincial championship. after victories over kydon chania (59-51) and chalkida (75-69), ergotelis secured a place in a national competition for the first time in its history.  1977-1983: competing at national level  during the 1977-78 season, ergotelis made its debut in the greek b basketball league. after 20 matches however, the club managed claim only a single victory (vs. dorieas rodos, 58-33), and as a result, was instantly relegated.  for the next season, 1978-79, ergotelis, led by head coach manthos stathakis, was once again crowned cretan champion, and thus participated in the provincial championship held in august 1979. the club tied at the top of the final standings table with panachaiki, but secured promotion to the b league as it had won the head-to-head match during the championship.  during the 1979-80 b league season, ergotelis was placed in a separate southern group, along with 11 other clubs. at the end of the season, ergotelis placed last, and was once again relegated. the next year, the eastern and western cretan local basketball committees merged, forming the unified cretan local basketball committee.  during the 1981-82 season, ergotelis won its first cretan cup, after a 56-45 victory over kydon chania in the competition final. the same year,
ergotelis also won the cretan local basketball committee championship, and participated once more in the provincial championship, where it placed 2nd in the southern group. ergotelis eventually won the promotion play-off match vs. faeakas kerkyra (51-50), thus making a return to the b league. in what proved to be the club's last appearance in the competition for over 30 years, ergotelis managed to win only 3 out of a total 26 matches in the 1982-83 b league season, and as a result was relegated once again after claiming the bottom spot in the league table.  1983−1992: regional competitions  during 1984-85, ergotelis again won the cretan championship, after a 64-44 victory over kydon in the competition final, however the club failed to promote to national level after partaking in a promotion play-off tournament. more of the same happened during the 1986-87 season, in which the cretan local basketball committee championship was renamed to cretan basketball association union a basketball league, which saw the club finish in 2nd place. ergotelis managed to win the 1989-90 edition of the tournament, however the club once again failed to achieve promotion.  in the end, during the 1991-92 season under coach kostas dionysopoulos, and once again after the club won the regional title in crete, ergotelis managed to promote to the newly founded c league, after coming through undefeated in the promotion play-off tournament.  1992-2009: attempts in the c league and decline  ergotelis made its debut in the c league during the 1992-93 season, being placed in a group along with 11 other teams. the club finished in 11th place after an 8-14 record, and was subsequently relegated back to the cretan a league. the next season, ergotelis once again won the cretan title, after winning the finals series against o.a. chania 3-2, thus making an instant return to the c league.  in its second season in the c league during the 1995-96 season, ergotelis finished in 10th place, again leading to relegation to the local championship. in the summer, the club merged with another local basketball club, kronos, and won the 1996-97 cretan a league for the 13th time in its history. during the following season (1997-98), ergotelis managed to stay clear from relegation in the c league, making quality changes to the roster and finishing in 8th place. however, as the club faced serious internal issues throughout the 1998-99 season, ergotelis was once again relegated
.  the club made one more brief return to the c league after winning its 14th cretan championship in the 2001-02 season. the 2002-03 c league season saw the club finish in the bottom of the table (tied with kentavros dafni), after a 3-23 record. for the next 6 years, and until the spring of 2009, ergotelis competed in the cretan a league, unable to record any notable achievements.  2009-2017: return to the nationals and meltdown  in the 2009-10 season, ergotelis won both the cretan a league (15th title), as well as the cretan cup (2nd title), thus being promoted back to the c league after several years of absence. during the 2010-11 c league season, ergotelis was placed in the 2nd southern group along with 13 opponents. after a 14-12 record, ergotelis finished 6th, tied with chalkida, securing its place in next season's tournament.  the next season (2011-12) ergotelis once again competed in the same group, whose participants were reduced from 14 to 12. the club finished in 7th place, after a triple tie-in with polis kallithea and niki amarousiou, all of which had an 11-11 record during the season. after another re-structuring of the group to contain a total of 11 teams in 2012-13, ergotelis finished in 6th place after an 11-9 record, staying in the c league for the third time in a row.  ιn its fourth consecutive season in the c league, ergotelis was once again placed in the 2nd southern group, which was once again made up of 11 teams. with a 13-7 record, ergotelis achieved its best finish in the league so far, by placing 4th in the final group standings table. however, the club was defeated 70-65 in the play-off ranking match vs. apollon ancient corinth, the club that placed 4th in the 2013-14 c league northern group.  promotion to the b league became an even more difficult task in the 2014-15 c league season, as the groups were once again restructured to contain 14 teams each. with a 17-9 record, ergotelis finished in third place, which marks the best performance of the club in the competition. afterwards, the club squared off against promitheas chalandri in the neutral ground of chania, winning the play-off match 73-69 and gaining advantage for promoting to the b league, in case the league would
be restructured. indeed, the hellenic basketball federation went through with its planned changes, announcing ergotelis' return to the b league after 32 years. the club failed to avoid relegation at the end of the season however, and after calculating costs, club president vangelis giannoulakis decided to opt out of the c league, and instead have the club start anew in the cretan basket league, in hopes of attracting more financiers for the future.  logos and uniforms  logos  personnel  current roster  notable former coaches  honours  regional competitions cretan a basketball league winners (16): 1969, 1970, 1971, 1974, 1976, 1977, 1979, 1982, 1985, 1990, 1992, 1994, 1997, 2002, 2010, 2020 cretan cup winners (3): 1983, 2010, 2020  other teams  youth teams  ergotelis youth basketball has won three youth cretan championships, starting in the 1970-71. in 1986, ergotelis youth, under coach manolis stavrakakis, finished 4th in the greek youth basketball league held in karditsa, which is the best in the history of the department.  women's basketball  ergotelis currently maintains women's basketball departments who partake in the adult, young women and teenage championships organized by cretan basketball clubs association.  references  basketball teams in greece basketball teams in crete basketball teams in heraklion basketball teams established in 1968
ndricim is a masculine albanian given name. notable people with the name include:  ndricim babasi, albanian politician ndricim shtubina (born 1987), albanian footballer ndricim xhepa (born 1957), albanian actor  albanian masculine given names
sobeknakht was high steward during the 12th dynasty in ancient egypt.  sobeknakht (sbk-nht, "sobek is strong") may also refer to:  sobeknakht i, official and nomarch during the second intermediate period, father of the one below sobeknakht ii, official and nomarch during the second intermediate period, son of sobeknakht i sobeknakht (king's daughter), princess during the late 12th or early 13th dynasty  theophoric names
ambassador moushira mahmoud khattab is an egyptian politician and diplomat born in 1944. she is the former minister of family & population of egypt, former assistant minister of foreign affairs, ambassador of egypt to south africa, the czech republic and slovakia as well serving in egypt's diplomatic missions in australia, hungary, austria and the united nations in new york and vienna. she is also a human rights activist advocating the rights of children and women and the former vice chair and rapporteur of the un committee on the rights of the child based at the un headquarters in geneva.  on 19 july 2016, the prime minister of egypt announced that moushira khattab will be egypt's candidate for the post of unesco director-general at the elections due to be held in 2017.  education  khattab holds a phd on the rights of the child from cairo university, an m.a. in international relations from the university of north carolina at chapel hill, usa and a b.a. political science from cairo university, faculty of economics and political science.  diplomatic career  a career diplomat serving as egypt's first ambassador to nelson mandela's south africa and before it czechoslovakia during its peaceful separation to the czech republic and slovakia, khattab ended her diplomatic career as assistant minister of foreign affairs for international cultural relations. khattab has also served at egypt's diplomatic missions in budapest, vienna and melbourne as well as serving at the un headquarters in new york and unido headquarters in vienna.  ministerial career  from march 2009 until february 2011, khattab served as minister of state for family and population of egypt. she holds the position of vice-president of the international bureau for children's rights "ibcr". khattab represents the mena region on the board of child helpline international and chairs both the national committee and the steering committee of middle east & north africa on violence against children. khattab served as vice chair, rapporteur and member of un committee on the rights of the child 2002-2010. she is a member in several associations including the women leadership council to combat trafficking in persons including children, ungift- vienna 2008. she chaired the ad hoc un intergovernmental expert group that formulated the un guidelines on justice matters related to children victims and witnesses to crime adopted by ecosoc in 2005. khattab is vice president of "aflatoun child savings international" (amsterdam) and is a regular lecturer on children's rights to police officers, judges, women organizations and the media.  since 2011,
ambassador khattab has been a speaker and panelist in key events related to women's rights, children's rights and development as well as other international  events.  candidature for unesco director-general  on 19 july 2016, the prime minister of egypt announced that khattab will be egypt's candidate for the post of unesco director-general at the elections due to be held in 2017. the announcement was made against the backdrop of the egyptian museum to symbolise egypt's strong culture and rich heritage and also as one of the founding members and earliest partners of unesco including the relocation of the abu simbel temples in 1964 among many others. khattab's candidature was endorsed by the african union at the 27th au summit held in kigali from 10-18 july 2016.  honours  in 1999, khattab was awarded the order of good hope by the president of the republic of south africa, the highest order which can be awarded to a foreign national.  in 2010, khattab was awarded knight grand cross of the italian republic by the president of italy. in 2008, she was awarded the international women of courage award by the u.s. state department. in 2007, she was awarded commander of the order of merit of the italian republic.  references   http://www.dailynewsegypt.com/2016/07/10/egypt-nominates-moushira-khattab-for-unesco-director-general/  year of birth missing (living people) living people cairo university alumni university of north carolina at chapel hill alumni government ministers of egypt ambassadors of egypt to south africa ambassadors of egypt to the czech republic ambassadors of egypt to slovakia women government ministers of egypt egyptian women diplomats women ambassadors 21st-century egyptian women politicians 20th-century egyptian women politicians
harold w. houston (10 march 1872 - 17 january 1947) was an american labor lawyer who represented union miners during the paint creek-cabin creek strike of 1912, and defended the umwa leaders accused of treason in the aftermath of the battle of blair mountain. he also led the legal defense of sid hatfield and other defendants who participated in the 1920 matewan massacre against members of the baldwin-felts detective agency.  houston was from freedom township, portage county, ohio. he died in kanawha county, west virginia.  references  1872 births 1947 deaths people from portage county, ohio 20th-century american lawyers american labor lawyers
beermann is a german surname. notable people with the surname include:   frank beermann (born 1965), german conductor  janine beermann (born 1983), german field hockey player  maik beermann (born 1981), german politician  ralph f. beermann (1912-1977), american politician  timo beermann (born 1990), german footballer  german-language surnames
new pragmatism () - original paradigmatic and heterodox theory of economics created by grzegorz w. kolodko to address the contemporary civilizational challenges and economic system transformations. it is based on the imperative for a harmonious triply sustainable social and economic growth.  new pragmatism, by creating a new, multidisciplinary epistemological perspective for analyzing economic phenomena and by providing new, enriched cognitive and analytic methods and tools stands for abandoning the economic orthodoxy in favor of what works, and what may be a useful basis for solving actual social and economic problems. cognitive and methodological eclecticism is inherent in this approach.  characteristics new pragmatism as a theoretical concept fits squarely in the sequence of views of philosophers and economists who believed the meaning and purpose of economics as a science is to find the rules governing the functioning of a good economy in specific temporal and spatial conditions (adam smith, karl marx, john m. keynes, john k. galbraith, douglass c. north, edmund s. phelps, joseph e. stiglitz), rather than to look for universal timeless economic laws.  new pragmatism searches for a reasonable compromise between an economic policy of national states and the policy run at a regional and international level. the economics of the future emerging from new pragmatism creates and equips politicians with tools to prevent "yet grander crises", as kolodko calls them. what should be an important rule governing the economy of the future is moderation, or consciously adapting the size of human, material and financial flows to the requirement to maintain a long-term dynamic balance.  in descriptive terms, new pragmatism explains the historic development process, emphasizing not only the significance of respective causative factors but also their coincidence.  in normative terms, new pragmatism indicates the goals of economic activity, which should involve:   economically sustainable growth, i.e. sustainable with respect to goods and capital markets as well as investments, finance and labor;  socially sustainable growth, i.e. sustainable with respect to socially acceptable, fair division of income, which favors capital accumulation, and to appropriate participation of basic population groups in public services and access to public goods;  environmentally and spatially sustainable growth, i.e. sustainable with respect to maintaining appropriate relations between human economic activity and nature, both on a current and long-term basis;  in new pragmatism, economics is seen as a science that is:   descriptive, explanatory and evaluative alike - a description is a point of departure and imminently leads to a norm
ative (prescriptive), that is evaluative perspective;  contextual - analyses and syntheses are not conducted in isolation from reality, in "pure" economic models but, instead, with reference to specific dynamic and variable complex circumstances, determinants, constraints and possibilities;  complex - it combines elements of analysis and synthesis from various economic schools, from behavioral economics to political economics, as well as microeconomics with macroeconomics and global economics;  multidisciplinary - the analysis of economic reality takes account of findings and methods of other disciplines of social sciences, most of all history, geography, philosophy, sociology, psychology, law and anthropology;  comparative - the comparison of economic, cultural, geographic and political reality is treated as the basic research method.  new pragmatism sees globalization - the historical and spontaneous process of liberalizing and integrating various markets into one interconnected and internally consolidated worldwide system - as an irreversible phenomenon. hence, what becomes the fundamental economic problem of modern times is an effective coordination of economic policy and developmental strategies at a national and global level and rebuilding the institutional structure of global economy.  references  further reading 1. publications on new pragmatism by grzegorz w. kolodko  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2011), truth, errors and lies: politics and economics in a volatile world, columbia university press, new york-london  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2011), "new pragmatism versus failing neoliberalism", roubini's economonitor", april 26th  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2012), "neither washington, nor beijing consensus, but the new pragmatism", roubini's economonitor", january 24th  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2013), "the new pragmatism and the future of world economy", "roubini's economonitor", january 25th  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2014), the new pragmatism, or economics and policy for the future, "acta oeconomica", vol. 64 (2)  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2014), whither the world: the political economy of the future, palgrave macmillan, houndmills, basingstoke, hampshire  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2017), new pragmatism versus new nationalism, tiger working paper series no. 137  kolodko, grzegorz w. (2017). "new pragmatism: in the quest for economics and
development policy in the 21st century", "journal of management and business administration. central europe"¸ vol. 25, no. 2, s. 2-5  2. publications on new pragmatism by other authors  phelps, edmund s. (2013). "mass flourishing: how grassroots innovation created jobs, challenge, and change", princeton university press, new york  baltowski, maciej (2015), "evolution of economics and the new pragmatism of grzegorz w. kolodko", maria sklodowska-curie university (umcs), lublin  galbraith, james k. (2016), "backwater economics and new pragmatism: institutions and evolution in the search for a sustainable economics", lyndon b. johnson school of public affairs, university of texas, austin  4. baltowski, maciej (2017), "evolution of economics and the new pragmatism of grzegorz w. kolodko", "tiger working paper series", no. 136 (march 2017)  acta oeconomica (2019) vol. 69, special issue 1, grzegorz w. kolodko turns 70.  schools of economic thought
sasobek (egyptian: "son of sobek") was an ancient egyptian vizier, who officiated between the late 25th - early 26th dynasty, during the reign of pharaoh psamtik i. being the "vizier of the north", he resided and officiated from sais, in lower egypt.  sasobek is known from his fine siltstone sarcophagus which is now in the british museum (ea 17), and also from a kneeling greywacke statue of his son horwedja, now in the walters art museum of baltimore (22.79).  references  ancient egyptian viziers people of the twenty-sixth dynasty of egypt
kabaw fault is a fault in myanmar.  it was among those that ruptured during the 1762 arakan earthquake.  location kabaw fault lies roughly parallel with the indo-burmese border near mizoram at the foothills of the mountains separating the plains of central myanmar with the arakan mountains, extending due south roughly 300 km.  references  geology of myanmar seismic faults
the 2016 major league baseball home run derby (known through sponsorship as the t-mobile home run derby) was a home run hitting contest between eight batters from major league baseball (mlb). the derby was held on july 11, 2016, at petco park in san diego, california, the site of the 2016 mlb all-star game. on july 8, the participants that will be eligible to participate in the home run derby were announced. giancarlo stanton won the home run derby by defeating defending champion todd frazier 20-13.  rules  eight players participated in the derby in a bracket-style, single-elimination timed event. each player had four minutes to hit as many home runs as possible. hitters were awarded an additional 30 seconds if they hit two home runs over . hitters were also allowed one 45 second timeout to stop the clock (two in the finals). homers hit off a t-mobile ball during the final minute resulted in a $10,000 donation to charity by t-mobile & mlb, to the boys & girls clubs of america.  the eight competing players were seeded 1-8 based on their home run totals. the higher seed hit second in any round, and the round ended if the higher seed surpassed the total of the first hitter. in the event of a tie, the two hitters competed in a one-minute swing-off (with no timeouts nor bonus time awarded). if there remained a tie, each player got three swings; whoever hit more home runs in the three swings would be declared the winner; thereafter, sudden death swings would occur until the tie was broken.  results  references  2016 major league baseball home run derby, 2016 baseball in san diego major league baseball home run derby 2010s in san diego
a modern buccaneer (1894) is a novel by australian writer rolf boldrewood.  story outline  set in the south pacific, this novel is written in the form of an autobiography, told by hilary telfer.  fascinated by tales of sailors and south sea traders, he leaves sydney at the age of seventeen to take up a life at sea.  the novel follows his adventures and provides a commentary on the trade between the islands and the practice of "blackbirding" that was rife at the time.  the "buccaneer" of the title is bully hayes, an american-born ship's captain, on whose ship telfer finds himself.  critical reception  a reviewer in the australian star expressed an initial wariness with the novel, given that the author had moved his focus from bushrangers to buccaneers but "it was well for one who, whether by personal visitation or reading, or intercourse with island men, had made himself familiar with the facts of the island life to weave them into such a romance as people of to-day and to-morrow would read, and possibly remember, and as would help them to an understanding of things as they are or have been. this task rolf boldrewood has essayed, and very fairly accomplished...all in all, it may be said that the story, tale, narrative, sketch - we scarce know how to classify it - is plentiful in the incident, and warm as it should be in color."  on the other hand, a reviewer in the australian town and country journal thought boldrewood should have stayed with what he knew: "he should stick to his stories of the australian bush, and of the people whom he knows so much about, and avoid dealing with buccaneers either ancient or modern. he is singularly unqualified for such a subject, and talks of nautical matters in a way which smacks too decidedly of mere amateur, and  mere make-belief enthusiasm."  see also   full text of the novel from harvard university library  1894 in australian literature  references  1894 australian novels australian adventure novels novels set in oceania 19th-century australian novels pirate books nautical fiction  victorian novels
saturday (czech: sobota) is a 1945 czechoslovakian drama film directed by vaclav wasserman and starring hana vitova, adina mandlova and jirina stepnickova.  cast  hana vitova as helena malkova    adina mandlova as luisa herbertova    jirina stepnickova as karla bartosova    ruzena slemrova as herbert's mother    paula valenska as seller    ella sarkova as john's wife    oldrich novy as richard herbert    ladislav bohac as jiri vales   frantisek hanus as petr malek    bedrich veverka as jindrich    karel dostal as dr. john    jindrich laznicka as hotel doorkeeper   jan fifka as guest    marie geblerova as chambermaid    marie hrdlickova as cycler    slavka jagrova as customer    bohdan lachman as usher    kvetoslava pouchla   jirina salacova as singer   jan w. speerger as hotel headmaster    nora stallich as josef    milos subrt as gardener  references  bibliography   alfred krautz. international directory of cinematographers set and costume designers in film: czechoslovakia. saur, 1991.  external links     1945 films 1945 drama films czechoslovak drama films czech films czech-language films czechoslovak black-and-white films czechoslovak films
des/amor (english: un/love) is the fifth studio album from mexican latin pop group reik, released on june 17, 2016, through sony music latin. the album received a nomination at the 17th annual latin grammy awards for best contemporary pop vocal album and the lo nuestro award for pop album of the year.  accolades  track listing  "que gano olvidandote" - 3:27 "vamonos lejos" - 3:30 "de rodillas" - 3:31 "voy a olvidarte" - 3:17 "spanglish" - 3:25 "un amor de verdad" - 3:33 "ya me entere" - 3:22 "we only have tonight" - 3:28 "naufragos" - 2:58 "al fin estas aqui" (featuring felix y gil) - 3:16 "ya me entere" (featuring nicky jam) [urban version] - 3:39  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  2016 albums albums produced by cachorro lopez reik albums sony music latin albums
loup-denis elion (born 9 september 1979) is a french actor and singer.  theater  filmography  references  external links  1979 births living people 21st-century french male actors french male television actors people from fontenay-aux-roses
auguste isaac (1849-1938) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1919 to 1924, representing rhone.  minister of industry and commerce between 1920 and 1921, isaac attacked the french fashion industry for its "indecency" during an anti-pornography congress in lyon in 1922.  references  1849 births 1938 deaths people from roubaix french roman catholics politicians from hauts-de-france republican federation politicians members of the 12th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
wdxz may refer to:   wjnz (am) (1000 am), a radio station in robertsdale, alabama, which held the call sign wdxz from 1999 to 2004 and from 2013 to 2016  wbzr-fm (105.9 fm), a radio station in atmore, alabama, which held the call sign wdxz in 2004  wyrd-fm (106.3 fm), a radio station in simpsonville, south carolina, which held the call sign wdxz from 1995 to 1999  wrfq (fm) (104.5 fm), a radio station in mount pleasant, south carolina, which held the call sign wdxz from 1985 to 1993
ales trcka (born 14 august 1961) is a czech former cyclist. he competed for czechoslovakia in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links      1961 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from prague
the 1955 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 25 june 1955 at white city stadium.    the winner was rushton mac and the winning owners frank johnson and mary johnson received £1,500.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  ¾, 4½, 1, 1¾, 3 (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report the ante-post favourite was hi there trained by paddy mcevoy and a winner of the national sprint in ireland the previous year. other leading contenders included defending champion pauls fun, barrowside and the frank johnson litter brothers rushton mac and rushton spot. the trafalgar cup winner golden sail failed to gain selection in the 48 runner event resulting in his owner mr hughes quitting the sport.  after the eight heats the fastest qualifier was barrowside (28.82 sec). pauls fun and hi there both underperformed but progressed. during the second round hi there finished lame but would become a legendary stud dog. pauls fun now trained by joe booth also succumbed to injury being withdrawn from his heat. duet leader a fawn dog trained by tom reilly won easily and barrowside remained unbeaten.  the semi-finals produced another victory for barrowside and the grand national champion was installed as the hot favourite to win the final. the second semi-final was won by rushton mac following a tough battle with laurels champion coolkill chieftain.  wembley trainer jack harvey had three of the finalists in his attempt to gain a second derby title. barrowside started at very short odds of 1-2 and made a good start followed by home straight and rushton mac. rushton mac moved towards the rails and took the lead on the back straight only for barrowside to respond and take the lead by the fourth bend but rushton mac came again to win by three quarters. coolkill chieftain ran on well for third place.  see also  1955 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
maksym salamakha (; born 17 july 1996) is a professional ukrainian football striker.  salamakha is the product of the karpaty lviv, fc lviv and fc metalist school systems. he played for fc metalist and fc dnipro in the ukrainian premier league reserves and under 19 championship, but never made a senior team appearances. in july 2016 he signed a three-year contract with his native city's team fc karpaty. he made his debut for fc karpaty as a substituted player in the second half of a game against fc stal kamianske on 23 july 2016 in the ukrainian premier league.  references  external links    1996 births living people ukrainian footballers fc karpaty lviv players ukrainian premier league players ukrainian second league players sportspeople from lviv association football forwards nk veres rivne players
ali attoui (born january 21, 1942 in annaba) is a retired algerian international football player.  career attoui spent the majority of his career with hamra annaba, with brief stints with as bone, and jbac bone. he also represented algeria at the 1968 african cup of nations.  honours  won the algerian cup one with hamra annaba in 1972  references  external links      1942 births footballers at the 1965 all-africa games african games competitors for algeria competitors at the 1967 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for algeria 1968 african cup of nations players living people people from annaba algerian footballers algeria international footballers hamra annaba players association football defenders 21st-century algerian people
events from the year 1782 in russia  incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events  bronze horseman, sculpture of peter the great, unveiled in st. petersburg  the minor (fonvizin play) first performed  order of saint vladimir established  siberia governorate, orenburg governorate, and others dissolved as part of a general administrative reorganization  births  stepan andreyevskiy - general  constantine iv, prince of mukhrani - georgian nobleman, russian general  philaret drozdov - russian orthodox metropolitan of moscow  yevgeny golovin - general  afanasy grigoriev - architect  pyotr kotlyarevsky - hero of the russo-turkish war and russo-persian war  vasili krasovsky - writer  orest kiprensky - portrait artist  yakov kolokolnikov-voronin - artist  valerian madatov - armenian prince, russian general  pavel martynov - general  ivan paskevich - general  konstantin poltoratsky - general  sophie swetchine - mystic  prince teimuraz of georgia - scholar and historian  fyodor ivanovich tolstoy - nobleman and traveller  georg andreas von rosen - general  ferdinand von tiesenhausen - nobleman and soldier  alexander varnek - portrait artist  mikhail semyonovich vorontsov - general  deaths  elizabeth antonovna of brunswick - member of the russian royal family  vasily dolgorukov-krymsky - general and governor-general of moscow  vasily neyolov - architect  references  1782 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
ghosthunters is a 2016 american direct-to-video horror film written and directed by pearry reginald teo. the film stars francesca santoro, stephen manley and david o'donnell. the film was released by the asylum on july 5, 2016. in the tradition of the asylum's catalog, ghosthunters is a mockbuster of the 2016 film reboot ''ghostbusters.  plot  a group of paranormal investigators, neal, henry, jessica, neal's girlfriend amy, and jessica's girlfriend devon, have arrived at a house where henry's wife and daughter were murdered by a serial killer known only as the night stalker. the team hopes to free the pair's souls via a device created by neal, which can capture ghosts and seal them in containers. as the investigation proceeds devon leaves and is killed by a floating knife while another amy experiences a series of visions. these visions not only show her the deaths of henry's wife and daughter, but also reveal that henry is the night stalker. henry had murdered them as part of a paranormal experiment, in the hopes that their extreme distress would amplify paranormal energy. amy manages to get a recording of henry confessing to the murders, an action that ends with henry shooting neal with a gun he was carrying with him. amy and jessica flee, but are caught by henry. they are almost shot, but are spared when the ghost of henry's wife appears and distracts him long enough for jessica to break the containers of ectoplasm. the now released ghosts attack henry, killing him and giving amy and jessica a chance to escape - only for jessica to get shot and die. the film ends with amy, the sole survivor of the night's events, leaving the house as police arrive.  cast  francesca santoro as amy  stephen manley as henry  david o'donnell as neal  liz fenning as jessica  web crystal as devon  phyllis spielman as martha  anna harr as gabby  kim shannon as sally  aaron moses as stanley  kris marconi as officer mack  release  the films was released direct-to-video on july 5, 2016 in the united states.  reception horrornews.net reviewed the movie, criticizing it for a lack of logic and sense while stating that "in the end, though, horror fans tend to prioritize tension and dread over lucidity, and if you are willing to make that tradeoff, ghosthunters can be oddly satisfying."  references  external links        2016 films 2016 horror films american films american
supernatural horror films english-language films american direct-to-video films the asylum films
recreation park. is a public, urban park in el segundo, california, a suburb of los angeles. located adjacent to downtown el segundo, recreation park is bordered by pine street on the north, eucalyptus drive on the west, and houses on the south and east.  references  parks in los angeles county, california el segundo, california geography of los angeles parks in los angeles
daniele barboli, o.p. (died 25 february, 1570) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of pedena (1563-1570).  biography daniele barboli was ordained a priest in the order of preachers. on 4 june 1563, he was appointed during the papacy of pope pius iv as bishop of pedena. he served as bishop of pedena until his death on 25 february 1570.  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope pius iv 1570 deaths dominican bishops
bytkiv (; ) is an urban-type settlement in nadvirna raion in ivano-frankivsk oblast. it belongs to pasichna rural hromada, one of the hromadas of ukraine. the population was .  location  bytkiv is located 12 kilometers west of nadvirna between the bystrytsia of nadvirna and the bystrytsia of solotvyn rivers in the northeastern part of the gorgany mountain range.  history  between 1772 and 1918 it was part of austrian galicia. after the end of world war i bytkiv became part of  nadvirna powiat in stanisławow voivodeship, part of poland. in 1939 it was annexed by the soviet union. in 1940 it became an urban-type settlement.  bitkiv was occupied by german troops during world war ii from 1941 to 1944, part of the district of galicia.  since 2015, the head of the village council has been vasyl yosypovych vintonyak.  economy  oil and gas deposits are located in the area of bytkiv. since the end of the 19th century, oil has been produced in the settlement, with production peaking in 1925. during the 1920s and the 1930s, bytkiv was the largest galician oil producer after boryslav.  education  bytkiv has one school serving all education levels and two 1st level schools.  notable people  bohdan beniuk - actor  mykola hobdych - choral conductor  roman maksymyuk - footballer  references   urban-type settlements in ivano-frankivsk oblast nadvirna raion
william or bill nicholls may refer to: william nicholls (theologian) (1664−1712), english clergyman and theologian sir william nicholls (royal marines officer) (1854−1935), british royal marines general william henry nicholls, australian amateur botanist billy nicholls (born 1949), british singer, songwriter, composer, record producer, and musical director bill nicholls (australian footballer) (born 1981), australian rules footballer bill nicholls (vanuatuan footballer) (born 1993), vanuatuan footballer will nicholls (born 1995), british photographer and film-maker  see also william nichols (disambiguation)
the berlin green head is an ancient egyptian statue head (aemp 12500) made from greenschist and housed in the egyptian museum of berlin, not far from the nefertiti bust. it has been considered the work of a highly skilled (though unknown) ancient egyptian sculptor, as well as one of the most famous and credited pieces of art from the late and ptolemaic periods of ancient egypt.  description the face of the statue is calm and emotionless and, unusually for contemporary works of art, also perfectly symmetric, and it is that of an intelligent-looking, middle-aged man with many well-rendered wrinkles and lines. the statue's shaved, oval-shaped skull is so realistic that it was once believed that the sculptor could not have made it without ancient greek knowledge of anatomy, a claim subsequently disproved by the analysis of similar, earlier egyptian artworks. on the back of the head, the top portion of a conventional back pillar is still visible.  the whole artefact is uninscribed, thus the owner's name and titles are unknown. for the same reason, the statue could only be dated on stylistic grounds. once regarded as art of the saite period, it was later attributed to the ptolemaic period by friedrich wilhelm von bissing. in 1960, bernard von bothmer further reduced the time range between 100 and 50 bce, arguing that the head reveals a maturity not compatible with the earlier ptolemaic art, as well as a similarity with some upcoming roman republic-era egyptian works. its provenance is also unknown, as well as its trace before 1895, when it was acquired from the collections of prince ibrahim hilmy and henry wallis.  the berlin green head has been compared to the similar, yet earlier boston green head, with the former one having lost part of the "verism" (among that, the asymmetry) which is more prominent in the latter one, yet without compromising the characterization of the individual represented on it.  references  1st-century bc sculptures sculptures of ancient egypt sculptures of the berlin state museums ptolemaic kingdom egyptological objects of the berlin state museums
simon gegenheimer is a german cross-country mountain biker. he competes in the cross-country, cross-country eliminator, and cross-country marathon events. he won the german national championship in the cross-country eliminator in 2012, 2013, and 2016. in 2016 he won the silver medal in the cross-country eliminator at the world championships in nove mesto na morave, czech republic. he also won the 2017 uci xce world cup.  references  german male cyclists cross-country mountain bikers living people 1988 births sportspeople from karlsruhe german mountain bikers
martin borulya is a 1953 soviet comedy drama film directed by aleksei shvachko and gnat yura and starring yura, varvara chayka and olga kusenko. it was made in ukrainian at the dovzhenko film studios in kyiv.  cast  gnat yura as martyn borulya    varvara chayka as palazhka   olga kusenko as marysya    sergey olekseyenko as stepan    maryan krushelnitsky as omelko    grigoriy teslya as gervasiy gulyanitskiy    vasiliy dashenko as mikola    dmitri milyutenko as protasiy penenozhka    nikolay yakovchenko as trandalyov    nikolay svitenko as dulskiy   semyon likhogodenko as trokhim   grigori semyonovich aleksandrov  references  bibliography   viacheslav oleksandrovych kudin. soviet ukrainian screen art. mistetstvo publishers, 1979.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy-drama films soviet comedy-drama films soviet films ukrainian-language films films directed by aleksei shvachko soviet black-and-white films
veer bahadur singh sports college, gorakhpur is a residential sports college in gorakhpur, uttar pradesh, established in 1988. it offers sports training in football, hockey, wrestling, athletics, badminton, swimming and kabaddi in 6th to 12th standard and with the curriculum of the u.p. board. it is the second sports college established in uttar pradesh after guru gobind singh sports college of lucknow and before etawah's saifai sports college.  history  after the success of guru gobind singh sports college, lucknow, the government of uttar pradesh established this sports college in gorakhpur in 1988-1989.  notable alumni  preeti dubey, indian women's hockey team (2016 summer olympics)  see also maharana pratap sports college, dehradun motilal nehru school of sports, rai, sonipat  external links official website  references  sport schools in india intermediate colleges in uttar pradesh universities and colleges in uttar pradesh sport in gorakhpur education in gorakhpur uttar pradesh sports colleges society 1988 establishments in uttar pradesh educational institutions established in 1988
r & r studios is a multidisciplinary studio focusing on public artworks, architecture, and design of the city. based in miami, florida, the studio was founded in 1995 by the argentinian architects, roberto behar and rosario marquardt. critic peter boswell describes their work in painting, installation, and architecture as three expressions of the same concept: that "an idea is both dream and obstinate reality." boswell writes, "the works propose encounters of stories and spaces, which alternate between the private and the public, the intimate and the monumental, the quotidian and the fantastic." r & r studios designs solutions that challenge the status quo and introduce imagination to the everyday environment.  works include the "big m," at the metromover entrance in downtown miami, "the living room" structure, an oversized living room turned inside-out in a public space, a super-billboard called "besame mucho," which was constructed for coachella music and arts festival, and public squares in mexico df and copenhagen.  r & r studios has received awards of excellence from the american institute of architects, and their work was selected among the best public art in 2007 and 2013 by americans for the arts. their work has been published in over 250 publications worldwide.  biography   roberto behar and rosario marquardt have known one another since childhood. behar and marquardt received their diplomas in architecture from the universidad nacional de rosario in argentina. behar also completed postgraduate study at the institute for architecture and urban studies in new york city, was a visiting artist at the getty research center academy in rome, and a visiting professor at harvard university and cornell university. behar and rosario both teach at the university of miami school of architecture.  projects   emeryville shellmound/ powell street. public art master plan. (work in progress)  roosevelt station plaza and sculpture, sound transit, seattle.  i love you. downtown, miami, florida. (concept)   besame mucho. coachella valley music and arts festival. indio, california.   rhode island intermodal station. warwick, rhode island.   question mark. madison public central library. madison, wisconsin.   all together now. denver urban renewal. denver, colorado.   peace & love. miami international airport. miami, florida.   m. miami-dade art in public places. downtown, miami, florida.   the peace project. museum of contemporary art. denver, colorado.    los pasos perdidos. centre international pour la ville, l'architecture, et le
paysage. brussels, belgium.    cruaute et utopie. centre international pour la ville, l'architecture, et le paysage. brussels belgium.  opa-locka public art masterplan. opa-locka community development corporation. opa-locka, florida.  sonoran boulevard. phoenix office of arts and culture. phoenix, arizona.   watching the wheels go round & round... museum of art ft. lauderdale. ft. lauderdale, florida.  broward county children's museum. broward county. public art & design dept. davie, florida.  time of friendship, madison museum of contemporary art. madison, wisconsin.   museum of art ft. lauderdale. moafl. ft. lauderdale, florida.   toftegards plads syd. copenhagen, denmark.    biblioteca central. rosario, argentina.    the most beautiful table in the world. household objects for the pursuit of happiness series.    the living room. design district, miami, florida.    indian school road. scottsdale public art program. scottsdale, arizona.  open room. city of austin. cultural arts division. austin, texas.   all we need is love. miami international airport. miami, florida.    camelback pedestrian underpass. phoenix office of arts and culture. phoenix, arizona.   streamers. fort lauderdale airport broward county public art & design dept. ft. lauderdale, florida.  meeting square. charlotte area transit system. charlotte, north carolina.   plaza esperanza & mask. centre international pour la ville. l'architecture et le paysage. brussels, belgium.  alice. public art biennial. neuberger museum of art. purchase, new york.   paradise room. miami-dade art in public places. miami, florida.   port everglades. public art & design master plan. broward cultural affairs council. fort lauderdale, florida.   the rooms. miami, florida.   the salon. miami, florida.   entrance & square. university of miami. coral gables, florida.   miami design district & little haiti. public art master plan. miami, florida.  exhibitions   time of friendship. museum of art fort lauderdale. fort lauderdale, florida.   the absent city. museum of contemporary art. madison, wisconsin. (individual exhibition)  the peace project. museum of contemporary art denver, colorado. (individual exhibition)  centre international pour la ville, l'architecture et le paysage. brussels, belgium.  honors  between
2012 and 2014, r & r studios has won awards of excellence from the miami chapter of the american institute of architects for their intermodel station facade in warwick, rhode island, for the museum of art in ft. lauderale, and for the toftegards plads syd in copenhagen, denmark. the americans for the arts year in review best public art projects chose r & r studios as a leading creator of public works in both 2007 and 2014. other honors include the arizona forward award of merit 2014, inclusion in the austin chronicle best of austin 2010, and the national terrazzo award given by the national terrazzo and mosaic association in 2007.  press   the new york times, "mr. and mrs. magritte, living large in miami," by donna paul.    bad at sports: contemporary art talk, "episode: 501: roberto & rosario marquardt," by patricia malone & bryan andrews.   the new york times, "a century-old city still in the process of being invented," by abby goodnough.   los angeles times, "coachella 2016: expect extra-big art installations at this year's festival," by deborah vankin.  publications   behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. the living room. miami, florida: 2013.   behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. museum works. miami, florida: 2013.   behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. m. miami, florida: 2011.   behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. the peace project. miami, florida: 2007.    behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. satellite of love. hotje cantz verlag: startseite, germany: 2007.   behar, roberto, and rosario marquardt. here comes the sun. miami, florida: 2003.  references   studios in the united states
thigli  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of thigli. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  kapurthala - 0 km, dhilwan - 17 km, nadala - 21 km, rayya-6 - 25 km  are the nearest taluks and kapurthala - 2 km, jalandhar - 21 km, tarn taran - 50 km and hoshiarpur- 59 km are the nearby district headquarters to the village.  transport  kapurthala - 0 km, kartarpur - 13 km, jalandhar - 22 km and jalandhar cantt. - 24 km are the nearby cities to thigli.  train  kapurthala railway station - 1 km, rail coach factory railway station - 7 km, khojewala railway station - 9 km and husainpur railway station - 10 km are the very nearby railway stations to thigli, however jalandhar city railway station is major railway station is 23  km away from thigli village.  air raja sansi airport:- 73 km, pathankot airport:- 107 km, ludhiana airport:- 77 km and gaggal airport:- 148 km nearest airports are available to thigli village.  schools   government public school, thigli.  colleges   college of engineering & management, kapurthala.  guru nanak college of education for women, kapurthala.  nsja government college, kapurthala.  caparo p.t.u.school of manufacturing and materials technology, kapurthala.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
altschool is a san francisco-based education and technology company founded with one school in 2013, later expanded to additional schools in 2014. as of june, 2019 altschool ceased operating schools directly and rebranded as altitude learning, a software company.  founding  altschool's founder and ceo, max ventilla, left his previous career at google in 2013. he wanted to work in education and in 2014 raised $33m of venture capital funding to start altschool. the series a financing was led by founders fund and andreessen horowitz, with follow-on investment from first round capital and harrison metal and participation from john doerr, jonathan sackler, learn capital, and omidyar network.  series b  in 2015, altschool raised a $100m series b round of funding. the round was led by founders fund and andreessen horowitz , with mark zuckerberg and priscilla chan also participating through their silicon valley community foundation.  coddy johnson, former executive of video game company activision, joined the company from 2016 to 2017. in 2017, the company hired devin vodicka, former superintendent of vista unified school district in california to serve as its chief impact officer. ben kornell, former coo of envision charter schools, joined the company as vice president of growth.  schools the company has created a series of micro schools that focus on personalized learning, where children are involved in setting the projects they work on. students and teachers create individual "playlists" of tasks and projects for each student. their progress is streamed to parents using a portal app. by 2016, six schools had been opened in san francisco, palo alto and brooklyn. in october 2016, berthold academy in reston, the greene school in west palm beach, and temple beth sholom in miami beach partnered with altschool. in 2017, altschool launched a tiny private middle school in new york city's union square. in november 2017, altschool said it would close a school in san francisco's palo alto and a school in new york city's east village at the end of the academic year.  references   internet properties established in 2014 educational technology companies of the united states b lab-certified corporations public benefit corporations based in california  technology companies based in the san francisco bay area
the swan 391 was designed by ron holland and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1981.  external links  nautor swan  references  sailing yachts keelboats 1980s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by ron holland
anolis nietoi is a species of anole lizard first found in the mexican states of oaxaca, guerrero, and puebla. the species has keeled ventral scales.  references  external links reptile database  anoles lizards of north america endemic fauna of mexico reptiles of mexico natural history of oaxaca natural history of guerrero natural history of puebla reptiles described in 2014 taxa named by gunther kohler
keaton nigel cooke is an american film actor, television actor, and singer. he made his television debut in difficult people (2015) and his film debut in wiener-dog (2016).  career keaton nigel cooke is an american film actor, television actor, and singer. he started his acting career at five years old playing the lead role of mowgli in the jungle book. after several more lead roles in stage productions, he was cast as ryder silverman in the tv series difficult people (2015), followed by the role of hudson in the tv series i love you...but i lied (2015). his first lead role in a movie came in todd solondz's dark satire wiener dog, where he played the young boy remi (2016). keaton was a lead actor again in norman lear: just another version of you, where he played norman lear as a boy (2016). both movies went to the sundance film festival, where keaton was the only lead actor with two movies. alex and the handyman was a black comedy in which keaton played alex (2017). the short won critical acclaim and keaton was awarded best actor by n.y.u.. he played abraham lincoln's beloved son willie, in lincoln in the bardo, a boy who died young and is visited by his bereaved father in the graveyard (2017). keaton played the lead character simon in a bread factory, part one, and the follow up movie, a bread factory part two. the general story line is a small town theater setting taking on big themes of social institutions and changing technologies in which keaton plays the cameraman (2018). adult ed. is a tv comedy where keaton plays the wise cracking son named toby (2019). keaton recently played the lead role josh in a movie called la bamba. this movie is currently in post-production (2019). - imdb mini biography by: k. cooke  filmography  film  television  references  external links    21st-century american male actors american male child actors american male film actors american male television actors living people place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people)
ludovico spada veralli potenziani (19 august 1880 - 8 august 1971) was an italian nobleman. he was born in rieti. he was the 2nd fascist governor of rome (1926-1928). he served in the senate of the kingdom of italy. he died in rome, italy.  references  external links    1880 births 1971 deaths mayors of rome recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus members of the senate of the kingdom of italy
this was the first edition of the men's singles tournament.  go soeda won the title, defeating blaz kavcic 6-7(4-7), 6-4, 6-2 in the final.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references main draw qualifying draw  winnipeg national bank challenger winnipeg challenger
the 2018 alaska gubernatorial election took place on november 6, 2018, to elect the governor and lieutenant governor of alaska. in the primaries for recognized political parties, candidates for governor and lieutenant governor run separately. the winners of each respective primary for governor and lieutenant governor then become a joint ticket in the general election for their political party. incumbent independent governor bill walker was running for reelection in what was originally a three-way race between walker, republican nominee mike dunleavy, a former state senator, and democratic nominee mark begich, a former u.s. senator. however, walker dropped out on october 19, 2018 and endorsed begich. in spite of walker dropping out, dunleavy defeated begich in what would become the only gubernatorial gain by a republican candidate in 2018.  independent candidates for governor and lieutenant governor may form a ticket that will appear on the general election ballot, provided that both candidates on the ticket collect enough valid petition signatures, as mandated by the alaska division of elections.  democratic-libertarian-independence primary candidates from the alaska democratic party, alaska libertarian party and alaskan independence party appear on the same ballot, with the highest-placed candidate from each party receiving that party's nomination. in october 2017 the akdp sued for the right to allow non-democrats to compete for and win the democratic nomination, which was ultimately decided in their favor in april 2018. this move was widely thought to benefit incumbent gov. bill walker, to foreclose the possibility of a democratic nominee splitting the vote with walker against a republican nominee. however, with the entry of former senator mark begich into the race, walker withdrew from the democratic primary and forged ahead with a fully independent bid for reelection.  governor  declared    mark begich (democratic), former u.s. senator  william s. "billy" toien (libertarian), libertarian candidate for alaska governor in 2010  polling   with mark begich  endorsements  results  lieutenant governor  declared    debra call (democratic), cook inlet tribal council board of directors representative  withdrawn    edgar blatchford (democratic), former mayor of seward  results  republican primary  governor  nominated  mike dunleavy, educator and former state senator  eliminated in primary   dorian colbry  thomas a. "tom" gordon gerald heikes, perennial candidate merica hlatcu michael sheldon mead treadwell, former lieutenant governor  withdrawn    mike chenault, state representative and former speaker of the alaska house of representatives  scott hawkins, businessman  declined
bill walker, incumbent independent governor (running for re-election as an independent)  robert gillam, businessman  loren leman, former lieutenant governor  anna mackinnon, state senator (endorsed mike dunleavy)  joe miller, former magistrate judge and perennial candidate  sean parnell, former governor of alaska (endorsed mike dunleavy) frank murkowski, former governor of alaska and u.s. senator  peter micciche, state senator (running for re-election to state senate)  dan sullivan, former mayor of anchorage and nominee for lieutenant governor in 2014 (endorsed mike dunleavy)  endorsements  polling  results  lieutenant governor  declared    lynn gattis, former state representative and candidate for the state senate in 2016  edie grunwald, retired air force colonel and former human resources director for the alaska national guard  sharon jackson, activist and former congressional staffer  kevin meyer, state senator and former president of the alaska senate  gary stevens, state senator  stephen wright, air force veteran  declined    david wilson, state senator  glen thompson, ketchikan gateway borough assemblyman  results  independents  governor  withdrew  bill walker (independent), incumbent governor  lieutenant governor  withdrew  byron mallott (democratic), incumbent lieutenant governor until october 16 valerie davidson (independent), incumbent lieutenant governor since october 16  general election  campaign independent candidate and incumbent governor bill walker announced on october 19 that he was suspending his campaign and endorsing mark begich, three days after walker's running mate and incumbent lieutenant governor byron mallott resigned from office (and amid low polling numbers just three weeks before election day). however, walker and mallott still remained on the ballot as the deadline to withdraw was on september 4.  debates  predictions  endorsements  polling with bill walker (campaign suspended), mike dunleavy, and mark begich  with mark begich and mike dunleavy  with bill walker and mike dunleavy  with bill walker and mark begich  results  notes  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia  official gubernatorial campaign websites mark begich (d) for governor mike dunleavy (r) for governor  official lieutenant gubernatorial campaign websites kevin meyer (r) for lieutenant governor  alaska division of elections unofficial election results - nov. 2018  gubernatorial 2018 alaska mark begich
shimon mordukhovich iakerson (russian: семен мордухович якерсон; born august 4, 1956) is a russian scholar specializing in medieval hebrew manuscripts and incunabula.  career prof. shimon iakerson, phd, dlitt, is the head of the department of semitic and hebrew studies at the st. petersburg state university, russia. he is also the head researcher at the institute of oriental manuscripts of the russian academy of sciences, as well as a corresponding member of the hebrew paleography project of the israel academy of sciences and humanities. he has lectured at a variety of academic institutions around the world, most recently at sorbonne in paris, france. one of his most notable lecture series was "collectors and collections: hebrew manuscripts and incunabula in russia" delivered on 23-24 may 2010 at the penn libraries in philadelphia, usa, organized jointly with the jewish studies program and the herbert d. katz center for advanced judaic studies.  in recent years he has become involved with jewish museology and the presentation of jewish history to larger audiences, for a period of time serving as a curator at the judaica collections of the russian museum of ethnography.  achievements since 1985, iakerson has produced 49 publications on jewish history and hebrew incunabula. his works have been published in russian, hebrew, french, dutch and english.  his opus magnum is the catalogue of hebrew incunabula from the collection of the library of the jewish theological seminary of america, wherein he describes the largest collection of hebrew books printed with movable type before 1501 a.d. he holds the first honorable medal of the euro-asian jewish congress "for service to the jewish people" (28 july 2005, jerusalem) for the publication of his 2005 catalogue of hebrew incunabula from the collection of the library of the jewish theological seminary of america and is a winner of the antsiferov award in saint-petersburg studies for the 2008-2009 publication of the illustrated volume jewish treasures of petersburg.  family daughters:  dina (born 1983) - israeli art historian and artist. she born in st. petersburg, immigrated to israel (1990). she lives in tel aviv.  maria (born 1994).  bibliography of individual works  1. от буквы к литере. очерки по истории евреискои средневековои книги / from
letter to type. essays on the history of the medieval hebrew book. санкт-петербург, 2016. 391 с.  2. оцар сефарад - сефардская сокровищница. сефардская книга x - xv вв.  от рукописнои к печатнои традиции. учебно-методическое пособие для студентов спбгу, обучающихся по направлению «востоковедение и африканистика». санкт-петербург, 2015. 128 с., илл.  3. наставление иуды ибн тиббона сыну самуилу, сочиненное во дни юности оного. факсимиле рукописи. пролегомена, критическое издание текста, перевод с иврита, глоссарии и указатели с. м. якерсона. поэтическии перевод пролога и эпилога е. к. юзбашян. спб, 2011. 200 с., илл.  4. евреиские сокровища петербурга. [т. 2] ашкеназские коллекции россииского этнографического музея. спб, 2009. 231 с., ил. [в соавт.: урицкая л.б.].  5. евреиские сокровища петербурга. свитки, кодексы, документы. спб, 2008. 264 с., ил.  6. агнон ш. и. первыи поцелуи / перевод,
предисловие и комментарии с. м. якерсона. спб.: центр «петербургское востоковедение», 2006. 24 с.  7. большая хоральная синагога в санкт-петербурге. спб.: «конструкт», 2006.  8. abraham firkovich de karaiet en zijn verzameling hebreeuwse en samaritaanse manuscripten in sint-petersburg. amsterdam, 2005. 39 p. (printed in dutch)  9. евреиская рукописная и первопечатная книга x-xv вв. как историко-культурныи источник / автореферат диссертации на соискание ученои степени доктора исторических наук. спб., 2005. 57 с.  10. catalogue of hebrew incunabula from the collection of the library of the jewish theological seminary of america. vol. 1-2. new york and jerusalem. 2004-2005. (parallel text in english and hebrew).  11. уникальное пятикнижие из собрания барона гинцбурга. [м., 2004]. 12 с. (приложение к факсимильному изданию памятника. text in russian and english).  12. евреиская средневековая книга: кодикологические, палеографические и книговедческие аспекты. м., 2003. 256 с.  13. избранные жемчужины. уникальные памятники евреискои культуры в санкт-петербурге (рукописи, документы, инкунабулы, культовая ут
варь). санкт-петербург, 2003. 144 с. (parallel text in russian and english).  14. ohel hayim: a catalogue of hebrew manuscripts of the manfred and anne lehmann family. vol. 3: printed books. incunabula and sixteenth century books. new york, 1996. [49], 314, xxiii pp. (the manfred and anne lehmann foundation series. 22). (in english and hebrew).  15. инкунабулы на семитских языках (древнеевреиском и арамеиском) и их место в европеискои книжнои культуре xv века / автореферат диссертации на соискание ученои степени кандидата филологических наук. л., 1989. 16 с.  16. евреиские инкунабулы. описание экземпляров, хранящихся в библиотеках москвы и ленинграда. ленинград, 1988. 337 с.  17. каталог инкунабулов на древнеевреиском языке библиотеки ленинградского отделения института востоковедения ан ссср. ленинград, 1985. 107 с.  references  in 2 vols. "new york and jerusalem: the jewish theological seminary of america," 2004-2005. "speaker biography" in shimon iakerson, "unique hebrew manuscripts in saint-petersburg, russia," a lecture delivered at the library of congress on february 3, 2010, and available at https://www.loc.gov/today/cyberlc/feature_wdesc.php?rec=4841 . "shimon mordukhovich iakerson," the institute of oriental manuscripts of the russian academy of sciences, http://www.orientalstudies.ru/eng/index.php?option
=com_personalities&itemid=74&person=215. https://www.ephe.fr/international/directeurs-d-etudes-invites/shimon-iakerson  russian historians
niranjan das gulhati was an indian civil engineer, water resources consultant and writer, known for his mediation in the indus waters treaty of 1960 between india and pakistan. his contributions were reported in the formation of the international commission on irrigation and drainage (icid), a non governmental organization which promotes transfer of water sharing technologies between countries. an alumnus of the thomason college of engineering (present-day indian institute of technology, roorkee), he was associated with the world bank, international development association and united nations economic and social commission for asia and the pacific. he was the author of two books, indus waters treaty: an exercise in international mediation and data of high dams in india. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1961, for his contributions to society. his life story has been documented in a book, the untiring indian - lifestory of mr. n. d. gulhati - a visionary water resources engineer, published in 2011. the international commission on irrigation and drainage has instituted an annual oration, n.d. gulhati memorial lecture for international cooperation in irrigation and drainage in his honor.  see also   indus waters treaty  international commission on irrigation and drainage  references  external links  further reading     recipients of the padma bhushan in civil service 1904 births year of death missing indian civil engineers water resource management in india indian technology writers indian institute of technology roorkee alumni 20th-century indian engineers 20th-century indian biographers
this is life (danish: det gælder livet) is a 1953 danish film directed by jon iversen and starring poul muller, lisbeth movin and elsebet knudsen.  cast  poul muller as arkitekt olaf henningsen   lisbeth movin as ella henningsen    elsebet knudsen as lotte henningsen    hans kurt as fabrikant viggo thomsen    signi grenness as polly thomsen    henning moritzen as sanglærer stefan korsby    henrik wiehe as kurt rosing    preben uglebjerg as kurts ven    kjeld jacobsen as henningsens læge    tavs neiiendam as rektor    johannes meyer as vagtmester madsen    ove rud as hospitalslæge    axel strøbye as mekaniker   povl wøldike as tilskuer ved jubilæumsfest    peter kitter as journalist  references  bibliography   morten piil. gyldendals danske filmguide. gyldendal a/s, 2008.  external links     1953 films danish films danish-language films films directed by jon iversen danish black-and-white films
rampura phul is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of bathinda district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022           -->  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  bathinda district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india bathinda district
allen williams may refer to:  j. allen williams (born 1960), american animator, writer and director  allen lane (allen lane williams, 1902-1970), british publisher  see also  allan williams (1930-2016), british businessman and promoter  allan williams (politician) (1922-2011), british columbia politician
giorgio rautgartler or giorgio reitgherlet (died 10 december, 1600) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of pedena (1573-1600).  biography on 27 april 1573, giorgio rautgartler was appointed during the papacy of pope gregory xiii as bishop of pedena. he served as bishop of pedena until his death on 10 december 1600.  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia 17th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope gregory xiii 1600 deaths
the 2016 iowa senate election was held on november 8, 2016.  the senate seats for the twenty-five even-numbered districts were up for election.  senate terms are staggered such that half the membership is elected every two years, with each senators serving a four-year term. prior to the election, the democrats were in the majority.  senate composition  results the election took place on november 8, 2016.  candidate list and results  from the iowa secretary of state.  see also 2016 united states house of representatives elections in iowa iowa senate iowa house of representatives iowa general assembly political party strength in u.s. states  references  2016 iowa elections iowa senate elections iowa senate
, prov. designation: , is a large trans-neptunian object in the scattered disc, approximately  in diameter. it was discovered on 18 april 2010, by the pan-starrs 1 survey at haleakala observatory, hawaii, united states.  orbit and classification    orbits the sun at a distance of 40.4-64.4 au once every 379 years and 3 months (138,537 days; semi-major axis of 52.4 au). its orbit has an eccentricity of 0.23 and an inclination of  with respect to the ecliptic. the body's observation arc begins with its official discovery observation at haleakala in april 2010.  numbering and naming   this minor planet was numbered by the minor planet center on 25 september 2018 (). , it has not been named.  physical characteristics   according to michael brown and the johnston's archive,  measures 626 and 770 kilometers in diameter, based on an absolute magnitude of 4.2 and 3.8, with an assumed albedo of 0.10 and 0.09, respectively. the mpc/jpl databases give an absolute magnitude of 3.92. on 25 february 2019, a stellar occultation by  was observed in new zealand. from these observations, a lower limit of 575 km was placed for its mean diameter.  , no physical characteristics have been determined from photometric observations. the body's rotation period, pole and shape remain unknown.  references  external links   discovery circumstances: numbered minor planets (520001)-(525000) - minor planet center      scattered disc and detached objects discoveries by pan-starrs possible dwarf planets objects observed by stellar occultation 20100418
joshua hamilton wilson (born 5 june 1972) is an australian politician. he is the labor member for fremantle in the house of representatives, serving from 2 july 2016 until his resignation on 10 may 2018 as a part of the 2017-18 australian parliamentary eligibility crisis and then since the 2018 fremantle by-election.  early life wilson was born on 5 june 1972 in westminster, london. as a child he lived in india and long island, new york before moving to fremantle.  education  wilson has a bachelor of arts (honours) from the university of western australia, and a master of arts (honours) from the university of melbourne.  career  before going into politics, wilson served as an associate lecturer at curtin university, a paralegal and litigation project manager, a freelance journalist as well as a travel writer.  wilson was a councillor of the city of fremantle from 2009 to 2016, was deputy mayor of fremantle from 2011 and also worked as a staffer to parke. during his time as deputy mayor, wilson initiated the "fremantle forever" campaign which opposed local government amalgamations, worked on economic development and revitalisation, and introduced an indigenous employment target. he initially lost preselection to contest the seat in 2016 to chris brown, but he became the candidate when brown was forced to stand aside after failing to declare spent convictions.  wilson was elected to the australian house of representatives for the seat of fremantle in the 2016 federal election with 40.99% of the primary vote, and 57.52% of the two-party-preferred vote.  on 9 may 2018, wilson announced his resignation from the house of representatives following the high court of australia ruling that senator katy gallagher was ineligible to contest the 2016 election. like gallagher, wilson had failed to renounce his british citizenship before nomination in the 2016 federal election. wilson was re-elected in the subsequent 2018 fremantle by-election.  personal life wilson has a wife and three children. they live in fremantle.  references  external links  1972 births living people australian labor party members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for fremantle english emigrants to australia people who lost british citizenship labor left politicians 21st-century australian politicians
the 1933 kentucky derby was the 59th running of the kentucky derby. the race took place on may 6, 1933.  the first two finishers of the race were brokers tip, ridden by don meade, and head play, ridden by herb fisher. head play led early, but brokers tip went through an opening on the inside to pull even. as the horses ran side-by-side down the stretch, their jockeys grabbed and whipped each other, and the race became known as the "fighting finish." the racing stewards declared brokers tip the winner by a nose. it was the only victory of his career.  meade and fisher later fought in the jockey's room; both were suspended for 30 days for their actions during the race. fisher claimed that head play had won and that brokers tip should have been disqualified. meade, when interviewed 50 years later, said, "i couldn't push him away from me because he had ahold of me, so i had to get ahold of him. so from there down to the wire, that's what it was - grab and grab and grab."  full results  references  further reading  1933 kentucky derby derby
autoclasica is an elegance competition for classic and vintage cars. it has taken place every year since 1998 during the first weekend of october in san isidro, buenos aires, argentina. the event is the largest in south america, with more than 600 vehicles on display.  the show takes place the first week of october at the hipodromo de san isidro gardens, organized by the club de automoviles clasicos (cac), of argentina.  best of show  references  external links official site official facebook  automotive events concours d'elegance auto shows
the washington state cougars women's basketball team represents washington state university in women's basketball. the school competes in the pac-12 conference in division i of the national collegiate athletic association (ncaa). the cougars play at beasley coliseum near the campus in pullman, washington.  season-by-season record the cougars have a 533-794 all-time record as of the 2018-19 season, with a 138-402 record in the pacific 10/12 conference and a 228-488 overall record for conferences.  ncaa tournament results  references  external links
the little match girl (danish: den lille pige med svovlstikkerne) is a 1953 danish short adventure film directed by johan jacobsen. it is based on hans christian andersen's story the little match girl.  cast  liselotte krefeld as the little girl  agnes thorberg wieth as grandmother  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1953 films danish films danish-language films danish short films films based on the little match girl films directed by johan jacobsen danish adventure films danish black-and-white films 1953 adventure films
macacha guemes (1787-1866) was an argentine heroine. a sister of martin miguel de guemes, she, alongside her sister francisca guemes, is considered as a heroine of the argentine war of independence for her participation in the gaucho war, during the war of independence.  references    sosa de newton, lily (1980). diccionario biografico de mujeres argentinas. buenos aires: plus ultra. .  1787 births 1866 deaths argentine rebels 19th-century argentine people people of the argentine war of independence women in 19th-century warfare 19th-century rebels
the 2016-17 season was zob ahan football club's 16th season in the iran pro league, and their 21st consecutive season in the top division of iranian football. they also competed in the hazfi cup and afc champions league, and had their 46nd year in existence as a football club.  players  first team squad as of 15 may 2017.  iran pro league squad as of 19 january 2016  transfers confirmed transfers 2016-17  summer  in:  out:  winter  in:  out:  competitions  overview  iran pro league  standings  results summary  results by round  matches  afc champions league  group c  hazfi cup  matches  round of 32  last 16  quarter-final  semi-final (1/2 final - last 4)  final  statistics  appearances   |}  top scorers includes all competitive matches. the list is sorted by shirt number when total goals are equal.  last updated on 30 may 2016  friendlies and pre-season goals are not recognized as competitive match goals.  disciplinary record includes all competitive matches. players with 1 card or more included only.  last updated on 30 may 2016  goals conceded   updated on 30 may 2016  own goals   updated on 5 january 2016  club  coaching staff  other information  see also   2015-16 persian gulf pro league  2015-16 hazfi cup  2016 afc champions league  notes  references  external links iran premier league statistics persian league  2016-17 iranian football clubs 2016-17 season
s. cataracta could refer to one of the following species: schistura cataracta, a ray-finned fish in the genus schistura scolopendra cataracta, a centipede in the family scolopendridae
cetoconcha elegans is a species of saltwater clams in the genus cetoconcha. it is known from seamounts and knolls.  references  external links     cetoconcha elegans at the world register of marine species (worms)  poromyidae bivalves described in 1991 bivalves of europe marine molluscs of europe
fc araks yerevan (), is a defunct armenian football club from the capital yerevan.  the club was formed during the soviet period as a labor sports union representing the production unit of the state-owned "armelectromachines" plant.  the club won the armenian ssr championship in 4 occasions: 1965, 1968 1969 and 1977.  however, the club was dissolved after the independence of armenia.  references  defunct football clubs in armenia
elizabeth divov (russian: елизавета петровна дивова; 1762-1813), born countess buturlina was a russian empire courtier. she served as lady-in-waiting to empress catherine the great, and was married in 1784 to adrian divov. in 1784 she was suspected to be behind a controversial political satire.  in 1792, divov visited sweden with her husband, and became known for her involvement in political plots during her stay. her house in st. petersburg, called little koblenz, was known as a haven for french emigres.  references   русские портреты xviii-xix столетии. изд. вел. кн. николая михаиловича. спб. 1906. т. ii вып iii. no. 62.  1762 births 1813 deaths ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire
shibu lal (born april 28, 1973) is a bangladeshi tennis player who has played for bangladesh davis cup team. he lost to us player daniel mccall to 7-6, 6-2 in the first qualifier of tiburon open, united states. born and raised in dhaka, he left his country to pursue a professional career in tennis. he now lives in northern ca with his three daughters.  references  bangladeshi male tennis players living people people from novato, california 1973 births
benthofascis conorbioides is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family conorbidae.  these snails are predatory and venomous. they are capable of "stinging" humans, therefore live ones should be handled carefully or not at all.  description the length of an adult shell varies between 38 and 43 mm, its diameter between 15 mm and 17 mm.  distribution this marine species is endemic to australia and occurs off southern queensland at depths between 80 m and 120 m.  references  external links    conorbioides gastropods of australia gastropods described in 2011
jagdgeschwader 133 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938 military units and formations disestablished in the 1940s
lords of black is a spanish heavy metal band formed in madrid in 2014 by guitarist tony hernando and singer ronnie romero.  history  first album: 2014 in 2014, guitarist tony hernando founded lords of black together with vocalist ronnie romero. they were joined by drummer andres cobos (known as andy c), who had previously played with hernando in the band saratoga. their debut, self-titled album, was released in may 2014. it was produced by hernando and roland grapow.  lords of black ii: 2015-16 lords of black received record label attention after ritchie blackmore announced that romero would be fronting the revival of rainbow. in early 2016, the band signed a contract with the italian label frontiers records, with whom they released their next album, lords of black ii. once again, hernando and grapow acted as producers, and mixing and mastering was done at grapow studios in slovakia.  in the fall of 2016, lords of black conducted their merciless over europe tour, with intentions to begin writing and producing a follow-up album afterwards.  icons of the new days, departure of ronnie romero: 2017-19 while continuing to tour in support of their second album and making their first appearances at larger festivals such as wacken and progpower usa, the band was writing and recording demos for the third album. the recordings took over a year to conclude and the album, titled icons of the new days, was released on 11 may 2018, with "icons of the new days" and "world gone mad" as singles. in january 2019, ronnie romero announced his departure from the band.  alchemy of souls, pt. i: 2019-present in february 2019, argentine vocalist diego valdez was announced as romero's replacement. the band started pre-production for a new album and announced a live performance at leyendas del rock festival. during the performance, they were joined onstage by croatian singer dino jelusick. additionally, drummer andy c was replaced by matt de vallejo for the duration of the festival.  in may 2020, lords of black announced the return of ronnie romero and the conclusion of their latest album, alchemy of souls, pt. i. johan nunez, who recorded the drums on the album, was announced as the replacement for andy c.  band members current members  ronnie romero - vocals (2014-2019, 2020-present)  tony hernando - guitar (2014-present)  daniel criado - bass (2017-present)  johan nunez - drums (2020-present
)  past members  diego valdez - vocals (2019)  victor duran - bass (2014-2015)  javier garcia - bass (2016-2017)  andy c - drums (2014-2020)  discography studio albums  lords of black (2014)  ii (2016)  icons of the new days (2018)   alchemy of souls, part 1 (2020)  alchemy of souls, part 2 (2021)  references  external links    lords of black at metallum archives  musical groups established in 2014 spanish hard rock musical groups spanish heavy metal musical groups spanish power metal musical groups frontiers records artists 2014 establishments in spain
bareuther is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  ernst bareuther (1838-1905), bohemian-austrian politician herbert bareuther (1914-1945), german world war ii flying ace  see also  bayreuther (disambiguation)  surnames of german origin
yang yumin (chinese:杨玉敏; born 1 january 1955) was a chinese footballer who played for china pr in the 1980 asian cup. he spent all of his player career in liaoning football team.  playing career yang yumin start his footballer career at the age of 17. he spent all of his player career in liaoning football team. in 1977, he was called up to china national football team, and represented for china in the 1980 asian cup and qualifying for the 1982 fifa world cup. yang retired from football in 1982.  management career yang yumin had ever worked as the coach of liaoning football team third place. from 1998 to 1999, yang worked as the coach of jiangsu football team. in 2009, he worked as caretaker coach of shenyang dongjin f.c.  personal life yang yumin's daughter yang banban is a basketball player.  references  external links team china stats  1955 births living people chinese footballers chinese football managers 1980 afc asian cup players china international footballers footballers from dalian liaoning f.c. players asian games bronze medalists for china asian games medalists in football association football forwards footballers at the 1978 asian games medalists at the 1978 asian games
ngc 1854 (also known as ngc 1855) is a young globular cluster in the northern part of the central bar structure of the large magellanic cloud in the dorado constellation.  at 200x magnification the cluster appears very bright, large and round, with dozens of very faint stars visible. ngc 1858, a nebula/star cluster object,  lies to the south-east.  the cluster was first discovered by scottish astronomer james dunlop who observed it in 1826.  references  external links    globular clusters 1854 dorado (constellation) astronomical objects discovered in 1826 large magellanic cloud
pleuronaia is a genus of freshwater mussels, aquatic bivalve mollusks in the family unionidae, the river mussels. they are native to the united states.  some members of this genus were formerly included under the now-obsolete name lexingtonia.  species  pleuronaia barnesiana  pleuronaia dolabelloides ("slab-sided naiad")  pleuronaia gibberum  references    bivalve genera
the umm al-fahm art gallery is in umm al-fahm, israel. it's the israeli-arab art gallery, run by artist sayid abu shaqra.  history the gallery was founded in 1996 in the heart of umm al-fahm, as the initiative of artist sayid abu shaqra, who to this day serves as the gallery's director and head curator. jewish and arab artists' works can be found at the gallery, as well as works of other arab artists and from the western world. this gallery is said to be the meeting place for israeli and arab artists.  the umm el-fahem museum of contemporary art project owing to the success of the gallery, the gallery's management turned to zaha hadid in order to design a museum in umm al-fahm, though due to several delays hadid dropped out of the project, and was replaced by israeli-arab architect sanaan abd al-qadr. due to several disagreements, his offer was denied, and a contest to find a suitable architect to design the museum was launched. in 2006, during a ceremony held in the tel aviv museum of art, the building of the umm al-fahm museum for contemporary art was declared. the contest was won by architects amnon bar or, lior zionov, and lior vitkin.  cancellation of museum project the project had to be inaugurated in 2013, but it was cancelled due to lack of budget, when sponsors from gulf states found out the israeli government is supporting the creation of the museum. abu shakra had to give up on the plan to build a new museum. he currently tries to receive an official recognition as a museum in the gallery's present 1700 square meter building.  references  external links umm al-fahm art gallery official website  1996 establishments in israel art museums and galleries in israel museums in israel
goh jin wei (; born 30 january 2000) is a malaysian badminton player. she won the girls' singles titles at the 2015, 2018 world junior championships and at the 2018 summer youth olympics. she also won the women's singles title at the 2017 southeast asian games.  early life  goh jin wei was born in bukit mertajam, penang into a malaysian chinese family, to loh bee sim and goh boon huat. she first started playing badminton at the age of six as a hobby. her father noticed her talent and let her train under the guidance of teh peng huat, lee chong wei's former coach. when she was 11, she won the under-12 grand prix finals and the malaysian school sports council representing her primary school. she was drafted into the malaysia national team in 2014.  career  juniors   at the 2015 world junior championships, goh won the girls singles' event by defeating compatriot lee ying ying in the final. in 2017, she earned a bronze medal in the singles event after losing to han yue in the semifinals. goh participated at the youth olympic games in buenos aires where she defeated top seed, phittayaporn chaiwan in the semifinals. in the final, goh defeated wang zhiyi to win malaysia's first gold medal at the youth olympic games. in doing so, goh became the first ever shuttler to win both world junior championships and the youth olympic games title. at the 2018 world junior championships, goh reached the final where she defeated line christophersen to capture her second world junior championship title.  2015-2018  in february 2015, goh became the youngest-ever national winner at the age of 15 after defeating lim yin fun in the final of the kuala lumpur open. at the 2015 southeast asian games, goh won the bronze medal in women's singles event and a silver medal in women's team event. she won her first senior title, the belgian international at the age of 15 by defeating kirsty gilmour in the final. she won her second senior title at the vietnam international.  in april 2016, she won the orleans international. goh was named in the malaysian squad for the 2016 uber cup. she made her super series debut at the 2016 australian open where she defeated michelle li in the first round before losing to eventual champion, saina nehwal in the second round. in her first grand prix gold tournament, goh reached the final of the indonesian masters before losing to top seed, busanan ongbamrungphan. she then lost in the semifinals of the thailand open
to the same opponent. in december 2016, she became national no. 1 shuttler for the first time in her career after surpassing tee jing yi in bwf ranking.  in january 2017, goh competed at the malaysian masters where she lost to lee chia-hsin in the second round after playing with an injury. she made her return at the malaysia open in april and was defeated in the second round by chen yufei. in july 2017, she reached the final of the chinese taipei open where she lost to saena kawakami. at the 2017 sea games in august, goh won all her matches in the women's team event. the team made it to the finals where they lost to thailand, taking home the silver medal. in the women's singles event, goh defeated her compatriot and senior, soniia cheah su ya in the final, becoming the first malaysian to win the women's singles gold medal since wong mew choo in 2003. in september 2017, goh reached the final of the singapore international which she lost to ruselli hartawan.  in march 2018, she competed in her first all england open but lost to aya ohori in the second round. in june 2018, she reached the quarterfinals of the malaysia open before losing to eventual winner, tai tzu-ying. in her world championships debut, she lost to the reigning world champion, nozomi okuhara in the third round. at the korea masters in november, goh lost in the semifinals to li xuerui.  2021-present: retirement and return to badminton  in september 2021, goh announced her retirement from professional badminton in a youtube video, citing health reasons after her colectomy surgery back in 2019. while reiterating that she would not be able to give her full commitment as a player with the national team due to her health issues, goh signed a three-year contract with kuala lumpur racquet club as an independent player on 6 january 2022. she was due to appear in the 2022 syed modi international and 2022 odisha open after having registered for the tournaments, but was asked to withdraw by the badminton association of malaysia (bam). on 21 january 2022, bam issued her a backdated two-year ban from participating in badminton world federation-sanctioned tournaments, starting from when she left the national team in september 2021. the ban was issued to her and lee zii jia after the latter quit the national team on 19 january 2022.  on 27 january 2022, the ban was rescinded after raising furore from international and domestic sportsmen over lee's ban
.  achievements  southeast asian games  women's singles  youth olympic games  girls' singles  world junior championships  girls' singles  bwf grand prix (2 runners-up)  the bwf grand prix had two levels, the grand prix and grand prix gold. it was a series of badminton tournaments sanctioned by the badminton world federation (bwf) and played between 2007 and 2017.  women's singles    bwf grand prix gold tournament  bwf international challenge/series (3 titles, 2 runners-up)  women's singles    bwf international challenge tournament   bwf international series tournament  bwf junior international (2 titles)  girls' singles  mixed doubles    bwf junior international grand prix tournament   bwf junior international challenge tournament   bwf junior international series tournament   bwf junior future series tournament  award   2015  sam-100 plus best young athlete  references  external links     2000 births living people sportspeople from penang malaysian sportspeople of chinese descent malaysian female badminton players badminton players at the 2018 summer youth olympics youth olympic gold medalists for malaysia competitors at the 2015 southeast asian games competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games southeast asian games gold medalists for malaysia southeast asian games silver medalists for malaysia southeast asian games bronze medalists for malaysia southeast asian games medalists in badminton
octavian ursu (born 15 november 1994) is a romanian professional footballer who plays as a forward for ssu politehnica timisoara. in his career, ursu also played for clubs such as universitatea cluj, asu politehnica timisoara or uta arad, among others.  honours  club universitatea cluj  liga iii: 2017-18  uta arad  liga ii: 2019-20  references  external links      1994 births living people people from medias romanian footballers association football forwards liga i players liga ii players fc universitatea cluj players afc unirea slobozia players cs mioveni players asa 2013 targu mures players fc olimpia satu mare players ssu politehnica timisoara players fc uta arad players fc rapid bucuresti players
shahkot assembly constituency (sl. no.: 32) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in  jalandhar district, punjab state, india.  members of legislative assembly  1962: dalip singh, shiromani akali dal  2012: ajit singh kohar, shiromani akali dal  election result  2022      -->  2018  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  jalandhar district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india jalandhar district
anita ghulam ali (1934-2014) was an educational expert in sindh, pakistan. she was a recipient of pride of performance awards (1999) and sitara-e-imtiaz.  early life  anita was born on october 2, 1934, in karachi, pakistan. her father was feroz nana, a judge in the sindh high court. her mother, shereen feroz, was the daughter of mirza nadir baig. anita received her early education in maharashtra, india. after returning to karachi, she graduated from the university of sindh in 1980. in 1983 she received a b.sc. from the women college d.j in karachi.  career anita ghulam ali started her broadcast career with radio pakistan, karachi in the late 1950s as an english language news broadcaster and served in that position for almost 2 decades. professor anita ghulam ali was a popular english news broadcaster in the 1960s.  she started her career as a teacher in microbiology at sindh muslim science college, karachi in 1961. she taught at that college until 1985. she was appointed minister of education, culture, science, technology, youth, and sports. she was an assistant professor at sindh muslim science college in 1987. during that time, she was the leader of the pakistan teachers association and worked at radio pakistan as a newscaster for 20 years.  she wrote many articles relating to the education of women. she wrote books in english about sindhi embroidery and the secrets of the palace.  she was appointed as an education minister in 1996 under the provincial caretaker government.    anita represented pakistan at various international forums of education and development. she was the recipient of sitara-i-imtiaz award. she was managing director of sindh education foundation.  recognition  she was awarded the benazir women excellence award at the 5th international conference on women's leadership held in karachi.  she died of a respiratory illness at karachi's south city hospital on 8 august 2014.  references  1934 births 2014 deaths sindhi people pakistani broadcasters pakistani educators recipients of sitara-i-imtiaz recipients of the pride of performance
tom's baobao is a fast casual restaurant specializing in authentic, traditional, hand-made bao (steamed buns). at the first international location of the china-based restaurant company, in cambridge, massachusetts' harvard square, several varieties of authentic chinese steamed buns are handmade in front of customers.  bao (also called baozi, baobao, or steamed buns) is a delicious street food that first appeared over 1,200 years ago in china. this leavened dough can be filled with anything from pork to curry beef to spicy lotus root. bao grows during the steaming process into a large, fluffy bun that encapsulates its flavorful filling. in modern china, the vast majority of bao is frozen and mass-produced by machines.  history  tom's baobao harvard square is the first international location of the chinese fast-casual bao restaurant, ganqishi, which has more than 200 locations throughout china and has been serving nearly 250,000 bao a day since it was founded in 2009. interested in expanding his passion for quality bao, founder and ceo tom tong fell in love with massachusetts and rhode island while on vacation and knew it was the perfect place to introduce his concept abroad.  a second location opened in providence, ri on october 15, 2016.  restaurant design  tom's baobao is a modern, bright white space with tile floors, hand-painted murals and wood finishings. stools and communal tables for up to 13 guests reflect both the sleek design and dedication to nature. the restaurant's design seeks to bring to life the four senses of bao through large murals depicting the bao-making process cast all over the small space. red flags with chinese characters reading "we enjoy the food we eat and the clothes we wear," and "we are safe, we are content" hang from the side wall as guests enter the restaurant and proceed to the counter to order. behind the counter, a large glass window looks into the kitchen so that guests can watch the baoists at work. the restaurant is located on the ground floor and has a large window that looks directly onto winthrop square so that passersby can take a look inside. the store design also ensures quick service; less than thirty seconds from initial order to fulfilment.  menu   the menu at tom's baobao is small with several different bao flavors that combine historical chinese recipes with modern innovations and local ingredients:   juicy pork: pork, scallion, ginger, shaoxing
wine  curry beef: beef, potatoes, carrots, curry  chicken: chicken, cabbage, fermented bean sauce  bacon cheese: spinach, bacon, cheddar cheese  sweet bean paste: black cowpea, osmanthus flower  sweet potato: sweet potato, orange essence  vegetarian: baby bok choy, shiitake mushroom  chive blossom: dough, chives, sea salt, grapeseed (vegetable) oil  each tom's baobao restaurant also features a signature bao specific to the location. the harvard square menu includes a lobster bao with locally sourced lobster. the menu changes seasonally. drinks served with bao include oolong tea, which comes from wuyi mountain in china where tom oversaw the harvest; fresh brewed new harvest coffee from pawtucket, ri; soy milk made fresh in cambridge by chang shing tofu inc., and seasonal fruit and vegetable juices.  see also    list of chinese restaurants  references  external links     fast casual restaurants chinese restaurants in the united states restaurants established in 2016 companies based in boston restaurant chains in the united states fast-food chains of the united states 2016 establishments in massachusetts
communications in theoretical physics (ctp) is a peer reviewed academic journal published by the chinese physical society along with the institute of theoretical physics of the chinese academy of sciences hosted by iop publishing. ctp reports on new theoretical developments in physics and its crossover with other interdisciplinary fields. the first volume was published in 1982 and it currently has an impact factor of 1.066 (2018). ctp is published monthly in english and it is currently edited by zhu bang-fen of tsinghua university.  external links  communications in theoretical physics iop publishing website  communications in theoretical physics institute of theoretical physics, chinese academy of sciences website  physics journals chemistry journals english-language journals iop publishing academic journals publications established in 1982 chinese physical society academic journals monthly journals
cephalodella elegans is a species of rotifers in the family notommatidae.  references  external links     ploima animals described in 1924
the 2016-17 season will be al-minaa's 41st season in the iraqi premier league, having featured in all 43 editions of the competition except two. al-minaa are participating in the iraqi premier league and the iraq fa cup.  they enter this season having finished in a disappointing sixth place in the league in the 2015-16 season, and will be looking to wrestle back the title they won in the 1977-78 season.  squad  transfers  in  out {| class="wikitable" |- ! date ! pos. ! name ! to ! fee |- | june 2016 | mf |  abdul hadi zaqlam | end of contract | - |- | june 2016 | fw |  ali al-shareef | end of contract | - |- | june 2016 | fw |  gleisson freire | end of contract | - |- | june 2016 | mf |  ali hosni |  caykur rizespor | - |- | june 2016 | fw |  ziyad ahmed |   naft al-wasat | - |- | june 2016 | mf |  ahmed jabbar |   naft al-wasat | - |- | june 2016 | gk |  saqr ajail |   amanat baghdad | - |- | june 2016 | gk |  medhat abdul hussein |   al-bahri | - |- | june 2016 | mf |  ahmad abbas hattab |  naft al-janoob | - |- | june 2016 | mf |  jawad kadhim |  al-shorta | - |- | july 2016 | df |  ali bahjat |   al-quwa al-jawiya | - |- | july 2016 | mf |  faisal jassim |  al-shorta | - |- | july 2016 | df |  omar midani ||  al-wahda | - |- | september 2016 | df |  saad attiya |   zakho | - |- | november 2016 | fw |  david rugamas | released |  - |- | november 2016 | fw |  ricardinho | released |  - |- | december 2016 | df |  ali mohammed alialah | released |  - |- | december 2016 | mf |  mustafa hussein | released |  - |- | december 2016 | mf |  safaa hadi | released | - |- | january 2017 | mf |  ali hosni |  al-arabi |loan
|- | june 2017 | gk |  noor sabri | released |  - |- | august 2017 | fw |  ahmed yasser |   al-masry | end of loan  technical staff  top scorers  last updated: 20 august 2017  clean sheets  last updated: 14 august 2017  penalties  overall statistics  last updated: 20 august 2017  sources  fifa.com   iraqi league 2015/2016  al-minaa sc: transfers and news  al-mina'a sc seasons al mina
sonia gomes (caetanopolis, 1948) is a contemporary afro-caribbean artist who lives and works in sao paulo, brazil. she is known for her mixed media sculptures made of fabric, wires, and other objects that are either found or given to her.  background  sonia gomes was born to a black mother and white father in caetanopolis, a small town considered to be the birthplace of the textile industry in brazil, in 1948. gomes joined the art world relatively late, at around the age of 45.  work  gomes combines secondhand textiles with everyday materials, such as furniture, driftwood, and wire, to create abstract sculptures that reclaim afro-brazilian traditions and feminized crafts from the margins of history. her compositions stem from a spontaneous and casual practice of deconstructing and re-assembling everyday objects; lagrima (tear) (2014), for example, was made with a blue tablecloth that once belonged to her friend's family. through her recycling of used fabric, gomes's work also evinces a principle of thrift that can be read both in terms of the consequence of brazil's rapid and uneven industrial development and the accompanying culture of wasteful consumption and environmental destruction. the artist is represented by blum and poe, mendes wood dm, and pace gallery.  solo exhibitions   when the sun rises in blue, blum & poe, los angeles (2021)  i rise - i'm a black ocean, leaping and wide, museum frieder burda and salon berlin, baden-baden/berlin (2019)  silence of color, mendes wood dm, brussels (2019)  still i rise, masp - museu de arte de sao paulo / casa de vidro, sao paulo (2018)  a vida renasce, sempre, museu de arte contemporanea de niteroi, rio de janeiro (2018)  group exhibitions gwangju biennial, gwangju, korea (2021) liverpool biennial, liverpool, uk (2021) unconscious landscape - works from the ursula hauser collection, hauser & wirth, somerset, uk (2019) experimenting with materiality, levy gorvy, zurich, switzerland (2019) historias afro-atlanticas, masp, sao paulo, brazil (2018) o triangulo atlantico, 11ª bienal de artes visuais do mercosul, porto alegre, brazil (2018) tissage, tressage, fondation villa datris, l'isle-sur-la-sorgue, france (2018
) entangled, turner contemporary, margate, uk (2017) revival, the national museum of women in the arts, washington, usa (2017) 56ª biennale di venezia, venice, italy (2015)  references  1948 births living people 20th-century brazilian women artists 21st-century brazilian women artists 21st-century brazilian artists mixed-media artists brazilian contemporary artists
cherkasy oblast is subdivided into districts (raions) which are further subdivided into amalgamated territorial communities (hromadas).  administrative divisions after 2020  on 18 july 2020, the number of districts was reduced to four. these are:  cherkasy (черкаськии раион), the center is in the city of cherkasy;  uman (уманськии раион), the center is in the city of uman;  zolotonosha (золотоніськии раион), the center is in the city of zolotonosha;   zvenyhorodka (звенигородськии раион), the center is in the town of zvenyhorodka.  administrative divisions until 2020  before july 2020, cherkasy oblast was subdivided into 32 regions: 26 districts (raions) and 6 city municipalities (mis'krada or misto), officially known as territories governed by city councils.  cities under the oblast's jurisdiction:  cherkasy municipality  cities and towns under the city's jurisdiction:  cherkasy (черкаси), the administrative center of the oblast  kaniv (канів)  smila municipality  cities and towns under the city's jurisdiction:  smila (сміла)  uman (умань)  vatutine municipality  cities and towns under the city's jurisdiction:  vatutine (ватутіне)  zolotonosha municipality  cities and towns under the city's jurisdiction:  zolotonosha (золотоноша)  districts (raions):  cherkasy (черкаськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  irdyn (ірдинь)  chornobai (чорнобаівськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  chornobai (чорнобаи)  chyhyryn (чигиринськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  chyhyryn (чигирин)  drabiv  (драбівськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  drabiv (драбів)  horodyshche (городищенськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  horodyshche (городище)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  tsvitk
ove (цвіткове)  vilshana (вільшана)  kamianka  (кам'янськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  kamianka (кам'янка)  kaniv (канівськии раион)  katerynopil  (катеринопільськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  katerynopil (катеринопіль)  yerky (єрки)  khrystynivka (христинівськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  khrystynivka (христинівка)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:   verkhniachka (верхнячка)  korsun-shevchenkivskyi (корсунь-шевченківськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  korsun-shevchenkivskyi (корсунь-шевченківськии)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  stebliv (стеблів)  lysianka (лисянськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  lysianka (лисянка)  mankivka  (маньківськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  buky (буки)  mankivka (маньківка)  monastyryshche  (монастирищенськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  monastyryshche (монастирище)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  tsybuliv (цибулів)  shpola (шполянськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  shpola (шпола)  smila  (смілянськии раион)  talne  (тальнівськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  talne (тальне)  uman (уманськии раион)  urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction:  babanka (бабанка)  zhash
kiv (жашківськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  zhashkiv (жашків)  zolotonosha  (золотоніськии раион)  zvenyhorodka  (звенигородськии раион)  cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction:  zvenyhorodka (звенигородка)  references   cherkasy cherkasy oblast
the swan 38 was designed by olin stephens and first launched in 1974. the first 9 hulls were fitted with in boom roller reefing and later boat with slab reefing with 116 boats built in total. there were two rig plans with one ton and a taller ior mk3 version also produced.  references  external links  nautor swan  designers website  s&s swan owener association  sailing yachts keelboats 1970s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by sparkman and stephens sailboat type designs by olin stephens
marcia hatfield daudistel is a non-fiction writer and editor who focuses on the history and culture of el paso, texas. daudistel has been inducted into the el paso women's hall of fame.  daudistel's anthology, literary el paso (2009) is a large collection of essays, stories, poetry and more from 62 different literary figures from el paso. each writer represented in the book describes el paso and their own personal connections to the city. daudistel shared that it was difficult to limit the number of authors for the anthology because el paso has "an amazing literary heritage."  grace and gumption: the women of el paso, was also edited by daudistel and released in 2011. the book describes the profiles of women who have lived in el paso starting in the 1800s.  references  external links   author talk (video)  interview (audio)  year of birth missing (living people) living people people from el paso, texas 21st-century american women writers 21st-century american biographers
caustic bush could refer to many plant species including:  grevillea dimidiata, a small tree or shrub which is endemic to western australia  grevillea pyramidalis, a tree or shrub which is endemic to western australia
alverstone wildlife park is a 100 hectare nature reserve near hillcrest, kwazulu-natal, south africa. the reserve was created in 1997 by a group of neighbouring landowners.  the wildlife park has a diverse ecosystem, which includes grasslands, a forest, and wetlands.  a number of mammals can be found in the reserve, including duiker, bushbuck, bushpig, civet, genet, mongoose and rock hyrax.  herds of blesbok, blue wildebeest, impala and zebra have been introduced to the reserve.  references   nature reserves in south africa
cancellotti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  francesco cancellotti (born 1963), italian tennis player tommaso cancellotti (born 1992), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
cherne is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   hal cherne (1907-1983), american football player  leo cherne (1912-1999), american economist, public servant, and commentator  see also  herne (surname)
the 2016-17 tcu horned frogs women's basketball team represents texas christian university in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the 2016-17 season was head coach raegan pebley's third season at tcu.  the horned frogs were members of the big 12 conference and played their home games in schollmaier arena. they finished the season 12-18, 4-14 in big 12 play to finish in ninth place. they lost in the first round of the big 12 women's tournament to texas tech.  roster  schedule and results   |- !colspan=9 style="background:#4d1979; color:#ffffff;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#4d1979; color:#ffffff;"| non-conference games  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#4d1979; color:#ffffff;"| conference games  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#4d1979; color:#ffffff;"|  big 12 women's tournament  schedule and results from gofrogs.com  see also   2016-17 tcu horned frogs men's basketball team  references   tcu tcu horned frogs women's basketball seasons
oxogestone phenpropionate (opp; ) (former developmental code name or tentative brand name oxageston), also known as xinogestone, as well as 20β-hydroxy-19-norprogesterone 20β-(3-phenylpropionate), is a progestin related to the 19-norprogesterone derivatives which was developed as an injectable hormonal contraceptive, specifically a progestogen-only injectable contraceptive, in the 1960s and early 1970s but was never marketed. it was studied at a dose of 50 to 75 mg once a month by intramuscular injection but was associated with a high failure rate with this regimen and was not further developed. opp is the 20β-(3-phenylpropionate) ester of oxogestone, which, similarly, was never marketed.  see also  list of progestogen esters  references  abandoned drugs hormonal contraception norpregnanes phenylpropionate esters progestogen esters progestogens
grevillea brachystylis grandis, commonly known as large-flowered short-styled grevillea, is a subspecies of grevillea brachystylis.  description g. brachystylis grandis typically grows to a height of , has non-glaucous branchlets and simple leaves  long and  wide. it produces irregular red inflorescence from august to september.  distribution the shrub is endemic to a small area along the west coast of the south west region of western australia. it grows among medium to high trees and shrubland in loamy or sandy soils. it occupies an area of approximately  in an area in the whicher range south of busselton mainly in areas infested with watsonia meriana var. bulbillifera and juncus microcephalus.  conservation the subspecies is only found in six fragmented locations, road reserves between areas cleared for agriculture. it species is listed as critically endangered in western australia in 2002. in 2005 the estimated population following surveys was 176 plants.  translocation program 1000 seeds were collected from existing populations between 2009 and 2012. a total of 92 seedlings in 2012 and 172 in 2013 were planted at a secure site within a nature reserve close to the existing populations. the translocation worked well with 97 to 99% of the plants surviving after the first two years, 95% of them flowering and 80% bearing fruit.  references  brachystylis eudicots of western australia proteales of australia plant subspecies critically endangered flora of australia taxa named by gregory john keighery
bercellino is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giancarlo bercellino (born 1941), italian footballer silvino bercellino (born 1946), italian footballer, brother of giancarlo  italian-language surnames
zlatoje pavlovic (; born 22 may 1995) is a serbian footballer, and assistant referee.  career  sloga kraljevo born in kraljevo, pavlovic passed youth categories of local club sloga. he joined the first team in 2014. he started 2014-15 season, as a midfielder in the first squad, but later, after some players joined club, pavlovic moved on the bench. he made 10 serbian first league and 1 cup appearance for the season, changing several position on the field. pavlovic also started 2015-16 serbian league west season on the right-back position, but he was replaced in two future matches against zvizd kucevo, and later moved on the bench, noting some other matches until the end of first half-season. after sloga relegated to the morava zone league, pavlovic started 2016-17 season as a team captain. at the beginning of 2017, pavlovic moved decided to join prva petoletka, after which he moved to the club for the rest of a season. in summer same year, he returned to his home club, sloga kraljevo.  career statistics  club  references  external links    1995 births living people sportspeople from kraljevo association football defenders fk sloga kraljevo players serbian first league players serbian footballers
karen koch is a plant biologist in the horticultural science department in the university of florida. she is a professor in the plant molecular and cellular biology (pmcb) program, horticultural sciences department, and genetics institute at university of florida.  research interest  koch's lab is best known for its research on sugar-responsive gene expression and the capacity for this process to alter form and function of plants.  sugar availability provides pivotal cues for adjustment of genes affecting c and n allocation in plants.  of all the nutrients and hormones involved, sucrose remains the "life blood" of plants.  this sugar occupies a truly central position in vascular transport, carbon partitioning within the plant, and as a source of sugar signals for responsive genes.  her group thus focuses on genes that affect sucrose metabolism, its contribution to sugar signaling, and its partitioning to different end products.  particular attention is being directed toward maize kernel (fruit) development, cell-wall composition, and mechanisms of sugar transfer.  single-gene knockout mutants are being used to examine gene function.  current projects are testing hypotheses for carbon-partitioning and gene expression in developing maize ovaries from floral differentiation to kernel harvest, and for involvement of key genes in cell wall biosynthesis at strategic stages of development (e.g. root-hair and pollen-tube elongation, early phases of kernel differentiation, and growth of seedlings).  research and work   genetic and genomic approaches to understanding long-distance transport and carbon partitioning.  nsf-pgrp.  braun et al. (2011-2015).  diverse approaches are testing mechanisms of phloem function and carbon partitioning in maize and arabidopsis.  adapting kernel metabolism to enhance cereal yield under adverse conditions. nifa.  hannah et al.  (2011-2014).  central focus is heat-tolerance of genes for kernel dry weight.  uniformmu: a transposon resource for mutagenesis in maize.  nsf-pgrp.  mccarty and koch. (2007-2011; 2011-2013).  single-gene knock-outs provide an outstanding means of testing gene function, and mutant lines are now available for over a third of maize genes.  publication list  here are the list of publications from koch's lab.  awards  koch is the 2016 recipient of the charles reid barnes award, the american society of plant biologists (aspb)'s oldest award. according to aspb 'karen has excelled in research, in the training
of students of plant biology, and in service to the society. her research on carbohydrate metabolism and sugar signaling is known internationally and her training of plant biology students is legendary.'  her work on carbon metabolism and the effects of sugars on gene expression was one of five 2012 fellows inducted by the aspb organization. koch's  "feast and famine" framework for regulating the expression of genes forms the  basis for understanding the responses of plant organs to sugar signaling to  optimize resource allocation. she served the group as an elected member of its  executive committee and is the first fellow of aspb recipient from florida. she was on the plant physiology editorial board from 1987 to 1993.  references   university of florida faculty american women botanists american botanists year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) living people american women academics 21st-century american women scientists
p.p. chaudhary (born 12 july 1953) is an indian politician. he served as the union minister of state for the ministry of law and justice, ministry of electronics and information technology and the ministry of corporate affairs. currently chaudhary is  chairperson of the standing parliamentary committee on external affairs and also a member of the business advisory committee, consultative committee, ministry of home affairs, govt. of india, general purposes committee, lok sabha and joint committee on the personal data protection bill, 2019. he is a member of the bharatiya janata party (bjp) and won the indian general elections, 2014 from pali lok sabha constituency, with a victory margin of over 4,00,000 votes and again won in 2019 with a margin of 5,00,000 votes.  positions may, 2014	:elected to 16th lok sabha.  1 sep. 2014 - 5 july 2016	:member, standing committee on personnel, public grievances, law and justice. member, committee on subordinate legislation, lok sabha  11 dec. 2014 - 5 july 2016	:chairperson, joint parliamentary committee on offices of profit, lok sabha. member, consultative committee, ministry of finance & corporate affairs, govt. of india  29 jan. 2015 - 5 july 2016	:member, general purposes committee - lok sabha. member, central direct taxes advisory committee, ministry of finance, govt. of india  13 may 2015 - 5 july 2016	:member, joint committee on the right to fair compensation and transparency in land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement (second amendment) bill, 2015  11 sept. 2015 - 5 july 2016	:member, international executive committee, commonwealth parliamentary association, london, uk (union branch - parliament of india)  23 dec. 2015 - 5 july 2016	:member, joint committee on the insolvency and bankruptcy code  25 april 2016 - 5 july 2016	:chairperson, fellowship committee, lok sabha  11 may 2016 - 5 july 2016	:member, joint committee on the enforcement of security interest and recovery of debts laws and miscellaneous provision (amendment) bill, 2016  5 july 2016 - 3 sept. 2017	:union minister of state, ministry of law and justice; and ministry of electronics and information technology  3 sept. 2017 - 25 may 2019	:union minister of state, ministry of law and justice; and ministry of corporate affairs  may, 2019	                :re-elected to 17th lok sabha (2nd term)  20 june 2019 onwards	        :member, business advisory committee
, lok sabha  17 july 2019 onwards	        :member, all india institute of medical sciences (aiims), jodhpur  24 july 2019 onwards	        :member, committee on estimates, lok sabha  13 sept. 2019 onwards	        :chairperson, standing committee on external affairs  31 oct. 2019 onwards	        :member, consultative committee, ministry of home affairs, govt. of india  21 nov. 2019 onwards	        :member, general purposes committee, lok sabha  11 dec. 2019 onwards	        :member, joint committee on the personal data protection bill, 2019  social and cultural activities joined rss "shakha" at the age of eight; worked, along with his wife, to improve & uplift the educational status of children, especially girls, in rural areas. developed hostel facilities in urban areas for students of rural area to facilitate higher education, especially for girls. actively associated with eye camps, rural development programs and sports competitions.  special interests to work for the upliftment of the poor farmers and marginalized sections of the society. actively worked for the cause of farmers in the state of rajasthan. pursued many cases of farmers related to various irrigation projects. promoted organic farming.  favourite pastime and recreation social service, organic farming, reading, listening to music  sports and clubs football, hammer throw and badminton member : lions club, sardar club, jodhpur and indian law institute, constitution club, delhi  other information represented as indian delegate in international parliamentary conference on human rights in the houses of london, u.k. (2-6 feb. 2015)  attended the international executive committee and general assembly meetings, commonwealth parliamentary association, london, u.k. as the representative of the parliament of india (30 sept. 6 oct. 2015) & elected for three years as member of international executive committee, common wealth parliamentary association london, u.k. (union branch - parliament of india)  attended the international executive committee of commonwealth parliamentary association, london, u.k. (represented union branch-parliament of india) 27-29 april 2016. in both the meeting of cpa, effectively put forward the indian view point on the issue of jammu & kashmir  provided insurance cover for 2,00,000 (two lakh) women of pali parliamentary constituency, from own parliamentary salary & income  chaired the meeting with us & dutch lawyers in hague (holland) with a view to finalize the appeal to be filed in the hague court of justice against the huge award rendered against the government of india in devas-antrix
case (october 2016)  represented the government of india at the marrakech law ministers international conference on justice in marrakech, morocco, under the theme "the independence of the judiciary" from 01 - 5 april 2018 as minister of state (law and justice and corporate affairs)  led a delegation to the sco justice ministers' meeting in tashkent in october 2017 as mos (law and justice and corporate affairs)  visited st. vincent and the grenadines and met prime minister of st. vincent and the grenadines, dr. the honourable ralph everard gonsalves, under the "brihad sampark yojana", an initiative by the ministry of external affairs to expand the bilateral relations of india with countries across the world  visited barbados and met prime minister of barbados, h.e freundel stuart as a part of the outreach initiative "brihad sampark yojana" undertaken by the ministry of external affairs in april 2018  area of experience vast experience of the law profession in high courts and supreme court of india. conducted around 11000 (eleven thousands) cases, mostly constitutional litigation, for the last 40 years (since 1978). matters were related to - (1) constitutional law (2) land acquisition (3) farmers grievances (4) labour & service (5) central excise & customs (6)pil - related to restoration of natural water bodies & dams. (7) mines and minerals (8) covenants (9) arbitrations (10) companies law etc.  references  external links  official website official video channel on veblr.com loksabha members bioprofile pp chaudhary speech by in order to increase air travel in western rajasthan at parliament  1953 births bharatiya janata party politicians from rajasthan indian hindus 20th-century indian lawyers indian solicitors living people rajasthani people senior advocates in india narendra modi ministry 16th lok sabha members 17th lok sabha members lok sabha members from rajasthan people from jodhpur people from pali district
sianvar (pronounced: sea-en-var) is an american progressive rock band from sacramento, california, formed in 2013. the group currently consists of lead vocalist donovan melero, guitarists will swan and sergio medina, and drummer joseph arrington. the band is signed to swan's independent record label blue swan records. they released their debut self-titled ep on january 5, 2014 and their debut full-length studio album, stay lost, in august 2016. the band announced an indefinite hiatus on april 8, 2019.  career  2013-17: self-titled ep and stay lost  the band announced their formation on july 23, 2013. the group's first iteration consisted of dance gavin dance guitarist will swan, hail the sun drummer and vocalist donovan melero, stolas guitarist sergio medina, and a lot like birds bassist michael littlefield and drummer joseph arrington. they signed with swan's independent record label blue swan records.  the group released their debut single "sick machine" on november 11, 2013. on january 5, 2014, they released their eponymously titled debut ep through bandcamp. sianvar performed their first concert on january 8, 2014 in san francisco, california. in support of the release, the band toured with other musical groups such as a lot like birds, tilian pearson, strawberry girls, stolas, the venetia fair, my iron lung, eros, idlehands, artifex pereo, and eidola.  michael littlefield departed from the band in february 2015, subsequently being replaced by a lot like birds guitarist michael franzino. sianvar began tracking for their debut full-length studio album in july 2015. on june 26, 2016, the band announced their debut studio album, stay lost, its track listing, and release date. two days later, the group released the lead single "omniphobia", accompanied with its music video, which premiered on alternative press. the band released the single "psychosis succumbing" on july 14. the band embarked on their headlining stay lost tour beginning at the red house in walnut creek, california on august 4, 2016.  sianvar embarked on a second headlining tour in support of stay lost in january 2017 with icarus the owl and frameworks.  2018-present: second studio album and hiatus  sianvar toured as a supporting act on dance gavin dance's headlining 2018 spring tour along with erra and i see stars, from may 26 to june 21, 2018.  on august 11, 2018, it was confirmed that
recording sessions for the band's second full-length studio album had begun at interlace recording studios in portland, oregon, with producer kris crummett.  on september 11, 2018, michael franzino announced his departure from the group, stating that he wanted to focus on his own music career. will swan announced that he would be recording bass guitar for the band's second studio album. on september 27, they revealed that they would be moving forward as a four-piece band.  the group embarked on a headlining tour, performing their debut studio album stay lost in its entirety, with support from ghost atlas and wolf & bear, from january 11 to january 19, 2019. former a lot like birds bass guitarist and vocalist matthew coate served as a touring member pursuing bass guitar on the trek.  on april 8, 2019, the band revealed that they were going on an indefinite hiatus from touring and releasing music. the announcement read, "all sianvar music releases and activities have been postponed indefinitely." it continued, "this isn't a permanent goodbye, though it could be a while before we meet again". during the hiatus, swan joined american post-hardcore band royal coda while donovan melero and sergio medina formed the post-hardcore duo nova charisma and signed to equal vision records.  two unreleased demo recordings from the group's recording sessions for their second studio album were repurposed for dance gavin dance's ninth studio album afterburner, one of which was its lead single "prisoner".  musical style  sianvar's musical style has been praised for its use of progressive rock, post-hardcore, and psychedelic elements. they have often been labelled post-hardcore, math rock, and experimental rock.  members  final line-up  donovan melero - lead vocals (2013-2019)  will swan - lead guitar (2013-2019); bass (2018-2019)  sergio medina - rhythm guitar, backing vocals (2013-2019)  joseph arrington - drums, percussion (2013-2019)  former members  michael littlefield - bass (2013-2015)  michael franzino - bass (2015-2018)  touring members  matthew coate - bass (2019)  timeline  discography  studio albums  stay lost (blue swan, 2016)  extended plays  sianvar ep'' (blue swan, 2014)  singles  "sick machine" (2013)  "omniphobia" (2016)  "psychosis succumbing" (2016)  "
bedroots" (2016)  references  musical groups from sacramento, california american post-hardcore musical groups musical groups established in 2013 2013 establishments in california
blessing liman (born 13 march 1984), is a nigerian military personnel of the nigerian air force best known for being nigeria's first female military pilot.  life liman is a descent of zangon kataf local government area of kaduna state, nigeria. an alumnus of the nigerian college of aviation technology, she enlisted into the nigerian air force in july 2011 and was commissioned on 9 december 2011. on 27 april 2012, she made history by becoming nigeria's first female combat pilot following the badge decoration ceremony of thirty flying officers by chief of air staff, air marshal mohammed dikko umar.  references  1984 births living people people from kaduna state nigerian women aviators nigerian aviators women air force personnel african women in war women in 21st-century warfare nigerian female military personnel nigerian women's history nigerian air force personnel
enos michael house, also known as the michael-sullins house, is a historic home located  in fremont, steuben county, indiana. it was built in 1848, and is a -story, rectangular, five bay, greek revival style frame dwelling.  it sits on a cut stone foundation and has a side gable roof. a rear addition was built about 1920. it features a recently added one-bay, central entrance portico.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1982.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana greek revival houses in indiana houses completed in 1848 buildings and structures in steuben county, indiana national register of historic places in steuben county, indiana
lord george bentinck (1715-1759) was a british army officer and member of parliament (mp).  biography the second son of henry bentinck, 1st duke of portland, he received the appointment of ensign on 3 november 1735, and having been promoted on 12 april 1743 to the command of a company in the 1st foot guards, with the rank of lieutenant-colonel, he served at the battle of dettingen in june that year. he obtained the appointment of aide-de-camp to the king on 12 march 1752, and the colonelcy of the 5th regiment of foot on 29 august 1754. he was afterwards promoted to the rank of major-general, and at the 1754 general election he was elected as the member of parliament for the borough of malmesbury in wiltshire. he died at bath on 2 march 1759.  bentinck was elected at by-election in 1742 as a member of parliament for the borough of droitwich. at the next general election, in 1747, he was elected as an mp for the rotten borough grampound. he held that seat until the 1754 general election, when he was elected for the borough of malmesbury in wiltshire. he held that seat until his death.  in 1753 he married mary davies at keith's chapel, westminster.  references  1715 births 1759 deaths george younger sons of dukes grenadier guards officers royal northumberland fusiliers officers british army personnel of the war of the austrian succession british army generals members of the parliament of great britain for english constituencies british mps 1741-1747 british mps 1747-1754 british mps 1754-1761 members of the parliament of great britain for constituencies in cornwall
hans rohrbach (27 february 1903 - 19 december 1993) was a german mathematician. he worked both as an algebraist and a number theorist and later worked as cryptanalyst at pers z s, the german foreign office cipher bureau, during world war ii. he was latterly known as the person who broke the american diplomatic o-2 cypher, a variant of the m-138-a strip cipher during 1943. rohrbach wrote a report on the breaking of the strip cypher when he was captured by ticom, the allied effort to roundup and seize captured german intelligence people and material.  personal life hans rohrbach was a son of journalist paul rohrbach and his wife clara (nee muller), who were married in berlin in 1897. there was always confusion around rohrbachs' name; one source gives his full name as hans joachim albert rohrbach, while the mathematician bernhard neumann believed this full name to be hans wolfgang rohrbach, and was sure his middle initial was a 'w'.  rohrbach entered the gymnasium (school) at berlin-friedenau in the autumn of 1909 and studied there until autumn 1917. he then entered the fichte gymnasium in berlin-wilmersdorf. after having successfully passed the school leaving exam in 1921, he entered the friedrich-wilhelm university in berlin, where he studied mathematics, physics, and philosophy for two years. in 1923, as a head of the berlin student organization mathematisch-physikalische arbeitsgemeinschaft (mathematics and physics working group), he went with his father to the united states. the visit, which rohrbach called his propaganda visit, was a tour of american universities to raise money for impoverished berlin students. germany's economy, which was undergoing a period of hyperinflation, was making life extremely difficult for students, who had to take employment to supplement their income.  in the autumn of 1924 rohrbach resumed his studies at the university of berlin and studied there until 1929. in the late 1920s he started work on his phd thesis, titled die charaktere der binaren kongruenzgruppen mod p2 (the characters of the binary congruence groups mod p2), advised by issai schur. he submitted it and was awarded his doctorate on 25 july 1932.  while studying at berlin university, rohrbach met fellow student rose gadebusch (born 1905), who studied mathematics starting in 1925. gadebusch took a major role in the mathematisch-physikalische arbeitsgemeinschaft. after graduation she took a position at the women's gymnasium.
rohrbach married her sometime around 1932.  in 1936, rohrbach was appointed senior assistant at the university of gottingen. in 1937, he undertook his habilitation there with a paper titled ein beitrag zur additiven zahlentheorie nebst einer anwendung auf eine gruppentheoretische frage (english: a contribution to additive number theory together with an application on a group theoretical question).  on 1 april 1938 he was appointed as a senior assistant at the mathematical institute of the german university of prague. in 1941 he was promoted to extraordinary professor and in 1942 he became an ordinary professor. he also served as director of the mathematical institute there.  rohrbach was a member of the nazi party and the sturmabteilung (the party's original paramilitary wing, later superseded by the ss), but was considered not fully reliable due to his friendship with jewish colleagues.  after the war ended, rohrbach was not allowed to teach for a number of reasons. however, he held an appointment as visiting professor in the department of mathematics in the faculty of science at the university of mainz, 1946-1951. from 1951 to 1957 he was extraordinary professor in the faculty of science at mainz, and was later dean of the faculty of natural sciences, 1954-1958. he was then associate professor in the department of mathematics between 1957 and 1969. while undertaking all these roles, he was appointed director of the department of mathematics at mainz, a position he held from 1958 until 1970.  between 24 november 1966 and 1967 he was rector of the university of mainz. between july 1967 - 1977, he was a director of advisory center for student life issues at the university of mainz. he was also an editor of crelle's journal, 1952-1977, assisting helmut hasse. he held this chair until he retired as professor emeritus in 1977.  work  hans rohrbachs time was split between work with an academic focus, and work involving the military. during his time of doctorate in the very early 1930s, he published several solutions to mathematical problems that were set by the jahresbericht (annual report) of the german mathematical society. in 1931, he published a solution to problem 66, in 1932 a solution followed to problem 84 and problem 89 was also solved in 1932.  in 1937, rohrbach introduced a mathematical puzzle, which was a variation of james joseph sylvester's stamp puzzle:  i have a large number of stamps to the value of 5d and 17d only. what is the largest denomination which i cannot make up with a combination of these two
different values.  in 1937, he formulated in his paper ein beitrag zur additiven zahlentheorie (a contribution to the additive number theory) a related problem, which he considered much more difficult:  an envelope may carry no more than h stamps, and one has available k integer-valued stamp denominations. given h and k, find the maximal integer n = n(h, k) such that all integer postage values from 1 to n can be made up. in addition, find all sets of k stamp denominations satisfying this condition. the problem statement is usually modified by augmenting the solution sets with a stamp of value zero, and requiring that a letter carry exactly h stamps.  here are some examples from mactutor, which have been copied verbatim to ensure mathematical accuracy:  n(2, 3) = 8 with the unique solution set {0, 1, 3, 4}.  n(2, 6) = 20 with five solution sets {0, 1, 2, 5, 8, 9, 10}, {0, 1, 3, 4, 8, 9, 11}, {0, 1, 3, 4, 9, 11, 16}, {0, 1, 3, 5, 6, 13, 14}, and {0, 1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 10}.  n(3, 4) = 24 with one solution set being {0, 1, 4, 7, 8}.  within the paper, rohrbach find asymptotic bounds for n with h fixed and k large. this is a problem many mathematicians have looked at but have not been solved yet.  it was while rohrbach was at the mathematical institute of the german university of prague, starting in 1933 as a senior assistant.  in 1944, he wrote a report, of which this is an exert:  i am taking the move of the mathematical institute into the recently completed new rooms as an opportunity to give a short report on the development of the institute in the last year. up to the end of 1943 no research work was carried out in the institute. the two established professors had been assigned to war work but, in addition, continued to carry out their teaching duties. the assistant had been drafted into the army, and no additional mathematicians were available. however, since i arrived here, i have made efforts to have the institute itself to be involved in war related research. to achieve this i required more space and more collaborators. once my requests to enlarge
the institute were granted in a satisfactory way by the curator, the work of setting up began a year ago.  the work undertaken by rohrbach was related to the computational problems associated with the manufacture and flight of v-weapons. the research and prototyping experimental work was undertaken at the village of peenemunde.  the scientists detailed in rohrbach report above were dr gerhard gentzen, dr franz krammer and dr paul armsen.  the other major area that hans rohrbach contributed to the german war effort was as working as cryptanalyst (cryptography) in the mathematical and cryptological section of the special section of unit z (the cryptanalysts) in the reich foreign office () (pers z s).  he was awarded the war service cross 2nd class (kvk ii) in september 1944, for his work on the solution of the u.s. diplomatic strip system o-2.  rohrbach had originally broken the cipher in 1943 after working on it for more than a year. the cipher was used by the us state department for diplomatic traffic, and the us navy from 1940 to 1944. rohrbach and his team used hollerith punched card machinery and also built a special decoding machine called automaton to aid cryptanalysis of the cipher. the americans who made up the ticom team that investigated pers z s, ordered rohrbach to write a report on 6 august 1945, in the form of homework to describe the process. the report was formulated as ticom document i-89.  this is the introduction to the report:  in this report we are dealing with a field of applied mathematics which has been foreign to most mathematicians and on which practically nothing has been published up to now. methods and results have generally been left in secrecy, existing largely in the minds of the people involved. for these reasons we must go into the basic concepts and principles of this field rather thoroughly. further, we cannot expect this report, as a first approach, to be exhaustive. the written materials needed for a foundation, including in particular the only publication to my knowledge of the character of a scientific journal (scientific papers of the dahlem special service, published by the foreign office, berlin, 1940-45), either have been destroyed or have been retained by the allies; the workers concerned are known to me only in small part or cannot be contacted. accordingly, i can bring only scattered examples to the best of my memory. they come largely from the work of the foreign office, the department of defense (okw), and the department of the army (okh
). by agreement with those workers that i have been able to contact, i will not give any names - it's a chance selection at best. naturally much more work in this field has been done in germany than i am able to take into consideration here, for the reasons already given. it seems to me at least, as will be brought out sufficiently in the material that follows, that mathematical cryptology is a very attractive field of applied mathematics. with good reason have all larger nations selected mathematicians for special use, particularly for use in cryptanalysis.  here is how hans rohrbach split his work between academia and the military:  i had concluded my activity there [prague] for the winter semester 1944-45 [at the end of february] and was in berlin, where during the war i was busy full time at the foreign office. i looked after the work in prague for only two days in the week during the semester, traveling there at night in a sleeper coach, two night later back in a sleeper coach, thus working four days a week in berlin, two days in prague. during the vacations i was busy only in berlin. i intended to return to prague for the summer semester 1945 [at the end of april]. i had as always left everything personal behind in the institute, in particular books, lecture manuscripts, etc. but at the beginning of april 1945 i was already in the store of the foreign office in thuringia.  missionary concerns  while working at the mathematical institute rohrbach managed to have several mathematicians join his group in prague, to undertake and assist in war work. friedrich bauer wrote about hans rohrbach  i do not know what rohrbach's group in prague calculated. ... in my estimation of rohrbach's character, the activity of the computing group could have been a [facade] for the rescue of human lives. ... i have treasured rohrbach's human traits greatly, even if his missionary concerns got on my nerves  one of the people that rohrbach saved was the mathematician ernst max mohr from execution. on 12 may 1944 mohr was arrested by the gestapo along with his wife, at the beranek hotel in prague. on 24 october 1944, his case was heard before the people's court, the accusation was to listen to enemy foes, to denigrate hitler and for expressing defeatism. he is said to have described the war as already lost, the destruction of the jews as a mistake.  his work was important for the war, especially the luftwaffe. he was nevertheless found guilty and sentenced to death, but intervention by rohrbach and
alexander nikuradse resulted in his death sentence being suspended for six months; he was transferred to the sachsenhausen concentration camp, later on 18 december 1944 to the plotzensee prison where he continued to undertake mathematical calculations for the v-weapon programs. he survived the war.  rohrbach's assistants franz krammer and paul armsen were also rescued by rohrbach. krammer had been rescued in may 1944 in, he wrote,  for me a wonderful action [by rohrbach], from the disintegrating eastern front.  armsen was appointed by rohrbach first as his assistant, later as a special lecturer.  after the war  rohrbach and his wife became missionary christians after the war. rohrbach became president of the studentenmission in deutschland an organization setup to spread christian values in schools and universities. he published a number of books which espoused his christian values. these included:   science, world view, faith (german:naturwissenschaft, weltbild, glaube) (1967)   live with the invisible: invisible powers and the power of jesus (german:mit dem unsichtbaren leben: unsichtbare machte und die macht jesu)  (1976)   invisible powers and the power of jesus: for pastoral care of weary people (german:unsichtbare machte und die macht jesu: zur seelsorge an belasteten menschen)  (1985)  the offensive creed: a natural scientist for the christian creed (german:das anstossige glaubensbekenntnis: ein naturwissenschaftler zum christlichen glaubensbekenntnis) (1987)  the fascination of the supernatural (german:die faszination des ubersinnlichen) (1988)   creation - myth or truth? (german:schopfung - mythos oder wahrheit?) (1990)  miracles: the unusual in the work of god (german:wunder: das ungewohnliche im wirken gottes) (1992)  honours   1974 order of merit, federal cross of merit (german:bundesverdienstkreuz, bundesverdienstkreuz am bande)  1983 order of merit of rhineland-palatinate ()  publications                             paul armsen and hans rohrbach, sequences in permutations, ber. math. meeting tubingen 1946 (1946), pp36-37.    a comment to a work by h hadwiger, mitt. club. switzerland. insurance. math. 48 (1948),
pp43-45.  the number of numbers with predefined checksum, math. requirements. 1 (1948), pp357-364.  paul armsen and hans rohrbach, sequences in permutations, arch. math., oberwolfach 1 (1948), pp106-112.  the axiom system of erhard schmidt for the set of natural numbers, math. requirements. 4 (1951), pp315-321.  hans rohrbach and bodo volkmann, the convergence quantities episodes, math ann. 124 (1952), pp298-302.  hans rohrbach and bodo volkmann, to the theory of asymptotic density, j. reine angew. math. 192 (1953), pp102-112.  mathematical and mechanical methods to encrypt and decrypt, in science and medicine in germany, 1939-1946 vol. 3. applied mathematics, part 1 (verlag chemie, weinheim, 1953), pp233-257.  hans rohrbach and bodo volkmann, generalized asymptotic densities, j. reine angew. math. 194 (1955), pp195-209.  robert e clark and hans rohrbach, to the theory of asymptotic density. ii, j. reine angew. math. 201 (1959), pp113-118.  hans rohrbach and jurgen weiss, the finite case of the bertrandschen postulate, j. reine angew. math. 214/215 (1964), pp432-440.  hans rohrbach, erhard schmidt. a picture of life, jahresber. dtsch. math. ver. 69 (4.1) (1967-68), pp209-224.  alfred brauer and hans rohrbach, some applications of matrix theory to algebraic equations, j. reine angew math. 236 (1969), pp11-25.   alfred brauer and hans rohrbach (eds.), issai schur, collected papers. vols. i, ii, iii (springer-verlag, berlin-heidelberg-new york, 1973).      hans rohrbach, richard brauer to the memory jahresber. dtsch. math. ver. 83 (3) (1981), pp125-134.  hans rohrbach, helmut hasse, and crelle's journal, mitt. math ges. ohim. 11 (1) (1982), pp155-166.  hans rohrbach (ed.), journal for pure and applied mathematics, est. 1826 by august leopold crelle. total register, vol. 1-300th
alphabetical author index. (walter de gruyter, berlin - new york, 1984).    hans rohrbach, alfred brauer to the memory jahresber. dtsch. math. ver.. 90 (3) (1988), pp145-154.  hans rohrbach, helmut hasse and crelle's journal. translated from the 1982 german original by barbel deninger, j. reine angew. math. 500 (1998), pp5-13.  references  1903 births 1993 deaths 20th-century german mathematicians german cryptographers nazi party members recipients of the cross of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany charles university faculty
vinod kumar dahiya (born 7 august 1986), also known as vinod kumar, is an indian-australian greco-roman & freestyle wrestler a competes in the 66 kg category.  life and career dahiya was born on 7 august 1986 in the indian village of khanda, sonipat in haryana. he began wrestling in 1994, and joined chhattarsal stadium, model town (padamshri satpal singh's) coaching akhara in delhi in 1998.  in 2001, while going to the national championship in kerala, dahiya was pushed out of a moving night train by two men, one of whom was the father of a rival wrestler. dahiya was discovered in the morning by rail workers who admitted him to a hospital. the injuries left him bed-ridden for a year, during which his weight dropped to 40 kg. his family members rejected the compensation offered by the perpetrators and launched legal action against them.  in 2009, dahiya finished third at the australia cup and decided to move to australia. he gathered 17 lakh from his relatives and by taking loans, and moved to melbourne in 2010. for few days he done training at rocksbank camblefield, melbourne   and then went to coach leonid babira at sparta wrestling club.due to shortage of money, he worked as a newspaper hawker, bouncer, security guard and courier.  in  2014 he started training under coach konstantin ermakovich at in2fitness national training centre. dahiya acquired australian citizenship in 2015. he represented australia for the first time at the 66 kg greco-roman event of the 2016 oceania wrestling championships in new zealand and won the gold medal. by 2016, he won six national championships in australia. he won the silver medal at 2016 african & oceania wrestling olympic qualification tournament and qualified for the 2016 summer olympics. he thus became the second indian-born australian wrestler to qualify for the olympics. however, in july 2016, he was handed a four-year ban after failing a doping test conducted at the olympic qualification tournament in april, and was subsequently removed from the australian olympic contingent.  references  external links  profile at united world wrestling  1986 births living people australian male sport wrestlers indian male sport wrestlers sport wrestlers from haryana indian emigrants to australia
dhaliwal bet  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of dhaliwal bet. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, dhaliwal bet has a total number of 747 houses and population of 3,370 of which include 1,732 males and 1,638 females.  literacy rate of dhaliwal bet is 73.54%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 312 which is  9.26% of total population of dhaliwal bet, and child sex ratio is approximately  835, lower than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 35.07% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population,  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  notable people  1. late sardar karnail singh dhaliwal, patti ballo ki  2. jaspreet kaur bal  3. karpal singh dhaliwal  4. late sherriff sandeep singh dhaliwal  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
yamal-201 (russian: ) was a geostationary communications satellite operated by gazprom space systems and built by rsc energia. it was, along with yamal-202 the second dual launch of the yamal programme and the second iteration of the usp bus. it was a  satellite with 4,080 watts of power (3.4 kw at end of life) on an unpressurized bus. it had eight spt-70 electric thrusters by okb fakel for station keeping. its payload was 9 c-band and 6 ku-band transponders supplied by space systems/loral.  history  during 1997, even before the launch of their first satellites (yamal-101 and yamal-102), gazprom space systems was planning the second generation. at that time, they planned a 24 satellites of the second generation. this extremely aggressive plan was scaled back by 2001 with a plan to launch four yamal-200 series satellites. the first two, yamal-201 and yamal-202 would be launched by 2001 and the second pair, yamal-203 and yamal-204 by 2004. yamal-201 and yamal-203 would be identical and be positioned at the 90° east orbital position and yamal-202 and yamal-204 would also be twins and be positioned at the 49° east.  launch  yamal-201 was launched, along yamal 202, on 24 november 2003 at 06:22:00 utc from baikonur site 81/23 by a proton-k / blok dm-2m directly to geostationary orbit. the launch and satellite deployment was successful and yamal-201 was commissioned into service. on 5 june 2014, yamal-201 failed and the clients had to be moved to other satellites of the network. the satellite lasted 10 years and 6.5 months, short of the design life of 12 years.  see also    yamal-202 - satellite that was launched together with  yamal - communication satellite family operated by gazprom space systems  gazprom space systems - satellite communication division of the russian oil giant gazprom  usp bus - the satellite bus on which yamal-201 is based  rsc energia - the designer and manufacturer of the yamal-201 satellite  references  external links   gunter space page on the yamal 201/203  yamal-201 satellites using the usp bus spacecraft launched in 2003 2003 in russia spacecraft launched by proton rockets
queensland railways patriotic fund was established in 1914 by the queensland railways department to support railway workers who had enlisted during world war i, as well as their dependents. as part of the fund, a number of fundraising schemes were implemented including charitable subscriptions by employees, public concerts and railway excursions. by april 1918, it was estimated that over 2,350 queensland railway employees had enlisted since the start of the war.  formation  on 19 august 1914, a delegation of employees from the southern division of the queensland railways department attended a meeting at the railway commissioner's office in brisbane. the purpose of the meeting was to establish a queensland railways patriotic fund to raise funds to assist fellow employees who had enlisted, as well as provide support to their dependents. at the meeting it was agreed that subscriptions to the fund by employees would be voluntary.  arthur james crowther, secretary to the railway commissioner was elected chairman of the queensland railway patriotic fund. all monies raised would be paid into the general queensland patriotic fund. crowther also held a position on the general sub-committee no.1 of the queensland patriotic fund, so he could represent the railwaymen serving at the front. it was reported in april 1918 that 2,350 queensland railway employees had enlisted since the start of the great war.  fundraising  along with voluntary subscription by employees, the queensland railways patriotic fund also organised many other fundraising activities during the course of world war i. in september 1914, railway guard robert munro from tooowoomba offered all the proceeds from the sale of his song, british call to arms across the sea, to support the fund. on october 17, 1914, a queensland railways patriotic concert was organised with tickets sold at all brisbane suburban railway stations. the concert was held at the exhibition building in brisbane and featured the musical talents of railway staff, including a choir of 60 men from the ipswich railway workshops. the concert raised £120 for the fund. further queensland railways patriotic concerts were held during world war i.  ten miles of pennies  in february 1918, the queensland railways patriotic fund pushed to increase the amount of monies coming in by introducing the ten miles of pennies scheme with the intent of raising £2,200 by july of that year. in an open letter addressed to all railway employees, published in the march edition of the queensland railway railway express, chairman of the fund, arthur crowther explained the reason behind the ten miles of pennies scheme."the committee of the railway patriotic fund regret to have to admit a serious falling off in the recipts [sic] to the
fund, the amount now received barely reaching £200 per month. the claims on the fund on behalf of the returned soldiers and their dependents, at present, amount to £500 per month. taking the receipts and expenditure into consideration points to the necessity of immediate action being taken to keep the fund solvent."the scheme included appealing for further subscriptions from railway workers as well as other fundraising activities, such as public street collections on the 26 and 27 april and a cheap excursion train journey from brisbane to tweeds heads on 21 april. railway staff and their families volunteered their time in running these events. it was reported that £4,707 was raised during this campaign.  references  attribution  further reading   report of general railway patriotic fund (1917). queensland state archives  report on ten miles of pennies, queensland railways patriotic fund (1918). eight page leaflet in volume 1 of om92-46, hackett's scrapbooks, john oxley library, state library of queensland  queensland in world war i 20th century in queensland
elliott is an unincorporated community in scott township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography  elliott is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
enniscorthy greyhound stadium is a greyhound racing track located on the west side of enniscorthy, county wexford, ireland.  racing takes place every monday and thursday evening and race distances are 350, 525, 550, 575, and 600 yards. the track is described as a wide galloping track with a sharp rise from the last bend to the winning line. the feature competition at the track is the red mills future champion unraced stake.  history although racing officially started on 3 august 1933 there was sporadic racing earlier at this venue. eight businessmen got together and formed the track. the first directors were denis o'brien, james mccrea, william stamp and tim larkin, in addition doctor bowen, p.j.o'l james mccrea, william stamp and tim larkin, in addition doctor bowen, p.j.o'loughlin, r mccrea helped found the track. race nights for many years were on monday and thursday evenings and the racing and betting market remains as one of the strongest despite the remote location.  board membership has been family affair over the years with ties to the original board members such as paul mccrea, mary stamp, harry larkin, billy stamp, barbara teehan and mary nolan, the latter two are grand-daughters of denis o'brien and tim larkin respectively. another relation the late kay prendergast (daughter of o'brien) was a director and ireland's first female timekeeper.  the racing managers over the years have been pat white, peter agnew, sean mccrea, john mccrea and stephen cullen. the main races run at the track have been the grand prize, the leinster puppy cup, wexford leger and more recently the future champion unraced stake. there have been many famous greyhounds to appear here; mile bush pride and palms printer both began their careers at enniscorthy as did the greyhounds with the monalee prefix.  track records  current  former  references  external links irish greyhound board  greyhound racing venues in the republic of ireland
the bugler's grandsons (romanian: nepotii gornistului) is a 1953 romanian drama film directed by dinu negreanu. the film was shot at the buftea studios in bucharest. it was the first in a two-part production portraying ordinary romanian life of recent decades, covering the period between the romanian war of independence and the 1930s. it was followed by the sequel the sun rises in 1954.  cast  marga barbu - simina   - pintea dorobantu  liviu ciulei   constantin codrescu - ilies   - stanca dorobantu  iurie darie - miron  ernest maftei   constantin ramadan - grigore leahu  george vraca - dobre racoviceanu  references  bibliography   liehm, mira & liehm, antonin j. the most important art: eastern european film after 1945. university of california press, 1977.  external links     1953 films 1950s war drama films romanian drama films romanian films romanian-language films films directed by dinu negreanu 1953 drama films romanian black-and-white films
the confederacion nacional de organizaciones populares (cnop, "national confederation of popular organizations") is a political institution of the institutional revolutionary party (pri) in mexico. it was founded in 1943 and has historically served to represent the middle and lower classes within the party organization. although a major sector of the pri, it has been less studied that the worker and peasant sectors.  its secretary general is senator cristina diaz salazar.  history the creation of the cnop in guadalajara, jalisco in february 1943 responded to the increasing middle class in mexico in the early 20th century and the need to adequately represent them within the corporatist structure of the pri, then known as the party of the mexican revolution (prm). it replaced the party's popular sector, which included the middle class and, from 1940, representatives of the military, after the military sector was abolished at the initiative of manuel avila camacho. while it also intended to represent those not included in either of the pri's two other large representative institutions, the confederation of mexican workers (ctm) and  (national rural confederation), it was dominated by the middle class, and seven of its ten branches ultimately represented that sector of society. moreover, its primary function in the prm/pri system was to simultaneously create a mediated venue for political participation while securing middle-class support for pri policies and creating a farm system for new politicians, loyal to the president, outside of the ctm and cnc; this was particularly important during a time when avila camacho needed "a loyal creature of the executive" and an institution to balance the ctm and cnc, both roles the cnop filled. the "backbone" of the cnop was the federation of unions of workers in state service (fstse), a holdover from the government of lazaro cardenas; this organization connected the cnop and the federal government, and given the dominance of bureaucrats in the former, it held considerable sway.  the cnop continued to grow in power and size through the government of miguel aleman valdes, which emphasized urban development and sought to target the country's urban middle class. given the post-1946 focus on stability and government institutions, and thus on the middle class, the cnop continued to become an institution devoted to the development of new political leaders. it also allowed the government to exercise political muscle against the ctm and cnc, particularly in the demands for higher wages that followed the 1948 devaluation of the mexican peso. as its relative influence in the pri structure grew,
so too did the proportion of federal legislators that were members; the middle class represented 43% of deputies in 1943 and 55% in 1967. however, as agitation grew in the pri for change and reform, the cnop's national importance waned.  in 2015, the cnop moved to new headquarters on plaza de la republica, which had previously been the former facilities of the direccion federal de seguridad, which proceso described as "the most sinister building in the country".  references  external links  1943 establishments in mexico institutional revolutionary party
jakub zulczyk (born 12 august 1983 in szczytno) is a polish writer and journalist who writes for elle, machina, przekroj and onet.pl. he lives in warsaw.  life and career he graduated in journalism from the jagiellonian university. he publishes articles in such literary magazines as lampa and machina. he has also worked as a columnist for the dziennik newspaper as well as tygodnik powszechny and wprost.  in 2011, he was a co-host of the redakcja kultury programme broadcast on tvp2 channel. he also worked as a host together with rapper sokoł of instytut prosto programme on roxy radio.  zulczyk and monika powalisz wrote the script to the popular crime tv series belfer.  his first book zrob mi jakas krzywde... was published in 2006. he was nominated to the paszport polityki award in 2014 for slepnac od swiateł ("blinded by the lights") and to the literary award of warmia and masuria in 2017. he is the winner of the 2018 literary award of the capital city of warsaw.  legal case on 23 march 2021, zulczyk was charged under the polish lese-majeste law, article 135 of the penal code, for referring to polish president andrzej duda as a "moron" () in online social media in the context of comments criticising duda's description of the 2020 united states presidential election victory of joe biden. zulczyk risks three years' imprisonment under the law, which the polish constitutional tribunal judged to be constitutionally and internationally valid, arguing that the effective carrying out of the duties of the president requires having authority and being especially respected.  see also  polish literature  bibliography  2006 - zrob mi jakas krzywde... czyli wszystkie gry video sa o miłosci  2008 - radio armageddon  2010 - instytut  2011 - zmorojewo  2011 - swiatynia  2014 - slepnac od swiateł  2017 - wzgorze psow  2019 - czarne słonce  2021 - informacja zwrotna  references  external links     21st-century polish writers polish journalists people from szczytno county 1983 births living people
maud rozita auer, (born 4 august 1952) is a swedish belly dancer, actress and singer. she grew up in gubbangen in stockholm. through friends she came into contact with indian dance and then turkish dance. she started working as a belly dancer at klubb kamelen in gamla stan in stockholm in 1969. besides doing that she also studied acting at calle flygares teaterskola.  as an actress she has participated in several theater plays and has had roles in a number of films and tv-productions. amongst other plays she has participated in povel ramels stage show  "tingel tangel pa tyro between 1989 and 1990. she became a pioneer in sweden as the first professional belly dancer, she has also had classes in the art of oriental dance. she is the lead singer of the band rozita auer band.  in 2016, rozita published her autobiography called i huvudet pa en magdansos.  references  1952 births living people 20th-century swedish actresses swedish women singers actresses from stockholm 21st-century swedish actresses
minerva herrera (february 26, 1929 - july 11, 2016) was a popular cuban folk singer, who performed as part of the duo martin y minerva. she is perhaps best known as the mother of albita, the grammy-winning cuban-american singer, producer and composer. under the name of mima, she appeared on a popular segment of her daughter's show, la descarga con albita.  biography  as a youngster, herrera showed an affinity for decima campesina, a type of cuban folk song. later she would publish four books on the musical genre.  with martin rodriguez she formed the music duo martin y minerva. in 1952, her partner became her second husband. the team rose to prominence on palmas y canas, a cuban television program. the couple had two children together, angel miguel and albita. she also has two children from a previous marriage.  her daughter, albita is a popular recording artist. in 2010, minerva began appearing on her daughter's television show, la descarga con albita, which airs on mega tv. minerva was featured on "mima's counsels," a popular segment of the show.  herrera died of a heart attack in her miami home on monday, july 11, 2016.  references  1929 births 2016 deaths cuban exiles cuban women singers cuban musicians american women singers musicians from miami 21st-century american women
monique conti (born 9 december 1999) is an australian rules footballer and former basketballer. conti currently plays for the richmond football club in the afl women's (aflw), having previously played for the western bulldogs from 2018 to 2019. she also played in the women's national basketball league (wnbl) for the melbourne boomers from 2016 to 2020 and the southside flyers in 2020.  as an australian rules footballer, conti won an afl women's premiership with the bulldogs in 2018, and was adjudged best afield in the grand final. she was also selected in the 2019 afl women's all-australian team and won the western bulldogs best and fairest award in 2019 before moving to richmond, where she won the inaugural two richmond best and fairest awards in her first two seasons at the club and was selected in the 2021 afl women's all-australian team. conti received a nomination for the 2018 afl women's rising star award in round 4 of the 2018 season.  as a basketballer, conti was a member of the australian team that won the gold medal at the 2016 fiba under-17 world championship for women and was named in that year's all-tournament team. she also won the wnbl rookie of the year award in her first wnbl season with the boomers in 2017, before moving to the flyers ahead of 2020, winning a wnbl championship in her only season at the club.  early life conti was born in fitzroy, victoria. she studied at maribyrnong college in her secondary school years, and looked up to other australian dual-sport athletes such as ellyse perry and fellow footballer/basketballer and afl women's player erin phillips.  conti started playing football from the age of ten, playing with boys at the essendon doutta stars football club until the age of 14 and then in the melbourne university under-18 youth girls team until the age of 17, making the vic metro and all-australian teams in all three years playing at that level. in september 2016, conti was one of 15 players from around australia selected in level 2 of the inaugural afl women's academy. conti played for the calder cannons in the tac cup girls in 2017 alongside current afl women's players such as afl women's rising star winners chloe molloy and madison prespakis, and was coached by current player alicia eva. earlier in the year, at a testing day prior to the five-round season, she ranked first among tac cup girls players in both the 20-metre sprint and agility test. conti also played for melbourne university in the
vfl women's (vflw) in 2017 before being drafted.  conti started playing basketball from the age of five, playing with the melbourne tigers for the entirety of her junior basketball years and in the south east australian basketball league (seabl) in 2017 and 2018. prior to the creation of the afl women's, conti had aspirations to play college basketball in the united states from a young age, and received offers from over thirty schools to play there at the age of 16, but instead committed to studying at deakin university, which was aligned with the melbourne boomers, allowing her to continue her studies and to continue playing basketball at national level, along with football. she began studying a business degree there in 2018 while also part of its elite athlete program.  basketball career  national team conti made her junior international debut at the 2016 u17 world championship in spain with the u17 sapphires. conti lead the sapphires to their inaugural title in spain. after snapping team usa's 28-game win streak at u17 level, australia went on to take home gold. alongside two of her teammates, conti was named to the all-tournament team.  wnbl  melbourne boomers conti began her professional career with the melbourne boomers in the 2016-17 season, where she remained through 2019-20 season. prior to the 2019-20 finals, conti sought a release from her contract over conflicts between her basketball and football commitments. the release allowed her to play from the opening round of the aflw season, but saw her give up the final year of her boomers contract.  southside flyers conti joined the southside flyers for the 2020 season, with the condensed fixture in place as a result of the covid-19 pandemic allowing conti to complete the full commitments of both the wnbl and afl women's seasons. conti was a member of the flyers team that won the wnbl championship that season, the flyers' first since changing their name from the dandenong rangers, but did not return for the 2021-22 season after choosing to focus solely on her afl women's career.  afl women's career  western bulldogs (2018-2019) conti was drafted by the  with the club's second selection and fourth overall in the 2017 afl women's draft. she made her debut in the twenty-six point win against  in round 1, 2018 at vu whitten oval. in round 4, conti received a nomination for the 2018 afl women's rising star award after recording 16 disposals in her side's win over , and went on to finish second in the voting for
the award with 39 votes, 11 behind winner chloe molloy. she was also selected in afl.com.aus team of the week in rounds 3 and 5. conti was a member of the western bulldogs team that won the afl women's premiership in 2018, defeating  by six points at ikon park, and won the medal for best-on-ground in the grand final. she was also named in the initial 2018 afl women's all-australian 40-woman squad. the western bulldogs signed conti for the 2019 season during the trade and signing period in may 2018.  conti improved on her debut season in 2019, achieving selection in womens.afls team of the week in round 7 after recording a then-career-high 25 disposals in the bulldogs' loss to carlton at vu whitten oval and finishing equal-fourth in the 2019 afl women's best and fairest count with seven votes. she was also named in the 2019 afl women's all-australian team and won the western bulldogs best and fairest award.  richmond (2020-present) in april 2019, conti was traded to  for the first selection in the 2019 afl women's draft and began playing for the club's vfl women's team the following month. conti went on to win the club's vflw best and fairest award and finish second in voting for the lambert-pearce medal, despite only playing seven games. by december, conti was expected to miss up to the first five games of richmond's inaugural season in the aflw due to the 2020 wnbl finals clashing with the opening rounds of the 2020 afl women's season; however, in january 2020, conti announced that she had requested to be released from her melbourne boomers contract to focus on playing in richmond's inaugural aflw season.  leading into the 2020 season, womens.afl journalist sarah black named conti at no. 13 on her list of the top 30 players in the aflw. she made her richmond debut in the club's inaugural game against carlton at ikon park, and was named among richmond's best players. conti was named among richmond's best players in all six matches, averaging a career-high 19.8 disposals per game, and was selected in womens.afls team of the week in round 4; in the round 4 match, conti recorded five tackles and a career-high 28 disposals in the loss to . she went on to be selected in the initial 40-woman squad for the 2020 afl women's all-australian team. conti was also selected in the afl players association
's inaugural afl women's 22under22 team, having earlier been selected in the retrospective 2017-2019 team, and won the inaugural richmond best and fairest award.  leading into the 2021 season, sarah black again named conti at no. 13 on her annual list of the top 30 players in the aflw. conti was among the club's best players in round 1 and was named richmond's best player in the following four matches. she best afield in the round 4 loss to carlton and richmond's inaugural aflw win against geelong in round 5, and was selected in womens.afls team of the week for those same rounds. conti pulled up sore from the round 5 match, and was a late withdrawal the following week with hamstring soreness; she was among the best afield with 25 disposals and seven tackles upon her return in richmond's round 7 win against . at the conclusion of the season, conti was selected in the 2021 afl women's all-australian team. conti also achieved selection in champion data's 2021 aflw all-star stats team after leading the league for average ground-ball gets in the 2021 season, totalling 10.6 a game, a league record to that point.  conti focused solely on the upcoming afl women's season leading into 2022, completing a full pre-season for the first time after her wnbl commitments prevented her from doing so in previous years. she was named at no. 10 in sarah black's 2022 list of the top 30 players in the aflw, which was conti's first appearance in the top ten. conti was best afield with a career-high 29 disposals and nine clearances in richmond's round 1 win against , with  afl midfielder and brownlow medallist patrick dangerfield tweeting during the match that she could win that season's afl women's best and fairest award playing at that level if richmond won enough games; she also won the maximum ten coaches' votes and was named in womens.afls team of the week. conti was named among richmond's best players in round 2 with 25 disposals and her first goal for richmond in its loss to ; she polled eight coaches' votes, the equal-most for the match and was also selected in womens.afls team of the week for that round. she was named richmond's best player in its loss to fremantle in round 3 and was the only richmond player to poll coaches' votes, with six. despite being heavily tagged, conti was named among richmond's best players in its loss to gold coast in round 4 with a team-
high 21 disposals and game-high ten tackles, and was richmond's best player in its loss to the western bulldogs in round 5, polling five coaches' votes. she was also richmond's best player in its loss to  in round 6 and was best afield with 24 disposals, nine tackles and a goal in richmond's win over  in round 7. conti also received the maximum ten coaches' votes and was selected in womens.afls team of the week for round 7. conti was richmond's best player in its loss to geelong in round 8 and was the only richmond player to poll coaches' votes, with three.  statistics updated to the end of round 8, 2022.  |- style=background:#eaeaea | bgcolor=f0e68c | 2018# ||  || 8 | 8 || 3 || 3 || 71 || 39 || 110 || 23 || 14 || 0.4 || 0.4 || 8.9 || 4.9 || 13.8 || 2.9 || 1.8 || 0 |- | 2019 ||  || 8 | 7 || 1 || 3 || 73 || 53 || 126 || 20 || 31 || 0.1 || 0.4 || 10.4 || 7.6 || 18.0 || 2.9 || 4.4 || 7 |- style=background:#eaeaea | 2020 ||  || 4 | 6 || 0 || 2 || 61 || 58 || 119 || 16 || 29 || 0.0 || 0.3 || 10.2 || 9.7 || 19.8 || 2.7 || 4.8 || 7 |- | 2021 ||  || 4 | 8 || 0 || 2 || 86 || 92 || 178 || 14 || 25 || 0.0 || 0.3 || 10.8 || bgcolor=cae1ff | 11.5† || 22.3 || 1.8 || 3.1 || 12 |- style=background:#eaeaea | 2022 ||  || 4 | 8 || 2 || 3 || 98 || 93 || 191 || 15 || 50 || 0.3 || 0.4 || 12.3 || 11.6 || 23.9 || 1.9 || 6.3 ||  |- class=sortbottom ! colspan=3 | career ! 37 !! 6 !! 13 !! 389 !! 335 !! 724 !! 88 !! 149 !! 0.2 !! 0.4 !! 10.5 !! 9.1 !! 19.6 !! 2.4 !! 4.0 !! 26 |}  honours and achievements team  afl women's premiership player (): 2018  afl women
's minor premiership (): 2018  individual  afl women's grand final best-on-ground: 2018  2× afl women's all-australian team: 2019, 2021  western bulldogs best and fairest: 2019  2× richmond best and fairest: 2020, 2021  afl women's 22under22 team: 2020  afl women's 2017-2019 22under22 team  afl women's rising star nominee: 2018  references  external links         1999 births living people australian rules footballers from victoria (australia) western bulldogs (aflw) players australian women's basketball players melbourne boomers players sportspeople from victoria (australia) guards (basketball) melbourne university football club (vflw) players richmond football club (aflw) players
eliza stewart was a sailing ship built in 1833. she traded with australia, china, and india and was last listed in 1843, having wrecked in early 1844.  history eliza stewart entered the register of shipping in 1833 with miller, master, stewart, owner, and trade london-bombay.   in 1841 a group of passengers who had sailed from london to australia on the ship published a letter in the sydney morning herald thanking captain robert millar for his "polite, kind and gentlemanly conduct" to them on the voyage and noting the "very liberal manner in which we were provided and our comforts attended to whilst on board his ship", and thanking messrs phillips and tiplady as charterers of the ship.  eliza stewart was last listed in lloyd's register in 1843 with mcleod, master, stewart, owner, homeport of glasgow, and trade london-bombay.   and  shared salvage money for eliza stewart and her cargo for assistance they rendered to eliza stewart between 29 january and 25 february 1844.  notes  citations  age of sail merchant ships of england victorian-era merchant ships of the united kingdom 1833 ships maritime incidents in january 1844
association of environmental engineering and science professors (aeesp) is made up of professors in academic programs throughout the world who provide education in the sciences and technologies of environmental protection.  the headquarters are located in washington, dc.  history  aeesp was founded in 1963 as the american association of professors of sanitary engineering (aapse) and later as the association of environmental engineering professors (aeep).  membership  the more than 700 members of aeesp include faculty, students, and affiliates in the fields of environmental engineering and environmental engineering science.  mission  the association assists its members in improving education and research programs, encourages undergraduate and graduate education, and serves the profession by providing information to government agencies and the public.  direct services provided to members include publication of the journal, environmental engineering science, hosting biennial research and education conferences, coordinating recognition of excellence in research, teaching, and service, and providing a forum for the exchange of information relevant to the field including newsletters, online media, workshops, and lectures.  awards  through the aeesp foundation, recognition of members include: doctoral dissertation and ms thesis awards; educator and educational content awards; global engagement, research, and publication awards; and the perry l. mccarty founders award. in collaboration with sister organizations, the aeesp recognizes outstanding students, outstanding teaching, and outstanding integration of research, teaching, and the practice of environmental engineering with the pohland medal.  see also american academy of environmental engineers and scientists american chemical society american institute of chemical engineers american public health association american public works association american society for engineering education american society for microbiology american society of civil engineers american society of mechanical engineers american water works association international water association national society of professional engineers solid waste association of north america water environment federation  references  external links  official website of aeesp  american engineering organizations organizations established in 1963 1963 establishments in the united states engineering societies based in the united states
nandrolone hydrogen succinate (brand name anabolico, menidrabol), or nandrolone hemisuccinate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-(3-carboxy)propionate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester that is or has been marketed in italy.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids estranes nandrolone esters progestogens succinate esters testosterone
albert lisacek (july 13, 1933 - november 20, 2012), also known as "kojak", was a montreal policeman involved in a number of high-profile cases. he was considered by some to be canada's toughest cop.  the son of czechoslovakian immigrants mary and joseph lisacek, he was born in montreal near "the main". after being chased by group of bullies at the age of fifteen, he decided on a career in policing. he first worked as a private detective and joined the surete du quebec in 1956. in 1963, lisacek became a member of the holdup squad. he was known for bringing his thompson submachine gun with him while breaking down doors during raids.  his methods of dealing with criminals sometimes fell outside of the law. in a 2008 interview, lisacek remarked that if he was a policeman now, he would be shown the door on his first day on the job.  french criminal jacques mesrine planned to ambush lisacek at a restaurant where the policeman frequently ate but lisacek changed his routine.  lisacek was on the scene when pierre laporte's body was discovered in october 1970 and later when three of the front de liberation du quebec kidnappers were arrested.  in 1972, lisacek shot at a thief fleeing a robbery in verdun and accidentally castrated him.  he was present at the 1975 raid where richard blass was gunned down by police. after a string of killings, blass was located in a chalet north of montreal. lisacek reportedly allowed blass time to put his pants on. when blass exited the bedroom, police opened fire; the official explanation was that blass had been armed, but in 2010, lisacek told a journalist that blass had only been 'wielding' a sock. following this incident, lisacek was assigned to a desk job. he left the force in 1981.  a character based on lisacek appeared in the 2006 television miniseries about events from the october crisis, october, 1970 .  lisacek married his first wife claudia in 1962; she died in 1999. he later married jacqueline richer.  he died in montreal from cancer at the age of 79.  lisacek claimed "i was good at getting rid of the bad people".  references   1933 births 2012 deaths canadian police officers canadian people of czech descent people from montreal deaths from cancer in quebec
amir obeid, known professionally as amir obe (born 1989), is a sudanese rapper, singer, songwriter, and record producer from detroit, michigan. he started his music career in 2009 as phreshy duzit and signed to atlantic records. he later left the label to reinvent his style and changed his name to amir obe and found his own collective neighborhood phck$. obe rose to fame by releasing the mixtape, detrooklyn in 2014. in 2015, he released the ep, happening in the grey area and then 2016's, won't find love in the hills. on december 1, 2016, amir announced that he had signed a deal with def jam recordings, and that an album is set to release sometime in 2017. his debut single on def jam, "wish you well" was released on march 9, 2017.  life and career  1990-2012: early life and career beginnings  amir obe was born in detroit, then moved to new york city. his mother is polish and a music teacher and his father is sudanese. obe's father listened to michael jackson growing up and was heavily influenced by pharrell williams and kanye  obe played football in the street and rode his bike. during high school, he kept going back and forth from new york city to visit his sister. obe played basketball in high school. he played one and two, point guard and shooting guard. he also played aau, but in high school he was best offensive player in junior year and senior year.  when obe was 16 or 17, he bought a computer mic and made song called, "step your swag up", which was his first. his parents didn't know he made music because he did it privately, but basketball was his main priority at the time. after high school, obe started pursuing a music career and moved back to brooklyn. obe was first known as an artist when he went by the name of phreshy duzit on myspace. he had about 100,000 fans and every week he kept releasing new freestyles and started seeing attention and getting messages from record labels. he eventually got signed to atlantic records. when obe was 18, he made a friendship with partynextdoor on twitter, who at the time went by "jahron b". at that time, he was always songwriting and producing, so he'd always send him beats.  obe released his debut ep, brave new world on april 15, 2011 on atlantic records. the ep was entirely produced by nylz. soon after, obe left the label to
revamp his style and described the record deal as "bullshit". on august 27, 2012, he released his debut mixtape, the new religion on his own independent record label neighborhood phck$ and after platinum records. it has guest appearances from cory gunz, jon connor, and los and includes production from nylz, daniel worthy, rich flyer, and obe himself. he revealed he got signed to after platinum by releasing the mixtape.  2014-present: rise to fame and collaborations  obe changed his name to amir obe in 2014 when he released the mixtape, detrooklyn. the mixtape was released on after platinum records and included production from nylz, vinylz, and daniel worthy. "i started feeling like both these places were the same place, so it was an imaginative project talking about my upbringing and my philosophies as an early teen 'till where i'm at now", says obe. in the fall of 2014, oliver el-khatib (drake's manager and co-founder of ovo sound) spoke to obe and told him drake is a fan of detrooklyn. because of that, obe sent him music and got positive feedback.  in february 2015, obe co-produced, "star67" for drake, which appeared on if you're reading this it's too late. soon after, there was a rumor being passed around that obe signed to ovo sound, but he confirmed it wasn't true. obe opened for partynextdoor on tour and the two collaborated on multiple songs. obe released his second ep, happening in the grey area on december 11, 2015. the album contains guest appearances from partynextdoor and eli sostre and includes production from nylz, the mekanics, daniel worthy, wondagurl, oz and more. on march 11, 2016, obe released his third ep, won't find love in the hills on neighborhood phck$ and empire distribution. it has production from nylz, oz, eli sostre, the mekanics, stwo, and ashton mills. in late march 2016, amir obe was featured on toronto r&b/electro singer gov's single wrong one/reflectin produced by frequent collaborator nylz and was the lead single from gov's nights ep which was premiered via complex magazine.  on december 1, 2016, amir obe announced his signing to def jam records.  in early 2017, amir obe was featured on toronto based artist keffaleng's ep, "not so famous
" on the davinci produced single, "yeah, yeah".  obe's "wish you well" is featured on the soundtrack for madden nfl 18.  discography  extended plays  mixtapes  singles  as lead artist  as featured artist  references  external links      living people african-american male rappers musicians from brooklyn musicians from detroit african-american record producers record producers from new york (state) atlantic records artists 21st-century american rappers 21st-century american male musicians 1989 births 21st-century african-american musicians 20th-century african-american people
arthrochilus latipes, commonly known as robust elbow orchid, is a flowering plant in the orchid family (orchidaceae) and is endemic to the "top end" of the northern territory in australia. each plant has from two to four ground-hugging leaves and between three and fifteen flowers during the wet season and the species often forms spreading colonies on sandstone escarpments. like others in the genus, the flowers are pollinated by a species of thynnid wasp.  description arthrochilus latipes is a terrestrial, perennial, deciduous, sympodial herb with an underground tuber which produces daughter tubers on the end of root-like stolons. there are two to four lance-shaped, ground-hugging, dull green leaves at the base of the plant, each leaf  long and  wide.  the inflorescence is a raceme,  tall with three to about fifteen flowers, each  long with and green with brownish glands on the labellum.  the dorsal sepal curves downwards, is narrow egg-shaped to spoon-shaped, about  long,  wide and is wrapped around one-quarter of the column. the lateral sepals and petals are turned back towards the ovary, the sepals about  and the petals about the same length but narrower. the labellum is about  but wider at the base, greenish with a dark purple blotch at its base. the callus resembles a flightless female thynnid wasp and is covered with short, shiny, club-shaped, yellowish brown to brown structures called "calli". the tip of the callus is bulb-shaped and covered with shiny black glands. the column is shaped like a semi-circle, about  long with its inner surface hairy. one pair of column wings are triangular and point forwards, while the other pair on the side of the column are erect and have a hooked summit. flowering occurs from october to january and is followed by a dehiscent, oval-shaped capsule about  long.  taxonomy and naming arthrochilus latipes was first formally described in 1991 by david jones and the description was published in australian orchid research from a specimen collected in radon gorge in kakadu national park. the specific epithet (latipes) is derived from the latin words latus meaning "broad" and pes meaning "foot" referring to the broad base of the labellum of this orchid species.  distribution and habitat robust elbow orchid is found in the top end of the northern territory, east of darwin, growing on rocky outcrops and
sandstone escarpments, especially in the kakadu and litchfield national parks.  ecology as with other arthrochilus orchids, robust elbow orchid is pollinated by males thynnid wasps of the genus arthrothynnus although the species involved is not known. it also reproduces asexually by producing new tubers.  references   latipes plants described in 1991 orchids of the northern territory
ao vivo (live in english) is the second album of banda calypso. it was recorded live on october 18, 2000 in the lamb's exhibition park in recife, and being released in february 2001. on this album are hits from his first album, like dancando calypso, amor nas estrelas, disse adeus (which was the first song of the disclosed band in town ), among others. this album marks the exit of the band belem to brazilian northeast. the album sold over 1.2 million copies and established the band on the national scene.  content  in this disc the band out of rhythm calipso stronger in their previous songs and in his new rhythms repertoire as cumbia, lambada, carimbo that are present the new songs brought to disk as cumbia do amor, dudu, odalisca, lambada complicada (music where there is only instrumental sound, played by chimbinha), among others, plus a bonus track in the studio, como uma virgem.  relaunching and differences  the disc was released without edits the tracks loirinha and the two potpourri of carimbo 1 and 2, both songs sung by dinho. the singer acted on stage in the interval joelma, when itself had finished its block on the show and was going to change costume, so continuing the show. the album was well received by the public even without mass release had great bandage.  track listing 1st edition  2nd edition  2001 live albums portuguese-language live albums banda calypso albums
louise levesque, nee cavelier, (23 november 1703, rouen - 18 may 1745, paris) was an 18th-century french femme de lettres.  the daughter of a prosecutor at the parlement de normandie, louise cavelier received a good education. at age 20, she married levesque, a gendarme of the king whom she followed to paris. introduced to distinguished writers, these men of letters, of which she made her favorite company and who appreciated the scope of her mind, induced her to write. she therefore devoted her leisure reading and soon indulged herself to poetry. she tried her hand to most varied genres.  works  1731: lettres et chansons de cephise et d'uranie, paris, in-8° ; 1733: celenie, histoire allegorique, paris, 4 part. in-12 ; 1736: le minet, piece comique et facetieuse, paris, in-12 ; 1736: lelia, ou histoire de carthage, amsterdam, in-12 ; 1736: judith, five-act opera, paris, non performed because no composer accepted to write the music.  remarques critiques sur l'histoire de don quichotte ;  l'augustin, piece grave et plusieurs pieces de vers dans les amusements du cœur et de l'esprit ; 1736-1741: le siecle, ou les memoires du comte de solinville, moral novel, la haye, in-12 ; 1738: sancho panca, gouverneur, poeme burlesque, amsterdam, in-8° ; 1740: l'auteur fortune, comedy, paris ; 1744: le prince des aigues-marines. le prince invisible, contes, paris, in-12 ;  sources   gabriel lhery, « notice sur louise cavelier levesque », poetes normands, ed. louis-henri baratte, paris, amedee bedelet, martinon, dutertre et pilout, 1846.  pierre larousse, grand dictionnaire universel du xixe, vol. 10, paris, administration du grand dictionnaire universel, (p. 445).  levesque (louise cavelier, dame), in biographie universelle, ancienne et moderne... , vol. 24, paris, 1819; copied in theodore-eloi lebreton's biographie normande, vol. 12, rouen, 1858, and biographie rouennaise, rouen, 1865.  external links   louise levesque on data.bnf.fr  18th-century
french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french poets 18th-century french male writers french women poets writers from normandy french women dramatists and playwrights french opera librettists people from rouen 1703 births 1743 deaths 18th-century women writers
scandinavian traveler is the inflight magazine of scandinavian airlines (sas).  history and profile scandinavian traveler was established as a successor to scanorama, former inflight magazine of sas. the magazine was first published in november 2014. it is published on a monthly basis  and covers lifestyle- and travel-related articles. the printed magazine is published in english, and online versions of the magazine are published in norwegian, swedish, danish and english.  the second issue of the magazine, published in december 2014, was suspended by sas when it led to criticism of norway's progress party due to the article by swedish journalist per svensson. the article was concerned with the recent increase of right-wing extremist parties in scandinavian countries.  scandinavian traveler has won numerous awards, for example, the swedish content awards for its cover design of the issue hit men in 2016. the magazine has 1.4 million readers monthly, and since the launch the online versions has had 1.3 million visitors.  references  external links  official website  2014 establishments in sweden english-language magazines inflight magazines lifestyle magazines magazines established in 2014 magazines published in stockholm monthly magazines published in sweden scandinavian airlines tourism magazines
hygrocybe ingrata, commonly called dingy waxcap, is a mushroom of the waxcap genus hygrocybe. found in europe, it was described as new to science in 1945.  see also list of hygrocybe species list of fungi by conservation status  references  fungi of europe ingrata fungi described in 1945
tagar or taggar is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 9 km from nurmahal, 21 km from phillaur, 29.9 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 142 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  as of the 2011 census of india, the village has a total number of 180 houses and population of 858 of which include 454 are males while 404 are females. literacy rate of the village is 81.81%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 83 which is 9.67% of total population of the village, and child sex ratio is approximately 1128 higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule castes, which constitute 47.44% of the total population in the village. the town does not have any people from the schedule tribes.  as per census 2011, 321 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 306 males and 15 females. according to census survey report 2011, 99.07% workers describe their work as main work and 0.93% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 21.2 km away from the village. the village is 52 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 122 km away in amritsar.  see also  list of villages in india  references   villages in jalandhar district
the military police brigade of rio grande do sul () (bmrs) like other military police in brazil is a reserve and ancillary force of the brazilian army, and part of the system of public security and brazilian social protection. its members are called "state military" person.  the primary mission of bmrs is ostensibly preventive policing for the maintenance of public order in the state of rio grande do sul.  under the united nations, in cooperation with the brazilian army, the military police of rio grande do sul has served in guinea-bissau and haiti.  see also   military police of brazil brazilian federal police national force of public safety federal highway policed brazilian civil police  gendarmerie  references  external links    official website of military police of rio grande do sul state (in portuguese)  rio grande do sul rio grande do sul
when the meteor shot across the sky is a 2016 chinese romantic drama film directed by song qi and starring xu nuo, sun lihua, liang yu and yang xiaorong. it was released in china by beijing jinyi qiankun entertainment on june 17, 2016.  plot  cast xu nuo sun lihua liang yu yang xiaorong  reception the film grossed  in china.  references  chinese films chinese romantic drama films 2016 romantic drama films
william jordan was a college football player and coach for the georgia tech yellow jackets. a prominent end, he was selected all-sec in 1937. he was a key feature in the defeat of vanderbilt. jordan was selected for the all-alexander era team, and the tech athletics hall of fame. he later coached the ends for tech.  references  georgia tech yellow jackets football players american football ends date of birth missing date of death missing coaches of american football
the 2017 scotties tournament of hearts was held from february 16 to 26 at the meridian centre in st. catharines, ontario. the rachel homan rink, representing ontario, won their third national title; with homan becoming the youngest skip, man or woman, to ever win three national championships. her team represented canada at the 2017 world women's curling championship in beijing from march 18 to 26.  teams the 2017 scotties was notable for the presence of many veteran skips from previous canadian women's championship tournaments. shannon kleibrink made her 5th scotties appearance after defeating the 2-time scotties silver medalist valerie sweeting in the alberta final; however, issues with back pain limited her performance. marla mallett of british columbia and stacie curtis of newfoundland and labrador made their 4th scotties appearances, as well as mary mattatall who was in her 5th as team nova scotia after upsetting last year's nova scotia champion jill brothers. pei's robyn macphee made her 8th scotties appearance, eve belisle of quebec made her 3rd, and kerry galusha of the northwest territories made her 14th scotties appearance. geneva chislett returned again for team nunavut, as did sarah koltun for the yukon. the only two teams to make their scotties debuts were penny barker of saskatchewan and melissa adams of new brunswick. notably absent was the 5-time scotties champion and 12-time manitoba scotties champion, jennifer jones, who was defeated in the manitoba scotties semifinal by darcy robertson, who lost to michelle englot (9-time saskatchewan scotties champion) in the final. the headline teams for this year's scotties were last year's silver medalist krista mccarville who defeated tracy fleury in northern ontario for the second year in a row, the 2-time scotties champion rachel homan who won the southern ontario final against jacqueline harrison, and the defending champions chelsea carey of team canada.  the teams are listed as follows:  ctrs ranking  pre-qualifying tournament  standings  results all draw times are listed in eastern standard time (utc−5).  draw 1 thursday, february 16, 6:30 pm  draw 2  friday, february 17, 8:00 am  draw 3  friday, february 17, 4:00 pm  pre-qualifying final saturday, february 18, 2:30 pm  round robin standings final round robin standings  round robin results all draw times are listed in eastern standard time (utc−5).
draw 1 saturday, february 18, 2:30 pm  draw 2 saturday, february 18, 7:30 pm  draw 3 sunday, february 19, 9:30 am  draw 4 sunday, february 19, 2:30 pm  draw 5 sunday, february 19, 7:30 pm  draw 6 monday, february 20, 2:30 pm  draw 7 monday, february 20, 7:30 pm  draw 8 tuesday, february 21, 9:30 am  draw 9 tuesday, february 21, 2:30 pm  draw 10 tuesday, february 21, 7:30 pm  draw 11 wednesday, february 22, 9:30 am  draw 12 wednesday, february 22, 2:30 pm  draw 13 wednesday, february 22, 7:30 pm  draw 14 thursday, february 23, 9:30 am  draw 15 thursday, february 23, 2:30 pm  draw 16 thursday, february 23, 7:30 pm  draw 17 friday, february 24, 9:30 am  playoffs  1 vs. 2 friday, february 24, 7:30 pm  3 vs. 4 saturday, february 25, 2:30 pm  semifinal saturday, february 25, 7:30 pm  bronze medal game sunday, february 26, 2:30 pm  final sunday, february 26, 7:30 pm  statistics round robin only  awards the awards and all-star teams are as follows:  all-star teams first team skip:  rachel homan, ontario third:  emma miskew, ontario second:  joanne courtney, ontario lead:  blaine de jager, british columbia  second team skip:  chelsea carey, team canada third:  shannon aleksic, british columbia second:  sarah wilkes, alberta lead:  lisa weagle, ontario  marj mitchell sportsmanship award  kerry galusha, northwest territories  joan mead builder award  wendy morgan, who is both program manager and team leader of the canadian wheelchair curling program, helping the national team win three paralympic gold medals.  notes  references  external links    2017 in canadian curling scotties tournament of hearts sport in st. catharines curling in ontario 2017 in ontario february 2017 sports events in canada 2017 in women's curling
paige mycoskie (born february 26, 1980) is an american artist, fashion designer, and businesswoman, best known as the founder and owner of the 1970s-inspired clothing company, aviator nation. she is the sister of blake mycoskie, founder of toms shoes. in 2013, mycoskie was named gq's menswear designer of the year and in 2007 was named one of la business journal's "top bosses under 30".  early life and education mycoskie was born in arlington, texas to pam mycoskie, an author and mike mycoskie, an orthopedic surgeon. she has two siblings: younger brother tyler mycoskie and older brother blake mycoskie, founder of toms shoes. she attended arlington martin high school where she was recognized as a state volleyball champion. excelling in sports, she was also on the arizona state university water ski team while attending asu's walter cronkite school of journalism. an avid athlete, she still enjoys surfing; scuba diving; water skiing; and snowboarding.  mycoskie spent her teenage years in arlington on the hunt for 70s vintage tees and hoodies and attending concerts at starplex, the nearby amphitheatre. she particularly is inspired by the history and the phenomena created by music and art festivals. mycoskie cites woodstock as a major influence in both her work and her personal life as the festival best encapsulates music's power of connectivity, its ability to reveal our humanity, creativity, and personal expression.  the amazing race  mycoskie and her brother blake auditioned for cbs' survivor in 2001, independently sending in their applications. they both made it to final interviews. realizing they were siblings, executives at cbs offered to cast both of them for season two of the amazing race. they agreed to that opportunity preferring to compete as a team. they finished in third place, missing the million dollar prize by four minutes.  career  in 2001 mycoskie moved to southern california for her first internship at shape magazine. she soon shifted focus to freelance photography, video, graphic design, and branding. she steadily developed successful campaigns in branding and commercials, and created the toms logo for her brother's company toms shoes. she became a buyer's assistant at zj boarding house in venice, ca.  discovering that vintage clothing was harder to find, mycoskie decided to create her own clothes, sewing, dying, and designing herself. debuting with a white hoodie with rainbow stripes in the hood, known as the brand's "sign
ature hoodie", aviator nation was in business. the california surf culture is evident in all her pieces designing clothing, accessories, and surfboards.  aviator nation  mycoskie established aviator nation in venice, ca in 2006. gravitating towards clothing that suit her active lifestyle, aviator nation is a complete contemporary casual wear lifestyle brand, selling t-shirts, hoodies, sweatpants, tanks, outerwear, and hats to name a few. mycoskie remains true to her inspired era, studying vintage fabrics, the process of fiber weaving, inks, and dye treatments popular in the 70s. production of garments employ hand stitching and hand drawn graphics, ensuring originality, a vintage essence, and a worn-in feel.  aviator nation has a main focus in connecting fashion with music festivals, raising funds for philanthropies, and generating a greater awareness of our collective consciousness. the brand works with global citizen festival by creating festival merchandise with proceeds aiding in the festival's ongoing campaign to end poverty. the brand also has partnerships with austin city limits music festival; lollapalooza music festival; and with john mayer's previous concert tours.  personal life  mycoskie is an avid surfer/musician and loves the hawaiian islands.  passions for surfing, music, and her southern california lifestyle are all very present in her signature designs. music fuels much of her artistry, noting fleetwood mac, the beach boys, and the eagles as sound favorites. aviator nation's prints include drawings from mycoskie's earliest sketches, and she still hand draws some of the icons found on her clothing from the signature lightning bolts to psychedelic maidens. the use of rainbows and bright colors found in aviator nation clothing that has now become the brand's niche, comes from her mother pam's preference of decorating and dressing mycoskie in bold colors and rainbows prints.  mycoskie has done projects and events for a variety of non-profits including charity water; surf aid; heal the bay; surfer's healing; the flatwater foundation; and global citizen.  she resides in malibu, california.  references   1980 births living people the amazing race contestants american artists american fashion businesspeople american fashion designers arizona state university alumni
towcestrians sports club (towcestrians) is a british sports club based in towcester, northamptonshire. it was founded in 1933 as a rugby union club, and subsequently extended its scope to cricket, hockey, tennis, and softball.  history  old towcestrians rugby club was founded in 1933 by "old boys" of towcester grammar school (now sponne school technology college). in the following summer old towcestrians cricket club was formed and included many members from the rugby club in the market town of towcester.  the two clubs operated independently until the mid-1960s with rugby being played in the centre of towcester whilst cricket used the school pitch, pavilion and canteen for teas. in 1967 negotiations were begun with hesketh estates regarding the availability of land and the rugby and cricket committees began work on the constitution for a combined 'open' club.  in february 1968 the joint committees agreed a 30-year lease with hesketh estates for 9 acres of land ground off the greens norton road. in march of the same year a special meeting approved the amalgamation of the two clubs into towcestrians rugby and cricket club under the chairmanship of colin waklelin. although old towcestrians tennis club originally started in 1925 they joined the new club later in the summer of 1968.  in august 1969 planning approval was granted for the development of the new facilities and construction work begun on the club house and ground. one year later, in august 1970, the new ground was opened.  the hockey club joined in 1982 and played on a grass pitch till new hockey rules forced them to play on artificial pitches in northampton.  towcestrians softball started in 2014 as towcester tigers playing at towcestrians.  sports  rugby  senior rugby towcestrians senior rugby consists of towcestrians 1st xv, 2nds and 3rds with a mini and junior section. towcestrians 1st xv saw promoted in 2016 and will start their 2016-2017 season in national 3 midlands. 2016 also saw towcestrians 1st xv win the lewis shield on 19 april 2016  with a 19 - 34 comprehensive win over bletchley rfc at franklins gardens northampton.   ladies rugby  towcester roses are one of the newest additions to the club's teams; ladies, young and old, from the surrounding area play in the nc3 south midlands league.  mini and juniors rugby towcestrians mini & junior section caters for young
players from the ages of 6 up to 17, organised into year groups with some year groups having more than one team. coaching sessions are held on sunday mornings (10am - 12 noon), games/matches are scheduled throughout the year according to the structured season.  tennis towcestrians tennis have three flood lit all weather tennis courts offering playing facilities all year round. activities include 5 teams playing in local leagues, social play, junior coaching and summer camps.  cricket towcestrians cricket caters for senior and junior cricket with the senior xi winning promotion to sncl division 2 in 2015 with a game in hand. cricket is played at towcestrians and winter nets at sponne school with notable players such as graeme swann.  hockey towcestrians hockey currently have 2 men, 5 lady, juniors and a mixed team.  softball towcester tigers backed up by gb player alex reynolds he has also been selected by baseball/softball uk for the youth sports trust national talent camp for coaching/umpire. after her first season laura simpson has tried for softball academy and has been accepted into high performance academy, and youth sports trust national talent camp as a softball player.  she has also been asked to represent gb in the netherlands in january 2016 at an indoor softball tournament and selected as eligible for trials for the gb women's team to play at the world championships in canada in july.  references  rugby clubs established in 1933 rugby union in northamptonshire 1933 establishments in england
masashi arikura (有倉 雅史, born june 12, 1967) is a japanese former professional baseball pitcher. he played for the nippon-ham fighters from 1990 to 1994, the fukuoka daiei hawks in 1996 and 1997, and the hanshin tigers in 1998.  references  1967 births japanese baseball players living people nippon professional baseball pitchers nippon ham fighters players fukuoka daiei hawks players hanshin tigers players
the 1986 tour de france was the 73rd edition of tour de france, one of cycling's grand tours. the tour began in boulogne-billancourt with a prologue individual time trial on 4 july and stage 11 occurred on 14 july with a flat stage to bordeaux. the race finished on the champs-elysees in paris on 27 july.  prologue 4 july 1986 - boulogne-billancourt,  (individual time trial)  stage 1 5 july 1986 - nanterre to sceaux,  stage 2 5 july 1986 - meudon to saint-quentin-en-yvelines,  (team time trial)  stage 3 6 july 1986 - levallois-perret to lievin,  stage 4 7 july 1986 - lievin to evreux,  stage 5 8 july 1986 - evreux to villers-sur-mer,  stage 6 9 july 1986 - villers-sur-mer to cherbourg,  stage 7 10 july 1986 - cherbourg to saint-hilaire-du-harcouet,  stage 8 11 july 1986 - saint-hilaire-du-harcouet to nantes,  stage 9 12 july 1986 - nantes to nantes,  (individual time trial)  stage 10 13 july 1986 - nantes to futuroscope,  stage 11 14 july 1986 - poitiers to bordeaux,  references  1986 tour de france tour de france stages
lisle community unit school district 202 (lisle cusd 202) is a school district headquartered in lisle, illinois.  schools  lisle high school  lisle junior high school  lisle elementary school  references  external links  lisle community unit school district 202 official website  lisle junior high school website   lisle high school website   lisle, illinois school districts in dupage county, illinois
mount isa mine early infrastructure is a heritage-listed group of mining infrastructure on the mount isa mine lease, mount isa (locality), city of mount isa, queensland, australia. they comprise the lawlor shaft & winding plant, the urquhart shaft and headframe, the mount isa mine experimental dam, and the mount isa mine power station. they were built from 1924 to . they were added to the queensland heritage register on 25 february 2005.  history  john campbell miles discovered the ores of mount isa as lead outcrops early in 1923. such a late find on a mineral field closely prospected for nearly sixty years was probably due to the fact that most queensland prospectors were looking for copper or gold and lead mining was an alien tradition. however, while the discovery was first acknowledged in 1923, it is not improbable that the mount isa deposits were long known and ignored.  by the end of 1923, 118 leases had been pegged on the mount isa field and of these william henry corbould, formerly of the mount elliott company at selwyn, acquired 51 leases. in january 1924, corbould's mount isa mining company was registered in new south wales. soon after two other companies were floated - mount isa silver-lead proprietary and mount isa south, but by december 1925 both had been bought by mount isa mines in a coup unprecedented in australian mining - a single company held virtually the entire mineralised area of what promised to be a major field.  support for the new mining venture came from the queensland labor government which gave the government geologist, ec saint-smith, permission to act as general manager at mount isa for six months to august 1924, and in september the queensland geological survey undertook australia's first aerial photographic survey for geological purposes over six square miles at mount isa. in october 1925 the queensland legislative assembly passed the duchess to mount isa railway act.  during 1924 the mount isa mines sank thirty-three shafts and realised that enormous capital would be required. william corbould visited london regularly between 1924 and 1927 trying to raise capital. in june 1927 the russo-asiatic consolidated company chaired by leslie urquhart, took control of operation and development of mount isa. corbould resigned but retained a non-voting seat as honorary advisory director in london.  on 7 june 1926 the company announced a major reconstruction scheme. the scheme, if successful would provide russo-asiatic with a working capital of  for its activities outside russia. the announcement of the "no capital" restructuring arrangements for mount isa saw an increase in the value
of russo asiatic and a scramble to purchase mount isa shares. the scheme commanded considerable attention in the london press with the financial times remarking that the "no capital reorganisation" scheme was proving successful because it appeared to encourage the queensland government to give its assurance that the government "was anxious and willing to assist the enterprise."  the resources of russo-asiatic, acquired through the restructuring assisted mount isa's development. the new york firm of hh knox and jh allen produced plans for exploration and development of the black star lode and devised a treatment process. in january 1928 urquhart visited mount isa to inspect all-embracing plans for a major dam and pipeline, an employee housing program, and a development schedule for mining, milling and treatment. knox arrived at mount isa in april to design the treatment plan and was followed by fellow american engineers, ca mitke and jm callow.  lawlor shaft and winding plant (1920s)  robert lawlor held the  crystal lease at top camp on the new mount isa field when the government geologist, ec saint-smith, inspected the area in september 1923. this lease was consolidated into mount isa mines holdings by the end of 1924 but lawlor's shaft remained as the major access point to ores in the rio grande lode during the exploration and ore proving phase (1925-9). the headframe and ancillary buildings were featured in a photograph in the queensland government mining journal, 15 august 1929.  in 1930 the rio grande mine was described as being served by the three compartment vertical lawlor shaft, from which, at a depth of , a crosscut in the hanging wall cuts through the lode of sulphide ore. diamond drilling had already proved persistence of the ore to a depth of .  it is not known when the lawlor shaft stopped operating but the king's cross area of the settlement developed nearby and would have constrained mining operations. during the second world war it was used for copper extraction.  urquhart shaft and headframe (1930-31)   before russo-asiatic's engineers had visited the field, corbould and his geologists decided that separate shafts should penetrate each ore-body and a railway should carry the ore from the shaftheads to a central treatment plant in the valley to the north. after a year of diamond drilling however, the ore-bodies were found grouped so closely, that they could be worked cheaply by use of an underground railway linking them to central shafts. charles mitke designed the man and supply shaft to take all men and materials underground and
the urquhart shaft to hoist the ore and pump the water.  mitke's plan transferred the main ore shaft and treatment plant to the town side of the long ridge, which divided the struggling township on the river flats from the previous centre of mining activity in the valley. mitke supervised the sinking of the urquhart shaft in 1929. work proceeded simultaneously with the service shaft and development shafts in the black rock and rio grande ore-bodies, but was not completed at the time of a ministerial inspection in april 1930. the urquhart shaft had hit an underground reservoir and was never continued to the planned depth.  the urquhart shaft and headframe were erected during 1930-31 and the ore produced had been smelted into lead bullion for shipment overseas by the official opening of the mount isa mines complex by the hon. ernest atherton, minister for mines, on 15 june 1931. the urquhart shaft, which went down vertically for , carried  of ore and rock each year. it operated for over thirty years until the biggest shaft on the mount isa field, then known as the k57 ore shaft, was opened in 1963.  mount isa mine power station (1931)   from mid-1927 the technical management of mount isa mine was in the hands of the urquhart group (formerly known as the russo-asiatic consolidated). with their increased capital they set about developing the "most modern mine of the age." the initial power house of corbould's company was replaced by the steel framed power station consisting of a coal-fired boiler house and a generator house, designed by jm callow in 1928 and located at the base of the mount isa mine ridge overlooking the new tent settlement on the bank of the west leichhardt river. the power station was operational by 1931 and a photograph of it appeared in the queensland government mining journal on 15 july 1931, which described the ministerial opening of the new mining plant. it was described as having "twin chimneys rising like black cigars above a roof of dazzling iron".  the powerhouse supplied electricity to the town and its houses as well as to the mine until the opening of the mica creek power station. in 1951 the powerhouse was extended to supply the new copper smelter. when the mica creek power station came into operation supplying electricity, the mines power station was adapted to supply compressed air for the entire mine operation. it continues to fulfill this function.  mount isa mine experimental dam (1920s)  from march 1923 when jc miles discovered the lead outcrops of mount isa, shortage of water was identified as
a "temporary disability" for the new field. small soaks were opened in the bed of the leichhardt river at both top camp and lower camp settlements. this appears to have been the period when the experimental dam was constructed, with a weir built at the entrance to a narrow gully, known as hidden valley, just south of the mine. the original stone wall of the weir was later raised with a form-cast concrete section. william corbould of mount isa mines knew that the treatment works would be greedy for water and ehr greensill, a surveyor, recommended damming the gorge of rifle creek,  south of the mine. the rifle creek dam was constructed by mid 1929 and a pipeline laid to mount isa, which became operational by 1930. presumably from this time, the experimental dam ceased to function as a water supply augmenting the bores, which had been sunk. it was subsequently used for recreational purposes and there is a photographic record of a swimming carnival there about 1929.  description   the mount isa mine early infrastructure comprises: lawlor shaft and winding plant; urquhart shaft and headframe; mount isa mine power station; and mount isa mine experimental dam.  lawlor shaft and winding plant  the remaining evidence of the winding plant consists of a partly intact two-cylinder steam winding engine without drums, manufactured by may brothers engineers of gawler, south australia, resting on concrete mounts (). adjacent and to the south of the engine are a further two concrete foundations, possibly for an air compressor. a return flue boiler is situated further south in line with the winding engine. the iron chimney of the boiler lies alongside. the entrance to the lawlor shaft, which is now secured with a grid, is located east of the winding plant within a wire mesh security fence. there was no apparent evidence of headframes bases near the shaft. between the shaft and the plant is a low raised earth surface indicating the extent of the winding shed and containing concrete mounts with machinery bolts and the concrete base for an iron chimney. the remnants of a mullock dump are located south of the mine shaft. the place is situated alongside the main mine road and adjacent to the company's former residential and community retail area known as king's cross.  urquhart shaft and headframe  an intact steel headframe of asymmetrical design is located over the urquhart shaft (). the headframe, occupying a hilltop position, is a community landmark and a symbol of mount isa mines limited and the city of mount isa. headframe steelwork is attached to concrete foundations. the
urquhart headframe steelwork bears the name of the manufacturer, f rodingham iron & steel co ltd., england. the concrete mounts of the original development headframe winding plant survive beneath the main structure. as the former main ore haulage shaft, the headframe is equipped with a large steel ore bin, which emptied directly into a primary crusher. the jaw crusher plant has been removed but the concrete structure of the crusher remains. from here the ore was conveyed to the three no.1 concentrator mills.  the urquhart shaft's uskside winding engine, which was housed in a shed immediately to the north of the headframe, has been removed from the site and installed at the "outback@isa explorers park" tourist facility in the town. the original corrugated iron winding shed which had been replaced by more recent ribbed steel sheets on the former frame and concrete surface, has also been removed from the site.  mount isa mine power station  the mine power station is located at the eastern base of the urquhart shaft hill (). the power station forms a two-level complex comprising two sections, a boiler and furnace house on the eastern side and a turbine-generator powerhouse on the western side. the external appearance of both sections has remained comparatively unchanged since construction although substantial extension and adaptation of internal structure and plant have taken place with the development of the mine. the power station was initially coal-fired. the boiler house now contains natural gas and oil-fired furnaces, and waste-heat boilers which powered compressors to produce compressed air for the entire mine operation the power house which is a long steel framed corrugated iron clad building aligned north south has been substantially renewed and re- equipped since the 1950s. the original central third of the powerhouse remains structurally intact. this section originally housed nos.1 and 2 turbo-generators. no.3 turbo generator (made in england by the general electric co ltd., witton, birmingham) was installed in line north of no.2 in 1936 to replace no.1 generator after it blew up. no.2 generator has since been removed leaving no.3 as the only surviving early generator plant. no.3 plant comprising a general electric alternator and turbine generator is coupled to a water-tube condenser unit (manufactured by hick hargreaves & co ltd., bolton, england) situated beneath. the northern and southern sections of the powerhouse contain compressors installed in the 1950s. mine power is now drawn from mica creek power station.  mount isa mine experimental dam
the dam is constructed as a curved stone overshot weir, with later form-cast concrete additions above, at the entrance to a narrow gully of kennedy creek at the southern end of the mount isa mine tailings and seepage ponds (). the wall shows the height of original construction and of two subsequent extensions in height and width. the original section is of rendered stone, initially rising an estimated  above the original valley floor, assuming a current build-up of about  of silt. the  deep overflow was subsequently in-filled with roughly rendered stonework. the wall was later raised a further  with a form-cast concrete section constructed atop the original structure. the weir now stands  above the existing upstream silt level and is  in width.  heritage listing  mount isa mine early infrastructure was listed on the queensland heritage register on 25 february 2005 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  the mount isa mine early infrastructure, established in the 1920s and early 1930s, comprises: lawlor shaft and winding plant; urquhart shaft and headframe; mount isa mine power station; and mount isa mine experimental dam. this infrastructure is important in demonstrating the pattern of development of queensland's history, being surviving evidence of the establishment of large-scale mining at mount isa by the mount isa mining company (later mount isa mines limited) in the 1920s and early 1930s. the lawlor shaft and winding plant (1920s) are significant in queensland's history as the earliest surviving winding plant and shaft at mount isa. because of their direct association with the early development of mount isa mine from 1924 they also have symbolic value. the urquhart shaft and headframe (1930-31) is important in demonstrating the early development and growth of mount isa mine. this headframe, which is an american a-frame rather than the more usual four poster frames of the period, was innovative at the time. the use of this style of headframe popularized the use of america a-frames. the mount isa mine power station (1929-31) at the base of the urquhart shaft hill are significant remains from the initial plant construction period at mount isa (1929) made possible by united states capital and engineering design. the place is of historical significance for its long association with power generation for the town of mount isa and the mine, prior to construction of mica creek power station. the mount isa mine experimental dam (1920s) is the earliest surviving construction at mount isa and mount isa
mine, demonstrating the early development of queensland's richest mining venture. the silted up dam remains as evidence of the vital need for storing water to enable mining operations to proceed. its small size and out-of-the-way location on the mount isa mine lease is in juxtaposition to the massive scale of the tailings dams, open cuts and tall chimneys marking the current operations.  the place demonstrates rare, uncommon or endangered aspects of queensland's cultural heritage.  the development of the mining and mining infrastructure was on a scale rare in queensland mining. it was also significant in queensland that development was funded through an internationally accepted process of restructuring rather than through profits. in addition [at the lawlor shaft and winding plant] the two-cylinder steam winding engine manufactured by may brothers, engineers of gawler, south australia, is a rare survivor and highlights the recycling of earlier australian made equipment before specific heavy machinery was imported from england. the operational, pre-second world war (english) general electric turbine generator and alternator in the mount isa mine power station is an extremely rare survivor of the former three units that comprised the initial power station to the mine.  the place has potential to yield information that will contribute to an understanding of queensland's history.  the place has potential to reveal, through archaeological investigation, further information that may contribute to our knowledge of the early workings of the mount isa mine.the lawlor shaft and winding plant demonstrates the continuity of mining history at mount isa and has the capacity to lend itself to interpretation of that history.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the infrastructure has a symbolic association with the work of mount isa mines, which has been important in the queensland economy since the 1920s. the urquhart shaft and headframe is the largest, most complex and most visible of the two surviving steel headframes at mount isa mine. silhouetted on the skyline it has been a community landmark for over sixty years.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register buildings and structures in mount isa mines in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
the 1969-70 miami floridians season was the second season of the floridians in the american basketball association. the team notably tried gimmicks to attract fans. november 5th's game would be ladies night, with free honey colored pantyhose (originally $2 value) given to the first 500 ladies, provided it fit anyone from 5 feet to 5 feet, 9 inches in size, with nothing extra needed to buy. for the november 10th game, if one bought a ticket (for $5), they would be allowed to walk to the auditorium to see jimmy ellis (who had just lost the world heavyweight title to joe frazier) box roberto davila, with the fight being after the game. the team faltered to a dead last finish, with constant trades and scant profits. ned doyle, an advertising executive became majority owner of the team, and he decided to make the team a regional franchise, named the floridians, playing in miami beach, jacksonville, tampa-st. petersburg and west palm beach.  roster  23 andrew anderson - shooting guard   41 butch booker - center   22 walter byrd - power forward   30 larry cannon - shooting guard   42 al cueto - center   20 donnie freeman - point guard   32 art heyman - shooting guard   34 simmie hill - small forward   14 wil jones - power forward   26 george lehmann	 - point guard   22 maurice mchartley - point guard   44 willie murrell - small forward   23 lynn shackelford	- small forward   33 donald sidle - power forward   32 daniel sparks - power forward   24 erv staggs - small forward   43 george sutor - center   43 skip thoren - center   34 dallas thornton - small forward   22 stephen vacendak - point guard   32 hubie white - shooting guard   -- bob woollard - center  final standings  eastern division  awards and honors 1970 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 24, 1970)  donnie freeman  references   floridians on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1969-70 regular season and playoff results  miami floridians page  miami floridians seasons miami miami floridians, 1969-70 miami floridians, 1969-70
elder financial abuse is a type of elder abuse in which misappropriation of financial resources or abusive use of financial control, in the context of a relationship where there is an expectation of trust, causes harm to an older person.  the older americans act of 2006 defines elder financial abuse, or financial exploitation, as "the fraudulent or otherwise illegal, unauthorized, or improper act or process of an individual, including a caregiver or fiduciary, that uses the resources of an older individual for monetary or personal benefit, profit, or gain, or that results in depriving an older individual of rightful access to, or use of, benefits, resources, belongings, or assets."  types  by family or caregivers  family members and informal or paid caregivers have special access to seniors and thus are often in a position to inflict financial abuse through deception, coercion, misrepresentation, undue influence, or theft. common abusive practices include:  money or property is used without the senior's permission or taken from them, for example removal from their home and then use of the home by the abuser, or depositing income such as pension or benefit checks  the senior's signature is forged or identity is misappropriated for financial transactions  the senior is coerced or influenced to sign over deeds or wills, or caused to execute legal documents they do not understand  the abuser fraudulently obtains a power of attorney or guardianship  money is borrowed from the senior and never repaid  family members engaged in financial abuse of the elderly may include spouses, children, or grandchildren. they may engage in the activity because they feel justified, for instance, they are taking what they might later inherit or have a sense of "entitlement" due to a negative personal relationship with the older person, or that it is somehow the price of a promise of lifelong care. or they may take money or property to prevent other family members from getting the money or for fear that their inheritance may be lost due to cost of treating illnesses. sometimes, family members take money or property from their elders because of gambling or other financial problems or substance abuse.  scams and fraud targeting seniors  seniors are also often deliberately targeted by scams, fraud, and misleading marketing - often by otherwise legitimate businesses. this may include:  fraudulent investment or insurance schemes  fraudulent contracts (such as extended car or home warranties, which in reality cover nothing)  unauthorized charges imposed by internet service providers  worthless "sweepstakes" that elderly persons
must pay in order to collect winnings  fake pharmaceutical or diet/health products  medical billing scams and unnecessary medical care  predatory or unnecessary lending (e.g. reverse mortgages) tech support and irs impersonation scams, in which an elderly person may be cajoled or threatened into paying large sums of money in the form of bank transfers or gift cards  charitable giving scams, including pressure to rewrite wills 419 scams  identity theft  lottery scams  work from home schemes or other ways to generate income  a 1996 study by aarp found that while individuals over 50 comprised 35% of the american population, they accounted for 57% of all fraud victims (aarp, 1996). seniors' level of vulnerability to this type of exploitation varies by the type of scam. for example, the aarp found that lottery fraud victims were more likely to be women over 70 living alone, with lower education, lower income, and less financial literacy, while victims of investment fraud were more likely to be men between the ages of 55 and 62 who were married, with higher incomes and greater financial literacy.  hybrid financial exploitation  hybrid financial exploitation (hfe) is financial exploitation that co-occurs with physical abuse and/or neglect. hfe victims are more likely to be co-habiting with abusive individual, to have fair/poor health, to fear the abusive individual, to perceive abusive individual as caretaker, and to have a longer duration of abuse.  estimates of size and scope  various attempts have been made to estimate the size and scope of the problem. the primary difficulties in estimating the size of the problem are:  differing descriptions of financial abuse - victims often do not identify as having been a victim of fraud, so researchers generally offer respondents specific examples. the more specific the questions are, the more likely someone is to say they have experienced it - for example, surveys focused on identity theft, telemarketing, "gray charges," or investor fraud have found much higher rates than general surveys.  underreporting - studies that rely on government databases or press reports are estimated to be off by factors ranging from five to forty, with 25 being a frequently cited number. additionally, because of the stigma of victimhood caregivers are more likely to report that their parents have been victimized than the parents are to self-report as victims.  differences in survey methodology - some surveys ask for losses in the last year, some ask about losses in the last five years, and some ask "have you ever experienced
...", and surveys have variously defined seniors as aged 45+, 50+, 60+, and 65+.  nonfinancial effects  other effects include damage to credit, missing work, depression, and loss of sleep.  references  abuse gerontology elder law
the first series of british television sketch comedy the catherine tate show premiered on bbc two on 16 february 2004. it consists of six episodes and concluded on 22 march 2004. in the first series audiences are introduced to various characters portrayed by catherine tate, including joannie 'nan' taylor, lauren cooper and bernie, the irish nurse. the series was entirely written by tate alongside mathew horne, derren litten, aschlin ditta, arthur mathews and bruce mackinnon.    the series premiered in the united states on 27 november 2004 on an unknown network and concluded on 21 february 2005.   series one is the recipient of a bafta award, british comedy award, and a banff rockie award. it has received several nominations including a bafta award, a british comedy award, a royal television society award and an international emmy award.  characters   joannie 'nan' taylor: the foul-mouthed grandmother is an old east london woman who constantly swears at and criticises other people. she is always visited by her well-mannered grandson jamie, where the visits usually start off well enough, with the nan showing how grateful she is that her grandson has come to see her. however, things usually take a turn for the worse after she starts to make unfavourable comments about her neighbours, family, and home help visitors. jamie is a university student, but according to nan, is unemployed. nan repeatedly asserts that he is gay, although jamie has said on many occasions that he has a girlfriend. regular performances by catherine tate and mathew horne.  lauren cooper: lauren cooper is a comprehensive school student with a bad attitude who is most widely known for her phrase "am i bovvered?". lauren, her best friend lisa 'liese' jackson and her love interest ryan perkins are known as yobs. regular performances by catherine tate, mathew horne and niky wardley.  bernie: the incompetent irish nurse. bernie is an unruly, randy woman who bordered on being sacked in the hospital where she worked in every episode. she frequently makes inappropriate remarks to her patients, flirts with most of the male staff, takes a critically ill patient on a wild night out, and mixes up the records of living patients with those of deceased ones. regular performance by catherine tate.  paul and sam: the essex couple. they are happily married yet slightly simple, and find everyday situations surprisingly hilarious. paul and sam often excitedly tell each other stories, which they find highly amusing and interesting. the stories build up and
when completed, paul and sam would both produce an exaggerated and completely silent laugh.  regular performances by catherine tate and lee ross.  kate and ellen: this sketch followed two office workers who sat next to each other. while ellen is usually keen to get on with her work, she is frequently disturbed by kate (tate). kate continually makes conversation about her lifestyle, inviting her co-worker to "have a guess!" on such delicate situations. while ellen is reluctant to go along with the guessing games, she is pressured into making a wild guess, which almost always results in kate's becoming insulted and consequently offensive. ellen occasionally guesses correctly, causing kate to become angry and verbally or physically abuse her. regular performances by catherine tate and ella kenion.   elaine figgis: elaine is a woman who appeared in a documentary following her search for love, mostly corresponding with people around the world via the internet in search of a man. the unseen interviewer and narrator is called tanya. follows her engagement and eventual marriage to a convicted cannibal and lunatic on death row in the us, who abducted, tortured and murdered eight people, proceeding to eat two of them. regular performance by catherine tate and rebecca front as the voice of tanya.  the aga saga woman: an upper-middle-class woman who goes into a state of shock in various, seemingly innocuous situations. regular performance by catherine tate.  episodes  release  reception  accolades royal television society 2004   -nominated: rts award for best make up design - entertainment and non-drama productions (vanessa white)  banff world television festival 2004   banff rockie award for best comedy (tiger aspect productions)  british comedy awards 2004   british comedy award for best comedy newcomer (catherine tate)  -nominated: british comedy award for best tv comedy actress (catherine tate)   british academy television awards 2005   bafta award for best comedy programme or series (catherine tate, gordon anderson & geoffrey perkins)  -nominated: bafta award for best new writer (catherine tate & darren litten)  international emmy awards 2005  -nominated: international emmy award for best actress (catherine tate)  home media "the complete first season" was released on dvd region 1 in the united states and canada on 25 september 2007 from white star distribution.   "series one" was released on dvd region 2 in the united kingdom on 22 august 2005 via 2 entertain distribution. special features contain the 2005 comic relief appearance and a behind the scenes interview with catherine tate on how
the characters came about. it was subsequently released as part of "series one and series two" dvd on 30 october 2006, and as part of "complete series one, two & three" dvd on 12 november 2007. a umd (universal media disc), which is only compatible with the playstation portable, of the first series was made available from 2 entertain on 12 december 2005.       "series one" was released on dvd region 4 in australia on 7 november 2007 via hopscotch entertainment. prior to the individual release of the first series, a box set continuing the first two series was released on 6 september 2007, and a box set comprising all three series was released on 2 april 2009.  further reading  am i bovvered: the catherine tate show scripts (2 october 2006 - fourth estate, )   catherine tate: laugh it up! (6 october 2008 - andre deutsch ltd, ) by tina ogle.  u.s. airdates  references  external links    the catherine tate show episodes at the internet movie database  the catherine tate show episodes at epguides   2004 british television seasons
"all mine" is a song recorded by south korean girl group f(x) for the first season of sm station, a weekly digital music project by their label sm entertainment. the song was released through the project on july 22, 2016, serving as the group's first release since their christmas single "wish list" in december 2015, and subsequently their last korean single to date as a quartet.  background and release  on july 20, 2016, it was announced that f(x) would be the next artist to release a single for the sm station project, with the title, "all mine", on july 22. the single was released digitally at midnight on july 22, 2016, by s.m. entertainment, accompanied by a music video.  music video  the music video was filmed during f(x)'s stay in japan for sm town live world tour v in osaka. it was directed and edited by the group's rapper, amber.  track listing  charts  references   2016 singles 2016 songs korean-language songs f(x) (group) songs sm entertainment singles songs written by andre merritt songs written by greg bonnick songs written by hayden chapman
xerocomellus dryophilus, commonly known as the oak-loving bolete and formerly known as boletus dryophilus or xerocomus dryophilus, is a mushroom in the family boletaceae native to north america. it appears to only occur under the coast live oak (quercus agrifolia).  it was transferred to the new genus xerocomellus in 2014.  references  external links  boletaceae fungi of north america fungi described in 1975
the mosaic of rehob, also known as the tel rehov inscription and baraita of the boundaries, is a late 3rd-6th century ce mosaic discovered in 1973, inlaid in the floor of the foyer or narthex of an ancient synagogue near tel rehov,  south of beit she'an and about  west of the jordan river, containing the longest written text hitherto discovered in any mosaic in the land of israel, and also the oldest known talmudic text.  unlike other mosaics found in the region, the rehob mosaic has very little in the form of ornate design and symmetric patterns, but is unique due to its inscription, acclaimed by scholars to be one of the most important epigraphical findings discovered in israel in the last century. its text sheds invaluable light on the historical geography (toponymy) of palestine during the late roman and byzantine periods, as well as on jewish and non-jewish ethnographic divisions in palestine for the same periods and their relation to one another, specifically, on agricultural produce cultivated by farmers, and the extent of jewish law regulating the use of such farm products grown in different regions. these eight regions are: the area of scythopolis (modern-day beit she'an) and the jordan valley (the longest paragraph), susita (hippos) and its neighbouring settlements on the east bank of the sea of galilee, naveh (nawa) in the roman province of arabia petraea, tyre and its neighbouring cities to the south, and the land of israel proper, dealt with in the second-longest paragraph, followed by the cities of paneas and caesarea, finishing with villages from the vicinity of sebaste.  by delineating the boundaries of the land of israel, it seeks to establish the legal status of the country in its various parts from the time of israel's return from the babylonian captivity, and whether or not local farm products acquired by jews from other jews, or from gentiles and samaritans, are exempt or obligated in what concerns the laws of seventh year produce, and of demai produce. the mosaic also describes different kinds of fruits and vegetables that were cultivated in the country at the time, and the laws which applied to them at the time.  history a late roman and byzantine-period jewish village located about one kilometre (half mile) northwest of tel rehov has preserved the old name in the form of rehov (hebrew) or roob/roob (latin).  according to excavator f. vitto, the village synagogue underwent three phases of
construction and reconstruction: first built as a basilical hall in the 4th century ce, it was destroyed by a fire and rebuilt in the following century, with the addition of a bemah, of a new mosaic floor and a plaster coating for the walls and pillars, decorated with several inscriptions; and the last phase, dating to the 6th or 7th century ce, when the narthex was added on whose floor the halakhic inscription was laid. others put the creation of the halakhic inscription in the late 3rd century ce at the earliest. the synagogue was probably abandoned after being destroyed in an earthquake.  the site of the ancient jewish village was later taken by the arab village of farwana, documented at least since the ottoman period, and abandoned during the 1948 war. kibbutz ein hanetziv was established in 1946 on land including the ancient site.  the remains of the ancient synagogue were first discovered by members of kibbutz ein hanetziv while preparing their lands for cultivation in the late 1960s. an archaeological excavation of the site in 1973, led by a team under iaa's fanny vitto, revealed the mosaic and its content, which has been on display at the israel museum in jerusalem since 1978.  description of mosaic the mosaic pieces are made of black limestone tesserae contrasted against a white background, measuring , with an accompanying text written on 29 lines, comprising a total of 364 words, with an average length of  to each line. it begins with the salutation, "shalom" - peace!, followed by a long halakhic text, and ends with the salutation, "shalom," followed by an appendix where it lists some eighteen towns in the vicinity of sebaste (the ancient city of samaria) whose fruits and vegetables were exempt from tithes and the stringencies applied to seventh year produce. there is little uniformity in the size of the letters, while the spelling of some words is faulty. portions of the main text contain elements that are related to late second-century rabbinic literature, particularly that found in the tosefta (shevi'it 4:8-11), the jerusalem talmud (demai 2:1; shevi'it 6:1) and sifrei on deuteronomy 11:24, although the mosaic of rehob expands on aspects of each. the more ancient text in the rehob mosaic has been used to correct errors in transmission of extant rabbinic texts.  of especial interest to philologists, the system of spelling in
the mosaic follows the beth-shean practice of enunciation, where ʻayin () is often interchanged with aleph (), and het () is often interchanged with he (), just as it is alluded to in the jerusalem talmud (berakhot 2:4)  legal (halakhic) background  the text in the rehob mosaic can only be understood in the context of jewish law at the time, which required the tithing of agricultural produce six years out of a seven-year cycle, as well as the observance of seventh year law strictures on the same produce once in every seven years. this, too, was contingent upon lands that had been settled by returning jews from the babylonian captivity. the underlying principle in jewish law states that when the jewish exiles returned from the babylonian captivity in the 4th century bce, the extent of territories resettled by them in galilee and in judea did not equal nor exceed the territory originally conquered by israel at the time of joshua, more commonly referred to as "those who came-up from egypt." the practical bearing of this restructuring of boundaries (although still part of the biblical land of israel proper) meant that places then settled by non-jewish residents in the land (whether phoenicians, syrians, grecians, or otherwise) and not taken by israel were not deemed as consecrated land and, therefore, fruits and vegetables grown in such places and purchased by jews were exempt from the laws of tithing, and of seventh year restrictions. however, if fruits and vegetables were purchased by gentile vendors from israelites in their respective places and transported into these non-consecrated places in order to be sold in the marketplaces, they were still made subject to tithing as demai-produce by prospective jewish buyers. the fruits and vegetables mentioned in the rehob mosaic with respect to beit she'an (as detailed in the jerusalem talmud) were not locally grown in beit she'an, but were transported there from places settled by israel. beit she'an was a frontier city along the country's eastern front with transjordan, and since it was not initially settled by israelites upon their return from babylon, although later israelites had joined the local inhabitants, all home-grown fruits and vegetables there were made exempt from tithing in the days of rabbi judah hanasi. rabbi judah hanasi also made beit gubrin exempt from tithes and from the seventh-year observance, since that stretch of country had been settled by the idumaeans (esau's descendants) when the
people of israel returned from the babylonian captivity.  translation of ancient text  [excursus: the agricultural products named above were not cultivated in beit she'an, but were brought into the city by donkey drivers, whether they were jewish rustics or in some cases non-jews, who had bought them from jewish planters in other regions of the country to be sold in the marketplace of beit she'an. to this list can be added the special fruits peculiar to the hebrew nation and mentioned in mishnah demai 2:1, if perchance they were acquired by a jew from his fellow co-religionist who was unskillful in the laws of his countymen, such as a cultivar of dates grown only in israel,  cakes of dried figs that were prepared strictly in israel, and carob-fruit of a quality found only in israel. in this case, they too would require the removal of the tithe known as demai. all other fruits and vegetables cultivated in beit she'an would have been exempt from tithing altogether, seeing that when rabbi judah hanasi permitted the eating of vegetables in the seventh year in beit she'an, it was one and the same enactment, namely, the release from the seventh year obligations and the release from tithing all produce throughout the remaining six years of the seven-year cycle.]  [excursus: the import of detailing the above frontier towns and villages was to show the boundaries of the land of israel as retained by the jews who returned from the babylonian captivity. where agricultural produce was prohibited unto jews living in these areas, this implies that these places were originally part of those places settled by the returnees from babylon, and that since the land was consecrated by their arrival in those parts, all fruits and vegetables were prohibited until the time that they could be tithed, and the land was required to lie fallow during the seventh year. however, where the places were designated as "dubious," this is explained in the tosefta (shevi'it 4:8) as meaning that initially these places were permitted (as there was no requirement to tithe produce grown in these places), but later the sages of israel made all fruits and vegetables in these places prohibited until they were first tithed. this may have been the result of produce being brought into these towns and villages from regions liable to tithing and sold there, or else it was not clear unto the sages if these places had actually been settled by the people of israel who
returned from babylon. in any case, the practice is to behave stringently with regard to such produce.]  regulation of produce between achziv (chezib) and tyre the maritime city of akko (ptolemais), and the river south of achziv (chezib), a small coastal town ca.  north of acre, according to the mishnah (demai 1:3 and gittin 1:2), were the extent of the northern boundary settled by jews returning from the babylonian captivity in the days of ezra. produce locally grown in the country beyond achziv was exempt from the rules of demai-produce, but if purchased from achziv itself, it required tithing. although the towns and villages (in what follows here) were traditionally outside of the territorial bounds occupied by jews returning from babylonia, still, these cities attracted jewish settlement. in addition, fruits and vegetables grown in the land of israel were often transported northward, along the route known as the promontory of tyre (heb. סולמות של צור). israelites who frequented these areas, or who had moved there, were likely to buy fruits that had not been properly tithed in israel, or had been marketed during the sabbatical year. the emphasis on the regulation of agricultural produce obtained by israel in the following northern areas, or, as the rehob inscription says, "what an israelite has purchased" in those parts, was because of its doubtful nature.  boundary of the land of israel in the 4th c. bce the following frontier cities once marked the boundary of the land of israel, or the extent of places repopulated after the return from babylonian exile. in a broader sense, the list of frontier towns and villages herein named represent the geographical limits of regulations imposed upon all agricultural produce, making them fully liable to tithing and to sabbatical-year restrictions within that same border, or, in the event of being purchased from the common people of the land, to separate therefrom only the demai-tithe. as one moved further east of achziv, the border extended northward, into what are now portions of south lebanon, and as far east as places in the present-day kingdom of jordan. while the settlements here named reflect a historical reality, bearing heavily on jewish legal law (halacha), they did not always reflect a political reality, insofar that the political borders and demographics have since changed owing to a long history of occupiers and
conquerors.  [excursus: jose ben joezer of zareda and jose ben yohanan of jerusalem decreed defilement in respect of the country of the gentiles (bt, shabbat 14b), so that the priests of aaron's lineage will not venture beyond the borders of israel and, in so doing, become defiled unawares by corpse-uncleanness and turn again to defile their offerings (which must needs be eaten by them in a state of ritual purity). ashkelon was long deemed as one of such cities, as it was settled by gentiles and not conquered by israel upon their return from the babylonian exile. the jerusalem talmud (shevi'it 6:1) relates how that rabbi phinehas ben jair, a priest of aaron's lineage, and others with him, used to go down into the marketplace of the saracens in ashkelon to buy wheat during the seventh year, and return to their own city, and immerse themselves in order to eat their bread (terumah) in a state of ritual purity. the beth-din of rabbi ishmael, the son of rabbi jose, and ben hakapar, when they heard about what rabbi phinehas ben jair had done, a most pious man on all other accounts, but who went down into ashkelon when it was not permitted for priests to venture outside the land of israel, understood thereby that ashkelon - though not conquered by those returning from the babylonian exile - was not like other lands of the gentiles, and that defilement had not been decreed upon that city. therefore, taking as an exemplum and as a guiding precedent the act they heard performed by rabbi phinehas ben jair, they assembled themselves and reverted the old practice, decreeing a state of cleanness over the city's air, and that, henceforth, jews (including those of the priestly stock) were permitted to go into the city without harboring feelings of guilt or fear of contracting uncleanness. the next day, they assembled themselves again, this time to declare, by a majority vote, that the city's agricultural produce was exempt from tithes - even with such doubtful produce as had been carried into the city from places in israel proper, unlike the restrictions regarding produce brought into the region of tyre. this was done with the intent of easing the burden of the poor of israel during the seventh year.]  caesarea maritima the maritime city of caesarea maritima was an enclave along the mediterranean coast not immediately settled by
jewish emigres returning from the babylonian exile. later, however, jews joined the inhabitants of the city, yet, by the 1st century ce, it was still principally settled by foreigners, mostly grecians. to ease the strictures placed upon the poor of the jewish nation during the seventh year (since planting was prohibited throughout that year, and after-growths could not be taken by the people), rabbi judah hanasi (2nd century ce) found the juridical legitimacy to release the city (and its bounds) from the obligation of tithing locally-grown produce, and from the restrictions associated with seventh year produce. notwithstanding, on certain fruits and on one commodity spice (see infra.), they still required the separation of the demai tithe because of the majority of these specific items being transported into caesarea from other places of the country held by israel. however, during the seventh year, since these items were usually not harvested or worked by jews in that year, the majority of such produce were esteemed as such that had been harvested and worked by the gentiles of that place and who are not obligated in the laws of the seventh year. this, therefore, made it permissible unto jews to purchase from them such items.  addendum: permitted towns in region of sebaste between the country of judea and the country of galilee lies an intermediate stretch of land known as "the strip of the samaritans." jews often passed through the region, while en route from galilee to jerusalem during the three annual pilgrimages, and again when returning home.  although the region of samaria was not seized at the very outset by those jews returning from the babylonian exile, the priests of aaron's descent were still permitted to pass through that section of the country, without fear of contracting defilement in respect to the country of the gentiles. nonetheless, with respect to fruits and vegetables had in samaria, there were some places in samaria that were exempt from tithes, as if they had been a foreign land.  the jerusalem talmud, when speaking about the impropriety of leaving the land of israel, describes the standard rule of practice of the time: "said rabbi abbahu: 'there are hamlets belonging to the samaritans wherein it has been customary to permit [a jew's passage through them], since the days of joshua, the son of nun, and they are permitted' (i.e. released from the laws requiring tithing of produce)." the reason for this exemption is explained by talmudic exegete,
solomon sirilio, as being that these villages in samaria and their suburbs had the status of feudal or usufruct lands given by grant from the state to farm-laborers for a share of its increase, while the majority of increase accrued unto the state. this was enough to exempt such produce from the requirement of tithing, since the kingdom (ptolemaic or roman, or otherwise) had not forfeited its hold over such lands, and since the jewish regulations for tithing prescribe that produce or grain that is to be tithed must be the property of its tither, in accordance with deuteronomy 14:22, "...you shall tithe all the produce of your seed" - meaning, your seed, but not the seed belonging to others. the following list of towns concerns those hamlets held by the state (kingdom) in the region of sebaste (the biblical city of samaria) and which were, therefore, exempt from the laws of tithing. the list is not known from any other source, and is only alluded to in the jerusalem talmud.  by this it is implied that other towns and villages that were settled by the samaritans, such as gebaʻ and badan, fruits grown therein were still under the obligation to have all tithes separated therefrom before they could be eaten.  see also   impurity of the land of the nations  laws and customs of the land of israel in judaism  shmita  tithes in judaism  turos amanus  references  bibliography  amar, z. (2012). "flora of the bible: a new investigation aimed at identifying all of the plants of the bible in light of jewish sources and scientific research", pub. by ruben mass, jerusalem 2012   avi-yonah, m. (1949). historical geography of palestine, jerusalem  avi-yonah, m. (1979). the holy land - from the persian to the arab conquests (536 b.c. to a.d. 640) a historical geography, grand rapids, michigan   ben-gad hacohen, david (1998), the southern boundary of the land of israel in tannaitic literature and the bible, cathedra: for the history of eretz israel and its yishuv, issue no. 88, pp. 15-38 (hebrew)   goldhor, isaac (1913). adamat kodesh, being the land of israel (vol. 2), jerusalem (hebrew) ) hamitovsky, it
zhaq (2004). changes and developments of the samaritan settlement in the land of israel during the hellenistic-roman period, bar-ilan university: ramat-gan (hebrew)     josephus (1926). antiquities, loeb classical library, ed. h.st.j. thackeray, heinemann: london      , s.v. roob </ref> mukaddasi (1886), description of syria, including palestine, ed. guy le strange, london ()   (digitised 2006)     (reprinted a. hart: philadelphia 1850)   sussmann, jacob (1974). a halakhic inscription from the beth-shean valley, pub. in journal tarbiz (43): mandel institute for jewish studies, jerusalem, pp. 88-158 (hebrew)  (jacob sussmann)  (jacob sussmann) urman, dan & flesher, paul v.m. (1998). ancient synagogues: historical analysis and archaeological discovery, brill: leiden  (vol. 1);  (vol. 2)  weiss, zeev (2001). new light on the rehov inscription: identifying 'the gate of campon' at bet shean, tarbiz, pp. 35-50  external links description of archaeological site in tel farwana palestine exploration fund - quarterly statement for 1894 - historical geography map of the holy land / constructed by c.w.m. van de velde; 2nd edition, 1865  meir bar-ilan, 'what was the purpose of the tannaim in describing the borders of the land of israel?', te'uda', 7 (1988-1991), pp. 95-110 (hebrew). abstract  4th-century works 1973 archaeological discoveries archaeological discoveries in israel israeli mosaics archaeology of israel jews and judaism in the byzantine empire jewish texts rabbinic literature byzantine mosaics ancient sites in israel judaic inscriptions collections of the israel museum land of israel historical geography ancient jewish history mosaics jewish agrarian laws ancient hebrew texts land of israel laws in judaism geography of israel talmud places
antonio da silva alves barbosa (24 december 1931 - 29 september 2018), commonly known as alves barbosa, was a portuguese professional road cyclist. he won the volta a portugal in 1951, 1956 and 1958, placing third in 1955, and rode the tour de france from 1956 until 1958 and again in 1960. he also won a stage of the 1961 vuelta a espana.  major results  1950  1st  junior national road race championships 1951  1st  overall volta a portugal 1st prologue & stages 2 & 3 1952  1st prova ciclistica 9 de julho  1st stage 9 tour du maroc 1954  1st  national road race championships 1955  1st prova ciclistica 9 de julho  1st stages 4, 7, 8b, 9, 10 & 12a volta a portugal 1956  1st  national road race championships  1st  overall volta a portugal 1st stages 2a, 4a, 7, 8b, 9b, 10b, 12, 14 & 15  8th overall four days of dunkirk  10th overall tour de france 1958  1st  overall volta a portugal 1st stages 1b, 8, 12, 17, 21, 22a & 23 1959  1st stages 5a, 5b (ttt), 13, 14, 15a, 16a & 19 volta a portugal 1960  1st stages 1 & 6 tour du maroc  9th overall vuelta a andalucia 1961  1st stage 9 vuelta a espana  8th overall vuelta a andalucia 1st stage 4  references  external links    1931 births 2018 deaths portuguese male cyclists people from figueira da foz volta a portugal winners portuguese vuelta a espana stage winners s.l. benfica (cycling)
gideon koegelenberg (born 25 november 1994) is a south african rugby union player for the  in super rugby and in the currie cup and the  in the rugby challenge. he usually plays as a lock.  rugby career  youth rugby  koegelenberg was born in wellington and played for the  at youth level. he earned inclusion in the 2012 south africa schools squad and made appearances against france and england.  sharks / ukzn impi  he then joined the  academy, where he made a single appearances against former side . a knee injury hampered his progress at the durban-based side, ruling him out of the entire 2014 season. he made five appearances for the  in the team's title-winning 2015 varsity shield season.  golden lions  koegelenberg joined the  in 2015, where he made eleven appearances in the 2015 under-21 provincial championship group a, scoring one try against .  zebre  he then moved to italy to join pro12 side zebre during the 2015-16 season. he played five matches during the 2015-16 season, and a further 12 in the 2016-17 season, starting nine matches and receiving three yellow cards.  return to sharks  at the end of the 2017 season, koegelenberg left zebre to return to south africa, and to former side the sharks, signing a two-year deal with the durban-based franchise.  super rugby statistics  references  south african rugby union players living people 1994 births people from wellington, western cape rugby union locks sharks (currie cup) players zebre parma players south african expatriate rugby union players expatriate rugby union players in italy sharks (rugby union) players expatriate rugby union players in australia melbourne rebels players expatriate rugby union players in japan kurita water gush akishima players
rentala madhubala is an indian scientist who studied molecular parasitology and functional genomics. she is the director of the academic staff college in jawaharlal nehru university. she was the dean at the school of life sciences and the director of the advanced instrumentation research facility there.  education and career madhubala received her bachelor's and master's degrees in zoology from the delhi university. she completed her m. phil in life sciences at jawaharlal nehru university in 1974 and obtained a phd in biochemistry from the university of hyderabad in 1983. she is a fellow of indian academy of sciences, national academy of sciences, india and indian national science academy.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people 20th-century indian biologists place of birth missing (living people) jawaharlal nehru university alumni delhi university alumni indian women molecular biologists indian molecular biologists 20th-century indian women scientists women scientists from delhi
laquan stallworth (born may 17) is a former professional women's basketball player. she played for coach leon barmore and kim mulkey to play for louisiana tech university, from 1995 to 1999.  after successful collegiate playing years, laquan took her talents overseas for the next 6 to 7 years. she will be part of the global mixed gender basketball league (gmgb).  professional  stallworth went to play international basketball for fiba maccabi ashdod in ashdod, israel, dynamo kursk in kursk, russia, usa junior olympic team, china, germany (halle), and ireland for burnell.  stallworth was on the practice squad 2 times for wnba houston comets (99 and 01)undrafted wnba. then 3 years of playing for the adidas travel team. stallworth retired from basketball in 2009.  stallworth is coach for the houston spirit and houston red storm aba (2013-present). she also train and develop the youth, participate in coaching aau.   2018 - named coach of the year - texas basketball association  college  attended louisiana tech university, laquan has a bachelor's of science in computer information systems.  latech women's basketball during her years went to 1 national championship as the runner-up, semi finals in the final four, and 2 years in the final 8 of the ncaa championships.  laquan currently holds several records at louisiana tech such as defensive player of the year (3 years), most steals in game, #3 in assist, #1 in most assist in a game, and most ncaa tournaments and the 2nd player in tech history to record over a 1000 pts and 500 assist.  she holds record for most assist in ncaa tournament.  basketball wall of fame  high school  laquan attended silsbee high school, which was coached by kim albers, started all 4 years, 2 state tournaments championships runner-up and gatorade (wbca) all-american throughout all 4 years. she received awards such as mvp of district (4 years) and all-state 1st team (4 years). stallworth's high school jersey was retired in 1995. stallworth received the proclamation from the mayor of silsbee and placed on the wall of fame at silsbee high school in 2016.     she is named one for the greatest basketball player in the top 100 for the state of texas.  achievements  louisiana tech lady techsters basketball single-game steals record  louisiana tech lady techsters basketball 3rd all-time assists leader  louisiana tech lady
techsters basketball 1st single-game assists record  ncaa tournament assists leader  2nd player in louisiana tech lady techsters basketball history to record over 1000 points and 500 assists  personal laquan is an active member of the naacp.  she started playing basketball at the age of 4 years old. laquan is also a member of delta sigma theta sorority.   stallworth wrote, produced, and directed her own indie film "caught between the two" which discusses relationship issues and it was released in 2016 on amazon.com.  stallworth will be working on her 2nd film "sins of a scorned wife" for 2017 to be released late 2017 or early 2018. it was released in may 2019. the film stars paul ynfante, whitney skye, and debuting actor joseph brooks. stallworth also coached in the men's american basketball association (aba) as the head coach for the houston red storm and minor league basketball team the houston spirit.  the greatest joy that stallworth does is give back to the community. she is active in the boys & girls club, ymca, and meals on wheels program.  she is very family oriented and she takes pride in her mother karen stallworth, who raised 3 kids as a single parent. (brother - trey singleton and sister - charity edwards) with three nieces jasmine edwards, taliyah edwards, and ariyian singleton.  wall of fame - basketball great  imdb  references  american basketball assoc -aba  year of birth missing (living people) living people american women's basketball players louisiana tech lady techsters basketball players guards (basketball)
best friend (tc: 好朋友) is a cantopop album by edmond leung.  track listing 0:11 (零時十一分) best friend (不問自戀) i am accustomed to you (習慣你) free lunch (免費午餐) stop breathing (斷了氣) to be continued (待續) one day off (休息一天) moonlight pool (月光游泳池) rainy night (流離夜雨)  charts  music awards  references  edmond leung albums 1997 albums
arthur delaney is a track runner formerly with the oregon ducks he ran in the olympic trials in 2016. who competed at multiple ncaa championships.  he was a gold medalist at the 2012 world junior championships in athletics - men's 4 × 100 metres relay  references  living people place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people) oregon ducks men's track and field athletes
giovanni agostino marliani (1585 - 4 june 1674) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of reggio emilia (1662-1674) and bishop of accia and mariana (1645-1656).  biography giovanni agostino marliani was born of a patrician family in genoa, italy in 1585.  he is attested as vicar general of the diocese of genoa in 1635 and again in 1640.  on 15 july 1645, marliani was appointed bishop of accia and mariana by pope innocent x. in 1645, he was consecrated bishop by stefano durazzo, archbishop of genoa. in 1656, he resigned as bishop of accia and mariana.   on 27 february 1662, he was appointed bishop of reggio emilia by pope alexander vii. he held a diocesan synod in reggio on 15-17 june 1665. he held a second synod on 17-19 april 1674.  marliani served as bishop of reggio emilia until his death on 4 june 1674.  episcopal succession while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of:  references  external links and additional sources  saccani, giovanni (1902). i vescovi di reggio-emilia, cronotassi, reggio emilia: tip. artigianelli 1902, pp. 137-139.   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent x bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1585 births 1674 deaths 17th-century roman catholic bishops in genoa
the library of the royal institute of asturian studies (biblioteca del real instituto de estudios asturianos; baridea) is a public entity containing the bibliographic heritage and documentation of asturias. it was  formally founded in the summer of 1946 at 3 calle san vicente in oviedo, but moved to its present location in  the palacio conde de toreno on the plaza de porlier in 1957. it  specialises in bibliographic documents and documentaries on asturias and is one of the centres of study for the royal institute of asturian studies (ridea). it has a collection of about 20,000 volumes.  gallery  references  bibliography toyos, ana belen de los, catalogo de libros de fondo asturiano, oviedo, ridea, 1996 (in spanish) castano rodriguez, maria jose, catalogo de libros del fondo antiguo, oviedo, ridea, 1996 (in spanish) fondo fotografico del idea: 40 anos de cultura asturiana (2), 1946-1986, oviedo, ridea, 1989 (in spanish)  external links official website  asturian culture libraries in spain 1946 establishments in spain libraries established in 1946 buildings and structures in oviedo
to catch a smuggler is a documentary that depicts the work of u.s. customs and border protection and u.s. immigration and customs enforcement law enforcement officers at multiple united states airports. violations range from fraudulent visas to human trafficking.  to catch a smuggler is featured on national geographic television.  episodes  series overview  season 1 (2012)  season 2 (2020)  season 3 (2021)  season 4  references  external links      american documentary films american films
dennis cheng is an american development executive. he served as the chief development officer of the clinton foundation from 2011 to 2015. he served as the national finance director of the 2016 presidential campaign of hillary clinton and senior advisor of external outreach for the joe biden 2020 presidential campaign.  education cheng graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in political science and economics from swarthmore college in 2001. he received an msc in international relations from the london school of economics (lse).  career cheng served as the deputy chief of protocol of the united states from july 20, 2009 to july 2011.  cheng has since 2008 acted in important roles for hillary clinton. he served as new york state finance director for the 2008 hillary clinton presidential campaign. he also served on campaigns for john kerry, andrew cuomo, and wesley clark. during the clinton-led state department he was deputy chief of protocol. he joined the clinton foundation in 2011 as chief development officer in 2011 and is credited with raising $248 million until 2015.  in 2015, cheng became the national finance director of hillary clinton's presidential campaign. his role in the campaign is to direct fundraising activity and serve as a close aide to hillary clinton with major donors describing cheng's presence as "often as close as you get to talking to hillary clinton". cheng spent the summer of 2016 taking clinton from fundraiser to fundraiser in the richest zipcodes across the united states, including beverly hills, california, the silicon valley, cape cod and the hamptons. according to cheng more than 1,500 fundraisers were hosted and raised $972 million for clinton's campaign, the dnc and state parties. clinton attended almost 400 of those fundraisers and donations were made by more than 3 million people.  in may 2017, hillary clinton hired cheng for the launch of her new political action organization onward together.  cheng joined the joe biden 2020 presidential campaign as senior advisor for external outreach.  in may 2021, it was announced that cheng would executive produce "recipe for change" for youtube alongside lebron james, maverick carter, michelle kwan, jamal henderson and philip byron. the special, set to air june 16, 2021 and produced by the springhill company, will bring together asian american celebrities, chefs, activists, and creators to celebrate api culture and discuss the recent and historic acts of hate and violence against the api community.  cheng is currently a senior advisor to the asian american foundation and a board member of the american lgbtq+ museum.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people swarthmore college alumni alumni
of the london school of economics american political consultants hillary clinton 2016 presidential campaign hillary clinton 2008 presidential campaign people associated with the 2008 united states presidential election people associated with the 2016 united states presidential election
itheum vittigerum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by francis polkinghorne pascoe in 1864. it is known from australia.  references  lamiinae beetles described in 1864
steuben county jail is a historic jail located at angola, steuben county, indiana. it was built in 1877, and is a -story,  brick and concrete building with second empire style design elements.  it consists of an irregular main section with a rectangular prison wing at the rear.  a porch was enclosed in 1961 and wing added in 1971. the main section is topped by a slate mansard roof and has an elaborate tower with a pyramidal roof and elaborate cupola.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1976.  references  jails on the national register of historic places in indiana second empire architecture in indiana government buildings completed in 1877 buildings and structures in steuben county, indiana national register of historic places in steuben county, indiana jails in indiana 1877 establishments in indiana
gaspar andres servio (born march 9, 1992 in buenos aires, argentina) is a professional argentine footballer who currently plays for club guarani.  honours cafetaleros de tapachula  ascenso mx: clausura 2018  references  1992 births living people argentine footballers argentine expatriate footballers argentine primera division players primera nacional players ascenso mx players paraguayan primera division players club atletico river plate footballers club atletico banfield footballers independiente rivadavia footballers arsenal de sarandi footballers dorados de sinaloa footballers cafetaleros de chiapas footballers club guarani players footballers from buenos aires association football goalkeepers argentine expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in mexico expatriate footballers in paraguay
notommatidae is a family of rotifers in the order ploima.  references     o'reilly, m. (2001). rotifera, in: costello, m.j. et al. (ed.) (2001). european register of marine species: a check-list of the marine species in europe and a bibliography of guides to their identification. collection patrimoines naturels, 50: pages 149-151  external links       ploima rotifer families taxa named by philip henry gosse
botanichesky sad () is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro. construction started on the station in october 2014 and the station opened in september 2016.  name the station is named for the nearby moscow botanical garden.  transfer the station offers free out-of-station transfers to botanichesky sad station of the kaluzhsko-rizhskaya line. in 2018, the city plans to complete an underground facility that connects the stations.  gallery  references  external links     ботаническии сад mkzd.ru   moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
events from the year 1912 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  chairman of the council of ministers - vladimir nikolayevich kokovtsov  events   russian empire at the 1912 summer olympics  brusilov expedition  lena massacre  1912 russian legislative election  births  leonid vitaliyevich kantorovich: a soviet mathematician and economist, known for his theory and development of techniques for the optimal allocation of resources.  deaths  references  1912 in russia years of the 20th century in the russian empire
robert marinier (born 1954 in sudbury, ontario) is a canadian stage actor, playwright and television writer, who was a nominee for the governor general's award for french-language drama at the 1997 governor general's awards for his play l'insomnie. for the same play, he was also a dora mavor moore award nominee for best actor in a play, mid-size theatre division, in 1997.  he has also been a television writer for the series the smoggies, meteo+ and les bleus de ramville.  plays  1979 - lafortune et lachance  1980 - la tante  1982 - l'inconception  1984 - les rogers (with robert bellefeuille and jean-marc dalpe)  1988 - en camisoles  1989 - deuxieme souffle (with dan lalande)  1993 - a la gauche de dieu  1994 - l'insomnie  1997 - but for the grace of god... (english translation of a la gauche de dieu)  1999 - le golfeur et la mort  1999 - contes sudburois (with jean-marc dalpe, robert dickson, paulette gagnon, michael gauthier and brigitte haentjens)  2000 - big crunch  2000 - univers  2000 - je me souviens  2005 - epinal  references  external links  20th-century canadian dramatists and playwrights 21st-century canadian dramatists and playwrights canadian male dramatists and playwrights canadian male stage actors canadian dramatists and playwrights in french 1954 births living people writers from greater sudbury canadian television writers franco-ontarian people 20th-century canadian male writers 21st-century canadian male writers canadian male television writers
the seymour church house is a historic residence located north of winterset, iowa, united states.  samuel stover originally acquired  of land in 1854, and it includes the property the house was built on.  the property was transferred to matilda stover before seymour church acquired it.  the house is an early example of a vernacular limestone farmhouse.  it is sited on the side of a hill south of the road and facing a stream.  the north elevation reveals only the second floor, while the south side reveals it to be a 2½-story house.  it is composed of locally quarried finished cut and rubble limestone. the house was listed on the national register of historic places in 1987.  references  houses completed in 1865 vernacular architecture in iowa houses in madison county, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa houses on the national register of historic places in iowa
emphytoecia suturella is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by blanchard in gay in 1851. it is known from chile.  references  pteropliini beetles described in 1851 endemic fauna of chile
al largo is a composition for orchestra by the finnish composer magnus lindberg.  it was commissioned by the new york philharmonic while lindberg served as the orchestra's composer-in-residence.  its world premiere was given by the new york philharmonic under the direction of alan gilbert at avery fisher hall on june 23, 2010.  composition  background al largo is composed in a single movement and has a duration of roughly 25 minutes.  the composer described the piece in the score program notes, writing, "this is the fastest music i've ever written, yet somewhere deep down there is a feeling of a very slow undertone and a very slow momentum, something large and wide in terms of expression. for a long time i already had an idea that i should call the work something contradictory-not something indicating a fast piece but, rather, something like adagio or largo."  the title, which lindberg described as "unusual," ultimately came at the suggestion of his friend and fellow composer luca francesconi.  lindberg recalled, "he suggested that i use the italian expression 'al largo,' which means being offshore, specifically referring to that moment when you reach the open sea and you don't see the coast anymore and what is before you is vast."  he continued, "al largo is full of fanfares and joyous noises, but somehow its main structure falls into two halves, both of them starting very energetically and ending up as slow music. i like the sound of the word largo and i like the historical ballast of the word largo; even when you put it into the context of the italian meaning of its name context, the piece remains abstract, musically."  lindberg cited maurice ravel's ballet ma mere l'oye and arnold schoenberg's verklarte nacht for string sextet as deciding influence in the piece's orchestration and composition.  he wrote, "one of my earliest ideas with regard to this project was to create a big piece, but i didn't want to use a huge orchestra since i had done that many times in the past; i wanted the work to be more constrained, played by a smaller ensemble, and a perfect masterpiece in that category is ravel's ma mere l'oye (mother goose), which is a gorgeous piece, particularly in the way that ravel builds up tremendous expression with smaller resources."  the composer added, "for me, the most beautiful moment in music history occurs at the end of [schoenberg's verklarte nacht]. i actually worked in a one-bar quote from ver
klarte nacht at the end of al largo. i use my own melodic material on top of it, but there is a real, small gesture toward schoenberg. i'm still fascinated by that moment in music history, when tonality somehow collapsed."  instrumentation the work is scored for an orchestra consisting of two flutes (2nd doubling piccolo), oboe, cor anglais, two clarinets, bass clarinet, two bassoons (2nd doubling contrabassoon), two horns, two trumpets, two trombones, tuba, two percussionists, harp, piano, and strings.  reception al largo has been praised by music critics.  reviewing the world premiere, anthony tommasini of the new york times described al largo as a "a lushly colorful, brilliantly orchestrated, teeming, intriguing yet baffling work."  tommasini wrote, "the piece is basically an essay for orchestra, full of restless, swirling figures, eerie fanfares, solo flights and harmonies that stack up, note by note, to create thick, pungent masses of sound: a lindberg trademark."  he nevertheless added, "there were arresting moments in al largo. i was never bored. but the piece did not earn its length. the flow of events sounded arbitrary, like hearing a fragmented film score without seeing the film. still, mr. lindberg writes brilliantly for orchestra, and mr. gilbert and the philharmonic made the most of it in this glittering, virtuosic performance."  andrew clark of the financial times similarly called the work "an attractively upbeat symphonic essay."  richard whitehouse of gramophone favorably compared the piece to lindberg's expo, remarking, "more complex in content and evolution, al largo (2010) falls into two continuous parts - the first as dense and eventful as the second is luminous and thoughtful - with a climactic burst of energy spilling over into a sibelian string threnody redolent of those found in numerous lindberg orchestral works these past two decades."  references  compositions by magnus lindberg 2010 compositions compositions for symphony orchestra music commissioned by the new york philharmonic
jonathan mitchell may refer to:  sportspeople  jonathan mitchell (footballer) (born 1994), english footballer  jonathan mitchell, a linebacker for the 2011 lehigh valley steelhawks season  jonathan mitchell (basketball), 2006 winner of the mr. new york basketball award  jonathan mitchell (cyclist), british cyclist, bronze medalist in 2015 and 2017 british national track championships competitions  others  jonathan mitchell (writer) (born 1955), american autism writer and activist  jonathan mitchell (producer) in who do you love? (2008 film)  jonathan f. mitchell, american attorney, academic, and government official  see also  jon mitchell (disambiguation)  john mitchell (disambiguation)  joni mitchell, canadian singer-songwriter
guinea-israel relations refers to the current and historical relationship between guinea and israel.  history israel had diplomatic relations in 1958. in 1967, guinea cut ties with israel. diplomatic relations were re-established in july 2016.  trade relations  israel exported a total of us$4.13 million to guinea in 2014, mainly electronics and raw materials, while guinea's exports to israel totaled us$6.95 million, almost exclusively raw diamonds. in 2015 israel did not import diamonds from guinea, bringing imports down to about us$23,000. israel's exports to guinea totaled us$3.66 million that year.  see also  foreign relations of guinea foreign relations of israel economy of israel  references    israel bilateral relations of israel
norman j. sauer is an american forensic anthropologist and professor emeritus of anthropology at michigan state university (msu).  education sauer received his undergraduate degree from the state university of new york at geneseo and his ph.d. from michigan state university.  career sauer taught in the department of anthropology at msu from 1974 to 2012. while at msu, he co-directed their forensic anthropology track of the forensic science program, and directed their forensic anthropology laboratory. he retired from msu in 2013. in 2015, he was named vice president of the american academy of forensic sciences.  work and views in the 2000s, sauer identified a 200-year-old mummy that had previously been posted for sale on ebay as belonging to the university of maryland school of medicine. it was returned there in 2011. he has also analyzed the famous photograph v-j day in times square and has concluded that the sailor depicted therein is george mendonsa (who has claimed to be this sailor). he has argued that race is an invalid method of classifying humans.  references  american forensic scientists american anthropologists michigan state university faculty living people michigan state university alumni forensic anthropologists state university of new york at geneseo alumni people from williamston, michigan year of birth missing (living people)
fereydoun ghanbari (, 23 september 1977, kermanshah, iran - 17 april 2021) was an iranian wrestler. he won gold medal at the 2004 asian wrestling championships. in 1997 he won the gold medal at junior world freestyle wrestling championships in helsinki. he died on the 17 april 2021 due to pancreatitis after some days admitted in hospital.  references  external links profile  1977 births 2021 deaths iranian male sport wrestlers sportspeople from kermanshah deaths from pancreatic cancer deaths from cancer in iran
orlando castillo (born 11 february 1967) is a colombian former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1967 births living people colombian male cyclists olympic cyclists of colombia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
the women in aviation international pioneer hall of fame (also wai pioneer hall of fame) was established in 1992 by women in aviation international to honor and recognize women who have made significant contributions in aviation. its purpose is to honor women who have made significant contributions as record setters, pioneers, or innovators in the aviation and aerospace industries. wai solicits nominations from throughout the aviation industry each year for the wai pioneer hall of fame. inductees are chosen from the nominations by a committee, "with special consideration given to individuals who have helped other women become successful in aviation or opened doors of opportunity for other women." women are inducted to the hall of fame at the conclusion of the wai annual conference.  see also   north american aviation halls of fame  references   1992 establishments in ohio aviation halls of fame halls of fame in ohio women's halls of fame awards established in 1992 tourist attractions in preble county, ohio lists of women
pandori jagir is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 2.6 km from the postal head office in sidhwan r.s., 5.7 km from nurmahal, 32.9 km from the district headquarters at jalandhar and 138 km from the state capital at chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 32 km away from the village. the village is 42 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 122 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
ellen mary rope (1855-1934) was a british sculptor whose career stretched from 1885 until the early 1930s. her work is notable for its range of expression and style, from the classical to the popular. she worked chiefly in bas-reliefs, in stone, cast metal or plaster.  life born the seventh child of george and anne rope of blaxhall, suffolk, ellen mary rope is said to have displayed strong artistic leanings as a child, maybe under the influence of her eldest brother, george thomas rope, a landscape painter and naturalist. to foster this interest, she was sent to london in 1870 to study at nottingham place school in marylebone, where she was taught drawing by octavia hill. she later returned to her home village and attended the ipswich school of art, taught by among others william t. griffiths, the principal. her first exhibited works were paintings and drawings of similar rural subjects to her brother, who exhibited alongside her. she returned to london to the slade school of fine art in 1877, continuing to study drawing and painting but in 1880 professor alphonse legros introduced a course in sculpture and modelling, which rope followed to good effect, radically influencing the direction of her artistic career. her art developed along classic arts and crafts lines, with emphasis on the artist's involvement throughout the creative process and manual not mechanised production. rope was based in london for most of her professional career, latterly in deodar road, putney, where she shared accommodation and a studio with her assistant dorothy anne aldrich rope, a niece. in the same road was the stained-glass studio of another niece m. e. aldrich rope, not to be confused with a third artistic niece margaret agnes rope.  ellen mary rope only fully retired to the family home at grove farm in blaxhall soon before her death in 1934.  works her first piece at the royal academy of arts was a terracotta panel: "david playing before saul" (1885). from that date she had works at r.a. exhibitions in most years up until 1918. by 1893 she was sufficiently well known to be commissioned to provide  four plaster relief figures for spandrels in the woman's building (chicago) of the world columbian exposition in chicago. each polychrome panel was nearly six feet tall, and represented faith, hope, charity and heavenly wisdom. as well as exhibition pieces, she had a more commercial strand to her art, becoming a leading designer for the della robbia pottery from 1896 until its closure in 1906. this led to more popular domestic works featuring children,
flowers and the sea. these small panels "were primarily designed to be executed at low cost and repeated if desired, so that they could be used by others than the very rich" however, major architectural commissions continued, including large figures of faith, hope and charity for morley town hall, leeds (since lost), a 20' long panel for rotherhithe town hall (destroyed by wartime bombing), and a memorial executed in cement at st mary's, bolton-on-swale. her association with the garrett circle, dating back to childhood, led to her spandrels from chicago being installed in the dining room of chenies street ladies' residential chambers (a project of cousins rhoda and agnes garrett) and later to the marble memorial to the mother of elizabeth garrett anderson in aldeburgh parish church. earlier, in 1894, another garrett associate, octavia hill, had commissioned bas-reliefs by rope for the drawing room of the women's university settlement in nelson square, blackfriars. rope's 1902 memorial plaque in marble to mary anne moberley is located in salisbury cathedral.  gallery  references  further reading "the new sculpture" by beattie, s., yale university press, london, 1983  "miss ellen rope, sculptor" by kendall, b., in the artist, december 1899, pp. 206-212  "the art of e.m.rope" by maclean, f.j., in the expert, july 13, 1907, pp. 251-2  "working against the grain; women sculptors in britain c.1885-1950" by rose, p., liverpool university press, 2020; 21, 117, 175-77, 215-20, 221, 263-64  "arts & crafts churches" by hamilton, a., lund humphries, 2020; 133,209, 217, 255,261  external links  1855 births 1934 deaths 19th-century british women artists 20th-century british women artists alumni of the slade school of fine art british women sculptors people from suffolk sibling artists
gunnilbo church () is a church in gunnilbo socken, sweden. it was built between 1825 and 1835, and was inaugurated 4 october 1835.  references  19th-century church of sweden church buildings churches completed in 1835 churches in vastmanland county churches in the diocese of vasteras
dr. daljit singh cheema (born 2 march 1962) is an indian politician from the state of punjab and was the  education minister in the punjab government.  educational/professional qualification cheema completed his m.b.b.s with six month house job each in orthopedics and ophthalmology from guru gobind singh medical college, faridkot.  constituency cheema represented the rupnagar assembly constituency of punjab (2012-2017). during this span of his serving his constituency as the mla of ropar, this region have seen developments such as first and iit of punjab has been setup in ropar. rupnagar flyover has been developed as one of its own kind in the whole state.  political party   cheema is an active member of shiromani akali dal. he is designated as secretary and spokesman to shiromani akali dal. earlier he also served the party as advisor to chief minister, punjab (in the rank of cabinet minister) in 2007-2012.  other positions education minister of punjab (2012-2017) member of legislative assembly, punjab from rupnagar assembly constituency (2012-2017) chairman - sub committee of cabe (central advisory board for education) member state literacy mission authority, punjab  references  people from gurdaspur shiromani akali dal politicians living people 1962 births members of the punjab legislative assembly punjabi people
the africa zone was one of the four zones within group 3 of the regional davis cup competition in 2016. the zone's competition was held in round robin format in antananarivo, madagascar, in july 2016. two nations won promotion to group ii, europe/africa zone, for 2017.  participating nations  inactive nations  draw date: 11-16 july 2016  location: antananarivo university, antananarivo, madagascar (clay)  format: round-robin basis. four pools of five teams (pools a and b). the winners of each pool play-off against the runners-up of the other pool to determine which two nations are promoted to europe/africa zone group ii in 2017.  seeding: the seeding was based on the davis cup rankings of 7 march 2016 (shown in parentheses below).  {| class="wikitable" !width=20%|pot 1 !width=20%|pot 2 !width=20%|pot 3 !width=20%|pot 4 !width=20%|pot 5 |- |   (68)   (80) |   (83)   (84)  |   (101)   (105) |   (113)  (119) |   (122)   (127) |}  group a  group b  first round  group a  morocco vs. mozambique  namibia vs. nigeria  morocco vs. namibia  mozambique vs. cameroon  namibia vs. cameroon  morocco vs. nigeria  namibia vs. mozambique  nigeria vs. cameroon  mozambique vs. nigeria  morocco vs. cameroon  group b  algeria vs. madagascar  benin vs. botswana  algeria vs. benin  madagascar vs. kenya  algeria vs. botswana  benin vs. kenya  benin vs. madagascar  botswana vs. kenya  madagascar vs. botswana  algeria vs. kenya  play-offs  promotional  morocco vs. benin  namibia vs. madagascar  5th−6th  nigeria vs. kenya  7th−8th  cameroon vs. algeria  9th−10th  mozambique vs. botswana  references  external links official website  africa zone group iii davis cup europe/africa zone
alexis castro may refer to:   alexis castro (footballer, born 1984), argentine footballer for aldosivi, on loan from newell's old boys  alexis castro (footballer, born 1994), argentine footballer for san lorenzo de almagro
listrocerum psathyroides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by lepesme in 1950. it is known from the ivory coast.  references  endemic fauna of ivory coast dorcaschematini beetles described in 1950
the 2017 national premier leagues was the fifth season of the australian national premier leagues football competition. the league competition was played amongst eight separate divisions, divided by ffa state and territory member federations. the divisions are act, nsw, northern nsw, queensland, south australia, tasmania, victoria and western australia.  the winners of each respective divisional league competed in a finals playoff tournament at season end, with heidelberg united crowned as champions, which gave them direct qualification for the 2018 ffa cup round of 32.  league tables  act  finals  nsw  finals  northern nsw  finals  queensland  finals  south australia  finals  tasmania  finals  victoria  finals  western australia  finals  final series the winner of each league competition (top of the table) in the npl competed in a single match knockout tournament to decide the national premier leagues champion for 2017. the quarter final match-ups were decided by an open draw. home advantage for the semi-finals and final was based on a formula relating to time of winning (normal time, extra time or penalties), goals scored and allowed, and yellow/red cards. the winner also qualified for the 2018 ffa cup round of 32.  quarter finals  semi finals  grand final  individual honours sean ellis from heidelberg united won the john kosmina medal for the best player in the npl grand final.  references  external links  official website  2017 2017 domestic association football leagues 2017 in australian soccer
john jordan (25 february 1924 - 23 june 2007) was a scottish professional footballer who played as an outside right in the scottish league for celtic and queen's park.  career statistics  references   footballers from glasgow scottish footballers english football league players scottish football league players 1924 births 2007 deaths association football outside forwards reading f.c. players alloa athletic f.c. players queen's park f.c. players celtic f.c. players heart of midlothian f.c. players pollok f.c. players edinburgh city f.c. (1928) players aberdeen f.c. players berwick rangers f.c. players
"que se jodan" (english: fuck them) is a song by puerto rican reggaeton recording artist ivy queen. it was composed by queen  background it was announced in september 2013, that queen had changed management and returned with jorge "goguito" guadalupe, president and co-founder of filtro musik, to release her ninth studio album, entitled vendetta. following the birth of her first biological child, queen then announced that she would embark on a u.s. tour entitled the "viva puerto rico tour". the tour, launched on 29 january 2014, included performances at various gay clubs in cities of the united states and puerto rico, such as new york, orlando, miami, houston, seattle, san francisco, san diego, atlanta, sacramento, los angeles, tampa, and ponce. the studio album version was originally announced for a release in february 2014, and later some time in 2014.  writing and composition the song was composed in minor key tonality with the use of vocal call and response. it features simple harmonic progressions, synthetic instrumentation, stick-drum percussion and mallet percussion. lyrically, it features catchy hooks as well as offensive lyrics. according to the spanish language newspaper hola ciudad!, the song is a "clear message against men". a poll of 649 people by the spanish language newspaper primera hora, determined that fifty-three percent of those polled did not like the new song, while forty-seven percent did.  release the song was released digitally on 13 may 2016. it was released with a parental advisory for explicit lyrics. the song was released simultaneously with "las que se ponen bien la falda," a duet with mexican singer maria jose.  an official lyric video of the song was released on 20 april 2016, featuring a two-minute and twenty-six second snippet of the song. an official artwork video for the song was released to coincide with the official digital release of "que se jodan". the official music video was released two days later, on 15 may 2016. the lyric video was directed by victor reyes and team tiger. the music video was directed by florida film house.  release history  references  2016 singles 2016 songs ivy queen songs spanish-language songs latin trap songs songs written by ivy queen songs with feminist themes
st. thomas marthoma church kalamassery, is a prominent christian parish of the kottayam - kochi diocese under the malankara mar thoma syrian church of malabar. this parish forms the worship place for all the marthomites in changampuzha nagar, edapally, muttam, nad, shanthinagar, north and south kalamassery. the nearest marthoma parishes are in eloor, palarivattom kakanad and aluva.  history in the year 1959, about nine families who were the part of aluva marthoma church started a small and active prayer group. they bought 27 cents of land near hmt road, kalmassery  to construct a church building. the most rev. dr. philipose mar chrysostom mar thoma valiya metropolitan laid the foundation of the chapel in 1963. later the chapel was elevated as parish in 1966. one of the major reconstruction of the church building was on 1997. the present strength of the parish is about 300 families and approximately 2000 members.  golden jubilee since 2016 is the golden jubilee year for the parish, the golden jubilee committee scheduled and charted numerous programs and events for one year.  the program's were conceived under the leadership of rev. dr. john joseph and prof. m. thomas mathew. the parish also has initiated some of the major social causes during the golden jubilee year the golden jubilee celebrations were inaugurated on 8 november 2015. the following are the notable initiatives   † the pain and palliative program of the church - friend in need is a movement that take care of the sick and week people in the  kalamassery region.  † snehakoodu is a fellowship for the elderly  people, where they gather and share their great moments and spent their time creatively.  † free medical consultation for the poor  † medical and poor aid program for education, marriages and homeless  † bazhaza - the distribution of school kits to children in tribal areas  the church witnessed the presence of eminent personalities, seminars, discussions and live music performances during the golden jubilee year. the notable names are alexander jacob (police officer), alphons joseph, benny prasad, v. d. satheesan, p. rajeev, fr. bobby jose kattikad, kochouseph chittilappilly, glorious choir team etc. st thomas marthoma church kalamassery organized a music show against drug abuse by hillsong international leadership college on 2 october 2016 at ernakulam durbar hall ground, cochin.  organizations 1. edavaka mission  2. yuvajana sakhy
am  3. pain & palliative  4. welfare trust  5. sevika sangam  6. sunday school  7. young couples association  8. choir  references  churches in ernakulam district mar thoma syrian churches churches completed in 1966 20th-century churches in india 20th-century oriental orthodox church buildings
a whist marker is a device for recording the current score in the game of whist.  whist markers generally come in pairs, one for each couple.  whist markers can be broadly divided into three groups:  short whist markers  long whist markers  long and short whist markers.  short whist markers  a short whist marker displays the number of points gained so far in the game, and the number of games gained in the rubber.  short whist overtook long whist  in popularity around the middle of the nineteenth century.  five points win a game and three games win a rubber.  the points are for each trick over the book (the first six tricks) in a given deal, and in some games for "honours".  thus a typical wooden whist marker has five broad flaps, for the points, and three narrow flaps for the number of games won so far.  long whist markers long whist markers are similar, but the number of points in a game is ten, or in some cases a lesser number, greater than five.  long and short whist markers these devices are designed to allow scoring for either the long or short game, using the same marker (or pair of markers).  references  external links  the whist marker museum  gaming counters part 2 by tony hall at world of playing cards.  whist
jamie murray and john peers were the defending champions, but murray chose to participate in the davis cup quarterfinals instead. peers played alongside henri kontinen and successfully defended the title, defeating daniel nestor and aisam-ul-haq qureshi in the final, 7-5, 6-3.  seeds  draw  draw  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers   kenny de schepper /  axel michon  lucky losers   daniel masur /  cedrik-marcel stebe  qualifying draw  references  main draw  qualifying draw  german open - doubles 2016 doubles 2016 international german open
dr. bani yadav (born 7 september 1971) is an indian rally driver, motorsports promoter and social rights supporter. yadav won the national autocross champion for 2019 and 2018 - ladies. yadav is the only woman in india to win most of the major cross country rally titles in the woman's category held in india as well as the first woman to come an overall second in the irc - rally de north - 2016. she was the first woman to receive the fmsci - outstanding woman in motorsports award for rallying for the year 2016.the 1st indian woman to drive a formula 4 car on the yas marina track in abu dhabi. she was awarded the best sportsperson award for 2017 by haryana state government on the 69th republic day of india. she has been awarded the woman achiever award by cii - iwn.  early life and career she was born in lucknow and later brought up in delhi. she did her schooling from army public school, dhaula kuan and holds a degree in bachelors of geography from university of delhi and a diploma in advertising and public relations. she had her very first experience on the wheels at a tender age of 13 and that was the moment she knew she wanted to have a career in racing. despite the several pull downs in her life she never gave up on her dreams. at the age of 43 years, for the first time in jaipur speed sprint in 2013 she finally started off with her racing career and ended at 2nd position in the rally.  bani is the national autocross champion-woman for two years in a row 2018 and 2019. she is the first woman from india to officially drive formula 4 cars outside of india at abu dhabi yas marina circuit. she is the only woman in india to have been awarded a doctorate in motorsports.  bani got into motorsport racing in the year 2013 and is the winner of multiple track events and cross country rallies in both men and women categories and only woman in india to have won major cross country rally titles. she has been doing various formats of rallies including auto cross races, cross country extreme rallies, time speed distance events, inrc and irc rallies. she was declared as the fastest woman driver in irc asia cup in the year 2015. bani is an active participant in women empowerment events, she is an active endorser of equal rights and gender equality. she is associated with multiple ngos focusing on cruelty against animals and women and is actively working for the cause. she helps to foster animals at her home till they can be adopted by willing families.  the
toughest time of her life was when she got spine injury in october 2013. she went through two back surgeries. minor surgery was in october, and then major one was in december. it took her 6 months to get back to her feet. as soon as she recovered she got back on the track.  family background she is married to her school friend suresh and has two sons, who have also grown up to be speed-racers.  career results  achievements  national autocross champion india 2018 | 2019 - ladies  1st woman to win second position in rally de north part of indian rally  1st woman to have won - the asia pacific rally cup of coffee day rally - indian rally championship women's category in 2015.  1st in class 2000cc - the asia pacific rally cup of coffee day rally - indian rally championship.  4th in asia pacific rally cup rally.  3rd 1650cc category in the maruti suzuki national autocross championship 2016  1st woman from india to officially drive formula 4 car outside of india at the abu dhabi yas marina circuit and tested the ps 4 sports tyres for michelin.  only indian woman to be awarded with an international doctorate in motorsports in india ( management by the commonwealth vocational university of tonga )  awarded the haryana state government " best sportsperson award for 2017 -18  awarded  "the topmost woman rallyist of the year" award for 2016 -17 ( international association of educators for world peace - affiliated to united nations  )  awarded the outstanding woman in motorsports for rallying for 2016, by fmsci.  awarded the nirbhaya jyoti national woman achiever award 2018  awarded the main hoon beti award 2018 by the uttar pradesh administration  facilitated by the ambassador of argentine republic his excellency mr daniel chuburu for contribution towards motorsports  awarded by the confederation of indian industries the cii  - iwn woman achiever award 2017.  felicitated by the ramraj environment for outstanding contribution towards women empowernment on good governance day  awarded the top woman achiever award by bharti airtel ltd. in 2017.  awarded with the woman's achievers award by amity university for the year 2016.  recognised as one of the top 4 woman achievers on the eve of 70th year of india's independence by doordarshan in 2017.  tedx speaker  irc asia cup  raid de himalaya  desert storm  dakshin dare  royal rajasthan rally  ultimate desert challenge  rally cross  speed sprints  auto cross delhi  solo challenge
references  external links  https://instagram.com/drbaniyadavofficial?r=nametag  indian rally drivers indian racing drivers living people asia-pacific rally championship indian women's rights activists 1971 births indian women activists activists from delhi
david street (born patrick devlin; december 13, 1917 - september 3, 1971) was an american actor and singer in the 1940s and 1950s.  early years  street was born patrick devlin in los angeles, california. while in high school, he formed a trio that sang in local theaters.  radio  street was a singer on the network programs meet me at parky's  and the sealtest village store.  in the 1940s, street had two programs that were distributed via electrical transcription. the david street song shop was produced by louis g. cowan, inc., and david street sings was done by sam kerner productions.  in 1948, he had a program, sponsored by cardinet candy, on a 21-station nbc west coast network.  bands  street played several instruments and worked with the orchestras of hal grayson, al lyons and irving aaronson in addition to having his own group. he also sang with bob crosby and freddie slack.  film  in 1942, street signed a contract with universal studios. he moved to 20th century fox late in 1945.  despite street's having some roles in films, such as an angel comes to brooklyn (1945), laura wagner wrote in films of the golden age (summer 2015), "[m]ovie success eluded him: he was good looking and had a very nice singing voice, but no real personality on camera."  recordings  in the 1940s, street recorded for rca victor, and he "was considered a popular, up-and-coming crooner."  television  street was featured in television programming produced by philco in 1947, using what apparently was an early version of lip synching. an article in variety magazine's september 10, 1947, issue reported that street and the modernaires guest starred on the philco program, "simulating singing to off-screen recordings."  street had his own programs on stations in new york and cincinnati and twice on klac in los angeles. he was also seen on melody, inc., make me sing it, manhattan penthouse, the arthur murray party and broadway open house  personal life  street married mary frances wilhite in 1942. they had a son, david, and later divorced in juarez, mexico. he then married actress lois andrews on october 27, 1945, a union that was ended by annulment in april 1946.  street married actress mary beth hughes april 28, 1948. they were divorced on january 23, 1956. his marriage to actress sharon lee lasted only 26
days, from the december 14, 1957, wedding to the january 8, 1958, divorce.  street's fifth wife was actress debra paget, whom he married january 14, 1958. an article in the may 1958 issue of modern screen magazine reported: "while debra and david were honeymooning ... his first wife, mary f. payne, was complaining because he had fallen $4,845 behind in child support payments, and his fourth wife, sharon lee, was suing him for $3,000 she claimed she had lent david." his marriage with paget was annulled april 10, 1958.  he married singer elaine perry in october 1958. they had a daughter in 1968.  death  street's death came from cancer on september 3, 1971, at valley presbyterian hospital in van nuys, california. he was 53 years old.  references  external links   1917 births 1971 deaths 20th-century american male singers 20th-century american singers american male actors
the stade de moutende is an association football field in apatou, french guiana. the stadium is home to asc agouado of the french guiana honor division, and has a capacity of 1,000 people.  references  football venues in french guiana athletics (track and field) venues in french guiana buildings and structures in apatou
alessia mia teresa russo (born 8 february 1999) is an english footballer who plays as a forward for manchester united in the fa women's super league and the england national team.  she has previously played for chelsea, brighton & hove albion and north carolina tar heels, and has represented england at all age groups.  club career  early career russo began her career at charlton athletic's centre of excellence, before joining and captaining chelsea's development squad. her first and only senior appearance with chelsea came during the first round of the fa wsl continental cup on 2 july 2016.  brighton & hove albion in january 2017, russo joined newly promoted wsl 2 side brighton & hove albion ahead of the 2017 fa wsl spring series. she made her brighton debut on 5 february 2017 in an fa cup third round victory against afc wimbledon. on 11 february, russo scored brighton's first ever goal at wsl level in the team's spring series opener, a 1-1 draw with london bees.  north carolina tar heels in autumn 2017, russo moved to the united states to play college soccer, joining acc team north carolina tar heels. as a freshman she appeared in 19 games, making 18 starts. she finished as the leading scorer on the team with 9 goals as well as 2 assists and earned several accolades including co-acc freshman of the year, acc all-freshman team selection and united soccer coaches all-east region first team selection. in 2018, despite missing the postseason with a broken leg, russo earned a united soccer coaches first-team all-america selection, the first tar heel to make the first team since crystal dunn in 2013, and was named acc offensive player of the year. in august 2020, russo announced she was forgoing her final year of college eligibility amid uncertainty around the season due to the covid-19 pandemic.  manchester united on 10 september 2020, russo signed a two-year contract with the option for a third year with manchester united, the club she grew up supporting. she made her debut three days later as a half-time substitute in a 5-2 league victory over birmingham city, registering an assist. she scored her first goal for the club in the following game, starting in a 3-0 victory over brighton & hove albion. russo was nominated for wsl player of the month in october 2020 with three goals and one assist in three appearances. however, she was sidelined in november after a hamstring injury suffered in training required surgery.  international career  youth russo has represented england on the under-15, under-17 and
under-19, under-20 and under-21 national teams. in october 2015, she scored five goals against croatia during a 13-0 2016 uefa women's under-17 championship qualification win before scoring a hat-trick against estonia in the following game. russo finished joint top-scorer in qualifying with 9 goals and then again at 2016 uefa women's under-17 championship, scoring 5 goals including a brace against germany in a 4-3 semi-final defeat as england finished third. she competed at the 2016 fifa u-17 women's world cup in jordan and was part of the squad that finished third at the 2018 fifa u-20 women's world cup.  senior on 26 february 2020, russo was called up to the senior england national team for the first time as part of the 2020 shebelieves cup squad, initially as a training player but was later added as an injury replacement for lucy bronze. she made her senior international debut on 11 march 2020 in the final game of the tournament, appearing as a 76th minute substitute for toni duggan in a 1-0 defeat to spain. on 30 november 2021, she scored her first international goals, a hat-trick in a national record 20-0 victory over latvia during 2023 world cup qualifying. timed at 11 minutes, the hat-trick was the fastest by any england player in history.  personal life born in maidstone, kent, russo is of italian descent. her sicilian grandfather moved to england in the 1950s. her father, mario, played non-league football for met police and brother, giorgio, has also played non-league football for multiple teams, most recently for ramsgate. her brother, luca, went to the university of missouri on a track and field scholarship.  in 2006, russo was a mascot for her future united manager casey stoney, who was captain of charlton athletic while russo was at the london club's centre of excellence.  career statistics  college  club .  international statistics accurate as of match played 23 february 2022.  international goals  as of match played 30 november 2021. england score listed first, score column indicates score after each russo goal.  honours north carolina tar heels atlantic coast conference regular season: 2018, 2019 acc women's soccer tournament: 2017, 2019 ncaa division i college cup runners-up: 2018, 2019  england arnold clark cup: 2022  england u17  uefa women's under-17 championship third place: 2016  england u20 fifa u-20 women's world cup third place: 2018 individual  uefa women's under-
17 championship team of the tournament: 2016  uefa women's under-17 championship top scorer: 2016  2016 uefa women's under-17 championship qualification top scorer: 2016 acc freshman of the year: 2017 acc offensive player of the year: 2018  references  external links  university of north carolina player profile  profile at the manchester united f.c. website  profile at the football association website        1999 births living people english women's footballers women's association football midfielders chelsea f.c. women players fa women's super league players sportspeople from maidstone north carolina tar heels women's soccer players brighton & hove albion w.f.c. players manchester united w.f.c. players expatriate women's soccer players in the united states english people of sicilian descent england women's international footballers
surja is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3.8 km (2 miles) from goraya, 16.9 km from phillaur,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by sarpanch, as an elected representative of the village.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station. however, phagwara junction train station is  away from the village. the village is  from the domestic airport in ludhiana, and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh. also, sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second-nearest airport, which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
divya seth shah is an indian film and television actress, who started her career with tv serial hum log, playing majhli. she is the daughter of actress sushma seth and dhruv seth.  she has done theatre with barry john in delhi, television shows and films like jab we met.  career divya seth was seen in the latest web series, the married woman, directed by sahir raza. the star cast also includes ridhi dogra, monica dogra.  television  films  web series  references  external link    indian television actresses
donna gould (born 10 june 1966) is an australian former athlete and cyclist. she competed in the women's 3000 metres at the 1984 summer olympics and the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1966 births living people australian female cyclists australian female middle-distance runners olympic athletes of australia olympic cyclists of australia athletes (track and field) at the 1984 summer olympics cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
michael jovan "juice" thompson (born february 9, 1989) is an american professional basketball player who plays for al ahly.  professional career in june 2013, thompson signed with elan bearnais pau-lacq-orthez.  on july 24, 2014, he joined spo rouen.  on august 12, 2015, thompson returned to elan bearnais pau-lacq-orthez. on 31 october 2015, thompson scored 41 points in a game against sluc nancy. thompson was named to the all-lnb pro a team of the 2015-16 season and was the league's top scorer.  on july 4, 2016, thompson signed with turkish club besiktas.  on july 9, 2017, thompson joined istanbul bb.  on august 23, 2019, he has signed with bcm gravelines-dunkerque of the lnb pro a. he averaged 9.9 points, 2.8 rebounds, and 5.7 assists per game. on august 10, 2020, thompson signed with bc astana of the kazakhstan championship and the vtb united league.  on september 9, 2021, thompson signed with egyptian club al ahly.  references  external links northwestern wildcats bio fiba profile  1989 births living people american expatriate basketball people in france american expatriate basketball people in germany american expatriate basketball people in turkey american men's basketball players asvel basket players basketball players from chicago bc astana players besiktas men's basketball players elan bearnais players istanbul buyuksehir belediyespor basketball players le mans sarthe basket players northwestern wildcats men's basketball players point guards skyliners frankfurt players
kreitman may refer to:  people with the surname esther kreitman (1891-1954), british novelist. hyman kreitman (1914-2001), british businessman. martin kreitman, american geneticist. norman kreitman (1927-2012), scottish psychiatrist.  other mcdonald-kreitman test
johanna larsson was the defending champion, but lost in the semifinals to katerina siniakova.  laura siegemund won her first wta title, defeating siniakova in the final, 7-5, 6-1.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  references   main draw  qualifying draw  swedish open - singles 2016 women's singles 2016 in swedish women's sport
the 1972 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 24 june 1972 at white city stadium.   the winner was patricias hope and the winning owners brian stanley, gordon marks and b marks received £10,952.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  3¼, head, 1¼, 1, 3½ (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report ante-post favourites were favourite rory and juvenile champion short interview. oaks heroine decimal queen and the previous year's third placed greyhound leap and run were two other leading contenders.  the first round consisted of nine heats and three fast winners were super rory (28.59), suburban gent (28.65) and westmead county (28.76), both ante-post favourites went out. when round two got underway super rory aged (only 20 months) recorded 28.36 to win heat two by five lengths from patricias hope; westmead county was eliminated in the same heat. irish entry proud life, bally lander from walthamstow and lucky punter trained by peter hawkesley took the other heat wins.   proud life won again to claim the first semi-final from patricias hope and micks pride; hot favourite first case trained by tom johnston jr could only finish fifth. in the second semi-final super rory became the fastest greyhound in the world by setting a time 28.26 sec when winning and bettering his father's (yellow printer) time.  an anonymous offer of £12,000 was followed by a £14,000 by freddie warrell for super rory but both were turned down and he was sent to traps as the 4-9 favourite for the final. super rory failed to trap well after being unsettled by the derby roar* but patricias hope did trap well and went on to record a comfortable victory.  note derby roar* (the noise made by the crowd when the electric hare is set in motion)  quarter finals  semi finals  + world and track record  see also 1972 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
giovanni turini (may 23, 1841 - august 27, 1899) was an american sculptor, born in verona, italy.  he immigrated to the united states in the late 1860s.  he is best remembered as a portrait and historical sculptor.  his portrait bust of giuseppe mazzini, which he created in 1876 and was dedicated in 1878 was funded by the new york italian american community and was one of the early examples of public statuary in the city.  turini, who served with giuseppe garibaldi as a volunteer during italy's war with austria in 1866, created garibaldi's statue in washington square park in 1888. his statue was initially designed to be a part of a three figure group, with garibaldi standing on top of a boulder.  however funds to complete the entire project, which was running well above projected costs, proved to be inadequate, so while turini was abroad the design was changed and garibaldi was placed atop a fairly standard pedestal.  it turned out in order to get the statue's feet to stand properly on the base, following its being designed and cast to be placed on an uneven surface, the legs had to be repositioned, leading to turini's calling those responsible "cruel amputators" and the new york times writing, "the man who suggested the change is said to have argued with garibaldi's friends in the italian colony on the basis that garibaldi was dead anyway, and he would not object, forgetting that the public might some day realize that it had a monstrosity of a statue on its hands."  his submission for a statue of simon bolivar for new york was "flatly rejected" by the national sculpture society in about 1899.  the commission was ultimately awarded to sally james farnham.  turini's granddaughter was painter and muralist verona burkhard.  selected works  giuseppe mazzini, central park, new york, new york,  1878  giuseppe garibaldi, washington square park, new york, new york, 1888  evangeline, jersey city museum,  jersey city, new jersey 1888  references  1841 births 1899 deaths 19th-century american sculptors 19th-century male artists american male sculptors artists from new york city italian emigrants to the united states sculptors from new york (state)
spacex crs-16, also known as spx-16, was a commercial resupply service mission to the international space station launched on 5 december 2018  aboard a falcon 9 launch vehicle. the mission was contracted by nasa and is flown by spacex.  this crs mission is the first with the falcon 9 block 5. it carried the global ecosystem dynamics investigation (gedi) lidar and the robotic refueling mission 3 (rrm3) experiment as external payloads.  launch  in february 2016, it was announced that nasa had awarded a contract extension to spacex for five additional crs missions (crs-16 to crs-20). , a nasa inspector general report had this mission manifested for august 2018, but it was later delayed to 29 november 2018, 4 december 2018, and 5 december 2018.  the first stage booster b1050.1 experienced a grid fin hydraulic pump stall on re-entry. this caused the first stage to go into a roll after the re-entry burn. it failed to reach landing zone 1, but recovered enough to achieve a water landing off cape canaveral. shortly after the landing, elon musk, ceo of spacex, stated the booster appeared undamaged and was being recovered. after recovering the booster, it was found to be too damaged to fly again and was scrapped for parts.  on 13 january 2019, dragon was released from iss at 23:33 utc and deorbited, splashing down in the pacific ocean approximately 5 hours later on 14 january 2019 at 05:10 utc, returning more than  of cargo to earth.  payload  nasa has contracted for the crs-16 mission from spacex and therefore determines the primary payload, date/time of launch, and orbital parameters for the dragon space capsule. crs-16 carried a total of  of material into orbit. this included  of pressurised cargo with packaging bound for the international space station, and  of unpressurised cargo composed of two external station experiments: the global ecosystem dynamics investigation (gedi) lidar and the robotic refueling mission 3. forty mice also flew with the payload in an experiment called rodent research-8 (rr-8).  the crs-16 mission also carried a pair of cubesats originally planned to launch aboard the cygnus ng-10 international space station (iss) cargo resupply mission, but which were deferred. these included the unite cubesat from the university of southern indiana and the techedsat-8 cubesat from nasa's ames research center.  the following is
a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:  crew supplies:   science investigations:   rodent research-8 (rr-8)   molecular muscle experiment (mme)   growth of large, perfect protein crystals for neutron crystallography (perfect crystals)   spacewalk equipment:   vehicle hardware:   computer resources:   russian hardware:   external payloads:  global ecosystem dynamics investigation (gedi): ≈   robotic refueling mission 3 (rrm3)  see also   uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references  external links   dragon website at spacex.com  commercial resupply services at nasa.gov  spacex dragon spacecraft launched in 2018 spacex payloads contracted by nasa supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft which reentered in 2019
yulia r. gel is a professor in the department of mathematical sciences at the university of texas at dallas and an adjunct professor in the department of statistics and actuarial science of the university of waterloo.  gel earned her doctorate in mathematics at saint petersburg state university in russia, under the supervision of vladimir n. fomin. after postdoctoral research at the university of washington, she joined the waterloo faculty in 2004, and moved to dallas in 2014.  in 2014 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for theoretical contributions to nonparametric aspects of spatiotemporal processes; for promoting the application of modern statistical methodologies in law, public policy, and the environmental sciences; and for championing the advancement of women and other under-represented groups in the mathematical and physical sciences."  references  external links google scholar profile  year of birth missing (living people) living people american statisticians canadian statisticians russian statisticians women statisticians saint petersburg state university alumni university of texas at dallas faculty university of waterloo faculty fellows of the american statistical association
the 2007 fiba europe under-20 championship for women was the sixth edition of the women's european basketball championship for national under-20 teams. it was held in sofia, bulgaria, from 13 to 22 july 2007. spain women's national under-20 basketball team won the tournament and became the european champions for the first time.  participating teams   (winners, 2006 fiba europe under-20 championship for women division b)    (runners-up, 2006 fiba europe under-20 championship for women division b as serbia and montenegro)  first round in the first round, the teams were drawn into four groups of four. the first three teams from each group advance to the quarterfinal round, the last teams will play in the classification round for 13th-16th place.  group a  group b  group c  group d  quarterfinal round in this round, the teams play in two groups of six. the first two teams from each group advance to the semifinals, the third and fourth teams advance to the 5th-8th place playoffs, the other teams will play in the 9th-12th place playoffs.  group e  group f  classification round for 13th-16th place  group g  9th-12th place playoffs  9th-12th place semifinals  11th place match  9th place match  5th-8th place playoffs  5th-8th place semifinals  7th place match  5th place match  championship playoffs  semifinals  3rd place match  final  final standings  references  2007 2007-08 in european women's basketball international youth basketball competitions hosted by bulgaria fiba u20 july 2007 sports events in europe
nandrolone caproate (brand name anabolin depot), or nandrolone hexanoate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-hexanoate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids caproate esters estranes nandrolone esters progestogens testosterone
ferial qadin (; ; died 21 february 1902) was a consort to ismail pasha, and mother to their son fuad i of egypt.  background she married ismail pasha, and gave birth to the future king fuad i on 26 march 1868 in the giza palace. isma'il was deposed in 1879, and was succeeded by his son tewfik pasha. she was widowed at isma'il's death in 1895.  she died on 21 february 1902 in the saffron palace, cairo, twenty years before her son fuad ascended the throne. she was buried in the khedival mausoleum located in al-rifa'i mosque, cairo.  fuad adored his mother, and believed that "f" was his lucky letter. the names of his five daughters and son farouk all started with f, and farouk  continued the practice with his own children.  see also  muhammad ali dynasty family tree  references  1902 deaths egyptian concubines egyptian princesses egyptian slaves ferial 19th-century egyptian women
fox lake is a national historic district located in pleasant township, steuben county, indiana.  the district encompasses 27 contributing buildings associated with the fox lake resort vacation community. it developed between 1928 and 1950 as a vacation resort for middle class african-americans. the cottages are primarily one-story, frame dwellings with gable roofs and concrete block foundations.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  references  african-american history of indiana historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana buildings and structures in steuben county, indiana national register of historic places in steuben county, indiana
mackenzie willis (born 7 august 1995) is a former australian rules footballer playing for the gold coast football club in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the gold coast football club with their fourth selection and fifty-second overall in the 2015 national draft. he made his debut in the 120 point loss against  in round 6, 2016 at simonds stadium. he was delisted by gold coast at the conclusion of the 2018 season.  references  external links  1995 births living people gold coast football club players australian rules footballers from tasmania kingborough football club players
the 2016 tour de serbie () was the 56th edition of the tour de serbie cycling stage race. it was scheduled from 14 to 19 june.  the winner of overall classification was matej mugerli.  schedule  classification leadership  final standings  general classification  points classification  mountains classification  young riders classification  team classification  references  external links  tour de serbie 2016 tour de serbie tour de serbie
simar is an unincorporated community in solway township, saint louis county, minnesota, united states, located near munger.  references  unincorporated communities in minnesota unincorporated communities in st. louis county, minnesota
porter pool bathhouse is a historic bathhouse located at shelbyville, shelby county, indiana. it was built in 1930, and is a -story, rectangular, art deco style brick building.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  upon closure of porter pool, the property and building has since been repurposed as the shelby county tourism and visitors bureau welcome center and the shelby county chamber of commerce. <httpl://www.shelbycountytourism.com>  references  park buildings and structures on the national register of historic places in indiana art deco architecture in indiana buildings and structures completed in 1930 buildings and structures in shelby county, indiana national register of historic places in shelby county, indiana public baths on the national register of historic places 1930 establishments in indiana
marcin chabowski (born 28 june 1986) is a polish long-distance runner. he finished fourth in the half marathon at the 2016 european championships. he led for a large part of the marathon race at the 2014 european championships but was caught by the chasers and eventually dropped out.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 1500 metres - 3:44.06 (warsaw 2009) 3000 metres - 8:01.87 (sopot 2009) 5000 metres - 13:52.61 (bydgoszcz 2009) 10,000 metres - 28:27.59 (kedzierzyn-kozle 2009) half marathon - 1:02:26 (piła 2011) marathon - 2:10:07 (dusseldorf 2012) 3000 metres steeplechase - 8:25.90 (szczecin 2008)  indoor 3000 metres - 8:13.82 (spała 2004)  references  1986 births living people people from wejherowo polish male long-distance runners polish male marathon runners polish male steeplechase runners athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of poland
cavusgnathus is an extinct genus of conodonts.  glen k. merrill stated in 1963 that "conodont workers have considered idiognathoides to be a junior synonym of polygnathodella but it now proves to be a junior synonym of cavusgnathus. polygnathodella and cavusgnathus are shown to form a transitional series."  references  external links       ozarkodinida genera pennsylvanian conodonts gzhelian life kasimovian life fossil taxa described in 1933 pennsylvanian first appearances pennsylvanian extinctions
the 2003 league of ireland first division season was the 19th season of the league of ireland first division and the first to be played as a summer league.  overview the first division was contested by 12 teams and dublin city won the division. each team played the other teams three times, totaling 33 games.  final table  promotion/relegation play-off four teams entered the promotion/relegation play-off. the second, third and fourth placed teams from the first division were joined by the ninth placed team from the 2003 league of ireland premier division.  semi-final 1st legs  2nd legs  derry city win 4-0 on aggregate  finn harps win 3-1 on aggregate  final  derry city win 2-1 on aggregate and retain their place in the premier division.  see also  2003 league of ireland premier division  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2 ireland ireland 2
the 2016-17 biathlon world cup (bwc) was a multi-race tournament over a season of biathlon, organised by the international biathlon union. the season started on 27 november 2016 in ostersund, sweden and ended on 19 march 2017 in holmenkollen, norway. the defending overall champions from the 2015-16 biathlon world cup were martin fourcade of france and gabriela koukalova of the czech republic.  calendar below is the ibu world cup calendar for the 2016-17 season.  world cup podiums  men  women  men's team  women's team  mixed  standings: men  overall   final standings after 26 races.  individual   final standings after 3 races.  sprint   final standings after 9 races.  pursuit   final standings after 9 races.  mass start   final standings after 5 races.  relay   final standings after 5 races.  nation   final standings after 22 races.  standings: women  overall   final standings after 26 races.  individual    final standings after 3 races.  sprint   final standings after 9 races.  pursuit   final standings after 9 races.  mass start   final standings after 5 races.  relay   final standings after 5 races.  nation   final standings after 22 races.  standings: mixed  mixed relay   final standings after 5 races.  medal table  achievements first world cup career victory  men  , 25, in his 3rd season - the wc 1 pursuit in ostersund; it also was his first podium  , 26, in his 7th season - the world championships sprint in hochfilzen; first podium was 2014-15 sprint in khanty-mansiysk  , 35, in his 15th season - the world championships individual in hochfilzen; first podium was 2013-14 sprint in kontiolahti  women  , 26, in her 2nd season - the wc 3 sprint in nove mesto; it also was her first podium  , 23, in her 3rd season - the wc 3 pursuit in nove mesto; first podium was 2016-17 sprint in nove mesto  , 30, in her 7th season - the wc 6 mass start in antholz; it also was her first podium  , 29, in her 10th season - the wc 9 sprint in oslo holmenkollen; first podium was 2013-14 sprint in kontiolahti  first world cup podium  men  , 28, in his 8th season
- no. 3 in the wc 1 individual in ostersund  , 25, in his 5th season - no. 3 in the wc 5 pursuit in ruhpolding  , 28, in his 8th season - no. 2 in the wc 9 mass start in oslo holmenkollen  women  , 28, in her 4th season - no. 3 in the wc 1 individual in ostersund  , 20, in her 3rd season - no. 2 in the wc 2 sprint in pokljuka  , 25, in her 4th season - no. 3 in the wc 2 pursuit in pokljuka  , 23, in her 3rd season - no. 2 in the wc 3 sprint in nove mesto  , 25, in her 4th season - no. 3 in the wc 6 individual antholtz  , 22, in her 3rd season - no. 3 in the wc 8 pursuit kontiolahti  victory in this world cup (all-time number of victories in parentheses)  men  , 14 (61) first places  , 2 (13) first place  , 2 (12) first places  , 2 (10) first places  , 2 (3) first places  , 1 (8) first place  , 1 (1) first place  , 1 (1) first place  , 1 (1) first place  women  , 10 (17) first places  , 5 (17) first places  , 2 (21) first places  , 2 (7) first places  , 2 (4) first places  , 2 (2) first places  , 1 (1) first place  , 1 (1) first place  , 1 (1) first place  retirements the following notable biathletes retired during or after the 2016-17 season:  men     women  notes  references  external links ibu official site    biathlon world cup 2016 in biathlon 2017 in biathlon
sunner khurd is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 5.3 km (3.5 miles) from rurka kalan, 22 km (14 miles) from phillaur, 29.8 km from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by sarpanch, as an elected representative of the village.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is  away from the village. the village is  from the domestic airport in ludhiana, and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh. also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second-nearest airport, which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
garhshankar assembly constituency (sl. no.: 45) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency representing garhshankar in hoshiarpur district, punjab state, india. currently, it is represented by jai krishan singh of the aam aadmi party.  the last assembly elections were held in february 2017  previous mla list 2017-2022 jai kishan singh rori, aap  2012-2017  surinder singh bhullewal rathaan, shiromani akali dal  2007-2012 love kumar goldy, indian national congress  2004-2007 (bye elections)  love kumar goldy, indian national congress  2002-2004 avinash rai khanna, bjp  1997-2002 shingara ram bahujan samaj party  1992-1997 shingara ram bahujan samaj party  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
senden bana kalan (english: what's left of you) is a turkish movie released on 17 april 2015.  synopsis ozgur (ekin koc) a young boy who has lost his parents since childhood was heir to his grandfather's wealth but there is one condition that he has to live a while in a village otherwise it will be donated to a charity. ozgur will go to that village and he meets a girl named elif (neslihan atagul dogulu).  cast and characters  references  external links    2015 films turkish-language films turkish drama films 2015 drama films films set in turkey turkish films
raymond l. "ray" pavlak (march 6, 1926 - april 1, 1994) was an american judge and politician.  from south st. paul, minnesota, pavlak graduated from south st. paul high school. he served in the united states navy during world war ii. pavlak graduated from the university of st. thomas and received his law degree from william mitchell college of law. he then practiced law. from 1965 until 1974, pavlak served in the minnesota house of representatives and was a democrat. in 1974, pavlak was appointed minnesota district court judge and served until his retirement in 1994. pavlak died at his home in south st. paul. minnesota.  notes  1926 births 1994 deaths people from south st. paul, minnesota university of st. thomas (minnesota) alumni william mitchell college of law alumni minnesota democrats minnesota state court judges members of the minnesota house of representatives 20th-century american judges  20th-century american politicians
texas hill station is a site of a later butterfield overland mail stagecoach station.  it was one of several built in 1859 to increase the number of water stops and team changes along the drier and hotter sections of the route and was located about 2 miles east of texas hill.  history texas hill station replaced griswell's station and when the union army measured the distances between stations in 1862, it was located 10.98 miles east of mohawk station, and 16.13 miles from flap-jack ranch, later known as grinnel's ranch, and stanwix station. their report also noted the station was a half a mile back from the river and that there was a little grass on the hill.  from 1861 the station was abandoned by the overland mail company, but texas hill station remained in use as a water stop and camp for soldiers, freighters and travelers, and from 1866 until 1880 a stage station once again.  the site today today no trace of the station remains in the river valley, no doubt swept away by the changing course of the river or by flood events since 1880.  references  texas hill station texas hill station former populated places in yuma county, arizona stagecoach stations in arizona
the 1916 argentine primera division was the 25th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on march 23 and ended on december.  racing win its 4th consecutive league championship.  final standings  references  argentine primera division seasons 1916 in argentine football 1916 in south american football
the crown colony of penang was a british crown colony from 1946 to 1957. it came under british sovereignty after being ceded by the sultanate of kedah in 1786, and had been part of the straits settlements in 1946. together with singapore, it became a crown colony under the direct control of the british colonial office in london until it was incorporated into the malayan union.  the british east india company gained penang in 1786 and established a trading post. it was ceded by the sultan of kedah to ensure the former's protection against the threat posed by its siamese and burmese neighbors. it was transformed into a crown colony, substituting state for company control through the straits settlement 1867.  during world war ii, it was occupied by the japanese from 1942 to 1945.   after the post-war dissolution of the straits settlements penang and malacca become crown colonies in the federation of malaya, while singapore became a standalone crown colony, separate from malaya. in 1955, tunku abdul rahman held a meeting with the british to discuss the end of british rule in penang with a merger with malayan union (which was then replaced by federation of malaya). on 31 august 1957, when malaya achieved its independence from the united kingdom, penang was integrated as part of the federation, which later known as malaysia when it merged with another territories in british borneo.  references  straits settlement of penang british malaya former countries in malaysian history straits settlements former polities of the cold war
catherine ann sugar is an american biostatistician at the university of california, los angeles, where she is professor in residence in the departments of biostatistics, statistics and psychiatry and director of the biostatistics core for the semel institute for neuroscience and human behavior. her research concerns cluster analysis, covariance, and the applications of statistics in medicine and psychiatry.  sugar graduated from pomona college in 1992. she earned a master's degree in mathematics from stanford university in 1994, and a ph.d. in statistics from stanford in 1998, under the supervision of  richard olshen. prior to joining the ucla faculty, sugar worked in the department of information and operations management of the marshall school of business at the university of southern california, with a joint appointment in the usc school of pharmacy.  in 2015 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for outstanding methodological contributions in cluster analysis and functional data analysis; for extraordinary accomplishment in teaching and mentoring; for outstanding leadership in integrating statistical methods into mental health research; and for exemplary service to the profession."  references  external links  year of birth missing (living people) living people american statisticians women statisticians biostatisticians pomona college alumni stanford university alumni university of southern california faculty ucla school of public health faculty fellows of the american statistical association
yang wenji (; born 24 september 1993) is a chinese footballer who currently plays for meizhou hakka in the china league one.  club career  yang joined china league two club hebei zhongji in 2011. he played as a substitute player in the club, following hebei to promote to china league one in 2014. he made 13 appearances in the 2015 season as hebei finished runners-up of the league and promoted to the chinese super league.   in january 2017, yang moved to league one side meizhou hakka.  career statistics  .  references  external links    living people 1993 births association football defenders chinese footballers footballers from wuhan hebei f.c. players meizhou hakka f.c. players chinese super league players china league one players china league two players
maria bernard (born april 6, 1993 in calgary, alberta) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the middle-distance events, predominately the 3,000-meter steeplechase.  in july 2016, she was officially named to canada's olympic team.  bernard competed for the ubc thunderbirds during her time in university, leading her team to three naia cross country team championships from 2012 to 2014. in 2014, bernard won the naia cross country individual title as well, capping off a cross country career with four all-american honours.  an eight-time naia all-american in track and field, she was named the 2015 herbert b. marett outstanding performer award winner at the conclusion of the naia outdoor track and field championships in gulf shores, ala., after winning both the steeplechase (for the second straight time) and the 5,000-meter run at the national meet. bernard set the naia championship steeplechase record in the preliminaries of the event in 2015.  she also claimed the gold in the steeplechase at the naia meet in 2014 and anchored ubc to a victory in the women's 4x800 relay at the naia championship in 2013.  references  1993 births living people athletes from calgary canadian female steeplechase runners athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada world athletics championships athletes for canada university of british columbia alumni
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the , after hitachi province. it was formed on 2 april 1945 in utsunomiya as a triangular division. it was one of a batch of eight divisions composed of the 201st, 202nd, 205th, 206th, 209th, 212th, 214th and 216th divisions created as part of the reaction to the battle of okinawa.  history on 19 june 1945, the 214th division organization and deployment was complete. the 519th infantry regiment was in utsunomiya, 520th - in yaita, and 521st infantry regiment - in setagaya. other smaller sub-units were stationed at nasushiobara. the 214th division was assigned to the army mobile reserve and did not see any combat by the time of the surrender of japan on 15 august 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第214師団 (日本軍), accessed 20 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
futuristic polar bears is a british dj and producer from london.  fran cosgrave has been signed to labels spinnin', revealed smash the house and protocol recordings.  career the futuristic polar bear has had many hit singles, including various number 1 singles in the beatport global dance charts, with releases on revealed recordings and their own record label cmmd records  originally, fpb was a trio, but luke hayes left in august 2018.  discography  singles  charted singles  other singles  2013: drift (with east & young) [strictly rhythm]  2013: never give up [pacha recordings]  2013: all night long [klass action]  2014: back to earth [revealed recordings]  2014: tomorrow is now (with mark le sal) [mutants]  2014: game over [harem records]  2014: vargo (with danny howard) [spinnin' records]  2014: romani (with danny howard) [spinnin' records]  2014: taurus (with thomas newson) [revealed recordings]  2015: the ride [starter records]  2015: manila (with sultan + shepard) [harem records]  2015: velocity (with henry fong) [revealed recordings]  2015: night vision [armada trice]  2015: shake it off (with kill the buzz) [revealed recordings]  2015: byos (with sandro silva) [armada music]  2015: why (with d.o.d) [wall recordings]  2016: cupid's casualty (with mark sixma and amba sheperd) [armada music]  2016: lynx (with maddix) [revealed recordings]  2016: sea coffee (with mattn and dimitri vegas & like mike) [blanco y negro]  2016: kali (with qulinez) [armada music]  2017: grizzly (with dimitri vangelis & wyman) [buce records]  2017: cactus (with wolfpack featuring x-tof) [smash the house]  2017: destiny (with wolfpack featuring shurakano) [smash the house]  2018: are am eye (with kevu) [smash the house]  2018: can't get over you (featuring syon) [moon records]  2018: running wild (with yves v featuring pollyanna) [spinnin' records]  2018: derb (with wolfpack) [smash the house]  2018: moksha (with wolfpack)
[cmmd records]  2018: throne (with mattn and olly james) [smash the house]  2018: aventus [maxximize]  2018: i can't do it (with kess ross) [protocol recordings]  2018: acid drop (with dimitri vangelis & wyman) [buce records]  2019 favourite dj (with kess ross) [sirup music]  2019: scars (with vanto and dj junior) [cmmd records]  2019: cntrl (with dj junior, mylok and love letters)  2019: you & me [protocol recordings]  2019: madness (with mr. black) [revealed music]  2019: odyssey (with angemi) [maxximize]  2019: shiva (with dj yaksa, bustarow and love letters) [23rd precinct] 2018: gypsy (with mariana bo and mr. black) [dharma]  2020: after party (with lenerd featuring love letters) [cmmd records]  2020: better than this (featuring franky) [protocol recordings]  2020: take control [protocol recordings]  2020: nebula (with reggio and love letters) [cmmd records]  2020: faith (featuring lux) [protocol recordings]  2020: with your love (with jaxx & vega) [revealed music]  2020: horns of fire (featuring jesus davila) [cmmd records]  2020: rave anthem (with reggio) [revealed]  2020: run away (with bassjackers and jaxx & vega) [smash the house]  2020: lord of the rave (with wolfpack and nick havsen) [generation smash]  2021: aura (with corey james featuring møøne) [protocol recordings]  2021: united we stand (with justin prime) [cmmd records]  2021: addiction (with cuebrick and angie vu ha featuring iives) [maxximize]  2021: mind reader (with sammy boyle) [cmmd records]  2021: ravers unite (with brian cross) [generation smash]  2021: no tears allowed (featuring franky) [protocol recordings]  2021: take me away (with jewelz & sparks featuring carly lyn) [maxximize]  2021: breathless (with tony junior and skazi) [revealed]  2021:
kiss the night (with justin prime and k1lo) [nexchapter]  remixes  2014: divine inspiration - "the way (put your hand in my hand)" (futuristic polar bears remix) [heat recordings]  2014: idyll - "paradisal" (futuristic polar bears remix) [anticodon]  2015: marletron - "world is yours" (futuristic polar bears remix) [monster tunes]  2016: kreesha turner, sultan & ned shepard - "bring me back" (futuristic polar bears remix) [armada music]  2017: jurgen vries - "the theme" (futuristic polar bears remix) [armada music]  2017: mattn and magic wand featuring neisha neshae - "let the song play" (futuristic polar bears remix) [smash the house]  2017: morgan page and damon sharpe featuring stella rio  - "beautiful disaster" (futuristic polar bears remix) [armada music]  2018: dimitri vegas & like mike and steve aoki vs. ummet ozcan - "melody" (futuristic polar bears remix) [free download] 2018: dimitri vegas & like mike featuring wolfpack - "ocarina" (futuristic polar bears remix) [free download] 2018: dimitri vegas, moguai & like mike - "mammoth" (futuristic polar bears remix) [free download] 2018: regi - "ellie" (futuristic polar bears remix) [cnr music belgium] 2020: qulinez - "el toro" (futuristic polar bears remix) [turnitup muzik] 2020: jerry davila ft. richie loop - celebrate (futuristic polar bears, jerry davila & dj pelos remix) 2020: krewella featuring asim azhar - "paradise" (futuristic polar bears remix) [mixed kids records] 2021: mr. black ft. richie loop - "feel the fire" (futuristic polar bears and jerry davila remix) [skink] 2021: yves v - echo (futuristic polar bears remix) [controversia]  references  notes  a  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the dance bubbling under chart.  b  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the walloon ultratip chart.  sources  external links official website  british djs british house musicians british electronic
music groups electro house musicians spinnin' records artists electronic dance music djs
cyartonema elegans is a species of free-living marine nematode in the genus cyartonema found in scotland.  references  external links      worms  chromadorea nematodes described in 1977 invertebrates of europe
bhila  is a village in barnala district of punjab state, india.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, bhila has a total number of 136 houses and population of 686 of which include 364 males and 322 females. literacy rate of bhila is  73.37%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 89 which is  12.97% of total population of bhila, and child sex ratio is approximately  894, higher than state average of 846.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
olenecamptus superbus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pic in 1908.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1908
the france women's national under-18 and under-19  is a national basketball team of france and is governed by the federation francaise de basket-ball. it represents france in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) women's basketball competitions.  fiba under-19 world championship for women  see also  france women's national basketball team  france women's national under-17 basketball team  france men's national under-19 basketball team  references  u women's national under-19 basketball teams
hussainabad  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of hussainabad. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, hussainabad has total number of 113 houses and population of 594 of which include 321 males and 273 females. literacy rate of hussainabad is 77.92%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 64 which is 10.77% of total population of hussainabad, and child sex ratio is approximately 939, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
fujian circuit, also translated as fujian province, was one of the major circuits during the tang and song dynasties of imperial china. its administrative area corresponds to roughly the modern chinese province of fujian.  history  the tang-era fujian circuit was renamed wuwei in 896.  list of governors  tang   ...  chen yan (884-891)  wang chao (891-896)  song   ...  see also  qingyuan jiedushi, an administrative circuit in the area created under southern tang that briefly remained nominally independent as well under song  references  citations  bibliography      circuits of the song dynasty 985 establishments 10th-century establishments in china 1278 disestablishments in asia 13th-century disestablishments in china former circuits in fujian
the cotsen children's library is a specialist library within the department of rare books and special collections at princeton university library.  it is an international research collection of illustrated children's books, manuscripts, original artwork, prints, and educational toys from the 15th century to the present day, presented to the library by its owner, lloyd e. cotsen, in 1997. the collection has important holdings of materials in several languages, including english, chinese, czech, dutch, french, german, greek, hebrew, italian, japanese, latin and russian.  treasures include an early-coptic christian schoolbook; medieval manuscripts; scrapbooks from hans christian andersen; drawings by edward lear, k.f.e. freyhold, and samuil marshak; picture letters by beatrix potter; early editions of fairy tales by madame d'aulnoy, charles perrault, and the brothers grimm; a large collection of books published by john newbery; soviet constructivist children's books; american dime novels; moveable books; jigsaw puzzles; educational playing cards; and other toys through the ages. it also houses the best collection of japanese children's books outside of japan (over 10,000 items), and of chinese children's books outside of china (over 35,000 items).  publications relating to specific collections held in the cotsen children's library the following is a selection only. the dartons, publishers of  educational aids pastimes & juvenile ephemera, 1787 - 1876: a bibliographical checklist.  together with a description of the darton archive as held by the cotsen children's library, princeton university library & a brief history of printed teaching aids.  by jill shefrin. los angeles: cotsen occasional press, 2009. the glory of the art of writing: the calligraphic work of francesco alunno of ferrara.  by nicolas barker. los angeles: cotsen occasional press, 2009. the dawn of wisdom: selections from the japanese collection of the cotsen children's library. edited by don j. cohn, with text by ann herring. los angeles: the cotsen occasional press, 2000. neatly dissected for the instruction of young ladies and gentlemen in the knowledge of geography: john spilsbury and early dissected puzzles by jill shefrin. los angeles: the cotsen occasional press, 1999. the beatrix potter collection of lloyd cotsen, by margit sperling cotsen, judy taylor, anne stevenson hobbs, and ivy trent.  los angeles: cotsen occasional
press, 2004. nip and the chocolate: a picture letter from beatrix potter to winifred warne; april 14, 1906 . introduction by ivy trent. los angeles and princeton: cotsen family foundation and the cotsen children's library, 2004. readers in the cotsen children's library. introductions by andrea immel. princeton: princeton university library, 2005. a catalogue of the cotsen children's library - a multi-volume project, initiated in 1996, completed in 2021. in print: volume i, the twentieth century a-l (may 2000), and volume ii, the twentieth century m-z (december 2003). as well as: the nineteenth century: 1. a-k. 2. l-z -- (january 2019); the pre-1801 imprints: 1. a-k. 2. l-z (july 2020);  comprehensive index: 1. author index ; title index ; illustrator index ; series index. 2. general & subject index ; owner & collector index ; chronological index. (june 2021)  imagerie populaire : french pictorial broadsides for children in the cotsen children's library : twelve prints from the exhibition, milberg gallery, firestone library, july 10, 2009 - january 24, 2010. by andrea immel, 2009.  references  children's books children's libraries
the 1971-72 pittsburgh condors season was the 2nd and final season of the pittsburgh condors along with the 4th and final season of pittsburgh involvement in the american basketball association. general manager mark binstein took over as coach after a 4-6 start. by the time the season was half over, the team was 17-25. from that point, the team went 8-34, with a losing streak of 12 near the end of the season sealing any hope of getting out of the cellar of the division. one factor was despite being 1st in points scored at 119.2 per game, they were dead last in points allowed, at 126.4 per game.  attendance had simply dried up, with games being moved (with one being moved to uniontown, 46 miles from pittsburgh) away from the arena, with the team unofficially becoming the "united states condors", with one game being played in birmingham, alabama. fittingly, their penultimate game was played in tucson, arizona versus the kentucky colonels. on march 29, they played (and lost) their final game, 113-128 to the indiana pacers. attempts to move the team failed after the season failed, and the league soon cancelled the franchise, ending pro basketball in pittsburgh. since then, no pro basketball team has played in pittsburgh. the players were dispersed to other teams, with george thompson  going to the memphis tams, mike lewis to the carolina cougars, skeeter swift to the dallas chaparrals, and walt szczerbiak to the kentucky colonels.  roster    13 nate bowman - center  40 john brisker - small forward  35 george carter - small forward  30 mickey davis - small forward  10 mike grosso - center  13 stew johnson - point forward  14/22 arvesta kelly - guard  33 dave lattin - point forward  24 mike lewis - center  12 jim ligon - point forward  44 jim o'brien - point guard  15 paul ruffner - center  23 skeeter swift - shooting guard  12 walt szczerbiak - small forward   22 ron taylor - center  25 george thompson - shooting guard  20 bob verga - point guard  final standings  eastern division  awards and honors 1972 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 29, 1972)  john brisker  george thompson  references   condors on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1971-72 regular season and playoff results  condors page  pittsburgh condors seasons
pittsburgh pittsburg pittsburg
emils liepins (born 29 october 1992 in dobele) is a latvian cyclist, who currently rides for uci worldteam . in october 2020, he was named in the startlist for the 2020 vuelta a espana.  major results  2012  3rd jurmala grand prix 2014  3rd overall tour of estonia 2016  3rd tour of yancheng coastal wetlands  5th minsk cup  10th grand prix minsk 2017  3rd overall tour of hainan  3rd overall dookoła mazowsza  3rd minsk cup 2018  1st  overall baltic chain tour 1st  points classification 1st stage 2  1st porec trophy  1st heistse pijl  1st stage 3 istrian spring trophy  4th gp izola  4th minsk cup  5th grand prix minsk  8th rutland-melton cicle classic 2019  1st stage 1a settimana internazionale di coppi e bartali  national road championships 3rd time trial 5th road race  4th ronde van drenthe  4th ronde van limburg  6th tour de l'eurometropole  8th scheldeprijs  10th circuit de wallonie 2020  6th trofeo campos, porreres, felanitx, ses salines  2021   2nd time trial, national road championships  grand tour general classification results timeline  references  external links  1992 births living people latvian male cyclists people from dobele
the 2016-17 fa women's premier league cup is the 26th running of the competition, which began in 1991. it is the major league cup competition run by the fa women's premier league, and for the third season it is being run alongside their secondary league cup competition, the premier league plate.  all 72 premier league clubs entered at the determining round, with the winners continuing in the competition and the losers going into the premier league plate tournament.  going into the tournament, tottenham hotspur is the reigning champions, having defeated cardiff city 2-1 after extra time the previous season.  results all results listed are published by the football association. games are listed by round in chronological order, and then in alphabetical order of the home team where matches were played simultaneously.  the division each team play in is indicated in brackets after their name: (s)=southern division; (n)=northern division; (sw1)=south west division one; (se1)=south east division one; (m1)=midlands division one; (n1)=northern division one.  qualifying round  determining round the competition begins with a determining round, which consisted of all 72 teams in the fa women's premier league being drawn in pairs. the winners of these 36 games progressed to the next stage of the competition, while the losers qualified for the 2016-17 fa women's premier league plate.  competition proper  first round with 36 teams progressing from the determining round, four needed to be eliminated to allow a single-elimination knockout tournament to take place. twenty eight of the winners from the determining round were given byes to the second round, with eight teams being drawn against each other in first round ties.  second round  third round  quarter-finals  semi-finals  final  references  fa women's national league cup prem
a general election was held in the u.s. state of indiana on november 8, 2016. elections were held for president of the united states, united states senator, governor of indiana, two of indiana's executive officers and all of indiana's nine seats in the united states house of representatives.  president of the united states  united states senate  united states house of representatives  governor  attorney general  incumbent republican attorney general greg zoeller declined to run for a third term in order to run for congress. republicans chose curtis hill, elkhart county prosecutor since 2002 over former attorney general steve carter, state senator randall head, and then-deputy attorney general abby kuzma at the republican state convention on june 11, 2016  democrats nominated lorenzo arredondo, former lake county circuit judge from 1976-2010  polling  general election  results  superintendent of public instruction  incumbent democratic superintendent of public instruction glenda ritz ran for re-election. she was unopposed at the democratic state convention on june 18, 2016.  republicans nominated jennifer mccormick, superintendent of yorktown community schools since 2010 over dawn wooten, adjunct faculty at fort wayne-area universities.  in 2019, governor eric holcomb signed house bill 1005, which would abolish the office and create an appointed position of secretary of education to replace it effective january 11, 2021. as a consequence, the 2016 election was the last election held for the office.  polling  general election  results  general assembly all 100 seats of the indiana house of representatives and 25 of 50 seats of the indiana senate were up for election. before the election the composition of the indiana general assembly was:  senate  house of representatives  references    indiana
portfolios of the poor: how the world's poor live on $2 a day is a book that aims to systematically explain how the poor find solutions to their everyday financial problems. it is written by stuart rutherford, jonathan morduch, orlanda ruthven, and daryl collins.  background  the book is the culmination of 10 years of research into the financial lives of the lowest classes of bangladesh, india, and south africa-with a focus on those living on less than two dollars a day per person.  reception  in 2015, mark zuckerberg announced that he highly recommended everyone read portfolios of the poor. he wrote: "it's mind-blowing that almost half the world - almost 3 billion people - live on $2.50 a day or less. more than one billion people live on $1 a day or less. this book explains how these families invest their money to best support themselves. i hope reading this provides some insight into ways we can all work to support them better as well."  the new yorker reported "while the authors do offer prescriptions for how to expand those options, it's their scrupulous attention to actual behavior that makes this book invaluable." reuters wrote "portfolios of the poor includes concrete ideas for moving forward. getting there, though, requires us to first step back and listen."  "the book's methodology and conclusions are fascinating," publishers weekly concluded.  references  external links   2009 non-fiction books business books books about poverty princeton university press books
"the gypsy cried" is a song written by twyla herbert & lou christie, using his actual name lugee sacco, which was released by lou christie as a single in 1962. the name "lou christie" was chosen by c & c records, and "the gypsy cried" was credited to "lou christie" before they had consulted with sacco about the name.  the song was the first song that herbert and christie wrote together, written over a period of 15 minutes, and was lou christie's first hit. the song was initially released by pittsburgh-based c & c records, and was a local hit in pittsburgh, but it was soon picked up by roulette records and became a national hit. the song was released on lou christie's eponymous album in 1963.  the song spent 13 weeks on the billboard hot 100 chart, peaking at no. 24 on march 16, 1963, while reaching no. 18 on the cash box top 100, and no. 3 on canada's chum hit parade.  references  songs about romani people songs about crying 1962 songs 1962 singles 1963 singles songs written by lou christie songs written by twyla herbert
poisonous fish are fish that are poisonous to eat. they contain toxins which are not destroyed by the digestive systems of animals that eat the fish. venomous fish also contain toxins, but do not necessarily cause poisoning if they are eaten, since the digestive system often destroys their venom.  examples   species of puffer fish (the family tetraodontidae) are the most poisonous in the world, and the second most poisonous vertebrate after the golden dart frog. the active substance, tetrodotoxin, found in the internal organs and sometimes also the skin, paralyzes the diaphragm muscles of human victims, who can die from suffocation. in japan, skilled chefs use parts of a closely related species, the blowfish to create a delicacy called "fugu".  the spotted trunkfish is a coral reef fish that secretes a colourless ciguatera toxin from glands on its skin when touched. the toxin is only dangerous when ingested, and poses no immediate harm to divers. however, predators as large as nurse sharks can die as a result of eating a trunkfish.  the giant moray is a reef fish at the top of the food chain. like many other apex reef fish, it is likely to cause ciguatera poisoning if eaten. outbreaks of ciguatera poisoning in the 11th to 15th centuries from large, carnivorous reef fish, caused by harmful algal blooms, could be a reason why polynesians migrated to easter island, new zealand, and possibly hawaii.  see also   aquatic toxicology  ciguatera  haff disease  hallucinogenic fish  ichthyoallyeinotoxism  salmon poisoning disease  scombroid food poisoning  references  external links  fish fish by adaptation
the 2016-17 missouri tigers men's basketball team represented the university of missouri in the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. their head coach was kim anderson, who was in his third year as the head coach at missouri. the team played its home games at mizzou arena in columbia, missouri, and was in its fifth season in the southeastern conference. they finished the season 8-24, 2-16 in sec play to finish in a tie for 13th place. as the no. 14 seed in the sec tournament, they defeated auburn in the first round before losing in the second round to ole miss.  on march 5, 2017, head coach kim anderson was asked to step down as head coach of the tigers following the season. he was allowed to coach the team in the sec tournament. on march 15, the school hired cuonzo martin as head coach.  previous season  the tigers finished the 2015-16 season 10-21, 3-15 in sec play to finish in last place. due to a self-imposed postseason ban, missouri did not participate in the sec tournament.  departures  incoming transfers  2016 recruits  future recruits  2017 recruiting class  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=12 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=12 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=12 style=|sec regular season  |- !colspan=12 style=| sec tournament  references  missouri tigers men's basketball seasons missouri tiger tiger
"guccifer 2.0" is a persona which claimed to be the hacker(s) who gained unauthorized access to the democratic national committee (dnc) computer network and then leaked its documents to the media, the website wikileaks, and a conference event. some of the documents "guccifer 2.0" released to the media appear to be forgeries cobbled together from public information and previous hacks, which had been mixed with disinformation. according to indictments in february 2018, the persona is operated by russian military intelligence agency gru. on july 13, 2018, special counsel robert mueller indicted 12 gru agents for allegedly perpetrating the cyberattacks.  the u.s. intelligence community concluded that some of the genuine leaks from "guccifer 2.0" were part of a series of cyberattacks on the dnc committed by two russian military intelligence groups, and that "guccifer 2.0" is actually a persona created by russian intelligence services to cover for their interference in the 2016 u.s. presidential election. this conclusion is based on analyses conducted by multiple private sector cybersecurity individuals and firms, including crowdstrike, fidelis cybersecurity, fireeye's mandiant, secureworks, threatconnect, trend micro, and the security editor for ars technica. the russian government denies involvement in the theft, and "guccifer 2.0" denied links to russia. wikileaks founder julian assange said multiple parties had access to dnc emails and that there was "no proof" russia was behind the attack. in march 2018, special counsel robert mueller took over investigation of guccifer 2.0 from the fbi while it was reported that forensic determination had found the guccifer 2.0 persona to be a "particular military intelligence directorate (gru) officer working out of the agency's headquarters on grizodubovoy street in moscow".  identity on june 21, 2016, in an interview with vice, "guccifer 2.0" said he is romanian, which is the nationality of marcel lazar lehel, the romanian hacker who originally used the "guccifer" pseudonym. on june 30, 2016, and january 12, 2017, "guccifer 2.0" stated that he is not russian. however, despite stating that he was unable to read or understand russian, metadata of emails sent from guccifer 2.0 to the hill showed that a predominantly-russian-language vpn was used. when pressed to use the romanian language in an interview with motherboard via online chat, "he used such clunky grammar and
terminology that experts believed he was using an online translator." linguistic analysis by shlomo engelson argamon showed that guccifer 2.0 is most likely "a russian pretending to be a romanian".  some cybersecurity experts have concluded that "guccifer 2.0" is likely a creation of the russian state-sponsored hacking groups thought to have executed the attack, invented to cover up russian responsibility. the cybersecurity firm crowdstrike, which was hired by the dnc to analyze the data breach, "posits that guccifer 2.0 could be 'part of a russian intelligence disinformation campaign'", i.e. a creation to deflect blame for the theft. russia has made use of the invention of "a lone hacker or an hacktivist to deflect blame" in the past, deploying this strategy in previous cyberattacks on the german government and the french network tv5monde. thomas rid of king's college london, a cybersecurity expert, says it is "'more likely than not' that the whole operation, including the guccifer 2.0 part, was orchestrated by russian spies." the hackers responsible for the dnc email leak (a group called fancy bear by crowdstrike) seem to have not been working on the dnc's servers on april 15 which in russia is a holiday in honor of the russian military's electronic warfare services.  on july 18, 2016, russian government spokesman dmitry peskov denied russian government involvement in the dnc theft. on july 25, 2016, during an interview with democracy now!, julian assange, editor in chief of wikileaks, said no one knows wikileaks' sources. he adds that "the dates of the emails that [wikileaks] published are significantly after all-or all but one, it is not clear-of the hacking allegations that the dnc says have occurred." the same day, assange told nbc news that "it's what's in the emails that's important, not who hacked them." when asked by nbc news if wikileaks might have been used to distribute documents stolen as part of a russian intelligence operation, assange replied: "there is no proof of that whatsoever. we have not disclosed our source." assange said this was "a diversion that's being pushed by the hillary clinton campaign." assange in 2012 hosted a program on rt, a russian state-run news channel. u.s. intelligence analyst malcolm wrightson nance said assange has long disliked clinton.  in an october 2016 joint statement, the united states department of homeland security and the office of the director of national intelligence stated:
in march 2018, the daily beast, citing u.s. government sources, reported that guccifer 2.0 is in fact a russian gru officer, explaining that guccifer once forgot to use a vpn, leaving ip logs on "an american social media company" server. the ip address was used by u.s. investigators to identify guccifer 2.0 as "a particular gru officer working out of the agency's headquarters on  in moscow."  in april 2018, buzzfeed reported that messages showed wikileaks' interest in guccifer 2.0's emails and files.  on july 13, 2018, the united states department of justice (doj) indicted 12 russian intelligence officers and revealed that guccifer 2.0 was a persona used by gru.  twitter suspended the persona's account on july 14, 2018, for "being connected to a network of accounts previously suspended for operating in violation of our rules." the account had been dormant for at least a year and a half.  computer hacking claims  on june 14, 2016, according to the washington post, the dnc acknowledged a hack which was claimed by guccifer 2.0.  on july 18, 2016, guccifer 2.0 provided exclusively to the hill numerous documents and files covering political strategies, including correlating the banks that received bailout funds with republican party and democratic party donations.  on july 22, 2016, guccifer 2.0 stated he hacked, then leaked, the dnc emails to wikileaks. "wikileaks published #dnchack docs i'd given them!!!", tweeted guccifer 2.0.  on september 13, 2016, during a conference, an unknown and remote representative of guccifer 2.0 released almost 700 megabytes (mb) worth of documents from the dnc. forbes also obtained a copy of those. still according to forbes, on september 12, 2016, ahead of that conference, guccifer posted a public twitter message in which he confirmed that his representative was legitimate. the russian government denied any involvement. the dnc, the dccc, u.s. intelligence officials, and other experts speculated about russia involvement. ngp van, who state they are the "leading technology provider" for the democratic campaigns, declined to comment on guccifer 2.0's recent statements.  on october 4, 2016, guccifer 2.0 released documents and claimed that they were taken from the clinton foundation and showed "corruption and malfeasance" there. security experts quickly determined that the release was a hoax; the release
did not contain clinton foundation documents, but rather consisted of documents previously released from the dnc and dccc thefts, data aggregated from public records, and documents that were fabricated altogether as propaganda. singled out as particularly absurd was the idea that clinton's team would have actually named a file "pay for play" on their own server, as guccifer 2.0's screenshots of the alleged "hack" show. former trump confidant roger stone was in contact with guccifer 2.0 during the campaign.  post-election activities  the guccifer 2.0 persona went dark just before the u.s. presidential election, and resurfaced on january 12, 2017, following the public release of the steele dossier that asserted the trump campaign was cooperating with the russians in their interference in the 2016 presidential election. the dossier also asserted that "romanian hackers" had performed the hacks.  the guccifer 2.0 persona made a blog post denying that they had any relation to the russian government, and calling the technical evidence suggesting links to the russian government "a crude fake." in the blog post, guccifer 2.0 indicated they had gained access to the dnc servers through a vulnerability in their ngp van software.  timeline of guccifer 2.0  2016  june: around this time, the conspirators charged in the july 2018 indictment stage and release tens of thousands of stolen emails and documents using fictitious online personas, including "dcleaks" and "guccifer 2.0".  june 15: "guccifer 2.0" (gru) claims credit for the dnc hacking and posts some of the stolen material to a website. crowdstrike stands by its "findings identifying two separate russian intelligence-affiliated adversaries present in the dnc network in may 2016." gawker publishes an opposition research document on trump that was stolen from the dnc. "guccifer 2.0" sent the file to gawker.  june 22: wikileaks reaches out to "guccifer 2.0" via twitter. they ask "guccifer 2.0" to send them material because it will have a bigger impact if they publish it. they also specifically ask for material on clinton they can publish before the convention.  july 6: "guccifer 2.0" releases another cache of dnc documents and sends copies to the hill.  july 13: "guccifer 2.0" releases over 10,000 names from the dnc in two spreadsheets and a list of objectionable quotes from sarah palin.  july
14: four days after the murder of seth rich, "guccifer 2.0" sends assange an encrypted one-gigabyte file containing stolen dnc emails, and assange confirms that he received it. wikileaks publishes the file's contents on july 22. the mueller report asserts that assange was "working to shift blame onto [seth rich] to obscure the source of the materials he was releasing". the senate intelligence committee reported that "wikileaks actively sought, and played, a key role in the russian intelligence campaign and very likely knew it was assisting a russian intelligence influence effort."  july 18: "guccifer 2.0" dumps a new batch of documents from the dnc servers, including personal information of 20,000 republican donors and opposition research on trump.  august 5: stone writes an article for breitbart news in which he insists "guccifer 2.0" hacked the dnc, using statements by "guccifer 2.0" on twitter and to the hill as evidence for his claim. he tries to spin the dnc's russia claim as a coverup for their supposed embarrassment over being penetrated by a single hacker. the article leads to "guccifer 2.0" reaching out to and conversing with stone via twitter.  august 12:  "guccifer 2.0" releases a cache of documents stolen from the democratic congressional campaign committee.  journalist emma best has two simultaneous conversations by twitter direct message with "guccifer 2.0" and wikileaks. best tries to negotiate the hosting of stolen dnc emails and documents on archive.org. wikileaks wants best to act as an intermediary to funnel the material from "guccifer 2.0" to them. the conversation ends with "guccifer 2.0" saying he will send the material directly to wikileaks.  august 13:  twitter and wordpress temporarily suspend guccifer 2.0's accounts. stone calls "guccifer 2.0" a hero.  august 15:  a candidate for congress allegedly contacts guccifer 2.0 to request information on the candidate's opponent. guccifer 2.0 responds with the requested stolen information.  guccifer 2.0 begins posting information about florida and pennsylvania races stolen from the dccc.  the gru stops its five-attempts-per-second attack on the illinois state board of elections servers.  august 16: stone sends "guccifer 2.0" an article he wrote for the hill on manipulating the vote count in voting machines. "guccifer 2.0" responds
the next day, "@rogerjstonejr paying u back".  august 22:  "guccifer 2.0" allegedly sends dccc material on black lives matter to a reporter, and they discuss how to use it in a story. "guccifer 2.0" also gives the reporter the password for accessing emails stolen from clinton's staff that were posted to "guccifer 2.0's" website but had not yet been made public. on august 31, the washington examiner publishes a story based on the material the same day the material is released publicly on guccifer 2.0's website.  florida gop campaign advisor aaron nevins contacts guccifer 2.0 and asks for material. nevins sets up a dropbox account and "guccifer 2.0" transfers 2.5 gigabytes of data into it. nevins analyzes the data, posts the results on his blog, hellofla.com, and sends "guccifer 2.0" a link. "guccifer 2.0" forwards the link to stone.  august 23: the smoking gun reaches out to "guccifer 2.0" for comment on its contacts with stone. "guccifer 2.0" accuses the smoking gun of working with the fbi.  august 31: "guccifer 2.0" leaks campaign documents stolen from house minority leader nancy pelosi's hacked personal computer.   september 3-5: wealthy republican donor peter w. smith gathers a team to try to acquire the 30,000 deleted clinton emails from hackers. he believes clinton's private email server was hacked and copies of the emails were stolen. among the people recruited are former gchq information-security specialist matt tait, alt-right activist charles c. johnson, former business insider cto and alt-right activist pax dickinson, "dark web expert" royal o'brien, and jonathan safron. tait quickly abandons the team after learning the true purpose of the endeavor. hackers contacted in the search include "guccifer 2.0" and andrew auernheimer (a.k.a. "weev"). the team finds five groups of hackers claiming to have the emails. two of the groups are russian. flynn is in email contact with the team. smith commits suicide on may 14, 2017, about ten days after telling the story to the wall street journal but before the story is published in june.  september 15: "guccifer 2.0" sends a twitter direct message to dcleaks informing them that wikileaks is trying
to contact them to set up communications using encrypted emails.  october 5: trump jr. retweets a wikileaks tweet announcing an "860mb [sic]" archive of various clinton campaign documents from "guccifer 2.0".  october 7: at 12:40 pm. edt, the dhs and the odni issue a joint statement accusing the russian government of breaking into the computer systems of several political organizations and releasing the obtained material via dcleaks, wikileaks, and "guccifer 2.0", with the intent "to interfere with the u.s. election process."  2017  january 12: "guccifer 2.0" denies having any relation to the russian government.  march 10: roger stone admits to communicating with guccifer 2.0.  march 13: senate intelligence committee chairman richard burr says roger stone's communications with guccifer 2.0 are part of the committee's ongoing investigation.  2018  march 22: the daily beast reports that guccifer 2.0, the "lone hacker" who took credit for providing wikileaks with stolen emails from the democratic national committee, was in fact an officer of russia's military intelligence directorate (gru) and that mueller has taken over the investigation into his criminal activities and his direct contact with stone.  june 18: lawyers for andrew miller, a former associate of roger stone, challenge in court a subpoena he received for information about stone, wikileaks, "guccifer 2.0", "dcleaks", and julian assange. miller's lawyer alicia dearn asserts at the hearing that miller had asked for immunity regarding political action committee transactions involving himself and stone.  see also   dc leaks  guccifer  hillary clinton controversies  mueller report  podesta emails  russian interference in the 2016 united states elections  references  external links   guccifer 2.0 website  wikileaks searchable dnc email database  hacking in the 2010s unidentified people unidentified criminals people associated with russian interference in the 2016 united states elections hackers russians associated with interference in the 2016 united states elections
fang wanyi (1732-1779), was a chinese poet and painter. she married the painter luo pin in 1752, and painted several works both with him as well as alone, of which many were exhibited in beijing during her lifetime and became famous.  references   lily xiao hong lee,clara lau,a.d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911   1732 births 1779 deaths 18th-century chinese poets qing dynasty painters chinese women poets qing dynasty poets 18th-century chinese women artists 18th-century chinese painters
groupe scolaire maimonide rambam, named for the medieval philosopher maimonides, is a jewish private school in boulogne-billancourt, france, in the paris metropolitan area. it serves levels maternelle (preschool) until lycee (senior high school).  it was established as ecole maimonide in 1935. in 1939 it closed as a result of world war ii but reopened in 1944 after the nazi-established ban on jewish institutions was lifted.  references  external links  groupe scolaire maimonide rambam   lycees in hauts-de-seine schools in hauts-de-seine secondary schools in france 1935 establishments in france educational institutions established in 1935
vivian jeanette kaplan (born june 17, 1946) is a canadian writer and business owner.  the daughter of gerda kosiner, she was born in shanghai. her parents were jews from vienna; her mother tongue was german. kaplan came to canada with her parents at the age of two; the family settled in toronto. she studied english, french and spanish at the university of toronto. kaplan operated vivian kaplan oriental interiors, a company which imported home furnishings from east asia, for twenty years.  she wrote her family's story in ten green bottles: the true story of one family's journey from war-torn austria to the ghettos of shanghai. the book received the canadian jewish book award in 2003 and the adei-wizo prize presented in florence, italy in 2007. a play based on the book was brought to the stage in toronto in 2009.  in 2012, kaplan published a historical novel blind vision.  references  external links     1946 births living people jewish canadian writers canadian biographers university of toronto alumni
antoine bret (9 july 1717, dijon - 25 february 1792, paris aged 74) was an 18th-century french writer and playwright.  a prolific writer, he practiced almost all genres. he composed light poetry, comedies, novels, memoirs, parodic and licentious tales. a fairly pure style, ease of invention, reviews more ingenious than deep made him a reputation without rising above the fair. a good connoisseur of drama, he wrote plays sinning nevertheless by lack verve and comic force.  we owe him an edition of the oeuvres by moliere, whose comments were appreciated. la belle alsacienne, ou telle mere telle fille, a libertine novel first published in 1745 under the title la belle allemande, ou les galanteries de therese, which tells the story of a girl walking in the footsteps of her mother and letting her drive by in the ways of gallantry, was assigned to him as well as to claude villaret.   antoine bret was a member of the academie de stanislas in nancy and academie des sciences, arts et belles-lettres de dijon. during several years, he contributed the gazette de france and journal encyclopedique and was also royal censor for operas.  publications  1743: cytheride, histoire galante traduite du grec 1745: la belle allemande, ou les galanteries de therese, also known under the title la belle alsacienne, ou telle mere telle fille and also attributed to claude villaret, text online 1746: lycoris, ou la courtisane grecque 1749: le *****, histoire bavarde, text online 1751: memoires sur la vie de mademoiselle de lenclos, text online 1765: essai de contes moraux et dramatiques 1770: essai d'une poetique a la mode. theatre 1744: le deguisement pastoral, one-act opera comique, paris, theatre de la foire saint-laurent, 27 july 1744: le quartier d'hiver, comedy in 1 act and in verse, with claude villaret and claude godard d'aucour, paris, theatre-francais, 4 december 1747: l'ecole amoureuse, one-act comedy, in verse, paris, theatre-francais, 11 september 1747: le concert, comedy in 1 act and in prose, paris, theatre-francais, 16 november 1750: la double extravagance, comedy in 3 acts and in verse, paris, theatre-francais, 27 july 1753: le parnasse moderne, one
-act opera comique, paris, theatre de la foire saint-germain, 3 february 1753: le calendrier des vieillards, one-act opera comique, paris, theatre de la foire saint-germain, 7 april 1755: le jaloux, comedy in 3 acts and in verse, paris, theatre-francais, 15 may 1758: l'orpheline, ou le faux genereux, comedy in 3 acts and in verse, paris, theatre-francais, 18 january 1763: le protecteur bourgeois, ou la confiance trahie, comedy in five acts and in verse, 13 october, text online 1764: l'epreuve indiscrete, two-act comedy in verse, paris, theatre-francais, 30 january 1765: le mariage par depit, three-act comedy in prose, paris, theatre-francais, 13 june 1778: les deux julies, ou le pere credule, three-act comedie-farce in free verse, imitated from the bacchides by plautus 1785: l'hotellerie, ou le faux ami, drama in 5 acts and in verse, paris, theatre de l'odeon, 30 september undated: la maison, comedy in two acts and in verse undated: l'humeur a l'epreuve, comedy in one act and in prose  undated: les lettres anonymes, comedy in four acts and in verse. collected works 1772: œuvres de m. bret, text online : 1. fables orientales et poesies diverses 2. le protecteur bourgeois 3. reflexions sur la litterature 1789: œuvres de m. bret, 2 vol., text online : 1. l'ecole amoureuse. la double extravagance. le jaloux. l'humeur a l'epreuve. le faux genereux 2. la maison. le protecteur bourgeois. les lettres anonymes. les deux julies edition de moliere 1778: œuvres completes de moliere, avec des remarques grammaticales, des avertissements et des observations sur chaque piece, 6 vol., 1773 ; 8 vol.  sources   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des litteratures, paris, hachette, 1876, (p. 324)  ferdinand hoefer, nouvelle biographie generale, t. 7, paris, firmin-didot, 1853, (p. 338)  external links    antoine bret on cesar  antoine bret on data.bnf.fr
18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 1717 births people from dijon 1792 deaths
orayiram kinakkalal is a 2018 indian malayalam-language comedy thriller film directed by pramod mohan. the screenplay was written by kiran varma and mohan, with dialogues co-written by hrishikesh mundani. the film stars biju menon, roshan mathew, sharu varghese, kalabhavan shajohn, nirmal palazhi, and sakshi agarwal. orayiram kinakkalal was released on 6 april 2018.  synopsis  sreeram, an ex nri gets involved in a quick money making plan along with few other characters. faced with unexpected turns of event, the story unfolds revealing different shades of each characters and how much they are willing to lose to fulfill their dreams. an unusual ride for a common man who is bound by family and law/crime.  cast   biju menon as sreeram  roshan mathew as jaison  sharu varghese as sherin  kalabhavan shajohn as shajahan p. k. nirmal palazhi as venu  sakshi agarwal as preethi  sai kumar as lalaji  sreeram ramachandran as gautham  parthavi as paaru  suresh krishna as abraham mathan  krishna kumar as stephen  ann benjamin  as leena mathan (abraham mathan's wife)  shaun xavier as deepu  production orayiram kinakkalal is the debut feature film directorial of pramod mohan, who has previously worked in television shows. the film is a comedy thriller. principal photography began on 10 december 2017 at kochi, kerala. the film was produced by renji panicker.  the production team involves brijeesh mohamed, josemon simon & umesh unnikrishnan (umesh nair)  the movie is distributed by renji panicker entertainment  music the film features songs composed by ranjith meleppat, sachin warrier, and aswin ram; the score was composed by bijibal. lyrics for the songs were written by santhosh varma and manu manjith.  release the film was released on 6 april 2018.  references  external links      indian films 2018 films 2010s malayalam-language films indian comedy thriller films
the bridge stress committee was appointed in 1923 by the uk department of scientific and industrial research under sir alfred ewing, to investigate stresses in railway bridges, especially as regards the effects of moving loads. its report, published in 1928, was very influential in british locomotive design as it enabled larger multi-cylinder locomotive classes.  background the increased weight of express trains in the united kingdom during the first quarter of the twentieth century required larger, six-coupled locomotives, but new designs were being limited by the weight restrictions imposed on many underline bridges. on most mainlines this was restricted to no more than  on any axle. however, engineers were becoming increasingly aware of the significance of 'hammer blow' rather than 'deadweight' in determining the safe loads for such bridges.  committee a committee of was established in 1923, funded jointly by the uk government and the railway companies, to carry out investigations in to the effects of hammer blow on bridges. the committee under chairmanship of the physicist sir james alfred ewing consisted primarily of railway civil engineers, but sir henry fowler, chief mechanical engineer of the london midland and scottish railway was also later invited to join. among the results was a better understanding of hammer blow and the effects of oscillations in both locomotive springs and bridges. one immediate impact of the investigations was an easing of the axle-load limit for locomotives with both inside and outside cylinders from   to . this enabled successful new designs such as the gwr 6000 class and the fitting of larger  boilers to gresley a1 class.  references         civil engineering railway bridges
joseph maxwell is an australian recipient of the victoria cross.  joseph maxwell may also refer to:  joseph edward maxwell, american politician from georgia  joseph r. n. maxwell, american jesuit priest, academic, and president of the college of the holy cross and boston college
sona chura is a village and a gram panchayat in nandigram i cd block in purba medinipur district in the indian state of west bengal.  history  nandigram movement  sona chura was one of the six gram panchayats mentioned in the notification issued for land acquisition of a proposed chemical hub in 2006. protests led by bhumi uchhed pratirodh committee snowballed into a major movement and repression followed. amongst the other affected areas were: bhangabera, saudkhali, maheshpur, gokulnagar and adhikaripara. the location of the proposed chemical hub was later shifted to nayachar and the proposal was finally scrapped.  geography  location sona chura is located at .  martyrs memorial nandigram andolan sahid smarane is a 130 ft tower that stands as a memorial to those who lost their lives at sona chura in 2007. it was built by bhumi uchhed pratirodh committee in 2014. there are pictures of 21 people who died, 14 of them died on 14 march 2007 when police fired upon a procession headed for nandigram from sona chura, 15 km away. another 10 people disappeared from tekhali.  bhangabera bridge  the bhangabera bridge, across the talpati canal, near sona chura (3.3 km away), is located at . talpati is a drainage canal which allows river waters to come inwards at times of tides and floods and helps in irrigation. talpati canal served as a 'boundary' between nandigram i and khejuri ii cd blocks. when the two cd blocks were under control of two opposing forces - khejuri under cpi (m) and nandigram under trinamool congress, bhangabera bridge formed a sort of a check point with flags of the two political parties fluttering on either side.  urbanisation 79.19% of the population of haldia subdivision live in the rural areas. only 20.81% of the population live in the urban areas, and that is the highest proportion of urban population amongst the four subdivisions in purba medinipur district.  note: the map above presents some of the notable locations in the subdivision. all places marked in the map are linked in the larger full screen map.  demographics as per the 2011 census of india sona chura had a total population of 5,736. there were 2,974 (52%) males and 2,762 (48%) females. population below 6 years was 736. the number of literates
were 4,239 (84.78% of the population above 6 years.  references  villages in purba medinipur district
poddavki (, "giveaway"), also known as giveaway checkers, suicide checkers, anti-checkers or losing draughts is a draughts (checkers) game based on the rules of russian draughts, with the variation that a player wins if they have no legal moves on their turn, either by giving up all their pieces or having them all blocked. as in most varieties of draughts, capturing is mandatory. the game is played in russia and some parts of the former soviet union.  rules   board. poddavki is played on an 8×8 board with alternating dark and light squares. the left down square field should be dark.  starting position. each player starts with 12 pieces on the three rows closest to their own side.  the row closest to each player is called the "crownhead" or "kings row". usually, the colors of the pieces are black and white, but possible use other colors (one dark and other light). the player with white pieces (lighter color) moves first.  pieces. there are two kinds of pieces: "men" and "kings". kings are differentiated as consisting of two normal pieces of the same color, stacked one on top of the other or by inverted pieces.   men. men move forward diagonally to an adjacent unoccupied square.  kings. if a player's piece moves into the kings row on the opposing player's side of the board, that piece to be "crowned", becoming a "king" and gaining the ability to move back or forward and choose on which free square at this diagonal to stop .  capture. if the adjacent square contains an opponent's piece, and the square immediately beyond it is vacant, the opponent's piece may be captured (and removed from the game) by jumping over it. jumping can be done forward and backward. multiple-jump moves are possible if, when the jumping piece lands, there is another piece that can be jumped. jumping is mandatory and cannot be passed up to make a non-jumping move. when there is more than one way for a player to jump, one may choose which sequence to make, not necessarily the sequence that will result in the most amount of captures. however, one must make all the captures in that sequence. a captured piece is left on the board until all captures in a sequence have been made but cannot be jumped again (this rule also applies for the kings).   if a man touches the kings row during a capture and can continue a capture, it jumps backwards as a
king. the player can choose where to land after the capture.   winning. a player with no valid move remaining win. this is the case if the player either has no pieces left or if a player's pieces are obstructed from making a legal move by the pieces of the opponent.  notation games and positions are recorded using a special notation - algebraic notation. the vertical columns of squares are labeled from a to h. the horizontal rows of squares are numbered 1 to 8 starting from white's side of the board. thus each square of the board has a unique identification of file letter followed by rank number.  move from e3 to d4 are recorded as e3-d4.  move with capture are recorded as c5:e3 (used a colon :).    1. e3-d4 d6-c5   2. g3-f4 c5:e3:g5   3. ...  sport first russian championships was held in 2011. next took place annually.  references  external links rules at the official site draughts federation of russia  draughts variants russian inventions
henri xavier francois pierre crisafulli (29 june 1827, naples - 5 march 1900, paris age 62) was a 19th-century french playwright and novelist.  crisafulli studied at college charlemagne in paris. he made his theatre debut in 1855. in addition to his plays, he also wrote novels in collaboration with gustave aimard and translated from dutch. he is buried at montmartre cemetery.  theatre  1855: cesar borgia, with edouard devicque, theatre de l'ambigu 1856: marie stuart en ecosse, with edouard devicque, ancien cirque 1857: les deux faubouriens, with edouard devicque 1858: girofle girofla, with edouard devicque 1861: ernest ramel, with edouard devicque, theatre du vaudeville 1863: le demon du jeu, theatre du gymnase 1864: mr et mme fernel, from the novel by louis ulbach, comedie en vaudeville 1865: le passe de m. jouanne, gymnase 1866: le fou d'en face, one-act comedy 1867: la chouanne, from the novel by paul feval, ambigu 1868: les loups et les agneaux, five-act comedy 1869: autour du lac, one-act comedy 1873: les postillons de fougerolles, five-act drama 1873: la falaise de penmarck, five-act drama 1875: l'idole, five-act drama 1876: l'affaire coverley, five-act dram  lord harrington, five-act comedy 1879: les petites lionnes, three-act comedy, with paul sipiere 1879: le petit ludovic, three-act comedy, with victor bernard 1881: le bonnet de coton, five-act comedy, with victor bernard 1881: les noces d'argent, play in three acts, with victor bernard 1887: une perle, three-act play 1883: le vertigo, opera bouffe with henry bocage.  short stories and novels  1866-1867: les invisibles de paris, with gustave aimard, 5 vol. 1867: les compagnons de la lune, with gustave aimard, amyot, paris, in-18. 1872: le roi marthe, bureaux de l'administration du figaro, paris, in-8°  translations  1878: max havelaar, van der hoeven en buys, rotterdam, 2 vol.  sources   .  external links   henri cris
afulli on data.bnf.fr  19th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french novelists translators to french translators from dutch 1827 births 1900 deaths burials at montmartre cemetery 19th-century french translators
the 2007 edition of the women's handball tournament of the african games was the 7th, organized by the african handball confederation and played under the auspices of the international handball federation, the handball sport governing body. the tournament ran from july 14−21 2007 in algiers, algeria, contested by 8 national teams and won by angola.  draw  preliminary round  group a  group b  knockout stage 7th place match  5th place match  championship bracket  final ranking  awards  references  external links  official website  handball at the 2007 all-africa games women's handball in algeria 2007 in women's handball handball at the african games
the 1968-69 miami floridians season was the first season of the floridians in the american basketball association. the team had moved from minnesota after one season as the muskies. the floridians finished one game behind the pacers, for a second place finish. they faced the replacement for them in minnesota, the pipers. they beat them in a close 7 game series to set up a chance to go to the aba finals. in the eastern division finals, they lost to the indiana pacers 4 games to 1.  roster  23 andrew anderson - shooting guard  20 donnie freeman - shooting guard  41 les hunter - power forward  24 ervin inniger - shooting guard  21 willie iverson - point guard  23 nick jones - guard  42 gary keller - center  22 maurice mchartley - point guard  44 willie murrell - small forward  22 ron perry - point guard  33 don sidle - power forward  32 dan sparks - power forward  43 skip thoren - center  34 dallas thornton - small forward  final standings  eastern division  playoffs eastern division semifinals vs. minnesota pipers  floridians win series, 4-3  eastern division finals vs indiana pacers   floridians lose series, 4-1  awards and honors 1969 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 28, 1969)  donnie freeman  les hunter  skip thoren  references   floridians on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1968-69 regular season and playoff results  miami floridians page  miami floridians seasons miami miami floridians, 1968-69 miami floridians, 1968-69
sphingomonas koreensis  is a gram-negative and aerobic bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from natural mineral water in taejon in korea. in one patient, with a meningeal drain,  sphingomonas koreensis was reported to cause meningitis.  references  further reading   <  external links type strain of sphingomonas koreensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  koreensis bacteria described in 2001
enicodes montrouzieri is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861. it is known from new caledonia. it feeds on coffea arabica and coffea canephora.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
maurice foulon (1886-1968) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1928 to 1936, representing seine.  references  1886 births 1968 deaths people from pantin politicians from ile-de-france members of the 14th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 15th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
the australasian performing right association awards of 2016 (generally known as apra awards) are a series of related awards which include the apra music awards, art music awards, and screen music awards. the apra music awards of 2016 was the 34th annual ceremony by the australasian performing right association (apra) and the australasian mechanical copyright owners society (amcos) to award outstanding achievements in contemporary songwriting, composing and publishing. the ceremony was held on 5 april 2016 at the carriageworks, sydney. the host for the ceremony was brian nankervis, adjudicator on sbs-tv's rockwiz.  the art music awards were distributed on 16 august at the plaza ballroom, melbourne and presented by apra and the australian music centre (amc), "to recognise achievement in the composition, performance, education and presentation of australian art music. art music covers activity across contemporary classical music, contemporary jazz and improvised music, experimental music and sound art."  the screen music awards were issued on 8 november by apra, amcos and australian guild of screen composers (agsc), which "acknowledges excellence and innovation in the genre of screen composition" and the ceremony was held at the city recital hall in sydney.  on 15 march nominations for the apra music awards were announced on multiple news sources; jarryd james and sia received four each. at the ceremony total of 14 awards were presented, including a new category, overseas recognition award. cold chisel members (jimmy barnes, don walker, ian moss, phil small and steve prestwich) were honoured by the ted albert award for outstanding services to australian music. songwriter of the year was courtney barnett.  presenters  at the apra music awards ceremony on 5 april 2016, aside from the host, brian nankervis, the presenters were styalz fuego, fiona bevan, catherine britt, trey campbell, suze demarchi, tim rogers, maegan cottone, adalita and don walker.  performances  the apra music awards ceremony showcased performances by:  urthboy with kira puru and bertie blackman  the delta riggs  d.i.g with ngaiire  gang of youths and montaigne  san cisco  guy sebastian  the living end  apra music awards  blues & roots work of the year  breakthrough songwriter of the year  country work of the year  dance work of the year  international work of the year  most played australian work  most played australia work overseas  overseas recognition award  pop work of the year  rock work of the year  song
of the year  songwriter of the year  courtney barnett  ted albert award for outstanding services to australian music  cold chisel (jimmy barnes, don walker, ian moss, phil small, steve prestwich)  urban work of the year  art music awards  instrumental work of the year  jazz work of the year  orchestral work of the year  vocal / choral work of the year  performance of the year  award for excellence by an individual  award for excellence by an organisation  award for excellence in music education  award for excellence in a regional area  award for excellence in experimental music  award for excellence in jazz  distinguished services to australian music  screen music awards  feature film score of the year  best music for an advertisement  best music for children's television  best music for a documentary  best music for a mini-series or telemovie  best music for a short film  best music for a television series or serial  best original song composed for the screen  best soundtrack album  best television theme  most performed screen composer - australia  most performed screen composer - overseas  references  2016 in australian music 2016 music awards apra awards
diego melendez de valdes (died 1506) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of zamora (1494-1506) and bishop of astorga (1493-1494).  biography in 1493, diego melendez de valdes was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vi as bishop of astorga. in 1494, he was appointed during the papacy of pope gregory xiii as bishop of zamora. he served as bishop of zamora until his death in 1506.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)            15th-century roman catholic bishops in castile 16th-century roman catholic bishops in spain bishops appointed by pope alexander vi 1506 deaths
"cry" is a single album recorded by south korean girl group stellar. it was released as their seventh single album and ninth single overall. the song was released on july 18, 2016 by the entertainment pascal and distributed by universal music. in order to promote the song, stellar appeared in several south korean music programs, including music bank and inkigayo. a music video for the song was also released on july 18.  the ep was a commercial success peaking at number 16 on the gaon album chart.  background and release  on may 20, 2016, it was reported that stellar was making a comeback in early july with a new song, after six months since the last single, "sting". on july 8, it was reported that a minor car accident occurred during the filming for the music video for the upcoming title track, resulting in a visit to the hospital with no major injuries.  on july 10, the entertainment pascal officially announced that the group will be releasing a song called "crying" on july 18, revealing teaser images of each member. on july 13 a music video teaser was released and the track list was also released, revealing that the song will be produced by brave brothers. on july 15 a second music video teaser was released.  on july 18 the song was released online in several music portals in south korea, such as melon, along with the music video.  promotion  the music video for "crying" was released on july 18, 2016 in conjunction with the single. they made their official comeback stage on sbs mtv's the show performing their title track "crying". they also perform on show champion on july 19, m countdown on july 20, music bank on july 21, music core on july 22 and on inkigayo on july 23.  chart performance  "cry" entered and peaked at number 16 on the gaon album chart on the chart issue dated july 17-23, 2016. in its second week, the song charted at number 34. in its third consecutive week, the single album charted at number 61.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  single charts 'crying'  release history  references   2016 singles 2016 songs stellar (south korean band) songs
the 2016-17 season was paris saint-germain football club's 44th professional season since its creation in 1970, and its 43rd consecutive season in the top-flight of french football.  that was first season without zlatan ibrahimovic since 2011-12 season.  players  french teams are limited to four players without eu citizenship. the squad list includes only the principal nationality of each player; several non-european players on the squad have dual citizenship with an eu country. also, players from the acp countries-countries in africa, the caribbean, and the pacific that are signatories to the cotonou agreement-are not counted against non-eu quotas due to the kolpak ruling.  squad  transfers  in  for recent transfers: list of french football transfers winter 2016-17  out  pre-season and friendlies  friendlies  international champions cup  competitions  overview  trophee des champions  ligue 1  league table  results summary  results by round  matches  coupe de france  coupe de la ligue  uefa champions league  group stage  knockout phase  round of 16  statistics  appearances and goals  |- ! colspan="16" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| goalkeepers  |- ! colspan="16" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| defenders  |- ! colspan="16" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| midfielders  |- ! colspan="16" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| forwards  |- ! colspan="16" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center"| players transferred out during the season |-  references  external links  paris saint-germain f.c. seasons paris saint-germain paris saint-germain
the 10th annual helpmann awards for live performance in australia were held on 6 september 2010 at the sydney opera house.  winners and nominees in the following tables, winners are listed first and highlighted in boldface. the nominees are those which are listed below the winner and not in boldface.  theatre  musicals  opera and classical music  dance and physical theatre  contemporary music  other  industry  special awards  references  external links  helpmann awards helpmann awards helpmann awards 2010 music awards
carlos eduardo cermeno uzcategui (born 8 august 1995) is a venezuelan footballer who plays for deportivo la guaira.  career  cermeno began his career with monagas in the venezuelan first division in 2011. he played four matches before being transferred to venezuelan first division club, deportivo tachira in 2013. in february 2017, fc dallas loaned in cermeno from deportivo tachira.  international carlos participated in the 2014 central american and caribbean games and 2015 south american youth football championship.  he made his full national team debut on march 24, 2016.  honours  club deportivo tachira venezuelan primera division: 2014/15  references  external links  carlos cermeno in soccerway  carlos cermeno in national football teams  venezuelan footballers deportivo tachira f.c. players monagas s.c. players living people 1995 births people from monagas fc dallas players expatriate soccer players in the united states major league soccer players association football midfielders venezuelan expatriate sportspeople in the united states
mathematics mastery is an approach to mathematics education which is based on mastery learning in which most students are expected to achieve a high level of competence before progressing.  this technique is used in countries such as china and singapore where good results have been achieved and so the approach is now being promoted in the uk by people such as schools minister nick gibb.  chinese teachers were brought to the uk to demonstrate the shanghai mastery approach in 2015.  a trial was made in the uk with about 10,000 students of ages 5-6 and 11-12.  in one year, test scores indicated that the students were about a month ahead of students in schools using other approaches. this result was considered small but significant.  the national association of mathematics advisers has highlighted five issues in understanding this approach. variation in the methods promoted by different organisations the extent of differentiation  the content of the curriculum  the amount of practise and repetition the choice and use of textbooks  references  external links mathematics mastery - a programme of the ark charity to support and encourage this approach   mathematics education
sphingomonas jaspsi  is a gram-negative, aerobic, pleomorphic and motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from fresh water in misasa in japan. sphingomonas jaspsi produces carotenoid.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas jaspsi at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase	  japonica bacteria described in 2007
adrian morejon garcia (born february 27, 1999) is a cuban professional baseball pitcher for the san diego padres of major league baseball (mlb). he made his mlb debut in 2019.  career  cuban national series morejon played in the 2014 15u baseball world cup, and was named the tournament's most valuable player. he appeared in the cuban national series for mayabeque that year. he defected from cuba in october 2015.  san diego padres  morejon signed with the san diego padres for $11 million in july 2016. he made his professional debut in 2017, spending time with both the tri-city dust devils and the fort wayne tincaps, posting a combined 3-4 win-loss record with a  3.86 earned run average (era) in 13 starts between both clubs. he spent 2018 with the lake elsinore storm, going 4-4 with a 3.30 era in 13 starts. he began 2019 with the amarillo sod poodles. morejon was named to the 2019 all-star futures game.  on july 21, 2019, the padres selected morejon's contract and promoted him to the major leagues. he made his major league debut that day versus the chicago cubs. in 2020, morejon pitched to a 2-2 record and 4.66 era with 25 strikeouts in 19.1 innings across 9 games (4 starts).  morejon departed an april 11, 2021 start against the texas rangers after suffering a left forearm strain. on april 20, it was announced that morejon would undergo tommy john surgery and miss the remainder of the 2021 season. on april 23, morejon was placed on the 60-day injured list.  see also   list of baseball players who defected from cuba  list of major league baseball players from cuba  references  external links  1999 births living people amarillo sod poodles players arizona league padres players defecting cuban baseball players fort wayne tincaps players lake elsinore storm players major league baseball pitchers major league baseball players from cuba cuban expatriate baseball players in the united states san diego padres players tri-city dust devils players
the diocese of milos or diocese of melos () was a roman catholic diocese located on the volcanic greek island of milos in the aegean sea, just north of the sea of crete. in 1700, it was suppressed. in 1800 it was restored as a titular episcopal see.  ordinaries erected 1207  nikolaus langen, o.p. (21 apr 1456 appointed - )  nicola bruni (10 dec 1511 appointed - 1540 died)  francesco rocchi (31 may 1540 appointed - 1541 resigned)  gian pietro ferretti (4 feb 1541 appointed - 1545 resigned)  gregorio castagnola, o.p. (6 nov 1545 appointed - 1550 died)  stefano gattalusio, o.s.b. (13 mar 1550 appointed - 1564 died)  bartolomeo doria (1 dec 1564 appointed - 1583 resigned)  bernardo lauro, o.p. (7 oct 1583 appointed - 27 nov 1585 appointed, bishop of santorini)  franciscus optimates, o.f.m. (23 jan 1602 appointed - 1610 died)  nicolaus lesdos (ludosius) (24 jan 1611 appointed - 1624 resigned)  hyacinthus arnolfini, o.f.m. obs. (27 jan 1625 appointed - 1629 died)  michael de bernardis, o.f.m. ref. (25 jun 1629 appointed - 1634 resigned)  gerolamo de paduano, o.f.m. (24 jul 1634 appointed - 16 jun 1642 appointed, bishop of santorini)  antonius serra (14 jul 1642 appointed - oct 1669 died) giovanni antonio de camillis (7 oct 1669 appointed - 14 nov 1698 died)  dionysio modino (15 nov 1728 appointed - 15 mar 1750 died)  suppressed 1700  references  former roman catholic dioceses in greece milos duchy of the archipelago
kelly d. murumets (born 1963) is a canadian business executive who served as the president and chief executive officer (ceo) of tennis canada from 2014 to 2017. she was also the president and ceo of participaction, a non-profit organization which promotes healthy living and physical fitness, from 2007 to 2014.  early life  murumets was born in kitchener, ontario. she attended ten different schools as a child, and graduated from welland centennial secondary school in welland, ontario, playing volleyball, basketball, tennis, and track and field. she earned a bachelor of arts from bishop's university in 1985, a master of business administration (mba) from the richard ivey school of business, and a master of social work from wilfrid laurier university in 1996.  career  her first job after earning her undergraduate degree was at w.c. wood co., an appliance manufacturer. prior to 2002, murumets was the vice president and client manager for managerial design corporation, a management consulting firm. she was named the executive vice president of counsel corporation in february 2002 and the executive vice president of acceris communications in december 2002. she was promoted to president of acceris in november 2003.  in 2007, murumets was named the president and ceo of participaction, a canadian non-profit organization which promotes healthy living and physical fitness. participaction had been shut down in 2001 when it lost its government funding, but was revived under murumets. she was named one of the most influential women in sport and physical activity by the canadian association for the advancement of women and sport and physical activity (caaws). she received a queen elizabeth ii diamond jubilee medal on january 12, 2013, awarded to canadians for "outstanding service to their country". she was succeeded by elio antunes as the president and ceo.  on march 3, 2014, she became the president and ceo of tennis canada. she replaced michael downey, who left tennis canada to head the british lawn tennis association.  she has served on the board of governors for both bishop's university and wilfrid laurier university. she is a member of the young presidents' organization.  personal life  murumets lives in toronto with her partner roy graydon. she enjoys skiing, golfing, scuba-diving, and hiking, having climbed both mount kilimanjaro and mount rainier.  references  living people canadian sports executives and administrators people from kitchener, ontario bishop's university alumni university of western ontario alumni wilfrid laurier university alumni tennis in
canada 1963 births
antonius serra (1610 - october 1669) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of milos (1642-1669).  biography antonius serra was born in chios, greece in 1610. on 14 july 1642, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of milos. on 7 september 1642, he was consecrated bishop by giovanni battista maria pallotta, cardinal-priest of san silvestro in capite, with alfonso gonzaga, titular archbishop of rhodus, and patrizio donati, bishop of minori, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of milos until his death in october 1669.  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in the republic of venice bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1610 births 1669 deaths clergy from chios
the following lists events that happened in 1981 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - gunnar thoroddsen  events  births  7 january - armann smari bjornsson, footballer 22 march - rakel logadottir, footballer 29 april - ragnhildur steinunn jonsdottir, television personality 13 july - helgi danielsson, footballer 31 august - orn arnarson, swimmer. 5 september - logi gunnarsson, basketball player 4 october - friðrik omar, singer 12 october - indriði sigurðsson, footballer 17 october - snorri guðjonsson, handball player 10 december - holmar orn runarsson, footballer 14 december - haraldur freyr guðmundsson, footballer  deaths 28 july - magnus kjartansson, journalist, writer and politician (born 1919).  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
"selamanya cinta" is a song recorded by malaysian singer-songwriter shila amzah and malaysian singer alif satar, taken from shila's sixth and debut chinese-language studio album, my journey (2016). it was released on july 14, 2016, through sony music malaysia (streaming) and july 15, 2016, through shila amzah entertainment berhad (digital download and streaming). the song was solely written by shila amzah and produced by helen yap with shila's aid. the song was released as a single after my journey was released in china on april 30, 2016, through her hong kong management label, shilala (hk) limited.  format and track listing  digital download  1    "selamanya cinta" - 4:12  credits and personnel  recording and management   recorded and mixed at nar records (kuala lumpur, malaysia)  mastered at sterling sound (new york city, united states of america)  shilala (hk) limited, shila amzah entertainment berhad, sony music malaysia personnel  shila amzah - lead vocals, writer, producer   alif satar - lead vocals  helen yap - producer, arranger, keyboards  jamie wilson - guitar  ujang exist - drums  bong kamal ali - bass  lim jae sern - strings  yap yen - strings  veronika thoene - strings  nasran nawi - strings  amir sulaiman - recording, mixing  tom coyne - mastering credits are adapted from helen yap's instagram post.  release history  references  2016 singles 2016 songs shila amzah songs song recordings produced by shila amzah songs written by shila amzah
mythical beasties is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of legendary creatures edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the sixth volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in may 1986. the first british edition was issued under the alternate title mythic beasts in trade paperback by robinson in 1988.  the book collects thirteen novellas, novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors.  contents "centaur fielder for the yankees" (edward d. hoch) "the ice dragon" (george r. r. martin) "prince prigio" (andrew lang) "the gorgon" (tanith lee) "the griffin and the minor canon" (frank r. stockton) "the kragen" (jack vance) "the little mermaid" (hans christian andersen) "letters from laura" (mildred clingerman) "the triumph of pegasus" (frank a. javor) "caution! inflammable!" (thomas n. scortia) "the pyramid project" (robert f. young) "the silken-swift" (theodore sturgeon) "mood wendigo" (thomas a. easton)  references  1986 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
the 1956 oklahoma a&m cowboys football team represented oklahoma a&m college in the 1956 ncaa university division football season. this was the 56th year of football at a&m and the second under cliff speegle. the cowboys played their home games at lewis field in stillwater, oklahoma. they finished the season 3-5-2, 2-1-1 in their final season in the missouri valley conference.  schedule  after the season  the 1957 nfl draft was held on january 31, 1957. the following cowboy was selected.  references  oklahoma aandm oklahoma state cowboys football seasons oklahoma am
talts is an estonian surname. notable people with the surname include:  jaan talts (born 1944), estonian weightlifter  janar talts (born 1983), estonian basketball player evelin talts (born 1977), estonian long-distance runner  estonian-language surnames
the following is a list of current indian super league club owners:  former clubs    this list features all the former clubs that featured in the indian super league in the past:  see also  list of indian super league records and statistics   list of indian super league seasons   list of foreign indian super league players   list of indian super league head coaches   indian super league attendance   list of indian super league hat-tricks  references  indian super league lists
southeast usd 247 is a public unified school district headquartered in cherokee, kansas, united states.  the district includes the communities of cherokee, mccune, sherman, weir, west mineral, and nearby rural areas.  schools the school district operates the following schools:  southeast high school  southeast middle school  southeast elementary school  history in 2007, cherokee usd 247 was renamed to southeast usd 247.  see also  kansas state department of education  kansas state high school activities association  list of high schools in kansas  list of unified school districts in kansas  references  external links    school districts in kansas school districts established in 2007 2007 establishments in kansas
this is a list of gliders/sailplanes of the world, (this reference lists all gliders with references, where available)  note: any aircraft can glide for a short time, but gliders are designed to glide for longer.  this list is of gliders/sailplanes that have limited information available.  miscellaneous   aeroplaneur 1911 glider  anb (glider) (cyrillic:анб)  aquilla (glider)  av 222/h14  bacerka  bahr (glider)  bauart  cancarevic  caucase du nord (north caucasus)  chelm school glider (latvia)  cirulitis (glider)  cumulus 5 - japan  daugaviete  delfin (glider)  delfin m-2  delfin m-3  delta 1  dream (glider)  dream (glider)  druckspatz ii  dubno school glider  dzerve  elytre  erglis  gamajun (glider)  gk 1911 glider  grif (glider)  gulbene ii - latvia  gulbis (glider)  hamborger jung  illerfalke  ilzs  jamin 1932 glider  janika (glider)  jar ptiza  jastreb 54  jastreb bis  jenni 1931 glider  jerav (glider) - bulgaria (kranich ii copy)  joey (glider)  jupp-pitter  kaija (glider)  kanja ultra light glider  kijushu 5  kijushu 7  kl biplane glider  koctebel (glider)  kokot pisece  kristal (avion)  lacplesis (glider)  lanyi az ket biplan  latvija (glider)  le grolinet  lenta (glider)  lotnia feyrala  ly thermikas  maikapars  mara (glider)  mattley primary  meinigen  mintava  młody lotnik glider  monk pegasus  mouisset ap-1  mulhousia  mulliners aeroplane  nameisis (glider)  niemcy brautigam  nippon tombo  okarmusa 1  okarmusa 2  parsla  pcf (glider)  perth glider 2  philips mk-i  philips mk-ii  pip (glider)
praha 1922 glider - skupina konstrkter  prodam iii hadi  prva petoletka roda  pw-5 (glider) - 1922  renaut primary  robert aeroplane  rowley r-100  russell whisper 2004  sailer liegnitz  salka (glider)  selija (glider)  seshayes p-1  sesquiplane glider  sharapov an brawler kudeyar  "desperado"  skaubitis  skauts  skif (glider)  skrunda i  sloka (glider)  sm-206  sm-5 (glider)  smith norbet 1923  smolenets (glider) - (смоленец)  sova (motor-glider)  staburags (glider)  stc-cg 1931  streifeneder albatros i  suarez 1895 glider  sue-1  sup 1922 glider  sutton airedale  sz-10 horak  references  miscellaneous
ioana minca (born 27 september 1998) is a romanian tennis player.  minca made her wta tour debut at the 2016 brd bucharest open.  references  external links       1998 births living people sportspeople from pitesti romanian female tennis players
christopher john crewther (born 6 august 1983) is a former australian politician. he was a liberal party of australia member of the australian house of representatives from 2016 to 2019.  early life and education crewther was born in mitcham and spent his first few years in kilsyth/mooroolbark, before moving to horsham in the wimmera when he was four. crewther attended horsham 298 primary school, horsham lutheran primary school, murtoa secondary college, and horsham college.  after school, crewther undertook part of a bachelor of commerce/bachelor of science at the university of melbourne (completing the equivalent of the first year of optometry), before transferring to study law in canberra. he graduated from a bachelor of laws with honours from the university of canberra, with a science minor.   crewther subsequently completed a graduate diploma of legal practice, and was admitted as a legal practitioner before the act supreme court in october 2006.   crewther then graduated with two master's degrees in international law and diplomacy from the australian national university, the latter in which he was awarded the james ingram ao prize for excellence in diplomatic studies for achieving top student.  career  crewther commenced his professional career working as an associate to magistrate (now supreme court justice) john burns in the act magistrates' court. he then worked as a lawyer in private practice, as well as in legal, policy and project management roles for aiatsis and the commonwealth department of agriculture. crewther then worked as an international lawyer through the united nations at the kosovo property agency in pristina.   after returning to australia from kosovo, crewther worked as an adviser to former minister for veterans' affairs, senator michael ronaldson, before running for parliament in 2013.   crewther then worked as ceo of mildura development corporation (now mildura regional development) and ran his own small business, before being elected to parliament in 2016.  crewther has also been a board director of zoe support australia and several other boards and committees.  politics  crewther was the liberal candidate for the outer regional/rural seat of mallee in 2013, which has been held by the national party since its establishment in 1949. crewther was the first liberal party to contest the electorate since 1993, reflecting the liberal and national parties agreement to not contest the same seat except on the retirement of a sitting member. crewther achieved 27% of the primary vote but the seat was held by the national party.  crewther was subsequently elected to parliament in 2016 in the inner regional
/outer metropolitan seat of dunkley, winning the seat with a 1.43% margin on the retirement of long serving member bruce billson.  following a speech to parliament in late 2016, crewther established the parliamentary friendship group for tourette syndrome as its founding chair.   crewther was chair of the australian parliament's foreign affairs and aid sub-committee, under the joint standing committee on foreign affairs, defence and trade (jscfadt). he chaired the sub-committee's 'inquiry into establishing a modern slavery act in australia', tabling to parliament the sub-committee's interim report in august 2017 and final report ('hidden in plain sight') in december 2017, which resulted in australia's modern slavery act 2018.  for this work, crewther was named amongst assent compliance's global top 100 corporate social responsibility influence leaders for 2018 and awarded a freedom award from anti-slavery australia in october 2019.  he was defeated at the 2019 election by labor candidate peta murphy. crewther was disadvantaged by an electoral redistribution which made dunkley notionally labor, along with a statewide swing to labor.  crewther ran again for liberal party preselection in dunkley for the 2022 federal election, but was ultimately unsuccessful.  in december 2021 crewther defeated long-standing member for mornington david morris to win preselection as the liberal candidate for mornington for the 2022 victorian state election.  personal life  crewther lives on the mornington peninsula and has two young children with his wife grace. he has a mild form of tourette's, which was diagnosed in his early 20s.  references     1983 births living people liberal party of australia members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for dunkley members of the australian house of representatives 21st-century australian politicians people with tourette syndrome
blue angel cafe  (also known as: object of desire), is a 1989 italian erotic film directed by joe d'amato.  plot united states, late 1980s. when raymond derek, a young politician with a great career, a beautiful wife and an expensive home, encounters sexy cabaret singer angie, he sees his life fall apart because the press finds out and it becomes front-page news.  cast   tara buckman as angie  richard brown as raymond derek  rick anthony munroe as william  jayne gray as kate  ken werbinski as steve  moses gibson as butler  daniel smith as mr. peterson  richard frank sume as tv journalist		  vera m. moore as journalist  release the film was released in united kingdom on august 18, 1989  reception in 1991, video watchdog called the film a "blase potboiler" and derided the main character's nightclub act as "consist[ing] of only one boring "i'm-down-and-out-but-i'm-fightin'-back" number - delivered a la minnelli in dietrich duds".  see also  list of italian films of 1989  notes  external links    films directed by joe d'amato films scored by luigi ceccarelli 1989 films italian films 1980s erotic drama films italian erotic drama films 1989 drama films
gorsian hakamrai is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
events from the year 1874 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events             jujevan  kiev roshen factory  odessa russian theatre  births  january 28 - vsevolod meyerhold, russian theatre practitioner (d. 1940)  february 7 - nikifor begichev, soviet seaman and explorer (d. 1927)  february 26 - nikolai korotkov, russian surgeon (d. 1920)  may 17 - mikhail diterikhs, russian general (d. 1937)  july 26 - serge koussevitzky, russian conductor (d. 1951)  october 9 - nicholas roerich, russian painter (d. 1947)  december 13 - josef lhevinne, russian pianist (d. 1944)  deaths  references  1874 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
pabwan is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4.9 km from postal head office in nurmahal, 25 km from phillaur, 27.8 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 136 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, goraya junction train station is 20 km away from the village. the village is 53.4 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 120 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the 1943-44 sk rapid wien season was the 46th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  ==fixtures and results  gauliga  tschammerpokal  references  1943-44 rapid wien season rapid
the last bookstore is an independent bookstore located at 453 s spring street, downtown los angeles. conde nast traveler called it california's largest new and used bookstore.  history  the store was founded in 2005 by josh spencer. the first incarnation was a downtown los angeles loft. they sold books and other things online only, then focused on books, opened a small bookstore in december 2009 on 4th and main streets. they moved to the current incarnation in the spring arts tower at 5th and spring streets on june 3, 2011. the store is 22,000 square feet. the current store is in a former bank with books on two levels, including the former vault.  vox reported that the store creates visual merchandising through creative displays, which attracts instagram users, "in the hope of trying to convert instagram visitors into book purchasers."  media filmmaker chad howitt chronicled the last bookstore and its owner, spencer, in a short documentary titled welcome to the last bookstore, released in 2016. it tells the story of how spencer was injured as a young man and lost the use of his legs, forcing him to re-examine his life. los angeles film review called the effort an "ode to resilience."  references  external links  "the man behind 'the last bookstore'" the atlantic   bookstores in california independent bookstores of the united states buildings and structures in los angeles companies based in los angeles retail buildings in california tourist attractions in los angeles retail companies established in 2005
dirba assembly constituency (sl. no.: 100) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in sangrur district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017 results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sangrur district
the 2015-16 czech extraliga season is the 23rd season of the czech extraliga since its creation after the breakup of czechoslovakia and the czechoslovak first ice hockey league in 1993.  regular season  scoring leaders     list shows the ten best skaters based on the number of points during the regular season. if two or more skaters are tied (i.e. same number of points, goals and played games), all of the tied skaters are shown. gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; +/- = plus/minus; pim = penalty minutes  leading goaltenders   these are the leaders in gaa among goaltenders who played at least 40% of the team's minutes. the table is sorted by gaa, and the criteria for inclusion are bolded.  gp = games played; toi = time on ice (minutes); ga = goals against; so = shutouts; sv% = save percentage; gaa = goals against average  playoffs  play-in round  pirati chomutov - hc kometa brno 3:1 (2:1 ot, 2:0, 3:2, 3:4)  psg zlin - hc ocelari trinec 3:2 (2:1, 3:4 p, 2:3 ot, 4:3, 3:2 ot)  play-off final: hc bili tygri liberec - hc sparta praha 4:2 (1:3, 4:2, 4:1, 1:4, 4:3, 2:1 ot). hc bili tygri liberec has won its first ever league title.  relegation  references  external links     czech 2015-16 in czech ice hockey leagues czech extraliga seasons
la posta is an unincorporated community in la plata county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  la posta is a name derived from spanish meaning "travelers' rest".  references  unincorporated communities in la plata county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
cyril of trier was bishop of trier from the beginning of the second half of the 5th century bishop of trier. some think he was a greek. in his time trier fell to the huns and there was general unrest in the year 451ad. in gaul after the assassination of emperor valentinian iii in 455 also fall in this time.  as bishophe built a new oratory and an inscription testifying to his rule has been found.  the construction of the church was between 446/47 and 475/76.  he was buried in the church but the exact location of the grave is not known.  references  gallo-roman saints saints of germania 5th-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown 5th-century bishops in germania 5th-century christian saints roman catholic bishops of trier
van ryckeghem is a belgian surname. notable people with the surname include:  daniel van ryckeghem (1945-2008), belgian cyclist lars van ryckeghem (born 2002), belgian cyclist valerie van ryckeghem (born 1975), belgian golfer willy van ryckeghem (born 1935), belgian economist  dutch-language surnames surnames of dutch origin
osvobozhdeniye ("liberation") was a liberal magazine during the final revolutionary years of the russian empire, prior to the october manifesto in 1905. the periodical was established in 1902, and was in clandestine circulation until 1905. it was published in stuttgart (germany) and paris (france), successively.  the publication was on a regular basis smuggled into russia and enjoyed a wide leadership. it advocated the establishment of a constitutional monarchy, alongside the granting of full civil rights in russia.  contributors included pavel milyukov, who for a short period of time in 1917 would become foreign minister, and pyotr struve, who perhaps was most influential as editor of osvobozhdeniye.  references  magazines established in 1902 magazines disestablished in 1905 russian-language magazines political magazines published in russia defunct magazines published in russia defunct political magazines published in france magazines published in paris mass media in stuttgart
henry wadsworth (june 18, 1903 - december 5, 1974) was an american actor best known for appearing in applause (1929),  the thin man (1934), and mark of the vampire (1935).  early life  joseph henry wadsworth was born on june 18, 1903 to john gray wadsworth and ida power wadsworth, who were married in 1894. henry wadsworth's ancestors first arrived in hartford, connecticut from england in 1632. he was the grandson of william henry wadsworth, who was a well-known lawyer, orator, and congressman.  wadsworth attended the university of kentucky after graduating from maysville high school in 1921.  he enrolled in carnegie institute of technology's drama school before starting his acting career.  career  wadsworth made his first appearance in film in the title role of howard lindsay's tommy in late 1927, following which he went on to appear in films like applause, made under paramount production. the film also marked helen morgan's debut.  he played minor roles in operator 13 (alongside marion davies) and in fast and loose before starring in w.s. van dyke's the thin man. he also appeared in the voice of bugle ann, this side of heaven, all-legit cast, mark of the vampire, sitting on the moon, and dr. kildare goes home.  wadsworth was cast in the big broadcast series' the big broadcast of 1936.  he retired from acting in the late 1950s; his last appearance was in rodgers and hammerstein's the happy time alongside leora dana and eva gabor. he joined the us navy during world war ii and remained there for two and a half years.  death  wadsworth died on december 5, 1974 at st. luke's hospital, new york city, at the age of 71.  filmography  references  external links  american male actors 1897 births 1974 deaths people from maysville, kentucky
the independence speed tandem is a german single-place, paraglider that was designed by michael nesler and produced by independence paragliding of eisenberg, thuringia. it is now out of production.  design and development the speed tandem was designed as a tandem glider for flight training.  the aircraft's  span wing has 48 cells, a wing area of  and an aspect ratio of 5.4:1. the pilot weight range is . the glider is dhv 1-2 certified.  company test pilot christian amon was also involved in the development as well as flight testing of the speed tandem.  specifications (speed tandem)  references  speed tandem paragliders
cp5 is a disability sport classification specific to cerebral palsy.  in many sports, it is grouped inside other classifications to allow people with cerebral palsy to compete against people with other different disabilities but the same level of functionality. sportspeople in this class have greater functional control of their upper body, and are generally ambulant with the use of an assistive device. quick movements can upset their balance.  sports that cp5 athletes are eligible to participate in include athletics, cycling, football, swimming, skiing wheelchair tennis, archery, para-equestrian, powerlifting, rowing, shooting, sledge hockey, sailing, table tennis, wheelchair basketball, wheelchair curling, and wheelchair fencing.  in some of these sports, different classification systems or names for cp5 are used.  definition and participation   cerebral palsy-international sports and recreation association (cp-isra) defined this class in january 2005 as, "diplegic - moderate involvement this individual may require the use of assistive devices in walking but not necessarily when standing or throwing. a shift of centre of gravity may lead to loss of balance. a triplegic may appear in this class. lower extremities-spasticity grade 3 to 2. involvement of one or both legs which may require assistive devices for walking. a class 5 athlete may have sufficient function to run on the track. if function is insufficient class 4 may be more appropriate. balance-usually has normal static balance but exhibits problems in dynamic balance e.g. attempting a spin or throwing forcefully. upper extremities-this is an area where variation occurs. some moderate to minimal limitation in upper extremities can often be seen particularly when throwing, but strength is within normal limits. hand function-normal cylindrical/spherical, opposition and prehensive grasp and release in the dominant hand is seen in all sports."  performance  cp5 sportspeople in this class have greater functional control of their upper body.  they may require the use of an assistive device when walking but they do not require use of a wheelchair.  they often have problems with their dynamic equilibrium but not their static equilibrium.  quick movements can upset their balance.  sports  athletics  in athletics events, cp5 competitors participate in t35/f35 classes. in some cases, cp5 athletes may be classified as f56. events that may be on the program for cp5 competitors include the club, discus throw, shot put and javelin. in athletics, they have some balance issues in track events and field events that require either running or throwing.  cycling
people with cerebral palsy are eligible to compete in cycling at the paralympic games. cp5 and cp6 competitors may compete using tricycles in the t2 class.  cyclists opting to compete in the t2 class often do so as a result of balance issues, which make riding a standard bicycle or handcycle difficult.   tricyclists are not eligible to compete in track events, only in road events. cp5 and cp6 may also chose to compete on a bicycle in the c3 class.  football  cp5 sportspeople are eligible to compete in association football in the sport of cp football. cp5 players are classified as ft5.  the rules of the sport are such that there must be at least on ft5 or ft6 player on the field at all times.  if it is not possible to field an ft5 or ft6 player, the team plays with six players on the field instead of seven.  players in this class may have problems running or walking.  they do not have problems though standing in a stationary position or with kicking a ball.  the extent of their disability is such that cp5 players would unlikely to ever be competitive against able-bodied players. during play, the more ft5 players exert themselves, the more their form deteriorates. coordination issues make it difficult for them to trap the ball.  they may be unable to do throw-ins because of balance issues.  cp footballers are first required to go through national level classification before being eligible for international classification.  the first stage of international classification involves a physical assessment.  this may involve classifiers who are medical experts.  the second stage involves observing the footballer practicing their sport specific skills in a non-competitive setting.  the third stage involves classifiers observing the player in competition for at least 30 minutes.  following that, the classification panel then assigns the footballer to a class, which may also include "not eligible."  the canadian development pathways for cp footballers trains ft5 players to become goalkeepers.  skiing   cp5 athletes are eligible to compete in skiing competitions at the elite level and the paralympic games. cp5 nordic skiers compete in  lw3, lw4 and lw9.  cp5 alpine skiers compete in lw1 and lw3/2.  in teaching skiers with cerebral palsy, instructors are encouraged to delay the introduction ski poles as skiers may overgrip them. use of a ski bra is also encouraged as it helps the skier learn correct knee and hip placement. one method of learning to ski for competitors
with cerebral palsy in this classification is the american teaching system. they first thing skiers learn is what their equipment is, and how to put it on and take it off. next, skiers learn about positioning their body in a standing position on flat terrain. after this, the skier learns how to side step, and then how to fall down and get back up again. the skier then learns how to do a straight run, and then is taught how to get on and off the chair lift. this is followed by learning wedge turns and weight transfers, wedge turns, wide track parallel turns, how to use ski poles, and advanced parallel turns. while learning to ski, skiers in this class with cerebral palsy may use ski-bras, bungi cords, outriggers, slant boards or toe boards.  cp5 lw4 skiers may have better balance while using skis than they would otherwise. this presents challenges for coaches who are working with the skier. compared to other skiers in the class, the skier with cerebral palsy may tire more quickly.  swimming  cp5 swimmers are eligible to compete at the paralympic games. these swimmers may be found in several classes including s5, and s6.  cp5 swimmers tend to have a passive normalized drag in the range of 0.6 to 1.0. this puts them into the passive drag band of pdb5, pdb6, pdb7, pdb8, and pdb9. because of their balance issues, swimmers in this class can find the starting block problematic and often have slower times entering the water than other competitors in their class. because the disability of swimmers in this class involves in a loss of function in specific parts of their body, they are more prone to injury than their able-bodied counterparts as a result of overcompensation in other parts of their body.  when fatigued, cp5 asymmetry in their stroke becomes a problem for swimmers in this class, more so than others in their class.  the integrated classification system used for swimming, where swimmers with cp compete against those with other disabilities, is subject to criticisms has been that the nature of cp is that greater exertion leads to decreased dexterity and fine motor movements.  this puts competitors with cp at a disadvantage when competing against people with amputations who do not lose coordination as a result of exertion.  other sports  people with cerebral palsy are eligible to compete at the elite level in a number of other sports including wheelchair tennis, archery, para-equestrian, powerlifting, rowing
, shooting, sledge hockey, sailing, table tennis, wheelchair basketball, wheelchair curling, and wheelchair fencing.  race running is another sport open to this class. cp5 race runners may be classified as rr3. para-taekwondo is open people in this class.  early on, the cp5 classification competed as cp5 before a different sport specific classification system was developed.  references   parasports classifications cerebral palsy and other paralytic syndromes
magma oceans exist during periods of earth's or any planet's accretion when the planet is completely or partly molten.   in the early solar system, magma oceans were formed by the melting of planetesimals and planetary impacts. small planetesimals are melted by the heat provided by the radioactive decay of aluminum-26. as planets grew larger, the energy was then supplied from large or giant impacts with other planetary bodies. magma oceans are integral parts of planetary formation as they facilitate the formation of a core through metal segregation and an atmosphere and hydrosphere through degassing. evidence exists to support the existence of magma oceans on both the moon and the earth. magma oceans may survive for millions to tens of millions of years, interspersed by relatively mild conditions.  magma ocean heat sources  the sources of the energy required for the formation of magma oceans in the early solar system were the radioactive decay of aluminum-26, accretionary impacts, and core formation. the abundance and short half life of aluminum-26 allowed it to function as one of the sources of heat for the melting of planetesimals. with aluminum-26 as a heat source, planetesimals that had accreted within 2 ma after the formation of the first solids in the solar system could melt. melting in the planetesimals began in the interior and the interior magma ocean transported heat via convection. planetesimals larger than 20 km in radius that accreted within 2 ma are expected to have melted, although not completely.  the kinetic energy provided by accretionary impacts and the loss of potential energy from a planet during core formation are also large heat sources for planet melting. core formation, also referred to as metal-silicate differentiation, is the separation of metallic components from silicate in the magma that sink to form a planetary core. accretionary impacts that produce heat for the melting of planet embryos and large terrestrial planets have an estimated timescale of tens to hundreds of millions of years.  a prime example would be the moon-forming impact on earth, that is thought to have formed a magma ocean with a depth of up to 2000 km. the energy of accretionary impacts foremost melt the exterior of the planetary body, and the potential energy provided by core differentiation and the sinking of metals melts the interior.  lunar magma ocean  the findings of the apollo missions were the first articles of evidence to suggest the existence of a magma ocean on the moon. the rocks in the samples acquired from the missions were found
to be composed of a mineral called anorthite. anorthite consists mostly of a variety of plagioclase feldspars, which are lower in density than magma. this discovery gave rise to the hypothesis that the rocks formed through an ascension to the surface of a magma ocean during the early life stages of the moon. additional evidence for the existence of the lunar magma ocean includes the sources of mare basalts and kreep (k for potassium, ree for rare-earth elements, and p for phosphorus). the existence of these components within the mostly anorthositic crust of the moon are synonymous with the solidification of the lunar magma ocean. furthermore, the abundance of the trace element europium within the moon's crust suggests that it was absorbed from the magma ocean, leaving europium deficits in the mare basalt rock sources of the moon's crust. the lunar magma ocean was initially 200-300 km thick and the magma achieved a temperature of about 2000 k. after the early stages of the moon's accretion, the magma ocean was subjected to cooling caused by convection in the planet's interior.  earth's magma ocean  during its formation, the earth likely suffered a series of magma oceans resulting from giant impacts, the final one being the moon-forming impact. the best chemical evidence for the existence of magma oceans on earth is the abundance of certain siderophile elements in the mantle that record magma ocean depths of approximately 1000 km during accretion. the scientific evidence to support the existence of magma oceans on early earth is not as developed as the evidence for the moon because of the recycling of the earth's crust and mixing of the mantle. unlike earth, indications of a magma ocean on the moon such as the flotation crust, elemental components in rocks, and kreep have been preserved throughout its lifetime.  see also   lava planet - hypothetical type of planet with a surface dominated by molten rock hadean chondrites planetary differentiation  references   geology planetary science moon hadean volcanism geochemistry planetary geology
events from the year 1859 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events             iskra (magazine)  russian musical society  vilnius-kaunas railway  births  deaths  references  1859 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
macrocamptus virgatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by gahan in 1890, originally under the genus cylindrepomus. it is known from laos.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1890
martina hingis and jana novotna were the defending champions, but none of them competed this year. novotna also retired at the end of the 1999 season.  julie halard-decugis and ai sugiyama won the title by defeating nicole arendt and manon bollegraf 4-6, 7-5, 6-4 in the final. it was the 9th title for halard-decugis and the 12th title for sugiyama in their respective careers. it was also the 2nd title for the pair during the season, after their win in sydney.  seeds a champion seed is indicated in bold text while text in italics indicates the round in which that seed was eliminated. all sixteen seeds received a bye to the second round.  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  bottom half  section 3  section 4  references  official results archive (itf)  official results archive (wta)  women's doubles
drunk shakespeare is an off-broadway play created by scott griffin and david hudson currently performing at "the gallery at green fig" at 570 10th ave, 4th floor (near 42nd street), new york. it premiered at quinn's bar and grill in march 2014. as of jan 2019, there have been over 2000 performances. it received a new york times critic's pick saying "it seems inevitable that all performing will soon be done either plastered or stoned". drunk shakespeare follows a trend of drinking and performing popularized by the comedy central series drunk history.  it is also performing at "behind the chicago theater" at 182 n wabash ave (near e lake st), chicago.  premise  the show has five actors. one has between four and six shots of whiskey in front of the audience. the cast then attempts to perform a shakespearean play. the drunk actor can do anything they want and the four sober actors must follow their requests.  cast  current cast members include: whit leyenberger, michael amendola, hayley palmer, alison wien, mike sause, aubrey taylor, kelsey lidsky, scott watson, caitlin morris, tim haber, david andrew laws, danielle cohn, and mariah parris.   past cast members include: damiyr shuford (now with blue man group), josh hyman (now with men are from mars, women are from venus), lindsey hope pearlman (up & down theatre), lucas calhoun (the elephant man), julia giolzetti, josh sauerman (three day hangover), brandon carter (classical theatre of harlem), phil gillen, adam thomas smith, poppy liu, tiffany abercrombie, kristin friedlander (the flea, chicago shakespeare), lou sallan, chris gebauer, monique sanchez, elissa klie, carolina do, and kate gunther.  references  off-broadway plays
during the 1999-2000 english football season, mansfield town football club competed in the football league third division where they finished in 17th position with 56 points.  final league table  results mansfield town's score comes first  legend  football league third division  fa cup  league cup  football league trophy  squad statistics  references general mansfield town 1999-2000 at soccerbase.com (use drop down list to select relevant season)  specific  mansfield town f.c. seasons mansfield town
teresa andres zamora (1907-1946) was a spanish librarian who led the seccion de bibliotecas de cultura popular. she was a valenician ministry of public instruction delegate, communist militant, feminist, republican and trade unionist. andres fled into exile, first in belgium and afterwards in france where she was involved in politics until her death on 5 july 1946 from leukaemia.  biography  teresa andres zamora was born in villalba de los alcores. she grew up in cevico de la torre, province of palencia, where four brothers (troadio felix, dionisio, mariano and victoriano) and a sister (isabel) were born.  andres studied for her bachelor's degree in palencia, living in a flat rented with her grandmother, and matriculating with high honors. during the years 1923 to 1927, she studied philosophy and letters in valladolid, at the same time studying additional subjects, such as teaching. in 1928, with the intention of working on a doctorate, andres moved to the residence of misses in madrid.  during her studies 1928-29 and 1930-31, andres was a teacher at the institute-school, where she gave classes in geography. here, andres became aware of the fight for women's rights. during the 1928-29 term, clara campoamor spoke at a conference on "how to create the woman on the right". in 1928, she participated in madrid at the international congress of university women. included among the participants were representatives of the international federation of university women, some of which lodged in the same pavilion as the residence of misses, were andres resided.  during her stay at the residence, andres collaborated with the institution's activities. one of them was a trip to andalucia, during which she gave an art presentation in collaboration with the centre of historical studies for the missions of art which was set up the architect pablo gutierrez. during the 1933-34 term, andres and encarnacion cobre herrero spoke at four conferences, with some of the work used as an object of her doctoral thesis. she continued working on her doctorate under the guidance of the man who would become her husband emili gomez nadal  after examinations in 1931, she became the director of the archaeologic museum in leon. in 1931, she was appointed the director of the archive of the national palace, commissioned to organise and safeguard the palace fonds. the board of enlargement of studies granted her a scholarship in 1932 for eleven months in germany. there, she witnessed the ascension of
hitler. she took courses of mediaeval archaeology, german sculpture of the 14th century, and mediaeval painting, at the institute of history of art at the university of berlin. she also worked in several libraries and museums. she returned to spain in september 1933 and advanced in his doctoral thesis, "la rejeria en espana", under the direction of gomez moreno.  in 1935, she received two more scholarships, one in the section of archaeology at the centre of historical investigations for a trip of studies with the end to do an investigation in the cathedrals of cuenca, valencia, barcelona and saragossa. there was another scholarship in 1936. she died in paris in 1946.  references   1907 births 1946 deaths 20th-century spanish women spanish librarians women librarians people from valladolid spanish feminists spanish communists spanish trade unionists
the 1992 european promotion cup for men was the third edition of this tournament. it was hosted in nicosia, cyprus and austria achieved its first title ever after beating luxembourg in the final game.  preliminary round  group a  group b  classification games  final round  bracket  final  final ranking  external links fiba archive  1992 1991-92 in european basketball international basketball competitions hosted by cyprus 1992 in cypriot sport
the oklahoma state-tulsa football rivalry is a college football rivalry game between oklahoma state and tulsa. the two teams first played each other in 1914, and the rivalry has been played on and off for a total of 75 games as of 2021.  series history from 1935 to 1956, the two teams both competed in the missouri valley conference. in those 22 seasons, the conference champion would be won by either oklahoma state or tulsa 16 times.  they played each other annually from 1926 to 1965. then played again regularly from 1981 to 2000. the two universities are approximately 70 miles apart via the cimarron turnpike.  in 1992, the tulsa world reported that former tulsa teammates dave rader and denver johnson were now coaching on opposite sides: rader as tulsa head coach and johnson as oklahoma state defensive line coach.  the bank of oklahoma began a sponsorship deal in 2017 with oklahoma state and tulsa to name the series the bank of oklahoma turnpike classic.  the next scheduled game between oklahoma state and tulsa is scheduled for september 14, 2024, in stillwater, as part of annual home-and-home series that extends through 2031 with a hiatus in 2022 and 2023.  quotes on the series "the university of tulsa and oklahoma state have a colorful history of compelling football games," wrote bill haisten for the tulsa world in 2010. bill connors wrote 16 years earlier for the tulsa world: "tulsa and oklahoma state never played each other in football when the game seemed insignificant to the participants."  oklahoma state head coach jimmy johnson said in 1982: "ou and osu, that's a rivalry, but not osu and tulsa." in contrast, tulsa head coach john cooper said about the oklahoma state-tulsa series: "it's a natural rivalry, and i don't think you can underestimate the importance of that."  in 2008, the oklahoman sportswriter berry tramel wrote that this series "should be played regularly" because tulsa had improved over the decade. however, tramel changed his opinion in 2017: "osu-tulsa has faded away. . . . conference realignment and economic realities have made it more difficult for age-old rivals to schedule, especially when they end up on different competitive planes."  notable games  1945 oklahoma a&m 12 - tulsa 6  oklahoma a&m entered week 6 undefeated (5-0) ranked no. 11 and hosted a tulsa team who had dropped to no. 19 after their first loss to indiana the previous week. this
is the only contest between the two schools with both teams ranked in the ap poll. the cowboys defeated the golden hurricane en route to an undefeated (9-0) season.  1995 tulsa 24 - oklahoma state 23  tulsa was trailing by 20 points in the fourth quarter, then scored three touchdowns in the final 5:41 to win 24-23 in what was then still called skelly stadium.  2011 oklahoma state 59 - tulsa 33  in week 3, tulsa took on oklahoma state in a home game that memorably lasted until 3:35 am after inclement weather delayed the kickoff past midnight. the golden hurricane scored a field goal on their first drive to take an early lead, but were unable to contain the cowboys' potent offense and quickly fell behind for good. the team was further hindered by the loss of g.j. kinne near the end of the first quarter, forcing them to rely heavily on the run for the remainder of the game.  game results  see also    list of ncaa college football rivalry games  references  college football rivalries in the united states oklahoma state cowboys football tulsa golden hurricane football 1914 establishments in oklahoma
the york outer ring road is a ring road around the city of york, england. the south-eastern section is part of the a64 and the north-western section is the a1237.  history an outer ring road for york had been proposed as far back as 1948 but it wasn't until 1976 that the first section, the york bypass, opened. the second section was constructed in three phases. the first phase, the northern section between the a19 and the a64, opened in 1986, the second and third sections opened the following year - phase two was between the a64 and the a59 and phase three was the short section between the a59 and a19 - this section took longer to construct due to it having to cross the river ouse and the east coast main line. phase three was opened by the secretary of state for transport paul channon on 11 december 1987.  route  the south-eastern section (a64) runs as a continuous dual carriageway with grade separated junctions at grimston bar (a1079/a166), fulford (a19) and askham bar (a1036).   the north-western section (a1237) is a single carriageway road, and has eleven roundabouts.  proposed improvements  several bodies have proposed improvements to the single carriageway a1237. these include:  dualling the road by 2030 as detailed in the north yorkshire strategic prospectus.  in the west yorkshire plus transport fund (york schemes), improvements to seven roundabouts between the wetherby road and monks cross junctions. the design includes ensuring room for future dualling of the carriageways; increasing the number of approach and exit lanes at the roundabouts; enlarging their diameter; three subways for pedestrians/cyclists at busy crossing points and two bridges to accommodate a widened road.  on 3 march 2015 the executive of york city council resolved to progress option 1 of the report into improvements to the york outer ring road. this was to carry out the work recommended in the west yorkshire plus transport fund (york schemes)  however two previous proposed improvements were rejected. immediately after the opening of the single carriageway a1237 congestion became a problem, especially at peak times, and the 1989 department for transport's roads for prosperity white paper included improvements to the section between (a19 to the a64). the proposals were for a new continuous through-route running parallel to the existing road with just a single grade separated junction at the b1363. the existing road
, and the roundabouts, would have been retained for local access. the plans were subsequently dropped. also later plans for dualling 7.8 km, at a cost £31m, of the a1237 york outer ring road were rejected by the regional transport board in 2009.  timeline  1976: a64 york bypass completed  1984: start of construction of a1237 phase i (a19 to a64)  1985: start of construction of a1237 phase ii (a64 to a59) and phase iii (a59 to a19)  1986: phase i completed  september 1987: phase ii completed  december 1987: phase iii completed  references   york outer ring road published by north yorkshire county council  york outer ring road supplement published by the yorkshire evening press on 12 december 1987  ring roads in the united kingdom roads in yorkshire transport in york
athege roshen shivanka silva, commonly known as roshen silva (born 17 november 1988) is a professional sri lankan test cricketer who plays for the sri lanka national cricket team. he also plays first-class cricket for colts cricket club.  domestic career in march 2018, he was named in galle's squad for the 2017-18 super four provincial tournament. in the opening fixture of the tournament, he scored 231 not out in the first innings against colombo. he was the leading run-scorer for the tournament, with 535 runs in three matches.  in march 2019, he was named in kandy's squad for the 2019 super provincial one day tournament.  international career in july 2016 he was named in sri lanka's test squad for their series against australia, but he did not play. in september 2017, he was named in sri lanka's test squad for their series against pakistan in the united arab emirates, but again, he did not play.  in november 2017, he was named in sri lanka's test squad for their series against india. he made his test debut for sri lanka against india on 2 december 2017. he was dismissed for duck in the first innings, by the first delivery silva faced from ravichandran ashwin. however, in the second innings, silva scored his maiden test fifty and guided sri lanka to edge closer to the win. however at the end, match was drawn and silva finished the match with unbeaten 74 runs.  during the first test against bangladesh, silva scored his maiden test century. his century along with centuries from dhananjaya de silva and kusal mendis gave sri lanka a first innings total of 713. however, the match ended in a draw after mominul haque's made centuries in both innings.  silva took his batting form to the second test of the tour as well. in the match, he scored match winning fifties in each innings, with sri lanka setting a target over 300 for bangladesh to win the match. the match ended with a 215-run win to sri lanka due to impressive bowling performance by all bowlers. during the test series, roshen silva went onto become the fifth batsman to register four fifty-plus scores in his first five test innings of his test career and became the only sri lankan to achieve the feat. he also finished with an aggregate of 309 runs in his first five test innings which is also the second highest aggregate by a sri lankan in his first five test innings just behind asela gunaratne's aggregate of 310. sri lanka won the two-
match series 1-0 and silva was adjudged man of the match and player of the series for his batting performance.  for his performance, silva was rewarded with a jump of 29 places in the icc test batting rankings, which has put him inside the top-50 batsmen in 49th spot for first time in his career.  in may 2018, he was one of 33 cricketers to be awarded a national contract by sri lanka cricket ahead of the 2018-19 season.  references  external links    1988 births living people sri lankan cricketers sri lanka test cricketers cricketers from colombo basnahira north cricketers colts cricket club cricketers mannar district cricketers prime doleshwar sporting club cricketers ragama cricket club cricketers singha sports club cricketers
marco gobbetti is an italian businessman, and the ceo of burberry. he succeeded christopher bailey in july 2017. starting his career in management at luxury companies such as bottega veneta, valextra, and moschino, and became ceo of givenchy in 2004 and was the chairman and the ceo of celine.  early life and education gobbetti was born in 1958, and is italian. he has a degree in business administration from the american university in washington, d.c., and a master's degree in international management from the thunderbird school of global management in phoenix, arizona.  career  1984-1992 from 1984 to 1989, gobbetti worked with the italian luxury label bottega veneta as a commercial director. first a sales director for bottega veneta in the united states, he then became a marketing and sales director. in 1989 he then joined valextra as managing director.  1993-2016 he was chief executive of moschino from 1993 to 2004, and then was appointed chief executive of givenchy in february 2004, which is owned by lvmh. gobbetti became celine's chief executive in 2008 working with creative director phoebe philo.  under gobbetti, the company moved its headquarters and revamped its product offerings to focus on "clean and sophisticated" lines. as of 2016, he remained the chairman and ceo of celine.  in july 2016, it was announced that gobbetti would replace christopher bailey as the ceo of burberry, with bailey remaining with the company as president and chief creative officer. gobetti took on the role of executive chairman, asia pacific and middle east, in january 2017. the position was created for gobetti to familiarize himself with the company. he became ceo and joined the board in july 2017.  references  american university alumni burberry people italian chief executives living people thunderbird school of global management alumni year of birth missing (living people)
gypsy curse (spanish: maldicion gitana) is a 1953 spanish comedy film directed by jeronimo mihura and starring luis sandrini, elena espejo and julia caba alba.  cast  maria arias   josefina bejarano  francisco bernal   julia caba alba as dona alfonsa    gaspar de aquino   carlos diaz de mendoza   elena espejo as elvira    felix fernandez   miguel angel fernandez  manuel guitian  casimiro hurtado   delia luna   arturo marin   juanjo menendez   elisa mendez   juan olaguivel   rosa palomar   carmen perez gallo   santiago rivero   dora sancho   eduardo sandrini   luis sandrini as alejo franchinelli    mercedes serrano   ricardo turia  anibal vela  references  bibliography   de espana, rafael. directory of spanish and portuguese film-makers and films. greenwood press, 1994.  external links     1953 comedy films spanish comedy films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films films directed by jeronimo mihura suevia films films films scored by juan quintero munoz spanish black-and-white films
the gelocidae are an extinct group of hornless ruminantia that are estimated to have lived during the eocene and oligocene epochs, from 36 mya to 6 mya. the family generally includes extinct hornless ruminants which do not belong to similar families such as moschidae (musk deer) or tragulidae. fossils of family gelocidae have been discovered in europe, asia, africa, and north america.  description  members of the family gelocidae were long-legged, even-toed ungulates adapted for running and grazing. the gelocidae likely share a close common ancestor with moschidae and were of a similar size and shape. they had similar dentition and proportions to members of moschidae, but lacked the sabre-like tusks of the modern musk deer.  bibliography   even-toed ungulates prehistoric mammal families
aacanthocnema huegelianae is a species of jumping plant lice, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it lacks hinaria on its eighth antennal segment as well as sclerotised spurs on its hind tibia. females of the species lack a posterior apical hook on their proctiger.  references  triozidae insects described in 2011
pinnacles is an album by jazz trombonist and arranger j. j. johnson recorded in 1979 for the milestone label.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow observed "although not quite an essential set, j.j. johnson is in excellent form on this date". all about jazz said "this is deep 'seventies funk, with block horns and lots of percussion. it's also pretty generic - these guys are more at home playing jazz, and that's what they should be playing".  track listing all compositions by j. j. johnson except where noted.  "night flight" - 7:46  "deak" - 6:26  "cannonball junction" - 5:32  "pinnacles" - 6:40  "see see rider" (traditional) - 6:46  "mr. clean" (weldon irvine) - 5:46  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone, arranger oscar brashear - trumpet (tracks 2, 3, 5 & 6) joe henderson - tenor saxophone (tracks 1-4) tommy flanagan - piano ron carter - bass billy higgins - drums kenneth nash - percussion (tracks 5 & 6)  use of electronic music equipment  from the liner notes:  "j.j. johnson uses barcus-berry pickup, gentle electric pitch follower, and roland space echo on "cannonball junction", and the same pickup and pitch follower, plus arp 2600 synthesizer and oberheim expander module on "mr. clean."  references   1980 albums milestone records albums j. j. johnson albums
the 1955-56 sk rapid wien season was the 58th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  european cup  mitropa cup  references  1955-56 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
count axel charles emil lewenhaupt (27 may 1917 - 20 november 2018) was a swedish diplomat and grand master of ceremonies at the royal court of sweden.  career lewenhaupt was born in helsingborg, sweden, the son of colonel, count gustaf lewenhaupt and his wife baroness elisabeth ramel. he passed studentexamen in 1936 and his reserve officer exam in 1938 and received a candidate of law degree from uppsala university in 1942 before becoming an attache at the ministry for foreign affairs in 1943. lewenhaupt served as an attache in rome in 1943. the swedish legation's duties during world war ii in rome included taking special measures to protect swedish interests and swedish nationals (including elizabeth hesselblad) who was still in rome. the focus was to protect the swedish institute and the convent church santa brigida. after rome, lewenhaupt was attache in berlin in 1944 and in helsinki from 1945 to 1947. he was second secretary at the foreign ministry from 1948 to 1952 and first legation secretary in madrid from 1952 to 1956. lewenhaupt was first secretary at the foreign ministry from 1956 to 1958 and director at the foreign ministry from 1958 to 1960.  he was embassy counsellor in washington, d.c. from 1960 to 1962 and ambassador in leopoldville from 1962 to 1963. lewenhaupt was acting head of the political department at the foreign ministry from 1964 to 1965 and its administrative department from 1965 to 1967. he was ambassador in bangkok, rangoon, kuala lumpur and singapore from 1967 to 1970 and ambassador in new delhi, colombo and katmandu from 1970 to 1975. lewenhaupt was then ambassador in belgrade and tirana from 1975 to 1978 and served at the  foreign ministry from 1978 to 1979. he was ambassador in rome and valletta from 1979 to 1983 and grand master of ceremonies at the royal court of sweden from 1983 to 1988.  other work lewenhaupt was also secretary of the foreign ministry's admissions commission (ud:s antagningskommission) in 1951 and representative at trade negotiations with spain, soviet union and other nations from 1952 to 1958. he became a member of the royal automobile club in 1956 and was the companion of the duke of halland at the officer's visit to ethiopia and liberia in 1959. lewenhaupt was representative at the united nations general assembly in 1973 and permanent representative at the food and agriculture organization from 1979 to 1983.  personal life in 1944, lewenhaupt married elsa rudberg (1918-1990), the daughter of first accountant ivar rudberg and sonja bergstrom. he
was the father of anne (1946-2018) and eva (born 1948). in 1991 he married countess louise ehrensvard (1925-2014), the daughter of the general, count carl august ehrensvard and countess gisela bassewitz. he turned 100 in may 2017 and died in november 2018 at the age of 101.  awards and decorations lewenhaupt's awards: commander of the order of civil merit knight of the order of the white rose of finland knight of the order of the crown of italy knight of the order of merit of the republic of hungary grand officer of the order of the star of ethiopia commander of the order of the crown commander of the order of merit of the austrian republic swedish red cross badge of merit in silver (svenska roda korsets fortjansttecken i silver)  bibliography  references  1917 births 2018 deaths ambassadors of sweden to albania ambassadors of sweden to india ambassadors of sweden to italy ambassadors of sweden to malaysia ambassadors of sweden to malta ambassadors of sweden to myanmar ambassadors of sweden to nepal ambassadors of sweden to singapore ambassadors of sweden to sri lanka ambassadors of sweden to thailand ambassadors of sweden to the democratic republic of the congo ambassadors of sweden to yugoslavia men centenarians people from helsingborg swedish centenarians swedish counts uppsala university alumni
the 1994 european promotion cup for men was the 4th edition of this tournament. it was hosted in dublin, ireland and the host team achieved its first title ever after beating cyprus in the final game.  preliminary round  group a  group b  classification games  final round  bracket  final  final ranking  external links fiba archive  1994 1993-94 in european basketball international sports competitions hosted by ireland basketball competitions in ireland 1994 in irish sport
the following list shows the line of descent for major winners from the northern dancer sire line, tracking patrilineal descent from the stallion dubbed by the new york times in 1990 as "the dominant progenitor of his breed". it focuses on winners of the principal three-year-old classic races, as these have long been used to evaluate a stallion's success, and the highest quality races for older horses based on international federation of horseracing authorities rankings. a few other highly prestigious races from around the world have been included as well.  northern dancer's first major winner was nijinsky, who swept the english triple crown in 1970. nijinsky in turn established himself as a leading sire, as did several other of northern dancer's sons, especially danzig, storm bird (through his son storm cat) and sadler's wells. modern descendants of northern dancer's sire line include american triple crown winner justify (2018) and the majority of recent english classic winners including the undefeated frankel.  although not covered by the following list, northern dancer's influence is magnified in modern pedigrees by the success of several of his male descendants as broodmare sires. triple crown winner american pharoah and leading sire tapit are just two examples of horses who descend from northern dancer in an indirect line.  races included and number of winners  the following races were selected based on notability (for example, the english classic and american triple crown races), quality (as measured by the ifha ranking of the top 100 g1 races), and geography (to sample racing from around the world). this list also shows how many winners of the given race descend from the northern dancer sire line  (not including northern dancer's own wins in the kentucky derby, preakness and queen's plate).  three-year-old classics: 2000 guineas - 26 1000 guineas - 22 epsom derby - 30 epsom oaks - 22 st leger - 22 kentucky derby - 7 preakness stakes - 12 belmont stakes - 8 kentucky oaks - 10 coaching club american oaks (ccao) - 6 poule d'essai des poulains - 28 poule d'essai des pouliches - 17 prix du jockey club - 20 prix de diane - 20 irish 2000 guineas - 28 irish 1000 guineas - 22 irish derby - 36 irish oaks - 23  deutsches derby - 14  randwick guineas - 18  rosehill guineas - 16  australian derby - 15  australian oaks - 13 satsuki sho (japanese 2000 guineas) - 4 oka sho (japanese 1000 guineas) - 7 tokyo yushun (
japanese derby) - 6 yushun himba (japanese oaks) - 11 kikuka sho (japanese st. leger) - 3  top rated races:  black caviar lightning - 19/22  dubai world cup - 6/7  dubai sheema classic - 9  queen elizabeth stakes (aus) - 8/10  champions mile (hong kong) - 10/11  queen elizabeth ii cup (qeii cup - hong kong) - 15/17  metropolitan handicap (met mile) - 8 prince of wales's stakes - 16  takarazuka kinen - 6  eclipse stakes - 22 king george vi and queen elizabeth stakes (king george) - 25/27  whitney stakes - 7  sussex stakes - 27/28  pacific classic - 8/9  prix jacques le marois - 21/24 international stakes - 21/22  irish champion stakes - 26/28   prix vermeille - 23/24 prix de l'arc de triomphe - 24/26  queen elizabeth ii stakes - 25  champion stakes  - 19/21  cox plate - 12/15  breeders' cup mile - 17/22  breeders' cup distaff - 10/11  breeders' cup turf - 18/19 breeders' cup classic - 7  japan cup - 5  hong kong sprint - 8/10  arima kinen - 4  other races of interest:  cheltenham gold cup - 11/12  ascot gold cup - 16/23 durban july handicap (south africa) - 18 queen's plate (canada) - 18  melbourne cup - 11/13  major winners in the northern dancer sire line  nijinsky branch  nijinsky (1970 english triple crown (2000 guineas, epsom derby & st leger), irish derby, king george):  green dancer (1975 poulains): aryenne (1980 pouliches) no attention: super creek (1988 kikuka sho)  cadoudal: indian river: native river (2018 cheltenham gold cup)  long run (2011 cheltenham gold cup)  buck's boum:  al boum photo (2019-2020 cheltenham gold cup)  suave dancer (1991 prix du jockey club, irish champion, arc de triomphe):  compton admiral (1999 eclipse)  volvoreta (2000 prix vermeille) green tune (1994 poulains) dancing champ: dancing duel (1993 durban july) space walk (1994 durban july) copper kingdom: my brilliant star (1992 australian oaks)  whiskey road:  just a dash
(1981 melbourne cup)  strawberry road (1983 rosehill guineas, australian derby, cox plate)  fraise (1992 breeders' cup turf)  ajina (1997 ccao, breeders' cup distaff)  escena (1998 breeders' cup distaff)  maruzensky:  horisky (1982 kikuka sho)  suzuka koban (1985 takarazuka kinen)  sakura chiyono o (1988 tokyo yushun)  leo durban (1991 kikuka sho)  yamaninsky:  yaeno muteki (1988 satsuki sho)	  light color (1989 yushun himba)  ile de bourbon (1978 king george):  lagunas (1984 deutsches derby)  kahyasi (1988 epsom and irish derby):  enzeli (1999 ascot gold cup)  vereva (1997 prix de diane)  zainta (1998 prix de diane)  ile de chypre (1989 international stakes)  yeats (b. 1976):  our poetic prince (1988 cox plate, 1989 queen elizabeth (aus))  niniski:  petoski (1985 king george)  kala dancer:  subzero (1992 melbourne cup)  minster son (1988 st leger)  lomitas:  belenus (1999 deutsches derby)  silvano (2001 qeii cup): bold silvano (2010 durban july) heavy metal (2013 durban july) lucky speed (2013 deutsches derby) power king (2015 durban july) marinaresco (2017 durban july)  danedream (2011 arc de triomphe, 2012 king george) hernando (1993 prix du jockey club):  holding court (2000 prix du jockey club)  sulamani (2002 prix du jockey club, international, 2003 dubai sheema classic)  mastery (2009 st leger)  look here (2008 epsom oaks)   czaravich (1980 met mile)  kings lake (1981 irish 2000, sussex, irish champion) sportin' life:  bet twice (1987 belmont stakes)  golden fleece (1982 epsom derby)  solford (1983 eclipse)  russian roubles:  isono roubles (1991 yushun himba)  serheed:  northerly (2001-2 cox plate)  caerleon (1983 prix du jockey club, international):  caerlina (1991 prix de diane)  generous (1991 epsom and irish derby, king george)  moonax (1994 st leger)  overbury (1996 qeii cup)
lady carla (1996 epsom oaks)  fusaichi concorde (1996 tokyo yushun)   cape verdi (1998 1000 guineas)  marienbard (2002 arc de triomphe)  shadeed (1985 2000 guineas, queen elizabeth ii):  shadayid (1991 1000 guineas)  alydeed (1992 queen's plate)  sayyedati (1993 1000 guineas, sussex, prix jacques le marois)  manzotti:  two altazano (1994 ccao)  shahrastani (1986 epsom and irish derby)  ferdinand (1986 kentucky derby, 1987 breeders' cup classic)  royal academy (1990 breeders' cup mile):  ihtiram:  miss andretti (2007 lightning)  ali-royal (1997 sussex)  sleepytime (1997 1000 guineas) zalaiyka (1998 pouliches)  val royal (2001 breeders' cup mile):  cockney rebel (2007 2000 guineas, irish 2000)  bel esprit:  black caviar (2011-3 lightning)  bullish luck (2005-6 champions mile) eyeofthetiger (2006 durban july)  lammtarra (1995 epsom derby, king george, arc de triomphe)  lyphard branch  lyphard (1972 prix jacques le marois):  pharly:  le nain jaune:  magic night (1991 prix vermeille)  reine de saba (1978 prix de diane)  dancing maid (1978 pouliches, prix vermeille)  three troikas (1979 pouliches, prix vermeille, arc de triomphe)  lypheor:  royal heroine (1984 breeders' cup mile)  tolomeo:  innocent king (1993 rosehill guineas, australian derby)  mogami:  sirius symboli (1985 tokyo yushun)  mejiro ramonu (1986 yushun himba)  legacy world (1993 japan cup)  manila (1986 breeders' cup turf)  alzao:  second set (1991 sussex)  matiya (1996 irish 1000)  winona (1998 irish oaks)  alborada (1998-9 champion stakes)  shahtoush (1998 epsom oaks) elliodor: super quality (1997 durban july)  bellypha: silvermine (1985 pouliches)  mendez:  linamix (1990 poulains):  miss satamixa (1995 prix jacques le marois)  sagamix (1998 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  vah
orimix (2001 poulains, prix jacques le marois)  rajsaman:  brametot (2017 poulains, prix du jockey club)  dancing brave (1986 2000 guineas, eclipse, king george, arc de triomphe): wemyss bight (1993 irish oaks) white muzzle:  smile tomorrow (2002 yushun himba)  king halo:  kawakami princess (2006 yushun himba) commander in chief (1993 epsom and irish derby) kyoei march (1997 oka sho) t m ocean (2001 oka sho) ensconse (1989 irish 1000)  jolypha (1992 prix de diane, prix vermeille) pearl bracelet (1989 pouliches)  nureyev branch  nureyev:  sonic lady (1986 irish 1000, sussex)  theatrical (1987 international, breeders' cup turf)  madeleine's dream (1993 pouliches)  zagreb (1996 irish derby)  media puzzle (2002 melbourne cup)  mrs lindsay (2007 prix vermeille)  miesque (1987 1000 guineas, pouliches, 1987-8 prix jacques le marois and breeders' cup mile)  soviet star (1987 poulains, sussex): ashkalani (1996 poulains))  starcraft (2004 australian derby, 2005 queen elizabeth ii) fotitieng: wonder perfume (1995 oka sho)  zilzal (1989 sussex, queen elizabeth ii): always loyal (1997 pouliches)  among men (1998 sussex)  faithful son (1998 prince of wales)  robin des bois:  gentlemen (1997 pacific classic)  polar falcon:  pivotal:  captain rio: terravista (2017 lightning) saoire (2005 irish 1000) falco (2008 poulains) halfway to heaven (2008 irish 1000) sariska (2009 irish oaks) buzzword (2010 deutsches derby) immortal verse (2011 prix jacques le marois) farhh (2013 champion stakes) king of change (2019 queen elizabeth ii)  african story (2014 dubai world cup)  sariska (2009 epsom oaks)  siyouni:  ervedya (2015 pouliches) laurens (2018 prix de diane) sottsass (2019 prix du jockey club, 2020 arc de triomphe) dream and do (2020 pouliches) st mark's basilica (2021 poulains, prix du jockey club, eclipse, irish champion) lightning spear (2018 sussex) addeybb (2020 champion stakes, 2020-1 queen elizabeth (aus)) caesour
: irridescence (2006 qeii cup) rudimentary: industrialist (2000 qeii cup)  unusual heat:   acclamation (2011 pacific classic) mehthaaf (1994 irish 1000)  spinning world (1996 irish 2000, 1996-7 prix jacques le marois, 1997 breeders' cup mile):  thorn park: jimmy choux (2011 rosehill guineas)  ocean park (2012 cox plate)  heavenly glow (2008 australian oaks)  wolfhound:  bright sky (2002 prix de diane)  peintre celebre (1997 prix du jockey club, arc de triomphe):  dai jin (2003 deutsches derby)  pride (2006 champion stakes)  byword (2010 prince of wales)  reams of verse (1997 epsom oaks)  stravinsky: serenade rose (2006 australian oaks)  skimming (2000-2001 pacific classic)  danzig branch  danzig:  chief's crown:  erhaab (1994 epsom derby)  key of luck:  alamshar (2003 irish derby, king george) concerto: bellamy road: diversify (2018 whitney stakes)  chief bearhart (1997 breeders' cup turf)  grand lodge:  sinndar (2000 epsom and irish derby, arc de triomphe):  shawanda (2005 irish oaks, prix vermeille)  shareta (2012 prix vermeille)  shogun lodge (2001 queen elizabeth (aus))  grandera (2002 irish champion, prince of wales) hotel grand (2006 randwick guineas)  danzig connection (1986 belmont stakes)  green desert:  desert sun:  sunline (1999-2000 cox plate) desert style: bachir (2000 poulains, irish 2000)  next desert (2002 deutsches derby)  mandesha (2006 prix vermeille)  paco boy:  galileo gold (2016 2000 guineas) oriental express (1998 qeii cup) cape cross:  ouija board (2004 epsom and irish oaks, 2006 prince of wales)  able one (2007 & 2010 champions mile)  sea the stars (2009 2000 guineas, epsom derby, eclipse, international, irish champion, arc de triomphe): taghrooda (2014 epsom oaks, king george) sea the moon (2014 deutsches derby)  harzand (2016 epsom and irish derby)  stradivarius (2018, 2019, 2020 ascot gold cup)  sea of class (2018 irish oaks)  crystal ocean (2019 prince of wales)  star catcher (2019 irish oaks, prix vermeille
) baaeed (2021 queen elizabeth ii) teona (2021 prix vermeille)  golden horn (2015 epsom derby, irish champion, eclipse, arc de triomphe)  awtaad (2016 irish 2000)  desert prince (1998 irish 2000, queen elizabeth ii)  invincible spirit:  lawman (2007 prix du jockey club) just the judge (2013 irish 1000)  charm spirit (2014 queen elizabeth ii)  moonlight cloud (2013 prix jacques le marois)  kingman (2014 irish 2000, sussex, prix jacques le marois)  persian king (2019 prix d'essai des poulains)  palace pier (2020 & 2021 prix jacques le marois)  harbour law (2016 st leger)  magna grecia (2019 2000 guineas) rose gypsy (2001 pouliches)  eishin preston (2003-4 qeii cup)  oasis dream:  midday (2010 prix vermeille)  power (2012 irish 2000)  showcasing:  mohaather (2020 sussex)  polish navy:  sea hero (1993 kentucky derby) allied flag: classic flag (1998 durban july)  polish precedent (1989 prix jacques le marois):  pure grain (1995 irish oaks)  pilsudski (1996 breeders' cup turf, 1997 eclipse, champion, irish champion, japan cup)  rakti (2003 champion stakes, 2004 prince of wales, queen elizabeth ii)  polish summer (2004 dubai sheema classic)  court masterpiece (2006 sussex)  darsi (2006 prix du jockey club)  danehill:  danasinga: metal bender (2009 randwick guineas, rosehill guineas)  danzero:  fairway (2000 randwick guineas, australian derby)  jymcarew (2005 randwick guineas)  danewin (1995 rosehill guineas)  dane ripper (1997 cox plate)  danendri (1997 australian oaks)  desert king (1997 irish 2000, irish derby):  makybe diva (2003-5 melbourne cup, 2005 cox plate)  mr dinos (2003 ascot gold cup)  speciosa (2006 1000 guineas)  desert war (2007 queen elizabeth (aus))  legatissimo (2015 1000 guineas)  flying spur:  mentality (2007 randwick guineas)  dealer principal (2008 rosehill guineas)  inspiration (2008 hong kong sprint) arena (1999 randwick guineas): rena's lady (2007 australian oaks) camacho: teppal (2018 pouliches)  fairy
king prawn (1999 hong kong sprint)  tiger hill:  rewilding (2011 dubai sheema classic, prince of wales)  redoute's choice:  not a single doubt:  southern legend (2020 champions mile)  stratum: streama (2012 australian oaks) time thief: in her time (2019 lightning)  snitzel:  shamus award (2013 cox plate)  snitzerland (2014 lightning)  absolutely (2011 australian oaks)  royal descent (2013 australian oaks)  lankan rupee (2015 lightning)  the autumn sun (2019 randwick guineas, rosehill guineas)  danehill dancer:  where or when (2002 queen elizabeth ii)  choisir (2003 lightning):  starspangledbanner:  the wow signal:  couersamba (2021 pouliches) state of rest (2021 cox plate)  olympic glory (2013 queen elizabeth ii)  fast company: jet setting (2016 irish 1000)  dancing rain (2011 epsom oaks)  mastercraftsman (2009 irish 2000): the grey gatsby (2014 prix du jockey club, irish champion) kingston hill (2014 st leger) alpha centauri (2018 irish 1000, prix jacques le marois)  esoterique (2015 prix jacques le marois)  here comes when (2017 sussex)  dansili:  rail link (2006 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  harbinger (2010 king george) blast onepiece (2018 arima kinen)  the fugue (2013 irish champion, 2014 prince of wales)  miss france (2014 1000 guineas)  zoffany:  mother earth (2021 1000 guineas)  aquarelliste (2001 prix de diane, prix vermeille)  mozart:  dandy man:  peniaphobia (2016 hong kong sprint) landseer (2002 poulains)  rock of gibraltar (2002 2000 guineas, irish 2000, sussex):  mount nelson (2008 eclipse) samitar (2012 irish 1000)  banks hill (2002 prix jacques le marois)  jeune king prawn (2002 champions mile)  exceed and excel:  helmet:  thunder snow (2018-9 dubai world cup)  excelebration (2012 queen elizabeth ii, prix jacques le marois)  mr stunning (2017-2018 hong kong sprint) clodovil (2003 poulains)  westerner (2005 ascot gold cup) aussie rules (2006 poulains) darci brahma: gust of wind (2005 australian
oaks)  fastnet rock (2005 lightning): hinchinbrook: beat the cloack (2019 hong kong sprint) mosheen (2012 randwick guineas)  qualify (2015 epsom oaks)  fascinating rock (2015 champion stakes)  unforgotten (2018 australian oaks)  north light (2004 epsom derby):  arctic cosmos (2010 st leger)  oratorio (2005 eclipse, irish champion) military attack (2013 qeii cup)  george washington (2006 2000 guineas, queen elizabeth ii)  champs elysees:   trip to paris (2015 ascot gold cup)   billesdon brook (2018 1000 guineas)  dylan thomas (2007 irish derby, king george, arc de triomphe, 2007-8 irish champion) blazing speed (2015 qeii cup)  peeping fawn (2007 irish oaks)  holy roman emperor:  homecoming queen (2012 1000 guineas)  designs on rome (2014 qeii cup)  mongolian khan (2015 australian derby) romanised (2018 irish 2000, 2019 prix jacques le marois)  duke of marmalade (2008 prince of wales, king george, international):  star of seville (2015 prix de diane)  simple verse (2015 st leger)  nutan (2015 deutsches derby)  big orange (2017 ascot gold cup)  shaadi (1989 irish 2000)  honor grades:  adoration (2003 breeders' cup distaff)  langfuhr (1997 met mile): wando (2003 queen's plate)  lawyer ron (2007 whitney)  dance smartly (1991 breeders' cup distaff, queen's plate)  pine bluff (1992 preakness stakes)  lure (1992-3 breeders' cup mile) orpen: torrestrella (2004 pouliches)  dispute (1993 kentucky oaks)  maroof (1994 queen elizabeth ii)  figures (2004 champions mile)  natural blitz (2005 hong kong sprint)  boundary:  big brown (2007 kentucky derby, preakness stakes)  perugino:  testa rossa (2000 lightning)  anabaa:  anabaa blue (2001 prix du jockey club)  headturner (2006 australian derby)  goldikova (2008-2010 breeders' cup mile, 2009 prix jacques le marois]  style vendome (2013 poulains)  bianconi: nicconi (2009 lightning) nature strip (2021 lightning)  mull of kintyre: araafa (2006 irish 2000)  war chant (2000 breeders' cup mile)
war front:  declaration of war (2013 international stakes) olmedo (2018 poule d'essai des poulains) vow and declare (2019 melbourne cup)  war of will (2019 preakness)  librettist (2006 prix jacques le marois)  hard spun:   questing (2012 ccao)  le romain (2016 randwick guineas)  silver state (2021 met mile) astronomer royal (2007 poulains)  storm bird branch  storm bird:  storm cat:  harlan:  harlan's holiday:  majesticperfection:  lovely maria (2015 kentucky oaks)  into mischief:  authentic (2020 kentucky derby, breeders' cup classic)  tabasco cat (1994 preakness and belmont stakes)  forest wildcat:  var:  variety club (2014 champions mile)  sardula (1994 kentucky oaks)  hennessy:   johannesburg: scat daddy: no nay never: alcohol free (2021 sussex) justify (2018 kentucky derby, preakness, belmont) once were wild (2010 australian oaks)  wiseman's ferry:  wise dan (2012-3 breeders' cup mile)  henny hughes:   beholder (2013, 2016 breeders' cup distaff, 2015 pacific classic)  grand armee (2004-5 queen elizabeth (aus))  special duty (2010 1000 guineas, pouliches) inglorious (2011 queen's plate)  tale of the cat:   lion heart:  dangerous midge (2010 breeders' cup turf) gio ponti: sir dudley digges (2016 queen's plate)  stopchargingmaria (2014 ccao, 2015 breeders' cup distaff)  forestry:  shackleford (2011 preakness stakes, 2012 met mile)  cat thief (1999 breeders' cup classic)  aljabr (1999 sussex)  bernstein:  karakontie (2014 poulains, breeders' cup mile)  tepin (2015 breeders' cup mile)  giant's causeway (2000 eclipse, sussex, international, irish champion): footstepsinthesand (2005 2000 guineas) shamardal (2005 poulains, prix du jockey club) lope de vega (2010 poulains, prix du jockey club) phoenix of spain (2019 irish 2000) gytrash (2020 lightning) dan excel (2013 champions mile) mukhadram (2014 eclipse) baltic baroness (2014 prix vermeille) able friend (2015 champions mile) pakistan star (2018 qeii cup) victor ludorum (2020 poulains) tarnawa
(2020 prix vermeille, breeders' cup turf) mike fox (2007 queen's plate) ghanaati (2009 1000 guineas)  rite of passage (2010 ascot gold cup)  protonico:  medina spirit (2021 kentucky derby)  eskendereya:  mor spirit (2017 met mile)  mitole (2019 met mile) bricks and mortar (2019 breeders' cup turf) black minnaloushe (2001 irish 2000) pure prize:  blue prize (2019 breeders' cup distaff)  life is sweet (2009 breeders' cup distaff)  indian skimmer (1987 prix de diane, champion, irish champion)  prince of birds (1988 irish 2000)  bluebird:  dolphin street:  spinning hill (2002 lightning)  summer squall (1990 preakness stakes):  charismatic (1999 kentucky derby, preakness)  summerly (2005 kentucky oaks)  balanchine (1994 english oaks and irish derby)  sadler's wells branch  sadler's wells (1984 irish 2000, eclipse, irish champion):  old vic (1989 prix du jockey club and irish derby)  kicking king (2005 cheltenham gold cup)  scenic:  universal prince (2001 randwick guineas, australian derby)  viewed (2008 melbourne cup)  scenic blast (2008 lightning) fort wood: dynasty (2003 durban july) legislate (2014 durban july) belgarion (2020 durban july) elusive fort: kommetdieding (2021 durban july) hunting tower  (2007 durban july)  in the wings (1990 breeders' cup turf):  winged love (1995 irish derby)  singspiel (1996 japan cup, 1997 dubai world cup, international):  moon ballad (2003 dubai world cup)  papineau (2004 ascot gold cup)  lohengrin:  logo type (2013 satsuki sho)  confidential lady (2006 prix de diane)  eastern anthem (2009 dubai sheema classic)  dar re mi (2010 dubai sheema classic)  solow (2015 sussex, queen elizabeth ii) act one: dancer's daughter (2008 durban july) casey tibbs: big city life (2009 durban july)  soldier hollow:  pastorius (2012 deutsches derby)  welstar (2018 deutsches derby)  adlerflug (2007 deutsches derby) in swoop (2020 deutsches derby) torquator tasso (2021 arc de triomphe)   batshoof (1990 prince of wales)  salsabil (1990 1000 guineas, epsom oaks, irish derby, prix verme
ille)  stagecraft (1991 prince of wales)  opera house (1993 eclipse, king george):  t m opera o (1999 satsuki sho, 2000 takarazuka kinen, arima kinen, japan cup)  meisho samson (2006 satsuki sho and tokyo yushun)  saddlers' hall:  silver patriarch (1997 st leger)  intrepidity (1993 epsom oaks, prix vermeille)  kayf tara (1998 & 2000 ascot gold cup)  kings theatre (1994 king george)  barathea (1993 irish 2000, 1994 breeders' cup mile)  northern spur (1995 breeders' cup turf)  el prado:  medaglia d'oro (2003 whitney):  rachel alexandra (2009 kentucky oaks, preakness stakes)  plum pretty (2011 kentucky oaks)  songbird (2016 ccao)  talismanic (2017 breeders' cup turf)  wonder gadot (2018 queen's plate)  higher power (2019 pacific classic)  golden sixty (2021 champions mile)  kitten's joy:  hawkbill (2016 eclipse, 2018 dubai sheema classic)  roaring lion (2018 eclipse, international, irish champion, queen elizabeth ii)  kameko (2020 2000 guineas)  tripoli (2021 pacific classic)  borrego (2005 pacific classic)  artie schiller (2005 breeders' cup mile) laser hawk (2012 rosehill guineas)  carnegie (1994 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  carnegie express (2002 randwick guineas, rosehill guineas)  moonshell (1995 epsom oaks)  dance design (1996 irish oaks)  entrepreneur (horse) (1997 2000 guineas)  vintage tipple (2003 irish oaks)  ebadiyla (1997 irish oaks)  beat hollow:   minella indo (2021 cheltenham gold cup)  oscar:  lord windermere (2014 cheltenham gold cup)  dream well (1998 prix du jockey club and irish derby)  king of kings (1998 2000 guineas)  leggera (1998 prix vermeille)  montjeu (1999 prix du jockey club, irish derby, king george, arc de triomphe):  motivator (2005 epsom derby):  treve (2013 prix de diane, 2013 & 2015 prix vermeille, 2013-4 arc de triomphe)  scorpion (2005 saint leger)  hurricane run (2005 irish derby and arc de triomphe)  authorized (2007 epsom derby, international) the revenant (2020 queen elizabeth ii) santiago (2020
irish derby)  tavistock:  volkstok'n'barrell (2015 rosehill guineas)  tarzino (2016 rosehill guineas)  tavago (2016 australian derby) werther (2016 qeii cup)  frozen fire (2008 irish derby)  nom du jeu (2008 australian derby)  fame and glory (2009 irish derby, 2011 ascot gold cup)  roman emperor (2009 australian derby)  pour moi (2011 epsom derby)  wings of eagles (2017 epsom derby)  masked marvel (2011 st leger)  st nicholas abbey (2011 breeders' cup turf, 2013 dubai sheema classic)  green moon (2012 melbourne cup)  camelot (2012 2000 guineas, epsom and irish derby) latrobe (2018 irish derby) even so (2020 irish oaks) sir dragonet (2020 cox plate)  chicquita (2013 irish oaks)  leading light (2013 st leger, 2014 ascot gold cup)  bracelet (2014 irish oaks)  saffron walden (1999 irish 2000)  imagine (2001 irish 1000, epsom oaks)  galileo (2001 epsom and irish derby, king george):  nightime (2006 irish 1000)  sixties icon (2006 st leger)  red rocks (2006 breeders' cup turf)  teofilo:  trading leather (2013 irish derby)  pleascach (2014 irish 1000)  cross counter (2018 melbourne cup)  exultant (2020 qeii cup)  twilight payment (2020 melbourne cup)  subjectivist (2021 ascot gold cup)  soldier of fortune (2007 irish derby)  new approach (2008 epsom derby, champion, irish champion):  talent (2013 epsom oaks)  dawn approach (2013 2000 guineas)  poetic flare (2021 2000 guineas) masar (2018 epsom derby) mac swiney (2021 irish 2000}  rip van winkle (2009 sussex, queen elizabeth ii, 2010 international)  cape blanco (2010 irish derby, irish champion)  frankel (2011 2000 guineas, queen elizabeth ii, 2011-2 sussex, 2012 international, champion)  soul stirring (2017 yushun himba)  cracksman (2017-2018 champion)  anapurna (2019 epsom oaks)  logician (2019 st leger)  hungry heart (2021 australian oaks)  adayar (2021 epsom derby, king george)  hurricane lane (2021 irish derby, st leger)  nathaniel (2011 eclipse, king george)  enable (2017 epsom & irish oaks, 2017, 2019 & 2020
king george, 2017-2018 arc de triomphe, 2018 breeders' cup turf, 2019 eclipse) channel (2019 prix de diane)  golden lilac (2011 prix de diane) igugu (2011 durban july)  treasure beach (2011 irish derby)  galikova (2011 prix vermeille)  misty for me (2011 irish 1000)  roderic o'connor (2011 irish 2000)  was (2012 epsom oaks)  great heavens (2012 irish oaks)  intello (2013 prix du jockey club)  ruler of the world (2013 epsom derby)  magician (2013 irish 2000, breeders' cup turf)  australia (2014 epsom and irish derby, international)  galileo chrome (2020 st leger)  order of australia (2020 breeders' cup mile)  adelaide (2014 cox plate)  galiway: sealiway (2021 champion stakes)  marvellous (2014 irish 1000)  noble mission (2015 champion stakes)  gleneagles (2015 2000 guineas, irish 2000)  found (2015 breeders' cup turf, 2016 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  highland reel (2016 king george, breeders' cup turf, 2017 prince of wales)  order of st george (2016 ascot gold cup  minding (2016 1000 guineas, epsom oaks, queen elizabeth ii)  seventh heaven (2016 irish oaks)  the gurkha (2016 poulains, sussex)  alice springs (2016 falmouth stakes, matron stakes, sun chariot stakes)  decorated knight (2017 irish champion)  churchill (2017 2000 guineas, irish 2000)  winter (2017 1000 guineas, irish 1000)  capri (2017 irish derby, st leger)  ulysses (2017 eclipse, international)  forever together (2018 epsom oaks)  kew gardens (2018 st leger)  magical (2019-20 irish champion, 2019 champion)  waldgeist (2019 arc de triomphe)  anthony van dyck (2019 epsom derby)  hermosa (2019 1000 guineas, irish 1000)  japan (2019 international stakes)  sovereign (2019 irish derby)  love (2020 1000 guineas, epsom oaks, 2021 prince of wales)  peaceful (2020 irish 1000)  serpentine (2020 epsom derby}  empress josephine (2021 irish 1000)  joan of arc (2021 prix de diane) not impossible: not bourbon (2008 queen's plate) sligo bay: lexie lou (2014 queen's plate)  milan (2001 st leger)  sholokhov:   don cossack (2016 cheltenham gold cup
)  gossamer (2002 irish 1000)  high chaparral (2002 epsom and irish derby, 2002-3 breeders' cup turf, 2003 irish champion)  shoot out (2010 randwick guineas, australian derby)  so you think (2009-10 cox plate, 2011 eclipse, irish champion, 2012 prince of wales) inference (2017 randwick guineas) d'argento (2018 rosehill guineas) quick thinker (2020 australian derby)  contributer:  lion's roar (2021 randwick guineas)  it's a dundeel, aka dundeel (2013 randwick guineas, rosehill guineas, australian derby, 2014 queen elizabeth (aus)) castelvecchio (2020 rosehill guineas)  toronado (2013 sussex)  free eagle (2015 prince of wales)  rekindling (2017 melbourne cup)  brian boru (2003 st leger)  refuse to bend (2003 2000 guineas, 2004 eclipse):  sarafina (2010 prix de diane)  yesterday (2003 irish 1000)  poliglote:  solemia (2012 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  doyen (2004 king george) river dancer (2004 qeii cup)  yeats (2006-2009 ascot gold cup)  alexandrova (2006 epsom and irish oaks)  synchronised (2012 cheltenham gold cup)  other branches  viceregal:   esclavo:  karloff (1990 deutsches derby) nice dancer: fiddle dancer boy (1981 queen's plate) vice regent: regal embrace (1978 queen's plate) deputy minister:  silver deputy:  archers bay (1998 queen's plate)  silverbulletday (1999 kentucky oaks)  open mind (1989 kentucky oaks, ccao)  dehere:  defier (2002 queen elizabeth (aus))  french deputy:  left bank (2002 whitney)  eishin deputy (2008 takarazuka kinen)  kurofune: sodashi (2021 oka sho) reginetta (2008 oka sho)  awesome again (1997 queen's plate, 1998 whitney, breeders' cup classic):  ghostzapper (2004 breeders' cup classic, 2005 met mile):  moreno (2014 whitney) shaman ghost (2015 queen's plate) holy helena (2017 queen's plate)  guarano (2019 ccao)  mystic guide (2021 dubai world cup)  round pond (2006 breeders' cup distaff)  ginger punch (2007 breeders' cup distaff)  paynter
:  knicks go (2021 whitney, breeders' cup classic)  game on dude (2013 pacific classic)  oxbow (2013 preakness stakes)  sir winston (2019 belmont stakes)  touch gold (1997 belmont stakes)  keeper hill (1998 kentucky oaks) new regent: savana city (1988 australian oaks) regal intention (1988 queen's plate) regal classic: regal discovery (1995 queen's plate) tejabo: t js lucky moon (2002 queen's plate) northfields:  north stoke (1977 irish champion)  oats:  master oats (1995 cheltenham gold cup)  northjet (1981 prix jacques le marois)  no pass no sale (1985 poulains) northern taste:  amber shadai (1981 arima kinen):  mejiro ryan (1991 takarazuka kinen):  mejiro dober (1997 (yushun himba)  shadai ivor (1982 yushun himba)  dyna carle (1983 yushun himba)  shadai sophia (1983 oka sho)  dyna gulliver (1986 tokyo yushun, arima kinen) fight gulliver (1996 oka sho)  adorable (1992 yushun himba) far north: fast topaze (1986 poulains) compliance: fourstars allstar (1991 irish 2000) be my guest:  assert (1982 prix du jockey club, irish derby, international, irish champion):  all my dreams (1995 deutsches derby)  zaffaran:  looks like trouble (2000 cheltenham gold cup)  on the house (1982 1000 guineas, sussex)  luth enchantee (1983 prix jacques le marois)  double bed: jim and tonic (1999 qeii cup)  go and go (1990 belmont stakes)  pentire (1995 irish champion, 1996 king george):  prince of penzance (2015 melbourne cup) valentine waltz (1999 pouliches) try my best:  last tycoon (1986 breeders' cup mile)  bigstone (1993 sussex, queen elizabeth ii):  meisho doto (2001 takarazuka kinen)  marju:  my emma (1996 prix vermeille)  martino alonso:  ramonti (2007 sussex, queen elizabeth ii)  soviet song (2004 sussex)  viva pataca (2007, 2010 qeii cup)  satono crown (2017 takarazuka kinen)  ezzoud (1993-4 international stakes, 1994 eclipse)  mahogany (1994
australian derby, 1995 & 1997 lightning)  o'reilly:  shamrocker (2011 australian derby)  tycoon lil (1998 randwick guineas)  waajib:   royal applause:  acclamation:  dark angel:  persuasive (2017 queen elizabeth ii)  expert eye (2018 breeders cup mile) kolmsky:  merry nice (1987 tokyo yushun) the minstrel (1977 epsom and irish derby, king george):  l'emigrant (1983 poulains)  palace music (1984 champion stakes):  naturalism (1992 rosehill guineas, australian derby)  cigar (1995 breeders' cup classic, 1996 dubai world cup)  musical bliss (1989 1000 guineas)  opening verse (1991 breeders' cup mile) topsider:  salse:  classic cliche (1995 st leger, 1996 ascot gold cup)  air express (1997 queen elizabeth ii) white star line (1978 kentucky oaks) sovereign dancer:  gate dancer (1984 preakness stakes)  priolo (1990 prix jacques le marois) sendawar (1999 poulains)  louis quatorze (1996 preakness stakes) northern baby (1979 champion stakes):  michelozzo (1989 st leger) secreto (1984 epsom derby):  mystiko (1991 2000 guineas) glenstal:  las meninas (1994 1000 guineas) night shift:  in the groove (1990 1000 guineas, international, champion stakes)  midnight legend:  sizing john (2017 cheltenham gold cup) dyhim diamond: turtle bowl: lucayan (2012 poulains)  daryaba (1999 prix de diane, prix vermeille)  azamour (2004 prince of wales, irish champion, 2005 king george):  valyra (2012 prix de diane)  covert love (2015 irish oaks)  dolniya (2015 dubai sheema classic) dixieland band:  drum taps (1992-3 ascot gold cup)  dixie brass (1990 met mile)  egyptband (2000 prix de diane)  dixie union:  union rags (2012 belmont stakes) lomond (1983 2000 guineas):  marling (1992 irish 1000, sussex) shareef dancer:  nediym:  general nediym (1998 lightning)  regimental gal (2004 lightning)  possessive dancer (1991 oaks) el gran senor (1984 2000 guineas, irish derby):  belmez (1990 king george)  rodrigo de triano (1992 2000 guineas, irish 2000, international, champion):
erimo excel (1998 yushun himba) northern trick (1984 prix de diane, prix vermeille) fairy king:  turtle island (1994 irish 2000):  island sands (1999 2000 guineas)  helissio (1996 prix de l'arc de triomphe)  helenus (2003 rosehill guineas)  ethiopa (2012 australian derby)  encosta de lago:  sacred kingdom (2007, 2009 hong kong sprint)  road to rock (2010 queen elizabeth (aus)): beauty generation (2018-2019 champions mile)  chautauqua (2016 lightning)  victory note (1998 poulains)  oath (1999 epsom derby)  falbrav (2002 international, queen elizabeth ii, japan cup, 2003 eclipse) rakeen:  jet master (saf):  j j the jet plane (saf) (2010 hong kong sprint) pomodoro (2012 durban july) ajdal:  cezanne (1994 irish champion) unfuwain:  bolas (1994 irish oaks)  lahan (2000 1000 guineas)  petrushka (2000 irish oaks)  alhaarth:  haafhd (2004 2000 guineas, champion)  eswarah (2005 epsom oaks)  phoenix reach (2005 dubai sheema classic)  lailani (2001 irish oaks)  references  notes  thoroughbred racehorses
privacyidea is a two factor authentication system which is multi-tenency- and multi-instance-capable. it is opensource, written in python and hosted at github. privacyidea is a linotp's fork from 2014.  fields of use  privacyidea provides an authentication backend for various kinds of applications (including ssh, vpn, as well as web applications such as owncloud). thus it is meant to replace classical proprietary two factor authentication systems such as rsa securid or vasco. it supports single sign-on via saml.  it is also possible to login with a second factor to windows desktops using a privacyidea credential provider.  installation  privacyidea is running on-premises as a web application on a linux system. it can be set up quickly and easily. it can run on debian, ubuntu, redhat.  authentication devices  privacyidea supports a wide variety of authentication devices. amongst those are hardware tokens like feitian c200, the yubikey by yubico or other u2f/webauthn devices. also many smartphone apps compliant to hotp and totp like the google authenticator are supported.  references   computer security software authentication methods computer access control linux
thenpattinam ponnuswamy meenakshisundaram (1901-1980), popularly known as te po meenkshisunadaranar, was an indian scholar, writer of tamil and english literature and the founder vice chancellor of madurai kamaraj university.  life born on 8 january 1901 at thenpattinam, in the erstwhile chengelput district of the south indian state of tamil nadu to s. ponnusami gramani, meenakshisundaram did his college studies at pachaiyappa's college from where he secured his ba (1920), bl (1922), ma in history (1923) and a diploma in economics. after starting his career in 1923 as a lawyer and serving the madras corporation council in 1924, he shifted his career as a professor of tamil and served annamalai university from 1954 to 1958 and the presidency college, chennai till 1961. he was serving as the director of the center for advanced study in dravidian linguistics of annamalai university when he was appointed as the founder vice chancellor of madurai kamaraj university in 1966, a post he held till 1971.  meenakshisundaram published several works in tamil and english. he is best known for his english renderings of the tirukkural published in 1919, in which he republished the work of his mentor vadivelu chettiar, appending it with his own english renderings. his notable works include philosophy of tiruvalluvar, a history of tamil language, a history of tamil literature, and aesthetics of the tamils. he was a recipient of several honors such as the tamil nadu sahitya akademi award (1975), and honorary doctorates from madurai kamaraj university (1967), university of colombo (1973) and annamalai university (1976). the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1977, for his contributions to literature and education. he died on 27 august 1980, at the age of 79. madurai kamaraj university has since instituted an endowment prize, dr. t. p. meenakshisundaram endowment prize, in his honor.  see also   madurai kamaraj university  references  external links  further reading       recipients of the padma bhushan in literature & education 1901 births 1980 deaths scholars from tamil nadu indian tamil people heads of universities and colleges in india madurai kamaraj university annamalai university faculty 20th-century indian linguists tamil-english translators translators of the tirukkural into english 20th-century translators presidency college, chennai faculty
the 2020 united states senate election in north carolina was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of north carolina, concurrently with the 2020 united states presidential election as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states and elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. north carolina was one of just five states holding presidential, gubernatorial, and senatorial elections concurrently in 2020. on march 3, 2020, incumbent thom tillis and former state senator cal cunningham won their respective primaries. most experts and pollsters considered cunningham to be the favorite, however, tillis outperformed pre-election polling to win a narrow victory, successfully breaking the "one-term curse" that existed with this particular senate seat for over thirty years, as many of tillis' predecessors only served one term.  on november 10, 2020, a week after election day, cunningham called tillis to concede the race. tillis won by a margin of 1.8% over cunningham, slightly larger than his narrow 1.5% victory in 2014.  republican primary  candidates  nominee thom tillis, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary larry holmquist, candidate for u.s. senate in 2016 sharon hudson, activist paul wright, former north carolina superior court judge, perennial candidate, and candidate for u.s. senate in 2016  withdrawn sandy smith, farm owner (running for u.s. house in nc-01) garland tucker, former ceo and chairman of triangle capital  declined mark meadows, former u.s. representative for north carolina's 11th congressional district ted budd, incumbent u.s. representative for north carolina's 13th congressional district mark walker, incumbent u.s. representative for north carolina's 6th congressional district  endorsements  polling  with only thom tillis and mark walker  with thom tillis and generic republican  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominee cal cunningham, former state senator and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2010  eliminated in primary trevor fuller, mecklenburg county commissioner atul goel, physician and retired united states air force officer erica d. smith, state senator steve swenson  withdrawn katherine bell-moore eva f. lee, attorney (running for north carolina commissioner of labor) eric l. mansfield, former state senator steve williams  declined janet cowell, former north carolina state treasurer (endorsed cunningham) anthony foxx, former u.s. secretary of transportation and former mayor of charlotte
(endorsed cunningham) rachel hunt, state representative vi lyles, mayor of charlotte dan mccready, former u.s. marine, businessman, and nominee for north carolina's 9th congressional district in 2018 and 2019 special election deborah k. ross, former state representative and nominee for u.s. senate in 2016 (running for north carolina's 2nd congressional district) thomas w. ross, former president of the university of north carolina system josh stein, north carolina attorney general (running for reelection) brian turner, state representative  endorsements  polling  results  other candidates  libertarian party  nominee shannon bray, u.s. navy veteran, author, and candidate for north carolina's 3rd congressional district in 2019  constitution party  nominee kevin e. hayes, candidate for the north carolina house of representatives in 2012 and 2018  independence party  withdrawn jeremy thomas  independent write-in candidates  withdrawn marcia abrams lee brian matthew cisneros michelle parks sunita singh  general election  campaign during the democratic primary, a republican-funded super pac spent $3 million on ads attacking cunningham and promoting left-wing rival erica smith.  cunningham and tillis participated in debates on september 13, september 22, and october 1.  in july, tillis claimed cunningham had been "silent" on the issue of defunding the police, saying,-"i assume [his] silence is ...consent". in reality, cunningham had spoken publicly about the issue and written an op-ed a month earlier stating his opposition to defunding the police, advocating police reform instead.  on october 3, the new york times wrote that the race had fallen into "utter mayhem" within a period of a few hours after tillis tested positive for covid-19 and cunningham admitted to exchanging sexual text messages with a woman who was not his wife, damaging an image that leaned heavily on his character and military service. days later, the woman confirmed that she had a consensual physical relationship with cunningham in 2020. the army reserve started an investigation into cunningham. the husband of the woman who confirmed having an affair with cunningham, himself an army veteran, called on cunningham to drop out of the senate race. asked repeatedly whether he had had other extramarital affairs, cunningham declined to answer.  tillis's diagnosis, which came after an outbreak at a white house ceremony for supreme court nominee amy coney barrett, temporarily threw barrett's confirmation into jeopardy, as two republican senators had already stated their intention to vote against (though one of them would eventually vote in favor of her confirmation
).  predictions  endorsements  fundraising in the first quarter of 2020, cunningham outraised tillis for the first time, receiving $4.4 million compared to the $2.1 million tillis raised.  tillis's prior fundraising, however, left him with the advantage in cash on hand, with $6.5 million in the bank, compared to cunningham's $3 million.  polling  graphical summary  aggregate polls  tillis vs. cunningham  with erica d. smith  with generic democrat  with thom tillis and generic opponent  with generic republican and generic democrat  results  while tillis consistently trailed in pre-election polls, the senator narrowly defeated cunningham 48.7 to 46.9 and slightly outperformed president trump in terms of margin of victory. tillis's upset victory has been largely attributed to cunningham's response to his affair as well as tillis's fierce campaigning during the last few weeks of the campaign.  see also  2020 north carolina elections  notes partisan clients  voter samples and additional candidates  references  further reading  external links   (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)          official campaign websites  shannon bray (l) for senate  cal cunningham (d) for senate  thom tillis (r) for senate   (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)  2020 north carolina united states senate
"mamacita" is a song by british rapper tinie tempah. it was released on 8 july 2016, as the third single from his third studio album, youth (2017). the song, produced by bless beats, features vocals from nigerian singer wizkid.  music video the song's music video premiered on 4 july 2016, via tempah's official youtube channel. it was directed by craig moore and was filmed in dominican republic.  charts  references  external links  2016 singles 2016 songs tinie tempah songs wizkid songs parlophone singles songs written by tinie tempah songs written by jin jin (musician) songs written by wizkid
alan cristian arario (born 1 april 1995) is an argentine footballer who plays for italian eccellenza club asd frattamaggiore calcio.  career  club career on 13 december 2019 it was confirmed, that arario had joined italian eccellenza club asd frattamaggiore calcio.  references  external links      1995 births living people people from buenos aires argentine footballers argentine expatriate footballers club atletico river plate footballers atletico madrid footballers a.s. roma players club atletico velez sarsfield footballers dorados de sinaloa footballers club deportivo palestino footballers u.s. vibonese calcio players chilean primera division players ascenso mx players argentine primera division players serie d players eccellenza players association football forwards argentine expatriate sportspeople in spain argentine expatriate sportspeople in italy argentine expatriate sportspeople in chile argentine expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in spain expatriate footballers in italy expatriate footballers in chile expatriate footballers in mexico
hms beagle was one of sixteen destroyers ordered under the 1908-09 naval estimates from john brown & company of clydebank.  named for the english hunting dog, she was the sixth ship to carry this name since it was introduced for a cruizer class fir-built, brig-sloop on 8 august 1804 and sold on 21 july 1814.  the destroyers of the 1908-09 program would be the last coal-fired destroyers of the royal navy.  she and her sisters served in the first destroyer flotilla then were moved en masse to the third destroyer flotilla and before the start of the great war to the fifth destroyer flotilla.  with the advent of the convoy system they were moved to the second destroyer flotilla.  with the armistice she was laid up then scrapped in 1921.  construction and design laid down as yard number 387 on 17 march 1909 at the john brown & company's shipyard at clydebank, beagle was launched on 16 october 1909.  beagle was  long between perpendiculars, with a beam of  and a draught of . displacement was  normal. five yarrow boilers fed steam at  to parsons steam turbines rated at , driving three shafts and giving a design speed of . during sea trials she reached a speed of .  service she was commissioned on 10 june 1910 under the command of lieutenant lionel j.g. anderson, rn for service with the first destroyer flotilla of the first division of the home fleet tendered to .    by 1 may 1912 she was assigned to the third destroyer flotilla tendered to .  on 30 august 1912 the admiralty directed all destroyer classes were to be designated by alpha characters starting with the letter 'a'.  after 30 september 1913, she was known as a g class destroyer and had the letter 'g' painted on her hull below the bridge area and on her fore funnel.  in october 1913 as the l-class destroyers came on line the entire g-class was moved to the mediterranean as the newly formed fifth destroyer flotilla along with the depot ship blenheim.  with war clouds looming on 2 august 1914 the fifth destroyer flotilla was involved in the search for  and  in the mediterranean. on 3 august, the 3rd division of the 5th flotilla (beagle, ,  and ) were at malta and while it was initially planned that they reinforce rear admiral ernest troubridge's squadron patrolling the entrance to the adriatic, they remained at malta until 6 august, when beagle and bulldog left in company with the cruiser . goeben and breslau had been spotted by the cruiser
east of the straits of messina later that day,  with gloucester shadowing the two german ships on their course towards cape matapan. dublin and her two destroyers were ordered to intercept goeben and breslau, and expected to make a night torpedo attack off zante. breslau was sighted and chased for a while, but the ships turned away to intercept the more important goeben, but missed the german battlecruiser during the night.  on 9 august, beagle and bulldog joined the 1st division at port vathi on the island of ithaca off the west coast of greece.  the units of the 1st division were short of coal and were awaiting the arrival of a collier.  after coaling the ten destroyers were ordered to establish a patrol line in the aegean sea off the dardanelles thereby blockading the german ships there.  in november 1914, as a response to a shortage of destroyers in home waters, beagle was recalled to britain, reaching plymouth on 29 november, and being used to operate from portsmouth, patrolling the routes used by cross-channel transports. it had been planned to use the beagles to equip a new tenth destroyer flotilla based at harwich, but the need for escorts for transports in the channel led to these plans being abandoned, and the ships remained at portsmouth. they were heavily used, with beagle raising steam on 26 days out of 28 in february 1915.  on 26 march 1915, following the failure of attempts to force the dardanelles had failed, these eight beagles were ordered to mudros for operations in support of the dardanelles campaign. on 25 april 1915, beagle took part in the landing at anzac cove, carrying troops of the 9th battalion, royal queensland regiment who were landed in row boats. on the night of 12/13 may, the pre-dreadnought battleships  and  were anchored in morto bay, supporting french troops. to protect the two battleships, beagle and bulldog patrolled the north side of the straits, with  and  patrolling the southern side and  in the centre of the straits. despite these patrols, the turkish destroyer  managed to sneak past beagle and bulldog on the northern side of the straits and torpedoed and sunk goliath before successfully escaping.  on 28 june beagle, together with the destroyers bulldog,  and  escorted the cruiser  as she provided naval gun support to the advancing british and indian troops during the battle of gully ravine. the british made another attempt to break the stalemate at gallipoli on 6-7 august
1915, with the landing at suvla bay, to the north of anzac cove. this time, instead of row-boats, armoured shallow-draught self-propelled landing craft known as "beetles" were used, which were towed close to shore by destroyers. while the main landing took place on nibrunesi beach to the south of sulva bay, beagle, together with bulldog and  landed troops of the 34th brigade in sulva bay itself. each destroyer carried 500 troops aboard, while towing a "beetle" carrying a further 500 troops. the "beetles" would land their troops and then return to pick up the remaining troops on the destroyers and land them. while the landings on nibrunesi beach went well, those in sulva bay were less successful, landing to the south of the planned place, with the result that the "beetles" ran aground off shore, with the remaining troops aboard the destroyers having to be landed by reserve row boats. beagles troops were not all landed until nearly 5:00 am on 7 august, several hours late. beagle helped to cover the evacuations from anzac cove on 20 december 1915.  on 13 december 1916 beagle and  were involved in a friendly fire incident when on patrol near kum kale.  both destroyers raced to engage a low flying aircraft.  hms racoon fired four shells causing damaged to the aircraft and forcing it to alight on the water.  hms racoon rescued the french pilot and observer then towed the aircraft to kephelo air base on imbros. on 9 january 1917, beagle was escorting the pre-dreadnought , on passage from mudros to malta, when cornwallis was torpedoed twice by the german submarine . when attempts at damage control failed and it was clear that cornwallis was sinking, beagle went alongside the battleship and took off her crew. after this was complete, and beagle had pushed off from cornwallis, u-32 struck the battleship with a third torpedo. an attempt by beagle to depth charge the german submarine was unsuccessful. fifteen of cornwalliss crew were lost in her sinking.  in mid-1917 as the convoy system was being introduced, the admiralty began reassigning older destroyers to escort duties.  she was recalled to home waters and assigned to the 2nd destroyer flotilla now based at buncrana, near lough swilly in the north of ireland in october 1917. equipped with depth charges she was employed for anti-submarine patrols and as a convoy escort for the north west approaches to the british
isles for the remainder of the war.  disposition by march 1919, with the disbandment of the second destroyer flotilla she was withdrawn from active service and laid up in reserve at the nore.  in april 1920 she was placed on the disposal list. she was sold on 1 november 1921 to b. fryer of sunderland for breaking.  references  notes  bibliography  external links   naval database hms beagle   clyde built database hms beagle   list of battle honours and single ship actions 1914 to 1918      beagle-class destroyers world war i destroyers of the united kingdom ships built on the river clyde 1909 ships
knut monrad (march 14, 1913 - june 23, 1987) was a norwegian painter. he has been described as a nature poet that interpreted his experience of nature with rapid, broad brushstrokes. in addition to his activity as a painter, monrad also worked as a translator of english and swedish literature.   monrad was born in vestre aker, the son of hans sundt monrad and astrid haslum. he studied at the norwegian national academy of craft and art industry under karl høgberg and at the norwegian national academy of fine arts under jean heiberg. during the second world war he studied in bjarne engebret's painting school. he began his artistic path relatively late, and he consistently displayed subdued naturalistic expression. landscapes drawn in broad strokes with a view across the land or sea were his main motif. he often used a limited range of color, with gray or blue-tinted coloring interspersed with green and gray shades. he participated in 42 exhibitions from 1952 to 1980. among group exhibitions, he took part in the autumn exhibition eight times from 1947 to 1972, twice in the southern norway exhibition (, in 1972 and 1978), and once in the eastern norway exhibition (, in 1979). he also participated in the young artists society's anniversary exhibition (1975).  monrad was part of the artists' colony that developed in flosta after the second world war. together with artists such as ferdinand finne, ellen iden, ivar jerven, kjerstin øvrelid, liv nergaard, finn strømsted, bodil cappelen, and finn henrik bodvin, an artistic environment was created that drew inspiration from nature and the skerries. many of monrad's motifs are drawn from impressions of nature in flosta, tromøy, and ytre møkkalasset lighthouse.  monrad was married twice, to eva eriksen and live hiorth. he died in bærum.  references  1913 births 1987 deaths 20th-century norwegian painters norwegian male painters 20th-century male artists
"bonita" (meaning "pretty" in english) is a bossa nova song composed by antonio carlos jobim, with lyrics in english credited to gene lees and ray gilbert.  according to brazilian author ruy castro, jobim composed the song in 1963, after being inspired by "a young woman, candice bergen, whom he had the pleasure of meeting at the home of the president of atlantic records, nesuhi ertegun. the pleasure, by the way, was mutual."  jobim made the first recording of the song in 1965, for his album, the wonderful world of antonio carlos jobim. in 1969, frank sinatra performed the song with jobim for their planned album sinatrajobim, but at the last minute, sinatra stopped release of the record. seven of the ten songs from those sessions were eventually released as side a of sinatra & company (1971), but "bonita" was not included. it finally appeared in 1977 on a reprise uk album entitled, portrait of sinatra - forty songs from the life of a man, and was later included on  sinatra-jobim sessions (1979) and sinatra/jobim: the complete reprise recordings (2010).  gene lees, who had written several other english-language lyrics for jobim, claims that "jobim gave my lyric to bonita, which i had written in new york, to ray gilbert, who altered a phrase or two and put his name on it. if you look at the credits on the back of the album titled the wonderful world of antonio carlos jobim ... you'll find that the writer credit on bonita reads jobim/gilbert. gilbert produced an album for warner brothers in which he again used the song, again taking credit for the lyric.... i was furious at both records and took the matter up with the american guild of authors and composers. a hearing was organized, with sheldon harnick as its chairman, and i presented the evidence of my authorship. the committee ruled that it was indeed my lyric, solely or largely.... the contretemps over bonita was one of the reasons i parted company with jobim."  recorded versions  antonio carlos jobim - the wonderful world of antonio carlos jobim (1965) and a certain mr. jobim (1967)  sergio mendes - the great arrival (1966)  sylvia telles - sylvia telles sings the wonderful songs of antonio carlos jobim (1966)  stanley turrentine - the return of the prodigal son (rec. 1967, released 2008)  roy ayers - daddy bug (1969)  frank
sinatra & antonio carlos jobim - sinatra/jobim: the complete reprise recordings (rec. 1969, released 2010)  nara leao - dez anos depois (1971)  elis regina & antonio carlos jobim - elis & tom: 30th anniversary edition (1974) - bonus track  sarah vaughan - copacabana (1979)  ella fitzgerald - ella abraca jobim (1981)  mongo santamaria - brazilian sunset (rec. 1992, released 1996)  gal costa - gal costa canta tom jobim ao vivo (1999)  ivan lins - jobiniando (2001)  jaques morelenbaum, paula morelenbaum, and ryuichi sakamoto - morelenbaum 2/sakamoto: casa (2001)  eliane elias - love stories'' (2019)  references  frank sinatra songs ella fitzgerald songs songs with music by antonio carlos jobim bossa nova songs brazilian songs
francois xavier talbert, dit l'abbe talbert (1725, besancon - 4 june 1805, lviv, ukraine), was an 18th-century french preacher and writer.  he was a canon in besancon and later in paris before emigrating to ukraine where he died. concurrently with jean-jacques rousseau, he treated the question proposed by the academie de dijon on l'origine de l'inegalite parmi les hommes (1754) and won the prize.  in addition to his sermons, he wrote eloges of louis xv, montaigne, bossuet, massillon and other great french figures, crowned by several academies.  he contributed the article "preux" (brave, gallant, doughty) to the supplement of the encyclopedie by diderot and d'alembert.  he was one of the founding members of the .  sources  references  external links   francois xavier talbert on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 1725 births people from besancon 1805 deaths
kill kare state park, is a state park in northwest vermont on st. albans point on lake champlain. the day-use park is administered by the vermont department of forests, parks, and recreation, as part of the vermont state park system.  facilities include a swimming area, boat launch, kayak rentals, picnic tables and grills. the rocky point house museum, dedicated in august 2012, features displays about the site's history from its days as a summer resort hotel to its use as a boys summer camp from 1906 to 1966. there is a 26' x 40' open-air shelter with a group-sized cooking grill and electricity, which can be reserved for group functions.  the island runner ferry departs from the dock to nearby burton island state park seven times daily.  the state of vermont bought the property in 1967 as a base to service burton island state park.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of franklin county, vermont st. albans, vermont 1967 establishments in vermont
jagdgeschwader 142 horst wessel was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1938
the andria-corato train collision happened late in the morning of 12 july 2016 when two regional passenger trains on a single-track section of the bari-barletta railway collided head-on between the towns of andria and corato in the apulia region of southern italy. twenty-three people were killed and 54 injured. the stretch of track is operated by regional rail company .  background   the bari-barletta line is laid to standard gauge, with 3,000 v dc overhead electrification. since the 1990s the line has been refurbished, and is mostly upgraded to double track. the accident occurred between the corato and andria stations, on the remaining single-track section of the line between ruvo di puglia and barletta. that  section operates with "telephonic block" signalling, where station masters must notify the arrival of trains and inform drivers whether it is safe to proceed. eu funds were made available in april 2012 to upgrade this remaining section to double track, but at the time of the accident the work had only recently been put for tender.  accident   the collision occurred at 11:06 local time (09:06 utc) in the countryside, adjacent to an olive grove, approximately  from andria station and  from bari.  (many earlier reports mentioned the time 11:38 and also other train service numbers than those later reported. but this seems to have been a mistake.) the trains involved were a stadler flirt etr 340 (service et1016 from bari to barletta) and an alstom coradia elt 200 (service et1021 from barletta to bari), each being a four-carriage multiple unit. they were travelling at speeds of up to  in opposite directions: et1021 travelling south-east from andria and et1016 north-west from corato. the crash occurred on a curve, giving neither driver any chance to spot the other train, or attempt an emergency braking, before the collision. the first two carriages and the fore part of the third one of et1016, and the leading carriage of et1021, disintegrated in the impact; the second carriage of et1021 partially derailed and was heavily damaged; the other cars of both trains remained on track almost intact.  the weather at the time was described as hot, moist and sunny, with temperatures up to .  casualties  23 people were killed and 54 injured. both drivers and one of the two conductors were killed. one of the victims was a farmer who was hit
by a metal plate while he was working close to the crash site.  rescue  the rescue operations were complicated by the lack of road access to the site of the accident and by the hot weather.  a field hospital was set up adjacent to the crash site. some of the injured were airlifted to hospital by medical helicopter. an appeal was made for local people to donate blood. around 200 emergency service personnel were involved in the rescue effort, as well as members of the army.  reactions   the italian prime minister, matteo renzi, cut short a visit to milan, returned to rome and then, in the early evening, visited the crash site.  the italian president, sergio mattarella, expressed condolences for the crash, as did pope francis. the mayor of corato, massimo mazzilli, said that the scene was "as if an airplane fell out of the sky".  investigation   the  (ansf) is responsible for investigating rail accidents in italy. the rail operator stated  that it had secured records of the communications between the stations at either end of the single track section and the phone calls made between the station masters and the two drivers. the train event recorder from one of the trains was recovered from the wreckage, but the other's was destroyed.  initial responses from the public inquiry led by the public prosecutor of trani's justice court said that departure clearance from andria for et1021 should not have been given because, when it left the station, et1016 was already on the track. investigations will try to determine why et1021 was cleared for departure before et1016 (the train coming from the opposite direction) had arrived at andria station. on 14 july 2016, the station masters of both corato and andria were placed under investigation for their roles in the disaster.  according to the timetable, both trains should have been crossing in andria's station between 10:58 and 10:59. accounted sources report that a third train et1642, running late from corato to andria and preceding et1016, could have been confused with et1016 itself, causing andria's station master to assume the track between andria and corato was free of traffic once the late train had departed northbound to barletta.  on 6 december 2017, ministry of infrastructure and transport published a survey report on the accident and confirmed the direct cause was the confusion of et1642 and et1016.  see also   list of rail accidents in 2016  references  external links  timetable of bari-barletta railway. valid from
20 june 2016  picture of elt 200 with comments by railfan from bari with information about units running numbers that have been crashed  2016 in italy accidents and incidents involving ferrotramviaria history of apulia july 2016 events in italy railway accidents in 2016 train collisions in italy
hilton helsinki kalastajatorppa (commonly referred to as kalastajatorppa; literal translation the fisherman's croft) is a four-star international conference and banqueting hotel. the round restaurant was opened in 1939, the two hotel buildings in 1969 and 1975.  history  hilton helsinki kalastajatorppa hotel has a history as far back as 1910 when it was a fisherman's croft. it all started in a red wooden house, which became a cafeteria established by brondin bakery 1915. eliel saarinen, a famous finnish architect, had a vision about munkkiniemi area as a "recreational area" but the first world war changed plans.   in 1920 a tram line and tennis courts were built, then in 1932 the company "fazer bakery ltd" buys the business and finally gets an authorization to sell liqueur. four years later, in 1936 the red wooden building is being demolished and in 1937 "old torppa" opens.   the new kalastajatorppa restaurant opened to the public in july 1939 when the colonial hall and the symbol of the restaurant, the round hall, were commissioned. with terraces, kalastajatorppa could serve 2,000 customers at a time, being the biggest restaurant in the nordic countries.  the restaurant was finished for the 1940 summer olympics - originally scheduled to be held from 21 september to 6 october 1940, in tokyo, japan, but they were cancelled due to the outbreak of world war ii.   during the winter war the restaurant serves as a military hospital.  the building served the defence forces during the continuation war as well. after the wars, the restaurant's operations successfully continued. in 1952, kalastajatorppa was sold to the yhtyneet ravintolat company.  the first hotel building was completed in 1969, and it was designed by architect markus tavio - 77 fabulous rooms in the seaside wing. the newer and main hotel building was completed in 1975, with 158 rooms, designed by architect einari terasvirta, just in time for the osce conference. finnish state guest house is located near the hotel.  in 1998 scandic hotels buys arctia. few years later, in 2001 hilton hotels & resorts buys the scandic hotel. it took two-and-a-half year refurbishment when everything is finally over and on 2004, feb 2nd hilton helsinki kalastajatorppa was opened.  events a number of key entertainment
events are arranged in kalastajatorppa.   in may 1952, armi kuusela was crowned as the first finnish maiden.  a lot of fashion shows and concerts are organized there.  finland's first disco was held at kalastajatorppa in 1966.  many world leaders have visited kalastajatorppa over the years, including yasser arafat, leonid brezhnev, george h. w. bush, bill clinton, tenzin gyatso, 14th dalai lama, gerald ford, mikhail gorbachev, harald v of norway, trygve lie, jawaharlal nehru, mohammad reza pahlavi (and farah pahlavi), vladimir putin, ronald reagan (and nancy reagan), helmut schmidt, donald trump and boris yeltsin.  bilderberg conference was held at kalastajatorppa in 1994.  references  external links    hotels in helsinki helsinki hotels established in 1969 hotel buildings completed in 1969
pratikno (born 13 february 1962) is an indonesian politician and academician. he is currently the minister of state secretariat of indonesia in the onward indonesia cabinet, the cabinet appointed by president joko widodo for his second term in office 2019-2024.  pratikno was formerly dean of the faculty of social and political science at gadjah mada university in yogyakarta, indonesia, before becoming rektor of the university in 2012.  he resigned as rektor on being appointed state secretary in the first joko widodo administration in 2014.  early life born at bojonegoro in east java, pratikno graduated from gadjah mada university in 1985 where he studied public administration. he then received a master's degree in development administration from birmingham university and doctoral degree from the department of asian studies, flinders university, in adelaide, south australia.  references  1962 births government ministers of indonesia indonesian muslims gadjah mada university alumni alumni of the university of birmingham flinders university alumni gadjah mada university faculty javanese people living people politicians from east java people from bojonegoro regency working cabinet (joko widodo) onward indonesia cabinet
deane waretini snr was a famous maori baritone singer from rotorua. he was possibly the first maori singer to be commercially recorded, together with his cousin ana hato. his son deane waretini would also be a first with his no 1 hit the bridge, which became the first maori language song to be no 1 in the new zealand music charts.  background in 1926/27, he and his cousin hato began recording. during a performance for the duke and duchess of york, they were recorded by parlophone records technicians from the label's australian branch. this was recorded on small portable acoustic equipment. this resulted in the first locally recorded commercial music that was to be released on shellac 78rpm disc format.      along with his cousin hato, he was contracted to parlophone records. an advertisement from parlophone in the 1930s showed that they already had two solo releases under his name, as well as four in duet with his cousin.  waretini died in december 1967.  later years after his funeral, a relative george tait, took his son deane under his wing and would become his mentor and manager.  in 1996, the ana hato - raua ko deane waretini, legendary recordings 1927-1949 album was released by the kiwi label.  in 2015, some of his records turned up at the st michael's and kelburn village fair's vintage and clothing and bric-a-brac in wellington. someone pointed out to organizer patricia thompson some boxes and suitcases of very old 78s. among some of the records that were covered in mouse droppings were eight recordings by ana hato, and waretini. one of them was "medley and haka" by ana hato and himself. these were made during a performance in rotorua when the duke and duchess of york visited in 1926.  discography (selective)  references  1967 deaths new zealand maori male singers 20th-century new zealand male singers
okruzhnaya ( - circle [station]) is a station on the moscow central circle of the moscow metro. the station named after the moscow circular railway, the old name of nowaday moscow central circle.  external links   mkzd.ru  moscow metro stations railway stations in russia opened in 2016 moscow central circle stations
event one of the 2016 monster energy fim speedway world cup was the opening race of the 2016 edition of the speedway world cup. it was staged on 23 july 2016 at vojens speedway center in vojens, denmark and was won by poland from hosts denmark, russia, and the czech republic. as a result, poland progressed directly to the 2016 speedway world cup final, while denmark and russia progressed to the 2016 speedway world cup race-off. the czech republic were eliminated.  piotr pawlicki jr. led poland to the final by scoring 12 points, while patryk dudek, who scored 11 points, secured second place in the heat 20 to ensure poland finished ahead of denmark. michael jepsen jensen top scored for the danes with 18 points, while emil sayfutdinov was the star of the meeting, scoring 18 points for russia.  results  scores  see also  2016 speedway grand prix  references  2016 speedway world cup
ino80 complex subunit c is a protein that in humans is encoded by the ino80c gene.  references  further reading
westminster is a regional transportation district (rtd) commuter rail station on the b line in westminster, colorado, part of the denver metropolitan area. the station opened on july 25, 2016, and became the interim northern terminus of the b line until extensions north toward boulder and longmont are built. from westminster, b line trains travel  south to union station in denver, taking about 11 minutes.  the station consists of a single platform on the north side is situated on the south side of the tracks. it will have a 350-stall park and ride that can be expanded to 1,000 spaces and a public plaza, both located on the north side of the tracks. the station is connected to the nearby adams county residential neighborhood by a  pedestrian bridge over the tracks, platform, and nearby little dry creek. the underpass of the station, connecting to the north plaza, is home to a  art installation by brian w. brush called "grotto", which consists of high-density polyethylene plastic tubes lit by led lights in an array of colors.  the city of westminster plans to encourage transit-oriented development in a  area around the station; a  park and open space is also planned for the south side of the station area.  references  rtd commuter rail stations 2016 establishments in colorado railway stations in the united states opened in 2016
this is a list of hills in devon. many of these peaks are important historical, archaeological and nature conservation sites, as well as popular hiking and tourist destinations in the county of devon in southwest england.  colour key  the table is colour-coded based on the classification or "listing" of the mountain or hill. the types that occur in devon are marilyns, humps and tumps, listings based on topographical prominence. "prominence" correlates strongly with the subjective significance of a summit. peaks with low prominences are either subsidiary tops of a higher summit or relatively insignificant independent summits. peaks with high prominences tend to be the highest points around and likely to have extraordinary views.  a marilyn is a hill with a prominence of at least 150 metres or about 500 feet. a "hump" (the acronym comes from "hundred metre prominence) is a hill with a prominence of at least 100 but less than 150 metres. in this table marilyns are in beige and humps in lilac. a "tump" as defined here is a hill with a prominence of at least 30 but less than 100 metres. the term "sub-marilyn" or "sub-hump" is used, e.g. in the online database of british and irish hills to indicate hills that fall just below the threshold. to qualify for inclusion, hills must either be 400 metres or higher with a prominence of at least 30 metres, below 400 metres with a prominence of at least 90 metres (the threshold for a sub-hump) or be in some other way notable.  for further information see the lists of mountains and hills in the british isles and the individual articles on marilyns, humps, and tumps; by way of contrast, see also the article listing tumps (a traditional term meaning a hillock, mound, barrow or tumulus).  list of mountains and hills  in the uk and ireland, a mountain is usually taken to be at least 2,000 feet high. by that definition, devon has two mountains: high willhays and yes tor.  notes   parts of dartmoor are military training areas which means the peaks in these areas are only accessible to the public at certain times.  the following summit(s) have been omitted from the table as they are sub-peaks, as per the uiaa definition or alternative names of hills in the main list:  whitehorse hill (601m), dartmoor, subpeak
of hangingstone hill 600 m to the n.  see also   list of mountains and hills of the united kingdom  list of marilyns in england  references and footnotes     devon hills
adam papalia is an australian sports commentator for fox sports and radio station 6pr.   papalia has covered an average of 60 games a season calling the nbl, a-league and the afl, after completing a sports broadcasting course at edith cowan university. in 2016, he joined the fox footy broadcast team, commentating a game each saturday, and sometimes on sunday if there is a game played in perth.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people australian rules football commentators   people from perth, western australia
augusto armellini was an italian politician. he was acting mayor of rome from july 1880 to october 1881. he was mayor of rome, kingdom of italy from 1889 to 1890.  references  19th-century italian politicians mayors of rome
johannes maximus stainer von pleinfelden (1610-1692) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1682-1692).  biography johannes maximus stainer von pleinfelden was born in bamberg, germany in 1610 and ordained a priest in 1648. on 7 dec 1682, he was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent xi as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop of selymbria. on 14 mar 1683, he was consecrated bishop. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 15 oct 1692. while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of sigmund ignaz von wolkenstein-trostburg, bishop of chiemsee (1689).  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope innocent xi 1610 births 1692 deaths
united cooperative is an american agricultural supply cooperative based in beaver dam, wisconsin. they supply feed, grain, agronomy, and energy products to customers.  history united cooperative was incorporated on january 27, 1936.  in 1985, united cooperative acquired iron ridge cooperative.  in 1990, united cooperative acquired don's elevator in allenton, wisconsin, and hartford elevator in hartford, wisconsin.  in 2012, united cooperative acquired pulaski chase cooperative of pulaski, wisconsin, mid-country cooperative of shawano, wisconsin, and cooperative services of denmark, wisconsin.  in 2015, united cooperative acquired agventures llc, with locations in coleman and shawano, wisconsin, and grain ventures llc, with locations in shawano and oconto falls, wisconsin. these facilities have a combined storage capacity of 4 million bushels of grain.  in 2015, united cooperative also acquired four locations from archer daniels midland. these locations are in auroraville, oshkosh, ripon, and westfield, wisconsin, and have a storage capacity of 13 million bushels.  also in 2015, croplife magazine ranked united cooperative #29 on their list of the top 100 agronomy companies. they also ranked #57 on the usda's top 100 agricultural cooperatives.  in 2017, united cooperative merged with greenville cooperative of greenville, wis.  corporate governance  headquarters united cooperative's corporate headquarters is located in beaver dam, wisconsin. their complex includes their corporate offices, a cenex gas station, and feed storage.  charitable activities in 2014, united cooperative partnered with land o' lakes, and donated $28,000 to wisconsin food pantries.  in 2015, united cooperative again partnered with land o' lakes, this time donating $37,000 to 34 food pantries in wisconsin.  also in 2015, united cooperative donated over $31,000 to charities.  united cooperative also awards scholarships to graduating high school seniors, which totaled over $40,000 in 2015.  subsidiaries united ethanol is a subsidiary of united cooperative. united ethanol was incorporated in 2007, and produces 3.9 million gallons of ethanol per month. in 2008, united ethanol constructed a carbon dioxide processing facility, which is the byproduct of ethanol production. the carbon dioxide is then sold for use in food processing, beverage production, oil recovery, municipal water treatment, and chemical production. in 2011, united ethanol constructed a corn oil extraction facility.  references  external links united cooperative united ethanol  agricultural cooperatives in the united states grain companies of the united states 1936 establishments in wisconsin american
companies established in 1936
emphytoecia dimidiata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by blanchard in gay in 1851. it is known from chile.  references  pteropliini beetles described in 1851 endemic fauna of chile
mathieu de dombasle (1777-1843) was a french agronomist. he was one of the first french farmers to grow beetroots to producer sugar, until he went bankrupt. he invented the dombasle plough, and he established a model farm in roville-devant-bayon. he was the author of many books about agriculture.  early life mathieu de dombasle was born on 26 february 1777 in nancy, france. he served in the french army.  career de dombasle grew beetroots in monplaisir near nancy to produce sugar as early as 1809. he was one of the first farmers to grow beetroots for this purpose in france. five years later, in 1814, he went bankrupt, as the new tariffs made sugarcane more profitable. he subsequently wrote several essays about sugar.  de dombasle invented the "dombasle plough," based on the works of albrecht thaer. he organized agrarian fairs, where he demonstrated the plough.  de dombasle was the co-founder of the societe centrale d'agriculture with antoine bertier, and he served as its founding president from 1820 to 1825. meanwhile, the two men established a model farm in roville-devant-bayon in 1821-1822.  de dombasle became an officer of the legion of honour.  death and legacy de dombasle died on 27 december 1843 in nancy, france. his grandson, charles de meixmoron de dombasle, who became a painter, edited three of his books and published them posthumously in 1861-1862.  works  further reading  references  1777 births 1843 deaths people from nancy, france french agronomists french non-fiction writers officiers of the legion d'honneur
zila school, bhagalpur is an education center in bhagalpur, bihar, india, that was established in 1823.  this school is affiliated to the bihar school examination board (bseb). it is located at adampur, bhagalpur, bihar 812001 india.  external links  bihar school examination board  schools in bihar schools in bhagalpur 1823 establishments in india educational institutions established in 1823
ngalia, ngaliya or ngalea may refer to:   ngalia (western desert), an aboriginal people of the western desert in western australia and south australia  ngalia (ngalea or ooldean), a dialect of the western desert language  ngalia (northern territory), an aboriginal australian people of the northern territory  ngaliya, a dialect of the warlpiri language  ngalia basin, a sedimentary basin in central australia  see also  mantjintjarra ngalia, a union of the western desert ngalia and mantjintjarra
all through the house is a 2015 american holiday slasher film written and directed by todd nunes and produced by the readmond company. it stars ashley mary nunes, jessica cameron, and jennifer wenger, and follows a masked killer dressed in a santa claus costume who terrorizes a neighborhood during the christmas holiday. the film was shot in los angeles, san francisco, and lake arrowhead, california over a period of 21 days.  all through the house had its world premiere on october 31, 2015 at the rip film festival in hollywood, california, where it won the best slasher and best editing awards, as well as the audience choice award. on october 4, 2016, the film was released on itunes and other video-on-demand platforms by gravitas ventures.  plot  a christmas-obsessed neighborhood becomes engulfed in fear when five-year-old jamie garrett mysteriously vanishes from her home. citing various different explanations ranging from krampus to kidnapping, the adult denizens of the district begin to treat the young girl's mother and her home as the stuff of a spooky, holiday-themed legend. the missing girl's house goes dark as her mother becomes a depressed recluse. the local children, mesmerized by the seemingly-haunted story, trade bedtime fears about their missing friend, eventually turning the tragedy into an innocuous fairytale.  fifteen years later, rachel kimmel, a 22-year-old student, comes home for christmas. the offbeat and slightly creepy mrs. garrett invites rachel to her home as she finally emerges from her self-imposed exile, determined to make this christmas a jovial one to be remembered, which brings rachel's memories of the missing girl rushing back to her.  all the while, the same neighborhood is being terrorized by a faceless killer dressed in a santa suit and mask who stalks the wintery streets- slaughtering women and castrating men. rachel and her two best friends soon find themselves trapped in a grisly nightmare, fighting for their lives as the santa killer's obsession zeroes in on them as well as mrs. garrett and her festively-decorated home.  after various terrifying encounters with the santa killer that leave a trail of even more dead bodies behind, rachel finally uncovers the madness behind the santa mask and the truth behind the mysteries of the neighborhood's past. the killer's twisted revelation sends rachel into shock as she learns her own sick connection to the garrett family legacy.  cast  reception all through the house received generally positive reviews
. michael therkelsen of horror society called the film "the perfect stocking stuffer, the perfect present under the tree. it's an unpredictable gorefest filled with holiday cheer and unadulterated horror." the blood shed states that "almost every aspect of the film is superb". the shock chamber praised the film, saying, "if this film was made 30 years ago it would be mentioned today in the same conversations as black christmas and silent night, deadly night." the reviewer also called writer-director todd nunes an "exceptional horror filmmaker and i look forward to seeing him crank out many more projects." the uk's bloody flicks reports that, "all through the house isn't perfect but it revels in its flaws and creates a rip roaring sleigh ride straight to hell."  awards  best artwork & design, action on film international film festival, los angeles, ca (2016)  2nd place, best horror film, action on film international film festival, los angeles, ca (2016)  2nd place, best actress (ashley mary nunes), action on film international film festival, los angeles, ca   best supporting actress (feature), genre blast film festival, culpepper, va (2016, won - melynda kiring)  best director, hardcore horror fest, chicago, il (2016, won - todd nunes)  best actress, hardcore horror fest, chicago, il (2016, won - jessica cameron)  official nomination, "top ten", online, the golden rake award for indie horror (2016)  best slasher award, rip horror film festival, hollywood, ca (2015)  audience choice award, rip horror film festival, hollywood, ca (2015)  best editing award, rip horror film festival, hollywood, ca (2015)  best local feature award, sfindie's "another hole in the head" phenomenal film festival, san francisco, ca (2015)  references  external links        2015 films 2015 horror films 2010s slasher films american slasher films american films american christmas horror films films shot in california english-language films 2010s christmas films 2010s christmas horror films
brouilletts creek covered bridge, also known as s hill covered bridge and furnace road bridge, was a historic burr arch truss covered bridge located at clinton, vermillion county, indiana. it was built in 1879, and is a single span covered timber bridge.  it measured 157 feet long.  the bridge was disassembled in 1994 and currently in storage in its entirety for reassembly in the future.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1994 and delisted in 1999.  see also eugene covered bridge newport covered bridge possum bottom covered bridge  references  former national register of historic places in indiana covered bridges in indiana bridges completed in 1879 transportation buildings and structures in vermillion county, indiana wooden bridges in indiana burr truss bridges in the united states road bridges in indiana
the siege of cuddalore was a battle during the war of the austrian succession on 17 june 1748.  after a british raiding squadron left for madras, joseph francois dupleix decided to make another attack on cuddalore, where the british had taken refuge after the fall of madras. he was assisted by bertrand-francois mahe de la bourdonnais. commanding a force of 800 europeans and 1,000 indian sepoys, dupleix marched from pondicherry and arrived on the hills at bandapolam, three miles from cuddalore, on the morning of 17 june. planning to take the town by surprise, dupleix stopped until night. forewarned of the advance, major lawrence stringer (who had arrived in india in january 1748 to command the east india company's forces and had formed the first regular company battalion on the coromandel coast) managed to thwart this attempt with a force of no more than 400 men by removing the garrison and taking away the guns to fort st. david, to make the french believe the british were unable to hold it.  when night arrived, however, stringer led his men and guns back into cuddalore, so that when the french attacked on the stroke of midnight and tried to put their scaling ladders against the town walls they were met with such a hail of musket-fire and gunshot that their advance was stopped dead. in the ensuing panic, the french made a hasty retreat to pondicherry, with notable losses.  sources william freke williams, william cooke stafford, england's battles by sea and land : history of england's campaigns in india and china ; and of the indian mutiny, 1857-1859, vol. 3, london ; new york, printing and publishing company, 1863, p. 33-37.  sieges involving france battles involving great britain conflicts in 1748 1748 in india first carnatic war
enotes lifuanus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by xavier montrouzier in 1861.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1861
say when may refer to:  say when!!, a 1960s american gameshow say when (film), an alternative title for the 2014 film laggies say when (musical), a 1934 musical by ray henderson "say when" (song)", a 1998 song by lonestar "say when", a song by lene lovich in their album stateless
the 27th district of the iowa senate is located in northern iowa, and is currently composed of butler, cerro gordo, and franklin counties.  current elected officials amanda ragan is the senator currently representing the 27th district.  the area of the 27th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 53rd district (represented by sharon steckman) the 54th district (represented by shannon latham)  the district is also located in iowa's 4th congressional district, which is represented by randy feenstra.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  joe brown, 1983-1986 richard varn, 1987-1992 wally horn, 1993-2002 ron wieck, 2003-2010 bill anderson, 2011-2012 amanda ragan, 2013-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  27
cylindrepomus laetus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pascoe in 1858. it is known from malaysia, sumatra and java. it contains the varietas cylindrepomus laetus var. shelfordi.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1858
james bird may refer to:  sports  james bird (rugby union) (born 1989), welsh-born american rugby union player james bird (cricketer) (1808-1876), english cricketer doug bird (james douglas bird, born 1950), baseball player  others james curtis bird (1773-1856), canadian fur trader james bird (fur trader) (1798-1892), canadian-american fur trader j. malcolm bird (james malcolm bird, 1886-1964), american mathematician and parapsychologist jim bird, utah politician james bird (illinois politician) in 5th illinois general assembly  see also james byrd (disambiguation)
|}  the challenge stakes is a group 3 flat horse race in ireland open to fillies and mares aged three years or older. it is run at leopardstown over a distance of 1 mile and 6 furlongs (2,816 metres), and it is scheduled to take place each year in july.  the race was first run in 1991 and was restricted to fillies and mares from 2016.  since 2016 the race has been run as the stanerra stakes. in 2018 it was upgraded from listed to group 3 status as part of changes to enhance the european programme of stayer's races.  records most successful horse (3 wins): profound beauty - 2008, 2009, 2010  leading jockey (8 wins): pat smullen - vinnie roe (2001), orpington (2005), profound beauty (2008,2009,2010), sense of purpose (2011), galileo's choice (2012), pale mimosa (2014)  leading trainer (8 wins):  dermot weld - vinnie roe (2001), orpington (2005), profound beauty (2008,2009,2010), sense of purpose (2011), galileo's choice (2012), pale mimosa (2014)  winners  see also  horse racing in ireland  list of irish flat horse races  references   racing post:  , , , , , , , , ,   , , , , , , , , ,   ,    ifhaonline.org - international federation of horseracing authorities - stannera stakes (2019).  flat races in ireland leopardstown racecourse open long distance horse races recurring sporting events established in 1991 1991 establishments in ireland
rarenoiserecords is an independent record label based in london, co-founded by italian entrepreneur giacomo bruzzo and italian musician and producer eraldo bernocchi in 2008. the label's mission is to detect and amplify contemporary trends in progressive music, by highlighting their relation to the history of the art-form, while choosing not to be bound by pre-conceptions of genre. it seeks to become a guiding light for all those enamored by exciting, adventurous and progressive sounds. in 2020, bruzzo described his preferences in music for the label: "i like music that gives me a sense of vertigo, like i'm half a second away from the cliff's edge".  the label released its first albums in 2009. musicians who have worked frequently with rarenoise include eraldo bernocchi, lorenzo feliciati, lorenzo esposito fornasari, colin edwin, cuong vu, jamie saft, bill laswell, joe morris, balazs pandi, roy powell, and pat mastelotto. rarenoise offers a subscription service, allowing customers to pay for one year's releases in advance.  artists  references  external links rarenoiserecords official site rarenoiserecords on youtube  7 questions for... rarenoiserecords on a jazz noise freewheelin' with giacomo bruzzo on jazz da gama amn interviews: giacomo bruzzo of rare noise records on amn a desire to surprise :the rarenoise interview on expose  british independent record labels experimental music record labels jazz record labels record labels based in london record labels established in 2008
the 2016 brickyard 400, branded as crown royal presents the combat wounded coalition 400 at the brickyard, was a nascar sprint cup series stock car race held on july 24, 2016 at indianapolis motor speedway in speedway, indiana. as the 23rd running of the brickyard 400, contested over 170 laps-- extended from 160 laps due to an overtime finish, on the  speedway, it was the 20th race of the 2016 nascar sprint cup series.  kyle busch scored his second career victory at the brickyard, the race had four lead changes among different drivers and eight cautions for 31 laps, and one red flag for seven minutes and 45 seconds.  this is the first brickyard 400 without dale earnhardt jr. since the 1999 edition and the first brickyard 400 without an earnhardt in the starting lineup.   also, this marks the final brickyard 400 starts for 5-time brickyard 400 winner jeff gordon and 2-time brickyard 400 winner tony stewart.  report  background  the indianapolis motor speedway, located in speedway, indiana, (an enclave suburb of indianapolis) in the united states, is the home of the indianapolis 500 and the brickyard 400. it is located on the corner of 16th street and georgetown road, approximately  west of downtown indianapolis.  constructed in 1909, it is the original speedway, the first racing facility so named. it has a permanent seating capacity estimated at 235,000 with infield seating raising capacity to an approximate 400,000. it is the highest-capacity sports venue in the world.  considered relatively flat by american standards, the track is a , nearly rectangular oval with dimensions that have remained essentially unchanged since its inception: four  turns, two  straightaways between the fourth and first turns and the second and third turns, and two  short straightaways - termed "short chutes" - between the first and second, and third and fourth turns.  entry list the preliminary entry list for the race included 41 cars and was released on july 15, 2016 at 10:12 a.m. eastern time. dale earnhardt jr. was slated to run the race in the no. 88 hendrick motorsports chevrolet, but concussion symptoms forced him to sit out and be replaced by jeff gordon.  practice  first practice jimmie johnson was the fastest in the first practice session with a time of 48.864 and a speed of .  final practice kyle busch was the fastest in the final practice session with a time of 48.749 and a speed of .  qualifying kyle busch
scored the pole for the race with a time of 48.745 and a speed of . busch said afterwards that the pole "means a lot to me and it means a lot to the guys on this team. to be able to sit on the pole here at indy is something that i've always wanted to do. (crew chief) adam stevens and the guys gave me a great piece this weekend.  after qualifying third, tony stewart said he wished he "could do a lap ... one more time and not clip the apron in (turn) 4; i think we could have been on the pole. what we learned today for qualifying, we are going to have to take some of that and try to make a car a little better for tomorrow."  making his first start since homestead in november, jeff gordon - who qualified 21st subbing for dale earnhardt jr. - said he was "much calmer than i was [friday]. usually, my heart is beating more for qualifying than it is for practice. but that wasn't the case [in practice]. i feel more relaxed and comfortable in the car."  qualifying results  race  first half under clear blue indiana skies, kyle busch led the field to the green flag at 3:22 p.m. during the first lap, tony stewart used all of the real estate on the backstretch and made a power move under denny hamlin to take second. the first caution of the race flew on the fourth lap for matt dibenedetto blowing an engine on the frontstretch. he went on to finish 40th.  the race restarted on the ninth lap. busch just pulled away from the field during this run. by lap 19, he pulled to a five and a half second lead over teammate denny hamlin. during the run, stewart began falling from second to eighth. martin truex jr. kicked off a round of green flag stops on lap 25. more cars followed suit the next lap. busch pitted from the lead on lap 28 and handed it to brad keselowski. kevin harvick made an unscheduled stop on lap 32 for what he believed to be a flat tire. it turned out that the tire wasn't flat. keselowski and joey logano pitted on lap 42 and the lead cycled back to busch.  the second caution of the race flew on lap 52 after greg biffle suffered a right-front tire blowout and slammed the wall in turn 1. logano opted not to pit under the caution and assumed the race lead.  the race restarted on lap 59. busch ran
down logano to retake the lead on lap 63. a number of cars began hitting pit road on lap 84. hamlin and jimmie johnson were tagged for speeding on pit road and were forced to serve a pass through penalty. busch pitted on lap 87 and handed the lead to carl edwards. he pitted the next lap and the lead cycled back to busch.  second half  a number of cars began hitting pit road on lap 112. the third caution of the race came out on lap 120 for david ragan blowing a left-front tire and slamming the wall head-on in turn 2. tony stewart and jamie mcmurray were tagged for speeding on pit road and restarted the race from the tail end of the field.  the race restarted with 33 laps to go. the fourth caution of the race flew with 30 laps to go for regan smith coming to a halt on the backstretch.  the race restarted with 26 laps to go. debris in turn 1 brought out the fifth caution of the race with 10 laps to go. the top-five cars opted not to pit while the rest of the lead lap cars elected to hit pit road.  the race restarted with seven laps to go and the sixth caution of the race flew for a multi-car wreck in turn 1. it started when edwards got loose and slammed into the wall, collecting drivers like ryan newman and keselowski. "it felt like i just got tight down there," edwards said. "i had a little trouble there on the starts and i got down there, we were fighting really hard for the bottom and it felt like i got tight with whoever was on the outside of me. if indeed that is what happened, i apologize, that's pretty frustrating. i don't know if he came down or if i came up. it felt like i got in there and just scrubbed that right front. hopefully a toyota wins. i hate it for stanley, joe gibbs racing and everybody that was caught up in that wreck. it's frustrating." this brought out the red flag to ensue cleanup. the race resumed under caution shortly thereafter.  the race restarted on lap 159, with two laps to go in regulation. the seventh caution of the race flew half a lap later for a two-car wreck on the backstretch involving trevor bayne and clint bowyer.  overtime  attempt #1 the race restarted on lap 165 and the eighth caution of the race flew when jamie mcmurray slid down the access road in turn 1, coming back up onto the track and being hit by ryan
newman.  attempt #2 the race restarted on lap 169. kyle busch was leading at the finish and scored his second career victory at the brickyard.  post-race  driver comments busch said afterwards that his "toyota was awesome today, it was just so fast and able to get out front and stay out front. not even some of my teammates could challenge. this was hooked up and on rails." "the repeat-ability there was something i wasn't looking forward to," busch added. "i certainly didn't want one, let alone (four) of them. you never know what is going to happen on those restarts. there's a lot of gamesmanship that kind of gets played, and there was a little bit of back and forth a little bit with the guys in the different grooves. i think i had kenseth to my outside. i had truex to my outside. i think i had carl to my outside and then joey logano to my outside, so there were a lot of different characters that we had to deal with on the restarts. but i always felt like i could hit my marks and set sail each time."  race results  race summary  lead changes: 4 among different drivers  cautions/laps: 8 for 34  red flags: 1 for 7 minutes, 25 seconds  time of race: 3 hours, 17 minutes and 46 seconds  average speed:  media  television nbc sports covered the race on the television side. rick allen, jeff burton and steve letarte had the call in the booth for the race. dave burns, mike massaro, marty snider and kelli stavast reported from pit lane during the race.  radio indianapolis motor speedway radio network and the performance racing network jointly co-produced the radio broadcast for the race, which was simulcast on sirius xm nascar radio, and aired on ims or prn stations, depending on contractual obligations.  the lead announcers and two pit reporters were prn staff, while the turns and two pit reporters were from ims.  standings after the race  note: only the first 16 positions are included for the driver standings.. - driver has clinched a position in the chase for the sprint cup.  references  2016 in sports in indiana 2016 nascar sprint cup series 2016 brickyard 400 july 2016 sports events in the united states
xiangyang () is a town of ziyang county, shaanxi, china. , it has one residential community and 12 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of shaanxi ziyang county
hejrenæs is a 1953 danish film directed by svend methling and starring john wittig, astrid villaume and karin nellemose.  cast  john wittig as godsejer hans-henrik thann    astrid villaume as vibeke thann    karin nellemose as tante sofia    maria garland as tante hortense    lisbeth movin as ulla biehle    ib schønberg as godsinspektør sejersen    johannes meyer as herskabstjener blackhøj    knud rex as skovfoged ulf henningsen    bendt rothe as fabrikant helge knudsen    carl heger as dyrlæge    peter poulsen as savværksbestyreren    jakob nielsen as skovarbejder martin    emil hass christensen  references  bibliography   morten piil. gyldendals danske filmguide. gyldendal a/s, 2008.  external links     1953 films danish films danish-language films films directed by sven methling danish romantic drama films 1953 romantic drama films danish black-and-white films
xiangyang () is a town of wuchang, harbin, heilongjiang, china. , it has 17 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of heilongjiang wuchang, heilongjiang
gary j. gates is an american demographer and the blachford-cooper distinguished scholar at the ucla school of law's williams institute, of which he is also the research director. he is an expert on the demography of lgbt populations in the united states. prior to becoming a demographer, he worked as a software engineer and seminarian.  education gates received his b.s. from the johnstown branch of the university of pittsburgh, his m.div. from st. vincent college, and his ph.d. from carnegie mellon university.  work gates is the co-author of the 2004 book the gay and lesbian atlas. in 2013, he wrote an amicus brief for the supreme court of the united states case united states v. windsor in which he outlined a number of statistics about same-sex couples in the united states. according to the washington post, one of these statistics was that "about one in five gay and lesbian couples are raising children under age 18".  personal life gates, who is gay, lives in seattle with his husband.  references  living people american demographers ucla school of law faculty university of pittsburgh at johnstown alumni saint vincent college alumni carnegie mellon university alumni year of birth missing (living people)
tessa johanna van schagen (born  2 february 1994) is a dutch athlete who specialises in sprinting. she competed in the 4 × 100 m event at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands, where she won the gold medal.  international competitions  1did not finish in the final  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links      1994 births living people sportspeople from leiden dutch female sprinters european athletics championships medalists athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of the netherlands dutch athletics championships winners olympic female sprinters
marcel anghelescu (; 1909-1977) was a romanian stage and film actor.  partial filmography   ziua cumpatarii (1942)  squadriglia bianca (1944) - nello  the valley resounds (1950) - ion  arendasul roman (1952)  vizita (1952)  cu marincea e ceva (1954) - marinica busuioc  a lost letter (1954) - ghita pristanda  popescu 10 in control (1955)  pe raspunderea mea (1956) - serban  stormy bird (1957) - steaga  o mica intimplare (1957)  doua lozuri (1957) - capitanul pandele  ciulinii baraganului (1957) - ursu  avalansa (1959) - matei  telegrame (1960) - popic  baietii nostri (1960) - marian  furtuna (1960)  badaranii (1960) - maurizio  darclee (1960) - ruggero leoncavallo  post restant (1962) - toma  omul de langa tine (1962)  celebrul 702 (1962)  cinci oameni la drum (1962) - dobre  partea ta de vina (1963) - oniga  lumina de iulie (1963) - pavel serea  pasi spre luna (1963) - baronul de munchhausen  mofturi 1900 (1964)  mona, l'etoile sans nom (1966) - station master  corigenta domnului profesor (1966) - andrei muresanu  castelanii (1967) -  madaras  aventuri la marea neagra (1972) - generarul  ceata (1973)  cantemir (1973)  trei scrisori secrete (1974) - foreman bocancea  fratii jderi (1974) - iohan rosu  stefan cel mare - vaslui 1475 (1975) - george amirutzes, royal tutor  muschetarul roman (1975) - dragus  tufa de venetia (1977)  razboiul independentei (1977) - nicolae fleva  severino (1978) - (final film role)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1909 births 1977
deaths people from craiova romanian male film actors romanian male stage actors
shangzhou (商州镇) is a town in yibin county, sichuan, china.   township-level divisions of sichuan yibin
an ardent heart () is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by gennadi kazansky and starring gennadiy michurin, anna belousova and tamara alyoshina. it is based on the play an ardent heart by aleksandr ostrovskiy. it was made by lenfilm studio.  synopsis the famous merchant kuroslepov wastes his life binge drinking. the home is run by his wife matrona, an overbearing and immoral woman who spends her husband's money, has an affair with the bailiff and strongly oppresses parasha, kuroslepov's daughter from his first marriage. the plot develops around the loss of a large sum of money. parasha's groom vasya gets accused of stealing and is threatened with being sent to serve in the army. the unfortunate young woman desperately prays for her man. the cowardly and prudent vasya agrees to become a clown of the merchant khlynov, who buys him off from conscription. realizing the nullity of her beloved, parasha finds happiness with a clerk gavrila who is infatuated with her.  cast  gennadiy michurin as kuroslepov pavlin pavlinovich  anna belousova as kuroslepov's wife  tamara alyoshina as parasha  aleksandr borisov as gavrilo  konstantin kalinis as vasya shustryi  konstantin skorobogatov as gradoboev serapion mordarievich  konstantin adashevsky as khlynov taras tarasovich  g. osipenko as silan  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1953 drama films 1953 films soviet drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films films based on works by alexander ostrovsky films directed by gennadi kazansky soviet black-and-white films
the samsung galaxy j1 ace is a lower mid-range smartphone manufactured by samsung electronics as part of the galaxy j series.  specifications  hardware  the j1 ace features a spreadtrum sc9830 soc with a quad-core 1.2 ghz arm cortex-a7 cpu and either 768 mb or 1 gb of ram. it is available with either 4 or 8 gb of internal storage with support for removable microsd cards of up to 128 gb.  the cameras of the j1 ace are a 5 megapixel main camera with led flash and a 2 megapixel front-facing camera. both can record 720p video at 30fps.  a special version for brazil (sm-j110l) without 4g connectivity features a lower-spec marvell pxa1908 soc including a dual-core 1.2 ghz arm cortex-a53 and 512 mb of ram and 4 gb internal storage.  software  the j1 ace was originally shipped with android 4.4.4 "kitkat" with samsung's touchwiz user interface. it can be upgraded to android 5.1.1 "lollipop".  samsung galaxy j1 ace neo  at 11th july, 2016, samsung released an updated version of the j1 ace named j1 ace neo (j1 ace ve in north africa). it features a quad-core 1.5 ghz cpu with 1 gb of ram. the rest of the specs remain the same, the model number is sm-j111f.  references   samsung galaxy mobile phones introduced in 2015 android (operating system) devices samsung mobile phones mobile phones with user-replaceable battery
yingzhoulu subdistrict is a subdistrict in hejian, cangzhou, hebei, china. prior to 2016 it was a town known as yingzhou town ().  references  township-level divisions of hebei hejian
the killer (turkish: katil) is a 1953 turkish adventure film directed by lutfi akad and starring ayhan isik, gulistan guzey and neriman koksal.  cast  ayhan isik as kemal    gulistan guzey as nevin    neriman koksal as suheyla    muazzez arcay as huriye    necla sertel as nermin    zaruhi degirmenci   sevki artun   nubar terziyan as nuri    riza tuzun as suleyman    mualla surer as camasirhane yoneticisi    hamdi sarligil as hamdi    fikri coze   sadettin erbil as emniyet sube muduru    kemal tozem as hakim    erkan baydemir as turhan   fadil garan as tahir    turan seyfioglu as muzaffer durak  references  bibliography  gonul donmez-colin. the routledge dictionary of turkish cinema. routledge, 2013.  external links    1953 films 1953 adventure films turkish-language films turkish films turkish adventure films films directed by lutfi akad turkish black-and-white films
the irish distributive and administrative union (idatu) was a trade union representing workers in ireland.  the union was founded in 1901 as the irish drapers' assistants' association by michael o'lehane.  o'lehane had been working at cannocks in limerick where several female shop workers living on the premises died in a major fire.  o'lehane relocated to dublin, where he founded the union.  in 1902, o'lehane travelled around ireland, recruiting members for the idaa, with a branch being set up in galway and over the next few years in other towns and cities.  the union focused its campaigns on reducing working hours, creating a half-day holiday per week, and setting up agreements to cover overtime pay.  the idaa attracted particular attention for recruiting women.  by 1914, 1,400 of its 4,000 members were women.  o'lehane stood down as secretary in 1919, being succeeded by several high-profile trade unionists, including luke duffy, michael drumgoole and billy fitzpatrick.  the union changed its name to the irish union of distributive workers and clerks (iudwc), and in 1935 it merged with the commercial employees' union.  membership varied greatly over the years, falling as low as 6,443 in 1930, but reaching 15,579 in 1950, and more than 17,122 in 1970.  in 1985, the union took its final name, the "irish distributive and administrative union".  the union experienced rapid growth in the 1980s under the stewardship of general secretary john mitchell, who was seen as a left-winger.  in 1984 a number of female workers and one man at dunnes stores department store in henry street, dublin refused to sell south african grapefruits as part of the growing campaign against the apartheid regime then in power.  mitchell gave full support to the workers and a long strike / lockout ensued.  the action made international headlines and at one stage a delegation of eight of the dunnes workers led by idatu official brendan archbold were expelled from south africa where they had gone to meet archbishop desmond tutu.  mitchell was ousted from his position in 1988, leading to a major controversy and claims of unfair dismissal from himself and leading supporters. he was also heavily criticised for expanding the union into northern ireland where a row took place with the rival gmb union.  mitchell took legal action to secure reinstatement but eventually the union made a settlement with him, but he was
not reinstated.  in 1994, idatu merged with the irish national union of vintners', grocers' and allied trades assistants to form mandate.  general secretaries 1901: michael o'lehane 1920: john g. gilloway 1922: luke duffy 1933: michael drumgoole 1954: billy fitzpatrick 1983: john mitchell 1989: hugh pollock 1992: owen nulty  references  defunct trade unions of ireland retail trade unions 1901 establishments in ireland trade unions established in 1901 trade unions disestablished in 1994 1994 disestablishments in ireland
this is the first edition of the tournament since 1994.  viktorija golubic won her first wta title, defeating kiki bertens in the final, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  references  main draw  qualifying draw  ladies championship gstaad wta swiss open
the town of muvattupuzha in kerala, india contains places of worship for hindus, syrian christians and mappila muslims.  temples and ashramas  velloorkunnam shiva temple 'velloorkunnu' means the hill of light. this is one of the rarest siva temples situated near the three rivers, which merge to form a single river. worshippers believe that lord maheswara is the eliminator of all the worries. he gets easily pleased with those who worship. he awards peace in this world and salvation in the other world. he is the annihilator of the wicked and protector of the good. the idol in velloorkunnam mahadeva temple is kirathamoorthy, who gets easily pleased in his devotees. they believe that the fore sating of arrogance and the trust in lord sankara bring them auspices. the other deities are vinayaka, sreekrishna, sreedharma sastha and naga. mondays, saturdays and pradosha days are important here. among the hindu temples the velloorkunnam temple is the oldest and most traditional. old people say that during the period of invasion of tippu, terrified with the attack at any time the flag mast of this temple was removed and deposited in the river by the devotees. still one can find the basement of this staff at the temple courtyard. stories also live as to the hiding of the flag mast and valuables of narasimha temple at the pond in the temple compound. the 'sreekovil' (sanctum sanctorum) of this temple which is round in shape is so beautiful incomparable with anyone of its kind. narasimha temple is also an old and traditional one owned by various 'manas'.  puzhakkarakavu bhagavati temple puzhakkarakavu temple is dedicated to the divine mother. it is situated at the confluence of the three rivers and is the oldest temple in the town. the town grew around it. sangharakshita gives some details about this place in his book.  puzhakkarakavu on which the beauty, glory and fame of muvattupuzha are founded requires particular mention. even people from distant places come to worship here. the idol or 'vigraham' in this temple is 'swayambhoo', self made, naturally born. with the joint efforts of the king's servants and local chiefs the temple was constructed at 'thriveni sangamam', point of harmony of the rivers, where the deity was discovered. the 'chirappu maholsavam
' here is grand and colorful. it was started during the rule of the king, which is still celebrated with all devotion and glamour by the people of muvattupuzha irrespective of the caste and the religion. colorful cultural programs, rituals and prayers are the specialities of this age-old festival. there is an 'aanapandal' (a canopy for the elephant) in this kavu which also bears a historical story. as the predecessor to the concrete thodupuzha bridge, there was a bridge made of wood, pillars been made of granite stones, constructed in 1917. chattanathakaralayar of chenkottai was the contractor for the work. the stone pillars failed to stick well to the ground and become firm despite all the engineering skills. a perplexed god fearing contractor made an offering to the goddess by donating the 'anapandal', when everything was made all right. this historical fact is inscribed in the stone laid in the temple.  sree kumara bhajana devaswom temple sree kumara bhajana devaswom temple is located on a small hill at the heart of muvattupuzha town. it is managed by the sndp union, muvattupuzha. lord shiva and lord murugan have equal importance here. annual temple festival called "kumbha pooya mahotsavam" is very famous.  pallikavu bhagavati temple pallikavu bhagavati temple is situated on the banks of muvattupuzha river. the temple is dedicated to 'pallikavilamma.' it is situated off the muvattupuzha-arakuzha road. the divine presence of pallikavilamma is believed to have been radiating from chottinakkara. the temple is more than hundred years old.  mattapili sri. krishna temple sri. krishna temple is dedicated to lord krishna. it is situated on the banks of muvattupuzha river, off the muvattupuzha-arakuzha road. its name is mattapilli sree krishna swamy temple. this temple is hundreds of years old. it is believed that its by the brahmins who fled in fear of tippu sulthan from malabar placed their lord in this place. there is goddess kali with krishna in this temple.  sivankunnu temple this temple of shiva, situated at a great height, is almost as old as the one at the confluence. sangharakshita mentions this place too in his book. it has almost 108 steps  ramakrishna math this math is known locally for long as sri ramakrishna ashrama. it is situated on a little hillock
called ashramam kunnu and was founded in 1931 on behalf of ramakrishna mission by swami nirmalananda who was one of the direct disciples of ramakrishna paramahamsa. though some renovation work was done between 2006 and 2008, this math still exudes an old world charm. this math has paid host to a number of noted monks of the ramakrishna mission starting with swami nirmalananda. they include swami niranjanananda (junior), swami sailajananda (both disciples of swami nirmalananda) and others.  swami bhajanananda, in his pre monastic days, was residing in a relative's house near puzhakkarakavu bhagavati temple and working in the agriculture department. he wished to become a monk and came to this math. he was sent to swami agamananda of kalady ramakrishna math who sent him to swami yatishwarananda of bangalore math. swami chitswarupananda (1948-78) and swami purushottamananda (1978-1997) managed the ashrama as instructed by ramakrishna mission. here stayed and worked for about fifteen months in 1947-48, the future sangharakshita and buddharakshita as angarika dharmapriya and angarika satyapriya. in his books `thousand petalled lotus: the indian journey of an english buddhist' and `the rainbow road' (both having many common chapters) - sangharakshita devotes three very informative chapters to the sights he saw and experienced here. this began as a branch of tiruvalla centre of ramakrishna mission and at present is a sub-center of ramakrishna math, belur math under the direct administrative control of its branch center at kalady. after swami purushottamananda's demise in 1997, swami paramananda was matadhipathi here for a few months, after which swami bhadrananda puri took charge and continued for eight years till he officially handed over the charge to swami atmamaswarupananda, a monk of ramakrishna order deputed from the ramakrishna math headquarters at belur math. between 2006 and 2008 swami sampurnananda was in charge. swami akshayatmananda is presently in charge since 2010.  kizhakkekara sri dharma sastha temple this temple is located in kizhakkekara road adjacent to nirmala medical centre. lord ayyappa, lord shiva, lord ganapathy, goddess durga, goddess bhadra are also being worshipped here. there are separate sree kovils for navagraha. this temple comes under sri dharma sastha temple trust.  nettorkottu
vanadurga devi temple this temple is located very close to the muvattupuzha town on muvattupuzha-piravom road, locally known as nettorkottu kavu. the main deity of this temple is the goddess vanadurga. lord ayyappa, lord shiva, lord vishnu and naga (sarppam) are also being worshipped here. there are separate sree kovils for lord shiva and lord vishnu . this temple comes under the travancore devaswom board.  churches muvattupuzha is a major center for syrian christians (commonly known as nasrani) in kerala. syrian christians of muvattupuzha include syro-malabar catholic, syro-malankara catholic, jacobite and malankara orthodox. important churches in the region are:  kadamattom church kadamattom church is the oldest church in this region and is situated 10 km west on route to ernakulam. kadamattathu kathanar is a historical legend who became famous all over kerala for his magical powers and he established his own tradition in magic called kadamattathu sambradayam.  marth mariam syro-malabar catholic forane church marth mariam syro-malabar catholic forane church is in arakuzha village, 6 km from muvattupuzha. it was established in 999 a.d.  holy magi syro-malabar catholic forane church  holy magi syro-malabar catholic forane church, a syrian catholic church situated in the centre of the city. the church is under the syro-malabar catholic diocese of kothamangalam  the syrian church located at the post office junction is known as holy magi church. in the first quarter of the 19th century, after circuit to the northern region, the king's administrators were returning to south in 'manchal' accompanied by the pedestrian forces. when they reached muvattupuzha it was getting dark. they had to reach koothattukulam, the nearby inn for their stay. the team was upset due to lack of adequate lamps. geevarghese achan of arakuzha pittapillil family helped them by arranging torches made of dried coconut leaves. as an expression of gratification for this, the 'adhikari' recommended achan to the king. achan was invited to the palace and honoured with a 'vadi and pidi' (stick with a grip). considering of goodwill of achan, king allotted some land for the construction of a church. on 27 july 1820 the ancient form of the present church, a small chapel, came into existence.  apart from the
native christians who mainly hail from arakuzha, kothamangalam and mylakompu foranes, who constitute majority of the laity, syrian christians from kizhakkambalam, palai, mannathoor, veliyannoor, nediyasala and other places migrated to this land and a powerful syrian catholic community made its roots here.  st. joseph's syro-malankara catholic cathedral st. joseph's syro-malankara catholic cathedral is the headquarters of the syro-malankara catholic diocese of muvattupuzha.  christ the king roman latin church christ the king latin church is situated near vazhappilly junction founded in 1925. a latin roman catholic community, though small in number consisting of people originally from varapuzha, kottappuram and kochi lives here.  mosques  muvattupuzha-kothamangalam region is a main centre for mappila muslims. unlike southern districts of kerala, mappila muslims makes up most of the muslim population. thulukkar, the hanafi school of islam followers are majority in southern parts of kerala. in muvattupuzha, thulukkar are concentrated around pettah, near post office junction. muslims include sunni, ahmediyya.   mappila muslims following shafi'i fiqh are the majority in muvattupuzha, kothamangalam talukas. the main masjid is central mahallu jama'ath situated at kavumkara market.   perumattom dasukhi masjid is one of the oldest one. valiyuppappa, a sufi darvesh famous for his treatments and mystical capabilities lived in perumattom. mappila muslims of this region considers perumattom as the main centre from where many of them migrated to nellikkuzhy, kothamangalam and parts of idukki.  petta juma masjid in pettah, near post office junction, muvattupuzha is the main mosque of thulukkar or tamil muslims who follow hanafi fiqh.   ahmediyya mosque is situated in vazhappilly towards pattimattom route.  references  religious buildings and structures in ernakulam district muvattupuzha
events from the year 1791 in russia  incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events  russo-turkish war (1787-1792) continues  july 10: battle of macin  august 11: battle of cape kaliakra   kakhovka founded  pale of settlement established  zoological museum of moscow university founded  births  vladimir fyodorovich adlerberg, general  sergey aksakov, writer  nikolay bestuzhev, navy officer, writer, inventor, painter, decembrist  kapiton pavlov, portrait painter  yekaterina saltykov, courtier  pyotr sokolov (portraitist), portrait painter  alexandru sturdza, diplomat and writer  deaths  prince alexander of kartli (1726-1791), georgian prince  yakov knyazhnin, writer  grigory potemkin (born 1739)  potap kuzmich zaikov, navigator in russian america  references  1791 in the russian empire years of the 18th century in the russian empire
the 2020 united states senate election in iowa was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of iowa, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states and elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections. primaries were held on june 2.  most experts and pollsters considered this race and the concurrent presidential race as a tossup due to incumbent president donald trump's low approval ratings and ernst's own popularity dropping in polls. despite this, ernst was reelected by a larger-than-expected 6.6 points, while trump simultaneously won the state with a similarly unexpected margin of victory. ernst carried an overwhelming majority of the state's counties including many rural ones, while greenfield carried only eight counties: polk, linn, scott, johnson, black hawk, story, cerro gordo, and jefferson.  republican primary  candidates  nominee joni ernst, incumbent u.s. senator  withdrawn paul rieck  endorsements  results  democratic primary  on june 2, 2020, theresa greenfield won the democratic primary with 47.71% of the vote, defeating three other major candidates, including michael t. franken, a retired u.s. navy admiral and former aide to u.s. senator ted kennedy.  greenfield grew up on a small farm where her family raised crops and hogs. she took courses at iowa lakes community college and iowa state university before graduating from minnesota state university, mankato in 1987 with a bachelor's degree in design and human environment. at 24 years old, greenfield's husband, an electrician, was killed in a work accident. she has credited social security, workers' compensation, and family support with helping her through that period, during which she was caring for a one-year-old son and pregnant with a child born five months later.  in 2005, greenfield took a position at the homebuilding company rottlund homes, where she was named president of the iowa division in 2007. in 2012, greenfield became president of the des moines commercial real estate firm colby interests, based in windsor heights, iowa.  candidates  nominee theresa greenfield, businesswoman, candidate for iowa's 3rd congressional district in 2018  eliminated in primary michael t. franken, retired u.s. navy admiral and former aide to u.s. senator ted kennedy kimberly graham, child welfare attorney eddie mauro, businessman, teacher, candidate for iowa's 3rd congressional district in 2018
withdrawn cal woods, journalist and u.s. navy veteran (endorsed michael t. franken) (remained on ballot)  declined  cindy axne, incumbent u.s. representative for iowa's 3rd congressional district (running for reelection, endorsed greenfield)  chet culver, former governor of iowa  deirdre dejear, nominee for secretary of state of iowa in 2018  abby finkenauer, incumbent u.s. representative for iowa's 1st congressional district (running for reelection, endorsed greenfield)  amber gustafson, candidate for the iowa senate in 2018 (endorsed greenfield) rita hart, former state senator and nominee for lieutenant governor of iowa in 2018 (running in iowa's 2nd congressional district)  rob hogg, state senator  liz mathis, state senator  rob sand, iowa state auditor  j.d. scholten, nominee for iowa's 4th congressional district in 2018 (running in iowa's 4th congressional district) tom vilsack, former governor of iowa and former u.s. secretary of agriculture stacey walker, linn county supervisor (endorsed graham) steve warnstadt, former state senator and intelligence officer in the iowa army national guard  debates  endorsements  polling  results  other candidates  libertarian party  nominee  rick stewart, libertarian nominee for the 2018 iowa secretary of agriculture election and independent candidate for the 2014 united states senate election in iowa  independents  declared  suzanne herzog, economist and former er nurse  general election  major media described the campaign as one of the most likely to decide control of the senate after the 2020 election. polls conducted after the primary showed a close contest between greenfield and ernst, with neither candidate leading by more than 4 points.  through june 2020, greenfield had raised $11.5 million, compared to $14.6 million for ernst but by september, greenfield had pulled ahead, raising $40.0 million compared to $21.6 million for ernst. the race was expected to be the most expensive in the state's history, and the second most expensive senate race in the united states, after the 2020 united states senate election in north carolina, where cal cunningham challenged thom tillis.  debate  predictions  endorsements  polling  graphical summary  aggregate polling  with eddie mauro  with joni ernst and generic democrat  with joni ernst and generic opponent  with generic republican and generic democrat  results  while greenfield flipped one county that ernst had won in 2014, carrying scott county, ernst flipped seven counties that were previously won by then-representative
bruce braley, winning clinton, des moines, dubuque, floyd, howard, lee and worth counties.  results by congressional district  see also  2020 iowa elections  notes partisan clients  voter samples  references  further reading  external links   (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)   official campaign websites  joni ernst (r) for senate  theresa greenfield (d) for senate  suzanne herzog (i) for senate   rick stewart (l) for senate  2020 iowa united states senate
louis dausset (september 3, 1866 - january 22, 1940) was a french politician. he served as a member of the french senate from 1920 to 1927, representing seine.  references  1866 births 1940 deaths people from tarbes college stanislas de paris alumni french senators of the third republic senators of seine (department) officiers of the legion d'honneur members of the ligue de la patrie francaise
antoine de laroque (1672, marseille - 3 october 1744, paris) was an 18th-century french librettist.  biography  when laroque was constable of the royal guard, a cannonball smashed his leg during the battle of malplaquet, and they had to cut it off above the knee. he left the service with the cross of  chevalier of the order of saint louis and a pension from louis xiv.  in 1721, he took over the privilege of the mercure de france, to which his brother jean de laroque also participated and perfected it, writing in collaboration with fuzelier and dufresny, from june 1721 up to 31 october 1744. when dufresny died in october 1724, laroque was left alone to administer the review and d'antoine also participated.   he also wrote an opera, theone, five-act tragedie lyrique, paris, ribou, (1715). abbott pellegrin under the name laroque gave the theater his tragedy medee et jason, which was even printed several times under his own name from 1716 until 1760.  antoine laroque was also known for being a great collector, particularly of paintings. in 1745, gersaint, the famous art dealer of the pont notre-dame, wrote a catalog of chevalier laroque's cabinet. among the 300 paintings from his collection were the flight into egypt by paul veronese, a st. george by rubens, drinkers and auctioneers by terburg, a lady by gerard nesscher, bathsheba leaving her bath by nicolas poussin, two landscapes by claude lorrain, three paintings by wouwerman, two paintings by antoine watteau etc. all these paintings would be sold at a modest price, probably given the disasters of france.  references  sources       antoine de leris, dictionnaire portatif historique et litteraire des theatres (leris), paris, c. a. jombert, .  joseph-marie querard, la france litteraire, t. 4, paris, firmin didot, 1830, .  external links   antoine de laroque on data.bnf.fr  his plays on cesar  writers from marseille 1672 births 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 18th-century french journalists french military personnel of the war of the spanish succession french opera librettists knights of the order of saint louis 1744 deaths french art collectors
we're all somebody from somewhere is the debut solo studio album by american singer-songwriter steven tyler. the album was released on july 15, 2016, by dot records.  critical reception  we're all somebody from somewhere received generally mixed reviews from music critics. at metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 62 based on 12 reviews, which indicates "generally favorable reviews".  commercial performance in the united states, the album debuted at number 19 on the billboard 200, with 18,000 album equivalent units in its first week. it also debuted at number 1 on the top country albums. with 16,800 pure album sold.  the album has sold 50,700 copies in the united states as of january 2017.  track listing  notes   signifies a co-producer   signifies an additional producer  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2016 debut albums steven tyler albums albums produced by t bone burnett albums produced by marti frederiksen albums produced by dann huff country albums by american artists dot records albums
peter urusov or ouroussoff may refer to:   peter arslanovich urusov, a tatar prince who killed false dmitry ii in 1610  pyotr vasilyevich ouroussoff, co-founder of the bolshoi ballet in 1776
the royal commission on the toronto jail and custodial services, also known as the shapiro commission, was a public inquiry into the treatment of prisoners and the training of correctional officers in the province of ontario, particularly toronto jail. with recommendations from the ministry of correctional services, the executive council of ontario presented the matter to the chief justice of ontario.  chief justice george alexander gale appointed honorable judge b. barry shapiro as the commissioner in 1974 who presented its recommendations to the lieutenant governor of ontario pauline mills mcgibbon in 1978.  the commission's inquest focused on four areas of interest: firstly, the mistreatment of inmates in particular the use of unnecessary force and physical assaults. second, the role and functions of a correctional officer at the institution. third, the service demands on the staff within the institution. fourth, the methods of recruitment and training of the institution.  the commission reported investigations and recommendations and that were broken down into four volumes. there were over 70 recommendations made in respects to the manner which inmates were treated and staff development.  references    shapiro, b. barry. report of the royal commission on the toronto jail and custodial services. vol. 1-4 queen's printer for ontario, 1978. ()  royal commissions in canada imprisonment and detention 1978 documents political history of ontario
stefan stoev (born 1977 in sofia) is an austrian entrepreneur, philanthropist and supporter of the arts.  education stoev has a phd degree in information technology and economics, a master's degree in international finance and economics, a bachelor's degree in international economic affairs, and a professional degree in foreign affairs and linguistics.  life and philanthropy stoev served 2004/2005 as austrian gedenkdienst  representative at the holocaust memorial museum in washington, d.c. during this time he was engaged in scientific research at the center for advanced and holocaust studies, maintained contact to holocaust survivors and wrote on the book time bridge/zeitbrucke. upon his return in austria he founded the cultural organization idea society (society for international development and enhancement of arts). stoev engaged in cultural and art diplomacy, and promotes the intercultural dialogue by supporting austrian and international artists worldwide. in 2008 he initiated the international art project pangaea in support of unicef. the outcome of this project was the creation of the art collection for world peace, which since then is on travel exhibitions on all continents. stoev established cooperations with peace museums and international topic related organizations. followed by annual events as artistic tribute to the international day of peace and numerous lectures from stoev on conferences at the united nations and at the european parliament. in 2011 stoev was nominated as ambassador for peace from the universal peace federation. for his contribution to  the promotion of arts and culture stoev was honored in 2012 with the award of the bulgarian ministry of culture. among others stoev realized the eu funded project for harmonization of culture and arts between austria and turkey. also in 2012 he participated as juror at the international art for peace contest for young people from the united nations office for disarmament affairs and the harmony for peace foundation. in the same year stoev organized in vienna an exhibition for the sculptress and diplomat gabriela von habsburg on art diplomacy between the danube and the black sea. in cooperation with the academic council of the united nations system (acuns) in vienna, the universal peace federation (upf) and the austro-brazilian ngo abrasa, stoev organized with the idea society at the vienna international centre (vic) the conference on "culture as a basic element for sustainable development and human rights". stoev helped for the successful theatre premiere of william shakespeare's of the american drama group in vienna and is since then regular supporter of the annual international event at the stadtpalais liechtenstein.  in 2013 stoev organized an international exhibition on humanity, with art works of :de:
manfred bockelmann and pangaea, moderated by danielle spera. stoev applied on behalf of the idea society the ngo special consultative status with the ecosoc of the united nations economic and social council (ecosoc), which was granted in 2014 upon the decision of the committee on ngos in new york city.  as entrepreneur stoev is the co-founder and ceo of the austrian mining company minex and angel investor in the green hi-tech company hfx.  in 2021 stoev was appointed as european climate pact ambassador in austria to the european commission, european union.  other wikis   wiki fr  publications  women of society lea fuchs and ljubomir dimov 2015   любомир димов - българският маистор на цветовете и пъстрите мотиви придобил международно признание, black&white magazine, 10.10.2014  bringing cultures together through the arts to facilitate cultural diplomacy in the context of the european project, international conference on cultural diplomacy in the eu, brussel, 2011  zeitbrucke - generationskontakte, geschichtseinblicke, freundschaften, 2005  "i wanted to be sent to europe to participate in the struggle against the nazis." a conversation with german survivor gerald schwab, jewish news, 4.01.2007  references  living people 1977 births bulgarian emigrants to austria austrian philanthropists austrian businesspeople museum people
waldorf astoria amsterdam is a five-star luxury hotel in amsterdam, part of hilton worldwide.  waldorf astoria amsterdam was opened on may 1, 2014. it is the 25th hotel of the waldorf astoria hotels & resorts. it is located at herengracht 542-556, between the utrechtsestraat and reguliersgracht, on the unesco heritage protected herengracht (gentlemen's canal).  the hotel has a historical exterior comprising six monumental 17th and 18th century double-front canal palaces featuring a staircase built by the architect of louis xiv, daniel marot. there are 93 rooms and suites overlooking the city's canal or the courtyard garden. the interior is designed by ga design from london.  history of buildings herengracht 542 and 544 building were built in 1687 under one roof.  in 1672 herengracht 546 was built for mr. william sautijn.  herengracht 548, 550 and 552 were built in 1665. number 548 was for cornelis backer, former board ships and, number 550 for mayor henry hooft gerritsz and no. 552 for dirck van der waeijen. in 1920, 548 and 550 were combined and converted into an office. number 548 remained in the family until 1720, then it was sold to nicholas witsen and in 1747 to gerrit hooft danielsz.  herengracht 554 was built in 1666 as a double house. in 1716 the former mayor quirijn van strijen moved to live there, and in 1741 his son jacob followed him. the building changed owners over the years as follows - nicolaes geelvinck lived there after 1756, until 1770 when the house was sold to mr. mayor william huygens.  herengracht 556 was built in 1670 and it was also a double house and henry hooft was the principal. in 1738 the two houses were replaced by the current building, where merchant james loten moved. in 1930 it became a branch of the national life insurance. they allowed the restoration of the facade.  restaurants the waldorf astoria amsterdam offers several dining options. the first restaurant opened in the waldorf astoria amsterdam is called spectrum (amsterdam). it is a fine dining restaurant that is awarded two michelin stars.  references  art nouveau architecture in amsterdam hotels in amsterdam
george curriden baldwin (may 5, 1917 - january 23, 2010) was an american theoretical and experimental physicist.  he was a professor of nuclear engineering at rensselaer polytechnic institute and a scientist working at the general electric research laboratory and at the los alamos national laboratory.  he wrote a book on nonlinear optics and authored or co-authored over 130 technical papers.  education and career  george c. baldwin earned his b.s. degree in physics from kalamazoo college in 1939 and his ph.d. in physics from the university of illinois at urbana-champaign in 1943.  his ph.d. thesis was on the nuclear photo-effect; his thesis advisor was donald william kerst.  continuing at illinois, he taught college-level physics in the army specialized training program during world war ii.  he joined general electric research laboratory in schenectady, new york, as a physicist working on industrial research and development (1944-1967).  he directed the argonaut research reactor facility at argonne national laboratory, conducting neutron measurements and developing operational procedures (1958-1959).  he was a professor of nuclear engineering at rensselaer polytechnic institute in troy, new york (1967-1977).  he continued his research at the los alamos national laboratory in los alamos, new mexico (1977-1987).  scientific contributions  baldwin's fields of research included photo-nuclear reactions with  bremsstrahlung radiation from electron accelerators, resulting in the discovery of the giant dipole resonance; orbit dynamics of synchrotrons; nuclear reactor physics; electrical propulsion for space; low-energy electron scattering in gases; nonlinear optics; and investigation of the feasibility of a gamma-ray laser.  his early research involved perfecting ge's 100 mev betatron for use as an x-ray source. using  bremsstrahlung radiation from the betatron beam, he and g. s. klaiber excited uranium nuclei and observed a prominent peak at about 20 mev in the cross section for photons (1947), (1948), which was not anticipated by the nuclear physics community.  this "giant dipole resonance" discovered by baldwin and klaiber was subsequently explained theoretically by edward teller and maurice goldhaber, and others.  baldwin's research with low-energy electron scattering on noble gases extended the scattering cross-section data to very low energies, well under 1 ev (1967), a technically difficult task.  his book "an introduction to nonlinear optics" (1969) helped bridge the gap in knowledge
between specialists in the field and engineers and technical managers involved with this new technology.  baldwin, along with ge colleagues, developed ideas for nuclear radiation analogues of the optical laser, now known as the gamma-ray laser, or gamma-ray amplification by stimulated emission of radiation (graser).  he launched international efforts to define and quantify issues facing the development of this advanced idea, working with many academic colleagues, including r. v. khokhlov and v. i. gol'danskii of the ussr and j. c. solem of los alamos, opening an entirely new field of physics and making bold, creative attempts to bring the concept to fruition (1963), (1965), (1975).  he authored an early bibliography of literature on the problem of developing gamma-ray lasers, covering the period 1917 through 1979 (1979).  baldwin investigated methods for detecting nuclear stimulated emission, seeking to demonstrate coherent emission from nuclear states, but establishing that a number of innovative ideas were unworkable.  he and his colleagues identified criteria necessary for the process of laser action at gamma-ray energies. he collaborated on theoretical issues, on experiments to demonstrate isomer separation by selective photoionization (1983), and on modeling of the kinetics of gamma-ray lasers.  decades of his gamma-ray laser work, together with that of others, is assessed in a paper (1981) and a second assessment concentrates on later work on recoilless gamma-ray lasers (1997). these review papers contain an extensive list of references.  he collaborated with j. c. solem on research on the use of x-ray microholography to image biological specimens (1982).  personal life  baldwin's 57-year marriage to his wife winifred, who collaborated as copy editor and typist for many of his publications, produced three children and seven grandchildren, of these three obtained a college degree in physics.  baldwin was an avid amateur astronomer, grinding his own lenses and building his own telescopes; fisherman; self-taught pianist, entertaining friends by playing by ear; and historical researcher.  one of baldwin's notable accomplishments was locating an inscription left by the dominguez-escalante expedition of 1776, discovered originally in 1884 by his father on a surveying expedition in northern arizona.  baldwin organized the 1995/1996 museum of new mexico expeditions that found the escalante inscription and documented this in the journal of the southwest (1999).  publications  books  cited articles  honors and awards    fellow of the american physical
society (1953)   distinguished achievement award, kalamazoo college (1987)  patents   u.s. patent no. 2,331,788.  jan. 20, 1942.  baldwin, g. c.  " magnetic induction accelerator".  u.s. patent no. 2,803,767.  sept. 30, 1952.  baldwin, g. c.; gaerttner, e. r.; yeater, m. l.  "  radiation sources in charged particle accelerators".  u.s. patent no. 2,902,613.  april 9, 1954.  baldwin, g. c.  " adaptation of a high energy electron accelerator as a neutron source".  u.s. patent no. 2,902,604.  sept. 26, 1955.  baldwin, g. c.  " scintillation converter".  references  1917 births 2010 deaths kalamazoo college alumni grainger college of engineering alumni general electric employees rensselaer polytechnic institute faculty los alamos national laboratory personnel theoretical physicists american physicists fellows of the american physical society
the mikoyan pak dp (, ) is a russian programme to develop a stealth interceptor aircraft/heavy fighter under development by mikoyan to replace the mikoyan mig-31 in the russian air force in mid-2020s or mid-2030s. it is often referenced as mikoyan mig-41, because its project code is izd.41, but its official designation has never been given, as russian planes only get their official designation when they are about to enter service. according to the russian defence analyst vasily kashin, the mig-41 would be considered as a 5++ or 6th generation project.  development it was argued at first that the work on the supersonic pak dp mig-41 interceptor was making use of the mig-701 (izdeliye 7.01), mikoyan mig-301 and mikoyan mig-321 projects begun in the 1990s.   as of july 2016, not much information was available apart from the statement that such aircraft is planned for development, no official data was available concerning its capabilities. it was speculated that it could enter service by the mid-2020s or 2030s. as an interceptor, its primary mission was rumored to offset future reconnaissance aircraft currently being developed by the united states of america and china. to achieve the high speeds rumoured for the aircraft, the aircraft would need to be equipped with ramjet or turboramjet engines.  the design of the pak dp was finalized by the end of 2019, at the same time the research work was completed. in 2020, within that research framework, the russian ministry of defense selected the most promising project. work in this area now continues in r&d and with wind tunnel models. ilya tarasenko, the general director of the mig corporation, as well as the head of the sukhoi company, said in an interview in july 2020 that the pak dp will be created on the basis of the mig-31's design   according to izvestia, the pak dp is envisioned to become an interceptor of hypersonic missiles by carrying a multifunctional long-range interceptor missile system (mpkr dp) that will dispense several sub-missiles in order to increase the chance of intercepting hypersonic weapons. the pak dp is also intended to carry anti-satellite missiles.  in january 2021, rostec corporation, the owner of mikoyan, announced that the pak dp had now entered the development phase, saying "development of the next generation of interceptor fighters has already begun."  design in an interview for
russia today, the director general of rsk mig, ilya tarasenko, speculated that it would be a new construction capable of mach number 4-4.3, equipped with an anti-missile laser, and said would be able to operate at very high altitudes and even in near space.  he also stated that it could be transformed into an unmanned version later. if purchased by the russian air force, he said that the first production pak dp would be completed in 2025.  the aircraft may cruise at speeds of at least  and fly at high altitudes (at levels between the stratopause and the tropopause, i.e. below 45,000 meters and above 12,000 meters) to cover the most amount of russia's very large territory in the shortest period of time. it could use a variant of the izdeliye 30 engines currently under development for the su-57. it was said that the pak dp will use some stealth technology.  an unmanned version is also under consideration.  see also  bae systems tempest f/a-xx program next generation air dominance future combat air system mitsubishi f-x  references  mikoyan aircraft proposed aircraft of russia proposed military aircraft soviet and russian fighter aircraft stealth aircraft twinjets
the sob (turkish: hıckırık) is a 1953 turkish drama film directed by atıf yılmaz.  cast  muzaffer tema  nedret guvenc as nalan   temel karamahmut  leman akcatepe  osman altınay  muazzez arcay  ihsan askın  abdullah atac  fatma bilgen  karin davutoglu  belkis dilligil  muazzez dogan  bilsev etus  resit gurzap  alev koral  settar kormukcu  tunc nuyan  nejat saydam  dursune sirin  yetvart yeretzyan  lebibe cakin   feridun colgecen  references  bibliography  gonul donmez-colin. the routledge dictionary of turkish cinema. routledge, 2013.  external links    1953 films 1953 drama films films based on turkish novels turkish-language films turkish films turkish romantic drama films turkish black-and-white films films set in istanbul films shot in istanbul films shot in rome films about cancer
todd meagher is an american entrepreneur and songwriter.  career throughout the 1980s meagher's company todd meagher music had a co-publishing songwriter deal with warner/chappell music co-writing songs with artists including night ranger, gorky park, tuff (band), eddie money, alice cooper, white lion, warrant, julian lennon and vince neil (motley crue).  in, 2009, meagher launched therevolution a full-service, artist-focused, music services company with john lennon's son julian lennon and michael birch.  in 2010, meagher again partnered with lennon and birch to relaunch mystore, an e-commerce website originally developed in 2005 to provide artists with a free web store to sell their music and merchandise via a mystore button on their myspace page. also in 2010, meagher and his company sued the agency group, seeking $20 million in damages. the case was settled in 2017.  in 2019, meagher sold mystore.com to mike lindell owner of mypillow who re-launched the site as a "patriotic rival to amazon".  affiliations meagher is a voting member of the national academy of recording arts and sciences, which organizes the grammy awards, as well as being affiliated with the warner chappell music and broadcast music, inc. as a writer and music publisher.  references  external links    1961 births living people
the 2016 jiangxi international women's tennis open was a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. it was the third edition of the event, in the international category of the 2016 wta tour and took place in nanchang, china, from august 1 - august 7, 2016.  points and prize money  point distribution  prize money  singles main draw entrants  seeds   rankings are as of july 25, 2016.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   lu jiajing   yang zhaoxuan   zheng wushuang    zhang yuxuan  the following player received entry by a protected ranking:   tereza mrdeza  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   nicha lertpitaksinchai   lu jingjing    junri namigata   peangtarn plipuech   storm sanders   zhang ying  the following player received entry by a lucky loser spot:   han na-lae  withdrawals  before the tournament   zarina diyas → replaced by  elitsa kostova   magda linette → replaced by  han na-lae   katerina siniakova → replaced by  daniela hantuchova   wang qiang → replaced by  marina melnikova  doubles main draw entrants  seeds   rankings are as of july 25, 2016.  other entrants the following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:   chang kai-chen /  duan yingying   sun ziyue /  zhu aiwen  champions  singles    duan yingying def.   vania king 1-6, 6-4, 6-2  doubles    liang chen /  lu jingjing def.  shuko aoyama /  makoto ninomiya, 3-6, 7-6(7-2), [13-11]  references  2016 2016 wta tour 2016 in chinese tennis december 2016 sports events in china  january 2016 sports events in china
someone is waiting for you (the greater mother love song) is a world war i song written and composed by al piantadosi. the song was first published in 1917 by al. piantadosi & co., inc.  in new york, ny.the sheet music cover features an older woman sitting by an open door of a rustic home.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .   1917 songs songs of world war i songs written by al piantadosi
antonio gandolfi (february 20, 1835 - march 20, 1902) was an italian soldier and politician. he was the 2nd italian governor of eritrea. he was a recipient of the silver medal of military valor.  in june 1890 francesco crispi, president of the council, appointed him governor of eritrea.  references  policarpo guaitoli, ricordanze patrie. miscellanea di notizie carpigiane, carpi, pederzoli e rossi, 1882-1883, vol. 2, famiglia gandolfi;  angelo del boca, gli italiani in africa orientale. dall'unita alla marcia su roma, roma-bari, mondadori, 1976;  nicola labanca, la politica della memoria. le carte inedite di antonio gandolfi, 'governatore civile e militare della colonia eritrea''', «ricerche storiche», xix (1989), n. 2, pp. 375-402;  angelo del boca, antonio gandolfi, in dizionario biografico degli italiani, roma, istituto della enciclopedia italiana, vol. 52 (1999), pp. 157-159.  external links  biografia e scheda isaar (cpf) di antonio gandolfi - biblioteca dell'archiginnasio di bologna   scheda isad(g) del fondo antonio gandolfi - biblioteca dell'archiginnasio di bologna   mostra documentaria in rete eritrea 1885-1898. fotografi, generali e geografi sulle sponde del mar rosso. gli inizi della politica coloniale italiana'' della biblioteca dell'archiginnasio di bologna   1835 births 1902 deaths 19th-century italian politicians italian military personnel recipients of the silver medal of military valor recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus 19th-century italian military personnel
the 2015 turk telecom izmir cup was a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. it was the eighth edition of the tournament which is part of the 2015 atp challenger tour. it took place in izmir, turkey between 21 and 27 september 2015.  singles main draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of september 14, 2015.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   sarp agabigun   altug celikbilek   barıs erguden   barkın yalcınkale  the following player entered into the singles main draw as a protected ranking:   marco chiudinelli  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   petros chrysochos   ilya ivashka   daniel masur    aleksandre metreveli   the following players received entry as a lucky loser:   michal konecny   maximilian neuchrist   andrei vasilevski  champions  singles   lukas lacko def.  marius copil, 6-3, 7-6(7-5)  doubles   saketh myneni /  divij sharan vs.  malek jaziri /  denys molchanov, 7-6(7-5), 4-6, 0-0 retired  external links official website    turk telecom izmir cup 2015 in turkish tennis
aleksa vukanovic (; born 18 june 1992) is a serbian professional footballer who plays as a forward, most recently for serbian club red star belgrade.  club career  early career vukanovic started his career with hometown team hercegovac. later he moved to csk celarevo, where he played in the serbian league vojvodina between 2010 and 2014. in summer 2014, he moved to ofk backa, where he made serbian first league debut against sloga kraljevo on 23 august 2014. next summer, vukanovic returned to csk after club promotion in the first league.  napredak vukanovic joined napredak krusevac in summer 2016. on 22 july 2016, he scored a goal in his debut for napredak in a 2-2 tie against red star belgrade. on 27 october 2018, he scored a goal with his heel in a 1-1 tie against partizan. by november that year, he was the top scorer in the entire league.  red star belgrade on 18 january 2019, vukanovic signed a three-year contract with red star belgrade. on 27 august 2019, he scored a goal in the champions league play-off in a 1-1 tie against young boys, which resulted in red star's qualification to the champions league that season.  career statistics  honours red star belgrade serbian superliga (3): 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 serbian cup: 2020-21  references  external links        1992 births living people people from backa palanka association football forwards serbian footballers fk csk celarevo players ofk backa players fk napredak krusevac players serbian first league players serbian superliga players
kbcz is a class a radio station broadcasting a community radio format to boulder creek, california.  history kbcz began broadcasting on july 15, 2016.  see also list of community radio stations in the united states  references  external links    community radio stations in the united states 2012 establishments in california bcz radio stations established in 2012
pentagonaster pulchellus, commonly known as the biscuit star or sometimes the jewelled star is a species of starfish endemic to new zealand, where it is common in cook strait and around the coasts of the south island. it has also been recorded from the chatham islands and in the campbell plateau down to the snares islands.  description and habitat the dorsal surface of the biscuit star is studded with hard smooth plates, which enlarge along the margins and at the ends of the five arms into convex, oval-shaped shields. it is one of the most colourful sea stars in nz, appearing in red, orange, brown, or a silvery purple. the ventral side is a patterned mesh of white over light grey, with yellow tube feet. p. pulchellus frequents seaweed beds, rocky and muddy bottoms from low intertidal down to 300m.  references  goniasteridae echinoderms of new zealand starfish described in 1840
thomas hampson (1839 - 25 november 1918) was an english author and local historian.  life he was born in horwich in 1839, the youngest child of henry and mary hampson. he was baptised at holy trinity church, horwich on 10 november 1839. his father died in may 1842, leaving his mother to bring up the children on her own. he started work at wallsuches bleach works in horwich when he was seven-years-old. he married sarah jane aldred at holy trinity church, horwich on 2 april 1866. they had three sons: john henry, john fox, and benjamin, and three daughters: clara, mary ann, and eleanor. after his marriage, he continued to be employed at the bleach works as a finisher, but between 1877 and 1881 he lost a number of fingers on his left hand in a works accident which seems to have forced him into a clerical career. he was a secretary at the short-lived red moss ironworks, horwich. then employed as a cashier, first at scot lane colliery, blackrod, then at fourgates colliery, wingates, westhoughton.  it was around this period of his life he wrote a number of notable local history books. he published history of blackrod in 1882, horwich: its history, legends, and church in 1883, and history of rivington in 1893.    after horwich works were built by the lancashire and yorkshire railway (l&yr) in 1886, he was employed as a labourer in the iron foundry, then as a locomotive stores keeper.  his wife, sarah jane, died in april 1907, aged 64, and eleven years later thomas died at bolton royal infirmary on 25 november 1918, aged 79. they are both buried in holy trinity churchyard, horwich.  notes  references  bibliography  external links  horwich: its history, legends, and church (archive.org)  history of rivington (archive.org)  1839 births 1918 deaths people from horwich english local historians
persia praecox is a species of phillipsiid proetid trilobite from tournaisian-aged marine strata in what is now eastern iran.  etymology the generic name refers to "persia," the old name of iran, the country where the type specimen was found.  the specific name refers to how it is the earliest known and most primitive phillipsiid of the subfamily cummingellinae, i.e., that it is the progenitor of cummingellinae.  references   carboniferous trilobites philipsidae proetida genera
zhang yuxuan was the defending champion, but lost in the first round to shuko aoyama.  wang qiang won the title, defeating luksika kumkhum in the final, 7-5, 6-2.  seeds  main draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references   main draw  itf women's circuit - wuhan - singles wuhan world tennis tour
dhaani is a pakistani television drama serial that first aired on geo tv on 12 july 2016 and ended on 14 february 2017. it is written by hashim nadeem, produced by babar javed and directed by ali faizan. it stars sami khan and madiha imam.  dhaani revolves around sameer (sami khan), who has a rich father. sameer has a fiance, maya (shezray) and parties hard, fighting for dhaani (madiha imam) the love of his life, an innocent humble girl, who lives with her father and phupho (aunt).  plot dhaani lives with her father kaleem ud din, aunt bee jee, her cousin raja and sister shaani in an old neighbourhood in lahore. sameer, who is studying abroad, returns to pakistan and lives with his mother, father rehan seth, brother tanveer and his sister-in-law in an elite, suburban neighbourhood in lahore. kaleem ud din has been working for rehan seth's family's business for forty-seven years, and knows sameer's family very well. sameer's family also own a house in the old neighbourhood right next to dhaani's home. sameer's father's business has an alliance with the business of his friend, a politician, riasat, whose daughter maya is sameer's best friend. rehan seth is running for local elections in the old neighbourhood alongside riasat.  dhaani and sameer first see each other during a kite competition in the old neighbourhood. they meet face to face after dhaani climbs down from her rooftop to get empty wine bottles from the rooftop at sameer's house who finished having a party. sameer catches dhaani trespassing and makes a bet with dhaani who accepts, and tells her that if she doesn't fulfill the bet, he is going to eat her chicken, babra shareef. dhaani fails in fulfilling the bet and whilst out with bee jee, dhaani and her sister shaani meet up with sameer and instead of giving her chicken to sameer to eat, she takes him to have chaat. soon after bee jee calls both dhaani and shaani. before dhaani can run away, sameer grabs dhaani and give her his own mobile phone on which he has already added his number. dhaani and sameer spend the next couple of days talking over the phone in secret. dhaani has to hide the phone because phones in her house are banned and sameer talks to dhaani when his fiance maya isn't nearby or he'll get into trouble. after having frequently spoken on the phone and met each other in person a few times, dhaani
begins to fall in love with sameer, although this love is not reciprocated.  dhaani thinks that sameer wants to marry her and tells him to hurry up and send his parents over so they can marry before someone else does. dhaani is heartbroken when sameer informs her that he only saw her as a friend and nothing more, resulting in dhaani ending whatever they had between them. sameer's and maya's parents then arrange their engagement without notifying sameer beforehand. because of this, sameer's behaviour changes. dhaani is the only thing on his mind. he constantly calls dhaani who keeps telling him to never ring her again and hangs up. dhaani is then engaged to amjad, and their engagement party is arranged on the same day as sameer's and maya's engagement. after the engagements, sameer then goes with his friend to the same rooftop the day he and dhaani met and waits for her. dhaani comes out onto the rooftop without knowing sameer is waiting for her. sameer climbs the ladder leading to dhaani's rooftop and talks to her. they get caught by sameers fiance maya who gets upset. dhaani's father works at rehan seths office. because dhaani and sameer got caught, dhaani's father kaleem ud din loses his job. dhaani gets slapped by her father and is told she is never to meet him again. kaleem ud din finds amjad, dhaani's future husband. dhaani's engagement party takes place the same day sameer has his. sameer who is going crazy about dhaani not being his friend, begins to fall in love with her, and breaks his engagement off with maya. after finding out that kaleem ud din's daughter was the reason why sameer broke off his engagement with maya, rehan seth, out of anger, fires kaleem ud din. this results in kaleem ud din losing respect in his neighbourhood, to which he blames sameer. riasat is also angry with sameer for breaking off his engagement with his daughter, and takes his vengeance out on sameer's father by kicking him out of his political party. rehan seth now feels that sameer is the reason for all of this, and never wishes to see him again unless he marries maya.  days later sameer packs his bags, leaving behind all his valuables, passport and credit cards, and sets off to find a job. he goes and finds a man called babu botal who lives in the same neighbourhood as dhaani. babu botal is more understanding and sympathetic of sameer's situation than anyone else in the neighbourhood, since he himself had been in a similar one years ago.
sameer is hated by everyone in the neighbourhood. he goes to dhaani's house and tells her that he loves her, but dhaani tells him that it's too late to say that and closes the door. babu botal finds sameer a job coincidently at the same place dhaani's fiance works as the boss. sameer and amjad meet for the first time. sameer doesn't know that amjad is dhaani's fiance and amjad doesn't know what happened between dhaani and sameer. sameer starts working at his new job without knowing that kaleem ud din comes now and then to meet amjad. sameer is thrashed by dhaani's cousin raja and his group. after seeing kaleem ud din at the office, sameer gives a resignation letter to amjad. sameer soon starts earning the trust of the neighborhood after helping everyone out. he also tells the locals to form their own political party and contend the elections themselves, rather than voting for riasat's party. sameer starts teaching english and maths at a school in the neighbourhood. his ex-fiancee soon finds him and tries to bring him back home, but sameer refuses. dhaani arranges to meet with sameer at the local mazar to beg him to go back home and to never see her again, but at the same time, acknowledging that she knows he loves her. raja's friend sees them together and quickly informs raja about this. sameer, now heartbroken, gets beaten up, and intentionally doesn't put up a fight and is nearly killed. raja and his friends get arrested, but are released from prison by sameer. sameer's family hear about this and one by one to the come to meet him in the hospital except his father, rehan seth. they all tell him to come home but sameer again refuses. the only thing sameer wants his father to do is go and ask for forgiveness from kaleem ud din, but his father refuses. amjad learns of sameer and dhaani's situation and goes to dhaani's house to tell her father, after which, he breaks off the engagement with dhaani.  soon after this, sameer is released from the hospital. kaleem ud din decides to get dhaani married to her cousin raja, and asks his sister bee jee for permission, to which she agrees. raja then finds out that dhaani loves sameer and goes to kaleem ud din and asks him to let dhaani and sameer get married, which results in kaleem ud din getting infuriated and slapping raja. riasat finds out that the reason he is losing the elections in the neighbourhood is because of sameer
, and forms a riot to attack sameer but is met with an equal force from the locals to help sameer. maya tells this to sameer's parents. rehan seth goes with his family to kaleem ud din's house and asks for forgiveness, to which dhaani's father accepts. rehan seth also asks for dhaani's hand in marriage for his son sameer. though initially reluctant, kaleem ud din realises that the only way to resolve the issue it to allow sameer and dhaani to have what they want, and so he accepts. sameer's family leave kaleem ud din's house where the whole neighbourhood is outside waiting for an answer. rehan seth tells the news and everyone is overjoyed. the scene then cuts to sameer and dhaani, now married, who are on the rooftop happily together while sameer puts his hand around dhaani and they both enjoy the view from dhaani's roof.  cast   sami khan as sameer madiha imam as dhaani  tauqeer nasir as sheikh kaleem ud din  azra aftab as bee jee  mubarak ali as raja dania enwar as shaani  shezray as maya  mohsin ali as tanveer  kamran mujahid as babu botal asad malik as rehan seth ayesha sana as rehan seth's wife imtiaz ali bhacho bilal mohsin ali khawar raja feroz gulfam khan faheem muzzaffar as amjad  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  references  external links  2016 pakistani television series debuts 2017 pakistani television series endings a&b entertainment   pakistani drama television series urdu-language television shows
the 1954 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college of education, renamed central michigan university in 1959, in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1954 college football season.  in their fourth season under head coach kenneth "bill" kelly, the chippewas compiled an 8-2 record (5-1 against iiac opponents), tied for the iiac championship, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 321 to 107.  the team's statistical leaders included jim king with 399 passing yards, jim podoley with 1,079 rushing yards, and jerry thomas with 121 receiving yards. center dick kackmeister received the team's most valuable player award. four central michigan players (podoley, kackmeister, guard ray figg, and halfback laverne wolf) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  official program, september 11, 1954  1955 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons interstate intercollegiate athletic conference football champion seasons central michigan chippewas football
catherine a. "kate" calder is an american statistician who works as chair of statistics and data sciences at the university of texas at austin. she was previously a professor of statistics at ohio state university. calder earned a bachelor's degree in mathematics from northwestern university in 1999, and completed her ph.d. in statistics from duke university in 2003 under the joint supervision of david higdon and michael l. lavine. she joined the ohio state faculty in 2003, and was promoted to full professor in 2015.  in 2013 she won the young investigator award of the american statistical association (asa), and in 2014 she was elected as a fellow of the asa "for outstanding contributions to the development of bayesian statistical methodology for spatial and spatiotemporal data; for significant multidisciplinary collaborations; for excellence in teaching and mentoring graduate students both in statistics and in other disciplines; and for service to the profession."  references  external links home page  year of birth missing (living people) living people american statisticians women statisticians northwestern university alumni duke university alumni ohio state university faculty fellows of the american statistical association
john pass or paas (c.1783-1832) was an english engraver and murder victim.  life  pass was an established copper plate engraver in pentonville, london. he made plates for the history, civil and ecclesiastical, and survey of the antiquities of winchester (1798-1801) by john milner. john wilkes the london bookseller, who was from winchester,  knew him at the end of the 18th century, and took him on for illustrations of his encyclopaedia londoniensis. pass produced plates for volume 13 of the work.  john paas (name used legally) was murdered in leicester by james cook, in a criminal case that attracted wide attention. he was aged 49, a partner in the firm paas & co. of high holborn, london, engravers. he was in leicester as a travelling salesman of specialist hardware. cook, a printer and bookbinder, was exhibited on a gibbet after being hanged, the last british criminal to be so treated.  paas & co. the firm of c. and a. paas & co. was in business at various holborn addresses in the second half of the 18th century. one of the partners, cornelius paas, an engraver from germany, came to london around 1765.  notes  external links british library, untold lives blog, credit crunch leads to murder 18 october 2011  1832 deaths english engravers male murder victims people murdered in england year of birth uncertain
"hero" is a song by japanese recording artist namie amuro. it was released as a stand-alone single on july 27, 2016 by avex trax and amuro's own label dimension point; it was distributed physically in japan and taiwan, and digitally worldwide. the song was written by ryosuke imai and sunny boy, whilst production and composing was handled by the latter collaborator. originally slated to appear as a b-side track to her previous single "mint", it served as the official japanese theme song to the 2016 summer olympics and paralympics, broadcast by the nhk. alongside this, a b-side track titled "show me what you've got" appeared on the release of "hero".  musically, "hero" is a pop song that incorporates elements of dance music. it is an empowerment anthem, while the lyrical content focuses on themes such as courage, triumph, and faith; the title of the track is a reference to the competitors at the 2016 summer olympics. upon its release, "hero" received positive reviews from music critics, who commended the lyrical content and production of the track. critics also praised its empowerment and its inclusion as a theme song for the olympics.  commercially, the single was successful in japan, peaking at number six on the oricon singles chart, one of her few singles to miss the top five. it performed better on japan's billboard charts, peaking at number one on japan hot 100 and has since spent 59 weeks on the chart. digitally, the single has experienced great longevity over time, receiving a triple platinum certification in april 2018. six music videos were directed by ykbx, and all visually represent the colours and events of the 2016 olympics. to promote the single, "hero" is scheduled to be performed on her 2016-17 live style concert tour.  background and release in march 2016, japanese music publication jame world announced the release of amuro's single "mint", scheduled on may 18, 2016. online publications also reported a new song titled "hero", which was to be included with the physical and digital formats of "mint", but was later removed for unknown reasons. then on march 25, an announcement from japan today revealed that "hero" had been chosen as the nhk broadcasting theme song for the 2016 summer olympics and paralympics in rio de janeiro, brazil, as part of japan's entry to the event. the nhk committee personally chose amuro to perform the theme song based on her "powerful voice that can deeply move people's hearts" and "her popularity among different generations." that same day, amuro
commented that she was "extremely honored" to perform at the olympics and said it was a "dream happening only once in four years."  "hero" was first leaked online in mid-april 2016. the single will be released on july 27, 2016 through avex trax and amuro's own label dimension point as a cd single and dvd single in japan and taiwan, and a digital ep worldwide. it also served as amuro's sixth non-album maxi single, after the release of her may 2016 single "mint". alongside this, the accompanied formats of the single included a b-side track named "show me what you've got". according to amuro, she described the sound of "show me what you've got" as a "cheerful" and "fun" pop song that features instrumentation of synthesizers and marching drums. on june 20, first press issues at cdjapan.com offered special gold packaging of both the cd and dvd format, alongside a b2-size poster.  composition "hero" was written by japanese musician ryosuke imai, and composed, arranged, and produced by sunny boy. the song's instrumentation includes string sections by the yuichiro goto strings assemble, acoustic guitar by singo kubota, and synthesizers and keyboards by imai and sunny boy. the chorus features a choir chanting by: chiaki ishii, kou kuroda, minato kuroda, momoka kimura, imai, sunny boy, yume iwata, and yuto newberry, and was recorded at avex studios in tokyo, japan by fumitoshi nakamura and wataru namifusa; japanese recording artist emyli provides backing vocals throughout the entire track. musically, "hero" was described by amuro as a pop song that incorporates musical elements of dance music. lyrically, the song focuses on themes such as courage and triumph, whist referencing factors of olympians. the nhk committee agreed, labelling the overall song as an "inspirational tune" that serves as a "human anthem to cheer the athletes." the committee further stated that the lyrical content hopefully intertwines with the athletes competing and the audience, stating "athletes face this grand stage once every 4 years. together with this dynamic music, we expect to boost people's expressions, and raise everyone's excitement."  reception "hero" received positive reviews from music critics. a staff member at cd journal was positive in their review, labelling the track "elegan[t]" and full of "passion". similarly, staff editors at sbs popasia australia
commended the track by saying that it's a "driving tune that will get everyone excited and on their feet." commercially, "hero" was moderate success in japan. it debuted at number six on the oricon singles chart, selling 28,879 units; it became her second non-album single after "brighter day" to miss the top five. by the end of july 2016, it was ranked at number 20 with the same unit sales from its first week. the following week, it fell to number 19 with 5,230 unit sold, one of amuro's largest drops on the chart. however, in the wake of the 2016 summer olympics, it rose to number 15 and sold 6,163 units.  the single fared better through digital outlets in japan, peaking at the top spot on the recochoku ringtone charts and japan's itunes store chart. it debuted at number 44, number 48, and number six on the japan hot 100 chart, radio songs chart, and hot singles sales chart, all hosted by billboard. the track entered the top ten in its second week for the first two charts, whilst it slipped to 19 on the latter. in the wake of the 2016 summer olympics, the single rose to number three, number two, and number 14 on all three charts respectively. the b-side track "show me what you've got" reached number 95 on the japan hot 100 chart for a sole week.  music videos  six music videos were produced for the single; the first being a lyric video, which lasts two minutes and 46 seconds. the video includes the artwork of the single, alongside a behind the scenes of the photo shoot for the single cover. then three more music videos were released on amuro's youtube channel, labelled the "green floor", the "blue floor", and the "red floor", all representing the elements of earth, water, and fire. the green floor video opens with amuro sitting on a field of flowers, underneath a large architecture. several vines and flowers are then surrounding large parts of the building, whilst amuro sings the song with back up dancers surrounding her and flower petals falling from the ceiling.  the "blue floor" opens with amuro sitting on a white ledge, surrounded by back up dancers again and underneath the large architecture. the floor is covered with water, and features large floating water bubbles. some scenes during the video features amuro singing the song and standing in the water. the red floor opens with amuro on a large brick platform, and features a large statue holding fire. the
back up dancers start to run up to amuro, whilst she is setting a large object ablaze. it closes with confetti falling from the sky, along with amuro walking around on the platform. in a special commentary by amuro, she stated that each of the three videos symbolises a special trait: the green floor represents "love", the blue floor represents "life", and the red floor represents "passion".  then on july 5, amuro announced a fifth music video entitled the "gold edition". this version featured her walking through a large cityscape with intricate architecture that were made out of gold. according to amuro, she stated that this video is a "special olympic version depicting the road to glory in a world of gold." the full version had broadcast on nhk's website that same day, and also featured a special commentary by amuro. then on july 22, a shortened edit of the dvd version of "hero" was uploaded on amuro's youtube account. the video is a collective of all the single's previous videos, except the lyric video, with additional new scenes of the architecture and of amuro singing the track in different locations, and each of the colors represent the flag of brazil, the country where "hero" will be broadcast. the music video received positive reviews from online publications, including a staff member at sbs popasia australia, labelling the video "surreal" and "colorful".  the music video to the b-side track "show me what you've got" was released on amuro's youtube channel on july 21, which featured amuro and a group of friends enjoying a party on a double-decker bus. the bus was not moving throughout the video shoot, which required two large video screens to be placed outside the bus to show motion shots of driving, whilst the set was decorated with balloons, food, and furniture.  promotion and live performances "hero" will be used as the official japanese theme song for the 2016 summer olympics and 2016 summer paralympics held in rio de janeiro, broadcast by nhk. the single will also be included on the setlist for amuro's 2016 and 2017 live style concert tour, set to begin at the kanagawa-ku, yokohama national hall stadium.  track listing  digital download "hero" - 5:37  cd single "hero" - 5:37 "show me what you've got" - 3.05 "hero" (instrumental) - 5:37 "show me what you've got" (instrumental) - 3.05  dvd single "hero" - 5:37
"show me what you've got"  "hero" (instrumental) - 5:37 "show me what you've got" (instrumental) - 3.05 "hero" (music video) "show me what you've got" (music video)  personnel credits adapted from the cd liner notes of "hero";  recording recorded at avex studios, tokyo, japan by fumitoshi nakamura and wataru namifusa.  credits  namie amuro - vocals, background vocals ryosuke imai - songwriting, composition, arrangement yuichiro goto - arrangement chiaki ishii - chorus vocals kou kuroda - chorus vocals minato kuroda - chorus vocals momoka kimura - chorus vocals sunny boy - chorus vocals, production, composition, arrangement  yume iwata - chorus vocals yuto newberry - chorus vocals singo kubota - guitar  yuichiro goto strings - string arrangements ykbx - art direction, music video director masaya asai - design emyli - backing vocals, vocal direction yasuji maeda - mastering d.o.i. - mixing yasunari kikuma - artwork photography hiromitsu uehara - music video cinematographer ryouhei shingu - music video director hirohisa ishihara - music video producer  charts  weekly charts  monthly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  external links "hero" at namie amuro's official website.  "hero" at dimension point website.   2016 singles namie amuro songs 2016 songs avex trax singles billboard japan hot 100 number-one singles
dean cullen smith (september 27, 1899 - march 4, 1987) was a pioneer american mail pilot, test pilot, flying instructor, antarctic pilot, and airline pilot.  at 17 years of age, he became the youngest flight instructor in u.s. army history. he was a lead pilot for the u.s. postal service's airmail service, and was the first pilot to initiate night air mail flights. he was an executive for many airlines and aircraft companies.  smith was a pilot for the byrd antarctic expedition of 1928-1930 involved in aerial overflights to discover new land that could be claimed for the benefit of the united states. the land was later viewed by byrd and named after his wife. smith was awarded the distinguished flying cross and the congressional gold medal. an antarctic peak bears his name. he was inducted into the new jersey aviation hall of fame in 1986.  early life and education  smith was born in cove, oregon, on september 27, 1899 at his grandparents home. his parents were joshua cullow smith and rhoda harris smith. when he was three years old he traveled with his family to central america where his father's business was headquartered. he would often run away from home to go to his grandmother's to hear her talk about the pioneer days of covered-wagons. as a child, smith attended public schools in oregon. after high school he attended two years at principia college in st. louis, missouri, but did not graduate.  mid life and career   smith enlisted in the aviation section of the united states signal corps in july 1917, several months before his eighteenth birthday. soon after he enlisted, he was promoted to master signal electrician, the highest non-commissioned rank of the us army signal corps.   during this time, he was the youngest enlist to serve in the capacity. in this position he was able to promote himself to be a cadet in ground   at 17, smith became the youngest ever flight instructor in u.s. army history after receiving just under 57 hours of flying instruction. though he volunteered to serve overseas to the front lines with the american expeditionary forces, he was posted as a flying instructor at fort scott. he was promoted to second lieutenant and stayed in the united states for the duration of his service duties.  from august 1918 to january 1919, smith was assigned to gosport instructor's school in san antonio, texas, as an army flight instructor. later he was then transferred to rockwell field in san diego to teach at the pursuit school of instruction,
where he remained until he was discharged in march 1919. subsequently, smith flew as a barnstormer for about a year at carnivals. he also gave five-minute rides, for five dollars each, at county fairs in various states during this time. eventually he destroyed his plane and discontinued these ventures.  smith was instrumental in the inauguration of the air mail service by the united states postal service (usps) in the summer of 1919. he had logged 900 hours of flying time in the army before he joined the u.s. mail service at age nineteen. his first assignment was to fly mail from omaha, nebraska, to california, essentially following the same route as the oregon trail. his mother had taken this trail by covered wagon from council bluffs, iowa, to cove, oregon, in 1871. his mother and grandparents had taken two years to complete their trip, whereas smith flew his route to california within a week with several stops along the way.  he became an official air mail pilot on may 21, 1920. he helped to develop a transcontinental route that included the technology of flying using electronic instruments. the next segment he added later was from cleveland to chicago and that leg was later extended  to omaha.  flying planes carrying air mail, day or night, was hazardous and accidents happened often, more so even than in barnstorming. smith worked as an air mail pilot until august 31, 1927. in his association with usps for more than 7 years, he logged 3764.57 hours and flew 365,719 miles (588,568 km). smith was permanently stationed at bellefonte, pennsylvania, as an air mail pilot starting in may 1920. he often flew from there in and out of cleveland and used the de havilland airco dh-4b aircraft for the delivery of airmail.   smith reported in his autobiography, during one run from omaha to cheyenne, that he had had to ditch into a pasture, landing on a cow. he sent a laconic telegram to his division supervisor at headquarters in college park, maryland, reporting the mishap. crashes were part of the job. engines were unreliable, and pilots were using road maps. unpredictable, bad weather was a constant risk. in the first five years of us post office air mail service the average forced landing was every 800 miles and a pilot was killed about every 80,000 miles. thirty-five pilots died during the postal service's operation of air mail flights; most deaths were between 1920 and 1925.  smith was involved in another incident that scared him
to death. one day when he was flying his normal air mail route from hadley field to cleveland, he caught something out of the corner of his eye that looked like a skyscraper. he pulled back on the control stick to  quickly gain altitude and just missed hitting the u.s. navy airship uss los angeles that was in his direct path. it was a close call of just over a hundred feet.  byrd expedition   in 1928, smith was selected as a pilot for the byrd antarctic expedition of 1928-1930 from a list of over 25,000 pilots. byrd selected smith not only for his all-weather experience, but because of the respect he had for smith's mother after meeting her. smith flew a three-engined ford trimotor plane named the floyd bennett (named in bennett's honor) and headed for the south pole on august 25, 1928. he logged 70 hours of antarctic flying during the time he was at the south pole with admiral richard byrd.  smith flew antarctic missions with bernt balchen, a norwegian, who piloted the first plane to traverse the south pole. he was a pilot involved in aerial overflights to discover new land in antarctica that had not been claimed by other countries. one was a matterhorn-like mountain, and surrounding region which was named marie byrd land in honor of byrd's wife. the mountain range was seen first by smith before byrd saw it. byrd claimed his "pet mountain" for the united states and a narrative of byrd's story, and how the land got his wife's name, was published in the new york times of february 21, 1929.  smith returned from the expedition to his home town in oregon for a festive welcome on july 21, 1930. among the many questions the crowd had for him, the one that stood out was a question about the most impressive thing he experienced while at the south pole. his answer was of the notable silence in the antarctic. he accounted for this by remarking that no woman had ever been there. smith went back to the air mail delivery after being at the south pole for two years with byrd, even setting a record on the notorious "hell stretch" over mountains in pennsylvania.  later life and death   throughout his career in aviation, smith worked for various companies such as learning curtiss company, fairchild aviation, hughes tool company, douglas aircraft company, american airlines, and united airlines at one time or another, in various capacities. he died in maryland on march 4, 1987.  though he stopped flying commercially in 1943, smith continued his work
with the aircraft and aviation industry. in 1973, he returned to new zealand after more than 40 years as a guest for air new zealand on its first flight of mcdonnell douglas dc-10, this time as a passenger. he also was on board for a landing on the tasman glacier, passing through milford sound and mount cook, new zealand.  personal traits  smith was nicknamed "the dean" because of his given name. as an adult he was 6 feet 3 inches tall, weighed 180 pounds, and had black hair. he was known as a man of few words.  some claimed his extreme shyness was unexpected, given his large size. smith married mrs. elizabeth schuyler on january 3, 1931.  societies   smith was a member of the aero club of america. he was also a member of several pioneer aviator groups including the air mail pioneers association and the quiet birdmen. he was the last president of the national air pilots association, as it was subsumed in 1932 into the airline pilots association.  as a pioneer flier, he was named to the curtiss ox5 and aviation halls of fame.  awards and legacy   smith was decorated in 1930 with the distinguished flying cross for assisting byrd. he received the harmon trophy in 1934 for being america's most outstanding aviator. smith was also a recipient of the detroit news aerial trophy. he was a featured aviator in chasing the sun, a public television documentary on commercial aviation, produced by kcet hollywood. smith peak on thurston island, antarctica, is named for smith.  published works  see also   hadley field  notes  references  citations  bibliography  further reading  external links   historic pictures of dean c. smith  smith's honeymoon picture with new bride at miami air races in 1931 dean cullom smith 1899-1987 at earlyaviators.com  1899 births 1987 deaths american aviation record holders american aviators marie byrd land explorers and scientists american test pilots aviators from oregon commercial aviators people from cove, oregon recipients of the distinguished flying cross (united states) united states airmail pilots
oleg konstantinovich komov (; 16 july 1932 - 3 september 1994) was a prominent soviet-russian sculptor and graphics artist.  biography  oleg komov was born on 16 july 1932 in moscow.  1948-1953 studied at moscow art school in memory of 1905.  1953-1959 studied at surikov art institute by nikolai tomsky.  since 1959 member and since 1968 member of the directorial board of artists' union of the ussr.  since 1962 member of cpsu.  since 1975 associate, 1988 member and member of the directorial board of academy of arts of the ussr (imperial academy of arts)  since 1992 professor of sculpture at surikov art institute.  died on 3 september 1994, buried in kuntsevo cemetery in moscow.  work   up to 1970s komov mostly created indoor sculpture works.  starting from mid-1970s komov created dozens of monuments in moscow and other places in the ussr to prominent russian artists, politicians and historical figures.  komov's works usually have laconic forms and chamber scale. his monuments also usually fit the architectural and historical context where they were placed. persons depicted in his monuments typically have details or items relating the person to their historical context.  awards   people's artist of the ussr (1987)  people's artist of the rsfsr (1976)  honoured artist of the rsfsr (1970)  ussr state prize (1981) - for alexey venetsianov monument in vyshny volochyok  государственная премия рсфср имени и. е. репина (1974) - for pushkin monuments  премия имени дж. неру (1988)  works (selected)  links   komov's sculpture "glass", 1958 in tretyakov gallery in moscow   komov's monument to minin in nizhniy novgorod on a 2002 russian post stamp   "soviet sculptor oleg komov" on soviet-art.ru  komov's biography at rusartnet  komov's monuments to russian writers and musicians on russianlandmarks    komov's sculptures at ilovefigiresculpture  savva yamshchikov олег комов: «моя жизнь - творчество» (вспоминая русского мастера)  морозов в. ваятель. // наш современ
ник. - 2003. - № 4.  скульптор олег комов. радио маяк, 2003  культпоход № 2  энциклопедия кирилла и мефодия  культурное наследие земли смоленскои  ему помогало небо. выставка в академии хуожеств  о чем рассказывает банкнота. наука и жизнь, № 12, 2008  сполна ли отдана земная дань... олегу комову исполнилось бы 70 лет  пушкиниана. о выставке в государственном музее а. с. пушкина (на арбате)  скульптурные портреты а. с. пушкина  достопримечательности москвы, сущевскии дворик  могила олега комова на новокунцевском кладбище  ирина лобанова. народныи художник рсфср, член-корреспондент академии художеств ссср олег комов: «открыть новое» // смена, no.1408, январь 1986  алексеи касмынин. комов навсегда (о вечере памяти о. к. комова в библиотеке им. а. ф. лосева на арбате) // завтра, декабрь, 2010.  1932 births soviet sculptors 1994 deaths people from moscow 20th-century russian sculptors 20th-century male artists russian male sculptors
warren doyle is a hiker and supporter of the appalachian trail.  he holds the informal record for the hiking the entire appalachian trail the most times (eighteen times; 9 thru-hikes and 9 section hikes). from 1974 to 2017, he organized and led 10 groups up the entire appalachian trail. he is the founder of two organizations dedicated to the trail: the appalachian long distance hikers association, and the appalachian trail institute.  he remains the director of appalachian trail institute.  life warren doyle (born 1950) became interested in hiking while attending southern connecticut state college.  he had spent one summer after his junior year volunteering in the mountains of jamaica and the next year on the edge of the coalfields in southwest west virginia; the latter enabled him to meet, and be mentored by, the noted appalachian activist/educator/poet don west.  in 1973, he decided to hike the appalachian trail solo, and in doing so in 66.33 days, set the unofficial record for the then-fastest hike. doyle has two children., and is divorced; and remarried. . he went on to become an american studies professor at george mason university and the founding director of that institution's hemlock overlook: center for outdoor education (1985-96).  from 2004 to 2010, he taught at lees-mcrae college in banner elk, north carolina.  appalachian trail hikes warren's interest in the appalachian trail was such that he organized a group of mostly college students to hike the trail in 1975.  all 19 participants in the group completed the hike together in 109 days. warren led additional "circle expeditions" of the appalachian trail in the years 1977, 1980, 1990, 1995, 2000, 2005, 2010 (also with higher than average completion rates); and then two 'regular' expeditions in 2015 and 2017.  since 1989, approximately one thousand hikers have completed warren's appalachian trail institute, a five-day-long training course taken by those who hope to complete a thru-hike. according to backpacker magazine, about 75% of those who complete this course go on to complete a through hike. this is substantially higher than the 20% - 25% of those who start on a hike who actually finish the entire trail in one year, as reported by the appalachian trail conservancy.  influence on well known hikers  jennifer pharr davis, the onetime record holder for the fastest at hike, completed warren's appalachian trail institute and cited him in her books as an inspiration
. he wrote the introduction to her book, becoming odyssa.  bill irwin, a blind hiker, attended the appalachian trail institute and went on to complete the trail with his seeing eye dog, becoming the first blind man to complete a thru-hike of the trail.  during the summer of 2018, doyle provided logistical assistance to karel sabbe, a belgian dentist who set the fastest known time for a supported at traverse (41.5 days - a record that still stands).  during the summer of 2020, he (aka 'jupiter') provided support for liz anjos (aka 'mercury') on her fkt traverse (supported woman nobo) of 51.5 days. his detailed knowledge of all the roads that cross the at enabled him to meet mercury with the support van (2003 windstar van aka 'pegasus') an unprecedented 427 times without ever being late.  criticism  warren has been criticized for what some describe as a skeptical attitude toward rules & regulations.  in the 1990s, the appalachian trail conservancy removed a bathtub he had placed in a stream in virginia near i-77.  warren has led his groups to cross the kennebec river by fording, a practice the maine appalachian trail club says is dangerous as the volume of water flowing in the river can increase rapidly when an upstream dam is opened.  in winter 1979, following an act of civil disobedience, warren was cited at baxter state park for climbing katahdin, the terminus of the trail.  as a matter of conscience, warren chose to spend a night in jail rather than pay a $25 fine to raise awareness for what he thought was an unnecessary policy. sometime after the incident, the baxter state park authorities changed the policy and allowed climbing of katahdin in the rain.  references  http://www.blueridgeoutdoors.com/go-outside/hiking/outdoor-person-of-the-year/ http://www.backpacker.com/destinations-stories/madman-walking/ http://www.si.com/vault/1995/08/21/205662/trek-star-hiker-philosopher-warren-doyle-jr-is-an-institution-on-the-appalachian-trail  external links  warren doyle's personal website  american activists 1950 births living people
m. v. s. haranatha rao (27 july 1948 - 9 october 2017) was a noted telugu playwright, script writer and actor. he wrote dialogues for more than 150 films. his notable films include pratighatana, anna, and ammayi kapuram, and he received five nandi awards.  m.v. s. haranatha rao entered the cine field through noted film maker t. krishna. he worked as a story and dialogue writer for such award-winning films as swayamkrushi, and sutradharulu. he also played significant roles in rakshasudu and swayamkrushi. most of his dialogues are progressive in nature and for the betterment of the society.  personal life m.v. s. haranatha rao studied in guntur. he was interested in theater arts since his childhood. he started acting in stage dramas since his third standard. his father rangacharyulu was a clerk  and mother was a carnatic music professional.  he used to go to mythological dramas along with his father. when his mother got transferred to ongole, haranatha rao also went there and joined sarma college.  he was married to koteswari who is a govt school teacher in ongole. haranatha rao used to travel from ongole to chennai/hyderabad to have a good work life balance. koteswari supported haranatha rao in every aspect of life. they have three children (two sons and a daughter).  theater the first play he wrote was rakta bali (blood sacrifice). he was a good friend of t. krishna from his college days. they both used to work together on stage plays. after they witnessed dramas in vijayawada as part of stage celebrations, he was inspired to do a thorough research and wrote a play called jagannatha ratha chakralu (the wheels of chariot of lord jagannatha). this novel is about the philosophical existence of god. he got a critical response from people like kodavatiganti, gora, and athreya. he also got invitation to enter into film world, but he did not go.  his play kanya vara sulkam has won the best drama award of the andhra pradesh cultural affairs department. kshira sagara mathanam (churning of mythological ocean) got him sahitya academy award. in addition to writing the plays, he also directed and composed music for some of the plays.  in 1980, when andhra nataka parishat, rajam
andri conducted competitions for stage plays and his four plays won 20 out of 25 awards.  list of stage plays   raktabali  jagannatha ratha chakralu  kshirasagara mathanam  antham kadidi arambham  yakshaganam  redlight area  mee peremiti?  boochi  adavilo aksharalu  ledi panja  tere naam  harmonium  thalangu thakadhimi  janani jaiahe  khadga srushti  prajakavi vemana  naivedyam  filmography  he wrote dialogues for more than 150 films. he received four nandi awards for the films pratighatana, bharata nari, anna, ammayi kapuram, idaa prapancham for his story/dialogues. he also acted in more than 30 films.  as a writer   pratighatana bharata nari idaa prapancham desamlo dongalu paddaru devalayam repati pourulu manchi donga yuddha bhoomi rakshasudu ramayanam inspector pratap dharma chakram adapilla adigo alladigo akali neku joharlu ammayi kapuram anna aruna kiranam athagaru swagatham bharatha simhareddy broker (2010 film) chalo assembly desam lo dongalu paddaru devalayam dr. ambedker emandi avidochindi jai (2004 telugu film) kallu kodukulu kondapalli rattaya kuthuru leader m dharma raju ma ma ayina bangaram manavudu dhanavudu manchi donga m.l.a. yedukondalu modilla muchata nenu saitam paruvu pretishta praanam punyabhumi nadesam sagatu manishi sardhar krishnama naidu seetakka sutradharulu srimathi velostha stuvartu puram police station subhapradam swarnakka swati kiranam yerra mandaram yuddha bhoomi vande mataram (1985 film) taraka ramudu navayugam encounter repati rowdy pichipullaiah atha nekoduku jagartha oka yadardha prema katha vadani malli vadina gari gajulu vamsam gunda rajyam mamatala kovela pathala bhairavi (hindi) - translated by khadar khan andam  as an actor   rakshasudu  aadapilla  chitram  devalayam  swayamk
rushi  dharma chakram  broker  hora hori  m dharma raju ma  bhargava ramudu  paruvu pretishta  moodilla muchata  1 2 3 from amalapuram  sambhavami yuge yuge  akali neku joharlu  artharatri swatantram  chalo assembly  gunda rajyam  kulala kurukshetram  awards   nandi awards                  best dialogue writer,1985 - pratighatana    best dialogue writer ,1987 - idaa prapancham    best dialogue writer ,1989 - bharata naari    best dialogue writer  ,1994 - anna  best story writer  ,1995 - ammayi kapuram     other awards   andhrapradesh sahitya academy award for best writer    pinnisetty smarka award   acharya athreya award   dasari swarna kankanam   putchalapalli sundaraiah smaraka award   chatla sriramulu trust award   kandukuri rangasthala award  references  external links  1948 births 2017 deaths telugu male actors telugu screenwriters indian male screenwriters people from guntur 20th-century indian male actors 20th-century indian dramatists and playwrights 21st-century indian male actors 21st-century indian dramatists and playwrights indian male dramatists and playwrights 20th-century indian male writers 21st-century indian male writers indian male stage actors screenwriters from andhra pradesh
clarence v. peirce (december 25, 1850 - december 2, 1923) was an american farmer and politician.  born in the community of germania, marquette county, wisconsin, peirce went to the public schools and to business college in london, ontario, canada. he was in the mercantile business. he was also in the milling business. peirce was also a livestock dealer and a dairy farmer. he was involved with the westfield state bank in westfield, wisconsin and the state bank in wilsonville, nebraska. peirce served on the local draft board during world war i. from 1891 to 1895, peirce served in the wisconsin state assembly and was a republican. he then served in the wisconsin state senate from 1895 to 1899. peirce died from a stroke at his home, in eau claire, wisconsin.  references  1850 births 1923 deaths politicians from eau claire, wisconsin people from marquette county, wisconsin businesspeople from wisconsin farmers from wisconsin wisconsin republicans members of the wisconsin state assembly wisconsin state senators
on 22 july 2016, an antonov an-32 twin engine turboprop transport aircraft of the indian air force disappeared while flying over the bay of bengal. the aircraft was en route from tambaram air force station in the city of chennai on the western coastline of the bay of bengal to port blair in the andaman and nicobar islands. there were 29 people on board. radar contact with the aircraft was lost at 9:12am,  east of chennai. the search and rescue operation became india's largest search operation for a missing plane on the sea in history. there were similar incidents in 1986 and 2019.  passengers there were 29 people on board the aircraft: six crew members; 11 indian air force personnel; two indian army soldiers; one each from the indian navy and indian coast guard; and eight defence civilians working with naval armament depot (nad). the civilians were from visakhapatnam in andhra pradesh.  disappearance and search  the antonov an-32 took off from tambaram air force station, chennai at 08:30 local time on 22 july 2016. it was expected to land in port blair around 11:45 local time. the indian navy and the indian coast guard launched a large search and rescue operation, using a submarine, 12 surface vessels and five aircraft.  on the third day after the disappearance, 16 ships, a submarine and six aircraft were deployed to search for the missing an-32 in the bay of bengal, about 150 nautical miles east of chennai. on 1 august, it was confirmed that the aircraft had no underwater locator beacon (ulb). it did have two emergency locator transmitters (elts).  on 15 september 2016, the search and rescue mission was called off; all 29 people on board were presumed dead and their families were notified.  see also  list of missing aircraft  1986 indian air force an-32 disappearance  2019 indian air force an-32 crash  references  external links    2016 disasters in india missing aircraft history of the indian ocean accidents and incidents involving the antonov an-32 aviation accidents and incidents in 2016 aviation accidents and incidents in india indian air force an-32
darcy macpherson (born 29 october 1997) is an australian rules footballer playing for the gold coast football club in the australian football league (afl). he is the son of former  player, stephen macpherson. he was drafted by the gold coast football club with their second selection and twenty-first overall in the 2016 rookie draft. he made his debut in the seventy-three point loss against  in round 7, 2016 at metricon stadium.  references  external links  1997 births living people gold coast football club players northern knights players australian rules footballers from victoria (australia)
konstantinos "kostas" galanopoulos (greek: κωνσταντινος "κωστας" γαλανοπουλος, born 28 december 1997) is a greek professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for super league club aek athens and the greece national team.  club career  aek athens galanopoulos started his career from kentavros vrilission at a young age. in 2011, he moved at aek academy and on 21 august 2015 he signed a professional contract for three next years. despite having andre simoes and jacob johansson in front of him in the aek's roster, galanopoulos managed to earn playing time this season with the club and showed great potential for his career ahead. on 31 may 2016, he made his professional debut, with aek, against panionios, for the super league play-offs. on 28 july 2016, he made his european debut in a 0-0 away game against saint-etienne for the first leg of the third qualifying round of uefa europa league. on 10 december 2016, he netted his first goal with the club in a 4-0 home win against levadiakos. he was named mvp of the match.  in aek's title winning 2017-18 season, galanopoulos was often included in the starting line-up by manolo jimenez, forming a productive partnership with andre simoes in the middle. shielding the defence, the diminutive greek (standing at 172 cm tall) provides an effective transition to the attacking third, able to protect possession and pass the ball forward accurately. on april 19, 2017, galanopoulos agreed to a contract extension with aek, until the summer of 2021. on 31 march 2019, he scored his first goal for the 2018-19 season as christos albanis found galanopoulos and the aek midfielder skipped past a panetolikos defender before firing past dimitris kyriakidis in a 4-0 home win game against panetolikos. on 30 june 2019, according to multiple reports, galanopoulos  agreed to a new deal, according to the original contract terms, which will see him remain at the club for the next two seasons. on 14 december 2019, galanopoulos lashing in a winning goal in the 84th minute in a vital away 1-0 win against xanthi. it was his first goal for the season.  on 18 december 2019, during the game against asteras tripolis, in-form midfielder was substituted with a nasty ankle injury, and subsequent medical
tests have confirmed that the 21-year-old requires surgery. as a result of the seriousness of the injury, galanopoulos will be unavailable to play for the next 1,5 months.  on 25 august 2020, galanopoulos agreed to a contract extension with aek, until the summer of 2023.  on 22 november 2020, he sealed a triumphant 4-1 home win against ael. after the end of the match, galanopoulos burst into tears, having previously been to the sidelines for 11 months. on 6 january 2021, he scored helping to a 1-0 home win against panetolikos. on 24 january 2021, he scored in an eventual 2-2 away draw in the double-headed eagles derby against paok.  on 18 april 2021, he scored in a 3-1 home win against asteras tripolis. on 29 april 2021, he scored the opener with a header after a corner kick by muamer tankovic but the host team responded with two goals by michael krmencik and andrija zivkovic, and αεκ lost 2-1 to paok at toumba stadium in the 2nd leg of the semi final of 2020-21 greek cup and disqualified from the final of the competition.  on 8 october 2021, galanopoulos suffered from an ankle injury, that which required immediate surgical treatment. the rehabilitation period was estimated at six months. it will be his third surgery, as in the 2019-20 season, galanopoulos underwent surgery on the cartilage of his ankle. on 4 february 2021, he suffered a fracture in his right shoulder. in the first injury he was left out for 250 days, while another significant period of absence followed (59 days to be exact) for his shoulder.  international career he has played for greece u19 and greece u21. on 15 may 2018, he made his debut with greece in a 2-0 friendly game against saudi arabia.  career statistics  club  international  international goals scores and results list greece's goal tally first.  honours aek athens superleague: 2017-18 greek cup: 2015-16  references  external links  1997 births living people greek footballers association football midfielders greece youth international footballers greece under-21 international footballers greece international footballers aek athens f.c. players super league greece players
hedong subdistrict () is a subdistrict in chengzhong district, liuzhou, guangxi, china. , it has 5 residential communities and 2 villages under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of guangxi  references   township-level divisions of guangxi liuzhou
oncheon-cheon (also known as the oncheon stream or oncheon river) is a tributary of the suyeong river in busan, south korea. it was previously known as the seocheon or dongnaecheon. the source of the river is on geumjeongsan. it then flows through the built-up area of busan, passing between allak-dong (dongnae district) and yeonsan-dong (yeonje district) along the way.  in 2003, the busan municipal government began redevelopment in order to address the stream's environmental issues and provide recreation facilities on its banks. the oncheon stream park along the banks of the river is an excellent place to view the blossoming of cherry trees.  ecosystem the river's ecosystem suffered due to urban development and industrialisation. a 1984 study found that the water contained more than ten times the safe level of synthetic organic compounds, attributable to the dumping of industrial waste in the river. in april 2000, eight social & environmental volunteer groups began efforts to restore the river's ecosystem. however, by 2008, there was still far greater plant diversity at the upper reaches of the river than in the urban area.  see also cheonggyecheon, a river in seoul with a similar redevelopment history  references  dongnae district yeonje district rivers of busan
skiathos castle () or simply kastro is a medieval fortified site on the northern tip of the island of skiathos in greece, which was the main settlement of the island from the mid-14th century to 1829. it is now abandoned and a protected site.  history the castle was founded in ca. 1360, as the local inhabitants fled from the previous main settlement (on the same site as the modern town of skiathos) due to the depredations of the turkish pirates. as with the rest of the island, the castle remained in byzantine hands until the fall of constantinople in 1453, when it was taken over by the republic of venice. venetian rule proved oppressive, leading to a rebellion against the local governor vicenzo baffo in 1518, and failed to provide security from the ottoman corsairs. when the ottoman admiral hayreddin barbarossa besieged the castle in 1538, the local inhabitants killed the venetian governor and allowed the ottomans entry in hopes of lenient treatment, but the ottomans killed many and took others as slaves. the castle was repaired by the ottomans in 1619. the venetians raided skiathos in 1655, and in 1660 the venetian commander francesco morosini captured the castle. the brief venetian occupation was harsh, with many executed or forced to serve as rowers in the venetian galleys. during the greek war of independence, the island was often raided by a faction of greek rebels from mount olympus; on 14 july 1826, the rebels under tsamis karatasos captured the castle and looted it. in 1829, as skiathos became part of the new independent greek state, the castle was abandoned and the site of the ancient and early medieval town was re-occupied.  description the castle is located on a rocky promontory on the northernmost point of the island. it is a naturally secure position, as it is surrounded on three sides by steep cliffs overlooking the sea. the castle features only low walls on these sides, and its only substantial fortifications are to the south, where lies its only entrance, a narrow gate protected by a wooden drawbridge and a cauldron with boiling oil (ζεματιστρα). the population numbered between 500 and 1,500 people, living in tightly packed houses. there were 20 churches in four parishes, a chancellery, and several cisterns. in the ottoman period, a mosque and governor's residence were built for the small turkish garrison. following the castle's abandonment, only the two churches of st. nicholas and of the nativity-the
cathedral of the local bishop-continued in use, while in recent years the churches of st. marina and st. basil, two cisterns, the ottoman mosque, the gate complex, and parts of the walls have been restored.  references  sources    skiathos byzantine fortifications in greece 1360 establishments in europe former populated places in greece
nanu mazara or nano mazara is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 11.6 km from phagwara, 28 km from phillaur, 37.4 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 119 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , nanu mazara has a total number of 70 houses and population of 327 of which include 171 males and 156 females. literacy rate of nanu mazara is 78.26%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 28 which is 8.56% of total population of nanu mazara, and child sex ratio is approximately 750 lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 40.37% of total population in nanu mazara. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 114 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of nanu mazara which includes 96 males and 18 females. according to census survey report 2011, 94.74% workers describe their work as main work and 5.26% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 12.5 km away from the village. the village is 57.6 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 132 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
nikolai andreevich bodisko, () (1756 - 1815) was a russian counter admiral.  bodisko participated in the wars against napoleonic france before the treaties of tilsit in 1807. during the finnish war he commanded the russian forces that landed on gotland on 22 april 1808 and occupied the island. when a swedish naval force under counter admiral rudolf cederstrom arrived on 16 may, the russian situation became hopeless. bodisko capitulated and the russian forces returned home. this was not appreciated by emperor alexander i who exiled bodisko to vologda. bodisko was eventually pardoned by the emperor and became commander of the sveaborg fortress (today suomenlinna) at helsinki.  references  external links   (tyska) genealogisches handbuch der baltischen ritterschaften estland - bodisco nobility in the estonia  1815 deaths 1757 births people from saint petersburg russian commanders of the napoleonic wars imperial russian navy admirals russian military personnel of the finnish war recipients of russian royal pardons
jinghu south circuit or jinghu south province was one of the circuits during the song dynasty. its administrative area corresponds roughly to the modern province of hunan.  jinghu south circuit and jinghu north circuit were split from jinghu circuit in 998.  references         circuits of the song dynasty 998 establishments 10th-century establishments in china former circuits in hunan
mladen matkovic (born 12 may 1989 in mostar, bosnia and herzegovina)  is a croatian footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for nk inter zapresic.  club career matkovic started out his football career at nk slavonac from his home village of komletinci. at the age of 15 he moved on to the nearby nk otok before joining the nearby prva hnl team hnk cibalia's academy, where he would remain for the rest of his academy years, apart from a short stint back at nk otok.  due to competition from davor burcsa and marijan antolovic, cibalia sent matkovic out on two loans, one to nk otok and one to second-tier vukovar '91 before he was offered a professional contract and, following the departure of aforementioned players, made the team's first-choice goalkeeper. for the following three seasons he remained cibalia's first-choice goalkeeper, amassing 96 appearances in all official competitions, but left the club following its relegation to druga hnl in the summer of 2013, joining nk zadar. following two seasons at nk zadar, the club was relegated as well, and he rejoined hnk cibalia, with which he achieved promotion back to prva hnl at the end of the 2015/16 season.  references  external links  1989 births living people croatian footballers hnk cibalia players hnk vukovar '91 players nk zadar players nk inter zapresic players croatian first football league players association football goalkeepers
the cathedral basilica of st. lawrence  (), also called santa cruz de la sierra cathedral, is the main catholic church in the city of santa cruz de la sierra, bolivia. it is located in the city center, opposite the 24 de septiembre square.  the first church was built by the mercedarian fray diego de porres in times of viceroy francisco alvarez de toledo. in 1770, bishop raman de herbosos rebuilt the church, commending the sacristan antonio lombardo greatest gift the execution of the works. at the time of marshal andres de santa cruz (1838), the old temple was replaced by a new church of eclectic style, designed by the french architect felipe bertres. it is notable for its wooden vaults and the pictorial decoration that covers them. in the main altar part of the original carved silver coating of the jesuit mission of san pedro de moxos it is conserved. four sculptural reliefs from the same mission are also exhibited.  see also roman catholicism in bolivia  references  roman catholic cathedrals in bolivia buildings and structures in santa cruz de la sierra basilica churches in bolivia baroque church buildings in bolivia
the southern amazon mosaic () is a protected area mosaic in brazil.  creation the southern amazon mosaic  of conservation units in the region between the states of amazonas, mato grosso and rondonia was recognized by the federal environment ministry by ordnance 332 of 25 august 2011. the mosaic was to have an advisory board as a forum for integrated management with representatives of the conservation units, the federal and state environmental agencies and civil society organisations.  federal units  under the administration of the chico mendes institute for biodiversity conservation (icmbio) it included:  juruena national park  campos amazonicos national park  jaru biological reserve  jatuarana national forest  amazonas units  under the administration of the centro estadual de unidades de conservacao - ceuc (amazonas): sucunduri state park guariba state park bararati sustainable development reserve aripuana sustainable development reserve guariba extractive reserve manicore state forest aripuana state forest sucunduri state forest apui state forest  mato grosso units  under the administration of the coordenacao de unidades de conservacao - cuco (mata grosso): igarapes do juruena state park tucuma state park apiacas ecological reserve rio madeirinha ecological station rio roosevelt ecological station guariba-roosevelt extractive reserve  rondonia units  under the administration of the secretaria de estado do desenvolvimento ambiental de rondonia - sedam (rondonia):  roxinho extractive reserve seringueira extractive reserve garrote extractive reserve mogno extractive reserve piquia extractive reserve angelim extractive reserve itauba extractive reserve ipe extractive reserve jatoba extractive reserve massaranduba extractive reserve maracatiara extractive reserve sucupira extractive reserve castanheira extractive reserve aquariquara extractive reserve freijo extractive reserve rio preto/jacunda extractive reserve cedro state forest mutum state forest gaviao state forest araras state forest tucano state forest  notes  sources  protected area mosaics of brazil protected areas of amazonas (brazilian state) protected areas of mato grosso protected areas of rondonia
spain at the european athletics championships has participated in all editions of the european athletics championships since the 1950 edition.  this are the results of the spanish athletes at the european athletics championships  medal count  list of medalists men  women  multiple medalists  medals by event  see also royal spanish athletics federation  references  external links  european athletic association    nations at the european athletics championships athletics in spain
qipengyuania seohaensis is a gram-negative, non-spore-forming and slightly halophilic bacteria from the genus qipengyuania which has been isolated from sea water from the yellow sea in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of erythrobacter seohaensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  sphingomonadales bacteria described in 2005
branevatnet ("melting lake") is a lake at nordaustlandet, svalbard. it is located between winsnesbreen and oxfordhalvøya, to the north of etonbreen. the river of oxfordelva flows from branevatnet through oxfordhalvøya and debouches into bodleybukta.  references  lakes of svalbard nordaustlandet
maaveeran kittu () is a 2016 indian tamil-language period action drama film written and directed by suseenthiran. the film stars vishnu vishal and sri divya, while r. parthiepan and soori play supporting roles. it is the first time yugabharathi has written film dialogues.  the movie is about a warrior who struggled to uphold the rights of the tamil dalith people in this land. this film got mixed reviews and ordinary successful at the box office.  plot set in the year 1987, the movie depicts the life of krishnakumar alias kittu (vishnu vishal), a youth whose main ambition is to become a collector. he is influenced by the ideas of chinnarasu (r. parthiban), a local leader who had also sponsored his education. chinnarasu and kittu try to fight against the rampant caste discrimination meted out to them by the upper caste people, but are unable to do much about it as the police and courts are biased towards the upper castes. one day, kittu sees his classmate gomathi (sri divya), who is from the upper caste, discriminate against a dalit girl. he admonishes her publicly for her act of caste discrimination, which makes her repent her behaviour. gomathi eventually falls in love with kittu, but kittu maintains a distance as they are from different castes, though he too is in love with her.  when the news spreads through the village that gomathi is in love with kittu, upper caste men kill gomathi's father and frame kittu, who is imprisoned, but is soon released on bail as there is no evidence that he had killed gomathi's father. kittu then assaults the village inspector selvaraj (harish uthaman), who holds a grudge against the dalits and was responsible for framing him for the death of gomathi's father. in retribution, selvaraj arrests kittu and thrashes him mercilessly in the police station. kittu does not return home the next morning, despite selvaraj's pleas that he had released him, prompting the villagers to think that selvaraj had killed kittu while in custody as his hatred towards the dalits is well known in the village. the dalits led by chinnarasu protest outside the police station, leading to selvaraj's suspension.  however, it is then revealed that kittu had not gone "missing" but is living in a tribal village near kodaikanal as part of a plan hatched by kittu and chinnarasu to expose
the upper caste men involved in the death of gomathi's father, with kittu deciding to return to the village after he is cleared of all involvement in the murder. gomathi, who is aware that kittu had not killed her father, finds out kittu's location and runs away from her home to be with him. at this juncture, the upper caste men and the police find out that kittu is alive and in hiding and leave for kodaikanal to capture kittu and bring him back to the village with the intention to imprison kittu, humiliate chinnarasu and reclaim their domination over the dalits. kittu finds out about their plan and asks gomathi to return to the village, promising to marry her once he is cleared of all charges.  sadly, kittu and gomathi never reunite as kittu had decided to commit suicide by jumping off a cliff in order to save the reputation to chinnarasu and expose the upper caste discrimination against the dalits. he is found dead by the police, which exposes the upper caste hatred towards the dalits. the movie ends with the funeral procession of kittu going through the main street of the village, which had traditionally been out of bounds for the dalits to carry their dead, thus implying the end of caste discrimination in the village.  cast  vishnu vishal as krishnakumar "kittu"  r. parthiban as chinnarasu  sri divya  as gomathi  soori as thangarasu  harish uthaman as selvaraj  nagineedu as the upper caste's leader  poster nandakumar as nellai varathan  kasi viswanathan  florent pereira  production  the film began production in july 2016, with suseenthirant revealing that the film was about a warrior who fought for the people's rights in 1985 and in no way related to the former liberation tigers of tamil eelam kittu. the shoot was held in pazhani for a period of fifty days. vishnu vishal and sri divya were signed on to play the leading roles, marking their second collaboration after jeeva. suseenthiran stated the idea of making the film had come to him after a member of the public had approached him at a shopping complex and requested that he made a film on the plight of tamil people. newcomer soorya handled the cinematography, while fellow newcomer shekar made his debut as art director.  release the film had a theatrical release on 1 december 2016, with behindwoods.com stating the film has "strong content that could've been more impactful had the
execution been better". sify.com's reviewer suggested that "suseenthiran has tried to convey an important message to the society but ended up being preachy", and that "perhaps the only saving grace of maaveeran kittu is the fact that it oozes sincerity from start to finish, you can make out right away that the filmmaker's intention is not to deceive the audience". baradwaj rangan of the hindu wrote "suseenthiran's only concession to narrative excitement is the little twist that changes our perception of an event. otherwise, this is a dull drama, shockingly reliant on dialogue to move the plot along as well as make its big points."  soundtrack  d. imman has rendered the musical score with yugabharathi's lyrics for the songs. album was released on 4 november and it consists of 6 songs (1 theme song).  references  external links     2010s tamil-language films 2016 films indian films 2016 action drama films indian action drama films films scored by d. imman films set in 1980 films set in the 1980s films set in tamil nadu films shot in tamil nadu films directed by suseenthiran films about social issues in india
on 18 july 2016, a knifeman stabbed and injured five people on and outside a train near wurzburg, germany. the attacker, a 17-year-old, was shot dead by police.  attack at about 21:00 local time, on a train traveling on the line between treuchtlingen and wurzburg, a youth, armed with a hatchet and a knife, stabbed random passengers, injuring a family of four hong kongers, two critically. the knifeman then went out of the train, stabbing a woman who was walking her dog, hitting her with the axe twice in the face, seriously injuring her. the perpetrator was located by the police about  from the train. the attacker tried to flee and was shot dead by the sek police tactical unit after they confronted him and he tried to attack them with the hatchet. he reportedly shouted "allahu akbar!" during the attack, according to oliver platzer, a spokesman for the bavarian interior ministry. public prosecutor erik ohlenschlagern said police heard the attacker call out  "allahu akbar!" in a recorded emergency call from a witness' mobile phone.  on 20 july, it was announced the attorney general peter frank had taken over the investigation, because it is believed "the assassin committed the offence as a member of the so-called islamic state."  victims five people were wounded in the attack. four were members from the same family: a woman, her boyfriend and her parents, and were all tourists from hong kong. a fifth victim, attacked outside the train, was a local german woman. fourteen witnesses were treated for shock.  perpetrator riaz khan ahmadzai, born on 6 april 1999 (), also known as muhammad riyad, was reported to be a 17-year-old pakistani  male who arrived in germany as an unaccompanied child refugee in 2015. he first lived in a refugee camp in ochsenfurt, then for two weeks with a foster family in gaukonigshofen  southwest of ochsenfurt, both in the district wurzburg. prosecutors learnt the perpetrator wanted to avenge the death of a friend who had been killed in afghanistan. authorities later discovered evidence showing that ahmadzai was in contact with a suspected islamic state member and had originally been asked to drive a car into a crowd of people. ahmadzai declined this suggestion as he was not able to drive the car. instead, he told his contact that he would plan and carry out a train attack.  die welt reported that "he was a devout muslim," but
was not perceived as fanatical.  amaq news agency published a two-and-a-half minute video, allegedly of him speaking in pashto, proclaiming himself a soldier of the caliphate, threatening further isil attacks in "every village, city and airport" and holding a knife. german officials were checking if the man in the video was in fact the attacker. the chief of the german chancellery, peter altmaier, told zdf television, "the security authorities expect that this video is in all likelihood authentic".  police found a hand-painted isil flag at his foster family's home, along with a letter he appeared to have written to his father, which they said read: "and now pray for me that i can get revenge on these non-believers, pray for me that i go to heaven."  reactions authorities temporarily closed the train line between ochsenfurt and wurzburg-heidingsfeld.  bavarian interior minister joachim herrmann said, "there are witnesses that suggest there may be an islamic background to this but that is far from clear at this point." both he and landeskriminalamt spokesman fabian hench declined to confirm the attacker said "allahu akbar". herrmann said it did not appear the victims were targeted for being chinese. on 21 july, joachim herrmann demanded stricter control of the german borders. people without valid papers had to be adhered and checked at the border. "we can't let it slide this way anymore", herrmann said. hermann also criticised slow asylum proceedings. no fingerprints were taken of the perpetrator and no hearing of him took place.  german chancellor angela merkel condemned the attack as an "incredibly cruel act" and promised that everything would be done by the authorities to prevent further attacks.  rolf tophoven, director of the crisis prevention institute in essen told le monde that the perpetrator was "integrated" and wasn't known to police or intelligence agencies. he said he appeared to have been radicalised overnight, perhaps through frustration, hopelessness and online isil propaganda, and that the case appeared similar to that of mohamed lahouaiej-bouhlel, who committed the 2016 nice truck attack, or omar mateen of the 2016 orlando nightclub shooting, because of their lack of direct connection to isil.  amaq news agency, an online presence associated with the islamic state of iraq and the levant, citing an "inside source", said the attacker was "a soldier of the islamic state who executed the operation in response to calls to target nations in the coalition fighting the islamic state".  hong kong chief
executive leung chun-ying has condemned the attack as he dispatched a team of immigration officers to accompany the victims' relatives to germany. the hong kong economic and trade office in berlin dispatched staff to visit the injured. leung said he was saddened by the incident and expressed his sympathy.  the attack was linked to the european migrant crisis, and was reported to have raised more questions about angela merkel's open-door refugee policy. the attack was compared to a knife attack at hanover main station earlier that year on 26 february.  former federal minister renate kunast of the green party was ridiculed by police union chief rainer wendt as a "parliamentary smart aleck" for asking why the perpetrator was shot dead instead of arrested alive.  see also   list of islamist terrorist attacks  list of terrorist incidents in july 2016  2021 wurzburg stabbing  munich knife attack  reutlingen knife attack  immigration and crime in germany  2017 dusseldorf axe attack  references  2016 in bavaria 2016 in rail transport history of rail transport in germany isil terrorist incidents in germany islamic terrorist incidents in 2016 july 2016 crimes in europe july 2016 events in germany mass stabbings stabbing attacks in 2016 terrorist incidents in germany in 2016 terrorist incidents involving knife attacks islamic terrorism in germany history of wurzburg stabbing attacks in germany knife attacks axe attacks 2016 crimes in germany
the following lists events that happened in 1980 in iceland.  incumbents president - kristjan eldjarn, vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - benedikt grondal, gunnar thoroddsen  events  births  21 march - veigar pall gunnarsson, footballer 10 may - dagny skuladottir, handball player 22 may - robert gunnarsson, handball player. 25 may - joey guðjonsson, footballer 20 july - sturla asgeirsson, handball player. 7 october - kristjan orn sigurðsson, footballer 22 october - helgi hrafn gunnarsson, politician 18 december - marel baldvinsson, footballer  deaths 20 october - stefan johann stefansson, politician (b. 1894).  full date missing  jon guðmundsson, chess player (b. 1904)  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
anuradha lohia  ( fatehpuria)   is an indian molecular parasitologist who works in infectious disease. she is currently the vice chancellor of the presidency university. she was earlier the chairperson of the department of biochemistry in the bose institute in kolkata. she was chairperson of an indo-british wellcome trust/ dbt india alliance, an organization to promote medical research in india.  education and career she was a student of the modern high school for girls in calcutta. she did a b.sc. in physiology from presidency college in calcutta university and an m.sc. in physiology from rajabazar science college, calcutta university and later did her doctorate in vibrio cholerae from the indian institute of chemical biology. she was a visiting scientist in various universities around the world. she did her postdoctoral research in new york university medical centre. she was elected a fellow of the indian academy of sciences. she was also awarded the stree shakti award and the unesco molecular and cell biology network grant.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people indian parasitologists indian women biologists 20th-century indian biologists university of calcutta alumni place of birth missing (living people) women parasitologists fellows of the indian academy of sciences 20th-century indian women
dharamkot assembly constituency (sl. no.: 74) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in moga district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india moga district
the holy innocents (1981) is a novel by miguel delibes about the everyday life on a farm in extremadura during the franco dictatorship.  adaptation a spanish film adaptation of the novel was made in 1984, directed by mario camus.  references  1981 novels spanish novels adapted into films
ulrich hubbe ll.d. (1 june 1805 - 9 february 1892) was a german immigrant to south australia, remembered for his part in framing the real property act, which led to the torrens title system of land registration.  history dr. hubbe was born in hamburg in 1805, the third son of heinrich hubbe (1771-1847), and was educated at the johanneum gymnasium before studying law at jena, berlin, and the university of kiel (then in denmark), where he was awarded his ll.d.  he arrived in south australia aboard the taglioni, 350 tons, from london in october 1842, and for a time worked for the south australian register before being involved as a land agent.  the system of land title deeds which existed from the foundation of south australia, as inherited from the britain, was complex, open to abuse and disliked by both land agents and landowners, and seemed to have few supporters apart from traditionalists and lawyers. suggestions for centralized registration of property were made in the earliest days after proclamation by such as james hurtle fisher. dr. hubbe, who had personal experience with both the german system and the british, was one among many who wrote to the papers suggesting reform, but it was not until r. r. torrens submitted his "real property act" to the house of assembly that any substantial effort towards reform was made.  hubbe, who was away from adelaide around this time, returned in 1856 to find torrens's campaign in full swing, and wrote, as "sincerus", to the register supporting the act and making light of the difficulties in its implementation. torrens, who was under siege from some powerful interests, sought out hubbe as an ally, no doubt with an eye to enlisting the support of the equally powerful german community. in support of torrens's campaign, hubbe wrote a booklet the voice of reason and history on conveyancing, drawing on his knowledge of european law, particularly that inherited from hanseatic league states, but also of france. the cost of printing and publishing was met by g. f. angas.  responding to commentators who claimed he was the unacknowledged father of the real property act, hubbe wrote: ... i modestly disclaim as a matter of fact the honour of having originated that act, ... (although) i drew attention to the very objectionable features of the english mode of conveyancing, and to the honest, unsophisticated mode of transfer practised in germany. ... the facts pointed
out and the ideas thus kindled in the minds of clear-sighted, practical men, who were afterwards seen in the front rank of the contest, were no doubt farther circulated, ... torrens first laid down his scheme of legal reform, formed his private committee; and prepared the public mind for the contemplated change by a series of telling articles in the public journals. of all this i knew nothing, nor was i at that period known to mr. torrens; and on returning to adelaide in 1856 i was perfectly surprised on finding the reform campaign in full operation, and the papers bristling with leading articles and letters on the subject, and the men of law on the heights of indignation - not then from any great apprehension of danger, but at the unprecedented boldness and comprehensiveness of torrens' assault. well may you say that his is a "master-mind." he perfectly understood the situation. he brought, besides his own intellectual powers, tact, and brilliant eloquence, the landowners, large and small, the commercial men. the tradesmen, and the intelligence of the south australian people as a whole, to bear on the subject all at once, so as almost to overwhelm the opponents of reform. perceiving, however, that he was likely to be outflanked by adroit opponents on some intricate points of permanent consequence both in the foundation and practical working of the new system, i ran, unasked by mr. torrens and unknown to him, into the breach. my letters signed ' sincerus ' arrested mr. torrens' attention directly. he came to look for me in my humble abode in freeman-street, and we have ever since been firmly allied. i and other germans, led on by beyer, vosz, and many others, gave him what ever assistance we were able to contribute; and he, finding me well up in the judicial and historical aspects of the matter, encouraged me to write ' the voice of reason and history on conveyancing' (not yet wholly forgotten), and he got mr. g. f. angas, in his own generous way, to bear the whole costs of publishing. i also lent mr. torrens some amount of industrious and persevering aid in privately discussing the principles of his first scheme, and i had a share - a very humble share - in re-settling the draft of the first act before its second reading. i claim, therefore, no more than a share in this useful work, in which i have been - and am
proud that i have been- an aider and abettor; but, as you will now see, i have not been its originator. ... it were unjust to sir robert torrens to withhold a single leaf of the crown of laurel which belongs to him, and to him alone, as the originator of his great act. but if, under present circumstances (he being absent), my fellow-colonists will allow me to advise them they will find me a thoroughly sound and expert, as well as firm, defender of the act. yours, &c., ulrich hubbe. l.l.d. [sic]  ulrich and his wife lived with their teacher daughter isabella from around 1875; at spalding, then at white hut. he was a deeply religious man of the lutheran faith, and was blind for many years before his death, but having taught himself to read moon type (an alternative to braille) was able to console himself by reading the gospels and psalms. in the house of assembly, in september 1884, e. w. hawker moved, seconded by j. l. stirling, that hubbe be granted £200 in recognition of his contribution, given gratuitously, to torrens's act. one commentator called him "one of the most unselfish, un-businesslike, and gentle creatures that ever lived", and hoped that he would be better appreciated in an after-life.  family ulrich hubbe married martha gray ( - 29 july 1885) in 1847. martha mary hubbe (1 august 1848 - 27 january 1881) married john hood (c. 1839 - 15 may 1924) in 1871. both worked at townsend duryea's photographic studio. samuel grau "sam" hubbe (1 august 1848 - c. 15 october 1900) married edith agnes cook (1859 - 2 april 1942) on 3 january 1885. he was inspector of vermin, then the first commissioned officer to be killed in the boer war. dr. edith ulrica "rica" hubbe (1885-1967), was a student at asg janet doris hubbe (1887 - 17 december 1950) married alfred allen simpson (15 april 1875 - 27 november 1939) on 6 january 1910. sgt. max ulrich hubbe (28 may 1891 - ) of 1st aif, then farmer at woodenup, near kojonup, western australia (harriet) marjorie hubbe (1893 - 1993) married alfred beech caw ( - 1966) on 22 february 1922, farmed at woodenup. capt.(hermann
) fritz hubbe (1895 - 28 july 1916) of 1st aif, killed in action, france. catharine elizabeth hubbe (1851-1861) isabella christina hubbe (c. january 1854 - 18 october 1946) was a teacher at spalding from 1877, and white hut from 1880, married francis coleman may (1855 - 26 february 1923) in 1889, lived at "uplands", mount barker, moved to mullewa, western australia in 1908.  references   people educated at the gelehrtenschule des johanneums australian lutherans german emigrants to australia settlers of south australia 1805 births 1892 deaths 19th-century lutherans
my hindu friend is a 2015 brazilian drama film, directed and written by hector babenco, starring willem dafoe, maria fernanda candido, barbara paz, selton mello and reynaldo gianecchini.  it was released on 3 march 2016.  plot  diego (willem dafoe) is a film director who is diagnosed with cancer and, while hospitalized, meets and befriends a hindu 8-year-old boy who is also a patient at the hospital.  cast  willem dafoe as diego fairman maria fernanda candido as livia monteiro bueno reynaldo gianecchini as ricardo steen selton mello as common man barbara paz as sofia guerra guilherme weber as antonio fairman dan stulbach as marcos gilda nomacce as antonio's wife tuna dwek as gabi tania khalill as rosemary maite proenca as debora dalton vigh as dr. morris supla as paiva ary fontoura as dudu rio adlakha as hindu friend soren hellerup as herbert spencer  references  external links      2015 films portuguese-language films english-language films 2015 drama films brazilian films brazilian drama films films about cancer films set in hospitals brazilian independent films films set in sao paulo films directed by hector babenco films scored by zbigniew preisner 2015 independent films
sheikha al-zain sabah al-naser al-sabah also al-zain s. al-sabah (arabic: الشيخة الزين الصباح ) is the chairperson and ceo of national creative industries group kscc, a kuwait-based organization that aids in the facilitation, incubation, and expansion of the creative arts and industries in the mena region.  formerly, al-zain served as under secretary of state at the ministry for youth affairs in kuwait, a start-up government agency responsible for developing national policies that support "innovation, civic engagement and entrepreneurship" amongst kuwaiti youth.  under her helm, kuwait was named the arab capital of youth in 2017 and the country saw the drafting of its first national youth policy.  career and background   from 2002-2013, al zain was chairperson and managing director of eagle vision media group, a multimedia production facility in kuwait.  in 2008, she co-produced "amreeka", an official selection at the 2009 sundance film festival.  al-zain also co-produced "journey to mecca", a documentary about islamic scholar ibn battuta's journey from morocco to saudi arabia.  prior to filmmaking ventures, al zain worked in boston and new york, where she was on staff at abc world news tonight with peter jennings.  she has also produced and directed a number of political talk shows for kuwait television.  references  zain zain  women film producers
mahat () is an ekthariya (single-clan) chhetri surname among nepalese, of khasa heritage. the name may have originated when one of the jumli malla kings in medieval times made his younger brother, dharma malla, chief of staff in the army. this granted dharma malla the title of mahat (meaning the great one), and as a result, his descendants started using 'mahat' as their surnames.  like other khasa chetris such as thapa, basnyat/basnet, karki, khadka and rawat, mahats worship masta, a local non-vedic deity of the karnali region. among twelve mastas, khaapar masta is their kuldevata. khasa chhetris are referred to by their place of origin, and therefore mahats are also called as kalikote mahat.  military roles  mahats have been an integral part of the nepalese army during the same period of shah kings. many individuals with the mahat surname still serve the nepalese army as well as in the indian and us armies in different designations, both as officers and non-officers.  population and distribution  at the time of the 1991 nepal census, there were 4,240 mahats living in 799 dwellings. the most prominent population of mahat is mahat gaun in jumla. notable settlements of mahats have been found in nuwakot, parbat, tanahu, jumla (mahat village development committee which now falls under chandan nath municipality), rukum, parbat, myagdi, pokhara (mahat gauda), nuwakot (kabilash and kholegaun), tanahun, kabhre (panauti), bhaktapur(palanse mahatgaun), lalitpur (lele, satdobato, thaiba), makwanpur (hetauda), charikot and ilam (sangrumba, hattidhunga, khammang, ilam municipality).  the mahats living in lele of lalitpur are believed to have settled there from the valley malla after the khasa attack on kathmandu led by khas king jitari malla. mahats also live in places like jhapa (mechinagar/ kakarbhitta, sanischare, damak), sunsari (dharan, paanmara), darchula (marma, duhun), baitadi and outside nepal in west bengal (bagrakot) and assam in india.  notable mahats
gajendra bahadur mahat (jumla), nepalese politician leyla mahat, kazakhstani artist dr. prakash sharan mahat (nuwakot), foreign minister in nepal government  dr. ram sharan mahat (nuwakot) - senior leader of nepalese congress, finance minister in nepal government (brother of prakash sharan mahat)  references  surnames of nepalese origin khas surnames
the football sporting event at the 1927 far eastern championship games featured matches between china, japan and the philippines.  results  winner  references  football at the far eastern championship games international association football competitions hosted by china 1927 in asian football 1927 in chinese sport
tayabpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of tayabpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, tayabpur has total number of 96 houses and population of 464 of which include 258 males and 206 females. literacy rate of tayabpur is 77.46%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 47 which is 10.13% of total population of tayabpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 880, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the rue oudinot is a street in the 7th arrondissement of paris, france. it was named for nicolas-charles oudinot. the defunct ministry of the french colonial empire was located on the street.  references
provision shop (chinese: 杂货店) is a singaporean telemovie commissioned by the ministry of communications and information in collaboration with tribal worldwide singapore. it is directed by royston tan and stars sora ma, marcus chin, li yinzhu, siti khadijah, brandon wong, cui yang, aden tan and sarah daniel. the telemovie will debut on television on july 17, 2016 on mediacorp channel 8.  plot the telemovie tells four stories revolving around a diverse community of locals and foreigners grappling with social tensions, and shows how through mutual understanding and respect, there will eventually be the openness to embrace change and diversity.  cast sora ma as gao ling ling, the provision shop owner's daughter who is obsessed with korean dramas marcus chin as the provision shop owner li yinzhu as madam goh, also nicknamed "empress wu", who is tough on the outside but soft in the inside siti khadijah as theresita, madam goh's helper brandon wong as an ice-delivery man cui yang as the ice-delivery man's supervisor from china aden tan as peter, a tertiary student who is a frequent patron of the provision shop sarah daniel as a tertiary student in a budding romance with peter  references  singaporean television films 2016 television films 2016 films films directed by royston tan films shot in singapore films set in singapore singaporean films
enyalioides sophiarothschildae, or the rothschild's woodlizard, is a species of lizards in the family hoplocercidae. it is endemic to the amazonian slopes of the cordillera central in northeastern peru. it differs from its congeneric species by possessing homogeneous (size) caudal scales on each caudal segment, a white gular region that has a black patch as well as turquoise scales in males, and immaculate white labials and chin.  references  enyalioides lizards of south america reptiles of peru endemic fauna of peru reptiles described in 2015 taxa named by omar torres-carvajal taxa named by pablo j. venegas taxa named by kevin de queiroz
stephen lord (born 1949) is an american conductor, specializing in opera. he resigned from michigan opera theatre and opera theatre of saint louis (otsl) in 2019, following an expose on his alleged sexual harassment of fellow musicians at these and other opera companies.  raised in massachusetts, he is a 1971 graduate of oberlin college.  in 1980, lord joined otsl as its head of music staff.  he was named as artistic advisor to otsl general director richard gaddes in 1983.  in 1986, lord made his formal otsl conducting debut, and in 1991, became music director of otsl.  in november 2015, otsl announced that lord is to stand down from the otsl music directorship after the 2017 season, and to take the title of music director emeritus.  lord was music director and principal conductor at boston lyric opera from 1991 to 2008.  from 2011 to 2015, he was artistic director of the opera studies department at the new england conservatory of music.  in november 2016, michigan opera theatre (mot) named lord to the newly created position of principal conductor of mot, with an initial contract through the 2018-2019 season, with immediate effect.  on june 18, 2019, the twin cities arts reader published an investigative expose of alleged sexual harassment activities by lord at several opera companies, consisting of "verbal and written sexual overtures" to multiple singers, conductors and pianists. the report was based on interviews with "more than two dozen individuals who made harassment claims" (all remaining anonymous in the article) as well as copies of electronic messages and corroborating statements from other parties. lord resigned from opera theatre of saint louis and michigan opera theatre the following day. but denied the allegations. opera maine (portland, me) removed lord from their 2019 production of the magic flute around the same time. a review by the detroit news found no lawsuits filed in the matter. the opera theatre of saint louis stated that "we have not received any complaints or reports of harassment against this company member at our organization, but [...] we will be conducting a full and thorough independent investigation into this matter." a representative of the agency barrett artists stated that they had never received a complaint while representing lord for nearly 30 years. in february 2020, the canadian opera company announced that lord would lead its 2021 production of la traviata, defending the decision by arguing that "no complaints or records of misconduct were found in our files" in a "detailed review" of lord's past engagements back to 1986, but reverted its
decision the following month after protests by its staff and the public.  references  external links  barrett artists agency page on stephen lord  opera theatre of saint louis page on stephen lord  1949 births living people american male conductors (music) oberlin college alumni 21st-century american conductors (music) 21st-century american male musicians 20th-century american conductors (music) 20th-century american male musicians classical musicians from massachusetts
miller bridge may refer to:  miller creek bridge; batesville, arkansas miller bridge (winterset, iowa) longdon l. miller covered bridge; west finley, pennsylvania
this is a list of massacres in yugoslavia during the 20th century.  inter-war period (1919-41)  sahovici massacre  rugova massacre  world war ii  1946-1991  foibe massacres  croatian war  bosnian war  kosovo war    yugoslavia massacres
anxiety (spanish: ansiedad) is a 1953 mexican musical drama film directed by miguel zacarias and starring pedro infante, libertad lamarque and irma dorantes.  cast   pedro infante as carlos iturbe y valdivia / gabriel lara / rafael lara  libertad lamarque as maria de lara  irma dorantes as isabel valdivia  arturo soto rangel as don lorenzo  guillermo samperio as policia  salvador quiroz as doctor  jose munoz as asesino  miguel funes hijo as rafaelito  hernan vera as cantinero 1  felipe montoya as agente teatral  jorge sareli as investigador privado  chel lopez as taxista  jose pidal as invitado a fiesta  marion de lagos as enfermera  ricardo adalid as locutor radio  manuel casanueva as invitado a fiesta  velia lupercio as invitada a fiesta  concepcion martinez as espectadora programa de radio  carlos robles gil as espectador programa radio  humberto rodriguez as empleado teatro  references  bibliography   amador, maria luisa. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1950s musical drama films mexican musical drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by miguel zacarias 1953 drama films mexican black-and-white films
invisible is the fifth studio album by leeland, released on july 22, 2016 through bethel music.  critical reception  ccm magazine's matt conner describes, "leeland's latest proves itself well worth the wait." jonathan j. francesco, in a newreleasetoday review, states, "leeland has crafted a worship album that should remind artists and listeners alike of what worship music can and should be." chris major of the christian beat writes, "for listeners wanting a flowing and moving collection of powerful, truth-filled worship music, leeland's invisible surpasses expectations."  accolades the song, "lion and the lamb", was no. 8 on the worship leaders top 20 songs of 2016 list.  on august 9, 2017, the gospel music association was announced that the song "lion and the lamb" would be nominated for a gma dove award in the song of the year and worship song of the year categories at the 48th annual gma dove awards.  track listing  charts  references  2016 albums leeland (band) albums
godey is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  louis antoine godey (1804-1878), american editor and publisher  louis-luc godey (1813-1873), french mycologist  alexis godey (1818-1889), frontiersman, scout, explorer  see also   morton freedgood (1913-2006), american author who wrote under the pen name john godey  gode, ethiopia
gerard thielin (29 march 1935 - 20 september 2007) was a french professional racing cyclist. he rode in four editions of the tour de france.  references  external links     1935 births 2007 deaths french male cyclists sportspeople from loir-et-cher
united nations security council resolution 2102 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions may 2013 events
11c-ucb-j is a pet tracer for imaging the synaptic vesicle glycoprotein 2a in the human brain.  it is used to study the brain changes associated with several diseases including alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, and depression.  references  pet radiotracers
sangeetha rajeev, also known as sara is an indian singer, stage performer and composer. she won the best international pop singer of the year at the vima music awards 2019 in malaysia. she is the first independent artist from karnataka to collaborate with sonu nigam for a kannada track called "neene neene"  which was also released in hindi as "tuhi tuhi". her track "nee hinga nodabyada" which was sung, composed and performed by sangeetha rajeev remains one of the biggest viral kannada independent tracks  she introduced the genre ಕ pop and is setting examples to many upcoming artists in karnataka. her independent tracks are featured in mtv (indian tv channel) and bbc asian network united kingdom.  singing and composing work sangeetha started her career from kannada films. she was introduced to this industry by the music composer dharma vish. she sang a song in the film aane pataaki for which she also won the best playback singer award the same year. she was then introduced to the tollywood industry by the kshanam music composer sricharan pakala and director shreeranjani through actor/producer nagarjuna's home production annapurna studios. she started her telugu film career with the film rangula ratnam where she sang the birthday (tic toc) song and became the voice of sithara (actress). she has also sung in the bollywood film simply ek love story.  she has also produced and composed many independent singles in the kannada and hindi languages, including "nee hinga nodabyada". her single "neene neene" was a collaboration with sonu nigam  early life sangeetha rajeev was born bangalore to a musical family. her father s rajeev was a bank manager, who had to move to mumbai on an official transfer. she along with her family moved to mumbai at the age of 6 where she spent most of her childhood. in mumbai she was trained in bharatnatyam and carnatic classical music. she is also trained in hindustani classical music.  education sangeetha did most of her schooling in mumbai. sangeetha graduated in information science engineering. she then moved to england to work before returning to india to pursue music.  influences one of sara's early musical influences was her mother herself, m k sharadamba, who is a carnatic classical musician. sara is highly influenced by western music and considers mariah carey & the late great michael jackson to be her western influences. she considers herself to be one of the biggest admirers of sunidhi chauhan.  selected film songs  albums
awards  judging  references  external links      year of birth missing (living people) living people singers from bangalore kannada playback singers 21st-century indian singers women musicians from karnataka indian women playback singers 21st-century indian women singers
the bombardments of the beylik of tunis (june 1784 - 1788) were a series of venetian naval bombardments of the capital and various cities of the beylik of tunis in order to force bey hammuda ibn ali to stop supporting the pirates that harassed the trade routes of venice. the campaign lasted four years, during which the venetian fleet at the orders of angelo emo greatly increased in both number and power.  bombardments  1784: the first raid against sousse on 21 june 1784, the capitano straordinario delle navi of venice, angelo emo, went out the port of malamocco. he commanded a squadron composed by two ships of the line, the 70-gun forza under giovanni moro, his second-in-command, and the 66-gun fama, his own flagship, the 38-gun frigate palma, two bomb vessels (the polonia and the distruzione), one 22-gun xebec and one 12-gun galiot.  slowed down by bad weather conditions, the squadron, after a brief stop at the bocche di cattaro to embark a company of marines and 60 sailors, arrived at corfu only in july.  at the time, in dalmatia the bubonic plague was ravaging the city of spalato, and all the ports and cities of this province were under quarantine. given that men from kotor could be infected, emo could not drop anchor in that harbour until 7 august. the venetians started to do shooting practices with the heavy mortars of the bomb vessels (two 340-pounders and two 135-pounders), that evidenced some issues to their beds. here in corfu the squadron was joined by the 56-gun heavy frigate concordia and another 22-gun xebec.  on 18 august, emo was in sight of sicily. on 26 august, he passed the island of malta; and on 30 august, he arrived in the bay of tunis. here the squadron was targeted by the terrible weather, unable to move for three days. on 3 september, the venetian ships - while sailing to get closer to the city - found a neapolitan tartana (a type of small merchant ship) that had been captured by the barbary pirates shortly after and re-captured it.  references  angelo emo, giornale storico del viaggio in africa della veneta squadra, venice, 1787.  venetian navy battles involving the republic of venice battles involving ottoman tunisia 1780s conflicts barbary pirates conflicts in 1788 conflicts in 1787 conflicts
in 1786 conflicts in 1785 conflicts in 1784 1780s in the republic of venice 18th century in tunisia
seven mountains is the fourth album of swiss folk rock and indie rock band 77 bombay street released 18 september 2015 after their self-financed independent album dead bird in 2009 and their two studio albums up in the sky in 2011 and oko town in 2012. the four buchli brothers started writing the songs in berline, germany before moving to australia to add new songs to the album. the album was recorded in linear recording studios and produced by chris vallejo, its founder.  the single "seven mountains" was pre-released on 16 june 2015 in preparation for the launching of the album. the follow-up singles were "once and only" and "bombay", all three accompanied by music videos.  the album reached the top of the schweizer hitparade, the official swiss albums chart becoming their second consecutive chart topping release in switzerland as the previous album oko town also made it to number 1. the album was certified platinum.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2015 albums 77 bombay street albums
themba sonnyboy sekowe  (born ), known professionally as dj maphorisa (or rather madumane), is a south african record producer, dj and vocalist. as a record producer with a blend of house music, amapiano and afropop, he has worked with and has received production credits from several notable artists, including wizkid, sizwe alakine, kwesta, uhuru, drake, black coffee, major lazer, runtown, c4 pedro, tresor, kabza de small and era istrefi. he is presently signed to his record label blaqboy music upon quitting kalawa jazmee records.  he rose to stardom after producing several hit singles for artists of multiple music genres, such as  uhuru ("y-tjukuta"), kwesta ("ngud'"), busiswa ("lahla"), dj zinhle ("my name is"), professor  ("jezebel") and shekinah  ("suited").  career  on september 2018, he released  a single "midnight starring" featuring  moonchild  sanelly, dj tira and busiswa. at the 2018 dstv mzansi viewers choice awards he received two  nominations: favourite song of the year and favourite dj. on november 27, 2018, at the third ceremony of mzansi kwaito and  house music awards  his single "midnight starring" won an award for most voted-for song.  2019-present: rumble in the jungle, banyana ep  on april 9, 2021, maphorisa, tresor and kabza de small released the collaboration studio album rumble in the jungle. on april 16, 2021, maphorisa and tyler icu's  studio ep banyana was released.  the ep featured sir trill, daliwonga and kabza de small, mpura, and visca. the single "banyana" surpassed 4.2 million streams and was certified double platinum by the recording industry of south africa. in 2021, he embarked to made in lagos tour for an opening act with wizkid. at the 2021 music kwaito and house music awards he received a nomination for best dj.  on 17 september 2021, he released a single "abalele"  with kabza de small featuring ami faku.  in october 2021, he produced congolese-born singer tresor's singles, "makosa" and "nyota" from the album, motion.  tours  co-head
lining   made in lagos tour (2021) (with wizkid)  amafest (2021)  discography collaborative albums & eps  our father  (2013)  blaqboy music presents gqom wave (2017)  scorpion kings ep  (2019)  the return of scorpion kings  (2019)  scorpion king live at sun arena  (2020)  once upon a time in a lockdown  (2020)  madumane ep (2020)  rumble in the jungle ) (2021)  banyana ep ) (2021)  singles  runtown the banger "omalicha nwa"  kwesta ngud' "mayibabo" "afro trap"  mafikizolo khona  kucheza love portion  busiswa bazoyenza midnight starring  himself soweto baby featuring wizkid & dj buckz  singles produced  awards and nominations  african muzik magazine awards  !  |- |2020 |  himself  |music producer of the  | |  dstv mzansi viewers choice awards   |- |rowspan="2"|2018 | "midnight starring" | favourite song of the year  |  |- | himself  | favourite dj |  humanitarian african prestigious awards  |- |rowspan="2"| |rowspan="2"|himself |music producer of the year | |- |best dj africa |  mtv africa music awards  |- |2016 |himself  |song of the year | |- |2020 | |best african act |  mzansi kwaito and house music awards   |- |2018 | "midnight starring" | most voted song  |  |- |rowspan="3"|2021 |rowspan="3"|himself |best producer | |-   |rowspan="3"|best amapiano songs | |- |  sa amapiano music awards   |- |2021 |himself |best amapiano male dj/act |  references  external links  1987 births living people amapiano musicians south african record producers south african djs south african musicians electronic dance music djs
leiserson is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  charles e. leiserson (born 1953), computer scientist william morris leiserson (1883-1957), labor relations scholar and mediator
the 2007/08 fis ski jumping continental cup was the 17th in a row (15th official) continental cup winter season and the 6th summer season in ski jumping for men. this was also the 4th winter season for ladies.   other competitive circuits this season included the world cup and grand prix.  men  summer  winter  ladies  winter  men's standings  summer  winter  ladies' standings  winter  europa cup vs. continental cup  this was originally last europa cup season and is also recognized as the first continental cup season by international ski federation although under this name began its first official season in 1993/94.  references  fis ski jumping continental cup 2007 in ski jumping 2008 in ski jumping
the 1939-40 sk rapid wien season was the 42nd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  gauliga  german championship  tschammerpokal  references  1939-40 rapid wien season rapid
sonic mania is a 2017 platform game published by sega for nintendo switch, playstation 4, xbox one, and windows. produced in commemoration of the sonic the hedgehog series' 25th anniversary, sonic mania pays homage to the original sega genesis sonic games, featuring speedy side-scrolling gameplay. it takes place over 12 levels, including several redesigned from past games. the story follows sonic, tails and knuckles as they venture to defeat their nemesis doctor eggman and his robotic henchmen, the hard-boiled heavies.  the development team was composed of members known for their work in the sonic fangame and rom hacking community. development began after lead developer, director and programmer christian "taxman" whitehead, who was previously contracted by sega to develop enhanced mobile ports of genesis sonic games, presented a playable prototype to sonic team producer takashi iizuka. art, level design, audio, and additional programming was provided by independent studios pagodawest games and headcannon. the team used whitehead's retro engine and aimed for a graphical quality between genesis and sega saturn games.  sonic mania was released in august 2017 and became the highest-rated sonic game in fifteen years. many reviewers saw it as a return to form for the sonic series following a number of poorly received games released after the 1990s. its presentation, level design, music, and faithfulness to the early sonic games were praised, but its lack of originality was criticized. several described it as one of the best sonic games and one of the best games of 2017. within a year, it had sold over one million copies worldwide. sonic mania plus, an enhanced version with additional content, was released in july 2018.  gameplay   sonic mania is a side-scrolling platformer similar to the early sonic the hedgehog games released for the sega genesis. players select one of 3 playable characters, each with their own unique abilities: sonic can perform a "drop dash" which sends him rolling in a dash after a jump, tails can fly and swim, and knuckles can glide and climb walls. as with sonic 2 (1992), players can play as sonic and tails simultaneously, or a second player can control tails independently. unlockable options include sonic's abilities from sonic cd (1993) and sonic 3 & knuckles (1994) in place of the drop dash and "& knuckles" mode, which allows simultaneous control of any character and knuckles, including himself.  sonic mania takes place over 12 levels, called zones; the game features eight "remixed" zones, such
as green hill zone from the first sonic game (1991), alongside four original ones. remixed stages consist of both new elements and recycled gimmicks and ideas from other past sonic games. each zone is divided into 2 acts, in which the player must guide their character past various enemies and obstacles to reach the end. at the end of each act, the player takes part in a boss battle against doctor eggman, also known as dr. robotnik, or one of his robots, including the hard-boiled heavies, elite henchmen based on the eggrobo enemies from sonic 3 & knuckles. the player collects golden rings, which serve as a form of health; players survive hits as long as they have at least one ring, but, if hit, their rings scatter and disappear after a short time. television monitors containing rings, elemental shields, or power-ups such as invincibility and faster running speed are scattered throughout each level. like sonic 3 & knuckles, the story is told via short in-game cutscenes between levels.  giant rings hidden in each act, a feature of the original games, lead to pseudo-3d special stages similar to those in sonic cd, where players can attempt to collect a chaos emerald. in special stages, players dodge obstacles and collect colored spheres to increase their speed, allowing them to pursue a ufo carrying a chaos emerald; collecting all seven chaos emeralds allows players to use their character's super transformation and unlocks the game's true ending. players' ring counters slowly decrease during special stages and must be continually replenished; if the player runs out of rings before they catch the ufo, the special stage ends. the "blue sphere" special stages from sonic the hedgehog 3 also return, repurposed as bonus stages that are accessed by entering a portal that appears when the player passes a checkpoint while carrying 25 or more rings. completing bonus stages earns the player a silver or gold medal depending on their performance; collecting medals unlocks features such as a debug mode and sound test.  in a time attack mode, players must complete levels as quickly as possible, with the best times included on an online leaderboard; players can instantly reload a level to try again at any time. a split-screen competitive multiplayer mode allows two players to race to the end of a level, similar to those of sonic 2. players can also unlock "mean bean", a 2-player minigame based on dr. robotnik's mean bean machine.  plot  after the events of sonic 3 and
knuckles, sonic and tails detect a powerful energy reading on angel island and board their biplane, the tornado, to investigate. however, dr. eggman sends an elite group of eggrobos to reach the signal before sonic and tails. the eggrobos excavate the source of the signal, a magical gemstone called the phantom ruby, just as sonic and tails arrive. the eggrobos gain new powers from the ruby, becoming the hard boiled heavies, and send sonic, tails, and the island's guardian, knuckles, through zones the trio have previously visited where they pursue eggman to prevent him from using the ruby's power for evil, clashing with him and the heavies along the way.  sonic and his allies discover that eggman has used the phantom ruby's power to retake control of little planet from sonic cd. they board eggman's robotic fortress, defeat him and the heavies, and escape just as it explodes. if all 7 chaos emeralds are collected while playing as sonic, the phantom ruby transports him and eggman to another dimension. there, the heavy king betrays eggman and takes the ruby, imbuing himself with power; eggman attacks the heavy to try to reclaim it. sonic uses the chaos emeralds to become super sonic and fights eggman and the heavy king separately to keep the ruby out of their possession. after the battle, the phantom ruby reacts with the emeralds, negating sonic's super state and creating a wormhole that engulfs itself and sonic as little planet vanishes.  development   development of sonic mania began in 2015, led by australian programmer christian "taxman" whitehead. whitehead was a prominent member of the sonic fangame community, and had previously been contracted by sega to develop remastered ports of sonic the hedgehog, sonic 2, and sonic cd for mobile phones. after developing the game for a few months, whitehead presented a prototype, which he called sonic discovery, to series producer takashi iizuka. iizuka was receptive, and suggested that it should include old levels from the early sonic games it was inspired by, "remixed" in a way that felt new. he also gave it the working title of sonic mania, which stuck after no one suggested a better one. the title referenced the development team's "maniacal" fandom for the series; iizuka described the project as being made "by the mania, for the mania", and as a "passion product" driven by the fans' love for the early sonic games
.  sonic mania was produced in commemoration of the series' 25th anniversary. it was developed using whitehead's retro engine, a game engine tailored for creating two-dimensional games, which he also used for the enhanced ports of sonic the hedgehog, sonic 2, and sonic cd. the team also included programmer simon "stealth" thomley of the independent studio headcannon, who assisted whitehead with those projects and on various sonic fangames and rom hacks, as well as level designer jared kasl and art director tom fry of pagodawest games, who had previously independently collaborated on an unofficial high-definition remaster of sonic 2. tantalus media helped develop the nintendo switch port. iizuka and the rest of sonic team provided guidance and made sure the team did not "go off the rails into something that doesn't feel like sonic". iizuka described the visuals as a cross between the graphical capabilities of the sega genesis and sega saturn, comprising mostly pixel art with some polygonal graphics.  the developers modeled the gameplay on sonic 3, with each zone consisting of two acts and boss fights at the end of each. for returning stages, the designers made the first act feel familiar, and introduced new elements in the second act. the team cited sonic cd and sonic 3 as major influences on the level design for their "big, wide open" and "streamlined" designs, respectively. according to thomley, the team typically decided what elements to include in the returning stages prior to designing them, but sometimes came up with new ideas or changed them based on how the development progressed. the first original level designed was the hollywood-themed studiopolis zone. the desert-themed mirage saloon zone was inspired by an unfinished level from sonic 2 and the monument valley region of the united states. the special stages were inspired by more recent games such as sonic rush (2005) and sonic colors (2010). the team felt proud of their recreation of classic sonic gameplay.  the game features animated opening and ending sequences led by tyson hesse, one of the artists of the sonic comics by archie comics. it also features an optional crt graphical filter, and supports the enhanced features of both the  playstation 4 pro and xbox one x, outputting at a native 4k resolution. the soundtrack was composed by tee lopes of pagodawest games, consisting of rearranged pieces from previous sonic games alongside new material. lopes was chosen due to his popularity on youtube for producing arrangements of various sonic tracks, and for his work on the sonic 2 hd project. lopes initially
wanted his score to resemble the sonic cd soundtrack, trying to imagine what a sequel to it might have sounded like. as development progressed, he took inspiration from other older sonic and sega games, such as the revenge of shinobi (1989) and the sega rally games, and from 1990s popular music, such as the work of michael jackson. the reveal trailer theme, "checkpoint", was composed by the electronic music groups hyper potions and nitro fun and the opening theme, "friends", was composed by hyper potions.  release sonic mania was announced alongside sonic forces at the 25th anniversary sonic event at the san diego comic-con (sdcc) convention in july 2016. the game was also featured at south by southwest (sxsw), the electronic entertainment expo (e3), and sdcc in 2017; at sdcc 2017, attendees received a promotional instruction manual for the game. the game was announced for the second quarter of 2017, but sega announced at sxsw that it had been delayed to allow for more development.  sonic mania was released digitally for the nintendo switch, playstation 4, and xbox one in north america and europe on august 15, 2017, and in japan the following day. four days before release, sega delayed the windows version for another two weeks for further optimization, releasing it on august 29 as a download on steam. as compensation, those who had pre-ordered the game received a copy of the original sonic the hedgehog on steam.  in addition to the standard release, a sega genesis-themed collector's edition was also released, containing a 12-inch (30 cm) sonic statue atop a model genesis, a game cartridge cast with a golden ring, and a metallic collector's card with a download code for the game. to promote the collector's edition, sega released a retro-styled infomercial featuring former series art director kazuyuki hoshino and social media manager aaron webber, based on an american television commercial for sonic the hedgehog 2. the music label data discs published a vinyl lp featuring the game's original music in late 2017. an expanded soundtrack was released on digital music distribution platforms on january 17, 2018.   a five-part animated short mini-series, sonic mania adventures, was released on the sonic the hedgehog youtube channel between march and july 2018, promoting the release of sonic mania plus. the series depicts sonic's return to his world following the events of sonic forces, teaming up with his friends to prevent eggman and metal sonic from collecting the chaos emeralds and master emerald
. a holiday-themed bonus episode was released in december 2018. the shorts were written and directed by hesse, with animation production by neko productions, and music written by lopes.  sonic mania plus  an expanded version of the game, sonic mania plus, was released at retail and as downloadable content for the original version on july 17, 2018. it adds playable characters mighty the armadillo and ray the flying squirrel from the 1993 arcade game segasonic the hedgehog, each with unique abilities: mighty can slam the ground and is immune to spikes when in ball form, while ray can glide without losing altitude. plus also adds an "encore mode" with remixed levels and a reworked lives mechanic, a pinball bonus stage, and a four-player competition mode. additionally, an update released alongside sonic mania plus adds more cutscenes and a reworked metal sonic battle based on his appearance in knuckles' chaotix (1995). the physical version was released with a 32-page art book and a reversible cover in the style of genesis or mega drive boxart covers, depending on the region. a soundtrack cd was included with the japanese physical release.  in an interview with famitsu, iizuka explained that sonic mania was not intended to have a physical release; sega staff requested one, but a retail version would have presented a challenge for the production schedule. after the game launched, fans also expressed interest in a physical version. as a retail release would cost more than the downloadable version, the team added value with new content. mighty and ray were included because they were rarely featured in games; to accommodate them, level designs had to be altered. additionally, the multiplayer mode was updated because of the increased number of selectable characters.  reception   sonic mania was announced following years of mixed reviews for the sonic franchise. according to the international business times, the series had been "tarnished by years of sub-par games with only the occasional gem". the business times predicted that sega's approach of releasing sonic forces and sonic mania in the same year, catering to new and old fans, could repair the series' reputation and lead to a "sonic renaissance". several critics expressed excitement for a return to the style of the early sonic games, and wrote that sega's previous efforts to develop games in the "classic" style, such as sonic the hedgehog 4 in 2010, had been disappointing.  according to review aggregator site metacritic, sonic mania received "generally favorable" reviews. it became the best-reviewed sonic game in fifteen years,
and several critics described it as one of the best 2d platform games. at launch, sonic mania was the bestselling switch game, outselling minecraft and overcooked: special edition. it greatly increased sega's third-quarter profits, and helped sega almost double sales of packaged games compared to the same period in 2016. by april 2018, it had sold over one million copies worldwide across all platforms.  the presentation attracted acclaim. usgamer described it as the "pinnacle" of the series' pixel graphics. gamespot called the animations and detail superior to the original games, writing that they added an extra layer of personality. cubed3 described the levels as stylish and vibrant. critics also praised the attention to detail in recreating the early games. game informer wrote that its gameplay was "nearly indistinguishable" from its genesis predecessors, but with "extra polish". easy allies wrote that mania emulated the original games "exceptionally", and that "running, jumping, and spin dashing all work exactly as well as you would hope". nintendo world report wrote that it avoided the physics problems from sonic the hedgehog 4 and recaptured the spirit of the 16-bit games.  the level design and music also received praise. hardcore gamer wrote that the remixed versions of older stages felt fresh while staying true to the originals. game informer wrote that the new stages matched the quality and captured the spirit of early sonic games. the a.v. club praised the detail and content in each level; metro praised the fan service, and likened it to a school project "gone wild, something enthusiastic kids have made while the teacher was away and which far surpasses anything they were actually supposed to be doing". like ign, venture beat appreciated the replay value, with branching paths that made multiple playthroughs "fresh". egm wrote that the soundtrack was "completely fantastic" and felt nostalgic and new at the same time. nintendo life called the soundtrack "one of the best of recent times".  the game received some criticism. polygon commented that frustrations with controls and enemy placement in the original sonic games were present in sonic mania. videogamer.com wrote that the game relied too much on nostalgia, with minimal innovation and too few original stages, but was a good proof of concept that the development team could expand upon. nintendo world report complained about the boss fights, which they felt were poorly executed and too easy. the windows version was subject to review bombing due to its implementation of the digital rights management (drm)
software denuvo, which some thought to be the real reason behind the two-week delay. the game could not be played offline on launch day; sega stated this was a bug unrelated to denuvo, and released a patch the following day.  multiple reviewers saw it as a return to form for the sonic series after a number of poorly reviewed games after the 1990s. egmnow commended sonic mania as one of the "purest and most enjoyable" sonic games, expressing excitement for the future of the series. ign wrote that it was the "classic" throwback that fans had clamored for since the 1990s, but also recommended it for people new to the franchise. nintendo world report called it a "must-buy" for fans of the older sonic games. waypoint compared it favorably to donkey kong country returns, describing it as a game that knew "what was fun" about its predecessors. nintendo life felt that mania represented "a true return to form" and was a contender for the best game in the series.  sonic mania plus was generally reviewed even better than the original release of the game, with the nintendo switch version receiving "universal acclaim" according to review aggregator metacritic. multiple reviewers called it the definitive version of the game thanks to the addition of an extra game mode and two new characters. dualshockers' tomas franzese praised the encore mode for feeling fresh, as well as the new movement options introduced with the inclusion of mighty and ray to the roster. michael leri of game revolution, however, found the partner system of the new mode more frustrating than the traditional lives system found in classic sonic games. some publications like ign spain did not recommend the update for people who own the original title, but still praised the existence of the physical release and the value for the new players and hardcore fans.  legacy sonic mania was nominated for the "best family game" at the game awards 2017 and the "best kids game" at the 2018 new york game awards. the theme song "friends" was reused for the prologue of the 2020 sonic the hedgehog film.  references  external links     sonic mania at mobygames  2017 video games multiplayer and single-player video games nintendo switch games platform games playstation 4 games retro-style video games sega video games side-scrolling platform games sonic the hedgehog video games video games about time travel windows games xbox one games video games developed in the united states playstation 4 pro enhanced games xbox one x enhanced games video games scored by tee lopes
the 1907 news of the world match play was the fifth news of the world match play tournament. it was played from tuesday 15 to thursday 17 october at sunningdale golf club. 32 players competed in a straight knock-out competition, with each match contested over 18 holes, except for the final which was over 36 holes. the winner received £100 out of a total prize fund of £240. james braid defeated j.h. taylor 4 & 2 in the final to win the tournament.  qualification entry was restricted to members of the professional golfers' association (pga). qualification was by a series of 36-hole stroke-play competitions; one for each of the six pga sections. the number of entries from each section were adjusted. the southern section had 14 qualifiers, the northern section 6, the midland and the scottish sections 4 and the irish and welsh sections 2. in the event of a tie for places there was a playoff.  the qualifiers were:  irish section: james edmundson, charlie pope midland section: george coburn, alfred lewis, jack oke, tom williamson northern section: george duncan, sandy herd, bill leaver, george pulford, ted ray, charles roberts southern section: albert bellworthy, james bradbeer, james braid, ernest gaudin, ernest gray, rowland jones, anthony kettley, james kinnell, charles mayo, bob mckenzie, arthur mitchell, james sherlock, j.h. taylor, harry vardon scottish section: tom drummond, alex marling, robert thomson, tom watt welsh section: jack ross, sam whiting  format the format was unchanged. matches were over 18 holes except for the final which was over 36 holes. extra holes were played in the event of a tied match. two rounds were played on the first day, two more on the second day with the final on the third day.  results source:  w/o = walk over  prize money the winner received £100 and a gold medal, the runner-up £30 and a silver medal, the losing semi-finalists £15 and a bronze medal, while the third round losers received £10 and the second round losers received £5.  references  golf tournaments in england news of the world match play news of the world match play october 1907 sports events
putong or tubong is a ceremony occasionally performed in the province of marinduque, philippines, in which visitors are honored and welcomed.  the ceremony takes the form of the eponymous song which is a call for "thanksgiving, hope and prayer for a long, blessed life". the ceremony begins with the celebrants gathering around the home of the host, they begin singing slowly as they enter the house, accompanied by a guitarist. they women wear costumes such as a kimono or a saya, while the men wear a barong, and they carry baskets of flowers, palm leaves, or coins.  once in the home, the tempo of the song picks up until a crown is placed on the honoree's head. after being crowned, the honoree is then showered with the contents of the celebrant's baskets.  the celebration ends with all the participants shouting mabuhay, which means "long life".  references  festivals in the philippines
vladislav koutsky (born april 19, 1985) is a czech professional ice hockey goalie. he is currently playing for hc spartak chocen of the ffhg division 1.  koutsky made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc dynamo pardubice during the 2003-04 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1985 births living people hc dynamo pardubice players hc ocelari trinec players czech ice hockey goaltenders people from hronov
"ugh!" (stylized in all caps) is a song by english band the 1975 from their second studio album, i like it when you sleep, for you are so beautiful yet so unaware of it (2016). the song was written by george daniel, matthew healy, adam hann and ross macdonald. mike crossey handled the production alongside daniel and healy. the song was released on 10 december 2015 by dirty hit and polydor records as the second single from the album. the band's obsession with syncopation and rhythm drove the song's creation, while healy explained the lyrics are about coming down from cocaine, drug-fuelled conversations and social interactions.  "ugh!" is a stripped-down funk, r&b and synth-pop ballad containing disco, art pop, jazz, electro-funk, new wave and dark pop elements. the song's tropical production consists of a synthetic funk groove, an electro-indie rhythm and a 1970s-style funk beat. the song is about healy's cocaine addiction, narrating a struggle between attempting to quit and the desire to continue. themes explored on the song include sexual frustration, self-obsession and self-disgust, among others.  upon release, "ugh!" received generally positive reviews from contemporary music critics, who praised the song's sonic innovation, production, lyrics and healy's vocals. commercially, it reached number 42 on the uk singles chart, number 26 in scotland, number 80 in ireland and number 10 on the us billboard hot rock & alternative songs chart. the song was later certified silver in the united kingdom by the british phonographic industry (bpi). an accompanying music video, directed by adam powell, was released on 18 december 2015. the visual features the 1975 performing the song on a neon-lit stage.  background and development   the 1975 released their eponymous debut studio album in september 2013 to critical and commercial success. domestically, it topped the uk albums chart and the scottish albums chart. in the united states, the album reached number 28 on the us billboard 200, number 7 on the billboard top alternative albums chart and number 8 on the billboard top rock albums chart. the band became recognized as a breakthrough act in 2013, having achieved commercial success with their single "chocolate", which became a radio staple. in june 2015, the 1975 posted cryptic cartoons and deleted their social media accounts, fueling speculation that they were disbanding. however, the band returned 24 hours later to announce their absence was for a "new chapter" starting with the release of their
second album, later revealed to be titled i like it when you sleep, for you are so beautiful yet so unaware of it. the album was released in february 2016 and includes "ugh!"  healy described the songwriting process of "ugh!" as "something that goes back to the early foundation of how we write music as [t]he 1975", saying it was driven by the 1975's obsession with syncopation and rhythm. regarding the title, the singer said it is meant to represent a sense of dissatisfaction and regret for oneself. healy told patrick doyle of rolling stone that "ugh!" is about coming down from cocaine, saying he felt comfortable discussing his past with cocaine due to the understanding nature of the band's fanbase. in an interview with michael hann of the observer, healy spoke about a conflict between his desire to be honest and the responsibility he has he has towards younger fans, saying: "i can't start talking to kids about drugs." he was questioned about this by hann, who noted that "ugh!" reflects upon the singer's relationship with cocaine. in response, healy said that despite being a former addict, his attitude towards cocaine has since become nonchalant: "it's part of the social fabric. it's part of going out. i don't have a problem with cocaine any more." speaking with shahlin graves of coup de main, he said the song takes inspiration from drug-fuelled conversation and social interactions, observing a tendency for individuals to focus on themselves instead of involving others. following its premiere on zane lowe's beats 1 show on 10 december 2015, "ugh!" was officially released as the album's second single, accompanied by a typewritten note and three drawings related to the song.  music and lyrics   musically, "ugh!" is a stripped-down funk, r&b and synth-pop ballad, which has a length of three minutes (3:00). a "carbonated" synthetic funk groove provides the song's foundation, which incorporates an upbeat tempo, tight hooks, an off-beat melody, an off-kilter electro-indie rhythm and a 1970s-style funk beat. the song's tropical production contains a glossy synth-bass, skronky space-age synths, spare handclaps, a finger-picked guitar, bright and supple guitar lines and a loose rhythm section. the track also incorporates elements from disco, art pop, jazz, electro-funk, new wave and dark pop.  "ugh!" explores themes of romantic and sexual frustrations,
as well as self-obsession and self-disgust. it is about healy's cocaine addiction and discusses both his comedown from the drug and his unsuccessful attempts to rid himself of the addiction. the song acts as a commentary on oneself and modern culture, narrating a struggle between the desire to continue something while also trying to give it up. the singer reveals that despite efforts to differentiate himself, he cannot escape an era of lost, self-absorbed youth seeking acceptance and money, realising that while a life outside of fame and drugs was better, he cannot give his lifestyle up. healy sings about the shallow nature of modern fame, including overrated parties, cheap make-up and temporary highs, while also making references to an irregular heartbeat, numb gums and asking for a card. in the chorus, he passionately sings "and you're the only thing that's going on in my mind / taking over my life a second time / i don't have the capacity for fucking / you're meant to be helping me" with a strain in his voice.  tom connick of diy called "ugh!" a "wavering take on [t]he 1975's funkier pop tendencies" and compared healy's vocal delivery to justin timberlake. chris deville of stereogum felt the song is similar to the works of phil collins, noting it mines funky 1980s art pop elements reminiscent of inxs, peter gabriel and scritti politti. mikael wood of the los angeles times also observed influences of inxs. larry fitzmaurice of vice said the song "imagines how scritti politti would sound if vampire weekend was green gartside's backing band". jamieson cox of the verge said its "sprightly density" draws from scritti politti and prefab sprout, while andrew unterberger of spin echoed the comparisons to the former. carolyn menyes of music times interpreted a darker undertone within the lyrics. similarly, rhian daly of nme noted that while the dark subject matter could make the song dreary and self-indulgent, its "joyous" sound "virtually [encourages] finger-clicking, hip-dipping dad-dancing". hayden manders of nylon compared the song to the 1975's "menswear" (2013), observing themes of drug use, love and lust, saying it blurs the lines between them to justify healy's use of cocaine.  reception  critical response  upon release, "ugh!" was met with positive reviews from contemporary
music critics, while the response from the 1975's fanbase was more favourable than "love me". stereogum declared the former the 28th-best pop song of 2015, with deville writing: "i'm already all-in on matthew healy's scritti politti phase." dan weiss of spin called the song a "convincingly arresting tune", deeming it a marriage of scritti politti's cupid & psyche 85 (1985) and usher's my way (1997). kika chatterjee of alternative press described the track as a "technicolor anthem", praising the juxtaposition of healy's sardonicism with the glowy synth. she also noted similarities with "menswear", deeming it the mature companion. matt collar of allmusic called "ugh!" delightful while comparing it to "something madonna might have made in collaboration with chic guitarist nile rodgers and art-pop duo yello".  amy davidson of digital spy called "ugh!" brilliant and an "unravelling of the band's new sound". erin hampton of euphoria magazine praised the song's innovative sound and desperate lyrics, observing there is a "brave and brilliant new sound". she noted the 1975 presented a clear agenda by releasing the song after "love me", saying it mirrors the album's themes. the editorial staff of radio x said the track builds upon the 1980s sound of "love me", commenting that healy "sings up a storm". menyes noted "ugh!" is an improvement over "love me", praising the sinister lyrics and production while calling it "the sort of earworm that can't necessarily get out of your head". daly commended the song's verbose and ostentatious lyrics, calling them "one of the most fascinating facets" of the band. additionally, he wrote: "[the track] might be more personal than the selfie culture-attacking 'love me', but it's no less bold, brilliant or thought-provoking."  jon dolan of rolling stone said "ugh!" is slickly strutting, praising healy's vocals while calling him a "disco lizard king". natalie weiner of billboard called the song "groovy" and commended healy's vocals. jonathan wroble of slant magazine called the track "impossibly squirmy" and praised the backing groove, calling it an "earworm". sean adams of drowned in sound commended the song's "glorious clatter". annie zaleski of the a.v. club felt "ugh!" is an "obvious single",
describing it as a "beachy ode to the lure of cocaine". manders praised the 1975 for finding a silver lining in the song's dark themes, noting they successfully move the song away from being morose, while writing that it perfectly captures the sick amusement in complacency. alex green of clash said the song covers familiar ground, calling it bland. andy gill of the independent said the track is less appealing than "love me", writing that it "[mistakes] mere riff for melody, and lyrical tricksiness for sophistication".  commercial performance  in the 1975's native united kingdom, "ugh!" peaked at number 42 on the uk singles chart and number 26 in scotland. the song was later certified silver by the british phonographic industry (bpi), denoting sales of over 200,000 units in the uk. elsewhere in europe, it reached number 80 in ireland. in the united states, "ugh!"  peaked at number 12 on the us billboard hot rock & alternative songs chart, before later being ranked at number 98 on the chart's year-end edition.  music video  an accompanying music video, directed by adam powell, was released on 18 december 2015. the visual, which was shot entirely on film, is based on the 1975's live shows. it features projection-mapping over a kraftwerk-style set, with the band performing the song on a series of platforms surrounded by pillars and fuzzy screens. the set lights up in a variety of hues, including fluorescent lights, bright neon lights and the muted, soft colour theme introduced in "love me". as the 1975 perform, healy dances in various outfits and oftentimes appears on screen without a shirt. chandra johnson of mtv news gave the visual a positive review, comparing healy's "cheeky dance moves" to drake's in "hotline bling" (2015). graves also drew comparisons to "hotline bling" while noting it continues to perpetuate the band's recently introduced retro, vibrantly coloured aesthetic. menyes commended the 1975 for being "as energetic as ever", calling the video "fiery". brittany spanos of rolling stone described the video as sleek and futuristic, writing that it showcases a stark shift from the black-and-white aesthetic present on the visuals of the 1975.  credits and personnel  credits adapted from i like it when you sleep, for you are so beautiful yet so unaware of it album liner notes.   george daniel composer, producer, programming, synthesizer programming, drums, keyboards, synthesizer, percussion
matthew healy composer, producer, electric guitar, vocals, background vocals  adam hann composer, electric guitar  ross macdonald composer  mike crossey producer, programming, mixer  jonathan gilmore recording engineer  chris gehringer mastering engineer  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  external links     2010s ballads 2015 singles 2015 songs the 1975 songs songs written by matthew healy funk ballads music videos directed by adam powell songs about cocaine synth-pop ballads contemporary r&b ballads songs about sexuality
fiber to the office (ftto) is an alternative cabling concept for local area network (lan) network office environments. it combines passive elements (fibre optic cabling, patch panels, splice boxes, connectors and standard copper 8p8c patch cords) and active mini-switches (called ftto switches) to provide end devices with gigabit ethernet. ftto involves centralised optical fibre cabling techniques to create a combined backbone/horizontal channel; this channel is provided from the work areas to the centralised cross-connect or interconnect by allowing the use of pull-through cables or splices in the telecommunications room.  history ftto technology emerged in germany at the start of the 1980s when fibre based connectivity was extensively explored. ftto appeared as a response to the growing network complexity.  the aim was to meet the following requirements:      ethernet based network  long life cycle  scalability, flexibility, sustainability  high reliability and robustness  redundancy  security  low maintenance cost/simple administration  quick and simple realization  improved energy efficiency  less network hierarchy  technology  ftto is a hybrid network involving fibre optic cabling (pre-terminated or extractable cables) and copper twisted pair patch cords with 8p8c connectors. in an ftto environment, fibre is laid up vertically from the central distribution switch right to the office floor, where it runs horizontally to active ftto switches at the users' workplaces. the final distance of 3-5 m to the end user desk is bridged using standard 8p8c twisted pair patch cords. there are only two network levels: the core and the access with no aggregation or distribution level in between compared to traditional structured cabling networks.  the ftto switch provides a connection between optical uplinks and electrical downlinks. typically, the switch has up to five twisted pair ports supporting power over ethernet (ieee 802.3af, 15.4w per port) and power over ethernet plus (ieee 802.3at, 30w per port). modern ftto switches offer speeds of 1 gbit/s per user port (gigabit ethernet). link aggregation may also be supported. thus, pcs, laptops, ip phones, wireless access points, cameras, access control units, building automation devices (including lights control, electricity meters, cooling and hvac units), and other devices with network interfaces may be connected to the backbone network
with gigabit speeds.  ftto should not be confused with fibre to the desk (fttd), which is a concept for structured cabling that is found mostly in military environments as a secure communication technology.  benefits due to the signal transfer qualities of fibre and its electromagnetic interference (emi) resilience, signals can be transferred over distances longer than 100 m (100 m is the channel limit in traditional structured cabling networks).  multi-mode fibre cabling covers distances of up to 550 m and single-mode of up to 10 km for gigabit ethernet and more. this is ideal for large, spatially distributed facilities typically found in public administration, universities, hospitals, airports, shopping malls and military.  ftto is characterized by an absence of network hierarchy which may make an installation easier to deploy and manage.  in ftto designs there is no need for floor distributors, and no investment in cooling, power supply and security equipment (i.e. access control, fire protection, sensors, ups) for the floor distribution room is required. floor distribution rooms hosting technical equipments (usually measuring 6-18 m2 each) are not required and the room saved can be used alternatively. another advantage of ftto infrastructures is their flexibility. new users, services or applications can be easily accommodated into the network. moreover, network adjustments, upgrades and physical changes are seamlessly integrated into the existing network without operation stops. also, ftto installations can be realised on average by 60% quicker than their traditional counterparts. research shows that using eee-enabled switches can save up to 70% power consumption compared to traditional non-eee network designs.. on top of that, most advanced ftto infrastructures help to save up to 40% tco.  among the more advanced features of ftto switches are precise link diagnostics (on the uplinks and tp ports), programmable function contacts, hardened management against hacking attacks, intelligent power budget management, easy reboot with memory cards, and extended durability. many products have a mean time between failures (mtbf) of over 60 years (based on siemens calculation procedure) and interoperability certificates with the leading manufacturers of core equipment (i.e. cisco, hp, alcatel).  advantages of fibre-based infrastructures  fibre infrastructures need less cabling than traditional copper twisted pair networks. the volume of fibre optics cabling is considerably reduced.  this is due to a very small fibre optic cable diameter of 9-50 mm. typically
, one fo-link replaces four twisted pair cables with no loss in bandwidth. this renders advanced redundancy concepts financially feasible.  fo-cabling knows no earthing problems.  fibre is a very safe medium. there are no problems with frayed or damaged insulation, incorrect or insufficient circuit protection, short circuits and overvoltage.  the fire load of fibre optic cables is extremely low, which is good for historical buildings with special needs regarding fire protection and safety.  advantages of ftto  no limit of 100 m for links as in traditional twisted-pair ethernet cabling  neither floor distributors nor special cabling needed  more usable space due to less technical space  disadvantages of ftto  ftto is not suitable for small and middle size installations with a small number of network components and users.  ftto requires a high port count in central distribution, rather than using fewer ports with higher bandwidth for vertical distribution.  ftto switches are managed, which requires professional skills for their configuration and management.   managed ftto switches can never beat unmanaged soho switches in terms of simplicity and price.   ftto projects require an extensive knowledge of and routine with optical fibre cabling technology.  an additional power supply unit may be needed to power an ftto switch. direct connection to the main powerline might reduce functionalities or require extra adjustments.  since ftto relies on ethernet transport, additional cabling may still be required for applications that could be transported over structured cabling, but not over an ethernet network, e.g. usb, hdmi, traditional analog or isdn telephony.  ftto projects are not low cost infrastructure projects, though they enable cost-efficient solutions for large and middle size network infrastructure projects.  ftto is mostly used in larger professional infrastructure projects, with campus architecture, large number of users and advanced redundancy needs.  references  external links  fiber optics technology consortium of tia.  international standard iso/iec 11801, information technology - generic cabling for customer premises, second edition, 2010.  it wissen. das große online-lexikon fur informationstechnologie  office enterprise architecture
tom ruggles (born 25 april 1992) is a former professional australian rules footballer who played for the geelong football club in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the geelong football club with their third selection and forty-fourth overall in the 2016 rookie draft. he made his debut in the sixty-nine point win against the  in round 3, 2016 at simonds stadium. he was delisted by geelong at the conclusion of the 2017 season.  references  external links  1992 births living people geelong football club players australian rules footballers from victoria (australia)
william g. clark, jr. (1912-1990) was an american jurist and politician who served as an associate justice of gloucester district court and was a member of the massachusetts house of representatives.  early life clark was born on may 6, 1912 in gloucester, massachusetts. he graduated from worcester academy in 1931, duke university in 1935, and the boston university school of law in 1938.  political career clark served as a member of the massachusetts house of representatives from 1941 to 1942. during world war ii, he worked in counter espionage for the federal bureau of investigation. after the war, he was once again elected to the house of representatives, where he served from 1947 to 1949.  legal career clark began practicing law in gloucester in 1938. in 1972 he was appointed to the gloucester district court by governor francis w. sargent. he remained on the bench until his retirement in 1982.  death clark died on november 14, 1990 at massachusetts general hospital.  see also  1941-1942 massachusetts legislature  1947-1948 massachusetts legislature  references  1912 births 1990 deaths boston university school of law alumni duke university alumni massachusetts lawyers massachusetts republicans massachusetts state court judges members of the massachusetts house of representatives people from gloucester, massachusetts worcester academy alumni 20th-century american judges 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american lawyers
sras appala naidu, (6 november 1925 - 1996) was an indian member of parliament sitting in the lok sabha.  he was born in 1925 in pendurthi, visakhapatnam. he served as gram munisibhu four times between 1944 and 1964 and served as then gram sarpanch between 1964 and 1967.  he was member of andhra pradesh legislative assembly between 1967 and 1969. he was elected from parwada constituency as indian national congress candidate. he was minister for fisheries and ports during 1969 - 71  he was elected to the 5th lok sabha (1971-77), 6th lok sabha (1977-80) and 7th lok sabha (1980-84) from anakapalli (lok sabha constituency) as a candidate of indian national congress. he was also the chairman of visakhapatnam urban development authority (vuda) in 1982-83.  memorial a bronze statue was erected in his memory at the pendurthi cross roads visakhapatnam in the mid 1990s. a bronze statue was erected in his memory at the kasimkota ecb visakhapatnam in 2016.  references  5th lok sabha members 6th lok sabha members 7th lok sabha members 1925 births telugu people lok sabha members from andhra pradesh people from visakhapatnam district 1996 deaths andhra pradesh mlas 1967-1972 indian national congress politicians from andhra pradesh
minister for seniors and ageing and minister for volunteering are positions in the government of western australia, currently held by mick murray of the labor party. the position of "minister for the aged" was first created in 1984, for the government of brian burke; in 2005 a combined "minister for seniors and volunteering". this arrangement was terminated in 2017 when they were made into separate portfolios. the ministers' portfolios fall within the state government's department of local government and communities.  titles  20 december 1984 - 27 february 1991: minister for the aged  27 february 1991 - 25 november 2005: minister for seniors  25 november 2005 - 17 march 2017: minister for seniors and volunteering  17 march 2017 - present: minister for seniors and ageing; minister for volunteering  list of ministers  see also  minister for child protection (western australia)  minister for community services (western australia)  minister for youth (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  seniors minister for seniors volunteering in australia
the new european  is a british pro-eu weekly newspaper that began publication on 8 july 2016. launched as a response to the united kingdom's 2016 eu referendum, its readership is aimed at those who voted to remain within the european union, with the newspaper's original tagline being "the new pop-up paper for the 48%". formerly owned by archant, it was announced at the beginning of february 2021 that a consortium including founder matt kelly, media executive mark thompson and former financial times editor lionel barber had acquired the newspaper.  newspaper it was founded and edited for the first three-and-a-half years of its existence by matt kelly, who formerly worked at the daily mirror and local world. kelly was partially inspired in his idea by the european, a british weekly newspaper that was published from 1990 to 1998; hence the name the new european.  the newspaper's owners stated that the new european was to have an initial lifespan of just four issues, beyond which publication would be reviewed on a week-by-week basis. by the eve of the third edition the paper revealed it had broken even and sold around 40,000 copies. it continued to publish beyond its fourth issue, and claimed in july 2019 that it continued to be profitable. the circulation was reported in november 2016 to be "about 25,000" and, in february 2017, to be 20,000.  alastair campbell became the newspaper's editor-at-large in march 2017, months after it won the serial rights to the fifth volume of his diaries about the blair government, which it serialised over three weeks.  in may 2017 it said it only had one permanent staff member and around 40 contributors. the paper announced it was changing from berliner to compact format in july 2017.  in may 2018 the newspaper devoted a whole issue to feminism, rebranding as the new feminist, edited by caroline criado-perez with contributions from helen lewis, samira ahmed, and konnie huq. on 29 march 2019, the date the uk was expected to leave the european union under theresa may, the newspaper devoted a whole edition to the writings of will self. the 25,000-word essay was illustrated by martin rowson.  in september 2019, kelly announced he was promoting jasper copping, previously the paper's deputy editor, to the role of editor, while taking the role of publisher himself.  in february 2021 it was announced that a consortium including founder matt kelly, media executive mark thompson and former financial times editor lionel barber had bought the
newspaper from archant.  digital the paper announced in november 2016 that it was moving to become more digitally focussed. in may 2017 it launched its first podcast which now attracts between 10,000 and 15,000 listeners each week. the website, which combines contributions from the newspaper with unique online-only content, claimed to attract more than a million page views a month.  reception  awards in march 2017, the society of editors awarded the new european the chairman's award. in may 2017, the new european won prizes at the annual british media awards for launch of the year (gold), print product of the year (silver) content team of the year (bronze) and pioneer of the year for the editor matt kelly. in july 2017, the archant group won the professional publishers association chairman's award, with the launch of the new european cited.  criticism in july 2016, just a week after the launch of the paper, vice news described the new european as a newspaper for the "sore loser" that is "not united by a love for europe, but rather a disdain for the 52%".  in april 2017, the new european sent out a press release of its cover story titled "skegness: the seaside town that brexit could close down". in the press release it also mentioned that the story was "unlikely to go down well, locally, and there is an opportunity to stir up some controversy locally". the new european had claimed the press release had been sent out in error and issued another copy without the commentary. the spectator ran a piece titled "the new european reveals its plan to troll skegness". it said: "although the pro-eu paper claims it is an advocate for unity and tolerance, it seems they hold no qualms about stirring up division in uk towns". the cartoon image on the cover of that issue was a play on the jolly fisherman, originally commissioned by the great northern railways, and received heavy criticism. the i reported that the people of skegness were "hurt and offended" that the town's mascot, the jolly fisherman, had been "exploited" on the front cover of the new european magazine. in response to the feature, member of parliament for boston and skegness matt warman said that "those who seek to make the european case anew would do better to try to understand than to insult either individuals or whole towns."  references  external links    the new european homepage  weekly newspapers published in the united kingdom archant pro-europeanism in
the united kingdom 2016 united kingdom european union membership referendum publications established in 2016
the baia do iguape marine extractive reserve () is a marine extractive reserve in the state of bahia, brazil. as of 2002 the reserve supported about 5,000 people engaged in fishing and shellfish collection.  location  the baia do iguape marine extractive reserve is divided between the municipalities of cachoeira (56.37%) and maragogipe (39.48%) in the state of bahia. it covers . it covers the long and narrow iguape bay at the mouth of the paraguacu river which empties into the bay of all saints (baia de todos os santos).  economy  as of 2002 there were about 900 families with 4,960 people involved in fishing and gathering shellfish in the bay. fishing is mainly done by men and shellfish collection by women and children. shrimps, fish, oysters and mussels are harvested, sorted, in some cases smoked, and sold to middlemen who take the product to salvador. other economic activities include agriculture, crafts, and more recently fish farming. earnings are generally well above the minimum wage. as of 1998 only 4% of the population had high school education and 28% were illiterate.  as of 2009 the state government had selected the extreme south of the reserve as the site for a naval centre, and was proceeding with implementation.  the local communities had not been consulted.  the project was justified on the basis of creating jobs, but negative social impacts had not been considered.  history  the baia do iguape marine extractive reserve was created by presidential decree on 11 august 2000. when created it had an area of about  of which  were land and mangroves, and  were inland waters. it became part of the central atlantic forest ecological corridor, created in 2002. it is classed as iucn protected area category vi (protected area with sustainable use of natural resources). the objective is to protect an area used by traditional extractive populations whose livelihood is based on extraction, subsistence agriculture and raising small animals, to protect the livelihoods and culture of these populations, and to ensure sustainable use of natural resources.  law 12058 of 13 october 2009 amended the limits, defining an area of about  with a perimeter of about . the deliberative council was created by icmbio on 16 october 2009 with representatives of government agencies and the extractive communities. the reserve was recognised on 14 may 2014 for pronaf purpose as covering 1,500 extractive families.  notes  sources  2000 establishments in brazil marine extractive reserves of brazil protected areas of bahia protected areas established in 2000
jal minocher mehta (died 2001) was a parsi indian surgeon, social worker and philanthropist, known for his services for the rehabilitation of people afflicted with leprosy. he was the president of pune district leprosy committee and was involved in organizing self help groups of the leprosy patients and in creating social awareness about the disease through documentaries. he chaired the serum institute of india (siil) and sat in the advisory boards of pharmabiz, chronicle pharmabiz and the vienna karl landsteiner institute. his efforts towards the leprosy eradication program included the management of a leprosy hospital and a rehabilitation centre in pune. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1982, for his contributions to medical science. he died on 13 october 2001, succumbing to a cerebral hemorrhage at pune, survived by his wife, mehru, a medical doctor and cancer surgeon; their only son, minoo, had predeceased jal mehta, caught in an avalanche in the himalayas earlier.  see also   serum institute of india  references  external links     recipients of the padma bhushan in medicine year of birth missing 2001 deaths indian surgeons social workers indian philanthropists scientists from pune 20th-century indian medical doctors parsi people medical doctors from maharashtra social workers from maharashtra 20th-century surgeons
the 1833 morpeth by-election was held on 31 december 1833 it was won by the unopposed whig candidate edward george granville howard who replaced his brother frederick george howard.  references  by-elections to the parliament of the united kingdom in northumberland constituencies unopposed by-elections to the parliament of the united kingdom in english constituencies 1833 in england 1833 elections in europe 19th century in northumberland morpeth, northumberland december 1833 events
invasive species are a serious threat to the native biodiversity of colombia, located in northern south america.  invasive plants and invasive insect pests are an ongoing cost to colombia agriculture.  see also  references  external links  invasive species
osmaniye mosque (, ), also locally called frangomachala mosque (τζαμι του φραγκομαχαλα, "mosque of the frankish quarter") is one of the three remaining mosques on the island of chios, greece, located inside the old citadel area of chios town, which was the main neighborhood of the turkish community of the island.  history  the mosque's construction started in 1891 on the orders of sultan abdulhamit ii, when chios city was serving as the capital of the vilayet of the archipelago. the construction was completed in 1892. the marble inscription (kitabe) over the door of the mosque mentions this information. it was prepared by the turkish artist feyzi.  recent  the mosque was officially registered by greek ministry of culture as a cultural landmark on january 21, 1983.  as a result, in 1997, the mosque was repaired and renovated by the greek government and made available for hosting exhibitions and various cultural events.  architecture  the mosque has a rectangular plan with a 8x10 m area and a 8x8 m main praying hall. it has a roof-floor, an inlet port and also a gallery on the west side which serves to access the minaret. the minaret has an octagonal shape and is located on the northeastern corner of the mosque. in addition, there is a historical turkish building connected to the minaret and is an outbuilding to the mosque which contained service rooms during turkish rule.  the osmanie mosque was built in same period with another turkish mosque which still survives, hamidiye mosque, in chios and shows similarities in architectural style.  references   ottoman mosques in greece buildings and structures in chios ottoman chios mosques completed in 1892 19th-century architecture in greece
nurpur jattan  is a village in hoshiarpur district of punjab state, india. it is located  from hoshiarpur, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of nurpur jattan. this village comes under mahilpur police station and garhshanker (tehsil). sabka sarpanch was sartaj singh sangra and now ajit singh pannu elected as a sarpanch in recent election. this village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.nurpur jattan has two sikh temples and a religious place which is known as bhagat charn dass ji. a fair held on every year in october in memory of bhagat charan daas ji. the village comprises an area of 208.54 hectares.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, nurpur jattan has total number of 157 houses and population of 763 of which include 401 males and 362 females. 568 persons were counted as literate, representing a literacy rate of 74.4%, slightly below the state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 55 (32 males and 23 females), which is 7.21% of total population of nurpur jattan.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
sameer phaterpekar is an indian composer who composes music for hindi films.  life and early career sameer phaterpekar started his career in the indian film music industry as a musician in 1982. during the golden era of live recordings he got an opportunity to workwith legends like r.d.burman, kalyanji-anandji, rajesh roshan as well as a guitarist for iconic song composition by laxmikant-payrelalfor hawa hawaii (mr. india), choli ke peeche kya hai (khalnayak), jumma chumma (hum) and for nadeem - shravan (ashiqui). as the face of the music industry started changing in 2002, sameer ventured out as an independent music composer after setting his foot as a music composer with his first two albums 'khoobsurat' by venus music company along with anand bakshi and the noted gazal singer talat aziz and 'dil le gaya ajnabi' with well-known voice of the music industry alka yagnik by tips music. sameer went to give background score for nearly 55 hindi, marathi, punjabi and tamil films. he has composed songs for remarkable songs like 'o my friend ganesha' the title track of the popular kid's movie 'my friend ganesha' which was a range.  mr. sameer has been associated with all the films' directed by mr.nishikant kamat. he has composed music for 'pal mai achanak' for nishikant kamat's the directorial debut in hindi cinema 'mumbai meri jaan' as well as for 'dombivali fast' a critically acclaimed national award film which marked the directorial debut of nishikant kama in marathi cinema. he has also composed background score for john abraham starrer film 'force' as well as for marathi debut of ritesh deshmukh award-winning movie 'lai bhari' which was a huge commercial success. the most recent of this association was composing the background score for ajay devgan-tabu starrer drishyam, which has received both critical appreciation and commercial success also for irfan khan, jimmy shergill, tushar dalvi star cast film 'madaari'. one of the milestones of his musical career was receiving the 'best background music' award at the 5th dada saheb phalke film festival 2015. sameer sees every new project as a new journey and is he is waiting to embark on many such journeys in the future.  filmography as composers
for background score only  shaadi karke phas gaya yaar(2002)  parwana (2003)  kid's no. (2003)  vidyaarthi (2006)  hawas (2004)  mitterpyare nu (punjabi) (2004)  ali baba chalis chor  (2004)  shabanum mausi (2005)  girlfriend (2004)  bachelor  tauba tauba (2004)  insan (2005)  chetna (2005)  kal na kal ye toh hona hi tha  (2004)  jalwa (1987)  devaki (film) (2006)  eight (2006 film)|eight (2006)  meri life me usaki wife (2009)  libaas (1988)  atma (2006)  dombivali fast  (2005)  umar (2006)  khujli  red swastik (2007)  miss anara (2007)  jimmy (2008)  bali che rajya yeu de(marathi) (2008)  evano oruvan (tamil) (2007)  mi nahi ho tyatla (marathi) (2008)  good luck (2000)  abhimanyu   mumbai meri jaan (2008)  bandya aani bebby (2010)  dhuaan (2013)  ajoba vayat aale (marathi) (2011)  ringa ringa (marathi) (2010)  riwayat (2012)  debu (film) (marathi) (2010)  kab se sambhala hai dil (2005)  ajab lagnachi gajzb gosht (marathi) (2010)  chaloo (2011)  force (2011)  bikkar bai sentimental (punjabi) (2013)  love recipe (2012)  lai bhaari (2014)  rocky the slave (2011)  ka kha ga   bhay (marathi) (2016)  drishyam (2015)  madaari (2016)  aapla manus (2018)  criminal justice (2019) indian adaptation  out of love (2019)  samaantar web seris (2020)  duri me bhi hum pass hai (2020) music composer  times music (2020) episode 1  criminal justice: behind closed doors (2021)  out of love season 2(2021)  references  external links  https://www.imdb.com/name/
nm2192772/  http://myswar.com/artist/sameer-phatarpekar  https://www.imdb.com/name/nm2192772/  https://www.imdb.com/title/tt4430212/reviews-2  http://www.zeetalkies.com/gossip/background-music-is-like-a-character-of-the-film-sameer-phatarpekar.html  https://www.youtube.com/channel/uc8dkp-dhfo5c9b5e1xfnnwq  indian film score composers musicians from mumbai indian male film score composers
ceres is an unincorporated community in lewis county, in the u.s. state of washington. it is located off washington state route 6 in a bend of the chehalis river. the willapa hills trail bisects the area.  history a post office called ceres was established in 1908, and remained in operation until 1931. the community was named by the northern pacific railroad after ceres, the roman goddess of agriculture.  references  populated places in lewis county, washington unincorporated communities in lewis county, washington unincorporated communities in washington (state)
the wild places is the third studio album by english singer-songwriter and musician duncan browne. released in 1978 through logo and sire records, it is browne's first solo album since his departure from the band metro that year, and features contributions from session musicians tony hymas, john giblin and simon phillips. in contrast to his previous self-titled solo record, the sound of the album is fully electric and ranges from progressive rock to straightforward rock music and synthpop.  the record achieved moderate commercial success. it has been long out of print in the united states and was reissued during late 2000 in japan.  critical reception  in their 1979 review, billboard magazine described the record as "sophisticated and sensitive," writing that browne's percussion playing in addition to his guitar work adds a good balance. the review concludes: "browne sings cosmopolitan songs of sex, love and sensations, not yet jaded but getting there." nevertheless, the new rolling stone album guide critic dave marsh criticised the record and its successor, streets of fire (1979), dismissing them as "synthesizer pop that hardly lives up to the promise of the album titles." marsh further wrote: "fire and wild- ness, not to mention human passion, is just what this mechanical marvel [browne] lacks."  in a retrospective review, allmusic critic bruce eder was positive in his assessment of the album, comparing it to "a lost roxy music album, or perhaps a lost bryan ferry record." eder further stated that "the music has a sense of drama as well as beautiful melodies that were even better realized, with lush contributions on the synthesizer and related keyboards" and concluded: "duncan browne was at the top of his game, as both a singer and composer, working in an introspective, romantic vein."  track listing all tracks are written by duncan browne, except where noted.  "the wild places" - 5:55  "roman vecu" - 4:43  "camino real, part i, part ii, part iii" (browne, giblin, thomas, hymas) - 8:30  "samurai" (peter godwin) - 4:25  "kisarazu" - 7:10  "the crash" - 3:53  "planet earth" (godwin) - 6:15  2000 japan reissue bonus tracks  personnel album personnel as adapted from album liner notes.  duncan browne - lead vocals, electric guitar, acoustic guitar, percussion, production, backing vocals; keyboards
(5)  tony hymas - synthesizer  john giblin - fretless bass  simon phillips - drums, percussion; piano (3)  chart positions album  references  external links    1978 albums logo records albums sire records albums progressive rock albums by english artists duncan browne albums synth-pop albums by english artists
the lamkhaga pass (5,282 m / 17,320 ft) is one of the toughest pass which connects kinnaur district of himachal pradesh with harshil in uttrakhand. the lamkhaga pass trek starts from chitkul the last village of sangla valley in himachal, though it can be done from harshil side also. this trek is a fairly remote trek, which was first crossed by greek-british author and mountaineer marco alexander pallis in 1933. pallis was a greek-british author and mountaineer who was famous for his writings on tibetan buddhism. he made a first ascent of leo pargial(6790m) in 1933.  this pass is located near indo - tibetan border and to cross the pass one needs to obtain inner line permit from the district administration of kinnaur, himachal pradesh  references  mountain passes of himachal pradesh mountain passes of uttarakhand
valor christian academy is a private transitional kindergarten through middle grades christian school in redondo beach, california, in the los angeles metropolitan area. it was previously known as coast christian school but received its current name in september 2012. it was affiliated with the assemblies of god.  history pastor wilbur wacker and calvary church of the coastlands established the school in 1977.   it was named coast christian schools (ccs), served grades kindergarten through 12, and had two campuses in redondo beach, both leased from the redondo beach city school district, and the school also maintained a campus in harbor city. by 1999 it had six campuses, with five in redondo beach and one in torrance.  circa 2012 ambassador high school, a christian high school, was supposed to begin using the valor christian campus but there were issues with the redondo beach city council, which postponed the decision on whether the school was permitted to open there.  operations as of 1992 all teachers must be christians but they were not required to have educational credentials from the state of california.  as of 1999 these were the campuses (all except for one were in redondo beach):  prospect campus - two years through prekindergarten  inglewood campus - infant through prekindergarten  elementary campus - kindergarten through grade 5  middle school campus - grades 6 through 8  accelerated learning center in redondo beach - grades 6-12  accelerated learning center in torrance - grades 9-12  demographics as of the 1991-1992 school year it had 390 students. of its elementary students, 77% were anglo white, 10% were black, 8% were asian, and 5% were latino; and of the secondary students, 35% were black, 30% were anglo, 20% were latino, and 15% were asian. many of the minority students lived in hawthorne, inglewood, and other areas, and would have otherwise attended public schools. jean merl of the los angeles times wrote that the secondary campus was "well-integrated" and that it "appears free of the racial tensions that have split some of the nearby public high schools."  references  external links    coast christian schools (archive)  christian schools in california private elementary schools in california private middle schools in california private high schools in california redondo beach, california high schools in los angeles county, california schools in los angeles county, california 1977 establishments in california educational institutions established in 1977
jacques derogy (1925-1997) was a french investigative journalist.  early life jacques derogy was born on july 24, 1925 in neuilly-sur-seine near paris in france. his father, henri weitzmann, was a journalist. during world war ii, they hid in the ardeche with members of the french resistance.  career derogy started his career as a journalist by writing for franc-tireur and l'intransigeant. he wrote for l'express from 1959 to 1987, and subsequently for l'evenement du jeudi. during one of his investigations, he uncovered the criminal past of paul touvier during world war ii. he also wrote about israel.  derogy was the author of many books.  death derogy died of cancer on october 30, 1997 in neuilly-sur-seine, france.  works  references  1925 births 1997 deaths people from neuilly-sur-seine deaths from cancer in france 20th-century french journalists
the german national action plan on energy efficiency (nape) () is the national energy efficiency action plan (neeap) for germany.  the plan was commissioned under eu energy efficiency directive 2012/27/eu of the european union and released on 3 december 2014.  under the plan, the german government offers an average increase of 2.1%/year in macroeconomic energy productivity from 2008 to 2020.  the exact reduction in primary energy use is therefore dependent on the rate of economic growth.  the nape is part of the climate action programme2020, also approved on 3december 2014.  targets   the german government target under the national action plan on energy efficiency is specified in terms of energy productivity relative to gross domestic product (gdp).  under the plan, the german government offers an average annual increase of 2.1% in macroeconomic energy productivity from 2008 to 2020.  assuming an annual increase in gdp of 1.1%, this represents a reduction in the energy-related share of primary energy consumption (in million tonnes crude oil equivalent) from  in 2008 to  in 2020.  and corresponds to a reduction in final energy consumption from  in 2008 to  in 2020.  these projections are covered by a caveat on economic and physical influences beyond the control of the government.  this macroeconomic target is concurrent with other official energy efficiency and consumption targets not included in the national action plan on energy efficiency, in particular that of reducing primary energy consumption from 2008 levels by 20% in 2020 and by 50% in 2050.  policy and monitoring   the areas covered are the energy efficiency of buildings, energy conservation for companies, consumer energy efficiency, and transport energy efficiency.  the policy contains both immediate and forward-looking measures.  the central short-term measures of nape include the introduction of competitive tendering for energy efficiency, the raising of funding for building renovation, the introduction of tax incentives for efficiency measures in the building sector, and the setting up energy efficiency networks together with business and industry.  german industry is expected to make a sizeable contribution.  the government's fourth energy transition monitoring report, published in 2015, briefly reviews the national action plan on energy efficiency.  government progress on its energy efficiency targets under nape and elsewhere (and on the energiewende more generally) is subject to external review.  the 2015 review found energy efficiency developments in electricity and space heating were roughly on track, although developments in transport were not.  but because the various instruments introduced specifically under nape were still
in planning, testing, or early introduction, the review panel was unable to analyse their effectiveness.  these instruments will be covered in future reviews.  the 2016 annual report on nape, submitted to the eu on 28 april 2016, presented the major legislative and non-legislative energy efficiency measures adopted in the previous year.  these include the energy efficiency network initiative aimed at companies, new obligations on non-smes to carry out regular energy audits, increased funding for energy efficient commercial renovation and new-build, and a new energy efficiency strategy for buildings (esg) that may result in an "almost climate-neutral building stock".  in addition, the government is in the process of developing a scheme to promote heating optimization, an energy efficiency program for waste heat, programs to increase the energy efficiency in municipalities, and measures to improve the use of energy in rail transport.  the report also noted that final energy consumption in the transport sector rose by 3.9pj between 2013 and 2014, as a result of the increase in passenger-kilometres by around 2.0% and tonne-kilometres by around 1.3%, despite improvements in the final energy consumption per kilometre.  see also      energieeinsparverordnung (enev) - german building energy regulations  energiewende in germany  federal ministry for economic affairs and energy (bmwi) - oversees the national action plan on energy efficiency (nape)  german climate action plan 2050  german national renewable energy action plan  notes  references  further reading    3rd national energy efficiency action plan (neeap) 2014 - text of the german national action plan on energy efficiency (nape)  external links    european commission (ec) national energy efficiency action plans (neeap) website  german federal ministry for economic affairs and energy (bmwi) national action plan on energy efficiency (nape) website  action plans energy conservation energy conservation in europe energy efficiency energy efficiency policy energy in germany energy law energy policy transition low-energy building
the hauge bjerge formation is a formation of the peary land group in greenland. it preserves fossils dating back to the silurian period.  see also   list of fossiliferous stratigraphic units in greenland  haug range  references    silurian greenland
eric racy (born 10 september 1980) is a platinum selling mixing engineer and producer.  currently, he lives and works in la in a wide range of genres and with clients ranging from indie bands to grammy winning pop artists.   his clients have included katy perry, nicki minaj, pharrell, tyga, jonathan davis, 2ne1, troye sivan, alessia cara, kelly clarkson, divinity roxx, kelly rowland, j. cole, janelle monae, t-pain, missy elliott, zendaya, lil wayne, big sean, busta rhymes, photek and many more.  eric is managed by chris woods for alignment management.  career  production & mixing  eric started his career in the underground dance music scene in 1998, producing drum and bass and eventually working alongside edm legends like loxy & ink, soul slinger and tech itch.  after releasing singles on renegade hardware and liquid sky he began to move away from drum and bass towards traditional engineering and turned his attention to working with artists and bands.  in 2008, racy relocated to los angeles where he began focusing more heavily on mixing.  in 2011, while working with the band vayden, lead singer curtis casey introduced racy to record producer jess jackson who was working on tyga's major label debut album careless world.  shortly after the meeting, jackson brought racy on to mix the project which went on to produce multiple gold and platinum singles.  after careless world, racy's demand continued to increase both in the urban and pop genres leading him to work with and mix songs for artists including troye sivan, alessia cara, divinity roxx, jonathan davis, photek, major myjah and many more.  in 2016, eric was hired to mix the single "this is for my girls", a charity single commissioned by first lady michelle obama, featuring kelly clarkson, kelly rowland, janelle monae, missy elliott, zendaya, jadagrace, chloe & halle and written by diane warren.  proceeds from the single benefits michelle obama's 'let girls learn' initiative as well as the first lady's #62milliongirls campaign, targeted towards helping young ladies around the world complete their education.  2ne1 'new evolution' global tour & katy perry's 'prismatic world tour'  shortly after the release of careless world, racy was asked to join yg entertainment for the mega k pop group 2ne1's first world tour.  alongside former members of michael
jackson, cee-lo and beyonce's camps, eric traveled to seoul to help program and create the audio and multimedia for the show. racy traveled with the group as part of the band for the duration of the tour and also created a remix of 2ne1's hit "i am the best" that was used for the concert's finale.  the remix appears on the 'live in japan' tour dvd.  in 2014, while back in the studio in la, racy was approached to join the katy perry "prismatic" world tour to help build and program the show as he had for 2ne1's 'new evolution'.  after spending several months creating the show in los angeles, eric traveled with katy and the tour for the first leg before heading back to the studio.  the prismatic world tour which opened to critical acclaim continued throughout 2014/2015, becoming perry's most successful tour to date.  in addition to his work as a mixer, racy is also one half of "black box analog design", a boutique company that builds handmade tube, studio equipment.  selected credits  references  1980 births living people american audio engineers
e.d.m.o.n.d is a cantopop album by edmond leung, and the last studio album released by gold typhoon.  track listing the positive energy song (正氣歌) di ga day  mmm~13 things you didn't know better than you know (mmm~十三件唔知好過知的事) anti-love song (反情歌) never  delete  references e.d.m.o.n.d (ep), yesasia.com  edmond leung albums 2013 eps
in the 2016-17 season, mc alger competed in the ligue 1 for the 46th season, as well as the algerian cup, super cup and the confederation cup.  pre-season  competitions  overview  ligue 1  league table  results summary  results by round  matches  algerian super cup  algerian cup  caf confederation cup  preliminary round  first round  play-off round  group stage  squad information  playing statistics  |-  |- ! colspan=14 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| players transferred out during the season  goalscorers  squad list  transfers  in  out  references  2016-17 mc alger
the 1992-93 courage league national division three was the sixth full season of rugby union within the third tier of the english league system, currently known as national league 1.  otley finished the season as champions and were promoted to courage league division 2.  due to rfu changes to the english rugby union league system for the following season because of the introduction of courage league division 5, eight teams were relegated into courage league division 4.  participating teams and locations  league table  sponsorship national division three is part of the courage clubs championship and is sponsored by courage brewery.  see also  english rugby union leagues  english rugby union system  rugby union in england  notes  references  n3 national league 1 seasons
the smosh west lakes football club is an australian rules football club based in the western suburbs of adelaide which was formed in 1996 as a merger between the former st. michael's old scholars and hindmarsh football club and west lakes football club.  the club has participated in the south australian amateur football league since being formed.  a-grade premierships   south australian amateur football league division 3 (1)  2007   south australian amateur football league division 4 (1)  2003  merger history  smosh west lakes was formed in 1996 through the amalgamation of st. michael's old scholars and hindmarsh football club and west lakes football club.  st. michael's old scholars and hindmarsh (smosh)  the st. michael's old scholars and hindmarsh football club was first formed as church team st. saviour, representing st. saviour's catholic church at brompton, which was open from 1868 to 1924.  some records indicate matches were played against other church teams in the 1890s but it is not known if these were part of an organised competition.  the first record of participating in an organised competition was when they finished runners-up to st. francis xavier's in the st. vincent de paul football association in 1907.  st. saviour's was renamed hindmarsh cym (catholic young men) for four years from 1939 before a slight change of name to hindmarsh cyms (catholic young men's society) in 1943.  in 1975, the club formed a partnership with st michael's college and once again changed names to become st. michael's old scholars and hindmarsh.  a-grade premierships   catholic young men's society football association (5)  1944   1945   1946 undefeated   1947 undefeated   1948  1950   adelaide metropolitan football league a division (1)  1967   south australian amateur football league a3 (1)  1994  west lakes   the west lakes football club was first formed as the semaphore park football club in 1930.  in 1978 they joined the south australian football association and in 1984 were renamed west lakes football club.  a-grade premierships  port adelaide and district football association (2)  1949   1950   south australian amateur football league a3 (1)  1951 undefeated   1955   south australian amateur football league a4 (1)  1967  references   australian rules football clubs in south australia australian rules football clubs established in 1996 1996 establishments in australia adelaide footy league clubs
turkish basketball clubs in european and worldwide competitions is the performance record of men's professional basketball clubs from turkey's top-tier level league, the basketbol super ligi (bsl), in international competitions.  the finals  turkish clubs in euroleague (1st tier)  season to season  turkish clubs in fiba saporta cup (2nd tier)  season to season  turkish clubs in fiba korac cup (3rd tier)  season to season  see also european basketball clubs in european and worldwide competitions from:  croatia  czechoslovakia  france  greece  israel  italy  russia  spain  ussr  yugoslavia  references  basketball in turkey
tenco may refer to:  tenco, alternative way of writing tenso, a style of troubadour song luigi tenco (1938-1967), italian singer songwriter
the polaris flare is a filamentous gas cloud in the milky way which is seen in the sky in the region of the constellation ursa minor and around the star polaris. the area on the sky is estimated at 50 square degrees. the range is approximately 500 light years.  see also  list of molecules in interstellar space  interplanetary medium - interplanetary dust  interstellar medium - interstellar dust  intergalactic medium - intergalactic dust  local interstellar cloud  references  ursa minor (constellation) molecular clouds milky way
leonardo campos duarte da silva (born 17 july 1996), commonly known as leo duarte, is a brazilian professional footballer who plays as a centre-back for super lig club istanbul basaksehir, on loan from ac milan.  career  early career duarte spend most of his youth career at flamengo winning multiples competitions, the most important was the 2016 copa sao paulo de futebol junior, the top youth tournament in brazil, being the team captain and lifting the trophy. he had a solid tournament, being praised and along with felipe vizeu and ronaldo, duarte received has been praised as a player ready to be promoted to the professional team. few weeks later all three players started training with the professional team.  flamengo on 5 march 2016, duarte debuted as a starter in a 3-1 win over bangu on a 2016 rio de janeiro state league match. in this particular game flamengo fielded several young players and reserves.  due to injuries and transfers throughout the 2016 season duarte played in another eight matches, including seven in the 2016 brazilian serie a and one appearance in 2016 copa do brasil, all matches as starter. his first brazilian serie a match was on 14 may 2016 in a 1-0 win against sport at estadio raulino de oliveira in volta redonda.  on 22 august 2018, duarte extended his contract with flamengo until december 2022.  ac milan on 27 july 2019, brazilian press announced the agreement between flamengo and ac milan in a €10 million transfer with a clause that could potentially rise to €11 million. on 7 august 2019, duarte was officially announced as a milan player on a five-year deal. he made his debut on 29 september 2019, in a 3-1 league defeat to fiorentina.  istanbul basaksehir (loan) on 11 january 2021, duarte joined turkish club istanbul basaksehir on loan until 30 june 2022. the deal includes the option to buy.  personal life on 23 september 2020, he tested positive for covid-19.  career statistics  honours flamengo  campeonato carioca: 2017, 2019  references  external links  flamengo leo duarte profile instagram facebook  1996 births living people people from sao paulo (state) brazilian footballers association football defenders campeonato brasileiro serie a players clube de regatas do flamengo footballers serie a players super lig players a.c. milan players istanbul basaksehir f.k. players brazilian expatriate footballers brazilian expatriate sportspeople in italy brazilian expatriate sportspeople in turkey expatriate footballers in italy expatriate footballers in turkey
j.j.'s broadway is an album by jazz trombonist and arranger j. j. johnson recorded in 1963 for the verve label.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow observed "this album has some good music, but it will be very difficult to find".  track listing  "lovely" (stephen sondheim) - 3:56  "my favorite things" (richard rodgers, oscar hammerstein ii) - 4:17  "mira" (bob merrill) - 3:23 		  "make someone happy" (jule styne, betty comden, adolph green) - 3:51  "who will buy?" (lionel bart) - 3:54  "a sleepin' bee" (harold arlen, truman capote) - 3:54  "put on a happy face" (lee adams, charles strouse) - 4:06  "nobody's heart" (richard rodgers, lorenz hart) - 3:39  "a second chance" (andre previn) - 2:55  "the sweetest sounds" (rodgers) - 3:28 recorded in new york city on march 12, 1963 (tracks 1, 3, 5, 6, 8 & 10) and april 6, 1963 (tracks 2, 4, 7 & 9)  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone, leader paul faulise, urbie green, lou mcgarity, tom mitchell - trombone  (tracks 1, 3, 5, 6, 8 & 10) hank jones - piano (tracks 2 & 4-8) richard davis (tracks 2, 4, 7 & 9), chuck israels (tracks 1, 3, 5, 6, 8 & 10) - bass walter perkins - drums  references   1963 albums verve records albums j. j. johnson albums
jean-francois de bastide (15 july 1724, marseille - 4 july 1798, milan aged 73) was an 18th-century french writer and playwright.  the son of a magistrate from provence, bastide was a polygraph: he wrote novels (histoire d'une religieuse par elle-meme, "bibliotheque universelle des romans", may 1786, 24 p. in-16), theatre plays, critics, and was also a journalist and a compilator. as a journalist, he published le nouveau spectateur (1758-60), le monde tel qu'il est (1760-61), journal de bruxelles ou le penseur (1766-67), etc. he also directed the "bibliotheque universelle des romans" from 1779 to 1789.  as a playwright, he composed: 1749: le desenchantement inespere 1762: l'epreuve de la probite 1763: les caracteres de la musique 1763: les deux talents, opera comique presented at comedie italienne 11 august (music by chevalier d'herbain) 1764: le jeune homme, comedy presented in bordeaux 1766: les amants opposes, comedy presented in the hague 11 march  la majorite, comedy presented the same day in the same theatre 1766: le soldat par amour, opera comique presented in brussel, at theatre de la monnaie, 4 november (music by pieter van maldere and ignaz vitzthumb)  gesoncourt et clementine, tragedy presented the same day in the same theatre.  la petite-maison, published in contes de m. de bastide, paris, l. cellot, 1763, ii, 1, p. 47-88  external links  his plays and their presentations on cesar la petite maison on cairninfo  18th-century french writers 18th-century french male writers 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights french opera librettists writers from marseille 1724 births 1798 deaths
niecee nelson was the head women's basketball coach at fort wayne, serving from 2016 through 2021. nelson previously served as an assistant coach at ipfw from 2004-05. she also was an assistant coach for san diego toreros women's basketball and as a graduate assistant coach for wyoming.  nelson graduated from concordia university in 2002 and university of wyoming with a master's degree in 2004. she is married to her husband steve.  references  purdue fort wayne mastodons women's basketball coaches wyoming cowgirls basketball coaches san diego toreros women's basketball coaches concordia university (oregon) alumni university of wyoming alumni living people american women's basketball coaches 1979 births
three thieves is a graphic novel series by canadian cartoonist scott chantler. it follows the adventures of dessa (a human), topper (a dwarf-sized humanoid creature called a norker), and fisk (a big-sized humanoid creature called an ettin with only one head as opposed to his kind's usual two) as they run from the queen's "dragons" (elite personal knights) and at the same time try to track down greyfalcon, the royal chamberlain who kidnapped dessa's twin brother. tower of treasure received a joe shuster dragon award in 2011.  there are seven books in the series, which were released from 2010 to 2016.  books  tower of treasure is the first book in the three thieves series and was published on august 1, 2010. the book follows dessa, topper, and fisk as they attempt to break into the queen's treasury in kingsbridge.  they are captured by captain drake and the palace guards.  greyfalcon happens upon the scene, and dessa recognizes him to be one of the men who kidnapped her long lost brother, jared.  greyfalcon requests that queen magda have dessa, topper, and fisk executed, which she agrees to.  however, the trio of thieves are able to escape during the night.  topper and fisk attempt to leave the city, while dessa goes back to find greyfalcon.  dessa finds greyfalcon's chamber empty, and she believes that he's left the city.  after a speedy chase, dessa, topper, and fisk all make it out of the city gates.  dessa is still convinced that greyfalcon kidnapped her long lost brother, and she and her friends set off to find him.  back in kingsbridge, queen magda orders all of the dragons, a group of the 12 best knights in the kingdom, to pursue and capture the three thieves and greyfalcon.  captain drake and the other dragons leave the city.  the sign of the black rock is the second book in the three thieves series, and was published on september 1, 2011. the book follows dessa, topper, and fisk as they are forced off the road by a rainstorm and end up at the black rock inn.  during the night, captain drake and the rest of the dragons all arrive at the inn, and the three thieves narrowly avoid being captured several times.  by the end of the night, the dragons have caught a group of smugglers and
arrested the owner of the inn, mortimer grig, but haven't managed to apprehend the three thieves.  after the dragons leave, dessa learns from grig's wife that greyfalcon stayed at the inn many years ago.  greyfalcon had jared with him at the time, and grig's wife eudora saw a single word in greyfalcon's book: astaroth.  because greyfalcon suspected that she's read something in his book, he tried to cut out her tongue to keep her from telling anyone about it.  grig's wife thinks the word "astaroth" must be important, and dessa thanks her for her help.  the captive prince is the third book in the three thieves series and was published on september 1, 2012.  the book follows dessa, topper, and fisk as they save a kidnapped prince.  the king's dragon is the fourth book in the three thieves series and was published on april 1, 2014.  the book follows captain drake as he continues to try to capture topper, fisk, and an injured dessa, who are holed up in a remote monastery.  while attempting to find them by any means possible, captain drake is haunted by memories of his early days as one of the king's dragons.  pirates of the silver coast is the fifth book in the three thieves series and was published on september 1, 2014.  the book follows dessa, topper, and fisk as they ride out to sea with a band of smugglers, hoping to find the island of astaroth.  the dark island is the sixth book in the three thieves series and was published on april 5, 2016.  the book follows dessa, topper, and fisk as they finally reach the island of astaroth, and discover that nothing is as it seems.  meanwhile, captain drake has accidentally found dessa's long lost brother, jared, and is surprised by what he discovers about jared's kidnapping.  the iron hand is the seventh and final book in the three thieves series and was published on october 4, 2016.  the book follows dessa, topper, and captain drake as they race back to kingsbridge to make a final confrontation with greyfalcon.  setting  the series is set in a medieval fantasy world known to the characters as the six kingdoms. the kingdoms include lothar, medoria, kamaria, magishead, gan, and north huntington. gan is technically an empire, as it is independent and
is ruled by an emperor.  characters  dessa redd: the main character, an acrobat in a traveling circus troupe. during an attempt to rob the treasury of the evil queen magda, she finds a clue to the whereabouts of her long-lost twin brother jared. at the end of the last book, she becomes captain of the king's dragons under king jared.  topper: a blue norker, a diminutive mythical creature native to the six kingdoms, a juggler with the circus troupe and a pickpocket. he is depicted as waist high in stature, has long pointy ears, and a goatee.  fisk: a mythical creature of great stature and strength who joined the circus troupe after being rejected by his tribe for being born with only one head (most ettins have 2). he died during the destruction of the island astaroth in book 6.  captain drake: the leader of an elite group of twelve soldiers called the queen's dragons. they are tasked with doing her special bidding and serve as a powerful police unit. he was an idealist when young, but became disillusioned with the cronyism and corruption of the dragons. drake is uncorrupt, brave and loyal as the day is long. he will pursue his duty to the ends of the earth and will put life and limb on the line for his monarch. topper often refers to him as patchy mcone-eye.  maarten greyfalcon: the queen's chamberlain. along with his twin brother, he was the heir of the throne of south huntington before its annexation by north huntington. he was hired by the iron hand crime syndicate to do various tasks for them and ended up their leader. he has wielded a lot of power since the days of the queen's predecessor, king roderick. he is a creative genius and designed the traps in the treasure tower, along with many other gadgets.  rylan greyfalcon: maarten's twin brother. he is skilled in the manufacture of toys.  queen magda: the ruler of north huntington. she is the firstborn of roderick and his queen. she hatched the plot along with greyfalcon to bring about the murder of jared, thus securing her claim as the only descendant of roderick.  jared redd: dessa's long-lost twin brother. even though he is nearly 20 years magda's junior, north huntington's laws of male primogenitor decree him to be the true heir of roderick, even though he was illegitimately conceived.  king roderick:
the monarch before queen magda. he was assassinated by a secret group called the iron hand. he is the father of magda, and the twins jared and dessa.  the kings (queens) dragons: the elite group of soldiers who are bodyguards and shock troopers for the monarchs of north huntington. there are twelve of them. phineas is a member.  references  canadian graphic novels series of children's books adventure graphic novels fantasy graphic novels 2010s fantasy novels
prithvi singh azad (1892-1989) was an indian independence activist, revolutionary and one of the founder members of ghadar party. he suffered incarceration several times during the pre-independence period, including a term in the cellular jail. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1977, for his contributions to society.  early and personal life  prithvi singh azad was born on 15 september 1892 at lalru, a small town in mohali district of the north indian state of punjab. he was a rajput (bhati clan), but he did a lot of work for the upliftment of dalits. while still in his teens, we was married to prabhavati devi, a lady of his own community and similar social background, in a match arranged by their parents in the usual indian way. the marriage was entirely harmonious in the traditional indian mould and it lasted all their lives, through the tribulations of the freedom struggle, imprisonment and relative poverty. the couple were blessed with children, including a son, ajit singh bhati, and a daughter, dr. pragya kumar, who retired as chief medical officer at panjab university, chandigarh.  according to the historian ramachandra guha, who makes the assertion in his book "rebels against the raj," mirabehn, daughter of a british admiral and one of mahatma gandhi's closest disciples, was enamoured of prithvi singh azad and infatuated with him for many years; she even wrote him a number of letters expressing her feelings. however, he received absolutely no reciprocation from azad, and finally she moved away. guha refers to a number of respectable sources to make these assertions.  biography singh was attracted to the nationalist movement while he was still in his teens, and is reported to have been influenced by the arrest of lokmanya tilak and khudi ram bose by the british government in 1907-08. he visited the usa in 1912, where he met lala har dayal, one of the founders of later-day ghadar party, a militant organization formed by indians in north america for the liberation of india. he also assisted in the establishment of hindustan ghadar, the mouthpiece of the party. returning to india along with around 150 freedom fighters, he was captured by the british on 7 december 1914, tried, sentenced for 10 years' imprisonment and spent time in various jails, including calcutta, madras and the cellular jail. after the initial futile attempt, he escaped by jumping out of a running train while
he was being transferred from one jail to another. later, he became an associate of chandra shekhar azad and reportedly received a mauser pistol from him. it was reported that azad was with chandra shekhar azad just before the british forces surrounded him at alfred park on 27 february 1931, but the latter asked prithvi singh to escape while deciding to continue his battle with the forces; alternatively another contention was that the two azads met at alfred park a few days before the death of chandra shekhar.  it was chandra shekhar who advised azad to visit russia for further training; it was reported that the idea to send azad to russia in fact came from bhagat singh, another martyred revolutionary and chandra sekhar was conveying bhagat singh's request. he visited russia to spend a few months there and his experiences in russia were later published as a book, lenin ke desham me, which was subsequently translated into english by vijay chauhan under the title, prithvi singh azad in lenin's land. on his return to india, he met several mainstream freedom fighters, including mohandas gandhi and joined the nationalist movement led by gandhi. between 1933 and the indian independence in 1947, he was arrested several times, including for the lahore conspiracy case, in which he was sentenced to death; the sentence was later commuted to life imprisonment in the cellular jail. after the indian independence, he successfully contested the elections to the first constituent assembly of india from punjab and was its member since the assembly met for the first time at constitution club hall, new delhi on 9 december 1946. after india gained independence, he was selected as the minister for labor and local self-government, when bhim sen sachar took over as the second chief minister of punjab in 1949. the government of india honored him with the civilian honor of padma bhushan in 1977.  azad died on 5 march 1989, at the age of 96. the story of his life has been documented in two autobiographies; kranti path ka pathik (a traveler in the revolutionary path), was published in 1990 by haryana sahitya akademi while baba prithvi singh azad, the legendary crusader was published by bharatiya vidya bhavan three years earlier in 1987. a set of documents related his life has been preserved in nehru memorial museum and library, new delhi as baba prithvi singh azad papers. a local hospital in lalru, his native place, is being considered for renaming as baba prithvi singh azad memorial hospital.  see also    bhim sen sachar  chandra shekhar azad  constituent assembly of india  ghadar party  hindustan ghadar  ghadar mutiny
lala har dayal  lahore conspiracy case trial  references  further reading  external links    excerpt from the book, a revolutionary history of interwar india.    1892 births 1989 deaths members of the constituent assembly of india indian independence activists from punjab (british india) revolutionary movement for indian independence state cabinet ministers of punjab, india recipients of the padma bhushan in public affairs
the hun sen cup is the main football knockout tournament in cambodia. the 2007 hun sen cup was the 1st season of the hun sen cup, the premier knockout tournament for association football clubs in cambodia involving cambodian league and provincial teams organized by the football federation of cambodia.  group stage there were 28 participants from cambodian league and other provinces.  round of 16  quarter-finals  semi-finals  third place play-off  final  awards  top goal scorers: hok sochivorn of phnom penh crown  fair play: build bright university  references  hun sen cup seasons 2007 in cambodian football
the energy supply improvement investment program is a proposed electric power transmission link intended to supply afghanistan with power from other central asian countries as well as interconnecting the ten separate power grids within afghanistan. it is unofficially known as tutap, which stands for the names of the countries involved: turkmenistan, uzbekistan, tajikistan, afghanistan and pakistan. the project was approved by the asian development bank on 15 december 2015.  a decision to reroute the project through salang pass, rather than bamyan province, led to a protest by hazara people, organising as the enlightenment movement, who felt that this decision would continue the long-term discrimination against hazaras. on 23 july 2016, this protest was bombed, killing at least 80 people and injuring 260.  references   electric power in afghanistan
monticello carnegie library, also known as the white county historical society, is a former library in the historic carnegie library building located at monticello, white county, indiana. it was built in 1907, and is a two-story, classical revival style buff brick building on a raised basement.  it features a large limestone entrance portico and full round arched window openings.  a two-story addition was built in 1957.  the original building was constructed with a $10,000 grant from the carnegie foundation.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2013. the old monticello carnegie library no longer contains a public library. it functions today as the offices of the white county indiana historical society. the town's present public library is the monticello-union township public library at 321 w. broadway st.  references  carnegie libraries in indiana libraries on the national register of historic places in indiana neoclassical architecture in indiana library buildings completed in 1907 buildings and structures in white county, indiana national register of historic places in white county, indiana
pajo is a district (indonesian: kecamatan) in the regency (indonesian: kabupaten) of  dompu, west nusa tenggara, indonesia.  references  districts of west nusa tenggara populated places in west nusa tenggara west nusa tenggara
the whitehead lifesaving station was a maritime rescue facility on whitehead island, an island off the coast of st. george, maine at the mouth of penobscot bay.   established in 1874 by the united states life-saving service, its original building is one of the best-preserved of the five stations built by the service on the coast of maine and new hampshire at that time.  the station was in active use until the 1940s, and is now privately owned.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1988.  description and history whitehead island is a  island off the northeastern coast of st. george, near the southwestern approach to penobscot bay. in addition to the former lifesaving station, the island is also home to whitehead light, located at its southeastern point. the lifesaving station is located near the southwestern point of the island, between it and a small peninsula jutting to the south. its historic features include the original 1874 building, located near the water, and a 1922 residential structure set further inland. between these two structures is a small parade ground which was used by the station crews for drills; part of this ground includes the foundation point where a "wreck pole" was mounted, simulating the mast of a ship. the 1874 building is a two-story rectangular wood frame structure with decorative italianate features, while the 1922 residence is a modest vernacular two-story building with a hip roof.  the original 1874 building was probably designed by francis chandler, who was employed in the office of the supervising architect of the united states treasury department. the 1922 building was probably designed by victor mendelhoff, the principal architect of the united states life-saving service from 1896. the life-saving service was merged into the united states coast guard, which closed the facility about 1944, selling it into private ownership. most of whitehead island is privately owned, with a conservation easement protecting most of it. the facilities of the station are rented by the owners to the pine island camp, which owns the lighthouse complex and conducts trips to the island.  see also national register of historic places listings in knox county, maine  references  government buildings on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in knox county, maine queen anne architecture in maine colonial revival architecture in maine buildings and structures completed in 1874 closed facilities of the united states coast guard life-saving service stations life-saving service stations on the national register of historic places historic districts on the national register of historic places in maine 1874 establishments in
maine
salvador ribera avalos, o.p. (died 1612) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of quito (1605-1612).  biography salvador ribera avalos was ordained a priest in the order of preachers. on 17 august 1605, he was appointed during the papacy of pope leo xi as bishop of quito. on 23 october 1605, he was consecrated bishop. he served as bishop of quito until his death in 1612.  while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of pedro ponce de leon, bishop of ciudad rodrigo (1605).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century roman catholic bishops in ecuador bishops appointed by pope leo xi dominican bishops 1612 deaths roman catholic bishops of quito
20/20 is a discontinued spreadsheet program developed by access technology inc., of south natick, massachusetts, and later sold by ca technologies. for a while, it was the dominant spreadsheet on vax minicomputers. it was a direct competitor to lotus 1-2-3, and was available for more operating systems than 1-2-3. 20/20's performance specifications were similar to those of 1-2-3.  the software was originally titled "supercomp-20". it was renamed 20/20, and was available for at&t unix, dec vax, prime computers, the ibm rs/6000, data general and ibm-compatible pcs. it was the first spreadsheet with integrated database and graphics support available for unix. in 1989, a version was released with real-time data updating. 20/20 also had macros (called "command files" in the documentation), and a goal-seeking facility, which allowed the user to choose a desired value for a result cell, and vary an input cell automatically until the desired result was achieved.  references  spreadsheet software discontinued software dos software unix software openvms software
<noinclude>the u.s. news & world report best colleges ranking''' is an annual set of rankings of american colleges and universities published by u.s. news & world report beginning in 1983. they</noinclude>in 1983, u.s. news & world report published its first "america's best colleges" report. the rankings have been compiled and published annually since 1985 and are the most widely quoted of their kind in the united states.  the rankings are split into four categories: national universities, liberal arts colleges, regional universities, and regional colleges, with the latter two categories further split into north, south, midwest, and west. the rankings are based upon data that u.s. news & world report collects from an annual survey sent to each school, as well as opinion surveys of faculty members and administrators from other schools. the publication's methodology was created by robert morse, who continues to oversee its application as chief data strategist.  the rankings are popular with the general public (for their 2014 release, usnews.com garnered 2.6 million unique visitors and 18.9 million page views in one day), and influence high school seniors' application patterns (a 2011 study found that a one-rank improvement leads to a 0.9% increase in number of applicants). however, they have been widely denounced by many higher education experts. detractors argue that they ignore individual fit by comparing institutions with widely diverging missions on the same scale, imply a false precision by deriving an ordinal ranking from questionable data, encourage gamesmanship by institutions looking to improve their rank, and contribute to the admissions frenzy by unduly highlighting prestige.  in addition to the rankings, u.s. news & world report also publishes college guides in book form, and ranks american graduate schools and academic programs in a number of specific disciplines, including business, law, engineering, nursing, and medicine. in october 2014, the magazine began publishing a best global universities ranking that focuses more on research and includes non-american schools.  methodology the magazine u.s. news & world report's rankings are based upon information they collect from educational institutions via an annual survey, government and third party data sources, and school websites. it also considers opinion surveys of university faculty and administrators outside the school. their college rankings were first published in 1983 and have been published in all years thereafter, except 1984.  the us news listings have gained such influence that some universities have made it a specific goal to reach a particular level in
the us news rankings. belmont university president bob fisher stated in 2010, "rising to the top 5 in u.s. news represents a key element of belmont's vision 2015 plan."  clemson university made it a public goal to rise to the top 20 in the us news rankings, and made specific changes, including reducing class size and altering the presentation of teacher salaries, so as to perform better in the statistical analysis by us news.  at least one university, arizona state, has actually tied the university president's pay to an increase in the school's placement in the us news rankings.  the following are elements in the us news rankings as of the 2020 edition.   peer assessment: a survey of the institution's reputation among presidents, provosts, and admissions deans of other institutions (20%)  retention: six-year graduation rate and first-year student retention rate (22%)  social mobility: six-year graduation rates of students receiving pell grants-both as a standalone measure and compared to graduation rates of all other students at the school-adjusted significantly to give more credit to schools enrolling larger proportions of students receiving pell grants. (5%)  faculty resources: class sizes, faculty salary, faculty degree level, student-faculty ratio, and proportion of full-time faculty (20%)  student excellence: standardized test scores of admitted students and proportion of admitted students in upper percentiles of their high school class.  financial resources: per-student spending related to academics, student support and public service. (10%)  graduation rate performance: comparison between modeled expected and actual graduation rate (8%)  alumni giving rate (5%)u.s. news determined the relative weights of these factors and changed them over time. the national opinion research center reviewed the methodology and stated that the weights "lack any defensible empirical or theoretical basis". the first four of the listed factors account for the great majority of the u.s. news ranking (62.5%, according to u.s. news's 2017 methodology), and the "reputational measure" (which surveys high-level administrators at similar institutions about their perceived quality ranking of each college and university) is especially important to the final ranking (accounting by itself for 22.5% of the ranking according to the 2017 methodology).  a new york times article reported that, given the u.s. news weighting methodology, "it's easy to guess who's going to end up on top: the big three, harvard, yale and princeton round out the first
three essentially every year. when asked how he knew his system was sound, mel elfin, the rankings' founder, often answered that he knew it because those three schools always landed on top. when a new lead statistician, amy graham, changed the formula in 1999 to one she considered more statistically valid, the california institute of technology jumped to first place. ms. graham soon left, and a modified system pushed princeton back to no. 1 the next year."  a 2010 study by the university of michigan found that university rankings in the united states significantly affect institutions' applications and admissions. the research analyzed the effects of the u.s. news & world report rankings, showing a lasting effect on college applications and admissions by students in the top 10% of their class. in addition, they found that rankings influence survey assessments of reputation by college presidents at peer institutions, such that rankings and reputation are becoming much more similar over time.  a 2014 study published in research in higher education removed the mystique of the u.s. news ranking process by producing a ranking model that faithfully recreated u.s. news outcomes and quantified the inherent "noise" in the rankings for all nationally ranked universities. the model developed provided detailed insight into the u.s. news ranking process. it allowed the impact of changes to u.s. news subfactors to be studied when variation between universities and within subfactors was present. numerous simulations were run using this model to understand the amount of change required for a university to improve its rank or move into the top 20. results show that for a university ranked in the mid-30s it would take a significant amount of additional resources, directed in a very focused way, to become a top-ranked national university, and that rank changes of up to +/- 4 points should be considered "noise".  ranking results {| class="wikitable" !top national universities !2022 rank ! rowspan="22" | !top liberal arts colleges !2022 rank |- |princeton university |1 |williams college |1 |- |columbia university |2  |amherst college |2  |- |harvard university |2 |swarthmore college |3 |- |massachusetts institute of technology |2 |pomona college |4  |- |yale university |5 |wellesley college |5  |- |stanford university |6  |bowdoin college |6 |- |university of chicago |6 |united states naval academy |6 |- |university of pennsylvania |8 |claremont
mckenna college |8 |- |california institute of technology |9 |carleton college |9 |- |duke university |9 |middlebury college |9 |- |johns hopkins university |9 |united states military academy |11 |- |northwestern university |9 |washington and lee university |11 |- |dartmouth college |13 |davidson college |13 |- |brown university |14  |grinnell college |13 |- |vanderbilt university |14 |hamilton college |13 |- |washington university in st. louis |14 |haverford college |16 |- |cornell university |17 |barnard college |17 |- |rice university |17 |colby college |17 |- |university of notre dame |19 |colgate university |17 |- |university of california, los angeles |20 |smith college |17 |- | | |wesleyan university |17 |}  top 10 map  criticism  during the 1990s, several educational institutions in the united states were involved in a movement to boycott the u.s. news & world report college rankings survey. the first was reed college, which stopped submitting the survey in 1995. the survey was also criticized by alma college, stanford university, and st. john's college during the late 1990s. sat scores play a role in the u.s. news & world report college rankings even though u.s. news is not empowered with the ability to formally verify or recalculate the scores that are represented to them by schools. since the mid-1990s there have been many instances documented by the popular press wherein schools lied about their sat scores in order to obtain a higher ranking. an expose in the san francisco chronicle stated that the elements in the methodology of the u.s. news and world report are redundant and can be reduced to one thing: money.  on june 19, 2007, during the annual meeting of the annapolis group, members discussed the letter to college presidents asking them not to participate in the "reputation survey" section of the u.s. news & world report survey (this section comprises 25% of the ranking). as a result, "a majority of the approximately 80 presidents at the meeting said that they did not intend to participate in the u.s. news reputational rankings in the future". the statement also said that its members "have agreed to participate in the development of an alternative common format that presents information about their colleges for students and their families to use in the college search process". this database will
be web-based and developed in conjunction with higher-education organizations including the national association of independent colleges and universities and the council of independent colleges. on june 22, 2007, u.s. news & world report editor robert morse issued a response in which he argued, "in terms of the peer assessment survey, we at u.s. news firmly believe the survey has significant value because it allows us to measure the 'intangibles' of a college that we can't measure through statistical data. plus, the reputation of a school can help get that all-important first job and plays a key part in which grad school someone will be able to get into. the peer survey is by nature subjective, but the technique of asking industry leaders to rate their competitors is a commonly accepted practice. the results from the peer survey also can act to level the playing field between private and public colleges". in reference to the alternative database discussed by the annapolis group, morse also argued, "it's important to point out that the annapolis group's stated goal of presenting college data in a common format has been tried before ... u.s. news has been supplying this exact college information for many years already. and it appears that naicu will be doing it with significantly less comparability and functionality. u.s. news first collects all these data (using an agreed-upon set of definitions from the common data set). then we post the data on our website in easily accessible, comparable tables. in other words, the annapolis group and the others in the naicu initiative actually are following the lead of u.s. news".  some higher education experts, such as kevin carey of education sector, have asserted that u.s. news and world reports college rankings system is merely a list of criteria that mirrors the superficial characteristics of elite colleges and universities. according to carey, the u.s. news ranking system is deeply flawed. instead of focusing on the fundamental issues of how well colleges and universities educate their students and how well they prepare them to be successful after college, the magazine's rankings are almost entirely a function of three factors: fame, wealth, and exclusivity. he suggests that there are more important characteristics parents and students should research to select colleges, such as how well students are learning and how likely students are to earn a degree.  the question of college rankings and their impact on admissions gained greater attention in march 2007, when michele tolela myers (the former president of sarah lawrence college) shared in
an op-ed that the u.s. news & world report, when not given sat scores for a university, chooses to simply rank the college with an invented sat score of approximately one standard deviation (roughly 200 sat points) behind those of peer colleges, with the reasoning being that sat-optional universities will, because of their test-optional nature, accept higher numbers of less academically capable students.  in a 2011 article regarding the sarah lawrence controversy, peter sacks of the huffington post criticized the u.s. news'' rankings' centering on test scores and denounced the magazine's "best colleges" list as a scam:  in the u.s. news worldview of college quality, it matters not a bit what students actually learn on campus, or how a college actually contributes to the intellectual, ethical and personal growth of students while on campus, or how that institution contributes to the public good ... and then, when you consider that student sat scores are profoundly correlated [to] parental income and education levels - the social class that a child is born into and grows up with - you begin to understand what a corrupt emperor 'america's best colleges' really is. the ranking amounts to little more than a pseudo-scientific and yet popularly legitimate tool for perpetuating inequality between educational haves and have nots - the rich families from the poor ones, and the well-endowed schools from the poorly endowed ones.  see also  u.s. news & world report best global university ranking  fiske guide to colleges, the most popular non-ranking college guide in the u.s.  references  external links  university and college rankings in the united states best colleges ranking 1983 introductions
the ministry of health is a cabinet-level government ministry of uganda. it is responsible for planning, delivering, and maintaining an efficient and effective healthcare delivery system, including preventive, curative, and rehabilitative services, in a humane, affordable, and sustainable manner. the ministry is headed by minister of health jane aceng.  location the headquarters of the ministry are located at plot 6 lourdel road, in the wandegeya neighborhood, kampala central division, in kampala, uganda's capital and largest city, about  north of the city's business district. the coordinates of the building are 0°19'59.0"n, 32°34'39.0"e (latitude:0.333044; longitude:32.577486).  subministries  state minister for health (general duties)  state minister for primary healthcare - joyce moriku.  see also  politics of uganda list of hospitals in uganda  references  external links    health uganda organisations based in kampala
gunderich of trier, also gundwich (fl. c. 600) was a bishop of trier, born in the 6th century.  gunderich may well have become bishop of trier as early as 586/588; he apparently remained bishop until his death some time before 614. he is known only from a bishops' list, in which he is placed after magnerich,: he was therefore the second bishop of trier of germanic origin. otherwise, little is known about him.  however, if he was a disciple of magnerich he probably had access to the court of the german kings.  he was reportedly buried after his death in trier cathedral.  see also catholic church in germany  references  6th-century frankish bishops 6th-century christian saints roman catholic bishops of trier saints of germania year of birth unknown
priscus fogagnolo (born 17 april 1983) is an australian mixed martial artist, multiple time national judo champion, multiple time pan pacific brazilian jiu jitsu champion and two time national greco roman wrestling champion. priscus fogagnolo represented australia for judo at the 2010 judo world championships  mixed martial arts career priscus fogagnolo started his mixed martial artist career with cage fighting championships in australia in 2008 up until an injury in 2012 forced him out of the sport. his only loss during that time was to james te huna.  fogagnolo returned to mma in february 2016 where he was due to fight jesse taylor for hex fight series in melbourne, australia, but the fight was cancelled due to jesse having visa problems. fogagnolo fought daniel way instead and was victorious by submission in round one.  in may 2016, fogagnolo won the valor fight middleweight championship in hobart, tasmania.  references  external links    1983 births living people australian male mixed martial artists light heavyweight mixed martial artists middleweight mixed martial artists mixed martial artists utilizing greco-roman wrestling mixed martial artists utilizing judo mixed martial artists utilizing brazilian jiu-jitsu australian practitioners of brazilian jiu-jitsu australian male sport wrestlers australian male judoka sportspeople from hobart
castanopsis costata is a tree in the family fagaceae. the specific epithet  is from the latin meaning "ribbed", referring to the leaf venation.  description castanopsis costata grows as a tree up to  tall with a trunk diameter of up to . the whitish bark is smooth, scaly or flaky. the coriaceous leaves measure up to  long. its conical nuts measure up to  long.  distribution and habitat castanopsis costata grows naturally in thailand, borneo, peninsular malaysia and sumatra. its habitat is lowland dipterocarp to montane forests from sea-level to  altitude.  uses the wood is locally used in construction. the nuts are considered edible.  references  costata trees of thailand trees of borneo trees of peninsular malaysia trees of sumatra plants described in 1851
biofuels play a major part in the renewable energy strategy of denmark. denmark is using biofuel to achieve its target of using 100% renewable energy for all energy uses by 2050. biofuels provide a large share of energy sources in denmark when considering all sectors of energy demand. in conjunction with denmark's highly developed renewable energy resources in other areas, biofuels are helping denmark meet its ambitious renewable energy targets.  the main sources of biofuels in denmark include wood and wood products, energy from waste, straw, biogas, biodiesel and bioethanol. biofuels have the potential to provide environmental and economic benefits but they must be carefully managed to ensure that they are truly sustainable resources. there is the potential for economic and environmental damage if biofuels are not used responsibly. biofuel use in europe must be certified by the eu commission before biofuels can be recorded as sustainable resources and used for national renewable energy targets.  history  the oil shocks of the 1970s severely impacted denmark, as about 90% of its energy use then came from oil, a majority of which was imported. the government was thus compelled to rethink its energy portfolio and shift the focus of its energy plans. as a result, biomass for bioenergy started being incentivized and promoted as a renewable energy source and an alternative to fossil fuels. denmark's aim was to reduce the oil dependency and to secure energy supplies, an objective that has remained relevant in the progression of the country's energy policy agreements. the prospect of the creation of new jobs and the utilization of waste products also factored into denmark's decision to start using biomass. consequently, the use of biomass in the danish energy system has continuously grown. in the last decade, bioenergy consumption in denmark has nearly doubled, increasing by more than a factor of twelve between 1970 and present day. over this period, biomass has been predominantly in the form of waste, straw and wood.  currently, denmark is striving to create an energy system by 2050 that is free of all fossil energy, and bioenergy will likely play a key role. in order to achieve this goal, denmark has, since 1993, been increasing its development of large-scale combined heat and power plants (chp) that combust biomass, where continuous technological improvements have been achieved over the past 20 years. the danish strategy to reduce emissions has also included retrofitting older coal-fired plants to biomass and investing heavily into research, development and demonstration (rd&d) for converting agricultural residues
into second-generation (2g) bioethanol, which is then blended with gasoline for the transportation sector. rd&d activities are also in place for biodiesel for shipping and road transport.  in agreement with the european environment agency scientific committee, denmark considers environmental sustainability as a key component of its strategy to incorporate a greater share of biofuels into its national energy portfolio. as such, it does not consider biomass produced from existent forests as carbon neutral and it counts waste biomass as double towards its renewable energy target, thus favoring biomass grown on marginal land or sourced from residues. this way, the country is able to ensure that it benefits from incorporating a larger share of biomass into its energy system, as biomass sourced from plantations that have been converted from natural forest land then generate a net carbon benefit over fossil fuels. denmark's guidelines for utilizing biomass for energy and transportation strive to ensure both environmental sustainability and efficiency aspects.  as a member state of the european union (eu), denmark is under commitments from its directives, which set targets for the amount of renewable energy within the national profiles, including biofuels. following eu legislation, for example, its renewable energy use should reach 100% by 2020. however, denmark has been highly proactive and ambitious in the targets it has set for its renewable energy and greenhouse gas emissions reduction, such as aiming for 100% renewable energy by 2050. danish environmental legislation has been important in the process to achieving this goal as taxes on  emissions have been in place since the 1990s, and since 2005, biofuels have been exempt from fuel taxes. its strategy continues to support research and innovation to improve production processes and lower costs. furthermore, the country's long tradition of promoting renewable energy as something that also contributes to environmental issues has created strong links between its environmental and energy policies. looking ahead, the challenges for denmark include uncertainty in future energy demand and securing a reliable supply of biomass that is sustainably produced.  government strategies and policy targets  under the renewable energy act from 2009, the danish government plans to achieve a 20% share of biomass to its energy production by 2020. biomass will also allow denmark to have a spare energy capacity to guarantee a stable energy system.  the danish government set market incentives, such as feed-in tariffs and premiums for bio mass, biofuels and other renewables, in order to reach their ambitious target of being independent from fossil fuels by 2050.  in late 2016 the government decided on the 0.9% blending mandate for use of advanced biofu
els. it requires all suppliers of transport fuels to blend an additional 0.9% share of advanced biofuels (i.e. straw) to the already required five percent conventional bioethanols share in gasoline.  the country has a target of quadrupling energy from biogas by 2020 with the target of using 50% of manure in the country, with the gas produced being injected directly into the national gas supply or used for electricity generation.  denmark has been highly innovative in its energy strategy and has greatly increased energy efficiency by using combined heat and power plants (chp plants). these plants generate electricity whilst the waste heat is simultaneously extracted. this provides energy to district heating networks, and several such plants are operating at world record levels of energy efficiency. chp plants in denmark are being converted to biofuel power sources, providing not only energy efficiency but also local markets and sources of income to local communities. farmers are able to sell waste straw and biogas produced from manure, while municipal authorities can provide waste products to heat and power generators.  the small country of denmark with just 5.7 million people is now being asked to lend its expertise to china to advise it on how to develop fuel flexibility,  chp power and heat generation. the two countries have associated initiatives which seek to improve china's vast energy requirements as the workshop of the world.  contribution to national energy supply by sector  heating and cooling sector   *estimated percentage based on proportion of total data submitted in the progress report.  *original data converted to gj.  biofuels combined to provide 9,908,200 gj of energy for denmark's heating and cooling sector, and accounted for approximately 35.33% of the sector in 2014.  electricity sector   *estimated percentage based on proportion of total data submitted in the progress report.  biofuels combined to provide 3,789 gwh in 2015. using the iea unit converter this equates to 13,640,000 gj of energy, and accounted for 12.7% of electricity generated.  transport sector   *estimated percentage based on proportion of total data submitted in the progress report.  *original data converted to gj.  biodiesel and bioethanol provided the transport sector with 9,608,000 gj of energy, and accounted for approximately 5.27% of the sector in 2014.  total national supply, production and use by detailed biofuel source, 2015  total supply   denmark's total supply of energy overall in 2015 was 2,
523,048,939 gj. therefore, biofuels made up approximately 5.9% of the total supply in 2015.  production   denmark's total energy production in 2015 was 1,422,701,209 gj. therefore, biofuels made up approximately 5.8% of denmark's total energy production in 2015.  total use   denmark's total energy use in 2015 was 2,523,048,939 gj. therefore, biofuels made up approximately 5.9% of denmark's total energy use in 2015.  industry and household use   denmark's total industrial and household energy use in 2015 was 1,837,851,411 gj. therefore, biofuels made up approximately 7.8% of denmark's industrial and household energy use in 2015.  overview of biofuel sources  renewable energy (re) thermal generation includes both electricity generated from biofuels and electricity generated from the fraction of waste that is biodegradable. since 2010, re thermal generation in denmark has accounted for approximately 4000 gwh per year.  biofuels also play an increasingly important part in denmark's district heating. the proportion of heat generated by biofuels has been rising since the 1980s, and by 2013 close to 45% of district heat was produced by renewables. a rough calculation of the 60% of households provided with district heat would imply that through this means alone renewable fuels provided just over a quarter of denmark's heating and hot water needs in that year.  waste to energy  re generation from waste reduced slightly over the period from 2009 to 2014 by 792 gwh. this reduction was due to less availability of waste and the reduced proportion of waste being classified as renewable energy in 2011. overall about 2.6% of national electricity was generated by re generation from waste. denmark incinerates close to 3 million tonnes of waste each year to produce electricity and heat; most of this heat is produced domestically with a smaller share imported from abroad. there are 28 waste incineration plants in the country. the waste powered chp plants may also co-burn additional fossil fuels, including oil and natural gas, but biomass is increasingly used to improve the performance of waste energy production. only the carbon neutral biodegradable part of waste is classified as renewable energy generation, which was defined as 55% of total waste from 2011 (in 2009 it was 58.8%). total waste provided 20% of district heating generation and between 4% and 5% of electricity generation in the country.
energy production from waste over the next ten years is expected to remain at similar levels, however, new pre-treatments of waste may be developed.  biogas  biogas generation has been rising steadily and reached 447 gwh of electricity production in 2014, contributing about 1.5% of denmark's electricity. approximately 75% of denmark's 120 biogas-generating plants are 3 mw or smaller in size. a further 15 larger chp plants account for the remaining approximately 25% of biogas consumption and co-fire biogas, mostly with natural gas. the largest source of biogas is from manure, other sources include water treatment plants and landfill sites. many of the smaller plants are located on farms and or other sources of biogas. smaller biogas plants tend not to contribute heat to district heating networks. denmark intends to increase production and use of biogas from 4 pj consumption in 2015 to 17 pj by 2020 with the goal of using 50% of manure in the country. most of the new biogas is likely to be injected directly into the gas system and used for industry and transport.  biomass  biomass provides the largest share of renewable energy in denmark when considering the electricity sector, heating and cooling sector and transport sector combined. the fuel contributed to approximately 8.6% of total electricity generation in denmark generating 2,631 gwh of electricity in 2014. total consumption of biomass amounted to 107 pj in 2013. there were 39 chp plants using biomass as a fuel in 2014, consuming approximately 2.7 million tonnes to produce heat and power, and corresponding to 40.94 pj consumption in that year. biomass is sometimes co-fired with other fuels including a small percentage that is co-fired with waste. around 40% of the biomass used in denmark is imported, including the majority of wood pellets.  electricity generated from biomass increased dramatically in 2010 following in increased share in its use in a number of power plants. between 2009 and 2014 production of power increased by around 50%. by 2024 biomass is expected to double the percentage of renewable energy share from 15% to 30% of renewable electricity production in denmark. total consumption of biomass is expected to rise to 115pj by 2024. a number of power stations are being converted from using coal to using wood pellets as fuel. some smaller chp plants are converting from using natural gas to biomass.  see also    renewable energy in denmark  wind power in denmark  solar power in denmark  general references   denmark

san donnino is a romanesque-style, roman catholic pieve church located in the frazione of villamagna, in the territory of the commune of bagno a ripoli in the metropolitan city of florence, region of tuscany, italy. the church was founded in the 8th century and rebuilt prior to the 14th century.  history over the centuries various refurbishments were performed but in 1930, it was restored to its romanesque origins under the guidance of attilio rampoldi. the tall romanesque bell-tower has mullioned windows.  the interiors still house a tryptych (1394) by mariotto di nardo. additionally, the church contains a 14th-century altarpiece depicting enthroned madonna and child with two saints. it also has a canvas depicting st dominic and st catharine in adoration with a bas-relief depicting the madonna and child by lazzaro cavalcanti. the frescoes on the right of the nave are attributed to the maestro di signa. below the main altar are the relics of the blessed gherardo da villamagna. on the left nave is a canvas depicting the madonna and child and san donnino by francesco granacci. the church has an altarpiece depicting the enthroned madonna and child with saints john the baptist, nicola, donnino and sebastian, by david ghirlandaio. this altar has frescoes depicting the nativity, the pieta and god the father with evangelists by maestro signa. above the baptismal font is a st john the baptist, st anthony abbot and st francis of assisi attributed to jacopo di cione. it was also the original home of rosso fiorentino's 1522 villamagna altarpiece.  references  romanesque architecture in tuscany churches in the metropolitan city of florence 14th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy
babylon fm is a contemporary hit radio station located in erbil, iraq. the station is owned by babylon group and broadcasts from studios in the babylon media headquarters located in the city's ankawa district. the station is the only all-english radio station in all of iraq. the station is the official partner of american top 40 show in the country.  history  babylon group ceo salwan zaito launched babylon fm in 2012, as an all-jazz radio station, catering only to erbil city. after one year of broadcasting, the station changed its format to hit music in september 2012 with assyrian presenter noor matti joining the company. the station came to be known as the only all-english radio station in all of iraq. the first all-english live show (noor in the morning) went on air october 15, 2012. in march 2013, british radio personal angel b joined the morning show, along with the dutch-kurd maze to create the breakfast club.  2014 and 2015, the station quickly became popular within the expat community as well as the local youth population, as the ipsos polls showed the station within top 20 for the first time in erbil. the station expanded to broadcast in duhok on 17 april 2015. three months later, the station began to broadcast in iraqi kurdistan's second largest city, slemani.  as iraqi kurdistan's expat community continued to become more diverse, the station began to broadcast 1-hour shows in different language, with pierrick bonno going on air in french for the first time in early 2015.  in 2021, the channel expanded to broadcast in baghdad's frequency of 97.3.  shows  the breakfast club  the drive  babylon singles chart  american top 40  to karpouzi  el fasolia  slava plus  la french touch  references  radio stations in iraq mass media in iraq mass media in kurdistan region (iraq) indigenous radio
acanthocasuarina campestris is a species of jumping plant louse, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it possesses rhinaria on its fourth, sixth, eighth and ninth antennal segments; the species' hind tibia has one outer and two inner spurs, while the female's proctiger carries an apical hook posteriorly.  references   triozidae insects described in 2011
friar luis zapata de cardenas, o.f.m. rec. (1510 - 24 february 1590) was a roman catholic prelate who served as archbishop of santafe de bogota, capital of the new kingdom of granada (1570-1590).  biography luis zapata de cardenas was born in llerena, spain, in 1510 and ordained a priest in the order of friars minor recollects.  on 8 november 1570 he was appointed during the papacy of pope pius v as archbishop of santafe en nueva granada.  in may 1571, he was consecrated bishop by giovanni battista castagna, archbishop of rossano.  he served as archbishop of santafe en nueva granada until his death on 24 feb 1590.  while bishop, he was the principal consecrator of dionisio de santos, bishop of cartagena (1575).  references  literature  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   16th-century roman catholic bishops in new granada bishops appointed by pope pius v 1510 births 1590 deaths franciscan bishops roman catholic archbishops of bogota
mount vernon is an unincorporated community in waltz township, wabash county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located next to the town of somerset.  geography mount vernon is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in wabash county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
"good god, y'all!" is the second episode of the fifth season of paranormal drama television series supernatural and the 84th overall. the episode was written by  sera gamble and directed by executive producer phil sgriccia. it was first broadcast on september 17, 2009 on the cw. in the episode, sam and dean watch the aftermath of lucifer being freed from the cage while the angels plan a new strategy to stop the apocalypse.  plot bobby is still wheelchair-bound in the hospital and hasn't spoken in days. castiel calls sam's cell phone to find out where the boys are - the enochian sigils he etched into their ribs hides them from all angels, including castiel. when bobby tells him to heal him castiel tells bobby he can't as he's cut off from heaven. he then says in order to defeat lucifer, he plans to find god. he says he needs dean's amulet which apparently burns hot in god's presence.  meanwhile, rufus heads to a town he thinks is under attack from demons, based on omens of a polluted river and a falling star. he calls bobby for help. when sam and dean arrive, they find the town deserted. they come across ellen on the street who takes them to a church where she has gathered with her some of the surviving townsfolk. she suspects that the rest of the town is possessed by demons. she tells them that rufus called her and jo for help and they got separated while fighting the demons. dean and sam go into town for supplies, and while sam is getting salt from a store, two teenagers with black eyes enter. sam kills them with ruby's knife, but appears drawn to the blood.  when sam and ellen go to find jo and rufus, they are attacked. ellen escapes, but sam is captured by jo and rufus - who seem to think sam is possessed. while he is held captive, one of the townspeople reveals that he is war - one of the four horseman of the apocalypse and has tricked the people into thinking everyone is possessed, leading them to attack each other.  returning, ellen tells dean that jo thought she was possessed because she called her a "black-eyed bitch," and dean starts to suspect all is not what it seems. checking the bible, he works out that these signs and the conflict herald the arrival of war. shortly after, war, in the guise of a townsman, arrives and insists that they all need to attack the demons. as dean and ellen try to calm the panic, war turns
the ring on his finger and the townspeople start seeing them as demons and attack. dean and ellen flee.  the townspeople form a force. they equip themselves with real bullets because they believe dean had been a demon all along and lied about the effectiveness of salt. dean and ellen reach jo and rufus shortly before the townspeople arrive and manage to convince the two there are no demons and it's all the work of war. dean frees sam and they rush to catch up with war and cut off the ring that was helping him deceive the townspeople.  after the battle is over, sam tells dean that he can't trust himself, and that he needs to take a break from hunting - and dean. dean agrees - he can't focus on the job because he is worrying about sam. he offers sam the impala but sam declines, and hitches a ride out of town.  reception  viewers the episode was watched by 2.80 million viewers with a 1.2/3 in the 18-49 demographics. this was an 18% decrease in viewership from the season premiere, which was watched by 3.40 million viewers with a 1.4/4 in the 18-49 demographics. this means that 1.2 percent of all households with televisions watched the episode, while 3 percent of all households watching television at that time watched it. supernatural ranked as the second most watched show on the cw in the day, behind the vampire diaries  critical reviews "good god, y'all!" received positive reviews. diana steenbergen of ign gave the episode a "great" 8.9 out of 10 and wrote, "even though the storyline of the demon-possessed town is connected to the larger storyline of the apocalypse, it still functions as a self-contained episode, and writer sera gamble does a good job tying all the elements together. however, just like last week, there is a part of the story that falls a little flat. this time it is when we learn that dean's amulet, the one he has been wearing the entire series and that sam gave to him when they were children, is actually a talisman that can help castiel find god. for the second time in as many weeks, the show sets something up that is too convenient to be fully believable, the first being bobby's possession in the season premiere. it is true that the apocalypse storyline is immense, but they need to be more careful to make the details make sense, and not feel as if they were thrown in to make the plot
work."  the a.v. club's zack handlen gave the episode a "b" grade and wrote, "it's not a flawless episode, though; the strong concept at the episode's heart gets short-changed, as do the handful of returning characters. there's also something else i've been thinking about - are we going to start having fun again soon? supernatural has always had its share of darkness; in the first episode, sam lost his fiancee to the same demon that killed his mother, which isn't exactly at the top of sir chuckles-a-lot's list of fun time party gags. (he prefers to open with something about dead puppies.) but that darkness is generally leavened by the writers obvious pleasure in playing with horror tropes, and the banter between the heroes. when the show leaves on its serious face for too long, it gets increasingly hard to actually take seriously. it works best when we're getting to snicker with the characters enough that we don't feel the need to start snickering at them."  jon lachonis of tv overmind, wrote, "i pity any writer tasked with following up eric kripke on supernatural, including the always awesome sera gamble. the fact is, in the shadow of the master practically anything is going to seem to register a little flat. such was the case for the second episode of supernaturals fifth season, good god y'all. a perfectly good episode of supernatural, but a ho-hum follow up to kripke's cinematic and mythos oozing jumpstart from last week. let's dissect."  references  external links      supernatural (season 5) episodes 2009 american television episodes the devil in fiction television episodes set in south dakota television episodes set in colorado
2016 munich attack may refer to:   2016 munich knife attack, on 10 may 2016 in the town of grafing  2016 munich shooting, on 22 july 2016 in the moosach district of munich
lucretia is a 1666 history painting by the dutch golden age painter rembrandt harmensz van rijn in the collection of the minneapolis institute of art. it depicts a myth about a woman by the name of lucretia who lived during the ancient roman eras. she committed suicide to defend her honor after being raped by an etruscan king's son. she is known as a heroine to the romans for her self sacrifice. the romans celebrated the feminine ideals of virtue and chastity.  history it was quite popular during the baroque period for artists to paint lucretia. rembrandt was one of the many dutch artists who carried the story throughout northern europe. it has been suggested by svetlana alpers that there is a significant link to the painting and his mistress hendrickje stoffels. in 1663, when he portrayed her as bathsheba. hendrickje had been chastised for "living like a whore", by the dutch reformed church when she gave birth to their illegitimate daughter, cornelia van rijn. she shared the guilt of the reified and sexually compromised woman which limited their position within patriarchy.  rembrandt never married hendrickje because of the contents of saskia van uylenburgh's (rembrandt's first wife) will, which threatened his income. he was not allowed to remarry if he wanted to inherit her fortune or see their son, titus. titus was the sole survivor out of three children, two of whom died shortly after birth. after the death of his wife in 1642, he hired a wet-nurse, geertje dircx to care for titus. rembrandt and dircx soon became lovers and their relationship lasted several years. when they split, a court case for "breach of promise" arose. she had expected to marry him, after he had given her a ring belonging to his deceased wife. rembrandt promised to pay a settlement to dircx, on the condition that she would not change her will, which named titus as her heir. after years of blackmailing rembrandt, in 1650, geertje was sent to a woman's house of correction.  during the trial, rembrandt hired hendrickje as a housekeeper, and she became his new mistress. even though hendrickje and rembrandt never married, she became his longtime partner and remained together up till hendrickje's death. alpers noted the patriarchal motives underlying the 1666 painting may be rembrandt's guilt for not marrying hendrickje, and the displacement of his domestic life. he knew of hendrickje's experience and pain, and used her as "lucretia
" to explore the full humanity of a woman - a tragic object of desire.  description  in this depiction of lucretia, she is wearing an ornate gold dress and pearl earrings, indicating her status as a woman of wealth. her dress is somewhat disarrayed, exposing her under garment. the fabric of her undergarment is stained with blood, signifying her own acceptance of impending death. in her right hand, she grips the dagger which has caused the wound to her heart, while the left hand is gripping what appears to be a bed tassel. this depiction of lucretia is not supposed to represent idealised beauty, rather, it accentuates the anguish she is experiencing after losing her honour. her face embodies her despair and hopelessness, her skin is pale, and her lips are small and express her grief.  subject this painting is depicting an ancient roman legend written by roman historian livy, who covered the period from early rome through to the reign of augustus. during the ancient roman and greek era, legends of women committing suicide to keep their virtue pure were popular. it was a way to promote feminine ideals to women. as the legend goes, lucretia was a noblewoman who was married to lucius. while her husband was out performing his duty, her husband's friend sextus and few of his men went to visit her. they wanted to see which man had the most virtuous wife. lucretia graciously hosted her husband's guests, and as nightfall came all the men left, except sextus. he was determined to have lucretia for himself. after a couple of days had passed, he went back and told her she either sleep with him, or be killed with her servant, to be framed as an affair gone wrong. the next day, she sent a letter to her father, lucretius, and her husband. when they arrived, she explained what had happened to her. she considered death as the only suitable punishment for her losing her chastity and value as a wife, by being raped. she stabbed herself.  similar work  rembrandt painted another depiction of lucretia in 1664, displayed now at the national gallery of art. it follows the iconographic tradition which shows lucretia clutching the dagger before she stabbed herself. rembrandt was known to have used family and friends as models for his paintings; the 1664 lucretia is in the likeness of his daughter-in-law magdalena van loo.  there has been speculation by sir lawrence gowing that the 1666 figure is not lucretia, but in fact another roman heroine, arria
, who stabbed herself to encourage her husband, paetus, who was sentenced to death by suicide.  influence caravaggio's influence spread to the netherlands and provided adaptation of figural postures, structural principle and dark shadows. caravaggio's style often included illuminated figures, spot-lit, emerging from surrounding shadow - a technique called tenebrism. rembrandt borrowed influence from this style of artwork, evident in lucretia; she is illuminated as the focus of the painting. the dark shadowing on her face and the dark background pull her towards the viewer. there is evidence that rembrandt pulled inspiration from caravaggio's compositions, especially caravaggio's david, in the case of rembrandt's lucretia. the head and body's composition are similar: both have their head slightly tiled to an angle, both forms end below the waist, horizontal marks on lucretia dress may mirror david's bone structure, and lucretia's chain across her dress is similar to the line of david's shirt. while david is holding the head of goliath, the rembrandt shows lucretia holding her bed tassel. recent scholarship and exhibitions have unearthed striking connections between rembrandt and caravaggio. jeremy caniglia artist and art historian in 2020 published his groundbreaking findings explaining exactly how rembrandt's minneapolis lucretia was created by using caravaggio's david with the head of goliath. using x-rays, palette comparisons and overlay analysis technology he was able to show how rembrandt was able to create his feminized copy of lucretia. *  link to historical findings on rembrandt lucretia and caravaggio comparison.  provenance    private collection jean-baptiste wiscar, lille/rome possibly part of the collection of jean-baptist, by nov. 1802 (biikker/schapelhouman/krekeler 2014, online supplement p.21-22)  private collection michal hieronim radziwill, nieborow private collection  private collection john calvert wombwell, london (england)  1853-06-04 date of auction  private collection william w. burdon, newcastle upon tyne  1853-06-04 - 1862-06-28 date of auction  private collection j. purvis carter, london/florence 1877-after 1877 (hudson 1969,no.21)  reinhardt galleries, new york city  1926-1926 (judson 1969,no.21)  private collection h.v. jones, minneapolis (minnesota) 1928-1927/1928 (weller et al. 2011, no.50)  private collection lydia augusta jones, minneapolis
(minnesota) descent from her husband herschel v. jones  minneapolis institute of art , minneapolis (minnesota)  1934 -  notes  references   lucretia in the rkd becker, emil. "hendrickje stoffels the companion of rembrandt." fine arts journal, vol. 22, no. 6, 1910, pp. 324-332. hults, linda c. "durer's 'lucretia': speaking the silence of women." signs, vol. 16, no. 2, 1991, pp. 205-237. crenshaw, paul. rembrandt's bankruptcy: the artist, his patrons, and the art market in seventeenth-century nederlands. cambridge: university press, 2006. print. russell, margarita. rsa journal, vol. 137, no. 5389, 1988, pp. 60-62. russell, margarita small, jocelyn penny. "the death of lucretia." american journal of archaeology, vol. 80, no. 4, 1976, pp. 349-360. "the story of lucretia." echoes of two cultures, by arthur m. young, university of pittsburgh press, 1964, pp. 59-126.   paintings by rembrandt 1660s paintings rembrandt
steve bernard (born 28 december 1949) is an australian cricketer and referee. he played his domestic matches for new south wales. bernard serves as a member of the icc associate and affiliate panel of referee representing australia.  see also  list of new south wales representative cricketers  references  1949 births living people australian cricketers new south wales cricketers
edouard cadol (11 february 1831 - 1 june 1898) was a 19th-century french playwright and novelist.  biography  an employee at chemins de fer du nord, cadol soon left his position to dedicate himself entirely to literature. he made his debut as a critic in small newspapers such as the courrier de paris and the journal de francfort. he became secretary of the editorial board of le temps, wrote the drama chronicle in l'esprit public, was one of the cofounders of l'esprit francais, published short stories in l'univers, le monde illustre, l'estafette, le nord, while working in collaboration for theaters of the suburbs and the boulevards.  the brilliant success of his comedy, les inutiles, which reached 200 consecutive performances in 1868, established his reputation as a playwright. therefore, many pieces went out of his pen. his novels include rose, splendeurs et miseres de la vie theatrale (1873) and hortense maillot (1885).  cadol also collaborated with jules verne on theatrical versions of some fiction, such as around the world in eighty days, which degenerated into a polemic and un neveu d'amerique (a nephew from america, 1873).  works   1856: la mye du roy le onziesme, one-act drama, with edouard devicque,  in-8° ; 1860: le jeune homme au riflard, one-act comedie en vaudeville, with charles varin, in-18 ; 1862: lettre a m. le marquis de carabas sur les partis, in-8 ; 1863: la germaine, three-act comedy, in prose, in-12 ; 1867: les ambitions de m. fauvelle, five-act comedy, in-12 ; 1867: contes gais. les belles imbeciles, in-12 ; 1868: l'affaire est arrangee, one-act comedy, in-12 ; 1868: les inutiles, four-act comedy, in-12 ; 1870: la belle affaire, three-act comedy, in-12 ; 1870: la fausse monnaie, five-act comedy, in-12 ; 1870: jacques cernol, three-act comedy, in-12 ; 1870: le mystere, comedy in one act and in prose, in-12 ; 1871: les creanciers du bonheur, three-act comedy, in-12 ; 1871:
paris pendant le siege read online, brussels, in-8° ; 1872: le spectre de patrick, drame fantastique en cinq actes et neuf tableaux, in-12 ; 1872: une amourette, four-act comedy, in-12 ; 1872: memnon, ou la sagesse humaine, one-act opera comique from a tale by voltaire, in-12 ; 1873: le monde galant, in-12 ; 1873: rose, splendeurs et miseres de la vie theatrale, in-12 ; 1874: madame elise, in-12 ; 1875: la bete noire, in-12 ; 1876: le cheveu du diable, voyage fantastique au japon, in-12 ; 1878: berthe sigelin, in-12 ; 1878: l'enquete, three-act drama, in-12 ; 1878: la grand'maman, comedy in four acts in prose, in-12 ; 1878: marguerite chauveley, in-12 ; 1878: la prima donna, le pere raymond, in-12 ; 1879: la diva, in-12 ; 1879: la grande vie, la preferee, in-8° ; 1880: la princesse aidee, tale imitated from carlo gozzi, followed by marianne and georges pairier, in-12 ; 1880: la comtesse berthe, four-act play, in-12 ; 1881: un enfant d'israel, in-12 ; 1881: le fils adulterin, in-12 ; 1882: la revanche d'une honnete femme, in-12 ; 1882: son excellence satinette (affaires etrangeres), in-12 ; 1883: la belle virginie, in-12 ; 1883: cathy, in-12 ; 1883: mademoiselle ma mere, in-12 ; 1883: son altesse, in-12 ; 1884: tout seul, aventures d'un pretendant a travers le monde, in-12 ; 1884: la vie en l'air, in-12 ; 1885: hortense maillot, in-12 ; 1885: les parents riches, in-12 ; 1886: les amours de chicot, in-8° ; 1886: les erreurs de la guillotine, in-8° ; 1886: lucette, in-8° ; 1886: madame veuve emilie, in-8 ; 1886: le meilleur monde, in-12 ; 1887: gilberte, paris,
in-12 ; 1887: mademoiselle, in-12 ; 1888: mariage de princesse, in-12 ; 1889: le parasite, in-32 ; 1889: chere madame, in-12 ; 1890: andre laroche, in-12 ; 1890: le chemin de mazas, in-12 ; 1890: les filles seduites, in-4 ; 1891: la fiancee anonyme, in-12 ; 1892: mademoiselle raymonde, in-12 ; 1892: le fils adoptif, in-12 ; 1893: le cher maitre, in-12 ; 1893: le roi de la creation, in-12 ; 1893: therese gervais,  in-12 ; 1894: la belle armande, in-32 ; 1894: le besigue chinois, one-act comedy in prose, in-12 ; 1894: les bouilleurs de cru. mademoiselle michu, in-32 ; 1894: le secretaire particulier, in-12 ; 1894: suzanne herbain, in-12 ; 1895: madeleine houlard, in-12 ; 1896: l'archiduchesse, in-12 ; 1897: theatre inedit (la fete, le mariage rompu, son altesse), in-12.  references  sources   edouard cadol on wikisource  .  external links    edouard cadol on data.bnf.fr   1831 births 1898 deaths 19th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french novelists chevaliers of the legion d'honneur french critics jules verne writers from paris
there have been 4 formula one drivers from uruguay.  former drivers eitel cantoni was the first. he entered three races in 1952: britain, where he failed to finish; germany, where he again failed to finish; and italy, where he finished 11th.  alberto uria entered the argentine grands prix of 1955 and 1956. he retired from the former and finished 6th in the latter.  oscar gonzalez only race was a shared drive with uria in the 1956 argentine grand prix. he completed the second half of the race, finishing in the 6th place, 10 laps down from the race winner and 3 laps behind the 5th-placed driver.  asdrubal fontes bayardo is the most recent uruguayan to enter a grand prix. he failed to start the 1959 french grand prix, his only attempt at a grand prix.  timeline  references
z (minuscule: z) is a letter of the latin alphabet, formed from z with the addition of a grave accent. it is used in the old welsh and wenzhounese alphabets.  encodings  the html codes are: &#58246; for z (upper case)  see also  grave accent  rz (digraph)  references   latin letters with diacritics phonetic transcription symbols
paraburkholderia rhizosphaerae is a bacterium from the genus of paraburkholderia which has been isolated from rhizosphere soil in daejeon in korea.  references  rhizosphaerae bacteria described in 2015
richard hamilton babington (30 november 1901 - 9 june 1984) was archdeacon of exeter from 1958 to 1970; and treasurer of exeter cathedral from 1962 to 1970.   his father, also called richard, was an anglican priest. he was educated at malvern and keble college, oxford. after a curacy at banstead he held incumbencies in southampton and ipswich. he was a canon of st edmundsbury cathedral from 1947 to 1958.  references  1901 births alumni of keble college, oxford people educated at malvern college archdeacons of barnstaple 1984 deaths richard
atlantis university is a private for-profit university in miami. it offers degree programs through its schools of information technology, engineering, business, health care, and foreign languages. the university offers graduate, undergraduate, diploma and certification courses both onsite and online.  references  external links  official website  private universities and colleges in florida education in miami
kilcohan park greyhound stadium is a greyhound racing track and former soccer stadium located in the south of waterford, ireland.  operations racing takes place every friday and saturday evening. race distances are 325, 525, 550, 575 and 731 yards  and the feature event at the track is the gain feeds select stakes.  the main event held at the track is the gain feeds select stakes which for many years was known as the waterford glass stakes.  facilities include a restaurant, fast food facilities, a number of bars and totalisator betting.   the stadium is near waterford city, and has a large customer car park.  history originally built as a soccer stadium for waterford football club, opening on 2 november 1930 and unlicensed greyhound racing. it was owned by mr j.mcgrath and agreement was reached with mr j.mulhall, the president of the irish coursing club (icc) for the track to be run by them and under icc rules in 1947. it staged its first meeting during may 1947 under icc rules and is one of the ireland's smallest provincial tracks but still has a circumference of 460 yards.   in september 1978 a new restaurant was built by the owners the waterford greyhound racing company and overseen by racing manager paddy grant. the track managed to survive despite the large scale redundancies at the nearby waterford glass works in the late eighties. waterford united football club remained at the stadium until 1993 and european cup matches were held at this venue before the club moved grounds.   greyhound racing ireland took over the venue and invested in improvements in 2002, with a major facelift throughout the stadium and on the track. in 2006 a €3.5m extension featuring a new 180-seated restaurant and bar bringing the facilities up to a very high standard.  competitions  select stakes  track records current     former  references  greyhound racing venues in the republic of ireland defunct association football venues in the republic of ireland buildings and structures in waterford (city) sport in waterford (city)
the 2015-16 season is the 88th season in cd leganes 's history and the 13th in the second-tier.  squad  competitions  overall  liga  league table  matches  kickoff times are in cet.  copa del rey  2nd round  3rd round  round of 32  references  cd leganes seasons leg
ancient faith ministries (afm) is a pan-orthodox media ministry and department of the antiochian orthodox christian archdiocese of north america.   alongside its sales division (ancient faith store), it includes four media outlets: ancient faith radio (afr), ancient faith publishing (afp), ancient faith blogs and ancient faith films.  it is headed by ceo john maddex.  overview ancient faith ministries is the product of a 2008 merger of two previously independently existing ministries, ancient faith radio and conciliar press, with other ministry divisions being added later.   conciliar press formed in 1977 as the publishing arm of the new covenant apostolic order, a group of thousands of evangelical christians who were in the process of adopting a historic, liturgical approach to christianity and eventually renamed themselves the evangelical orthodox church (eoc).  with the reception of the eoc into the antiochian archdiocese in 1987, conciliar press became part of the archdiocese.  ancient faith radio began in 2004 in the home of john maddex, a former division manager of moody institute's 35 radio stations, who was attending all saints antiochian orthodox church in chicago.  its initial form was internet streaming of orthodox liturgical music, with podcasts being added in 2005 with recordings of homilies from fr. patrick henry reardon, pastor of all saints church.  in 2008, conciliar press merged with ancient faith radio to form conciliar media ministries, becoming fully a department of the antiochian archdiocese.  with the better brand recognition of the ancient faith brand, in 2013 the merged ministry was renamed ancient faith ministries and the press division renamed ancient faith publishing.  ancient faith blogs was added in 2014, featuring weblogs from multiple writers, a number of whom are associated with afr and afp.   ancient faith films began production in 2015.  in 2016, afm launched orthodox christian ebooks, a site dedicated to the sale of e-books from multiple publishers.   on several occasions, afm has received funding from the virginia h. farah foundation, a non-profit foundation that supports development in the orthodox church.  references  external links official website (includes afr content) ancient faith blogs ancient faith publishing/store orthodox christian ebooks  eastern orthodoxy in the united states
once i will return or dalmatian wedding () is a 1953 german-yugoslav comedy film directed by geza von bolvary and starring paul dahlke, helene stanley, and adelheid seeck. a millionaire returns from the united states to his native dubrovnik.  cast paul dahlke as john rick helene stanley as gloria adelheid seeck as countess stella monti pero alexander as count pero monti elma karlowa as marina heinz drache as bob emerson egon von jordan as mome ivan petrovich as ruge vickie henderson as stewardess mary pat chico as cook hans hais as 1. creditor lojze potokar as 2. creditor viktor beck as fisherman josip das jugoslawische national-ensemble zagreb as dancers  references  external links  1953 romantic comedy films west german films german romantic comedy films yugoslav films films directed by geza von bolvary films set in dubrovnik films set in the mediterranean sea yugoslav romantic comedy films
michael drumgoole (1882 - 24 may 1960) was an irish trade unionist.  born in croom, county limerick, drumgoole moved to new york in 1899, where he worked at lord & taylor and lived with his uncle. in 1902, he returned to ireland, where he joined the irish drapers' assistants' association (idaa) in 1905. the idaa was renamed the irish union of distributive workers and clerks (iudwc), and drumgoole was elected as its general treasurer in 1920. alongside this, he was secretary of the union's dublin and drapery buyers branches, until he was elected as general secretary in 1934.  drumgoole was also active in the irish trades union congress (ituc), serving on its general council from 1931, and as its president in 1936/37. however, in 1945, he led the iudwc out of the ituc as a founder constituent of the congress of irish unions, and served as the chairman of congress for six years.  drumgoole was an unsuccessful labour party candidate for seanad eireann at both the 1948 and 1951 elections. he retired in 1954, and died six years later.  references  1882 births 1960 deaths irish trade unionists people from county limerick
maj. sir henry george elliot  (25 december 1826 niagara falls, ontario - 29 november 1912 pietermaritzburg), was a canadian-born soldier and administrator, and chief magistrate of the tembuland territories in south africa from 1891 to 1902. he was a son of maj. j. f. elliot.  elliot was trained at windsor, ontario, and enlisted with the royal marine light infantry in 1847. he took part in the crimean war between 1854 and 1856, including sebastopol and balaclava, distinguishing himself and being decorated by both the british and turkish forces (5th class order of the medjidie). in 1865 he married the daughter of a mr. j. drummond. then followed by a military career in england, ending in december 1869 with his resigning while holding the rank of major.  poor health resulted in his settling in natal in 1870, and soon after joining the crowds flocking to the diamond fields at kimberley. his health recovered, elliot was persuaded in 1877 by the prime minister john molteno to stay on in south africa as chief magistrate or resident commissioner of tembuland. in 1879 his second marriage was to a daughter of a mr. w. gardner.  in the 1880s elliot acquired from the pondo chief rights over some land at the mouth of the umzimvubu river. traders soon settled there and coasters were able to steam some 18 km up the river to load cargoes of maize. the town later became known as port st. johns.  elliot's greatest achievement was his 1904 bringing about of the bloodless annexation of pondoland, which was the last independent territory in south africa. cecil rhodes was premier of the cape colony at that time, and when britain determined to extend colonial rule to the pondos, lord loch was of a mind that an armed force was needed. this could well have led to a widespread war, and rhodes suggested major elliot as the man whose diplomatic skills might avert such a disaster. the respect he earned from all parties that were involved in disputes led to his highly successful career in the civil service. he was awarded the cmg in 1879, kcmg in 1899 and cb in 1900. in 1902 he retired to pietermaritzburg.  during the boer war a skirmish on 20 november 1901 at the mission station of gatberg, now ugie, eastern cape, led to the death of captain herbert elliot, son of henry george elliot.  the towns of elliot, eastern cape and elliotdale were named in honour of henry
george elliot, as was the sir henry elliot hospital in umtata.  references  external links  historical papers - university of the witwatersrand  people from niagara falls, ontario 1826 births 1907 deaths
the acts of mar mari is a syriac christian apocryphal acts. it pertains to the introduction of christianity in northern and southern mesopotamia by addai's disciple saint mari in the first century and in the beginning of the second century ad.  manuscript history   the acts of mar mari is preserved in multiple manuscripts. six manuscripts written in either syriac or garshuni dated from the nineteenth century and are stored at the library of the rabban hormizd monastery. these manuscripts were copied at either tel keppe or alqosh from a series called stories of saints and martyrs. one manuscript was known to be copied at alqosh in 1881 by a man named abraham of the qasha (priest) family. his copy was based on a nineteenth-century manuscript written by master copyist isa aqruraia. jean baptiste abbeloos had compared the manuscript with an older one he had received from bishop g. khyyath of amida. abbeloos published it along with his latin translation in his acta sancta maris (1885) with a list of variants between the manuscripts.  r. raabe had compared a manuscript known as cb hereafter with abbeloos's. he had published his german translation along with variants in his die geschichte des dominus mari, eines apostels des orients (leipzig: hinrichs, 1893).  paul bedjan edited his manuscript based on abbeloos in his acta martyrum et sanctorum syriace (1890). bedjan's manuscript was less descriptive than abbeloos and raabes.  there are also two arabic translations of the acts of mar mari. the first was from bishop addai scher of seert (turkey) in his kitab sitar asher suhada al-masriq al-qiddisin (1900). the other was an abridged translation with sections of the beginning and the end being omitted. it was published by fr. albert abuja in his suhada al-masriq (1985).  the acts of mar mari was translated for the first time from syriac to english in amir harrak's the acts of mar mari the apostle (2005).  textual similarities   the acts of mar mari derives from the doctrine of addai, but includes some insertions from the bible (primarily the book of daniel), eusebius and ancient literary content from mesopotamia. the author of the acts of mar mari claims to have written down traditions transmitted from books but never identifies them. according to amir harrak, the author probably inserted fragmented
information from old sources, but incorporated them in the acts in way that has made the incorporations indistinguishable from the author's edition of the acts.  the introduction of the acts begins with a correspondence between abgar v and jesus and abgar's healing by addai from the doctrine of addai. the acts further usage of the doctrine of addai continues with a similar occurrence concerning the healing of the king who ruled over arzen; the arzen king was suffering from the exact disease gout as abgar did, but the arzen king is healed by mar mari as abgar was healed by addai. the king then conversed with mar mari as king abgar did similarly with addai in the doctrine of addai. not much prior to his death, mar mari addresses his disciples with the exact words as addai did when he was on his sickbed.  a similar motif from a syriac translation of eusebius's church history (7:17) can be found in the acts of mar mari (ch.1) which depicts a copper statue of a woman that had been bleeding for twelve years; the statue is in reference to a woman whom had been bleeding for twelve years in the gospel of mark (5:25-34). the statue's position has been described to be on a rock with the arms stretch out and knees bent and facing the opposite side of the house of the actual women referenced in mark, and next to the statue, a copper statue of jesus clothed with a cloak and having the arms stretched out towards the women statue.  many moments in the act of mar mari were inspired by the bible. in the book of daniel (ch.3), nebuchadnezzar ii made threats to have shadrach, meshach, and abednego thrown into a blazing furnace if they refused to worship a golden statue he had set up. a similar threat was made (mar mari ch.12) to those who would violate a three-day prohibition of the use of fire during a ceremonial worship of gods. a three-day motif is also alluded to darius the mede instituting a decree to have everyone pay homage only to him in a thirty-day period (dan 6:7, 12). shadrach, meshach, and abednego were eventually thrown into the blazing furnace, but by divine intervention because of their faith in god, they were miraculously unharmed by the fire (dan 3:19-23). this event is mirrored in the
acts (ch.23) when mar mari enters the fire but is unharmed.  date  the date of the acts of mar mari is not universally accepted. jean baptiste abbeloos who first edited the text, dated the acts to the sixth or possibly during the seventh century ad. josef markwart chose a late date because of the two geographical places mentioned, gawar and zawzan which are unattested in the early periods. harrak states that these names do not sound arabic, and though zawzan is found occurring only in arabic sources, harrak states it does not mean the name was coined in the arab period. he further explains the majority of geographical places mentioned in the acts are evidently present in syriac sources of the pre-islamic era. several scholars have dated the acts to the mid seventh century after the fall of the sasanian empire by the arabs, however, amir harrak states that's unlikely since the acts never mentions the end of the sasanian empire or near it.  citations  bibliography   syriac christianity texts in syriac new testament apocrypha	 apocryphal acts 6th-century christian texts 7th-century christian texts
events from the year 1907 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii   chairman of the council of ministers - pyotr arkadyevich stolypin  events coup of june 1907  births  january 21 - janis mendriks, latvian catholic priest (d. 1953) october 27 - semyon mandel, soviet/russian theatre and film production designer and art director (d. 1974) december 7 - fred rose, canadian politician and trade union organizer (d. 1983)  full date missing   hans-wilhelm scheidt, german reichsamtsleiter of the nsdap, the german nazi party (d. 1981).  deaths       dmitri mendeleev, chemist and inventor  (b. 1834)  elizabeth trubetskaya, courtier  (b. 1834)  references  1907 in russia years of the 20th century in the russian empire
chrysogorgiidae is a family of soft corals in the suborder calcaxonia.  references    bayer, f.m. and k.m. muzik. 1976. new genera and species of the holaxonian family chrysogorgiidae (octocorallia: gorgonacea). zoologische mededelingen (leiden) 50: 65-90.  external links          calcaxonia cnidarian families
events from the year 1844 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas i  events  births   marija mesjtjerskaja, courtier  (d. 1868)  varvara rudneva, physician (d. 1899)  april 1 - nikolai skrydlov, admiral (d. 1918)  deaths   roksandra skarlatovna edling, courtier  (d. 1786)  references  1844 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
andon boshkovski (born october 5, 1974) is macedonian handball coach.   he was a player for the macedonian club rabotnicki and macedonian youth national team until he was forced to retire as a young player due to hand injury.  career as handball coach  andon boshkovski started his coaching career from the club where he finished his playing career, the team of rabotnicki. in 2004 he transferred to, then ambitious club, rk metalurg skopje taking the role of assistant coach. with metalurg he won the macedonian national league and participated in the champions league, before he moved to another project with the team from bogdanci. handball club bogdanci lasted about a year, and boshkovski returned to metalurg where he stayed until 2011. in 2011, boshkovski moved to vardar and assisted coach veselin vujovic in winning the seha league, the national title and the cup title. for a short period in 2014, boshkovski had a new function as the head coach of vardar. in 2015 he was appointed as head coach of the oldest macedonian handball club rabotnicki, which finished on the sixth position in the national championship.  boshkovski had brief international experience coaching women's handball in romanian club csm roman in 2016, before he returned to macedonia as coach of rk eurofarm rabotnik. leading the club to their historic first final in the macedonian cup against vardar boshkovski secured a place in ehf challenge cup.  career as assistant coach in the macedonian national team  from 2008 until 2013, andon boshkovski was assistant coach in the macedonian national team. during this period macedonian national team participated in the 2009 world men's handball championship, 2012 european men's handball championship and 2013 world men's handball championship.  references   1974 births living people macedonian handball coaches
cecil creek is a stream in the u.s. state of washington.  cecil creek was named after julia cecil, an indian who settled there.  see also list of rivers of washington  references  rivers of okanogan county, washington rivers of washington (state)
the israel netanya kibbutz orchestra (abbreviated iko) is an orchestra established in 1970. its offices are situated in netanya, israel. the orchestra performs 120 concerts every season, presenting imaginative, up-to-date and refreshing artistic programs. its original and experiential approach - classical pieces alongside folklore and jazz, and combinations of different styles-artistic, vocal and visual - are what build up its uniqueness. the orchestra holds a special educational program, in which 140 orchestral and chamber concerts are held for roughly 23 thousand grade school children in israel.  the orchestra's performances worldwide, in the united states, mexico, south korea, germany, and spain, and is dubbed successful. the orchestra's tour in south africa was successful to the point that the orchestra was invited to tour again in the 2016 season.  the directors of the orchestra are conductors avi ostrowsky, noam sheriff, uzi wiesel, shalom ronli-riklis, lior shambadal, doron salomon, yaron gutfrid, and shalev ad-el. starting 2016-2017 season, swedish conductor and trombone player christian lindberg will serve as the music director of the orchestra. the orchestra regularly performs in beit gabriel, mizra, ein hahoresh, givat brener, dorot, nahariyya, netanya, and tel aviv.  mandoline player and conductor shmuel elbaz serves as the orchestra's residence conductor.  the orchestra is expected to close in august 2021 and   jerusalem symphony orchestra is expected to receive some of its members.  external links israel netanya kibbutz orchestra official website israel netanya kibbutz orchestra on netanya municipality's website  chamber orchestras 1970 establishments in israel israeli orchestras
forbidden fruit (spanish: fruto prohibido or fruto de tentacion) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by alfredo b. crevenna and starring arturo de cordova, irasema dilian and maria douglas.  cast  arturo de cordova as marcos villarreal    irasema dilian as minu    maria douglas as barbara    jorge reyes as ramon    eduardo alcaraz as felipe, mayordomo   fanny schiller as senorita directora  luz maria aguilar as estudiante colegio    amparo arozamena as la actriz    lonka becker as profesora colegio    victorio blanco as botones   ada carrasco as senora luz maria gomez    lupe carriles as fan de villareal    ethel carrillo as estudiante colegio    roberto corell as artemio    maria cortes   linda cristal as julia    rafael estrada as gerente hotel    miguel angel ferriz as senor vidal    emilio garibay as apolonio martinez   hilda grey as virginia    luis guevara as juanito    rosario galvez as olga    ana maria hernandez as invitada al baile    ismael larumbe as gervasio    cecilia leger as invitada a fiesta    elena luquin as estudiante colegio    tana lynn as greta    pepe martinez as invitado a baile    hector mateos as invitado a baile    alvaro matute as invitado al baile    kika meyer as fan de villarreal    roberto meyer as invitado al baile   alicia montoya   irlanda mora as estudiante colegio   diana ochoa as mama de juanito   ignacio peon as juez en boda    carlos robles gil as invitado al baile    joaquin roche as invitado al baile    alicia rodriguez as meche    felix samper as pariente de minu   manuel santigosa as notario   alta mae stone as invitada gringa en fiesta    maria valdealde as hortensia   armando velasco as juez  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by alfredo b. crevenna mexican black-and-white films
kastamonu castle is a medieval castle in kastamonu, turkey.  geography the castle lies inside the urban fabric of the modern city. it is situated slightly to the south west of the city center at an elevation of about .  history during the 10th century, the area around kastamonu was under the rule of the byzantine commander manuel erotikos komnenos who built the castle bearing his name: kastra komnenon, "castle of the komnenoi", a corrupted version of which later became the name of the city in turkish, i.e. kastamonu. the city and the castle was captured by the cobanoglu on behalf of the seljuks of rum. after the cobanoglu, the castle fell to the candarid beylik and finally to the ottoman empire. during the turkish republic era, in 1943, a part of the castle was destroyed as a result of 1943 tosya-ladik earthquake. in 2005 kastamonu municipality partially restored the castle.  building the original castle had fortification walls around the city. but presently only the inner castle which was restored during the candarid era is partially standing. the north to south dimension of the castle is    and the width is  (narrowest) and  (widest). there are 15 bastions and a secret  passage to the outer castle.  references  history of kastamonu castles in turkey byzantine anatolia buildings and structures in kastamonu province ruined castles in turkey former buildings and structures in turkey 10th-century establishments in the byzantine empire
paul donovan is a british economist and author. he is global chief economist for the swiss financial services firm ubs wealth management.  education donovan studied philosophy, politics and economics at st anne's college, oxford, graduating in 1993. he also holds an msc in financial economics from the university of london. donovan is an honorary fellow of st anne's college, and a member of the vice chancellor's circle of oxford university.  career in 1992 donovan joined ubs phillips and drew, as the investment banking arm of ubs was then known, as an intern in the fixed income economics department. in 1995 he moved to be global economist. his appointment as global chief economist of ubs wealth management was announced in june 2016. he has been a managing director of ubs since 2004 and sits as a member of the wealth management global investment committee.  economic views and notable research  donovan has co-authored two books on environmental economics with ubs colleague and fellow st anne's college alumna julie hudson. the book "from red to green" examined the concept of the environmental credit crunch, arguing that use of environmental resources could be considered to be an inter-temporal transfer of living standards in a similar manner to financial credit, and that the consequences of a credit crunch could usefully be applied to environmental issues. the subsequent book "food policy and the environmental credit crunch" looked at the way in which food supply and consumption was dependent on non-renewable resources, and how this may be rectified so as to provide sustainable food supply in the future. a central argument was the need to control waste with holistic policies, not looking at specific parts of the food distribution process in isolation.  in 2015 donovan published "the truth about inflation" arguing that inflation was a poorly understood concept in financial markets. in particular he focused on the issue of inflation inequality - the idea that aggregate inflation indices do not accurately portray the cost of living for certain groups in society. in particular, as income inequality increases, donovan contends that a plutocratic statistic like consumer price inflation will increasingly misrepresent the cost of living for lower income groups in society. donovan has criticised the idea of helicopter money arguing that it reduces policy flexibility, has dire consequences if not controlled, and that raising price inflation expectations may not be desirable if wage inflation expectations remain weak.  donovan was one of the collaborators on the guy fox project's book "how the world really works, the economy", a guide to economics aimed at children of around 10 years of age.  donovan is a self-described
political economist, and has been critical of the veneration of mathematical modelling in economics. he supports the idea of the relationship between policy and the economy as being in flux (the lucas critique).  donovan has written several pieces of research on the economic damage that arises from prejudice in a society, focusing on the impact on productivity and labour markets. donovan has argued that prejudice irrationally discards skilled workers, undermines existing workers' skills, and reduces flexibility in the workplace. donovan has specifically addressed the economic consequences of prejudice around same sex marriage, arguing that the act of denying groups in society access to an institution that grants social status should be considered to be prejudice, and that this undermines economic efficiency.  in 2020 donovan's book "profit and prejudice - the luddites of the fourth industrial revolution" was published, expanding his earlier work on prejudice. the book argues that the structural changes of the fourth industrial revolution are likely to increase prejudice, and that technology will both help and hinder the spread of prejudice. he argues that prejudice will be especially damaging to economies and companies during this period of structural change, as it is not technology but how technology is used that will determine economic success. this means employing the right person, in the right job, at the right time - and prejudice prevents that.  in 2006 donovan authored a detailed analysis of the london 2012 olympic games, in his role as economic adviser to the east london business alliance (elba). in this research, donovan argued that the macro economic benefits of the games could amount to between £5.9bn and £7.8bn of long term gains for the london boroughs of hackney, newham and tower hamlets.  while engaged in a discussion in june 2019 concerning chinese consumer prices, donovan commented that the swine influenza - which was causing the cost of pork to rise - mattered to "chinese pigs and those who ate them". donovan later apologized for his remarks before taking a leave of absence from ubs, saying "i made a mistake and i unwittingly used hugely culturally insensitive language." patrick winters and benjamin robertson of bloomberg reported that "local rivals of ubs, which have been trying to take bigger piece of a business dominated by the established western wealth managers, were quick to condemn donovan's comments."  other interests in 2003 donovan co-founded the peter culverhouse memorial trust, a charity funding long term cancer care and research into low grade glioma. he sits on the investment committee of st anne's college, oxford and has worked with the bridge academy school in hackney.
donovan describes himself as a keen skier and an amateur heavyweight boxer.  references  external links  www.ubs.com/pauldonovan  www.ubs.com/nobel    living people ubs people 1972 births alumni of st anne's college, oxford macroeconomists british economists
ss cathay was a british passenger ship that was sunk during operation torch in 1942 by a german air raid in the mediterranean sea off bougie, algeria.  construction  ss cathay was ordered in 1923 and laid down the following year at the barclay curle & company shipyard in glasgow, scotland. it was launched by lady inchcape (wife of p&o's chairman) on 31 october 1924. the ship was completed and acquired after completing its sea trials on 12 march 1925. the ship made its maiden voyage from london to sydney on 27 march 1925.  the ship was  long, with a beam of  and a depth of . it was assessed at . it had 2 x 4 cyl. quadruple expansion engines driving double screw propellers and the engine was rated at 13.437 nhp. its second funnel was a dummy.  early career  after its maiden voyage in 1925, ss cathay continued sailing for p&o on the australian service route via the suez canal. in 1932 however, bombay was added to its route. it also made an occasional run on the far eastern route.  on 14 december 1933 ss cathay lost a screw while trying to make up time between colombo and fremantle. it had to wait for repairs in sutherland dock, australia, and returned to service in march 1934.  world war ii  on 25 august 1939, ss cathay was requisitioned by the admiralty and converted at bombay for service as an armed merchant cruiser. the second (dummy) funnel was removed and eight 6-inch and two 3-inch guns were fitted on the decks. the ship served on the bombay-durban patrol after its conversion in october 1939.  sinking of ss anselm  ss anselm was a troopship that was part of a convoy consisting of the survey vessel  and the flower-class corvettes lavender, petunia and starwort. on 5 july 1941 anselm and its escorts were in the mid-atlantic about 300 nautical miles (560 km) north of the azores when a luftwaffe focke-wulf fw 200 condor patrol spotted them and signaled the german type viic submarine u-96 to attack the convoy. the submarine only managed to hit anselm before fleeing from enemy fire.  anselm sank in 22 minutes and 254 people died; the 1,061 survivors were either picked up by the other escort ships or by anselms lifeboats until cathay arrived to offer assistance. it took on 900 survivors to relieve anselms overloaded escorts and brought the survivors to freetown
without further incident.  refitting as troopship  on 5 february 1942, cathay was returned to p&o and refitted as a troopship by the bethlehem steel corporation at brooklyn; it entered service again on 30 april of the same year.  operation torch and sinking ss cathay was part of operation torch, which consisted of british and american troops invading french north africa. it disembarked troops west of algiers at the beginning of the operation on 8 november 1942.  while cathay was returning to the port of bougie, algeria from algiers on 11 november 1942, it was bombed by german aircraft at 1:30 pm. one person died as a result of the air raid, and the remaining crew tried to save the ship. the order to abandon ship was giving at 7:00 pm and all the remaining crew got off cathay safely. some of the survivors were picked up by the british indian ship ss karanja. at 10:00 pm a delayed action bomb exploded in the galley and started a serious fire that made the ship unreachable. the following day at 7:00 am, its ammunition exploded and blew off the stern. at 10:00 am, cathay capsized on its starboard side and sank nearly 24 hours after being bombed.  gallery  footnotes  references  1924 ships passenger ships of the united kingdom steamships of the united kingdom ships built on the river clyde ships sunk by german aircraft maritime incidents in november 1942 world war ii shipwrecks in the mediterranean sea world war ii merchant ships of the united kingdom auxiliary cruisers of the royal navy troop ships of the united kingdom
the women's cross-country eliminator (xce) is an event at the annual uci urban cycling world championships. from 2012 to 2016 the uci world championships in the xce were held as part of the uci mountain bike & trials world championships.  medalists  medals by country  references  external links uci mountain biking page  events at the uci mountain bike & trials world championships
jagdgeschwader 136 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  references  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1936 military units and formations disestablished in the 1940s
youtube copyright strike is a copyright policing practice used by youtube for the purpose of managing copyright infringement and complying with the digital millennium copyright act. the digital millennium copyright act (dmca) is the basis for the design of the youtube copyright strike system. for youtube to retain dmca safe harbor protection, it must respond to copyright infringement claims with a notice and take down process. youtube's own practice is to issue a "youtube copyright strike" on the user accused of copyright infringement. when a youtube user gets hit with a copyright strike, they will be required to watch a warning video about the rules of copyright and take trivia questions about the danger of copyright. when a youtube user has three copyright strikes, youtube terminates that user's youtube channel, including any associated channels that the user have, removes all of their videos from that user's youtube channel, and prohibits that user from creating another youtube channel.  youtube assigns strikes based on reports of copyright violations from bots.  some users have expressed concern that the strike process is unfair to users. the complaint is that the system assumes guilt of youtube users and takes the side of copyright holders even when no infringement has occurred.  youtube and nintendo were criticised by cory doctorow, a writer for the blog boing boing, due to them reportedly treating video game reviewers unfairly by threatening them with strikes.  reasons for strikes  disagreements about what constitutes fair use  fair use is a legal rationale for reusing copyrighted content in a limited way, such as to discuss or criticize other media. various youtube creators have reported receiving copyright strikes for using media in the context of fair use.  suppression of criticism youtube creators have reported receiving copyright strikes on videos that are critical of corporate products. they assert that copyright violation, in this context, has been used as a strategy to suppress criticism.  strikes for posting own work copyright strikes have also been issued against creators themselves. miracle of sound's channel was hit with multiple copyright strikes as a result of automated strikes by the distributor of their own music.  strikes for works in the public domain in a similar incident to such strikes, though in another forum, sony issued an automated copyright strike against james rhodes for a video on facebook of him playing part of a piece by bach, on the grounds that they owned the copyright on a similar recording, and when the strike was challenged, asserted that they owned the rights to the work, before finally admitting that bach's compositions are in the public domain.  strikes for unknown reasons some publishers on youtube report not understanding why they have received strikes
.  this may relate to the fact 99.95 percent of dmca takedown notices are actually sent at random urls that could have existed (valid format) but is not actually used at all at the point in time the takedown notice is sent. this is the work of bots having no valid claims to any copyright, trying to carpet bomb dmca notices for various illegal reasons such as trying to ruin a competitor.  references  external links copyright strike basics in youtube help how to dispute a strike -- dmca process explained by h3h3productions  copyright infringement youtube controversies criticism of google
jean louis edmond saint-edme de manne, known under the name edmond-denis de manne, (18 august 1801 in paris - 6 may 1877 in paris) was a 19th-century french playwright and journalist.  de manne was a member of the societe des auteurs et compositeurs dramatiques and mayor of champ-haut (orne) where he is buried. in addition to his publications, he wrote numerous articles in the papers of his time. he also wrote under the pen names armand duplessis, fernand de lisle, alexis bartevelle, edmond nouel and dupre.  publications   1820: histoire d'un chien naufrage, then a pupil at royal college henri iv 1821: vers sur la naissance de sar mgr le duc de bordeaux, signed edmond de m. 1822: parallele de talma et de joanny 1822: la peste de barcelone, ou le devouement des medecins francais, written when the author was an employee at the king's library 1831: un dimanche a londres, ou vive la france, comedie en vaudeville written with tellier 1831: le mouchoir bleu, comedie en vaudeville written with m. margues 1834: nouveau recueil d'ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes 1835: chansons, under the pen name alexis bartevelle ; 1838: une conquete !, one-act comedie en vaudeville, under his pseudonym 1844: a moliere, hommage de la posterite... 1835: avec mme... : souvenirs, poesies 1838: une conquete, comedie en vaudeville 1842: emery le negociant, three-act drama 1851: le chateau de carrouges 1851: le desert et ses episodes, translated from english 1852: voisin de campagne, comedie en vaudeville 1853: un laquais d'autrefois, one-act comedie en vaudeville, under his pseudonym 1864: avant souper, comedy in 1 act in prose, under his pseudonym 1861: galerie historique des portraits des comediens de la troupe de voltaire1862: nouveau dictionnaire des ouvrages anonymes et pseudonymes1866: galerie historique des comediens de la troupe de talma1869: galerie historique des comediens de la troupe de nicolet, available on gallica ; 1869: esquisses historiques sur quelques localites de la normandie1870: chansons1876: galerie historique de la comedie francaise1877: galerie historique des acteurs francais''  external links   edmond-denis de
manne on data.bnf.fr  edmond-denis de manne on wikisource  19th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french journalists french male journalists french librarians french chansonniers french bibliographers chevaliers of the legion d'honneur 1801 births writers from paris 1877 deaths 19th-century french male writers
techniques have been developed to produce carbon nanotubes in sizable quantities, including arc discharge, laser ablation, high-pressure carbon monoxide disproportionation, and chemical vapor deposition (cvd). most of these processes take place in a vacuum or with process gases. cvd growth of cnts can occur in vacuum or at atmospheric pressure. large quantities of nanotubes can be synthesized by these methods; advances in catalysis and continuous growth are making cnts more commercially viable.  types  arc discharge  nanotubes were observed in 1991 in the carbon soot of graphite electrodes during an arc discharge, by using a current of 100 amps, that was intended to produce fullerenes. however the first macroscopic production of carbon nanotubes was made in 1992 by two researchers at nec's fundamental research laboratory. the method used was the same as in 1991. during this process, the carbon contained in the negative electrode sublimates because of the high-discharge temperatures.  the yield for this method is up to 30% by weight and it produces both single- and multi-walled nanotubes with lengths of up to 50 micrometers with few structural defects. arc-discharge  technique  uses  higher  temperatures (above 1,700 °c) for cnt synthesis which typically causes the expansion of cnts with fewer structural defects in comparison with other methods.  laser ablation  in laser ablation, a pulsed laser vaporizes a graphite target in a high-temperature reactor while an inert gas is led into the chamber. nanotubes develop on the cooler surfaces of the reactor as the vaporized carbon condenses. a water-cooled surface may be included in the system to collect the nanotubes.  this process was developed by dr. richard smalley and co-workers at rice university, who at the time of the discovery of carbon nanotubes, were blasting metals with a laser to produce various metal molecules. when they heard of the existence of nanotubes they replaced the metals with graphite to create multi-walled carbon nanotubes. later that year the team used a composite of graphite and metal catalyst particles (the best yield was from a cobalt and nickel mixture) to synthesize single-walled carbon nanotubes.  the laser ablation method yields around 70% and produces primarily single-walled carbon nanotubes with a controllable diameter determined by the reaction temperature. however, it is more expensive than either arc discharge or chemical vapor deposition.  the effective equation for few cycle optical pulse dynamics was obtained by virtue of the boltzmann collision-less equation solution
for conduction band electrons of semiconductor carbon nanotubes in the case when medium with carbon nanotubes has spatially-modulated refractive index.  plasma torch  single-walled carbon nanotubes can also be synthesized by a thermal plasma method, first invented in 2000 at inrs (institut national de la recherche scientifique) in varennes, canada, by olivier smiljanic. in this method, the aim is to reproduce the conditions prevailing in the arc discharge and laser ablation approaches, but a carbon-containing gas is used instead of graphite vapors to supply the necessary carbon. doing so, the growth of swnt is more efficient (decomposing the gas can be 10 times less energy-consuming than graphite vaporization). the process is also continuous and low cost. a gaseous mixture of argon, ethylene and ferrocene is introduced into a microwave plasma torch, where it is atomized by the atmospheric pressure plasma, which has the form of an intense 'flame'. the fumes created by the flame contain swnt, metallic and carbon nanoparticles and amorphous carbon.  another way to produce single-walled carbon nanotubes with a plasma torch is to use the induction thermal plasma method, implemented in 2005 by groups from the university of sherbrooke and the national research council of canada. the method is similar to arc discharge in that both use ionized gas to reach the high temperature necessary to vaporize carbon-containing substances and the metal catalysts necessary for the ensuing nanotube growth. the thermal plasma is induced by high-frequency oscillating currents in a coil, and is maintained in flowing inert gas. typically, a feedstock of carbon black and metal catalyst particles is fed into the plasma, and then cooled down to form single-walled carbon nanotubes. different single-wall carbon nanotube diameter distributions can be synthesized.  the induction thermal plasma method can produce up to 2 grams of nanotube material per minute, which is higher than the arc discharge or the laser ablation methods.  chemical vapor deposition (cvd)   the catalytic vapor phase deposition of carbon was reported in 1952 and 1959, but it was not until 1993 that carbon nanotubes were formed by this process. in 2007, researchers at the university of cincinnati (uc) developed a process to grow aligned carbon nanotube arrays of length 18 mm on a firstnano et3000 carbon nanotube growth system.  during cvd, a substrate is prepared with a layer of metal catalyst particles, most commonly nickel, cobalt,
iron, or a combination. the metal nanoparticles can also be produced by other ways, including reduction of oxides or oxides solid solutions. the diameters of the nanotubes that are to be grown are related to the size of the metal particles. this can be controlled by patterned (or masked) deposition of the metal, annealing, or by plasma etching of a metal layer. the substrate is heated to approximately 700 °c. to initiate the growth of nanotubes, two gases are bled into the reactor: a process gas (such as ammonia, nitrogen or hydrogen) and a carbon-containing gas (such as acetylene, ethylene, ethanol or methane). nanotubes grow at the sites of the metal catalyst; the carbon-containing gas is broken apart at the surface of the catalyst particle, and the carbon is transported to the edges of the particle, where it forms the nanotubes. this mechanism is still being studied. the catalyst particles can stay at the tips of the growing nanotube during growth, or remain at the nanotube base, depending on the adhesion between the catalyst particle and the substrate. thermal catalytic decomposition of hydrocarbon has become an active area of research and can be a promising route for the bulk production of cnts. fluidised bed reactor is the most widely used reactor for cnt preparation. scale-up of the reactor is the major challenge.  cvd is the most widely used method for the production of carbon nanotubes. for this purpose, the metal nanoparticles are mixed with a catalyst support such as mgo or al2o3 to increase the surface area for higher yield of the catalytic reaction of the carbon feedstock with the metal particles. one issue in this synthesis route is the removal of the catalyst support via an acid treatment, which sometimes could destroy the original structure of the carbon nanotubes. however, alternative catalyst supports that are soluble in water have proven effective for nanotube growth.  if a plasma is generated by the application of a strong electric field during growth (plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition), then the nanotube growth will follow the direction of the electric field. by adjusting the geometry of the reactor it is possible to synthesize vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (i.e., perpendicular to the substrate), a morphology that has been of interest to researchers interested in electron emission from nanotubes. without the plasma, the resulting nanotubes are often randomly oriented. under certain reaction conditions, even in the absence of a plasma, closely spaced nanotubes will maintain a vertical growth direction resulting in a dense array of tubes resembling a carpet or forest
.  of the various means for nanotube synthesis, cvd shows the most promise for industrial-scale deposition, because of its price/unit ratio, and because cvd is capable of growing nanotubes directly on a desired substrate, whereas the nanotubes must be collected in the other growth techniques. the growth sites are controllable by careful deposition of the catalyst. in 2007, a team from meijo university demonstrated a high-efficiency cvd technique for growing carbon nanotubes from camphor. researchers at rice university, until recently led by the late richard smalley, have concentrated upon finding methods to produce large, pure amounts of particular types of nanotubes. their approach grows long fibers from many small seeds cut from a single nanotube; all of the resulting fibers were found to be of the same diameter as the original nanotube and are expected to be of the same type as the original nanotube.  super-growth cvd  super-growth cvd (water-assisted chemical vapor deposition) was developed by kenji hata, sumio iijima and co-workers at aist, japan. in this process, the activity and lifetime of the catalyst are enhanced by addition of water into the cvd reactor. dense millimeter-tall vertically aligned nanotube arrays (vantas) or "forests", aligned normal to the substrate, were produced. the forests height could be expressed, as     in this equation, β is the initial growth rate and  is the characteristic catalyst lifetime.  their specific surface exceeds 1,000 m2/g (capped) or 2,200 m2/g (uncapped), surpassing the value of 400-1,000 m2/g for hipco samples. the synthesis efficiency is about 100 times higher than for the laser ablation method. the time required to make swnt forests of the height of 2.5 mm by this method was 10 minutes in 2004. those swnt forests can be easily separated from the catalyst, yielding clean swnt material (purity >99.98%) without further purification. for comparison, the as-grown hipco cnts contain about 5-35% of metal impurities; it is therefore purified through dispersion and centrifugation that damages the nanotubes. super-growth avoids this problem. patterned highly organized single-walled nanotube structures were successfully fabricated using the super-growth technique.  the mass density of super-growth cnts is about 0.037 g/cm3. it is much lower than that of conventional
cnt powders (~1.34 g/cm3), probably because the latter contain metals and amorphous carbon.  the super-growth method is basically a variation of cvd. therefore, it is possible to grow material containing swnt, dwnts and mwnts, and to alter their ratios by tuning the growth conditions. their ratios change by the thinness of the catalyst. many mwnts are included so that the diameter of the tube is wide.  the vertically aligned nanotube forests originate from a "zipping effect" when they are immersed in a solvent and dried. the zipping effect is caused by the surface tension of the solvent and the van der waals forces between the carbon nanotubes. it aligns the nanotubes into a dense material, which can be formed in various shapes, such as sheets and bars, by applying weak compression during the process. densification increases the vickers hardness by about 70 times and density is 0.55 g/cm3. the packed carbon nanotubes are more than 1 mm long and have a carbon purity of 99.9% or higher; they also retain the desirable alignment properties of the nanotubes forest.  liquid electrolysis method  in 2015, researchers in the george washington university discovered a new pathway to synthesize mwcnts by electrolysis of molten carbonates. the mechanism is similar to cvd. some metal ions were reduced to a metal form and attached on the cathode as the nucleation point for the growing of cnts. the reaction on the cathode is  li2co3 -> li2o + cnts + o2  the formed lithium oxide can in-situ absorb carbon dioxide (if present) and form lithium carbonate, as shown in the equation.  li2o + co2 -> li2co3  thus the net reaction is  co2 -> cnts + o2  in other words, the reactant is only greenhouse gas of carbon dioxide, while the product is high valued cnts. this discovery was highlighted by science, bbc news, mit technology news, etc., as a possible technology for carbon dioxide capture and conversions.  natural, incidental, and controlled flame environments  fullerenes and carbon nanotubes are not necessarily products of high-tech laboratories; they are commonly formed in such mundane places as ordinary flames, produced by burning methane, ethylene, and benzene, and they have been found in soot from both indoor and outdoor air. however, these naturally occurring varieties can be highly irregular in size and
quality because the environment in which they are produced is often highly uncontrolled. thus, although they can be used in some applications, they can lack in the high degree of uniformity necessary to satisfy the many needs of both research and industry. recent efforts have focused on producing more uniform carbon nanotubes in controlled flame environments. such methods have promise for large-scale, low-cost nanotube synthesis based on theoretical models, though they must compete with rapidly developing large scale cvd production.  purification  removal of catalysts  nanoscale metal catalysts are important ingredients for fixed- and fluidized-bed cvd synthesis of cnts. they allow increasing the growth efficiency of cnts and may give control over their structure and chirality. during synthesis, catalysts can convert carbon precursors into tubular carbon structures but can also form encapsulating carbon overcoats. together with metal oxide supports they may therefore attach to or become incorporated into the cnt product. the presence of metal impurities can be problematic for many applications. especially catalyst metals like nickel, cobalt or yttrium may be of toxicological concern. while unencapsulated catalyst metals may be readily removable by acid washing, encapsulated ones require oxidative treatment for opening their carbon shell. the effective removal of catalysts, especially of encapsulated ones, while preserving the cnt structure is a challenge and has been addressed in many studies. a new approach to break carbonaceous catalyst encapsulations is based on rapid thermal annealing.  application-related issues   many electronic applications of carbon nanotubes crucially rely on techniques of selectively producing either semiconducting or metallic cnts, preferably of a certain chirality. several methods of separating semiconducting and metallic cnts are known, but most of them are not yet suitable for large-scale technological processes. the most efficient method relies on density-gradient ultracentrifugation, which separates surfactant-wrapped nanotubes by the minute difference in their density. this density difference often translates into difference in the nanotube diameter and (semi)conducting properties. another method of separation uses a sequence of freezing, thawing, and compression of swnts embedded in agarose gel. this process results in a solution containing 70% metallic swnts and leaves a gel containing 95% semiconducting swnts. the diluted solutions separated by this method show various colors. the separated carbon nanotubes using this method have been applied to electrodes, e.g. electric double-layer capacitor. moreover, swnts can be separated by the
column chromatography method. yield is 95% in semiconductor type swnt and 90% in metallic type swnt.  in addition to separation of semiconducting and metallic swnts, it is possible to sort swnts by length, diameter, and chirality. the highest resolution length sorting, with length variation of <10%, has thus far been achieved by size exclusion chromatography (sec) of dna-dispersed carbon nanotubes (dna-swnt). swnt diameter separation has been achieved by density-gradient ultracentrifugation (dgu) using surfactant-dispersed swnts and by ion-exchange chromatography (iec) for dna-swnt. purification of individual chiralities has also been demonstrated with iec of dna-swnt: specific short dna oligomers can be used to isolate individual swnt chiralities. thus far, 12 chiralities have been isolated at purities ranging from 70% for (8,3) and (9,5) swnts to 90% for (6,5), (7,5) and (10,5)swnts. alternatively, carbon nanotubes have been successfully sorted by chirality using the aqueous two phase extraction method. there have been successful efforts to integrate these purified nanotubes into devices, e. g. fets.  an alternative to separation is development of a selective growth of semiconducting or metallic cnts. recently, a new cvd recipe that involves a combination of ethanol and methanol gases and quartz substrates resulting in horizontally aligned arrays of 95-98% semiconducting nanotubes was announced.  nanotubes are usually grown on nanoparticles of magnetic metal (fe, co), which facilitates production of electronic (spintronic) devices. in particular, control of current through a field-effect transistor by magnetic field has been demonstrated in such a single-tube nanostructure.  references  carbon nanotubes chemical synthesis
molly solverson is a fictional character in the fx television series fargo. one of the main characters of the first season, she is portrayed by allison tolman, who received critical acclaim for her performance, and was nominated for a primetime emmy award and a golden globe award, and won a critics' choice television award for her performance. she appeared as a minor character in season 2, portrayed by raven stewart as a child; tolman also briefly reprised her role in a cameo.  character summary  solverson is the female protagonist of the first season and appears as a child in a supporting role in the second season. in the first season, she is introduced as a deputy, and is a major figure in the solving of the case involving lorne malvo (billy bob thornton) and lester nygaard (martin freeman). by the end of the season, she is promoted to chief after bill oswalt (bob odenkirk) resigns after the death of both malvo and nygaard.  in the second season which is set in 1979, solverson is the daughter of the protagonist of the second season, lou solverson, who is one of the major figures involved in the solving of the murder of rye gerhardt and the crime that surrounds it. tolman reprised her role (along with colin hanks, joey king, and keith carradine) in a dream sequence by her mother, betsy solverson (cristin milioti).  production allison tolman beat over 600 women for the role of solverson. tolman, who mostly worked in chicago theater, only had three credits on her resume when she auditioned for the role. casting director, rachel tenner revealed that the casting directors and the producers were always open to an unknown actress accepting the role. she later added that tolman was the only actress who felt right for the role to her, saying: "the only role we tested was molly. we saw hundreds of girls trying to do fargo accents. it's a lot to listen to... alison felt so organic to this role. she found moments of humor and compassion where nobody else was."  noah hawley has stated that the main reason he created the character vern and ida thurman and initially set it up to seem like vern would be the protagonist of the series, was so that the audience would not compare the character of molly to marge gunderson, the protagonist of the original film, stating: "i knew that if i started the show with "molly" as the chief of police, everyone was going to make a
direct comparison to frances mcdormand and no one could survive that because frances' performance was so oscar winning and iconic. so, i snuck "molly" in through the side door. i created "vern," and i gave him a pregnant wife, and my thought was well the audience will go oh, i see what they're doing, they just switched this and now the wife is pregnant but he's having a baby, and then i kill him off and "molly" has been introduced through the side door as a sidekick, so suddenly you realize only in episode 2 that she is actually the star of the show, but at that point, you haven't judged her against frances mcdormand. so, you've formed an opinion on her based on her performance versus based on somebody else's performance."  reception for her performance in the first season, tolman received widespread critical acclaim, with some critics calling her the "breakout performance" of the show.  dan fienberg of hitfix praised tolman's performance, writing: "character acting gets no better than the performances by billy bob thornton, martin freeman, oliver platt, adam goldberg, keith carradine and a dozen other familiar faces, but it was unknown chicago theater actress allison tolman who grounded this perfectly contained gem of a season."  references  television characters introduced in 2014 fictional american police officers fargo (tv series) characters fictional sheriffs
desal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of desal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, desal has a total number of 266 houses and population of 1,433 of which include 763 males and 670 females. literacy rate of desal is 68.43%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 169 which is  11.79% of total population of desal, and child sex ratio is approximately  1012, higher than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 81.02% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
the ras al khaimah tourism development authority (raktda) was established in may 2011 under the government of ras al khaimah. its purpose is to develop and promote the emirate's tourism offering and infrastructure, both domestically and abroad.  mission  in order to achieve target growth of one million visitors by the end of 2018, the authority aims establish ras al khaimah as a compelling destination for leisure and business travel, create sustainable investment opportunities and enhance the quality of life for its residents. in order to achieve its goals, rak tda has a government mandate to license, regulate and monitor the emirate's tourism and hospitality industry.  activities  raktda promotes the emirate's tourism products and services through a wide range of activities, including research and analysis of current tourism trends and future projects; representation of the destination at travel shows; educating travel professionals on ras al khaimah's attractions through workshops, roadshows and  training programmes; coordinating and implementing joint initiatives and co-marketing opportunities with industry partners; branding and marketing strategies to encourage tourism and investment into the emirate; media and consumer campaigns and promotions; and hosting sporting, cultural, trade and csr events.  chief executive  raki philips is the current ceo of raktda  haitham mattar (2015 - 2019)  external links  official site  references  tourism in the united arab emirates tourism agencies
jagdgeschwader 135 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1937
the 1962 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1962 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 6-4 overall and 5-2 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by abe martin in his tenth year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
the swan 441 was designed by ron holland.  external links  nautor swan  references  sailing yachts keelboats 1970s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by ron holland
costantino is both a masculine italian given name and an italian surname. notable people with the name include:  people with the given name costantino affer (1906-1987), italian medallist costantino barbella (1853-1925), italian sculptor costantino bresciani turroni (1882-1963), italian economist and statistician costantino de castro, 11th-century italian roman catholic bishop costantino catena (born 1969), italian classical pianist costantino cedini (1741-1811), italian painter costantino corti, 19th-century italian sculptor costantino d'orazio (born 1974), italian art critic and curator costantino fiaschetti, 18th-century italian architect costantino de giacomo, italian physician costantino lazzari (1857-1927), italian politician costantino nigra (1828-1907), italian diplomat costantino nivola (1911-1988), italian sculptor costantino pasqualotto (1681-1755), italian painter costantino patrizi naro (1798-1876), italian cardinal costantino rocca (born 1956), italian golfer costantino sala (born 1913), italian footballer costantino sereno (1829-1893), italian painter  people with the surname  christian costantino ( born 2008), basketball player damian costantino (born c. 1978), american baseball player gregory costantino (born 1960), american politician marco costantino (born 1991), italian footballer mark americus costantino (1920-1990), american judge normando costantino (born 1952), argentine air force brigadier raffaele costantino (1907-1991), italian footballer romola costantino (1930-1988), australian pianist rosario costantino (footballer, born 1988), italian football player rosario costantino (footballer, born 1997), italian football player steven m. costantino (born 1957), american politician tommaso costantino (1885-1950), italian fencer  see also costantino lake, a lake in calabria, italy constantine (disambiguation) san costantino (disambiguation)  italian-language surnames italian masculine given names patronymic surnames
the dai kannon of kita no miyako park (japanese: 北海道大観音), also known as the hokkaido kannon, as well as the byakue kannon, is the third-tallest statue in japan and is the tenth-tallest statue in the world, tied with the grand buddha at ling shan. it was the tallest statue in the world when it opened in 1989 at , holding the world record until 1991.  planning of the statue began in 1975 and construction occurred through 1989. the statue depicts guanyin (avalokitesvara) and is in the kita no miyako park on the island of hokkaido. the statue contains over 20 floors with an elevator, with floors containing shrines and places of worship, eight in total, and a platform providing a panoramic view of the area to visitors.  see also  ashibetsu  buddhism  buddhist art  kannon  list of tallest statues  references  1989 establishments in japan 1989 sculptures buildings and structures in hokkaido colossal guanyin statues concrete sculptures outdoor sculptures in japan religious buildings and structures completed in 1989 tourist attractions in hokkaido
domenico cennini (1606 - august, 1684) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of gravina di puglia (1645-1684).  biography domenico cennini was born in chiusi, italy in 1606 and ordained a priest in november 1644. on 6 march 1645, he was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent x as bishop of gravina di puglia. on 19 march 1645, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna, with onorato onorati, bishop of urbania e sant'angelo in vado, and papirio silvestri, bishop of macerata e tolentino, serving as co-consecrators. he served as bishop of gravina di puglia until his death in august 1684.  while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of salvatore scaglione, bishop of castellammare di stabia (1678).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent x 1606 births 1684 deaths people from chiusi
olenecamptus malayensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
mehlhorn is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  annika mehlhorn, german swimmer bill mehlhorn, american golfer hans mehlhorn, german bobsledder herbert mehlhorn kurt mehlhorn ludwig mehlhorn, german mathematician ulf mehlhorn, german footballer  german-language surnames
ipsc chile is the chilean association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  external links   official homepage of ipsc chile  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organisations of chile
a protected area mosaic () or conservation unit mosaic ()  in brazil is a mosaic of nearby, adjoining or overlapping protected areas of brazil that are managed as a whole.  definition  the national system of conservation units (snuc) law defines a mosaic as a collection of protected areas of the same or different categories that are near to each other, adjoin each other or overlap, and that should be managed as a whole.  given the different categories of conservation unit and other protected areas in a mosaic, including fully protected and sustainable use units, the different conservation goals must be considered. a mosaic may include private lands and indigenous territories.  examples  the jacupiranga mosaic is in the ribeira valley and the south coast of the state of sao paulo, with 14 conservation units of various categories. it was created to reconcile the goals of conserving the atlantic forest and improving the living conditions of the traditional populations of the area. it originated with the jacupiranga state park, created on 8 august 1969, and includes the rio turvo and caverna do diabo state parks. it also includes four environmental protection areas, five sustainable development reserves and two extractive reserves.  the itatiaia national park, created in 1937 as the first national park in brazil, is part of the mantiqueira mosaic and the mantiqueira ecological corridor, part of the larger serra do mar ecological corridor, which in turn is part of the unesco-recognised atlantic forest biosphere reserve. the park is a vulnerable "conservation island" due to its location between the major cities of rio de janeiro and sao paulo.  brazil has created a mosaic of federal and state conservation units along the br-319 highway through the amazon rainforest in an effort to better prevent deforestation when the highway is paved through more efficient management of a larger area.  however, wwf-brazil has pointed out that it is not enough to simply create the protected areas on paper.  they must be staffed, delimited, legal owners compensated and so on.  the terra do meio mosaic is in para state between the xingu and tapajos rivers.  it was created after the death of sister dorothy stang, who was campaigning against illegal exploitation of the forests. it includes the terra do meio ecological station, a strictly protected conservation, created despite the presence of long-standing residents. the residents, who live along the iriri river, have been placed under intense pressure to evacuate the area.  the chapada dos veadeiros national park in the state of
goias, brazil, was expanded by federal decree in september 2001 and inscribed as a unesco world heritage site in december 2001. in 2003 the expansion was successfully challenged and 72% of the national park lost its protection status. the park is part of the cerrado biosphere reserve. brazil has outlined plans for a mosaic of new conservation units with different management categories covering an equivalent area to the expanded national park, but unesco has questioned whether the mosaic will be sufficient to ensure the statutory protection required for the world heritage properties.  partial list  references  sources    nature conservation in brazil types of protected area of brazil
the dr congo women's national under-18 and under-19  is a national basketball team of mali and is governed by the basketball federation of democratic republic of congo.  it represents democratic republic of the congo in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) women's basketball competitions.  the team was formerly known as the zaire women's national under-18 and under-19 basketball team.  see also  dr congo women's national basketball team  dr congo national under-19 basketball team  references  basketball basketball women's national under-19 basketball teams
gordana turuk  (5 march 1974, mannheim, germany) is an artist whose works include glass images, works of art, furniture and accessories made from glass. gordana turuk has croatian heritage. her works are created under the gordana glass brand.  education   her education was responsible for leading her in an artistic direction. she first studied textile arts in zagreb (1992-1994), which she followed up with fashion design at the private callegari school (pescara, 1994 - 1998), where she studied under academic painter josip marinkovic.  works   her works of art are created using an annealed glass technique where coloured pigments are added into the molten glass in combination with pure gold and platinum. annealed glass is a glass-making technique where the glass is heated to a high temperature to its stress-relief point after which it is poured into prepared moulds that are placed below it. this allows the glass to be used to create various ornaments and to create an aged glass patina.  gordana glass pieces have been used as gifts for foreign dignitaries during visits to slovakia. examples include britain's queen elizabeth ii (who was presented with a glass jewellery box inlaid with gold and platinum by the former president during her official visit to slovakia), pope benedict xvi (who received a golden gross during his visit to slovakia), the king of denmark and presidents milos zeman, vaclav klaus, andrej kiska and ivo josipovic.  the gordana glass gallery is located in the centre of prague on dusni ulice.  gordana turuk's studio is located close to bratislava in the villa section of bratislava's lamac borough.  she is actively engaged in charitable activities and the arte bene civic association in addition to her artistic endeavours.  references   portret v deniku pravda  beauty woman 06/2016:rozhovor s gordanou turuc  hospodarske noviny:rozhovor s gordanou turuk  bratislava dnes 24:palfiho palac predstavuje osobito-experimentalnu tvorbu gordany turuk  slovak artists glass artists women glass artists 1974 births living people artists from mannheim
edward lekganyane, popularly known as "kgoshi edward" (1922 - 21 october 1967), was the leader of the zion christian church (zcc) from easter sunday, april 17, 1949, until his death eighteen years later. during this time he used his charisma and organizational abilities to expand the zcc from about 50,000 to 600,000 members, while also reshaping numerous facets of the church. during his tenure as bishop, the zcc emerged as south africa's largest independent church, while lekganyane became arguably the wealthiest and most powerful african in apartheid-era south africa.  early life and career   edward was the second-born son of engenas lekganyane and his senior wife, salfina rabodiba, and was born in thabakgone in the mamabolo reserve east of polokwane. although his exact birth date is unknown, he is known to have been born during a smallpox epidemic that led his father to quarantine his household for some time. at this time, engenas lekganyane was the transvaal leader of the zion apostolic faith mission church, led by edward lion, who he named his son after. edward was then educated by his father at private schools in the area, eventually obtaining standard 5. as one of five legitimate sons of engenas lekganyane, he was one of two brothers seen as a potential successor by his father (the other being his youngest brother, joseph, b. 1931). although his father had hopes for him, edward was not a particularly diligent student, and nor did he fulfil his church duties particularly faithfully. after he was married to a woman selected by his family in the mid-1940s, edward fell out with his father when he demanded a divorce since he was unhappy with the arrangement. his father refused to sanction the idea, leading edward to leave home and obtain an itinerant job as a driver based out of durban. this further angered his father, who wanted to edward to lead the zcc brass band. during his absence, the youngest of the lekganyane brothers, joseph, became his father's principal driver and assistant.  assuming control of the zcc   following the death of engenas lekganyane in june 1948, members of the zion christian church were split regarding the appointment of his heir. engenas himself had never been clear about the succession and was particularly indecisive in the latter years of his life. because edward never returned home prior to his father's death,
it appears that engenas told his brother, paulus, to install joseph as his successor after a year's mourning period. this designation, if made, was not known to the membership.  edward, on the death of his father, returned to the zcc headquarters of zion city moriah and began to lobby for his appointment as the new bishop. by this time he was viewed as the natural successor of engenas lekganyane by most of the zcc's membership on the witwatersrand. during his years as a driver, edward had had the ability to interact continuously with the leadership and membership of the zcc's urban ranks-which outnumbered its rural base. after spending some time with these supporters in alexandra in 1948, edward returned to zion city moriah one weekend with a large contingent that he bused in. using this group as muscle, he was able to take over his father's residence and headquarters, forcing his uncle paulus to evacuate.  on 1 june 1949 thousands of zcc  members assembled at the church's headquarters in moria to vote for their leader of choice between edward and his uncle, paulus. the election of the leader or bishop was overseen by " sergeant kotzee" of the then south african police and multiracial constables. edward received the most votes since most of the zcc members were from the witwatersrand where he had the most support and was the preferred successor of engenas there. less than two weeks after the election, edward lekganyane was declared the winner and was installed as the bishop of the zcc church. joseph however refused to accept the election results maintaining that engenas left a will naming him as the rightful successor, joseph and his supporters including paulus and the inner lekganyane circle were then driven by force onto the land that joseph inherited. edward lekganyane' s new appointed position as bishop allowed him to appoint even non family members to key positions in the church    edward's urban supporters, who chanted "eddy ke morena ka sebele" and who performed the stomping "mokhukhu" dance, further supported edward's installation as bishop east at the zion christian church easter ceremonies in 1949. at this event, edward's uncle, reuben, who had been estranged from engenas, installed edward on behalf of the authority of the church and the lekganyane family.  during 1950, paulus and the supporters of joseph became increasingly alienated from edward's leadership, and eventually seceded to form the st. engenas zion christian
church. citing prophecies from as far back as 1931 and paulus's testimony that joseph had been the preferred successor, they established a base only a couple of kilometers away from zion city moriah on land that joseph had inherited. his church would never rival, though, edward's rapidly-expanding congregation.  early leadership of the zcc   edward became an active evangelist for the zcc, ending a period in which such activities had been reduced following his father's ill-health in the mid-1940s. on most weekends, edward travelled to the townships in the witwatersrand, driving in a fleet of fancy cars, where he was met by large crowds of church members and his brass band. they then marched through townships, dancing and singing in their regalia, before finally preaching to the assembled masses. in this way, zcc membership grew quite dramatically in urban areas. typically, edward preached against the use of both witchcraft and modern medicine, alcohol and drugs, and urged people to live godly, christian lives.  as his position became more secure following the secession of joseph's st. engenas faction, edward instituted several crucial changes in zcc practices. first, he created the "mokhukhu" organization within the church, to which all men were expected to belong. this group met twice-weekly at prescribed times in its military-style uniforms, and danced for hours in the "mokhukhu" stomping style. according to one interpretation, the function of the mokhukhu was to make rural-urban migrants more disciplined and hireable by employers, thus gaining them an advantage in the competitive job market.  a second change, instituted in late 1952, was to make the zcc's preaching far more politically conservative. prior to this time, the lekganyanes had clashed with rural chiefs and had done everything they could to escape involvement with the government and white authorities. edward, meanwhile, had often spoken bitterly of racism. but after 1952, with the national party in power and apartheid entrenched, edward decided to make peace with the government. he told his followers not to join the african national congress or any anti-government party. additionally, he demanded that his followers contract marriages formally through the paying of bridewealth for the first time, a move that buttressed the control of rural chiefs over their followers.  from 1952 until his death, edward became a fervent supporter of the apartheid government, although his successors have maintained that he was not sincere and was merely strategizing a way forward out of
a difficult situation. senior government officials were brought in to attend proceedings at the major zcc conferences, and lekganyane publicly praised government leaders. in return he was allowed to purchase a wide range of properties in the transvaal, a rare privilege for africans of the time.  lekganyane also built up his power and wealth by reinvesting tithes and donations into a number of successful business ventures. he had his own lucrative brands of coffee and tea and other consumables that members purchased. he also organized transport, milling, agricultural processing companies, and sold life insurance and burial insurance. using white lawyers to organize these activities, he built up a secretive and lucrative business domain in his own personal name.  later life and career  by the late 1950s edward lekganyane was a rich man. with his church expanding rapidly along with its revenues, he lived in a large residence with a fleet of expensive vehicles. he also began to increase his profile, journeying to europe and america in 1959 and 1960 with his entourage. his departures from the johannesburg airport led to some of the biggest crowds ever seen there. this increasing exposure did not always bring lekganyane the results he desired. in 1954 he was incensed by coverage in the south african magazine, drum, and launched a bitter libel lawsuit versus the publication that he refused to relent on for many years.  during his tenure as leader the zion christian church built up its international membership. large congregations developed in lesotho, swaziland, and botswana. the biggest international section, based in zimbabwe, which had been part of the church since its founding in 1925, ultimately split from edward's control in 1962 over a number of issues.  in 1963 edward was able to enroll at the stofberg theological school, run by the dutch reformed church, where he graduated from after three years of training. although he subsequently aimed to reform the zcc's theology, his death came too soon for him to make substantive changes.  after edward died of a heart attack suddenly in late 1967, he was succeeded by his son barnabas.  references  1922 births 1967 deaths south african christian religious leaders
jean baudrais (14 august 1749, tours - 4 may 1832, bicetre from cholera) was an 18th-19th-century french writer and magistrate.  man of letters  based in paris, where he married, since the age of twenty, he published in 1781 l'allegresse villageoise, an entertainment mingled with singing and dancing, on the occasion of the birth of the dauphin. then he published la vanite est bonne a quelque chose, a mock-heroic poem, in 1782, le dieu mars desarme, entertainment in verse on the occasion of the treaty of versailles of 1783. author of numerous theater plays, he also was a publisher, publishing with leprince la petite bibliotheque des theatres, whose project was to bring together all plays of the comic and lyrical tragic scene with portrait of authors and records on their lives, judgments and anecdotes about each book and analytical catalog of all documents excluded from the collection.  a politician during the revolution  faced with the emigration of many of his subscribers, he abandoned his literary career, devoted himself to politics, and joined various clubs. a member of the club des jacobins, he obtained various public offices: commissioner of the district of the filles saint-thomas, then employee to the signing of the assignats and comptroller general of this paper money, twice a member of the electorate, a member of the general council, as well as of the body and the municipal office of the commune de paris after the day of the 10 august. in that latter capacity, he attended on 21 january 1793  the execution of louis xvi, receiving and countersigning his will and exercised the functions of censor.  under the reign of terror, he was a police officer. dismissed for having said that, had he had to judge louis xvi, he would have condemned him to deportation rather than to the death penalty, he was imprisoned and transferred to the conciergerie. however, after the , he escaped the revolutionary tribunal. soon after, he was appointed justice of the peace by the .  life in america  in 1797, he was sent to guadeloupe in order to occupy the fonctions of judge of the civil, criminal and appeal courts in matters of trade and maritime seizures.  he lived for three years in this colony when, after the plot of the rue saint-nicaise, he was included on the  of the 5 january 1801. according to some biographers, he was mistaken for baudray, owner of the "cafe des bains chinois
" on the boulevard des italiens. despite his protests, he was deported to cayenne, where he served as clerk of court, notary and responsible for keeping the civil registers.  at the proclamation of the first french empire, he refused to swear allegiance to napoleon and resigned before retiring with his wife to the united states, where he saw the work of his hands for thirteen years.  leaving new york, he returned to france in 1817, where he had to belie newspapers and biographies saying he died in guyana in 1801. admitted to the hospital for old men of bicetre, while his wife was admitted in another home, he died during the 1829-51 cholera pandemic at the age of 83.  works  1785-1789: etrennes de polymnie. choix de chansons, romances et vaudevilles, paris, 5 vol. 1791: essai sur l'origine et les progres de l'art dramatique en france, paris, 3 vol. (unfinished) 1783-1790: petite bibliotheque des theatres (in collaboration with le prince), paris, 72 vol. (incomplete collection)  sources  eugene ernest desplaces, joseph francois michaud, louis gabriel michaud (dir.), biographie universelle ancienne et moderne, 1854, tome 3, p. 290-291 ferdinand hoefer (dir.), nouvelle biographie generale depuis les temps les plus recules jusqu'a nos jours, paris, firmin didot freres, 1859, tome 4, p. 790-791  external links   jean baudrais on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french male writers 18th-century french poets 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights french publishers (people) jacobins 1749 births people from tours, france deaths from cholera 1832 deaths
the st petersburg school for the deaf (санкт-петербургское училище глухонемых) was a school for the deaf in saint petersburg in russia between 1806 and 1918. it was the first school for the deaf in russia and as such a pioneer institution. it was founded by empress maria and a part of the office of the institutions of empress maria.  references  басова а. г., егоров с. ф. история сурдопедагогики: учеб. пособие для студентов дефектол. фак. пед. ин-тов. -- м.: просвещение, 1984. - 295 с., ил  1806 establishments in the russian empire 1918 disestablishments in russia 19th century in saint petersburg schools in saint petersburg educational institutions established in 1806
events from the year 1868 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events                 the khanate became a vassal of the russian empire.  births  nicholas ii of russia maxim gorky - march 28, 1868  deaths         marija mesjtjerskaja, courtier  (b. 1844)  references  1868 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
gil oved (born 16 august 1975) is a south african entrepreneur who is the co-founder and co-ceo of the creative counsel, south africa's largest advertising agency. he is a member of the global young presidents' organization where he is the johannesburg chapter chair as well as the africa regional forum officer. he is one of the dragons on the hugely popular television reality show dragons' den south africa which premiered in the last quarter of 2014 on dstv. in 2016 oved was chosen as the first "shark" on the new series of shark tank on m-net.  early life oved was born on 16 august 1975 in johannesburg, south africa. he matriculated at crawford college, sandton, earned a bachelor of commerce degree (cum laude) at the university of south africa, and subsequently obtained the chartered financial analyst (cfa) qualification.  as a teenager at the time of south africa's first democratic elections in 1994, oved's imagination was fired by the country's new potential for transformation. he became an anchor presenter for the country's first multi-racial television teen magazine programme called zap mag. he was the anchor presenter from 1990 to 1995, along with a vusi twala. twala and oved became close friends and, after they matriculated, started a television production company in 1996 known as jewazi (a combination of the words jew and swazi).  the production company saw some successes over its approximate three years of existence and had programmes commissioned by the sabc (south african broadcasting corporation) most noteworthy superkidz, but never got the traction needed to create a sustainable business. oved set his sights on the next goal. he teamed up with a friend from school, ran neu-ner, to start an internet trading company just as the dot.com bubble was expanding.  the pair raised almost a million dollars and invested three years in developing their business called wealthmaker but, when the dot.com bubble burst in the early 2000s, their investors went bankrupt, and they followed suit. observing that neu-ner's girlfriend of the time, a student who was earning extra money as a promotional field worker, was earning considerably more than they were, oved and neu-ner decided to set up a small low risk, low barrier-to-entry business placing promotional staff.  although initially a 'stop-gap' initiative, both men found that they enjoyed the process of helping clients think through campaigns and began to take very seriously the creative process and execution of brand building through promotions
and activations.  the company grew exponentially, through the acquisition of new clients as well as other businesses in the advertising and marketing sector attracting the attention of publicis groupe who bought the company in september 2015. tcc operates under publicis africa group. oved remains group co-ceo together with neu-ner. the creative counsel has retained its name.  oved lives in the johannesburg region.  television  in 2014 oved became one of the dragons in the first season of south africa's dragons' den along with vinny lingham, lebo gunguluza, vusi thembekwayo and polo leteka radebe. in 2015 was chosen as the first 'shark' in the south african version of the shark tank series by mnet. the shark tank series is sponsored in full by telkom south africa.  awards  oved's industry accolades include:  2015 finalist ernst and young entrepreneur of the year: southern africa   2015 sanlam / business partners entrepreneur of the year® - overall winner   2014 cnbc all africa business leader awards (aabla) young business leader - overall africa  2014 cnbc all africa business leader awards (aabla) young business leader - southern africa  2014 adreview ranks tcc largest marketing, media and advertising group in south africa  2014 gil oved named gq best dressed man 2014  2013 absa unlisted company award for business excellence and entrepreneurship  2013 destiny magazines top 40 under 40 men in south africa.  references  external links  the creative counsel  gil oved at tedxufs, 2015  getting to know gil oved  south african businesspeople 1975 births living people south african jews white south african people south african chief executives south african company founders people from johannesburg university of south africa alumni cfa charterholders
angelic del castilho (born 4 april 1967), also known as angelic alihusain-del castilho, is a surinamese politician of democratic alternative '91, and a former ambassador.  early life  angelic del castilho was born on 4 april 1967 in paramaribo, suriname. she grew up as the eldest in a family of seven children. her father is a retired salesman for different businesses and her mother is a retired teacher.   del castilho attended secondary school at the christus koning school in paramaribo and junior college at the algemene middelbare school in paramaribo. she participated as a member in leo clubs and for a short while in the rotaract.  education and work experience  after del castilho obtained her diploma from the algemene middelbare school she chose to study agriculture at the anton de kom university in paramaribo. during her studies she did research on alternative processes for the baking of bread, making use of locally available products for flour production. her final thesis was on the cost-effective rearing of small ruminants on small and medium-sized farms. she did additional research in the caribbean, namely on the island of barbados. del castilho obtained her bachelor of science degree in december 1997. in 2010 del castilho obtained her master of arts degree in contemporary diplomacy, summa cum laude, from the university of malta.    during her studies del castilho held many part-time jobs. after she graduated she had her first job at kersten bakery in paramaribo. she was hired in the position of human resource manager and set-up the hr department. after this first job del castilho also worked for ngo's as a trainer/consultant charged with capacity building of grassroots organisations. del castilho worked for the peace corps in suriname as the associate peace corps director programming and successfully selected, trained, placed and supported over 150 volunteers in a 4-year period in the position of apcd-programming. during this period she also successfully grew the program in suriname with 50%.    in 2006 del castilho was nominated as ambassador extraordinary and plenipotentiary with posting jakarta, indonesia. in january 2011 del castilho returned to suriname.  on 30 september 2015 she became chairperson of democratic alternative '91, succeeding winston jessurun. for the 2020 surinamese general election del castilho was the party list leader for paramaribo.  personal life she is married to rudie
alihusain.  references   http://www.diplomacy.edu/sites/default/files/el_angelic%20caroline%20alihusain-del%20castilho.pdf  http://www.starnieuws.com/index.php/welcome/index/nieuwsitem/3403  http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2010/09/29/a-taste-java-a-faraway-land.html  1967 births living people ambassadors of suriname to indonesia democratic alternative '91 politicians people from paramaribo surinamese politicians surinamese women diplomats women ambassadors
ng akew (; died 1880), was a chinese opium smuggler and house owner in hong kong. she was the central figure in a pirate scandal in 1849, which attracted great attention as a cause celebre.   ng akew was a tanka slave of the american opium smuggler james bridges endicott (1814-1870) in hong kong, and seem to have been involved in his business. in 1849, he gave her a share of his cargo, which she sold along the coast from her own boats. when her boat and cargo was stolen by pirates, she traveled herself to the pirate base and negotiated compensation. shortly after, an american ship was attacked and its cargo stolen by a pirate ship with ng akew present. the stolen cargo was later discovered in her own ship. it was assumed that she had negotiated with the pirates that the cargo from their next pirate attack would go to her as compensation for the cargo they stole from her. her guilt could not be proven in court and she was therefore freed, but the case became famous in her time.   when bridges endicott retired to macao he provided her with land in hong kong, and she became a wealthy house owner.  references   lily xiao hong lee, clara lau, a.d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911   19th-century births 1880 deaths 19th-century pirates british hong kong chinese slaves hong kong women chinese pirates female pirates tanka people 19th-century chinese businesswomen 19th-century chinese businesspeople 19th-century hong kong people 19th-century slaves
loyola college gumilla is a coeducational school, primary through high school, founded by the jesuits in 1965 in puerto ordaz, ciudad guayana, bolivar state, venezuela.  history loyola college gumilla was opened by the jesuits in 1965. in 1968 it moved to its present location and was given its present name. since 1980 loyola gumilla has been coeducational from kindergarten. in 1978 the night school was added. by 1989 there were 1,727 students. the nuns of cristo rey withdrew from the college in 1980.  see also  list of jesuit schools  references  jesuit schools in venezuela educational institutions established in 1965 1965 establishments in venezuela schools in bolivia
star trek beyond: music from the motion picture is a soundtrack album for the 2016 film, star trek beyond, composed by michael giacchino. the soundtrack album was released in physical form on july 29, 2016, through varese sarabande, as the follow-up to the critically successful 2009 soundtrack album star trek and the 2013 soundtrack album star trek into darkness.  track listing  personnel credits adopted from allmusic:  production michael giacchino - composer, producer alexander courage - original material gene roddenberry - original material j. j. abrams - executive producer hollywood studio symphony - orchestra reggie wilson - orchestra contractor page la studio voices - choir/chorus bobbi page - vocal contractor  orchestration, management and technical warren brown - editing assistant vincent cirilli - pro tools david coker - composer's assistant andrea datzman - vocal coordinator stephen davis - editing patricia sullivan fourstar - mastering joel iwataki - engineer, mixing jeff kryka - orchestration tim lauber - scoring recordist jason richmond - soundtrack coordination tim simonec - conductor, orchestration randy spendlove - executive in charge of music denis st. amand - stage engineer tom steel - stage manager damon tedesco - stage manager robert townson - executive in charge of music eric wegener - editing assistant booker white - music preparation mae crosby - live to picture consultant  charts  see also  list of star trek composers and music  "sledgehammer" - original song for star trek beyond by rihanna and co-written by sia.  references  external links  star trek beyond: music from the motion picture at varese sarabande  music based on star trek 2016 soundtrack albums science fiction soundtracks varese sarabande soundtracks michael giacchino soundtracks action film soundtracks science fiction film soundtracks
mojsije i rajovic () was the archbishop of pec and serbian patriarch, head of the serbian orthodox church, from 1712 to 1725, with seat in the patriarchal monastery of pec.  before he became the serbian patriarch, mojsije served as metropolitan of raska, from 1704, under patriarch kalinik i. that was traditionally a very prominent position, so when the next patriarch atanasije i died in 1712, mojsije was elected as his successor. his seat was in the patriarchal monastery of pec.  during the austro-turkish war (1716-1718), belgrade was liberated from ottoman rule together with northern parts of serbia and temes banat. in those regions new ecclesiastical province for orthodox serbs in habsburg monarchy was formed, known as the metropolitanate of belgrade. it was headed by metropolitan mojsije petrovic, who received blessings and confirmation from patriarch mojsije. new autonomous metropolitanate of belgrade had jurisdiction over kingdom of serbia and temes banat.  by 1725, patriarch mojsije decided, under the burden of old age and poor health, to transfer his authority to the metropolitan of raska, named arsenije, who became new serbian patriarch. after abdication from the patriarchal throne, he spent the rest of his days in the patriarchal monastery of pec and died there on 13 april 1726.  references  sources  external links  official site of the serbian orthodox church: serbian archbishops and patriarchs  mojsije i eastern orthodox christians from serbia 18th-century eastern orthodox bishops 18th-century serbian people serbs of the ottoman empire 1726 deaths
my little pony: the movie is a 2017 animated musical fantasy film based on the animated television series my little pony: friendship is magic, which itself is based on the fourth incarnation of hasbro's my little pony franchise. the film was directed by jayson thiessen, written by meghan mccarthy, michael vogel (all three of whom are friendship is magic veterans), joe ballarini, and rita hsiao, and produced by stephen davis, brian goldner, marcia gwendolyn jones, and haven alexander. the plot follows the alicorn twilight sparkle, her five pony friends - collectively known as the "mane 6" - and her dragon friend spike embarking on a quest to save their home of equestria from an evil conqueror while gaining new friends along the way. the film stars the show's regular voice cast of tara strong, ashleigh ball, andrea libman, tabitha st. germain, cathy weseluck, and nicole oliver reprising their roles and the guest voices of emily blunt, kristin chenoweth, liev schreiber, michael pena, sia, taye diggs, uzo aduba and zoe saldana as new characters.  the film was produced by allspark pictures and dhx media, using traditional animation created with toon boom harmony. it premiered in new york city on september 24, 2017, and was released on october 6, 2017 in north america by lionsgate, and in canada by entertainment one films. despite mixed reviews from critics, who praised the female representation but criticized the script and pacing, the film was commercially successful, grossing $61.3million worldwide on a $6.5 million budget, and becoming lionsgate's highest grossing animated feature to date.  plot  the ponies of equestria prepare for their first friendship festival, overseen by princess twilight sparkle in canterlot. the festivities are interrupted by the army of an evil conqueror called the storm king, led by his second-in-command, a unicorn named tempest shadow, who is under orders to capture twilight and her fellow princesses for him to harness their magic to empower his mystical staff of sacanas in exchange for restoring her broken horn. tempest uses obsidian orbs to petrify princess celestia, princess luna, and princess cadance. celestia gives luna incomplete instructions to seek help from "the queen of the hippo" beyond equestria before they both get petrified. twilight escapes canterlot with her six friends, pinkie pie, rainbow dash, rarity, applejack, fluttershy, and spike, and they
set out to find the "hippos" to save their home.  the group arrive at a desert village named klugetown, where pinkie blows their cover. a feline con artist named capper offers to escort them to his house, secretly intending to sell them to settle a debt he owes to local mob boss verko, however capper begins to develop a genuine friendship with them after rarity generously fixes his coat. twilight discovers an atlas that reveals the "hippos" to be hippogriffs. they begin to leave, but verko arrives to buy them, exposing capper's treachery. when tempest arrives to pursue twilight, the group evades her aboard a delivery airship. tempest brings capper to guide her to them, but he deliberately misdirects her to atone for deceiving the group. on the airship, the group encounter five parrot pirates, whom the storm king has taken into labor. rainbow dash persuades them to defy him and take them to the hippogriffs' kingdom on mount aris, which they do. in celebration, rainbow dash, against twilight's wishes, performs a sonic rainboom that accidentally exposes their location to tempest, forcing the group to reach mount aris in a makeshift hot air balloon.  while exploring the hippogriffs' deserted kingdom, the group are saved from drowning in an underwater cavern by the seapony princess skystar, who leads them to her undersea home of seaquestria. skystar reveals her kind to be the hippogriffs, transformed by a magic pearl used by her mother, queen novo, to hide from the storm king. when novo forbids them to use the pearl to fight the storm king, twilight desperately attempts to steal it while letting her friends unknowingly distract the seaponies. her plan backfires when she accidentally triggers an alarm just before the others can persuade novo to give them the pearl, resulting in novo kicking the entire group out of seaquestria and back to the surface. twilight and pinkie argue over twilight's actions, ending with twilight angrily berating and disowning her friends for behaving irresponsibly throughout the journey. afterwards, twilight, remorseful over her actions, gets kidnapped by tempest, who gains her sympathy by revealing how the loss of her horn as a filly after an ursa minor attack destabilized her magic and caused her own friends to shun her out of fear, which also caused her to see friendship as a foolish notion. meanwhile, twilight's friends, upon learning from spike
about twilight's kidnapping, return to canterlot to rescue and make amends with her with the help of capper, the pirates, and skystar.  in canterlot, tempest delivers twilight to the storm king, who absorbs the princesses' magic, including twilight's, into his staff, empowering it. after witnessing twilight's friends and their new allies successfully fighting off his army, the storm king conjures a powerful storm against them, betraying tempest as well, revealing he only used her and that he was never going to hold up his end of their bargain. twilight saves tempest from the storm, and just when the storm king is about to destroy them both, twilight's friends blast themselves from pinkie's giant party cannon to get through the storm and knock the staff right out of his hands. twilight and her friends reconcile and they take the staff and end the storm. the storm king hurls an obsidian orb at the group to petrify them, but tempest, who saw the true act of friendship between the group, takes the hit, turning them both into stone. the storm king's body falls to the ground and shatters, while the group use the staff to revive tempest, who returns the magic to twilight and the princesses, de-petrifying them and restoring the damaged city.  the friendship festival resumes, and the ponies celebrate with all of the allies twilight and her friends have made on their adventure, including novo. assured by twilight that she's perfect with or without her horn, tempest joins in the festival by producing a fireworks display with her broken horn, and happily accepts the group's friendship.  voice cast   tara strong as twilight sparkle, an intelligent alicorn who is equestria's princess of friendship, responsible for spreading friendship and harmony across the kingdom. she is the leader of the "mane 6" ponies.  rebecca shoichet performs twilight sparkle's singing voice.  ashleigh ball as rainbow dash and applejack, two of the "mane 6"; rainbow dash is a loyal pegasus with an adventurous spirit, and applejack is an honest apple farmer pony.  andrea libman as pinkie pie and fluttershy, two of the "mane 6"; pinkie pie is a party-obsessed pony filled with joy and laughter, and fluttershy is a kind and timid pegasus who cares for animals.  shannon chan-kent performs pinkie pie's singing voice.  tabitha st. germain as rarity, a generous fashion designer unicorn and one of the "mane
6".  kazumi evans performs rarity's singing voice.  cathy weseluck as spike, a baby dragon and twilight sparkle's assistant.  emily blunt as tempest shadow / fizzlepop berrytwist, an embittered unicorn who serves as the storm king's second-in-command in order to repair her broken horn. on the development of the character, screenwriter meghan mccarthy said, "we just arrived at this idea of a character who had come from equestria, and had not had the positive experience that twilight [sparkle] and her friends had. it felt like a good counterpart to our heroes was to have a villain who didn't just not get friendship, but had a reason that she didn't understand it." mccarthy also called blunt's performance "a big influence" on how the character was animated in the film.  michael pena as grubber, a wisecracking hedgehog and tempest shadow's cohort. mccarthy said that grubber "needed to be goofy" to counterpoint the "very straight-laced, hardcore" tempest. pena ad-libbed much of the character's dialogue, with mccarthy saying, "you get michael pena in a recording booth, and you just are like, 'please just go and say funny things.' he will be there for hours, just giving you all kinds of really great material that was not something that we had originally scripted!"  liev schreiber as the storm king, the despotic, satyr-like leader of the storm creatures who conquers lands in search of powerful magic to control the weather. on his acceptance of the role, schreiber said that he wanted something child-friendly for his kids to watch, noting his repertoire of violent, adult-oriented films. comparing his character to basil rathbone, schreiber said the storm king "is prone to temper tantrums, and he's a little crazy. he has a wide range of behaviors." he considers the character to be "one of the more intense roles [he's] played".   taye diggs as capper, an anthropomorphic alley cat who is a cunning yet good-hearted con artist. diggs, who was excited to appear in an animated film, says, "i'm very movement-oriented, so just looking at the way capper is positioned, the expressions on his face, all enhances my performance. it's really cool."  zoe saldana as captain celaeno, an anthropomorphic parrot and jaded pirate captain who is relegated to the
storm king's delivery service. saldana says celaeno "cares for her crew", adding, "she's a responsible, thoughtful, and empathetic leader. that's a terrific, very poignant message to give to children about leadership - that it's okay for you to want to be a leader as long as you know that the responsibilities that come along with it."  kristin chenoweth as princess skystar, an excitable hippogriff and magically transformed seapony princess. chenoweth said of her character, "let's just say she's been locked up for a while and is longing for friends." she joked that she dabbled in method acting for the role, making sure her hair was "on point for every recording session".  uzo aduba as queen novo, the benevolent ruler of the hippogriffs-turned-seaponies, and princess skystar's mother. the character is described by chenoweth as "loving but also a little too strict and stern". detailing her role, aduba says, "she [wants] to protect her group to the best of her ability, and [wants] to create a life of peace and stability. she doesn't take any nonsense, and will do everything in her power to protect her family."  sia as songbird serenade, a pegasus and famous pop star in equestria. the character's design is modeled after sia's likeness.  nicole oliver, st. germain and britt mckillip reprise their respective roles from friendship is magic as twilight's mentors and fellow alicorn princesses princess celestia, princess luna, and princess cadance. st. germain also voices granny smith, applejack's grandmother, and muffins, a cross-eyed gray pegasus. michelle creber and peter new voice apple bloom and big mcintosh, applejack's younger sister and older brother, respectively. michael dobson voices bulk biceps, a muscular pegasus and samuel vincent voices party favor, a balloonist unicorn.  adam bengis voices code red, one of the canterlot ponies. brian dobson voices verko, a mole-rat crime boss in klugetown, whom capper is in debt to. max martini, mark oliver and nicole oliver respectively perform as three of captain celaeno's parrot-like crew: boyle, first mate mullet and lix spittle. michael dobson, andrew mcnee, tegan moss, sabrina pitre, rhona rees and vincent all feature as assorted citizens of canterlot. richard ian
cox, michael dobson, mcnee, new and nicole oliver also perform as denizens of klugetown. additional voices are provided by alistair abell, caitlyn bairstow, julia benson, christine chatelain, brian dobson, paul dobson, rondel reynoldson, jason simpson, sarah troyer and siobhan williams.  production  development at san diego comic-con international in 2012, friendship is magic head writer meghan mccarthy commented on the possibility of a feature film based on the series, saying that it was not in her control whether or not the film would be made. the film was announced on october 20, 2014, with joe ballarini attached as screenwriter and mccarthy as co-executive producer. hasbro studios president stephen davis said of the film that "i think it gives us an opportunity to tell a bigger story, that maybe we [can't] tell on television" and that "[it's] also an opportunity to broaden the franchise". the film was one of the first produced through hasbro studios' self-financing film label allspark pictures, which also produced the live-action adaptation of jem and the holograms. during ponycon au on february 22, 2015 alongside fellow writer gillian m. berrow, mccarthy said that the movie would be unrelated to the equestria girls spin-off franchise, and that the crew was "going all out on it, to make sure it doesn't just feel like an extended episode".  series supervising director jayson thiessen was confirmed to be directing the film while mccarthy was announced to be writing the film. mccarthy was supposed to work on season 5 of the series, but left to write the film while thiessen announced on twitter that after the finale to season 5, he would be stepping down as supervising director of the television series to work full-time on the film. michael vogel, a writer on the series, signed on as co-executive producer alongside mccarthy, with davis and hasbro ceo brian goldner signing on as producers. vogel, ballarini, and rita hsiao were later announced as co-writers alongside mccarthy.  on april 30, 2016, concept artwork and other information was officially revealed at ponyradiocon in moscow; the panel included additional plot details such as the main characters' transformation into "sea ponies" for a portion of the film.  casting the initial lionsgate announcement listed the principal voice cast of friendship is magic - tara strong, ashleigh ball, andrea libman, tabitha st. germain and cathy weseluck - reprising their roles alongside actress
kristin chenoweth as a new character. on february 12, 2016, it was announced that emily blunt joined the voice cast. by april 27, 2016, actors michael pena and uzo aduba were in negotiations to join the cast. on may 16, liev schreiber and taye diggs were confirmed additions to the cast. on june 20, ball stated through twitter that she had begun recording for the film's songs. at san diego comic-con in july 2016, singer sia was announced to be portraying a new "pop star pony" character called songbird serenade. on january 11, 2017, it was reported by variety that zoe saldana had joined the cast. friendship is magic voice actress nicole oliver confirmed via twitter on january 23 that she would also be a part of the film's cast, reprising her role as princess celestia.  animation on april 2, 2016, michel gagne, after receiving an email from thiessen, both of whom having worked together on insanely twisted shadow puppets back in 2004, took an eight-month hiatus from spider-man: into the spider-verse and joined the film as special effects lead. in early october 2016, gagne reported that nik gipe was hired onto the film's staff as his assistant. he also mentioned that the film was being animated using toon boom animation's harmony software rather than the usual adobe flash animation software used in the television series as apparently, it was too cheap-looking to be used for a theatrical film. several crew members, including thiessen, gagne, art director rebecca dart, storyboard artist joclean thiessen, thiessen's wife, and creative consultant kevin munroe, who was also a storyboard artist on the film, said they wanted to add "simple yet impactful changes" to the designs for the big screen, such as depth and shadows for the characters' eyes and ears, and the impression of heart-shaped indentations on the bottom of their hooves, while still keeping the look and feel of the show, which using toon boom enabled them to do. like the series, the animation for the film was outsourced to top draw animation in the philippines.  according to cinematographer anthony di ninno, the crew used 3d modeling in autodesk maya to determine camera locations, lens, angles, rough lighting, character, and prop placement, and which way the characters would be looking and expressing while the comp crew used toon boom and adobe after effects and the background paint was done in phot
oshop. the pre-visualization crew were able to use the 3d backdrops, which became more detailed throughout the film's development, to integrate the 3d character models and test the toon boom animations on top of these scenes using the placement established by maya, speeding up the production.  music  the film's official soundtrack was released on september 22, 2017 by rca records.  the film's songs and score were composed by friendship is magic songwriter daniel ingram, instead of the songs being composed by ingram and the score being composed by william anderson. ingram first announced at galacon 2015 that he would be collaborating with a live studio orchestra for the film. on his songwriting for the film, ingram said, "i had to challenge myself to push beyond what had been done in the tv show; to write bigger, more epic." it was stated through the ponyradiocon panel that the film would have a total of eight original songs. on november 17, 2015,  background score orchestrator steffan andrews, who left the series after season 4 ended, announced via twitter that he would return to work on the film. the tweet in question was deleted in november 2016, meaning he didn't return to work on the film after all, but was given a special thanks credit. at hasbro's toy fair investor presentation on february 17, 2017, it was announced that there would be seven songs. around 5,800 pages of sheet music were created for all orchestral parts of the score.  recording for the score began at nashville on june 5, 2017, performed by the nashville scoring orchestra and conducted by david shipps, and finished on june 11 with additional music by joseph magee, caleb chan, and trevor hoffman.  sia contributed an original song to the film, "rainbow", which was released as a single on september 15, 2017. a music video for the song later released by entertainment weekly on september 19. the video was directed by daniel askill and features a dance performance by maddie ziegler, a previous collaborator with sia, intercut to scenes from the film. danish band lukas graham also contributed an original song for the film titled "off to see the world", which was used in the film's first trailer and played over the closing credits. other artists included in the album are dnce and cl. the score for the film was released on spotify on october 7, 2017. it features a song cut from the film titled "equestria" that was originally going to play in the beginning, but was cut in favor
of rachel platen's "we got the beat".  the film's production wrapped up on july 29, 2017, as announced by thiessen.  release on august 7, 2015, lionsgate announced that they would distribute and market the film worldwide except in china. the film was showcased at the 2016 cannes film festival on may 10 along with eight other lionsgate features to help sell the film to international distributors.  the film was originally scheduled for release in the united states on november 3, 2017, but it was subsequently moved up to october 6, 2017. theatrically, the film was accompanied by a 5-minute animated short from hasbro studios' web series hanazuki: full of treasures. a private premiere screening was held in new york city on september 24, 2017, twelve days prior to the nationwide release date.  marketing  numerous toys based on characters, sets, and props from the film were made by hasbro, and a vast majority of the products was released on august 1, 2017. the 2016 ponyradiocon panel included a brief preview for some of the planned merchandise being developed for the film, including t-shirts and graphics. on july 27, 2016, the my little pony collectible card game hinted on twitter about a new set of cards based on the film. hasbro's toyline for the film was shown and promoted at toy fair 2017 and various other toy conventions.  several books and comics related to the film have been announced: my little pony: annual 2018, which contains "exclusive content from the my little pony movie" was released on august 10, 2017; and a "prequel" story released on august 1. on january 23, 2017, hachette book group listed five different books for the film, all released on august 29, 2017. books based on the film have been showcased at bookcon 2017 on june 4, with guest appearances by libman and ball. idw publishing released a four-issue comic book miniseries titled my little pony: the movie prequel, with the first issue released on june 28, 2017. viz media released an art book for the film on august 29, 2017. a comic adaptation based on the film by idw was released on september 27, 2017.  a teaser trailer for the film was released online on april 6, 2017, and in theaters alongside smurfs: the lost village the following day. the first full trailer debuted online on june 28, 2017, and was released with despicable me 3 two days later. another trailer was released by usa today online on september 12,
2017. the same day, the official my little pony facebook page hosted a live q&a stream with two of the movie's characters, pinkie pie (voiced by libman) and twilight sparkle (voiced by strong). another trailer was played during the season 12 finale of america's got talent on september 20, 2017. on september 27, 2017, the official my little pony facebook page hosted a live q&a stream with dart, who drew a custom artwork of rainbow dash (voiced by ball).  on september 30, 2017, a special titled the making of my little pony: the movie aired on discovery family, a joint venture between discovery communications (now discovery, inc.) and hasbro; it was watched by 18,000 viewers.  home media my little pony: the movie was released on december 19, 2017 for digital downloads, and was later released on january 9, 2018 for dvd, blu-ray and on demand. its special features includes a deleted scene, a music video for the song "i'm the friend you need", a featurette starring pinkie pie, two behind the scenes featurettes, an exclusive equestria girls animated short, and the hanazuki: full of treasures short bundled with the film's theatrical release.  a home media bundling both this film and the namesake 1986 film was released on october 16, 2018, commemorating the 35th anniversary of the my little pony toyline. the releases contain the same bonus features as its dvd/blu-ray counterparts.  as of april 2018, my little pony: the movie had sold over 200,000 dvd copies and 160,000 blu-ray copies.  reception  box office my little pony: the movie has grossed $21.9 million in the united states and canada, and $39.4 million in other territories, for a worldwide total of $61.3 million on a production budget of $6.5 million.  in the united states and canada, the film was expected to gross between $10 million and $17 million from 2,528 theaters in its opening weekend. it made $3 million on its first day, including $290,000 from thursday night previews. it ended up opening to $8.9 million finishing 4th at the box office behind blade runner 2049, the mountain between us and it. amid amidi of cartoon brew stated that - despite the opening being considered a disappointment - any reasonable return from the film would be seen as positive by hasbro because it is tied to the toy line
. the film dropped 54% in its second weekend, making $4.1million and falling to 9th.  its biggest markets outside north america are china with $7.4 million, the united kingdom with $5 million, germany with $2.4 million, and russia with $2.3 million.  critical response on rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 47% based on 66 reviews and an average rating of 5.10/10. the critics consensus reads: "charming and sweet, my little pony: the movie will please its dedicated fanbase, even if it's unlikely to encourage non-devotees to gallop along for the ride." on metacritic, the film has a score of 39 out of 100 based on 13 critic reviews, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews". audiences polled by cinemascore gave the film an average grade of "a−" on an a+ to f scale.  rogerebert.com's christy lemire gave the film one and one half stars out of a possible five stars, criticizing the screenplay: "meghan mccarthy, rita hsiao and michael vogel share screenwriting credits... the narrative itself is all over the place, with a multitude of underdeveloped, crammed-in characters. plus, every once in a while, the various animals burst into song, but not in any particularly memorable way."  the hollywood reporter listed the film as "the worst animated movie of the year", with staff critic michael rechtshaffen saying, "attention the emoji movie: your status as worst animated feature of the year might well be in jeopardy when my little pony: the movie trots into theaters this weekend." ign notably gave the film the lowest rating received for a film in 2017, a 3.5 out of ten, criticizing the script and animation, and saying "the design philosophy of the show is completely subverted for the purpose of introducing new characters who aren't necessary to the story, and read like self-insert fanfic characters."  katie walsh of the los angeles times gave the film a negative review, saying: "truthfully, this film feels like four episodes of a cartoon strung together, and there are times, especially during some of the latter musical numbers, where it truly drags." she also criticized the film's animation, saying that it "embraces the flat, colorful, saturday-morning cartoon look and feel". josh terry of deseret news panned the film, saying that parents should "put their money into
some new my little pony toys" rather than into seeing the film.  gwen ihnat of the a.v. club gave the film a negative review, and criticized the music in the film, noting, "the ponies' odes aren't likely to make anyone rush out to get the soundtrack; even the sia song fails to stand out."  some critics praised the film's female representation, however. elizabeth weitzman of thewrap wrote positively of the film, saying that the film, "like its television predecessor, is all dressed up in bubbles and cupcakes and rainbows. but it's so jam-packed with rousing girl power, it passes the bechdel test with (literally) flying colors." amy nicholson of variety called the film "at once cliched and exceptional", praising its female characters and "emotionally wise" story.  references  external links    (defunct, now redirected to lionsgate website)            2017 films 2017 animated films 2010s children's animated films 2010s fantasy adventure films 2010s musical fantasy films 2010s american animated films american films american children's animated adventure films american children's animated fantasy films american children's animated musical films american fantasy adventure films american musical fantasy films animated films about friendship animated films about dragons animated films about horses animated films based on animated series canadian films canadian animated fantasy films canadian animated feature films canadian fantasy adventure films canadian musical fantasy films dhx media films english-language films films based on television series films directed by jayson thiessen films about princesses films about unicorns hasbro brands hasbro studios films lionsgate animated films lionsgate films my little pony films my little pony: friendship is magic english-language canadian films films produced by brian goldner
kazuo iwama may refer to: kazuo iwama (sony) (1919-1982), president of the sony corporation  (born 1936) kazuo iwama (computer scientist) (born 1951), japanese computer science researcher
the 2017 world financial group continental cup of curling was held from january 12 to 15 at the orleans arena in paradise, nevada. this marked the third edition of the continental cup held outside of canada. the continental cup featured team events, mixed doubles events, and skins competitions, and the brunt of the points was in the skins competitions. tsn broadcast the event, as it had in previous years.  north america would go on to win the event 37 points to 23. the total attendance for the event was 57,753, the second highest in event history.  competition format this edition of the continental cup used a similar format as that of the previous year, with the main difference being the elimination of the singles event, which was replaced by an additional mixed doubles event. out of the sixty total points available, a majority of points was needed to win the cup. the mixed doubles, and team games were worth one point each, and ties were worth one half point each to both teams. the skins games were worth a total of five points. nine mixed doubles were played, along with eighteen team games and six skins games.  teams the teams were selected from the top teams in each region. six teams from each region will compete against each other in the competition. four teams from canada earn the right to represent team north america by virtue of winning certain events, namely the canada cup of curling and the canadian national championships (the brier and the tournament of hearts). two teams from the united states, namely the top point-getters of american teams on the world curling tour, were chosen to represent north america, and the teams representing team world were selected by the world curling federation.  the teams in the table below have been announced as representatives of their respective regions.  events all times listed are in pacific standard time (utc−8).  thursday, january 12  draw 1 team 9:00 am  draw 2 mixed doubles 1:30 pm  draw 3 team 6:30 pm  friday, january 13  draw 4 team 9:00 am  draw 5 mixed doubles 1:30 pm  draw 6 team 6:30 pm  saturday, january 14  draw 7 mixed doubles 9:00 am  draw 8 team 1:30 pm  draw 9 team 6:30 pm  sunday, january 15  draw 10 skins 1:30 pm  draw 11 skins 6:30 pm  references  external links   2017 2017 in curling international curling competitions hosted by the united states continental cup of curling 2017 2017 in sports in nevada
sports competitions in las vegas curling in nevada january 2017 sports events in the united states
nurpur lubhana  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of nurpur lubhana. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, nurpur lubhana has total number of 334 houses and population of 1,525 of which include 793 males and 732 females. literacy rate of nurpur lubhana is 86.17%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 173 which is 11.34% of total population of nurpur lubhana, and child sex ratio is approximately 713, lower than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 628 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of nurpur lubhana which includes 401 males and 227 females. according to census survey report 2011, 84.87% workers describe their work as main work and 15.13% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the 2016 waterford senior football championship was the 129th edition of the waterford gaa's premier club gaelic football tournament for senior graded clubs in county waterford, ireland. the tournament consists of 12 teams, with the winner going on to represent waterford in the munster senior club football championship. the championship starts with a seeded group stage and then progresses to a knock out stage.  stradbally were the defending champions after they defeated abbeyside/ballinacourty in the 2015 final, however, they relinquished their crown when ballincourty defeated them at the semi-final stage.  this was ballinameela's return to the senior grade.  on 6 november 2016, the nire claimed their 8th s.f.c. title when defeating ballinacourty 1-17 to 0-8 in the final in fraher field.  st. saviour's were relegated to the 2017 i.f.c. after losing the relegation final and a remarkable 29 season stay in the top flight came to an end. during this period they claimed one s.f.c. title when defeating kilrossanty in 1998 and were runners-up in 1988 when losing to the same opposition.  team changes   the following teams have changed division since the 2015 championship season.  to s.f.c.  promoted from i.f.c.  ballinameela - (intermediate champions)  from s.f.c.  relegated to i.f.c.  de la salle  group stage  all 12 teams enter the competition at this stage. the top 4 teams in both groups compete in four quarter-finals. the bottom team in each group contest the relegation play-off.  group 1   round 1  rathgormack 1-7, 0-8 brickey rangers, 9/4/2016,  stradbally 1-10, 1-5 ballinameela, 9/4/2016,  kilrossanty 2-8, 1-8 clashmore, 21/8/2016,  round 2  kilrossanty 2-11, 1-7 brickey rangers, 16/4/2016,  stradbally 0-8, 0-4 rathgormack, 19/4/2016,  clashmore 1-12, 0-7 ballinameela, 19/4/2016,  round 3  rathgormack 1-17, 0-7 ballinameela, 25/6/2016,  clashmore 1-10
, 0-9 brickey rangers, 3/9/2016  stradbally 1-13, 2-9 kilrossanty, 4/9/2016,  round 4  kilrossanty 1-12, 0-10 rathgormack, 15/7/2016,  ballinameela 3-7, 0-15 brickey rangers, 29/7/2016,  stradbally 1-11, 0-11 clashmore, 11/9/2016,  round 5  clashmore 0-16, 1-3 rathgormack, 14/10/2016,  kilrossanty 4-16, 0-4 ballinameela 14/10/2016,  stradbally w/o, scr brickey rangers, 17/10/2016,  group 2   round 1  ballinacourty 1-10, 1-10 an rinn, 15/4/2016,  ardmore 5-5, 2-12 st. saviour's, 16/4/2016,  the nire 4-16, 1-7 gaultier, 19/4/2016,  round 2  an rinn 4-9, 1-9 gaultier, 23/4/2016,  st. saviour's 3-7, 1-11 ballinacourty, 23/4/2016,  the nire 2-18, 0-9 ardmore, 22/8/2016,  round 3  ardmore 2-12, 0-13 gaultier, 23/6/2016,  an rinn 2-15, 0-9 st. saviour's, 23/6/2016,  ballinacourty 2-13, 0-11 the nire, 9/9/2016,  round 4  gaultier 0-13, 0-6 st. saviour's, 16/7/2016,  ballinacourty 1-15, 0-8 ardmore, 30/7/2016,  the nire 2-13, 0-14 an rinn, 3/9/2016,  round 5  the nire 0-15, 1-5 st. saviour's, 14/10/2016,  an rinn 2-10, 0-6 ardmore, 14/10/2016,  ballinacourty 8-16, 0-6 gaultier, 17/10/2016,  knock-out stage  last eight  quarter-
finals  semi-finals  final  relegation playoff   brickey rangers 0-10 0-8 st. saviour's, leamybrien, 5/11/2016  munster senior club football championship  references   waterford senior football championship waterford senior football championship
quickening is a cantata for countertenor, two tenors, two baritones, children's choir, chorus, and orchestra by the scottish composer james macmillan.  the work was co-commissioned by the proms and the philadelphia orchestra and was completed in 1998.  its world premiere was performed by the hilliard ensemble, the bbc symphony orchestra & chorus, and the westminster cathedral boys' choir under the direction of andrew davis at royal albert hall, london, on 5 september 1999.  the journalist damian thompson of the spectator described it as "one of macmillan's masterpieces."  composition  background quickening is set to text by the british poet and frequent macmillan collaborator michael symmons roberts.  it is written in aramaic and english, but also features the use of glossolalia (speaking in tongues).  the religious theme of the work draws upon the phenomenon of childbirth, with a boys' choir particularly used to evoke the journey of an unborn child.  structure the piece has a duration of roughly 48 minutes and is composed in four movements: incarnadine midwife poppies living water  instrumentation the work is scored for a countertenor, two tenors, baritone, children's choir, satb chorus, and a large orchestra consisting of two flutes, piccolo, three oboes (3rd doubling cor anglais), three clarinets (3rd doubling bass clarinet), two bassoons, contrabassoon, four horns, four trumpets, three trombones, tuba, timpani, four percussionists, harp, piano (doubling celesta), chamber organ, grand organ (or synthesizer), and strings.  reception quickening has been highly praised by many music critics.  reviewing the united states premiere in philadelphia, peter dobrin of the philadelphia inquirer wrote, "the best thing about quickening - one of the orchestra's centennial commissions - is that it is very much of our time. macmillan's musical language is all his own, and the emotional message behind it speaks for this era in a way that very few works do. it's chaotic, vaguely spiritual, obstreperous, and full of simultaneously conflicting messages about what we should be feeling."  despite noting that "a lot of the concrete associations [macmillan] tries to get across in the piece didn't ring true" with him, dobrin concluded, "but music doesn't need, or even always benefit from, a tangible relationship with real life. the pure sonic experience is more than enough reason to justify the investment of mental adrenaline needed to
listen."  john von rhein of the chicago tribune later described the piece as an "arresting meditation" and wrote, "none of macmillan's effects come across as meretricious, certainly not the murmurous babel of mixed choral voices at the beginning or the magical hush of 'unborn' children's voices with solo violin at the end. those two sections, 'incarnadine' and 'living waters,' frame two darker central tableaux, 'midwife' and 'poppies,' that erupt in spasms of orchestral agitation undergirding powerful surges of choral declamation."  lawrence a. johnson of the chicago classical review similarly remarked, "quickening is a big, complex and multifaceted work with a lot to take in at first hearing. macmillan's distinctive brand of musical 'muscular christianity' is here at his most flamboyant and audacious, with largely successful results. the composer wields his vast forces with skill and panache, particularly in his writing for brass and his favored percussion, often making a dazzling and brilliant effect."  andrew achenbach of gramophone called it, "a powerful experience, in sum, and a work well worth getting to know."  putting a contrary view (reviewing the work's premiere) was john allison in the times, who found the work "..."big" only in terms of its duration and the vast forces it employs: the absence of developed, large-scale ideas in macmillan's music is becoming a worrying trend...". allison went on to say that "the score is no greater than the sum of its parts: acclaim has come easily to macmillan, but now it is surely time for less self-indulgence".  recording a recording of quickening was released through chandos records on 27 january 2009.  the recording was performed by the hilliard ensemble, the cbso chorus & youth chorus, and the bbc philharmonic under the direction of macmillan.  see also list of compositions by james macmillan  references  compositions by james macmillan 1998 compositions cantatas music commissioned by the bbc music commissioned by the philadelphia orchestra
andre antonio rosario teles (born 6 april 1997 in ) is a portuguese footballer who plays for maritimo b as a midfielder  football career on 18 may 2013, andre teles made his professional debut with maritimo b in a 2015-16 campeonato de portugal match against camacha.  references  external links  1997 births sportspeople from funchal living people portuguese footballers association football defenders liga portugal 2 players c.s. maritimo players
helen c. purchase is a researcher in information visualization, graph drawing, and human-computer interaction who works as a senior lecturer in the school of computing science of the university of glasgow.  purchase earned a doctorate at the university of cambridge in 1992. before moving to glasgow, she was a senior lecturer at the university of queensland, australia, where she won a teaching award in 1999.  she is the author of the book experimental human-computer interaction (cambridge university press, 2012), and was a keynote speaker at the 7th international symposium on visual information communication & interaction (vinci 2014) in sydney, australia.  references  external links home page  year of birth missing (living people) living people british computer scientists british women computer scientists alumni of the university of cambridge university of queensland faculty academics of the university of glasgow graph drawing people
yesshop (stylised as yesshop) was a new zealand shopping channel. the channel was based on the south korean model of home shopping.  the channel originally launched in new zealand on free-to-air television and pay television on 4 november 2013. the channel expanded to australia via pay television provider foxtel, launching on 29 february 2016, and later a short-lived run on regional free-to-air television via southern cross austereo on 1 august 2016.  yesshop's owner, yes retail, made the decision to cease trading on 29 september 2016 citing lack of funds to pay wages and the company's current losses of approximately 20 million dollars. employees' contracts were terminated the same day.  references  external links   official website (archived site)  new zealand television channels 2016 disestablishments in new zealand english-language television stations in new zealand english-language television stations in australia home shopping television stations in australia television channels and stations established in 2013 defunct new zealand television channels defunct australian television channels television channels and stations disestablished in 2016
let there be light (stylised as let there be light.) is the 25th live album of hillsong worship, which consists of several worship pastors from australian church hillsong church. the album was recorded during the 2016 hillsong conference at the qudos bank arena from 4 july until 7 july 2016 and was released on 14 october 2016, under hillsong music, sparrow records and capitol christian music group.  their music captures the heart and sound of hillsong church globally and represents the coming together of the hillsong worship team from around the world; including reuben morgan, marty sampson, joel houston, brooke ligertwood, ben fielding, taya smith, dave ware, annie garratt and many more.  background  in march 2016, "grace to grace" was released and served as a single for easter.  in july worship leader ben fielding said, "we've been intentional about writing songs that will translate across the church globally." from many of the hillsong global campuses such as sydney, london, new york and los angeles, songs were written, re-written and collaborated on in the lead up to the album recording.  "the collaborations have been more through relationship this year, and it has felt less segmented. we've been writing in the studio and there would be people from three different campuses in three different countries there. each would be representing their own congregation's unique sound, but working together to create something that will translate for all campuses."  the title of the album is a reference to genesis 1:3.  theme  rich langton, who oversees the pastoral care of the creative team in australia, said, "jesus is the light of the world and we carry that too."  awards and accolades  on 9 august 2017, it was announced that let there be light would be nominated for a gma dove award in the worship album of the year and the long form video of the year categories at the 48th annual gma dove awards. in addition to the album's nomination, the song "what a beautiful name" was nominated for a gma dove award in the song of the year and worship song of the year categories. on 17 october 2017, "what a beautiful name" won both gma dove awards for song of the year and the worship song of the year at a ceremony held at the allen arena in nashville, tennessee, with composers brooke ligertwood and ben fielding receiving the awards.  track listing   notes  "behold (then sings my soul)" is inspired by "how great thou art
", courtesy of the stuart hine trust.  "i will boast in christ" contains additional lyrics from "nothing but the blood", traditional.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  personnel credits adapted from zendesk and allmusic.  vocals   annie garratt - lead vocals  ben fielding - lead vocals  benjamin hastings - lead vocals  brooke ligertwood - lead vocals  david ware - lead vocals  jad gillies - lead vocals  joel houston - lead vocals  jonathon "jd" douglass - lead vocals  matt crocker - lead vocals  marty sampson - lead vocals  reuben morgan - lead vocals  taya smith - lead vocals  alexander epa iosefa - additional vocals  alexander pappas - additional vocals  aodhan king - additional vocals  chelsea larosa - additional vocals  dee uluirewa - additional vocals, vocals coach  eric liljero - additional vocals  gloria mati-leifi - additional vocals  hannah hobbs - additional vocals  jay cook - additional vocals  katie dodson - additional vocals  kris hodge - additional vocals  laura toggs - additional vocals  melodie wagner - additional vocals  rachel helms - additional vocals  renee sieff - additional vocals  tarryn stokes - additional vocals  composer   aodhan king - composer  ben fielding - composer  benjamin hastings - composer  brooke ligertwood - composer  chris davenport - composer  jamie snell - composer  joel houston - composer  jonas myrin - composer  joshua grimmett - composer  matt crocker - composer  marty sampson - composer  michael fatkin - composer  michael guy chislett - composer  reuben morgan - composer  scott groom - composer  scott ligertwood - composer  technical, strings and horns   ben whincop - record engineer, post production engineer  brandon gillies - assistant record engineer, post production engineer  michael cuthbertson - assistant record engineer  michael guy chislett - post production engineer, electric guitar  james rudder - post production engineer  ian sullivan - post production engineer  michael zuvela - post production engineer  grant konemann - post production engineer, choir recording  philip metcalf - choir recording  stephen marcussen - mastering  sam gibson - mixing  stewart whitmore - digital editing (for marcussen mastering, hollywood, us)  autumn hardman starra - music director, keys  nigel hendroff - music director, electric guitar, acoustic guitar  daniel mcmurray - drums  harrison wood - drums  matthew hann - bass guitar  jihea oh - bass
guitar  matt tennikoff - bass guitar  dylan thomas - electric guitar  jad gillies - electric guitar  jarryd scully - electric guitar  joel hingston - electric guitar  peter james - keys  david andrew - keys  ben tennikoff - keys  jack mcgrath - keys  tim kozio - keys  nathan hughes - keys  joel houston - acoustic guitar  reuben morgan - acoustic guitar  ben fielding - acoustic guitar  brooke ligertwood - acoustic guitar  michaeli witney - strings  evie gallardo - strings  salla sinerva - strings  corrie haskins - strings  gerard alvares - strings  celeste shackelton - strings  event production   steve pippett - production director  luke fairbairn - event production manager  kevin watts - assistant event production manager  julian cepeda - assistant event production manager  ian anderson - technical production manager  kayleigh alexandre - technical director  eric lechner - technical director  anthony gomez - technical director  joanna wakeley - assistant technical director  andrew friesen - assistant technical director  wesley hahn - assistant technical director  kelly maclaggan - assistant technical director  michaela sjøberg - assistant technical director  andrew crawford - head of audio  omar sierra - front of house engineer  james rudder - front of house engineer  justin "juzzy" arthur - front of house engineer  erik viking carlsson - front of house engineer  ryan johnson - front of house engineer  glenn setchfield - assistant front of house engineer  eddie phiri - assistant front of house engineer  kyleigh allender - front of house communication  kevin kwan - front of house communication  reid wall - monitor engineer  brad law - monitor engineer  andrew howell - monitor engineer  ariel vargas - monitor engineer  nicholas canavan - monitor engineer  caleb taylor - assistant monitor engineer  jesse small - assistant monitor engineer  philipp grimm - assistant monitor engineer  blake pulman - assistant monitor engineer  stephanie gardner - monitor communication  sean wilson - monitor communication  mari bøhlerengen - monitor communication  jim monk - broadcast engineer  nathan steele - broadcast engineer  josh mathis - assistant broadcast engineer  fabio george - assistant broadcast engineer  beverly bangard - broadcast communication  ben carbone - broadcast communication  ian hendrick - lighting designer  jarrad donovan - lighting director  kevin stahl - lighting director  paul cox - head backline technician  dan yao - head backline technician  laura kelly - head stage manager  kris mateika - creative design  peter "nubsy
" fairall - creative design  nathan taylor - stage design  ricki cook - engineer  gary beavan - rf technician  album administration   alison brown - administrator  anthony gomez - administrator  chris neal - administrator  jill casey - administrator  josh olson - administrator  laura kelly - administrator  steve harmeling - administrator  album artwork   jay argaet - art director, album artwork  scott ligertwood - art director  nathan cahyadi - cover photographer, album artwork  nicholas dellis - album artwork  project handling and management   ben fielding - product director  brooke ligertwood - product director  cassandra langton - product director  joel houston - product director  michael guy chislett - product director  reuben morgan - product director  matthew capper - project manager  scott ligertwood - assistant project manager  jay argaet - assistant project manager  jose huergo - assistant project manager, hillsong worship band manager  grant thomson - assistant project manager  steve mcpherson - assistant project manager  tim whincop - assistant project manager  album production   michael guy chislett - producer  brooke ligertwood - co-producer  joel houston - co-producer  ben tan - assistant producer  benjamin tennikoff - assistant producer  dylan thomas - assistant producer  executive   brian houston - global senior pastor, executive producer  bobbie houston - global senior pastor  cassandra langton - global creative pastor  richard langton - global creative pastor  international releases   there are several international releases (translation) version of the album releases in 2017:  el eco de su voz (spanish version) (also included songs from hillsong worship's open heaven / river wild, hillsong young & free's youth revival and hillsong worship's single "grace to grace")  que la lumiere soit (french version)  est werde licht (german version)  toen werd het licht (dutch version)  да будет свет (russian version)  ما اجمل اسمك (arabic version of "what a beautiful name")  references  hillsong music live albums 2016 live albums
henry benoit francois darondeau (born as "d'arondeau") (28 february 1779 - 30 july 1865) was a 19th-century french composer and piano teacher.  life henry darondeau was born in strasbourg, alsace, the son of the munich-born french composer benoni darondeau who came to paris as a vocal teacher in 1782. around 1802, he studied in paris with henri-montan berton (composition) and ignaz anton ladurner (piano), leaving the conservatoire without a degree. afterwards he was active as a piano teacher and composer before he moved to bourges in 1836.  in bourges, he worked as an organist and gave lessons in solfege, piano, harmony and counterpoint, among others to the young frederic barbier.  in 1860, he returned to paris, resuming his wide-spread contacts among notable musicians of his time, including adolphe adam and francois antoine habeneck, and poets like marc-antoine madeleine desaugiers. he was closely attached to the theatre des varietes and the second theatre de l'ambigu-comique, for which he composed (comic) operas, ballets and incidental music. he also excelled as a composer of romances as well as potpourris and transcriptions of popular works by other composers.   he was the father of benoit darondeau, hydrographer, and stanislas darondeau, a painter. he died paris in paris.  selected works he wrote some 100 works among which:   rosina et lorenzo, ballet by jean-pierre aumer (1805)  le retour de la sentinelle, lyrics by louis brault (1809)  frederic duc de nevers, text by mardelle, e. f. varez (1810)  herliska, op. 35 for piano (1862)  references  external links  henri darondeau on data.bnf.fr   francois-joseph fetis, biographie universelle des musiciens et bibliographie generale de la musique, vol. 2 (paris: firmin didot, 1866) (2e ed.), p. 431.  1779 births 1865 deaths 19th-century classical composers 19th-century french composers french opera composers french romantic composers people from strasbourg
the 2013 south american rhythmic gymnastics championships were held in santiago, chile, december 10-15, 2013.  medalists  references   2013 in gymnastics south american gymnastics championships international gymnastics competitions hosted by chile 2013 in chilean sport
the 2016-17 texas a&m aggies women's basketball team represented texas a&m university in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the team's head coach was gary blair, who is in his fourteenth season at texas a&m. the team plays their home games at the reed arena in college station, texas and will play in its fifth season as a member of the southeastern conference. they finished the season 22-12, 9-7 in sec play to finish in sixth place. they defeated florida and missouri before losing to mississippi state in the semifinals of the sec women's tournament. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa women's basketball tournament, where they defeated penn in the first round after rallying from 21 points down, before losing to ucla in the second round.  roster  rankings  schedule and results  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#500000; color:#ffffff;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#500000; color:#ffffff;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#500000; color:#ffffff;"| conference games  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#500000;"| sec women's tournament  |- !colspan=12 style="background:#500000;"| ncaa tournament  see also  2016-17 texas a&m aggies men's basketball team  references  texas a&m aggies women's basketball seasons texas aandm texas aandm aggies women's basketball texas aandm aggies women's basketball texas aandm
the house of kolowrat is a czech noble family that had a prominent role in the history and administration of their native kingdom of bohemia as well as the holy roman empire and later the habsburg monarchy as high-ranking officials and supporters of the czech national revival.  the family origins are so far back in time that they are not recorded in any extant bohemian historical documents. only a few legends, such as those recounted by historians bohuslav balbin and frantisek palacky, give an account of those origins. the first historically documented kolowrat is albrecht of kolowrat the elder (cs). the family rose to prominence during the habsburg monarchy, during which its members held some of the highest political, military, and clerical offices, including serving as minister-presidents, supreme chancellors, field marshals, archbishops, and knights of the order of the golden fleece.  history  the founder of the house  albrecht the elder of kolowrat, whose ancestors came from the village of kolovraty, is considered to be the founder of the dynasty. being a hetman and the court marshal of anna of schweidnitz (wife of charles iv), and an assessor of the provincial and royal feudal court, he entered historical documents in 1347 when rozmital castle was sold and he was mentioned as an assessing witness. he married three times and had eight children, six of which were sons who later laid the foundations of the house of kolowrat. in 1373, albrecht of kolowrat established an augustinian monastery of the assumption in rocov, where he was later buried.  14th century  the founder of the family and the first documented member of the kolowrat family was lord albrecht the elder (†1391). he was first mentioned as a witness in the sale of rozmital castle in 1347. he is known primarily because he became the marshal of empress anna of schweidnitz (wife of charles iv, holy roman emperor), and governor of vogtland. together with his sons, he founded the augustinian monastery of the virgin mary in dolni rocov. here, lord albrecht the elder is also buried, and his gravestone is tied to a family legend that has persisted for centuries. lord albrecht's sons and grandchildren laid the foundations of eight noble branches of the kolowrat family. his oldest son, lord albrecht the younger (1369-1416), founded a branch of kolowrat-liebsteinsky and perhaps kolowrat-krakowsky, whose descendants still live today. following his father's example, he financially supported the monastery in dolni rocov.  15th
century  hanus i. (1390-1450) became one of the most powerful people in the country, as in 1437 he became one of six interim administrators of the czech kingdom (together with oldrich ii. of rosenberg, meinhard of neuhaus, ales of sternberg, nicholas of hazmburg, and zikmund of warttenberg) before the new king took over the government. later he became the governor of the prague cities and was a well known adversary of george of podebrady, king of bohemia . he was also involved in the hussite wars. his son, hanus ii. (1430-1483), unlike his grandfather and father, did not enter politics as was expected of him, but instead turned to the church and became the administrator of the prague archbishopric. he became famous as the patron of the catholic church, when in 1465, he donated the golden, precious-jewel inlaid kolowrat prayer book with relics of czech saints to the saint vitus cathedral treasure (the largest and most important treasure in czech republic, and one of the most extensive in europe). to the chapter library, he bequeathed the rare, illuminated manuscript of his travel breviary among others. of the zehrovsky family, we can mention jan (1434-1473), who, unlike other members of his extended family, became an ally of king george of podebrady, and took part in his mission of peace in central and western europe between 1465 and 1467.  16th century  of the nowohradsky family, the best-known is jachym (2nd half of the 16th century), who built a political career as a vice-governor in the court of emperor rudolf ii. he also became burgrave of karlstejn, and while holding this position, he had karlstejn castle markedly repaired and enlarged. thus, he held both provincial and the court offices, which was not very common. further, we can also name ignac jindrich (1575/77-1628), who became famous for his ecclesiastical career as a representative of olomouc bishop frantisek cardinal dietrichstein, and subsequently was even elected as provost of the olomouc chapter. of the members of the bezdruzicky family we'll mention george (1481-1526), who was the supreme judge and who witnessed the rivalry of the nobles and the royal cities over power in the land. another important member of the family was vaclav († pre-1539), who was the
supreme feudal judge and burgrave at vysehrad. he continued with the tradition of supporting of the monastery in dolni rocov, thus becoming responsible for extensive reconstruction of the entire building.  17th century   during the 17th century, many major changes took place. for the kolowrat family, among the most important of events was the promotion of the family to counts of the holy roman empire and counts of bohemia. in 1629, a family agreement was concluded between the male members of all branches of the family, in which the indivisibility of the property, the maintenance of the monastery in dolni rocov, preservation of the coat of arms and the ancestral history, and the non-mixing of ancestral noble blood were negotiated. many members became major patrons, primarily of the catholic church. count franz karel i. (1620-1700), knight of the order of the golden fleece, financially supported the construction of many church buildings throughout his life. in 1674, he founded an entailed estate consisting of rychnov nad kneznou, cernikovice, and borohradek. count oldrich frantisek (1607-1650) was present at the establishment of the capuchin monastery in susice, supported the founding of the jesuit college in klatovy, in breznice and in hlohov. count krystof jaroslav (1604-1659) provided extensive repairs of the augustinian monastery in dolni rocov between 1647 and 1648. count vaclav (1634-1659) is considered the greatest patron of the entire family, because in 1654 he renounced the entire estate and devoted it to the construction of the st. nicholas cathedral in mala strana in prague . after the departure of french troops from the country, count maximilian norbert (1660-1721), provided financial assistance to repair the jesuit college, grammar school and seminary in klatovy. worth noting is also the last wife of count wilhelm albrecht i (1600-1688), countess ludmila eva frantiska (1616-1695), who in 1691 donated her diamond-studded wedding dress (6500 diamonds) to the prague loreta, from which the diamond monstrance, also known as the prague sun, was made. count jan wilhelm vojtech (1627-1668) dedicated his life to his ecclesiastical career, and was a canon several times over and a prelate. in 1668, he even became archbishop of prague.  18th century   in the 18th century, many kolowrats become members of prestigious orders. several of them even received the most prestigious habsburg
order, the order of the golden fleece. one of its recipients was count norbert leopold (1655-1711),who was a lifelong supporter of the catholic church and empress eleonor. when the karlstejn castle was for sale, count norbert leopold bought it for 150,000 gold and donated it back to the crown as he believed that karlstejn castle should not be in private hands.  another knight of the order of the golden fleece was count filip nerius (1686-1773), the supreme burgrave ( equivalent to prime minister) of the czech kingdom and a provincial judge. he also founded one of the family tombs. another family member to receive recognition was count leopold wilhelm (1727-1809), who was also awarded the grand cross of the hungarian order of st. stephan and the order of leopold. he served as the first state and conference minister and the highest czech-austrian chancellor, but he was also a capable entrepreneur in the tobacco and needle industries. field marshal general and commander of bohemia , count johann kollowrat (1748-1816), who fought against napoleon, also achieved recognition when he was awarded the grand cross of the order of leopold (austrian imperial order of leopold), the french legion of honour and the military order of maria theresa. he later became a commander of the order of the knights of malta. kajetan frantisek (1689-1769), too, became a field marshal general and military commander of moravia. emanuel vaclav (1700-1769), who, among other things, was grand prior of the order of the knights of malta, became a general, lieutenant field marshal, and owner of the "kolowrat" regiment (the kolowrat family private army). we should also mention count , the high chancellor of the czech kingdom, who took over the inheritance after the barons of ujezd family, which provided him with many estates, including breznice na pribram, which remained in the possession of the kolowrat family for a long time.  19th century   the most important politician of the kolowrat family was count franz anton ii. (1778-1861), who became the first minister-president of the austrian empire, the de facto second in command after emperor ferdinand i. he later became one of the founders of the czech national gallery, donating his extensive collection of paintings. together with josef maria (1746-1824) and jan nepomuk karel (1794-1872), he was also one of the founders of the czech national museum, to which he donated, among other things, a library with rare
prints and a collection of minerals. many members of the family played an important role in the czech national revival in order to support the unity of the czech nation. count jan nepomuk karel (called hanus), a knight of the order of the knights of malta, also donated his collections and the breznice library with many rare incunabula and illuminated manuscripts to the museum. he also did not neglect to support czech authors, financially supporting bozena nemcova and karel havlicek borovsky. he also contributed one of the largest amounts to the building of the national theater. even in this period, there were members of the family who set out on a political or military career path. vincenc maria (1749-1824), a knight of the order of the golden fleece and many other honors, became the grand prior of the knights of malta, and in his military career he achieved the rank of commanding general and lieutenant field marshal. it was in this rank that he commanded the 4th russian-austrian infantry column of 16,000 men at the battle of austerlitz on december 2, 1805, when his army fought against emperor napoleon bonaparte. count franz xaver ii. (1803-1873) also became the grand prior of the order of the knights of malta and was awarded the imperial order of leopold. he is known primarily because of his post as ambassador at the imperial court. count leopold maria (1804-1863) dedicated his entire life to a military career, becoming a lieutenant field marshal and commanding general. he later became the governor of venice. let us also not forget the clergy, and mention count alois josef (1759-1833), deputy bishop of olomouc, bishop of hradec kralove and archbishop of prague from 1830.  20th century  standing out among others in the 20th century is film producer, founder of the austrian film industry, automobile and motorcycle racer count alexander joseph (1886-1927), whom everyone simply called sasha. he was the holder of the franz joseph cross of merit. during world war i he was the chief of film propaganda for the austro-hungarian empire. after the war, he financially supported laurin & klement, even becoming a co-owner of the company, financially backing some of their automotive factories. he also collaborated with ferdinand porsche who built him a light-weight sports car called the sascha wagen (in honor of count alexander). count alexander kolowrat also discovered actress marlene dietrich and director michael curtiz (famous for casablanca). his younger brother, jindrich josef (1897-1996
), was a prominent politician, diplomat, national economist, anti-nazi fighter and patron in the spirit of the kolowrat ancestral tradition. he received many honors and awards for both his political activities as well as his lifelong work. other family holders of state awards include bohuslav (1876-1934), jan (1879-1955), and zdenek (1881-1941).  family descendants   after 1989, count jindrich kolowrat returned from exile in the us to czechoslovakia, accompanied by his youngest son count frantisek tomas (1943-2004), so that together they could restitute the family property. after the return of the family property, he leased the kolowrat palace to the national theater for the symbolic price of 1 czk for the duration of 20 years making him one of the greatest supporters of czech arts. also in april 1992, pursuant to the restitution act, the castle in rychnov nad kneznou, including its collections, the chateau in cernikovice, lands, were returned to count krystof jaroslav kolowrat-krakowsky-liebsteinsky, who managed them until 1999. the properties are now under the administration of his son, jan egon. count jindrich died in 1996 and appointed count frantisek tomas as the sole heir and administrator of the family property. frantisek tomas established a family with judr. dominika kolowrat-krakowska, nee perutkova, and their son, count maxmilian alexander was born in 1996. two years later, they welcomed their daughter, francesca dominika (*1998). after the premature passing of count frantisek tomas in 2004, dominika kolowrat-krakowska took over the administration of the family assets. together with her children, count maximilian and francesca, on february 26, 2008 (the 65th anniversary of the birth of frantisek tomas), she established the kolowratek endowment fund.  important members    albrecht the older lord of kolowraty († 1391), founder of the st. augustine's order's monastery in dolni rocov  albrecht the younger lord of kolowraty (mentioned 1369-1416), co-founder of the augustinian monastery in dolni rocov  hanus i. lord of kolowrat (1390-1450), governor of the towns of prague, intermediary governor of the kingdom of bohemia  albrecht i. lord of kolowrat (mentioned 1422-1470), associate of the feudal court  hanus ii. lord of kolowrat († 1483), canon of prague and vysehrad, administrator of the prague archdiocese, sponsor  albrecht ii. lord liebsteinsky of kolowrat (
mentioned 1463-1510), supreme chamberlain, supreme chancellor of bohemia  jindrich albrecht lord of kolowrat and krakovec (mentioned 1479-1530), the highest judge of feudal court in bohemia  albrecht ii. lord of kolowrat (mentioned 1503-1542), governor of rakovnik region  jan lord kolowrat-krakowsky (mentioned 1530-1555), governor of rakovnik region  krystof jindrich lord krakowsky of kolowrat (1549-1596), governor of rakovnik region  bohuslav jiri lord krakowsky of kolowrat (1596-1638/41), chamberlain and imperial council  vilem albrecht i. count krakowsky of kolowrat  (1600-1688), chief feudal judge and chief bailiff of the czech kingdom, sponsor  krystof jaroslav lord krakowsky of kolowrat  (mentioned 1604-1659), imperial council, associate of feudal chambre court, sponsor  oldrich frantisek count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1607-1650), the highest burgrave, hofmeister, chamberlain, sponsor  frantisek karel i. count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1620-1700), knight of the order of the golden fleece, provincial governor, president over appeals, sponsor  jan vilem vojtech count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1624-1668), the archbishop of prague, grand master of the military order of the crusaders of the red star  vaclav count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1634-1659), jesuit, sponsor, exemplary canon, scholar  jan frantisek count krakowsky of kolowrat (1649-1723), the highest chancellor of the kingdom of bohemia, royal commissioner   albrecht jindrich count krakowsky of kolowrat (1655-1704), governor of the rakovnik region  norbert leopold count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1655-1716), knight of the order of the golden fleece, elector in koln, sponsor  maximilian norbert count krakowsky of kolowrat (1660-1721), supreme provincial chamberlain, president of the appellate council in bohemia, sponsor  vilem albrecht ii. count krakowsky of kolowrat, baron of ujezd (1678-1738), the highest chancellor of the bohemian royal court  filip nerius (neri) count krakowsky of kolowrat (1686-1773), knight of the golden fleece, grand burgrave, supreme judge  kajetan frantisek count krakowsky of kolowrat (1689-1769), field marshal and military commander in moravia  emanuel vaclav kajetan count krakowsky of kolowrat (1700-1769), cavalry general, the owner of the kolowrat dragoon regiment
, grand prior of the order of malta  prokop jan count krakowsky of kolowrat, baron of ujezd (1718-1774), supreme feudal judge, supreme judge in bohemia  leopold vilem count krakowsky of kolowrat (1727-1809), knight of the order of the golden fleece, the supreme czech-austrian chancellor, first minister of state and conference minister  jan nepomuk karel josef count krakowsky of kolowrat, baron of ujezd (1748-1816), commander of the order of the knights of malta, commanding general in bohemia, lieutenant field marshal  vincent maria count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1749-1824), knight of the order of the golden fleece, grand prior of the order of malta in bohemia, cavalry general, field marshal  alois josef count krakowsky of kolowrat, baron of ujezd, (1759-1833), archbishop of prague   frantisek antonin ii., count liebsteinsky of kolowrat (1778-1861), knight of the order of the golden fleece, minister of state and minister of conference, founder of the national museum in prague, sponsor  frantisek xaver i. count krakowsky of kolowrat (1783-1855), chamberlain, lieutenant-colonel (oberstleutnant)  jan nepomuk karel (called hanus) count krakowsky-nowohradsky of kolowrat, baron of ujezd (1794-1872), honorable knight of the order of the knights of malta, chamberlain, imperial privy council, sponsor  frantisek xaver ii. count krakowsky of kolowrat (1803-1873), czech grand prior of the maltese knights order, the ambassador at the imperial court in vienna  leopold maria meinrad adam camillo johann nepomuk raimund count krakowsky of kolowrat (1804-1863), field marshal, the right hand of marshal joseph radetzky von radetz  leopold filip count krakowsky of kolowrat (1852-1910), member of the imperial council and the czech assembly, second class knight of the order of the iron crown  alexandr joseph count krakowsky of kolowrat (1886-1927), film producer, car and motorcycle racing driver  jindrich josef vilem albrecht pavel count krakowsky of kolowrat (1897-1996), politician, visionary and restorer of the family estate  frantisek sal. tomas karel count krakowsky of kolowrat (1943-2004), continuer of the family property administration  family properties  coat of arms  the original kolowratian coat of arms was composed of an or wheel with eight spokes in a gules field. this familial coat of arms is also common to
other families, which explains the theory of a common forefather for the kolowrats, the janovics, the cejkas, and the dvoreckys. the azure shield features an argent and gules party per pale eagle with arms and a half moon finished with clover trefoils in or. since the 15th century, the eagle has featured the royal crown in or on the neck. having acquired the countship title, the lineage of the liesbsteinskys added a second tail to the eagle along with a small austrian heart shield (in gules with argent bar). the crest above the helmet, which is decorated with a crown in or and mantlings in argent and gules, is formed by closed eagle wings with a half moon finished in clover trefoils in or, a princely crown in or, and a crowned shield in gules with argent bar.  relatives  throughout the years, the kolowrats have created family bonds with the houses of berka, colloredo-mannsfeld, gutstein, lobkowicz, martinic, schwarzenberg, schlik, sternberg, and wallenstein.  links  references  literature   halada, jan. lexikon ceske slechty : erby, fakta, osobnosti, sidla a zajimavosti. 1. praha: akropolis, 1992. . kapitola kolovratove, s. 75-77.jurik, pavel. encyklopedie slechtickych rodu. praha: euromedia - knizni klub, 2014. 464 s. .  jurik, pavel. kolowratove. verne a stale. praha: euromedia - knizni klub, 2016. 152 s. .  pelant, jan. erby ceske, moravske a slezske slechty. vyvoj erbu a strucne dejiny 610 rodu. praha: lidove noviny, 2013. 622 s. .  pouzar, vladimir. almanach ceskych slechtickych rodu. praha: martin, 2011. 493 s. .  external links   www.kolowrat.cz  www.kolowrat.com  www.kolovraty.cz  www.hrady.cz  dokument ct - modra krev: kolowratove  dokument ct - lide s erbem  dokument ct - gen: jindrich hrabe kolowrat-krakowsky  bohemian
noble families habsburg bohemian nobility
gully dada is a 2013 indian telugu language comedy film written by rss brothers and directed by shashikanth.   it debuts radhika rathod and aakash reddy in the lead roles alongside sanjana reddy, r shekhar and jai singh. music by varun, written by rss brothers and cinematography by rahul. the film released in the first week of may 2013.  plot gully dada (shekhar r) is a ruthless don, who kills people for money. he has a younger brother who got beaten and threatened by another local don shakil (jai singh), which made wage disputes between gully dada and shakhil aka adnan sajid khan of charminar.  cast  r shekhar  radhika rathod  sanjana reddy  aakash reddy  jai singh  references  external links    2013 films 2010s telugu-language films indian films
a night in rio (finnish: rion yo) is a 1951 finnish musical comedy film directed by ville salminen and starring assi nortia, leif wager and tapio rautavaara.  cast  assi nortia as carmen conchita    leif wager as lefa    tapio rautavaara as tapsa    lasse poysti as lasse    ville salminen as don jose    rauni luoma as donna lola    reino valkama as mikko   yrjo ikonen as miguel    birger kortman   rakel laakso   matti lehtela   veikko linna as chef    otto noro   heikki savolainen   oke tuuri as pedro    kauko vuorensola  kaarlo wilska as police  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1951 films 1951 musical comedy films finnish musical comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by ville salminen finnish black-and-white films
nadia grace eicher mejia (born 22 november 1995) is an american model and beauty pageant titleholder who won miss california usa 2016 and placed in the top 5 at miss usa 2016.  mejia is the daughter of ecuadorian-born musician gerardo mejia, best known for the 1990s song "rico suave", and kathy eicher, miss west virginia usa 1989, and appeared with her family on the reality television show suave says.  she is a 2013 graduate of diamond bar high school.  mejia works as a model and is signed to next management. she once suffered from anorexia.  mejia won the miss california usa 2016 title in november 2016 after previously competing three times for miss california teen usa and making the top twenty at miss california usa 2015.  she went on to represent california at the miss usa 2016 pageant where she was voted fan favourite and made the top five. mejia's open sharing of her body image struggle was praised as a contributing factor for winning the fan favourite vote, however her failed attempt at answering a question about economics during the interview competition was also widely reported in the media.  in 2018, mejia was featured in major advertising campaigns for skechers and too faced cosmetics.  references   1995 births american beauty pageant winners american people of ecuadorian descent beauty pageant contestants from california living people miss usa 2016 delegates people from diamond bar, california
spork is a locality () of the town of bocholt in the district of borken. it was first mentioned in 1188 as sporklo. formerly an independent municipality, it was merged into the city of bocholt in 1975. its population was 972 in december 2017.  references  bocholt, germany
mahesh is a residential area and historical part of the city of serampore, in the indian state of west bengal.  it is the site of a 14th-century temple of jagannath, and the rathayatra of mahesh, which first took place in 1397, is the second oldest in india.  see also  serampore city  tin bazar  battala  chatra, serampore  dakshin rajyadharpur  sheoraphuli  references  neighbourhoods in west bengal serampore
conon (also cono or cuno; died 1 may 1106) was a lotharingian nobleman and military leader of the first crusade. he was one of the most prominent lords of the ardennes, being the count of montaigu, lord of rochefort and advocate (defender) of the city of dinant from 1064. he was also one of the most important vassals of the bishop of liege, holding the county of huy from the church. his chief seat was the castle of montaigu, while the castle at huy was the redoubt of the bishops.  family conon was the eldest son of gozelo, count of montaigu, and his wife ermentrude of harenzey. his younger brother henry was the dean of the cathedral of saint lambert in liege. conon's only known wife was named ida. according to the medieval english historian orderic vitalis, conon married a sister of godfrey of bouillon. godfrey is not otherwise known to have had a sister, but his mother was also named ida. in contrast, the cantatorium, the chronicle of the abbey of saint-hubert, records that conon's wife was the daughter of lambert the old, a nobleman from the region of liege who was buried at saint-hubert. conon and his wife ida had four children, in order of birth:  gozelo (died 1097), who died on the first crusade  lambert (died 1140 or after), his father's successor as count of montaigu  henry (died 1128 or after), archdeacon and provost of fosses from 1111  theobald (died after 1086) the name of his father and eldest son suggests that conon was related in some way to the ardennes-verdun dynasty, the family of godfrey of bouillon.  succession conon first appears in 1055 alongside his father and his brother rudolf confirming the diploma by which the emperor henry iii transferred the church of  to the abbey of florennes. in 1064, conon, his father and his brother witnessed the confirmation of the foundation of the priory at longlier by duke frederick of lower lorraine.  the cantatorium of saint-hubert, in recording conon's father's death in 1064, only accords him the title "count of behogne" and not of montaigu. it has been hypothesised that the elder gozelo had already ceded the castle of montaigu to his eldest son and moved his residence to the more secure and central village of behogne, where he proceeded to erect the castle later known as rochefort.
whatever the case, conon inherited his father's lands and titles after his death. a document dated 1 january 1071 in the archives of the abbey of waulsort records conon as count under duke godfrey iv and under the emperor henry iv.  lotharingian politics on 30 august and 1 september 1080, an important regional assembly was held to decide on the construction of a stone bridge over the meuse at dinant. as suzerain over the city, bishop henry of liege was present, as was conon, the lay advocate of the city, and count albert iii of namur, who retained some rights in dinant, including a right to tribute. isaac, the mayor of dinant, and frewald, its provost, were also in attendance. it was necessary to get the permission of godescalc, abbot of waulsort, for the construction of a bridge, since it would obviate the need for the ferry, which was operated by the abbey and provided substantial revenues. a deal was struck, and the bridge was built.  conon was among the barons under the spiritual jurisdiction of the bishop of liege who assented to the truce of god (treuga dei) being proclaimed throughout the diocese in 1082. this was the first time the truce had been proclaimed in the holy roman empire. in 1086, conon also subscribed to the bishop's charter establishing a permanent tribunal to try high crimes such as abduction, rape, assault, robbery, arson and murder. the 15th-century chronicler jean de stavelot, records that dodon, the count of laroche, refused to accede to the charter and besieged by the forces of the assenting nobles. after a siege of seven months, the besiegers gave in and recognised the exemption of laroche from the jurisdiction of the tribunal.  in 1087, conon was present in aachen when the emperor henry iv took the collegiate church of saint servatius in maastricht under his protection, confirmed its liberties and exempted its provostship from any other ecclesiastical jurisdiction.  when bishop henry died in 1091, he was succeeded by otbert, a man devoted to the cause of henry iv and the antipope clement iii against the legitimate pope, urban ii. when otbert attempted to depose theoderic ii, abbot of saint-hubert, and appoint in his place hildebrand, a monk of lobbes, conon led the noble opposition. the legal proceedings as recorded in the cantatorium present conon as a confident and unyielding lover of justice.  in 1095, conon
assisted at a judicial duel between champions representing the inhabitants of olne and the abbey of stavelot. the men of olne were renting land at fraipont from the abbey, and disagreements between the parties had led to violence. giselbert, champion of the abbey, won the duel.  crusade in 1083, bishop henry of liege gave conon the advocacy of the domain of nandrin, a possession of the church of saint paul of liege in the county of montaigu, because it had repeatedly suffered the depredations of the neighbouring count of . in 1095, henry's successor, bishop otbert, purchased the county of clermont from its count, giselbert, and enfeoffed conon's son lambert with it.  conon participated in the first crusade, along with his sons gozelo and lambert and their erstwhile enemies giselbert of clermont and his ally fredelo. they travelled with the army of godfrey of bouillon. conon's lord, bishop otbert, had purchased the castle of bouillon from godfrey to finance the latter's crusade. thirty-four marks for the purchase came from the poor church of saintes-marie-et-perpetue in dinant. in compensation, otbert transferred some rents and tolls to the church and apparently persuaded conon to transfer one of his rents as well.  the army of godfrey of bouillon, with conon's smaller retinue, was one of the first to arrive in constantinople. there the byzantine emperor alexios i and godfrey had different views of the goals of the crusade, and godfrey was unwilling to commit to the emperor's demands until the remaining crusaders arrived. he camped outside the city, while conon, baldwin of le bourg and godfrey of esch (fredelo's son) met with alexios in the palace. conon and baldwin subsequently received alexios' representative, john komnenos of dyrrhachium. conon's son gozelo died in the east, but he and his son lambert continued on to jerusalem, after they considered their vows fulfilled and returned to montaigu before the end of the year 1099.  alberic of trois-fontaines and giles of orval record the tradition that conon was returning on a ship with peter the hermit and some men of huy when they encountered a severe storm and vowed to build a church if they survived. the storm immediately subsided, and the promise was kept when conon and peter founded the augustinian canonry of neufmoustier, dedicated to the holy sepulchre and john the baptist. according to the tradition kept at neufmoust
ier, peter lived there until his death in 1115.  notes  references  external links charles cawley, comtes de montaigu, medieval lands project. foundation for medieval genealogy.  1106 deaths house of ardennes christians of the first crusade
scum with boundaries is the second studio album by american rock duo the i.l.y's. the album was released on july 16, 2016, through youtube and soundcloud.  track listing  personnel the i.l.y's  zach hill - vocals, drums, keyboards, guitar, production  andy morin - guitar, bass, engineering  references  external links  the i.l.y's albums 2016 albums self-released albums
giofra (foaled 11 march 2008) is a british-bred, french-trained thoroughbred racehorse and broodmare. problems with leg injuries meant that she did not race until the autumn on her three-year-old season but she then won two of her three races in late 2011 including the listed prix casimir delamarre. in 2012 she emerged as a top-class racemare, taking the prix d'harcourt on her seasonal debut and recording her biggest win in the group one falmouth stakes at newmarket racecourse in july. she also finished second in the prix ganay and the hong kong cup and third in the prix de l'opera. she failed to win as a five-year-old in 2013 but finished third in both the dubai duty free and the falmouth stakes before being retired from racing.  background giofra is a bay mare with a white blaze bred and owned by the haras de la perelle. she was sired by dansili, whose other progeny have included the leading middle distance winners harbinger, the fugue and rail link. giofra's dam showed very good form as a two-year-old in 2003, winning three races including the prestige stakes, and has produced several other winners including the ben marshall stakes winner big baz. she was a granddaughter of guindilla, a half-sister to the premio parioli winners gay burslem and crisos il monaco.  the filly was sent to race in france and was trained throughout her racing career by alain de royer-dupre.  racing career  2011: three-year-old season giofra did not race until the autumn of her three-year-old season and made no impact on her debut when she finished fifth in the prix de l'esperance at moulins racecourse on 2 september. a month later she recorded her first success when winning a minor race at compiegne and was then moved up in class to contest the listed prix casimir delamarre over 1800 metres at longchamp racecourse on 28 october. ridden by maxime guyon and starting at odds of 11.4/1 she took the lead 200 metres from the finish, accelerated clear of the field and won by three lengths from the german filly acacalia.  2012: four-year-old season giofra's 2012 debut saw her moved up in class for the group three prix d'harcourt over 2000 metres on 8 april at longchamp and started second favourite behind her stablemate vadamar, the winner of the prix du conseil de paris. she raced in third before accelerating
into the lead 300 metres from the finish and drew clear to win "comortably" by three lengths from vadamar. explaining the filly's delayed career, alain de royer-dupre said "she had a problem with a foreleg, which meant we had to be patient with her, and she only ran three times last year but she showed when easily winning the listed race here last october that she was group class".  the filly was stepped up again three weeks later for the group one prix ganay over 2100 metres at the same course. racing on heavy ground she provided little challenge to the winner cirrus des aigles but took second place by two lengths from reliable man with wigmore hall (jebel hatta, northern dancer stakes) a further eight lengths back in fourth.  after a break of two and a half months giofra was sent to england to contest the falmouth stakes over one mile at newmarket racecourse on 13 july, with christophe soumillon taking over from guyon. golden lilac started favourite ahead of maybe and joviality (musidora stakes, windsor forest stakes), with giofra next in the betting on 10/1 alongside lay time (fortune stakes). after being settled by soumillon just behind the leaders, giofra began to make progress in the last quarter mile, gained the advantage inside the final furlong and won by half a length from the three-year-old outsider elusive kate (ridden by frankie dettori) with siyouma close behind in third. after the race soumillon said "the pace wasn't that quick, i wouldn't say i wasn't happy but a quicker pace would have been better as she was a bit keen when i asked her to go at the two-furlong marker she was going very well and i knew i just had frankie to beat." alain de royer-dupre said "she's a great filly. i've known that for a long time, but she had a leg problem at the beginning of her three-year-old career and she is a new filly at four. she can go on any ground and i think she'll be better at 10 furlongs. it was a risk to run her over a mile and we may now look at the nassau stakes for her".  in the following month the filly returned to france and started favourite for the prix jean romanet over 2000 metres at deauville racecourse but finished sixth of the nine runners behind the subsequently disqualified snow fairy.  after another lengthy break, giofra returned in october for the prix de l
'opera on heavy ground at longchamp in which she finished third behind ridasiyna and izzi top. giofra ended her season in hong kong when she started at odds of 6/1 for the hong kong cup over 2000 metres at sha tin racecourse. she was restrained towards the rear of the field before making steady progress in the straight to finish second, a length behind the six-year-old gelding california memory. the other beaten horses included dan excel, military attack, carlton house and saonois.  2013: five-year-old season on her first appearance at five, giofra was sent to the united arab emirates for the dubai duty free over 1800 metres at meydan racecourse on 30 march. ridden by guyon, she stayed on in the closing stages to finish third beaten one and three quarter lengths and three-quarters of a length by sajhaa and the apache. on her return to europe she started favourite for the prix ganay but finished fourth behind the german colt pastorius. on 12 july giofra attempted to repeat her 2012 success in the falmouth stakes and finished third to elusive kate and sky lantern. on her final appearance giofra ran poorly in the prix rothschild at deauville on 28 july, finishing last of the twelve runners behind elusive kate. her retirement was announced shortly afterwards, with alain de royer-dupre commenting "she has left training and gone to stud to become a broodmare. i think the time is right".  breeding record at the end of her racing career, giofra became a broodmare for the haras de la perelle. in her first season she was scheduled to be covered by frankel.  pedigree   giofra was inbred 3 × 4 to danzig, meaning that this stallion appears in both the third and fourth generations of her pedigree.  references   2008 racehorse births racehorses bred in the united kingdom racehorses trained in france thoroughbred family 6-e
the gens hateria, occasionally ateria, was a plebeian family at ancient rome, known from the last century of the republic and under the early empire.  the most distinguished of the haterii was quintus haterius, a senator and rhetorician in the time of augustus and tiberius.  he was consul suffectus in 5 bc.  praenomina the praenomina associated with the early haterii are quintus, sextus, and decimus, the former two being among the more common names in roman history, the last somewhat more distinctive, although it tended to run in families.  in later times we find haterii named lucius, marcus, titus, and tiberius.  branches and cognomina none of the haterii of the republic are mentioned with a surname, but agrippa and antoninus are found in imperial times.  they do not seem to represent distinct branches of the family, as decimus haterius agrippa was the son of the senator quintus haterius; if his father also bore the cognomen, it is not found in surviving records.  quintus haterius antoninus was probably the son of agrippa.  valerius maximus, who wrote during the age of tiberius, relates an anecdote concerning a certain haterius rufus, but without sufficient information to guess when he lived.  in the second century, we find the surnames summus, nepos, and saturninus.  members   haterius or aterius was a jurist, probably in the time of cicero, who mentions him in one of his letters.  haterius, a victim of the proscriptions of the triumvirs in 43 bc.  he was betrayed by one of his slaves, who was rewarded with his freedom; but when the freedman insulted the dead man's sons, and outbid them for his estate, the triumvirs acceded to popular outrage, and reduced him to servility again.  quintus haterius, a rhetorician in the age of augustus and tiberius, known for his rapid, inventive, and sometimes reckless style, and "archaic" language hearkening back to the age of cicero.  he was consul suffectus in 5 bc, and a member of the roman senate, in which he wasted his talents in flattery of tiberius and his family.  sextus haterius q. f., a son of the orator.  seneca the elder describes a speech of his father's, in
which the elder haterius was reduced to tears when speaking of his son, giving his argument a great emotional appeal.  decimus haterius q. f. agrippa, a son of the orator, and neighbor of germanicus. agrippa was tribune of the plebs in ad 15, praetor in 17, and consul in 22.  he was described as a man of poor moral character, and ten years after his consulship he is said to have been plotting the downfall of various men.  quintus haterius (d. f. q. n.) antoninus, probably the son of decimus haterius agrippa, was consul in ad 53.  after dissipating his inheritance, he became dependent on nero for his support.  he may be the same quintus haterius described as a legacy-hunter by seneca, although haterius the senator might have been intended.  haterius rufus, an eques, who dreamed one night that he was slain by a retiarius.  the following day, while attending gladiatorial combat in the theatre at syracuse, he was killed by a clumsy gladiator.  lucius haterius, father of marcus haterius summus.  marcus haterius l. f. summus, a duumvir at iuvavum, who helped relieve the city's grain supply, and to whom a monument was dedicated by the people of his town, probably in the first half of the second century.  titus haterius nepos, prefect of egypt from ad 121 to 124.  titus haterius nepos, consul suffectus from april 134, succeeding the aging lucius julius ursus servianus. that the consul was a member of the arval brethren in 120 shows he is a separate person from the equestrian governor of egypt.  tiberius haterius saturninus, consul suffectus in ad 164, and possibly son of the consul of 134.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  marcus tullius cicero, epistulae ad familiares (letters to friends).  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  lucius annaeus seneca (seneca the elder), controversiae, suasoriae.  lucius annaeus seneca (seneca the younger), epistulae morales ad lucilium, de beneficiis.  publius cornelius tacitus,
annales.  gaius suetonius tranquillus, de vita caesarum (lives of the caesars, or the twelve caesars).  eusebius of caesarea, chronicon.  eusebius sophronius hieronymus (st. jerome) (trans.), epiphanii epistola ad pammachium adversus errorem joannem hierosolytitanum (epiphanius' letter to pammachius against the error of john of jerusalem).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  mary rothes margaret tyssen-amherst (lady amherst of hackney), a sketch of egyptian history from the earliest times to the present day, methuen & co., london (1904).  timothy venning, a chronology of the roman empire, bloomsbury publishing (2010).    roman gentes
ihor romanovych kohut (; born 7 march 1996) is a ukrainian professional football midfielder who plays for dnipro-1.  career kohut is a product of the fc dnipro youth sportive school system. his first trainers were ihor khomenko and yevhen kovalenko.  he made his debut for fc dnipro in the match against fc volyn lutsk on 24 july 2016 in the ukrainian premier league scoring a header off a cross to make the score 2-0. the game would eventually end 5-0.  career statistics  references  external links  1996 births living people sportspeople from dnipro ukrainian footballers fc dnipro players sc dnipro-1 players ukrainian premier league players ukrainian first league players ukrainian second league players  association football midfielders ukraine youth international footballers
lisa carducci, also li, shasha; li, sha; 李沙莎; 李莎 (born may 22, 1943) is a canadian writer of italian descent living in china.  the daughter of a father whose parents were immigrants from italy, she was born in montreal, quebec. she received a bed from the university of montreal in 1963. she has taught languages, theatre and history, first in montreal and, since 1991, in china.  in 1985, carducci published her first collection of poetry les heliotropes and a collection of short stories nouvelles en couleurs. in 1988, she received the prix san giuliano (milan) for l'ultima fede (the last faith, italian) and the prix anne de la vigne from the societe culturelle quebec-normandie. in 1990, carducci received the prix il trovatore (sicily) for vorrei and, in 1992, the prix citta di ragusa for amore di porcellana. in 1993, she received first prize of the grand prix litteraire de laval for une lettre. she received the trofeo mediterraneo 1998 from the academie internationale des micenei (calabria). in 2004, she received the prix de l'alteralite for pays inconnu / paese sconosciuto and the prix international de poesie s. domenichino (awarded for italian poetry written outside italy) for il domani. in 2009, she received le mot d'or de la traduction francophone for the translation with yan hansheng of le totem du loup from jiang rong's novel lang tuteng. in 2015, she received the special book award of china, awarded by the chinese government for foreigners studying chinese literature.  carducci has worked as a consultant for cctv and as a translator, columnist and editor for the beijing review. she also has contributed to the canadian italian-language weekly il cittadino canadese.  carducci speaks fluent english, french, italian, spanish and mandarin.  in 2005, she received her permanent residence card for china.  references  external links  carducci, item at athabasca university  1943 births living people writers from montreal canadian women poets canadian poets in french canadian women novelists canadian novelists in french canadian translators canadian people of italian descent canadian women non-fiction writers
columb the smith was an irish saint of the early middle ages and possibly of the same time period as st columba. he was commemorated on 7 june.  little is concretely known about his identity. it is possible that he is the same person as columb coilrigin mentioned in adomnan of iona's biography of st columba. in adomnan's account, columb is a blacksmith who lives in mide in ireland (modern-day county westmeath). he lived his life doing works of charity and all that he gained through his work, he used to help the poor. on the day that he died, columba, in iona, saw his death and told others that for his charity in life, his soul was then being carried up to heaven by the angels.  references     irish saints blacksmiths
the merchant shipping history institute exhibition is a museum in piraeus, athens, greece. the permanent exhibition houses ship models and nautical items from all eras of greek merchant shipping history, from ancient times to the present.  references   piraeus museums in athens maritime museums in greece
anita v. figueredo (august 24, 1916 - february 19, 2010) was an american surgeon and philanthropist, the first woman medical doctor from costa rica and the first woman surgeon to practice in san diego, california. she was posthumously inducted into the san diego women's hall of fame in 2015.  early life and education figueredo was born in costa rica, the daughter of roberto figueredo, a well-known cuban-born soccer player. she was raised by her mother, sarita villegas, in spanish harlem after they immigrated in 1921. she enrolled at manhattanville college of the sacred heart at age 15 with a full scholarship, and graduated in 1936. she was one of four women admitted to long island medical college in her year.    anita figueredo was one of the first two women surgical residents at memorial hospital for cancer in new york, during world war ii when many male medical students were serving in the military. she was the first woman from costa rica to earn a medical degree.  career while she was a young doctor on staff at memorial in new york, figueredo was one of the pan-american women delegates to formulate a declaration of human rights for the paris treaty process in 1946. figueredo presented the group's resolutions for approval, which was unanimous.  figueredo spent most of her career as a surgical oncologist at scripps memorial hospital in southern california. she was the first woman surgeon in san diego. she was known for standing on a stool to perform surgery, as she was under five feet in height.  as a philanthropist, figueredo co-founded friends of the poor in 1982, a charity to bring food, clothing and medical care to underserved places, initially in baja california; the organization later maintained projects on three continents.  in the 1950s she began a long and close association with mother teresa. she was also a founding board member of the san diego college for women, and a backer of the san diego women's bank.  in 1954, figueredo was honored by pope pius xii with a papal medal, the pro ecclesia et pontifice, for her service work. figueredo was a trustee of the la jolla town council from 1956 to 1968. in 2009 she won scripps memorial hospital's lifetime achievement award.  a biography of figueredo, written by her oldest daughter sarita eastman, was published in 2009.  personal life anita figueredo married fellow doctor william j. doyle in 1942. they were married 58 years
until she was widowed in 1999. they had nine children, six of whom survived her.  anita figueredo died in 2010, at age 93, at home in la jolla, california, after a cerebral hemorrhage. she was posthumously inducted into the san diego women's hall of fame in 2015.  references  external links friends of the poor us, official website. the office of war information (1944), "the personal and professional life of dr. anita figueredo, a woman surgeon at st. elizabeth's hospital" (a set of nine photographs)  1916 births 2010 deaths american surgeons manhattanville college alumni people from la jolla, san diego women surgeons people from east harlem costa rican emigrants to the united states
mathias emilio pettersen (born 3 april 2000) is a norwegian professional ice hockey player currently under contract with the calgary flames of the national hockey league (nhl). he was selected by the flames in the 2018 nhl entry draft and previously played collegiate hockey with the university of denver of the national collegiate hockey conference (nchc) and junior for the omaha lancers and muskegon lumberjacks of the united states hockey league (ushl). pettersen's early career was met with great expectations. supporters and newspapers started covering his career when he was 6 years old.  playing career  pettersen first played minor hockey for manglerud star and lørenskog ik, often at age levels several years older than his own. he was invited to move to sweden at age 13 and join the youth program of farjestad bk, but instead opted to move to the united states in 2013. he joined south kent school of the united states premier hockey league in 2014. he spent two season with south kent, scoring 41 points in 28 games the first season, and 65 points in 40 games the second.   he signed a tender with omaha lancers of the united states hockey league on 4 january 2016. after one season with omaha, where he recorded 27 points in 57 games, pettersen was traded to the muskegon lumberjacks. he has committed to joining the university of denver in 2018.  following his sophomore season, pettersen concluded his collegiate career by signing a three-year, entry-level contact with the calgary flames on 27 april 2020.  international play pettersen's first international ice hockey federation (iihf) tournament was the 2016 iihf world u18 championship division i. he appeared in 5 games for norway and recorded five points. he returned for the 2017 iihf world u18 championship division i, and led the tournament in scoring with 12 points in 5 games.  on 5 may 2021, the norwegian ice hockey association announced that pettersen would be added to the roster of team norway for the upcoming 2021 iihf world championship.  personal life pettersen's father, flemming pettersen, is a former ice hockey player who played for manglerud star and spektrum flyers in the norwegian league.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  references  external links    2000 births living people calgary flames draft picks ice hockey players at the 2016 winter youth olympics denver pioneers men's ice hockey players norwegian ice hockey centres omaha lancers players south kent school alumni sportspeople from oslo stockton heat players muskegon lumberjacks players
patrick ching  (born  1963) is a hawaiian conservationist and wildlife artist, ornithological illustrator, and author of children's books.  early life ching was born in oahu. he received his alma mater from the otis college of art and design where he trained to be an artist. in 1984 he moved to kauai in order to do volunteer for the united states fish and wildlife service as a wildlife ranger. this took him to remote areas of the hawaiian islands where he worked a great deal with sharks, seals, turtles and other marine animals. he then became a ranger at the kilauea point national wildlife refuge.  as a painter a painter since age 16, ching gained international recognition because of his painting's remarkable likeness to the photographs he took while in the field. his most notable works of art can be seen on hawaii's first wildlife conservation stamp featuring the hawaiian state bird the nene, a species of goose endemic to the hawaiian islands. and the hawaiian telcom phone book cover featuring haley's comet.  in 2008, ching painted the hundred foot mural for the salt lake public library. which was featured in national magazines including wildlife art news, audubon, and birders' world.  works by ching are included in the collections of hawaii's bishop museum and the smithsonian museum in new york.  as an author ching has written around twenty books, most of which are about wildlife and nature. in 1998 ching started writing children's books.  art gallery in 1996, patrick opened the naturally hawaiian gallery from the ruins of an old gas station in the heart of waimanalo, and in 2008, patrick ching art gallery opened in princeville, kauaʻi.  publications ching has written around twenty books, among them are: honu and hina: a story of coexistence how fo surf bettah (2010) the tale of rabbit island (2001) sea turtles of hawaiʻi (2001) the story of hina (1998) endangered animals of hawaiʻi (1995) the hawaiian monk seal (1994) the beautiful birds of hawaii (1992) native animals of hawaiʻi (1988) exotic animals in hawaiʻi  see also  list of artists who painted hawaii and its people  references  external links official website moanalua memories at salt lake-moanalua public library  1960s births living people hawaii artists people from oahu otis college of art and design alumni american illustrators american conservationists wildlife artists
kokalpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of kokalpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, kokalpur has total number of 258 houses and population of 1,377 of which include 722 males and 655 females. literacy rate of kokalpur is 70.44%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 115 which is  8.35% of total population of kokalpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 797, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
louis-claude cheron de la bruyere (28 october 1758, paris - 13 november 1807, poitiers aged 49) was a french politician, playwright and translator.  works  theatre   caton d'utique, tragedy in 3 acts and in verse, imitated from addison (1789) l'homme a sentimens, ou le tartuffe de mœurs, comedy in 5 acts and in verse, partly imitated from the school for scandal by sheridan, paris, french comedians of the comedie italienne, 10 march 1789. reworked and abridged  under the title valsain et florville (1803). translations richard lovell edgeworth and maria edgeworth: lecons de l'enfance (5 volumes, 1803) elizabeth hamilton: lettres sur les principes elementaires d'education (2 volumes, 1804) henry fielding: tom jones, or histoire d'un enfant trouve (6 volumes, 1804)  sources   henri mataigne, histoire d'auvers sur oise.  external links   louis-claude cheron de la bruyere on data.bnf.fr  members of the legislative assembly (france) 18th-century french dramatists and playwrights 19th-century french dramatists and playwrights english-french translators writers from paris 1758 births 1807 deaths 19th-century french translators 18th-century french translators
the hungarian canoe federation (, mkksz) is the governing body of canoe in hungary. it organizes the hungarian representation at international competitions and the hungarian national championships.  the federation was formed on july 30 1941 in budapest. it became a member of the international canoe federation and of the european canoe association.  international competitions in hungary world championships: 1998 icf canoe sprint world championships - szeged, 3-6 september 2006 icf canoe sprint world championships - szeged, 17-20 august 2011 icf canoe sprint world championships - szeged, 17-21 august 2019 icf canoe sprint world championships - szeged,   european championships: 2002 canoe sprint european championships - szeged, 18-21 july  international achievements  olympic games  world championships  european championships  notable kayakers, canoers  canoe (c) men's  women's  kayak (k) men's  women's  presidents  current sponsorships a-hid - official sponsor granit bank - official sponsor mercedes-benz - official sponsor nelo - official sponsor plastex - official sponsor adidas - official sponsor mtva - official sponsor hungaroplakat - official sponsor nemzeti sport - official sponsor radio88 - official sponsor inforadio - official sponsor over magazin - official sponsor tara strong - big fan  external links magyar kajak-kenu szovetseg (official website)   national members of the european canoe association canoe organizations canoeing 1941 establishments in hungary
wiwili may refer to:   wiwili de jinotega, nicaragua  wiwili de nueva segovia, nicaragua
christian ignacio ramirez sanchez (born 14 may 1993 in guanajuato, mexico) is a mexican professional footballer who currently plays for inter playa del carmen. he made his professional debut with santos laguna during a copa mx victory over correcaminos uat on 19 august 2014.  references  1993 births living people mexican footballers association football defenders santos laguna footballers tampico madero f.c. footballers inter playa del carmen players ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from guanajuato people from irapuato
is a former japanese professional baseball pitcher who played for the chunichi dragons in japan's nippon professional baseball. he has been a pitching coach for the dragons since 2003.  kondo had a shortened career due to a consistent arm injury that forced him into early retirement.  on 8 august 1987, kondo became the first player in japanese baseball history to throw a no-hitter on debut in a 6-0 victory over the yomiuri giants.  he is the father of former dragons outfielder, hiroki kondo.  see also  bumpus jones  list of nippon professional baseball no-hitters  external links  dragons.jp  references  1968 births living people baseball people from aichi prefecture japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball pitchers chunichi dragons players japanese baseball coaches nippon professional baseball coaches
karimu hill-harvey is a retired municipal court judge serving east orange, new jersey, irvington, new jersey and newark, new jersey. she has been an attorney in practice for over 24 years. karimu hill-harvey was the first ever african-american woman to be listed in the "top 20 verdicts and settlements" in the new jersey law journal for obtaining a $3.25 million settlement in grant v. laresca, et al. the case led to the creation of a new law, as did her work on simmons-dixon v. ford motor corporation, and several other cases.  career a graduate of seton hall university school of law in 1983, karimu hill-harvey served as an attorney in law for twenty-four years. for more than fifteen years she served as senior associate counsel for the housing authority of the city of newark, new jersey. she also spent her time working as an arbitrator for the new york stock exchange, the american arbitration association and finra.  hill-harvey is admitted to the u.s. supreme court bar, the united states court of appeals for the third circuit bar, the united states district court for the district of new jersey and the new jersey state bar association. in 2000, she completed the ll.m trial advocacy program at temple university.  hill-harvey is known in new jersey for her public work as a community organizer.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people african-american judges african-american lawyers new jersey lawyers seton hall university school of law alumni 21st-century african-american people
county of lytton may refer to:  county of lytton, queensland  county of lytton (south australia)
laurent mourguet (3 march 1769 - 30 december 1844) was a french puppeteer, creator of the famous puppet guignol.  see also   guignol  external links   laurent mourguet on wikisource  societe des amis de guignol  portail des arts de la marionnette (pam)  jean guy mourguet presente guignol. institut national de l'audiovisuel  jean-guy mourguet raconte guignol au musee des marionnettes du monde.  french puppeteers entertainers from lyon 1769 births 1844 deaths
kahan tum chalay gaye (previously titled meri har nazar teri muntazir) is a pakistani drama serial that first aired on geo entertainment on 10 february 2016. it is produced by babar javed and asif raza. it currently airs every sunday 7pm  only on geo entertainment, after being moved from the wed&thurs 10pm-11pm slot. the show went off air unfinished after 9-10 episodes (early march) due to military censor issues but then resumed after 2 months, in may 2016, with a name change.  cast  saman ansari muhammad ali firdous jamal parveen akbar ali hassan faisal qazi hira shaikh faria hassan  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  external links  a&b entertainment 2016 pakistani television series debuts geo tv original programming pakistani drama television series 2016 pakistani television series endings urdu-language television shows
marillier is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   dougie marillier (born 1978), zimbabwean cricketer  garance marillier (born 1998), french actress  juliet marillier (born 1948), new zealand-born writer of fantasy  william marillier (1832-1896), english cricketer  see also  marillier shot, a shot in cricket
the 1967-68 oakland oaks season was the first and season of the franchise in the american basketball association (aba). the oaks played in the first ever game of the aba on october 13, 1967, beating the anaheim amigos 134-129. rick barry attempted to defect over to the oaks, due to being angered by san francisco warriors management's failure to pay him certain incentive awards he felt he was due. however the team sued to stop him from playing, which meant that he would sit out the season rather than play for the warriors, subsequently doing radio broadcasts for the oaks. the next season, barry was allowed to play for the oaks.  the team struggled, finishing dead last in the west by 3 games, with the worst record in the aba. the oaks averaged 110.8 points a game (which was 4th best in the league), but gave up an average of 117.4 points, the worst in the league. according to the elo rating system, the oaks had the second-worst performance of any professional basketball team ever in a major league, of 1485 such team-seasons, with only the 1946-47 pittsburgh ironmen having a worse year.  roster  14 andrew anderson - point guard  44 wesley bialosuknia - shooting guard  30 gary bradds - power forward  55 mike dabich - center  11 ron franz - small forward  42/55 jim hadnot - center  33 ira harge - center  31 steve jones - shooting guard  32 david lee - small forward  12 barry leibowitz - point guard  32 wayne molis - center  40 mel peterson - small forward  33 willie porter - power forward  15 al salvadori - forward  34 levern tart - shooting guard  30 gene wiley - center  final standings  western division  record vs. opponents  awards and honors 1968 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 9, 1968)  levern tart  references  external links  https://web.archive.org/web/20070927223307/http://www.remembertheaba.com/oakland-oaks.html oakland oaks  oakland oaks oakland oaks, 1967-68 oakland oaks, 1967-68 basketball in california
leonard essau korir (born december 10, 1986) is a kenyan-born american long-distance runner who competes over distances from 5000 meters to the marathon. he was twice ncaa champion, winning an indoor 5000 m title and outdoor 10,000 meters title in 2011 for the iona gaels. he gained united states citizenship and began competing for his adoptive nation in 2016.  career  early life korir attended tambach teachers training college and it was only there, at the age of twenty, that his skill for running was identified. strong performances by the iten-based athlete led him to a meeting with irish coach colm o'connell.  o'connell advised him to try for an athletic scholarship at an american university and supported korir's running efforts. he opted to study political science at iona college, an institution he recognised as a fellow kenyan, richard kiplagat, had attended there.  college despite his running pedigree, korir did not excel athletically in his first year for the iona gaels, finishing fifth at the metro atlantic athletic conference (maac) cross country, though he did reach the 10,000 meters podium in third at the 2010 maac outdoor track championships.  his improvement was marked in his second year there: he won the maac cross country title, then took fourth at the ncaa men's division i cross country championship after winning the regional title. in the 2011 indoor season he won the mile run and distance medley relay maac titles for iona and set a 5000 meters school record of 13:26.01 minutes to win at the ncaa men's division i indoor track and field championships. he won his second collegiate title at the ncaa men's division i outdoor track and field championships that year, topping the field over 10,000 m as well as coming third in the 5000 m. he was runner-up at the 2011 ncaa cross country championships behind another kenyan, lawi lalang. in his final year he was a finalist at the 2012 ncaa indoor championships but didn't make the top three.  professional after completing his studies at iona he focused more on road running. he was runner-up at the healthy kidney 10k in 2012 and made his half marathon debut with 61:19 minutes for fourth at the 2013 new york city half marathon. he won the bix 7 road race that same year, but was down the order at the delhi half marathon in ninth. he regularly ran in lower level american road races, with highlights including third at the 2014 boston half marathon.  in 2015 a
win at the new york half marathon in 61:06 minutes established him among the best on the american circuit, as he edged training partner stephen sambu by one second. he was third at the baa 10k and won the bix 7 road race for the second time. he moved back to the track in the 2016 season, achieving a win at the stanford invitational with a time of 27:58.65 minutes. in september 2015 korir joined the u.s. army as a driver.  he gained eligibility to represent the united states in may 2016. in his debut at national level he placed in the top three at the 2016 united states olympic trials behind galen rupp and shadrack kipchirchir (another former kenyan). this achievement qualified him to place on the american olympic team for the 2016 summer olympics.  personal records track 1500-meter run - 3:43.65 (2011) mile run - 4:03.57 (2012) 3000-meter run - 7:51.40 (2011) two miles - 8:22.44 (2013) 5000-meter run - 13:15.45 (2013) 10,000-meter run - 27:20.18 (2017) road 10 miles - 46:35 (2016) half marathon - 59:52 (new delhi, 2017) marathon -  2:07:56 (amsterdam, 2019)  all information from world athletics.  national titles ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships 10,000 m: 2011 ncaa division i indoor track and field championships 5000 m: 2011  references  external links  living people 1986 births people from elgeyo-marakwet county kenyan male long-distance runners american male long-distance runners iona gaels men's track and field athletes kenyan emigrants to the united states athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states world athletics championships athletes for the united states iona gaels men's cross country runners
vladimir aleksandrovich plotnikov (; born 3 april 1986) is a kazakhstani professional footballer who plays for fc ordabasy and the kazakhstan national football team.  career  club plotnikov started his club career in fc taraz in 2006. prior to joining fc kairat in january 2015, plotnikov played for fc taraz, fc kairat, fc alma-ata, fc atyrau and fc zhetysu. on 24 november 2017, kairat announced that plotnikov had extended his contract with the club until the end of 2020.  on 11 february 2020, fc ordabasy announced the signing of plotnikov from fc kairat.  international on 29 march 2016, plotnikov debuted for kazakhstan in a friendly match against georgia.  career statistics  club  international  statistics accurate as of match played 29 march 2016  references  external links    1986 births living people kazakhstani footballers kazakhstan international footballers kazakhstan premier league players fc taraz players fc atyrau players fc zhetysu players fc kairat players association football goalkeepers
stuart williams (born 19 september 1967) is a new zealand cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people new zealand male cyclists olympic cyclists of new zealand cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics cyclists from auckland commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games gold medallists for new zealand cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
geelong was a ship which owned by the blue anchor line, and, after 1910, by p&o.  she was constructed in 1904 by barclay, curle and co. ltd., at glasgow, scotland.  when originally constructed, she had accommodation for 120 saloon and 200 third-class passengers, and also carried cargo. her gross register tonnage was 7700 (or 7,951) tons, and she was 450 feet (137 meters) long, powered by triple-expansion steam engines, and capable of 14 knots, with an average cruise speed of 12 knots.  in august 1909, geelong participated in a search for her sister ship waratah, which had disappeared without trace close to the south african coast, and was thought to be disabled and drifting.  during world war i, the government of australia leased geelong for use as a troopship to transport the australian imperial force to the middle east and europe. designated hmat a2 geelong, the ship departed on her first voyage as a troopship on 22 september 1914, carrying 440 soldiers from melbourne, australia, consisting of the australian army′s 3rd field artillery brigade, the 3rd field company engineers, and some members of the 12th infantry battalion. she proceeded to hobart, australia, where she picked up another 912 soldiers, consisting of the 12th infantry battalion and the 3rd light horse regiment. she left hobart, bound for egypt, on 20 october 1914.  her second outbound trooping voyage left adelaide, australia, on 31 may 1915, transporting 1,264 soldiers of the 27th infantry battalion and the 7th field ambulance unit. she also picked up another 252 soldiers, who were reinforcements for various other units, from fremantle, australia, on 7 june 1915.  her final departure from australia was on 18 november 1915, carrying 1,362 soldiers, including the 32nd infantry battalion and some reinforcements for other units. shortly after disembarking the men in egypt, geelong sank after a collision with , an admiralty store ship, in the mediterranean sea near alexandria, egypt, on 1 january 1916. there was no loss of life.  references   1904 ships ships built on the river clyde maritime incidents in 1916 ships sunk in collisions world war i shipwrecks in the mediterranean sea ships sunk with no fatalities
vitosha metro station () is a station on the sofia metro in bulgaria, named after vitosha mountain. it opened on 20 july 2016.  interchange with other public transport  tramway service: 10  bus service: 64, 65, 66, 83, 88, 93, 98, 120, 122  location the station is located in hladilnika district, just next to paradise center, the largest shopping mall in bulgaria, to which it is connected by an underpass. hladilnika bus station, located nearby, serves several suburban bus lines to vitosha mountain.  architecture the interest of mountaineers in the station determines its design, which is entirely inspired by the mountain and creates the feeling of a celebration of nature. travelers on the platform fall in minutes among the hills of the mountain through the three-dimensional effect achieved by combining natural stone in warm gray and granite slabs in two shades of green - bolder and brighter for close-ups and darker and muted for distant. colorful meadows in the pavement are formed with basalt flower mosaic.  the materials of the station are a combination of natural and artificial stone. the floors of the two lobbies and the platform are made of colored granite and granitogres. the walls are a combination of granite, granitogres and mineral plaster. the ceiling is made of "etalbond" composite material and colored mineral plaster. the stairs are made entirely of granite steps and the railings are made of stainless steel. impressive lighting fixtures adorn the platform.  gallery  references  external links   sofia metropolitan  more info in bulgarian  sofiametro@urbanrail  sofia urban mobility center  sofia metropolitan  sofia metro stations railway stations opened in 2016 2016 establishments in bulgaria
drigg and carleton is a civil parish located in the borough of copeland, cumbria, england.  it contains eight listed buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  all the listed buildings are designated at grade ii, the lowest of the three grades, which is applied to "buildings of national importance and special interest".  the parish contains the villages of drigg and holmrook and the surrounding countryside.  all the listed buildings are houses or farmhouses and associated structures.   buildings  references  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria
darius mutamba is a conceptual visual artist from zimbabwe.  darius is a journalist who has worked as a photojournalist for local news papers daily news, daily news on sunday, and the weekend post. he also works as a production assistant for the financial gazette.  controversy in the month of june 2016 mutamba curated a controversial photography exhibition in harare entitled object of desire which focused on the nude human form. in support of his work he comments that nudity expresses "our common and universal element as humans." in 2014 his work silent voices, a collection of 15 black and white photographs on canvas depicting zimbabwean children, was exhibited at the harare international festival of the arts.  references  external links darius mutamba at talenthouse  zimbabwean photographers zimbabwean artists 1991 births living people
highway of the hauts plateaux is a highway of 1020 km under construction in algeria.  project  this structuring motorway project is part of the scheme and motorway road master 2005 / 2025 in order to open up and link the cities in the highland areas of the interior, in parallel to the east-west highway.  it runs through the wilayas of tlemcen on the border with morocco, saida, tiaret, medea, m'sila, batna, oum el bouaghi, khenchela and tebessa on the border with tunisia.  the project is divided into three lots:    west lot : going to aricha in tiaret,  through saida about 305 km   lot centre : ranging from tiaret to batna, through boughezoul and m'sila about 495 km   east lot : ranging from batna to tebessa, through khenchela 220 km  construction  the lot of construction "east" were launched on 30 october 2014 near tazoult ( wilaya of batna ) by the minister of public works abdelkader kadi. this is a first section of 102 km through the municipalities of batna, tazoult, timgad, taouzient, kais, el hamma and khenchela, under the direction of algerian companies headed by cosider group for a period of 18 months.  references  highways in algeria
the prix robert-cliche is a literary prize created in 1979 to honour robert cliche, a quebec lawyer, judge and politician. the prize is awarded annually for an original french language work by a canadian author who has not previously published a novel. the manuscript must contain at least 30,000 words.  winners  1979 - gaetan brulotte, l'emprise 1980 - madeleine monette, le double suspect 1981 - robert lalonde, la belle epouvante 1982 - chrystine brouillet, chere voisine 1983 - louise leblanc, 37 1/2 aa 1984 - danielle dube, les olives noires 1985 - rachel fontaine, black magic 1986 - jean-robert sansfacon, loft story 1987 - louise doyon, les heritiers 1988 - raymond beaudet, passeport pour la liberte 1989 - jean-alain tremblay, la nuit des perseides 1990 - jean fontaine, les lievres de saint-giron 1991 - andre girard, deux semaines en septembre 1992 - gabrielle gourdeau, maria chapdelaine ou le paradis retrouve 1993 - jacques desautels, le quatrieme roi mage 1994 - robert gagnon, la these 1995 - not awarded 1996 - danielle roy, un cœur farouche 1997 - raymonde lamothe, l'ange tatoue 1998 - michel desautels, smiley 1999 - guy moreau, l'amour mallarme 2000 - chantal gevrey, immobile au centre de la danse 2001 - arlette fortin, c'est la faute au bonheur 2002 - mylene gilbert-dumas, les dames de beauchene 2003 - gilles jobidon, la route des petits matins 2004 - reine-aimee cote, les bruits 2005 - roxanne bouchard, whisky et paraboles 2006 - francois x cote, slash 2007 - stephane achille, balade en train assis sur les genoux du dictateur 2008 - danielle trussart, le train pour samarcande 2009 - olivia tapiero, les murs 2010 - simon lambert, la chambre 2011 - ryad assani-razaki,  la main d'iman 2012 - judy quinn, hunter s'est laisse couler 2013 - philippe arseneault, zora. un conte cruel 2014 - martin clavet, ma belle blessure 2015 - not awarded 2016 - antoine charbonneau-demers, coco 2017 - philippe meilleur, maitre glockenspiel 2018 - alice guericolas-g
agne, saint-jambe 2019 - alexandre michaud, francis 2020 - not awarded 2021 - paul serge forest, tout est ori  references  external links    first book awards canadian fiction awards awards established in 1979 quebec awards
law of the lawless may refer to:  law of the lawless, a 1923 american silent drama film  law of the lawless (1963 film), a 1963 american film brigada a.k.a. law of the lawless, a 2002 russian tv miniseries
kei nishikori was the defending champion, but chose not to participate this year. second-seeded gael monfils won the title, defeating ivo karlovic in the final: 5-7, 7-6(8-6), 6-4.  seeds all seeds receive a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  bottom half  section 3  section 4  qualifying  seeds the top four seeds received a bye into the qualifying competition.  qualifiers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  references main draw qualifying draw  citi open - men's singles 2016 men's singles
james patrick quirk (november 27, 1926 - june 4, 2020) was a caltech professor of economics.   quirk obtained a degree in civil engineering from marquette university in 1944, and then a bba, ma (econ) and ph.d. (economics) from the university of minnesota. between 1944 and 1946 he served in the u.s. navy. he taught at st. mary's university, san antonio, texas (1949-1951), then worked as an economist for the us government (bureau of the census, washington, d.c., 1951-52, u. s. dept. of commerce 1952-53. after working as an economist for pillsbury co. and for northwestern bell, both in minneapolis, he taught at purdue university 1958-1965. in 1966 he became professor of economics at the university of kansas. between 1971 and 1987 he was professor of economics at caltech, in addition to being a visiting professor at the university of wyoming, montana state university and university of mississippi. he continued to teach part-time after retirement, and was a consultant, at various times to the california hospital association, the world hockey association, the alan cranston senatorial campaign, the u. s. department of justice, the jet propulsion laboratory and others.  he also had a love for jazz and played the cornet with several different jazz bands, cornet player with salty dogs jazz band, "on the river", cuca records, 1967 and leader and cornet player, dungeness traditional jazz band, sequim, washington, 2002-2013.  books he was the author of several books: quirk, james p., study guide, principles of economics i, general extension division, university of minnesota, 1957. quirk, james p., and rubin saposnik. introduction to general equilibrium theory and welfare economics, mcgraw hill economics handbook series, 1969; japanese translation, 1972, spanish translation, 1972; french translation, 1980. quirk, james p., and arvid zarley, papers in quantitative economics, university of kansas press, 1969;  paper back edition, 1970. quirk, james p., intermediate microeconomics, science research associates/macmillan; first edition, 1976; spanish translation 1979; chinese translation, 1980; second edition, 1982; third edition, 1987; japanese translation, 1989. quirk, james p., mathematical notes to intermediate microeconomics; science research associates; paper back, 1976. quirk, james p., coal models and their uses in government planning; (katsuaki terasawa and david
whipple, editors), praeger press, 1980. quirk, james p., essays in contemporary fields in economics, (george horwich, editor), purdue university press, 1981. quirk, james p., and duncan mcdougall, economics, science research associates, 1981. quirk, james p., minnesota football: the golden years, 1932-1941, privately printed, 1984. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, paydirt: the business of pro team sports; princeton university press, 1993. according to worldcat, the book is in 961  libraries, and was the runner-up for the  1993  choice magazine outstanding reference/academic book award. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, hardball, princeton university press, 1999.  quirk, james p., and douglas hale, george lady, and john maybee, nonparametric comparative statics and stability, princeton university press, 1999. quirk, james p., the ultimate guide to college football, university of illinois press, 2003. quirk, james p., and quentin quirk, college football game scores, 1869-2006, cd rom; james and quentin quirk publishers.  academic papers he is the author of several papers: according to google scholar, his most cited article, jp quirk, r saposnik "admissibility and measurable utility functions" the review of economic studies 29.2 (1962): 140-146.,   has received 529 citations.  quirk, james p., "preliminary mathematic model for business strategy game", pillsbury mills, inc., 1957 letter to joseph bradley pillsbury about the game developed, "a description of the game model"  experimental design and mathematical research, pillsbury mills, inc., september, 29, 1958. letter from dr. britt school of business northwestern university to pillsbury, corp. about publishing, "mathematical models of market simulation: an example" in journal of marketing, 1959.  quirk, james p., and thomas f. dernburg, " per capita output and technological progress", institute for quantitative research in economics and management, issue paper no. 1, 1960.  quirk, james p., "summary:default risk and the loan market", journal of finance, vol. 15, no. 4, 1960. quirk, james p., "the capital structure of firms and the risk of failure", international economic review, vol. 2, no. 2, may, 1961. quirk, james p., and rubin saposnik, "admissibility and measurable utility functions
", review of economic studies, vol. 31, no. 1, 1962. quirk, james p., book review: harry markowitz, portfolio selection, journal of political economy, vol. 70, no. 2, 1963. quirk, james p., and james mcrandle, "summary: an interpretation of the german risk fleet", econometrica, vol. 3, no. 2, 1963. quirk, james p., and richard ruppert,  "qualitative economics and the stability of equilibrium", review of economic studies, vol. 34, no. 3, 1965. quirk, james p., book review: david huang, "introduction to the use of mathematics in economic analysis", american statistical association journal, 387-388, 1965. quirk, james p., and james mcrandle,  "an interpretation of the german risk fleet", in papers in economic history (lance davis and j. r.t. hughes, editors), 1966. quirk, james p., lowell bassett, and hamid habibagahi, "qualitative economics and morishima matrices", ''econometrica, vol. 35, no. 2, april, 1965. quirk, james p., and rubin saposnik, "homogeneous production functions and convexity of the production possibility set", metroeconomica, vol. 18, no. 3, 1966. quirk, james p., and lowell bassett and john maybee, "qualitative economics and the scope of the correspondence principle", econometrica, vol. 36, no. 3-4, july-october, 1968. quirk, james p., "the correspondence principle: a macroeconomic application", international economic review, vol. 9, no. 3, october, 1968. quirk, james p.,  and richard ruppert, "maximization and the qualitative calculus", in papers in quantitative economics (james quirk and arvid zarley, editors), university of kansas press, 1968. quirk, james p., and arvid zarley, "policies to attain external and internal balance: a reappraisal", in papers in quantitative economics (james quirk and arvid zarley, editors), university of kansas press, 1968. quirk, james p., book review: robert kuenne, microeconomic theory of the market mechanism: a general equilibrium approach, in the journal of business, vol. 41, no. 3, 1968. quirk, james p., and john maybee, "qualitative problems in matrix theory", siam review, vol. 11, no.
21, 1969. quirk, james p., "comparative statics under walras' law: the case of strong dependence", review of economic studies, vol. 38, no. 1, 1969. quirk, james p., and vernon smith), "dynamic economic models of fishing", in h.r. mcmillan lectures in commercial fishing, university of british columbia press, 1970. quirk, james p., "complementarity and the stability of the competitive equilibrium", american economic review, vol. 60, no. 2, june, 1970. quirk, james p., "competitive equilibrium: a qualitative analysis" in risk programming and economic theory (john chipman, editor), springer-verlag, 1970. quirk, james p., "the hospital as an economic institution", 1970. quirk, james p., "economics 203- growth theory", 1970. quirk, james p., and mohamed el hodiri, "an economic model of a professional sports league", journal of political economy, vol. 79, no. 6, november-december 1971. quirk, james p., book review: trout rader, theory of general economic equilibrium, american economic review, 1973. quirk, james p., "an analysis of team movements in professional sports", journal of law and contemporary problems, vol. 38, no. 1, 1973-74. quirk, james p., and hamid habibagahi, "hicksian stability and walras' law", review of economic studies, vol. 40, no. 2, 1973. quirk, james p., "employee fringe benefits- faculty caltech", california institute of technology, june 5, 1973. quirk, james p., "statement: the measure of a value asset in competitive market",  paper used to testify in court for seattle basketball team, 1973. quirk, james p., and mohamed el hodiri, "the economic theory of a professional sports league", in government and the sports business (roger noll, editor), brookings, 1974. quirk, james p., and david montgomery, "the role of mathematics in economic theory", siam news, vol. 7, no. 6, 1974. quirk, james p., book review: michio morishima, theory of demand, in journal of economic literature, 97-98, 1974. quirk, james p., "a class of generalized metzlerian matrices", in trade, stability and macroeconomics, horwich and paul samuelson, editors, new york and london: academic press, 1974. quirk, james p., and w.
david montgomery, "factor bias and innovations: a microeconomic approach",  working paper 38 has been published in government policies and technological innovation, national technical information service. national science foundation, washington, d.c. 20550. vol. iii, state-of-the-art surveys, pb244573. march 1974. quirk, james p., and mohamed el-hodiri, "on comparative dynamics", nov 1974. quirk, james p., and w. david montgomery, "the market for innovations", social science working paper number 60, california institute of technology, october 1974. quirk, james p., and mohamed el hordiri, "stadium capacities and attendance in professional sports", in management  science and its applications (shaul ladany, editor), north holland, 1975. quirk, james p., and lance davis), "tax writeoffs and the value of sports teams", in management science and its applications  (shaul ladany, editor), north holland, 1975. quirk, james p., " from earlier work by sonnenschein, debreu, and others", 1975. quirk, james p., and lance davis, "the ownership and valuation of professional sports franchise", april 1975. quirk, james p., and david montgomery, "rate of return regulation and factor bias in innovations", 1976. quirk, james p., and stuart burness, "optimal water storage policy with applications to the colorado river", paper presented at aea meeting new york, dec 1977. quirk, james p., and stuart burness, "colorado river project: phase i: water rights and allocations", dec 1977. quirk, james p.,  "water policy and water pricing in reclamation projects: the issue of subsides", 1977. quirk, james p., manuscript review "some results in comparative statics", 1977. quirk, james p., comments on book, "open access and extinction", 1977. quirk, james p., and katsuaki teraswawa,  "review of the nuclear regulation process", jpl report to the california energy commission, 1977. quirk, james p., and david montgomery, "cost escalation in nuclear power", in perspectives in energy, (l. ruedisile and m. firebaugh, editors), oxford university press, 1978. quirk, james p., "the simple economics of water", engineering and science, october 1978. quirk, james p., and  roger g. noll, and joel a. balbien, "economic policy of boxing, wrestling
, and karate: a data management system for california state athletic commission" 1978. quirk, james p., review paper terry anderson- economic historian, montana state university, july 26, 1978. quirk, james p., review of report on "venture capital investment",  national science foundation study by dr willard carleton, dec 6, 1978. quirk, james p., and h stuart burness, "capital gains and the economic theory of corporate finance", california institute of technology, social science working paper 232, september, 1978. quirk, james p., and h. stuart burness, "appropriative water rights and the efficient allocation of resources", american economic review, vol. 69, no. 1, march, 1979. quirk, james p., "comments on marine economics", in marine sciences and ocean policy seminar, uc santa barbara, 1979. quirk, james p., "the athlete's bill of rights", in 1979 proceedings, smart, university of massachusetts, 1979. quirk, james p., "some economic aspects of water problems in the west", paper presented at eql conference water problems in west, may 1979. quirk, james p., and h. stuart burness, "water law, water transfers, and economic efficiency: the colorado river", journal of law and economics, vol. 23, no. 1,  1980. quirk, james p., david montgomery, and h. stuart burness, "capital contracting and the regulated firm", american economic review, vol. 70, no. 3, june 1980. quirk, james p., david montgomery, and h. stuart burness, "the turnkey era in nuclear power", land economics, vol. 56, no. 2, 1980. quirk, james p., "the reserve clause: recent developments", in current topics in professional sports  (m. jones, editor), university of new hampshire press, 1980. quirk, james p., and h. stuart burness, "economic aspects of appropriative water rights", journal of environmental economics and management, vol. 7, no. 2, 1980. quirk, james p., "worked example: stocomo with random end points", jet propulsion lavatory, 1980.  quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "divergent expectations, r & d expenditures and technical progress", jet propulsion lavatory, 1980. quirk, james p., "bayes rule updating in stocmo", jet propulsion lavatory, 1980. quirk, james p., "a discrete version of a probabilistic
model of cocomo: stocomo", jet propulsion lavatory, 1980. quirk, james p., "bayesian stocomo: updating of software cost estimates in a probabilistic framework", jet propulsion lavatory, 1980. quirk, james p., "comments on a demand oriented model of software cost estimation",  jet propulsion lavatory and department of energy, 1980. quirk, james p., "water projects in central valley-preliminary", june 1980. quirk, james p., "the social rate of discount-a literature review", rand corp., 1980. quirk, james p., and h stuart burness, ronald cummings, "ex ante optimality and spot market economies", california institute of technology, social science working paper 365, december 1980.  quirk, james p., and h stuart burness, "the theory of the dam: an application to the colorado river", in essays in contemporary fields in economics  (george horwich and james quirk, editors), purdue university press, 1981. quirk, james p., "qualitative stability of matrices and economic theory: a survey article", in computer assisted analysis and model simplification  (harvey greenberg and john maybee, editors) academic press, 1981. quirk, james p., joel a. balbien, and roger noll, " the economics of boxing regulation in california", california institute of technology, social science working paper 366, january 1981. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "divergent expectations and r& d expenditures" in coal models and their use in government planning  (james quirk, k. terasawa and david whipple, editors) praeger press, ch. 15, pgs. 241-259, 1982. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "nuclear regulation: an historical overview", natural resources journal, vol. 21, no. 4, 1982. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "market externalities and the role of government in r and d activities in the energy industry", jpl no. 15, dec 1982. quirk, james p., "a model of "true" future market", 1982. quirk, james p., "a beginner's introduction to the principal-agent literature: a summary of four fundamental papers", rand, corp., 1983. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "asymmetric arbitrage and normal backwardation", california institute of technology, social science working paper 467, february, 1983. quirk,
james p., and ronald braeutigam, "demand uncertainty and the regulated firm", international economic review, vol. 25, no. 1, february 1984. quirk, james p., "hedging as speculation on the basis", california institute of technology, social science working paper 553, december 1984. quirk, james p., and donald lien, "asymmetric arbitrage and the pattern of futures prices under rational expectations", california institute of technology, social science working paper 544, september, 1984. quirk, james p., "review of uranium markets and prices", martin marietta energy systems, inc., october 24, 1984. appeared in who's who in economics, eldgar publishing, 1985 and 1986. quirk, james p., "consumer surplus under uncertainty: an application to dam-reservoir projects", water resources research, vol. 21, no. 9, 1985. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "the winner's curse and cost estimation bias in pioneer projects" also known as "sample selection and cost underestimation bias in pioneer projects", california institute of technology, social science working paper 512, and land economics, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 192-200, 1986. quirk, james p., "comments on intergenerational problems in resource economics", in natural resource economics  (daniel bromley, editor), bost: kluwer-nijhoff publishers, 1986. appeared in who's who in america 44th edition 1986-1987, volume 2, l-z, macmillan directory division. quirk, james p., memorandum from rick stroup copies of papers to review, montana state university, 1987. quirk, james p., "a report on the linkage between iffs and gams models", department of energy, july 24, 1987. quirk, james p., "a survey of the literature on cost growth and contracting models in defense procurement", rand corporation, wd-3520-pa&e, 1987. quirk, james p., article by edward h. kohn, "the stadium dilemma-to build or not build: expert calls economics of 2 plan unjustified". saint louis post dispatch, special report, sunday jan.16, 1987. quirk, james p., "a report on the economic aspects of the international  nuclear model", department of energy, 1988. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "normal backwardation and the inventory effect", journal of political economy, vol. 96, no. 1, february, 1988. quirk,
james p., "cost underestimating bias in space station software cost estimation", jet propulsion lavatory, 1988. quirk, james p., "lognormal version of bayesian stocomo: the model and a worked example", jet propulsion lavatory, 1988. quirk, james p., "report on the economic viability of a domed stadium in st. louis", report in the st. louis post dispatch (special section), january 19, 1987. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "the choice of a government discount rate applicable to government resource use", rand report $-3464-pa&e, 1987, rand corporation. quirk, james p., and hamid habibagahi, mark olsen, and george fox, "uncertainty and leontief systems: an application to space station", management science, vol. 35, no. 5, 1989. quirk, james p., katsuaki terasawa, and keith womar), "turbulence, cost estimation, and capital intensity bias in defense contracting", in t. r. gulledge, editor, lecture notes in economics and mathematical systems #332, springer verlag, 1989. quirk, james p., and robert kuller, "the phenomenon of "throwing good money after bad", 1989. quirk, james p., "report on m.a. program in economics at bowling green state university", 1989. quirk, james p., comments on "theoretical and empirical evidence on cost-savings from privatization contracting " by carlos ulibarri, orman pannanen, and mark weimar", 1990. quirk, james p., " probabilistic version of cocomox", jet propulsion lavatory, 1990. quirk, james p., "whose charade is it, anyway?", 1990. quirk, james p., "memorandum: review of the independent expert review of intermediate future forecasting system (iffs)/gas analysis modeling system (gams) model linkage", department of energy, sent to yvonne bishop, 1990. quirk, james p., "final report: independent expert review of world integrated nuclear evaluation system (wines)", department of energy, april, 1990. quirk, james p., and john hoag, kyoo kim, " some impacts of price-anderson on the nuclear energy industry", 1990. quirk, james p., and mohamed el-hodiri, "sector ranking under uncertainty in leontief models", 1990. quirk, james p., some comments on "resources use: the intertempor
al problem", 1990. quirk, james p., and katsuaki terasawa, "choosing a government discount rate: an alternative approach", journal of environmental economics and management, vol. 20, no. 1, 1991. quirk, james p., hamid habibagahi and shahn mulhotra, "estimating software productivity and cost for nasa projects", parametrics, vol. 11, no. 1, 1991. quirk, james p., and rubin saposnik, "the great football wars", in advances in sports economics  (gerald scully, editor), jai press, 1991. quirk, james p., and donald lien, "measuring the benefits from futures markets: some conceptual issues", 1993. quirk, james p., "markets, the voucher system, and public education", 1993. quirk, james p., "cross subsidization in professional team sports leagues"  presented at annual meeting of minnesota economic association, 1994. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "cross subsidization, incentives, and outcomes in professional team sports leagues", journal of economic literature, september, 1995. quirk, james p., " software development schedule estimation: a review of the literature", jet propulsion lavatory, 1995. quirk, james and fort, rodney, "over-stated exploitation: monopsony versus revenue sharing in sports leagues."  in john fizel, elizabeth gustafson and lawrence hadley (eds.) baseball economics: current issues (westport, ct: praeger publishers), pp. 159-178, 1996. quirk, james p.,  and stuart burness, "water rights and optimal reservoir management", california institute of technology, social science working paper 165, june, 1977. quirk, james p., "some thoughts on the economics of the proposed new seahawks stadium", 1997. quirk, james p., " an estimate of the subsides to the seattle mariners from the proposed new baseball stadium", 1997. quirk, james p., "the salary cap: affirmative action for small city teams", in stre-e-ike four (dan marberger, editor), greenwood press, 1997.  quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "reassessing exploitation rates in baseball: the effect of gate sharing", in new advances in the economics of sports (wallace hendricks, editor), north holland, 1997. quirk, james p., "stadiums, arenas, and major league sports: the twin cities' experience", in sports, jobs and taxes: the economic impact of sports teams and sports stadiums (
roger noll and andrew zimbalist, editors), brookings, 1997. quirk, james p., "qualitative comparative statics", journal of mathematical economics, vol. 28, 1997. quirk, james p., "the minneapolis marines: minnesota's forgotten nfl team", in coffin corner, vol. 20, no. 1997. quirk, james p., " source of cost underestimation bias", 1998. quirk, james p., and carlos ulibarri; orman pannanen; and mark weimar, "cost-savings from doe private contracting?", paper presented in session 233 of 73rd annual western economic association international lake tahoe, nv, july 2, 1998. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "the college football industry", in sports economics, current research  (john fizel, elizabeth gustafson, and lawrence hadley, editors) greenwood press, 1999. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "why do pro athletes make so much money?" in frontier issues in economic thought, vol. 51, the political economy of inequality" (william moomaw and neva goodwin, editors) 2000. quirk, james p., and h. stuart burness; carlos ulibarri; orman pannanen, "auctioning incentive contracts: the dual problems of characterizing optimal cost reduction policies and estimating potential cost savings", july 2000. quirk, james p., "college football conferences and competitive balance", in managerial and decision economics, vol. 25, 2004. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "owner objectives and competitive balance", the journal of sports economics, january, 2004. quirk, james p., "minneapolis mariners rough out history", football notes, 2005. quirk, james p., and james mcrandle, "the blood test revisited: a "new" look at german casualty counts in world war i", the journal of military history, july, 2006. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "rational expectations and pro sports leagues."  scottish journal of political economy 54(no. 3 july):374-387, 2007.  quirk, james p., and george lady, "the scope of the lechatelier principle", physica a: statistical mechanics and its applications, 2007. quirk, james p., "the capital market crisis", report to students on view of the economic situation in january 2008. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "the optimal level of competitive balance in a season ticket league", 2009. quirk, james p.,
george lady, "the global lechatelier principle and multimarket equilibria", review of economic design, 2009. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "the optimal level of competitive balance in a pro sports league", economic inquiry, 2009. quirk, james p., and h. stuart burness, carlos a. ulibarri, "incentive-based procurement contracts and optimal cost-sharing policy", 2010. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "sport team behavior and sports policy: the winning percent maximizing league", 2010. quirk, james p., and rodney fort, "optimal competitive balance in single-game ticket sports leagues."  journal of sports economics11(december):587-601.  online first: march 12, 2010. quirk, james p., and william delehanty) "equity and efficiency: a use of efficiency as a filter in analyzing  schemes to reduce the concentration of economic and political power (1915-1916)", may 2016.  references  1926 births 2020 deaths writers from minneapolis military personnel from minneapolis university of minnesota college of liberal arts alumni economists from minnesota california institute of technology faculty carlson school of management alumni
harry cherrington brook (born 22 february 1999) is an english international cricketer who plays international cricket for england and domestic cricket for yorkshire county cricket club. primarily a right-handed batsman, he also bowls right-arm medium pace. he made his international debut for england in january 2022.  early life brook was born in airedale but raised in burley in wharfedale. he was educated at ilkley grammar school, a comprehensive school in ilkley, west yorkshire. at the age of 14, he left having been offered a scholarship at sedbergh school, an independent boarding school in cumbria. journalist alex mason reported for the cricketer magazine that former professional cricketer and sedbergh school cricket coach martin speight was a very big influence on brook's career during his schooldays.  cricket career  domestic brook made his first-class debut for yorkshire against pakistan a on 26 june 2016 at headingley whilst still at school. he made his county championship debut for yorkshire against middlesex at lord's on 19 june 2017. his debut followed a series of three centuries scored within a fortnight for yorkshire's second eleven. at international level, brook toured india in early 2017 with the england under-19s, playing in two u-19 tests and five u-19 lois against the india under-19s.  brook made his twenty20 debut for yorkshire in the 2018 t20 blast on 5 july 2018. he was signed by northern superchargers for the hundred 2021 tournament.  in 2022, he was signed by lahore qalandars. in match against islamabad united, brook came to bat when lahore was 12-3 and scored an unbeaten 102 off 49 balls to power his team to a massive 197 total. it was his maiden t20 ton and he became youngest ever centurion in pakistan super league.  international brook captained the england under-19 cricket team in a five match youth odi series against india in august 2017.  in december 2017, brook was named as the captain of england's squad for the 2018 under-19 cricket world cup. in england's second group fixture, against bangladesh, he scored 102 not out, becoming the second england captain after alastair cook to score a century in the u19 world cup. following england's matches in the tournament, the international cricket council (icc) named brook as the rising star of the squad. he was the leading run-scorer for england in the tournament, with 239 runs.   in january 2022, brook was named in the england's t20i squad for the series against
west indies. he made his t20i debut on 26 january 2022, for england against the west indies.  references  external links    1999 births english cricketers england twenty20 international cricketers living people cricketers from keighley yorkshire cricketers people educated at ilkley grammar school people educated at sedbergh school english cricketers of the 21st century northern superchargers cricketers hobart hurricanes cricketers
no woman (persian: زن ممنوع)  is a 2015 experimental, arthouse short film from afghanistan by yama rauff, who was also selected for the "fresh legs 2016" exhibition at galleri heike arndt dk in germany and denmark. the film debuted in afghanistan and received recognition in march 2015 at the women's day celebration film competition in mazar-i-sharif and won best film prize. it featured in the december 2015 east van short film showcase in vancouver, british columbia, canada and in the october 2015 international women's film festival in herat, and was projected among the finalists in the "social theme" section  in the june 2016 tracce cinematografiche film fest in rome. it won the 2016 "audience choice: experimental film" award of the women's voices now online film festival and received another  "best experimental film award" from poland's 25th euroshorts film festival.  reception  nick wangersky of hollywood north magazine felt that "in spite of the way they're treated at times", woman do matter. he called rauff's project an "artistic film", and expanded that it "states that women should be allowed to make decisions too." he further felt the film a "very innovative and bold way of showing how to show what's really behind the vileness of individuals as well as how women struggle in islamic countries."  misty layne of cinemaschminema highly praised the film, writing it "has got to be one of the most beautiful films under 3 minutes i've ever seen. shot entirely in black and white, out in the desert, it shares a beautiful message about women leading women, women following in the footsteps of those who fought before them for equal rights, etc. seriously. under 3 minutes. it's amazing."  najibullah khurshid from afghanistan's 8am daily newspaper (روزنامه هشت صبح)  noticed that " while in several scenes it shows girls being in trouble, but they don't help out each other, they do not cross eyes at each other and at one point even they lack their common aspiration.  no woman is an artistic first three-minute short film with a community orientated story which is beyond the level of awareness of its audience in our society and other societies as well.  in the last fifteen years, no films have been made outside political attractions and formats. all have been made into the base of market demand.  success
of no woman comes with a fresh western prespictves and looks: in the sense that no elements in the making of the film can be ignored from the perspective of a film critic, unless it be taken simplistic, not profound."  synopsis  two girls standing in the desert on a road that has a sign it shows that no women are allowed to cross the line. one of them walks alone and reaches an armed person in the middle of the road with a mask. she rips the mask off and keeps walking as the person gets into his knees and cries in the road behind her. then it shows group of girls come to the same road, they hear a gun shot, not sure of what to do. then they see a floating mask in the wind.  theme  no woman shines the spotlight on the big "no" that is given to women in afghanistan, when it comes to making decisions for themselves. majority of women suffers from inequality, but few stands to fight against it. no woman shows few girls on screen, but it represents story of almost every women and their aspirations and obstacles.  references  external links      includes link to view the film  2010s avant-garde and experimental films afghan short films afghan films 2015 short films 2015 films
is a japanese politician and member of the house of councillors since 2013, representing the tokyo at-large district. she is a member of the japanese communist party.  kira was born in kochi, the daughter of a prefectural assemblyman. she graduated from waseda university in 2005 and worked for takara printing company for four years before entering politics.  she first ran in the 2009 tokyo metropolitan assembly elections as a candidate from toshima city, but failed to win a seat. her next appearance was in the 2013 house of councillors election, in which she placed third within the tokyo at-large district, becoming the first communist party member to win an at-large district seat in twelve years. one focus of her campaign, along with that of successful jcp candidate saori ikeuchi, was the unstable jobs situation faced by young people.  she is a member of the house of councillors committee on general affairs, special committee on political ethics and election system, and commission on the constitution.  her husband yuichiro matsushima is a member of the meguro city assembly in tokyo.  references  external links  official website  1982 births people from kochi, kochi living people members of the house of councillors (japan) female members of the house of councillors (japan) japanese communist party politicians waseda university alumni
bila nawab is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 6 km from nakodar, 31 km from kapurthala, 30 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 161 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 39 km away from the village. the village is 69 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 111 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
jamaica state park is a 772-acre state park in jamaica, vermont, on the shore of the west river.  activities includes camping, swimming, boating, river fishing, hiking, picnicking, mountain biking, wildlife watching, and winter sports.  facilities include a picnic shelter, 43 tent/trailer sites, 18 lean-to shelters, two rest rooms with hot showers, and firewood and ice available for purchase.  there is a nature center, and park rangers offer interpretive programs including night hikes, campfire programs, amphibian explorations, and nature crafts and games.  the 211-acre hamilton falls natural area is located in the park. cobb brook includes several waterfalls, and hamilton falls drops 40 to 50 feet into a large pool. there is a trail to the top and bottom of the falls.  the park includes a 2-mile section of the 16-mile west river trail, a universally-accessible trail along the old railbed for the west river railroad. the trail leads up to ball mountain dam.  references  external links  official web site  state parks of vermont jamaica, vermont protected areas of windham county, vermont nature centers in vermont 1969 establishments in vermont protected areas established in 1969
rexha is a surname of albanian origins.  notable people with this name include:  bebe rexha (born 1989), american singer and songwriter ervin rexha (born 1991), albanian footballer fitnete rexha (1933-2003), albanian folk singer  see also kenga e rexhes, a ballet whose title means rexha's song  surnames albanian-language surnames
crella elegans is a species of marine demosponges in the family crellidae found in the adriatic. it is the type species of its genus. it is the host of the ectoparasitic copepod cryptopontius capitalis.  references  external links  crella (crella) elegans at world register of marine species (worms)  poecilosclerida animals described in 1862
armando escobar diaz (born 27 august 1993) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a defender.  honours atlante liga de expansion mx: apertura 2021  references  1993 births living people mexican footballers association football defenders tampico madero f.c. footballers alebrijes de oaxaca players atlante f.c. footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players footballers from veracruz people from xalapa
john stewart (1784-1873), of belladrum, inverness was a british politician.  he was a member (mp) of the parliament of the united kingdom for beverley 1826-1830.  references  1784 births 1873 deaths people from inverness members of the parliament of the united kingdom for english constituencies uk mps 1826-1830
chark is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
"dance on my own" is a song by english recording trio m.o. it was released as a digital download on 22 august 2014 in the united kingdom as the band's fifth single. sampling the 2000s garage hit single "flowers" by female duo sweet female attitude, the song was co-written with darren martyn, who also produced the track alongside white n3rd and duo loadstar.  music video a music video for "dance on my own" was directed by carly cussen and filmed on a multi story car park in peckham, a district of south-east london. it was premiered on vevo on 23 june 2014.  track listing  chart performance  release history  references  2014 singles 2014 songs m.o songs uk garage songs
on july 18, 2016, charles kinsey, a mental health therapist, was shot in the leg by a police officer in north miami, florida. kinsey had been retrieving his 27-year-old autistic patient, arnaldo rios soto, who had run away from his group home. police encountered the pair while they were searching for an armed suicidal man. kinsey was lying on the ground with his hands in the air, and trying to negotiate between officers and his patient, when he was shot. the officer who shot kinsey said he had been aiming at the patient, who the officer believed was threatening kinsey with a gun. both kinsey and his patient were unarmed.  following the shooting, kinsey said he was handcuffed and left bleeding on the ground for 20 minutes without police giving him medical aid. authorities said they were investigating the incident, which received significant media attention following the appearance of cellphone video footage. the officer who shot kinsey, jonathan aledda, was arrested in 2017, and charged with attempted manslaughter and negligence. in june 2019, aledda was found guilty by a jury of culpable negligence. one day after being found guilty, aledda was also fired from the police force. he was sentenced to probation and required to write a 2,500 word essay on policing. he ultimately served a total of 5 months of probation before being released. after aledda was found guilty, kinsey and the city of north miami reached a settlement for an undisclosed amount in a federal lawsuit kinsey had filed.  background on july 18, 2016, shortly before 5:00 p.m. edt, a 27-year-old male non-verbal severely autistic man clutching a silver toy tanker truck ran away from his mental health facility, mactown panther group homes. charles kinsey, a 47-year-old mental health worker, followed his patient out of the facility to retrieve him. kinsey had worked at the facility for over a year, was involved in community efforts to keep local kids in school, and is the father of five children. according to npr, kinsey has been a member of the local "circle of brotherhood" group whose mission is "serving and protecting our community".  the police were at the same time responding to reports of a man threatening to shoot himself in the area, at northeast 127th street and 14th avenue. police received a call around 5:30 p.m. the north miami assistant police chief, neal cuevas, said that the autistic man did not comply with orders when
the police arrived on the scene.  shooting while kinsey lay on the ground with his hands raised, one officer, north miami police department special weapons and tactics (swat) team member jonathan aledda, who was  away, said he thought the patient was holding the therapist hostage and that the small silver toy truck being clutched by the patient was a gun, following a report made by a passing female motorist, at whom the patient had pointed the toy truck which the motorist believed appeared to be a firearm, and a dispatch to the police officers that there was a "male with a gun". aledda said "it appeared he [the black therapist] was screaming for mercy or for help or something. in my mind, the white male [the patient] had a gun. i couldn't hear what the black man was saying. in my mind, i thought he might get shot." aledda said he had not aimed at kinsey, but rather had been aiming at rios-soto, who he believed was threatening the therapist with a gun. aledda fired three .223 caliber rounds from his colt m4 carbine rifle, which did not have advanced optical sights, with one bullet striking kinsey in the right leg. the shooting occurred a block from the group home where kinsey worked at 1365 ne 128th st.  kinsey's lawyer hilton napoleon ii provided the miami herald with a cellphone video of kinsey lying on the ground, his hands in the air, moments before the shooting. the man who took the video initially thought that the patient had a gun in his hands. in the video kinsey asks police not to shoot him, while his patient plays with his toy truck. kinsey said he was trying to convince his patient, who was clutching a small toy truck, to obey officers' commands. the video also shows kinsey telling police that he is unarmed. in the video kinsey is seen telling police, "all he has is a toy truck. a toy truck. i am a behavior therapist at a group home." kinsey is also shown telling his patient, "please be still... lay down on your stomach." while two of his fellow officers were close enough to hear what kinsey was saying, the shooting officer was not.  kinsey said that after he was shot, police turned him on his back, handcuffed him, and left him bleeding on the road for 20 minutes, and that police did nothing to stop kinsey's bleeding before an ambulance arrived. a second video shows officers carrying rifles and patting down kinsey and
his patient while they lie on the ground.  aftermath a witness to the shooting told the associated press that when police arrived, he grabbed binoculars and saw that the autistic man seated in the road, next to kinsey, was holding a toy truck. he informed an officer that the man was holding a toy and not a gun, but she told him to back up and did not inform other officers. kinsey was shot shortly afterwards.  one officer, about 15-20 feet away, heard kinsey yelling and said over the radio to "use caution" because "the person advised that it's a toy." a minute later, at least 30 seconds before shots were fired, that officer said over the radio to the other police officers at the scene that he had a visual, and that the item did not appear to him to be a firearm, but appeared to be a toy truck.  kinsey said he was more worried about his patient, who did not have his hands raised, and did not believe he himself would be shot. "as long as i've got my hands up, they're not gonna shoot me, that's what i'm thinking," kinsey said. "wow, i was wrong."  kinsey said that being shot "was so surprising, it was like a mosquito bite." he said that when he was shot his life flashed before his eyes, and he thought of his family.  according to kinsey, when he asked the officer why he had shot him, the officer replied, "i don't know." kinsey's lawyer said that when another officer asked the shooting officer "why did you shoot this guy", the shooter again responded, "i don't know." kinsey survived the shooting after being taken to jackson memorial hospital. kinsey's wife said, "i'm just grateful he's alive and able to tell his story."  following the shooting, the name of the police officer who shot kinsey was not immediately revealed to the public. police later announced that the shooter was a 30-year-old hispanic officer who had worked in the police department for four years, and was a member of the swat team. miami police subsequently identified the officer as jonathan aledda.  a police department employee told the herald that the officer fired because the autistic patient did not obey police commands. on july 22, the local president of the florida police benevolent association chapter in dade county, john rivera, said that the officer who fired the bullets was aiming for kinsey's patient, and was "trying to save kinsey's life."
rivera said that kinsey "did everything right." in response, napoleon and some media outlets questioned the explanation that kinsey was shot accidentally, and asked why kinsey was handcuffed and left bleeding on the ground after being shot.  a second officer was initially placed on administrative leave, but prosecutors then found that the officer had not lied when he told investigators he didn't witness the shooting, because he had in fact returned to a police cruiser when the shot was fired.  police announced that the miami-dade state attorney's office would assist with an ongoing investigation. an inquiry into the shooting was performed by the florida department of law enforcement, at the request of both north miami police and the state attorney's office.  legal proceedings on august 3, 2016, kinsey filed a federal lawsuit against jonathan aledda, claiming he violated his civil rights and used excessive force and falsely arrested him. in his complaint, kinsey stated that aledda violated his fourth amendment right to be free from excessive force during police seizures when he shot him in the leg. he also stated that aledda put handcuffs on him that were too tight, cutting off his circulation.  on april 12, 2017, jonathan aledda was arrested on charges of attempted manslaughter and negligence for his role in the affair.  on june 15, 2017, rios soto's family filed a lawsuit against north miami on his behalf alleging the police falsely imprisoned him and intentionally inflicted pain and suffering. a confidential settlement was reached in 2019.  in march 2019, the case was declared a mistrial as the jury could not reach a verdict on all charges. the jurors voted to acquit aledda of one misdemeanor count of culpable negligence for shooting at rios soto. however they could not reach a decision on the three remaining charges, one of misdemeanor culpable negligence for his shot at kinsey, and two charges of felony attempted manslaughter.  in june 2019, jonathan aledda was retried and found not guilty on two counts of attempted manslaughter (felony charges) but guilty of culpable negligence, a misdemeanor. he was not sentenced to prison, and was instead sentenced to one year of administrative probation, 100 hours of community service, and to write a 2,500-word essay on communication and weapon discharges. his conviction would also not appear on a criminal record due to the withholding of adjudication. he was released from probation less than five months later.  after aledda's sentencing, charles kinsey and the city of north miami reached a settlement for an undisclosed amount in the federal suit kinsey
had filed against the city and its police.  reactions after the release of the video, florida congresswoman frederica wilson tweeted that she was shocked and angered by kinsey's shooting, writing, "like everyone else i have one question: why?" mayor smith joseph apologized to the family and promised a complete investigation stating "i have made it clear that i will not tolerate anything that goes against the process."  on thursday after the shooting, black lives matter activists protested outside the north miami police department, stating that it was kinsey who was "protecting and serving" in the incident, and confronting police officials. protestors demanded that the shooting officer be fired.  npr wrote that the incident "has renewed discussions of officers' use of force".  abroad, france tv wrote that while the incident could have ended far more tragically, it was "no less absurd and worrisome", calling the event "surreal". le figaro wrote that the story broke at a time when the united states has been "plagued by intense controversy following the death of several black people shot by police, and attacks on five policemen."  references  2016 in florida african-american history of florida black lives matter july 2016 events in the united states law enforcement controversies in the united states law enforcement in florida north miami, florida african-american-related controversies 2016 controversies in the united states police brutality in the united states history of racism in florida non-fatal shootings
yveta synek graff (november 18, 1933, prague, czechoslovakia - november 6, 2015, montecito, california)  was a vocal and language coach and writer who helped popularize the performances of czech operas internationally during the last quarter of the 20th century and early 21st century. considered one of the world's leading authorities on czech operas, she was described by the new york times as the "secret weapon of czech opera's velvet revolution". she was widely admired for her translations of czech operas into english which were utilized in performances by companies like the metropolitan opera and the lyric opera of chicago. she also coached artists for performances in czech; including working on productions for the glyndebourne festival opera, the los angeles opera, the new york city opera, the san francisco opera, and the royal opera in london among others.  references  1933 births 2015 deaths czech opera singers czech women writers vocal coaches
taylor terrell (july 22, 1991 - july 21, 2016) was an american news anchor for 41nbc news at daybreak and 41today at wmgt-tv in macon, georgia.  terrell died on the eve of her 25th birthday after slipping over rainbow falls, a waterfall in north carolina.  references  external links   profile at 41nbc  2016 deaths 1991 births african-american women journalists african-american journalists journalists from georgia (u.s. state) television anchors from atlanta georgia southern university alumni accidental deaths from falls american women television journalists 21st-century african-american people 21st-century african-american women
olenecamptus olenus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by gahan in 1904.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1904
mary pickering nichols (january 29, 1829 - february 3, 1915), was an american translator of german literature, active in the last quarter of the 19th century. she was the fifth of the six children of benjamin ropes nichols and her namesake mary pickering. she is credited with making the first complete english translation of the medieval german epic poem gudrun in 1889.  in 1875, she translated piano and song: how to teach, how to learn, and how to form a judgment of musical performance by friedrich wieck, the famed instructor of his daughter clara schumann and son-in-law robert schumann. according to census records, she never married and spent most of her adult life living at 10 chestnut street, a block from boston common, with her brother benjamin who she thanked in the preface to both translations mentioned above. she died there in 1915, at age 86.  published works   1875. piano and song: how to teach, how to learn, and how to form a judgment of musical performance, translated from the german of friederich wieck. boston: lockwood, brooks and company. 197 pages.  1889. gudrun: a medieval epic, translated from the middle high german. houghton, mifflin and company: boston and new york. 363 pages.  notes and references  notes  references  external links      1829 births 1915 deaths american women writers people from salem, massachusetts german-english translators 19th-century american translators 19th-century american women
parada is an orchestral composition by the finnish composer magnus lindberg.  the piece was composed for the music festival related rocks which celebrates the works of lindberg and related composers.  its world premiere was given at the anvil, basingstoke on february 6, 2002 by the philharmonia orchestra under the direction of esa-pekka salonen, to whom the work is dedicated.  composition parada is composed in a single slow movement and has a duration of approximately 13 minutes.  instrumentation the work is scored for a large orchestra consisting of two flutes (2nd doubling piccolo), two oboes, english horn, two clarinets, bass clarinet, two bassoons (2nd doubling contrabassoon), four horns, two trumpets, three trombones, tuba, timpani, two percussionists, harp, piano (doubling celesta), and strings.  reception parada has been praised by music critics.  reviewing the world premiere, fiona maddocks of the observer opined, "parada, part of the related rocks festival, is an expansive, mainly slow (unusual for lindberg) single movement. it opens with lush, dream-like massed strings, muted and using vibrato. within this slow trajectory, moments of rapid action and clarity - brass explosions and woodwind ripples - unsettle the hazy stillness, dying away with simple cello pizzicatos. lindberg achieves luminous orchestral effects, holding the sounds poised as if centrifugally. the philharmonia, now well groomed in his style, made masterly work of its subtleties."  reviewing the united states premiere by the los angeles philharmonic, mark swed of the los angeles times wrote, "magnus lindberg's parada begins with a slow parade of chords. they are somber but colorful. they move with solemn grace, like ghostly visions floating through a fog. and when you have resonant chords like these--complex and new, yet somehow familiar-sounding, cloaked in beautiful sonorities, awash in mystery--you have a pretty good sense that something special is about to follow in their wake."  he added, "it is a weighty slow movement, with lots of fast things happening on the surface and distant hints of sibelius."  anne midgette of the washington post called it "an attractive braid of music created by winding two disparate ideas - a fast scherzo and the slow shimmer of strings - into a single whole, now full, now slender, set off with gleaming beads of
percussion, tapering at the end to something gentle and warm."  she added, "it took a big orchestra, including a full complement of percussion, but felt light."  however, reviewing a recording of the piece alongside other lindberg works, the magazine gramophone was somewhat critical of the piece, remarking, "parada‚ the slowestmoving of these scores‚ is also the most frankly sibelian‚ full of gestures and textures redolent of the inescapable finnish master. while its ravishing invention is easy to enjoy‚ i wasn't sure how it was meant to hold together‚ so this may or may not be the place to start for the uninitiated."  recording a commercial recording of parada, performed by the philharmonia orchestra under salonen, was released through sony classical records in 2002.  the album also features lindberg's cantigas, cello concerto no. 1, and fresco.  references  compositions by magnus lindberg 2001 compositions compositions for symphony orchestra
dopahi, also known as agrouli, is a village located in the eastern side of ballia district in the indian state of uttar pradesh.  references  villages in ballia district
alex trezza (born september 1, 1980) is an american college baseball coach and former catcher. he played college baseball at stony brook university. he serced as head baseball coach of the liu brooklyn blackbirds baseball team from 2015 to 2016.  trezza played catcher at stony brook for three years, and in the 2001 season was among national leaders in offensive categories including home runs and rbi.  he then played professionally for twelve seasons, reaching class a+ in the detroit tigers organization.  he began his coaching career at anna maria, where he served as an assistant for one season before moving to adelphi for one season.  next, he served as assistant coach and recruiting coordinator at new haven.  he then earned his first ncaa division i job at sacred heart, where he served for one season before earning his first head coaching position at liu brooklyn in 2015.  on july 19, 2016, trezza left liu brooklyn to join the boston college eagles baseball team staff. trezza left the eagles after the 2021 season.  head coaching record  references  external links  1980 births living people adelphi panthers baseball coaches anna maria amcats baseball coaches baseball catchers liu brooklyn blackbirds baseball coaches new haven chargers baseball coaches sportspeople from brooklyn sacred heart pioneers baseball coaches stony brook seawolves baseball players boston college eagles baseball coaches
chain lightning is a 1922 american silent melodrama film produced and directed by ben f. wilson.  plot as described in a film magazine, kentuckian major lee pomeroy (macgregor) has been obliged by financial circumstances to sell his race horse chain lightning, which is really the property of his daughter peggy (little). she comes home from school in washington to learn that the horse has passed to the possession of colonel george bradley (girard), her father's enemy. the horse is entered in an important race and pomeroy wagers all his remaining funds on his former track star. red rollins (carroll), the jockey to ride the horse, makes advances on peggy but is repulsed. the jockey then threatens to pull the horse in the race. peggy meets rollins the day of the race and endeavors to dissuade him. the vehicle they are in has an accident, and this gives peggy the opportunity to tie up rollins and lock him in an abandoned cabin. making her way to the track, she dons jockey attire, don chain lightning, and ride him to victory in a thrilling neck and neck race. in the meantime, a romance has sprung up between the nephew of her father's enemy, bob bradley (dougherty). with the winnings for her family and the winning of the race, the enmity between the kentuckian gentlemen ends, leaving a happy ending for all except the corrupt jockey.  cast norval macgregor as major lee pomeroy joseph w. girard as col. george bradley william a. carroll as red rollins (credited as william carroll) jack dougherty as bob bradley ann little as peggy pomeroy  preservation status chain lightning survives in the library of congress collection packard campus for audio-visual conservation.  references  external links  lantern slide (wayback machine)    1922 films american silent feature films american films films directed by ben f. wilson american black-and-white films melodramas 1922 drama films american drama films arrow film corporation films
puncak borneo is a federal constituency in kuching division (bau district and kuching district) and serian division (tebedu district and siburan district), sarawak, malaysia, that has been represented in the dewan rakyat since 2018.  the federal constituency was created in the 2018 redistribution and is mandated to return a single member to the dewan rakyat under the first past the post voting system.  demographics  history  polling districts  according to the gazette issued on 30 december 2015, the puncak borneo constituency has a total of 87 polling districts.  representation history  state constituency  current state assembly members  local governments  election results  references  sarawak federal constituencies
gianni ferlenghi (born 11 february 1931) is an italian former professional racing cyclist. he rode in three editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1931 births living people italian male cyclists sportspeople from tuscany
dr. jaswinder singh (born 17 may 1954) is an indian punjabi novelist.  books  amariki panjabi kahani : ika punara-mulankana : khoja nibandha	 amrici punajbi kahani	  bhartiya kavita sanchayan, punjabi (1950-2010)	  ghara da jia : kahani sangrahi	  gurabakhasha singha pritalari di swaijiwani	  mat-lok	  mata loka : nawala	  mera pinda : alocanatamaka adhiaina	  nawem kawi sitare nawim panjabi kawita : pachana cinnha  awards singh won the sahitya akademi award in 2015 for his novel maat lok.  see also list of sahitya akademi award winners for punjabi  references  1954 births living people 20th-century indian novelists punjabi-language writers recipients of the sahitya akademi award in punjabi people from jalandhar novelists from punjab, india
william l. lords house, also known as the stone house, is a historic home located in clear lake township, steuben county, indiana. it was built about 1866, and is a -story, "t"plan, dwelling constructed of random laid cut fieldstone. the house is representative of "folk architecture."  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana houses completed in 1866 buildings and structures in steuben county, indiana national register of historic places in steuben county, indiana
the 1953 greyhound derby final took place during june with the final being held on 27 june 1953 at white city stadium.   the winner was daws dancer and the winning owner mr d j fitzgerald received £1,250.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  ½, 2¼, 2¼, 1¼, ½ (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report endless gossip returned to defend his derby title that he won in 1952 and was quoted 8-1 joint second ante-post favourite by the bookmakers for the event along with pall mall stakes champion marsh harrier. the market leader at 7-1 was ollys pal. on the eve of the first round marsh harrier and another leading runner bargain hunter were both withdrawn lame. the first round brought some surprises, dublin darkie won at 20-1 and then a puppy called daws dancer beat endless gossip, but the latter still progressed and remained favourite for the competition. ollys pal encountered a large amount of trouble but impressed by still qualifying.   the second round resulted with many favourites being eliminated. a four way battle between glittering look, small town, daws dancer and endless gossip ended with a photo finish that showed daws dancer holding on for third place by a short head from the defending champion. polonius claimed the heat that saw the elimination of ollys pal, whilst galtee cleo had posted 28.76 in the same round and was installed as the new favourite.  glittering look won the first semi-final holding off the challenge of daws dancer and small town but galtee cleo remained the favourite after winning the second semi-final to remain unbeaten in the competition.  the draw for the final (which did not carry seeding*) resulted in the wide running galtee cleo drawing trap one. daws dancer a 10-1 shot, had made it through to the final with two third place finishes and made a good break in the decider leading galtee cleo to the first bend; galtee cleo swung wide as expected and was baulked and also interfered with others including glittering look who was going well at this stage. galtee cleo recovered well but could not make up the ground lost to daws dancer.  note* seeding (the allocation of greyhounds and trap numbers based on their running style)  see also 1953 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references
greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
the internazionali di tenis femminili citta di latina was a tournament for professional female tennis players played on outdoor clay courts. the event was classified as a $50,000 itf women's circuit tournament and was held in latina, italy, in 2003 and from 2007 to 2009.  past finals  singles  doubles  external links   itf search  itf women's circuit clay court tennis tournaments tennis tournaments in italy recurring sporting events established in 2003 recurring sporting events disestablished in 2009 defunct tennis tournaments in italy
wan'an () is a town under the administration of xinluo district, longyan, fujian, china. , it has 20 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of fujian longyan
fabio rinaldi is a research scientist at the idsia, switzerland. until 2019 he was a researcher and group leader at the university of zurich.  he is also a group leader at the swiss institute of bioinformatics (sib), and a visiting scientist at the center for genomic sciences  (unam, mexico), where he collaborates with the regulondb group.  he is the initiator and team leader of the ontogene research group, which focuses on text mining for biomedical applications.  dr. rinaldi is a very active contributor to the field of biomedical text mining. he is one of the co-organizers of the well-known biocreative challenges on evaluation of biomedical text mining technologies.  notes  external links  profile at idsia  profile at the university of zurich  living people year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) university of zurich faculty swiss scientists
somewhere in palilula () is a 2012 romanian drama film directed by silviu purcarete.  cast   aron dimeny -serafim  george mihaita as ilie tudorin  razvan vasilescu as predoleanu  constantin chiriac as virgil codreanu (trotzki)  sorin leoveanu as gogu  ofelia popii as leana mica  reception the film was watched by 12,253 viewers in cinemas in romania between the premiere and december 31, 2014, according to records kept by romania's national center of cinematography.  references  external links     2012 drama films 2012 films romanian films romanian drama films
saint petersburg is an unincorporated community in logan county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  the community derives its name from pete lousberg, who built the town a church in exchange for the naming rights.  references  unincorporated communities in logan county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
serban pavlu (; born 29 june 1975) is a romanian actor. he has appeared in more than thirty films since 1995. he is well known for the successful tv series umbre broadcast on hbo, his role in the soap opera "fetele marinarului" and in the television  format "in puii mei", which aired on antena1.  in 2008 the actor was chosen by dreamworks animation to provide the romanian voice of po in the animated movie kung fu panda.  selected filmography  references  external links   1975 births living people romanian male film actors
ermias ghermay is an ethiopian people-smuggler who is believed to be the boss of one of the main human smuggling cartels in libya.  see also mered medhanie  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) human trafficking in africa
pauline kim, a specialist in employment law, is the charles nagel chair of constitutional law and political science at washington university in st. louis and the co-director of its center for empirical research in the law.  biography  kim earned an a.b., summa cum laude, in social justice from harvard and radcliffe colleges in 1984. from 1984 to 1985, kim attended new college, oxford university, as a henry fellow (studies in jurisprudence, political and moral philosophy). in 1988, kim graduated with j.d., magna cum laude, from harvard law school.  kim served as a clerk for   cecil f. poole on the united states court of appeals for the ninth circuit (1988-1989). then, she became a staff attorney at the employment law center of the legal aid society of san francisco (1990-1994).   in 1994, she joined the faculty of washington university   school of law as   associate professor. she was the first recipient of the law school's john s. lehmann research professorship in 2007-2008 and was the  school's associate dean for research and faculty development in 2008-2010, and   co-founded its workshop on empirical research in the law.  awards and honors   david m. becker professor of the year, 2016 international association of privacy professionals paper award for "data-driven discrimination at work," presented at privacy law scholars' conference, 2016  selected publications   work law: cases and materials (3d ed.), with marion crain & michael selmi, matthew bender & co./lexisnexis group (2015).  references  external links   washington university school of law faculty profile  the center for empirical research in the law   equal employment opportutniy commission litigation project  harvard law school alumni radcliffe college alumni year of birth missing (living people) living people american legal scholars alumni of new college, oxford
indian canyon (formerly known as indian gulch) is the only federally recognized indian country from sonoma to the coast of santa barbara in california, a distance of over 300 miles. the canyon is a mile long. as the only such place within the original costanoan-ohlone territory, anyone of native american heritage can come to indian canyon to hold ceremonies on this sacred and traditional land. until 1978, when the american indian religious freedom act was passed, native americans were prohibited from practicing all traditional forms of spirituality.  the canyon is a mile long, and contains canopies of trees, streams, and a cascading waterfall. the parcel contains more than 30 gathering areas and nine sweat lodges are available for ceremonies. the canyon's arbor is used for cultural storytelling, chanting, and dancing that bring together indigenous peoples from around the world, from the maori of new zealand to the gwich'in of alaska.  anne marie sayers and the reclamation of indian canyon anne marie sayers is a mutsun ohlone leader and the tribal chair of the indian canyon. she was born and raised in indian canyon, on her great grandfather's trust allotment - a piece of land granted to an individual native american - which had been established in 1911. in a landmark 8-year case ending in 1998, sayers used the dawes act (also known as the allotment act of 1887) to reclaim land in the indian canyon, that had belonged to her family for centuries.  sayers is also the director of the costanoan indian research, inc., an organization based in the indian canyon, dedicated to the preservation and return of native artifacts to their tribal groups.  in 2015, during pope francis' visit to the united states, sayers joined religious leaders across the country to protest fracking.  sayers' story is the subject a short documentary, in the land of my ancestors, produced by photojournalist rucha chitnis.  references  native american history of california native american leaders native american tribes in california ohlone costanoan populated places native american activists native american culture
rasmus johannes mork (19 january 1896 - 23 may 1974) was a norwegian economist and administrator.  he took the cand.oecon. degree in 1920, lectured at norges landbrukshøgskole from 1921, was appointed professor of dairy economics from 1945 to 1962, and served as rector from 1946 to 1953. he was a member of the administrative council in 1940, as head of the ministry of agriculture and food. he was decorated commander of the order of st. olav in 1951. he died in 1974.  references  1896 births 1974 deaths people from ørsta norwegian people of world war ii norwegian economists university of oslo alumni norwegian college of agriculture faculty rectors of the norwegian university of life sciences commanders crosses of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany
kepler-1229 is a red dwarf star located about  away from the earth in the constellation of cygnus. it is known to host a super-earth exoplanet within its habitable zone, kepler-1229b, which was discovered in 2016.  nomenclature and history  prior to kepler observation, kepler-1229 had the 2mass catalogue number 2mass j19495680+4659481. in the kepler input catalog it has the designation of kic 10027247, and when it was found to have a transiting planet candidate it was given the kepler object of interest number of koi-2418.  planetary candidates were detected around the star by nasa's kepler mission, a mission tasked with discovering planets in transit around their stars. the transit method that kepler uses involves detecting dips in brightness in stars. these dips in brightness can be interpreted as planets whose orbits pass in front of their stars from the perspective of earth, although other phenomenon can also be responsible which is why the term planetary candidate is used.  following the acceptance of the discovery paper, the kepler team provided an additional moniker for the system of "kepler-1229". the discoverers referred to the star as kepler-1229, which is the normal procedure for naming the exoplanets discovered by the spacecraft. hence, this is the name used by the public to refer to the star and its planet.  candidate planets that are associated with stars studied by the kepler mission are assigned the designations ".01"  etc. after the star's name, in the order of discovery. if planet candidates are detected simultaneously, then the ordering follows the order of orbital periods from shortest to longest. following these rules, there was only one candidate planet were detected, with an orbital period of 86.829 days.   the designation b, derives from the order of discovery. the designation of b is given to the first planet orbiting a given star, followed by the other lowercase letters of the alphabet. in the case of kepler-1229, there was only one planet, so only the letter b is used. the name kepler-1229 derives directly from the fact that the star is the catalogued 1,229th star discovered by kepler to have confirmed planets.  stellar characteristics kepler-1229 is a red dwarf star that is approximately 54% the mass of and 51% the radius of the sun. it has a temperature of 3784 k and is roughly 3.72 billion years old. in comparison, the sun is about 4.6
billion years old and has a temperature of 5778 k.  the star is slightly poor in metals, with a metallicity ([fe/h]) of about −0.06, or about 87% of the amount of iron and other heavier metals found in the sun. the star's luminosity is somewhat normal-low for a star like kepler-1229, with a luminosity of around 4.8% of that of the solar luminosity.  the star's apparent magnitude, or how bright it appears from earth's perspective, is 15.474. therefore, it is too dim to be seen with the naked eye.  planetary system  the only known planet transits the star; this means that the planet's orbit appear to cross in front of their star as viewed from the earth's perspective. its inclination relative to earth's line of sight, or how far above or below the plane of sight it is, vary by less than one degree. this allows direct measurements of the planet's periods and relative diameters (compared to the host star) by monitoring the planet's transit of the star.  kepler-1229b is a super-earth, likely rocky, with a radius of 1.4 , and it orbits well within the habitable zone. in terms of stellar flux, radius, and equilibrium temperature, kepler-1229b is similar (or an analog in some terms) to the potentially habitable exoplanet kepler-62f.  references    planetary systems with one confirmed planet m-type main-sequence stars planetary transit variables cygnus (constellation) 2418
her only way is a 1918 silent film drama directed by sidney franklin with norma talmadge as the star.  plot  cast norma talmadge - lucille westbrook eugene o'brien - joseph marshall ramsey wallace - paul belmont e. alyn warren - judge hampton bates jobyna howland - mrs. randolph  preservation status the film is currently lost.  references  external links  her only way at imdb.com  lantern slide(wayback machine)  1918 films american silent feature films american films american black-and-white films lost american films films directed by sidney franklin american drama films 1918 drama films selznick pictures films lost drama films 1918 lost films
the 1991 coca-cola 600, the 32nd running of the event, was a nascar winston cup series race held on may 26, 1991 at charlotte motor speedway in charlotte, north carolina. contested over 400 laps on the 1.5 mile (2.4 km) speedway, it was the 10th race of the 1991 nascar winston cup series season. davey allison of robert yates racing won the race.  background charlotte motor speedway is a motorsports complex located in concord, north carolina, united states 13 miles from charlotte, north carolina. the complex features a 1.5 miles (2.4 km) quad oval track that hosts nascar racing including the prestigious coca-cola 600 on memorial day weekend and the winston, as well as the mello yello 500. the speedway was built in 1959 by bruton smith and is considered the home track for nascar with many race teams located in the charlotte area. the track is owned and operated by speedway motorsports inc. (smi).  top 10 results  race statistics  time of race: 4:19:05  average speed:   pole speed:   cautions: 9 for 54 laps  margin of victory: 1.28 sec  lead changes: 22  percent of race run under caution: 13.5%  average green flag run: 34.6 laps  references  coca-cola 600 coca-cola 600 nascar races at charlotte motor speedway
south west acute hospital is a local teaching hospital located in enniskillen, county fermanagh, northern ireland. it is managed by western health and social care trust.  history the hospital was built to replace the erne hospital, and was opened by the queen and the duke of edinburgh on 21 june 2012. it was the first new hospital to be built in northern ireland for more than a decade, and was the first hospital in northern ireland with single ensuite rooms for every patient.  facilities  the hospital has up to 210 inpatient and 22 day-case beds.  services  the hospital has been designated as one of the nine acute hospitals in the acute hospital network of northern ireland on which healthcare would be focused under the government health policy 'developing better services'.  teaching  the hospital is a university teaching hospital for both queen's university belfast and the royal college of surgeons in ireland.  references  external links      inspection reports from the regulation and quality improvement authority  western health and social care trust health and social care (northern ireland) hospitals teaching hospitals in northern ireland hospital buildings completed in 2012 hospitals established in 2012 2012 establishments in northern ireland hospitals in county fermanagh
newell bryan weight (august 1, 1916 - july 12, 2009) was a professor of music at brigham young university and founded its a cappella choir. he was later a professor at the university of utah.  early life newell bryan weight was born august 1, 1916, in springville, utah. his parents were ralph and minerva bryan weight. he was married to dorothy hill on july 20, 1936. the couple was sealed in the salt lake temple in 1939. they went on to have five children.  weight attended brigham young university (byu) and graduated with a master's degree in music education. he later graduated from the university of southern california with a doctorate degree in music. weight also studied choral techniques with olaf christiansen, who was a director of the st. olaf choir.  career weight began teaching at provo high school in 1948; however, he moved to teach at byu in 1949. while teaching at the university, he founded byu's acapella choir. when weight began the choir, they accepted all applicants. as popularity grew and the talent increased, the choir became more selective. by 1954, they had over 500 applicants and only accepted 70. the choir sang a variety of songs including contemporary music, plainchants, folk music, and sacred hymns. under weight's direction, the choir became "regarded by many critics as one of the finest in the nation." during his time at byu, weight also worked with john r. halliday. the byu choir was also featured on "colleges on the air," a radio program from mutual broadcasting system, and made recordings in commercial studios.  weight stayed at byu until 1962 when he went to the university of utah. weight worked with their already established a cappella choir. the choirs he directed received two grammy nominations. weight became the chair of the music department. he retired from teaching in 1984, having taken many choirs from both universities on annual tours in the united states.  during his life, weight was a member of the good sam's club and the golden kiwanis club. he was noted by music critics as "one of the nation's outstanding choral conductors." he died in orem, utah on july 12, 2009.  references  external links newell weight papers, mss 8226 at l. tom perry special collections, brigham young university  1916 births 2009 deaths people from springville, utah brigham young university alumni brigham young university faculty university of utah faculty harold b. lee library-related 20th century articles
the smite world championship (swc) is the annual world championship for the multiplayer online battle arena video game smite.  from january 9-11, 2015 hi-rez studios hosted the first smite world championship. teams from north america, south america, europe and china travelled to atlanta, georgia for the tournament. the us$2.6 million prize pool for the tournament was at the time the third-highest in esports, behind the third and fourth iterations of dota 2's the international and just slightly ahead of the league of legends world championships. one of the north american teams, cognitive prime, took home the first place prize of $1.3 million.  the 2016 iteration was held from january 7-10, 2016, and featured tournaments for both the pc and xbox one versions of the game. the event was streamed on twitch on the smite game tv account. the total prize pool for the pc tournament was us$1 million.  swc 2017 was held january 5-8 as part of the hi-rez expo event that also included a smite console world championship, and the paladins hrx invitational. it was streamed on the hireztv twitch account and had a us$1 million prize pool. the winner was the european team nrg esports, who won the 2016 event under the epsilon name.  the 2018 smite world championship was held from january 3-7, 2018. the prize pool was at its lowest $785,000. the north american team  defeated eu's team rival in the finals.  unlike previous iterations which were held in january, swc 2019 was held from november 16-18, and in order to end the competitive season, was also held in 2018. the smite world championship also saw a move to the georgia world congress center, whereas previous iterations were held in the cobb energy performing arts centre. the prize pool was estimated around $785,000. north american splyce defeated eu's returning finalists team rival.  swc 2020 was held from november 15-17, 2019. the prize pool was estimated to have had a slight increase at $800.000. as its previous iteration, it was held at the georgia world congress center. sk gaming defeated now three-time finalist team rival (different roster to previous years).  past results  references   recurring events established in 2015 sports in atlanta world championships in esports smite (video game) competitions
alyja daphne "jaja" antonio santiago (born january 20, 1996) is a filipino volleyball player who currently plays for saitama ageo medics of the japan's v.league.  personal life santiago was born on january 20, 1996, the fourth of five siblings. her brother axel leonard santiago, a former champion of men's volleyball player in national university "nu bulldogs" of uaap season 75, is currently working in pldt and her older sister is working in dubai, while she and her sister, aleona denise "dindin" santiago, both played for the women's volleyball in different leagues. her father was former basketball player jojo santiago and her mother is alma antonio, a caregiver in israel.  career  college santiago led the nu lady bulldogs to win back-to-back championships in the shakey's v-league 13th season collegiate conference without her sister dindin to support her, despite that, she was crowned as the conference most valuable player award and the best middle blocker. she was also crowned as the most valuable player in the 2016 philippine super liga grand prix in a back-to-back win with the foton tornadoes.  she started her rookie collegiate volleyball career with the ust golden tigresses, with her sister dindin before transferring to national university to follow her sister. after being transferred from ust to the nu lady bulldogs, santiago, now in her 4th year, served as the team captain. she was undecided if she was going to use her fifth and final year, after being eliminated by the ust golden tigresses in the uaap season 79 women's volleyball.  she holds the record of the youngest player to ever play in shakey's v-league. she joined nu as guest player in season 7 conference 2 at the age of 14. she also holds the record of the tallest player so far in the shakey's v-league as she stands 6'5".  club  foton tornadoes (2015-2018) her first professional team, the foton tornadoes, debuted in the 2015 grand prix conference of the philippine super liga (psl) and played for 3 conferences (2015 philippine super liga grand prix, 2016 philippine super liga all-filipino and 2016 philippine super liga grand prix).  in 2017, santiago won the premier volleyball league 1st season collegiate conference championship with the nu lady bulldogs and was named the conference mvp. also winning the bronze medal in the psl grand prix conference with the foton tornadoes along with the 1st best opposite spiker award
.  psl all stars santiago was part of the psl all stars selection team formed to represent the hosts of the 2016 fivb club world championship which was held in manila.  ageo medics (2018-2019) santiago joined ageo medics of japan's v.league in 2018 for the 2018-19 season.  foton tornadoes (2019) santiago returned the philippines to feature for the foton tornadoes in the 2019 psl all-filipino conference. following the conclusion of the tournament, she returned to japan to play for ageo medics again.  ageo medics (2019-2021) santiago helped ageo medics clinch a bronze medal finish in the 2019-20 division 1.  santiago renewed her contract with ageo medics in august 2020 she went on to help ageo medics win the division 1 v.cup title, which was the first for santiago with a foreign club. after she was unable to rejoin foton, which renamed themselves as chery tigo, for the 2020 psl grand prix which was cancelled due to the covid-19 pandemic.  shortly after, santiago bared that ageo medics has convinced her to change her citizenship to japanese through naturalization which would enable the club to field her as a local. however, santiago was non-committal and maintained that she still has pride in being a filipino citizen.  chery tiggo her contract with ageo medics expired after her 2021 v.cup stint. santiago returned to the philippines to play for the chery tiggo 7 pro crossovers, which has transferred from the psl to the newly fully-professionalized premier volleyball league (pvl). she rejected offer to play for a club in taiwan so she could play for chery in the pvl.  national team she was also a member of the philippine national team that played in singapore during the 28th southeast asian games and played in kuala lumpur, the 29th southeast asian games.  clubs   pldt home telpad turbo boosters (2014-2015)   foton tornadoes (2015-2019)   ageo medics (2018-present)   chery tiggo 7 pro crossovers (2021-present)  awards  individuals  2010 uaap season 72 girls' volleyball "rookie of the year"  2012 uaap season 75 girls' volleyball "best attacker"  2013 uaap season 76 "rookie of the year"  2014 shakey's v-league 11th season open conference "best attacker"  2015 uaap season 77 "best attacker"  2015 shake
y's v-league 12th season open conference "finals' most valuable player"  2015 shakey's v-league 12th season open conference "2nd best middle blocker"  2015 philippine superliga grand prix "2nd best middle blocker"  2016 shakey's v-league 13th season open conference "1st best middle blocker"  2016 shakey's v-league 13th season collegiate "conference's most valuable player"  2016 shakey's v-league 13th season collegiate conference "1st best middle blocker"  2016 uaap season 78 "best attacker"  2016 philippine superliga all-filipino "2nd best middle blocker"  2016 philippine superliga grand prix "most valuable player"  2017 uaap season 79 "best attacker"  2017 uaap season 79 "best scorer"  2017 uaap season 79 "best blocker"  2017 philippine superliga all-filipino "best opposite spiker"  2017 premier volleyball league 1st season collegiate conference "conference's most valuable player"  2017 philippine superliga grand prix "1st best opposite spiker"  2018 uaap season 80 "season's most valuable player"  2018 uaap season 80 "best attacker"  2019 philippine superliga all-filipino "1st best middle blocker"  2021 premier volleyball league open conference "2nd best middle blocker"  2021 premier volleyball league open conference "conference's most valuable player"  2021 premier volleyball league open conference "finals' most valuable player"  clubs  shakey's v-league 12th season open conference -  champion, with pldt home ultera ultra fast hitters  2015 philippine super liga grand prix -  champion, with foton tornadoes  2016 philippine super liga all-filipino -  runner-up, with foton tornadoes   2016 philippine super liga grand prix -  champion, with foton tornadoes  2017 philippine superliga grand prix -  bronze medal, with foton tornadoes  2019-20 v.league division 1 women's -  bronze medal, with ageo medics  2020-21 v.cup women's -  champion, with ageo medics  2021 premier volleyball league open conference -  champion, with chery tiggo crossovers  special recognition  2014 fivb volleyball women's world championship qualification (avc) "miss volleyball"  references  external links  volleyverse profile  1996 births people from cavite city national university (philippines) alumni university athletic association of the philippines volleyball players living people sportspeople from cavite philippines women's international volleyball players
filipino women's volleyball players middle blockers opposite hitters filipino expatriate sportspeople in japan expatriate volleyball players in japan competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games volleyball players at the 2018 asian games ageo medics players asian games competitors for the philippines filipino expatriate volleyball players
niquette bay state park is a  state park in colchester, vermont, on the shore of lake champlain.  the day-use park is located just off route 2, about  from sand bar state park in milton, vermont.  activities includes swimming, fishing, hiking, wildlife watching, and winter sports.  there is a swimming beach and hiking trails through the forested area and down to the beach.  references  external links  niquette bay state park - a hidden gem - lake champlain land trust  state parks of vermont colchester, vermont protected areas of chittenden county, vermont
phichai railway station is a railway station located in nai mueang subdistrict, phichai district, uttaradit. it is located  from bangkok railway station and is a class 2 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. phichai railway station opened as part of the northern line extension from phitsanulok to ban dara junction in november 1908.  there is also a specialty menu at this station that is recommended for those who pass by train. that is the "kaeng khua hoi khom" (), a thai curry with river snails over rice on a banana leaf container sold by hawkers with trays walking along platforms. it is regarded as the signature food of the locality. because pichai is a district surrounded by mountains and rivers, it is a place rich in food ingredients.  train services  special express 3/4 bangkok-sawankhalok/sila at-bangkok  express 51/52 bangkok-chiang mai-bangkok  rapid 102 chiang mai bangkok  rapid 105/106 bangkok-sila at-bangkok  rapid 107/108 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  rapid 109 bangkok-chiang mai  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  local 403 phitsanulok-sila at  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  local 410 sila at-phitsanulok  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
alaeddin mosque, or alaaddin mosque is the name of a number of mosques, mostly in turkey. it may refer to:  alaaddin mosque (sinop), in sinop, turkey alaeddin mosque, in konya, turkey alaeddin mosque (eskisehir), in eskisehir, turkey alaeddin mosque (jugra, malaysia), in jugra, selangor, malaysia yivliminare mosque, called also alaaddin mosque, in antalya, turkey
chiazzolino is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  dario chiazzolino (born 1985), italian jazz guitarist and composer giacomo chiazzolino (born 1986), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
the road transport act 1987 (), is a malaysian law which enacted to make provision for the regulation of motor vehicles and of traffic on roads and other matters with respect to roads and vehicles thereon; to make provision for the protection of third parties against risks arising out of the use of motor vehicles; to make provision for the co-ordination and control of means of and facilities for transport; to make provision for the co-ordination and control of means of and facilities for construction and adaptation of motor vehicles; and to make provision for connected purposes.  structure the road transport act 1987, in its current form (1 february 2013), consists of 5 parts containing 129 sections and 3 schedules (including 10 amendments).  part i: preliminary  part ii: classification, registration and licensing motor vehicles and drivers  classification of motor vehicles  registration of motor vehicles  licensing of motor vehicles  miscellaneous  licensing of motor drivers  driving and offences in connection therewith  licensing of drivers and conductors of public service vehicles, employees vehicles and goods vehicles  miscellaneous  part iia: periodic inspection of motor vehicles  part iib: foreign motor vehicles  part iii: roads  part iv: provisions against third party risks arising out of the use of motor vehicles  part v: offences and miscellaneous provisions  schedules  references  external links  road transport act 1987   1987 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation history of transport in malaysia transport legislation 1987 in transport
the locust creek house complex is a historic former tavern turned farmstead at 4 creek road (vermont route 12) in bethel, vermont.  built in 1837 and enlarged in 1860, it is a rare surviving example of a rural tavern in the state, with an added complex of agriculture-related outbuildings following its transition to a new role.  the property was listed on the national register of historic places in 1982.  it now houses residences.  description and history the locust creek house complex stands on the east side of vermont route 12, just south of its junction with vermont route 107.  it is a rambling complex of wood-frame structures, one or two stories in height, with most of them connected together.  stretching along the road are a five-bay i-house and a four-bay carriage barn with open ground-floor bays.  projecting from the rear of the i-house is a -story ell, while a barn is joined to the northeast corner of the carriage barn, and a gabled shed extends further north from the side of the barn.  the southern sections of this structure have been covered in a modern metal roof, and adapted for residential use, with the open carriage barn bays used as vehicle parking.  the house is the oldest portion of the building, and was constructed as a tavern in 1837.  it was apparently not very successful financially, going through a number of lessee and ownership changes in its early years.  the carriage barn was added in 1860, also including a large ballroom with a sprung floor on the second floor.  then billed as a hotel, it became a favored local social venue for dances and other events.  because the railroad did not pass nearby, it eventually declined and closed permanently in 1899.  for the first half of the 20th century it was the centerpiece of a small dairy farm.  see also national register of historic places listings in windsor county, vermont  references  houses on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in windsor county, vermont houses completed in 1837 houses in windsor county, vermont buildings and structures in bethel, vermont
kazuo iwama (, born january 1, 1951) is a japanese computer scientist who works at kyoto university. topics in his research include stable marriage, quantum circuits, the boolean satisfiability problem, and algorithms on graphs.  education and career iwama earned bachelor's, master's, and doctoral degrees from kyoto university in 1973, 1975, and 1980 respectively. he taught at kyoto sangyo university from 1978 to 1990, when he moved to kyushu university. in 1997 he returned as a professor to kyoto university.  academic service iwama became the founding president of the asian association for algorithms and computation in 2007. he was the founding editor-in-chief of the journal algorithms, in 2008. since 2013 he has been editor-in-chief of the bulletin of the european association for theoretical computer science.  awards and honors iwama received an honorary doctorate from the university of latvia in 2008, and was elected to the academia europaea in 2012.  selected publications . . . .  references  external links home page  1951 births living people japanese computer scientists theoretical computer scientists kyoto university alumni kyushu university faculty kyoto university faculty members of academia europaea
pierre comert (1880-1964) was a french journalist and diplomat. he was the director of the information section of the league of nations from 1919 to 1932 and the head of the information and press service of the ministry of foreign affairs from 1933 to 1938. in august 1940, in london, he founded the france daily.  early life  born in 1880 in montpellier, the son of a general of the engineer regiment, he went to the ecole normale superieure in 1900. then, he was nominated as an associate professor of german in the secondary school in bourges. the following year, he went around the world for one year, thanks to a scholarship financed by the philanthropist albert kahn. he resided, in particular, in the united states, japan and china.  during his travels, he found a passion for political problems and international relationships. on 18 april 1906, he was an accidental witness of the san francisco earthquake; he related it in the french daily newspaper le temps without realising he was starting his journalist career.  journalist after returning from his travels, he moved to germany as a lecturer in the gottingen university. then, he was employed by le temps as a correspondent in vienna, at the time capital of the austro-hungarian empire, and was deemed in 1911 a particular correspondent of that newspaper in berlin. his telegrams described and analyzed the progress of the militaristic ambitions of the german government and the feverish but also worried ambiance that slowly gained berlin. comert remained the german capital until 1 august 1914, two days before the declaration of war. in his last article as a correspondent of le temps, he related his return trip, particularly eventful.  as the war was declared, affected by "excessive myopia" (9.5 diopters), he was appointed to the press service of the ministry of foreign affairs, then became in february 1916 a press officer for the french embassy in london.  interwar period   in 1919, he actively participated in the creation of the league of nations, in london, next to especially jean monnet and sir eric drummond. he became one of the five directors of the league.  while the support of the public was, even more than the one of the governments, of utmost importance for the future of the new international organisation, comert created the information section of the league of nations.to manage the press. with his team, with 19 members in 1930, he established new relationships between diplomats and the press, making official documents public even before they were sent to the general assembly
or to the council of the league of nations.  called the 'cherished child of the league of nations', he had a real influence on the events until the end of 1932, which marked his departure, as demanded by the ultra-nationalist german government in place at the time (the latter accepted to nominate the frenchman joseph avenol to general secretary).  in january 1933, he was nominated in paris as the chief of the new press service of the ministry of foreign affairs and served as a spokesman. a leftist democrat even though he never joined a political party, he was notably a fervent defender of the german anti-nazis refugees in france.   his strong opposition to the munich agreement had him fired from this position by the minister georges bonnet. nominated as head of the american sub-division of the quai d'orsay, with the rank of plenipotentiary minister, he witnessed the disastrous events of 1940 and fled, along with paul reynaud's government, to tours then to bordeaux.  france daily   comert left bordeaux to go to london on 17 june, on board of the madura.  with a few colleagues and friends (such as charles and georges gombault, marcel hoden, louis levy), he founded the france daily newspaper, of which he was to be the director until its last issue (after the liberation, the newspaper kept being published under a weekly format, until june 1948).  mainly aimed to the french people in britain. with 20,000 french soldiers and sailors, the daily sold about 35,000 copies every day and had an increasing success. financed by the british government but with an independent tone, it strongly supported the war efforts of free france. the fact that it failed to join political creed of de gaulle gave much practical difficult. it became precious for its information and analysis on the progress of the war, particularly on the french resistance.  later life in 1949, he entered the foreign service of paris match/he retired in 1960 and split his life between sommieres, gard, where he owned a house, and his flat in the place des pyramides, in paris, where he died in 1964.  references  20th-century french diplomats french journalists league of nations
kennedy ohene agyapong (born june 16, 1960) is a ghanaian politician and businessman who represents assin central in parliament for the new patriotic party. he was first elected a member of parliament in 2000 to the seat of assin north. he retained his seat in the 2004 and 2008 parliamentary elections. in 2012 he was elected in the new seat of assin central and was re-elected in 2016. he also retained his seat in the 2020 general elections. he is currently the chairman of the parliament's defense and interior committee.  early life and education  ohene agyapong was born in assin dompim in the central region of ghana. he had his secondary education at adisadel college in the central region. agyapong holds a gce a level and studied in the fordham university, new york, usa. he is a farmer and businessman, director of assin farms, supercare group of companies and hollywood shopping centre. he is married with 22 children.  politics kennedy agyapong still remains one of the politicians who have never lost election. his intellectual work in the 2016 elections resulted in the victory of nana addo dankwah akufo- addo. he also contributed immensely to the victory of most npp parliamentary candidates- such as k.t hammond and many more.  kennedy agyapong chairs the communication committee in parliament, under the current presidency of nana akufo-addo.   agyapong has vowed to commit suicide if former president john mahama's brother, ibrahim, is not jailed by the akufo-addo government for some  corrupt activities which, according to agyapong, have led to the state losing money. one example he claimed, was the defaulting of payment of taxes by ibrahim mahama for more than a year period when his brother was president of the republic of ghana. agyapong's personal campaign on the issue to bring it to media attention led to  the investigation of ibrahim mahama and subsequent agreement of ibrahim mahama to pay the said taxes. this action earned kennedy agyapong praises from a wide section of ghanaians.  agyapong's indirect attack on the electoral commissioner of ghana charlotte osei for, he alleged, trading sex for her position as the electoral commissioner (ec) boss brought upon him criticisms from various leaders including queen mothers and human rights activists as well as other members of parliament. in 2018, following the arrest of ghana football association president kwasi nyantakyi, he said that anti-corruption investigative journalist
anas aremeyaw anas should be stopped before he started investigating people in their "bedrooms whilst asleep". he has repeatedly threatened anas and was condemned internationally by the committee to protect journalists  and reporters without borders  he stated that anas' methods were 'unfair'. speaking live on adom fm on 4 june 2018, he called anas "a blackmailer, an extortionist", mimed his throat being cut and said he should be "hanged." he also called for "retribution" against anas' fellow reporter, ahmed hussein-suale, saying "if he comes here, beat him... whatever happens, i'll pay." hussein-suale was subsequently assassinated.  in july 2018, he was cross examined for contempt of parliament.  he is believed to be the first ghanaian individual to own an ¢8 million rolls royce, and is believed to also own a private jet, sparking calls for an investigation from the customs excise and preventive service into his wealth.  see also who watches the watchman expose number 12 expose net2tvgh  references  19.ʌ "kennedy agyapong admits that he almost died last month. legitloaded.com. retrieved 21 july 2020.  living people 1960 births people from central region (ghana) ghanaian mps 2017-2021 fordham university alumni ghanaian agriculturalists ghanaian businesspeople ghanaian mps 2001-2005 ghanaian mps 2005-2009 ghanaian mps 2009-2013 ghanaian mps 2013-2017 ghanaian mps 2021-2025
grey spider flower may refer to:   grevillea bracteosa, endemic to western australia  grevillea sphacelata, endemic to australia  grevillea taxa by common name
excursions is an american independent film directed by daniel martinico.  the film follows two couples who retreat to a remote cabin in the woods for mysterious purposes.  it was written by martinico and hugo armstrong, who collaborated previously on the 2012 film ok, good.  release  excursions premiered in the beyond program at the 2016 slamdance film festival, and subsequently screened at the chicago underground film festival and new orleans film festival, among others.  the film was presented by slamdance cinema club and arclight cinemas as part of the arclight presents screening series in hollywood and chicago in july 2016.  it was named one of the 10 best undistributed films of 2016 by the film stage.  references  external links       2016 films english-language films american films american independent films
the work is the official student publication of tarlac state university (tsu) in tarlac city, philippines founded in 1948. it is a member of the college editors guild of the philippines (cegp), the oldest existing alliance of student publications in the country committed to uphold students' rights and press freedom.  the work circulates its regular issue at least four times in an academic year and its literary folio, obra, once in a year. it also releases special issues for the university intramurals and student elections and a mid-year issue after the regular semesters.  it is under the office of student affairs and is financially dependent of the university. it is run by an editorial board comprising an editor-in-chief, associate editor, managing editor, associate managing editor, and section editors, all of whom are undergraduate students, supervised by an adviser.  apart from its published issues, the work also holds laab, a seminar and workshop for student journalists on campus, and lathala, an annual literary and arts competition where winning works are published in obra.  the work is a two-time best performing publication in the regional higher education press conference (rhepc) and it is the recipient of the best publication award at the 6th gawad jemalyn lacadin, a regional biennial event organized by cegp.  sections the regular issues of the work are published in different formats (broadsheet, magazine, tabloid, newsletter) and contain six sections-the news, editorial and opinion, development communication, features, literary and culture, and the sports sections.   news - it usually includes university-based news, local and national news, and other stories affecting the tsu community. it occupies the largest portion of every issue. editorial and opinion features  development communication literary and culture sports  activities laab and lathala are university-wide activities the publication organizes. laab is a journalism and arts seminar-workshop offered to college publications annually. commenced in 2008, it aims to develop effective student journalists and to make college publications more active in campus journalism. moreover, lathala was launched in 2010 to discover students' talent in the field of literature and arts. it is a competition open to all students of tsu, and the winners and other selected works are published in obra, the work's literary folio.  references  publications established in 1948
julian christopher hill (born 4 june 1973) is an australian politician who is currently serving as the member of parliament for bruce in the house of representatives, and was previously the 4th mayor of port phillip.  a member of the australian labor party (alp), he succeeded alan griffin at the 2016 federal election.  hill is the deputy chair of the australian parliament's joint statutory committee of public accounts and audit. this committee oversees the commonwealth auditor-general, the parliamentary budget office and interrogates the australian government's expenditure, performance and financial statements.  before entering parliament, hill was the youngest councillor elected to the city of port phillip in 1999, and in 2000 became the city's youngest mayor, serving two terms from 2000-2002. hill was re-elected to serve another term as councillor of the city in 2002 and served until 2005. hill then forged a senior executive career in the victorian public service, serving under labor and liberal governments.  in his first speech hill stated: "i am conscious that as a rainbow labor member my election is a very small step to adding to the diversity of this parliament, and i am proud to see more lgbti australians in this parliament than the last." he is a member of labor's left faction. hill has championed australian multiculturalism and spoken up about the importance of australia embracing its human diversity to ensure future success; whether that be on the grounds of race, gender, sexuality or religion.  early life and education hill grew up in the east melbourne suburb of burwood, and attended wesley college from 1985 to 1990. he obtained bachelor of science (chemistry) and bachelor of laws degrees from monash university in 2000, and a graduate certificate of international relations from deakin university in 2015. he became a graduate member of the australian institute of company directors, and was elected a fellow of the institute of public administration australia in 2012.  personal life  hill has spoken of being raised by a single parent, his mother, after the death of his father, a medical doctor, when he was aged four.  he has described how his mother, a nurse and midwife by profession, instilled in him the values of "responsibility, hardwork and compassion". hill spoke in parliament, during national palliative care week, about "the enormous privilege and authentic human experience" he had nursing his mother at home for the 10 months before her death, after she was diagnosed with an incurable cancer in 2008.  hill campaigned for amendment to australian prescription drug laws following an incident in 2017 which left his daughter el
anor with a 64 cm blood clot after she was prescribed the oral contraceptive, diane-35, to use as an acne medication, which is not approved by the therapeutic goods administration.  hill's brother and only sibling was the actor and independent filmmaker damian hill, best known for writing and acting in the 2016 film pawno. damian died on 22 september 2018. julian hill presented the inaugural damian hill independent film award, named in honour of his brother, at the 2019 melbourne international film festival. hill has also spoken of two former long-term partners, lorien and david.  career hill started his career as an electorate officer and adviser for his predecessor alan griffin in 1995. from 2002 until his election to parliament in 2016, he worked as a senior public servant for the victorian government in the departments of transport, sustainability and environment, planning and community development, and economic development, jobs, transport and resources.  councillor and mayor of port phillip  in 1999 hill was elected a councillor of the city of port phillip and re-elected for a second term in 2002. in 2000 he was elected as the youngest ever mayor of the city at the age of 25 and served 2 terms.   as mayor, hill led the city through a period of enormous and rapid change, including a development boom as inner city bayside suburbs rapidly gentrified. hill led high profile initiatives in the municipality which generated metropolitan attention, including in transport planning, parking management, complex social policy reforms and the greening port phillip program. as mayor, hill signed the first friendship agreement between an australian local government and an east timorese town. founded on the principles of community development, the friends of suai celebrated its 20th year in 2020.  a 2000 article in the age newspaper states that "[f]ar from hiding his light in local government hill is fast becoming the most outspoken mayor in melbourne". questioned about being a young high profile councillor and mayor, hill commented that "[t]here is something insidious about saying, 'aren't you too young to be doing this job?' it is the other end of the scale from saying, 'oh, you're 60, your brain must be soft.'"  health policy - drug use treatment and law reform advocacy  hill was a strong advocate for the establishment of a supervised injecting centre in st kilda, melbourne. hill has continued his advocacy for reform in the federal parliament where he spoke his strong conviction that "[d]rug addiction is a health issue" that "must be treated like a health issue, like other health issues
. the evidence is clear: making it a moral issue does not help. it might make you feel good in your liberal partyroom meeting, in government, but it doesn't actually help anyone in the community suffering from addiction. addiction cuts across every class and hits every suburb and every family in this country."  in a speech to the house of representatives a year later hill reflected on his experience in his mid-20s "as the mayor and leader of an inner-city council where the heroin epidemic saw people dying every day, every week around the city, in shops, in front yards, in laneways. the evidence then remains true: criminalising or demonising someone's addiction, whether or not they need income support, doesn't actually help."  member for bruce in the australian parliament  hill was elected in 2016 with a swing of + 2.28%.  in 2018, as part of a redistribution altering electoral boundaries, media reports suggested hill was the biggest beneficiary.  he was subsequently reelected in 2019  australian head of state  hill made it clear in his maiden speech that he held strong views against the monarchy. in december 2019, he addressed the chamber on the issue, stating that when he was first elected it was a confronting moment for him to take an oath of allegiance to a foreigner. he spoke of feeling like a cheap traitor, going as far as stating that he crossed his fingers when taking his oath of allegiance.  see also  members of the australian house of representatives, 2016-2019  references  1973 births living people australian labor party members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for bruce members of the australian house of representatives south australian local councillors australian public servants labor left politicians place of birth missing (living people) lgbt legislators in australia 21st-century australian politicians
the 2018 new mexico gubernatorial election took place on november 6, 2018, to elect the next governor of new mexico, concurrently with the election of new mexico's class i u.s. senate seat, as well as other elections to the united states senate in other states, elections to the united states house of representatives and various local elections.  incumbent republican governor susana martinez was term-limited and could not seek reelection to a third consecutive term. following party primaries on june 5, 2018, u.s. representative steve pearce was the republican nominee and u.s. representative michelle lujan grisham was the democratic nominee. lujan grisham won the election by a substantial margin, which in fact was a complete reversal of the 2014 gubernatorial results. her win also signaled a continuation of the pattern of the partisanship of the office changing every two terms, beginning with gary johnson's first election in 1994. furthermore, the pattern of the partisanship changing with each officeholder was continued, a pattern first started after toney anaya left office in 1987. furthermore, the margin between the candidates (57.2% to 42.8%) was the same as the previous election, albeit with the parties switched.  background at the presidential level, new mexico has begun to trend into a democratic-leaning swing state. it has gone democratic in all but one presidential election since 1992. the only break in this trend came in 2004, when george w. bush won it by less than a point. however, in 2008, barack obama won the state over john mccain by 15 points and in 2012 by 10 points over mitt romney. in 2016, democrat hillary clinton defeated republican donald trump by eight points.  however, in 2010, then-district attorney of new mexico's third judicial district susana martinez won the election, becoming the first us latina governor, over lieutenant governor diane denish, former running mate of two-term democrat bill richardson, by approximately seven points. in 2014, martinez was re-elected over state attorney general gary king by nearly 15 points. it has been described as one of the democrats' best chances at a pickup, due to gov. martinez's unpopularity and because "she's leaving behind a high unemployment rate and struggling education system."  the 2018 primary election results show 116,311 votes for democratic candidate michelle lujan grisham and a total of 175,182 for all three democratic candidates while republican candidate/nominee steve pearce received 74,705; note that 23% of new mexico's registered voters are third party or independents (280,000
), who do not vote in the primary election.  republican primary  governor  candidates  nominated  steve pearce, u.s. representative, candidate for the u.s. senate in 2000 and nominee for the u.s. senate in 2008  declined  aubrey dunn, jr., new mexico commissioner of public lands and candidate for nm-02 in 2008  john sanchez, lieutenant governor and nominee for governor of new mexico in 2002  results  lieutenant governor  candidates  declared  michelle garcia holmes, former chief of staff to attorney general gary king, former police detective and candidate for mayor of albuquerque in 2017  withdrew  kelly zunie, former secretary of the new mexico indian affairs department  declined  ted barela, former state senator  mark moores, state senator  cliff pirtle, state senator  results  democratic primary  governor  candidates  nominated  michelle lujan grisham, u.s. representative  eliminated in primary  jeff apodaca, businessman and son of former governor jerry apodaca  joe cervantes, state senator  declined  hector balderas, attorney general (running for re-election)  javier gonzales, former mayor of santa fe (running for lieutenant governor)  martin heinrich, u.s. senator (running for reelection)  tim keller, mayor of albuquerque and former state auditor  ben ray lujan, u.s. representative  tom udall, u.s. senator  alan webber, mayor of santa fe and candidate for governor in 2014  endorsements  polling  results  lieutenant governor  candidates  declared  billy garrett, dona ana county commissioner rick miera, former majority leader of the new mexico house of representatives  howie morales, state senator and candidate for governor in 2014  withdrew  david mcteigue, juvenile probation officer jeff carr, retired teacher and former new mexico public education commissioner michael padilla, state senator  javier gonzales, former mayor of santa fe  declined  brian colon, former chairman of the democratic party of new mexico, nominee for lieutenant governor in 2010 and candidate for mayor of albuquerque in 2017 (running for state auditor)  bill o'neill, state senator  results  libertarian primary based on the party's voter registration numbers and presidential nominee gary johnson's result in 2016, the libertarian party holds major-party status in new mexico. under new mexico law, both gubernatorial and lieutenant governor candidates must receive each at least 230 signatures from registered libertarian voters to formally receive the nomination and be placed on the ballot as the libertarian nominees. both walsh and dunn failed to meet that requirement and will not
be on the ballot.  governor  candidates  declared  bob walsh, retired mathematician  declined  aubrey dunn, jr., commissioner of public lands(ran for the u.s. senate, but dropped out)  gary johnson, former republican governor and nominee for president in 2012 and 2016(running for the u.s. senate)  results  lieutenant governor  candidates  declared  robin dunn, wife of aubrey dunn, jr.  results  general election  endorsements  debates complete video of debate, september 19, 2018  predictions  polling  results  by county  by congressional district  see also new mexico elections, 2018  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia  official governor campaign websites michelle lujan grisham (d) for governor steve pearce (r) for governor bob walsh (l) for governor  official lt. governor campaign websites michelle garcia holmes (r) for lieutenant governor howie morales (d) for lieutenant governor  2018 new mexico elections 2018 2018 united states gubernatorial elections
john isner was the three-time defending champion, but lost in the final to nick kyrgios, 6-7(3-7), 6-7(4-7). kyrgios was the first non-american winner in the tournament's history.  seeds the top four seeds receive a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  lucky losers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  references main draw qualifying draw  atlanta open - singles bbandt atlanta open - singles 2016 singles atlanta
james pazhayattil (26 july 1934 - 10 july 2016) was the syro-malabar catholic hierarch, bishop of irinjalakuda, india.  ordained to the priesthood in 1961, pazhayattil served as bishop of irinjalakuda from 1978 to 2010.  notes  1934 births 2016 deaths syro-malabar bishops
the ancient theatre of epidaurus is a theatre in the greek city of epidaurus, located on the southeast end of the sanctuary dedicated to the ancient greek god of medicine, asclepius. it is built on the west side of cynortion mountain, near modern lygourio, and belongs to the epidaurus municipality. constructed in late 4th century bc, it is considered to be the most perfect ancient greek theatre with regard to acoustics and aesthetics.  history  according to pausanias, the ancient theatre was constructed at the end of the 4th century bc by the architect polykleitos the younger. pausanias praises the theatre for its symmetry and beauty. at a maximum capacity of 13,000 to 14,000 spectators, the theatre hosted music, singing and dramatic games that were included in the worship of asclepius. it was also used as a means to heal patients, since there was a belief that the observation of dramatic shows had positive effects on mental and physical health.  today, the monument attracts a large number of greek and foreign visitors and is used for the performance of ancient drama plays. the first modern performance conducted at the theatre was sophocles's tragedy electra. it was played in 1938, directed by dimitris rontiris, starring katina paxinou and eleni papadaki.  performances stopped due to world war ii. theatrical performances, in the framework of the organized festival, began again in 1954. in 1955 they were established as an annual event for the presentation of ancient drama. the epidaurus festival continues today and is carried out during the summer months.  the theatre has been sporadically used to host major musical events. in the framework of the epidaurus festival, well-known greek and foreign actors have appeared, including the greek soprano maria callas, who performed norma in 1960 and medee in 1961.  description  the monument retains the characteristic tripartite structure of a hellenistic theatre that has an theatron, orchestra, and skene. during roman times, the theatre (unlike many greek theatres) did not suffer any modifications.  the auditorium is divided vertically into two unequal parts, the lower hollow or theatre and the upper theatre or epitheatre. the two sub-sections are separated by a horizontal corridor for the movement of spectators (width 1.82 m.), the frieze. the lower part of the auditorium wedge is divided into 12 sections, while the upper part is divided into 22 sections. the lower rows of the upper and lower auditoriums have a presidency
form, namely places reserved for important people. the design of the auditorium is unique and based on three marking centres. due to this special design, the architects achieved both optimal acoustics and an opening for better viewing.  the circular orchestra, with a diameter of 20 m, constitutes the centre of the theatre. in the centre is a circular stone plate, the base of the altar or thymele. the orchestra is surrounded by a special underground drainage pipeline of 1.99 m width, called the euripos. the euripos was covered by a circular stone walkway.  opposite the auditorium and behind the orchestra develops the stage building of the theatre (skene), which was constructed in two phases: the first is placed at the end of the 4th century bce and the second in the middle of the 2nd century bce. the format of the skene (which is partly preserved today) is dated up to the hellenistic period and consisted of a two-storey stage building and a proscenium in front of the stage. there was a colonnade in front of the proscenium and on both of its sides, the two backstages slightly protruded. east and west of the two backstages there were two small rectangular rooms for the needs of the performers. two ramps lead to the roof of the proscenium, the logeion, where the actors later played. finally, the theatre had two gates, which are now restored.  excavations  the first systematic excavation of the theatre began in 1881 by the archaeological society, under the direction of archaeologist panayis kavvadias and preserved in very good condition thanks to the restorations of p. kavvadias (1907), of a. orlandos (1954-1963) and the preservation committee for epidaurus monuments (1988 to 2016). with the work done, the theatre has been recovered - except the stage building - almost entirely in its original form.  see also   list of ancient greek theatres  theatre at halicarnassus  references  further reading   defrasse a. and  lechat h., epidaure: restauration et description des principaux monuments d u sanctuaire d'asclepios, ''''paris, '1895   γωγος σ., γεωργουσοπουλος  κ. - ομαδα θεατρολογων, «επιδαυροσ: το αρχαιο θεα
τρο και οι παραστασεις»,  αθηνα 2004     a. von gerkan, w. muller-wiener, das theater von epidaurus, stuttgart 1961     καββαδιας π., το ασκληπιειο της επιδαυρου επανεκδοση του εργου το ιερον του ασκληπιου εν επιδαυρω και η θεραπεια των ασθενων (αθηνα 1900)  καζολιας ε., μελετη προστασιας, συντηρησης και αποκαταστασης του σκηνικου οικοδομηματος του αρχαιου θεατρου επιδαυρου, α΄φαση: αμεσα μετρα προστασιας και αποκαταστασης των ευπαθων τμηματων. επιδαυρος 2010  β. λαμπρινουδακης, ε. καζολιας, μ. σοφικιτου, το προγραμμα ερευνας, αποκαταστασης και αναδειξης του αρχαιου θεατρου ασκληπιειου επιδαυρου, εισηγηση στο διεθνες συνεδριο «το αρχαιολογικο εργο στην πελοποννησο», τριπολη, 7-11 νοεμβριου 2012.  μπολετης κ., ιστορικο των νεοτερων επεμβασεων στο θεατρο του ασκληπιειου επιδαυρου και
στον ευρυτερο χωρο του εως το 1989, αρχαιολογικο, δελτιο,ανατυπο,  μερος α΄:  μελετες, τομος 57, 2002     ομαδα εργασιας για τη συντηρηση των μνημειων επιδαυρου, το ασκληπιειο της επιδαυρου: η εδρα του θεου γιατρου της αρχαιοτητα, η συντηρηση των μνημειων του, περιφερεια πελοποννησου, 1999     παπαχατζης νικ. δ. παυσανιου ελλαδος περιηγησις, βιβλιο 2ο: λακωνικα, μεταφραση, αθηνα, 1989  the acoustic harmony of the epidaurus theatre https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ucziwyfilsi  ancient greek theatres in greece theatres in greece world heritage sites in greece epidaurus
the 2016 kontinental hockey league all-star game took place on january 23, 2016 at the vtb ice palace in moscow, russia, home of dynamo moskva, during the 2015-16 khl season. before the game, the players competed in the khl skills competition.  final roster   the first six players for each conference were chosen via a fan vote. the next six were chosen by media and accredited journalists. the final five were selected by the khl's competition committee.  withdrawn prior to the draft several players withdrew due to injury:  though kaspars daugavins participated in the skills competition, he would not play in the match due to an illness. he was not replaced.  game summary  references   sports competitions in moscow kontinental hockey league all-star games 2015-16 khl season
fred m. wilcox (july 17, 1870 - january 13, 1944) was an american lawyer, public official, and politician.  born in marshall county, iowa, wilcox graduated from montour high school in montour, iowa in 1887. he then graduated from iowa state university in 1893. in 1894, wilcox practiced law in seymour, wisconsin and then in appleton, wisconsin. wilcox served as district attorney for outagamie county, wisconsin from 1896 to 1904 and was a republican. wilcox served in the wisconsin state senate from 1905 to 1909. in 1913, wisconsin governor francis mcgovern appointed wilcox to the wisconsin industrial commission; wilcox served on the commission until 1934 and was chairman of the industrial commission. in 1936, wilcox was appointed director of the social security administration office in minneapolis, minnesota serving until his death in 1944. wilcox died from a heart attack, that he had while at work, at his home in minneapolis, minnesota.  notes  1870 births 1944 deaths people from marshall county, iowa politicians from appleton, wisconsin politicians from minneapolis iowa state university alumni wisconsin republicans district attorneys in wisconsin wisconsin state senators people from seymour, wisconsin
caramella is a 2010 studio album by the italian singer mina.  caramella may also refer to:  caramella, a fictional character in the italian comedy film scandal in sorrento, played by tina pica  candy caramella, a fictional character in the french animated series space goofs  count caramella (it. , ru. граф карамелла), an opera by baldassare galuppi  doto caramella, a species of gastropod within the genus doto  people with the surname  alberto caramella (1928-2007), an italian poet and lawyer  riccardo caramella, italian pianist, the first western pianist to perform xian xinghai's yellow river concerto in china with a chinese orchestra  see also  caramella girls, a swedish musical group  miriam caramella josephine battista (1912-1980), an american actress known for her early career as a child star in silent films  carmella, a given name  ciaramella, surname
dera bassi assembly constituency (sl. no.: 112) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in sahibzada ajit singh nagar district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sahibzada ajit singh nagar district 2012 establishments in punjab, india
renai medicity is a multi super-speciality hospital in kochi, kerala, built in memory of founder late polakulath narayanan. the hospital is situated on  of land adjacent to nh 47, between palarivattom and edapally.  overview renai medicity is managed by polakulath group of hotels, resorts & healthcare. the hospital is located at the heart of kochi. the hospital has an in-patient capacity of 500 beds and has 24 hour accident & emergency care facilities. the nearest airport is cochin international airport,  from the hospital by road. the vytilla mobility hub is  away and can be accessed through nh 47. the nearest railway station, edappally is  away and the kochi metro has a station just  away.  facilities the hospital has 500 beds and has centrally air conditioned rooms. renai medicity has a 24x7 accident & emergency care unit that can handle any emergency, the first of its kind in kerala. it has 15 operation theaters including hybrid ot's for cardiothoracic surgeries and  11 separate intensive care units with 120 beds. it houses more than 35 specialty and super specialty departments, multiple cath labs, a chest pain centre, modern radiological equipment, 24 hour pharmacies and clinical laboratories, suites and wards, multiple restaurants, ample car parking facilities and more.  the core departments include anesthesia and critical care, cardiology, endocrinology, gastroenterology, dental sciences, ayurveda, dermatology & cosmetology, neonatology, nephrology, neurosurgery, orthopaedics, psychiatry, plastic surgery and urology.  references  hospitals in kochi year of establishment missing
the international racquetball federation's 18th racquetball world championships were held in cali, colombia, from july 15 to 23, 2016. this was the first time worlds were in colombia, and the first time the event was held in south america since 1998, when cochabamba, bolivia, was host.  in the final, americans aimee ruiz and janel tisinger upset mexicans paola longoria and samantha salas, who were the three time defending champions in women's doubles. ruiz and tisinger were silver medalists in 2014, when they lost to the mexicans in the final. the win was ruiz's third world championship in women's doubles, as she also won in 2006 with laura fenton and 2008 with jackie paraiso. it was tisinger's first world championship.  tournament format the 2016 world championships was a two-stage competition. there was an initial group stage played as a round robin with the results used to seed teams for the medal  round.  round robin source  pool a  pool b  pool c  pool d  elimination round source  references  2016 racquetball world championships
first place is an album by the j. j. johnson quartet which was released on the columbia label.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 4 stars stating "bop is their thing, and johnson's flawless lines on his trombone were never more in evidence than on this stupendous effort...  johnson's smaller ensemble dates have stood the test of time as perhaps his best ever -- which is debatable, considering all his fine work, but first place is indisputably brilliant".  track listing  recorded at columbia studios, studio a, nyc on april 11, 1957 (tracks 2, 3, 5, 6 & 9), april 12, 1957 (tracks 1, 4 & 7) and at columbia 30th street studios, nyc on april 26, 1957 (track 8).  personnel j. j. johnson - trombone tommy flanagan - piano paul chambers - bass max roach - drums  references  columbia records albums j. j. johnson albums 1957 albums albums produced by cal lampley
the computer crimes act 1997 (), is a malaysian law which was enacted to provide for offences relating to the misuse of computers.  structure the computer crimes act 1997, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 3 parts containing 12 sections and no schedule (including no amendment).  part i: preliminary  part ii: offences  part iii: ancillary and general provisions  references  external links  computer crimes act 1997   1997 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
mohammad azam (born 23 october 1980) is an emirati cricketer. he is a left-hand batsman and left-arm orthodox bowler. he made first class debut against ireland in icc intercontinental cup in 2013   he made his list a debut against ireland in icc world cricket league in 2013  he made t20 debut against ireland on 21 march 2013. on 11 august 2013 he played a match winning knock against canada in t20.  references  external links    1980 births living people emirati cricketers
philippe briones is a french animator, author and comic book artist. his pencils are usually inked by himself.  biography he did his studies in france, at the " beaux-arts" in beaune, and at the " cft goblins" in paris. right after his studies, he was recruited  by disney studios to work in animation, and he started by working on "a goofy movie", in 1994. he worked on several disney animation movies, but it is important to notice that he has been the clean-up supervisor on tarzan's adult character, and collaborated with the number one in animation, glen keane for 2 years. at the same time, in 2002, he started his author career by working for the french editor "soleil production" on  titles such as "les seigneurs d'agartha", "tales of the dragon guard" and "kookaburra".  he signed his first contract at marvel comics in 2006, on the "white tiger" series. then, he worked on various series with famous characters such as namor, iron man, spider-man, and  x-men, until he was approached by dc comics, in 2015. they first offered him to illustrate the "suicide squad" series. he then worked on a "flash" issue, and is now acting on the "aquaman" rebirth series.  while drawing for dc comics, he still works for french editors, with some various and sometimes stunning collaborations (karate boy, psg heroes). co-scriptwriter, he also has illustrated the geek agency series, which cleverly associate action, pop culture references and humor. he achieved in 2016 an album in the "7" collection at delcourt.( "7 heros").  filmography  bibliography french editors :    soleil productions  (2001-2002) : "les seigneurs d'agartha" issues 1 & 2.    (2002-2006) : tales of the dragon guard issues 2 et 4.     (2004) : kookaburra universe.    (2015) : psg heroes issues 1 & 2.      "label fusion" (soleil/panini).  (2008) : wanderers : (on an original scenario by chris claremont).  ankama.  (2012) : karate boy.  (2013) : geek agency tome 1 : resident geek : original scenario by philippe briones and romain huet, drawing and inking by philippe briones, colors by romain huet.
(2013) : geek agency tome 2 : dragon geek   : original scenario by philippe briones and romain huet, drawing and inking by philippe briones, colors by romain huet.  delcourt.  (2016) : "7 heros" ( collection " 7 ", 3rd season ). american editors :  marvel comics.  (2006) : white tiger #1-5 : drawing, inked by don hillsman.  (2007) : namor #1-6 : #1-3 drawing and inking, #4-6 drawing, inked by scott hanna.   (2008-2009) : x-men legacy #216,219 et 225 : #216 drawing, inked by scott hanna #219 inked by cam smith, #225 drawing and inking.   (2009) : mrs marvel  #245.   (2009) : iron man vs whiplash #1-4.    (2010) : american son #1-4.    (2010) : iron man legacy #10-11 : drawing, inked by jeff huet.    (2010) : web of spider man #7 & 12    (2011) : captain america corps #1-5 : in collaboration with roger stern.  (2013-2014) : uncanny x- force #13-15 (2015) : x-men #13-15,17. dc comics.  (2015-2016) : suicide squad #8-16.  (2015) : suicide squad annual #1.  (2016) : flash #49.  (2016) : aquaman (rebirth) #3-5.  references   http://marvel.com/comics/creators/1122/philippe_briones  http://www.dccomics.com/talent/philippe-briones his page on dc comics.com  http://www.bedetheque.com/auteur-5724-bd-briones-philippe.html  http://culturebox.francetvinfo.fr/livres/bande-dessinee/rencontre-avec-philippe-briones-le-frenchie-qui-dessine-spider-man-155089  external links  his page on marvel.com  his page on dc comics.com  his page on bdgest  his blog  comiccon interview  phil briones on comicvine  living people french animators french comics artists french male
writers year of birth missing (living people)
gaudenzi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  andrea gaudenzi (born 1973), italian tennis player gianluca gaudenzi (born 1965), italian footballer and manager jochen gaudenzi (born 1978), austrian footballer and manager pietro gaudenzi (1880-1955), italian painter pietro gaudenzi (bishop) (died 1664), roman catholic bishop stefano gaudenzi (born 1941), italian tennis player  italian-language surnames
the casca river () is a river of the state of mato grosso, brazil. it is a tributary of the roncador river.  course  the casca river runs through the rio da casca ecological station  from south to north. further north the casca river is dammed for the casca hydroelectric plant. still further north it joins the roncador river in an arm of the manso dam.  see also list of rivers of mato grosso  references  sources  rivers of mato grosso
the third series of british television comedy sketch series the catherine tate show premiered on bbc two on 26 october 2006 and ended on 30 november 2006. this is the final series of the show; however a christmas special was broadcast on bbc one on 25 december 2007. although this was the end to the sketch series, popular character joannie 'nan' taylor began appearing in her own spin-off specials, beginning with nan's christmas carol in 2009 and catherine tate's nan from 2014.  in addition to the major characters of series one and series two, new main character geordie georgie is introduced for the third series. new subsidiary characters include john reilly's mum, ma willow, helen marsh, laura powers, snack food woman and the frankie howerd impressionist.  due to the high ratings success of the third series, peaking at 4.92 million viewers, the show was moved to bbc one for the 2007 christmas special and has remained on the channel from future specials.  characters   joannie 'nan' taylor: the foul-mouthed grandmother is an old east london woman who constantly swears at and criticises other people. she is always visited by her well-mannered grandson jamie, where the visits usually start off well enough, with the nan showing how grateful she is that her grandson has come to see her. however, things usually take a turn for the worse after she starts to make unfavourable comments about her neighbours, family, and home help visitors. jamie is a university student, but according to nan, is unemployed. nan repeatedly asserts that he is gay, although jamie has said on many occasions that he has a girlfriend. regular performances by catherine tate and mathew horne.  lauren cooper: lauren cooper is a comprehensive school student with a bad attitude who is most widely known for her phrase "am i bovvered?". lauren, her best friend lisa 'liese' jackson and her love interest ryan perkins are known as yobs. regular performances by catherine tate, mathew horne and niky wardley.  bernie: the incompetent irish nurse. bernie is an unruly, randy woman who bordered on being sacked in the hospital where she worked in every episode. she frequently makes inappropriate remarks to her patients, flirts with most of the male staff, takes a critically ill patient on a wild night out, and mixes up the records of living patients with those of deceased ones. regular performance by catherine tate.  paul and sam: the essex couple. they are happily married yet slightly simple, and find everyday
situations surprisingly hilarious. paul and sam often excitedly tell each other stories, which they find highly amusing and interesting. the stories build up and when completed, paul and sam would both produce an exaggerated and completely silent laugh.  regular performances by catherine tate and lee ross.  kate and ellen: this sketch followed two office workers who sat next to each other. while ellen is usually keen to get on with her work, she is frequently disturbed by kate (tate). kate continually makes conversation about her lifestyle, inviting her co-worker to "have a guess!" on such delicate situations. while ellen is reluctant to go along with the guessing games, she is pressured into making a wild guess, which almost always results in kate's becoming insulted and consequently offensive. ellen occasionally guesses correctly, causing kate to become angry and verbally or physically abuse her. regular performances by catherine tate and ella kenion.   elaine figgis: elaine is a woman who appeared in a documentary following her search for love, mostly corresponding with people around the world via the internet in search of a man. the unseen interviewer and narrator is called tanya. follows her engagement and eventual marriage to a convicted cannibal and lunatic on death row in the us, who abducted, tortured and murdered eight people, proceeding to eat two of them. regular performance by catherine tate and rebecca front as the voice of tanya.  the aga saga woman: an upper-middle-class woman who goes into a state of shock in various, seemingly innocuous situations. regular performance by catherine tate.  derek faye: derek, who first appeared in series two, is a man who shows several signs of being gay (combining some mannerisms of famous gay british comedians such as kenneth williams and frankie howerd), but seems to be in denial about his sexuality and becomes extremely offended and defensive when people assume he is gay. to his dislike, these occurrences are frequent because he behaves in an extremely effeminate way. his most famous catchphrase is "how very dare you!", along with the overuse of the word "dear". this can be seen in another catchphrase; when asked about his sexuality he replies "who, dear? me, dear? gay, dear? no, dear!", or when asked for advice replying "me, dear? advice, dear? yes, dear." when offended, derek states how he and his mother have been doing something relative to the person derek is insulted by for 25 years. regular performer includes catherine tate.  irene and vernon: irene (
whose accent suggests that she is an east londoner of maltese origins) and the ever silent vernon (often referred to as vern) first appeared in series two. they are the owners of a mobile burger van situated on the side of a motorway. during their sketches they are visited by a regular customer called neville whom irene tries to convince that she and vernon have been visited by various celebrities. neville almost always orders a double cheese with no sauce, and keeps a tab with irene and verne and always asks if he can "settle up on friday." when neville appears, irene never knows the name of the celebrity in question and always attempts to describe them. regular performers include catherine tate, aschlin ditta and brian murphy.   janice and ray: a racist, xenophobicnorthern couple, who express their disgust at meals they have been presented with at restaurants, usually based on either perceived over-pricing or the exotic nature of the food. they are also shown to be frustrated by the availability of such items in their locality, owing to comments such as "this were in harrogate." after complaining about the food and prices, they use their most infamous catchphrase: "the dirty bastards!" or sometimes "the dirty, evil, robbing bastards!"  geordie georgie: a frequent petitioner, who constantly tries to get her co-worker, martin, to sponsor her charities with facts such as "every 38 minutes ..." then follows her statements up with "if you don't believe me then log on to the website ...". the scenes for this sketch follow the same pattern. georgie comes into the office and starts singing happily, with martin joining in, and then she asks martin how his weekend went. martin then talks about his daughter michaela which would prompt georgie to feel concerned about her but then begin to talk abusively about her. georgie then requests to borrow something on martin's desk, for example "can i borrow your nice lime green highlighter?" she then describes her and 'the girls' latest fund-raising effort and asks him to sponsor her. he always offers a modest donation then makes at least one small increase, but after several futile attempts to get him to donate yet more money, she says "let's say no more about it because i wouldn't want it to come between us pet". she then attacks him in a manner that has something to do with the cause she was championing.  episodes  release  reception  accolades british academy television awards   -nominated: bafta award for best make up & hair design
(vanessa white & neill gorton)  -nominated: bafta award for best comedy programme (catherine tate, geoffrey perkins, aschlin ditta & gordon anderson)  national television awards   national television award for most popular comedy programme (the catherine tate show)  british comedy awards   -nominated: british comedy award for best tv comedy actress (catherine tate)  home media  "series three" was released on dvd on region 2 in the united kingdom on 12 november 2007 from 2 entertain distribution. a boxset comprising "complete series one, two and three was additionally released on 17 november 2007. "the catherine tate show: christmas special" was made available on dvd on 26 december 2007, a day following its broadcast.  on region 4 in australia, "series three" was released on dvd on 30 june 2008 and includes the 2007 christmas special, which was not made available as a single dvd edition. the third series, with the christmas special, was again released as part of "complete series one, two and three" box set on 2 april 2009.  future episodes  following the conclusion of the original sketch series, the catherine tate show returned in 2009 with a spin-off christmas special titled "nan's christmas carol" in which the character of joannie 'nan' taylor only appeared, while spoofing a christmas carol. "catherine tate's nan" is now established as the first episode of christmas and new year specials titled "catherine tate's nan" (or simply "nan"). 2014 saw the return of nan taylor as she is accompanied by school girl, alice, who makes frequent visits as part of the 'young and old buddy-up foundation', while her grandson, jamie, is in africa building a school for orphans and makes regular contact with nan via skype. while nan, accompanied by alice, is on a mission to have her kitchen tap fixed, insisting the help of the council, she lands herself in trouble for 'disturbing the peace' and must serve community service. two further "nan" specials broadcast in december 2015; the first with nan being forced to attend anger management classes and the second with nan fighting against a group of property developers who have bought the block of flats which she lives in.  further reading  catherine tate: laugh it up!'' (6 october 2008 - andre deutsch ltd, ) by tina ogle.  references  external links    the catherine tate show episodes at the internet movie database  the catherine tate show episodes at epguides  2006 british television seasons

budhlada assembly constituency (sl. no.: 98) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in mansa district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  2007  2002  results from 20th century  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india mansa district, india
steenberg may refer to:   steenberg, cape town, a small community in south africa  steenberg railway station  steenberg estate, a hotel, vineyard and golf course in cape town  steenberg (surname)
charles f. "chub" watson (april 5, 1915 - june 28, 1971) was an american professional basketball player. he played college basketball for davis & elkins college and marshall university, as well as baseball and football for marshall. watson then played in the national basketball league for the pittsburgh pirates in only one game during the 1938-39 season and scored 16 points.  references  1915 births 1971 deaths american men's basketball players basketball players from west virginia centers (basketball) davis & elkins senators men's basketball players high school football coaches in west virginia marshall thundering herd baseball players marshall thundering herd football players marshall thundering herd men's basketball players people from lewis county, west virginia pittsburgh pirates (nbl) players player-coaches
saleh al-qobaissi (born 6 november 1964) is a saudi arabian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1964 births living people saudi arabian male cyclists olympic cyclists of saudi arabia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
the third and final season of the american streaming television series daredevil, which is based on the marvel comics character of the same name, follows matt murdock / daredevil, a blind lawyer-by-day who fights crime at night. when wilson fisk is released from prison, murdock must decide between hiding from the world or embracing his life as a hero vigilante. the season is set in the marvel cinematic universe (mcu), sharing continuity with the films and other television series of the franchise. it is produced by marvel television in association with abc studios, with erik oleson serving as showrunner, and series creator drew goddard acting as a consultant.  charlie cox stars as murdock and vincent d'onofrio portrays fisk, with deborah ann woll, elden henson, and stephen rider also returning from previous seasons; joanne whalley, jay ali, and wilson bethel join them. former series regular ayelet zurer also returns in a guest role. the season was ordered in july 2016, with oleson announced as the new showrunner for the season in october 2017. filming began the following month and ended by june 2018, with the season adapting elements from the "born again" comic storyline.  the 13-episode season was released on october 19, 2018. netflix canceled the series on november 29, 2018.  episodes  cast and characters  main  charlie cox as matt murdock / daredevil  deborah ann woll as karen page  elden henson as franklin "foggy" nelson  joanne whalley as maggie grace  jay ali as rahul "ray" nadeem  wilson bethel as benjamin "dex" poindexter  stephen rider as blake tower  vincent d'onofrio as wilson fisk / kingpin  recurring  peter mcrobbie as paul lantom  danny johnson as benjamin donovan  stephen rowe as nicholas lee  kate udall as tammy hattley  sunita deshpande as seema nadeem  noah huq as sami nadeem  geoffrey cantor as mitchell ellison  peter halpin as theo nelson  amy rutberg as marci stahl  holly cinnamon as julie barnes  royce johnson as brett mahoney  joe jones as felix manning  kelly mcandrews as mrs. shelby  notable guests  matt gerald as melvin potter  john patrick hayden as jack murdock  annabella sciorra as rosalie carbone  ron simons as strieber  ayelet zurer as vanessa marianna-fisk  production  development at san diego comic-con international 2016, marvel and netflix revealed the series had been renewed for a third season, with the expectation
that doug petrie and marco ramirez would return as showrunners from the second season. in october 2017, it was announced that erik oleson would replace petrie and ramirez as showrunner for the season. the season had yet to be scheduled for release by the end of july 2018, and television critics wondered whether the quality of the season was to blame on this. netflix vp cindy holland responded that the scheduling of the various marvel netflix series, especially the crossover miniseries the defenders which required cast members from all of the series to come together, was to blame for the delay, and that the company had no issue with the quality of the season; on the contrary, holland described the season as "fantastic" and felt it was a "real return to form" for the series.  writing the ending of the miniseries the defenders, which sees matt murdock waking up in a convent surrounded by nuns after being presumed dead, implied elements of the season would be inspired by the "born again" story arc. charlie cox was excited to adapt "born again", calling it "an amazing story" and that the implications of the story on the season "would be  exciting". he cautioned, however, that it would not be a "page-for-page" adaptation, "because if you do [that], then you become a foregone conclusion. there may be elements from "born again", but i'm sure there will be elements that are unfamiliar and surprising and different in order for the show to be compelling to fans who know the comics very well." oleson crafted an original story for the season, taking "pieces of some of my favorite comic book runs, that told a larger story". when pitching his ideas to marvel, oleson expected "more pushback" from them, but said "marvel was incredibly excited about the storyline" and gave him "complete freedom". executive producer jeph loeb did note that despite this apparent freedom, oleson was still required to deal with murdock's death in the defenders which was part of "a fairly good idea as to what [marvel] wanted to tackle in terms of story" before oleson presented his ideas. oleson drew inspiration from "born again" and "guardian devil" for the tone of the season. building the season structurally, oleson felt if any viewer was "a devout catholic... you could read into the events of the early episodes as a message from god to matt".  at the start of the season, oleson noted that murdock would be "broken physically, broken emotionally,
and broken spiritually", with his heightened senses failing him. oleson added, "he's angry at god, he's angry at the fact that he had risked his life to do god's work, and he's questioning whether or not he was a fool." this results in murdock donning his original black suit, similar to the one he wore in season one, since he "goes to pretty much the darkest place you can" and is at a point, oleson notes, "[w]hen he realizes that he's incapable of being daredevil, [and] he would rather just end it than go forward in his life without abilities." this also allowed oleson to return the character "to the core idea" of being a boxer's son, "where his fighting style was more brutal and kind of close in combat". oleson also wanted "to make the action sequences matter in ways that reflected on characters, or had real stakes". he added, "the best writing is one where the action sequences are an inherent part of the story and you cannot predict that the action is going to turn out a certain way."  regarding the return of wilson fisk / kingpin, oleson called him "smarter, more calculated, and more manipulative," and felt his inclusion allowed the ability to "tell a story that's relevant to the world around us. i looked at the show as a way to examine how tyrants manipulate in order to push their own agenda and cause fear and distrust." loeb felt the season went "back to the world of the crime story". karen page's backstory is further explored in the season, with woll explaining it reveals "why shooting someone [james wesley] and covering it up is a bit more in her wheelhouse," while foggy nelson's family and additional backstory is also seen. all of the supporting characters in the season were treated "as emotionally real people as opposed to treating them as props or devices". oleson wanted them to be "the protagonist of their own journey", modeling this approach after the series breaking bad, game of thrones, the sopranos, and the wire.  benjamin "dex" poindexter does not go by bullseye in the season. in the season's final sequence, dex's spine is being operated on before the camera zooms into his face and a bullseye appears in his eye. oleson "was very interested in telling an origin story not only about how a character we know from the comics as a full-blown psychopath and killer,
but how somebody in real life could be turned into something like that." this origin also spoke to the overall theme for the season of fear, which touched the story arcs of murdock, page, and fisk as well. psychiatrists and psychologists were consulted to help create "a realistic portrait of dex and how he might be able to turn into bullseye".  casting cox, woll, henson, and d'onofrio all return in the season, reprising their roles as matt murdock / daredevil, karen page, foggy nelson, and wilson fisk / kingpin, respectively. rider also returns as blake tower. in november 2017, wilson bethel was cast as a new series regular, benjamin "dex" poindexter, and in january 2018, joanne whalley was revealed to have been cast as maggie grace, a nun who cares deeply about murdock's safety, and was mentioned at the end of the defenders. jay ali was cast as rahul "ray" nadeem, another fbi agent, by march.  recurring characters in the season include peter mcrobbie as paul lantom, danny johnson as benjamin donovan, geoffrey cantor as mitchell ellison, amy rutberg as marci stahl, and royce johnson as brett mahoney, all of whom are reprising their roles from earlier seasons. other recurring characters include stephen rowe as nicholas lee, one of fisk's lawyers; kate udall as tammy hattley, the special agent in charge of the fbi; sunita deshpande as seema nadeem and noah huq as sami nadeem, ray's wife and son, respectively; peter halpin as theo nelson, foggy's brother created for the series; holly cinnamon as julie barnes, a friend of dex; joe jones as felix manning, fisk's fixer; kelly mcandrews as mrs. shelby, fisk's surveillance technician; and matthew mccurdy, don castro, scotty crow, richard prioleau, david anthony buglione, sam slater, and andrew sensenig as fbi agents wellers, arinori, lim, doyle, johnson, o'connor, and winn, respectively.  characters making guest appearances from the first two seasons and other mcu media include matt gerald as melvin potter, john patrick hayden as jack murdock, annabella sciorra as rosalie carbone, following up on her character's introduction in the second season of luke cage, ron simons as nypd captain strieber, following his appearance in the defenders, and former main cast member ayelet zurer as vanessa marianna-fisk.  former daredevil comic writer and editor roy
thomas has a cameo appearance as a prison inmate in "blindsided".  design costume designer liz vastola noted daredevil's black suit was "purposely ripped and jagged to highlight matt's state of mind" throughout the season. vastola described page's wardrobe as "fucking fierce" as page transitions into more of an investigative journalist. foggy nelson's look is a "complete 180" from what he was wearing in season one, with the character now wearing suits made by martin greenfield clothiers.  filming filming for the season began on november 13, 2017, in new york city. a week of filming for the season in march 2018 took place in the town of windham, new york, with set photos revealing that the town was representing fagan corners, vermont, the hometown of karen page in the comics. the production paid for the renovation of a local store to portray a diner for the series, and used the town's emergency helicopter pad. additional filming locations for the week included nearby ski areas and a country club. the exterior of the lotte new york palace hotel served as the building of fisk's penthouse while under fbi surveillance. an abandoned prison in staten island was used for the riot sequence in episode four. filming for the season was completed by mid-june 2018.  "blindsided" features a long action sequence filmed in a single take. oleson credited the episode's director alex garcia lopez, writer lewaa nasserdeen, and the stunt team for conceiving the idea. once the sequence was decided, oleson asked marvel to give them a full day to rehearse the sequence, which "no one had ever done before", since "it required every single member of the crew to work in perfect sync." oleson said once "the crew finally pulled it off, it was something spectacular that injected adrenaline into the crew for the remainder of the season." the sequence, which does not feature any hidden edit cuts, was meant to be a "homage, and then one-upping" of the sequence from season one. several moments were included in the sequence where the editing team could add a cut if needed, though they did not need them. while editing the episode, oleson increased the lighting in certain shots "so that the audience could see that we never cut the camera". cox called the completed sequence "amazing", adding it was "a real testament to the stunt team".  music composer john paesano once again returns for the season. a soundtrack album for the season was released digitally by hollywood records on october
19, 2018.  all music composed by john paesano, unless otherwise noted.  marketing by mid-june 2018, discussions were underway regarding the season being promoted at san diego comic-con that year. a teaser trailer for the season was included as a post-credits scene at the end of the second season of iron fist. a full trailer for the season was released on october 4, 2018, which also confirmed bethel's role as benjamin poindexter in the season. cox, henson, woll, d'onofrio, whalley, bethel, and ali promoted the season at new york comic con on october 6, 2018.  release the third season of daredevil was released on october 19, 2018 on the streaming service netflix, worldwide, in ultra hd 4k. initially thought to be releasing in 2017, netflix coo ted sarandos stated in july 2016 that the season would not debut until 2018 at the earliest, after the defenders released on august 18, 2017. cox was hopeful the season would debut in 2018, and in october 2017, marvel revealed the season was indeed expected to release in 2018. in mid-september 2018, the season's release date was revealed.  the season, along with the additional daredevil seasons and the other marvel netflix series, will no longer be available on netflix starting march 1, 2022, due to netflix's license for the series ending and disney regaining the rights. canada will be one of the first territories to have the season be available on disney+ in the star hub, starting march 16.  critical response the review aggregation website rotten tomatoes reported a 97% approval rating based on 64 reviews, with an average rating of 8.06/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "the man with no fear returns to top form with a third season that begins tediously slow but gradually generates comic book thrills, immeasurably helped by the welcome return of vincent d'onofrio's menacing kingpin." metacritic reported a score of 71 based on 6 reviews.  notes  references  external links       03 2018 american television seasons
ramarajyamlo bheermaraju is a 1983 indian telugu-language action film, produced by midde rama rao under the sri rajyalakshmi art pictures banner and directed by a. kodandarami reddy. it stars krishna and sridevi, with music composed by chakravarthy.  cast  krishna as bheemaraju / krishna raja kumar sridevi as jyothi rao gopal rao as ramaraju satyanarayana as lakshmipathi allu ramalingaiah as kailasam jaggayya as raghupati raja chandra mohan as ramudu rajendra prasad as satish suthi veerabhadra rao as veerabhadraiah suthi velu as kanaka rao rallapalli as rajaiah kk sarma as priest chalapathi rao as polaiah mallikarjuna rao as rangadu sangeeta as sundari sivaranjani as seeta nirmalamma as suvachala  crew art: a. sai kumar choreography: saleem stills: sabastian brothers fights: parama sivam, raju dialogues: satyanand  lyrics: veturi playback: s. p. balasubrahmanyam, p. susheela, s. p. sailaja music: chakravarthy story: vasundhara editing: d. venkataratnam cinematography: a. venkat producer: midde rama rao screenplay - director: a. kodandarami reddy banner: sri rajyalakshmi art pictures release date: 28 july 1983  soundtrack  music composed by chakravarthy. lyrics were written by veturi.  references  external links    indian films indian action films films directed by a. kodandarami reddy films scored by k. chakravarthy 1983 action films 1983 films
the practical shooting association of panama, spanish club de tiro practico de panama, is the panamanian association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organizations of panama
cortinarius controversus is a species of fungus native to tasmania.  references  external links  controversus fungi native to australia fungi described in 2008
sphingomonas sediminicola  is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from freshwater sediments from the daecheong bank near daejeon in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas sediminicola at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  sediminicola bacteria described in 2013
steal kisses (tc: 偷吻) is a cantopop album by edmond leung.  track listing ends of the earth: west of the sun (天涯:太陽之西) angle (角度) the men in the closet (衣櫃裡的男人) a genuine person (性情中人) my wish (我的志願) after love (戀後) splendid and fallen (燦爛與墮落) mistake (破綻) ends of the earth: south of the border (海角:國境之南) be reluctant to part (依依)  charts  references  edmond leung albums 1997 albums
the 2015 atp challenger china international - nanchang was a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. it was the second edition of the tournament which was part of the 2015 atp challenger tour. it took place in nanchang, china between 14 and 20 september 2015.  singles main draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of september 7, 2015.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   he yecong   yuqing ning   zhuoyang qiu   zhicheng zhu  the following player received entry courtesy of a protected ranking:   amir weintraub  the following player received entry by a special exemption:   daniil medvedev  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   sriram balaji   riccardo ghedin   jeevan nedunchezhiyan   finn tearney  the following player received entry as a lucky loser:   dane propoggia  doubles main draw entrants  seeds  1 rankings as of september 7, 2015.  other entrants the following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:   he feng /  yuqing ning   he yecong /  zhuoyang qiu   daniil medvedev /  zhang zhizhen  champions  singles    peter gojowczyk def.  amir weintraub, 6-2, 6-1  doubles   jonathan eysseric /  jurgen zopp def.  lee hsin-han /  amir weintraub, 6-4, 6-2  external links official website  2015 atp challenger tour atp challenger china international - nanchang
elsa beata persdotter brahe (1629 - 7 april 1653), elizabeth beatrice was a swedish countess and duchess, married to adolph john i, count palatine of kleeburg, duke of stegeborg, the brother of king charles x of sweden.  life she was the daughter of per brahe the younger and kristina katarina stenbock, and was raised by her paternal grandmother elsa gyllenstierna at rydboholm castle. as the majority of female nobles at the time, her education mainly focused on how to manage an estate, and how to act in a representational social life.  prior to her marriage, she served as maid of honour to queen christina of sweden. the queen introduced her to adolph john, and the couple was engaged in 1646. the wedding took place at tre kronor (castle) 1649 in the presence of the monarch.  the marriage was described as unhappy, and her spouse was said to neglect in favor of his personal pleasures. while the second spouse of adolph john has been described as his equal in his bad habits, his first spouse has in contrast been described as his opposite in this regard and as the superior of them both. the economic circumstances of the ducal couple was solved when adolph john was appointed general governor of vastergotland in 1651.  elsa beata had only one child: a son who lived a few months after birth in 1652. she died during a visit to vadstena after a period of ill health.  references   nanna lundh-eriksson (1947). hedvig eleonora. stockholm: wahlstrom & widstrand. isbn  ingrid larsson haglund - grevarna brahes vinterbok  erik petersson - vicekungen - en biografi over per brahe den yngre  1629 births 1653 deaths 17th-century swedish people swedish duchesses swedish countesses swedish princesses swedish ladies-in-waiting people of the swedish empire
balehar khanpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of balehar khanpur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, balehar khanpur has a total number of 146 houses and population of 726 of which include 375 males and 351 females. literacy rate of balehar khanpur is 76.57%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 73 which is 10.06% of total population of balehar khanpur, and child sex ratio is approximately  622 lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
a byzantine-hungarian war was fought between byzantine and hungarian forces on the danube between 1127 and 1129. byzantine primary sources, cinnamus and choniates, give little detail about this campaign; no dates are specified, and what they do say differs considerably. the chronology presented here, 1127-1129, follows that of michael angold and other scholars, but john fine has the events taking place earlier in 1125-1126. according to the byzantine chronicler niketas choniates, the citizens of the byzantine town branicevo "attacked and plundered the hungarians who had come to" the byzantine empire "to trade, perpetrating the worst crimes against them." stephen ii of hungary broke into the empire in the summer. his troops sacked belgrade, branicevo and naissus, and plundered the regions around serdica (sofia, bulgaria) and philippopolis (plovdiv, bulgaria), before returning to hungary. in response, emperor john ii marched against hungary in 1128, where he defeated the royal troops in a battle at haram, and "captured frangochorion, the richest land in hungary" (now in serbia). following his victory over the hungarians john ii launched a punitive raid against the serbs. dangerously for the byzantines the serbs had aligned themselves with hungary. many serbian prisoners were taken, and these were transported to nicomedia in asia minor to serve as military colonists. this was done partly to cow the serbs into submission (serbia was, at least nominally, a byzantine protectorate), and partly to strengthen the byzantine frontier in the east against the turks. the serbs were forced to acknowledge byzantine suzerainty once again. in hungary, the defeat at haram undermined stephen ii's authority and he faced a serious revolt when two counts, named 'bors' (possibly boris kalamanos) and 'ivan', were declared kings. both were eventually defeated, ivan being beheaded and bors fleeing to byzantium. stephen was unable to participate in any of the fighting because he was sick, recuperating in his homeland, according to john kinnamos. john kinnamos wrote of a second campaign by stephen against the byzantine empire, when the hungarian troops, supported by bohemian reinforcements under the command of duke vaclav of olomouc, took branicevo by storm and destroyed its fortress. the hungarians had renewed hostilities, possibly so that king stephen could be seen to reassert his authority, by attacking the byzantine frontier fortress of branicevo, which was immediately rebuilt by john. further byzantine military
successes - choniates mentions several engagements - resulted in a restoration of peace. cinnamus describes a byzantine reverse occurring before peace was established, which suggests that the campaign was not entirely one-sided. hungarian records, however, agree with choniates in indicating that king stephen was again defeated and was consequently forced to negotiate a peace on byzantine terms. historian ferenc makk thinks that emperor john ii komnenos was forced to retreat and sue for peace and that the treaty was signed in october 1129. the byzantines were confirmed in their control of branicevo, belgrade, and zemun and they also recovered the region of syrmia (called frangochorion in choniates), which had been in hungarian hands since the 1060s. the hungarian pretender almos died in 1129, removing the major source of friction.  references  sources primary  secondary                 1127 in europe 1128 in europe 1129 in europe 1120s in the byzantine empire 12th century in hungary 12th century in serbia wars involving medieval serbian states wars involving hungary wars involving the byzantine empire grand principality of serbia 1120s conflicts
afrana islam prity (born january 24, 2000) is a bangladeshi tennis player. she plays on the junior itf circuit under the wta. she has a win-loss record of 1-4 in singles and 0-4 in doubles.  career at the september 2013 asian 14-under tennis event in bangladesh, prity won the women's singles and also won the women's doubles with shah safina laxmi. at the asian under-14 tennis tournament that october, she won the women's singles and also won the women's doubles with safina. at the itf under-14 asian championships divisions-2 in bangkok the following january, she won the consolation round against perera probaddhi of sri lanka.  in the 2014 runner group independence cup open tennis tournament, she defeated the top seed, sharmin alam sharda, in the semi-final round.  in 2016, she won the women's singles in the independence day runner open tennis tournament, defeating popy akhter 6-3, 6-4 in the final. she and laxmi lost in straight sets in the final of the women's doubles.  references  bangladeshi female tennis players living people 2000 births
arthur luysterman (born 18 march 1932) is a belgian roman catholic bishop.   he served as the twenty-ninth bishop of ghent between 1991 and 2003.  life arthur luysterman was born in meerbeke, a village in the intensively developed countryside between ghent and brussels.  he was the eldest of his parents' four children.  he attended school locally, obtaining a grounding in graeco-latin humanities at the st aloysius college in ninove and our lady's college, dendermonde before abandoning an earlier ambition to become a lawyer and entering the seminary of ghent in 1950: he was ordained into the priesthood on 26 august 1956.  he received a degrees and a doctorate in canon law from the catholic university of louvain in 1959.   after this he joined the military seminary in aalst the produced military chaplains ("centre d'instruction de base" / cibe), initially as professor of moral theology and later with more general responsibilities.   however, over the years the number of candidates coming forward for training reduced, and in the end the institution was closed.   after this, on 1 february 1973 he became chief chaplain to the belgian armed forces, a post he retained till 13 july 1990.  on 13 july 1990 (a friday) pope john paul ii appointed luysterman coadjutor bishop of ghent.   he was consecrated a bishop by leonce-albert van peteghem, the bishop of ghent, on 21 october of the same year.   just over a year later, when van peteghem retired on 27 december 1991, luysterman succeeded him.   he took as his episcopal motto "et in terra pax" ("and peace on earth").  he was the founder of the fund for church buildings in the diocese of ghent.   during his time the number of seminarians declined and the episcopal seminary was closed, but he insisted that the quality of candidates for ordination was more important than their quantity.   on 28 august 1994 he was a principal co-consecrator of the flemish born bishop andre de witte as bishop of ruy barbosa, bahia in brazil.   on 11 october 2003 he was principal consecrator for cardinal joos.  after reaching the age of 70, arthur luysterman offered his resignation to the pope.   this was accepted on 19 december 2003.   since then, as an emeritus bishop, he has nevertheless continued as a member of the belgian bishops' conference.  references  20th-century belgian roman catholic theologians bishops of ghent 20th-century roman catholic
bishops in belgium people from east flanders 1932 births living people
the 2016-17 columbia lions women's basketball team represented columbia university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the lions, led by first year head coach megan griffith, played their home games at levien gymnasium and are members of the ivy league. they finished the season 13-14, 3-11 in ivy league play to finish in a tie for seventh place.  ivy league changes this season, the ivy league will institute conference postseason tournaments. the tournaments will only award the ivy league automatic bids for the ncaa division i men's and women's basketball tournaments; the official conference championships will continue to be awarded based solely on regular-season results. the ivy league playoff will take place march 11 and 12 at the palestra in philadelphia. there will be two semifinal games on the first day with the no. 1 seed playing the no. 4 seed and the no. 2 seed playing the no. 3 seed. the final will be played the next day for the ncaa bid.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#75b2dd; color:#ffffff;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#75b2dd; color:#ffffff;"| ivy league regular season  see also  2016-17 columbia lions men's basketball team  references  columbia lions women's basketball seasons columbia columbia columbia
west new goshen is an unincorporated community in fayette township, vigo county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  the community is part of the terre haute metropolitan statistical area.  geography west new goshen is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vigo county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana terre haute metropolitan area
clarissa altagracia de la rocha de torres (ciudad trujillo, 12 august 1959) is an economist from the dominican republic. she is serving as vice-governor (or vice-chairperson) of the central bank of the dominican republic since august 2004.  early life and family de la rocha was born within an upper class family, her parents are the deceased civil servant and columnist julio ernesto de la rocha baez (son of julio de la rocha carmona and mercedes baez soler), who served as minister of the treasury during the dictatorship of rafael trujillo, and altagracia edith pimentel. she married engineer nelson torres rodriguez and had three children.  de la rocha de torres graduated as bachelor of business administration from universidad apec in 1980.  career de torres joined the central bank of the dominican republic in 1978 as assistant to the foreign exchange department. de torres was appointed on 17 august 2004 as vice-chairperson of the central bank of the dominican republic.  notes  references  1959 births living people central bankers descendants of buenaventura baez dominican republic economists dominican republic people of basque descent dominican republic people of spanish descent people from santo domingo
prem ki bujhini () is a 2016 romantic drama film directed by sudipto sarkar and starring om and subhashree ganguly. it is a remake of the 2011 telugu-language film 100% love.  om and subhasree act together for the first time.  cast  om as prithwiraj / raj  subhashree ganguly as paro / paromita  jannatul ferdoush peya as meera (cameo appearance)  soundtrack  remakes  references   পরম ক বঝন মভ  2010s bengali-language films bangladeshi films bengali-language films indian films indo-bangladesh joint production films scored by savvy gupta bangladeshi remakes of indian films bengali remakes of telugu films bangladeshi remakes of telugu films
kelletia lischkei is a species of large sea snail, or whelk, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family buccinidae, the true whelks.  description  kelletia lischkei is a medium-to-large species of buccinid whelk.  distribution the species is endemic to the sea of japan, and is found in coastal waters off of south korea and eastern japan. fossils of k. lischkei occur in the middle pleistocene fossil record of japan, and the species bears a resemblance to the extinct fossil species kelletia brevis.  references  external links  world register of marine species: kelletia lischkei (kuroda, 1938)  buccinidae gastropods described in 1938 marine gastropods
nitin agarwal is an indian politician and a member of the 17th legislative assembly in india. he represents the hardoi constituency of uttar pradesh and is an elected member of the samajwadi party. he was elected as the deputy speaker of the uttar pradesh legislative assembly on 18 october 2021.  early life and education nitin agarwal was born in hardoi district. he attended the symbiosis international education centre and university of delhi and attained b.com & mba degrees. his father is naresh chandra agarwal who was mla from hardoi constituency for seven terms and is currently a member of the rajya sabha.  political career nitin agarwal has been mla for three terms. he represented the hardoi constituency and is a member of the samajwadi party political party. for his first term, he was elected in the by-election for hardoi constituency after the sitting mla resigned to assume membership in the rajya sabha.  posts held  see also   hardoi (assembly constituency)  sixteenth legislative assembly of uttar pradesh  uttar pradesh legislative assembly  references   1981 births living people people from hardoi samajwadi party politicians uttar pradesh mlas 2007-2012 uttar pradesh mlas 2012-2017 uttar pradesh mlas 2017-2022 uttar pradesh politicians bharatiya janata party politicians from uttar pradesh
simon john edge (born 25 december 1964 in chester, england) is a british novelist and journalist.  educated at the king's school, chester, he went on to receive a master's degree in philosophy from st catharine's college, cambridge and has a master's degree in creative writing from city university, where he also taught as a visiting lecturer.  he got his first job in journalism at the middle east business magazine meed and went on to be the final editor of capital gay. he was on staff at the london evening standard and joined the daily express in 1999, where he spent many years as a feature writer and theatre critic. he is a former senior contributing editor of attitude magazine.  he is the author of with friends like these, a critique of the left's record on gay rights.  edge has written five novels, all published by lightning books. his first novel, the hopkins conundrum (2017), was based on the life of poet gerard manley hopkins. it was described by the spectator as "a pleasurable literary thriller [in which] edge wears his hopkins learning lightly," and by the daily express as "enjoyable on every level." it was longlisted for the waverton good read award 2017-18. his second novel, the hurtle of hell (2018), was inspired by scientific research into what happens in the brain during a near-death experience. his third, a right royal face-off (2019), is a comic novel based on the life of painter thomas gainsborough, and has been described by gainsborough authority hugh belsey as "beguiling" and "beautifully managed and brilliantly resolved." his fourth novel, anyone for edmund? (2020), imagines the rediscovery of the body of edmund the martyr, england's lost patron saint. the i (newspaper) said "edge's sharp-edged political comedy is guaranteed to have you laughing out loud". his fifth novel, the end of the world is flat (2021), was blurbed by francis wheen as a "bracingly sharp satire on the sleep of reason and the tyranny of twaddle." the times called it "nifty, often snort-inducingly funny satire".  edge was married to ezio alessandroni, a former roman catholic priest, until the latter's death from cancer in march 2017.  references  external links   official website  1964 births living people british male journalists british theatre critics people from chester english gay writers lgbt writers from england alumni of st
catharine's college, cambridge alumni of city, university of london 20th-century british writers 21st-century british writers 20th-century british male writers
the calidore string quartet is an internationally performing classical music string quartet based in new york city. the calidore is composed of violinists jeffrey myers and ryan meehan, violist jeremy berry and cellist estelle choi.  formed at the colburn conservatory of music in 2010, the quartet won the grand-prize in the inaugural 2016 m-prize competition sponsored by the university of michigan school of music, theater and dance. the $100,000 m-prize is the largest award for chamber music in the world. in february 2016, the calidore string quartet was the first north american ensemble to ever be awarded a fellowship from the borletti-buitoni trust based in london. within the first two years of their formation, the calidore won the fischoff national chamber music competition, the coleman national chamber music competition and top prizes at the 2012 ard munich string quartet competition and the hamburg international chamber music competition.  in 2018, the calidore quartet was the recipient of the prestigious avery fisher career grant.  the quartet was artist-in-residence at stony brook university from 2014 to 2016. in late 2016 they joined the roster of the chamber music society of lincoln center ii. the quartet regularly performs across north america, europe and asia and has appeared in carnegie hall, wigmore hall, lincoln center, kumho art hall (seoul) and in festivals including verbier, ravinia, aspen, rheingau, , mostly mozart (new york) and east neuk (uk). they have released numerous critically acclaimed albums. their debut album includes string quartets by mendelssohn and haydn and was heralded as "the epitome of confidence and finesse" by gramophone magazine. their second album is a survey of music from world war i released on the french label editions hortus. the quartet is represented worldwide by opus 3 artists.  references  external links  american string quartets musical groups from new york city
kristen thomas (born july 1, 1993) is an american rugby sevens player. she competed at the 2020 summer olympics.  early life  she participated in track and field and basketball in high school. she began her rugby career as a freshman at the university of central florida. she is openly lesbian.  career  she made her debut for the united states sevens team at the 2015 sao paulo women's sevens. she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the united states women's national rugby sevens team.   thomas missed out on selection for the 2016 summer olympics squad due to an injury she sustained at the 2016 france women's sevens. she was named in the eagles 2017 women's rugby world cup squad.  references  external links  kristen thomas at usa rugby      1993 births living people united states international rugby sevens players american female rugby union players female rugby sevens players pan american games silver medalists for the united states pan american games medalists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of the united states lgbt sportspeople from the united states 21st-century american women
ecole maimonide is a french international secondary school in casablanca, morocco. a part of the aefe school network, it serves the levels college and lycee (junior and senior high school).  references  external links  lycee maimonide   french international schools in casablanca jewish schools in morocco jews and judaism in casablanca
jean mansart de jouy (1705, paris - 1783) was a french architect. he was also known as mansart the elder (mansart l'aine).  he and his younger brother, jacques hardouin-mansart de sagonne, were both bastard sons of jacques hardouin-mansart by his mistress madeleine duguesny, later his wife but at the time married to jean maury. their grandfather was jules hardouin-mansart, louis xiv's chief architect.  de jouy is most notable for his rebuilding of the entrance to the eglise saint-eustache in paris, which was finally completed in 1788 by pierre louis moreau.  references  bibliography bruno pons, « le grand salon du chateau d'abondant », revue du louvre, 1991.  architects from paris 18th-century french architects 1705 births 1783 deaths
androstanolone benzoate (brand names ermalone-amp, hermalone, sarcosan), also known as stanolone benzoate or dihydrotestosterone benzoate (dhtb), as well as 5α-androstan-17β-ol-3-one 17β-benzoate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a dihydrotestosterone ester. it is used as an injectable and acts as a prodrug of androstanolone (stanolone, dihydrotestosterone, dht).  see also  list of androgen esters § dihydrotestosterone esters  references  androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes benzoate esters dihydrotestosterone esters prodrugs testosterone
shaun reynolds may refer to:  shaun reynolds (musician), english musician  shaun reynolds (rugby union) (born 1995), south african rugby union player
oisin kelly (born 1997) is an irish hurler who plays as a left corner-forward for the offaly senior team.  born in belmont , county offaly, kelly first played competitive hurling during his schooling at banagher college. he arrived on the inter-county scene at the age of sixteen when he first linked up with the offaly minor team before later joining the under-21 side. kelly made his senior debut during the 2016 championship.  at club level kelly plays with belmont gaa.  references  1997 births living people ferbane gaelic footballers belmont hurlers offaly inter-county hurlers
vicky ntetema (born c.1958/59) is a tanzanian journalist known for breaking the story about the murder of persons with albinism in tanzania. later, she became executive director of under the same sun (utss) in tanzania.  life and career  ntetema was born in tanzania in 1958. with a government scholarship she studied in the soviet union and received her master's degree in journalism in 1985 and also received her msc in information systems development in 1998 at the london school of economics in the uk. in 1991, ntetema joined the bbc as a swahili an electronic media journalist (radio presenter and producer) in london and in 2006 a senior journalist and bureau chief for the bbc world service in tanzania. ntetema came to notice when in 2008 she broke a story about the murder of persons with albinism in tanzania. ntetema later left the bbc to become executive director of under the same sun in tanzania, a canadian charity promoting the human rights of persons with albinism. a post she held until her retirement in may 2018.  reports on the persecution of persons with albinism in tanzania  ntetema's undercover investigation exposed that some tanzanians saw persons with albinism as ghost-like beings and local witch doctors considered "their body parts as potent ingredients for magic charms" bringing success. her reports were primarily responsible for drawing international attention to the situation. due to threats against her, ntetema had to go into hiding, required around the clock protection and had to leave the country twice for her own protection.  in 2010, the international women's media foundation awarded her the courage in journalism award for her reports. in 2016, the u.s. secretary of state john kerry awarded ntetema the international women of courage award.  awards courage in journalism award in 2010 tanzania women of achievement award in the category "information and communication" in 2013 international women of courage award in 2016  references  1959 births living people tanzanian journalists bbc news people tanzanian human rights activists women who received the international women of courage award
the technische hochschule nurnberg georg simon ohm  (shortened th nurnberg; english name nuremberg institute of technology georg simon ohm) is a public technische hochschule in nuremberg, bavaria. with its 12,200 students and 1,800 faculty members, it is the second biggest technische hochschule in bavaria.  the university got its name in honor of georg simon ohm who was a professor and headmaster of the predecessor of the hochschule, the polytechnische schule, between 1839 and 1849.  the logo of the technische hochschule is the ω as a reference to ohm the si derived unit for electric resistance named after georg simon ohm.  the three campuses are located around the wohrder wiese city park close to  nuremberg's downtown area. they also contain a cafeteria and a university owned kindergarten called milliohm.  faculties  applied chemistry  applied mathematics, physics and general science  architecture  business administration  civil engineering  computer science  design  electrical engineering, precision engineering, information technology  materials science  mechanical engineering and building services engineering  social science  process engineering  external links  official website of the university  nuremberg technical universities and colleges in germany buildings and structures in nuremberg universities of applied sciences in germany educational institutions established in 1971 education in nuremberg 1971 establishments in west germany
bhucho mandi assembly constituency (sl. no.: 91) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in bathinda district, punjab state, india. its previous name was nathana assembly constituency.  members of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india bathinda district
leontius of trier (died 19 february 446 ) was bishop of trier from 414 to 445.  very little is known of his life but he is one of a number of bishops in  that time. the rapid succession of bishop names in the 5th century indicates the troubled times in the period of transition from the roman empire to frankish rule in trier.  trier itself was taken in 496 by the franks.  references  446 deaths 460s deaths 5th-century deaths gallo-roman saints saints of germania 5th-century christian martyrs year of birth unknown 5th-century bishops in germania 5th-century christian saints roman catholic bishops of trier
jozef bujnak (born 27 january 1994) is a slovak football defender who currently plays for 2. liga club sk odeva lipany.  club career  1. fc tatran presov bujnak made his professional fortuna liga debut for 1. fc tatran presov against mfk ruzomberok on 16 july 2016.  references  external links  1. fc tatran presov official club profile  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1994 births living people slovak footballers association football defenders 1. fc tatran presov players sk odeva lipany players slovak super liga players expatriate soccer players in the united states slovak expatriates in the united states 2. liga (slovakia) players
pontiggia is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giuseppe pontiggia (1934-2003), italian writer and literary critic simone pontiggia (born 1993), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
arthat st mary's orthodox cathedral (arthat valiyapally) also called kunnamkulam-chattukulangara church  is an ancient church located in arthat village of thalapilly taluk, one mile south of kunnamkulam town, thrissur, kerala, india. this church did not participate in the synod of diamper. during the invasion of tippu sultan the church was arsoned and later reconstructed.  history the local belief states that st thomas came to a region near present-day kunnamkulam where jews were colonized. he preached gospel to the jews and many were converted to christianity. the jewish synagogue in that area was later converted to a christian church. this church was known as chattukulangara pally. when st thomas came to judakunnu (jew hill), there occurred a water scarcity in that area at that time. people were in great distress and they appealed to st thomas for help. he whipped on the land on the top of the hill and there appeared a spring of fresh water. this was later called chattakkulam. (ml:ചടടകകള) and the church near to it came to be known as chattakkulangara pally.  in contradistinction to this twentieth century identification, the traditional site where the establishment of a christian community in the region is believed to have occurred has been the palayur church at least since the fourteenth century.  in 1789 tippu sultan attacked and arsoned this church. it is said in folklores that tippu's army killed a priest in the altar room of this church and the blood spilled over there. since it was considered impure, some part of the altar was cut and removed. hence this church was also called as vetti muricha pally (ml:വടട മറചച പളള) or cut altar church. even now the altar of this church remain distinct from other churches.  starting from the coonan cross oath of 1653, both the factions of malankara nasranis  wanted to take over the church to their fold and because of the dispute the church was closed for a while. in 1805 with the request of the them, the then king of cochin, sakthan thampuran himself came to arthat church to resolve the problem. both parties agreed for a lucky draw. in the lucky draw the main church and buildings were gone to the malankara puthenkoor syrians and the
stone cross of the church gone to the pazhayakoor syrians.  the coral missionary magazine of 1876 gives an account of the arthat church in kunnamkulam.   in 1800 francis buchanan visited this church and met ittoop malpan,(pulikkottil joseph mar dionysious i / mar dionysius ii).  in 1806 the arthat padiyola (resolution) declared to break all the chains of rome, babel & antioch.  in 1808 dr.claudius buchanan & colonel macauley made a visit and awarded a large gold medal to this principal church in the name of all syrian jacobite churches in malabar.  this church has the largest cemetery(1 hectare) of all churches in kerala. the present cemetery wall was built with the initiative of geevarghese mar gregorios of malankara.  church architecture the church was earlier built in kerala architectural style thatched with coconut palm leaves. during the attack of tippu sultan the church was arsoned. later the church was restructured with wooden roof, thatched with clay tiles. mar dionysius ii when he was a ramban was instrumental in restructuring the church in the present state. the present structure was built during 1805-1827 ce.  chattukulangara pally  in 1772, kattumangattu bishop sent a letter to sakthan thampuran (sakthan thampuran page 289) which states, in thalappilli there was only one church existing in that region, which is the chattukulangara palli . there were 2 more chapels also present in that region viz. 1.chiralayam 2. pazhanji (dedicated to geverghese sahada).  church feud the feud between the patriarch faction and the catholicos faction lead the patriarch faction to establish another church called arthat st mary's simhasana church in 1920.  list of parishes separated from arthat church the following are the parishes separated from this church   chiralayam  kottappady------>kaveed/perakam  anjoor  puthusseri  chowwannoor---->marathamcodu/pazhunnana/vellarakkadu/eyyal/parembadam  guruvayoor  chemmannoor  vylathoor ------>attupuram  parannoor  2017 storm   in 2017 june 25, a hurricane happened in arthat causing great damages to all the churches in arthat. the small, old st.thomas catholic church had to be reconstructed because of it.  in
literature  history of the church is well narrated in the fiction novel francis itticora by t.d. ramakrishnan.  references     churches in thrissur district cathedrals in kerala malankara orthodox syrian church buildings
maur assembly constituency is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india representing maur.  it is part of bathinda district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  bathinda district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india bathinda district
the georgia national football team represents georgia in association football and is controlled by the georgian football federation (gff), the governing body of the sport there. it competes as a member of the union of european football associations (uefa), which encompasses the countries of europe. organised football has been played in the country since the 20th century. georgia joined uefa and the international federation of association football (fifa) in 1992; the country played two friendlies before joining. in 1990-91, due to succession from the football federation of the soviet union, football in georgia was under sanctions from the soviet federation and international ban. in its inspiration to independence from the russian dominance, georgia became the first soviet republic which football parted with the soviet football.  georgia's first match-a 2-2 draw against lithuania-took place on 27 may 1990 and was their only match as the georgian soviet socialist republic. their first victory came in their next match, 4-2 against moldova. they entered their first major international competition in 1994: the qualifying rounds for 1996 uefa european football championship. the team won their first competitive match on 10 february 1994 when they defeated malta 1-0 in the 1994 rothmans international tournament. georgia made its first appearance in the qualifying rounds of the fifa world cup during the 1998 edition, but the country has yet to reach the finals of the world cup or the european football championship.  the team's largest victory came on 30 march 1997 when they defeated armenia by seven goals to nil in a friendly. their worst loss is a 6-1 against denmark in 2005. georgia have also been defeated by five goals to nil against romania in 1996. levan kobiashvili holds the appearance record for georgia, having been capped 100 times during an international career that lasted 15 years. the goalscoring record is held by shota arveladze, who scored 26 times in 61 matches. as of april 2019, georgia are ranked 94th in the fifa world rankings. its highest ever ranking of 42nd was achieved in september 1998.  international matches  key to background colours  - indicates georgia won the match  - indicates georgia's opposition won the match  - indicates the match ended in a draw  1990  1991  1992  1993  1994  1995  1996  1997  1998  1999  2000  2001  2002  2003  2004  2005  2006  2007  2008  2009  2010  2011  2012  2013  2014  2015  2016  2017  2018  2019  all-time record  updated to game played
12 october  2019.  record by opponent georgia's first team has competed in a number of competitions and friendlies, and their record against each team faced in these competitions is listed below. since their first official match against lithuania in may 1990 georgia have faced a total of 62 teams, they met their most recent different opponent, andorra, for the first time in november 2018. the team that georgia has met most is albania, against whom they have contested 14 matches; having won eight of these albania are also the side georgia have beaten the most. georgia have tied four games with moldova, they are the team that they have drawn with the most. the team that has defeated georgia the most are the republic of ireland, who have won nine of their ten matches with georgia.  record by competition  see also georgia national football team results (2020-present)  notes  references general        specific  georgia national football team results results association football in georgia (country) lists
post-truth politics (also called post-factual politics and post-reality politics) is a political culture where true/false, honesty/lying have become a focal concern of public life and are viewed by popular commentators and academic researchers alike as having an important causal role in how politics operates at a particular point in history (especially influenced by new communication and media technologies). oxford dictionaries declared that its international word of the year in 2016 was "post-truth", citing a 2,000% increase in usage compared to 2015 and noted that it was commonly associated with the noun "post-truth politics." popularized as a term in news media, and a dictionary definition, post-truth has developed from a short-hand label for the abundance and influence of misleading or false political truth claims into a concept empirically studied and theorized by academic research. since post-truth politics are primarily known through public truth statements in specific media contexts (commentary on major broadcasting networks, podcasts, youtube videos, and other social media), it is especially studied as a media and communication studies phenomenon with particular forms of truth-telling: intentional rumors, bullshitting, lying, conspiracy theories, and fake news (subsequently gaining philosophers' attention). post-truth politics' historical nature has also been discussed with regard to more traditional areas of communication and journalism studies such as propaganda and disinformation.  , political commentators and academic researchers have identified post-truth politics as ascendant in many nations, notably australia, brazil, china, india, russia, the united kingdom, and the united states, among others.  history  terminology the term post-truth politics appears to have developed from other adjectival uses of "post-truth," such as "post-truth political environment," "post-truth world," "post-truth era," "post-truth society," and very close cousins, such as "post-fact society" and "post-truth presidency." according to oxford dictionaries, the serbian-american playwright steve tesich may have been the first to use the term post-truth in a 1992 essay in the nation. tesich writes that following the shameful truth of watergate (1972-1974), more assuaging coverage of the iran-contra scandal (1985-1987) and persian gulf war (1990-1991) demonstrates that "we, as a free people, have freely decided that we want to live in some post-truth world." however, as harsin (2018) notes, the term was in academic circulation in
the 1990s. the media studies scholar john hartley used the term "post-truth as the title of a chapter, "journalism in a post-truth society," in his 1992 book the politics of pictures.  in 2004 ralph keyes used the term "post-truth era" in his book by that title. in it he argued that deception is becoming more prevalent in the current media-driven world. according to keyes, lies stopped being treated as something inexcusable and started being viewed as something acceptable in certain situations, which supposedly led to the beginning of the post-truth era. the same year american journalist eric alterman spoke of a "post-truth political environment" and coined the term "the post-truth presidency" in his analysis of the misleading statements made by the bush administration after 9/11 in 2001. in his 2004 book post-democracy, colin crouch used the phrase "post-democracy" to mean a model of politics where "elections certainly exist and can change governments," but "public electoral debate is a tightly controlled spectacle, managed by rival teams of professionals expert in the techniques of persuasion, and considering a small range of issues selected by those teams". crouch directly attributes the "advertising industry model" of political communication to the crisis of trust and accusations of dishonesty that a few years later others have associated with post-truth politics. more recently, scholars have followed crouch in demonstrating the role of professional political communication's contribution to distrust and wrong beliefs, where strategic use of emotion is becoming key to gaining truth for truth statements.  the term "post-truth politics" may have originally been coined by the blogger david roberts in a blog post for grist on 1 april 2010. roberts defined it as "a political culture in which politics (public opinion and media narratives) have become almost entirely disconnected from policy (the substance of legislation)". post truth was used by philosopher  joseph heath to describe the 2014 ontario election. the term became widespread during the campaigns for the 2016 presidential election in the united states and for the 2016 "brexit" referendum on membership in the european union in the united kingdom.  concept scholars and popular commentators disagree about whether post-truth is a label that is newly generated but can be applied to phenomena such as lying in any historical period; or whether it is historically specific, with empirically more recent observable causes (especially new social and political relations enabled by new digital communication technologies) and is only simplistically reduced to the age-old phenomenon of political lying. scholars and popular commentators also disagree
about the degree to which emotion should be emphasized in theories of post-truth, despite the emphasis on emotion in the oxford dictionary's original definition of the word. while the term "post-truth" had no dictionary entry before oxford dictionaries' entry in 2016, the oxford entry was inspired by the outcomes of the brexit referendum and the 2016 u.s. presidential campaign; it was thus already implicitly referring to politics. further, in the original oxford dictionaries''' entry's (even today, more of a press release than traditional dictionary entry) justification for their choice, they say that it is often used in noun form of "post-truth politics." thus, post-truth is often used interchangeably with post-truth politics.  post-truth politics is a subset of the broader term post-truth, whose use precedes the recent focus on political events. while oxford dictionaries influentially named post-truth its 2016 word-of-the-year, current academic development of post-truth as a concept does not entirely reflect their original emphasis on "circumstances" where appeals to "objective facts" fail to influence as much as "appeals to emotion and personal belief" (see "drivers" section below).  some uses of the concept are more general, referring not to historical conditions of widely empirically documented distrust or a context of promotional capitalism, easily accessible and hard-to-control amateur mass communication of social media, but to the presence of lying and distrust in politics and bias in journalism (and commentators' opinions that people of the day were distrustful or that political lying was common).  reducing the concept of post-truth to dishonest political communication and different styles thereof, some scholars argue that what one identifies as post-truth politics today is really a return of previous periods of politics. jennifer hochschild, h.l. jayne professor of government at harvard university, has described the rise of post-truth as a return to 18th- and 19th-century political and media practices in the united states, following a period in the 20th century where the media was relatively balanced and rhetoric was toned down. such a view nonetheless also conflicts with those in other countries at other times. for example, in 1957 scientist kathleen lonsdale remarked in the british context that "for many people truthfulness in politics has now become a mockery.... anyone who listens to the radio in a mixed company of thinking people knows how deep-seated is this cynicism.") similarly, new scientist characterised the pamphlet wars that arose
with the growth of printing and literacy, beginning in the 1600s, as an early form of post-truth politics. slanderous and vitriolic pamphlets were cheaply printed and widely disseminated, and the dissent that they fomented contributed to starting wars and revolutions such as the english civil war (1642-1651) and (much later) the american revolution (1765-1783).  drivers communication/media scholars and philosophers tend to view the definition, origins, and causes of post-truth slightly differently. media and communication scholars emphasize the historical revolution in communication technologies, which has fundamentally altered social life, including our ways of knowing socially (social epistemology), our authorities, and trust in institutions. some also do not see post-truth as primarily a problem of knowledge, but rather of confusion, disorientation, and distrust. philosophers tend to cite media and communications changes but claim that philosophical and cultural movements themselves, such as postmodernism, have influenced society, resulting in a situation where feeling and belief create an epistemic crisis for politics.  the "circumstances" surrounding post-truth (politics) noted by the original oxford dictionaries' definition have been expanded to denote a historical period, defined by the convergence of numerous empirically documented shifts. as opposed to early commentators who described it as a long-standing part of political life that was less notable before the advent of the internet and related social changes, several scholars point to a host of empirical changes that are contemporary and are the core of the concept. for these scholars, post-truth differs from traditional contesting and falsifying of facts in public life by pointing to a cultural and historical convergence of several developments:  an abundance of competing truth claims, partly due to accessible technologies of communication production, personal websites, videos, micro-blogging, and chat groups;  a lack of shared authorities for adjudicating truth claims, especially with the demise of traditional journalism as a gatekeeper of issues and public truth claims;  a fragmented public space, facilitated by algorithms, where truth claims appear unchallenged or unexamined by a larger public in attendance to them, sometimes associated with false knowledge effects of echo chambers and filter bubbles;  a well-resourced influence or persuasive industry in public relations, marketing, advertising, and big data analytics, whose goals are especially to influence, not inform or educate;  a cultural backdrop of "promotional culture," characterized by self-promoting, self-branding, user-generated content, about image as much
as truth;  a resorting to emotion and cognitive bias as a means to practically deal with the competition and confusion;  a far-reaching context of social distrust to which post-truth political communication contribute and are affected by;  communication technologies corresponding to a culture of acceleration, distraction, and "hot cognition; and, perhaps, changing historical ethics about how much misleading or "spin" is acceptable.  in 2015 media and politics scholar jayson harsin coined the term "regime of post-truth" which encompasses many aspects of post-truth politics. he argues that a convergent set of historical developments have created the conditions of post-truth society and its politics: the political communication informed by cognitive science, which aims at managing perception and belief of segmented populations through techniques like microtargeting, which includes the strategic use of rumors and falsehoods; the fragmentation of modern, more centralized mass news media gatekeepers, which have largely repeated one another's scoops and their reports; the attention economy marked by information overload and acceleration, user-generated content and fewer society-wide common trusted authorities to distinguish between truth and lies, accurate and inaccurate; the algorithms which govern what appears in social media and search engine rankings, based on what users want (per algorithm) and not on what is factual; and news media which have been marred by scandals of plagiarism, hoaxes, propaganda, and changing news values. these developments have occurred on the background of economic crises, downsizing and favoring trends toward more traditional tabloid stories and styles of reporting, known as tabloidization  and infotainment. in this view, post-truth cannot be understood without regard for the revolution in communication technologies and social life, their effects on cognition (the way people are disposed to think online), in a backdrop of social acceleration. in terms of entertainment, scholars such as corner and pels (2003) and harsin (2018, 2021) argue that citizens' orientations towards politics are dispositions formed  first as audiences in relation to entertainment forms such as reality television, which can be shown to be transposable to their evaluation of political communication.  while some of these phenomena (such as a more tabloidesque press) may suggest a return to the past, the effect of the convergences is a socio-political phenomenon which exceeds earlier forms of journalism in deliberate distortion and struggle. fact-checking and rumor-busting sites abound, but they are unable to reunite a fragmented set of audiences (attention-wise)
and their respective trustful-/distrustfulness. harsin has called it a "regime of post-truth" instead of merely post-truth politics, with professional pan-partisan political communication manipulating the communication competitively in a context where institutions and discourses (such as science and news media) were interdependent on one another to stabilize the public circulation of truth. cosentino (2019) expands the concept of regime of post-truth to a geo-political level, analyzing political communication cases in the non-western as well as western world.  other scholars, such as the philosopher lee mcintryre (2018), who focuses on "post-truth" generally but makes reference to politics, argue that rising social distrust of scientific expertise and postmodern academic discourse, allegedly promoting a devaluing of or disregard for truth, have combined with cognitive biases to produce conditions where feeling triumphs over facts. while several of these scholars cite distrust as an agent of post-truth social and political effects, the origin of the distrust is less clear. mcintyre sees public relations efforts to undermine scientific truths, on, for example, the effects of tobacco, as important factors (in addition to the alleged influence of academic postmodernism on conservative politics, though this link is not empirically established). however, public relations is just one part of a larger culture of promotionalism (consumer capitalism), where truth has long been the last concern in strategies to influence people to feel positively or negatively towards brands as businesses, countries, products, parties, and politicians. furthermore, the scandals in journalism around plagiarism and "cheerleading" for the 2003 u.s. invasion of iraq, combine with promotional culture, ethically questionable professional strategic political communication, potential viral mediascapes, algorithmically customized presentation of information, among other factors to reproduce various forms of specific and generalized distrust-trust being crucial for recognition of legitimate public truth-tellers.  while many popular treatments of post-truth (sometimes used interchangeably with fake news) claim or imply a growth in political lying, kalpokas (2018), harsin (2015, 2017, 2018, 2021), and cosentino (2019) see lying as only one feature of post-truth (which cannot historically distinguish it as new), instead focusing on problems of distinguishing true and false (common authorities for inducing belief being scarcer), or on disorientation, confusion, misperception, and distraction. the appeals to scientific expertise (though minority views in their fields), as with anti-vacc
ine supporters, demonstrates that across the board, people do in fact respect scientific experts, or the idea thereof. but science and expertise have been politicized, making it harder for the unknowing to identify legitimate authorities (all of whom may hold advanced degrees). furthermore, it may not be so much that post-truth is manifest trust in one's emotions before truth claims as one's identification of emotional truth-tellers as authentic, honest, and therefore trustworthy.  description  in modern professionalization of political communication (tied to marketing and advertising research), a defining trait of post-truth politics is that campaigners continue to repeat their talking points, even when media outlets, experts in the field in question, and others provide proof that contradicts these talking points. for example, during campaigning for the british eu referendum campaign, vote leave made repeated use of the claim that eu membership cost £350 million a week, although later began to use the figure as a net amount of money sent directly to the eu. this figure, which ignored the uk rebate and other factors, was described as "potentially misleading" by the uk statistics authority, as "not sensible" by the institute for fiscal studies, and was rejected in fact checks by bbc news, channel 4 news and full fact. vote leave nevertheless continued to use the figure as a centrepiece of their campaign until the day of the referendum, after which point they downplayed the pledge as having been an "example", pointing out that it was only ever suggested as a possible alternative use of the net funds sent to the eu. tory mp and leave campaigner sarah wollaston, who left the group in protest during its campaign, criticised its "post-truth politics". the justice secretary michael gove controversially claimed in an interview that the british people "had had enough of experts".  however, the charges of "post-truth politics" could also be levelled against those repeatedly claimed the vote leave pledge to spend £350 million saved from eu membership on the nhs was a lie. a figure less than £350 million per week was only obtained by ignoring the cost to the uk government of allowing the eu tariff-free access to the uk's single market. in 2015 this loss of uk government revenue would have been £12.9 billion per year. furthermore, in the years following the referendum spending in the nhs actually increased beyond the pledged £350 million. in real terms (indexed to 2020-21 prices) the increase between 2016-17 and 2021-22 was £21.
6 billion per year (or £415 million per week). this increase would have been much larger if additional spending on the covid-19 epidemic had not been factored out of the figures.  michael deacon, parliamentary sketchwriter for the daily telegraph, summarised the core message of post-truth politics as "facts are negative. facts are pessimistic. facts are unpatriotic."  he added that post-truth politics can also include a claimed rejection of partisanship and negative campaigning. in this context, campaigners can push a utopian "positive campaign" to which rebuttals can be dismissed as smears and scaremongering and opposition as partisan.  in its most extreme mode, post-truth politics can make use of conspiracism. in this form of post-truth politics, false rumors (such as the "birther" or "muslim" conspiracy theories about barack obama) become major news topics. in the case of the "pizzagate" conspiracy, this resulted in a man entering the comet ping pong pizzeria and firing an ar-15 rifle.  in contrast to simply telling untruths, writers such as jack holmes of esquire describe the process as something different, with holmes putting it as: "so, if you don't know what's true, you can say whatever you want and it's not a lie". finally, scholars have argued that post-truth is not simply about clear cut true/false statements and people's failure to distinguish between them but about strategically ambiguous statements that may be true in some ways, from some perspectives and interpretations, and false in others. this was, the case around the disinformation campaigns of the uk and us in promoting the us invasion of iraq (saddam hussein/al qaeda "ties" or "links" and weapons of mass destruction), which have been described as watershed moments of the post-truth era.   major news outlets  several trends in the media landscape have been blamed for the perceived rise of post-truth politics. one contributing factor has been the proliferation of state-funded news agencies like cctv news and rt, and voice of america in the usa which allow states to influence western audiences. according to peter pomerantsev, a british-russian journalist who worked for tnt in moscow, one of their prime objectives has been to de-legitimize western institutions, including the structures of government, democracy, and human rights. as of 2016, trust in the mainstream media in the us had reached historical lows. it has been suggested
that under these conditions, fact checking by news outlets struggles to gain traction among the wider public and that politicians resort to increasingly drastic messaging.  many news outlets desire to appear to be, or have a policy of being, impartial. many writers have noted that in some cases, this leads to false balance, the practice of giving equal emphasis to unsupported or discredited claims without challenging their factual basis. the 24-hour news cycle also means that news channels repeatedly draw on the same public figures, which benefits pr-savvy politicians and means that presentation and personality can have a larger impact on the audience than facts, while the process of claim and counter-claim can provide grist for days of news coverage at the expense of deeper analysis of the case.   social media and the internet  social media adds an additional dimension, as user networks can become echo chambers possibly emphasised by the filter bubble where one political viewpoint dominates and scrutiny of claims fails, allowing a parallel media ecosystem of websites, publishers and news channels to develop, which can repeat post-truth claims without rebuttal. in this environment, post-truth campaigns can ignore fact checks or dismiss them as being motivated by bias. the guardian editor-in-chief katherine viner laid some of the blame on the rise of clickbait, articles of dubious factual content with a misleading headline and which are designed to be widely shared, saying that "chasing down cheap clicks at the expense of accuracy and veracity" undermines the value of journalism and truth. in 2016, david mikkelson, co-founder of the fact checking and debunking site snopes.com, described the introduction of social media and fake news sites as a turning point, saying "i'm not sure i'd call it a post-truth age but ... there's been an opening of the sluice-gate and everything is pouring through. the bilge keeps coming faster than you can pump."  the digital culture allows anybody with a computer and access to the internet to post their opinions online and mark them as fact which may become legitimized through echo-chambers and other users validating one another. content may be judged based on how many views a post gets, creating an atmosphere that appeals to emotion, audience biases, or headline appeal instead of researched fact. content which gets more views is continually , regardless of its legitimacy. some also argue that the abundance of fact available at any time on the internet leads to an attitude focused on knowing basic claims to information instead of an underlying truth or
formulating carefully thought-out opinions. the internet allows people to choose where they get their information, allowing them to reinforce their own opinions.   polarized political culture  the rise of post-truth politics coincides with polarized political beliefs. a pew research center study of american adults found that "those with the most consistent ideological views on the left and right have information streams that are distinct from those of individuals with more mixed political views-and very distinct from each other". data is becoming increasingly accessible as new technologies are introduced to the everyday lives of citizens. an obsession for data and statistics also filters into the political scene, and political debates and speeches become filled with snippets of information that may be misconstrued, false, or not contain the whole picture. sensationalized television news emphasizes grand statements and further publicizes politicians. this shaping from the media influences how the public views political issues and candidates.   dissenting views   unlike some academic treatments of post-truth that see it as historically specific and closely associated with shifts in journalism, social trust, and new media and communication technologies, several popular commentators (pundits and journalists), equating post-truth with lying or sensational news, have proposed that post-truth is an imprecise or misleading term and/or should be abandoned. in an editorial, new scientist suggested "a cynic might wonder if politicians are actually any more dishonest than they used to be", and hypothesized that "fibs once whispered into select ears are now overheard by everyone". david helfand argues, following edward m. harris, that "public prevarication is nothing new" and that it is the "knowledge of the audience" and the "limits of plausibility" within a technology-saturated environment that have changed. we are, rather, in an age of misinformation where such limits of plausibility have vanished and where everyone feels equally qualified to make claims that are easily shared and propagated.   toby young, writing for the spectator, called the term a "cliche" used selectively primarily by left-wing commentators to attack what are actually universal ideological biases, contending that "[w]e are all post-truthers and probably always have been". the economist has called this argument "complacent", however, identifying a qualitative difference between political scandals of previous generations, such as those surrounding the suez crisis and the iran-contra affair (which involved attempting to cover-up the truth) and contemporary ones in which public facts are simply ignored. similarly,
alexios mantzarlis of the poynter institute said that political lies were not new and identified several political campaigns in history which would now be described as "post-truth". for mantzarlis, the "post-truth" label was-to some extent-a "coping mechanism for commentators reacting to attacks on not just any facts, but on those central to their belief system", but also noted that 2016 had been "an acrimonious year for politics on both sides of the atlantic". mantzarlis also noted that interest in fact checking had never been higher, suggesting that at least some reject "post-truth" politics.  in addition, the guardian's kathryn viner notes that while false news and propaganda are rampant, social media is a double-edged sword. while it has helped some untruths to spread, it has also restrained others; as an example, she said the suns false "the truth" story following the hillsborough disaster, and the associated police cover-up, would be hard to imagine in the social media age.  international examples post-truth politics has been applied as a political buzzword to a wide range of political cultures; one article in the economist identified post-truth politics in austria, germany, north korea, poland, russia, turkey, the united kingdom, and the united states.  germany  in december 2016 "postfaktisch" (post-factual) was named word of the year by the gesellschaft fur deutsche sprache (german language society), also in connection with a rise of right-wing populism from 2015 on.  since the 1990s, "post-democracy" was used in sociology more and more.  india amulya gopalakrishnan, columnist for the times of india, identified similarities between the trump and brexit campaigns on the one hand, and hot-button issues in india such as the ishrat jahan case and the ongoing case against teesta setalvad on the other, where accusations of forged evidence and historical revisionism have resulted in an "ideological impasse".  south africa health care and education in south africa was substantially compromised during the presidency of thabo mbeki due to his hiv/aids denialism.  united kingdom an early use of the phrase in british politics was in march 2012 by scottish labour msp iain gray in criticising the difference between scottish national party's claims and official statistics. scottish labour leader jim murphy also described an undercurrent of post-truth politics in which people "cheerfully shot the messenger"
when presented with facts that didn't support their viewpoint, seeing it among pro-independence campaigners in the 2014 scottish independence referendum, and leave campaigners in the then-upcoming eu membership referendum.  post-truth politics has been retroactively identified in the lead-up to the iraq war, particularly after the chilcot report, published in july 2016, concluded that tony blair misrepresented military intelligence to support his view that iraq's chemical weapons program was advanced.  the phrase became widely used during the 2016 uk eu membership referendum to describe the leave campaign. faisal islam, political editor for sky news, said that michael gove used "post-fact politics" that were imported from the trump campaign; in particular, gove's comment in an interview that "i think people in this country have had enough of experts..." was singled out as illustrative of a post-truth trend, although this is only part of a longer statement. similarly, arron banks, the founder of the unofficial leave.eu campaign, said that "facts don't work ... you've got to connect with people emotionally. it's the trump success." andrea leadsom-a prominent campaigner for leave in the eu referendum and one of the two final candidates in the conservative leadership election-has been singled out as a post-truth politician, especially after she denied having disparaged rival theresa may's childlessness in an interview with the times in spite of transcript evidence.  united states  in conjunction with the rise of new media and communication technologies (especially the internet and blogging) and the professionalization of political communication (political consulting), scholars have viewed the periods following 9/11 and the george w. bush administration's strategic communication as a seminal moment in the emergence of what has subsequently been called post-truth politics, before the term and concept exploded in public visibility in 2016. the bush administration's talking points about "links" or "ties" between saddam hussein and al qaeda (repeated in parallel by the tony blair government), and hussein's alleged possession of weapons of mass destruction (both highly contested by experts at the time or later disproven and shown to be misleading) were viewed by some scholars as part of a historical shift. despite age-old precedents of political and government lying (such as the systematic lying by the u.s. government documented in the pentagon papers), these propaganda efforts were seen as more sophisticated in their organization and execution in a new media age, part of a complicated new public communication culture (between a wide number of cable and
satellite tv, online, and legacy news media sources). in the us., the distrust and deception identified with strategic communication of karl rove, george w. bush, and donald rumsfeld, among others, were a close historical precedent to controversies around truth (as accuracy and/or honesty) that entered the media agenda of u.s. public life, drawing significant news and new media attention and producing measurable confusion and false belief. the most spectacular examples studied by scholars include the presidential candidacy of john kerry in 2004 (accusations by the republican consultant-directed "swift boat veterans for truth" that he lied about his war record) and then, several years later (prior to the 2008 u.s. presidential campaign), that then candidate barack obama was a muslim, despite his declaration that he was christian, and was using a fake birth certificate (allegedly born in kenya).  in its original formulation, the phrase "post-truth politics" was used to describe the paradoxical situation in the united states where the republican party, which enforced stricter party discipline than the democratic party, was nevertheless able to present itself as more bipartisan, since individual democrats were more likely to support republican policies than vice versa. the term was used by paul krugman in the new york times to describe mitt romney's 2012 presidential campaign in which certain claims-such as that barack obama had cut defense spending and that he had embarked on an "apology tour"-continued to be repeated long after they had been debunked. other forms of scientific denialism in modern us politics include the anti-vaxxer movement, and the belief that existing genetically modified foods are harmful despite a strong scientific consensus that no currently marketed gmo foods have any negative health effects. the health freedom movement in the us resulted in the passage of the bipartisan dietary supplement health and education act of 1994, which allows the sale of dietary supplements without any evidence that they are safe or effective for the purposes consumers expect, though the fda has begun regulation of homeopathic products.  in a review for the harvard gazette, christopher robichaud-a lecturer in ethics and public policy at harvard kennedy school-described conspiracy theories about the legitimacy of elections and politicians, such as the "birther" idea that barack obama is not a natural-born us citizen, as one side-effect of post-truth politics. robichaud also contrasted the behavior of the candidates with that following the contested result of the 2000 election, in which al gore conceded and encouraged his supporters to accept
the result of bush v. gore. similarly, rob boston, writing for the humanist saw a rise in conspiracy theories across us public life, including birtherism, climate change denialism, and rejecting evolution, which he identified as a result of post-truth politics, noting that the existence of extensive and widely available evidence against these conspiracy theories had not slowed their growth.  in 2016, the "post-truth" label was especially widely used to describe the presidential campaign of donald trump, including by professor daniel w. drezner in the washington post, jonathan freedland in the guardian, chris cillizza in the independent, jeet heer in the new republic, and james kirchick in the los angeles times, and by several professors of government and history at harvard. in 2017, the new york times, the washington post, and others, have pointed out lies or falsehoods in trump's statements after the election. former president barack obama stated that the new media ecosystem "means everything is true and nothing is true".  environmental politics although the consensus among scientists is that human activities contribute to global warming, several political parties around the world have made climate change denial a basis of their policies. these parties have been accused of using post-truth techniques to attack environmental measures meant to combat climate changes to benefit industry donors. during the course of the 2016 election, the united states has seen numerous climate change deniers rise to power, such as new environmental protection agency head scott pruitt replacing barack obama's appointee gina mccarthy. in australia, the repeal of carbon pricing by the government of tony abbott was described as "the nadir of post-truth politics" by the age.  solutions  both technology companies and governments have started to make efforts to tackle the challenge of "post-truth politics". in an article for the journal global policy, professor nayef al-rodhan suggested four particular responses:   improve the technological tools for fact checking. for example, germany has already asked facebook to introduce a fake news filtering tool.  greater involvement and visibility for scientists and the scientific community. the uk, for instance, has a series of parliamentary committees at which scientists are called to testify, and present their research to inform policy-making. similarly in canada, the role of chief science advisor was re-established and each department with even a small scientific capability was required to develop a policy for scientific integrity.  stronger government action. in countries such as the czech republic, new units have been set up to tackle fake news. the most important challenge here
is to ensure that such state-led efforts are not used as a tool for censorship.  securitizing fake news. it is important to treat post-truth politics as a matter of security and devise global efforts to counter this phenomenon. in march 2017, the united nations special rapporteur on freedom of opinion and expression, the osce, and the organization for american states issued a joint declaration on "freedom of expression and fake news, disinformation and propaganda" to warn against the effects of fake news but, at the same time, condemn any attempts at state-mandated censorship.   see also                                 trumpism  antiscience  dark enlightenment  reactionary modernism  "art, truth and politics" (nobel lecture)  why leaders lie (book)  references  further reading  alloa, emmanuel.  "who's afraid of the post-factual?" los angeles review of books, the philosophical salon (july 2017)  economist. "post-truth politics: art of the lie: politicians have always lied. does it matter if they leave the truth behind entirely?" (leader) the economist, sept 20, 2016  gewin, virginia. communication: post-truth predicaments, nature 541, pp. 425-427, (19 january 2017),   harsin, jayson. "post-truth and critical communication." oxford research encyclopedia of communication.  20 december 2018. oxford university press.    hyvonen, ari-elmeri. "defining post-truth: structures, agents, and styles. e-international relations (october 2018).  mcintyre, lee.  "post truth" mit press (february 2018)   parmar, inderjeet. "us presidential election 2012: post-truth politics." political insight 3#2 (2012): 4-7.  pomerantsev, peter. nothing is true and everything is possible: the surreal heart of the new russia (2014)   rabin havt, ari, and media matters for america. lies, incorporated: the world of post-truth politics (2016)  online  soldatov, andrei and irina boroganhe. red web: the struggle between russia's digital dictators and the new online revolutionaries (2015).  tallis, benjamin. "living in post-truth." new perspectives. interdisciplinary journal of central & east european politics and international relations'' 24#1 (2016): 7-18.    election campaigning political campaign techniques political culture postmodernism truth 2010s neologisms
bashni (russian: башни, towers), also known as column draughts, multi-level checkers, and rarer chinese checkers, is a variation of draughts, known in russia since the 19th century. the game is played according to the basic rules of russian draughts, with the main difference being that draughts being jumped over are not removed from the playing field but are instead placed under the jumping piece (draught or tower). the resulting towers move across the board as one piece, obeying the status of the upper draught. when a tower is jumped over, only the upper draught is removed from it. if, as a result of the combat, the top draught changes colour, ownership of the tower passes on to the opposing player. based on bashni, but according to the basic rules of english draughts, world chess champion emanuel lasker developed the draughts game "laska" and, in 1911, published its description. lasker described towers that can only be "double-layered": i.e. there can be no alternation of colors. he also showed that during the game the number of game pieces either remains constant or decreases. column draughts are a subject of interest for the mathematical sciences: combinatorics, theory of paired zero-sum games, etc.  history  it is believed, the first description of column draughts was presented in the article "towers or tours" of the "collection of games for family and school" compiled by valerian alexandrovich viskovatov, and published in 1875 in st. petersburg. a famous theorist and historian draughts davyd i. sargin., being the editor of the chess and draughts sections in many russian newspapers repeatedly reprinted the article and published its own research pole pieces. one of the most complete descriptions of column draughts is given in his fundamental work "the antiquity of the games of checkers and chess", published in moscow in 1915[2]. a significant role in the dissemination column draughts belongs to enthusiasts of the leningrad production association "krasnaya zarya" headed by researcher table games, teacher of adult education and the promoter of aleksandr g. borovikov (23 june 1931 - 8 march 2017 g). a. g. borovikov for many years (from 2000 to 2015), co-editor of the magazine "koster" in which he led the column "on the checkered board" and told a fascinating story not only about the varieties of column draughts, but also other board games. yuri pavlovich filatov, one of the first initi
ators of the go-movement in the ussr, highly valued column draughts and actively promoted them. wonderful style game shows columnar checkers grandmaster n. in. abatsiev  rules   board. bashni is played on an 8×8 board with alternating dark and light squares. the left down square field should be dark.  starting position. each player starts with 12 pieces on the three rows closest to their own side.  the row closest to each player is called the "crownhead" or "kings row". usually, the colors of the pieces are black and white, but possible use other colors (one dark and other light). the player with white pieces (lighter color) moves first.  pieces. there are two kinds of pieces: "men" and "kings". both kinds of pieces may be a simple piece or column. kings are differentiated as consisting of two normal pieces of the same color, stacked one on top of the other or by inverted pieces.   men. men move forward diagonally to an adjacent unoccupied square.  kings. if a player's piece moves into the kings row on the opposing player's side of the board, that piece is "crowned", becoming a "king". the piece now has the ability to move both diagonal backwards and forwards to an adjacent unoccupied square.   capture. if the adjacent square contains an opponent's piece, and the square immediately beyond it is vacant, the opponent's piece may be captured and placed under the piece that jumped over it and create a column. jumping can be done forward and backward. multiple-jump moves are possible if, when the jumping piece lands, there is another piece that can be jumped. jumping is mandatory and cannot be passed up to make a non-jumping move. when there is more than one way for a player to jump, one may choose which sequence to make, not necessarily the sequence that will result in the most amount of captures. however, one must make all the captures in that sequence. if the column make jump over opponent column only upper piece removed from the opponent column.  if a man touches the kings row during a capture and can continue a capture, it jumps backwards as a king. the player can choose where to land after the capture.  column. move as man if upper piece is man (man's column) and move as a king if upper piece is a king (king's column). if a man's column touches the kings row only upper piece become king.  winning. a player with no valid move remaining
loses. this is the case if the player either has no free pieces left (not under opponent column) or if a player's pieces are obstructed from making a legal move by the pieces of the opponent.  draw. the game is considered a draw when the same position repeats itself for the third time, with the same player having the move each time. if one player proposes a draw and his opponent accepts the offer. if quantity of pieces and their composition after 15 moves don't change.  notation games and positions are recorded using a special notation - algebraic notation. the vertical columns of squares are labeled from a to h. the horizontal rows of squares are numbered 1 to 8 starting from white's side of the board. thus each square of the board has a unique identification of file letter followed by rank number.  move from e3 to d4 are recorded as e3-d4.  move with capture are recorded as c5:e3 (used a colon :).  1. c3-b4 b6-c5  2. b4-a5 a7-b6  3. b2-c3 c5-b4  4. a3:c5:a7 c7-b6  5. a5:c7:e5 f6:d4:b2  6. a1:c3 d8-c7  for record a position with column men are recorded as «о», king as «1». captured opponent's piece are recorded under note «/».  for example:  white: с1 - 1/0000, d6 - 000000, f4 - 0000; black: а1 - 110101/1, b2 - 00.  official rules first official rules was adopted by assembly members of the saint petersburg regional club 16-17 march 2002.  see also    russian draughts  emergo tak  lasca  external links rules of the game and combinations (rus.) столбовые шашки, удивляющие мир towers draughts tournament  draughts variants russian inventions
i think you think too much of me (stylised as i think you think too much of me) is the second ep by irish musician eden, released on 19 august 2016 through his own label mcmxcv and distributed by astralwerks. the ep was recorded and produced in dublin and contains seven tracks spanning approximately 27 minutes. i think you think too much of me is the first of ng's works to be released on physical media, with two 12-inch vinyl formats, clear red and clear being made available on his own store, a clear blue version being produced for general sale, and on compact cassette.  the ep debuted at no. 43 on the irish albums chart, becoming ng's first charting album. the ep also charted in australia, the united kingdom, and the united states.  background the ep was announced after the conclusion of ng's end credits tour and release of his cover single "hey ya". as with his previous songs, the entirety of the ep was written and produced by himself. during production, he created three different versions of "drugs" and two versions of "rock + roll". by contrast, "and" was written in "a day or two" and became one of the fastest songs he produced. the songs drew on a combination of past experiences.  the singles "sex" and "drugs" were released on 10 june and 14 july 2016 respectively, with the former garnering praise from the singer lorde who described "sex" as "messy and emotional and twitchy and kind of in love and definitely as freaked out as that situation feels." billboard live streamed "drugs" on facebook and released the single exclusively on their platform a day earlier than the worldwide release.  the songs "fumes", "circles" and "xo" are updated versions of songs released under his old alias the eden project. the remastered version of "fumes" features a collaboration with american musician gnash. eden has stated that the ep "is more of a realization than a journey", while also noting that "the songs are all intertwined, but in different ways."  promotion in july 2016, there were reports of mysterious packages containing a virtual reality head set being sent to eden fans. it was later revealed that the headsets were included in the vip packages for the futurebound tour. on 7 september 2016, a 360-degree music video for "drugs" was released.  i think you think too much of me was supported by the futurebound tour, which featured 33 performances in
north america and europe.  music videos three music videos were released for this album. the video for "sex" was uploaded onto youtube on 14 june 2016. the video takes place in tokyo, japan and sydney, australia. the music video for "drugs" was filmed in los angeles and was released through youtube on 18 august 2016. a second music video was released as a 360 degree virtual reality experience on 7 september 2016. the music video for "rock + roll" was filmed primarily at the wild atlantic way and in south county dublin, ireland and was released on 4 october 2016.  artwork the album cover depicts the album name written continuously in a square shape with the eden logo spanned across the text on a grey background. the covers of the singles are of his first concert scenes in different lighting environments.  track listing all songs were composed by jonathon ng.  personnel jonathon ng - guitar, vocals, piano, sound design, production, mixing, engineering, string arrangement chris finney - additional dialogue (track 4) kate fleetwood - additional dialogue (track 4) garrett nash - vocals (track 5) hal ritson - additional engineering and programming  charts  references  2016 eps eden (musician) eps astralwerks eps
jean milesi (born 24 june 1935) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in seven editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1935 births living people french male cyclists people from digne-les-bains sportspeople from alpes-de-haute-provence
carroll cottage is a heritage-listed cottage at 6 edward street, kingaroy, south burnett region, queensland, australia. it was built from 1900 to 1930s. it is also known as daniel carroll's house. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 28 july 2000.  history  daniel carroll's house is a small timber residence constructed in 1900 on a selection owned by daniel carroll. carroll was an early settler of the district, part of a wave of selectors who took up land in the area from the 1880s onwards, and his cottage was the nucleus of a small settlement that was to become the town of kingaroy. significant pastoral expansion took place in southern queensland commencing in 1840 when extensive tracts of land were taken up on the darling downs, brisbane valley and logan river area in 1840 and 1841. the first large properties of the burnett district, tarong and nanango, were taken up in 1842.  for about 40 years, these large pastoral holdings survived substantially intact and their dominance suppressed the need for service towns. however, the lands act of 1868 caused dramatic changes to rural areas and large portions of these leases were resumed for selection purposes. the result was the closer settlement of smaller selections, which consequently enabled the establishment of rural communities and created a need for service towns and public facilities. the first notable selection in the area was that of the markwell brothers, who applied for  of land in 1878. it was located on the stuart river and kingaroy creek and became known as the kingaroy paddock, ultimately giving its name to the area.  in 1891, daniel carroll selected portion 107v, a  block abutting the kingaroy paddock. carroll had arrived from ireland at the age of twenty in 1887 and spent some years in the area working as a coach driver. in 1898, it was reported that carroll was the only european living in the vicinity of the current site of kingaroy and that he had built a hut for himself and a yard for his horses nearby. in 1900, in anticipation of his forthcoming marriage to bridget pender, carroll had the present cottage built, by a mr ferdinand seng. by this time, carroll had selected further blocks of land adjoining portion 107v.  to facilitate the transport of timber and other produce of developing agricultural industries in the district, the kilkivan branch railway was extended to wondai in 1903 and to the "56 mile peg" in 1904. the  peg was near the corner of the kingaroy paddock. the termination of the railway line at the peg was the impetus for the establishment of the town of kingaroy. daniel
carroll and arthur youngman (owner of taabinga station) sold town blocks at public auction in 1903-04. when the first train arrived on 19 december 1904, the carroll cottage was one of only three buildings at the termination site. the others being carroll's new hotel, the carrollee (burnt down in 1913) and f c petersen's recently completed store. the official banquet for the opening of the railway was held in carroll's horse paddock.  after the extension of the railway, the establishment of commercial premises such as shops and hotels were soon followed by public offices, churches and schools. the seven years that the town served as railhead were sufficient to secure its growth beyond neighbouring centres and establish a lasting dominance. daniel carroll continued to be involved with the development of kingaroy through his property interests and as a member of a variety of committees for public facilities. he donated a building site from his original block for st. mary's, the first catholic church in kingaroy and also donated land for the hospital. the carroll family moved into a new home in albert street in 1910, but retained possession of the cottage, which was rented out. the property is still owned by members of the carroll family, with the kingaroy historical society as caretakers. it is furnished and interpreted to the early interwar period and is open by appointment as a house museum.  description  daniel carroll's house is located on a small block of land in edward street in the town of kingaroy. the house is a four room cottage with several accretions. the cottage is a small, single storey timber dwelling, low-set on short timber stumps with a short, centrally located entry stair. the area of the house that accommodates the front two rooms has a steep hipped roof without eaves that is clad in corrugated iron and the back two rooms have a simple lean-to roof. a verandah runs across the front of the house with a recent cross braced balustrade replacing an earlier dowel balustrade. the cottage is clad externally in weatherboards and has ogee-profile steel window hoods surmounting the windows, which are double hung timber sashes.  the detached kitchen is located at the back of the house, connected by a raised, covered walkway that has been enclosed in horizontal, corrugated iron sheeting. on the western side this area is abutted by a bathroom also sheeted in corrugated iron. the kitchen is a simple rectilinear building with a pitched roof. it is clad in weatherboards and has been extended with a small open, lean-to at the
back which is used for timber storage. the cottage is lined internally with beaded, tongue and groove timber boarding and has three bedrooms and a parlour. the kitchen is lined with fibro cement sheeting.  heritage listing  carroll cottage was listed on the queensland heritage register on 28 july 2000 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  daniel carroll's house is important in demonstrating the evolution and pattern of queensland's history, reflecting the housing and living conditions of early settlers in rural districts. as the earliest dwelling to be constructed in kingaroy, daniel carroll's house demonstrates the growth of the town from a rural selection to a thriving town around a railhead and later a regional administrative and commercial centre. constructed in 1900, the house is conspicuous amongst surrounding interwar homes as being of an earlier period and contributes to an understanding of how the town developed.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  daniel carroll's house demonstrates the principal characteristics of a small, timber residence constructed in a then remote rural district. key features include the simple rectilinear form of the building, steep, hipped roof, basic four-roomed plan and detached kitchen. the house provides a good illustration of the way in which houses have traditionally been extended in queensland.  the place is important because of its aesthetic significance.  daniel carroll's house has aesthetic significance derived from its simple design, diminutive scale, cottage-like form and unrefined use of materials. it is largely intact and its current use as a house museum has the ability to evoke an impression of the lives of early residents and other times.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  daniel carroll's house has strong social value to the kingaroy community, both as the earliest house in the settlement on its original site and also as part of a community museum complex maintained by the local historical society.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  the house has a special association with daniel carroll, a key figure in the establishment of kingaroy.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register kingaroy houses in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
beyond control is the second studio album by kings kaleidoscope. bec recordings alongside gospel song records released the album on july 1, 2016.  critical reception  jeremy armstrong writes, "beyond controls willingness to cascade sound upon sound yet stay musically concise is impressive by any standard." ryan barbee states, "kings kaleidoscope is justified in receiving well-earned praises for their latest offering." scott fryberger describes, "[he's] sure everyone who listens will find something to love in beyond control." lucas munachen says, "although a lot will be torn on the band's newest offering, it's still a solid follow-up and worth checking out." mark woodhouse responds, "so does it live up to my expectations? not really. but it's still growing on me. beyond control is an album that will repay with multiple listens, and one that'll provoke and encourage you, and will leave you wanting more of the good stuff."  track listing  charts  references  2016 albums bec recordings albums
andria "antri" christoforou (born 2 april 1992) is a cypriot professional racing cyclist, who currently rides for uci women's continental team . in 2016, she became the national champion for cyprus in both the road race and individual time trial. she was selected to represent cyprus at the 2016 summer olympics. she qualified to represent cyprus at the 2020 summer olympics in the women's road race.  major results  2010  1st  road race, national road championships  2013  national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial   3rd time trial, games of the small states of europe  2014   1st sfendami mountainbike race  2nd lakatamia mountainbike race  2016   national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial   1st arad dimona arad  1st dead sea-scorpion pass  3rd massada arad  2017   1st  road race, national road championships  games of the small states of europe  1st time trial 2nd cross-country  2018  national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial   1st vr women itt  3rd time trial, mediterranean games  6th overall tour of eftalia hotels & velo alanya  6th time trial, commonwealth games  2019  national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial  1st scorpions' pass time trial 7th chrono gatineau 8th grand prix cycliste de gatineau  2020  national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial  references  external links    1992 births living people cypriot female cyclists cyclists at the 2016 summer olympics cyclists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic cyclists of cyprus cyclists at the 2010 summer youth olympics commonwealth games competitors for cyprus cyclists at the 2014 commonwealth games cyclists at the 2018 commonwealth games mediterranean games bronze medalists for cyprus competitors at the 2018 mediterranean games mediterranean games medalists in cycling european games competitors for cyprus cyclists at the 2019 european games people from nicosia district
the 1989 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1989 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their 12th season under head coach herb deromedi, the chippewas compiled a 5-5-1 record (5-2-1 against mac opponents), finished in fourth place in the mac standings, and outscored their opponents, 228 to 182.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 88,152 in five home games.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback jeff bender with 1,487 passing yards, tailback donnie riley with 1,187 rushing yards, and ken ealy with 346 receiving yards. riley received the team's most valuable player award. six central michigan players (riley, center ralph newland, placekicker kevin nicholl, linebacker mark dennis, defensive lineman j.j. wierenga, and defensive back david johnson) received first-team all-mac honors. nicholl set a school record with 20 field goals kicked during the 1989 season.  schedule  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
ultra singapore started with a road to ultra event which took place in september 2015, and in 2016 returned as a two-day festival, which took place at ultra park, a field across marina bay sands during 10-11 september 2016.  history  2015  the road to ultra event in singapore took place on 19 september 2015 at the convention center in the marina bay sands hotel during the 2015 formula one race weekend. early bird tickets for the event sold out in a record-breaking 21 minutes, eventually leading to the selling out of all tickets. artists on the bill for the rtu event included skrillex, alesso, nicky romero, mija, ansolo, and rave republic. the debut of road to ultra: singapore welcomed over 11,000 people in attendance to the marina bay sands hotel.  2016  the first edition of ultra singapore took place at the ultra park, located near the marina bay sands hotel during 10-11 september 2016. early bird tickets went on sale during early january and the round of tier 2 tickets followed after. the phase one lineup for the festival was announced on 20 june 2016 and included afrojack, axwell & ingrosso, deadmau5, kygo, nero, dj snake, far east movement, jauz, and marshmello. the phase two lineup was released on 29 july 2016 and included additions like above & beyond, alesso, zhu, carnage, gryffin, matador, nicole moudaber, reboot, shaded live, technasia, and w&w. there were three stages at ultra singapore, which included the main stage, resistance stage, and the live stage. singapore was the third country to host an ultra live stage, following ultra music festival in miami and ultra korea. the final lineup for ultra singapore was announced on 16 august 2016 which included the addition of regional and local acts. it was announced shortly after the inaugural edition of ultra singapore, that 45,000 people were in attendance.  2017 the second edition of ultra singapore took place once again at the ultra park during 10-11 june 2017. the phase one lineup was announced on 14 march 2017 and included the like of kshmr, tchami, dash berlin, dubfire, nic fanciulli, sasha & john digweed, steve aoki, and many more. the phase two lineup was released on 17 may 2017 and included the additions of anna, carlo lio, showtek, henry saiz, rich chigga and many more. the festival hosted three stages including the main stage, resistance stage, and the
live stage.  2019 the fourth edition of ultra singapore was supposed to take place at ultra park, but was changed to the b2 level of the sands expo and convention centre at marina bay sands. this information was relayed to the public less than five days to the festival.  legal history   in 2017 and 2018, there were at least eight suits filed against ultra singapore pte ltd for sums ranging from $3,745 to $74,686. in at least three of the cases, the plaintiffs have received payments.  see also   ultra music festival  road to ultra  russell faibisch  ultra brasil  ultra buenos aires  ultra chile  ultra japan  ultra korea  ultra bali  ultra south africa  ultra europe  references  external links   ultra worldwide  ultra music festival  ultra singapore  road to ultra  resistance  music festivals established in 2015 electronic music festivals in singapore
lyubov yarovaya () is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by yan frid. it was based on a 1926 play of the same name by konstantin trenyov, which was later adapted a second time as a 1970 film. the film was the most popular film released in the soviet union that year, with attendance figures of more than 46 million.  subject  russian civil war  cast    zinaida karpova  as lyubov yarovaya   igor gorbachyov  as shvandya    elena granovskaya as elena ivanovna gornostaeva    valentina kibardina  as panova    aleksandr mazayev as yarovoy  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films soviet drama films soviet films russian-language films films directed by yan frid soviet black-and-white films ru: любовь яровая (спектакль, 1951)
john olubi sodipo (october 15, 1935 - december 4, 1999), was a nigerian philosopher.  early life and education  he went to remo secondary school, sagamu from 1948 to 1953 and also to university of ibadan from 1956 to 1960 and at the durham university, england from 1961 to 1964.lectured university ibadan from 1964 to 1966 sodipo lectured in philosophy at the university of lagos from 1966 and taught at obafemi awolowo university from 1968 to 1982, where he became the first professor in african philosophy and served as first head of department of philosophy. he became the first vice-chancellor of ogun state university when it opened in 1982. sodipo was an editor of second order: an african journal of philosophy.  references  1935 births 1999 deaths people from ogun state nigerian philosophers alumni of durham university university of lagos faculty obafemi awolowo university faculty olabisi onabanjo university faculty vice-chancellors of nigerian universities 20th-century nigerian philosophers
chandalar is an unincorporated community in yukon-koyukuk census area in the u.s. state of alaska.  chandalar is located on the eastern shore of chandalar lake by chandalar lake airport, about 200 miles north of fairbanks, and is at an elevation of 1,873 feet. it succeeded an earlier community (or communities) by that name (see history). the present chandalar has never formally reported a population on the u.s. census.  the community is served by the chandalar lake airport and is not accessible by road. it was featured in the national geographic show life below zero.  history, other chandalars and little squaw at least two communities bore the name of chandalar before the present one. the chandalar mining camp was located several miles to the northeast of the current chandalar.  this settlement was developed as a mining camp in about 1906-07, and a post office was established in 1908, but it was shut down in 1944.  also at or adjacent to this location was the mining camp of little squaw, which was along the same named creek. little squaw had been named for the daughter of frank & nevelo yasuda, who helped found this mining area. little squaw appeared twice on the u.s. census, reporting a population of 8 in 1930 and 10 in 1940. in at least one instance, little squaw and chandalar were reported as being the same place on the 1951 usgs chandalar topographical map.  the present-day census-designated place of venetie, alaska was also called chandalar village. it is unclear if this was the "chandalar" reported on the 1920 and 1930 u.s. censuses. maps of the time were not clear on the location, though the 1929 usgs topographical map of chandalar-sheenjek region, alaska  reported chandalar at the present location of venetie. a review of the names on the census rolls for 1930 chandalar and 1940 venetie would confirm whether this was the same location.  the name was removed to the present settlement on chandalar lake by the airport around the 1940s.  climate chandalar has a continental subarctic climate (koppen dfc).  the nearest weather station is at chandalar lake.  demographics  (old) chandalar  chandalar first appeared on the 1920 u.s. census and again in 1930 as an unincorporated village. it reported "no population" in 1940 and did not appear on the census
again under that name. as stated under "history", it is unclear if this chandalar is the former mining camp at little squaw creek or if it was the present day venetie.  new chandalar the new settlement that sprang up around the chandalar lake airstrip has never formally reported a population to date, as of the 2010 census. however it has a population of about 5.  references  external links   lanigan's retreat  unincorporated communities in alaska unincorporated communities in unorganized borough, alaska unincorporated communities in yukon-koyukuk census area, alaska populated places of the arctic united states
stefan ciubotarasu (; 21 march 1910 - 27 august 1970) was a romanian actor. he appeared in more than thirty films from 1954 to 1970.  he was born into a poor farming family in lipovat, vaslui county, a village in the moldavia region of romania. at the age of 10-11 he was sent by his family to bucharest to become an apprentice shoemaker. in the fall of 1924 he decided to go back and study at a high school in vaslui, and became interested in art, culture, and poetry and began to write. he then studied from 1929 to 1932 at the academy of music and dramatic art in iasi, after which he moved to barlad, where he wanted to establish himself as a theater actor. in 1934, with help from poet mihai codreanu, who taught at his old university and offered himself as a mentor, ciubotarasu secured a job at the conservatory theater in iasi. he debuted with the role of an assassin in macbeth, and then played the role of count alexis czerny in the play ninotchka by melchior lengyel. starting in 1945 he played at the  and from 1950 at the national theatre bucharest.  from the mid-1950s, ciubotarasu was also cast regularly in romanian films. notable were his portrayal of petre in liviu ciulei's drama, the forest of the hanged (which competed at the 1965 cannes film festival), and his role as the dacian captain ciungul in mircea dragan's historical film, the column.  in 1964 he was awarded the order of culture of merit as people's artist of the romanian people's republic "for outstanding work in the field of theater, music and visual arts" and in 1967 for "a lasting and outstanding achievement in dramatic art in the theater".  filmography  references  external links   1910 births 1970 deaths romanian male film actors people from vaslui county george enescu national university of arts alumni romanian male stage actors 20th-century romanian male actors
the battle of cana was fought between greek seleucid under king antiochus xii dionysus of syria, and the arab nabataean kingdom. cana is an unknown village; scholars place it somewhere south or southwest of the dead sea.  after the nabataeans ambushed the judaean hasmoneans in a steep valley, they gained new territories, and the greek seleucids stationed in damascus felt threatened by the rising power of the nabataeans to their south.  antiochus was slain during the combat and the battle became a decisive nabataean victory. antiochus's demoralized army fled and perished from starvation in the desert afterwards.  background    the port of gaza was the last stop for spices that were carried by trade caravans from eudaemon, in today's yemen, across the arabian peninsula, passing through petra and ending up in the gaza for shipment to european markets. the nabataean kingdom had generated considerable wealth from the passing of this trading route through their territory and had considerable influence over the gazans. the hasmonean king of judaea, alexander jannaeus, had besieged the city of gaza around 100 bc. this came after the gazans had favoured the ptolemaic kingdom over the judaeans in their recent battles. gaza was occupied and its inhabitants put to the sword by jannaeus.  the capture of gaza posed a threat to the nabataean trade business and altered their previous neutral relationship with the hasmoneans. the hasmoneans under jannaeus launched a campaign that captured several territories in transjordan north of nabataea, along the road to damascus, including northern moab and gilead. although these areas were not under direct control of the nabataeans, the presence of the judaeans posed a threat to nabataean interests as they cut the communications and trade routes to damascus which was then controlled by the seleucid empire. the nabataean king, obodas i, with the support of the seleucid king demetrius iii, fought to restore these areas. obodas managed to defeat jannaeus during the battle of gadara around 93 bc, when he ambushed him and his forces in a steep valley where jannaeus "was lucky to escape alive".  battle the nabataeans exploited divisions in the hasmonean kingdom for their benefit. janneus had to cede the territories to obodas in order to dissuade him from supporting his opponents. with these areas now under direct nabataean control, the greek seleucids, at the time in terminal decline, felt threatened and launched two campaigns against
the arabs under seleucid king antiochus xii. during the second of them, antiochus marched along the coast of judae in order to surprise the nabataeans.  although initially successful, the young king was caught in a melee and killed by an arab soldier. upon his death the syrian army fled to an unknown village known cana and mostly perished in the desert; the location of the settlement is unknown but many scholars propose a place south of the dead sea. having gained a decisive victory, the nabateans soon after conquered damascus.  aftermath  after obodas's victories over the hasmoneans and the seleucids, he became the first nabataean king to be worshipped as a god by the nabataean people. avdat was a temple built in the negev desert by the nabataeans for commemorating obodas where inscriptions have been found referring to "obodas the god".  see also antigonid-nabataean confrontations  references  cana wars involving the nabataean kingdom 80s bc conflicts 87 bc
the moscow international biennale for young art (mibya) is a major contemporary visual art exhibition that focuses on the work of artists and curators under the age of 35. it aims to bring together new artistic initiatives from russia and the world by supporting the creative development of young artists for interested audiences.  mibya was first held in 2008 in response to rising interest from artists, curators and critics following the festival of young art, "qui vive?" sponsored by the national center for contemporary arts (ncca) and held annually from 2002 to 2006, in collaboration with free workshops at the moscow museum of modern art (mmoma). "the project has acquired new status thanks to growing interest from young artists, curators, and critics. through the combined efforts of the ncca and mmoma, the biennial for young art was developed."  participants are given the chance to establish connections and connect with the professional artistic community.  6th moscow international biennial for young art  the 6th moscow international biennial for young art was scheduled to begin on june 8, 2018. the curator of the main project is lucrezia calabro visconti, an independent curator from italy. the theme of the event is "abracadabra" with an emphasis on "the night out" and the "dance floor". abracadabra is an archaic magical incantation with opaque origins.  curator lucrezia calabro visconti (italy, 1990) is an independent curator based in torino, where she co-founded the research-driven, non-profit space clog projects, "a research-driven independent space with a focus on contemporary art and culture, autonomous education experiments and self-production projects."  visconti previously worked as an artistic advisor for "artissima" (internazionale d'arte contemporanea) and as assistant curator for "tutttovero" by francesco bonami and "shit and die" by maurizio cattelan, myriam ben salah and marta papini. she writes for contemporary art journals and platforms, and founded the online projects "curatorshit", "shitndie" and "ketchup drool". her "dear betty: run fast, bite hard!" at gamec, bergamo, was the winning project of premio bonaldi 2015-16.  commissioner  ekaterina kibovskaya serves as commissioner of the project. she was born in moscow and graduated from the journalism department of moscow state university (media culture and communications laboratory). she worked at esquire magazine as a manager in new york city with
a number of artists and gallery owners. she was also commissioner of the 5th moscow international biennale for young art.  founders and organizers the founders of the biennale are ministry of culture of the russian federation, the moscow department of culture, the national centre for contemporary arts (ncca) as part of the rosizo exhibition space and the moscow museum of modern art (mmoma).  rosizo state museum and exhibition center develops and presents exhibition projects in partnership with other museums and cultural institutions. it hosts a collection of more than 40,000 artworks.   moscow museum of modern art (mmoma) is the first state russian museum that concentrates exclusively on the art of the 20th and 21st centuries. one of the museum's priorities is to promote young and emerging artists, by bringing them into the contemporary artistic process, and to create inclusive projects.  references   art biennials
the multitude of hindu temples in north paravur are often attributed to the influence of the travancore and cochin state rulers who presided over the region for many years. in addition, throughout history north paravur saw the arrival of many brahmins, who settled and constructed many more temples of worship.  hindu temples some of the major temples in the taluk district include:  peruvaram mahadeva temple, north paravur  kannankulangara sreekrishna temple, north paravur  dakshina mookambika temple, north paravur  kalikulangara temple, nanthiattukunam, north paravur   chakkumarassery sree kumara ganesha mangalam maha-temple, north paravur  sree balaparameswari temple, kochangadi, vadakkumpuram, north paravur  thiravallur shiva temple, alangad, north paravur  munduruthy kavu temple at munduruthy, north paravur  venketachalapathi gsb temple at kmk junction, north paravur  thonniakavu bhadrakali temple, north paravur  perumpadanna mahadeva temple, north paravur  veluthattamma temple, kedamangalam, north paravur  ayroor pisharikkal sree durga temple, north paravur  vettakaran temple at thirumuppam variam, north paravur  sree krishna swami temple, kotayilkovilakam, north paravur   puthenvelikara karottu sree krishna temple, north paravur  mannam sree subramaniya swami temple, north paravur  nandhikulangara sreekrishna temple, north paravur  sree neeleshwaram mahadeva temple, pattanam, vadakkekara, north paravur  alunkal sree bhadrakali temple, kottuvallikkad, famous for thalam vazhipadu, north paravur  churches  the initial kottakkavu mar thoma syro-malabar pilgrim church was founded by saint thomas, one of the twelve apostles of jesus christ, in 52 a.d. this apostolic church was the first church built in india and was one of the seven churches established by saint thomas in india where he preached and converted locals to syriac christianity. the other six churches were built in kodungalloor, kokkamangalam, palayoor, kollam, niranam, and nilackal. in the 9th century, the kottakkavu mar thoma syro-malabar pilgrim church was rebuilt by mar sabor and mar proth who arrived in malakara from persia. the kottakkavu sliva, a persian cross engraved on granite stone by mar sabor and mar pro
th, is preserved in the chapel in front of the church. the remains found on-site today are those of the third church, which was built in 1308. pope gregory xiii raised the altar of this church to the status of privileged altar in 1575.  list some of the major churches in taluk include:   kottakkavu mar thoma syro-malabar pilgrim church, north paravur founded a.d. 52  st. thomas jacobite syrian church, north paravur, where the tomb of gregorios abdal jaleel is present.  mar sleeva syro-malabar church, kadalvathuruth, north paravur  st. antony's church, chettikkad, north paravur  st. don bosco roman catholic latin church, north paravur  st. joseph cottolengo roman catholic latin church, north paravur st. antony's syro malabar church, kochal valluvally. st george  syro malabar church puthenpally  varapuzha.     alengad kunnel syro malabar church, north paravur  gothuruth st. sebastians latin church, north paravur  kunjithai st. francis xavier church, north paravur   malavana st. george's church, north paravur   vyakulambika matha church, pattanam, north paravur  ayroor st. antony's syro malabar church, north paravur  kuthiathodu st. francis xavier church, north paravur  thuruthur st.thomas church, north paravur  little flower catholic church koottukad (latin-rite), north paravur  st. mary's assumption church, ezhikkara, north paravur  st. vincent ferrar church, chathanad, north paravur  st. germain's syro-malabar church, kacheripady, north paravur  masjids (mosques)  paravur juma masjid, north paravur  w. veliyathunadu jum'a masjid, north paravur   isha athu sunna juma masjid, near pvt bus stand, north paravur  pattalam juma masjid, north paravur   perumpadanna juma masjid, north paravur   manjaly juma masjid, north paravur  kattenellure munavarsha thangal, masjid tattappilly, north paravur  kadungallur juma masjid, north paravur  parappuram juma masjid, north paravur  eloor juma masjid, north paravur  ezhikara juma masjid, north paravur  vaniyakkad juma masjid, north paravur   kaitharam juma masjid, north paravur  valluvally juma masjid, north paravur  che
riyappilly juma masjid, north paravur  paravur synagogue paravur synagogue is a historically important jewish place of worship in north paravur  festivals  paravur mookambika navarathri festival, north paravur   kalikulangara valiyavilka festival, north paravur   moothakunam temple festiva, north paravur  dukrana of st. thomas the apostle festival, north paravur  the annual feast of st. antony at st. antony's church festival, north paravur  the celebration of sacred heart of jesus, don bosco church, festival, north paravur   perumpadanna holi festival at perumpadanna ksms mahadeva temple, north paravur  unnimisiha chapel, madaplathuruth, north paravur  chakkumarassery temple festival, north paravur  the feast of st. theresa at little flower church (koottukad), north paravur  peruvaram sree mahadeva temple festival, north paravur  mannam sreemurugan thaipooya festival, north paravur  references  north paravur religious buildings and structures in ernakulam district
players in bold have later been capped at full international level.  group a  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  group b  head coach:  head coach:  henryk apostel  head coach:  head coach:  group c  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  group d  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  head coach:  references  1981
verticordia serotina is a flowering plant in the myrtle family, myrtaceae and is endemic to the north-west of western australia. it is a shrub with egg-shaped leaves and bright pink flowers with long, curved styles in spring.  description verticordia serotina is a shrub with a single main branch and many side-branches and which usually grows to a height of . the leaves are elliptic, egg-shaped or almost round and  long.  the flowers are scented and arranged in spike-like groups near the ends of the branches, each flower on a spreading stalk  long. the floral cup is top-shaped,  long, rough, glabrous and has curved green appendages. the sepals are  long, spreading, deep pink with 12 or 13 feathery lobes. the petals are a similar colour to the petals,  long, with pointed lobes around its edge. the style is  long, curved and hairy on one side. flowering time is from august to september, sometimes later.  taxonomy and naming verticordia serotina was first formally described by alex george in 1991 from a specimen he collected near exmouth and the description was published in nuytsia. the specific epithet (serotina) is a latin words meaning "happening late" referring to the later flowering of this species compared to the closely related v. forrestii.  george placed this species in subgenus eperephes, section pennuligera along with v. comosa, v. chrysostachys, v. lepidophylla, v. aereiflora, v. dichroma, v. x eurardyensis, v. muelleriana, v. argentea, v. albida, v. fragrans, v. venusta, v. forrestii, v. oculata, v. etheliana and v. grandis.  distribution and habitat this verticordia usually grows in deep sand in heath and shrubland. it occurs in the cape range national park and nearby stations in the carnarvon biogeographic region.  conservation verticordia serotina is classified as "priority two" by the western australian government department of parks and wildlife, meaning that it is poorly known and known from only one or a few locations.  use in horticulture verticordia serotina has only been successfully cultivated in kings park botanic garden. it has been propagated from cuttings and by grafting onto chamelaucium uncinatum rootstock.  references  serotina rosids of western australia eudicots of western australia plants described in 1991
the my raven is a passenger vessel operating for ullswater 'steamers' on the lake of ullswater in the english lake district, where she has spent her entire working life. she was built in 1889 as a steam vessel, but converted to diesel power in 1934. she is a member of the national historic fleet.  the raven has a length of , a beam of  and a draught of . her gross tonnage is 63, and she can carry 150 passengers. she is the largest vessel in the ullswater 'steamers' fleet.  history the m.y. raven was ordered by the ullswater steam navigation company, a predecessor of the current owners. like her older sister ship, lady of the lake, she was built by t.b. seath & co. at rutherglen near glasgow, and transported overland from there to ullswater, where she was launched on 11 july 1889. she was commissioned at the suggestion of thomas cook, in response to the growing popularity of ullswater as a tourist destination, and because the previous year a breakdown of lady of the lake forced the cancellation of services. she was named after ravencragg, the lakeside home of company director william hugh parkin.   in 1912, raven was made a temporary royal yacht when the german emperor wilhelm ii visited ullswater during his stay with the 5th earl of lonsdale at lowther castle. her decks were painted yellow, the earl's personal colour, for the occasion. in 1934, raven was converted from steam and fitted with twin diesel engines.  gallery  references     ferries of england ships and vessels of the national historic fleet transport in cumbria 1889 ships
giselbert (gilbert) (d. after 1097), once count of clermont, son of widrich ii (d. after 1062), who in turn was son of widrich i (d. before 1062), the first count of clermont, and his wife hersende, ex-wife of hildrad (hezelin), count of :fr:grandpre.  giselbert's sister was ermengarde, whose first husband was gozelon, count of montaigu (and so she was grandmother of lambert, count of montaigu and clermont), and second husband was fredelon of esch, who practiced brigandage with giselbert.  documents from 1083 relate how the church at st. paul at liege possessed property at nandrin near the castle of clermont.  giselbert and fredelon terrorized the region so that the inhabitants could not do basic tasks for survival, such as gathering wood or tilling the soil.  henri de verdun, bishop of liege, gave the advocacy of this land to the adjacent landowner, conon, count of montaigu, and forced giselbert and fredelon to restore the damage they had wrought.  giselbert married a woman named longarde, of unknown origins.  they had no known children.  giselbert, his brother herman, his wife longarde and his aunt ermengarde donated the church of saint-symphorien to the abbey of cluny in 1091.  by 1095, the castle of clermont had become a menace to shipping on the meuse, occupied by brigands, and otbert, the new prince-bishop of liege, organized a siege of the castle. the siege lasted from 29 june to 9 august 1095 and ended unsuccessfully, partly because godfrey of bouillon and other nobles in the army refused to attack the castle owing to an unresolved dispute concerning the deposed abbot of saint-hubert.  the fact that lambert obtained the rights to the castle of clermont and the countship is undisputed.  two theories abound as to the cause.  the first is that lambert married the daughter of giselbert and obtained the title by marriage.  the second is that the activities of the occupants of clermont in 1095, giselbert and fredelon, who some regarded as brigandage, were perceived by these two as the legitimate levying of tolls on river traffic. a 1095 entry in the chronicle of giles of orval reveals that what otbert's objective was accomplished by purchase. the
acquisition of clermont and its subsequent enfeoffment to his vassal lambert was part of a consistent policy of purchase which also brought to the prince-bishop the important fortresses of mirwart, couvin and, bouillon.  this second theory is now regarded by scholars as the most likely.  as for giselbert, the best avenue of escape was then the crusade. avoiding defeat in 1095, he apparently departed in the army of godfrey of bouillon, and later appearing as a member of the army of godfrey's brother baldwin in cilicia in the winter of 1097, described as giselbertus de claro monte.  no further reference to giselbert can be found, although a knight in godfrey's army, milo de claro monte, who appeared in 1099, may have been a relative or follower of giselbert.  references  sources  murray, alan v., ''the army of godfrey of bouillon, 1096-1099: structure and dynamics of a contingent on the first crusade (pdf)'', revue beige de philology et d'histoire, tome 70, fast. 2, 1992  external links medieval lands project, comtes de clermont  christians of the first crusade
the 2017 big 12 conference women's basketball tournament was the postseason women's basketball tournament for the big 12 conference that was held from march 3 to 6, 2017 in oklahoma city, oklahoma at chesapeake energy arena. west virginia won their first big 12 tournament title after upsetting #1 seeded baylor 77-66 to win an automatic bid to the ncaa women's tournament  seeds  schedule  bracket  all-tournament team most outstanding player - tynice martin, west virginia  see also 2017 big 12 conference men's basketball tournament 2017 ncaa women's division i basketball tournament 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  references  external links  2017 phillips 66 big 12 conference women's basketball tournament official website  big 12 conference women's basketball tournament tournament big 12 conference women's basketball tournament big 12 conference women's basketball tournament
the following lists events that happened in 1984 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - steingrimur hermannsson  events  births  7 february - smari mccarthy, innovator and information activist 17 february - asgeir orn hallgrimsson, handball player 18 february - solvi ottesen, footballer 27 april - hannes þor halldorsson, footballer. 25 may - unnur birna vilhjalmsdottir, model and beauty contestant, miss world 2005. 20 september - holmfriður magnusdottir, footballer 28 october - kari kristjansson, handball player. 29 october - asta birna gunnarsdottir, handball player  deaths 11 july - ragnar jonsson, art patron, book publisher and art collector (b. 1904)  18 july - ingolfur jonsson, politician (b. 1909). 16 september - hallgrimur fr. hallgrimsson, businessman (b. 1905)  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
when the world is wide is the debut studio album by japanese indie rock band ykiki beat. it was released on july 22, 2015 by p-vine records.  track listing  personnel ykiki beat nobuki akiyama - lead vocals, guitar kohei kamoto - guitar koki nozue - synthesizer yotaro kachi - bass mizuki sekiguchi - drums  additional personal yujiro yonetsu - production tom mcfall - mixing yoshirotten - artworks yu nakazato - a&r takuya yamaguchi - management hiroki sakida - management  charts  weekly chart  release history  references  external links    2015 debut albums japanese-language albums p-vine records albums
377001-377100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377101-377200   |-id=144 | 377144 okietex ||  || the oklahoma city astronomy club, founded in 1958, has run the okie-tex star party annually since 1984. it offers amateur astronomers a relaxed observing atmosphere under some of the darkest skies in the central united states. ||  |}  377201-377300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377301-377400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377401-377500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377501-377600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377601-377700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377701-377800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377801-377900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  377901-378000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   377001-378000
ali alanc (born january 22, 1959) is a turkish football manager. he is the head coach of the izmir-based konak belediyespor since the 2015-16 season, which competes in the turkish women's first football league.  alanc serves also as the president of the confederation of the turkish amateur sports clubs (askf), and a member of the turkish football federation's executive board.  alanc has been with konak belediyespor since 2007 managing the amateur football team. after taking over the leadership of the women's team from huseyin tavur, who coached the team since the 2006-07 season and won three championships in a row, alanc managed the team in three matches of the 2015-16 uefa women's champions league qualifying round. his team won the champion title of the 2015-16 season for the fourth time. he will coach konak belediyespor at the 2016-17 uefa women's champions league group 9 matches.  managerial statistics  honours turkish women's first football league konak belediyespor  winners (2): 2015-16, 2016-17  third places (1): 2017-18  references  living people 1959 births sportspeople from izmir turkish women's football managers konak belediyespor
transfiguration of hiram brown is a studio album by mose allison released in 1960 under the columbia records label (columbia cl1444). the album includes nine tracks written by allison and five covers, all sung by allison, with addison farmer on bass and jerry segal on drums.  background from the liner notes by teo macero:  according to mose allison, "transfiguration of hiram brown suite" is a serio-comic fantasy based on a perennial theme.  hiram brown is the naive provincial who dreams of a life of opulence in the city.  he goes there, is overwhelmed and disillusioned, longs for his youth, realizes that this too is an illusion, despairs, goes through a crisis and is "transfigured...." some of the material contained here was written many years ago, and some written especially for this album.  (the opening theme, for instance, was written ten to fifteen years ago.) the suite is a fusion of different elements.  the first three parts are the country; the middle section the city; the last part, the denouement....  per allmusic.com:  "the album begins with the eight-part "hiram brown" suite, in which a naive country boy loses his illusions and optimism in the big city. five standards complete the album in fine style. "baby please don't go" and "'deed i do" offer mose's unique, smoky singing at its most touching."  track listing all compositions by mose allison except as indicated.  "barefoot-dirt road" - 3:16  "city home" - 2:29  "cuttin' out" - 1:38  "gotham day" - 3:21  "gotham night" - 4:26  "echo" - 0:59  "the river" - 4:07  "finale" - 0:46  "barefoot-dirt road" - 3:18 (alternate take on cd reissue)  "how little we know" (johnny mercer, hoagy carmichael) - 3:49  "baby, please don't go" (big joe williams) - 2:32  "make yourself comfortable" (bob merrill) - 4:12  "'deed i do" (walter hirsch, fred rose) - 2:32  "love for sale" (cole porter) - 5:02  personnel mose allison - piano, vocals addison farmer - bass jerry segal - drums  references  mose allison
albums 1960 albums
central sunbelt federal credit union (commonly referred to as central sunbelt or csfcu) is a full-service not-for profit credit union offering financial products and services across the pine belt region of southern mississippi.  recent press  central sunbelt was selected as one of the top 10 places to work in mississippi 2016 by the mississippi business journal.  overview  central sunbelt was originally chartered as the masonite employees federal credit union on october 16, 1953, and since has grown to house over 220 million dollars in assets and service over 30,000 members across the mississippi pine belt region with full service financial services.  the beginnings  masonite, a wood product fabricated for production of doors, roofing, walls, and house siding, was invented in laurel, mississippi, in 1924 by william h. mason, a friend to thomas edison.  mass production of masonite began shortly after in 1929 and the size of the company quickly grew with the demands of the masonite product.  the employees of masonite soon found the need for a financial institution to service the needs of the growing employee base and established a federally chartered credit union on october 16, 1963.  expansion  within twenty years, the credit union that once began to serve a single company's employee base was now a multimillion-dollar financial institution serving a large part of the growing community.  the board of directors found it necessary to update the name of masonite employees federal credit union to better adapt to the growing membership base.  the credit union name changed january 1, 1983, to central sunbelt federal credit union, as the result of expanding the field of membership to include other employee groups. in may 1991, central sunbelt aimed to fit the growing needs of the membership base with a second branch in the neighboring city of hattiesburg.  soon after, a second office in laurel was established on sawmill road in april 1995.  a fourth branch was constructed on lincoln road in hattiesburg in july 2000.  in july, 2012, a fifth location was built to service mccomb, in pike county) as central sunbelt merged in pike county teachers federal credit union.  january 2015, central sunbelt launched a new branch in waynesboro, the seat of wayne county, mississippi.  current state  today, central sunbelt is the third largest credit union in the state, servicing several hundred segs as well as those who live, work, worship, volunteer, and attend school in the expansion areas of jones county, pike county, simpson
county, wayne county, and parts of forrest, lamar, and convington counties.  other credit unions who merged in to create what central sunbelt is today:  masonite employees fcu  jones county school district fcu  black creek fcu  pike county teachers fcu  lamar county fcu  green county fcu  howard employees fcu  references   https://web.archive.org/web/20150905134006/http://creditunionaccess.com/cu08905.htm  http://www.sunbeltfcu.org  https://www.bloomberg.com/research/stocks/private/snapshot.asp?privcapid=113396714  http://www.creditunionsonline.com/credit-union-4049.html#reviews  https://web.archive.org/web/20160806075820/http://www.sunbeltfcu.org/about-csfcu.html  https://web.archive.org/web/20160806075820/http://www.sunbeltfcu.org/about-csfcu.html  https://web.archive.org/web/20160718001912/http://sunbeltfcu.org/membership.html  https://web.archive.org/web/20160806015003/https://www.co-opfs.org/news/2012/central-sunbelt-fcu-joins-co-op-network,-nation%e2%80%99s-largest-credit-union-only-network-of-atms/  credit unions based in mississippi
mansour bin rashid al-matroushi, born 1979, is a qatari islamist-activist and blogger, most commonly known for his 2013 arrest and detention.  activism and arrest  context  following the 2012 coup in mali and the political instability that followed, islamist insurgents alongside tuareg fighters began to make strategic gains. a force of 4,000 french soldiers intervened on january 11. seven days later a cease-fire agreement was signed between tuareg fighters and government forces; despite continuing and sporadic terrorist attacks the intervention was considered successful.  france's intervention in the mali conflict came only two years after their involvement in nato air-strikes against muammar gaddafi's government forces in libya.  letter to french embassy  on january 28th, 2013 al-matroushi, along with 150 other activists submitted a request to qatar's interior ministry to orchestrate a protest in front of the french embassy in doha. the protest was intended to criticize france's planned military intervention in mali.  the activists' request to hold a protest was denied. instead, al-matroushi and a fellow activist, mohammad issa al-baker, delivered a letter to the embassy which directly addressed the french ambassador. the letter, which would later be described as "threatening" by qatari authorities, was handed to the french on behalf of 70 activists, whose signatures were not included.  the tone of the letter in question is undoubtedly hostile towards french presence in not only mali, but north africa as well, claiming that "it is common knowledge that the crimes [france] committed in algeria martyred more than a million muslim persons". it goes on to state that france is currently killing and torturing malian muslims, describing its policies as "terrorist" and "racist". perhaps the letter's most alarming statement comes in the form of a warning: "we demand that you immediately cease your military campaign in mali or else you would be exposing yourselves to the wrath of people who love death as much as you love life".  within four days of receiving the letter, the french embassy reported it to qatari authorities on march 7, but refused to comment publicly.  arrest, detention, and release  in the weeks following delivery of the letter, al-matroushi had received multiple phone calls from state officials questioning him about his activism and recent activities; he was summoned to report for questioning by authorities but refused. on the 22nd of march both al-matroushi and al-baker were arrested by plain clothed officers on their way back
from a family trip in mesaieed (approximately 30 miles south of doha).  the two men were held in solitary confinement with no official charge, and were re-questioned about the nature of the letter. sultan al-khalaifi, a fellow-activist, was quoted defending the letter, saying "the letter we sent to the french embassy carried no threat. it was advice". al-khalaifi was previously associated with alkarama after his 2011 arrest by qatari authorities.  after numerous appeals and petitions sent by amnesty international and other human rights groups, the two men were released on april 18, but were subject to a travel-ban. al-matroushi later requested permission to travel to egypt in order to pursue his education which was granted.  controversies and ties to extremism  al-matroushi's close associate, al-baker, has been tied to two u.s. designated al-qaeda financiers and a purported charity that served as a fundraising mechanism for the al-nusra front (al-qaeda's branch in syria).  despite his alleged travel ban, al-baker appears in a video of a 2014 aid shipment into syria (14), furthermore a video was uploaded from bakr's twitter account which appears to have been recorded in turkey. the video promotes madad ahl al-sham, featuring collections and deliveries intended for syria. madad ahl al-sham was openly endorsed by nusra front fighters as well the group's official social media accounts.  al-baker also posted to his twitter account the phone numbers of sa'ad bin sa'ad al-ka'abi and abd al-latif bin 'abdullah al-kawari. both al-ka'abi and al-kawari were designated as al-qaeda financiers and facilitators in 2015.  additionally, al-matroushi is associated with alkarama, which advocated for matroushi during his detention by authorities. the organization itself has been listed as a terrorist entity by the united arab emirates and two of its three founding members, abdel rahman al-nuaymi and abdul wahab al-humayqani, have been designated by the united states government as financiers of terror in 2013. moreover, alkarama's legal director, rachid mesli, was arrested in italy on august 19, 2015 under an algerian warrant through interpol for his connection to the islamic salvation front.  references  1979 births living people qatari prisoners and detainees qatari activists
"steppin up" is a song by british recording artist m.i.a. from her third studio album, maya (2010). the track was written by maya "m.i.a." arulpragasam, rusko and switch, and produced by rusko. the song was self-released worldwide as a digital download, under license to xl recordings and n.e.e.t. recordings, on 16 june 2010, as the third single from the album. a different version of the song later appeared on the vicki leekx mixtape under a slightly altered title. the song was performed during the maya tour in 2010 and 2011. no music video has been made for the single. the track received mixed to positive reviews from music critics.  track listing digital download  "steppin up" - 4:01  12" vinyl single a. "steppin up" b. "meds and feds"  charts  release history  references  2010 singles 2010 songs electronic songs m.i.a. (rapper) songs songs written by m.i.a. (rapper) xl recordings singles songs written by switch (house dj)
beautiful broken is the sixteenth studio album by american rock band heart, released on july 8, 2016, by concord records. aside from two new songs, the album consists mostly of re-interpretations of songs from the band's earlier albums.  track listing  personnel credits adapted from the liner notes of beautiful broken.  heart  ann wilson - vocals ; background vocals ; autoharp   nancy wilson - guitar ; background vocals ; vocals ; marxophone ; bowed acoustic guitar ; acoustic guitar ; autoharp, handclaps, whispers   ben smith - drums ; percussion ; claps, snaps   craig bartock - guitars ; acoustic guitar ; 12-string acoustic guitar ; background vocals ; percussive guitar, claps, snaps   chris joyner - synthesizers ; piano ; wurlitzer ; hammond b3 ; field organ, nylon-string guitar   dan rothchild - bass ; background vocals ; additional synthesizer ; moog bass ; hammond b3, additional piano ; background vocals ; guitar ; acoustic guitar ; lap steel guitar ; percussion ; textures ; upright bass ; additional guitar ; handclaps  additional musicians  james hetfield - vocals, background vocals   paul buckmaster - string arrangement   hungarian studio orchestra - strings   peter illenyi - conducting  peter kanyurszky - concertmaster  ken sluiter - additional textures ; claps, snaps ; textures   billy mims - claps, snaps   dwight mikkelsen - copyist  technical  dan rothchild - production  nancy wilson - production  ken sluiter - engineering, mixing  bill mims - additional engineering  howie weinberg - mastering  gentry studer - mastering assistance  chris claypool - engineering assistance  geoff neal - engineering assistance  greg fidelman - additional engineering (james hetfield's vocals)  kurina tamas - strings recording  artwork  brian mcguffey - artwork  nancy wilson - art direction  anna knowlden - photography  dan rothchild - photography  charts  notes  references  2016 albums concord records albums heart (band) albums
barbara sherwood lollar,  (born february 19, 1963) is a canadian geologist and academic known for her research into billion-year-old water. she is currently a professor in the department of earth sciences at the university of toronto. in 2007, she was made a canada research chair in isotope geochemistry of the earth and the environment. it was renewed in 2014.  early life and education sherwood lollar was born in kingston, ontario, the daughter of john m sherwood and joan sherwood, historians and academic at queen's university, kingston, she joined the university of toronto in 1992 after receiving a bachelor of arts degree in geological sciences from harvard university, a ph.d. in earth sciences from university of waterloo in 1990, and a postdoctoral fellow at university of cambridge.  career she has frequently collaborated with tullis onstott and lisa pratt on large multi-national research projects.  honours in 2004, she was made a fellow of royal society of canada. in 2010, she was made a senior fellow of massey college. in 2012, she was awarded the eni award. in 2015, she was made a fellow of the american geophysical union. in 2016, she was awarded the natural sciences and engineering research council's john c. polanyi award. in 2016, she was invested as a companion of the order of canada "for her revolutionary contributions to geochemistry, notably in the development of innovative mechanisms for groundwater remediation, and for her discovery of ancient fluids that hold implications for life on other planets". also in 2016, she was awarded the bancroft award by the royal society of canada. she received the logan medal in 2018.  she was elected a fellow of the royal society in 2019. in 2021, he was elected a member of the national academy of engineering for contributions to understanding of the evolution of earth's groundwater and atmosphere.  on 6 may 2019, lollar received the gerhard herzberg canada gold medal for science and engineering from the natural sciences and engineering research council of canada.  references  external links    sherwood lollar research group  living people 1963 births scientists from ontario people from kingston, ontario alumni of the university of cambridge canadian geochemists canada research chairs companions of the order of canada fellows of the american geophysical union fellows of the royal society of canada harvard university alumni massey college, toronto university of toronto faculty university of waterloo alumni women earth scientists 20th-century canadian geologists 20th-century canadian women scientists 21st-century canadian geologists 21st-century canadian women scientists female fellows of the royal society
the 2017 horizon league men's basketball tournament (also known as motor city madness) was the conference tournament for the horizon league. it was played from march 3 through march 7, 2017 at joe louis arena in detroit. northern kentucky defeated milwaukee in the championship game to win the tournament championship. as a result, northern kentucky received the conference's automatic berth into the 2017 ncaa division i men's basketball tournament with a 59-53 win over milwaukee.  seeds all 10 teams participated in the tournament. the top six teams receive a bye into the quarterfinals. this was a change from the previous season where the top two seeds received double byes into the semifinals. teams were seeded by record within the conference, with a tiebreaker system to seed teams with identical conference records.  schedule  bracket  references  tournament horizon league men's basketball tournament horizon league men's basketball tournament horizon league men's basketball tournament basketball in detroit
martin bickham (born c. 1780) was an american merchant.  personal life bickham was born in new jersey in approximately 1780, his family originated in chester, england, and had emigrated to the philadelphia region in the late 17th century.  his elder sister, sally bickham, became mistress to merchant stephen girard in 1787, after his wife was committed to an insane asylum.  martin was looked after by girard, almost as a surrogate son, and he was taught the merchant's business from the age of fourteen.  girard financially supported martin and sally's father, caleb bickham, until his death in 1799.  sally left girard amicably in 1796 to marry.  bickham established his own import/export firm in philadelphia but was unable to make a success of it and the company went bankrupt.  he returned to girard and, in 1796, was sent as supercargo on girard's  ship sally ii to ile de france (later known as mauritius), where he became the first us merchant to conduct trade with the island.  bickham acted as girard's agent on the island from 1798 and traded rice, indigo, flour, brandy, tea, cookware, hats, chinese fans, umbrellas and french imports.  in 1799 he took the sally ii to manila, philippines under girard's order to trade for sugar and indigo.  on 2 october 1805 he married eugenie rivalz in mauritius. bickham served as us consul to ile de france from 1816 to 1825, when he returned to the united states.  bickham was embroiled in a long-running legal case, white-larramendi v. martin bickham, which concerned the loss of cargo from a ship owned by bickham and ran from 1802 to 1829.  bickham had a son, whom he named stephen girard bickham, and arranged for him to be indentured to girard.  girard invested $1,500 in training the boy in business, though his indentureship remained uncompleted upon girard's death in 1831.  stephen bickham later became a successful merchant in his own right.  martin bickham also had a daughter, ladorie, who married the comte dupont and had one son, arthur dupont.  after the deaths of the comte and ladorie, martin and stephan bickham became the managers of the dupont estate in the united states.  the historical society of pennsylvania holds some of bickham's records.  the girard college (founded by stephen girard) also holds an archive of documents relating to
bickham, including letters between bickham and girard.  references   businesspeople from new jersey colonial american merchants american consuls year of birth uncertain year of death missing 1780s births
the robbery (turkish: soygun) is a 1953 turkish adventure film directed by sami ayanoglu.  cast  sami ayanoglu  heyecan basaran   sadri alisik   suavi tedu   talat artemel  peruz agopyan   sakir arseven   atif avci   berrin aydan   necdet mahfi ayral   viktor acikyan  aziz basmaci   ugur boran  hasan ceylan   kemal erguvenc   vehdi ersin   mehmet karaca   mufit kiper   nergiz mogol   saziye moral   hasan mutlucan   saadet nazikcan   kadir savun   nubar terziyan  references  bibliography  burcak evren. turk sinema sanatcıları ansiklopedisi. film-san vakfı yayınları, 1983.  external links    1953 films 1953 adventure films turkish-language films turkish films turkish adventure films turkish black-and-white films
the institute of medical illustrators (imi) was established in 1968 in the uk, to set and maintain standards for the medical illustration profession. it is notable for introducing the first diploma in medical illustration in the united kingdom.  medical illustrators work in the field of healthcare science and create resources for patient care, education and teaching. imi brings together the disciplines of clinical photography, medical art, illustration, graphic design and video within healthcare, both in the uk and internationally.  the institute of medical illustrators offers professional accreditation for those with a relevant qualification in clinical photography, medical illustration, photography, graphic design or illustration.  imi members can also join the register for the accreditation of medical illustration practitioners (camip), essential for those working in close contact with patients.  references  external links institute of medical illustrators sport & medical sciences  1968 establishments in the united kingdom illustration medical photography and illustration medical and health organisations based in the united kingdom
the 2016 saba championship was the 5th saba championship, and the qualifying event in the saba subzone, one of the fiba asia's subzone for the 2016 fiba asia challenge. the games were held from 6 july to 8 july in bengaluru, india.   successfully defended their title by sweeping the tournament, 3-0, winning the subzone title and the subzone's lone spot for the main tournament.  after a three-way tie for the second spot,  notched their first podium finish by winning the point differential against third-place  and fourth-place .  venue  the kanteerava indoor stadium was set to host the games for the second successive year.  standings  results  final rankings  awards  references   2015 2016-17 in asian basketball 2016 in indian sport international basketball competitions hosted by india
david reid (2 may 1896 - march 1963) was a scottish football player who played for everton, captained ballymena to irish cup success in 1929 and also managed both sides of the irish border with drumcondra and glentoran.  early life the reid family originally came from the riccarton area near kilmarnock in scotland, but moved to belfast in 1900. david (who had a twin sister mary) and siblings including jimmy, max and jack were born in scotland while willie and bob were born in ulster; all the boys became footballers to some extent.  reid began his football career alongside his brothers at distillery in the late 1910s, winning two caps for the irish league representative side in 1919 and two consecutive county antrim shield winners' medals.  everton in late may 1920, everton announced the signing of 23-year-old reid for a fee of £1,500, having impressed during a representative game between the irish and english leagues, in which reid scored.  reid made his debut against bradford park avenue in august 1920, going on to make 101 appearances for the toffees, scoring 10 goals during eight seasons at goodison park. in february 1928, reid returned to northern ireland to finish the 1927-28 season with distillery. everton went onto win the english first division that season.  ballymena despite having been highly expected to complete a permanent move back to distillery in the summer of 1928, reid was convinced to join the new ballymena team who had been recently formed to compete in the irish league for the 1928-29 season. he signed for the light blues as club captain in june 1928 alongside his older brother john, who had also returned home from fellow merseyside club, new brighton. the braidmen experienced immediate success with a shock win in the 1929 irish cup final against belfast celtic.  the ballymena side led by reid proved their debut season success was no fluke with back-to-back irish cup final appearances in 1930 and 1931. his performances for the new side led to a return to the irish league representative team during the 1929-30 season. during three seasons, reid made 128 appearances and scored 12 goals at the ballymena showgrounds.  post ballymena career  in august 1931, reid took up the position of player-manager at struggling drumcondra in the league of ireland. he returned north back to the irish league for the 1934-35 season, having retired from playing to become manager of glentoran, but only lasted until september 1934 before resigning his post at the oval.  club honours distillery
county antrim shield winner: 1918-19, 1919-20  ballymena irish cup winner: 1928-29 irish cup runner-up: 1929-30, 1930-31 city cup runner-up: 1928-29  statistics  references  1896 births 1963 deaths twin people from scotland twin people from northern ireland twin sportspeople scottish footballers scottish football managers everton f.c. players drumcondra f.c. players ballymena f.c. players irish league representative players english football league players association football midfielders association footballers from northern ireland football managers from northern ireland sportspeople from kilmarnock association footballers from belfast nifl premiership players nifl premiership managers glentoran f.c. managers lisburn distillery f.c. players association football player-managers league of ireland players league of ireland managers scottish expatriate sportspeople in ireland expatriate association footballers in the republic of ireland scottish expatriate footballers scottish expatriate football managers
kaatru veliyidai () is a 2017 indian tamil-language romantic war film, produced, written and directed by mani ratnam. made under the madras talkies banner, it features music composed by a. r. rahman, cinematography by ravi varman and editing by a. sreekar prasad. the film stars karthi and aditi rao hydari in the lead roles with lalitha, rukmini vijayakumar, delhi ganesh and rj balaji playing other pivotal roles. set in the backdrop of the kargil war of 1999, the film narrates the story of an indian air force pilot who recalls his romance with a doctor in the lead up to the war, while being kept as a prisoner of war at a jail in rawalpindi, pakistan.  principal photography of the film commenced in july 2016, with the shoot taking place in ooty, hyderabad, ladakh, chennai and belgrade, before being completed in january 2017. the film was released worldwide on 7 april 2017 along with a telugu dubbed version titled cheliyaa . the film won two national film awards at the 65th national film awards: best music direction for a. r. rahman and best female playback singer for shashaa tirupati.  plot the film begins with a shot of the kargil war showing the advances made by indian soldiers. an indian air force fighter jet is shot down by the enemy. the pilot varun chakrapani ejects from the hit aircraft and lands in enemy territory. the pakistani army promptly surrounds him. they imprison him in the rawalpindi as a prisoner of war (pow) and subject him to torture. while being held captive, he reminisces about his romance with leela.  leela comes to srinagar to work as a doctor. meanwhile, varun has an accident while on a joy ride. he is brought in a critical condition to the hospital. with the duty doctor not available, leela takes charge, treats varun, and nurses him back to health. but, with little regard to her feelings, he leaves the hospital without her knowledge.  dr. illyas hussain, an army doctor, helps him with this.  when leela learns about it, she and nidhi, her colleague confront illyas about it. ilyas then arranges for leela and nidhi to come to an airforce meeting the following week and there they meet varun. varun impresses her with his excellent dance moves at the ball.  he tells her she should meet him at the flying club the next saturday at 5 pm if she likes him back. leela accepts and varun takes her for
a joy ride in his private aircraft to apologize for running away from the hospital.  varun gets to know that leela is his course pilot ravi abraham's sister, who died in a flight that varun was supposed to fly in. both develop feelings for each other. later, leela doesn't meet varun for two months and questions illyas about his whereabouts. he reveals that varun has orders to be in a camp at leh military base for 3 months. leela and nidhi go to meet him. when varun asks whether leela came to meet him, she says yes. but also that she wanted to see the place where her brother ravi died. he takes her to the spot. slowly she realizes that varun has a dark side to his personality, which is very different from what she has seen.  back to the present, varun and two other indian prisoners plan to escape from the rawalpindi prison. back to the past, leela leaves and he tells her that she'll get couriers from him. he's true to his word. one day, the officers are discussing their attack and she airs her opinion on the subject.  varun angrily tells her that god made men and women for different purposes and she can't talk about this. but, she retaliates by saying that both genders are equal and women are not made just to manage the house and give birth to children. varun tells leela to shut up, but she refuses. so, he orders her to do what he tells her. she gets angry and moves out.  he goes to her home and tries to make up with her by expressing his love for her. he says he's not like her. hers is a nobler job than him as he kills and she saves lives. so, varun takes leela to a local registrar office and tells her that they should marry. as she is not ready for marriage, he asks her to think about it and come the next day at 4.00 pm. in a sad turn of events, he leaves for delhi forgetting about what happened at the registrar office. this upsets leela very much. she feels that sometimes he treats her like a queen whereas at other times like a doormat.  leela reveals that she's pregnant. varun gets hesitant about it and leela says that she'll take care of her baby by herself. the following day, leela's grandfather dies. vc goes to her house and finds that leela's father hates him. that night he goes and tries to convince them, but he doesn't get even a single word from them. before
varun departs for the kargil war, leela tells him that she's resigning and leaving srinagar. he pleads for one more chance and goes away to war. while fighting, he gets captured by the enemy and taken a prisoner. somehow, varun and the two other prisoners escape and reach india.  varun starts searching for leela. he finds her after 3 years. he tells her that he's a different person now. he says that he regrets his meeting her and loving her only to end up hurting her. vc is surprised to learn that leela has a daughter. when he sees her daughter, leela asks him whether she (the small girl) looks like her father or mother. vc's happiness knows no bounds. he tells his daughter that he crossed 7 seas and 7 mountains to meet her. vc asks leela why she didn't try to contact him, to which she says that she was afraid he wouldn't like her or their daughter. they hug each other and leela says that rohini (vc's daughter) is his responsibility from thereon.  cast    karthi as  varun chakrapani aka vc, an air force officer who is arrested by pakistan army and later released  aditi rao hydari as dr. leela abraham varun's love interest (voice-over by krithika nelson)  k. p. a. c. lalitha as achamma  rukmini vijayakumar as dr. nidhi leela's best friend   shraddha srinath as girija kapoor varun's first girlfriend (cameo appearance)   rj balaji as iliyas hussain leela's friend  delhi ganesh as col. mithran leela's grandfather   sivakumar ananth as girish reddy  vipin sharma as lawyer abraham leela's father   mir sarwar as muzaffar khan  harish raj as madhusoodhanan pillai, vc's brother  dhyana madan as rohini  supyarde singh as vc's sister-in-law  indranil ghosh  production  development after shelving a multi-cast project featuring karthi and dulquer salmaan in the lead roles during december 2015, it was reported in the media that mani ratnam would instead work on a new film retaining karthi as the lead actor and a. r. rahman as the music composer and ravi varman as cinematographer. in february 2016, karthi confirmed that he had signed on to play the lead role and would collaborate with the director twelve years after having worked with him as an assistant during the making of aayutha ezhuthu (2004). mani ratnam requested karthi to lose
weight through the crossfit program and learn the basics of flying to portray the lead character of a pilot. he prepared for the role by understanding more about fighter pilots through a wing commander friend including varthaman and analysed their typical fitness routine their body language. karthi also was asked to sport a clean-shaven look like a part of his role and did so for the first time in his acting career. the start of the film was delayed as the team wanted to wait for a better climate, before beginning the shoot in kashmir, while the team also chose to wait for karthi to finish his commitments for the production of kaashmora (2016). sai pallavi successfully auditioned for the leading female role of a doctor in the project and was signed on to make her debut as a lead actress in the tamil film industry through the project. however, in april 2016, mani ratnam felt that the character had to be older and opted to leave sai pallavi out of the project, later replacing her with aditi rao hydari. hydari participated in tamil lessons prior to the film's shoot, in order to improve her understanding of the script. she also worked in a hospital for a few days in order to get a better understanding of her role as a doctor.  mani ratnam and his team began location hunting in april 2016 to seek out replacements to resemble kashmir and scouted areas including himachal pradesh, kerala, kodaikanal, ooty and coonoor. meanwhile, mani ratnam also worked closely with music composer a. r. rahman and lyricist vairamuthu in finalizing seven songs for the film during the pre-production period. the rights to faith johnson's book four miles to freedom was also bought by the team, as they looked to draw inspiration from the real-life incidents of dilip parulkar's escape from a pakistani jail in 1971. actors rj balaji and delhi ganesh joined the cast of the film in july 2016, while actress shraddha srinath revealed that she would feature in a small role as a brigadier's daughter. kannada actor harish raj and hindi actor vipin sharma also joined the first schedule of the film, making their debuts in the tamil film industry. likewise, actresses lalitha and rukmini vijayakumar were signed up for roles during the film's initial schedule. the film's first look poster was revealed in early july 2016, with the title of kaatru veliyidai, inspired by a poem by subramania bharati, officially announced.  filming the shoot of the film began in early july 2016 in nilgiris,
ooty with a twenty-day schedule featuring karthi and aditi rao hydari. the location was chosen to show kashmir on screen, as the latter's climate had made conducting shooting there difficult. art director amaran and production designer sharmishta roy worked together on designing the set during the first schedule, choosing to enhance existing backgrounds rather than to create lavish sets. the team regularly shot scenes from sunrise onwards, in order to ensure that the film progressed quickly. a second schedule for the film took place in hyderabad during october 2016, lasting a period of ten days. the team then moved to leh and the surrounding areas of ladakh for a third schedule lasting fifteen days, with action sequences choreographed by sham kaushal being filmed. in late november 2016, the team moved to shoot scenes in, siberia and the surrounding snow-capped mountainous regions after they were denied permission to shoot action sequences involving aircraft in north india. during the ten-day schedule, the team also shot a romantic song in the snowy backdrop choreographed by brindha. the shoot was concluded in mid-january 2017, with the team announcing that the post-production phase would take a couple of months.  music  release the film had a theatrical release on 7 april 2017 in approximately 1500 screens worldwide. kaatru veliyidai was dubbed into telugu as cheliyaa which was also theatrically released simultaneously along with the original version. sri venkateswara creations bought the telugu dubbing rights for the film. while sri thenandal films released the film throughout tamil nadu. rights for kerala was acquired by sibu thameens, while arun pandian acquired the rest of india rights under his company a&p groups. the satellite rights of the film were sold to star vijay.  reception  upon release, kaatru veliyidai received mixed reviews; though critics predominantly praised the performance of hydari along with rahman's music and ravi varman's cinematography, they criticised mani ratnam's screenplay. baradwaj rangan of film companion gave the film a high score of 3.5 out of 5 stars, writing "as a movie, kaatru veliyidai leaves you wanting, but as cinema, very little can come close to it". rangan added "like some of mani ratnam's recent films, kaatru veliyidai feels abstracted" and that the "director is in his mature phase" with "a little less obvious, little more complicated version of storytelling". anupama subramaniam of the deccan chronicle wrote "mani ratnam, known for his romantic tales with a different note, surprises you
with a fresh angle again", noting that it was "a poetic romance that is worth experiencing", while drawing particular praise for the performances of karthi and aditi rao hydari. a critic from dna india noted that the film "does not disappoint" and that "to say that mani portrays the lovers' intense passion with a painter's bold and indelible strokes would be no exaggeration", while similarly rediff.com's divya nair called the film a "beautiful romance". malini mannath of the new indian express wrote that "kaatru veliyidai is visual treat where roses overpower guns" and that despite a few glitches, it is a "love poem on celluloid". kaveree bamzai wrote for dailyo that "few directors understand women as well as mani ratnam. he understands they are complicated, vulnerable, strong, powerful, independent and submissive at the same time. but it is in his writing of varun that mani ratnam shows real spunk. kaatru veliyidai may not be mani ratnam's best, but it beats bollywood." tanul thakur of thewire.in wrote in his analysis that "kaatru veliyidai's portrayal of toxic masculinity through the lens of a successful love story is much more intelligent and unsettling than it lets on."  sify's reviewer also praised the film stating "it is an experience you must enjoy", stating "if you like beautiful, intimate, playful, passionate love story in typical mani ratnam style then kaatru veliyidai is bang on". vishal menon of the hindu wrote "there are reasons why kaatru veliyidai is certainly no classic", "but when you leave the theatre with a lump in your throat, you remember how your love for this director doesn't arise merely because he makes you smile - he does so much more than that". giving the film their highest score of 2017, top10cinema.com wrote "it's a custom made film for maniratnam buffs, who are very well etched up with his trademark pattern of storytelling" and that "he film has brilliant flash point of visual and musical poetry with some nuance performances too". in their review, behindwoods.com wrote the film "is a classical poetic love story" and that "it is not a film to watch but something to experience, but an experience that not everyone would accept".  in contrast, karthik kumar of the hindustan times called the film "an underwhelming love saga", adding "vis
ually, kaatru veliyidai is beautiful, beyond anyone's imagination" but the film "does not move you emotionally". suganth of the times of india noted "the leads have charm, and try their best to make us care, but we are never as emotionally invested in the fate of vc and leela as we should be", though wrote "the film is saved to an extent by the technical proficiency on display - right from ravi varman's lush visuals to rahman's peppy score and sharmishta roy's realistic sets, the film is a treat technically". the bangalore mirror's critic wrote "kaatru veliyidai eventually is one of mani ratnam's weaker films and that's disappointing, thankfully it is not a disaster like kadal". likewise, a critic from the indian express wrote "kaatru veliyidai flunks the test" and "what we are left with is a few moments in which hydari impresses, the spectacular scenery, shot by ravi varman, and a couple of rousing song-and-dance numbers, powered by a r rahman's score".  box office the film took a strong opening at the tamil nadu box office, grossing over ₹120 million during the first weekend and performed exceptionally well in chennai, coimbatore and chengalpattu. however mixed reviews from social media and the release of three new tamil films the following weekend led to the number of shows being screened to drop substantially in the second week of its theatrical run. the film performed well at the us box office, with the tamil version earning $313,227. the film collected  in tamil nadu in three days. the film collected approximately  on thursday premiere and regular friday and saturday shows in united states.  legacy songs from the film have inspired the titles of other tamil films. a film titled vaanil thedi nindren, inspired from the opening line of "nallai allai", began production in may 2017, before being cancelled. likewise, a film titled vaan starring ashok selvan began production in december 2018, with the name and first look poster drawing comparisons to the song "vaan varuvaan" from kaatru veliyidai.  accolades  notes  references  external links     2017 films indian films indian aviation films films about aviators films shot in ooty films directed by mani ratnam films scored by a. r. rahman films shot in ladakh films shot in hyderabad, india war romance films indian air force in films films shot in serbia films set in punjab,
pakistan indian war drama films kargil war films set in prison prisoner of war films indian nonlinear narrative films indian army in films films based on indo-pakistani wars and conflicts war films based on actual events drama films based on actual events 2017 war drama films films set in jammu and kashmir kashmir conflict in films military of pakistan in films films set in kargil 2017 drama films
andres hernandez ros (july 30, 1948 - june 26, 2016) was a spanish politician and member of the spanish socialist workers' party (psoe) from the region of murcia. hernandez served as the first president of the region of murcia from july 1982 until march 9, 1984, following the establishment of autonomy in 1982. prior to autonomy, he held the office of president of regional council, the head of the pre-autonomous government of murcia, from may 5, 1979, until july 1982.  hernandez ros, who was a chemist by profession, first joined the spanish socialist workers' party (psoe) in 1974 and became the psoe secretary in 1977. on may 1, 1978, he was elected party secretary general following the merger of the psoe with the people's socialist party, which had been led by enrique tierno galvan.  in 1979, andres hernandez ros was nominated as the psoe candidate for president of the president of regional council of murcia, which was the per-autonomous body which governed murcia prior to the creation of the autonomous community in 1982.  hernandez was elected president of the regional council on may 5, 1979. he held the office from may 5, 1979, until july 1982.  andres hernandez ros became the first president of the region of murcia, or head of government, in july 1982 following the creation of the autonomous community that same year. he served as murcia's first president of the region from july 1982 until march 9, 1984.  hernandez ros resigned from the presidency of the region on march 9, 1984, in the wake of a bribery scandal. he had been accused of allegedly bribing two journalists from the la verdad newspaper in exchange for not criticising  him in the newspaper. though he resigned as president, hernandez retained his seat in the regional assembly of murcia until the end of the legislature in 1987, when he retired from politics.  hernandez ros had four children with his first wife, josefa cebrian; the marriage ended in divorce. in 1988, he married and moved to chile with his second wife, maria elena sarmiento, a chilean. hernandez owned and operated a sawmill near temuco and a spanish restaurant in santiago, chile. he and his second wife, maria elena sarmiento, separated in 1994.  he returned to politics only once, when he attended a 1994 psoe meeting to elect delegates in support of prime minister felipe gonzalez. in 2012, hernandez ros was awarded the gold medal of the region of murcia (la medalla de oro de la region de murcia), the highest honor awarded by the
autonomous government of murcia.  andres hernandez ros died on june 26, 2016, at the age of 67.  references  1948 births 2016 deaths presidents of the region of murcia members of the regional assembly of murcia politicians from the region of murcia spanish socialist workers' party politicians spanish expatriates in chile
the swan 80 mki was designed by german frers and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1999. this model together with a few others marked a shift in production method using kevlar.  references  external links  nautor swan  german frers official website  sailing yachts keelboats 1990s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
john horewode (fl. 1421) was an english politician.  he was a member (mp) of the parliament of england for chipping wycombe in december 1421.  references  year of birth missing year of death missing english mps december 1421
tapirus oliverasi is a likely invalid extinct species of tapir from south america.  t. oliverasi was described based on dentary remains from the early pleistocene deposits at the libertad formation in uruguay that were of  larger size than that of t. terrestris but smaller than t. rioplatensis. however, the validity of species has been questioned and it is considered dubious.  references  prehistoric tapirs pleistocene mammals of south america
guillaume perret (; born 21 june 1980 in annecy) is a french jazz musician (tenor saxophone and soprano saxophone, also keyboard) and composer.  references   french musicians 1980 births living people people from annecy
garcia diaz arias (died 1562) was a roman catholic prelate who served as the first bishop of quito (1546-1562).  biography on 8 january 1546, garcia diaz arias was appointed during the papacy of pope paul iii as bishop of quito. on 5 june 1547, he was consecrated bishop by juan solano, bishop of cuzco. he served as bishop of quito until his death in 1562.   while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of martin de calatayud, bishop of santa marta (1547).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   16th-century roman catholic bishops in ecuador bishops appointed by pope paul iii 1562 deaths roman catholic bishops of quito
drumragh is a civil parish and townland in county tyrone, northern ireland, on the right bank of the river drumragh. today, it is within the county town of omagh. it has a roman catholic church; and a church of ireland one.  references  civil parishes of county tyrone omagh
olenecamptus albovittatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
girolamo sarriano, c.r. (1580-1627) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of vico equense (1611-1627).  biography girolamo sarriano was born in naples, italy in 1580 and ordained a priest in the congregation of clerics regular of the divine providence. on 31 january 1611, he was appointed during the papacy of pope paul v as bishop of vico equense. he served as bishop of vico equense until his death on 23 july 1627. while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of cristoforo caetani, coadjutor bishop of foligno (1623).  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope paul v 1580 births 1627 deaths clergy from naples theatine bishops 16th-century neapolitan people 17th-century neapolitan people
yenisehir spor kulubu (in english: yenisehir sports club) is a multi-sports club based in ankara, turkey.  history the club was founded in ankara in june 1953, and first began to show effectiveness in handball, basketball and football fields.  after the disappearance of larissa district rapid urbanization financial hardship falls club by sponsoring sporting association agreements between the years 1977-1987 lived in 3 different with the company for 11 years. club for two seasons from 1977-1979 year meysu yenisehir  name of the vehicle. then istanbul bankası yenisehir between 1979-1983, as a result of confiscation of state istanbul bank and then a short time remains sponsors a short time in finding a new sponsor in 1985-1987 and adopted the name yenisehir hortas. although cancel the sponsorship agreement at a general meeting held on 14 march 1986, the club's name was changed. february 20 extraordinary general meeting held in 1988. the club's name was first founded as when it was just yenisehir and football branch was closed.  honors  handball   men's turkish league  winner (3) : 1983, 1984, 1985  women's turkish league  winner (1) : 1984  references  turkish basketball super league teams defunct basketball teams in turkey turkish handball clubs basketball teams established in 1953 sports clubs disestablished in 1988
general sir thomas willshire, 1st baronet,  (24 august 1789 - 31 may 1862) was a british army officer.  he was born in halifax, nova scotia, the eldest surviving son of captain john willshire by mary, daughter of william linden of dublin. his father, a soldier himself, purchased thomas' army commission in the 38th foot when he was only 6 years old. he joined the regiment in the west indies in 1798, returned with it to england and attended schools in king's lynn and kensington. he was promoted captain in 1804, joined the regiment in south america and took part in the attack on buenos aires. he then went with the regiment to portugal in 1808, where he fought at rolica, vimiero, and coruna. in 1809 he served in the walcheren campaign, where his father died.  in june 1812 the first battalion of the 38th embarked for the iberian peninsula, with willshire commanding the light company. it joined the royal regiment and the 9th foot in the 5th (leith's) division three days before the battle of salamanca, where willshire was twice wounded. he commanded the light companies of the brigade in the action on the carrion on 25 october during the retreat from burgos. in 1813 the division formed part of graham's corps at the vittoria and the siege of san sebastian. there the 38th was assigned the lesser breach in the first assault and was held in reserve in the second assault, although soon brought up in support of the stormers. he commanded the light companies of the brigade at the passage of the bidasoa, the battle of the nive (9-11 december) and the repulse of the sortie from bayonne (14 april 1814). he received a brevet lieutenant-colonelcy, and afterwards the peninsular silver medal with seven clasps.  in 1815 his battalion was sent to the netherlands, but was too late for the battle of waterloo and instead went on to paris, where willshire was employed for a short time on the staff. in december he returned with the battalion to england and in june 1818 went with it to the cape. on his way out he wrote a manual of 'light company manœuvres in concert with battalion manœuvres' which was sent to sir henry torrens and was probably used by him in preparing the drill-book of 1824.  early in 1819 willshire was sent to the frontier as commandant of british kaffraria. a quarrel between the chiefs, in which the british authorities intervened,
led to a well-planned attack on grahamstown by mokana with six thousand kaffirs on 22 april. the attack was repulsed by a company of the 38th and 240 local troops and mokana forced to surrender, after which the territory between the great fish river and the keiskamma river was added to the colony and fort willshire built upon it.  in 1822 the 38th were sent to calcutta and in 1823 willshire was given a majority without purchase in the 46th foot, which he commanded for some time at bellary. in december 1824 he commanded a brigade in the force under colonel deacon which retook the fort at kittoor. on 30 august 1827 he was made lieutenant colonel without purchase of the 2nd (queen's), stationed at poona, serving with that regiment for nearly ten years.  on 10 january 1837, he was made brevet colonel, with the local rank of brigadier general in india. in 1838, while commanding a brigade at poona, he was given one in the 'army of the indus,' formed for the invasion of afghanistan. in february 1839 the army was reorganised and willshire was given the command of the bombay division of infantry. his troops were the last to cross the bolan, reaching quetta on 30 april, and kandahar on 4 may. he took part in the storming of ghazni on 23 july and went on to kabul. on the return journey, after having been presented with the order of the dooranee empire, he was told to depose mehrab khan of kelat, which he achieved by storming his fort, in the process of which mehrab khan was killed. he was made a knight commander of the order of the bath in 1839 and created a baronet (willshire of the east indies) for the capture of kelat.  he returned to england in 1840, retired from the queen's regiment on half-pay, and was appointed commandant at chatham. he remained there till 1846 when he was promoted major general. he was made colonel of the 51st foot on 26 june 1849, promoted lieutenant general on 20 june 1854 and general on 20 april 1861. he was advanced to knight grand cross of the order of the bath on 28 june 1861.  he died on 31 may 1862 at hill house, near windsor. he had married annette lætitia, eldest daughter of captain berkeley maxwell, r.a., of tuppendene, kent and had two sons and three daughters.  references  1789 births 1862 deaths people from halifax, nova scotia 19th
-century british people british army generals knights grand cross of the order of the bath baronets in the baronetage of the united kingdom south staffordshire regiment officers 46th regiment of foot officers queen's royal regiment officers king's own yorkshire light infantry officers british military personnel of the first anglo-afghan war british army personnel of the napoleonic wars
avior byron () is an israeli singer songwriter and musicologist.  biography avior byron was born in petah tikva,  and grew up in yavne.  from the age of ten he studied classical piano, and from thirteen learnt rock and jazz guitar.  at the age of fifteen, he had a band, in which he was the composer, the singer and the guitarist.  he started to study at tel aviv university, and he graduated with a b.a. in musicology and orchestration. avior has a doctorate in music from royal holloway, university of london.  his tutor for the doctorate was prof. john rink, and the subject of his thesis was "schoenberg as a performer: esthetics in practice".    in 2001 byron became religious;  from 2011-2016 he studied literature, judaism, philosophy and hebrew poetry in the friends' program of "alma - home for hebrew culture". at the conclusion of their studies, the students were asked to prepare works of art, and byron composed songs, some of which appear in his debut album.   in 2015, he issued a mini-album "songs for zipporah", which is composed of five songs; yuval messner produced the album.  the subject matter of the songs is the social protest, tolerance, and accepting the other, israeli and jewish identity.  the texts contain dialogues with jewish sources.   the melodies, and style of playing are influenced by classical music, rock, jazz, folk and alternative tuning of the guitar.     "ruth is waiting", is a protest song about the imperviousness of the religious establishment towards those who wish to convert to judaism  "zipporah" is a love song to his wife.    "in the streets of the city" is a song about a woman from biblical times, who lives on the edge of society, and criticizes the status of women in the past and in the present.  "signs on sand" is a love song to his children, and talks of the heritage that we leave them.  "ruth is waiting" was the song chosen from the album to be played on the radio. other songs were also posted on various web sites. the media have called byron: "the first religious protest singer".   since 2014, byron has been appearing throughout israel with the songs from the album,   and others that he has written and set to music. in february 2016, he signed a contract with "banana disc" for the distribution of "songs for zip
porah".    byron has published articles in musicology journals, including "music theory online". he specializes in the following fields: research into musical performance, theory and analysis, twentieth century music.   currently byron is working on a book, on arnold schoenberg, to be published by oxford university press.    he has written a number of articles for nrg and ynet.   he worked as a lecturer at bar-ilan university.   in 2013, he taught at "alma - home for hebrew culture",   and since 2014, he has been lecturing at achva academic college.   he is ceo of "byron seminars", a company for translations, and teaching languages, which was founded by his parents in 1987.   avior byron lives in mazkeret batya with his wife and their three children.   they belong to the "keshet" congregation there.  see also  judy maltz , "a singer with a blunt message for israel: don't mess with converts", in haaretz, july 22, 2015  shay binyamin shemesh, "there was darkness, there was avior", in the newspaper "yediot aharonot", rehovot, issue 1289, friday av 1st 5775, july 17, 2015, pp. 54-56.  sources  external links  avior byron's web site, as a singer and composer  avior byron's official youtube page  byron's musicology site  byron album in ba-nana disc in bandcamp  1973 births living people 21st-century israeli male singers israeli male singer-songwriters israeli rock singers israeli musicologists baalei teshuva people from yavne
stormy bird (romanian: pasarea furtunii) is a 1957 romanian drama film directed by dinu negreanu. the film portrays the lives of black sea fisherman during the second world war and then in the years following the communist takeover.  cast  mircea albulescu as adam jora  marcel anghelescu   costache antoniu   stefan ciubotarasu as dobre     fory etterle   margareta pogonat as uliana  paul sava   as simion  references  bibliography   liehm, mira & liehm, antonin j. the most important art: eastern european film after 1945. university of california press, 1977.  external links     1957 drama films 1957 films romanian drama films romanian films romanian-language films films directed by dinu negreanu romanian black-and-white films
lam cheuk-ting (; born 13 june 1977) is a democratic party politician in hong kong. he is a former investigator of the independent commission against corruption (icac) and chief executive of the democratic party. he was a member of the north district council for shek wu hui until march 2021. he was elected to the legislative council of hong kong in 2016 through new territories east.  biography lam graduated from the chinese university of hong kong in 1999, studying government and public administration. after graduation, he joined the democratic party and became assistant of albert ho. he was transferred to democratic party's legislative council secretariat in 2001 and became assistant of party's chairman in 2003, having been serving yeung sum, lee wing-tat and albert ho. in 2006 when the democratic party set up a five-member investigation commission on the allegation of some senior members involving in spying activities of beijing, he became the secretary of the commission.  he left the party and joined the independent commission against corruption (icac) as an investigator in 2006. he returned to the democratic party as chief executive in 2011, succeeding chan ka-wai who quit after being caught visiting a one-woman brothel.  lam is a spokesman of the property owners' anti bid-rigging alliance against an alleged bid-rigging scandal in garden vista, where he is a resident, as well as the alleged scandals in other flats.  in 2015, he won a seat in shek wu hui of the north district council in the 2015 district council elections, defeating incumbent simon wong yuen-keung. in 2016, he represented the democratic party to run successfully in new territories east for the 2016 legislative council election, succeeding chairwoman emily lau.  he was re-elected in the 2019 district council elections for the same constituency, but resigned on 31 march 2021 when he was remanded in custody.  on 6 january 2021, lam was among 53 members of the pro-democratic camp who were arrested under the national security law, specifically its provision regarding alleged subversion. the group stood accused of the organisation of and participation in unofficial primary elections held by the camp in july 2020. lam was released on bail on 7 january.  2019 yuen long attack   lam was a victim of the yuen long attacks on 21 july 2019, when mtr passengers, journalists, and pro-democratic protesters were attacked by a mob of white-clad men. as a result, his mouth was wounded and he was treated with several stitches. lam was streaming the violence on facebook with his phone.  a rally was held
in yuen long alleging that lam was responsible for the yuen long attack and accusing him of bringing protesters to yuen long. in response, lam pointed out that video footage shows the men attacking people in yuen long long before he arrived in the town, and replied that "telling a lie a hundred times will not make it the truth".  on 26 august 2020, lam was arrested on charges of "rioting" for showing up in yuen long station on 21 july 2019, and "conspiring with others to damage property and obstructing the course of justice" in tuen mun on 6 july 2019. he was granted bail the same month, which was extended in december under condition of a ban on leaving hong kong. prosecutors had cited the case of ted hui, without mentioning his name, as a reason for an increased risk that lam would abscond. on 28 december, lam was arrested for allegedly disclosing personal details of individuals under police investigation for their possible role in the yuen long attacks. lam was again arrested on 6 january 2021 as part of the 2021 arrests of hong kong pro-democracy primaries participants. in may 2021, a representative of lam said that lam and eight other people who had been injured in the yuan long attack had decided to drop the civil lawsuit against police commissioner chris tang that they had filed in january 2020 in relation to the attack, citing the legal fees; his lawyer albert ho said that lam felt "very tired having to attend all these [multiple charges]".  references  1977 births living people hong kong christians alumni of the chinese university of hong kong district councillors of north district democratic party (hong kong) politicians hk legco members 2016-2020 members of the legislative council of hong kong hong kong political prisoners
julian bugier (born november 22, 1980, in blois, loir-et-cher), is a french tv journalist.  after working for news channels bfm tv and i tele; he presented, as a substitute, the 8 o'clock news on weekdays on france 2.  family   julian bugier  was born in 1980 in blois (loir-et-cher).  his father jacques bugier was a literary man and former journalist. his father worked at la republique du centre then at le monde from 1991 to 2008. close to francois bayrou, (he followed francois' presidential campaign in 2007) and to jack lang, he died in june 2013 at the age of 59 years.  julian bugier is the eldest of two children   he has a sister, louise.  career  television   self-educated, julian pursued a deug (diplome d'etudes universitaires generales) in economics without graduating. at 19, he moved to london  (uk) and began his journalistic career on the financial and economic station, bloomberg tv.  there he reported for two years and then became a production assistant. he then presented for a year and a half on the french branch of bloomberg tv,.  in november 2005, he participated in the launch of the news channel bfm tv.  from may 2006   and the launch of the second version of the channel, he presented the economy journal every evening from monday to friday.  from late 2008, he served  as a substitute presenter of the newspaper chain.  during the summer of 2009, he left bfm news to join the channel of news and current affairs i-tele. succeeding thomas joubert, he took charge of info matin week-end on saturday and sunday from 7:00am to 11:30am. at the beginning of september 2010, jean-baptiste boursier replaced him when julian took charge of a new show (l'info sans interdit) with sonia chironi (and with participation from robert menard) from monday to friday between 5:00pm and 7:00pm, and until 8:00pm from november 2010 when audrey pulvar was suspended from her show audrey pulvar soir.  in july 2011, he rejoined france 2 to become the substitute for laurent delahousse  on the new shows 13 heures and 20 heures on the weekends.  in september 2011, julian bugier was appointed  joker (parttime replacement) of david pujadas, for the vingt he
ures weekday news show on france 2. he replaced at this post marie drucker who became substitute presenter of the television news of the weekend.  from january to may 2012, in anticipation of the 2012 french presidential election, julien presented the short program elysee me monday to saturday at 7:55pm just before the france 2 news.  this short news show allowed viewers to see archives of former french presidential elections. (campaigns, debates, etc.)  in august 2014, he held both the position of substitute for vingt heures both  weekdays and weekends. he thus made twenty-five straight days of news presentation  at france 2  in september 2014, france 2 entrusted him with the presentation of soirees continues (a presentation followed by a debate).  on 27 may 2015, at the entrance to the pantheon with pierre brossolette,  genevieve de gaulle-anthonioz,  germaine tillion and jean zay, he presented the special show on france 2 quatre resistants au pantheon with  consultants at his side stephane bern and nathalie saint-cricq.  julian bugier presented, in addition to his work as a part-time substitute, news shows on the weekend between march and july 2015 because of the pregnancy of marie drucker.  from 5 september 2015, he presented a weekly consumer magazine show, tout compte fait on saturday at 2:40pm on france 2.  on the radio   during the summers of 2013 and 2014, he hosted l'economie cette semaine et c'est l'economie demain at 9am weekends to 10 hours on europe 1.  private life   married to economic journalist claire fournier, he is father of a boy born in april 2011 and a daughter born in 2013.  distinction   in 2009 the magazine tetu designated him as .  filmography    2011 :  marquis, film dominique farrugia   : himself, presenting a news program on i tele     2012 :  sea to drink, film jacques maillot   : himself, newscaster     2012 :  this world is crazy, tv movie baddredine mokrani   : himself, newscaster     2013 : do not do this, do not do that (series)   : himself, 20-heures news presenter for france 2.     2015 : the great divide, film alexandra leclere   : himself, 20-heures news presenter for france 2.  2017 : l'ascension'', film ludovic bernard : himself  notes and references   1981 births living people french
television journalists french male journalists french television presenters people from blois
educating my father (greek: o babas ekpaidevetai) is a 1953 greek comedy film directed by giorgos lazaridis and nikos tsiforos and starring petros kyriakos, sasa dario and giorgos kabanellis.  cast  petros kyriakos as prokopis kolaouzos    sasa dario as riri    giorgos kabanellis as giannis kolaouzos    gelly mavropoulou as myrto    nicos matheos as skouratzos    nana papadopoulou as riri's mother    alekos anastasiadis as nikolas    dimitris aviatis   kostas pomonis   kostas papakonstantinou  dimitris koukis as alex vranas    nasos patetsos as singer   zozo sapountzaki as singer    sofy as dancer    vallas as dancer    kostas voutsas  references  bibliography  achilleas hadjikyriacou. masculinity and gender in greek cinema: 1949-1967. bloomsbury publishing, 2013.  external links    1953 films 1953 comedy films greek-language films greek films greek comedy films greek black-and-white films
united nations security council resolution 2101 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions april 2013 events
mansuran is a village located in west ludhiana in ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and the panchayati raj (india).  mansuran village is 14 kilometers from ludhiana bus stand and railway station. mansuran village also has banking services by oriental bank (now  pnb), hdfc bank, and the  sbi.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
cabify is a spanish ridesharing company which provides vehicles for hire via its smartphone mobile app. vehicles are driven by self-employed service providers. operating in spain, portugal and latin america (mexico, chile, colombia, peru, brazil, panama, ecuador, argentina, dominican republic, and uruguay), the company offers two services, one for businesses and another for individuals.  cabify was founded in may 2011 by juan de antonio, and raised a total of $304 million from investment funds.  history  development in spain cabify was founded in may 2011 by juan de antonio, a spanish entrepreneur, telecommunications engineer, and graduate of stanford university. de antonio was motivated to create a vehicle for hire company after receiving negative market feedback due to high upfront costs when trying to introduce electric vehicles in european cities. de antonio started discussing the idea with adeyemi ajao, one of the founders of tuenti, and brendan wallace. cabify set up its first transportation network in madrid, and the idea attracted investors from silicon valley. juan de antonio stayed as the ceo, while ajao and wallace became advisors as they continued leading their own startup. samuel lown joined as the cto in july with michael koper and adrian merino joining the team two months later.  initially, the service was called "executive" and was intended for a niche group, with high-end vehicles that were slightly more expensive than taxis. in february 2012, cabify had 20,000 users and completed nearly 3,000 rides in madrid alone. in the next two years, more than 150 taxi drivers in madrid joined the company.  in june 2013, the company launched cabify lite, with mid-range vehicles that were usually cheaper than taxis. by the end of 2015, cabify lite represented 85% of the company's offer.  in 2016, the company partnered with waze to complete its trips more quickly and improve driver and passenger safety. in 2016, cabify launched in portugal (lisbon),  the company operates in eight spanish cities as of 2017 - madrid, barcelona, valencia, bilbao, vitoria, a coruna, malaga, and sevilla - and on the island of tenerife. in july 2018, a violent taxi-driver strike in barcelona forced the company to suspend its services until further notice. in september 2018, drivers for ride-hailing services including cabify protested against the spanish government's proposition to tighten up rules for ride-hailing services. in january 2019, cabify suspended its operations in barcelona after the catalan government voted a new rule requiring a 15-minute
notice for booking a car. its service was restored in barcelona in march 2019. a specific system architecture for catalonia alone was developed to comply with the region's harsher laws.  in latin america a year after its foundation in spain, cabify launched its operations in latin america, opening subsidiaries in mexico, chile and peru.  within a few years, 80% of cabify's income would come from the american continent.  in 2016, cabify increased expansion in mexico. the hoy no circula program in mexico city generated a 200% increase in demand. during that period, cabify reduced its tariffs by 25% to motivate the inhabitants to use alternative means of transportation. also, it donated a part of its revenues to unicef. at that time, the company operated in six mexican cities: mexico city, monterrey, queretaro, puebla city, guadalajara and toluca.  in 2016, cabify started operating in argentina (buenos aires and rosario), brazil (sao paulo), costa rica, bolivia, ecuador, and panama. it also announced it would expand its current services to new cities, such as valparaiso and vina del mar in chile.  cabify started offering services to the corporate sector in bogota in 2015. cabify late opened in cali in april 2016 and announced its expansion to medellin and the caribbean region, more precisely to the cities of barranquilla and cartagena. it planned to offer its services in pereira, manizales and bucaramanga later in the year.  in march 2017, the killing of the 19-year-old girl maria castilla by a cabify driver in mexico raised the question of safety with ride-hailing services. cabify installed a panic button in its app to prevent other similar crimes.  investments in september 2012, the company raised a $4 million series seed investment round from black vine, belgian fund emerge, angel investors sourced via angellist (including the winklevoss twins), and a series of latin american investors.  a second $8-million investment was round up in april 2014, and led by seaya ventures.  the company's biggest investor, japanese e-commerce giant rakuten, which is also a lead investor in taxi-app player lyft, made its first investment in cabify in october 2015, when it provided capital for a further push into latin america. cabify's revenues had risen to $40m, from $10m in 2014 and $1m in 2013. in april 2016, rakuten invested $92 million more in cabify. rakuten's investment was a part of a round of funding in
which cabify raised $120 million. after the 2016 financing, cabify was valued at around $320 million.  in january 2018, cabify raised an additional $160 million, valuing the company at $1.4 billion. the company cut down 10% of its workforce and reorganized its top management.  description  service cabify operates as the contact point between customers and private drivers by means of its mobile app for android and iphone, as well as its web page. users pay for the service via their credit card or paypal account, with cash payments introduced in 2016. the payment system is protected by symantec's verisign security. cabify has 400 permanent employees. cabify offers three core classes of vehicles: executive, with vehicles such as mercedes s-class or audi a8, lite (e.g. toyota avensis), or group (6 persons).  the app shows the location of drivers to the customer, calls the closest driver, directs the driver, and plays the role of intermediary for payments, taking a commission of around 20%. once the ride is over, cabify sends a summary to the customer's mobile phone, including information such as the distance, duration and cost of the ride. the customer can evaluate the ride and the driver. locations can be saved as favorites to be accessed more easily. the system has a waiting queue, where it keeps looking for a ride over a period indicated by the customer (from 5 to 30 minutes). the service can be reserved up to 30 days in advance. the app integrates with waze. the service includes the possibility of real-time tracking between departure and arrival. if the signal is lost for more than sixty seconds or the route changes considerably, the passenger will receive a telephone call verifying their comfort and safety. the app allows the customer to choose the type of vehicle (executive, lite or group), and offers a wide range of free options, such as the driver speaking a foreign language, the desired air-conditioning temperature, the driver opening the door or calling upon arrival, and the desired radio station.  the company serves two types of clients: corporate and private passengers, with the former taking up 60% of cabify's offer. cabify claims corporate users are the focus of the company's service offering.  other services cabify also offers a number of other services depending on the city, including: cabify express, a service of immediate delivery via moto taxis, in peru; cabify taxi, a service for accessing local taxi cabs, in spain; cabify city, a service of independent
drivers, in chile; cabify bike, a service where users can ride with their bikes in chile, and cabify cash, a service where users pay with cash instead of credit cards, in peru.  cabify also has a transportation option for disabled persons. since then, the service has been opened in chile, spain and peru. cabify's plans for the future include global expansion of cabify access, its service for the disabled.  the company is trying to grow in a sound way by forging relationships with local businesses, hiring both traditional taxis and regular consumers as cabify drivers, and placing heavy emphasis on repeat customers, for example by steering its cars in peak hours towards habitual users rather than those that offer the most lucrative one-off fare. because of this approach, the company claims that it has no need to subsidize drivers or offer steep discounts to users, unlike many of its rivals.  pricing cabify charges per kilometer of the optimal route. this means that it optimizes the distance between two points so the passenger is paying for the most direct route regardless of the actual route chosen by the driver. uber, in comparison, charges according to minutes and kilometers spent inside the vehicles.  moreover, cabify has fixed pricing (since december this was removed in the brazilian territory), where the price per kilometer does not change depending on the time of the day. uber, on the other hand, has dynamic prices, which change depending on peak hours, weather and local events. cabify described it as a socially motivated feature: "we are not something that the driver does in his free time. we are his main source of income. we don't think it should be something occasional, but a job that can sustain a family."  drivers cabify cars and drivers pass a rigorous selection and filtration process. all drivers must pass psychometric tests, tests for alcohol and drugs, and a city orientation test. they must show they have no criminal record or traffic violations. the murder of a young female customer in puebla, mexico, by one of cabify's drivers raises important questions about the credibility of any filtration process carried out by the company.  all drivers are required to wear professional attire, to be polite, to attend to the needs of the passenger which may include additional services such as in-car reading materials and cabify-branded water. drivers are required to take the fastest way to the destination. if they change the route without the passenger's approval, they can be penalized by cabify.  legal position cabify tries to work with governments to find a way
to operate legally. in the case of spain, all the drivers work as "collaborators" for cabify, and they do this under a commercial contract for the supply of services, either as part of a company or as freelance owners of a vtc vehicle fleet  (chauffeur driven vehicle). they can be either the direct suppliers of the service or provide it through hired personnel under the social security's legislation. cabify doesn't take care of the registration of self-employed workers. instead, they need to be considered as such, before they begin to collaborate with the company. cabify's drivers don't receive monthly or yearly fixed salaries from the company. their income comes from the invoicing of journeys and the amount of services they have provided.  cabify's control system allows them to keep track of all payments and charges that come from them because journeys are not allowed to be paid in cash. this helps eliminate the informal economy and the precariousness currently present in the rest of  urban transportation's segments.  the taxi union of santiago protested against cabify and uber, announcing a national strike in may 2016. several chilean celebrities who use cabify's services, including cristian sanchez and renata ruiz, supported the company by filming a video where they give their reasons for using cabify. after trying to find a legal solution with the chilean government for over six months without success, cabify launched cabify city, which connects independent car owners with users on the cabify app. cabify city is its first unregulated service.  on may 9, 2017, the colombian superintendence of ports and transport fined cabify $516 million colombian pesos (about $173,240 united states dollars), as it "facilitated the transgression of transport laws stated by the government of colombia, by allowing personal transport services to operate in special transport vehicles that were not authorized by the ministry of transport for this modality of services".  references  external links    companies based in madrid transport companies established in 2011 ridesharing companies location-based software road transport in spain online companies of spain transport companies of spain spanish brands 2011 establishments in spain internet technology companies of spain
redditch borough f.c. is an english semi professional football club based in redditch, worcestershire. they are currently members of the . the club is a fa charter standard club affiliated to the worcestershire county football association.  history redditch borough football club was formed in may 2006 originally starting out as a junior football club with only an under 10's team managed by current first team manager julian workman.  the club applied for the club to join the midland football league in 2014 and was accepted into division 3. the club finished 4th in its first season in the league and achieved promotion the following season to division 2 after finishing as runners up.  the 2016-17 season saw the club enter the fa vase for the first time, but they were beaten 5-2 by premier side rocester f.c. the same season, the club finished 2nd-place in division two but eventually this was taken away from them due to a 3-point deduction as the club was found guilty of fielding an illegible player against paget rangers, so finished in fourth place. the club currently remains in division two.  ground since 2017, the club has been based at their home redditch borough community sports & social club, cherry tree walk, batchley, redditch, worcestershire.  honours  midland football league les james challenge cup winners (1) 2018-19 les james challenge cup runners-up 2016-2017 midland football league division three runners-up 2015-2016 midland football league challenge vase winners 2015-16 evesham hospital senior cup'winners 2015-16 evesham hospital senior cup'winners 2016-17 evesham hospital senior cup'winners 2017-18 smedley crook cup runners-up 2015-2016  references  external links redditch borough on football club history database  football clubs in england football clubs in worcestershire 2006 establishments in england association football clubs established in 2006
the 1994 colchester borough council election for the colchester borough council took place in 1994.  results summary  ward results  berechurch  birch messing copford  castle  harbour  lexden  mile end  new town  prettygate  pyefleet  shrub end  st. andrew's  st. anne's  st. john's  st. mary's  stanway  tiptree  west bergholt & eight ash green  west mersea  winstree  wivenhoe  1994 1994 english local elections 1990s in essex
crystal frasier is an american artist and game designer known for her work on the pathfinder roleplaying game. she was also the author of the webcomic, venus envy, with a trans woman as a protagonist, which ran from 2001 to 2014. she is a trans woman and is intersex.  early life in her early life, frasier grew up in small town in florida, spending time watching television, reading, and playing with her ninja turtles or stuffed animals. in elementary school, she started writing stories and drawing comics, continuing this in junior high school where she drew comics for the school's newspaper. in high school, she wrote a sailor moon fan fiction, began running a gaming blog, and her first paid article was in a gaming magazine. she later graduated from the art institute of seattle and the new college of florida.  career in december 2001, she started the webcomic venus envy under the name "erin lindsey."  frasier worked in the art and layout department of paizo inc. from 2009 to 2014. in 2015 she rejoined the company as a game developer. in 2016 she also became the line developer for mutants and masterminds, the flagship rpg game from green ronin publishing. her adventure design credits include the harrowing and in hell's bright shadow. she also created shardra geltl, the pathfinder roleplaying game's first transgender iconic character. she also worked on comic books based on pathfinder, like the spiral of bones and dynamite series.  in june 2015, she and jenn dolari also received notice for the creation of a meme featuring transgender people based on the vanity fair cover featuring caitlyn jenner.  in 2016, frasier was announced as a gen con industry insider featured presenter. in 2018, she left the paizo game developing team to "focus on her freelancing career."  in january 2021 oni-lion forge stated that in august 2021, a graphic novel, cheer up!, written by frasier and illustrated by val wise, would be release the graphic novel was described by barnes & noble as a "sweet, queer teen romance perfect for fans of fence and check please!."  in february 2021, it was announced that she was one of the writers for the love is a battlefield special by dc comics, working with juan gedeon on a story where wonder woman and steve trevor have a "date night that inevitably takes a superheroic turn." in march 2021, she was noted as a co-writer of a comic series titled gamma
flight for marvel comics with al ewing. lan medina would be the illustrator. frasier had previously worked for marvel in 2020 on a comic about the immortal hulk.  she is one of the authors of the upcoming dungeons & dragons sourcebook van richten's guide to ravenloft (2021).  personal life frasier came out as a trans woman while working for paizo, after going "stealth" following her transition, as she had no community to connect with, and wanted to help other trans people at that point. in november 2020, she tweeted that she was also intersex.  references  external links twitter account official website  writings for know direction podcast  21st-century lgbt people american comics writers intersex women living people role-playing game artists role-playing game designers transgender and transsexual women transgender and transsexual writers year of birth missing (living people)
olenecamptus tessellatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by william lucas distant in 1898.  variety  olenecamptus tessellatus var. battangi villa, 1901  olenecamptus tessellatus var. vittatus breuning, 1940  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1898
madison iseman (born february 14, 1997) is an american actress. she is known for her role on the cmt comedy television series still the king, where she played charlotte, the daughter of billy ray cyrus' character, vernon brownmule. she is also known for playing the role of bethany walker in jumanji: welcome to the jungle and jumanji: the next level, sarah quinn in goosebumps 2: haunted halloween, lennon/alison in i know what you did last summer,  and mary ellen in  annabelle comes home.  biography and career  iseman is from myrtle beach, south carolina, and is the daughter of susan and john iseman, a dentist. she went through four auditions over a period of several months for her role on still the king. she has appeared on the series modern family and henry danger. in 2017, she played bethany in jumanji: welcome to the jungle and  jumanji: the next level in 2019. pam in beauty mark. iseman next had lead roles in two horror films, goosebumps 2: haunted halloween, released in october 2018, and annabelle comes home, released in june 2019.  filmography  film  television  references  external links  21st-century american actresses actresses from south carolina american child actresses american film actresses american people of dutch descent american people of jewish descent american television actresses living people people from myrtle beach, south carolina 1997 births
the 1904 rollins tars football team represented rollins college in the sport of american football as an independent during the 1904 college football season.  schedule  references  rollins rollins tars football seasons college football winless seasons rollins tars football
jack l. gingrass (27 august 1921 - 23 january 2010) was an american politician who was a democratic member of the michigan house of representatives, representing a portion of the upper peninsula in the 1960s and 1970s.  after attending northern michigan university, gingrass served in the united states army air corps during world war ii. gingrass was elected to the house in 1966 and served one term before being defeated for re-election by john payant. gingrass won the rematch in 1972 and served through 1984. after leaving the legislature, he was appointed to the lake superior state university board of control where he served until his appointment to the michigan state transportation commission by governor john engler in 1991. in 2000, he retired from the commission. gingrass owned and operated a printing company, retiring from that in 2008.  references  1921 births 2010 deaths 20th-century american politicians united states army personnel of world war ii members of the michigan house of representatives michigan democrats people from marquette, michigan northern michigan university alumni united states army soldiers
heidi marie schellman (born 1957) is an american particle physicist at oregon state university (osu), where she heads the department of physics. she is an expert in quantum chromodynamics.  early life and education schellman was born in 1957 in hennepin, minnesota, the daughter of two chemists. her father, john anthony schellman, who trained at princeton, was a professor of chemistry and biochemistry at the university of oregon; he was an early member of the "groundbreaking institute of molecular biology" and a member of the national academy of sciences. her mother, f. charlotte green, held a ph.d. in chemistry from stanford and had also worked at the california institute of technology. they married in 1954 while they were both postdoctoral fellows at the carlsberg laboratory in copenhagen, denmark. at the university of oregon, both her parents "were known for advancing the study of protein structure, folding and stability through techniques such as circular dichroism spectroscopy".  heidi schellman graduated from south eugene high school in eugene, oregon, in 1975. she earned a b.s. in mathematics in 1977 from stanford university and an m.s. and ph.d. in physics by 1984 from the university of california, berkeley.  shellman married physicist stephen a. wolbers in 1983.  career and research  shellman began her career as a programmer at the stanford linear accelerator (slac), where she learned "she liked the mixture of theory and practice in experimental physics. she describes her love of physics succinctly: 'physicists get to build things!' ".  prior to joining the osu faculty in 2015, she held postdoctoral fellowships at the university of chicago and fermilab, and was on the faculty of northwestern university, where she was chair of the physics and astronomy programs at the weinberg college of arts and sciences.  in 2015, schellman was elected vice chair of the commission on particles and fields within the international union of pure and applied physics.  schellman's research interests include, "future high-intensity neutrino experiments and the relation between cosmology and high-energy physics". she has collaborated on d-zero and tevatron experiments at fermilab, researching the mass of top quarks and interactions of protons and anti-protons, and has extensively studied quantum chromodynamics perturbation theory.  honors  schellman was an a.p. sloan research fellow and a department of energy outstanding junior investigator. she was elected a fellow of the american physical society in 1999
, cited for "her leadership in qcd physics and as spokesperson of e-665, the tevatron muon scattering experiment". she was awarded the 2015 mentoring award by the american physical society's division of particles and fields.  references  external links   physicists hunt for hidden particles: npr, october 13, 2009. (audio, 12:28 minutes)  heidi schellman, from a physicist's mind, helix, northwestern university, november 30, 2008.  1957 births living people 21st-century american physicists oregon state university faculty particle physicists sloan research fellows stanford university alumni university of california, berkeley alumni american women physicists people from hennepin county, minnesota fellows of the american physical society american women academics 21st-century american women
ealing jazz festival is an annual summer jazz festival in ealing's walpole park. it was first held in 1984.  in 2016 concern was raised after ealing council announced it was to take over management of the festival from "the event umbrella". as a result the festival programme was reduced from five to two days of live music and ticket prices increased sharply. these unpopular measures were intended to reduce financial risk. a group of protesters staged a demonstration outside ealing council's offices to publicise their objections.  see also ealing jazz club  references  jazz festivals in the united kingdom tourist attractions in the london borough of ealing music festivals in london
izabela vidovic (, ; born ) is an american actress. she began as a child actress, and is known for her roles in the films homefront and wonder, and for her recurring role as taylor shaw in the freeform television series the fosters.  early life  izabela vidovic was born in chicago, illinois, to croatian parents mario vidovic and elizabeta basic. her mother is a filmmaker, actress and writer, born to croats from the village of busovaca in bosnia. izabela can speak croatian; vidovic started performing in stage productions by the time she was seven, appearing in mary poppins, camp rock, and annie. she moved onto film and television productions in 2011.  career  vidovic has appeared in several series on the cw. in 2013, she played charlotte on the 100 in the first season episodes "murphy's law" and "earth kills". in 2017, vidovic first played a young kara danvers / kara zor-el in the supergirl season 3 flashback episode "midvale", then in 2021 reprised this role for two time-travel episodes of season 6. in 2018, she had a multi-episode arc in the fourth season of izombie as isobel. in 2017, she played the lead character's sister olivia in the film wonder. in 2019, vidovic had a recurring role in the fourth season of veronica mars on hulu.  filmography  film  television  references  external links    2001 births 21st-century american actresses actresses from chicago american child actresses american film actresses american people of croatian descent american people of bosnia and herzegovina descent american television actresses living people
this is a timeline of the presence of eastern orthodoxy in greece from 2008. the history of greece traditionally encompasses the study of the greek people, the areas they ruled historically, as well as the territory now composing the modern state of greece.  third hellenic republic (from 2008)   2008 abp. ieronymos ii (liapis) of athens elected; glorification of george (karslidis) of drama; pan-orthodox meeting in constantinople in october of the primates of the fourteen eastern orthodox churches, signing a document calling for inter-orthodox unity and collaboration and "the continuation of preparations for the holy and great council"; the 13-member standing committee of the church of greece denounced government plans to introduce a civil partnerships law, saying government support for common law marriage would amount to state-sanctioned "prostitution;" ecumenical patriarch bartholomew addresses european parliament; the relics of saint peter of argos are returned to argos, greece, from a monastery chapel in rome belonging to a spanish order of monks; the arab-hellenic center for culture and civilization (ahccc) was established in athens, financed with a donation of around us$3.4 million by 'europe trust', a uk-based fund closely related with the muslim brotherhood's umbrella organization 'federation of islamic organizations in europe (fioe)'. 2008-2014 according to a bank of greece report, over 427,000 people (ages 15 to 64) left greece since 2008, marking the third wave of mass emigration in the 20th and 21st centuries. 2009 in the aftermath of the global financial crisis of 2007-2008, the greek government-debt crisis began in late 2009, also known as the greek depression, with a series of sudden reforms and austerity measures leading to impoverishment and loss of income and property of the greek populace, as well as a small-scale humanitarian crisis; led by three senior archbishops, a group of orthodox clergy in greece published the manifesto, a confession of faith against ecumenism,  pledging to resist all ecumenical ties with roman catholics and protestants, amongst its signatories including six metropolitans, 49 archimandrites, 22 hieromonks, 30 nuns and abbesses, and many other priests and church elders; orthodox-roman catholic joint commission meets in paphos, cyprus, 11th plenary, studying the theme "the role of the bishop of rome in the communion of the church in the first millennium;" us president barack obama made an explicit appeal in his speech to the turkish parliament for the reopening of the hot
ly contested greek orthodox theological seminary on halki; russian orthodox patr. kirill of moscow called on turkish authorities to re-open the theological seminary on halki; repose of elder joseph of vatopedi a noted twentieth century monastic regarded as one of the few remaining true athonite elders; the first complete german-language translation of the septuagint was published by the german bible society under the title "septuaginta deutsch", founded on the gottingen septuagint edition, and the rahlfs edition for the books not yet contained in that version; the european court of human rights (echr) ruled that turkey violated the property rights of the bozcaada kimisis teodoku greek orthodox church on the aegean island of bozcaada; patr. mor ignatius zakka i iwas of the oriental church of antioch went on an official visit to greece, to renew the relationship between both churches; greek orthodox church urges christians across europe to unite in an appeal against a ban on crucifixes in classrooms in italy; viktor yanukovych makes pilgrimage to mount athos; over 1,000 muslims rallied in athens over unsubstantiated claims that greek police allegedly tore up and trampled on the quran. 2010 the metropolis of attica was split into 2 new metropolises: the metropolis of kifissia, amaroussion and oropos, and the metropolis of ilion, acharnes and petroupolis; on sunday, 15 august, 2010 ecumenical patriarch bartholomew i conducted the first divine liturgy in 88 years at the historic monastery of panagia soumela in trapezounta, northeastern turkey, marking the first official religious service carried out at the ancient monastery since the foundation of the modern turkish republic; death of metr. augoustinos kantiotes of florina, a prolific spiritual writer and defender of traditional orthodox theology. death of painter, illustrator, engraver and writer rallis kopsidis (1929-2010), a student of photis kontoglou who was inspired by the macedonian (11th-14th c.) and cretan (14th-17th c.) schools, who took part in painting the frescoes of the byzantine church of chevetogne abbey in belgium (1955-57) as well as the church of the orthodox centre of the ecumenical patriarchate in chambesy, geneva, considered one of the pioneers of his generation even though his work is not particularly well known; croatian roman catholic archdiocese of zadar gives cherished relic of st. simeon to the greek orthodox patriarchate of jerusalem.   2011 the governments of armenia, bulgaria,
cyprus, the russian federation, greece, lithuania, malta, and the republic of san marino filed a joint submission as a third-party intervener in the case of  lautsi v. italy  (application no. 30814/06) in the european court of human rights (echr), arguing that the cross was a symbol deeply ingrained in their respective heritages and that to extend the values of a secular state to the whole of europe would represent the "americanisation" of europe in that a single and unique rule and a rigid separation of church and state would be binding on everyone, with the grand chamber of the european court of human rights (echr) ruling on 18 march 2011, by a majority (15 votes to two) that there was no violation of article 2 of protocol no. 1 (the right to education) and no separate issue under article 9 (the rights of freedom of thought, conscience, and religion) to the european convention on human rights, thus upholding the display in public places of religious and cultural symbols and affirming freedom of religion; on sunday 3 april 2011, at 9:30pm, in the church of the holy trinity in kalymnos, the face of christ crowned with thorns appeared in the icon of the virgin mary on the iconostasis; canonization of 1241 new martyrs of naoussa, greece, massacred by the ottomans from thursday of bright week to the sunday of thomas in 1822. metropolitan hilarion (alfeyev) of volokolamsk, chairman of the department of external church relations of the russian orthodox church (decr), visits the greek orthodox church; launch of "the great orthodox christian encyclopedia" 12-volume set, blessed and sponsored by ecumenical patriarch bartholomew i of constantinople, patriarch theodore ii of alexandria, patriarch ignatius iv of antioch, patriarch theophilos iii of jerusalem, archbishop chrysostomos ii of cyprus, archbishop ieronymos ii of athens and all greece, and others; chief rabbi yona metzger signed a historic declaration on 6 december 2011, in nicosia, cyprus, with archbishop chrysostomos, primate of the church of cyprus, in which both of them promised to deepen relations between the church and the jewish people; greek orthodox church officials wrote a letter to the president of the european commission, jose barroso protesting the hardships the greek people were being made to suffer; a december 2011 nationwide survey conducted by metron analysis (one of the biggest independent market research and public opinion survey companies in greece), 95% of those polled reported that
they were orthodox christians, while 1.5% said that they belong to some other religion, and 2.8% of the population said that they were irreligious or atheist, which is among the lowest figures in europe. 2012 ecumenical patriarch bartholomew gave a landmark address at the turkish parliament's constitution conciliation commission, tasked with drafting a new constitution for turkey, presenting an 18-page report demanding equal treatment and rights for turkey's non-muslim communities, including state-aid for churches and minority schools; the greek orthodox church of albania rejected an official census in the balkan country suggesting that ethnic greeks represent just 6.75 percent of the overall population, with the church instead claiming that the figure is at 24 percent, slightly above that of previous censuses that put the percentage at 20.7 percent in 1942 and 22.3 percent in 1927; in june the church of cyprus gave a part of the holy relics of st. lazarus to a delegation of the russian orthodox church led by patriarch kirill of moscow and all russia; in october, abp. ieronymos spoke out against europe's handling of the financial crisis in greece which, he said, is encroaching on the debt-hit nation's sovereignty; in november metr. seraphim (mentzelopoulos) of piraeus filed a blasphemy complaint against the director and actors of the theatrical play "corpus christi," which portrayed jesus and the apostles as gay men; in 2012 deaths in greece outnumbered births by 16,300, while 44,200 more people left the country than moved to it; the number of employed people was 3.8 million compared to 4.1 million pensioners and the unemployed, out of a population of 11,062,500; commenting to the bbc on the issue of constructing a mosque in athens, metr. seraphim (mentzelopoulos) of piraeus remarked that "greece suffered five centuries of islamic tyranny under turkish rule and building a mosque would offend the martyrs who freed us," adding that "we are not a multicultural country." 2013 plot to assassinate ecumenical patriarch bartholomew uncovered by turkish police; ecumenical patriarch bartholomew opens seminar on religious freedom celebrating the 1700th anniversary of the edict of milan; the eu published guidelines to the promotion and protection of freedom of religion or belief (forb); patriarch kirill i of moscow and all rus' made an official visit to greece; patr. kirill i of moscow visited mount athos, accompanied by metr. hilarion of volokolamsk, head of the department for external church relations (decr), visiting several
monasteries and hermitages, venerating their shrines and celebrating the divine liturgy at the russian monastery of st. panteleimon; metr. seraphim (mentzelopoulos) of piraeus condemned the position of the pope, and others, on 4 march 2013, in an encyclical on the sunday of orthodoxy, during which those who have abandoned orthodoxy for heresy are traditionally condemned; in a letter in late march to abp. ieronymos of athens and all-greece, patr. bartholomew responded that he was especially concerned by the recent statement by metr. seraphim invoking an anathema against the pope, protestants, jews, muslims and ecumenists; on 27 june 2013, metr. seraphim (mentzelopoulos) of piraeus sent a 73-page epistle to patr. bartholomew about the subject of ecumenism; the greek parliament passed a bill lifting the ban on sunday shopping, liberalizing the country's trading laws as demanded by the troika of international lenders in exchange for further bailout aid, protested by the church of greece and more than seventeen greek trade unions; church of greece draws up a three-year financial plan in an effort to determine the size of its debt and to exploit its assets, according to abp. ieronymos ii (liapis) of athens; the us house subcommittee for european affairs called the turkish government to "facilitate the reopening of the ecumenical patriarchate's theological school of halki without condition or further delay"; on 27 november, the sacred and holy synod of the ecumenical patriarchate formally glorified elder porphyrios (bairaktaris) of kafsokalivia († 1991) and venerable meletios of ypseni († 19th century); the russian orthodox church recognized the primacy of constantinople in a special document having a synodal status. 2014 the gifts of the wise men to the infant jesus were brought to moscow's christ the savior cathedral by archimandrite parthenios, igumen of the monastery of agios pavlos on mount athos, together with the monks of the monastery, who handed the special ciborium to patriarch kirill i of moscow, who placed it the center of the cathedral; sacred synaxis of the primates of the orthodox churches at the phanar from 6-9 march, in order to deliberate on matters pertaining to the entire orthodox church throughout the world and procedural issues for the convocation of the holy and great council; abp. ieronymos declared his support for the robben island declaration for the freedom of marwan bargh
ouhti and all palestinian prisoners; metropolitans seraphim of piraeus and andrew of dryinoupolis of the church of greece, write a lengthy epistle sent to pope francis on 10 april 2014, concerning his past, the abysmal state of papism, and a plea to return to holy orthodoxy; death of renowned lay theologian, philologist and charismatic preacher nikolaos sotiropoulos, a fiery orthodox traditionalist who was excommunicated by the holy synod of constantinople in july 1993; death of archimandrite nikodemos bilalis of new skete (mount athos), a scholar, philologist and prolific writer, and founder of the "panhellenic union of friends of the polyteknon" (mothers of many children); metr. gerasimos (michaleas) of san francisco officiated at the thyranoixia (opening of the doors) service of the holy transfiguration greek orthodox church in south anchorage, alaska, being the northernmost parish of the greek orthodox archdiocese of america and the only greek orthodox church in the state of alaska; greek orthodox church bans religious rites for those who choose cremation; his beatitude john x, patriarch of antioch and all the east conducted his irenic first visit to the church of greece from 23 to 27 october at the invitation of his beatitude ieronymos ii;<ref>joint statement by the churches of antioch and greece on patriarch john x's visit. yahoo! groups - orthodox news. november 1, 2014.</ref> in september, greek lawmakers passed a bill toughening anti-racism laws and making holocaust denial a criminal act; metr. amvrosios of kalavryta and aigialeia adamantly spoke out against the "anti-racist law" passed in greece, stating that "a priest who will speak up against jehovah's witnesses and other religions from the ambo, may be declared a racist and imprisoned," adding that "soon we will become aliens in our own home country...your children will surely be slaves of muslims...greece is disappearing, faith is disappearing";bishop amvrosios against jihadists. greek reporter: greece. 29 sep 2014. retrieved: 10 november 2015 in november, a  'synaxis of greek orthodox clergy and monastics' , including protopresbyters dr. george metallinos and dr. theodoros zisis, launched a petition to oppose the new "divided church" ecclesiology of patriarch bartolomew, being signed by some 2000 orthodox christians at the time of its initial publication,
including six hierarchs of the church of greece, and many abbots, clergy, monastics, and laity;archpriest andrew phillips. greek faithful launch anti-patriarch bartholomew petition. orthodox england - events. 29 november 2014. the head of the vatican pope francis visited istanbul on 29 and 30 november for the ecumenical joint-prayer service with ec. patr. bartholomew on the feast of st. andrew; pope francis bowed to receive a kiss and the blessing of ec. patr. bartholomew during joint prayer service in the patriarchal cathedral of st george at the phanar; in a special eurobarometer poll, cyprus had the highest proportion of respondents in the eu (21%) who said that religion was the most important value for them personally, while greece had the third-highest proportion of respondents (15%).  2015 on 13 january, the sacred and holy synod of the ecumenical patriarchate formally glorified elder paisios of mount athos († 1994);ecumenical patriarchate officially entered elder paisios among the list of saints. ecumenical patriarchate - orthodox metropolitanate of hong kong and south east asia (omhksea). 13 january 2015. retrieved: 20 january 2015. aristides baltas, the greek minister of culture, education and religious affairs, stated at a meeting of parliament that the new government would be launching the process of separation of church and state in the near future; for the first time in over a thousand years, the largest portion of the sacred relics of saint barbara were transferred to athens from venice, on loan for two weeks from 10 may to 24 may and hosted at the shrine of saint barbara in the municipality of agia varvara, after a highly symbolic move by the roman catholic church who decided to respond positively to the request of the apostoliki diakonia of the church of greece on its upcoming 80th anniversary;philip chrysopoulos. greek archbishop worships holy relics, criticizes syriza parliamentary representative. greek reporter - greece. 14 may 2015. retrieved: 3 june 2015. at a meeting hosted by the greek orthodox church's refugee and migrant center (kspm-erp), and attended by the general secretary of the churches' commission for migrants in europe (ccme) and other officials, abp. ieronymos ii of athens stated that refugees arriving at european borders should be hosted not only by greece but by all other eu countries as well, proportional to the population of each, noting that illegal immigrants suffer because of the western world's actions; in response to the international day of yoga, which was established by the united nations in
2014, the holy synod of the church of greece stated that yoga is incompatible with christianity as it is a fundamental aspect of hinduism and cannot be considered as just a "form of exercise", also stating that it respects the freedom of religious belief but has a responsibility to avoid developing a "climate of religious syncretism"; in a letter to justice minister nikos paraskevopoulos, abp. ieronymos ii of athens slammed cohabitation agreements which grant couples living together similar rights to those who are married, describing the pact as "a poor imitation" of marriage; a muslim cleric from ankara recited a passage from the koran in the hagia sophia for the first time in 85 years; the patriarchate of antioch broke communion with the patriarchate of jerusalem over the non-resolution of the jurisdictional dispute over qatar (resolution no. 5-3/2015); resolution no. 5-3/2015 (the formal resolution in arabic, greek and french). june 2015. retrieved 23 july 2015. in 2015 wikileaks released "the saudi cables", including a cable from the saudi embassy in jordan stating that in 2011 abp. atallah hanna contacted them with a request for money and they agreed to give him $200,000; new english edition of protopresbyter george metallinos' 1992 greek publication  unia: the face and the disguise;  greek-russian businessman and politician ivan savvidis offers to build a new mosque in trabzon and hand it to the city's municipality in return for making the hagia sophia in trabzon a church once again; synaxis of hierarchs of the ecumenical throne in istanbul from 29 august to 2 september, including 140 bishops and archbishops from churches in europe, the united states and asia, celebrating the indiction (church's new year) and exchanging ideas on a wide range of issues from a pan-orthodox synod, to environmental issues, to interfaith dialogue and other social issues;orthodox church leaders mark church's new year in istanbul. pravmir.com. 2 september 2015. retrieved: 3 september 2015. abp. ieronymos ii of athens and all greece accused europe and the greek government of trying to alter christian greek society and the identity of greek people; on a formal visit to lambeth palace from 2-4 november, ec. patr. bartholomew and the abp. of canterbury justin welby marked the publication of a new agreed common statement,   'in the image and likeness of god: a hope-filled anthropology'  , the culmination of six years of study on
"what anglicans and orthodox can say together about the meaning of human personhood in the divine image"; the prime minister of greece alexis tsipras visited the patriarchate of jerusalem, praising the contribution of the patriarchate to interreligious dialogue and being awarded the grand cross of the order of the holy sepulchre (greek: μεγαλοσταυρος του ταγματος των ιπποτων του παναγιου ταφου) by patriarch theophilos iii;ioanna zikakou. greek prime minister tsipras ends official visit to israel, palestinian areas. greek reporter: greece. 27 nov 2015. retrieved: 27 november 2015. the greek parliament legislated a cohabitation agreement for same-sex couples, with a parliamentary majority of 193 mps in favor, 56 mps against and 51 absent; commenting on the recent anti-racism law and on the recognition of same-sex unions in greece, various greek orthodox hierarchs warned that the time of persecutions has arrived in orthodox greece; the unhcr reported that 851,319 refugees and migrants arrived in greece in 2015 as a gateway to the schengen area; the greek orthodox patriarchate of jerusalem, with the agreement of two other major communities (roman catholic and armenian apostolic churches), invited the national technical university of athens (which had previously led restoration projects on the athenian acropolis and the hagia sophia) to restore the aedicule of the church of the holy sepulchre in march 2016, with work to be completed by the spring of 2017.  2016 the church of jerusalem canonized venerable john the chosebite / john jacob of neamt (†1960); η συνοδικη πραξη αγιοκαταταξεως του οσιου ιωαννου του χοζεβιτου. romfea.gr. κυριακη, 31 ιανουαριος 2016.  russian president vladimir putin visited mount athos alongside patriarch kirill, in order to mark the 1,000-year presence of russian orthodox monks in greece; patriarch kirill consecrated the restored cathedral of the old russikon skete of the great-martyr panteleimon, on holy mount athos on 28 may; the turkish government stated it would permit the use of the hagia sophia basilica for islamic ramadan prayers throughout the month, a move that greek officials decried as "retrograde"
and disrespectful; in a letter to the greek secretary-general for transparency and human rights, over 50 organisations, including the national secular society (nss), urged the ministry of justice to abolish greek blasphemy laws and "drop all related charges pending" before greek courts; holy and great council of the orthodox church is held in kolymvari, crete, from 17-27 june, with 10 out of 14 autocephalous churches in attendance, agreeing on six official documents; the xxiii conference of the inter-parliamentary assembly on orthodoxy (i.a.o.) met in thessaloniki; over 60 athonite fathers wrote an "open letter" to the holy community of mt. athos calling for an immediate convocation of the governing body of athos to formally condemn the council in crete, stating their intention to cease commemorating the patriarch of constantinople due to his leadership in the "false council" at which the pan-heresy of ecumenism was supported; ecclesiastical delegation from church of greece met the patriarch and hierarchs of church of georgia from 25-28 july, to express - on behalf of all faithful orthodox christians in greece - their heartfelt gratitude to the patriarch, hierarchy and faithful of the venerable and martyric church of georgia for their confession of the orthodox faith over and against the rise - in council - of syncretistic ecumenism, and to discuss the proper response to the unorthodox "council of crete"; a public consultation process for constitutional revision was launched by greek prime minister alexis tsipras, including a proposed a "neutrality of the state" but with preservation of the recognition of the christian orthodox faith as "prevailing religion, for historical and practical reasons";irene kostaki. new greece 2021: tsipras's constitutional revision with a latin american twist. 22:15 july 25, 2016. new europe. retrieved: 8 august 2016. a group of protesters said to be anarchists burst into and disrupted the divine liturgy at the greek orthodox church of gregory palamas in thessaloniki; repose of schema-archimandrite jeremiah (alekhin), hegumen of the russian monastery of st panteleimon on mt athos, aged 100, the oldest hegumen on the holy mountain; amid growing tension between the church of greece and the government over changes to the way religion is taught at schools, abp. ieronymos stated that "greece and orthodoxy are not for sale"; in a lengthy presentation to the hierarchy of the church of greece, abp. ieronymos dismissed calls for the separation of church and state as outdated remnants
of the previous century, targeting left-wing ideology that is shrouded in a progressive guise as the driving force behind the move for the separation, while noting that the people will decide whether such a separation can take place;archbishop: separating church from state will come up against society. ekathimerini.com. 04.10.2016. retrieved: 5 october 2016. αρχιεπισκοπος: η εκκλησια δε θα ζητησει ποτε τον χωρισμο απο το λαο της - (εισηγηση). romfea.gr. 04 οκτωβριος 2016. retrieved: 5 october 2016. archimandite athanasios athanasios, proigoumenos of the holy monastery of the great meteora wrote " the 'council' of crete, the chronicle of a premeditated deviation ", a historical account and spiritual analysis demonstrating that the results of the 'council' of crete were pre-determined and pre-fabricated; according to a pro rata survey for the efimerida ton syntakton newspaper, 46 of respondents were against severing state-church ties, while 38 percent were in favor of maintaining the existing status between the two institutions; patr. bartholomew i of constantinople writes letter to abp. ieronymos ii of athens, demanding the defrocking and severing of communion with those opposed to the pan-orthodox council in crete; in his patriarchal proclamation of christmas 2016, ec. patr. bartholomew declared 2017 as the year of protection of the sacredness of childhood, inviting everyone to recognize and respect the rights and integrity of children; official figures provided by the church of greece show a total of 9,792 parish and monastery churches. 2017 first russian church is opened in cyprus, in the village of episkopeio (archdiocese of tamassos and oreini), dedicated to st andrew the first-called and all the saints who shone forth in the russian land;metropolitan hilarion of volokolamsk begins his working visit to cyprus. the russian orthodox church - department for external church relations. 26.03.2017 21:50. st. anthony's greek orthodox monastery in arizona published the departure of the soul according to the teaching of the orthodox church, the first comprehensive presentation of the teachings of over 120 orthodox saints and dozens of holy hierarchs, clergy, and theologians on the subject
of the soul's exodus to the next life; the greek state recognized paganism (hellenic religion) as a religion, through a decision of the greek ministry of education, research and religious affairs, defined as a 'known religion' according to paragraph 17 - the only form of recognition for a religion in greece; metr. seraphim of piraeus wrote a 37-page letter to turkish president recep tayyip erdogan urging him to convert to greek orthodox christianity and be baptised in the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople, also suggesting that russian president vladimir putin be his godfather. the patriarchs and heads of the christian churches in jerusalem criticized what they see as a breach of the status quo in the capital, claiming there is a "systematic attempt to undermine the integrity of the holy city of jerusalem and the holy land, and to weaken the christian presence"; patr. theophilos iii of jerusalem visited pope francis of rome at the vatican, raising two recent issues of all the christian churches of the holy land, namely: the proposed bill by 40 members of the knesset which, if passed into law, would deny the rights of the churches to freely deal with their land properties, as well as the recent decision of the israeli district court in jerusalem, which gave effect to the unauthorised and illegitimate contracts relating to the jaffa gate properties that belong to the patriarchate of jerusalem; the greek parliament passed a law on tuesday 10 october to make it easier for anyone 15 years of age and older to change their legally recognized gender, a move that was denounced by church of greece as a threat to the social fabric; a particle of the relics of st. seraphim of sarov is brought from diveyevo monastery to the greek town of patras from 16-26 november, timed to the inter-orthodox conference the voice of apostle andrew the first-called in modern world held on 17-18 november; the greek orthodox metropolis of sweden and all scandinavia established a new parish in the norwegian city of bergen, named after st. chrysostomos of smyrna, martyred in 1922; with the approval and recommendation of the church of greece, on 27 november the sacred and holy synod of the ecumenical patriarchate formally glorified archimandrite elder iakovos (tsalikis) (†1991), igumen of the monastery of saint david the elder in euboea. ι.μ. χαλκιδος (metropolis of chalcis, istiaia and sporades islands). πρωτη δοξολογια για την αγιο
καταταξη του οσιου ιακωβου στην ι.μ. οσιου δαυιδ. romfea.gr. 29 νοεμβριου 2017.    2018 the historic monastery of st. john the baptist in the bethabara area, east of jericho, on the west bank of the river jordan, is reopened as an orthodox shrine of the jerusalem patriarchate on monday 29 january; death of french archimandrite placide deseille (fr), a well-known orthodox patrologist and theologian and the founder and hegumen of two athonite monasteries in france that are metochia of simonopetra on mt. athos; first orthodox monastery is opened in south africa, the monastery of sts. nicholas the wonderworker, nektarios of aegina, and paisios the athonite, near hartbeespoort, 40 miles north of johannesburg; on 17 february, hundreds of christians rallied peacefully in support of the greek orthodox patriarchate of jerusalem and the other jerusalem churches against tax measures (arnona) imposed by the israeli jerusalem municipality on the holy churches and their adjacent buildings;new municipal tax measures 'threaten churches' ministry in jerusalem,' leaders say. anglican journal. 15 february 2018. retrieved: 20 february 2018.  on 25 february, the heads of churches in charge of the holy sepulchre and the status quo governing the various christian holy sites in jerusalem - namely the greek orthodox patriarchate, the custody of the holy land and the armenian patriarchate - took the unprecedented step of the closure of the church of the holy sepulchre as a measure of protest against the jerusalem municipality's "discriminatory and racist" pursuing of 650 million shekels (over $186 million) in church taxes, against centuries of precedent,griffin paul jackson. jerusalem christians unite ... to close church of the holy sepulchre. christianity today (ct). 25 february 2018 10:40 pm. retrieved: 27 february 2018.gregory pappas. angry jerusalem patriarch closes holy sepulchre church amid israeli "discriminatory and racist" moves against christians. pappas post. 25 february 2018. retrieved: 27 february 2018. slammed also by palestine, jordan and lebanon, as israeli tax and land grab plans targeting churches in jerusalem in violation of international regulations; the ecumenical patriarchate declared that the actions of the bulgarian orthodox church regarding the schismatic and unrecognized macedonian orthodox church to be un-canonical, also seriously criticized by the serbian orthodox church and church of greece; the
office of heresies and para-religions of the metropolis of piraeus issued a letter admonishing ecumenical circles for an orchestrated plot and persecution against elder ephraim of arizona and monastic elders who are battling ecumenism; σκληρη επιθεση της μητροπολης πειραιως στο φαναρι για τον γεροντα εφραιμ της αριζονας. βημα ορθοδοξιασ. 17-02-2018 | 22:00:58. retrieved: 22 february 2018. the glorification of elder iakovos (tsalikis) of euboea was liturgically celebrated on sunday 3 june 2018, at st. david monastery, headed by his all-holiness ecumenical patriarch bartholomew, with the concelebration of 30 orthodox bishops from the greek and cypriot churches and the ecumenical patriarchate; african king tchiffi zie jean gervais of cote d'ivoire, permanent secretary general of the 'forum of kings, princes, sheiks and traditional leaders of africa', is received into the orthodox church on mt. athos, baptized by hieromonk dionysius of koutloumousiou monastery with the christian name of david;secretary general of africa's forum of kings visits luxembourg. afrika 247. 17 december 2017. the holy synod of the church of greece declared st. therapont of cyprus (may 14) and st. gregory the theologian (jan. 25) as patron saints in the medical field. members of the ukrainian orthodox church's synod met with patriarch bartholomew of constantinople, concerning 'the impossibility of legalizing the schism' in ukraine and also to the need to heal it; 25th annual interparliamentary assembly on orthodoxy (iao) took place at the byzantine & christian museum in athens; 500th anniversary since st. maxim the greek of vatopedi monastery arrived in russia marked on mount athos; glorification of elder amphilochios (makris) of patmos (†1970); synaxis of the hierarchy of the ecumenical throne meets in constantinople, 1-3 september; abp. ieronymos ii told a meeting of the holy synod in athens that he feared the greek state was rudderless after nearly a decade of wrenching economic crisis, a rising crime rate, crippled health and justice systems, inadequate welfare and what he called a lack of direction in foreign policy, and that the orthodox church and its teachings are in
danger of being forgotten in an increasingly secularized and crisis-ridden society; the synod of bishops of the russian orthodox church, at its session on 15 october 2018, in minsk, severed eucharistic communion with the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople, following the decisions of the patriarchate of constantinople 'to grant autocephaly to the ukrainian church'; greece ranked first in europe in a list by jo di graphics measuring the number of priests per 100,000 people, with about 88 priests per 100,000 people in greece, followed by italy in second with 82.8, and romania in third with 80.1;number of priests per 100,000 people. jo di graphics. 31 october 2018. retrieved: 6 november 2018. greek prime minister alex tsipras announced plans to disestablish the church of greece, intending to amend the constitution of greece to remove references to the church and define the greek state as 'religiously neutral',greece takes major step towards disestablishment of orthodox church. national secular society (nss). 9 november 2018. opposed by many hierarchs, clergy, and faithful of the greek orthodox church. on 27 november 2018 the synod of the ecumenical patriarchate decided to dissolve the patriarchal exarchate for orthodox parishes of the russian tradition in western europe, by repealing the patriarchal tomos of 1999, without consulting the ruling hierarch archbishop john (renneteau) of chariopoulis.  2019 metr. tikhon of the orthodox church in america (o.c.a) joined ecumenical patriarch bartholomew on his annual pilgrimage to cappadocia, concelebrating the divine liturgy on the sunday of all saints; the holy synod of the church of greece establishes "unborn child" day via circular number 5721/2018, to be celebrated on the sunday after the feast of the nativity, to protect children and to help solve the country's demographic problem; death of elder ephraim of philotheou and arizona;elder ephraim of arizona has reposed. mystagogy. 8 december 2019. greek orthodox byzantine chant is added to unesco's representative list of intangible cultural heritage of humanity.byzantine chant - cyprus and greece. united nations educational, scientific and cultural organization - intangible cultural heritage. retrieved: 14 december 2019.   2020 the holy synod of the church of greece expressed the church's position on voluntary abortion as constituting murder; taking into account the suggestions of the synodal committee on heresies, the holy synod of the church of greece issued a statement condemning yoga as "a fundamental chapter of the religion of hinduism"
that is "absolutely incompatible with the orthodox christian faith and has no place in the lives of christians", and also urging all bishops and clergy to refrain from any event organized by the rotary and the lions organizations, whose activities are not limited to social events, but also extend to religious acts.   see also  eastern orthodoxy in greece list of archbishops of athens greek orthodox church eastern orthodox church organization history history of the eastern orthodox church history of eastern christianity history of the eastern orthodox church under the ottoman empire history of eastern orthodox churches in the 20th century timeline of eastern orthodoxy in america church fathers apostolic fathers church fathersante-nicene fathers (book)desert fathersnicene and post-nicene fatherslist of church fathers  notes  references  bibliography  giannes koliopoulos and thanos veremes. greece: the modern sequel, from 1831 to the present. nyu press, 2002. 407 pp.   anastasios anastassiadis. religion and politics in greece: the greek church's 'conservative modernization' in the 1990s. research in question, no.11, january 2004. (pdf).  c.m. woodhouse. modern greece. 4th ed. boston : faber and faber, 1986.  charalambos k. papastathis and nikos maghioros. "greece: a faithful orthodox christian state. the orthodox church in the hellenic republic". in: javier martinez-torron and w. cole durham, jr.. religion and the secular state: national reports (issued for the occasion of the xviiith international congress of comparative law, washington, d.c., july 2010). published by: complutense universidad de madrid, in cooperation with the international center for law and religion studies, brigham young university. july 2014. pp. 339-375.  demetrios j. constantelos. understanding the greek orthodox church: its faith, history and life. 4th edition. brookline, mass.: hellenic college press, 2005.   dimitri e. conomos, graham speake. mount athos, the sacred bridge: the spirituality of the holy mountain. oxford: peter lang, 2005.  dr. daphne halikiopoulou. patterns of secularization: church, state and nation in greece and the republic of ireland. ashgate publishing, ltd., 2011.   effie fokas. religion in the greek public sphere: nuancing the account. journal of modern greek studies. volume 27, number 2, october 2009, pp. 349-374.  efthym
ios nicolaidis. science and eastern orthodoxy: from the greek fathers to the age of globalization. transl. susan emanuel. johns hopkins university press. 2011. 288 pp.    herman a. middleton. precious vessels of the holy spirit: the lives & counsels of contemporary elders of greece. 2nd ed. protecting veil press, 2004.  john hadjinicolaou (ed.). synaxis: an anthology of the most significant orthodox theology in greece appearing in the journal synaxe from 1982 to 2002. montreal : alexander press, 2006.  john l. tomkinson. between heaven and earth: the greek church. anagnosis books, athens, 2004.  mother nectaria mclees. evlogeite! a pilgrim's guide to greece. 1st ed. st. nicholas press, kansas city, mo, 2002. 927 pp.  norman russell. modern greek theologians and the greek fathers. philosophy & theology volume 18, issue 1. 2007.10.17. pages 77-92. ()  rev. dr. nicon d. patrinacos (m.a., d.phil. (oxon)). a dictionary of greek orthodoxy - λεξικον ελληνικης ορθοδοξιας. light & life publishing, minnesota, 1984.  rev. a. h. hore. eighteen centuries of the orthodox greek church. london: james parker & co. 1899. 706pp. (re-printed: gorgias press llc, 2003.)  vasilios makrides (professor). hellenic temples and christian churches: a concise history of the religious cultures of greece from antiquity to the present. new york university press, 2009. 345 pp.   victor roudometof and vasilios makrides (eds.). orthodox christianity in 21st century greece: the role of religion in culture, ethnicity, and politics.'' ashgate publishing, ltd., 2010. 258 pp.   21st century in greece cultural history of greece greek orthodoxy in greece orthodoxy in greece history of eastern orthodoxy in greece history of greece since 1974 orthodox church
edmund martin herzig (born february 1958) is a british professor, historian, and author. he is currently the soudavar professor of persian studies, he is part of the faculty of oriental studies at the university of oxford, and also has served (1988-2006) as a lecturer in iranian studies at the university of manchester. his principal areas of research are the histories of iran, the caucasus, armenia, and the armenian people with an emphasis on the armenians of iran.  education herzig received his ba in russian and persian from the university of cambridge, while he received his dphil in oriental studies at the university of oxford. his graduation thesis was entitled 'the armenian merchants of new julfa, isfahan: a study in pre-modern asian trade'.  publications  sources        1958 births 20th-century british historians 21st-century british historians soudavar professors of persian studies fellows of wadham college, oxford people associated with the university of manchester iranologists armenian studies scholars living people
kezban is a 1953 turkish romance film directed by hicri akbasli and starring bulent oran, gonul bayhan and muzaffer nebioglu.  cast  bulent oran   gonul bayhan   muzaffer nebioglu   muhterem nur   cahit irgat  ayten cakar  external links    1953 films 1950s romance films turkish-language films turkish films turkish romance films turkish black-and-white films
rinaldo santini (27 december 1914 - 6 july 2013) was an italian christian democrat politician. he was born in rome, kingdom of italy. he was mayor of rome (1967-1969) and president of lazio (1973-1975). he died in rome, italy.  references  external links    1914 births 2013 deaths 20th-century italian politicians 21st-century italian politicians christian democracy (italy) politicians mayors of rome presidents of lazio grand officers of the order of merit of the italian republic
love in a sleeper is the final studio album released by german euro-disco group silver convention, which at the time consisted of vocalists ramona wulf, rhonda heath and zenda jacks. the album managed to chart in the rpm 's disco album chart, peaking #11. the single spend the night with me peaked #80 in the billboard r&b singles chart, #10 in dance music/club play singles and #12 in canadian dance chart.  track listing  side a  "love in a sleeper" - 5:33  "mission to venus" - 4:24  "take me, shake me, wake me" - 3:50  "get it up" - 5:00  side b  "acuestate conmigo" - 4:27 * lead vocals ramona wulf.   "spend the night with me" - 4:28  "city in the sun" - 3:15  "breakfast in bed" - 3:48  weekly charts  references   1978 albums silver convention albums
marilyn n. raphael is a trinidadian climatologist, best known for her work on climate change and variability in the high latitude southern hemisphere. she is a professor and former chair of the department of geography at ucla, has authored an award-winning text, and sits in leadership positions on a number of international polar research initiatives.  early life and education  raphael was born and grew up in trinidad and tobago. she obtained a bachelor of arts in geography from mcmaster university in 1984, and a master of arts and phd in geography (1990) from ohio state university. her phd work focused on atmospheric circulation and sensible heat flux in the northern hemisphere.  career  raphael's research interests are global climate change and variability, specifically climate dynamics in the middle and high latitude of the southern hemisphere and the interaction between antarctic sea ice and the atmosphere. her research uses global climate models and also large-scale observational databases.  raphael has been teaching at ucla since 1998 and spent time as departmental chair (2010-2013). notable courses include: climatology, environmental impact analysis, seminar - environmental studies, tropical climatology, and issues in geographical inquiry.  influences   growing up, education was of the utmost importance for raphael. her mother was one of the key driving factors for pushing an education because she saw that education was the key to advancing in life. raphael's path to climatology specifically was internally driven; however, she had people in her life that served as role models and mentors. her high school teacher as well as her undergraduate adviser were both very encouraging of her pursuits into the geosciences.  raphael's interest in the southern hemisphere specifically came about when she was pursuing her phd in geography.  positions and accomplishments   marilyn n. raphael is a professor in the department of geography at ucla and is a former chair of the department, serving between 2010 and 2013.  raphael is a co-chair of the science committee of antarctic research (scar) expert group antarctic sea ice processes and climate (aspect). she is also a co-lead of the world climate research programme's polar climate predictability initiative. raphael has also served on the national research council's committees on future science opportunities in antarctica and the southern ocean and stabilization targets for atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations.  raphael's co-authored book, the encyclopedia of weather and climate change: a complete visual guide, received an atmospheric science librarians international (asli) choice award in 2010.  selected bibliography  raphael, m.n., holland, m.m., land
rum, l. et al., 2019. links between the amundsen sea low and sea ice in the ross sea: seasonal and interannual relationships. climate dynamics, 52: 2333. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00382-018-4258-4 raphael, m.n. and hobbs, w., 2014. the influence of the large‐scale atmospheric circulation on antarctic sea ice during ice advance and retreat seasons. geophysical research letters, 41(14): 5037-5045.  fry, j. l., graf, h.-f., grotjahn, r., raphael, m. n., saunders, c., & whitaker, r., 2010. the encyclopedia of weather and climate change: a complete visual guide. berkeley, calif: university of california press. raphael, m.n., 2007. the influence of atmospheric zonal wave three on antarctic sea ice variability. journal of geophysical research: atmospheres, 112: d12.  raphael, m. and holland, m., 2006. twentieth century simulation of the southern hemisphere climate in coupled models. part i: large scale circulation variability, climate dynamics, 26: 217-228  holland, m.m and raphael, m.n., 2006 twentieth century simulation of the southern hemisphere climate in coupled models. part ii: sea ice conditions and variability. climate dynamics, 26: 229-245  raphael, m.n., 2004. a zonal wave 3 index for the southern hemisphere. geophysical research letters, 31  raphael, m. n., 2003. impact of observed sea-ice concentration on the southern hemisphere extratropical atmospheric circulation in summer. j. geophys. res., 108 (d22): 4687  raphael, m.n., 2003. recent, large-scale changes in the extratropical southern hemisphere atmospheric circulation. j. clim., 16 (17): 2915-2924.  raphael, m.n., 2003. a possible influence of the tropical quasi-biennialoscillation on the variability of the extratropical circulation in the southern hemisphere. j. geophys. res., 108(d22).  references  external links   marilyn raphael, ucla department of geography  trinidad and tobago women scientists women earth scientists american climatologists women climatologists year of birth missing (living people) living people 21st-century american women scientists
mwadui airport  is an airport serving the williamson diamond mine, in the shinyanga region of tanzania. the runway extends along the east side of the mine pit.  the mwadui non-directional beacon (ident: wm) is on the field.  see also  list of airports in tanzania transport in tanzania  references  external links ourairports - mwadui openstreetmaps - mwadui  airports in tanzania buildings and structures in the shinyanga region
the antelope hill highway bridge (also known as the antelope hill bridge) is a historic bridge over the gila river in tacna, arizona, u.s. it was built between 1914 ad 1915 as a ten-span concrete girder bridge. the bridge served as an integral piece of the ocean to ocean highway between yuma and phoenix from 1915 to 1922, when it was bypassed by an alternate route through gila bend, paralleling the gillespie dam. the bridge and original highway were bypassed mainly due to damage caused by flooding along the river floodplain it was constructed on. after being repurposed for traffic traveling north from yuma, the bridge was finally abandoned in 1929 following completion of the mcphaul suspension bridge. the ruins of the old bridge are currently listed on the national register of historic places.  history in 1912, arizona state engineer lamar cobb surveyed two different locations to construct an auto bridge over the gila river. one location was near the town of dome while the other was located further east along the river at the base of antelope hill. cobb chose the latter as the preferred site for a new bridge. in 1913, engineers working within cobb's office designed a multiple span concrete girder bridge, with the concrete sections measuring  in length. this did not include the length of the approach spans to be constructed of timber trestle structures. the longest single-span would measure  long. in total, the new bridge would have 15 separate spans. guard rails on the bridge would be constructed from steel piping.  cobb opened competitive bidding for the bridge in december 1913. however, the state initially rejected every bid, wishing to use prison labor to construct the bridge instead of contracted labor. the bridge had to be redesigned when cobb calculated there wasn't an adequate amount of manpower in the arizona prison system to match the project's size. having reworked his original plans, cobb once again opened the project to competitive bidding, awarding the contract to an individual named parry borchers in 1914. construction began in june 1914 but stopped soon afterward due to borchers defaulting on his loans. several months later, a winter flood badly damaged the incomplete structure. borchers' failure to complete the project resulted in the state taking over construction and completing the bridge using prison labor. the antelope hill highway bridge was finally opened to traffic on august 18, 1915. the event was marked with a celebratory gala picnic attended by thousands of individuals.  the bridge was originally part of the main highway between yuma and phoenix, known as the ocean to ocean highway. the route also carried several auto trails such as the
dixie overland highway, bankhead highway and old spanish trail. it was partly rebuilt in 1917-1918 after the 1916 flood washed away the northern approach to the bridge; the modification added five more concrete spans and a wooden trestle. washouts and destruction of the bridge by flooding were common due to its placement on a weak soil area along the gila river floodplain. damage to the bridge came to be expected every time a major flood event occurred on the lower gila river. two particularly large floods in november 1919 and february 1920 not only damaged the bridge but completely submerged it as well as washed out a large section of the highway it served. this led to the arizona highway department deciding to construct an entirely different route to bypass the floodplain all together. in 1922, construction of an alternate route through gila bend was completed. the new route crossed the gila river with a concrete apron at the foot of the gillespie dam. the apron itself would be replaced five years later by the new gillespie dam bridge. this effectively ended the purpose for which the antelope hill highway bridge was constructed. the alternate route became the new main highway to phoenix and was designated as part of u.s. route 80 in 1926. us 80 would later be replaced by interstate 8.  despite no longer being the main route between yuma and phoenix, the antelope hill highway bridge was still utilized as the main route for traffic traveling north from yuma. however, costly flood damage continued, causing the antelope hill highway bridge to be completely abandoned in 1929. it replaced by the mcphaul suspension bridge as the main north-south auto connection from yuma. the new bridge later became part of u.s. route 95 before being abandoned itself. despite total abandonment, the antelope hill highway bridge has been listed on the national register of historic places since june 28, 1979. where the replacement mcphaul bridge and gillespie dam bridge are still intact, the years of flood damage and abandonment have left what remains of the antelope hill highway bridge in ruins. the remains of the antelope hill highway bridge can be accessed by foot from roll road, but are impassible to vehicles. the antelope hill highway bridge is one of only three surviving twin concrete girder bridges in arizona, with the other two being the santa cruz bridge and hell canyon bridge.  see also  agua caliente, arizona - ghost town once served by the bridge.  gillespie dam bridge  ocean to ocean bridge  mcphaul suspension bridge  dixie overland highway  bankhead highway  old spanish trail (auto trail)  antelope hill, arizona  list of bridges
on the national register of historic places in arizona  national register of historic places listings in yuma county, arizona  references  road bridges on the national register of historic places in arizona bridges completed in 1915 buildings and structures in yuma county, arizona bridges over the gila river former road bridges in the united states concrete bridges in the united states girder bridges in the united states road bridges in arizona
trump: surviving at the top is a 1990 book written by businessman donald trump and journalist charles leerhsen, and published by random house. in 1991, warner books purchased the paperback rights to the book and re-released it as the art of survival.  the photograph used for the book's cover was originally taken by michael o'brien for an article of fortune magazine published on september 11, 1989. the photograph was later installed at the national portrait gallery after trump was elected the 45th president of the united states.  synopsis  the book serves as a continuation and response to trump: the art of the deal. in the introduction to the book, trump wrote "looking back on it, i see that writing the art of the deal was one of the most satisfying and fulfilling experiences of my life." trump also commented on the debt that he faced after writing the art of the deal, as well as the problematic relationship of his then-wife ivana trump, claiming that his relationship with marla maples was "not the cause of the trouble between ivana and me".  writing and publication  trump wrote the book with charles leerhsen, who also worked as a senior writer for newsweek at the time. trump had considered naming the book everybody hates a winner, stating that he sensed "a lot of jealousy and hostility from many people i do business with or see socially." as the book was being written, trump was unsure if he would include details regarding his troubled marriage to ivana trump.  peter osnos, the book's editor, said in june 1990 that the book was being updated repeatedly. editing of the book was completed on july 16, 1990. the book had initially been scheduled for release in october 1990, but was instead released in august 1990, because of the declining condition of trump's finances and his separation from ivana trump. because of the success of the art of the deal, random house published and distributed approximately 500,000 copies of surviving at the top. after the book's release, trump stated that it was "a transitional book," and that his next book "will be the real story, describing my comeback and the success of it all."  warner books paid random house nearly $1 million for the paperback rights. warner books released the paperback version in july 1991, with a new title: the art of survival. laurence kirshbaum, the then-president of warner books, said, "we really thought 'the art of survival' was a more apt representation of what has happened in trump's career recently."
a new introduction was written by trump for the paperback version.  reception  john rothchild, writing for the los angeles times, noted the different writing styles between trump's first two books due to the change in trump's ghostwriter. rothchild also commented that trump featured more pictures of himself with celebrities than his actual buildings. meanwhile, gary bells of fortune commented that trump "taking the blame for mistakes is just not his style." michael lewis, writing for the new york times, criticized surviving at the top, believing that the book "is a portrait of an ego gone haywire".  the book spent seven weeks on the new york times best seller list, including two weeks at the number one spot. trump's previous book, the art of the deal, had spent 48 weeks on the list. in october 1990, trump stated that random house expected to sell between 200,000 and 250,000 copies of the book, out of the 500,000 copies.  in january 2017, michael kranish of the washington post contrasted trump's advice in surviving at the top to his later book, think like a billionaire, and commented "to read trump's books is to find a man of contradiction."  references   1990 non-fiction books american memoirs biographies about businesspeople books about companies books about donald trump surviving at the top finance books collaborative non-fiction books random house books self-help books
general sir charles hotham-thompson, 8th baronet (18 june 1729 - 25 january 1794) was a british army officer and member of parliament.  he was the eldest son of sir beaumont hotham, 7th bt., of beverley, in the east riding of yorkshire. he was educated at westminster school (1741-5) and studied law at the middle temple (1742). he was commissioned into the army as an ensign in the 1st foot guards in 1746.  he served with regiment in flanders, where he took part in the battle of lauffeld in 1747 and was appointed aide-de-camp to the earl of albemarle, commander of the british forces in the low countries. during the seven years' war (1754-63) he was firstly aide-de-camp to lord ligonier and then adjutant to the british forces fighting on the continent. he was promoted to colonel in 1762 and given the colonelcy of the 63rd (west suffolk) regiment of foot in 1765.  from 1761 to 1768 he was also the member of parliament for st ives and in 1763 was made a groom of the bedchamber.  in 1768 he transferred as colonel to the 15th regiment of foot and retired to yorkshire, where he succeeded his father in 1771 to the baronetcy and his estate near beverley. he took the additional name of thompson on inheriting the thompson estates in yorkshire from his wife's family in 1772 (reverting to hotham in 1787) and commissioned thomas atkinson of york to rebuild dalton hall between 1771 and 1775. he was knighted kb in 1772.  promoted major-general in 1772, he retired from the army in 1775, was gazetted full general (as sir charles thompson, bt) in 1793  and died at dalton hall in 1794. he had married lady dorothy hobart, the daughter of john hobart, 1st earl of buckinghamshire, and had one daughter. he was succeeded as baronet by his brother sir john hotham, 9th baronet.  references         1729 births 1794 deaths people from beverley people educated at westminster school, london members of the middle temple british army generals knights companion of the order of the bath members of the parliament of great britain for st ives british mps 1761-1768 baronets in the baronetage of england
agostinho soares nconco (born 27 january 1990), known simply as nconco, is a guinea-bissauan professional footballer who plays for portuguese club vila real as a left back .  references  external links  1990 births living people bissau-guinean footballers association football defenders guinea-bissau international footballers 2017 africa cup of nations players bissau-guinean expatriate footballers bissau-guinean expatriate sportspeople in mali bissau-guinean expatriate sportspeople in brazil bissau-guinean expatriate sportspeople in portugal expatriate footballers in mali expatriate footballers in brazil expatriate footballers in portugal liga portugal 2 players s.c. covilha players c.d. cinfaes players
kelly forbes mader (february 12, 1952 - june 24, 2016) was an american rancher and politician.  born in sheridan, wyoming, mader was a rancher, auctioneer, and real estate broker. he was also involved with the coal industry. mader lived in campbell county, wyoming. mader served on the wyoming house of representatives in 1983 and 1984 and was a republican. he then served in the wyoming state senate from 1985 to 1991. he died suddenly from a heart attack at his home in college station, texas at age 64. his brother troy mader also served in the wyoming legislature.  notes  1952 births 2016 deaths people from college station, texas people from sheridan, wyoming ranchers from wyoming wyoming republicans members of the wyoming house of representatives wyoming state senators 20th-century american politicians
the jimmy v classic is an annual basketball game organized by espn events to raise money and awareness for cancer research. it is named after jim valvano and features clips from his speech at the 1993 espy awards.  history beginning in 1995 the jimmy v men's classic features four teams in a double header.   the jimmy v women's classic began in 2002 featuring four teams in a double header. in 2005, the women's classic reduced to two teams a year in a single game.  men's yearly results  source:  men's wins by team  women's yearly results  source:  women's wins by team  references  external links jimmy v. classic  recurring sporting events established in 1995 1995 establishments in new jersey college basketball competitions college men's basketball competitions in the united states college women's basketball competitions in the united states annual sporting events in the united states
sir william booth (fl. 1673-1689), captain in the royal navy, was promoted to that rank in june 1673.  later military career after the peace with the dutch he was for several years employed in the mediterranean, and more especially against the algerine pirates.  on 8 april 1681, whilst in command of , he engaged one of these corsairs named the golden horse, a vessel larger, more heavily armed, and with a more numerous ship's company,  the fight was long and bloody; both ships were much shattered, but neither could claim the victory, when a stranger came in sight under turkish colours.  she proved, however, to be the english ship , commanded by captain francis wheler, and to her the golden horse at once submitted without further resistance.  a somewhat acrimonious dispute afterwards arose between the others and men of the two ships as to their relative share in the capture, which also involved john benbow, captain wheler assuming all the honour to himself, and claiming the whole profit of the prize. the question was referred by booth to the admiralty, who, without any evidence beyond booth's partial statement, directed the commander-in-chief to "cause the colours of the golden horse to be delivered to captain booth as a mark of honour which we judge he hath well deserved", and also an appointed share of the value of the prize.  in 1683 he commanded ; in september 1688 he was appointed to the 70-gun ; and in the following february, having given in his allegiance to king william, he was knighted and appointed commissioner of the navy.  it would appear that his profession of allegiance was but a  blind to enable him the better to act as agent to the exiled james; for on 16 march he went down the river to the pendennis, then lying at sheerness, and endeavoured by his personal influence and promises of money to persuade the lieutenants to agree with him in carrying over the ship to france; the plot also involved carrying over the fireship , commanded by captain wilford, who seemed to acquiesce. but wilford got too drunk to act the part designed for him, and the lieutenants refused to have anything to do with it, or to let the pendennis go; on which booth, conceiving that he had gone too far, and that the affair could not be kept secret, fled to france.  no account remains of his further life or of his death.  references  dnb references these references are found in the dnb article
referred to above.  external links    year of birth missing year of death missing place of birth unknown royal navy officers 1680s conflicts 17th-century royal navy personnel
jose portugal perez (december 14, 1946 - august 12, 2021) was a filipino lawyer who was appointed associate justice of the supreme court of the philippines in 2009. he had served the supreme court of the philippines administration from 1971, starting as technical assistant and attaining the post of court administrator in 2008.  he is the only member of the bench to be appointed from the administration.  early life and education  perez was born on december 14, 1946. his parents are luciano g. perez and engracia r. portugal, both of ibaan, batangas. he completed his elementary education at st. bridget college in 1959. he then graduated as valedictorian of the batangas city high school in 1963. he completed his bachelor of arts in political science from university of the philippines in 1967 wherein he was one of its top 10 graduates. he was awarded bachelor of laws from university of the philippines college of law in 1971. he was accepted by the phi kappa phi and phi gamma mu honor societies as well as the university's law honor society, the order of the purple feather.  career  fresh from graduation, perez started working at the supreme court of the philippines as technical assistant in 1971. he then moved up, with appointments as legal assistant (1972-1973), judicial assistant (1974-1976) and, in 1977, a confidential attorney in the office of chief justice fred ruiz castro. in 1980 he was the supervising attorney in the office of the chief attorney where he rose to the position of assistant chief. in 1987 he was named a deputy clerk of the court, promoted as assistant court administrator in 1996 then finally as deputy court administrator in 2000. he served as acting court administrator several times before his appointment as court administrator in 2008. following the retirement of associate justice leonardo a. quisumbing on november 6, 2009, perez was appointed by president gloria macapagal arroyo as her 14th appointee to the court.  in 2012, perez was nominated by the asia pacific bar association for appointment to the chief justice position vacated by renato corona.  personal life and death perez was married to expedita sabile and they had three children together.  perez died on august 12, 2021 aged 74.  references  1946 births 2021 deaths university of the philippines alumni associate justices of the supreme court of the philippines people from batangas city
birth of a man () is a 2002 south korean film starring jung joon, hong kyung-in and yeo hyun-soo.  production the team was helped by a legendary korean boxer hong soo-hwan regarding the boxing scenes in the film.  cast   jung joon as jang dae-seong  hong kyung-in as lim man-goo  yeo hyun-soo as kim hae-sam  lee won-jong   kim sa-rang as sa-rang  lee jae-yong as mr. choi  plot to accomplish the 99 year old grandfather's dream of sending young people to university, three men practice boxing to enroll as a boxing student for university.  reception the film was pulled out in a day from theaters citing low performances despite being well received by 10,000 people in its test screening.the decision to pull out only in a day was criticized, and some even made an internet community for the movie to be offered more screenings.  references  external links       man born - and then the movie  man born - mubiseuteu making film for 'birth of a man'  2002 films 2000s sports drama films 2000s korean-language films south korean films south korean sports drama films films directed by park hee-jun 2002 drama films
lofts farm pit is a 4.5 hectare geological site of special scientific interest in heybridge, a suburb of maldon in essex. it is a geological conservation review site.  many fossils have been found at the former gravel pit dating to the last ice age, 110,000 to 12,000 years ago. finds included reindeer, woolly mammoth and woolly rhinoceros. they date to a period when what is now the north sea was doggerland, and the river blackwater was a tributary of the thames/medway river.  the site has been converted into a lake and there is no public access.  references   sites of special scientific interest in essex geological conservation review sites
nanjingese may refer to:   the people or culture of nanjing, china  the dialects spoken in nanjing  nanjing dialect  nanjingese wu dialects
sitgreaves pass is a gap at an elevation of 3,586 feet / 1,093 meters, in the black mountains of mohave county, arizona. when edward fitzgerald beale built beale's wagon road over this pass, he named it john howells pass for one of the men in his expedition in october, 1857.  subsequently, the pass was named for captain lorenzo sitgreaves, of the corps of topographical engineers, who led the 1851  expedition down the zuni and colorado rivers.  sitgreaves' expedition never crossed the black mountains by this pass, but did farther north, at secret pass or at union pass.  under the mistaken impression sitgreaves and his expedition had crossed this pass, the name was given to it by lieutenant joseph christmas ives of the corps of topographical engineers in march 1858, as he passed eastward to survey the colorado plateau on his way to fort defiance, following his exploration of the colorado river.  references  mountain passes of arizona landforms of mohave county, arizona
jorel's brother () is a brazilian  animated television series created by juliano enrico and produced by copa studio for cartoon network brazil since 2012. the series debuted on september 22, 2014, and is notable for being the first animated production exclusively produced by cartoon network latin america (although their first very original production was the short series santo vs the clones), in which was confirmed that the show premiere in the region on february 2, 2015.  on december 8, 2015, it was announced that jorel's brother had been renewed for a second season. on may 25, 2017, the series was renewed for a third season. on may 25, 2017, the series was renewed for a third season.  series overview  {|class="wikitable plainrowheaders" style="text-align:center;" !colspan="2" rowspan="2"|season !rowspan="2"|episodes !colspan="2"|originally aired |- !first aired !last aired |- | scope="row" style=background:#66b3ff; color:white"| | 1 | 26 |  |  |- | scope="row" style=background:#fade04; color:white"| | 2 | 26 |  |  |- | scope="row" style=background:#fb5470; color:white"| | 3 | 26 |  |  |- | scope="row" style=background:#339b67; color:white"| | 4 | 26 |  |  |}  episodes  season 1 (2014-15)  season 2 (2016-17)  shorts (2017)  references   lists of brazilian television series episodes lists of animated television series episodes lists of children's television series episodes
warrior arena is an ice hockey arena and practice facility in brighton, boston, massachusetts. the arena is part of a larger mixed-use development being constructed by new balance at boston landing that includes the headquarters of new balance and that will also include shops, a hotel and the practice facility for both the boston bruins and a separate one for the boston celtics next door (the auerbach center). the arena is named after new balance's warrior sports brand, which is the brand new balance uses for their hockey products.    warrior arena is the home arena of the boston pride of the national women's hockey league and the practice facility of the boston bruins of the national hockey league who moved in from harvard university's bright-landry hockey center, and ristuccia ice arena in wilmington, massachusetts respectively.  public transit to the facility is via the mbta boston landing station, a station on the mbta commuter rail system's framingham/worcester line. groundbreaking took place in december 2014, with the completed facility hosting its grand opening on september 8, 2016.  references  external links warrior ice arena page at boston landing  2016 establishments in massachusetts boston bruins boston landing boston pride indoor ice hockey venues in massachusetts national hockey league practice facilities new balance sports venues completed in 2016 sports venues in boston
mitrea cocor is a 1953 romanian war drama film directed by victor iliu and marieta sadova. it is based on the 1949 socialist realist novel of the same name by mihail sadoveanu. a poor young romanian goes off to fight during the second world war, and returns home at the same time as the red army advances into the country.  cast  toma dimitriu  constantin ramadan   cornel rusu   marieta sadova   dem savu   septimiu sever   aurelia sorescu   ion talianu   nicolae tomazoglu   george manu   andrei codarcea   vasile lazarescu   nucu paunescu   titus laptes   maria voluntaru   gheorghe ionescu-gion   ion henter  references  bibliography   liehm, mira & liehm, antonin j. the most important art: eastern european film after 1945. university of california press, 1977.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films romanian drama films romanian films romanian-language films world war ii films films directed by victor iliu romanian political films romanian black-and-white films
al-muqtataf (arabic: المقتطف; dmg: al-muqtataf; english: "the digest") was an arabic journal of popular science. the journal was published monthly from 1876 to 1952 in beirut and cairo with a total of 121 issues.  along with al-manar and al-hilal, it was one of the arab world's three most popular journals in the early 20th century.  publication history al-muqtataf was founded in 1876 by the arabic christians yaqʿub sarruf (1852-1927) and faris nimr (1856-1951) at the syrian protestant college (spc, today american university of beirut) in beirut. both of them graduated there with a bachelor of arts degree in science and worked afterwards as lecturers. sarruf, who had made a name himself as an important science journalist and promoter of the modern arabic literature, was interested predominantly in scientific and literary topics. nimr, on the other hand, dedicated himself additionally to current politics. the third publisher sahin makariyus (1853-1910) who was also a journalist, was responsible for the printing technology, and he developed this already in the production of the journals nasra al-usbuʿiya (1871) and at- tabib (1884-1885).  the publishing course was apparently not planned from the beginning since the volumes are not furnished with a date till the fourth year. the chronology was published until 1885 only according to gregorian calendar later the islamic dating was also added. besides syria and egypt the issues were also distributed in iraq, iran, yemen]] and were spread in numerous european countries, in the usa, canada, latin america, australia as well as in india and china.  in 1882, the journal attracted controversy when it published a speech by an spc professor named edwin lewis. the speech made favorable references to darwinism, and was opposed by religiously conservative authorities at spc. in addition, another christian journal al bashir'''s editor louis cheikho harshly criticised the articles on darwin published in al-muqtataf. the editors of al-muqtataf were accused of being atheists by al bashir. the accusations of two journals each other lasted until 1884, and the incident became known not only in the region, but also in europe. the problem was solved the same year only through the intervention of the ottomans who asked the editors through the directorate of foreign affairs and publications in beirut to
stop accusing each other if they did not want to be subject to the bans or penalty. such oppositions led sarruf and nimr to migrate to cairo in 1884 where they produced the journal in a private printing press owned by makariyus. one of the contributors in cairo was may ziadeh, a palestinian feminist writer. in addition, sarruf and nimr published simultaneously the daily newspaper al-muqattam (1889-1952), the monthly journal al-lataʾif (1886-1896) and garidat as-sudan (the sudan times, 1903) in cairo.  contental-muqtataf was not a political but rather an encyclopaedic journal that followed european and american examples. the new yorker weekly journal american artisan'' for "arts, mechanics, manufactures, engineering, chemistry, inventions and patents" provided the logo of crossed hammer and feather, which was copied at the title page till the 1890s. at first the subheading was "garida ʿilmiya sinaʿiya" ("journal for science and industry") which indicates that current politics was for the most part neglected.  the publishers' aim was to inform the reader in the arab world about the western scientific progress of that time and how to use that knowledge in one's daily life. the scientific and literary topics of the journal were varied. articles on modern sciences were published, from anatomy to astronomy and from physics to veterinary medicine as well as agriculture and handicraft. evolutionary theory and darwinism obtained great significance in the first years of publication and resulted in excited discussions among the authors and readers. cultural and social topics as well as literature gained over the time more relevance, and translations of european literature were increasingly published.  the rubric for disputation and correspondence (bab al-munazara wa-l-murasala) and the column for questions and answers (masaʿil wa-agwibatuha) enabled and promoted social, scientific and political debates. authors and readers could express their opinions, debate with other authors or ask questions. the importance of interaction with the readership is also evident in numerous reader surveys, its results were continuously published.  it was also important for the authors to complement the articles with numerous illustrations, first in black and white and from 1926 on for the first time coloured. from march 1885 a lot of advertisements appeared, from october 1886 they were published in arabic and english in many pages for a wider public. all in all this encyclopaedic educational journal, the
only one of its kind, had remarkable influence on numerous scientific, social and political debates in the arab world. due to its publications scientific fields, european literature as well as social topics could gain popularity and broadly be discussed.  references  external links  1876 establishments in the ottoman empire 1952 disestablishments in egypt arabic-language magazines defunct magazines published in egypt education magazines magazines established in 1876 magazines disestablished in 1952 magazines published in beirut magazines published in cairo monthly magazines published in egypt popular science magazines monthly magazines published in lebanon
cylindrepomus hayashi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by hudepohl in 1987.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1987
the office for women is a department of the australian government "to deliver policies and programmes to advance gender equality and improve the lives of australian women"  history in march 1983 the office of women's affairs changed its name to the office of the status of women. susan ryan was the first federal australian labor party (alp) female minister, appointed as minister for education and youth affairs and minister assisting the prime minister for the status of women in bob hawke's first ministry in 1983.  ryan wrote after hawke's death in 2019: as the first (and only) woman in a federal labor cabinet, i lost quite a few battles and budget bids, and endured some tough treatment. but i never lost a debate in cabinet because of sexism or misogyny. bob never dealt with me or my proposals through a derogatory gender lens, and he set the tone.  dr anne summers was appointed to run the office of the status of women in december 1983, a position she occupied for about three years. significant reforms in these years that benefited women included the sex discrimination act 1984, the affirmative action (equal opportunity for women in employment) act 1986 and a massive increase in spending on childcare.  on 26 october 2004, under the liberal national party (lnp) government of prime minister john howard, the office was transferred from the department of the prime minister and cabinet to the department of family and community services, changing its name to the office for women.  in 2013, under lnp prime minister tony abbott, a number of federal government departments were restructured, including the department of the prime minister and cabinet which took responsibility for the office of the status of women.  reports in december 2017, the office for women released the report, "gender balance on australian government boards report 2016-17" to show "the government's performance against its gender diversity target on australian government boards."  the report found that:on 1 july 2016, the government set a target of women holding 50% of australian government board positions overall, and at least 40% representation of women and 40% representation of men on individual boards. as at 30 june 2017, women held 42.7% of australian government board positions. this is the highest outcome since public reporting on the gender balance of government boards began in 2011. statistics on new appointments made in 2016-17 show how individual portfolios have progressed towards meeting the target. of the 729 new appointments made in 2016-17, 46.2% of appointees were women. for seven of the 18 government portfolios, women comprised over
50% of new board appointments during 2016-17.  see also  women in australia women and gender equality canada formally known as status of women canada  references  women in australia gender equality
una notte, un sogno (one night, a dream) is a 1988 italian comedy film directed by massimo manuelli and starring sergio rubini.  plot turin, italy late 1980s. a young woman, bored and disturbed by the behavior of her husband and friends, decide to leave the villa in which he lives to go in the town. on the road she is attacked by a group of young thugs, but a photographer saves her. this man, just before this meeting, he witnessed a crime committed by the chinese mafia, so he is forced into hiding. between the two fugitives born solidarity, which soon turned into a feeling. but the short love story, which has as its backdrop the nocturnal environments of turin, will fade away at dawn to the porta nuova train station, on a train leaving for narvik. the photographer must escape: it is a witness too dangerous. she tries to reunite with him.  cast  sergio rubini as bruno  claire nebout as silvia  hugues quester  laura d'arista  rodolfo traversa  pietro molino  quinto cavallera   franco vaccaro  john chen  release the film was premiered in italy in turin on may 4, 1988  see also    list of italian films of 1988  references  external links  1988 films 1988 comedy films italian films italian comedy films italian-language films films set in turin
highland reel (foaled 21 february 2012) is an irish thoroughbred racehorse. in a career running from june 2014 to december 2017 he raced in ireland, britain, france, the united states, australia, hong kong and dubai, and recorded seven victories at group 1 or grade 1 level in the secretariat stakes, hong kong vase (twice), king george vi & queen elizabeth stakes, breeders' cup turf, coronation cup and prince of wales's stakes. he was also placed in the prix du jockey club, cox plate, international stakes, prix de l'arc de triomphe and champion stakes. he holds the record for the greatest amount of prize money earned by a racehorse trained in europe.  background highland reel is a bay horse with a white blaze and a white sock on his right hind leg bred in ireland by the hveger syndicate. he was sired by galileo, who won the derby, irish derby and king george vi and queen elizabeth stakes in 2001. galileo is now one of the world's leading stallions and has been champion sire of great britain and ireland five times. his other progeny include cape blanco, frankel, golden lilac, nathaniel, new approach, rip van winkle and ruler of the world. highland reel's dam hveger was an australian mare who finished third in the australasian oaks in 2005. as a daughter of the ajc oaks winner circles of gold she was a full-sister to elvstroem and a close relative of starspangledbanner.  as a yearling in october 2013 highland reel was offered for sale at tattersalls and was bought for 460,000 guineas by the bloodstock agent john warren on behalf of john magnier's coolmore stud. highland reel entered training with aidan o'brien at ballydoyle. like many coolmore horses, the exact details of highland reel's ownership have changed from race to race: he has raced in the colours of michael tabor, derrick smith and the partnership of tabor, smith and susan magnier.  racing career  2014: two-year-old season on his first racecourse appearance, highland reel contested a seven furlong maiden race at leopardstown racecourse on 12 june and finished strongly to take second place, beaten three quarters of a length by the dermot weld-trained tombelaine. nineteen days later the colt started 8/15 favourite in a one-mile maiden at gowran park. ridden by his trainer's son joseph o'brien he took the lead two furlongs out and drew away from his opponents to win "easily" by twelve lengths from taq
aseem. on 30 july highland reel was stepped up in class when he was sent to england for the group three vintage stakes over seven furlongs at goodwood racecourse. with joseph o'brien again in the saddle he started the 10/11 favourite with the best of his seven opponents appearing to be ahlan emarati (placed in the norfolk stakes and railway stakes). after racing in mid-division he took the lead inside the final furlong and won by two and a quarter lengths from tupi.  2015: three-year-old season highland reel began his second season with two races in france, both of them at group one level. on 10 may, despite an absence of nine and a half months he started favourite for the poule d'essai des poulains over 1600 metres at longchamp racecourse but finished sixth of the eighteen runners behind make believe. three weeks later he contested the prix du jockey club over 2000 metres at chantilly racecourse and finished second, beaten one and a half lengths by new bay. four weeks later highland reel started the 11/4 second favourite behind jack hobbs in the irish derby at the curragh. he sweated up before the race and finished fifth of the eight runners. after three consecutive group one races, highland reel was dropped in class for the group three gordon stakes at goodwood on 29 july in which he was ridden by joseph o'brien and started the 7/4 favourite. the best-fancied of his eight rivals were medrano (glasgow stakes), scottish (runner-up in the king george v stakes) and disegno (third to golden horn in the feilden stakes). after being hampered in the early stages, highland reel settled in fourth place before moving forward in the straight, taking the lead inside the final furlong and winning by one and a half lengths from scottish.  in august highland reel was sent to the united states for the grade i secretariat stakes at arlington park in which he was ridden by seamie heffernan. he started second favourite behind the belmont derby winner force the pass whilst the other runners included green dispatch (prix de guiche) from france and goldstream (derby italiano) from italy. in a race run in heavy rain, highland reel went to the front from the start, set a steady pace, accelerated on the final turn and drew away to win by five and a quarter lengths from closing bell. after race heffernan said that the colt "won easy", while aidan o'brien's assistant t j comeford commented "there was so little pace in
the race, if we couldn't make the lead and then make all, we didn't deserve to win". on his return to europe he started the 16/1 outsider in an exceptionally strong seven-runner field for the irish champion stakes and finished fifth behind golden horn, found, free eagle and pleascach.  highland reel's travels continued in october when he was shipped to australia to contest the cox plate over 2000 metres at moonee valley racecourse, a race which his stable had won with adelaide in 2014. ridden by moore, he raced close behind the leaders but was unable to make any significant progress in the closing stages and finished third of the fourteen runners behind winx. on his final appearance of the season the colt ran in the hong kong vase at sha tin racecourse and started the 5/1 second favourite behind flintshire. the other runners included cirrus des aigles, dominant (winner of the race in 2013), cannock chase (canadian international stakes), dariyan (prix eugene adam) preferment (turnbull stakes) and ming dynasty (prix du conseil de paris). after taking an early lead he was settled in third place by ryan moore before producing a strong late run in the straight. he overtook flintshire inside the last 200 metres and won by one and a half lengths with dariyan taking third ahead of ming dynasty. after the race moore commented "he really wanted it. flintshire is a very high-class horse and he takes a lot of beating in races like this. he has had plenty of exposure around the world and a lot of experience."  2016: four-year-old season highland reel began his third season with a journey to the united arab emirates for the dubai sheema classic on 26 march and finished fourth behind postponed, duramente and last impact. he was back in hong kong in april for the queen elizabeth ii cup but met trouble in running and finished eighth behind werther. at royal ascot in june he ran in europe for the first time in nine months when he was ridden by heffernan in the group two hardwicke stakes. in a closely contested finish he was beaten a head into second place by the queen's colt dartmouth after heffernan dropped his whip a quarter of a mile from the finish.  on 23 july, over the same course and distance, highland reel faced a rematch with dartmouth in britain's most prestigious weight-for-age race, the king george vi and queen elizabeth stakes. the other five runners were erupt (grand prix de paris), wings of desire
(dante stakes, fourth in the 2016 epsom derby), sir isaac newton (international stakes, wolferton handicap), western hymn (brigadier gerard stakes, prix eugene adam, gordon richards stakes) and second step (jockey club stakes, grosser preis von berlin). starting the 13/8 favourite he led from the start and set a steady pace from erupt, wings of desire and sir isaac newton. in the straight he held off a sustained challenge from wings of desire to win by one and a quarter lengths with dartmouth two and three quarter lengths back in third place. highland reel was then dropped in distance for the international stakes over ten and a half furlongs at york racecourse and started the 6/1 joint second favourite behind postponed. ridden by heffernan, he was among the leaders from the start and stayed on well in the straight to finish second behind the favourite with the grey gatsby, hawkbill and wings of desire unplaced.  highland reel reappeared in a strong renewal of the irish champion stakes on 10 september when he was ridden by colm o'donoghue. he briefly took the lead in the straight but was outpaced in the closing stages and finished seventh behind the french colt almanzor. on 2 october the colt was ridden by heffernan and started a 24/1 for the 2016 prix de l'arc de triomphe which was run at chantilly as longchamp was closed for redevelopment. after tracking the leaders he stayed on strongly in the straight to finish second, a length and three quarters behind his stablemate found.  on 5 november at santa anita park highland reel, ridden by heffernan, started third favourite behind flintshire and found for the $4 million breeders' cup turf. the other nine runners included ectot, ashleyluvssugar (del mar handicap), da big hoss (american st. leger stakes), mondialiste (arlington million), ulysses (an improving three-year-old from europe) and the veteran twilight eclipse (man o' war stakes). breaking quickly from an outside draw, highland reel took the lead soon after the start and set a steady pace before kicking seven lengths clear of his opponents at half way. he maintained a clear advantage into the straight and stayed on to win by one and three quarter lengths from flintshire, with found staying on to take third place. after the race aidan o'brien said "we knew that he gets a mile-and-a-half well, that he handles fast ground and doesn't mind dictating, so it was
straightforward really, but seamus executed it brilliantly. he controlled the race perfectly. he kicked at the right time, and really the race was over from a long way out... he's an incredibly versatile horse that loves travelling".  as in the previous year, highland reel ended his season with a run in the hong kong vase and started the 1/2 favourite to repeat his 2015 success. ridden by moore, he went to the front from the start, regained the advantage after being headed by the british-trained big orange, and galloped three lengths clear of his rivals in the straight. he looked certain to win but was overtaken in the final strides and beaten half a length by the japanese challenger satono crown with a gap of almost seven lengths back to one foot in heaven in third place.  2017: five-year-old season as in the previous year, highland reel began his 2017 campaign with a run in the dubai sheema classic in march. starting the 5/2 second favourite he took the early lead but faded badly after being headed in the straight and finished last of the seven runners behind jack hobbs. on his first start after his return to europe highland reel started the 9/4 favourite in the coronation cup at epsom racecourse on 2 june. a technical fault on the plane scheduled to deliver the horse to epsom meant that he arrived at the course much later than expected. his nine rivals included journey, hawkbill, us army ranger, idaho and the improving handicapper frontiersman. ridden by moore, he set the pace as usual, saw off a sustained challenge from hawkbill and stayed on well to win by one and three quarter lengths from frontiersman. after the race o'brien said "i'm delighted with him, he's obviously gone through a lot today, and just before the race, but ryan gave him a great ride. he hadn't run since dubai, but he was brilliant... he's an amazing horse this, he's tough, he has tactical speed and he stays."  on his next appearance highland reel was dropped back to ten furlongs for a rematch with jack hobbs in the prince of wales's stakes at royal ascot. the other six runners included ulysses, decorated knight (tattersalls gold cup), mekhtaal (prix d'ispahan) and queen's trust (breeders' cup filly and mare turf). after racing in second behind the pacemaker scottish he took the lead in the straight but was immediately challenged by ulysses and decorated knight. he lost the lead inside the final furlong but rallied to regain
the advantage and pulled ahead to win by one and a quarter lengths from decorated knight.  in breeders' cup turf, highland reel finished in third, behind the godolphin owned talismanic. in his final race, highland reel won his second hong kong vase by defeating talismanic.  assessment in the 2015 world's best racehorse rankings highland reel was rated the eleventh-best three-year-old colt and the twenty-seventh best racehorse in the world.  in the 2016 edition of the world's best racehorse rankings highland reel was given a rating of 123, making him the 12th best racehorse in the world.  in the 2017 world's best racehorse rankings, highland reel was rated the twelfth-best horse in the world, and the joint-best horse in ireland.  pedigree  references  external links  career 1-2-3 colour chart - highland reel  2012 racehorse births racehorses bred in ireland racehorses trained in ireland thoroughbred family 22-b breeders' cup turf winners king george vi and queen elizabeth stakes winners
the making of the mob is an american television docu-series detailing the emergence of organized crime in 20th-century america. the series premiered on june 15, 2015, on amc, and is narrated by actor ray liotta. the series also features intercuts within each episode of archival footage and interviews with historians, authors, actors, law enforcement personnel, and family members. on july 31, 2015, amc renewed the series for a second season of eight episodes, which premiered on july 11, 2016.  overview  season 1 (2015)  the first season, subtitled new york, highlighted lucky luciano, his rise in the new york city mafia, and the creation of the five families.  season 2 (2016)  the second season, subtitled chicago, focuses on the origin of al capone, his chicago outfit, and their expansion into the midwestern u.s.  production on january 10, 2015, amc ordered the series as a "special event" miniseries to air in mid-2015. on july 31, 2015, two weeks after the series premiere, amc renewed it for a second season to air in mid-2016.  reception the first season received mixed responses from television critics and a metacritic score of 59 out of 100, based on six reviews, indicating "mixed or average reviews". the review aggregator website rotten tomatoes reported a 40% "rotten" critics rating based on five reviews.  references  external links  2015 american television series debuts 2016 american television series endings amc (tv channel) original programming 2010s american crime drama television series 2010s american documentary television series cultural depictions of american men cultural depictions of gangsters english-language television shows historical television series period television series television series about organized crime works about the american mafia
this article provides a list of genetic engineering software.  cloud-based freemium software  varstation ngs variants processing and analysis tool  basespace variant interpreter by illumina  closed-source software  bluetractorsoftware dnadynamo  agilent technologies rflp decoder software, fish species  applied biosystems genemapper  joint bioenergy institute j5  clc bio clc dna workbench software  clc bio clc free workbench software  clc bio clc sequence viewer  clc bio protein workbench software  dnastar lasergene  geneious  labvantage solutions inc. labvantage sapphire  labvantage solutions inc. lv lims  snapgene  the generecommender  open-source software autodesk genetic constructor (suspended) biofab clotho biofab edition  biofab biofab studio  egf codons and egf cuba (collection of useful biological apps) by the edinburgh genome foundry  integrative genomics viewer (part of google genomics)  mengqvist's dnapy  see also  geppetto (3d engine); an open-source 3d engine for genetic engineering-related functions;also used in the openworm project  bioinformatics software  software e genetic
sycamore corner is an extinct town that was located in jordan township in warren county, indiana, between the towns of stewart and judyville.  even though the community no longer exists, it is still cited by the usgs.  geography sycamore corner was at the intersection of county roads 300 north and 600 west, roughly two miles west of judyville.  references  former populated places in warren county, indiana ghost towns in indiana
live from philadelphia is the fourth  live album by american singer and songwriter john legend.  track listing "do u wanna ride" "heaven" "stereo" "let's get lifted" "alright" "number one" "save room" "where is the love" "i can change" "i want you (she's so heavy)" "slow dance" "dance to the music" "again" "p.d.a. (we just don't care)" "feel like makin' love medley" "used to love u" "ordinary people" "coming home" "show me" (encore) "so high" (encore)  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  2008 live albums john legend albums
olenecamptus indicus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. the species was first described by stephan von breuning in 1936, originally under the genus cylindrepomus.  they have since been reclassified as part of the olenecamptus genus.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
alencier ley lopez is an indian film and theatre actor, who appears in malayalam films. lopez made his debut in the 1998 film daya; and he worked in films like annayum rasoolum (2013), njan steve lopez (2013), and maheshinte prathikaaram (2016). at the 48th kerala state film awards, he won the best character actor award for his performance in thondimuthalum driksakshiyum (2017).  personal life  alencier ley lopez is from a latin catholic family from puthenthope, a coastal village in thiruvananthapuram, kerala. he graduated from st. xavier's college, thumba and university college thiruvananthapuram. alencier is married to suseela george, a mathematics teacher. the couple has two sons alen savio lopez and alen steve lopez.  acting career  early years in theatre lopez developed a passion for theatre early in life after witnessing the leyon lopez nadakaolsavam (theatre festival). his theatre debut was at the age of five. later lopez and some friends formed their own troupe - the netaji theatre, directing and acting in their own plays. after graduating school lopez decided to chase a career as an actor or a priest. in college he partnered with various theatre troupes such as c. p. krishnakumar's troupe, kavalam narayana panicker's sopanam and k. raghu's natakayogam. he continued his career in theatre until the platforms of performance arts were taken over by scene platforms film and television.  films  lopez was introduced to films by cinematographer-director venu in his directorial debutdaya in 1998. he played one of the leads in k. r. manoj's kanyaka talkies (2013), which was screened in major film festivals and received critical applause. then in vedivazhipadu (2013), as a typical south kerala brahmin. in 2013, director rajiv ravi cast him in annayum rasoolum starring fahadh faasil and later in njan steve lopez (2014). in 2015, lopez starred in maheshinte prathikaaram (2015) at the recommendation of fahadh fazil which was his first major break. in 2017, he did a role in the film thondi muthalum drisakhsiyum, directed by dileesh pothan.  sexual harassment allegations divya gopinath, who worked with him on abhasam, alleged that he sexually harassed her on the sets of the film. the director of aabhasam claimed that al
encier came drunk to the sets and messed up many of the shots which affected the continuity of the shooting. another american woman was also allegedly harassed by lopez when he was in the united states filming for monsoon mangoes.  filmography  awards kerala state film award for best character actor : thondimuthalum driksakshiyum filmfare award for best supporting actor - malayalam : thondimuthalum driksakshiyum flowers indian film awards - best supporting actor: thondimuthalum driksakshiyum asianet film awards 2018  - best supporting actor: thondimuthalum driksakshiyum cpc cine awards 2017- best character artist: thondimuthalum driksakshiyum  references  external links    https://www.cinemaexpress.com/malayalam/videos/2021/dec/17/appan-trailer-sunny-wayne-starrer-promises-a-dark-comedy-on-parent-child-conflict-28500.html  https://www.newindianexpress.com/entertainment/malayalam/2021/dec/18/appan-trailer-sunny-wayne-majus-dark-comedy-delves-into-parent-child-conflicts-2396740.html  https://www.koimoi.com/south-indian-cinema/alencier-ley-lopez-apologises-to-venu-after-director-raises-the-issue-with-the-association-of-malayalam-movie-artists-amma/  https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/entertainment/malayalam/movies/news/sunny-waynes-film-appan-is-getting-ready-makers-announce-an-exciting-update/articleshow/88540639.cms  https://www.thehindu.com/entertainment/movies/in-conversation-with-state-film-award-winner-alencier-ley-lopez/article23379621.ece  https://www.newindianexpress.com/entertainment/malayalam/2016/oct/25/acting-with-the-superstars-1531804.html  https://www.newindianexpress.com/entertainment/malayalam/2021/sep/04/trailer-of-rajeev-ravis-true-
crime-drama-kuttavum-shikshayum-lands-2353997.html  https://english.mathrubhumi.com/news/kerala/actor-alencier-launches-complaint-against-gouging-out-eyes-remark-1.2317741  https://indianexpress.com/article/entertainment/malayalam/manju-warrier-withdraws-chathur-mukham-from-theatres-promises-to-re-release-when-its-safe-7285835/  1965 births living people indian male film actors indian male stage actors male actors in malayalam cinema malayalam comedians male actors from thiruvananthapuram 20th-century indian male actors 21st-century indian male actors
club sportivo alsina, or simply sportivo alsina is an argentine sports club from valentin alsina, buenos aires that played in tournaments organised by the argentine football association from the 1920s to the 1940s, even reaching the primera division in 1933 and 1934.  the club is headquartered on the corner of choele choel and juan domingo peron streets in valentin alsina.  although football is no longer practised at competitive levels in sportivo alsina, the club hosts the practise of other disciplines such as baby football, basketball, roller skating and volleyball.  history   the club was established on october 17, 1916 in valentin alsina district of greater buenos aires under the name "el aeroplano", in 1922 the football section separated from the club, adopting the name "sportivo alsina" honoring the district where the club had been established.  the football squad began to compete that same year, achieving its first title in 1925 when the team won the tercera division championship organised by dissident asociacion amateurs de football (aam).  in 1932 the club won the division intermedia (the third level by then) championship, which allowed sportivo alsina to play at primera division. one year later, the club would win another tercera division championship playing with a reserve team.  sportivo alsina debuted in the argentine top division, primera division, in 1933 where the squad finished 5° of 20 teams. sportivo alsina continued to play at the top-flight until 1934 where all the clubs of the amateur league (afa) were relegated as it merged with the professional one, liga argentina de football.  sportivo alsina disaffiliated from the association in 1948. since then, the institution has focused on several disciplines, practised at amateur level.  notable players  angel grippa, the team's goalkeeper, was part of the argentina national team at the 1934 fifa world cup. in 1936 and 1941 sportivo alsina would win two championships else in the third division of argentine football league system.  honours   division intermedia (1): 1932  primera c (4): 1925 aam, 1933 , 1936, 1941  notes  references  external links     association football clubs established in 1916 football clubs disaffiliated from the argentine football association lanus partido
pompeo ferrari (circa 1660 - 15 may 1736) was an italian architect, known as the best baroque artist of greater poland.  biography  he studied in the leading art school of the era - accademia di san luca in rome. after 1696, he lived in the court of the king stanislaus i leszczynski in rydzyna. in 1703 he married anna rozyna eitner, with whom he had several children.  main works   leszno town hall (disputed) and tombs in the parish church  urban foundation of rydzyna  lad abbey  basilica on the holy mountain near gostyn   teodor potocki's chapel at the cathedral in gniezno   fara church in poznan  bibliography dalbor, witold. 1938. pompeo ferrari ok. 1660-1736: działalnosc architektoniczna w polsce. warszawa: kasa mianowskiego.  1736 deaths polish baroque architects italian baroque architects year of birth uncertain
blackass is a novel by nigerian author a. igoni barrett. it was released in the united kingdom and nigeria in 2015, and 2016 in the united states. it received mixed reviews.  plot summary the novel concerns furo wariboko, a nigerian man, who wakes up one day to discover that he has become white.  reception reviewing blackass in the financial times, jon day wrote: "from the first sentence, kafka's the metamorphosis confronts you with the inherent strangeness of the pact you make when you read fiction. gregor samsa has become an insect, kafka says. suspend your disbelief. take it or leave it. a igoni barrett's first novel - his third book - demands a similar response....to read him only as a nigerian writer would be to do him a disservice. for blackass is a strange, compelling novel, and barrett has something to tell us all." writing in the guardian, helon habila said: "igoni barrett's greatest asset is his ability to satirise the ridiculous extents people, especially lagosians, go to in order to appear important." claire fallon for the huffington post concluded: "blackass is a blunt, transparently written novel - the kind that makes the reader feel as though they're standing inside the skin of the character, going about his day with him - and though the topic could easily be that of a polemic, it's also a subtle, circumspect novel about the intersecting, sometimes mutually exclusive needs humans have for family and connection, and for status and power." aaron bady of okayafrica calls it "the most unapologetically nigerian book that american publishers have published in a long time, and as the 'afropolitan' has become an increasingly omnipresent strand of contemporary african literature, there has been a steady backlash, both against the afropolitan as such, and against the entire category of african immigrant literature.  in 2016 blackass won the people's literature publishing house and the chinese foreign literature society's 21st century best foreign novel award. it was nominated for the inaugural ft/oppenheimerfunds emerging voices awards, the 2017 pen open book award, the 2015 kitschies golden tentacle award, and the inaugural nommo award for best novel. in 2017 it was nominated for a hurston/wright legacy award in the debut fiction category.  references  2015 nigerian novels 2015 debut novels novels set in lagos nigerian fantasy novels
juliet ehimuan is a nigerian technology expert and entrepreneur who currently serves as google's country manager in nigeria. in august 2011, she was listed in forbes ' "20 youngest power women in africa".  early life and education born in nigeria, ehimuan completed her b.eng. degree in computer engineering from obafemi awolowo university, ile-ife, with a first-class honours. she proceeded to obtain a postgraduate degree in computer science from the university of cambridge, united kingdom before she went on to complete her mba programme from london business school.  career in 1995, ehimuan began career as performance monitoring and quality assurance supervisor at the shell petroleum development company until 1997 when she left the firm. she then joined microsoft uk as a program manager who oversaw projects for msn subsidiaries in europe, middle east, and africa; and then business process manager for msn international.  upon leaving microsoft in 2005, she started a firm called strategic insight consulting ltd. and then later became the general manager of chams plc's strategic business units. in april 2011, she was appointed google's country manager for nigeria.  awards and recognitions a fellow of the cambridge commonwealth society, ehimuan's contributions to technology and entrepreneurship has won her several awards and recognitions. she is a recipient of the london business school global women's scholarship, and while at the university of cambridge, she received two scholarly awards - selwyn college scholar and malaysian commonwealth scholar. in 2012, she won the "it personality of the year" at the 2012 national information technology merit award. she was also ranked among the 50 most innovative youths in nigeria in 2021  references  living people alumni of the university of cambridge obafemi awolowo university alumni alumni of london business school nigerian women in business google people year of birth missing (living people)
the women's emergency signalling corps (wesc) was founded by florence violet mckenzie in 1939 as a volunteer organisation in sydney. as world war ii loomed, mckenzie saw that with her qualifications and teaching skills she could make a valuable contribution. she foresaw a military demand for people with skills in wireless communications. as she told the australian women's weekly in 1978: "when neville chamberlain came back from munich and said 'peace in our time' [sic], i began preparing for war."   initially, training was provided to female trainees, but after the war broke out, the corps also provided training to male servicemen using a pool of female instructors. in 1941, a number of wesc personnel were recruited into the royal australian navy initially as civilian employees before becoming part of the women's royal australian naval service in 1942. throughout the war, the demand for signals training saw over 12,000 servicemen and recruits receive training at the wesc school, while 3,000 women also received signals training, with around one third joining the services.  the organisation was dissolved in 1954.  history  foundation  in 1939 mckenzie established the women's emergency signalling corps in sydney in her clarence street rooms - known affectionately as "sigs". her original idea was to train women in telegraphy so that they could replace men working in civilian communications, thereby freeing those skilled men up to serve in the war. by the time war broke out, 120 women had been trained to instructional standard.  training for men  it quickly became apparent that men in the armed forces also urgently needed training in wireless communications and mckenzie's female trainees were in a position to train the male servicemen directly: early in the war, one young would-be pilot tried to enlist but was refused because he didn't know morse code. by sheer coincidence he walked past [the women's emergency signalling corps on clarence street] and heard the sounds of morse signalling. "it was just a room full of women", remembered mrs mckenzie, "but he walked up to me and said 'will you teach me morse code?" i just heaved a big sigh because i saw a whole world opening up in front of me. then i knew what we could do. we could train girls to train the men. it was wonderful, because i'd thought we could only do things like relieving in the post office."  the premises at 9 clarence street became overcrowded, so mckenzie moved the operation to an old wool store at 10 clarence street, where during the 1940s the wesc occupied the
first and second floors, which she renovated with linoleum flooring and installed radio equipment for twelve classes. sometimes military intelligence personnel would appear at the school with complaints from guests in the pub next door, who thought a spy operation was at work when they heard morse code through the walls each evening.  funding  mckenzie ran the school without any government grant or allocation of accommodation by the services. the women of the wesc each gave one shilling per week towards the rent. no fees were ever charged for tuition as mckenzie said it was "her contribution to the war effort". by august 1940, there was a waiting list of 600 women for the small school, and wesc-trained telegraphists were teaching men from the armed forces and merchant navy.  joining the navy  inspired by an article on the women's royal naval service, mckenzie contacted the royal australian navy on several occasions to suggest that her telegraphists be employed by the ran. in 1940 she wrote to the minister of the navy, former prime minister wm (billy) hughes, saying "i would like to offer the services of our signalling corps, if not acceptable as telegraphists then at least as instructors." in early january 1941, commander newman, the navy's director of signals and communications, visited the wesc headquarters on clarence street to test mckenzie's trainees. finding they were highly proficient, he recommended the navy admit them. hughes still took some convincing. after mckenzie threatened to take her offer to the air force instead, the urgent need for trained telegraphists prevailed, and on 21 april a navy office letter authorised the entry of women into the navy. this was the beginning of the women's royal australian naval service - the wrans. the minister's condition was that "no publicity...be accorded this break with tradition'.  on 28 april 1941, mckenzie accompanied 14 of her wesc trainees (twelve telegraphists and two domestic helpers). they had their medical test on 25 april and arrived at  in canberra on 28 april 1941. the women were dressed in their green wesc uniform which had been designed by mckenzie herself - it was several months before a female navy uniform was ready. francis proven became wrans number 1. the women became employed at the royal australian navy wireless/transmitting station canberra. six months later, another nine women were recruited. although treated as naval personnel, the women were technically civilian employees of the ran. despite the formation of women's auxiliaries in the army and air force, the ran remained reluctant to formally enlist the telegraphists.  official recognition  the
increasing demand for manpower in the pacific war resulted in a change of opinion in the ran, with increasing recruitment of female personnel, and public promotion of the service. approval to form a women's royal australian naval service of 580 personnel (280 telegraphists plus 300 other duties) was granted on 24 july 1942, and the initial wesc telegraphists were offered enlistment on 1 october 1942. the scale of the response to recruitment campaigns was unexpected, with over 1,000 women enlisted by the end of 1942. this prompted the ran to establish an officer corps within the women's royal australian naval service, with the first training course for female officers beginning at flinders naval depot on 18 january 1943, and a further 16 courses run by september 1945. the wrans ranks expanded to some 2,600 by the end of the war, representing about 10 per cent of the entire royal australian naval force at the time. all told, mckenzie trained about 3,000 women, one-third of whom went into the services. by the end of the war approximately 12,000 servicemen and recruits had been trained at the wesc school:  the army sent lorry loads of soldiers to have early training in morse before going to the middle east, the raaf sent several groups of servicemen in uniform, with their own instructor... to use our equipment. the royal indian navy sent their indian communication ratings... many ran musterings came to the signalling school to improve their signalling. scores of american servicemen attended the school, sometimes with their own instructor, but mostly to join our classes. more than forty police officers attended the school in their spare time to reach the necessary standard for enlisting as pilots in the raaf.  the organisation was dissolved in 1954.  see also  pat studdy-clift  references  women's organisations based in australia organizations established in 1939 military education and training in australia
holy trinity church is a heritage-listed anglican church at saibai island, torres strait island region, queensland, australia. it was built from 1926 to 1938. it is also known as holy trinity church of england. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992.  history  the first missionaries, representing the society for the propagation of the gospel in foreign parts, arrived at the newly established settlement of somerset, cape york peninsula, in march 1867, followed by the london missionary society (lms) in july 1871. the london missionary society arrived at saibai island in july 1871. the first substantial building for christian worship was constructed in 1881. this was replaced by the holy trinity church, on which construction began about 1919 and was completed about 1938.  the first christian missionary in the torres straits, rev f.c. jagg, was appointed on behalf of the society for the propagation of gospel in foreign parts, and arrived in somerset with his family on 15 march 1867. a young english schoolteacher, w.t. kennett, funded by the queensland government to establish a school at somerset, arrived with rev jagg and started a mission school on 1 october 1867. a lack of funding, lack of support from the government administration and dismay at the brutality of the police meant that the mission was closed by june 1868.  in 1871 the london missionary society arrived in the torres strait on the vessel surprise, a ship owned or chartered by the lms,  after the french government had demanded their removal from the loyalty islands and new caledonia in 1869. the lms decided to expand into the torres strait and new guinea. they were represented by two englishmen, revs s. macfarlane and a.w. murray, 8 lifu (loyalty islander) evangelists and their wives. the missionaries arrived at darnley island (erub) on 1 july 1871, an event which came to be known as the "coming of the light" and which is now celebrated by torres strait islanders annually.  two islander missionaries were left on darnley island while the remaining missionaries travelled to warrior island (tudu island), where they were welcomed by captain banner, who had an established pearl shell fishery on the island. john joseph, an employee of banner's, travelled with the missionaries as an interpreter to dauan island on 6 july, and finding most of the islanders were away on saibai island, they were taken to saibai by nudai, the chief of dauan. two islander missionaries, josaia and
sivene, were left at saibai and dauan. further missionaries were left on yorke and yam islands, while hms surprise sailed to the newly established settlement at somerset.  the london missionary society established temporary headquarters at somerset from where they could expand their operations into other torres strait islands and the mainland of new guinea . between 1871 and 1878 at least 131 pacific islander teachers, mainly from loyalty islands, cook islands, niue, society islands and rurutu, taught in the torres strait and new guinea, along with their wives and families. only four european missionaries taught in the same period .  in 1872 the london missionary society revisited selected islands in the torres straits. they reported that the missionaries that had been left on dauan and saibai had been accepted into the local tribes and had been given land by the local chiefs.  the queensland government annexed the islands of the torres straits within  of the mainland in 1872, followed by the remainder of the islands in 1879. this was in response to fear of rival colonial powers controlling what had become an important shipping route, also as a means of controlling the increasingly lucrative beche-de-mer and pearl shelling economies and in particular regulating the use of torres strait and south sea islander labour in these industries. the government moved its administration centre from somerset to thursday island in 1877; however, the lack of government resources, such as a regular patrol boat, meant that administration of the islands had to be left to the london missionary society .  a theological facility called the papuan institute was established on mer, an island of the torres straits, to train torres strait islanders as priests and suitable students were selected by the london missionary society. the institute was closed in 1888, but had trained a number of local priests who were familiar with both formal missionary teaching and the local islander customs.  by 1890 the torres strait mission was beginning to slow its operations in the torres straits. conversion on the islands had been successful and papua was seen to be "waiting for the light". a full time superintendent on the islands was no longer deemed necessary and the incumbent priest, rev james chalmers, moved to saguane in the fly river in new guinea. teacher/supervisors were appointed on various islands by the queensland government, and in 1904 the protector of aborigines assumed comprehensive control of islanders lives under the queensland aboriginal protection act 1897.  worship on various islands was then led by the islander priests who had been trained at the papuan institute with annual inspections from london missionary society representatives travelling from new guinea.  in 1914 the secretary of the london missionary
society requested that the bishop of carpentaria, gilbert white, take over the missionary work in the torres strait due to financial pressure. this was formally accepted by the australian board of missions in november 1914 and the anglican church assumed responsibility for the torres strait mission. all the leases granted to the london missionary society, including the buildings, were transferred to the anglican church. coming of the light celebrations were instituted by the anglican church soon after they took over, as a tribute to the london missionary society and perhaps as a way of ensuring continuity of worship. this celebration continues to be celebrated annually by torres strait islanders both in the torres straits and in torres strait islander communities on the australian mainland.  the first building used for worship on saibai is described in the "50th anniversary of holy trinity church saibai island" as an "island style building". it was replaced with a more substantial building called "panetha" built by nemia, a samoan missionary who arrived on saibai in 1881.  chief council gauga awabu decided that "panetha" needed to be replaced and a third church building called "mari yoewth", built from corrugated iron salvaged from "panetha", was used temporarily while the holy trinity church was being constructed4. three generations of saibai islanders worked on the construction of the holy trinity church over 19 years. saibai men worked on boats in the fishing industry to raise funds for timber, cement and the corrugated iron roofing needed for the building.  construction materials consisted of portland cement for the foundations and concrete slab floor, lime gravel and sand poured into a mangrove timber framework for the  thick cement walls and wongai timber rafters. canoes brought coral for lime from the saibailgua maza (saibai reef), dauanalgau maza (dauan reef), gawal maza and wai reef. it was burned on the beach to form lime and mixed with sand and gravel in canoes using wooden paddles. dauan islanders assisted with burning the coral and transporting it to saibai and boigu islanders provided food for the workers during the monsoon. the wongai timber was brought from the new guinea mainland, some was also recycled from "panetha".  foreman carpenters were saibai islanders, specifically kanai, baudu, isua, elu, zsunai, aniba, bamaga and waiangu. a european mission carpenter with the surname irish, supervised the construction of the roof and rev john done, based on mabuiag island, provided plans and visited
the construction site from time to time.  on 24 july 1926 the archbishop of brisbane gerald sharp blessed the granite foundation stone of holy trinity church. the church was dedicated by rev stephen davies, the bishop of carpentaria, on 4 december 1938. islanders from throughout the torres straits and new guinea mainlanders attended the dedication travelling to saibai in pearl, beche-de-mer and trochus luggers and in outrigger canoes. over 1500 people attended the dedication.  the holy trinity bell, donated by thomas soki, was installed in the bell tower around the time of world war ii. previous to the installation of the bell a bu-shell, a native shell to the torres straits reefs, had been used to call people to church.  holy trinity church incorporates hand carved furnishings of wongai plum originally used in the early church, "panetha". along with these are new carvings also from wongai were produced for holy trinity. involved in the carving of the early furniture were islanders aki, kebisu baira and daku garmai. this furniture comprised a cross, two candlesticks and a lectern.  description  holy trinity church is situated on the waterfront of saibai island. it looks across to new guinea which is less than  away. the building is about  from the water's edge and is protected from waves by a sea wall.  the building is constructed of unreinforced mass concrete footings, floor and walls, constructed from crushed coral, sand and cement. the building has a timber framed gable roof clad with fibrous cement sheeting. timber roof trusses are exposed internally and there is no internal ceiling lining.  the form of the holy trinity church is simple, with 3 bays extending from the rectangular central nave area. the 3 bays consist of a front entry area facing the road, alcove at the rear of the building towards the coast and bell tower to one side of the building. double arch doors are present on each side of the building and double rectangular doors lead to the front entry area facing the road. the bell tower is no longer used, the higher section being constructed from mass concrete blocks with little or no mortar connecting them. the bell tower has an independent steeply pitched roof constructed with the same materials as the main roof.  the grounds are grassed with a small number of trees and shrubs. an independent timber framed bell tower is present on one side of the building, behind which is a freestanding crucifix depicting an image of jesus. a white rainwater tank is at the rear
of the building.  heritage listing  holy trinity church was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  holy trinity church, saibai island survives as important evidence of the development of missionary activity in the torres straits that started in 1871.  the place is important in demonstrating the principal characteristics of a particular class of cultural places.  the building is an important example of a torres strait christian church and was constructed over a period of 19 years by saibai islanders and london missionary society missionaries using local materials such as burnt coral, mangrove timber and wongai plum timber and incorporating materials and hand carved furnishings of the previous church, "panetha", constructed by a samoan london society missionary in 1881. it is influenced by torres strait vernacular architecture with elements such as locally sources construction material, mass unreinforced cement footings and decorative internal arches.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  the place has a strong and special religious significance with torres strait christians and with the london missionary society and anglican church and has served as a focus of christian worship since the construction of the first church at this site prior to 1881.  references  attribution  further reading  external links      queensland heritage register saibai island articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register anglican churches in queensland
alexey alexeyevich kuznetsov (; born 3 april 1981) is a paralympian athlete from russia who competes in category f54 throwing events. he participated in the 2008 and 2012 paralympics and won a silver medal in the javelin throw in 2012.  personal history kuznetsov was born in saransk in the former soviet union in 1981. at the age of five he fell from a fifth floor of a building, resulting in a spinal trauma. he was educated at the international independent university of environmental and political sciences in moscow where he studied philology. he is married to his wife, daria, and they have two sons.  athletics career before turning to athletics kuznetsov was a world class arm-wrestler, but decided to take up track and field to become a paralympic champion. he began training in cheboksary in 2007 and by the following year he was representing russia at his first summer paralympics, beijing 2008. in china he entered the javelin throw in a mixed points f53-54 category event, finishing sixth overall.  in the build up to the 2012 summer paralympics in london, he entered the 2011 ipc athletics world championships in christchurch. competing in three throwing events, he found success in his favoured javelin, with a distance of 29.44 m giving kuznetsov his first major international gold medal. the following year he travelled to stadskanaal to represent russia at the 2012 ipc athletics european championships. he won bronze in the discus and gold in the javelin. just a few months later kuznetsov was at his second paralympics, in london, where he competed in the javelin throw. he led the field until the final round, where his leading throw of 27.87 was beaten by mexico's luis alberto zepeda felix, leaving kuznetsov with the silver medal.  in the build-up to the 2016 summer paralympics in rio, kuznetsov managed to retain his european title in the javelin throw in both swansea in 2014 and again in grosseto in 2016. the world title proved more elusive, with a silver medal in the 2013 world championships in lyon and a bronze medal in the 2015 world championships in doha.  references  paralympic athletes of russia athletes (track and field) at the 2008 summer paralympics athletes (track and field) at the 2012 summer paralympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer paralympics paralympic silver medalists for russia living people 1981 births world record holders in paralympic athletics medalists at the 2012 summer paralympics medalists at the 2020 summer paralympics russian male discus throwers russian male shot putters russian male javelin throwers paralympic medalists in athletics (track and field) paralympic silver medalists for the russian paralympic committee athletes

james cooper (1846-1922) was a church of scotland minister and church historian.  life he was the son of john alexander cooper, a local merchant and farmer, born in elgin, moray. he studied at elgin academy and aberdeen university, graduating m.a. in 1867. he was minister at broughty ferry near dundee, and then in aberdeen, being appointed in 1899 by glasgow university as professor of ecclesiastical history.  in 1917 cooper acted as moderator of the general assembly of the church of scotland. he was active in the foundation of the scottish church society and scottish ecclesiological society.  notes  external links rev. james cooper from index of glasgow men (1909)  1846 births 1922 deaths 19th-century ministers of the church of scotland scottish historians people educated at elgin academy, moray alumni of the university of aberdeen people from moray 19th-century british historians 19th-century scottish writers 20th-century british historians 20th-century scottish writers 20th-century ministers of the church of scotland moderators of the general assembly of the church of scotland
the philippine drug war is the anti-drug policy and actions of the philippine government under president rodrigo duterte, who assumed office on june 30, 2016. according to former philippine national police chief and senator ronald dela rosa, the policy is aimed at "the neutralization of illegal drug personalities nationwide".  duterte has urged members of the public to kill criminals and drug addicts. research by media organizations and human rights groups has shown that police routinely execute unarmed drug suspects and then plant guns and drugs as evidence. philippine authorities have denied misconduct by police.  background  owing to its geographical location, international drug syndicates use the philippines as a transit hub for the illegal drug trade. some local drug syndicates and gangs are also involved in narcotics, utilizing drug mules to transport small amounts of illegal drugs to other countries. in the 90s, the philippines became a temporary theatre of the u.s.-led war on drugs; at one point the drug enforcement administration even conducted their own operations in the country. the new millennium saw a boom in the illegal drug industry. in 2010 alone, a u.s. international narcotics control strategy report estimated the illegal drug trade in the philippines at $6.4 to $8.4 billion annually.  this perceived growth of illegal drugs in the philippines led to the nomination of rodrigo duterte in the 2016 presidential election, owing to his time as mayor in davao city which was considered as the 9th "safest city in the world". duterte would win the 2016 philippine presidential election promising to kill tens of thousands of criminals, with a platform urging people to kill drug addicts. duterte has benefited from reports in the national media that he made davao into one of the world's safest cities, which he cites as justification for his drug policy, although national police data shows that the city has the highest murder rate and the second highest rape rate in the philippines.  as mayor of davao city, duterte was criticized by such groups as human rights watch for the extrajudicial killings of hundreds of street children, petty criminals and drug users carried out by the davao death squad, a vigilante group with which he was allegedly involved. duterte has alternately confirmed and denied his involvement in the alleged davao death squad killings. cases of extrajudicial killings have long since been a problem in the philippines even before the duterte administration. in a research report for the asia foundation conducted by atty. al a. parreno on the grim tradition of police executions, there were a total of 305 incidents of extrajudicial killings with 390 victims from 2001 to 2010, with only a total
of 161 cases or 56% of the incidents have been filed with the prosecutor. atty. parreno also concluded that the number of cases could be higher.  philippine anti-narcotic officials have admitted that duterte uses flawed and exaggerated data to support his claim that the philippines is becoming a "narco-state". the philippines has a low prevalence rate of drug users compared to the global average, according to the united nations office on drugs and crime. in his inaugural state of the nation address, duterte claimed that data from the philippine drug enforcement agency shows that there were 3 million drug addicts two to three years ago, which he said may have increased to 3.7 million. however, according to the philippine dangerous drugs board, the government drug policy-making body, 1.8 million filipinos used illegal drugs (mostly cannabis) in 2015, the latest official survey published, a third of whom had used illegal drugs only once in the past 13 months.  death toll  estimates of the death toll vary. officially, 5,100 drug personalities have been killed as of january 2019. news organizations and human rights groups claim the death toll is over 12,000. the victims included 54 children in the first year. opposition senators claimed in 2018 that over 20,000 have been killed. in february 2018, the international criminal court in the hague announced a "preliminary examination" into killings linked to the philippine drug war since at least july 1, 2016.  based on data from the pnp and pdea from june 2016 to july 2019, 134,583 anti-drug operations were conducted, 193,086 people were arrested, and 5,526 suspects died during police operations.  worth of drugs were seized. 421,275 people surrendered under the pnp's recovery and wellness program (219,979 pnp-initiated, 201,296 community center-supported), and 499 reformation centers established. on the law enforcement side, 86 personnel were killed during the drug war with 226 wounded since 2018. according to general oscar albayalde and the pnp, since 2019, 50 of these casualties killed and 144 others who were injured were police.  major events  2016  early months in speeches made after his inauguration on june 30 of 2016, duterte urged citizens to kill suspected criminals and drug addicts. he said he would order police to adopt a shoot-to-kill policy, and would offer them a bounty for dead suspects. in a speech to military leadership on july 1, duterte told communist rebels to "use
your kangaroo courts to kill them to speed up the solution to our problem". on july 2, the communist party of the philippines stated that it "reiterates its standing order for the npa to carry out operations to disarm and arrest the chieftains of the biggest drug syndicates, as well as other criminal syndicates involved in human rights violations and destruction of the environment" after its political wing bagong alyansang makabayan accepted cabinet posts in the new government. on july 3, the philippine national police announced they had killed 30 alleged drug dealers since duterte was sworn in as president on june 30. they later stated they had killed 103 suspects between may 10 and july 7. on july 9, a spokesperson of the president told critics to show proof that there have been human rights violations in the drug war. later that day, the moro islamic liberation front announced it was open to collaborate with police in the drug war. on august 3, duterte said that the sinaloa cartel and the chinese triad are involved in the philippine drug trade. on august 7, duterte named more than 150 drug suspects including local politicians, police, judges, and military. on august 8, the united states expressed concerns over the extrajudicial killings.  a presidential spokesperson said that duterte welcomed a proposed congressional investigation into extrajudicial killings to be chaired by senator leila de lima, his chief critic in the government. on august 17,  duterte announced that de lima had been having an affair with a married man, her driver, ronnie palisoc dayan. duterte claimed that dayan was her collector for drug money, who had also himself been using drugs. in a news conference on august 21, duterte announced that he had in his possession wiretaps and atm records which confirmed his allegations. he stated: "what is really crucial here is that because of her [romantic] relationship with her driver which i termed 'immoral' because the driver has a family and wife, that connection gave rise to the corruption of what was happening inside the national penitentiary." dismissing fears for dayan's safety, he added, "as the president, i got this information ... as a privilege. but i am not required to prove it in court. that is somebody else's business. my job is to protect public interest. she's lying through her teeth." he explained that he had acquired the new evidence from an unnamed foreign country.  on august 18, united nations human rights experts called on the philippines to halt extrajudicial killings. agnes callamard, the un special rapporteur on summary executions, stated that duterte had given
a "license to kill" to his citizens by encouraging them to kill. in response, duterte threatened to withdraw from the un and form a separate group with african nations and china. presidential spokesperson ernesto abella later clarified that the philippines was not leaving the un. as the official death toll reached 1,800, a congressional investigation of the killings chaired by de lima was opened.  then presidential spokesperson harry roque said that the government is open to subjecting the philippines to a probe through regular domestic channels, as long as they are competent and unbiased rapporteur on the anti-drug campaign.  on august 23, chito gascon, head of the philippine commission on human rights, told the senate committee that the international criminal court may have jurisdiction over the mass killings. on august 25, duterte released a "drug matrix" supposedly linking government officials, including de lima, with the new bilibid prison drug trafficking scandal. de lima stated that the "drug matrix" was like something drawn by a 12-year-old child. she added, "i will not dignify any further this so-called 'drug matrix' which, any ordinary lawyer knows too well, properly belongs in the garbage can." on august 29, duterte called on de lima to resign and "hang herself".  state of emergency following the september 2 bombing in davao city that killed 14 people in the city's central business district, on september 3, 2016, duterte declared a "state of lawlessness", and on the following day signed a declaration of a "state of national emergency on account of lawless violence in mindanao". the armed forces of the philippines and the philippine national police were ordered to "suppress all forms of lawless violence in mindanao" and to "prevent lawless violence from spreading and escalating elsewhere". executive secretary salvador medialdea said that the declaration "does not specify the imposition of curfews", and would remain in force indefinitely. he explained: "the recent incidents, the escape of terrorists from prisons, the beheadings, then eventually what happened in davao. that was the basis." the state of emergency has been seen as an attempt by duterte to "enhance his already strong hold on power, and give him carte blanche to impose further measures" in the drug war.  at the 2016 asean summit, us president barack obama cancelled scheduled meetings with duterte to discuss extrajudicial killings after duterte referred to obama as a "son of a whore."  senate committee on september 19, 2016, the senate voted 16-4 to remove de lima from her position heading
the senate committee, in a motion brought by senator and boxer manny pacquiao. duterte's allies in the senate argued that de lima had damaged the country's reputation by allowing the testimony of edgar matobato. she was replaced by senator richard gordon, a supporter of duterte. matobato had testified that while working for the davao death squad he had killed more than 50 people. he said that he had witnessed duterte killing a government agent, and he had heard duterte giving orders to carry out executions, including ordering the bombing of mosques as retaliation for an attack on a cathedral.  duterte told reporters that he wanted "a little extension of maybe another six months" in the drug war, as there were so many drug offenders and criminals that he "cannot kill them all". on the following day, a convicted bank robber and two former prison officials testified that they had paid bribes to de lima. she denies the allegations. in a speech on september 20, duterte promised to protect police in the drug war and urged them to kill drug suspects regardless if they draw a gun or not when conducting police operation.  at the beginning of october, a senior police officer told the guardian that 10 "special ops" official police death squads had been operating, each consisting of 15 police officers. the officer said that he had personally been involved in killing 87 suspects, and described how the corpses had their heads wrapped in masking tape with a cardboard placard labelling them as a drug offender so that the killing would not be investigated, or they were dumped at the roadside ("salvage" victims). the chairman of the philippines commission on human rights, chito gascon, was quoted in the report: "i am not surprised, i have heard of this." the pnp declined to comment. the report stated: "although the guardian can verify the policeman's rank and his service history, there is no independent, official confirmation for the allegations of state complicity and police coordination in mass murder."  on october 28, datu saudi ampatuan mayor samsudin dimaukom and nine others, including his five bodyguards, were killed during an anti-illegal drug operation in makilala, north cotabato. according to police, the group were heavily armed and opened fire on police, who found sachets of methamphetamine at the scene. no police were injured. dimaukom was among the drug list named by duterte on august 7; he had immediately surrendered, and then returned to datu saudi ampatuan.  on november 1, it was reported that the us
state department had halted the sale of 26,000 assault rifles to the pnp after opposition from the senate foreign relations committee due to concerns about human rights violations. a police spokesman said they had not been informed. pnp chief ronald dela rosa suggested china as a possible alternative supplier. on november 7, duterte reacted to the us decision to halt the sale by announcing that he was "ordering its cancellation".  in the early morning of november 5, mayor of albuera, rolando espinosa sr., who had been detained at baybay city sub-provincial jail for violation of the comprehensive dangerous drugs act of 2002, was killed in what was described as a shootout inside his jail cell with personnel from the criminal investigation and detection group (cidg). according to the cidg, espinosa opened fire on police agents who were executing a search warrant for "illegal firearms." a hard drive of cctv footage which may have recorded the shooting of espinosa is missing, a provincial official said. espinosa had turned himself in to pnp after being named in duterte's drug list in august. he was briefly released but then re-arrested for alleged drug possession. the president of the national union of people's lawyers, edre olalia, told local broadcaster tv5 that the police version of events was "too contrived". he pointed out that a search warrant is not required to search a jail cell. "such acts make a mockery of the law, taunt impunity and insult ordinary common sense." espinosa was the second public official to be killed in the drug war.  following the incident, on the same day, senator panfilo lacson sought to resume the investigation of extrajudicial killings after it was suspended on october 3 by the senate committee on justice and human rights.  on november 28, duterte appeared to threaten that human rights workers would be targeted: "the human rights [defenders] say i kill. if i say: 'okay, i'll stop'. they [drug users] will multiply. when harvest time comes, there will be more of them who will die. then i will include you among them because you let them multiply." amnesty international philippines stated that duterte was "inciting hate towards anyone who expresses dissent on his war against drugs." the national alliance against killings philippines criticized duterte's comment believing that human rights is a part of dealing the illegal drug issue and that his threats constitutes to "a declaration of an open season on human rights defenders".  on december 5 reuters reported that 97% of drug suspects shot by police died, far more
than in other countries with drug-related violence. they also stated that police reports of killings are "remarkably similar", involving a "buy-bust" operation in which the suspect panics and shoots at the officers, who return fire, killing the suspect, and report finding a packet of white powder and a .38 caliber revolver, often with the serial number removed. "the figures pose a powerful challenge to the official narrative that the philippines police are only killing drug suspects in self-defense. these statistics and other evidence amassed by reuters point in the other direction: that police are pro-actively gunning down suspects."  on december 8, the senate committee on justice and human rights issued a report stating that there was sufficient evidence to prove the existence of a davao death squad, and  there is no proof of an imposed state-sponsored policy to commit killings "to eradicate illegal drugs in the country". eleven senators signed the report, while senators leila de lima, jv ejercito, antonio trillanes and senate minority leader ralph recto did not sign the report or did not subscribe to its findings.  2016 new bilibid prison riot on early morning of september 28, 2016, a riot erupted inside building 14 at new bilibid prison. initial reports from acting bureau of corrections director rolando asuncion said that one inmate witnessed three other convicts, namely peter co, tony co and vicente sy, using methamphetamine moments before the riot started. the inmate then alerted former police officer clarence dongail, who entered the cell and told them to stop. however, upon returning to the common area to watch tv, tony co attacked dongail, triggering the riot. department of justice secretary vitaliano aguirre ii, in his media interview, said that high-profile convict tony co was killed after being stabbed. convict and alleged drug lord jaybee sebastian-who was also involved in the riot, peter co and sy were seriously wounded and taken to the hospital, however, sebastian is in now stable condition while peter co is in critical condition. dongail suffered minimal injuries.  senator leila de lima claimed that the malacanang palace was behind the bilibid riot incident in order to persuade the inmates to testify against her for alleged drug operations inside the prison. later in a press conference, de lima angrily condemned the incident and challenged duterte to arrest her.  temporary cessation of police drug operations following criticism of the police over the kidnapping and killing of jee ick-joo, a south korean businessman, duterte ordered the police to suspend drug-related operations while ordering the military
and the philippine drug enforcement agency to continue drug operations. human rights watch criticized the south korean government in may 2018 for continuing to supply materials to the philippine authorities after the death of jee ick-joo.  2017 on january 4, 2017, a sputnik gang member by the name of randy lizardo shot and killed policeman po1 enrico domingo in tondo. domingo, together with other pnp officers, were conducting a buy-bust operation inside lizardo's home. as the lawmen burst inside, the gang surprised them out of the curtains with handguns. domingo was hit in the head and died instantly, while another, po2 harley gacera, was wounded in the shoulder. lizardo and the gang managed to get away, but he would later be captured as he tried to flee the city nine days later. the death of domingo became one of the most covered case of a police casualty during the drug war.  amnesty international investigation on january 31, 2017, amnesty international published a report of their investigation of 59 drug-related killings in 20 cities and towns, "if you are poor you are killed": extrajudicial executions in the philippines' "war on drugs", which "details how the police have systematically targeted mostly poor and defenceless people across the country while planting 'evidence', recruiting paid killers, stealing from the people they kill and fabricating official incident reports." they stated: "amnesty international is deeply concerned that the deliberate, widespread and systematic killings of alleged drug offenders, which appear to be planned and organized by the authorities, may constitute crimes against humanity under international law."  the palace said that the report was wrong, and there were no such illegal killings. "as for the spate of killings, there is no such thing as state-sponsored since the police has been following the strict protocols in arresting these drug-related criminals. secretary salvador panelo said that the true cause of the killings are the "members of the drug syndicates are killing each other to prevent their competitors from informing the authorities which may lead to their arrest. as for those who were killed by the police, the same were made on the basis of self-defense when they employed unlawful means to resist arrest posing threat to the lives of the police officers."  the president also criticized the double standard narrative on the killings involved in the anti-illegal drug campaign. "when you bomb a village you intend to kill the militants, but you kill in the process the children there. why do you say it is collateral damage to the west and to us
it is murder?" president duterte said months after he sat in office.  a police officer with the rank of senior police officer 1, a ten-year veteran of a metro manila anti-illegal drugs unit, told ai that police are paid 8,000 pesos (us$161) to 15,000 pesos (us$302) per "encounter" (the term used for extrajudicial executions disguised as legitimate operations); there is no payment for making arrests. he said that some police also receive a payment from the funeral home they send the corpses to. hitmen hired by police are paid 5,000 pesos (us$100) for each drug user killed and 10,000 to 15,000 pesos (us$200-300) for each "drug pusher" killed, according to two hitmen interviewed by ai.  ai spoke to many witnesses who complained of the dehumanizing treatment of their family members. crisis response director tirana hassan stated: "the way dead bodies are treated shows how cheaply human life is regarded by the philippines police. covered in blood, they are casually dragged in front of horrified relatives, their heads grazing the ground before being dumped out in the open. the people killed are overwhelmingly drawn from the poorest sections of society and include children, one of them as young as eight years old."  the report makes a series of recommendations to duterte and government officials and departments. if certain key steps are not swiftly taken, it recommends that the international criminal court "initiate a preliminary examination into unlawful killings in the philippines's violent anti-drug campaign and related crimes under the rome statute, including the involvement of government officials, irrespective of rank and status."  the guardian and reuters stated that the report added to evidence they had published previously about police extrajudicial executions. presidential spokesman ernesto abella responded to the report, saying that senate committee investigations proved that there had been no state-sponsored extrajudicial killings. in an interview on february 4, duterte told a reporter that amnesty international was "so naive and so stupid", and "a creation of [george] soros". he asked, "is that the only thing you [de lima] can produce? the report of amnesty?"  de lima was jailed on february 24, awaiting trial on charges related to allegations made by duterte in august 2016. a court date has not been set.  arturo lascanas on february 20, arturo lascanas, a retired police officer, told reporters at a press conference outside the senate building that as a leader of the davao death squad he had
carried out extrajudicial killings on the orders of duterte. he said death squad members were paid 20,000 to 100,000 pesos ($400 to $2,000) per hit, depending on the importance of the target. he gave details of various killings he had carried out on duterte's orders, including the previously unsolved murder of a radio show host critical of duterte, and confessed to his involvement with matobato in the bombing of a mosque on duterte's orders. on the following day the senate voted in a private session to reopen the investigation, reportedly by a margin of ten votes to eight, with five abstentions.  on march 6, lascanas gave evidence at the senate committee, testifying that he had killed approximately 200 criminal suspects, media figures and political opponents on duterte's orders.  allegations of police using hospitals to hide killings in june 2017 reuters reported that "police were sending corpses to hospitals to destroy evidence at crime scenes and hide the fact that they were executing drug suspects." doctors stated that corpses loaded onto trucks were being dumped at hospitals, sometimes after rigor mortis had already set in, with clearly unsurvivable wounds, having been shot in the chest and head at close range. reuters examined data from two manila police districts, and found that the proportion of suspects sent to hospitals, where they are pronounced dead on arrival (doa), increased from 13% in july 2016 to 85% in january 2017; "the totals grew along with international and domestic condemnation of duterte's campaign."  then-pnp chief gen. ronald "bato" dela rosa dismissed the reuters report, saying police were trying to save the victims' lives even when encountering violent resistance. he added that police should not be disparaged for trying to save victims and the removal of bodies from a crime scene did not mean a proper investigation could not be carried out.  ozamiz raid, and death of reynaldo parojinog on july 30, reynaldo parojinog, the mayor of ozamiz city, was killed along with 14 others, including his wife susan, in a dawn raid at around 2:30 am on his home in san roque lawis. according to police, they were on a search warrant when parojinog's bodyguards opened fire on them and police officers responded by shooting at them. according to police provincial chief jaysen de guzman, authorities recovered grenades, ammunition and illegal drugs in the raid.  "one-time, big-time" operations  on august 16, over 32 people were
killed in multiple "one-time, big-time" antidrug operations in bulacan within one day. in manila, 25 people, including 11 suspected robbers, were also killed in consecutive anti-criminality operations. the multiple deaths in the large-scale antidrug operations received condemnation from human rights groups and the majority of the senate.  reshuffling of the caloocan city police as a result of involvement in the deaths of teenagers like kian delos santos, and carl angelo arnaiz and reynaldo de guzman, and robbing of a drug suspect in an antidrug raid, national capital region police office (ncrpo) chief oscar albayalde ordered the firing and retraining of all members of the caloocan city police, with the exception of its newly appointed chief and its deputy.  transfer of anti-drug operations to pdea on october 12, 2017, duterte announced the transfer of anti-drug operations to the philippine drug enforcement agency (pdea), ending the involvement of the philippine national police (pnp). the announcement followed the publication of an opinion poll on october 8, showing a drop in presidential approval from 66% to 48%. in a televised speech, duterte scoffed and mocked the "bleeding hearts" who sympathized with those killed in the drug war, pointedly at the european union, whom he accused of interfering with philippine sovereignty.  rodrigo duterte's refutation to asean representatives in a speech before asean representatives, rodrigo duterte refuted all extrajudicial killings related to the war on drugs by stating that these stories only serve as a political agenda in order to demonize him. he stated that he has only used his mouth to tell drug users that they will be killed. he stated that "..."shabu" (crystal meth) users have shrunken brains, which is why they have become violent and aggressive, leading to their deaths." duterte further added that all the drug pushers and their henchmen always carry their guns with them and killing them is justifiable so that they would not endanger the lives of his men. duterte appointed a human rights lawyer, harry roque, a kabayan partylist representative, as his spokesperson. roque stated that he will change public perception by reducing the impact of the statements by which duterte advocates extrajudicial killings in his war on drugs.  2018  in a speech on march 26, 2018, duterte said that human rights groups "have become unwitting tools of drug lords." human rights watch denied the allegation, calling it "shockingly dangerous and shameful."  consecutive
assassinations of local government officials  the controversial tanauan, batangas mayor antonio halili was assassinated by an unknown sniper during a flag-raising ceremony on july 2, 2018, becoming the 11th local government official to be killed in the drug war. on the following day, ferdinand bote, mayor of general tinio, was shot dead in his vehicle in cabanatuan city.  supreme court issuance of writs of amparo  after holding deliberations on petitions by the free legal assistance group and the center for international law, the philippine supreme court in december 2017 ordered the solicitor-general to release documents related to the drug war. in january 2018, the supreme court granted the petitioners a writ of amparo and issued restraining orders against police officers. the spokesperson for the president said the administration will comply with the order.  the supreme court issued a second writ of amparo in february 2018, prohibiting interior secretary ismael sueno and police chief ronald dela rosa from going within one kilometer from the widow of a drug war victim killed in antipolo, rizal.  there was a certain sense of frustration because of the cases that were filed before the icc without first going through the domestic remedies and the domestic channels, wherein remedies can be considered to be able to address these cases that were brought before the attention of the icc. so the philippine government thought it was very disrespectful and violative of the processes, according to the presidential human rights committee secretariat (phrcs)  but despite the withdrawal, it will not prevent the philippine government from engaging other agencies such as the un the european union, which the philippines have always remained faithful to the processes that are available, according to the phrcs.  2019  on january 17, 2019, sri lankan president maithripala sirisena, on his state visit in the country, praised the war on drugs campaign, saying that the campaign is "an example to the whole world." two days later, human rights groups had expressed alarm over the statement of sirisena. on january 18, the armed conflict location and event data project (acled) issued a statement, saying that the philippines along with syria, nigeria, yemen, and afghanistan, is "one of the deadliest places in the world to be a civilian," citing deaths in the drug war. malacanang reacted by saying that the report "is remarkable in ignorance and bias." a survey conducted by sws from december 16-19, 2018, showing that 66% of the filipinos believe that drug addicts in the country have
diminished substantially. however, on february 19, 2019, opposition senator antonio trillanes made a statement about the few drug addicts, whom trillanes said that "they were killed 'without due process,'" and slams presidential spokesperson salvador panelo by saying "what are you celebrating, mr. panelo, the ruthlessness of your boss?"  on march 1, 2019, results of an sws survey conducted from december 16 to 19, 2018, on 1,440 adults nationwide was released that concluded that 78% (or almost 4 out of 5 filipinos) were worried "that they, or someone they know, will be a victim of extrajudicial killings (ejk)." however, philippine national police chief, police general oscar albayalde criticized the survey results pointing out that the survey wrongly presented a question which "cannot be validated by respondents without keen awareness or understanding of ejk as we know it from administrative order no. 35 series of 2012 by president [benigno simeon] aquino [iii]." he reiterated "i take the latest survey results on public perception to alleged extrajudicial killing with a full cup of salt. it shouldn't be surprising that 78 percent are afraid of getting killed. who isn't afraid to die, anyway?"  on march 14, duterte released another list of the politicians allegedly involved in the illegal drug trade. the list consists of 45 incumbent officials: 33 mayors, 8 vice mayors, 3 congress representatives, one board member, and one former mayor. of all politicians named, there are eight politicians belong to duterte's own political party pdp-laban. opposition figures such as senatorial candidates from otso diretso said that duterte used the list "to ensure their allies would win" in may 2019 election.  on march 17, the country formally withdrew from the icc after the country's withdrawal notification was received by the secretary-general of the united nations last year.  in september 2019, the authorities accused guia gomez-castro, former chair of barangay 484 in sampaloc, manila, as a mastermind of "recycling" the illegal drugs the law enforcement seized to the corrupt police officers. dubbed by the authorities as "drug queen", the pdea added that the corrupt police officers have been selling shabu which is worth p16.6 million daily in gomez-castro's cohort and also said that gomez-castro is allegedly being protected by the corrupt police officers and other politicians. on september 25, the bureau of immigration (bi) said that gomez-castro has already left the country on september 21
. on the same day, manila mayor isko moreno, through his facebook live streaming, has ordered gomez-castro to surrender to her office.  prior to this, in november 2013, the nbi raided the house of gomez-castro in barangay 484, sampaloc, manila where they seized a p240,000 worth of shabu. in november 2018, seven people were arrested by tondo police during drug operation; some of them are chairwoman's relatives. in a text message, castro refuted all the accusation thrown against her.  on october 25, 2019, clarin, misamis occidental mayor david navarro, one of the mayor whom duterte named him for alleged involvement in the illegal drug trade, was shot dead in ambush by four masked men while he was being transported to the prosecutor's office in cebu city, following his alleged beating up the massage therapist. prior to his death, cebu city police said that according to navarro's family, the mayor had been received death threats in misamis occidental.  the philippines was deemed as the 4th most dangerous country in terms of violence directly meant at civilians in the world, declaring that 75% of reported deaths are from war on drugs pursued by authorities.  ninja cops controversy  the "ninja cops" refers to the police officers who were accused of "recycling" the illegal drugs that they seized during the police operations. pnp chief oscar albayalde was the center of the controversy who was accused of protecting the so-called "ninja cops" or the corrupt officials.  on november 29, 2013, twelve police officers, led by major rodney baloyo, conduct a raid on mexico, pampanga and seized  of methamphetamine (shabu). albayalde was the acting police chief of pampanga at the time of the raid. that operation was supposed to go after chinese drug lord johnson lee, but they evaded the arrest after lee allegedly paid the police officers a p50 million. lee currently remains at large and is now wanted by the authorities. baloyo contradicted the morning police operations, saying that they raided lee's house at 4:30pm. on november 30, 2013, authorities submitted the illegal drugs that they recovered as a evidence. pnp chief general oscar albayalde was accused of covering-up in the issue.  in a senate hearing, according to major rodney baloyo, he ordered the police officer 2 anthony lacsamana to conduct a raid on the area; however, lacsamana denied baloyo's claim. senator richard gordon
has baloyo detained at the new bilibid prison for "lying" at the hearing. a senate investigation found out that p648 million worth of seized shabu from the november 2013 raid was not declared by the pampanga police. additionally, it was reported that the police officers have earned p50 million from the drug lord's wealth. former deputy director for operations of the cidg gen. rudy lacadin revealed that then-pampanga provincial director albayalde had received some money from the operation. a memo written by albayalde sent to the regional director on december 2, 2013 stated that albayalde himself ordered the buy-bust operation in pampanga, however during the senate hearing, albayalde denied the knowledge of the operation.  meanwhile, in central visayas, nine police officers were dismissed from their duties of police regional office 7 over the reports that they "were proven to be drug users."  the makabayan bloc demanded the immediate resignation of albayalde from his post and other officials over the implication of the controversy. on october 14, albayalde eventually resigned as the pnp chief. duterte expressed his disappointment over the issue.  on october 21, 2019, the pnp-criminal investigation and detection group (cidg) filed a complaint before the department of justice, citing a re-investigation of albayalde and 13 of his personnel over the alleged recycling of drugs of some 162 kilograms of shabu of that they seized, while a senate suggested a life imprisonment for the mentioned police officers. the pnp said in a statement that the accused "remain innocent until proven guilty."  robredo's appointment as co-chairperson of the inter-agency committee on anti-illegal drugs (icad)  on october 23, 2019, vice president leni robredo made a statement, saying that duterte should allow the un to investigate the war on drugs, and she added that a campaign has been "a failure and a dent on the country's international image." presidential spokesman salvador panelo slammed robredo's remark, saying that her claim "lacked factual basis." however, on october 27, 2019, robredo clarified that she suggested for "tweaks" to the campaign and denied that she called to stop the war on drugs. on november 4, 2019, duterte assigned vice president leni robredo to be co-chairperson of the inter-agency committee on anti-illegal drugs (icad) until the end of his term in 2022, said presidential spokesman salvador panelo.  the dangerous drugs
board (ddb) said that, the vice president is "misled in understanding the anti-drug campaign," and that law enforcement is only a part of a multi-faceted dimension in addressing domestic drug issues using a holistic, balanced, and comprehensive approach. "while enforcement issues are more evident, we cannot discount the successes we have gained in the demand reduction part of the campaign," the ddb said. presidential spokesperson salvador panelo meanwhile tagged robredo's comments as "black propaganda" as they lacked factual basis-advising the vice president to detach herself from detractors. panelo said that while the government is not intolerant of criticisms, robrado's comments "become a disinformation campaign and an abuse of the freedom of speech and expression, and unproductive to the mature evolution of a democratic society a hindrance to its progress. on november 12, 2019, former deputy director of human rights watch's asia division phelim kline made a statement to robredo, stating the recommendation of arresting duterte "and his henchmen for inciting and instigating mass murder."  on november 24, duterte fired robredo from her post. according to presidential spokesperson salvador panelo, her removal is "in response to the taunt and dare" of vice president leni robredo for duterte "to just tell her that he wants her out."  2020  in january 2020, vice president leni robredo reported her findings and recommendations on the drug war. using data from the philippine national police (pnp) and the philippine drug enforcement agency (pdea), robredo said, "in spite of all the filipinos who were killed and all the money spent by the government, we only seized less than 1 percent in supply of shabu and money involved in illegal drugs." in december 2020, "international criminal court (icc) prosecutor fatou bensouda said there is 'reasonable basis' to believe that crimes against humanity were committed in the killings related to president rodrigo duterte's war on drugs."  in june 2020, a shooting in paranaque left one policeman and one criminal dead, as well as one cop wounded. p/ lt. armand melad and his group were sent to unida and dimasalang streets, brgy. baclaran, to answer a complaint about loud noises from a karaoke. they then came across two males on a motorcycle without helmets. as they questioned the two men, an argument erupted, which led to the policemen trying to arrest the two. one of them by the name of moamar
sarif drew and opened fire with a .40 jericho pistol. the police then swarmed and grabbed their own guns, while the other person on the motorcycle drove away. during the shootout, both melad and sarif were critically wounded, later dying in the same hospital. another police named p/corporal allan baltazar was also wounded.  august 2020 was the sight of a bloody series of killings in the province of leyte, of which many drug dealers and users were killed. jason golong, a former drug pusher and user, was killed outside of the rtr hospital in calanipawan road, shot upon while driving his car. he was the son of former tacloban city prosecutor ruperto golong, and was once captured in a buy-bust operation conducted by the pdea in 2018. retired police officer and drug user pio molabola penaflor was were killed in a drive-by shooting together with his son alphy chan penaflor in palo, leyte. four more people were killed in the next month, two of them were former police officers - constantino torre, dennis monteza, ian pat cabredo and maritess pami. ian pat cabredo was a former guard at the leyte provincial jail and was in the police's drug suspect list before his death.  in november 24, police captain ariel ilagan of the southern police district, was driving together with his family inside a toyota fortuner in imus city, when armed assailants on foot ambushed them. the suv they were driving at where set upon by fire from m16 rifles. the attackers then fled onboard a red toyota innova that had no registration plate. the shooting was captured in cctv. ilagan was killed while his wife and daughter sustained injuries. ilagan previously headed the taguig city police's drug enforcement unit, but had been recently transferred to the discipline law and order section (dlos), which handles "administrative and less grave cases" of policemen.  2021  january 23 saw a major gun battle between the pnp and a mindanao drug syndicate in maguindanao. the shootout started when a joint task force of police and marines attempted to serve a search warrant to pendatun adsis talusan, a former village chief who was convicted of robbery with homicide, double frustrated murder, and illegal possession of firearms. members of talusan's group then holed themselves up inside an apartment where the police besieged them. during the end of the firefight, 12 syndicate members including talusan was killed, together
with one policeman. the shootout happened a few days after the assassination of christopher cuan, mayor of libungan and a politician included in duterte's drug list.  in palo, leyte in the morning of february 10, a policeman by the name of master sergeant jay paul culas was shot and killed while riding his motorcycle. the assailants were inside a four-wheeled vehicle when they shot culas with pistol fire. his body laid dead on the national highway. police determined the killers were tied to culas' occupation as a policeman, with various suspects presented, including a waray-waray gang.  a fatal friendly fire incident happened on the evening of february 24 between pnp personnel and pdea agents near a mall in quezon city. both organizations were conducting separate drug operations that intertwined near the ever gotesco mall. a botched buy-bust operation then led to a shootout between the two that caused the deaths of two policemen, two pdea agents, and one pdea informant. although the shootout happened near a crowded area, mall management managed to secure the mall of civilians. during the preliminary investigation, the pnp claimed that the pdea agents fired first. the pnp and the pdea decided to have a joint investigation on the matter, while police general debold sinas appointed the cidg as the lead investigating body. the department of justice had also ordered the national bureau of investigation to create a parallel investigation on the matter.  in february of the year, department of justice secretary menardo guevarra told the press that they started investigating the alleged police misconduct during the drug war. the doj believed the pnp had constantly failed to observe police protocols and ethics, due to the same similar patterns that led to deaths and the lack of any ballistics tests or paraffin tests. findings from the investigation will be forwarded to human rights watch. hrw in turn, urged the doj to keep its promise "regarding the alleged failures of the police force in its anti-drug operations." in the same month, leila de lima, one of duterte's long-time critics, was acquitted of one of her three drug charges.  in june 2021, the international criminal court (icc) office of the prosecutor applied for authorization to open an investigation into the alleged crimes against humanity committed in president rodrigo duterte's violent campaign against drugs. it also sought to probe killings committed in davao city from 2011 to 2016. prosecutor fatou bensouda, whose term ends a week after the investigation announcement, said a preliminary probe that began
in february 2018 determined "that there is a reasonable basis to believe that the crimes against humanity of murder [have been] committed" in the philippines since rodrigo duterte's presidential election win in 2016. malacanang, through presidential spokesperson harry roque, responded to the claims by calling it "legally erroneous." the philippines cut its ties with the international criminal court in 2018 when the philippine supreme court junked petitions that challenged the country's plan to withdraw from the international tribunal. the decision to withdraw was a reaction to the icc's 2018 preliminary inquiry into accusations that duterte and other philippine officials had committed mass murder and crimes against humanity in the course of the drug crackdown.  operations the philippine national police manages oplan double barrel as part of its involvement in president rodrigo duterte's campaign against illegal drugs in the philippines. it consists of two main components: oplan tokhang and oplan hvt. tokhang is characterized as the lower barrel approach while hvt which stands for high value targets is described as the police's high barrel approach. the operation was launched in 2016.  the philippine police temporarily suspended its operations in october 2017 after a directive by president duterte amidst reports of abuse by the police with the philippine drug enforcement agency (pdea) taking over as the leading agency against illegal drug activities in the philippines. the police resumed operations in january 2018 with the police officially playing a supporting role to pdea in duterte's campaign.  oplan tokhang one component of the war on drugs by the administration of president rodrigo duterte is oplan tokhang. the name of the operation was derived from the cebuano words tuktok (knock) and hangyo (plead). as the name suggests, oplan tokhang involves the police visiting the houses of individuals suspected to be involved in the illegal drug trade or as users, to persuade them to stop their activities and submit themselves to authority for potential rehabilitation. a more comprehensive guideline by the philippine national police then under the leadership of police chief ronald dela rosa was released prior to the resumption of police operations on the war on drugs in january 2019 after it was temporarily postponed. tokhang is characterized as a police community relations operation.  under the guidelines, in a single operation, four police officers selected by the locality's police chief are designated as tokhangers to visit the suspects' houses in full uniform. they are to be accompanied by one member of the barangay, municipality, or city anti-drug abuse council, one representative from the pnp human-rights affairs office or any human
rights advocate and at least one from the religious sector, members of the media or other prominent personalities in the area. they are only allowed to enter the suspect's house upon the suspect's consent or the house owner. the police coordinates with the philippine drug enforcement agency and the local anti-drug abuse councils for the conduct of the operations. the guidelines include the option for drug suspects to surrender themselves to the police or the barangay hall and the option to avail of rehabilitation. they are not required to sign any document. if the suspect refuses to surrender or engage with the visiting oplan tokhang team, their case is to be submitted to the drug enforcement units, which will conduct relevant police operations including case build-up and negation.  the policy was first used in a more local scale in davao, when dela rosa was still the police chief of the locality, leading police visits to drug suspects houses. the word tokhang has become associated with killings related to the campaign against illegal drugs prior to the release of the guideline with the pdea chief general aaron aquino urging to discontinue the use "thokhang" to refer to the government's operations.  oplan hvt oplan high value targets (hvt) is a component of the philippine national police operations under operation double barrel which aims to arrest and neutralize individuals which the police allege to be involved in the country's illegal drug trade. they include drug lords and pushers who operate in groups. in its november 2016 report, the pnp directorate for intelligence said that of the 956 validated high-value targets identified by the national police since the start of the campaign, 23 were killed in police operations, 109 were arrested, and 361 surrendered. this accounts for over 54.6% of the total identified hvts while another 29 targets were listed as deaths under investigation. the pnp also reported that at least  worth of illegal drugs has been seized in the first four months of their campaign against hvts.  the high-value targets identified by the national police include albuera mayor rolando espinosa who earlier surrendered to the pnp before being killed in prison, and alleged number 2 visayas drug lord franz sabalones, the brother of san fernando, cebu mayor fralz sabalones, who surrendered to the pnp after being named by president duterte in his narco-list speech.  support of non-state actors rodrigo duterte's campaign against illegal drugs was aided by non-government organizations including rebel groups and vigilantes. the communist party of the philippines (cpp) and
its armed wing the new people's army (npa), initially cooperated with the government but withdrew its support for the government's campaign against drugs in august 2016 although the communist party vowed to continue its own operations, independent from the government's anti-drug campaign, against drug suspects.  the moro islamic liberation front, a rebel group at truce with the government,  forged a protocol with the philippine government in july 2017 in which it pledged to arrest and turn over drug suspects taking refuge in the rebel group's camps and would allow the government to conduct its anti-drug operations in areas controlled by the rebel group.  armed vigilantes and hired killers are also involved in the campaign, including the dreaded og imba vigilante gang.  youth casualties  on august 17, 2017, kian loyd delos santos, a 17-year-old grade 11 student, was shot dead in an antidrug operation in caloocan. cctv footage appeared to show kian being dragged by two policemen. police say they killed him in self-defense, and retrieved a gun and two packets of methamphetamine. delos santos was the son of an overseas filipino worker, a key demographic in support of duterte. the teenager's death caused condemnation by senators. his funeral on august 25, attended by more than a thousand people, was one of the largest protests to date against the drug war.  carl angelo arnaiz, a 19-year-old, last found in cainta, rizal, was tortured and shot dead also on august 17 (the same date kian delos santos was killed) by police after allegedly robbing a taxi in caloocan. his 14-year-old friend reynaldo de guzman, also known by the nickname "kulot," was stabbed to death thirty times and thrown into a creek in gapan, nueva ecija. the deaths of arnaiz and de guzman, along with the death of kian delos santos, triggered public outrage and condemnation.  human rights watch repeated their call for a un investigation. hrw asia director phelim kine commented: "the apparent willingness of philippine police to deliberately target children for execution marks an appalling new level of depravity in this so-called drug war." duterte called the deaths of arnaiz and de guzman (the former being a relative of the president on his mother's side) "sabotage," believing that some groups are using the philippine national police to destroy the president's public image. presidential spokesman abella said "it should not come as a
surprise that these malignant elements would conspire to sabotage the president's campaign to rid the philippines of illegal drugs and criminality," which "may include creating scenarios stoking public anger against the government."  on august 23, 2016, a 5-year-old student named danica may garcia was killed by a stray bullet coming from unidentified gunmen in dagupan city, pangasinan during an anti-drug operation. another minor, 4-year old skyler abatayo of cebu was killed by a stray bullet through an 'anti-drug operation'. in the first year of the drug war, 54 children were recorded as casualties. on the same week, a 15-year old by the name of angelika bonita (sometimes spelled "angelica") was killed while riding inside the toyota hilux of 48-year-old narco-lawyer rogelio bato jr., the attorney of rolando espinosa. the two were cruising in a subdivision near a mall  in marasbaras, tacloban when they were fired upon by m16s and .45 caliber guns. both were killed instantly. bato and bonita were not related and questions surround their relationship. rumors speculated that bonita was bato's girlfriend and that she was caught in the crossfire.  newly seated senator ronald dela rosa made a statement about the death of a 3-year-old child named myka ulpina in crossfire during police operations in rodriguez, rizal on june 29, 2019, reacting to the incident by saying "shit happens". it was alleged that renato dolofrina took his 3-year-old daughter hostage and that both were killed by the police after the father used the child as a "human shield." however, the family denied the allegations of hostage taking, insisting that the child was killed by a stray bullet. also, a police officer who went undercover to buy crystal meth died in an operation after suspected drug user dolofrina's companion discovered the ruse. a few days later, several militant groups and netizens, as well as opposition senators, condemned dela rosa's remarks. the commission of human rights also condemned the child's death.  on july 8, 2019, dela rosa apologized for his remarks and retracted his earlier statement, saying that the incident was "unfortunate."  reactions  local  senator risa hontiveros, an opponent of duterte, said that the drug war was a political strategy intended to persuade people that "suddenly the historically most important issue of poverty was no longer
the most important."  president duterte claimed to recognize poverty as a key problem of the country; the administration's 10-point socioeconomic agenda, no.8 is to improve social protection programs, including the conditional cash transfer program, to protect the poor. president duterte signed republic act (ra) no. 11315, or the community-based monitoring system (cbms) act. ra 11315 authorizing the government to adopt a cbms.  de lima expressed frustration with the attitude of filipinos towards extrajudicial killings: "they think that it's good for peace and order. we now have death squads on a national scale, but i'm not seeing public outrage."  president duterte has denied involvement in the 'davao death squad.' "it started in davao as a political issue. as a matter of fact, you go to davao, the dds is not really a dds. it was during the time 'sparrow versus the dds of government," president duterte said. the president has pointed out that not a single case was filed against him when senator leila de lima was chair of the commission on human rights for 7 years.  during his fourth sona, the president called on officials to work towards lifting 6 million filipinos out of poverty. according to data from pulse asia surveys, the poverty-stricken,classes d and e, never gave the president approval and trust ratings below 70% throughout the first half of his presidency. according to a pulse asia opinion poll conducted from july 2 to 8, 2016, 91% of filipinos "trusted" duterte. a survey conducted between february and may 2017, by pew research center, found that 78% of the filipinos support the drug war. a survey in september 2017 showed 88% support for the drug war, while 73% believed that extrajudicial executions were occurring. an independent survey in september 2017 showed that 88% of filipinos support the drug war. as of 2019, it is at 82%.  dela rosa announced in september 2016 that the drug war had "reduced the supply of illegal drugs in the country by some 80 to 90 percent", and said that the war was already being won, based on statistical and observational evidence.  aljazeera reported that john collins, director of the london school of economics international drug policy project, said: "targeting the supply side can have short-term effects. however, these are usually limited to creating market chaos rather than reducing the size of the market. ... what you learn is that you're going to war with a force of economics and the
force of economics tends to win out: supply, demand and price tend to find their own way." he said it was a "certainty" that "the philippines' new 'war' will fail and society will emerge worse off from it."  malacanang and the chief of police declared the drug war a success, claiming that supply has been cut by 90 percent, with the government regaining authority at national penitentiary bilibid where incarcerated leaders of cartels continue to control the narcotics chain from their swish cells.  in june 2017 the price of methamphetamine on the streets of manila was lower than it had been at the start of duterte's presidency, according to philippine drug enforcement agency data. gloria lai of the international drug policy consortium commented: "if prices have fallen, it's an indication that enforcement actions have not been effective".  the chairman of the philippine chamber of commerce and industry, sergio ortiz-luis jr., quelled fears that foreign investors might be put off by the increasing rate of killings in the country, explaining at a press conference on september 19, 2016, that investors only care about profit: "they don't care if 50% of filipinos are killing each other so long as they're not affected". on the following day the wall street journal reported that foreign investors, who account for half of the activity on the philippine stock exchange, had been "hightailing it out of town", selling $500 million worth of shares over the past month, putting pressure on the philippine peso which was close to its weakest point since 2009.  the archbishop of manila luis antonio tagle acknowledged that people were right to be "worried about extrajudicial killings", along with other "form[s] of murder": abortion, unfair labor practices, wasting of food, and "selling illegal drugs, pushing the youth into vices".  international  during his official state visit to the philippines in january 2017, japanese prime minister shinzo abe said: "on countering illegal drugs, we want to work together with the philippines through relevant measures of support". he offered financial assistance for philippine drug rehabilitation centers, and made no mention of deaths resulting from the drug war. he announced an $800 million official development assistance package to "promote economic and infrastructure development".  in june 2016, gary song-huann lin, the representative of taiwan in the philippines, welcomed duterte's plan to declare a war against criminality and illegal drugs. he said taiwan is ready to help the philippines combat cross-border crimes like human and drug trafficking
. he later reasserted on october that taiwan was an indispensable partner to the philippines' war on drugs. in 2018, ricardo parojinog, an alleged narcopolitician at ozamiz and the brother of reynaldo, was detained in taiwan for illegal immigration and later deported to the philippines; he was then found dead in september 2020.  on july 19, 2016, lingxiao li, spokesman for the chinese embassy in manila, announced china's support for the drug war: "china fully understands that the philippine government under the leadership of h. e. president rodrigo duterte has taken it as a top priority to crack down on drug-related crimes. china has expressed explicitly to the new administration china's willingness for effective cooperation in this regard, and would like to work out a specific plan of action with the philippine side." the statement made no reference to extrajudicial killings, and called illegal drugs the "common enemy of mankind". on september 27, the chinese ambassador zhao jianhua reiterated that "illegal drugs are the enemy of all mankind" in a statement confirming chinese support for the duterte administration.  indonesian national police chief general tito karnavian commented in regards to indonesia's rejection of a similar policy for indonesia: "shoot on sight policy leads to abuse of power. we still believe in the presumption of innocence. lethal actions are only warranted if there is an immediate threat against officers... there should not be a deliberate attempt to kill". in september 2016 budi waseso, head of indonesia's national anti-narcotics agency (bnn), said that he was currently contemplating copying the philippines' hardline tactics against drug traffickers. he said that the agency planned a major increase in armaments and recruitment. an agency spokesman later attempted to downplay the comments, stating: "we can't shoot criminals just like that, we have to follow the rules." most recently, indonesian president joko "jokowi" widodo used the language of "emergency" to ramp up the country's war on drugs, in a move that observers see as "in step with filipino president rodrigo duterte's" own campaign against the illegal drug trade.  on september 9, the prime minister of new zealand, john key spoke to duterte about "arguably better" ways to deal with drug issues. the then prime minister commented "now he didn't really give us a direct answer to what happens when and if innocent people get associated with what is essentially extra-judicial killings." the new zealand government has repeatedly spoken to duterte
regarding his war on drugs across several administrations since and there was some consideration in barring duterte from a layover arrival in new zealand following the 2016 apec summit in peru, due to his human rights record, mainly as a result of the war on drugs.  on october 16, prior to duterte's departure for a state visit to brunei, the president said he would seek the support of that country for his campaign against illegal drugs and brunei's continued assistance to achieve peace and progress in mindanao. this was responded to positively by brunei sultan hassanal bolkiah the next day according to philippine foreign affairs secretary perfecto yasay jr. malaysia's deputy prime minister ahmad zahid hamidi said "he respects the method undertaken by the philippine government as it is suitable for their country's situation", while stressing that "malaysia will never follow such an example as we have our own methods such as seizing assets used in drug trafficking with resultant funds to be channelled back towards rehabilitation, prevention and enforcement of laws against drugs".  on december 3, 2016, duterte said that during a phone conversation on the previous day with then-united states president-elect donald trump, trump had invited him to washington, and endorsed his drug-war policy, assuring him that it was being conducted "the right way". duterte described the conversation:   on december 16, duterte and singaporean president tony tan and prime minister lee hsien loong agreed to work together in the fight against terrorism and illegal drugs. in a meeting during a state visit both parties discussed areas of cooperation between the two countries.  the european parliament expressed concern over extrajudicial killings in a resolution september 15, stating: "drug trafficking and drug abuse in the philippines remain a serious national and international concern, note meps. they understand that millions of people are hurt by the high level of drug addiction and its consequences in the country but are also concerned by the 'extraordinarily high numbers killed during police operations in the context of an intensified anti-crime and anti-drug campaign."  in response, the foreign affairs secretary alan peter cayetano stated that the european parliament had crossed a red line when it called for interfering in the philippines' sovereignty. the resolution was said to be "biased, incomplete and even wrong information and does not reflect the true situation on the ground". in addition,the european parliament was also criticized when the philippine presidential spokesperson said that it is inconsistent that the european parliament will condemn the war against drugs, which is now also being financed partly by the european union especially in drug rehabilitation projects.  in response,
at a press conference duterte made an obscene hand gesture and called british and french representatives "hypocrites" because their ancestors had killed thousands of arabs and others in the colonial era. he said: "when i read the eu condemnation i told them fuck you. you are doing it in atonement for your sins. they are now strict because they have guilty feelings. who did i kill? assuming that it's true? 1,700? how many have they killed?"  eu trade commissioner cecilia malmstrom, in a visit to the philippines in march 2017, warned that unless the philippines addresses human rights issues, the eu would cancel tariff-free export of 6,000 products under the generalized system of preferences. presidential spokesman ernesto abella dismissed the concerns, saying that they revealed european ignorance.  on december 24, u.s. senators marco rubio, edward markey, and christopher coons expressed their concerns regarding the alleged extrajudicial killings and human rights violations in duterte's war on drugs. through a letter sent to the u.s. department of state, they noted that instead of addressing the drug problem, investing in treatment programs or approaching the issue with an emphasis on health, duterte has "pledged to kill another 20,000 to 30,000 people, many simply because they suffer from a drug use disorder." rubio, markey and coons also questioned u.s. secretary of state john kerry's pledge of $32-million funding for training and other law-enforcement assistance during his visit to manila. in may 2017, senator rubio, along with senator ben cardin, filed a bipartisan bill in the u.s. senate to restrict the exportation of weapons from the u.s. to the philippines.  the us ambassador in manila announced on december 14, 2016, that the us foreign aid agency, the millennium challenge corporation, would cancel funding to the philippines due to "significant concerns around rule of law and civil liberties in the philippines," explaining that aid recipients were required to demonstrate a "commitment to the rule of law, due process and respect for human rights." the mcc had disbursed $434 million to the philippines from 2011 to 2015. the funding denial was expected to lead to the cancellation of a five-year infrastructure development project previously agreed to in december 2015.  in february 2017, former colombian president cesar gaviria wrote an opinion piece on the new york times to warn duterte and the administration that the drug war is "unwinnable" and "disastrous," citing his own experiences
as the president of colombia. he also criticized the alleged extrajudicial killings and vigilantism, saying these are "the wrong ways to go." according to gaviria, the war on drugs is essentially a war on people. gaviria suggested that improving public health and safety, strengthening anti-corruption measures, investing in sustainable development, decriminalizing drug consumption, and strengthening the regulation of therapeutic goods would enhance supply and demand reduction. in response to gaviria, duterte called him an "idiot," and said the issue of extrajudicial killings should be set aside, and that there were four to five million drug addicts in the country.  in september 2017, foreign affairs secretary alan peter cayetano delivered a speech at the 72nd united nations general assembly, during which he argued that extrajudicial killings were a myth, and that the drug war, which according to human rights watch had resulted in 13,000 deaths to date, was being waged to "protect (the) human rights of...the most vulnerable (citizens)." in october 2017, cayetano was interviewed by al-jazeera. he asserted that all 3,900 people who were killed in the drug war had fought against the police, and that all of the killings were being investigated.  in january 2018, philippines' presidential spokesman harry roque relayed that indian prime minister narendra modi had expressed support for duterte's campaign against narcotics and also called for stronger cooperation against illegal drugs.  on may 27, 2020,a human rights watch report showed the impact of the "war on drugs" in the philippines. children and thousands of people have been killed during anti-drug raids, which the authorities have called "collateral damage," since president rodrigo duterte launched his "war on drugs" on june 30, 2016.  international criminal court the international criminal court (icc) chief prosecutor fatou bensouda expressed concern over the drug-related killings in the country on october 13, 2016. in her statement, bensouda said that the high officials of the country "seem to condone such killings and further seem to encourage state forces and civilians alike to continue targeting these individuals with lethal force." she also warned that any person in the country who provokes "or engages in acts of mass violence by ordering, requesting, encouraging or contributing, and in any other manner, to the commission of crimes within the jurisdiction of icc" will be prosecuted before the court. about that, duterte is open for the investigation by the icc, malacanang said.  in february 2018, the icc announced a "
preliminary examination" into killings linked to the philippine government's "war on drugs". prosecutor bensouda said the court will "analyze crimes allegedly committed in [the philippines] since at least 1 july 2016." duterte's spokesman harry roque dismissed the icc's decision as a "waste of the court's time and resources". in march, duterte announced his intention to withdraw the philippines from the icc tribunal, which is a process that takes a year.  in august 2018, activists and eight families of victims of the drug war filed a second petition with the icc, accusing duterte of murder and crimes against humanity, and calling for his indictment for thousands of extrajudicial killings, which according to the 50-page complaint, included "brazen" executions by police acting with impunity. neri colmenares, a lawyer acting for the group, said that "duterte is personally liable for ordering state police to undertake mass killings." duterte threatened to arrest the icc prosecutor bensouda.  united nations human rights council action on june 19, 2018, 38 united nations member states released a collective statement through the united nations human rights council (unhrc), calling on the philippines and president duterte to stop the killings in the country and probe abuses caused by the drug war. the 38 nations included australia, austria, belgium, bulgaria, canada, croatia, cyprus, czech republic, denmark, estonia, finland, france, georgia, germany, greece, iceland, ireland, italy, latvia, liechtenstein, lithuania, luxembourg, malta, macedonia, montenegro, the netherlands, new zealand, poland, portugal, romania, slovakia, slovenia, spain, sweden, switzerland, ukraine, the united kingdom and the united states.  on july 11, 2019, the unhrc adopted an iceland-proposed resolution calling on the council to look into the rising homicides related to the drug war and the human rights situation in the country. in response, president rodrigo duterte reacted to the resolution saying iceland has no crime because its people "just go about eating ice" while senators vicente sotto iii and imee marcos said that countries who voted in favor of the resolution lacked the moral high ground due to abortion being legal in most of these countries.  malacanang called the resolution "outrageous interference" in the sovereignty of the philippines as it has no jurisdiction to do so. the philippine government also said that iceland may have been fed with inaccurate information about the philippines' war on drugs, as the former has no embassy in the philippines.  the presidential spokesperson called
the resolution "grotesquely one-sided, outrageously narrow, and maliciously partisan." "it reeks of nauseating politics completely devoid of respect for the sovereignty of our country, even as it is bereft of the gruesome realities of the drug menace," he added.  according to the presidential human rights committee secretariat (phrcs) the government didn't find the need for such a country-specific inquiry on the philippines as there are so many existing mechanisms wherein the information in the country can be accessed.  the philippine government continues to subject itself to the universal periodic review every four years as well as different treaty bodies periodically. despite the mechanisms that are already in place, iceland resorted to such a move. "the position of the philippine government is that we will not respect such a resolution, but we will continue engaging the un through the different mechanisms which we already availed and always respected throughout the years. there was a certain sense of frustration because of the cases that were filed before the icc without first going through the domestic remedies and the domestic channels, wherein remedies can be considered to be able to address these cases that were brought before the attention of the icc. so the philippine government thought it was very disrespectful and violative of the processes," phrcs undersecretary severo catura said.  in june 2020, a report by the un human rights office condemned the philippine president's so-called "war on drugs" and stated that more than 8,000 people and at least 248 human rights defenders, journalists and trade unionists have died over the past five years.  two months after the un revealed that the philippine government's policies related to its war on drugs have caused systematic violations including killings, arbitrary detentions, and vilification of dissent, the government introduced hrc resolution no. 45. there was no voting for the resolution. it requested high commissioner michelle bachelet to provide support for the country in the continued fulfilment of its international human rights obligations and commitments.  following the un report, high commissioner michelle bachelet called for the united nations human rights council to consider supporting new accountability measures against perpetrators of extrajudicial killings in the philippines' war on illegal drugs whilst also reiterating concerns over proposed new anti-terror legislation, the anti-terrorism act of 2020 stating "the recent passage of the new anti-terrorism act heightens our concerns about the blurring of important distinctions between criticism, criminality and terrorism, the law could have a further chilling effect on human rights and humanitarian work, hindering support to vulnerable
and marginalized communities... so i would i urge the president to refrain from signing the law, and to initiate a broad-based consultation process to draft legislation that can effectively prevent and counter violent extremism, but which contains some safeguards to prevent its misuse against people engaged in peaceful criticism and advocacy." according to ms. bachelet's office, the campaign against illegal drugs has been linked to the deaths of 73 children. these figures "are not exhaustive...the youngest victim was five months old," the ohchr report noted. echoing these concerns, ms. bachelet underscored that the operation was being carried out "without due regard for the rule of law, due process and the human rights of people who may be using or selling drugs. the report finds that the killings have been widespread and systematic - and they are ongoing." the high commissioner also addressed long-running concerns of "near-impunity" for perpetrators of illegal killings during police operations highlighted in the report. it details how the philippines police internal affairs service (ias) automatically investigates any deaths that occur during police operations, and yet of more than 4,580 investigations, "the government has cited only one case - that of 17-year-old kian delos santos - where three police officers were convicted of a drug campaign-related killing". ms. bachelet added: "the state has an obligation to conduct independent investigations into the grave violations we have documented. in the absence of clear and measurable outcomes from domestic mechanisms, the council should consider options for international accountability measures."  accusations of genocide many observers have compared the mass killings of alleged users and dealers to a genocide, and the icc has opened a case of crimes against humanity. writing for the washington post, maia szalavitz argued that the campaign has not had much blowback because drug users are seen by many as worthless members of society and therefore easy targets. in his book dopeworld, author niko vorobyov has compared the drug war to the stages of annihilation outlined by raul hilberg to the holocaust:   identification - singling out a group of people as subhuman. duterte has said meth addicts have shrunken brains.  confiscation and concentration - finding a way of taking those people's property, before taking themselves away, either to prisons, concentration camps, or to be deported.  annihilation - the final solution, where the unwanted people(s) are simply exterminated.  duterte has himself likened his actions to hitler. at a press conference on september
30, 2016, duterte appeared to make a comparison between the drug war and the holocaust. he said that "hitler massacred three million jews. now there are three million drug addicts. i'd be happy to slaughter them." his remarks generated an international outcry. united states secretary of defense ash carter said the statement was "deeply troubling." the german government told the philippine ambassador that duterte's remarks were "unacceptable." on october 2, duterte announced, "i apologize profoundly and deeply to the jewish." he explained, "it's not really that i said something wrong but rather they don't really want you to tinker with the memory."  in popular media  television and film in 2016, director brillante mendoza filmed ma' rosa, which follows the story of a mother who sells the local methamphetamine. the film's main actress, jaclyn jose, won  best actress at the cannes film festival of the same year. in 2018, mendoza filmed alpha: the right to kill, which follows similar themes of poverty, drugs, and corruption in the police force. in the same year, netflix aired its first series from the philippines entitled amo, also made by mendoza.  the long-running action drama series ang probinsyano has also tackled the issue in its storyline. the show's portrayal of the pnp and its handling of the drug war, however, was criticized by the pnp chief oscar albayalde because of its alleged negative portrayal. the pnp at one point also withdrew its support for the show and threatened legal action if the show's story was not changed. netizens, politicians, artists and others, on the other hand, defended the show's depiction of the police force and of the drug war.  in 2018, alyx ayn arumpac filmed the documentary aswang, which frames events related to the drug war, trailing journalists and interviewing left-behinds of the victims. it premiered at the international documentary film festival amsterdam (idfa) in the netherlands.  also in 2018, the action film buybust was released which similarly tackled the subject of the drug war. the film was released imternationally and was an entry to the 2018 new york asian film festival.  in 2019, a multi-award-winning joint production by pbs and the bbc, on the president's orders highlights the war on drugs in the philippines. produced and directed by two-time emmy award-winning and five-time bafta-nominated director james jones, also filmed and directed by emmy award-winner for cinematography
olivier sarbil.  music hustisya is a rap song about the drug war which was created by local artists inspired by the death of their friend immortalized in a photograph often compared to michelangelo's pieta.  in december 2016, american singer james taylor posted on social media that he had canceled his concert in manila, which was set for february 2017, citing the increasing number of deaths related to the drug war.  the 2017 song manila ice, by musician eyedress, and its music video depict violence and corruption and were created as a response to the drug war.  in may 2019, pdea called for a ban on rapper shanti dope's song amatz for allegedly promoting marijuana use, which is illegal in the philippines. the concerned artists of the philippines criticized the pdea for the attempt to suppress freedom of expression. in june 2019, the national telecommunications commission ordered the kapisanan ng mga brodkaster ng pilipinas (association of broadcasters of the philippines) to stop the airing of the song.  the 2019 rap album kolateral tells the story of the philippine drug war through the eyes of the drug war's victims. the album features 12 songs by artists blkd (pronounced balakid), calix, and others.  on december 10, 2019, irish musician bono of u2 sent a message to duterte during his visit to manila for concert tour, saying that he "can't compromise on human rights." in a press conference, bono said that he had been a member of amnesty international and he is "critical" when it comes to human rights. during the u2's concert, the band paid tribute to important women in the history such as late president corazon aquino and rappler ceo maria ressa by flashing the images on the large screen.  photography on april 11, 2017, the new york times won a pulitzer prize for breaking news photography on their philippine drug war report. the story was published on december 7, 2016, and was titled "they are slaughtering us like animals."  the la pieta or the "philippines pieta," named after the sculpture by michelangelo, refers to the photograph of jennilyn olayres holding the lifeless corpse of michael siaron, who was shot dead by unidentified assailants in pasay, metro manila, on july 23, 2016. the image was widely used in the national press. the death of michael siaron remains unsolved for almost a year. malacanang asserts that the man behind the killing were committed by drug syndicates themselves. after siaron was shot dead by unidentified
assailants, a writing on a cardboard states, "wag tularan si siaron dahil pusher umano," was placed on his body. one year and three months after he was killed, the police identified the suspected assailant as nesty santiago through a ballistic exam on the recovered firearm. santiago was apparently a member of a syndicate involved in robberies, car thefts, hired killings and illegal drugs. the pasay city police declared his death as "case closed." however, santiago was also killed by riding-in-tandem on december 29, 2016. no further investigation were made.  a photo of a body of an alleged drug dealer, killed during a police anti-drug operation, in manila by noel celis has been selected as one of time magazine's top 100 photos of 2017.  mobile gaming there are various mobile games featuring duterte fighting criminals, many of which have since been removed by apple inc. from their app store following an appeal by various regional organizations.  contemporary art  in 2016, a group of artists exhibited everyday impunity: ang mga walang pangalan during art fair philippines. it was curated by erwin romulo, with photography by carlo gabuco, music by juan miguel sobrepena, sound system design by mark laccay, and lighting design by lyle sacris. the exhibit reveals a wall of photographs by gabuco, taken from his coverage of the philippine drug war. central to the exhibit space is a blue sofa, which is revealed to be from the crime scene where a drug suspect was supposedly shot. the spectator is invited to sit and to hear the suspect's daughter, who talks about her father and their life in payatas.  a work of muralist archie oclos is also attributed to the philippine drug war. his work entitled ang mamatay nang dahil sa iyo at the cultural center of the philippines shows a dead body wrapped in a blanket. the work consists of 20,000 black ink strokes, roughly the estimated number of drug war casualties.  literature   an anthology of poems, bloodlust: philippine protest poetry (from marcos to duterte), was published in 2017. edited by alfred yuzon and gemino abad, the book contains works by 65 filipino poets writing about dictatorship, mass killings, and related subjects.  reuters also covered the war on drugs with their 2018 pulitzer prize winning special report, duterte's war, by clare baldwin, andrew marshall, and manuel mogato.  see also 2017 bureau of customs drug smuggling scandal comprehensive dangerous drugs act of 2002 bangladesh
drug war mexican drug war thailand drug war illegal drug trade in the philippines illegal firearm trade in the philippines mega drug treatment and rehabilitation center war on drugs  notes  references  external links  the nightcrawlers - national geographic documentary on the photojournalists covering the philippine drug war (geo-locked, may require vpn)  on the president's orders - award-winning documentary. "a searing, on-the-ground look at president rodrigo duterte's deadly campaign against suspected drug dealers and users in the philippines"  ang pangako - interactive philippine drug war victim map (click on victims panel toggle button at upper left)  paalam - remembering the victims of the drug war  duterte's war - inside the bloody drug crackdown in the philippines. reuters series, winner of the 2018 pulitzer prize for international reporting  the drug archive - a data-driven examination of the philippine antidrug campaign  the killing state: the unrelenting war against human rights  summary and extrajudicial killings in the philippines.pdf , a submission to the united nations human rights council for the universal periodic review of the philippines (3rd cycle, 27th session, 2017), (ateneo human rights center) the kill list - published by the philippine daily inquirer in an attempt to document the casualties of the philippine drug war. the duterte list: judges, mayors, police officials linked to drugs - a list of officials who are allegedly involved in the drug trade named by president rodrigo duterte on early morning of august 7, 2016.    2016 in the philippines 2017 in the philippines 2018 in the philippines conflicts in 2016 conflicts in 2017 conflicts in 2018 crime in the philippines human rights abuses in the philippines duterte administration controversies organized crime conflicts in the philippines operations against organized crime 21st century in the philippines history of the philippines (1986-present) extrajudicial killings law enforcement controversies in the philippines
the jayu motorway (also called jayu-ro, , lit. freedom road) is a major north-south arterial highway in south korea. its southern terminus is in seoul, while its northern terminus is at national route 1's reunification bridge leading into the dmz. north korea is visible from a section of the highway stretching from seongdong-ri to ogeum-ri. its shape closely parallels the northern bank of the han river and is heavily fortified with barbed wire and military observatories. it is part of national route 77.  this route connects seoul (gayang bridge), goyang (ilsan) to paju (munsan, panmunjeom), with a total length of .  the highway is directly connected with the gangbyeonbuk-ro at gayang bridge.  history  may 19, 1990 - construction begin  august, 1992 - haengju bridge~tongil observatory section(29 km) opens to traffic.  september, 1994 - tongil observatory~jayu bridge(자유의다리) section(17.5 km) opens to traffic.  compositions  lanes   dangdong ic ~ jayu ic: 4  nakha ic - dangdong ic: 6  nakha ic - isanpo jc: 8  gayang bridge - isanpo jc: 10  length  speed limits  90 km/h  list of facilities   ic: interchange, jc: junction, sa: service area, tg:tollgate  jayuro ghost  the highway is also notable for its variant of the vanishing hitchhiker called the jayuro ghost. the area frequently experiences foggy weather and thus has a high rate of automobile collisions. according to the narrative, a woman can sometimes be seen along the side of the road wearing sunglasses. upon closer inspection it is revealed that the so-called sunglasses are actually the woman's gouged-out eyes. another version of the narrative has a driver picking up the ghost, only for the ghost to direct the driver to a cemetery or disappear when the driver reaches the destination.  see also list of streets in seoul olympicdaero gimpo hangang highway  1992 establishments in south korea roads in seoul roads in gyeonggi
endeavour is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal published by elsevier. it began as a scientific review publication published by imperial chemical industries in 1942, and since has evolved into a scholarly journal covering the fields of history and philosophy of science, technology, and medicine. its editor-in-chief is don opitz (depaul university).  history the journal was established during world war ii, releasing its first issue in january 1942. it began as a scientific review journal published by the public relations department of imperial chemical industries, with support from the british government. it was initially published in english, french, german, and spanish editions. it later added an italian edition. through the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s, the journal was distributed to scientists and academic libraries around europe in an effort to promote scientific internationalism. ici continued to run the journal as its house technical publication until january 1977, when it became the property of pergamon press, a commercial publisher. pergamon then started renumbering the volumes, starting with volume 1 in 1977. elsevier acquired pergamon press in 1991 and has published the journal since.  in the 1990s, endeavour moved away from publishing scientific reviews and began to focus on the history of science. it is now commonly listed among journals in history, sts, and hps.  abstracting and indexing  the journal is abstracted and indexed by:  according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2017 impact factor of 0.500.  references  external links     quarterly journals elsevier academic journals history of science journals english-language journals publications established in 1942 1942 establishments in the united kingdom
the 1917 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1917 college football season.  in their 11th season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 4-3 record and outscored their opponents, 203 to 105. tackle warren allen was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
flavio romero de velasco (22 december 1925 - 2 july 2016) was a mexican politician and lawyer. he held the office of governor of jalisco, one of mexico's most important states, from march 1977 until february 1983. prior to becoming governor, romero served as a deputy in the federal  chamber of deputies for three separate tenures.  romero was born and raised city of ameca, jalisco. he earned his law degree from the national autonomous university of mexico (unam), where he also received a degree in philosophy.   he served in the federal chamber of deputies for three terms: 1955-1958 for the viii federal electoral district of jalisco; 1961-1964 for the iii  federal district of jalisco in the xlv legislature; and 1973-1976 for the ix federal electoral district of jalisco in the xlix legislature. he was the president of the chamber of deputies in 1955.he also worked as an aide and advisor during the 1958 presidential campaign of adolfo lopez mateos. he became a customs administrator in the northern, border city of ciudad juarez, chihuahua.  romero, a member of the ruling institutional revolutionary party (pri), held the position of governor of jalisco from 1977 to 1983. romero was inaugurated on march 1, 1977. one of governor romero's first priorities was a crack down on left-wing guerillas, who were active in jalisco during the 1970s.  under romero, the state government launched sistecozome, the bus public transportation system for the city of guadalajara in 1982. romero also renovated much of guadalajara's city center, which culminated with the construction and opening of the city's large plaza tapatia, also in 1982, although such process involved the demolition of most of the historical buildings from the spanish colonial epoch.  on january 23, 1998, romero was arrested and charged with aiding drug trafficking. romero denied the charges and accused the then-president ernesto zedillo of being behind his arrest due to a political vendetta. romero was released from prison on july 14, 2001, and later acquitted due to lack of evidence.  flavio romero de velasco died on july 2, 2016, at the age of 90.  references  1925 births 2016 deaths governors of jalisco members of the chamber of deputies (mexico) presidents of the chamber of deputies (mexico) politicians from jalisco institutional revolutionary party politicians mexican lawyers national autonomous university of mexico alumni people from ameca, jalisco 20th-century mexican politicians
the 1905 news of the world match play was the third news of the world match play tournament. it was played from tuesday 3 to thursday 5 october at walton heath golf club. 32 players competed in a straight knock-out competition, with each match contested over 18 holes, except for the final which was over 36 holes. the winner received £100 out of a total prize fund of £240. james braid defeated tom vardon 4 & 3 in the final to win the tournament.  qualification entry was restricted to members of the professional golfers' association (pga). qualification was by a series of 36-hole stroke-play competitions; one for each of the six pga sections. the southern section had 16 qualifiers, the midland and northern sections had 5 each, the scottish section 3, the irish section 2 and the welsh section 1. in the event of a tie for places there was a playoff. compared to 1904 one entry was allocated to the new welsh section with the number of qualifiers from the northern section being reduced to five.  the qualifiers were:  irish section: tom hood, fred smyth midland section: george cawsey, john hutchings, willie lewis, john whiting, tom williamson northern section: george duncan, sandy herd, percy hills, david mcewan, bertie snowball southern section: james braid, george carter, harry cawsey, james hepburn, rowland jones, arthur mitchell, wilfrid reid, ernest riseborough, jack rowe, ralph smith, j.h. taylor, alfred toogood, harry vardon, tom vardon, william webb, jack white scottish section: jock hutchison, andrew kirkaldy, arnaud massy welsh section: fred collins  format the format was unchanged. matches were over 18 holes except for the final which was over 36 holes. extra holes were played in the event of a tied match. two rounds were played on the first day, two more on the second day with the final on the third day.  results source:  w/o = walk over scr = scratched  prize money the winner received £100 and a gold medal, the runner-up £30 and a silver medal, the losing semi-finalists £15 and a bronze medal, while the third round losers received £10 and the second round losers received £5.  references  golf tournaments in england news of the world match play news of the world match play october 1905 sports events
terminal is a 2018 neo-noir thriller film written and directed by vaughn stein. the film stars margot robbie alongside an ensemble cast, featuring simon pegg, dexter fletcher, max irons, and mike myers. the plot follows the intertwining lives of two assassins, a fatally ill teacher, a custodian, and a waitress, all of whom become part of a murderous plan.  the film is an international co-production between  ireland, the united kingdom, hungary, hong kong, and the united states. principal photography took place in budapest, hungary during may 2016.  terminal was released in north america on 11 may 2018, by rlje films. the film premiered in the united kingdom on 26 june 2018 at the edinburgh international film festival as part of the american dreams strand. it was released theatrically in the united kingdom and ireland on 6 july 2018 by arrow films. the film received generally negative reviews from critics, who criticized the plot, narrative, pacing, and direction, though some praised robbie's performance and the visual style. it was also a box office bomb, grossing a mere $843,970.  plot a young woman meets a mysterious employer in a confession booth and implores him to employ her as his sole contract killer. to prove her worth, she offers to eliminate his other contractors. in exchange for her efforts, she asks if he can find someone for her. bill is standing on a deserted train platform and is told by a limping janitor that no trains will be coming until 4:04 in the morning. the janitor suggests he wait in the 24-hour cafe. there, he converses with annie, a waitress, who notices that he has a terminal disease, and is suicidal. she discusses various ways he can kill himself.   the story shifts to three weeks earlier; illing, a hitman, is captured by annie, who is posing as a prostitute. he awakes to find himself handcuffed to a bed before annie incapacitates and kills him.  mr. franklyn, the employer, calls his two hitmen - vince and alfred - and orders them to pick up a briefcase from the lockers at the terminal. they take it to the cafe and find a pack of matches and an envelope of money. they wonder why mr. franklyn has called on them, and not illing. the match pack is from a strip joint, where they find a dancer resembling the waitress annie from earlier. she takes the envelope of money as payment for passing on
information about the hit mr. franklyn wants them to do. she comes on strong to alfred but is dismissive of vince. the hitmen are told to wait in an apartment and to shoot a person in the window opposite when told. vince is also secretly told via a phone call to then kill alfred. the waitress tells alfred that vince will try to kill him, so alfred should kill vince once the hit is completed. mr. franklyn watches from his lair, with monitors displaying camera footage of the cafe and the hitmen's hideout.  back at the train terminal, the waitress takes bill to an abandoned air shaft and tries to talk him into committing suicide. although he described throwing himself down a deep, dark hole as his final act, he cannot jump. the waitress teases him, and bill tells the waitress that she is a "naughty girl". this triggers a memory from his days as a school teacher, where he had two girls in his class that he abused. the waitress reveals that she is one of those girls, and then she stabs bill in the neck with his pen and pushes him down the shaft. meanwhile, mr. franklyn calls the hitmen's apartment and says that they should be ready to take the shot. vince trains his sniper's rifle at the window across the courtyard but is surprised to find annie in his crosshairs. alfred pulls his gun on vince and disarms him. annie comes over and alfred shoots vince. alfred and annie leave the apartment and run into the janitor, who is arriving to clean up the murder scene.  back in the terminal, the waitress turns on alfred, tells him that she is not infatuated with him, and shoots him dead. the janitor comes along to clean up the body. the waitress decides to help the janitor take the bodies to the top of the air shaft and drop them both into it. the janitor returns to the terminal and enters the janitor's closet, which is actually mr. franklyn's control center. he is revealed to be mr. franklyn in disguise, removing his prosthetic bad teeth and fake latex skin. he stops limping and walks normally. there are dozens of attache cases lined up for future jobs. as he leaves his "closet", he is accosted by the waitress and her doppelganger, revealed to be a set of twins, annie and bonnie.  the twins tie up mr. franklyn and describe how their mother died. she was being pursued by her partner, revealed
to be mr. franklyn - a.k.a. clinton sharp - after she witnessed him murder someone and ran back to her flat to protect her twin girls. mr. franklyn poured gasoline in her home, and set it on fire. the mother had time to push the girls out a broken window, but could not save herself. after that, the twins spent the rest of their childhood in an orphanage being molested by bill. the twins tell mr. franklyn that he is their biological father and they are ready to exact their revenge. despite mr. franklyn's pleas for mercy, the twins  lobotomize him, finally kill him, then walk out of the terminal together.  cast  production  development on 12 february 2016, it was announced that margot robbie would headline and produce a "noir thriller" written and directed by vaughn stein, through her production company luckychap entertainment. highland film group would be handling finance and introducing the project to international buyers in berlin. creative artists agency would handle domestic distribution sales in the united states. david barron of beagle pug films was also attached to the project as a producer. on 24 may 2016, simon pegg, mike myers, max irons and dexter fletcher joined the cast alongside robbie. this film marks mike myers's first non-documentary film since 2012.  filming principal photography on the film began in may 2016 in budapest, hungary, and lasted over the course of 27 nights. by september 2016, post production was near completion and a rough cut was screened at the 2016 toronto international film festival for potential international buyers.  distribution highland film group attended the 2017 cannes film festival for selling distribution rights for the film. on 24 january 2018, rlje films acquired distribution rights in the united states. initially, in september 2016, icon film distribution acquired distribution rights for the united kingdom and ireland. however, in february 2018, arrow films overtook distribution rights.  release terminal received a limited theatrical release and was simultaneously released through video on demand in the united states on 11 may 2018 by rlje films. the film premiered in the united kingdom on 26 june 2018 at the edinburgh international film festival as part of the american dreams strand. it was released theatrically in limited theatres in the united kingdom and ireland on 6 july 2018 by arrow films. on 9 september 2016, the first official image of the film was released at the toronto international film festival, featuring robbie in character. the film was released "unrated" in the united states by the motion picture association of america. in the united kingdom, it
received a 15 certificate by the british board of film classification for "strong language, violence, suicide references, threat". in ireland, the film was given a 16 certificate by the irish film classification office for "strong violence, injury and language, and suicide theme".  home media the film was released on blu-ray and dvd in the united states on 26 june 2018 by rlj entertainment. it was released on blu-ray, dvd, digital and on demand in the united kingdom and ireland on 6 august 2018 by arrow video.  reception terminal received generally negative reviews from critics, with many criticising the plot, pacing, direction and narrative, though robbie's performance and the film's visual style and production values received praise. on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of  based on  reviews, and an average rating of . the site's critical consensus reads, "worth seeking out for only the most hardcore of margot robbie completists, terminal lives down to the medical definition of its title in dreadfully derivative fashion." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 27 out of 100, based on 20 critics, indicating "generally unfavorable reviews".  rolling stones peter travers panned the film, awarding zero stars, stating, "the title of this wretched tarantino-meets-blade runner noir rip-off doubles as a diagnosis". rex reed of the new york observer also awarded zero stars, calling the film "a turgid, pretentious, and incomprehensible existential joke." david edelstein of vulture gave a negative review, criticising the plot's focus, saying, "since the film doesn't establish a baseline of reality, it's hard to pick out a premise." david ehrlich of indiewire gave the film a d, writing, "vaughn stein's terminal takes a mess of dead tropes and frankensteins them together into a crime saga that's in desperate need of brains. and a soul. and a story." jacob knight of birth.movies.death. heavily criticised stein's direction and wrote, "no amount of pretty pictures could save a script this abysmally written. stein has penned scene after scene after scene of nasty people talking circles around one another, no character defined by anything beyond their comic book-ready aesthetic." jeffrey m. anderson of the san francisco examiner awarded the film two and a half stars out of four, describing the film as "mediocre", though praising robbie's performance, writing, "robbie is a bright one, and even though terminal isn
't much, it offers a chance to watch her shine." clint worthington of consequence of sound heavily criticised stein's direction, calling the film a "waste of time" and "an entirely empty exercise in dated, exhausting hyper-stylized filmmaking."  richard roeper of the chicago sun-times praised the film, awarding three out of four stars, writing, "the final 15 minutes or so of terminal are flat-out nutso. one can imagine robbie, myers et al., breaking into laughter after hearing "cut!" - not out of disrespect for the material, but out of sheer giddiness for having the opportunity to try something so audacious. even when it doesn't work, terminal is a film with never a dull moment." kenneth seward jr. of ign gave a mostly positive review, scoring the film a 7.5 out of 10, indicating it is "good", stating, "terminal is an interesting revenge story that mostly works. there are a few missteps, namely a few wasted characters and a straight forward plot made needlessly complicated. still, vaughn stein should be pleased with what's here." colin covert of the minneapolis star tribune gave a highly positive review, awarding three and a half out of four stars, praising the film's visual style, noting, "every moment of terminal engages the eye, and - unexpectedly - the mind. even the makeup is arresting - the arterial red of annie's lipstick is hypnotic."  james berardinelli of reelviews gave a mixed review, awarding the film two and a half stars out of four, writing, "at its best, terminal is a tasty, tangy parfait - a kaleidoscope of neon-tinged visuals and a twisty storyline with a tortured timeline." however, he criticised the film's ending as "generic" and "anticlimactic". john defore of the hollywood reporter gave a mostly negative review criticising stein's direction, writing, "an airless debut that says much about its writer-director's cultural diet and little about anything else in the world, vaughn stein's terminal blends tropes from several sorts of crime flicks into a soundstagey affair that's more brittle than hard-boiled." jeannette catsoulis of the new york times also gave a negative review, calling the film "a flashy, hyperstylized bore." shaun munro of flickering myth gave a mostly positive review, stating, "it's messy and navel-gazingly ostentatious, but fitfully entertaining
thanks largely to a scene-stealing, against-type performance from simon pegg."  references  external links       2018 films 2018 crime thriller films american crime thriller films american films american films about revenge american neo-noir films british crime thriller films british films british films about revenge british neo-noir films films about contract killing films about twin sisters films produced by david barron films produced by margot robbie films produced by tom ackerley films shot in budapest hong kong crime thriller films hong kong films hong kong films about revenge hong kong neo-noir films hungarian crime thriller films hungarian films irish crime thriller films irish films luckychap entertainment films patricide in fiction
the metropolis of banat () is a metropolis of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the archdiocese of timisoara; its suffragan dioceses are the archdiocese of arad and the diocese of caransebes. the headquarters is the metropolitan cathedral in timisoara. it covers the romanian portion of the historic region of banat. it is the successor of a metropolis attested to the early 18th century that later became a diocese before being dissolved in the mid-19th century. the modern metropolis was established in april 1947.  the diocese of gyula in hungary and the diocese of dacia felix in serbia used to work under the metropolis of banat, but in 2009, they were transferred under the subordination of the patriarch of all romania.  metropolitan bishops vasile lazarescu (october 1947 - december 1961) nicolae corneanu (march 1962 - september 2014) ioan selejan (from december 2014)  notes  external links  official site    banat 1947 establishments in romania banat religious organizations based in timisoara
abimbola ayodeji abolarinwa (born ), is a nigerian physician. she was the first female urologist in nigeria.  life born in england, united kingdom to a mother who is a lawyer and a father who is a nigerian air force officer and surgeon, abolarinwa is a native of illofa, a suburb of oke ero local government area of kwara state. she had her primary school education at air force primary school, kaduna and her secondary school education at air force girls military school, jos before she proceeded to study medicine at the university of ibadan, ibadan, graduating in 2004. upon graduation, she did her internship in the nigerian air force hospital, ikeja, lagos state and thereafter completed her compulsory national youth service corps service nigerian army reference hospital, kaduna where she worked as a medical officer. in 2009, she got employed by the lagos state university teaching hospital, where she currently works, for her residency training in surgery. in october 2013, she became a certified urologist after she passed the part 2 west african college of surgeons examination. she is a recent recipient of the first awards known as the zakilo awards for pioneers in their field of endeavors in january 2019. she is a lecturer at the lagos state university college of medicine and an honorary consultant to the lagos state university teaching hospital, ikeja  references  1979 births living people nigerian urologists nigerian women medical doctors yoruba women physicians university of ibadan alumni yoruba people
pesi girsch (1954) is a german-born israeli photographer.  biography  pesi girsch was born in munich, germany to holocaust survivors. in 1968, she immigrated to israel with her mother and four siblings. she studied sculpture with rudi lehmann. after serving in the army, she studied drawing with yosef schwartzman and traveled to germany to continue her studies. in 1977, she moved to zaire, africa with her husband. two years later, she resettled in tel aviv-yafo.  art career in the 1980s, she abandoned sculpture, studying photography and education at the midrasha le'omanut.  among her best-known work is the photography series "glory to the photographer's model" (1991) in which she shows staged portraits of figures in the water with ritualistic overtones. in natures mortes from the early 2000s, girsch shows still life using the corpses of dead animals. stark, symmetrical compositions and lyrical lighting invest the photographs with symbolic meaning.  education  1969-74 sculpture with rudi lehmann  1972-74 drawing with yosef schwartzman, tel aviv  1974-77 sculpture, academy of fine arts, munich, germany  1982-87 photography, art teachers college, ramat hasharon  1982-87 meisterschule of kathe kollwitz, tel aviv  teaching  from 1986 wizo france school, tel aviv, photography  from 1992 haifa university, creative art group  awards and recognition  1988 the america-israel cultural fund scholarship   1988 gerard levy prize for a young photographer, israel museum, jerusalem  1989 prize for a young artist, ministry of education  1995 grant from german academy, berlin, for exchange of artists  1999 hadassah and raphael klatchkin grant for art, america-israel cultural foundation  2001 eli oshorov prize for an outstanding artist; painter and sculptors association, tel aviv  2001 prize, ministry of education and culture  references  external links         israeli artists 1954 births bezalel academy of arts and design faculty german emigrants to israel 20th-century german jews jewish israeli artists living people
ollie thorley (born 11 september 1996) is an english rugby union player who plays for gloucester in the premiership rugby.  club career thorley made his professional debut at age 17, becoming the youngest player to play for gloucester in the professional era when he played the full 80 minutes, partnered with world cup winner mike tindall in a anglo-welsh cup match against northampton saints in november 2013. ollie became the club's youngest first team try scorer when he crossed against ospreys in march 2015 in the anglo-welsh cup and he marked his debut in the aviva premiership, from off the bench, with the game's only try against the exeter chiefs in april 2016.  in november 2017, he was awarded try of the week for his week 8 try against saracens.  following a spate of tries and man of the match presentations, thorley was awarded the gallagher premiership rugby player of the month for november 2018.  ollie won the rpa young player of the year award for the 2018/2019 season and the premiership rugby try of the season award.  in the 2019/2020 season ollie thorley was named the gallagher premiership top try scorer with a total of 11 tries. this was also the most number of tries scored by a gloucester player in a premiership season. in the same season ollie thorley also became one of only 3 players to have scored four first-half tries in a gallagher premiership game as gloucester beat leicester 46-30 at kingsholm.  international career thorley was selected for the england u18s for the summer tour in south africa after winning the fira/aer european championship in april 2016 beating ireland 30-14 in poland.  he was also selected for the england u20s, winning every cap and part of winning the 2016 irb junior world championship defeating ireland 45-19 at city of manchester stadium in manchester  thorley was selected for the senior england squad for the first time when eddie jones announced his 2019 six nations squad after a string of impressive performances for his club, gloucester. he was called up again for the 2020 six nations championship.  on 31 october 2020 he made his england debut from the bench in england's delayed final six nations match against italy, to become the 2020 six nations champions.  personal life thorley attended st paul's cathedral school until the age of seven, whereupon his family moved out of london and to the cotswolds. he then attended cheltenham college junior school and cheltenham college, respectively - the latter of which he was deputy head boy. he captained the cc
1st xv in upper sixth, and the athletics team.  upon moving to the cotswolds, thorley also played club rugby for stow on the wold rfc before being spotted as a rising star.  thorley is the great nephew of martin britt, a former football player who played as a striker for west ham united and blackburn rovers from 1961 to 1968. his aunt is the tv presenter and model eku edewor.  references  external links gloucester rugby profile england profile  1996 births living people english rugby union players gloucester rugby players rugby union players from london england international rugby union players
nigel "neil" lloyd (born 1 october 1966) is an antiguan former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people antigua and barbuda male cyclists olympic cyclists of antigua and barbuda cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
lutgarde raskin is a belgian-american scientist and professor of environmental engineering.  she is best known for her studies of microbial ecology in engineered water systems for sewage treatment and drinking water production.  raskin earned her b.s. and m.s. in engineering and her b.s. in economics from katholieke universiteit leuven.  in 1993, she completed her ph.d. at the university of illinois.  from 1993-2005, she was a member of the faculty of the university of illinois.  since 2005, she has been a member of the faculty of the university of michigan where she currently holds the altarum institute/erim russell o'neal endowed professorship.  raskin is a fellow of the american academy of microbiology (aam) and the water environment federation (wef).  in 2006, she won the walter  l. huber  civil  engineering  research  prize from the american society of civil engineers, in 2007, she won the frontier award in research from the association of environmental engineering and science professors, and in 2016, she won the isme/iwa biocluster award. in 2021, raskin was elected a member of the national academy of engineering for, "application of genetic tools to improve anaerobic biological water treatment."  raskin has advocated for changes in the operation of drinking water treatment facilities to encourage the growth of potentially beneficial microorganisms.  in the wake of the flint water crisis, she responded to allegations by marc edwards that researchers at the university of michigan declined to collaborate on joint research of the problem.  references  external links  google scholar  environmental engineers living people university of michigan faculty university of illinois faculty ku leuven alumni university of illinois alumni year of birth missing (living people)
edoardo albinati (born 11 october 1956) is an italian novelist.  life and career  born in rome, after  albinati started his career as a translator, a script adaptor and as editor of the magazine nuovi argomenti.  he made his debut as a writer in 1988, with a collection of short stories titled arabeschi della vita morale. his 1989 novel il polacco lavatore di vetri was adapted into a film, the ballad of the windshield washers by peter del monte. from the mid-1990s he works at the rebibbia prison as a teacher. in 2002 and in 2004 he took part to two un high commission for refugees missions in afghanistan and chad, also writing several reports published by the newspapers corriere della sera and la repubblica.  in 2004 albinati won the viareggio prize with the novel svenimenti. in 2006 he co-wrote with actor filippo timi the novel tuttalpiu muoio, which later timi adapted into a stage drama. in 2015 he collaborated with matteo garrone for the screenplay of the fantasy film tale of tales. in 2016 he won the strega prize with the semi-autobiographical novel la scuola cattolica.  selected english translations   coming back: diary of a mission to afghanistan (2014, trans. howard curtis)  the catholic school (2019, trans. antony shugaar)  references  external links    1956 births living people writers from rome 20th-century italian male writers 21st-century italian male writers 20th-century italian novelists 21st-century italian novelists viareggio prize winners strega prize winners 20th-century italian translators italian male novelists
george arnold (1881, hong kong - 1962) was a british entomologist who  specialised in aculeate hymenoptera (particularly ants, sphecid wasps and pompilid wasps).  from the royal college of science he was appointed to the department of cytology and cancer research at liverpool and then only worked on hymenoptera as a hobby. in 1911 he became curator, and later director, of the national museum of southern rhodesia, bulawayo.  the butterfly species anthene arnoldi, or arnold's hairtail, was named after him by neville jones in 1918.  works many scientific papers in annals of the south african museum and occasional papers: national museum of southern rhodesia.  references pinhey, e.c.g. 1977. rhodesia science news 11(8): 205. varley, g.c. 1963. the president's remarks. proceedings royal entomological society of london (c) 27: 50.  external links biodiversityexplorer.org  british entomologists 1962 deaths 1881 births 20th-century british zoologists
lordina mahama (nee effah; born 6 march 1963) is a ghanaian former first lady of ghana who served as first lady from 2012 to 2017. she is married to the fourth president of the fourth republic of ghana, john dramani mahama. prior to becoming first lady, she was the second lady of ghana from 2009 to 2012.  prior to becoming second lady, lordina mahama's husband served as a member of the parliament of ghana representing the bole-bamboi constituency from 1997 to 2008.  raised in brong-ahafo and tamale in the northern region of ghana, mahama is a trained caterer and a hospitality manager. she is a graduate of ghana institute of management and public administration, where she acquired both a degree in hospitality management and a masters in governance and leadership. she is also a graduate of the de montfort university in the united kingdom.  mahama joined her husband on campaign trails ahead of the 2008 when he was the running mate to john atta mills and also in both 2013 and 2017 when he was the flag bearer for the national democratic congress, winning in 2013 but losing in 2017.  whilst as first lady mahama served as a role model for women in ghana and worked as an advocate for hiv/aids awareness, breast and cervical cancer awareness, orphans and alleged witches. she is currently the president of the lordina mahama foundation, a charity whose motto is "the more we share, the more we have".  early life  she was born lordina effah on march 6, 1963, by the late mr. and mrs. effah. lordina is from jema-ampoma in the nkoranza district, located in the brong-ahafo region of ghana. she is last of three children. she had her initial training in tamale, ghana, at the tishigu anglican elementary school. she then proceeded to the ghana secondary school in tamale, where she finished her gce education. it was at ghana secondary school that lordina met her future husband, john dramani mahama.  education and career mahama was a student at flair catering services, and received a four-year college education in hospitality management at the ghana institute of management and public administration (gimpa) she studied for a masters of arts in governance and leadership at the ghana institute of management and public administration (gimpa) and graduated in 2012. mahama graduated with a master of laws (llm) in business law/international business law from the de montfort university in the united
kingdom in 2019.  political roles  second lady of ghana  mahama became second lady when her husband john dramani mahama, the former president of the republic of ghana, became the vice-president of ghana to president john evans atta-mills on 7 january 2009. she served as second lady until july 2012, when she became first lady of ghana.  first lady of ghana  in line with ghana's constitution, her husband became president of ghana on 24 july 2012 on the death of his predecessor, john atta mills and was sworn in to parliament in july 2012, automatically making her the first lady of the republic of ghana. as first lady she worked as an hiv/aids advocate, breast and cervical cancer advocate, empowered women through her foundation and through tehnical and vocational training (tvet) whilst also representing ghana at different conferences and forums to discuss issues relating to women and children.  oafla  in her tenure as first lady, mahama was also elected president of the organisation of african first ladies against hiv and aids (oafla) in june 2015. before that, she had served as the vice president for the west africa region of oafla.  as president of the organisation of african first ladies against hiv and aids (oafla), mahama was honoured at the 50th international women luncheon of the rainbow push coalition which took place in chicago (usa) for her role and outstanding work in advocating for the destitute and vulnerable children in africa and also in her role as president to empower women to take charge of their reproductive health rights, as well as end mother-to-child transmission of hiv.  hiv/aids advocacy  from 2013 until she left office, mahama worked with the ghana aids commission and other agencies to bring as integrated hiv and aids, sexual reproductive health, breast and cervical cancer services to all the then ten regions in ghana. the decision to include hiv and aids service during such health outreach programs was due to being aware that people infected with hiv were more susceptible to developing cancers. due to that during those outreaches, the former first lady took the opportunity to also engage directly with leaders, members of the communities she visited to advocate for more people to know their status and start early treatment. she remained a keen advocate on issues relating to hiv/aids whilst serving as first lady.  breast and cervical cancer advocacy  during her tenure, mahama was an advocate for breast and cervical cancers. through her foundation and her role as first lady, she came up with initiatives for early detection screening of women especially within the rural
areas of ghana to ensure proper treatment if necessary.  through her foundation and support from government and other private and non-governmental organisations, some girls in ghana have been immunised against hpv by the gavi vaccination initiative to prevent cervical cancer and other diseases. she considered women as being major contributors to the development of the world's economies as seen over the years and made continuous calls on non-governmental organisations to help bridge the health promotion and healthcare delivery gap in terms of cancer as they provide the main source of funding for such initiatives not withstanding governments providing healthcare funds.  she represented ghana at the 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th stop cervical, breast and prostate cancer conference. at the 8th conference, she announced that ghana was going to start the implementation of a five-year national strategy for cancer control to roll out various interventions that will help manage and control breast and cervical cancers, as well as other cancers in the country.  on 21 july 2015, she called on other first ladies at the 9th stop cervical, breast and prostate cancer (scca) conference in nairobi, kenya, not to see implements as a dream but rather develop initiatives and campaigns for action to be taken to ensure early detection and to lead a planned, sustained campaign and work with related agencies and organizations to support cancer prevention and control in africa.  mahama made it known that approximately 2,900 women in ghana are diagnosed with breast cancer every year and that based on the world health organization (who) findings, 6.7 million women within ages 15 and older in ghana were estimated to be at risk at developing cervical and breast cancer, through her initiatives and the governments', they were hoping on improving the situation in ghana and to reduce the mortality rate of cancer by 30 percent.  care for the underprivileged  whilst she was first lady, mahama led initiatives to provide for the underprivileged within the society. her focus was providing food items, housekeeping items, clothes, and other basic items to orphanages and ''witch camps' within ghana.  through her foundation, she adopted six vulnerable orphanages and one witch camp in ghana as focus facilities for her donations whilst still contributing to other orphanages. the orphanages and witch camp were made up of two in the greater accra region; the osu children's home in osu and the christ faith forster home in frafraha, two in the brong ahafo region; frankmay children's home and bethesda children's home both in techiman, two in the northern region; the tamale children's home
and anfaani children's home both in tamale and the gambaga witches camp located in the north-east region. over the period she served she made several donations to these orphanages and several others.  in may 2014, she visited the gambaga witch camp and donated bags of rice, utensils, pieces of clothes and other items for their up keep. she began the construction of accommodation facilities for the alleged witches at the gambaga camp. she also visited nyohini children's home and the anfaani orphanage in tamale, where she interacted with the children and made donations food items including bags of rice, sugar, milk, toiletries and others for the upkeep of kids at the orphanages.  in december 2016, she along with nana oye lithur, the minister of gender, children and social protection inaugurated an accommodation complex for toddlers financed by her foundation at the osu children's home. she also presented food items and bales of clothes to support the children in celebrating the christmas.  women empowerment through tvet  through her women empowerment initiatives she adopted the gambaga witch camp located in north-east region of ghana as a centre that needed attention. she began a training centre building project at the camp called the gambaga training centre to provide vocational training and other entrepreneur skills to serve women and girls within the camp and near by communities. these skills were to help empower them and help start their own enterprises after completion. as part of the training centre she was putting up a hostel facility for students in and around gambaga who would want to train at the centre.  she also made several donations of start-up kits to artisans across the country who had completed and graduated from vocational training centres and institutes to facilitate their entry into the business world and help them establish their own enterprises and businesses, these included donations in support with the chinese embassy in ghana through their ambassador sun baohong.  personal life  lordina is married to john dramani mahama and together they have five children named shafik, shahid, sharaf, jesse and farida. she speaks english, hausa, dagbani and twi fluently.  humanitarian works  her charity, the lordina foundation, has touched the lives of beneficiaries in different regions of ghana. the motto of the foundation is "the more we share, the more we have". donations are made especially around christmas and at other periods in the year.  honours and recognition  the former first lady has a number of awards to her name and credit. these include:
honorary doctor of humane letters, by the president and trustees of the fordham university.  an award for campaign for cervical cancer, maputo, mozambique.  award for cervical cancer advocacy, windhoek, namibia.  inducted into the global women leaders hall of fame.  global inspiration leadership award at the africa-middle east-asia summit in dubai.  enstooled as sompahemaa of the nkoranza traditional area, with a stool title (nana akosua fremaa ampomah sika i).  enstooled as development queen in bodom in the brong ahafo region of ghana.  enstooled as development queen in ampoma in the brong ahafo region of ghana.  enstooled as development queen in anloga in kumasi, ashanti region of ghana.  see also   second lady of ghana nana konadu agyeman rawlings  ernestina naadu mills  references  external links    q & a with oafla president, h.e. dr. nana lordina dramani mahama  lordina mahama commended for philanthropic work  living people 1963 births first ladies of ghana second ladies of ghana ghanaian businesspeople people from brong-ahafo region ghanaian pentecostals ghana institute of management and public administration alumni ghanaian philanthropists ghana senior high school (tamale) alumni
charity williams (born october 20, 1996) is a canadian rugby sevens player. in 2016, she was named to canada's first ever women's rugby sevens olympic team.  alongside teammates pam buisa and caroline crossley, williams represents the national women's sevens team on the rugby canada black, indigenous, and people of colour working group which was established on july 17, 2020.  in june 2021, williams was named to canada's 2020 summer olympics team.  achievements and honours   2017, canada sevens langford dream team  references  external links      1996 births living people canadian female rugby union players sportspeople from toronto rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of canada canada international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2014 summer youth olympics canadian people of jamaican descent olympic bronze medalists for canada olympic medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2016 summer olympics rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics youth olympic silver medalists for canada
the direct sales and anti-pyramid scheme act 1993 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to provide for the licensing of persons carrying on direct sales business, for the regulation of direct selling, for prohibiting pyramid scheme or arrangement, chain distribution scheme or arrangement, or any similar scheme or arrangement, and for other matters connected therewith.  structure the direct sales and anti-pyramid scheme act 1993, in its current form (1 december 2011), consists of 7 parts containing 45 sections and 1 schedule (including 1 amendment).  part i: preliminary  part ii: requirement for a licence to carry on direct sales business  part iii: door-to-door sales and, mail order sales and sales through electronic transactions  part iv: direct sales contracts  part v: cooling-off period and rescission  part va: prohibition of pyramid scheme  part vi: enforcement  part vii: miscellaneous  schedule  references  external links  direct sales and anti-pyramid scheme act 1993   1993 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
warner bros. studio tours are a pair of public attractions owned and run by warner bros. entertainment inc.  studio tours the studio tours are both built into existing film studios, offering an authentic glimpse into the techniques and craft of filmmaking.  warner bros. studio tour hollywood  warner bros. studio tour hollywood is a public attraction situated inside warner bros. studios, burbank in burbank, california that offers visitors the chance to glimpse behind the scenes of one of the oldest and most popular film studios in the world.  the tour in some form has been open for several decades, but was recently renamed to give the warner bros. studio tours a more uniform identity after the success of warner bros. studio tour london in leavesden. previously it was known as the warner bros. studios vip tour.  tours depart every 30 minutes and last about 2 hours with a guide who leads a small group on a custom tram.  the tour stops at various locations on the backlot and front lot.  the tour starts on the backlot where you see old sets on hennessy street where they filmed scenes from annie, minority report and gremlins.  there is a stop in the jungle where you get to see merlottes from true blood and the lagoon where one of the final scenes from er was filmed.  on midwest street the tram stops and there is plenty to see including the sets from gilmore girls (stars hollow), pretty little liars (rosewood), miss deagle's house from gremlins which is also the seaver house from growing pains.  the high school is dressed from the set of grease live and there are many more sets like lukes diner, the brew, the alibi room (shameless), the church (waltons & the lost boys), the geller house (friends) and the fuller house house.  new york and chicago streets are the setting for er and shameless where patsy's pies is a practical set used from filming.  new york street is the setting for iconic scenes from auntie mame, whatever happened to baby jane, house of wax and argo.  the front lot contains all of the sound stages.  the tour stops in a few stages including stage 25 where they tape the big bang theory, stage 1 where they tape the ellen show and there are many other stages where they film including conan, the fosters, lucifer, and the real.  the biggest stage on the lot is stage 16 where they filmed scenes from dunkirk, the perfect storm and the goonies.  stage
16 is also where emma stone and ryan gosling can be seen walking in the film la la land.  also on the front lot is the prop house with tons of artifacts and furniture from films and tv shows from the 1920s to today.  next to the prop house is the batcave, where 10 batmobiles are on display from several of the batman films.  jokers car from suicide squad is on display front and center.  at the end of the guided portion of the tour, there is custom built soundstage called stage 48.  inside this facility there is the real central perk set from friends.  pictures can be taken on the orange sofa that the cast sat on during taping of the series.  there are green screen photo opportunities where you can ride a batpod through gotham city or a nimbus 2000 broom through hogwarts and even play a game of quidditch.  there is event a working central perk cafe that serves central perk branded coffee  the warner archive contains a displays of props and costumes in dc universe:the exhibit from batman vs superman:dawn of justice and wonder woman including diana's training armour, warrior costume and even here lasso and sword.  the sword is set in the golden requiem.  the upper levels have some of the original props and sets from the harry potter films including the costumes from harry, hermione and ron.  fantastic beasts and where to find them is represented as well with newt scamander's suit and jacob's apartment complete with the case of creatures and baked goods.  warner bros. studio tour london - the making of harry potter  warner bros. studio tour london - the making of harry potter is a walkthrough exhibition and studio tour in leavesden, southeast england. it is located within warner bros. studios, leavesden, near watford, in southwest hertfordshire, and houses a permanent exhibit of authentic costumes, props and sets utilized in the production of the harry potter films, as well as behind-the-scenes production of visual effects. the tour is contained in soundstages j and k, which were specially built for the attraction, and is separate from the studio's actual production facilities. it opened to the public in early 2012. the grand opening event was attended by many of the harry potter film series cast and crew members.  each tour session typically lasts three and a half hours, and the tour has the capacity to handle 6,000 visitors daily. despite warner bros. being the studio behind harry potter, the tour is not styled
as a theme park due to the fact that warner bros. sold the license to do so to universal studios. instead, visitors get a chance to see up close the detail and effort that goes into a major feature film at the scale of the harry potter series. tripadvisor reported that warner bros. studio tour london - the making of harry potter has been the highest-rated attraction worldwide every year since the tour opened.  warner bros. studio tour osaka - the making of harry potter announced in august 2020, warner bros. studio tour osaka - the making of harry potter is an upcoming attraction in osaka, japan. this will be the second such park in the world, after the one in london, which opened in 2012. it will be located in the osaka nerima ward, on part of the now-defunct toshimaen amusement park site. similar to its counterpart in london, the 30,000 square-meter attraction in osaka will offer visitors a walking tour through some of the recreated famous film sets including the great hall, the forbidden forest, and the diagon alley. it will also display film sets, costumes, and props that were used in the harry potter films. in addition to harry potter, it will also cover the fantastic beasts spin-offs. the attraction is scheduled to be opened in the first half of 2023. steam locomotive 4920 dumbleton hall, that is identical to the locomotive used in the harry potter movies, will be an exhibit.  other warner bros. public attractions warner bros. has licensed several other attraction operators to use various copyrights belonging to wb.  the wizarding world of harry potter  rights to build a theme park based on the harry potter films were sold to universal parks & resorts, this property has matured into an immersive themed land with rides and attractions named the wizarding world of harry potter. the enormous undertaking has been immensely popular, following the first at universal orlando resort's universal's islands of adventure and universal studios florida. the themed land has since been established at universal studios hollywood, japan, and beijing.  warner bros. movie world  warner bros. movie world is a theme park on the gold coast in australia. currently owned and operated by village roadshow theme parks, the theme park features a variety of attractions that are based on warner bros.'s franchises. village roadshow is a long time partner of warner bros. and the parks feature properties owned by both them and wb.  warner bros. world abu dhabi   warner bros. world abu dhabi is a theme park in abu dhabi, united
arab emirates. developed by miral asset management in 2018, under a licence from warner bros., the theme park features a variety of attractions that are based on warner bros.'s franchises. a 257-room warner bros. branded hotel named wb abu dhabi, is currently being constructed adjacent to the park and will be operated by hilton hotels & resorts when it opens in 2021.  parque warner madrid   parque warner madrid is a theme park in madrid, spain. owned partially by warner bros., the theme park features a variety of attractions that are based on warner bros.'s franchises.  see also  warner bros. global brands and experiences  warner bros. studio tour hollywood  warner bros. studio tour london - the making of harry potter  warner bros. studios, burbank  warner bros. studios, leavesden  the wizarding world of harry potter (warner bros. movie world)  the wizarding world of harry potter (universal studios)  warner bros. movie world warner bros. world abu dhabi parque warner madrid  universal parks & resorts  village roadshow theme parks  warner bros.  halloween horror nights  incidents at universal parks  list of licensed properties at universal parks & resorts  halloween fright nights  references  external links  warner bros. studio tour hollywood website  warner bros. studio tour london website    warner bros.
ala singh  (1691-1765)  was the first king of the princely state of patiala. he was born in 1691 at phul, in present-day bathinda district of the punjab, to chaudhary ram singh sidhu of phulkian misl. his father had six kids, from eldest to youngest dunna, subha, ala, bakha, budha, ludha. the chowdhriat of the misl had been originally conferred on his ancestor brahm by babur, after the first battle of panipat in 1526 a.d.  ahmad shah durani attacked barnala in the absence of the maharaja, when he was at moonak. he forced the maharaja to pay rs. four lacs, out of which only rs. fifty thousand were paid. the durani king conferred upon him the title of "raja" and granted him an area comprising 727 villages. ala singh at the age of 57, in 1763 a.d., laid the foundation of the city of patiala. in the same year heading the sikh confederacy he conquered sirhind and surrounding territories along with nanu singh saini. he died in 1765, leaving the gaddi to his grandson maharaja amar singh, his three sons having predeceased him. sardaul singh the eldest died in 1753, bhumian singh died in 1742 and lal singh the youngest died in 1748.  references  further reading     1691 births 1765 deaths people from patiala punjabi people
carlo vincenzo ferrero d'ormea (5 april 1680, mondovi - 29 may 1745, turin) was an italian politician and diplomat. he was president of the council of the kingdom of sardinia from 1742 to 1745.  life  early career - from prefect to general of finances (1713-24)  embassy to rome and concordat with benedict xiii (1724-30) he was repeatedly sent to the court of pope benedict xiii and gained the pope's recognition of vittorio amedeo ii as king of sardinia as well as concluding a concordat with the papacy in 1727, thus normalising sardinia's relations with the papal states, which had been strained for the previous thirty years.  secretary of state to the interior (1730-42), for foreign affairs (1732-45) and grand chancellor  sources  bio] roberto gaja, il marchese d'ormea, milano, bompiani, 1988 nobilta e stato in piemonte. i ferrero d'ormea, atti del convegno (torino-mondovi, 3-5 ottobre 2001), a cura di andrea merlotti, torino, zamorani, 2003  1680 births 1745 deaths italian diplomats kingdom of sardinia
patrick "patsy" conway (july 4, 1865 - june 10, 1929) was a prominent american bandleader during the golden era of professional bands. he often was referred to as pat conway or patsy conway.  early life conway was born in troy, new york, but moved to homer, new york as an infant. he learned to play cornet as a young man while working in a carriage factory, joining the popular homer cornet band and eventually becoming leader of the cortland band.  the ithaca band after a successful appearance by the cortland band at the 1894 central new york volunteer fireman's association convention in ithaca, new york, conway was recruited by the judges (including music educator hollis dann) to relocate to ithaca in 1895. he served as director of the cornell university cadet band (predecessor of the cornell big red marching band) from 1895 to 1908. he also began teaching students at the new ithaca conservatory of music (predecessor of ithaca college) at a time when teaching band music and brass instruments was uncommon.  conway formed the ithaca band in 1895 and brought the ensemble to national popularity and acclaim. by around 1910, the ensemble came to be known as conway's band or patrick conway and his famous band. in ithaca, they had a standing contract with the trolley company to perform at stewart park (then renwick park), but extensive tours brought them around the country to the st. louis world's fair, canadian national exhibition, cincinnati zoo, corn palace, willow grove park, the pan-american exposition, atlantic city, oaks amusement park, and the panama-pacific exposition.  many members of conway's band had substantial success beyond the band, such as lincoln holroyd, getty h. huffine, ernest williams. conway and the ithaca band made many recordings on the victor and edison labels. in 1927, they played on the premiere of the general motors family hour radio show.  in the stage and film productions of the music man, set in 1912, character harold hill mentions conway in the introduction to "seventy-six trombones" alongside other famous bandleaders like patrick gilmore and john philip sousa. all three were inaugural members of the national band association hall of fame of distinguished band conductors in 1980.  conway military band school in 1922, sensing the waning popularity of professional bands, conway founded the conway military band school in affiliation with the ithaca conservatory of music. it was among the first schools of its kind in the country. students included george s. howard (first director of the u.s.
air force band) and les brown (noted bandleader). conway led the school until his death in 1929 following a prostate operation. the school was merged into ithaca college in 1931 and laid the foundation for the college's strong band tradition.  other work when not touring with the ithaca band, conway conducted the syracuse symphony orchestra from 1910 to 1916 and also led the pit orchestra for a theater in syracuse. in world war i, he received a captain's commission and led musical activity for the united states army air service while at camp macarthur in waco, texas. this was the first band program for the predecessor of the united states air force.  references  external links  patrick conway recordings at the discography of american historical recordings.  1865 births 1929 deaths 19th-century american composers 19th-century american male musicians 19th-century male conductors (music) 19th-century conductors (music) 20th-century american composers 20th-century american conductors (music) 20th-century american male musicians american bandleaders american cornetists american male conductors (music) ithaca college faculty musicians from troy, new york people from homer, new york united states army personnel of world war i united states military musicians
sphenovipera jimmysjoyi is an extinct species of sphenodontian dated from the middle jurassic. if was discovered in the lower part of the la boca formation located in tamaulipas, mexico. only the lower jaw of this organism has been discovered and studied. it is possibly the only species of rhynchocephalian yet discovered to show evidence of venom delivery.  etymology sphenovipera was named by reynoso in 2005. the name alludes to sphenodontians via spheno- and -vipera is latin for "venomous snake."  venom delivery the mandible of sphenovipera jimmysjoyi has several characteristics indicative of venom delivery. this includes large curved fangs with grooves seen in other animals that use low-pressure venom delivery, such as colubrid snakes.  references  sphenodontia jurassic reptiles of north america prehistoric reptile genera
the shelbourne 600 is a greyhound racing competition held annually at shelbourne park in ringsend, dublin, ireland.    it is one of the leading competitions for stayers in the irish racing greyhound racing calendar and was inaugurated in 1964.  past winners  venues & distances 1964-present 	(shelbourne 600 yards)  sponsors 1964-1999 (guinness)  2000-2009 (ladbrokes) 2010-2011 (hegarty bookmakers) 2012-2012 (betfair)  2013-2013 (ladbrokes) 2014-2019 (gain)  references  greyhound racing competitions in dublin (city) recurring sporting events established in 1964 1964 establishments in ireland
the crosby sisters are an australian country music duo consisting of jodie and kelly crosby.  in 2001, the sisters won vocal group or duo of the year at the country music awards of australia.  music career both sisters moved to tamworth, new south wales in 1986.  in 1991 and 1997, the sisters won duo of the year at the victorian country music awards. also winning the cmaa achiever awards 'independent entertainers of the year' in 2000.  in 1999, the sisters imprinted their hands into the country music hands of fame 1999.  jodie crosby married journalist jon wolfe in march 2006. they have one son together, ethan crosby-wolfe (born 10 march 1994), who is also a singer/songwriter, actor and performer.  in late 2010, jodie & jon had success hosting tamworth's morning program "the pulse", weekday's on 88.9fm tamworth.  in 2013, the crosby sisters teamed up with brent larkham and recorded their album home spun. both sisters are currently working on original music for the first time since their award-winning train of desperation in the mid-1990s.  in november 2016, jodie crosby commenced work on her debut solo album. her debut single, "hello" was released early february 2017. written by her son ethan crosby-wolfe. the album titled jodie crosby was released during the 2017 tamworth country music festival.  discography  albums  extended plays  awards  country music awards of australia the country music awards of australia (cmaa) (also known as the golden guitar awards) is an annual awards night held in january during the tamworth country music festival, celebrating recording excellence in the australian country music industry. they have been held annually since 1973.  |- | 2001 | crosby sisters - "trouble in the fields" | vocal group or duo of the year |    note: wins only  references  musical groups established in 1985 australian country music groups people from tamworth, new south wales sibling musical duos 1985 establishments in australia
chang kai-chen and han xinyun were the defending champions, but chose not to partner each other. chang partnered duan yingying, while han partnered zhang kailin. the two teams faced in the quarterfinals with chang and duan prevailing.  shuko aoyama and makoto ninomiya won the title, defeating chang and duan in the final, 6-4, 6-4.  seeds  draw  references   draw  itf women's circuit - wuhan - doubles wuhan world tennis tour
nina bang mountain () is a mountain in nw greenland. administratively it is part of avannaata municipality. this peak was named after denmark's first woman cabinet minister nina bang.  geography nina bang mountain is located in southwestern nyeboe land. it rises roughly 12 km to the east of the shore of newman bay fjord and reaches a height of .  see also list of mountains in greenland  bibliography greenland geology and selected mineral occurrences - geus  references  nina
the 10th beijing college student film festival was held in 2003 in beijing, china. zhou yu's train was the biggest winner, receiving three awards, including best director, best actor, and favorite actress.  awards  best film award: cala, my dog!  best director award: sun zhou for zhou yu's train  best actor award: sun honglei for zhou yu's train  best actress award: ni ping for pretty big feet  best visual effects award: hero  best first film award: ma xiaoying for gone is the one who held me dearest in the world  favorite actor award: ge you for cala, my dog!  favorite actress award: gong li for zhou yu's train, zhou xun for where have all the flowers gone  favorite film: eyes of a beauty  artistic exploration award: chicken poets  grand prix award: together with you, when ruo ma was seventeen  committee special award: deng xiaoping, jing tao hai lang, gada meilin  best child actor award: zhang yan for warm spring  special award for national spirit: jing tao hai lang  outstanding contribution to chinese cinema award: zhang yimou  references  external links  10th beijing college student film festival sohu  beijing college student film festival 2003 film festivals 2003 festivals in asia bei
serraiocco is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  federico serraiocco (born 1993), italian footballer sara serraiocco (born 1990), italian actress  italian-language surnames
the russia women's national under-18 and under-19  is a national basketball team of russia and is administered by the russian basketball federation. it represents russia in international under-19 and under-18 (under age 19 and under age 18) women's basketball competitions.  history  fiba under-19 world championship  fiba europe under-18 championship  see also  russia women's national basketball team  russia women's national under-17 basketball team  soviet union women's national under-19 basketball team  references  external links archived records of russia team participations  u19 women's national under-19 basketball teams
the 1912-13 sk rapid wien season was the 15th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  references  1912-13 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
events from the year 1804 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander i  events  births   - aleksey khomyakov, russian theologian, philosopher, poet and amateur artist who co-founded the slavophile movement. (d. 1860)  - mikhail glinka, russian composer and founder of the russian nationalist school of classical music. (d. 1857)  deaths         anna matyushkina, courtier  (b. 1722)  references  1804 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
the bank of ireland £50 note is a banknote of the pound sterling. it is the second largest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  history the bank of ireland began issuing notes in 1783, the same year as the bank's founding. early banknotes were denominations of the irish pound, but following that currency's abolition in 1826 banknotes produced by the bank of ireland were denominated in pounds sterling. these early banknotes were printed by the bank in dublin, and featured a design with a row of mercury heads across the top. this basic design remained effectively unchanged for 120 years. northern irish banknotes are fully backed such that holders have the same level of protection as those holding genuine bank of england notes. the £50 note is currently the second largest denomination of banknote issued by the bank of ireland.  the £50 note of the queen's university belfast series was first issued in 2004. this issue features a representation of hibernia on the front, alongside shields of arms of the six counties of northern ireland. the back of this note displays an image of queen's university belfast. in 2008 a new series featuring the image of the old bushmills distillery on the reverse was introduced, although no new £50 note was issued. apart from this change of rear design the difference between this series and the preceding series is minimal. the design of the bushmills series was tweaked in 2013, and a new £50 note was introduced, with slight changes of the front design taking place. the 2013 note also features an image of the bushmills distillery on the reverse.  designs  information taken from bank of ireland website.  references  external links  bank of ireland banknotes the association of commercial banknote issuers  banknotes of northern ireland fifty-base-unit banknotes
hu dun pao (虎蹲砲) is the name of two different missile weapons in chinese history. in the song dynasty (960-1279), it was a trebuchet and its name is translated into english as crouching tiger trebuchet; in the ming dynasty (1368-1644), the name was given to a type of bombard and it is known in english as crouching tiger cannon.  trebuchet according to the song dynasty military compendium wujing zongyao (published 1044), the hu dun pao is depicted as a traction trebuchet with a triangular frame. it is operated by a dedicated corps of 70 haulers, who took turns pulling the ropes attached to the trebutchet arm to send the projectile, a  stone or bomb, into flight. it has a range of .  the annales ianuenses, the official history of genoa, carries drawings of trabuchium, a counterweighted trebuchet with triangular supporting trusses, that sinologist joseph needham considers to be derived from or related to the chinese "crouching tiger trebuchet". similar triangular-framed trebutchets are found in byzantine sources as labdarea (lambda-shaped machines) and as "turkish trebuchets" (manjaniq turki) by mardi ibn ali al-tarsusi and the templar of tyre.  mao yuanyi (茅元儀; 1594-1640), the compiler of the ming dynasty military treatise wubei zhi, considered the "crouching tiger trebuchet" as an ancestor to the cannon along with other bomb-throwing trebuchets.  cannon  by the publication of the 1350 edition huolongjing during the ming dynasty, the meaning of the character pao 砲 changed from "trebuchet" to "cannon", mirroring the development of gunpowder artillery in china. likewise, "hu dun pao" came to refer to an early chinese iron cannon in the same text. the hulongjing describes the "crouching tiger cannon" as thus:  according to this description and the illustration in the huolongjing, the "crouching tiger cannon" was a small cannon that was propped up at the muzzle end and pinned to the ground to deaden the recoil. this setup supposedly resembles a crouching tiger, giving the cannon its name like its trebuchet predecessor. the barrel holding 100 bullets could mean the "crouching tiger
cannon" fired pellets, or that the bullets could have been placed in a bag as grapeshot.  of special note are the iron bands acting as reinforcements around the cannon-they indicated that the "crouching tiger cannon" was a built-up cast-iron gun, preceding the armstrong gun by five centuries. the iron bands were shrunk onto the barrel while red hot, and the consistently fitting bands show that the ming chinese foundrymen had mastered quenching in mass-production conditions. the grounding pins were cast separately.  according to qi jiguang's treatise on military training (練兵實紀, lianbing shiji) of 1568, the "crouching tiger cannon" was placed at various points on the chinese frontier since the beginning of the ming dynasty. they were still used during the imjin war of 1592-98, where their deployment was crucial in the retaking of pyongyang (1593) from the japanese invaders. following the imjin war, a typical fujianese war junk (福船, fuchuan), the standard ship of the ming navy, would carry the "crouching tiger cannon" alongside heavy cannons, breech-loading cannons, falconets, and fire lances.  references  notes  works cited  artillery of china cannon chinese inventions military history of the ming dynasty military history of the song dynasty
final program was a pioneering scottish minimal synth band formed in stirling in 1978.   they are noteworthy as a pioneering influence in the emergence of minimalist electronica synth music in scotland.  history  formation and early years formed in stirling in 1978, the original lineup consisted of richie program and anne droid. richie ditched his guitar and went fully electronic when edp launched the "wasp" synthesiser. anne had no musical background and she played bass synth. her real name was anne benson\turnbull. in 1981 the band released the instrumental 7" ep "protect and survive", which reached 19 in the futurist chart the first pressing selling out after plays by legendary dj john peel.  the disc now features in the "rare record price guide." the scottish tourist board used the track trains in their promotional video. the band continued to evolve as anne left, with kennie j young joining as a vocalist, as well as al robertson who featured briefly before going on to form "100% man made fibre".  richie and kennie toured scotland in the early 80's and produced a 12 track vocal demo album which was circulated as part of the vibrant "cassette culture" of the era. richie program then joined sean kelly and john sharp of "those french girls", disbanding final program in 1984 to form "sean novak" releasing one 12" single.  re-emergence 2010-2016 richie program relocated to london in the mid 80's to become part of the wider techno music scene.  however, the minimalist sound continued to be sought after and valued amongst musical cognoscenti, and in november 2010 final program featured alongside depeche mode, soft cell and new order as part of a noteworthy dj mix and playlist "ssg special: high-rise living 78-86 [part 1] - compiled by the black dog & regis " released on wednesday, 24 november 2010. "the black dog" stated:  'historically, music only really gets interesting when the british get involved and this was a very british musical revolution.'  another accolade was the inclusion of final program phase one in the crispy nuggets mix released on 8 june 2011.  robots, rockets, radiation released on 1 october 2014, "robots rockets, radiation" is a very comprehensive album, mastered by stephan bornhorst which provides collectors with a singular opportunity to possess the original 7" ep tracks plus all 12 tracks from the original vocal demo.  the collection has been described as pure and raw, yet playful analogue synth bliss including the hits
"phase one", "automation", "mechanic dancing", and a vocal version of "protect and survive" as well as a cover version of the stranglers "hanging around" and perhaps rather unexpectedly, a surprising interpretation burt bacharach's "raindrops" (keep falling on my head)  official guide to scottish minimal/synth 1979-1983 also in 2014 vinyl on demand included an extensive selection of final program material in a massively definitive 8 record set :   "official guide to scottish minimal/synth 1979-1983"  featuring alistair robertson and "100% man made fibre"  final program contributed the material for the fourth 12" disc in the set:  lp4  final program demos 81/82 / inter city static love amongst the mannequins, 1981  lp4a: final program demos  & compilation-tracks from 1981/82  (25:16) a1 mechanical dancing (demo) 3:50 a2 phase one (demo) 2:34 a3 videomatic (demo) 4:03 a4 zero g (demo) 3:46 a5 don't call me lacy (demo) 2:49 a6 cure for cancer 2:22 (on v/a horrorbox, trax 0282) a7 phase one 2:36 (on v/a technodeath, trax1281, 1981) a8 videophab 3:08 (on v/a sunset gun audiozine no.1, 1981)  close to the noise floor in 2016 final program (protect and survive) featured alongside human league and omd on "close to the noise floor: formative uk electronica 1975-1984" an immensely powerful compilation album which may come to be seen as the ultimate definitive collection of nascent electronica.  cherry red records described the importance of the collection: "inspired by the diy ethos of punk, a quiet revolution took place across the uk in the late 1970s and early 1980s. the rise of the microchip and the advent of affordable synthesisers enabled countless artists for whom guitars, drums and bass had become old hat, and in grubby bedsits, unremarkable living rooms and art school halls across the british isles, uk electronica was born. the underground, fuelled by cassette exchanges, co-operative vinyl compilations and a thriving mail order network, quickly began to stretch the boundaries of sonic experimentation."  a review by pitchfork further develops the theme: "the primitivist phase of the synthesizer came after the sophisticated
start. in the late 1970s, cheaper machines like the wasp became available; they were also compact, portable, and relatively user-friendly compared with their bulky predecessors. this democratization of electronics happened to coincide with rock's own self-conscious return to juvenile basics in the form of punk. .....close to the noise floor is a 4xcd survey of the excitingly messy birth of british electronica during the late '70s and early '80s. ....."minimal synth" works as a shorthand tag for close to the noise floor's remit, although the scope of the trawl is actually wider and more disparate than what that term tends to signify, taking in electro-punk, industrial, synthpop, dark ambient, and more. rather than use generic focus as an organizing principle, the anthology achieves coherence through sticking with a single country-britain-when it could have easily have swept across the equally active european scene or harvested the scattered but significant american exponents like john bender and nervous gender. the national focus makes sense historically, in so far as the uk scene was catalyzed by half-a-dozen native outfits who released debut singles within a few months of each other ... close to the noise floor provides a fascinating overview of the formative years of british home-studio electronica: groups who were precursors in spirit, if not direct lineage, to the techno and idm artists of the '90s.  metacritic gave the 4 cd boxed set a score of 89.  legacy in may 2016 record collector magazine (issue 453) as part of a review of "close to the noise floor" by oregano rathbone pays particular homage to the original final program track "protect and survive" first released 35 years earlier: "whatever nexus of elements provided the impetus, it's significant how almost homely so much of the chilly electronica produced in that era now seems. "adorable" is emphatically not what any of them would have been going for; but listening to, for example, in the room by third door from the left, or the earnest and utterly wonderful protect and survive by final program - "what's all this i hear about nuclear fallout?" proclaims vocalist richie program, in a stentorian android monotone - the envisioned dystopia was clearly our dystopia, a comfortably familiar landscape bordered by frisbee-trapping pylons, rough-cast bauhaus concrete and the poundsaver monophonic synths that acted as sonic emoj
is for the tomorrow people."  in the late 1980s richie program relocated to london, spending some years as an independent fashion designer and playing a semi-opaque role in various social and cultural developments including the anti-poll tax movement.  during this period he established himself as a dj and promoter under the pseudonym richie 303.  discography   7" ep "protect and survive" (1980) (released on program records catalogue number final001)  dj mix high-rise living 78-86 [part 1 (2010) (compiled by the black dog & regis)  dj mix: various artists  "crispy nuggets" (2011)   "robots rockets, radiation"  (2014) (anna logue records)  "official guide to scottish minimal/synth 1979-1983" (2014) (vinyl on demand)  various artists - close to the noise floor: formative uk electronica 1975-1984 (2016) (cherry red records crcdbox 24 [4cd] )  external links  website main website for band facebook page  full discography discogs appearances for final program  protect and survive discogs entry for protect and survive high rise living crispy nuggets  robots rockets radiation discogs entry for robots rockets radiation soundcloud entry for robots rockets radiation   subculture records:robots-rockets-radiation with samples.  official guide to scottish minimal/synth 1979-1983 vinyl-on-demand  close to the noise floor cherry red review pitchfork review record collector review metacritic  references  1978 establishments in scotland musical groups established in 1978 scottish electronic music groups scottish new wave musical groups cassette culture 1970s-1990s
the 2016 wk league was the eighth season of the wk league, south korea's top level women's football league. the regular season began on 14 march 2016 and ended on 17 october 2016. incheon hyundai steel red angels won their fourth title in a row by beating icheon daekyo in the championship final.  teams  table  results  matches 1 to 14  matches 15 to 28  play-offs the semi-final was played as a single-elimination match, and the championship final over two legs.  semi-final  championship  final first leg  second leg  incheon hyundai steel red angels won 4-0 on aggregate.  references  external links wk league official website  season on soccerway.com  2009 women south korea south korea
a gun in each hand () is a 2013 spanish comedy film directed by cesc gay.  cast   javier camara as s.  ricardo darin as g.  eduard fernandez as e.  jordi molla as m.  eduardo noriega as p.  leonor watling as maria  alberto san juan as a.  leonardo sbaraglia as j.  luis tosar as l.  cayetana guillen cuervo as sara  candela pena as mamen  references  external links   2013 comedy films 2013 films spanish films spanish comedy films films directed by cesc gay
breathe (tc: 呼吸) is a cantopop album by edmond leung.  track listing breathe (呼吸) can or can't (可不可不可以) dear (親愛的) lovelorn ten thousand times (失戀一萬次) punish me (懲罰我) three broken hearts (傷了三個心) love and affection (愛與情) all i need is love (我需要的只是愛) i want to fly (我要先飛) i am wrong (我錯) fight for tomorrow (為明日爭氣) color, aroma and taste (濃情色香味)  charts  music awards  references  edmond leung albums 1996 albums
jake wightman (born 11 july 1994) is a british middle-distance runner competing primarily in the 1500 metres. he won the gold medal at the 2013 european junior championships.  in june 2018, whightman set the scottish record for 1000 metres with a time of 2:16.27 at the diamond league event in stockholm breaking the previous record which had stood since 1984.  in the 2020 diamond league in monaco, wightman broke the scottish record for 1500 metres, with a time of 3:29.47.  personal life his father-coach, geoff wightman, and mother, susan tooby, were marathon runners. jake has a twin brother, sam and a sister, martha.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 800 metres - 1:44.18 (ostrava 2020) 1000 metres - 2:17.51 (boston 2020) 1500 metres - 3:29.47 (monaco 2020) one mile - 3:50.00 (new york 2021)  references  1994 births living people sportspeople from nottingham scottish male middle-distance runners athletes (track and field) at the 2014 commonwealth games athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games alumni of loughborough university world athletics championships athletes for great britain commonwealth games medallists in athletics commonwealth games bronze medallists for scotland european championships (multi-sport event) bronze medalists european athletics championships medalists athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of great britain anglo-scots
sebastian rodl (born 1967 in mainz) is a german philosopher and professor of practical philosophy at the university of leipzig. from 2005 to 2012 he was professor of philosophy at the university of basel.  biography  rodl studied philosophy, musicology, german literature and history in frankfurt am main and berlin. his work focuses on the nature of human thought and action. his contributions are to the areas of philosophy of mind, philosophy of language, moral philosophy, epistemology and action theory. his influences include hegel.  publications   categories of the temporal. an inquiry into the forms of the finite understanding, harvard university press 2012.  self-consciousness, cambridge/mass., london: harvard university press 2007.  "law as the reality of the free will", in a. speer et al. (eds.), the new desire for metaphysics, berlin: de gruyter 2015.  "joint action and recursive consciousness of consciousness", phenomenology and the cognitive sciences 14/4, 2015.  external links   homepage sebastian rodl - universitat leipzig  1967 births living people writers from mainz 21st-century german philosophers continental philosophers
sphingomonas melonis  is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from the plant cucumis melo var. inodorus in madrid in spain. sphingomonas melonis can cause brown spots on melon fruits from the melon plant (cucumis melo var. inodorus). in rice plants it can have disease-preventing effects, the seed-endophytic strain sphingomonas melonis zj26 that can be naturally enriched in certain rice cultivars, confers diseases resistance against a bacterial pathogen and is vertically transmitted among plant generations via their seeds.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas melonis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  melonis bacteria described in 2002
rosa maria cid lopez (born, 29 january 1956) is a spanish academic. specializing in the study of women and gender, she served as president of the asociacion espanola de investigacion de historia de las mujeres (spanish association investigating the history of women).  early years  cid lopez was born in 1956. in 1979, she received a license in philosophy and letters (section of history) in the university of oviedo. in 1986, she defended her thesis, "the cult to the emperor in numidia of diocletian". she earned a phd in geography and history at the university of oviedo.  career she serves as professor of ancient history in the university of oviedo and has been the chair since 2011. she coordinates the demeter group, and the motherhood, gender and family department at the same university.  cid lopez's research focuses on motherhood and mothers in ancient mediterranean civilizations. she is also a specialist in the history of the women, and of gender in  ancient societies, with attention to the subjects of historiography, power, religion and construction of feminine stereotypes through the biographies of livia and cleopatra.  while a professor at the university of oviedo, she has been interested in the study of the history of asturias in  antiquity, participating in excavations of gijon in 1983 and  lugo of llanera in 1983-1989. she  coordinated the corresponding publication in the history of asturias, published by la nueva espana in 1990-91. cid lopez was a member of the committee that designed the permanent exhibition of the archaeological museum of asturias (2008-2011), prior  to its inauguration.  cid lopez has participated in four archaeologic excavations (regional and national) and was co-director of the excavations in lugo of llanera (asturias) in the period of 1987 to 1989. she is the author and editor of multiple publications and scientific documents in diverse magazines and books, including the spanish translation of the work of francoise thebaud "escribir la historia de las mujeres y del genero" (write the history of women and gender). from 1981, she has been a speaker at numerous congresses, seminars and academic meetings, national and international, in addition to forming part of the organizational committees or scientists.  cid lopez was president of spanish association of historical investigation of women (aeihm) april 2002 through april 2004. she served as vice-president of the university association of studies of women (audem) april 1999 to may 2001. she is a member of, european network on gender studies on antiquity (eugesta), ar
ys associations, social history, association; council adviser of the magazines genre et histoire; and a member of the scientific committee of the  electronic magazines, the future of the past and magazine (audem).  publications   2013 - horas de radio sobre mujeres e historia, trabe.  2013 - debita verba. estudios en homenaje al profesor julio mangas (co-editor with estela garcia fernandez).  2012 - la maternite a l´epreuve du genre. metamorphoses et permanences de la mediterraneenne maternite  dans l´aire mediterraneenne.(codirectora junto a y. knibiehler y francesca arena). presses de l´ecole des hautes etudes de sante publique.  2010 - mujeres en la historia, ambitu.  2010 - maternidad/es: representaciones y realidad social. edades antigua y medieval, almudayna, col. laya.  2009 - madres y maternidades. construcciones culturales en la civilizacion clasica, krk.  2003 - mitos femeninos de la cultura clasica. creaciones y recreaciones en la historia y la literatura. krk (coed. junto a marta gonzalez  gonzalez).  references  external links  university of oviedo alumni spanish women writers spanish feminists 1956 births living people university of oviedo faculty spanish non-fiction writers
marcus gratidius (d. 102 bc) was a roman statesman and orator from arpinum during the late second century bc.  he is best known as a result of his connections with cicero and marius.  family gratidius' sister, gratidia, married marcus tullius cicero, grandfather of the celebrated orator.  his wife was maria, sister of gaius marius, and they had at least one son, marcus, who was adopted into the maria gens, probably by his uncle, marcus, after the elder gratidius' death, and became known as marcus marius gratidianus.  a marcus gratidius who was legate to quintus tullius cicero in asia, from 61 to 59 bc, may have been his grandson.  career marcus gratidius first appears in history as the proposer of a lex tabellaria at arpinum.  the law was opposed by gratidius' brother-in-law, marcus tullius cicero, who brought the matter to the consul marcus aemilius scaurus.  scaurus agreed with cicero, whose courage and opinions he praised, so it seems that the law was not passed.  gratidius was a clever man and naturally talented in oratory; he was learned in greek literature; and among his friends was marcus antonius, the orator and grandfather of marcus antonius the triumvir.  probably early in 102 bc, he gave testimony against gaius flavius fimbria, who had probably been accused of repetundae, or extortion, in the administration of his province the previous year.  later that year, gratidius accompanied his friend, the praetor marcus antonius, who had been assigned the province of cilicia, and given proconsular authority in order to fight the pirates.  gratidius served as prefect under antonius, and was killed in the course of the campaign.  see also gratidia gens  footnotes  references  bibliography  marcus tullius cicero, de legibus, brutus.  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  wilhelm drumann, geschichte roms in seinem ubergang von der republikanischen zur monarchischen verfassung, oder: pompeius, caesar, cicero und ihre zeitgenossen (history of rome in its transition from republic to empire, or pompeius, caesar, cicero, and their contemporaries), konigsberg (1834-1844).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  dictionary
of greek and roman antiquities, william smith, ed., little, brown, and company, boston (1859).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  2nd-century bc romans ancient roman rhetoricians ancient romans killed in action gratidii
eric vuillard (4 may 1968, lyon) is a french writer and film director. he has made two films, l'homme qui marche and mateo falcone, the latter based on a story by prosper merimee. he is the author of conquistadors (2009) which won the prix de l'inapercu in 2010. he won the prix goncourt in 2017 for l'ordre du jour.  his literary works include:   le chasseur, editions michalon, 1999 bois vert, editions leo scheer, 2002 tohu, editions leo scheer, 2005 conquistadors, paris, editions leo scheer, 2009 (prix ignatius j. reilly, 2010) la bataille d'occident (stories) actes sud, 2012 ( (franz-hessel-preis 2012, prix litteraire valery larbaud 2013) « un endroit ou aller », 2012 (prix franz-hessel, 2012 ; prix valery-larbaud, 2013; prix valery-larbaud, 2013; finalist for the prix femina 2014; prix joseph-kessel 2015) congo, recit, arles, actes sud, 2016 (franz-hessel-preis 2012, valery-larbaud prize 2013) tristesse de la terre: une histoire de buffalo bill cody, recit, arles, actes sud, coll.  14 juillet, recit, arles, actes sud, 2016 - prix alexandre-vialatte 2017 pour 14 juillet et pour l'ensemble de son œuvre, decerne par le groupe centre france tristesse de la terre (joseph-kessel prize 2015) tristesse de la terre has been translated into english under the title sorrow of the earth.  l'ordre du jour (prix goncourt 2017) the order of the day, english translation by mark polizzotti, other press, 2018,  (albertine prize shortlist 2019) la guerre des pauvres, actes sud, 2019,  the war of the poor, english translation by mark polizzotti, other press, 2020,  (international booker prize shortlist 2021)  filmography    2002 la vie nouvelle  2006 l'homme qui marche  2008 mateo falcone  references  mass media people from lyon 1968 births 21st-century french novelists prix valery larbaud winners 20th-century french non-fiction writers french film directors living people prix goncourt winners writers from lyon
romulo barrameda espena, (november 22, 1952 - may 12, 2013) known as tita swarding (), was a filipino radio broadcaster and columnist who worked for the manila broadcasting company-owned dzrh.  life and career tita swarding was born on november 22, 1952, as romulo espena. swarding joined manila broadcasting company-owned dzrh before it was shut down after the imposition of martial law on september 21, 1972.  after martial law, swarding returned to dzrh and resumed his broadcasting career. tita swarding became the showbiz segment anchor of balitang bayan numero uno during the time of joe taruc and rey langit (later replaced by tiya dely magpayo in 1992).  tita swarding had a sunday afternoon program entitled dzrh showbiz balita, which was aired after the station moved to pasay. tita swarding was also the columnist of pinoy parazzi.  death at the age of 60, tita swarding suffered emphysema and was rushed to the quezon city general hospital. he died on may 12, 2013.  filmography  radio balitang bayan numero uno (showbiz segment) dzrh showbiz balita  references  1952 births 2013 deaths filipino radio personalities filipino radio journalists manila broadcasting company people
the 1934 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1934 college football season.  in their sixth season under head coach mike gary, the hilltoppers compiled a 7-1 record and outscored their opponents, 104 to 52. halfback john miller was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
gary james george noel (born 7 march 1990) is a professional footballer who plays as a forward for lewes. born in england, he represents mauritius at international level.  career noel started his millwall before playing in non-league football for dulwich hamlet, thurrock and lewes amongst others. he then moved to austria to play for admira wacker but featured only for their second team in the austrian regionalliga. after a spell with sv schwechat, noel joined st. polten in 2013 where he went on to score in the final of the 2013-14 austrian cup final. he then joined first vienna before moving to germany to join regionalliga side lubeck. after two seasons with lubeck, noel joined fellow regionalliga nord side weiche.  on 22 june 2019, alemannia aachen announced the signing of noel on a 1-year contract. he left the club two months later to join tus rot-weiß koblenz. however, he was released on 31 january 2020.  noel returned to lewes in february 2020.  international career noel is eligible to represent mauritius through his parentage, his father was born on the african island. he made his international debut against rwanda on 26 march 2016.  references  external links   lewes stats  living people footballers from greater london mauritian footballers mauritius international footballers english footballers english people of mauritian descent association football forwards millwall f.c. players dulwich hamlet f.c. players harrow borough f.c. players croydon athletic f.c. players thurrock f.c. players carshalton athletic f.c. players lewes f.c. players fc admira wacker modling players sv schwechat players skn st. polten players first vienna fc players vfb lubeck players sc weiche flensburg 08 players alemannia aachen players fc rot-weiß koblenz players national league (english football) players regionalliga players austrian regionalliga players 1990 births
heskestad church () is a parish church of the church of norway in lund municipality in rogaland county, norway. it is located in the village of heskestad. it is the church for the heskestad parish which is part of the dalane prosti (deanery) in the diocese of stavanger. the white, wooden church was built in a long church style in 1905 using designs by the architect victor nordan. the church seats about 240 people.  history the earliest existing historical records of the church date back to the year 1380, but the church was not new that year. the medieval stave church was renovated during the first half of the 1600s. in 1734, the old church was torn down and replaced with a new building. in 1827, the church building was again torn down and replaced with a new building. in 1905, a new church was constructed about  north of the old church site. after the new church was completed, the old church was torn down.  see also list of churches in rogaland  references  lund, norway churches in rogaland wooden churches in norway 20th-century church of norway church buildings churches completed in 1905 13th-century establishments in norway
the 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment (3e r.t.a) was an infantry unit of the army of africa in the french army. recruited primarily from algerian muslims, it was mainly commanded by french officers. the racial boundaries were not absolute, with some french volunteers serving in the ranks and a limited number of muslims being appointed as officers. after 1913 a selective form of conscription was applied to algerian muslims but the majority of muslim soldiers serving in the 3e r.t.a continued to be voluntarily enlisted.  during its existence from 1842 to 1962, the regiment distinguished itself in the intervention in mexico, during the battle of san lorenzo, which earned the regiment the legion d'honneur and specially during world war ii during which, commanded by colonel francois de linares then colonel agostini at the corps of the 3rd algerian infantry division 3e dia, the regiment was cited four times at the orders of the armed forces.  the 3e rta was one of the five most-decorated french regiments of the second world war; along with the 4th tunisian tirailleurs regiment (4e rtt), the 2nd moroccan tabors group, the chad marching regiment () and the 13th demi-brigade of the foreign legion.  names   1842 : 3rd indigenous battalion of constantine  1856 : 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment, 3e rta  1962 : disbanded  the regiment originated as the indigenous (locally recruited muslim) battalion of constantine, created in algeria in 1842. in 1856 the battalion was designated as the 3e rta. the regiment was dissolved in 1962.  history  1815 to 1848  french conquest of algeria ()  regiments having participated to the conquest of algeria by france ()  second french empire  franco-prussian war of 1870   on august 1, 1870, the 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment formed part of the army of the rhin.  together with the 87th infantry regiment commanded by colonel blot, the 3rd formed the 2nd brigade under the orders of general lacretelle. this 2nd brigade, together with the 1st brigade of general fraboulet de kerleadec, two batteries of artillery plus one of mitrailleuse, and one engineer company constituted the 4th infantry division commanded by general de division de lartigue. the division was part of the 1st army corps with marshal patrice de macmahon, duke of magenta as commanding general.  on august 17, 1870, the 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment was part of the army of chalons.  with the 87
th infantry regiment of colonel blot, the 2nd marching regiment of lt-colonel de lenchey and the 3rd battalion of the 3rd grenadiers of the guard, the 3rd formed the 2nd brigade at the orders of general carrey de bellemare. this 2nd brigade with the 1st brigade of general fraboulet de kerleadec, two batteries de 4 and one de mitrailleuse, and one engineer company constituted the 4th infantry division commanded by general de brigade de lartigue. the division was part of the 1st army corps with general de division auguste-alexandre ducrot as commanding general.  world war i  1914  vers charleroi : oret, mettet (august 23), florennes (august 24)  unfolding of the iiird army and iv army: courgivaux, petit-morin  battle of the marne : cuts-la-pommeraye (september 15-17)  1915 ist army and iiird army in argonne and one meuse: plateau des loges  september 25 - october 6 : second battle of champagne epine de vedegrange  1916 battle of verdun : louvemont, cote-du-poivre (february), souville (july)   apprehending of the forts de douaumont and forts de vaux: bois le chaume, bezonveaux (december 15)  1917  verdun: cote 304  1918  moreuil (august 8)  battle of noyon (august 28)  chauny, tergnier  world war ii  composition of the regiment  during the second world war, one north-african tirailleur regiment consisted a little more than 3000 men (out of which 500 officers and sous-officiers) and 200 vehicles. the proportion of maghrebis reach 69% for the regiment, 74% for the battalion, 79% for the company of fusiliers-voltigeurs, 52% for the anti-tank company and 36% for the cannon infantry company.  campaigns  in 1943, the 3e rta formed part of the marching division of constantibe, subsequently designated as the 3rd algerian infantry division. the regiment earned distinction in tunisia then during the italian campaign: first in january 1944 while apprehending monna acquafondata, then operation diadem in may 1944. the regiment was cited twice during that campaign, carrying the inscriptions: "abruzzes 1944" and "rome 1944" on its colours.  disembarked at provence on august 15, 1944
, the 3e dia entered first to toulon, participated to the liberation of marseille, manoeuver during which the 3e and 7e rta formed the forward contingent. the regiment made way towards the alpes and jura, until the alsace. accordingly, the regiment then mounted the confrontations in the vosges, apprehended mulhouse and mounted the defensive of strasbourg at kilstett, in january 1945.  the 3e dia mounted the assault on the siegfried line, reached the rhin at spire and apprehended stuttgart. since naples, the 3e dia endured the loss of 4000 killed and 12,000 wounded.  collective citations  throughout the course of second world war, the 3e rta obtained 7 collective citations at the orders of the armed forces (4 for the regiment and 3 for the battalions).  casualties  the 3e dia recorded 811 killed in action in the 3e rta from november 1942 to may 1945, out of which 614 maghrebis (75%) and 197 europeans (25%).  since 1945  in the spring of 1947, the following tirailleur units were disembarked at saigon: the b.m of the 1st (), 2nd (), 3e rta, 7e rta and the 4e rtt, and the 25e, 23e and 27e bta. all eight of these battalions, were repatriated from indo china to north africa within 24 to 30 months.   1954 : battle of dien bien phu  disbandment   following the campaign in indochina, the regiment returned to algeria. following the outbreak of the algerian war in 1954 the 3e rta was involved in active service in the region of constantine.   in 1955, the regiment provided support for the creation of the 3rd company group of algerian nomades (1st, 2nd, 3rd algerian nomades companies ())  at the end of the algerian war in 1962, the majority of the units formerly comprising the french army of africa were disbanded. algerian muslim conscripts were demobilised while long service volunteers were given the option of transferring to other units of the french army. the 3e rta was amongst the regiments dissolved.  traditions  regimental colors  decorations   the regimental colors of the 3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment are decorated with:   croix of the legion d'honneur in 1863 for the capture of two flags on may 8, 1863 during the battle of san lorenzo, by tirailleur ahmed ben miloud, who was awarded the medaille militaire ;  croix de guerre 1914-1918 with:   2
palms and 1 silver star   croix de guerre 1939-1945 with:  four palms.  medaille d'or de la ville de milan  fourragere:  the regimental colors bear wearing the fourragere with colors of the medaille militaire with olives of the colors of the croix de guerre 1914-1918  honours  battle honours artois 1915 champagne 1915 verdun 1916 soissonnais 1918 picardy 1918 aisne 1918 levant 1920--1921 morocco 1925-1926 fondouk el okbi 1943 rome 1944 marseille 1944 vosges 1944 indochine 1947-1954 afn 1952-1962  regimental commanders  1811 - ...  :  colonel commandant adrien   1818 - ...  :  chef de bataillon frederic   1825 - ... :  lieutenant dieudonne  1870 :  colonel gandil   1870 :  colonel barrue  1905 - ...  :  colonel gabriel (1849-1930)  world war i  until august 25, 1914 : colonel simon, provisionary command was assured by commandant demaris  from september 19, 1914 to april 28, 1916 : lieutenant-colonel de gouvello   from april 28 to august 6, 1916 : colonel thouvenel, provisionary command was assured by commandant gonnel then commandant le clerc   from august 26 to october 7, 1916 : colonel simon    since october 7, 1916 : lieutenant-colonel vibert   world war ii  19/09/1943 - 15/09/1944: colonel de linares  15/09/1944 - march 1945: colonel agostini  march 1945 - ... : colonel de la boisse  1958 - ...  : general gandoet commanding the 19th infantry division  see also  moroccan division  references  bibliography  historique du 3e regiment de tirailleurs algeriens : ouvrage redige d'apres les ordres de m. le colonel boitard, g. heim, constantine (algerie), 1888, 582 p.  le 3e regiment de tirailleurs algeriens pendant la campagne d'italie (janvier-aout 1944), vie exaltante, numero 20, editions de la nouvelle france, paris, 1945.  livre d'or de la 3e division d'infanterie algerienne. fribourg-en-brisgau: imprimerie nationale, 1948.   par les portes du nord : la liberation de toulon et de marseille en 1944, nouvelles editions latines, 2005.    tirailleurs regiments of france military units and formations established in 1856 military units and formations disestablished in 1962

vojislav stanimirovic may refer to:   vojislav stanimirovic (politician) (born 1953), croatian politician of serbian descent  vojislav stanimirovic (criminal) (born 1937), serbian american journalist and high-profile thief
ricardo baca (born  ) is an american journalist best known for being the first full-time marijuana rights editor for a major american newspaper. he was an editor at the denver post, producing the cannabist for over three years until december, 2016. he is the "central character" of the 2015 documentary film rolling papers. he also shares his name with the first person to be convicted for the possession of marijuana after the marijuana tax act of 1937 was put into action.  education baca went to high school at westminster high school in the denver suburbs, where he wrote for the school paper. he earned a bachelor's degree in journalism in 1999 from metropolitan state university of denver.  work prior to the cannabist, baca worked at corpus christi caller-times from 1999 to 2002, and following that, was the denver posts music critic and entertainment editor for more than a decade. baca also co-founded denver's  underground music showcase in 2002.  in 2016, baca started started grasslands: a journalism-minded agency, which provides pr, content, and social media marketing for cannabis businesses and others in highly regulated industries, real estate and healthcare.  personal life baca has been married since  2015.  books  film rolling papers, 2015, directed by mitch dickman  references  further reading  external links writer's page at the cannabist   1977 births living people american newspaper editors cannabis in colorado cannabis writers metropolitan state university of denver alumni people from denver the denver post people
talwandi pain  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of talwandi pain. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, talwandi pain has 117 houses with total population of 630 persons of which 334 are male and 296 females. literacy rate of talwandi pain is 76.43%, higher than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 53 which is 8.41% of total population. child sex ratio is approximately 828, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
paharipur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of paharipur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, paharipur has 129 houses with total population of 702 persons of which 373 are male and 329 females. literacy rate of paharipur is 74.68%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 74 which is 10.54% of total population. child sex ratio is approximately 850, higher than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
derwydd is a hamlet in the south-east of carmarthenshire, wales, historically situated in the parish of llandybie, north of ammanford. it is around halfway between ammanford (to the south) and llandeilo, at a rural crossroads between the a483 and a476 roads.  the name of the hamlet literally means "druid" in welsh, but is more likely to have derived from derwen (oak tree), which are common in the area.  in 1870-72, john marius wilson's imperial gazetteer of england and wales described derwydd as follows:  "derwidd, or derwydd, a hamlet in llandebie parish, carmarthen; on the river cennen, near the vale of towy railway, 4 miles sse of llandeilo-fawr. derwidd-road station, on the railway, is east of the hamlet. derwidd house belonged to sir harry vaughan, who commanded in the army of charles i.; belonged afterwards to the stepneys; and contains some furniture of the time of henry viii."  see also   history of the vaughans of derwydd  list of places in carmarthenshire  references  villages in carmarthenshire
simon lillistone (born 13 february 1969) is a male british former cyclist.  cycling career he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  he represented england in the scratch race and won a bronze medal in the 4,000 metres team pursuit, at the 1990 commonwealth games in auckland, new zealand. four years later at the 1994 commonwealth games in victoria, british columbia, canada he won a silver medal in the team time trial and competed in the scratch race and points race.  references  external links    1969 births living people british male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from shrewsbury commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for england commonwealth games bronze medallists for england cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games cyclists at the 1994 commonwealth games
nila djuwita farid moeloek (born 11 april 1949) is an indonesian politician and physician. she was the minister of health of the republic of indonesia from 27 october 2014 until 20 october 2019. she is an ophthalmologist and lecturer in the faculty of medicine, university of indonesia.  career moeloek has participated in the selection for the minister of health on 18 october 2009, but instead she was appointed as the representative of indonesia to millennium development goals (mdgs) by president susilo bambang yudhoyono.  references  1949 births living people indonesian muslims people from jakarta government ministers of indonesia university of indonesia alumni health ministers of indonesia indonesian ophthalmologists women government ministers of indonesia indonesian women physicians 21st-century women politicians working cabinet (joko widodo)
baylin high cross is a high cross and national monument located near athlone, county westmeath, ireland.  location baylin high cross is located about  east of athlone.  description the cross is believed to have been moved, perhaps from clonmacnoise. on the east face was a lion and a scroll of interlaced creatures with birdlike heads running up the shaft, and a celtic knot pattern at the centre of the head. the north face shows a hunting scene with a horseman with spear and a dog biting a deer's leg.  there is an inscription at the bottom of the west face dating the cross to around ad 800: the inscription reads oroit ar tuathgall las dernath in chrossa ("a prayer for tuathgal who caused this cross to be made"), referring to the abbot of clonmacnoise who died in 811.  references  national monuments in county westmeath high crosses in the republic of ireland
bushmaster bullpup may refer to:   bushmaster m17s, a bullpup rifle  bushmaster arm pistol, a bullpup pistol
cutthroat kitchen is a reality cooking television show hosted by alton brown. it premiered on august 11, 2013, on food network, and features four chefs competing in a three-round elimination cooking competition.  the contestants face auctions in which they can purchase opportunities to sabotage one another. each chef is given $25,000 at the start of the show; the person left standing keeps whatever money they have not spent in the auctions. the show is in its fifteenth season as of june 2017.  series overview  episodes  season 1  season 2  season 3  season 4  season 5  season 6  season 7  season 8  season 9  season 10  season 11  season 12 richard blais became a new recurring judge in season 12.  season 13  season 14  season 15  australian airings  references  lists of american non-fiction television series episodes
the owatonna firemen's hall, formerly the owatonna city and firemen's hall, is a historic government building in owatonna, minnesota, united states. it was built from 1906 to 1907 to house the owatonna fire department and city government offices.  the city offices were relocated to the former campus of the minnesota state public school for dependent and neglected children in 1974.  the firemen's hall continues to serve as the headquarters for the owatonna fire department.  the firemen's hall building was listed on the national register of historic places in 1997 for having local significance in the themes of architecture and politics/government.  it was nominated for serving as the government center and a key public facility in owatonna, and for exemplifying the municipal buildings often built in late-19th/early-20th-century minnesota.  in 2015 the firemen's hall was also listed as a contributing property to the owatonna commercial historic district.  history in september 1903 the city's fire department bought two lots,  wide by  long, west of the metropolitan opera house (later the roxy theatre) for $3,126.00 (). on september 19, 1905, a special election was held to gauge support from owatonna residents for a $15,000.00 bond for the construction of a new city hall and fire station. the bond was passed. on july 17, 1906, the construction firm hammel and anderson, with a bid of $19,643.00, was awarded the contract for construction of the fire hall. on august 17 the two lots were donated to the city by the firemen for construction of a combination city hall and fire hall on the condition that the city would spend not less than $15,000.00 for construction of a three-story building. the firemen contributed $1,000 towards capital costs and obtained a 25-year lease. the cornerstone was laid on september 8, 1906. an opening ceremony was held on october 5, 1907 and the equipment was transferred to the new site, the same year, on november 5. the team used horse-drawn equipment until 1915, when the first motorized vehicle, a 1915 jeffery, was purchased.  the city vacated their portion of the building in 1974, moving to the new west hills campus on the site of the former state orphanage. a truck bay was built where the old roxy theatre stood, which was demolished in the 1950s, along with other improvements to the building, done in the 1996 renovation. an elevator was installed
and the third floor remodeled in 2008.  in february 2016 the city of owatonna purchased two lots for $184,000 on the corner of 24th street and kenyon road, in northeastern owatonna, for the future development of a fire sub-station. the northern section of owatonna is about  from the current firemen's hall, which has led to longer response times. the city intended to wait for further development before any building is done. the time before any building occurs is estimated at 10 years.  fire department chiefs   1875 - 1879: m. r. srong  1879 - 1884: h. randal  1884 - 1885: s. s. green  1886 - 1887: e. m. twiford  1888 - 1892: c. e. luce  1892 - 1895: f. g. schuman  1895 - 1898: e. m. twiford  1899 - 1900: o. wood  1901 - 1919: e. m. twiford  1919 - 1927: f. g. schuman  1927 - 1933: andrew erdman  1933 - 1942: a. c. smith  1942 - 1972: ed slazak  1972 - 1987: frank anderson  1987 - 1988: paul illg  1988 - 2001: jerry rosenthal  2001 - present: mike johnson  other uses  the owatonna firemen's hall is also the headquarters for steele county skywarn, a non-profit weather spotting organization.  locally, it is a part of steele county emergency management. it uses the third floor for meetings and another room in the building as a nerve center, to communicate with spotters out in the field, monitor weather conditions in and around owatonna, and make reports to the national weather service in chanhassen, minnesota.  see also  list of fire stations  national register of historic places listings in steele county, minnesota  references  external links  owatonna fire department  1906 establishments in minnesota buildings and structures in steele county, minnesota city and town halls on the national register of historic places in minnesota fire stations completed in 1907 fire stations in minnesota fire stations on the national register of historic places in minnesota former seats of local government government buildings completed in 1907 individually listed contributing properties to historic districts on the national register in minnesota national register of historic places in steele county, minnesota romanesque revival architecture in minnesota
san gaetano is a roman catholic church located on corso palladio #147 in the city of vicenza, region of veneto, italy.  history the church was erected between 1721 and 1730 using designs of girolamo frigimelica and commissioned by the theatine order. the church underwent reconstruction after bombardment in 1944. the church still houses a st cajetan painted by francesco solimena.  references  roman catholic churches in vicenza roman catholic churches completed in 1730 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy
siitonen is a finnish surname. notable people with the surname include:  eva-riitta siitonen (born 1940), finnish politician hannu siitonen (born 1949), finnish javelin thrower pauli siitonen (born 1938), finnish cross-country skier fredi (singer), stage name of the finnish comedic actor, musician, singer/songwriter and television presenter matti kalevi siitonen (born 1942) stig (singer), stage name of the finnish singer pasi siitonen (born 1978)  finnish-language surnames
no zuo no die () is a chinese internet meme. the original wording of the chinese phrase, meaning "one would not be in trouble had one not asked for it", is half-translated to chinglish where it retains one of its chinese characters in pinyin. "zuo" (作) is a shanghainese word meaning to "act silly or daring (for attention)".  the original chinese phrase has become very popular in china. when its chinglish translation was included in urban dictionary in 2014, it generated a lot of interest in the media, interpreted by many chinese as a sign of china's growing soft power.  references  internet memes chinese words and phrases shanghainese
rahmat khali canal (), or rahmatkhali river, is a canal that flows through lakshmipur sadar upazila in chittagong division, bangladesh.  course  the canal flows through lakshmipur district and empties into the meghna river at , just below moju chowdhury hat.  see also   list of rivers in bangladesh  references   water transport in bangladesh rivers of bangladesh rivers of chittagong division
the hellenic shooting federation (hsf), greek: σκοπευτικη ομοσπονδια ελλαδος, is an umbrella organization for sport shooting in greece.  hsf is greece's representative for the international shooting organizations international shooting sport federation (issf), international practical shooting confederation (ipsc), federation internationale de tir aux armes sportives de chasse (fitasc), muzzleloaders international committee (mlaic), international metallic silhouette shooting union (imssu), world field target federation (wftf) and the european shooting confederation (esc).  see also   list of shooting sports organizations  other umbrella organizations for shooting   association of maltese arms collectors and shooters  french shooting federation  finnish shooting sport federation  monaco shooting federation  norwegian shooting association  royal spanish olympic shooting federation  swiss shooting sport federation  references  external links official website  regions of the international practical shooting confederation shooting
the 1995 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1995 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their second season under head coach dick flynn, the chippewas compiled a 4-7 record (2-6 against mac opponents), finished in seventh place in the mac, and were outscored by their opponents, 276 to 255.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 95,292 in five home games.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback chad darnell with 1,737 passing yards, tailback silas massey with 1,089 rushing yards, and flanker bryan schorman with 604 receiving yards. massey was named mac freshman of the year.  linebacker cory gildersleeve was selected as the team's most valuable player. center brock gutierrez and free safety quincy wright were selected as first-team all-mac player.  schedule  references  external links  1995 football media guide  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
isabella giovinazzo is an australian actress. from 2013 until 2017, she played phoebe nicholson in the australian soap opera home and away. after leaving the serial, she played jessie davies in the network ten drama series playing for keeps from 2018 until 2019. giovinazzo has had supporting roles in web series sex and death, the 2021 miniseries lie with me, and soap opera neighbours as felicity higgins.  early life giovinazzo was born in melbourne. her father is a music composer and educator of italian descent. she is the oldest of three sisters.  giovinazzo completed her secondary education at melbourne girls' college. after graduating, she enrolled in a bachelor of arts degree at the university of melbourne. however, during her first semester at university, she deferred her studies, choosing, instead, to travel europe, spending an extended period in the calabrian town where her paternal grandparents were born and grew up.  after her return to melbourne, giovinazzo, decided to resume her studies and focus more explicitly on the film industry and, in particular, writing and directing. she enrolled in a bachelor of film and television degree at swinburne university of technology. while at film school, she was often called upon to act in films under the direction of fellow students.  as this progressed, she developed an interest in the craft of acting. after the completion of her degree, she decided to focus on developing her acting skills, and took night classes at a number of private acting schools in melbourne, howard fine and 16th street, among others.  career as a film student, she directed a number of short films. she co-wrote the documentary chong's world with ella carey, and it was selected for inclusion in the st kilda film festival. after the completion of her degree, when her attention turned more to acting, she wrote, produced, and played the lead role in the short film swim that was also selected for inclusion in the st. kilda film festival. it later screened at the byron bay film festival, and aired on the australian television network sbs.  in november 2013, it was announced that giovinazzo had joined the cast of soap opera home and away as phoebe nicholson, marking her first major acting job. she relocated to sydney for the role and began filming mid-2013, before making her first appearance in the november 2013 season finale. her character is a singer/songwriter who leaves melbourne when she learns her former boyfriend is putting on a music festival in the fictional town of summer bay. giovinazzo decided to leave
home and away to pursue new roles, and she made her final appearance in home and away on 11 may 2017.  following her departure from home and away, giovinazzo was cast in the network ten drama playing for keeps. she played jessie, a footballer's wife, who gave up her career in the sport to be a mother. playing for keeps was cancelled after two seasons. giovinazzo played a supporting role in the 2020 web series sex and death, alongside writer and director kathleen lee. the series later aired on sbs viceland. in 2021, giovinazzo appeared in drama miniseries lie with me as caroline wilder. she also joined the cast of neighbours in the recurring role of felicity higgins.  personal life giovinazzo married her partner charlie ford in 2015. the couple separated in august 2016.  giovinazzo was in a relationship with her home and away co-star  james stewart from 2016 to 2017.  filmography  references  external links     living people australian soap opera actresses australian people of italian descent australian people of calabrian descent 21st-century australian actresses actresses from melbourne year of birth missing (living people)
manpreet singh sandhu  (born 26 june 1992) is an indian field hockey player and the captain of india men's national field hockey team since may 2017. he led the indian field hockey team to the bronze medal at the tokyo 2020 olympics. he plays as a halfback.  he first played for india in 2011 at the age of 19. he represented india at the 2012 summer olympics and was named asia's junior player of the year in 2014. he was named in the indian squad for the 2016 summer olympics.  early and personal life manpreet singh was born in a farming family in mithapur village on outskirts of jalandhar city of punjab in india. manpreet married malaysian illi najwa saddique on december 16, 2020 in punjab, india. he first met her when the team featured in the sultan of johor cup in 2013 where indian team won the gold medal.  before the game he focuses and relaxes by meditating with yoga, playing playstation and by listening to the punjabi bhangra music specially by diljit dosanjh and honey singh. he carries his playstation with him whenever he travels for matches. he is a fan of salman khan and enjoys watching movies of sports genre, such as m.s. dhoni: the untold story, chak de! india and bhaag milkha bhaag, and he would love to try acting in movies if offered a role.  his big dream is to "win big for india" and biggest goal is to "inspire youngsters to play a sport, any sport".  sports career he was inspired by the former indian hockey captain padma shri pargat singh, who also hails from manpreet's mithapur village. he was further attracted by the prizes his elder brothers won while playing hockey. around 2002, he started to play hockey regularly at the age of 10 when his mother locked him in room to prevent him from playing hockey. however, he eventually managed to escape. his coach told his angry elder brother to at least let him try since he was so keen to play. manpreet's  family started to support him completely after he won his first prize of 2013 sultan of johor cup ₹500 cash (us$12 per 2002 conversion rate) in a tournament. in 2005, he enrolled in india's one of the most sought-after hockey academies, surjit hockey academy of jalandhar. in 2011, he made his international debut as part of indian junior team. he idolises former german captain moritz furste and is inspired by sardar singh's style of play. he
is also a fan of cristiano ronaldo and david beckham, and just like them he also wears the same jersey number 7.  junior hockey in 2013 he became captain of india junior men's hockey team in the 2013 men's hockey junior world cup. indian team also won the final gold medal under his captainship in the 2013 sultan of johor cup after defeating malaysia 3-0 in final where manpreet also scored a goal. in 2014, he was titled junior player of the year by the asian hockey federation.  senior hockey  2012-2016: olympic, commonwealth and asian games wins in 2012 summer olympics, he represented india.  in 2014 asian games at incheon in south korea, he was part of india's men's hockey team that won gold medal after defeating arch rival pakistan in final by 4-2.  in 2014 commonwealth games at glasgow in scotland, india won silver medal after losing to australia in final by 4-0.  in 2016 men's hockey champions trophy at london, india won silver medal after losing to australia in the final by 1 - 3, where india had made finals after 38 years.  in 2016 summer olympics, he was named in the indian squad, where india lost 1 -3 to belgium in the quarterfinals.  father's death during 2016 sultan azlan shah cup few hours before the 6 april 2016 japan vs india opening match 2016 sultan azlan shah cup, which india won 1-2, he received the news of his father's sudden death, he missed the next australia vs india match on 7 april 2016 as he went back to india to perform death rituals for his father, australian players observed a minute's silence while wearing black arm band to show support for manpreet and india lost in his absence by 5-1. his mother told him to go back and play to fulfill his father's wish of giving his best to play for the pride of nation. he came back to join the team to play the next canada vs india match on 10 april 2016, which india won by 1-3. india won again by 1-5 in the next pakistan vs india match on 12 april 2016 where manpreet played an important role in creating an early pressure by scoring a goal within first 4 minutes. new zealand won 2-1 against india on 13 april 2016, where manpreet scored india's sole goal. india won 1-6 against malaysia on 15 april 2016 in their last pool match. india won the second place after losing the final against australia by 4-0 on 16 april 2016. out of india's total 18 goals
in the tournament, he scored 2 during the period of mourning despite missing few matches.  captain of india 2017 onward on 18 may 2017, he was promoted to captain india's hockey team for the three nations invitational tournament in germany that started on 1 june and the world league semi final in england that started on 15 june. he was awarded 2019 men's fih player of the year awards. in tokyo 2020 olympics, he went there as the captain of indian national men's hockey team. also, he was the flagbearer during the opening ceremony of the olympics, along with mary kom. at the tokyo 2020 olympics, he captained india towards victory by bringing bronze medal for country. india defeated germany by 5-4.  tokyo olympics 2020 in the tokyo olympics held in 2021, manpreet singh led the indian men's team to a bronze medal. after losing 1- 7 to australia in the second match of the group stage, india, under his leadership, staged a remarkable comeback to defeat spain, argentina (the then defending champion) and japan in succession. they beat great britain 3 - 1 in the quarter-final but fell to then world no. 1 and eventual gold medallists belgium 2 - 5 in the semi-finals. in the bronze-medal match, india defeated germany 5-4 to win the bronze medal. it was the indian hockey team's first podium finish at the olympic games since 1980.  awards  2021 - khel ratna award, highest sporting honour of india.  references  external links manpreet singh at hockey india  1992 births living people field hockey players from jalandhar indian male field hockey players male field hockey midfielders field hockey players at the 2012 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2020 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of india field hockey players at the 2014 commonwealth games commonwealth games medallists in field hockey commonwealth games silver medallists for india field hockey players at the 2014 asian games field hockey players at the 2018 asian games 2014 men's hockey world cup players 2018 men's hockey world cup players asian games gold medalists for india asian games bronze medalists for india asian games medalists in field hockey medalists at the 2014 asian games medalists at the 2018 asian games south asian games silver medalists for india south asian games medalists in field hockey recipients of the arjuna award olympic bronze medalists for india medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic medalists in field hockey
anwar ul-islam girls' high school was founded as the anwar ul-islam movement's post primary institution for girls. it operates at two levels: junior and senior school as day and boarding school.  history it was founded on 4 october 1972 at km 27, abeokuta expressway, ojokoro, nigeria. signatories were alhaji k.d. oshodi and mr. j.a. gbadamosi. all the blocks of classrooms were inherited from ahamadiyya grade iii teacher's training college, which closed down in 1996.  in a letter dated 19 february 1972, the lagos state government through the ministry of education approved the school called ahmadiyya girls' high school which was later change to anwar ul-islam girls' high school. the school started with 72 students, four teaching staff, and the principal was ms. m.a. ketiku.  on october 2, 2001, the school was returned to the anwar ul-islam movement of nigeria due to the policy of the lagos state government headed by governor bola ahmed tinubu after several years of government control. after the school was returned to the movement, mrs akorede b.f. was posted as the principal.  structure the school operates at two levels: junior and senior school as day and boarding school. the lowest forms, js i to js iii, make up the junior school. students in those forms study for the basic education certificate examination (bece) conducted by the lagos state examination board and taken at the end of their third year. the senior school certificate examination (ssce) is the goal of the students in the upper forms.  two examination bodies - west african examinations council (waec) and national examinations council (neco) - are empowered to conduct separately the end-of-course examination. students are to enter for both examinations.  famous past pupils/students  *alhaja shakirat adepeju - former chairperson institute of chartered accountants, ikeja branch, lagos.   alhaja bimbo abina lagos business tycoon   mrs. deola sode u.k. based neurosurgeon  administration the school is headed by the principal, who is assisted by vice principals. the principals of the school since inception are:  mrs. m.a. ketiku              1972-1976  mrs. o.o. sode                1976-1982  mrs. k.a. giwa                1982-1989  mrs. s.a. ajao                1989-1990
alhaja t.m. akinwande         1990-2001  mrs. b.f akorede              2001-2008  mrs. f.s. afolabi             2008-2013  mrs. a. shobowale             2013-2014  mrs. b.a. ndukw               2014-2016  mrs. salau o.f.               2016-2017  mrs balogun s.a               2017-present  girls' schools in lagos educational institutions established in 1972 1972 establishments in nigeria
kentucky route 980 (ky 980) is a  long state highway located entirely in allen county in south-central kentucky. it originates at the junction with u.s. route 231 and u.s. route 31e on the west side of scottsville, and ends in downtown scottsville at a junction with kentucky route 100.  history    ky 980 was originally part of u.s. 231 going into scottsville. us 231 was rerouted onto the us 31e alignment west of town during the 1970s.  major intersections  references  external links kentucky transportation cabinet  u.s. route 231 0980 0980
rasei (pronounced ray-see) is a joint institute between the university of colorado boulder (cu-boulder) and the national renewable energy laboratory (nrel) addressing important, complex problems in energy that require a multidisciplinary, multi-institutional approach.  its mission is to expedite solutions that transform energy by advancing renewable energy science, engineering, and analysis through research, education, and industry partnerships.  rasei benefits from the strengths of its partner institutions. cu-boulder is a premier institution for research and education, and its broad spectrum of capabilities and disciplines contributed to its placement of eight in research citation output among u.s. institutions of higher learning (science, nov. 2010). nrel is the only national laboratory solely dedicated to advancing renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies from concept to commercial application.  rasei's four goals create integrated energy campus: create a world-leading venue for energy research and education that benefits from the concentration of academic institutions, federal research laboratories, and businesses involved in the green economy along colorado's front range.  perform innovative research: develop a comprehensive and multidisciplinary approach to research that meets the scientific and institutional energy challenges of the 21st century.  educate energy leaders and workforce: provide programs, lectures, and opportunities that prepare students to become the energy leaders of the future.  develop industry partnerships: engage industry partners in comprehensive programs involving energy research, education, policy, and technology development.  understanding the scale and complexity of the energy challenge we face an unprecedented global energy challenge. demand for energy is projected to double within the next few decades and continue to grow through the end of the century. to meet this ever-growing demand, energy industries of the 21st century need an entirely new infrastructure that produces more energy at a lower cost, uses energy far more efficiently, improves the security of supply by relying more on domestic and stable sources, and produces far fewer greenhouse gas emissions.  the scale and complexity of the energy challenge and the intense competition in the energy marketplace necessitate a comprehensive approach for developing new energy industries. a measured investment from the public and private sectors and new models for public-private partnerships are required.  understanding the dynamics of this new marketplace and the factors governing a sustainable energy system are crucial for emerging energy industries to succeed. these systems must meet multiple requirements such as scaling to a terawatt, using readily available resources for manufacturing, and having a sustainable lifecycle.  notable people arthur nozik  related news  the renewable and sustainable energy institute today announced its
inaugural group of rasei fellow appointments and plans for future faculty hires to form one of the world's leading university and federal laboratory partnerships in the development and commercialization of renewable energy technologies.  rasei, a new joint institute between the university of colorado at boulder and the u.s. department of energy's national renewable energy laboratory in golden, made the announcement at cu-boulder's annual energy research symposium taking place today in boulder.  "nrel and cu-boulder, along with research colleagues from colorado state university and the colorado school of mines, are already working together on a variety of critical energy technologies that will help to ensure a clean and sustainable energy supply for our nation's future," said robert mcgrath, nrel deputy laboratory director for science and technology, and one of rasei's chief architects. "the newly established rasei significantly strengthens the structural platform enabling cu-boulder and nrel researchers to take full advantage of the complementary strengths resident within each institution."  a national search will be conducted for rasei's director. in addition to creating the resources to attract a top candidate to lead the new institute, cu-boulder plans to designate as many as 10 new faculty hires to rasei over the next several years, with exact levels of support contingent upon the colorado economy and the university's budget.  institute management and decision-making will be coordinated by the new director, a private-sector leadership board and a set of prominent research fellows appointed from nrel and cu-boulder. the initial 34 rasei fellows named today include 18 from cu-boulder and 16 from nrel.  "cu has a long history of joint institutes with national laboratories that attract the highest caliber leadership and scientific talent," said cu-boulder chancellor philip p. distefano. "with this initiative, cu is fostering an invaluable working relationship with an important partner, and opening up new opportunities for cu researchers to collaborate with stanford, mit and other major american association of universities research institutions focusing on the development of new energy solutions."  rasei will operate much like cu-boulder's other independent research institutes, including jila, which collaborates with the national institute of standards and technology, and the cooperative institute for research in environmental sciences, which collaborates with the national oceanic and atmospheric administration.  according to mcgrath, "rasei will expand and build upon the work already initiated under the center for revolutionary solar photoconversion, the colorado center for biorefining and biofuels, the center
for research and education in wind and other research centers affiliated with the colorado renewable energy collaboratory."  the collaboratory's partners include cu-boulder, csu, the colorado school of mines and nrel.  "colorado's new energy economy is leading america toward a new energy future, and collaborations between our universities and national laboratories such as rasei are leading the way," said colorado gov. bill ritter. "rasei is poised to attract the best and brightest new research talent to the state of colorado, which will also bring good jobs and advance clean energy technologies."  and with conocophillips, a member of rasei's industry-driven leadership board, building a new global technology center and corporate learning center at the sun microsystems/storagetek site in louisville, the new institute will spur greater overall investment in new energy development in colorado, now seen as a national hub for clean energy technology creation. the new conocophillips center will handle research and development of renewable energy and high-tech carbon fuels recovery.  "one of the key reasons conocophillips plans to locate its new global technology center and corporate learning center in colorado is the exceptional research talent pool in close proximity to our proposed campus," said stephen brand, conocophillips' senior vice president for technology. "as a long-time collaborator with cu-boulder, and member of the rasei leadership council, conocophillips is committed to making this new institute a world-class success."  references  university of colorado boulder renewable energy in the united states
gerard vyacheslavovich vasilyev (; born 24 september 1935 in tersko-orlovsky mayak, leningrad oblast) is a soviet and russian singer and actor, people's artist of the rsfsr, president of the foundation for the conservation and development of the operetta genre, president of competition for young artists of operetta operettaland.  biography  in 1967, vasilyev graduated from the leningrad state conservatory vocal class and was accepted into the troupe of the novosibirsk theatre of operetta, where for eight months of the six played a major role. in 1968, he was invited as a soloist at the moscow operetta theater, where he works now.  roles in movies  1975 -  maiden planner as yuri tokmokov, clerk 1975 -   the count of luxembourg as rene von luxemburg 1976 -   silva-csardas princess  1977 -   espanyola or lope de vega suggested...  1979 -   hanna ringleaders  as count danilo  awards  honored artist of the rsfsr (1974) people's artist of the rsfsr (1981)  order of friendship (1995) -  for services to the state, and many years of fruitful work in the field of art and culture  order of honour (2001) -  for many years of fruitful work in the field of culture and art, a great contribution to strengthening friendship and cooperation between the peoples  medal "for strengthening military cooperation" (2003) -  for his merits in strengthening military cooperation, active involvement in the military-patriotic education of youth  order "for merit to the fatherland", 3rd class  order "for merit to the fatherland",  4th class  references  external links  gerard.ru  биография  1935 births living people people from ostrovnoy, murmansk oblast soviet male stage actors russian male stage actors russian and soviet theatre directors soviet male singers 20th-century russian male actors 21st-century russian male actors 20th-century russian singers 21st-century russian singers recipients of the order "for merit to the fatherland", 3rd class recipients of the order of honour (russia) people's artists of the rsfsr honored artists of the rsfsr baritones saint petersburg conservatory alumni russian music educators soviet music educators 20th-century russian male singers 21st-century russian male singers recipients of the order "for merit to the fatherland", 4th class
julia martinez fernandez (born 5 december 1931) is a spanish film and television actress. she was awarded the silver shell for best actress at the san sebastian international film festival in 1953.  selected filmography  spanish serenade (1952)  a room for three (1952)  flight 971 (1953)  nobody will know (1953)  the last torch song (1957)  miracle of the white suit (1956)  l'amore piu bello (1958)  references  bibliography   bentley, bernard. a companion to spanish cinema. boydell & brewer 2008.  external links     1931 births living people spanish television actresses spanish film actresses people from santander, spain
a bronze statue of composer george m. cohan, by artist georg john lober and architect otto langman, is installed at duffy square in manhattan, in new york. cast in 1959 and dedicated on september 11, 1959, the statue rests on a light barre granite pedestal, which is set on a dark barre granite base.  see also   1959 in art  references  external links     1959 establishments in new york city 1959 sculptures bronze sculptures in manhattan granite sculptures in new york city monuments and memorials in manhattan outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures of men in new york city statues in new york city times square
european pakistanis, or depending on the preference white pakistanis, comprise residents of pakistan who are of european origin.  history prior to its independence in 1947, pakistan was part of the colonial british raj empire in south asia. british control of the region began with the annexation of sind in 1843, the punjab and north-west frontier in 1849, and baluchistan in 1876. the colonial period expanded european presence and influence in south asia. thousands of european settlers arrived in the subcontinent as administrators, soldiers, officials, civilians, missionaries and traders. during the 1940s, there were small populations of european jews scattered across cosmopolitan cities such as karachi and lahore. they arrived as part of the jewish exodus to british india following the outbreak of world war ii in europe. however, by the late 1960s, most of these jews effected a secondary migration and left for israel or western nations. the terms gora, firangi or angrez are used in pakistan to refer to a white person.  demographics the following sections outline current expatriate european communities in pakistan, sorted by their geographical region of origin.  central europe the swiss community in pakistan numbered 336 people as of 2014, based on embassy registrations. there is also a small austrian expatriate group. czechs in pakistan are a minor community consisting of expatriates, and czech nationals married to pakistanis. a czech film club was set up in islamabad by the czech embassy, as of 2004. it arranged screenings of czech films for czechs living in pakistan as well as czech-speakers. there is also a minor german community as well.  eastern europe there is a very small ukrainian community in the country, numbering a few dozen. it includes businesspersons, journalists, diplomats and ukrainian spouses married to pakistanis. most of them reside in metropolitan cities. the russian community in pakistan is a small one, and has been present since the soviet era. there are also white pakistanis of armenian and turkish descent there are some romanians, concentrated in islamabad.  northern europe northern european expatriates in pakistan primarily consist of scandinavian communities. a pattern of return-migration is observed among danes of pakistani origin, of whom some families have settled in pakistan. around 100 other danes were living in pakistan as of 2006. there were also around 200 swedes in pakistan, and they are spread throughout the country. the population of finns in pakistan is fewer in number.  a norwegian diaspora is present in the country, a large number of them being norwegians of pakistani descent. up to 4,000 norwegian citizens live in
pakistan. the town of kharian in gujrat district of punjab is known as "little norway", as the majority of pakistani-norwegians hail from this area and many of them have resettled here. others split their time between norway and pakistan. they have established family businesses and built large houses in the town, including those who have moved back to pakistan post-retirement. remittances and investment by norwegians have boosted the town's economy and real estate. those who are more accustomed to urban living prefer owning houses in larger cities such as islamabad and lahore. private schools in kharian supported by the embassy provide norwegian-language classes to the children of norwegian citizens, making assimilation easier when the expatriates return to norway. according to statistics norway, one-in-three pakistani-norwegian youth spend at least a year or more in pakistan, gaining key exposure to their cultural roots. the norwegian community maintains keen interest in politics back home and observes the country's national events.  southern europe as of 2010, 300 italian nationals were residing in pakistan. some italians are notable in the region's history as empire mercenaries, such as paolo avitabile and jean-baptiste ventura who served in punjab and the frontier under ranjit singh. there is a small spaniard population in pakistan, mainly confined to islamabad. there is also a minor portuguese community residing in karachi. the community is known for establishing missionary schools, and for its contribution to the country's pop music scene. the portuguese presence in south asia dates back to the start of the 16th century, following the rise of the portuguese empire. the empire did not control any regions that are part of modern pakistan. however, it did possess colonies in india (most notably goa), and made a series of incursions along pakistan's present southern coastline. in 1568, the portuguese led by admiral fernao mendes pinto attacked debal (near thatta) when they encountered ottoman traders' ships anchored at the port.  western europe in 2005, over 47,000 britons resided in pakistan. by 2015, their population was 80,000, making them by far the largest western community. they comprise english and smaller numbers of scottish, welsh and northern irish expatriates. the community also includes a large number of british pakistanis who have resettled in pakistan. the city of mirpur in kashmir, where the majority of british pakistanis originate from, is called "little britain" due to its expatriate british population. colonial-era buildings, infrastructure, laws, institutions, governance and culture left by the british exist throughout pakistan
as a legacy of the empire.  irish people have been present in the south asian subcontinent since the days of the east india company. many of them served as soldiers and government officials for the colonial empire. around half of the british forces in the subcontinent consisted of irish manpower. others became renowned as educators, nurses and christian missionaries. this tradition continues today, as several convent schools in pakistan are run by irish nuns - such as the convents of jesus and mary in karachi, lahore and murree, or the presentation convent schools in punjab founded by the presentation sisters. many roman catholic missionaries from ireland have been working in pakistan for decades, and are involved in social work or provision of services to the country's christian community. irish expatriates also work as medical volunteers or have occupied key positions representing international organisations such as the united nations. notable irish-pakistanis include sister john berchmans conway who became a teacher, and jennifer musa who married into the qazi family and entered politics - earning the title "queen of balochistan."  among other western european diasporas include a small french community as well.  organisations european countries have embassies in islamabad, while some also have deputy missions in karachi and lahore. in addition, the european union is represented in pakistan through a delegated mission.  see also   pakistan-european union relations  european diaspora  immigration to pakistan  references    immigration to pakistan
daulatpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of daulatpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, daulatpur has a total number of 26 houses and population of 128 of which include 68 males and 60 females. literacy rate of daulatpur is 79.41%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 26 which is  20.31% of total population of daulatpur, and child sex ratio is approximately  1000, higher than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 39.06% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population,  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
fairfield sun times is a weekly newspaper serving fairfield, montana and surrounding towns choteau, augusta, vaughn, power, simms, ft. shaw and sun river. its circulation area encompasses parts of teton county, cascade county and lewis and clark county.  history it started as the fairfield times in 1912.  references  external links  newspapers published in montana publications established in 1912 1912 establishments in montana
the southern high rhon (, also sudliche hohe rhon) is a natural region of the 5th level which, together with the central rhon, forms the region called the high rhon. this low mountainous region has several peaks over 900 metres high, including the dammersfeldkuppe (927.9 m), the kreuzberg (927.8 m) and the eierhauckberg (909.9 m)  natural regions  the southern high rhon was first defined in 1968 as a natural region as part of the natural regional classification of germany at a map scale of 1:200,000 (sheet 140 schweinfurt) and is grouped and divided as follows: (part of no. 35 east hesse highlands) (part of no. 354 high rhon)  354.0 southern high rhon 354.00 dammersfeld ridge (in the north and west of the area) 354.01 black mountains (in the south of the area) 354.02 kreuzberg group (in the east of the area)  boundaries  in the east the area borders on the eastern south rhon, in the southeast on the hammelburg south rhon, both parts of the south rhon and the major region (3rd level) of the odenwald, spessart and south rhon within the south german scarplands (2nd level).  in the west there are areas of the western and eastern kuppenrhon, which is part of the anterior and kuppenrhon. in the north is the central rhon, also part of the high rhon. together with the anterior and kuppenrhon the high rhon is part of the east hesse highlands.  natural region  from heidelstein two mountain ridges radiate south and southwest, separated by the sinn. the southwesternmost is the dammersfeld ridge, which forms a contiguous and predominantly basaltic unit. the ridge radiating southwards is divided into the more northerly kreuzberg group and the more southerly black mountains.  references   mountain ranges of bavaria mountain ranges of hesse rhon mountains natural regions of the east hesse highlands rhon-grabfeld bad kissingen (district) fulda (district)
admiral valter girardelli (born rovereto, 22 july 1955) is a retired italian naval officer who served as chief of the italian navy from 2016 to 2019.  he joined the navy in 1975 and graduated from the naval academy in 1978. he served aboard various ships as an operations officer. he commanded the its giuseppe garibaldi from 2000 to 2002.  in 2004 he was appointed to flag rank and held various posts ashore. he was promoted to vice admiral in 2013 and appointed deputy secretary of defence before becoming chief of the cabinet of the minister of defence in march 2015.  on 22 june 2016 he was appointed chief of the italian navy. he retired in 2019.  references  external links  italian admirals living people 1955 births people from rovereto knights grand cross of the order of merit of the italian republic
raymond watson-smith (born 20 february 1940) is a former south african cricketer. playing for border in 1969-70, he scored a not-out century in each of his first two first-class matches, and reached 310 runs before being dismissed.  cricket career  ray watson-smith made his first-class debut for border against orange free state in november 1969 in the b section of the currie cup. in a drawn match in bloemfontein, in which 1258 runs were scored in three days for the loss of only 17 wickets, watson-smith, batting at number seven, scored 183 not out, the highest of five centuries in the match. in the next match, against griqualand west in east london two weeks later, he batted at number six and made 125 not out in 145 minutes. border won by an innings. he was finally dismissed for the first time in the next match against natal b, when he made 2 and 19, and border lost by an innings. in the fourth and last match of the currie cup season he made 25 and 53 not out in a draw with north eastern transvaal.   he finished the currie cup season at the top of the competition's batting averages, with 407 runs at an average of 135.66. he then played for border against the australians, scoring 28 and 9. at the end of the season he played one match in south africa's first list a cricket tournament, top-scoring with 47 in a losing border team.  his captain at border, gordon minkley, said watson-smith was a talented player but "he hit a lot of balls in the air and i think the word quickly got around among the other teams." watson-smith moved away from border after the 1969-70 season and played no further first-class cricket.  watson-smith's 310 career runs before being dismissed remained a world record until 2015, when the victorian batsman travis dean made 347 runs before being dismissed. dean was dismissed in his second first-class match.  references  external links  1940 births living people cricketers from cape town south african cricketers border cricketers
brainware university is a private university located in barasat, kolkata, west bengal, india. it was established  after the west bengal assembly passed the brainware university bill in 2015. it is part of the brainware group of institutions. like most of the universities in india, brainware university is recognized by the university grants commission (ugc).  campus  brainware university is built on a  barasat campus, located at barasat kazipara (near jagadighata market). it is a 5 minutes drive away from the barasat chapadali bus stand and 10 minutes drive away from the barasat railway junction. the nearest airport is netaji subhash chandra bose international airport at dum dum, kolkata.  the central library has more than 36,000 textbooks and reference books. the institute also subscribes journals, periodicals, proceedings, and magazines.  programmes the university offers undergraduate and post-graduate degrees. all the courses are run by constituent institutes and schools offering programs in the field of management, engineering, computer science, media science, multimedia, law, commerce, pharmacy, and bio-technology.  references  external links    private universities in india universities in kolkata educational institutions established in 2016 2016 establishments in west bengal
united nations security council resolution 2083 was adopted in 2012.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2001 to 2100 (2011-2012)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2012 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions december 2012 events
rich man, poor man may refer to:   a line from the traditional counting poem "tinker, tailor"  rich man, poor man (1918 film), a lost american silent romantic drama  rich man, poor man (novel), a 1969 novel by irwin shaw  rich man, poor man (miniseries), a 1976 miniseries based on the novel  rich man, poor man book ii, a sequel miniseries  "rich man, poor man", a song by peter, paul and mary from the album late again  see also  rich man, poor girl  rich man and lazarus, a parable of jesus in the gospel of luke
lebu group is stratigraphic unit of arauco basin in south-central chile. the group consists of a sequence of four formations, of both marine and nonmarine origin, deposited between the early paleocene and middle eocene.  description  the group is made up of four formations, from youngest to oldest these are: millongue formation, trihueco formation, boca lebu formation and curanilahue formation.  the eocene millongue formation is composed of shale and siltstone of both marine and continental origin. its top is marked by an unconformity, the so-called "main unconformity" of arauco basin, which is thought to have formed by erosion during a period of tectonic inversion.  notes  references   geologic groups of south america geologic formations of chile paleocene series of south america eocene series of south america paleogene chile danian stage selandian stage thanetian stage ypresian stage lutetian stage bartonian stage shale formations sandstone formations siltstone formations mudstone formations coal formations geology of biobio region
blue lightning is the first solo album of guitar virtuoso evan k, released 2016 by fc metal recordings in europe and king records in japan. it consists of 6 instrumental titles and 3 songs (the japanese version includes two additional bonus tracks) and features some famous guests from the power-progressive metal scene like fabio lione (rhapsody of fire, angra, vision divine), bob katsionis (firewind, serious black, outloud), markus johansson (4arm, sylencer) and jimmy pitts (marco minnemann, christian munzner).  track listing "rising" (instrumental) - 1:16 "into the light" (instrumental) - 5:04 "skies of shred" (instrumental) - 4:49 "picking the stars" (instrumental) - 4:06 "orchestra of withered clouds" (instrumental) - 8:18 "blue lightning" (instrumental) - 5:33 "edge of the sky" (vocals fabio lione) - 5:04 "one last time" (vocals fabio lione) - 6:20 "everything is coming up roses" ( black cover / vocals markus johansson) - 4:10 "far beyond the sun" (yngwie malmsteen cover) *** bonus track - japan release "edge of the sky" (instrumental) *** bonus track - japan release  personnel  evan k - guitars  fabio lione - vocals on "edge of the sky" & "one last time"  bob katsionis - keyboards  markus johansson - vocals on "everything is coming up roses"  jimmy pitts - keyboards on "everything is coming up roses  jim c. - bass  danny joe hofmann - drums  credits  all music and lyrics written by evan k.  produced and recorded by evan k at epsilon studio in mannheim, germany.  all keyboards arranged and produced by bob katsionis (firewind, serious black, outloud) at sound symmetry studio in athens, greece.  all vocals recorded by fabio lione (rhapsody of fire, angra, vision divine) in pisa, italy.  vocals on track 9, "everything is coming up roses" recorded by markus johansson (4arm, sylencer, them) in chicago, usa.  keyboards on track 9, "everything is coming up roses", recorded by jimmy pitts (marco minnemann, christian munzner) in missouri, usa.  mixed and mastered by r.d. liapak
is (mystic prophecy, devil's train) and christian schmid at the prophecy and music factory studios  (mystic prophecy, suicidal angels, devil's train, steel prophet, eldritch etc.) in kempten, germany.  logo concept, design, album artwork and layout by abstrata - the art of gustavo sazes.  references  king records (japan) albums 2016 albums
sukru ozyıldız (born 18 february 1988) is a turkish actor. he is best known for his roles in the series benim hala umudum var, seref meselesi and kıs gunesi.  life  ozyıldız was born in the city of izmir. during ottoman empire, his maternal family is of rum descent who immigrated from rhodes.   his father is of turkish descent from trabzon. after earning a steat the department of ship mechanics engineering at istanbul technical university and studying in istanbul for one year, he started studying again at ege university and then went to portugal under the erasmus program. ozyıldız has been interested in martial arts since he was a youngster and has participated in cage fights in portugal. after participating in a workshop on acting, he realized that he liked the experience very much and decided to study acting at the mujdat gezen art center.   starting in 2011, he debuted in the series derin sular. since then he has appeared in major films and television productions in his native country, including coban yıldızı, kıs gunesi, seref meselesi and benim hala umudum var. his most recent role on tv was in the series akıncı, which was broadcast on the turkish television channel atv.  filmography  film  television  references  external links   1988 births living people turkish male film actors turkish male television actors actors from izmir turkish people of greek descent
pryor is an unincorporated community in huerfano county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called pryor was established in 1898, and remained in operation until 1996. the community was named after ike and mack pryor, local ranchers. there is no census information for pryor as it has not been counted.  references  unincorporated communities in huerfano county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
venoge farmstead, also known as musee de venoge, is a historic home and farm located in craig township, switzerland county, indiana. the house was built in 1828, and is a -story, rectangular frame cottage in a vernacular french colonial style.  it has a side gable roof and measures 18 feet by 38 feet, including an integral front porch.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1997.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana houses completed in 1805 buildings and structures in switzerland county, indiana national register of historic places in switzerland county, indiana
456001-456100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456101-456200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456201-456300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456301-456400   |-id=378 | 456378 akashikaikyo ||  || the akashi kaikyo bridge is the longest suspended bridge in the world. its main span is 1991 meters long. it joins the city of kobe on honshu island to awaji island, passing over the strait of akashi. ||  |}  456401-456500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456501-456600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456601-456700   |-id=627 | 456627 cristianmartins ||  || cristian martins (born 2005), from campos dos goytacazes, brazil, is a student at escola municipal dr. getlio vargas. he participates in the international astronomical search collaboration, having made many asteroid observations and discoveries. name suggested by p. miller. ||  |-id=677 | 456677 yepeijian ||  || ye peijian (born 1945), a chinese aerospace engineer and member of the chinese academy of sciences ||  |}  456701-456800   |-id=731 | 456731 uligrozinger ||  || ulrich grozinger (born 1952) worked from 1979 to 2018 as an all-round engineer at mpia heidelberg. he contributed to many infrared space missions (including iso, herschel, and jwst) with his vast knowledge in electronics and cryoengineering. he developed and built the control system of the telescope used for the discovery. ||  |}  456801-456900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  456901-457000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   456001-457000
the cunningham bridge is a historic structure located northwest of bevington, iowa, united states. it spans the north river for . the madison county board of supervisors contracted with the george e. king bridge company of des moines to replace an existing span that was to be moved to another site.  the wrought iron pratt pony truss bridge was shipped to the county and erected by june 1886 for $820.  the approaches are timber stringer spans, and it is supported by timber pile bents.  the bridge was listed on the national register of historic places in 1998.  references  bridges completed in 1886 road bridges in iowa bridges in madison county, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa road bridges on the national register of historic places in iowa truss bridges in iowa wrought iron bridges in the united states pratt truss bridges in the united states
alibaba cloud, also known as aliyun (), is a cloud computing company, a subsidiary of alibaba group. alibaba cloud provides cloud computing services to online businesses and alibaba's own e-commerce ecosystem. its international operations are registered and headquartered in singapore.  alibaba cloud offers cloud services that are available on a pay-as-you-go basis, and include elastic compute, data storage, relational databases, big-data processing, anti-ddos protection and content delivery networks (cdn).  it is the largest cloud computing company in china, and in asia pacific according to gartner.  alibaba cloud operates data centers in 24 regions and 74 availability zones around the globe. as of june 2017, alibaba cloud is placed in the visionaries' quadrant of gartner's magic quadrant for cloud infrastructure as a service, worldwide.  history  september 2009 - alibaba cloud is founded and r&d centers and operation centers are subsequently opened in hangzhou, beijing, and silicon valley.  november 2010 - supported the first single's day (11.11) taobao shopping festival, with 2.4 billion pv in 24 hours.  november 2012 - became the first chinese cloud service provider to pass iso27001:2005 (information security management system).  january 2013 - merged with hichina for www.net.cn business.  august 2013 - apsaradb architecture supported 5000 physical machines in a single cluster.  december 2014 - defended a 14-hour long ddos attack, peaking at 453.8gbit/s.  may 2014 - hong kong data center went online.  october 2015 - two us data centers went online.  july 2015 - alibaba group invested a further us$1 billion to alibaba cloud.  august 2015 - alibaba cloud's first singapore data center opened. singapore is announced as alibaba cloud's overseas headquarters.  october 2015 - maxcompute took the lead of the sort benchmark, sorting 100tb data in 377s compared with apache spark's previous record of 1406s.  october 2015 - alibaba cloud computing conference was held in hangzhou and attracted over 20,000 developers.  november 2015 - supported the 11.11 shopping festival with a record of $14.2 billion transactions in 24 hours.  april 2016 - alibaba cloud partnered with sk holdings c&c to provide cloud services to korean and chinese companies.  may 2016 - alibaba group and softbank formalized joint venture to launch cloud services in japan that utilize technologies and solutions from alibaba cloud.  june 2016 - alibaba cloud expanded its data
center operations in singapore with the establishment of a second availability zone. alibaba cloud also achieved two new certifications overseas: singapore multi-tier cloud security (mtcs) standard level 3, and the payment card industry data security standard (pci-dss). november 2016 - alibaba cloud partnered with vodafone germany for data center operation and to provide cloud services to german and european companies.  january 2017 - alibaba became the official cloud services provider of the olympics. february 2017 - became founding member of the eu cloud code of conduct.  june 2017 - alibaba cloud is placed in the visionaries quadrant of gartner's magic quadrant for cloud infrastructure as a service, worldwide.  july 2017 - alibaba cloud official website is changed from intl.aliyun.com to www.alibabacloud.com.  september 2017 - alibaba cloud partners with malaysia's fusionex to provide cloud solutions in southeast asia.  october 2017 - alibaba cloud partners with elastic and launches a new service called alibaba cloud elasticsearch.  october 2017 - alibaba cloud malaysia data center commences operations.  december 2017 - alibaba cloud india data center commences operations. december 2017 - alibaba cloud received the c5 standard certification from german federal office for information security (bsi) for its datacenters in germany and singapore.  february 2018 - alibaba cloud indonesia data center commences operations.  june 8, 2021 - alibaba cloud further expands its asia footprint with its first data center in the philippines.  october 19, 2021 - alibaba cloud unveils the arm-based yitian 710 chip, designed in-house, for use in its data centers.  november 24, 2021 - the bug log4shell disclosed to apache on november 24 by chen zhaojun of alibaba cloud security team. december 22, 2021 - the chinese ministry of industry and information technology suspended a partnership with alibaba cloud for "failure in reporting cybersecurity vulnerabilities" related to the log4shell bug.  report log4j2  the alibaba cloud engineering team discovered a remote code execution vulnerability in the apache log4j2 component. the team notified the u.s.-based apache software foundation about the vulnerability. the chinese government received notice of the vulnerability from a third party, and not from alibaba cloud who discovered the exploit. as a result, the chinese government suspended their cybersecurity deal with alibaba cloud.  data center regions  alibaba cloud has 25 regional data centres globally.  regions outside mainland china (13)   asia pacific se 1 (singapore), asia pacific se 2 (sydney), asia pacific
se 3 (kuala lumpur), asia pacific se 5 (jakarta), asia pacific se 6 (philippines), asia pacific sou 1 (mumbai), asia pacific ne 1 (tokyo), us east 1 (virginia), us west 1 (silicon valley), eu central 1 (frankfurt), uk (london), middle east 1 (dubai), china (hong kong)  regions in mainland china (12)   china north 1 (qingdao), china north 2 (beijing), china north 3 (zhangjiakou), china north 5 (hohhot), china north 6 (ulanqab), china east 1 (hangzhou), china east 2 (shanghai), china east 3 (nanjing), china south 1 (shenzhen), china south 2 (heyuan), china south 3 (guangzhou), china west 1 (chengdu)  the data center in germany is operated by vodafone germany (frankfurt) and certified with c5.  alibaba cloud announced they will launch new data center in south korea and thailand by 2022.  products  alibaba cloud provides cloud computing iaas, paas, dbaas and saas, including services such as e-commerce, big data, database, iot, object storage (oos), kubernetes and data customization which can be managed from alibaba web page or using aliyun command line tool.  history  analyticdb was first released in may, 2018, and the latest version 3.0 was released in 2019  on april 26, 2019, tpc published tpc-ds benchmark result of analyticdb.  in 2019, a paper about the system design of analyticdb was published in vldb conference 2019.  academic partner in 2017, alibaba cloud and the singapore university of social sciences (suss) jointly launched a university-accredited entrepreneurship program for tertiary students.  list of academic alliances: shanghai jiao tong university universiti tunku abdul rahman (utar) hong kong shue yan university macao university of science and technology telecom paris supinfo international university universite de technologie sino-europeenne de l'universite de shanghai gadjah mada university universitas prasetiya mulya bina nusantara university krida wacana christian university hong kong institute of vocational education nanyang polytechnic republic polytechnic sekolah tinggi teknologi informasi niit usman institute of technology aissms institute of information technology  see also  alibaba cloud ecs  references    cloud chinese companies established in 2009 companies based in hangzhou cloud computing providers cloud computing cloud infrastructure
cloud platforms cloud storage computer-related introductions in 2010 web hosting
a noite (english: the night) was a brazilian newspaper based in rio de janeiro, brazil. it was published daily from 18 july 1911 to 27 december 1957 when it stopped publication. its headquarters, which is located at praca maua in the central zone, was erected in the late 1920s.  history  beginnings and popularity a noite was founded in 1911 by irineu marinho, castelar de carvalho, marques da silva and other idealists, such as the first evening newspaper in rio de janeiro. releasing the news at 7:00pm until around 5:30pm, its popularity grew rapidly, which was also aided by last minute headlines in updated editions. the newspaper had seven daily editions and it was the only evening newspaper in rio to reach a circulation of around two hundred thousand copies.  a turning point in 1925, irineu left as the director of the newspaper, and he was replaced by geraldo rocha. marinho was in europe when he learned about geraldo's plan to make him a minority shareholder in the company. he later left the company and founded the media conglomerate grupo globo, and with it came his own newspaper, o globo.  a new headquarters in 1929, the a noite building (now the joseph gire building), which was then rio de janeiro's tallest building, was inaugurated, serving as a noite's headquarters. after passing through the hands of french groups, the federal government of brazil (during the vargas era) took over the newspaper in 1940. during that decade, under carvalho neto's administration, the newspaper returned to a budget balance. however, in the 1950s, it again had a budget deficit.  closure and reception a noite was later closed towards the end of 1957, during a decision by the superintendent of companies incorporated into the national heritage, which was criticized by other newspapers in rio de janeiro. "a noite was born and grew in the shadow of the popular prestige that it managed to gain during a period of political turmoil", wrote correio da manha. "it reached the maximum, then the descent began, when elements outside the profession took over the sheet. the 1930 revolution completed the work by seizing, through confiscation, the company's assets. in the hands of the government, the decay of the once-dear newspaper became more and more accentuated. it is over now, from a material point of view, but it has long been morally condemned in public opinion. the justice of the people, in these cases, is
inexorable."   however, the daily newspaper jornal do brasil argued that the closure of a noite represented the "administrative incompetence of the brazilian state": "the public distrust toward the press of any government is such that in less than twenty years, a noite stopped to be the greatest evening newspaper in the city to perish [from] an inglorious death. it is a melancholy moment in the life of the city and of the brazilian press, and the government must have thought a lot, measured not even the solutions and the paths, before making the old capital suffer this new unexpected pain."  officials told to the diario popular that "the closing of a noite is part of a plan that ranges from its extinction to the transfer of radio nacional and other agencies to the control of a certain economic group" not identified by them. "the newspaper was, really, without resources to support itself", acknowledged editor-in-chief carvalho neto. "it is now believed that the newspaper will be sold. the solution for all would be the validity of the decree elaborated in the government of general dutra, which gave a noite to employees. they could lease it with the right to purchase the 'historic cost'. the solution we know today is tragic, painful and, above all, melancholy."  cultural impact  a noite organized the beauty pageant miss brazil in 1929, when miss federal district, olga bergamini de sa, was elected. in 1933, a noite launched a contest that would award the best june song. the dispute ended up creating the musical genre of melodies made specifically for the festivities of saint john, being won that year by benedicto lacerda, with the song "briguei com sao joao". other initiatives by the newspaper were the creation of contests, such as "rei momo primeira e unico" or a fantasy bath in the sea, the corrida da fogueira and the statue "monumento ao pequeno jornaleiro", located in downtown rio.  in a noite, the career of writer clarice lispector began, who, in parallel to her service at the national agency, had her first job there as a journalist and translator in 1939. it was also the starting point of the career of artist orlando mattos.  several additional publications were launched, taking advantage of the prestige of a noite , such as a noite ilustrada , vamos ler , a carioca and a manha , in addition to radio nacional. the newspaper is also considered
a pioneer in the integration of the reader into the news, thanks to the creation of the "carioca reporter" section, later imitated by other vehicles.  see also   grupo globo  references  external links   irineu marinho  a noite mass media in rio de janeiro (city) 1911 establishments in brazil newspapers established in 1911 1957 disestablishments in brazil publications disestablished in 1957 portuguese-language newspapers
cylindrepomus bilineatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by schwarzer in 1926.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1926
ghosts is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of ghosts edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the tenth volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in december 1988. the first british edition was issued in trade paperback by robinson in october 1989.  the book collects fourteen novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors, with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction: ghosts" (isaac asimov) "ringing the changes" (robert aickman) "author! author!" (isaac asimov) "touring" (michael swanwick, gardner dozois and jack m. dann) "the wind in the rose-bush" (mary e. wilkins freeman) "come dance with me on my pony's grave" (charles l. grant) "the fire when it comes" (parke godwin) "the toll-house" (w. w. jacobs) "the invasion of the church of the holy ghost" (russell kirk) "a terrible vengeance" (charlotte riddell) "elle est trois, (la mort)" (tanith lee) "a passion for history" (stephen minot) "daemon" (c. l. moore) "the lady's maid's bell" (edith wharton) "the king of thieves" (jack vance)  notes  1988 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
ankylosphenodon is an extinct species of sphenodontian known from tepexi de rodriguez, mexico. it is known from early cretaceous sedimentary deposits from the tlayua formation.  lifestyle ankylosphenodon is thought to have been an aquatic reptile due to its pachyostotic skeleton and other anatomical features often seen in aquatic animals. there is also evidence that its teeth were constantly growing throughout its lifetime, which may be indicative of herbivory, a rare characteristic among lepidosauria.  references  sphenodontia cretaceous reptiles of north america prehistoric reptile genera
the 2016 tampere open was a professional tennis tournament played on clay courts. it was the 35th edition of the tournament which was part of the 2016 atp challenger tour and the 2016 itf women's circuit. it took place in tampere, finland, on 18-24 july 2016.  men's singles main draw entrants  seeds    1 rankings as of 11 july 2016.  other entrants  the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   vladimir ivanov   ristomatti lanne   patrik niklas-salminen   eero vasa  the following player entered the singles main draw as a special exempt:   clement geens  the following players entered as an alternate:   markus eriksson  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   lauri kiiski   hubert hurkacz    milos sekulic    alexander vasilenko  women's singles main draw entrants  seeds    1 rankings as of 11 july 2016.  other entrants  the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   monica malinen   mariella minetti    milka-emilia pasanen    roosa timonen  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   aleksandra draganova    katerina filip   grace leake    sandra ortevall    saana saarteinen   andrea raaholt    adrija runca    anastasia veselova  the following player received entry by a lucky loser spot:   emilia salo  champions  men's singles     kimmer coppejans def.  aslan karatsev, 6-4, 3-6, 7-5  women's singles    piia suomalainen def.  emma laine, 0-6, 6-2, 6-3  men's doubles     david perez sanz /  max schnur def.  steven de waard /  andreas mies, 6-4, 6-4  women's doubles    emma laine /  julia wachaczyk def.  mia eklund /  katharina hering, 6-2, 6-3  external links   official website   2016 2016 atp challenger tour 2016 itf women's circuit clay court tennis tournaments tennis tournaments in finland 2016 in finnish sport
tivoli theater was a historic theatre building located at mishawaka, st. joseph county, indiana. it was built in 1924-1925, and was a two-story, brick building with a facade featuring terra cotta ornamentation, a massive central arched window, and decorative art glass. the auditorium seated 1,500 patrons. the building consisted of three storefronts and the auditorium and lobby entrance, and office on the second floor.  it was demolished in 2005.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1998, and delisted in 2005.  references  external links     former national register of historic places in indiana theatres on the national register of historic places in indiana theatres completed in 1925 buildings and structures in st. joseph county, indiana national register of historic places in st. joseph county, indiana demolished buildings and structures in indiana buildings and structures demolished in 2005
wang nangxian (1778-1798) was a female chinese leader of the anti-manchu white lotus rebellion along with wang cong'er during the reign of the qing dynasty. another female member of the rebellion along with wang cong'er, she declared herself divine and commanded her own troops in battle against the imperial army. she was called 'sorceress wang' due to her use of 'magical powers' as a blessing for their strength, power and dignity towards her troops including wang cong'er and many other chinese residents during ritual ceremonies.  reportedly born in 1778, wang nangxian is of bouyei descent.  white lotus sect  the white lotus sect originated during the yuan dynasty. wang nangxian along with wang cong'er led the uprising of the white lotus sect against the qing regime. she also reportedly used kung fu and acrobatics, and fought with a sword in each hand. intent on avenging the death of her husband at the hands of the qing, wang led an army of men into battle against the qing army. though wang's peasant troops were at an obvious disadvantage, they overcame and surprised the qing troops repeatedly by using guerrilla tactics. the contemporary records of the qing court stated that "the deadliest of all the rebels are those led by madam wang, wife of qi" and "it is said that all the rebel factions from hubei and shanxi were stirred up by wang".  the qing general ming liang eventually recruited local landlords to build forts and lock civilians inside whenever rebels were in the area, cutting off support from civilian sympathizers who were a key part of the rebels' supply chain. in 1798, a year later after wang cong'er's death in 1797, the qing forces, with an increased number of warriors, ambushed wang nangxian and her fighters in the mountains near yunxi, hubei. after thousands of her men were defeated, wang was forced to retreat. with no escape route available, she also reportedly jumped to her death. despite being defeated, wang nangxian has also been credited with creating a precedent for revolts against chinese imperial rule.  see also  wang cong'er  references   lily xiao hong lee, clara lau, a.d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911  1778 births 1798 deaths qing dynasty rebels 18th-century chinese people women in 18th-century warfare 18th-century chinese women women in war in china bouyei people suicides by jumping in china
william logie (20 september 1932 - 20 june 2016) was a scottish footballer, who played for cambuslang rangers, rangers, aberdeen, arbroath, brechin city, and alloa athletic.  references  1932 births 2016 deaths scottish footballers canadian soccer players canadian people of scottish descent soccer players from montreal footballers from stirling association football wing halves cambuslang rangers f.c. players rangers f.c. players aberdeen f.c. players arbroath f.c. players brechin city f.c. players alloa athletic f.c. players scottish football league players scottish junior football association players canadian expatriate soccer players canadian expatriate sportspeople in scotland
the diocese of slatina and romanati () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the ascension cathedral in slatina and its ecclesiastical territory covers olt county. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of oltenia. it was established in 2004, and in 2008, sebastian pascanu became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  external links official site  slatina 2004 establishments in romania slatina olt county
panki is a small town situated in the palamu district of jharkhand, india. according to the 2011 census the town has 1,312 households with an aggregate population of 7,743 (4,056 males and 3,687 females). the town is part of the panki block, an administrative block of the palamu district which has 179 registered villages.  the town consists of both hindu and muslim communities. most of them belong to the other backward class.  languages  the people from the panki region speak hindi, english, bhojpuri, urdu, and magahi and write in devanagri scripts.  places of official importance  panki block   panki block is one of the administrative blocks of palamu district, jharkhand, india. according to the 2011 census the block has 30,725 households with an aggregate population of 1,57,850 (80,749 males and 77,101 females). the block has 179 registered villages.  education   panki girls high school  rajkiye buniyadi ms panki school  shishu vidya mandir  govt. h/s panki  sarswati sishu mandir panki  siksha niketan  upgovernment primary school darjahi  govt urdu ps panki bazar  mk inter college, panki, jharkhand  kidz school, panki  jkdps, panki  ankesh singh (ngo) usku, panki  economic interests  most of the people from panki are involved in business and farming, a trend that is gradually changing. many students from younger generations are choosing full-time jobs instead.  references  external links   panki east gram panchayat  panki west gram panchayat  cities and towns in palamu district
bar one or bar•one is a popular chocolate bar invented and manufactured in south africa by nestle and sold in south africa and india.  it is similar to the english mars bars and consists of a layer of malted nougat with a caramel topping and covered in milk chocolate. in south africa, there are other variations, including a bar one peanut version and one flavoured with coffee.  overview  it was first manufactured in south africa in 1965, and is produced at the nestle factory in east london. in india, it is one of the top 5 most sold chocolate bars.  spinoffs  other products have also been released using the bar one branding or popular cuisine made using the chocolate bar.   bar one ice cream - a popular south african flavour of ice cream.  bar one chocolate cake - a cake made using the chocolate bars.  bar one chocolate sauce - a popular sauce either made at home using the chocolate or bought under a brand name source manufactured by nestle.  bar one cereal- manufactured by nestle for the south african market.  advertising slogans   south africa: "for a 25-hour day"  references  external links    brand name confectionery chocolate bars 1965 establishments in south africa products introduced in 1965 south african confectionery south african snack foods
ilan baruch (born 1974) is an israeli plein air landscape painter.  his "cactus" series, painted over a period of three years, began as "fastidiously rendered... sun-drenched, [and] naturalistic," progressing to images that are "expressive [and] closely cropped."  invited to create a pair of new "delft" tiles for the 2014 exhibition blue-and-white delftware, baruch painted one with an olive tree and another with an image of the dome of the rock.  solo exhibitions 1992, nidbach (layer), jerusalem 2004, the cactus: introspections, helena rubinstein pavilion for contemporary art, tel aviv museum of art 2005, monartmuseum 2013, "it was never truly a wilderness", at the ramat gan museum of israeli art  group exhibitions 1999, bezalel academy of arts and design 2000, yanko dada museum in einhod, "introspection time" 2000, "observation time" 2007, tel aviv museum of art, new acquisitions 2014, blue-and-white delftware, tel aviv museum of art  references  1974 births israeli landscape painters living people
maria harrison is a plant biologist, william h. crocker scientist professor at the boyce thompson institute for plant science, and adjunct professor in the school of integrative plant science at cornell university. harrison's lab, including post-doctoral, graduate, undergraduate, and intern students, utilizes a combination of molecular, cell biology, genetic, and genomic techniques to investigate the developmental mechanisms underlying the symbiosis and phosphate transfer between arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (am fungi; amf) (including glomus versiforme, glomus intraradices, and gigaspora gigantea) and the roots of model legume medicago truncatula. among harrison's most notable findings are that plants use hormone signaling to regulate am fungi symbiosis and that phosphate transport is critical to the maintenance of this symbiosis. these discoveries have allowed the field of fungal-plant interactions to pursue new research questions including future manipulation of phosphate acquisition in valuable crop species.  she was elected a member of the national academy of sciences in april 2019.  honors and awards   cornell university college of agriculture and life sciences faculty excellence in undergraduate research mentoring award (2015)  the dennis r. hoagland award (2015)  american academy of microbiology (aam) fellow (2013)  american association for the advancement of science (aaas) fellow (2012)  william h. crocker scientist (2011)  patents  references   living people cornell university faculty american women botanists american botanists place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people) members of the united states national academy of sciences american women academics 21st-century american women
the 2006 3m performance 400 presented by post-it picture paper was a nascar nextel cup series stock car race held on june 18, 2006 at michigan international speedway in brooklyn, michigan. contested over 129 laps  - shortened from 200 laps due to rain on a 2-mile (3.218 km) speedway, it was the 15th race of the 2006 nascar nextel cup series season. kasey kahne of evernham motorsports won the race.  background michigan international speedway (mis) is a  moderate-banked d-shaped speedway located off u.s. highway 12 on more than   approximately  south of the village of brooklyn, in the scenic irish hills area of southeastern michigan. the track is used primarily for nascar events. it is sometimes known as a "sister track" to texas world speedway, and was used as the basis of auto club speedway. the track is owned by international speedway corporation (isc). michigan international speedway is recognized as one of motorsports' premier facilities because of its wide racing surface and high banking (by open-wheel standards; the 18-degree banking is modest by stock car standards).  entry list  qualifying  results  race statistics  time of race: 2:10:19  average speed:   pole speed:   cautions: 9 for 37 laps  margin of victory: under caution  lead changes: 17  percent of race run under caution: 28.7%           average green flag run: 10.2 laps  references  external links  full race coverage  3m performance 400 3m performance 400 nascar races at michigan international speedway june 2006 sports events in the united states
madeleine mary harvie king (nee morris; born 31 march 1973) is an australian politician. she is the member for brand in the australian house of representatives. she is a member of the australian labor party and succeeded the previous member, gary gray, at the 2016 federal election.  early life king was born on 31 march 1973 in calista, western australia. she is the youngest of five children born to diana eve pizer and john harvie morris. her father was born in england and served in the royal navy, moving to australia to work at the kwinana oil refinery. her mother owned a drapery shop in rockingham.  king grew up in the suburb of shoalwater, attending safety bay primary school, rockingham beach primary school, and safety bay senior high school. she started an arts degree at the university of western australia (uwa), but subsequently moved to melbourne to study aerospace engineering at rmit university. she returned to perth after a year and completed a bachelor of laws at uwa.  king worked as a commercial lawyer in private practice from 1997 to 2005, working in england for a period following her marriage. she then joined uwa's legal department as a research contracts lawyer (2005-2008), later working as chief of staff to the vice-chancellor alan robson (2008-2011) and principal advisor of strategic projects (2012-2013). she oversaw the university's centenary celebrations in 2013. immediately prior to entering parliament she was the chief operating officer of the perth usasia centre, a think tank based at uwa.  politics king was a ministerial adviser to federal labor mp gary gray from 2011 to 2012, and also advised wa federal government ministers stephen smith and chris evans during the commonwealth heads of government meeting 2011 in perth.  in march 2016, king won alp preselection unopposed for the division of brand, following gray's retirement. she retained the seat for the alp at the 2016 federal election, increasing the swing to labor from a nominal 3.7 points to 7.7 points, making brand one of labor's safest federal seats in western australia. she is a member of the labor right faction.  in june 2018, king was selected to fill a vacant place on the opposition frontbench, replacing tim hammond. she was given the consumer affairs portfolio and also made an assistant minister in the small business and resources portfolios. after the 2019 election she was appointed shadow minister for trade and shadow minister for resources. in march 2021, king stated that the alp would oppose a moratorium on new coal mines and that
"so long as international markets want to buy australian coal, which is high quality, then they will be able to".  personal life king is married to jamie king. she has represented western australia's in master's field hockey.  references     1973 births living people australian labor party members of the parliament of australia members of the australian house of representatives for brand members of the australian house of representatives women members of the australian house of representatives place of birth missing (living people) 21st-century australian politicians 21st-century australian women politicians labor right politicians university of western australia alumni australian people of english descent people from perth, western australia australian lawyers
the palazzo mussato is an 18th-century palace located on via speroni sperone in the city of padua, region of veneto, italy. it is presently occupied by the middle school "francesco petrarca".  history a house on the site was once linked to albertino mussato, an orator and notary of the late 13th to 14th century. the present structure was rebuilt in the 18th century by the architect girolamo frigimelica. the rooms contain ceilings frescoed with mythologic and allegoric frescoes painted by francesco zugno and fabio canal.  references  palaces in padua buildings and structures completed in the 18th century
knight of ellerslie (1881 - 1906) was an american thoroughbred racehorse. in 1884 he won the preakness stakes and was second to panique in the belmont stakes. these two important races would become the second and third legs of the u.s. triple crown series.  knight of ellerslie was bred at ellerslie stud in albemarle county, virginia, owned by richard hancock. he was the father of arthur b. hancock, who would have inherited ellerslie stud but who later sold it in order to consolidate his breeding operations at his claiborne farm in paris, kentucky. knight of ellerslie was purchased by major thomas walker doswell of bullfield farm in doswell, virginia, who trained and raced him throughout his career on the track.  as a sire, the best of knight of ellerslie's progeny was henry of navarre, the 1894, and 1895 american horse of the year and a future u.s. racing hall of fame inductee.  knight of ellerslie died at woodburn stud in kentucky in november 1906.  references  1881 racehorse births 1906 racehorse deaths racehorses bred in virginia racehorses trained in the united states thoroughbred family 37 preakness stakes winners
young as the morning old as the sea is the seventh studio album by passenger. it was released on 23 september 2016 on black crow records. it topped the charts in the uk and other countries. a deluxe edition was released containing six additional acoustic versions of songs appearing on the album. the album was produced by chris vallejo and mike rosenberg.  background on 17 june 2016, passenger announced details of his seventh studio album on facebook, confirming that the album would be released in september 2016. he also announced that the deluxe version of the album would include a documentary and some acoustic bonus tracks. the landscapes in both new zealand and on a trip passenger took in iceland lent inspiration to the creation of a newly panoramic album, with themes of relationships and the passing of time that are at once personal and universal. the album was recorded in australia, new zealand and united kingdom. canadian group the once, who joined rosenberg on his whispers tour, contributed backing vocals on the album.  singles "somebody's love" was released as the lead single from the album on 17 june 2016. "anywhere" was released as the second single from the album on 19 august 2016. the song has peaked at number 43 on the australian singles chart.  critical reception  young as the morning old as the sea has received generally mixed to negative reviews from critics. reviewing for allmusic, matt collar commented, "ultimately, with young as the morning old as the sea, passenger has crafted an album that, not unlike the oceans, fields, roads, and relationships that inspired it, remains with you, calling you to return." david smyth of the london evening standard wrote, "as passenger, the solo artist achieved a slow-burning worldwide hit with his pretty break-up song let her go, and has followed it with similarly tasteful fare. here his piano duet with birdy, beautiful birds, and the gentle guitar ballad the long road, are pleasant but forgettable. rosenberg's voice is meek throughout, even when he has a powerful band to sing over on home. the paul simon-style jangle of anywhere and lively horns of if you go provide the most entertaining backdrops for songs that too often stray towards blandness."  reviewing for the guardian, chris owen said, "it's a struggle to believe, while wading through his seventh studio album, that passenger was responsible for let her go, the song most of britain spent six months humming in 2012. there isn't a single singalong number trying to set up camp in your temporal lobe on young as
the morning old as the sea - it seems that in his hurry to vacate the trodden ground of campfire pop, michael rosenberg hasn't really planned where to go. most of the songs here are almost identical, and the ones that manage to stand out are perfectly fine jaunts into well-cultivated sonic territories. the collaboration with birdy is nice enough, as are the old fashioned trad-folk sounds of everything - and that's the thing: it's all nice. all this from the man who used to run rings around your brain." lauren murphy of the irish times wrote, "his "if it ain't broke, don't fix it" approach means that songs such as everything and fool's gold lumber pleasantly but forgettably along, while the addition of birdy on vapid duet beautiful birds makes scant difference. anywhere and if you go are perkier affairs, but there is little in the way of "edgy" here, along with some criminally bad lyrical rhymes. rosenberg remains a passenger in all senses, allowing others to call the tune while he travels in their mind-numbingly ordinary wake."  accolades  track listing all tracks were written by mike rosenberg.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  see also  list of number-one albums of 2016 (australia)  list of number-one albums from the 2010s (new zealand)  list of uk albums chart number ones of the 2010s  release history  references  2016 albums passenger (singer) albums
caroline winterer is an american historian. she is the william robertson coe professor of history and american studies at stanford university. she is also professor, by courtesy, of classics. from 2013 to 2019, she was director of the stanford humanities center. she received her b.a. from pomona college and her ph.d. from the university of michigan.  her expertise is american history before 1900, especially the history of ideas, political theory, and the history of science.  books   t ime in maps: from the age of discovery to our digital era (chicago: university of chicago press, 2020), edited with karen wigen.  american enlightenments: pursuing happiness in the age of reason, yale university press, 2016,   "what was the american enlightenment?" in the worlds of american intellectual history, eds. joel isaac, james kloppenberg, and jennifer ratner-rosenhagen, oxford university press, 2016 (isbn forthcoming)  the american enlightenment: treasures from the stanford university libraries']' (stanford: stanford university libraries, 2011),   [http://www.cornellpress.cornell.edu/book/?gcoi=80140100351740 the mirror of antiquity: american women and the classical tradition, 1750-1900 (ithaca: cornell university press, 2007; pb 2009),   the culture of classicism: ancient greece and rome in american intellectual life, 1780-1910 (baltimore: johns hopkins university press, 2002; pb 2004),   awards   american ingenuity award, smithsonian institution, for mapping the social network of benjamin franklin (2013)  notes  external links  featured in smithsonian magazine: http://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/dear-sir-ben-franklin-would-like-to-add-you-to-his-network-180947639/?no-ist  "'enlightenment': america's semantic shield for the cold war," the takeaway (wnyc) (oct. 26, 2016): http://www.wnyc.org/story/enlightenment-americas-semantic-shield-cold-war/  "stanford historian makes case for american 'enlightenments,'" forum'' (kqed) (nov. 30, 2016): https://ww2.kqed.org/forum/2016/11/29/stanford-historian-makes-case-for-american-enlightenments
/  year of birth missing (living people) living people 21st-century american historians stanford university faculty university of michigan alumni pomona college alumni 21st-century american women writers american women historians historians from california
"play game" () is a song recorded by taiwanese mandopop singer-songwriter william wei. the song was recorded and released as a promotional single for microsoft office 365. the song was released as a single by linfair records on 19 september 2015.  an accompanying music video was released on 14 september 2015. it was directed by kidding (許智彥). a subsequent extended version music video was released on 28 october 2015, featuring wei with 156 selected fans.  background and composition "play game" is an uptempo electropop song, with an electro beat and elements of trance. the song was written by wei and the taiwanese team from microsoft office 365. in a radio interview, wei explained that the song was inspired from his experiences in playing online games. wei shared that he plays online games to relieve stress. however, he often ends up feeling even more agitated and frustrated due to the competitiveness of the games. wei felt that life is like a game - we often get so involved in the game that we forget that we are playing a game. taking life too seriously will rob us of happiness and fun. wei hopes that everyone can re-align our perspectives and enjoy the things we do in life.  music video the music video for "play game" was directed by kidding. it premiered on youtube on 14 september 2016. the video begins with a dreaded wei reporting to work. the video follows wei as he endures his daily monotonous work routine. later, wei decides to lighten things up and have some fun at work.  subsequently, microsoft office 365 launched an online portal for fans to submit short video clips that portrays having fun in the office. selected fans will have their videos featured in a special music video with wei. on 28 november 2015, a followed-up music video was released, featuring wei and 56 selected fans.  references  2015 singles william wei songs 2014 songs
the 1928-29 sk rapid wien season was the 31st season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  mitropa cup  references  1928-29 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
maruti rao may refer to:   s. maruti rao, an indian cinematographer who worked mainly in tamil films.  marutirao parab, an indian actor and director best known for playing comic roles in hindi films.
anne-lise børresen-dale (born 3 july 1946 in molde) is a norwegian biochemist. she is a senior scientist at oslo university hospital and professor of molecular tumor biology at the university of oslo. she received the 2002 nordic medical prize. in 2015 she received the fritjof nansen medal and award for outstanding research from the norwegian academy of science and letters, and in 2017 she was appointed to commander of the royal norwegian st. olavs order  by the king of norway.  she holds an m.sc. in biochemistry from ntnu (1970), a d.sc. in medical biochemical genetics from the university of oslo (1978) and was awarded full professor competence in gene technology in 1987. she was employed at the institute of medical genetics at the university of oslo from 1970 as a research assistant, research fellow, senior research fellow and head of section. from 1987 she was a senior scientist at the department of genetics at the norwegian radium hospital, and since 1999 she has also been head of department. she has additionally been professor of molecular tumor biology at the university of oslo since 1992.  honours king olav v's prize for cancer research, 1994 member of the royal norwegian society of sciences and letters, 1998 honorary member of the norwegian biochemical society, 2001 research prize of the university of oslo, 2002 nordic medical prize, 2002 member of the norwegian academy of science and letters, 2004 swiss bridge award for outstanding cancer research, 2004 honorary doctorate in medicine (dr.med. h.c.), university of copenhagen, 2008 mobius prize of the research council of norway, 2008 member of the european academy of cancer sciences, 2009 honorary ambassador of the norwegian cancer society, 2010 honorary member of the hungarian cancer society, 2012 helmholtz international fellow award, germany, 2014 european journal of surgical oncology award lecture, 2014 elena timofeeff-ressovsky lecturer, berlin, 2015 mildred scheel lecturer, germany, 2015 fritjof nansen medal and award for outstanding research, 2015 oslo university hospital's excellent researcher award, 2015  the aacr distinguished lectureship in breast cancer research, 2015 aacr-women in cancer research charlotte friend memorial lectureship and award, 2017 commander of the royal norwegian st. olavs order, 2017  references  1946 births living people norwegian biochemists oslo university hospital people members of the norwegian academy of science and letters royal norwegian society of sciences and letters
a de excommunicato deliberando is a writ which issued out of chancery to release a prisoner from the county jail after the bishop had certified the prisoner's reconciliation with the church, following his arrest and imprisonment under a writ de excommunicato capiendo.  see also de excommunicato capiendo  references  ecclesiastical writs latin legal terminology
listrocerum murphyi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by adlbauer in 2004. it is known from malawi.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 2004
, provisional designation , is a large trans-neptunian object of the kuiper belt in the outermost regions of the solar system. it was discovered on 9 september 2015, by the outer solar system origins survey at mauna kea observatories on the big island of hawaii, in the united states. the object is in a rare 2:9 resonance with neptune and measures approximately 600 kilometers in diameter.  may have a satellite according to a study announced by noyelles et al. in a european planetary science congress meeting in 2019.  discovery  a first precovery of  was taken at the cerro tololo observatory in chile on 15 october 2004. it was first observed by a research team led by michele bannister while poring over images that the canada-france-hawaii telescope in hawaii took in september 2015 as part of the outer solar system origins survey (ossos), and later identified in images taken at sloan digital sky survey and pan-starrs between 2008 and 2016. the discovery was formally announced in a minor planet electronic circular on 10 july 2016.  numbering and naming  this minor planet was numbered by the minor planet center on 25 september 2018 (). as of 2021, it has not been named.  orbit and classification   as of 2018,  has a reasonably well defined orbit with an uncertainty of 3. it orbits the sun at a distance of 33.8-128.6 au once every 731 years and 6 months (for reference, neptune's orbit is at 30 au). its orbit has an eccentricity of 0.58 and an inclination of 8° with respect to the ecliptic.   is among the most distant known solar system objects. as of 2018, it is 63 au from the sun. it will make its closest approach to the sun in 2093, when it will reach an apparent magnitude of 21.2.  2:9 resonance  additional precovery astrometry from the sloan digital sky survey and the pan-starrs1 survey shows that  is a resonant trans-neptunian object, securely trapped in a 2:9 mean motion resonance with neptune, meaning that this minor planet orbits the sun twice in the same amount of time it takes neptune to complete 9 orbits. the object is unlikely to have been trapped in the 2:9 resonance for the age of solar system. it is much more likely that it has been hopping between various resonances and got trapped in the 2:9 resonance in the last 100 million years.  physical
characteristics  diameter and albedo  its exact size is uncertain, but the best estimate is around  in diameter, assuming an albedo of 0.12 (within a wider range of 500 to 870 km, based on albedos of 0.21 to 0.07). for comparison, pluto, the largest object in the kuiper belt, is about  in diameter. astronomer michael brown assumes an albedo of 0.11 and calculates a diameter of 626 km, while the johnston's archive gives a diameter of 770 kilometers, based on an assumed albedo of 0.09. all of these estimates assume that  is a single object, the discovery of a large satellite means that the size is likely to be smaller.  satellite   is suspected to be binary, though the size of the secondary body (moon) has not been determined. if the moon significantly contributes to the observed brightness of the primary, the size of  may therefore be substantially smaller than estimates that assumed the system's total brightness was from a single object. once the orbit of the satellite is determined, the mass and density of the  can be determined.  was be observed by the hubble space telescope in 2020.  references  external links   mpec 2016-n67 : 2015 rr245, minor planet electronic circular - minor planet center  new dwarf planet, canada-france-hawaii telescope  kuiper belt's big, new, far-out object, sky & telescope  outer solar system origins survey (ossos)     discovery announcement      523794 523794 523794 20150909
prince fu of the second rank, or simply prince fu, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince fu peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yihui (奕譓; 1845-1877), the daoguang emperor's ninth son, who was granted the title "prince fu of the second rank" by his father in 1850. the title was passed down over three generations and held by four persons.  members of the prince fu peerage   yihui (奕譓; 15 nov 1845 - 22 mar 1877; 1st), the daoguang emperor's ninth son, held the title prince fu of the second rank from 1850 to 1877, posthumously honoured as prince fu jing of the second rank (孚敬郡王) (a) zaipei (載沛; 31 mar 1872 - 23 aug 1878; 2nd), initially named zaihuang (載煌) , yidong's (a member from prince yu (愉)) sixth son and yihui's adopted son, succeeded yihui in 1877 as a beile (a) zaishu (載澍; 8 nov 1870 - after 1909; 3rd), initially named zaiji (載楫), yizhan's (a member from prince zhi (直)) son and yihui's adopted son, held the title of a beile from 1878 to 1897, his title stripped in 1897. his consort was 3rd daughter of zhaoxiang, a younger brother of empress dowager cixi. he had two daughters. n/a (a) pujin (溥伒; 30 aug 1893 - 1966; 4th), zaiying's (a member from prince dun) eldest son and yihui's adopted grandson, held the title of a beizi from 1897 to 1945. he was missing with his daughter during cultural revolution. 1 & 2 yuquan (毓㟫) & yuyan (毓巘)  family tree  legend:  - title bearers  - emperors  see also  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  prince dun  prince zhi (�
�)  prince yu (愉)  references    qing dynasty princely peerages
natalia kocherova (born 23 february 1990) is a ukrainian-born russian paralympic wheelchair racer and cross-country skier from omsk.  early life kocherova was born in yegorovka, ukraine in 1990. an accident resulted in her right leg being amputated above the knee.  skiing career kocherova first major international event as a nordic skier was at the 2014 winter paralympics in sochi. there she competed in two events, the 12 km free (sitting) where she finished ninth, and the 1 km sprint (sitting), which after taking the twelfth and final spot during qualification, she qualified for the final, finishing in fifth position.  the following year she qualified for the 2015 ipc biathlon and cross-country skiing world championships in cable, wisconsin. kocherova entered three events in the biathlon, winning a bronze medal in the 12.5 km individual (sitting). she followed this with four events in the cross-country, and was part of the gold medal winning russian team in the 4 x 2.5 km mixed relay.  she won the bronze medal in the women's 6km sitting biathlon event at the 2021 world para snow sports championships held in lillehammer, norway. she also won the silver medal in the women's 10km sitting biathlon event.  track and field career 2015 saw kocherova qualify for the russian team for the 2015 ipc athletics world championships. she entered seven events, including all distances in the t54: 100m, 200m, 400m, 800m, 1500m, and 5000m. her best result was fourth in the 800m. the next year she entered the 2016 ipc athletics european championships, and became the tournaments most successful athlete after winning five gold and a single silver medal. at grosseto she set championship records in the 200m, 400m, 800m, 1500m and 5000m races.  references  1990 births living people russian amputees ukrainian amputees russian people of ukrainian descent cross-country skiers at the 2014 winter paralympics russian female cross-country skiers russian female sprinters russian wheelchair racers female wheelchair racers russian female biathletes russian disabled sportspeople biathletes at the 2018 winter paralympics
djibouti-ethiopia relations are bilateral relations between djibouti and ethiopia.  history diplomatic relations between the two countries was established in 1984. relations between the countries are generally good. both countries share ownership of the addis ababa-djibouti railroad; however, this utility is in need of repairs and upgraded capacity. the railroad is tied to the port of djibouti, which provides port facilities and trade ties to landlocked ethiopia. disputes between the afar and issa people of djibouti have the potential of involving ethiopian citizens of these groups.  references    ethiopia djibouti
the gautier benitez high school, a school named after puerto rican poet jose gautier benitez, was built in 1924 in caguas, puerto rico and is listed on the u.s. national register of historic places.  it is a u-shaped, two-story concrete structure with classical revival elements including monumental portico with triangular pediment and use of columns.  it was deemed significant for nrhp registration because it was the first high school in its area, and for its architecture.  its neo-classical style  reflects americanization of public education since the 1898 transition of puerto rico.  it was built in a program along with the ponce high school in ponce and the central high school in san juan, both also nrhp-listed.  references  national register of historic places in puerto rico school buildings on the national register of historic places classical revival architecture in puerto rico school buildings completed in 1924 1924 establishments in puerto rico
bernard viot (born 9 august 1937) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in three editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1937 births living people french male cyclists place of birth missing (living people)
max landis (born february 2, 1993) is an american basketball player who plays for fc porto in the portuguese basketball league.  college career landis attended gardner-webb for his first two years of college eligibility, then transferred to indiana university - purdue university fort wayne (ipfw) for his final two seasons. as a senior in the 2015-16 season, landis was named the summit league player of the year.  professional career after a successful senior campaign, landis conducted workouts with the chicago bulls, milwaukee bucks, utah jazz, and his hometown team indiana pacers. on june 15, 2016, landis signed with crelan okapi aalstar of the belgian basketball league.  following the 2016-17 campaign, landis signed with the gießen 46ers of the german basketball bundesliga.  references  1993 births living people american expatriate basketball people in belgium american expatriate basketball people in germany american men's basketball players basketball players from indianapolis fc porto basketball players gardner-webb runnin' bulldogs men's basketball players gießen 46ers players okapi aalstar players point guards purdue fort wayne mastodons men's basketball players
prince zhi may refer to either of the following:   prince shen (慎郡王), a qing dynasty princely peerage created in 1735, renamed to prince zhi (質郡王) in 1772  prince zhi (直) (直郡王), a qing dynasty princely peerage created in 1698  yunzhi, prince zhi, the first prince zhi in this peerage  the daoguang emperor of the qing dynasty, known as prince zhi (智親王) before his coronation in 1820
bernardo rimarim (born 23 march 1962) is a filipino former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1962 births living people filipino male cyclists olympic cyclists of the philippines cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling asian games bronze medalists for the philippines cyclists at the 1986 asian games medalists at the 1986 asian games
on roadways around the united states, radio-frequency identification (rfid) transponders, supporting transceivers, antennas, and video cameras are the current standard for the collection of toll fees. this technology was invented during the 1970s and was implemented throughout the 1980s and 1990s. today, the fastest growing payment technologies center around smart phones. these devices are beginning to permit tolling authorities new channels of toll collection and communication with drivers. there are a number of mobile applications that are available for drivers to use as a way to manage their toll accounts as well as  applications that actually allow the consumer to pay tolls from their smart phone.  toll applications  peasy  application name: peasy roadways: available for toll roads in: california, colorado, delaware, florida, georgia, illinois, kansas, kentucky, massachusetts, maryland, maine, north carolina, new hampshire, new jersey, new york, texas, virginia, washington and west virginia. capabilities: allows users with or without a transponder device or a toll account to register vehicles for toll coverage with no pre-funding requirements. automatically pays tolls via a credit card. a mobile phone is not required for toll location validation. eliminates missed payments, violations, toll fines and penalties while using approved toll ways.  tollmate application name: tollmate toll authority: north texas toll authority capabilities: gives users the ability to log into their transponder accounts and view history, add money to their balance, contact customer service, and calculate toll fees update:  in may 2016 the app received an update that now provides push notification to help users manager their toll tag account  texpress application name: texpress toll authority: north texas toll authority capabilities: gives users the ability to create accounts and registers vehicles to their toll tag account  bancpass application name: pluspass toll authority: all toll roads in texas, georgia and the state of washington, agreements pending with e-z pass system(s), colorado and california agencies roadways:  all toll roads in texas, florida and washington state capabilities: provides the ability for users to add their vehicle information and pay tolls. patents: awarded patent #9,691,061 "system for electronic toll payment". additional patents pending.  fasttoll application name: fasttoll toll authority: none roadways:  illinois tollways capabilities: fasttoll allows users to track tolls on the illinois tollway roads. the tolls can be then paid through the app within 7 days. the app
issues reminders ensuring that tolls are paid timely. available on both android and apple ios platforms.  ipass manager application name: ipass manager toll authority: none roadways:  illinois tollways capabilities: allows users to manage their illinois i-pass toll transponder account. i-pass manager users may check their balance, add funds, view their toll history, and manage credit card or vehicle information.  available on both android and apple ios platforms.  paytollo application name: paytollo toll authority: agreement with central florida expressway roadways:  the state of florida, georgia,  north carolina, orange county (tca) california. capabilities: provides users the ability to register a vehicle, use the phone's gps to observe toll crossings, allow real time payment, avoid the pay by mail system for tolls crossed without their phone and integrates with toll authorities back office systems. patents: patent pending for "mobile device and navigation device toll paying system and method " update: in january 2016 the central florida expressway began testing of the platform update: in july 2016 the platform was opened up to the general public for up to 1,000 users  the toll roads application name: the toll roads toll authority: fasttrak roadways:  california capabilities: gives users the ability to log into their transponder accounts and view history, add money to their balance, contact customer service, and calculate toll fees  references  external links peasy pluspass texpress website tollmate by ntta fasttoll ipass manager paytollo http://www.thetollroads.com/  car costs mobile software
tricholoma acerbum is a mushroom of the agaric family tricholomataceae.  it is found in europe and north america.  see also list of north american tricholoma species list of tricholoma species list of fungi by conservation status  references  fungi described in 1792 fungi of europe fungi of north america acerbum
rabindra narain singh is an indian orthopedic surgeon and the former president (2006-07) of bihar orthopedic association. he is an honorary consultant at anup memorial orthopaedic centre and research institute, a patna-based orthopedic healthcare centre and the director of anup institute of orthopaedics and rehabilitation. he is a fellow of the royal college of surgeons of edinburgh and the indian medical association academy of medical specialists. he holds the chair of the institute ethics committee of the all india institute of medical sciences, patna, a member of the ad-hoc committee of the bihar chapter of the indian red cross society and a life member of the indian foot and ankle society. the government of india awarded him the fourth highest civilian honour of the padma shri, in 2010, for his contributions to medical science. he has been nominated as new president of vhp in july 2021  references   recipients of the padma shri in medicine year of birth missing (living people) indian orthopedic surgeons indian medical administrators fellows of the royal college of surgeons of edinburgh scientists from patna 20th-century indian medical doctors medical doctors from bihar living people 20th-century surgeons
ludmilla dudarova was a turkish-born romanian film actress known for her work in italy.  filmography  references  bibliography   verdone, luca. i film di alessandro blasetti. gremese editore, 1989.  external links     year of death unknown year of birth unknown romanian people of turkish descent romanian emigrants to italy romanian film actresses people from samsun
aguinaldo silva  (carpina, 7 june 1943) is a brazilian emmy-winning telenovela writer born in carpina, brazil.  filmography  television  references  external links       aguinaldo silva at the memoria globo  1943 births living people authors of brazilian telenovelas brazilian male writers people from pernambuco brazilian male dramatists and playwrights brazilian male novelists brazilian screenwriters male television writers 20th-century brazilian dramatists and playwrights 20th-century brazilian novelists 20th-century brazilian male writers 21st-century brazilian dramatists and playwrights 21st-century brazilian novelists 21st-century brazilian male writers lgbt writers from brazil 21st-century lgbt people
brenden david nelson bissett (born january 28, 1993) is a canadian field hockey player who plays as a midfielder or forward for the vancouver hawks and the canadian national team.  club career since 2017, he played club hockey in the netherlands for nmhc nijmegen. after one season he returned to canada to the vancouver hawks.  international career he competed at the 2015 pan american games and won a silver medal. in 2016, he was named to canada's olympic team. he was selected for the 2018 world cup, where he played all four games. in june 2019, he was selected in the canada squad for the 2019 pan american games. they won the silver medal as they lost 5-2 to argentina in the final.  in june 2021, bissett was named to canada's 2020 summer olympics team.  references  external links  brenden bissett at field hockey canada    1993 births living people field hockey players from vancouver canadian male field hockey players male field hockey midfielders male field hockey forwards field hockey players at the 2015 pan american games field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2020 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2018 commonwealth games 2018 men's hockey world cup players field hockey players at the 2019 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for canada olympic field hockey players of canada pan american games medalists in field hockey nmhc nijmegen players expatriate field hockey players canadian expatriate sportspeople in the netherlands medalists at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2019 pan american games commonwealth games competitors for canada
baloki is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 16.5 km from nakodar, 51 km from kapurthala, 41.6 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 162 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of the village.  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, jalandhar city train station is 44 km away from the village. the village is 70.6 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 121 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
send me away with a smile is a world war i song written by louis weslyn and composed by al piantadosi. the song was first published in 1917 by al. piantadosi & co., inc. in new york, ny. the sheet music cover depicts a woman waving to a soldier from a fenced yard with an inset photo of rita gould.  the famous irish tenor, john mccormack, had a very popular recording of this song in 1918. m.j. o'connell also received popularity with his recording of the song in 1918.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music vol 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .  tyler, don. hit songs, 1900-1955: american popular music of the pre-rock era. jefferson, n.c.: mcfarland, 2007. .  vogel, frederick g. world war i songs: a history and dictionary of popular american patriotic tunes, with over 300 complete lyrics. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 1995. .   songs about smiling songs about parting 1917 songs songs of world war i songs written by al piantadosi
cavernularia is a genus of marine cnidarians in the family veretillidae.  the genus contains bioluminescent species.  species   cavernularia capitata williams, 1989  cavernularia chuni kukenthal & broch, 1911  cavernularia clavata kukenthal & broch, 1911  cavernularia dayi tixier-durivault, 1954  cavernularia dedeckeri williams, 1989  cavernularia elegans (herklots, 1858)  cavernularia glans kolliker, 1872  cavernularia habereri moroff, 1902  cavernularia kuekenthali lopez gonzalez, gili & williams, 2000  cavernularia lutkenii kolliker, 1872  cavernularia malabarica fowler, 1894  cavernularia mirifica tixier-durivault, 1963  cavernularia obesa valenciennes in milne edwards & haime, 1850  cavernularia pusilla (philippi, 1835)  cavernularia vansyoci williams, 2005  references  external links   marinespecies  eol  recif-france.com  veretillidae octocorallia genera bioluminescent cnidarians
the 39th district of the iowa senate is located in southeastern iowa, and is currently composed of johnson, keokuk, and washington counties.  current elected officials kevin kinney is the senator currently representing the 39th district.  the area of the 39th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 77th district (represented by amy nielsen) the 78th district (represented by jarad klein)  the district is also located in iowa's 2nd congressional district, which is represented by mariannette miller-meeks.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  william palmer, 1983-1992 james riordan, 1993-1994 jo ann douglas, 1995-1998 jo ann johnson, 1999-2002 david lord, 2002 joe bolkcom, 2003-2012 sandy greiner, 2013-2014 kevin kinney, 2015-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  39
daughter of the sea (spanish: la hija del mar) is a 1953 spanish drama film directed by antonio momplet and starring virgilio teixeira, isabel de castro and manuel luna. it is based on a play by angel guimera which had previously been turned into a 1917. it goes on about a girl who survives a bot crash and reaches an island where she is different from everyone. she falls in love and some tragedies occur.  cast  virgilio teixeira as tomas pedro    isabel de castro as mariona    manuel luna as tio roque    carlos otero  as pablo   nicolas d. perchicot as sacerdote    jesus colomer   ramona cubexes   mercedes de la aldea    emilio fabregas    luis induni   fernando martinez   faustina nieto   maria luisa parona   juana soler  references  bibliography   bentley, bernard. a companion to spanish cinema. boydell & brewer 2008.  external links     1953 drama films spanish drama films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films films based on works by angel guimera films directed by antonio momplet remakes of spanish films  sound film remakes of silent films cifesa films spanish black-and-white films films scored by augusto alguero
broyles is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  chuck broyles (born 1947), american football player and college football head coach dwayne broyles (born 1982), american basketball player frank broyles (born 1924), american football player and college football head coach paul w. broyles (1896-1974), american businessman and politician ryan broyles (born 1988), american football player william broyles jr. (born 1944), american screenwriter  see also broyles-darwin house, a historic house in dayton, tennessee, u.s. broyles award, an american college football award
grihalakshmi is an indian magazine published fortnightly by the mathrubhumi group. as of december 2013, it is the fifth largest regional language magazine in india by circulation according to irs survey 2013, with average qualifying sales of 826,000 copies.  history and profile a women's magazine published in malayalam, grihalakshmi was launched in 1979 as a monthly publication. it became a bi-weekly in 2013. grihalakshmi is owned and published by mathrubhumi, and is based in kozhikode.  women's midnight half-marathon on 30 january 2016, grihalakshmi organized a women's midnight half-marathon in kochi, kerala. it was the first of its kind in india. prominent malayalam actor mamta mohandas, olympic athlete anju bobby george and social worker sunitha krishnan were the ambassadors of the event.  organized as a celebration of womanhood, the agenda was to spread the message that the streets are safe and free for women also in the night. around 2000 people attended the marathon. the then home minister ramesh chennithala launched the event. the marathon started at 10:30 pm on 30 january and crossed over to 31 january, making it a two-day marathon.  see also  mathrubhumi  references  external links  1979 establishments in kerala biweekly magazines published in india monthly magazines published in india women's magazines published in india magazines established in 1979 malayalam-language magazines mass media in kerala women in kerala
thomas hewitt jones (born 24 october 1984) is a british composer and music producer, working predominantly in the fields of contemporary classical and commercial music.  thomas scored the music for the london 2012 olympics mascots animated films.  on 11 july 2016, outgoing prime minister david cameron was recorded humming four notes of an unidentified tune, which created an internet furore; on the following day, thomas hewitt jones released the sheet music for a fantasy on david cameron: arranged for high/low solo instrument(s) and piano, which he made available for download from the classic fm website.  on 26 july 2017, his worcester service (magnificat and nunc dimittis) was broadcast live on bbc radio 3 from worcester cathedral.  early life thomas hewitt jones was born in 1984 in dulwich, south london, into a musical family; his parents are both musicians and his paternal grandparents were both composers.  educated at dulwich college, he went on to be the organ scholar at gonville and caius college, cambridge. he was the winner of the 2003 bbc young composer of the year competition, and in 2009 received a bbc music magazine "premiere album" award for producing an album of the music of imogen holst.  composer on 18 may 2020, during the covid-19 lockdown, the choir of royal holloway, university of london and soprano laura wright (singer) released a new single 'can you hear me?', composed by thomas with words by long-time collaborator matt harvey (poet) to raise awareness of mental health, encouraging those in need to seek support.  his christmas carol lullay, my liking was recorded by british choir ora singers in 2017.  key works 2008 - the forbidden kingdom soundtrack (assistant to composer david buckley)  2008 - under milk wood (for ballet cymru) 2008 - what child is this? 2009 - how green was my valley (for ballet cymru) 2009 - child of the stable's secret birth 2009 - romance for viola and piano 2010 - lady of the lake (for ballet cymru) 2012 - london 2012 / locog mascot animated films (soundtracks) 2013 - incarnation: a suite of songs for christmas  2014 - wildflower meadows (for arts for rutland) 2015 - panathenaia (for the british museum) 2016 - christmas party (christmas violin concerto) 2017 - worcester service (magnificat & nunc dimittis) 2017 - lullay, my liking for ora singers, conducted by suzi digby  music producer he produced this is the day (2012)
for the english composer john rutter and his choir the cambridge singers and aurora orchestra.  personal life thomas scores production music from his own studio facility and lives in london with annalisa, his wife, whom he married in 2020.  references  21st-century classical composers english classical composers people from dulwich people educated at dulwich college alumni of gonville and caius college, cambridge 1984 births living people
the union for the defense of tradesmen and artisans (french: union de defense des commercants et artisans) was a french political movement from 1953 to 1962.  history the union for the defense of tradesmen and artisans was founded in 1953 by pierre poujade. it published a newspaper, fraternite francaise. it also had a hymn, written by andre montagard in 1955.  poujade recruited up to 800,000 members. in 1956, 2.5 million french people voted for them, electing 42 new members of the national assembly. in the assembly, they were called the union et fraternite francaises.  the movement initially promoted the repeal of taxes for small business owners. by 1958, they were strongly opposed to charles de gaulle's policy of decolonisation in french algeria.  the union dissolved in 1962, due to infighting.  references  1953 establishments in france 1962 disestablishments in france taxation in france right-wing populism in france
the 2016 la course by le tour de france was the third edition of la course by le tour de france, a one-day women's cycle race held in france. the race was held before the final stage of the 2016 tour de france on 24 july. it was organised by the aso and is part of the uci women's world tour. it was won by chloe hosking of .  teams competing  race  result  see also  2016 in women's road cycling  references  external links     la course la course by le tour de france la course
the ranfurly shield, colloquially known as the log o' wood, is perhaps the most prestigious trophy in new zealand's domestic rugby union competition. first played for in 1904, the ranfurly shield is based on a challenge system, rather than a league or knockout competition as with most football trophies. the holding union must defend the shield in challenge matches, and if a challenger defeats them, they become the new holder of the shield.  waikato opened the decade with the ranfurly shield defending it successfully 21 times prior to losing it. the shield changed hands 11 times throughout the decade, notably winning the shield four separate times, but ultimately losing it to ,, auckland again, and finally, who held the shield at the close of the decade.  the bay of plenty and wellington were also involved with short shield stints during the decade - both beating auckland at eden park, but also both falling to canterbury. north harbour secured the shield for the first time in beating canterbury, however gave the shield to a strong waikato side after three defences.  fixtures  2000  waikato finally succumbed to the pressure of ranfurly shield rugby after valiantly defending the shield 21 times, a run of games stretching back to 1997  2001  2002  2003  after 23 successive shield defences canterbury fall to long time rivals auckland - a dominant performance in christchurch, sees the shield head to auckland  2004  a shock upset in auckland after only two defences, as the steamers claim their first ranfurly shield victory, a historic win at the hallowed turf of eden park  after a brilliant home defence over staunch local rivals waikato - the steamers fall to canterbury as the red and black take the shield back down south  2005  2006  christchurch is the home of upsets as north harbour win the shield for the first time in 11 attempts in its 21 year history as a rugby province  2007  north harbour's historic first run of three shield defences comes to a crunching halt by a simply dominant waikato displaying electric attacking rugby  ultimately it wouldn't be a successful shield reign for the mooloos as canterbury went on to claim the shield back after just over a year without it  a dominant auckland team crushed any hopes canterbury had of repeating the double figure shield defences of earlier in the decade with a classy win  2008  on the weekend of rugby's 125th anniversary, a dominant wellington side broke gull hearts, and its own 26-year drought stretching back to 1982  2009  in just under two years after losing the shield to auckland, canterbury regain it after a
dominant performance in the capital, outclassing wellington  christchurch was again host to a mighty upset as southland regained the shield for the fifth time in their history after a 50-year hiatus stretching back to 1959  see also  rugby union in new zealand hanan shield mitre 10 cup  external links ranfurly shield history on the mitre 10 cup website  ranfurly shield rugby union trophies and awards new zealand rugby union competitions 2000 in new zealand rugby union 2001 in new zealand rugby union 2002 in new zealand rugby union 2003 in new zealand rugby union 2004 in new zealand rugby union 2005 in new zealand rugby union 2006 in new zealand rugby union 2007 in new zealand rugby union 2008 in new zealand rugby union
elisabeth guibert (31 march 1725, versailles - 1788) was an 18th-century french woman writer.  elisabeth guibert is the author of several plays dealing with conventional subjects or inspired by classical themes. in addition to her theatre, she also published many poems extolling the virtues of a simple life and lamenting the infidelity in the almanach des muses 1766, 1767, 1768 and 1769.  elisabeth guibert benefited a pension from louis xv. in her dictionnaire historique, litteraire et bibliographique des francaises et des etrangeres naturalisees en france, fortunee briquet wrote that her works were "remarkuable for their ease and wit."  works  1768: le sommeil d'amynthe, paris, veuve duchesne 1768: les filles a marier, one-act comedy in verse, paris, veuve duchesne 1775: les phileniens ou le patriotisme, paris, lesclapart 1770: pensees detachees, s.l. [bruxelles] 1764: poesies et œuvres diverses, s.l. [paris], (this work includes la coquette corrigee, tragedie contre les femmes, le rendez-vous, comedy in one act and in verse, les triumvirs, tragedy presented 5 june 1764, epistles, poems, vers de societe, etc.)  sources   nicolas-toussaint des essarts, les siecles litteraires de la france ou nouveau dictionnaire, historique, critique, et bibliographique, de tous les ecrivains francais, morts et vivans, jusqu'a la fin du xviiie, paris, firmin-didot, 1803, (p. 369-370)  ferdinand hoefer, nouvelle biographie generale, t. xxii, paris, firmin-didot, 1862, (p. 1015-6)  joseph-marie querard, la france litteraire, ou dictionnaire bibliographique des savants, historiens et gens de lettres, paris firmin didot, 1829, (p. 522)  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights french women dramatists and playwrights people from versailles 1725 births 1788 deaths 18th-century french women writers 18th-century french poets french women poets
lukas micherda (born 29 september 1994) is a slovak football defender who currently plays for odeva lipany on loan from partizan bardejov.  club career  1. fc tatran presov micherda made his professional fortuna liga debut for tatran presov against ruzomberok, on 16 july 2016.  partizan bardejov micherda joined partizan bardejov in january 2019. on 3 august 2019 odeva lipany announced, that micharda had joined the club on loan.  references  external links  1. fc tatran presov official club profile  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1994 births living people slovak footballers association football defenders 1. fc tatran presov players partizan bardejov players sk odeva lipany players slovak super liga players 2. liga (slovakia) players
police story is a 2007 kannada, action film, directed by thriller manju, starring sai kumar as a super cop reprising his role as agni ips. the film was a sequel to 1996 film of same name. the film was simultaneously dubbed into telugu under the same name, with p. ravi shankar, brother of sai kumar dubbing for shobraj in the telugu version  plot agni (saikumar) and vijay (rockline venkatesh) are the loyal cops. they face stiff opposition from godmother kempamma (godmother thimakka in telugu version) (sana) in their objective of a crime free city. thimmakka who can make or break (in judiciary and politics) faces severe jolt when her son is gunned down by agni and vijay for rape and murder of call center girl swetha. to bring in bad name to police power thimmakka unite the two underworld dons on a promise that they get prime positions. agni does not lose his courage even though his colleagues in the department turn in favor of thimmakka. he has the support of sincere chief minister (p. j. sarma). in his killing spree of anti social elements that is also reply to thimmakka, agni becomes a nightmare. at this time the political moves changes the seat of power. a criminal who is a right hand of thimmakka becomes the chief minister. agni is at the receiving end. in the blood boiling situation, agni uses his intelligence and kills one of the two dons in the residence of chief minister in the pretext of security reasons. the cm who is also a don is confused about agni's moves. to finish off the power of agni another old rival black tiger (shobaraj) arrives. the emergence of black tiger is shocking not only for agni but for the entire police department. this black tiger was sentenced for capital punishment in the last scene of part one of the 'police story'. he has escaped the gallows corrupting the government officials what leads to dangerous situation. agni is on a hunt again. in the case of black tiger slipping away from gallows he finds three government officials interlinked in this case. when he finds all the three and brings them to a safe place to produce to the court all of them are killed by black tiger in an encounter. in the custody of agni three government officials gunned down is the black spot in his life. agni loses his trusted colleague vijay at this stage and he becomes alone. now he has very tough opponents for him. like a
wounded tiger agni wages a lone battle. black tiger setting bombs in various places escapes to hong kong. in one of the bomb blasts agni loses his mother too. he chases black tiger in hong kong and it is as expected.  cast saikumar as agni rockline venkatesh as vijay p. j. sarma as chief minister shanoor sana as kempamma shobaraj as black tiger thalapathy dinesh as tiger memon g. v. sudhakar naidu as dharmaraj ponnambalam lambu nagesh karibasavaiah rami reddy raghu babu  production police story 2 is a sequel to 1996 film of same name. the film retained most of its actors and technicians from the original version. saikumar said "when we decided to make a sequel, we wondered from where to begin. so we decided to extend the story to rayalaseema."  critical reception nowrunning wrote "police story part ii' looks every inch like the original in its narration, content, technical details and even the way the characters speak their dialogues. it is utterly crude with no space for sensibility and sensitivity." sify wrote "this is a power packed action extravaganza. a sequel to 'police story' released 10 years ago this film is updated in technology and is stylishly made. thriller manju has done a mind blowing job with eight action scenes and non stop punching dialogues from dialogue king saikumar in the role of agni is the redeeming feature of this film. this is a feast for the action lovers and those who love dialogue oriented films."  references  2000s kannada-language films indian films 2007 films kannada-language films fictional portrayals of the karnataka police 2000s masala films indian action films indian sequel films films scored by r. p. patnaik films set in bangalore films shot in bangalore films shot in andhra pradesh films shot in hong kong 2007 action films
wolmark is a surname.  "wolmark" is a jewish term for people from poland. variants of the surname can be found in other countries of eastern europe, as well as argentina and the united states.  people  alfred wolmark (c.1877 - 1961), polish painter and decorative artist  jenny wolmark, british writer and professor  nina wolmark, belorussian writer and producer of animated series  zevi wolmark (born 1962), american tv actor
the diocese of tulcea () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is saint nicholas cathedral in tulcea and its ecclesiastical territory covers tulcea county. divided into three archpriests' districts, it has around 150 churches and priests, fourteen monasteries and a theological seminary in tulcea. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of muntenia and dobrudja. it was established in 2004, and in 2008, visarion baltat became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  external links  official site  tulcea 2004 establishments in romania tulcea tulcea county
our lady of candelaria cathedral, () also called camaguey cathedral, is a roman catholic cathedral and minor basilica in camaguey, cuba, located in ignacio agramonte park.  history the building was built in the early eighteenth century, but has been rebuilt several times. the current appearance of the cathedral is the result of work done in 1864. after pope john paul ii visited cuba in 1998, several donations for the renovation of the cathedral  were performed, which today is in very good condition.  the church is dedicated to the patron saint of the city, the virgen de la candelaria. the most striking feature is the huge bell tower, topped with a statue of christ.  the temple follows the roman or latin rite and is the seat of the metropolitan archdiocese of camaguey (archidioecesis camagueyensis) which was raised to its current status in 1998 by the bull "maiori spirituali".  the cathedral is part of the historic center of camaguey, a unesco world heritage site since 2008. in january 2014 pope francis also conferred on it the title of minor basilica.  see also roman catholicism in cuba our lady of candelaria cathedral  references  external links  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in camaguey basilica churches in cuba 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
james brendan foley (born april 4, 1957) is a retired american foreign service officer. he served as the united states ambassador to the republic of haiti from may 27, 2003 to august 14, 2005, and as the united states ambassador to the republic of croatia from august 12, 2009 to august 19, 2012.   as ambassador to haiti, foley participated in the late-night negotiations between haitian president jean bertrand aristide and u.s. secretary of state colin l. powell leading to aristide's february 29, 2004 resignation and acceptance of a u.s. offer to fly him into exile.  early life and education  foley was born in buffalo, new york. he received his b.a. in 1979 from the state university of new york at fredonia and m.a.l.d. in 1984 from the fletcher school of law and diplomacy.  professional career  foley is a former member of the senior foreign service.  he served from 2007-2009 as the state department's senior coordinator for iraqi refugee issues, working to alleviate the plight of several million iraqis displaced by the war.  previously, he served as faculty member and deputy commandant of the national war college, as a diplomat-in-residence, and as deputy permanent representative to the united nations in geneva from 2000-2003.  he joined the foreign service in 1983 and served overseas as vice consul and political officer in manila, philippines and as political officer in algiers, algeria.  foley was a speechwriter and adviser to former secretary of state lawrence s. eagleburger from 1989 to 1993 and deputy director of the private office of the nato secretary general in brussels, belgium from 1993 to 1996. he was special assistant to the late senator paul coverdell and served as state department deputy spokesman from 1997-2000.  references  external links  1957 births living people ambassadors of the united states to haiti state university of new york at fredonia alumni st. joseph's collegiate institute alumni the fletcher school at tufts university alumni ambassadors of the united states to croatia united states foreign service personnel 21st-century american diplomats
yevgeny maximovich titarenko (; december 5, 1935 - april 28, 2018) was a russian writer and the brother of  raisa gorbacheva.  biography  titarenko was born on december 5, 1935 in the village of yar funny west siberian krai (now the rubtsovsk district of the altai territory) into the family of maxim andreyevich  and alexandra petrovna. he was the brother of mikhail gorbachev's wife raisa titarenko (raisa gorbacheva).  after a seven-year course he graduated from the leningrad naval preparatory school, then he studied at the leningrad higher naval school of engineers of weapons, but did not graduate. demoted to the rank of sailor he served in the north, in the arctic. then he moved to the donbass, where he worked in the mines.  he graduated from the maxim gorky literature institute. according to the distribution in 1965, he arrived in voronezh.  he worked as an editor of fiction in the central black earth publishing house. he first offered to publish the novel landslide which was, according to the potential publishers, weak and thus did not see the light of day. instead titarenko had published an adventure story for teenagers, discoveries, wars, wanderings of the admiral-generalissimo and his сhief of staff on water, on earth and under earth.  he immediately drew the attention of readers and critics to the young author. his other novels  four to the мarket рlace, miner, nikodimov lake, on a small рiece of the universe were published in moscow and voronezh and achieved mass circulation.  he was married to the ossetian poet zoya gaboeva and together they have a daughter, irina. after their divorce, titarenko thought to create a new family, but all his attempts ended in failure. according to one version, none of the women he pursued could accept the way of life of the writer. on the other hand, the security services deliberately guided of all the ladies away from his gorbacheva's brother.  titarenko suffered from chronic alcoholism. every year, his condition only worsened. around 1989 titarenko finally moved to the hospital. the official diagnosis was organic brain damage, alzheimer's disease. initially, the writer settled into very good conditions in a private room with a refrigerator. he was visited by comrades from his literary workshop, but he gradually ceased to receive visitors in the hospital. gorbacheva herself as her husband was high up in the national government, never
visited him there. however she related in her memoirs... my brother was a gifted, talented person. but his talents did not come true. his talent has appeared unclaimed and ruined. brother and drink for many months spent in the hospital. his fate  a drama of mother and father. it is my constant pain that i carry in my heart for more than 30 years. i worry about his bitter tragedy, especially as a child we were very close, has always been between us a special emotional connection and attachment... is hard and painful.  titarenko spent more than thirty years in a psychiatric hospital near the village of orlovka (voronezh oblast).  death yevgeny titarenko died on 28 april 2018 at the age of 82, following a long illness.  bibliography   miner (voronezh, 1968)  nikodimov lake (moscow, 1973)  nikodimov lake (voronezh, 1974)  inventing тenderness (voronezh, 1977)  the сritical тemperature (voronezh, 1978)  on a small рiece of the universe (moscow, 1982)  four to the мarket рlace (voronezh, 1983)  on a small рiece of the universe  (voronezh, 1985)  references  external links  «уберите свою балалаику!» - сказал брат раисы максимовны горбачевои телевизионщикам, пришедшим к нему в больницу за «жареным»  брат раисы горбачевои ведет растительныи образ жизни  1935 births 2018 deaths people from rubtsovsk russian people of ukrainian descent soviet writers russian writers soviet children's writers russian children's writers mikhail gorbachev maxim gorky literature institute alumni
sergei safonovich gurzo (; 1926-1974) was a russian stage and film actor. he was married to the dancer and actress irina gubanova.  biography  sergei gurzo born september 23, 1926 in moscow patriarchal family. his grandfather was an archpriest, his father a doctor, his mother taught the exact sciences in gnessin state musical college. sergei's uncle   ivan mikhailovich kudryavtsev was a people's artist of the ussr, he played on the stage of the moscow art theater.  selected filmography  the young guard (1948) as sergei tyulenin  on peaceful days (1950) as pavlo panychuk  far from moscow (1951) as petya gudkin  brave people (1950) as vasily terentevich govorukhin  the encounter of a lifetime (1952) as vasov  a fortress in the mountains (1953) as kuleshov  those born of storm (1957) as andrey ptakha  references  bibliography   birgit beumers. directory of world cinema: russia. volume ii. intellect books, 2015.  external links     1926 births 1974 deaths soviet male film actors soviet male stage actors male actors from moscow stalin prize winners gerasimov institute of cinematography alumni
the 1927-28 sk rapid wien season was the 30th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  mitropa cup  references  1927-28 rapid wien season rapid
brandon fortenberry (born may 18, 1990) is an american professional basketball player for balkan botevgrad of the bulgarian national basketball league. he played college basketball for southeastern louisiana university he was born in pigayune.  career in the 2011-12 season, as a senior in the picayune memorial high school, he was played only seven games because of a foot injury. he was later named a preseason all-southland conference selection.  fortenberry was selected by the bakersfield jam in the round 6 of the 2013 nba development league draft. he left the jam before the start of the season. he did not play pro basketball from 2013 to 2015.  for the 2015-16 season he signed with balkan botevgrad of the bulgarian nbl. in 33 games he averaged 13.4 points per game. he was named the best foreign player in the 2015-16 bulgarian championship.  on july 22, 2016, fortenberry signed with igokea for the 2016-17 season. on january 11, 2017, he was released by igokea. in 15 aba league games, he averaged 5.5 points, 2.1 rebounds and 1.7 assists per game.  on july 22, 2017, fortenberry returned to balkan botevgrad.  references  external links beobasket profile  1990 births living people african-american basketball players american expatriate basketball people in bosnia and herzegovina american expatriate basketball people in bulgaria kk igokea players bc balkan players shooting guards people from picayune, mississippi american men's basketball players southeastern louisiana lions basketball players 21st-century african-american sportspeople
the lottery ticket seller (spanish: el billetero) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by raphael j. sevilla and starring david silva, esther fernandez and  rodolfo acosta.  cast  references  bibliography   rogelio agrasanchez. cine mexicano: posters from the golden age, 1936-1956. chronicle books, 2001.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by raphael j. sevilla mexican black-and-white films
the dead room is a 2015 new zealand horror film directed by jason stutter, who co-wrote it with kevin stevens. the dead room was inspired by the 1970s urban legend of a haunted farmhouse in central otago, new zealand.  it stars jed brophy,  jeffrey thomas, and  laura petersen as ghost hunters who are hired to determine if a house is haunted.  it premiered at sitges film festival in october 2015 and was released later that month in new zealand.  plot after a ghost scares a family out of their house, an insurance company hires three ghost hunters to determine if it is haunted. they include liam, who handles their technological tools, skeptic scott, and psychic holly. at first, holly senses nothing in the house, and scott's tools measure no electromagnetic disturbances. after liam sets up several cameras with sensors, they go to sleep. at 3am, the cameras pick up movement, which scott later dismisses as a draft. as liam and scott discuss their previous cases, scott describes his theory that low frequency sound can disperse a ghost, and liam shows holly footage of a chair rocking by itself. scott admits that he can not explain the footage and says he wants to find a scientific explanation for the paranormal.  a loud noise wakes the ghost hunters at 3am the next night, and holly says she sees a ghostly figure, which neither of the men can see. in the morning, scott tells them nobody will accept their evidence, as it is too subjective. although frustrated, liam and holly eventually agree, and the three go through each room, trying to make contact. before going to sleep, they set alarms to wake just before 3am. that night, holly sees the ghostly figure again, and it reacts aggressively, threatening her. scott calms the others by telling them that there is no evidence a ghost has ever harmed a living person; all it can do is scare them. holly, more shaken than the others, reveals she took the job to conquer her fear of ghosts.  during the day, holly senses a presence and strong temperature change, which the others do not feel. scott's emf meter reads nothing, but he soon realizes he forgot to insert a battery. when he does so, it immediately begins reading a large disturbance. the reading suddenly goes dead at the end of the main hallway, and holly agrees that there is no presence in the kitchen. this is reinforced when the ghost later chases them, and they take refuge in the kitchen. worried that
the attacks could turn dangerous, liam and holly argue they should leave the house. scott, however, insists they stay to capture evidence of the paranormal. when they subsequently film a telekinetic attack by flying furniture, scott again insists they stay, this time to test his theory. liam, who owns their transportation, reluctantly agrees, overriding holly's objections.  during the ghost's next appearance, liam restarts the house's generator while scott sets up his equipment. after the machine reaches its lowest frequency, the attack suddenly ends, and holly admits that the ghost is gone. as the relieved ghost hunters pack up their equipment, liam notices a strangely-cold corner in the kitchen. upon further investigation, a hidden passage leads to another room. there, they discover the mummified remains of a woman. overwhelmed by a paranormal presence, holly is forced to leave the room, and the others call the police, who, after looking, say there is no body in the room. as the ghost hunters attempt to convince the police officers of their story, holly is suddenly possessed and reveals that the first ghost was trying to frighten them off and protect them from the second, the woman. the second ghost quickly kills the police officers, then scott. liam saves holly, only to be killed himself. as holly flees the house, the ghost kills her. in the final scene the killer ghost finally shows itself and the credits roll.  cast  jed brophy as liam andrews  jeffrey thomas as scott cameron   laura petersen as holly mathews  release the dead room premiered at the sitges film festival on 14 october 2015. it was released in new zealand on 29 october 2015.  ifc midnight released it in the us in april 2016, and scream factory is releasing the film on blu-ray and dvd 6 september 2016.  reception  matt donato of we got this covered wrote, "you've visited haunted houses that are more hair-raising than the dead room." noel murray at the los angeles times described the lack of excitement or scary scenes and with the exception of the last 10 minutes, when "stutter builds to a genuinely impressive sequence of spooky special effects and mayhem."  references  external links      2015 films 2015 horror films new zealand films new zealand horror films english-language films 2010s supernatural horror films haunted house films
centerpoint is an unincorporated community in gallia county, in the u.s. state of ohio.  history a variant name was wales. a post office called wales was established in 1855, and remained in operation until 1906.  references  unincorporated communities in gallia county, ohio unincorporated communities in ohio
janez bernik (6 september 1933 - 15 july 2016) was a multiple-time awarded and internationally acclaimed slovenian painter and academic.  bernik was born in the village of gunclje, now part of ljubljana. after finishing the crafts school in ljubljana, from 1951 until 1955, bernik attended the academy of fine arts in ljubljana, where he was a pupil of maksim sedej. from 1956 to 1958, he continued his studies with the professors of graphic design bozidar jakac and riko debenjak, and on a number of study travels (italy, france...). from 1958 to 1969, he worked as a freelance artist, and in 1970 started teaching as a professor of drawing and painting at the academy of fine arts in ljubljana. from 1979 to 1996, when he retired, he was a full professor and the head of the painting department of the academy. he was member of the group 69 and participated at all its exhibitions. in 1989, he was named an associate member of the slovenian academy of sciences and arts, and in 1993 became its full member. he was an external corresponding member of accademia di san luca in rome, and from 1996, a regular member of the european academy of sciences and arts. he died in prebold.  bernik was a versatile artist, who reached excellent results in painting, sculpture, graphic design, illustration, tapestry, book design, and poetry. his graphic prints are kept in numerous worldwide-known galleries and collections. he had over 60 independent exhibitions, including at the main galleries of the former yugoslavia, klagenfurt, milan, rome, paris, berlin, new york... several times, he also participated at the venice biennale, as well as at a number of group exhibitions at home and abroad. he published four independent graphic folders. his poems were published in two collections; the first one in the monograph lines ("crte"), and the second one, triptych ("triptih"), in the catalogue 1985 exhibition  ("razstava 1985") and the new magazine ("nova revija").  of the domestic awards, of particular importance are the preseren fund award for painting and graphic design (1963), jakopic award for painting (1971), and preseren award (1981). he also received a number of international honorary awards and golden medals for painting and graphic design. his works are kept by slovenian galleries (ljubljana, maribor, ajdovscina, and idrija) and by galleries and museums in most of larger european cities (
london, vienna, prague, zagreb, warsaw, paris, rome, amsterdam). many of his works are also kept in the northern and southern americas (san francisco, washington, new york, buenos aires, rio de janeiro), and even japan (tokio).  references  1933 births 2016 deaths slovenian painters slovenian male painters members of the slovenian academy of sciences and arts‎ preseren award laureates members of the european academy of sciences and arts herder prize recipients
carly boag (born 4 september 1991) is an australian basketball player, who currently plays for the bendigo spirit in the wnbl.  college boag played college basketball for the minot state beavers in minot, north dakota, participating in ncaa division ii.  professional career  europe boag began her professional career in pleyber-christ, france, for the 2014-15 season with leon tregor basket 29 in ligue feminine de basketball 2.  in 2019, boag joined espoo basket in finland's naisten korisliiga for the 2019-20 season.  wnbl boag began her wnbl career in her home state of new south wales, with the sydney uni flames in 2015. boag has re-signed with the flames for the 2016-17 season, her second consecutive season in sydney.  in 2020, boag was signed to return to the sydney uni flames for the 2020-21 season. this will be her fourth season with the flames, and first since 2018.  references  1991 births living people australian women's basketball players australian expatriate basketball people in the united states college women's basketball players in the united states forwards (basketball) minot state university alumni people from tamworth, new south wales sportspeople from new south wales sydney uni flames players
hypaeus poseidon is a species of jumping spider from the brazilian amazon, specifically sao felix do xingu, para.  references  salticidae spiders of brazil spiders described in 2015
saddam omar al-jamal () is a syrian islamic militant and islamic state of iraq and the levant leader. he is known for taking part in a 2014 massacre of the al-shaitat and being involved in the death of jordanian pilot muath al-kasasbeh.  history  free syrian army  he was originally leader of the allahu akbar brigade, a free syrian army faction operating in deir ezzor, which had more than 800 fighters. according to al-jazeera, "jamal was not only the leader of a battalion but also a top fsa commander for the whole of syria's eastern region." he was the leader of the supreme military council (syria)'s eastern front. the allahu akbar brigade was part of the ahfad al-rasul brigade.  islamic state  on 16 december 2013, he appeared in a video entitled 'revealing the biggest conspiracy targeting the islamic state in iraq and the levant' announcing he had joined the islamic state in iraq and the levant.  the extent to which he had a choice in joining the isil has been disputed, with his defection sometimes cast as a 'surrender' to isil after two of his brothers were kidnapped, his brother's house was bombed and several of his fighters died. during this time, jamal narrowly escaped an assassination attempt after a man blew himself up at the headquarters. jamal had set up at a branch of the state bank.  from then on through 2014, he was the isil emir for abu kamal, syria, his home town.  in september 2015 it was reported he had been appointed as a deputy to abu firas al-iraqi, the isil governor of their euphrates province straddling the iraq-syria border.  saddam al-jamal was captured on 9 may 2018 along with four other commanders in the syria-iraq border by iraqi forces.  references  islamic state of iraq and the levant in syria people of the syrian civil war islamic state of iraq and the levant members from syria 1987 births syrian salafis living people people from deir ez-zor governorate
football 7-a-side was taken place since the 1984 summer paralympics in new york/stoke mandeville for standing and wheelchair players but in the 1988 summer paralympics, it was changed to only standing competitors. men have played in this sport but women have not yet played. netherlands have won this sport three times while russia has won twice, been runners-up twice and earned a bronze medal within five paralympic games.  medalists  men's wheelchair medalists  men's standing medalists  multi-medalists  carlo dengerink, jaap de vries, paul heersink, barend verbeck, peter guntlisbergen, arno de jong were all multi-medalists by winning three gold medals for the netherlands between 1988 to 1992.  alan ball, paul cassin, anthony noland, peter alexander, carlos keating were two-time bronze medallists in 1988 and 1992 for ireland.  between 2004 and 2008, volodymyr antonyuk, ihor kosenko, vitaliy trushev, denys ponomaryov, andriy tsukanov, taras dutko, serhiy vakulenko were gold medal winners twice consecutively for ukraine.  meanwhile, the russian team, andrey lozhechnikov (1996 to 2004) has won two silver medals and a bronze. andrey kuveav (2004 to 2008) has earned a silver and bronze medal.  iran have been football 7-a-side bronze medallists twice. moslem akbari, bahman ansari, rasoul atashafrouz, abdolreza karimzadeh appeared in the 2008 summer paralympics and 2012 summer paralympics.  references  medalists football 7
elections were held in slovakia's eight self-governing regions on 9 november 2013. elected were regional governors and city councilors.  it was held on basis of 2 rounds if candidate haven't gained 50% of votes, if he gained the required percents, there would not be runoff. only three candidates got elected in the first round, in presov, zilina, and trencin regions. there was runoff in kosice, banska bystrica, nitra, trnava, and bratislava regions.  six of the regional presidencies were won by centre-left direction - social democracy (smer), with bratislava region being carried on by incumbent governor pavol freso of slovak democratic and christian union - democratic party. the biggest surprise came in banska bystrica region, where leader of the far-right people's party - our slovakia, marian kotleba, got to the second round of elections to face off with incumbent governor vladimir manka of smer. he then defeated vladimir manka in the second round and won the runoff by 55,5 % (71 397 regional votes) and became governor of banska bystrica region, and also ended as candidate with most votes to city council of banska bystrica (8678 votes).  results  presidencies  councils  references  elections in slovakia 2013 elections in europe november 2013 events in europe 2013 in slovakia
liane jakob-rost (born 1928 in berlin) is a german assyriologist.  liane jakob-rost studied ancient near eastern languages at the university of berlin. from 1949 she worked at the vorderasiatisches museum berlin in berlin, as an academic employee after she received her doctorate in 1952. from 1958, she was curator of the collection and in this position she was responsible for the re-incorporation of the looted art returned by the soviet union at that time into the collection. in 1978 she succeeded  as director of the museum. she retired from this position in 1990 and was succeeded by .  jakob-rost's research focus was the editing and publication of cuneiform sources in the museum's collection. she gave presentations in germany and abroad, and also participated in several overseas exhibitions. she was involved in excavations in bulgaria and iraq.  publications   die entzifferung der keilschrift. zum 200. geburtstag von g. f. grotefend (the decipherment of cuneiform: on the 200th birthday of g.f. grotefend), staatliche museen, berlin 1975  das lied von ullikummi. dichtungen der hethiter (the song of ullikummi: poetry of the hittites), insel-verlag, leipzig 1977  with : babylon, staatliche museen, berlin 1983  with joachim marzahn: assyrische konigsinschriften auf ziegeln aus assur (assyrian royal inscriptions on bricks from assur), akademie-verlag, berlin 1985  das vorderasiatische museum, von zabern, mainz 1992   with : die stempelsiegel im vorderasiatischen museum (the stamp-seals in the vorderasiatischen museum), von zabern, mainz 1997  external links     1928 births living people german assyriologists
wikstroemia hanalei, the lavafield false ohelo, is a shrub, of the family thymelaeaceae.  it is native to the hawaiian islands, specifically kauai.  description the shrub has an erect habit, and grows small red fruits up to 13 mm long and 6 mm in diameter. it is believed to be extinct as of 1990.  references  fruticosa
the 1969 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1969 ncaa college division football season. in their third season under head coach roy kramer, the chippewas compiled a 7-3 record (2-1 against iiac opponents) and outscored their opponents, 254 to 147. the team's statistical leaders included quarterback bob miles with 305 passing yards, tailback jesse lakes with 1,263 rushing yards, and dave lemere with 239 receiving yards. on september 27, 1969, lakes set a school record, rushing for 343 yards (and also scored five touchdowns) in a 41-6 victory over wisconsin-milwaukee. lakes broke jim podoley's record of 254 yards set in 1954. lakes' record was broken in 1994 by brian pruitt. tight end dave farris received the team's most valuable player award. nine central michigan players (lakes, farris, defensive tackle ralph burde, guard fred ferguson, linebackers tom hahnenberg and bump lardie, defensive back bob markey, and tackles mike post and jim prisk) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  1970 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
lisa anne pruitt (born april 2, 1966) is an american mechanical engineer known for her research on orthopedic biomaterials and medical polymers.  early life and education  born in cambridge, massachusetts, pruitt double-majored in materials engineering and chemical and ocean engineering at the university of rhode island, earning two bachelor's degrees in 1988. she earned her master's and phd degrees from brown university in 1990 and 1993 respectively.  career and research  she began her career at the university of california, berkeley in 1993 as an assistant professor of mechanical engineering; she was appointed a chancellor's professor in 2004 and lawrence talbot chair in engineering in 2007. in addition to her position as professor of mechanical engineering, she is also a professor of bioengineering at uc berkeley and an adjunct professor of orthopaedic surgery at the university of california, san francisco.  honors and awards  notable awards include  uc berkeley's  distinguished teaching award   u.s. presidential award for excellence in science, mathematics and engineering mentoring fellow of the  american association for the advancement of science national science foundation career award  2011 winner of the a. richard newton abie award from the anita borg institute.  references   1966 births living people american mechanical engineers 20th-century american engineers 21st-century american engineers people from cambridge, massachusetts university of rhode island alumni brown university school of engineering alumni university of california, san francisco faculty uc berkeley college of engineering faculty
tom macleod is a scottish presenter, formerly for sky news.  he has anchored several live, breaking international news stories and was the writer and presenter of the sky documentary 'concussion: the impact on sport'.  he has also worked for the bbc world service and previously on commercial radio covering a range of programming. he is a trustee of the global legal action network and an advocate for increased awareness of concussion and head injury in sport, supporting the leading brain injury charity headway u.k.  early life and education macleod was born and brought up in edinburgh, scotland. he holds an ma in geopolitics from the university of sussex and a ba in music from the london centre of contemporary music. he also gained an nctj diploma at news associates in london.  career in between studying, macleod freelanced for bbc london, assisting the newsroom and on-air shows. he then moved to the north of scotland to present and produce the afternoon drive time show on waves radio, five days a week.  he returned to london as a radio newsreader before joining sky's radio service in leeds. he then returned to london to work for sky news.  2014-2021: sky news from 2014 to 2021, macleod was  a presenter for sky news. in his time at the channel, he has anchored during several major news stories including the 2016 nice truck attack, the 2016 turkish coup d'etat attempt and broke news of the deaths of muhammad ali, fidel castro and carrie fisher.  he also wrote and presented the sky documentary 'concussion: the impact on sport'.  in 2021, he joined the scottish government as an advisor.  references  external links      living people scottish sports broadcasters television personalities from edinburgh british reporters and correspondents sky news newsreaders and journalists year of birth missing (living people)
vladimir vladimirovich troyepolsky (; august 2, 1954 - july 8, 2016) was a journalist and media manager for both soviet and modern russia. he was deputy ceo of the holding information all-russia state television and radio broadcasting company (2001-08, 2009-16), ceo and president of the tv channel 2×2  (1991-97), director-general of ntv plus (1997-98), and jsc petersburg - channel 5 (2008-09). he was also a member of the russian television academy (2007-16).  he died july 8, 2016.  honors and awards  order of friendship (2006) - for achievements in the field of culture, the press, broadcasting and many years of fruitful work. order of honour (south ossetia) (2009) - for outstanding contribution to the organization of objective coverage of the events in south ossetia in august 2008.  references  external links троепольскии, владимир владимирович: все о телевидении - кто есть кто  генеральныи директор вгтрк олег добродеев: «канал «культура» революционно менять не будем - его смотрит советская интеллигенция» михалыч и «медведи»  1954 births 2016 deaths people from saratov soviet journalists russian journalists russian media executives moscow state university alumni
"livin' for your love (your love)" is a song recorded, written, and produced by the american electronic/house duo rosabel, featuring vocals by singer/songwriter/actress jeanie tracy. the underground garage-themed track reached number one on billboard's dance club songs chart in its july 30, 2016 issue, giving the rosabel their sixth chart topper, as well as their third with tracy, who in turn picked up her fourth, all as a featured vocalist on production acts (the fourth being the brazilian act altar with "party people" in 2007).  track listings itunes listing  livin' for your love (your love) [rosabel housed radio mix] 3:36    livin' for your love (your love) [rosabel housed club mix] 6:28     livin' for your love (your love) [spiritchaser club mix] 6:36   livin' for your love (your love) [spiritlevel dub mix] 6:34    livin' for your love (your love) [rosabel & e thunder peak dub] 6:53      livin' for your love (your love) [spiritchaser club instrumental]  6:36  references  external links official audio at youtube  2016 songs 2016 singles electronic songs house music songs
the 2002-03 league of ireland first division season was the 18th season of the league of ireland first division. the first division was contested by 12 teams. waterford united won the title while finn harps won the first division cup, a one-off tournament staged this season.  overview  first division cup between july and august the 12 teams competed in the first division cup. the teams were divided into two regionalised groups and played a single round of games. the two group winners then qualified for the final. on 6 july 2002 kildare county, the first division's newest members, made their competitive debut against limerick at station road. philip gorman and shey zellor scored for county as they won 2-0. county went on to win their regional group and qualify for the final but lost 4-0 on aggregate to finn harps.  final tables southern section  northern section  final  finn harps win 4-0 on aggregate.  regular season the regular season began in august  and concluded in january. it used a round-robin format which saw each team play 22 games. under manager jimmy mcgeough and with a team that included dan connor, waterford united won the title and were automatically promoted to the 2003 premier division.  final table  promotion/relegation play-off the promotion/relegation play-off format was changed this season. it now featured four teams, the second, third and fourth placed teams from the first division plus drogheda united, the ninth placed team from the 2002-03 league of ireland premier division.  semi-finals 1st legs  2nd legs  galway united win 2-1 on aggregate  drogheda united win 4-2 on aggregate  final  drogheda united win 3-2 on aggregate and retain their place in the premier division.  see also  2002-03 league of ireland premier division  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2002-03 in republic of ireland association football ireland
ajit kumar guha (15 april 1914 - 12 november 1969) was a bengali educationist. he was awarded ekushey padak in 2013 posthumously by the government of bangladesh.  education and career  guha passed the matriculation from ishwar pathshala and intermediate from comilla victoria college in 1930 and 1932 respectively. he earned his bachelor's from comilla victoria college in 1934 and master's from calcutta university in 1939. he studied at visva-bharati university in santiniketan from 1940 to 1942.  guha started teaching at the priyanath high school from 1942 until 1948. he then joined the jagannath college as a professor in the department of bangla. he served as a part-time professor in the department of bangla at the university of dhaka.  references  1914 births 1969 deaths people from comilla bengali educators university of calcutta alumni university of dhaka faculty recipients of the ekushey padak comilla victoria government college alumni
the 1940 western state teachers broncos football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1940 college football season.  in their 12th season under head coach mike gary, the broncos compiled a 2-5 record and were outscored by their opponents, 117 to 77.  the team played its home games at waldo stadium in kalamazoo, michigan.  guard wayne falan and guard/quarterback harold benge were the team captains. halfback horace coleman received the team's most outstanding player award.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers broncos football
vladimir hruza (born 6 february 1960) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1960 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from jihlava
francois chevalier (27 may 1914 - 6 may 2012) was a distinguished french historian of latin america. his most well-known publication is la formation des grands domaines au mexique (paris 1952). translated to spanish (1956) and english (1963), it is a classic and pioneering work on agrarian history in colonial mexico, a point of departure for later studies of mexican haciendas sparking a discussion on whether they were fundamentally feudal or capitalist.  education and career chevalier was a student of geography at the university of grenoble (1933-36) and alumnus of the ecole des chartes (1936-40). he became a doctoral student of french historian marc bloch and developed interests in accord with the annales school. during world war ii, chevalier was resident in madrid at the casa de velazquez, with the aid of anthropologist paul rivet. in spain, chevalier began pursuing his interest in the agrarian history of mexico using the archivo general de indias in seville.  between 1946 and 1949 he was a fellow of the  in mexico city.  during this period he developed his theory concerning the formation of the great landed estates (haciendas) in mexico. this subject was developed in his doctoral dissertation, directed by marc bloch, which he completed in 1949. it was revised for publication in french by the  in paris (1952).  its publication was a major contribution to colonial mexican history, but with some lacunae.  it was translated to spanish and published in mexico in 1956.  it was edited and translated to english by alvin eustin, with an introduction by lesley byrd simpson and published in 1963 as land and society in colonial mexico: the great hacienda. one reviewer faults this english edition for its many omissions of the original french text and that the english translation is not faithful to the french original. eric van young took chevalier's work as a point of departure for a lengthy discussion of hacienda studies in mexico.  chevalier spent considerable time in mexico.  he had contacts with mexican historians including jose miranda, , , and  moreno as well as intellectuals visiting mexico, including woodrow borah, marcel bataillon, , and claude dumas.  while in mexico, chevalier worked in the archivo general de la nacion and in regional archives in guadalajara, zacatecas, monterrey, and puebla. he and his wife josephe chevalier frequently hosted meals and parties for friends and visitors.  in a festschrift for chevalier, an article is devoted to this aspect of his personal life.  he traveled extensively in mexico, with some journeys
on a harley davidson motorcycle that he rode in a suit and tie.  he visited the isthmus of tehuantepec, coast of michoacan, and the highlands of jalisco, as well as veracruz, puebla,  nayarit, and aguascalientes.  during his travels and researches, he accumulated a huge personal archive of photos and notes, which became the basis for his book viajes y pasiones.  he returned to france in 1962, where at the time there was little interest in latin america.  with the help of hispanist , the spanish literature department at the university of bordeaux hired chevalier. he taught courses on mexico from the prehispanic period to the mexican revolution, especially emphasizing issues of land tenure. between 1962 and 1966, he directed the institut francais des etudes andines, traveling to the andean countries frequently and he collected material for his personal archive-library.   in 1969 he had a position at the university of paris 1, pantheon-sorbonne, where he remained until his retirement in 1983.    he had accumulated a huge personal library and archive of materials from mexico and the andes, which he donated in his 90s to the centre de recherches d'histoire de l'amerique latine et du monde iberique (cralmi) de la universite de paris i (pantheon- sorbonne).  a published inventory of the archival materials, photos, and documents appears in the 2005 festschrift.<ref>"archives et documents" in sur les traces d'un mexicaniste francais. editions karthala 2005, pp. 281-307.</ref>  he died in paris on 6 june 2012.  impact of chevalier's work chevalier's publication on the development of the great landed estate in colonial mexico grew out of his doctoral dissertation under the direction of marc bloch.  when it was published, it was recognized as a major contribution to mexican history.  relatively few works in french at the time were translated to spanish or english, but chevalier's merited having a wide scholarly readership and was translated into both.  chevalier's publication built on earlier work by mexican historians, such as silvio zavala, jesus silva herzog, and others, but his book applied the model of the medieval landed estates in france, "emphasizing the politico-institutional dimension highlighted by his own teacher, marc bloch."  chevalier viewed the landed estate's development by elites was as much as anything a "psychological" impetus, to show one's status whether or not the estate was profitable.  in 1983, van young wrote a major
historiographical article taking chevalier's work as the point of departure, saying that "thirty years ago, francois chevalier told us everything we had always wanted to hear about "men rich and powerful" and the classical mexican hacienda... chevalier, with his painstaking approach to masses of previously unexploited documentation, who brought the great hacienda down from the level of abstraction to that of historical reality."    chevalier's book set in motion scholarly activity investigating the hacienda in mexico. historian charles gibson in his magnum opus ''the aztecs under spanish rule'' (1964), called for more research to test chevalier's hypothesis that the hacienda was a basically feudal enterprise using debt peonage labor.  gibson's doctoral student william b. taylor examined colonial oaxaca land tenure patterns and showed that indigenous communities held significant amounts of land, a counter-example to patterns of the catholic church and colonial elites' accumulation of land.  honors and recognition corresponding member of the spanish real academia de la historia corresponding member of the academia mexicana de la historia awarded the "medalla 1808" by the government of mexico city exhibition in his honor, 2012 mexican instituto nacional de antropologia e historia of a selection of his photos taken during his travels in mexico. colloquium in his honor 2007  "the schools of historiography of france and mexico: circulation, reception, and debates: homage to francois chevalier. " at the instituto frances de america latina (ifal) colloquium in his honor, 1990, universidad de guadalajara "las formas y las politicas del dominio agrario: homenaje a francois chevalier", 1990. "memorias" from the colloquium were published in 1992.  publicationsla formation des grands domaines au mexique (terre et societe aux xvie et xviie siecles), paris, institut d'ethnologie, paris, 1952. new expanded edition in french, karthala, 2006.formacion de los latifundios en mexico :  tierra y sociedad en los siglos xvi y xvii, trad. de antonio alatorre, mexico : fondo de cultura economica, 1976. (2a. ed., con nueva introduccion del autor, 1976; 3a.ed., 1999). chevalier updated the introduction and bibliography for the 1999 edition.land and society in colonial mexico: the great hacienda, edited and translated by alvis eustin, prologue by lesley byrd simpson, university of california press, 1963.l'amerique latine de l'independance a nos jours, paris, puf- nouvelle clio
, 1977. (2a.ed., 1993).america latina : de la independencia a nuestros dias, mexico : fondo de cultura economica, 1999,   (with javier perez siller), viajes y pasiones. imagenes y recuerdos del mexico rural, mexico: ifal - cemca - fondo de cultura economica, mexico : instituto frances de america latina, 1998.  references  people from montlucon 1914 births 2012 deaths historians of mexico 20th-century french historians latin americanists ecole nationale des chartes alumni
the joint program in survey methodology was established at the university of maryland, college park in 1993, a collaboration between that university, the university of michigan, and westat.  today jpsm offers coursework on-site and online, offering ms and ph.d. degrees, certificate programs, and short courses on the subjects of survey methodology, survey statistics, and data science.  history  in the early 1990s, the u.s. federal statistical system (interagency council on statistical policy) sought assistance to provide advanced training to their employees in survey statistics and methodology.  employees who had graduate degrees from traditional statistics programs lacked knowledge on the design of complex samples and developing survey instruments-interdisciplinary training which was necessary for implementing large-scale national surveys and censuses.  in order to accomplish this initiative, the national science foundation set up a grant that would provide an initial five years of funding for a university to establish this program.  the grant was awarded to the joint program in survey methodology (jpsm), a group made up by the university of maryland, college park, the university of michigan, and westat, and was headquartered at the university of maryland, college park.  academic courses began in fall 1993, under the heading of the first jpsm director, sociologist stanley presser.  the second director of jpsm, serving from 1996 to 2001 was robert groves, who went on to later head the us census bureau.  in 1998, a summer internship program was added for undergraduate students which linked them to paid internships at u.s. federal statistical agencies as well as offering coursework in survey methodology.  in 2000, jpsm enrolled their first ph.d. students, in both statistical and social science concentrations of survey methodology.  survey methodologist, roger tourangeau, was named the director of jpsm in 2001 and served through 2011.  the fourth jpsm director, frederick conrad, served from 2012 to 2015.  jpsm is currently headed by frauke kreuter, who is also professor of statistics and methodology at the university of mannheim and head of the statistical methods research department at the institute for employment research (iab) in nurnberg, germany.  present  currently, jpsm offers both ms and ph.d. programs, in addition to an undergraduate minor, graduate-level certificates, online courses, and short (1-2 day) courses to meet the needs of survey professionals.  in addition, jpsm offers a summer program for
undergraduate students with internship placements at statistical agencies.  to greater strengthen jpsm's collaboration with the federal statistical agencies, many agencies, such as the us census bureau, the national center of health statistics, and the bureau of labor statistics, have employed jpsm students as research assistants.  federal agencies also provide real world problems that are taken on by students in practicum or design seminar classes.  graduates of the jpsm programs are employed by federal agencies, by industry survey organizations, such as westat, mathematica policy research, gallup, and the pew center, as well as university survey organizations such as the university of michigan institute for social research and norc at the university of chicago.  jpsm is also a core partner, along with the university of mannheim (germany), in a new international program in survey and data science (ipsds), allowing international survey researchers to learn survey methodology courses online from international experts in the field.  references   survey methodology university programs university of maryland, college park
hans van arum (born 23 december 1966) is a dutch football coach and former professional player, appearing as a striker in over 200 games in the eredivisie with vitesse, willem ii and rkc waalwijk.  van arum was head coach for agovv apeldoorn in the dutch jupiler league, the interim head coach for sbv vitesse in the dutch eredivisie, and head coach for the houston dutch lions fc in the 2013 pdl season. in 2013 he is coaches sdv barneveld in the hoofdklasse.  references  1966 births living people dutch football managers sbv vitesse managers agovv apeldoorn managers dutch footballers sportspeople from amersfoort association football forwards eredivisie players sbv vitesse players rkc waalwijk players willem ii (football club) players rinus michels award winners dutch expatriate football managers
the men's african qualifiers for the 1960 summer olympics tournament began in november 1959 and ended in april 1960.  round 1  group 1  group 2  group 3  round 2   united arab republic and tunisia qualify.  references   football qualification for the 1960 summer olympics football at the summer olympics - men's african qualifiers
timothy is an unincorporated community in overton county, tennessee, united states. it is concentrated around the intersection of state route 52 and state route 136 between livingston and celina, and lies just north of standing stone state park. the community was named for an early postmaster, timothy stephens.  references  unincorporated communities in overton county, tennessee unincorporated communities in tennessee
i'm off then: losing and finding myself on the camino de santiago () is a book by german writer hape kerkeling written in 2006 and translated into english in 2009. it has sold over three million copies. it has also been translated into french, italian, dutch, polish, latvian, spanish, korean and chinese.  a film adaptation, directed by julia von heinz, with devid striesow and martina gedeck starring, was released on december 24, 2015.  references   2006 non-fiction books camino de santiago 21st-century german literature german-language books german books travel books pilgrimage accounts spain in fiction non-fiction books adapted into films german non-fiction books
thiol oxidoreductases are proteins that redox control by utilizing catalytic cysteine (cys) residues for oxidation or reduction of their substrates. examples of such proteins include thioredoxin, thioredoxin reductase, glutathione reductase, glutaredoxin, glutathione peroxidase, and peroxiredoxin.  they are involved in various processes, such as sulfur metabolism, dna synthesis and repair, signaling, protein degradation, oxidative folding, protein modification, regulation of gene expression.  some form functional complexes/modules, where one thiol oxidoreductase acts on another. for example, thioredoxin reductase provides reducing equivalents to thioredoxin, which in turn reduces peroxiredoxin.  references  oxidoreductases
the sustainable energy authority of ireland (seai) () is an irish governmental body established to promote and aid in the development of sustainable energy in ireland.  history  the seai was founded as the national energy agency of ireland under the sustainable energy act 2002 by the government, with the goal of increasing the use and development of affordable sustainable energy in ireland. it is financed by ireland's eu structural funds programme, which funded by both the irish government and the eu.  projects and initiatives  the main objectives of the seai as a statutory body is to ensure the implementation and adoption of energy efficiency across all irish sectors, as well as the development of new technology for use in with renewable energy sources and the decarbonisation of the irish energy supply. it also funds and supports research into new technologies and their deployment in sectors including bioenergy, electric vehicles, the combination of heat and power systems, and ocean energy. among their large public initiatives are the better energy communities and sustainable energy communities programmes aimed at domestic and community energy and sustainability programmes.  national retrofitting plan  the seai is the body overseeing ireland's national retrofitting of domestic and business buildings to increase energy efficiency and the move away from fossil fuels as heat sources.  offshore renewable energy  the seai is engaged in supporting the offshore renewable energy sector in ireland. it does so by advising on government policy development, investing in grant schemes and the creation of test sites, and actively implementing the irish offshore renewable energy development plan (oredp). with the marine institute, the seai it manages ireland's ocean energy portal, an information portal for those engaged in the development of the marine renewable energy sector. among the projects the seai has supported with eu funding are:   opin (ocean power innovation network)  aflowt (accelerating market uptake of floating offshore wind technology)  oceanset (support to the realisation of the ocean energy implementation plan of the set-plan)  references   renewable energy in the republic of ireland
cawarral is a rural town and locality in the livingstone shire, queensland, australia. in the  the locality of cawarral had a population of 831 people.  history  cawarral state school opened on 13 july 1874.  in the 2011 census, cawarral had a population of 726 people.  in the  the locality of cawarral had a population of 831 people.  education  cawarral state school is a government primary (prep-6) school for boys and girls at 125 annie drive ().  in 2015, cawarral state school had an enrolment of 87 students with 6 teachers (5 full-time equivalent). in 2018, the school had an enrolment of 85 students with 7 teachers (6 full-time equivalent) and 9 non-teaching staff (5 full-time equivalent).  there is no secondary school in cawarral. the nearest secondary schools are yeppoon state high school in yeppoon to the north-east and glenmore state high school in kawana in rockhampton to the south-west.  facilities   the cawarral cemetery is on the corner of cemetery road and helena lane () and is managed by the livingstone shire council.  references  external links      towns in queensland shire of livingstone localities in queensland
olenecamptus siamensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936. it is known from china, sumatra, myanmar, vietnam, thailand, and taiwan. it contains the varietas olenecamptus siamensis var. reductus.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
judy shaw (born in stillwater, oklahoma) is an inductee of the women in technology international hall of fame. she has retired from texas instruments where she had a role in semiconductor process technology. she has since been involved in christian charities real options for women in plano, texas and shiloh place mckinney in mckinney, texas.  references   texas instruments people american women computer scientists american computer scientists people from stillwater, oklahoma year of birth missing (living people) living people 21st-century american women
famine warhouse 1848, traditionally known as the ballingarry warhouse or the widow mccormack's house, is an irish farmhouse famous as the site of a skirmish in the young irelander rebellion of 1848 (ireland's contribution to the springtime of the peoples), at which the irish tricolour was flown for the first time.  located  north-northeast of ballingarry, south tipperary, the house was owned at the time of the battle by margaret mccormack, the widow of thomas mccormack. rebels led by william smith o'brien besieged 47 policemen of the irish constabulary. after the loss of two men the rebels retreated, and were later arrested and transported.  known locally as the warhouse, it became a national monument in 1989, was renovated in 2000-01 and was renamed "famine warhouse 1848" in 2004. today it houses a museum with exhibits on the great famine and mass emigration, the rebellion, the high treason trials and exile of the young ireland leaders in australia and their escapes to the us.  references  buildings and structures in county tipperary tourist attractions in county tipperary agricultural buildings in ireland national monuments in county tipperary
the st. joseph cathedral () is a religious building belonging to the catholic church and is the seat of the roman catholic archdiocese of gatineau (archidiocese de gatineau or archidioecesis gatinensis), in the administrative region of outaouais, in the province of quebec in eastern canada. it is located in the former city of hull, at 245, boulevard saint-joseph in gatineau, quebec, canada.  its construction began in 1951 and ended the following year under the plan and design of lucien sarra-bournet. it has been declared a religious heritage.  see also roman catholicism in canada st. joseph cathedral (disambiguation)  references  external links  roman catholic cathedrals in quebec buildings and structures in gatineau roman catholic churches completed in 1952 1952 establishments in quebec 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in canada
new lancaster may refer to:  new lancaster, indiana new lancaster, kansas
bubacarr sanneh (born 14 november 1994) is a gambian professional footballer who plays as a centre-back for danish superliga club sønderjyske and the gambia national team.  club career born in serekunda, sanneh began his career with real de banjul.  on 1 september 2014 ac horsens confirmed, that they had signed sanneh on a season long loan-deal with a buying option. he made his debut on 10 november 2014 against viborg ff, where he played the whole match and scored a goal. ac horsens utilized the buying option, and announced the transfer on 22 april 2015.  on 5 november 2017 sanneh officially signed with midtjylland on a four-year deal, with the transfer happening during the winter transfer window.  in august 2018, sanneh signed a five-year deal with belgian club anderlecht for a transfer fee believed to be €8m. he made his competitive debut for the club in a 1-1 home draw with royal antwerp before scoring his first goal in a 2-1 win over standard liege. in august 2019, he signed for turkish club goztepe on loan before terminating the contract by mutual consent. he returned to belgium in january 2020 to join oostende on loan until the end of the season. on 25 january 2021, sanneh was sent on a six-month loan to agf. his anderlecht contract was cancelled on 31 august 2021.  on 21 february 2022, sanneh returned to denmark and signed a deal with danish superliga club sønderjyske until the end of the season.  international career he made his international debut for gambia in 2012.  international goals scores and results list the gambia's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each sanneh goal.  personal life sanneh's younger brother muhammed is also a professional footballer.  honours midtjylland danish superliga: 2017-18  individual ac horsens player of the year: 2014-15  references  1994 births living people gambian footballers the gambia international footballers real de banjul fc players ac horsens players fc midtjylland players r.s.c. anderlecht players goztepe s.k. footballers k.v. oostende players aarhus gymnastikforening players sønderjyske fodbold players danish 1st division players danish superliga players belgian first division a players 2021 africa cup of nations players association football defenders gambian expatriate footballers gambian expatriate sportspeople in denmark gambian expatriate sportspeople in belgium gambian expatriate sportspeople in turkey expatriate footballers in denmark expatriate footballers in belgium expatriate footballers in
turkey
state bridge is an unincorporated community in eagle county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called state bridge was established in 1909, and remained in operation until 1915. the community is named for a bridge near the town site.  references  unincorporated communities in eagle county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
saliencia lakes are a conjoined group of post-glacial lakes  in somiedo, asturias, spain. they are situated in the somiedo natural park and are composed of the following: calabazosa (or black lake), cerveriz, almagrera lagoon (or la mina), and lago de la cueva. lago del valle, at  above sea level, is the largest in the group and is the principality's largest lake. fauna in the lake valley includes the presence of eurasian brown bear, otter, egyptian vulture and golden eagle.  the majority of amphibians inside the park are found by these lakes, including alpine newt, palmate newt, fire salamander, common toad, common midwife toad, common frog, and the iberian frog. the lakes are protected space within the world network of biosphere reserves of somiedo natural park, declared a natural monument on 22 may 2003. myth has it that the lakes are guarded by xanas (fairy princesses).  gallery  see also   conjunto lacustre de somiedo  references  bibliography  external links     hiking route by the saliencia lakes  lakes of asturias
oil mines regulations-1984(omr 1984) replaces the oil mines regulations-1933, with effect from october 1984 to deal with matters for the prevention of possible dangers in oil mines in india.  omr 1984 was published in 1986 by directorate general of mines safety, ministry of labour in dhanbad, jharkhand.  salient features chapter-1 priliminary short title; extent; application and; definitions. (reg 1-2) chapter-ii  returns, notices and plans. (reg 3-9)  chapter-iii : inspectors, management and duties  qualifications; appointment; general management and; duties of pe ns employed in mines for various functions. (reg 10-23)  chapter-iv : drilling and workover  reg 24- derricks; 25- derrick platforms and floors; 26- ladders; 27- safety belts and life lines; 28- emergency escape device; 29- weight indicator; 30- escape exits; 31- guardrails, handrails and covers; 32- draw-works; 33- cathead and cat line; 34-  tongs; 35-  safety chains or wire lines; 36- casing lines; 37-  rigging equipment for material handling; 38- storage of materials; 39- construction and loading of pipe-racks; 40-  rigging-up and rig dismantling; 41-  mud tanks and mud pumps; 42-  blowout preventer assembly; 43-  control system for blowout preventers; 44-  testing of blowout preventer assembly; 45-  precautions against blowout; 46-  precautions after a blowout has occurred; 47-  drilling workover and other operations; 48-  precautions during drill stem test.  chapter-v: production  well completion, testing and activation (reg 49-50)  group gathering station and emergency plan (reg 51-51a)  precautions during acidizing operations; fracturing operations and; loading and unloading of petroleum tankers. (reg 52-54)   storage tank; well servicing operations;  artificial lifting of oil;   temporary closure of producing well and; plugging requirements of abandoned wells (reg 55-59) chapter-v: production  application (reg-60) chapter-vi : transport by pipelines  approval and design of the route and design of pipeline, their laying and, emergency procedure. (reg 61-64)  chapter - vii : protection against gases and fires storage and use of flammable material; precaution
against noxious, flammable gases and, fire; fire fighting equipment and; contingency plan. (reg 65-72) chapter-viii : machinery, plant and equipment  use of certain machinery and equipment; classification of hazardous area;  use of electrical equipment in hazardous area; general provisions about construction and maintenance of machinery;  internal combustion engines;  apparatus under pressure;  precautions regarding moving parts of machinery; engine rooms and their exits and;   working and examination of machinery. (reg 73-81)  chapter-ix : general safety provision housekeeping; general/emergency lighting; supply and use of protective equipments; protection against noise, toxic dusts, gases and ionising radiation ; communication;  protection against pollution of environment; fencings and;  general safety. (reg 82-98)  chapter-x : miscellaneous safety and health education, instructions and, inspections;  returns, notices, correspondence and appeals. (reg 99-106)  references  see also oil spill  mining law and governance mine safety occupational safety and health organizations safety engineering indian legislation oil spills technology hazards bird mortality ocean pollution product safety scandals road hazards
gigascience is a peer-reviewed scientific journal that was established in 2012. it covers research and large data-sets that result from work in the biomedical and life sciences. the editor-in-chief is scott edmunds. originally, the journal was co-published by biomed central and the beijing genomics institute (bgi). in 2016, it left biomed central to form a new partnership between the gigascience press department of bgi and oxford university press. in 2018, gigascience won the association of american publishers' prose award for innovation in journal publishing in the multidisciplinary category.  gigadb and gigagalaxy in order to host the large data-sets the journal covers, gigascience has built and integrated its own disciplinary repository: gigadb. the journal also provides a galaxy-based platform to analyze data, gigagalaxy. the journal has tried to promote the use of galaxy pipelines as publishable research outputs through its 'galaxy series' of articles.  abstracting and indexing the journal is abstracted and indexed by index medicus/medline/pubmed, the science citation index expanded, cas, cnki, embase and scopus. according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2020 impact factor of 6.524.  references  external links   journal site at biomed central gigagalaxy  biology journals creative commons attribution-licensed journals publications established in 2012 oxford university press academic journals english-language journals
giuseppe mussi (2 january 1836 - 18 august 1904) was an italian politician. he was twice mayor of corbetta, lombardy and mayor of milan. he was a recipient of the order of saints maurice and lazarus.  references  external links    1836 births 1904 deaths 19th-century italian politicians 20th-century italian politicians recipients of the order of saints maurice and lazarus mayors of milan
rene saez (born june 27, 1971 in havana, cuba) is a former international swimmer from cuba, who participated in two consecutive panamerican games for his native country, starting in 1987. his best result was a third place in the men's 200m freestyle at the 1991 panamerican games, havana, cuba. at the 1993 central american and caribbean games, he won medals in both the 100 and 200 backstroke.  he also participated in the swimming at the 1991 pan american games - men's 200 metre freestyle and swimming at the 1991 pan american games.  references  living people 1971 births sportspeople from havana cuban male freestyle swimmers pan american games bronze medalists for cuba pan american games medalists in swimming swimmers at the 1991 pan american games medalists at the 1991 pan american games
alburg dunes state park is a state park in alburgh, vermont. the park lies on the shore of lake champlain and features one of the lake's largest beaches. it is named for the sand dunes near the center and western end of the south-facing natural sand beach.  this is a day use park with hours from 10 a.m. to sunset. there are sanitary facilities, a picnic area with grills, and parking. there is no public drinking water. a bicycle and pedestrian path goes between the dunes and wetlands.  the park includes the charles e. smith natural area, a sand dune community being managed by the state to protect and restore the rare plants that grow here.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of grand isle county, vermont alburgh, vermont 1996 establishments in vermont protected areas established in 1996
the horn house is a historic residence located northwest of decorah, iowa, united states.  the significance of this house is the unique architectural combination of the italianate and georgian styles found in iowa.  the latter style is found in the symmetrical composition of the attached service wing.  the two-story brick main block features a low-hipped roof, wide eaves and a plain wood cornice.  the house was built by henry harcourt horn, a native of hertfordshire who was part of the english colony in the decorah area.  the colony was established in the early 1860s, principally by well-to-do englishmen who tried to become gentleman farmers. most of them, including horn, failed. horn moved into decorah and tried his hand in a variety of businesses.  he had to file for bankruptcy and lost his house in a sheriff's sale.  he relocated to st. paul, minnesota where he took up a law career.  the house was listed on the national register of historic places in 1977.  references   houses completed in 1869 houses in winneshiek county, iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa houses on the national register of historic places in iowa italianate architecture in iowa
moonah creek hanging tree is a heritage-listed tree at ardmore station, waverley, shire of boulia, queensland, australia. it is also known as killing tree and butchering tree. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 8 september 2005.  history  this ghost gum (corymbia papuana) near the bank of moonah creek and the road connecting urandangi to the diamantina developmental road is located on oban holding in the parish of moonah. according to oral history from queensland's northwest aboriginal communities, near the turn of the 19th century local police used the tree as a gallows from which they hanged 15 aborigines as a reprisal for cattle spearing. the people indigenous to this area were the waluwara.  oban holding is situated on the barkly tableland, an area that has been used successfully for pastoral purposes since the 1870s. as in other parts of queensland there was tension between pastoralists and the indigenous people, who were in competition for land and resources. relations between the two groups were often strained, especially during the 1880s.  according to local oral history two policemen stationed at urandangi, aided by aboriginal trackers, rounded up a mob of aborigines reputedly involved in cattle spearing. using a gum tree they built a timber gallows and hanged these aboriginal people as an example.  from 1898 to 1902 there were two police constables and a native tracker stationed at urandangi, the nearest police station at the time when this event is said to have occurred. under the aborigines protection and the restriction of the sale of opium act of 1897 police in remote and northern areas were also protectors of aborigines.  representatives of the waluwarra aboriginal corporation have extensive oral history relating the incident. however, no documentary evidence has been identified that gives the names of the people hanged, or whether there were more than 15 aborigines involved in the cattle spearing.  it is not clear whether the native police were involved but there is no documentary evidence in the 60 years (1848-1913) during which the native police operated in queensland that they ever hanged anyone. many incidents have been recorded of native police shooting aboriginal people, but not hanging them.  it is also possible that the moonah creek tree was used for the butchering of cattle. killing or butchering trees are found on many properties. usually a timber horizontal beam was tied into a fork in a tree or scarfed in, using an axe to mortice it in. sometimes the tree would then grow around it,
as occurred with the moonah creek tree. a timber vertical post sometimes supported the far end of the horizontal beam, to give the structure greater strength and stability.  in 1984 the tree was entered in the national trust of queensland's register of significant trees for its reputed association with the hanging of aboriginal people. the nominator wrote that he had first seen the hanging tree many years prior and described it as a beautiful ghost gum that over the years had grown around the timber beam, which could be seen clearly in 1964.  description   commonly known as a ghost gum (corymbia papuana) due to its whitish bark, the tree known as the hanging tree is located about  from the bank of moonah creek, close to the urandangi-mount isa road, where it stands in a landscape of grasses, gidgee gums, ghost gums and coolibahs.  a march 2003 report stated that the tree was dead. it stood approximately eight metres in height, had lost two of its four major limbs and that the limb that held the "gallows beam" had fallen and lay broken on the ground. the beam itself was missing. the tree trunk had bad termite damage and a large crack running through it.  heritage listing  moonah creek hanging tree was listed on the queensland heritage register on 8 september 2005 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  the place has a strong or special association with a particular community or cultural group for social, cultural or spiritual reasons.  according to local oral history, at the turn of the 19th century local police hanged 15 aboriginal people from this tree near the bank of moonah creek on oban station, as a reprisal following a cattle spearing incident. tension between indigenous and non-indigenous peoples was characteristic of the queensland frontier, often resulting in tragic confrontations as the competition for land and resources escalated. while no documentary evidence of the hangings at moonah creek has been found, local aboriginal people are convinced that the hangings took place and that the tree is a conflict site illustrative of the violent history of frontier relations in queensland. the place has a strong association with the local aboriginal community (the waluwarra nation) and the regional community generally for its historical and social values.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register shire of boulia individual trees in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
jean duval, o.c.d. (22 april 1597 - 10 april 1669) was a roman catholic prelate who served as the second bishop of baghdad (1638-1669) and bishop of ispahan (1638-1669).  biography jean duval was born in clamecy, france on 22 april 1597 and was ordained a priest in the order of discalced carmelites. on 16 august 1638, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of baghdad. on 22 august 1638, he was consecrated bishop by giovanni battista maria pallotta, cardinal-priest of san silvestro in capite, with antonio severoli, archbishop of dubrovnik, and tommaso carafa, bishop emeritus of vulturara e montecorvino, serving as co-consecrators. on 25 september 1638, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of ispahan. he served as bishop of baghdad and bishop of ispahan until his death on 10 april 1669.  references   1597 births 1639 deaths 17th-century roman catholic bishops in safavid iran bishops appointed by pope urban viii carmelite bishops
cylindrepomus flavus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1947.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1947
christoph weilhamer (1547-1597) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1589-1597).  biography christoph weilhamer was born in landshut, germany in 1547 and ordained a priest in 1578. on 9 oct 1589, he was appointed during the papacy of pope sixtus v as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop of symbalia. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 22 may 1597.  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope sixtus v 1597 deaths 1547 births
the central virginia legal aid society (cvlas) is a nonprofit organization that provides free legal assistance in civil matters to low-income and elderly residents in central virginia.  mission and services cvlas is one of 10 legal aid services in virginia. the geographical area it covers includes the cities of richmond, petersburg, hopewell, colonial heights and charlottesville, as well as the counties of albemarle, charles city, chesterfield, dinwiddie, fluvanna, goochland, greene, hanover, henrico, louisa, nelson, new kent, powhatan, prince george and surry. it has offices in richmond, charlottesville and petersburg.  cvlas provides legal advice primarily in the areas of bankruptcy, consumer and disability rights, employment law, housing law, family law, and public benefits. through the legal services corporation, it receives federal funding and is thus subject to specific restrictions: the society and its employees may not be affiliated with a political party, support a specific candidate, lobby for legislation or represent criminal clients, among other activities.  the society primarily represents individuals with incomes under 125% of the poverty line, although it may accept clients earning up to 200% of the poverty line. it also represents people over the age of 60, even if they do not meet the income qualifications. its services include legal advice, briefs, negotiation, litigation, and representation in administrative hearings, as well as community education and activities in partnership with other local, state, and national legal aid groups.  the richmond office has the resources to help only 4,000 to 5,000 low-income residents a year. according to the virginia state bar, virginia has one lawyer for every 349 people, but just one legal aid lawyer for every 6,200 residents living in poverty.  cvlas hosts a local radio show titled it's time for justice, broadcast every wednesday from 12:30 to 1:00 p.m. on wrir-lp. the host is martin d. wegbreit, cvlas's director of litigation. the show includes news, interviews, and answers to listeners' questions about consumer, employment, family, housing, public benefits, and other civil law.  partnerships attorneys in cvlas's richmond office run free workshops and information sessions on subjects such as power of attorney and writing wills, and the organization works with local law students through the no fault divorce program at the university of richmond school of law. the charlottesville office partnered with the university of virginia to create the sexual assault advocacy fund (saaf
), whose goal is to provide support to survivors of sexual assault on college campuses.  cvlas is also involved in the medical-legal partnership, richmond (mlp-r), a collaboration with the vcu health system (part of virginia commonwealth university), the university of richmond school of law, the legal aid justice center, and the legal information network for cancer. the partnership provides free legal services to the children's hospital of richmond at vcu (mlp-r at pediatrics), vcu's massey cancer center (mlp-r at massey) and vcu's hayes willis center of south richmond (mlp-r at hayes willis). its mission is to "integrate legal assistance as a vital component of patient care, reduce health disparities and create a new standard of care for vulnerable, low income patients".  justiceserver, a database used to make pro bono work easier and more accessible in virginia, was created with help from cvlas.  history the first legal aid organizations serving the richmond area were the neighborhood legal aid society and the metropolitan richmond legal aid society, both founded in 1971. they merged in 1981 to form cvlas.  similarly, legal aid programs were formed in charlottesville in 1967 and petersburg in 1974.  the virginia farm workers legal assistance project, currently the virginia farmworkers program, was established in 1978, serving h2a visa holders statewate. in 2001, the legacy of these organizations consolidated into one organization, funded in part by the legal services corporation, under the name central virginia legal aid society.  cvlas and the virginia bar association were awarded the harrison tweed award by the american bar association for their pro bono hotline and pro bono housing law programs. cvlas is the only two-time winner of the award.  in 2013, cvlas received a grant from enroll virginia! to provide certified navigators to offer application assistance for the health insurance marketplace established under the affordable care act.  notable past attorneys from 1985 to 1998, anne holton worked as a staff attorney for the central virginia legal aid society. in 1998, she was appointed by the virginia general assembly to be a judge on the richmond juvenile and domestic relations court, and she was virginia's secretary of education until she resigned when her husband, u.s. senator tim kaine, became the 2016 democratic vice-presidential nominee.  former executive director henry w. mclaughlin has received a number of awards and honors, including the virginia state bar's annual legal aid award in 1994, virginia lawyers weekly's leader in the law title in 2009, and the richmond bar association
's hill-tucker public service award in march 2010. he is also a fellow of the virginia law foundation and of the american college of trial lawyers, the only legal aid attorney to be so honored.  current leadership  the current executive director is steve dickinson, and the director of litigation is martin d. wegbreit, the first recipient of the virginia state bar's legal aid award.  doris causey is the managing attorney in richmond, as well as the first african-american and first legal aid lawyer to fill the top elected post for the virginia state bar.  funding cvlas, a nonprofit 501(c)(3) organization, receives funding from the legal services corporation, the commonwealth of virginia, and united way of america, as well as iolta funds and other grants and donations. along with the legal aid justice center, it often relies on fundraisers and private donations. one of the largest individual supporters of legal aid in central virginia is john grisham.  see also  legal aid society of cleveland  legal aid justice center  references  1971 establishments in virginia legal aid in the united states non-profit organizations based in richmond, virginia organizations established in 1971
lipowiec castle -  ruins of the krakow bishops castle in the polish jura. near the babice village in chrzanow county, lesser poland voivodeship, in southern poland.  history  the castle was first mentioned in the 13th century when it was bought by krakow bishop prandota. in 1295 the castle belonged to bishop jan muskata. in his times the original foundation was significantly developed. the first stone structures were built.  the castle's present shape was developed in the 15th century by wojciech jastrzebiec (1412-1423) and zbigniew olesnicki (1423-1451). since the late 15th century the castle was used as a prison for ecclesiastical offenders.   the decline of the castle dates to a fire in 1629, and swedish deluge when it was burned again in 1655/1657.  in 1789 after the death of krakow bishop kajetan sołtyk and after the partition of poland the castle belonged to emperor joseph ii. in 1800 fire destroyed most of the buildings. since then the castle stayed inhabited. during the  january uprising 1863 the troops of general marian langiewicz sheltered in the castle.  see also   castles in poland  references   castles in poland chrzanow county
greena park (born january 8, 1985) is a south korean actress. park debuted in the film the ghost (2004). known for her ability to act various characters, she is loved by many viewers for her outstanding roles, including the cafe waitress hee-young in babo (2008), the tom·boy soon-nam in once upon a time in seoul (2008), and the female cop lee min-jae in the television series the devil (2007).  filmography  television series  references  external links    greena park at j's entertainment korea         1985 births living people south korean television actresses south korean film actresses dongduk women's university alumni actresses from seoul south korean female martial artists
the 2006/07 fis ski jumping continental cup was the 16th in a row (14th official) continental cup winter season and the 5th summer season in ski jumping for men. this was also the 3rd winter season for ladies.   other competitive circuits this season included the world cup and grand prix.  men  summer  winter  ladies  winter  team winter  men's standings  summer  winter  ladies' standings  winter  europa cup vs. continental cup  this was originally last europa cup season and is also recognized as the first continental cup season by international ski federation although under this name began its first official season in 1993/94.  references  fis ski jumping continental cup 2006 in ski jumping 2007 in ski jumping
hms vautour was 16-gun brig-sloop of the british royal navy. the navy captured her from the french on the stocks in 1809 and commissioned her in 1810. she foundered in october 1813.  origin and capture vautour was a  of 16 guns, one of 32 built between 1804 and 1814. the french navy had ordered her construction in 1806 and her keel was laid down in october 1806.  vautour was taken on the stocks on 16 august 1809, at flushing (vlissingen's dock-yard slip) during the unsuccessful british walcheren expedition of august 1809 to seal the river scheldt and antwerp. vautour described in 1812 as "the only remaining trophy in our navy of the expedition to the scheldt."  career vautour arrived at chatham for finishing on 20 november 1809. she was hauled onto chatham slipway on 4 may 1810, and relaunched on 15 september 1810. because there was already a  in service, the navy retained her french name.  commander john parish commissioned vautour in july 1810. commander paul lawless replaced parish in 1811. lawless had distinguished himself at the scheld as captain of the bomb vessel .  on 19 december 1810, vautour was cruising off la hogue, northern france, in company of , in strong winds. satellite foundered during the night. in the morning vautour picked up her empty boats and some deck spars, but no other vestige was found.  between 1811 and 1812, vautour was based at portsmouth. from there she patrolled and escorted convoys in the channel.  at some point in early 1812, the reverend george cuthbert sued lawless for "a gross assault". once the facts of the case had been established, cuthbert did not pursue the case further, even though the circumstances of the case would not admit of a proffered apology.  on 5 september 1812, vautour sailed from portsmouth chasing the 16-gun sloop , which had left three days earlier, to request her land her army money cargo at lisbon, instead of oporto. vautour arrived oporto on the 13th, but too late, so turned back, arriving lisbon on the 17th. vautour had a crew of 105; captain lawless (who was a 1st lieutenant); 2nd lieutenant soper, 4 midshipmen; her armament was fourteen 24-pound guns & 2 long nines; from journal of army lieutenant larpent. larpent wrote, "vautour", 'a
fast-sailing brig' was also known as 'vauteur' (her french name) and 'vulture' (a sloop called hms vuture was already in the navy). larpent shared the captain's windowless 10 by 12 foot cabin; the admiralty paid him £21 for the transport "of deputy judge advocate larpent to lisbon".  on 14 november 1812, vautour recaptured the brig margaret.   the same day, vautour and , lieutenant augustus baldwin, recaptured the brig peace.  on 22 january 1813 vautour sailed for the leeward islands, with the west india convoy. there she joined the jamaica station.  fate vautour disappeared in the english channel in october 1813 with the loss of lawless and his entire crew. her loss is possibly related to the wreck that month of an unknown sloop at portreath on the coast of cornwall. the admiralty did not officially pay her off until august 1814. the archeological data service has a website on the loss that allocates the location to pentreath.  notes, citations and references notes  citations  references  external links    1809 ships captured ships brigs of the royal navy maritime incidents in 1813 missing ships ships lost with all hands
major patrick hunter gordon cbe mc frse (1916-1978) was a scottish soldier and electrical engineer. he was managing director of both ai welders and cable belt.  life  he was born on 6 december 1916 in inverness, the son of samuel gordon hunter (b.1877) and his wife, clare agnes johnston from county down.  he was educated at cargilfield preparatory school in edinburgh then oundle school in northamptonshire then went to cambridge university where he graduated ma.  he next undertook military training at the royal military academy sandhurst joining the royal engineers in 1936.  in the second world war he was located at fort hahenberg and brillon near lille on the maginot line in march 1940.  in june 1948 he became an instructor at camberley staff college.  he died in a car accident on 28 march 1978 and was buried at tomnahurich in inverness.  family   in 1940 he married valerie de ferranti (granddaughter of sebastian ziani de ferranti founder of ferranti). valerie hunter gordon came to fame in 1947 as the inventor of one of the world's first disposable nappies, the paddi.  references   1916 births 1978 deaths commanders of the order of the british empire fellows of the royal society of edinburgh recipients of the military cross people from inverness royal engineers officers scottish soldiers scottish electrical engineers alumni of the university of cambridge people educated at oundle school scottish chief executives road incident deaths in scotland 20th-century scottish businesspeople
the 1933-34 sk rapid wien season was the 36th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  mitropa cup  references  1933-34 rapid wien season rapid
the following lists events that happened in 1960 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - olafur thors  events   11 march 1961 - the icelandic althing approved the agreement which expands its territorial waters to 12 nmi (22 km), following the first stage of the territorial dispute with the united kingdom known as the cod wars.  births  1 june - einar vilhjalmsson, javelin thrower 18 july - guðmundur steinsson, footballer 30 july - arni þor sigurðsson, ambassador 4 september - elin hirst, politician. 16 october - bjarni sigurðsson, footballer 13 november - jon loftur arnason, chess grandmaster 8 december - broddi kristjansson, badminton player 8 december - solveig anspach, film director and screenwriter (d. 2015) 23 december - guðmundur guðmundsson, handball player  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
olenecamptus duodilloni is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by gilmour in 1947.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1947
the europeans of the year award was established in 2001 by european voice to honour influential european citizens who have mostly affected the european legislative and policy agenda. the annual award is officially supported by the belgian prime minister guy verhofstadt. every year, senior editors of european voice and a panel of advisors from the european community select 50 people who have had most influence on the european legislative and policy agenda in the past year. the list includes european commissioners, meps, heads of state, politicians, eu functionaries, ngos, campaigners and european citizens. following a public poll, the results of which are announced at a gala dinner, the winners in different categories receive the "europeans of the year" awards.  references  external links  the europeans of the year (archived as of february 2014)  awards honoring politicians european awards awards established in 2001
kunwar singh negi (1927 - 20 march 2014) was an indian braille editor and social worker. he has transliterated 300 books into braille. his major works include bhagwan buddh ka updesh and hazrat mohammed ki vani, both being about teachings of gautam buddha and muhammad. he was presented with indian civilian awards padma shri in 1981 and later with padma bhushan in 1990.  life   negi was born in pauri, a town now in the north indian state of uttarakhand in 1927. he fought in burma as part of the indian army during world war ii. he credits the british officers to have infused compassion and discipline in him. in 1954, after india's independence from british rule, he joined the national institute of visually handicapped at dehradun where he started taking interest in braille. negi started transcribing books in various indian languages like punjabi, bengali, urdu, gujarati, oriya, marathi and also in russian. he has worked on 300 books which include sikh scriptures like sukhmani sahib and transcribed works of gautam buddha and muhammad.  negi was also active in social work for blind and was associated with bharat netrahin samaj in punjab and the national federation of blind in delhi. his various religious works were distributed free of cost through the maharaja ranjit singh international mission for gurbani braille literature. he also transliterated politician surjit singh barnala's book my other two daughters.  negi was honoured with padma shri, indian's fourth-highest civilian award in 1981 for his social work. in 1990, he was presented with padma bhushan, the third-highest award for his contributions in the field of literature and education. he was also presented with sikh gaurav award by the shiromani gurdwara parbandhak committee.  in 2003, negi underwent an operation on his prostate gland with funds received from the then uttarakhand government headed by n. d. tiwari as chief minister. in 2009, negi highlighted his financial plight in media when he could not afford an artificial cardiac pacemaker and was not being provided any help by the government. he had received incomplete treatment due to lack of funds at the gb pant hospital in new delhi. he died on 20 march 2014 at dehradun.  references   1927 births 2014 deaths scholars from dehradun recipients of the padma shri in social work recipients of the padma bhushan in literature & education braille social workers social workers from uttarakhand 20th-century indian translators writers from dehradun 20th-century indian educational theorists educators from uttarakhand
crella is a genus of marine demosponges in the family crellidae.  subgenera   crella (crella) gray, 1867  crella (grayella) carter, 1869  crella (pytheas) topsent, 1890  crella (yvesia) topsent, 1890  species   crella acanthosclera (levi & levi, 1983)  crella aceratospiculum (carter, 1880)  crella affinis (brøndsted, 1924)  crella akraleitae (brøndsted, 1932)  crella alba (vacelet, 1969)  crella albula (bowerbank, 1866)  crella atra (topsent, 1890)  crella aurantiaca bertolino, calcinai & pansini, 2009  crella basispinosa burton, 1931  crella beglingerae van soest, 2009  crella brasiliensis moraes, 2011  crella caespes (ehlers, 1870)  crella carnosa (topsent, 1904)  crella carteri van soest & hooper, 2020  crella chelifera van soest, 1984  crella commensalis whitelegge, 1906  crella compressa (carter, 1886)  crella crassa (hentschel, 1914)  crella cyathophora carter, 1869  crella digitifera (levi, 1959)  crella dispar (topsent, 1927)  crella donsi burton, 1931  crella elegans (schmidt, 1862)  crella erecta (levi, 1963)  crella fallax (topsent, 1890)  crella fristedti (dendy, 1924)  crella fusifera sara, 1969  crella gelida (lundbeck, 1910)  crella gerzensteini (swartschevsky, 1906)  crella gracilis (alander, 1942)  crella guernei (topsent, 1890)  crella hanseni (topsent, 1890)  crella hennequinae goodwin, berman & hendry, 2019  crella incrustans (carter, 1885)  crella jaegerskioeldi alander, 1937  crella linguifera (topsent, 1890)  crella mammillata (arnesen, 1903)  crella mollior topsent, 1925  crella nodulosa sara, 1959  crella novaezealandiae (bergquist & fromont, 1988)  crella papillata (levi, 1958)  crella papillosa (schmidt, 1870)  crella pertusa (t
opsent, 1890)  crella plana picton & goodwin, 2007  crella polymastia (thiele, 1903)  crella pulvinar (schmidt, 1868)  crella pyrula (carter, 1876)  crella richardi (topsent, 1890)  crella ridleyi (topsent, 1890)  crella rosea (topsent, 1892)  crella rubiginosa (schmidt, 1862)  crella schottlaenderi (arndt, 1913)  crella shimonii pulitzer-finali, 1993  crella sigmata topsent, 1925  crella spinulata (hentschel, 1911)  crella stylifera hentschel, 1914  crella topsenti (babic, 1922)  crella triplex (koltun, 1970)  crella tubifex (hentschel, 1914)  crella ula (de laubenfels, 1950)  references  external links       poecilosclerida sponge genera
local testimony is a regional photojournalism exhibition for photographers from israel and the palestinian authority, held every year since 2003 in the eretz israel museum.  the exhibition is held alongside the world press photo exhibition, presenting photographs from the field of photojournalism.  details the photographs in the exhibition are selected by a panel of judges. photographs are divided into several categories. three images are selected in each category: first, second and third place. in addition to categories, photo of the year and series of the year are chosen by the jury.  one of the categories is religion and faith, which traditionally includes photographs reflecting life of the jewish ultra-orthodox community.  the exhibition was established by dana wohlfeiler-lalkin, who has been the manager of the project since.  frames of reality local testimony established the frames of reality project in 2008 in collaboration with peres center for peace. the project is to bring together israeli and palestinian photojournalists and documentary photographers to promote coexistence and mutual understanding. the project includes workshops, meetings and lectures.  photos of the year  references  external links  interview of dana wohlfeiler-lalkin (video)  photography exhibitions photography awards photojournalism awards
gov. lucas nogueira garcez airport  is the airport serving lins, brazil.  history in 2013 the administration of the airport was transferred to the municipality of lins. previously it was administrated by daesp.  airlines and destinations no scheduled flights operate at this airport.  access the airport is located  from downtown lins.  see also  list of airports in brazil  references  external links  airports in sao paulo (state)
elim chan (; born 18 november 1986) is a hong kong conductor. elim chan has been the chief conductor of the antwerp symphony orchestra from the 2019-2020 concert season, and has been the permanent guest conductor of the royal scottish national orchestra from the 2018-2019 season.  early life  in 1986, chan was born in hong kong. as a youth, she played cello and piano, and sang in choirs. chan attended the good hope school (form one).  education  chan was a sixth-form student at li po chun united world college in hong kong.  chan began studies at smith college in the us with the initial intent of becoming a medical doctor.  following an initial experience in conducting during her second year of college, she changed her path of study and graduated with a bachelor of arts degree in music in 2009.  chan moved to the university of michigan, ann arbor for graduate studies in music. at michigan, her teachers included kenneth kiesler.  she was music director of the university of michigan campus symphony orchestra, and of the michigan pops orchestra (2012-2013). she earned her mm degree in orchestra conducting from michigan in 2011, and her doctor of musical arts in 2015.  career  in december 2014, at age 28, chan won the donatella flick lso conducting competition, the first female conductor to win the competition in its history. as part of winning the competition, she was subsequently named assistant conductor of the london symphony orchestra, for a one-year contract from 2015-2016.  she has also participated in master classes in conducting with bernard haitink.  in april 2016, norrlandsoperan announced the appointment of chan as its next chief conductor, effective in 2017, with an initial contract of 3 years.  in january 2017, she made her first guest-conducting appearance with the royal scottish national orchestra (rsno).  she returned as guest conductor with the rsno a fortnight later as an emergency substitute for neeme jarvi.  based on these appearances, in june 2017, the rsno appointed chan as its next principal guest conductor, effective 2018.  in november 2017, chan first guest-conducted the antwerp symphony orchestra.  she returned as guest conductor in antwerp in march 2018.  based on these appearances, in may 2018, the orchestra announced the appointment of chan as its next chief conductor, effective with the 2019-2020 season.  chan is both the first female conductor, and the youngest conductor, ever to be named chief conductor of the
orchestra.  personal life  elim chan is married to the dutch percussionist dominique vleeshouwers, who was awarded the dutch music prize (nederlandse muziekprijs) in 2020.  references  external links  harrison parrott agency page on elim chan  hong kong philharmonic orchestra biography of elim chan  davis united world college scholars program, page on elim chan  shadrach kabango, elim chan on how conductors conjure musical magic.  q, cbc radio, 22 december 2014  yip's children's choral & performing arts centre, oliver chou, 'hong kong conductor elim chan urges city to nurture musical talent'.  1 january 2015  1986 births living people hong kong conductors (music) smith college alumni university of michigan school of music, theatre & dance alumni 21st-century conductors (music) 21st-century hong kong musicians 21st-century women musicians women conductors (music) people educated at a united world college
is a japanese voice actor and singer affiliated with 81 produce. he won the award for best rookie actor at the 10th seiyu awards. his roles include producer in the idolmaster cinderella girls, alexander yamato in king of prism, juuza hyoudo in a3!, revolver in yu-gi-oh! vrains, zack walker in astra lost in space and brawler in akudama drive.  takeuchi is part of the musical duo amadeus with rapper lotus juice, performing under the stage name jack westwood. he is also credited under that name for his music productions.  biography  filmography  television animation  original video animation (ova)  original net animation (ona)  theatrical animation  video games  2015  the idolmaster as producer  granblue fantasy as barawa   2016 the caligula effect as shougo satake la corda d'oro as sunaga takumi elsword as ain  maplestory as shade  under night in-birth exe:late[st] as enkidu  2017 danganronpa v3: killing harmony as gonta gokuhara musou stars as oda nobunyaga super bomberman r as black bomber sengoku night blood as kanbee kuroda xenoblade chronicles 2 as wulfric (jikarao) aka to blue as aka sheenk a3! as juza hyodo  2018 fate/grand order as chiron shinen resist as trueno  2019 kingdom hearts iii as olaf replacing pierre taki arknights as rangers and matterhorn  2020 the king of fighters for girls as goro daimon bleach: brave souls as askin nakk le vaar genshin impact as dvalin/stormterror alchemy stars as barton  2021 re:zero − starting life in another world: the prophecy of the throne as salum ensemble stars! as gatekeeper rune factory 5 as murakumo neo: the world ends with you as hishima sazakuchi cookie run: kingdom as purple yam cookie  dubbing  live-action coming 2 america as lavelle junson (jermaine fowler) danger close: the battle of long tan as private paul large (daniel webber) dolittle as humphrey (tim treloar) happiest season as john (dan levy) jaws 2 (2022 bs tokyo edition) as michael brody (mark gruner) judas and the black messiah as william "bill" o'neal (lakeith stanfield) major grom: plague doctor as sergei razumovsky / plague doctor (
sergei goroshko) the matrix resurrections as berg (brian j. smith) the night of as nasir "naz" khan (riz ahmed) the suicide squad as richard "dick" hertz / blackguard (pete davidson) teenage mutant ninja turtles: out of the shadows as trevor (connor fox) tomb raider as bruce (josef altin) uncharted as samuel "sam" drake (rudy pankow)  animation encanto as mariano guzman frozen (revised dub) as olaf (replaced pierre taki after his march 2019 arrest) frozen 2 as olaf rwby as vine zeki  discography  songwriting credits  accolades  references  external links   official agency profile   1997 births living people japanese male pop singers japanese male video game actors japanese male voice actors male voice actors from tokyo singers from tokyo 81 produce voice actors 21st-century japanese male actors 21st-century japanese male singers
the terms acid egg and montejus (or monte-jus) are sometimes used interchangeably to refer to a device with no moving parts formerly used instead of a pump in order to transfer difficult liquids. the principle is that a strong vessel containing the liquid is pressurized with gas or steam, forcing the liquid into a pipe (usually vertical upwards) thereby causing flow.  when the liquid has been transferred, the pressure is released and more liquid is put in via gravity.  it is thus cyclic in operation. the same principle has been used to lift water and called an air displacement pump or intermittent gas-lift pump, and has been applied to pumping oil up from the formation. its use has largely been superseded by modern pumps, but it is still used sometimes for special tasks.  acid egg this was specifically devised to deal with the highly corrosive sulfuric acid, but was extended to other corrosive substances. it was traditionally made of ceramic (to be corrosion resistant) and spherical in shape (to withstand the pressure) thus giving its name. a cylindrical version (with hemispherical ends) was described by swindin, being 3 feet in diameter and 6 feet long, holding 40 cubic feet of acid. in principle, the vessel is part filled with liquid, which is then expelled by pumping in compressed air.  the liquid outlet is via a pipe from the top going down almost to the bottom of the vessel.  when the acid egg is emptied, connections to the compressor and the delivery pipe are closed by valves, the air pressure is vented and the vessel refilled with acid.  the cycle can then start again.  montejus a french invention used in sugar production to move the partially processed sugar liquid up a pipe to the next stage of purification.  hence the name "monte-jus" or "raise juice". unlike the acid egg, it traditionally consists of a vertical cylindrical vessel made of steel, with a pipe from the bottom turned upwards, and it is pressurized by steam.  references  pumps chemical equipment chemical industry history of sugar
bilshivtsi (; ; ) is an urban-type settlement in ivano-frankivsk raion in ivano-frankivsk oblast. between 1940 and 1963 it was the center of a raion. bilshivtsi hosts the administration of bilshivtsi settlement hromada, one of the hromadas of ukraine. its population was .  location  bilshivtsi is located at the confluence of the narayivka river and the hnyla lypa river, a tributary of the dniester. it is 3 kilometers to the east of the lvivivano-frankivsk road and 8 kilometers north of the halych train station.  history  between 1772 and 1918 it was part of austrian galicia. after the end of world war i bilshivtsi became part of  rohatyn powiat in stanisławow voivodeship, part of poland. in 1939 it was annexed by the soviet union.  bilshivtsi was occupied by german troops during world war ii from 1941 to 1944. in 1943, more than 1,000 local jewish residents were shot by german troops.  until 18 july 2020, bilshivtsi belonged to halych raion. the raion was abolished in july 2020 as part of the administrative reform of ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of ivano-frankivsk oblast to six. the area of halych raion was merged into ivano-frankivsk raion.  references   urban-type settlements in ivano-frankivsk oblast holocaust locations in ukraine
joaquin luis romero marchent (26 august 1921 - 16 august 2012) was a spanish screenwriter and film director. he directed several spaghetti westerns during the 1960s.  he died on 16 august 2012 at the age of 91 in madrid.  filmography  references  bibliography   de espana, rafael. directory of spanish and portuguese film-makers and films. greenwood press, 1994.  external links     1921 births 2012 deaths spanish film directors spanish screenwriters people from madrid
brian babilonia (born 16 september 1994) is an american cyclist. of puerto rican descent.  babilonia represented the united states at the 2016 summer olympic road race. at that moment, he was without a pro contract, and was the first puerto rican cyclist to join the road race since 1996.  palmares 2015 3rd national road race championships  references  1994 births living people people from mayaguez, puerto rico puerto rican male cyclists cyclists at the 2016 summer olympics olympic cyclists of puerto rico
raboin is an unincorporated community in wilkinson township, cass county, minnesota, united states, near cass lake and walker. it is located along state highway 371 (mn 371) near 134th street nw.  raboin is named after settler joseph m. raboin, who served as the first postmaster in the community.  the post office was established at raboin in 1911, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1936. in early years, the community hosted a store, school, and spur track on the great northern railway.  references  unincorporated communities in cass county, minnesota unincorporated communities in minnesota
flustridae is a family of bryozoans in the suborder flustrina.  references  external links       cheilostomatida bryozoan families
swan 601 is a performance cruiser/racer designed by german frers and built by nautor's swan. it was created with the intention of being a one design class following on from the successful launch of the swan 45 and had two successful seasons however it never gained enough momentum. the boats produced have continued to have considerable racing success in general fleets.  external links  nautor swan  german frers  references  keelboats sailing yachts 2000s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
the zman switch is a patented specialized shabbos clock marketed to the observant jewish market. unlike a traditional timer, it contains a pre-programmed jewish calendar through the year 2050, so that the consumer does not need to readjust the programming for sunset times or jewish holidays throughout the year.  it is manufactured by zman technologies located in new jersey and invented by yonason bloch and herbert klein.  see also   electricity on shabbat  39 categories of activity prohibited on shabbat  shabbat clock  references  external links     shabbat innovations switches
lars otto olsen (born 29 june 1965) is a danish former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links  1965 births living people danish male cyclists olympic cyclists of denmark cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from copenhagen
jedermann (a german word, whose english meaning is "everyone" or "anyone" or "everyman") may refer to:  jedermann (play), a 1911 austrian play by hugo von hofmannsthal jedermann (film), a 1961 film based on the hofmannsthal play jedermann (sibelius), 1916 incidental music by jean sibelius to the hofmannsthal play  see also everyman (disambiguation)
the von baeyer nomenclature is a system for describing polycyclic hydrocarbons. the system was originally developed in 1900 by adolf von baeyer for bicyclic systems and in 1913 expanded by eduard buchner and wilhelm weigand for tricyclic systems. the system has been adopted and extended by the iupac as part of its nomenclature for organic chemistry. the modern version has been extended to cover more cases of compounds including an arbitrary number of cycles, heterocyclic compounds and unsaturated compounds.  extended von baeyer  see also   clar's rule: polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon#physicochemical properties and bonding  references   chemical nomenclature
jalal bholana  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of jalal bholana. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, jalal bholana has total number of 219 houses and population of 1,028 of which include 548 males and 480 females. literacy rate of jalal bholana is 91.91%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 89 which is 8.66% of total population of jalal bholana, and child sex ratio is approximately  1225, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the deep sea range is an raf missile range in the outer hebrides. it has also been known as the hebrides guided weapon range and the south uist missile range.  history  the range was operated by the defence evaluation and research agency (dera), for evaluating new missiles. st kilda became scotland's first world heritage site in 1987.  the site was built in 1957 by the ministry of defence to test nuclear missiles. opposition to the construction of the range resulted in the novel rockets galore!, by sir compton mackenzie, which was made into a film, filmed on the island of barra.  resistance to the building of the range also led to the construction of the religious monument our lady of the isles.  structure it is situated in the outer hebrides on south uist. the missiles are tracked from st kilda, scotland, a now uninhabited island, which is now leased by the ministry of defence. the site is run by qinetiq, a privatised former division of the mod.  around 230 people work across all sites of the range.  see also  list of rocket launch sites  1957 in scotland  butec (british underwater test and evaluation centre) at raasay  luce bay in dumfries and galloway  raf tain on the moray firth  references  external links  hebrides missile range  1957 establishments in scotland bombing ranges buildings and structures in the outer hebrides guided missiles of the united kingdom history of the outer hebrides military installations in scotland military units and formations established in 1957 qinetiq south uist st kilda, scotland
emilio dulio (may 21, 1859 - 1950) was an italian politician. he was twice colonial governor of italian somaliland (1897, 1898-1905).  bibliography          1859 births 1950 deaths 20th-century italian politicians
villa furtado-heine is a historic mansion in nice, alpes-maritimes, france. it was built from 1784 to 1787.  it was the home of french-jewish philanthropist cecile furtado-heine, who donated it to the government for the convalescent of army officers following return of the french expeditionary force of madagascar. it has been listed as an official national monument since june 10, 1961.  references  houses completed in 1787 monuments historiques of nice
sphinx international airport  is a public airport, serving the city of giza, on the western side of cairo, egypt.  facilities the airport is adjacent to and shares some infrastructure with the cairo west air base. it is located on the cairo-alexandria desert road. the main runway (16r/34l) is  west of the cairo west runway complex. the aircraft parking ramp and terminal facilities are on the west side of the runway. the cairo west tacan (ident: bla) is located on the field. the cairo vor-dme (ident: cvo) is located  east of the airport.  in december 2020, it was reported the airport was being expanded to increase the total area from 4,500 square meters (48,400 square feet) to 23,000 square meters (248,000 square feet), helping to provide a capacity of 900 passengers per hour instead of 300. this is to accommodate an increase in passenger traffic expected as a result of the opening of the grand egyptian museum. the airport building is expected to include a travel hall with an area of 6,500 square meters (70,000 square feet), an arrival hall of 7,000 square meters, a food and beverage area of 1,000 square meters, duty-free shops, passport offices, an x-ray area and 28 check-in counters. this is in addition to a banking and quarantine area, a baggage claim area, eight passport counters, eight escalators, and a cooling plant with a capacity of 1,440 tons of refrigeration.  airlines and destinations in october 2017, it was announced that the airport will be open to commercial flights in summer 2018 and is set to start experimental operations in october 2018.  in january 2019 egyptair express launched test flights to hurghada, sharm el sheikh, luxor and aswan.  on 1 january 2020, the airport received its first international flight from jordan, operated by fly jordan. however, as of march 2021, there are still no scheduled flights to or from the airport.  see also  list of airports in egypt  transport in egypt cairo international airport capital international airport new administrative capital of egypt  references  external links   great circle mapper - cairo west ab  openstreetmap - sphinx int'l    airports in egypt transport in egypt
nemaschema collarti is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1958.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1958
the canarian independent groups (, aic) were a spanish political party based in the canary islands that existed from 1985 until its integration in canarian coalition.  history the party was founded in 1985 with the name of federation of canarian independent groups (), consisting of the union of different parties and groupings of insular scope, coming mostly from the former union of the democratic centre (ucd). on 23 april 1986 they changed their name to canarian independent groups. in 1987 it was joined by the canarian union of the centre. the members of aic were mainly centre-right and insularist political groups.  in 1993, together with the nationalist canarian initiative (ican), majorera assembly (am), canarian nationalist party (pnc) and independent canarian centre (cci) it formed canarian coalition (cc). however, in 1994, independents of fuerteventura (if) and lanzarote independents group (transformed into the lanzarote independents party (pil)) abandon both canarian independent groups and canarian coalition.  it obtained parliamentary representation in the general elections of 1986 and in the ones of 1989. it was dissolved definitively during the canarian coalition congress celebrated in 18-19 may 2005, in which all the integral parties disappeared and cc became unique party.  members the groups that were members of the party are:  tenerife group of independents (, ati)  la palma group of independents (, api)  gomera group of independents (, agi)  independents of fuerteventura (, if)  lanzarote independents group (, ail), although this group ended up leaving the organization..  election results  parliament of the canary islands  cortes generales  european parliament  references  political parties in the canary islands political parties established in 1985 regionalist parties in spain 1985 establishments in spain canarian nationalist parties
a hidden life is a 2019 epic historical drama film written and directed by terrence malick. it stars august diehl, valerie pachner, and matthias schoenaerts with both michael nyqvist and bruno ganz in their final performances. the film depicts the life of franz jagerstatter, an austrian farmer and devout catholic who refused to fight for the nazis in world war ii. the title is taken from george eliot's middlemarch, which in turn derives it from a phrase in the new testament, the epistle to the colossians 3:3: "for you died, and [now] your life is hidden with christ in god."  the film premiered at the cannes film festival in may 2019 and was theatrically released in the united states on december 13, 2019. it received critical acclaim upon release and was the final feature film to be released under the fox searchlight pictures name before walt disney studios changed the company's name to searchlight pictures on january 17, 2020.  plot austrian peasant farmer franz jagerstatter, born and brought up in the small village of st. radegund, is working his land when war breaks out. married to franziska, colloquially fani, the couple are important members of the tight-knit rural community. they live a simple life with the passing years marked by the arrival of the couple's three girls. franz is called up for basic training in the german army and is away from his beloved wife and children for months. eventually, when france surrenders and it seems the war might end soon, he is sent back from training.  with his mother and sister-in-law resie, he and his wife farm the land and raise their children amid the mountains and valleys of upper austria, cutting hay and gathering. as the war goes on, jagerstatter and the other able-bodied men in the village are called up to fight. their first requirement is to swear an oath of allegiance to adolf hitler and the third reich. despite pressure from the mayor and his neighbors, who increasingly ostracize him and his family, and from the bishop of salzburg, jagerstatter refuses. wrestling with the knowledge that his decision will mean arrest and even death, he finds strength in his faith in god, his prayers, and fani's love and support. he is taken to prison, first in enns, then in berlin and waits months for his trial. during his time in prison, he and fani write letters to each other and give each other strength. fani and their daughters are
victims of growing hostility in the village over her husband's decision not to fight. fani is eventually able to visit her husband in berlin.  after months of brutal incarceration, jagerstatter's case goes to trial. he is found guilty and sentenced to death. despite many opportunities to sign the oath of allegiance, and the promise of non-combatant work, he continues to refuse and is executed by the third reich on august 9, 1943, while his wife and daughters survive.  cast  production  development on june 23, 2016, reports emerged that the film, then titled radegund, would depict the life of austria's franz jagerstatter, a conscientious objector during world war ii who was put to death at age 36 for undermining military actions, and was later declared a martyr and beatified by the catholic church. it was announced that august diehl was set to play jagerstatter and valerie pachner to play his wife, franziska jagerstatter. jorg widmer was appointed as the director of photography, having worked in all of malick's films since the new world (2005) as a camera operator.  writing malick said a hidden life would have a more structured narrative than his previous works: "lately-i keep insisting, only very lately-have i been working without a script and i've lately repented the idea. the last picture we shot, and we're now cutting, went back to a script that was very well ordered." this makes it his first linear, plot-driven film since 2005's the new world. he added, "there's a lot of strain when working without a script because you can lose track of where you are. it's very hard to coordinate with others who are working on the film. production designers and location managers arrive in the morning and don't know what we're going to shoot or where we're going to shoot. the reason we did it was to try and get moments that are spontaneous and free. as a movie director, you always feel with a script that you're trying to fit a square peg into a round hole. and with no script, there's no round hole, there's just air. but i'm backing away from that style now."  malick obtained rights to the book franz jagerstatter: letters and writings from prison, edited by erna putz, for the film.  filming  the film began production in studio babelsberg in potsdam, germany in summer 2016. from 11 july to 19 august 2016
the production shot on location in south tyrol. locations there were the church of st. valentin in seis am schlern, the valley of gsies, the village of rodeneck, the mills in terenten, the meadows of albions in lajen, the seiser alm, the taufers castle, the fane alm in muhlbach, the puez-geisler nature park, the renaissance velthurns castle in the village of feldthurns, the franzensfeste fortress, the gardens of the bishop's hofburg in brixen and the neustift cloister.  in august 2016, reports emerged that some of the film's scenes were shot in the small italian mountain village of sappada.  post-production actor franz rogowski said in a march 2019 interview that no one knew how the film would turn out or when it would be released, considering that it had been in post-production for more than two years at that point. rogowski added that malick is "a director who creates spaces rather than produces scenes; his editing style is like that."  music the film's score is by james newton howard and features violinist james ehnes, who also performed howard's violin concerto released in 2018. it was released by sony classical records on december 6, 2019. of the score, howard said, "it is a spiritual-sounding score... terry often spoke about the suffering inherent in love, and you feel yearning, suffering and love in that piece". the score features 40 minutes of original score mixed with selected classical works by bach, handel, dvorak, gorecki, part and others. it was recorded at abbey road studios in london in one day in june 2018 with a 40-piece string section conducted by pete anthony with shawn murphy as score mixer.  not listed  henryk gorecki symphony no. 3, op. 36  lento-cantabile  release a hidden life premiered in competition at the 72nd cannes film festival on may 19, 2019. the next day, it was acquired by fox searchlight pictures for $12-14 million. the film screened at the vatican film library on december 4, 2019, with malick making a rare public appearance to introduce the film. it was released in limited release in the u.s. on december 13, 2019, followed by a wide release in january.  reception on review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of  based on  reviews, with an average rating of . the site's critical consensus
reads, "ambitious and visually absorbing, a hidden life may prove inscrutable to non-devotees-but for viewers on malick's wavelength, it should only further confirm his genius." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 78 out of 100, based on 43 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews."  peter debruge of variety writes: "whether or not he is specifically referring to the present day, its demagogues, and the way certain evangelicals have once again sold out their core values for political advantage, a hidden life feels stunningly relevant as it thrusts this problem into the light." jagerstatter biographer erna putz was touched by the film's spirituality after a private screening in june 2019, saying that malick had made an "independent and universal work". she also considered diehl's and pachner's performances to be accurate to who franz and franziska were ("franz, as i know him from the letters, and franziska, as i know from encounters").  accolades  references  external links     2019 films 2010s prison drama films american prison drama films cultural depictions of austrian men films about farmers films directed by terrence malick films scored by james newton howard films produced by grant hill (producer) films set in 1939 films set in 1941 films set in 1943 films set in austria films set in berlin fox searchlight pictures films english-language german films german drama films world war ii films based on actual events american films films about anti-fascism films about catholicism films about christianity anti-war films about world war ii anti-war films 2019 drama films
ayad hamid khalaf al-jumaili (also known as abu yahya; arabic: اياد الجميلي) is a senior leader in the islamic state of iraq and the levant (isil) and an intelligence official under the government of former president of iraq saddam hussein.  history jumaili is a former intelligence officer from fallujah under the government of former president of iraq saddam hussein. after the u.s.-led invasion, he joined the sunni insurgency and answered directly to abu bakr al-baghdadi. he is the head of amniyat (the arabic word for 'security') in iraq and syria, isil's intelligence and public security department. an iraqi intelligence spokesman announced on 1 april 2017 that he was killed along with two other isil commanders in an airstrike by the iraqi air force in the region of al-qaim. the statement described him as the second-in-command of isil and as a war minister. the us-led anti-isil coalition meanwhile said it was unable to confirm the information about his death.  references  islamic state of iraq and the levant members from iraq people of the war in iraq (2013-2017) possibly living people
the following lists events that happened in 1983 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - gunnar thoroddsen, steingrimur hermannsson  events  births  1 april - hera hjartardottir, singer-songwriter 1 april - olafur ingi skulason, footballer. 7 september - garðar gunnlaugsson, footballer  deaths 19 june - vilmundur gylfason, politician, historian and poet (b. 1948) 8 february - sigurður þorarinsson, geologist (b. 1912) 25 september - gunnar thoroddsen, politician (b. 1910)  references    1980s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
douglas gilbert lamb (born 22 may 1968) is a belizean former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people belizean male cyclists olympic cyclists of belize cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
women in business romania () is a non-profit organization based in bucharest, romania, founded in 2009 by entrepreneur alice botnarenco. the organization develops projects addressed to female entrepreneurs as well as for women working in companies, who seek to improve themselves professionally or to promote their businesses.  women in business romania is a membership-based organization that connects its members through an online platform, helping them to find other businesswomen, products or services that can aid them in their activity, facilitating access to other business events, offering information about startups and promoting success stories through interviews and articles.  projects  meet the woman!  meet the woman! is a series of business networking events started in 2010 and the longest-running project developed by women in business romania. besides the networking aspect, the events focus on one speaker at a time, a woman sharing her success story and discussing aspects that women in business are facing. some of the women who have been speakers at the events are: bibiana stanciulov - producer of topoloveni plum jam, camelia sucu - owner of class living, iconic food wine & design, virginia otel - deputy general manager at garanti leasing, violeta luca - marketing & operations director at microsoft romania (ex-ceo flanco), sonia nastase - country manager at nespresso romania, rucsandra hurezeanu - founder of ivatherm, doina costache - partner manager for global advertisers and agencies, asia pacific at google (ex-head of multiple industries at google romania), emma bizu - financial consultant showing people"s earning is a new skill by investing money for better returns. and many others.  the international women in business conference  the first edition of the international women in business conference was organized on 17 october 2013, when there were presents 19 speakers from romania, poland, switzerland, moldova, belgium and greece. the conference set out to highlight the more and more important role that women play in business as well as to discuss the realities of the business environment and seek solutions for women who want to start a business, to develop an existing one or to build a career.  the second edition of the international women in business conference is organized on 20 october 2016, in bucharest.  she decides, you succeed  "she decides, you succeed" is a project initiated by afaemme and co-funded by the progress programme of the european union. the project aims to promote gender balance in the private sector by sharing with private companies the benefits they can have when involving more
women in their economic decision-making positions. women in business romania is one of the partners in the project, and together with the women's business development agency, the  associazione donne imprenditrici e donne dirigenti di azienda, the spanish organisation of businesswomen and management, and the women's ngo's cooperation network of latvia, had the task of meeting with representants from private companies and discussing the reasons why they should encourage the access of women to economic decision-making positions.  other projects  other projects through which the organization aims to promote and develop the business environment for women are: "meet the business!", a series of events that brings the participants to a business's headquarters for networking and the opportunity to find out information about the company, "workshops", events that focus on learning important skills for a business owner through a practical and theoretical approach, and other special events such as test drives or parties for the organization's members.  partners women in business romania developed several partnerships with other organizations for women at an international level such as global summit of women, weconnect international, the association of women entrepreneurs in moldova (afam) and the association of organisations of mediterranean businesswomen (afaemme)  external links  official site  references  women's occupational organizations women's organizations based in romania
leizhou or lei prefecture was a zhou (prefecture) in imperial china in leizhou peninsula, guangdong. it existed from 634 to 1329, but between 742 and 758 it was known as haikang commandery (also translated as haikang prefecture).  the modern county-level city leizhou retains its name.  counties lei prefecture administered the following counties () through history: haikang (), roughly modern leizhou. suixi (), roughly modern suixi county, guangdong and mazhang district, zhanjiang. suixi was created in 742 by merging two counties, tiepa () and shenchuan (). xuwen (), roughly modern xuwen county.  references         prefectures of the tang dynasty guangnan west circuit prefectures of southern han former prefectures in guangdong 634 establishments 7th-century establishments in china 1278 disestablishments in asia 13th-century disestablishments in china zhanjiang
heather blitz (born december 25, 1968) is an american dressage rider. blitz won team gold and individual silver in the 2011 pan american games, and was a part of the u.s. olympic team for the 2012 london olympic games. blitz teaches annie peavy, who has been named to the u.s. paralympic team and will compete in the 2016 paralympic games.  career blitz began competing in dressage in 1994.  she rode in grand prix competitions in florida on the danish horse rambo, then moved to denmark for several years. while living in denmark, she competed across europe on another danish warmblood, otto. she won team gold and individual silver in 2011 at the pan american games. blitz has periodically taken lessons from six-time olympic rider robert dover.  blitz's competition horse since prior to the pan american games is a danish warmblood gelding named paragon, who stands  and is estimated to weigh 1,600 pounds. blitz herself bred paragon, attended his foaling, and began training him herself when he was three years old. she initially got the idea to breed him after riding his dam on a farm in louisiana and being impressed with her gaits and temperament. blitz originally intended to sell paragon when he reached maturity, but later decided to keep him and compete him herself. paragon has never been trained or ridden in competition by anyone but blitz. in 2012, blitz was part of the united states equestrian team, and competed in the london olympics.  blitz trains paralympic dressage rider annie peavy, who is scheduled to compete in the 2016 summer paralympics with her hanoverian, reno's lancelot warrior.  blitz lives in wellington, florida.  references  american dressage riders 1968 births equestrians at the 2011 pan american games living people american female equestrians pan american games medalists in equestrian pan american games gold medalists for the united states pan american games silver medalists for the united states medalists at the 2011 pan american games 21st-century american women
alex mativo  (born 21 april 1994) is a kenyan entrepreneur and fashion designer.  he is the founder and ceo of e-lab,  a company aimed at eradicating electronic waste in africa by transforming it into products for the fashion and interior design industry. he is also the recipient of the queen's young leaders award.  he has two companies. he founded nanasi  which helps businesses and brands sell on all the different social networks using a single platform.  his other company ethnic brand  is a virtual factory for fashion brands.  early life  alex mativo was born in nairobi, kenya grew up in athi-river. he attended lenana school in nairobi.  career  in 2013 mativo founded e-lab, to help solve the problem of electronic waste in his community.  in the same year his company e-lab participated in the startup open competition was listed among the global entrepreneurship week top 50 most innovative companies in the world by the global entrepreneurship week and the kauffman foundation  he is also the founder and ceo of the retail company nanasi.  enterprise and entrepreneurship   mativo has spoken to audiences across africa to share his business start-up story. notable public speaking appearances include a  tedx talk on why we should embrace design thinking at the african leadership university in may 2016 alongside the president of the republic of mauritius ameenah gurib-fakim .  he was also an attendee of the 2015 "one young world summit" in bangkok, thailand where he represented his country kenya.  mativo has developed several high impact projects through e-lab which have resulted in the eradication of 3000 tons electronic waste across africa.  his work has been featured on international media houses notably cnn, al jazeera, enca africa and the bbc.  awards   2015 dxd (disruption by design) upcoming disruptor of the year by up magazine  gew 50 2013 by global entrepreneurship week  queen's young leaders award 2016 global student entrepreneurship award 2017  references   1994 births kenyan businesspeople living people people from nairobi
the 2017 supercopa mx was a mexican football match-up played on 16 july 2017 between the champions of the apertura 2016 copa mx, queretaro, and america. like the previous two editions, the 2017 supercopa mx was contested in a single-leg format at a neutral venue in the united states. this match took place at the stubhub center in carson, california for the second straight year.   the match is normally contested by the winners of the apertura and clausura editions of the copa mx. however guadalajara, winners of the clausura 2017, also won the clausura 2017 liga mx, and thus qualified for the 2017 campeon de campeones. since guadalajara were also the supercopa mx title holders, they were replaced by america, who were the team that accumulated the most aggregate points in the previous two editions of copa mx that was not already playing in either the campeon de campeones or supercopa mx.  the 2017 supercopa mx was part of a doubleheader, which also includes the 2017 campeon de campeones, organized by univision deportes, soccer united marketing (sum), liga mx and la galaxy.  match details  see also apertura 2016 copa mx clausura 2017 copa mx  references  2017 2017-18 in mexican football
united nations security council resolution 2117 was adopted in 2013. russia abstained.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions september 2013 events
anthony richard graham (born in montreal on january 8, 1957) is a canadian businessman based in toronto, canada.  he is presently president and chief executive officer of sumarria inc.  family and education  graham is the son of francis ronald graham, jr. and renee beatrice moncel.  he married helen marie (nee. chisholm) on september 16, 1978 and they have three daughters, laura (married to taylor dixon), diana (married to patrick hamm) and marina (married to barnaby lewis). he is the brother of journalist ron graham, nephew of military general robert moncel and nephew to former politican bill graham.  graham was educated at selwyn house school and bishop's college school.  he attended the university of western ontario from 1974 to 1976.  he was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws degree from brock university in 2007.  career  graham received his early education in the investment business working during summer holidays at his father's brokerage firm oswald, drinkwater and graham ltd.  in 1976, he joined wood gundy ltd., becoming one of the youngest stockbrokers in canada.  in 1979 he moved to london england where he was appointed resident manager of levesque beaubien inc., a firm of canadian stockbrokers, dealing with u.k. and european portfolio managers investing in the canadian capital markets.  in 1983, he was appointed managing director of levesque beaubien inc. in toronto with the mandate to grow the firm's presence outside of the province of quebec.  during this time, graham served on the boards of the toronto stock exchange and the canadian securities institute.  in 1986, graham led a group of partners to purchase levesque, beaubien inc. from the then controlling shareholder and proceeded to take the firm public. following these transactions, graham became the largest shareholder of the firm.  in 1989, following the deregulation of the canadian financial service industry (note: #) the national bank of canada purchased 75% of the firm (with the balance held by graham and fellow partners) and in 1999, the firm purchased first marathon securities, inc.  and was then taken completely private by the bank and changed its name to national bank financial.  in june 2000, graham became president of wittington investments, limited, the principal holding company of the weston/loblaw group.  from 2017 to 2019, he served as vice chairman.  during his time at wittington, he has served in various different capacities including director of george weston limited (1996
- 2016), loblaw companies (1998 - 2015), chairman of president's choice bank (2000 - 2015), president of selfridges group (2003 - 2017) and chairman of choice properties reit(2017 - 2020).  graham is the chairman, president and ceo of sumarria inc., which is the largest shareholder (along with the extended graham family) of graymont limited.  graymont has production and distribution facilities for chemical lime, stone and precipitated calcium carbonate in canada, the united states, australia, new zealand, malaysia and the philippines as well as a significant investment in the largest lime producer in mexico and south america.    graham has been a director of graymont since 1987 to the present and served as chairman from 2003 to 2008.  graham has also served on the board of power corporation of canada since 2001.  he is a former director of brown thomas & company limited, garbell holdings limited, gardiner group capital, holt renfrew & co. limited, power financial corporation, scott's hospitality inc., scott's restaurants inc., sulconam inc. and victoria square ventures inc.  community involvement  the arts  since 2008, graham has served as the chairman of the ontario arts foundation  and has been vice-chairman of the council for business and the arts in canada since 2002.  graham was a board member of the shaw festival from 1993 - 1998, serving as chairman in 1995 - 1996.  he has been the founding chairman of the shaw festival theatre endowment foundation since 2002.  graham has been a trustee of the art gallery of ontario since 1993, a founding board member of luminato since 2006 and is a past board member of massey hall/roy thomson hall (1998 - 2007).  health, education and research  graham was the chairman of the charter for business of the duke of edinburgh awards in canada from 2017 - 2020.  he served on the board of st. michael's hospital from 2009 to 2019 and has served on the board of the canadian institute for advanced research (cifar) since 2002.  he served on the board of branksome hall school from 1989 - 2001, serving as chairman from 1997 - 2001.  he also served as chairman of the branksome hall foundation from 2002 - 2013.  during this time he also served on the board of the canadian education standards institute.  military  graham served as the honorary colonel of the royal regiment of canada from 2011 to 2019.  honors and memberships  in 2007, graham was awarded an honorary doctorate of laws degree from brock university.
in 1990, he was awarded the government of ontario volunteer services award.  in 1995, he was recognized by the financial post as one of canada's top 40 under 40.  in 2012 was presented the  queen elizabeth ii diamond jubilee medal.  graham is a former member of the business council of canada, chief executives organization and the world presidents organization.  he is a member and past president of the toronto club.  news articles  globe and mail - globe investor  globe and mail - report on business  globe and mail - report on business  references  see also  list of bishop's college school alumni  canadian businesspeople bishop's college school alumni 1957 births living people
lystrup station is a railway station serving the railway town and suburb of lystrup north of the city of aarhus in jutland, denmark. the station is located on the grenaa line between aarhus and grenaa. the train services are currently operated by the railway company dsb which runs frequent local train services between aarhus and grenaa as part of the aarhus commuter rail service.  references  external links   banedanmark  dsb  railway stations in denmark
enyalioides anisolepis the rough-scaled woodlizard, is a species of lizards in the family hoplocercidae. it is known from the amazonian slopes of the andes in southern ecuador and northern peru. it differs from its congeneric species by possessing scattered, projecting large scales on its dorsum, flanks, and hind limbs; a well-developed vertebral crest, with vertebrals on its neck being about three times in size compared to those between the animal's hind limbs.  references  enyalioides lizards of south america reptiles of ecuador reptiles of peru reptiles described in 2015 taxa named by omar torres-carvajal taxa named by pablo j. venegas taxa named by kevin de queiroz
in the 2016-17 season, usm bel abbes competed in the ligue 1 for the 22nd season, as well as the algerian cup.  squad list players and squad numbers last updated on 20 august 2016.note: flags indicate national team as has been defined under fifa eligibility rules. players may hold more than one non-fifa nationality.  competitions  overview  ligue 1  league table  results summary  results by round  matches  algerian cup  squad information  playing statistics  |- ! colspan=10 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| goalkeepers  |- ! colspan=10 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| defenders  |- ! colspan=10 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| midfielders  |- ! colspan=10 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| forwards  |- ! colspan=10 style=background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center| players transferred out during the season  goalscorers includes all competitive matches. the list is sorted alphabetically by surname when total goals are equal.  transfers  in  out  references  2016-17 algerian football clubs 2016-17 season
dallas joseph moore (born october 27, 1994) is an american-born naturalized albanian professional basketball player for kk partizan of the aba league and eurocup. he played college basketball for university of north florida (unf), where he was named the asun conference player of the year after both his junior and senior seasons in 2016 and 2017, respectively.  college career moore, a 6'1 point guard from st. petersburg, florida, immediately entered the starting lineup upon arriving at unf. as a freshman during the 2013-14 season, he averaged 12.5 points and 2.6 assists per game - both team highs - and was named the asun conference freshman of the year. as a sophomore, moore led the team to its first ncaa tournament berth and was named first-team all-atlantic sun. in his junior season, moore averaged 19.8 points and 6.0 assists per game and was named the atlantic sun player of the year.  following his junior year, moore declared his eligibility for the 2016 nba draft, before ultimately choosing to return to the ospreys for his senior season.  in his senior year at north florida, he averaged 23.8 points, 3.1 rebounds, 3.9 assists and 1.1 steals per game. moore finished his college career with 2,437 points, which is the most in unf history and 2nd most in asun conference history. on february 26, 2017, moore was named atlantic sun player of the year, becoming the third student-athlete in asun history to secure back-to-back asun player of the year recognition.  professional career  pesaro (2017-2018) after going undrafted in the 2017 nba draft, moore joined the denver nuggets for the 2017 nba summer league, where he averaged 9.3 points and 1.6 rebounds per game.  on july 15, 2017, moore started his professional career with the italian team consultinvest pesaro, signing a one-year deal. on october 8, 2017, moore recorded a season-high 29 points, shooting 9-of-13 from the field, along with four rebounds and three assists in a 102-95 win over reggio emilia. he was subsequently named lba round 2 mvp.  in 22 games played for pesaro, moore finished the season as the lba second-leading scorer with 18.7 points, to go with 3.7 rebounds, 2.1 assists and 1.2 steals per game.  hapoel tel aviv (2018) on august 16, 2018, moore signed with the israeli team hapoel tel
aviv for the 2018-19 season. on october 6, 2018, moore recorded 24 points in his first israeli league game, he shot 9-of-13 from the field, along with three rebounds and four assists in a 100-81 win over hapoel eilat. on november 10, 2018, moore parted ways with hapoel after appearing in six games.  auxilium torino (2018-2019) on november 20, 2018, moore signed a deal with italian team auxilium torino. on january 13, 2019, moore recorded a career-high 30 points, shooting 12-19 from the field, along with six rebounds in a 102-98 loss to pesaro. in 23 lba games played for torino, he averaged 15.9 points, 2.3 rebounds and 3.1 assists per game, while shooting 40 percent from three-point range.  nanterre 92 (2019-2020) on july 23, 2019, moore signed a one-year deal with nanterre 92 of the french lnb pro a. he averaged 14.2 points and 2.4 assists per game. moore signed a one-year extension with the team on june 16, 2020.  guangzhou loong lions (2020-2021) on october 17, 2020, moore signed with guangzhou loong lions.  kk partizan (2021-present) on july 23, , moore signed with kk partizan of the aba league and eurocup.  albanian national team on may 24, 2018, moore received an albanian passport, making him eligible for the albania national basketball team.  on july 1, 2018, moore made his first appearance for the albanian team in the eurobasket 2021 qualification game against denmark.  references  external links north florida ospreys bio realgm profile fiba profile  1994 births living people aba league players albanian men's basketball players albanian people of african-american descent american expatriate basketball people in israel american expatriate basketball people in italy american expatriate basketball people in serbia american men's basketball players auxilium pallacanestro torino players basketball players from st. petersburg, florida hapoel tel aviv b.c. players lega basket serie a players kk partizan players nanterre 92 players naturalized citizens of albania north florida ospreys men's basketball players point guards shooting guards victoria libertas pesaro players
yashpal sharma may refer to:   yashpal sharma (actor) (born 1967), indian actor  yashpal sharma (cricketer) (1954-2021), indian cricketer
mimenicodes latreillei is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
the our lady of mercy cathedral  () also called machala cathedral is a religious building of the catholic church is located in the armas central square of the town of machala, machala canton in the province of el oro in the southern part of the south american country of ecuador.  the temple follows the roman or latin rite and functions as the headquarters of diocese of machala (dioecesis machalensis) that was created on january 31, 1969 with the bull quem admodum of pope paul vi. it is under the pastoral responsibility of the bishop angel polibio sanchez loaiza.  it was built on an old cemetery and nearby is the paseo de la merced dedicated to the virgin mary. its history dates back to 1747. in 1885, 1900 and 1928 underwent considerable renovations .  see also roman catholicism in ecuador our lady of mercy  references  roman catholic cathedrals in ecuador machala roman catholic churches completed in 1747 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in ecuador
atakoy olympic pool stadium was an open-air swimming stadium in istanbul, turkey.   the 1999 european aquatics championships were held in the 50 m pool. alongside swimming, aquatic sports included diving, synchronised swimming and open water swimming.  history  sinan erdam built the stadium, as well as other olympic pools; e.g. the sinan erdam dome.  the building was destroyed in 2009, but now a bigger sports complex stands there.  references  coordinates: 40°59′13″n 28°51′20″e  sports venues in istanbul
restless blood (finnish: levoton veri) is a 1946 finnish drama film directed by teuvo tulio and starring regina linnanheimo, eino katajavuori and toini vartiainen. the film tells the story of siblings sylvi and outi, who love the same man, sylvi's husband valter. the couple's relationship breaks down after the tragic death of their child. after becoming blind, sylvi suspects valter is being unfaithful to her. she begins spying on her husband and sister outi, and gradually her mental health deteriorates with fatal consequences.  the film was shot in parallel with the swedish-language version oroligt blod.  tulio remade the film in 1953 as jealousy.  cast      regina linnanheimo  as sylvi    eino katajavuori  as valter sora    toini vartiainen  as outi kahra   h. stenroos as liisa     lauri korpela  as brauner   laina laine  as housekeeper    nora makinen  as prostitute    lida salin  as bar hostess   emma vaananen  as mother in consulting room    elli ylimaa  as aunt  references  bibliography   pietari kaapa. directory of world cinema: finland. intellect books, 2012.  external links     1946 films 1946 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by teuvo tulio finnish black-and-white films
family farm seaside, one of the top grossing mobile games developed and published by the beijing-based videogame company funplus, is a farming game available for free on both ios and android platforms, and available in 18 languages.  the game has received positive reception from the public, and according to cnet "it was ranked around 100 on apple's list of highest grossing apps on the app store, and around the 135th most downloaded free software, according to data compiled by app annie". in 2014 social times also reported that "family farm seaside has a dau/mau engagement of over 35 percent, compared to 18 percent for farmville, and 20 percent for farmville 2".  by june 2015 family farm seaside had more than 60 million active users.  gameplay starting with a small farm near a beach, players need to take care of their farms through planting and harvesting crops, feeding animals, and constructing buildings and machines. in-game items may be sold for "coins", a virtual currency.  external links official site  references  android (operating system) games ios games mobile games
a streamlined motorcycle is a motorcycle with a fairing that goes beyond a 'full' or 'dustbin' fairing, to form an aerodynamic shell to minimize drag. this helps attaining higher top speeds, as in the motorcycle land-speed record, or increased energy efficiency, as in the craig vetter fuel economy challenge.  often they are feet forwards motorcycles or have the rider in a prone position, rather than upright, to reduce the frontal area exposed to headwind.  see also motorcycle land-speed record bub seven streamliner  references  external links    official ack attack page
when i come back to you (we'll have a yankee-doodle wedding) is a world war i song written and composed by william tracey and jack stern. the song was first published in 1918 by douglas & newman music in new york, ny.the sheet music cover depicts a soldier hugging a woman with the liberty bell in the background.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music vol 2. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  vogel, frederick g. world war i songs: a history and dictionary of popular american patriotic tunes, with over 300 complete lyrics. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 1995. .   songs about marriage 1918 songs songs of world war i
money island is the smallest and most remote of five rural communities that make up downe township in cumberland county in the u.s. state of new jersey. the road that led to the development of money island was constructed in the late 1930s. in the 1940s, the first homes were constructed in the community. the community is located on the shore of the delaware bay on the southern side of nantuxent creek. its location may be described as the southwest corner of new jersey.  money island is a low-income community which has been devastated by sea level rise and hurricane sandy. local opinions have been divided regarding participation in the blue acres buy-out program, part of the new jersey department of environmental protection's process of managed retreat.   money island remains the second most important seafood landing port in southern new jersey. the money island marina and more than a dozen seafood harvesters or aquaculture businesses remain, with estimated annual sales of about $20 million. products include oysters, blue claw crabs, soft-shell crabs, menhaden, conch, eels and horseshoe crabs (for medical research).  as of june 2016 the number of full-time residents had dropped below 20, and fewer than 10 of its original 40+ houses were occupied. a partnership of non-profit organizations-including the nature conservancy, baysave association, the partnership for the delaware estuary, and rutgers university-are engaged in shoreline-stabilization research projects, attempting to arrest the erosion impact of rising waters.  references   downe township, new jersey managed retreat populated places in cumberland county, new jersey unincorporated communities in new jersey
pablo zelaya sierra (october 30, 1896 - 1933) was a honduran artist and painter. the highest national prize for honduran artists carries his name as a tribute.  biography  parents and first years pablo zelaya sierra was born on october 30, 1896 in the municipality of ojojona, francisco morazan department. his parents were felipe zelaya and isabel sierra. from early childhood, he developed his artistic interests and made his way to study at the school of fine arts in the neighboring republic of costa rica in 1918-1919.  decade in spain in 1920, zelaya sierra traveled to madrid to study art at the royal academy of fine arts of saint fernando, thanks to a scholarship from the spanish cooperation agency in honduras, thus becoming a disciple of manuel benedito and daniel vazquez diaz, one of the major spanish painters who also lived in paris beside pablo picasso, juan gris and joan miro.  during his time in europe, zelaya sierra participated in the following events and exhibitions:   national exhibition (paris, 1922)  salon d'automne and national exhibition (paris, 1924)  exhibition of the society of iberian artists (paris, 1925)  individual exhibitions salon des independents (paris, 1924)  salon of the heraldo de madrid (1930)  ateneo de madrid (1932)  zelaya sierra is also the author of an art manifesto: aiming with a pencil (1932), a significant document in understanding the art of his times.  the strong and productive ideas of zelaya sierra enabled the birth of the modern art in honduras.  death in 1932, back in his native honduras, his health began to deteriorate. he was rushed to the saint felipe hospital, where he died at the age of 36 due to a massive stroke.  work in zelaya sierra's proposal, there is a multiplicity of formal appropriations that range from the use of renaissance chiaroscuro to the concepts of the spanish painting movement of the period, and then progress into cubism. this was achieved later through his teachers benedito and vasquez diaz.  zelaya sierra assumed aesthetic conditions like gravitational core, finding no problems on focusing closely on the honduran social reality of the times. in fact, his iconography in 1932 features paintings illustrating the social and political conflicts of the times, such as "brothers against brothers", a magnificent painting in which he gathered the deep pain and the fear prevalent during one of the many guerras intestinas (civil wars) that shook the honduran country in that decade. the painting marks his way
of denouncing the harm and pain that a man inflicts upon his fellow men during a civil war. it is a moving, terrible and violent painting.  homage  the national prize for the honduran arts carries his name in his honour.  in 1991, the cultural center of spain in tegucigalpa devoted the ii anthology of the plastic and visual arts of honduras to "pablo zelaya sierra".  see also  culture of honduras  painting of honduras  art in honduras  jose antonio velasquez  maximiliano ramirez euceda  moses becerra  arturo moon  francisco alvarado juarez  carlos zuniga figueroa  references  bibliography  martinez, jose francisco. "honduran literature and his generational process" new editions university, number 28 of collection honduran letters. autonomous national university of honduras, university publisher. 1987.  1933 deaths 1896 births honduran painters people from francisco morazan department male painters
the gens iccia was a minor plebeian family at rome.  it is known primarily from a small number of individuals who lived during the first century bc, as well as a number of inscriptions from gallia narbonensis.  members  iccius, a native of durocortorum, a town of gallia belgica, who led a deputation from the town to seek an alliance with caesar in 57 bc.  on his return, he defended bibrax from hostile belgae.  this iccius was probably not of roman ancestry, but he may have obtained a roman name, perhaps from one of the iccii in caesar's army; or the resemblance may be accidental.  marcus iccius, appointed praetor of sicily by marcus antonius in november of 44 bc, shortly before antonius' departure for cisalpine gaul.  iccius, a friend of quintus horatius flaccus, who tried to dissuade him from seeking adventure and material wealth.  in 25 bc, horace addressed an ode to iccius, who was preparing to accompany gaius aelius gallus on his expedition to arabia felix.  about ten years later, horace composed an epistle to iccius, who was then legate to marcus vipsanius agrippa in sicily.  gaius iccius vaticanus, a lamp-maker at rome.  marcus iccius, the maker of a small vessel found at gratianopolis.  marcus iccius, the maker of a small vessel found at nemausus.  marcus iccius mummius, commemorated on a tall cippus from vocontiorum.  marcus iccius soterichus, named on a cippus at nemausus.  publius iccius veratianus, found on an inscription in chapel ruins from vasio.  iccius vitalis, mentioned in an inscription found in a garden at nemausus.  iccia m. f., commemorated on a huge stone at noviomagus tricastinorum.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  gaius julius caesar, commentarii de bello gallico.  marcus tullius cicero, philippicae.  quintus horatius flaccus (horace), carmen saeculare, epistulae.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  samuel birch, history of ancient pottery: egyptian, assyrian, greek, etruscan, and roman, john murray, london (1873).
corpus inscriptionum latinarum.  roman gentes
working mom parenting daddy () is a 2016 south korean television series starring hong eun-hee, park gun-hyung, , han ji-sang, shin eun-jung and . it aired on mbc every mondays to fridays at 20:55 (kst) for 120 episodes from may 9 to november 11, 2016.  cast  main cast hong eun-hee as lee mi-so park gun-hyung as kim jae-min  as joo ye-eun han ji-sang as cha il-mok shin eun-jung as yoon jeong-hyun  as park hyuk-gi  people around lee mi-so goo geon-min as kim bang-geul gil hae-yeon as lee hae-soon  people around joo ye-eun go seung-bo as cha min-ho  as ok soo-ran  as young soo-ran  people around yoon jeong-hyun go na-hee as park eun-sol  ritz electronic   as oh sang-sik   as park jin-sung  as yoo han-moo  as kim heung-bok  as kwon jeong-hoon (human resource management team's vice-chief) baek min as go jin-ho (head of disciplinary committee) n/a as deputy choi  extended cast  as park hyuk-gi's friend lee yeon-seon as yoo-ra's mother n/a as chan-ho's mother yang so-min kim bibi  kwon young-kyung choi moon-jeong gook jeong-sook kim hyun  kim mi-rim park gi-hoon baek min yeo woon-bok  cameo appearances yoo jun-sang as lee moon-han  ratings in the table below, the blue numbers represent the lowest ratings and the red numbers represent the highest ratings.  awards and nominations  references  external links       working mom parenting daddy at daum   working mom parenting daddy at naver movies   2016 south korean television series debuts 2016 south korean television series endings mbc tv television dramas korean-language television shows
iron latch is a 4.3 hectare nature reserve in eight ash green, west of colchester in essex.  the site consists of areas of species-rich grassland and ash woodland. bird's foot trefoil provides food for common blue butterflies, and other butterflies include purple hairstreaks. nightingales nest in the trees and hedges.  there is access from iron latch lane.  the woods are currently being destroyed by indiscriminate digging and remodelling of the land by cyclists using the area as a race track. they also leave large quantities of rubbish all over the woods.  references  essex wildlife trust
william philip allen  (11 november 1888 - 4 may 1958) was a british trade unionist.  born in islington, allen worked for the great northern railway from 1907, initially as an engine cleaner.  he became active in the associated society of locomotive engineers and firemen (aslef), and served as its hornsey branch secretary and on the national executive before winning election as the union's president in 1930, being re-elected in 1932 and 1933.  after his final term as president, allen was employed as the union's organising secretary.  he was promoted to assistant general secretary in 1936 before, in 1940, becoming general secretary.  at the same time, he was elected to the general council of the trades union congress.  he served in the post for seven years, and was made a commander of the order of the british empire in the 1947 new year honours.  later in 1947, allen resigned all his trade union positions to take up a position on british transport commission (btc)'s new railway executive, acting as chief negotiator with the railway trade unions.  while in this post, an lner peppercorn class a1 locomotive was named in his honour.  in 1953, he became the btc's chief of establishment and staff, the role later renamed manpower adviser, retaining his negotiation responsibilities.  he retired in 1958, shortly before his death.  references  1888 births 1958 deaths general secretaries of the associated society of locomotive engineers and firemen members of the general council of the trades union congress people from the london borough of islington commanders of the order of the british empire
the men's 60 metres event  at the 1990 european athletics indoor championships was held in kelvin hall on 3 march.  medalists  results  heats first 3 from each heat (q) and the next 4 fastest (q) qualified for the semifinals.  semifinals first 2 from each semifinal qualified directly (q) for the final.  final  references  video including the final of the race  60 metres at the european athletics indoor championships 60
grote prijs stad sint-niklaas is a cycling race held annually in sint-niklaas, belgium since 1932. it has part of the uci europe tour in category 1.2 since 2016.  winners  references  cycle races in belgium uci europe tour races recurring sporting events established in 1932 1932 establishments in belgium
berbers in the netherlands are people of berber descent living in the netherlands. berbers in the netherlands are estimated to number 367,455 people and are mainly of riffian-berber descent.  notable people oussama assaidi abdelkader benali khalid boulahrouz ali elkhattabi ahmed aboutaleb ismail aissati mounir el hamdaoui rajae el mouhandiz mohammed bouyeri mohammed benzakour abdel malek el hasnaoui zakaria labyad  see also berbers berbers in belgium moroccan-dutch moroccan diaspora  references    ethnic groups in the netherlands   muslim communities in europe
free escape (italian: libera uscita) is a 1951 italian comedy film directed by duilio coletti and starring nino taranto, ludmilla dudarova and laura gore.  the film's sets were designed by alberto boccianti. it was made at cinecitta.  cast  nino taranto as domenico errichiello    ludmilla dudarova as signora quaglia    laura gore as rosetta    nyta dover as susanna   luigi pavese as signor quaglia    carlo croccolo as pinozzo molliconi    elena altieri   guglielmo inglese   simona gori  galeazzo benti   arturo bragaglia   ciro berardi   enrico luzi as regista di fotoromanzi   gigi reder   mario lauri   nerio bernardi  references  bibliography  pasquale sorrenti. il cinema e la puglia. schena, 1984.  external links  1951 films 1951 comedy films italian comedy films italian films italian-language films films directed by duilio coletti films shot at cinecitta studios italian black-and-white films
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of the cricketers who have played for the bangladesh national under-19 cricket team. like other team lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active in the under-19 team, current players to the end of the 2015-16 season.  please to note that the list includes players who have not (yet) gone on to appear in first-class or list a cricket. these players' names are unlinked, as under-19 players only they are not complying with wp:ncric.  a  md rabiul islam robi (2014-15 to 2015-16)  abdul qayium (2014)  abdur rashid (2010-11)  abu hider (2012 to 2013-14)  abu jayed (2009 to 2012)  abu sayeem (2013 to 2013-14)  abul bashar (2003-04)  abul hasan (2009 to 2009-10)  aftab ahmed (2001-02 to 2004)  aftabul islam (1994-95)  ahsanullah hasan (1997-98)  al-amin abdullah (1989-90)  al-amin (2011-12 to 2012)  alauddin babu (2009 to 2009-10)  ali arman (2001-02)  al sahariar (1995-96 to 1997-98)  aminul islam bulbul (1989-90)  amit majumder (2007-08 to 2009-10)  anamul haque (2009 to 2012)  anisur rahman (1989-90)  anwar hossain monir (1999-2000)  arafat sunny (2003-04)  ariful haque (2007)  ariful islam (2015-16)  arman badshah (2009-10)  arman hossain (1999-2000)  ashim chowdhury (2004)  ashiqul islam (2007-08)  ashiqur rahman (2001-02)  ashiqur rahman, born 1986 (2003-04)  ashraful aziz (2007 to 2007-08)  ashraful hossain (2007-08)  asif ahmed (2009 to 2012)  aslam hossain (2010-11 to 2012)  aslam khan (2005-06)  atiar rahman (1994-95 to 1995-96)  d  dewan sabbir (2011-12 to 2012)  dhiman ghosh (2003-04 to 2004)  dolar mahmud (2005-06 to
2007-08)  e  ehsanul haque (1997-98)  enamul haque (2003-04 to 2004)  f  fahim muntasir (1997-98 to 1999)  g  gazi salahuddin (2001-02)  golam kibria (2007 to 2007-08)  golam mortaza (1997-98 to 1999)  h  habibul bashar (1989-90)  halim shah (1989-90)  hamidul islam (2007 to 2007-08)  hannan sarkar (1997-98 to 1999-2000)  hasibul haque (2001-02)  hasibul hossain (1994-95 to 1995-96)  humayun kabir (2005-06)  i  iftekhar nayem (2007)  iftikharul islam (2003-04)  imamul hossain (2009 to 2009-10)  imran ahmed (1999)  imran rahim (1999)  irfan sukkur (2009)  ishraq sonet (2004 to 2005-06)  j  jahangir alam (1989-90)  jakir ali (2014-15 to 2015-16)  jashimuddin (2011-12 to 2013-14)  javed omar (1989-90 to 1994)  jewel hossain (1995-96)  joyraz sheik (2013 to 2015-16)  jubair hossain (2010-11 to 2013-14)  k  kamrul islam imon (2003-04)  kamrul islam rabbi (2009 to 2009-10)  kazi hasibul haque (2001-02)  kazi kamrul islam (2005-06)  kazi anik (2014-15)  khaled mahmud (1989-90)  khaled mashud (1994)  kuntal chandra (1999-2000)  l  liton das (2010-11 to 2013-14)  m  mafizul islam (1994)  mahbubur rahman (1989-90)  mahfuz kabir (1999-2000)  mahmudul hasan (2007 to 2009-10)  mahmudullah (2003-04)  manjural islam (1997-98)  marshall ayub (2005-06 to 2007-08)  mazharul haque (1999)  mehdi hasan (2005-06)  mehedi hasan bappy (2013)  mehedi hasan milon (2013)  mehedi hasan miraz (2013 to 2015-16)  mehedi
hasan rana (2013 to 2015-16)  mehrab hossain senior (1994 to 1997-98)  mehrab hossain junior (2005-06)  mithun ali (2007 to 2007-08)  mobashir khan (2009-10)  mohammad al-amin (1994)  mohammad ali (1989-90)  mohammad ashraful (1999-2000 to 2001-02)  mohammad azim (2009)  mohammad kalim (1999-2000)  mohammad mostadir (1994 to 1995-96)  mohammad nazmul hossain (2003-04 to 2004)  mohammad rubel (2009)  mohammad saddam (2013-14)  mohammad saifuddin (2013 to 2015-16)  mohammad salim (1999-2000)  mohammad shakil (2007 to 2007-08)  mohammad shariful (2001-02)  mohammad sukran (2007-08)  mohammad sumon (2013 to 2013-14)  mominul haque (2009 to 2009-10)  morshed alam (1997-98)  morshed ali khan (1994 to 1995-96)  mosaddek hossain (1999 to 1999-2000)  mosaddek hossain (2010-11 to 2014)  mossabbek hossain (2014-15 to 2015-16)  munim shahriar (2010-11 to 2014-15)  murad khan (2001-02)  mushfiqur rahim (2004 to 2005-06)  mushfiqur rahman (1997-98)  mustafizur rahman (2013 to 2013-14)  n  nabil samad (2005-06)  nadif chowdhury (2003-04 to 2004)  nadimuddin (2007-08)  naeem islam senior (2003-04)  naeem islam junior (2010-11 to 2012)  nafees iqbal (2001-02 to 2004)  nahid hasan (2013-14 to 2014-15)  nahidul haque (1999 to 1999-2000)  naimur rahman (1994 to 1995-96)  nasir hossain (2007 to 2007-08)  nasum ahmed (2010-11 to 2012)  nazimuddin (2003-04 to 2004)  nazmul hossain milon (2005-06)  nazmul hossain shanto (2013 to 2015-16)  nazmus sadat (2005-06)  niamur rashid (1994-95)  nihaduzzaman (2013 to 2014-
15)  noor hossain (2009 to 2012)  nurul hasan (2009 to 2012)  nuruzzaman (2011-12)  p  pinak ghosh (2014-15 to 2015-16)  prosenjit das (2013-14 to 2015)  r  hasibul hasan rakib (unlimited time)  rahatul ferdous (2013 to 2013-14)  raihan anas (2007 to 2007-08)  rajin saleh (1999 to 1999-2000)  rakib hasan (1994)  ranjan das (1999 to 1999-2000)  raqibul hasan (2005-06)  rashidul haque (1997-98)  rezaul haque (1999)  rezaul islam (2005-06)  rifat pradhan (2013 to 2015-16)  rony talukdar (2007 to 2007-08)  rubaiyat haque (2003-04 to 2004)  rubel hossain (2007 to 2007-08)  s  sabbir khan (1997-98)  sabbir rahman (2009 to 2009-10)  saddam hossain (2009)  saddam hossain (2010-11)  saddam khan (2009)  sadik hasan (1999)  saeed sarkar (2013 to 2015-16)  saghir hossain (2003-04)  saif hassan (2014-15 to 2015-16)  saiful islam (1989-90)  saikat ali (2007-08 to 2009-10)  sajal chowdhury (1994 to 1997-98)  sajid hasan (1994-95 to 1995-96)  sajjad ahmed (1994-95)  saleh ahmed (2014 to 2015-16)  salman hossain (2010-11 to 2012)  sanjit saha (2014 to 2015-16)  selim shahid (1989-90)  shadman islam (2013 to 2014-15)  shafaq al zabir (2001-02)  shafiul alam (2001-02)  shafiul hayat (2014-15 to 2015-16)  shahadat hossain, albahani ltd (2009)  shahadat hossain (2003-04 to 2004)  shahanur rahman (2014-15 to 2015)  shahnawaz kabir (1997-98)  shahriar hossain (1994 to 1995-96)  shahriar nafees (2003-04 to 2004)  shaker ahmed (2009 to 2009-10)  shakib al hasan (2005-06)
shamsul huda (1989-90)  shamsur rahman (2004 to 2005-06)  shariful haque (1994-95)  shohag raza (2009)  sifat islam (2013-14 to 2014)  sirajullah khadim (2005-06)  sohail islam (1994 to 1994-95)  soumya sarkar (2009-10 to 2012)  subashis roy (2007 to 2007-08)  suhrawadi shuvo (2005-06 to 2007-08)  syed rasel (2001-02)  t  taibur rahman (2009)  taijul islam (2009)  talha jubair (2001-02 to 2004)  tamim iqbal (2005-06 to 2007-08)  tanveer khan (1997-98)  tanvirul islam (1997-98)  taposh ghosh (2007 to 2007-08)  tarikul hasan (1999 to 1999-2000)  tasamul haque (2009 to 2009-10)  taskin ahmed (2010-11 to 2012)  touhid tareq (2010-11 to 2011-12)  towhid hossain (1997-98)  tushar imran (1999)  w  waseluddin ahmed (2001-02)  y  yasir ali (2010-11 to 2013-14)  z  zabid hossain (2007 to 2007-08)  zahed zabed (2010-11)  zakaria imtiaz (1994 to 1994-95)  zakaria masud (2010-11 to 2013-14)  zakir hasan (2013-14 to 2015-16)  ziaur rahman (2003-04)  references  under-19
felicien georges wolff was a french organist and composer, born 21 july 1913 in elbeuf in normandy and died on 16 february 2012.  from 1930 to 1934, he was a student at the paris conservatory in the class of paul dukas (composition), marcel dupre (organ) and maurice emmanuel (music history). around 1950, he was appointed professor of piano at the conservatory of grenoble, under the direction of eric-paul stekel who strongly encouraged him in composition. the entirety of his work is published today in delatour france. he was for more than thirty years titular organist of the collegiate church of saint-andre, grenoble.  he died on 16 february 2012 at the age of 98 years.  references  french classical organists french male organists 1913 births 2012 deaths conservatoire de paris alumni people from elbeuf 20th-century classical musicians 20th-century french male musicians
an intelligence engine is a type of enterprise information management that combines business rule management, predictive, and prescriptive analytics to form a unified information access platform that provides real-time intelligence through search technologies, dashboards and/or existing business infrastructure.  intelligence engines are process and/or business problem specific, resulting in industry and/or function-specific marketing trademarks associated with them.  they can be differentiated from enterprise resource planning (erp) software in that intelligence engines include organization-level business rules and proactive decision management functionality.  history the first intelligence engine application appears to have been introduced in 2001 by sonus networks, inc. in their patent us6961334 b1. applied to the field of telecommunications systems, the intelligence engine was composed of a database queried by a data distributor layer, received by a telephony management layer and acted upon by a facility management command & control layer. this combined standalone business intelligence tools like a data warehouse, reporting and querying software and a decision support system.  the concept was reinforced in 2002 in patent application us20030236689 a1 which applied predictive quantitative models to data and used rules to correlate context data at different stages of the business process with business process outcomes to be presented to end users.  logrhythm inc. advanced the concept in 2010 by adding event managers to the end of the intelligence engine's process to determine reporting, remediation and other outcomes.  in 2016, professional service company kpmg continued to advance the concept by commercializing intelligence engines with the introduction of third party intelligence, which is differentiated from past intelligence engines in its increased use of embedded intellectual property, diversity of global data inputs and focus on predictive analytics to mitigate risk and yield cost savings.  traits as a system that combines human intelligence, data inputs, automated decision-making and unified information access, intelligence engines are an advancement in business intelligence tools because they:   integrate structured data and unstructured content in a single index  provide advanced workflow automation that can trigger multiple business processes  project future impact of data such as supply chain threats  recommend best actions / highlight opportunities for process improvement  leverage business intelligence from a variety of experts   combine human expertise with the power of technology to deliver actionable intelligence  scale data visualization capabilities with the number of users  applications  attivio active intelligence engine  kpmg spectrum intelligence engine(s)  salesforce service cloud intelligence engine   fireeye threat intelligence engine  factiva intelligence engine  parasoft process intelligence engine  see also
business intelligence (bi)  business intelligence tools   business rule management system  data mining  data science  decision management   enterprise information management   predictive analytics   prescriptive analytics  references  data management information management big data business terms business intelligence information systems
kaijumax is a comic series by two time eisner award winning creator zander cannon published by oni press. the comic is centered around an island prison whose inmates are kaiju (monsters) and guards have powers similar to ultraman. kaijumax was a nominee in the "best new series" category of the 2016 eisner awards. kaijumax is published monthly in seasons, with an indeterminate amount of time between seasons.  on the inspiration for the series, cannon has stated: "a lot of people assume that my comic kaijumax is take on godzilla, but ultraman is the real inspiration: deliriously fast paced, utterly unconcerned with continuity, and with beautiful monster designs throughout all its incarnations."  references  oni press titles kaiju
xiangyang () is a town of xiangfang district, harbin, heilongjiang, china. , it has one residential community and 8 villages under its administration.  references  township-level divisions of heilongjiang harbin
witts station is an unincorporated community in harrison township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography witts station is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
coptaspis is a genus of bush crickets in the tribe agraeciini, containing the following species:  coptaspis brevipennis redtenbacher, 1891 coptaspis crassinervosa redtenbacher, 1891 coptaspis elegans willemse, 1966 coptaspis lateralis erichson, 1842  references  external links      conocephalinae tettigoniidae genera
free the children: radical reform and the free school movement is the first book-length account of the free school movement written by allen graubard and published by pantheon books in 1972.  contents   the "free" in free schools refers to pedagogy and not tuition. in this distinction, he includes both community-controlled schools run by racial minorities and bohemian "vegetarian geodesic dome schools".  the book contains five chapters and covers a range of topics related to free schools including their philosophies, prominent examples, curricular questions, and contemplation of their usefulness to society.  graubard begins with the premise that american public education had been inadequate, as of the late 1960s, following the arguments of charles silberman and jonathan kozol but with fewer accusations. he also criticizes a. s. neill for his beliefs on authority and nature, and george dennison for his "ahistorical perspective". still, graubard believes that free schools need radical political ideology to survive and protect more than a few children.  graubard then discusses schools through the perspectives of students and teachers-their breakthroughs and breakdowns. the author contends that a school's format alone-such as its emphasis on friendly cooperation, free expression, student initiative-does not ensure an enriching education. he also explores negative aspects of free schools, such as situations in which children received little adult guidance and in which communal, consensus-based governance became overly dramatic and personally vindictive. graubard also notes how working-class and black parents did not trust consensus governance, preferring instead the clear rules that middle-class parents found too restrictive.  while schools may exhibit social maladies, graubard believes that the society and not the school is responsible for solving them. thus, reform efforts should not be limited to schools and pedagogy. efforts to "humanize the public schools", he holds, will conflict with "the fundamental social realities-the sickness of american society". graubard also acknowledges that public schools will be resistant to the changes proposed in free schools.  reception   harvard educational review reviewer found graubard's treatment of community-staff conflict to be sparse, and questioned whether the author appreciated the plight of good-intentioned but limited public school teachers.  notes  references  external links      1972 non-fiction books english-language books pantheon books books books about education democratic free schools
west dana is an extinct town in helt township, vermillion county, in the u.s. state of indiana. the site is near the illinois and indiana border.  even though the community no longer exists, it is still cited by the usgs.  geography west dana is located at .  references  former populated places in vermillion county, indiana former populated places in indiana
c ursae majoris is the bayer designation for a double-lined spectroscopic binary star system in the northern constellation of ursa major. it has an apparent visual magnitude of 5.20, which indicates that is visible to the naked eye. parallax measurements yield an estimated distance of 64.1 light years from the sun. the star is moving closer to the earth with a heliocentric radial velocity of −14 km/s.  the spectroscopic binary nature of this system was among the first 75 such discovered by the dominion astrophysical observatory in 1919. the pair orbit each other every 16.2 days with an eccentricity of 0.1. the semimajor axis of their orbit has an angle of around 2.9 mas, and the plane of the orbit is inclined to the line of sight at an angle of around 106°.  the primary component has a stellar classification of g0 v, suggesting that it is a g-type main sequence star similar to ι per. it has a mass of about 1.2 times the mass of the sun, and 2.6 times the sun's radius. the magnitude difference between the two components is estimated to be . the estimated properties of the secondary indicate that it is most likely a k-type main sequence star. the system displays no indication of chromospheric activity.  the system has been examined for evidence of an infrared excess that could indicate the presence of a circumstellar debris disk, but none has been found. at present, c uma is moving in earth's direction with a radial velocity of −14.3 km/s. perihelion passage will occur in 1.3 million years when the system comes within  of the sun. this is most likely a member of the milky way's thin disk population of stars.  references   ursa major (constellation) g-type main-sequence stars ursae majoris, c ursae majoris, 16 spectroscopic binaries 045333 079028 3648 bd+62 1058
ipsc ecuador is the ecuadorian association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organisations of ecuador
norbert bonvecchio (born 14 august 1985) is an italian athlete specialising in the javelin throw. earlier in his career, he competed in the high jump.  his personal best in the event is 80.37 metres, set in braunschweig in 2014.  international competitions  seasonal bests by year  2008 - 70.23 2009 - 70.74 2011 - 75.52 2012 - 79.22 2013 - 77.78 2014 - 80.37 2015 - 79.45 2016 - 79.21 2017 - 79.80 2018 - 70.93 2019 - 73.22 2020 - 74.64  references  external links  1985 births living people italian male javelin throwers competitors at the 2013 summer universiade athletes (track and field) at the 2013 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for italy university of l'aquila alumni italian athletics championships winners
cylindrepomus bivittipennis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1955. it is present in vietnam.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1955
the varsity is a historic apartment building located at west lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built in 1928, and is a three-story, "l"-shaped, tudor revival style brick building.  it has a limestone quoins and detailing, a tudor-arched entrance, projecting pavilions, and semi-hexagonal projecting bays.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  references  residential buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana tudor revival architecture in indiana residential buildings completed in 1928 buildings and structures in tippecanoe county, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
tmu-na theater  () is a community theater and performance center, featuring acts that veer towards the fringe and avant garde. the theater is situated on soncino road 8 in the montefiore neighborhood of tel aviv, israel, and contains four event halls. the theater's artistic director is nava zuckerman.  the theater was founded in 1987 by nava zuckerman, with the help of micky zuckerman and ilan rozental, at first as a place for fringe productions of the ensemble of the theater, which nava zuckerman had established in 1981. the "tmu-na" ensemble had a repertoire of circa 30 plays and participated in various festivals in israel and the rest of the world, among them the acre festival, the israel festival, theatronetto, the edinburgh festival, and others. the ensemble has roughly 140 performances per year.  since 1999 the place has developed into a multidisciplinary center for dance, music, literature and the fine arts as well. it annually exhibits more than 550 theater shows, around 80 dance acts, 50 literature and poetry nights and over 350 music events and more.  references  external links tmu-na theater's website interview with artistic director nava zuckerman, habama 2006 video: the german season - theaterstunde @ tmuna theater  theatres in israel theatres in tel aviv dance in israel 1987 establishments in israel
"starving" is a song by american singer hailee steinfeld and american duo grey, featuring russian-german producer zedd. the song was written by grey members michael trewartha and kyle trewartha, robert mccurdy, christopher petrosino, and asia whiteacre. it was released on july 22, 2016, through republic records and universal music group. "starving" is included on the japanese edition of steinfeld's debut extended play, haiz (2015). it serves as the record's third and final single.  background  in an interview with nylons irina grechko, steinfeld said "'starving' is a song about sort of knowing someone, or getting to know that certain someone, to the point where even though you were somebody before that person came along, they have given you this whole new outlook on yourself and on life. it's this idea that since you came into my life everything is different, and i didn't know that it could be this different since you came into my life."  critical reception katherine barner of idolator called the song "a dreamy, teen romance anthem." teen vogues isis briones said that the song "has a soft guitar start and builds up to a mellow dance tune, perfect for a low-key summer night with your best friends. thanks to the catchy lyrics and zedd's smooth transitions, you'll instantly pick up on all the words to the song after just listening to it a few times. there's no doubt this single will soon top the charts, so get on it early and add it to your playlist asap."  chart performance "starving" debuted at number 96 on the billboard hot 100 chart dated august 20, 2016. the song rose 31-24 on the chart dated october 15, 2016, making it steinfeld's highest-charting single to date (ahead of the number 30-peaking "love myself"). it reached a peak position of 12 on the chart dated december 17, 2016. "starving" is steinfeld's second top 40 single, grey's first, and zedd's fifth. on the pop songs chart, "starving" debuted at number 32 on the chart dated august 13, 2016 and reached a peak position of 5 on the chart dated january 14, 2017. the song became steinfeld's first top 10 on the chart in november 2016.  in canada, "starving" debuted at number 86 on the billboard canadian hot 100 chart dated august 27, 2016. the song reached
a peak position of 9 on the chart dated january 14, 2017, earning steinfeld her first top 10 single in that country.  the song also charted well internationally, earning steinfeld her first top 10 on multiple record charts. "starving" peaked at number 5 in australia, number 8 in denmark, number 8 in ireland, number 8 on the netherlands' dutch top 40 chart, number 5 in new zealand, number 3 in scotland, and number 5 in the united kingdom.  music video a music video directed by darren craig was released on september 27, 2016. it features steinfeld dancing with four shirtless male back-up dancers, as well as a cameo appearance by grey.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  2016 songs 2016 singles republic records singles island records singles hailee steinfeld songs zedd songs songs written by asia whiteacre
the 2017 caf super cup (officially the 2017 total caf super cup for sponsorship reasons) was the 25th caf super cup, an annual football match in africa organized by the confederation of african football (caf), between the winners of the previous season's two caf club competitions, the caf champions league and the caf confederation cup.  the match was played between mamelodi sundowns of south africa, the 2016 caf champions league winners, and tp mazembe of the democratic republic of the congo, the 2016 caf confederation cup winners. it was hosted by mamelodi sundowns at the loftus versfeld stadium in pretoria on 18 february 2017.  mamelodi sundowns defeated tp mazembe 1-0 to win their first caf super cup.  teams  venue  format the caf super cup was played as a single match, with the caf champions league winners hosting the match. if the score was tied at the end of regulation, extra time would not be played, and the penalty shoot-out would be used to determine the winner (caf champions league regulations xxvii and caf confederation cup regulations xxv).  match  details  prize money the winners would receive $100,000 usd in prize money while the runners-up would receive $75,000 usd.  see also 2016 caf champions league final 2016 caf confederation cup final  references  external links total super cup 2017, cafonline.com  2017 super csc csc february 2017 sports events in africa
the veskanda c1 (more commonly known as just "veskanda") is a one-off, australian designed and built, mid-engined closed top racing car built in 1985 to cams group a sports car specifications. powered by a chevrolet v8 engine, the car is generally regarded as the fastest sports car ever built in australia and as of 2016 remains one of australia's fastest  race cars.  concept in december 1984, australia held its first ever fia world championship motor racing event, a 1000 km world endurance championship event at melbourne's sandown raceway (pre-dating the 1985 australian grand prix formula one race in adelaide by 11 months). one of the spectators at the event was adelaide based australian sports car championship competitor and professional photographer bernie van elsen who was inspired to build an australian group c sports car. at the time it was to be the first of three wsc races at sandown, but the 1985 and 1986 races which van elsen planned to enter with the car were eventually canceled.  build van elsen commissioned adelaide based engineering firm k&a engineering run by dale koennecke (a former engineer for garrie cooper's ansett team elfin) and harry aust to build a ground effect racing sports car that not only complied to cams group a rules but also to the fia's group c rules while also being compliant to the american imsa gt championship regulations. k&a were already prominent in australian motor racing having rebuilt john briggs' rapid dekon chevrolet monza which had raced in the national sports sedan and gt championships during the early 1980s, and most notably the don elliot owned alfa romeo alfetta gtv (originally powered by a repco holden v8 and later a 5.0 and 6.0 litre chevrolet) that tony edmonson drove to win the 1980 and 1981 australian sports car titles.  van elsen purchased an old lola t400 f5000 car to use its suspension, transmission and  chevrolet v8 engine which produced approximately . the veskanda also featured an aluminum monocoque and a porsche 956 style full width rear wing (a small front wing was also used when extra downforce was needed), and to comply with the group c and imsa gtp regulations featured the pedal box behind the front axle. the car was completed with a full fibreglass body.  the car, named the veskanda (for van elsen special k and a), was the second closed top, ground effect racing sports car built in australia following on from the romano
we84 designed and built by queensland based kaditcha owner barry lock in 1982. the romano, which started life named the kaditcha k583, was powered by a, ex-mclaren cosworth dfv formula one v8 engine and had dominated the 1984 australian sports car championship in the hands of its owner bap romano (van elsen had finished 28th in the championship driving a bolwell nagari). by the time the veskanda was debuted in 1985, romano had upgraded from the 3.0 l cosworth engine to a 3.9 l cosworth dfl v8 engine developed for sports car racing.  racing  1985 the veskanda was completed by june 1985 and van elsen enlisted the services of 1984 and 1985 cams gold star winner john bowe to drive the car in the 1985 australian sports car championship. after a test crash at the adelaide international raceway (caused by wheel failure) put back the cars debut by two months, bowe debuted the car in round 4 of the series at air. bowe would take his first win in the series in the next round at calder park in melbourne, easily defeating the previously dominant kaditcha chevrolet of chris clearihan (the eventual series champion) and the lola t610 chevrolet of terry hook. bowe's late series run would see him finish 7th in the championship.  1986 for the 1986 championship, cams lifted the engine capacity limit for over 3 litre cars from  to . van elsen, along with most other chevrolet v8 runners, took advantage of the new rules and replaced the 5.0 litre v8 with the more powerful () chevrolet 350 (5.8 litre) v8. like most chevrolet users in the championship, van elsen chose the 5.8 litre engine rather than a 6.0 litre engine due to the fuel limit per race imposed by cams (bringing the championship in line with the fia's wsc regulations). with the new power plant in the veskanda, bowe would completely dominate the 1986 ascc. he scored pole position at all 5 rounds, won all 7 races that made up the championship and set fastest lap in each race (all class lap records), including outright circuit records at calder park and the fast surfers paradise international raceway.  bowe finished the championship with a maximum 120 points, 34.5 points clear of second placed terry hook's lola t610 chevrolet and 42.5 clear of reigning champion chris clearihan driving his kad
itcha chevrolet. as of august 2016, bowe's outright lap record at the 2.280 km (1.417 mi) calder park circuit (52.69) has yet to be beaten, while his record lap at the 3.219 km (2.000 mi) surfers paradise circuit (1:04.3) was not beaten by the time the circuit closed in 1987.  1987 bowe and the veskanda were again expected to dominate the 1987 australian sports car championship which was only run over 3 rounds after the 3 final rounds were canceled due to a lack of entries (which some blamed on the veskanda's dominance). however, engine problems in the wet opening round at calder park meant winning back to back titles was a long shot. bowe would bounce back in rounds 2 and 3 at amaroo park and sandown and would eventually finish 2nd in the championship, 19 points behind andy roberts in his self-designed roberts sr3 powered by a 1.6 litre ford engine. under cams point scoring rules which gave extra points for lower capacity cars finishing in outright positions, roberts scored more points (27) for finishing 2nd at amaroo than bowe who scored 25 points for winning the race. this and finishing in 4th place in the opening and final rounds allowed roberts to claim the championship.  bowe's win at amaroo park also saw him set the circuit's outright lap record with a 44.36 second lap. this time would remain the outright lap record for the circuit until it closed in 1998.  1988 with john bowe moving to drive the higher profile (in australia) group a touring cars full-time in 1988, van elsen did not enter the veskanda in the 1988 australian sports car championship which (as of 2016) would prove to be the final australian sports car championship ever run. the car did run in some local south australian based sports car and sports sedan races through the year including being driven by noted adelaide sports sedan racer mick monterosso who set the short circuit lap record in the car at the adelaide international raceway.  after the canceled 1985 and 1986 world sportscar championship races (and a rumoured wsc race at surfers paradise in 1986 which eventually fell through), sandown in melbourne was again to host the final round of the 1988 world sportscar championship. unlike the 1984 race, the fia did not allow australian sports cars and sports sedans to enter the event as they did not conform to the wsc regulations. however, as
his car did comply to the regulations, van elsen entered the veskanda and again enlisted john bowe to drive. bowe was partnered in the event, the 360 km of sandown park by his touring car teammate and boss, reigning (and then 4 time) australian touring car champion dick johnson who had driven in the 1984 race driving a similarly powered (6.0 l) chevrolet monza.  for the event, the veskanda was upgraded to a 6.0 l chevrolet v8 engine. against the world's leading sports cars including the 7.0 l v12 powered jaguar xjr-9's from tom walkinshaw racing, the turbocharged 5.0 l mercedes-benz v8 powered sauber c9's and the porsche 962's, bowe qualified the car in a credible 8th place with a time of 1:35.510, though he was some 6.89 seconds behind the pole winning sauber c9 of frenchman jean-louis schlesser (bowe's time was 2.89 seconds faster than the fastest australian qualifier in the 1984 race, alfredo costanzo in the romano cosworth). bowe and johnson would eventually finish in 8th place, 6 laps behind the schlesser / jochen mass sauber mercedes but were later disqualified for exceeding the fuel allowance limit (ironically giving johnson his second wsc dq in two races as the monza he drove in 1984 had been disqualified for receiving outside assistance from the track marshals).  with cams closing the australian sports car championship following 1988 and the sandown world championship race again proving to be a one-off, the 1988 360 km of sandown park would prove to be the veskanda's final competitive race.  post racing in the following years, the veskanda remained dormant until it was purchased by former sports sedan racer john briggs who restored the car. it make a welcome on-track return at the historic sandown meeting in 2007 (with what briggs described as a "very tired" 5.8 l v8 engine installed). brigg's later got the chance to run it against other historic sports cars (including the porsche 956) at the phillip island classic meeting in 2011.  the veskanda is currently owned and was driven in classic sports car events in europe (including the very wet le mans legend race in 2012 where the 6.0 litre veskanda chevrolet attained the top speed on the mulsanne straight with  on its way to 8th place) by western australian driver/
enthusiast paul stubber. driving in the group c - c1 historic sports car series which raced at such tracks as le mans, silverstone, donington, nurburgring, imola, paul ricard and spa-francorchamps, stubber finished in 10th place in 2012 and 5th place in 2013.  the , 6.0 l chevrolet v8 currently in the veskanda was built by kre race engines in queensland. kre are better known in australia as engine builders for both v8 supercars as well as a number of australia's top sprintcars.  race wins  overall  australian sports car championship - 1985 (x1), 1986 (x7), 1987 (x2)  series wins  australian sports car championship - 1986  references  cars of australia 1980s cars group c cars
alycaeus is a genus of land snails with a gill and an operculum, terrestrial gastropod mollusks in the family cyclophoridae.  species  species within the genus myxostoma include:   myxostoma messageri bavay & dautzenberg  myxostoma petiverianum (wood, 1828)  references  external links  cyclophoridae
the 1939 central michigan bearcats football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1939 college football season. in their third season under head coach ron finch, the bearcats compiled an 8-1 record, shut out six opponents, and outscored their opponents by a combined total of 167 to 40. the team's sole loss was by a 20-7 score to gus dorais' 1939 detroit titans football team.  schedule  references  external links  1940 chippewa yearbook (pages 94-95)  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan bearcats football
aditi bhatia (born 29 october 1999) is an indian actress and model known for playing ruhi bhalla in star plus's yeh hai mohabbatein.  early life and education bhatia completed her intermediate studies from the maharashtra state board of secondary and higher secondary education in 2018.  career bhatia started off her career as a child actor, having featured in the advertisements followed by various films like vivah, shootout at lokhandwala, the train, chance pe dance and sargoshiyan.  in 2015, bhatia played bubbly taneja in zee tv's tashan-e-ishq. from 2016 to 2019, she portrayed adult ruhi bhalla in star plus's ye hai mohabbatein after ruhanika dhawan. she also participated in colors tv's comedy nights bachao taaza. in 2018, she joined comedy circus. in 2019, bhatia appeared in colors tv's khatra khatra khatra.  filmography  films  television  music videos  references  external links      1999 births living people indian television actresses 21st-century indian actresses
outstanding (spanish: sobresaliente) is a 1953 spanish comedy film directed by luis ligero and starring miguel ligero and rosita yarza.  the film's sets were designed by teddy villalba.  cast  valeriano andres  manuel arbo  rafael arcos  ricardo b. arevalo  pedro pablo ayuso  julian balbuena  xan das bolas  josefina carreras  juan cazalilla  manuel r. cuevillas  juan cordoba  mercedes duval  alfonso estela  jose franco    victoria herrera  maria antonia jimenez  arturo calderon de la barca  miguel ligero  luis lucas  manuel luna hijo  juana manso  jose maria martin  pablo muniz   encarna paso   blanca pozas   ines perez indarte   olimpia raga as dance couple    vicente raga as dance couple    alberto romea   carlos rufart   mary serra   ana de siria   alicia torres   jose maria uribarri   anibal vela hijo   rosita yarza  references  bibliography   mario gallina. de gardel a norma aleandro: diccionario sobre figuras del cine argentino en el exterior. ediciones corregidor, 1999.  external links     1953 comedy films spanish comedy films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films spanish black-and-white films
the cayey bridge, also known as puente de cayey, is an iron lateral lattice girder bridge in puerto rico that was built in 1891. it brings puerto rico highway 15 over the guamani river.  it is an extremely rare example of such a bridge in the united states or its territories. puerto rico has the only bridges in the united states or its territories built with this technology.  the bridge was fabricated by the belgian firm nicrisse & decluve.  the girder bridge has two independent spans.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1995.  gallery  see also  arenas bridge, another nicaise et delcuve bridge in puerto rico.  references  external links  road bridges on the national register of historic places in puerto rico bridges completed in 1891 national register of historic places in guayama, puerto rico
rene gerber (29 june 1908; travers, switzerland - 21 october 2006; bevaix) was a swiss composer. a student of paul dukas and nadia boulanger, among others, he taught at the college  latin (neuchatel) and became the director of the conservatoire de musique de neuchatel.  an exponent of neoclassicism and "french clarity", his compositions follow traditional forms. he composed symphonic music (including the orchestral suite "the old farmer's almanach"), 15 concertos, chamber music, vocal music, piano music, a work for organ, two operas inspired by shakespeare plays (romeo and juliet, midsummer night's dream).  references  20th-century classical composers swiss composers swiss male composers 1908 births 2006 deaths 20th-century male musicians
olenecamptus nubilus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by karl jordan in 1904.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1904
hot flash havoc is a feature-length documentary film focused on the female medical condition menopause.  the film, narrated by goldie hawn, describes the journey through perimenopause, menopause and into post-menopause by examining in-depth personal experiences of women and featuring relevant perspectives by medical experts. presented by iron rose films, it is directed by marc bennett, produced by heidi houston and gary jaffe, written by marnie inskip, and edited by gary jaffe.  houston's inspiration for the film came after three years of battling a range of health issues related to menopause and its precursor, perimenopause. there are currently over 1 billion women in menopause and over 1.5 billion women in perimenopause. the women interviewed in the documentary talk about their sex lives with candor and humor. the film addresses the use of hormone therapy to treat the symptoms of menopause and confronts the 2002 women's health initiative study that led women to forgo estrogen-replacement medications and, in some cases, jeopardize their health.  the documentary was selected for several film festivals around the united states including the aspen film festival, the film festival of colorado, fort lauderdale international film festival, gig harbor film festival, port townsend film festival, la femme film festival, the unmentionables film festival of nyc, and docmiami international film festival, where it was nominated for the best documentary (contemporary issue) award. hot flash havoc won the aasect award for 'best audio visual for sexual health' from the american association of sexuality educators, counselors and therapists in 2011. the film aired nationwide on pbs in 2016.  references  external links  hot flash havoc official site  american documentary films american films english-language films 2012 films
san nicolao is an architecture, roman catholic parish church located in the town of borgiallo in the metropolitan city of turin, region of piedmont, italy.  history a church at site, of medieval construction was replaced by the present church in 1863. the romanesque architecture campanile, likely from the 11th century still remains. the stone tower has traces of mullioned windown, now closed and a closed arcade. the sober facade of the church has two heavy columns; the interior layout is of a greek cross tre navate, con five altars. in the choir is an altarpiece depicting santi nicolao e giorgio (1834) by giorgio cigliana (painter).  references  churches in the province of turin 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy roman catholic churches completed in 1863
francois-michel-chretien deschamps (1683, near troyes - 10 november 1747, paris) was an 18th-century french playwright.  a cavalry lieutenant, later employed in finance, deschamps wrote several tragedies, of which one, caton d'utique (1715), was successful; the others - antiochus et cleopatre (1717), artaxerxes (1735), meduse (1739) - were not.  deschamps also wrote recherches sur le theatre francais (1735, 3 vol. in-8°).  sources   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des litteratures, paris, hachette, 1876, (p. 613)  external links  francois-michel-chretien deschamps on data.bnf.fr  18th-century french dramatists and playwrights people from troyes 1683 births 1747 deaths
cardigan is a lost 1922 american silent revolutionary war historical drama film directed by john w. noble and starring william collier, jr. it was adapted for the screen by robert william chambers from his own 1901 novel cardigan.  plot as described in a film magazine, two years before the start of the american revolutionary war, michael cardigan (collier), a young irishman who is ward of the english governor, is in love with felicity warren (carpenter), who is known as silver heels. captain butler (pike) is also a suitor for her hand. cardigan is sent to deliver a message to a distant point but is betrayed by captain butler, and almost meets death by being burned at the stake for the murder of the children of chief logan (montgomery). a runner saves him and cardigan is later admitted to the secret councils of the minutemen. he hears patrick henry (loeffler) utter the words, "give me liberty, or give me death!", and sees john hancock (willis) sign the declaration of independence "large so that the king may read it." there follows the ride of paul revere (hume) and the battles of lexington and concord and the retreat of the british, which follow with the splendid climax of the film.  cast william collier, jr. as michael cardigan betty carpenter as silver heels thomas cummings as sir william johnson william pike as captain butler charles graham as lord dunmore madeleine lubetty as marie hamilton hattie delaro as lady shelton louis dean as sir john johnson colin campbell as the weazel jere austin as jack mount frank montgomery as chief logan eleanor griffith as dulcina dick lee as quider j. w. johnston as colonel cresap (credited as jack johnston) florence short as molly brandt george loeffler as patrick henry william willis as john hancock austin hume as paul revere  see also the heart of a hero (1916) america (1924)  references  external links  1922 films english-language films american silent feature films american films films directed by john w. noble lost american films films based on american novels films based on works by robert w. chambers american revolutionary war films american black-and-white films films set in the 1770s 1920s historical drama films american historical drama films 1920s war drama films american war drama films 1922 lost films lost war drama films 1922 drama films cultural depictions of john hancock cultural depictions of patrick henry cultural depictions of paul revere
grigoris grigoriou (1919-2005) was a greek screenwriter and film director.  selected filmography  red cliff (1949)  storm at the lighthouse (1950)  bitter bread (1951)  the big streets (1953)  references  bibliography   vrasidas karalis. a history of greek cinema. a&c black, 2012.  external links     1919 births 2005 deaths film people from athens greek screenwriters greek film directors 20th-century screenwriters
david or dave adamson may refer to:  david b. adamson (1823-1891), farm implement manufacturer and inventor in adelaide, south australia  david r. adamson (1923-2011), royal canadian air force officer  dave adamson (australian footballer) (1874-1914), australian rules footballer  dave adamson (english footballer) (born 1951), english footballer
dominic raacke (born 11 december 1958) is a german actor and screenwriter. he is best known for his performance as till ritter in tatort. he appeared in more than seventy films since 1981.  selected filmography  references  external links   1958 births living people german male film actors german male television actors 20th-century german male actors 21st-century german male actors german screenwriters german male screenwriters people from hanau film people from hesse
antonia rebecca caroline romeo (nee rice-evans; born 20 october 1974) is a british civil servant. she is currently serving as the permanent secretary at the ministry of justice and clerk of the crown in chancery. she was the permanent secretary at the department for international trade and before that, the british consul-general in new york for the foreign and commonwealth office and concurrently director-general for economic and commercial affairs in the usa.  early life and education  romeo was born on 20 october 1974 in london, england, to peter rice-evans and catherine rice-evans. her mother worked full-time as a professor of biochemistry. she was educated at north london collegiate school and then westminster school. romeo's undergraduate education at brasenose college, oxford, culminated in her earning an ma in philosophy, politics and economics.  career  in 1996 romeo joined the strategic consultancy firm oliver wyman where she worked for three years. in 1999 romeo left the firm and earned an msc in economics from the london school of economics.  joining the civil service in 2000, romeo applied for a one-year temporary contract as a professional economist in the lord chancellor's department.  in a 2016 interview with management today romeo stated that at the time she "barely knew what the civil service did."  in 2004, returning to work after the birth of her first child, romeo became the head of the information rights division within the new department for constitutional affairs, in charge of freedom of information and related government policies.  in 2006, romeo became principal private secretary to the lord chancellor - initially charles falconer, then from 2007 jack straw.  in 2008, romeo transferred to the foreign and commonwealth office as the director of whitehall liaison department, responsible for the fco's relations with intelligence agencies and other government departments. she left the role in 2010.  cabinet office following the 2010 united kingdom general election and the subsequent formation of the cameron-clegg coalition, romeo transferred to the cabinet office as the executive director in the new efficiency and reform group under francis maude. the group was responsible for reforming the government's governance and board model, as well as working with businesses.  ministry of justice in 2011, after 18 months at the cabinet office, romeo moved back to the ministry of justice, taking on the role of director general, transformation. romeo was made responsible for reform and savings programmes, strategy, digital services, communications, group hr and group estates. two years later, romeo changed role to director general, criminal justice, taking over from helen edwards. romeo was responsible
for all criminal justice policy and major programmes, romeo also delivered a 2.5 year, £1bn programme to reduce reoffending among ex-offenders. romeo left the role in february 2015 and was succeeded by indra morris.  cabinet office - economic and domestic affairs secretariat during the 2015 election romeo took on the role of director general at the economic and domestic affairs secretariat and was responsible for delivering the prime minister's top policy priorities. her work involved coordinating policy advice to the prime minister and the cabinet, oversight of the implementation unit, and the operation of the implementation task forces.  romeo later described this as her "dream job."  after nine months she moved with her family to new york. romeo later said that the cabinet secretary jeremy heywood had asked her to stay in the civil service, and encouraged her to take on a role in new york as the government's envoy to the tech sector. before undertaking the role romeo attended columbia university in new york where she completed the advanced management programme.  special envoy to us technology companies from october 2015 to 2016 romeo served as the government's special envoy to the u.s. technology companies. the formal title was "her majesty's government's envoy to the united states' communications service providers". in this role she worked with the us-based technology firms across prosperity, security, and regulatory issues.  her majesty's consul general in july 2016, romeo was appointed her majesty's consul general in new york, replacing danny lopez. aged forty-one, romeo was the first woman to hold the position in its two-hundred-and-thirty-one year history.  in addition to her duties as consul general, romeo was given the additional role of director general economic and commercial affairs usa, under the auspices of uk trade & investment. as dgeca usa, romeo's responsibilities included oversight of the north american operations of the foreign commercial arm of the uk government.  in a talk given to global citizen magazine in october 2016, romeo said that following the brexit vote, the uk was no less committed to its international standing than it was before. "we want to become more globally outward facing," she told the room. "britain isn't turning in on itself." asked about xenophobia rhetoric used in the brexit campaign romeo replied that the government "thinks xenophobia and hate crime are completely unacceptable." she added: "we want to be engaged and tolerant at home."   romeo left the role as director general economic and commercial affairs usa in march 2017, after nine months.  department for
international trade in january 2017 romeo was appointed as permanent secretary of the department for international trade. her first day was on 27 march 2017, just two days before article 50 was triggered, a major step in the uk's exit from the european union. romeo's team was tasked with ensuring that the uk was prepared to leave the eu on 29 march 2019. during that time, they developed and published a temporary tariff regime, negotiated vital continuity agreements, and secured continued participation in the gpa to ensure uk businesses could continue to bid for public sector contracts globally worth more than £1.3 trillion per year. at dit romeo was in charge of trade policy, trade negotiation and market access arrangements with countries outside the eu, global trade promotion and finance, and inward and outward business investment.  #dataisgreat campaign in the course of her duties as director general economic and commercial affairs, romeo and her staff had a number of contacts with british tech company cambridge analytica. the company was keen to expand in the us following its success on the trump campaign. romeo met with executives and as a result of the meeting her subordinates invited the company to take part in a potential spin-off of the "great campaign" titled "#dataisgreat". the spin-off campaign was never launched.  return to the ministry of justice in january 2021 romeo moved back to the ministry of justice as permanent secretary.  other interests as the civil service's gender champion, one of romeo's first roles was to set up the gender equality leadership group, a group of director general level gender champions from all departments.  board memberships romeo is president of the whitehall choir, an amateur choir in london.  she is also a member of the civil service board. she is a trustee of the donmar warehouse theatre, and the john browne charitable trust. from 2016 to 2021 romeo was a member of the international advisory board of british american businesses (bab).  personal life she married john romeo, a managing partner in charge of north america for oliver wyman, and has three children.  references  external links   site of the british consulate-general in new york  romeo's twitter account  living people 1974 births people educated at north london collegiate school people educated at westminster school, london alumni of brasenose college, oxford british diplomats british civil servants british consultants place of birth missing (living people) permanent under-secretaries of state for justice
burelli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  guglielmo burelli (born 1936), italian footballer miguel angel burelli rivas (1922-2003), venezuelan lawyer, diplomat, and politician  italian-language surnames
franck lepage is one of the founder of workers' co-operative of popular education 'le pave' (self-disbanded in 2014). an activist of popular education, he was until 2000, managing director of programmes in community centers and research specialist with 'institut national de la jeunesse et de l'education populaire'.  by telling the story of christiane faure (the first ever director of popular education in france in 1944), he criticizes vividly the role of culture and arts in our society in a conference called inculture(s) 1 - l'education populaire, monsieur, ils n'en ont pas voulu..., (inculture(s) 1 - popular education, sir, they did not want any of it...), he played on stage in a « conferences gesticulees » (a new concept of gesticulate conference), that became more and more popular from 2006 to 2014. many people were to follow then on different subjects.  in 2010, under the same format conference/one-man-show, franck lepage started inculture(s) - 2, in which he deals with teaching. then inculture(s) 5 with gael tanguy, on social protection, based on the theorytical work of bernard friot. with the developing network of workers' co-operatives of popular education, especially 'la grenaille', le pave of rennes, l'orage of grenoble, le vent debout of toulouse and l'engrenage of tours, he helps them in creating other gesticulate conferences. about a hundred conferences are then created by the end of 2014.  the self-disbandment of le pave in december 2014, leads to co-found a new structure of political popular education « l'ardeur » (blazing heat) with a  new group of radicalist gesticulating conference folks. created in 2015 and focused on trade unionism, and see many new conferences and also the creation of activist workshops.  biography born in paris on the 17th november 1954. he went to sciences po, failed to get in year 2 but took up oriental languages and law, and turned to pedagogy.  teacher for youths with learning difficulties in haute-savoie in 1974, he discovers the social and cultural activities in community centers in 1975 and starts working within the department of social and cultural activities, and science of education at centre universitaire experimental de vincennes - a free, revolutionary and open university in vincennes (paris 8) - in 1977
. the teaching is practical and freestyle in order to rethink the whole of capitalism's institutions.  he then stopped teaching to take up theatre in 1980, at l'universite de paris 8 (vincennes in saint-denis). he found his own theatre company in 1985. then he works for federation francaise des maisons des jeunes et de la culture in 1987 and for the first time he hears about popular education, without anybody being able to explain to him the concept.  it is in that moment, by trying to take up the cultural and social problems of the youth and the community of community centres to the culture and arts ministry, that he realises the violence of the symbolic division of culture and social affairs in france. he then, with help from others, put a theory in place and a definition of what is popular education. he writes a report years later in 1994 to the education ministry about the importance of this subject. not much is done, that is why he went on to create his own popular education network.  in 2007, foundation with five other members of la scop d'education populaire et transformation sociale le pave.  in 2012, he defines himself as a political activist: "i am a political activist, not an artist. [...] artist, is a social status. but the system refuse to see me as an activist". "i'm a « french comedian ». art and culture destroy politics.  he quits scop le pave in april 2012 in order to fully train people of the networks, especially with la grenaille.  publications  report on popular education or labour in culture in the political and social transformation context, 2000, ministry report for marie-george buffet (then minister of youth affairs and sports (france)).  « from popular education to the enslavement by "culture & arts", le monde diplomatique, mai 2009   popular education, a utopia to become, ed. les liens qui liberent, 2012  bibliography  2007 : incultures - tome 1, l'education populaire, monsieur, ils n'en ont pas voulu... ou une autre histoire de la culture, cerisier (editeur)   participation au livre noir de l'animation socioculturelle, editions l'harmattan, 2005  participation a l'ouvrage collectif altergouvernement, paru aux editions le muscadier, 2012: franck lepage s'y incarne en ministre de la culture de l'altergouvernement, un gouvern
ement fictif compose de 18 citoyens, non politiciens de metier, chacun reconnu pour son engagement dans son domaine.  references  external links  interview juin 2009  radio daniel mermet - france inter 2010 "pour une education populaire" "pour une education populaire"  daniel mermet - france inter 2012 " le printemps francais"  daniel mermet - france inter 2013. "trois reacs a la fiac" "trois reacs a la fiac"  interview en video, janvier 2011 par l'universite populaire de roubaix  article de sud ouest sur les conferences gesticulees et franck lepage, 2012  intervention sur l'ecole a "ce soir ou jamais", frederic taddei, france 2, le 5 decembre 2014.   entretien pour la revue ballast - franck lepage : « l'ecole fabrique des travailleurs adaptables et non des esprits critiques »  1954 births living people popular education french educational theorists
429001-429100   |-id=031 | 429031 hannavonhoerner ||  || hanna von hoerner (1942-2014) was a german astrophysicist and space entrepreneur. after studying physics at heidelberg university she founded a company involved in the development of space instrumentation, primarily for solar system missions, such as rosetta's cosima mass spectrometer ||  |-id=032 | 429032 sebvonhoerner ||  || sebastian von hoerner (1919-2003) was a german astrophysicist and radio astronomer. after graduation and habilitation at heidelberg he moved to the green bank radio observatory, contributing to the optimisation of radio telescope designs. he became one of the pioneers of the search for extraterrestrial intelligence ||  |-id=033 | 429033 gunterwendt ||  || gunter wendt (1924-2010) was a german aeronautical engineer. after world war ii he moved to the us and joined the crewed spaceflight program. he was pad leader during the mercury, gemini, apollo and skylab missions and was the person who closed the spacecraft hatch and bade farewell to launching astronauts ||  |-id=084 | 429084 dietrichrex ||  || dietrich rex (1934-2016), a german physicist, university professor and head of the spaceflight and reactor technology institute of the brunswick university of technology. ||  |}  429101-429200   |-id=120 | 429120 mikhaillavrov ||  || mikhail ivanovich lavrov (1927-2002) was an astrophysicist and a professor at kazan university. he was a brilliant teacher of practical astrophysics, researcher on eclipsing binary stars, and one of the pioneers of computer analysis and modeling of light curves in the 1970s. ||  |-id=136 | 429136 corsali ||  || andrea corsali (1487-?) was an italian explorer who traveled to asia and the south seas aboard a portuguese merchant vessel. he identified, located, illustrated and named the constellation now known as the southern cross. ||  |}  429201-429300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429301-429400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429401-429500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429501-429600
|-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429601-429700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429701-429800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429801-429900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  429901-430000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   429001-430000
the araki shuseikan museum (荒木集成館 araki shuseikan) is an art museum located in tenpaku-ku, nagoya, central japan.  the collection of araki minoru is housed here. the collection includes japanese ceramics such as sue wares, teabowls and roof tiles.  archaeological findings at old kilns are also shown.  references  external links    official homepage  archaeological museums in japan museums in nagoya
jurgen henke is a retired olympic trap shooter from east germany who won silver medals at the world championships in 1969 and 1971.  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) german male sport shooters
the 2017 world men's curling championship (branded as ford world men's curling championship 2017 for sponsorship reasons) was a curling event that was held from april 1 to 9 at northlands coliseum in edmonton, alberta.  canada won the title for the 36th time overall and the second consecutive year.  like rachel homan's team at the women's tournament, brad gushue and his teammates finished with a perfect 13-0 record, which included defeating eventual runner-up niklas edin of sweden three times.  switzerland won the bronze medal.  with the win, gushue became the first skip in the history of the sport to win the world junior title, the olympic gold medal, and the world men's title, and canada became the first country ever to be in simultaneous possession of olympic and world championships in both men's and women's curling.  qualification the following nations qualified to participate in the 2017 world men's curling championship:  (host country) one team from the americas zone  (winner of the 2017 americas challenge) eight teams from the 2016 european curling championships   (winner of the world challenge games) two teams from the 2016 pacific-asia curling championships  teams {| class=wikitable |- !width=200| !width=200| !width=200| |- |bally haly g&cc & st. john's cc, st. john's skip: brad gushue third: mark nichols second: brett gallant lead: geoff walker alternate: thomas sallows |harbin cc, harbin skip: liu rui third: xu xiaoming second: ba dexin lead: zang jialiang alternate: zou qiang |baden hills g&cc, rheinmunster skip: alexander baumann third: manuel walter second: daniel herberg lead: ryan sherrard alternate: sebastian schweizer |- !width=200| !width=200| !width=200| |- |a.s.d. trentino curling, cembra fourth: amos mosaner skip: joel retornaz second: andrea pilzer lead: daniele ferrazza alternate: simone gonin |karuizawa cc, karuizawa skip: yusuke morozumi third: tetsuro shimizu second: tsuyoshi yamaguchi lead: kosuke morozumi alternate: kosuke hirata |cc pwa zoetermeer, zoetermeer skip: jaap van dorp third: wouter gosgens second: laurens hoekman lead: carlo glasbergen alternate: alexander magan|- !width=200| !
width=200| !width=200| |- |oppdal ck, oppdalskip: steffen walstad third: markus høiberg second: magnus nedregotten lead: alexander lindstrom alternate: sander rølvag|moskvitch cc, moscowskip: alexey timofeev third: alexey stukalskiy second: timur gadzhikanov lead: artur razhabov alternate: evgeny klimov|curl aberdeen, aberdeenskip: david murdoch third: greg drummond second: scott andrews lead: michael goodfellow alternate: ross paterson|- !width=200| !width=200| !width=200| |- |karlstads ck, karlstad  skip: niklas edin third: oskar eriksson second: rasmus wrana lead: christoffer sundgren alternate: henrik leek|cc geneve, genevafourth: benoit schwarz   third: claudio patz skip: peter de cruz lead: valentin tanner alternate: romano meier|duluth cc, duluthskip: john shuster third: tyler george second: matt hamilton lead: john landsteiner alternate: joe polo|} notes   stuklaskiy threw skip stones during draws 1, 3 and 17 while timofeev threw third stones.  wct ranking year to date world curling tour order of merit ranking for each team prior to the event.  round robin standingsfinal round robin standingsround robin results all times listed in mountain daylight time (utc−6).  draw 1saturday, april 1, 14:00draw 2saturday, april 1, 19:00draw 3sunday, april 2, 9:00draw 4sunday, april 2, 14:00draw 5sunday, april 2, 19:00draw 6monday, april 3, 9:00draw 7monday, april 3, 14:00draw 8monday, april 3, 19:00draw 9tuesday, april 4, 9:00draw 10tuesday, april 4, 14:00draw 11tuesday, april 4, 19:00draw 12wednesday, april 5, 9:00draw 13wednesday, april 5, 14:00draw 14wednesday, april 5, 19:00draw 15thursday, april 6, 9:00draw 16thursday, april 6, 14:00draw 17thursday, april 6, 19:00playoffs  1 vs. 2friday, april 7, 19:
003 vs. 4saturday, april 8, 14:00semifinalsaturday, april 8, 19:00bronze medal gamesunday, april 9, 12:00gold medal gamesunday, april 9, 18:00statistics top 5 player percentagesround robin onlyperfect gamesround robin only''  awards the awards and all-star team are as follows:  all-star team skip:  brad gushue, canada third:  mark nichols, canada second:  brett gallant, canada lead:  geoff walker, canada  collie campbell memorial award  carlo glasbergen, netherlands  references general  specific  external links    world men's curling championship 2017 in canadian curling 2017 in alberta curling in alberta international curling competitions hosted by canada sports competitions in edmonton april 2017 sports events in canada 2010s in edmonton
the 2020 united states senate election in massachusetts was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the commonwealth of massachusetts, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as elections to the united states senate in other states, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various state and local elections. on september 1, incumbent senator ed markey defeated u.s. representative joe kennedy iii in a competitive primary for the democratic nomination, and kevin o'connor defeated shiva ayyadurai for the republican nomination. markey went on to win the general election with 66.2% of the vote, and was thus re-elected to a second full term in a landslide.  democratic primary the state primary election took place on september 1, 2020. incumbent senator ed markey was challenged by u.s. representative joe kennedy iii, a member of the kennedy family. kennedy and markey had similar political positions, both being considered reliably liberal democrats, though markey was considered more left-wing on the dw-nominate scale. an elected senator had not been defeated in a primary since richard lugar in 2012, and an elected democrat had not been defeated since joe lieberman in 2006.  in august 2019, it was reported that kennedy was considering a primary challenge to markey. he announced that he would be launching a campaign on september 18. according to vox, one of the main reasons for kennedy's decision to challenge markey, rather than waiting for a senate seat to open up, was that markey was perceived to be an easier opponent than the raft of candidates that would run without an incumbent. polling of the potential match-up showed markey trailing kennedy by 14 points, leading to speculation that he would retire rather than face a humiliating primary defeat, but he resolved to run for re-election.  kennedy's campaign pitch largely focused around a message that he would "show up" for disadvantaged residents of massachusetts, something he claimed markey had not been doing. this strategy was heavily inspired by ayanna pressley's succesful campaign for the u.s. house the previous cycle, and was aimed at casting kennedy as an insurgent outsider running against the establishment.  support from within the democratic party was divided. markey received support from the dscc, senate minority leader chuck schumer, and dscc chair catherine cortez masto. he was also endorsed by key figures in the party's progressive wing, such as representative alexandria ocasio-
cortez, fellow massachusetts senator elizabeth warren, and the youth-led sunrise movement. kennedy received various endorsements from the house leadership, including speaker nancy pelosi (which was noteworthy because speakers rarely endorse candidates in competitive primaries, especially challengers to incumbents), house majority leader steny hoyer, house democratic caucus chair hakeem jeffries, house intelligence committee chair adam schiff, and house democratic senior chief deputy whip john lewis.  as the campaign progressed, markey began to explicitly criticise the kennedy family, deeming them as emblematic of privilege, and frequently contrasting the kennedy compound with his own upbringing in malden. kennedy attacked markey for these actions, accusing him of "weaponizing" the history of the kennedy family. as the race entered its final days the contest began to assume an ideological meaning, with new york magazines gabriel debendetti writing that the contest was viewed as a "fight for the soul of the national democratic party", with both candidates claiming that a victory for them would be an affirmation of the strength of the left-wing of the democrats.  candidates  nominee ed markey, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary joe kennedy iii, u.s. representative from massachusetts' 4th congressional district  withdrawn washington blask shannon liss-riordan, labor attorney steve pemberton, chief human resources officer of workhuman (endorsed markey) allen waters, perennial candidate (endorsed kennedy)  declined maura healey, massachusetts attorney general scott lang, former mayor of new bedford (endorsed kennedy) juana matias, former state representative and candidate for massachusetts's 3rd congressional district in 2018 seth moulton, former 2020 presidential candidate and incumbent u.s. representative for massachusetts's 6th congressional district (running for reelection) michelle wu, boston city councilor  endorsements  polling  debates   complete video of debate, february 18, 2020 - c-span  complete video of markey-kennedy debate, august 11, 2020 - c-span  results  markey defeated his challenger, joe kennedy iii. markey won by running up big margins in boston and its suburbs, and did well in western  massachusetts, especially in college towns. kennedy did well in the cape cod region, and won many southern municipalities, especially his native 4th district. markey's margin of victory of 10.8% was attributed to his unexpected strength among progressives and younger voters. kennedy's loss marked the first time a member of the kennedy family had lost an election in massachusetts.  republican primary the state primary election took place on september
1, 2020.  candidates  nominee kevin o'connor, attorney  eliminated in primary shiva ayyadurai, entrepreneur, conspiracy theorist, and independent candidate for the u.s. senate in 2018 (ran as an independent (write-in) in the general election)  declined charlie baker, governor of massachusetts (endorsed o'connor)  results  other candidates  libertarian party  failed to qualify vermin supreme, performance artist and political satirist; member of the libertarian party judiciary committee; former 2020 libertarian presidential candidate (as a write-in candidate)  results  green party  withdrawn andre "maha visnu" gray, co-chair of the massachusetts green-rainbow party, teacher, and businessman  independents  write-in candidate  shiva ayyadurai (switched to this candidacy after losing republican primary)  withdrawn  frederick mayock, independent candidate for massachusetts' 1st congressional district in 2020  general election the general election took place on november 3, 2020.  predictions  endorsements  polling  with charlie baker  results   markey won all fourteen of massachusetts' counties for the second election in a row.  see also  2020 massachusetts general election  notes general   partisan clients  references  further reading  external links        (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters)    official campaign websites  ed markey (d) for senate  kevin o'connor (r) for senate  2020 massachusetts united states senate
the rendiconti di matematica e delle sue applicazioni (reports on mathematics and its applications) is an open access peer-reviewed mathematics journal, jointly published by the "guido castelnuovo" department of mathematics of the sapienza university of rome and by the istituto nazionale di alta matematica francesco severi, established in 1913. the journal started his publications a year after, in 1914, and his first director was vito volterra.  it publishes research articles in pure and applied mathematics, without imposing restrictions on the length of the work: for this reason, the submission of surveys, articles of foundational nature and doctoral dissertations is also encouraged. as in every peer reviewed journal, every article is refereed, and the journal adheres to the ems code of practice.  the journal is abstracted and indexed by mathematical reviews,  zentralblatt math and scopus.  historical notes  foundation and the first four series the journal was founded in 1913 as the press organ of the "seminario matematico della facolta di scienze della reale uninversita di roma": its first director (editor in chief) was vito volterra, who held this position from its foundation to the year 1921. the direction passed to guido castelnuovo who held it from 1921 to 1922: with the beginning of and during the publishing of the whole second and third series of the journal, from 1922 to 1935 federigo enriques was the director. during fourth series of the journal, at the starting of which it underwent its first name change, the direction passed to gaetano scorza, who held it until his death in 1939.  the indam and its influence the founding of the istituto nazionale di alta matematica in 1939, under the decisive influence of francesco severi, had important consequences on the "rendiconti del seminario matematico". on 23 november 1939, during its first meeting, the scientific council of the then newborn institute, considering the need of a means to publish the results of the research done by the members and the students working at the institute, decided to merge the needed means and the already existing journal in one single entity, giving birth to the "rendiconti di matematica e delle sue applicazioni". entrusted with this double function the fifth series of the journal, from the first volume published in 1940 to the first issue of the fourth volume published in 1943, included a section listing the programs of the indam courses of the current academic year as well as section listing
the research problems proposed by the lecturers currently working at the institute.  timeline of journal series and editors in chief  see also rendiconti del seminario matematico della universita di padova rendiconti del seminario matematico universita e politecnico di torino rivista di matematica della universita di parma  notes  references  . . . . . . this is a monographic fascicle published on the "bollettino della unione matematica italiana", describing the history of the "istituto nazionale di alta matematica francesco severi" from its foundation in 1939 to 2003: it was written by gino roghi and includes a presentation by salvatore coen and a preface by corrado de concini. it is almost exclusively based on sources from the institute archives: the wealth and variety of materials included, jointly with its appendices and indexes, make this monograph a useful reference not only for the history of the institute itself, but also for the history of many mathematicians who taught or followed the institute courses or simply worked there. . the "introduction" (english translation of the title) to the indexes volume of the first five series of the journal. . this work describes the research activity at the sapienza university of rome and at the (at that time newly created) "istituto nazionale di alta matematica francesco severi"  from the end of the 1930s to the early 1940s.  external links volumes from 14 (1994) to 22 (2002) of the series viii of the "rendiconti" archived at the internet archive.  mathematics journals publications established in 1913 biannual journals academic journals associated with universities and colleges open access journals
the woolcock institute of medical research (wimr) is an australian medical research institute that is focused on the prevention and treatment of sleep and respiratory disorders, lung cancer, and tuberculosis. affiliated with the university of sydney and the royal prince alfred hospital, the woolcock institute is located in the sydney suburb of , new south wales; with a satellite office located in hanoi, vietnam.  the executive director of the woolcock institute since july 2012 is professor carol armour.  history and facilities the institute was founded in 1981 by then prof. ann woolcock, a professor of respiratory medicine/science at the sydney medical school and was originally called the institute of respiratory medicine. the institute was renamed in memory of woolcock in 2002 after her passing in 2001. the research institute has collaborative agreements with the hunter area health service, the university of newcastle, and liverpool, concord and royal north shore hospitals.  originally, the woolcock institute of medical research was located within the royal prince alfred hospital in camperdown before it was relocated to a custom-built building in glebe in 2008. in addition to research facilities, including offices, "wet-lab" laboratories and sleep laboratories, there are also consulting rooms for doctors' clinics.  see also  health in australia sleep disorder  references  external links  1981 establishments in australia lung disease organizations medical research institutes in sydney research institutes established in 1981 tuberculosis organizations
was a general in the imperial japanese army during the world war ii.  biography  early career yoshimoto was the eldest son of an indigo merchant from tokushima prefecture. he was born in tokyo, but his birth was registered in tokushima. he graduated from the 20th class of the imperial japanese army academy in 1908 and 28th class of the army staff college in 1916 and was assigned to staff positions within the imperial general headquarters upon graduation.   in 1919 he was sent as a military attache to france, returning in 1922. he remained in various administrative and bureaucratic positions within the army staff until 1933, when he was assigned command of the ija 68th infantry regiment. he was promoted to major general in 1936 and assigned command of the ija 21st infantry brigade. in 1937, he became chief of staff of the tokyo metropolitan military police, in charge of organizing defenses for eastern japan.  world war ii in june 1938, yoshimoto became chief-of-staff of the newly-formed ija 11th army. this force was part of the japanese central china area army and assigned the task of conquering and occupying the central provinces of china between the yangtze river and the yellow river during the second sino-japanese war. the 11th army played a major role in the battle of wuhan. from september 1939, it came under the newly formed china expeditionary army and yoshimoto became chief-of-staff of the china expeditionary army from january 1939. he was promoted to lieutenant general that march and assigned command of the ija 2nd division that november.   on april 29, 1940, yoshimoto was awarded the order of  the golden kite, 2nd class and the grand cordon of the order of the rising sun. in april 1941, he became chief of staff of the kwangtung army and from april 1942 was assigned command of the ija 1st army. during this time, the 1st army was largely a garrison force in manchukou. he was imperial general headquarters. in february 1945, he was assigned to the newly-created japanese eleventh area army. this force was part of the last desperate defense effort by the empire of japan to deter possible landings of allied forces in honshu during operation downfall and was responsible for the tohoku region of japan from its headquarters in sendai, miyagi. on may 7, 1945 he was promoted to general, and in june received the honorific title of junior third court rank. on september 14, 1945, shortly after the surrender of japan, he committed suicide at the imperial japanese army headquarters in ich
igaya, tokyo.  career   december 1908: second lieutenant  december 1911: first lieutenant  october 1918:  captain  august 1923: major  march 1928: lieutenant colonel  august 1, 1931: colonel  march 7, 1936: major general  march 9, 1939: lieutenant general  may 7, 1945: general  references  1887 births 1945 deaths people from tokushima prefecture japanese military attaches japanese generals japanese military personnel who committed suicide people of the second sino-japanese war members of the kwantung army grand cordons of the order of the rising sun recipients of the order of the golden kite, 2nd class
flinders ranges is a locality in the australian state of south australia located in the mountain range of the same name, about  north of the state capital of adelaide, about  north-east of the municipal seat of quorn and about  north-east of the centre of port augusta in the state's far north region.  its boundaries were created in april 2013, with the name selected in respect to the 'long established local name'. its southern boundary was altered in november 2013 with the addition of land from hawker and the transfer of land to shaggy ridge. the sites of the government towns of edeowie and mernmerna are also within its boundaries. these were both surveyed in 1863; edeowie post office was open from  to 1876 and from 1879 to 1881, while mernmerna post office was open from 1874 to 1881 and again for a period in 1905.  flinders ranges consists of the part of the mountain range between the 'town centre' of hawker in the south and the 'town centre' of parachilna in the north, as well as some land to the west of the range. in the north east it contains all of the protected areas of the ikara-flinders ranges national park and bunkers conservation reserve, whose eastern boundaries align with that of the locality. the marree railway line and the outback highway both pass through the west side of the locality while the flinders ranges way passes through the south-east side.  as of 2012, its land use was either pastoral farming or conservation. the marree railway line is the boundary between these uses, with pastoral farming to the west and land to the east zoned for conservation, including the ikara-flinders ranges national park and the bunker conservation reserve.  flinders ranges is located within the federal division of grey, the state electoral districts of giles and stuart, the flinders ranges council and the pastoral unincorporated area of south australia.  heritage listings  flinders ranges contains a number of places listed on the south australian heritage register, including:   ajax mine fossil reef  aroona valley: hayward homestead ruins  aroona valley: eddie pumpa outstation  brachina gorge: impact ejecta horizon late precambrian shales geological site  brachina road: enorama outstation and mail station ruins  wilpena pound geological landform  stromatolites in the precambrian trezona formation, ikara-flinders ranges national park  wilkawillina archaeocyathae geological site  oraparinna diapir  tuf
a waterfall  enorama diapir  appealinna mine ruins and miner's hut  blacksmith's shop, oraparinna station  dingley dell homestead ruins  wills homestead complex ruins  hill's cottage, wilpena pound  wilpena homestead complex  adjoining localities flinders ranges is bounded by the following localities:  northwest: motpena,  north: motpena, mount falkland, alpana, gum creek station and agorigina.  northeast: wirrealpa  east: wirrealpa, willow springs, upalinna, prelinna, mount havelock and willippa.  southeast: black hill station  south: barndioota, hawker, shaggy ridge and black hill station  southwest: wallerberdina  west: motpena, wintabatinyana, lake torrens station  see also  st mary peak edeowie station cazneaux tree  references notes  citations  towns in south australia places in the unincorporated areas of south australia far north (south australia) flinders ranges
this is a list of recorded fatal shark attacks in south african territorial waters, in reverse chronological order, including cases that were immediately, eventually or presumably fatal.  2020s  2010s  2000s  1990s  1980s  1970s  1960s  1950s  1940s  1930s-1850s  unknown  references  shark attacks shark attacks in south african territorial waters
bahinolophus is an extinct genus of herbivorous mammals that flourished in the middle eocene and were related to tapirs. the genus was defined in 2005.  references  eocene odd-toed ungulates eocene mammals of asia fossil taxa described in 2005
the duelist () is a 2016 russian action adventure thriller drama film directed by aleksey mizgirev. the film stars pyotr fyodorov, vladimir mashkov, and yulia khlynina. this is the russian third feature film produced using the imax format. it was released in russia on september 29, 2016 in full imax.  an adventure film, with dramatic and thriller elements set against the backdrop of palaces and the noble view of the russian capital, the movie centers on yakovlev, a retired officer, who returns to st. petersburg from a long exile. while in the city, he fights as a duelist's representative. during nineteenth-century russian duel law allowed for a duelist to be replaced by any one person. though yakovlev fights for money, he also seeks honor and revenge against those who disgraced him, therein, challenging the russian providence.  inspirations the movie goes back to the novels of city mysteries, popular in the middle of the 19th century (the most famous example - les vrais mysteres de paris (1844) by eugene francois vidocq). in preparation for filming, alex mizgirev reviewed the movie the duellists directed by ridley scott (1977) and loosely based on the novel by joseph conrad's duel, which, in turn, was inspired by pushkin's the shot.  plot set in saint petersburg in 1860, the story revolves around retired officer yakovlev. a deadly shot, yakovlev is effectively a kind of mercenary in that he is available for hire through his associate baron staroe to stand in for others in formal duels.  much later in the film, flashbacks reveal that years ago an aleut shaman has predicted he would never die, and so far that seems about right as yakovlev wins duel after duel, wounding and more often killing noble opponents. although duels of honor are technically illegal in russia at the time, most people turn a blind eye to the law. the code of practice is not written down anywhere, and yet everyone knows the rules and rituals, while many participants see it as an almost mystical rite. to take part in a duel is to accept that one's fate is ultimately in the hands of god, hence the practice of russian roulette.   eventually, it turns out that all of yakovlev's recent duels were secretly arranged by count beklemishev. he is a shadowy puppet master with a grudge and designs on princess martha tuchkova whose brother (prince tuchkov) yakovlev is scheduled to duel with next
. when attraction stirs between him and the pretty blond princess, problems arise, especially since, as the flashbacks reveal, yakovlev has an agenda of his own.  cast  release the screening was part of the 2016 toronto international film festival official program.  the film was released in russia on september 29, 2016 by walt disney studios sony pictures releasing (wdsspr). it is scheduled for release in china in 2017.  reception and reviews the film was number-one on its opening weekend at the russian box office, with .  anton dolin noted the uniqueness of the genre of "the most intriguing of the russian film of the year", where saint petersburg is represented as "city of permanent flooding", rain-drenched and mud; in this respect it resembles the works of steampunk london. according to dolin, it is extremely rare in post-soviet russia the sample quality mainstream and the first ever russian blockbuster, has earned a solid "five": at an altitude here and casting, and "brutal-rock" music, and "noble-monochrome" movie.  according to conclusion written by andrey plakhov: "mizgiryov with his usual taste for brutalism produces big-budget costume author noir genre and esthetic at the same time: petersburg is buried in dirt, the grand duchess sleeps with cynical mercenary and russian nobles, who boast of a code of honor, behave if it 'brother "dashing nineties", or thugs, adventurers in the wild west". his colleague michael trofimenkov saw this as a conscious debunking the myth of the beautiful and noble 'russia which we have lost': "high society - a flock of black brutal killers, wearing a fetish noble honor, the concept of which has already become for them a "concept". the ruling class, professing the cult of blood, sexually worshiper arms and engaged in pointless self-destruction in the duels, the right word, is not worthy of reverence to him. around this class more trouble-free and curl performers dirty orders, intermediaries, pimps. but perhaps the nastier they titled young man with big names and a slim profile, ready to sink your best friend a knife in the back".  western professional reviews of the film were very few. based on 14 reviews collected by rotten tomatoes, the duelist has an overall approval rating from critics of 43%, with an average score of 5.50/10. on metacritic, the film has a
weighted average score of 55 out of 100, based on 10 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews". the hollywood reporter's leslie felperin found the film as appropriate to compare to the "universal for any country story about social mobility issues, honor and militarism" with classic westerns, though lamented the technical imperfections ("in imax some of the frames darker look videotaped"). the variety reviewer dennis harvey gave a moderately negative review, rated the film as "putin's fantasy of the russian empire" and noting the absurdity of individual scenes and episodes.  see also  cinema of russia  references  external links          2016 films 2010s russian-language films 2010s action adventure films 2010s adventure thriller films 2010s historical drama films 2016 thriller drama films russian films russian films about revenge films about the russian empire russian action adventure films russian historical drama films russian thriller drama films films set in the 19th century films set in saint petersburg films set in the russian empire historical action films films shot in russia russian swashbuckler films columbia pictures films 2016 3d films russian 3d films imax films 2016 drama films
american woman is an american sitcom that was inspired by the childhood of actress and reality star kyle richards that premiered on june 7, 2018, on paramount network. the series was created by john riggi and stars alicia silverstone, mena suvari, jennifer bartels, makenna james, and lia mchugh. on september 5, 2018, it was announced that the series had been cancelled after one season.  premise american woman follows "bonnie, an unconventional mother struggling to raise her two daughters after leaving her husband amid the rise of second-wave feminism in the 1970s. with the help of her two best friends, kathleen and diana, these three women each discover their own brand of independence in a glamorous and ever-changing world reluctant to give it."  cast and characters  main  alicia silverstone as bonnie nolan  mena suvari as kathleen callahan  jennifer bartels as diana vaughan  makenna james as becca nolan, bonnie and steve's elder daughter  lia mchugh as jessica nolan, bonnie and steve's younger daughter  recurring  james tupper as steve nolan, bonnie's husband whom she throws out after catching him with another woman.  cheyenne jackson as greg, kathleen's boyfriend who is secretly gay.  sam morgan as adam  diandra lyle as louise  tobias jelinek as mr. bishop  patrick bristow as randall  jonathan chase as alan  christine estabrook as peggy, diana's mother  guest   sam anderson as raymond turner ("changes and the new normal")  elizabeth bogush as sherry ("changes and the new normal")  audrey wasilewski as anne ("changes and the new normal")  chosen jacobs as william ("the heat wave")  jon prescott as barry ("the agreement")  carter macintyre as harris ("the agreement")  matt knudsen as dr. taylor ("jack")  peta sergeant as hannah ("jack")  cullen douglas as philip ("the breakthrough")  bob glouberman as mr. knave ("the breakthrough")  matthew glave as cal ("obstacles and assets")  laura regan as carol ("i will survive")  episodes  production  development on june 2, 2015, it was announced that tv land was developing a television pilot inspired by the life of the real housewives of beverly hills star kyle richards. the pilot was set to be produced by john wells productions in association with warner horizon television. executive producers included john wells and john riggi, who wrote the pilot script.  on november 7, 2016, it was announced that tv land had given the production
a series order for a first season consisting of 12 episodes, but a premiere date had not been set.  on march 30, 2017, it was revealed that the series had been shifted from tv land to the newly rebranded paramount network. on august 14, 2017, it was announced that john riggi had departed the series citing creative differences. replacing him in the role of showrunner was fellow executive producer john wells. on january 16, 2018, it was announced at the annual television critics association's winter press tour that the series would premiere on june 7, 2018. on september 5, 2018, it was announced that the series had been canceled after one season.  casting on july 25, 2016, it was announced that alicia silverstone had been cast in the series lead role. on august 11, 2016, mena suvari joined the pilot in another lead role. later that month, it was reported that cheyenne jackson and jennifer bartels had also joined the cast. in may 2017, diandra lyle was cast as louise, a recurring role. on june 13, 2017, it was announced that sam morgan had joined the cast in a recurring capacity.  filming principal photography for the first season of the series began in april 2017 in los angeles, california.  theme song the show's theme song was a cover version of the 1970 the guess who song, american woman. the song was performed by kelly clarkson.  release  marketing on march 27, 2018, paramount network released six "first look" images from the series. on may 3, 2018, the first official trailer for the series was released. on may 17, 2018, it was announced that a cover of the song "american woman" had been recorded by singer kelly clarkson. it was subsequently used in marketing material for the series.  premiere on april 29, 2018, the series held its official world premiere during the series mania festival in lille, france in which the first three episodes of the first season were screened. it competed against nine other international television programs in the festival's "official competition" series of shows.  on june 7, 2018, the series held a screening at the annual atx television festival in austin, texas. a question-and-answer panel followed, featuring executive producer josh wells, cast members alicia silverstone, mena suvari, jennifer bartels, and co-executive producer kyle richards.  reception  critical response the series has received a mixed reception from critics upon its premiere. on the review aggregation website rotten tomatoes, the series holds a 44% approval rating with an average rating
of 5.36 out of 10 based on 18 reviews. the website's critical consensus reads, "stereotypes and ambiguity shadow the well-meaning intentions of american woman, though the nostalgic period setting is cute." metacritic, which uses a weighted average, assigned the series a score of 48 out of 100 based on 10 critics, indicating "mixed or average reviews."  ratings  notes  references  external links      2010s american single-camera sitcoms 2018 american television series debuts 2018 american television series endings paramount network original programming english-language television shows television series set in the 1970s television shows set in los angeles television series by warner horizon television
ikun-shamash or iku-shamash () was a king of the second mariote kingdom who reigned c. 2500 bc. according to francois thureau-dangin, the king reigned at a time earlier than ur-nanshe's of lagash. he is one of three mari kings known from archaeology, and probably the oldest one. another king was iku-shamagan, also known from a statue with inscription, in the national museum of damascus. the third king is lamgi-mari, also read isgi-mari, also known from an inscribed statue now in the national museum of aleppo.  in his inscriptions, ikun-shamash used the akkadian language, whereas his contemporaries to the south used the sumerian language. his official title in the inscriptions was "king of mari" and "ensi-gal", or "supreme prince" of the deity enlil.  he is known from a statue with inscription, which he dedicated to god shamash.  ikun-shamash's territory seems to have included southern babylonia.  statue ikun-shamash's votive statue, set by one of his officials, was discovered in the city of sippar; the inscription reads:   the statue is located in the british museum.  citations  kings of mari 25th-century bc rulers 25th-century bc semitic people
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in qiqihar as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th,  135th, 136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation was the 274th infantry regiment taken from the 125th division.  action initially, the 149th division was mostly garrisoning qiqihar.  one battalion of the  386th infantry regiment was in yi'an county, two other battalions of the 386th infantry regiment - in bei'an. also, one platoon of the 274th infantry regiment was deployed in nehe.  during the soviet invasion of manchuria, the 149th division was ordered to harbin 11 august 1945, arriving in parts 12-15 august 1945. the fortifications of qiqihar were then taken over by the 136th independent mixed brigade.  although the division was relatively well equipped by rifles, the heavy weapons were deficient. in particular, it had absolutely no artillery. kwantung army has estimated combat efficiency of the 149th division to be 15% of the nominal.  the 149th division was disarmed 23 august 1945 without seeing any action during soviet invasion of manchuria. majority of soldiers have then deserted or were hastily discharged before remainder of 4480 were taken prisoner in hailin 27 august 1945 and sent to siberian labour camps. some officers have returned to japan in 1947.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第149師団 (日本軍), accessed 11 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
anatol slissenko () (born august 15, 1941) is a soviet, russian and french mathematician and computer scientist. among his research interests one finds automatic theorem proving, recursive analysis, computational complexity, algorithmics, graph grammars, verification, computer algebra, entropy and probabilistic models related to computer science.  early years  anatol slissenko was born in siberia, where his father served as head of a regiment of military topography. he graduated from the leningrad state university, faculty of mathematics and mechanics in 1963 (honors diploma).  academic career  he earned his phd (candidate of sciences, his adviser was nikolai aleksandrovich shanin) in 1967 from the leningrad department of steklov institute of mathematics, and his doctor of science (higher doctorate) in 1981 from the steklov institute of mathematics in moscow.  during 1963-1981 he was with the leningrad department of steklov institute of mathematics of the ussr academy of sciences (lomi). from 1967 till 1992 he headed the leningrad seminar on computational complexity that played an important role in the development of this field in the soviet union.  during 1981-1993 he was the head of laboratory of theory of algorithms at the leningrad institute for informatics and automation of the ussr academy of sciences. from 1993 until 2009 he was a full professor of the university paris-est creteil, france, and since 2009 he remains professor emeritus of this university. he had also been head (and in a way a founder) of laboratory for algorithmics complexity and logic from 1997 until 2007.  in 1981-1987 he was a part-time professor of the leningrad polytechnical institute, and during 1988-1992 he was a professor and head of the department of computer science at leningrad state university, faculty of mathematics and mechanics, whose creation he initiated (the teams of the department were world champions of acm international collegiate programming contest four times). many mathematicians (among them yuri matiyasevich, dima grigoriev, e.hirsch) started their research in his seminars for students.  slissenko was invited as a speaker at many conferences, in particular at international congress of mathematicians in 1983, in warsaw, poland.  research  among his results one can mention a six-head one-tape turing machine that recognizes palindromes in real-time, an algorithm (for a kind of pointer machine) that solves in real-time a large variety of string-matching problems (including finding of all periodicities in a compact form), slissenko graph-
grammars (that describe classes of np-hard problems solvable in polytime), decidable classes of verification of hard-real-time controllers, algorithms for constructing shortest paths among semi-algebraic obstacles, and entropy-like concepts for analysis of algorithms and inference systems.  he collaborated with n.shanin, s.maslov, g.mints and v.orevkov on automatic theorem proving, and with d.beauquier d.grigoriev, d.burago, a.rabinovich, p. vasilyev and others on some algorithmic problems, see.  references  external links    russian mathematicians french mathematicians living people 1941 births
hafiz saeed khan (1972 - 26 july 2016), also known as mullah saeed orakzai, was an islamic militant who served as the islamic state emir for its khorasan province, which is active in afghanistan and pakistan, from january 2015 until his death in july 2016. prior to 2015, khan was a senior commander in the tehrik-i-taliban pakistan and initially a member of the afghan taliban.  early life and family saeed was born in 1972 in the town of mamozai in the orakzai agency, in the federally administered tribal areas of pakistan near the afghan border, and got his early education from a local cleric, maulana shabit, before moving to the hangu district of khyber pakhtunkhwa, where he was admitted to the local school known as darululoom islamia hangue, one of his classmates, maulana shahidullah, remembering him as a good student, having memorized the entire qur'an in just one year, and for also being particularly peaceful, while in terms of private life, he first married his cousin, having two sons and a daughter, before taking another wife from the north waziristan district.  as opposed to most talibans, who are deobandis, saeed was a panjpiri, panjpir being a town in the swabi district of khyber pakhtunkhwa known for its seminaries with salafi tendencies, producing many militants who thus later felt a natural affinity for the ideology of the islamic state.  islamic militancy  tehrik-i-taliban pakistan after the september 11 attacks, saeed went to kabul to fight against the united states invasion of afghanistan with the afghan taliban. he remained in kabul for two years.  he became close to  baitullah mahsud, who formed the tehrik-i-taliban pakistan in 2007 and became its leader. he appointed saeed to the majlis ash-shura and made him emir for orakzai agency.  on august 2009, baitullah mahsud was killed in an american drone strike. a dispute arose as to the leadership of the ttp, with some commanders wanting hakimullah mahsud to assume the leadership, while saeed wanted his ally wali ur rahman to become the leader. according to abdul saboor khan, a renowned analyst of tribal affairs, "the ttp split in two groups after baitullah's killing and saeed was not happy over the differences," in 2013 hakimullah was himself killed in an american drone strike. "saeed was one of the three main contenders for the top slot
of the ttp chief, and i think he was disheartened when fazlullah was nominated", khan said.  islamic state saeed, who as a ttp commander was known for his salafi tendencies to the point he attacked hanafi seminaries, had already personally joined is on 11 may 2013.  few months after pakistani offensive in north waziristan against ttp, saeed formally left the ttp on 15 october 2014, along with seven other taliban leaders, creating a new group called tehrik-e khilafat  pakistan (tkp), and pledged allegiance to islamic state leader abu bakr al-baghdadi. the other men who left alongside him were the ttp's former spokesman, shahidullah shahid; its khyber agency chief, gul zaman fateh; peshawar chief mufti hassan swati; kurram agency chief hafiz dawlat khan;commander in waziristan, abdul bahar mehsud;bajaur commander abu bakr and hangu chief khalid mansoor.  saeed's position as head of is khorasan was confirmed in a video message released by the group on 11 january. the video features a message by shahidullah shahid.  the 13th issue of dabiq, titled the rafidah from ibn saba' to the dajjal and published 19 january 2016, features an interview with saeed.  us sanctions on 29 september 2015, the united states department of the treasury sanctioned saeed alongside 15 other islamic state leaders. according to the department of the treasury, "khan, as leader of isil-k, plays a central role in expanding isil's operations in the region, commanding militants and coordinating the delivery of supplies and munitions, the travel of associates, and other arrangements. in mid-2015, khan appointed isil representatives in kunar province and nangarhar province, afghanistan and approved funding for the establishment of a training camp for isil fighters in western afghanistan. isil militants under khan's command had taken control of several districts in nangarhar province in mid-2015".  death on 12 july 2015, the afghan intelligence agency, the national directorate of security, claimed that saeed was killed in a strike carried out by us-led coalition forces in coordination with intelligence provided by the spy agency, though the united states never confirmed such an operation. the islamic state rejected the claim, but the strike did kill shahidullah shahid and gul zaman, according to senior is leader abdul rahim muslim dost.  on 12 august 2016, the united states announced that hafiz saeed khan was killed in a u.s. airstrike in achin district of afghanistan's
nangarhar province. there was no immediate response from the group itself, and it was initially unknown who would succeed him.  he was succeeded by abdul hasib, who was in turn killed by afghan and us special forces in nangarhar on 27 april 2017.  references  1972 births 2016 deaths assassinated isil members islamic state of iraq and the levant members islamic state of iraq and the levant in afghanistan tehrik-i-taliban pakistan tehrik-i-taliban pakistan members taliban members islamic state of iraq and the levant and pakistan leaders of islamic terror groups people from orakzai district pakistani islamists salafi jihadists people who memorized the quran
unsolved: the boy who disappeared is an eight-part documentary series broadcast by online channel bbc three (available exclusively through iplayer), with all episodes released simultaneously on 25 july 2016 at 10 am. the series follows the 1996 disappearance of damien nettles, a 16-year-old boy who went missing one night on the isle of wight. investigative journalists bronagh munro and alys harte spent three months looking into the case, speaking to involved parties and analysing evidence. both reporters had previously worked on flagship bbc current affairs documentary programme panorama.  episodes run for 15 minutes each, giving a total run time of approx 120 minutes. the video episodes are supplemented by a range of other features such as maps, documents and character profiles published on the show's bbc mini-site.  valerie nettles, damien's mother, praised the team for their efforts in the case, having previously been frustrated by progress. she provided the team with a large amount of evidence to assist with their investigation.  the show has been widely compared to the podcast serial and the netflix programme making a murderer, two hugely successful investigations into purported miscarriages of justice in the usa. in contrast to the cases featured in those shows, no-one has been convicted of any crime associated with nettles' disappearance. it was one of the anticipated highlights of the early schedule following bbc three's move to being an online-only channel. damien kavanagh, bbc three controller, said we are innovating with new ways to tell stories at bbc three and unsolved is the perfect example of how our move online has opened up new possibilities for storytelling. harte described the filming as an experimental format for bbc three with cameras following their every move.  references  external links      2016 british television series debuts 2016 british television series endings 2010s british crime television series bbc television documentaries british documentary television series english-language television shows investigative journalism isle of wight television shows set on islands
eunidia albovariegata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1960.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1960
2016 western balkans summit in paris, france was third annual summit within the berlin process initiative for european integration of western balkans states. previous summits took place in berlin in 2014 and in vienna in 2015. heads of government, foreign ministers and the ministers of economy of albania, bosnia and herzegovina, kosovo, republic of macedonia, montenegro, serbia, as well as eu member states from the region croatia, slovenia and eu member states austria, france, germany, italy as well as representatives of the european union and the international financial institutions took part in paris summit. summit took place on 4 july 2016. participants welcomed the intention of italy to host the next summit in 2017.  summit took place in the context of the outcome of the united kingdom european union membership referendum. western balkans participants reaffirmed their commitment to european integrations process. european perspective of the region was recognized to all countries during the summits in zagreb and thessaloniki in 2000 and 2003 and "repeatedly and unequivocally reiterated since then" as stated in final declaration after the summit. participants reaffirmed the importance of regional cooperation and their commitment to abstain from misusing bilateral issues in the eu accession process. at the day of summit regional youth cooperation office was established based on experience of the franco-german youth office. all parties welcomed the progress with projects that were launched in august 2015 and agreed upon a list of 3 new railway projects, which will receive eu co-financing of little less than 100 million euros in addition to financing from the international financial institutions and the national budgets of the western balkan states. the parties welcomed the launch of an energy efficiency initiative supported by eu through funding of 50 million euros. participants agreed on a road-map for the setting up of a regional market for electricity in the western balkans and european commission intent to support initiative through the energy community secretariat. regional market integration, especially through cefta was reaffirmed. improving the perspective of younger generations' through erasmus+ and investments in education were discussed.  notes and references notes:  references:  see also berlin process southeast europe stabilisation and association process central european free trade agreement stability pact for south eastern europe  external links  western balkans summit  2016 in politics diplomatic conferences in france 21st-century diplomatic conferences 2016 in international relations 2016 conferences foreign relations of croatia foreign relations of albania foreign relations of bosnia and herzegovina foreign relations of kosovo foreign relations of north macedonia foreign relations of montenegro foreign relations of serbia foreign relations of slovenia international relations in southeastern europe contemplated enlargements of the european union 2016 in paris july 2016
events in france
secrets of deltora is a fictional book in the deltora quest series written by emily rodda and illustrated by marc mcbride. this book is a fictional travel guide around deltora, written from the point of view of doran the dragonlover.  references  2009 australian novels 2009 fantasy novels books about dragons deltora fictional atlases
this is a list of teams that have competed in the league of legends championship series (lcs), the top level of professional league of legends in north america.  all teams   100 thieves (spring 2018 - present)  apex gaming (summer 2016)  cloud9 (summer 2013 - present)  clutch gaming (spring 2018 - spring 2020)   team coast (summer 2013 - summer 2015)  complexity gaming (summer 2014)  counter logic gaming (spring 2013 - present)  team curse (spring 2013 - summer 2014)  dignitas (spring 2013 - spring 2016, spring 2017 - summer 2017; summer 2020-present)  team dragon knights (summer 2015)  echo fox (spring 2016 - summer 2019)  enemy esports (summer 2015)  team envy (summer 2016 - summer 2017)  evil geniuses (spring 2014 - summer 2014; summer 2020-present)  flyquest (spring 2017 - present)  golden guardians (spring 2018 - present)  good game university (spring 2013)  gravity gaming (spring 2015 - summer 2015)  immortals (spring 2016 - summer 2017; summer 2020-present)  team impulse (spring 2015 - spring 2016)  team liquid (spring 2015 - present)  lmq (summer 2014)  team mrn (spring 2013)  nrg esports (spring 2016 - summer 2016)  optic gaming (spring 2018 - summer 2019)  phoenix1 (summer 2016 - summer 2017)  renegades (summer 2015 - spring 2016)  team solomid (spring 2013 - present)   team 8 (spring 2015 - summer 2015)  velocity esports (summer 2014)  team vulcun (spring 2013 - summer 2013)  winterfox (spring 2015)  xdg gaming (spring 2014)  notes  prior to franchising  2013 spring   team solomid  team curse  team dignitas   counter logic gaming   team vulcun  good game university  team mrn   complexity gaming  2013 summer   cloud9  team vulcun   team solomid  team curse   team dignitas  counter logic gaming   team coast   velocity esports  2014 spring   cloud9  team solomid   counter logic gaming  team dignitas   team curse  team coast   evil geniuses  xdg gaming  2014 summer   cloud9  lmq  team solomid  team curse  counter logic gaming  team dignitas  evil geniuses   complexity gaming  2015 spring   team solomid  cloud9  counter logic gaming   team
impulse  gravity gaming  team liquid  team 8  winterfox   team dignitas  team coast  2015 summer   team liquid  counter logic gaming   team impulse  gravity gaming  team solomid  team dignitas  cloud9  team 8  enemy esports  team dragon knights  2016 spring   immortals  counter logic gaming  cloud9  team liquid  nrg esports  team solomid  echo fox  renegades  team impulse  team dignitas  2016 summer   immortals  counter logic gaming   cloud9  team liquid   nrg esports  team solomid  echo fox  team envy  phoenix1  apex gaming  2017 spring   cloud9  counter logic gaming  echo fox  flyquest  immortals  phoenix1  team dignitas  team envy  team liquid   team solomid  2017 summer   cloud9  counter logic gaming  echo fox  flyquest  immortals  phoenix1  team dignitas  team envy  team liquid   team solomid  franchise teams  2018 spring - 2019 summer   100 thieves (cleveland cavaliers)  cloud9  clutch gaming (houston rockets)  counter logic gaming  echo fox  flyquest  golden guardians (golden state warriors)  optic gaming  team liquid   team solomid  2020 spring onwards   100 thieves (cleveland cavaliers)  cloud9  counter logic gaming  dignitas  evil geniuses  flyquest  golden guardians (golden state warriors)  immortals  team liquid   team solomid  references    league of legends championship series teams
olenecamptus triplagiatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by karl jordan in 1894.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1894
the broyles-darwin house is a historic mansion in dayton, tennessee, u.s.. it was built circa 1860 for stephen sanders decatur broyles. broyles served in the confederate states army during the american civil war of 1861-1865. by 1908, the house was purchased by james robert darwin. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since july 9, 1997.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in tennessee houses completed in 1860 buildings and structures in rhea county, tennessee
the 1970 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 27 june 1970 at white city stadium.   the winner was john silver and the winning owner received £9,861. john silver was owned, bred and reared by reg young, who later went on to take out a trainer's licence in his own right.  1981  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  1, 5, 1¼, 1¾, 2½ (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report the 1970 derby attracted 187 entries and the market leaders were cals pick the 1969 greyhound of the year, trafalgar cup winner sherwood glen, moordyke spot, valiant ray the select stakes champion and hack it lee. in addition trainer geoff demulder had a greyhound called little county that was subject to significant ante-post wagers.  the qualifying races were a series of races with no betting to determine which greyhounds would line up as the final 48. on the monday before the competition got underway 125 hounds took part and cals pick, valiant ray and sherwood glen all failed to progress through. john silver was the fastest qualifier in 28.94 sec and subsequently became one of the favourites alongside moordyke spot.  during the first round moordyke spot went quickest in 28.74 with john silver and little county also winning. the second round pitted moordyke spot with john silver and the latter came out on top in 28.56; little county remained unbeaten which attracted a £5,000 bet by b.j. patel to win the event.  the semi-finals arrived and demulder's little county won again going into the final unbeaten whilst moordyke sport gained quick revenge over john silver in the second heat. on the run up to final night little county was backed once again in london bookmakers shops and the bookies now had £25,000 liabilities against the greyhound.  the bookmakers made little county 7-4 favourite for the final but he missed the break as the lids went up. recovering well he showed good early pace to get into contention by the second bend and then led by the third bend but john silver, who was involved in early bunching was always in contention before passing little county to claim a one length victory. the success enabled barbara tompkins to claim responsibility for a derby winner one year after her involvement
with sand star. john silver, a british-bred son of 1966 winner faithful hope was bred and owned by reg young, who later became a promoter at the milton keynes track.  quarter finals  semi finals  see also 1970 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
south african heavy metal has its roots in south african hard rock and heavy metal bands in the 1980s. through the late 1980s and the early 1990s south africa grew a well supported metal scene. particular scenes developed in cape town, johannesburg and pretoria. south african heavy metal has been particularly influenced by foreign bands, particularly the new wave of american heavy metal and american thrash metal.  history   in the 1990s there developed extreme metal scenes with grindcore and death metal acts, there was a devout following nationally, which attracted international artists to tour the country. in the mid 1990s two south african bands, voice of destruction and groinchurn signed to the german label morbid records.  south african bands play a variety of different genres, including thrash metal, black metal, speed metal and metalcore.  mind assault was formed in 2003, and were the first extreme metal band to use their native language afrikaans in their music.  famous metal acts that have played in south africa includes, lamb of god, trivium, sepultura, kataklysm, behemoth, hatebreed, cannibal corpse, napalm death, iron maiden and metallica.  in cape town there is a well attended bi-annual metal showcase from metal4africa.  references  south african styles of music
claude chauveau (1861-1940) was a french politician. he served as a member of the french senate from 1910 to 1940, representing cote-d'or.  references  1861 births 1940 deaths people from cote-d'or french senators of the third republic senators of cote-d'or
cortinarius osloensis is a species of fungus native to norway.  references  external links  osloensis fungi of europe
the 1930 argentine primera division was the 39th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on march 23, 1930, and ended on april 12, 1931.  the argentine league restructured as a tournament of 36 teams, playing one another once, with boca juniors crowning champion. following the disruption of the 1929 season by mass abandonment of games, the second half of the 1930 season was marred in a similar way.  final table  relegation the teams occupying the bottom two positions of the league were relegated. argentino del sud set one of the worst points tallies in the history of south american football. the other team, honor y patria, was relegated in its first season at the top level.  references  argentine primera division seasons 1930 in argentine football 1930 in south american football
the companies act 1965 (), is a malaysian law which relates to companies.  structure the companies act 1965, in its current form (15 august 2007), consists of 12 parts containing 374 sections and 10 schedules (including 36 amendments).  part i: preliminary  part ii: administration of act  part iii: constitution of companies  division 1: incorporation  division 2: powers  part iv: shares, debentures and charges  division 1: prospectuses  division 2: restrictions on allotment and commencement of business  division 3: shares  division 3a: substantial shareholdings  division 4: debentures  division 5: interests other than shares, debentures, etc.  division 6: title and transfers  division 6a: provisions applicable to companies whose securities are deposited with the central depository  division 7: registration of charges  part v: management and administration  division 1: office and name  division 2: directors and officers  division 3: meetings and proceedings  division 4: register of members  division 5: annual return  part vi: accounts and audit  division 1: accounts  division 2: audit  part vii: arrangement and reconstructions  part viii: receivers and managers  part ix: investigations  part x: winding up  division 1: preliminary  division 2: winding up by the court  subdivision 1: general  subdivision 2: liquidators  subdivision 3: committees of inspection   subdivision 4: general powers of court   division 3: voluntary winding up  subdivision 1: introductory   subdivision 2: provisions applicable only to members' voluntary winding up   subdivision 3: provisions applicable only to creditors' voluntary winding up  subdivision 4: provisions applicable to every voluntary winding up   division 4: provisions applicable to every mode of winding up  subdivision 1: general  subdivision 2: proof and ranking of claims  subdivision 3: effect on other transactions   subdivision 4: offences   subdivision 5: dissolution  division 5: winding up of unregistered companies  part xi: various types of companies, etc.  division 1: investment companies  division 2: foreign companies  part xii: general  division 1: enforcement of act  division 2: offences  division 3: miscellaneous  schedules  see also companies act  references  external links  companies act 1965   1965 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
the fiji pro 2016 was an event of the world surf league for 2016 world surf league.  this event was held from 07 to 19 june at namotu, (tavarua, fiji) and opposed by 36 surfers.  the tournament was won by gabriel medina (bra), who beat matt wilkinson (aus) in final.  round 1  round 2  round 3  round 4  round 5  quarter finals  semi finals  final  references  fiji pro surfing in fiji 2016 in fijian sport 2016 world surf league
mongolodus is an extinct genus of protoconodonts.  references  external links       conodont genera cambrian conodonts paleozoic life of newfoundland and labrador fossil taxa described in 1977
westlinton is a civil parish in the carlisle district of cumbria, england.  it contains eight listed buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  all the listed buildings are designated at grade ii, the lowest of the three grades, which is applied to "buildings of national importance and special interest".  the parish include the villages of westlinton and blackford, and is otherwise rural.  the listed buildings include farmhouses, a house with outbuildings, two milestones, a bridge, and a church.   buildings  notes and references  notes  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria
abraham l. cohn (may 24, 1898 - may 23, 1966) was an american politician who served part of one term in the massachusetts house of representatives.  cohn was born on may 24, 1898 in haverhill, massachusetts. he attended public schools in haverhill, massachusetts and later in portsmouth new hampshire.    he graduated from the university of new hampshire, class of 1921, where he was a member of  rotc, serving in  wwi.   he married lilian bernson, and moved to  beverly, massachusetts.  where they raised their family,  and were founding members of  congregation b'nai abraham.  both mr. and mrs. cohn were known for their service to the community, and  lived in beverly for the rest of their lives.    cohn served as a member of the beverly board of aldermen, citizen's urban renewal commission, and recreation commission. in 1964, he was elected to the massachusetts house of representatives as a republican. outside of politics, cohn, along with his son arlen was the proprietor of alcon's clothing store in beverly.  on may 23, 1966, cohn collapsed at a meeting of the beverly mental health association and was rushed to beverly hospital, where he died later that night.  references  1898 births 1966 deaths massachusetts republicans members of the massachusetts house of representatives people from beverly, massachusetts 20th-century american politicians
bhattian is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  cast the village  constitutes   18.31%  of schedule caste  and the village  doesn't have any schedule tribe population.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
spain competed at the 1998 european athletics championships in budapest, hungary, from 18-23 august 1998.  medals  results  men track & road events  field events  combined events - decathlon  women track & road events  field events  combined events - heptathlon  nations at the 1998 european athletics championships 1998 european athletics championships
dr george ritchie gilruth frse lrcp lrcse (24 october 1842 - 15 august 1921) was a scottish surgeon and author.  life  he was born on 24 october 1842 the son of eliza ritchie and john, writing master in leith just north of edinburgh and living at 28 constitution street. he is presumed to have studied medicine at the university of edinburgh. he qualified as a surgeon in 1865.  in 1877 he was living at 9 union street in edinburgh and is noted as a qualified surgeon. he was a demonstrator in anatomy at the royal college of surgeons of edinburgh.  in 1880 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were william ferguson, andrew douglas maclagan, patrick heron watson and thomas alexander goldie balfour.  in june 1888 he is noted as an acting surgeon in the edinburgh city artillery volunteer corps. he was then living at 48 nothumberland street.  in 1911 he is noted as living at 53 northumberland street in edinburgh's new town.  he later worked as resident surgeon at consett infirmary in the north of england.  he died at allanton near bridge of allan, stirlingshire on 15 august 1921.  references  1842 births 1921 deaths scottish surgeons people from leith alumni of the university of edinburgh fellows of the royal society of edinburgh medical doctors from edinburgh
30 days of flavia is a book with a series of thirty stories from the life and career of the protagonist and author, flavia tumusiime. the stories were published on flavia's facebook page and later on her main website with the #30daysofflavia.  plot 30 days of flavia started in august 2015. it started with how flavia tumusiime got a job at 91.3 capital fm. the stories profile flavia's private and career life in a random order. she tells of how she got different media jobs what has kept her at most of her jobs. she advises her fans on how to deal with social, private and career problems. the stories were published daily on her facebook page for 30 days. every episode or chapter started with a title and would end with a piece of advice for the readers. her last chapter titled "the journey" was published just moments before appearing on ntv uganda in an interview to officially close the stories of her life.  purpose the purpose of the stories according to flavia was to help the young people that were going through tough times and thought they were alone. 30 days of flavia tells of flavia's personal life which has mistakes, burdens and hard times, a life most of her fans never knew about. she goes on to advise her readers every after each chapter, word of advice, even if you are at your last grain of strength, never show desperation. be confident that the best asset is you and with that, you can acquire anything else.. her last piece of advice was,  my last word of advice is..the bigger the burden/challenge, the bigger the blessing so hold on. #30daysofflavia"  reception the stories garnered mostly positive reviews.  in chapter (day) 27 which was titled "actions", flavia wrote about how one's actions could send out wrong signals people. she described how she had sent wrong signals to us rapper j. cole after an interview at big brother africa in 2012 and how she turned him down. this chapter of her life was trending on social media platforms, radio and television. j. cole's fans all over the world attacked flavia with criticism as her fans commended her for sharing the story which had been loosely published in print media.  references  biographies about actors
in mathematics, differential forms on a riemann surface are an important special case of the general theory of differential forms on smooth manifolds, distinguished by the fact that the conformal structure  on the riemann surface intrinsically defines a hodge star operator on 1-forms (or differentials) without specifying a riemannian metric. this allows the use of hilbert space techniques for studying function theory on the riemann surface and in particular for the construction of harmonic and holomorphic differentials with prescribed singularities. these methods were first used by  in his variational approach to the dirichlet principle, making rigorous the arguments proposed by riemann. later  found a direct approach using his method of orthogonal projection, a precursor of the modern theory of elliptic differential operators and sobolev spaces. these techniques were originally applied to prove the uniformization theorem and its generalization to planar riemann surfaces. later they supplied the analytic foundations for the harmonic integrals of . this article covers general results on differential forms on a riemann surface that do not rely on any choice of riemannian structure.  hodge star on 1-forms on a riemann surface the hodge star is defined on 1-forms by the local formula  it is well-defined because it is invariant under holomorphic changes of coordinate.  indeed, if  is holomorphic as a function of , then by the cauchy-riemann equations  and . in the new coordinates  so that  proving the claimed invariance.  note that for 1-forms  and   in particular if  then  note that in standard coordinates  recall also that  so that  the decomposition  is independent of the choice of local coordinate. the 1-forms with only a  component are called (1,0) forms; those with only a  component are called (0,1) forms. the operators   and  are called the dolbeault operators.  it follows that    the dolbeault operators can similarly be defined on 1-forms and as zero on 2-forms. they have the properties  poincare lemma on a riemann surface the poincare lemma states that every closed 1-form or 2-form is locally exact. thus if ω is a smooth 1-form with  then in some open neighbourhood of a given point there is a smooth function f such that  in that neighbourhood; and for any smooth 2-form ω there is a smooth 1-form ω defined in some open neighbourhood of a given point such that  in that neighbourhood.   if
is a closed 1-form on , then . if  then  and . set  so that .  then  must satisfy  and . the right hand side here is independent of x since its partial derivative with respect to x is 0. so  and hence  similarly, if  then  with . thus a solution is given by  and  comment on differential forms with compact support. note that if ω has compact support, so vanishes outside some smaller rectangle  with  and , then the same is true for the solution f(x,y). so the poincare lemma for 1-forms holds with this additional conditions of compact support.  a similar statement is true for 2-forms; but, since there is some choices for the solution, a little more care has to be taken in making those choices.  in fact if ω has compact support on  and if furthermore , then  with ω a 1-form of compact support on . indeed, ω must have support in some smaller rectangle  with  and . so  vanishes for  or  and for  or . let h(y) be a smooth function supported in (c1,d1) with . set : it is a smooth function supported in  (a1,b1). hence  is smooth and supported in . it now satisfies . finally set  both p and q are smooth and supported in  with  and . hence  is a smooth 1-form supported in  with  integration of 2-forms if ω is a continuous 2-form of compact support on a riemann surface x, its support k can be covered by finitely many coordinate charts ui and there is a partition of unity χi of smooth non-negative functions with compact support such that σ χi = 1 on a neighbourhood of k. then the integral of ω  is defined by  where the integral over ui has its usual definition in local coordinates. the integral is independent of the choices here.  if ω has the local representation f(x,y) dx ∧ dy, then |ω| is the density |f(x,y)| dx ∧ dy, which is well defined and satisfies |∫x ω| ≤ ∫x |ω|. if ω is a non-negative continuous density, not necessarily of compact support, its integral is defined by  if ω is any continuous 2-form it is integrable if  ∫x |ω| < ∞. in this case,
if ∫x  |ω| = lim ∫x  ψn |ω|, then ∫x ω can be defined as lim ∫x  ψn ω. the integrable continuous 2-forms form a complex normed space with norm ||ω||1 =  ∫x |ω|.  integration of 1-forms along paths if ω is a 1-form on a riemann surface x and γ(t) for  is a smooth path in x, then the mapping γ induces a 1-form γ∗ω on [a,b]. the integral of ω along γ is defined by  this definition extends to piecewise smooth paths γ by dividing the path up into the finitely many segments on which it is smooth. in local coordinates if  and  then  so that  note that if the 1-form ω is exact on some connected open set u, so that  for some smooth function f on u (unique up to a constant), and γ(t), , is a smooth path in u, then  this depends only on the difference of the values of f at the endpoints of the curve, so is independent of the choice of f. by the poincare lemma, every closed 1-form is locally exact, so this allows ∫γ ω to be computed as a sum of differences of this kind and for the integral of closed 1-forms to be extended to continuous paths:  monodromy theorem. if ω is a closed 1-form, the integral  can be extended to any continuous path γ(t),  so that it is invariant under any homotopy of paths keeping the end points fixed.    in fact, the image of γ is compact, so can be covered by finitely many connected open sets ui on each of which ω can be written dfi for some smooth function fi on ui, unique up to a constant. it may be assumed that [a,b] is broken up into finitely many closed intervals  with  and  so that . from the above if γ is piecewise smooth,  now γ(ti) lies in the open set , hence in a connected open component vi. the difference  satisfies , so is a constant ci independent of γ. hence  the formula on the right hand side also makes sense if γ is just continuous on [a,b] and can be used to define . the definition is independent of choices: for the curve γ can be uniformly approximated by piecewise
smooth curves δ so close that  for all i; the formula above then equals  and shows the integral is independent of the choice of δ. the same argument shows that the definition is also invariant under small homotopies fixing endpoints; by compactness, it is therefore invariant under any homotopy fixing endpoints.  the same argument shows that a homotopy between closed continuous loops does not change their integrals over closed 1-forms. since , the integral of an exact form over a closed loop vanishes.  conversely if the integral of a closed 1-form ω over any closed loop vanishes, then the 1-form must be exact.  indeed a function f(z) can be defined on x by fixing a point w, taking any path δ from w to z and setting . the assumption implies that f is independent of the path. to check that , it suffices to check this locally. fix z0 and take a path δ1 from w to z0. near z0 the poincare lemma implies that  for some smooth function g defined in a neighbourhood of z0. if δ2 is a path from z0 to z, then , so f differs from g by a constant near z0. hence  near z0.  a closed 1-form is exact if and only if its integral around any piecewise smooth or continuous jordan curve vanishes.  in fact the integral is already known to vanish for an exact form, so it suffices to show that if  for all piecewise smooth closed jordan curves γ then  for all closed continuous curves γ. let γ be a closed continuous curve. the image of γ can be covered by finitely many opens on which ω is exact and this data can be used to define the integral on γ. now recursively replace γ by smooth segments between successive division points on the curve so that the resulting curve δ has only finitely many intersection points and passes through each of these only twice. this curve can be broken up as a superposition of finitely many piecewise smooth jordan curves. the integral over each of these is zero, so their sum, the integral over δ, is also zero. by construction the integral over δ equals the integral over γ, which therefore vanishes.  the above argument also shows that given a continuous jordan curve γ(t), there is a finite set of simple smooth jordan curves γi(t) with nowhere zero derivatives such that  for any closed 1-form ω. thus to check exactness
of a closed form it suffices to show that the vanishing of the integral around any  regular closed curve, i.e. a simple smooth jordan curve with nowhere vanishing derivative.  the same methods show that any continuous loop on a riemann surface is homotopic to a smooth loop with nowhere zero derivative.  green-stokes formula  if u is a bounded region in the complex plane with boundary consisting of piecewise smooth curves and ω is a 1-form defined on a neighbourhood of the closure of u, then the green-stokes formula states that  in particular if ω is a 1-form of compact support on c then  since the formula may be applied to a large disk containing the support of ω.  similar formulas hold on a riemann surface x and can be deduced from the classical formulas using partitions of unity. thus if  is a connected region with compact closure and piecewise smooth boundary ∂u and ω is a 1-form defined on a neighbourhood of the closure of u, then the green-stokes formula states that  moreover, if ω is a 1-form of compact support on x then  to prove the second formula take a partition of unity ψi supported in coordinate charts covering the support of ω. then , by the planar result. similarly to prove the first formula it suffices to show that  when ψ is a smooth function compactly supported in some coordinate patch. if the coordinate patch avoids the boundary curves, both sides vanish by the second formula above. otherwise it can be assumed that the coordinate patch is a disk, the boundary of which cuts the curve transversely at two points. the same will be true for a slightly smaller disk containing the support of ψ. completing the curve to a jordan curve by adding part of the boundary of the smaller disk, the formula reduces to the planar green-stokes formula.  the green-stokes formula implies an adjoint relation for the laplacian on functions defined as δf = −d∗df. this gives a 2-form, given in local coordinates by the formula  then if f and g are smooth and the closure of u is compact  moreover, if f or g has compact support then  duality between 1-forms and closed curves  theorem. if  γ is a continuous jordan curve on a riemann surface x, there is a smooth closed 1-form α of compact support such that  for any closed smooth 1-form ω on x.  it suffices to prove this when γ
is a regular closed curve. by the inverse function theorem, there is a tubular neighbourhood of the image of γ, i.e. a smooth diffeomorphism  of the annulus  into x such that . using a bump function on the second factor, a non-negative function g with compact support can be constructed such that g is smooth off γ, has support in a small neighbourhood of γ, and in a sufficiently small neighbourhood of γ is equal to 0 for  and 1 for . thus g has a jump discontinuity across γ, although its differential dg is smooth with compact support. but then, setting , it follows from green's formula applied to the annulus  that  corollary 1. a closed smooth 1-form ω is exact if and only if  for all smooth 1-forms α of compact support.  in fact if ω is exact, it has the form df for f smooth, so that  by green's theorem. conversely, if  for all smooth 1-forms α of compact support, the duality between jordan curves and 1-forms implies that the integral of ω around any closed jordan curve is zero and hence that ω is exact.  corollary 2. if γ is a continuous closed curve on a riemann surface x, there is a smooth closed 1-form α of compact support such that  for any closed smooth 1-form ω on x. the form α is unique up to adding an exact form and can be taken to have support in any open neighbourhood of the image of γ.  in fact γ is homotopic to a piecewise smooth closed curve δ, so that . on the other hand there are finitely many piecewise smooth jordan curves δi such that . the result for δi thus implies the result for γ. if β is another form with the same property, the difference  satisfies  for all closed smooth 1-forms ω. so the difference is exact by corollary 1. finally, if u is any neighbourhood of the image of γ, then the last result follows by applying first assertion to γ and u in place of γ and x.  intersection number of closed curves the intersection number of two closed curves γ1, γ2 in a riemann surface x can be defined analytically by the formula  where α1 and α2 are smooth 1-forms of compact support corresponding to γ1 and γ2. from the definition it follows that . since αi can be taken to have its support in a neighbourhood of the image of γi,
it follows that  if γ1 and γ2 are disjoint. by definition it depends only on the homotopy classes of γ1 and γ2.  more generally the intersection number is always an integer and counts the number of times with signs that the two curves intersect. a crossing at a point is a positive or negative crossing according to whether dγ1 ∧ dγ2 has the same or opposite sign to , for a local holomorphic parameter z = x + iy.  indeed, by homotopy invariance, it suffices to check this for smooth jordan curves with nowhere vanishing derivatives. the α1 can be defined by taking α1df with f of compact support in a neighbourhood of the image of γ1 equal to 0 near the left hand side of γ1, 1 near the right hand side of γ1 and smooth off the image of γ1. then if the points of intersection of γ2(t) with γ1 occur at t = t1, ..., tm, then  this gives the required result since the jump  is + 1 for a positive crossing and −1 for a negative crossing.  holomorphic and harmonic 1-forms a holomorphic 1-form ω is one that in local coordinates is given by an expression f(z) dz with f holomorphic. since  it follows that dω = 0, so any holomorphic 1-form is closed. moreover, since ∗dz = −i dz, ω must satisfy ∗ω = −iω. these two conditions characterize holomorphic 1-forms. for if ω is closed, locally it can be written as dg for some g, the condition ∗dg = i dg forces , so that g is holomorphic and dg = g '(z) dz, so that ω is holomorphic.  let ω = f dz be a holomorphic 1-form. write ω = ω1 + iω2 with ω1 and ω2 real. then dω1 = 0  and dω2 = 0; and since ∗ω = −iω, ∗ω1 = ω2. hence d∗ω1 = 0. this process can clearly be reversed, so that there is a one-one correspondence between holomorphic 1-forms and real 1-forms ω1 satisfying dω1 = 0 and d∗ω1 = 0. under this correspondence, ω1 is the real part of ω while ω is given by ω = ω1 + i∗ω
1. such forms ω1 are called harmonic 1-forms. by definition ω1 is harmonic if and only if ∗ω1 is harmonic.  since holomorphic 1-forms locally have the form df with f a holomorphic function and since the real part of a holomorphic function is harmonic, harmonic 1-forms locally have the form dh with h a harmonic function. conversely if ω1 can be written in this way locally, d∗ω1 = d∗dh = (hxx +  hyy) dx∧dy so that h is harmonic.  remark. the definition of harmonic functions and 1-forms is intrinsic and only relies on the underlying riemann surface structure. if, however, a conformal metric is chosen on the riemann surface (see below), the adjoint d* of d can be defined and the hodge star operation extended to functions and 2-forms. the hodge laplacian can be defined on k-forms as ∆k = dd* +d*d and then a function f or a 1-form ω is harmonic if and only if it is annihilated by the hodge laplacian, i.e. ∆0f = 0 or ∆1ω = 0. the metric structure, however, is not required for the application to the uniformization of simply connected or planar riemann surfaces.  sobolev spaces on t2 the theory of sobolev spaces on  can be found in , an account which is followed in several later textbooks such as  and . it provides an analytic framework for studying function theory on the torus c/z+i z = r2 / z2 using fourier series, which are just eigenfunction expansions for the laplacian . the theory developed here essentially covers tori c / λ where λ is a lattice in c. although there is a corresponding theory of sobolev spaces on any compact riemann surface, it is elementary in this case, because it reduces to harmonic analysis on the compact abelian group . classical approaches to weyl's lemma use harmonic analysis on the non-compact abelian group c = r2, i.e. the methods of fourier analysis, in particular convolution operators and the fundamental solution of the laplacian.  let t2 = {(eix,eiy: x, y ∊ [0,2π)} = r2/z2 = c/λ where λ = z + i z. for λ = m + i n ≅ (m,
n) in λ, set . furthermore, set dx = −i∂/∂x and dy = −i∂/∂y. for α = (p,q) set dα =(dx)p (dy)q, a differential operator of total degree |α| = p + q. thus , where . the (eλ) form an orthonormal basis in c(t2) for the inner product , so that .  for f in c∞(t2) and k an integer, define the kth sobolev norm by  the associated inner product  makes c∞(t2) into an inner product space. let hk(t2) be its hilbert space completion. it can be described equivalently as the hilbert space completion of the space of trigonometric polynomials-that is finite sums -with respect to the kth sobolev norm, so that hk(t2) = {σ aλ eλ : σ |aλ|2(1 + |λ|2)k < ∞} with inner product  (σ aλ eλ, σ bμ eμ)(k) = σ aλ (1 + |λ|2)k.  as explained below, the elements in the intersection h∞(t2) =   hk(t2) are exactly the smooth functions on t2; elements in the union h−∞(t2) =  hk(t2) are just distributions on t2 (sometimes referred to as "periodic distributions" on r2).  the following is a (non-exhaustive) list of properties of the sobolev spaces.differentiability and sobolev spaces.  for k ≥ 0 since, using the binomial theorem to expand (1 + |λ|2)k,   differential operators. dα hk(t2) ⊂ hk−|α|(t2) and dα defines a bounded linear map from hk(t2) to hk−|α|(t2).  the operator i + δ defines a unitary map of hk+2(t2) onto hk(t2); in particular (i + δ)k defines a unitary map of hk(t2) onto h−k(t2) for k ≥ 0.  the first assertions follow because dα eλ = λα eλ and |λα| �
� |λ||α| ≤ (1 + |λ|2)|α|/2. the second assertions follow because i + δ acts as multiplication by 1 + |λ|2 on eλ.duality. for k ≥ 0, the pairing sending f, g to (f,g) establishes a duality between hk(t2) and h−k(t2).  this is a restatement of the fact that (i + δ)k establishes a unitary map between these two spaces, because .multiplication operators. if h is a smooth function then multiplication by h defines a continuous operator on hk(t2).  for k ≥ 0, this follows from the formula for ||f|| above and the leibniz rule. continuity for h−k(t2) follows by duality, since .sobolev spaces and differentiability (sobolev's embedding theorem). for k ≥ 0,  and sup|α|≤k |dαf|  ≤ ck ⋅ ||f||(k+2).  the inequalities for trigonometric polynomials imply the containments. the inequality for k = 0 follows from  by the cauchy-schwarz inequality. the first term is finite by the integral test, since ∬c (1 + |z|2)−2 dx dy =  < ∞ using polar coordinates. in general if |α| ≤ k, then |sup dαf| ≤ c0 ||dαf||2 ≤ c0 ⋅ cα ⋅ ||f||k+2 by the continuity properties of dα.smooth functions. c∞(t2) =  hk(t2) consists of fourier series σ aλ eλ such that for all k > 0, (1 + |λ|2)k |aλ| tends to 0 as |λ| tends to ∞, i.e. the fourier coefficients aλ are of "rapid decay".  this is an immediate consequence of the sobolev embedding theorem.inclusion maps (rellich's compactness theorem). if k > j, the space hk(t2) is a subspace of hj(t2) and the inclusion hk(t2)  hj(t2) is compact.  with respect to the natural orthonormal bases, the inclusion map becomes multiplication
by (1 + |λ|2)−(k−j)/2. it is therefore compact because it is given by a diagonal matrix with diagonal entries tending to zero.elliptic regularity (weyl's lemma). suppose that f and u in  h−∞(t2) =  hk(t2) satisfy ∆u = f. suppose also that ψ f is a smooth function for every smooth function ψ vanishing off a fixed open set u in t2; then the same is true for u. (thus if f is smooth off u, so is u.)  by the leibniz rule , so . if it is known that φu lies in hk(t2) for some k and all φ vanishing off u, then differentiating shows that φux  and φuy lie in hk−1(t2). the square-bracketed expression therefore also lies in  hk−1(t2). the operator (i + δ)−1 carries this space onto hk+1(t2), so that ψu must lie in hk+1(t2). continuing in this way, it follows that ψu lies in  hk(t2) = c∞(t2).hodge decomposition on functions. h0(t2)  =  ∆ h2(t2)  ker ∆ and c∞(t2) = ∆ c∞(t2)  ker ∆.  identifying h2(t2) with l2(t2)  = h0(t2) using the unitary operator i + δ, the first statement reduces to proving that the operator t = ∆(i + δ)−1 satisfies l2(t2) = im t  ker t. this operator  is bounded, self-adjoint and diagonalized by the orthonormal basis eλ with eigenvalue |λ|2(1 + |λ|2)−1. the operator t has kernel c e0 (the constant functions) and on (ker t)⊥ =  it has a bounded inverse given by s eλ = |λ|−2(1 + |λ|2) eλ for λ = 0. so im t must be closed and hence l2(t2) = (ker t)⊥  ker t = im t   ker t.  finally if f = ∆g + h with
f in c∞(t2), g in h2(t2) and h constant, g must be smooth by weyl's lemma.hodge theory on t2. let ωk(t2) be the space of smooth k-forms for 0 ≤ k ≤ 2. thus ω0(t2) = c∞(t2), ω1(t2) = c∞(t2) dx  c∞(t2) dy and ω2(t2) = c∞(t2) dx ∧ dy. the hodge star operation is defined on 1-forms by ∗(p dx + q dy) = −q dx + p dy. this definition is extended to 0-forms and 2-forms by *f = f dx ∧ dy and *(g dx ∧ dy) = g. thus ** = (−1)k on k-forms. there is a natural complex inner product on ωk(t2) defined by  define . thus δ takes ωk(t2) to ωk−1(t2), annihilating functions; it is the adjoint of d for the above inner products, so that .  indeed by the green-stokes formula  the operators d and δ = d* satisfy d2 = 0 and δ2 = 0. the hodge laplacian on k-forms is defined by . from the definition . moreover  and . this allows the hodge decomposition to be generalised to include 1-forms and 2-forms:hodge theorem. ωk(t2) = ker d  ker d∗  im d  im ∗d  = ker d  ker d*  im d  im d*. in the hilbert space completion of ωk(t2) the orthogonal complement of  is , the finite-dimensional space of harmonic k-forms, i.e. the constant k-forms. in particular in   ,  , the space of harmonic k-forms. thus the de rham cohomology of t2 is given by harmonic (i.e. constant) k-forms.  from the hodge decomposition on functions, ωk(t2) = ker ∆k  im ∆k. since ∆k = dd* + d*d, ker ∆k = ker d  ker d*. moreover im (dd* + d*d) ⊊ im
d  im d*. since  ker d  ker d* is orthogonal to this direct sum, it follows that ωk(t2) = ker d  ker d*  im d  im d*. the last assertion follows because ker d contains  and is orthogonal to im d* = im ∗d.  hilbert space of 1-forms in the case of the compact riemann surface c / λ, the theory of sobolev spaces shows that the hilbert space completion of smooth 1-forms can be decomposed as the sum of three pairwise orthogonal spaces, the closure of exact 1-forms df, the closure of coexact 1-forms ∗df and the harmonic 1-forms (the 2-dimensional space of constant 1-forms). the method of orthogonal projection of  puts riemann's approach to the dirichlet principle on sound footing by generalizing this decomposition to arbitrary riemann surfaces.  if x is a riemann surface ω(x) denote the space of continuous 1-forms with compact support. it admits the complex inner product  for α and β in ω(x). let h denote the hilbert space completion of ω(x). although h can be interpreted in terms of measurable functions, like sobolev spaces on tori it can be studied directly using only elementary functional analytic techniques involving hilbert spaces and bounded linear operators.  let h1 denote the closure of d c(x) and h2 denote the closure of ∗d c(x). since , these are orthogonal subspaces. let h0 denote the orthogonal complement (h1  h2)⊥ = h  h.theorem (hodge−weyl decomposition). h = h0  h1  h2. the subspace h0 consists of square integrable harmonic 1-forms on x, i.e. 1-forms ω such that dω = 0, d∗ω = 0 and ||ω||2  = ∫x ω ∧ ∗ < ∞.  every square integrable continuous 1-form lies in h.  the space of continuous 1-forms of compact support is contained in the space of square integrable continuous 1-forms. they are both inner product spaces for the above inner product. so it suffices to show that any square integrable continuous 1-form can be approximated by continuous 1-forms of compact support. let ω be a continuous square integra
ble 1-form, thus the positive density ω = ω ∧ ∗ is integrable and there are continuous functions of compact support ψn with 0 ≤  ψn ≤ 1 such that ∫x ψn ω tends to ∫x ω = ||ω||2. let , a continuous function of compact support with . then ωn = φn ⋅ ω tends to ω in h, since ||ω − ωn||2 = ∫x (1 − ψn) ω tends to 0.  if ω in h is such that ψ ⋅ ω is continuous for every ψ in cc(x), then ω is a square integrable continuous 1-form.  note that the multiplication operator m(φ) given by m(φ)α = φ ⋅ α for φ in cc(x) and α in ω(x) satisfies ||m(φ)α|| ≤ ||φ||∞ ||α||, where ||φ||∞ = sup |φ|. thus m(φ) defines a bounded linear operator with operator norm ||m(φ)|| ≤ ||φ||∞. it extends continuously to a bounded linear operator on h with the same operator norm. for every open set u with compact closure, there is a continuous function φ of compact support with 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1 with φ ≅ 1 on u. then φ ⋅ ω is continuous on u so defines a unique continuous form ωu on u. if v is another open set intersecting u, then  ωu = ωv on u  v: in fact if z lies in u  v and  ψ in cc(u  v) ⊂ cc(x) with ψ = 1 near z, then ψ ⋅ ωu = ψ ⋅ ω = ψ ⋅ ωv, so that ωu = ωv near z. thus the  ωu's patch together to give a continuous 1-form ω0 on x. by construction, ψ ⋅ ω = ψ ⋅ ω0 for every ψ in cc(x). in particular for φ in cc(x) with , ∫  φ ⋅ ω0 ∧ ∗ = ||φ1/2 ⋅ ω0||2 = ||φ1/2 ⋅ ω||2 ≤ ||ω||2. so
ω0 ∧ ∗ is integrable and hence ω0 is square integrable, so an element of h. on the other hand ω can be approximated by ωn in ω(x). take ψn in cc(x) with 0 ≤ ψn ≤ 1 with . since real-valued continuous functions are closed under lattice operations. it can further be assumed that ∫ ψ ω0 ∧ ∗, and hence  ∫ ψn ω0 ∧ ∗, increase to ||ω0||2. but then ||ψn ⋅ ω − ω|| and ||ψn ⋅ ω0 − ω0|| tend to 0. since , this shows that .   every square integrable harmonic 1-form ω lies in h0.  this is immediate because ω lies in h and, for f a smooth function of compact support,  and .  every element of h0 is given by a square integrable harmonic 1-form.  let ω be an element of h0 and for fixed p in x fix a chart u in x containing p which is conformally equivalent by a map f to a disc d ⊂ t2 with f(0) = p.  the identification map from ω(u) onto ω(d) and hence into ω1(t2) preserves norms (up to a constant factor). let k be the closure of  ω(u) in h. then the above map extends uniquely to an isometry t of k into h0(t2)dx  h0(t2)dy. moreover if ψ is in c(u) then . the identification map t is also compatible with d and the hodge star operator. let d1 be a smaller concentric disk in t2 and set v = f(v).  take φ in c(u) with φ ≡ 1 on v. then (m(φ) ω,dh) = 0 = (m(φ) ω,∗dh) for h in c(v). hence, if ω1 = m(φ)ω and ω2 = t(ω1), then (ω2, dg) = 0 = (ω2, ∗dg) for g in .  write ω2 = a dx + b dy with a and b in h0(t2). the conditions above imply (dω1, ∗g) = 0 = (
d∗ ω1, ∗g). replacing ∗g by dω3 with ω3 a smooth 1-form supported in d1, it follows that ∆1 ω2  = 0 on d1. thus ∆a = 0 = ∆b on d1. hence by weyl's lemma, a and b are harmonic on d1. in particular both of them, and hence ω2, are smooth on d1; and dω2 = 0 = d∗ω2 on d1. transporting these equations back to x, it follows that ω1 is smooth on v and dω1 = 0 = d∗ω1 on v. since ω1 = m(φ)ω  and p was an arbitrary point, this implies in particular that m(ψ)ω is continuous for every ψ in cc(x). so ω is continuous and square integrable.  but then ω is smooth on v and dω = 0 = d∗ω on v. again since p was arbitrary, this implies ω is smooth on x and dω = 0 = d∗ω on x, so that ω is a harmonic 1-form on x.  from the formulas for the dolbeault operators  and , it follows that  where both sums are orthogonal. the two subspaces in the second sum correspond to the ±i eigenspaces of the hodge ∗ operator. denoting their closures by h3 and h4, it follows that h = h3 ⊕ h4 and that these subspaces are interchanged by complex conjugation. the smooth 1-forms in h1, h2, h3 or h4 have a simple description.  a smooth 1-form in h1 has the form df for f smooth. a smooth 1-form in h2 has the form ∗df for f smooth. a smooth 1-form in h3 has the form f for f smooth. a smooth 1-form in h3 has the form f for f smooth.  in fact, in view of the decompositions of h and its invariance under the hodge star operation, it suffices to prove the first of these assertions. since  h1  is invariant under complex conjugation, it may be assumed that α is a smooth real 1-form in h1. it is therefore a limit in h1 of forms dfn with fn smooth of compact support. the 1-form α must be
closed since, for any  real-valued f in c(x),  so that dα = 0. to prove that α is exact it suffices to prove that ∫x α ∧ ∗β = 0 for any smooth closed real 1-form β of compact support. but by green's formula    the above characterisations have an immediate corollary:  a smooth 1-form α in h can be decomposed uniquely as α = da + ∗db = ∂f + ∂g, with a, b, f and g smooth and all the summands square integrable.  combined with the previous hodge-weyl decomposition and the fact that an element of h0 is automatically smooth, this immediately implies:theorem (smooth hodge-weyl decomposition). if α is a smooth square integrable 1-form then α can be written uniquely as  with ω harmonic, square integrable and  smooth with square integrable differentials.  holomorphic 1-forms with a double pole the following result-reinterpreted in the next section in terms of harmonic functions and the dirichlet principle-is the key tool for proving the uniformization theorem for simply connected, or more generally planar, riemann surfaces.theorem. if x is a riemann surface and p is a point on x with local coordinate z, there is a unique holomorphic differential 1-form ω with a double pole at p, so that the singular part of ω is z−2dz near p,  and regular everywhere else, such that ω is square integrable on the complement of a neighbourhood of p and the real part of ω is exact on x \ {p}.   the double pole condition is invariant under holomorphic coordinate change z  z + az2 + ⋯. there is an analogous result for poles of order greater than 2 where the singular part of ω has the form z-kdz with k > 2, although this condition is not invariant under holomorphic coordinate change.  to prove uniqueness, note that if ω1 and ω2 are two solutions then their difference ω = ω1 − ω2  is a square integrable holomorphic 1-form which is exact on x \ {p}. thus near p,  with f holomorphic near z = 0. there is a holomorphic function g on x \ {p} such that ω = dg there. but then g must coincide with a
primitive of f near z = 0, so that ω = dg everywhere. but then ω lies in h0 ∩ h1 = (0), i.e. ω = 0.  to prove existence, take a bump function 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 1 in c(x) with support in a neighbourhood of p of the form |z| < ε and such that ψ ≡ 1 near p. set  so that α equals z-2dz near p, vanishes off a neighbourhood of p and is exact on x \ {p}. let β = α − i∗α, a smooth (0,1) form on x, vanishing near z = 0, since it is a (1,0) form there, and vanishing off a larger neighbourhood of p.  by the smooth hodge−weyl decomposition, β can be decomposed as β = ω0 + da -  i∗da with ω0 a harmonic and square integrable (0,1) form and a smooth with square integrable differential. now set γ = α -  da = ω0 + i∗α − i∗da and ω = re γ + i∗ re γ. then α is exact on x \ {p}; hence so is γ, as well as its real part, which is also the real part of ω. near p, the 1-form ω differs from z-2dz by a smooth (1,0) form. it remains to prove that ω = 0 on x \ {p}; or equivalently that re γ is harmonic on x \ {p}. in fact γ is harmonic on x \ {p}; for dγ = dα − d(da) = 0 on x \ {p} because α is exact there; and similarly d∗γ = 0 using the formula γ = ω0 + i∗α − i∗da and the fact that ω0 is harmonic.corollary of proof.  if x is a riemann surface and p is a point on x with local coordinate z, there is a unique real-valued 1-form δ which is harmonic on x \ {p} such that δ - re z−2dz is harmonic near z = 0 (the point p)  such that δ is square integrable on the complement of a neighbourhood of p. moreover, if h is any real-valued smooth function on
x with dh square integrable and h vanishing near p, then (δ,dh) = 0.  existence follows by taking δ = re γ = re ω above. since ω = δ + i∗δ, the uniqueness of  ω implies the uniqueness of δ. alternatively if δ1 and δ2 are two solutions, their difference η = δ1 - δ2 has no singularity at p and is harmonic on x \ {p}. it is therefore harmonic in a neighbourhood of p and therefore everywhere. so η lies in h0. but also η is exact on x \ p and hence on the whole of x, so it also lies in h1. but then it must lie in h0 ∩ h1 = (0), so that η = 0. finally, if n is the closure of a neighbourhood of p disjoint from the support of h and y = x \ n, then δ|y lies in h0(y)  and dh lies in the space h1(y) so that  dirichlet's principle on a riemann surfacetheorem. if x is a riemann surface and p is a point on x with local coordinate z, there is a unique real-valued harmonic function u on x \ {p} such that u(z) - re z−1 is harmonic near z = 0 (the point p)  such that du is square integrable on the complement of a neighbourhood of p. moreover, if h is any real-valued smooth function on x with dh square integrable and h vanishing near p, then (du,dh)=0.  in fact this result is immediate from the theorem and corollary in the previous section. the harmonic form δ constructed there is the real part of a holomorphic form ω = dg where g is holomorphic function on x with a simple pole at p with residue -1, i.e. g(z) = -z−1 + a0 + a1z + a2 z2 + ⋯ near z = 0. so u = - re g gives a solution with the claimed properties since δ = −du and hence (du,dh) =  −(δ,dh) = 0.  this result can be interpreted in terms of dirichlet's principle. let dr be a parametric disk |z| < r about p (the point z = 0) with r > 1. let α = −d
(ψz−1), where 0 ≤ ψ ≤ 1 is a bump function supported in d = d1, identically 1 near z = 0. let α1 = −χd(z) re d(z−1) where χd is the characteristic function of d. let γ= re α and γ1 = re α1. since χd can be approximated by bump functions in l2, γ1 − γ lies in the real hilbert space of 1-forms re h; similarly  α1 − α lies in h. dirichlet's principle states that the distance function  f(ξ) = ||γ1 − γ - ξ||  on re h1 is minimised by a smooth 1-form ξ0 in re h1. in fact −du coincides with the minimising 1-form: γ + ξ0 = −du.  this version of dirichlet's principle is easy to deduce from the previous construction of du. by definition ξ0 is the orthogonal projection of γ1 - γ onto re h1 for the real inner product re (η1,η2) on h, regarded as a real inner product space. it coincides with the real part of the orthogonal projection ω1 of α1 - α onto h1 for the complex inner product on h. since the hodge star operator is a unitary map on h swapping h1 and h2, ω2 = ∗ω1 is the orthogonal projection of ∗(α1 -  α) onto h2. on the other hand, ∗α1 = −i α1, since α is a (1,0) form. hence  (α1 - α) − i∗(α1 - α) = ω0 + ω1 + ω2,  with ωk in hk. but the left hand side equals -α + i∗α = −β, with β defined exactly as in the preceding section, so this coincides with the previous construction.  further discussion of dirichlet's principle on a riemann surface can be found in , , , ,  and .historical note.  proved the existence of the harmonic function u by giving a direct proof of dirichlet's principle. in , he presented his method of orthogonal projection which has been adopted in the presentation above, following , but with the theory of sobolev spaces on t2 used to prove elliptic regularity without using measure theory
. in the expository texts  and , both authors avoid invoking results on measure theory: they follow weyl's original approach for constructing harmonic functions with singularities via dirichlet's principle. in weyl's method of orthogonal projection, lebesgue's theory of integration had been used to realise hilbert spaces of 1-forms in terms of measurable 1-forms, although the 1-forms to be constructed were smooth or even analytic away from their singularity. in the preface to , referring to the extension of his method of orthogonal projection to higher dimensions by , weyl writes:  "influenced by kodaira's work, i have hesitated a moment as to whether i should not replace the dirichlet principle by the essentially equivalent "method of orthogonal projection" which is treated in a paper of mine. but for reasons the explication of which would lead too far afield here, i have stuck to the old approach."  in , after giving a brief exposition of the method of orthogonal projection and making reference to weyl's writings, kodaira explains:  "i first planned to prove dirichlet's principle using the method of orthogonal projection in this book. however, i did not like to have to use the concept of lebesgue measurability only for the proof of dirichlet's principle and therefore i rewrote it in such a way that i did not have to."  the methods of hilbert spaces, lp spaces and measure theory appear in the non-classical theory of riemann surfaces (the study of moduli spaces of riemann surfaces) through the beltrami equation and teichmuller theory.  holomorphic 1-forms with two single polestheorem. given a riemann surface x and two distinct points a and b on x, there is a holomorphic 1-form on x with simple poles at the two points with non-zero residues having sum zero such that the 1-form is square integrable on the complement of any open neighbourhoods of the two points.  the proof is similar to the proof of the result on holomorphic 1-forms with a single double pole. the result is first proved when a and b are close and lie in a parametric disk. indeed, once this is proved, a sum of 1-forms for a chain of sufficiently close points between a and b will provide the required 1-form, since the intermediate singular terms will cancel. to construct the 1-form for points corresponding to a and b in a
parametric disk, the previous construction can be used starting with the 1-form  which locally has the form  poisson equationtheorem (poisson equation). if ω is a smooth 2-form of compact support on a riemann surface x, then ω can be written as ω = ∆f where f is a smooth function with df square integrable if and only if  ∫x  ω = 0.  in fact, ω can be written as ω = dα with α a smooth 1-form of compact support: indeed, using partitions of unity, this reduces to the case of a smooth 2-form of compact support on a rectangle. indeed ω can be written as a finite sum of 2-forms each supported in a parametric rectangle and  having integral zero. for each of these 2-forms the result follows from poincare's lemma with compact support. writing α = ω + da + *db, it follows that ω = d*db = ∆b.  in the case of the simply connected riemann surfaces c, d and s= c ∪ ∞, the riemann surfaces are symmetric spaces g / k for the groups g =  r2, sl(2,r''') and su(2). the methods of group representation theory imply the operator ∆ is g-invariant, so that its fundamental solution is given by right convolution by a function  on k \ g / k. thus in these cases poisson's equation can be solved by an explicit integral formula. it is easy to verify that this explicit solution tends to 0 at ∞, so that in the case of these surfaces there is a solution f'' tending to 0 at ∞.  proves this directly for simply connected surfaces and uses it to deduce the uniformization theorem.  see also differentials of the first kind abelian differential dolbeault complex  notes  references  , 1989 reprint of 1941 edition with foreword by michael atiyah , reprint of 1941 edition incorporating corrections supplied by hermann weyl    , part iii, chapter 8: "die verallgemeinerung des riemannschen abbildungssatzes. das dirichletsche prinzlp," by richard courant        harmonic functions riemann surfaces differential forms
varfolomey alexandrovich zaytsev (, 11 september 1842, kostroma, imperial russia, - 20 january 1882, clarens, switzerland, switzerland) was a russian literary critic, historian, journalist, and publicist. he was a leading figure of the russian nihilist movement in literary publication of his time.  career   arguably the most ardent and confrontational author of russkoye slovo in 1863-1865, zaytsev propagated the 'negation of aesthetics' doctrine, panned alexey pisemsky's and nikolai leskov's anti-nihilistic novels and published critical essays which were "not dry and dour book reviews but fiery propaganda in the form of literary criticism... written with blood from open heart and juices of nerves," according to the critic and fellow social democrat nikolai shelgunov. it was zaytsev who chose to take saltykov-shchedrin's remark concerning chernyshevsky's novel what is to be done as a pretext for instigating the long and bitter feud with sovremennik which came to be known (via dostoyevsky) as 'the break among the nihilists'.  in 1866 after dmitry karakozov's attempt at the life of the tsar, zaytsev was arrested and spent several months in the petropavlovskaya fortress. in 1869 he left russia and, having veered towards the anarchists and mikhail bakunin in particular, launched the italian section of the 1st international in turin. later in his life he veered towards the revolutionary narodniks and became friends with georgy plekhanov, vera zasulich and sergey stepnyak-kravchinsky.  zaytsev contributed to such publications as the geneva-based obshcheye delo (common cause, where more than 80 of his articles appeared which earned him the reputation of "russian rochefort") and kolokol in london, as well as delo and otechestvennye zapiski back in russia.  in the 1870s zaytsev's main subject of interest became history; the two compilations on the ancient history ( 1882) have won him scholarly acclaim. among the books he translated were  by johann jakob honegger, the works by ferdinand lassalle (1870), ippolito nievo's confessions of an italian (1875), james guillaume's anarchy according to proudhon (1874), denis diderot's novels and novellas in 2 volumes (1872). starting with volume 3 he succeeded nikolai chernyshevsky as a translation editor of the world history by friedrich christoph schlosser (1861-1868
).  the selected works by v.a. zaytsev came out in moscow, ussr, in 1934.  references   russian literary critics russian journalists russian nihilists russian revolutionaries people from kostroma 1842 births 1882 deaths
rogerio dutra silva was the defending champion but chose not to defend his title.  santiago giraldo won the title after defeating uladzimir ignatik 6-4, 3-6, 7-6(7-2) in the final.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references  main draw  qualifying draw  2016 men's singles advantage cars prague open - singles
a death midwife, or death doula, is a person who assists in the dying process, much like a midwife or doula does with the birthing process. it is often a community based role, aiming to help families cope with death through recognizing it as a natural and important part of life. the role can supplement and go beyond hospice. practitioners perform a large variety of service, including but not limited to creating death plans, and providing spiritual, psychological, and social support before and just after death. their role can also include more logistical activities, helping with services, planning funerals and memorial services, and guiding mourners in their rights and responsibilities.  the presence of the role of a modern death midwife has been evolving in recent years, including a controversy over the regulation process for the position and the use of the term "midwife" as opposed to doula, and bills proposed to regulate the process and provide licenses for death doulas. the terms "end of life guide", "home funeral guide" and "celebrant" are also used. the field has also seen a significant rise in training organizations, which train hospitals along with individuals.  historical role of death midwives   the rise of death midwives is a relatively new movement, with private certification programs following the legacy of pilot programs in clinical care. one of the first movements was started out of new york in 2000, a volunteer program focused on pairing so-called "doulas" with terminally ill people. the program was funded by the shira ruskay center of the jewish board of family and children's services and nyu medical center, and began pairing five volunteers with patients. the program was ultimately named "doula to accompany and comfort". the volunteers went through training on both clinical and spiritual aspects,  including but not limited to the complexities of end of life health care, physical issues like incontinence and disorientation, and hope in the face of death.  the next major clinical implementation of the death doula methodology was at the baylor supportive and palliative care service and clinical ethics committee shortly after the establishment of the new york program. members of this department including palliative care nurses, chaplains, and therapists worked together to create a program with in consultation with the new york program. from there, a program involving a 6-week training program was formed to work hand in hand with clinical medicine, wherein doulas are referred by nurses, social workers, and therapists, and must be specifically ordered by the doctor. after being ordered, volunteer trained do
ulas are matched by the hospital's reverend to individual cases. while the doula to accompany and comfort program provided outpatient services as well as inpatient, the baylor program is only for inpatients.  legal controversy  college of midwives of british columbia  there has been controversy over the label of "death midwife". the college of midwives of british columbia has called for death midwives to stop using the label of midwife, specifically with the canadian integrative network for death education and alternatives (cindea). the basis of the case is that louise aerts, the executive director of the college of midwives, claims that the term "midwife" is specifically reserved for the traditional sense of the word in relation to birth. the health professions act protects its usage. in response, the cindea website has recently added the following disclaimer to their website: "the role and practices of death midwives are frequently referred to on this website. death midwives are not conventional midwives (who deal with birthing) or health professionals, nor are they registered with any of the colleges of midwives in canada."  regulation  there have been a few measures to regulate and license the practice of being a death midwife. in 2009, senator vicki walker from oregon introduced sb 796. the bill aimed to regulate "death care consultants", in other words, death midwives and related professions. after the bill passed in july, death doulas were required to be licensed by the oregon mortuary and cemetery board. the test they must pass to gain a license covers oregon and federal laws related to the care of dead bodies.  responsibilities the role of a death midwife is to educate and empower families to exercise their innate right to care for their own dead. death midwives or doulas "provide emotional, spiritual, and physical support at an intensely personal and crucial time. they assist people in finding meaning, creating a legacy project, and planning for how the last days will unfold. doulas also guide and support loved ones through the last days of life and ease the suffering of grief in its early stages".  death is a situation that no one can completely prepare for. additionally, many people don't have much experience with people close to them dying.  because of this, when it comes to the time to deal with dying there are a lot of questions and uncertainty. pain management is only one part of end of life care; another part, of equal or greater importance at the end of their life, is the psychological aspects, including the management of close relationships. a doula's support can
relieve stress and burdensome tasks from the family in order to provide care for the dying individual but also gives the individual psychological and emotional support in the process.  although the specific responsibilities of a death doula vary from certification program to program, there are certain parallels through each. the services provided by a death doula can generally be broken down into two categories.  information   providing the family with information about a broad spectrum of end-of-life choices, including home funerals and natural burials  providing the family with information about advance directives and other forms, especially those needed for home funerals  providing families from culturally diverse communities with the same information as above, which helps avoid a gap in care  support   building a relationship with the terminally ill person, and advocating for their needs and wishes  providing spiritual and emotional support for the terminally ill person and their family  helping the family in administering the terminally ill person's final wishes  motivations many people who become death midwives are "volunteers who feel strongly about creating a safe space." they are caring individuals who want to support patients in their end of life stages. another reason people are attracted to this field is that "they want the contact, the involvement and they are drawn to the mission - making sure someone is not facing this [death process] alone". people who become death doulas are there because they want to help the family and the patient through the whole process, as a neutral third party. though most death midwives are volunteer based, the funding source for their roles still remain unknown.  certification  there are many private organizations that offer education or certification programs. certification is not available in traditional educational environments; it usually is offered in shorter, paid training sessions. however, since there is no centralized organization for death doulas the training involved often varies by location causing inconsistencies within the role. the doula program in new york is a volunteer organization that focuses on the relationship between the doula and the dying. instead of certification, volunteers submit an application in a pool of around 300, and around 12 are admitted each cycle.  public certification programs associated with hospitals and more closely tied with clinical care are restricted to a few pilot programs. these often involve training spanning multiple weeks similarly to the private programs, however, they are often more related to palliative care and putting the terminally ill patient in a more comfortable situation through clinical means and mental health counseling rather than focusing so much on the spiritual and emotional support aspect. these programs include baylor university medical center's support and palliative care service
's doula to accompany and comfort program, as well as new york university medical center's department of social services nonsectarian volunteer doula program.  "doula" etymology  the term doula came from ancient greek, where the term defined a lackey. the term doula was more commonly used again in roughly the 1960s where it often defined an individual who assisted in the birthing process. this individual was often a woman, one that not only helped during the birthing process but also provided support for women before and after the birth as well. recently the term death doula has been coined to refer to a trained person who provides a dying individual and their family with assistance and resources.  associated fields  hospice care  the role of a death midwife is consistent with the more holistic approach taken in hospice care. as a result, some hospitals and hospice centers that deal with end of life patients have had their own staff's counselors go through death doula training. this can be carried out through the organization international end of life doula association (inelda), which provides training sessions across four countries.  alternative death care movement  the death midwife phenomenon is associated with the "death positive" movement.  it has also been linked to increasing interest in alternative methods of dealing with remains, including green burials, conservation burials, and home burials.  death doulas are trained to have the knowledge to provide the family with after-life alternative death care options. a goal of many death doulas is to provide information about alternatives to cremation or conventional burial, such as natural or green burial, and "flameless cremation" or alkaline hydrolysis, which is legal in 14 states.  other environmentally sustainable methods of final disposition are being developed, including human composting, or "recomposition".  see also   natural burial  references  external links     www.asacredpassing.org  www.deathmidwife.org  http://www.deathmidwifery.ca/  http://www.cindea.ca/midwifery.html  caregiving palliative care health care occupations death
dawda ngum (born 2 september 1990) is a gambian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for the gambia national team.  club career born in banjul, ngum has played for bk olympic, trelleborg, hollviken, and rosengard. he signed for brønshøj in july 2018, and for roskilde in july 2019. on 10 january 2020, it was confirmed that ngum had left roskilde. on 26 february 2020, he returned to brønshøj.  international career  ngum made his international debut for gambia in 2015.  references  1990 births living people gambian footballers the gambia international footballers bk olympic players trelleborgs ff players hollvikens gif players brønshøj boldklub players fc roskilde players danish 2nd division players danish 1st division players association football midfielders 2021 africa cup of nations players gambian expatriate footballers gambian expatriate sportspeople in sweden expatriate footballers in sweden gambian expatriate sportspeople in denmark expatriate footballers in denmark
k2-72d is a small exoplanet orbiting around the red dwarf star k2-72 approximately 227.7 light-years away. k2-72d completes an orbit in 7.8 days, and it has a radius of only 73% of that of the earth.  references  exoplanets discovered in 2016 transiting exoplanets 72  aquarius (constellation)
maurice privat (1889-1949) was a french author. he was an advisor to pierre laval, who served as the french prime minister from 1942 to 1944.  works  references  1889 births 1949 deaths writers from paris french biographers
anne mauduit de fatouville, called nolant de fatouville, (17th-century, rouen - 2 september 1715) was a 17th-18th century french playwright of the comedie italienne.  works  1682: arlequin lingere du palais 1682: arlequin mercure galant 1682: la matrone d'ephese ou arlequin grapignan 1683: arlequin protee 1684: arlequin empereur dans la lune 1684: arlequin jason ou la toison d'or comique 1685: colombine avocat pour et contre 1685: isabelle medecin 1685: arlequin chevalier du soleil 1687: le banqueroutier 1688: le marchand dupe 1689: colombine femme vengee 1690: la fille savante 1692: la precaution inutile  bibliography   le theatre italien, recueilli par evariste gherardi, textes etablis, presentes et annotes par charles mazouer, paris, societe des textes francais modernes, 1994 issn 0768-0821  sources   napoleon-maurice bernardin, la comedie italienne en france et les theatres de la foire et du boulevard (1570-1791), paris, revue bleue, 1902.  external links   anne mauduit de fatouville on data.bnf.fr  list of his plays on cesar  17th-century french dramatists and playwrights writers from normandy people from rouen year of birth unknown 1715 deaths
ian maurice haig  (13 december 193510 march 2014) was an australian public servant and diplomat.  life and career born in perth on 13 december 1935, haig moved with his mother and brother to adelaide as a young boy when his father enlisted to serve in the 2nd aif.  he was educated at pulteney grammar school before going on to study for a bachelor of arts at the university of adelaide.  in february 1974, haig was appointed australia's first ambassador to saudi arabia. in august 1975, haig was also appointed non-resident australian ambassador to the united arab emirates.  in 1978, haig was one of 20 who contested for liberal party pre-selection for the new south wales senate vacancy created when sir robert cotton retired. he was unsuccessful securing the nomination by just one vote.  in 1986, haig was chairman of power international, a technology company.  haig was made a member of the order of australia in 1988 for his services to international relations.  references  1935 births 2014 deaths ambassadors of australia to saudi arabia ambassadors of australia to the united arab emirates agents-general for victoria members of the order of australia university of adelaide alumni
ward no. 2 dhaka north city corporation () is an administrative division of dhaka north city corporation in zone 1. it's located in pallabi police station of dhaka city. it forms a city corporation council electoral constituency and is a part of bangladesh jatiyo sangshad constituency dhaka-16.  overview  the ward covers pallabi police station and mirpur-12 in dhaka. the boundaries of the ward are: manikadi is in the east, pallabi main road is in the west, harirampur union is in the north and journalist plot is in the south.  election highlights  references  external links   official website  wards of dhaka north city corporation
verticordia oxylepis, commonly known as bonsai featherflower, is a flowering plant in the myrtle family, myrtaceae and is endemic to the south-west of western australia. it is a small shrub, often with a layered appearance, small leaves and very small yellow and pink flowers.  description verticordia oxylepis is a shrub which usually grows to a height of up to  and   wide with its main branches mostly horizontal. its leaves are linear to almost club-shaped,  long and semi-circular in cross-section.  the flowers and arranged in rounded groups near the ends of the branches, each flower on a stalk  long and smelling faintly of mice. the floral cup is hemispherical and  long. the sepals are green and reddish,  long, deeply divided into thin filaments, partly whitish and partly brownish. the petals are cream to yellowish, egg-shaped, about  long, and fade to reddish or brown. the style is  long, straight and hairy near the tip. flowering time is from october to january.  taxonomy and naming verticordia oxylepis was first formally described by nikolai turczaninow in 1852 from a specimen collected by james drummond. the description was published in bulletin de la classe physico-mathematique de l'academie imperiale des sciences de saint-petersbourg. the specific epithet (oxylepis) is derived from the ancient greek words oxys meaning "sharp" or "acute" and lepis meaning "a scale", probably in reference to the pointed sepals.  when alex george reviewed the genus verticordia in 1991, he placed this species in subgenus verticordia, section infuscata along with v. longistylis.  distribution and habitat this verticordia grows in sandy clay, in exposed rocky areas and in heath. it occurs in the area between the gairdner river and hopetoun in the esperance plains, avon wheatbelt, and mallee biogeographic regions.  conservation verticordia oxylepis is classified as "not threatened" by the western australian government department of parks and wildlife.  use in horticulture bonsai featherflower is a very slow growing plant. it has been propagated from both cuttings and from seed, and have been grown in a range of soils where they have proven to be hardy in full sun.  references  oxylepis rosids of western australia eudicots of western australia plants described in 1857 taxa named by nikolai turczaninow
the 2018 united states senate election in wisconsin took place on november 6, 2018, concurrently with a gubernatorial election and u.s. house elections. incumbent democratic u.s. senator tammy baldwin won a second term, defeating republican challenger leah vukmir by more than 10 percentage points. the primary elections were held on august 14, with a filing deadline on june 1. baldwin was unopposed for the democratic nomination, while vukmir defeated charles barman, griffin jones, george lucia and kevin nicholson in the republican primary.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  tammy baldwin, incumbent u.s. senator  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee  leah vukmir, state senator and state senate assistant majority leader  eliminated in primary  charles barman  griffin jones  george lucia  kevin nicholson, businessman and member of the wisconsin board of veterans affairs  declined  david clarke, former milwaukee county sheriff  sean duffy, u.s. representative (running for reelection)  mike gallagher, u.s. representative  glenn grothman, u.s. representative  eric hovde, businessman and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2012  rebecca kleefisch, lieutenant governor of wisconsin  nicole schneider, businesswoman  charlie sykes, talk radio host  scott walker, governor of wisconsin (running for reelection)  dale kooyenga, state representative  duey stroebel, state senator  scott fitzgerald, state senate majority leader  endorsements  polling  results  general election  endorsements  debates complete video of debate, october 8, 2018 complete video of debate, october 13, 2018  predictions  polling  with kevin nicholson  with generic republican  with david clarke  with sean duffy  results despite initial expectations of a potentially close race, baldwin ended up winning by over 10 percentage points, which was the highest margin of victory for a wisconsin democratic statewide candidate in 2018. she ran up the margins in the traditional democratic strongholds of milwaukee and madison, but also won in western wisconsin, green bay and most of the counties bordering illinois, including racine, rock, and kenosha counties.  see also  2018 united states senate elections  2018 wisconsin gubernatorial election  2018 wisconsin elections  notes  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites tammy baldwin (d) for senate john schiess (i) for senate (write-in) leah vukmir (r) for senate  2018 wisconsin united states senate
karimpur  is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
the county of dufferin is one of the 49 counties of south australia on the state's west coast. it was proclaimed in 1889 and named for frederick, lord dufferin, a prominent british diplomat of the day.  it covers a portion of the state adjoining the west coast north of streaky bay, including all but the western tip of pureba conservation park. this includes parts of the contemporary local government areas of ceduna district and streaky bay district councils.  hundreds  the county of dufferin contains the following 11 hundreds, covering approximately the south western half of its total area:  hundred of pureba (pureba)  hundred of hague (mudamuckla, puntabie, chinbingina, nunjikompita)  hundred of nunnyah (pureba, nunjikompita)  hundred of carawa (carawa, chinbingina)  hundred of petina (nunjikompita, pimbaacla)  hundred of wallala (wallala)  hundred of koolgera (pureba, koolgera)  hundred of haslam (haslam, petina)  hundred of perlubie (pimbaacla, petina)  hundred of walpuppie (wirrulla, yantanabie)  hundred of yantanabie (yantanabie)  references  dufferin
olenecamptus australis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
victor sutton (3 december 1935 - 29 july 1999) was a british professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1959 & 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1935 births 1999 deaths british male cyclists people from thorne, south yorkshire sportspeople from doncaster
the bisexual book awards are an annual literary award program, presented by the bi writers association to honour the year's best works of literature addressing themes of bisexuality. the awards were presented for the first time in 2013.  awards are presented in 11 categories, where any writer who has addressed bisexual themes in their work may be submitted for consideration regardless of their own sexual orientation. two special awards are also presented: the bi book publisher award to the publishing company that has submitted the most books to the awards program that year, and the bi writer award for the best book by an out bisexual writer.  2013  bisexual fiction  john irving, in one person ellis avery, the last nude annette lapointe, whitetail shooting gallery catherine lundoff, silver moon lee mandelo, beyond binary: genderqueer and sexually fluid speculative fiction richard mason, history of a pleasure seeker basil papademos, mount royal  bisexual non-fiction  cheryl burke, my awesome place: the autobiography of cheryl b janet w. hardy, girlfag: a life told in sex and musicals  bisexual poetry  erynn rowan laurie, fireflies at absolute zero donnelle mcgee, shine yazmin monet watkins, love without limits: the bi-laws of love   bisexual erotic fiction  basil papademos, mount royalmykola dementiuk, times square queer: tales of bad boys in the big apple cecilia tan, the poet and the prophecy: magic university book four  bisexual speculative fiction [science fiction/fantasy/horror]  lee mandelo, beyond binary: genderqueer and sexually fluid speculative fictionfiona glass, gleams of a remoter world cecilia tan, the poet and the prophecy: magic university book four catherine lundoff, silver moon  bi writer of the year  cheryl burke, my awesome place: the autobiography of cheryl bmykola dementiuk, times square queer: tales of bad boys in the big apple janet w. hardy, girlfag: a life told in sex and musicals annette lapointe, whitetail shooting gallery erynn rowan laurie, fireflies at absolute zero catherine lundoff, silver moon lee mandelo, beyond binary: genderqueer and sexually fluid speculative fiction basil papademos, mount royal cecilia tan, the poet and the prophecy: magic university book four  bisexual book publisher of the year  lethe press, riptide publishing and sibling rivalry press2014 bisexual fiction  manil suri, the city of devisusan choi, my education nicola griffith, hild david leav
itt, the two hotel francforts frank anthony polito, the spirit of detroit bushra rehman, corona arlene schindler, the last place she'd look  bisexual non-fiction  charles "zan" christensen, anything that loves: comics beyond gay and straightshiri eisner, bi: notes for a bisexual revolution marina peralta and penelope james, barriers to love: embracing a bisexual identity maria san filippo, the b word: bisexuality in contemporary film and television jade sylvan, kissing oscar wilde: a love story in the city of light       bisexual speculative fiction  laura lam, pantomimefrancesca lia block, love in the time of global warming alaya dawn johnson, the summer prince malinda lo, inheritance saundra mitchell, the elementals mary anne mohanraj, the stars change emma trevayne, coda       bisexual teen/young adult fiction  malinda lo, inheritancefrancesca lia block, love in the time of global warming m. g. higgins, bi-normal alaya dawn johnson, the summer prince bill konigsberg, openly straight laura lam, pantomime  bisexual biography/memoir  alden jones, the blind masseuse: a traveler's memoir from costa rica to cambodiacharles "zan" christensen, anything that loves: comics beyond gay and straight marina peralta and penelope james, barriers to love: embracing a bisexual identity  bisexual erotic fiction  adriana kraft, the reunionrachel kramer bussel, twice the pleasure: bisexual women's erotica livia ellis, memoirs of a gigolo omnibus jean roberta, the flight of the black swan elizabeth schechter, house of sable locks  bi writer of the year  shiri eisner, bi: notes for a bisexual revolutionrachel kramer bussel, twice the pleasure: bisexual women's erotica clive davis with anthony decurtis, the soundtrack of my life livia ellis, memoirs of a gigolo omnibus ed kurtz, a wind of knives marina peralta and penelope james, barriers to love: embracing a bisexual identity jean roberta, the flight of the black swan  bisexual book publisher of the year  circlet press and riverdale avenue books2015 bisexual fiction  courtney moreno, in case of emergencyemma donoghue, frog music sheela lambert, best bi short stories vivek shraya, she of the mountains sarah waters, the paying guests  bisexual non-fiction  robyn ochs and h. sharif williams, recognize: the voices of bisexual menjacob anderson-minshall and diane anderson-minshall
, queerly beloved: a love story across gender charles m. blow, fire shut up in my bones breanne fahs, valerie solanas: the defiant life of the woman who wrote scum (and shot andy warhol) daisy hernandez, a cup of water under my bed edward white, the tastemaker: carl van vechten and the birth of modern america  bisexual romance  shari slade and amber lin, one kiss with a rock starshira glassman, climbing the date palm debbie mcgowan, crying in the rain may woodworth, heart of the hurricane l. c. chase, let it ride jenna galicki, the prince of punk rock (radical rock stars book one)  bisexual erotic fiction  julie cox, capricious: a texan tale of love and magicmegan mulry, bound to be a groom livia ellis, memoirs of a gigolo, second omnibus jamie fessenden, murder on the mountain shari slade and amber lin, one kiss with a rock star  bisexual speculative fiction  corinne duyvis, otherboundjulie cox, capricious: a texan tale of love and magic shira glassman, climbing the date palm sarah luddington, the pendragon legacy alex jeffers, that door is a mischief  bisexual memoir/biography  daisy hernandez, a cup of water under my bedallison moon, bad dyke charles m. blow, fire shut up in my bones alan cumming, not my father's son daniel schreiber, susan sontag: a biography edward white, the tastemaker: carl van vechten and the birth of modern america  bisexual teen/young adult fiction  nora olsen, frenemy of the peoplecorinne duyvis, otherbound   bisexual mystery  jamie fessenden, murder on the mountaina. r. fiano, the book of joel   bisexual poetry  laura foley, joy streetjames franco, directing herbert white  bisexual anthology  robyn ochs and h. sharif williams, recognize: the voices of bisexual menrachel kramer bussel, big book of submission: 69 kinky tales  bi writer of the year  robyn ochs and h. sharif williams, recognize: the voices of bisexual mensheela lambert, best bi short stories daisy hernandez, a cup of water under my bed charles m. blow, fire shut up in my bones livia ellis, memoirs of a gigolo, second omnibus alan cumming, not my father's son  bisexual book publisher of the year  bisexual resource center, circ
let press, cleis press and riverdale avenue books2016 fiction  lidia yuknavitch, the small backs of childrenjennifer steil, the ambassador's wife redfern jon barrett, the giddy death of the gays & the strange demise of straights kelly gardiner, goddess anna north, the life and death of sophie stark  non-fiction  maria pallotta-chiarolli, bisexuality in education: erasure, exclusion and the absence of intersectionalitysurya monro, bisexuality: identities, politics, and theories jillian deri, love's refraction: jealousy and compersion in queer women's polyamorous relationships   memoir/biography  kate evans, call it wonder: an odyssey of love, sex, spirit, and travelchelsey clammer, bodyhome emily bingham, irrepressible: the jazz age life of henrietta bingham  romance  megan mulry, bound with honoravon gale, breakaway j. l. merrow, caught! amy jo cousins, the girl next door tess bowery, she whom i love francis gideon, a winter in rome   erotic fiction  heidi belleau and sam schooler, dead ringer lauren gallagher, kneel, mr. president avon gale, let the wrong light in tess bowery, she whom i love santino hassell, sunset park (five boroughs #2) lauren e. mitchell, the triad trial  speculative fiction  b. r. sanders, ariah megan derr, the harem master shira glassman, a harvest of ripe figs michelle moore and reesa herberth, peripheral people c. b. lee, seven tears at high tide lori a. witt, the tide of war  teen/ya fiction  hannah moskowitz, not otherwise specified erica yang, bad idea casey lawrence, out of order c. b. lee, seven tears at high tide  mystery  michelle moore and reesa herberth, peripheral people casey lawrence, out of order  poetry  jennifer perrine, no confession, no mass maureen seaton and denise duhamel, caprice  bi writer of the year  kate evans, call it wonder: an odyssey of love, sex, spirit, and travel b. r. sanders, ariah hannah moscowitz, not otherwise specified  publisher of the year  less than three press and macmillan publishers  2017  fiction susan wittig albert, loving eleanor georgia clark, the regulars erin judge, vow of celibacy  non-fiction tiggy upland and
jennifer l. bonardi, advice from a wild deuce: the best of ask tiggy eric anderson and mark mccormack, the changing dynamics of bisexual men's lives: social research perspectives maria pallotta-chiarolli, women in relationships with bisexual men: bi men by women  memoir/biography juliet nicolson, a house full of daughters ira nadel, virginia woolf  romance  garrett leigh, what remains  jordan brock, change of address  j. l. merrow, lovers leap  keelan ellis, misinformation  dahlia adler, out on good behavior  lauren sattersby, rock n soul  lauren gallagher, stuck landing  erotic fiction  lauren gallgher, the best laid plans  j. a. rock, 24/7  nicole wood, club trega  vanessa clark, the man on top of the world  speculative fiction  megan derr, the painted crown  foz meadows, an accident of stars  sasha l. miller (editor), enchanted soles  archer kay leah, for the clan  zoraida cordova, labyrinth lost  k. c. alexander, necrotech  julia ember,   the seafarer's kiss  teen/ya fiction  alison cherry, look both ways  jamie deacon, caught inside  c. b. lee, not your sidekick  suzanne van rooyen, obscura burning  casey lawrence, order in the court  dahlia adler, out on good behavior  emily o'beirne, the sum of these things  mystery  erica cameron, assassins: discord  casey lawrence, order in the court  poetry   ann tweedy, the body's alphabet  cathleen chambless, nec(romantic)  graphic novel/memoir  tyler cohen, primahood: magenta  jon macy and tara madison avery (editors), alphabet: the lgbtqaiu creators from prism comics  anthology  sasha l. miller (editor), enchanted soles  jon macy and tara madison avery (editors), alphabet: the lgbtqaiu creators from prism comics  bi writer of the year  tiggy upland and jennifer l. bonardi, advice from a wild deuce: the best of ask tiggy  lauren gallgher, the best laid plans  ann tweedy, the body's alphabet  suzanne van rooyen, obscura burning  erin judge, vow of celibacy  garrett leigh, what remains  publisher of the year  dreamspinner press, less than three press and riptide publishing  2018
fiction  elaine castillo, america is not the heart jennifer natalya fink, bhopal dance alan robert clark, the prince of mirrors elizabeth j. colen and carol guess, true ash emily strelow, the wild birds  non-fiction  michael amherst, go the way your blood beats: on truth, bisexuality, and desire sophie lucido johnson, many love  memoir/biography    sophie lucido johnson, many love  charlie harmon, on the road and off the record with leonard bernstein  romance    felicia davin, edge of nowhere  lilah suzanne, jilted  layla reyne, medley (changing lanes)  nem rowan, rough sleepers  michele engardt, the thing about forever  l.a. witt, the torches we carry  erotic fiction    lexi mohney, carnal knowledge  m.k. lee, whatever comes first  speculative fiction    jeanne g'fellers, cleaning house  megan derr, dragon magic  william c. tracy, the seeds of dissolution  felicia davin, etymon press  j.r. mabry, the worship of mystery  teen/ya fiction    gene gant, a love song for mr. dakota  j.e. sumerau, palmetto rose  lisa walker, paris syndrome  cat clarke, we are young  mia kerick, the weekend bucket list  mystery    alexandra ch nowakowski and je sumerau, other people's oysters  cari z & l.a. witt, reckless behavior  cat clarke, we are young  kristen lepionka, what you want to see  rosalie knecht, who is vera kelly?  poetry    britteney black rose kapri, black queer hoe  diana hamilton, god was right  jan steckel, like flesh covers bone  julian randall, refuse  duy doan, we play a game  publisher of the year    less than three press  references  external links  lgbt literary awards american literary awards awards established in 2013 2013 establishments in the united states lgbt literature in the united states bisexuality-related literature bisexual culture in the united states
the 2016 women's u22 south american volleyball championship will be the second edition of the tournament, organised by south america's governing volleyball body, the confederacion sudamericana de voleibol (csv).  preliminary round  pool a  |}  |}  pool b  |}  |}  final round  5th-6th place  |}  final four  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  final standing  all-star team  most valuable player  best setter  best opposite  best outside hitters     best middle blockers  best libero  see also 2016 men's u23 south american volleyball championship  external links csv official website  women's south american volleyball championships s
the cathedral basilica of potosi, the official name is cathedral basilica of our lady of peace  (), is a minor basilica and cathedral with baroque and neoclassical colonial influence. it has a stone facade and is located in the 10 de noviembre square in the center of this bolivian city. it was built between 1808-1838 on the site where the old church collapsed in 1807. its main promoter was the fray manuel sanahuya.  in the nineteenth century on the site was working with the neoclassical style, leaving us among other works, his exemplary maximum, the new main church, basilica today for the years 1808-1836, whose author was the spanish, franciscan friar and architect manuel de sanahuja, who introduced the neoclassical style in potosi, simultaneously to the cathedral did other work both religious and civil architecture. he moved to la paz, where he died in 1834.  see also roman catholicism in bolivia cathedral basilica of our lady of peace  references  roman catholic cathedrals in bolivia buildings and structures in potosi roman catholic churches completed in 1838 basilica churches in bolivia 19th-century roman catholic church buildings
pierre jannet (5 january 1820, saint-germain-de-grave - november 1870, paris) was a 19th-century french bibliophile and bibliographer.  a self-educated publisher, jannet published with the assistance of ternaux-compans, the bibliotheque elzevirienne, elegant collection of 16th-century french writers, of which he edited himself several volumes: l'ancien theatre francais, les facetieuses de straparole, etc.  he wrote several collections of bibliographies.  sources   gustave vapereau, dictionnaire universel des litteratures, paris, hachette, 1876, p. 1090  alphonse alkan, les etiquettes et les inscriptions des boites-volumes de pierre jannet, fondateur de la bibliotheque elzeverienne, 1883  external links   pierre jannet on data.bnf.fr  french bibliographers french bibliophiles people from gironde 1820 births 1870 deaths
the following is a list of characters from the itv sitcom man about the house, which was originally broadcast from 1973 to 1976.  list of characters  main richard o'sullivan as robin tripp paula wilcox as chrissy plummer sally thomsett as jo  supporting yootha joyce as mildred roper brian murphy as george roper doug fisher as larry simmonds  recurring norman eshley as ian cross and norman tripp roy kinnear as jerry daphne oxenford as mrs plummer jenny hanley as liz john carlin as the barman  descriptions  robin tripp played by richard o'sullivan  the sex mad cookery student robin tripp is from southampton. he moves in with the two girls chrissy and jo after they find him in their bath (with his clothes on!) after the girls held a party the previous night. robin was raised on a farm in the middle of the countryside and is frequently asked by his mother and father to rejoin them in the family business of making pipes. he is always bringing his girlfriends over and is usually unsuccessful. he is a fan of southampton f.c. and fulham f.c. and attends their matches. robin is best friends with larry.  chrissy plummer played by paula wilcox  chrissy lives in the flat, whom mildred and george roper are caretakers of, with jo, then robin moves in. she is often taken out by men in all different shapes, sizes and natures. chrissy is fond of tending her flowers on the balcony, and always prefers her or robin's cooking as jo's is always dreadful. she has a sister named susan who is married to ted, whom her father dislikes. chrissy's mother visits chrissy at the flat and is pressures her to get married. chrissy detests larry living upstairs.  jo played by sally thomsett  jo, the dippy blonde dolly bird who is rubbish at cooking, is very keen on having parties in the flat with loud music, the opposite of the ropers! she is always forgetting things and is always doing things wrong. jo is often asked out by the men at the local pub and does not get on with larry, like chrissy, her best friend.  mildred roper played by yootha joyce  mildred is the long suffering wife of george who is always getting on her nerves. whether she buys a new hat or armchair, george is not bothered. it is hinted that she used to have many flings with men when she used to work at an airbase during the war. mildred has a sister called ethel, who
is a snob and is disliked by george and many others. she also has a sexual interest in robin. mildred dislikes jerry, george's best friend and odd-job man who is usually conning people.  george roland roper played by brian murphy  the dim, lazy husband of mildred roper is either at the pub, arguing with mildred or watching his television set, which often breaks down. george sometimes meets the flatmates in the local pub and is known to be fond of having a scotch. george is easily led. it was implied in the spin-off series george and mildred that he was one of seven children.  larry simmonds played by doug fisher  larry is the best friend of robin and the neighbour of robin, chrissy and jo as he lives upstairs in the newly refurbished attic. he frequently visits robin's flat to borrow things and never gives them back. larry used to live in another flat but was evicted as he was not paying his rent. he often brings girls of all natures home, but, as he tells robin, he never gives his real name and usually gives false ones, one once being robin tripp!  norman tripp played by norman eshley  norman tripp is robin's brother who is only seen at the end of the series, not being mentioned before then. he comes to stay with robin for a few days and starts a relationship with chrissy. they then arrange to get married and the day before norman and chrissy's wedding and mildred is upset that she has not received an invitation. however, when she delivers their wedding present she discovers that they have been invited and that george has hidden it from her because he wants to go to a darts match. norman eventually marries chrissy, and they presumably start a new life together.  jerry played by roy kinnear  the incompetent odd job man who is often persuaded by george to get him to do various jobs around the flat that do not even need doing. apart from george, he is disliked by all, especially mildred. he once tried to get robin, chrissy and jo evicted so he could subdivide the flat into smaller units. he also diagnosed one of the doors in the flat as having woodworm despite there being a perfect circle of unmarked wood and a dartboard lying on the floor - the holes were created by missed darts!  mrs plummer played by daphne oxenford  chrissy's mother often bothers chrissy by pressuring her to marry, and annoys robin. on the day of chrissy's sister susan's baby's christening, she
goes on that much about chrissy and robin getting married that they return home.  liz martin played by jenny hanley  liz martin is robin's girlfriend who appears in two episodes. her first appearance sees her trying to sneak into the flat to spend some time with robin. it is shown that she has many flings with men and when she is invited to robin, chrissy and jo's party, she stays the whole time with chrissy's boyfriend, mark (played by ian lavender). neither are seen again in the series.  jim the barman played by michael segal  seen in the first two series, jim is the friendly barman at the local pub, the mucky duck. he often helps robin out by giving him alcohol 'on the slate' for parties.  the barman played by john carlin  the camp scottish barman at the pub, sometimes referred to as percy, is obviously homosexual and frequently misunderstands what people say, thinking that it is something sexual. he is very friendly to all, especially robin, larry and mr roper.  dr. mccleod played by duncan lamont  the local doctor, who appears in two episodes, mccleod treats robin for flu before his football match and appears again in the episode "three of a kind".  references  man about the house characters
the 2016-17 san jose state spartans men's basketball team represented san jose state university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the spartans, led by fourth year head coach dave wojcik, played their home games at the event center arena as members of the mountain west conference. they finished the season 14-16, 7-11 in mountain west play to finish in a tie for eighth place. they lost in the first round of the mountain west tournament to utah state.  on july 10, 2017 dave wojcik resigned as head coach for personal reasons. on august 4, the school hired jean prioleau as head coach.  previous season the spartans finished the season 9-22, 4-14 in mountain west play to finish in last place. during the season, the spartans were invited and participated in the great alaska shootout in anchorage, alaska. during the tournament, they defeated san diego and alaska-anchorage to earn 5th place. in the postseason, they lost in the first round of the mountain west tournament to colorado state.  offseason  departures  2016 recruiting class  2017 recruiting class  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#005a8b; color:#c79900;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#005a8b; color:#c79900;"| non-conference regular season\  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#005a8b; color:#c79900;"| mountain west regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#005a8b; color:#c79900;"| mountain west tournament  references  san jose state spartans men's basketball seasons san jose state san jose state spartans men's basketball san jose state spartans men's basketball
zander lombard (born 18 january 1995) is a south african professional golfer.  amateur career as an amateur, lombard won several events in africa and represented south africa in the eisenhower trophy in 2012 and 2014. in 2014, he was runner-up at the amateur championship, losing to bradley neil in the final, 2 and 1. he turned professional in late 2014.  professional career lombard earned a spot in the 2016 open championship after a second-place finish at the joburg open, an open qualifying series event. he made the cut and finished tied for 66th.  lombard was runner-up in the 2017 rocco forte open in sicily, losing to alvaro quiros at the second hole of a sudden-death playoff.  after a poor start to 2018, lombard tied for 6th place in the dubai duty free irish open. this also gave him a place in the 2018 open championship where he finished tied for 67th. in august he won the vodacom origins (zebula) on the sunshine tour.  amateur wins 2011 south african u16 strokeplay 2012 north west open 2013 namibian open, kwazulu-natal amateur championship, igt winter challenge centurion  source:  professional wins (1)  sunshine tour wins (1)  sunshine tour playoff record (1-0)  playoff record european tour playoff record (0-1)  results in major championships     cut = missed the half-way cut "t" = tied  results in world golf championships  1cancelled due to covid-19 pandemic  nt = no tournament "t" = tied  team appearances amateur eisenhower trophy (representing south africa): 2012, 2014  see also 2018 european tour qualifying school graduates  references  external links  south african male golfers sunshine tour golfers european tour golfers sportspeople from pretoria 1995 births living people
brian rolapp is the chief media and business officer of the national football league.  rolapp is responsible for the nfl's media businesses including digital media, nfl network, advertising sales, nfl sponsorships, nfl media assets, television contracts, and digital media rights. rolapp graduated from brigham young university (byu) with a degree in english and completed a master of business administration at harvard business school.  professional career rolapp began as an analyst at cibc world markets for their media and entertainment group. in 2000, rolapp joined nbc universal as the director of business development in new york city. his concentration included nbc's cable and new media strategies and their acquisition of all properties of vivendi universal entertainment, which include usa network, sci-fi and trio. after three years with nbc universal, rolapp moved to the nfl network in 2003 where he became the director of finance and strategy. in 2005, he was promoted to vice president of media strategy and digital media. in 2007, his title was changed to senior vice president. he was promoted to coo of nfl media in 2011 and in 2014 became the executive vice president of nfl media and the ceo and president of the nfl network, succeeding steve bornstein.   brian has been named to the sports business journal's forty under 40 hall of fame. he has been named as a potential successor to nfl commissioner roger goodell.  personal life rolapp lives in darien, connecticut with his wife, cindy, and their four children. rolapp grew up outside of washington, d.c. and his father was rich rolapp, the long‑time president of the american horse council. he is a practicing member of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints. he is a national trustee for the boys & girls clubs of america and a member of the national advisory council at the marriott school of business at byu.  references  external links marriott school of business national advisory council brian rolapp twitter account  year of birth missing (living people) living people harvard business school alumni american chief operating officers american chief executives in the media industry brigham young university alumni
astigmatic is a studio album by polish jazz pianist and composer krzysztof komeda. it is often considered to be komeda's masterpiece as well as one of the greatest albums of both polish and european jazz.  composition  astigmatic consists of three long tracks, all written by komeda. "kattorna" (meaning "female cats" in swedish) is based on a motif from komeda's soundtrack for a movie of the same name directed by henning carlsen. "svantetic" is dedicated to svante foerster, a swedish poet who was a friend of komeda.  the music combines many disparate elements, including modal playing, free jazz-inspired improvisation, precise forms, tone clusters, aleatoric structures and avant-garde use of timbre and articulation, while imbuing them with individual expression and a sense of dramatic lyricism that's been compared to late romantic music.  reception and legacy   authors of the penguin guide to jazz, richard cook and brian morton, named it as "one of the finest jazz albums ever made in europe" and included it among their 1001 best jazz records. critic stuart nicholson wrote that it "has become a bellwether for european jazz, with critics pointing to how this album marked a shift away from the dominant american approach with the emergence of a specific european aesthetic". similarly, jazzwise magazine stated that it "is one of the most important contributions to the shaping of a european aesthetic in jazz composition", placing it at number 85 in the list the 100 jazz albums that shook the world. manfred eicher, the founder of ecm records, described astigmatic as a milestone in the history of jazz. it was voted the best album of all time by readers of the polish jazz forum magazine.  writing about the 2016 reissue, fact magazine author mikey iq jones stated: "komeda's compositions and arrangements are beautiful and complex, and it's the rare epochal album whose power is still potent from the first listen through to its thousandth".  the compositions from astigmatic have been repeatedly reinterpreted by polish jazz musicians, including urszula dudziak, michał urbaniak and tomasz stanko. the title of the album asthmatic by polish free jazz band miłosc is an ironic reference to astigmatic.  track listing  all tracks composed by krzysztof komeda.  personnel  komeda quintet  krzysztof komeda - bandleader, piano rune carlsson - drums gunter lenz - double
bass zbigniew namysłowski - alto saxophone tomasz stanko - trumpet  additional personnel   wojciech pietowski - production  halina jastrzebska - engineering  rosław szaybo - cover design  marek karewicz - cover photo  adam sławinski - liner notes  references   1966 albums avant-garde jazz albums
the 1968 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1968 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 3-7 overall and 2-5 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by fred taylor in his second year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  roster  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
sphingomonas rubra  is a gram-negative, rod-shaped, neutrophilic and motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from wastewater from a leather plant in china.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas rubra at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  rubra bacteria described in 2011
chung hong (; born 16 may 1993) is a south korean tennis player.  on the junior tour, chung has a career high itf junior ranking of 64 achieved in january 2011.  chung has a career high atp singles ranking of 632 achieved on 2 january 2017. he also has a career high atp doubles ranking of 624 achieved on 9 june 2014. chung has won one itf futures singles title and two itf futures doubles titles.  playing for south korea in davis cup, chung has a win-loss record of 0-1.  chung is the older brother of chung hyeon, who is also a professional tennis player.  references  external links        1993 births living people south korean male tennis players people from suwon universiade medalists in tennis universiade gold medalists for south korea medalists at the 2015 summer universiade
cai wan (1695-1755), was a chinese poet.  she was the daughter of the noble official cao yurong and married to the cabinet minister gao quizhou. she was educated within confucianism, and published her own collection of poems. cai wan had an acknowledged influence as the adviser of her spouse, who reportedly confided his suggestions to her before introducing them to the government.  references   lily xiao hong lee; clara lau; a. d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911   1695 births 1755 deaths 18th-century chinese people 18th-century chinese poets chinese women poets 18th-century chinese women writers
on the morning of july 28, 2013, security footage at a mobil gas station in newtown, connecticut, united states, captured robert hoagland (born 1963), a local chef and property appraiser, buying a map along with fuel for his wife's car. he was last seen by anyone who knew him later that morning, when his son bid goodbye as robert was mowing the lawn of the family home, a conversation also witnessed by a neighbor. hoagland failed to show up for work the next morning or pick up his wife when she returned home from an overseas trip that afternoon. he was reported missing and his whereabouts are still unknown.  police investigated several sightings of hoagland over the next year, mostly nearby. tips also placed him in southern california and south carolina; neither they nor the alleged sightings yielded any trace of him. theories about his disappearance range from foul play possibly connected to his son's drug problems to an attempt to start a new life. the case has been featured on an episode of the investigation discovery series disappeared.  background robert hoagland and his wife lori, a culinary arts teacher at newtown high school, lived on glen road in the sandy hook neighborhood of newtown, connecticut, where they had raised their three sons to young adulthood. the couple had at one point separated for two years, but later reconciled. lori stated they had begun planning their retirements.  robert and lori's 24-year-old son, max hoagland, had a history of problems with drug addiction and had been in rehab earlier in 2013. robert left his restaurant job for a position in a friend's law firm to better help his son with his recovery; he also worked as a real estate appraiser. robert and lori had talked about going on a hiking trip with max on the appalachian trail that summer as part of that effort. in july, lori went on a two-week trip to turkey with some friends; she and robert regularly exchanged email messages while she was away.  in the week before lori's return, two of the family's laptop computers were stolen. robert came to believe that max had taken them to either sell or exchange in order to obtain drugs, and sent an email to lori apologizing for having let it happen. investigators later learned that robert had traveled to an abandoned industrial building in bridgeport to confront some men they described as max's "associates" over the theft, which max had said they were responsible for. on july 25, $600 was withdrawn from one of the family's bank accounts.
disappearance robert and lori spoke briefly by phone on the evening of july 27, confirming his plan to pick her up upon her return from turkey at john f. kennedy international airport in new york city two days later. early the next morning, he went out in his wife's volkswagen golf to buy bagels for breakfast at a local bakery, then stopped at a mobil station on church hill road (u.s. route 6 and connecticut route 34) near interstate 84 to get gas. security cameras inside recorded him paying for the fuel and also buying a map of the eastern united states at 6:45 a.m. it would be his last documented public sighting.  upon robert's return home, he and max had breakfast. after the meal, max said later, his father paid some bills and played scrabble online for a while. around 10 or 11 a.m., robert went out to mow the lawn. while he was doing so, max went out in the volkswagen, telling his father he expected to be back a few hours later. a neighbor also told police he saw the two talking on the lawn.  the next day, robert was not at the airport when lori arrived around 4 p.m. she tried calling both their home and his cell phone, but got no answer at either. she assumed that he was in traffic on his way there and his phone's battery was dead. "this happens with him frequently," she later said.  lori did not initially return to newtown, instead going to a relative's home nearby. she learned from another phone call, to robert's boss's wife, that he had not shown up for work that morning. when lori finally arrived home on july 30, robert was not in the house. instead she found his phone, keys, passport and prescription high blood pressure medications, as well as his dirty clothes in the laundry. the mower robert had been using had been returned to its usual storage location, and the loafers he had been wearing when he went on his morning shopping trip  his preferred summertime footwear  were also in the house, as was his other pair. his mini cooper was still parked in the driveway.  with the volkswagen still absent, lori presumed her husband might have had some other reason to leave for a short term. but then she heard from police in bridgeport that they had arrested max the night before, near the same building where his father had gone a few days before to confront the men max had told him took the laptops, a location known
to the police for drug sales and prostitution. since the area is clearly posted, max was charged with third-degree criminal trespass, a misdemeanor.  max told police he had gone there in the volkswagen to buy drugs, and that he had his mother's permission to use it. she told the bridgeport police that he did not, and they held him on $2,500 bond. however, max did not know where robert might have gone.  investigation the hoagland family informed the national park service that robert might have gone on his own to hike the appalachian trail. along with friends of the family, the park service printed and distributed flyers with hoagland's picture, and worked to bring media attention to the case. the newtown police looked into the case as well, and soon learned of the events before robert's disappearance such as the confrontation in bridgeport and the cash withdrawal. a week after his disappearance, robert's personal information was entered into the national missing and unidentified persons system database.   about august 6, lori found robert's wallet and car keys hidden under a doll on a chair in their bedroom. she said later that this led her to change her original theory that her husband had left voluntarily to include the possibility that he might have been abducted. around that time, max pled guilty to the trespassing charge and was released from jail. police questioned the two men he said had stolen the laptops, but could not establish any link to robert's disappearance. max also denied any knowledge of his father's whereabouts. lori later said his arrest was unconnected to the disappearance.  police also searched robert's work computer, where he was found to have searched several times on an address in rhode island; no connection was found to his disappearance when it was investigated. a similar search on his home computer was frustrated due to a program, which he had apparently downloaded and installed a month before his disappearance, that allowed the user to delete all records of searches and results.  in the fall, lori and volunteers searched wooded areas in and around sandy hook; police brought in search dogs as well. the newtown police used sonar to search lake zoar along the housatonic river on the edge of town in september. none of these efforts turned up any trace of robert. lori said these searches were about "eliminating possibilities." the next month, chris hoagland, the couple's eldest son, left his job in the tourism industry in hilton head, south carolina, to take over his father's responsibilities around the house.  in september 2013,
the hoagland family began the court process necessary to appoint a trustee to represent robert's interests, although they hoped it would not be necessary.  possible sightings later in september 2013, two sightings of men matching hoagland's description were reported in rhode island, which borders connecticut to the east. a man with a backpack was seen walking along rhode island route 117 and interstate 95 near warwick; it turned out to be someone else. a short time later, rhode island department of transportation workers also reported seeing a similar-looking man, also with a backpack, walking west along rhode island route 165 near the connecticut state line at voluntown. police were unable to locate that man or determine his identity.  in december 2013, the los angeles police department asked citizens of that area to be on the lookout for robert, who his family said had connections to several los angeles suburbs, including hollywood. while no significant sightings have been reported in los angeles, another sighting came in january, when a tipster reported seeing robert at a savers thrift store in brookfield, just to north of newtown. he was reportedly driving a car with new york license plates. however, review of security-camera video from the store was inconclusive.  around the one-year anniversary of robert's disappearance, in late july 2014, another sighting near newtown was reported. a man told officials of the putnam county, new york, sheriff's office that he had seen robert going into the county jail in carmel, the county seat, a short distance from connecticut, and then leaving after two minutes. however, the only video footage the county could find that might have shown the man was from the building's exterior, and the man on it could not be conclusively identified.  at that time, some friends of the hoagland family complained about the slow pace of the search. they believed the possibility of criminal activity was highly likely in the case, and that the police had tacitly concluded that he had left the area of his own accord in order to devote less resources to the investigation. "all we know is that he went to the church hill road mobil gas station, filled up his car and bought a map. we're at the same place we were at day one," said one officer. critics faulted the police for not publicizing the case more or enlisting the assistance of other law enforcement agencies. in his department's defense, kehoe said detectives were still "putting a lot of effort" into the investigation.  in november 2014, newtown police
received another tip that robert might be working in a restaurant in myrtle beach, south carolina. they clarified to a local newspaper that the tipster had not claimed to have actually seen him, only that he might be there. their counterparts in horry county, where myrtle beach is located, provided assistance. at that time, richard robinson, a newtown supervising detective, stated, "we cannot say how long it may be before it's known whether mr. hoagland is [in south carolina] or not."  disappeared episode in 2016, the producers of the investigation discovery series disappeared  focused an episode on hoagland's disappearance. since there had been no significant leads or sightings since late 2014, newtown police and the hoagland family (who cooperated) were hopeful that it would produce some new information. the episode, "a family man", aired on may 31.  theories "everything is on the table," newtown police chief charles kehoe said in 2014, as what might have happened to robert. two possibilities have emerged: that he was the victim of foul play, or that he decided to walk away from his life. there is significant evidence of both possibilities and neither has emerged as more likely.  since lori discovered her husband's wallet and keys hidden in their bedroom, she has come to believe foul play is a stronger possibility. she believes the (still unaccounted for) $600 to be an odd amount to withdraw if robert was planning to disappear. this amount was more than could be withdrawn at an automatic teller machine yet nowhere near enough to live on for an extended period. concerning their earlier separation, she stated, "[i]f he wanted out of the marriage, all he would have had to say is that he wanted out of the marriage. but that was not remotely where we were." his son chris also finds it unlikely that his father left wearing neither pair of his loafers, "the only shoes he ever wore."  lori says she believes it is possible that, where his children were concerned, robert could have made someone feel scared enough to do him harm in return. "i've seen him chase people down the street with baseball bats," she told the danbury news-times. family and friends also do not believe he would have walked away from his children so readily. "i don't believe he just left," says lori. "wouldn't he have surfaced by now?"  the hoagland family believes that robert is no longer in the newtown area. "he's going to be stumbled upon
," lori said. "someone's going to find him accidentally, and i hope that's sooner than later." his son chris states: "what if he was taken ... and he's in a hole somewhere? ... i don't want to think it, but i have to."  see also  list of people who disappeared  references  external links , page set up by family  2010s missing person cases missing person cases in connecticut newtown, connecticut 2013 in connecticut july 2013 events in the united states
triplemania xxiv was a professional wrestling pay-per-view event produced and scripted by the mexican professional wrestling promotionlucha libre aaa world wide (aaa) or triple a. the event took place on august 28, 2016, and was held in the arena ciudad de mexico in mexico city, mexico. the event was the 24th year in a row that aaa had held a triplemania show, and was the 31st show held under the triplemania banner since 1993. the annual triplemania show is aaa's biggest show of the year, serving as the culmination of major storylines and feature wrestlers from all over the world competing in what has been described as aaa's version of wrestlemania or their super bowl event.  a total of seven matches took place, with the main event being a lucha de apuestas, or "bet match" where psycho clown  put his wrestling mask on the line and pagano put his hair on the line, "betting" it on the outcome of the match. the aaa latin american championship was also defended on the show along with the aaa world tag team championship and la copa triplemania.  production  background  2016 marked the 24th year since 1993 where the mexican professional wrestling company lucha libre aaa world wide (aaa) or triple a held their annual triplemania show and the 31st triplemania show promoted by aaa, as they held multiple triplemania shows over the summers of 1994 to 1997. the 2016 event took place at the arena ciudad de mexico (mexico city arena), an indoor arena in azcapotzalco, mexico city, mexico that has a maximum capacity of 22,300 spectators. this was the fifth consecutive triplemania (xx, xxi, xxii, and xxiii) held at the venue. aaa's triplemania is their biggest show of the year, the highlight of their year, aaa's equivalent of the wwe's wrestlemania or their super bowl event. aaa later confirmed that the show would be available as an internet pay-per-view (ippv) with both spanish and english language commentary, but not available through traditional ppv channels.  the triplemania was the first of three major shows held within a week of each other, produced by the three biggest lucha libre promotions in mexico, aaa, consejo mundial de lucha libre (cmll) and international wrestling revolution group (iwrg). the second major lucha libre show, the cmll 83rd anniversary show, will take place five days after triplemania on september 2 at arena mexico where psycho clown's cousin la mascara will risk his mask
as well in a match against dragon lee. finally the third-largest mexican lucha libre promotion, iwrg will hold iwrg la hora de la verdad in arena naucalpan two days later on september 4, headlined by a lucha de apuestas, mask vs. mask match, between trauma i and canis lupus.  storylines the triplemania xxiv show featured seven professional wrestling matches with different wrestlers involved in pre-existing scripted feuds, plots and storylines. wrestlers portrayed either heels (referred to as rudos in mexico, those that portray the "bad guys") or faces (tecnicos in mexico, the "good guy" characters) as they followed a series of tension-building events, which culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.  after pentagon jr. won the 2016 rey de reyes tournament, he and the rest of los perros del mal were attached by the team of nicho el millonario, damian 666, halloween and pagano, claiming they were the "real perros del mal", alluding to the fact that nicho, damian 666 and halloween used to be part of the group. after the show pagano confirmed that he had indeed signed with aaa. the group was initially known as la nueva familia fronteriza, later shortened to simply la familia fronteriza ("the border family"). bestia 666, son of damian 666, was later added to the group. while the rest of la familiar fonteriza continued to work the storyline feud with los perros del mal, pagano moved off on a tangent, starting a storyline with psycho clown, an aaa wrestler who, like pagano, used a clown ring character. pagano made his official aaa in ring debut on april 18 as he, pagano, damian 666 and nicho defeated los psycho circus (psycho clown, murder clown and monster clown) by count-out. subsequently pagano and psycho clown faced off in a hardcore wrestling match. during the match pagano lit a wooden table on fire and then threw psycho clown through it to win the match. two weeks later the two clashed again, this time in a match that also included pentagon jr., a match that was once again won by pagano. after defeating psycho clown once more on july 8 and stealing psycho clown's wrestling mask, pagano challenged psycho clown to put his mask on the line while pagano would put up his hair in a luchas de apuestas, or "bet match". at the time psycho clown did not respond to the challenge. on july 16 aaa officially announced the match
as the main event of triplemania xxiv on august 28.  the team of averno and chessman, also known as los hell brothers won the vacant aaa world tag team championship by defeating the teams of aero star/fenix and mascara ano 2000 jr./villano iv at the guerra de titanes show. los hell brothers subsequently made several successful title defenses and began bragging about how there were no challengers left for them to deal with, that "no man" could defeat them. in the spring of 2016 sisters-turned-rivals mari apache and faby apache reunited as mari returned to the tecnico side and started to team up with her sister on a regular basis. the two teamed up with their former step-mother lady apache and won the women's version of the 2016 lucha libre world cup. around the time of the world cup mari and faby apache challenged los hell brothers, demanding that they put the tag team championship on the line, a challenge that averno and chessman turned down, acting very dismissing and sexist in the process. during the july 8 aaa television taping averno and chessman dressed up as a pair of frumpy women as they mocked los apaches. at the subsequent taping los apaches distracted averno and chessman during a title defense against jack evans and angelico, which lead to averno and chessman losing the tag team titles. afterwards it was announced that averno and chessman had finally agree to face los apaches at triplemania xxiv.  el patron alberto defeated el texano jr. to win the aaa mega championship at the 2014 guerra de titanes show. over the next year el patron defended the championship on several occasions, until he signed a contract with wwe in late 2015, which led to aaa announcing that since the wwe would not allow el patron to defend the championship it was vacated and they would hold a tournament to determine a new champion. at the 2016 guerra de titanes show el mesias and el texano jr. defeated dr. wagner jr. and psycho clown, earning the right to wrestle for the vacant aaa mega championship at a later date. at the subsequent rey de reyes show el texano jr. pinned el mesias to become a two time aaa mega champion. in the weeks following rey de reyes el texano jr. was repeatedly attacked by el mesisas and later on brian cage as well, slowly turning el texano jr. tecnicos in the process. el mesias, brian cage and johnny mundo all
adopted an "anti-mexico" attitude, even naming themselves "team trump" after the us presidential candidate. on june 16, 2016 dr. wagner jr. defeated el mesias by disqualification to become the number one contender for the aaa mega championship, surprisingly inserting him into the championship feud. during an aaa press conference on july 28 and confirmed that el texano jr. would defend the aaa mega championship against both dr. wagner jr. and brian cage, but el mesias was not included.  on july 3, 2016 pentagon jr. defeated psycho clown to win the aaa latin american championship. the following week the team of johnny mundo, el mesias and hernandez defeated the trio of pentagon jr., el texano jr. and el hijo del fantasma when mundo pinned pentagon jr. following the match mundo challenged pentagon jr. to defend the latin american championship against mundo since he just pinned the champion. on july 23 aaa announced that pentagon jr. would defend the aaa latin american championship against johnny mundo, acknowledging that the two had faced off before as part of lucha underground.  the second match of the night was announced as the second ever copa triplemania with 12 wrestlers competing for the trophy. aaa confirmed 11 of the 12 names, la parka, el elegido, el zorro, daga, taurus, el hijo del pirata morgan, pimpinela escarlata, mamba, super fly, hernandez and australian suicide, but listed the 13th wrestler simply as a luchador sorpresa ("surprise wrestler").  aaa hall of fame first established in 2007 the aaa hall of fame has inducted one or two lucha libre-related people each year at triplemania. the initial class of the hall of fame included aaa founder antonio pena and rey misterio jr. later inductees have included eddie guerrero (2008), pepe "tropi" casas (2009), octagon (2011), perro aguayo (2012), abismo negro (2013), el brazo (2014), rayo de jalisco sr. (2014), hector garza (2015), and el hijo del perro aguayo (2015).  on august 18 the record sports newspaper revealed that "love machine" art barr was the first name confirmed for the 2016 aaa hall of fame, joining his former los gringos locos partner eddie guerrero in the hall of fame. barr is the first inductee who is not of mexican heritage, being born in portland, oregon to us parents. barr, son of local promoter sandy barr, had a storied
career before ending up working in mexico. initially he worked as a local face character called beetlejuice and was even offered a contract with world championship wrestling, but due to a statutory rape conviction he later found himself unable to get full-time work in the us. moving to mexico he first worked as the masked character "american love machine" for cmll, but was unmasked by blue panther. he later jumped to aaa and formed a team with eddie guerrero known as "la pareja del terror" (the pair of terror) with eddie guerrero who won the aaa world tag team championship. the duo, along with konnan, would go on to form los gringos locos, the most hated rudo team in mexico at the time. barr and guerrero main evented aaa's aaa when worlds collide, their first us broadcast ppv, losing an apuesta match to el hijo del santo and octagon. barr died only 17 days after when worlds collide, with the official cause never being clearly stated. the record article also confirmed that aaa was planning in inducing a second person in the hall of fame but did not name that person. during the show aaa also inducted joaquin roldan, who took control of aaa after antonio pena's death, into the hall of fame.  results  references  2016 in professional wrestling triplemania events in mexico city 2016 in mexico august 2016 events in mexico
khem karan is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of tarn taran district and the current mla is sukhpal singh bhullar.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  tarn taran district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india tarn taran district
the 1934-35 sk rapid wien season was the 37th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  mitropa cup  references  1934-35 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
dr denis coulthard graham frse frsc fib frsa (december 1929-12 october 2002) was a british biological chemist. he specialised in plant diseases and their treatment.  life  he was born in carlisle in december 1929.  he went to durham university graduating with a bsc. he then undertook postgraduate studies at the university of edinburgh gaining a doctorate (phd). he became director of agricultural scientific services in the department of agriculture and fisheries within the scottish office. the university of edinburgh granted him a second, honorary doctorate (dsc) while in this role.  from the 1970s he lived in caiystone gardens in southern edinburgh.  in 1975 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were mary noble.  he died in edinburgh on 12 october 2002.  family  in 1968 he married elizabeth (betty) fraser, a new zealander. they had no children.  publications  chemical control of certain fungal diseases of potato tubers (1982)  references  1929 births 2002 deaths people from carlisle, cumbria british biochemists alumni of durham university fellows of the royal society of edinburgh british non-fiction writers 20th-century non-fiction writers
progress ms-07 (), identified by nasa as progress 68p, is a progress spacecraft used by roscosmos to resupply the international space station (iss).  history  the progress-ms is a uncrewed freighter based on the progress-m featuring improved avionics.  this improved variant first launched on 21 december 2015. it has the following improvements:   new external compartment that enables it to deploy satellites. each compartment can hold up to four launch containers. first time installed on progress ms-03.  enhanced redundancy thanks to the addition of a backup system of electrical motors for the docking and sealing mechanism.  improved micrometeoroid (mmod) protection with additional panels in the cargo compartment.  luch russian relay satellites link capabilities enable telemetry and control even when not in direct view of ground radio stations.  gnss autonomous navigation enables real time determination of the status vector and orbital parameters dispensing with the need of ground station orbit determination.  real time relative navigation thanks to direct radio data exchange capabilities with the space station.  new digital radio that enables enhanced tv camera view for the docking operations.  the ukrainian chezara kvant-v on board radio system and antenna/feeder system has been replaced with a unified command telemetry system (ucts).  replacement of the kurs a with kurs na digital system.  launch  after a two-day delay, the progress ms-07 lifted off on 14 october 2017, at 08:46:53 utc. the spacecraft docked at the station on 16 october 2017, at 11:04:07 utc. progress ms-07 was launched from the baikonur cosmodrome in kazakhstan, atop a soyuz-2.1a rocket.  docking  progress ms-07 was docked with the aft docking port of the pirs module. this progress flight was intended to mark the debut of the new two-orbit rendezvous profile which was not possible when the original launch date had to be scrubbed.  cargo  the progress ms-07 spacecraft delivered 2,549 kg of cargo and supplies to the international space station for the six-person crew. the following is a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:   dry cargo: 1,382 kg  fuel: 700 kg (for zvezda service module)  oxygen: 23 kg  air: 24 kg  water: 420 kg  spacewalk  once the progress arrived at the station, expedition 53 commander randolph bresnik and flight engineer joseph m. acaba
prepared for a spacewalk, on 20 october 2017, to accomplish a variety of maintenance tasks outside the complex. this included the replacement of a fuse on the station's canadian-built dextre robot, replacing an external camera and light fixture, and removing thermal insulation from two spare units to prepare them for future relocation.  undocking and decay  progress ms-07 undocked from the pirs on 28 march 2018, at 13:50:30 utc. the vehicle continued with experiments until 26 april 2018.  references   progress (spacecraft) missions spacecraft launched in 2017 2017 in russia supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft launched by soyuz-2 rockets spacecraft which reentered in 2018
jaroszewicz is a surname. notable people with the surname include:   hans jaroszewicz (1935-2003), german cyclist  paweł jaroszewicz (born 1985), polish drummer  piotr jaroszewicz (1909-1992), polish politician  polish-language surnames
pachycentria glauca is a small epiphytic shrub in the melastomataceae family. it has 2 subspecies: p. glauca subsp. glauca and p. glauca subsp. maingayi. the glauca subspecies is endemic to borneo, the maingayi subspecies is native to peninsular malaysia and thailand, perhaps sumatra. it grows on trees, other epiphytes (so, a double epiphyte) and rocks in partial shade. it is intimately associated with particular ant species, growing on their gardens, providing a home for them, feeding them and having its seeds dispersed by them.  description the species is a small shrub, epiphytic, with many hanging, creeping or erect branches and adventitious roots that have irregular, globose swellings up to 2 cm in diameter. these swellings have the same anatomical structure as a storage root. the round branchlets have minute scales, with the older branches are stunted and have thickened node, the globose swellings. leaves are elliptic-lanceolate or obovate-suborbicular with a cuneate base and an apex that can be truncate, rounded or acute, often red below, some 1.4 to 4 cm by 0.5 to 2 cm in size. the terminal or axillary inflorescences have solitary or pairs of flowers. flowers have white to pink petals. anthers are slender and have a long thin, curved upward tip, the style points downward. septae disappear in young buds. the young berries are urceolate (urn/pitcher-shaped), but become globose, about 5mm in diameter, when immature they are green with a reddish rim, and become red on ripening. there are 5-10 cylindrical seeds some 2 to 2.5mm long (relatively large for the genus), with smooth testa cells.  the species is distinguished by the following characteristics: the terminal or axillary inflorescences with 1 or 2 flowers; the 5-10 cylindrical seeds about 2-2.5mm long; an anther appendage of a thick, dorsal, smooth margin spur; the size of the leaves (1.5-4 x 0.5-2 cm); adventitious roots which often have globose swellings; the flowers are mostly axillary, paired or solitary in simple cymes; the species often grows on ant plants.  the leaves of p. glauca subsp. glauca grow small, 1-nerved, elliptic to lanceolate leaves (only 2-4 by 0.5
-2 cm) when growing on ant-plants, in the wild. however when grown under greenhouse conditions, the leaves are longer, broader, ovate and have 3 nerves. this is an example of the large phenotypic variation of leaves in the pachycentria genus.  the autonym p. glauca subsp. glauca has elliptic-lanceolate leaves with an acute apex.  the maingayi subspecies has leaves that are obovate-suborbicular with a truncate or rounded apex. in thailand flowering and fruiting occurs from april to october.  taxonomy this species has two accepted subspecies:  pachycentria glauca subsp. glauca pachycentria glauca subsp. maingayi (c.b.clarke) clausing  the species was named by the colombian botanist jose jeronimo triana (1828-90), who also produced medical products and how-to-read books. he published his description in an edition of transactions of the linnean society of london produced in 1871 but published in 1872.  the maingayi subspecies was named in 2000 by the botanist gudrun clausing (born 1969) who was working at johannes gutenberg-universitat mainz.   the description was published in the journal blumea. the subspecies was based on the previous taxa medinilla maingayi, described by the english botanist charles baron clarke (1832-1906) in 1879, in the publication the flora of british india overseen by joseph dalton hooker.  distribution the autonym subspecies, p. glauca subsp. glauca is endemic to borneo.  the maingayi subspecies is native, to peninsular malaysia. there is a single recording of it occurring on the adjacent north coast of sumatera. in 2009, the subspecies was identified growing in the sankalakhiri range of extreme south thailand.  habitat and ecology the species is pollinated by bees, using buzz pollination, using vibrations to collect the pollen. one flower in an inflorescence opens per day, the open flower has stamens bent to one side of the flower, their tips arrange in close proximity with the style remaining either in the middle or pointing to the other side. the bee vibrates and pollen is comes from the pores of the anthers. after pollination the petals reflex and stamens spread.  the fruit are dispersed by small to mid-sized birds and ants disperse seeds. the ants (philidris and crematogaster species and camponotus (myrmotarsus) irritabilis) take seeds from bird poo or
from the ripe fruit. seedlings are observed on ant plants and in ant gardens. not only the seeds are attractive to ants, the plant grows pearl bodies as well.  subspecies glauca is found in kerangas, dry hill and old secondary forest from sea level to 1100m elevation. it grows as an epiphyte very frequently (perhaps exclusively) on ant plants, especially on other epiphytes such as hydnophytum, myrmecodia and lecanopteris. the root swellings of the plant has been observed to be inhabited by ants.  the maingayi'' subspecies is found in primary lowland, kerangas and heath forests at the same elevation ranges as its sibling subspecies. also like it's sibling, it grows as an epiphyte, mostly on trees, also on other epiphytes and on ant plants, up to 40m in the air. ants have been observed living in the root swellings. the thai specimens identified were found growing on tree trunks and branches but also on rocks in partial shade on the quartzitic phyllite ridge, and in lowland evergreen forest, at elevations of 500-900m.  references   trans. linn. soc. london 28(1): 89., 8 dec 1871 to 13 jan 1872.  revision of pachycentria (melastomataceae), gudrun clausing, blumea 45 (2000) 341-375.  glauca endemic flora of borneo epiphytes flora of peninsular malaysia flora of thailand flora of sumatra myrmecophytes plants described in 1871 plants described in 2000
the following lists events that happened in 1930 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - tryggvi þorhallsson  events  births  22 march - eythor thorlaksson, guitarist and composer (d. 2018) 15 april - vigdis finnbogadottir, politician. 26 may - ragnhildur helgadottir, politician (d. 2016). 25 august - baldur ragnarsson, poet (d. 2018)  deaths  references    1930s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
constantin codrescu (; born 5 september 1931) is a romanian actor. he appeared in more than thirty films since 1953.  born in husi, he was raised in northern bukovina, but had to move to bucharest after the region was annexed by the soviet union in 1940.   in the early 1950s he was married to actress valeria gagialov, but some strange circumstances involving his mother (who tried to poison his wife) led to divorce. afterwards he was married for five years to actress margareta-yvonne butuc (later known as marga barbu); after divorcing her in 1959, he  married adina georgescu in 1963, but this marriage also did not last long. in 1972 he found employment at the hungarian theatre in targu mures, where he met and later married actress ildiko codrescu.  selected filmography  references  external links   1931 births living people people from husi romanian male film actors recipients of the order of cultural merit (romania)
dasuya assembly constituency (sl. no.: 40) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in hoshiarpur district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2017  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india hoshiarpur district
2015 aff futsal club championship  is the first edition of aff futsal club championship. the tournament will be held in bangkok, thailand from 23 to 29 november. the futsal clubs from aff member countries will be invited to compete in the tournament.  participants  group a (men's)     thai port   felda united   mic   east coast heat   sanna khanh hoa  group b (women's)     bg-college of asian scholars   felda united   mic   dural warriors   thai son nam  venue  group stage  group a (men's)  third place match  final  winner  group b (women's)  third place match  final  winner  references  external links  aff futsal club championship 2015, aseanfootball.org  aff futsal club championship 2015 in asian futsal international futsal competitions hosted by thailand 2015 in thai football sport in bangkok november 2015 sports events in asia
mikhail kukushkin was the defending champion, but chose not to defend his title.  evgeny donskoy won the title defeating fellow russian konstantin kravchuk in the final, 6-3, 6-3.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references  main draw  qualifying draw  president's cup (tennis) - singles 2016 men's singles
dhadda dilkhapur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 18 km from nakodar, 30 km from kapurthala, 42 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 174 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is 81 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 107 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
listrocerum joveri is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by quentin in 1951, originally under the genus combesius. it is known from the ivory coast.  references  endemic fauna of ivory coast dorcaschematini beetles described in 1951
melani olivares mora (born 1973) is a spanish actress. she is mainly known for her performance as paz in the comedy television series aida.  biography  she was born in badalona in 1973. she had her television debut in 1993 as host in the antena 3's youth show lena al mono que es de goma. after training at the cristina rota's acting school, her acting career began in 1995 with a performance in la nina de tus suenos.  among her extensive credits is quedate, a short film for which she won the best actress award at vi certamen nacional de cortos de dos hermanas.  films  la nina de tus suenos (1995)  me da igual (2000)  no te fallare (2001)  noche de reyes (2001)  no dejare que no me quieras (2002)  agujeros en el cielo (2004)  shevernatze un angel corrupto (2007)  8 citas (2008)  temporal (2013)  dos a la carta (2014)  crisis (2014)  references  external links  spanish actresses 1973 births living people 20th-century spanish actresses 21st-century spanish actresses
david f. sandberg (born 21 january 1981) is a swedish filmmaker. he is best known for his collective no-budget horror short films under the online pseudonym ponysmasher and for his 2016 directorial debut lights out, based on his 2013 acclaimed horror short of the same name. he also directed the conjuring universe spin-off horror film annabelle: creation (2017), and shazam! (2019), the seventh installment in the dc extended universe.  early life david f. sandberg was born on 21 january 1981 in jonkoping, sweden. according to sandberg, he grew up watching films and making his own using his dad's vhs-c camera. he worked in a video store as a teenager, and saved up money to buy his own camcorder for filmmaking.  career  beginning with animation and documentaries (2006-2013)  in his late teens or early twenties, sandberg began working at film i jonkoping, a local film center in jonkoping, initially as an intern. he learned more about filmmaking from svante rosberg, the film commissioner who ran film i jonkoping when he started, and whom sandberg considers his mentor.  starting in 2006, sandberg found moderate online success making animated short films; according to sandberg, his first online successes were his films for barnen and vad tyst det blev, the latter of which garnered 1.7 million views on youtube. as a result of his increased visibility, he began to receive offers for animation work; his first job was working as a consultant on the tv show  on the swedish channel 5.  he continued working at film i jonkoping, primarily working on documentary projects. from 2006 to 2009, he worked on several documentaries for , the swedish inheritance fund. his last collaboration with rosberg before his retirement was animera = gora livlig, a 2010 documentary about senior citizens creating animated films.  in 2009, he moved to the city of gothenburg. he continued working on animation and documentaries, and began collaborating with producer claes lundin. in 2011, they completed and sold an animated documentary series called earth savers, and in 2013, their documentary short ladyboy premiered at cinequest film festival.  shifting to feature films (2013-present)  in 2013, he began to shift his focus away from animation and documentary works and towards horror short films. according to sandberg, his original goal with filmmaking had been to make horror and sci-fi films, and he felt he needed to have some existing work in that field in
order to get funding for future work. lacking any funding of his own, his shorts were made with no budget-his equipment and props consisted mostly of items he already had or could buy very cheaply, and his only cast and crew were himself and lotta losten, his wife. he released his films on both vimeo and youtube, using his alias ponysmasher.  in 2013, he released his second horror short, lights out, which centered around a monster that only exists when the lights are turned out. the film was a viral success, and quickly garnered millions of views. according to sandberg, his life changed "in every way imaginable" after lights out; he began receiving tons of messages from film industry people who wanted to work with him.  one of these contacts was lawrence grey, a producer who wanted to adapt lights out into a feature-length film. grey brought screenwriter eric heisserer and producer james wan on board to collaborate and produce a script with sandberg, who would also direct the new feature. the film (also titled lights out) began production in mid-2015, and premiered at la film festival in june 2016. the film was a massive box office success, grossing $148 million on a $5 million budget, and a moderate critical success, earning a 76% approval score on rotten tomatoes and a 58 out of 100 score on metacritic.  sandberg next directed annabelle: creation, a prequel to supernatural horror film annabelle and the fourth film in the conjuring universe. the film was released in 2017 to positive reviews and box office success.  in 2019, sandberg directed the dc extended universe superhero film shazam!, based on the dc comics character of the same name. the film received positive reviews. in april 2019, thewrap reported that new line cinema is developing a sequel with sandberg returning to direct. he is set to direct and produce the horror film the culling with his wife lotta losten through their production company mangata. the film will be distributed by lionsgate. he is set to direct the film adaptation of cullen bunn and jack t. cole's "the unsound" graphic novel for netflix.  personal life  sandberg was diagnosed with atypical autism when he was a child.  sandberg married actress, designer, and photographer lotta losten in 2013. she has featured in many of his short films, including lights out.  sandberg and losten moved to los angeles together circa 2015. sandberg's younger brother is joakim sandberg, creator of the iconoclasts video
game.  filmography  films  shorts  television  references  external links        1981 births english-language film directors horror film directors living people people from jonkoping swedish animators swedish animated film directors swedish documentary film directors swedish expatriates in the united states swedish film directors swedish-language film directors people on the autism spectrum
nazzareno formosa (29 march 1901 - 22 july 1937) was an american-maltese roman catholic priest who served as curate of the parish church of the sacred hearts of jesus and mary in manhattan, new york city.  biography nazzareno formosa was born in gozo, malta, on 29 march 1901 to nikola formosa and maria caruana, the first born of 8 children. he studied in italy and was ordained a priest on august 2, 1925. in 1927 he emigrated to the united states to minister to the growing maltese population in new york city. he became a naturalized american citizen and was incardinated as a priest of the archdiocese of new york. he was then assigned to the parish of the sacred hearts of jesus and mary as curate to monsignor joseph congedo.  for the next ten years reverend formosa ministered to both the parishioners of sacred hearts parish and to the maltese community in manhattan and astoria, queens. he served as the chaplain to numerous associations formed within the maltese community in new york. nazzareno died in columbus hospital on 22 july 1937, at the age of 36, as a result of appendicitis. his funeral was held at the church of the sacred hearts of jesus and mary which was attended by almost 800 people. he was buried in st john cemetery in queens.  references  1901 births 1937 deaths people of the roman catholic archdiocese of new york maltese roman catholic priests maltese emigrants to the united states people from għarb 20th-century american roman catholic priests
mo abbaro (17 october 1933 - 12 march 2016), also known professionally as mo abdalla or mohammed ahmed abdalla abbaro, was a london-based sudanese ceramicist and potter, who has been described by artist oliver bloom as "one of the world's finest ceramicists".  life and career mohammed ahmed abdalla abbaro was born in abu jibayha, sudan. he graduated in fine and applied arts from khartoum technical institute in 1958, the following year winning a scholarship to london to study ceramics at the central school of arts and crafts. he did postgraduate studies in industrial pottery design at the north staffordshire college of ceramics, after which he had a period of training in chemical analyses of ceramics materials at the north staffs college of ceramics technology. he went back to sudan to teach ceramics for some years, but decided to return to england in 1966 to pursue his career in britain.  he taught ceramics at the camden arts centre for more than two decades, and had many exhibitions in london - including at the barbican centre, the whitechapel gallery, the mall galleries, and the iraqi cultural centre - and elsewhere in the uk, as well as in the us and sweden. his studio and showroom were in king henry's road, close to primrose hill.  he turned to writing in later life, publishing works on ceramic technique, such as modern ceramics - on the interplay of forms and surfaces (2000), as well as on his own family history, including the history of the abbaros of sudan since the 15th century (1997).  his ceramics are in the collections of london's british museum, the institut du monde arabe in paris, and the smithsonian museum, washington.  family he was married since 1964 to rose, daughter of composer elisabeth lutyens and granddaughter of sir edwin lutyens.   abbaro died aged 80 in march 2016, survived by his wife and their son and two daughters.  see also    visual arts of sudan  references  external links  oliver bloom, "the ceramicist", youtube video, 18 october 2012.  1935 births 2016 deaths sudanese emigrants to the united kingdom sudanese ceramists 20th-century sudanese artists  21st-century sudanese artists  20th-century ceramists 21st-century ceramists
midway in life (persian: nimeh rahe zendegi) is a 1953 iranian film directed by mehdi besharatian.  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1953 films iranian films persian-language films films directed by mehdi besharatian iranian black-and-white films
st. ignatius loyola college () is a private catholic primary and secondary school, located in the la plazuela area of medellin, antioquia, colombia. the school was founded by the society of jesus in 1885, initially as a boys' school, and now offers a co-educaitonal environment for students from kindergarten through 12th grade. the school moved to the stadium area in 1957.  history san ignacio opened in 1885 with 200 students, including 30 borders. in 1957 it moved to its present location in the stadium area. the school went coeducational in 1994.  in 2009, the deputy minister of preschool, basic, and secondary education gave colegio san ignacio de loyola the top award for results of a non-state school in the state examinations.  see also   education in colombia  list of schools in colombia  list of jesuit schools  references  jesuit secondary schools in colombia catholic primary schools in colombia educational institutions established in 1885 1885 establishments in colombia education in antioquia
the iberoamerican university of science and technology  or uibero (in the past unicit) is a private university chilean accredited by the national commission of accreditation (cna-chile). it finds  situated in the city of santiago of chile.  in 2016, the ranking of americaeconomia situated it in the 47th place of a total of 57 universities considered, whereas the ranking webometrics situated it in the place 74th place of a total of 79 chilean universities considered.  history  the university was founded on 17 april 1989, by the professor normalista, graduate in education of the catholic university of chile and employer filomena narvaez elgueta.  on 1 april 1991, the ministry of education authorises the careers of agronomy, veterinary medicine, engineering in foods, commercial engineering, civil engineering in electronics, forest engineering and contador auditor. during this first stage, the university was examined by the university austral, university of concepcion and university of talca, explaining ademas with the support of the university of tennessee.  in june 1996 created  the magazine witnesses university like space of opinion, discussion and diffusion of the institution.  in april 1998 inaugurated  the building tennessee, central headquarters of the university, where concentrate  laboratories, rooms of classes and administrative units of the institution.  on 15 january 2004, after the presentation in front of the upper council of education, delivered  the status of autonomous university.  in 2005, the national commission of accreditation, accredited to the university in the areas of institutional management and teaching of pregrado by a valid term until 28 january 2011.  in december 2013, during the retoria of sergio becerra ovalle, the house of studies lost the accreditation when the national commission of accreditation dictated his last institutional certifications of the year.  on 13 january 2016, the university signs an agreement with the private university san juan bautista of peru.  rectors  the rectors from his foundation until the day of today have been the following:  professors stood out   ivan palavicino hernandez ːex dean of the faculty of natural resources and sciences silvoagropecuarias and educational of bovine medicine.  walter von frey: educational of reproduction, gynaecology and veterinary obstetrics.  frederick ahumada: ex dean of the faculty of natural resources and sciences silvoagropecuarias and educational of veterinary pharmacology.  roberto parada navarro: ex director of the school of veterinary and educational medicine of toxicology and animal physiology.
organisation  the university organises  around five academic faculties.  see also   annex:universities of chile  references   organizations established in 1989 universities in santiago metropolitan region
eight thousand li of cloud and moon may refer to:  eight thousand li of cloud and moon (film), a 1947 chinese drama film set in the 1930s and 1940s eight thousand li of cloud and moon (tv series), a 1988 taiwanese historical television series based on the life of yue fei (1103-1142)  see also man jiang hong, a poem by yue fei where the phrase first appeared
ugadi is a 1997 telugu romantic film directed by s. v. krishna reddy starring himself and laila in the lead roles.  this film is about a middle class young man winning his lady love despite opposition from the girl's father. the music for the film was well received by audiences.  cast  s. v. krishna reddy  laila  sharat saxena  kaikala satyanarayana  sudhakar  tanikella bharani  mallikarjuna rao  annapoorna  babu mohan  gautam raju  bandla ganesh  soundtrack  references  external links    ugadi film on youtube  1997 films telugu-language films indian films indian romance films films directed by s. v. krishna reddy films scored by s. v. krishna reddy 1990s telugu-language films
platysulcidae is a monotypic family of heterokonts that was recently discovered to be the earliest diverging lineage of the heterokont phylogenetic tree.  taxonomy  class platysulcea cavalier-smith 2017  order platysulcida cavalier-smith 2017  family platysulcidae shiratori, nkayama & ishida 2015  genus platysulcus shiratori, nkayama & ishida 2015  species platysulcus tardus shiratori, nkayama & ishida 2015  references  external links     heterokont families
the swan 44 was designed by olin stephens and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1972.  external links  swan website  references  sailing yachts keelboats sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by sparkman and stephens sailboat type designs by olin stephens
maria agata olech (born 1941) is a polish antarctic researcher, known for her work on lichenology and mycology of the antarctic and arctic. olech was base leader for the henryk arctowski polish antarctic station and the olech hills in the three sisters point area of antarctica was named in her honour.  early life and education olech was born in nowy sacz (southern poland) in 1941. she graduated in biology (1963) from the department of biology and earth sciences at the jagiellonian university with her msc in 1963.  she then completed a phd in lichenology (1968) in the institute of botany jagiellonian university.  the title of her thesis was stosunki lichenologiczne beskidu sadeckiego (western carpathians).  career and impact olech has worked extensively on the taxonomy, biodiversity, ecology, biogeography and adaptations of lichenized and lichenicolous fungi in mountains and polar regions. she has also worked on heavy metals and radionuclides contaminants of the antarctic environment and other human impacts on terrestrial antarctic ecosystems. she has described about 100 algae, lichens, fungi, lichenicolous fungi new to science.  olech was a research assistant at the institute of botany jagiellonian university (1968-1971) where she organized the laboratory and herbarium of lichens. she was then appointed assistant professor at the institute of botany jagiellonian university (1971-1986) and was promoted to assoc. professor (1986-1992) at the institute of botany jagiellonian university, where she organized department of polar research and documentation.  she became a full professor of biology at the jagiellonian university in 1992. she is also the curator of the jagiellonian university cryptogamic herbarium, is the president of editorial board polish polar research, the president of team of biology and development of polar landscapes within the committee on polar research of the polish academy of sciences.  olech was the head of the polish antarctic station from 1991-1993 and then again from 2005-2006.  she was the head of the zdzisław czeppe department of polar research and documentation, jagiellonian university (1996- 2011). she has participated in and led several arctic and antarctic expeditions.  awards and honours olech became a member of the explorers club in 2001. in addition the olech hills in the three sister point area of antarctica was named in her honour.  references  polish women scientists 1941 births living people antarctic scientists women antarctic scientists polish women academics 20th-century polish scientists 21st-century
polish scientists polish lichenologists mycologists women mycologists jagiellonian university alumni jagiellonian university faculty 20th-century polish women
filip zadina (; born 27 november 1999) is a czech professional ice hockey forward currently playing with the detroit red wings of the national hockey league (nhl). zadina was drafted 6th overall by the red wings in the 2018 nhl entry draft.  playing career zadina made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc dynamo pardubice during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  zadina was selected 10th overall by the halifax mooseheads in the 2017 chl import draft. he committed to the mooseheads believing they would help him achieve his dream of playing in the nhl. he led all rookies in points, was named to the first all-star team, the all-rookie team, and won the michael bossy trophy as the best professional prospect in the league.  prior to the draft zadina was considered a top prospect, with nhl central scouting bureau describing him as a natural scorer with a great finishing touch. he was the third ranked north american based skater, before he was selected sixth overall in the 2018 nhl entry draft by the detroit red wings on 22 june 2018. he soon agreed to a three-year, entry-level contract with the red wings on 7 july 2018. after attending red wings training camp prior to the 2018-19 season, zadina was reassigned to the grand rapids griffins in the american hockey league on 30 september. on 16 february 2019, in a game against the san antonio rampage, zadina scored eight seconds into overtime, setting the griffins franchise record for fastest overtime goal.  on 23 february 2019, zadina was recalled by the red wings. prior to being recalled, he recorded 15 goals and 16 assists in 45 games with the griffins, ranking third on the team in goals and fourth in points. he made his nhl debut for the red wings the next day in a game against the san jose sharks. on 5 march, he scored his first career nhl goal in his fourth nhl game, against semyon varlamov of the colorado avalanche. on 15 march, zadina was assigned to the griffins. he recorded one goal and two assists in nine games with the red wings, and averaged 15:23 of ice time. on 24 november 2019, zadina was again recalled by the red wings. on 11 december 2019 zadina, was reassigned to the grand rapids griffins (ahl).  on 7 august 2020, with the 2020-21 nhl season delayed due to the covid-19 pandemic, zadina having trained in the off-season with hc ocelari trinec was loaned
by the red wings to join the czech elh club for the beginning of their season until the resumption of the red wings training camp in november.  personal life filip is the son of , a retired professional ice hockey player who is currently an assistant coach for hc ocelari trinec of the czech extraliga.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  awards and honours  references  external links  1999 births czech ice hockey forwards detroit red wings draft picks detroit red wings players grand rapids griffins players halifax mooseheads players hc dynamo pardubice players hc ocelari trinec players living people national hockey league first round draft picks sportspeople from pardubice
larry miller (born 1944) is an american artist, most strongly linked to the fluxus movement after 1969. he is "an intermedia artist whose work questions the borders between artistic, scientific and theological disciplines.       he was in the vanguard of using dna and genetic technologies as new art media." electronic arts intermix, a pioneering international resource for video and new media art has said, "miller has produced a diverse body of experimental art works as a key figure in the emergent installation and performance movements in new york in the 1970s... his installations and performances have integrated diverse mediums [sic] and materials."  miller's early works already demonstrate his personal understanding of the artist as an investigator of experience and of art as an experiment. in addition to his work with fluxus and dna, miller's work can be divided into two distinct categories: 1) miller's own video pieces, which were often components of his larger installations and performances and 2) documentary videotapes of fluxus interviews, performances and events. since the 1960s, miller has shot and collected an impressive number of fluxus related materials, including the 1978 interview with george maciunas.  the interview that miller conducted with maciunas shortly before the latter's death is an outstanding documentation, which has made a great contribution to the reconstruction of early fluxus history in particular. miller has also done interviews with artists joe jones, carolee schneemann, ben vautier, dick higgins, alison knowles and others. miller has helped produce, organize and develop exhibitions for fluxus artists such as maciunas and nam june paik. miller also organized several evenings at the judson church in new york.  biography larry miller was born in marshall, missouri in 1944. he earned his mfa degree at rutgers university, new brunswick, new jersey in 1970 when he began exhibiting his work in new york. larry miller studied under robert watts at rutgers university, and has been active in the fluxus network since the late 1960s. he lives in new york with artist sara seagull, who is also associated with the fluxus movement. miller and seagull met in the early 1970s under the mutual influence of fluxus artist robert watts who taught film and mixed media at rutgers university from the 1950s to the 1980s and remained a lifelong friend of both artists.  miller's performance residencies have included portland school of art, maine; lafayette college, easton, pennsylvania; walker art center, minneapolis; and santa barbara museum, california and has taught and lectured at colleges and universities throughout the country
. in 1986, miller was the subject of a retrospective and catalogue, as if the universe were an object at the anderson gallery, virginia commonwealth university in richmond and washington project for the arts, washington, d.c.  miller and seagull live in new york city. they maintain a studio near new paltz, ny.  work with fluxus miller's official association with the fluxus group dates to 1969 when the founder of the group george maciunas took him on as a protege, leading to close collaborations. many of miller's original compositions have become part of the fluxus collective's standard repertoire of works. miller has become a frequent interpreter of "classic" fluxus scores and is credited with enlarging the group's works to a wider audience, often straddling the boundaries between research, art, and producer.  through miller, fluxus attracted media coverage such as the worldwide cnn coverage of off limits exhibit at newark museum, 1999. other miller activities as organizer, performer and presenter within the fluxus milieu include performance in fluxus continue 1963-2003 at musee d'art et d'art contemporain in nice; fluxus a la carte in amsterdam; and centraal fluxus festival at centraal museum, utrecht, netherlands. in 2004, for geoffrey hendricks' critical mass: happenings, fluxus, performance, intermedia and rutgers university 1958-1972, miller reprised and updated the track and field events of the flux olympics, first presented in 1970. for do-it yourself fluxus at ai - art interactive - in cambridge, massachusetts, miller took on the role of curatorial consultant for recreation that offered viewers experiential interactive participation in maciunas's original design of the historic flux labyrinth, a large, complex maze built by george maciunas at akademie der kunst, berlin in 1976 featuring sections by many fluxus artists with miller's assistance.  "the flux-labyrinth was essentially a giant fluxbox. because when we did it we were trying to engage all these aspects of experience- aural, optic, olfactory, epithelial and tactile," miller told post-fluxus artist mark bloch in a 2015 interview. "the fundamental idea behind the flux-labyrinth is maciunas was taking that essential idea of the puzzle of consciousness... and trying to translate it in basic 20th century terms which to me were existential." miller created a new version of the flux labyrinth at the in the spirit of fluxus exhibit at the walker art center in 1994, where griel marcus said
, "miller was... fine tuning the monster."  during the opening night of george brecht - a heterospective at museum ludwig, cologne in 2005, miller organized fellow fluxus artists alison knowles, ben vautier and others to convey the ideas behind  brecht's original "event" scores in a performance program that embodied the subtleties of the genre including a rare reenactment of brecht's 1960 motor vehicle sundown (event) for john cage, featuring more than 40 vehicles in the historic dom platz adjacent to the famous cologne cathedral the following day. with a large local audience in attendance, the event spectacle, broadcast live on german television, utilized fire trucks, police and military vehicles and vintage automobiles as sound instruments to bring brecht's classic score to life.  miller and three collaborators alison knowles, geoffrey hendricks and art critic peter frank did a live performance of pre-fluxus, pre-happenings artist al hansen's alice denham in 48 seconds at andrea rosen gallery in 2006.  before fluxus founder george maciunas died in 1978 from complications due to pancreatic cancer, he left behind his thoughts on fluxus in a series of important video conversations with miller called interview with george maciunas which has been screened internationally and translated into numerous languages.  a notable contribution to the spirit of fluxus-related works by miller has been the "flux-tour", a form of performance whereby artist-performers conducted alternative museum and gallery tours in which guides focused attention to the architectural spaces themselves rather than discussing or interpreting works of art on display, resulting in the examination of minute detail such as the floors, structural elements and lighting present in the spaces.  miller reprised examples of earlier flux-tours at the grey gallery at new york university, new york, in 2011 in conjunction with the exhibitions, fluxus and the essential questions of life and fluxus at nyu: before and beyond which featured documentation from prior flux-tours, dating back to 1976.  miller has been active with the fluxolympics, unproductive group activity staged as sports events which were altered to the point of being unrecognisable as fluxus practice went from being housed in concert halls or theatre spaces to having more urban settings the end of the 1960s. "in fluxus' historic context these events were organised by means of open calls for participation, in which artists carried out their proposals, thus nourishing the movement's collaboration and communication grid. later, artists such as larry miller and sara seagull became the
main promoters of this type of activity."  art and science since the late 1980s, larry miller has questioned such boundaries in works exploring issues raised by science, exploring subjects as diverse as dna, hypnosis and turning ordinary chocolate and carrots into art objects.  according to his website, "whether presented as live performance, specific site installation, or gallery exhibition, miller considers all of his works -- as well as himself -- to be 'performing objects.' in this view, there are no fixed boundaries between objects, events, time and space, or between definitions that societies offer for science, art, and religion."  from an event realized under the influence of hypnosis, larry miller created an installation "mom-me," from 1973, which featured snapshots, family photos by the artist, video freeze frames and video as part of the third mind: american artists contemplate asia at the guggenheim museum from january to april 2009.  in addition to fluxus, miller is best known for his works with genetics. "basing lines of conceptual inquiry on his 1989 'copyright' claim to his personal genome, he focused on questions of the ownership of dna, and of the commercial applications of genetic technology. in 1992, miller launched an international public action, which has since facilitated thousands of individuals in making claims to their genetic rights. miller created the genetic code copyright certificate and published it in several language, a document that, when signed, guarantees the multiplication of one's own genome." in 1990 and 1993, miller traveled to actions and exhibitions in poland, where, among other things during the festival constructions in process iv by the international artists' museum in łodz, he registered the dna of poet allen ginsberg, and installed a sound sculpture in honor of nicolaus copernicus. he also produced an advertising campaign calling for the public to copy their dna.  a form on miller's website provides a declaration of copyright of the user's dna genome. subsequent works emerging from this activity have created speculation on the genetic science applications. miller's "genomic license series postulates that dna is a malleable material which, like clay or digital information, can be shaped into novel products -- bought, sold, and distributed like any other commodity." miller "riffs on the increasing commodification of the double helix, in the form of patents on natural genes... he portrays 11 artists, each with a vial of his own blood or other cells, and offers to license, for a price and one-time-only use, the genes that
undergird his creativity."  larry miller's genetics works have been seen in numerous exhibitions including paradise now: picturing the genetic revolution, exit art, nyc, 2000 (touring u.s. through 2004); from code to commodity: genetics and visual art, new york academy of science, nyc, 2003; gene(sis): contemporary art explores human genomics, henry art gallery, university of washington, seattle, 2002 to 2005), codes and identity, clifford art gallery, colgate university, new york, 2003,;how human: life in the post genome era, international center of photography, new york, 2003 and dna: do not assume bowling green state university, ohio 2005.  exhibitions larry miller's work has been supported by the new york state foundation for the arts, creative artists program and the national endowment for the arts. he has exhibited at the 112 greene street gallery,  gallery lelong, stux gallery, and emily harvey gallery, new york. institutions such as franklin furnace, ps 1, exit art and the kitchen as well as the whitney museum of american art, the museum of modern art, the guggenheim museum, the new museum, and the walker art center, the new museum, the museum of contemporary art, chicago; the san francisco museum of modern art, san francisco and numerous other venues in canada, europe, korea, japan, and australia have exhibited millers work. in particular, miller's art has appeared at the venice bienalle, italy; akademie der kunste, daadgalerie and bonner kunstverein, germany; ecole nationale des beaux arts, galerie 1900-2000, france.  references  external links   larry miller website  fluxus east  larry miller performances on youtube  interview: larry miller on the flux labyrinth by mark bloch  free flux tour of the grey art gallery  larry miller fluxus videos at artpool  library holdings of works referencing larry miller  1944 births living people people from marshall, missouri american performance artists american video artists  fluxus
brad's status is a 2017 american comedy-drama film written and directed by mike white and starring ben stiller, austin abrams, michael sheen, jenna fischer, and luke wilson. it premiered on september 9 at the 2017 toronto international film festival in the juried platform section, and was theatrically released by amazon studios on september 15, 2017.  plot brad sloan (ben stiller) runs his own non-profit organization, and lives a comfortable life with his loving wife and son, but cannot help contemplating how his old friends craig fisher (michael sheen), billy wearslter (jemaine clement), jason hatfield (luke wilson), and nick pascale (mike white) are rich and accomplished. craig works in the white house and published a best-selling book; jason owns a hedge fund firm; billy sold a company he founded, moved to maui, and retired; and nick is a hollywood director. brad's wife, melanie (jenna fischer), tries to comfort brad, telling him that they do not need to compare themselves with the wealthiest 1%.  in the morning, brad and his son, troy (austin abrams), leave for boston to visit colleges. after troy confesses to him that he aims to get into harvard, brad sees this as a way to make up for his lost ambitions. after arriving at harvard to meet with admissions, they find out they have missed the appointment by one day. brad argues to see the admission committee, but troy gets him to back down. melanie suggests that brad should call craig, which he reluctantly agrees. brad calls billy to get craig's number and finds out that nick married his boyfriend a few years back, but brad was not invited. he then laments how his friends' exclusion of him confirms his fears: that he is not only a failure in his own eyes but to others as well. brad also reflects about his waning sex life with melanie and how his wife easily gets satisfied, which he thinks might have undermined his ambitions. at a restaurant, brad opens up to troy about feeling left out, and troy picks up on things. after talking to craig, craig gets troy a meeting with the famous harvard music professor and the dean of admissions.  brad and his son meet ananya (shazi raja), a high school musician friend of his son, and her friend maya (luisa lee). brad relishes ananya's idealism and her respect for his work, reminding him of his better days. she also reveals to brad that she did not like craig's lectures since
she finds him sexist and arrogant. after having dinner with them, brad and troy turn down the offer of drinks with them and return to their hotel.  that night, brad can not sleep so he decides to have a drink with ananya. he tells her that the non-profit life was a mistake and he should have tried to make money. as he is talking, he recognizes that he's lost her admiration; but he goes on about his perceived mistakes in his career, relative to the success of his friends. ananya tells him that he is living a privileged life and that there are kids she knows in india who are lucky to have dinner, so he should be grateful for what he has in his life.  troy meets his role model music composer thanks to craig pulling some strings. however, when troy tells brad that his idol is not as cool as he thought, they get in an argument where brad tells troy that he cannot judge people for selling out because he is just living in a bubble. the argument soon ends and troy attends his interview. during the interview, jason calls brad in a rush that brad does not initially pick up on because of his self-focus. jason informs him that he is at the mayo clinic and that his 3-year old daughter has a tethered spine. shaken by the news, brad forgets to ask troy about how his interview went. troy tell brad things went really well. brad then accompanies troy to tufts, his alma mater, where he learns his old professor just died. watching troy go on the tour at tufts, his thoughts are interrupted when melanie returns his call. brad expresses his pride about his son and wishes melanie were there with them.  the next night, brad has dinner with craig, to properly thank him for his help. he finds out that his old friends, the ones he believes are leading privileged lives, are actually living with major problems. in addition to jason hatfield's daughter having a serious medical condition, he learns jason's company is under legal investigation. he also learns billy wearslter is an addict and alcoholic. craig also expresses some homophobic remarks about nick. while brad tolerates craig's constant bragging and backhanded compliments, eventually brad feels conflicted about how craig treats him, questioning if they really are friends. when craig seems confused at brad's reaction, brad abruptly leaves their dinner. he decides to join troy at the orchestral performance where ananya and maya are playing, explaining to troy he'd rather be there with him. the beautiful music transports brad into
feeling emotional and reflective, realizing he still loves the things of the world. after returning to the hotel that evening, troy asks his father if he is having a nervous breakdown. brad said he just sometimes has doubts that people view him as a failure. troy explains that everyone only thinks of themselves, so they don't even consider whether brad is a failure or not.  troy adds that his opinion is the only one that matters, and he loves his dad.  brad is touched and mollified by troy's words.  in his thoughts, brad is trying to imagine the future. the movie ends with him repeating, "we're still alive. i am still alive," as he turns over and goes to sleep. at the end of the credits, brad's imagination wanders back into thinking that his son is busking.  cast   ben stiller as brad sloan, melanie's husband, troy's father and one of craig, billy, nick and jason's four friends  michael sheen as craig fisher, one of billy, nick, jason and brad's four friends  jenna fischer as melanie sloan, brad's wife and troy's mother  luke wilson as jason hatfield, one of billy, nick, craig and brad's four friends  austin abrams as troy sloan, brad and melanie's son  devon packer as young troy sloan  jemaine clement as billy wearslter, one of nick, craig, jason and brad's four friends  mike white as nick pascale, one of billy, craig, jason and brad's four friends  jimmy kimmel as himself  shazi raja as ananya  production  on july 13, 2016, it was announced that plan b entertainment was developing a comedy film, brad's status, written and directed by mike white, in which ben stiller would star. on october 31, 2016, amazon studios came aboard to co-finance and distribute the film. michael sheen, luke wilson, jenna fischer, and austin abrams joined stiller in the cast.  principal photography on the film began in october 2016 in montreal.  release in may 2017, it was announced that amazon studios and annapurna pictures, who produced another amazon-released film, wiener-dog, would co-distribute the film on september 15, 2017.  critical response on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 79% based on 175 reviews, with an average rating of 6.8/10. the site's critical consensus reads, "brad's status transcends its familiar premise with insightful observations and affecting
interplay between stars ben stiller and austin abrams." on metacritic, another review aggregator, the film has a weighted average score of 71 out of 100, based on 40 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".  accolades  references  external links     2017 films english-language films american films 2017 comedy-drama films amazon studios films american comedy-drama films films directed by mike white films produced by brad pitt films produced by sidney kimmel films scored by mark mothersbaugh films with screenplays by mike white films shot in montreal films shot in boston midlife crisis films plan b entertainment films sidney kimmel entertainment films vertigo films films father and son films
eugene "yaney" rosenthal (august 5, 1914 - april 19, 2006) was an american professional basketball player. he played college basketball and football for carnegie mellon university. rosenthal then played in the national basketball league for the pittsburgh pirates during the 1938-39 season and averaged 3.3 points per game.  references  1914 births 2006 deaths american men's basketball players united states navy personnel of world war ii basketball players from pittsburgh carnegie mellon tartans football players carnegie mellon tartans men's basketball players forwards (basketball) jewish men's basketball players pittsburgh pirates (nbl) players
weaves is the debut extended play of canadian indie pop group weaves. two-thirds of the record was produced by guitarist morgan waters with garageband, the other third produced by david newfeld. praised by music journalists for its varied style and burke's vocal performance, weaves combines elements of high-quality recording common in pop music with lo-fi noise music styles to create a "disgusting" yet "catchy" feel. released for streaming on march 26, 2014 and in stores on april 1, 2014 by buzz records, the ep was promoted with four singles ("hulahoop", "motorcycle", "take a dip" and "buttercup"), with music videos for the latter three, a two-month tour and a remix record. weaves was ranked number eight on popmatters' list of best indie rock albums of 2014.  production and composition jasmyn burke and morgan waters, who first met each other in a bar, started weaves in 2012 when the two made demo songs based on files of song ideas burke recorded on her iphone. in 2013, bassist zach bines and drummer spencer cole joined the project and started recording their self-titled debut ep immediately after. "motorcycle", "take a dip", "do you see past" and "hulahoop" were produced by waters in his bedroom using garageband, while "buttercup" and "closer" was produced by david newfeld in his church studio of dobbstown north. waters described newfeld's production contributions as "music lessons and artist lessons in a way," given that he knew what he was making. he also said, "that open mindedness and visibility to capture what happens in the moment and allow mistakes and encourage them brings you out of your comfort zone."  the indie pop album combines elements of high-quality recording common in pop music with lo-fi noise music styles, leading to a complicated sound of "bombast and confusion" and a feel of the tracks being "disgusting" yet "catchy" as the band described. now's carla gillis gave style descriptions such as "soul-grunge" and "sludge-pop" to label this sound. elements from a big number of genres are present on weaves, such as neo-pop, r&b, soul, art rock, and psychedelic music. the lyrics on the songs are filled with sexual innuendo such as "won't you ride my motorcycle / take a ride", which gillis wrote "can turn into both
amusing nah-nah-nah insolence and wailing, dead-serious desperation on a dime."  promotion four songs were released as singles before weaves was issued: "hulahoop" on april 30, 2013, "motorcycle" on july 23, 2013, "take a dip" on september 23, 2013, and "buttercup" on february 18, 2014. "take a tip" was a premiere by spin magazine. the blog brooklynvegan premiered weaves for streaming on march 26, 2014. a tour in ontario and new york promoting the ep last from april 10 to june 22, 2014. on july 21, 2014, noisey premiered the remix ep for weaves, which features a re-edit of "hulahoop" by bram gielen. the video for the remix was released by chart attack on july 29, 2014, and in the video, burke "drinks from straw glasses, waves torches and sparklers and performs some lounging, laconic dance moves."  on august 12, 2013, a music video for the song "motorcycle" was released. chart attack noted the video's "weird, wrong-handed sketches, which divert from the badlands 4 kidz plot with lots of delightful non-sequiter cutaways to make it a junky feast for your rapidly deteriorating attention span." on march 24, 2014, rookie magazine premiered the video for "buttercup". the werid, crazy look of the video is meant to match the pretty-looking yet poisonous aspect of a buttercup, a flower the song is named after. both videos were directed and created by jason harvey, who waters described as "a really talented guy" with his own "strong voice". on october 15, 2013, the video for "take a dip" was released; it depicts burke dressed in a white-colored shawl in a dark-lit church. the other band members appear near the end of the video, where she grates cheddar cheese onto their heads as they bow to her.  critical reception  response towards weaves from music journalists upon release was generally favorable. critics from publications like exclaim! and noisey praises included the record's combination of numerous musical styles to the point where the overall genre the ep could be labeled its own category or could be very hard to pin-point. noisey said that the ep "experiments and dips across genre lines in a balancing act between of laxity and concentration, without all of the pretension and
exclusivity that normally accompanies a buzzing indie band". a more mixed review came from liz fox of popmatters, finding most of the aspects of weaves typical of indie music released in the previous fifteen years but praising burke's "sultry" vocal performance that "improve the elaborate backdrop, allowing for some simplicity among the chaos". now called the ep an "excellent introduction for new fans", writing that its only downfall was the track "do you see past" due to its "more sophisticated, less interesting electro-pop sound". in a list by another popmatters journalist of the best indie rock albums of 2014, weaves ranked number eight.  track listing  credits and personnel credits adapted from liner notes of weaves. locations produced, mixed and engineered at dobbstown north (unknown location), also engineered at candle recording in toronto, ontario and echo valley (unknown location) credits  jasmyn burke lead vocals morgan waters  lead guitar, bass and production on "motorcycle", "take a dip", "do you see past" and "hulahoop", mixing on "hulahoop",  bram gielen  organ on "motorcycle" and "take a dip" spencer cole drums zach bines bass on "buttercup" and "closer"  nathan vanderwielen engineering on "motorcycle" and "take a dip" david newfeld production, engineering, mixing and synthesizers on "buttercup" and "closer", mastering leon taheny engineering on "motorcycle", "take a dip" and "do you see past", mixing on "motorcycle" nick stumpf mixing on "motorcycle", "take a dip" and "do you see past" alanna questell  artwork george kokomo artwork photography  release history  references  2014 eps indie pop eps weaves (band) albums
the 1990 munster senior hurling championship final was a hurling match played on sunday 15 july 1990 at semple stadium. it was contested by cork and tipperary. cork captained by kieran mcguckin claimed the title beating defending champions tipperary on a scoreline of 4-16 to 2-14.  references  external links match video official programme cover  munster munster senior hurling championship finals tipperary gaa matches cork senior hurling team matches
john owen ʻaimoku dominis (january 9, 1883 - july 7, 1917) was the illegitimate son of john owen dominis and mary purdy lamiki ʻaimoku, and the adopted (hanai) son of queen liliʻuokalani of the kingdom of hawai'i. he served as a trustee of queen liliʻuokalani's trust, in which he was named a beneficiary.  biography he was born on january 9, 1883, in the waikiki residence of liliʻuokalani. the boy was the illegitimate son of liliʻuokalani's husband john owen dominis and mary purdy lamiki ʻaimoku (1855-1921), one of her household retainers. his father was an american from schenectady, new york who served in many political posts including as governor of oʻahu during the reigns of the kamehamehas and the house of kalakaua, which he married into. his mother was a hapa-haole, of part hawaiian descent, while his maternal grandmother mary purdy was a relative of the family of samuel parker.  liliʻuokalani had learned of the pregnancy from the royal physician georges phillipe trousseau in november 1882.  in an effort to protect her unfaithful husband, she considered claiming the child as their own and establishing him as the next in line to the throne. this act would have been illegal. instead, he was cared for by his grandmother mary purdy and financially supported by liliʻuokalani, who adopted him under the hawaiian tradition of hanai. besides ʻaimoku, she also adopted lydia kaʻonohiponiponiokalani aholo and joseph kaiponohea ʻaeʻa. liliʻuokalani would later succeed as queen of hawaii in 1891 and be overthrown in 1893. after a period as the republic of hawaii, the islands were annexed to the united states becoming the territory of hawaii. revolutionists and annexationists openly criticized 'aimoku's mother and the circumstances of his illegitimate birth in order to undermine the reputation of the former queen. during this politically turbulent period, 'aimoku attended the ʻiolani school.  in 1909, he was included in liliʻuokalani's deed trust and also named a trustee. her intention was to will her and dominis' personal home, washington place, to him as a lifelong estate for himself and his descendants. in 1910, many years after the death of her husband, liliʻuokalani officially adopted ʻaimoku and changed his name to john ʻaimoku dominis.  ʻaimoku
served as an assistant clerk to henry smith in the local circuit court and later worked the insurance business in the office of bishop trust company before his last illness.  he married sybil frances kahulumanu mcinerny (1891-1994), on june 19, 1911, at washington place. his wife was the daughter of edward aylett mcinerny and rose kapuakomela stillman wond mcinerny, both from old kamaʻaina families. they had three children: john owen dominis (1912-1933), who was named by the former queen after her husband, sybil frances kaolaokalani o liliuokalani dominis (1914-1998), and virginia beatrice kauhanenuiohonokawailani dominis koch (1916-2007).  on july 7, 1917, after suffering from a long illness considered hopeless for several days, ʻaimoku died at the mcinerny residence at kahala. he was thirty-four years old. following a funeral service at st. andrews cathedral, he was cremated and his remains buried at oahu cemetery. he was survived by his widow and children.   following the death of liliʻuokalani in the same year, his heir inherited his right to washington place. the queen liliʻuokalani's trust offered the property to the territorial government with the understanding they would "will make provision for the rights of the dominis minors, who have a life interest as tenants in the premises." however, the bill authorizing the purchase of washington place never passed the territorial legislature and the home and surrounding property were condemned by the territorial government under the law of eminent domain. the heirs of dominis contested this action in court but their case was withdrawn. by taking washington place via eminent domain, neither the trustees nor the territorial government had to compensate the dominis' children and they were deprived of their claims to the life estate. subsequently, washington place was converted into the executive mansion for the governors of hawaii until 2007, when it became a museum.  references  bibliography  1883 births 1917 deaths people from honolulu people of native hawaiian descent hawaiian kingdom people ʻiolani school alumni hawaiian nobility hawaiian adoptees (hanai) burials at oahu cemetery
dheena dayalan, popularly known as rj dheena, தனதயளன (தமழ) is an indian radio jockey and television show host based in chennai, tamil nadu. he is best known for his unique voice and tamil slang, humour and rapid speaking rate. he has worked at suryan fm 93.5 and big fm - tamil, chennai. he started his own studio/business  academy of radio studios & salt audios in 2011. later joined 8k miles media ) as a creative consultant united states of america in 2015 and 2018-19 headed a tamil radio station 89.4 tamil fm in dubai.  he set a new world record live  on radio continuously for 168 hours and entered the guinness book of world records, after breaking the existing world record of 135 hours set by italian rj stefano venneri. he also appeared as cameo in a tamil movie chennaiyil oru naal.  references  people from chennai 1972 births living people
justin phillips may refer to:  justin phillips (american football) (born 1995), american football player  justin phillips (canadian football) (born 1985), canadian football player  justin phillips (rugby union) (born 1995), south african rugby union player
mku (originally incorporated as m kumar udyog) is an indian defence company headquartered in kanpur, uttar pradesh, india. the company manufactures protection and surveillance range of equipment, including ballistic helmets, armour inserts, bulletproof vests, and electro-optical devices like night vision binoculars and monoculars.  mku was set up in 1985 to build fibre-reinforced plastic products for the indian army. it now provides protection to over 20 lakh (2 million) soldiers and 2000 platforms. its products are used by 230 forces in over 100 countries worldwide including the united nations and nato.  history  the company started off with the manufacturing of locks. in 1985, m kumar udyog was founded for manufacturing and supply of defence specific requirements of the indian army, with its first lot of frp helmets being shipped out in 1989.  by 1993 footwear manufacturing unit was commissioned. the company further diversified in 1997 and entered into plywood manufacturing business. subsequently, a separate manufacturing unit was set up for catering to the growing demand of plywood in india. in the same year a bitumen manufacturing plant was commissioned for supplies to the emerging road construction requirements of india.  during the kargil war of 1999, fought between india and pakistan, the indian ministry of defence realised the acute need of ballistic protection due to the high casualties amongst indian soldiers, leading to mku entering the bulletproof protection market. it made its first commercial international sale in 2003.  management  manoj gupta is the chairman of mku, his brother, neeraj gupta, heads the international business team, while the third brother, anurag gupta, looks after the domestic operations. neeraj gupta is the managing director of mku limited. he started the armour business of the company.  technology  mku has its centres of research & development in india and germany that develop ballistic protection technologies for the company. additionally it has its own in house ballistic testing laboratory in germany which can conduct ballistic testing up to stanag level iv including various other prevalent testing standards, globally. it recently launched a new technology which it terms as the 6th generation ballistic protection technology by the name "gen-6" offering a substantial reduction in the weight and thickness of personal body armour by 40% and 30% respectively.  mku's mukut combat helmets are manufactured using its rht (reduced helmet trauma) technology which provides protection from bullets and fragments and reduces head and skull injuries. more importantly, it reduces the resultant trauma, arising due to bab
t (behind armour blunt trauma), by over 40 per cent as compared to standard conventional composite helmets, according to the tests conducted by hp white laboratory, usa.  the company has recently been contracted by the government of india to manufacture and supply 1.59 lakh ballistic helmets to the indian army. the deal is estimated to be worth ₹170-180 crore. it's the first time in the last two decades that the army has placed such a big order for helmets with an aim to enhance the fighting capability of its soldiers and provide them better protection on the battlefield.  the existing helmets have serious limitations as they provide safety against only splinters, rocks, and bullets that have ricocheted and grazed the helmets. the soldier will likely incur injury or lose his life if the bullet is hit directly on the helmet.  a crucial factor about the new helmets is they are bullet proof and can bear impact of 9 mm ammunition fired from a short distance. about 6000 of these helmets will go to the indian navy, and many of these helmets will be designed for integration with modern communication and night vision devices. these helmets are part of the modern military equipment that is designed to protect and improve the lethality of the soldiers engaged in counter-insurgency or counter terrorist operations.  business  platform armouring mku designs, manufactures and supplies ballistic kits to global forces for their tracked and off-road vehicles across acvs (armoured combat vehicles) & apcs (armoured personnel carriers). these kits can be installed on platforms in real time in combat zones depending on the mission criticality and combat requirements, and often include standalone armours or add on armours, and spall liners.  spall liners protect the soldiers in apcs from spall effect arising due to penetration of hull by high speed projectiles like anti-material rifles. such spall effect delivers multiple impacts on the occupants by injuries from fragments arising due to breach of vehicle hull from anti-material rounds.  mku has created armour panels for more than 20 types of helicopters including de havilland dhc-6 twin otter, pilatus pc-6 turbo porter, bell uh-1/212 huey-types, boeing ch-47,  eurocopter b0-105, eurocopter puma/super puma/cougar, sikorsky ch-53, mil mi-8/17, nh industries nh-90. the company uses its german engineered patented system modulare schutz technik and polyshield v
6 technology to build up to 40 per cent lighter and thinner armour panels for different aircraft that protect the platform from small handguns, assault rifles, armour piercing ammunitions, fragments, and heavy machine guns. a reduced weight of the panels also translates into more useful payload and increases the endurance of the aircraft which means the pilot can have more crew and more ammunition or rations inside the aircraft. the products are in use on warships as well for e.g. armouring german-built warships in turkey.  the kanpur-based defence manufacturer also joined with french defence technology giant thales group to produce night vision devices in the country. the mou was signed on the sidelines of india's largest defence exhibition organised defence expo2020 lucknow, uttar pradesh in february this year.  mku recently won a contract to supply 14,500 ballistic vest to the policia militar do estado de sao paulo of brazil. the mku also supply night vision device to the brazilian army.  references  defence companies of india
the last hero is the fifth studio album by the american rock band alter bridge, released on october 7, 2016, by napalm records worldwide except in north america, where it was released on the band's own vanity label. it was produced by longtime collaborator michael "elvis" baskette. the album's first single, "show me a leader", was released digitally and to rock radio on july 26, 2016. on september 8, 2016, "my champion" was released as the album's second single. the album's third single, "poison in your veins", was released on june 12, 2017.  background the last hero was written during the winter of 2015, while both singer myles kennedy and guitarist mark tremonti were on tour with their respective projects (slash featuring myles kennedy and the conspirators and tremonti), with the recording process being finished during the spring of 2016. regarding the sound of the album, tremonti stated it to be similar to fortress and blackbird but they were planning on a darker sound. the album name comes from the subject of being a hero in society and people's feelings of disillusionment with their current leaders. it also marks a departure from the band's previous visual style, with the grungy aesthetic of previous albums replaced with a more streamlined logo.  reception  the last hero has received generally positive reviews, with critics praising its lyrical themes and the band members' musicianship, though some criticized michael baskette's production and the album's long length. it has a score of 74 out of 100 on metacritic, indicating "generally favorable reviews". dom lawson from the guardian gave the album a mixed review with a rating of three out of five stars. he praised the album's heavy sound, but said he felt that nearly "every last second of the last hero is purposefully, relentlessly bombastic" and that listening to the album from start to finish is an "exhausting" exercise. he concluded by saying that he felt the band was "trying too hard". timothy monger from allmusic felt that the album stays within the band's "tried and true" sound and does not stray far from what listeners will expect, but overall liked the album, praising tremonti's guitar playing and kennedy's vocal performance. he gave it three-and-a-half stars out of five. teamrock's grant moon gave the album four stars out of five and highly praised its lyrical themes, but lambasted baskette's production, saying he "produces this
all to within an inch of its life". he concluded by calling the album "a bold, bombastic rock album that really chimes with our troubled times". in a review of the band's performance with parallax orchestra in october 2017, writer dom lawson referred to the last hero as "stodgy and overproduced".  track listing  personnel  alter bridge myles kennedy - lead vocals, rhythm and lead guitar mark tremonti - lead and rhythm guitar, backing vocals brian marshall - bass guitar scott phillips - drums, percussion  production michael "elvis" baskette - production, mixing, string arrangements, keyboards jef moll - engineering, digital editing ted jensen - mastering daniel tremonti - cover art ben grosse - production, mixing on "breathe" tom baker - mastering on "breathe"  charts  references  external links  official band website  2016 albums alter bridge albums napalm records albums albums produced by michael baskette
ivan martynovich lesovoy (, 22 november 1835 - ?) was a russian imperial army general who fought in the russo-turkish war and served as the minister of war of the principality of bulgaria.  biography  ivan lesovoy joined the russian imperial army on 20 july 1857. after the russo-turkish war, he commanded the artillery of the bulgarian land forces. in 1882 lesovoy became the acting war minister of bulgaria and the general-adjutant of the prince of bulgaria. later that year he returned to russia. from 1885 to 1893, lesovoy was in command of the 39th artillery brigade of the 39th infantry division.  rank history  ensign (1.10.1858) junior lieutenant (14.09.1860) guards ensign (30.07.1862) guards junior lieutenant (30.08.1862) guards lieutenant (4.10.1863) guards staff captain (16.04.1867) guards captain (30.08.1870) guards colonel (31.03.1874) major general (21.04.1881)  awards  order of st. george (4th class)  references   1835 births imperial russian army generals russian military personnel of the russo-turkish war (1877-1878) year of death missing defence ministers of bulgaria
enicodes schreibersii is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by thomson in 1865. it is known from new caledonia. it feeds on the breadfruit tree.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1865
bayesian-optimal pricing (bo pricing) is a kind of algorithmic pricing in which a seller determines the sell-prices based on probabilistic assumptions on the valuations of the buyers. it is a simple kind of a bayesian-optimal mechanism, in which the price is determined in advance without collecting actual buyers' bids.  single item and single buyer  in the simplest setting, the seller has a single item to sell (with zero cost), and there is a single potential buyer. the highest price that the buyer is willing to pay for the item is called the valuation of the buyer. the seller would like to set the price exactly at the buyer's valuation. unfortunately, the seller does not know the buyer's valuation. in the bayesian model, it is assumed that the buyer's valuation is a random variable drawn from a known probability distribution.  suppose the cumulative distribution function of the buyer is , defined as the probability that the seller's valuation is less than . then, if the price is set to , the expected value of the seller's revenue is:  because the probability that the buyer will want to buy the item is , and if this happens, the seller's revenue will be .  the seller would like to find the price that maximizes . the first-order condition, that the optimal price  should satisfy, is:  where  the probability density function.  for example, if the probability distribution of the buyer's valuation is uniform in , then  and  (in ). the first-order condition is  which implies . this is the optimal price only if it is in the range  (i.e., when ). otherwise (when ), the optimal price is .  this optimal price has an alternative interpretation: it is the solution to the equation:  where  is the virtual valuation of the agent. so in this case, bo pricing is equivalent to the bayesian-optimal mechanism, which is an auction with reserve-price .  single item and many buyers  in this setting, the seller has a single item to sell (with zero cost), and there are multiple potential buyers whose valuations are a random vector drawn from some known probability distribution. here, different pricing methods come to mind:  symmetric prices: the seller sets a single price for the item. if one or more buyers accept this price, then one of them is selected arbitrarily.  discriminatory prices: the seller sets a different price for each buyer. if one or more buyers accept this price, then the buyer who accepted
the highest price is selected. discriminatory pricing can be implemented sequentially by ordering the prices in decreasing order and giving the item to the first buyer who accepts the price offered to him.  in the multiple-buyer setting, bo pricing is no longer equivalent to bo auction: in pricing, the seller has to determine the price/s in advance, while in auction, the seller can determine the price based on the agents' bids. the competition between the buyers may enable the auctioneer to raise the price. hence, in theory, the seller can obtain a higher revenue in an auction.  example. there are two buyers whose valuations are distributed uniformly in the range .   the bo auction is the vickrey auction with reserve price $100 (= the inverse-virtual-valuation of 0). its expected revenue is $133.  the bo discriminatory pricing scheme is to offer one agent a price of $150 and the other agent a price of $100. its expected revenue is 0.5*150 + 0.5*100 = $125.  in practice, however, an auction is more complicated for the buyers since it requires them to declare their valuation in advance. the complexity of the auction process might deter buyers and ultimately lead to loss of revenue. therefore, it is interesting to compare the optimal pricing revenue to the optimal auction revenue, to see how much revenue the seller loses by using the simpler mechanism.  buyers with independent and identical valuations  blumrosen and holenstein study the special case in which the buyers' valuations are random variables drawn independently from the same probability distribution. they show that, when the distribution of the buyers' valuations has bounded support, bo-pricing and bo-auction converge to the same revenue. the convergence rate is asymptotically the same when discriminatory prices are allowed, and slower by a logarithmic factor when symmetric prices must be used. for example, when the distribution is uniform in [0,1] and there are  potential buyers:  the revenue of the bo auction (a vickrey auction with reserve price determined by the probability distribution) is ;   the revenue of bo discriminatory pricing is ;   the revenue of bo symmetric pricing is .  in contrast, when the distribution of the buyers' valuations has unbounded support, the bo-pricing and the bo-auction might not converge to the same revenue. e.g., when the cdf is :  the revenue of the bo auction is ;  the revenue of bo discriminatory pricing is
;  the revenue of bo symmetric pricing is .  buyers with independent and different valuations  chawla and hartline and malec and sivan  study the setting in which the buyers' valuations are random variables drawn independently from different probability distributions. moreover, there are constraints on the set of agents that can be served together (for example: there is a limited number of units). they consider two kinds of discriminatory pricing schemes:  in an order-oblivious pricing mechanism (opm), the mechanism-designer determines a price for each agent. the agents come in an arbitrary order. the mechanism guarantees are for worst-case (adversarial) order of the agents, determined after the agents' valuations are drawn.  in a sequential pricing mechanism (spm), the mechanism-designer determines both a price for each agent, and an ordering on the agents. the mechanism loops over the agents in the pre-determined order. if the current agent can be served together with the previously-served agents (according to the constraints), then his personal price is offered to him, and he can either take it or leave it.  their general scheme for calculating the prices is:  for each agent , calculate the probability  with which the bo mechanism (myerson's mechanism) serves agent . this can be calculated either analytically or by simulations.  the price for agent  is , where  is a constant (either 1 or 1/2 or 1/3, depending on the setting). in other words, the price  satisfies the following condition: prob[the valuation of agent  is at least ] =  prob[the bo mechanism serves agent ]. if  then the marginal-probability that an agent is served by the spm is equal to the marginal-probability that it is served by the bo auction.  the approximation factors obtainable by an opm depend on the structure of the constraints:  uniform matroid or partition matroid constraints - 2 (i.e, the revenue of the bo opm is at least 1/2 the revenue of myerson's bo auction).  graphic matroid - 3  intersection of two partition matroids - 6.75  intersection of a graphic matroid and a partition matroid - 10.66  general matroid with matroid rank  -   moreover, they show two lower bounds:  an opm cannot guarantee more than 1/2 the revenue of the bo auction, even in the single-item setting.  an opm
cannot guarantee more than  the revenue of the bo auction when there are downwards-closed non-matroid constraint.  the approximation factors obtainable by an spm are naturally better:  uniform matroid, partition matroid - e/(e-1) ≅ 1.58  general matroid - 2  intersection of two matroids - 3 the lower bound (proved by ) is approximately 1.25.  yan explains the success of the sequential-pricing approach based on the concept of correlation gap, in the following way. the revenue of a mechanism is related to a set function . e.g, in a k-unit auction, the function is   the revenue of the bo auction is at most , where "winners" is the set of k agents with highest valuations.   the revenue of the bo spm is at least , where "demand" is the set of agents whose valuation is above the price.  both "winners" and "demand" are random-sets, determined by the agents' valuations. moreover, by carefully setting the price, it is possible to ensure that each agent  has the same probability  to be in "winners" and to be in "demand". however, in "winners", there is high correlation between different agents (if one agent wins, there is more probability that other agents lose), while in "demand", the agents are independent. therefore, the correlation gap is an upper bound on the loss of performance when using bo spm instead of bo auction.  this gives the following approximation factors:  general matroid -   k-unit auctions (a sub-case of general matroids) -   p-independent set systems (a generalization of the intersection of  matroids) - .  different items and one unit-demand buyer  in this setting, the seller has several different items for sale (e.g. cars of different models). there is one potential buyer, that is interested in a single item (e.g. a single car). the buyer has a different valuation for each item-type (i.e., he has a valuation-vector). given the posted prices, the buyer buys the item that gives him the highest net utility (valuation minus price).  the buyer's valuation-vector is a random-vector from a multi-dimensional probability distribution. the seller wants to compute the price-vector (a price per item) that gives him the highest expected revenue.  chawla and hartline and
kleinberg study the case in which the buyer's valuations to the different items are independent random variables. they show that:  the revenue of the bo unit-demand pricing when there are  item-types is at most the revenue of the bo single-item auction when there are  potential buyers.  when the buyer's valuations to the different items are independent draws from the same distribution, the bo unit-demand pricing that uses the same price to all items attains at least 1/2.17 of the revenue of the bo single-item auction.  when the buyer's valuations are independent draws from different distributions, the bo unit-demand pricing that uses the same virtual-price (based on virtual valuations) attains at least 1/3 of the revenue of the bo single-item auction. they also consider the computational task of calculating the optimal price. the main challenge is to calculate , the inverse of the virtual valuation function.  for discrete and regular valuation distribution, there is a polynomial-time 3-approximation.  for continuous and regular valuation distribution (available via an oracle) there is a polynomial-time (3+ε)-approximation with high probability, and a faster (6+ε)-approximation with probability 1.  different items and many unit-demand buyers  in this setting, there are different types of items. each buyer has different valuations for different items, and each buyer wants at most one item. moreover, there are pre-specified constraints on the set of buyer-item pairs that can be allocated together (for example: each item can be allocated to at most one buyer; each buyer can get at most one item; etc).  chawla and hartline and malec and sivan study two kinds of discriminatory pricing schemes:  in a sequential pricing mechanism (spm), the mechanism-designer determines a price for each buyer-item pair, and an ordering on the buyer-item pairs. the mechanism loops over the buyer-item pairs in the pre-determined order. if the current buyer-item pair is feasible, then the buyer is offered the item in the pre-determined price, and he can either take it or leave it.  in an order-oblivious pricing mechanism (opm), the mechanism-designer determines a price for each buyer-item pair. the buyers come in an arbitrary order, which may be adversarially determined after the agents' valuations are drawn.  a sequential-pricing mechanism is, in general, not a truth
ful mechanism, since an agent may decide to decline a good offer in hopes of getting a better offer later. it is truthful only when, for every buyer, the buyer-item pairs for that buyer are ordered in decreasing order of net-utility. then, it is always best for the buyer to accept the first offer (if its net utility is positive). a special case of that situation is the single-parameter setting: for every buyer, there is only a single buyer-item pair (e.g, there is a single item for sale).  to every multi-parameter setting corresponds a single-parameter setting in which each buyer-item pair is considered an independent agent. in the single-parameter setting, there is more competition (since the agents that come from the same buyer compete with each other). therefore, the bo revenue in the single-parameter setting is an upper bound on the bo revenue in the multi-parameter setting. therefore, if an opm is an r-approximation to the optimal mechanism for a single-parameter setting, then it is also an r-approximation to the corresponding multi-parameter setting. see above for approximation factors of opms in various settings.  see chapter 7 "multi-dimensional approximation" in  for more details.  many unit-demand buyers and sellers  recently, the spm scheme has been extended to a double auction setting, where there are both buyers and sellers. the extended mechanism is called 2spm. it is parametrized by an order on the buyers, an order on the sellers, and a matrix of prices - a price for each buyer-seller pair. the prices are offered to in order to buyers and sellers who may either accept or reject the offer. the approximation ratio is between 3 and 16, depending on the setting.  see also   monopoly pricing  references   pricing mechanism design
li peifu (; born october 1953) is a chinese novelist best known for his novel the book of life, which won him china's top literature prize: mao dun literature prize, in 2015. li is a member of the communist party of china and the china writers association. he was selected as a national first-class writer by the chinese government, and enjoys the special subsidy of the state council.  biography li was born into a  worker's family, in xuchang, henan, in october 1953. he started to publish works in 1978, after the cultural revolution. he graduated from henan radio and television university in 1984, where he majored in chinese language and literature. after graduation, he worked at xuchang municipal bureau of culture and later became president of the henan writers association and henan literature and art association. on august 16, 2015, he was awarded the mao dun literature prize for his novel the book of life. his most influential work is the book of life, which he finished in 2011, and which won him the prestigious mao dun literature prize in 2015. the book of life is also the finale of his plains trilogy, after the 1999 door of the sheepfold and the 2003 the light of the cities.  works  novellas  black dragonfly ()  cunhun ()  the countryside ()  collected works of li peifu ()  novels  the 17th generation great-great-grandson of li family ()  golden house ()  urban white paper ()  door of the sheepfold ()  the light of the cities ()  the book of life or a record of life ()  telescript  * the story of ying river ()  * ordinary story ()  * memorable years: stories of red flag canal ()  * shen fengmei ()  awards 1994 zhaung zhongwen literature prize  2012 the book of life - people's literature award  2015 the book of life - mao dun literature prize  references  1953 births living people writers from xuchang henan university alumni chinese male novelists mao dun literature prize laureates people's republic of china novelists
la cordee des alpes is four star hotel situated in the village verbier, in the canton valais, switzerland. it was built in 2012 and it is part of kv hotels.  the hotel is a member of a group small luxury hotels (slh).  the hotel features a spa cinq mondes and a bistronomic restaurant.  references  external links   kv hotels  cordee des alpes  hotels in switzerland buildings and structures in valais
the fountain of life may refer to:   the fountain of life (film), a 2012 fan film based on the masters of the universe franchise  the fountain of life (painting), a 1432 painting attributed to jan van eyck and others  the fountain of life (sculpture), a 1905 sculpture by ivan mestrovic  see also   fountain of life
fraser ministry may refer to:   first lyons ministry  second lyons ministry  third lyons ministry  fourth lyons ministry
geir børresen (born 16 november 1942) is a norwegian actor and entertainer.  biography  he was born in oslo. he made his film debut in liv in 1967, and made his stage debut at nationaltheatret in 1968. he played the characters "labbetuss" and "max mekker" in the television series sesam stasjon. he provided the voice of trigger in the norwegian dub of robin hood (1973 film)  he is known for songs based on the comics series the smurfs, and his albums i smurfeland (1978),  sommer i smurfeland (1979) and alle gode ting er smurf (1979) sold a total of nearly 400,000 copies.  references  1942 births living people male actors from oslo norwegian male stage actors norwegian male film actors norwegian male television actors nrk people children's musicians musicians from oslo
qipengyuania aquimaris  is a gram-negative, non-spore-forming, slightly halophilic and non-motile bacteria from the genus qipengyuania which has been isolated from the yellow sea in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of erythrobacter aquimaris at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  sphingomonadales bacteria described in 2004
hu fuguo (; born october 1937) is a chinese politician currently serving as president of china association of poverty alleviation & development. he was communist party secretary, governor and cppcc chairman of his home province shaanxi.  he was a delegate to the 13th and 19th national congress of the communist party of china. he was a member of the 14th and 15th central committee of the communist party of china.  hu was a powerful provincial official in home-province shanxi in the 1990s. during his tenure, he focused on energy alternatives, water development and conservation, the environment, education, economic development, and supervised the construction of taiyuan-jiuguan expressway, taiyuan wusu international airport, and taiyuan railway station. at the same time, with his name and political influence, his town sons hu zhiqiang and hu wenqiang got a meteoric rise in local politics and local state-owned enterprises. but hu zhiqiang was sacked for purchasing offices and selling offices and collusion between officials and businessmen.  early life and education hu was born into poverty in xiahuo village () of zhangzi county, shanxi, in october 1937, after the second sino-japanese war broke out. both his parents were poor farmers. he had eleven siblings, but only him and two younger sisters survived. his mother died young and the three of them were raised by his father.  after middle school in 1957, hu entered the workforce as accountant in local people's commune. in 1958 he was accepted to the newly established vestibule school of coal, which was attached to lu'an bureau of mines (), and he joined the communist party of china in the next year. in october 1960 he enrolled at the fuxin college of mines (now liaoning technical university), where he majored in mining.  career after graduating in 1964, hu was assigned to datong bureau of mines () in datong, a city rich in coal resources in his home-province. he spent almost 20 years working at the province's institutes about coal resources before serving as vice-minister of coal industry in beijing.  in 1988 he was appointed vice-minister of energy, he concurrently served as general manager and party branch secretary of china unified distribution coal mine corporation, a state-owned company. in the spring of 1990, people's daily published an article titled "the vice minister's wife burns the boilers" and subsequently published another article "secretary of the provincial party committee's black lammy", praising hu was a clear official and good official.  in july 1992
, hu was transferred back to taiyuan, capital of shanxi province, where he was appointed deputy party chief and acting governor of shanxi. in early 1993 he was installed as governor of shanxi, replacing wang senhao. in september of that year, he was promoted to party chief of shanxi, the top political position in the province, where he served until june 1999. he concurrently served as cppcc committee chairman of shanxi between march 1994 and february 1995. during his term in office, he focused on energy alternatives, water development and conservation, the environment, education, economic development, he also undertook major improvements to the province's infrastructure, and supervised the construction of taiyuan-jiuguan expressway, taiyuan wusu international airport, and taiyuan railway station.  in june 1999, hu was transferred to beijing again and was appointed as deputy director of the department for poverty alleviation of the state council, a position at ministerial level. he served in the post until he retirement in may 2005. now he is the president of china association of poverty alleviation & development.  personal life hu married chang genxiu (). the couple has two sons: hu zhiqiang and hu wenqiang (). hu and his family are buddhist believers, they built a buddhist temple named "anle temple" () in their hometown. in the temple there is a jade statue of guanyin worthing 200 million yuan. every year during the chinese new year, businessmen drive to their home to pay new year's greetings.  hu zhiqiang was mayor of yulin, communist party secretary of yulin, and party branch secretary of shaanxi provincial health and family planning commission before he was placed under investigation by the communist party of china's anti-corruption agency in june 2018.  hu wenqiang is now the deputy general manager of shanxi coking coal group co., ltd. (), a state owned company headquartered in taiyuan, capital of shanxi province. he is also the party chief and chairman of the board of nanfeng chemical industry share holding co., ltd (), which headquartered in yuncheng, shanxi province.  references  1937 births chinese communist party politicians from shanxi people's republic of china politicians from shanxi governors of shanxi members of the 14th central committee of the chinese communist party members of the 15th central committee of the chinese communist party members of the standing committee of the 10th chinese people's political consultative conference living people politicians from changzhi
the 2018 united states senate election in nebraska took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of nebraska. incumbent republican deb fischer was re-elected to a second term against lincoln city councilwoman jane raybould and libertarian candidate jim schultz. the election comprises part of the 2018 u.s. senate elections.  the candidate filing deadline was march 1, 2018, and the primary election was held on may 15, 2018.  republican primary  candidates  nominated  deb fischer, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  jack heidel, retired university of nebraska at omaha professor  dennis frank macek  jeffrey lynn stein  todd watson, businessman and independent candidate for the u.s. senate in 2014  declined  shane osborn, former state treasurer and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2014  don stenberg, state treasurer, former attorney general, nominee for the u.s. senate in 2000 and candidate in 1996, 2006 and 2012  endorsements  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  jane raybould, lincoln city councilwoman, former lancaster county commissioner and nominee for lieutenant governor in 2014  eliminated in primary  chris janicek, businessman  larry marvin, perennial candidate  frank svoboda  endorsements  results  libertarian primary  candidates  declared  jim schultz  results  general election  predictions  debates  polling  results  by county  from secretary of state of nebraska  references  external links  candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia  campaign finance at fec  campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites  deb fischer (r) for senate  jane raybould (d) for senate  jim schultz (l) for senate  2018 nebraska united states senate
cruise mode is an australian motoring magazine television series which screened on network ten from 23 july 2016 at 3pm saturdays. it is hosted by shannon noll and charli robinson and is about special cars, special places and special road trips.  from the beach to bush a classic car and classic destination cruise mode is a relaxed way to explore all that great motoring has to offer  network 10 original programming automotive television series 2016 australian television series debuts 2017 australian television series endings
evangelia is a greek feminine given name. notable people with this name include:  evangelia atamian, (1922 - 23 february 1957), an armenian-greek rebetiko singer, known as marika ninou evangelia aravani, greek fashion model and tv presenter evangelia chantava, greek volleyball player evangelia chatziefraimoglou, greek volleyball player evangelia christodoulou, greek rhythmic gymnast evangelia micheli-tzanakou, biomedical engineer and professor evangelia moraitidou, greek water polo player evangelia platanioti, greek artistic swimmer evangelia psarra, greek archer evangelia tsagka, greek swimmer  see also mv e evangelia, a ship  references  greek feminine given names
amparay is a  mountain in the vilcabamba range in the andes of peru. it is located in the region of cusco.  references   mountains of peru mountains of cusco region
hanumakonda mandal is one of the 14 mandals in  hanumakonda district of the indian state of telangana. it has thousand pillar temple and public garden.  so many institutes , coaching centers and hospitals are in hanumakonda.  villages/areas kumarpally hanumakonda  palivelpula lashkar singaram gopalpur waddepally  references   mandals in hanamkonda district
this is the discography for german-american music producer toby gad. the table below includes songs that he has either or both written/produced for other people.  references   discographies of american artists pop music discographies rock music discographies
grantham & rose is a 2014 american independent coming of age drama film directed by kristin hanggi and starring jake t. austin and marla gibbs.  it is hanggi's directorial debut.  michael urie and mark lee served as an executive producers of the film.  plot  grantham (jake t. austin) struggles to become a man when a spontaneous road trip places him in the care of an 81-year-old african-american woman named rose (marla gibbs).  cast  jake t. austin as grantham portnoy  marla gibbs as rose price  tessa thompson as wallis  ryan spahn as erik henry  lisa winters ii as sherrie portnoy  production on august 2, 2012, it was announced that gibbs would be cast opposite austin in the film.  filming began in georgia on august 2012.  release and reception marvista entertainment released grantham & rose on february 10, 2015.  the film premiered on netflix on august 21, 2015.  references  external links      2014 films 2010s coming-of-age drama films films shot in georgia (u.s. state) american coming-of-age drama films american independent films american films 2014 directorial debut films 2014 independent films
hugelland is a type of landscape consisting of low rolling hills whose topography or surface structure lies between that of a lowland region (plains or river terraces) and that of a more rugged hill range or low mountain range.  the term is german and has no exact equivalent in english, but is often translated as "hill country", "hilly terrain", "upland(s)" or "gently undulating" or "rolling country", or "rolling countryside". it is derived from hugel, a low hill or hillock and appears frequently as a proper name for this type of terrain.  the term hugelland is not unambiguously defined, even in german. for example, on the plains of north germany, poland or hungary it may be applied to terrain with a height variation of just 50 metres, whilst in the alpine foreland or in the voralpen it might refer to terrain with a height difference of at least 100-200 metres.  on the other hand, some scholars prefer to define hugelland by its height above sea level; for example, applying it to terrain between 200 and 500 metres above sea level.  structure   structurally and geomorphologically, a hugelland landscape has a significant proportion of less well-defined components. for example:  it is topographically not as clearly defined a mountain or hill range,  which is why it usually exhibits variable erosion (the aspects of its slopes facing all points of the compass) and  why it rarely has series of parallel watercourses such as those typically created in hilly or mountainous terrain.  settlements may be located either in the valleys or on the heights (which offered sunny sites in winter, sheltered leeward locations and, formerly, better defensive positions);  arable usage is equally diverse - depending on soil type, local climate and groundwater.  the formation of the terrain often has geological causes that differ from those of hills and mountains:  hills and mountains are caused by folding along tectonic weaknesses or fault lines, which are then followed by rivers. this results in a parallel pattern, which can be made even more regular through erosion. hugelland rarely exhibits these properties.  when the gently rolling hills of a hugelland are suitable for agriculture, their small-scale nature is further reinforced, which may result in a colourful succession of mixed forest and open areas with pastures, meadows, arable crops and orchards, divided by hedgerows along the tracks, lanes and embankments. mixed woodland, hedges, ponds and scattered settlements occur, giving the appearance of a mosaic from the air.
regions named hugelland  the regions listed below have hugelland as part of their proper name. several also have alternative english-language names.  austria:   mattersburger hugelland, burgenland  oststeirisches hugelland, styria  germany:  aachener hugelland, north rhine-westphalia  alzeyer hugelland, rhineland-palatinate  angelner hugelland, schleswig-holstein  mittelsachsisches hugelland, saxony  nordthuringer hugelland, thuringia  ostbraunschweigisches hugelland, lower saxony  schleswig-holsteinisches hugelland, schleswig-holstein  spalter hugelland, bavaria  unterbayerisches hugelland, bavaria  switzerland  freiburger hugelland  other examples    austria:   upper austria: innviertel, hausruckviertel  lower austria: bucklige welt, parts of mostviertel; weinviertel, wienerwaldsee  south burgenland  se-carinthia  germany  baden-wurttemberg: jagst-ries, kraichgau  bavaria: haßlacherbergkette in north-upper franconia, middle franconia, upper swabia  brandenburg/saxony-anhalt: flaming  rhineland-palatinate: rhenish hesse  lower saxony: luneburg heath  mecklenburg-vorpommern: baltic uplands, feldberg lake district, mecklenburg switzerland  north rhine-westphalia: baumberge and beckum hills, munsterland  saxony: lower lusatia, north saxony  schleswig-holstein: holstein switzerland, hutten hills  italy:  the langhe in the piemont, between turin and the ligurian alps  poland:  pomeranian lakeland, prussian-, baltic uplands  lower silesia, lodz region  switzerland  parts of the jura  swiss plateau, napf  hungary, rumania, serbia  gocsej, raabtal, balaton-south; buda hills, zemplin  slavonia, batschka, banat, siebenburgen, dobruja  similar concepts  an example of hugelland outside europe is rwanda in africa, whose character is expressed by its french name of pays de mille collines ("land of a thousand hills"). in sweden the term undulating hilly land () is used since sten rudberg coined the concept in 1960. in the swedish context this means hilly areas made up of crystalline rocks of the baltic shield that are often contrasted with joint valley landscapes, the sub-cambrian peneplain and plains with residual hills. in southern sweden the
undulating hilly lands are coterminous with the sub-mesozoic hilly peneplains, an ancient surface formed by weathering in warm and humid climates during the mesozoic.  references   landforms
the enabling peace in iraq center (epic) is a charitable organization that works with iraqi civil society to provide relief, monitor iraqi affairs to better inform public policy, and enhance understanding of iraq's story. epic was founded by veterans of the gulf war in 1998 in washington, dc including executive director erik gustafson.  history trade and economic sanctions against iraq and the saddam hussein regime throughout the mid-1990s contributed to conditions of inadequate healthcare, few public education opportunities, and a critical shortage of food across the country. iraqis who sought to convince hussein to comply with un demands or conspire to remove him from power were frequently jailed or killed by the regime.  in that context, epic was founded in 1998 by veterans of the gulf war. early organizers created a grassroots movement to share the concerns of everyday iraqis living under sanctions with members of congress, thought leaders, and the american public. leading up to the u.s.-led 2003 invasion of iraq, epic urged the american public to support a peaceful approach and to prevent war through the use of e-mail petitions and a speakers bureau of volunteer military veterans who discussed their opposition to the invasion on college campuses and in front of civic organizations. in the aftermath of the invasion, including the years of sectarian violence and occupation of territory by the so-called islamic state, epic's mission shifted to include humanitarian work on-the-ground.  current programs epic currently conducts the following programs in three categories, according to its website:  enhance understanding    blog - epic's blog includes written analyses of urgent socio-political issues facing the country, such as anti-corruption reform, infrastructure development, and access to healthcare.  iraq matters podcast - the iraq matters podcast involves interviews conducted with notable iraqis, humanitarian experts, academics, and government officials. episodes are released at least quarterly and are available on the organization's website.  iraq speakers' bureau - the speakers' bureau enables those who have a close connection to iraq to share their knowledge and experience with the american public, helping to correct misconceptions about iraq and the needs of refugees fleeing violence. iraq thought leaders are connected to local speaking engagements wherever they live to help tell iraq's story.  monitor the crisis    iraq security and humanitarian monitor - the weekly e-mail publication and blog post is available to policymakers, scholars, aid workers, journalists, and anyone interested in analysis of ongoing humanitarian, political, and security developments in iraq. the publication uses firsthand accounts and arabic and kurdish-language news outlets as its source material.
provide relief    emergency response - the organization provides funding to cover emergency medical needs in areas recently cleared of isis militants, including mosul.  soccer salam - epic leads a consortium of non-profits who deliver humanitarian relief in the form of food, water filtration, medicine, and other essentials to displaced families in iraq under the banner of "soccer salam." the program includes donations of soccer balls and equipment for children whenever humanitarian aid is distributed.  board of directors as of june 2017, the enabling peace in iraq center's board of directors is composed by the following officers and members:  soren sudhof, president  marion abboud, secretary  hussein al-baya, treasurer  yasmeen alamiri  zach brooks-miller  peter kjeldgaard  david slater  bilal wahab  see also  epic website  iraq security and humanitarian monitor (ishm)  epic on facebook  epic on twitter  references  foreign charities operating in iraq charities based in the united states
ziosk is a table ordering tablet for casual dining restaurants developed by dallas based tabletop media. the device consists of a 7-inch tablet running android and a credit card reader. certain models also include a receipt printer and near field communication (nfc). as of july 2016, there are 170,000 ziosk tablets at restaurants in the united states, including chili's, friendly's, olive garden, red robin, and outback steakhouse franchisee cerca trova. the company employs around 110 active employees.  the tablets also allow users to play games for a fee. tabletop media rents the devices to restaurant operators through a subscription fee and revenue-share on paid games.  history  in september 2013, ziosk announced the deployment of tablets to all company-owned chili's restaurants, to be completed by the first half of 2014.  ziosk announced the deployment of tablets to olive garden in april, 2015 after customer and restaurant testing in 2014. olive garden expected to deploy tablets to all of its 800-plus restaurants by the end of 2015. after the deal is complete, the company estimated ziosk tablets will be used by more than fifty million users per month.  software and hardware  ziosk implements an over-the-air (ota) update mechanism of the product platform as well as security and encryption key management for credit card payments and implementing drivers for the magnetic stripe reader hardware. ziosk hardware is fully compliant with payment card industry payment application data security standards (pci pa-dss) 1.1 and payment application best practices (pabp) 1.4 standards.  in 2017, ziosk introduced its second generation tablet, the ziosk aurizon.  this tablet features a single slot that can read either magstripe or emv credit and debit cards, support for contactless payments, and a pin pad for cards requiring a pin.  for existing ziosk tablets in the field, ziosk also introduced the smart battery, which adds emv and contactless capability to existing ziosk tablets.  privacy concerns  some users of ziosk tablets have questioned the use of cameras on tabletop ordering tablets, citing privacy concerns. ziosk responded to the concerns stating that the company does not save or share information from the camera without permission from the user. they also noted that a green light near the top of the device will be activated when the camera is active, and that the camera is used specifically to read coup
ons.  references  external links    tablet computers android (operating system) devices
sphingomonas cynarae  is a gram-negative, non-spore-forming, rod-shaped and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from the phyllosphere of the plant cynara cardunculus var. sylvestris in lecce in italy.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas cynarae at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  cynarae bacteria described in 2013
oko town is the third album of swiss folk rock and indie rock band 77 bombay street released 5 october 2012 after their self-financed independent album dead bird in 2009 and their studio album up in the sky in 2011. it was released on gadget records.  the single "low on air" was released on 17 august 2012 and the follow-up singles were "angel" and "follow the rain".  the album reached the top of the schweizer hitparade, the official swiss albums chart becoming their first chart topping release in switzerland. the album was certified platinum.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2012 albums 77 bombay street albums
mysterious discovery (russian: таинственная находка) is a 1953 soviet family adventure film directed by boris buneev.  plot three schoolchildren from a polar settlement find an old gun. trying to figure out its origin, they learn many interesting things about the history of the region, and the national hero guria gagarki.  cast in alphabetical order  aleksey alekseev as stepan golovin    igor bezyayev as nikanor sarvanov    b. dorochov as andrei    mikhail gluzsky as segey chernyshev    nikolay grabbe as british lieutenant    valentin grachyov as vasia golovin    aleksei gribov as nikanor sarvanov    georgi gumilevsky as prokhor brusnichkin    larisa matvienko as gagarka's wife    andrei petrov as aleksei golovin    alexandr pokrovsky as stepa brusnichkin    aleksei pokrovsky as episode  nikolai rybnikov as sailor    ekaterina savinova as ekaterina sotnikova    a. shmurakova as luda    nikolay smorchkov as sailor   aleksandr susnin as anton    yevgeny  teterin as british captain    andrei tsimbal as geologist    yan yanakiyev as sailor   gennadi yudin as guriy gagarka  references  bibliography   natalja cemodanova /  alfred krautz. international directory of cinematographers, set-and costume designers in film: soviet union. saur, 1995.  external links     1953 films 1953 adventure films soviet adventure films soviet films russian-language films gorky film studio films
cruciani is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  andres cruciani (born 1966), argentine footballer and manager enrico cruciani alibrandi (1839-1921), italian politician giuseppe cruciani (born 1966), italian radio presenter, television presenter and journalist michele cruciani (born 1986), italian footballer paola tiziana cruciani (born 1958), italian actress, comedian and playwright  italian-language surnames
amazon elasticache is a fully managed in-memory data store and cache service by amazon web services (aws). the service improves the performance of web applications by retrieving information from managed in-memory caches, instead of relying entirely on slower disk-based databases. elasticache supports two open-source in-memory caching engines: memcached and redis (also called "elasticache for redis").  as a web service running in the computing cloud, amazon elasticache is designed to simplify the setup, operation, and scaling of memcached and redis deployments. complex administration processes like patching software, backing up and restoring data sets and dynamically adding or removing capabilities are managed automatically. scaling elasticache resources can be performed by a single api call.  amazon elasticache was first released on august 22, 2011, supporting memcached. this was followed by support for reserved instances on april 5, 2012 and redis on september 4, 2013.  uses as a managed database service with multiple supported engines, amazon elasticache has a wide range of uses, including  performance acceleration database limitations are often a bottleneck for application performance. by placing amazon elasticache between an application and its database tier, database operations can be accelerated.  cost reduction using elasticache for database performance acceleration can significantly reduce the infrastructure needed to support the database. in many cases, the cost savings outweigh the cache costs. expedia was able to use elasticache to reduce provisioned dynamodb capacity by 90%, reducing total database cost by 6x.  processing time series data using the redis engine, elasticache can rapidly process time-series data, quickly selecting newest or oldest records or events within range of a point-in-time.  leaderboards leaderboards are an effective way to show a user quickly where they currently stand within a gamified system. for systems with large numbers of gamers, calculating and publishing player ranks can be challenging. using amazon elasticache with the redis engine can enable high-speed at scale for leaderboards.  rate limitation some apis only allow a limited number of requests per time period. amazon elasticache for redis engine can use incremental counters and other tools to throttle api access to meet restrictions.  atomic counter programs can use incremental counters to limit allowed quantities, such as the maximum number of students enrolled in a course or ensuring a game has at least 2 but not more than 8 players. using counters can create a race condition where an operation is allowed because a counter was not updated promptly. using
the elasticache for redis atomic counter functions, where a single operation both checks and increments the counter's value, prevents race conditions.  chat rooms and message boards elasticache for redis supports publish-subscribe patterns, which enable the creation of chat rooms and message boards where messages are automatically distributed to interested users.  deployment options amazon elasticache can use on-demand cache nodes or reserved cache nodes.  on-demand nodes provide cache capacity by the hour, with resources in the aws cloud assigned when a cache node is provisioned. an on-demand node can be removed from service by its owner at any time. each month, the owner will be billed for the hours used.  reserved nodes require a 1-year or 3-year commitment, which dedicates cache resources to the owner. the hourly cost of reserved nodes is significantly lower than the hourly cost of on-demand nodes.  performance an efficient cache can significantly increase application's performance and user navigation speed. amazon cloudwatch exposes elasticache performance metrics that can be tracked.  key performance metrics  client metrics (measure the volume of client connections and requests): number of current client connections to the cache, get and set commands received by the cache  cache performance: hits, misses, replication lag, latency  memory metrics: memory usage, evictions, amount of free memory available on the host, swap usage, memory fragmentation ratio  other host-level metrics: cpu utilization, number of bytes read from the network by the host, number of bytes written to the network by the host  metric collection many elasticache metrics can be collected from aws via cloudwatch or directly from the cache engine, whether redis or memcached, with a monitoring tool integrating with it:  using the aws management console using the online management console is the simplest way to monitor elasticache with cloudwatch. it allows to set up basic automated alerts and to get a visual picture of recent changes in individual metrics.   cloudwatch command line interface metrics related to elasticache can also be retrieved using command lines. it can be used for spot checks and ad hoc investigations.  monitoring tool integrated with cloudwatch the third way to collect elasticache metrics is via a dedicated monitoring tool integrating with amazon cloudwatch.  notable customers users of amazon elasticache include airbnb, expedia, zynga, fanduel, and mapbox  limitations as an aws service, elasticache is designed to be accessed exclusively from within aws, though it is possible to connect the service
to applications and databases that are not hosted by aws.  alternatives other vendors provide cloud data cache services comparable to amazon elasticache, including azure cache for redis, redis ltd (company behind open source redis and redis enterprise), redis to go, ibm compose, oracle application container cloud service, and rackspace objectrocket.  references  external links      web services cloud computing providers cloud platforms 2006 software web hosting elasticache cloud infrastructure cloud storage distributed data stores structured storage nosql products cloud databases
the goodwillie-allen house (also known as the goodwillie house, h. e. allen house, allen-rademacher house, and goodwillie-allen-rademacher house) is a small american craftsman-style bungalow located in bend, oregon.  the house was constructed in 1904 by arthur goodwillie, the first mayor of bend.  today, the building is owned by the city of bend.  it is the oldest structure inside the city limits of bend, the oldest american craftsman style house in deschutes county, oregon, and the second oldest craftsman-style bungalow in oregon.  the goodwillie-allen house was added to the national register of historic places in 2007.  history   arthur l. goodwillie was born in chicago, illinois in 1878.  he moved to bend in 1904 to explore business opportunities in central oregon.  goodwillie became a partner in the pilot butte development company, serving as the company's secretary.  he was an investor in the town's first bank and its first telephone company.  he helped organize bend's first water, power and light utilities.  goodwillie also helped establish the area's first school district, serving on its board of directors.  in december 1904, goodwillie was elected bend's first mayor.  shortly after arriving in bend, goodwillie married grace jones, a local school teacher.  after their marriage, the goodwillies built a new home overlooking the deschutes river.  it was a small bungalow constructed in the american craftsman style.  they lived in the home from its completion in 1904 until late 1907, when they moved back to chicago.  the goodwillies sold the house to herbert and alice allen, a young couple who had just arrived in bend.  herbert allen was a senior manager with the brooks-scanlon lumber company, a firm that operated a large sawmill in bend.  he was also active in a wide range of other private enterprises including the central oregon irrigation company and the deschutes irrigation and power company as well as many civic and public affairs organizations such as the bend commercial club, the local chamber of commerce, and the bend school district.  the allens lived in the bungalow from 1908 until herbert's death in october 1929.  a local physician, doctor clyde rademacher, and his wife marjorie were the next owners of the house.  the rademachers bought the property from the allens in 1937.  doctor rademacher was a founder of the bend memorial clinic, the community's
first multi-specialty medical clinic.  the rademachers lived in the house until the 1980s when both the doctor and his wife died just a few years apart.  after the death of the rademachers, the property sat vacant for several years.  eventually, the building was scheduled for demolition to create space for a parking lot.  however, a community group was organized in 1993 to save the historic residence.  the plan, called the riverfront connection project, was to acquire the building and move it  south of its original site onto an adjacent tax lot.  this was done successfully, without any damage to the structure.  once the building was on its new foundation, it was renovated for use as a fine art gallery and art education center. in 2012, the art gallery vacated the property.  the city of bend then leased the building to a new tenant for use as a cafe and bicycle rental shop.  today, the bungalow is the oldest building in the city of bend and the oldest american craftsman-style residence in deschutes county.  it is also the second oldest craftsman-style bungalow in the state of oregon.  over the course of its existence, the house has been known by various names.  initially, it was known as the goodwillie house, then the h. e. allen house, later the allen-rademacher house, and finally the goodwillie-allen-rademacher house.  when the property was nominated for listing on the national register of historic places in 2007, it was nominated as the goodwillie-allen house.  however, it is most commonly known as the goodwillie-allen-rademacher house to recognize the bungalow's three principal owners.  structure   the goodwillie-allen house is a one-and-one-half-story american craftsman style bungalow.  it was built in 1904 at a cost of $1,800.  it was constructed with locally produced lumber and native stone.  the main part of the house is  wide and  long with an extension on the east facade.  the extension adds  to the length of the house on the southeast side and is half the width of the building.  there is also a porch on the west facade that adds an additional  to the structure's length.  the house is an excellent example of an american craftsman style residence, highlighting many of the style's most notable features. for example, it has a low-pitch hip roof with dormers, deeply overhanging eaves with exposed
rafters under the eaves, a large front porch tucked under an extension of the main roof, and numerous windows, many with art glass features.  the front (west) facade has a wide porch with heavy lava stone walls surrounding the porch area.  the porch is covered by an extension of the main hip roof.  the porch roof is supported by three stone columns.  the front door has a large leaded-glass panel and is set to one side of the building's center line.  next to the door are three large picture windows that look out across drake park at the deschutes river.  the windows are separated by wide mullions and topped with a single matching header.  all three windows feature lead glass detailing in a diamond-obelisk design. above and set back from the porch roof extension is a large second-floor dormer with a hip roof which caps the west facade.  the south elevation is dominated by a side porch covered by an open lattice beam pergola which runs the entire length of the building.  the front of the side porch is bordered by a lava stone wall that matches the front porch.  the lattice beams are supported by seven lava stone columns.  starting near the southwestern corner, there are double casement windows bordered by wood-molding frames.  the windows are separated by wide mullions with a header sill above.  next to the window group, there is a single wooden door that has been sealed closed.  then there is group of six bay windows.  the main side entrance is a wooden door with a large glass panel insert.  the door is flanked on both sides by five-pane sidelight windows in wooden frames.  east of the entrance are three casement windows with diamond-obelisk art glass in wooden frames.  a second floor dormer is centered in the middle of the south facade.  at the rear of the building (east facade) is the extended section of the house along the south side.  the extension is half the width of the building.  there are two small square windows on the main part of the building and a sealed wooden door on the north side of the extension.  there is a small shed dormer in the center of the roof.  next to the rear dormer is a chimney.  a small garden area is located between the rear of the building and the public sidewalk.  first-floor windows run along the northwest side of the building.  all the windows feature leaded glass with diamond-obelisk patterns.  the
windows are separated by wide mullions and topped with matching headers.  in the middle of the facade are three single casement windows about  apart, all with matching window frames.  at the northeast corner, there is an alcove area created by the south side extension. on the second floor, there is a large dormer with a hip roof that matches the dormer on the south side of the building.  interior   the interior of the goodwillie-allen house reflects american craftsman design concepts. it has  of interior space with  on the first floor and  on the second floor.  most of the first floor has  ceilings.  the living room runs the entire width of the west side (front) of the building.  the living room is spacious and bright, with large windows on three sides.  the room's main feature is a massive lava stone fireplace in the center of the room, facing the front picture windows. the fireplace features "a high mantel and a low hearth".  the mantel is a single thick piece of smooth stone projecting out from the chimney.  this fireplace is deschutes county's oldest known example of native volcanic tuff stone used as residential building material.  originally, the main dining room was east of the living room on the south side of the building with a bedroom on the north side, opposite the dining room.  today, the dining room is still in its original place, but the front bedroom and another room in the rear have been removed to create a completely open floor plan along the north side of the building.  originally, the kitchen was on the south side of the building next to the dining room, with the side door providing access to the south side porch area.  today, the kitchen has been converted into a foyer for the south side entrance.  the small modern kitchen and bathrooms are now in the rear of the building.  in these rear rooms the ceiling drops to .  the stairway to the second floor and several small stage rooms are located in the center of the building toward the rear.  the second floor has a cruciform floor plan under a  vaulted ceiling.  today, the second floor provides space for three small offices with stairway access, a restroom, and storage area under the shed dormer at the rear of the building.  the dormer windows on the west, south, and north sides of the building provide natural light to the office spaces, although the western and southern offices are in separate rooms.  there are built-in shelves and storage cabinets throughout the
second floor area, typical of the american craftsman style architecture.  the building has an unfinished basement with approximately  of clearance.  the basement is used for general storage.  it is accessed through a hatch in the front porch deck.  see also  national register of historic places listings in deschutes county, oregon american craftsman  references  external links  city of bend, oregon deschutes county, oregon  houses on the national register of historic places in bend, oregon american craftsman architecture in oregon houses completed in 1904 1904 establishments in oregon
deperetellidae is an extinct family of herbivorous odd-toed ungulates  containing the genera bahinolophus, deperetella, irenolophus, and teleolophus. their closest living relatives are tapirs.  members of deperetillidae are medium to large-sized animals distinguished from other tapiroids by their high crowned and very bilophodont molars.  references  prehistoric mammal families
zena is a feminine given name. notable people with the name include:  zena cardman (born 1987)  american marine biologist and a nasa astronaut candidate zena dare (1887-1975), english singer and actress zena keefe (1896-1977), american silent film actress zena marshall (1925-2009), british actress zena mcnally (born 1979), english singer zena skinner (1927-2018), english chef and television presenter zena tooze (born 1955), canadian biologist and conservationist zena tsarfin, american journalist zena upshaw or zeke upshaw (1991-2018), american men's basketball player zena walker (1934-2003), english actress zena werb (born 1945), cell biologist at university of california, san francisco zinaida kupriyanovich (born 2002), belarusian singer, sometimes known as zena  see also zina (given name)  feminine given names
the sculptured pigtoe (rotundaria infucata) is a species of freshwater mussel native to the united states. it is endemic to the apalachicola and ochlockonee river systems in the states of alabama, florida, and georgia.  it was formerly classified under quadrula, but in 2012 it was moved to rotundaria based on genetic evidence. it was also formerly included in the now-obsolete genus quincuncina, and in fusconaia based on shell morphology.  references  molluscs of the united states rotundaria bivalves described in 1834
yoonkyung lee is a professor of statistics at ohio state university, and also holds a courtesy appointment in computer science and engineering at ohio state. her research takes a statistical approach to kernel methods, dimensionality reduction, and regularization in machine learning.  professional career  lee earned bachelor's and master's degrees in computer science and statistics from seoul national university in korea in 1994 and 1996. she completed her ph.d. in statistics in 2002 at the university of wisconsin-madison, under the supervision of grace wahba and yi lin, with a dissertation about support vector machines and their applications to microarray and satellite data. she joined the ohio state faculty in 2002 and was promoted to full professor in 2016.  recognition in 2015, lee was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for fundamental and influential research on the multicategory support vector machine; for work at the edge of statistics and computer science and building a bridge between the statistics and machine learning communities; and for editorial and program committee service to the profession."  references  external links home page  year of birth missing (living people) living people american computer scientists south korean computer scientists south korean women computer scientists american statisticians south korean statisticians women statisticians seoul national university alumni university of wisconsin-madison college of letters and science alumni ohio state university faculty fellows of the american statistical association 21st-century south korean women scientists
there have been five formula one drivers from the republic of ireland.  former drivers  joe kelly was ireland's first f1 driver, racing in the first two world championship british grands prix. his privately entered alta failed to be classified in either race.  having taken the 1977 british f3 title, derek daly was promoted to hesketh racing for what would be their final three grands prix, failing to qualify for any race. he was quickly snapped up by ensign for the rest of the season and took points in the final race of 1978. the next four seasons saw sporadic stints with ensign, tyrrell, march, theodore and williams, with a best finish of 4th in the argentine and british grands prix of the 1980 season.  as runner-up of the 1979 british formula one season, david kennedy's prize was promotion to a world championship shadow seat for 1980. however, the team was chronically underfunded and had a poorly engineered chassis and despite theodore's intervention mid-season kennedy only qualified for 1 of the 8 grands prix he was entered in - the spanish grand prix, an event subsequently stripped of its world championship status due to the fisa-foca war.  following jan lammers' quitting of the theodore team in 1982, tommy byrne made his debut at the austrian grand prix. he entered the final five races of the season, qualifying twice but failing to finish either of the races he qualified for.  eddie jordan, keen to promote an irish driver, settled on 2002 formula nippon season champion ralph firman for his eponymous team's 2003 championship assault. he raced in all but two grands prix that year, having injured himself in a practice crash in hungary. he scored a single point in spain however his efforts were not enough to keep him a place on the grid for 2004.  timeline  references
richard eliot chamberlin (20 march 1923, cambridge, massachusetts - 14 march 1994) was an american mathematician, specializing in geometric topology.  r. eliot chamberlin's father was ralph vary chamberlin. eliot chamberlin attended east high school  in salt lake city. he received his bachelor's degree from the university of utah. in the early 1940s he was a teaching fellow in physics at the university of utah and then the massachusetts institute of technology. after serving as an instructor of physics at northeastern university, he served two years in the united states navy during world war ii. after discharge from the navy, he entered graduate school in mathematics at harvard university, and received his ph.d. in 1950 with thesis supervisor hassler whitney.  chamberlin joined the faculty of the mathematics department at the university of utah in 1949 and retired there as professor emeritus on 1 july 1988.  chamberlin gave an invited address at the international congress of mathematicians in 1950 in cambridge, massachusetts.  selected publications  references  1923 births 1994 deaths people from cambridge, massachusetts united states navy personnel of world war ii mathematicians from massachusetts 20th-century american mathematicians topologists institute for advanced study visiting scholars university of utah alumni harvard graduate school of arts and sciences alumni university of utah faculty
the 1955-56 beitar jerusalem season was the club's 20th season since its establishment, in 1936, and 8th since the establishment of the state of israel.  at the start of the season, the league which started during the previous season was completed, with the club finishing 11th (out of 14), which meant the club had to compete in a promotion/relegation play-offs against the 12th placed club, hapoel kfar saba, and the two liga bet winners, maccabi jaffa and hapoel kiryat haim. the club lost all three play-offs matches and was relegated to the second division, which was renamed liga alef, and played in this division during the remainder of the season, finishing 10th (out of 12), which meant that the club had to face another promotion/relegation play-offs, which were delayed and were played at the beginning of the next season.  match results  legend  1954-55 liga alef the league began on 6 february 1955, and by the time the previous season ended, only 20 rounds of matches were completed, with the final 6 rounds being played during september and october 1955.  final table  matches  results by match  promotion/relegation play-offs  table  beitar jerusalem relegated to liga alef  matches  1955-56 liga alef  final table  matches  results by match  promotion/relegation play-offs  table  references     beitar jerusalem f.c. seasons beitar jerusalem
the murders of blake and mary-jo hadley occurred on july 16, 2011, in port st. lucie, florida. tyler hadley, their son, was convicted of the murder.  timeline  murder shortly before 5:00 p.m. on the evening of july 16th 2011, tyler took three pills of ecstasy and then stood behind his mother, mary-jo. they stared at each other for a brief moment, before he beat his mother unconscious. following the assault of his mother, he then began to stab her with a kitchen knife, eventually killing her.  having heard mary-jo's screams, blake emerged from their bedroom and saw tyler standing over mary-jo's lifeless body on the floor. blake then went to call 911, however before reaching the telephone, tyler stabbed and killed him. he then spent the following three hours cleaning up the blood before throwing a house party.  party some time after the murders, tyler made a facebook post  that he was having a party that night. he then stopped at an atm and then picked up some friends. about 60 people gathered for the party, playing beer pong, smoking cigars and drinking. that night, tyler told his best friend, michael mandell, that he had bludgeoned his parents with a hammer. he showed michael the master bedroom and the blood that was in the room. after processing what had happened, michael took a picture with tyler thinking he was never going to see him again. news of the crime was then spread by word of mouth. hadley was arrested early the next morning.  perpetrator during his teenage years, tyler began skipping school and taking drugs. he had mental health problems; his parents took him to a psychiatrist and an outpatient mental health and substance abuse program.  convictions tyler was 17 and could not be sentenced to death by florida law. in 2014, he was sentenced to life imprisonment without parole.  in april 2016, his sentencing was overturned by an appeal judge who stated the lower court "did not consider the correct alternative to a life sentence".  in december 2018, hadley was resentenced to life in prison, but this time with the possibility of parole.  hadley is imprisoned in the okeechobee correctional institution.  aftermath in april 2015, the hadley house was demolished.  references  2011 in florida 2011 murders in the united states american murder victims deaths by person in the united states murder committed by minors parricides people murdered in florida port st. lucie, florida violence in florida
jeanne beadle burbank (may 8, 1915 - march 2, 2002) worked for 25 years at the united states naval research laboratory (nrl), studying the materials and components of lead-acid and silver-zinc batteries used in submarines.  she was acknowledged internationally as an expert in the field of electrochemistry.  early life and career jeanne beadle was born in philadelphia, pennsylvania on may 8, 1915, to john bookwalter beadle and isabelle (peacock) beadle. she had a younger brother, john beadle, jr., and a sister, joan beadle (later gailar). much of jeanne's childhood was spent in washington, d.c. prior to entering high school, jeanne was home-schooled by her father, john bookwalter beadle. he was a civil engineer with degrees in mining and metallurgy. he worked with the united states bureau of reclamation and later with brock & weymouth, an aerial photography company.  jeanne received a b.a. in chemistry from american university in washington, d.c. she married robert clowe burbank, also a chemist, on july 1, 1936. they worked at peacock laboratories in philadelphia and studied colloidal chemistry at the university of pennsylvania, from which jeanne received her m.s. degree. their daughter, carey lea burbank, was born in 1942. after robert's early death on september 21, 1946 of hodgkin's lymphoma, jeanne and her daughter returned to washington, d.c. where she was hired as a research chemist by joseph clark white at the united states naval research laboratory (nrl).  research white's group was working to improve living conditions on submarines. jeanne burbank's main focus was research on acid storage batteries and storage cells, with special application to their use in submarines. emissions from batteries, which required frequent maintenance, were an important concern on submarines. possible dangers included the explosion of accumulated hydrogen gas, formation of poisonous chlorine gas if salt water contaminated the battery, and corrosion of the submarine's hull if an electrolyte leak went undetected. during her 25-year career at the naval research laboratory, burbank published 35 articles, obtained several patents, and was acknowledged internationally as an expert in the field of electrochemistry. when the first nuclear submarine, the uss nautilus (ssn-571), was developed, burbank was able to view the actual working conditions in which her batteries would be installed and used, and set up her own laboratory at the nrl with similar conditions for development and testing
of her designs.  her 1949 report, phosphate coatings on steel, was followed by "ground-breaking work" with john lander on positive-grid corrosion in the lead-acid cell, and with albert c. simon on subgrain structure in lead and lead-antimony alloys in 1952. she received her first patent in 1958: us 2821565, with lander and simon, for a more resistant battery grid and plate using an alloy of tin, antimony and lead, "to improve the construction and increase the operating life of the acid-lead storage battery with a principal object being the provision of an improved grid and positive plates therefor which have greater resistance to corrosion and growth."  she worked on portable batteries with charles p. wales, and was a leader in the study of polymorphs of lead dioxide and their implications for battery design and processing of battery materials. she also developed a special electroplating cell for dynamic x-ray diffraction studies. this was used to study the properties of electrodes made of materials such as lead and silver-zinc. in 1969, she was commended when awarded the william blum award: "your methods of applying x-ray and electron microscopy to the materials and components of lead-acid and silver-zinc batteries have made a substantial contribution to the understanding of battery grid corrosion and active materials reactions."  awards  1966,  battery division research award, nrl, with charles p. wales  1969,  william blum award, national capital section of the electrochemical society  1970,  inaugural frank booth award for outstanding technical merit  later life in 1971, jeanne retired. she settled in tucson, arizona, where she enjoyed interests in archaeology and native american history and culture. an oil painter, she frequently chose the sonoran desert and native americans as subjects of her paintings. in 1986 she moved to scottsdale, arizona with her sister, joan beadle gailar. in 1997, after the death of her sister, jeanne moved to phoenix, arizona. she died in phoenix on march 2, 2002.  references  1915 births 2002 deaths scientists from philadelphia people from washington, d.c. american university alumni university of pennsylvania alumni 20th-century american chemists american women chemists 20th-century american women
the 2010 south american rhythmic gymnastics championships were held in cochabamba, bolivia, november 18-23, 2010. the competition was organized by the bolivian gymnastics federation and approved by the international gymnastics federation.  medalists  references   2010 in gymnastics south american gymnastics championships international gymnastics competitions hosted by bolivia 2010 in bolivian sport
thomas kielty scherman (february 12, 1917 - may 14, 1979) was an american conductor and the founder of the little orchestra society.  biography  he was a son of bernardine (nee kielty) and harry scherman, founder and president of the book of the month club. his father was jewish and his mother was of irish and welsh descent. his sister is katharine scherman rosin (married to axel rosin). he attended columbia university and then studied piano with  isabelle vengerova and conducting with  carl bamberger and  otto klemperer. he served in the u.s. army (1939-1941), reaching the rank of captain.  references  1917 births 1979 deaths american male conductors (music) 20th-century american conductors (music) 20th-century american male musicians american people of jewish descent american people of irish descent american people of welsh descent columbia university alumni
st. ignatius college () is a brazilian catholic school located in fortaleza, ceara. it offers kindergarten through high school as well as an evening school which enables workers to complete elementary and high school. the school was founded by the society of jesus in 1955.  history st. ignatius college began in 1955 as a small school at the church of christ the king, under the name of apostolic pre-school our lady of fatima. the following year it took the name christ the king day school but had semi-boarding. a new foundation was laid in 1960 and in 1963 the school moved into its current headquarters under the name st. ignatius college.  its directors have all been jesuit priests:    gerardo sa da silveira - 1963-1967  jose correia - 1967-1972  pedro alberto campos - 1972-1977  antonio farias basic - 1977-1979  luciano - 1980-1986  pedro vicente ferreira - 1986-1988  manuel madruga - 1988-1991  benjamin gesteira - 1992-1995  pedro vicente ferreira - 1996-2001  jose ivan dias - 2002-2005  antonio tabosa - 2005-2008   raimundo kroth - 2008-2010  ponciano petri - 2010-2011  see also  list of jesuit educational institutions  references    1955 establishments in brazil buildings and structures in fortaleza educational institutions established in 1955 education in ceara jesuit schools in brazil mixed-sex education catholic primary schools in brazil catholic secondary schools in brazil private schools in brazil
the registration of criminals and undesirable persons act 1969 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to consolidate and amend the law providing for the registration of certain criminals, banishees, expelees, deportees and restrictees and for other purposes connected with it.  structure the registration of criminals and undesirable persons act 1969, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 16 sections and 3 schedules (including 11 amendments), without separate part. section 1: short title and application section 2: interpretation section 3: appointment of officers section 4: minister may deem or declare other particulars to be registrable particulars section 5: functions of recording officer section 6: functions of authenticating officer section 7: register of registrable particulars to be kept section 8: refusal to sign fingerprint form an offence section 9: return of fingerprint form on acquittal, etc. section 10: proof of finger impressions and previous convictions section 11: proof of previous convictions outside the federation section 12: inspector general may exempt certain cases from provision of act section 13: minister may order destruction of particulars of banishee, etc. section 14: regulations section 15: schedules and forms section 16: repeal and transitional schedules  references  external links  registration of criminals and undesirable persons act 1969   1969 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
the 1931 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1931 college football season.  in their third season under head coach mike gary, the hilltoppers compiled a 5-2 record and outscored their opponents, 86 to 51. fullback al briggs was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
the angola national under-20 football team is the national under-20 football team of angola and is controlled by the angolan football federation. the team competes in the african u-20 championship and the fifa u-20 world cup, which is held every four years.  honours   african u-21 championship:  winners (1): 2001  tournament records  fifa u-20 world cup record  caf u-20 championship record  current squad the following players were called for the 2019 africa u-20 cup of nations qualification against malawi on 13 may 2018.  recent callups the following players have been called up in the last twelve months.  see also   angola national under-17 football team  angola national football team  references  african national under-20 association football teams under-20
bhakti mandir is a hindu temple located in kunda, india. this temple is situated on the sai river.this divine temple was established by the world's fifth original jagadguru in november 2005. it is maintained by jagadguru kripalu parishat, a non-profit, charitable, educational and spiritual organisation.  beautiful life sized divine deities of radha krishna (on the ground floor) and sita ram (on the first floor) leave the visitors spell bound. adjacent to it is a large dome which is another magnificent structure.  its mystical divine charm and unique architecture has made it the crown jewel among temples situated near allahabad. while reminding future generations of the greatness of this divine place, it will also provide inspiration for bhakti and divine knowledge for thousands of years.  history  bhakti mandir, meaning "the abode of devotion", is a divine temple established by jagadguru shree kripalu ji maharaj in the village of mangarh, kunda, india.  bhakti mandir is built exactly at the place where jagadguru shri kmaharaj ji descended to open his eyes to grace the innumerable souls.  a stone, hand-carved temple. standing 108 feet tall and built with pink sandstone, white marble and black granite. the foundation stone of bhakti mandir was laid on 26 october 1996, and was inaugurated in november 2005.  architecture and design  this is the first temple in the world to stand on granite pillars. the architectural drawings were prepared by architects from ahmadabad, who are renowned in indian in the field of temple construction. this temple is 105 feet tall from the ground to the golden flag on the top of the temple. there are a total of three doors on three sides of the temple.  like the ground floor of the main temple, the top floor also has a round verandah and shrine. the ceiling is constructed above the second level. this temple is built of pink stone on the outside and marble on the inside, which showcases its exceptional artwork. all the outer walls are made from sandstone, which are elegantly carved. all 32 doors, the shrines on both levels, and the ceilings of the verandahs are all made from makrana marble, which was carved with very attractive and artistic designs by makrana craftsmen.  beautiful life sized deities of radha krishna and delicately carved deities of the ashta mahasakhis (8 eternal and closest friends of radha rani) encircle the main hall on the ground floor. equally beautiful life sized deities of sita ram, radha rani and krishna balram are present
on the first floor. apart from the main building there are two adjacent blocks which encompass the panels depicting major life events of shri krishna on one side and of shri kripalu ji maharaj on the other and have carved panels depicting the divine pastimes of shree radha krishna the walls outside.  bhakti mandir - yugal swaroop of shri sitaram and shri radhakrishna darshan  the divine deity of "radha krishna" in bhakti mandir is so mesmerizing that tens of thousands of devotees from all over the world visit and do the darshan on regular basis. level 1 (ground floor) of bhakti mandir is where  'radha krishna' idol is placed. the darshan of "radha krishna" in bhakti mandir appears exactly same as in prem mandir, vrindavan. the divine deity of "sita ram" in bhakti mandir is so enticing that tens of thousands of devotees from all over the world visit for darshan.  level 2 (second floor) of bhakti mandir is where  "sita ram" idol is placed.in the event of major festivals like janmashtami, radhashtami, the bhakti mandir temples gets hundreds of thousands of devotees from all over the world. it is a divine gift of jagadguru kripalu ji maharaj. similar to bhakti mandir, there is  bhakti bhavan in mangarh, up, india  prem mandir in vrindavan, up, india  rangeeli mahal in barsana, up, india  radha madhav dham, austin, texas, us  events and festivals  holi guru poornima janmashtami radhashtami sharat poornima diwali jagadguruttam mahaprayan diwas bhakti mahotsav  gallery  references  radha krishna temples krishna temples hindu temples in mathura district vrindavan tourist attractions in mathura district
san giovanni nuovo (also known as san zan novo or san zaninovo) is a roman catholic church in the campo of the same name, in the sestiere of castello.  history a church at the site was present by the 10th century, but the facade, which remains mostly incomplete, was rebuilt in 1762 using designs by matteo lucchesi.  the interior has a nave defined by corinthian columns. there are two lateral chapels. the main altar has a canvas depicting st john evangelist martyred by boiling in cauldron of oil by francesco maggiotto. it is flanked by two smaller paintings, a sacrifice of abraham and of melchisedech, painted by fabio canal. in the second lateral chapel is a 14th-century polychrome wood crucifix. the bell-tower dates from the earlier church.  bibliography  giulio lorenzetti, venezia e il suo estuario, ristampa 1974, edizioni lint trieste, pag. 320. derived from italian wikipedia entry.  roman catholic churches in venice roman catholic churches completed in 1762 10th-century churches in italy 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy
the fifth season of the american reality series bar rescue aired on spike on august 7, 2016 and ended on september 17, 2017 with a total of 31 episodes. the first three episodes aired at 9/8c before moving to 10/9c for the remainder of the season.  experts jon taffer - host/star/bar consultant samantha "sam" taffer - host's daughter/mixologist/recon spy  chefs ryan scott aaron mccargo jason santos vic vegas tiffany derry michael ferraro  mixologists lisamarie joyce shawn ford rob floyd phil wills david vaughn mia mastroianni daniel ponsky ashley clark derrick turner  production in may 2015, taffer confirmed on his facebook that a fifth season was in the works. on july 27, 2016, spike greenlit the fifth season along with a late-night talk show pilot from taffer. season 5 also featured ten new back to the bar episodes with never-before-seen footage of the experts visiting the previously rescued bars in addition to taffer revisiting past confrontations with the memorable owners he faced during his visit.  episodes  notes  references  external links  bar rescue updates - unaffiliated site that keeps track of bars being open or closed and has updates for each bar  2016 american television seasons 2017 american television seasons bar rescue
sarah murray (born april 28, 1988) is a canadian-american ice hockey coach and the head coach of the women's ice hockey team of saint mary's university of minnesota in the minnesota intercollegiate athletic conference (miac) of the ncaa division iii. she served as head coach of the south korean women's national ice hockey team during 2014 to 2018 and was the head coach of the korean unified team at the 2018 winter olympics.  playing career murray was born april 28, 1988 in faribault, minnesota to ruth and andy murray. she played hockey at shattuck-saint mary's, a private parochial and college-preparatory school known for its ice hockey program. as a rookie with the minnesota duluth bulldogs women's ice hockey program in the 2006-07 season, she broke her ankle in the first round of the western collegiate hockey association (wcha) conference playoffs. following the injury, murray skated in 108 consecutive games and, in total, played 153 career games with the bulldogs, ranking her in a third place tie all-time among program alums. murray was a two-time ncaa women's ice hockey tournament national champion with the bulldogs, winning the title in 2008 and 2010.  coaching career murray became the head coach of the south korean national women's ice hockey team in 2014. she was part of team red's coaching staff at the 2016 high performance camp, held in vierumaki, finland. other members of team red's coaching staff included mentor-coach peter smith, assistant coach eva-maria verworner, and athlete-ambassador lyndsey fry, among others. murray ceased coaching the south korea ice hockey team in october 2018.  on june 5, 2019 she was named head coach of the saint mary's university of minnesota cardinals women's ice hockey team.  personal life her father is the head coach of the western michigan broncos men's ice hockey team and the former head coach of the st. louis blues and los angeles kings hockey teams in the national hockey league (nhl). her brothers, brady and jordy, also played hockey. brady competed with the university of north dakota men's ice hockey team and was a fifth round draft pick of the los angeles kings in the 2003 nhl entry draft. jordy also played at the collegiate level, competing at the university of wisconsin. murray and her two brothers hold us-canadian dual citizenship.  career stats  ncaa  awards and honors wcha scholar athlete award (2008) wcha scholar athlete award (2009) wcha
scholar athlete award (2010)  references  external links    living people 1988 births american ice hockey coaches american women's ice hockey defensemen canadian ice hockey coaches canadian women's ice hockey defencemen ice hockey in south korea ice hockey coaches from minnesota minnesota duluth bulldogs women's ice hockey players swiss women's league players ice hockey players from minnesota
viktor petrovich ostrogorsky , (16 february 1840, saint petersburg, imperial russia - 31 january 1902, valday, novgorod governorate, imperial russia was a russian writer, pedagogue, publisher, translator and social activist.  career a saint petersburg university alumnus, ostrogorsky taught russian language and literature in numerous schools and institutes, including the saint petersburg institute of performing arts. as a publisher, he's made himself a name by launching the series of cheap, accessible books for the poor, including from the people's life (из народного быта, an 1883 collection of short stories, folk tales, songs and sayings), good people (хорошие люди, 1884) and natalya borisovna dolgorukaya (1891). several of his short dramas formed the 1891 collection from distant past (из дальнего прошлого, 1891).  described as the follower of konstantin ushinsky, nikolay pirogov and vladimir stoyunin, ostrogorsky contributed regularly to the pedagogical publications like uchitel (teacher), zhenskoye obrazovanye (women's education) and obrazovanye. in 1877-1884 he edited pedagogichesky listok (pedagogical paper), detskoye chtenye (children's reading) and later (in 1892-1901) mir bozhy.  ostrogorsky translated into russian le bourgeois gentilhomme by moliere and authored numerous popular essays on russian writers, as well as a book of memoirs how i became a teacher (из истории моего учительства. как я сделался учителем, 1895).  references   russian writers russian editors russian memoirists people from saint petersburg 1840 births 1902 deaths 19th-century memoirists 19th-century russian translators
this is a list of the puerto rico national football team results from 2008 to the present day.  2008  friendly  2010 fifa world cup qualification first round  2010 fifa world cup qualification second round  2011  2014 fifa world cup qualification second round  2012  friendly matches  2012 caribbean championship qualification first round  2012 caribbean championship qualification second round  2014  2014 caribbean cup qualification first round  2015  friendly matches   1 : non fifa 'a' international match  2018 fifa world cup qualification second round  2016  friendly matches   1 : non fifa 'a' international match  2017 caribbean cup qualification first round  2017 caribbean cup qualification second round  2017 caribbean cup qualification third round  2017  friendly matches   1 : non fifa 'a' international match  2018  2019-20 concacaf nations league qualifying  2019  2019-20 concacaf nations league qualifying  2019-20 concacaf nations league  friendly matches  2021  friendly matches  2022 fifa world cup qualification first round  results national association football team results
thabiso enoch nkwe (born 8 february 1983) is a south african cricket coach and former first class cricketer. he played 42 first class and 38 list a matches for lions and gauteng between 2002 and 2009 before becoming a coach. he was south africa's national team assistant coach.  early life nkwe was born in soweto, johannesburg. he played football until the age of eleven when he was introduced to cricket. this led to him being awarded a cricket scholarship to attend st stithians college in johannesburg.  playing career nkwe made a century on his first class debut for gauteng against easterns at the age of 19 in 2002. he was the first black south african player to do so and only the fourth gauteng player to achieve this. his form earned him a call up to the national academy in 2003. his career was cut short at the age of 26 due to a wrist injury.  coaching career  nkwe joined dutch club hcc rood en wit as player-coach and won the hoofdklasse in 2005 and 2010 respectively. later in 2010 he was named head coach of gauteng under-19s before being named assistant coach of the south africa under-19 team in 2011 under then head coach, ray jennings.  following his success with gauteng, nkwe became head coach of the lions cubs and led them to the csa cubs week title in 2013. in the same year, he was named head coach of gauteng strikers with whom he won all three cricket south africa competitions between 2013 and 2016. he was named csa amateur coach of the year in 2015.  in 2016, nkwe joined the netherlands national cricket team as assistant coach to anton roux. he returned to south africa in 2018 to take over as head coach of the highveld lions winning both the csa t20 challenge and the 4day sunfoil series in his first season. he was named head coach of jozi stars for the inaugural mzansi super league in 2018, winning the tournament. in the same year he joined vancouver knights as assistant coach in the global t20 canada where the team finished runners up.  in august 2019, nkwe was appointed interim team director of the south african national team.  in december 2019, nkwe was named as permanent south african national team assistant coach.  references  external links  living people 1983 births south african cricketers lions cricketers gauteng cricketers people from soweto south african cricket coaches
imported from europe is an album by saxophonist stan getz which was released on the verve label in 1959.  reception the allmusic review by jason ankeny stated: "imported from europe channels the frosty ambience of its geographic origins to create one of getz's most evocative efforts -- a decisively modern and cerebral session, it's nevertheless humanized by the warm, rich tone of getz's tenor sax".  track listing  "bengt's blues" (bengt hallberg) - 4:15  "honeysuckle rose" (fats waller, andy razaf) - 6:43  "they can't take that away from me" (george gershwin, ira gershwin) - 7:18  "topsy" (edgar battle, eddie durham) - 6:25  "like someone in love" (jimmy van heusen, johnny burke) - 4:15 	  "speak low" (kurt weill, ogden nash) - 3:42  "stockholm street" (lars gullin) - 4:12 recorded in stockholm, sweden on august 26, 1958 (tracks 2-4), september 15, 1958 (tracks 5 & 6) and september 16, 1958 (tracks 1 & 7)  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone benny bailey - trumpet ake persson - trombone bjarne nerem (tracks 6 & 7), erik nordstrom - tenor saxophone lars gullin - baritone saxophone bengt hallberg (tracks 1 & 5-7), jan johansson (tracks 2-4) - piano gunnar johnson - bass william schiopffe - drums  references   1959 albums stan getz albums verve records albums
the 1971-72 utah stars season was the 2nd season of the stars in utah and 5th overall in the american basketball association. the stars went 31-11 in the first half of the season, while going 29-13 in the second half of the season, with a ten-game winning streak near the end of the season. their biggest losing streak was three, which happened four times during the season. they finished 3rd in points scored at 117.8 per game, and 4th in points allowed at 112.0 per game. the stars swept the dallas chaparrals in the semifinals but lost to the indiana pacers in seven games, denying them a repeat aba finals appearance.  roster     44 john beasley - power forward  31 zelmo beaty - center  24 ron boone - shooting guard  12 mike butler - shooting guard  40 glen combs - shooting guard  23 bobby fields - guard  22 rick fisher - forward  33 ira harge - center  10 mervin jackson - point guard  15 jimmy jones - point guard  35 manny leaks - center  14 roderick mcdonald - small forward  21 red robbins - power forward  33 george stone - small forward  42 willie wise - small forward  final standings  western division  playoffs western division semifinals vs. dallas chaparrals  stars win series 4-0  western division finals vs. indiana pacers  stars lose series, 4-3  awards and honors  1972 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 29, 1972) willie wise zelmo beaty glen combs all-aba second team selections: willie wise and zelmo beaty.  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1971-72 regular season and playoff results  utah stars page  utah stars seasons utah stars utah stars, 1971-72 utah stars, 1971-72
cardinal cap alley is an alley in bankside.  it used to lead to a brothel called the cardinal's cap named because it had been owned by  henry cardinal beaufort, the bishop of winchester, who had paraded here wearing his red hat, after being appointed a cardinal by the pope.  the architectural critic ian nairn highlighted it in his 1966 guidebook to london, and the following year it featured in the documentary the london nobody knows, based on the geoffrey fletcher book of the same name. it has been gated since the 1990s.  references  nairn, ian (1966) nairn's london, penguin books  footpaths in london
carl soderlund (born 3 june 1997) is a former swedish tennis player.   soderlund reached a career high atp singles ranking of 387 achieved on 8 may 2017. in the atp doubles ranking he reached a career high of 1303 achieved on 10 october 2016. soderlund won 3 itf futures titles on the itf men's circuit.   soderlund made his atp main draw debut at the 2016 swedish open, where he received a wildcard into the singles main draw. he faced fellow wildcard and compatriot fred simonsson in the first round.  atp challenger and itf futures finals  singles: 4 (3-1)  external links  1997 births living people swedish male tennis players sportspeople from stockholm virginia cavaliers men's tennis players
the clearwater women's open was a tournament for professional female tennis players played on outdoor hard courts. the event was classified as a $25,000 itf women's circuit tournament and was held in clearwater, florida, united states, from 2005 to 2012.  past finals  singles  doubles  external links   itf search  itf women's circuit hard court tennis tournaments in the united states clearwater women's open recurring sporting events established in 2005 recurring sporting events disestablished in 2012 sports in clearwater, florida 2005 establishments in florida 2012 disestablishments in florida women's sports in florida
mrinalini puranik is lead scientist at unilever limited. her areas of research include biomolecular spectroscopy, raman spectroscopy of proteins, and nucleic acids. she started her career as associate professor at indian institute of science education and research, pune (iiser). in 2015, her article "solution structures of purine base analogues 9-deazaguanine and 9-deazahypoxanthine" was published by the journal of biomolecular structure and dynamics.  puranik studied for her m.sc in physics from university of pune. puranik was a chevening rolls-royce science and innovation leadership programme (crisp) scholar at university of oxford.  references  indian women biologists savitribai phule pune university alumni indian biochemists indian institute of science faculty indian women physicists alumni of the university of oxford year of birth missing (living people) living people
the development of craniofacial growth is a complicated phenomenon that has been the subject of much research for past 70 years. from the first theory in 1940s, many different ideas pertaining to how a face develops has intrigued the mind of researchers and clinicians alike.  key concepts bone remodeling is characterized by deposition and resorption of bone at different sites of a bone in the body, mostly for renewal and maintenance throughout life. this does not usually lead to change in size or shape of the bone.  bone modeling is known as formation of new bone from either cartilage or by direct deposition, mostly during growth and development. this usually does lead to changes in size and shape over time.  growth sites is a term proposed by baume. growth sites serve as a location in the bone where the actual growth occurs. growth sites are dependent on the growth centers for growth. some examples include sutures of cranial vault, lateral cranial base and maxilla.  growth centers is an area in the bone that controls the overall growth of the bone from its locations through different signaling mechanisms. growth at these centers are genetically controlled. all growth centers can be growth sites but not all growth sites can be growth centers. some examples include membranous bones of cranium, mandibular condyle.  genetic theory this theory was popularized by allan g. brodie in 1940s and it states that craniofacial growth is controlled by genetics. this theory states that genes such as homeobox, sonic hedgehog, transcription factor and ihh (protein) play an important role in craniofacial development.  bone remodeling theory this theory was popularized by brash in 1930s and it relies on three principles: 1) appositional growth 2) hunterian growth 3) calvarial growth. hunterian growth says that both maxillary and mandibular bones get bone deposition at the posterior surface.  sutural theory this theory was popularized by sicher in 1941 which states that sutures are the primary determinant of the craniofacial growth. expansion forces at the sutures lead to expansion of bone and thus growth of craniofacial skeleton. cranial vault increases in size via the primary growth of bone that happens at the suture. sicher theorized that tissues such as periosteum, cartilage and sutures are growth centers just like epiphysis of the long bone that allow the bone to form. he said that growth of maxilla happens at expansion of the circumaxillary sutures which push maxilla down and forward
. evidence says that sutures are growth sites that respond intrinsically to signals.  cartilaginous theory this theory was popularized by scott in 1950s and states that cartilage determines the craniofacial growth. proponents of this theory state that cartilage is responsible for the growth and bone just replaced it. in this theory, mandibular condyle having cartilage at its end allows the downward and forward growth of the mandible. maxilla, consisting of the nasal septum and nasomaxillary complex, which is made up of cartilage, moves forward and downward also by the forces from the nasal septum. bones in both maxilla and mandible respond to their respective cartilaginous growth centers. to test this theory, two approaches were taken by researchers in past. either the cartilage was removed from the nasal septum or the cartilage was transplanted into the cultures to see the effects on the growth. when the cartilage was transplanted into the in vitro cultures, it was found that the cartilage from nasal septum grew as nearly as it did in vivo. in comparison, cartilage from mandibular condyle did not grow as well. therefore, cartilage at condyle, cranial base synchondroses and nasal septum can act as growth centers.  functional matrix theory the functional matrix hypothesis was popularized by melvin moss in 1962. this theory said that neither bone nor cartilage is a major determinant of growth but soft tissue is. his view stated that as soft tissues around the jaw and face grow, bone and cartilage follow the growth of these soft tissues. dr. profitt in his contemporary orthodontics textbook gave a good example of impact of brain growth on the cranial vault. he states that when the soft tissue of brain grows, the cranial vault follows the growth. another example is hydrocephaly where increased intracranial pressure leads to increased size of the cranial vault. he also mentioned that when a condylar fracture happens in children there is a chance of about 80% that the condyle will regrow over time. however, 20% of the time the condyle does not regrow because of the extent of the injuries. the extent of trauma and soft tissue scarring can impact the healing of the fractured condyle and thus it shows the functional matrix theory working naturally in real life.  functional matrix theory states that growth of both maxillary and mandibular bones are dependent of the functional needs of tissues around the bone. therefore, a normal function is critical to the growth of the maxilla and mandibular according to moss
.  servosystem theory this theory was popularized by alexandre petrovic in 1970s which stated that craniofacial growth happened because of growth signals and feedback mechanisms. petrovich theorized a cybernetic model for the servosystem theory. this theory states that occlusion provides a constantly changing input which influences the horizontally regulated growth of the midface and anterior cranial base. this midface growth then serves as a rate limiting factor for the growth of the mandible.  enlow's principles  there are two principles that donald enlow developed which are important part of the study of the craniofacial development. enlow's v principle is related to the bones of the craniofacial area which have a v shape configuration. we see bone resorption happening on the outer side of the "v" of the bone and bone deposition happens on the inner side of the "v". therefore, the movement of bone happens towards the open-end of the v. enlow's counterpart principle states that growth of one bone in the craniofacial area relates to the other bones in the same region. therefore, each bone and its counterpart bone both grow to a certain extent to maintain the balanced growth. an example is the growth of maxilla corresponding to the growth of mandible.  references  orthodontics
boldero may refer to  boldero bank edmund boldero (1608-79), english royalist clergyman henry george boldero (1794-1873), british army officer and member of parliament luigi gorgio boldero (baldero) (19th century), italian painter ancient english spelling of bolderaja, latvia
the 2006 chevy rock & roll 400 was a nascar nextel cup series race held on september 9, 2006, at richmond international raceway in richmond, virginia. contested over 400 laps on the three-quarter (1.2 km) short track, it was the 26th race of the 2006 nascar nextel cup series season. kevin harvick of richard childress racing won the race.  background in 1953, richmond international raceway hosted grand national series; lee petty won the race. original track was paved in 1968. in 1988, track was re-designed into a d-shaped configuration, during spring and fall races.  the name for the raceway complex was "strawberry hill" until the virginia state fairgrounds site was bought out in 1999 and renamed the "richmond international raceway".  qualifying  results  race statistics  time of race: 2:57:37  average speed:   pole speed:   cautions: 7 for 48 laps  margin of victory: 0.153  lead changes: 16  percent of race run under caution: 12%           average green flag run: 44 laps  references  chevy rock and roll 400 chevy rock and roll 400 nascar races at richmond raceway september 2006 sports events in the united states
i won't may refer to:   "i won't", a song by akon from his 2004 album trouble  "i won't", a song by little mix from the 2015 album get weird  "i won't", a song by h.e.r. from her 2017 self-titled album
george blowers (march 5, 1906 - october 19, 1969) was an american banker. a harvard graduate, he became governor of the state banks of liberia, ethiopia and saudi arabia.  during his career he was responsible for introducing two new currencies and represented ethiopia at the bretton woods conference.  early career and liberia born on march 5, 1906 in pineville, kentucky, blowers graduated from harvard university before gaining a job at the national city bank in new york city in 1928.  in 1938 he became general manager of the bank of monrovia in liberia, during which time he was responsible for changing the country's currency from the british west african pound (pegged to the pound sterling) to the liberian dollar (pegged to the us dollar).  the smithsonian institution's 1940 national zoological park expedition to monrovia met with blowers and he presented his household pets, a red forest duiker, a civet cat and a west african linsang, to them for use as zoo exhibits.  british foreign office staff writing to anthony eden in march 1942 noted that blowers adhered strictly to the american policy of neutrality, opposing attempts to enforce british control of capital in liberia.  blowers, who could speak german, was known to have transferred german funds through liberia to the united states.  state bank of ethiopia  blowers was appointed governor of the state bank of ethiopia in 1943 following a request by emperor haile selassie for more american advisers to replace the british staff that predominated in his court.  the 1942 anglo-ethiopian agreement required selassie to seek british approval prior to the appointment of any foreign staff.  the british were not informed of the new appointments and the arrival of blowers in ethiopia came as something of an embarrassment to his british predecessor, who was still in post.  ethiopia formally renounced the treaty with britain in 1944.  blowers, in addition to his duties as governor, also acted as adviser to the ethiopian minister of commerce, who preferred him over his official british adviser.  blowers attended the july 1944 bretton woods conference that resulted in the introduction of the bretton woods system of foreign exchange.  in 1945 he was responsible for the reintroduction of the ethiopian birr to replace the east african shilling.  later career  blowers became deputy director of the economic cooperation administration, set up to administer the us marshall plan for economic rejuvenation in europe, in 1948.  he became known as an expert of african economics and was appointed head of a un
mission to libya, looking into its currency and banking system, in 1950.  he later worked with the international monetary fund and in 1952 was appointed governor of the saudi arabian monetary agency (which functioned as the central bank but couldn't be described as such under islamic law), having been recommended to the position by arthur n young, the director of harry truman's point four program in the country.  the bank started off with a fund of $10 million that was developed into billions of dollars of capital.  during his time as governor he revised the saudi riyal.  blowers became director of the export-import bank of the united states in washington, dc in 1954.  he became well known to latin american governments, travelling to peru, ecuador and bolivia on special missions.  he retired from the bank in 1961 and died at hempstead, long island, new york, on october 19, 1969.  references   1906 births 1969 deaths people from bell county, kentucky harvard university alumni businesspeople from kentucky governors of the saudi arabian monetary agency american bankers 20th-century american economists economists from kentucky 20th-century american businesspeople
leptonota comitessa is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by white in 1855.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1855
barracudas may refer to:  barracuda,  a large, predatory ray-finned fish  music  the barracudas, an english surf rock band  sport  birmingham barracudas, a canadian football team in alabama  boston barracudas, an english speedway team  brisbane barracudas, an australian water polo club  brunei barracudas, a basketball team  burlington barracudas, a women's ice hockey team in ontario, canada  centex barracudas, an indoor football team in belton, texas  emerald coast barracudas, a women's american football team in panama city beach, florida  jacksonville barracudas, an ice hockey team in florida  long beach barracudas, a baseball team in california  pensacola barracudas (arena football), an american football team in florida  pensacola barracudas (soccer), a soccer team in florida  san diego barracudas, an inline hockey team in california
the 1923 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1923 college football season.  in their second and final season under head coach milton olander, the hilltoppers compiled a 6-1-1 record and outscored their opponents, 160 to 21. halfback harry potter was the team captain.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
sharon fichman and jovana jaksic were the defending champions, but decided not to participate this year.  francesca di lorenzo and ronit yurovsky won the title, defeating marie-alexandre leduc and charlotte robillard-millette 1-6, 7-5, [10-6] in the final.  seeds  draw  references main draw  winnipeg national bank challenger winnipeg challenger
sumandeep vidyapeeth is private, deemed university located in piparia, waghodia, vadodara, gujarat, india. it is accredited "a++" grade by naac.  institutes and departments  k. m. shah dental college and hospital  shrimati b. k. shah medical institute and research centre  college of physiotherapy  sumandeep nursing college  department of pharmacy  department of management  controversy in 2017, the president mansukh shah and two other persons were arrested by the anti corruption bureau (acb) of gujarat for allegedly demanding and accepting  20lakh to let a medical student appear in examination. in raid, the acb found documents pertaining to fixed deposits worth  44.63 crore, four cars collectively worth  1 crore and 200 bank cheques of  101 crore from home and offices of shah.  references  universities and colleges in gujarat vadodara district educational institutions established in 2007 2007 establishments in gujarat deemed universities in india
kbfe-lp is a low power radio station in bakersfield, california.  history kbfe-lp began broadcasting on may 26, 2015.  references  external links  2015 establishments in california mass media in bakersfield, california bfe-lp bfe-lp radio stations established in 2015 bfe-lp bfe-lp
petr sidlik (born january 18, 1994) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he was play for pirati chomutov of the czech extraliga.  sidlik made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc karlovy vary during the 2014-15 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1994 births living people pirati chomutov players hc karlovy vary players victoriaville tigres players czech ice hockey defencemen sportspeople from jihlava
raja bhaiya poochwale (1882-1956) was an indian musician from poonch gharana. raja bhaiya poochwale also considered from gwalior from gharana.  raja bhaiya was born on 12 august 1882 in gwalior state of the central india agency. his birth name was rao radhalkishan anand. his ancestors were jagirdars of elichpur in the district of jhansi (uttar pradesh). he was famous for taan-malika, sangeetopasna, thumari, and tarangini dhrupad dhamar-gayan. he received the sangeet natak akademi award in 1956, and died in 1956.  references   people from poonch district, india 20th-century khyal singers 1882 births 1956 deaths 20th-century indian male singers
radio dayz () is a 2008 south korean romantic comedy film written and directed by ha ki-ho.  cast   kim sa-rang as radio announcer and jazz singer, mari ryoo seung-bum as producer lloyd lee jong-hyuk as k hwang bo-ra as myung-wol oh jung-se as man-chul kim roi-ha as mr. noh ko ah-sung as sun-deok moon se-yun as  political party member 3  additional cast members   kim kwang-sik as political party member 1 park jung-pyo as  political party member 2 ko beun-jin as radio listener kim byeong-man as truck driver ahn sang-tae as postal employee kwon oh-min as delivery boy jung young-ki as japanese soldier #3 kim young-pil as writer kim sa-hee as hong-joo jeon su-ji as madame kakadyu  references  external links  2008 films south korean films korean-language films 2008 romantic comedy films south korean romantic comedy films films set in korea under japanese rule
andrew evans (born january 25, 1991) is an american track and field athlete who competes in the discus throw.  born to lawrence and laura evans he grew up in portage, michigan. he competed in ice hockey, american football and discus at high school.  as a sophomore, 2007, andrew finished as mi mhsaa d1 state discus runner-up with a throw of 162'5". he also finished as all-state in shot put his sophomore year with a throw of 52'10.75".  he is two time mhsaa division 1 state discus champion (2008 - 180'8" & 2009 - 182'10") from portage northern high school, mi. he finished as state runner-up in shot put in 2008 - 60'4" - & 2009 - 57'9.75",  the pn t&f team finished 2nd in the state of michigan d1 championship in 2009.   he made his international debut at the 2010 world junior championships in athletics, taking tenth place. after a period at kalamazoo valley community college he went on to attend the university of kentucky from 2011 and took part in competitions with the kentucky wildcats team.  he was the winner of the discus at the southeastern conference outdoor championships in 2012 and 2014, finishing runner-up in the interim. at the ncaa men's division i outdoor track and field championships he was seventh in 2012 and improved to third in 2013. in his final year, he fell back to 14th place, however.  leaving college and turning professional, he entered the 2015 usa outdoor track and field championships and took third place. he failed to obtain the qualifying standard for the 2015 world championships in athletics, however. both he and russ winger contested the final place at the 2015 nacac championships in athletics and it ultimately went to winger, with evans being the silver medalist at the nacac meet.  he achieved the olympic standard in april 2016 with a new personal record of . at age 25 he made his first american olympic team with a third-place finish at the 2016 united states olympic trials, finishing behind mason finley and tavis bailey.  international competitions  references  external links  living people 1991 births track and field athletes from michigan people from portage, michigan american male discus throwers kentucky wildcats men's track and field athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states
the stan getz quartet in paris is a live album by saxophonist stan getz recorded at the salle pleyel which was first released on the french verve label.  reception  the allmusic review by ken dryden stated "the tenor saxophonist's always-lush tone is beautifully complemented by his musicians' sensitive accompaniment".  track listing  there are several editions of this album. here are all the tracks included in at least one of them.   "manha de carnaval" (luiz bonfa, antonio maria) - 3:26  	  "when the world was young" (philippe-gerard, angele vannier, johnny mercer) - 6:09  "singing song" (gary burton) - 3:10  "sweet rain" (stan getz) - 7:30  "on green dolphin street" (bronisław kaper, ned washington) - 5:52  "o grande amor" (jobim, de moraes) - 5:25  "stan's blues (o grande amor)" (antonio carlos jobim, vinicius de moraes) - 5:53 	  "edelweiss" (richard rodgers, oscar hammerstein ii) - 3:56 	  "the knight rides again" (frank loesser) - 10:10  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone gary burton - vibraphone steve swallow - bass roy haynes - drums  references   1967 live albums stan getz live albums verve records live albums
the rivers state gubernatorial election took place on 9 march 2019, concurrently with various other nigerian state level elections. a rerun of the vote was held in abua-odual, ahoada west, gokana and opobo-nkoro on 13 april. one-term incumbent governor ezenwo nyesom wike of the people's democratic party was eligible to run for re-election. he won in 2015 with 87.77% of the vote.  vote counting after the elections was suspended after widespread violence in the state. on 3 april, the inec declared that incumbent wike won re-election, as the total number of voters in areas where elections were cancelled or did not hold was not enough to give his opponent victory.  background ezenwo nyesom wike previously served as minister of state for education prior to becoming governor. he was also chairman of the 2016 pdp national convention committee. wike considered running for a second term as the state's chief executive, and 51 years old at the time of the election in 2019.  there had been reports of a rift between members of the all progressives congress dakuku peterside and ibim semenitari. the state party chairman, davies ikanya has, however, denied this. in 2017, transportation minister chibuike amaechi got involved in a dispute with party members, after he declared billionaire businessman tonye cole as his choice for the all progressives congress nomination for governor.  on 22 may 2017, senate minority leader and former governor godswill akpabio announced that he would support a second term for governor wike in the brick house. former senate president david mark and deputy senate president ike ekweremadu also voiced their endorsement of the incumbent governor to run for reelection.  election  see also  2015 rivers state gubernatorial election  elections in rivers state  references  rivers state rivers state gubernatorial elections election and referendum articles with incomplete results march 2019 events in nigeria 2019 rivers state elections
a.f.c. silverwood is an intermediate-level football club playing in the intermediate a division of the mid-ulster football league in northern ireland. the club was founded in 2016 following the amalgamation of a.f.c. craigavon and silverwood united. the club is based in craigavon, county armagh. the club competes in the irish cup.  external links  daily mirror mid-ulster football league official website  nifootball.co.uk - (for fixtures, results and tables of all northern ireland amateur football leagues)  notes  association football clubs in northern ireland association football clubs established in 2016 association football clubs in county armagh mid-ulster football league clubs 2016 establishments in northern ireland
1-100   |- | 1 ceres || - || ceres, roman goddess of agriculture, grain crops, fertility and motherly relationships ||  |-id=002 | 2 pallas || - || athena (pallas), greek goddess of wisdom, handicraft, and warfare ||  |-id=003 | 3 juno || - || juno, roman goddess of marriage and childbirth ||  |-id=004 | 4 vesta || - || vesta, roman goddess of the hearth, home, and family ||  |-id=005 | 5 astraea || - || astraea, greek virgin goddess of justice, innocence, purity and precision ||  |-id=006 | 6 hebe || - || hebe, greek goddess of eternal youth, prime of life, and forgiveness. cupbearer to the gods. ||  |-id=007 | 7 iris || - || iris, greek goddess of the rainbow and messenger of the gods ||  |-id=008 | 8 flora || - || flora, roman goddess of flowers, gardens and spring ||  |-id=009 | 9 metis || - || metis, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. ||  |-id=010 | 10 hygiea || - || hygieia, greek goddess of health, one of the daughters of asclepius, god of medicine ||  |-id=011 | 11 parthenope || - || parthenope, one of the sirens in greek mythology ||  |-id=012 | 12 victoria || - || victoria, roman goddess of victory, daughter of pallas and styx ||  |-id=013 | 13 egeria || - || egeria, minor roman goddess and nymph, wife of numa pompilius, second king of rome ||  |-id=014 | 14 irene || - || eirene, greek goddess of peace, daughter of zeus and themis ||  |-id=015 | 15 eunomia || - || eunomia, minor greek goddess of law and legislation, daughter of zeus and themis ||  |-id=016 | 16 psyche || - || psyche, greek nymph and wife of cupid, god of erotic love and affection ||  |-id=017 | 17 thetis || - || thetis, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris. she is the mother of achilles. ||  |-id=
018 | 18 melpomene || - || melpomene, the muse of tragedy in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=019 | 19 fortuna || - || fortuna, roman goddess of chance, luck and fate ||  |-id=020 | 20 massalia || - || the city of marseilles (by its latin name) in south-western france ||  |-id=021 | 21 lutetia || - || the city of paris, capital of france, named by its latin name, lutetia. this asteroid was the first minor planet discovered by an amateur astronomer. ||  |-id=022 | 22 kalliope || - || calliope, the muse of epic, heroic poetry in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=023 | 23 thalia || - || thalia, the muse of comedy in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=024 | 24 themis || - || themis, goddess of law in greek mythology. she is one of the 12 first-generation titans, the children of uranus (father sky) and gaea (mother earth). ||  |-id=025 | 25 phocaea || - || the ancient city of phocaea, located on the western coast of anatolia (asia minor). the greek settlers from phocaea founded the colony of modern-day marseille, france, where this asteroid was discovered at the marseilles observatory. ||  |-id=026 | 26 proserpina || - || proserpina, roman goddess of fertility, wine, agriculture. she is the daughter of ceres and jupiter, and was abducted by pluto into the underworld. ||  |-id=027 | 27 euterpe || - || euterpe, the muse of music and lyric poetry in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=028 | 28 bellona || - || bellona, roman goddess of war. the daughter of jupiter and juno is the consort and sister of mars.
||  |-id=029 | 29 amphitrite || - || amphitrite, sea goddess and wife of poseidon in greek mythology. the queen of the sea is either an oceanid, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys or a nereid (a daughters of the nereus and doris). ||  |-id=030 | 30 urania || - || urania, the muse of astronomy in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=031 | 31 euphrosyne || - || euphrosyne, one of the three charites (graces) in greek mythology. charites are the daughters of zeus and eurynome, an oceanid (sea nymph). her other two sisters are thalia and aglaea (aglaja). ||  |-id=032 | 32 pomona || - || pomona, roman goddess of fruit trees, gardens, and orchards. she is the wife of vertumnus god of seasons, change and plant growth. ||  |-id=033 | 33 polyhymnia || - || polyhymnia, the muse of singing of hymns and rhetoric in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=034 | 34 circe || - || circe, goddess of magic in greek mythology. the enchantress tried to influence odysseus and changed his companions into pigs. ||  |-id=035 | 35 leukothea || - || leukothea, daughter of king cadmus and harmonia, the goddess of harmony and concord in greek mythology. leukothea later became the goddess of the sea and is also known as ino. ||  |-id=036 | 36 atalante || - || atalanta, mythological greek heroine, who would only marry the man defeating her in a footrace, while those who lost were killed. hippomenes won the race against her with the help of three sacred apples he received from aphrodite. ||  |-id=037 | 37 fides || - || fides, the roman goddess of faith, oaths and honesty ||  |-id=038 | 38 leda || - || leda, queen of sparta and mother of helen of troy in greek mythology. she was seduced
by zeus in the guise of a swan (also see leda and the swan). ||  |-id=039 | 39 laetitia || - || laetitia, roman goddess of gaiety ||  |-id=040 | 40 harmonia || - || harmonia, greek goddess of harmony and concord. she is the daughter of ares (god of war) and aphrodite (goddess of love). ||  |-id=041 | 41 daphne || - || daphne, a fresh water nymph (naiad) in greek mythology ||  |-id=042 | 42 isis || - || isis, the egyptian goddess who help the dead enter the afterlife. the name also alludes to isis pogson (1852-1945), british astronomer and meteorologist and daughter of the discoverer, norman pogson. ||  |-id=043 | 43 ariadne || - || ariadne, cretan princess and daughter of king minos from greek mythology, who sent every seven years 14 young noble citizens to the labyrinth, to be eaten by the minotaur. ariadne fell in love with theseus and helped him to find his way out of the minotaur's labyrinth. ||  |-id=044 | 44 nysa || - || the mythological region of nysa. in greek mythology, the mountainous was where the rain nymphs (hyades) raised the infant god dionysus. ||  |-id=045 | 45 eugenia || - || eugenie de montijo (1826-1920), empress of france and mother of napoleon eugene, prince imperial, after whom antoine de saint-exupery's character the little prince is based. (the asteroid's companion is named petit-prince) ||  |-id=046 | 46 hestia || - || hestia, greek goddess of the hearth, home, and family. she is the daughter of the titans cronus and rhea. alternatively, she is one of the seven hesperides, nymph daughters of the titans atlas and hesperis. ||  |-id=047 | 47 aglaja || - || aglaea (aglaja), one of the three charites (graces) in greek mythology. charites are the daughters of zeus and eurynome, an oceanid (sea nymph). her other two sisters are thalia and euphrosyne. ||  |-id=048 | 48 doris || - || doris, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters
of the titans oceanus and tethys.  doris and her brother nereus are the parents of nerites and 50 nereids (also sea nymphs). ||  |-id=049 | 49 pales || - || pales, roman goddess of shepherds, flocks and livestock ||  |-id=050 | 50 virginia || - || the ancient roman story of verginia (virginia), a girl stabbed by her father in order to save her from appius claudius crassus in 448 b.c. it also an allusion to u.s. state of virginia. ||  |-id=051 | 51 nemausa || - || the city of nimes in southern france (by its latin name "nemausa") ||  |-id=052 | 52 europa || - || europa, mythological greek princess, abducted by zeus in the form of a bull and gave birth to minos, the first king of crete. ||  |-id=053 | 53 kalypso || - || calypso, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. calypso kept odysseus prisoner at ogygia for seven years. ||  |-id=054 | 54 alexandra || - || alexander von humboldt (1769-1859), german explorer ||  |-id=055 | 55 pandora || - || pandora, the first human woman in greek mythology. she was created from clay by hephaestus at the request of zeus. ||  |-id=056 | 56 melete || - || melete, one of the three original muses before the nine olympian muses were founded. her sisters were aoide and mneme. ||  |-id=057 | 57 mnemosyne || - || mnemosyne, the goddess of memory in greek mythology . she is the mother of the nine muses with zeus, and one of the 12 first-generation titans, the children of uranus (father sky) and gaea (mother earth). ||  |-id=058 | 58 concordia || - || concordia, roman goddess of peace and concord. she is the daughter of jupiter and themis. ||  |-id=059 | 59 elpis || - || elpis, the personification and spirit of hope in greek mythology. in the 1860s, there was a dispute about a new nomenclature proposed by urbain le verrier who wanted to name this asteroid after its discoverer, jean chacornac (1823-1873). this was
rejected by the community of astronomers. the asteroid was then named by karl l. littrow on a request by edmund weiss since chacornac refused to submit a name (other than his own). the given name is an allusion to the "hope" that this dispute could be settled. ||  |-id=060 | 60 echo || - || echo, an oread (mountain nymph) in greek mythology, who, as a punishment, was only able to speak the last words spoken to her. when she fell in love with narcissus, she was unable to tell him how she felt; and was forced to watch him as he fell in love with himself. ||  |-id=061 | 61 danae || - || danae, daughter of king acrisius and mother of hero perseus by zeus in greek mythology. danae was confined in a brass tower by her father to keep her a virgin. zeus however, desired her, and came to her in the form of golden rain which streamed in through the roof of her confinement and down into her womb. ||  |-id=062 | 62 erato || - || erato, the muse of love poetry in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=063 | 63 ausonia || - || the country of italy, by its ancient greek name for lower italy, derived from king auson, a son of odysseus and kallisto. the term "ausones" was also applied by greek writers to describe various italic peoples. ||  |-id=064 | 64 angelina || - || astronomical station of hungarian astronomer franz xaver von zach (1754-1832), near marseilles in france ||  |-id=065 | 65 cybele || - || cybele, mother goddess worshiped as "mountain mother" by the phrygias, and adopted as "great mother" by the greeks and romans. this asteroid was originally named "maximiliana", after maximilian ii, king of bavaria. this non-classical name, however, was rejected by several astronomers, also see . ||  |-id=066 | 66 maja || - || maia, one of the pleiades, the seven daughters of titan atlas and oceanid nymph pleione. maia is the mother of the olympian messenger god hermes. ||  |-id=067 | 67 asia || - || asia, an ocean
id from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. this was the first asteroid discovered in asia. english astronomer n. r. pogson discovered it at madras observatory, india, in april 1861. ||  |-id=068 | 68 leto || - || leto, goddess of motherhood in greek mythology. she is the daughter of the titans coeus and phoebe and mother of olympian god apollo. ||  |-id=069 | 69 hesperia || - || the country of italy (by its greek name hesperia; "setting sun" or "evening"). this asteroid was discovered one month after the italian unification was proclaimed on 17 march 1861. ||  |-id=070 | 70 panopaea || - || panopaea, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris. she was invoked by sailors during storms. ||  |-id=071 | 71 niobe || - || niobe, daughter of king tantalus in greek mythology. the gods punished her by killing her seven sons and seven daughters and changing her into a rock. ||  |-id=072 | 72 feronia || - || feronia, roman goddess of groves, wildlife and freedman ||  |-id=073 | 73 klytia || - || clytie, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys ||  |-id=074 | 74 galatea || - || galatea, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris, who loved the shepherd acis. alternatively, the name may refer to the statue of a woman created by sculptor pygmalion. ||  |-id=075 | 75 eurydike || - || eurydice, an oak nymph and daughter of apollo in greek mythology. she was the wife of orpheus, who failed to bring her back from the dead. with his enchanting music he softened the hearts of the gods who let him descend into the underworld under the condition that he must not look at her until both had reached the upper world. ||  |-id=076 | 76 freia || - || freyja, the goddess of love and beauty in norse mythology ||  |-id=077 | 77 frigga || - || frigg, wife of odin and queen of all the gods in norse mythology
||  |-id=078 | 78 diana || - || diana, goddess of the hunt in roman mythology. she is the daughter of jupiter and latona. her greek counterpart is artemis. ||  |-id=079 | 79 eurynome || - || eurynome, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. ||  |-id=080 | 80 sappho || - || sappho (c. 630 - c. 570 bc), greek poet who, according to mythology, killed herself by jumping off the cliffs for love of the ferryman phaon. ||  |-id=081 | 81 terpsichore || - || terpsichore, the muse of dance and chorus in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=082 | 82 alkmene || - || alcmene, mother of the divine hero heracles in greek mythology. zeus slept with alcmene disguised as her husband amphitryon. ||  |-id=083 | 83 beatrix || - || beatrice portinari (1265-1290), beloved of italian poet dante alighieri ||  |-id=084 | 84 klio || - || clio, the muse of history in greek mythology. the nine muses are the inspirational goddesses of literature, science, and the arts. they are the daughters of zeus and mnemosyne. ||  |-id=085 | 85 io || - || io, daughter of inachus, king of argos, and one of the mortal lovers of zeus in greek mythology. ||  |-id=086 | 86 semele || - || semele, the youngest daughter of king cadmus and the mother of dionysus by zeus in greek mythology ||  |-id=087 | 87 sylvia || - || rhea sylvia, the mythical mother of the twins romulus and remus from roman mythology (src). alternatively, it was named after sylvie petiaux-hugo flammarion, first wife of french astronomer camille flammarion (1842-1925) ||  |-id=088 | 88 thisbe || - || thisbe, lover of pyramus in classical mythology. the two babylonian lovers are also prominent in the comedy  by shakespeare. ||  |-id=089 | 89 julia || - || julia of corsica (c. died 439), a virgin martyr who
is venerated as a christian saint. ||  |-id=090 | 90 antiope || - || antiope, an amazon and daughter of ares in greek mythology. alternatively, she was the daughter of nycteus, king of thebes, and the lover of zeus. this minor planet is likely the first double asteroid ever discovered. ||  |-id=091 | 91 aegina || - || aegina, daughter of the river-god asopus and the river-nymph metope. she was changed into the island of aegina by zeus. ||  |-id=092 | 92 undina || - || heroine of the fairy-tale novella undine by german writer friedrich de la motte fouque (1777-1843) ||  |-id=093 | 93 minerva || - || minerva, goddess of wisdom and strategic warfare and daughter of jupiter and metis in roman mythology. her greek equivalent is athena. ||  |-id=094 | 94 aurora || - || aurora, goddess of the dawn in roman mythology. her greek counterpart is eos, who is the daughter of the titans hyperion and theia. ||  |-id=095 | 95 arethusa || - || arethusa, one of the seven hesperides, nymph daughters of the titans atlas and hesperis ||  |-id=096 | 96 aegle || - || aegle, one of the seven hesperides, nymph daughters of the titans atlas and hesperis ||  |-id=097 | 97 klotho || - || clotho (klotho), one of the three fates or moirai who spin (clotho), draw out (lachesis) and cut (atropos) the thread of life in ancient greek mythology. ||  |-id=098 | 98 ianthe || - || ianthe, a girl who married iphis after isis turned iphis from a woman into a man. alternatively, she was an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. ||  |-id=099 | 99 dike || - || dike,  minor greek goddess of human justice and the spirit of moral order, daughter of zeus and themis ||  |-id=100 | 100 hekate || - || hecate, greek goddess (the name "hecate" also sounds like greek hekaton meaning "one hundred.") ||  |}  101-200   |- | 101 helena
|| - || helen of troy, the most beautiful woman in the world in greek mythology. the wife of king menelaus of sparta was abducted by paris which led to the trojan war. ||  |-id=102 | 102 miriam || - || miriam, biblical prophetess ||  |-id=103 | 103 hera || - || hera, greek goddess of marriage, childbirth, and family. she is the daughter of the titans cronus and rhea, and sister and wife of zeus. ||  |-id=104 | 104 klymene || - || one of various greek figures named clymene ||  |-id=105 | 105 artemis || - || artemis, greek goddess of the hunt, forests, and the moon. she was the daughter of zeus by leto and twin sister of apollo. her roman equivalent is diana. ||  |-id=106 | 106 dione || - || dione, an oceanid from greek mythology, one of the many daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys. she was one of the wives of zeus and mother of aphrodite, the goddess of love, beauty and sexuality. ||  |-id=107 | 107 camilla || - || camilla, queen of the volsci  from roman mythology. less likely, the name refers to french astronomer camille flammarion (1842-1925). ||  |-id=108 | 108 hecuba || - || hecuba, wife of king priam during the trojan war in greek mythology ||  |-id=109 | 109 felicitas || - || felicitas, goddess of happiness in roman mythology. she is often portrayed holding a caduceus (staff) and a cornucopia (horn of plenty). ||  |-id=110 | 110 lydia || - || lydia, ancient region of asia minor ||  |-id=111 | 111 ate || - || ate, goddess of mischief, delusion, ruin, and folly in greek mythology. she is the daughter of zeus or of eris. ||  |-id=112 | 112 iphigenia || - || iphigenia, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=113 | 113 amalthea || - || amalthea, mythological greek nursemaid ||  |-id=114 | 114 kassandra || - || cassandra, mythological trojan prophetess ||  |-id=115 | 115 thyra || - || thyra, wife of king gorm of denmark ||  |-id=116 | 116 sirona || - || sirona, celtic goddess ||  |-id=117
| 117 lomia || - || misspelling of lamia queen of libya, lover of zeus ||  |-id=118 | 118 peitho || - || peitho, greek goddess ||  |-id=119 | 119 althaea || - || althaea, greek mother of meleager ||  |-id=120 | 120 lachesis || - || lachesis, one of the three fates or moirai who spin (clotho), draw out (lachesis) and cut (atropos) the thread of life in ancient greek mythology. ||  |-id=121 | 121 hermione || - || hermione, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=122 | 122 gerda || - || gerðr, norse goddess ||  |-id=123 | 123 brunhild || - || brunnehilde, norse valkyrie ||  |-id=124 | 124 alkeste || - || alcestis, mythological greek woman ||  |-id=125 | 125 liberatrix || - || possibly adolphe thiers (1797-1877), french president during the franco-prussian war. also possibly joan of arc. ||  |-id=126 | 126 velleda || - || veleda, germanic priestess, leader of batavian uprising against the romans ||  |-id=127 | 127 johanna || - || joan of arc (1412-1431), saint and heroine of france ||  |-id=128 | 128 nemesis || - || nemesis, greek goddess ||  |-id=129 | 129 antigone || - || antigone, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=130 | 130 elektra || - || electra, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=131 | 131 vala || - || volva, mythological norse prophetess ||  |-id=132 | 132 aethra || - || aethra, greek mother of theseus ||  |-id=133 | 133 cyrene || - || cyrene, greek lover of apollo ||  |-id=134 | 134 sophrosyne || - || sophrosyne, plato's concept of moderation ||  |-id=135 | 135 hertha || - || nerthus (hertha), norse goddess, also see  ||  |-id=136 | 136 austria || - || austria, country ||  |-id=137 | 137 meliboea || - || meliboea, various greek figures ||  |-id=138 | 138 tolosa || - || latin for toulouse, france ||
|-id=139 | 139 juewa || - || chinese for 'star of china's fortune' ||  |-id=140 | 140 siwa || - || siwa, slavic goddess ||  |-id=141 | 141 lumen || - || lumen : recits de l'infini, book by camille flammarion (1842-1925) ||  |-id=142 | 142 polana || - || pula, city now in croatia ||  |-id=143 | 143 adria || - || adriatic sea ||  |-id=144 | 144 vibilia || - || vibilia, roman goddess and patroness of journeyings ||  |-id=145 | 145 adeona || - || adeona, roman goddess and patroness of homecomings ||  |-id=146 | 146 lucina || - || lucina, roman goddess ||  |-id=147 | 147 protogeneia || - || protogeneia, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=148 | 148 gallia || - || gaul, roman province ||  |-id=149 | 149 medusa || - || medusa, mythological greek monster ||  |-id=150 | 150 nuwa || - || nuwa, chinese mythological figure ||  |-id=151 | 151 abundantia || - || abundantia, roman goddess ||  |-id=152 | 152 atala || - || atala, eponymous hero of novel by francois-rene de chateaubriand ||  |-id=153 | 153 hilda || - || daughter of austrian astronomer theodor von oppolzer (1841-1886) ||  |-id=154 | 154 bertha || - || berthe martin-flammarion, sister of french astronomer camille flammarion (1842-1925) ||  |-id=155 | 155 scylla || - || scylla, greek mythological monster ||  |-id=156 | 156 xanthippe || - || xanthippe, wife of socrates ||  |-id=157 | 157 dejanira || - || deianira, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=158 | 158 koronis || - || coronis, various greek figures ||  |-id=159 | 159 aemilia || - || via aemilia, roman road ||  |-id=160 | 160 una || - || una, character in edmund spenser's the faerie queene ||  |-id=161 | 161 athor || - || hathor, egyptian goddess ||  |-id=162 | 162 laurentia || - || joseph jean pierre
laurent (died 1900), french amateur astronomer ||  |-id=163 | 163 erigone || - || erigone, various greek figures ||  |-id=164 | 164 eva || - || unknown origin of name; it may refer to eve. ||  |-id=165 | 165 loreley || - || the lorelei, character in german folklore ||  |-id=166 | 166 rhodope || - || queen rhodope, greek mythology ||  |-id=167 | 167 urda || - || urd, norse norn ||  |-id=168 | 168 sibylla || - || the sibyls, greek prophetesses ||  |-id=169 | 169 zelia || - || niece of french astronomer camille flammarion (1842-1925) ||  |-id=170 | 170 maria || - || maria, sister of italian astronomer antonio abetti (1846-1928) ||  |-id=171 | 171 ophelia || - || ophelia, character in shakespeare's hamlet ||  |-id=172 | 172 baucis || - || baucis, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=173 | 173 ino || - || ino, mythological greek woman ||  |-id=174 | 174 phaedra || - || phaedra, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=175 | 175 andromache || - || andromache, trojan wife of hector ||  |-id=176 | 176 iduna || - || ydun, a club that hosted an astronomical conference in stockholm, sweden (the club was probably named after iduna, a norse goddess) ||  |-id=177 | 177 irma || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=178 | 178 belisana || - || belisana, celtic goddess ||  |-id=179 | 179 klytaemnestra || - || clytemnestra, greek mythological queen ||  |-id=180 | 180 garumna || - || ancient name for river garonne, france ||  |-id=181 | 181 eucharis || - || eucharis, greek nymph ||  |-id=182 | 182 elsa || - || elsbeth - the austrian variant of "elisabeth" a common female first name - and only later changed into a more lyrical "elsa" with the consent of the discoverer, johann palisa. it may also refer to the empress elisabeth of austria (1854-1898), or other person or characters. ||  |-id=183 | 183 istria || - || ist
ria, peninsula in croatia and slovenia ||  |-id=184 | 184 dejopeja || - || deiopaea, roman nymph ||  |-id=185 | 185 eunike || - || eunice (eunike), a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris, whose name means "happy victory". it was chosen to commemorate the treaty of san stefano, which was signed two days after the discovery of this asteroid by c. h. f. peters in march 1878. ||  |-id=186 | 186 celuta || - || celuta, the main character in the short novella rene by french author francois-rene de chateaubriand (1768-1848) ||  |-id=187 | 187 lamberta || - || johann heinrich lambert (1728-1777), swiss polymath ||  |-id=188 | 188 menippe || - || menippe, greek daughter of orion ||  |-id=189 | 189 phthia || - || phthia, various greek figures and places ||  |-id=190 | 190 ismene || - || ismene, greek daughter of oedipus ||  |-id=191 | 191 kolga || - || kolga, daughter of ægir in norse mythology ||  |-id=192 | 192 nausikaa || - || nausicaa, mythological greek princess ||  |-id=193 | 193 ambrosia || - || ambrosia, greek food of the gods ||  |-id=194 | 194 prokne || - || procne, sister of philomela in greek mythology ||  |-id=195 | 195 eurykleia || - || eurycleia, greek nurse of odysseus ||  |-id=196 | 196 philomela || - || philomela, sister of procne in greek mythology ||  |-id=197 | 197 arete || - || arete, greek mother of nausicaa ||  |-id=198 | 198 ampella || - || ampelos, greek friend of dionysus ||  |-id=199 | 199 byblis || - || byblis, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=200 | 200 dynamene || - || dynamene, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris. ||  |}  201-300   |- | 201 penelope || - || penelope, greek wife of odysseus ||  |-id=202 | 202
chryseis || - || chryseis, mythological trojan woman ||  |-id=203 | 203 pompeja || - || pompeii, ruined roman town ||  |-id=204 | 204 kallisto || - || callisto, greek nymph ||  |-id=205 | 205 martha || - || martha, woman in the new testament ||  |-id=206 | 206 hersilia || - || hersilia, roman wife of romulus ||  |-id=207 | 207 hedda || - || hedwig, wife of german astronomer friedrich august theodor winnecke (1835-1897) ||  |-id=208 | 208 lacrimosa || - || our lady of sorrows, a title referring to mary, the mother of jesus ||  |-id=209 | 209 dido || - || dido, mythological carthaginian queen ||  |-id=210 | 210 isabella || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=211 | 211 isolda || - || isolde, heroine of the legend of tristan and iseult ||  |-id=212 | 212 medea || - || medea, greek mythological witch ||  |-id=213 | 213 lilaea || - || lilaea, greek naiad ||  |-id=214 | 214 aschera || - || astarte (aschera, astoreth), sidonian and phoenician goddess of love and fertility, also see  ||  |-id=215 | 215 oenone || - || oenone, greek nymph ||  |-id=216 | 216 kleopatra || - || cleopatra (69-30 bc), queen of egypt ||  |-id=217 | 217 eudora || - || eudora, greek hyad ||  |-id=218 | 218 bianca || - || bianca bianchi, stage name of the german opera singer bertha schwarz (1855-1947) ||  |-id=219 | 219 thusnelda || - || thusnelda, wife of germanic warrior arminius ||  |-id=220 | 220 stephania || - || princess stephanie of belgium (1864-1945) ||  |-id=221 | 221 eos || - || eos, greek goddess ||  |-id=222 | 222 lucia || - || lucia, daughter of austrian explorer count johann nepomuk wilczek (1837-1922) ||  |-id=223 | 223 rosa || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=224 | 224 oceana || - || the pacific ocean ||  |-id=225 | 225
henrietta || - || henrietta, wife of french astronomer pierre janssen (1824-1907) ||  |-id=226 | 226 weringia || - || wahring, part of vienna ||  |-id=227 | 227 philosophia || - || philosophy ||  |-id=228 | 228 agathe || - || agathe, daughter of austrian astronomer theodor von oppolzer (1841-1886) ||  |-id=229 | 229 adelinda || - || adelinde weiss (nee fenzel), wife of austrian astronomer edmund weiss (1837-1917), director of the vienna observatory where this asteroid was discovered by johann palisa; also see , , and . ||  |-id=230 | 230 athamantis || - || athamantis, greek daughter of athamas ||  |-id=231 | 231 vindobona || - || latin name for vienna, austria ||  |-id=232 | 232 russia || - || russia, country ||  |-id=233 | 233 asterope || - || sterope, greek pleiad ||  |-id=234 | 234 barbara || - || saint barbara ||  |-id=235 | 235 carolina || - || caroline island, now part of kiribati ||  |-id=236 | 236 honoria || - || honoria, roman goddess ||  |-id=237 | 237 coelestina || - || coelestine, wife of austrian astronomer theodor von oppolzer (1841-1886) ||  |-id=238 | 238 hypatia || - || hypatia (c. 350-415), greek philosopher ||  |-id=239 | 239 adrastea || - || adrasteia, greek goddess ||  |-id=240 | 240 vanadis || - || vanadis, norse goddess ||  |-id=241 | 241 germania || - || latin name for germany ||  |-id=242 | 242 kriemhild || - || kriemhild, mythological germanic princess ||  |-id=243 | 243 ida || - || ida, cretan nymph, after whom mount ida is named, where the mythical dactyls lived ((243) ida i dactyl) ||  |-id=244 | 244 sita || - || sita, hindu wife of rama ||  |-id=245 | 245 vera || - || unknown origin of name. the asteroid's name was suggested by the wife of the discoverer, n. r. pogson (1829-1891) ||  |-id=246 | 246 asporina || - || asporina
, goddess worshipped in asia minor ||  |-id=247 | 247 eukrate || - || eukrate, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris. ||  |-id=248 | 248 lameia || - || lamia, lover of zeus ||  |-id=249 | 249 ilse || - || ilse, legendary german princess ||  |-id=250 | 250 bettina || - || bettina caroline de rothschild (1858-1892), austrian baroness and wife of albert salomon anselm von rothschild, who named the asteroid after her. the discoverer, johann palisa, reportedly sold the naming rights for 50 pounds in order to help fund his expedition to observe the total solar eclipse of august 29, 1886. src ||  |-id=251 | 251 sophia || - || sophia, wife of german astronomer hugo von seeliger (1849-1924) ||  |-id=252 | 252 clementina || - || unknown origin of name. the asteroid was named by its discoverer, henri joseph anastase perrotin (1845-1904) ||  |-id=253 | 253 mathilde || - || mathilde, wife of french astronomer maurice loewy (1833-1907) ||  |-id=254 | 254 augusta || - || auguste von littrow (1819-1890), author, and champion of women's rights; wife of austrian astronomer carl ludwig von littrow ||  |-id=255 | 255 oppavia || - || opava, now czech republic ||  |-id=256 | 256 walpurga || - || saint walpurga ||  |-id=257 | 257 silesia || - || silesia, region of central europe ||  |-id=258 | 258 tyche || - || tyche, greek goddess ||  |-id=259 | 259 aletheia || - || veritas (aletheia), greek goddess ||  |-id=260 | 260 huberta || - || saint hubertus ||  |-id=261 | 261 prymno || - || prymno, one of the oceanids, daughters of the titans oceanus and tethys in greek mythology ||  |-id=262 | 262 valda || - || unknown origin of name. the asteroid's name was proposed by the baroness bettina caroline de rothschild, see  ||  |-id=263 | 263 dresda || - || the city of dresden in germany ||  |-id=264 | 264 libussa || - || libussa, legendary founder of
prague ||  |-id=265 | 265 anna || - || anny weiss (nee kretschmar), daughter-in-law of austrian astronomer edmund weiss (1837-1917), director of the vienna observatory where this asteroid was discovered by johann palisa; also see  and  ||  |-id=266 | 266 aline || - || linda von schuster (nee weiss), daughter of austrian astronomer edmund weiss (1837-1917), director of the vienna observatory where this asteroid was discovered by johann palisa; also see  and  ||  |-id=267 | 267 tirza || - || tirzah, biblical figure ||  |-id=268 | 268 adorea || - || adorea, roman cake ||  |-id=269 | 269 justitia || - || justitia or themis, greek goddess ||  |-id=270 | 270 anahita || - || anahita, persian goddess ||  |-id=271 | 271 penthesilea || - || penthesilea, mythological amazon queen ||  |-id=272 | 272 antonia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=273 | 273 atropos || - || atropos, one of the three fates or moirai who spin (clotho), draw out (lachesis) and cut (atropos) the thread of life in ancient greek mythology. ||  |-id=274 | 274 philagoria || - || philagoria, recreation club in olmutz ||  |-id=275 | 275 sapientia || - || latin for wisdom ||  |-id=276 | 276 adelheid || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=277 | 277 elvira || - || character in books by alphonse de lamartine (1790-1869) ||  |-id=278 | 278 paulina || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=279 | 279 thule || - || thule, mythical northern land (usually identified with scandinavia) ||  |-id=280 | 280 philia || - || philia, greek nymph ||  |-id=281 | 281 lucretia || - || caroline herschel (1750-1848), german astronomer ||  |-id=282 | 282 clorinde || - || clorinda, heroine of torquato tasso's poem jerusalem delivered ||  |-id=283 | 283 emma || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=284 | 284 amalia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=285 | 285 regina || - ||
unknown origin of name ||  |-id=286 | 286 iclea || - || iclea, heroine of french astronomer camille flammarion's novel uranie ||  |-id=287 | 287 nephthys || - || nephthys, egyptian goddess ||  |-id=288 | 288 glauke || - || glauke, greek daughter of creon ||  |-id=289 | 289 nenetta || - || french slang for a frivolous woman ||  |-id=290 | 290 bruna || - || brno, now czech republic ||  |-id=291 | 291 alice || - || unknown origin of name. the asteroid was named by the french astronomical society (). ||  |-id=292 | 292 ludovica || - || unknown origin of name. the asteroid was named by the french astronomical society (). ||  |-id=293 | 293 brasilia || - || brazil, country ||  |-id=294 | 294 felicia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=295 | 295 theresia || - || unknown origin of name. previously, the name was erroneously attributed to maria theresa (1717-1780), holy roman empress and queen of hungary and bohemia. ||  |-id=296 | 296 phaetusa || - || phaethusa, greek goddess ||  |-id=297 | 297 caecilia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=298 | 298 baptistina || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=299 | 299 thora || - || thor, god of thunder, weather and storms in norse mythology ||  |-id=300 | 300 geraldina || - || unknown origin of name ||  |}  301-400   |- | 301 bavaria || - || bavaria, region of germany ||  |-id=302 | 302 clarissa || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=303 | 303 josephina || - || discoverer elia millosevich simply stated "in homage to a person dear to me" ||  |-id=304 | 304 olga || - || olga, niece of german astronomer friedrich wilhelm argelander (1799-1875) ||  |-id=305 | 305 gordonia || - || james gordon bennett jr. (1841-1918), editor of the new york herald, founded by his father ||  |-id=306 | 306 unitas || - || book by italian astronomer angelo secchi (1818-1878); also named for the unity of italy ||  |-id=307 | 307 nike || -
|| nike, greek goddess, and also nice, france ||  |-id=308 | 308 polyxo || - || polyxo, greek hyad ||  |-id=309 | 309 fraternitas || - || latin for fraternity ||  |-id=310 | 310 margarita || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=311 | 311 claudia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=312 | 312 pierretta || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=313 | 313 chaldaea || - || chaldea, babylonian nation ||  |-id=314 | 314 rosalia || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=315 | 315 constantia || - || constancy ||  |-id=316 | 316 goberta || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=317 | 317 roxane || - || roxana (c. 340-310 bc), wife of alexander the great ||  |-id=318 | 318 magdalena || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=319 | 319 leona || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=320 | 320 katharina || - || mother of discoverer johann palisa (1848-1925) ||  |-id=321 | 321 florentina || - || florentine, daughter of the discoverer, austrian astronomer johann palisa ||  |-id=322 | 322 phaeo || - || phaeo, greek hyad ||  |-id=323 | 323 brucia || - || catherine wolfe bruce (1816-1900), american patron of astronomy ||  |-id=324 | 324 bamberga || - || bamberg, germany ||  |-id=325 | 325 heidelberga || - || heidelberg, germany ||  |-id=326 | 326 tamara || - || tamar of georgia (c. 1160-1213), queen of georgia ||  |-id=327 | 327 columbia || - || christopher columbus (1451-1506), an italian explorer, navigator, who initiated the permanent european colonization of the americas ||  |-id=328 | 328 gudrun || - || gudrun, norse wife of sigurd ||  |-id=329 | 329 svea || - || sweden ||  |-id=330 | 330 adalberta || a910 cb || adalbert merx (1838-1909), german protestant theologian and orientalist;  father-in-law of the discoverer, max wolf ||  |-id=331 | 331 etheridgea || - || unknown origin of name
||  |-id=332 | 332 siri || - || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=333 | 333 badenia || 1892 a || baden, region of germany ||  |-id=334 | 334 chicago || 1892 l || chicago, united states ||  |-id=335 | 335 roberta || 1892 c || carl robert osten-sacken (1828-1906), baltic-german diplomat and entomologist ||  |-id=336 | 336 lacadiera || 1892 d || la cadiere-d'azur, village in var, france ||  |-id=337 | 337 devosa || 1892 e || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=338 | 338 budrosa || 1892 f || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=339 | 339 dorothea || 1892 g || dorothea klumpke (1861-1942), american astronomer ||  |-id=340 | 340 eduarda || 1892 h || heinrich eduard von lade (1817-1904), german banker and amateur astronomer ||  |-id=341 | 341 california || 1892 j || california, us state ||  |-id=342 | 342 endymion || 1892 k || endymion, greek mythology ||  |-id=343 | 343 ostara || 1892 n || ostara, old high german name for eostre, the anglo-saxon goddess of spring, reconstructed by jacob grimm in his deutsche mythologie ||  |-id=344 | 344 desiderata || 1892 m || desiree clary (1777-1860), queen of sweden and norway ||  |-id=345 | 345 tercidina || 1892 o || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=346 | 346 hermentaria || 1892 p || herment, village in puy-de-dome, france ||  |-id=347 | 347 pariana || 1892 q || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=348 | 348 may || 1892 r || karl may (1842-1912), german author ||  |-id=349 | 349 dembowska || 1892 t || ercole dembowski (1812-1881), italian astronomer ||  |-id=350 | 350 ornamenta || 1892 u || antoinette horneman from scheveningen, daughter of a dutch mariner. she was a very zealous member of the societe astronomique de france ||  |-id=351 | 351 yrsa || 1892 v || unknown origin of name; it may refer to yrsa, queen in norse mythology ||  |-id=352 | 352
gisela || 1893 b || gisela wolf, wife of the discoverer, max wolf (1863-1932) ||  |-id=353 | 353 ruperto-carola || 1893 f || ruprecht karls university of heidelberg ||  |-id=354 | 354 eleonora || 1893 a || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=355 | 355 gabriella || 1893 e || gabrielle flammarion (1877-1962), french astronomer ||  |-id=356 | 356 liguria || 1893 g || liguria, region of italy ||  |-id=357 | 357 ninina || 1893 j || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=358 | 358 apollonia || 1893 k || apollonia, ancient greek colony in illyria ||  |-id=359 | 359 georgia || 1893 m || king george ii of great britain (1683-1760) ||  |-id=360 | 360 carlova || 1893 n || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=361 | 361 bononia || 1893 p || latin name for bologna, italy, and for boulogne-sur-mer, france ||  |-id=362 | 362 havnia || 1893 r || latin name for copenhagen, denmark ||  |-id=363 | 363 padua || 1893 s || padua, italy ||  |-id=364 | 364 isara || 1893 t || river isere, france ||  |-id=365 | 365 corduba || 1893 v || latin name for cordoba, spain ||  |-id=366 | 366 vincentina || 1893 w || vincenzo cerulli (1859-1927), italian astronomer ||  |-id=367 | 367 amicitia || 1893 aa || latin for friendship ||  |-id=368 | 368 haidea || 1893 ab || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=369 | 369 aeria || 1893 ae || air, one of the four classical elements ||  |-id=370 | 370 modestia || 1893 ac || modesty ||  |-id=371 | 371 bohemia || 1893 ad || bohemia, region of czech republic ||  |-id=372 | 372 palma || 1893 ah || palma de mallorca, spain ||  |-id=373 | 373 melusina || 1893 aj || probably melusine, mythological french mermaid, associated with the origins of the lusignan dynasty ||  |-id=374 | 374 burgundia || 1893 ak || burgundy, region of france ||  |-id=375 | 375 ursula || 1893 al || unknown origin of name ||
|-id=376 | 376 geometria || 1893 am || geometry ||  |-id=377 | 377 campania || 1893 an || campania, region of italy ||  |-id=378 | 378 holmia || 1893 ap || latin name for stockholm, sweden ||  |-id=379 | 379 huenna || 1894 aq || latin name for hven, swedish island ||  |-id=380 | 380 fiducia || 1894 ar || latin for confidence ||  |-id=381 | 381 myrrha || 1894 as || myrrha, greek mythological princess ||  |-id=382 | 382 dodona || 1894 at || dodona (now dodoni), greece ||  |-id=383 | 383 janina || 1894 au || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=384 | 384 burdigala || 1894 av || latin name for bordeaux, france ||  |-id=385 | 385 ilmatar || 1894 ax || ilmatar, finnish goddess ||  |-id=386 | 386 siegena || 1894 ay || siegen, germany ||  |-id=387 | 387 aquitania || 1894 az || aquitaine, region of france ||  |-id=388 | 388 charybdis || 1894 ba || charybdis, mythological greek monster ||  |-id=389 | 389 industria || 1894 bb || latin for diligence ||  |-id=390 | 390 alma || 1894 bc || alma river on the crimean peninsula ||  |-id=391 | 391 ingeborg || 1894 be || unknown origin of name; it may refer to ingeborg from norse mythology ||  |-id=392 | 392 wilhelmina || 1894 bf || queen wilhelmina of the netherlands (1880-1962) ||  |-id=393 | 393 lampetia || 1894 bg || lampetia, various greek figures ||  |-id=394 | 394 arduina || 1894 bh || arduenna, gaulish goddess ||  |-id=395 | 395 delia || 1894 bk || alternative name for the greek goddess artemis ||  |-id=396 | 396 aeolia || 1894 bl || aeolis or aeolia, an ancient region of asia minor; or, the aeolian islands, italy ||  |-id=397 | 397 vienna || 1894 bm || vienna, austria ||  |-id=398 | 398 admete || 1894 bn || admete, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=399 | 399 persephone || 1895 bp || persephone,
greek goddess ||  |-id=400 | 400 ducrosa || 1895 bu || j. ducros, french mechanician at nice observatory ||  |}  401-500   |- | 401 ottilia || 1895 bt || ottilia, character in german folklore ||  |-id=402 | 402 chloe || 1895 bw || chloe, shepherdess from greek mythology ||  |-id=403 | 403 cyane || 1895 bx || cyane, a nymph from greek mythology ||  |-id=404 | 404 arsinoe || 1895 by || arsinoe, mother of orestes from greek mythology ||  |-id=405 | 405 thia || 1895 bz || theia, one of the twelve titans from greek mythology ||  |-id=406 | 406 erna || 1895 cb || erna bidschof, granddaughter of austrian astronomer johann palisa (1848-1925) ||  |-id=407 | 407 arachne || 1895 cc || arachne, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=408 | 408 fama || 1895 cd || pheme (fama), roman goddess ||  |-id=409 | 409 aspasia || 1895 ce || aspasia (c. 470-400 bc), mistress of pericles, greek statesman and general of athens during its golden age ||  |-id=410 | 410 chloris || 1896 ch || chloris, greek goddess ||  |-id=411 | 411 xanthe || 1896 cj || xanthe, an oceanid (sea nymph) from greek mythology. the numerous oceanids are the daughters of oceanus and tethys (titans). ||  |-id=412 | 412 elisabetha || 1896 ck || elise wolf (1840-1924), mother of the discoverer max wolf ||  |-id=413 | 413 edburga || 1896 cl || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=414 | 414 liriope || 1896 cn || liriope, mother of narcissus from greek mythology ||  |-id=415 | 415 palatia || 1896 co || the electorate of the palatinate, region of germany ||  |-id=416 | 416 vaticana || 1896 cs || vatican hill, rome ||  |-id=417 | 417 suevia || 1896 ct || suevia, a fraternity of heidelberg university ||  |-id=418 | 418 alemannia || 1896 cv || alemannia, a fraternity of heidelberg university ||  |-id=419 | 419 aurelia || 1896 cw || unknown origin of name ||
|-id=420 | 420 bertholda || 1896 cy || berthold i of zahringen (c. 1000-1078), margrave of baden ||  |-id=421 | 421 zahringia || 1896 cz || the zahringen family of baden ||  |-id=422 | 422 berolina || 1896 da || berolina, latin name for the city of berlin, germany ||  |-id=423 | 423 diotima || 1896 db || diotima of mantinea, greek teacher of socrates ||  |-id=424 | 424 gratia || 1896 df || the graces, roman mythology ||  |-id=425 | 425 cornelia || 1896 dc || cornelia africana, daughter of scipio africanus ||  |-id=426 | 426 hippo || 1897 dh || hippo regius, now annaba, ancient town in algeria ||  |-id=427 | 427 galene || 1897 dj || galene, a nereid (sea nymph) from greek mythology, one of the 50 daughters of nereus and doris. ||  |-id=428 | 428 monachia || 1897 dk || monachia, latin name for the german city of munich ||  |-id=429 | 429 lotis || 1897 dl || lotis, a nymph in greek mythology ||  |-id=430 | 430 hybris || 1897 dm || hubris, greek goddess ||  |-id=431 | 431 nephele || 1897 dn || nephele, a nymph in greek mythology ||  |-id=432 | 432 pythia || 1897 do || the pythia, greek prophetess ||  |-id=433 | 433 eros || 1898 dq || eros, greek god ||  |-id=434 | 434 hungaria || 1898 dr || latin for hungary, a country in central europe ||  |-id=435 | 435 ella || 1898 ds || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=436 | 436 patricia || 1898 dt || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=437 | 437 rhodia || 1898 dp || rhodia, an oceanid (sea nymph) from greek mythology ||  |-id=438 | 438 zeuxo || 1898 du || zeuxo, an oceanid in greek mythology ||  |-id=439 | 439 ohio || 1898 eb || ohio, u.s. state and river ||  |-id=440 | 440 theodora || 1898 ec || theodora, daughter of julius f.
stone, benefactor and time trustee of the ohio state university ||  |-id=441 | 441 bathilde || 1898 ed || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=442 | 442 eichsfeldia || 1899 ee || the region of eichsfeld, located in lower saxony, germany ||  |-id=443 | 443 photographica || 1899 ef || photography, the method first used by max wolf (1863-1932) to discover asteroids ||  |-id=444 | 444 gyptis || 1899 el || gyptis, wife of protis, founder of marseille, france ||  |-id=445 | 445 edna || 1899 ex || edna, wife of julius f. stone, benefactor and time trustee of the ohio state university ||  |-id=446 | 446 aeternitas || 1899 er || aeternitas, roman god ||  |-id=447 | 447 valentine || 1899 es || valentine, daughter of baron albert von rothschild (1844-1911), benefactor ||  |-id=448 | 448 natalie || 1899 et || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=449 | 449 hamburga || 1899 eu || the city of hamburg, germany ||  |-id=450 | 450 brigitta || 1899 ev || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=451 | 451 patientia || 1899 ey || patientia, latin for patience ||  |-id=452 | 452 hamiltonia || 1899 fd || mount hamilton, california ||  |-id=453 | 453 tea || 1900 fa || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=454 | 454 mathesis || 1900 fc || greek for (the act of) learning, chosen to mark the 300th anniversary of the mathematische gesellschaft in hamburg founded in 1690 ||  |-id=455 | 455 bruchsalia || 1900 fg || bruchsal, germany ||  |-id=456 | 456 abnoba || 1900 fh || abnoba, celtic goddess ||  |-id=457 | 457 alleghenia || 1900 fj || allegheny observatory, pennsylvania, united states ||  |-id=458 | 458 hercynia || 1900 fk || latin name for a forested region of germany ||  |-id=459 | 459 signe || 1900 fm || signy, sister of sigmund in norse mythology ||  |-id=460 | 460 scania || 1900 fn || skane (scania), region of sweden ||  |-id=461 | 461 saskia || 1900
fp || saskia van uylenburgh (1612-1642), wife of rembrandt ||  |-id=462 | 462 eriphyla || 1900 fq || eriphyle, mythological greek woman ||  |-id=463 | 463 lola || 1900 fs || lola, character in cavalleria rusticana, opera by italian composer pietro mascagni (1863-1945) ||  |-id=464 | 464 megaira || 1901 fv || megaira, one of the greek erinyes (furies) ||  |-id=465 | 465 alekto || 1901 fw || alecto, one of the greek erinyes (furies) ||  |-id=466 | 466 tisiphone || 1901 fx || tisiphone, one of the greek erinyes (furies) ||  |-id=467 | 467 laura || 1901 fy || laura, character in la gioconda, opera by italian composer amilcare ponchielli (1834-1886). alternatively, it may have been named after the character in sonnets to laura by petrarch (1304-1374) ||  |-id=468 | 468 lina || 1901 fz || lina, a maidservant of the discoverer max wolf (1863-1932) ||  |-id=469 | 469 argentina || 1901 ge || argentina, country in south america ||  |-id=470 | 470 kilia || 1901 gj || latin for kiel, germany ||  |-id=471 | 471 papagena || 1901 gn || papagena, a character in mozart's opera the magic flute ||  |-id=472 | 472 roma || 1901 gp || the city of rome, italy ||  |-id=473 | 473 nolli || 1901 gc || nolli is a nickname for a small child used in max wolf's family (discoverer) ||  |-id=474 | 474 prudentia || 1901 gd || prudentia, roman allegorical figure ||  |-id=475 | 475 ocllo || 1901 hn || ocllo, inca queen, named after the wife of one of the four sons of pirua wiracocha, creator god of civilization in inca mythology ||  |-id=476 | 476 hedwig || 1901 gq || hedwig, wife of swedish-danish astronomer elis stromgren (1870-1947) ||  |-id=477 | 477 italia || 1901 gr || italy, country ||  |-id=478 | 478 tergeste || 1901 gu || latin name
for trieste, italy ||  |-id=479 | 479 caprera || 1901 hj || caprera, island in sardinia, italy ||  |-id=480 | 480 hansa || 1901 gl || the hanseatic league, a medieval confederation of merchant guilds and market towns in northwestern and central europe ||  |-id=481 | 481 emita || 1902 hp || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=482 | 482 petrina || 1902 ht || feminine form of petrus, latin for peter, one of the discoverer's dogs (max wolf) ||  |-id=483 | 483 seppina || 1902 hu || sepp, name of one of the discoverer's dogs (max wolf) ||  |-id=484 | 484 pittsburghia || 1902 hx || pittsburgh, pennsylvania, united states ||  |-id=485 | 485 genua || 1902 hz || latin name for the city of genova, in liguria, italy ||  |-id=486 | 486 cremona || 1902 jb || the city of cremona in lombardy, italy ||  |-id=487 | 487 venetia || 1902 jl || the italian veneto region with its capital venice ||  |-id=488 | 488 kreusa || 1902 jg || creusa, various greek figures ||  |-id=489 | 489 comacina || 1902 jm || comacina, island in lake como, italy ||  |-id=490 | 490 veritas || 1902 jp || veritas, roman goddess ||  |-id=491 | 491 carina || 1902 jq || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=492 | 492 gismonda || 1902 jr || gismonda, a figure in the decameron, a collection of novellas by italian giovanni boccaccio (1313-1375). she is the daughter of tancred, prince of salerno. ||  |-id=493 | 493 griseldis || 1902 js || griselda, folk tale heroine ||  |-id=494 | 494 virtus || 1902 jv || virtus, roman god ||  |-id=495 | 495 eulalia || 1902 kg || the grandmother of the discoverer's wife (max wolf) ||  |-id=496 | 496 gryphia || 1902 kh || andreas gryphius, german poet ||  |-id=497 | 497 iva || 1902  || iva shores, daughter of the discoverer's landlord (raymond smith dugan) ||  |-id=
498 | 498 tokio || 1902 ku || the city of tokyo, japan ||  |-id=499 | 499 venusia || 1902 kx || venusia, an alternative name for the swedish island of hven ||  |-id=500 | 500 selinur || 1903 la || selinur, a character in the novel auch einer by german friedrich theodor vischer (1807-1887) ||  |}  501-600   |- | 501 urhixidur || 1903 lb || urhixidur, character in the novel auch einer by german friedrich theodor vischer (1807-1887) ||  |-id=502 | 502 sigune || 1903 lc || sigune, character in the novel auch einer by german friedrich theodor vischer (1807-1887). the name may originate from arthurian legend, where sigune is the cousin of parzival. ||  |-id=503 | 503 evelyn || 1903 lf || evelyn smith dugan, the discoverer's (raymond smith dugan) mother ||  |-id=504 | 504 cora || 1902 lk || cora, from inca mythology. she is the wife of one of the four sons of pirua wiracocha, creator god of inca civilization. also see . ||  |-id=505 | 505 cava || 1902 ll || cava, figure in inca mythology ||  |-id=506 | 506 marion || 1903 ln || marion orcutt, cousin of american discoverer raymond smith dugan (1878-1940) ||  |-id=507 | 507 laodica || 1903 lo || laodice from greek mythology. she is the daughter of hecuba and trojan king priam. ||  |-id=508 | 508 princetonia || 1903 lq || princeton university, new jersey, united states ||  |-id=509 | 509 iolanda || 1903 lr || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=510 | 510 mabella || 1903 lt || mabel loomis todd (1856-1932), american editor and writer. she is the daughter of the mathematician elias loomis, and the wife of astronomer david peck todd (see next entry). ||  |-id=511 | 511 davida || 1903 lu || david peck todd (1855-1939), american astronomer and husband to mabel loomis todd (see previous entry). ||  |-id=512 | 512 taurinensis || 1903 lv || the city of turin in northern italy. its latin name is taur
inum. ||  |-id=513 | 513 centesima || 1903 ly || centesima, for the 100th discovery of an asteroid made by max wolf (1863-1932) ||  |-id=514 | 514 armida || 1903 mb || armida, fictional character in the epic poem jerusalem delivered by italian baroque poet torquato tasso (1544-1595). the story of armida and rinaldo has also been the basis of several the operas including armide by german bohemian christoph willibald gluck (1714-1787), also see . ||  |-id=515 | 515 athalia || 1903 me || athalia, biblical queen of judah (2 kings ix) ||  |-id=516 | 516 amherstia || 1903 mg || amherst college in massachusetts, united states, the alma mater of the discoverer raymond smith dugan (1878-1940) ||  |-id=517 | 517 edith || 1903 mh || edith dugan eveleth, sister of american discoverer raymond smith dugan ||  |-id=518 | 518 halawe || 1903 mo || halva (halawe), a type of arabic sweetmeat, a favourite of the discoverer raymond smith dugan ||  |-id=519 | 519 sylvania || 1903 mp || from "sylvan" (forest, wood), for the discoverer's (raymond smith dugan) passion of tramping through the forests since he was a small boy ||  |-id=520 | 520 franziska || 1903 mv || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=521 | 521 brixia || 1904 nb || the italian city of brescia (brixia in latin), birthplace of astronomer emilio bianchi, who computed the asteroid's orbit. ||  |-id=522 | 522 helga || 1904 nc || ([h] only says "named by lt. th. lassen, orbit computer"; see an 169, 363. note that computer does not refer to a personal computer, i.e. a machine, but rather to a person actually doing the necessary calculations) ||  |-id=523 | 523 ada || 1904 nd || ada helme, school friend and neighbour of the discoverer ||  |-id=524 | 524 fidelio || 1904 nn || leonora's pseudonym in beethoven's only opera fidelio ||  |-id=525 | 525 adelaide || 1908 eka || queen adelaide, consort to king william iv ([h]
says nothing) this name was first borne by a max wolf discovery until it was identified as 1171 rusthawelia; the name was then reassigned to this j. h. metcalf discovery ||  |-id=526 | 526 jena || 1904 nq || jena, germany, on the occasion of a meeting of the astronomische gesellschaft there in 1905 (see an 172, 287) ||  |-id=527 | 527 euryanthe || 1904 nr || the main character in the opera euryanthe by german composer carl maria von weber (1786-1826) ||  |-id=528 | 528 rezia || 1904 ns || rezia, a character in the opera oberon by carl maria von weber (1786-1826) ||  |-id=529 | 529 preziosa || 1904 nt || character in the short story la gitanilla by miguel de cervantes (1547-1616) ||  |-id=530 | 530 turandot || 1904 nv || turandot, character in the opera turandot by giacomo puccini (1858-1924) ||  |-id=531 | 531 zerlina || 1904 nw || zerlina, character in the opera don giovanni by mozart (1756-1791) ||  |-id=532 | 532 herculina || 1904 ny || feminine form of hercules, roman demigod ([h] simply says "named by prof. elia millosevich, observatory of the collegio romano" an 167, 45) ||  |-id=533 | 533 sara || 1904 nz || sara, a friend of the discoverer raymond smith dugan (1878-1940) ||  |-id=534 | 534 nassovia || 1904 oa || the nassau hall is the oldest building at princeton university in new jersey, united states. ||  |-id=535 | 535 montague || 1904 oc || the town of montague, massachusetts, the birthplace of the american discoverer raymond smith dugan (1878-1940) ||  |-id=536 | 536 merapi || 1904 of || mount merapi on the island of sumatra, indonesia, site of several expeditions to observe the solar eclipse of 17 may 1901 ||  |-id=537 | 537 pauly || 1904 og || max pauly, german businessman (manager of a sugar factory) and amateur optician whom ernst abbe appointed as head of the newly established astronomy division of zeiss to design and produce telescope lenses; he ground the 10-inch lens of the bruce double
-astrograph, the "jewel" of the heidelberg observatory ||  |-id=538 | 538 friederike || 1904 ok || friederike, a friend of the discoverer paul gotz (1883-1962) from heidelberg, germany ||  |-id=539 | 539 pamina || 1904 ol || pamina, a character in the opera the magic flute by mozart (1756-1791) ||  |-id=540 | 540 rosamunde || 1904 on || the main character in the play rosamunde by helmina von chezy, best remembered for its incidental music composed by schubert (1797-1828) ||  |-id=541 | 541 deborah || 1904 oo || deborah, biblical prophetess who helped to free the israelites. she is mentioned in the book of judges. ||  |-id=542 | 542 susanna || 1904 oq || susanna, a friend of the co-discoverer paul gotz (1883-1962) from heidelberg, germany ||  |-id=543 | 543 charlotte || 1904 ot || charlotte, a friend of the discoverer paul gotz (1883-1962) from heidelberg, germany ||  |-id=544 | 544 jetta || 1904 ou || jetta, a legendary german soothsayer. "jettenbuhl" is the site where jetta was said to have lived and on which the medieval heidelberg castle was later built. ||  |-id=545 | 545 messalina || 1904 oy || messalina (c. 17/20-48), the third wife of roman emperor claudius ||  |-id=546 | 546 herodias || 1904 pa || herodias (c. 15 bc - 39 ad), princess of the herodian dynasty of judaea during the time of the roman empire. she was a consort of herod antipas, the 1st-century ruler of galilee and perea. in the gospels, herodias plays a major role in the execution of john the baptist. ||  |-id=547 | 547 praxedis || 1904 pb || praxedis, a character in the novel ekkehard by german joseph victor von scheffel (1826-1886) ||  |-id=548 | 548 kressida || 1904 pc || cressida, trojan princess, character of shakespeare's play troilus and cressida (based on the medieval legend of troy, as opposed to the classical) ||  |-id=549 | 549 jessonda
|| 1904 pk || jessonda, a character in the opera jessonda by german composer louis spohr (1784-1859) ||  |-id=550 | 550 senta || 1904 pl || senta, a character in the opera the flying dutchman by german composer richard wagner (1813-1883) ||  |-id=551 | 551 ortrud || 1904 pm || ortrud, a character in the opera lohengrin by richard wagner, where she is the wife of ferederick of telramund. ||  |-id=552 | 552 sigelinde || 1904 po || sigelinde, a character in the opera die walkure by richard wagner (1813-1883) ||  |-id=553 | 553 kundry || 1904 pp || kundry, a character in the opera parsifal by richard wagner, who is both sorceress and mortal woman. the opera is based on the epic by wolfram von eschenbach. ||  |-id=554 | 554 peraga || 1905 ps || the village of vigonza (peraga) in northern italy, where the family of astronomer g. abetti, who computed the asteroid's orbit, owned country villa. ||  |-id=555 | 555 norma || 1905 pt || the main character in the opera norma by italian composer vincenzo bellini (1801-1835) ||  |-id=556 | 556 phyllis || 1905 pw || phyllis, from greek mythology. the thracian princess commits suicide when she realizes that her husband, king demophon of athens, will not return to her. ||  |-id=557 | 557 violetta || 1905 py || violetta, the frivolous woman and leading character in the opera la traviata by giuseppe verdi. the opera is based on the novel la dame aux camelias by alexandre dumas fils (1824-1895) ||  |-id=558 | 558 carmen || 1905 qb || the main character in the opera carmen by frech composer georges bizet (1838-1875). the opera is based on the novella carmen by prosper merimee (1803-1870). ||  |-id=559 | 559 nanon || 1905 qd || the operetta nanon, die wirtin vom goldenen lamm by german-austrian composer richard genee (1823-1895) ||   |-id=560 | 560 delila || 1905 qf || delilah, biblical character, set to music by saint-saens in his
samson et dalila ||  |-id=561 | 561 ingwelde || 1905 qg || ingwelde, opera by max von schillings (?) ([h] simply says « german feminine first name ») ||  |-id=562 | 562 salome || 1905 qh || salome, biblical daughter of herod the great, character of richard strauss' opera salome, in turn based on oscar wilde's salome play ||  |-id=563 | 563 suleika || 1905 qk || suleika, character in the philosophical novel thus spoke zarathustra by friedrich nietzsche (1844-1900). suleika and dudu (see entry below) are mentioned in chapter "among the daughters of the wilderness" (, link) and are the novel's only feminine names. ||  |-id=564 | 564 dudu || 1905 qm || dudu, character in the philosophical novel thus spoke zarathustra by friedrich nietzsche (1844-1900). dudu and suleika (see entry above) are mentioned in chapter "among the daughters of the wilderness" (, link) and are the novel's only feminine names. ||  |-id=565 | 565 marbachia || 1905 qn || the town of marbach in hesse, germany ||  |-id=566 | 566 stereoskopia || 1905 qo || the blink comparator, formerly known as "stereo-comparator", is an apparatus used to find differences between two photographs of the night sky by rapidly "blinking" back and forth between the two. in 1902, this asteroid was the first to be discovered by this method using photographic plates taken in 1899. the asteroid was named by the inventor of the blink comparator, carl pulfrich (1858-1927). ||  |-id=567 | 567 eleutheria || 1905 qp || eleutheria, the goddess of liberty in greek mythology. the counterpart of eleutheria among the roman gods is libertas. ||  |-id=568 | 568 cheruskia || 1905 qs || cheruskia, student fraternity at heidelberg university, named in turn after the cherusci, an early german tribe ||  |-id=569 | 569 misa || 1905 qt || |misa, from greek mythology. she is the mother of dionysus (bacchus) and a divinity in orphism, a mystic religion from the ancient greek and hellenistic
world. ||  |-id=570 | 570 kythera || 1905 qx || kythira, greek island (first name in a long list published in 1914) ||   |-id=571 | 571 dulcinea || 1905 qz || dulcinea, a character in the novel don quixote by miguel de cervantes (1547-1616) ||  |-id=572 | 572 rebekka || 1905 rb || rebekka, a "bourgeois daughter" from heidelberg, germany. the name was given by the discoverer paul gotz and may be inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation which contains the letters "rb". ||   |-id=573 | 573 recha || 1905 rc || recha, a character in the play nathan der weise by gotthold ephraim lessing (1729-1781). the name may be inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation which contains the letters "rc". ||  |-id=574 | 574 reginhild || 1905 rd || unknown origin of name. the choice for the german feminine first name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "rd". ||  |-id=575 | 575 renate || 1905 re || unknown origin of name; the name may be inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "re". ||  |-id=576 | 576 emanuela || 1905 rf || emanuela, a friend of the discoverer paul gotz (1883-1962) ||  |-id=577 | 577 rhea || 1905 rh || rhea, from greek mythology. she is a titan of the first generation and known as "the mother of gods". the name may be inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "rh". ||  |-id=578 | 578 happelia || 1905 rz || carl happel (1820-1914), a german painter and benefactor of the heidelberg observatory, where the happel laboratory is named after him. ||  |-id=579 | 579 sidonia || 1905 sd || sidonia, character in the epic poem jerusalem delivered by italian baroque poet torquato tasso (1544-1595). the character has also been adopted in the opera armide by german bohemian christoph willibald gluck (1714-1787), which is based on the poem. also see . the name sidonia may be inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "sd". ||  |-id=580 | 580 selene ||
1905 se || selene, lunar goddess from greek mythology ||  |-id=581 | 581 tauntonia || 1905 sh || the city of taunton, massachusetts, in the united states, where this asteroid was discovered by joel hastings metcalf ||  |-id=582 | 582 olympia || 1906 so || olympia, greece ||  |-id=583 | 583 klotilde || 1905 sp || klotilde, daughter of austrian astronomer edmund weiss (1837-1917), director of the vienna observatory where this asteroid was discovered by johann palisa. it was named by klotilde's mother, adelinde weiss (nee fenzel); also see . ||  |-id=584 | 584 semiramis || 1906 sy || semiramis, assyrian queen ||  |-id=585 | 585 bilkis || 1906 ta || the biblical queen of sheba who visited king solomon. in the qur'an, she is known as "bilqis", "balqis" or "balkis". ||  |-id=586 | 586 thekla || 1906 tc || thecla (born 30 ad), a saint of the early christian church ||  |-id=587 | 587 hypsipyle || 1906 tf || hypsipyle, mythological greek queen of lemnos, mother of twins by jason ||  |-id=588 | 588 achilles || 1906 tg || achilles, the greatest warrior in greek mythology ||  |-id=589 | 589 croatia || 1906 tm || the country of croatia in southeastern europe ||  |-id=590 | 590 tomyris || 1906 to || tomyris, scythian queen of the massagetae ||  |-id=591 | 591 irmgard || 1906 tp || unknown origin of name. irmgard is a common feminine first name in german. ||  |-id=592 | 592 bathseba || 1906 ts || bathsheba, wife of urias, mother of solomon ||  |-id=593 | 593 titania || 1906 tt || titania, folkloric queen of the fairies (name inspired by the provisional designation letters: titania) ||  |-id=594 | 594 mireille || 1906 tw || mireio, a narrative poem by french poet frederic mistral (1830-1914), the source of inspiration for the opera mireille by the french composer charles gounod ||  |-id=595 | 595 polyxena || 1906 tz || poly
xena, from greek mythology. the trojan princess is the daughter of priam and hecuba. ||  |-id=596 | 596 scheila || 1906 ua || an english student at the university of heidelberg, a friend of the discoverer ||  |-id=597 | 597 bandusia || 1906 ub || spring of bandusia, a fountain near polezzo in italy ||  |-id=598 | 598 octavia || 1906 uc || claudia octavia (c. 39-62), roman empress, stepsister and first wife of nero ||  |-id=599 | 599 luisa || 1906 uj || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=600 | 600 musa || 1906 um || the muses, the nine inspirational goddesses of poetry, science, and the arts in greek mythology ||  |}  601-700   |- | 601 nerthus || 1906 un || nerthus, germanic/scandinavian earth mother goddess ||  |-id=602 | 602 marianna || 1906 te || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=603 | 603 timandra || 1906 tj || timandra, mythological greek woman, sister of helen of troy, mother of evander ||  |-id=604 | 604 tekmessa || 1906 tk || tecmessa, mythological greek woman, daughter of the phrygian prince teubrantes, captive of ajax, by whom she had a son, eurysaces ||  |-id=605 | 605 juvisia || 1906 uu || the city of juvisy-sur-orge, france, location of the camille flammarion observatory ||  |-id=606 | 606 brangane || 1906 vb || brangane, character in the opera tristan und isolde by richard wagner. she is a maid servant of isolda. ||  |-id=607 | 607 jenny || 1906 vc || jenny adolfine kessler, friend of the discoverer august kopff, on the occasion of her engagement (also see next entry) ||  |-id=608 | 608 adolfine || 1906 vd || jenny adolfine kessler, friend of the discoverer august kopff, on the occasion of her engagement (also see previous entry) ||  |-id=609 | 609 fulvia || 1906 vf || fulvia (c. 83 bc - 40 bc),  aristocratic roman woman and wife of mark antony ||  |-id=610 | 610 valeska || 1906 vk || unknown origin of name.
the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "vk". ||  |-id=611 | 611 valeria || 1906 vl || unknown origin of name. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "vl" ||  |-id=612 | 612 veronika || 1906 vn || unknown origin of name. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "vn" ||  |-id=613 | 613 ginevra || 1906 vp || guinevere, wife of king arthur from arthurian legend (possibly) ||  |-id=614 | 614 pia || 1906 vq || pia observatory (), in trieste, italy, the private observatory of johann nepomuk krieger (1865-1902), german amateur astronomer and selenographer ||  |-id=615 | 615 roswitha || 1906 vr || hrotsvitha of gandersheim (c. 935-973), german poet ||  |-id=616 | 616 elly || 1906 vt || elly boehm, wife of german mathematician karl boehm (1873-1958; bio-de) ||  |-id=617 | 617 patroclus || 1906 vy || patroclus, warrior from greek mythology, close friend of achilles and killed by hector. the satellite of this jupiter trojan, (617) patroclus i menoetius, was named after menoetius, father of patroclus. ||  |-id=618 | 618 elfriede || 1906 vz || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=619 | 619 triberga || 1906 wc || the town of triberg im schwarzwald, southern germany ||  |-id=620 | 620 drakonia || 1906 we || drake university, iowa, us, where the orbit computers worked ||  |-id=621 | 621 werdandi || 1906 wj || verdandi, one of the norns in norse mythology ||  |-id=622 | 622 esther || 1906 wp || esther, biblical heroine described in the book of esther as a jewish queen of the persian king ahasuerus ||  |-id=623 | 623 chimaera || 1907 xj || mount chimaera of lycia, inspiration for the chimera, mythological greek monster ||  |-id=624 | 624 hektor
|| 1907 xm || hector, trojan hero from greek mythology ||  |-id=625 | 625 xenia || 1907 xn || unknown origin of name. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "xn" ||  |-id=626 | 626 notburga || 1907 xo || saint notburga (c. 1265-1313), holy character of the neckar valley, the discovery site ||  |-id=627 | 627 charis || 1907 xs || charis, one of the charites (graces), the goddesses of charm, beauty, creativity, and fertility in greek mythology. they are the daughters of zeus and eurynome and include euphrosyne, thalia and aglaea (aglaja). ||  |-id=628 | 628 christine || 1907 xt || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=629 | 629 bernardina || 1907 xu || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=630 | 630 euphemia || 1907 xw || saint euphemia (died 303 ad), whose feast day is september 16. the name also means a good omen. ||  |-id=631 | 631 philippina || 1907 yj || philipp kessler, friend of the discoverer, on the occasion of his engagement. he is a friend of the astronomer august kopff who discovered this asteroid (see also 634). ||  |-id=632 | 632 pyrrha || 1907 yx || pyrrha, wife of deukalion, greek mythological woman ||  |-id=633 | 633 zelima || 1907 zm || unknown origin of name. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "zm" ||  |-id=634 | 634 ute || 1907 zn || ute kessler, on the occasion of her engagement. she is a friend of the astronomer august kopff who discovered this asteroid (see also 631). ||  |-id=635 | 635 vundtia || 1907 zs || wilhelm wundt (1832-1920), german psychologist ||  |-id=636 | 636 erika || 1907 xp || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=637 | 637 chrysothemis || 1907 ye || chrysothemis, mythological daughter of agamemnon, character in sophocles' electra ||
|-id=638 | 638 moira || 1907 zq || moirai (moira), greek goddess of fate ||  |-id=639 | 639 latona || 1907 zt || roman goddess latona, daughter of ceo titan, loved by jupiter, and mother of apollo and diana ||  |-id=640 | 640 brambilla || 1907 zw || prinzessin brambilla, novel written by e. t. a. hoffmann (1776-1822), and set to music by walter braunfels (1882-1954) ||  |-id=641 | 641 agnes || 1907 zx || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=642 | 642 clara || 1907 zy || clara, one of the discoverer's housekeepers (max wolf) ||  |-id=643 | 643 scheherezade || 1907 zz || scheherazade, legendary arabic storyteller in 1001 nights ||  |-id=644 | 644 cosima || 1907 aa || cosima wagner (1837-1930), daughter of hungarian pianist and composer franz liszt, and second wife of german composer richard wagner ||  |-id=645 | 645 agrippina || 1907 ag || agrippina the elder (14 bc-33) and her daughter agrippina the younger (15-59), two roman noblewomen. former was the wife of general germanicus and mother of emperor caligula, while the latter was the mother of emperor nero. ||  |-id=646 | 646 kastalia || 1907 ac || castalia, greek nymph whom apollo transformed into a fountain at delphi, at the base of mount parnassos ||  |-id=647 | 647 adelgunde || 1907 ad || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=648 | 648 pippa || 1907 ae || pippa, main character in the novel and pippa dances () by german writer gerhardt hauptmann (1862-1946) ||  |-id=649 | 649 josefa || 1907 af || unknown origin of name. a feminine first name in german. ||  |-id=650 | 650 amalasuntha || 1907 am || amalasuntha, ostrogoth queen, daughter of theoderich ||  |-id=651 | 651 antikleia || 1907 an || anticlea, from greek mythology. she is the wife of laertes and mother of odysseus. ||  |-id=65
2 | 652 jubilatrix || 1907 au || the 60-year jubilee of emperor franz joseph of austria, during which this minor planet was discovered ||  |-id=653 | 653 berenike || 1907 bk || berenice ii of egypt (c. 267-221 bc), queen of cyrene and egypt ||  |-id=654 | 654 zelinda || 1908 bm || zelinda dini, sister of italian mathematician ulisse dini (1845-1918). the name was proposed by astronomer elia millosevich, a good friend of dini. ||  |-id=655 | 655 briseis || 1907 bf || briseis, mythological trojan slave ||  |-id=656 | 656 beagle || 1908 bu || hms beagle, darwin's ship ||  |-id=657 | 657 gunlod || 1908 bv || gunnlod, mythological norse giantess ||  |-id=658 | 658 asteria || 1908 bw || asteria, various greek figures ||  |-id=659 | 659 nestor || 1908 cs || nestor, mythological greek king ||  |-id=660 | 660 crescentia || 1908 cc || heroine of a german legend, a variant of the genevieve of brabant medieval story, found in the historie von der geduldigen konigin crescentia, itself based on a 12th-century poem in the kaiserchronik ||  |-id=661 | 661 cloelia || 1908 cl || cloelia, legendary roman woman ||  |-id=662 | 662 newtonia || 1908 cw || previously believed to refer to isaac newton, british physicist; but later correctly identified as being named after newton, massachusetts (isaac newton is now honored by asteroid ) ||  |-id=663 | 663 gerlinde || 1908 dg || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=664 | 664 judith || 1908 dh || biblical heroine dramatised in friedrich hebbel's play judith ||  |-id=665 | 665 sabine || 1908 dk || unknown origin of name. ||  |-id=666 | 666 desdemona || 1908 dm || desdemona, character in shakespeare's othello. the name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "dm". ||  |-id=667 | 667 denise || 1908 dn || unknown origin of name. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "dn". ||
|-id=668 | 668 dora || 1908 do || dora, a friend of the wife of astronomer august kopff, who discovered this asteroid. the name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "do". ||  |-id=669 | 669 kypria || 1908 dq || kypria, poem sometimes attributed to homer, which serves as an introduction to the iliad ||  |-id=670 | 670 ottegebe || 1908 dr || character in gerhardt hauptmann's play der arme heinrich ||  |-id=671 | 671 carnegia || 1908 dv || the carnegie institution of washington, dc, founded by andrew carnegie, scottish-born american businessman and philanthropist ||  |-id=672 | 672 astarte || 1908 dy || 'ashtart, phoenician goddess of love and fertility ||  |-id=673 | 673 edda || 1908 ea || the norse edda, a collection of myths ||  |-id=674 | 674 rachele || 1908 ep || wife of italian astronomer emilio bianchi, the orbit computer ||  |-id=675 | 675 ludmilla || 1908 du || character in the opera ruslan and lyudmila by russian composer mikhail glinka (1804-1857) ||  |-id=676 | 676 melitta || 1909 fn || attic form of the greek name melissa, nymph changed into a bee (and also an allusion to the discoverer's name, melotte) ||  |-id=677 | 677 aaltje || 1909 fr || aaltje noordewier-reddingius (1868-1949), a dutch classical soprano ||  |-id=678 | 678 fredegundis || 1909 fs || fredegundis, an opera based on the life of fredegund (a.k.a. fredegunda, fredegundis, fredigundis, fredegonde, queen consort of chilperic i, the merovingian frankish king of soissons), begun by the french composer ernest guirand and completed by saint-saens ||  |-id=679 | 679 pax || 1909 fy || pax, roman goddess of peace. her greek equivalent is eirene. ||  |-id=680 | 680 genoveva || 1909 gw || main character in friedrich hebbel's play genoveva ||  |-id=681 | 681 gorgo || 1909
gz || gorgon () one of the three sisters - euryale, stheno, and medusa - who had hair made of living, venomous snakes and a gaze that could turn one to stone. paul herget reports that ingrid van houten-groeneveld and  thought the name refers to gorgo (a.k.a. gorgos, gorgus), king of salamine (salamis, cyprus) in the 5th century b.c., who accompanied xerxes in greece. ||  |-id=682 | 682 hagar || 1909 ha || hagar, biblical woman in the book of genesis ||  |-id=683 | 683 lanzia || 1909 hc || karl lanz (1873-1921; bio-de), a german mechanical engineer and industrialist who provided the funds for the re-establishment of the heidelberg academy of sciences and humanities ||  |-id=684 | 684 hildburg || 1909 hd || unknown origin of name. the choice for this german feminine first name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "hd". ||  |-id=685 | 685 hermia || 1909 he || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=686 | 686 gersuind || 1909 hf || main character in the play gersuind by gerhart hauptmann ||  |-id=687 | 687 tinette || 1909 hg || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=688 | 688 melanie || 1909 hh || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=689 | 689 zita || 1909 hj || princess zita of bourbon-parma, wife of emperor charles i of austria ||  |-id=690 | 690 wratislavia || 1909 hz || latin for breslau (wrocław), now in poland ||  |-id=691 | 691 lehigh || 1909 jg || lehigh university, us, where the computer (j. b. reynolds) was ||  |-id=692 | 692 hippodamia || 1901 hd || hippodamia, queen of pisa from greek mythology. she is the wife of pelops and ancestor to king agamemnon. the choice for this name may have been inspired by the asteroid's provisional designation, containing the letters "hd". ||  |-id=693 | 693 zerbinetta || 1909 hn || character in richard strauss' opera ariadne auf naxos ||  |-id=6
94 | 694 ekard || 1909 ja || drake university, us ('drake' backwards), where the orbit computers (s. b. nicholson and his wife) were ||  |-id=695 | 695 bella || 1909 jb || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=696 | 696 leonora || 1910 jj || mary leonora snow, wife of the orbit computer, arthur snow ||  |-id=697 | 697 galilea || 1910 jo || galileo galilei (1564-1642), on the occasion of the 300th anniversary of his discovery of the galilean moons ||  |-id=698 | 698 ernestina || 1910 jx || ernst wolf, son of the discoverer max wolf (1863-1932) ||  |-id=699 | 699 hela || 1910 kd || hel, norse goddess of the dead ||  |-id=700 | 700 auravictrix || 1910 ke || latin for 'victory against the wind' (named for the first schutte-lanz zeppelin flights in 1911) ||  |}  701-800   |- | 701 oriola || 1910 kn || the old world golden oriole, oriolus oriolus ||  |-id=702 | 702 alauda || 1910 kq || the bird genus alauda (larks) ||  |-id=703 | 703 noemi || 1910 kt || valentine noemi von rothschild, wife of baron sigismund von springer (presumed). alternatively, noemi is a biblical heroine from the book of ruth (unsourced) ||  |-id=704 | 704 interamnia || 1910 ku || latin for city of terni (teramo) in italy, birthplace of the discoverer vincenzo cerulli. several roman towns were called interamnia, meaning "in between two rivers". ||  |-id=705 | 705 erminia || 1910 kv || the comic operetta erminie, by edward jacobowsky ||  |-id=706 | 706 hirundo || 1910 kx || the bird genus hirundo (swallows) ||  |-id=707 | 707 steina || 1910 ld || mr. stein, a benefactor of the breslau observatory  in former german empire, now poland ||  |-id=708 | 708 raphaela || 1911 lj || raphael bischoffsheim (1823-1906), french banker and philanthropist, founder of the nice observatory ||  |-id=709 | 709 fringilla || 1911 lk ||
the bird genus fringilla (finches) ||  |-id=710 | 710 gertrud || 1911 lm || gertrud rheden, daughter of austrian astronomer joseph rheden and granddaughter of the discoverer johann palisa ||  |-id=711 | 711 marmulla || 1911 ln || marble, the small spherical toy. the name is possibly derived from the german medieval word "marmul", according to astronomer paul wild. the asteroid's name was originally spelt "marmula". ||  |-id=712 | 712 boliviana || 1911 lo || simon bolivar (1783-1830), south american revolutionary ||  |-id=713 | 713 luscinia || 1911 ls || the bird genus luscinia (nightingales) ||  |-id=714 | 714 ulula || 1911 lw || the bird genus ulula (owls) ||  |-id=715 | 715 transvaalia || 1911 lx || the province of transvaal in south africa. this is the first numbered minor planet discovered in africa. ||  |-id=716 | 716 berkeley || 1911 md || university of california in berkeley ||  |-id=717 | 717 wisibada || 1911 mj || the german city of wiesbaden, birthplace of the discoverer franz kaiser (1891-1962) ||  |-id=718 | 718 erida || 1911 ms || erida, daughter of american astronomer armin otto leuschner (1868-1953) ||  |-id=719 | 719 albert || 1911 mt || baron albert salomon von rothschild (1844-1911), benefactor of the vienna observatory ||  |-id=720 | 720 bohlinia || 1911 mw || karl petrus theodor bohlin (1860-1939), swedish astronomer, who studied jupiter's perturbations. the name was given on the occasion of his 65th birthday. ||  |-id=721 | 721 tabora || 1911 mz || the tabora, an ocean liner visited during an astronomical conference ||  |-id=722 | 722 frieda || 1911 na || frieda, the daughter of austrian astronomer karl hillebrand (1861-1939; bio-de) ||  |-id=723 | 723 hammonia || 1911 nb || hamburg, germany ||  |-id=724 | 724 hapag || 1911 nc || the hamburg america line (hapag), after the shipping line ||  |-id=725 | 725 amanda || 1911 nd || amanda schorr, wife
of german astronomer richard schorr, see  ||  |-id=726 | 726 joella || 1911 nm || feminine form of joel, for joel hastings metcalf, american unitarian minister and astronomer ||  |-id=727 | 727 nipponia || 1912 nt || japan, where the minor planet was accidentally discovered twice (1900 fe; 1908 cv) by shin hirayama ||  |-id=728 | 728 leonisis || 1912 nu || leo gans (1843-1935; bio-de), german chemist and president of the physical society at frankfurt (), named on the occasion of his 70th birthday. the society's emblem shows the goddess isis, and contributed to the ending of the asteroid's name. ||  |-id=729 | 729 watsonia || 1912 od || james craig watson (1838-1880), canadian-american astronomer ||  |-id=730 | 730 athanasia || 1912 ok || greek for immortality ||  |-id=731 | 731 sorga || 1912 oq || surga, indonesian for "heavens" ||  |-id=732 | 732 tjilaki || 1912 or || tjilaki (cilaki) river and village near malabar, indonesia ||  |-id=733 | 733 mocia || 1912 pf || werner "mok" wolf, son of the german discoverer max wolf ||  |-id=734 | 734 benda || 1912 ph || anna benda, wife of austrian discoverer johann palisa. (in some publications the name has been erroneously attributed to czech composer karel bendl, 1838-1897) ||  |-id=735 | 735 marghanna || 1912 py || margarete vogt, mother of german discoverer heinrich vogt; and hanna, a relative of his ||  |-id=736 | 736 harvard || 1912 pz || harvard university, us ||  |-id=737 | 737 arequipa || 1912 qb || arequipa, peru, where harvard university had an observing station ||  |-id=738 | 738 alagasta || 1913 qo || original name of the german city gau-algesheim (gaualgesheim), native city of discoverer's family (franz kaiser) ||  |-id=739 | 739 mandeville || 1913 qr || mandeville, jamaica ||  |-id=740 | 740 cantabia || 1913 qs || contraction of cantabrigia, latin for cambridge, named in honour of cambridge,
massachusetts and its harvard university ||  |-id=741 | 741 botolphia || 1913 qt || saint botolph, 7th-century founder of the monastery that would become boston, lincolnshire, england ||  |-id=742 | 742 edisona || 1913 qu || thomas edison, american inventor ||  |-id=743 | 743 eugenisis || 1913 qv || eugenisis, for "good creation" (composed greek word: "eu" for good, well and "genesis" for creation). it was named by the discoverer franz kaiser for the birth of his daughter. ||  |-id=744 | 744 aguntina || 1913 qw || aguntum, the ancient roman settlement in the province of noricum, near the austrian town of lienz, tyrol, the birthplace of the discoverer adam massinger (1888-1914) ||  |-id=745 | 745 mauritia || 1913 qx || saint maurice (saint mauritius), patron saint of a church in wiesbaden, germany ||  |-id=746 | 746 marlu || 1913 qy || marie-louise kaiser, a german physician and daughter of the discoverer franz kaiser ||  |-id=747 | 747 winchester || 1913 qz || winchester, massachusetts, united states, location of the taunton observatory () where this asteroid was discovered by joel hastings metcalf ||  |-id=748 | 748 simeisa || 1913 rd || simeis observatory, crimea, ukraine, the discovery site ||  |-id=749 | 749 malzovia || 1913 rf || nikolai sergeevich maltsov (s. i. maltsov), russian amateur astronomer, founder of simeis observatory ||  |-id=750 | 750 oskar || 1913 rg || oskar ruben von rothschild (1888-1909), the youngest son of albert salomon anselm von rothschild ||  |-id=751 | 751 faina || 1913 rk || faina mikhajlovna neujmina, colleague and first wife of the discoverer grigory neujmin (1886-1946) ||  |-id=752 | 752 sulamitis || 1913 rl || sulamith, biblical woman identified with the queen of sheba ||  |-id=753 | 753 tiflis || 1913 rm || the city of tbilisi in georgia, birthplace of the discoverer grigory neujmin (1886-1946) ||  |-id=754 | 754 malabar || 1906 ut || malabar, java, indonesia,
commemorating the dutch-german solar eclipse expedition of 1922 to christmas island ||  |-id=755 | 755 quintilla || 1908 cz || quintilla, feminine italian first name, chosen because no other planet had a name beginning with q so far. ||  |-id=756 | 756 lilliana || 1908 dc || lillian, sister of american astronomer harlow shapley (1885-1972) ||  |-id=757 | 757 portlandia || 1908 ej || the city of portland in maine, united states, where the discoverer, joel hastings metcalf (1866-1925), was a church minister at the time of his death ||  |-id=758 | 758 mancunia || 1912 pe || the city of manchester, united kingdom (by its latin name "mancunia"), native city of the discoverer, harry edwin wood (1881-1946) ||  |-id=759 | 759 vinifera || 1913 sj || vitis vinifera, the wine grape, former means of livelihood of the discoverer's ancestors ||  |-id=760 | 760 massinga || 1913 sl || adam massinger (1888-1914), a german astronomer and discoverer of minor planets at heidelberg observatory who was killed in world war i (src) ||  |-id=761 | 761 brendelia || 1913 so || martin brendel (1862-1939), german astronomer, director of the international planet institute, who chose this minor planet amongst kaiser's unnamed discoveries for its small orbital inclination ||  |-id=762 | 762 pulcova || 1913 sq || pulkovo heights, hills near st. petersburg, site of the oldest russian observatory, pulkovo observatory ||  |-id=763 | 763 cupido || 1913 st || cupid, roman god, because of the minor planet's relative closeness to the sun ||  |-id=764 | 764 gedania || 1913 su || the city of gdansk, poland (formerly free city of danzig) where the discoverer, franz kaiser (1891-1962), was an assistant at the observatory during the early 1920s. ||  |-id=765 | 765 mattiaca || 1913 sv || the city of wiesbaden in germany (by its latin name "mattiacum"), home town of discoverer franz kaiser (1891-1962) ||  |-id=766 | 766 moguntia || 1913 sw || the city of mainz in germany (by its latin name "moguntia"), where the discoverer, franz kaiser, taught at city's johannes gutenberg
university ||  |-id=767 | 767 bondia || 1913 sx || william cranch bond (1789-1859) and his son george phillips bond (1825-1865), both american astronomers and directors of the harvard college observatory in cambridge, massachusetts. ||  |-id=768 | 768 struveana || 1913 sz || friedrich georg wilhelm struve (1793-1864), otto wilhelm struve (1819-1905) and hermann struve (1854-1920), russo-german astronomers, known for their double star studies and directors of the pulkovo and berlin observatory observatories, respectively. ||  |-id=769 | 769 tatjana || 1913 ta || tatjana, a colleague of the discover grigory neujmin at pulkovo observatory in saint petersburg, russia. alternatively, "tatjana" may refer to the heroine in the novel eugene onegin by aleksandr pushkin. ||  |-id=770 | 770 bali || 1913 te || mahabali (bali), king of the daityas in the hindu puranas ||  |-id=771 | 771 libera || 1913 to || a friend of the discoverer (the minor planet was named by his widow) ||  |-id=772 | 772 tanete || 1913 tr || the city of tanete on the island of sulawesi in indonesia ||  |-id=773 | 773 irmintraud || 1913 tv || feminine german first name, common in old myths and legends ||  |-id=774 | 774 armor || 1913 tw || armorica, celtic name for northwest france (brittany and normandy) ||  |-id=775 | 775 lumiere || 1914 tx || the brothers auguste and louis lumiere (1862-1954; 1864-1948), french physicists and pioneers of photography and cinematography ||  |-id=776 | 776 berbericia || 1914 ty || adolf berberich (1861-1920), german astronomer ||  |-id=777 | 777 gutemberga || 1914 tz || johannes gutenberg (c. 1400-1468), printing pioneer ||  |-id=778 | 778 theobalda || 1914 ua || theobald kaiser, father of german discoverer franz kaiser (1891-1962) ||  |-id=779 | 779 nina || 1914 ub || nina nikolaevna neujmina (1877-1956), mathematician and sister of russian discoverer grigory neujmin ||  |-id=780 | 780 armenia || 1914 uc || the country of armenia in the south
caucasus ||  |-id=781 | 781 kartvelia || 1914 uf || kartveli, georgian name for the georgian people ||  |-id=782 | 782 montefiore || 1914 uk || clarice sebag-montefiore, wife of alphonse mayer rothschild (1878-1942), the second son of baron albert von rothschild ||  |-id=783 | 783 nora || 1914 ul || nora, heroine in the play a doll's house by norwegian writer henrik ibsen (1828-1906) ||  |-id=784 | 784 pickeringia || 1914 um || edward charles pickering (1846-1919) and his brother william henry pickering (1858-1938), both american astronomers ||  |-id=785 | 785 zwetana || 1914 un || tsvetana popova, daughter of professor kyrille popoff (also popoff or pophoff) of sofia, bulgaria ||  |-id=786 | 786 bredichina || 1914 uo || fyodor bredikhin (1831-1904), russian astronomer ||  |-id=787 | 787 moskva || 1914 uq || the city of moscow in russia ||  |-id=788 | 788 hohensteina || 1914 ur || hohnstein castle near bad schwalbach in hesse, germany, hometown of the wife of the discoverer, franz kaiser (1891-1962). her ancestors derive from the castle's order of knighthood, "breder von hohenstein". ||  |-id=789 | 789 lena || 1914 uu || elena petrovna neujmina (1860-1942), mother of the discoverer grigory neujmin. ||  |-id=790 | 790 pretoria || 1912 nw || the city of pretoria in south africa ||  |-id=791 | 791 ani || 1914 uv || ani, ruined city in armenia ||  |-id=792 | 792 metcalfia || 1907 zc || joel hastings metcalf (1866-1925), american unitarian minister and astronomer ||  |-id=793 | 793 arizona || 1907 zd || the u.s. state of arizona, where the lowell observatory is located in flagstaff ||  |-id=794 | 794 irenaea || 1914 vb || irene hillebrand, nee weiss, daughter of austrian astronomer edmund weiss (1837-1917), director of the vienna observatory. the name's aea-suffix was needed to avoid conflict with asteroid 14 irene. ||  |-id=795
| 795 fini || 1914 ve || unknown origin of name. fini is an austrian diminutive of josephine. ||  |-id=796 | 796 sarita || 1914 vh || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=797 | 797 montana || 1914 vr || from mons, the latin for mountain, in honour of hamburg observatory, located at bergedorf, in germany. it was the observatory's first minor-planet discovery ||  |-id=798 | 798 ruth || 1914 vt || ruth, biblical heroine in the old testament ||  |-id=799 | 799 gudula || 1915 wo || gudula, german feminine first name, from the calendar  ||  |-id=800 | 800 kressmannia || 1915 wp || major a. kressmann (or kreßmann), benefactor who donated the 318-mm kressmann refractor to the heidelberg observatory, germany. the telescope was used for double star measurements and was hosted in the dome of heidelberg's ostinstitut until 1978, when it was replaced by the 50-centimeter telescope (src). ||  |}  801-900   |- | 801 helwerthia || 1915 wq || elise helwerth-wolf (1840-1924), mother of the discoverer max wolf; also see  ||  |-id=802 | 802 epyaxa || 1915 wr || epyaxa, queen of syennesis, wife to king of cilicia in south asia minor in the 5th century bce ||  |-id=803 | 803 picka || 1915 ws || friedrich pick (1867-1921), a czech physician from prague who first introduced endoscopy in medicine ||  |-id=804 | 804 hispania || 1915 wt || the country of spain, named by its latin name, hispania. it was the first discovery of an asteroid ever made in spain. ||  |-id=805 | 805 hormuthia || 1915 ww || hormuth kopff, wife of german astronomer august kopff, assistant to the discoverer, max wolf. ||  |-id=806 | 806 gyldenia || 1915 wx || hugo gylden (1841-1896), swedish astronomer at stockholm observatory ||  |-id=807 | 807 ceraskia || 1915 wy || vitold tserasky (1849-1925), also known as vitold cerasky or vitol'd karlovic tseraskiy, a russian astronomer and director at the moscow observatory . the lunar
crater tseraskiy is named after him. his wife, lidiya tseraskaya was also an astronomer. ||  |-id=808 | 808 merxia || 1901 gy || adalbert merx, the father-in-law of max wolf. the discovery was made by his assistant luigi carnera at heidelberg. ||  |-id=809 | 809 lundia || 1915 xp || lund observatory, located in lund, southern sweden ||  |-id=810 | 810 atossa || 1915 xq || atossa (550-475 bc), ancient persian queen, daughter of cyrus, wife of darius ||  |-id=811 | 811 nauheima || 1915 xr || the town of bad nauheim in hesse, germany ||  |-id=812 | 812 adele || 1915 xv || adele, character in the operetta die fledermaus by johann strauss (1825-1899) ||  |-id=813 | 813 baumeia || 1915 yr || "h. baum", a german student of astronomy at heidelberg university who died in world war i ||  |-id=814 | 814 tauris || 1916 yt || tauris, ancient name of the crimean peninsula (schmadel says "tauric mount", but there is no such mountain) ||  |-id=815 | 815 coppelia || 1916 yu || the comic ballet coppelia by composer leo delibes (1836-1891) based upon a story by e. t. a. hoffmann (1776-1822) ||  |-id=816 | 816 juliana || 1916 yv || queen juliana of the netherlands (1909-2004) ||  |-id=817 | 817 annika || 1916 yw || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=818 | 818 kapteynia || 1916 yz || jacobus kapteyn (1851-1922), dutch astronomer ||  |-id=819 | 819 barnardiana || 1916 za || edward emerson barnard (1857-1923), american astronomer ||  |-id=820 | 820 adriana || 1916 zb || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=821 | 821 fanny || 1916 zc || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=822 | 822 lalage || 1916 zd || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=823 | 823 sisigambis || 1916 zg || sisygambis (died 323 bc), mother of darius iii of persia
||  |-id=824 | 824 anastasia || 1916 zh || anastasia semenoff, an acquaintance of russian discoverer grigory neujmin (1886-1946) ||  |-id=825 | 825 tanina || 1916 zl || tanina, one of the white russian princesses whose family were slaughtered during the 1918 revolution ||  |-id=826 | 826 henrika || 1916 zo || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=827 | 827 wolfiana || 1916 zw || max wolf (1863-1932), german astronomer ||  |-id=828 | 828 lindemannia || 1916 zx || adolph friedrich lindemann (1846 - 25 august 1931), german-born british amateur astronomer, inventor of the lindemann electrometer, a quadrant electrometer ||  |-id=829 | 829 academia || 1916 zy || the russian academy of sciences, st. petersburg, on the occasion of its 200th anniversary ||  |-id=830 | 830 petropolitana || 1916 zz || the city of saint petersburg, russia, by its latin name "petropolis" ||  |-id=831 | 831 stateira || 1916 aa || stateira (died c. 400 bc), wife of artaxerxes ii of persia ||  |-id=832 | 832 karin || 1916 ab || karin mansdotter (1550-1612), swedish queen and wife of eric xiv of sweden ||  |-id=833 | 833 monica || 1916 ac || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=834 | 834 burnhamia || 1916 ad || sherburne wesley burnham (1838-1921), american astronomer who discovered many visual binary stars. he observed from the chicago (1877), lick (1888) and yerkes (1897) observatories. ||  |-id=835 | 835 olivia || 1916 ae || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=836 | 836 jole || 1916 af || iole, wife of divine hero heracles in greek mythology ||  |-id=837 | 837 schwarzschilda || 1916 ag || karl schwarzschild (1873-1916), german physicist and astronomer, best known for his solution of einstein's field equations, leading to the schwarzschild radius. he was the director of the gottingen and potsdam-babelsberg observatories. ||  |-id=838 | 838 seraphina || 1916 ah || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=839 | 8
39 valborg || 1916 aj || valborg, heroine in the play axel and valborg by danish poet and playwright adam oehlenschlager (1779-1850) ||  |-id=840 | 840 zenobia || 1916 ak || zenobia (died c. 290 ad), a slavic holy martyr, whose feast day is october 30 in the eastern orthodox and roman catholic church. alternatively, it may refer to zenobia (c. 240 - c. 274 ad), the queen of the palmyrene empire in syria, who was defeated by aurelian in 272 ad. ||  |-id=841 | 841 arabella || 1916 al || the opera arabella by german composer richard strauss (1864-1949) ||  |-id=842 | 842 kerstin || 1916 am || unknown origin of name. it is a german feminine first name. ||  |-id=843 | 843 nicolaia || 1916 an || thorvald n. thiele (1838-1910), danish astronomer, actuary and mathematician. he is the father of the discoverer holger thiele. ||  |-id=844 | 844 leontina || 1916 ap || the town of lienz, austria, birthplace of the asteroid's discoverer, joseph rheden (1873-1946) ||  |-id=845 | 845 naema || 1916 as || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=846 | 846 lipperta || 1916 at || eduard lippert (1844-1925; bio-de), a german businessman and benefactor of the hamburg observatory, who to donated the "lippert astrograph". ||  |-id=847 | 847 agnia || 1915 xx || agnia ivanovna bad'ina (1877-1956), a russian physician from simeiz, on the crimean peninsula ||  |-id=848 | 848 inna || 1915 xs || nikolaevna leman-balanovskaya (1881-1945), a russian astronomer at the pulkovo observatory near st petersburg ||  |-id=849 | 849 ara || 1912 ny || american relief administration (ara), in appreciation of the help it gave during the russian famine of 1922-1923 ||  |-id=850 | 850 altona || 1916 s24 || altona, germany, location of the altona observatory at which h. c. schumacher began publication of the astronomical journal astronomische nachrichten in 1821 ||  |-id=851 | 851 zeissia || 1916 s
26 || zeiss optical works ||  |-id=852 | 852 wladilena || 1916 s27 || vladimir lenin (1870-1924), russian communist revolutionary, politician and soviet leader ||  |-id=853 | 853 nansenia || 1916 s28 || fridtjof nansen (1861-1930), norwegian polar explorer ||  |-id=854 | 854 frostia || 1916 s29 || edwin brant frost (1866-1935), an american astronomer ||  |-id=855 | 855 newcombia || 1916 zp || simon newcomb (1835-1909), a canadian-american professor of astronomy and director of the u.s. nautical almanac office at united states naval observatory ||  |-id=856 | 856 backlunda || 1916 s30 || oskar backlund (1846-1916), swedish-russian astronomer ||  |-id=857 | 857 glasenappia || 1916 s33 || sergey glazenap (1848-1937), a soviet astronomer, director of both st. petersburg and pulkovo observatory and founder of the russian astronomical society ||  |-id=858 | 858 el djezair || 1916 a || the city of algiers, algeria by its arabian name meaning "the islands". ||  |-id=859 | 859 bouzareah || 1916 c || the borough of bouzareah, in the city of algiers, algeria. it is the site of algiers observatory. ||  |-id=860 | 860 ursina || 1917 bd || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=861 | 861 aida || 1917 be || aida, opera by the italian composer giuseppe verdi (1813-1901) ||  |-id=862 | 862 franzia || 1917 bf || franz wolf, son of the discoverer max wolf ||  |-id=863 | 863 benkoela || 1917 bh || the city of benkoelen on the island of sumatra, indonesia  ||  |-id=864 | 864 aase || a921 sb || ase (also spelled "aase") the mother of the title character in the play peer gynt by norwegian poet henrik ibsen (1828-1906) ||  |-id=865 | 865 zubaida || 1917 bo || zubaida, a character in the opera abu hassan by carl maria von weber (1786-1826) ||  |-id=866 | 866 fatme || 1917 bq || fatme, a
character in the opera abu hassan by carl maria von weber (1786-1826) ||  |-id=867 | 867 kovacia || 1917 bs || friedrich kovacs (1861-1931), physician from vienna, austria, who treated the wife of discoverer johann palisa (src, src) ||  |-id=868 | 868 lova || 1917 bu || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=869 | 869 mellena || 1917 bv || werner von melle (1853-1937), mayor of hamburg, germany, who promoted the establishment of the university of hamburg and founded the hamburg observatory ||  |-id=870 | 870 manto || 1917 bx || manto, mythological greek soothsayer, erector of apollo's oracle in claros ||  |-id=871 | 871 amneris || 1917 by || amneris, character in verdi's opera aida ||  |-id=872 | 872 holda || 1917 bz || edward s. holden (1846-1914), american astronomer at lick observatory and fifth president of the university of california ||  |-id=873 | 873 mechthild || 1917 ca || unknown origin of name. a feminine first name in german. ||  |-id=874 | 874 rotraut || 1917 cc || likely named after the poem schon rotraut (pretty rotraut) by german poet eduard morike (1804-1875) ||  |-id=875 | 875 nymphe || 1917 cf || the nymphs, greek mythological figures ||  |-id=876 | 876 scott || 1917 ch || miss e. scott, of the society of friends in vienna, austria, a friend of discoverer johann palisa. this minor planet has also been erroneously attributed to the english polar explorer robert falcon scott ||  |-id=877 | 877 walkure || 1915 s7 || valkyrie (), a female spirit in norse mythology. also, die walkure is part of wagner's opera cycle der ring des nibelungen. ||  |-id=878 | 878 mildred || 1916 f || mildred (born 1915), daughter of american astronomer harlow shapley ||  |-id=879 | 879 ricarda || 1917 cj || ricarda huch (1864-1947), german poet ||  |-id=880 | 880 herba || 1917 ck || herba, greek god of misery and poverty ||  |-id=881 | 881 athene || 1917 cl
|| athena, greek goddess, also known as minerva ||  |-id=882 | 882 swetlana || 1917 cm || unknown origin of name. a feminine first name in russian. ||  |-id=883 | 883 matterania || 1917 cp || august matter, german maker of photographic plates (matterplatten) for the heidelberg observatory, which allowed max wolf and others to make numerous discoveries. this asteroid was one of them. matter's factory was later destroyed in world war ii. ||  |-id=884 | 884 priamus || 1917 cq || priam, from greek mythology. he is the king of troy during the trojan war and father of hector and paris in homer's iliad. ||  |-id=885 | 885 ulrike || 1917 cx || ulrike von levetzow (1804-1899), a friend and the last love of johann wolfgang von goethe; alternatively: ulrica, a character in verdi's opera un ballo in maschera ||  |-id=886 | 886 washingtonia || 1917 b || george washington (1732-1799), american general and first president of the united states of america. ||  |-id=887 | 887 alinda || 1918 db || the ancient city of alinda in caria, asia minor. alternatively, alinda is the man in the moon in australian aboriginal mythology. ||  |-id=888 | 888 parysatis || 1918 dc || parysatis, wife of darius ii of persia ||  |-id=889 | 889 erynia || 1918 dg || the erinyes, or furies, greek mythological creatures ||  |-id=890 | 890 waltraut || 1918 dk || waltraut, character in the opera gotterdammerung in the der ring des nibelungen by richard wagner ||  |-id=891 | 891 gunhild || 1918 dq || unknown origin of name. it is a feminine german first name. ||  |-id=892 | 892 seeligeria || 1918 dr || hugo von seeliger (1849-1924), austrian-german astronomer ||  |-id=893 | 893 leopoldina || 1918 ds || the german academy of sciences leopoldina ||  |-id=894 | 894 erda || 1918 dt || erda, a character in wagner's opera cycle der ring des nibelungen, who is the goddess of wisdom, fate and earth. she is
based on urðr (wisdom and fate) and jorð (the personification of earth) in norse mythology. ||  |-id=895 | 895 helio || 1918 du || helium, whose spectrum paschen and runge investigated together (paschen named it at wolf's request) ||  |-id=896 | 896 sphinx || 1918 dv || the sphinx. the female monster in greek and egyption mythology has the head of a woman, the haunches of a lion, and the wings of a bird. it has the habit of killing anyone who cannot answer her riddle. ||  |-id=897 | 897 lysistrata || 1918 dz || the anti-war comedy lysistrata by aristophanes ||  |-id=898 | 898 hildegard || 1918 ea || saint hildegard of bingen (1098-1179). the benedictine abbess is considered to be the founder of scientific natural history in germany. ||  |-id=899 | 899 jokaste || 1918 eb || jocasta, mother and wife of oedipus, the mythical greek king of thebes ||  |-id=900 | 900 rosalinde || 1918 ec || rosalinde, character in the opera die fledermaus by johann strauss ii (1825-1899) ||  |}  901-1000   |- | 901 brunsia || 1918 ee || heinrich bruns (1848-1919), german astronomer and director of the leipzig observatory  ||  |-id=902 | 902 probitas || 1918 ej || probity, a quality attributed to the late discoverer ||  |-id=903 | 903 nealley || 1918 em || nealley, amateur astronomer from new york, who contributed to the photographic star charts edition by max wolf and johann palisa (discoverer) ||  |-id=904 | 904 rockefellia || 1918 eo || john d. rockefeller (1839-1937), american business man, philanthropist and one of the wealthiest persons in modern history ||  |-id=905 | 905 universitas || 1918 es || university of hamburg, germany ||  |-id=906 | 906 repsolda || 1918 et || johann georg repsold (1770-1830), german astronomer, optician and manufacturer of astrometric instruments ||  |-id=907 | 907 rhoda || 1918 eu || wife of american astronomer edward emerson barnard (1857-1923) ||  |-id=908 | 908
buda || 1918 ex || buda, historic part of the city of part of budapest, hungary ||  |-id=909 | 909 ulla || 1919 fa || ulla ahrens, member of the ahrens family, who helped financially at the heidelberg observatory. ulla's father was also a friend of the discoverer, karl wilhelm reinmuth (1892-1979). ||  |-id=910 | 910 anneliese || 1919 fb || anneliese, a friend of german astronomer julius dick at babelsberg observatory, germany ||  |-id=911 | 911 agamemnon || 1919 fd || agamemnon, from greek mythology. the king of mycenae commanded the greek forces in the trojan war. ||  |-id=912 | 912 maritima || 1919 fj || maritima, annual end-of-term excursions on the north sea organised by the university of hamburg; also see . ||  |-id=913 | 913 otila || 1919 fl || otila, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=914 | 914 palisana || 1919 fn || johann palisa (1848-1925), austrian astronomer, discoverer of minor planets, and friend of the discoverer max wolf ||  |-id=915 | 915 cosette || 1918 b || cosette, youngest daughter of french astronomer francois gonnessiat (1856-1934), who discovered this asteroid ||  |-id=916 | 916 america || 1915 s1 || america, for the help rendered by the american relief administration (under herbert hoover) during the famine in crimea ||  |-id=917 | 917 lyka || 1915 s4 || lyka, a friend of the sister of the discoverer, grigory neujmin ||  |-id=918 | 918 itha || 1919 fr || itha, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=919 | 919 ilsebill || 1918 eq || ilsebill, a character in the fairy tale the fisherman and his wife by the brothers grimm ||  |-id=920 | 920 rogeria || 1919 ft || rogeria, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=921 | 921 jovita || 1919 fv || jovita, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar
der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=922 | 922 schlutia || 1919 fw || edgar schlubach, a german businessman from hamburg, and henry frederic tiarks, fras, british banker and amateur astronomer from london, who together financed the expedition to the christmas island to observe the solar eclipse of september 21, 1922 (src). ||  |-id=923 | 923 herluga || 1919 gb || herluga, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=924 | 924 toni || 1919 gc || toni, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=925 | 925 alphonsina || 1920 gm || alfonso x of castile (1221-1284) and alfonso xiii of spain (1886-1941) ||  |-id=926 | 926 imhilde || 1920 gn || imhilde, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=927 | 927 ratisbona || 1920 go || the city of regensburg in south-east germany (by its latin name) ||  |-id=928 | 928 hildrun || 1920 gp || hildrun, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=929 | 929 algunde || 1920 gr || algunde, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=930 | 930 westphalia || 1920 gs || the historic region of westphalia in germany, birthplace of the discoverer walter baade (1893-1960) ||  |-id=931 | 931 whittemora || 1920 gu || thomas whittemore (1871-1950), american professor at both harvard and columbia universities ||  |-id=932 | 932 hooveria || 1920 gv || herbert hoover (1874-1964), american president, then secretary of state, in recognition of his help to austria after world war i ||  |-id=933 | 933 susi || 1927 ch || susi, wife of kasimir graff (1878-1950), german astronomer at hamburg observatory and later director of the vienna observatory ||  |-id=934 | 934 thuringia || 1920 hk || the thuringia, an atlantic liner
of the hamburg america line, on which german astronomer walter baade travelled on his visits to new york. the captain was an amateur astronomer, and was invited to name one of baade's asteroids. ||  |-id=935 | 935 clivia || 1920 hm || clivia, genus of flowering plant ||  |-id=936 | 936 kunigunde || 1920 hn || kunigunde, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=937 | 937 bethgea || 1920 ho || hans bethge (1876-1946), german poet ||  |-id=938 | 938 chlosinde || 1920 hq || chlosinde, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=939 | 939 isberga || 1920 hr || isberga, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=940 | 940 kordula || 1920 ht || kordula, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=941 | 941 murray || 1920 hv || gilbert murray (1866-1957), british classical scholar and diplomat who helped austria in 1920 through the league of nations ||  |-id=942 | 942 romilda || 1920 hw || romilda, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=943 | 943 begonia || 1920 hx || begonia, genus of herbs and flowers ||  |-id=944 | 944 hidalgo || 1920 hz || miguel hidalgo (1753-1811), father of the independence of mexico, where german astronomers went to observe the solar eclipse of september 10, 1923 ||  |-id=945 | 945 barcelona || 1921 jb || barcelona, spain, where the discoverer was born and the asteroid discovered ||  |-id=946 | 946 poesia || 1921 jc || poesia, goddess of poetry ||  |-id=947 | 947 monterosa || 1921 jd || the mv monte rosa, a ship (of the german monte klasse) used by the university of hamburg on their outings on the north sea; also see . ||  |-id=948 | 948 jucunda || 1921 je || j
ucunda, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=949 | 949 hel || 1921 jk || hel, norse goddess ||  |-id=950 | 950 ahrensa || 1921 jp || the ahrens family, friends of the discoverer, karl reinmuth ||  |-id=951 | 951 gaspra || 1916 s45 || the spa town of gaspra on the crimean peninsula ||  |-id=952 | 952 caia || 1916 s61 || caia, a character in the novel quo vadis by henryk sienkiewicz ||  |-id=953 | 953 painleva || 1921 jt || paul painleve (1863-1933), french mathematician and politician ||  |-id=954 | 954 li || 1921 ju || lina alstede reinmuth, wife of discoverer karl reinmuth ||  |-id=955 | 955 alstede || 1921 jv || lina alstede reinmuth, wife of discoverer karl reinmuth ||  |-id=956 | 956 elisa || 1921 jw || elisa reinmuth, mother of discoverer karl reinmuth ||  |-id=957 | 957 camelia || 1921 jx || camellia, genus of flowering plants ||  |-id=958 | 958 asplinda || 1921 kc || bror ansgar asplind (1890-1954), swedish astronomer ||  |-id=959 | 959 arne || 1921 kf || arne asplind, son of swedish astronomer bror asplind, also see (958) ||  |-id=960 | 960 birgit || 1921 kh || birgit asplind, daughter of swedish astronomer bror asplind, also see (958) ||  |-id=961 | 961 gunnie || 1921 km || gunnie asplind, daughter of swedish astronomer bror asplind, also see (958) ||  |-id=962 | 962 aslog || 1921 kp || aslog, mythological norse woman ||  |-id=963 | 963 iduberga || 1921 kr || iduberga, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=964 | 964 subamara || 1921 ks || latin for 'very bitter' (referring to the observing conditions at the vienna observatory) ||  |-id=9
65 | 965 angelica || 1921 kt || angelica hartmann, wife of the discoverer, johannes franz hartmann (1865-1936) ||  |-id=966 | 966 muschi || 1921 ku || "kitty"  nickname of walter baade's wife, who discovered this asteroid ||  |-id=967 | 967 helionape || 1921 kv || adolf von sonnenthal (1834-1909), an austrian actor . helionape is the direct greek translation of his name ("sonne" and "tal", to "helio" and "nape"). ||  |-id=968 | 968 petunia || 1921 kw || petunia, a genus of flowering plants ||  |-id=969 | 969 leocadia || 1921 kz || unknown origin of name. feminine russian first name. ||  |-id=970 | 970 primula || 1921 lb || the flower genus primula (primroses) ||  |-id=971 | 971 alsatia || 1921 lf || alsace, region in western france. originally named "alsace" by french discoverer alexandre schaumasse (1882-1958), in 1920, the name was later changed to "alsatia" by the german ari. ||  |-id=972 | 972 cohnia || 1922 lk || fritz cohn (1866-1922), german astronomer and director of the astronomisches rechen-institut in berlin ||  |-id=973 | 973 aralia || 1922 lr || aralia, genus of ivy-like plant ||  |-id=974 | 974 lioba || 1922 ls || saint leoba (or lioba; c. 710-782), abbess in tauberbischofsheim, germany, who helped saint boniface spreading christianity throughout germany. ||  |-id=975 | 975 perseverantia || 1922 lt || perseverance, a quality posthumously attributed to the discoverer, austrian astronomer johann palisa ||  |-id=976 | 976 benjamina || 1922 lu || benjamin, son of discoverer benjamin jekhowsky ||  |-id=977 | 977 philippa || 1922 lv || baron philippe de rothschild (1902-1988), french financier ||  |-id=978 | 978 aidamina || 1922 ly || aida minaievna, a friend of the family of soviet discoverer sergey belyavsky ||  |-id=979 | 979 ilsewa || 1922 mc || ilse waldorf, an acquaintance of
german discoverer karl reinmuth ||  |-id=980 | 980 anacostia || 1921 w19 || the historic district of anacostia in washington, d.c., united states, as well as for the nearby anacostia river ||  |-id=981 | 981 martina || 1917 s92 || henri martin (1810-1883), french historian and politician ||  |-id=982 | 982 franklina || 1922 md || john franklin adams (1843-1912), british amateur astronomer and stellar cartographer ||  |-id=983 | 983 gunila || 1922 me || gunila, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=984 | 984 gretia || 1922 mh || gretia, sister-in-law of german astronomer albrecht kahrstedt (1897-1971), also see  ||  |-id=985 | 985 rosina || 1922 mo || rosina, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=986 | 986 amelia || 1922 mq || amelia, wife of discoverer josep comas i sola ||  |-id=987 | 987 wallia || 1922 mr || wallia, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=988 | 988 appella || 1922 mt || paul emile appell (1855-1930), french astronomer ||  |-id=989 | 989 schwassmannia || 1922 mw || arnold schwassmann (1870-1964), german astronomer, discoverer of minor planets and comets at potsdam-babelsberg and hamburg-bergedorf observatories ||  |-id=990 | 990 yerkes || 1922 mz || yerkes observatory, in williams bay, wisconsin, united states, where this asteroid was discovered ||  |-id=991 | 991 mcdonalda || 1922 nb || mcdonald observatory, texas, united states, originally endowed by the texas banker william johnson mcdonald ||  |-id=992 | 992 swasey || 1922 nd || ambrose swasey (1846-1937), american benefactor and mechanical engineer, co-founder, with worcester reed warner of the warner & swasey company which manufactured astronomical telescopes and precision instruments, including the 82-inch otto struve telescope for the mcdonald observatory, one of the largest telescopes at the time. they gave their own observatory to case western university and it
took the name warner and swasey observatory. ||  |-id=993 | 993 moultona || 1923 nj || forest ray moulton (1872-1952), american astronomer and mathematician ||  |-id=994 | 994 otthild || 1923 nl || otthild, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=995 | 995 sternberga || 1923 np || pavel shternberg (1865-1920), russian astronomer ||  |-id=996 | 996 hilaritas || 1923 nm || contentedness, a quality posthumously attributed to the discoverer, austrian astronomer johann palisa ||  |-id=997 | 997 priska || 1923 nr || priska, female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar der lahrer hinkende bote ||  |-id=998 | 998 bodea || 1923 nu || johann elert bode (1747-1826), german astronomer, author of the berliner astronomisches jahrbuch, known for the empirical titius-bode law about the sequence of planetary distances ||  |-id=999 | 999 zachia || 1923 nw || franz xaver von zach (1754-1832), hungarian astronomer and director of the seeberg observatory  in germany ||  |-id=000 | 1000 piazzia || 1923 nz || giuseppe piazzi (1746-1826), italian astronomer and discoverer of  in 1801 ||  |}  references   000001-001000
sui ran (), born june 25, 1992) is a chinese professional basketball player. he currently plays for the shandong golden stars of the chinese basketball association.  he represents china's national basketball team at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro.  references  external links asia-basket.com profile nbadraft.net profile real gm profile  1992 births living people basketball players at the 2016 summer olympics basketball players from shanxi chinese men's basketball players olympic basketball players of china sportspeople from taiyuan point guards shandong hi-speed kirin players shooting guards
eunidia multinigromaculata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1967.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1967
is a japanese otome game published by red entertainment. it was released in japan on july 1, 2010, for the playstation 2. a fan disc titled scared rider xechs: stardust lovers was released in 2011. the game was ported to the playstation vita in 2015. a 12-episode anime television series adaptation by satelight aired between july 5 and september 20, 2016.  characters  media  anime a 12-episode anime television series adaptation by satelight aired between july 5 and september 20, 2016. the opening theme is  performed by tatsuhisa suzuki and mamoru miyano. the ending theme is "old revelation" performed by kenn. funimation streamed the series in north america and animelab streamed the series in australia.  references  external links    2010 video games anime television series based on video games funimation otome games playstation 2 games playstation vita games red entertainment games satelight video games developed in japan
tip tv is an albanian tv channel for children and teenagers from 6-17 years old. it was launched on october 10, 2011 at 04:00 pm by the tv platform tring. the channel's content is either dubbed or subtitled in albanian.  programming  original productions  artist tak fak  hip hop show  i love music  superhero quiz  tring art club  animated tv series  heroic age (starways)  huntik: secrets & seekers (huntik)  kung fu dino posse (kung fu dino)  monster allergy (alergji nga perbindeshat)  the invisible man (njeriu i padukshem)  what's with andy? (c'po shpik andi?)  live-action tv series  aliens in america (nxenesi i ri)  big time rush (endrra e suksesit)  blue water high (shkolla e notit)  ¿can you teach my alligator manners? (a mund ti sjelljet e mia kloshat krokodili?)  dino dan (dino den)  game shakers (superloja)  h2o: just add water (h2o)  house of anubis (shtepia e sekreteve)  k.c. undercover (kej-si ne nje mision te fshehte)  liv and maddie (binjaket)  maggie & bianca: fashion friends (megi dhe bianca)  mako: island of secrets (mako: ishulli i sirenave)  merlin (sekreti magjik)  mortified (pse mua?)  sam & cat (semi dhe keti)  sonny with a chance (soni mes yjesh)  the adventures of shirley holmes (aventurat e shirley holmes)  the sarah jane adventures (aventurat e sares)  think big  victorious (hollywood arts)  wingin' it (engjell ne kampus)  animated movies  a matter of loaf and death (uollas dhe gromit ne nje ceshtje per jete a vdekje)  a monster in paris (nje perbindesh ne paris)  appleseed alpha (appleseed alpha: ne kerkim te qytetit olimp)  brave (ariu dhe harku)  cloudy with a chance of meatballs (rrebesh qoft
esh)  coraline (koralina dhe porta magjike)  despicable me (gru dhe minionet)  despicable me 2 (gru dhe minionet 2)  dragon hunters (gjuetaret e dragonjve)  epic (leafmen)  fantastic mr. fox (aventurat e qytetarit fox)  frozen (nje aventure e akullt)  gnomeo & juliet (qeramikat)  horton hears a who! (hortoni degjon dicka)  igor (igori)  minions (minionet)  moana (vaiana: ishulli legjendar)  monsters university (monsters & co 2)  penguins of madagascar (pinguinet e madagaskarit)  planes (fluturimi i heroit)  puss in boots (macoku me cizme)  ratatouille (ratatuja)  shrek  sing (te gjithe ne skene)  tangled (flokearta)  the book of life (legjenda e manolos)  the boss baby (shefi i vogel)  the pirate fairy ()  the road to el dorado (rruga per ne el dorado)  toy story 3 (bota e lodrave 3)  wall-e (uoll-e)  wreck-it ralph (ralf shkaterruesi)  zootopia (qyteti i kafsheve)  live-action movies  a wrinkle in time (nje udhetim permes universit)  agent cody banks (adolegjenti)  akeelah and the bee (nje fjale per nje enderr)  alexander and the terrible, horrible, no good, very bad day (nje dite fantastike per te mos u harruar)  alice through the looking glass (liza pertej pasqyres)  alvin and the chipmunks (alvin superstari)  alvin and the chipmunks: the squeakquel (alvin superstari 2)  alvin and the chipmunks: chipwrecked (alvin superstari 3)  an american girl: saige paints the sky (qielli i seixhit)  annabelle hooper and the ghosts of nantucket (anabel huper dhe fantazma e nentakit)  another cinderella story (nje tjeter histori hirusheje
)  aquamarine (shoqja ime sirene)  beauty and the beast (e bukura dhe bisha)  beethoven (bethoven: nje me shume ne familje)  bratz (bratz: filmi)  bridge to terabithia (ura per ne terabithia)  bring it on (lart e me lart)  camp rock ()  camp rock 2: the final jam ()  cheaper by the dozen ()  cheaper by the dozen 2 (duzina ime e cmendur 2)  city of ember (qyteti i emberit)  daddy day camp (kampingu i baballareve)  daddy day care (kopshti i baballareve)  descendants (pasardhesit)  diary of a wimpy kid (ditari i nje deshtaku)  diary of a wimpy kid 2: rodrick rules (ditari i nje deshtaku 2)  diary of a wimpy kid: dog days (ditari i nje deshtaku 3)  diary of a wimpy kid: the long haul (ditari i nje deshtaku 3)  dolphin tale (pacienti winter)  dolphin tale 2 (pacienti winter 2)  dr. dolittle (doktori i kafsheve)  dr. dolittle 2 (doktori i kafsheve 2)  dr. dolittle 3 (doktori i kafsheve 3)  ella enchanted (bota magjike e eles)  enchanted (kenaqesia)  flubber (endrrat prej gome)  freaky friday (e premtja e cmendur)  hannah montana: best of both worlds concert (hana montana: koncerti)  hannah montana: the movie (hana montana: filmi)  harry potter and the philosopher's stone ()  harry potter and the chamber of secrets ()  harry potter and the prisoner of azkaban ()  harry potter and the goblet of fire ()  high school musical (koncerti i gjimnazit)  high school musical 2 (koncerti i gjimnazit 2)  high school musical 3: senior year (koncerti i gjimnazit 3)  horrid henry: the movie (henri i tmerrshem)  invisible sister (motra ime e paduksh
me)  jessica darling's it list (lista shkollore e jesika darling)  journey to the center of the earth (udhetim ne qender te tokes)  jumanji (loja e xhungles)  little manhattan (ne manhatan)  maleficent (bukuroshja e fjetur)  material girls (vajzat materialiste)  mr. popper's penguins ()  nanny mcphee (neni mek fi)  nanny mcphee and the big bang ()  nim's island ()  pan ()  percy jackson & the olympians: the lightning thief (hajduti i rrufeve)  percy jackson: sea of monsters (deti i perbindeshave)  princess protection program (programi i mbrojtjes se princeshave)  rv (nje kamping i pazakonte)  she's the man (ajo eshte ai)  spy kids (agjentet e vegjel)  spy kids 2: the island of lost dreams (agjentet e vegjel 2)  spy kids 3-d: game over (agjentet e vegjel 3)  spy kids: all the time in the world (agjentet e vegjel dhe tregtari i lodrave)  stormbreaker (rekruti)  teenage mutant ninja turtles (breshkat ninxha)  teenage mutant ninja turtles ii: the secret of the ooze (breshkat ninxha 2)  teenage mutant ninja turtles iii (breshkat ninxha 3)  the bfg ()  the chronicles of narnia: the lion, the witch and the wardrobe (kronikat e narnias: luani, shtriga dhe garderoba)  the chronicles of narnia: prince caspian (kronikat e narnias: princi kaspian)  the chronicles of narnia: the voyage of the dawn treader ()  the karate kid (djali i karatese)  the last song (kenga e fundit)  the little rascals (mistrecat e vegjel)  the parent trap (prinder ne kurth)  the princess diaries (ditari i princeshes)  the princess diaries 2: royal engagement (ditari i princeshes 2: fejesa mbreterore)  the velveteen rabbit ()  who framed roger rabbit ()
wizards of waverly place: the movie (magjistaret e sheshit uejverli)  see also  television in albania  vizion plus  tring  tring sport hd  tv klan  references  external links official website channel and transponder list  television networks in albania tring television networks television channels and stations established in 2011 mass media in tirana
eunidia annulicornis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1953.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1953
the explosives act 1957 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted relating to the manufacture, use, sale, storage, transport, import and export of explosives.  structure the explosives act 1957, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 3 parts containing 28 sections and 1 schedule (including 5 amendments).  part i: preliminary  part ii: offences, penalties, enforcement and proceedings  part iii: general  schedule  references  external links  explosives act 1957   1957 in malayan law malaysian federal legislation
joseph butler (1804-84), born in parndon, essex, was  an architect, surveyor and builder. his specialist area was that of church buildings. he worked widely in sussex, england.  career joseph butler worked  as surveyor in chichester cathedral, where he supervised r c carpenter's restoration from 1846. butler was responsible for the opening up of the sub-deanery in the cathedral and for its eventual removal  to a new church saint peter the great, chichester.  in 1849 butler designed the bishop otter memorial college, a college to train school teachers, nairn and pevesner described the [original] buildings as being of a 'sober neo-tudor style' and were 'typically honest and unselfconscious'.  when chichester cathedral spire fell down after a storm in 1861, it was rebuilt by sir gilbert scott. before the disaster, joseph butler had carried out a survey of the cathedral. it was with the aid of his detailed drawings that  a replica of the original spire was constructed.  during the victorian era there was a gothic revival in the design and restoration of churches.  nairn and pevesner were scathing in their criticism  of many church architects of that era describing them as 'meddlers', however they credit butler, who built in the gothic style, as saving many dozens of village churches.  selection of work source: sussex parishes. lambeth palace library.  churches designed  chichester, - st. paul (1836); chichester, - st peter the great (1848-52 - worked as surveyor for r c carpenter); plaistow (1853-54); stanmer (1838 - attributed) stedham (1850)  churches restored or extended appledram (1845); bosham (1845); brighton and hove, - st andrew's church, church road, hove (1833-35 - contractor) compton (1849-51); fishbourne (1847); forest row (1850); lower beeding (1852 - unexecuted); mid lavant (1844); pagham (1838); pyecombe (1842 - examined); sidlesham (1840 - unexecuted); southwick (1835 - extent of involvement uncertain); stoughton (1844); upper beeding (1852)  notes  references  architects from essex 1884 deaths 1804 births gothic revival architects english ecclesiastical architects 19th-century english architects
arab business leaders (known also as abl) is an independent business non-profit organization founded by houssam nasrawin. abl has representatives and partners in 37 countries in africa, asia, europe, and middle east.  since its inception in 2011, the organization has been active to encourage international initiatives with the middle-east mainly by encouraging entrepreneurship initiatives and supporting business initiatives in the region.  entrepreneurship programs abl has launched in 2015, an investment platform to support entrepreneurs from the mena region to develop their projects entrepreneurship programs also include an incubator meant to support women entrepreneurs in the arab countries.  connecting entrepreneurs abl's first mission is to support arab entrepreneurs and governments to connect to those in the rest of the world. this is mainly done through roadshows of business delegations or business events. abl has organized more than 35 events since 2011 in dubai, abu dhabi, amman, doha, paris, luxembourg, london and brussels.  references  external links    abl president received by former french president nicolas sarkozy  abl roadshow in bahrain  abl and bdb signed mou  interview abl president on tv5  interview abl president in le figaro  abl conference with bpifrance and gcpme  abl on emirati tv   arab business leaders and ceo clubs network signed mou in dubai  "dubai, the new bridge between the middle east and africa" the role of abl  abl to bridge uae and europe  abl conference: french companies gain insight into sharjah's investment potential  organizations established in 2015
maribel aber (born maribel alacbay o'brien) is a correspondent for cnn's money matters.  she has previously been chief of staff for the vice chairman of nasdaq.  career  she joined cnn in 2012, leaving her job as anchor of pbs' wall street week. she has reported for cnn on financial, business, and personal finance news as they relate to families and consumers. she has also covered stories including the china market crash in 2015, the sandy hook elementary school shooting and facebook ipo in 2012. she graduated from the university of virginia with a b.a. degree, majoring in foreign affairs.  from there, she graduated from new york law school with a j.d. degree in february 2003. aber resides in new york city. she is married to robert e. aber, former senior vice president and general counsel to nasdaq.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people american women journalists university of virginia alumni new york law school alumni cnn people pbs people american people of filipino descent 21st-century american women
laurie anne hill rozenel (born 11 february 1970) is an american-born mexican retired footballer who played as a midfielder. she has been a member of the mexico women's national team.  early life and education  hill was born on february 11, 1970, in los angeles, california, and was raised in the same area.  her mother was born in mexico city, mexico.  hill attended the university of california, santa barbara and was a student-athlete on the uc santa barbara gauchos women's soccer team.  hill became uc santa barbara's career leader in minutes played (6,422) and was named a three-time all american from 1989 through 1991.  following her ucsb career, she was inducted into the uc santa barbara athletics hall of fame.  club career  hill played for the southern california nitemares as a teenager.  after she graduated from uc santa barbara, she went to japan to play professionally for a year before returning to southern california.  hill rejoined the nitemares in 1995 as they became a founding member of the usl w-league. for the 1995 w-league season, hill was named the league's first mvp.  she also featured for the sacramento storm.  following the 1999 women's world cup, hill was selected to be a part of a travelling exhibition against the united states women's national team.  she would later be drafted to the women's united soccer association's philadelphia charge in the 15th round of the 2000 wusa draft.  she quit playing soccer before the charge played their first game after deciding to focus on a nursing career.  international career  hill, being american born and raised, attempted to join the united states women's national soccer team. she never made an appearance for the team.  after a law change, hill was eligible to attempt to join the mexico women's national football team prior to the 1999 fifa women's world cup. after the mexico national team played a scrimmage against the sacramento storm, hill, who played for the storm, approached the mexican officials about joining the team.  hill was successful in joining the team for their first women's world cup appearance and was one of over half of the 20-player roster that had american ties. hill served as a co-captain for the team and appeared in all three group matches.  personal life  hill was nicknamed "the thrill" after her play on the field.  after soccer, she met her husband, johnny, in the summer 2001 and moved to ireland.
she works in nursing and is a mother to three children.  references  external links     1970 births living people citizens of mexico through descent mexican women's footballers women's association football midfielders mexico women's international footballers 1999 fifa women's world cup players mexican people of american descent american women's soccer players soccer players from los angeles american sportspeople of mexican descent uc santa barbara gauchos women's soccer players usl w-league players california storm players
chiliwist creek is a stream in the u.s. state of washington.  chiliwist creek was named after charley chiliwist, a pioneer settler of native american descent.  see also list of rivers of washington  references  rivers of okanogan county, washington rivers of washington (state)
soray is a  mountain in the vilcabamba range in the andes of peru. it is located in the province of anta, in the region of cusco.  external links   cerro soray. summitpost page.  references   mountains of peru mountains of cusco region
paisaje is an unincorporated community in conejos county, in the u.s. state of colorado.  history a post office called paisaje was established in 1906, and remained in operation until 1920.  paisaje is a name derived from spanish meaning "pretty place".  references  unincorporated communities in conejos county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
the humane society of the pikes peak region (commonly abbreviated as hsppr) is a nonprofit corporation in both colorado springs, colorado and pueblo, colorado. incorporated in 1949, hsppr rescues stray or forsaken pets and facilitates adoption. a variety of fundraising events throughout the fiscal year keep them financially viable.  events  in the fall, hsppr hosts the pawtoberfest 5k/beer festival at bear creek regional park. during the winter, they hold a 12 strays of christmas adoption drive in partnership with daniels long chevrolet.  ratings and reviews  the humane society of the pikes peak region is a better business bureau-accredited charity, meeting the 20 standards of charity accountability. in fact, it is rated 100/100 for transparency & accountability by charity navigator, with an overall rating of 4/4 stars. in terms of animal care certification, hsppr has also been accredited by the american animal hospital association.  references  external links   official website  facebook page  youtube channel  animal welfare organizations based in the united states organizations based in colorado springs, colorado
tcr international is a ground support equipment (gse) supplier company, headquartered in brussels, belgium. the company provides ground support equipment  to ground handlers, airlines, airports and cargo handlers. currently the company operates at approximately 150 airports worldwide.  tcr international started rental and maintenance activities in 1996. at present, the company provides a range of gse services supporting handlers in their ground handling processes. the customer bases includes airlines, handling companies, airport,  integrators and cargo handlers. the company is headquartered in brussels. it has local offices in uk, france, spain, the netherlands, norway, ireland, italy, germany, sweden, denmark, the usa, malaysia australia and new zealand. the company employs 1300 people and rents 33,000 gse. in 2015, tcr started activities in asia. particularly it rents equipment in malaysia and japan. activities in the united states started in 2008 and tcr americas was also founded in 2015.  services  rental around 33,000 gse motorized or non-motorized are available for short or long term rental.  maintenance and ramp services workshops of the company are located airside. mobile workshops intervention are served in urgent conditions.  references   companies based in brussels
confederation of iranian students national union (; konfederasiun-e jahani-e mohasselin wa danesjuyan-e irani ettehadiya-ye melli, simply known as the confederation, or the federation of iranian students) was an international non-governmental organization purposed as the students' union of iranians studying abroad active during the 1960s and 1970s. it was more active in germany, france, england and the united states, among other countries. the confederation was a politically autonomous organization, made up by sympathizers of different iranian opposition groups to shah.  history  in 1952, the iranian students association in the united states (isaus) had been founded, an effort by the iranian embassy and american friends of the middle east, which has since been linked to the central intelligence agency (cia). in april 1960 student representatives from germany, france, and england met in heidelberg and established the confederation of iranian students (cis) in europe. these two groups isaus and cis merged to form the confederation of iranian students national union.   by the 1960s, there had been an international emergence of political opposition to the shah mohammad reza pahlavi's leadership in iran. many additional student groups supporting the iranian opposition organized together to join the confederation, including the iran liberation movement, socialist league of the iranian national movement, revolutionary organization of the tudeh party, storm marxist-leninist organization, as well as others.  in 1965, some cisnu leaders were arrested for attempting to murder shah mohammad reza pahlavi; as a result the event the group pushed towards more "radicalization". by 1971, the iranian government stated cisnu to be an illegal group.  in 1973, iranian passport holders that were officially recorded as holding foreign student visas was counted at 18,035 people; and of that number 93% of them were male. with 42% of these students living in the united states, 24% in germany, 10% in the united kingdom, 6% in austria, and 5% in france.  events  in may and june 1967, the shah mohammad reza pahlavi visited west germany. on june 2, 1967 in west berlin, iranian and german students (including the socialist german student union) protested the shahs visit, and it resulted in one student dying. the cisnu were part of the forefront of european-wide protests in 1967 and 1968.  on october 14, 1971, the  located at 3400 washington street was celebrating celebrating the 2500th anniversary of
the creation of the persian empire with the shah and the building was bombed, and the confederation had claimed responsibility.  see also    national front (iran), the opposing political party  references  further reading       international student organizations student organizations established in the 1960s student political organisations of iran
edward leo finnigan (may 10, 1911 - july 10, 1968) was an american football and basketball coach and player. he served as the head football coach at baldwin-wallace college-now known as baldwin wallace university-from 1949 to 1950 and at western reserve university-now known as case western reserve university-from 1951 to 1965, compiling a career college football coaching record of 68-52-9.  finnegan was also the head basketball coach at baldwin-wallace from 1935 to 1940, tallying a mark of 25-56.  playing career in high school, finnigan was a star athlete at john adams high school in cleveland.  finnegan was the first western reserve university athlete to earn nine varsity letters-three each in football, basketball, and track-at a time when freshmen were unable to play varsity sports.  he was football team captain and quarterback his senior year in 1932 leading the red cats to a 7-1 record.  his best sport was basketball, where he was an all-american during the 1932-33 season.  honors and death in recognition of his many contributions to the athletic community, both the cities of berea and cleveland proclaimed november 4, 1967 as "eddie finnigan day".  finnegan died of cancer july 10, 1968, at the cleveland clinic.  head coaching record  references  external links  encyclopedia of baldwin wallace university history: edward "eddie" finnigan  1911 births 1968 deaths american men's basketball players american football quarterbacks baldwin wallace yellow jackets football coaches baldwin wallace yellow jackets men's basketball coaches case western spartans athletic directors case western spartans football coaches case western spartans football players case western spartans men's basketball players college men's track and field athletes in the united states all-american college men's basketball players sportspeople from cleveland coaches of american football from ohio players of american football from cleveland basketball coaches from ohio basketball players from cleveland deaths from cancer in ohio john adams high school (ohio) alumni
t41 is  disability sport classification for disability athletics. it is used in track athlete and has a sister classification f41 for field athletes.  this is a classification for athletes with short stature.  sport   the t41 and f41 classification is for disability athletics. t41 do not currently challenge for any track events and none of the jumping events. the events presently open for t41 athletes are in the f41 shot put, javelin throw and discus throw.  the international paralympic committee defined this classification on their website in july 2016 as, "(short stature)".  performance and rules  in relay events involving t40s classes, no baton is used.  instead, a handoff takes place via touch in the exchange zone.  history the classification was created by the international paralympic committee  and has roots in a 2003 attempt to address "the overall objective to support and co-ordinate the ongoing development of accurate, reliable, consistent and credible sport focused classification systems and their implementation". t41 was created in 2013 as an additional classification to the t40 classification which covered competitors of short statue, primarily those with achondroplasia, or under a height of 140 cm for women or 145 cm (male). the t41 classification was added to divide the t40 category further, which would see the maximum height of t40 athletes set at 125 cm (female) and 130 cm (male) whilst the upper range for t41 athletes would retain the 140 cm and 145 cm limits.   in 2010, the ipc announced that they would release a new ipc athletics classification handbook that specifically dealt with physical impairments.  this classification guide would be put into effect following the closing ceremony of the 2012 summer paralympics. one of these changes was creating a minimum age to compete in this class. athletes needed to be at least 18 years old to compete.  this was to prevent still growing children from competing in this class despite otherwise not having a disability.  for the 2016 summer paralympics in rio, the international paralympic committee had a zero classification at the games policy.  this policy was put into place in 2014, with the goal of avoiding last minute changes in classes that would negatively impact athlete training preparations. all competitors needed to be internationally classified with their classification status confirmed prior to the games, with exceptions to this policy being dealt with on a case-by-case basis. in case there was a need for classification or reclassification at the games despite best efforts otherwise, athletics classification was scheduled for september 4 and september 5 at olympic
stadium.  for sportspeople with physical or intellectual disabilities going through  classification or reclassification in rio, their in competition observation event is their first appearance in competition at the games.  becoming classified short-statured athletes seeking to compete in this class first need to have a classification evaluation. during this, they undergo a medical examination where their height and limbs are measured, and are asked to demonstrate skills in athletics such as running and throwing. a determination is then made as to what classification an athlete should compete in.  competitors notable competitors in this classification include tunisian discus thrower and shot putter raoua tlili and british javelin thrower kyron duke.  see also   para-athletics classification  athletics at the summer paralympics  references  parasports classifications
middlesex north was an electoral riding in ontario, canada. it was created in 1867 at the time of confederation and was abolished in 1973 before the 1975 election.  members of provincial parliament  references  defunct ontario provincial electoral districts
maddie rice is an american guitarist. she performed several years with jon batiste's stay human, the house band for the late show with stephen colbert. she currently plays with the saturday night live band.  early life and education   rice grew up in salt lake city, utah, and attended judge memorial catholic high school.  rice moved to boston, massachusetts for college, where she attended the berklee college of music.  career   in september 2015, at the age of 22, she played lead guitar in jon batiste's stay human, the house band for the late show with stephen colbert.  she has toured the world with performers of all genres. in 2017 and 2018, she toured with a five piece band, rubblebucket, and played on their sun machine album. she also performed with the korean pop singer taeyang on 2 of his international tours (rise world tour 2014 and white night world tour 2017).  in 2019, she performed as part of the house band at the global citizen festival, for artists as diverse as french montana, carole king, and kelly clarkson. she toured with electronic dance music artist big wild.  in october 2020, she began appearing with the saturday night live band.  references  external links         living people 1993 births 21st-century american guitarists saturday night live band members musicians from utah stay human (band) members berklee college of music alumni the late show with stephen colbert 21st-century american women guitarists
the south african type et1 tender was a steam locomotive tender.  type et1 tenders were modified and reclassified type et tenders, which had entered service as tenders to class 15f  mountain type steam locomotives in 1947 and 1948. the modification resulted in a tender with a larger coal capacity, but the same water capacity.  origin the type et tender first entered service in 1947, as tenders to the last batch of 100 class 15f locomotives to enter service on the south african railways (sar). they were built by north british locomotive company to designs by doctor m.m. loubser, chief mechanical engineer of the sar from 1939 to 1949, and were equipped with mechanical stokers.  modification during the 1950s, some of the type et tenders were modified to enlarge their coal bunkers from  capacity. these modified tenders were designated type et1.  classification letters since many tender types are interchangeable between different locomotive classes and types, a tender classification system was adopted by the sar. the first letter of the tender type indicates the classes of engines to which it can be coupled. the "e_" tenders were arranged with mechanical stokers and could be used with the locomotive classes as shown.  class 15f, if equipped with a mechanical stoker.  class 23.  class 25nc.  class 26.  the second letter indicates the tender's water capacity. the "_t" tenders had a capacity of between .  a number, when added after the letter code, indicates differences between similar tender types, such as function, wheelbase or coal bunker capacity.  references  et1
st. martin's eve is a novel by ellen wood, first published in 1866. it takes its name from the festival of st. martin's day, held on november 11, the festivities for which in some countries commence on the previous evening; many of the critical events of the novel occur on this date over several years. the plot centres on the aftermath of george carleton st. john's untimely death, after which his second wife charlotte st. john (nee norris) is granted care of his two children-one by his first marriage (and the heir to alnwick), the other by theirs-but severe doubts surround her appropriateness for the role. in france, the bachelor frederick st. john seeks a reclusive existence in order to restore his finances; unexpectedly, he finds himself interposing in the engagement of adeline de castella to a french baron, with tragic consequences.  synopsis  the story is told as a third-person narrative that begins with the birth of benjamin ('benja') st. john, the delivery of whom results in the death of his mother. despite assertions that he will never remarry, her husband george carleton st. john takes a new wife, charlotte norris. george dies shortly afterwards of an inherited, constitutional weakness ('the alnwick curse'), after which benja and their son, george ('georgy'), are left to the care of charlotte. prompted by concerns that charlotte's envy of benja (who will inherit alnwick in place of her son) might lead her to harm him, his relative isaac st. john is left as a guardian to the child by a provision of the will. later, benja's nurse, honour tritton, grows increasingly alarmed by charlotte's violent behaviour towards the child. in an attempt to soothe benja, she builds him a toy made of paper and candles; left alone with the toy, and after the doors to the room are seemingly locked, the child is burned to death. eventually judged to be an accident, nonetheless charlotte is deeply disturbed by the event: she becomes prone to hallucinations about the child and the lighted toy, and decides to leave alnwick with her son george.  the bachelor frederick st. john relocates to france as a means of restoring his precarious financial situation. there he finds himself infatuated with adeline de castella, who is already engaged to the baron de la chasse. frederick is repeatedly rebuffed as he makes overtures to her family for them to be married
instead and launches a failed attempt to elope to england. finally, adeline is made aware by her father that their marriage would be an affront to their catholic faith (frederick is protestant), and is made to promise that she cannot tell frederick this. unable to sanction her behaviour, frederick returns to england, but the turmoil of his departure takes its toll on adeline; after a protracted illness, she dies of consumption. her close companions, rose darling (charlotte's sister) and mary carr, finally manage to contact frederick and take him to see adeline, whose body is preserved as part of its reception before the funeral. in the meantime, charlotte's son george dies in ypres, her household having been constantly on the move across europe since the death of benja; her own son never recovered from the shock of that night, and charlotte experiences another hallucination during a procession of candles on st. martin's eve.    some time later, in england, charlotte is lodged in the household of isaac st. john. frederick suspects her of hereditary madness and that she intends to marry isaac in order to acquire his fortune; various incidents suggest to him that her jealousy of him might lead her to commit violence against the other women also there. prance, charlotte's close confidante, elicits the help of her mother after her behaviour grows increasingly erratic, but they cannot make her leave the house. frederick's suspicions are confirmed when a physician is able to confirm that charlotte's father died mad. after a manic episode leads charlotte to be committed to a lunatic asylum, prance voices her suspicions that it was charlotte who locked the doors on the burning child, benja.  characters  george carleton st. john - the master of alnwick   frederick st. john    mrs. norris darling - charlotte's mother  charlotte st. john (nee norris) - second wife of george st. john and mother to his son, george  benjamin ('benja') st. john - first child of george st. john and the heir to alnwick  george ('georgy') st. john - second child of george st. john and charlotte's only child  isaac st. john  prance - a servant at alnwick hall and close confidante of charlotte  honour tritton - benja's nurse  references  1866 british novels novels set in france victorian novels novels set in england
hypaeus tridactylus is a species of jumping spider from the brazilian amazon, specifically juruti, para.  references  salticidae spiders of brazil spiders described in 2015
henry strong huntington jr. (1882-1981), was a presbyterian minister who advocated the healthful advantages of nudism. he established the burgoyne trail nudist camp near otis, massachusetts. he was editor of the magazine, the nudist.  he was also an advocate of eugenics.  clerical career huntington was born in gorham, maine, where his father was a congregational church minister. he graduated from yale university in 1904 and was ordained as a minister in 1911 at the auburn theological seminary, and became the minister of the hope presbyterian church in watertown, n.y.  after his ordination he became survey secretary of the presbyterian synod of new york. during world war i, huntington was a member of the american red cross commission in palestine. after the war, he became active in the interchurch world movement and from 1919 to 1925 he was associate editor of the periodical, christian work.  nudism huntington first encountered the nudist movement on a trip to germany in 1926. his interest continued after later trips to britain, france and, a further visit to germany. in 1929, he joined the american league for physical culture, an early promoter of organized nudism in the united states. he helped to prepare the league's statement of principles and standards. this statement became the american nudist movement's statement on the meaning and philosophy of nudism.  in 1931, huntington was elected the first president of the international nudist conference, an american group, which later became the national nudism organization, and in 1933 he became the first editor of the nudist magazine, later called sunshine and health. in the same year, huntington, with an associate, the revd ilsley boone, established the burgoyne trail nudist camp near otis, massachusetts.  this was one of the first nudist camps in the united states.  in 1932, huntington addressed the first nudist convention held in the united states, this convention took place in highland, ny, at that convention huntington said that "the goodness of man and the possible satisfactoriness of life make the nudist feel that god is a very kind and friendly being." he later described his forest frolicking with similarly minded friends as "poetry incamate".  in 1934 he attended the international nudist conference in akron, ohio at which ilsley boone was the president, huntington was introduced as the editor of the magazine, the nudist.  eugenics huntington's brother, ellsworth huntington, was a yale university geographer and member of the american eugenics society (a
es). in 1925 the aes authorized the establishment of three committees, one of which was the committee on cooperation with clergymen. of the three, it was this one that would become one of the largest and most well-funded of the fourteen standing committees of the society. the aes named ellsworth's brother the revd henry huntington to head the clergymen's committee.  it was left to henry huntington to develop a program and draft religious leaders into the committee. huntington had an innate intellectual restlessness which led him to exotic travels and many odd jobs before his editorship at the christian work magazine in the early 1920s.  huntington had been interested in eugenics for some time, and (perhaps under the influence of his brother ellsworth) had devoted considerable time to studying the major theorists of the movement. he wrote the pamphlet, baptist babies,  published by the northern baptist convention.  this tract was sent to every baptist minister in the convention. the pamphlet described the eugenics program and made a plea for payments given per child to defray the costs of bearing and raising children, specifically for the clergy.  while in palestine with the red cross commission in 1916, he wrote to the eugenicist and biologist, charles davenport to request copies of the eugenics record office's record of family traits, noting that he was "intensely interested in the practical implications of eugenics" and believed that "we can educate the people here and educate them within a generation" about its importance.  in a letter to potential members of the aes's committee on cooperation with clergymen, huntington repeated these educational hopes and described the committee as a forum to "work out methods of forwarding the teaching of eugenics through the churches" and to locate "new opportunities for the usefulness of the churches" in the eugenics campaign.  by 1927, huntington had convinced thirty-nine prominent ministers to join the committee on cooperation.  later life  in 1938, huntington resigned his ministry, declaring himself a humanist and an agnostic; he eventually joined the philadelphia ethical society.  huntington died in february 1981 at the unitarian-universalist house in philadelphia, where he lived. he was 99 years old. he was survived by two daughters, alice allen of amherst, mass., mary of hightstown, n.j., three sons, henry s. of dedham, mass., thomas f. of princeton, n.j. and david c. of ann arbor, mich., 13 grandchildren and five great-grandchildren.  published works  references  further reading , a work by
the father of the subject of this article, father and son share exactly the same name.  external links  at the brigham young university  1882 births 1981 deaths american eugenicists american naturists american presbyterian ministers people from gorham, maine people from otis, massachusetts social nudity advocates
hopeville may refer to:  hopeville, indiana hopeville, west virginia
eunidia obliquevittipennis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1971.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1971
end of (the) night may refer to:   dawn, the beginning of morning twilight  arts and media  films  nishant (film) (english: night's end), a 1975 hindi film directed by shyam benegal  the end of the night, a 1989 italian film directed by davide ferrario  at the end of the night, a 2003 italian film directed by salvatore piscicelli  literature  the end of night (book), 2013 book by paul bogard  songs  "end of the night", a 1967 song by the doors  "end of night" (song), a 2013 song by dido  television  "end of nights", an episode of the television series sanctuary  other uses  nishant (name), a common indian male given name, literally meaning "end of night"  see also  journey to the end of the night (disambiguation)
xenorhabdus hominickii  is a bacterium from the genus of xenorhabdus which has been isolated from the nematodes steinernema karii in kenya and steinernema monticolum from korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of xenorhabdus hominickii at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  bacteria described in 2006
my market kitchen is an australian cooking television series which debuted on network ten on 22 august 2016, currently hosted by matt sinclair, laura sharrad and mike reid. it was previously hosted by emma dean and lynton tapp from 2016 to 2018, then elena duggan and khanh ong for the 2019 series and ben o'donoghue for the 2020 series.  presenters  references  external links  my market kitchen hq at instagram my market kitchen tv my market kitchen - about us  network 10 original programming australian cooking television series 2016 australian television series debuts
giovanni intra (may 1968 - 17 december 2002) was an artist, writer, and art dealer who moved from his native new zealand to the united states in 1996.  life  intra was born in auckland in 1968 and grew up in turangi, a small town in the centre of new zealand's north island, and auckland where he attended dilworth, a boys' school.  he studied at the university of auckland's elam school of fine arts, completing a bachelor of fine arts with a major in sculpture in 1990 and a master of fine art in 1993. curator robert leonard has described him as a 'precocious student': he established a reputation as a conceptual painter while still in his teens.  intra was fascinated by surrealist photography, such as the work of jacques-andre boiffard, who was also a medical photographer. in his art work he investigated medicine, which he saw to have replaced religion as a source of hope for modern day society, and the frailties of the human body. his early work integrated ideas about culture text and body from non-western sources; some of which were derived from his travels in india c. 1988. his use of text, voice and typography presages his later engagement with theory and criticism.  intra became part of a collective of artists that established the influential auckland artist-run space teststrip in 1992.  in 1996 intra was awarded a fulbright scholarship and travelled to los angeles to study at the art center college of design in pasadena. he completed a master's degree in critical studies in 2001. his thesis was based on daniel paul schreber's 1903 book memoirs of my nervous illness (1903), and used texts by artists including salvador dali and robert smithson to "suggest ways that art writing might be reinvented."  writing  intra began writing about art for a magazine named stamp while at art school in auckland. at the time of his death intra was west coast editor for art and text, and helped edit the magazine semiotext; his writing was published in tema celeste, artforum, bookforum and flash art.  china art objects  in 1998 intra and fellow art student steve hanson, who intra worked with in the library at the art center, decided to start an artist-run gallery. they found a location in los angeles' chinatown district and named the gallery china art objects, after a sign left by a previous tenant. the gallery opened in january 1999 and was the beginning of the transformation of chung king road as a contemporary art scene. china art
objects became an influential dealer gallery, an early supporter of a number of los angeles artists.  death  intra died in manhattan in december 2002, on a visit for the opening of an exhibition by one of china art objects' artists. in an obituary for frieze will bradley wrote that intra would be remembered "for his achievements as an artist, writer and co-founder of china art objects galleries in los angeles, and equally for his enthusiasm, intelligence, integrity, warmth and all-around obvious decency".  in 2007 intra's mother donated his archives to the auckland art gallery. an exhibition based on the archive, beginning in the archive: giovanni intra 1968-2002, curated by kate brettkelly chalmers, was staged at the auckland gallery artspace in 2008.  public collections  works by intra are held in many public art collections in new zealand and australia, including:  auckland art gallery christchurch art gallery dunedin public art gallery govett-brewster art gallery museum of new zealand te papa tongarewa national gallery of victoria  references  1968 births 2002 deaths people from auckland drug-related deaths in new york city elam art school alumni new zealand contemporary artists
the 2016 winnipeg national bank challenger was a professional tennis tournament played on outdoor hard courts. it was the 1st edition, for men, and 4th edition, for women, of the tournament and part of the 2016 atp challenger tour and the 2016 itf women's circuit, offering totals of $75,000, for men, and $25,000, for women, in prize money. it took place in winnipeg, manitoba, canada between july 11 and july 17, 2016.  men's singles main draw entrants  seeds  1 rankings are as of june 27, 2016  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:  felix auger-aliassime  kevin kylar  brayden schnur  benjamin sigouin  the following player entered the singles main draw with a protected ranking:  blaz kavcic  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:  dayne kelly   james mcgee   cameron norrie  aleksandar vukic  women's singles main draw entrants  seeds  1 rankings are as of june 27, 2016  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:  bianca andreescu  isabelle boulais  marie-alexandre leduc  carol zhao  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:  jessie aney  francesca di lorenzo  jessica failla  catherine leduc  erin routliffe  kennedy shaffer  kristina smith  ronit yurovsky  champions  men's singles   go soeda def.  blaz kavcic, 6-7(4-7), 6-4, 6-2  women's singles   francesca di lorenzo def.  erin routliffe, 6-4, 6-1  men's doubles    mitchell krueger /  daniel nguyen def.  jarryd chaplin /  benjamin mitchell, 6-2, 7-5  women's doubles   francesca di lorenzo /  ronit yurovsky def.  marie-alexandre leduc /  charlotte robillard-millette, 1-6, 7-5, [10-6]  external links official website  winnipeg national bank challenger winnipeg national bank challenger winnipeg challenger winnipeg national bank challenger
ooyala is a 1998 telugu-language drama film directed by s. v. krishna reddy, starring srikanth, ramya krishna, nassar and suhasini. it is the remake of the malayalam movie irattakuttikalude achan.  this film is about a couple sacrificing one of their twins to another childless couple. the music for this film was well received by the audience.  cast  srikanth  ramya krishna  nassar  suhasini   s. p. balasubrahmanyam  brahmanandam  mallikarjuna rao  sudhakar  avs  rajitha  soundtrack  references  external links    ooyala film on youtube  1998 films telugu-language films indian films indian romantic drama films films directed by s. v. krishna reddy films scored by s. v. krishna reddy 1990s telugu-language films
thrashbird, is a los angeles-based street artist of unverified identity known for his billboard takeovers, stencils and wheatpastes. he is known widely in the street art community as a snitch, (source? not the one listed) and for this reason works keeps his identity private. his satirical street art and subversive content combine clever humor with social observations to highlight issues including: media obsession, selfie culture and reliance on technology. in 2016, he was listed on kcrw's radio broadcast as being one of the most exciting contemporary street artists to watch.  urban projects and the clone  thrashbird is known for putting his work in urban areas where his message can reach a large target audience. the artist became known with his image of the texting clone, a silhouette of a slender figure in a hoodie, glued to his phone and hunched to read the screen. when blackberry phones were popular, thrashbird noticed this his friends were more interested in their phones than in the world around them. when the iphone was released this trend got worse, inspiring thrashbird to respond through his art.  desert projects  more recently, thrashbird has expanded his city practice to the desert, exploring the energies of the natural landscape and abandoned built environments. combining the topography of the desert and its neglected structures with the artist's creativity, thrashbird designs from the shapes and surfaces he encounters and transforms them into something playful and nostalgic.  public activism and auctions  awareness and activism are central themes in thrashbird's work and the artist has presented in several symposia to talk about them. for example, in 2016 he was a featured guest at the la art show speaking on a panel on the commercialization of street art. his work has been included in street art auctions, including the 2016 street art and contemporary art sale at julien's auctions alongside works by banksy, shepard fairey and mr. brainwash.  street art as a sign of protest and dissent -thrashbird in an exclusive interview== references ==  year of birth missing (living people) living people
gary paul haney friba, faia (born april 16, 1955) is an american architect, a design partner in the firm of skidmore, owings & merrill. haney's approach draws heavily on environmental modeling techniques, deep materials research, and advanced building information modeling (bim) technologies. buildings on which he was lead designer include the supertall al hamra tower in kuwait city and civic buildings in the united states including two public safety answering centers in new york city and the united states census bureau headquarters and the redesign of the national museum of american history, both in washington, d.c.  early life and education born in middletown, ohio, haney earned a bachelor of environmental design in architecture from miami university in oxford, ohio, where he studied under richard mccommons, helping him design and construct private residences. he then became the first employee of the newly formed firm alesia & crewell before studying for a master of architecture at harvard university graduate school of design, where he participated in studios with michael mckinnell and gerhard kallmann and graduated in 1981.  career haney joined skidmore, owings & merrill as a junior designer in the technical department and was certified as a registered architect in 1987. he became a design partner with the firm in 1996. the bulk of his career has been in applied design work.  notable buildings  tall and supertall buildings  al hamra tower  al hamra tower in kuwait city, completed in 2011, is an example of haney and his team's use of building information modeling (bim) technologies. with 77 floors and 412 meters (1,351 ft) tall, it is the tallest building in kuwait. the building won a merit award from the new york chapter of the american institute of architects (aia) in 2013.  other notable tall building projects underway, completed, or design-stage submissions by haney include the manhattan west development, zhong hong tower, shum yip upperhills, longgang tian'an cyber park, international gem tower, baccarat hotel and residences, new york,  and al sharq tower.  civic and government buildings  ottawa embassy   haney was lead architect with david childs on the united states embassy in ottawa, ontario, dedicated by president clinton in october 1999. the design had to be completely changed after the oklahoma city bombing required a more secure building. the building's glazed facade was eliminated, and some walls are four feet thick. according to architecture critic benjamin forgey, childs and haney managed to build the
structure "like a bunker, without making it look like one".  u.s. census bureau headquarters   the new u.s. census bureau headquarters in suitland, maryland, officially opened in 2007, was designed to accommodate a workforce that fluctuates because of the periodic nature of the census, had to be constructed around operational structures, and was limited to eight stories by site regulations. essentially two buildings hewn from a central mass, it is 1,200 meters (3,937 feet) long. the design uses laminated wood on the facade, seeking to make those inside feel as if they are in a woodland. the building won a green good design award from the chicago athenaeum in 2009 and an award of excellence in architecture from the washington chapter of the aia in 2012.  smithsonian national museum of american history renovation   haney led the $85 million renovation of the national museum of american history, part of the smithsonian institution in washington, d.c. the highly trafficked museum, with nearly 3 million visitors in 2005, was closed the following year for the renovation, which increased light by creating a five-story atrium and re-organized 300,000 square feet of exhibition space around the original star-spangled banner. it reopened in november 2008. the renovation won an award of merit at the 2013 aia washington d.c. design awards.  education  haney also serves as an educator and lecturer. he has taught at mit, miami university, and ball state university and became a faculty member in architectural practice at northeastern university in september 2013 and is the current chair of the national building museum in washington.  architectural designs  tall buildings    al hamra tower, kuwait city, kuwait (2011)  manhattan west development, new york, new york (2015)  bbva bancomer operations center, mexico city, mexico, (2015)  international gem tower (55 west 46th street), new york, new york (2013)  baccarat hotel & residences, new york, new york, (2015)  qatar petroleum centre, doha, qatar (2014)  feidi next c master plan, tianjin, china   arb headquarters, riyadh, kingdom of saudi arabia   central bank of kuwait, kuwait (2003)  400 fifth avenue, new york, new york (not built)  new york mercantile exchange, new york, new york (1997)  255 fifth, cincinnati, ohio (1990)  shanghai jw marriott marquis hotel, shanghai, china (2017)  al sharq tower, dubai
, united arab emirates (unspecified)  jumeirah messilah beach hotel, kuwait (2010)  shum yip upperhills class a office & luxury hotel complex, shenzhen, china (2017)  zhong hong tower, beijing, china (2016)  longgang tian'an cyber park, longgang, shenzhen, china (2016)  shenzhen rural commercial bank, bo'an, shenzhen, china (2016)  tangshan zhaorui international plaza, tangshan, china (2017)  government   international monetary fund headquarters, washington, d.c. (2012)  u.s. census bureau headquarters, suitland, maryland (2007)  u.s. patent and trademark office, alexandria, virginia (2005)  fbi metropolitan field headquarters, washington, d.c. (1995)  public safety answering center ii, bronx, new york (2015)  public safety answering center i, brooklyn, new york (2001)  smithsonian national museum of american history, renovation & expansion, washington, d.c. (2009)  u.s. federal courthouse, charleston, west virginia (1998)  u.s. embassy, ottawa, ontario, canada (1999)  u.s. courthouse for the southern district of new york, white plains (1995)  port authority bus station (20 times square), new york, new york (2003)  other   1801 k street, nw, washington, d.c. (2009)  2001 k street, washington, d.c. (2000)  c4isr headquarters campus, aberdeen, maryland (unspecified)  city santa fe residences, mexico city, mexico (2016)  al rayyan boulevard and residential development, doha, qatar (2006)  georgetown plaza and four seasons hotel, washington, d.c. (1979)  park hyatt hotel - u.s. news & world report complex, washington, d.c. (1986)  national defense university, lincoln hall, fort mcnair, washington, d.c. (2008)  edwards center, university of cincinnati, cincinnati, ohio (1992)  metro center, washington, d.c. (1983)  park imperial and random house headquarters, new york, new york (2003)  hamilton square/garfinkel's renovation, washington, d.c. (1996)  publications  efficiency: an analytical approach to tall office buildings (northeastern university press, 2013: editor)  references  external links
official page at skidmore, owings & merrill  living people american architects skyscraper architects 1955 births harvard graduate school of design alumni miami university alumni
tim emmett (born 1973-74), is a british-born adventure climber and cimbing author, who practices to a high level in a diverse range of climbing disciplines, being ice-climbing, rock climbing, deep-water soloing (of which he is considered a poineer) and alpine climbing.  emmett has established the hardest waterfall ice-climbs in the world, and was the first to climb grades of w10 and above.  early life  tim emmett was born in taunton in somerset in england, and went to school at richard huish college, where he got his a-levels in biology, chemistry and mathematics.  while at huish,  emmett started climbing on a school trip at the age of 15 to a local crag called chudleigh rocks.  in 1993, he went on to study marine zoology at bangor university, north wales, where he became a prominent climber, featuring on the magazine cover of on the edge while still at university.  career  deep-water soloing emmett is regarded as a pioneer of deep-water soloing (dws), and in 2003, a short film on dws called psicobloc by american brothers josh and brett lowell chronicled emmett and klem loskot's 2001 development of dws routes in cova del diablo in mallorca, spain, which inspired us rock climber chris sharma to get involved in dws. in 2019, adventure filmmaker jon glassberg, created another dws short film called deep water featured on emmett and us rock-climber kyra condie developing dws routes in ha long bay in vietnam.  ice climbing  emmett's notable ice-climbs include the first ever waterfall ice climb at grade w10 (spray on, in 2010 with will gadd, at helmcken falls), at grade w11 (wolverine, in 2011 with klemen premrl, at helmcken falls), at grade w12 (interstellar spice, in 2016 with klemen premrl, at helmcken falls), and at grade w13 (misson to mars, in 2020 with klemen premrl, at helmcken falls).  from 2002 to 2007, emmett made the podium 4 times in tour events of the world ice climbing championships.  in 2015, emmett was the red bull "white cliffs champion".  rock climbing  emmett's rock climbs include some of the highest-grade traditional routes with notable ascents including the 2017 repeat of sonnie trotter's superman in squam
ish (5.14c, f8c+), and the 2016 repeat of trotter's the path in lake louise (5.14r, f8b+).  in 2010, emmett established muy caliente!, and early contender for the first traditional grade of e10 in pembroke in wales.  alpine climbing  for high altitude alpine climbing, emmett was nominated for a 2006 piolet d'or for climbing a new route on the south east pillar of kedar dome  in the garhwal himalaya with ian parnell 2006.  in 2019, emmett and his team had to abandon an expedition to mount everest due to the avalanche risk on the route they were planning.  para-alpinism  with para-alpinism, two adventure sports are merged, base jumping, and big wall climbing.  after ascending a large wall on vertical rock, emmett put a parachute on to descend down. only a handful of people do this type of climbing, and emmett retired from it at the age of 40 due to its high risk of fatality. emmett has also done wingsuit flying.  media  emmett has appeared in more than 50 magazines that of which include outside magazine, sports illustrated, gripped, grip, desnivel, gq and others. emmett has been the subject of several short films on climbing, including psiobloc (2003), dosage ii (2004), dosage iii (2005), welsh connections (2009), mountain (2017), and deep water (2019).  emmett has made several appearances on the bbc as a presenter and guest, including: ultimate rock climb with julia bradbury (2007), the great climb with british climber dave macleod (2010), and top gear (episode 2, season 7) with jeremy clarkson racing up a mountain with leo houlding (2005).  emmett has worked with steve backshall on his children's show.  in 2005, emmett wrote a book with fellow british-climber neil gresham called preposterous tales, about their climbing exploits around the world.  he has presented the duke of edinburgh award three times at st. james's palace.  personal emmett moved to canada and is married and living in squamish.  see also mountain hardwear, emmett's long-term sponsor mountain, 2017 film that includes tim emmett  references  external links       tim emmett filmography at mntnfilm database (2021)  living people people from taunton alumni of bangor university british rock climbers english mountain climbers ice climbers 1973 births
osteoclast stimulatory transmembrane protein is a protein that in humans is encoded by the ocstamp gene.  references  further reading
northup is an unincorporated community in gallia county, in the u.s. state of ohio.  history a post office called northup was established in 1858. the community was named after john s. northup, founder.  references  unincorporated communities in gallia county, ohio
christian krypper (died 1573) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1570-1573).  on 8 november 1570, christian krypper was appointed during the papacy of pope pius v as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop of symbalia. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 12 nov 1573.  see also catholic church in germany  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope pius v 1573 deaths place of birth missing year of birth unknown
safin taki (born november 9, 1983) is a kurdish, swedish producer, director and cinematographer from sweden. safin taki moved to sweden at the age of 1 with his parents sliman faiq taki and leocardia taki and big brother aras taki. safin grew up in small town in sweden, soderhamn. later on they moved to sweden's west coast where safin began studying film and media.  at the age of 16 safin directed his first stop-motion animation short film the expedition. the film was well received at swedish film festivals winning the frame film festival in skovde and the jury's special prize (lasse dahlqvist, lukas moodysson, fanny danielsson) at novemberfestivalen in trollhattan, sweden. in 2001 safin directed the short film ingen atervando starring martin wallstrom and niklas grussell. the movie was awarded the swedish film institutes "zoom priset" and the award for best male performances by the jury (jacob bastviken, josef fares, cecillia nordlund) at the novemberfestivalen in trollhattan, sweden.  filmography  the expedition, animation short (2000) sweden - (director, cinematography)]  borta for alltid, short (2001) sweden - (director, cinematography)  ingen atervando, short (2001) sweden - (director, cinematography)  dilemmat, feature (2001) sweden - (cinematography)  rec, short (2002) sweden - (cinematography)  guldfisken, short (2003) sweden - (director, cinematography)  fester & rex, animation short (2003) sweden - (director, cinematography)  bad day, short (2006) kurdistan - (director)  twins, short (2006) kurdistan - (cinematography)  a new world, short (2006) kurdistan - (cinematography)  newlyweds, short (2007) kurdistan - (director, cinematography)  through the window, short (2007) kurdistan - (sound recordist)  old and new, short (2007) kurdistan - (sound recordist)  jin ba jin (trading women), short (2008) kurdistan - (director)]  free like a bird, short (2008) kurdistan  - (cinematography)  broken mirror, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  bloody honor, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  you are not alone,
short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  trauma, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  golden years, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  the cell, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  the challenge, short (2008) kurdistan - (cinematography)  trying, short (2009) - kurdistan - (director, cinematography)  fgm mustafa zalmi, documentary (2011) kurdistan - (cinematography)  peaceful coexistence, documentary (2013) kurdistan - (cinematography)  risk it all, music video (2014) kurdistan - (producer, cinematography)  the life of street kids, short (2014) - (cinematography)  revolution, music video (2015) kurdistan - (producer, cinematography)  supas peshmerga, documentary (2015) - (cinematography)  mini library for refugees, documentary short, (2014) kurdistan - (cinematography, editor)  shouted from the rooftops, short (2016) - (sound recordist)  references  glimz.net (2001)  novemberfestivalen, trollhattan (2001)  stage 32 (2013)  he moved to kurdistan region, iraq in 2004 and helped develop and co-found the kurdish school of cinema.  http://duhokiff.com/index.php/archive/festival-2011/selection/short-films/item/485-trading-women/485-trading-women  external links http://www.imdb.com/name/nm1335921/ http://novemberfestivalen.se/?page_id=25 http://tidskrift.nu/artikel.php?id=1035 https://vimeo.com/user16972040 https://www.youtube.com/channel/ucqeqbvmym25btfzqrffliyw  living people 1983 births
beach soccer competition at the 2016 asian beach games was held in da nang, vietnam from 25 september to 2 october 2016 at bien đong park.  medalists  results  first round  group a  group b  group c  group d  knockout round  quarterfinals  semifinals  bronze medal match  gold medal match  goalscorers  10 goals       8 goals       7 goals     6 goals     5 goals           4 goals         3 goals                           2 goals                         1 goal  references  external links official website official result book - beach soccer  2016 asian beach games events beach 2016 asian beach games
the 1920-21 sk rapid wien season was the 23rd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  references  1920-21 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
campus diary is an upcoming malayalam political drama film directed by debutante jeevan das. the script is written by vinish palayad.  v. s. achuthanandan is debuting as an actor through this film, which also stars sudev nair, gauthami nair, rj mathukutty, suraj venjaramoodu.  cast  v. s. achuthanandan ... vs achuthanandan  sudev nair as nikhil  gauthami nair as krishnapriya   rj mathukutty   suraj venjaramoodu   joy mathew   sunil sukhada  renji panicker   kottayam nazeer  mamukkoya  s. p. sreekumar  thalaivasal vijay  lakshmi priya  anu sithara  sreevidya mullachery  music the music and background score for the film is composed by bijibal, the lyrics is written by rafeeq ahammed.  references  indian films 2010s malayalam-language films 2010s political drama films indian political drama films 2016 films 2016 drama films  external link
franchini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  gene e. franchini (1935-2009), american lawyer and judge gianfranco franchini (1938-2009), italian architect irene franchini (born 1981), italian archer luca franchini (born 1983), italian footballer niccolo franchini (1704-1783), italian painter roberto franchini (born 1973), australian ice hockey player teresa franchini (1877-1972), italian actress  italian-language surnames
sangrur assembly constituency (sl. no.: 108) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in sangrur district, punjab state, india. constituency consists of sangrur, bhawanigarh and other nearby villages. current mla from constituency is vijay inder singla of inc preceded by parkash chand garg of shiromani akali dal.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  2007  2002  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sangrur district
paramjit singh bahia (born november 10, 1950) is a former field hockey player who represented canada on the men's national team in the 1978 world cup, argentina and the 1979 pan am games (silver medal), puerto rico.  references   1950 births canadian male field hockey players living people 1978 men's hockey world cup players canadian people of indian descent
wesley koolhof and matwe middelkoop were the defending champions but chose not to defend their title.  julian knowle and igor zelenay won the title after defeating facundo arguello and julio peralta 6-4, 7-5 in the final.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  advantage cars prague open - men's doubles advantage cars prague open
james d. burke (born september 18, 1925) is an american lunar settlement and exploration expert. he is known for being the first manager of the ranger program, and considered one of the pioneers of america's space program  early life and career burke grew up in claremont, california and graduated from webb high school in 1942.  in 1945, after graduating in mechanical engineering from california institute of technology, he became a u.s. naval aviator. burke returned to caltech to receive his msc in aeronautics, before coming to work for jpl in 1949.  in his time in jpl, burke was the vega program director,  developing the third stage of the general-purpose vega launch vehicle, which was based on the atlas rocket.  following jpl's transfer from the u.s. navy to nasa, and reorganization during early 1960, the lunar and planetary program was created. burke was named deputy of the lunar program under clifford cummings, before becoming the ranger spacecraft project manager as well.  ranger program  burke was the first program manager of the ranger program, a series of unmanned space missions by the united states in the 1960s whose objective was to obtain the first close-up images of the surface of the moon. the ranger spacecraft were designed to take images of the lunar surface, transmitting those images to earth until the spacecraft were destroyed upon impact. burke was in charge of spacecraft design, deep space tracking and control network, space flight operations and data reduction support systems, while the space science division was in charge of the scientific experiments. burke could combine the technological and theoretical to integrate mechanical and electrical features to achieve the difficult technical objectives. along with his two associates, burke had solved the major guidance problem, velocity control, associated with solid-propellant ballistic missiles. he was recognized as one of the laboratory's most perceptive research engineers, and advanced to become deputy to cummings on the vega program.  technical difficulties and challenges, led to the failure of the first six flights. following the first five failures, h.m. schurmeier became project manager. the ranger program suffered an additional failure before ranger 7 was successful.  burke participated in many other lunar, planetary and astrophysical projects. he was a member of the human-powered flight team that won the kremer prize.  burke continued to work in jpl until his retirement in 2001.  minor planet 4874 burke, discovered by eleanor helin is named after him, when he retired from jpl.  outreach and education burke was a faculty member of the
international space university since 1989.  burke and his wife, caroline (lin), were advisers at the founding conference of the space generation advisory council during unispace iii in vienna and have participated in many space generation activities. burke is an honorary board member of sgac.  burke has been involved with the planetary society from the beginning. he has been the technical editor of newsletter, "the planetary report" for many years.  selected publications burke has over 129 works in 165 publications  burke, j, brereton, r, muller, p. 1970," desert stream channels resembling lunar sinuous rilles". in nature, vol. 225, 23 march,  pp1234-1236, (28 march 1970); doi:10.1038/2251234a0  burke, j. 1985, "merits of a lunar polar base location". in mendell, w. (ed.). lunar bases and space activities of the 21st century, lunar and planetary institute.  burke, j. 2001, "moon".  in encyclopædia britannica, 24th edition.  burke, j. 2008, "moon". in mcgraw-hill encyclopedia of science and technology, 10th ed.  references  external links  jim burke - looking back 35 years, interview on the planetary society radio  james burke on the space show, episode 189, jan 24, 2004  1925 births living people nasa people early spaceflight scientists 20th-century american engineers california institute of technology alumni people from claremont, california engineers from california
wvhy (97.1 fm) is a commercial radio station licensed in the us to axson, georgia. wvhy is part of a group of south georgia radio stations playing classic hits, and is owned by victor m. vickers.  references   wvhy. "fcc station information ", federal communications commission, 12/03/2015.  wvhy. " city of license change ", federal register , 05/27/2014.  wvhy. " public notice ", the clinch county news, 09/11/2013.  external links  vhy radio stations established in 2016 2016 establishments in georgia (u.s. state) classic hits radio stations in the united states
antonio salvador (born 21 march 1968) is a spanish former cyclist. he competed in the points race at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people spanish male cyclists olympic cyclists of spain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from madrid
mehtabgarh is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
wilson brown (august 27, 1804 - august 27, 1855) was an american politician. he was the lieutenant governor of missouri from 1853 until his death in office in 1855. he also served in the missouri house of representatives from 1838 to 1839.  references  1804 births 1855 deaths lieutenant governors of missouri members of the missouri house of representatives missouri democrats  19th-century american politicians
miyagawa may refer to: miyagawa-cho, one of the hanamachi or geisha districts in kyoto miyagawa dam, dam in the fukushima prefecture of japan miyagawa, mie, village located in taki district, mie prefecture, japan miyagawa station, railway station in ise  people with the surname , japanese women's footballer miyagawa choshun (1683-1753), japanese painter  daisuke miyagawa (born 1973), japanese comedian and actor hakaru miyagawa (1905-1949), manager of leper hospitals miyagawa issho, japanese painter in the ukiyo-e style kazuo miyagawa (1908-1999), japanese cinematographer keiko miyagawa (born 1986), japanese sailor satoshi miyagawa (born 1977), japanese football player , japanese rower sho miyagawa (born 1990), japanese professional baseball pitcher miyagawa shunsui (c. 1740-60s), japanese painter and printmaker  miyagawa yashukichi (born 1888), japanese drug trafficker  japanese-language surnames
the magnificent seven are a group of seven mansions located west of the queen's park savannah in northern port of spain, trinidad and tobago on maraval road in the st clair neighborhood. they were built between 1902 and 1910 on land that was previously used as a government stock farm and are listed as heritage sites at the national trust of trinidad and tobago. stollmeyer's castle was the first building in the neighborhood and took several years to complete, as was typical of the magnificent seven.  the structures were designed in an array of architectural styles including french colonial, scottish baronial, indian empire, and moorish mediterranean  styles-often blended with caribbean architecture. many have unusual elements, like the chiming clock and lighted clock tower of queen's royal college. stollmeyer's castle is said to be modeled after a wing of balmoral castle. hayes court, a french colonial style building, has contemporary scottish cast iron elements and traditional demerara windows. white hall is made of natural white limestone of barbados. some of the structures were made of imported materials, like italian marble and scottish cast iron elements.  most were originally built as residences and kept within families for decades. archbishop's house was built as, and remains, the official residence of the archbishop of port of spain. the anglican bishop to trinidad resided in hayes court. queen's royal college was built as a secondary school for boys.  white hall was used as the office of the prime minister from 1963 to 2009. white hall and stollmeyer's castle fall under the purview of the office of the prime minister. the two buildings had  restoration work so that they could be used by foreign dignitaries   visiting port of spain. both buildings were commandeered by the united states armed forces during world war ii. most of the magnificent seven houses retain the aesthetics of the original designs. of the buildings, milles fleur is the one most in disrepair due to extended periods where it was not occupied or maintained.  overview the properties are listed by the national trust of trinidad and tobago as examples of the "city's remarkable architectural heritage." some of the buildings are in good condition, but others have been in need of repair, like mille fleurs, which was beginning to be restored in 2015.  this period of construction of the magnificent seven occurred just after the turn of the 20th-century, following a "disastrous" fire of 1895 in port of spain, after which non-flammable materials like metal, concrete, and cast iron were used in the construction new buildings. george brown
of the trinidad trading company, who built mille fleurs, did much of the rebuilding after the fire and is responsible for much of the metalwork used in the city at that time.  buildings  queen's royal college  queen's royal college, a national trust of trinidad and tobago listed building, was built on the corner of st clair avenue and maraval road beginning 11 november 1902, when the foundation stone was placed by the acting governor of the day, sir courtney knollys. daniel meinerts hahn, a former student of queen's royal college at the princes building, designed the german renaissance style building, which includes a chiming clock and lighted clock tower. he was the chief draughtsman of the public works department. according to the national trust, "queen's royal college is considered to be the most striking of the buildings of the magnificent seven."  the secondary school, designed with a tropical interior, was built with six classrooms and a lecture hall for 500 people. less than 200 students attended the school each year. as of 2016, the building is being restored, including the classroom's hand-painted murals. it is listed as heritage site and protected under the national trust act.  hayes court  hayes court, at 21 maraval road, was built as a residence for the anglican bishop to trinidad. an anonymous gift was made in 1908 by two men to pay for the construction of the building, which was built in a french colonial architectural style. the design incorporates contemporary scottish cast iron elements in decorative beams and columns for the veranda, which wrap around all but the west side of the house. on the western facade of the building are traditional demerara windows. the mansion was designed by taylor and gillies and completed in 1910. the residence was named for bishop thomas hayes, who served as archbishop in trinidad and tobago from 1889 to 1904. right reverend john francis welsh was the first resident. it is listed as heritage site and protected under the national trust act.  mille fleurs  mille fleurs at 23 maraval road was built and named by the wife of dr enrique prada (1867-1944) in 1904. dr prada oversaw the construction of the french provincial house by george brown of the trinidad trading company. the pradas lived in the house until 1923, when they sold it to joseph salvatori. it remained in the family until the salvatori's daughter, mrs pierre lelong sold it to george malouk in 1973. he sold it to the government of trinidad and tobago in june 1979.  it served several purposes over
the years and then was under the jurisdiction of the ministry of culture until june 2000, when it was assigned to the ministry of environment. the national trust states, "although mille fleurs is less ostentatious as some of its neighbours, the quality of finish and detailing is perhaps of a far higher quality; the intricately carved balusters and the marble treads and risers to both the main and secondary staircases, the elaborate cast iron columns and brackets." however, after a period of time when it was not occupied or maintained, it deteriorated significantly. it has since been restored, and in august 2020 it was handed over to the national trust. it is listed as a heritage site and protected under the national trust act.  ambard's house  at 25 maraval road is ambard's house, built by lucien f ambard who the french second empire style house designed by a french architect. he had it constructed in 1904, using wood from the ambard family estate in erin for the rafters. he also imported scottish cast iron elements, italian marble, and french tiles for its construction.  ambard lost the house to the gordon grant and company in 1919, when he was unable to make the mortgage payments. it was inhabited by an american, william pettigrew humphrey, and his family from 1925 to 1940. the house was purchased from humphrey by timothy roodal and it has stayed within the family. it is now the home of roodal's granddaughter, dr yvonne morgan and her family, and is now also called roomor house, based upon a combination of the roodal and morgan family names. the house has been well-maintained and true to the original design. it is listed as a heritage site and protected under the national trust act.  archbishop's palace  the archbishop's house, at 27 maraval road, is the official residence of the archbishop of port of spain, which, as of 2016, is the most reverend joseph everard harris, cssp. it was built in 1903 by patrick vincent flood, the fifth archbishop of port of spain. at that time other residences were being built on maraval road by wealthy french creoles. the building, designed by an irish architect in an indian empire architectural style, had a chapel and sacristy on the first floor. a porch wraps around the building. on the east facade, there is a porte-cochere  with wide bay and six additional, narrower bays. the west side has nine bays, and there are six bays on the south and north facades
. the property had a summer house and stables, which was accessed by an extended gallery on the west side of the main building. the construction was completed in 1904 by george brown of the trinidad trading company.   it was remodeled extensively from 1968 to 1969, based upon the architectural design of sonny sellier. a chancery was built in the west side of the building and a new apartment was built at the site of a summer house and stables. in some cases, the renovations deviated from the original aesthetic of the architectural design. for instance, aluminum sliding doors replaced the double wooden doors on the ground floor. the contractor was rev father kevin devenish. monsignor anthony pantin, the first trinidadian-born archbishop, lived in the house after the renovation was completed in 1969.  it is listed as heritage site and protected under the national trust act.  whitehall  white hall, on 29 maraval road, is the largest residence on the road. originally called rosenweg, it was built by joseph leon agostini, a cocoa planter, based upon his design plans. agostini's family was from corsica, and the influence is reflected in the house's moorish mediterranean inspired architecture. construction began in 1904, by james moore of barbados, and it took three years to complete the project, except for the roof that was not completed until 1910. the exterior was built using white limestone from barbados. it was a three-storied building with four reception halls, a library, drawing room, wine cellars, and large galleries. there were six bedroom suites with large dressing rooms and advanced, modern bathrooms. the house had long corridors, wide-sweeping marble staircases, and a service lift between floors.  agostini died in 1906, but his family occupied the house until they were unable to make payments on the mortgage and it was foreclosed by william gordon grant in 1910, according to the national trust. some believe that the agostinis never lived in white hall, because the cocoa industry, which was strong when construction began, collapsed while the house was being built.  an american, robert henderson, purchased the house and renamed it white hall, for the coral stone exterior of the building. the national trust states that he  added a "delightful variety in the furnishings of the interior was added to the refined dignity of the exterior." henderson's heirs, the seigert family, possessed the house until world war ii, when it was commandeered by the united states forces as the air raid precaution headquarters. it was rented for
use as a cultural centre by the british council in 1944.   although it was returned to the hendersons after the war, they never lived in it again. it was then rented for a number of purposes-including public libraries, national archives, and government broadcasting unit-until 1949. it was not used again until it was purchased by the government of trinidad and tobago in 1954. it was used by the pre-federal interim government in 1957, before the formation in 1958 of the west indies federation. hon. dr. eric williams, trinidad and tobago's first prime minister, used it as the office of the prime minister from 1963 to 2009. during that time, there was a restoration of the building in 2000.  it is listed as heritage site and protected under the national trust act. beginning about 2008, the urban development corporation (udecott) renovated the building so that it could be used by visiting foreign dignitaries.  stollmeyer's castle   stollmeyer's castle, also called killarney, is a scottish baronial style residence located at 31 maraval road. built on land that was previously used as the government stock farm, it was the first residence built in the st clair neighborhood. it is named for charles fourier stollmeyer, who hired the scottish architect robert gillies to design the house, which is said to be patterned after a wing of balmoral castle. the two-year construction project began in 1902. when his wife said that she preferred a simpler home, stollmeyer gave the house to his son, conrad. his wife named it for killarney, ireland.   the property, like white hall, was commandeered by the united states forces, who called it "the castle", during world war ii. it then began to be called stollmeyer's castle. after the war, it stayed within the stollmeyer family until 1972, when it was bought by an insurance executive, jessy henry a mahabir. seven years later, the government of trinidad and tobago owned the building. in the late 1990s, the citizens for conservation restored the building. it is under the care of the office of the prime minister, and is a heritage site that is protected under the national trust act. a restoration project began in 2008 to ensure that the structure passed updated building codes and was restored for use by visiting foreign dignitaries.  notes  references  sources  further reading  external links   magnificent seven, citizens for conservation trinidad & tobago  national trust of trinidad and tobago, heritage sites  port of spain architectural walking tour  buildings
and structures in port of spain history of port of spain tourist attractions in port of spain
don't wanna be alone (tc: 不願一個人) is a cantopop album by edmond leung, released by capital artists in 14 april 1994.  the gold disc edition was released by east asia music on 20 sep 2011 in order to celebrate capital artists 40th anniversary.  track listing 100% in love with you (一百巴仙愛上你) tie me up, tie me down (綑著我困著我) don't wanna be alone (不願一個人) even i feel sad (即使傷心又如何) lingering games (纏綿遊戲) 5000% of love (五千巴仙的愛) rare love (不可多得的愛) empty sky (空空天空) classic kiss (經典之吻) the other man (第三者) after sunrise (日出之後)  references  edmond leung albums 1994 albums
donald lawson turcotte (born 22 april 1932) is an american geophysicist most noted for his work on the boundary layer theory of mantle convection as part of the theory of plate tectonics. he works at the university of california, davis.  he has won awards including the arthur l. day medal of the geological society of america, the william bowie medal and the charles a. whitten medal of the american geophysical union. he is a member of the national academy of sciences.  in 2008, the american geophysical union's nonlinear geophysics committee established the donald l. turcotte award, which is given annually to one honoree "in recognition of outstanding dissertation research that contributes directly to nonlinear geophysics."  books   donald l. turcotte and gerald schubert, geodynamics, cambridge university press, third edition (2014),  (hardback)  (paperback)  donald l. turcotte, fractals and chaos in geology and geophysics, cambridge university press, 1997  gerald schubert, donald l. turcotte, and peter olson, mantle convection in the earth and planets, cambridge university press, 2001  references  1932 births living people american geophysicists california institute of technology alumni cornell university alumni university of california, davis faculty members of the united states national academy of sciences
st. berrihert's kyle is an ecclesiastical enclosure and national monument containing cross slabs, wheel crosses, high crosses and a cursing stone located in county tipperary, ireland.  location  st. berrihert's kyle is located in the glen of aherlow at the foot of the galtee mountains,  southwest of bansha.  history  st. berrihert's kyle is named after saint berrihert (berrahert, bernihardt, bericheart), an anglo-saxon holy man who is traditionally believed to have come to the glen after the synod of whitby (ad 664), and in some biographies is the brother of gerald of mayo (d. 731). many saxon monks came to the region after the controversy at that synod over the dating of easter. he is probably the same man as st berichter, the patron of an early medieval ecclesiastical site at tullylease, county cork. a cross slab there mentions beirchachtuire, an irish version of the anglo-saxon name beorhtwine ("bright friend"). the annals of the four masters mention the death of berichtir of tulach leis on 6 december 839; this could be an error for 739. his feast day is 18 february.  a vast collection of stone cross slabs and other monuments were placed in the kyle (from irish cill, "church"; a medieval church once stood on the spot).  description  st. berrihert's kyle is a stone enclosure containing a variety of stone monuments: 72 slabs, fragments of a bullaun stone, four wheel crosses, the head and base of a high cross, the head of a small cross and a slab with an incomplete inscription on it. it is possible that the walls of the church were taken away for other building use, but the carved stones were considered sacred and so were left on site.  the stone enclosure is a recent construction, built in 1946 by the office of public works.  st. berrihert's well  nearby is a holy well; a pool  across traditionally believed to heal scalds and burns.  references  national monuments in county tipperary archaeological sites in county tipperary high crosses in the republic of ireland
adoration of the magi is a 1530s oil on panel painting by the italian renaissance artist benvenuto tisi in the collection of the rijksmuseum.  painting mary sits with her child in front of ruined columns receiving gifts in a fantasy landscape. on the right a man points to the star of bethlehem.  exhibitions  this painting has been considered a highlight of the collection since it was acquired in 1823 by william i of the netherlands from the estate of edmund bourke in paris and given to the trippenhuis museum. it has been included in all highlights of the rijksmuseum catalogs since.  references   sk-a-114 painting record on museum website  1530s paintings italian paintings paintings in the collection of the rijksmuseum garofalo paintings of the madonna and child
kalgoorlieite (ima2015-119) is a mineral from kalgoorlie, western australia.  kalgoorlieite is the fourth oxygen-free arsenic-tellurium mineral after benleonardite, debattistiite, and tornroosite.  it was discovered in 2015 by a curtin university academic dr kirsten rempel while she was checking samples in the kalgoorlie school of mines museum, and declared a new mineral in 2016, after verification and classification.  references  city of kalgoorlie-boulder monoclinic minerals minerals in space group 12
the 1959 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 27 june 1959 at white city stadium.    the winner was mile bush pride and the winning owner noel purvis received £1,500.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  neck, head, 7, 2½, dis (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report 140 entries at £5 were received for the first acceptance stage of the derby. the ante-post favourite mile bush pride failed to win his first round heat for the second consecutive year. however, despite encountering crowding he safely made it through to round two; the race was won by irish entry sir frederick. three greyhounds broke 29 seconds in the first set of qualifiers; they were crazy parachute, dunmore rocco and the previous year's finalist gentle touch.  the second round resulted in a fast win for mile bush pride (28.57), a time that could not be matched by any greyhound left in the competition. the irish hope sir frederick was knocked over ending his hopes and he would have to settle for finishing second behind dunmore rocco in the consolation stakes on final night.  mile bush pride followed his second round win with a seven length semi-final victory. the second semi-final was more competitive and ended with a first dead heat for a semi-final in derby history when snub rose ran on well to catch leader crazy parachute.  in the final snub nose made a good start from the traps with dancing sheik just behind. early pace by crazy parachute saw him pass dancing sheik and then snub nose by the second bend. by the third bend mile bush pride who had been last out of the traps had caught dancing sheik to take up third position. crazy parachute was vying with snub nose around the last bend and home straight when crazy parachute left a gap on the rails. this was enough for mile bush pride to take advantage and run on strongly to win the race by a neck.  see also 1959 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
hms thais was built for the british royal navy in 1806 and was the name-vessel of her class of fire ships. between 1811 and 1813 she served in the west africa squadron, which was attempting to suppress the slave trade. during this service she captured several slave traders and an american privateer. she made one voyage to the east indies. thais was sold in 1818. she then became a merchantman. she was last listed in 1826.  design john henslow designed the thais class as 18-gun fireships, with a design close to that of the tisiphone class of sloops. the royal navy used the class as sloops and re-rated them as such in march 1808. in early 1811 most of the class, including thais, were re-rated as post ships.  naval career commander isaac ferrieres commissioned thais in june 1807 as a fireship. thais was among the naval vessels at plymouth on 27 and 28 august 1807 and so shared in the proceeds arising from the detention of the danish vessels elizabeth, tiesco, and aurora, in the run-up to the gunboat war with denmark. ferrieres sailed thais on 9 september for the west indies. there she participated in the capture of the danish west indies during december.  by february 1808 thais was back at plymouth and undergoing refitting as a sloop, a process that took into april. on 21 january 1809 thais was at cape town. there admiral bertie, admiral in charge of the cape of good hope station, sent her out to look for diana, which had been reported damaged, and for the east indiamen experiment, glory, and lord nelson, which were overdue. it turned out that the three east indiamen had foundered without a trace. later in 1809 thais served in the north sea. in august thais was part of a squadron under the command of sir home riggs popham in the scheldt during the walcheren campaign. on 23 may 1810 she escorted a convoy to the mediterranean.  in november 1810 commander edward scobell assumed command.  on 14 december thais left gibraltar as an escort to a convoy  for britain.  west africa squadron thais was re-rated as a sixth rate in 1811, and on 3 april scobell received promotion to post captain. thais and scobell then sailed for the west coast of africa and service with the west africa squadron.  on 28 july 1811 thais captured the brig havannah. the capture took place off "trade town". havannah was suspected to be a british vessel sailing under
a foreign flag. she had 100 slaves aboard, of whom 98 survived to be landed at freetown, where the vice admiralty court condemned her. on 30 august, thais captured the portuguese brig venus off badagry. she too was condemned at freetown, and 21 slaves were landed there. three days later, thais captured another portuguese brig, calypso, off lagos. she landed 13 slaves at freetown, but the court returned her to her owners.  on 24 june 1812 thais captured the american schooner dolphin south of goree. she landed 79 slaves at freetown, where the court condemned her.  then on 14 august thais captured the spanish brig carlotta at loango bay. she had no slaves aboard. on 29 august, thais captured the portuguese brig flor d'america, also at loango, that was carrying 364 slaves. the court at freetown condemned both vessels.  on 5 september thais captured the portuguese schooner orizonte at mayumba bay. she landed 18 slaves at freetown, where the court condemned her.  on 31 march 1813 thais captured the u.s. brig rambler. rambler, of 160 tons (bm), was armed with twelve 9 & 6-pounder guns, and had a crew of 88 men. she had sailed from rhode island on 28 january and had not made any captures. the capture took place off cape mount.  then on 28 may 1813 thais was involved in apprehending juan a ship sailing near the rio pongo, which was then taken to sierra leone. she was an american sloop carrying no slaves; british records indicate that the capture took place off cape sierra leone. the court at freetown condemned her.  thais assisted the privateer  after kitty captured two slave traders, san jose triumfo and phoenix, on 4 june. on 27 june thais and the colonial armed schooner princess charlotte captured three small craft off cape mesurado.  in january 1814 captain henry weir replaced scobell, who had resigned his commission.  subsequent service in late march 1814 thais was at hellevoetsluis to transport french coins that nathan rothschild had collected. rothschild had a contract to deliver £600,000 to the south of france by 14 march. by the time thais and  were able to deliver to bordeaux the £450,000 that rothschild had gathered napoleon had abdicated. from bordeaux thais carried general henry bayly and his staff to plymouth.  between october and december 1814 thais was at plymouth being cut down, losing her spar deck, and having her armament being reduced to 16 guns.  in 1815 she sailed
to the east indies, escorting east indiamen. on 6 april thais took mercury, browsse, master, into madeira. mercury had been sailing from bordeaux to martinique when thais intercepted her. thais then sent mercury to england. mercure, brouessett, master, reached lisbon. there she was released to resume her voyage to martinique.  on 10 september thais left penang for china.  between 6 and 11 april 1816, weir was president of a court-martial that took place on  in madras roads. the board found that captain robert o'brien, captain of cornwallis, had exceeded his authority in appointing himself a commodore and dismissed him from the service.{{efn|in 1817 o'brien was reinstated in the navy. he contested the court-martial with one of his grounds being that every member of the board was junior to him.</ref> weir then assumed command of cornwallis.  weir returned to thais. under his command she arrived at st helena on 28 september from india, and sailed two days later for england.  disposal by 1817 thais was in ordinary at plymouth. the "principal officers and commissioners of his majesty's navy" offered "thais, of 22 guns and 431 tons", lying at plymouth, for sale on 13 august 1818. she sold on that day for £1,400.  merchantman thais appeared in lloyd's register for 1819 at london with robson, master, and brown & co. owners. this entry continuedunchanged until 1826, which was the last time thais was listed.  notes, citations, and references notes  citations  references      kaplan, herbert h. (2005) nathan mayer rothschild and the creation of a dynasty: the critical years. (stanford university press).    watson, george leo de st m (1912) a polish exile with napoleon: embodying the letters of captain piontkowski to general sir robert wilson and many documents from the lowe papers, the colonial office records, the wilson manuscripts, the capel lofft correspondence, and the french and genevese archives hitherto unpublished. (london & new york: harper & brothers).  1806 ships sloops of the royal navy ships of the west africa squadron age of sail merchant ships merchant ships of the united kingdom
khanna assembly constituency (sl. no.: 57) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in ludhiana district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
john millman was the defending champion but chose not to defend his title.  ernesto escobedo won the title after defeating frances tiafoe 6-2, 6-7(6-8), 7-6(7-3) in the final.  seeds  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references  main draw  qualifying draw  2016 ms kentucky bank tennis championships - singles
is a  japanese anime television series produced by studio tengu kobou. it premiered on october 5, 2016 on tokyo mx.  plot  the story revolves around puzzle-solving.  characters    the main protagonist of the story. tokine was a regular 22-year-old woman, working as a secretary to the ceo of a company known as ten2. after being swept into the world of quizzun to solve riddles, tokine possesses the power to discover the truth, and this aids her greatly in solving the riddles given to her. her best friends are yoshie and kyouka.   a little creature that resembles both a rabbit and a pig, showing tokine the rules of quizzun and granting her the special power of discovering truth. he is called a pig by tokine and a rabbit by natsuko.   an employee at ten2 and works at the front desk with yoshie. she is best friends with yoshie and tokine and has a younger sister named kyouko. her family runs a hot spring on the edge of the country.   an employee at ten2 and works at the front desk with kyouka. she is best friends with tokine and kyouka and often treats them to meals.   an employee at ten2 and a former cabaret member. she used her connections to get into the company and is looked down upon by yoshie. her real name is tokuyo nazo. like tokine, she is able to use her full capabilities in quizzun, and the two possess similar powers and thinking strategies.   kyouka's younger sister and friends with hinata and mamori. she is currently in high school and works at the counter of the hot spring facility which is owned and run by her family. kaito aen  ansa arishin  media  anime  the anime is created and directed by naoya fukushi, with animation by tengu kobou. hitomi takano is designing the characters and hiroyuki moriyama is serving as chief photography director. hiroaki yabunaka is in charge of the sound effects and hikaru nakatsugawa is producing the series. yuki hasegawa and ayumi masui are collaborating on the writing of the scenario. dream vision's takanori morita is in charge of making the puzzles to solve. yuzu fujisaki will perform the opening theme song to be named later, and aki will perform the unnamed ending theme song. crunchyroll simulcasts the anime.
a second anime created and directed by naoya fukushi, with animation by tengu kobou premiered on july 12, 2017 on tokyo mx.  episode list  notes  references  external links     2016 anime television series debuts 2017 anime television series debuts tokyo mx original programming anime with original screenplays
spexial is a taiwanese boy band formed by comic international productions in 2012. the group name is a combination of "extra" and "special", which expresses the desire of the group to be unique. the group started off with four members and debuted on december 7, 2012 with their self-titled album, spexial. after several lineup changes, the group's final line-up consists of four members: evan, win, ian, and dylan. their fandom name is sxf (chinese: 特使), which represents "special mission".  on may 21-22, 2016, spexial held their first major concert "spexial the 1st concert - spexial land 2016" at xinzhuang gymnasium in new taipei city, with a guest appearance by pets tseng.  career  2012 to 2013: debut  in 2012, comic international productions selected four boys whose average age was 20 years old and average height is 183 cm to form a new boy band named "spexial". the members included wes (made his acting debut in taiwanese idol drama k.o.3an guo), wayne (one of the top ten contestants of taiwanese tv singing contest one million star (season 6), brent and sam (made their acting debut in the television series ko one return. before releasing their first album, spexial received training in south korea for a month.  on december 7, 2012, spexial debuted with their first self-titled mandopop album, spexial. the album was funded by "2012 funding the production and marketing of outstanding popular music" of bureau of audiovisual and music industry development. also, spexial starred in idol drama ko one return and performed the theme song and insert song.  in 2013, spexial starred in the sequel, ko one re-act. they were invited by executive yuan for anti-drug campaign endorsement with pets tseng (who also starred in the sequel) because of their positive image in the drama.  2014: break it down  on may 26, 2014, comic international productions announced the addition of three new members (increased to seven members), including teddy (contestant of shanghai model competition), evan (champion of 2012 sunshine nation - sunshine boyz) and simon (scouted by the agency on the street). they officially debuted at the press conference of second mandopop album break it down on june 5, the album was released on june 12 and ranked no. 3 in five top ranking (week 24 of year 2014) in the first week.  also, warner music taiwan spent 2 million twd to
create an online reality show anything spexial, in order to introduce spexial in different aspects. the fourteen-episode show was released on may 27, 2014.  after starring in idol drama ko one return and ko one re-act and performing the theme songs, spexial took part in other dramas such as gto in taiwan, the x-dormitory, holding love and angel 'n' devil, etc.  2015: love killah and dangerous  in the second half of 2014, comic international productions recruited three new members, including riley (taiwanese-canadian), win (japanese) and ian (the youngest member). they were then officially added to the group on january 13, 2015, so that spexial consisted of ten members.  spexial's first extended play love killah was released on february 4, 2015. since evan had to finish college in canada from august 2014 and brent started fulfilling military service from the end of december, 2014, only eight members participated in the recording. in the first week after the release of love killah, spexial held their first fan meeting at national taiwan university sports center. on may 31, spexial won "hito group" and "most popular group" at 2015 hito music awards, which were their first two taiwanese music awards. this event was evan's comeback showcase, but brent and sam were absent at the ceremony as they were fulfilling military service.  in june 2015, spexial have been the endorser of a mobile game junior three kingdoms, which was downloaded one million times. in july, the j-pop queen ayumi hamasaki and spexial collaborated on new single sayonara feat. spexial, they also shot the music video together in japan. on august 1, spexial's first travelogue photobook "spexial life in thailand" was released, while the shooting process was edited as line tv's first reality show spexial life. on august 22, spexial were invited to perform at a-nation summer concert. it was the first time of them to perform sayonara feat. spexial with ayumi hamasaki on stage.  spexial's third mandopop album dangerous was released on september 11, 2015, while brent and sam did not participate in the recording due to military services. before the release of new album, one of the track dangerous was selected by 20th century fox as the chinese theme song of the film maze runner: the scorch trials. at the end of september, spexial held their second fan meeting under the theme of athletic meet at national taiwan university sports center.  2016: first major concert and
boyz on fire  on january 5, 2016, kkbox announced that ding dang and spexial were invited as guest performers of the 11th kkbox music awards presentation, which was spexial's first time performing at this ceremony. on january 9, spexial were firstly invited to participate in the recording of ttv's annual lunar new year music show - 2016 super star: a red & white lunar new year special. they participated as white team artists and performed two dance songs, break it down 11.11 and dangerous. the music show was then broadcast on february 7. on january 24, spexial performed three dance songs at kkbox music awards presentation, including love guardian, dangerous and silly girl. this performance was also brent's comeback showcase after the end of military service. although brent had participated in the 2016 super star, the kkbox music awards was broadcast earlier, so this was his official comeback showcase. during these two performance, sam and ian were absent at the ceremony as they were fulfilling military service and shooting tv drama respectively.  on may 21-22, spexial held their first major concert "spexial the 1st concert - spexial land 2016" at xinzhuang gymnasium in new taipei city, while pets tseng made guest appearance at their concert. the concert consisted of four themes, which included "welcome to spexial land", "spexial lover", "theme park challenge" and "ultimate theme park". in addition, spexial returned as ten-member group with sam's comeback showcase one week after the end of military service.  on june 5, spexial won "hito group" and "most popular group" again at 2016 hito music awards. however, riley and ian were absent at the ceremony as they were shooting tv dramas. on july 14, comic international productions announced the addition of two new chinese members dylan and zhiwei. they were then debuted at the press conference of fourth mandopop album boyz on fire on july 19, the album was released on august 12. apart from starring in dramas ko one: re-member and high 5 basketball, spexial took part in film and micro films and hosted a number of variety shows. meanwhile, spexial entered the chinese market by taking part in web series and web films such as ultimate ranger, men with sword and realm of the immortals, etc.  on october 25, wes injured his right leg with a comminuted fracture while shooting high 5 basketball. he then announced that he will take a three-month break from his activities to rest on november 7. it is expected that wes will come back in
february 2017. on november 4, simon dropped out of master's program at national taiwan university of arts to prepare for military service. he continued to work until the last public event, the press conference of high 5 basketball, held on december 11.  2017: buddy buddy  on january 25, simon announced on his personal facebook fan page that he has filed for contract termination from comic international productions due to "unclear accounts", and he intended to leave spexial. he is still close and often hangs out with the rest of the members.  on february 9, spexial's second travelogue photobook "spexial okinawa photobook" was released, while the shooting process was edited as line tv's reality show spexial life 2. during the shooting of photobook, spexial directed their own music video for "really really" from the album boyz on fire. these three projects were the last projects of spexial consisted of twelve members.  on march 20, zhiwei officially announced that he was leaving the group. on august 25, riley officially announced that he was leaving the group after his contract was terminated due to different career goals (he is still close and often hangs out with the other members). as a result, spexial will continue as a nine-member group, including wes, wayne, brent, sam, evan, teddy, win, ian and dylan.  on december 17, the press conference for spexial's fifth album 'buddy buddy' was held in beijing. the album was released on december 22.  2018: buddy buddy  on january 5, spexial held a press conference for their fifth album 'buddy buddy' in taiwan. however, dylan was absent due to filming. on january 13, spexial was once again invited to participate in the '2018 super star' awards for new year's eve, performing six songs, buddy buddy, love killah, dangerous, break it down, bad bad boy and super style, as singers from the white team. the program was broadcast february 15. wes was originally unable to go on stage due to his leg injury, but in order to be with his fans and group members on new year's eve, he disregarded his injury and danced along to super style with them. dylan was absent due to filming.  on march 23, wayne announced on his birthday that he was going to enlist in the army in august, and it was expected that his first solo concert would be held before may 27. on may 15, wes updated his facebook contact information to the contact of the new company, and officially leave spexial
now that his contract with comic international productions has ended, however the real reason was his leg injury never completely healed and it was difficult for him to dance. spexial will continue their activities in their group of eight, consisting of wayne, brent, sam, evan, teddy, win, ian and dylan.on december 17, a press conference was held in beijing targeting the group's fifth album, buddy buddy, which was released on december 22.  2018: wes' departure  on january 5, 2018, a new press conference was organized for buddy buddy in taiwan. however, dylan was absent due to filming of other projects. on january 13, the group was again invited to participate in the 2018 super star 'awards for new years eve, performing six songs: buddy buddy, love killah, dangerous, break it down, bad bad boy, and super style. the show aired on february 15.  on march 23, wayne announced on his birthday that he was going to enlist in the army for his military service and that he expected his first solo concert to take place before may 27. on may 15, the group's leader, wes, announced that he planned to leave spexial now that his contract with comic international productions had ended, in large part because his leg injury never fully healed and was it made it difficult for him to dance. his departure from the group took place that same day, 28 leaving the group with eight members; wayne, brent, sam, evan, teddy, win, ian, and dylan. wayne enlisted in the military on september 3, 2018, and his military service ended on august 12, 2019.  2019: wayne and teddy's departure  on september 19, 2019, wayne announced that he would be leaving spexial. teddy announced his departure from spexial on october 15, 2019, the same day as his twenty-sixth birthday.  2020: brent and sam's departure  on february 7, member brent announced on the live streaming network's platform that he was officially retiring from spexial.  on may 7, 2020, member sam announced on his facebook fan page that he would be joining tvbs, confirming his official retirement from spexial.  members  members' information  timeline    first period members (wes, wayne, brent, sam) formed spexial on december 7, 2012.  second period members (simon, evan, teddy) joined spexial on june 5, 2014.  evan finished college in canada from august 3, 2014, and came back on may 31, 2015.  brent fulfilled military service from december 23,
2014 to december 10, 2015.  third period members (win, riley, ian) joined spexial on january 14, 2015.  sam fulfilled military service from may 15, 2015 to may 14, 2016.  fourth period members (dylan, zhiwei) joined spexial on july 19, 2016.  wes injured his right leg while shooting high 5 basketball on october 25, 2015. he had to take a three month break until february 2017 (expected).  simon stopped working from december 12, 2016 to prepare for military service. he then announced that he has filed for contract termination on january 25, 2017, and officially left the group on february 2, 2017.  zhiwei changed his facebook and weibo information on march 12, 2017 and officially left the group on march 23, 2017.  riley announced that he will terminate contract with the company and officially leaving the group on august 25, 2017.  discography  studio albums  extended play  original soundtrack  singles   sayonara feat. spexial (2015) - spexial (collaborated with ayumi hamasaki, appeared on her sixth extended play sixxxxxx)  劍心飛揚 (2016) - evan and dylan  月光訣 (2016) - dylan  終有一天 (2016) - zhiwei (collaborated with li shaminzi, yu shuxin, cheng yi, tian yitong and liu runnan)  i'm your super wang / 我是你的super王 (2017) - ian  hero / 英雄 (2017) - dylan and zhiwei (collaborated with cha jie, ryuuji zhu, lu yunfeng and peng yuchang  fight for you (2017) - riley  膽小鬼 (2017) - wayne  畫師 (2017) - dylan  超完美情人 (2017) - brent  冒险家 (2017) - dylan  戰火荒煙 (2017) - dylan  破泪 (2017) - wayne and dylan  無名將 (2017) - evan and ian  concert  filmography  television series  web series  feature film  short film  tv film  web film  reality show  variety show  music videos  publications  photobook  television series publications  awards and nominations  references  external links    spexial official facebook
page  spexial official weibo  spexial youtube channel  spexial on warner music taiwan  comic international productions official facebook page  warner music taiwan official facebook page  warner music taiwan store  taiwanese boy bands mandopop musical groups musical groups established in 2012 2012 establishments in taiwan
cabragh ringfort  is a ringfort (rath) and national monument located in county cavan, ireland.  location  cabragh ringfort is located about  southwest of cootehill.  references  archaeological sites in county cavan national monuments in county cavan
nick terranova (born december 21, 1977 in los angeles, california), better known by his stage name starkillers, is an american dj and record producer.  biography terranova began his career in the early 2000s and was nominated to the idma awards 2012 in the category "best progressive track", which he won with the single "pressure" (with nadia ali and alex kenji). the music video has nearly 7 million views.  he is the founder of label terratraxx, which was created in 2002.  other successful titles were highly ranked in the national charts, such as "discoteka" which reached the 54th place in the dutch charts in 2006.  he has performed throughout the united states, as well as, in australia, canada and in china.  discography  charting singles  singles  2009 : able & uneasy (the real / unreal mix) [terratraxx recordings]  2009 : all the way (with austin leeds) [ultra]  2009 : music around the world (with austin leeds featuring teacha) [ultra]  2009 : get up (everybody) (with disco dollies) [nervous records]  2010 : bitch ass trick [nervous records]  2010 : cantina [spinnin records]  2010 : fuck shit up (with monojack) [nervous records]  2010 : insomnia (with pimp rockers, marco machiavelli, tom hangs) [spinnin records]  2010 : nervous tools ep [nervous records]  2010 : harem (with alex sayz) [nervous records]  2010 : big disco (with dmitry ko) [spinnin records]  2011 : odessa (bigroom mix) [doorn (spinnin)]  2011 : choose a name (with matan caspi, eddy good) [spinnin records]  2011 : pressure (with alex kenji & nadia ali) [spinnin records]  2011 : bottle pop (with david solano, dmitry ko) [spinnin records]  2011 : beat the bass (with dmitry ko) [sneakerz]  2011 : unbelievable (with dmitry ko) [spinnin records]  2011 : do u love (with dmitry ko) [hysteria]  2011 : take over [spinnin records]  2011 : keep it coming (with nadia ali) [spinnin records]  2012 : don't hold back (with dmitry ko) [spinnin records]  2012 : light it up (with dmitry ko) [diffused music
]  2012 : keep pushing (with dmitry ko and richard beynon) [spinnin records]  2012 : shut it down feat. natalie peris [azuli records]  2012 : what does tomorrow bring (with natalie peris, richard beynon) [next plateau]  2012 : xception (with dj bl3nd) [spinnin records]  2013 : let the love (with dmitry ko and amba shepherd) [spinnin records]  2013 : rampage (with kai, richard beynon) [spinnin records]  2013 : ride [doorn (spinnin)]  2013 : game over (with inpetto) [spinnin records]  2014 : total destruction (with tony junior) [dim mak records]  2014 : sweet surrender [ultra]  2014 : silence [brawla records]  2014 : bang ya head [big & dirty (be yourself music)]  2014 : where u at (with dmitry ko) [brawla records]  2015 : sriracha (with dmitry ko) [size records]  2015 : just the tip [brawla records]  2015 : it's love (trippin') (featuring proud) [toco asia]  2015 : 365 (roaches) (with baggi) [brawla records]  2015 : rattle the stars (with baggi) [brawla records]  2019 : all i see is red (featuring nyck) [self-released]  2019 : red shoe diaries - amy (featuring nyck) [self-released]  2019 : a million nights (featuring andrea godin) [self-released]  remixes  2009 : pimp rockers - keep on rockin (starkillers & austin leeds remix) [terratraxx]  2009 : nadia ali - love story (starkillers remix) [direxion entertainment]  2009 : kuffdam - burning up (starkiller & austin leeds remix) [vandit]  2009 : robbie rivera, fuzzy hair - the cat (austin leeds & starkillers remix) [sound division]  2009 : dj rap - give it all away (starkillers remix) [mos (america)]  2009 : shiny toy guns - rocketship (starkillers dub) [ultra]  2009 : myah marie - chemistry [nervous records]  2009 : armand van helden - the funk phenomena (starkillers mix) [henry street music]  2010 : dj rap - drummin' n bassin' (
starkillers vs. austin leeds remix) [impropa talent]  2010 : tune brothers - i like it 2010 (starkillers remix) [housesesions]  2010 : nadia ali - fantasy (starkillers remix) [smile in bed]  2010 : dmitry ko - i want you back (starkillers remix) [masv]  2010 : dootage - cash money (starkillers remix) [combo entertainment]  2010 : mr. sam, andy duguid - invincible (starkillers remix) [black hole]  2011 : memento, ken spector - enjoy the silence feat. ken spector (starkillers remix) [big & dirty]  2011 : jerome isma-ae, daniel portman, max'c - flashing lights feat. max'c (starkillers remix) [big & dirty]  2011 : melleefresh, dirty 30 - beautiful, rich & horny (starkillers butterfly terrace vocal mix) [play digital]  2011 : richard beynon - close to you (starkillers butterfly terrace mix) [perfecto]  2012 : stafford brothers - falling (starkillers remix) [astrx]  2012 : melleefresh, deadmau5 - hey baby (starkillers & dmitry ko club mix) [play digital]  2012 : serge devant - true faith (starkillers remix) [ultra]  2012 : steven ray - unexpected (starkillers remix) [housesession]  2012 : david solano, brass knuckles - closure (starkillers & dmitry ko mix) [juicy music]  2012 : pascal & pearce, juliet harding - disco sun (starkillers remix) [spinnin]  2012 : loleatta holloway - love sensation (starkillers & dmitry ko remix) [ultra]  2012 : olav basoski - the rain (starkillers remix) [spinnin records]  2012 : lisa millett, juan kidd, felix baumgartner - now you're gone (starkillers & dmitry ko remix)  2013 : pitbull, david rush, mr. 305 - all night (starkillers remix) [ultra]  2013 : nick skitz, akon - natural born hustla (starkillers remix) [lng music]  2013 : armin van buuren, nervo, laura v. - turn this love around (starkillers remix) [armada]  2014 : david guetta feat. skylar grey - shot me down (starkillers f.u.i.f remix)
2014 : akon, just ivy - paradise (extended starkillers club mix) [black pearl records]  2014 : fagault & marina, mandy jiroux - tonight (starkillers remix) [peace bisquit]  2015 : beaton3, tight lexor - olympus (starkillers edit) [brawla records]  references  notes  a  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the flemish ultratip chart.  b  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the walloon ultratip chart.  c  did not enter the ultratop 50, but peaked on the dance bubbling under chart.  sources  external links    beatport  1977 births american djs djs from los angeles record producers from california american dance musicians american house musicians living people electronic dance music djs
sibree is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  james sibree (1836-1929), english missionary in madagascar  prue sibree (born 1946), australian politician
natchaug elementary school is a public elementary school in willimantic, connecticut, united states. the school is one of four elementary schools in the windham public school system, and is accredited by the new england association of schools and colleges. the name natchaug comes from the native american nipmuc word meaning "land between the rivers." the school colors are bright green and blue.  student composition  the school is public, and serves local students from kindergarten through fifth grade, after which they move on to windham middle school. as of the 2017-18 school year, the majority of students were hispanic (77%), while 14% of students were non-hispanic white and smaller numbers asian, black, multiracial or of other backgrounds. by contrast, the majority of the staff are white (86%), with only a small number of hispanic educators. many of the school's students come from poor families: 95% qualified for free or reduced-price lunch in 2017-18, compared to 37% of connecticut public school students overall.  overall, about one in three students is classified as an english language learner, versus 7% of students statewide.  natchaug has had bilingual education programs in place since the 1980s, in accordance with state legislation. natchaug also currently has a family resource center and before- and after-school programs for its students.  early history  natchaug school first opened in 1865, and included a high school until 1897. the school was initially a large wooden building, completed in 1864 and replacing the old stone schoolhouse of earlier decades. in the late 1870s, pupils included several visiting students from china, who had been sent by the qing dynasty as the educational mission of its self-strengthening movement. the old school building was torn down in 1914 to make way for the current brick structure.  recent events  the school was closed from june 2012 to january 2014 due to roof damage. during that time, students attended elementary school classes at windham middle school.  principals eben jones (2017-present) robert kallajian (2016-2017) melissa mishriky cyr (2015-2016) jeff wihbey (2010-2012) joseph janisaitis (2008-2010) rose bisson (2004-2008) penny hebert (interim) maureen bojka (2003-2004, interim) kathleen rosewall (2002-2003) collette trailor (c. 1999-2002) susan webb (1990s)  in earlier decades, principals
included: james l. harroun (1892-c.1927) george cadwell (1888-1892) william burdick (1884-1888) col. john b. welch (1872-1884) thomas h. fuller (1868-1872) david p. corbin (1866-1868) s. w. powell (1865-1866)  notable alumni wilbur cross, literary critic and 71st governor of connecticut william sprague, congregationalist clergyman  isaiah oggins, american-born spy for the soviet union sung mun wai (宋文翙), participant in the chinese educational mission and vice admiral in the chinese navy george ernest waldo, u.s. representative from new york (1905-09)  references  willimantic, connecticut schools in windham county, connecticut public elementary schools in connecticut
the notre dame law review is a law review published by an organization of students at the university of notre dame law school in indiana.  history  the notre dame law review was originally founded by a group of students in 1925 as the notre dame lawyer,  changing its name after publication of the 8182 (vol. 57) volume.  it is published by students as an annual volume, each of which consists of 5 separate issues released between october and june corresponding to a single academic year. the faculty advisor is nicole stelle garnett.  in 2014 an online publication called the notre dame law review online was launched as a supplement to the print edition.  the online publication has taken up hosting its own symposium.  in 2019, the online journal was renamed the notre dame law review reflection.  symposium  the notre dame law review generally hosts an annual symposium dedicated to a particular set of ideas or a specific body of work.  these conferences are open to lawyers from outside the notre dame law faculty.  the proceedings of each symposium are published contemporaneously in that year's law review.  recent examples of symposia topics are administrative lawmaking in the 21st century (2017), contemporary free speech: the marketplace of ideas a century later (2018), and pioneering research in empirical legal studies: a symposium in honor of professor margaret brinig (2019).  ranking and impact  the notre dame law review is well regarded among the various rankings of us law reviews. it was ranked #8 in a 2020 study by washington and lee school of law based on data collected from 20152019. the notre dame law review reflection was ranked #25 among us online law reviews in a 2017 study conducted by the illinois law review.  references  external links  official website  american law journals notre dame law school publications established in 1925 general law journals law journals edited by students  university of notre dame academic journals
doug suisman (born 14 march 1955) is an american urban designer and architect. suisman founded the los angeles-based firm, suisman urban design, in 1990 and has since worked on projects in a variety of cities including los angeles, ramallah, and vancouver, among others. his work emphasizes sustainable development, public transportation, communal spaces and structures, and walkable streets. his projects include master plans and facilities for regional transit systems, downtowns, cultural districts, university campuses, transit-oriented development, civic and community centers, plazas, parks, and streetscapes.  suisman won the top master plan and future project of the year award at the 2010 world architecture festival for the arc. suisman's iquilt cultural district plan for downtown hartford, won an aia honor award and two grants from the national endowment for the arts. in 1999, suisman was made a fellow of the american institute of architects. in 2006, suisman was named a national peer in urban design by the u.s. general services administration.  suisman is the author of los angeles boulevard, described by christopher hawthorne, los angeles times architecture critic, as, "...the most important take on this gigantic subject."  early life and education  suisman was born and raised in hartford, connecticut. he attended phillips academy in andover, massachusetts from 1968 to 1972 and earned his bachelor of arts from yale university in 1976, graduating cum laude. in 1981, suisman obtained his master of architecture from columbia university and was awarded an american institute of architects medal.  career  academia  influenced by reyner banham's los angeles: the architecture of four ecologies, suisman moved to los angeles in 1983. from 1984 to 1988, he taught architectural design courses at the university of southern california while studying the urban layout of los angeles and collecting research for his 1989 book, los angeles boulevard. in 1987, suisman won a grant from the national endowment for the arts for his study of the "relationship between architecture and movement in american cities." from 1989 to 1991, suisman taught architectural design and theory at the university of california, berkeley.  projects  in 1997, suisman collaborated  with melendrez associates, johnson fain, raw international, and landmark partners to create a master plan for the civic center of los angeles. dubbed the "ten minute diamond," the plan envisioned a diamond-shaped district based on a ten-minute walk from the central rotunda of city hall. the diamond was divided into four quarters:
riverbed, new town, hillside, and old pueblo, with city hall as the central feature. the project drew attention from a variety of media outlets including the los angeles times.  in 2001, the los angeles county metropolitan transportation authority unveiled suisman's redesign of the metro rapid graphics and architecture. suisman's improvements included new branding for the buses and stations, and bus stops that featured skylit canopies and electronic signs with real-time arrival information.  suisman's collaboration with the rand corporation led to "the arc: a formal structure for the palestinian state," a master plan that envisioned a transportation and infrastructure corridor that would link the west bank and gaza strip. suisman received international attention for his plan, bloomberg news described it:  a concept of breathtaking sweep and simplicity, yet surprisingly practical...the elegance of suisman's idea ad its ready comprehensibility has drawn worldwide political press and political attention.  in 2008, the children's museum of pittsburgh hosted the "charm bracelet competition," a design competition that selected four teams out of a pool of both national and international entrants, and chose suisman as one of the four teams to reinvigorate the north side neighborhood of pittsburgh, formerly known as allegheny city. working with the urban lab at carnegie mellon university, suisman intensively researched the history of the north side neighborhood and devised a plan to revitalize the area.  that same year, suisman began developing the iquilt plan for downtown hartford, a master plan that imagined a more culturally and spatially connected hartford, connecticut. in 2010, his design won another aia honor award.  personal life  suisman resides in santa monica, california with his wife and two children.  references  external links  suisman urban design suisman's firm the day after peace: designing palestine commentary on suisman's "the arc" project  1955 births living people american urban planners american architects yale university alumni columbia graduate school of architecture, planning and preservation alumni
khok khram railway station is a railway station located in sao thong subdistrict, ron phibun district, nakhon si thammarat. the station is a class 3 railway station, located  from thon buri railway station.  train services   rapid train no. 173 / 174 bangkok-nakhon si thammarat-bangkok  local train no. 451/452 nakhon si thammarat-sungai kolok-nakhon si thammarat  local train no. 455/456 nakhon si thammarat-yala-nakhon si thammarat  local train no. 457/458 nakhon si thammarat-phatthalung-nakhon si thammarat  references           railway stations in thailand railway stations opened in 1914
gestadienol (), also known as 6-dehydro-17α-hydroxy-19-norprogesterone, is a steroidal progestin of the 19-norprogesterone group that was never marketed.  see also  gestadienol acetate  references  abandoned drugs tertiary alcohols enones norpregnanes progestogens
robert williams (23 april 1735 - 17 january 1814) was one of the oldest mps in the parliament of the united kingdom, elected at 71 in the 1807 general election.  williams was member of a dorset family who had had a business career in london, where at age 14 he was apprenticed as a cabinet maker, branching out to fitting out east india company ship's cabins, then graduating to ship building.  he owned 14 east indiamen ships at the time of his death. he was also senior partner in a london bank and became a director of the east india company.  he was mp for dorchester, which he had previously contested unsuccessfully as an independent candidate in 1806, from 1807 to 1812.  he died in january 1814 aged 78, leaving a fortune of half-a-million pounds.  references  1735 births 1814 deaths members of the parliament of the united kingdom for english constituencies people from dorchester, dorset uk mps 1807-1812
ekspress may refer to:   ekspress (satellite bus), a satellite bus designed by iss reshetnev  ekspress (satellite constellation), a communication satellite family operated by russian satellite communications company  eesti ekspress, an estonian newspaper  sport express, a russian daily sports newspaper  ekspres, a ukrainian daily broadsheet newspaper  see also  express (disambiguation)
ls-1727 (also known as nandrolone 17β-n-(2-chloroethyl)-n-nitrosocarbamate) is a synthetic, injected anabolic-androgenic steroid (aas) and a nitrosocarbamate ester of nandrolone (19-nortestosterone) which was developed as a cytostatic antineoplastic agent but was never marketed.  see also  list of hormonal cytostatic antineoplastic agents  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  abandoned drugs androgens and anabolic steroids antineoplastic drugs estranes hormonal antineoplastic drugs nandrolone esters nitrogen mustards organochlorides prodrugs progestogens chloroethyl compounds nitrosocarbamates
dragon's eye was a long-established bbc cymru wales weekly television programme, covering news and analysis of politics in wales.  it was broadcast between 2000 and 2012.  initially, it was produced by owen smith, later a labour mp.  smith said at the time: "politics is about drama and dark deeds, plottings and sackings, leaks, eavesdropping, lies and lives.  the political landscape of wales has changed dramatically and dragon's eye will attempt to plot the new political map of wales to determine where wales now sits in the wider world of westminster and beyond."   in 2006/07, the programme had an average audience of 79,000.    it was last broadcast in 2012, and was replaced by independently produced programmes.  references  bbc cymru wales television shows
fatehpur  is a village in fatehpur bhullowala of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of fatehpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, fatehpur has a total number of 69 houses and population of 409 of which include 213 males and 196 females. literacy rate of fatehpur is  67.89%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 54 which is 13.20% of total population of fatehpur, and child sex ratio is approximately  636, lower than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 208 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of fatehpur which includes 115 males and 93 females. according to census survey report 2011, 97.12% workers describe their work as main work and 2.88% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  population data  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 71.64% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
"lilali" is a song by the belgian eurodance singer kim kay. it was released in 1998 on emi as the debut single, lead single and as well as the opening track from her debut studio album, la vie en lilali (1998). it is a eurodance song that was written by guido veulemans, wim claes, and katrien gillis and produced by phil sterman and lov cook.  upon release in 1998, the "lilali" became a hit in europe, especially/particularly in belgium and france. the song produce over 80,000 copies in belgium. a year later after its release, a remix of the song were made by the artist and it sold in france over 300,000 copies.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  external links            1998 songs 1998 debut singles kim kay songs emi records singles french-language songs
the diocese of slobozia and calarasi () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the ascension cathedral in slobozia and its ecclesiastical territory covers ialomita and calarasi counties. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of muntenia and dobrudja. it was established in 1993, making it the church's first new diocese since before the onset of the communist regime. there are six archpriests' districts and around 400 priests assigned to 350 churches, of which eleven are historic monuments. the diocese includes nine monasteries and four sketes with around a hundred monks in total, seven almshouses, a high-school level theological seminary in slobozia and a school for church singers in calarasi.  bishops nifon mihaita (1994-1999) damaschin coravu (2000-2009) vincentiu grifoni (2009-)  notes  external links  official site  slobozia 1993 establishments in romania slobozia ialomita county calarasi county
eunidia sexplagiata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
the fiba oceania under-17 championship is an under-17 basketball championship in the international basketball federation's fiba oceania zone.   since 2017, the competition previously known as fiba oceania under-18 championship, which was a qualifier for the fiba under-19 basketball world cup, is now an under-17 competition for oceania teams to qualify to the fiba asia under-18 championship (from which they can then qualify for the world cup).  summary  oceania under-18 championship  oceania under-17 championship  performances by nation  participation details  see also  fiba oceania under-16 championship  references    basketball competitions in oceania between national teams oceania
bal hukmi is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4.5 km from nakodar, 37.2 km from kapurthala, 28.2 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 149 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 37.3 km away from the village. the village is 67 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 112 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
basil cairns dowling (1910-2000) was a new zealand, later british poet; originally a canterbury-born caxton or "southern" poet, but described in 1998 as "expatriate and unfashionable".  life born in southbridge, canterbury he was the youngest of five brothers born to thomas tayspill dowling (1841-1920) and christie ann paxton ballantyne (1867-1925). he was educated in christchurch at st andrew's college and graduated from canterbury university college (ma) in 1932. he trained for the presbyterian ministry but lost his faith in world war ii, and was jailed for his pacifist beliefs. his first three collections of poems were published by caxton press, and he was regarded as a "southern poet" and associated with charles brasch and ruth dallas.  many of his poems refer to his christchurch youth and much of his poetry alludes to alienation both from a bucolic new zealand childhood and from the english pastoral literary tradition.  he taught in british schools from 1952 to 1975 where he became head of english and died from pneumonia on 24 july 2000 in rye, sussex. he was survived by his wife margaret whom he married in 1936, a son and two daughters.  published works  a day's journey (1941, caxton press)  signs and wonders (1944, caxton press)  canterbury and other poems (1949, caxton press)   hatherley: recollective lyrics (1968) a little gallery of characters (1971, nag's head press)  bedlam, a mid-century satire (1972, nag's head press) the unreturning native and other poems (1973, nag's head press)  the stream (1979, nag's head press)  windfalls and other poems (1983, nag's head press)  selected poems (2004, global vision, vienna) summer afternoon (2014, pear tree press, auckland)  references  1910 births 2000 deaths people from southbridge, new zealand new zealand male poets british male poets university of canterbury alumni people educated at st andrew's college, christchurch 20th-century british poets new zealand emigrants to the united kingdom 20th-century new zealand poets 20th-century british male writers
the st. catherine of ricci cathedral () also called guantanamo cathedral is a religious building affiliated with the catholic church and is located in front of the marti park in the city of guantanamo, in the homonymous province on the caribbean island nation of cuba.  the construction of the cathedral began in 1837 and briefly paralyzing being restarted in 1839 and was blessed in 1842 when cuba was still under the rule of the spanish empire. in 1953 he was added a tower and between 1959 and 1960 were made major repairs.  follow the roman or latin rite and is the principal church of the diocese of guantanamo-baracoa (dioecesis guantanamensis-baracoensis) created in 1998 by bull spirituali christifidelium of pope john paul ii.  see also list of cathedrals in cuba roman catholicism in cuba st. catherine of ricci  references  roman catholic cathedrals in cuba buildings and structures in guantanamo roman catholic churches completed in 1842 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in cuba
grethcel soltones (sometimes mistakenly named as gretchel soltones) (born september 9, 1995) is a filipina volleyball player. currently, she is about to suit up for the petro gazz angels in the upcoming season of the premier volleyball league.  early life grethcel soltones was born and raised in catmon, cebu.  career soltones played for san sebastian lady stags in the national collegiate athletic association (ncaa) women's volleyball tournament and was named most valuable player for during the ncaa season 90, 91 and 92,. being also selected first best outside spiker in the season 92.  she also played for the pldt home ultera ultra fast hitters and the bali pure purest water defenders in the shakey's v-league, where she was crowned the conference mvp during the 13th season open conference.  she was a one-time national team player, who represented the philippines in the 2015 asian u23 women's volleyball championship and the 2015 southeast asian games.  on february 25, 2017, san sebastian lady stags coach roger gorayeb broke the news that soltones and fellow lady stag player villegas agreed to play for foton tornadoes.  on 2018, soltones suited-up again for the philippine women's volleyball team that competed in the 2018 asian women's volleyball cup held at nakhon ratchasima, thailand.  awards  individuals  2014 ncaa season 90 "most valuable player"  2015 ncaa season 91 "best scorer"  2015 ncaa season 91 "most valuable player"  2016 ncaa season 92 "most valuable player"  2016 ncaa season 92 "1st best outside spiker"  2016 shakey's v-league open conference "conference most valuable player"  2017 premier volleyball league reinforced conference "2nd best outside spiker"  2017 premier volleyball league open conference "finals most valuable player"  2017 premier volleyball league open conference "2nd best outside spiker"  2014 ncaa season 91 "beach volleyball champion & mvp"  2015 ncaa season 91 "beach volleyball champion & mvp"  2016 ncaa season 91 "beach volleyball champion & mvp"  2017 ncaa season 91 "beach volleyball champion & mvp"  references  1995 births living people sportspeople from cebu san sebastian college - recoletos alumni philippines women's international volleyball players filipino women's volleyball players outside hitters national collegiate athletic association (philippines) players filipino women's beach volleyball players
myddelton college is located at  denbigh in wales on the site of howell's school, denbigh, a former girls school founded in 1859. it was reopened in 2016 as an independent co-educational day and boarding school.  the college, taking its name from the local myddelton family who lived in the town, provides education for boys and girls aged 9-18. the campus covers 37 acres and in addition to the main grade ii listed block there are three boarding houses and the former principal's house.  the sports facilities include an open-air swimming-pool, four tennis courts, a sports hall used by local clubs, squash courts, a climbing wall and caving centre. the college has many athletes that compete in national teams including triathlon, swimming, gymnastics, horse riding, sailing, climbing and ice skating among others.  references  external links  myddelton college website  universities and colleges in wales
wilfried thaler (24 july 1934 - 15 february 2020) was an austrian professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1934 births 2020 deaths austrian male cyclists place of birth missing
the 1984 catalan regional election was held on sunday, 29 april 1984, to elect the 2nd parliament of the autonomous community of catalonia. all 135 seats in the parliament were up for election.  overview  electoral system the parliament of catalonia was the devolved, unicameral legislature of the autonomous community of catalonia, having legislative power in regional matters as defined by the spanish constitution and the catalan statute of autonomy, as well as the ability to vote confidence in or withdraw it from a president of the government. voting for the parliament was on the basis of universal suffrage, which comprised all nationals over eighteen, registered in catalonia and in full enjoyment of their political rights.  the 135 members of the parliament of catalonia were elected using the d'hondt method and a closed list proportional representation, with an electoral threshold of three percent of valid votes-which included blank ballots-being applied in each constituency. additionally, the use of the d'hondt method might result in an effective threshold over three percent, depending on the district magnitude. seats were allocated to constituencies, corresponding to the provinces of barcelona, gerona, lerida and tarragona. each constituency was allocated a fixed number of seats: 85 for barcelona, 17 for gerona, 15 for lerida and 18 for tarragona.  the electoral law provided that parties, federations, coalitions and groupings of electors were allowed to present lists of candidates. however, groupings of electors were required to secure the signature of at least 0.1 percent of the electors registered in the constituency for which they sought election-needing to secure, in any case, the signature of 500 electors-. electors were barred from signing for more than one list of candidates. concurrently, parties and federations intending to enter in coalition to take part jointly at an election were required to inform the relevant electoral commission within fifteen days of the election being called.  election date the term of the parliament of catalonia expired four years after the date of its previous election, unless it was dissolved earlier. the president of the government was required to call an election fifteen days prior to the date of expiry of parliament, with election day taking place within sixty days after the call. the previous election was held on 20 march 1980, which meant that the legislature's term would have expired on 20 march 1984. the election was required to be called no later than 5 march 1984, with it taking place on the sixtieth day from the call, setting the latest possible election date for the parliament on friday, 4 may 1984.  the parliament of catalonia could not be dissolved before the date of
expiry of parliament except in the event of an investiture process failing to elect a regional president within a two-month period from the first ballot. in such a case,  the parliament was to be automatically dissolved and a snap election called.  parties and candidates below is a list of the main parties and coalitions which contested the election:  opinion polls the tables below lists opinion polling results in reverse chronological order, showing the most recent first and using the dates when the survey fieldwork was done, as opposed to the date of publication. where the fieldwork dates are unknown, the date of publication is given instead. the highest percentage figure in each polling survey is displayed with its background shaded in the leading party's colour. if a tie ensues, this is applied to the figures with the highest percentages. the "lead" column on the right shows the percentage-point difference between the parties with the highest percentages in a poll.  voting intention estimates the table below lists weighted voting intention estimates. refusals are generally excluded from the party vote percentages, while question wording and the treatment of "don't know" responses and those not intending to vote may vary between polling organisations. when available, seat projections determined by the polling organisations are displayed below (or in place of) the percentages in a smaller font; 68 seats were required for an absolute majority in the parliament of catalonia.  voting preferences the table below lists raw, unweighted voting preferences.  victory likelihood the table below lists opinion polling on the perceived likelihood of victory for each party in the event of a regional election taking place.  preferred president the table below lists opinion polling on leader preferences to become president of the government of catalonia.  results  overall  distribution by constituency  aftermath  notes  references opinion poll sources  other  regional elections in catalonia catalonia april 1984 events in europe 1984 in catalonia
ennerdale and kinniside is a civil parish in the borough of copeland, cumbria, england.  it contains four listed buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  all the listed buildings are designated at grade ii, the lowest of the three grades, which is applied to "buildings of national importance and special interest".  the parish is in the lake district national park, and contains the settlements of ennerdale bridge and croasdle, but most of it consists of countryside, moorland and mountain.  the listed buildings comprise a house, a farmhouse and stable, a packhorse bridge, and a telephone kiosk.   buildings  references  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria
the 2016-17 formula 4 uae championship was the inaugural season of the formula 4 uae championship, a motor racing series for the united arab emirates regulated according to fia formula 4 regulations, and organised and promoted by the automobile & touring club of the uae (atcuae) and auh motorsports.  it began on 28 october 2016 at the yas marina circuit and finished on 11 march 2017 at the same venue, after a 3-race non-championship opening round and 18 championship races held across five rounds, all of them held at the yas marina circuit in abu dhabi and the dubai autodrome.  teams and drivers  drivers with an asterisk on their "rounds" column took part in the non-championship opening round.  race calendar and results  the season featured 18 championship races over five rounds. additionally, a three-race non-championship round, called "trophy event", took place at yas marina circuit at the start of the season. all rounds were held in the united arab emirates.  championship standings  points were awarded to the top 10 classified finishers in each race.  drivers' championship each driver dropped their worst three race results.  teams' championship  references  external links  f4 uae homepage  united arab emirates formula 4 championship united arab emirates formula 4 championship formula 4 uae championship formula 4 uae championship formula 4 uae championship seasons uae f4 uae f4
ossemotor (also enu-igbo) is an ancient river port and park on the bank of the lean 'finger-like' oguta lake in imo state, southeastern nigeria. known for its rich history of commerce, ossemotor was a strategic economic centre in the eastern region of nigeria. occupying approximately 46.50 km2 in landmass, it is a part of the oguta metropolis in imo state. ossemotor was used for exchange, evacuation and shipment of goods.  economy osemotor is a farming and fishing community in oguta lga. international marine university has been proposed for osemotor to help unlock the economic potentials of the port.  references  tourist attractions in imo state towns in igboland towns in imo state inner niger delta
olenecamptus octopustulatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by victor motschulsky in 1860, originally under the genus ibidiomorphum. it is known from mongolia.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1860
denis nikolayevich shcherbitsky (; ; born 14 april 1996) is a belarusian professional footballer, who plays for bate borisov.  honours bate borisov belarusian premier league champion: 2016, 2017, 2018 belarusian cup winner: 2019-20 belarusian super cup winner: 2017  references  external links      profile at bate website  1996 births living people footballers from minsk belarusian footballers association football goalkeepers belarus international footballers fc bate borisov players
kandola khurd is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 10.4 km away from nurmahal, 14 km from phillaur, 35.4 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 124 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , kandola khurd has a total number of 179 houses and population of 904 of which include 460 males and 444 females. literacy rate of kandola khurd is 75.27%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 83 which is 9.18% of total population of kandola khurd, and child sex ratio is approximately 965 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 55.9% of total population in kandola khurd. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 297 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of kandola khurd which includes 269 males and 28 females. according to census survey report 2011, 90.24% workers describe their work as main work and 9.76% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 13.5 km away from the village. the village is 43.8 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 129 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
animal kingdom is an american drama television series developed by jonathan lisco, based on the 2010 australian film by david michod. the series follows a 17-year-old boy (finn cole), who, after the death of his mother, moves in with the codys, a criminal family clan governed by matriarch janine "smurf" cody (ellen barkin). animal kingdom debuted on tnt on june 14, 2016.  on july 6, 2016, the series was renewed for a second season of thirteen episodes. on july 27, 2017, tnt renewed the series for a third season. on july 2, 2018, tnt renewed the series for a fourth season. on july 24, 2019, tnt renewed the series for a fifth season. on january 14, 2021, ahead of the fifth season premiere, tnt renewed the series for a sixth and final season. the fifth season premiered on july 11, 2021.  series overview  episodes  season 1 (2016)  season 2 (2017)  season 3 (2018)  season 4 (2019)  season 5 (2021)  ratings  season 1  season 2  season 3  season 4  season 5  notes  references  external links  list of animal kingdom episodes at tnt    lists of american crime drama television series episodes
jozef wierusz-kowalski (16 march 1866 - 30 november 1927) was a polish physicist and diplomat. he discovered the phenomenon of progressive phosphorescence. he served as rector of the university of freiburg, and helped to establish the section for physics at the reopened university of warsaw.  after polish independence was established, he served as the polish ambassador to the holy see, the netherlands, austria and turkey.  early life and education jozef wierusz-kowalski was born to dr. tadeusz wierusz-kowalski (1841-1904) and juliet wasilewska, in pulawy, kingdom of poland, then part of russian empire on 16 march 1866. his father owned property in olbiecin from 1869 to 1904.  initially, jozef wierusz-kowalski studied law at the imperial university of warsaw, but after a year he moved to the university of gottingen, where he studied physics. he studied the properties of glass, including its strength, and in 1889 presented his doctoral thesis, "untersuchungen uber die festigkeit des glases".  after working in berlin, wurzburg and the technical university in zurich, wierusz-kowalski studied physics and physical chemistry at the university of bern. in 1894, he accepted a faculty position in mathematics and natural sciences at the university of fribourg in switzerland. in 1894, he introduced pierre curie and maria skłodowska. as the chair of physics, he established the physics department.  during the academic year 1897-1998, he served as rector of the university. he remained at fribourg until 1915.  scientific and diplomatic career  in 1897, wierusz-kowalski hired ignacy moscicki as his assistant. moscicki created an electric arc method for fixing nitrogen, and he and wierusz-kowalski set up an experimental plant around 1903, trading nitric acid as the societe de l'acide nitrique.  wierusz-kowalski's major fields of study were lightning and electrical discharge, luminescence and phosphorescence. wierusz-kowalski examined mixtures of rare-earth metal compounds such as alkali under the influence of ultraviolet radiation, studying the phosphorescence of rare-earth compounds and organic compounds. in 1910, discovered the phenomenon of progressive phosphorescence in the phosphorescence spectra of organic molecules. for his work in this field he was distinguished  in 1912 by harvard university.  he was actively involved in the warsaw scientific society, which was founded in 1907.
he served as a member of the editorial board of a polish encyclopedia, the united universal encyclopedia, published in switzerland.  during world war i he worked with the committee in support of victims of war in poland, founded by henryk sienkiewicz in vevey.  the early 1900s were a time of great unrest in polish politics and education. in 1912 kowalski became a  member of the academy of sciences and letters in krakow.  in 1915, jozef wierusz-kowalski was one of the lecturers of physics at the physics & mathematics faculty of the tkn, a secular "free university" which later became wolna wszechnica polska (free polish university).  in 1916 he was a member of the board of the association of polish education.  the university of warsaw was reopened on 15 november 1915 as a polish institution. a section  of  experimental  physics was opened in 1916 as part of  the  department  of  philosophy, under wierusz-kowalski's leadership.  in january 1919 jozef wierusz-kowalski helped to found the warsaw physical society.  in 1919 jozef wierusz-kowalski entered the diplomatic service of poland, and was appointed envoy extraordinary and minister plenipotentiary to the holy see on 1 july 1919. on 19 october 1921 he was appointed deputy of poland at the hague, where he remained until 1 december 1924. he was a member of the international committee on intellectual cooperation of the league of nations.  he then became the polish ambassador in vienna, austria, holding the position until 30 september 1926. on 21 october 1926 he became a representative of the republic of poland in ankara, turkey, where he died.  see also list of poles timeline of polish science and technology  references  1866 births 1927 deaths 19th-century polish physicists 20th-century polish physicists ambassadors of poland to austria ambassadors of poland to turkey rare earth scientists
the 1938 central michigan bearcats football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1938 college football season. in their second season under head coach ron finch, the bearcats compiled a 7-1 record, shut out five of eight opponents, held seven opponents to fewer than seven points, and outscored their opponents by a combined total of 270 to 44. the team's sole loss was by a 35-0 score to western state.  schedule  references  external links  1939 chippewa yearbook (pages 82-84)  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan bearcats football
the 2016 foster farms bowl was an american college football bowl game played on december 28, 2016 at levi's stadium in santa clara, california. it was one of the 2016-17 bowl games concluding the 2016 fbs football season. the 15th edition of the foster farms bowl, the game featured the utah utes from the pac-12 conference against the indiana hoosiers from the big ten conference.  the 2016 edition was the first under its new management, as it is now run by the san francisco 49ers nfl team.  team selection the game featured conference tie-ins with teams from the pac-12 conference and the big ten conference.  utah  the utes finished their regular season 8-4 and accepted an invitation to play in the foster farms bowl. this was utah's second trip to the foster farms bowl, with the previous appearance being during the 2005-06 bowl season when they won against georgia tech by a score of 38-10 in the 2005 emerald bowl.  indiana  after finishing their season 6-6, the hoosiers received an invitation to play in the foster farms bowl, which they accepted. this bowl marked the hoosiers' eleventh bowl game (they were 3-7 in bowl games previously) and they were seeking their first bowl victory since the 1991 copper bowl, when they shut out baylor 24-0.  game summary  scoring summary  statistics  media  the 2016 foster farms bowl was the first broadcast under a new deal with fox news.  levi's stadium was equipped for intel freed instant replay technology (previously used by cbs during super bowl 50 at the stadium earlier in the year) in order to facilitate testing for be the player - a new instant replay feature fox planned to use during super bowl li to present first-person perspectives of plays.  references  external links  game summary at espn  2016-17 ncaa football bowl games 2016 2016 foster farms bowl 2016 foster farms bowl december 2016 sports events in the united states 2016 in sports in california
abd-ol-ghaffar amilakhori (,  ; died ) was an early 17th-century noble from the georgian amilakhori family of kartli, prominent in the safavid iranian service.  biography abd-ol-ghaffar amilakhori was raised at the safavid court in isfahan and was a "typical member of the new georgian converted elite". abd-ol-ghaffar was a son of faramarz amilakhori by his wife tamar, a great-grandson of king luarsab i of kartli. his sister tamar was a favourite concubine of the safavid shah abbas i (r. 1588-1629).   when in 1624, abbas i married off his granddaughter to the ruler of kartli, semayun khan (simon ii), abd-ol-ghaffar's wife was a companion to the bride; amilakhori and another leading georgian noble, zurab, eristavi of aragvi, entertained the guests of the wedding party on the order of the safavid-georgian officer murav beg (giorgi saakadze). around the same time, the shah arranged the marriage of abd-ol-ghaffar to a daughter of imam-quli khan, a prominent safavid military and political leader of georgian descent. according to the contemporary safavid historian fazli khuzani, abd-ol-ghaffar was 22-years old at the time of his marriage.   while in kartli, abd-ol-ghaffar was known as a champion of the safavid interests in the country. he further expanded his estates at the expanse of  the neighboring noble families, exterminated the ghazneli and had the environs of mtskheta ravaged. in 1625/6, abd-ol-ghaffar and his wife were captured by the rebellious georgians and imprisoned at the fortress of arshi. after the rebels' defeat at the battle of marabda, abbas i sent a force to their rescue. upon being informed about this, the rebels sent the two, according to fazli khuzani, to the relatives of abd-ol-ghaffar himself, as well as those of allahverdi khan (the father of imam-quli khan). amilakhori, thereafter, disappears from historical records.  notes  references  sources        1620s deaths people from isfahan iranian people of georgian descent shia muslims from georgia (country) converts to
shia islam from eastern orthodoxy former georgian orthodox christians nobility of georgia (country) 17th-century people of safavid iran 17th-century people from georgia (country)
the 1971-72 st. john's redmen basketball team represented st. john's university during the 1971-72 ncaa university division men's basketball season. the team was coached by frank mulzoff in his second year at the school. st. john's home games are played at alumni hall and madison square garden.  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#ff0000; color:#ffffff;"| regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#ff0000; color:#ffffff;"| nit tournament  team players drafted into the nba  references  st. john's red storm men's basketball seasons st. john's st. john's st john st john
the  maryland maniacs season was the team's second season as a football franchise and second in the indoor football league (ifl). one of twenty-five teams competing in the ifl for the 2010 season, the maniacs were members of the atlantic east division of the united conference. the team played their home games at cole field house in college park, maryland.  schedule  regular season  standings  roster  references  maryland maniacs maryland maniacs american football in maryland
the 1986-87 michigan state spartans men's basketball team represented michigan state university in the 1986-87 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the team played their home games at jenison field house in east lansing, michigan and were members of the big ten conference. they were coached by jud heathcote in his 11th year at michigan state. the spartans finished with a record of 11-17, 6-12 to finish in seventh place in big ten play.  previous season the spartans finished the 1985-86 season with a record of 23-8, 12-6 to finish in third place in big ten play. they received an at-large bid to the ncaa tournament as a no. 5 seed. there they defeated no. 12-seeded washington and no. 4-seeded georgetown to advance to the sweet sixteen where they lost to no. 1-seeded kansas.  roster and statistics   sourcehttp://grfx.cstv.com/photos/schools/msu/sports/m-baskbl/auto_pdf/2015-16/misc_non_event/201516basketballguide.pdf  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| big ten regular season  references  michigan state spartans men's basketball seasons michigan state michigan state spartans men's b michigan state spartans men's b
the fourth courtyard is one of four at prague castle, in prague, czech republic.  external links    prague castle courtyards
the 2018 nevada gubernatorial election took place on november 6, 2018, to elect the next governor of nevada. incumbent republican governor brian sandoval, was ineligible to run for re-election, due to the absolute two-term limit established by the nevada constitution. nevada is one of eight u.s. states (or nine u.s. states and territory) that prohibits its governors or any other state and territorial executive branch officials from serving more than two terms, even if they are nonconsecutive.  the candidate filing deadline was march 16, 2018 and the primary election was held on june 12, 2018. the republican nominee was adam laxalt and the democratic nominee was steve sisolak. sisolak won the election, becoming the first democrat to be elected governor of nevada since bob miller won his second full term in 1994 and the first non-incumbent democrat to win since 1982.  republican primary  candidates  nominated  adam laxalt, nevada attorney general  eliminated in primary  william w. boyd, small business owner  stephanie carlisle, businesswoman  jared fisher, small business owner  dan schwartz, nevada state treasurer and candidate for nv-04 in 2012 (endorsed laxalt)  declined  mark amodei, u.s. representative (ran for re-election and won)  joe heck, former u.s. representative and nominee for u.s. senate in 2016  dean heller, u.s. senator (endorsed laxalt and ran for re-election and lost)  steve hill, former executive director of the nevada governor's office of economic development  mark hutchison, lieutenant governor (endorsed laxalt)  ron knecht, nevada state controller (ran for re-election and lost)  brian krolicki, former lieutenant governor  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  steve sisolak, chair of the clark county commission  eliminated in primary  kyle chamberlain, activist and photographer  chris giunchigliani, vice-chair of the clark county commission and candidate for mayor of las vegas in 2011  declined  aaron ford, majority leader of the nevada senate (ran for attorney general and won)  vince juaristi, consultant and former gubernatorial aide  tick segerblom, state senator (ran for clark county commission and won)  dina titus, u.s. representative for nevada's 1st congressional district and nominee for governor in 2006 (endorsed sisolak and ran for re-election and won)  endorsements  polling  results  independents  declared  ryan
bundy, rancher  endorsements  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  with chris giunchigliani  results while sisolak only won two of the state's counties, those two counties account for more than 80% of the total state population. his overwhelming victory in clark county home of las vegas and his narrow victory in washoe county were enough to pull him over the finish line. sisolak became the first democrat to be elected governor of nevada since bob miller's successful re-election bid in 1994.  results by county  while laxalt won 15 of nevada's county-level jurisdictions (14 counties and the independent city of carson city), sisolak carried the two largest, clark (home to las vegas) and washoe (home to reno). sisolak ultimately prevailed by winning his home county, clark, by over 86,000 votes, double his statewide margin of 39,700 votes.  see also  2018 nevada elections  notes  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia  official campaign websites russell best (ia) for governor ryan bundy (i) for governor adam laxalt (r) for governor jared lord (l) for governor steve sisolak (d) for governor  2018 nevada elections 2018 2018 2018 united states gubernatorial elections
the indian super league is one of the top football leagues in india. founded in 2014, the 2015 season saw an average attendance of 27,111 between the eight teams, higher than the average from the league's inaugural season in 2014. in the 2016 season, average attendance reduced to 21,003. in the 2017-18 season, this figure reached a record of 25,443.  highest attended matches  2018-19 season attendances  season averages  isl attendance compared to the other leagues  see also  list of indian super league stadiums  list of indian super league records and statistics   list of indian super league seasons   list of indian super league owners   list of indian super league head coaches   list of foreign indian super league players   list of indian super league hat-tricks  references  attendance indian super league super league
william letwin (14 december 1922 - 20 february 2013) was an american academic who ended his career as professor of political science at the london school of economics.  letwin was born and raised in milwaukee, wisconsin, the son of bessie (rosenthal) and lazar letwin. his parents were jewish emigrants from mohyliv-podilskyi, ukraine. he was raised living above his father's shop, and gained entry to the university of chicago under a plan to benefit the brightest students from poorer schools. he graduated ba in 1943, and joined the us army, seeing second world war active service in the pacific as an intelligence officer on the staff of douglas macarthur. in 1944, while on leave, he married a fellow chicago student, shirley robin letwin (1924-1993). leaving the u.s. army in 1946, letwin returned to chicago as a graduate student, then in 1948 transferred to the london school of economics for two years with the benefit of a fulbright scholarship. graduating phd from chicago in 1951, he was a post-doctoral fellow in the economics department at chicago from 1951 to 1952, then a research associate in its law school, 1953-1955. he was then appointed as an assistant professor of industrial history at the massachusetts institute of technology, and in 1960 became an associate professor of economic history there. in 1966 he returned to the lse as a reader in political science and was promoted to professor in 1977, going on to chair the political science department.  according to an obituary in the times, letwin "played a key role in promulgating the free-market economics of the thatcher era".  as well as many works on economics, letwin published a biography of the merchant and politician sir josiah child. he was the father of the british politician oliver letwin.  selected publications sir josiah child, merchant economist: with a reprint of brief observations concerning trade, and interest of money (1668) (cambridge, mass: baker library, harvard graduate school of business administration, 1959) a documentary history of american economic policy since 1789 (aldine, 1962) law and economic policy in america: the evolution of the sherman antitrust act (university of chicago press, 1965, new edition 1981) on the study of public policy (london school of economics and political science, 1979)  the origins of scientific economics against equality: readings on economic and social policy (1983)  notes  1922 births 2013 deaths people from chicago writers from london military personnel from milwaukee university of chicago alumni alumni of the london school of economics jewish
american writers writers from chicago writers from milwaukee united states army personnel of world war ii american expatriates in the united kingdom 21st-century american jews
the 1942 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1942 college football season. the 1942 team was the first undefeated, untied football team in the school's history. in their sixth season under head coach ron finch, the chippewas compiled a 6-0 record, shut out three opponents, held five of six opponents to fewer than seven points, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 93 to 21. the team defeated northern michigan (21-0), grand rapids union (6-2, 20-6), eastern michigan (14-0), ball state (19-13), and wayne state (13-0).  right guard warren schmakel and end don provencher were the team co-captains. schmakel was named as a first-team honoree on the little all-america team, and fullback harry kaczynski received honorable mention on the same team.  for 15 year prior to 1942, central michigan's athletic teams had been known as the "bearcats".  in january 1942, the school's student council voted to rename the teams the "chippewas", because the area around the campus had for many years been the home of the chippewa tribe of michigan indians.  schedule  references  external links  1943 chippewa yearbook (page 70)  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons college football undefeated seasons central michigan chippewas football
tarcisio fusco was an italian composer of film scores. he was the brother of the composer giovanni fusco and the uncle of operatic soprano cecilia fusco.  selected filmography  boccaccio (1940)  free escape (1951)  abracadabra (1952)  the eternal chain (1952)  beauties in capri (1952)  milanese in naples (1954)  conspiracy of the borgias (1959)  references  bibliography   john stewart. italian film: a who's who. mcfarland, 1994.  external links     1904 births year of death unknown people from the province of benevento italian composers
pampulha (portuguese: regiao administrativa da pampulha) is an administrative region in the city of belo horizonte, brazil. it is one of nine administrative regions of belo horizonte, and occupies  in the northeast of the city. it has a population of 145,262 and a population density of 3.08 per square kilometer. the center of the pampulha is occupied by lake pampulha, an artificial lake constructed in the early 1940s by mayor juscelino kubitschek, later president of brazil from 1956 to 1961. the pampulha administrative region is further subdivided into 29 neighborhoods (bairros), one of which is also called pampulha.  otacilio negrao de lima, mayor of belo horizonte in the early 20th century, dammed a small streamed called pampulha in 1936 for flood control and augment the city water supply through the creation of a reservoir. the resulting lake pampulha became the site of an urban development project by juscelino kubitschek. kubitschek called on the young architect oscar niemeyer to create a series of buildings; niemeyer was joined by the landscape architect roberto burle marx and numerous artists to create site now considered the earliest and most important example of modernism in brazil.  in july 2016 the area around the lake became an unesco world heritage site known as the pampulha modern ensemble (conjunto arquitetonico da pampulha).  transport  belo horizonte/pampulha - carlos drummond de andrade airport is in the area.  education   the santa amelia section formerly housed the escola japonesa de belo horizonte (ヘロ・オリソンテ日本人学校) a.k.a. instituto cultural mokuyoo-kai sociedade civil, a japanese day school.  references  populated places established in 1943
the australische zeitung was a weekly german-language newspaper published in tanunda, south australia from 1860 until it ceased publication during world war i in 1916 due to anti-german sentiment. the newspaper also existed in a variety of earlier names or merged publications, reflecting the fluid nature of the newspaper industry in victorian gold rush era colonial south australia. the long history of german language australian newspapers reflects the considerable german-speaking population which settled in south australia in the nineteenth century.  history  suedaustralische zeitung die deutsche post fur die australischen colonien, first published c. 6 january 1848, and still appearing every thursday in 1850, was the first german-language newspaper published in south australia, and possibly in australia. a rival, the suedaustralische zeitung was first published in adelaide late 1849 by otto schomburgk and carl muecke and by gustav droege, who also acted as editor. it was remarkable in its day for being printed in roman type (and replacing umlauts with their two-letter equivalents) "as if to indicate its rejection of tradition" (or perhaps being the only typeface available), and was radical in its political views.  the following year it was printed in traditional black letter type as sudaustralische zeitung, and the editor's name written as gustav droge. the paper was initially printed by andrew murray in adelaide, and had sales outlets in tanunda, lyndoch, hahndorf, lobethal, burra burra, and macclesfield. the paper was taken over by wilhem eggers in september 1851 and published at the offices of the south australian register. production ceased due to the negative economic conditions caused in south australia by the victorian gold rush.  sud australische zeitung the sud australische zeitung was sold in 1859 to rudolf reimer, founder in april 1851 of the 'adelaider deutsche zeitung (1851-1862), (printed with roman type, considered by one commentator as conceding an advantage to its rival) but continued publication in tanunda as a separate title. reimer died in april 1860. it was taken over in january 1860 by c. h. barton, a prominent tanunda citizen, as editor and owner, but the paper floundered, with a circulation of just 400. it was in late 1862 sold to basedow, barton, and eimer, trading as george eimer & co. (later basedow, eimer & co.). contrary to promises and expectations, they immediately moved production from tanunda to adelaide. it was taken over in 1863 by wilhem
eggers and eimer and published in adelaide, and achieved a circulation of 1,500. barton and basedow retaliated with a new tanunda publication, the tanunda deutsche zeitung, edited by muecke. barton was later to become bankrupt and in 1867 fled to maryborough, queensland, owing substantial sums to his tanunda backers.  a special entertainment insert, called australisches unterhaltungsblatt (1862-1916), was included as well. from 1862 it was subtitled "belletristische beilage zur sud-australische zeitung" then "belletristische beilage zur australischen zeitung" from 1875.  australische zeitung in 1874 the rival german language newspapers of adelaide and tanunda once again merged as the australische zeitung, under publishers basedow, eimer & co. (frederick basedow and george eimer); and dr. muecke was appointed editor. the first edition under the new title was on 5 january 1875. in 1876 they absorbed the neue deutsche zeitung, a competing paper published by g. c. l. and f. a. reiger, and j. w. a. sudholz. the paper was regularly advertised in the mount barker courier.  (johann) august ludwig kayser (died c. 20 february 1910) who arrived in adelaide on the grasbruch in 1860, married cecilie catharine amalie beecken in 1862, and was for a time headmaster of the lyndoch valley and brighton schools, was on the paper's literary staff.  negative public sentiment during the great war against the use of the german language (or german place-names) in south australia led to demands in 1915 that the newspaper be closed or forced to discontinue printing in german. the paper's final edition was on wednesday, 15 march 1916. despite this, there could have been little to criticise regarding their loyalty to australia: "we do not protest against the frequent messages about the successes of the belgians, french, and russians because the sooner victory is gained the sooner there will be an end to the present shocking murder. what does cause our blood to boil is the cables alleging terrible and infamous actions and conduct on the part of the germans; if there were only a grain of truth in them it would make us sink into the earth for shame that we are of german descent."the newspaper was finally revived on 2 june 1927 in tanunda, albeit on a smaller scale, but it ceased production again on 4 july 1929.  digitisation issues have been digitised from photographic copies by the national
library of australia, and may be retrieved using trove.  references   german-language newspapers published in australia publications established in 1849 1849 establishments in australia publications disestablished in 1916 1916 disestablishments in australia german-australian culture defunct newspapers published in adelaide newspapers on trove
acteocina smirna is a species of small sea snail, a marine opisthobranch gastropod mollusk in the family acteocinidae, the barrel bubble snails.  description the length of the shell attains 4 mm, its diameter 2 mm.  the minute shell is white, with a yellowish periostracum. it contains about four whorls with a very minute subglobular hardly projecting glossy nucleus. the summit of the spire with the whorl is but little raised, flattish but not excavated between the suture and the bluntly rounded shoulder. the shell in front of the shoulder is subcylindrical, with fine axial incremental lines. the aperture is narrow. the outer lip is thin, nearly straight, rounding in front into the rather wide, slightly excavated columella which near the body carries a single strong plait. the body shows a thin coat of enamel, the umbilical region slightly impressed but imperforate.  distribution this marine species occurs from southern california to panama  references  acteocinidae taxa named by william healey dall gastropods described in 1919
burr oak savings bank - also known as the burr oak post office - is an historic building located in burr oak, iowa, united states.  the free-standing, single-story, brick structure was built in 1910 in the italianate style.  its primary decorative feature is a panel with corbeled brickwork in a dentil-like pattern, and the bracketed tin cornice above it.  in 1931 it suffered a robbery, being the first robbery in winneshiek county.  that same year - as well as in 1941, 1955 and 1967 - the building underwent expansions.   after the bank closed, the building was used as a barber shop and the post office, which closed in 1981.  in 2014 it became the visitors center for the laura ingalls wilder museum and park.  it is the only building that remains on burr oak's main street from a period of economic expansion in early 20th-century iowa, based on agricultural production and land values.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  references   commercial buildings completed in 1910 italianate architecture in iowa buildings and structures in winneshiek county, iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa bank buildings on the national register of historic places in iowa
the asia/oceania zone was the unique zone within group 4 of the regional davis cup competition in 2016. the zone's competition was held in round robin format in amman, jordan, in july 2016. two nations won promotion to group iii, asia/oceania zone, for 2017.  participating nations  inactive nations  draw date: 11-16 july 2016  location: al-hussein sport city, amman, jordan (clay)  format: round-robin basis. two pools of four and five teams, respectively (pools a and b). the winner of each pool plays off against the runner-up of the other pool to determine which two nations are promoted to asia/oceania zone group iii in 2017.  seeding: the seeding was based on the davis cup rankings of 7 march 2016 (shown in parentheses below).  {| class="wikitable" !width=25%|pot 1 !width=25%|pot 2 !width=25%|pot 3 !width=25%|pot 4 |- |   (98)   (106) |    (107)   (116) |    (117)   (120) |    (121)   (124)   (-) |}  group a  group b  first round  group a  united arab emirates vs. myanmar  saudi arabia vs. oman  united arab emirates vs. oman  saudi arabia vs. myanmar  united arab emirates vs. saudi arabia  oman vs. myanmar  group b  jordan vs. mongolia  iraq vs. tajikistan  bahrain vs. mongolia  jordan vs. tajikistan  iraq vs. mongolia  jordan vs. bahrain  tajikistan vs. mongolia  iraq vs. bahrain  jordan vs. iraq  bahrain vs. tajikistan  play-offs  promotional  united arab emirates vs. bahrain  oman vs. jordan  5th−6th  saudi arabia vs. iraq  7th−8th  myanmar vs. tajikistan  references  external links official website  asia/oceania zone group iv davis cup asia/oceania zone
venus (), is a small neighbourhood of perambur and a commercial area in north chennai, a metropolitan city in tamil nadu, india. the small area around erstwhile venus theatre is called venus unofficially by the people around perambur. the erstwhile venus theatre is demolished and constructed a new mall namely spectrum mall which has a five screen multiplex called s2 cinemas which is controlled by theater franchise spi cinemas. the mall is developed and promoted by ganga foundations.  location  venus is located near agaram, peravallur and perambur. it is well connected by train and bus transport. it is very close to perambur and perambur carriage works railway stations.  references  neighbourhoods in chennai
dorcaschema cinereum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by olivier in 1795, originally under the genus saperda. it is known from the united states.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1795
the 1973 spillers greyhound derby took place in june, with the final being held on 23 june 1973 at white city stadium.   the winning greyhood was patricias hope and the winning owners gordon marks, b marks and john o'connor received £12,500. the competition was sponsored by the spillers.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  ½, neck, neck, 4¼, dis (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report a new sponsor was secured for the derby in the form of spillers foods, famous for the winalot brand and they would offer record prize money. the total fund was £22,000, with £12,500 going to the winner with the race being broadcast live and in colour by world of sport.   peoples favourite patricias hope returned from stud duties (where he had covered some 36 bitches) in an attempt to become only the second greyhound to successfully defend the title after mick the miller. john o'connor from cork had taken over brian stanley's share of the white and fawn dog and would train him for the duration of the competition. the event attracted 151 entries with the market leaders including ramdeen stuart, irish entry westpark mustard, oaks champion miss ross, northern based pit lamp and priory hill, grand national winner killone flash, pall mall stakes champion forest noble, juvenile winner black banjo and edinburgh cup and circuit winner say little.   there were 26 qualifying trials to reduce the entries to just 48 starters. in the qualifying rounds dunmore spring cup winner suburban gent recorded the fastest time of 28.80 but suffered an injury in the first round and would take no further part. of the market leaders patricias hope went fastest in the first round heats with only ramdeen stuart, black banjo and say little surviving to round two. the second round draw threw up a very strong heat which ended with say little holding off patricias hope with ramdeen stuart going out. the first semi-final was secured by forest noble from softly and say little in a very competitive race. the second semi saw breakaway town take a short head victory from black banjo, third place went to patricias hope keeping his dream alive.  in the final say little had been well-backed at 50-1 ante-post in his home village of hill ridware near uttoxeter, was sent off 6-4 favourite. both say little
and patricias hope started well missing crowding at the first bend. patricias hope gained a lead before softly showed good back straight pace to pass say little. the pair remained behind patricias hope and forest noble began to make a move, but patricias hope held on in a thrilling finish to win by a half a length in 28.68sec, four hounds finished within 10 spots of each other.  patricias hope had emulated mick the miller's achievement of 1930 becoming only the second greyhound to win the english greyhound derby twice.  see also 1973 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
courtney frerichs (born january 18, 1993) is an american middle-distance runner from nixa, missouri, who specializes in steeplechase. frerichs placed second in steeplechase behind emma coburn and ahead of colleen quigley at the 2016 us olympic trials to qualify to represent the united states at the 2016 summer olympics. she won the silver medal at the 2017 world championships, becoming the seventh fastest woman in the history of the event (displaced to #8 two weeks later). emma coburn won the gold medal at the same event, thus making coburn and frerichs the first female americans to win the gold and silver medal in any individual world championships or olympics race longer than 400 meters since the 1912 stockholm games.  on july 20, 2018, at the herculis meet in monaco, she finished in second place behind beatrice chepkoech's world record 8:44.32.  frerichs' time of 9:00.85 jumped her ahead of coburn for the american and north american (nacac) records in the steeplechase and the #6 mark all time.  frerichs won the steeplechase ncaa title at the 2016 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships as a lobo, setting a collegiate record of 9:24.41.  nixa high school as a senior at nixa public high school, courtney frerichs earned all-conference, all-district, team mvp, kspr-tv athlete of the week in cross country. frerichs posted a freshman season-best time of 2:24 in 800 meters. she also set school records in the 5k (18:12), triple jump , and her team posted the best time for the 4x800-meter relay (10:02). frerichs lettered for four years in soccer as a midfielder/forward where she earned all-district honors and was a two-time regional qualifier in gymnastics. in 2010, she was a level 9 gymnast. frerichs attributes her accomplishments to gymnastics, strength training, and her teammates.  ncaa courtney frerichs won the steeplechase national title at the 2016 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships as a lobo, setting a collegiate record of 9:24.41 as of july 2017, frerichs has run 4 of the 10 fastest times in us collegian history. she finished her career with four of the top 10 steeplechase times in ncaa history between her time at new mexico and umkc, and was a semifinalist for the bowerman award. frerich
s earned seven ncaa division i all-american honors competing in cross country, and indoor and outdoor track and field for the umkc kangaroos and the new mexico lobos.  on grass in 2015, frerichs captured her third all-american honor in cross country with a fourth-place finish of 19:48.0 at the ncaa championships, leading the new mexico lobos to a dominant national championship victory.  early championship races courtney placed sixteenth in 2012 world junior championships in athletics - women's 3000 metres steeplechase.  frerichs finished 14th at 2012 junior usa cross country championships.  courtney frerichs placed fourth 2014 nacac u23 steeplechase.  professional  2016 frerichs placed 11th at athletics at the 2016 summer olympics - women's 3000 metres steeplechase running 9:22.87. frerichs represented usa at athletics at the 2016 summer olympics.  2017 courtney placed 4th at the 2017 usatf cross country championships in bend, oregon.  frerichs placed 2nd in the steeplechase at 2017 usa outdoor track and field championships running 9:22.23, and commenting, "having a positive mindset is huge": improving substantially, she placed 2nd at 2017 world championships in athletics running 9:03.77.  2018 courtney started her 2018 season with a 33:55.1, 4th place in 10 km at the 2018 usa cross country championships. the finishing times for her teammates  were emily infeld in 33:18.7 (3:19.9/km), molly seidel 33:22.1, stephanie bruce 33:34.1, emily durgin 33:56.9, and susan tanui 34:39.0. the six qualified for team usa at 2018 nacac cross country championships in la libertad, el salvador on february 17, 2018. frerichs was among leaders until the final lap. during the last 2 km, courtney maintained a pace of approximately 3:23/km.  frerichs placed 2nd in the steeplechase at 2018 usa outdoor track and field championships running 9:18.69.  frerichs set an american record in the 3000 meter steeplechase, running 9:00.85, finishing in second place.  frerichs was selected to represent team americas and placed 2nd in the steeplechase at 2018 iaaf continental cup running 9:15.22.  2019 frerichs began her 2019 season with a 6th place in 10 km at the 2019 usa cross country championships. on june 30, 2019, she ran
9:09.75 to place fifth behind world record holder beatrice chepkoech in the star-studded diamond league steeple at the prefontaine classic held in stanford, california.   in des moines, iowa on july 28, running 9:26.61, frerichs finished second at the 2019 usa track & field outdoor championships, in the steeplechase to emma coburn, who ran 9:25.63 and who was the defending world champion from 2017. each qualified for the 2019 world championships in doha, qatar in september and frerichs finished 6th in the 3000 m steeplechase in a time of 9:11.27.  2021 frerichs placed second in steeplechase behind emma coburn at the 2020 us olympic trials to qualify to represent the united states at the 2020 summer olympics. she won the silver medal at the olympics with a time of 9:04.79, finishing behind peruth chemutai and ahead of hyvin kiyeng jepkemoi.  competition record  references  external links   iaaf profile for courtney frerichs    living people 1993 births american female steeplechase runners american female long-distance runners american female middle-distance runners people from nixa, missouri track and field athletes from portland, oregon athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic silver medalists for the united states in track and field new mexico lobos women's track and field athletes kansas city roos athletes people from mundelein, illinois world athletics championships athletes for the united states world athletics championships medalists track and field athletes from illinois track and field athletes from missouri
"maybe it's a good thing" is a song by scottish recording artist kt tunstall. it was released as the lead single off her fifth studio album kin.  the song was released on 15 july 2016, right after the golden state ep and its promotional single "evil eye". the song was produced by tony hoffer.  composition   "maybe it's a good thing" was written by tunstall in los angeles, like most of the album. tunstall stated that the song was about dealing with hard things in the past, and seeing them a positive experience.  the song marks a different sound than her previous albums invisible empire // crescent moon which was folk, and tiger suit, which was electronic music. this time, it is a pop song. tunstall stated in an interview with entertainment weekly : "the truth is, i've finally made peace with being a pop songwriter".  promotion   tunstall played the song, acoustic and live, during her intervention at the oxford union on 20 july 2016. she also played it during the cambridge folk festival 2016.  music video  the clip of "maybe it's a good thing" was released on 1 august 2016 through vevo. yoni weisberg directed the video (he has previously worked with band of skulls and courtney barnett). the website entertainment weekly premiered the video along with an article, stating the video is a "kaleidoscopic  confetti, diving into a psychedelic potpourri of rapid fire visuals".  in the music video, tunstall is dancing in different, colorful outfits. she says the music seen is all about dancing; "i thought my dancing was really bad, [but] i'm a big fan of the band jungle from london, and they always do these awesome choreographed dance videos. i love dancing, no matter how i look, and that's how i want this whole album to make people feel, so i just did what felt good."  track listing  references  external links  2009 singles kt tunstall songs songs written by kt tunstall 2009 songs
manj is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
j.j.! is an album by jazz trombonist and arranger j. j. johnson and big band recorded in 1964 for the rca victor label.  reception  the allmusic site awarded the album 4 stars.  track listing  "el camino real" (j. j. johnson) - 4:10  "stolen moments" (oliver nelson) - 5:50  "train samba" (gary mcfarland) - 6:50  "swing spring" (miles davis) - 3:45  "bimsha swing" (thelonious monk, denzil best) - 3:10  "my little suede shoes" (charlie parker) - 4:55  "so what" (davis) - 4:15  "stratusphunk" (george russell) - 6:50  "winter's waif" (mcfarland) - 5:50 recorded at webster hall in new york city on december 7, 1964 (tracks 5-8), december 8, 1964 (tracks 2 & 4) and december 9, 1964 (tracks 1, 3 & 9)  personnel  j. j. johnson - trombone, arranger thad jones (tracks 1-4 & 9), jimmy maxwell (tracks 1, 3 & 9), ernie royal, clark terry (tracks 5-8), joe wilder (tracks 1, 3 & 9) - trumpet jimmy cleveland - trombone tommy mitchell (tracks 1, 3 & 9), tony studd - bass trombone james buffington - french horn (tracks 1, 3 & 9) bill stanley - tuba (tracks 1, 3 & 9) ray beckenstein (tracks 2 & 4), jerry dodgion, harvey estrin (tracks 1, 3 & 9), bud johnson (tracks 1, 3 & 9), oliver nelson, jerome richardson (tracks 5-8) - reeds hank jones - piano bob cranshaw - bass grady tate - drums  references   1965 albums rca records albums j. j. johnson albums
dalia amotz (12 august 1938 - 27 november 1994) was an israeli photographer.  biography  dalia amotz, born in kibbutz gan shmuel, she moved to jerusalem from 1962. she was the daughter of yaffa and isaac gleicher. in 1973 she presented her first solo exhibition, entitled "dir samit". in 1990 she won an oscar handler prize from the ghetto fighters' kibbutz. in 2000, an exhibition of her works was held at the tel aviv museum  of art entitled "the dark land, fields of light" as part her posthumously receiving the constantiner prize.  she died in 1994.  collections dalia amotz works are part of israel museum in jerusalem.  awards and recognition  1977 the enrique kavlin photography prize, the israel museum, jerusalem  1990 oskar handler award, ghetto fighters' house  2000 the constantiner photography award for an israeli artist, tel aviv museum of art  see also visual arts in israel  references  external links         dalia amotz at the gordon gallery, tel aviv  1938 births 1994 deaths jewish israeli artists israeli photographers israeli women photographers
casearia bartlettii is a species of flowering plants in the family salicaceae found in mesoamerica (belize-guatemala).  references  external links     bartlettii plants described in 1939 flora of belize flora of guatemala
in the united states, a one-room jail is a type of jail with only one room, or cell.  one-room jail examples  buhler jail: red brick building in buhler, kansas.  clifton cliff jail: stone building constructed in clifton, arizona, located at the entrance to a small mine-shaft, which was used as the cell. now preserved and listed on the national register of historic places.  lower lake stone jail: stone building constructed in 1876 in lower lake, california, and is one of the smallest historical jail buildings in the united states. now a california historical landmark.  san juan jail: wooden-frame structure built in 1870 in san juan bautista, california. now fully restored and open to the public.  washington county jail: one-room log structure in hillsboro, oregon. built in 1853 and in use until 1870. preserved and added to the national register of historic places in 1986.  calaboose in some areas of the united states, a small, free-standing, one or two room jail building is known as a calaboose, meaning "dungeon" in spanish. calaboose were mainly used to incarcerate prisoners for minor crimes, such as drunkenness in public or fighting, or as a temporary holding cell for when a prisoner awaited transportation to a county jail.  use of the calaboose was common throughout much of the united states in the 19th and early 20th centuries, and today surviving examples can be found in several states. texas, with its large number of counties, has the highest concentration of historic calaboose jail buildings with over 100 known structures. many calaboose have only a single cell, feature a curved or vaulted ceiling, and were constructed of solid concrete, although brick, stone and wooden examples also survive.  examples  arrow rock calaboose: stone structure with vaulted ceiling in arrow rock, missouri. built in 1873 to replace the original log jail building that was burned by an arsonist in 1872. fully restored by the city of arrow rock and open to the public.  bronwood calaboose: wooden-frame building with a gabled roof and two cells. built around 1900 in bronwood, georgia, and in use until 1954. added to the national register of historic places in 1982.  delmar calaboose: located in delmar, iowa. built of limestone block in 1878 and used well into the 20th century. currently listed on the national register of historic places.  elsberry
calaboose: limestone block structure built 1896 to replace the original wooden calaboose, which burned. located in elsberry, missouri, the calaboose has been fully restored by the city and is open to the public.  holliday calaboose: concrete structure in holliday, texas, with two cells. built in the 1920s and now privately owned. located in a vacant lot near the holliday post office.  ruby jail: small concrete structure with vaulted ceiling in the ghost town of ruby, arizona. built in 1936 to replace the mesquite jail tree. listed on the national register of historic places since 1975.  texola jail: concrete and cinder block structure in texola, oklahoma. built in 1908 and in use until 1910. now open to the public.  wingate calaboose: red brick building built in 1897 and in use until 1945. located behind the town hall in wingate, indiana.  strap-iron jail a strap-iron jail is a type of open air jail made of strap iron bars. basically a large metal cage with either one or two cells, strap-iron jails were commonly used in the united states in the mid to late 19th century. several surviving examples exist in texas.  examples  berne jail: originally located in the 1895 berne fire station in berne, indiana. now on display at the swiss heritage village in berne.  clarksdale jail: located in clarksdale, mississippi.  foss jail: historic town jail. located off route 66 in foss, oklahoma.  helena jail: located and on display in the ghost town of helena, texas. the falls city strap-iron jail is also located in helena.  kelso depot jail: strap-iron jail with two cells used to detain drunks in the ghost town of kelso, california, in the 1940s. now on display at the kelso depot.  mobeetie strap-iron jail: located and on display in mobeetie, texas. not be confused with the historic 1886 jail building.  the calaboose: owned by the punta gorda historical society in punta gorda, florida. originally located along olympia avenue, the jail has since been restored and is now on display at history park in punta gorda.  gallery  see also   one-room school  jail tree  list of hanging trees  village lock-up  references  jails in the united states american frontier jail
battle ground historic district is a national historic district located at battle ground, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 129 contributing buildings in the central business district of battle ground, including the site of the battle of tippecanoe.  it developed between about 1811 and 1930 and includes representative examples of queen anne, colonial revival, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture.  notable contributing resources include the soldier's memorial (1908), carpenter hall / service center (c. 1884, 1926), chapel (c. 1825), winans house (c. 1863), battle ground united methodist church (1920), masonic lodge (c. 1918), odd fellow lodge (1899), and knights of pythias lodge (1899).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1985.  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana historic districts in tippecanoe county, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
chernihiv oblast is subdivided into districts (raions) which are further subdivided into amalgamated territorial communities (hromadas).  administrative divisions after 2020  on 18 july 2020, the number of districts was reduced to five. these are:   chernihiv (чернігівськии раион), the center is in the city of chernihiv;  koriukivka (корюківськии раион), the center is in the town of koriukivka;  nizhyn (ніжинськии раион), the center is in the city of nizhyn;  novhorod-siverskyi (новгород-сіверськии раион), the center is in the city of novhorod-siverskyi;  pryluky (прилуцькии раион), the center is in the city of pryluky.  administrative divisions until 2020  before 2020, chernihiv oblast was subdivided into 26 regions: 22 districts (raions) and 4 city municipalities (mis'krada or misto), officially known as territories governed by city councils. cities under the oblast's jurisdiction: chernihiv (чернігів), the administrative center of the oblast nizhyn (ніжин) novhorod-siverskyi municipality  cities and towns under the city's jurisdiction: novhorod-siverskyi (новгород-сіверськии) pryluky (прилуки) districts (raions): bakhmach  (бахмацькии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: bakhmach (бахмач) baturyn (батурин) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: dmytrivka (дмитрівка) bobrovytsia  (бобровицькии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: bobrovytsia (бобровиця) borzna  (борзнянськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: borzna (борзна) chernihiv  (чернігівськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: honcharivske (гончарівське) mykhailo-kotsiubynske (михаило-коцюбинське) olyshivka (олишівка) sedniv (седнів) horodnia  (
городнянськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: horodnia (городня) ichnia  (ічнянськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: ichnia (ічня) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: druzhba (дружба) parafiivka (парафіівка) koriukivka  (корюківськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: koriukivka (корюківка) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: kholmy (холми) korop  (коропськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: korop (короп) ponornytsia (понорниця) kozelets  (козелецькии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: oster (остер) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: desna (десна) kozelets (козелець) kulykivka  (куликівськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: kulykivka (куликівка) mena  (менськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: mena (мена) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: berezna (березна) makoshyne (макошине) nizhyn  (ніжинськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: losynivka (лосинівка) nosivka  (носівськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: nosivka (носівка) novhorod-siverskyi  (новгород-сіверськии раион) pryluky  (прилуцькии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: ladan (ладан) lynovytsia (линовиця) mala divytsia (мала дівиця) ripky  (ріпкинськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: dobrianka (добрянка) liubech (любеч) radul (радуль) ripky (ріпки) zamhlai (зам
глаи) semenivka  (семенівськии раион) cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: semenivka (семенівка) snovsk  (сновськии раион), formerly shchors raion cities and towns under the district's jurisdiction: snovsk (сновськ), formerly shchors sosnytsia  (сосницькии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: sosnytsia (сосниця) sribne  (срібнянськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: dihtiari (дігтярі) sribne (срібне) talalaivka  (талалаівськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: talalaivka (талалаівка) varva  (варвинськии раион) urban-type settlements under the district's jurisdiction: varva (варва)  references  chernihiv chernihiv oblast
paneer makhani (also called paneer butter masala) is a slightly sweet dish of paneer, originating from the indian subcontinent, in which the gravy is prepared usually with butter (makhan), tomatoes and cashews . spices such as red chili powder and garam masala are also used to prepare this gravy.  a survey found that paneer butter masala was one of the top five foods ordered in india.  etymology  makhan is the hindi word for 'butter'. makhani means 'buttery'. this dish originated in the 1950s at moti mahal restaurant in delhi invented the sauce by mixing fresh butter into a tomato-based curry.  recipe  there is no strict set of steps to make this gravy. below is one of the ways in which makhani gravy is prepared.   frying cashew nuts and tomatoes and grinding both of them into a fine paste.  adding spices like cardamom and bay leaf.  usage of sour curd into the gravy (though in some preparation methods only tomatoes are used).  generous usage of butter.  usage of garam masala, red chili powder, kasuri methi and coriander leaves.  see also   list of indian dishes  references   indian cheese dishes
the following lists events that happened in 1936 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - hermann jonasson  events  births  7 may - jon kristinsson, architect 16 june - arni njalsson, footballer 19 july - birgir isleifur gunnarsson, politician. (d. 2019) 16 november - olafur gislason, footballer 26 december - bjarni felixson, footballer  full date missing helgi valdimarsson, immunologist  deaths  references    1930s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
chinese theology, which comes in different interpretations according to the classic texts and the common religion, and specifically confucian, taoist and other philosophical formulations, is fundamentally monistic, that is to say it sees the world and the gods of its phenomena as an organic whole, or cosmos, which continuously emerges from a simple principle. this is expressed by the concept that "all things have one and the same principle" (wanwu yili ). this principle is commonly referred to as tian , a concept generally translated as "heaven", referring to the northern culmen and starry vault of the skies and its natural laws which regulate earthly phenomena and generate beings as their progenitors. ancestors are therefore regarded as the equivalent of heaven within human society, and therefore as the means connecting back to heaven which is the "utmost ancestral father" ( zengzufu). chinese theology may be also called tianxue  ("study of heaven"), a term already in use in the 17th and 18th century.  the universal principle that gives origin to the world is conceived as transcendent and immanent to creation, at the same time. the chinese idea of the universal god is expressed in different ways; there are many names of god from the different sources of chinese tradition, reflecting a "hierarchic, multiperspective" observation of the supreme god.  chinese scholars emphasise that the chinese tradition contains two facets of the idea of god: one is the personified god of popular devotion, and the other one is the impersonal god of philosophical inquiry. together they express an "integrated definition of the monistic world".  interest in traditional chinese theology has waxed and waned over the various periods of the history of china. for instance, the great leap forward enacted in the mid-20th century involved the outright destruction of traditional temples in accordance with maoist ideology. from the 1980s onward, public revivals have taken place. the chinese believe that deities or stars, are arranged in a "celestial bureaucracy" which influences earthly activities and is reflected by the hierarchy of the chinese state itself. these beliefs have similarities with broader asian shamanism. the alignment of earthly and heavenly forces is upheld through the practice of rites, for instance the jiao festivals in which sacrificial offerings of incense and other products are set up by local temples, participants hoping to renew the perceived alliance between community leaders and the gods.  creation as ordering of primordial potentiality  as explained by the scholar stephan feuchtw
ang, in chinese cosmology "the universe creates itself out of a primary chaos of material energy" (hundun  and qi ), organising as the polarity of yin and yang which characterises any thing and life. creation is therefore a continuous ordering; it is not a creation ex nihilo. yin and yang are the invisible and the visible, the receptive and the active, the unshaped and the shaped; they characterise the yearly cycle (winter and summer), the landscape (shady and bright), the sexes (female and male), and even sociopolitical history (disorder and order). the gods themselves are divided in yin forces of contraction,  gui ("demons" or "ghosts") and yang forces of expansion  shen ("gods" or "spirits"); in the human being they are the hun and po (where hun () is yang and po () is yin; respectively the rational and emotional soul, or the ethereal and the corporeal soul). together,  guishen is another way to define the twofold operation of the god of heaven, its resulting dynamism being called itself shen, spirit.  by the words of the neo-confucian thinker cheng yi:  another neo-confucian, zhu xi, says:  the dragon, associated to the constellation draco winding the north ecliptic pole and slithering between the little and big dipper (or great chariot), represents the "protean" primordial power, which embodies both yin and yang in unity, and therefore the awesome unlimited power (qi) of divinity. in han-dynasty traditions, draco is described as the spear of the supreme god.  heaven continuously begets-according to its own manifest model which is the starry vault revolving around the northern culmen ( beiji)-and reabsorbs, the temporal things and worlds. as explained in modern confucian theology:  rather than "creation" ( zao), which has a long western connotation of creation ex nihilo, modern chinese theologians prefer to speak of "evolution" ( hua) to describe the begetting of the cosmos; even in modern chinese language the two concepts are frequently held together, zaohua ("creation-evolution"). such ordering power, which belongs to deities but also to humans, expresses itself in rites ( li). they are the means by which alignment between the forces of the starry sky, of earthly phenomena, and the acts of human beings (the three realms of heaven-earth-
humanity,  tiandiren), is established. such harmonisation is referred to as "centring" ( yang or  zhong). rituals may be performed by government officials, family elders, popular ritual masters and taoists, the latter cultivating local gods to centre the forces of the universe upon a particular locality. since humans are capable of centring natural forces, by the means of rites, they are themselves "central" to creation.  so, human beings participate in the ongoing creation-evolution of the god of heaven, acting as ancestors who may produce and influence other beings:  the relationship between oneness and multiplicity, between the supreme principle and the myriad things, is notably explained by zhu xi through the "metaphor of the moon":  in his terminology, the myriad things are generated as effects or actualities ( yong) of the supreme principle, which, before in potence ( ti), sets in motion qi. the effects are different, forming the "myriad species" ( wanshu), each relying upon their myriad modifications of the principle, depending on the varying contexts and engagements. difference exists not only between the various categories of beings, but among individuals belonging to the same category as well, so that each creature is a unique coalescence of the cosmic principle. the qi of kindred beings accord and communicate with one another, and the same happens for the qi of worshippers and the god receiving sacrifice, and for the qi of an ancestor and his descendants. all beings are, at different levels, "in" the god of heaven, not in the sense of addition but in the sense of belonging.  in the confucian tradition, the perfect government is that which emulates the ordering of the stary vault of heaven:  names and attributes of the god of heaven in the tradition  since the shang (1600-1046 bce) and zhou dynasty 1046-256 bce), the radical chinese terms for the supreme god are tian  and shangdi  (the "highest deity") or simply di  ("deity"). another concept is taidi  (the "great deity"). these names are combined in different ways in chinese theological literature, often interchanged in the same paragraph if not in the same sentence. one of the combinations is the name of god used at the temple of heaven in beijing, which is the "highest deity the heavenly king" ( huangtian shangdi); others are "great deity the heavenly king" ( tianhuang dadi) and "supreme deity of the vast heaven" (
haotian shangdi).  god is considered manifest in this world as the northern culmen and starry vault of the skies which regulate nature. as its see, the circumpolar stars (the little and big dipper, or broader ursa minor and ursa major) are known, among various names, as tianmen  ("gate of heaven") and tianshu  ("pivot of heaven"), or the "celestial clock" regulating the four seasons of time. the chinese supreme god is compared to the conception of the supreme god identified as the north celestial pole in other cultures, including the mesopotamian an ("heaven" itself), and enlil and enki/marduk, the vedic indra and mitra-varuna, the zoroastrian ahura mazda, as well as the dyeus of common proto-indo-european religion.  throughout the chinese theological literary tradition, the dipper constellations, and especially the big dipper ( beidouxing, "northern dipper"), also known as great chariot, within ursa major, are portrayed as the potent symbol of spirit, divinity, or of the activity of the supreme god regulating nature. examples include:  di is literally a title expressing dominance over the all-under-heaven, that is all created things. it is etymologically and figuratively analogous to the concept of di as the base of a fruit, which falls and produces other fruits. this analogy is attested in the shuowen jiezi explaining "deity" as "what faces the base of a melon fruit". tian is usually translated as "heaven", but by graphical etymology it means "great one" and scholars relate it to the same di through phonetic etymology and trace their common root, through their archaic forms respectively *teeŋ and *tees, to the symbols of the celestial pole and its spinning stars. other words, such as  ding ("on top", "apex") would share the same etymology, all connected to a conceptualisation-according to the scholar john c. didier-of the north celestial pole godhead as cosmic square (ding 口). zhou (2005) even connects di, through old chinese *tees and by phonetic etymology, to the proto-indo-european dyeus. medhurst (1847) also shows affinities in the usage of "deity", chinese di, greek theos and latin deus, for incarnate powers resembling the supreme godhead.  shang-zhou theology ulrich libbrecht distinguishes two layers in the development of early chinese theology, traditions derived respectively from the
shang and subsequent zhou dynasties. the religion of the shang was based on the worship of ancestors and god-kings, who survived as unseen divine forces after death. they were not transcendent entities, since the cosmos was "by itself so", not created by a force outside of it but generated by internal rhythms and cosmic powers. the royal ancestors were called di (), "deities", and the utmost progenitor was shangdi, identified as the dragon. already in shang theology, the multiplicity of gods of nature and ancestors were viewed as parts of shangdi, and the four fang ( "directions" or "sides") and their feng ( "winds") as his cosmic will.  the zhou dynasty, which overthrew the shang, emphasised a more universal idea of tian ( "heaven"). the shang dynasty's identification of shangdi as their ancestor-god had asserted their claim to power by divine right; the zhou transformed this claim into a legitimacy based on moral power, the mandate of heaven. in zhou theology, tian had no singular earthly progeny, but bestowed divine favour on virtuous rulers. zhou kings declared that their victory over the shang was because they were virtuous and loved their people, while the shang were tyrants and thus were deprived of power by tian.  tian  tian 天 is both transcendent and immanent as the starry vault, manifesting in the three forms of dominance, destiny and nature. there are many compounds of the name tian, and many of these clearly distinguish a "heaven of dominance", a "heaven of destiny" and a "heaven of nature" as attributes of the supreme cosmic god.  in the wujing yiyi (, "different meanings in the five classics"), xu shen explains that the designation of heaven is quintuple:  huang tian  -"yellow heaven" or "shining heaven", when it is venerated as the lord of creation;  hao tian -"vast heaven", with regard to the vastness of its vital breath (qi);  min tian -"compassionate heaven", for it hears and corresponds with justice to the all-under-heaven;  shang tian -"highest heaven" or "first heaven", for it is the primordial being supervising all-under-heaven;  cang tian -"deep-green heaven", for it being unfathomably deep.  other names of the god of heaven include:  tiandi -the "deity of heaven" or "emperor of heaven": "on rect
ification" (zheng lun) of the xunzi uses this term to refer to the active god of heaven setting in motion creation;  tianzhu -the "lord of heaven": in "the document of offering sacrifices to heaven and earth on the mountain tai" (fengshan shu) of the records of the grand historian it is used as the title of the first god from whom all the other gods derive.  tianhuang -the "king of heaven": in the "poem of fathoming profundity" (si'xuan fu), transcribed in "the history of the later han dynasty" (hou han shu), zhang heng ornately writes: «i ask the superintendent of the heavenly gate to open the door and let me visit the king of heaven at the jade palace»;  tiangong -the "duke of heaven" or "general of heaven";  tianjun -the "prince of heaven" or "lord of heaven";  tianzun -the "heavenly venerable", also a title for high gods in taoist theologies;  tianshen -the "god of heaven", interpreted in the shuowen jiezi as "the being that gives birth to all things";  shenhuang -"god the king", attested in taihong ("the origin of vital breath");  laotianye ()-the "olden heavenly father".  attributes of the supreme god of heaven include:  tiandao -"way of heaven"; it is the god's will of power, which decides the development of things: the book of historical documents says that «the way of heaven is to bless the good, and make the bad miserable». it is also the name of some religious traditions;  tianming -"mandate of heaven", defining the destiny of things;  tianyi -"decree of heaven", the same concept of destiny but implying an active decision;  tianxia -"under heaven"; means creation, ongoingly generated by the supreme god.  shangdi  shangdi ( "highest deity"), sometimes shortened simply to di ( "deity"), is another name of the supreme god inherited from shang and zhou times. the classic of poetry recites: «how vast is the highest deity, the ruler of men below!». di is also applied to the name of cosmic gods besides the supreme godhead, and is used to compose titles of divinity; for instance dijun  ("divine ruler", latin: dominus deus), used in taoism for high deities in
the celestial hierarchy.  in the shang dynasty, as discussed by john c. didier, shangdi was the same as ding (, modern ), the "square" as the north celestial pole, and shangjia ( "supreme ancestor") was an alternative name. shangdi was conceived as the utmost ancestor of the shang royal lineage, the zi () lineage, also called ku (or kui) or diku ("divus ku"), attested in the shiji and other texts.  the other gods associated with the circumpolar stars were all embraced by shangdi, and they were conceived as the ancestors of side noble lineages of the shang and even non-shang peripheral peoples who benefited from the identification of their ancestor-gods as part of di. together they were called  xiadi, "lower deities" part of the "highest deity" of the shang. with the supreme god identified as the pivot of the skies, all the lesser gods were its stars  xing, a word which in shang script was illustrated by a few grouped  ding (cf. jing , "perfect [celestial, i.e., star] light", and  pin, originally "starlight"); up to the han dynasty it was still common to represent the stars as small squares. the shang conducted magnificent sacrifices to these ancestor-gods, whose altar mimicked the stars of the north celestial pole. through this sympathetic magic, which consisted in reproducing the celestial centre on earth, the shang established and monopolised the centralising political power.  qin-han theology  the emperors of the qin dynasty (221-206 bce) are credited with an effort to unify the cults of the wufang shangdi ( "five forms of the highest deity"), which were previously held at different locations, in single temple complexes. the five deities are a cosmological conception of the fivefold manifestation of the supreme god, or his five changing faces, that goes back to the neolithic and continues in the classic texts. they "reflect the cosmic structure of the world" in which yin, yang and all forces are held in balance, and are associated with the four directions of space and the centre, the five sacred mountains, the five phases of creation, and the five constellations rotating around the celestial pole and five planets.  during the han dynasty (206 bce-220 ce), the theology of the state religion developed side by side with the huang-lao religious movement which in turn influenced the early taoist church, and focused on a conceptualisation of the supreme
god of the culmen of the sky as the yellow god of the centre, and its human incarnation, the yellow emperor or yellow deity. unlike previous shang concepts of human incarnations of the supreme godhead, considered exclusively as the progenitors of the royal lineage, the yellow emperor was a more universal archetype of the human being. the competing factions of the confucians and the fangshi ( "masters of directions"), regarded as representatives of the ancient religious tradition inherited from previous dynasties, concurred in the formulation of han state religion.  taiyi  taiyi (; also spelled  taiyi or  taiyi; "great oneness" or "great unity"), also known as "supreme oneness of the central yellow" ( zhonghuang taiyi), or the "yellow god of the northern dipper" ( huangshen beidou), or "heavenly venerable supreme unity" ( taiyi tianzun), is a name of the supreme god of heaven that had become prominent besides the older ones by the han dynasty in relation with the figure of the yellow emperor. it harkens back to the warring states period, as attested in the poem the supreme oneness gives birth to water, and possibly to the shang dynasty as dayi ( "big oneness"), an alternative name for the shangs' (and universe's) foremost ancestor.  taiyi was worshipped by the social elites in the warring states, and is also the first god described in the nine songs, shamanic hymns collected in the chuci ("songs of chu"). throughout the qin and the han dynasty, a distinction became evident between taiyi as the supreme godhead identified with the northern culmen of the sky and its spinning stars, and a more abstract concept of yi (一 "one"), which begets the polar godhead and then the myriad beings; the more abstract yi was an "interiorisation" of the supreme god which was influenced by the confucian discourse.  during the han dynasty, taiyi became part of the imperial cult, and at the same time it was the central concept of huang-lao, which influenced the early taoist church; in early taoism, taiyi was identified as the dao . the "inscription for laozi" (laozi ming), a han stela, describes the taiyi as the source of inspiration and immortality for laozi. in huang-lao the philosopher-god laozi was identified as the same as the yellow emperor, and received imperial sacrifices, for instance by emperor huan (146-168).
in han apocryphal texts, the big dipper is described as the instrument of taiyi, the ladle from which he pours out the primordial breath (yuanqi), and as his heavenly chariot.  a part of the shiji by sima qian identifies taiyi with the simple name di (deity) and tells:  in 113 bce, emperor wu of han, under the influence of prominent fangshi-miu ji and later gongsun qing-, officially integrated the huang-lao theology of taiyi with the confucian state religion and theology of the five forms of the highest deity inherited from the erstwhile dynasties.  huangdi  huangdi ( "yellow emperor" or "yellow deity") is another name of the god of heaven, associated with the celestial pole and with the power of the wu (shamans). in the older cosmological tradition of the wufang shangdi, the yellow deity is the main one, associated with the centre of the cosmos. he is also called huangshen  ("yellow god"), xuanyuan ( "chariot shaft"), which is said to have been his personal name as a human incarnation, xuanyuanshi ( "master of the chariot shaft") or xuanyuan huangdi ("yellow deity of the chariot shaft").  in chinese religion he is the deity who shapes the material world ( di), the creator of the huaxia civilisation, of marriage and morality, language and lineage, and progenitor of all chinese. in the cosmology of the wufang shangdi his astral body is saturn, but he is also identified as the sun god, and with the star regulus (α leonis) and constellations leo and lynx, of which the latter is said to represent the body of the yellow dragon, his serpentine form. the character  huang, for "yellow", also means, by homophony and shared etymology with  huang, "august", "creator" and "radiant", attributes of the supreme god.  as a progenitor, huangdi is portrayed as the historical incarnation of the yellow god of the northern dipper. according to a definition given by apocryphal texts related to the hetu , the yellow emperor "proceeds from the essence of the yellow god of the northern dipper", is born to "a daughter of a chthonic deity", and as such he is "a cosmic product of the conflation of heaven and earth".  as a human being, the yellow emperor was conceived by a virgin mother, fubao, who was imp
regnated by taiyi's radiance (yuanqi, "primordial pneuma"), a lightning, which she saw encircling the northern dipper (great chariot, or broader ursa major), or the celestial pole, while walking in the countryside. she delivered her son after twenty-four months on the mount of shou (longevity) or mount xuanyuan, after which he was named. through his human side, he was a descendant of  youxiong, the lineage of the bear-another reference to the ursa major. didier has studied the parallels that the yellow emperor's mythology has in other cultures, deducing a plausible ancient origin of the myth in siberia or in north asia.  in older accounts, the yellow emperor is identified as a deity of light (and his name is explained in the shuowen jiezi to derive from guang , "light") and thunder, and as one and the same with the "thunder god" ( leishen), who in turn, as a later mythological character, is distinguished as the yellow emperor's foremost pupil, such as in the huangdi neijing.  as the deity of the centre, the yellow emperor is the zhongyuedadi ( "great deity of the central peak") and he represents the essence of earth and the yellow dragon. he represents the hub of creation, the axis mundi (kunlun) that is the manifestation of the divine order in physical reality, opening the way to immortality. as the centre of the four directions, in the shizi he is described as "yellow emperor with four faces" ( huangdi simian). the "four-faced god" or "ubiquitous god" ( simianshen) is also the chinese name of brahma.  huangdi is the model of those who merge their self with the self of the supreme god, of the ascetics who reach enlightenment or immortality. he is the god of nobility, the patron of taoism and medicine. in the shiji, as well as in the taoist book zhuangzi, he is also described as the perfect king. there are records of dialogues in which huangdi took the advice of wise counselors, contained in the huangdi neijing ("inner scripture of the yellow emperor") as well as in the shiwen ("ten questions"). in the huang-lao tradition he is the model of a king turned immortal, and is associated with the transmission of various mantic and medical techniques. besides the inner scripture of the yellow emperor, huangdi is also associated to
other textual bodies of knowledge including the huangdi sijing ("four scriptures of the yellow emperor") and the  ("scripture of the dwellings of the yellow emperor").  in the cosmology of the wufang shangdi, besides the yellow deity, the black deity ( heidi) of the north, winter and mercury, is portrayed by sima qian as huangdi's grandson, and is himself associated with the north pole stars. the "green deity" or "blue deity" ( cangdi or  qingdi), of the east, spring, and identified with jupiter, is frequently worshipped as the supreme god and its main temple at mount tai (the cult centre of all eastern peak temples) is attested as a site for fire sacrifices to the supreme god since prehistoric times.  yudi  yudi ( "jade deity" or "jade emperor"), or yuhuang ( "jade king"), is a personification of the supreme god of heaven in popular religion. more elaborate names for the jade deity include yuhuang shangdi ( "highest deity the jade king") and yuhuangdadi ( "great deity the jade king"), while among the common people he is intimately referred to as the "lord of heaven" ( tiangong).  he is also present in taoist theology, where, however, he is not regarded as the supreme principle though he has a high position in the pantheon. in taoism his formal title is the "most honourable great deity the jade king in the golden tower of the clear heaven" (haotian jinque zhizun yuhuangdadi ), and he is one of the four sovereigns, the four deities proceeding directly from the three pure ones, which in taoism are the representation of the supreme principle.  the eminence of the jade deity is relatively recent, emerging in popular religion during the tang dynasty (618-907) and becoming established during the song dynasty (960-1279), especially under emperor zhenzong and emperor huizong of song. by the tang dynasty the name of "jade king" had been widely adopted by the common people to refer to the god of heaven, and this got the attention of the taoists who integrated the deity in their pantheon. the cult of the jade deity became so widespread that during the song dynasty it was proclaimed by imperial decree that this popular conception of god was the same supreme god of heaven whom the elites had the privilege to worship at the temple of heaven.  there are a great number of temples in china dedicated to the
jade deity ( yuhuangmiao or  yuhuangge, et al.), and his birthday on the 9th day of the first month of the chinese calendar is one of the biggest festivals. he is also celebrated on the 25th day of the 12th month, when he is believed to turn to the human world to inspect all goods and evils to determine awards or punishments. in everyday language the jade deity is also called the olden heavenly father (laotianye ) and simply heaven.  taidi taidi ( "utmost deity" or "great deity"), is another name that has been used to describe the supreme god in some contexts. it appears in the mystical narratives of the huainanzi where the supreme god is associated to the mount kunlun, the axis mundi.  shen   shen is a general concept meaning "spirit", and usually defines the plurality of gods in the world, however in certain contexts it has been used as singular denoting the supreme god, the "being that gives birth to all things".  concepts including shen expressing the idea of the supreme god include:  tianshen , the "god of heaven", interpreted in the shuowen jiezi () as "the being that gives birth to all things";  shenhuang , "god the king", attested in taihong ("the origin of vital breath").  shendao ( "way of the god[s]"), in the yijing, is the path or way of manifestation of the supreme god and the gods of nature.  since the qin and han dynasty, "shendao" became a descriptor for the "chinese religion" as the shejiao , "social religion" of the nation. the phrase shendao shejiao () literally means "established religion of the way of the gods".  zi  zi , literally meaning "son", "(male) offspring", is another concept associated to the supreme god of heaven as the north celestial pole and its spinning stars. zi , meaning "word" and "symbol", is one of its near homophonous and graphic cognates. it was the surname used by the royal lineage of the shang dynasty. it is a component of concepts including  tianzi ("son of heaven") and  junzi ("son of a lord", which in confucianism became the concept of morally perfected person). according to didier, in shang and zhou forms, the grapheme zi itself depicts someone linked to the godhead of the squared north celestial pole ( ding), and is related to  zhong, the
concept of spiritual and thus political centrality.  in modern chinese popular religion zi is a synonym of  lu ("prosperity", "furthering", "welfare"). luxing ( "star of prosperity") is mizar, a star of the big dipper (great chariot) constellation which rotates around the north celestial pole; it is the second star of the "handle" of the dipper. luxing is conceived as a member of two clusters of gods, the sanxing ( "three stars") and the jiuhuangshen ( "nine god-kings"). the latter are the seven stars of the big dipper with the addition of two less visible ones thwartwise the "handle", and they are conceived as the ninefold manifestation of the supreme god of heaven, which in this tradition is called jiuhuangdadi (, "great deity of the nine kings"), xuantian shangdi ( "highest deity of the dark heaven"), or doufu ( "father of the chariot"). the number nine is for this reason associated with the yang masculine power of the dragon, and celebrated in the double ninth festival and nine god-kings festival. the big dipper is the expansion of the supreme principle, governing waxing and life (yang), while the little dipper is its reabsorption, governing waning and death (yin). the mother of the jiuhuangshen is doumu ( "mother of the chariot"), the female aspect of the supreme.  the stars are consistent regardless of the name in different languages,cultures or view point on earth northern/southerm hemisphere. same sky,sun,stars and moon  theology of the schools as explained by stephan feuchtwang, the fundamental difference between confucianism and taoism lies in the fact that the former focuses on the realisation of the starry order of heaven in human society, while the latter on the contemplation of the dao which spontaneously arises in nature. taoism also focuses on the cultivation of local gods, to centre the order of heaven upon a particular locality.  confucian theology  confucius (551-479 bce) emerged in the critical warring states period as a reformer of the religious tradition inherited from the shang and zhou dynasties. his elaboration of ancient theology gives centrality to self-cultivation and human agency, and to the educational power of the self-established individual in assisting others to establish themselves (the principle of  airen, "loving others").  philosophers in the warring states compiled in the analects, and formulated
the classic metaphysics which became the lash of confucianism. in accordance with the master, they identified mental tranquility as the state of tian, or the one (一 yi), which in each individual is the heaven-bestowed divine power to rule one's own life and the world. going beyond the master, they theorised the oneness of production and reabsorption into the cosmic source, and the possibility to understand and therefore reattain it through meditation. this line of thought would have influenced all chinese individual and collective-political mystical theories and practices thereafter.  fu pei-jun characterises the heaven of ancient confucianism, before the qin dynasty, as "dominator", "creator", "sustainer", "revealer" and "judge". the han-dynasty confucian scholar dong zhongshu (179-104 bce) described heaven as "the supreme god possessing a will". in the song dynasty, neo-confucianism, especially the major exponent zhu xi (1130-1200), generally rationalised the theology, cosmology and ontology inherited from the foregoing tradition. neo-confucian thinkers reaffirmed the unity of the "heavenly city" and the earthly "divine city"; the city that the god of heaven morally organises in the natural world through humanity is not ontologically separate from heaven itself, so that the compound "heaven-earth" ( tiandi) is another name of the god of heaven itself in neo-confucian texts. heaven contains earth as part of its nature, and the myriad things are begotten (生 sheng) by heaven and raised up ( yang) by earth. neo-confucians also discussed heaven under the term  taiji ("great pole").  stephan feuchtwang says that confucianism consists in the search for "middle ways" between yin and yang in each new configuration of the world, to align reality with heaven through rites. the order of heaven is emphasised; it is a moral power and fully realises in patriarchy, that is to say the worship of progenitors, in the han tradition in the male line, who are considered to have embodied heaven. this conception is put into practice as the religious worship of progenitors in the system of ancestral shrines, dedicated to the deified progenitors of lineages (groups of families sharing the same surname). the philosopher promise hsu identifies tian as the foundation of a civil theology of china.  three models huang yong (2007) has discerned three models of theology in the confucian tradition
:  (i) theology of heaven as discussed in the confucian canonical texts, the classic of history, the classic of poetry and the analects of confucius, as a transcendent concept of god similar to the conception of god in the hellenistic and abrahamic traditions;  (ii) theology of heaven in contemporary new confucianism, represented especially by xiong shili, mou zongsan, and tu weiming, as an "immanently transcendent" god, the ultimate reality immanent in the world to transcend the world;  (iii) theology of heaven in neo-confucianism, particularly the cheng brothers in the song dynasty, as the wonderful life-giving activity transcending the world within the world.  canonical theology the supreme power in confucianism is tian, shangdi or di in the early or classic confucian tradition, later also discussed in its activity as  tianli or  tiandao, the "order of heaven" or "way of heaven" by neo-confucians. a number of scholars support the theistic reading of early confucian texts. in the analects heaven is treated as a conscious and providential being concerned not only with the human order in general, but with confucius' own mission in particular. confucius claimed to be a transmitter of an ancient knowledge rather than a renovator.  in confucianism, god has not created man in order to neglect him, but is always with man, and sustains the order of nature and human society, by teaching rulers how to be good to secure the peace of the countries. the theistic idea of early confucianism gave later way to a depersonalisation of heaven, identifying it as the pattern discernible in the unfolding of nature and his will (tianming) as peoples' consensus, culminating in the mencius and the xunzi.  immanent transcendence contemporary new confucian theologians have resolved the ancient dispute between the theistic and nontheistic, immanent and transcendent interpretations of tian, elaborating the concept of "immanent transcendence" ( neizai chaoyue), contrasting it with the "external transcendence" ( waizai chaoyue) of the god of christianity. while the god of the christians is outside the world that he creates, the god of the confucians is immanent in the world to call for the transcendence of the given situation, thus promoting an ongoing transformation.  the first theologian to discuss immanent transcendence was xiong shili
. according to him, noumenon ( ti) and phenomenon ( yong) are not separate, but the noumenon is right within the phenomenon. at the same time, the noumenon is also transcendent, not in the sense that it has independent existence, separated from the "ten thousand things", but in the sense that it is the substance of all things. as the substance, it is transcendent because it is not transformed by the ten thousand things but is rather their master: it "transcends the surface of things". by transcending the surface, one realises the self-nature ( zi xing shen) of himself and of all things; to the extent that a thing has not fully realised its own self-nature, god is also that on which any particular thing or human being depends ( yi ta shen).  according to the further explanations of xiong's student mou zongsan, heaven is not merely the sky, and just like the god of the judaic and hellenistic-christian tradition, it is not one of the beings in the world. however, unlike the god of western religions, the god of confucianism is not outside the world either, but is within humans-who are the primary concern of confucianism-and within other beings in the world. tian is the ontological substance of reality, it is immanent in every human being as the human nature (ren); however, the human being on the phenomenal level is not identical with its metaphysical essence. mencius stated that «the one who can fully realise one's heart-mind can understand one's nature, and the one who can understand one's own nature can know tian». this means that tian is within the human being, but before this last comes to realise his true heart-mind, or know his true nature, heaven still appears transcendent to him. mou cites max muller saying that «a human being itself is potentially a god, a god one presently ought to become», to explain the idea of the relationship of god and humanity in confucianism and other eastern religions. what is crucial is to transcend the phenomenon to reach tian.  mou makes an important distinction between confucianism and christianity: the latter does not ask one to become a christ, because the nature of christ is unreachable for ordinary humans, who are not conceived as having a divine essence; by contrast, in confucianism, sages who have realised tian teach to others how to become sages and worthy themselves, since heaven is present in everyone and may be cultivated. mou defines
confucianism as a "religion of morality", a religion of the "fulfillment of virtues", whose meaning lies in seeking the infinite and the complete in the finitude of earthly life.  tu weiming, a student of mou, furtherly develops the theology of "immanent transcendence". by his own words:  according to tu, the more man may penetrate his own inner source, the more he may transcend himself. by the metaphorical words of mencius (7a29), this process is like "digging a well to reach the source of water". it is for this emphasis on transcending the phenomena to reach the true self, which is the divine, that tu defines confucian religiosity as the "ultimate self-transformation as a communal act and as a faithful dialogical response to the transcendent"; confucianism is about developing the nature of humanity in the right, harmonious way. tu further explains this as a prognosis and diagnosis of humanity: "we are not what we ought to be but what we ought to be is inherent in the structure of what we are".  heaven bids and impels humans to realise their true self. humans have the inborn ability to respond to heaven. one may obtain knowledge of divinity through his inner experience (tizhi), and knowledge, developing his heavenly virtue. this is a central concern of tu's theology, at the same time intellectual and affectional-a question of mind and heart at the same time.  theology of activity  huang yong has named a third approach to confucian theology interpreting the neo-confucianism of the brothers cheng hao (1032-1085) and cheng yi (1033-1107). instead of regarding the divinity of tian as a substance, this theology emphasises its creative "life-giving activity" (生 sheng) that is within the world in order to transcend the world itself. also in the works of zhou xi, heaven is discussed as always operating within beings in conjunction with their singular 心 xin ("heart-mind").  neo-confucians incorporated in confucianism the discussion about the traditional concept of  li, variously translated as "form", "law", "reason", "order", "pattern", "organism", and most commonly "principle", regarding it as the supreme principle of the cosmos. the chengs use li interchangeably with other terms. for instance, discussing the supreme principle, cheng hao says that it "is called change ( yi) with respect
to its reality; is called  dao with respect to its li; is called divinity ( shen) with respect to its function; and is called nature ( xing) with respect to it as the destiny in a person". cheng yi also states that the supreme principle "with respect to li it is called heaven ( tian); with the respect to endowment, it is called nature, and with the respect to its being in a person, it is called heart-mind". as it appears from these analogies, the li is considered by the chengs as identical with heaven.  by the words of the chengs, huang clarifies the immanent transcendence of the li, since it comes ontologically before things but it does not exist outside of things, or outside qi, the energy-matter of which things are made. in chengs' theology the li is not some entity but the "activity" of things, sheng. explaining it through an analogy, according to the shuowen jiezi, li is originally a verb meaning to work on jade. the chengs further identify this activity as the true human nature. sages, who have realised the true nature, are identical with the li and their actions are identical to the creativity of the li.  generally, in confucian texts,  gong ("work", "work of merit" or "beneficial work") and  de ("virtue") are frequently used to refer to the ways of becoming an honourable man of heaven, and thus they may be regarded as attributes of heaven itself. zhu xi himself characterises heaven as extremely "active" or "vital" (jian ), while the earth is responsive ( shun).  humanity as the incarnation of heaven  the relationship "between heaven and mankind" (tianrenzhiji ), that is to say how heaven generates men and how they should behave to follow its order, is a common theme discussed in the confucian theology of heaven. generally, confucianism sees humanity, or the form-quality of the human being,  ren (translatable as "benevolence", "love", "humanity"), as a quality of the god of heaven itself, and therefore it sees humanity as an incarnation of heaven. this theory is not at odds with the classical non-confucian theology which views huangdi as the incarnated god of heaven, since huangdi is a representation of nobility and the pursuit of confucianism is to make all humans noble (junzi ) or sages and holy men ( shengren).  according to benjamin i. schwartz
, in the xunzi it is explained that:  in the "interactions between heaven and mankind" ( tianren ganying) written by the han-dynasty scholar dong zhongshu, humanity is discussed as the incarnation of heaven. human physiological structure, thought, emotions and moral character are all modelled after heaven. in the confucian discourse, ancestors who accomplished great actions are regarded as the incarnation of heaven, and they last as a form shaping their descendants. ren is the virtue endowed by heaven and at the same time the means by which man may comprehend his divine nature and achieve oneness with heaven.  discourse about evil, suffering and world renewal  in confucian theology there is no original sin, and rather humanity, as the incarnate image of heaven's virtue, is born good ( liangxin, "good heart-mind"). in confucian theodicy, the rise of evil in a given cosmic configuration is attributed to failings in the moral organisation of qi, which depends on mankind's (or the "practising subject", shijian zhuti , in zhu xi) free will, that is to say the ability to choose whether to harmonise or not with the order of heaven, which is part of the creature's ability to co-create with the creator.  paraphrasing zhu xi:  human qi, the primordial potential substance, organises according to the yin and yang polarity in the two facets of  xing ("body") and  shen ("soul"). qi is open to both disorder (yin) and order (yang), bodily and heavenly appetites. while other creatures have a limited perfection, the human being alone has an "unlimited nature", that is to say the ability to cultivate its qi in amounts and directions of its own choice, either yin or yang. while confucians prescribe to be moderate in pursuing appetites, since even the bodily ones are necessary for life, when the "proprietorship of corporeality" (xingqi zhisi ) prevails, selfishness and therefore immorality ensue.  when evil dominates, the world falls into disaster, society shatters up and individuals are hit by diseases, giving the way for a new heavenly configuration to emerge. by the words of zhu xi:  sufferings, however, are also regarded by confucians as a way of heaven to refine a person preparing him for a future role. according to mencius:  likewise, zhu xi says:  taoist theology  religious traditions under the label of "
taoism" have their own theologies which, characterised by henotheism, are meant to accommodate local deities in the taoist celestial hierarchy. according to stephan feuchtwang, taoism is concerned with the cultivation of local deities bringing them in alignment with the broader cosmology, in order to "centre" through the power of rite each locality with its peculiarities.  it has hermetic and lay liturgical traditions, the most practised at the popular level being those for healing and exorcism, codified into a textual corpus commissioned and approved by emperors throughout the dynasties, the taoist canon.  the core of taoist theology is the concept of dao , the "way", which is both the order of nature and the source of it. differently from common religion or even confucianism, taoism espouses a negative theology declaring the impossibility to define the dao. the core text of taoism, the daodejing, opens with the verses: «the dao that can be said is not the eternal dao, the name that can be said is not the eternal name». feuchtwang explains the dao as equivalent to the ancient greek conception of physis, that is "nature" as the generation and regeneration of beings. taoists seek "perfection", which is immortality, achieved by becoming one with the dao, or the rhythms of nature.  through time taoist theology created its own deities. certain sects modeled their temples to dedicate to certain deities. deities who take part in the dao are arranged in a hierarchy. the supreme powers are three, the three pure ones, and represent the centre of the cosmos and its two modalities of manifestation (yin and yang). the hierarchy of the highest powers of the cosmos is arranged as follows:  sanqing () - "three pure ones":  yuqing () - "jade purity";  yuanshi tianzun () - "heavenly honourable of the first beginning"  shangqing () - "high purity";  lingbao tianzun () - "heavenly honourable of the numinous treasure"  taiqing () - "supreme purity";  daode tianzun () - "heavenly honourable of the way and its virtue", incarnated historically as laozi   siyu () - "four sovereigns":  haotian jinque zhizun yuhuang dadi () - "most honourable great deity the jade emperor in the golden tower of the clear heaven"  zhongtian ziwei beiji dadi () - "great deity of the purple subtlet
y of the north star at the center of heaven"  gouchen shanggong tianhuang dadi () - "great deity the heavenly king in the high palace at the old hook"  chengtian xiaofa tuhuang deqi () - "land appeasing soil ruler who imitates the law which sustains heaven", who is the goddess houtu  trends in modern chinese political and civil theology  interest in traditional chinese theology has waxed and waned throughout the dynasties of the history of china. for instance, the great leap forward enacted in the mid-20th century involved the outright destruction of traditional temples in accordance with maoist ideology. from the 1980s onwards a revival has taken place, with public sacrifices held at temples meant to renew the perceived alliance between community leaders and the gods. in the 2010s, "the great majority of china's population of 1.3+ billion" takes part in chinese cosmological religion, its rituals and festivals of the lunar calendar. the cult of the yellow emperor is celebrated officially by the contemporary chinese government.  even chinese buddhism, a religion which originally came from abroad, adapted to common chinese cosmology by paralleling its concept of a triune supreme with shakyamuni, amithaba and maitreya, representing respectively enlightenment, salvation and post-apocalyptic paradise. the tathata ( zhenru, "suchness") is generally identified as the supreme being itself.  in the wake of gottfried wilhelm leibniz, many scholars understand confucian theology as a natural theology. the chinese theological conception of the god of heaven's ongoing self-creation/evolution in the "divine city" and the broader cosmos is contrasted with that of god as a craftsman external to his creation which is the type of theism of christianity. contemporary scholars also compare confucianism and christianity on the matters of humanity's good nature and of pneumatology, that is to say the respective doctrines of the shen dynamism produced by god's activity (guishen) and of the holy spirit, finding that the confucian doctrine is truly humanistic since the spirit is the creative dynamism always present in humanity, while in the christian doctrine the holy spirit ultimately belongs to god alone. according to the philosopher promise hsu, in the wake of eric voegelin, while christianity fails to provide a public, civil theology, confucianism with its idea of tian, within broader chinese cosmological religion, is particularly apt to fill the void left by the failing of christianity. paraphrasing varro, hsu says:  quoting from ellis sandoz's works
, hsu says:  also joel thoraval characterises the common chinese religion, or what he calls a "popular confucianism", which has powerfully revived since the 1980s, consisting in the widespread belief and worship of five cosmological entities-heaven and earth (di ), the sovereign or the government (jun ), ancestors (qin ) and masters (shi )-, as china's civil religion.  see also   chinese folk religion  huang-lao & taoism  chinese cosmology  tian & di  wufang shangdi  shen (chinese religion)  chinese spiritual world concepts  related cultures  an-enlil-enki  amenominakanushi  deus  haneullim  tengri  abrahamic syncretism  sino-christian theology  han kitab  notes  references  citations  sources    .         volume i: the ancient eurasian world and the celestial pivot, volume ii: representations and identities of high powers in neolithic and bronze china, volume iii: terrestrial and celestial transformations in zhou and early-imperial china.    .          .  . consulted hal-shs version, pages 1-56.       original preserved at the british library. digitalised in 2014.       two volumes: 1) a-l; 2) l-z.                articles    theology theology confucianism taoism
the diocese of salaj () is a diocese of the romanian orthodox church. its see is the ascension cathedral in zalau and its ecclesiastical territory covers salaj county. the diocese forms part of the metropolis of cluj, maramures and salaj. it has three archpriests' districts, around 220 priests in 270 churches, of which 74 are historic monuments, five almshouses, five monasteries, two sketes, 40 monks and a theological seminary in zalau. it was established in 2007, and in 2008, petroniu florea became the diocese's first bishop.  notes  external links official site  salaj 2007 establishments in romania salaj salaj county
volusianus was bishop of trier at the end of the 5th century.  very little is known of his life but he is one of a number of bishops around this time. the rapid succession of bishops named in the late 5th and early 6th centuries indicates the troubled times in the period of transition from the roman to frankish rule in trier, which was itself frankish by 496.  after a period of crisis for the christian community some stabilisation had apparently occurred under his predecessors.  volusianus has been associated with the so-called new year's privilege, referring to the grant by pope sylvester i (314-335) of certain privileges to the church in trier, although some question the authenticity of such a grant.  where volusianus was buried is unknown.  references  gallo-roman saints saints of germania year of birth unknown year of death unknown 5th-century christian saints 5th-century frankish bishops roman catholic bishops of trier
the eu independent fiscal institutions network (eu ifis)  is a voluntary and inclusive institution open to all independent fiscal oversight bodies operating in the eu. it provides a platform to exchange views, expertise and pool resources in areas of common concern. it was formally created in september 2015 following the meeting of eu fiscal oversight bodies.  the network supports the efforts to review and reinforce the eu fiscal framework, seeking to better exploit the synergies between rules and institutions, as well as between different levels of administration whilst respecting the principle of subsidiarity and enhancing local ownership and accountability.  the network is currently headed by sander van veldhuizen, chair of the cpb netherlands bureau for economic policy analysis. the secretariat is managed by the centre for european policy studies (ceps).  chairs   jose luis escriva (2015-2019)  seamus coffey (2019-2020)  sander van veldhuizen (2020-)  participating bodies  see also   parliamentary budget office (australia)  court of audit (belgium)  parliamentary budget officer (canada)  national assembly budget office (korea)  congressional budget office (united states)  cpb netherlands bureau for economic policy analysis (netherlands)  independent authority for fiscal responsibility (spain)  office for budget responsibility (united kingdom)  references  external links official website  eurozone policy and political reactions to the eurozone crisis fiscal federalism 2015 in the european union multi-speed europe united kingdom budgets
yusneysi santiusti caballero (born 24 december 1984) is an italian middle-distance runner competing primarily in the 800 metres. she competed at the 2016 european athletics championships.  competition record  see also italian all-time top lists - 800 m  references  external links    1984 births living people italian female middle-distance runners cuban female middle-distance runners cuban emigrants to italy naturalised citizens of italy sportspeople from havana athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of italy athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games central american and caribbean games medalists in athletics mediterranean games competitors for italy
brian torrealba (born july 14, 1997) is a chilean footballer who plays as a defender for the primera division de chile club o'higgins.  career  youth career  figueroa started his career at primera division de chile club o'higgins. he progressed from the under categories club all the way to the senior team.  o'higgins  torrealba made his debut in the first team on may 15, 2013, in the match against santiago wanderers, playing the 90 minutes.  in the 2015-16 clausura, torrealba was runner-up with o'higgins, after lose in the last matchday against universidad de concepcion, being universidad catolica the champions of the campeonato nacional.  honours  friendly chile u-20 l'alcudia international football tournament: 2015  references  external links    1997 births living people chilean footballers association football defenders chilean primera division players primera b de chile players o'higgins f.c. footballers rangers de talca footballers
yingzhou () is a town in lingshui li autonomous county, hainan, china.  township-level divisions of hainan
basketball at the 2009 games of the small states of europe was held from 2 to 6 june 2009. games were played at the eleftheria indoor hall, in nicosia.  medal summary  men's tournament men's tournament was played with a round-robin group composed by six teams.  table  women's tournament women's tournament was played by only four teams.  table  references  external links cyprus 2009 official website  small 2009 games of the small states of europe 2009 international basketball competitions hosted by cyprus
nexafed is a formulation of pseudoephedrine developed by acura pharmaceuticals used to deter the use of the pseudoephedrine contained in the product for illicit methamphetamine synthesis. nexafed uses a polymer matrix that forms a thick gel when hydrated, preventing the extraction of pseudoephedrine. nexafed is the only meth-resistant formulation of pseudoephedrine that shows therapeutic equivalence to sudafed.  it is sold at various pharmacies in the us, including fruth pharmacy and kroger, particularly in communities where illicit methamphetamine production is an issue.  references  decongestants methamphetamine  external links
hyman kreitman (3 june 1914 - 8 may 2001) was a british businessman, philanthropist and art collector. he served as the chairman of tesco from 1970 to 1974. he was a donor to tate and the ben-gurion university of the negev.  early life hyman kreitman was born on 3 june 1914. he had four older brothers. his father was abraham kreitman, who owned a. kreitman & sons, boot and shoe manufacturers, of 28 cambridge road, mile end, london. the business was "one of london's largest and most successful shoe manufacturers".  he was educated at cordwainers college, now part of the london college of fashion. he served in the royal artillery during world war ii.  career kreitman became an executive at tesco, the supermarket chain. he served as its managing director from 1968 to 1970, and as its chairman from 1970 to 1974.  philanthropy with his wife, kreitman endowed the kreitman foundation. they donated to wigmore hall and the royal national theatre. they also donated gbp£2.2 million to tate britain, where the hyman kreitman reading rooms are named in his honour. meanwhile, they supported the establishment of tate modern.  kreitman and his wife were donors to the ben-gurion university of the negev in israel, where the kreitman plaza is named in their honour, as is the irene and hyman kreitman annual memorial lecture. kreitman received an honorary doctorate in philosophy from bgu in 1979.  art collection with his wife, kreitman collected sculptures by kenneth armitage, michael ayrton, henry moore, barbara hepworth, elisabeth frink, anthony caro and lynn chadwick. they also collected paintings by john piper and ben nicholson.  personal life and death kreitman married irene cohen, the daughter of tesco founder jack cohen. they had two sons and one daughter. he died on 8 may 2001 at the age of 86. his widow, irene, died in 2005. their art collection was auctioned by sotheby's in october 2005.  references  external links irene and hyman kreitman on youtube  1914 births 2001 deaths art collectors from london british army personnel of world war ii businesspeople from london chairmen of tesco english philanthropists ben-gurion university of the negev royal artillery soldiers 20th-century english businesspeople
the mbari club was a centre for cultural activity by african writers, artists and musicians that was founded in ibadan, nigeria, in 1961 by ulli beier, with the involvement of a group of young writers including wole soyinka and chinua achebe. mbari, an igbo concept related to "creation", was suggested as the name by achebe. among other mbari members were christopher okigbo, j. p. clark and south african writer ezekiel mphahlele, frances ademola, demas nwoko, mabel segun, uche okeke, arthur nortje and bruce onobrakpeya.  the daily telegraph in an obituary of beier noted that "the mbari club became synonymous with the optimism and creative exuberance of africa's post-independence era. fela kuti made his debut as bandleader there, and it became a magnet for artists and writers from all over africa, america and the caribbean." in the words of toyin adepoju: "coming to birth in the flux of the preindependence and immediate postindependence period in nigeria, it brought together a constellation of artists whose work embodied the quality of transformation embodied by the aesthetic of creation, decay, and regeneration evoked by the mbari tradition."  closely connected with the literary magazine black orpheus, which beier had founded in 1957, mbari also acted as a publisher during the 1960s - considered to be the only african-based publisher of african literature at the time - producing 17 titles by african writers. mbari published early works by clark, okigbo and soyinka, poetry by bakare gbadamosi (okiri, 1961), alex la guma (a walk in the night and other stories, 1962), dennis brutus (sirens, knuckles, boots, 1963), kofi awoonor and lenrie peters, as well as translations of francophone poetry. brutus was chosen as winner of the mbari prize, awarded to a black poet of distinction, but turned it down on the grounds of its racial exclusivity.  history founded in 1961 by a diverse group of writers, visual artists, musicians and actors, and active throughout the 1960s, the mbari club was originally located in ibadan's dugbe market, on the site of an old lebanese restaurant that was converted into an open-air performance venue, an art gallery, a library, and an office.   while celebrating the creativity of nigerian talent in the newly independent nation, mbari "was an international environment,
attracting artists from across africa and beyond". the premieres of soyinka's the trials of brother jero and clark's song of a goat were staged at mbari, and internationally renowned artists were also invited to play or exhibit their work, including langston hughes, jacob lawrence and pete seeger. the club also initiated writing competitions.  as recalled by lindsay barrett, secretary of the mbari club from 1966 to 1967: "we were in a historic, literary setting ... when the civil war [1967-70] broke out and disintegrated everything."  mbari mbayo in 1962 a similar club based on the same concepts, called mbari mbayo (the name this time reflecting a yoruba phrase meaning: "were i to see, i would rejoice" or "when we see it, we shall be happy"), was developed in oshogbo - about 50 miles northeast of ibadan - by dramatist duro ladipo together with beier and mphahlele. ladipo converted his father's house into an art gallery and a theatre, where he produced his plays. artists who emerged from the mbari mbayo club in oshogbo include twins seven seven, jimoh buraimoh and muraina oyelami.  mbari-enugu the mbari-enugu club of eastern nigeria was established in 1963 and like mbari mbayo was particularly a platform for sculpture, painting and literary performance.  selected list of people associated with the mbari club   chinua achebe  frances ademola  ulli beier  lindsay barrett  j. p. clark  vincent akwete kofi  ezekiel mphahlele  arthur nortje  demas nwoko  uche okeke  christopher okigbo  bruce onobrakpeya  muraina oyelami  ibrahim el-salahi  mabel segun   wole soyinka  legacy in june 2016 the ibadan literary society (ibs) was launched, modelled after the mbari club. in december 2019, the mbari clubs and nigerian modernism, an exhibition focusing on the mbari clubs in ibadan and osogbo, took place at the barbican art gallery in london.  further reading  james currey, "literary publishing after nigerian independence: mbari as celebration", research in african literatures, vol. 44, no. 2, (in)visibility in african cultures / zoe norridge, charlotte baker, and elleke boehmer, guest editors (summer 2013), pp. 8-16.
olabode ibironke, "the ibadan origins of modern african literature: african writers series, mbari club & the social character of ibadan", history compass, vol. 13, issue 11, pp. 550-559, november 2015.  chika okeke-agulu, postcolonial modernism: art and decolonization in twentieth-century nigeria (durham, nc: duke university press, 2015)  references  external links  "mbari club" at library of congress.  'tunji olaopa, "the spirit of mbari club", punch (nigeria),  23 september 2018.  1961 establishments in nigeria arts organizations based in nigeria arts organizations established in 1961 poetry publishers nigerian culture
episode 4429 is an episode of the british television soap opera hollyoaks. the episode is a three hander between characters tony hutchinson (nick pickard), harry thompson (parry glasspool) and ste hay (kieron richardson). the episode primarily focuses on ste's addiction to crystal meth. during the episode, harry learns about ste's past with amy barnes (ashley slanina-davies).  plot the episode begins with ste hay (kieron richardson) sitting at tony hutchinson's (nick pickard) flat where harry thompson (parry glasspool) is trying to get him to eat. harry tells ste that tony is looking into getting a rehab for ste. ste tries to walk out but harry manages to stop him. tony appears and shows ste some diy work. tony convinces ste that the work will focus his mind off the drugs. tony also reveals that he has a room for ste. ste goes into the bathroom to have a shower, tony rushes in to get ste's phone. tony convinces ste to get clean for his children. tony is dancing to a song on the radio where ste comes in after his shower with clothes that don't fit him. ste then breaks the piggy bank that belongs to tony's twins when harry won't give him the money that he stole from the roscoe's. tony threatens to call the police but harry convinces him not to. harry follows ste outside where ste punches him and harry lands on the ground. ste immediately regrets punching harry. tony, harry and ste go back to the flat, harry overhears ste telling tony that he isn't a domestic abuser anymore.  during the night, ste demands the key to the door but harry refuses. ste verbally abuses harry but tony tells him it's only the drugs talking. tony reassures ste that they're trying to help him. while ste is asleep, harry quizzes tony about ste's earlier statement. tony explains ste's past with amy where harry is visibly disgusted. harry leaves the house to clear his mind. later, tony makes ste drink a glass of water. ste talks to tony about his regrets of helping her die. tony reassures him that he was just trying to be a good son. harry returns home and sits down and comforts ste throughout the night.  in the morning, tony finds ste and harry asleep on the sofa. ste returns the money he stole from the piggy bank. tony promises to pay for a private rehab where ste feels like he doesn't deserve it. harry
promises ste that he will stick by him. tony tells ste a story that stuck with him at church (the footprints) tony and harry hug ste as the episode ends.  production the episode was first publicised by kieron richardson. he was being interviewed by daniel kilkelly from digital spy at the british soap awards 2016. he said that the episode would only feature the characters of ste, harry and tony; a special constructed episode dubbed a "three hander". this was the show's second "three hander" stylised episode, the first airing in 2011, which focused on the characters of jacqui mcqueen (claire cooper), rhys ashworth (andrew moss) and gilly roach (anthony quinlan).  richardson had revealed that the three-hander would feature his character, going cold turkey. richardson had stated, "we were filming for four days, mainly in tony's flat, and i had to show ste in a frantic comedown state, so it was pretty exhausting."  richardson said in an interview with what's on tv, "it's very exciting and intense. we filmed a special episode with just ste, his boyfriend, harry [parry glasspool] and friend tony [nick pickard] and it was so powerful. i made myself feel poorly for real. it's unlike any episode of hollyoaks you've ever seen. it's a bit of a nod to the film trainspotting. harry and tony are trying to fight for ste's life. they lock him in the flat to try and stop him getting more drugs and the comedown is horrific. the audience goes through it all with ste."  in an interview with radio times, richardson was worried about the topic being controversial for the show's timeslot, he said "i am scared. i'm thinking that there might be reshoots because it's too extreme. i've literally gone for it".  reception "episode 4429" appeared in an article published via digital spy. it compiled ten unmissable soap storylines airing the week the episode was broadcast. their reporter, kilkelly, warned that viewers could expect harrowing scenes in the episode. richardson received a considerable amount of praise via the social networking website twitter. his performance mostly drew an emotional reaction from viewers conversing on the platform.  duncan lindsay of metro said "hollyoaks is often regarded as the underdog of the soap world - without much justification - but continually proves that it can deliver high octane and powerful drama as well as its rivals. the three hander on
e4, led by emotive performances from kieron richardson, has shown, once more, that it deserves far more credit." lindsay went on to say "the episode flew by and left us gripped from start to finish." while he added "the effective episode has revealed that hollyoaks deserves the credit it gets but also highlights that living in the shadows of its equally strong counterparts remains the biggest injustice in the soap world." lindsay had earlier stated "with secrets from the past coming out, big decisions made and ste at an all time low, it's an unmissable visit to hollyoaks that will answer the following questions. will ste come out the other side? will harry stand by him? will the truth about cameron's involvement come out?"  daniel kilkelly of digital spy stated "bravo to hollyoaks trio kieron richardson, nick pickard and parry glasspool, who pulled some of their most powerful performances out of the bag in their special episode tonight (july 13)."  carl greenwood of daily mirror stated "hollyoaks has made history with its first three-hander episode." greenwood also reported that "fans praise 'incredible' kieron richardson after emotionally powerful performance moves them to tears." he also stated, "actor kieron richardson knocked his performance out of the park as ste as he veered from begging for help and viciously attacking his loved ones for trying to keep him from getting his next fix."  a reporter for attitude said that "things get even darker for 'starry' in tonight's special episode of the channel 4 soap." inside soap included the episode in their "pick of the day" feature, with their writer describing "very disturbing scenes" and branding it an unmissable episode. they wrote about the episode "it's a very special episode of hollyoaks tonight, with only three actors involved. tony and harry spend a night trying to help ste through his drug withdrawal - so prepare yourselves for some very disturbing scenes as ste lashes out at the people who love him. you really mustn't miss this!"  rachel mcgrath of huffington post wrote "in one of the most emotionally-charged scenes, ste - spurred on by desperation to feed his habit - attacked harry, which brought back memories of the violence he put his ex amy barnes through."  references  2016 british television episodes hollyoaks hollyoaks episodes television episodes about drugs three-handers
cerylon is a genus of minute bark beetles in the family cerylonidae. there are about 11 described species in cerylon.  species  cerylon bescidicum reitter, 1911 g  cerylon californicum casey, 1890 i c g  cerylon castaneum say, 1826 i c g b  cerylon conditum lawrence and stephan, 1975 i c g  cerylon deplanatum gyllenhal, 1827 g  cerylon distans lawrence and stephan, 1975 i c g  cerylon fagi brisout de barneville, 1867 g  cerylon ferrugineum stephens, 1830 g  cerylon hazara slipinski, 1988  cerylon histeroides (fabricius, 1792)  cerylon impressum erichson, 1845 g  cerylon testaceum fairmaire, 1850 g  cerylon unicolor (ziegler, 1845) i c g b data sources: i = itis, c = catalogue of life, g = gbif, b = bugguide.net  references  further reading  external links       cerylonidae cucujiformia genera
simplicity is the tenth album from the bouncing souls and was released on july 29, 2016 on rise records in conjunction with chunksaah records, the band's own label. the album is also their first with drummer george rebelo, who joined the band in 2013, replacing michael mcdermott. production on the album was overseen by john seymour, who previously produced the band's albums, how i spent my summer vacation, and anchors aweigh.  track listing  credits the bouncing souls greg attonito - vocals pete steinkopf - guitar bryan kienlen - bass george rebelo - drums  charts  references  the bouncing souls albums 2016 albums rise records albums chunksaah records albums
nithyakalyana perumal temple is one of the three famous temple in the port city of karaikal, puducherry, india. it is nearby the karaikal ammayar temple. the temple tank of chandra theertham separates the two temples. the temple tank belongs to both the temples. the nithyakalyana perumal temple is located on the bharathiar street of karaikal.  deities inside the temple the temple is a vishnu temple with the idol of vishnu in a lying posture named nithyakalyana perumal.he is the main god of the temple. nithyakalyana perumal sanctum is present in the temple. in the praghara, there are many sanctums for the gods: chakkarathazhwar ranganayaghi thayar narasimha avatar of lord vishnu hanuman avatars of lord vishnu lord krishna's vishwaroopam lord garuda aandal alamelu thayaar  functions celebrated the festivals related to vishnu and his avatars are celebrated in a grand manner in this temple. the rama navami, vaikunda ekadesi, hanuman jayanti and the entire month of margazhi are celebrated here. during the tamil month of poorattadhi or puratasi, many rituals take place in the temple such as the pavithra pradhistai, kumba poojai, poornahoothi, and chakarathazwar aavahanam.  references  hindu temples in puducherry
the 1959 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1959 ncaa college division football season.  in their ninth season under head coach kenneth kelly, the chippewas compiled a 7-3 record (4-2 against iiac opponents) and outscored their opponents by a combined total of 233 to 155.  the team's statistical leaders included oarie lemanski with 962 passing yards and jerry o'neil with 821 rushing yards and 296 receiving yards. halfback walter beach received the team's most valuable player award for the second consecutive year. no central michigan players received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  official homecoming program, october 24, 1959  1960 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
andreas langl (born 15 october 1966) is an austrian former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people austrian male cyclists olympic cyclists of austria cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from braunau am inn sportspeople from upper austria
belleri is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alessandro belleri (born 1985), italian footballer manuel belleri (born 1977), italian footballer  see also  agonum belleri,  a species of ground beetle in the platyninae subfamily  italian-language surnames
following are the results of the 2016 finnish athletics championships.  the games, known as kalevan kisat in finnish, were first held in tampere in 1907.  the 2016 events were held july 21st through 24th in oulu.  results  references  finnish athletics championships finnish athletics championships finnish athletics championships
esquire records was the record label which distributed petula clark's first singles in australia.  see also  list of record labels  references  australian record labels defunct record labels of australia
the democratic national committee cyber attacks took place in 2015 and 2016, in which two groups of russian computer hackers infiltrated the democratic national committee (dnc) computer network, leading to a data breach. cybersecurity experts, as well as the u.s. government, determined that the cyberespionage was the work of russian intelligence agencies.  forensic evidence analyzed by several cybersecurity firms, crowdstrike, fidelis, and mandiant (or fireeye), strongly indicates that two russian intelligence agencies separately infiltrated the dnc computer systems. the american cybersecurity firm crowdstrike, which removed the hacking programs, revealed a history of encounters with both groups and had already named them, calling one of  them cozy bear and the other fancy bear, names which are used in the media.  on december 9, 2016, the cia told u.s. legislators the u.s. intelligence community concluded russia conducted the cyberattacks and other operations during the 2016 u.s. election to assist donald trump in winning the presidency. multiple u.s. intelligence agencies concluded that specific individuals tied to the russian government provided wikileaks with the stolen emails from the dnc, as well as stolen emails from hillary clinton's campaign chairman, who was also the target of a cyberattack. these intelligence organizations additionally concluded russia hacked the republican national committee (r.n.c.) as well as the d.n.c., but chose not to leak information obtained from the r.n.c.  cyber attacks and responsibility cyber attacks that successfully penetrated the dnc computing system began in 2015. attacks by "cozy bear" began in the summer of 2015. attacks by "fancy bear" began in april 2016. it was after the "fancy bear" group began their activities that the compromised system became apparent. the groups were presumed to have been spying on communications, stealing opposition research on donald trump, as well as reading all email and chats. both were finally identified by crowdstrike in may 2016. both groups of intruders were successfully expelled from the dnc systems within hours after detection. these attacks are considered to be part of a group of recent attacks targeting u.s. government departments and several political organizations, including 2016 campaign organizations.  on july 22, 2016, a person or entity going by the moniker "guccifer 2.0" claimed on a wordpress-hosted blog to have been acting alone in hacking the dnc. he also claimed to send significant amounts of stolen electronic dnc documents to wikileaks. wikileaks has not revealed the source for their leaked emails. however
, cybersecurity experts and firms, including crowdstrike, fidelis cybersecurity, mandiant, secureworks, threatconnect, and the editor for ars technica, have rejected the claims of "guccifer 2.0" and have determined, on the basis of substantial evidence, that the cyberattacks were committed by two russian state-sponsored groups (cozy bear and fancy bear).  according to separate reports in the new york times and the washington post, u.s. intelligence agencies have concluded with "high confidence" that the russian government was behind the theft of emails and documents from the dnc. while the u.s. intelligence community has concluded that russia was behind the cyberattack, intelligence officials told the washington post that they had "not reached a conclusion about who passed the emails to wikileaks" and so did not know "whether russian officials directed the leak." a number of experts and cybersecurity analysts believe that "guccifer 2.0" is probably a russian government disinformation cover story to distract attention away from the dnc breach by the two russian intelligence agencies.  president obama and russian president vladimir putin had a discussion about computer security issues, which took place as a side segment during the then-ongoing g20 summit in china in september 2016. obama said russian hacking stopped after his warning to putin.  in a joint statement on october 7, 2016, the united states department of homeland security and the office of the director of national intelligence stated that the us intelligence community is confident that the russian government directed the breaches and the release of the obtained material in an attempt to "... interfere with the us election process."  background  as is common among russian intelligence services, both groups used similar hacking tools and strategies. it is believed that neither group was aware of the other. although this is antithetical to american computer intelligence methods, for fear of undermining or defeating intelligence operations of the other, this has been common practice in the russian intelligence community since 2004.  this intrusion was part of several attacks attempting to access information from american political organizations, including the 2016 u.s. presidential campaigns.  both "cozy bear" and "fancy bear" are known adversaries, who have extensively engaged in political and economic espionage that benefits the russian federation government. both are believed connected to the russian intelligence services. also, both access resources and demonstrate levels of proficiency matching nation-state capabilities.  "cozy bear" has in the past year infiltrated unclassified computer systems of the white house, the u.s. state department, and the u.s
. joint chiefs of staff. according to crowdstrike, other targeted sectors include: defense, energy, mining, financial, insurance, legal, manufacturing, media, think tanks, pharmaceutical, research and technology industries as well as universities. "cozy bear" observed attacks have occurred in western europe, brazil, china, japan, mexico, new zealand, south korea, turkey and central asia.  "fancy bear" has been operating since the mid-2000s. crowdstrike reported targeting has included aerospace, defense, energy, government and the media industries. "fancy bear" intrusions have occurred in united states, western europe, brazil, canada, china, republic of georgia, iran, japan,  malaysia and south korea. targeted defense ministries and military organizations parallel russian federation government interests. this may indicate affiliation with the main intelligence directorate (gru, a russian military intelligence service). specifically, "fancy bear" has been linked to intrusions into the german bundestag and france's tv5 monde (television station) in april 2015. secureworks, a cybersecurity   firm headquartered in the united states, concluded that from march 2015 to may 2016, the "fancy bear" target list included not merely the dnc, but tens of thousands of foes of putin and the kremlin in the united states, ukraine, russia, georgia, and syria. only a handful of republicans were targeted, however.  hacking the dnc  on january 25, 2018 dutch newspaper de volkskrant and tv program nieuwsuur reported that in 2014 the dutch intelligence agency general intelligence and security service (aivd) successfully infiltrated the computers of cozy bear and observed the hacking of the head office of the state department and subsequently the white house and were the first to alert the national security agency about the cyber-intrusion.  in early 2015, the nsa apprised the fbi and other agencies of the dnc intrusions which the dutch had secretly detected and on august 15, 2015, the washington field office first alerted dnc technical staff of the compromise of their systems. much later, the lack of higher level communications between the political party and the government was seen by the former as an "unfathomable lapse" and it wasn't until april 2016 when legal authorizations to share sensitive technical data with the government finally apprised dnc leaders that their systems had been penetrated.  cozy bear" had access to dnc systems since the summer of 2015; and "fancy bear", since april 2016. there was no evidence of collaboration or knowledge of the other
's presence within the system. rather, the "two russian espionage groups compromised the same systems and engaged separately in the theft of identical credentials".  "cozy bear" employed the "sea daddy" implant and an obfuscated powershell script as a backdoor, launching malicious code at various times and in various dnc systems. "fancy bear" employed x agent malware, which enabled distant command execution, transmissions of files and keylogging, as well as the "x-tunnel" malware.  dnc leaders became aware of the compromise in april 2016. these attacks broadly reflect russian government interest in the u.s. political system, as well as political leaders' policies, tendencies and  proclivities while assessing possible beneficial outcomes. the attacks also broadly reflect russian government interest in the strategies, policies, and practices of the u.s. government. this also globally reflects foreign governments' interest in ascertaining information on donald trump as a new entry into u.s. political leadership roles, in contrast to information likely to have been garnered over the decades pertaining to the clintons.  the dnc commissioned the cybersecurity company crowdstrike to defeat the intrusions. its chief technology officer, dmitri alperovitch, who is also a cybersecurity expert, stated:  other cybersecurity firms, fidelis cybersecurity and fireeye, independently reviewed the malware and came to the same conclusion as crowdstrike-that expert russian hacking groups were responsible for the breach. in november 2017, us authorities identified 6 russian individuals who conducted the hack. beginning in december 2016 the russian government arrested sergei mikhailov, a high ranking government cyber-spy, ruslan stoyanov, a private sector cyber-security expert, georgy fomchenkov, a former government cyber-spy, and dmitry dokuchaev, a mikhailov associate and charged them with aiding u.s. intelligence agencies which the new york times associated with the dnc hacking.  donor information although the dnc claimed that no personal, financial, or donor information was accessed, "guccifer 2.0" leaked what he or they claimed were donor lists detailing dnc campaign contributions to gawker and the smoking gun.  however, this information has not been authenticated, and doubts remain about guccifer 2.0's backstory.  guccifer 2.0  in june 2016, a person or person(s) claimed to be the hacker who had hacked the dnc servers  and then published the stolen documents online. "guccifer 2.0" later also claimed to have leaked 20.000 emails to wikileaks
.  u.s. intelligence conclusions  the u.s. intelligence community tasked resources debating why putin chose summer 2016 to escalate active measures influencing u.s. politics. director of national intelligence james r. clapper said after the 2011-13 russian protests that putin's confidence in his viability as a politician was damaged, and putin responded with the propaganda operation. former cia officer patrick skinner explained the goal was to spread uncertainty. u.s. congressman adam schiff, ranking member of the house permanent select committee on intelligence, commented on putin's aims, and said u.s. intelligence agencies were concerned with russian propaganda. speaking about disinformation that appeared in hungary, slovakia, the czech republic, and poland, schiff said there was an increase of the same behavior in the u.s. schiff concluded russian propaganda operations would continue against the u.s. after the election.  on december 9, 2016, the cia told u.s. legislators the u.s. intelligence community concluded russia conducted operations during the 2016 u.s. election to assist donald trump in winning the presidency. multiple u.s intelligence agencies concluded people with specific individuals tied to the russian government gave wikileaks hacked emails from the democratic national committee (d.n.c.) and additional sources such as john podesta, campaign chairman for hillary clinton. these intelligence organizations additionally concluded russia hacked the republican national committee (r.n.c.) as well as the d.n.c.-and chose not to leak information obtained from the r.n.c. the cia said the foreign intelligence agents were russian operatives previously known to the u.s. cia officials told u.s. senators it was "quite clear" russia's intentions were to help trump. trump released a statement december 9, and disregarded the cia conclusions.  fbi involvement  a senior law enforcement official told cnn:   the fbi therefore had to rely on an assessment from crowdstrike instead, who were hired by the dnc to investigate the cyber attacks.  u.s. legislative response members of the u.s. senate intelligence committee traveled to ukraine and poland in 2016 and learned about russian operations to influence their affairs. u.s. senator angus king told the portland press herald that tactics used by russia during the 2016 u.s. election were analogous to those used against other countries. on 30 november 2016, king joined a letter in which seven members of the u.s. senate intelligence committee asked president obama to publicize more information from the intelligence community on russia's role in the u.s
. election. in an interview with cnn, king warned against ignoring the problem, saying it was a bipartisan issue.  representatives in the u.s. congress took action to monitor the national security of the united states by advancing legislation to monitor propaganda. on 30 november 2016, legislators approved a measure within the national defense authorization act to ask the u.s. state department to act against propaganda with an inter-agency panel. the legislation authorized funding of $160 million over a two-year-period. the initiative was developed through a bipartisan bill, the countering foreign propaganda and disinformation act, written by u.s. senators rob portman (republican) and chris murphy (democrat). portman urged more u.s. government action to counter propaganda. murphy said after the election it was apparent the u.s. needed additional tactics to fight russian propaganda. u.s. senate intelligence committee member ron wyden said frustration over covert russian propaganda was bipartisan.  republican u.s. senators stated they planned to hold hearings and investigate russian influence on the 2016 u.s. elections. by doing so they went against the preference of incoming republican president-elect donald trump, who downplayed any potential russian meddling in the election. u.s. senate armed services committee chairman john mccain and u.s. senate intelligence committee chairman richard burr discussed plans for collaboration on investigations of russian cyberwarfare during the election. u.s. senate foreign relations committee chairman bob corker planned a 2017 investigation. senator lindsey graham indicated he would conduct a sweeping investigation in the 115th congress.  president obama order on december 9, 2016, president obama ordered the entire united states intelligence community to conduct an investigation into russia's attempts to influence the 2016 u.s. election - and provide a report before he left office on january 20, 2017. lisa monaco, u.s. homeland security advisor and chief counterterrorism advisor to the president, announced the study, and said the intrusion of a foreign nation into a u.s. national election was an unprecedented event that would necessitate further investigation by subsequent administrations in the executive branch. the intelligence analysis will take into account data from the last three presidential elections in the u.s. evidence showed malicious cyberwarfare during the 2008 and 2016 u.s. elections.  see also   2016 democratic national committee email leak  cold war ii  conspiracy theories related to the trump-ukraine scandal  democratic congressional campaign committee cyber attacks  foreign electoral intervention  office of personnel management data breach  operation aurora  the plot
to hack america  podesta emails  russian espionage in the united states  russian interference in the 2016 united states elections  russian interference in the 2018 united states elections  social media in the 2016 united states presidential election  trump tower meeting    yahoo! data breaches  references  external links   timeline of hacks and publications on glomar disclosure  computer security democratic national committee espionage russian intelligence agencies 2015 scandals 2016 scandals data breaches in the united states 2015 in the united states 2016 in the united states email hacking hacking in the 2010s 2015 in computing 2016 in computing russian interference in the 2016 united states elections
schmilco is the tenth studio album by chicago-based alternative rock band wilco and was released on september 9, 2016. wilco announced the album on july 19, 2016, and released two songs, "locator" and "if i ever was a child". the album's announcement came a little more than a year after their previous studio album, star wars.  background and release in february 2016, jeff tweedy first mentioned in an interview that wilco would be releasing an album in 2016, though did not go into detail. during his solo benefit shows in chicago later in may, tweedy said they had finished the new record, but the band wasn't sure they wanted to release it yet. in july 2016, wilco released "locator" from the album to commemorate the one-year anniversary of star wars and then announced schmilco several days later, in addition to releasing "if i ever was a child" and "someone to lose". in september several days before the release, wilco had "i heard schmilco" events at record stores to promote the album across the country where people could listen to the album and then buy it on vinyl.  the album's name is a nod to the harry nilsson album nilsson schmilsson. the artwork was created by illustrator joan cornella in collaboration with stefania lusini.  on the album, tweedy tells stories of himself, his family, and his history.  critical reception  accolades  track listing  personnel wilco  nels cline - guitar  mikael jorgensen - keyboard  glenn kotche - drums  pat sansone - guitar, keyboard  john stirratt - bass guitar  jeff tweedy - lead vocals, guitar, production  additional personnel joan cornella - cover art  mark greenberg - engineering bob ludwig - mastering tom schick - production  spencer tweedy - drums  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  external links  2016 albums wilco albums albums produced by jeff tweedy dbpm records albums
the catalan european democratic party (, pdecat, sometimes stylized as pdecat), initially branded as the catalan democratic party (, pdc), is a liberal political party in spain that supports catalan independence. the party was founded in barcelona on 10 july 2016. pdecat is regarded as the successor party to democratic convergence of catalonia (cdc), which for most its history was a constituent party of the convergence and union (ciu) political formation.  the party declared to have 14,000 members in the 2018-2019 period, but this number has recently been revised down to figures as low as 5,000 as a result of internal infighting over former catalan president carles puigdemont's strategy and a number of party splits.  history  early development democratic convergence of catalonia (cdc) held its last congress on 8 july 2016, in which cdc's members agreed to its "refoundation" into a new political party, whose founding congress was held in the course of the same assembly from 8 to 10 july. the reasoning behind the re-branding process often cited the presenting of a renewed trademark and a desire to disassociate the party from cdc's corruption problems, including those of its founder, jordi pujol, which occurred during its dominance of catalan regional politics.  two names were commissioned to a communication company and initially floated for the new party: "more catalonia" () and "convergent catalans" (), but both were rejected by the party's membership who perceived them as artificial and "soulless". on 9 july, three other proposals were presented: "together for catalonia" (), "catalan democratic party" () and "catalan national party" (). in the last voting held on 10 july, "catalan democratic party" topped the ballot in a 871-657 vote against "catalan national party". in the new party's leadership election held on 23-24 july, artur mas became president-continuing on the role he held in cdc-neus munte was elected as vice-president and marta pascal was appointed to the newly-created post of coordinator-general.  spain's interior ministry announced the difficulty of registering the party under such name, since it could be confused with democrats of catalonia (dc), an existing political party which had been one of cdc's partners in the junts pel si electoral alliance; this fact had already prevented a 2015 registered of a different political organization under the name "democratic party of catalonia". dc's spokesman, antoni castella, threatened in august that "if the
pdc does not change its label, then there will be conflict within junts pel si". on 20 september the party announced that it would attempt to register the party under the "catalan european democratic party", but since it could result in potential conflict as well (the name "catalan party of europe" had been registered by pasqual maragall in july 1998) the names "catalan national party", "together for catalonia", "more catalonia" and "catalan democratic pact" were also registered in case the new name was to be rejected by the interior ministry as well. the interior ministry ended up accepting the new proposed name under the pdecat label on 29 september, and it was subsequently ratified by party members in a ballot conducted on 21-22 october 2016.  ever since its inception, the party struggled to maintain the political and electoral space formerly held by the late cdc. ahead of the 2017 catalan regional election and the exceptional circumstances around its celebration, the pdecat proposed ousted catalan president carles puigdemont as their leading candidate, at the helm of an electoral alliance centered around the candidate under the together for catalonia (jxcat) label and including puigdemont-aligned non-pdecat members such as jordi sanchez or eventual catalan president quim torra. the alliance's success in the election, where it outperformed republican left of catalonia (erc) to become the dominating force within the pro-independence camp, resulted in an increase of influence for puigdemont within the party. on 9 january 2018, artur mas resigned as pdecat president, citing disagreements with puigdemont's plan for independence. ahead of the party's general assembly on 21-22 july 2018, puigdemont forced marta pascal's renounce as pdecat's coordinator-general, resulting in the appointment of a new leadership-with david bonhevi becoming new party president (replacing munte, who had acceded the post after mas's resignation) and miriam nogueras as vice-president-more supportive of puigdemont's strategy. concurrently, puigdemont established his own political platform, the national call for the republic (cnxr), intending for the pdecat and its political structure to be eventually merged into it. one of pascal's last decisions as coordinator-general of the pdecat was to support the motion of no confidence on the government of mariano rajoy that saw pedro sanchez replace rajoy as prime minister of spain on 1 june 2018, against puigdemont's directions.  on 27 october 2018,
the pdecat was voted out from the alliance of liberals and democrats for europe party (alde) by a two-thirds majority of members at an extraordinary party council meeting, citing the corruption scandals affecting the late cdc's as the main driving reason behind the move, as they went "against the interests and values" of alde.  reorganization of the space throughout 2019, discussions took place on the future of the post-cdc political space, leading to negotiations between the pdecat and puigdemont to bring all three entities resulting from cdc's demise-pdecat, jxcat and cnxr-into a single unitary platform under the umbrella of together for catalonia, whose naming rights belonged to the pdecat. some sectors within the party had been weary of puigdemont's growing influence and  discourse taking over the traditional moderate political space of the late cdc, as well as his frequent use of independent candidates unrelated to the party's structure. concerns also came about puigdemont's decision to transform the cnxr into a full-fledged political party in january 2019, as the pdecat leadership, while favouring some type of relationship with puigdemont's movement, rejected any prospect of merging within another party and instead saw the cnxr as a potential competitor. in march 2020, the pdecat suggested the establishment of an electoral coalition rather than both parties competing each other, but this proposal went unheeded by the cnxr, and shortly after the negotiation process stalled as a result of the covid-19 outbreak in spain.  the resumption of talks in june 2020 revealed that the pdecat would keep opposing both to dissolve itself and to renounce the jxcat's trademark, while also citing that puigdemont "had moved too to the left" in the political spectrum as one of the reasons to preserve its identity. in contrast, the cnxr did not contemplate any scenario other than the promotion of a "different" structure that had nothing to do with the late convergence and its legacy. on 26 june, the party's executive under party president david bonhevi rejected puigdemont's attempts to absorb the party, prompting jxcat independents and elected members to launch a public manifesto arguing for the re-organization of the together for catalonia political space into a full-fledged party and the pdecat's dissolution into it. pdecat members replied with another manifesto, in which they vindicated the party's identity and legacy, showing their rejection to disband the party's organizational structure
into puigdemont's personal project and criticizing what they perceived as "one thinking" from the former president's supporters because of their unwillingness to treat them as equals.  this failure in negotiations led to puigdemont's announcement on 2 july that he would be founding a new political party aimed at bringing together supporters of unilateral independence ahead of the next catalan regional election, seeing the merger and subsequent dissolution into it of the cnxr and aligned organizations, as well as the breaking up of all ties with the pdecat. a political struggle ensued on the ownership of the "together for catalonia" trademark, with puigdemont's supporters taking over it from the pdecat on 10 july by changing jxcat's party data in the interior ministry register to reflect its new ownership. the pdecat dubbed this as an illegal act and announced that it would challenge it, as the party still regarded the jxcat's trademark as theirs. as the change did not affect the electoral coalition-which legally comprised the pdecat and cdc-nor its electoral rights, an awkward situation could develop if both "together for catalonia" (puigdemont's party) and "together for catalonia" (the pdecat's coalition) chose to confront each other in any future election under such labels, with the latter not ruling own an independent run. puigdemont's party rejected using the pdecat's electoral rights as well as engaging into any sort of future electoral arrangement with it that did not come through its dissolution, and prompted pdecat members supportive to his cause to leave it en masse upon the establishment of his new party. on 24 july, independence rally (ri.cat), which had been associated to cdc/pdecat since 2013, announced that it would be joining puigdemont's new party.  in the meantime, several current and former party members-including former coordinator-general marta pascal-split to form the nationalist party of catalonia (pnc), out of their disagreement with the pdecat's drift towards unilateralism under puigdemont's influence. the split was formalized by the pnc's founding congress on 27 june 2020, amid concerns that puigdemont's move to found his own party could also further the split of pdecat's sectors more aligned to his and the cnxr's strategies.  on 29 august 2020, the party made official that it was suing puigdemont for his "unlawful" takeover of the jxcat's trademark, sparking a defection en masse
from party members aligned to the former catalan president, including puigdemont himself, to the new junts party. as of early september 2020, pdecat still retained four legislators in the parliament of catalonia, four legislators in the congress of deputies, some prominent politicians (including former catalan president artur mas, the chairwoman of the port of barcelona merce conesa and the ex-regional minister of enterprise and knowledge angels chacon-just removed from office in a cabinet reshuffle by quim torra-) as well as a number of mayors, including marc solsona (also a catalan mp), the spokesperson of the party.  ideology the party is described as centre-right, supportive of european integration and market-liberal policies, and is neoliberal in economics outlook. the party describes itself as catalanist, independentist, republican, pro-europeanist and humanist in its ideological manifesto, defending that catalonia is a nation with the right of self-determination, whose fixed path to achieve an independent state involves expanding the pro-independence social majority and exhausting all legal venues to reach an agreement "without renouncing the unilateral path to achieve these objectives".  electoral performance  parliament of catalonia  cortes generales  nationwide  regional breakdown  symbols  notes  references  external links  2016 establishments in catalonia catalan independence movement catalan nationalist parties centrist parties in spain liberal parties in spain political parties established in 2016 political parties in catalonia pro-european political parties in spain republican parties in spain
ekenedirichukwu ijemba (born may 14, 1991), better known by his stage name humblesmith, is a nigerian afropop recording artist who achieved recognition upon the release of his hit single titled "osinachi". in 2015 which later won a nomination spot at the 2016 nigeria entertainment awards.  he first ventured into the entertainment business as an actor, starring in a number of films including hypertension (2010) with sam loco efe. currently signed to show bobo music limited, he made the list of "10 artists to watch in 2016" by notjustok.  early life originally from uruala, a town in ideato north local government area of imo state, southeastern nigeria, ekene ijemba was born on may 14, 1991 into a catholic family in abakaliki, ebonyi state, nigeria. while in secondary school, he started dancing and was part of a group called american boys before he left ebonyi state for asaba city, the capital of delta state, south-southern nigeria in order to pursue a career in music.  career  2014-2017: beginnings and rise to fame upon arriving in asaba city, humblesmith had to take up menial jobs in order to earn a living. he later ventured into entertainment as an actor and appeared in various films including hypertension with sam loco efe. he returned to ebonyi state at some point and then back to delta state again to focus on a career in music. determined to succeed, he started scouting for shows and performed for free until he was signed by dg records who were impressed with one of his several performances. in 2012, he left asaba city for lagos state where he recorded his debut single "chairmoo" in 2014. in 2015, he released "osinachi, a chart-topping single that featured phyno; and davido in the remix version. the song earned him a nomination spot in the "best new act" category at the 2016 edition of the nigeria entertainment awards and was also nominated in the "hottest single" category at the same event. in april 2016, he featured flavour n'abania in a song titled "jukwese" which enjoyed rotational airplay around the country. he later announced an instagram competition tagged the "#jukwesecontest" in reference to the song, with a $2,000 prize money for the winner.  2018-present: release of osinachi, hiatus, and other singles following the success of
his singles "osinachi" and jukwuese", humblesmith released his debut album osinachi, which featured guest vocals from davido, patoranking, phyno, harrysong, olamide, and tiwa savage. in december 2020, after a brief hiatus, he released a new single, kosi, loosely translated as "god's will", a song of gratitude to god for his achievements.  artistry humblesmith cites bright chimezie as his music influence. he usually sings the afropop genre of music with a little fusion of highlife.  endorsement deal in june 2016, humblesmith signed a multi-million naira endorsement deal with noodles manufacturing company tummy-tummy food industry.  discography  awards and nominations  see also   list of nigerian musicians  references  1991 births living people people from imo state people from delta state igbo highlife musicians igbo singers nigerian male singer-songwriters musicians from abakaliki 21st-century nigerian male  singers
dihydrotestosterone acetate, also known as androstanolone acetate or stanolone acetate, as well as 5α-dihydrotestosterone 17β-acetate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a dihydrotestosterone ester that was never marketed.  see also  list of androgen esters § dihydrotestosterone esters  references  abandoned drugs acetate esters androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes dihydrotestosterone esters prodrugs testosterone
archibald n. randall (august 22, 1830 - july 16, 1916) was an american lawyer and politician.  born in sardinia, erie county, new york, randall attended brockport collegiate institute. in 1847, randall moved to the town of avon, wisconsin territory. he served in the 13th wisconsin infantry regiment during the american civil war and was commissioned a captain. in 1869, he moved to brodhead, wisconsin. in 1873, randall was admitted to the wisconsin bar. randall served on the board of supervisors in rock and green counties. in 1882 and 1883, randall served in the wisconsin state senate and was a republican. randall died at his home in brodhead, wisconsin due to injuries from tripping over a croquet arch.  notes  1830 births 1916 deaths people from brodhead, wisconsin people from erie county, new york people of wisconsin in the american civil war state university of new york at brockport alumni wisconsin lawyers wisconsin republicans county supervisors in wisconsin wisconsin state senators people from avon, wisconsin 19th-century american lawyers
brinded is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  colin brinded (1946-2005), english snooker referee malcolm brinded (born 1953), british businessman  thrice the brinded cat hath mew'd. shakespeare, macbeth.
acanthocasuarina muellerianae is a species of jumping plant lice, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it possesses rhinaria on its fourth, sixth, eighth and ninth antennal segments; the species' hind tibia has one outer and two inner spurs, while the female's proctiger carries an apical hook posteriorly.  references   triozidae insects described in 2011
the 2016-17 coppa italia, also known as tim cup for sponsorship reasons, was the 70th edition of the national cup in italian football. juventus successfully defended its title by defeating lazio 2-0 in the final, becoming the first team to win the trophy in three consecutive years.  participating teams  serie a (20 teams)  atalanta bologna cagliari chievo crotone empoli fiorentina genoa internazionale juventus lazio milan napoli palermo pescara roma sampdoria sassuolo torino udinese  serie b (22 teams)  ascoli avellino bari benevento brescia carpi cesena cittadella frosinone latina novara perugia pisa pro vercelli salernitana spal spezia ternana trapani hellas verona vicenza virtus entella  lega pro (27 teams)  alessandria ancona arezzo bassano virtus carrarese casertana como cosenza cremonese feralpisalo fidelis andria foggia juve stabia lecce livorno maceratese matera messina modena padova pontedera pordenone reggiana siena sudtirol teramo tuttocuoio  serie d (9 teams)  altovicentino campodarsego caronnese fermana francavilla frattese grosseto montecatini seregno  source: legaseriea.it  format and seeding teams entered the competition at various stages, as follows:  first phase (one-legged fixtures)  first round: 36 teams from lega pro and serie d started the tournament  second round: the eighteen winners from the previous round were joined by the 22 serie b teams  third round: the twenty winners from the second round met the twelve serie a sides seeded 9-20  fourth round: the sixteen winners faced each other  second phase  round of 16 (one-legged): the eight fourth round winners were inserted into a bracket with the serie a clubs seeded 1-8  quarter-finals (one-legged)  semi-finals (two-legged)  final (one-legged)  round dates the schedule of each round was as follows:  first stage  first round a total of 36 teams from lega pro and serie d competed in this round, eighteen of which advanced to second round. the matches were played between 29 and 31 july 2016.  second round a total of forty teams from serie b and lega pro competed in the second round, twenty of which advanced to join twelve teams from serie a in the third round. the matches were played from 5 to 8 august 2016.  third round a total of 32
teams from serie a, serie b and lega pro competed in the third round, sixteen of which advanced to the fourth round. the matches were played between 12 and 15 august 2016.  fourth round fourth round matches were played between 29 november and 1 december 2016.  final stage  bracket  round of 16 round of 16 matches were played from 10 to 19 january 2017.  quarter-finals quarter-final matches were played from 24 january to 1 february 2017.  semi-finals the first semi-final legs were played on 28 february and 1 march, and the second legs were played on 4 and 5 april 2017.  first leg  second leg  final  top goalscorers  notes  references  2016-17 coppa italia italy
umar pulavar tamil language centre, formerly known as st george's road tamil language centre, is an academic institution for teaching tamil language in singapore.   after the closure of umar pulavar tamil high school in 1982, st george's road tamil language centre was renamed as umar pulavar tamil language centre in 1983 to preserve the name of the high school.  references  external links  official website of umar pulavar tamil language centre  language education in singapore language schools in singapore tamil-language education kallang
vada leon azeem (born august 23, 1983) is an american author, illustrator, songwriter from columbus, ohio.  early life vada azeem was raised on the northeast side of columbus, ohio. his father is of haitian and african-american descent, and his mother is mixed of irish and african-american descent.  azeem graduated from walnut ridge high school and accepted a full scholarship to the columbus college of art & design (ccad), where he would only complete one year of school.  music  azeem named and co-founded the hip-hop collective fly.union. they released a mixtape with dj mick boogie titled "closed doors, open windows"  which lead to the group signing a deal with maverick carter and nba all-star lebron james' springhill imprint. azeem parted ways with the collective soon after signing.  the anti-parachute theory mixtape  vada released his first solo mixtape in 2009 under the name l.e for the uncool titled the anti-parachute theory. this project featured production from j. rawls, blueprint, dj rhettmatic,, and rashad. p. blackk and von pea of tanya morgan contributed vocals on a track titled she/her. following the release of the tape, vada gained further notoriety by performing at atlanta's a3c festival, new york city's cmj festival, and sxsw.  the measure  in 2010 vada released the measure  (also under the name l.e for the uncool). during this time he created a bond and alignment with fellow ohio rapper stalley.  the monsters are due on maple street  this extended play (also under the name l.e for the uncool) was released soon after the measure on 2010's all hallows eve. the project's title pays homage to the twilight zone which is vada's favorite tv series.  prelude to a murder  complex premiered (under the name king vada) the leading track of prelude to a murder titled preserving youth, which featured stalley, 88 keys signee nemo achida, and fabrashay a.  murdrxflwr$  leading up to this project vada released the cardo produced track titled finish via xxl. vada's first full length project since 2010's the measure lead to high visibility premiering on complex, and features other production by j. rawls, dj rhettmatic, and dj o-zone.  flwr$ before i go  in november 2013 onsmash
premiered azeem's flwr$ before i go ep  which features production by cleveland, ohio producers dj corey grand and twizz. the cover artwork for this project was created by vada and uk visual artist jasmin sehra. a video for the track savior premiered on complex soon after the project's release.  twenties go for nix  after taking years off to write for other artist, vada returns in 2017 with twenties go for nix which premiered on complex's pigeons & planes. the project was produced entirely by long-time collaborator rashad thomas. the project allowed vada to face some demons of his own, and vividly walks listeners through his past.  children's illustration and literature  the boy who tried to touch the sun  azeem wrote and illustrated his first children's book in 2017 entitled "the boy who tried to touch the sun". the book features a young boy named anu who is faced with seemingly impossible challenges that he overcomes with ease as they are not as challenging as the goal he has set for himself; to touch the sun.  the ribbon in the sky  "the ribbon in the sky" is azeem's second self-published children's book. the offering is an "ode to the perseverance of women, but particularly, women of color," azeem told the columbus museum of art during a 2020 interview. the children's book was inspired by azeem's wife and her uphill battle with multiple sclerosis.  personal life  vada azeem is a sunni muslim. he married his wife aba on july 27, 2019. vada has two sons, peyton and luca azeem.  references   rappers from columbus, ohio 1984 births living people 21st-century american rappers
alexi pappas or alexia pappa (greek αλεξια παππα; born 28 march 1990) is a greek-american runner, filmmaker, actor, and writer. pappas was an ncaa all-american athlete at both dartmouth college and the university of oregon. she represented greece at the 2016 summer olympics, setting the national record for 10k.  early life and education pappas was born on 28 march 1990, to a greek-american father who has roots from rhodes and an american mother. she has a brother who is four years older. pappas grew up in alameda, california. her mother died by suicide when pappas was four years old.  athletic career  bishop o'dowd high school california interscholastic federation as a sophomore at oakland's bishop o'dowd high school, pappas placed fourth in the division iii girls 5k race at the california interscholastic federation state cross country championships in 2005.   pappas' high school coach refused to let her participate in multiple sports, even though boys at the same high school were permitted to do so, and stated that this affected her physical development.  ncaa pappas was a two-time ncaa all-american at dartmouth college. she was one of nine finalists for the 2012 ncaa woman of the year award. she also won the 2012 season's ivy league title in the steeplechase (9:58.80) and qualified for the 2012 u.s. olympic trials in eugene. pappas graduated magna cum laude in creative writing and english from dartmouth college in 2012.  pappas attended the university of oregon as a master's student, where she earned three ncaa division i all-american awards. she finished eighth individually at the 2012 ncaa cross country championships with a time of 19:43.9 (6,000 meters) helping the oregon ducks women's cross country team win the national title. she graduated from oregon with a master of fine arts in creative writing in 2013.  2016 olympics pappas became a greek citizen on 8 january 2016 and on 1 may that year she broke the 10,000 m greek national record, which had stood since 2002. she represented greece at the 2016 summer olympics. at the olympic finals, she improved her national record when she finished 17th in 31:36.16.  honors  filmmaking pappas has made several movies as a writer, actor, and producer. these include tall as the baobab tree (2012), speed goggles (2016), tracktown (2017), and olympic dreams (2019), which was the first fictional movie filmed
in an olympic village.  author pappas' first book, bravey: chasing dreams, befriending pain, and other big ideas, with a foreword by maya rudolph, was published on 12 january 2021.  personal life in 2020 pappas published a video about her struggle with depression, calling for better care of elite athletes' mental health.  pappas is married to jeremy teicher, with whom she also collaborates on films.  references  external links        author profile for alexi pappas on amazon books  1990 births living people track and field athletes from oregon track and field athletes from california greek female long-distance runners american female long-distance runners greek female steeplechase runners american female steeplechase runners olympic athletes of greece athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics dartmouth big green women's track and field athletes oregon ducks women's track and field athletes american people of greek descent greek people of american descent greek producers american producers greek film actresses american film actresses oregon ducks women's cross country runners dartmouth big green women's cross country runners
anthony john meagher (born 4 september 1953) is a judge of the court of appeal of the supreme court of new south wales, the highest court in the state of new south wales, australia, which forms part of the australian court hierarchy.  education  meagher was educated at saint ignatius' college, riverview. he graduated in 1976 from the university of new south wales with a degree in law and commerce.  career  meagher joined minter simpson in 1976 as a solicitor. he was called to the bar in 1982, and became senior counsel in 1995.  on 10 august 2011, meagher was sworn in as a judge of the supreme court of new south wales and as a judge of appeal.  see also   nsw court of appeal  unsw faculty of law  references   judges of the supreme court of new south wales living people 1953 births people educated at saint ignatius' college, riverview university of new south wales law school alumni
vladimir skrbinsek (1902-1987) was a slovenian stage and film actor.  filmography  references  bibliography   daniel j. goulding. liberated cinema: the yugoslav experience, 1945-2001. indiana university press, 2002.  external links     1902 births 1987 deaths actors from ljubljana slovenian male film actors slovenian male stage actors
the 2018 fiba women's basketball world cup, the 18th edition of fiba's premier international tournament for women's national basketball teams, was held in tenerife, canary islands, spain from 22 to 30 september 2018. this was the first edition to use the name of fiba women's basketball world cup. after the last edition in 2014, fiba changed the name of the competition from the fiba world championship for women, in order to align its name with that of the corresponding men's competition.  the united states were the two-time defending champions. this tournament saw the world cup debut of belgium, latvia and puerto rico.  the us team won the final against australia, to win their third straight and tenth overall title.  venues  hosts selection the whole bidding process started in october 2014. bids from two nations were submitted. on 31 october 2014, it was confirmed that spain and israel were the bidders. on 16 december 2014, it was announced that spain won the bid and would host the upcoming world cup.  qualification spain as the hosts automatically qualified for the tournament in december 2014. the united states were the next to qualify after winning gold at the 2016 summer olympics.  the remaining teams were decided over june, july & august 2017 through the women's continental cups. the continental qualifiers vary in the number of teams; the european qualifiers featured 16 teams, africa featured 12 teams, americas featured 10 teams and asia featured 8 teams. from the 46 teams competing for the final 14 spots, the field was completed by the top five teams from 2017 eurobasket women, the top three teams from the 2017 fiba women's americup, the two finalists from the 2017 women's afrobasket; as well as the top four teams from the 2017 fiba asia women's cup, which saw teams from asia and oceania compete together for the first time ever.  format the tournament was played in two phases. in the first phase, the 16 qualified teams were sorted into four groups of four (a-d), each team in a group played each other once, 24 games were played in the first phase. the top team from each group directly advanced to the quarterfinals. the teams that placed fourth in the group stage were eliminated. the teams placed second and third from each group advanced to the quarterfinal qualifications, where the winners of the qualification round then progressed to the quarterfinals, losers were eliminated.  in the second phase, a knockout stage was used to determine the champion. in the quarterfinals the four winners progressed to the semifinals, the four losers played in classification games for 5-8
th. in total, 40 games were played over a total of 8 days.  squads  draw the official draw ceremony took place on 6 february 2018, at san cristobal de la laguna, island of tenerife, canary islands, spain.  seedings included are the respective fiba world rankings for women:  preliminary round  group a  group b  group c  group d  final round  final  final rankings  awards and statistics  awards the all-star five was revealed on 30 september 2018.  mvp:  breanna stewart  breanna stewart  diana taurasi  astou ndour  emma meesseman  liz cambage  statistics  player tournament averages  points  rebounds  assists  blocks  steals  team tournament averages  points  rebounds  assists  blocks  steals  tournament game highs  marketing the logo and branding identity was unveiled on 5 february 2018 at the la laguna gran hotel in san cristobal de la laguna, the logo is inspired by the treasures of the island of tenerife, its coastlines and its heart of spain.  the mascot tina the turtle were also unveiled at the ceremony in the town hall of santa cruz de tenerife on 7 august 2018, 6 weeks before the tournament kick off the mascot name is a short form of tinerfina which means coming from or living from tenerife, both logo and the mascot were designed by a tenerife artist raul pena  references  external links official website    2018 world cup, 2018 sport in tenerife world cup world cup september 2018 sports events in europe
paglaum party may refer to:  bukidnon paglaum paglaum party (negros occidental)
the 1969-70 dallas chaparrals season was the third season of the chaparrals in the american basketball association. hagan (who had been player-coach since the team's inception) was fired halfway through the season, and general manager max williams took over as coach. the chaps once again fell in the aba semifinals. after the season, the team attempted to gain more fans in the state by playing games in fort worth and lubbock, under the moniker of the texas chaparrals. this experiment was done for only one season, and the team re-branded back to being the dallas chaparrals before the next season started.  roster   24 charles beasley - shooting guard   44 john beasley - power forward   22 bob bedell - power forward   12 ron boone - shooting guard   50 bob christian - center   10 glen combs - point guard   16 cliff hagan - small forward (also coach)  32 tom hagan - point guard   33 rich jones - small forward   43 manny leaks - center   31 riney lochmann - small forward   25 bill mcgill - center   34 maurice mchartley - shooting guard   35 cincy powell - small forward   34 willie scott - forward   55 john smith - center  final standings  western division  asterisk denotes playoff team  playoffs  western division semifinals  chaparrals lose series 4-2  awards and honors 1970 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 24, 1970)  cincy powell  john beasley  glen combs  references   chaparrals on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1969-70 regular season and playoff results  remembertheaba.com dallas chaparrals page  dallas chaparrals dallas texas chaparrals, 1969-70 texas chaparrals, 1969-70
mithra is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 24 km from phillaur, 27 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 138 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , mithra has a total number of 307 houses and population of 1579 of which include 793 males and 786 females. literacy rate of mithra is 78.40%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 158 which is 10.01% of total population of mithra, and child sex ratio is approximately 927 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 50.54% of total population in mithra. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 468 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of mithra which includes 418 males and 50 females. according to census survey report 2011, 89.10% workers describe their work as main work and 10.90% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 23.8 km away from the village. the village is 56 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 123 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
indonesia participated in the 1990 asian games held in beijing, china from september 22, 1990 to october 7, 1990. the country was ranked 7th in the medal tally with 3 gold medals, 6 silver medals and 21 bronze medals; a total of 30 medals.  medal summary  medal table  medalists  references  nations at the 1990 asian games 1990 asian games
the 2016 senior league world series took place from july 31-august 6 in bangor, maine, united states. chicago, illinois defeated melbourne, australia in the championship game. it was australia's first world series final in any division of little league.  this was the final slws held in bangor.  teams  results  group a  group b  consolation round  elimination round  references  senior league world series senior league world series senior senior league sports competitions in maine
t47 is a  disability sport classification for disability athletics primarily for competitors with a below elbow or wrist amputation or impairment. t47 is a classification for track events but unlike the other t40 to t46 classifications it has no equivalent f47 classification for field events.  the amputee sports equivalent class is isod the a8 class.  people in this class can have injuries as a result of over use of their remaining upper limb.  definition  this classification is for disability athletics. this classification is one of several classifications for athletes with ambulant related disabilities. similar classifications are t40, t42, t43, t44, t45 and t46. as of 2016, the international paralympic committee defines this classification as being for athletes with a unilateral upper limb impairment resulting in some loss of function at the shoulder, elbow and wrist and which impacts sprints primarily. the impact of the impairment is comparable to the activity limitations experienced by an athlete with a unilateral through wrist/below elbow amputation.  this class includes people from the isod a8 class.  disability groups  amputees  the nature of a person's amputations in this class can effect their physiology and sports performance. because they are missing a limb, amputees are more prone to overuse injuries in their remaining limbs.  common problems for intact upper limbs for people in this class include rotator cuffs tearing, shoulder impingement, epicondylitis and peripheral nerve entrapment.  a study was undertaken comparing the performance of athletics competitors at the 1984 summer paralympics when the isod classification system was in use. it found there was no significant difference in performance in times between women in a6, a7 and a8 in the discus, women in a6, a7 and a8 in the shot put, women in the a6, a7 and a8 in the long jump, women in a6, a7 and a8 in the 100 meter race, women in a5, a6, a7 and a8 in the 100 meter race, men in the a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8 and a9 in the discus, men in a6, a7 and a8 in the discus, men in a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8 and a9 in the javelin, men in a6, a7 and a8 in the javelin,  men in a8 and a9 in the shot put, men in a6,
a7 and a8 in the high jump, men in a6, a7 and a8 in the long jump, men in a6, a7 and a8 in the 100 meter race, men in a7 and a8 in the 400 meter race, and men in a7 and a8 in the 1,500 meter race.  performance and rules  people in this class are not required to use a starting block.  they have an option to start from a standing position, a crouch or a 3 point stance. in relay events involving t40s classes, no baton is used.  instead, a handoff takes place via touch in the exchange zone. people with arm amputations in this class can have elevated padded blocks to place their stumps on for the start of the race.  these blocks need to be in a neutral color or a color similar to that of the track, and they must be placed entirely behind the starting line.  their location needs to be such that they do not interfere with the start of any other athlete.  in field events for this class, athletes are not required to wear a prosthetic.  in jumping events, athletes have 60 seconds during which they must complete their jump.  during this time, they can adjust their prosthetic. if during a jump the athlete's prosthesis falls off and lands closer to the takeoff board than the athlete, the mark is taken where the prosthesis landed. if prosthesis falls off outside the landing zone nearer the board than where athlete landed, the jump counts as a foul.  events  history   the classification was created by the international paralympic committee (ipc) and has roots in a 2003 attempt to address "the overall objective to support and co-ordinate the ongoing development of accurate, reliable, consistent and credible sport focused classification systems and their implementation." t47 was created in 2013 as an additional classification to the t45 and t46 classifications for competitors whose primary impairments are in the upper limbs.  for the 2016 summer paralympics in rio de janeiro, the ipc had a zero classification at the games policy.  this policy was put into place in 2014, with the goal of avoiding last minute changes in classes that would negatively impact athlete training preparations. all competitors needed to be internationally classified with their classification status confirmed prior to the games, with exceptions to this policy being dealt with on a case by case basis. in case there was a need for classification or reclassification at the games despite best efforts otherwise, athletics classification was scheduled for september 4 and september 5
at olympic stadium.  for sportspeople with physical or intellectual disabilities going through  classification or reclassification in rio, their in competition observation event is their first appearance in competition at the games.  becoming classified  classification is often based on the anatomical nature of the amputation. the classification system takes several things into account when putting people into this class; these include which limbs are affected, how many limbs are affected, and how much of a limb is missing.  for this class, classification generally has four phases. the first stage of classification is a health examination.  for amputees, this is often done on site at a sports training facility or competition.  the second stage is observation in practice, the third stage is observation in competition and the last stage is assigning the sportsperson to a relevant class. sometimes the health examination may not be done on site because the nature of the amputation could cause not physically visible alterations to the body.  competitors notable athletes in the t47 classification include south african sprinter anrune weyers and world record long jumper carlee beattie of australia.  references  parasports classifications
santiago tilapa is a town inside municipality of tianguistenco in mexico state in mexico. the town is bordered on the north mirasol, south to xalatlaco, east with xalatlaco and west with santiago tianguistenco. this populated place was an indigenous settlement, there are persons with otomi language.  references  populated places in the state of mexico tianguistenco otomi settlements
united nations security council resolution 2080, adopted in 2012, extended the terms of five judges on the international criminal tribunal for rwanda (ictr), on the rwanda genocide. in the resolution, the security council also asked for updates on the transition of the ictr to the international residual mechanism for criminal tribunals (irmct), which was to finish the remaining tasks of the ictr and a similar tribunal on war crimes and genocide in the yugoslav wars.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2001 to 2100 (2011-2012)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2012 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions concerning the international criminal tribunal for rwanda december 2012 events
is a song recorded by japanese recording artist minmi, taken from her seventh studio album ego (2015). it was made available for digital download and physical consumption on june 10, 2015 through universal j-a subsidiary label owned by universal music japan-as her third stand-alone single. "hologram" marks minmi's second consecutive recording after "ite itai yo" to have been written, composed, arranged, and produced by herself. musically, the song was described by a critic at selective hearing as a transition from her signature reggae music styles to electronic dance music, whilst retaining musical elements of dancehall music.  upon its release, the single received generally positive reviews from music critics. some pointed out the track as a highlight from the album, whilst acclaiming the song's composition. minor criticism was outspoken towards the application of auto-tune to her vocals. commercially, it under-performed in japan, stalling at number 116 for a sole week on the oricon singles chart, marking her lowest-selling release in that region. to promote the single, it was used for japanese anime television series jitsu wa watashi wa (2015). additionally, she appeared on japanese music television shows count down tv and refreshing!, with her as well performing the track at the 2016 freedom aozora concert venue.  background, composition and release in june 2016, it was confirmed through anime news network that minmi would release a new song titled "hologram", which would serve as a featured track for the first season of japanese anime television series, actually, i am... (japanese: jitsu wa watashi wa) (2015). "hologram" marks minmi's second consecutive single to have been written, composed, arranged, and produced by herself, following her 2014 single "ite itai yo". musically, it was pointed out by a writer for selective hearing as a transition from her signature reggae music styles from previous releases to dance-pop and electronic dance music, whilst retaining musical elements of dancehall music. it also incorporates synthesizers and keyboards in its instrumentation, with minmi's vocals being processed with auto-tune and vocoder pyrotechnics.  "hologram" was released as the singer's third stand-alone digital single on june 10, 2015 through universal j, a subsidiary label owned by universal music japan; its artwork featured blue, purple, pink and green confetti. the label distributed the recording for physical consumption as a dvd and cd in japan, with a digital ep being made available in several
other territories. all formats included the original mix of the single, with the addition of b-side track "#yaccahaina" in collaboration with japanese performer mary jane. the dvd release incorporated minmi performing "hologram" live at the 2014 freedom aozora concert venue. the accompanying cover sleeve for all three formats portrayed a pink-haired minmi surrounded by digitally-superimposed confetti.  reception upon its release, the single received positive reviews from music critics. allmusic's adam greenberg, who contributed to mimni's biography on the website, cited the track as one of her best works. in a similar review, cd journal staff members pointed out "hologram" as a highlight from her album ego. another critic from the same publication commended minmi's transition to electronic dance music, labeling the recording's production as "bold" and "spacey". the review further acclaimed the singer's vocals and songwriting on the single. an editor from selective hearing enjoyed the track, concluding that, "in the end this is a slight deviation from minmi's typical releases, but it's also refreshing to hear her branch a little bit." however, the publication negatively perceived the overuse of auto-tune in the track and felt the corresponding b-side songs were better than the single. commercially, "hologram" under-performed in japan. it debuted at number 116 for a sole week on the oricon singles chart, marking minmi's lowest-charting release since "la la la (ai no uta)" (2012), which peaked at number 58. as of july 2016, it is her lowest-selling single according to oricon style's database.  music video and promotion an accompanying music video for "hologram" was directed by hideharu ueki. it opens with a woman walking down a beach front, with her subsequently holding and letting go of her bikini strap by the pre-chorus. over the rest of the visual, she is portrayed being engaged alone or with a man in the water or playing around the beach shore; several of the scenes repeat throughout the music video. the clip appeared on the dvd version of its parent album, ego. to promote the single, it was used for japanese anime television series jitsu wa watashi wa (2015). she also appeared on the japanese television music shows count down tv and refreshing! to perform the song, alongside providing an interview in each show. minmi subsequently performed "hologram" live at the 2016 freedom aozona concert venue; various
other japanese acts, such as scandal and 10-feet, were present at the venue.  credits and personnel credits adapted from the cd liner notes of "hologram".  management management done by record label universal j.  credits minmi - lead vocals, producing, composing, songwriting, mixing, arranging mary jane - featured artist, backing vocals hideharu ueki - music video director  track list and formats all lyrics written by minmi.  charts  release history  references  external links "hologram" at minmi's official website.  "hologram" profile at oricon style.   2015 singles 2015 songs anime songs japanese-language songs
keith jasper moral agovida (born february 14, 1990) is a filipino professional basketball player for the davao occidental tigers of the maharlika pilipinas basketball league (mpbl). he was drafted 34th overall by blackwater elite in the 2014 pba draft.  high school agovida once scored a career high 82 points in the ncaa for the jru light bombers.  pba career statistics  as of the end of 2020 season  season-by-season averages   |- | align=left |  | align=left | blackwater / mahindra | 26 || 10.2 || .434 || .167 || .824 || 2.0 || .9 || .3 || .2 || 3.9 |- | align=left |  | align=left | san miguel | 23 || 6.9 || .375 || .000 || .500 || 1.4 || .4 || .2 || .2 || 1.7 |- | align=left |  | align=left | san miguel | 6 || 1.7 || .000 || .000 || 1.000 || .7 || .0 || .0 || .2 || .3 |- | align=left |  | align=left | columbian | 20 || 8.5 || .400 || .000 || .400 || 1.9 || .7 || .2 || .2 || 2.2 |- | align=left |  | align=left | terrafirma | 7 || 5.5 || .250 || .000 || .000 || .7 || .0 || .0 || .1 || .3 |-class=sortbottom | align=center colspan=2 | career | 82 || 7.8 || .405 || .063 || .632 || 1.6 || .6 || .2 || .2 || 2.3  references   1990 births living people blackwater bossing players filipino men's basketball players jose rizal university alumni arellano chiefs men's basketball players people from aurora (province) san miguel beermen players shooting guards small forwards tagalog people terrafirma dyip players blackwater bossing draft picks
the 1994-95 league of ireland first division season was the 10th season of the league of ireland first division. the division was contested by 10 teams and university college dublin a.f.c. finished as champions. ucd completed a first division double having already won the league of ireland first division shield.  drogheda united finished as runners up in both competitions.  shield the league of ireland first division shield saw the 10 participating teams divided into two groups of five - a northern group and a southern group. the teams played a single round of games against the other teams in their group.  final tables  northern group  southern group  final the two group winners, ucd and drogheda united, played off in a two legged final.  1st leg  2nd leg  ucd won 2-1 on aggregate.  regular season  final table  promotion/relegation play-off third placed finn harps f.c. played off against athlone town who finished in tenth place in the 1994-95 league of ireland premier division. the winner would compete in the 1995-96 league of ireland premier division.  1st leg  2nd leg   athlone town won 5-3 on penalties and retain their place in the premier division  see also  1994-95 league of ireland premier division  notes  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2 ireland
kelsey kolojejchick ( ; born october 2, 1991) is an american field hockey player.  in 2016, she was named to the united states olympic field hockey team for 2016 olympics in rio de janeiro.  early life kelsey kolojejchick was on october 2, 1991 in kingston, pennsylvania. she grew up in larksville, pennsylvania. as a child, kolojejchick played soccer and took up field hockey at the suggestion of a soccer teammate's parent. she attended wyoming seminary high school with future united states national field hockey teammate kathleen sharkey. throughout high school, kolojejchick was a standout athlete, playing soccer, softball, gymnastics, track, swimming, and field hockey. while kolojejchick was on the wyoming seminary field hockey team, the team won two pennsylvania state championships and were undefeated for an entire season.  college field hockey player kolojejchick attended the university of north carolina (unc) where she was a midfielder on the school field hockey team. kolojejchick's older brother, matt kolojejchick, transferred to play football at unc after kolojejchick helped get his highlight tape in the hands of head coach butch davis. the field hockey team reached the national championship finals each year of kolojejckick's college career, winning the tournament her first year on the team. kolojejchich was named first team all-american all four years, a first for a unc player. she finished her collegiate career in 2012 with 68 career goals and 43 assists.  united states national field hockey team  kolojejchick was first named to the united states national field hockey team in 2012.  on the way to a fourth-place finish for the u.s. team at the 2014 women's hockey world cup, kolojejchick scored five goals in the tournament.  prior to 2015, kolojejchick was primarily a midfielder. injuries on the u.s. national team prior to the 2015 pan american games led to kolojejchick rotating between forward and midfield positions. the u.s. won the tournament, clinching its place in the 2016 summer olympics. kolojejchick scored seven goals for the team.  on july 1, 2016, kolojejcick was named to the united states team for the 2016 olympics.  kolojejchick played a "key role" in the united states' fifth-place finish, its best in 20
years.  references  external links     1991 births living people american female field hockey players olympic field hockey players of the united states field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics north carolina tar heels field hockey players women in red 2016 pan american games medalists in field hockey pan american games gold medalists for the united states field hockey players at the 2015 pan american games medalists at the 2015 pan american games
deperetella is an extinct genus of herbivorous mammals that flourished in the eocene and were related to tapirs. the genus was defined in 1925 by w. d. matthew and walter w. granger, who named it after french paleontologist charles deperet.  references  eocene odd-toed ungulates eocene mammals of asia fossil taxa described in 1925
gidesi chalamanda (born 1930), is most commonly known as "agide". he is a malawian acoustic artist. he was born in chiradzulu in the southern region of malawi.  he is one of malawi's legendary artists.  2016 coming to america tour in the lyrics to his song "buffalo soldier", he mentions that if he had enough money he would travel to america. in 2016, with the help of fans, friends and malawian organizations both in malawi and in the malawian diaspora, he was able to achieve this dream when he traveled to the us with musicians davis ndi edgar. he held a concert at the black rock center for the arts in the "pulse of malawi" concert  which celebrated malawian independence day in germantown md. he was a panelist at the panel discussions held by the malawian diaspora organizations.  he also played at the library of congress in washington d.c. where his music was archived. he also held a concert at the state theater in indiana, a state mentioned in his original song.  2020 collaboration with patience namadingo  in july 2020, chalamanda collaborated with malawian local gospel artiste patience namadingo who was the brand ambassador of malawian private bank fdh financial holdings and together made a remix of a number of his hit songs including "linnyhoo", "buffalo soldier", and "che meri". in the remix video, chalamanda is seen providing amazing bass vocals with namadingo weaving his voice together with his, producing a hit song that has made rounds on social media platforms like tiktok. in the same month, fdh promised to build chalamanda a grocery store in his local town of chiradzulu. the promise was fulfilled in september of the same year when the bank handed over a well constructed and fully stocked grocery store, thereby providing chalamanda with a reliable source of income to facilitate his retirement from music.  references  21st-century malawian male singers 1930 births living people 20th-century malawian male singers
magic concert (spanish: concierto magico) is a 1953 spanish musical film directed by rafael j. salvia and starring jose maria rodero and mercedes monterrey.  cast  jose calvo   rafael luis calvo   joan capri  ramon de larrocha   fortunato garcia   luis induni   juan monfort  mercedes monterrey   consuelo de nieva   antonio picazo   juan pich santasusana   leopoldo querol   elvira quintilla   jose maria rodero  references  bibliography   francesc llinas. directores de fotografia del cine espanol. filmoteca espanola, 1989.  external links     1953 musical films spanish musical films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films films directed by rafael j. salvia films with screenplays by rafael j. salvia spanish black-and-white films
the terrible twosome (portuguese: a dupla do barulho) is a 1953 brazilian comedy film directed by carlos manga and starring oscarito, grande otelo and edith morel.  cast  oscarito as tinoco   grande otelo as tiao    edith morel   mara abrantes   renato restier    wilson grey    fregolente  gregorio barrios   helio celano  paulo correa   paulo croccia  as ronaldo    clovis de castro   atila iorio   roberto leandro  madame lou  as madame chouchou    nelson morrisson    blanche mur   ana maria neumann   ilma pereira    joao pericles   adriano reys  as reporter    frederico schlee  as van der fleet    aloisio viana    anthony zamborsky  as coronel mata gatos  references  bibliography  shaw, lisa & dennison, stephanie. brazilian national cinema. routledge, 2014.  external links  1953 comedy films 1953 films brazilian films brazilian comedy films brazilian black-and-white films 1950s portuguese-language films
samson scherrer (1698-1780) was an organ builder in the 18th century.  early life born august 6, 1698, he began working with his father. scherrer's family, originally from stein, in the canton of st. gallen, switzerland, were already organ builders of renown in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries building instruments in switzerland, germany, france and spain.  in 1726, the council of two hundred in bern authorized the return of the organs in the protestant churches, which had been removed during the reformation. this was an important market for scherrer who moved to bern from 1727 to 1732. he partnered with emanuel bossart for the construction of an organ of 33 plays and 3 keyboards, intended for the church of the holy spirit. the finished the instrument in 1729, but the authorities refuse to buy it, having placed no orders. the partners separated and scherrer borrowed to pay out bossart.  career in 1726 (nov 19th) samson scherrer married verena anna edelmann, born about 1706 in wildhaus, canton st. gallen. they had six children: anna catherina (named in 1729); georg ludwig (baptised in 1731) who was also an organ builder; jacob (born in lausanne in 1733) who followed his father as an organ builder and organist; samuel samson, (baptised in geneva in 1739); suzanne pernette, born in geneva in 1740); bernard nicolas, born around 1747, probably in grenoble, who was also an organ builder, organist, harpsichordist and composer.  in 1732, samson scherrer moved to lausanne with his wife and children. he obtained permission to raise an organ at lausanne cathedral, but will be paid only thirty years later, in 1763.  he then moved to geneva, where the use of the organ was still banned in protestant churches, so therefore sought work in france, and particularly in the dauphine region. he works at st. gregory's church in tallard (1743), the church of saint-louis (1746-1747) and the collegiate church of saint-andre (1748), both in grenoble. he enlarged and modifies the organ of the abbey of saint-antoine (1748) and gap cathedral (1749-1750), and he rebuilt the great organ and built the small organ of embrun cathedral (1750-1751); his only completely new construction is one of his greatest instruments in france, that in valence cathedral.  in 1753, samson scherrer returned to geneva, where the organ was now permitted to be
used and offers his services to the authorities who commission an instrument for st. peter's church. the organ was completed in 1757, he adds 4 games in 1767. this organ was destroyed in 1865. in 1762 & 1763 he built a new instrument for the temple fusterie or neuf temple which his son nicolas will hold (destroyed in 1835). he also reconstructed the one of the auditorium in 1779. the yards are rare in geneva, samson also built as follows in the canton of bern: burgdorf 1759, ursenbach 1760, nidau 1761, hindelbank 1770, kirchberg 1771, kirchenthurnen 1772 (the latter two buffets remain, more or less modified, while all the others have disappeared), langenthal 1772, schlosswil 1773; and in the canton of vaud (all buffets being preserved, more or less modified): avenches 1774, vevey, church of st martin in 1776 (enlarged buffet), lausanne, church of st. francis 1777 (buffet and watch), morges, 1778, vevey, church of st claire 1779, nyon 1780.  samson scherrer died in geneva on march 4, 1780, while still working on the organ at nyon which was completed by his son jean-jacques and nicolas and his companion pierre burkhard.  references  swiss pipe organ builders 1698 births 1780 deaths people from geneva
the following lists events that happened in 1963 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - olafur thors, bjarni benediktsson  events 14 november - the island of surtsey is formed following a volcanic eruption off the coast of iceland.  births  17 january - tryggvi þor herbertsson, politician 17 march - willum þor þorsson, footballer 22 april - magnus ver magnusson, powerlifter and strongman 2 june - nanna leifsdottir, alpine skier. 30 june - oskar jonasson, film director and screenwriter 11 november - þorhallur gunnarsson, actor and media personality 24 november - kristin helga gunnarsdottir, children's writer 3 november - laufey lif borgarsdottir, prostitude  deaths hildur solveig magnusson urður tasa tjorvadottir  references    1960s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
fcds may refer to:  fairfield country day school, in connecticut, united states  forsyth country day school, in north carolina, united states  family computer disk system, an add-on for nintendo's family computer game console  see also   fcd (disambiguation)
usern, the official acronym of universal scientific education and research network, is non-governmental, non-profit organization and network for peaceful non-military scientific executions and policy-making. usern is established on 1 january 2016; the basic statutes of usern was drafted on 21 january 2015, but officially inauguration of the statute was made on 10 november 2016, the un day of science for peace an development, after signing by hundreds of top 1% scientists worldwide.  usern is organized exclusively for advancement of authentic, ethical and professional scientific research and education and consequently advancement of science for non-military purposes and public good.  making international interdisciplinary scientific projects and providing a platform for more effective communication among young researchers and experienced scientists, all over the world, is a head of usern's schedule.  membership  at the beginning of 2016, usern started its official activities and after the first meeting of top 1% scientists, it has started to get membership throughout the usern website. the usern website however has always faced critics in its functionality as users have often reported trouble logging in, changing the password or editing their pages.  usern prize   usern prize is an international award, established by usern, which would be annually bestowed to junior scientists or researchers less than 40 years of age for any novel advancement or achievement in scientific education, research, or serving the humanity in five scientific fields including medical sciences, life sciences, formal sciences, physical sciences, and social sciences.  usern prize awarding festival  the closing day of congress and awarding the international rewards ceremony of usern, the universal scientific education and research network prize or usern prize will be awarded in 10 november the world science day for peace and development to 5 young scholars under 40 ages in different theoretical sciences (mathematics and computer), physics sciences (physics, chemistry, engineering), environmental sciences, medical sciences, and social sciences.  usern laureates 2016  floris de lange (netherlands) in social sciences  for: expectation sharpens the visual response  alexander leemans (belgium/netherlands) in medical sciences  for: processing and visualization in diffusion imaging  jamshid aghaei (iran) in physical sciences  for: evaluating technical benefits and risks of renewable energy sources increasing penetration in electrical networks  morteza mahmoudi (iran/usa) in biological sciences  for: defining the biological identity of nanotherapeutics for high yield cancer therapy  lucas joppa (usa) in formal sciences  for: technology for nature  the second international usern congress  the 2nd international usern congress was held in kharkiv, ukraine on
8 to 10 november 2017.  usern laureates 2017   matjaz perc (slovenia) in social sciences  for: transitions towards cooperation in human societies  lucina qazi uddin (usa) in medical sciences  for: brain dynamics and flexible behavior in autism and attention-deficit/hyperactivity  maria-magdalena titirici (uk) in physical sciences  for: the design of efficient and low cost electrocatalysts catalysts without the use of critical metals  valentina cauda (italy) in biological sciences  for: hybrid immune-eluding nanocrystals as smart and active theranostic weapons against cancer -trojananohorse  manlio de domenico (italy) in formal sciences  for: multilayer structure and dynamics of the physical world: modeling the complexity of systems of systems  the third international usern congress  the 3rd international usern congress was held in reggio calabria, italy on 10 to 14 november 2018.  usern laureates 2018  igor grossmann (canada) in social sciences  for: wisdom - towards the social and behavioral science of sound judgment  gian paolo fadini (italy) in medical sciences  for: circulating stem cells in diabetic complications (remediation)  alex fornito (australia) in biological sciences  for: maps, models, and modifiers of brain changes in psychosis  xavier moya (uk) in physical sciences  for: barocaloric materials for environment-friendly solid -state refrigeration  jacob d biamonte (russia) in formal sciences  for: quantum enhanced machine learning  the fourth international usern congress  the 4th international usern congress was held in budapest, hungary on 8 to 10 november 2019.  usern laureates 2019  benjamin sovacool (denmark, uk) in social sciences  for: social justice in an era of climate change and energy scarcity  eugenia morselli (chile) in medical sciences  for:  mechanisms of hypothalamic autophagy in obesity  ajeet kaushik (usa) in biological sciences  for:  nano-bio-technology for personalized health care  giulia grancini (switzerland, italy) in physical-chemical sciences  for:  multi-dimensional ferroelectric hybrid perovskites for advanced optoelectronics  lucas lacasa (uk) in formal sciences  for:  bridging signal processing and network science (bipnet  the fifth international usern congress  the 5th international usern congress was held in tehran, iran on
7 to 10 november 2020.  usern laureates 2020  lianne schamaal (australia) in social sciences  for: a global alliance to elucidate neurobiological signatures of depression and suicide  mohammad ali shahbazi (finland) in medical sciences  for: a thermo-responsive biopolymeric micro-implant for the treatment of autoimmune disorders  daniel sauter (germany) in biological sciences  for: deciphering molecular determinants of coronavirus spread in the human population  gregory mark allen ashton (australia) in physical and chemical sciences  for: black holes and neutron stars: enabling astrophysics with bilb y  dongrui wu (china) in formal sciences  for: signal processing and machine learning for calibration-free and secure brain-computer interfaces (bcis)  the sixth international usern congress  the 6th international usern congress was held in istanbul, turkey on 6 to 13 november 2021.  usern laureates 2021   xudong zhao (china) in formal sciences  for: control synthesis of switched systems  minghao yu (germany) in physical and chemical sciences  for: developing sustainable energy storage devices with resource-aboundant raw materials  federico bella (italy) in biological sciences  for: from air to fertilizers: zero-impact agriculture of the future  hassan abolhassani (sweden) in medical sciences  for: integrative multi-omics analysis of unsolved inborn errors of immunity  daniel king (australia) in social sciences  for: empowering vulnerable populations to overcome unhealthy gaming habits and gaming disorder  usern offices worldwide  since the beginning of its establishment, and in order to promote universal scientific education and research, usern has signed several memorandum of understanding (mous) and established several offices in scientific research centers and universities worldwide.  usern executive directors   dr. sanam ladi seyedian (2016-2017)   directorial council (2018)  dr. farnaz delavari (2019)  dr. saboura ashkevarian (2020)  dr. heliya ziaei (2021-current)  see also    nima rezaei  gallery  references  external links     iranian social networking websites professional networks scholarly communication
jose guzman (born 1963) is a puerto rican baseball player.  jose guzman may also refer to:   jose guzman (basketball) (born 1937), peruvian olympic basketball player  jose guzman (boxer) (born 1963), venezuelan boxer  jose guzman santos (born 1947), mexican politician  jose florencio guzman (1929-2017), chilean politician  jose de guzman benitez (1857-1921), mayor of ponce, puerto rico  jose de guzman, 1st viscount of san rafael de la angostura (1740-1792), dominican cattle rancher, colonizer and nobleman  see also  juan jose guzman (1800-1847), president of el salvador (1842-1844)  jose rocchi guzman (born 1988), mexican football goalkeeper
elena likhovtseva and jana novotna were the defending champions, but none of them competed this year. novotna also retired from professional tennis at the end of the 1999 season.  virginia ruano pascual and paola suarez won the title by defeating conchita martinez and patricia tarabini 7-5, 6-3 in the final. it was the 5th title for ruano pascual and the 13th title for suarez in their respective doubles careers. it was also the 1st title for the pair during the season.  seeds the first four seeds received a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  external links  official results archive (itf)  official results archive (wta)  family circle cup charleston open
trombone and voices is an album by j. j. johnson with an orchestra and choir arranged and conducted by frank de vol which was released on the columbia label.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 3 stars.  track listing  "jennie's song" (bernard herrmann) - 3:31  "only the lonely" (jimmy van heusen, sammy cahn) - 3:32  "sometimes i feel like a motherless child" (traditional) - 3:12  "in a sentimental mood" (duke ellington) - 2:35  "get out of town" (cole porter) - 2:16  "i'm glad there is you" (jimmy dorsey, paul madeira) - 2:27  "you're my girl" (jule styne, cahn) - 3:59  "to the ends of the earth" (noel sherman, joe sherman) - 2:59  "what is there to say" (vernon duke, yip harburg) - 2:20  "lazy bones" (hoagy carmichael, johnny mercer) - 3:00  personnel j. j. johnson - trombone unidentified orchestra and choir arranged and conducted by frank de vol  references  columbia records albums j. j. johnson albums 1960 albums albums arranged by frank de vol albums conducted by frank de vol
richard west (born 19 july 1985) is a jamaican footballer.  playing career west began playing in the ksafa super league with santos f.c. in 2003. in 2004, he played in the country's top flight league the national premier league with waterhouse f.c., and won a jff champions cup. the following season he signed with rivals harbour view f.c. in 2006, he signed with tivoli gardens f.c. and during his tenure with the club he won the national premier league in 2009, and the jff champions cup in 2006. in 2011, he went overseas to canada to sign with brampton city united fc of the canadian soccer league. in his debut season he finished as the club's top goalscorer and the second highest goalscorer within the league with 17 goals. he helped the club secure a postseason berth by finishing fourth in the overall standings. he featured in the first round of the playoffs where they faced serbian white eagles, but were eliminated by a score of 8-0 on goals on aggregate.  in 2012, he signed with league powerhouse the serbian white eagles, and scored a goal in his debut match on 11 may 2012 against london city. he secured a postseason berth for the club by finishing sixth in the overall standings. in the quarterfinals of the playoffs he recorded the winning goal in a 1-0 victory against sc toronto. in the next round the white eagles faced their arch-rivals toronto croatia, but were eliminated by a score 4-0. the following season he was transferred over to york region shooters. in his debut season with york region he finished as the club's top goalscorer with 19 goals, and finished as runners-up in the regular season. in the postseason the club faced london city, but suffered a defeat in penalties.  in the 2014 season he helped york region achieve an undefeated season claiming the regular season title. in the postseason he contributed by scoring a goal in a 3-0 victory over brampton. in the csl championship finals they faced toronto croatia where west scored the equalizing goal which sent the game to penalties where york region won the shootout by a score of 5-4. in 2015, he won the csl golden boot by finishing as the league's top goalscorer with 23 goals. in the postseason he scored a hat-trick in a 4-2 victory over burlington sc. in the next round york region were eliminated by toronto croatia by a score of 3-2.  in 2018, he signed with unionville milliken sc in league1 ontario.  international career west
made his debut for the jamaica national football team on 24 november 2004 in a qualifying caribbean zone match against saint martin where he scored a goal in a 12-0 victory.  honours  york region shooters canadian soccer league first division (2): 2014. 2016 csl championship (1): 2014 csl golden boot: 2015  references  1985 births living people association football forwards jamaican footballers jamaica international footballers waterhouse f.c. players harbour view f.c. players tivoli gardens f.c. players brampton united players serbian white eagles fc players york region shooters players canadian soccer league (2006-present) players national premier league players santos f.c. (jamaica) players unionville milliken sc players
ronnie alcantara alonte ii (born october 26, 1996, in binan, laguna, philippines) is a filipino, actor, singer, and dancer. he is most known for his portrayals in the films seklusyon (2016), vince and kath and james (2016), and its sequel james and pat and dave (2020).  alonte is also known as one of members of the dance group hashtags on the noontime variety show it's showtime.  career   alonte first appeared in 2015 as a member of hashtags, a dance group in the daytime show it's showtime. hashtags released their debut self-titled album on may 21, 2016, with "roadtrip" released as the album's lead single. he also released a solo single entitled "love at website". the single was an entry to the himig handog p-pop love songs (2016) which made it to the top 30 of the said competition. it was written by gabriel tagadtad and produced by roxy santos under star music. he performed the song on gandang gabi vice last august 21, 2016 as well as it's showtime.  in 2016, he made several appearances on the longest running drama anthology maalaala mo kaya including the portrayal of his own story. in the same year, he starred in two movie entries in the 2016 metro manila film festival: vince and kath and james and seklusyon directed by erik matti.  in 2017, he and julia barretto (his co-star in vince and kath and james) is part of melodrama series a love to last, co-starring bea alonzo, ian veneracion and iza calzado. in the same year, he starred in bloody crayons as john jose.  filmography  film  television  accolades  references  external links      1996 births living people abs-cbn personalities filipino male film actors filipino male television actors male actors from laguna (province) people from binan tagalog people star magic 21st-century filipino male actors
stanislava varshavski and diana shapiro is a piano duo, formed in israel and residing in the united states.  stanislava varshavski was born in kharkov, ukraine. a young piano prodigy, she had her orchestral debut at the age of eight. after receiving her initial musical training in ukraine, stanislava proceeded with her studies at the jerusalem rubin academy in israel.  diana shapiro was born in moscow, russia. at the age of 17 she moved to israel and started her studies at the jerusalem rubin academy under prof. berkovich.  in 1998, at one of their classes in the academy, stanislava and diana were encouraged by prof. alexander tamir to try playing as a piano duo. the collaboration turned to be a real success and within a year the duo captured their first top prize at the international piano duo competition in bialystok, poland.  both ms. varshavski and ms. shapiro received bachelor and master's degrees from the jerusalem academy of music and dance, where they studied with the israeli duo bracha eden and alexander tamir, and in 2005 moved to boston, ma to continue their education under renowned american pianist victor rosenbaum. in 2011 both pianists completed doctoral degree studies at the university of wisconsin-madison. during their studies at uw-madison both artists served on the faculty of the maranatha university and upon completion joined the faculty of the silver lake college in manitowoc, wi.  the varshavski-shapiro piano duo has performed in such venues as the hkapa concert hall in hong kong, henry crown symphony hall in jerusalem, teatro valle in rome, and lincoln theater in miami. they have appeared with the radio orchestra in munich, the israel chamber orchestra, jerusalem symphony orchestra, warsaw philharmonic orchestra, miami's new world symphony, and wichita falls symphony orchestra, and have recorded for bavarian radio, radio 4 of hong kong, new york's wqxr, israeli national radio, and wisconsin public radio. in 2012 the duo has been featured in a documentary film presented on the wisconsin public television.  as music educators, diana shapiro and stanislava varshavski have presented master classes at a number of universities across the united states and gave lectures at wmta, ismta and college music society conferences. in 2016, varshavski and shapiro have been invited to showcase at the 2016 national conference of the chamber music america and served as judges at the 2016 chicago international competition for piano duos.  awards  2012 - winner of national auditions of the astral
artists in philadelphia, pa  2008 - career grant from "salon de virtuosi" in new york, ny  2005 - second prize at the murray dranoff international two piano competition in miami, florida  2004 - the grand prize at the 15th international piano competition "rome 2004" (two pianos section) in rome, italy  2004 - first prize at the 15th international piano competition "rome 2004" (one piano four hands section) in rome, italy  2004 - first prize at the "kol hamusica" young artists competition in jerusalem, israel  2003 - first prize at the 13th schubert competition in jesenik, czech republic  2003 - first prize at the israel chamber music competition in jerusalem, israel, 2003  2000 - top 5 at the ard competition in munich, germany  1999 - first prize (and two special prizes) at the international piano duo competition in bialystok, poland  references  living people classical piano duos israeli classical pianists jewish classical pianists american pianists classical pianists women classical pianists musical groups established in 1998 year of birth missing (living people) 21st-century classical pianists 21st-century american women pianists 21st-century american pianists
walnut hill station may refer to:  walnut hill station (septa), a septa regional rail station in abington township, pennsylvania walnut hill station (dart), a dart red line station in dallas, texas walnut hill/denton station, a dart green line station in dallas, texas  see also walnut hill (disambiguation)
kasam bapu tirmizi was an indian politician of the indian national congress. he was elected twice from the gandhinagar constituency of the gujarat legislative assembly in 1980 and 1990.  references   2016 deaths indian national congress politicians from gujarat
kheri is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  see also pandher kheri  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  see also gangu servant of guru gobind singh who told whereabouts of chotte sahibzade and mata gujri ji belonged to khehra pind
bergonzini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  luiz gonzaga bergonzini (1936-2012), brazilian roman catholic bishop mauro bergonzini (born 1912), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
amritsar west assembly constituency (sl. no.: 16) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india.  member of legislative assembly  2012: raj kumar verka, indian national congress  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
the uc santa cruz banana slugs are the athletic teams that represent the university of california, santa cruz. the banana slugs compete in division iii of the ncaa, mostly in the coast to coast athletic conference (c2c). there are fifteen varsity sports - men's and women's basketball, tennis, soccer, volleyball, swimming and diving, cross country, and women's golf. ucsc teams have been division iii nationally ranked in tennis, soccer, men's volleyball, and swimming. ucsc maintains a number of successful club sides.  uc santa cruz joined the ncaa in fall 1980 after years of playing unofficial club competition. in 2016, due to a mounting debt in funding of the athletic program, the university polled its students on whether or not they would approve an increase in student fees which would be necessary to maintain the athletic program. there was a significant doubt that the students would approve this increase. contrary to the predictions, a majority of the students approved a significant addition to their annual fees to maintain the existence of the athletic program.  varsity sports   ucsc participates in men's and women's basketball, cross country, golf, soccer, swimming & diving, tennis, track & field, and volleyball. in the past, it has also participated in water polo.  basketball since 2013, both men's and women's basketball teams play downtown at the kaiser permanente arena.  cross country the women's cross country team has finished as high as 5th at the ncaa west regional championships in 2014 with 7th place finishes in 2008, 2015, and 2016. the best finish by the men's  cross country team at regionals was second in 2017, with 6th place finishes in 1985, 1989, and 2013 and 7th place finishes in 2014 and 2016.  soccer the banana slugs were national runners-up in men's soccer in 2004. team members included future mls players adam smarte and stephen wondolowski.  tennis by defeating emory to win the 2007 ncaa championship in men's tennis, ucsc won their sixth  division iii team championship. ucsc won their seventh championship in 2009 beating amherst college in the finals to tie kalamazoo for the most team titles in ncaa division iii.  track & field  ucsc added a woman's track & field varsity program in 2012. in 2016, it added a men's varsity program as well. in 2017, the slugs track & field team competed in all event groups, for both men and women, for the first time.  volleyball  in 2012, the men
's volleyball team made a division iii ncaa semifinal appearance in the inaugural ncaa tournament. in 2013, men's volleyball qualified for a second division iii tournament. after a four-year absence, the slugs returned to the ncaa tournament in 2019 and were national runners-up.  the women's volleyball team has made two appearances in the ncaa tournament: 2013 and 2015. both teams started playing at kaiser permanente arena in 2018.  water polo in the 2006 season, the men's water polo team won the division iii championship, as well as an overall ncaa ranking of 19th in the nation. however, both the men and women's water polo teams went to club status in 2008 due to budget constraints.  club sports  in addition to its ncaa sports, ucsc maintains a number of successful club sides including its women's rugby ncaa division team, which won the division ii national collegiate championship during its 2005 season and has competed at nationals several times since, most recently in 2010 and 2013.  ucsc ultimate frisbee has a distinguished history, winning the men's collegiate national championship in 1991 and the women's national collegiate championship in 1994 and 1995. many other club teams exist such as soccer, lacrosse, baseball, rugby, softball, and muggle quidditch.  intramural athletics  although ucsc never had a track, the residential colleges regularly competed in an improvised "slug run" every spring from 1967 to 1982, though the run now is a community event and fundraiser event hosted by the cross-country club for much needed fund to pay for entry fees, hotel, and transportation to race.  approximately 25% of the student population participates in intramural athletics, which tend to be better funded than the intercollegiate athletic programs.  championships  appearances  the uc santa cruz banana slugs competed in the ncaa tournament across 11 active sports (5 men's and 6 women's) 108 times at the division iii level.  ncaa tournament appearances women's basketball (2): 2016 • 2017men's cross country (2): 2017 • 2019women's golf (1): 2007men's soccer (8): 2000 • 2001 • 2003 • 2004 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2009women's soccer (12): 1999 • 2000 • 2002 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2009 • 2011 • 2015 • 2016 • 2017 • 2019men's swimming and diving (18): 1991 • 1993 • 1994 • 1995 • 1996 • 1997 • 1998 • 1999 • 2000 • 2001 • 2002 • 2003 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2009 • 2010 • 2017women's
swimming and diving (16): 1989 • 1993 • 1995 • 1996 • 1997 • 1998 • 1999 • 2000 • 2001 • 2002 • 2003 • 2004 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008men's tennis (33): 1983 • 1984 • 1987 • 1988 • 1989 • 1990 • 1991 • 1992 • 1993 • 1994 • 1995 • 1996 • 1997 • 1998 • 1999 • 2000 • 2001 • 2002 • 2003 • 2004 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2009 • 2010 • 2011 • 2012 • 2013 • 2014 • 2015 • 2016 • 2018women's tennis (10): 1994 • 2002 • 2005 • 2006 • 2007 • 2008 • 2012 • 2013 • 2014 • 2016men's volleyball (4): 2012 • 2013 • 2015 • 2019women's volleyball (2): 2013 • 2015  team   the banana slugs of uc santa cruz earned 7 ncaa team championships at the division iii level.   men's (7)  tennis (7): 1989, 1995, 1996, 1998, 2005, 2007, 2009  results  below are eight national club team championships:   women's rugby - division ii (1): 2006 (usa rugby)  co-ed sailing (1): 1976 (icsa)  men's tennis - division iii (3): 2001, 2007, 2010 (ita)  men's ultimate (1): 1991 (usa ultimate)  women's ultimate (2): 1994, 1995 (usa ultimate)  note: those with no denoted division is assumed that the institution earned a national championship at the highest level.  individual   uc santa cruz had 18 banana slugs win ncaa individual championships at the division iii level.  mascot   ucsc's mascot is the banana slug (specifically, ariolimax dolichophallus). in 1970, volleyball team member david van cleve created the mascot "banana slugs" for the ucsc volleyball team.  he was concerned that, as sports began to gain in popularity at the institution, a team name or mascot did not exist. his roommate, bob grindeslug (no relation), silk-screened uniform shirts for the entire volleyball team in preparation for the all-cal tournament that year. after their graduation in 1972, the team name was no longer used until 1974, when the ucsc club soccer team reinvigorated the banana slug mascot. three soccer team members, larry deghetaldi, fred bicknell, sven steinmo and their roommate, richard hedges, chose to name the team the banana slugs before an all-cal tournament. the team's
unusual name was noted by the san jose mercury news after the team suffered a humiliating defeat against the san jose state spartans.   several years later, when the club basketball team became more formalized (with a coach and expanded schedule), the athletic director at the time, terry warner, informed the team that they needed to have a mascot and that it had been chosen to be the sea lions.  the team summarily rejected that name, claiming to not need any mascot. as such, their uniforms simply said "ucsc" on them.  in 1981, when the university began more formally participating in ncaa intercollegiate sports, the then-chancellor and some student athletes declared the mascot to be the sea lions. most students disliked the new mascot and offered an alternative mascot, the banana slug. in 1986, students voted via referendum to declare the banana slug the official mascot of ucsc - a vote the chancellor refused to honor, arguing that only athletes should choose the mascot. when a poll of athletes showed that they, too, wanted to be slugs, the chancellor relented.  a chemistry major uc berkeley transfer student to ucsc asked student activities for some service projects for porter college.  she was made the first porter college mural committee chairperson and was asked to represent porter college to the mascot committee at the time.  she had a good background in student government and had some experience as an amateur parliamentarian.  a few mascot meetings were held, perhaps without quorum, and the porter college representative was lobbied by the athletes and the science professors.    on the way to the important (final) mascot committee meeting, she stepped on an extremely flatulent banana slug, and so it was decided in that moment to push for the banana slug.  knowing quorum was important, with one member allowed from each college, on the way to the meeting she found a kresge student to be the kresge representative. the leader of the committee was against the idea of the banana slug and taken aback to see the porter college representative suddenly appearing to take control.  he tried to say no quorum, so no decision, but a count was forced, and quorum was established.  the porter college representative had already gotten the kresge representative to go along and second any motions she was going to make.  she moved to make the banana slug the mascot, and was seconded immediately.  the committee leader protested. then, she quickly motioned to ratify by referendum (moved to a vote by the student body), and was immediately
seconded, so moved.  she then essentially organized and ran the vote, as she had been trained to do in her earlier days participating in student government.  she knew that students would need their student body card to vote and so she rallied several classes to bring their cards and to vote.  the day of the vote, she rallied for students to go to the voting table.  it was a surprise to administration that so many students showed up with their student body cards and voted. there were some irritated faculty (including the chancellor) that made their opinions known as the voting was being set up, so the porter college representative decided to stay anonymous when she was called to do the people magazine interview.  she was told by the chancellor that the election didn't matter and the sea lion would be the mascot.  eventually, the sea lion statue was removed from where it had been placed.  the june 16, 1986, issue of people magazine featured a full-page spread dedicated to the selection of the banana slug as the official mascot of ucsc. in february 2008, espn sports travel named the ucsc banana slugs as one of the ten best nicknames in college basketball.  the "fiat slug" logo prominently featured on campus is a trademark of ucsc owned by the regents. it was developed by bernt wahl and two other students during the mascot controversy, who later incorporated as "oxford west" and licensed their design from the regents to produce clothing inspired by the university. the slug also is featured along with the school's logo on vincent vega's t-shirt in the 1994 film pulp fiction.  a sea lion statue can still be seen in front of the thimann hall lecture building.  2016 referendum  by 2016 the athletic program had been operating at a deficit for many years, with its most recent expanding rising to $2 million per year even though its budget had remained at $1.4 million. even so ucsc had the lowest operating budget in the ncaa division iii league. with few exceptions, most banana slugs teams had consistently very low attendance at their matches. at the same time the university was undergoing budget cuts that required a proportionate decrease in operating costs. because of apparent lack of student support for college athletics, it was decided that it would be reasonable to channel the funds to other areas. uc santa cruz provost allison galloway stated that under the current circumstances the university had to decide whether to keep funding the athletic program or to be able to maintain student services for an increasing student population.  the administration saw
that the only available option to maintain the athletic program was to significantly increase the student athletic funding tuition fee from $5 per quarter to $90 per quarter, which would total to $270 for the academic year. in comparison, uc berkeley fee totaled to $110 per year, uc san diego fee was $268, and uc davis fee was $150. both uc berkeley and uc davis were ncaa division i programs and while uc san diego was not d-i but d-ii its spending budget was $9 million, more than 6 times ucsc's. ucsc's increase of the fee to $270 would only raise the budget to $2 million. an online poll was scheduled for the end of may, where students would be asked if they were willing to approve the increase. due to opposition to the proposal by the university's athletes and coaches as well as alumni, it was considered to be very unlikely that such a significant increase would pass. on may 24, 2016, it was announced that a record 43% of undergraduates participated in the referendum with 63% approving the significant fee increase in concept. the measure did not actually create the new fee, however, but instead tested the support that students would have for a potential fee.  the actual referendum to create the new fee waited a year, until 2017.  2017 referendum  in may 2017, students approved measure 68, the intercollegiate athletics and athletics activities access fee, a new fee of $38.50 per student per quarter. the measure is expected to provide athletics with $1.5 million per year.  39.23% of the student body cast votes, and 79.84% of votes were in favor of the new fee.  the fee expires in spring 2042.  references  external links
marla romash is a democratic political consultant and speechwriter and pastry chef based out of jamestown, rhode island. she served as communications director to vice president al gore in the white house and press secretary on his 2000 presidential campaign. prior to working for vice president gore, romash was a tv and print reporter. she has worked with emily's list, and worked on the senate campaigns of senators elizabeth warren and richard blumenthal. romash moved to jamestown, rhode island in 2016, where she continues to operate a pastry and cookie business.  references  american political consultants washington, d.c. democrats clinton administration personnel people from jamestown, rhode island american press secretaries pastry chefs living people year of birth missing (living people)
claude-joseph gignoux (1890-1968) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1928 to 1932, representing loire. gignoux became an undersecretary of state. in 1936 he was director of the journee industrielle.  on 9 october 1936 the confederation generale du patronat francais (cgpf) held a general assembly to elect its new board. gignoux was elected president. he proved an energetic leader. he said that employers must not try to avoid their responsibilities, but must confirm their authority through united action. in the early part of 1939 gigoux warned the cgpf members of the danger of government demands to rehire workers who had been fired after the general strike, since this would only lead to further government intervention. he urged industrialists to make the present arrangement work, since socialism was the only alternative.  references  sources  external links    1890 births 1968 deaths politicians from lyon democratic and social action politicians members of the 14th chamber of deputies of the french third republic people of vichy france 20th-century french journalists french economists members of the academie des sciences morales et politiques
the 2016-17 central michigan chippewas men's basketball team represented central michigan university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the chippewas, led by fifth-year head coach keno davis, played their home games at mcguirk arena as members of the west division of the mid-american conference. they finished the season 16-16, 6-12 in mac play to finish in last place in the west division. as the no. 11 seed in the mac tournament, they lost in the first round to kent state.  previous season the chippewas finished the 2015-16 season 17-16, 10-8 in mac play to finish in a tie for the west division championship. they lost in the quarterfinals of the mac tournament to bowling green. they were invited to the collegeinsider.com tournament where they lost in the first round to tennessee-martin.  departures  incoming transfers  recruiting class of 2016  recruiting class of 2017  recruiting class of 2018  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac tournament  see also  2016-17 central michigan chippewas women's basketball team  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas men's basketball seasons
juan pablo magallanes aranda (born 6 february 1982 in leon, guanajuato) is a mexican cyclist.  major results  2003  9th gran premio industrie del marmo 2004  2nd gran premio della liberazione  2nd gran premio industrie del marmo  4th trofeo banca popolare di vicenza  8th giro del belvedere 2005  5th overall volta ao alentejo 2006  1st stage 5 vuelta a chihuahua 2007  national road championships 1st  road race 1st  time trial  vuelta a el salvador 1st points classification 1st stage 3  1st stage 10 vuelta a colombia  10th overall tour de beauce 2008  2nd time trial, national road championships  7th overall vuelta a chihuahua 2009  1st stage 1 vuelta mexico telmex  3rd road race, national road championships  8th overall doble sucre potosi gp cemento fancesa 2012  1st stage 2 ruta del centro 2013  vuelta a guatemala 1st stages 1 & 4  2nd overall ruta del centro 1st stage 6  5th road race, pan american road championships 2014  10th road race, central american and caribbean games 2015  1st overall tucson bicycle classic  2nd time trial, national road championships  3rd  road race, pan american road championships 2016  1st  time trial, national road championships  1st prologue ruta del centro 2020  3rd time trial, national road championships  references  1982 births living people mexican male cyclists sportspeople from guanajuato cyclists at the 2015 pan american games pan american games competitors for mexico
prince li of the first rank (manchu: ; hosoi doronggo cin wang), or simply prince li, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). it was also one of the 12 "iron-cap" princely peerages in the qing dynasty, which meant that the title could be passed down without being downgraded.  the first bearer of the title was daisan (1583-1648), the second son of nurhaci, the founder of the qing dynasty. he was awarded the title in 1636 by his half-brother, huangtaiji, who succeeded their father as the ruler of the qing empire. the peerage was renamed to prince xun of the first rank (prince xun) in 1651 during the reign of the shunzhi emperor, and to prince kang of the first rank (prince kang) in 1659, before it was renamed back to prince li of the first rank in 1778. the peerage was passed down over 12 generations and held by 15 persons. of the 15 princes, two held the title as prince xun, four held the title as prince kang, while the remaining nine held the title as prince li.  members of the prince li / prince xun / prince kang peerage   daisan (1583 - 1648; 1st), nurhaci's second son, held the title prince li of the first rank from 1636 to 1648, posthumously honoured as prince li lie of the first rank (禮烈親王) 1st son: yoto (1599-1639), prince cheng of the first rank members of prince keqin peerage 2nd son: soto (碩託; d. 1643), held the title of a beile from 1626. he was acting the title of a beizi from 1634 to 1639. he was demoted to the title of bulwark duke from 1639 to 1640. he was demoted to a commoner in 1643 due to seeking legislation for dorgon with adali, prince ying of the first rank. 3 sons: laka (喇喀), kilanbu (齊蘭布) & yosaibu (岳賽布) 3rd son: sahalin (1604-1636), prince ying of the first rank members of prince ying peerage & prince shuncheng peerage 4th son: wakeda (1606-1652), prince qian of the second rank members of prince qian peerage 5th son: balama (巴
喇瑪) 6th son: mazhan (瑪佔; 1612-1638), held the title of a bulwark duke from 1636 to 1638. he had not male heir. 7th son: mandahai (滿達海; 1622-1652; 2nd), he held the title of a bulwark duke from 1641 to 1644. then, he was promoted to the title of a beizi from 1644 to 1649. he succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1649 to 1652, posthumously honoured as prince xun jian of the first rank (巽簡親王). his posthumous name changed to a title of a beile. 1 chang'adai (常阿岱; 21 nov 1643 - 29 may 1665; 3rd), he succeeded the title prince xun of the first rank from 1652 to 1659. he later held the title of a beile from 1659 to 1665 due to his father's posthumously demotion. he was posthumously honoured as prince xun huaimin of the first rank (巽懷愍親王). he was succeeded by his 6th son, xingni as a beizi. 1st son: suojing (索晉) 2nd son: xilengtu (錫楞圖), held the title of a grace general. 3rd son: shixian (世憲), held the title of a grace general. 4th son: guangchang (廣昌), held the title of a grace general. 5th son: xichang (希常), a former grace general. 6th son: xingni, a former beizi & grace bulwark duke. he succeeded his father as a beizi. 2nd son: lengsaiyi (楞塞宜) 8th son: huse (祜塞; 1628-1646), held the title of a grace defender duke from 1645 to 1646, posthumously honoured as prince kang huishun of the first rank (康惠順親王) in 1653 after giyesu held the title of "prince kang of the second rank". his 2nd son, jinggi succeeded him as a grace defender duke. 1st son: alin (阿林) 2nd son: jinggi (精濟; 14 jan 1645 - 22 june 1649), he succeeded his father as a grace
defender duke from 1646 and promoted as a second-rank prince under the title of prince kang of the second rank. he was posthumously honoured as prince kang huaimin of the second rank (康懷愍郡王). 3rd son: giyesu (20 jan 1645 - 1 apr 1697; 4th), he initially succeeded his brother, jinggi, under the title prince kang of the second rank from 1649 to 1659. he succeeded the peerage of prince li from 1659 to 1697 under the title of prince kang of the first rank, posthumously honoured as prince kang liang of the first rank (康良親王). 1st son nitaha (尼塔哈), a former third class bulwark general. 2nd son: yantai (燕泰) 3rd son: zha'ertu (扎爾圖), held the title of a third class bulwark general. 4th son: ba'ertu (巴爾圖; died 1753; 7th), initially held the title of a third class bulwark general in 1693. he succeeded the title prince kang of the first rank from 1734 to 1753, posthumously honoured as prince kang jian of the first rank (康簡親王) 1st son: mozhang (謨章), held the title of a supporter general. 2nd son: mocun (謨存), a sixth-rank officer. 3rd son: mocheng (謨成) 4th son: moben (謨本), held the title of a supporter general. 5th, 6th & 7th son: mohong (謨宏), mowen (謨文) & mosheng (謨聲) 8th son: moyun (謨雲), held the title of a third class defender general. 9th, 10th, 11th & 12th son: moshou (謨壽), moyu (謨裕), moyao (謨耀) & motai (謨泰) 13th son: mogong (謨恭), held the title of a second class supporter general. 14th son: mojing (謨經), held the title of a third class supporter general. 15th son: modian (謨典), a former second class bulwark general. 16th son: morui (謨瑞) 17th son
: moguang (謨廣), held the title of a first class bulwark general. 18th & 19th son: moshun (謨順) & mojian (謨建) 20th son: moxian (謨顯), held the title of a second class bulwark general. 21st & 22nd son: moxun (謨勳) & moling (謨靈) 23rd son: moliang (謨亮), held the title of a third class defender general. 24th son: mohao (謨浩) 5th son: chuntai (椿泰; 5 sep 1683 - 20 jun 1709; 5th), succeeded the title prince kang of the first rank from 1697 to 1709, posthumously honoured as prince kang dao of the first rank (康悼親王) chong'an (崇安; died 1733; 6th), succeeded the title prince kang of the first rank from 1709 to 1733, posthumously honoured as prince kangxiu of the first rank (康修親王) 1st son: kuifu (魁福) 2nd son: yong'en (永恩; 12 sep 1727 - 10 apr 1805; 8th), he held the title of a beile from 1734 to 1753, when his uncle, ba'ertu succeeded the title of prince kang of the first rank. he succeeded the peerage under the title prince li of the first rank from 1753 to 1805, posthumously honoured as prince li gong of the first rank (禮恭親王) zhaolian (昭槤; 26 mar 1776 - 14 jan 1833; 9th), succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1805 to 1816, his title stripped in 1816 and house arrested for 3 years. xirui (錫濬) 3rd son: yonghui (永㥣; 5 feb 1729 - 28 mar 1799;), held the title of a defender general from 1749, posthumously honoured as prince li of the first rank in 1817 after his son succeeded the peerage. 1st son: linzhi (麟趾; 1756-1821 10th), yonghui's son, succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1817 to 1821, posthumously honoured as prince li'an of the first rank (禮安親王) xichun (�
��春; 1776 - 1817), posthumously honoured as prince li of the first rank after his son, quanling succeeded the peerage. 1st son: quanling (全齡; 15 dec 1816 - 9 may 1850; 11th), he held the title of a grace general from 1820. he succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1821 to 1850. he served as banner leader of bordered red in 1839. he was posthumously honoured as 'prince li he of the first rank (禮和親王) 1st & 2nd son: yukun (裕昆) & shize (世澤) 3rd son: shiduo (世鐸; 27 jul 1843 - 8 jan 1914; 12th), succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1850 to 1914, posthumously honoured as prince li ke of the first rank (禮恪親王)  chenghou (誠厚; 1864 - 1917; 13th), succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1914 to 1917, posthumously honoured as prince li dun of the first rank (禮敦親王) 4th son: shihua (世華) 2nd son: quanchang (全昌; 1818 - 1871), a third class imperial bodyguards. yuding (裕定; 1838 - 1891) chengkun (誠堃; 1886 - 1929; 14th), adopted as shiduo's son, succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1917 to 1929. junming (濬銘; 1918-1951; 15th), chenghou's adoptive son, succeeded the title prince li of the first rank from 1929 to 1945. 3rd son: quancheng (全成) 2nd, 3rd & 4th son maoxun (茂恂), maoji (茂績) & maozheng (茂政)  family tree  |- |legend: |- |  see also  prince qian  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages peerages of the plain red banner  prince li
|}  this is a list of results for the legislative council at the 1985 south australian state election.  continuing members   the following mlcs were not up for re-election this year.  election results  see also  candidates of the 1985 south australian state election  members of the south australian legislative council, 1985-1989  references  1985 1985 elections in australia 1980s in south australia
olenecamptus adlbaueri is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by bjornstad and minetti.  references  dorcaschematini
cristaria elegans is a species of flowering plant in the family malvaceae native to chile.  references    marticorena, c. & m. quezada. 1985. catalogo de la flora vascular de chile. gayana, bot. 42: 1-157  external links   cristaria elegans at tropicos  malveae plants described in 1845 endemic flora of chile
the 2016 men's u23 south american volleyball championship was the second edition of the tournament, organised by south america's governing volleyball body, the confederacion sudamericana de voleibol (csv).  preliminary round  pool a  |}  |}  pool b  |}  |}  final round  5th-6th place  |}  final four  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  final standing  all-star team  most valuable player  best setter  best opposite spiker  best outside spikers     best middle blockers  best libero  see also 2016 women's u23 south american volleyball championship  external links csv official website  men's south american volleyball championships s
pokolbin may refer to:  pokolbin, new south wales, a locality in the hunter region of new south wales, australia  a wine-producing region in the hunter region
the elysette () is the executive seat of the government of wallonia. it houses the office of the minister-president of wallonia, and is located in namur, namur province, belgium.  history   built in 1877 by master-tanner xavier thibault, it was bought by the walloon region to the city of namur.  this building, hosting the office of the minister-president, as well as his official residence, is on the right shore of the meuse river, in jambes, the administrative borough of namur, capital of wallonia.  for the minister-president's good services, you can find there kitchens, two bedrooms for the servants, garages, offices and meeting rooms (especially the council of ministers' room).  a flat, consisting of a bedroom, a dining room, a bathroom and a living room is next to the minister-president's office.   the elysette faces the parliament of wallonia. this one is on the left shore of the river, next to the grognon (confluence between meuse and sambre rivers).  bibliography   l'elysette : la presidence du gouvernement wallon a namur, jacques vandenbroucke, namur : institut du patrimoine wallon, 2010, 40 p.,  carnets du patrimoine nº 76, .  history of wallonia namur (city) buildings and structures in namur (city) politics of wallonia
cylindrepomus flavosignatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1947. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1947
stephan pappas (born december 14, 1950) is an american politician and a republican member of the wyoming state senate, representing the 7th district since january 5, 2015.  elections  2014 incumbent republican state senator leslie nutting retired after serving one term. pappas ran unopposed in the republican primary, and defeated democratic nominee dameione cameron, 59% to 41%. he took office on january 5, 2015.  early life and education  pappas was born in cheyenne, wyoming, in 1950, the son of theoni b; (harrison) and andrew s. pappas. he is of greek descent. he graduated from east high school in cheyenne, wy in 1969. he then attended the university of new mexico where he obtained a bachelor's degree in fine arts in 1973. he continued his education at the university of arizona obtaining a bachelors of architecture degree in 1978.  references  external links official page at the wyoming legislature profile at ballotpedia  1950 births living people wyoming state senators wyoming republicans university of new mexico alumni arizona state university alumni 21st-century american politicians  american politicians of greek descent
tamara korpatsch (born 12 may 1995) is a german tennis player.  she has won nine titles on the itf circuit, and reached her best singles ranking of world no. 107 in august 2019.  korpatsch made her wta tour debut at the 2016 swiss open in the doubles draw, partnering ekaterina yashina.  in december 2017, she won the singles title at the national german championships.  performance timeline  only wta tour and grand slam tournaments main-draw results are considered in the career statistics.  singles current through 2021 wta tour.  wta career finals  doubles: 1 (1 runner-up)  itf finals  singles: 14 (9 titles, 5 runner-ups)  head-to-head records  record against top-ten players    eugenie bouchard 1-0   maria sakkari 1-0   timea bacsinszky 1-1   paula badosa 1-1   sara errani 0-1   anett kontaveit 0-1   jelena ostapenko 0-1   patty schnyder 0-1   carla suarez navarro 0-1   iga swiatek 0-1   as of 8 november 2021  references  external links       1995 births living people tennis players from hamburg german female tennis players
the republican party or republican right () -also known as republican democratic right ()- was a chilean centre-right political party existing from 1982 to 1987 during the military dictatorship of augusto pinochet.  its origins date back to late october 1982, when a group of politicians from the national party founded the center for analysis of national and international reality. his goal was to provide a basis for the formation of a right-wing democratic party, inspired by modern liberalism and respectful of human rights. this would give rise to a party whose name would be republican right, led by the ex-conservative julio subercaseaux and ex-liberals hugo zepeda barrios and armando jaramillo lyon.  the party was among the founding members of the democratic alliance on august 6, 1983, having previously signed the democratic manifesto of march 14 of that year. in october 1984, it changed its name to the republican party after entry of the liberal party to the coalition. both merged in 1987 to form the liberal-republican union.  references  liberal parties in chile political parties established in 1982 political parties disestablished in 1987 defunct political parties in chile 1982 establishments in chile 1987 disestablishments in chile
the urbita lake railway was a  long miniature railway with a gauge of , which operated from approximately 1910 to at least august 1915 at urbita hot springs park (since 1966 the location of the inland center shopping mall) in san bernardino, california.  history  in 1910, the pacific electric railway took-over the san bernardino valley traction company and thus became owner of the urbita hot springs. at this time the hot springs were a very profitable business, which had been originally developed by r. paragette in 1901.   according to a contemporary newspaper, the railroad was unique, because it had probably the youngest president and oldest engineer in the world, the president being buster 'buddy' courcy, at the age of two, and the engineer being the retired railway worker bill simpson from the san bernardino valley.  locomotive  the locomotive had been built as  (original) no 1903 by john j. coit and has previously been used on the long beach and asbury park railway, the venice miniature railway and the eastlake park scenic railway. the oilfired steam locomotive with a total length of  from tip of pilot to end of tank couple and a height of  from the top of rail to the top of stack was of the 2-6-0 type. the locomotive had some technical innovations, such as a valve control without eccentrics, which was easy to adjust and to maintain. the locomotive had automatic couplings and a bespoke oil burner, for which coit filed a patent.  the locomotive had a weight of  including the tender, and  excluding the tender. the tender had a capacity of  water and  oil. the weight of the locomotive was spread over six driving wheels with a diameter of  and two smaller wheels of a pony truck with the diameter of  onto the rails. the vanderbilt type boiler had a maximum pressure of  and delivered . the cylinders were  bore x stroke. the locomotive had a pulling power of .  see also    billy jones wildcat railroad   eastlake park scenic railway  long beach and asbury park railway  seaside park railway  venice miniature railway  references   san bernardino, california 18 in gauge railways in the united states
william robert berkley (born 1946) is the founder and current chairman of w. r. berkley corporation and the chairman of the new york university board of trustees.  his net worth is $2.5 billion and he is ranked 333rd on the forbes 400.  early life and education berkley grew up in north jersey, the middle child of three boys. when he was 11 years old, his father was killed in an airplane crash. he started investing in the stock market at age 12 with money he made from lawn mowing.  berkley graduated from the new york university stern school of business with an undergraduate degree in 1966. he received an mba from harvard business school in 1968. while at harvard, he ran a $2 million mutual fund out of an apartment on the harvard campus with a classmate, paul dean.  career in 1967, he founded w. r. berkley corporation. in november 1973, when the company became a public company via an initial public offering, he owned 23.8% of the company. in 2015, he left the ceo position to become executive chairman.  berkley has served as chairman of board at new york university, his alma mater, since 2014.  personal life berkley is married to marjorie, who was his secretary when he founded his company. they have three children.  references  external links  william r. berkley collection at stuart a. rose manuscript, archives, & rare book library, emory university   1946 births living people new york university stern school of business alumni american business executives harvard business school alumni american billionaires
chief kofoworola abeni pratt hon. frcn ( scott, c.1915 - 18 june 1992), a nigerian-born nurse, was the first black nurse to work in britain's national health service. she subsequently became vice-president of the international council of nurses and the first black chief nursing officer of nigeria, working in the federal ministry of health.  early life pratt was born in lagos, nigeria as the second of four children of augustus alfred scott and elizabeth omowumi scott (nee johnson). her paternal great-grandfather was chief taiwo olowo, a wealthy yoruba nobleman. her family was anglican and she attended st john's secondary school and cms girls school, lagos. she passed the cambridge senior school certificate in 1933 and then studied to be a teacher at the united missionary college in ibadan, after her father discouraged her from her wish to be a nurse. from 1936 to 1940, she taught at the cms girls school.  on 3 january 1941, she married eugene samuel oluremi (olu) pratt, a pharmicist for the civil service. her husband was posted in enugu, warri and forcados, so the couple moved around. their first son died in infancy and their second son, babatunde, was born in lagos in 1943. her husband moved to london the following year to receive british medical qualifications. their third child, olufemi, was born in london in 1952.  career  in august 1946, pratt moved to england to study nursing at the nightingale school at st thomas' hospital, in london. her son was left with foster parents while she attended the st thomas's preliminary training school. during her time at the hospital, pratt experienced racial discrimination, when a patient refused to be treated by a black nurse. she was active in the west african students' union, an association of students from various west african countries who were studying in the united kingdom, and which, in 1942, had called for the independence of britain's west african colonies. pratt passed her preliminary state exams in 1948 and her finals in 1949, qualifying as a state registered nurse on 25 november 1949. it was unusual for a married woman to be allowed to take up nursing at that time, and pratt was also the first qualified black nurse to work for the nhs.  after qualification, she trained in midwifery at the anglican sisters of st john clinic, receiving a certificate in 1950. the following year, she received a tropical nursing certificate from the hospital for tropical medicine, st pancras. in 1952, she completed the royal college of
nursing ward sister course with a grant from the nightingale fund and then worked as a staff nurse for evelina children's hospital of guy's hospital. in 1953, she returned to st thomas' hospital as a part-time charge nurse.  return to nigeria  pratt returned to nigeria in 1954, after four years working for the nhs. although she was initially denied a post as ward sister - a position only open at the time for british expatriates - she got a position at the university college hospital in ibadan with the support of her colleagues at st thomas' hospital. when she arrived, she discovered that her accommodation was in a separate block than her british expatriate colleagues and that the professor of medicine would not let her work on the ward when he learned that she was nigerian. however the matron of the hospital overturned that decision and pratt was moved to the medical ward at adeoyo hospital.  the new hospital was still under construction and pratt imposed new standards for hygiene, care and nutrition and reformed the administration of the ward. she was promoted to administrative sister in 1955 and the following year, she returned to london to study for a diploma in hospital nursing administration from the royal college of nursing. in 1959, she travelled to the united states, puerto rico, and jamaica on a carnegie grant to gain broader nursing experience.  in march 1961, she became the deputy matron of the university college hospital, ibadan and in january 1964 she became matron. pratt was the first nigerian to hold that position. she created a school of nursing at the university of ibadan in 1965. pratt was also a founder and leader of the professional association of trained nurses in nigeria and founder and co-editor of the journal nigerian nurse.  pratt was the chief nursing officer to the federal ministry of health in nigeria and then appointed commissioner of health for lagos in the 1970s. in 1971, pratt became the president of the national council of women's societies in nigeria.  in 1973 she was awarded the florence nightingale medal by the international committee of the red cross. the citation described her as a:   the award was presented to her by the president of the nigerian red cross society, sir adetokunbo ademola, on 21 december 1973. in 1975, she was awarded a chieftaincy title - that of the iya ile agbo of isheri - for services to nigeria. in 1979 she was made an honorary fellow of the royal college of nursing.  in 1973, she was invited by the military governor of lagos, brigadier mobolaji johnson, to join his cabinet as, in effect
, minister of health (the title was "commissioner of health"). in the office, she succeeded in achieving reforms for doctors, nurses and in public health. her term of office ended in 1975 with another military coup.  she died on 18 june 1992.  references  further reading     1910s births 1992 deaths nigerian nurses honorary fellows of the royal college of nursing nigerian civil servants nigerian midwives nigerian expatriates in the united kingdom black british people in health professions alumni of st thomas's hospital medical school people from lagos 20th-century nigerian educators people of colonial nigeria yoruba nurses nigerian schoolteachers yoruba women educators university of ibadan faculty commissioners of ministries of lagos state nurses from london history of women in lagos 20th-century nigerian women nigerian women educators florence nightingale medal recipients 20th-century women educators
ellen ida benham (12 march 1871 - 27 april 1917) was a science teacher, headmistress and education pioneer in south australia.  history ellen was born at "talarno", kapunda, south australia to solicitor william hoare benham (27 november 1833 - ), who arrived in south australia aboard the gipsy in august 1853, and his second wife amie benham nee huggins. her father worked as a shearer for three years and drove bullocks before settling down as a lawyer's clerk and studying law. w. h. benham was born in hayes, near uxbridge, middlesex. at age 12 he embarked on a four-year apprenticeship to john boyce, a chemist of chertsey, surrey, but in 1849  his parents moved to brook green, hammersmith, london, and he was obliged to break his contract, and he found employment as office boy for a lawyer in essex street, strand, london. his health broke down and he was advised to seek the warmer climate of south australia, and emigrated aboard gipsy which arrived in august 1853. fellow passengers included lionel pelham, who was drowned in the ss gothenburg disaster, a. j. tolley, and mr. holden. with most of the able-bodied men at the victorian goldfields seeking their fortune, there was little call for a lawyer's clerk, but he found work on edward stirling's sheep and cattle station at lake alexandrina. he found later work at langhorne's creek with carter potts, then experienced wheat farming in strathalbyn, which entailed trialling ridley's first header. by 1856 his parents and siblings had migrated to the colony, and he joined them in adelaide, finding employment in the legal office of matthew smith, then with hanson & hicks. then an opportunity arose for benham to advance in the legal profession by taking his articles with james huggins in kapunda. in 1860 he married elizabeth wood, daughter of rev. william wood of penwortham. they had a son frank in 1861. on 21 june 1864, just a few days before his final examinations, his wife died. on 26 june 1864 he was admitted a practitioner of the supreme court of south australia, and was taken into partnership with huggins. in april 1867 he married again, to amie huggins, eldest daughter of his partner; they had around twelve children, of whom eight survived to adulthood. ellen was educated privately, then at the advanced school for girls before taking the science course at the adelaide university, graduating bsc
with honours in 1892. she taught science at the christ church anglican school in kapunda for a short time before taking a study tour of england and europe. she took an assistant position at dryburgh school, then taught at tormore house school for a little over twelve years. during this time she travelled to england, where she earned her oxford diploma of education. after the death of professor tate she taught botany at adelaide university and was appointed lecturer pro tem while awaiting the arrival of professor osborn thus she was, under similar circumstances to ada mary lambert at melbourne university, the first woman appointed to an academic post at the university.  in december 1912 she purchased walford school, fisher street, malvern, from lydia adamson, its founder in 1893. she reformed its teaching methods and course content, notably introducing science to the curriculum. in 1917 she sold the school to mabel jewell baker, who then led the school for almost 40 years.  recognition in 1922 the ellen benham scholarship was established at walford in recognition of her contribution to the development of the school. the benham wing, which incorporated science classrooms, in what became the walford church of england girls' grammar school, was also named for her.  she was a co-founder and longtime supporter of adelaide university's women's students' society, and its president for several years.  benham street, in the canberra suburb of chisholm, is named in her honour.  references   1871 births 1917 deaths australian women academics university of adelaide faculty australian headmistresses 19th-century australian educators 20th-century australian educators 19th-century australian women scientists 20th-century australian women scientists 19th-century women educators 20th-century women educators
brahmalokam to yamalokam via bhulokam  is 2010 telugu-language fantasy comedy film, produced by rupesh d gohil, bekkam venu gopal on utopia productions pvt ltd & lucky media banner and directed by gollapati nageswara rao. starring rajendra prasad, sivaji, kalyani, aarti agarwal, sonia deepti and music composed by m. m. srilekha. it was dubbed in hindi as yamlok.  plot lord bramha (rajendra prasad) has a tiff with his consort goddess saraswathi (kalyani) and wrongly writes the fate of a girl that she would die the moment she gets married. on the other side, seenu (sivaji) is a bachelor getting older and is sent back again to college with the hope that someone will offer his daughter's hand if seenu completes his degree. on coming to college, he sees swetha (sonia) and takes to like her very much. this results in seenu getting a sound beating in the hands of swetha's brother-in-law jackson (raghubabu). sreenu's classmate shobhan babu (venumadhav) is a lazy fellow starts meditating for lord bramha on the advice of some saints in a forest. lord bramha also gets pleased with shobhan babu's penance and appears before him. brahma grants him a peculiar kind of boon. bramha gives shobhan babu a 'kalasham' and tells him to drink milk from it and he will be knowing the future. in a coincidence, sreenu after getting beaten badly by jackson falls at the same place where the kalasham is. inadvertently he drinks the milk in the kalasham and starts getting knowledge of future events. since shobhan babu and seenu are friends, they both come to an understanding and earn lakhs of rupees by future-telling. they also come to know how brahma has written swetha's fate. once sreenu on coming to know that a school bus is going to meet with an accident saves the children from the accident. yama dharma raju (jaya prakash reddy) finds out that the school children have not reached yamalokam yet, goes to bramhalokam and inquiries with bramha. bramha realizes that this is all caused by the boon he has given to shobhan. he along with yama and chitragupta (avs) comes to bhoolokam to take back his boon (kalasham). goddess adi
parashakthi (laya) only gives one month's time to them to retrieve the kalasham. what the trio has done in bhoolokam and what has all taken place on earth forms the rest of the story.  cast  soundtrack  music composed by m. m. srilekha. lyrics were written by bhaskarabhatla ravikumar. music released on madhura audio company.  references  external links  indian films 2010s fantasy-comedy films indian fantasy-comedy films 2010s telugu-language films films featuring an item number 2010 comedy films 2010 films
kiki bertens and johanna larsson were the defending champions, but lost in the quarterfinals to andreea mitu and alicja rosolska.   mitu and rosolska went on to win the title, defeating lesley kerkhove and lidziya marozava in the final, 6-3, 7-5.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  swedish open - doubles 2016 women's doubles 2016 in swedish women's sport
clelia merloni (10 march 1861 - 21 november 1930) was an italian roman catholic nun and the founder of the apostles of the sacred heart of jesus. merloni was destined to follow her father into the business world but renounced his anti-religious sentiment and instead went down the religious path. internal complications led to merloni's fall from grace and she went into self-imposed exile where she received a dispensation to break from her religious vows. she later rejoined the congregation as a nun not long before her death.  the beatification process commenced in 1988 under pope john paul ii and she was titled as a servant of god. pope francis confirmed her heroic virtue on 21 december 2016 and named her as venerable. francis later confirmed a miracle attributed to her in 2018 and she was beatified in the basilica of saint john lateran in rome on 3 november 2018.  life clelia merloni was born on 10 march 1861 in forli to gioacchino merloni and teresa brandinelli. she was baptized mere hours after her birth in the diocesan cathedral of santa croce from bishop pietro paolo trucchi.  merloni's mother died in 1864 and her maternal grandmother became her guardian. her father remarried in 1866 to maria giovanna boeri and both her grandmother and stepmother did their best to instill religious values and a love of god in her. her father became engrossed in his work and his rising socio-economic status and this led to him exiting the faith and becoming instead an anti-clerical freemason.  despite her frail health her father sought to provide her with the best education that was possible to attain in order to prepare her for following him in his business. she attended a private school in her town where she learnt basic skills such as reading and mathematics while also learning sewing and piano skills.  merloni began to demonstrate signs that her father's business ambitions were not intended for her and due to conflict of this nature her father began to grow suspicious of merloni's grandmother and the things she was attempting to instill in his daughter - it led to merloni's grandmother being forced out of the house. the situation became aggravated when marriage struggles saw merloni's stepmother leave the household to live with other relatives. she often fled to her room to do penance for her father's misdeeds and withdrawal from the faith. the death of her father in 1895 - who reconciled to the faith before his death - saw his estate left to merloni, which she used to open an
orphanage.  merloni later joined the figlie di santa maria della divina provvidenza - the order that luigi guanella founded - and while there amongst the congregation in como realized a call to form an order that would be devoted to the sacred heart of jesus christ. she founded that order - on 30 may 1894 in viareggio. she had left for viareggio with her friend elisa penderzini while a third friend giuseppina d'ingenheim joined them a few weeks later before she founded her order.  in 1896 a financial disaster - due to her dishonest financial administrator - bought about great humiliation on the order which in turn led to public opinion turning against them. merloni was soon told that her life was in danger and was advised to leave viareggio for elsewhere - she sought refuge with the order based in broni.  it was to her benefit that she later met the bishop of piacenza giovanni battista scalabrini and on 10 june 1900 the latter granted diocesan approval to merloni's order and approved its rule of life. also on 10 june 1900 the bishop accepted the profession of merloni into her own order and the profession of ten other religious. the seat of the order then moved to scalabrini's diocese of piacenza. scalabrini also desired that the congregation also extend to the foreign missions and on 10 august 1900 six of the religious departed from genoa to sao paulo in brazil. four more left in october 1900 for santa felicidade in parana also in brazil while six more sailed on 16 june 1902 from genoa on the british ship "the vancouver" for boston to aid the missionaries of saint charles borromeo. in 1903 there were 30 houses with 200 sisters.  scalabrini's death in 1905 led to the motherhouse being transferred to alessandria and also saw the decline of merloni's good standing amongst the congregation. in 1911 the vatican removed her from the leadership and named as superior general marcellina vigano. she withdrew from the public due to this and in 1916 both requested and received a dispensation that would release her from her religious vows. during her exile pope benedict xv granted the decree of praise of the order on 17 july 1921. on 28 february 1928 she requested permission to renter the congregation and on 7 march 1928 was welcomed at the motherhouse in rome where the order was now based since 1916. vigano issued a circular letter that read: "our most ardent desires have finally been fulfilled! ... our beloved mother foundress is once again with us all of
the seventh of this month. the sacred heart has restored her health so that she may now enjoy here in the motherhouse, surrounded by the love of her daughters, that peace and quiet which she needs so much, after so many trials and sorrows".  merloni died on 21 november 1930 in rome and was buried at campo verano; but later exhumed and found intact in 1945. her remains were then transferred to the motherhouse of the order. the order itself now has 1200 members in nations such as taiwan and switzerland in 195 houses. her order received full papal approval from pope pius xi on 24 march 1931 while pope pius xii approved the constitutions of the congregation on 17 october 1941.  beatification the initial steps for the beatification of mother clelia began in 1988 at the request of the congregation of the apostles of the sacred heart of jesus. she was titled as a servant of god on 18 may 1990 when the congregation for the causes of saints issued the "nihil obstat" decree. the process saw 60 witness testimonies come from brazil and the united states in addition to from merloni's native homeland. the diocesan phase ended on 1 april 1998 with the c.c.s. validating the process on 7 august 1999.  in 2014 the postulation submitted the positio - a detailed dossier of 1385 pages on her life and holiness that examined her virtue. in 2015 historical consultants for the c.c.s. had examined the dossier and confirmed her virtue while theologians followed suit on 25 october 2015. on 1 december 2016, pope francis signed the decree confirming her life of heroic virtue and named merloni as venerable.  the miracle for her beatification was investigated in rome from 25 january 2005 until 11 april 2011. medical experts confirmed the miraculous nature of the healing presented on 23 february 2017 while theologians determined the miracle came as a result of her direct intercession on 27 june 2017. the c.c.s. confirmed these findings on 9 january 2018. on 27 january 2018 the pope approved the decree recognizing the miracle obtained through merloni's intercession which approved her for beatification. the beatification was celebrated in the basilica of saint john lateran on 3 november 2018.  beatification miracle the story of the miracle dates back to 14 march 1951, when the brazilian doctor, pedro angelo de oliveira filho, was stricken suddenly by a progressive paralysis of all four limbs and was rushed to santa casa de misericordia di ribeirao preto hospital. he was diagnosed with an ascending progressive paralysis known as landry's paralysis or guillain-barre
syndrome. within a few weeks the paralysis worsened and spread, resulting in acute respiratory failure. it eventually caused difficulty in swallowing.  the prognosis was fatal in view of the seriousness of the condition and the limited medical options for a cure which were available at that time. when the paralysis reached the throat, the doctors discontinued treatments. on march 20 the doctors informed the family that he would not survive the night. with that news the patient's wife, angelina oliva, sought out sr. adelina alves barbos to ask for prayers. the sister gave her a novena to mother clelia along with a holy card containing a piece of fabric from the veil that mother clelia wore. sr. adelina approached the sick man and gave him a cup of water in which she had placed the tiny relic. although he was gravely ill, he managed to take some of the water. after a few minutes, those present noticed that he was able to swallow.  when the doctor on call arrived in the morning and saw the patient cured, he exclaimed that it was a miracle. pedro angelo continued to improve, and within three weeks he was walking normally. on 6 may he was released from the hospital for his healing was complete, permanent, and without relapse or signs of any symptoms. the doctor died on 25 september 1976, of cardiac arrest, 25 years after his miraculous cure.  references  external links  mother clelia - official site  apostles of the sacred heart of jesus - site congregation  homily of the prefect of the congregation for the causes of saints during the mass for the beatification of clelia merloni, 03.11.2018  1861 births 1930 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 20th-century italian roman catholic religious sisters and nuns 19th-century italian roman catholic religious sisters and nuns 20th-century venerated christians beatifications by pope francis founders of catholic religious communities italian beatified people people from forli venerated catholics by pope francis people with guillain-barre syndrome
olav iversen (born september 23, 1977, in sandøy, møre og romsdal) is a norwegian heavy metal singer-songwriter and musician. he is better known as a founding member and the guitarist, lead vocalist, and primary songwriter of the rock band sahg, as well as its only constant member.  musical career  iversen's remarkable career began with trucks, a british/norwegian pop punk band, whose most popular release was the 2002 novelty single, "it's just porn mum". the single was a top 5 hit in norway, and peaked at no. 35 in the uk singles chart.  he's best known for being the only constant member and co-founder of the hard rock band sahg in 2004, along with tom cato visnes (king ov hell), einar selvik (kvitrafn) and thomas tofthagen.  iversen has also been an active member in several bands in his country, as audrey horne and manngard.  apart from his musical projects, he has also worked as an art director and graphic designer in bergen since 2000.  discography  with starling    mellowcold (ep, 2001)  with trucks   juice (2003)  with manngard     circling buzzards  (2006)	  european cowards (2007)  with sahg   sahg i (2006)  sahg ii (2008)  sahg iii (2010)  delusions of grandeur (2013)  memento mori (2016)  as guest musician  with audrey horne  le fol (2007)  with vulture industries  the malefactor's bloody register (2010)  with dominanz  noxious (2014)  with ahab  the boats of the "glen carrig" (2015)  references  external links  professional profile at cargo collective (in norwegian) metallum archvies  discogs.com youtube channel  1977 births norwegian heavy metal singers living people norwegian guitarists norwegian singer-songwriters people from sandøy sahg members 21st-century norwegian singers 21st-century norwegian guitarists 21st-century norwegian male singers
super bodyguard, also known as the bodyguard chao ji bao biao, is a 2016 chinese action drama film directed by yue song and also starring yue song. it was released in china on july 15, 2016.  plot wu-lin chooses the dark path to seek for revenge, and take the law in his own hands. wu-lin is not just a regular man from the rural village, he is also the successor of an ancient, once powerful chinese clan, the "iron feet". after the death of the clan master, wu-lin left the village and come to the city of stone-cold to look for his fellow apprentice jiang li. he turn out become the bodyguard of fei-fei, the daughter of jia-shan li, the richest family in the city. a clash of an unruly rich girl with a rugged and masculine bodyguard, sparks the flame of true love. wu-lin soon discovered that a group of mobster led by jiang li, attempts to kidnap fei-fei. to protect his love one, wu-lin forced to fight them alone. brutally crushed, but wu-lin managed to survive, he took off his iron-shoes, and feel the adrenaline rush into his body again. wu-lin decided to face the group of mobsters once more, and he knows someone much bigger, stronger than jiang li is behind the evil plot.  cast yue song ihsan li yufei collin chou michael chan shang tielong xu dongmei yang jun li changhai jiang baocheng yuan wu dong jiangtao  reception the film grossed  at the chinese box office.  references  external links  2016 films 2016 action drama films chinese action drama films chinese films films about bodyguards
468001-468100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468101-468200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468201-468300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468301-468400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468401-468500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468501-468600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468601-468700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468701-468800   |-id=725 | 468725 khalat ||  || isaak markovich khalatnikov (nicknamed khalat; born 1919) is an academician of the russian academy of sciences, and a theoretical physicist with an extremely wide range of scientific interests. he made important contributions to the theories of viscosity of superfluid helium, quantum electrodynamics and cosmology. ||  |}  468801-468900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  468901-469000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   468001-469000
chuvash literature () - consists of literature written in the chuvash language, regardless of the ethnic origin of the authors or the place of publication. this term applies to fictional works, but does not include folklore.  history the chuvash language is the only surviving member of the oghur or bulgar branch of the turkic group of languages. therefore, chuvash literature begins with ancient turkic literature.  the history of chuvash literature begins when texts in the chuvash language first appear in historical sources. the oldest known chuvash texts appear on the gravestones left by the volga bulgars in the 13th and 14th centuries in the middle volga region, during the reign of the golden horde. most of the epitaphs on the tombstones were written in oghur languages, of which chuvash is the only extant member. while these epitaphs cannot be considered full-fledged literary works, they do ensure that the chuvash language of the golden horde is forever cemented in time. even in their plain texts, you can find a certain artistry and in some instances there is even plot development.  18th century - early 19th century more artistic texts in the chuvash languages began to appear in the 18th century, with the emergence of the chuvash alphabet. for example, one poem by an anonymous writer in 1767 praised catherine the great, empress of russia: пелмастапар абирь тя минь барас парня, сана, чиберь патша, пора-мырынь ання, jоратнышан пире. пелмаста мар хальчен тора, хужу сюльда. пельзан и дах чечень. памалых сяванжен, нимень сjок чон анчах, - парня вырня полдар вулда аппинь санах!  translation: we do not know what to give / you, beautiful queen, universal mother, for the love of us. did not know until now / goddess, which is in heaven. it turns out she is very elegant. / we have nothing significant except our souls - / may they be a gift to you!  more than 10 similar chuvash poems, mostly with unknown authors, have been identified. one of them, written in 1795 and dedicated
to archbishop ambrose, is usually attributed to nikita bichurin (1777-1853). e.i. rozhanski (1741-1801), one of the founders of the original chuvash alphabet, also wrote literature in chuvash. for example, he translated "short catechezis" into the chuvash language in 1800, which came to be the first book published in the chuvash language. another piece of chuvash literature called "chvash aber boldymyr", perhaps authored by v.i. lebedev, dates to the same period (1852).  late 19th century  the current chuvash alphabet (based on the russian alphabet) was created in the early 1870s by iy yakovlev, a great educator and social activist. during these years, there were works in the chuvash language using this new alphabet. the highest achievement of the chuvash literature of this period may be a poem by mikhail fedorov (1848-1904), titled arzuri. it was written in 1884 and spread among the population, but was actually published much later, in 1908. during these years, ignatius ivanov (1848-1885) also wrote works of literature. he is best known as the author of a series of short stories entitled "how to live chuvash" some of his creations have been published in the primer by i. ya. yakovlev, alongside many other works of chuvash literature.  bayonet 19th to 20th centuries (1886-1903 biennium)  the formal starting point of this period can be considered 1886, when ivan yurkin (1863-1943) began his literary career by writing his first short story. he became a large figure in the chuvash culture and, in particular, in the realm of literature. yurkin's major works of literature include "wealth" and "the man is full, but his eyes were hungry". he was also known as a journalist and an active defender of the traditional religion of the chuvash.  chuvash literature of the 20th century  see also :category:chuvash writers  references  literature   «чаваш литературин антологиие», составители: д. в. гордеев, ю. а. силэм. шупашкар, 2003.  .  виталии родионов, «чаваш литератури. xviii-xix емерсем», чебоксары, 2006. .
юхма мишши, "авалхи чавашсем, чебоксары, 1996.  external links   история развития чувашскои литературы/ the history of the chuvash literature  культурное наследие чувашии. писатели/ cultural heritage chuvashia. writers  literature of chuvashia european literature
nadis airport scottish campaign for nuclear disarmament single convention on narcotic drugs
kota ezawa (born 1969, cologne, west germany) is a japanese-german american artist and arts educator. his artwork usually responds to current events from sources in the news, pop culture, and art history. ever since his debut 2002 video animation of the simpson verdict, ezawa has been known for his flattened style in works on paper, light-boxes, and videos. by flattening his pieces into more two-dimensional figures, he creates more focus on the re-contextualized historical events in his pieces.  originally from germany, he moved to san francisco in 1994 and is currently based in the san francisco bay area.  biography  ezawa grew up outside stuttgart, west germany in a rural area, his father was an immigrant to west germany from japan. he attended kunstakademie dusseldorf from 1990 until 1994 and studied with nan hoover and nam june paik. he moved in 1994 to san francisco, california. he graduated with a bachelor of fine arts in 1995 from san francisco art institute (sfai). in 2003 he received his master of fine arts degree from stanford university.  since 2000, ezawa has produced his own abstracted computer animations. his work often juxtaposes seemingly contrary videos, politics, and celebrity recounting historical events, reminding the viewer that history is seen through an interpretative lens.  in 2005 he received the artadia award. in 2006, ezawa received a seca art award.  he is an associate professor of film and fine arts at california college of the arts (cca).  kota ezawa has exhibited his work in solo exhibitions at chrysler museum of art (2015), yerba buena center for the arts (2013), wexner center for the arts (2009), st. louis art museum, artpace (2006), the wadsworth atheneum and many others.  work    simpson verdict (2002): ezawa took three years to create the 3 minute animation of the o.j. simpson's verdict. the animation reduces the international event to an exaggerated, simple cartoon. this work is in the museum of modern art (moma) permanent collection. the history of photography remix (2004-2006) this project explored how photographs act as a reflection of reality and how they can distort memories of people and events. ezawa used photographs from art history textbooks for his sources of photography and with these photographs he reproduced them into his minimalistic and flattened style. this effect equalized all of the photographs so that they all read as similar images to the human eye instead of individual content.  lennon,
sontag, beuys (2004): animation portrays three politically active artists, lennon, sontag, and beuys. this video sheds light on each artist stating their social and political platforms.   the unbearable lightness of being (2005): animation about the assassinations of abraham lincoln and john f. kennedy produced with old news footage and with the 1915 film birth of a nation. the name of the film is taken from a book of the same title by milan kundera.  lyam 3d (2008): a silent, colored, and four minute animation that gives new meaning to alain resnais′ 1960s french new wave film, l'annee derniere a marienbad (last year at marienbad). ezawa used many sources like the news media and popular cinema to create a video with his flattened style that only kept essential shapes.  choco drink tv (2012): sculpture of a mechanical television made from found objects such as wooden spoons and a nesquik can, the images on the screen are of kota's work. channels can be changed by moving the wooden spoon. national anthem (2018): watercolor animation was installed at the 2019 whitney biennial. the animated art piece addressees police brutality and racism. the inspiration behind this piece is the event where the san francisco 49ers football player, colin kaepernick, took a knee during the national anthem in protest of police officers being violent towards black men who are unarmed.  references  external links   kota ezawa collection at san francisco museum of modern art (sfmoma) kota ezawa collection at smithsonian institution  1969 births german emigrants to the united states people from san francisco san francisco art institute alumni stanford university alumni artists from san francisco california college of the arts faculty german people of japanese descent living people
jalalabad assembly constituency  is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in fazilka district, punjab state, india.  notable politicians  hans raj josan, former minister of punjab won twice from jalalabad constituency during 1992 to 1997 and 2002 to 2007.  sukhbir singh badal, son of punjab chief minister parkash singh badal, has been member from jalalabad vidhan sabha constituency from 2009. he has been the deputy chief minister of punjab since 2009 for two terms.  sher singh ghubaya who won twice from jalalabad constituency, became a member of the lok sabha, lower house of the parliament of india in 2009. he was elected to the firozpur lok sabha constituency of punjab in 2009 and vacated his seat from jalalabad.  members of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2019  previous results  see also  punjab legislative assembly  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india fazilka district
heroes of the frontier is a 2016 novel by dave eggers. it concerns a dentist who moves with her children to alaska after a failed relationship with the children's father.  references  2016 american novels novels set in alaska
eunidia albicans is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
barbarians () is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by leonid lukov, ilya sudakov  and  konstantin zubov. it is based on maxim gorky's 1905 play of the same name.  cast  yevdokiya turchaninova as bogayevskaya   irina likso as lidiya    vera orlova   evgeniy velikhov  as monakhov    yelena gogoleva as monakhova    nikolai annenkov as cherkun    kseniya tarasova  pavel olenev    konstantin zubov as tsiganov   vladimir golovin  as arkhip fomich pritykin    nikolai shamin as vasiliy ivanovich redozubov  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1953 drama films 1953 films soviet drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films films based on works by maxim gorky films directed by leonid lukov gorky film studio films soviet black-and-white films
araucaria haastii is an extinct species of conifer tree formerly native to new zealand. a large number of fossilised tree specimens from the family araucariaceae have been found in new zealand, but in many cases the level of preservation is not sufficient to reliably distinguish between araucaria species (related to extant modern trees such as the norfolk pine) and agathis species (related to new zealand's iconic kauri tree).  araucaria haastii is known from some of the better preserved fossils, found in cretaceous sediments from several sites in the south island. these fossils show sufficiently detailed morphology and cuticular structure in the leaves to allow this species not only to be definitively identified as an araucaria, but also to place it within the intermedia section of this genus, meaning that its closest living relative is the klinki pine found in the mountains of papua new guinea. north island fossil specimens from the same time period appear to be from a closely related but slightly distinct species of araucaria, though the relatively poorer quality of the fossils means that the identification is not so precise. related species of tree are also known from fossils found in tasmania and south america, reflecting the broad gondwanan distribution of the family araucariaceae.  see also  araucaria mirabilis  banksia novae-zelandiae  references  haastii cretaceous plants extinct plants of new zealand plants described in 1887 mesozoic trees
the political economy club was founded in 1909 by john maynard keynes. it was an invitation only club, initially held weekly in keynes' rooms at king's college, cambridge. typically a paper would be read then members would comment on its contents.  keynes made his last appearance at the club in february 1946, reading a paper about the future of pound sterling and whether the united states dollar would become scarce.  participants  maurice dobb  ralph george hawtrey  (1879 - 1975)  harry gordon johnson (1923 - 1977)  john maynard keynes (1883 - 1946, founder)  dennis robertson (president circa 1946)  references  political economy economic history of the united kingdom keynesian economics think tanks based in the united kingdom learned societies of the united kingdom
elena matous (born 10 may 1953) is a retired italian alpine skier, who competed for italy, san marino, iran and luxembourg. she had one second place in the downhill event at the 1977 alpine skiing world cup and finished eighth overall.  references  external links    1953 births living people italian female alpine skiers universiade medalists in alpine skiing universiade bronze medalists for italy competitors at the 1981 winter universiade
9 malabar hill is a television show broadcast on zee tv in 1997-1998. the drama show was edited and directed by siddharth sengupta, produced by sanjay datta  written by saurabh shukla, with pavan malhotra and renuka shahane in lead roles.  premise  9 malabar hill is the story of the people living on the island of sindwa, situated about the outskirts of mumbai (then bombay), during the pre-independent times in india.  cast   pavan malhotra  renuka shahane  deepika deshpande amin  aditya srivastava  alka kaushal  sandeep kulkarni  shilpa tulaskar  saurabh shukla  krishankant sinha as bhushan  references  external links  watch episodes from 9 malabar hill    zee tv original programming 1997 indian television series debuts 1998 indian television series endings television shows set in maharashtra television shows set in the british raj indian drama television series hindi-language television shows
franz heritsch (26 december 1882 in graz - 17 april 1945 in graz) was an austrian geologist and paleontologist, known for his studies of the paleozoic of the eastern alps.  from 1902 to 1906 he studied at the university of graz, and following graduation, worked as a middle school teacher in graz. in 1909 he obtained his habilitation, and later on, served as an associate (1921-24), and full professor (1924-45) of geology and paleontology at the university of graz. he was a member of the austrian academy of sciences.  published works  his book, die deckentheorie in den alpen (1927-28), was translated into english and published with the title "the nappe theory in the alps (alpine tectonics, 1905-1928)". other noted works by heritsch are:  druckschriften von dr. rudolf hoernes : 1872-1905, (1906) - pamphlets by dr. rudolf hoernes from 1872 to 1905.  beitrage zur geologie der grauwackenzone des paltentales (obersteiermark), 1912 - contributions to the geology of the greywacke zone of the paltentales (upper styria).  die osterreichischen und deutschen alpen bis zur alpino-dinarischen grenze (ostalpen), 1915 - the austrian and german alps to the alpino-dinaric border (eastern alps).  geologie von steiermark, 1921 - geology of styria.  die grundlagen der alpinen tektonik, 1923 - the basis of alpine tectonics.  die entstehung der hochgebirgsformen, 1927 - the emergence of high mountain forms.  faunen aus dem silur der ostalpen, 1929 - fauna from the silurian of the eastern alps.  references   1882 births 1945 deaths scientists from graz university of graz alumni university of graz faculty 20th-century austrian geologists austrian paleontologists
benthobatis yangi, the taiwanese blind electric ray, is a species of fish in the family narcinidae endemic to taiwan. its natural habitat is the upper continental slopes of coastal waters.  description relatively few specimens are known so far. mature individuals of this species reach a length of 19.1 - 21.5 cm. both dorsal and ventral surfaces are dark brown to purplish-black, with irregular whitish blotches on the belly. gill slits are very narrow; the second dorsal fin is slightly larger than first.  distribution and habitat the species appears to have a very limited distribution on continental shelves at a depth of less than 300 m, on the coast of southwestern taiwan (off tungkang).  feeding habits like all species of electric rays, b. yangi uses its electric shocks to paralyze prey. remains of polychaete worms are found in some specimens, meaning that these animals are the preferred prey of b. yangi.  conservation b. yangi is not a target of fishery but appears to be taken (and discarded) as bycatch in shrimp fisheries, which in the region use very fine nets that likely prevent capture avoidance by the animal. based on the very limited distribution and possible high rate of bycatch mortality, the iucn has classified the species as vulnerable.  references  narcinidae fish described in 2003 fish of taiwan endemic fauna of taiwan
the 1906 argentine primera division was the 15th season of top-flight football in argentina. the 1906 championship was expanded to include 11 teams. the teams were split into two groups with each team playing the others in their group twice. the two group winners played in a championship decider.  the season began on april 29 and ended on october 7. san isidro, argentino de quilmes and san martin a.c. (from the homonymous city) made their debuts in primera. belgrano a.c. also registered a "b" team (named "belgrano extra") to play the tournament. alumni regaining the argentine championship for the 6th time in seven seasons.  final tables  group a  group b  championship final  matchd details  references  argentine primera division seasons 1906 in argentine football 1906 in south american football 1906 in south american football leagues p
an act to prevent cruelty to farm animals, more commonly known as question 3, was the third initiative on the 2016 massachusetts ballot. the measure will require massachusetts farmers to give chickens, pigs, and calves enough room to turn around, stand up, lie down, and fully extend their limbs. it will also prohibit the sale of eggs or meat from animals raised in conditions that did not meet these standards.  in 2016, eleven other states had enacted laws against some of these forms of confinement, and california had a law prohibiting the sale of any eggs from chickens kept in small cages. the measure was supported by the humane society of the united states and its allies, and opposed by regional and national animal agriculture groups. proponents argued that the initiative represented a modest animal welfare reform that would benefit food safety, while opponents rejected both claims and warned that the regulations would sharply increase the price of animal products, harming low-income massachusetts residents.  the measure was overwhelmingly approved by voters, with 77.6% of votes in favor, becoming the broadest statute against farm animal confinement in the country. it will take full effect on january 1, 2022.  question 3 has been the subject of two legal challenges. the first, attempting to block it from the ballot for procedural reasons, was ruled against by the massachusetts supreme judicial court in july 2016. the second was filed with the u.s. supreme court by a coalition of agricultural states, claiming question 3's provisions violated the dormant commerce clause; the court declined to hear the case in january 2019.  background  intensive animal confinement in the u.s.  modern animal agriculture in the united states is dominated by indoor-housing systems in which animals are kept at very high densities, in order to maximize economic profit. these systems decrease land use requirements and increase feeding efficiency, but they restrict animals' movement, prevent animals from engaging in natural behaviors, and can lead to production-related diseases.  three such systems have been the focus of most regulatory debate: battery cages for egg-laying hens, gestation crates for pregnant sows, and veal crates for male dairy calves. battery cages are stacks of wire crates that contain one to eight or more hens, with each hen typically being allotted less space than a sheet of printer paper; according to u.s. department of agriculture estimates, this practice accounted for over 90% of commercial u.s. egg production in 2016. gestation stalls are not much larger than the sows they confine, and
were used by more than 80 percent of u.s. pork producers. in the dairy industry, both male and female calves are taken from cows within a few days of birth to maximize milk yields, and kept in crates that limit their movement and ability to interact with other calves.  in the decade before massachusetts question 3, a number of large american food chains, retailers, and animal agriculture corporations had voluntarily committed to plans phasing out the use of battery cages in egg production and gestation crates in pork production.  previous farm animal protection regulations  no federal legislation protects the welfare of u.s. farm animals except during transportation and slaughter, and poultry are excluded from the latter regulations. this lack of regulation has sometimes been attributed to the influence of agricultural interest groups at the federal level.  between 2011 and 2013, the animal protection group humane society of the united states (hsus) and the industry group united egg producers (uep) jointly lobbied for compromise legislation that would have phased out the use of battery cages, implemented minimum space requirements for cage-free systems, and prohibited the sale of eggs produced in conditions that violated these standards. a bill with these provisions was introduced by oregon representative kurt schrader in 2012 as  3789 and received a hearing. however, the national cattlemen's beef association and national pork producers council lobbied against the bill, believing it could set a precedent for regulation of other animal industries, and it was not brought to a vote. after this failure,  and  did not renew their agreement, and hsus returned its focus to state-level regulations.  state-level regulations  eleven other u.s. states had imposed or planned restrictions on one or more of these intensive animal confinement practices, beginning with florida in 2002. five of these policies were implemented by legislative action, one by executive action, and five by public referendum. these policy changes were largely driven by the activities of  along with other animal-welfare groups, who used a strategy of initially targeting coastal, relatively liberal states with little animal agriculture activity. this strategy, and the use of broad-based, non-partisan messaging, allowed consistent success for ; at the time of the 2016 election, voters had passed every state ballot measure banning similar "cruel" confinement. however, most of the states with the most intensive animal farms continued to allow these practices, have no mechanism for public ballot initiatives, and were perceived by animal welfare activists as having legislatures friendly to agricultural interests. as a result, this activity was unlikely to
be affected except by other states' restrictions on the sale of such products.  in 2008, california voters passed ballot proposition 2 with a 63.5% majority. this initiative prohibited confining hens, pigs, and calves so that they could not turn around, lie down, stand up, or fully extend their limbs. although proposition 2 did not restrict the sale of animal products produced using these practices, it was amended by an accessory bill passed by the california assembly in 2010 that banned the sale of eggs from intensively confined hens. supporters of this law argued that it was necessary to "level the playing field" and prevent california egg producers from being placed at a competitive disadvantage with out-of-state producers. when both laws went into effect in 2015, they were the first comprehensive restrictions on farm animal confinement conditions, both during production and when selling animal products, including those imported from outside the state. later laws in several states, including california proposition 12 in 2018, applied similar requirements to other animal products.  after california's laws went into effect, the number of hens kept and eggs produced in the state both decreased while the price of eggs rose; however, these effects were partly attributable to a widespread outbreak of bird flu at approximately the same time. as a result of this, and the historical variability of egg prices, there was considerable uncertainty about the effects of california's laws on egg prices at the time of the 2016 election.  the attorneys general of six agricultural states filed a lawsuit challenging california's ban on the sale of eggs produced under intensive confinement in other states, on the grounds that it violated the federal government's constitutional authority to regulate interstate commerce and preempt state laws. this case, missouri v. harris, was pending before the ninth circuit appeals court during the 2016 election.  previous efforts in massachusetts  prior to question 3, there were no laws governing the confinement of farmed animals in massachusetts.   in 1988, a ballot question in massachusetts would have required the department of food and agriculture to regulate surgical procedures such as castration and de-beaking, methods of transportation, slaughter, diet and housing for farm animals. if passed, it would have been the first state law requiring that farm animals be treated humanely. the measure was defeated by a vote of 66% to 27%,  in each session of the massachusetts legislature between 2009 and 2015, bills were introduced that would have prevented chickens, calves, and pregnant sows from being confined so that they could not turn around or extend their limbs. these bills were not brought to a
vote. in 2013 and 2015, state representative stephen kulik introduced bills to create a state commission that would issue standards for livestock treatment; this proposal earned the support of the massachusetts farm bureau.  path to the ballot supporters of the initiative, led by the , formed a committee to support it on august 28, 2015. the text of the proposed question was submitted to the office of massachusetts attorney general maura healey for certification that it complied with the state's constitutional requirements, and received approval on september 2, 2015.  supporters then had to gather 64,750 registered massachusetts voters' signatures in order to present the proposal to the state legislature. they collected over 130,000 signatures, saying in a press release that they did so without paid assistance; the office of secretary of state william f. galvin certified 95,817 of them, more than for any other initiative that year, and sent the bill to the massachusetts general court as h. 3930 on december 18, 2015. the legislature held a hearing in february 2016, at which free-range farmers, veterinarians, and animal protection advocates spoke in favor of the initiative, while representatives of egg and pork producers testified against. the democratic and republican co-chairs of the hearing, the latter of whom owned a beef farm, said afterwards that they were concerned about potential commerce clause issues, and would favor rep. kulik's bill establishing a state commission governing the treatment of farm animals instead.  the legislature's failure to adopt the initiative by may 3, which was expected given its history with similar bills, initiated the next stage of the process, in which proponents had to collect the signatures of 10,792 additional voters by june 22. they gathered 40,000, again more than for any other question, and in july the initiative was certified by secretary galvin as the third of four 2016 massachusetts ballot measures.  massachusetts supreme judicial court challenge opponents of the initiative filed a lawsuit on april 25, 2016, claiming that attorney general healey had erred in certifying the initiative and requesting that the massachusetts supreme judicial court bar it from the ballot under the single subject clause. this provision of the massachusetts constitution requires that ballot initiatives only contain subjects "which are related or which are mutually dependent". it is intended to prevent controversial proposals from being unfairly bundled together with more popular ones to increase their chance of passing; for example, in 2006 the court struck down a proposed initiative that combined a ban on dog racing with an increase in penalties for abusing dogs.  the plaintiffs in the lawsuit were diane sullivan, an anti-
poverty activist, and james dunn, a farmer; they were funded by protect the harvest, a national nonprofit that opposes restrictions on animal use. the plaintiffs argued that the initiative's bans on the production and the sale of intensively confined animal products represented unrelated questions, and that the bans on confinement of chickens, pigs, and calves were similarly separate issues on which voters might have divergent opinions. they also argued that the law inappropriately contained an "argumentative" statement of its purpose. the sincerity of protect the harvest's commitment to anti-poverty work was questioned by  president paul shapiro, who pointed to "offensive" comments about welfare recipients made by its attorney, jon bruning, in 2010.  on july 6, the court unanimously ruled against the plaintiffs. the court wrote that all the provisions of the initiative were "complementary" and shared the unifying purpose of "preventing farm animals from being caged in overly cramped conditions", and that the text was of an appropriate form for a law. they also questioned why the plaintiffs had delayed their filing so long after healey's office issued its decision in september, and recommended that future litigants appeal ballot initiatives by february of an election year.  text  the initiative's language was very similar to that of california's proposition 2. it built on this law's framework by adding more details about each species' required space allotment, including in cage-free systems, and by including an explicit enforcement mechanism: private citizens would be able to file complaints with the attorney general's office, which would be able to issue fines to violators. it also went further than california's laws in prohibiting the sale of intensively confined pork and veal products in addition to eggs, making it the broadest anti-confinement regulation in the country at the time of the campaign.  the text of the ballot question was as follows:  the ballot question was accompanied by the following explanatory text:  the full text of the law was later entered in the massachusetts session laws of 2016 as chapter 333, "an act to prevent cruelty to farm animals".  campaign  supporters and opponents question 3 was supported throughout the campaign by a dedicated ballot question committee, citizens for farm animal protection, which was incorporated in august 2015. its campaign was directed by stephanie harris, the massachusetts director of the humane society, and headquartered at an office provided by the animal charity and hospital mspca-angell. question 3 was endorsed by stakeholders who had already committed to not using intensive confinement,
including over one hundred massachusetts farmers and certain large food retailers; by public interest groups, including animal and environmental protection groups, labor organizations, and religious groups; and by massachusetts governor charlie baker, u.s. senator ed markey, five u.s. house members, 35 of 200 state legislators, and attorney general healey.  the committee opposing the initiative, citizens against food tax injustice, did not formally incorporate until the end of september, 2016. it represented a coalition of trade organizations for egg and pork producers and food retailers, protect the harvest, and anti-poverty advocates. the committee hired diane sullivan, one of the plaintiffs in the supreme judicial court case, as its director. sullivan, a lawyer, had previously experienced homelessness with her children, and had been working with an organization to end family homelessness for several years before joining the campaign. although she coordinated with protect the harvest and the massachusetts farm bureau, sullivan primarily campaigned alone, emphasizing her experiences of relying on intensively caged eggs as a cheap source of protein for her family during periods of food insecurity.  the massachusetts veterinary medical association opposed the measure, saying that while it did not disapprove of eliminating the confinement practices in question, a state commission was needed to implement more comprehensive and flexible standards. people for the ethical treatment of animals opposed a similar measure two years later in california on the abolitionist grounds that there should be no commercial egg-laying hens, whether in cages or not; however, they did not play a significant role in the 2016 question 3 campaign.  campaign finance citizens for farm animal protection spent a total of $2.8 million. this was provided primarily from  (approximately $1.8 million, in addition to in-kind donations of staff time), but also included large donations from animal-welfare organizations including the american society for the prevention of cruelty to animals; many donations from private individuals, including $250,000 from finance executive maximilian stone; and $100,000 from dr. bronner's magic soaps.  citizens against food tax injustice was funded primarily by a $195,000 contribution from forrest lucas, president of lucas oil and founder of protect the harvest, and $100,000 from the national pork producers council. the committee had a total budget of $302,900.  both sides began airing television advertisements at the end of october, 2016.  issues the state of massachusetts only contained one farm whose practices fell under the scope of the initiative. as a result, the campaign focused largely on the price, quality,
and ethical status of animal products imported from outside the state.  although both sides agreed the initiative would increase the price of covered animal products, a primary focus of public debate was how much it would do so. opponents warned that eggs and meat would become "luxury items," and cited analyses of california's laws indicating they raised the price of a dozen eggs by approximately $.49, or $.75 or more, in the year they went into effect. they argued that such an increase would represent a serious hardship for massachusetts residents struggling with poverty, and that this group's voice had been excluded from food policy debates. proponents cited an egg industry study finding that switching to cage-free systems would only increase costs by one to two cents per egg; they also argued that the relative cost of cage-free eggs would decrease when retailers could no longer charge a premium for them, and that massachusetts "shouldn't have a two-tiered system where safer food is only accessible to some."  proponents of question 3 focused on the animal welfare impacts of the initiative, framing the requirement for animals to be able to turn around and extend their limbs as a modest and minimal reform. however, opponents charged that the measure could have negative effects on animals and farm workers. the operators of the only caged egg farm in the state, diemand farm of wendell, described how their previous cage-free system had resulted in cannibalism, crowding, hygiene problems, and uneven access to food and water, concerns echoed by statewide allies. they also argued that chickens did not need to be able to spread both wings, as they could extend them one at a time to stretch while caged. even some farmers who used cage-free systems for welfare reasons expressed concern that the question would be decided by voters who did not have experience with agriculture, or appreciation for the complexity of the issue.  supporters of question 3, including some veterinarians, argued that the initiative would have public health benefits, claiming that the stress and high density of intensive confinement systems increases the risk of animal products being contaminated with salmonella and other diseases. opponents rejected these arguments, claiming that cage-free systems caused more salmonella.  finally, opponents questioned the necessity of the measure. the massachusetts farm bureau, primarily concerned about consumers losing trust in massachusetts farms, emphasized that intensive confinement practices were rare in massachusetts and unlikely to become more common; its president argued that the initiative targeted out-of-state producers, violating the commerce clause. others maintained that the free market was already shifting away from the confinement
practices in question, making the initiative unnecessary. the national pork producers council alleged that the move was part of a "vegan agenda";  denied this, claiming their interest was in ensuring humane conditions on farms. the ceo of united egg producers said that a "patchwork" of state-level restrictions on egg sales could cause "significant challenges for egg producers".  polling  question 3 consistently received higher support than the other ballot measures in opinion polls. some polls indicated that support for question 3 was higher among voters younger than 35, women, and people earning $40,000 or less per year.  referendum results on november 8, 2016, question 3 was passed overwhelmingly by massachusetts voters. the initiative was supported by 2,530,143 (77.6%) of the 3,258,797 votes cast on the issue, with 120,004 blanks. it had majority support in all but 3 of massachusetts' 351 towns. question 3 was the first ballot measure to ban the sale of animal products raised under certain conditions, and won the largest majority of any animal protection ballot measure in u.s. history.  an analysis published in the journal of agricultural and resource economics analyzed town-level votes on question 3 along with u.s. census data. the analysis found that, after controlling for demographic factors, support for the referendum correlated positively with a town's support for democratic presidential candidate hillary clinton and with the town's average income, and correlated negatively with the proportion of a town's residents employed in agriculture. extrapolating their analysis from this referendum and california's 2008 proposition 2, the authors predicted that such a measure would have enjoyed majority support in every state in 2016.  aftermath representatives of citizens for farm animal protection described the vote as a "historic advancement for animal welfare," and said it showed the strength of the american public's desire to reduce farm animals' suffering. diane sullivan, of citizens against food tax injustice, said the measure would cause food prices to skyrocket, and said "my work on this has just begun".  in 2017, republican congressman jim sensenbrenner introduced federal legislation that could have nullified question 3, forbidding states from setting conditions on how businesses outside the state produce goods. sensenbrenner said that excessive regulation was interfering with economic growth. in 2018, republican congressman steve king introduced an amendment to that year's farm bill that would have similarly forbidden states from imposing welfare restrictions on animal products imported and sold in the state, such as those of question 3. supporters of this amendment argued that such restrictions posed
a threat to american agricultural activities and to the freedom of interstate commerce. the king amendment drew heavy opposition from groups who noted that it would invalidate a wide range of state food-safety, labor, and animal welfare regulations, and it was not adopted into the final bill.  by may 2019, the only farm in massachusetts that was directly affected by question 3, diemand farm, had transferred one of its three flocks to a cage-free system. the owners estimated that it would cost $80,000 to transition their entire farm's architecture, in addition to incurring additional ongoing labor costs.  u.s. supreme court challenge on november 17, 2016, the ninth circuit dismissed missouri v. harris, the lead case against california's ban on the sale of battery cage eggs, without prejudice. the court found that the plaintiff states did not have standing, because they were bringing the case on behalf of specific egg farmers in their jurisdictions, rather than on behalf of their entire populations. the plaintiff states requested for the u.s. supreme court  to hear the case, and in may 2017 it declined, letting the ninth circuit's dismissal stand. on december 4, 2017, a similar coalition of agricultural states re-filed a case against california's law with the supreme court, this time arguing that they had standing because their low-income residents would be injured by increased egg prices, as would the prisons and other institutions operated by the states themselves.  on december 11, the state of indiana, joined by twelve other agricultural states, filed a complaint against massachusetts in the supreme court over question 3. the case brought by indiana overlapped with that brought by missouri against california. the plaintiff states argued that massachusetts's law violated the dormant commerce clause, which forbids states from discriminating against or unduly burdening interstate commerce, while attorney general healey responded that the plaintiffs' arguments had been tested and rejected by "centuries of precedent". on april 16, 2018, the supreme court asked the solicitor general, at the time noel francisco, to give an opinion on whether it should hear both cases.  francisco's office responded on november 29, 2018. its filing emphasized that the plaintiff states had still failed to show proper standing, in part because the impact of question 3 on out-of-state food prices had not been determined, but also discussed the commerce clause issue. state laws may violate the dormant commerce clause if they explicitly provide different treatment for identical situations found inside or outside the state. the solicitor general argued that, as the ninth
circuit noted in its dismissal of missouri v. harris, regulations like california's and massachusetts's treat in- and out-of-state suppliers equally, and are therefore not economically discriminatory in this sense. under a test established in pike v. bruce church, inc., if a state statute is not explicitly discriminatory but does affect interstate commerce, the court balances the local interest served by the law against the burden it places on interstate commerce. the solicitor general opined that a district court, not the supreme court, would be the appropriate place to weigh this balance.  on january 7, 2019, the supreme court declined to hear both the california and massachusetts cases, without explanation and with justice clarence thomas disagreeing.  proposed amendment in may 2019, the massachusetts house approved an amendment to the state budget that would have relaxed question 3's space requirement, allowing farmers with chickens in cage-free buildings to provide only 1 square foot of space per chicken instead of 1.5, if they also provided additional "enrichments", such as perches or multi-tiered platforms, meant to allow chickens to engage in more natural behaviors. this amendment was supported by the new england brown egg council as well as by , which said it represented an improvement to the 2016 law; it was patterned after similar compromises worked out in other states. however, the move drew criticism from other animal protection groups as well as from the massachusetts farm bureau, which had opposed the original ballot initiative but said its members had already invested in new buildings compliant with the 2016 version of the law.  the amendment was dropped in response to the criticism, but reintroduced in october.  related legislation in other states  a few months after the passage of question 3, a nearly identical bill was introduced in the rhode island state legislature, with an opinion poll finding 68% support among rhode island residents. the bill passed the house by a vote of 61-9 in june 2017, following a public campaign by ; the house had passed similar bills twice before, but they had failed to pass the senate, in part due to opposition from the representative of a town containing a large egg farm. the bill passed the general assembly on june 27, and is scheduled to take effect in 2026.  in 2018, california voters passed proposition 12, which refined 2008 proposition 2 and imitated massachusetts question 3 in banning the sale of eggs, veal, or pork from animals raised with less than certain space requirements. the ballot measure was similarly supported by  and opposed by animal agriculture groups.  in 2019, the legislatures of oregon and
washington passed bills to phase out the sale of eggs produced by caged hens. the laws were similar to massachusetts question 3, and were negotiated between the  and regional egg producers' associations.  analysis  several legal scholars have argued that massachusetts and california's laws pass the pike test and are therefore constitutional. they point out that courts have ruled that states have a legitimate interest in preventing animal cruelty as their populations understand it, pointing to cases such as hughes v. oklahoma. furthermore, since out-of-state producers are not obliged to sell to the states with stricter welfare regulations, the burden imposed by these regulations is comparatively minimal, as the ninth and seventh circuits have found in cases upholding california and chicago bans on the sale of foie gras produced by force-feeding geese. a separate commerce clause argument against question 3 is that the law regulates economic activity outside of massachusetts borders, making it unconstitutional according to the 1935 case baldwin v. g.a.f. seelig, inc. however, u.s. courts have increasingly discarded the baldwin doctrine as a relic of a less interconnected economy, especially when the law in question does not directly regulate prices.  one of these scholars, kathryn bowen, writes that state-level anti-confinement measures such as question 3 are a laudable expression of "food populism", in which citizens organize for "just, sustainable, and welfare-enhancing food and agriculture outcomes". she predicts that agricultural interests will attempt to preempt and undo such measures at the federal level, through interventions such as rep. king's amendment, and recommends that states coordinate and harmonize their regulations and efforts to defend them. another, sean murphy, argues that these regulations are bad policy despite being constitutional, because they may harm low-income humans while their benefits to food safety and animal welfare are debatable. he argues for federal preemption of these laws through a legislative process that allows nuanced concerns to be accounted for, praising the failed 2013 compromise legislation agreed on by the  and united egg producers, and calls for more detailed and accurate labeling of eggs.  in a 2019 paper, two agricultural economists note that the typical 2016 massachusetts voter supported banning the sale of intensively confined animal products despite regularly consuming such products themself. they cite several possible explanations from behavioral economics for this apparent discrepancy between individuals' choices as consumers and as voters. first, individuals may not have been fully informed about the effects of their choices in either case. second, individuals may have felt that their personal purchasing decisions did not have a meaningful effect on
animal welfare, because others will continue to buy low-welfare products, and believed that voting addresses these free-rider problems. certain consumers may have had a desire to purchase higher-welfare eggs but lacked the willpower to do so, and viewed the referendum as a chance to enforce a choice on themselves. finally, some evidence suggests that, in the ballot box, individuals value the opportunity to support public goods more than they do in the marketplace.  references  external links  massachusetts farm animal containment initiative (2016) at ballotpedia treatment of animals on the ballot at ballotpedia  2016 massachusetts ballot measures animal welfare and rights legislation in the united states united states agricultural policy
cp3 is a disability sport classification specific to cerebral palsy. in many sports, it is grouped inside other classifications to allow people with cerebral palsy to compete against people with other different disabilities but the same level of functionality.  compared higher number cp classes, they have increased issues with head movement and trunk function.  they tend to use wheelchairs on a daily basis though they may be ambulant with the use of assistive devices.  sportspeople in this class are eligible to participate in a number of sports on the elite level.  they include athletics, cycling, skiing, swimming,  wheelchair tennis, archery, wheelchair fencing, wheelchair curling, table tennis, shooting, sailing, powerlifting, para-equestrian, rowing and archery.  in some of these sports, different classification systems or names for cp3 are used.  because cp3 sportspeople use wheelchairs in most of the classes they compete in, they need to attend classification events while in their wheelchair to insure they do not get classed in an ambulatory class.  definition and participation   cerebral palsy-international sports and recreation association (cp-isra) defined this class in january 2005 as, "quadriplegic (tetraplegic), severe hemiplegic - moderate (asymmetric or symmetric) quadriplegic or severe hemiplegic in a wheelchair with almost full functional strength in dominant upper extremity. it is rare for an athlete with athetosis to be included within this class unless he/she presents with a predominantly hemiplegic or triplegic profile with almost full function in the dominant upper limb. can propel a wheelchair independently."  performance  on a daily basis, cp3 sportspeople are likely to use a wheelchair. some may be ambulant with the use of assistive devices. while they may have good trunk control, they may have some issues with strong forward movements of their torso. while cp2, cp3 and cp6  have similar issues with athetoid or ataxic, cp6 competitors have "flight" while they are ambulant in that it is possible for both feet to not be touching the ground while walking.  cp2 and cp3 are unable to do this. head movement and trunk function differentiate this class from cp4.  lack of symmetry in arm movement are another major difference between the two classes, with cp3 competitors having less symmetry.  sports  athletics  cp3 competitors compete in athletic events in the t33/f33 classes.  in some cases, cp3 athletes may be classified as f
53, f54, or f55. events that may be on the program for cp3 competitors include the club, discus throw, shot put and javelin.  while f33/f53/f54/f55 throwers may be able to walk with assistance, competitors throw from a fixed seated position.  historically, cp3 athletes were more active in track events. changes in the classification during the 1980s and 1990s led to most track events for cp3 racers being dropped and replaced exclusively with field events. this has been criticized, because with the rise of commercialization of the paralympic movement, there has been a reduction of classes in more popular sports for people with the most severe disabilities as these classes often have much higher support costs associated with them.  cycling   people with cerebral palsy are eligible to compete in cycling at the elite level and at the paralympic games. cp1 to cp4 competitors may compete using tricycles in the t1 class. tricycles are only eligible to compete in road events, not track ones.   tricycles are required because their level of cp effects their balance and they are unable to use a standard bicycle. cp3 cyclists may also use a handcycle in the h1 class.  cyclists in this class are required to wear a helmet, with a special color used to designate them as cp3 cyclists during a race.  cp3 class competitors wear a blue helmet.  skiing   cp3 athletes are eligible to compete in skiing competitions at the elite level and the paralympic games. cp3 nordic skiers compete in  lw10 and lw11. cp3 alpine skiers compete in lw10 or lw11.  swimming  cp3 sportspeople with cerebral palsy are eligible to compete in swimming at the paralympic games. cp3 swimmers may be found in several classes.  these include s3, and s4.  cp3 swimmers tend to have a passive normalized drag in the range of 0.9 to 1.1.  this puts them into the passive drag band of pdb3, and pdb5. because the disability of swimmers in this class involves in a loss of function in specific parts of their body, they are more prone to injury than their able-bodied counterparts as a result of overcompensation in other parts of their body.  when fatigued, asymmetry in their stroke becomes a problem for swimmers in this class.  other sports  people with cerebral palsy are eligible to compete at the elite level in a number of other sports including wheelchair tennis, archery, wheelchair fencing
, wheelchair curling, table tennis, shooting, sailing, powerlifting, para-equestrian, rowing and archery.  race running is another sport open to this class. cp3 race runners may be classified as rr2 or rr3. one of the available sports for cp3 competitors is slalom. slalom involves an obstacle course for people using carts.  cp3 competitors use self-propelled carts to navigate the course.  classification process  while some cp3 people may be ambulatory, they generally go through the classification process while using a wheelchair.  this is because they often compete from a seated position. failure to do so could result in them being classified as an ambulatory cp class competitor such as cp5 or cp6, or a related sport specific class.  one of the standard means of assessing functional classification is the bench test, which is used in swimming, lawn bowls and wheelchair fencing. using the adapted research council (mrc) measurements, muscle strength is tested using the bench press for a variety of disabilities a muscle being assessed on a scale of 1 to 5 for people with cerebral palsy and other issues with muscle spasticity. a 1 is for no functional movement of the muscle or where there is no motor coordination.  a 2 is for normal muscle movement range not exceeding 25% or where the movement can only take place with great difficult and, even then, very slowly.  a 3 is where normal muscle movement range does not exceed 50%.  a 4 is when  normal muscle movement range does not exceed 75% and or there is slight in-coordination of muscle movement.  a 5 is for normal muscle movement.  swimming classification generally has three components that cp3 sportspeople must go through. the first is a bench press. the second is water test. the third is in competition observation.  as part of the water test, swimmers are often required to demonstrate their swimming technique for all four strokes.  they usually swim a distance of 25 meters for each stroke.  they are also generally required to demonstrate how they enter the water and how they turn in the pool.  references   parasports classifications cerebral palsy and other paralytic syndromes
sfondrati is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:   francesco sfondrati (1493-1550), italian roman catholic bishop and cardinal and the father of pope gregory xiv  niccolo sfondrati (11 february 1535 - 16 october 1591), pope known as pope gregory xiv  paolo emilio sfondrati (1560 - 14 february 1618), italian cardinal  celestino sfondrati (10 january 1644 - 4 september 1696), italian benedictine theologian, prince-abbot of st. gall and cardinal  italian-language surnames
the 1919 central michigan normalites football team represented central michigan normal school, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1919 college football season. the central michigan football team compiled a 2-2-3 record and were outscored by their opponents by a combined total of 89 to 88. the team's victories were against ferris state (7-0) and bay city western high school (34-6), the losses were against the michigan agricultural frosh team (6-14) and detroit city college (14-42), and the ties were with saginaw east high school (13-13), grand rapids junior college (7-7), and the 1919 michigan state normal normalites football team (7-7).  chief nevitt was hired as the school's head football coach in march 1919. he was an alumnus of carlisle indian industrial school where he played with jim thorpe; he had been the football coach at the mount pleasant indian school for three years before being hired by central normal.  schedule  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan normalites football
the 2017 ohio valley conference women's basketball tournament was held from march 1-4 at nashville municipal auditorium in nashville, tennessee.  format the ovc women's tournament is a traditional single-elimination eight-team tournament, seeded with the #8 seed facing the #1 seed in the first round, #7 facing #2, and so on. there is no reseeding, so if the #8 team were to defeat the #1 seed it would continue in the tournament playing the team which would have faced the #1 seed in the subsequent round (winner of #4 vs. #5).  seeds  bracket  see also 2017 ohio valley conference men's basketball tournament  references  external links 2017 ovc men's & women's basketball championship  ohio valley conference women's basketball tournament basketball in nashville, tennessee 2016-17 ohio valley conference women's basketball season
olenecamptus sarawakensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1936. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1936
the carbon medal is a medal of achievement in carbon science and technology given by the american carbon society for the "... outstanding contributions to the discovery of novel carbon products or processes."  awardees the following have won the carbon medal:   1997 robert curl (rice university, co-discoverer of fullerene)  1997 harry kroto (university of sussex, co-discoverer of fullerene)  1997 richard smalley (rice university, co-discoverer of fullerene)  2001 mildred dresselhaus (mit, researcher of carbon nanotubes)  2004 donald s. bethune (ibm research, researcher of single-walled carbon nanotubes)  2004 morinobu endo (shinshu university, one of the pioneers of carbon nanofibers and carbon nanotubes synthesis)  2004 sumio iijima (nec, often cited as the inventor of carbon nanotubes)  2016 andre geim (university of manchester, co-inventor of graphene)  2016 konstantin novoselov (university of manchester, co-inventor of graphene)  references  1997 establishments in the united states awards established in 1997 american science and technology awards carbon
trichodesmium erythraeum is a species of cyanobacteria that are unique in being visible to the naked eye. this species is also known as "sea sawdust". it was originally discovered in 1770 by captain cook off the coast of australia.  anatomy this is a prolific nitrogen-fixing and phosphorus reducing species of bacteria that fixes approximately half of the nitrogen in the food chain of the ocean and contributes to the turn over of phosphorus. unlike other bacteria, it can also photosynthesize. this is a colonial species that forms long filaments and tends to accumulate with other trichodesmium. it is gram-negative and motile. some of the bacteria in the colony fix the nitrogen, and others are specialized for photosynthesis. however, the two processes must be done with two of them, because the oxygen byproduct that results from photosynthesis would interfere with the nitrogen-fixing process. this is done either by, having two separate cells share resources with each other or by separating the processes by time in the same cell. if the cells are physically separated, then one cell specializes as a diazotroph and undergoes nitrogen fixation while other cells undergo photosynthesis. alternatively, t. erythraeum also has been shown to separate the processes of photosynthesis and nitrogen fixation in the same cell by separating the time at which these processes occur. when this is done t. erythraeum will stop photosynthesizing at midday or night and begin oxygen scavenging as it begins nitrogen fixation. additionally, t. erythraeum have gas vesicles that account for 60-70% of the cell's volume. these vesicles allow t. erythraeum to move in the water coulomb up to 200 m using its buoyancy based on the concentrations of carbohydrates in order to search out nutrients such as nitrogen, phosphorus and iron.  genetics  t. erythraeum has one of the largest genomes sequenced so far at 7.75 mbp. it has a gc content of 34% and contains approximately 40% non-coding dna. there is evidence to suggest that the genome is in an expanding dynamic state due to the expansion of the genome through horizontal gene transfer. t. erythraeum shows a 98% homology with t. thiebautii but only a 75% homology with other cyanobacteria such as oscillatoria.  environment  t. erythraeum was isolated off the coast of north carolina. it resides in tropical and subtropical areas of the ocean typically from the surface to 40m however they can
travel as deep as 200 m in search of nutrients. they have a ph optima of 7.8-8.4 and an optimal temperature of 24-30 degrees celsius in aerobic conditions. t. erythraeum can, however, survive in lower temperatures and through periods of darkness.  discoloration of the red sea this species can also literally turn the red sea a red color that can be seen from outer space. the cause of this is unknown, but most scientists believe that a species of bacteria of the trichodesmium genus, most likely this species, is the cause.  references  oscillatoriales
laurence owen vine gandar (28 january 1915 -  15 november 1998) was a south african journalist and newspaper editor. he is best known as an editor of south african newspaper the rand daily mail.  early life laurence gandar was born on 28 january 1915 in durban, natal, south africa. after high school, he attended the university of natal and obtained a bachelor of arts. he would represent the province of natal in hurdles and long jump. after university, he started work as a journalist on a local paper. when war broke out in 1939, he enlisted in the union defence force and rose from the rank of corporal to captain, becoming the brigade intelligence officer in the 6th south african armoured division in italy. he would marry his wife isobel ballance in 1944.  career after the war he returned to journalism in durban with the argus newspaper group and would eventually become an assistant editor. he would leave the newspaper in 1953, describing it as 'spineless', and joined the anglo american corporation in their public relations department working as an editor for their publication, the optima.  in october 1957, he was offered the role of editor of the rand daily mail, one of many english south african newspapers owned by anglo american. he would change the editorial style of the newspaper to a liberal tone, which was in opposition to the views most white people, and would inform south africans about the racial and human rights abuses of apartheid and challenged the ruling afrikaner national party government. he would also challenge the white opposition parties for their lack of firm opposition to apartheid. his change in editorial style would have a negative effect on circulation in the mid-60s, falling to 112,000 from 125,000 readers and would continue until the papers demise in 1985. in 1959, it was instrumental in persuading liberals to break away from the white opposition united party and form the progressive party and would later assist the new party's only mp, helen suzman to be elected in 1961. in a 1963 editorial he would write the following concerning the future south africa had, 'there are two choices and only two. there is racial separation, with massive economic sacrifices - or there is economic integration, with far-reaching political concessions. there is no middle course. at present we are trying to get the best of both worlds, and it is killing us.'during june and july 1965, he and journalist benjamin pogrund wrote a series of articles on conditions in south african prisons for black south africans in port elizabeth, pretoria and the cinderella prison in boksburg based
on interviews with prison officials and prisoners. the articles cited assaults on prisoners, sodomy and unhygienic conditions in these prisons. the prison act, 1959 forbade newspapers from discussing conditions in prisons, forbidding interviews with prisoners, ex-prisoners, and administrators of the facilities, with a possible prison sentence of one year for breaching the act if in defense one could not prove the allegations in court.  during this period the newspaper was subjected to around the clock surveillance, security branch raids, the eavesdropping of the editor, journalists and the newsroom as well as infiltration by police informants and the intimidations and prosecution of informants. the attacks against the newspaper were also taken up by the government controlled south african broadcasting corporation (sabc) and the afrikaner newspapers and silence from the english newspapers. on 22 august 1965, he was visited at home and had his passport confiscated and the same would happen to pogrund. the government would instead of investigating the claims through the means of a judicial inquiry, prosecute two prisoners and two wardens sentencing one to three years in jail, 'confessing' to making up the charges and being a paid informant of the paper, a claim that the rand daily mail was not allowed to challenge at his trial.  they would be charged with contravening south africa's prisons act and would eventually appear in court in november 1968, before justice p. m. cillie, in a trial that last 88 days. the prosecution would successfully argue that 17 allegations in the articles were false and the judge agreed finding the two guilty on two charges of publishing false allegations and not 'verifying' the facts. gandar was fined r100 on both charges or three months imprisonment and pogrund received two three-month sentences suspended for three years and subject to him not contravening the prison act.  in 1965 he was fired as editor of the rand daily mail by it board of directors because of poor circulation figures but after a threatened walk-out by the senior journalists, gandar was appointed as editor-in-chief and raymond louw appointed as the new editor. gander would remain in his new role until 1969. gandar was appointed the first director of the minority rights group in britain which investigated and publicized the treatment of the worlds minorities, a position that lasted three years and afterwards returned to south africa.  honours gandar won a kemsley empire journalist scholarship and would spend a year in britain. in 1974, gandar was awarded an honorary doctorate by the university of the wit
watersrand and in 1990 he was awarded an honorary doctorate by the university of natal. in 2010, he was honoured with a posthumous award as a world press freedom hero from the international press institute. other awards include a gold medal award by the british institute of journalists and a world press achievement award in 1966 for his newspaper from the american newspaper publishers association.  death he retired to the south coast of natal and played golf and invested in the stock-market. his wife isobel died in 1989. his son mark died in 1998, and is survived by his wife jenny and their three children: collette, sally, and owen. laurence gandar died in pietermaritzburg, kwazulu-natal south africa on 15 november 1998 shortly after the death of his son, and after several years of illness, from parkinson's disease.  references   1915 births white south african people people from durban people from johannesburg south african journalists south african newspaper editors university of natal alumni 1998 deaths 20th-century journalists
ufc fight night: lineker vs. dodson (also known as ufc fight night 96) was a mixed martial arts event produced by the ultimate fighting championship that was held on october 1, 2016, at moda center in portland, oregon.  background the event was the second that the organization hosted in portland, with the first being ufc 102 in august 2009.  the event was headlined by a bantamweight bout between john lineker and former two-time ufc flyweight championship challenger and the ultimate fighter: team bisping vs. team miller bantamweight winner john dodson.  on september 9, two fighters pulled out from their bouts: brian ortega and bobby green were expected to face hacran dias and josh burkman, respectively. ortega was replaced by andre fili, while green was replaced by promotional newcomer zak ottow. due to the late replacement, burkman-ottow was contested at welterweight.  sergio pettis was expected to face louis smolka at the event. however, pettis pulled out of the fight on september 22 citing what his trainer described as "a minor injury". smolka remained on the card and faced promotional newcomer brandon moreno, from the ultimate fighter: tournament of champions.  at the weigh-ins, three fighters, john lineker, alex oliveira and hacran dias each missed the required weight limit for their respective fights. as a result, all three fighters were fined 20% of their fight purse, which went to their opponents.  results  bonus awards the following fighters were awarded $50,000 bonuses: fight of the night: none awarded performance of the night: brandon moreno, luis henrique da silva, nate marquardt and curtis blaydes  reported payout the following is the reported payout to the fighters as reported to the oregon state athletic commission. it does not include sponsor money or "locker room" bonuses often given by the ufc and also do not include the ufc's traditional "fight night" bonuses.  john lineker: $72,000 (includes $40,000 win bonus) def. john dodson: $38,000 ^ alex oliveira: $43,200 (includes $24,000 win bonus) def. will brooks: $57,800 ^  zak ottow: $24,000 (includes $12,000 win bonus) def. josh burkman: $54,000 brandon moreno: $20,000 (includes $10,000 win bonus) def. louis smolka: $32,000 luis henrique da silva: $24,000 (includes $12,
000 win bonus) def. joachim christensen: $10,000  andre fili: $39,200 (includes $18,000 win bonus) def. hacran dias: $12,800 ^ shamil abdurakhimov: $28,000 (includes $14,000 win bonus) def. walt harris: $12,000 elizeu zaleski dos santos: $24,000 (includes $12,000 win bonus) def. keita nakamura: $19,000   nate marquardt: $112,000 (includes $56,000 win bonus) def. tamdan mccrory: $15,000 ion cutelaba: $20,000 (includes $10,000 win bonus) def. jonathan wilson: $12,000 curtis blaydes: $20,000 (includes $10,000 win bonus) def. cody east: $10,000 ketlen vieira: $20,000 (includes $10,000 win bonus) def. kelly faszholz: $10,000  ^ john lineker, alex oliveira and hacran dias were fined 20 percent of their purse for failing to make the required weight limit for their respective fights. that money was issued to their opponents, an osac official confirmed.  see also list of ufc events 2016 in ufc  references  ufc fight night events in portland, oregon mixed martial arts in oregon sports in portland, oregon 2016 in mixed martial arts october 2016 sports events in the united states
"la negra tiene tumbao" (english: "the black woman's got style") is a song performed by cuban recording artist celia cruz. it features rap vocals performed by mikey perfecto. the song was written by sergio george and fernando osorio, produced by george and released as the lead single from cruz's fifty-ninth studio album la negra tiene tumbao (2001).  the song peaked at number thirty on the billboard latin songs chart and number four on the billboard tropical songs chart. it also managed to peak at number thirteen on the tropical digital songs chart in 2015. it received nominations for record of the year, song of the year, and music video of the year at the latin grammy awards of 2002.  recording and production producer sergio george was hired to produce more traditional tracks for the album. however, george wanted to try something different. according to george, he played a demo version of "la negra tiene tumbao" for cruz, "not knowing how she would respond, and that was the song that she most reacted to". it was the last song completed for the album.  musical composition "la negra tiene tumbao" combines elements of salsa music, reggae music and hip hop music. the song's title translates to "the black woman has style" or "the black woman has grace". the song was composed in minor key and incorporates the use of vocal call and response.  critical reception in allmusic's sharon witmer review of the parent album, the song was selected as at the "cd's biggest draw". according to billboard magazine's leila cobo, the song, "with its mid-section rap became the blueprint-to this day-for a bust of recordings featuring much younger acts." the song has been considered one of cruz's last hits before her death in july 2003.  the song received nominations for record of the year, song of the year, and music video of the year at the latin grammy awards of 2002. the parent album won the latin grammy award for best salsa album. it was nominated for album of the year. the song was also nominated tropical song of the year at the 2003 lo nuestro awards, eventually losing to cruz's own "la vida es un carnaval". it received a nomination for best "party starter" at the 2004 premios juventud. "la vida es un carnaval" was also nominated in the same category. in 2016, the song was awarded television theme song of the year, for the television program celia, at the american
society of composers, authors and publishers awards.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2001 songs 2001 singles celia cruz songs song recordings produced by sergio george sony discos singles songs written by sergio george songs written by fernando osorio
frank stanton burns gavin (october 13, 1890 - march 20, 1938) was an american anglican priest, theologian, author, journalist and educator. he received his b.a. at the university of cincinnati in 1912; b.h.l. at hebrew union college in 1923; a b.d. at the general theological seminary in 1915; and a th.d. from harvard university in 1916.  he served as literary editor of the living church beginning in 1924, and taught at nashotah house theological seminary and the general theological seminary.  select bibliography  aphraates and the jews: a study of the controversial homilies of the persian sage in their relation to jewish thought (1923) some aspects of contemporary greek orthodox thought (1923) the jewish antecedents of the christian sacraments (1928) the catholic doctrine of work and play (1930) selfhood and sacrifice: the seven problems of the atoning life (1932) the resources of the church (1934)  references  an episcopal dictionary of the church  external links  bibliographic directory from project canterbury  1890 births 1938 deaths general theological seminary alumni university of cincinnati alumni harvard divinity school alumni general theological seminary faculty 20th-century american episcopalians
thenpandi singam () is a 2016 tamil-language historical drama starring  benito alex, devipriya, nesan, krish and srikanth. it aired monday through friday on kalaignar tv from 15 september 2016 to 13 april 2017 at 8:30pm ist for 151 episodes. the show has been created and written by author and screenwriter karunanidhi. thenpandi singam is based on true story of the life of the valukku veli ambalam.  cast   benito alex  devipriya  nesan  krish  srikanth  v.k.r ragunath  sasindhar pushpalingam  shaji  ashokraj  vijaypapirasanth  karna  shivaraj  ravi krishna  dedid ramesh  sumaraj  mouriya  ashok  heisan  monika  sri priya  pathmini  shopana  santhy ananth  babi  sobaraani  kiruthika  getha  bakyasri  rajkumar   viramani  vinoth  v.m rathnavel  krish venkat  production  the series is written by karunanidhi of the 2014 - 2016 hit historical dramas romapuri pandian and 2015 ramanujar; and producer by vaishnavi media works limited of kutty padmini.  international broadcast the series was released on 1 june 2015 on kalaignar tv. the show was also broadcast internationally on channel's international distribution. it airs in sri lanka, singapore, malaysia, south east asia, middle east, oceania, south africa and sub saharan africa on kalaignar tv and also airs in united states, canada, europe on kalaignar ayngaran tv. the show's episodes were released on kalaignar tv youtube channel.  see also  list of programs broadcast by kalaignar tv  references  external links    kalaignar tv television series tamil-language historical television series tamil-language fantasy television series 2016 tamil-language television series debuts tamil-language television shows 2017 tamil-language television series endings
janine cirincione (born 1961) is an american curator and multimedia artist. she is the co-director of sean kelly gallery and was formerly the director of the tilton gallery where she curated "school days" in 2006 and "through the looking glass: artists' first encounters with virtual reality" in 1992. from 1993-1994, she was an artist in residence at the wexner center for the arts along with brian d'amato and michael ferraro. her project, "real life," (2001) created 2d animated characters which reacted to the real world of the gallery environment via sensors. cirincione has also been the president of content development at possibleworlds.  references  living people 1961 births place of birth missing (living people) 20th-century american artists 21st-century american artists 20th-century american women artists 21st-century american women artists american contemporary artists american multimedia artists
margarete ulrike augusta marie karoline elsa reger (nee von bagenski; previously von bercken, 25 october 1870 - 3 may 1951) was a german writer, the wife of the pianist and composer max reger, whose memory she kept alive by founding an archive, the max-reger-institute and a foundation, all dedicated to him and his work. the foundation is now named after her.  life  born as margarete ulrike augusta marie karoline elsa von bagenski in kolberg the daughter of captain ernst hugo robert von bagenski (or von bagensteg or von bagensky) and his wife auguste (or augusta) karoline josepha marie theresia fanny olga (nee baroness von seckendorff-aberdar zur welt), she married in 1887 franz von bercken. she met max reger in 1893, when she spent a summer vacation in  wiesbaden, where she took voice lessons with him. in 1899 she divorced her husband, but first rejected reger's courting. he composed many songs between 1899 and 1902. they married on 7 december 1902 in bad boll and lived in munich. as she was divorced and a protestant, the catholic reger was excommunicated. elsa's mother auguste also moved to munich where she died in 1904. elsa followed the composer, whose fame increased, to leipzig, meiningen and jena. she took care of his students as the regermutter (reger mother). the couple adopted two daughters, marie-martha heyer (1905-1969), adopted in 1908 as christa reger, and selma charlotte meinig (1907-1963), adopted as lotti reger in 1909. the relationship was troubled by reger's depressions and alcoholism.    after her husband's death in 1916, she took care of their daughters and also kept his memory alive. she initiated a , published in 1930 an autobiography mein leben mit und fur max reger (my life with and for reger), published his correspondence and prepared the publication of his works. she founded in 1947 the max-reger-institute with a foundation which was later named after her.   she died in bonn in 1951. according to her wish, she was buried on the alter friedhof close to clara schumann and maria magdalena van beethoven, beethoven's mother.  references  external links   elsa reger fembio.org  german women writers 1870 births 1951 deaths people from kołobrzeg
annales (; annals) is the name of a fragmentary latin epic poem written by the roman poet ennius in the 2nd century bc. while only snippets of the work survive today, the poem's influence on latin literature was significant. although written in latin, stylistically it borrows from the greek poetic tradition, particularly the works of homer, and is written in dactylic hexameter. the poem was significantly larger than others from the period, and eventually comprised 18 books.  the subject of the poem is the early history of the roman state. it is thought to be based mostly on greek records and the work of quintus fabius pictor. initially viewed as an important cultural work, it fell out of use sometime in the 4th century ad. no manuscripts survived through the middle ages. when interest in the work was revived during the renaissance period the poem was largely reconstructed from quotations contained in other works. subsequent academic study of the poem has confirmed its significance for its period.  contents  ennius's annales was the first epic poem that covered the early history of the roman state. fragments of the annales, as well as reports by ancient scholars, suggest that ennius opened his epic with a recollection of a dream. in this reverie, the poet claims that homer appeared to him and informed him that, thanks to the transmigration of souls, his spirit had been reborn into ennius.  the poem-which most speculate proceeded in chronological order-was likely divided into triads with a "concentric, symmetrical structure". in the first seven books, ennius wrote about mythical and historical past episodes, whereas in the following eight (and eventually, eleven), he wrote about contemporary events. although most of the poem has been lost, there is a "traditional"-albeit conjectured-organization for the book. books 1-3 cover the end of the trojan war in 1184 bc, to the reign of the last king of rome, lucius tarquinius superbus  535-509 bc. books 4-6 revolve around the early roman republic up until the pyrrhic war in 281-271 bc. books 7-9 deal briefly with the first punic war (264-241 bc) before covering the second (218-201 bc) in more detail. books 10-12 focus on the second macedonian war. (the ending to these three books is unclear; ennius might have concluded with an epilogue, or detailed rome's campaign against antiochus iii the great,  192 bc.) books 13
-15 detail the roman-seleucid war (192-188 bc) until the events of the aetolian war (191-189 bc). according to werner suerbaum and werner eck, it is likely that ennius chose to end the original portion of his opus with the aetolian war because of the role played in the conflict by one of his patrons, marcus fulvius nobilior.  sometime after ennius published his poem, he amended it with three additional books, which concern themselves with the istrian campaigns (177 bc) and the macedonian wars (214-148 bc). the final version of the annales therefore contained 18 books. according to pliny the elder in his historia naturalis, it was "on [the] account" of lucius caecilius metellus denter and his unspecified brother-two romans whom the poet admired-that ennius penned the sixteenth book.  sources  according to suerbaum and eck, it is likely that ennius drew mostly on greek records when he was compiling his poem, although he probably also made use of the roman historiographer quintus fabius pictor (who wrote in greek). additionally, it was assumed for a long time that both the structure, title, and contents of the annales were based on or inspired by the annales maximi-that is, the prose annals kept by the pontifex maximus during the roman republic. however, the scholars sander m. goldberg and gesine manuwald write that while the title of ennius's poem is reminiscent of the annales maximi, the idea that the poem is modeled on this official record is "almost certainly anachronistic", since there is very little evidence to suggest that an extensive version of the annales maximi would have existed around the time that ennius was writing his work. given this, they argue that the title "annales" was likely chosen by ennius not to connect it to the annales maximi, but rather to emphasize that he was rome's very first recorder of historical events (i.e., an "annalist").  style  whereas ennius's contemporaries like livius andronicus and gnaeus naevius wrote in saturnian verse, ennius eschewed this style. instead he penned annales in dactylic hexameter, in imitation of the works of homer; according to alison keith, by doing this, "ennius acknowledged the importance of greek culture in contemporary rome". because of ennius's decision, dactylic hexameter became the standard metre for subsequent latin epic poetry
.  but in addition to what alison sharrock and rihannon ashley call the "romanisation of greek poetic sophistication", suerbaum and eck note that by borrowing from homer's verse style, the work also "homerized" the roman historiographical tradition. suerbaum and eck cite "the appearance of deities, speeches, aristeiai, similes, ekphraseis, and the subdivision of events in single days" as decidedly homeric elements that ennius injected into roman historiography. with all this said, suerbaum and eck do argue the annales is also set apart from the works of homer by so-called "'modern' traits". these include its focus on and reference to "factual aspects" (with the aforementioned scholars citing its emphasis on "cavalry and naval battles"), as well as its use of "autobiographical, meta-literary and panegyric elements".  the scope and size of ennius's poem was at the time of its penning also "unprecedented"; for instance, both livius andronicus's odusia and naevius's bellum punicum were substantially shorter. sander m. goldberg and gesine manuwald postulate that ennius may have started writing a smaller historical poem that grew until it eventually comprised over a dozen books. the two write, "an expanding work of this kind would better align ennius with his predecessors, making his achievement more comprehensible but no less remarkable."  many scholars have declared that ennius's poem functions as "a mediator between homer and vergil"; in other words, it is claimed the annales transmits the style of homer into a decidedly latin tradition, which would eventually be used by virgil when it came time for him to pen his own epic poem, the aeneid. a large reason for this is that much of what is preserved of the annales comes from virgilian commentators, who were quoting ennius's work to compare or contrast it to passages in the aeneid. jackie elliott, however, points out that many of the extant fragments which were not derived from the quotations of commentators do not display the same "epic" style of either homer or virgil. thus, she argues, "to the extent that the annales today seem to the modern reader crucial to the epic tradition, they are the creation of vergil and of the vergiliocentric sources." put another way, the understanding of the annales as decidedly "epic" is largely a post facto one, prompted by its recontextual
ization in "vergiliocentric" commentaries on the aeneid. expressing a related sentiment, goldberg and manuwald write, "critics have grown more skeptical of a procedure that postulates echoes [in other poems] and then bases reconstructions [of the annales] upon them."  for centuries, it was believed that ennius focused on episodes in roman history that would appeal to his patrons. however, goldberg and manuwald once again note that this view has come into question in recent years and has yielded to a "more nuanced view that recognizes in the very sweep of the story he tells the subordination of personal interests to larger community values."  remains  over time, almost all of the work has been lost, and today only around 620 complete or partial lines remain, largely preserved in quotations by other authors (primarily cicero, festus, nonius, and macrobius). papyrus fragments of the poem were also found in the villa of the papyri in the ruins of herculaneum.  according to goldberg and manuwald, nearly one-fourth of the annaless extant fragments can be traced back to the work's first book. the two note that because this section of the poem was heavily quoted and commented upon in antiquity, reconstructing the contents and order of this book is less difficult than it is with the work's other books. consequently, given the relative dearth of fragments from other books-especially that of the climactic book 15-the two write the reconciliation of "scholarly methods and interpretive desires with the inconsistencies and silences of the fragmentary record" is "no easy task."  the first collection of the annales fragments was published in the later part of the 16th century. in the 19th century, the german philologist johannes vahlen was a key figure in the study of ennius's annales. goldschmidt, however, argues that the british classicist otto skutsch's book the annales of ennius (1985) is the "standard" for anyone interested in examining the fragments of the poem. a later edition supervised by enrico flores sought to reconsider "both the textual scholarship of the sources and the contextual placement of the fragments." in 1935, e. h. warmington prepared a version of the annales for the loeb classical library; this version was later superseded by sander m. goldberg and gesine manuwald's 2018 version.  fragment locations this chart lists in chronological order the authors whose works have preserved fragments of ennius's annales, alongside the ennian books quoted and the number of fragments
total, as determined by goldberg & manuwald (2018). the chart excludes 14 fragments that many scholars consider dubia (that is, unlikely parts of the annales).  reception  nora goldschmidt writes that when virgil was writing the aeneid, most grammarians and poets celebrated the annales as a "national epic" and a "carrier of rome's culture". as a result, the poem was extensively studied in schools around this time, as ennius himself was viewed as one of rome's greatest poets, historians, and writers. goldberg and manuwald concur with this latter point, writing that the annales cemented ennius's fame.  with that said, while many subsequent roman poets found ennius and his epic poem to be important (for having laid the groundwork of latin epic poetry), many also found it to be somewhat crude. for instance, virgil-who made heavy use of ennius-is reported by the historian suetonius to have once been reading ennius's poem only to be asked what he was doing; the poet replied that "he was gathering gold from ennius'  muck, for this poet has outstanding ideas buried under not very polished words." the later latin poets propertius and ovid, too, found ennius's work to be "crude and unkempt." (the latter, for instance, referred to ennius as "outstanding ... in talent [but] lacking in art" and noted that "nothing is rougher than" his poem).  regardless of some of ennius's "crudeness", his annales was read for hundreds of years. during the time of nero, it began to wane in popularity, although it remained a popular text with certain grammarians like festus and nonius (whose commentaries preserve much of the annales as we now have it). according to david scott wilson-okamura, "by the end of the fourth century, it was hard to find even one copy". at the turn of the fifth century, the work had become critically endangered. because of unknown circumstances, not a single complete manuscript of ennius survived textual transmission into the middle ages.  by the time renaissance humanists turned their attention to the work, they were forced to rely on small quotations embedded in other works and the testimonia of other writers-many of whom had taken to deriding ennius for his supposed stylistic "crudeness". given that they only had the briefest of snippets to analyze, many of these humanists-such as petrarch and richard stany
hurst-were forced to defer "to classical critics, not out of reverence only, but from necessity." thus, much of the discussion about ennius from this time also revolved around his poetic primitivism, and in time he came to be seen as "virgil's foil." with that said, a number of works from this time reference ennius, suggesting that these humanists found him and his epic poem worthy of interest. (he is, for instance, a major character in petrarch's unfinished epic africa.) golderg and manuwald also write that ennius's reception during this time is indexed by the zeal with which humanists attempted to collect the fragments of the annales that they could find.  notes on fragment locations  references  bibliography                         2nd-century bc works epic poems in latin greece in fiction italy in fiction latin histories lost poems
fission uranium corp. is a mineral exploration company. it is engaged in the exploration and development of uranium assets. its sole project is the patterson lake south (pls) project located in canada's athabasca basin district.  history fission's history can be traced directly to strathmore minerals corp., a firm  founded in 1996 by dev randhawa. under his leadership, strathmore minerals spun out fission energy corp in 2008, and time randhawa left strathmore to run fission energy. ross mcelroy joined fission energy and led the company's technical team to its first major discovery: the j zone at waterbury lake in saskatchewan's athabasca basin.  a second discovery, at pls in the athabasca basin, was made in november 2012. in 2013, fission uranium corp. was spun out of fission energy b  after a deal was made with denison mines corp to acquire all assets except pls. in january, 2015, fission uranium announced a major resource estimate in the indicated and inferred categories which, at that time, was the largest undeveloped resource in the athabasca basin region.  in fall 2015, fission uranium became embroiled in a dispute with a small group of dissident shareholders over an attempted merger with denison mines corp. the deal was opposed by some of the company's shareholders, who  staged an attempted 'proxy fight'  the attempt failed and fission's incumbent board of directors received an overwhelming majority of the shareholder vote   in january 2016, fission uranium corporation entered into an agreement with hong kong-based utility subsidiary cgn mining, which took a 19.9% share in the company and purchased up to 35% of annual production from the patterson lake south project for the investment of $82 million at a price of $0.85.  operations  the pls project is fission's core asset and is host to the triple r deposit, the undeveloped uranium deposit in canada's athabasca basin district. the property consists of around 17 contiguous claims totaling over 30,000 hectares located approximately 550 kilometers north-northwest of the city of prince albert and 150 kilometers north of the community of la loche. the pls property is located within the mid-boreal upland ecoregion of the boreal shield ecozone. in december 2016 the company announced it would conduct a 10,000 metre drill program to test regional targets outside of the triple r deposit.  in february 2017 fission announced it had expanded near-surface, high-grade uranium zones at each end of its 2.6 kilometer mineralized trend as well
as discovered new mineralization located 660 metres from the r840w zone.  in april 2017 fission reported it had expanded the r1515w zone and in turn extended the mineralized trend at patterson lake south to 3.17 kilometers.  awards  fission uranium and its management and technical teams have won a series of awards since its founding. these include: the northern miners "mining person/s of the year, 2013", pdac's "bill dennis award for a canadian discovery and prospecting success, 2014" and the mining journal's "exploration of the year, 2015".  references  companies based in kelowna 2013 establishments in british columbia
a scallywag  (british english; scalawag us english) is a good-natured, mischievous person who may act out of the norm; in some situations it can mean a good-for nothing person.  scallywag may also refer to:   a scalawag, one of the white southerners who supported reconstruction policies and efforts after the conclusion of the american civil war  scallywag (magazine), an alternative community magazine of the 1990s  scallywags (second world war), a nickname for the british auxiliary units, who were to engage in guerilla warfare in the event of a nazi invasion  scallywagga, a 2007 british comedy sketch show  "scallywagg", a song by captain bogg and salty from pegleg tango  see also  scalawag (disambiguation)  scally, a surname of irish origin
miss latina australia is an australian national beauty pageant was held in 2015 and 2016 run by e & e events management and estela tapia is national director of the contest. it was first held at the golden star receptions in epping, victoria on june 13, 2015 and designed for women of latina descent who are australian permanent residents or citizens. tapia chose to send the winners of the 2015 and 2016 pageants all expenses paid to compete in the miss america latina international beauty contest.  the miss latina australia pageant has received extensive coverage through national spanish newspapers such as the latin australian times and el espanol and is a highlight for the spanish speaking community in australia. filipinos with hispanic or latino descent were encouraged to participate, miss latina australia 2015 eva giollo is of argentinian and filipino descent, 2016 finalist andrea atherton was also of filipino decent, this received much attention from the australian filipino community though their leading print national newspaper the philippine times.  the current titleholder is georgette psarreas who was crowned on july 9, 2016 in the regent ballroom, melbourne, victoria.  charity  the miss latina australia contest supports the "hogar maria auxiliadora" orphanage in cochabamba, bolivia. many of the finalists fundraise for this cause and the most successful fundraiser is awarded the miss latina australia charity award.  miss latina australia 2016  miss latina australia 2016 took place on july 23, 2016, in the regent ballroom in northcote, melbourne. 12 finalists participated in the gala event. at the conclusion of the final event georgette psarreas (chilean & greek) was crowned miss latina australia with daniella seoane (uruguayan) second place and miss charity. jesica bustamante (el salvadorian)  won title of people's choice, tatiana castiblanco (colombian) winning miss photogenic.  titleholders  external links official website  see also  list of beauty contests  miss latina australia 2016  miss lindeza 2017  references     beauty pageants for people of specific ethnic or national descents
mazzotta is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  antonio mazzotta (born 1989), italian footballer federico mazzotta (1839-1897), italian painter giuseppe mazzotta, american historian peppino mazzotta (born 1971), italian actor riccarda mazzotta (born 1986), swiss cyclist roberto mazzotta (born 1940), italian economist and politician   italian-language surnames
hayley moffatt (born 10 august 1985) is an australian basketball player, who currently plays for the sydney uni flames in the wnbl.  career  wnbl moffatt began her wnbl career with the west coast waves in 2012. for the following season, she returned home to queensland and signed with the logan thunder. after the team left the league, moffatt was joined the sydney uni flames. moffatt has re-signed with the flames for the 2016-17 season, her third consecutive season in sydney.  references  1985 births living people australian women's basketball players guards (basketball) sportswomen from queensland sydney uni flames players
eunidia fallaciosa is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939. it is known from somalia.  subspecies  eunidia fallaciosa elongata teocchi & sudre, 2002  eunidia fallaciosa fallaciosa breuning, 1939  references  endemic fauna of somalia eunidiini beetles described in 1939
operator is a 2016 american comedy-drama film directed by logan kibens from a screenplay by sharon greene and logan kibens. it stars martin starr as joe, a programmer and obsessive self-quantifier, and mae whitman as emily, a budding comedy performer, who are a happily married couple until they decide to use one another in their work. nat faxon, cameron esposito, retta, and christine lahti co-star. the film had its world premiere at the sxsw film festival on march 12, 2016 and was released by the orchard on november 8, 2016.  plot joe (martin starr) is a programmer with a crippling anxiety problem who is unable to deal with uncertainty. at work he is tasked with creating an interactive call center answering machine that can convey empathy. joe recruits his wife emily (mae whitman) who has the perfect voice for the system. emily works at the front desk of a swanky hotel during the day and has an uncanny ability to soothe even the most irate guests (at night she performs with a comedy group at the neo-futurists). after years of being happily married, the pressures of work, family, and personal growth have strained their relationship. emily sees this as an opportunity to reinvigorate their marriage and agrees to participate. what begins as a collaboration to strengthen their relationship quickly spirals out of control. terrified of the uncertainty in their relationship, joe becomes obsessed with creating the "perfect" version of his wife, becoming detached from the real emily as he spends sleepless nights programming his automated emily to fulfill his needs for sex and companionship. while joe is losing touch with reality, emily is losing faith in their future together. joe will have to relinquish control and face the uncertainties of life if he wants to save their marriage.  cast  martin starr as joe larsen  mae whitman as emily klein  nat faxon as gregg  cameron esposito as chloe johnston  retta as pauline "roger" rogers  christine lahti as beth larsen  production operator began filming in chicago on june 29, 2015.  release and reception the film premiered to positive reviews at the south by southwest festival on march 12, 2016. on may 25, 2016, it was announced that the orchard had acquired distribution rights to the film.  on review aggregator rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 100% based on 6 reviews, with an average rating of 7.19/10.  references  external links        2016 films 2016 romantic comedy-drama films
american films american romantic comedy-drama films american independent films english-language films films about technological impact films set in chicago films shot in chicago the orchard (company) films 2016 independent films
mary taylor (1817 - 1 march 1893) an early advocate for women's rights, was born in gomersal, in the west riding of yorkshire, england.  early life  mary taylor's father joshua, a cloth manufacturer, and his wife anne had six children of which she was the fourth. her father, a radical and member of the methodist new connexion, was bankrupted in 1826, but determined to repay his creditors.  mary was an impulsive, clever child who shared her father's independent traits. she met ellen nussey and charlotte bronte in 1831 at roe head school in mirfield where they became firm lifelong friends despite having opposing views. at school taylor, while quiet, was defiant, standing by her opinions and practising what she preached. bronte, a visitor to the taylor's home, red house, described the family's company as 'one of the most rousing pleasures i have ever known'.  european tour taylor's father died in december 1840 and mary embarked on a european tour before joining her sister at the chateau de koekelberg, a finishing school in brussels. her correspondence with charlotte bronte described what she had seen on her travels inspiring her to go to brussels in 1842. after her sister's death in october 1842, taylor went to germany where, challenging established convention, she found employment teaching young men.  life in new zealand in march 1845, taylor followed her youngest brother, waring, who had arrived in wellington in 1842, to new zealand. here, she had a house built on cuba street, which she let out for rent whilst also earning as a piano teacher. in a letter, charlotte bronte writes mary was "in her element- because she is where he has a toilsome task to perform, an important improvement to effect- a weak vessel (waring) to strengthen- she will remain in new zealand as long as she can there find serious work to do - but no longer".  taylor also attempted to earn a living by sending written articles to english magazines, only to be unsuccessful in getting them published. during her stay in wellington, taylor also wrote a 150-page novel that would be published 40 years later, rumoured to be "miss miles".  in 1849, mary's cousin, ellen taylor, arrived in new zealand, and despite being 12 years her junior, boosted mary's confidence and enthusiasm with much-needed companionship during her stay. they leased a subdivision of town acre 178 where the two women built a two-storey house and
planned to open a drapery and garment business by 1850. having observed much of the dealings of her brother's business in trading commodities such as wool, land, cattle and clothing, mary caught on and had met many prospective clients. waring helped the two women with their bookkeeping and the business quickly took off. mary and ellen hoped to make £300 - £400 annually from the shop. the drapery had a gabled roof, a generous  by  building footprint and served as both a business and place of residence for mary and ellen in the upstairs rooms.  in 1851, when ellen fell ill to tuberculosis, mary nursed her cousin and after her death continued to work alone in the shop, where the business continued to grow. mary had to have the building extended and hire a sales assistant. an 1853 wellington almanack lists her shop as one of the most popular stores in the region. before mary left te aro in 1859, she invested £400 of her capital from selling her business into land in te aro, one in abel tasman street, another in ghuznee street.  she never had intended to remain in new zealand, and sold the shop that had provided her with a good income in a way a middle-class woman would have found impossible in england. she returned to yorkshire before 1860.  return to yorkshire and death when she was financially secure taylor returned to gomersal. high royd, the house built for her, was her home for the rest of her life. she made annual visits to switzerland where, aged almost 60 in 1875, she led a party of five women on an expedition to climb mont blanc and they published swiss notes by five ladies, an account of their ten-week adventure.  news of her death in yorkshire on 1 march 1893 was received in new zealand in may 1893.  feminist ideologies taylor was an avid reader of literature and used to read while running her drapery in new zealand. her home in gomersal shows her love for reading where a clear path in the carpet indicates the constant pacing she would do while reading. in her time back in yorkshire, between 1865 and 1870, taylor published many articles for victoria magazine  illustrating her many feminist ideas which were compiled into the book, the first duty of women. her great solace in reading and finding inspiration in it sheds insight on her opinions regarding women being discouraged from spending their time with books as she writes in first duty of women "let them undertake, then, the duty of providing for their own mental progress, as they must bear the
consequences of neglecting it". in these articles, she also states that women should be responsible for earning their own living and that to marry solely on the basis of money was demeaning. taylor strongly negated the idea that women were bound in duty to sacrifice themselves for others, and criticized charlotte bronte for inducing the notion that a working life was not meant for all women. in her letter to charlotte she writes: "you are a coward and a traitor. a woman who works is by that alone better than one who does not and a woman that does not happen to be rich and who still earns no money and does not wish to do so, is guilty of a great fault- almost a crime." it is clear in mary's many letters and in her writings that one of her central beliefs in life was that it was necessary for a woman to work in order to grant herself independence and happiness. in her book miss miles or a tale of yorkshire life 60 years ago, taylor writes about the lives of five women in gomersal and their attitudes towards work; where four of the women endure financially and mentally due to their working lives, whilst the fifth woman who doesn't have the motivation to pursue independent work is fated towards a woeful life.  taylor remarked that her time and efforts spent in wellington would be the part of her life which she would consider most agreeable because of the attitudes of settlers and the equal opportunities available for all those establishing the new township regardless of their gender and age. in settler ideology, there was a strong opposition to snobbery and any efforts to impose class distinctions which wholly satisfied mary. in her letter to bronte in june 1848, taylor provides social commentary on lower class and middle-class women, writing, "mrs taylor miss knox and mrs logan sat in mute admiration while we mentioned these things, being employed in the meantime in making a patchwork quilt. did you ever notice that the women of middle classes are generally too ignorant to talk to?, and that you are thrown entirely on men for conversation? there is no such feminine inferiority in the lower. the women go hand in hand with the men in the degree on cultivation that they are able to reach. i can talk very well to a joiner's wife, but seldom to a merchants."  references  external links   text of "swiss notes, by five ladies"  british women's rights activists people from gomersal people from wellington city 1817 births 1893 deaths 19th-century new zealand businesspeople
stoney grove estate is a former plantation on the caribbean island of nevis. the stoney grove strikers gained their name from here.  the estate is in the parish of saint john figtree. it is about is 177 meters above sea level. it is 4.49 acres in size. the estate contains ruins of former buildings, including the great house, whose floor area was 1,900 square feet.   the estate was first owned by james tobin senior, and then his son, james tobin (1736/7-1817), from whom it passed to his friend and business associate john pinney. while james tobin was an active anti-abolitionist, his son james webbe tobin opposed slavery and moved to nevis in 1809. he built the palladian mansion, whose ruins are visible today.  at the death of james tobin in 1817, there were 213 enslaved people on the estate. at emancipation the estate housed 209 enslaved africans, for which charles pinney received £3,572 10s 11d  references  nevis sugar plantations in the caribbean
raul ruiz gonzalez-riancho (born 13 february 1960) is a spanish football fitness coach. from october to november 2018, he was the interim manager of spartak moscow.  career he started his career in gimnastica de torrelavega as physical trainer and assistant coach working alongside manuel preciado rebolledo. after that he worked for racing de santander, levante ud, and fc rubin kazan.  in february 2014, he signed a contract with the ukrainian side fc dynamo kyiv as fitness coach and assistant for serhii rebrov. here he worked until 30 june 2016.  on 15 july 2016, he was appointed as assistant coach of the ukraine national football team to help the head coach andriy shevchenko.  references  external links    1960 births living people spanish football managers spanish expatriate football managers expatriate football managers in russia expatriate football managers in ukraine spanish expatriate sportspeople in russia spanish expatriate sportspeople in ukraine fc spartak moscow managers russian premier league managers strength and conditioning coaches
destiny () is a 1951 italian melodrama film directed by enzo di gianni and starring eva nova, renato valente and lilia landi.  the film's sets were designed by enzo trapani.  cast  eva nova as elena martini  renato valente as bruno  lilia landi as sonia  mario vitale as franco borielli  agostino salvietti as papa' ciocchetti  loris gizzi as filippo borcello  michele malaspina as l'avvocato giorgio bariello  tina pica as nunziata  amedeo trilli as il frate  giulia lazzarini as anna maria  domenico modugno as turiddu  silvana muzi as l'infermiera  salvatore furnari  as il nano sansone  references  bibliography  external links  1951 films 1951 drama films italian drama films italian films italian-language films films directed by enzo di gianni films set in naples melodramas italian black-and-white films
black dog (osage, manka-chonka, ca. 1780-1840) was a chief of the hunkah band of the osage indians that lived in an area around present baxter springs, kansas. in the fall of 1803, the band moved to the village of pasuga (big cedar), present day claremore, oklahoma. his towering height was around seven feet tall, his weight some 300 pounds, and he was blind in the left eye.  he took his band on hunts as far away as santa fe, then part of mexico, possibly earning the designation manka-chonka in battles with the comanche. he is credited with engineering a trail known as the black dog trail east of present baxter springs, kansas to the great salt plains in present alfalfa county, oklahoma.    on a visit to fort gibson in 1834, george catlin painted black dog's picture, giving his name as "tchong-tas-sab-bee, black dog, second chief".  black dog is known to have had at least one son, also called black dog (1827-1910), who became an osage chief in 1870.  early life black dog i was born in 1780 near the mississippi river and the site of the present-day city of st. louis, missouri. his birth name was zhin-gawa-ca (or shinka-wah-sa), meant dark eagle or sacred little one. about 1802 his people migrated and settled in the northeastern part of the present state of oklahoma. his band set up a village they named pasuga (big cedar), located on an ancient earthwork mound built by an earlier indigenous culture. after fighting well as a young warrior against the raiding comanche in that region, zhin-gawa-ca was given a new name, manka-chonka, meaning black dog. it was customary for the osage to be given new names to reflect such major passages in life.  chief black dog was a contemporary of, and shared power in the tribe with, two other noted chiefs: clermont (claremore) and pawhuska. osage men were typically described as very tall and physically well-built. black dog was apparently even more imposing than most, since he was described as nearly  tall and weighing at least . he was reportedly blind in his left eye. he is believed to have led one of the larger bands.  his men completed what became known as the black dog trail by 1803. it started from their winter territory east of baxter springs in kansas
and extended southwest to their summer hunting grounds at the great salt plains in present-day alfalfa county, oklahoma. the osage regularly stopped at the springs for healing on their way to summer hunting grounds. they made the trail by clearing it of brush and large rocks, and constructing earthen ramps to the fords. wide enough for eight horsemen to ride abreast, the trail was the first improved road in kansas and oklahoma.  the band had a village known as pasuga, "big cedar", built on an earthwork mound near what later developed as claremore, oklahoma.  osage tradition credits black dog i with having constructed a cave near his village on claremore mound. the cave was large enough to conceal the nearly 500 members of his band and they stocked it with enough food to survive for a year. the cave later provided a hiding place for the remaining residents of pasuga to escape being massacred by during the so-called battle of claremore mound in 1817.  black dog i had one son, known as an adult as black dog ii (1827-1910). he later became a chief among the osage. many sources refer to the father as black dog i and the son as black dog ii. the son reportedly became chief in 1870.  see also  battle of claremore mound  notes  references   pre-statehood history of oklahoma people from st. louis indian territory osage people 1780 births 1848 deaths
the lonely crossing and other poems (1905) is a collection of poems by australian poet louisa lawson. it was the only collection of her work published during her lifetime.  the collection includes 52 poems by the author that are reprinted from various sources, although most appeared first in the dawn, an early australian feminist magazine that lawson also edited.  contents  critical reception on its original publication the freeman's journal stated that "the literary level reached in these fugitive products of a life which has been too strenuous for dalliance with the muses may not reach the highest level of poesy ; but they have the true sweet note of the simple lyric and are faithful to nature whether of the observative or contemplative order. more than that, they are an earnest that the authoress might worthily vest herself, if she would, in the singing robes of australia."  in a minor review the maitland weekly mercury noted "her life has been one of hard work, and of many struggles against adverse circumstances, but these experiences have probably only the better fitted her to write many sweet and helpful sonnets for the encouragement of her countrywomen."  see also  the full text of the collection is available from the university of sydney  1905 in australian literature  1905 in poetry  references  australian poetry collections 1905 books
bohdan borovskyi (; born 17 september 1992), is a professional ukrainian football midfielder playing with fc vorkuta in the canadian soccer league.  career  ukraine  he is the product of fc ametyst oleksandria sportive school. he played in the ukrainian first league in 2010 with fc oleksandriya. in 2012, he played in the ukrainian second league with zhemchuzhina yalta, and later with fc ukrahrokom holovkivka where in 2013 he assisted in securing promotion to the ukrainian first league. after promotion to the ukrainian first league he signed with fc hirnyk kryvyi rih. he returned to his former club oleksandriya in 2016, and had a loan spell with fc inhulets petrove.   in 2017, he played with mfc kremin kremenchuk, and the following season with fc hirnyk-sport horishni plavni.  canada  in 2019, he played abroad in the canadian soccer league with fc vorkuta. in his debut season with vorkuta he assisted in securing the first division title. the following season he featured in the csl championship final against scarborough sc and assisted in securing the championship. in 2021, he assisted in securing vorkuta's third regular season title, and secured the prosound cup against scarborough. he also played in the 2021 playoffs where vorkuta was defeated by scarborough in the championship final.  honors  fc vorkuta   csl championship: 2020  canadian soccer league first division/regular season: 2019, 2021  prosound cup: 2021  references  external links       ukrainian footballers association football midfielders 1992 births living people people from oleksandriia fc oleksandriya players fc hirnyk kryvyi rih players fc ukrahrokom holovkivka players fc inhulets petrove players fc kremin kremenchuk players fc hirnyk-sport horishni plavni players fc vorkuta players ukrainian first league players canadian soccer league (2006-present) players ukrainian second league players
naimat (mada capital) is a pakistani drama serial directed by abdullah badini and written by naila ansari. the drama aired on ary digital. zahid ahmed and sunita marshall play the lead roles of babar and sara respectively.  plot naimat is a story of sara (sunita marshall) and babar (zahid ahmed), who were a happily married couple, but the surprises of life brings a reason for them to get distant. the trouble in their happy life begins, when they learn that their 5-year-old son bilal is suffering from a serious heart disease; and since then taking care of bilal becomes the ultimate reason of sara's life. her full attention towards bilal eventually develops into the reason of her ignorance toward babar  cast zahid ahmed as babar sunita marshall as sara samina ahmed as babar's mother kiran haq  as zara seemi pasha as zara's aunty shahood alvi as doctor ayesha khan as doctor's mother badar khalil as babar's mother  references  external links  ary digital programs  ary digital 2016 pakistani television series debuts pakistani drama television series 2016 pakistani television series endings urdu-language television shows ary digital original programming
pedrotti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  antonio pedrotti (1901-1975), italian conductor and composer carlo pedrotti (1817-1893), italian conductor and composer kevin pedrotti (1948-2011), australian rules footballer  italian-language surnames
jagadguru kripalu parishat (jkp), previously known as sadhna bhawan trust is a charitable religious organisation in india. it was established in 1970 by jagadguru shri kripalu ji maharaj and continues to run today under his auspices, with the leadership of the three presidents he has appointed. the philanthropic activities are designed to ensure and fulfill the vision of jagadguru kripalu, who was entitled with jagadguru on 14 january 1957, and these combined efforts benefit the communities and individuals that needs help. to fulfill his vision, jagadguru shri kripalu ji established three major temples, bhakti mandir (bhakti dham, mangarh), prem mandir (vrindavan) and kirti mandir (barsana), for the benefit of all.  as a non-profit, charitable, educational and spiritual organisation, dedicated to increasing spiritual awareness, jkp works tirelessly to disseminate the teachings of jagadguru shri kripalu ji maharaj throughout the world. following a clearly defined set of aims and objectives, jkp continues its work in india and globally, focusing on the growing number of people seeking spiritual guidance and support. in addition to this, jkp also works to cater to broader social welfare issues, such as educating and providing medical care to those at a disadvantage in society. this work has increased substantially over the years and jkp's three hospitals now cater to over 450,000 people annually.  these efforts have been sustained through the auspices of kripalu maharaj and the jkp presidents who continue to guide and inspire the trust to move forward. due to this, jkp is continuing to have a smooth and efficient operation. jagadguru kripalu parishat, established in 1972 with the aim of teaching the eternal knowledge of the vedas to seekers globally and helping the society by conducting philanthropic and humanitarian efforts.  jkp presidents  h.h. dr. vishaka tripathi  president - jkp bhakti dham, mangarh considered by devotees to be an embodiment of pure devotion and love, she inspires them to be fully devoted to the divine service of hari and guru. she is a pillar of strength and leadership to the worldwide community and remains fully engrossed in the strategic planning and advancement of all jkp projects. her presence has been instrumental in empowering jkp volunteers to perform their work enthusiastically. the entire world owes her for the invaluable treasure of shri maharaj ji's memories that she herself has preserved using various new technologies.  in the year 2016,h.h.dr.vishaka tripathi,president-
jkp bhakti dam,mangarh,was conferred the top 50 indian icon award. the award had been given to vishakha tripathi for her exemplary work and efforts in the field of girl education and philanthropy.  h.h. dr. shyama tripathi  president, jkp shyama shyam dham, vrindavan as an eminent scholar with profound knowledge of jagadguru kripalu bhaktiyoga tattva darshan (the body of works propounded by jagadguru kripalu ji maharaj) and the divine scriptures of hinduism, she is recognized within the organization for her aptitude in answering any queries in depth. she has also been instrumental in training shri maharaj ji's appointed preachers, who actively spread the knowledge and teachings of hinduism worldwide. dr. shyama tripathi oversees all the publication works of jkp and is key in guiding all preachers of jkp in spreading shri maharaj ji's message and philosophy throughout the world. she is recognized as a symbol of devotional discipline and hard work.  h.h. dr. krishna tripathi  president, jkp rangeeli mahal, barsana considered to be a personification of true worship and devotion, she is acknowledged for her ability to present the ideal ways of life to be adopted by a devotee. regarded as a personality with childlike innocence, energy and enthusiasm, she is regarded for her skill at instilling hope, vigor and love in all devotees, inspiring them to live and embrace a lifestyle in accordance with shri maharaj ji's philosophy. dr. krishna tripathi is also an eminent scholar with profound knowledge of the divine scriptures of hinduism. she is popularly known for welcoming questions from spiritual seekers and answering them wholeheartedly to erase doubts in the spiritual aspirants' mind. recognized for her skill in the art of adornment, she designs the ornate dresses of all deities within the jkp monuments.  jkp monuments   prem mandir, a religious and spiritual complex situated on a 54-acre site on the outskirts of vrindavan, mathura, india. it is dedicated to shri radha krishna and sita ram. the monument is built in italian marble and was opened to public on 17 february 2012. it is the most popular attraction in vrindavan. and is regarded as one of the best uses of marble in contemporary architecture.  prem bhavan, a 73,000 square feet temple in the form of a pillarless dome. it is being constructed next to prem mandir, which will accommodate 25,000 people at a time.  bhakti mandir mangarh. a stone, hand-carved
temple. standing 108 feet tall and built with pink sandstone, white marble and black granite. the foundation stone of bhakti mandir was laid on 26 october 1996, and was inaugurated in november 2005.  bhakti bhavan, mangarh. a 73,000 square feet temple in the form of a pillarless dome. it is situated next to bhakti mandir, and can accommodate 25,000 people at a time.  radha madhav dham or shree raseshwari radha rani temple, usa. the largest hindu temple complex in the western world. the temple encompasses about 35,000 square feet (3,300 m2) and is topped by a 90-foot (27 m)-high golden dome. the 90-foot (27 m) high temple dome is made of white and blue granite and gold. the artwork of the temple's shrine was hand-crafted by 15 artisans from south india. festivals and celebrations at the temple attract up to 8000 people.  kirti mandir, barsana. the mandir is 111 feet tall (up to its flag) and has twelve pillars made from emerald peri granite. the main pillar which is near the entrance was actually put in place by shri kripaluji maharaj, who is the inspiration and guide behind this breath-taking monument of love. four delicately carved panels can be found within the temple and there are 24 half pillars where the 'sakhis' are found intricately carved into. they all seem to be smiling in joy as they are praising their beloved shri radhe.  jkp philanthropy  jkp, under the inspiration, love and guidance of jagadguru shri kripalu maharaj, will continue to strive in its goal to serve more of the hundreds of thousands of people who are in desperate need of welfare. his appointed jkp presidents are tirelessly moving forward with the goals set out by the founder.  under the umbrella of jkp, there are three main philanthropic groups that have been established by jagadguru shri kripalu ji maharaj. in march 2020,in continuance of  the legacy of humanitarian and philanthropic efforts of jagadguru shri kripalu ji maharaj, jagadguru kripalu parishat presidents, h.h. sushri dr. vishakha tripathi ji, h.h. sushri dr. shyama tripathi ji and h.h. sushri dr. krishna tripathi ji have confirmed a contribution of rs100 lakhs to the prime minister's cares fund.  this initiative was taken to help the uttar pradesh state government in its fight against the covid-19 outbreak.  j
kp hospitals  the first, jagadguru kripalu chikitsalaya (jkc), a 100% free charitable hospital group that was established in 2003. the setup of jkc started with hospitals setup in kunda (november 2003) and then in barsana (january 2007) which are both in uttar pradesh. jkc has helped thousands of sick villagers in these remote locations in india due to the lack of medical facilities. it is unimaginable how such an endeavor has saved so many lives. in september 2015, jkc opened its third facility in vrindavan, housing important medical equipment, doctors and nurses living quarters as well as 100-beds to treat patients. all three hospitals will serve over 450,000 people in uttar pradesh ensuring constant medical care through a combination of allopathic, homeopathic, ayurvedic and naturopathic treatments.  till now,jagadguru kripalu chikitsalaya had given medical care to over 4 million impoverished patients from these three locations. these charitable hospitals are providing top class healthcare facilities to the poor and the needy in the villages.  jkp education   the second group under jkp is jagadguru kripalu parishat education (jkpe) which provides 100% free schooling to over 5000 village girls living near and around kunda. the schooling covers from pre-primary to post-graduate levels, using the best technology and amenities, via three institutions at pratapgarh in uttar pradesh. unfortunately, girls in this location do not receive the kind of education that would help them succeed in life. we know that when girls have equal opportunities to education, then the cycles of poverty are broken, economies grow and their potentials are unleashed. jagadguru kripalu parishat education,which offers education (kindergarten to college level) to underprivileged girls from pratapgarh and nearby areas and has till now  helped over 55,000 children from these areas getting good education and lead a good life. warm jackets and food bowls were provided regularly for school children from pratapgarh, vrindavan, and barsana.  jkp education has established  kripalu balika primary school (kbps), from classes lkg-5,  kripalu balika intermediate college (kbic), from classes 6-12 and  kripalu mahila mahavidyalaya (kmm), offering ba, bsc, ma & bed.  jkp social  the third group is jkp's task of providing social services in as many means as possible. this is done through the various funds to
help widows, the poor and underprivileged. for example, in april 2015, jkp distributed clothes and daily necessities to 4000 widows in vrindavan and in november 2015 more than 5000 sadhus were provided with valuable everyday necessities. the braj residents including widows  were given a bag full of important necessities such as warm jacket/sweater, blanket, walking stick, clothing, etc.  till april 2020, 35000 impoverished people were given winter resources by jkp in december 2019 to stay comfortable during winter. many efforts are being made by jkp serve humanity. the poor relief fund operated under jkp  helps giving out warm blankets, jackets, clothing, food items, school bags and resources (benches, chairs etc) and many other necessities to almost 100,000 impoverished individuals every year to braj residents of brindavan and barsana.  awards  up state mahotsav award, a state level award for charity in health and education received on 10 january 2015  zee sargam award a national level award for social service and education of girls received on 5 november 2014  nelson mandela award prestigious national award for selfless contribution to society, 19 april 2014   nari today award by inext for extraordinary work, remarkable contribution in female education received in 2013  mother teresa excellence award by economic growth society of india for educating the girl child received in 2013  rajiv gandhi excellence award noted as india's highest honour for outstanding achievements in charity, in may 2012  top 50 indian icon award  references  external links jkp hospitals jkp education  krishnaite vaishnava denominations hindu organizations hindu organisations based in india hindu relief organizations religious organizations established in 1970 health charities in india educational organisations based in india organisations based in uttar pradesh 1970 establishments in uttar pradesh
the kalayaan flyover, also known as the edsa-kalayaan flyover, is a four-lane flyover connecting gil puyat avenue, epifanio de los santos avenue (edsa), kalayaan avenue, and 32nd street in metro manila, the philippines. located primarily in makati with a short portion in taguig, it facilitates access from the makati central business district to the bonifacio global city and, ultimately, to circumferential road 5 (c-5).  preparation work for the flyover began in 1997, when the bases conversion and development authority (bcda) announced the construction of two new primary access points to the bonifacio global city, with the flyover serving as the main western access point to the area.  designed by katahira & engineers asia, actual construction of the flyover began in late 1997 with the construction of the segment between gil puyat avenue and edsa, contracted to the uy-pajara construction company.   work on the segment between kalayaan avenue and the bonifacio global city meanwhile began in april 1999, with the work being contracted to f.f. cruz and co., one of the philippines' largest construction companies.  capable of holding up to 4,000 vehicles at one time, the flyover would reduce travel times between makati and the bonifacio global city to five minutes by providing a direct connection between the two business districts instead of needing to route vehicles through edsa.  the  flyover was inaugurated by president joseph estrada and other government officials on january 25, 2000.  although promoted as a public project, it has been rumored that the ₱950 million spent for the flyover's construction did not come from public funds, but rather was underwritten by the first pacific group through their local subsidiary, metro pacific.  despite being a flyover, the entire road is designated as national route 191 (n191) of the philippine highway network.  gallery  references  road interchanges in the philippines
zhanyl okoeva (; born november 15, 1993) is a kyrgyzstani weightlifter, competing in the 48 kg category and representing kyrgyzstan at international competitions. she participated in the women's 48 kg event at the 2015 world weightlifting championships, and at the 2016 summer olympics, finishing in tenth position.  major results  references  1993 births living people kyrgyzstani female weightlifters sportspeople from bishkek weightlifters at the 2014 asian games weightlifters at the 2018 asian games weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics olympic weightlifters of kyrgyzstan asian games competitors for kyrgyzstan
the bahay ng pagbabago ("house of change"), formerly known as the bahay pangarap ("dream house" ), is a residential building inside the malacanang palace complex in manila, philippines. it has been used as the official residence of benigno aquino iii and rodrigo duterte during their presidencies, instead of taking residence at malacanang proper as done by their predecessors.  history  original house (1930s-2008) the bahay ng pagbabago's original structure was built in the 1930s by the bureau of public works and was designed by architect juan arellano it was originally built as a rest house of the malacanang park for informal activities and social functions of the president. the malacanang park itself was converted from a rice field south of the malacanang palace during the administration of president manuel l. quezon.  the rest house underwent refurbishment in the early 1960s initiated by first lady eva macapagal, wife of president diosdado macapagal. macapagal gave the name "bahay pangarap" to the rest house.  during the administration of president fidel v. ramos, the house was repurposed as a clubhouse for the malacanang golf club. in 1996, it was made as an alternative venue for official government functions, in addition to social and recreational events.  onglao house (2008-) the bahay pangarap underwent renovation in 2008 under architect conrad onglao. the structure was essentially demolished and rebuilt in a contemporary style. its roof has a basic design which was adopted from the previous structure.  president benigno aquino iii took residence in the bahay pangarap during his tenure from 2010 to 2016. he preferred to live in his private house in times street in quezon city and refused to take residence at the malacanang palace or the nearby arlegui mansion because the buildings are "too big" for a bachelor like him. he made a compromise, taking residence in bahay pangarap, where the presidential guards could better guarantee his safety. aquino is the first president to make the bahay pangarap his official residence.  after president rodrigo duterte took office in 2016, he moved into the bahay pangarap, which was renamed as "bahay ng pagbabago" (). the name change was a bid of the duterte administration to distance itself from the "pipe dream" of its immediate predecessor.  facilities the house is located at malacanang park beside the compound of the presidential security group, which situated
on the opposite side of the pasig river fronting malacanang palace itself. prior to 2010, it only has a single bedroom and a swimming pool. three additional rooms were added when president benigno aquino iii made the house his official residence; a guest room, a room each for the president's household staff and close-in security aides.  references  buildings and structures in paco, manila presidential residences in the philippines official residences in the philippines malacanang palace
the 2013 big 12 conference women's soccer tournament was the postseason women's soccer tournament for the big 12 conference held on november 6, 8 and 10, 2014. the seven-match tournament was held at the swope soccer village in kansas city, missouri with a combined attendance of 2,787. the 8-team single-elimination tournament consisted of three rounds based on seeding from regular season conference play. the west virginia mountaineers defeated the oklahoma state cowgirls in the championship match to win their first conference tournament since joining the league.  regular season standings source:  bracket  awards  most valuable player source: offensive mvp - frances silva - west virginia defensive mvp - kadeisha buchanan - west virginia  all-tournament team  references  2013 big 12 women's soccer tournament    big 12 conference women's soccer tournament
the peacocks is an album by pianist jimmy rowles featuring saxophonist/album producer stan getz which was recorded in 1975 and released on the columbia label in 1977. the album was one of several released in the 1960s and 1970s where rowles spelled his first name as "jimmie".  reception  the allmusic review by michael g. nastos stated "with few jimmy rowles recordings in the world, this has to rank as his best, clearly the most entertaining, and a project getz was ever proud to bring to the jazz world. it is definitive, deserving of the columbia jazz masterpieces tag, and a must-have item in your modern jazz collection".  track listing  "i'll never be the same" (matty malneck, frank signorelli, gus kahn) - 4:07  "lester left town" (wayne shorter) - 5:53  "body and soul" (johnny green, frank eyton, edward heyman, robert sour) - 5:51  "what am i here for?" (duke ellington, frankie laine) - 4:57  "serenade to sweden" (ellington) - 5:39  "the chess players" (shorter) - 5:43  "the peacocks" (jimmy rowles) - 5:42  "my buddy" (walter donaldson, kahn) - 4:26  "the hour of parting" (mischa spoliansky) - 3:35  "rose marie" (rudolf friml, herbert stothart, otto harbach, oscar hammerstein ii) - 2:54  "this is all i ask" (gordon jenkins) - 4:23  "skylark" (hoagy carmichael, johnny mercer) - 4:01  "mosaic/would you like to take a walk?" (cedar walton/harry warren, mort dixon, billy rose) - 1:33  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone (tracks 1, 2 & 4-13) jimmy rowles (as "jimmie rowles") - piano, vocals buster williams - bass (tracks 2, 6, 8, 10 & 11) elvin jones - drums (tracks 2, 6, 8, 10 & 11) beverly getz (track 6), jon hendricks (track 6), judy hendricks (track 6), michele hendrick (track 6) - vocals  references   1977 albums stan getz albums columbia records albums jimmy rowles albums
william smith was an english surveyor employed by the royal african company (rac) in 1726 to survey their castles in west africa. the rac dispatched him in response to reports of their castles deteriorating conditions and low personnel numbers. his account of the trip, a new voyage to guinea, was published posthumously in 1744, with a second edition being published in 1745. the full title of his book was a new voyage to guinea: describing the customs, manners, soil, manual arts, agriculture, trade, employments, languages, ranks of distinction climate, habits, buildings, education, habitations, diversions, marriages, and whatever else is memorable among the inhabitants. in the book, smith gave an account of several locations in west africa, including fort tantumquery and fort winneba.   upon smith's return to london in september 1727, he submitted a report to the rac indicating they could not afford the maintenance costs of the castles, which amounted to about £13,500 by 1731. in response to this, in 1730 the british parliament had voted to grant an annual subsidy of £10,000 to the rac to their castles could be properly maintained. as historian robert w. harms noted in his 2002 work the diligent: a voyage through the worlds of the slave trade, the subsidy resulted in the british government assuming financial responsibility for the rac's establishments along the gold coast.  references  18th-century english people english surveyors
anna stephanie maiwald (born 21 july 1990) is a german athlete who specialises in the heptathlon. in 2008 maiwald won the heptathlon at the german under 20 championship.  she competed in the heptathlon event at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands. has won the gold medal in the heptathlon at the 2015 universiade.  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links     1990 births living people german heptathletes universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade gold medalists for germany medalists at the 2015 summer universiade
janine "nine" culliford (nee devroye; 29 march 1930 - 5 july 2016) was a belgian colorist of comic strips.  nine culliford was the wife of the comic strip creator known as peyo (the pseudonym of pierre culliford, 1928-1992). she colored his illustrations up until his death.  she is especially notable for coming up with the idea that the smurfs should be colored blue. after the death of her husband, she continued to color the comic strips produced by the studio founded by her son thierry who has been continuing the work of peyo.  she died on 5 july 2016 at the age of 86.  the 2017 film smurfs: the lost village is dedicated to her memory.  references   1930 births 2016 deaths belgian comics artists place of death missing place of birth missing belgian female comics artists comics colorists peyo female comics writers
king ezekiel, later revealed as ezekiel sutton in the television series, is a fictional character from the comic book series the walking dead and the television series of the same name, in which he is portrayed by khary payton.  ezekiel is the leader of the kingdom, a community of survivors terrorized by a vicious group called the saviors. other communities including the hilltop and the alexandria safe-zone suffer the same subjugation. the communities, led by ezekiel, maggie at the hilltop, and rick at alexandria, team up in an all-out war against the saviors and their leader, negan. ezekiel has a loyal pet tiger, shiva, that he saved from the zoo in the early days of the apocalypse when he was a zookeeper. although shiva can be deadly to ezekiel's enemies, she is not a threat to the kingdom's peaceful residents and guests. instead, ezekiel rules by the consent of his community, who believe in his charismatic leadership skills and ability to keep them safe. in the comics, ezekiel enters into a romantic relationship with michonne, while in the show he instead marries carol.  appearances  comic book series ezekiel, referred to as "king ezekiel" by his fellow citizens, is the leader of a community known as the kingdom. ezekiel was formerly a zookeeper and has known his pet tiger, shiva, since she was born.  at some point, ezekiel meets and forms a friendship with paul "jesus" monroe, who invites his community to join a trading network that includes the hilltop community that jesus belongs to. ezekiel later discovers the saviors are threatening and harassing the other communities in the trade network in exchange for supplies and possibly sees how vicious their leader, negan really is (despite the truce offered by the saviors).  ezekiel bides his time and waits for the opportune moment to strike back against the tyrant. the opportunity ezekiel is waiting for finally comes when jesus brings rick grimes to meet him and passes on the information they have regarding the saviors' strength and the location of their main base of operations.  during the war, ezekiel starts a relationship with michonne. two years after the war against the saviors ends, ezekiel and michonne break up, but ezekiel is confident about starting their relationship again. however, he and 11 other people are decapitated by alpha during the conflict with the whisperers.  television series  backstory prior to the outbreak, ezekiel was a zookeeper in d.c. as well as a stage actor. at some point he met shiva, a tiger
cub who was injured in her exhibit. ezekiel cared for and befriended shiva and formed a strong bond with her. when the walker outbreak began, ezekiel returned to the zoo and freed shiva with the two being together ever since. ezekiel subsequently founded a community known as the kingdom which grew to be a thriving community, lush with food and comfort. to better inspire his people, ezekiel began referring to himself as king ezekiel and took on the mannerisms of a benevolent and generous feudal king (going so far as to speak in shakespearean tone and form). he also formed a court of advisers to help him manage the kingdom which include seasoned survivor richard, his personal attendant and bodyguard jerry, and benjamin, a young survivor who was the son of a good friend of ezekiel's.  season 7  ezekiel is first introduced to the series in the episode "the well", when morgan jones and carol are brought to the kingdom by his people to give medical attention to carol. when carol awakens, morgan introduces her to ezekiel and his pet bengal tiger shiva. ezekiel's quasi-shakespearean manner of ruling leaves carol quietly incredulous. when ezekiel asks what she thinks of his sanctuary and him, she feigns enthusiasm (telling him, "it's amazing!"), and refuses his offer of fruit, stating that pomegranates aren't worth the trouble. morgan, having swiftly gained ezekiel's confidence, is taken out with ezekiel's inner circle to perform a seemingly pointless task: herd a group of wild pigs into a barn far outside the kingdom, where they feed on walkers. ezekiel asks morgan about his combat skills, as he sees morgan is capable of using a staff, and asks him to train one of his men, benjamin. after hesitating, morgan agrees. ezekiel brings morgan and benjamin to a secret meeting with the saviors, who are given the walker-fed pigs, now slaughtered, as part of their tribute from the kingdom. one of the saviors, jared, tells richard the saviors are letting the kingdom off easy by taking only eight pigs, to which richard replies: the saviors are the ones being let off easy. jared attacks richard, and ezekiel makes them break up the fight. the leader of the saviors group tells jared to stop only after jared has hit richard a few times.  the saviors leave and say they will want produce next time, or richard will be the first to die. during the night, carol is picking fruit as she prepares to leave town quietly, and ezekiel catches her. he explains that he realized carol's innocence was just an
act but wonders how carol could survive, and wants to know where she originally came from. after a few moments, ezekiel slowly drops his guard and reveals that he was a zookeeper and amateur actor. he tells her that he developed the "king ezekiel" persona so that the people would have someone to follow and to emphasize that there is still good in the world. carol still wishes to leave, so ezekiel suggests that she live in the abandoned house she passed on the way to the kingdom, so that she could "go and not go". she agrees to this arrangement. morgan takes carol out to the house, tells her to take care of herself, and returns to the kingdom. later, she gets a visit from ezekiel and shiva. ezekiel once again offers her a pomegranate causing carol to smile.  in the mid-season premiere "rock in the road", ezekiel is shown to be friends with hilltop scout paul rovia, aka "jesus". jesus introduces ezekiel to rick grimes, the leader of alexandria, another community forced to serve the saviors. rick implores ezekiel to join their fight against the saviors as only together can they succeed. ezekiel takes the night to ponder his decision, but ultimately decides against open conflict with the saviors as he refuses to endanger his people's lives. he does, however, allow rick's friend daryl dixon to stay in the kingdom to hide from the saviors. ezekiel appears in episode "new best friends" when the saviors arrive for their offering. when jared continues to insult richard, the two draw guns on each other and morgan and ben are forced to stop further violence. ezekiel later chastises benjamin for acting hasty as violence must be reserved as a last resort. in the episode "bury me here", ezekiel, morgan, ben, richard and several others find a roadblock en route to their meeting with the saviors. they then find a grave reading bury me here with ezekiel claiming that it is only luck that the world has not driven them all insane, though ben credits ezekiel with keeping them together. they arrive to find that their load of fruit is short of the required amount, causing jared to shoot ben. they bring him to carol's, but despite their best efforts, ben dies. when they meet the saviors to settle their debt morgan attacks and kills richard, strangling him to death. he reveals that richard discarded a fruit on purpose in an effort to start a war with the saviors. ezekiel shown to be enraged at richard's betrayal while shocked at morgan's brutality (though he still attempts to bring him back).
carol later goes to the kingdom and offers ezekiel her condolences before stating that it is time to fight; morgan, wishing to be alone, temporarily stays at carol's house. ezekiel agrees. in the season finale "first day of the rest of your life", ezekiel leads carol and a group of kingdom fighters to alexandria to accept rick's alliance. they encounter morgan along the way, and ezekiel convinces him to march with them. ezekiel's arrival proves timely; their group arrives at alexandria just as negan is about to execute carl. ezekiel and shiva charge into battle, killing numerous saviors and helping drive off the saviors. the episode ends with ezekiel standing beside rick and maggie greene as the kingdom, hilltop and alexandria pledge their aid to each other.  season 8  in the season premiere "mercy", as rick prepares for war against negan, ezekiel commits his own soldiers from the kingdom, and provides rousing speeches to his men at kingdom and later to the combined group prior to their first attack. after their initial assault on sanctuary, resulting in a large walker horde that prevents the saviors from leaving or entering, rick's army breaks into several groups to attack other savior strongholds. in the following episode "the damned", ezekiel, alongside carol, leads forces most of kingdom soldiers, clearing out all but one savior at a stronghold. the solitary savior escapes, but ezekiel orders his group to give chase, fearing he will warn a nearby stronghold. with shiva's help, the solitary savior is stopped in time.  in the episode "monsters", since they are close to another stronghold but still undetected, ezekiel decides to launch an attack, despite not being in rick's plan and against carol's caution. the attack goes better than expected, with no losses to the kingdom forces. as they are celebrating, savior forces hidden in a nearby building fire on the group with a heavy machine gun, killing most of the kingdom forces instantly; the few not yet hit rush to protect ezekiel. in the episode "some guy", ezekiel crawls out from the pile of corpses with a limp foot, aghast at the bodies around him that are starting to reanimate. ultimately he is saved by jerry, who remains a loyal follower, and carol, who dealt with the savior attackers. they struggle towards the kingdom, but ezekiel is broken both physically and emotionally, and tells them to leave him behind, no longer worthy of being their king. shiva arrives to fend off walkers that are about to attack ezekiel, but the walkers eventually overwhelm the tiger, and ezekiel can only
look on in anguish as his companion is fed upon. the three eventually make it to kingdom, and ezekiel cannot come to say anything to the families of his soldiers, and walks off in silence. in the episode "the king, the widow, and rick", ezekiel has secluded himself in his home, refusing to allow others to see him. carol is able to approach ezekiel and tries to encourage him to take up leadership again, even if it just maintaining his act, but ezekiel remains reluctant to participate and urges her to lead the kingdom. in the mid-season finale "how it's gotta be", when his community is invaded by the saviors and they demand to know where ezekiel is hiding, he allows himself to be caught soon afterwards, so his people may escape.  in the mid-season premiere "honor" ezekiel is kidnapped by the saviors commanded by gavin, but its plans to take it to the sanctuary are frustrated by carol and morgan of successful way manage to annihilate their followers and rescue ezekiel, when gavin flees morgan catches him but ezekiel with carol tries to convince him not to kill him, morgan insists he has to, but before he can, a fighting stick pierces gavin's throat, killing him and henry is revealed to be the killer, shocking carol and morgan. ezekiel soothes henry and tells him not to look at gavin's body. carol berates henry for not staying behind and disobeying her, but ezekiel assures henry that everything will work out. "all will be resolved" he tells him. in the next episode "do not send us astray", ezekiel and his community move to hilltop to avoid retaliation from the saviors, henry wants to join the fight, but ezekiel orders him to defend hilltop from inside and make the guard, when the simon's convoy, daryl leads them through the gate, the people of hilltop block the convoy with a bus and ezekiel and all open fire on the rescuers. the battle begins and the rescuers succeed in wounding several members of the militia with weapons contaminated with the blood of a walker, ezekiel, carol, rosita, tara, maggie, daryl, enid, jesus, rick, carol and others but they manage to survive, due to they manage to turn the tide of the attack of the rescuers as simon and the remaining saviors flee. mayhem erupts at dawn inside the barrington house in hilltop, as many wounded succumb to the infection and die, because of the savior's contaminated weapons, begin to revive as walkers and attack ezekiel helps fight the walkers. ezekiel shoots down a re
animated kevin, while rick, morgan and daryl manage to shoot down the remaining walkers. the next day, ezekiel and carol look for henry, who disappeared during the night. in the episode "still gotta mean something", ezekiel asks carol to help him find henry, but she refuses. ezekiel realizes that carol believes that henry is dead. carol gives the boy for dead and ezekiel accuses her of being a coward for thinking that and leaves, later, jerry rushes to ezekiel to share the good news, just as carol and henry enter the community. ezekiel hugs henry and thanks carol, carol tells ezekiel that he was right about her being afraid. in the season finale "wrath" the combined forces mobilize to ambush the saviors, ezekiel predicts that it could be the last morning for some of them, ezekiel accompanies rick and the rest of the militia to fight the saviors in the battle final. after most of the saviors are eliminated due to eugene's defective bullets, ezekiel and the others fight the remaining saviors until they surrender, shortly after negan is defeated and captured while rick addresses the crowd, declaring the peace among all the communities. afterwards, ezekiel returns home to the kingdom.  season 9  in the season premiere "a new beginning" 18 months have elapsed, ezekiel and carol have grown as a couple and adopted henry, ezekiel attended the expedition in the city of washington d.c. to find a wooden cart and agricultural machinery needed by the rescuers and after finding everything they needed in an abandoned museum, the king helped the rest of the group carefully move the car through a glass floor that contained a huge number of walkers underneath, ezekiel falls in the last crossing as the glass floor is broken, but they were tied with ropes to catch them and carol and others rescued him quickly, before certain death, carol and ezekiel embrace and later the group goes back to their respective communities on their journey. on the way, ezekiel proposes to carol marriage. she tells him to keep the ring and reminds him that she still does not want to be asked, especially on a horse. ezekiel smiles and says he still loves her, the next day, carol tells ezekiel that she is staying in the sanctuary, ezekiel feels she is trying to be away, but she denies and kisses him, before telling him to kiss henry for her and instruct jerry to take care of him as they move away.  in the second half of the season, ezekiel, who has married carol and adopted henry, struggles to reunite the fractured communities with a trade fair while the kingdom begins to fall apart
from old age and disrepair. the situation worsens when a new enemy, the whisperers, arises and henry falls in love with lydia, the daughter of the whisperer leader. the new threat brings the communities back together. though michonne has developed a more isolationist mindset, she allows alexandria to send a delegation, convinced by judith grimes to mend relationships with her old friends. at the same time, the kingdom comes into contact with a new group, the highwaymen, who try to extort the kingdom for supplies. instead, ezekiel and carol make a deal with the highwaymen, who prove to be reasonable despite their rough start, to protect the area around the kingdom in exchange for trade and getting to watch a movie using the kingdom's recently repaired theater, something the highwaymen haven't been able to do for years.  in "the calm before," the communities are reunited at the kingdom's trade fair, much to ezekiel's pleasure. to cement their reestablished relationship, ezekiel has the leaders of the four communities finally sign michonne's charter which had been recovered by tara and given to ezekiel after michonne had given up on unity. ezekiel and carol invite daryl, who has been living on his own in the woods since rick's assumed death, to move to the kingdom. however, the trade fair takes an ominous turn when it is infiltrated by alpha, leader of the whisperers who ezekiel unknowingly encounters and talks with. alpha kidnaps and brutally murders ten people from the fair, including ezekiel's adopted son henry.  in "the storm," the kingdom finally falls due to disrepair and disaster and ezekiel and the other residents are forced to relocate to the hilltop during a massive blizzard. in the months since henry's death, ezekiel and carol's marriage has fallen apart. after reaching the hilltop, carol decides to end their marriage and return to alexandria, though ezekiel has her keep the ring he gave carol.  season 10  now living in hilltop, ezekiel struggles with the loss of the kingdom and his divorce from carol. michonne later finds him suicidal and they share a kiss, but don't take it further than that. ezekiel eventually reveals a large lump on his neck to siddiq, knowing that it is thyroid cancer which his family has a history of. while his father and grandmother successfully fought it off, ezekiel is convinced that his condition is terminal in the current world which lacks modern medicine. however, he can't bring himself to tell carol, getting off the radio when she comes on rather than admit that he is dying. after siddiq
is murdered by dante, ezekiel attends the funeral and is reunited with carol who he considers telling about his condition, but still can't go through with it.  development and reception ezekiel is portrayed by khary payton on the walking dead television series, beginning with the seventh season. ezekiel and his pet tiger shiva were introduced in the season seven trailer at the san diego comic-con in 2016.  noel murray of rolling stone ranked king ezekiel 9th in a list of 30 best walking dead characters, saying, "thanks to khary payton's theatrical flair, the general congeniality of "the kingdom," and one seriously awesome pet tiger, this new leader offered a reminder that violence and selfishness aren't the only way to survive. sometimes an overly polite nice guy pretending to be medieval royalty can stir up some loyalty too."  references  characters created by robert kirkman comics characters introduced in 2013 fictional african-american people fictional zombies and revenants image comics male characters the walking dead (franchise) characters
julienne david (1773-1843), was a french privateer.  julienne david participated in the vendee revolt on the royalists side and was imprisoned, but managed to escape sentence. after having secured a privateer's letter, she persecuted british ships on the english channel from her base in nantes.  in 1803, she was imprisoned in england for 8 years. after her release, she returned to france. a street in nantes is named after her. she's also the subject of a novel.  references   marie-eve stenuit, femmes pirates: les ecumeuses des mers. paris: editions du tresor 2015.   french privateers 1773 births 1843 deaths women in 19th-century warfare female pirates 19th-century pirates
shirley was an american thoroughbred racehorse. ridden by future u. s. racing hall of fame inductee george barbee, shirley won the 1876 preakness stakes.  references  thoroughbred family 9-a 1873 racehorse births racehorses bred in the united states racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners byerley turk sire line
the 1917 united states declaration of war on austria-hungary, officially house joint resolution 169, was a resolution adopted by the united states congress declaring that a state of war existed between the united states of america and the austro-hungarian empire. it occurred eight months after the earlier declaration of war against germany that had brought the united states into world war i. enacted on december 7, 1917 and coming into effect the same day, it was officially terminated in 1921, three years after the effective capitulation of austria-hungary.  background on april 6, 1917 the united states declared war against germany. the declaration of war was enacted at the request of us president woodrow wilson by a vote of both chambers of the us congress, with the us house of representatives voting 373 to 50 (nine not voting) in favor of war and the us senate voting 82 to six. in his speech to congress requesting for war to be declared against germany, wilson addressed the question of austria-hungary, an ally of germany:  two days later, austria-hungary terminated diplomatic relations with the united states and requested, in a diplomatic note that was delivered to the charge d'affaires of the us embassy in vienna, for american diplomats to depart the country.  declaration of war  request  on december 4, 1917, wilson appeared before congress to deliver the 1917 state of the union address. in it, he requested a declaration of war against austria-hungary and stated such a declaration to be necessary to "clear away with a thorough hand all impediments to success." wilson went on to charge that austria-hungary was "the vassal of the german government" and was acting as the "instrument of another nation." however, wilson's real impetus for seeking a declaration of war against was the situation in italy. american military planners believed that it might soon be necessary to deploy american forces to shore up italian defenses against robust austrian gains.  in response to wilson's address, henry d. flood introduced house joint resolution 169, a declaration of war, which was referred to the house committee on foreign affairs for consideration. the committee issued a report stating that the "state of war which this declaration declares to exist actually has been a fact for many months" and unanimously recommended adoption of the resolution. the report went on to charge that in september 1915, konstantin dumba, the austro-hungarian ambassador to the united states, had masterminded a scheme of industrial sabotage aimed at american manufacturing and that on april 4, 1917 the crew of an unflagged submarine boarded and then sank the american schooner
sv marguerite in the mediterranean and that the nationality of the submarine was suspected austrian since "austrian was the language spoken by the officer of the submarine ." the report was incorrect; the marguerite had actually been sunk by the german submarine u-35.  enactment on december 7 house joint resolution 169 was adopted by the house of representatives in a vote of 365-1, and by the senate in a vote of 74-0. the president signed the declaration later that day.  debate  jeannette rankin, who had earlier voted against the declaration of war against germany, voted in favor of the declaration of war against austria-hungary, stating that "the vote we are now to cast is not a vote on a declaration of war. if it were, i should vote against it. this is a vote on a mere technicality in the prosecution of a war already declared."  the sole vote of opposition in the house came from meyer london, a socialist representative from new york. on the floor of the house, london declared that he hated "professions of loyalty" but that he believed "i am as deeply in love with the united states as any man who can trace his ancestry to the mayflower." however, london said that his constituents opposed war and that he preferred the united states to adopt an arms embargo against europe, the same rationale that he had given for opposing the declaration of war against germany. he was roundly denounced on the floor of the house.  in the senate, robert m. la follette did not vote on the resolution since he had departed the chamber to return to his office and to prepare an amendment to the declaration that would guarantee that the united states would not participate in the postwar dismemberment of austria. while la follette was out of the chamber, the vote was called. la follette later said that he would have voted against the resolution in the form that it was passed.  text of declaration  international reactions : the austro-hungarian foreign minister, count ottokar czernin, remarked that the declaration of war "will be bad for austro-hungarians in america, but will not influence the results of the war." : in italy, the newspaper corriere della sera, in a staff editorial, stated, "austria-hungary has today a powerful enemy, and this enemy is for us a friend whose friendship must serve in war and peace " : in the russian soviet federative socialist republic, the official army journal, in a staff editorial, declared, "peace by means of war. this is the mark under
which the american imperialists are posing. america declares herself the implacable enemy of austria-hungary without any evident reason, without any justifying motives save covetousness and greed. american capitalists talking with hypocrisy about the horrors of war are striving to lengthen the bloody terror."  aftermath in autumn 1918, the imperial government collapsed, and on october 18, stephan burian von rajecz, acting on behalf of the remnants of the state organs, sued for peace. the us senate declined to ratify the treaty of saint-germain-en-laye and the treaty of trianon, which established peace between the allied powers and austria-hungary and resulted in the formal dissolution of the austro-hungarian empire. as a result, the state of war between the united states and a nonexistent austria-hungary continued, albeit without active hostilities, until it was officially terminated by the u.s.-austrian peace treaty (1921) and the u.s.-hungarian peace treaty (1921), which were signed by austria-hungary's successor states: austria and hungary.  the sinking of the sv marguerite has been credited to the sm u-35, a german u-boat.  see also  american entry into world war i declarations of war during world war i  references  1917 in international relations 1917 in austria-hungary 1917 in the united states austria-hungary foreign relations of austria-hungary united states in world war i austria-hungary-united states relations december 1917 events 1917 documents declarations of war during world war i
jaspal bangar is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
eunidia octoplagiata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1955.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1955
lotus is an unincorporated community in center township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  history a post office was established at lotus in 1865, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1903.  geography lotus is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
the following lists events that happened in 1972 in iceland.  incumbents president - kristjan eldjarn prime minister - olafur johannesson  events  births  29 march - hera bjork, singer 9 april - steinunn kristin þorðardottir, businesswoman 18 july - hannes stefansson, chess grandmaster 28 october - guðmundur steingrimsson, politician. 12 december - eyglo harðardottir, politician 29 december - reynir gretarsson, businessman  deaths  references    1970s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
templeton lake is the head of templeton river, in the kootenay land district of british columbia, canada.  references  lakes of british columbia kootenay land district
the 2016-17 armenian premier league season was the 25th since its establishment. the season began on 6 august 2016 and ended on 31 may 2017. alashkert are the defending champions.  teams six teams competed in this year's competition.   1ararat yerevan moved to the mika stadium during the second half of the season.  2gandzasar kapan moved to the vazgen sargsyan stadium in yerevan during the second half of the season.  personnel and sponsorship  league table  results the league was played in three stages. the six teams played each other six times, three times at home and three times away, for a total of 30 matches per team.  season statistics  top scorers as of 31 may 2017  references  external links  ffa.am  soccerway.com  uefa.com  rsssf.com  armenian premier league seasons arm 1
the istituto per le applicazioni del calcolo mauro picone (), abbreviated iac, is an applied mathematics institute, part of the consiglio nazionale delle ricerche. it was founded in 1927 as a private research institute by mauro picone, and as such it is considered the first applied and computational mathematics institute of such kind ever founded.  historical notes the iac was founded 1927 by mauro picone, while working at the university of naples federico ii and at the istituto universitario navale as professor of infinitesimal calculus. luigi amoroso also contributed to the founding of the institute, by providing to his former normale schoolfellow picone the funding for the creation of the institute by means of the banco di napoli. it was only in 1932, when picone moved from the university of naples to the sapienza university of rome, that the institute became part of the italian national research council.  see also istituto nazionale di alta matematica francesco severi  notes  references   . () a survey paper on the contribution of mauro picone and his school to applied mathematics through the foundation and the direction of the "istituto per le applicazioni del calcolo". . the preprint version of the original paper is downloadable from the author's academic web page. , previously published as . . the chapter on picone in a book collecting brief biographical sketches and bibliographies of the scientific works produced by the mathematicians who taught at the parthenope university of naples during their stay. . an ample survey paper on results on the solutions of linear integral and partial differential equation obtained by the research team of mauro picone at the istituto nazionale per le applicazioni del calcolo, by using methods from functional analysis.  . "" is an historical conference on the work and personality of mauro picone, pronounced by gaetano fichera. . fichera's "last lesson" of the course of higher analysis, given on the occasion of his retirement from university teaching in 1992. . . "mauro picone and the istituto nazionale per le applicazioni del calcolo" is a brief historical survey of picone's role in the founding of the istituto nazionale per le applicazioni del calcolo: the author is one of his pupils, former workers and then director of the institute. it was presented at the international congress in occasion of the celebration of the centenary of birth of mauro picone and leonida tonelli (held in rome on may 6-9, 1985): an english translation of the title of the conference is:-the work of leonida
tonelli and his influence on scientific thinking in this century. . this work completes the survey of  with the same title, by elucidating the role of some scientists and adding a further bibliography.  mathematical institutes organizations established in 1927 research institutes in italy 1927 establishments in italy
jacobus "japie" basson (25 july 1918 - 8 august 2012) was a south african politician who began his career with the national party, but was later expelled from it, and became a forceful critic of the apartheid government as a member, by turns, of the united party, progressive federal party, and his own short-lived national union. he was described as "fiery", "colourful", an "individualist", and as the "chameleon" of south african politics for his shifting partisan allegiances.  he was originally elected to the house of assembly in 1950 as mp for the constituency of namib, in what was then south african-administered south west africa, before leaving the national party in 1959. in 1960, he co-founded the south west party with ferdinand lempp, former editor of allgemeine zeitung, the german language daily newspaper in the territory.  however, he later founded his own party, the national union, which despite its opposition to many aspects of the apartheid policies of hendrik verwoerd, supported his government's decision to make south africa a republic, although he declared that a republic would do verwoerd himself no good.  basson was elected as mp for bezuidenhout in johannesburg in 1961, before merging it with the united party, for which he served as its foreign affairs spokesman. following the collapse of that party, basson led the committee for a united opposition, which merged with the more liberal progressive reform party to form the progressive federal party.  in 1980, in the wake of disagreements with the pfp over support for the constitutional reforms of the government of p w botha, he was expelled from the party caucus. this was because he had stated that he was prepared to serve on the president's council, a body established by the botha government  to advise on a new constitution. earlier, his party had adopted a resolution rejecting the body. he was appointed to the president's council, serving as a member of its constitutional committee from 1981 to 1984, and on retirement from the council, rejoined the national party.  references   1918 births 2012 deaths south african politicians people from paarl stellenbosch university alumni
is a japanese youtuber and competitive eater.  career yuka kinoshita began posting on her eating-focused youtube channel since 2014, five years after her debut in japanese competitive eating competitions.  kinoshita uploads daily videos in which she eats anywhere between 5,000 to 23,000 calorie meals. usually kinoshita edits her videos into 5 to 7 minute vlogs, but occasionally she uploads longer "live eating" videos in the tradition of mukbang. as of june 2020, her videos have garnered  more than 2 billion views.  kinoshita's videos are particularly in japanese and are accessible to english-speaking viewers because they are accompanied by english subtitles. partly for this reason, she has attracted attention from english-language news sources. she has also been featured in the japanese television programme, .  references  external links                yuka kinoshita's profile  on uuum  1985 births japanese competitive eaters living people japanese female youtubers
the sacramento capitols were a professional american football team based in sacramento, california. formed as the sacramento buccaneers, the team's inclusion in the pacific division of the continental football league was announced in may 1967. the franchise's first head coach was don mccormick, formerly of the pacific tigers.  less than two months into the 1967 season the buccaneers' players threatened to quit after not receiving their pay for two games. the players agreed to stay on with a $75-per-game pay cut, but demanded more of a say in team affairs in return. mccormick and four of his assistants quit afterwards. former oakland raiders player joe barbee was hired to coach the team on an interim basis.  the financially troubled franchise was purchased in march 1968 and later renamed to the sacramento capitols. under new head coach george porter the team improved to 5-7 in 1968 and then 8-4 in 1969. the team made the cofl playoffs for the first and only time in 1969, where they lost 31-0 to the las vegas cowboys. in july 1970, with the future of the cofl in doubt, the capitols folded after selling less than half of the 3,000 season tickets needed to remain viable.  season-by-season  references  continental football league teams defunct american football teams in california american football teams in sacramento, california american football teams established in 1967 sports clubs disestablished in 1970 1967 establishments in california 1970 disestablishments in california
eunidia obliquevittulipennis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1977.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1977
the 2018 texas gubernatorial election  took place on november 6, 2018, to elect the governor of texas, concurrently with the election of texas's class i u.s. senate seat, as well as other congressional, state and local elections throughout the united states and texas.  incumbent republican governor greg abbott successfully won re-election to a second term in office defeating democratic nominee lupe valdez, the former sheriff of dallas county, and libertarian nominee mark tippetts, a former member of the lago vista city council.  the republican and democratic party primaries were held on march 6, 2018, making them the first primaries of the 2018 electoral season. abbott won the march 6 primary with 90% of the vote to receive the republican nomination, while democratic candidates lupe valdez and andrew white advanced to a may 22 runoff. valdez defeated white in the runoff with 53.1% of the vote and faced abbott in the general election as the democratic nominee.  valdez's nomination made her the first openly gay person nominated for governor by a major party in the state.  tippetts was nominated at the libertarian party of texas' state convention in houston april 13-15, 2018. he defeated three challengers, as well as the none of the above option, on the first ballot and received more than 70% approval from libertarian party delegates.  despite considerably closer contests in other texas state elections, abbott handily won a second term with the highest margin of victory of any state official on the ballot, although valdez also won the largest vote share for a democratic gubernatorial candidate since ann richards in 1994.  tippetts' showing exceeded the previous record for most votes for a libertarian nominee for texas governor; that record had been set in 1990.  the election also took place alongside a closer, higher-profile senate race between beto o'rourke and ted cruz, which may have played a factor in making the democratic gubernatorial candidate considerably more competitive than in 2014. abbott won a majority among whites (72% to 26%), while valdez won majorities among african americans (80% to 16%) and latinos (63% to 35%).  republican primary  candidates  nominated  greg abbott, incumbent governor  eliminated in primary  larry kilgore, secession activist  barbara krueger, retired teacher  declined  dan patrick, lieutenant governor of texas (running for re-election)  joe straus, speaker of the texas house of representatives  endorsements  polling  results  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  lupe valdez, former dallas county sheriff  eliminated in primary  james jolly clark
, businessman  cedric davis, former mayor of balch springs  joe mumbach, businessman  adrian ocegueda, financial analyst  jeffrey payne, businessman and 2009 international mr. leather  demetria smith, mortgage broker  tom wakely, hospice chaplain and nominee for tx-21 in 2016  andrew white, entrepreneur and son of governor mark white  grady yarbrough, retired educator  withdrew  garry brown, candidate for travis county commission in 2014  lee weaver  declined  rafael anchia, state representative   dwight boykins, houston city councilman  joaquin castro, u.s. representative  julian castro, former united states secretary of housing and urban development and mayor of san antonio  mike collier, businessman and nominee for comptroller in 2014 (running for lieutenant governor)  wendy davis, former state senator and nominee in 2014  pete gallego, former u.s. representative  eva longoria, actress and political activist  jack martin, ceo of hill+knowlton strategies  trey martinez fischer, former state representative  william mcraven, chancellor of the university of texas system, retired navy admiral and former commander of the united states special operations command  michael sorrell, president of paul quinn college  allen vaught, former state representative  endorsements  first round  polling  results  runoff  lupe valdez and andrew white proceeded to a run-off on may 22 since neither received 50% of the vote in the first round of the primary. lupe valdez won the runoff.  results  libertarian nomination  candidates  nominated mark tippetts, former lago vista city councilman  defeated at convention  kathie glass, attorney and previous nominee patrick smith  kory watkins, activist  general election  debates complete video of debate, september 28, 2018  endorsements  predictions  polling   with andrew white  with julian castro  with wendy davis  results  by congressional district abott won 24 of 36 congressional districts  references  external links candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia  debates democratic primary debate, february 13, 2018  official campaign websites greg abbott (r) for governor mark tippetts (l) for governor lupe valdez (d) for governor  2018 texas elections 2018 2018 united states gubernatorial elections
the 2016 guzzini challenger was a professional tennis tournament played on hard courts. it was the fourteenth edition of the tournament which was part of the 2016 atp challenger tour. it took place in recanati, italy between 18 and 24 july 2016.  singles main draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   riccardo bonadio   andrea vavassori   andrey rublev   antonio massara  the following players entered  the singles main draw with a protected ranking:   albano olivetti  the following player entered the singles main draw as a special exempt:   gianluca mager  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   viktor galovic   alexander bublik   mate delic   filip veger  the following player entered as a lucky losers:   dzmitry zhyrmont   remi boutillier  doubles main draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants the following pairs received entry as wildcards:   edoardo lamberti /  panide mangiaterra   sam barnett /  jesse witten  champions  singles    illya marchenko def.  ilya ivashka, 6-4, 6-4  doubles    kevin krawietz /  albano olivetti def.  ruben bemelmans /  adrian menendez-maceiras, 6-3, 7-6(7-4)  external links official website  guzzini challenger guzzini challenger 2016 in italian tennis
dawud anyabwile (born february 6, 1965, in philadelphia) is an african-american comic book artist. he is the illustrator of brotherman: dictator of discipline comics, and c.e.o. of big city entertainment. he also has an artist archive at the auburn avenue research library on african american culture and history in atlanta, georgia.  career  dawud anyabwile graduated from central high school of philadelphia. after high school, he attended mason gross school of arts at rutgers university for a year (1983-84) followed by tyler school of art at temple university for a year (1985).  he began his career as an artist in 1984 by airbrushing t-shirts at the gallery mall of philadelphia.  in 1989, he collaborated with his brother guy a. sims to create and self-publish the brotherman: dictator of discipline comic book series. guy a. sims wrote and dawud anyabwile illustrated eleven brotherman: dictator of discipline issues. the first one was published april 1990 and the last one was published july 1996.  anyabwile worked for wanderlust interactive in new york city on the pink panther cd rom games and for mtv on daria in 1996. then, he relocated to california to work for klasky csupo on the wild thornberrys and rugrats from 1999 to 2001. finally, he moved to atlanta, georgia where he landed a production designer position at turner studios from 2005-2013. there he created storyboards and many other forms of design work for brands such as cartoon network, tnt, tbs, boomerang, turner sports, nba tv and many more.  in 2015, anyabwile once again collaborated with his brother guy a. sims and colorist brian mcgee to publish part one of a new graphic novel series for brotherman: dictator of disciple called revelation through big city entertainment.  he also illustrated walter dean myer's monster: a graphic novel in 2015 which is an adaptation of walter dean myer's original novel, monster. guy a. sims wrote the graphic novel.  awards  references  external links      brotherman comics website  1965 births african-american artists african-american comics creators american comics artists artists from philadelphia emmy award winners living people rutgers university alumni temple university tyler school of art alumni 21st-century african-american people 20th-century african-american people
olenecamptus clarus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pascoe in 1859. it is known from japan, china, taiwan and north korea. it feeds off of morus alba and prunus persica.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1859
marco antonio rigau gaztambide (born in ponce, puerto rico) was as an associate justice of the puerto rico supreme court from 1961 to 1981.  he was a member of fi sigma alfa fraternity.  references  associate justices of the supreme court of puerto rico civil servants from ponce puerto rican lawyers
roger fletcher gibson jr. (february 21, 1944 - september 30, 2015) was an american philosopher specializing in epistemology and the philosophy of language. he was best known as a leading exponent of the philosophy of w. v. quine.  biography   gibson was born in st. louis, missouri, to roger fletcher gibson sr. and virginia irene melton. he spent his formative years moving throughout the country, eventually coming to live with his maternal grandparents about whom he would later remark were the most influential people in his life. gibson joined the united states marine corps out of high school and volunteered for duty in vietnam. he served in saigon from october 1965 to october 1966. he considered his military service one of his greatest achievements.  gibson embarked upon the pursuit of philosophy as an academic career in 1967 upon the completion of his military service. he was ready to resume his education that year, having served in the united states marine corps immediately after high school, between 1962 and 1966, attached for part of that time as aide to general westmoreland during the height of the vietnam war. he enrolled in northeast missouri state college, currently truman state university, where he graduated in 1971 with a b.a. in philosophy.  encouraged by his undergraduate philosophy professors, henry smits and kay blair, both holding doctorates from the university of missouri, he applied to their graduate program in philosophy and was admitted in the fall of 1971. he developed a budding affinity for analytic philosophy while at the university of missouri, receiving an m.a. in 1973 and a ph.d. in 1977. his experience there was shaped by arthur berndtson, donald oliver, and john kultgen, among others, the latter also directing his dissertation.  gibson served the discipline both as a leader and as a scholar. his first notable leadership role was as president of the central states philosophical association in 1983-1984. his scholarly initiatives attracted attention from the outset, earning him grants from the national endowment for the humanities in 1984-1985  and 1988. his academic career flourished at washington university in st. louis, where he began teaching in 1985. he served as the chair of the department of philosophy there for a decade between 1989 and 1999. his many contributions to the department included spearheading the creation of the school's philosophy-neuroscience-psychology (pnp) program in 1993, playing a prominent role in securing grants for that purpose from the james s. mcdonnell foundation.  gibson's formal areas of expertise were epistemology and the philosophy of language, with further competence in
the philosophy of science. while publishing extensively in these areas, his overall engagement with philosophy was broad and deep enough for publication in other specialties as well, including those as diverse as logic and ethics. most of his works, even on the rare occasion he turned to ethics, tend to revolve around the philosophy of w. v. quine. those that do are all well-received (as are the few that do not), earning him a reputation as one of the world's leading exponents of quine.  that reputation is the culmination of an early and steadfast interest in quine. his master's thesis (1973) and doctoral dissertation (1977) are both on quine. his persistent appeals to the harvard philosopher for permission to sit in on his classes at harvard university, while himself still enrolled as a graduate student at the university of missouri, are something of an academic legend, related by quine himself both in his autobiography, the time of my life: an autobiography (1985), and in his foreword to gibson's first book, the philosophy of w. v. quine: an expository essay (1982). the permission granted paved the way for some of the most influential secondary literature on quine, including two monographs, three edited volumes, and numerous articles. gibson's two monographs - the philosophy of w. v. quine: an expository essay (1982) and enlightened empiricism: an examination of w. v. quine's theory of knowledge (1988) - are held in especially high regard.  his personal output on quine was complemented by his ability to bring out the same in others. attesting to his dedication to the enrichment of quine studies, he organized, together with robert b. barrett jr., a conference (april 9-13, 1988) bringing together at washington university in st. louis the world's foremost authorities on the subject, including quine himself, as well as donald davidson, dagfinn føllesdal, susan haack, gilbert harman, jaakko hintikka, jerrold katz, barry stroud, and joseph s. ullian. the proceedings were published in 1990 as perspectives on quine.  a festschrift organized in his honor in 2008 brought together eminent analytic philosophers from around the world: robert b. barrett jr.; lars bergstrom; richard creath; david henderson; terence horgan; ernest lepore; pete mandik; alex orenstein; kenneth shockley; j. robert thompson; josefa toribio; joseph s. ull
ian; josh weisberg; chase b. wrenn.  gibson died at the age of 71 in reston, virginia, after a long battle with parkinson's and parkinson's dementia.  selected publications  books  articles  reviews  references  external links    gibson's autobiographical post on the alumni page of the university of missouri philosophy department  announcement of gibson's death by the department of philosophy at washington university in st. louis  memorial minutes contributed by mark rollins to the american philosophical association (behind a paywall)  1944 births 2015 deaths 20th-century american philosophers epistemologists philosophers of science analytic philosophers american philosophy academics philosophers of language truman state university alumni university of missouri alumni united states marines united states marine corps personnel of the vietnam war people from unionville, missouri
monica patricia dominguez lara (born ) is a mexican weightlifter, competing in the 58 kg category and representing mexico at international competitions.   she competed at world championships, most recently at the 2015 world weightlifting championships.  she participated at the 2016 summer olympics.  major results  references  external links http://www.the-sports.org/monica-patricia-dominguez-lara-weightlifting-spf319519.html http://www.nbcolympics.com/news/weightlifting-recap-mens-62kg-and-womens-58kg http://www.gettyimages.com/photos/patricia-dominguez?excludenudity=true&sort=mostpopular&mediatype=photography&phrase=patricia%20dominguez http://www.zimbio.com/pictures/n9sfuud1qb5/weightlifting+olympics+day+3/t9op5xiydqu/monica+patricia+dominguez+lara https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=vnnpi415idy  1988 births living people mexican female weightlifters place of birth missing (living people) weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics olympic weightlifters of mexico universiade bronze medalists for mexico universiade medalists in weightlifting
state route 121 (sr 121) was a  state highway entirely in tallapoosa county in the east-central part of the u.s. state of alabama. the southern terminus of the highway was at u.s. route 280 (us 280) in camp hill. the northern terminus of the route was at its intersection with sr 50, also in camp hill.  route description state route 121 began at us 280 (now old us 280) in camp hill, heading towards downtown camp hill. at downtown camp hill there was the town's police station, library, the old post office, and some abandoned buildings. sr 121 then ended at sr 50 in camp hill.  history sr 121 was established in the 1970s and decommissioned three decades later in september 2005 because of the us 280 bypass opening.  major intersections  references  external links  121 transportation in tallapoosa county, alabama transportation in camp hill, alabama state highways in the united states shorter than one mile
the centrism () was a political formula that inspired the centrist governments of the italian republic between the end of the 1940s and the early 1950s. the governments of this period, also known as "the years of centrism" (gli anni del centrismo), were characterized by a coalition pact between the christian democracy and the other minor secular parties.  history  the general elections in april 1948 were heavily influenced by the cold-war confrontation between the soviet union and the united states. after the soviet-inspired february 1948 communist coup in czechoslovakia, the us became alarmed about soviet intentions and feared that, if the leftist coalition were to win the elections, the soviet-funded italian communist party (pci) would draw italy into the soviet union's sphere of influence.  the christian democrat campaign claimed that, in communist countries, "children send parents to jail", "children are owned by the state", "people eat their own children", and assured voters that disaster would strike italy if the left were to take power. another slogan was, "in the secrecy of the polling booth, god sees you - stalin doesn't."  the christian democrats won a resounding victory with 48.5% of the vote (their best result ever) and large majorities in both the chamber of deputies and senate. the communists received only half of the votes they had in 1946. although alcide de gasperi could have formed an exclusively christian democratic government, he instead formed a "centrist" coalition with liberals, republicans and social democrats. de gasperi formed three ministries, the second one in 1950 after the defection of the liberals, who hoped for more right-wing policies, and the third one in 1951 after the defection of the social-democrats, who hoped for more leftist policies. he ruled for five more years, helming four additional coalitions. "de gasperi's policy is patience", according to the foreign news correspondent for the new york times, anne mccormick. "he seems to be feeling his way among the explosive problems he has to deal with, but perhaps this wary mine-detecting method is the stabilizing force that holds the country in balance."  the 1953 general election was characterised by changes in the electoral law. even if the general structure remained uncorrupted, the government introduced a superbonus of two thirds of seats in the house for the coalition which would obtain at-large the absolute majority of votes. the change was strongly opposed by the opposition parties as well as dc's smaller coalition partners,
who had no realistic chance of success under this system. the new law was called the scam law (legge truffa) by its detractors, including some dissidents of minor government parties who founded special opposition groups to deny the artificial landslide to christian democracy.  the campaign of the opposition to the scam law achieved its goal. the centrist coalition (dc, psdi, pli, pri, svp, psd'az) won 49.9% of national vote, resulting in an ordinary proportional distribution of the seats. minor dissident parties resulted determinant for the final result, especially the short-lived national democratic alliance. the leading party christian democracy did not repeat the extraordinary result of five years earlier, which had been obtained under special conditions linked to the cold war, and lost a lot of votes to the right, including resurgent fascist politicians particularly in southern italy.  technically, the government won the election, winning a majority of seats in both houses. but the frustration with the lack of a supermajority caused significant tensions in the leading coalition. de gasperi was forced to resign by the parliament on august 2: de gasperi consequently retired and died twelve months later. the legislature continued with weak governments, with minor parties refusing institutional responsibilities. giuseppe pella rose to power, but fell after only five months, following heated disputes about the status of the free territory of trieste which pella was claiming. amintore fanfani's succeeding first ministry failed to receive a vote of confidence in parliament, whilst mario scelba and antonio segni followed with more traditional centrist coalitions supported by social democrats and liberals: under the administration of scelba, the problem of trieste was settled by ceding koper to yugoslavia. the parliamentary term was seen out by the minority government chaired by adone zoli, finishing a legislature which hugely weakened the office of the prime minister, held by six different leaders.  parties of the centrist coalition  electoral results  italian parliament  references  defunct political party alliances in italy
ian potts (1936-2014) was a painter and educator, who was head of the painting department at the brighton college of art and exhibited largely as a watercolour landscape artist.  potts' work has been added to several public and private collections; including the victoria and albert museum, london; arts council collection; towner gallery, eastbourne; hove museum, east sussex council; as well as the university of brighton's aldrich collection.  early life ian potts was born into a mining family in birtley, county durham, the only child of noble and annie potts. his artistic talent was first spotted at chester-le-street modern school. at 17 he went to sunderland college of art, where he studied fine art and won a scholarship to the royal academy schools in london. his graduation in 1958 was distinguished by the award of the silver medal for painting, which led in turn to his appointment to  brighton college of art.  in 1959 potts married a fellow student of the sunderland college of art, helen bewick. he began his professional career with  a travel scholarship which enabled attendance at the [british school at athens]. this began potts' professional interest as a travel painter and painter of european and mediterranean landscapes.  career at brighton school of art  ian potts joined the brighton college of art as a painting teacher in 1963. during his long career he became head of painting during his career at the college, as well as deputy head of fine art. he retired in 1995, having enhanced the regional, national and international reputation of the institution, helping to guide its role in the new brighton polytechnic and later the university of brighton.  josie reed recalls in her obituary for the guardian in 2014 that potts "was a popular tutor, known to his students - who included the turner prize winner rachel whiteread - as uncle ian. a skilled poker player, potts held his own in games against the head of department, gwyther irwin, who reputedly had once earned his living playing poker."  career as an exhibiting artist  potts was a life-long traveller, bringing this experience to his experiments with landscape composition and the watercolour medium.  of potts' initial use of watercolour michael tucker notes: "it was at first its mundane convenience that drew him to it, as the most practical means of taking note of what was immediately in front of him and visually so intrigued him. he would for ever be a great and curious traveller, and from the time, shortly after his graduation from the royal academy schools, when a travel scholarship took
him for a while to the british school at athens, he would have sketch-book and box of watercolours always in his bag."    ian potts' travel painting included works set in italy and greece, egypt and spain, as well as much of britain. in the late 1970s, potts represented great britain in the international painting symposium held at prilep in the former yugoslavia.   gavin murray described his work: "but however many distinctions we may detect, and at a time when abstraction and collage are popular, ian's work is remarkable for sustaining the representative tradition in english watercolour painting. while moving on from the classical, the picturesque, the vernacular and the neo-romantic styles that mark the history of english landscape painting ian advanced the english watercolour tradition just as cotman and girtin did before him."  exhibition catalogue, 2001, gavin murray, director of keynes gallery at the university of kent, canterbury.  later life and legacy   ian potts said, "i see my watercolours as an extension to the history of english watercolour painting - absolutely within the tradition, but moving forward a bit, i hope. there is a direct line from artists such as j.m.w turner and john sell cotman to the present day. a more modern artist i admire was edward burra though he was working with a world inside himself, whereas i look to the world outside."  quoted from ken gofton, 'watercolour artist' magazine, august 2014   william packer, principal art critic of the financial times 1974-2004, said, "as a painter, ian stands quite consciously - for he knew full well what he was up to - within the great english, or rather british watercolour tradition. so much is obvious; but simply to invoke the great names of turner or girtin,  cox or cotman is perhaps to miss the point, for the tradition continued to develop and ramify through the next two hundred years."  a major retrospective of potts' work was held at the university of brighton galleries july/august 2016.  references  external links   ian potts: profile at the university of brighton  ian potts artist: profile maintained by the estate of ian potts  obituary by josie reed, the guardian 2014       english watercolourists 1936 births 2014 deaths
the editio leonina or leonine edition is the edition of the works of saint thomas aquinas originally sponsored by pope leo xiii in 1879.  the leonine commission (commissio leonina) is the group of scholars working on the ongoing project of critically editing the works of aquinas.  the first superintendent of the commission was tommaso maria zigliara, professor and rector of the collegium divi thomae de urbe (the future pontifical university of saint thomas aquinas). its current seat is in paris, rue de la glaciere  and it is currently (as of 2015) chaired by friar adriano oliva. the editions are published with  editions du cerf, the historical dominican publishing house in france founded in 1929 at the request of pope pius xi.  aquinas' main work, the summa theologiae, was edited in nine volumes (tt.iv-xii) during 1888-1906. as of 2014, the editio leonina comprises 39 volumes, representing about half of the entire scope of the project.  bibliography  t.i*-1. expositio libri peryermenias, editio altera retractata, [ed. r.-a. gauthier ].  roma - paris,1989.  t.i*-2.  expositio libri posteriorum, [ed. r.-a. gauthier].  roma - paris, 1989. t.ii. commentaria in octo libros physicorum aristotelis.  roma, 1884.  t.iii. in libros aristotelis de caelo et mundo expositio, in libros aristotelis meteorologicorum expositio.,  roma, 1886. t.iv-xii. summa theologiae (with the commentaries by thomas cajetan). roma, 1888-1906.   t.xiii-xv. summa contra gentiles.   roma, 1918-1930.  t.xxi.  quaestiones de potentia dei, [ed. r.-a. gauthier].  [forthcoming].  t.xxii.1-3. quaestiones disputatae de veritate, [ed. a. dondaine]. ed. leon., roma: editori di san tommaso, 1972-1976.  t.xxiii.  quaestiones disputatae de malo, [ed. p.-m. gils]. roma - paris  1982.  t.xxiv-1 questiones disputate de anima, ed. b
.-c. bazan. roma - paris, 1996.  t.xxiv-2, quaestio disputata de spiritualibus creaturis, ed. j. cos.   roma - paris, 2000.  t.xxv.1-2. quaestiones de quolibet, [ed. r.-a. gauthier], 1996.  t.xxvi. expositio super iob ad litteram, [ed. a. dondaine].   romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1965.  t.xxviii. expositio super isaiam ad literam, [ed. h.f. dondaine et l. reid]. romae [ad sanctae sabinae]: editori di san tommaso, 1974. t.xl. opuscula, vol.i. romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1969. t.xli, opuscula, vol.ii. romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1970. t.xlii opuscula, vol.iii. roma: editori di san tommaso, 1979. t.xliii opuscula, vol.iv. roma: editori di san tommaso, 1976.  t.xlvi. sentencia libri metaphysice, ed. j.p. reilly.    (in preparation)  t.xlv-1. sentencia libri de anima, [ed. r.-a. gauthier].   roma - paris, 1984.  t.xlv-2. de memoria et reminiscencia, in sentencia libri de sensu et sensato cuius secundus tractatus est de memoria et reminiscencia..., [ed. r.-a. gauthier]. roma - paris, 1985. t.xlvii.1-2.  sententia libri ethicorum, [ed. r.-a. gauthier]. romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1969. t.xlviii.  sententia libri politicorum, [edd h.f. dondaine et l-j. bataillon].  romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1971, p.a.69-a.205. t.xlviii. tabula libri ethicorum, [ed. r.-a. gauthier].   romae [ad sanctae sabinae], 1971, p.b.63-b.158. t.l. expos
itio libri boetii de ebdomadibus, [edd l-j. bataillon et c.a. grassi]. super boetium de trinitate, [ed. p.-m.j. gils].  roma - paris, 1992.  see also list of works by thomas aquinas  references  concetta luna, "l'edition leonine de saint thomas d'aquin", revue des sciences philosophiques et theologiques 89 (1/2005) 31-110.  "la commission leonine: philologie et histoire au service de la pensee", revue des sciences philosophiques et theologiques, vrin, (2004).  external links commissio-leonina.org corpusthomisticum.org  works by thomas aquinas pope leo xiii series of books
euphyllia paraglabrescens is a species of large-polyped stony coral belonging to the euphylliidae family. the international union for conservation of nature has listed it as a vulnerable species, stating "its threat susceptibility increases the likelihood of being lost within one generation."  description colonies of euphyllia paraglabrescens are almost identical to those of euphyllia glabrescens with short, bubble-like tentacles that extend at night with cnidocytes.  distribution and habitat it is the dominant species of ojioya port, tanegashima, japan, the only place where this species has been found.  euphyllia paraglabrescens attaches to sandstone rock in shallow water at depths of 5 - 15 meters.  references   euphylliidae animals described in 1990
little river state park is a campground state park on the 850-acre waterbury reservoir in waterbury, vermont. it is located in mount mansfield state forest.  activities includes swimming, boating, fishing, hiking, picnicking, bicycling, wildlife watching, and winter sports.  facilities include 81 tent/trailer sites, 20 lean-tos, five cabins, restrooms with hot showers, and a dump station. campers can enjoy swimming beaches, play areas, a boat launch, ball field, and boat rentals. there is a nature center, and park interpreters offer programs including night hikes, campfire programs, amphibian explorations, and nature crafts and games.  waterbury center state park is a day-use park also located nearby on waterbury reservoir.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of washington county, vermont waterbury, vermont nature centers in vermont
von willebrand factor a domain containing 7 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the vwa7 gene.  see articles on von willebrand factor and on von willebrand factor type a domain.  references  further reading
the 1991 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1991 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their 14th season under head coach herb deromedi, the chippewas compiled a 6-1-4 record (3-1-4 against mac opponents), finished in second place in the mac, and outscored their opponents, 205 to 157.  the team's four ties is tied for the ncaa record for most ties in a season. the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 96,700 in five home games.  the highlight of the season was a 20-3 victory over no. 18 ranked michigan state at spartan stadium on september 14, 1991. michigan state had been favored by 21-1/2 points, and coach deromedi called it the biggest win in school history. on the opening drive, michigan state quickly took the ball to the goal line. on fourth down from the one-yard line, michigan state opted to go for the touchdown rather than kick a field goal. chippewa linebacker doug adler stopped tico duckett for no gain, and the goal-line stand was reported to be an inspirational moment for the chippewas. adler called the top "the biggest play i ever made." later in the first quarter, central michigan tailback billy smith scored on a 15-yard run. the chippewas expanded their lead in the second quarter on a 57-yard touchdown pass from jeff bender to ken ealy and led 14-3 at halftime. chuck selinger also kicked two field goals in the second half for central michigan. billy smith rushed for 162 yards on 40 carries in the game.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback jeff bender with 1,754 passing yards, tailback billy smith with 1,440 rushing yards, and flanker ken ealy with 724 receiving yards.  smith's 374 rushing attempts in 1991 remains a single season record at central michigan, and his 1,440 rushing yards was the third highest single season total in school history up to that time. smith received the team's most valuable player award and was selected as a first-team all-mac player. other central michigan players to receive first-team all-mac honors were offensive tackle jim wyatt and defensive tackle mike nettie. nettie had nine sacks in 1991, which was at the time tied for the school's single season record.  schedule  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan
chippewas football
this is a list of scholars (albanologists) specializing in albanian studies.  albanian born  ndoc nikaj (1864-1951)  gjergj pekmezi (1872-1938)  fan noli (1882-1965)  costa chekrezi (1892-1959)  tahir dizdari (1900-1972)  tajar zavalani (1903-1966)  stavro skendi (1905-1989)  eqrem cabej (1908-1980)  namik resuli (1908-1985)  selman riza (1909-1988)  aleks buda (1910-1993)  petro janura (1911-1983)  mahir domi (1915-2000)  dhimiter shuteriqi (1915-2003)  idriz ajeti (1917-2019)  shaban demiraj (1920-2014)  mark krasniqi (1920-2015)  androkli kostallari (1922-1992)  mehdi bardhi (1927-1994)  jashar rexhepagiq (1929-2010)  petro zheji (1929-2015)  besim bokshi (1930-2014)  skender rizaj (*1930)  fehmi agani (1932-1999)  muzafer korkuti (*1936)  rexhep qosja (*1936)  jorgo bulo (1939-2015)  anton berisha (*1946)  aurel plasari (*1956)  foreign born  demetrio franco (1443-1525)  johann erich thunmann (1746-1778)  johann georg von hahn (1811-1869)  karl reinhold (1834-1880)  vikentij makusev (1837-1883)  jan urban jarnik (1848-1923)  gustav meyer (1850-1900)  lajos thalloczy (1857-1916)  alexandru philippide (1859-1933)  theodor anton ippen (1861-1935)  carl patsch (1865-1945)  nicolae iorga (1871-1940)  norbert jokl (1877-1942)  franz nopcsa von felso-szilvas (1877-1933)  milan sufflay (1879-1931)  maximilian lambertz (1882-1963)  marco la piana (1883-1958)  margaret hasluck (1885-1948)  giuseppe valentini (1900-1979)  georg stadtmuller (1909-
1985)  agniya desnitskaya (1912-1992)  wacław cimochowski (1912-1982)  vangelis liapis (1914-2008)  eric p. hamp (1920-2019)  peter schubert (1938-2003)  james pettifer (*1949)  robert elsie (1950-2017)  vladimir orel (1952-2007)  pasquale scutari (*1952)  francesco altimari (*1955)  noel malcolm (*1956)  marko snoj (*1959)  oliver schmitt (*1973)  references   albanologists
{{infobox video game | title = badiya | image = badiya logo.png | alt =  | caption =  | developer = semaphore | publisher = semaphore | series =  | engine = unity | platforms =  | released = {{unbulleted list|battle royale (ios, android)||desert survival (pc, ps4, xbo)|}} | genre = survival | modes = single-player, multiplayer | director =  | producer =  | designer =  | programmer =  | artist =  | writer =  | composer =  | arcade system =  }}badiya () is an upcoming open world survival video game title developed by saudi developer semaphore. the title refers to two different games with the same settings and content.  the first game, entitled badiya: desert survival, is a single-player sandbox survival rpg planned to be released for playstation 4, xbox one, and microsoft windows. an early access beta was launched via steam on 11 november 2016.  the second game, entitled badiya: battle royale, is a multiplayer free-to-play battle royale online game that has launched for ios and android devices in may 2020.  summary the events of the game lie in the arabian desert in the 1920s, where the life is harsh, and players must explore and find the necessary supplies for survival. although the desert is very vast, the players have the opportunity to discover the sites, villages, camps, ancient ruins, and are forced to deal with wildlife and residents of the area.  development badiya: desert survival, simply known as badiya at the time, was originally announced by semaphore in april 2016. in an interview with kill screen, semaphore's director of development ahmad jadallah hoped semaphore's project would help clarify how the arab world is represented in video games (as certain game titles by western developers used stereotype and poorly researched interpretations), and explain the history of modern saudi arabia's unification, although the game will focus on an individual's survival in the desert amid the violence during that time period following instability after the end of the great war. using the game's infinite procedural generation, individual players may have unique gameplay experiences.  gameplay for badiya was revealed during e3 2016. the game was originally announced for playstation 4, xbox one, and microsoft windows, and that an early access beta would be available via steam later that year.  despite still being in early access, badiya was ret
ronymed with the subtitle desert survival when semaphore announced badiya: battle royale in april 2019. although it shares much of the same settings and content, battle royale is a separate build from desert survival that focuses on free-for-all online battle royale gameplay. battle royale officially launched for ios and android devices worldwide on 19 may 2020, with plans to release the game on playstation 4, xbox one, and microsoft windows in the future.  badiya: desert survival is made with the unity engine, whilst badiya: battle royale is based on unreal engine 4.  see also  unearthed: trail of ibn battuta - a 2013 game by the same company.  references  external links      desert survival on steam  2020 video games android (operating system) games battle royale games early access video games first-person shooters free-to-play video games ios games multiplayer and single-player video games open-world video games survival video games third-person shooters upcoming video games video games set in saudi arabia video games set in the 1920s video games developed in saudi arabia windows games
the 2016-17 1. fc nurnberg season is the 117th season in the club's football history.  review and events in 2016-17 the club plays in the 2. bundesliga.  the club also took part in the 2016-17 edition of the dfb-pokal, the german cup.  friendly matches  competitions  2. bundesliga  league table  matches  dfb-pokal  overall  sources  external links  2016-17 1. fc nurnberg season at weltfussball.de   2016-17 1. fc nurnberg season at kicker.de   2016-17 1. fc nurnberg season at fussballdaten.de   nuremberg 1. fc nurnberg seasons
sweetbitter is a 2016 novel by american author stephanie danler, published by alfred a. knopf. it is danler's first published book. it was written by the author over a seven-year period, and, despite receiving glowing press before its release, received mixed reviews.  the book is based in part on danler's experience as a waitress in new york city.  history and background the novel was written while danler was a waitress at union square cafe and an mfa student at nearby university the new school. later, while a waitress at buvette, another restaurant in new york city, she met peter gethers, a publisher, and informed him that she had recently finished a book. after gethers recommended the manuscript to a friend, danler  received a six-figure contract for two novels at alfred a. knopf. danler is one of a cohort of authors to receive large contracts in exchange for multi-book deals. others include emma cline and imbolo mbue.  danler has stated that although she has much in common with tess, the novel's protagonist, that tess "quickly became a character, and is in many ways much better and much worse at life than i was at that age" and is not entirely based on her. she has also stated that the novel's other two central characters, jake and simone, are entirely fictional. danler has compared writing her first novel to her experiences in the restaurant world.  plot summary tess is twenty-two when she packs up her things in her car and moves from ohio to new york city. knowing nothing and no one she stumbles her way into a job at a semi-prestigious restaurant as a back waitress. the servers and staff are exceptionally tight-knit and take their jobs extremely seriously and tess does as well. tess is also drawn to jake, one of the bartenders, and simone, a senior server who takes tess under her wing and begins to train her palate and teach her about wines so that she might one day be able to become a server.  although they initially dislike her, the staff members soon warm up to tess and she joins them in their hedonistic lifestyle. nevertheless she longs to be included in simone and jake's more exclusive circle and comes to learn that they are both from connecticut, they knew each other before the restaurant, and simone treats him like family. tess aggressively pursues jake but he refrains from sleeping with her which tess comes to realize is because of simone.
when simone walks in on tess licking jake after he cut himself, simone says she will speak to jake and he finally begins sleeping with tess.  tess is initially happy to be involved with jake and with simone. gradually her closeness to the two turns to bitterness after she discovers that they have matching tattoos neither one will talk about and that simone raised jake from the time he was eight. she also loses respect for simone after realizing that at 37 she is chained to the restaurant. hers is a specialty whose skills will transfer nowhere, and her beauty is quickly fading.  when the restaurant is closed by the health inspectors, tess goes upstairs to the general manager's office and accidentally discovers that simone and jake have planned a one month vacation to france for his birthday without telling her. she gets black out drunk and tries to confront simone and jake, but they fail to respond to her. the next time she sees them she confronts simone, mocking her for being irrelevant. she also tries to convince jake that his relationship with simone is unhealthy and asks him to quit for her but though he admits he is tempted he ultimately rejects her.  feeling defeated tess goes to speak to the general manager, howard, to convince him to give her one of the prestigious server jobs even though she knows that simone will try to block her promotion. howard has sex with her in return for the promotion; however, it turns out to be a transfer to one of their sister restaurants which tess refuses. she tells simone that she instead will try to work at a wine shop and simone encourages the move.  reception  several reviews noted the expectations that preceded the book's publication. the novel was mostly well received, with some critics noting that the central characters  (particularly jake) were not fully fleshed out and the novel lacks overall substance. however, others, such as gabrielle hamilton, writing for the new york times praised the novel, saying the "faults of the book are few".  vanity fair referred to the novel as a "love letter" to union square cafe. it was no. 32 on usa today's bestseller's list.  the washington post's karen heller described the novel as "true to its title: a smart, delicious, coming-of-age tale about a young woman already drunk on the idea of new york before her true education begins."  tv series  in october 2017, starz and plan b entertainment announced the development of a tv adaptation of the novel, with ella purnell as tess. the series premiered on starz
on may 6, 2018 to mixed reviews. in july 2018, it was announced that the series was renewed for a second season, which premiered in july 2019. it was cancelled in december 2019, after the second season ended.  references  2016 american novels alfred a. knopf books novels set in new york city novels set in the 21st century 2016 debut novels
sobeknakht i was an ancient egyptian official of the second intermediate period. he was local governor at elkab.  biography sobeknakht i started his career as a king's son and overseer of the gs-pr. later, he became governor of elkab.  the overseer of the gs-pr was a royal estate manager in provinces often associated with the overseer of the sealed things (treasury), and was also connected to future governors.  attestation sobeknakht i is mainly known from two sources; the juridical stele and tomb inscriptions.  juridical stela the juridical stela documents the transfer of the governorship of elkab from a certain kebsi to a relative, sobeknakht i, in year 01 of king nebiriau. kebsi had inherited this office from his father iymeru when the latter became vizier. iymeru had in turn inherited it from his elder brother aya junior, who died prematurely without children. prior to this, aya junior had inherited the office from their father aya who became vizier in year 01 of merhotepre.  elkab tomb inscription sobeknakht i is known from the inscriptions in the tomb of the local governor sobeknakht ii as the father of the latter. furthermore, from these inscriptions it is clear that the wife of sobeknakht i was a woman with the title hereditary princess and the name nofru. only recently his tomb was identified at elkab. the inscriptions in the tomb are only badly preserved, but the mentioning of a woman called nofru and remains of titles typical for local governors make the identification very likely.  references   nomarchs people of the sixteenth dynasty of egypt officials of the seventeenth dynasty of egypt
the football (disorder) act 2000 is an act of the parliament of the united kingdom enacted during the premiership of tony blair. it served as an amendment to the football spectators act 1989, and strengthened football banning orders (fbos), a civil order imposed to those convicted of football-related offences. fbos may be issued by courts in the united kingdom, or following a complaint from a local police force.  the act was "rushed through parliament" by then-home secretary jack straw following violent clashes during uefa euro 2000. it allows police in england and wales to arrest those suspected of travelling abroad to participate in hooliganism at international games, and to withhold their passports up to five days before an international fixture. straw stated during an opposition day for his bill that he was keen to enact the new laws in time for england's next international game against france in september 2000.  fbos, introduced by football spectators act 1989, may ban an individual from football grounds in the united kingdom for two to ten years, with provisions for individual cases. supporters may also be barred from using public transport on matchdays, and from town centres and built-up, high-risk areas prior to and following matches.  the act has been criticised by civil liberties campaigners for being "draconian", fearing it may result in profiling based on fan appearance.  more than 450 supporters were prevented from travelling to greece for a world cup qualifier in 2001 under the act.  references  external links   text of the football (disorder) act 2000 as in force today (including any amendments) within the united kingdom, from legislation.gov.uk  history of football in england united kingdom acts of parliament 2000 sports law 2000-01 in english football
the imaginary 20th century is a historical comic novel written by norman m. klein in collaboration with gilded age historian margo bistis. it is available in print (2016) and as an e-book with a companion narrated media archive (2014). the novel originated as an interactive archive with related solo and group exhibitions prior to publication. in 2012, klein and bistis coined the term "wunder-roman" to describe their alternative genre. as described in the novel, this term references a mythical 19th-century version of the picaresque novel where the layers-as story roll along a water wheel.  interactive archive  the original documents, and the curatorial idea for the imaginary 20th century, evolved out of bistis' research for "comic art: the paris salon in caricature," a 2003 exhibition organized by the getty research institute. klein and bistis started work on the project with support from california institute of the arts, though principal support came from zkm/center for art and media karlsruhe and the graham foundation for advanced studies in the fine arts.   the first iteration of the imaginary 20th century interface was built by andreas kratky, klein's collaborator on bleeding through.  it premiered in 2007, in "you-ser: the century of the consumer," an exhibition organized by zkm/center for art and media karlsruhe, followed by solo shows at orange county museum of art and showkonstfack, and a group show organized by the ben maltz gallery of otis college of art and design.  after considerable redevelopment, the second iteration was built in collaboration with blanka earhart directing the interface design; interface production by luke domagalski and raphael arar; illustrations by nick lu; sound compositions by aaron drake and kari rae seekins, with additional music by raphael arar. it premiered in the 2010 exhibition "the future of the future," curated by jaroslav andel for the dox: centre for contemporary art prague. the imaginary 20th century was included in "the digital body: the 3rd international exhibition on new media art- part 2" at the cica museum. for "the future can only be told in reverse" organized by the college of creative studies at the university of california, santa barbara, thirteen artists presented works produced in response to the interactive archive and novel. a solo show organized by the university of maryland art gallery featured an installation of "7 pieces from carrie's archive" drawn from university archives and special collections.  the novel  the genre wunder-roman captures
the mental imagery of navigating various components such as a narrated, media archive layered with sound or a comic historical novel accompanied by essays. each component stands alone, yet they work together like the lyrics and music of an opera. in the novel, the massive privately held "carrie's archive" (1917-1936) contains 2000+ documents affixed to cards stored inside a circuitous room and mechanically accessible much like garments stored on dry-cleaner racks. the novel's guiding principle is announced in the first chapter: "the future can only be told in reverse."  subscribers to the online package (the underlying archive and ebook of the novel) gain access to the underlying archive: "photographs, films, comic illustrations, scientific and medical imagery, industrial designs, architectural drawings and ephemera like postcards, stereocards, and maps" spanning 1885 to 1925. each component reveals different aspects of this progress "blown off course."  literary critic jan baetens considers the imaginary 20th century a "contemporary version of the classic 'great american novel', [yet] seen from a more global perspective, since [it] includes a large number of paratextual and metatextual material." it thus resembles a picaresque, the 16th century spanish prototype of the modern novel whereby episodic narratives feature shysters and humble survivors in a nearly hopeless world.  characters albert, always in debt, carrie's second husband  adaline, carrie's step-daughter who looks like carrie  gus angewynne, carrie's father, a failed con-man lynn angewynne, carrie's mother whom she hadn't seen in twenty years carrie angewynne, the protagonist  charles a. barney, impersonates a famous new york banker charles t. barney, the powerful banker linked to the 1907 financial panic natalie barney, a famous american lesbian poet and parisian socialite hy barney, a new york anarchist, one of carrie's four suitors harry brown, carrie's uncle who spent "over forty years ... erasing crimes that might prove embarrassing bruce bungel, fbi operative in pursuit of harry brown william j. burns, founder of a leading detective agency of the early twentieth century edgar rice burroughs, writer best-known for novels on tarzan and on john carter of mars  harry chandler, the leader of the booster oligarchs of los angeles clarence darrow, the great progressive lawyer eugene v. debs, a socialist leader who also ran for president of the u.s. edward doheny, shanty
irish oil mogul in los angeles ignatius donnelley, u.s. congressman, a utopianist and presumed discover of the secrets of atlantis marcel duchamp, masterful french artist, inspired by oncken's description of carrie as "the bride stripp'd bare"  albert fall, secretary of the interior who was caught in the teapot dome scandal o.b. fisk, mercurial right-wing socialist editor short, ugly fred, adaline's friend and admirer connected to the nascent film industry in the early 1920s karl friedrich (schneider), swiss businessman, one of carrie's four suitors   euphrosina van heger, carrie's belgian chaperone and nurse hannes hulscholler, director of the zukerkandl nerve clinic and spa in the vienna woods madame hulscholler, director of the zukerkandl and theosophist henry huntington, founder of the vast los angeles trolley system friedrich karl, swiss entrepreneur and sponsor of the science and crafts movement gaston lesage, algerian colon with a buffalo bill fetish, one of carrie's four suitors andre laurie, radical author and inventor, friend of french writer jules verne thaddeus s. c. lowe, the so-called balloonist who invented an american aeronautics industry in the late nineteenth century j. p. morgan, the most powerful capitalist in turn-of-the-century america mcnamara brothers, the union organizers who blew up the la times building in 1910 sylvanus (vay) morley,  d. l. oncken, famous philosopher-misanthrope of the early twentieth century general harrison gray otis, publisher of the los angeles times, the pugnacious leader of the oligarchs of los angeles paul otlet, belgian archivist, founder of the mundaneum in brussels ted (thaddeus), the perverse scion of a wealthy chicago family, carrie's first husband president theodore roosevelt willie roy shadbolt, an operative for hire usually for problems involving espionage otto turner, boston doctor of nervous diseases, one of carrie's four suitors sally turner, otto turner's wife, and one of carrie's intimate friends george vallotin, a murderer whose identity was erased by harry brown washovsky, harry's beleaguered and mercurial quality president woodrow wilson secretary zimmerman, the german ambassador to mexico who received the dangerous zimmerman telegram, 1917  the essays part ii of the book contains four essays: on the curating of the archive; on "picaresque disasters"; on the future city; and
on the "automated utopia." this serves as another layer, but also as a hinge between the media narrative and the novel.  readers and viewers make the transit from fiction to scholarship, and back again, from narrative hooks in the story, to spaces between the images.  references  external links  2016 american novels historical novels
star wars: scoundrels is a star wars novel written by timothy zahn, released by del rey books on january 1, 2013. it is set just after the events of the originating 1977 film star wars: a new hope and features han solo, chewbacca, and lando calrissian.  plot soon after the destruction of the death star, han, chewbacca, and lando recruit eight others for a high stakes heist. han still needs credits to pay off his debt, and this is the perfect opportunity.  development for scoundrels, zahn was inspired by team caper films. he said, "this is the star wars version of ocean's 11. in fact, my original title was solo's 11, but they decided that might be a little too close to the trademark."  references  external links      2013 american novels 2013 science fiction novels american science fiction novels star wars legends novels
an outdoor sculpture of roscoe conkling by john quincy adams ward is installed near madison avenue and 23rd street in madison square park in manhattan, new york.  see also  1893 in art  references  external links    1893 establishments in new york (state) 1893 sculptures bronze sculptures in manhattan monuments and memorials in manhattan outdoor sculptures in manhattan sculptures of men in new york city statues in new york city flatiron district
doveton (), is a neighbourhood in purasawalkam and vepery, and is a shopping district in central chennai, a metropolitan city in tamil nadu, india. it is the unofficial name of the neighbourhood in purasawalkam. the area of doveton acquired its name after capt. john doveton, who served as a captain commandant of the seventh regiment of infantry.capt.john doveton is the founder of the doveton group of schools situated at no 1,ritherdon road, vepery . the name doveton originated by the presence of the doveton group of schools in the area.  surroundings purasawalkam egmore vepery pattalam, chennai pulianthope basin bridge otteri perambur kellys kilpauk choolai  nearby railway stations chennai egmore railway station. puratchi thalaivar dr. m. g. ramachandran central railway station.  neighbourhoods in chennai
funny ladies of color was a comedy group in the 1990s formed by comedians lydia nicole and cha cha sandoval-epstein. the group was several women of varied ethnic backgrounds- african american, latino, armenian, chicana-jewish, south korean, black puerto rican, and filipino. their popularity grew out of the uniqueness of their brand as a strictly minority crew.  cultural significance the group formed out of response to their lack of steady work in hollywood in correlation with their ethnicity. their mission was to make a statement about diversity and minorities in the comedy industry. each comedian capitalized on their ethnicity through their sketches commenting on their families, upbringings, and stereotypes they've experienced. this route was uncommon mainly because popularity among minorities was virtually nonexistent in the comedy community at the time. the group began a movement of change for all women in comedy, but especially women of diverse ethnic backgrounds.  sketches  funny ladies' south korean comedian alexis rhee would bring her violin on stage and play a note or two between lines, such as, an excerpt of madonna's "like a virgin". rhee would follow up saying "madonna and i have something in common. neither one of us is chinese".  lydia nicole, known for being brought up in new york city between the corner of harlem and spanish harlem, says that in l.a., being half black and half puerto rican makes her a mexican. in miami, a cuban, and in mississippi, dead.  references  further reading      american comedy troupes american women comedians african-american female comedians puerto rican comedians 1993 establishments in the united states
shivani tomar is an indian television actress known for appearing in the serials mitegi laxman rekha, iss pyaar ko kya naam doon 3 and agni vayu.  career tomar did several roles in tv shows such as pavitra rishta and friends: conditions apply. she plays ruchita vinod karanjkar in the tv series pavitra rishta under balaji telefilms. friends: conditions apply aired on channel v is drama-thriller.  in 2018, tomar appeared in "more saiyaan", a music video by sumiran band (vaibhav saxena, sanjay upadhyay and gunjan jha).  television  references  external links       21st-century indian actresses living people indian television actresses year of birth missing (living people)
the liberia women's national basketball team is the national basketball team representing liberia. it is administrated by the liberia basketball federation.  it appeared at the 2005 fiba africa championship for women qualification stage.  see also  liberia women's national under-19 basketball team  liberia women's national under-17 basketball team  liberia women's national 3x3 team  references  external links welcome to friends and supporters of liberian basketball, inc. fiba africa - official website liberia basketball records at fiba archive welcome to liberia #1 online basketball portal  women's national basketball teams basketball basketball teams in liberia basketball
pronunciation of the phoneme  in the  english language has many variations in different dialects.  variations  depending on dialect,  has at least the following allophones in varieties of english around the world: "standard" r: postalveolar approximant  (a common realization of the  phoneme worldwide, received pronunciation and general american included) "bunched" or "molar" r: "bunched-tongue" alveolar approximant  (occurs in southern american english and some midwestern and western american english most strongly); in fact, there is often a continuum of possible realizations for the postalveolar approximant within any single dialect from a more apical articulation  to this more bunched articulation "velar" r: velarized alveolar approximant  (occurs in conservative irish english) "retroflex" r: retroflex approximant  (occurs in west country english, some american and canadian english and irish english, including northern irish english) "flapped" or "tapped" r: alveolar flap  (occurs in scouse and conservative northern england english, most scottish english, some south african, welsh, indian and irish english (probably influenced by the native languages of those regions) and early twentieth-century received pronunciation; not to be confused with flapping of  and ) "trilled" or "rolled" r: alveolar trill  (occurs in some very conservative scottish english, south african english,  some welsh english, indian english and jersey english) "uvular" r or "northumbrian burr": voiced uvular fricative  (occurs in very conservative varieties of geordie and northumbrian english, though largely now disappeared, as well as possibly some conservative south-west and east irish english and some aberdeen english) "labial" or "rounded" r: labiodental approximant  (occurs in some south-east england and london english as a presumed idiosyncrasy, though this is disputed, as is its overlap with rhotacism; see § r-labialization below)  in most dialects  is labialized  in many positions, as in reed  and tree ; in the latter case, the  may be slightly labialized as well. in general american, it is labialized at the beginning of a word but not at the end.  in many dialects,  in the cluster , as in dream,
is realized as a postalveolar fricative  or less commonly alveolar . in , as in tree, it is a voiceless postalveolar fricative  or less commonly alveolar . in england, while the approximant has become the most common realization,  may still be pronounced as a voiceless tap  after  (as in thread). tap realization of  after  is also reported in some parts of the united states, particularly utah.  there are two primary articulations of the approximant : apical (with the tip of the tongue approaching the alveolar ridge or even curled back slightly) and domal (with a centralized bunching of the tongue known as  molar r  or sometimes  bunched r  or  braced r ). peter ladefoged wrote: "many bbc english speakers have the tip of the tongue raised towards the roof of the mouth in the general location of the alveolar ridge, but many american english speakers simply bunch the body of the tongue up so that it is hard to say where the articulation is". the extension to the ipa recommends the use of the ipa diacritics for "apical" and "centralized", as in , to distinguish apical and domal articulations in transcription. however, this distinction has little or no perceptual consequence, and may vary idiosyncratically between individuals.  rhoticity and non-rhoticity  english accents around the world are frequently characterized as either rhotic or non-rhotic. most accents in england, wales, australia, new zealand, and south africa speak non-rhotic accents, and in those english dialects, the historical english phoneme /r/ is not pronounced except before a vowel.  on the other hand, the historical /r/ is pronounced in all contexts in rhotic accents, which are spoken in most of scotland, ireland, the united states, canada, and in some english accents (like in the west country and some parts of lancashire and the far north). thus, a rhotic accent pronounces marker as , and a non-rhotic accent pronounces the same word as . in rhotic accents, when  is not followed by a vowel phoneme, it generally surfaces as r-coloring of the preceding vowel or its coda: nurse , butter .  r-labialization  r-labialization, which should not be confused with the rounding of initial  described above, is a process occurring in certain dialects
of english, particularly some varieties of cockney, in which the  phoneme is realized as a labiodental approximant , in contrast to an alveolar approximant .    the use of labiodental  is commonly stigmatized by prescriptivists. however, it is used in many other languages, and its use is growing in many accents of british english. most speakers who do so are from the south-east of england, particularly london.    that has also been reported to be an extremely-rare realization of  in new zealand english.  the  realization may not always be labiodental since bilabial and velarized labiodental realizations have been reported.  r-labialization leads to pronunciations such as these:   red -   ring -   rabbit -   merry christmas -   however, the replacement of  by some kind of labial approximant may also occur caused by a type of speech impediment called rhotacism or derhotacization.  see also  english-language vowel changes before historic /r/ rhoticity in english  references  english phonology rhotic consonants
doleh is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  child sex ratio details the village population of children with an age group from 0-6 is 177 which makes up 9.83% of total population of village. average sex ratio is 921 per 1000 males which is higher than  the state average of 895. the child sex ratio as per census is 895, higher than average of 846 in the state of punjab.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
events from the year 1900 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  events   pyramid of capitalist system  russian polar expedition of 1900-02   trans-siberian railway panorama  russian empire at the 1900 summer olympics  births  deaths  references  1900 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
sergey fyodorovich lisovsky (; born 25 april 1960, moscow) is a russian politician, who was a member of the federation council of the russian federation in 2004-2020, a representative of the kurgan regional duma. tv host channel rbc tv. in the past - the entrepreneur. candidate of philology (2000). member of the general council of the party united russia. it is one of the pioneers of the russian social and political advertisements and an acknowledged expert on the contemporary electoral technologies.  biography  sergey fyodorovich lisovsky was born april 25, 1960 in moscow into a family of physicists. his father, fyodor viktorovich lisovsky - known person in the scientific community, doctor of physical and mathematical sciences, professor at the institute of radio electronics of the russian academy of sciences. co-author of one of the most complete dictionary of electronics and other special technical dictionaries. mother - inna fyodorovna lisovskaya long time worked as a teacher of physics at school, now a housewife.  career  after school sergei lisovsky entered the moscow power engineering institute,  graduating in 1983 in the specialty  radiophysics, i was a student disk jockey. from 1983 to 1984 he worked as an engineer at the central institute of radio engineering, from 1984 to 1987 - was on the komsomol  in the bauman district committee of the komsomol in moscow (the instructor). in 1986, together with the honored artist of the rsfsr yury chernavsky takes part in the creation of non-public leisure center for youth - a company spm  record  (later - moscow studio). in 1989 he registered one of the first in the soviet union production companies  lis's (later rice-lis's), which is engaged in the organization and conduct of various musical concerts.  on june 17, 1995 became a member of the coordinating council and a member of the bureau of the cop of business roundtable russia. in july, he was appointed general director of cjsc  ortv-advertising. in september, together with boris zosimov launched russia's first music channel  k-10.  in 1996   one of the founders of the creative union of  quinta, the president of the russian association of regional tv companies (rart), member of the national advertising council. became a member of staff of the presidential election campaign of boris yeltsin and the organizer of a nationwide campaign  vote or lose. june 26, 1996, was detained together with  arkady evstafiev, when he tried to take away from the
government house a cardboard box from under the copier to $500 thousand. on october 19 the newspaper  new look  was the first assistant of the president of the russian federation, head of the russian president's security service korzhakov published a sensational statement, which indicated that berezovsky tried to persuade him to kill lisovsky  (and vladimir gusinsky, yuri luzhkov and kobzon). western media responded to the statements korzhakov.  in early 1997, he tried to leave russia in the us, but in february, the us embassy refused to issue him a visa. in september, he became co-chairman of the conciliation committee on the relationship of artists and tax service.  december 11, 1998 the employees of the tax police with the support of the fsb and ruop staff conducted a series of searches in the office of jsc ortv-advertising in the country and in the flat sergey and seized all the documents and money. in the same year he became president of the association of managers of music and show business.  in 1999 he became a member of the board of directors tv centr television.  since june 29, 2004 - the representative in the federation council of the kurgan regional duma, first deputy chairman of the federation council committee on agrarian and food policy and fishery, a member of the federation council commission on information policy.  since 2013, lisovsky in the evening on rbc tv conducts the program  capital, in which the guests studio interviews with the same volume of karl marx in his hand, from time to time quotes selected place. for marx himself, according sergey, he relates with undisguised sympathy, and his thoughts and writings is very instructive and relevant to today's business world.  lisovsky is actively engaged in social activities in the field of culture - is one of the leaders of the russian festival kinotavr, as well as a member of the public council for advertising, the president of the russian association of regional tv companies, chairman of the all-russian confederation of creative.  he loves risky sports. he is fond of driving a helicopter, mountain climbing, hang gliding, golf, pilotage. in 1995 he participated in the dakar rally, finishing 47th in the suv category.  suspicion of involvement in the murder of vladislav listyev  during the investigation of vladislav listyev murder that happened march 1, 1995 in moscow, lisowski was a suspect in a criminal case, his lawyer was anatoly kucherena. lisovsky repeatedly mentioned in the media in
connection with the loud murder in a criminal case it repeatedly interrogated, while lisovsky never hiding from the investigation that set him apart from the alleged operatives of the murder of the organizer - the authority solntsevo opg igor dashdamirov a and alleged perpetrators, brothers alexander and andrey ageikin. following the resignation of the prosecutor general of the russian federation yuri skuratov in 1999, in which were carried out major investigations and established circle of suspects in the press again expanded version of involvement in the crime four main defendants, the first of which was called lisovsky. according to skuratov, the investigation was hampered by the kremlin as the alleged sponsor of the customer was yeltsin's presidential campaign in 1996.  references  external links  интервью сергея лисовского газете «новыи взгляд» (1996)  сергеи лисовскии о вто, сельском хозяистве и россииском чиновничестве  интервью  лисовского: «количество денег не влияет на свободу»  1960 births living people people from moscow politics of kurgan oblast members of the federation council of russia (after 2000) dakar rally drivers united russia politicians 21st-century russian politicians russian television presenters russian businesspeople eighth convocation members of the state duma (russian federation)
india-nicaragua relations refers to bilateral relations between india and nicaragua. relations have been limited to central american integration system dialogue and visits by nicaraguan ministers to india. india maintains an honorary consul general in nicaragua, concurrently accredited to the indian embassy in panama city and nicaragua used to maintain an embassy in india. it was reduced to an honorary consulate general in new delhi.  history visits between the two nations had been by the speaker of the indian parliament, shivraj patil, for an inter parliamentary union event in 1989 and the then labour & welfare minister, ram vilas paswan, who attended the inauguration of president chamorro in april 1990. while on the nicaraguan side, various top level ministers attended many summits hosted by india and even the current foreign minister samuel santos lopez visiting india in 2008 for the sica-india foreign ministers' meeting and in 2013 with high-level talks with the then external affairs minister salman khurshid which also expanded trade with the two countries and also opened up possibility of indian businessmen investing in the nicaraguan canal project.  trade bilateral trade between the two countries for the year 2012-13 was us$60.12 million with india exporting cotton, automobiles and accessories, iron & steel, rubber & rubber products and pharmaceuticals whereas nicaragua's export consists of skin & leather, wood & wooden articles, raw hides, etc. india has also donated surgical equipment and medicines worth ₹338,000 in 1998 and again in 2001 worth us$10,000 to help the drought stricken country. many indian industries and companies have set up in relation with nicaraguan companies like praj industries of pune setting up an ethanol production plant for nicaragua sugar estates limited, bajaj industries selling large numbers of three wheeler auto-taxi locally every year and mahindra jeep being sold with the help of grupo pellas of nicaragua, the country's largest business group. the national electricity transmission company (enatrel) chief executive, salvador mansell, under the nicaraguan government delegation has sought a loan of us$57 million from india for the construction of three power projects in the country, two electrical substations and a transmission line of 138 kilowatts, which is under negotiations.  references    nicaragua bilateral relations of nicaragua
sarcosoma globosum, or witches cauldron, is a species of fungus in the family sarcosomataceae. it was first described in 1793 by casimir christoph schmidel. johann xaver robert caspary transferred it to the genus sarcosoma in 1891.  also known as the charred-pancake cup, is a near-threatened fungus native to northern europe. it is rarely found in some parts of northeastern north america, particularly in the great lakes region. to biologists' surprise, in 2021 it was found in northern british columbia.  the witches cauldron is an ascomycete or sac fungus, meaning that its microscopic structure utilizes the ascus, a spore-bearing cell, for sexual reproduction. it is a detritivore, and survives on decomposing matter, most commonly leaf litter. it is found in spruce forests and does not currently have any human uses.  description and range  sarcosoma globosum is most commonly studied in northern europe, particularly sweden, however, its population has been in decline for the past 50 years. its preference of well-drained, nutrient-rich soil near rivers and streams coupled with its success in specifically light spruce forest has caused its regional extinction in central europe.  it is native to canada, czech republic, estonia, finland, latvia, norway, poland, russia, sweden, ukraine, and the united states. it has been classified regionally extinct in germany, lithuania, and slovakia.  ecology  the witches cauldron is found along streams and brooks in northern europe, where it has been studied and observed most thoroughly in estonia, finland, and sweden, while in norway it has become extinct. the fruit bodies of the sarcosoma globosum are described as big, round, and barrel-like, 5-10 centimeters in diameter. dark brown and even blackish in color, the witches cauldron can be glossy and velvety with a gelatinous inside. its fruit bodies flatten and wrinkle with time.  the striking appearance of the fungus has made it easy to spot for tourists, who later report their findings to museums and researchers. some researchers in finland introduced the idea that these fungus could be an indicator of climate change in fennoscandia.  conservation threats to habitat  some of the habitats of this fungus have been destroyed due to typical human activity associated with urban sprawl, such as the building of roads and houses or forestry. however, some anthropogenic habitat degradation has actually allowed the species to flourish. dense forest
is not suitable for the sarcosoma globosum and, therefore, the introduction of grazing cattle into the agroforest actually allowed the fungus to flourish in 1950s. the species, however, has had little success in recolonizing managed forests after they have been cut down for the logging.  conservation actions needed  witches cauldron is nationally red-listed or classified as rare in 12 countries and regions in europe. it has proven success in survey extensive selective logging, but it is unable to persist in forests that have been clear-cut. it is important to prevent overgrowth in forest regions to allow for populations to survive. the swedish epa developed a species action plan for sarcosoma globosum from 2010 to 2014.  research needed  population size, distribution, and trends need to be researched as well as the life history and ecology of this understudied fungus. the threats to the habitat of the witches cauldron are the same types of environmental degradation associated with progressing climate change. these need to be acutely identified and action plans need to be drafted and signed to hold countries and regions of the eu accountable.  references  external links  fungi described in 1793 fungi of europe pezizales
sherpur is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 7.4 km from nurmahal, 24.8 km from phillaur, 36.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 135 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 24.2 km away from the village. the village is 43.2 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 129 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
denee ayana benton (born december 31, 1991) is an american actress and singer. she is best known for her performance as natasha rostova in the 2016 musical natasha, pierre, & the great comet of 1812 on broadway, for which she received a tony award nomination. benton assumed the role of eliza hamilton in the broadway production of hamilton, beginning performances on october 30, 2018. her television acting credits include unreal and the gilded age.  early life and education benton was raised in eustis, florida. she named rodgers and hammerstein's cinderella as an early inspiration for her desire to act.  she attended trinity preparatory school in winter park, florida, before graduating from carnegie mellon university in 2014.  career benton's first prominent professional role was her role as nabulungi in the west end and u.s. national tour of the book of mormon. later she was cast in the titular role of natasha in natasha, pierre & the great comet of 1812 with the american repertory theatre; she made her broadway debut when that show opened at the imperial theatre on november 14, 2016. benton received a tony award nomination for best actress in a musical her role in the show.  she appeared on the late show with stephen colbert on december 12, 2016, to discuss the role.  she gained wider prominence in her recurring role on the second season of the lifetime series, unreal.  on october 17, 2018, it was announced that benton would assume the role of eliza hamilton in the broadway production of hamilton, beginning performances on october 30.  as of 2022, benton is a main cast member on the hbo max historical drama series the gilded age.  personal life  benton began dating carl lundstedt in 2014, whom she met in her acting program at carnegie mellon university. they married in 2020.  theatre credits  filmography  film  television  awards and nominations  references  external links      living people actresses from florida place of birth missing (living people) american musical theatre actresses people from winter park, florida carnegie mellon university alumni 21st-century american actresses african-american actresses american television actresses american film actresses american stage actresses 1991 births theatre world award winners african-american women singers
testosterone isobutyrate, sold under the brand names agovirin-depot and perandren m among others, is an androgen and anabolic steroid medication and a testosterone ester which is used for indications such as low testosterone levels in men and delayed puberty in boys. it is available only in the czech republic and slovakia. the medication is administered by injection into muscle once every 1 to 2 weeks in males. unlike most other testosterone esters, which are provided as oil solutions, testosterone isobutyrate is formulated as a microcrystalline aqueous suspension.  medical uses  testosterone isobutyrate is used in the treatment of hypogonadism in men and delayed puberty in adolescent boys. it is also used in the treatment of klinefelter's syndrome, aplastic anemia, cushing's syndrome (as an anabolic to preserve lean body mass), postmenopausal osteoporosis in women, advanced breast cancer in women, breast pain in women, and cachexia. testosterone isobutyrate has been used in masculinizing hormone therapy for transgender men as well.  available forms  testosterone isobutyrate is provided in the form of a 25 mg/ml microcrystalline aqueous suspension packaged in 2 ml ampoules (5 ampoules per box). this equates to a dose of 50 mg per ampoule. testosterone isobutyrate (25 mg) is also available in combination with estradiol benzoate (2.5 mg) under the brand name folivirin (1 ml ampoules).  side effects  side effects of testosterone isobutyrate include virilization among others.  pharmacology  testosterone isobutyrate is a prodrug of testosterone, and hence is an agonist of the androgen receptor, the biological target of endogenous androgens like testosterone and dihydrotestosterone. it produces both androgenic and anabolic effects, as well as weak estrogenic effects due to metabolism of testosterone into estradiol.  in contrast to most other testosterone esters, which are used as amorphous oil solutions, testosterone isobutyrate is provided in the form of a microcrystalline aqueous suspension. it has very low water solubility and forms a long-lasting microcrystalline depot within muscle upon intramuscular injection. this respository slowly dissolves over time. as a result, testosterone isobutyrate has a prolonged duration of action of approximately 2 weeks. it is administered at intervals of
once every 1 to 2 weeks in men. microcrystalline testosterone isobutyrate in aqueous suspension requires a larger needle (21 gauge) than oil solutions due to the presence of solid crystals in the suspension. it can produce local irritation, pain, and redness upon injection.  chemistry  testosterone isobutyrate, or testosterone 17β-(2-methylpropanoate), is a synthetic androstane steroid and a derivative of testosterone. it is an androgen ester; specifically, it is the c17β 2-methylpropanoate (isobutyrate) ester of testosterone.  history microcrystalline testosterone isobutyrate in aqueous suspension was first described in 1952. it was introduced for medical use shortly thereafter. around the same time, testosterone enanthate in oil solution was introduced for medical use. it became the dominant long-acting injectable form of testosterone, and limited the commercial success of testosterone isobutyrate. the combination of microcrystalline estradiol benzoate and testosterone isobutyrate in aqueous suspension was introduced under the brand name femandren m by 1953.  society and culture  brand names brand names of testosterone isobutyrate include agovirin-depot, perandren m, testocryst, and virex-cryst. it has also been marketed in combination with estradiol benzoate under the brand names femandren m and folivirin.  availability testosterone isobutyrate is available only in the czech republic and slovakia. it was originally manufactured by the pharmaceutical company spofa intermittently manufactured by biotika, and is now manufactured by bb pharma.  see also  estradiol benzoate/testosterone isobutyrate  references  external links  agovirin depot (testosterone isobutyrate) - william llewellyn's anabolic.org  androgens and anabolic steroids androstanes isobutyrate esters ketones testosterone esters
william francis stone (september 29, 1909 - august 18, 1973) was virginia lawyer and member of the virginia general assembly representing martinsville as well as patrick and henry counties between 1954 and 1957, first as a delegate and then elected to a partial senate term in a special 1957 election upon the death of frank p. burton. a member of the byrd organization, stone was a member of the boatwright committee which investigated the naacp as part of the massive resistance to racial integration vowed by u.s. senator harry f. byrd after the u.s. supreme court decisions in brown v. board of education.  early and family life  stone was borne in stoneville, rockingham county, north carolina to robert tyler stone (1865 - 1944) and his wife mary starling hamlin stone (1877 - 1965). he had at least four brothers who survived into the 1960s, including t. clarence stone, who would serve in both houses of the north carolina legislature and likewise active in opposing civil rights activists. meanwhile, william stone received a llb degree from washington and lee university in lexington, virginia in 1933. he received an llm degree from the atlanta law school in georgia in 1936. he married m. ivey courtney.  during world war ii, stone served in the u.s. navy, earning the rank of lieutenant commander. upon returning home, he was active in his presbyterian church, the kiwanis, and the virginia bar, being elected its vice president in 1953 and serving on its board of law examiners beginning in 1955.  political career  stone served as martinsville's city attorney from 1957 until 1958. he was also a director of the piedmont trust bank.  in 1954 he and william f. carter won election as the two delegates from henry and patrick counties and martinsville; willey r. broaddus jr. had previously represented henry county and martinsville. stone was re-elected in 1955. when state senator frank p. burton died in 1957, stone ran for the seat, and was elected, thus representing the district which included danville, martinsville as well as henry, patrick and pittsylvania counties along with incumbent landon r. wyatt. in the same 1957 general election, robert lybrook clark and henry county commonwealth attorney albert l. philpott won election as the two delegates representing henry and patrick counties and martinsville.  as part of massive resistance, the virginia general assembly passed the stanley plan in september 1956. among the various laws were seven expanding the common law legal offenses of champerty, maintenance, barratry, running and
capping, as well as the statutory violation of unauthorized practice of law. the legislature then appointed two committees to investigate the naacp, which was pursuing the legal cases to desegregate virginia schools. the speaker of the house of delegates appointed john b. boatwright to chair the new committee on offenses against the administration of justice, with stone and j. j. williams jr. as members; the president of the virginia senate appointed two additional members, e. almer ames jr. of onancock and earl a. fitzpatrick of roanoke (who became vice-chairman). shortly after the january 1957 began, the committee issued letters requesting information from the naacp as well as the defenders of state sovereignty and individual liberties and other segregationist organizations, and during the next month began subpoenaing naacp membership lists. these activities prompted litigation (naacp motions to quash the subpoenas) in richmond and several virginia counties. in march, the boatwright committee opined that various segregationist organizations did not commit the newly expanded legal offenses of champerty, maintenance, barratry, running and capping, nor the unauthorized practice of law. however, the commission's report issued november 13, 1957 recommended enforcement of those laws against the various named naacp lawyers. the subpoenas and other activities soon reduced naacp membership in virginia by half, but two years later (with stone remaining on the committee after his elevation to the senate) the committee issued another report and boatwright complained that the virginia state bar was not punishing those lawyers but instead spending $5000 on a jamestown commemoration and $6350 on a new continuing legal education program. ultimately, the virginia state bar tried to prosecute naacp attorney samuel w. tucker, but a circuit judge in emporia, virginia dismissed the case in 1963.  stone and landon p. wyatt jointly represented the virginia senate, district 13, constituting martinsville and danville, and henry, patrick and pittsylvania counties for numerous terms, although the district was renumbered the 12th in the 1965 elections after reapportionment required by davis v. mann and the civil rights act of 1965. w. carrington thompson succeeded wyatt after the 1969 election. after the reapportionment required by the 1970 census, stone was elected to the 20th district, which included martinsville along with franklin, henry and patrick counties, but he died after the first session and virgil h. goode, jr. replaced him during the second session.  death stone died in north carolina on august 19, 1973 and is buried in his family's ancestral plot in the stoneville cemetery. u.s
. route 220 near martinsville and its intersection with virginia state route 57 is named after him.  references  1909 births 1973 deaths washington and lee university alumni members of the virginia house of delegates people from martinsville, virginia people from rockingham county, north carolina virginia democrats 20th-century american politicians stone family (north carolina)
ufc fight night: cyborg vs. lansberg (also known as ufc fight night 95) was a mixed martial arts event produced by the ultimate fighting championship held on september 24, 2016, at ginasio nilson nelson in brasilia, brazil.  background the event in brasilia was the second that the organization hosted in the brazilian capital city, with the first being ufc fight night: bigfoot vs. arlovski in september 2014.  the event was headlined by a catchweight bout of 140 lb between former strikeforce women's featherweight champion and current invicta fc featherweight champion cris cyborg and promotional newcomer lina lansberg.  on august 13, the card suffered multiple changes due to injury: brandon thatch and shinsho anzai pulled out of their respective fights against erick silva and luan chagas. silva and chagas were instead rescheduled to face each other. renato moicano and joaquim silva also pulled out of their respective fights against mike de la torre and promotional newcomer gregor gillespie. their replacements were godofredo pepey and the ultimate fighter: brazil 4 winner glaico franca, respectively.  at the weigh-ins, michel prazeres missed weight by two pounds, weighing in at 158 lb. as a result, he was fined 20% of his fight purse, which went to gilbert burns.  results  bonus awards the following fighters were awarded $50,000 bonuses: fight of the night: erick silva vs. luan chagas performance of the night: eric spicely and vicente luque  see also list of ufc events 2016 in ufc  references  ufc fight night mixed martial arts in brazil sport in brasilia 2016 in mixed martial arts 2016 in brazilian sport september 2016 sports events in south america
the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems (icores) is an annual conference in the field of operations research. two tracks are held simultaneously, covering domain independent methodologies and technologies and also practical work developed in specific application areas. these tracks are present in the conference not only in technical sessions but also in poster sessions, keynote lectures and tutorials.  the works presented in the conference are published in the conference proceedings and are made available at the scitepress digital library. usually, it's established a cooperation with springer for a post-publication with some of the conference  best papers. the first edition of icores was held in 2012 in conjunction with the international conference on agents and artificial intelligence (icaart) and the international conference on pattern recognition applications and methods (icpram).  areas  methodologies and technologies  analytics for enterprise (engineering) systems  inventory theory  linear programming  management sciences  network optimization  optimization  predictive analytics  queuing theory  simulation  stochastic optimization  data mining and business analytics  decision analysis  design in es (e.g., real options for flexible design, etc)  dynamic programming  forecasting  game theory  industrial engineering  information systems  applications  automation of operations  or in education  or in emergency management  or in health  or in national defense/international security  or in telecommunications  or in transportation  project management  resource allocation  risk management  routing  decision support systems  scheduling  supply chain management  systems of systems/teams and socio-technical systems  energy and environment  engines for innovation  globalization and productivity  logistics  maintenance  new applications of or  optimization in finance  current chairs  conference chair marc demange, rmit university, school of science - mathematical sciences, australia  program co-chairs  greg h. parlier, ncsu, united states  federico liberatore, cardiff university, united kingdom  editions  icores 2019 - prague, czech republic   proceedings - proceedings of the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: methodologies and technologies  -  rainer schlosser. "stochastic dynamic pricing with strategic customers and reference price effects"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  sally i. mcclean, david a. stanford, lalit garg and naveed khan. "using phase-type models to monitor and predict process target compliance"  best student paper award  area: methodologies and technologies  -  marek vlk, antonin novak and zdenek hanzalek. "
makespan minimization with sequence-dependent non-overlapping setups"  best poster award  area: applications  -  clemence bisot. "dynamic linear assignment for pairing two parts in production - a case study in aeronautics industry"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  maria e. bruni, lorenzo brusco, giuseppe ielpa and patrizia beraldi. "the risk-averse profitable tour problem"  icores 2018 - funchal, madeira, portugal   proceedings - proceedings of the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: methodologies and technologies  -  rainer schlosser and keven richly. "dynamic pricing strategies in a finite horizon duopoly with partial information"  best student paper award  area: methodologies and technologies  -  claudio arbib, fabrizio marinelli, andrea pizzuti and roberto rosetti. "a heuristic for a rich and real two-dimensional woodboard cutting problem"  best poster award  area: applications  -  clemence bisot. "dynamic linear assignment for pairing two parts in production - a case study in aeronautics industry"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  maria elena bruni, luigi di puglia pugliese, patrizia beraldi and francesca guerriero. "a two-stage stochastic programming model for the resource constrained project scheduling problem under uncertainty"  icores 2017 - porto, portugal   proceedings - proceedings of the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: methodologies and technologies  -  michael dreyfuss and yahel giat. "optimizing spare battery allocation in an electric vehicle battery swapping system"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  martina fischetti and david pisinger. "on the impact of using mixed integer programming techniques on real-world offshore wind parks"  best poster award  area: applications  -  alexander hammerle and georg weichhart. "variable neighbourhood search solving sub-problems of a lagrangian flexible scheduling problem"  icores 2016 - lisbon, portugal   proceedings - proceedings of the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: applications  -  yujie chen, fiona polack, peter cowling, philip mourdjis and stephen remde. "risk driven analysis of maintenance for a large-scale drainage system"  area: methodologies and technologies  - vikas vikram
singh, oualid jouini and abdel lisser. "a complementarity problem formulation for chance-constraine games"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  jose l. saez and victor m. albornoz. "delineation of rectangular management zones under uncertainty conditions"  best phd project award  parisa madhooshiarzanagh. "preference dissagrigation model of electre tri-nc and its application on identifying preferred climates for tourism".  icores 2015 - lisbon, portugal   proceedings - proceedings of the international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: applications  -  l. berghman, c. briand, r. leus and p. lopez. "the truck scheduling problem at crossdocking terminals"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  kailiang xu and gang zheng. "schedule two-machine flow-shop with controllable processing times using tabu-search"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  wasakorn laesanklang, dario landa-silva and j. arturo castillo salazar. "mixed integer programming with decomposition to solve a workforce scheduling and routing problem"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  jan bok and milan hladik. "selection-based approach to cooperative interval games"  best phd project award  nigel m. clay, john hearne, babak abbasi and andrew eberhard. "ensuring blood is available when it is needed most"  sandy jorens, annelies de corte, kenneth sorensen and gunther steenackers. "the air distribution network design problem - a complex non-linear combinatorial optimization problem "  icores 2014 - eseo, angers, loire valley, france   proceedings - proceedings of the 3rd international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: applications  -  celine gicquel and michel minoux. "new multi-product valid inequalities for a discrete lot-sizing problem"  area: methodologies and technologies  -  nadia chaabane fakhfakh, cyril briand and marie-jose huguet. "a multi-agent min-cost flow problem with controllable capacities"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  nhat-vinh vo, pauline fouillet and christophe lente. "general lower bounds for the total completion time in a flowshop scheduling problem"  area: methodologies and technologies
-  antonio quintino, joao carlos lourenco and margarida catalao-lopes. "managing price risk for an oil and gas company"  best phd project award  laura wagner and mustafa cagri gurbuz. "sourcing decisions for goods with potentially imperfect quality under the presence of supply disruption "  icores 2013 - barcelona, spain   proceedings - proceedings of the 2nd international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: applications  -  daniel reich, sandra l. winkler and erica klampfl. "the pareto frontier for vehicle fleet purchases"  area: methodologies and technologies -  n. perel, j. l. dorsman and m. vlasiou. "cyclic-type polling models with preparation times"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  ahmad almuhtady, seungchul lee, edwin romeijn and jun ni. "a maintenance-optimal swapping policy"  area: methodologies and technologies - pablo adasme, abdel lisser and chen wang. "a distributionally robust formulation for stochastic quadratic bi-level programming"  icores 2012 - vilamoura, algarve, portugal  proceedings - proceedings of the 1st international conference on operations research and enterprise systems.  best paper award   area: applications  -  rita macedo, said hanafi, francois clautiaux, claudio alves and j. m. valerio de carvalho. "generalized disaggregation algorithm for the vehicle routing problem with time windows and multiple routes"  area: methodologies and technologies - herwig bruneel, willem melange, bart steyaert, dieter claeys and joris walraevens. "impact of blocking when customers of different classes are accommodated in one common queue"  best student paper award  area: applications  -  jianqiang cheng, stefanie kosuch and abdel lisser. "stochastic shortest path problem with uncertain delays"  area: methodologies and technologies - a. papayiannis, p. johnson, d. yumashev, s. howell, n. proudlove and p. duck. "continuous-time revenue management in carparks"  references  external links    science and technology events   science and technology publications   event management system  wikicfp call for papers  operations research modeling and simulation computer science conferences academic conferences
boys24 ( 'sonyeon ishipsa', stylized as boys24) was a south korean pre-debut boy group formed by cj e&m through a 2016 survival show with the same name. there were twenty-seven members in the group divided into four units. the group performed regular shows in their own concert hall, with the debut of the final eight members in2it on october 26, 2017.  the first promotional unit (later dubbed unit black) who were selected from the 'boys24 the 1st semi-final' concert consists of park doha, hwang inho, oh jinseok, kim sunghyun, kim yonghyun, jung yeontae, yoo youngdoo and han hyunuk. the unit release their first single album, steal your heart on april 11, 2017 on mnet's m! countdown with the song title "steal your heart".  after completing 260 concerts, the final group was selected from "the final", consist of eight members: yoo youngdoo (yoo jiahn), jeong yeontae, hwang inho, han hyunuk, isaac voo, lee inpyo, kim jinsub and kim sunghyun. they debuted on october 26, 2017 as in2it.  history  on january 10, 2016 cj e&m announced that they were investing 25 billion won ($20.6 million) over the next three years in a new boy band to perform throughout the year at a permanent venue. cj e&m had named the boy band and project name "boys24", to air the whole process from selecting members to performing in front of audiences.  concept of boys24  first, ahn seok-joon set the stage of 'boys24' as four stages, the first being 'excavation'. of the total of 5500 applicants, 49 were selected by mnet.com as untreated gemstones. the second stage was 'competition'. the unfinished 49 people formed a total of seven unit teams, where they would vividly confirm their intense competition. the third stage was 'growth', a process of the birth of a 24-member boys24, which would be confirmed in the theater. the final stage was 'evolution'. it could be said that they had evolved to become a crystal, and among the 24 people, a few select members who had the highest level in all aspects would make their debut as an idol group. they would enter the world of 'pro' and start full-scale activity.  january 2016 - august 2017  the auditions were held
from january 18 to february 19. however, due to the large  number of applicants, which was more than 4000, the final date of the audition was shifted to march 11. forty-nine participants who passed the audition competed in a survival show which began airing on 18 june 2016.  after the survival show ended, twenty-eight people were selected as boys24 members, and the group held their concert three to five days a week in rotation. the concert was set to take place at the boys 24 x booto hall, also known as mesa hall, near shinsegae's duty-free shop in myeongdong, seoul. the first concert was held on september 22, 2016.  on august 25, 2016 the group made a special appearance at m! countdown performing their song "rising star". in september 2016, yellow unit from the group were chosen as the models for 새싹보리 a barley drink, sold by cj health care. on september 10, 2016, unit yellow and unit sky from the group held their first fan meeting in hong kong. on september 27 and 28, 2016, the group held "boys24 live preview" press call at their own hall to promote their own concert.  on november 2, 2016, unit yellow's music video for "e" was released as an award for the unit for being mvp unit. the track also released on music sites and charted no.1 on mnet's music chart. on november 3, 2016, unit yellow and unit sky made a special appearance at m! countdown performing their song "e". a week later all units from the group made a special appearance again on m! countdown performing "e".  on december 1, 2016, the group announced that they would collaborate with dia tv as part of monthly idol project broadcasting with various creators from dia tv. on december 7, 2016, the group released two versions of their first live album from their concert boys24 live in cd format. the first version of the album was recorded by unit white and unit green while the second version of the album was recorded by unit sky and unit yellow.  on february 14, 2017, lee hwayoung was removed from the group and his contract was cancelled following his leaked audio controversy for making offensive comments about fans.  on march 5, 2017, the group held 'boys24 the 1st semi-final' concert at the hall of peace at kyung hee university in dongdaemun, seoul. the concert was broadcast live on mnet and m2
. through the concert park doha, jin sungho, hwang inho, oh jinseok, kim sunghyun, kim yonghyun, jung yeontae, yoo youngdoo and han hyunuk were selected to promote as promotional unit for three months. the promotional unit would perform on kcon japan, music programs, and entertainment shows.  on march 10, 2017, cj e&m and liveworks announced that jin sungho to leave his position as part of the first promotional unit but still remain in the group following controversies about his past actions in junior high school. the first promotional unit would move forward as an eight-member group.  on march 23, 2017, the group announced that the first promotional unit official name was unit black. the name was voted by fans through a team naming event that was announced on the group's official fan cafe. on april 11, 2017, the unit released their first single album, steal your heart on mnet's m! countdown with their song "steal your heart".  on august 12, 2017, the group held 'boys24 the final' concert at olympic park olympic hall, seoul, marking the end of boys24 survival project after 1 year and 6 months. the concert was broadcast live through v live. hwang inho, jung yeontae, kim jinsub, kim sunghyun, yoo youngdoo, isaac voo, and jin sungho were announced as final group members by fans vote, while lee inpyo and han hyunuk were selected as wild card directly by company, completing final line-up as nine-member group. the final group would start their overseas promotions right away, starting with visiting japan on august 26 followed by korea tourism organization invitation to kazakhstan in september.  on august 14, 2017, mmo entertainment, who manage the debut team, announced that jin sungho to had left the team due to differing musical point of view.  survival show   the survival show with the same name as the group was a 2016 reality boy group unit survival show that aired every saturday 10pm on mnet and tvn. it was a large-scale project in which the units of a selected number of members would be produced from a pool of 49 free-agents.  the show consists of 8 episodes, airing from june 18, 2016 to august 6, 2016. the highest ratings for this show is 0.8%.  mc & masters  oh yeon-seo (mc) shin hye-sung (director) lee min-woo (director) jeon bong-jin (
vocal master) ha hwi-dong (dance master) vasco (rap master) yoo jae-hwan (special vocal master) basick (special rap master) choi young-joon (special dance master)  winners  the winners of boys24 are unit yellow, unit white, unit green, and unit sky. unit yellow were selected as the mvp team and were awarded 200 million won (approximately $171,220) of investment into their music production and unit activities promotion. sangmin from unit sky withdrew from boys24 due to personal reasons, which included health issues. online votes were held to pick five contestants who were formerly eliminated on the show to replace sangmin's position. the votes took place august 10-15 with the winners of the vote being announced on august 16. the five contestants with the highest votes were jin sungho, jung yeontae, han hyunuk, kim sunghyun, and tak jinkyu. jin sungho was added to unit green, jung yeontae was added to unit yellow, kim sunghyun was added to unit white, han hyunuk and tak jinkyu were added to unit sky.  episodes guide  episodes ratings   episode 1 : 2016.6.18 : top7 selection : n/a episode 2 : 2016.6.25 : top7 chose unit members and mission : 0.8% episode 3 : 2016.7.02 : unit mission : 0.6% episode 4 : 2016.6.09 : first unit mission : n/a episode 5 : 2016.6.16 : second unit mission : n/a episode 6 : 2016.6.23 : third unit mission : n/a episode 7 : 2016.6.30 : third unit mission : n/a episode 8 : 2016.8.06 : final unit mission : 0.8%  members  at the final episode of the survival show, the group originally had twenty-four members that were separated in to four units. the units were unit yellow, unit white, unit green, and unit sky with each unit containing six members. however, shortly after the survival show ended lee sangmin withdrew from the group then five eliminated members were revived to replace his position. the revival made each unit consist of seven members and the total group then consisted of twenty-eight members. unit yellow consists jung yeontae, lee louoon, choi seonghwan, oh jinseok, kim hongin, shin jaemin, and lee changmin. unit white consists of park doha, yoo youngdoo, hwang in
ho, choi jaehyun, lee haejoon, kim jinsub, and kim sunghyun. unit green consists of jin sungho, go jihyeong, choi chani, jung minhwan, lee inpyo, kang san, and chae hocheol. unit sky consists of tak jinkyu, han hyunuk, isaac voo, park yongkwon, kim yonghyun, lee woojin, and lee hwayoung. lee louoon, park doha, lee inpyo, and kim yonghyun were leaders of their respective units. this unit line-up performed from september 22, 2016, to march 19, 2017.  on november 20, 2016, the group announced that they would perform with the new line-up that was called collabo line-up. the collabo line-up swapped: four members between unit white and unit sky; three members between unit yellow and unit green. collabo yellow consists of lee louoon, choi seonghwan, lee changmin, kang san, jung minhwan, jin sungho, and chae hocheol. collabo white consists of park doha, hwang inho, lee haejoon, kim sunghyun, han hyunuk, isaac voo, and lee woojin. collabo green consists of go jihyeong, lee inpyo, choi chani, jung yeontae, oh jinseok, kim hongin, and shin jaemin. collabo sky consists of tak jinkyu, kim yonghyun, park yongkwon, choi jaehyun, yoo youngdoo, kim jinsub, and lee hwayoung. the collabo line-up performed from december 7, 2016, to march 14, 2017.  on february 10, 2017, lee hwayoung stopped performing on concert then was removed from the group on february 14, 2017. his departures made unit sky and collabo sky consist of six members and the total group consists twenty-seven members.  on march 5, 2017, the group announced new units which are unit white, unit red, unit blue, and unit purple. the respective leaders from each unit are jin sungho, hwang inho, park doha, and kim sunghyun who were chosen from the members with the highest points voted by fans. unit white consists of park doha, yoo youngdoo, oh jinseok, lee louoon, isaac voo, go jihyeong, and kang san. unit red consists of jin sungho, han hyunuk, tak jinkyu, choi chani, lee
haejoon, kim hongin, and park yongkwon. unit blue consists of hwang inho, kim yonghyun, jung minhwan, lee inpyo, shin jaemin, lee changmin, and chae hocheol. unit purple consists of kim sunghyun, jung yeontae, choi seonghwan, choi jaehyun, kim jinsub and lee woojin. this new units line-up would perform starting from march 24, 2017.  on march 10, 2017, jin sungho voluntarily left his position from unit red leader. on march 24, 2017, the group announced that tak jinkyu to be the leader of unit red for temporary. on july 5, cj e&m announced that oh jinseok would not be participating in the final of boys24, but would finish the boys24 live concert up until august 6.  current members  promotional unit   unit black (first apromotional unit)  debuting members (the final)  past members   post-survival show departures  eliminated on the survival show  elimination    color key   notes  : do note that some boys' performance are not broadcast thus their score is unknown. some contestants did not get into top 7 seats and their score has been recorded as "less than" the 7th person during their turn.  : top7 contestants automatically become the leader of their respective unit.  : nine members of unit black (first promotional unit) were chosen from 1st semi-final on march 5, 2017. on march 10, 2017, jin sungho withdrawn from his position as part of promotional unit. the promotional unit move-forward with eight members.  : final line-up for the group would be announced on second half of 2017.  timeline   unit white  unit red  unit blue  unit purple  unit yellow  unit green  unit sky  discography  singles  single albums  live albums  music videos  filmography  boys24 (mnet, tvn, 2016)  wiki boys24 (mnet, 2017)  boys24 the 1st semi final (mnet, 2017)  boys24 the final (naver/v live app, 2017)  concerts & tours  main concert  boys24 live concert: seoul, south korea (september 22nd, 2016 - august 6, 2017)  boys24 the 1st semi-final: seoul, south korea (march 5th, 2017)  boys24 the final: seoul, south korea (august 12, 2017)  join concert kcon '
17: tokyo, japan (may 21, 2017) idolcon '17: seoul, south korea (may 26-27, 2017)  schedule   note   note  set list  other activities  endorsements  overseas fan meeting and showcase  awards and nominations  references  external links    mnet (tv channel) original programming talent shows 2016 south korean television series debuts 2016 south korean television series endings south korean boy bands music competitions in south korea
erlend apneseth (born 11 august 1990) is a hardingfele player from jølster in sogn og fjordane.  biography   apneseth is known for his critically acclaimed albums on hubro / grappa, with his trio featuring drummer øyvind hegg-lunde (drums, percussion) and stephan meidell (guitar, electronics), as well as his own solo-projects.  he has written music for cinema, theatre, dance performances, poetry, and musical ensembles and orchestras in different genres. as a soloist he has appeared with bergen filharmoniske orkester and the norwegian chamber orchestra among others. he has received several awards, such as gammleng-prisen, øyvind berghs minnepris and the folkelarm-award. erlend apneseth trio`s album «salika, molika», featurering accordeonist frode haltli, received both the nopa prize and spellemannprisen, and was nominated for the nordic music prize 2020.  honors   2012: grappa music debutant award  2013: fureprisen (2013)  2014: øivind bergh memorial award  2014: music scholarship from sparebanken vest  2014: ingerid, synnøve and elias fegerstens foundation for the norwegian composers and performing musicians  2016: folkelarm-award for det andre rommet   2016: nominated for spellemannprisen det andre rommet  2017: nominated for spellemannprisen nattsongar  2017: nominated for spellemannprisen ara  2018: gammleng-prisen   2018: nopa-award 2018 salika, molika  2019: nominated for folkelarm-award 2019 for salika, molika (with frode haltli)  2019: spellemannprisen 2019 for salika, molika  2019 forsberg & aulies legat 2019  2019 nominated for nordic music prize 2019 salika, molika  2020 folkelarm-award 2020 fragmentaritum  discography  solo albums   2013: blikkspor (grappa)   2016: det andre rommet (hubro), with erlend apneseth trio  2017: nattsongar (hubro)  2017: ara (hubro), with erlend apneseth trio  2019: salika, molika (hubro), with erlend apneseth trio
and frode haltli  2019: fragmentarium (hubro), erland apneseth with an ensemble  2021: lokk (hubro) erlend apneseth trio  references  external links     norwegian fiddlers norwegian musicians grappa music artists hubro music artists people from jølster musicians from kristiansand 1990 births living people 21st-century violinists
baselli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alberto valdivia baselli (born 1977), peruvian poet, writer, and literary scholar daniele baselli (born 1992), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
dr. kalamandalam radhika is an indian classical dancer, choreographer, research scholar, teacher, writer and philanthropist. she was the first non-resident keralite to win the kerala sangeetha nataka akademi award for mohiniyattom. she learnt kuchipudi, bharatanatyam, kathakali and other dance forms.  early years and education dr. kalamandalam radhika was born in bangalore to k.k nair, a chartered accountant. she started learning dancing at the age of three under guru rajan, and later learnt kathakali from muttar sri. narayana panicker and mridhangamvaitharis from guru ponniahpillai. in the late 1960s, she moved to cheruthuruthy and stayed at the kalamandalam for four years. under the wings of chinnammu amma, kalamandalam sathyabhama and kalamandalam padmanabhan nair she was moulded into a skilled performer. her tutelage under the late kalamandalam kalyani kutty amma and  her training under kalamandalam padmanabha ashan in kathakali honed her skills.  dancer and choreographer she has conducted more than two thousand performances in india and abroad at national and international levels. she is a member of the unesco international dance council, and has conducted her performances for  who delegates, saarc delegates, diplomats, soviet representatives, and others. to explore the depths of mohiniyattom, she has undertaken extensive research, and re-organized the basic steps, jewellery and costumes worn by mohiniyattom dancers of the early 1940s. she has executed and choreographed biblical themes including the advent of christianity in india, and  the birth of christ.  radhika has conducted workshops in us, uk, europe, atlanta, and germany. she has also choreographed and danced for behold thy mother, a biblical film directed by an italian priest fr.gerard. she has composed and choreographed five cholkettus, three varnams and innumerable padams in different languages. she was criticized for performing biblical themes in mohiniattam, but the poetical works of veerappamoily, kuvempu, fr. abel, amruth someshwar and st. chavara as adapted by radhika were well received.  author radhika has written numerous articles for the dance and music magazine shrutilaya and has submitted a paper on mohiniyattom at a seminar organized by the ncert on the subject of 'dance education in schools'. she has also written an article about the devadasi system
of kerala for the weekly indu , published from houston, usa, and is the author of the books 'mohiniyattom-the lyrical dance of kerala´ and 'mudra' published by mathrabhoomi.  appearances television  film  endorsement  oxygen - the digital shop advertisement  pankajakasturi  see also   kalamandalam padmanabhan nair  kalamandalam kalyanikutty amma  kalamandalam satyabhama  mohiniyattam  references  living people 21st-century indian actresses indian female classical dancers performers of indian classical dance indian women choreographers indian choreographers indian women philanthropists indian philanthropists actresses from bangalore dancers from karnataka year of birth missing (living people) actresses in malayalam television actresses in malayalam cinema actresses in tamil cinema indian television actresses indian film actresses
sibogasyrinx is a genus of sea snails, marine gastropod mollusks in the family cochlespiridae.  previously it was considered a subgenus of leucosyrinx dall, 1889 in the family pseudomelatomidae..  species species within the genus sibogasyrinx include:  sibogasyrinx archibenthalis (powell, 1969)   sibogasyrinx pyramidalis (schepman, 1913)  sibogasyrinx sangeri kantor, fedosov & puillandre, 2018  references
lee da-yoon (), better known as spirit, is a korean league of legends player who is currently the jungler for the afreeca freecs in the lck. spirit has previously played for was fnatic of the european league of legends championship series (eu lcs). he has also played for mvp blue, samsung galaxy blue, and team we. spirit joined fnatic on december 6, 2015 along with noh "gamsu" yeong-jin.  spirit left fnatic on september 28, 2016 and returned to korea, signing for the afreeca freecs after fnc failed to qualify for the 2016 league of legends world championship.  tournament results  samsung blue  3-4th - 2014 league of legends world championship  team we  fnatic  2nd - intel extreme masters season x - world championship  3rd  - 2016 eu lcs spring playoffs  5th - 2016 summer eu lcs  ? - 2016 summer eu lcs playoffs  references  external links    living people fnatic players team we players samsung galaxy (esports) players league of legends jungle players year of birth missing (living people)
eunidia partenigrofemoralis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1977.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1977
women's rugby league is a popular women's sports in australia. the sport has a high level of participation in the country both recreational and professional. australian rugby league commission (arlc) is the national governing body of the sport in australia, organising the australian women's rugby league, the australian women's national team, and the nine state governing bodies of the game, among other duties. women's participation of modern rugby league has been recorded since the early 1920s. it has since become one of australia's most popular women's team sports.  history  1920s the first women's rugby league match in australia was played in sydney, on saturday, 17 september 1921. players, who had been training in the preceding months, had been divided into two teams, named metropolitan (who played in blue jerseys) and sydney (who played in maroon jerseys). metropolitan won the match 21-11. a second 'return' match was played the following saturday, 24 september 1921. three matches were held in 1922 in april, august and october. the organisation was disbanded prior to the 1923 season.  1970s in the mid 1970s women's rugby league teams were organised in perth, including south perth and cottesloe.  in 1976, a women's rugby league team from manurewa in auckland, new zealand toured australia. the manurewa club had earlier received junior boys teams from goulburn and lalor park, sydney and these two clubs offered to host a visit from manurewa's ladies team. a women's team was formed in goulburn to play against the tourists. they played two matches, one in goulburn and another at endeavour field in cronulla. the lalor park team had played and won four local matches prior to their match against manurewa.  1990s in the early part of the 1990s women's rugby league competitions were run in sydney, the illawarra and the australian capital territory. some of the clubs from those regions participated in an annual knock-out competition. the east canberra club won this knock-out tournament in three consecutive years: 1991, 1992 and 1993. other participating clubs included the albion park outlaws, calwell colts, north sydney, northern districts illawarra, warilla warriors, woden valley and the wollongong wildcats. in the final of the 1994 tournament, picton defected bulli.  in 1995, australia hosted a tour by the new zealand national team. this was the inaugural series of test matches for both countries in women's rugby league. tour matches were played in sydney, canberra and brisbane
.  in 1996, australia hosted a seven match, three test tour by the great britain women's national rugby league team. australia claimed their inaugural international win in the first test in canberra. great britain, however, won the second test in brisbane and the third test at redfern oval in sydney to claim a series victory.  the australian national team toured new zealand in 1997 (both matches lost) and fiji in 1998 (both matches won). hosting duties for a test match series in 1999 were shared with new zealand with games played at leichhardt oval and penrith stadium in sydney and the third and final match played in auckland. australia beat new zealand for the first time in the second test at penrith, but the kiwi ferns won the series, 2-1.  the women's game in queensland expanded from brisbane and ipswich in 1998 when a competition commenced in mackay. souths beat the previously undefeated norths in the grand final.  during the later years of the 1990s national championships were conducted with representative, rather than club, teams participating. in 1997, illawarra beat brisbane in the final. the 1998 tournament was held at pizzey park, burleigh heads and included teams from sydney, canberra, illawarra, brisbane, ipswich and for the first time western australia. the 1999 tournament was reconfigured to have four state/territory teams. new south wales beat queensland in the final, ahead of western australia and the australian capital territory.  the year 1999 saw the introduction of an interstate series between queensland and new south wales. the teams play for the nellie doherty cup. although this ongoing series was occasionally referred to in the media as the women's state of origin the respective teams were selected on a residential basis until 2017. queensland won this augural match, 16-14.  2000s australia participated in the inaugural women's rugby league world cup in november 2000, playing two matches each against great britain & ireland and new zealand. the australian squad comprised players from the australian capital territory, new south wales, queensland and western australia.  national championships were held at belmont, western australia in 2000, rooty hill, new south wales in 2001, ipswich, queensland in 2002, west belconnen, australian capital territory in 2003, runaway bay, queensland in 2005, and queanbeyan, new south wales in 2006. queensland won the tournament in 2000 and 2001. in 2003, queensland whites defeated queensland maroons in the final, ahead of act and nsw teams. the tournament was not held in 2004. in 2005, south east queensland beat a queensland barbarians
team in the final, ahead of nsw city and nsw country teams. in 2006, brisbane beat sydney metro in the final, ahead of nsw country monaro and nsw country southern division teams.  the 2008 women's rugby league world cup was the first held in australia from 26 october, culminating in the final between australian jillaroos and the kiwi ferns on 22 november. it was held at stockland park alongside the police world cup. eight teams took part including defending champions new zealand.  2010s the 2011 all stars match included the first women's all stars exhibition match which was won by the nrl women's all stars 22-6.  in 2016 the first local derby by nrl clubs was played cronulla-sutherland sharks and st. george illawarra dragons had a women's rugby league nines match at southern cross group stadium which aired on fox sports it was a curtain-raiser for the main game sharks won 16-12.  the new south wales rugby league announced the creation of a nine-a-side under-18s women's league for 2017 named the tarsha gale nines after the former australian jillaroos and nsw captain of the 1990s.  for the first time in the sport's history the 2017 women's rugby league world cup was held concurrently with the men's tournament.  on 14 may 2017 the first women's city vs country origin game was played.  participation no information no information  competitions nrl women's premiership australian women's rugby league brisbane and district women's rugby league sydney metropolitan women's rugby league  see also  rugby league in australia women's rugby league nrl women's premiership - the official league for women's rugby league in australia starting in 2018  references  external links
francisco ("paco") torrent-guasp (gandia, 1931 - madrid, 2005). was a spanish cardiologist whose research focused on the anatomy and physiology of the human heart. his work led to the discovery and description of the ventricular myocardial band. his work can be found in reference books on anatomy and cardiac surgery.  biography  torrent-guasp started his cardiac research during medical school at the university of salamanca, spain. he was affectionately called "paco" by those that knew him well. during his fourth year, working with prof. gomez oliveros, he began to focus on his lifelong interest in cardiac anatomy and physiology. this motivated him to write his first monograph el ciclo cardiaco (the cardiac cycle)  after graduation, he started working as a family doctor in denia, doing research during his free time, independent from the scientific community and separated from its orthodoxy, paco understood the gap between academic and true clinical medicine better than most. along with his research, he published monographs and presented his work in many conferences, often self-funding these activities. starting in the 1970s and supported by the juan march foundation, he was able to hold dozens of invited lectures at universities worldwide. after the discovery of the ventricular myocardial band in 1972, he received the miguel servet (michael servetus) prize in 1978 and was nominated for the nobel prize in medicine in the same year.  paco torrent-guasp died suddenly in 2005 after giving the closing lecture in a cardiology meeting in madrid. his legacy lives on to all students of structural cardiology.  the ventricular myocardial band   several anatomists had previously focused on the structure of the heart: andreas vesalius, enrico rueda, jean-baptiste de senac, thomas bartholin, jules germain cloquet and robert koch. it is well established that mammalian and avian hearts have four chambers (two atria and two ventricles) and that their muscular fibers are intertwined on several levels.  many have attempted to explain the mechanism of blood circulation, such as galen, ibn-al nafis, and william harvey. little attention was paid to the general anatomical structural architecture of the myocardium, the intricate layering of the muscle fibers within the myocardium and its effect on the blood circulation and the anchor of the cardiac skeleton. the combined writings of drs. al-nafis and harvey, (400 years apart) yield the basis of the systemic and pulmonary circulation. eastern and western
perspectives are equally valuable in seeking this understanding between systole and diastole.   torrent-guasp performed hundreds of anatomical dissections of animals hearts in his denia laboratory. he also compared the structure of the heart in other vertebrates and annelids. from these dissections he discerned that the ventricles of the heart represent a continuous muscular band folded on itself as a helix during the embryonic development. by folding, the myocardial band crates a septum that separates two ventricular chambers of the heart close to the time of birth.  torrent-guasp focused further on the relationship between anatomy and physiology, i.e. between the form, structure and function of the human myocardium. it is commonly believed that the motion of the heart (systole-diastole) is active-passive: the former is produced by the active contraction of the cardiac musculature contraction while the second by its relaxation. the ventricular myocardial band model supports the existence of an active muscular contraction that creates suction (creation of suction in diastole is extremely problematic with current theory) during ventricular diastole. thus, it is the contraction of the ascending segment of the myocardial band that paradoxically increases the ventricular volume.  practical applications of the ventricular myocardial band   the insights provided by the ventricular myocardial band model allows glimpses of possible advances in cardiac surgical procedures, notably those associated with the remodeling seen in hearts with systolic heart failure. this procedure aims to improve the shape of the ventricles in dilated hearts by removing part of the excess muscle tissue within the ventricular cavity (ventriculotomy). however, using torrent-guasp model, drs. suma and burkberg replaced the ventriculotomy by placing a dacron patch longitudinal to the muscle fibers, modeling the ventricular cavity with an abnormal spherical shape to a normal ellipsoidal shape, therefore improving the stroke volume. this procedure, called septal anterior ventricular exclusion, was named "pacopexia" in honor of torrent-guasp.  references  scientific articles    torrent guasp, francisco. estructura macroscopica del miocardio ventricular. rev esp cardiol. 1980;33(3):265-87.  schmid, p; p, niederer p, lunkenheimer pp, torrent-guasp f. the anisotropic structure of the human left and right ventriculos.
http://iospress.metapress.com/content/9lv5wfvddl4r67nl/ technol health care. 1997 apr;5(1-2):29-43.  torrent guasp, f; caralps riera jm, ballester rodara m. proposals for ventricular remodelling in the surgical treatment of dilated myocardiopathy. rev. esp. cardiol. 1997 oct;50(10):682-8.  torrent guasp, f. estructura y funcion del corazon. rev esp cardiol. 1998 feb;51(2):91-102. review..  torrent guasp, francisco. a containing prosthesis in the treatment of dilated myocardiopathy. rev esp cardiol. 1998 jul;51(7):521-8.  torrent guasp, francisco. agonist-antagonist mechanics of the descendente and ascendente segmentos of the ventricular myocardial band. rev. esp. cardiol. 2001 sep;54(9):1091-1102..  torrent-guasp, francisco; ballester m, buckberg gd, carreras f, flotats a, carrio y, ferreira a, samuels le, narula j. spatial orientation of the ventricular hombro band: physiologic contribution and surgical implications. j thorac cardiovasc surg. 2001 aug;122(2):389-92.  torrent-guasp, francisco; kocica mj, corno af, komeda m, carreras-cuesta f, flotats a, cosin-aguillar j, wen h. towards new understanding of the heart structure and function. eur j cardiothorac surg. 2005 feb;27(2):191-201.. doi:doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2004.11.026.  ballester-rodara, manel; flotats a, torrent-guasp f, ballester-alomar m, carreras f, ferreira a, narula j. base-tono-apex ventricular activation: fourier studies in 29 normal individuales.. eur j nucl med muele imaging. 2005 debo de;32(12):1481-3.. doi:doi:10.1007/s00259-005-1889-6.  corno, af; kocica mj, torrent-guasp f.. the helical ventricular myocardial
band of torrent-guasp: potential implications in congenital heart defects. epub 2006 mar 29. review.. eur j cardiothorac surg. 2006 apr;29 suppl 1:s61-8.. doi:doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.02.049.  ballester-rodara, m; flotats a, torrent-guasp f, carrio-gasset y, ballester-alomar m, carreras f, ferreira a, narula j. the sequence of regional ventricular motion epub 2006 mar 24.. eur j cardiothorac surg. 2006 apr;29 suppl 1:s139-44.. doi:doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.02.058.  kocica, mj; corno af, carreras-cuesta f, ballester-rodes m, moghbel mc, cueva cn, lackovic v, kanjuh vi, torrent-guasp f. the helical ventricular myocardial band: global, three-dimensional, functional architecture of the ventricular myocardium. eur j cardiothorac surg 2006;29:s21-s40. doi:doi:10.1016/j.ejcts.2006.03.011.  external links   personal page of torrent-guasp  biography of torrent-guasp (spanish)  list of publications  editorial on the european journal of cardio-thoracic surgery on torrent-guasp (2006)  the helical heart. video of torrent-guasp explaining the ventricular myocardial band  2005 deaths 1931 births university of salamanca alumni spanish cardiologists people from gandia
suzanne wendy twelftree (12 august 1956 - 16 april 2019) was an australian wheelchair tennis player and paralympic powerlifter.  personal life twelftree was born on 12 august 1956 in wallaroo, south australia. she had three children prior to becoming a paraplegic in 1986 due to arteriovenous malformation and a surgical mishap. she lived on a farm until she moved to adelaide, south australia in 2005.  twelftree has been a board member of paraplegic and quadriplegic association of south australia.  she died on 16 april 2019 leaving behind husband greg and children todd, nick and abbey.  sporting career  after her accident, she took up wheelchair tennis and in 1991 was a member of the team that won the bronze medal at the world team cup in los angeles. at the 1992 barcelona paralympics, she lost in the first round of the women's singles. she partnered with randa hinson in the women's doubles but they lost in the first round.  at the 2000 sydney paralympics, she competed in the women's up to 48 kg powerlifting and finished ninth.  references  external links    1956 births 2019 deaths australian female tennis players australian wheelchair tennis players paralympic wheelchair tennis players of australia paralympic powerlifters of australia wheelchair tennis players at the 1992 summer paralympics powerlifters at the 2000 summer paralympics sportswomen from south australia tennis people from south australia
incumbents  monarch - catherine ii  events     minsk governorate  orthodox eparchy of minsk and slutsk  second partition of poland  births   jafargulu bakikhanov (1793-1867) - azerbaijani noble who became a russian general  maria danilova (1793-1810) - ballet dancer  apollon galafeyev (1793-1853) - general  nikolay kobozev (1793-1866) - merchant, first mayor of berdiansk  karl eduard von napiersky (1793-1864) - latvian historian  pavel pestel (1793-1826) - revolutionary, decembrist  feodor pryanishnikov (1793-1867) - post office administrator and reformer  elena yezhova (1793-1853) - opera singer and actress  deaths  karl blank (1728-1793) - architect  mikhail krechetnikov (1729-1793) - general  references  1793 in russia years of the 18th century in the russian empire
barbara matic (born 3 december 1994) is a croatian judoka. a two-time world junior champion in the women's 70 kg division, matic won a bronze medal at the 2014 european judo championships. her younger sister brigita matic has also been a successful judoka on junior level.  she competed at the 2016 summer olympics. she also competed in the women's 70 kg event at the 2020 summer olympics in tokyo, japan.  in 2020, she competed in the women's 70 kg event at the 2020 european judo championships held in prague, czech republic. she won one of the bronze medals in her event at the 2022 judo grand slam paris held in paris, france.  references  external links    1994 births living people croatian female judoka olympic judoka of croatia judoka at the 2010 summer youth olympics judoka at the 2016 summer olympics european games medalists in judo european games bronze medalists for croatia judoka at the 2015 european games judoka at the 2019 european games world judo champions sportspeople from split, croatia judoka at the 2020 summer olympics
gabriel wallin (born 14 october 1981) is a swedish athlete specialising in the javelin throw. he represented his country at four world championships in athletics without qualifying for the final.  his personal best in the event is 83.23 metres set in hasselby in 2013.  international competitions  seasonal bests by year  2004 - 80.71 2005 - 80.31 2007 - 78.97 2008 - 74.62 2009 - 79.69 2010 - 78.31 2011 - 80.88 2012 - 81.45 2013 - 83.23 2014 - 77.88 2015 - 79.16 2016 - 82.81  references  1981 births living people swedish male javelin throwers world athletics championships athletes for sweden people from sodermanland
russell hellman (1917-2004) was a democratic member of the michigan house of representatives, representing the western end of the upper peninsula for two decades.  a lifelong resident of the upper peninsula, and of the same block in dollar bay, michigan his entire life, hellman bought a gas station when he was a senior in high school, and was elected township supervisor, for osceola township, at age 21. in 1960, he was elected to the legislature where he served on the appropriations committee. hellman was also instrumental in beginning the great lakes coho salmon program and a forestry program.  after he left office, hellman started a consulting firm: the u.p. lansing associates about state and local issues.  references  1917 births 2004 deaths people from houghton county, michigan michigan democrats members of the michigan house of representatives 20th-century american politicians
joy selig (fl. 1988-1991) is a former gymnast who was inducted into the oregon state university sports hall of fame in 1997 and the oregon sports hall of fame in 2010. she specialised in the balance beam and floor exercise.  see also  joy selig (sculpture)  references  external links  legends of osu gymnastics oral history interviews  living people year of birth missing (living people) oregon state beavers women's gymnasts
pang ton phueng railway station is a railway station located in ban dan na kham subdistrict, uttaradit city, uttaradit. it is located 509.363 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  rapid 111/112 bangkok-den chai-bangkok  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
daniel scholten (born 1973) is a german writer specialising in scandinavian languages as well as ancient languages. he hosts the video-podcast series belles lettres on german linguistics.  background  upon graduating from school and completing an apprenticeship, scholten worked in scandinavia for several years as a typographer. after this, scholten studied at the ludwig-maximilians-universitat in munchen, with majors in egyptology and historical linguistics, specialising in the language and literature of ancient egypt.  beyond this, scholten has also been involved with scandinavian literature (primarily in icelandic and swedish) and published two literature journals.  in 2007, scholten began writing crime novels under the title kommissar cederstrom.  scholten founded the video-podcast series belles lettres in 2010 which focuses on linguistics and stylistics.  scholte has lived since 2012 in stockholm and munich.  selection of works  as author   novels  der zweite tod. ein fall um kommissar cederstrom. goldmann, munchen 2007,   die falsche tote. ein fall fur kommissar cederstrom. goldmann, munchen 2008,   der kopflose engel. ein fall fur kommissar cederstrom. goldmann, munchen 2008,   der name der dunkelheit. ein fall fur kommissar cederstrom. goldmann, munchen 2009,   scientific literature  einfuhrung in die islandische grammatik. ein lehrbuch fur anfanger und fortgeschrittene. philyra-verlag, munchen 2000,   paradigmenfinder zur islandischen grammatik. alle flexionsformen schnell bestimmt. philyra-verlag, munchen 2001,  as editor   islenska. zeitschrift fur islandische sprache und literatur, jg. 1 (2004), .  ida. schwedische sprache und literatur, band 1 (2006), .  references  external links  website von daniel scholten  belles lettres video-tutorials von daniel scholten zu grammatikfragen  1973 births living people german crime fiction writers german people of icelandic descent german male writers linguists from germany ludwig maximilian university of munich alumni old norse studies scholars scandinavian studies scholars
czech republic has participated at the youth olympic games in every edition since the inaugural 2010 games and has earned medals from every edition.  medal tables  medals by summer games  medals by winter games  medals by summer sport  medals by winter sport  list of medalists  summer games  summer games medalists as part of mixed-nocs team  winter games  winter games medalists as part of mixed-nocs team  flag bearers  see also czech republic at the olympics czech republic at the paralympics    sport in the czech republic nations at the youth olympic games
dashjamtsyn monkhbat (born 27 december 1961) is a mongolian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1961 births living people mongolian male cyclists olympic cyclists of mongolia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) cyclists at the 1990 asian games asian games medalists in cycling asian games silver medalists for mongolia medalists at the 1990 asian games
kelly kenison falkner (born march 1, 1960) is an american chemical oceanographer and educator. she is the director of the national science foundation's (nsf's) office of polar programs (opp). her work in the position led her nsf colleagues to name the falkner glacier, in victoria land, antarctica, after her.  early life and education born in lancaster, new hampshire, falkner received a b.a. in chemistry with a minor in russian from reed college in oregon in 1983. she then earned her phd in chemical oceanography from the massachusetts institute of technology/woods hole oceanographic institution joint doctoral program in 1989.  career and impact prior to joining the nsf as deputy head of opp on 3 january 2011, falkner was a professor at oregon state university's college of earth, oceanic and atmospheric sciences from 1992-2011. she taught and conducted research using state-of-the-art chemical measurements to investigate a wide array of environmental topics. falkner's research as a sea-going oceanographer for 30 years took her all over the world from two miles below the sea surface, to lake baikal, the greenland ice cap, the black sea and the world's oceans. she has 20 years of leading field research in the arctic including over a decade of being a member of the north pole environmental observatory as well as chief scientist on multiple arctic icebreaking and aircraft based expeditions.  during 2007-2009, falkner was the founding program director of the antarctic integrated system science in the antarctic science division of the national science foundation office of polar programs.  in 2011, falkner joined the national science foundation permanently, as the deputy head of polar programs, which manages the nsf's funding for research and  support in the polar regions. she became director of nsf's office of polar programs (opp) effective 1 april 2012 subsequent to the retirement of dr. karl a. erb.  awards and honours her success in the position led her national science foundation colleagues to name the falkner glacier, in victoria land, antarctic after her. she has also been awarded the national science foundation arctic service award( 2000), and received a presidential rank award for meritorious service (2018). in 2019, falkner was named a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science.  references  external links falkner's cv from oregon state university  living people 1960 births people from lancaster, new hampshire american oceanographers women oceanographers reed college alumni massachusetts institute of technology alumni oregon state university faculty american antarctic scientists women antarctic scientists american women
scientists american women academics fellows of the american association for the advancement of science 21st-century american women
cad overlay is a commercial software application for raster-to-vector translation in 2d computer-aided design (cad) and drafting - available between 1988 and 1996 as a third-party application for autocad and other cad systems.  developed and marketed by image systems technology, cad overlay was first released in january 1988 running on autocad version 2.6. cad overlay replaced the previous generation of automatic raster-to-vector translation systems by embedding scanned documents and images directly in the cad system.  history   cad overlay was derived from a custom autocad application developed using the nth engine graphics board in 1987 by david chassin for image integration technology, a scanning service bureau in schenectady, new york. in january 1988 bob godgart, david chassin and michael mayernik formed image systems technology in troy, new york.  the first version of cad overlay was demonstrated at a/e/c trade show in chicago in may 1988. subsequent versions include cad overlay esp, cad overlay gsx, and cad overlay lfx.  in 1995, softdesk inc. acquired image systems technology and in 1996 autodesk acquired softdesk,. cad overlay was subsequently rebranded as autodesk cadoverlay.  see also    autodesk  autocad  references  external links   |cadylist magazine article "cad overlay 2001i"  computer-aided design software
bhagwanpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of bhagwanpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  as per population census 2011, the bhagwanpur village has population of  855 of which 432 are males while 423 are females.  the village is administrated by sarpanch an elected representative of the village.  literacy rate of bhagwanpur is 71.77%, lower than state average of 75.84% of punjab.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 97 which is 11.35% of total population of bhagwanpur and child sex ratio is approximately 1021 higher than punjab average of 846.  as per census 2011, 283 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of bhagwanpur which includes 260 males and 23 females. according to census survey report 2011, 91.87% workers describe their work as main work and 8.13% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  caste  the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 40.58% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
sudanese canadians include canadians of sudanese ancestry and sudanese immigrants to canada. they include refugees from the second sudanese civil war. the canada 2016 census recorded 19,960 people who reported their ethnicity as sudanese.  see also   black canadians  south sudanese canadians  sudanese americans  sudanese australians  sudanese in the united kingdom  references  ethnic groups in canada canadian people of sudanese descent sudanese emigrants to canada sudanese diaspora african canadian
eunidia alboterminatoides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1977.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1977
the 2016/17 fis cup (ski jumping) was the 12th fis cup season in ski jumping for men and the 5th for ladies.  other competitive circuits this season included the world cup, grand prix, continental cup, fis race and alpen cup.  calendar  men  ladies  overall standings  men  ladies  references  2016 in ski jumping 2017 in ski jumping fis cup (ski jumping)
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 july 1945 in jiamusi as a triangular division. it was a part of the 8 simultaneously created divisions batch comprising 134th, 135th,  136th, 137th, 138th, 139th, 148th and 149th divisions. the nucleus for the formation were the 14th border guards group, fujin garrison and 78th independent mixed brigade.  action the division formation was complete 30 july 1945.  initially the 134th division was assigned to the 5th army, but was reassigned to 1st area army at the start of the soviet invasion of manchuria 9 august 1945. the division combat efficiency was estimated by kwantung army to be 15%.  as the positions at songhua river were deemed untenable, the 134th division have started retreat to fangzheng county after a few delaying skirmishes. since the divisional radio equipment breakdown 11 august 1945, the 134th division situation is unknown, with no contemporary records covering period prior to surrender of japan 15 august 1945.  the 134th division was disarmed 25 august 1945, after suffering 471 men killed in the short campaign. despite light losses, the division was severely disorganized, losing one-third of combat efficiency during retreat.  the majority of men of 134th division were taken to soviet union labour camps near khabarovsk 26 september 1945.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  independent mixed brigades (imperial japanese army)  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第134師団 (日本軍), accessed 7 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
kasaya is a japanese surname. notable people with the surname include:  leonida kasaya (born 1993), kenyan volleyball player yukio kasaya (born 1943), japanese ski jumper  japanese-language surnames
ss ben jee was a steel-built coastal cargo vessel which was operated out of ramsey, isle of man for the ramsey steamship company;  ostensibly to garston, belfast and whitehaven. her name, ben jee, came from the manx gaelic term for goddess. ben jee was constructed in rotterdam (circa) 1920. originally named the jolly basil she was registered in london until acquired by the ramsey steam ship company in the spring of 1924.  service life  ben jee entered service with the ramsey steam ship company under her original name in november 1924 under the command of captain john corlett. capt. corlett's previous command had been that of the ben blanche. ben jee was considered a well suited vessel for the company's operation, said to be well appointed throughout. she possessed two large hatchways which enabled an efficient loading and unloading operation.  incidents on tuesday 14 april 1925, a crew member of the ben jee drowned in youghal harbour, county cork. william quirk was the second engineer on the vessel, and was going ashore in a small rowing boat with a fellow crew member, harold dawson, in order to post some letters. quirk fell over the side and although dawson tried to save him, he sank quickly. the body of william quirk was recovered and returned to the isle of man.  disposal the ben jee was sold in 1933. she saw further service  as a molasses tanker with a number of companies under the names athelrill and molarill before being scrapped in 1959 at georgetown, guyana. in 1946 the ramsey steam ship company acquired another vessel which they subsequently named ben jee.  references  merchant ships of the isle of man 1919 ships ferries of the isle of man merchant ships of the united kingdom
limpia canyon is a deep valley or canyon in the davis mountains of jeff davis county, texas.  it was cut by limpia creek and is its path southeastward from the northeastern slope of mount livermore at , past fort davis and wild rose pass, to its mouth at an elevation of 4,117 feet / 1,255 meters on the eastern edge of the davis mountains.  history limpia canyon was the route of the san antonio-el paso road out of the pecos river valley into the davis mountains.  references  landforms of jeff davis county, texas san antonio-el paso road
eunidia mirei is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1967.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1967
the 1914 argentine primera division was the 23rd season of top-flight football in argentina. racing won the official afa tournament, while porteno won the dissident faf championship, the last tournament before both leagues, afa and faf reunified.  the afa season began on marzo 29 and ended on december? while the faf season began on april 5 and ended on december?.  final tables  asociacion argentina de football - copa campeonato  huracan made its debut in primera division, while ferrocarril sud was dissolved after playing 7 matches.  federacion argentina de football  tigre was ejected from the federation after playing 14 matches while argentino de quilmes was disaffiliated after playing 7 games. according to the rules, floresta had to be relegated but it finally remained in primera due to the reunification of both leagues asociacion argentina and federacion argentina.  references  argentine primera division seasons 1914 in argentine football 1914 in south american football
guangnan east circuit or guangnan east province was one of the major circuits during the song dynasty. its administrative area corresponds to roughly the modern chinese province of guangdong (minus leizhou peninsula).  guangnan east circuit and guangnan west circuit were split from guangnan circuit in 988.  see also   lingnan culture  references         circuits of the song dynasty 988 establishments 10th-century establishments in china 1278 disestablishments in asia 13th-century disestablishments in china
manchali is a pakistani drama series that first aired on geo entertainment on 25 april 2016. it is produced by babar javed. the lead cast is sami khan, rabab hashim and zainab jamil.  it marks the fourth on-screen joint appearance of sami khan and rabab hashim after piya mann bhaye, anaya tumhari hui, ishqaaway and after this serial they also appeared on mannat together. in total they have appeared in five series as a couple, which were all broadcast on geo entertainment.  synopsis  manchali is a story of two cousins, ambreen and afsheen, who are polar opposites but promise to stand with each other through thick and thin.  ambreen is often disliked by her family because of her exuberant and outspoken nature while afsheen is an innocent and kind-hearted girl who is in love with her next door neighbour, arham.  arham lives with his mother, surya begum and sister, seema.   afsheen's love life is challenged when moonis, who is arham's family friend and a potential groom for seema, falls in love with ambreen. to avoid complications between arham and afsheen's relationship, ambreen is afraid to reciprocate his feelings. upon knowing moonis' interest, surya begum plans to get rid of afsheen and ambreen. on the other hand, arham is constantly instigated against afsheen and he starts to lose trust in her.  while afsheen faces challenges in her marital life, ambreen is bothered about her relationship with moonis.  will the four of them able to save their relationships or will they fall prey to their family politics?  cast sami khan as monas rabab hashim as ambreen zainab jameel as afsheen manzoor qureshi shaheen khan as afsheen's mother shazia gohar hamid gul-e-rana sidra sajid adnan shah tipu shahida murtaza rameez siddiqui parwasha mustafa qureshi humera zahid hina rizvi as nasreen parveen soomro  soundtrack  the original soundtrack for manchali is "awara parinda" which is composed by shuja haider and the vocals are provided by ghazal ali & nauman shafi.  see also  list of programs broadcast by geo tv  geo tv  list of pakistani television serials  external links    a&b entertainment 2016 pakistani television series debuts
carmignani is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giulio carmignani (1813-1890), italian landscape painter pietro carmignani (born 1945), italian footballer and coach  italian-language surnames
2016 emmy awards may refer to:   68th primetime emmy awards, the 2016 emmy awards ceremony that honored primetime programming during june 2015 - may 2016  43rd daytime emmy awards, the 2016 emmy awards ceremony that honored daytime programming during 2015  44th international emmy awards, the 2016 ceremony that honored international programming  emmy award ceremonies by year
william frederick jaffray (25 march 1885 - 7 may 1968) was a scottish professional footballer who played in the scottish league for aberdeen as an outside left.  personal life  jaffray emigrated to the us with his family in 1915. he was married and had five children.  career statistics  references   scottish footballers brentford f.c. players southern football league players scottish football league players aberdeen f.c. players association football outside forwards peterhead f.c. players leith athletic f.c. players raith rovers f.c. players brechin city f.c. players footballers from aberdeen 1885 births 1968 deaths scottish expatriate sportspeople in the united states 20th-century scottish businesspeople
the boys' doubles tournament of the 2016 badminton asia junior championships was held from july 13-17 at the cpb badminton and sports science training center, bangkok. the defending champions of the last edition is he jiting and zheng siwei from china. he jiting / tan qiang of china and pakin kuna-anuvit / natthapat trinkajee of thailand leads the seeding this year. the runner-up in the last edition han chengkai and zhou haodong of china emerged as the champion after upset their teammates, the first seeded he and tan in the finals with the score 21-12, 21-17.  seeded   he jiting / tan qiang (final)  pakin kuna-anuvit / natthapat trinkajee (third round)  han chengkai / zhou haodong (champion)  andika ramadiansyah / rinov rivaldy (quarter final)  warit sarapat / panachai worasaktyanan (third round)  ooi zi heng / soh wooi yik (semi final)  krishna prasad garaga / dhruv kapila (third round)  fan qiuyue / ren xiangyu (semi final)  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  section 3  section 4  bottom half  section 5  section 6  section 7  section 8  references  external links  main draw  2016 badminton asia junior championships
jack bowes (born 26 january 1998) is an australian rules footballer playing for the gold coast football club in the australian football league (afl).  early life bowes was born and raised in cairns, queensland and attended st augustine's college. his great uncle, bill bowes, was an international english cricketer who famously bowled don bradman on the first ball in the 1932-33 ashes series. jack began playing junior football with the manunda hawks australian football club before moving to the cairns football club in the afl cairns competition. as a junior, he was a standout and was placed in the gold coast football club's academy at the age of thirteen. in 2014, he made his senior debut for cairns as a sixteen year old and went on to play in a losing afl cairns seniors grand final that year where he managed a goal in a sixteen-point loss to port douglas.   he made the decision to relocate to the gold coast at the beginning of 2015 to increase his chances of being drafted. there he continued playing football for the surfers paradise australian football club in the queensland australian football league (qafl) as well as gold coast's reserves team in the north east australian football league (neafl). his 2015 neafl debut for the gold coast reserves included twenty-two disposals and one goal. he was selected to represent the under 17 afl academy team in the 2015 afl grand final curtain raiser and shone in a sixteen possession performance. he also completed his schooling in 2015 at all saints anglican school.  bowes entered the final year of his junior football in 2016 and was predicted by many analysts to be selected with the first pick in the 2016 afl draft. bowes was named captain of the queensland team that would compete in the 2016 division two afl under 18 championships and led the team to several victories, the best being against northern territory. his performances in the championships saw him rewarded with the hunter harrison medal as the best division two player.  bowes was then selected to captain the allies in the division one championships and was named in the 2016 under 18 all-australian team as a result of his performances for the allies. he was also chosen to represent team judd in the 2016 all stars under-18 clash at punt road oval, where he amassed twenty-three disposals.  afl career bowes was recruited by the gold coast football club with their fourth selection and tenth overall in the 2016 national draft; he was initially bid on by the sydney swans, but gold coast matched the bid.  in 2019, bowes started with a
run with role player. he put down players like fyfe and cripps. bowes had a quad injury in the middle of the season, but recovered from it. jack bowes averaged 18.3 disposals and 3.7 tackles.   jack bowes bringing big midfielders down.  on 15 april 2019 bowes famously kicked a goal in the final seconds of a match to snatch the lead from carlton and ensure victory for the suns.  carlton at that time had traded away their first round pick to the adelaide crows, with this heart-breaking loss cementing them as likely favourites for the wooden spoon.  adelaide crows fans thereafter celebrated bowes for his efforts.  references  external links  1998 births living people australian rules footballers from queensland gold coast football club players people from cairns
bridgeman is an unincorporated community in may township, cass county, minnesota, united states, near motley and pillager. it is along 57th avenue sw (cass county road 35) near 116th street sw.  references  unincorporated communities in cass county, minnesota unincorporated communities in minnesota
hanna romanazzi do vale (born april 4, 1996) is a brazilian actress and model.  filmography  a favorita (2008)  ger@l.com (2009)  o astro (2011)  malhacao (2013)  alto astral (2014)  babilonia (2015)  ligacoes perigosas (2016)  liberdade, liberdade (2016)  reality z (2020)  references  external links  1996 births living people people from niteroi brazilian people of italian descent brazilian television actresses brazilian female models 20th-century brazilian actresses 21st-century brazilian actresses
yulin () is a town under the administration of lanxi county, heilongjiang, china. , it has 8 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of heilongjiang lanxi county
the 2017 boys' youth european volleyball championship was played in slovakia and hungary from 22 to 30 april 2017. the top six teams qualified for the 2017 youth world championship.  participating teams  hosts      qualified through 2017 boys' youth european volleyball championship qualification  pools composition  preliminary round  pool i venue:  gyor, hungary  |}  |}  pool ii venue:  puchov, slovakia  |}  |}  final round  5th-8th place  5th-8th semifinals  |}  7th place match  |}  5th place match  |}  final  semifinals  |}  3rd place match  |}  final  |}  final standing  awards at the conclusion of the tournament, the following players were selected as the tournament dream team.  most valuable player   adis lagumdzija best setter   ondrej piskacek best outside spikers   batuhan avci   davide gardini  best middle blockers   lorenzo cortesia   vitalii dikarev best opposite spiker   marek sotola best libero   filippo federici  references  external links official website  boys' youth european volleyball championship european boys' youth championship volleyball volleyball international volleyball competitions hosted by hungary international volleyball competitions hosted by slovakia sport in gyor april 2017 sports events in europe
ss ardmore was an irish cargo ship that was torpedoed by sm u-95 in st. george's channel  west south west of the coningbeg lightship on 13 november 1917 while carrying general cargo from london, united kingdom to cork, ireland.  construction  ss ardmore was built at the caledon shipbuilding & engineering co. ltd. shipyard in dundee, united kingdom in 1909. she was launched and completed that same year. the ship was  long, had a beam of  and had a depth of . she was assessed at  and had a triple expansion engine driving a screw propeller. the ship could reach a maximum speed of 12.5 knots.  early career  the ss ardmore made her maiden voyage from london to cork in 1909 and kept sailing on that line, even after the outbreak of the first world war. she had a stationary crew of 27 and was under the command of captain richard murray. she mainly transported general cargo.  sinking  ss ardmore left london and set sail for cork on 13 november 1917 with a crew of 27 and general cargo on board. before the ship left london, her crew were informed to be extra careful during the voyage as a large amount of u-boat activity was reported with several ships being sunk in the area only days before. the crew were given specific instructions when they started their voyage and were instructed to sail to milford haven first and wait until it became night so the ardmore could cross the irish channel under the protection of the darkness of night.  a few hours after the ship left milford haven while a small fog was rising over the water, when it was around 10:00 pm and the ship was about  off the coningbeg lightship, a challenge was flashed out by morse signal asking: "what ship is that, where bound?". captain murray, in accordance with sailing instructions ordering him to answer challenges, replied: "ardmore, london to cork.". the crew was not sure which ship sent the message as nobody could see any ships who were at a great distance in the dark. a crew member did finally spot the outline of a ship which they believed must have been of a patrol boat. it was however not a patrol boat but the german submarine sm u-95 who was patrolling the area that night.  at about 10:30 pm, captain murray was on the bridge with his chief officer, a carpenter and two seamen discussing about the mystery ship, when a deafening explosion occurred on the starboard side, just forward of the bridge. the
explosion shook the ship from stem to stern and blew out all the windows of the wheel-house. the captain ordered the lifeboats to be launched immediately and assisted the chief officer in lowering the forward starboard lifeboat which already had some of the crew in it. the ship only remained upright for a very short time when she suddenly plunged bow forwards into the depths of the nightly sea, taking everything and everyone still on board down with her. captain murray was dragged down with the ship, but managed to resurface and get hold of a piece of wreckage, to which he clung for some time while being nearly completely hidden in the fog. after clinging to the wreckage for about an hour, he was picked up by two sailors of his crew in a lifeboat. the lifeboat was badly damaged and taking on water, either by the explosion or by striking against the ship's side when she went down. shortly after the fog cleared, the coningbeg lightship could be seen to the east, just on the horizon. the survivors tried to row to the lightship, but made little progress. the cold was intense, in addition to which they were waist-high in the water. it wouldn't better for the survivors as the waves frequently rolled into the boat, drenching them again and again.  when it was around midnight, the survivors could see a steamer's hull approaching out of the darkness and as the ship passed close by, the lifeboats occupants hailed her and those on board answered. but luck was not on the survivors side that night as the ship could not stop in time and disappeared again into the dense fog which had been rising again over the cold and dark sea. the ship however did pick up a lone survivor of the ardmore, who was clinging onto a piece of wreckage. those in the lifeboat had no other change than to wait for dawn, hoping that they would make it through the night alive. when not a vestige of a vessel was to be seen and their chance of rescue seemed hopeless, the lifeboat occupants were surprised when they saw smoke on the horizon which later came closer and revealed masts and funnels of a steamer. this time there was nothing that could prevent the survivors of being rescued as the ship headed straight for the lifeboat and in a short time arrived on the scene and finally rescued the six survivors at 8:00 am. the rescue ship was a patrol boat called au breitia. after the rescue, a red flare was seen in the sky. the au breitia immediately set course to the
source of the flare and the survivors from the ardmore expected to find all of their 21 missing fellow crewmen when they would arrive. a lifeboat was spotted in the water when the ship arrived on the scene, however there was only one man standing in the boat. he was the only occupant of the boat and was picked up by the rescue vessel, the man turned out to be the second officer of the ardmore. he was asked if he had seen any other crewmen in the water or in the area to which he replied no. the rescue ship still searched the area, but only found debris.  after the search the au breitia sailed to cork and landed the survivors, who were all suffering from hypothermia. once at shore, the crew learned that another crew member also survived the sinking. he was picked up by the i.h. lookingback, which was the same ship that had barely missed the lifeboat back at midnight. the captain counted his men and came to the realisation that only 8 of his 27 counting crew survived the tragedy. the 19 men that perished included the chief officer and the first engineer, the victims either died from the explosion of the torpedo or by hypothermia if not drowning before it could even set in. the survivors later testified that there was no warning before the attack and that the ship sank a mere three minutes after being hit, which contributed to the number of victims.  crew  wreck  the wreck of the ardmore lies at a depth of  and was found by echo sounder. the current condition of the wreck is unknown.  references  1909 ships cargo ships ships built in dundee ships built in scotland world war i ships world war i shipwrecks in the irish sea maritime incidents in 1917
|}  this is a list of electoral division results for the northern territory 1974 general election in australia.  results by electoral division  alice springs    preferences were not distributed.  arnhem  barkly  casuarina    the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  elsey    preferences were not distributed.  the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  fannie bay    preferences were not distributed.  the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  gillen  jingili  ludmilla    the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  macdonnell    preferences were not distributed.  millner    the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  nhulunbuy  nightcliff  port darwin    the number of primary votes each individual independent received is unknown.  sanderson    the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  stuart  stuart park    the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  the independent candidate that came second on preferences is unknown.  tiwi    preferences were not distributed.  the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  victoria river    preferences were not distributed.  the number of votes each individual independent received is unknown.  see also    1974 northern territory general election  members of the northern territory legislative assembly, 1974-1977  references   results of northern territory elections
was a professional baseball player from japan.  he played for  chiba lotte marines     in the japan pacific league and the yakult swallows  in the japan central league.  references  1968 births living people baseball people from fukuoka prefecture japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball catchers lotte orions players chiba lotte marines players yakult swallows players
boniface doe (born 14 january 1957) is a liberian professional football coach and former player who is the current technical director of the south african football club eastern cape bees f.c.  boniface is the most successful liberian coach. he led the  nigerian premier league club shooting stars to the  1996 african cup of champions clubs final. he was one of the five coaches who were short listed for the liberian national team coaching job.  achievements   2004	helped bloemfontein cletics, promoted to premier league  2000	led max bees (ghana) from 1st division to premier league  1996	runner up silver medal with 3 sc shooting stars of nigeria in the  african club championship.  caf championship  (formerly sekou toure cup)  1996	won oyo state challenge cup with 3 sc shooting stars of ibandan  nigeria  1993	led nitel vasco dagama from 1st division to premier league, nigeria  1992	won the lagos state amateur league with french embassy fc, nigeria  1991	won the northern zone championship with kolentern rover f.c.,  sierra leone  references  external links   https://web.archive.org/web/20160817235931/http://old.liberiansoccer.com/  http://www.goal.com/en/news/.../liberian-fa-shortlists-five-coaches-for-national-team-job  http://www.allafrica.com/stories/200209300718.html  1957 births living people people from grand kru county liberian football managers
the department for exiting the european union (dexeu; also known as the department for brexit or brexit department) was the government department of the united kingdom responsible for overseeing negotiations relating to brexit, and establishing the future relationship between the united kingdom and the eu. it was formed by the prime minister, theresa may, in july 2016, in the wake of the referendum vote to leave the european union. the department was dissolved on 31 january 2020 when brexit took effect.  the department was formed by combining staff from the cabinet office's europe unit, the europe directorate of the foreign and commonwealth office, and the united kingdom's permanent representation to the eu, and was able to take on staff from other government departments as necessary. the department was overseen by david davis mp until he resigned on 8 july 2018. dominic raab was appointed as secretary of state for exiting the european union on 9 july 2018, but resigned on 15 november 2018 over the draft withdrawal agreement. his replacement was announced on 16 november 2018 to be steve barclay.  responsibilities  the responsibilities of the department included:   achieve the best possible outcome for the uk's departure from the eu; and build a new ambitious, deep and special future partnership between the uk and the eu.  coordinate delivery and legislation across government, to ensure the uk is prepared for all scenarios, including a smooth transition to our future relationship with the european union.  engage with parliament, member states and interested parties at home and abroad to shape a successful exit from the eu and to help build an ambitious future relationship.  ministers the ministers in the department for exiting the european union were as follows:  the first permanent secretary at the department was oliver robbins. in september 2017, robbins left the department as the prime minister appointed him the eu adviser in the cabinet office. in october 2017, philip rycroft was appointed the new permanent secretary, having previously been the department's second permanent secretary. after his departure in march 2019, he was replaced by clare moriarty, previously permanent secretary of the department for environment, food and rural affairs.  senior management  the department's senior management team included:   permanent secretary: clare moriarty  uk permanent representative to the eu: sir tim barrow kcmg lvo mbe  director general - emma ward  director general - simon ridley  acting director general - anna clunes  director for legislation & constitution - emma payne  director for analysis - ben cropper  co-director for market access and budget - chris hobley  co-director for market access and budget & dexeu chief scientific adviser
- eoin parker  director for negotiations strategy - rhys bowen  co-director for citizens and networks - rebecca evernden  co-director for citizens and networks - nicola webb  director for security, territories and ongoing business - vacant  co-director for communications & stakeholders - olivier evans  co-director for communications & stakeholders - simon baugh  director for business engagement & readiness - nathan phillips  co-director for domestic policy & implementation (policy) - david lamberti co-director for domestic policy & implementation (implementation) - colin dingwall co-director for corporate centre - helen mills co-director for corporate centre - kate caulkin dexeu legal advisers - cathy adams and daniel denman  staff  in march 2018 government data stated the department had 636 full-time equivalent posts, rising to 651 in august 2018 (excluding contractors, management consultants and fast streamers) on an average (mean) monthly wage of £5,890 including allowances.  references  external links    2016 establishments in the united kingdom government agencies established in 2016 brexit ministries established in 2016 2020 disestablishments in the united kingdom government agencies disestablished in 2020 ministries disestablished in 2020
wan'an township () is a township under the administration of enyang district, bazhong, sichuan, china. , it has one residential community and 10 villages under its administration.  references   township-level divisions of sichuan bazhong
first round  |}  second round  |}  third round 3 groups of 2 teams each. winners qualify for the final tournament.  |}  nigeria won 3-2 and qualified for the 1976 summer olympics football tournament.  ghana won 2-1 and qualified for the 1976 summer olympics football tournament.  zambia won 5-4 on penalties after 1-1 on aggregates and qualified for the 1976 summer olympics football tournament.  boycott  the three african participants withdrew a day before the start of the games and were not replaced. they boycotted the olympics protesting the participation of new zealand, whose rugby team planned a summer tour of south africa in spite of the soweto uprising.  references   football qualification for the 1976 summer olympics football at the summer olympics - men's african qualifiers
grevillea bracteosa, also known as bracted grevillea, is a species of flowering plant in the family proteaceae and is endemic to the south-west of western australia. it is an erect to spreading shrub usually with linear leaves, and oval to more or less spherical clusters of glabrous pale green to greenish-pink flowers with a pink or white style.  description grevillea bracteosa is an erect to spreading shrub that typically grows to a height of  but does not form a lignotuber. the leaves are mostly linear,  long and  wide with the edges rolled under, and two longitudinal grooves on the lower surface. the flowers are arranged in oval or more or less spherical clusters at the ends of stems, on a rachis  long, and are pale green to greenish pink with a deep rose-pink to pale pink or white style. the pistil is  long and glabrous. flowering occurs from august to october and the fruit is a glabrous oval follicle  long.  taxonomy grevillea bracteosa was first formally described in 1848 by carl meissner in johann georg christian lehmann's plantae preissianae from specimens collected in the swan river colony by james drummond. the specific epithet (bracteosa) means "having many or large bracts".  in 2008, peter m. olde and neil r. marriott described two subspecies in the journal nuytsia and the names are accepted by the australian plant census:  grevillea bracteosa meisn. subsp. bracteosa has a floral rachis  long and pedicels  long;  grevillea bracteosa subsp. howatharra olde & marriott has a floral rachis  long and pedicels mostly  long.  distribution and habitat bracted grevillea grows in shrubland and sometimes heath and is found from near geraldton to near mogumber in the avon wheatbelt, geraldton sandplains and jarrah forest biogeographic regions of south-western western australia.  conservation status both subspecies of g. bracteosa are listed as "threatened flora (declared rare flora - extant)" by the department of biodiversity, conservation and attractions.  use in horticulture this species of grevillea will grow in a wide range of well-drained soils and is frost and dought tolerant once esablished.  references  bracteosa endemic flora of western australia eudicots of western australia proteales of australia taxa named by carl meissner plants described in 1848
"diddy" is a song by american hip hop recording artist p. diddy, featuring vocals from american singer pharrell williams. was released on 2001 as the third single of his third studio album the saga continues..., with the record labels bad boy records and arista records. the song was produced by the neptunes. the hook line is inspired by "jimmy" a former hip hop track by the rap group boogie down productions  charts  references  sean combs songs pharrell williams songs song recordings produced by the neptunes songs written by sean combs songs written by pharrell williams songs written by chad hugo 2001 singles bad boy records singles 2001 songs songs written by loon (rapper)
nemaschema olivaceum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1950.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1950
top gun: maverick is an upcoming american action drama film directed by joseph kosinski from a screenplay by ehren kruger, eric warren singer, and christopher mcquarrie and a story by peter craig and justin marks. it is the sequel to 1986's top gun. the film stars tom cruise in the title role, miles teller, jennifer connelly, jon hamm, glen powell, lewis pullman, ed harris, and val kilmer. cruise and kilmer reprise their roles from the first film.  the film is scheduled to be theatrically released in the united states on may 27, 2022, by paramount pictures. it will also be available to stream on paramount+ 45 days after its theatrical debut. it was originally scheduled for release on july 12, 2019, but was postponed to "allow the production to work out all the complex flight sequences". due to the covid-19 pandemic and scheduling conflicts, the film experienced further delays.  synopsis  cast   tom cruise as captain pete "maverick" mitchell, a test pilot and flight instructor  miles teller as lt. bradley "rooster" bradshaw, a pilot trainee, and the son of maverick's late rio and best friend, nick "goose" bradshaw  jennifer connelly as penny benjamin, maverick's new love interest, who is a single mother, bar owner, and the daughter of a former admiral  jon hamm as vice admiral cyclone  glen powell as "hangman", a pilot trainee  lewis pullman as bob, a pilot trainee  ed harris as rear admiral, maverick's superior   val kilmer as admiral tom "iceman" kazansky, a fellow instructor and friend/former rival of maverick. he is a four-star admiral and currently serves as chief of naval operations  monica barbaro as natasha "phoenix" trace, pilot trainee  charles parnell as rear admiral warlock  danny ramirez as "fanboy", payback's wso  manny jacinto as fritz  bashir salahuddin as coleman  jay ellis as payback fitch  jake picking  raymond lee   lyliana wray as amelia benjamin, penny's daughter  jean louisa kelly as carole bradshaw, nick "goose" bradshaw's widow and mother of rooster. meg ryan previously portrayed her in the first film.  greg tarzan davis as coyote  bob stephenson as united states air force general edward clayton, chairman of the joint chiefs of staff  chelsea harris as flag aide angela burke  production  development  development of the film began in 2010 when paramount pictures made offers to jerry bruckheimer and tony scott
to make a sequel to top gun. christopher mcquarrie had also received an offer to write the sequel's screenplay, which was rumored to have tom cruise's character maverick in a smaller role. peter craig, justin marks, who described the film as a dream project, ashley edward miller and zack stentz would be credited as screenwriters on the project.  when asked about his idea for a new top gun film, scott replied, "this world fascinated me, because it's so different from what it was originally. but i don't want to do a remake. i don't want to do a reinvention. i want to do a new movie." the film will reportedly focus on the end of the dogfighting era and the role of drones in modern aerial warfare and that cruise's character, maverick, will fly an f/a-18 super hornet. after scott's suicide, the sequel's future remained in question, but producer jerry bruckheimer remained committed to the project, especially given cruise's and kilmer's interest.  in june 2017, cruise revealed that the title would be top gun: maverick, with harold faltermeyer returning as composer for the sequel. cruise further stated that, "aviators are back, the need for speed. we're going to have big, fast machines. it's going to be a competition film, like the first one ... but a progression for maverick." later the same month, it was confirmed that the film would be directed by joseph kosinski, while no title was officially confirmed.  musician kenny loggins has confirmed that his song "danger zone", which was used in the first film, will be featured in the sequel. in october 2018, it was reported that hans zimmer would also compose for the film alongside harold faltermeyer.  on june 19, 2019, at cineeurope in barcelona, attendees were able to watch for the first time some early footage of the film from a special paramount presentation. during the presentation the president of international theatrical distribution mark viane and co-president of worldwide marketing and distribution mary daily appeared in flight clothes.  casting  val kilmer had campaigned on his social media page that he would like to reprise his role in the film, and by june 2018, the wrap reported that he will appear in the film. while bruckheimer and the filmmakers wanted to bring kilmer back, cruise was the one who tirelessly insisted in bringing back kilmer to reprise his role. in july 2018, miles teller was cast in the role of goose's son
, against nicholas hoult and glen powell. all three were flown to cruise's home, the star of the film, for chemistry tests. later that month, jennifer connelly joined the film's cast to play a single mother running a bar near the naval base.  in august 2018, powell joined the cast of the film in a pilot trainee role that was enlarged for him, having impressed star tom cruise, producer jerry bruckheimer, as well as executives at paramount pictures and skydance, with his auditions. that same month, monica barbaro, thomasin mckenzie, charles parnell, jay ellis, bashir salahuddin, danny ramirez, ed harris, jon hamm and lewis pullman joined the cast of the film with barbaro, ellis, and ramirez portraying pilot trainees and mckenzie portraying connelly's daughter. in september 2018, manny jacinto joined the cast of the film. in october 2018, kara wang, jack schumacher, greg tarzan davis, jake picking, raymond lee, jean louisa kelly and lyliana wray joined the cast of the film. additionally, mckenzie was forced to drop out of the film after signing onto lost girls. in november 2018, chelsea harris joined the cast of the film in an undisclosed role.  according to kelly mcgillis, who appeared in the original film, she was not asked to appear in the sequel.  filming  preliminary production on the film officially started on may 30, 2018, in san diego, california. during late august a 15-person film crew from paramount and bruckheimer films were aboard the norfolk-based aircraft carrier  to shoot flight deck operations. in mid-february 2019, cruise and the production crew were sighted on board  at nas north island. in march, filming was completed at nas whidbey island in oak harbor, washington.  on june 19, 2019, miles teller revealed in an interview that he had finished filming two days earlier. principal photography was scheduled until april 15, 2019, in san diego, california; lemoore, california; china lake, california; lake tahoe, california; seattle, washington; and patuxent river, maryland.  the movie was filmed in imax format using imax-certified sony venice 6k full screen cameras.  marketing  the film's first trailer premiered during a surprise appearance by tom cruise at the 2019 san diego comic con on july 18, 2019. the first trailer received high praise from fans, with many lauding the return of the series and some comparing it to star wars: the rise of skywalker. the hollywood reporter wrote that some fans
noticed that the flag of the republic of china (known as the taiwanese flag) and the flag of japan were missing from the bomber jacket of cruise's character and accused paramount of removing it to appease china-based co-financier tencent pictures.  in february 2020, toy manufacturer matchbox company (owned by mattel) announced that they were releasing a series of top gun die-cast models and products, including an f-14 tomcat, boeing f/a-18e/f super hornet, north american p-51 mustang and role play items. they were scheduled for public release on june 1, 2020, despite the delayed theatrical release.  in june 2020, plastic model manufacturer revell company released a series of 1/48 scale top gun plastic models, including an f-14a tomcat and an f/a-18e super hornet based upon the aircraft in the movie. these are versions of previous revell offerings with modified decals and markings. in july 2020, hasbro announced a top gun themed transformers toy, "maverick", which released later in the year.  in august 2021, the first 13 minutes of the film was previewed at cinemacon along with a new trailer with tom cruise marking his presence virtually at the event.  in february 2022, a trailer of the film tied to porsche was aired before super bowl lvi.  release  top gun: maverick was originally scheduled to be released by paramount pictures on july 12, 2019. in august 2018, it was delayed to june 26, 2020. on march 2, 2020, paramount moved the film up two days early on june 24, 2020. on april 2, 2020, it was delayed to december 23 due to the ongoing covid-19 pandemic declared by the world health organization.  on july 23, 2020, the film was delayed again to july 2, 2021, partially due to scheduling conflicts with cruise, as well as the recent delays of mulan and tenet due to the rise of covid-19 cases. in april 2021, the film was delayed again to november 19, 2021. on september 1, 2021, the film was delayed again once more to may 27, 2022. netflix and apple tv+ tried to purchase the distribution rights to the film, but paramount has refused to sell them. it will be streamed on paramount+ 45 days after its theatrical release.  see also    list of films featuring drones  list of films released in imax  references  external links       2022 action drama films american action drama films american aviation films
american films american sequel films censored films cross-strait relations films about aviators films about the united states navy films directed by joseph kosinski films postponed due to the covid-19 pandemic films produced by jerry bruckheimer films scored by hans zimmer films scored by harold faltermeyer films set in california films shot in california films shot in maryland films shot in san diego films shot in washington (state) films with screenplays by christopher mcquarrie films with screenplays by peter craig paramount pictures films imax films top gun upcoming films upcoming imax films upcoming sequel films
heaven upside down is the tenth studio album by american rock band marilyn manson. it was released on october 6, 2017 by loma vista recordings and caroline international. the record had the working title say10 and was initially due to be issued on valentine's day. however, the release was delayed by numerous events, most notably the death of marilyn manson's father hugh warner, who died during production and to whom the album was later dedicated. the record features many of the same musicians who performed on the band's previous album, the pale emperor (2015), including producer tyler bates and drummer gil sharone. despite manson's early implications, long-time bassist twiggy ramirez did not participate on the album. he left the group following a sexual assault allegation by a former girlfriend.  "we know where you fucking live" was released as a single in september, shortly followed by "kill4me", which became the band's highest-peaking entry on billboards mainstream rock chart. the music videos for the album featured celebrities including johnny depp, courtney love and lisa marie presley. the single "tattooed in reverse" also entered mainstream rock, making heaven upside down their first album since 1998's mechanical animals to chart more than one song there.  the album received positive reviews from music critics upon release, with multiple publications saying it continued a creative resurgence that began with their previous album. it was also a commercial success, debuting at number eight on the billboard 200 and charting in the top ten in most of the major markets. in australia, it was their highest-charting album since mechanical animals, and was their first top 10 studio album in the united kingdom since the golden age of grotesque (2003).  manson suffered several injuries that delayed the heaven upside down tour. the band embarked on two co-headlining tours with rob zombie: twins of evil: the second coming tour and twins of evil: hell never dies tour. to promote the former, the two bands collaborated on a cover of the beatles song "helter skelter". manson issued three other covers on soundtracks during the album's promotional cycle: "stigmata", "god's gonna cut you down" and "cry little sister".  background and recording  marilyn manson met tyler bates, the score composer of the tv series californication, while playing a fictionalized version of himself in the season finale of the sixth season of the series. the two then collaborated on the band's ninth studio album, the blues-influenced the pale emperor (2015), which was described by numerous publications as
the best album the band had released in over a decade. in july 2016, manson received the 'icon award' at the apmas, where he revealed several details about the follow-up, such as its working title of say10 and a tentative valentine's day release date. he explained that the title originated from a note written in one of his workbooks from his time as a student at glenoak high school. manson doubted whether bates would collaborate with him again following the pale emperor, saying relations between the pair deteriorated to such an extent during the supporting the hell not hallelujah tour that manson threatened bates on-stage with a box-cutter knife.  during the tour, manson regularly shattered glass bottles on-stage so he could cut himself. bates, who recently announced his leaving the tour to pursue other projects, an announcement that he said saddened manson, confronted the vocalist during a concert when he realized the shards of glass were hitting drummer gil sharone. manson responded by threatening bates with a box-cutter, to which bates replied "you fucking come near me and i'll kill you with that box cutter". despite the confrontation, bates agreed to work with the band, and renamed his music publishing company box cutter music in honor of the incident.  on may 8, 2017, manson announced the album had been renamed heaven upside down, and said recording had been completed. he elaborated on the meaning of the new title: "i was going to call the record say10, but i didn't feel that that defined the album. i had the lyrics written for the song 'heaven upside down', and i thought that defined the record more so because of the idea of time as a flat circle, constellations being defined by the negative space-the blackness; the idea of looking at something from an opposite point of view."  as was the case with the pale emperor, manson and bates worked on the record while the latter was composing score material for the american television series salem; the third season of which featured manson as a recurring cast member. parts of the album were recorded in louisiana, where he was filming scenes for the series. the record was produced solely by bates, and recorded at bates's studio city recording facility abattoir studios, with live drums recorded by the pale emperor contributor gil sharone. despite initially suggesting that longtime bassist twiggy would contribute to the writing and production of the album, manson later confirmed that he was invited but did not participate during sessions at bates's recording studio. according to
manson, after listening to pre-recorded basslines performed by bates, twiggy responded by saying he would be unable to "play them any better, and that the record sounded great [as it was]".  manson and bates largely improvised during their writing sessions. bates said that songs were created "out of a conversation, essentially, just between [manson] and i, and we make it pretty much on the spot. it's me making music right from my head, and the lyrics are developed by manson right there in the studio with me." manson described the collaborative process between the two as being "a very intimate, personal experience. ... we sit across from each other, with headphones on, we look each other in the eye when we're writing." manson opted not to record his vocals from inside a vocal booth, instead recording them while sitting at bates's mixing console; the majority of vocals on the album were recorded in single takes, with minimal overdubbing. bates sought to incorporate the intensity of the band's live performances into the album's production, describing the record as "intense, fun and violent. it's more immediate than the pale emperor, much more aggressive, and definitely much more imbued with manson's fucked-up humor." he also said:  composition and style  manson initially described say10 as being a musical departure from the pale emperor, saying it was "pretty violent in its nature for some reason, and it's not emotional in the same way. it's got a chip on its shoulder." he called it "by far the most thematic and over-complicated thing that i've done", and indicated it would contain some of his most politically-charged lyrics, but denied the political lyrical content related to the election of donald trump by saying most of its lyrics were written before the 2016 us presidential election. he said he would not be voting in that election, and believed that - as an artist - he could make more of a difference with his music than with a vote.  manson dubbed heaven upside down his "most precise and well-thought-out work", and compared its lyrics to those of holy wood (in the shadow of the valley of death) (2000), noting the majority of lyrics on both records were initially written as prose. he additionally described it as a concept album, and contrasted it with the pale emperor: "the last album was faust, mephistopheles. for me, this would be pilgrim's progress". lyrical themes and subject matter on the record range from politics
, violence, sex and romance, chaos and isolation, and capitalism, religion, drugs, paranoia, fear and mental illness. manson characterized heaven upside down as a hard rock and punk rock album, in the vein of killing joke, joy division, bauhaus, and david bowie's scary monsters (and super creeps). reviewers have additionally defined it as an industrial metal, punk rock, glam rock and gothic rock record.  the title of opening track "revelation #12" is a reference to both the book of revelation and the beatles song "revolution 9". "we know where you fucking live" was the first song manson and bates recorded for the album; its lyrics reference state surveillance and drone warfare. "saturnalia" was the final song written for the album. manson described its lyrics as being "the real heart of the record." he was unaware of the severity of his father's terminal illness until two days before he died, on july 7, 2017, the same day the band finished recording "saturnalia". its lyrics contain numerous astrological and mythological references, specifically the astrological transit of saturn - saturn return - and the myth of saturnus devouring his children. manson conflated his father's death with the lyrical content: "seeing my father dying, i felt like that was the circle of life that he'd want me to put the energy of death into rebirth, you know, the snake eating its own tail, saturnalia, saturninus, that whole concept." "je$u$ cri$i$" was described by manson as "my resume ... it's basically something i would say with a [sarcastic] shrug when someone asked me, 'what do you do?' 'well, i write songs to fight and fuck to'."  release and artwork the album was not released on valentine's day, prompting increasingly aggressive responses from fans on social media platforms. manson later explained several factors caused the delay, including bates' schedule scoring films, manson being unhappy with the quality of the record by that date, as well as the death of his father, to whom heaven upside down is dedicated. bates also said recording was delayed due to the band's touring schedule; the pair had completed just six songs before beginning a co-headlining tour with slipknot in the summer of 2016. at least three tracks were recorded sometime after valentine's day: "revelation #12", "saturnalia" and "heaven upside down", with the album's name then being changed to the last
song title.  prior to the record's eventual release, manson posted a series of horror-themed videos on instagram. the first of these was captioned "6:19. the time has come." numerous publications hypothesized whether 6:19 referred to a june 19 release date, a bible verse, or the eat me, drink me track "if i was your vampire", which features the lyric "6:19 and i know i'm ready". the final video featured the celebritarian cross, an inverted variation on the cross of lorraine that had previously been used by manson as a logo for his celebritarian art movement in 2005; the symbol subsequently appeared on the heaven upside down album cover.  heaven upside down was released worldwide on october 6, 2017, by loma vista recordings in the united states, caroline international internationally, and in japan by loma vista in cooperation with hostess entertainment; japanese editions contain a mystery skulls remix of "kill4me" as a bonus track. the booklet was printed on bible paper, with the lyrics formatted to resemble biblical text. the record was mastered by brian lucey, the engineer who masters the majority of bates's soundtrack work. according to manson, lucey was chosen because the album contains "some extreme experiments with sound. we were very particular in not allowing someone else to master it, who might accidentally eliminate them. we've got some very intense, alchemical, scientific, binaural sounds that sometimes even make me have a panic attack while i'm listening to it." these sounds are most prevalent in the title track and "saturnalia", which manson highlighted as centerpieces of the record.  promotion and singles  the band initially included manson on vocals with bates and paul wiley on electric guitars, twiggy on bass and sharone on drums. they began the first leg of the heaven upside down tour on july 20, 2017 in budapest, during which they debuted several new songs. during this leg of the tour, the group narrowly avoided injury in moscow when their tour bus was involved in a collision with a semi-trailer truck, and manson caused controversy in eastern europe when he referenced the ongoing russo-ukrainian war during a concert in kiev, saying: "you just made moscow sound like your bitch." the band performed in moscow two days prior to the kiev concert.  the north american leg began on september 27, and was scheduled to incorporate performances at several music festivals, including the aftershock festival on october 22, at which nine inch nails was also scheduled to appear. manson indicated a
possibility of joining that band on stage during the festival, after he and trent reznor mended a longstanding feud. however, manson was injured on several occasions during the tour. he sprained his left ankle after jumping off the stage at pittsburgh's stage ae on september 29. the following night, at the hammerstein ballroom in new york, he was crushed by a large stage prop, and lay unconscious on the stage for up to 15 minutes before being carried out of the venue on a stretcher to a nearby hospital. manson had broken his fibula in two places, requiring a plate and ten screws to be inserted into his bone. the rest of the tour was then canceled, including their appearance at aftershock, with all dates - excluding festival appearances - rescheduled to take place at the start of 2018.  on october 25, manson announced he had "decided to part ways" with twiggy after the bassist was accused of sexual assault by former girlfriend jessicka addams, who was the vocalist for alternative rock band jack off jill. addams said the incident occurred while she and twiggy were a couple in the mid-90s. he was replaced on subsequent tour dates by former racer x and the mars volta bassist juan alderete. alderete's first show with the band, at the 2017 ozzfest meets knotfest festival in san bernardino on november 5, found manson performing in a wheelchair as a result of injuries he sustained earlier in the tour. manson attracted criticism from some publications after he used a replica assault rifle as a microphone during the concert, with some commentators arguing it was insensitive considering the city had previously been the subject of a terrorism-related attack, and that the concert took place hours after the sutherland springs church shooting in texas.  the day of the 2016 us presidential election, a short teaser clip for "say10" was released. created by director tyler shields, it featured images of manson holding a bloodstained knife while standing above a decapitated corpse lying in a pool of blood. numerous publications noted the corpse was dressed in similar clothing to the kind regularly worn by donald trump-a suit and red tie. manson would later say the decapitated figure in the video "wasn't anyone except if you wanted it to be them." a cover of ministry's "stigmata" was released on july 28, 2017, when it appeared on the soundtrack to atomic blonde. "we know where you fucking live" was issued as the album's lead single on september 11, after premiering on zane lowe's beats
1 show. its music video was posted onto youtube four days later, and was directed by bill yukich and perou. "kill4me" was issued as the album's primary airplay single in the united states, where it went on to become their highest peaking single ever on the billboard mainstream rock chart. a series of advertisements created by canadian pop artist alex kazemi to promote the album on instagram were leaked online in late september, but were deemed too graphic to be used on the image hosting service. music videos were subsequently released for "say10" and "kill4me", both directed by yukich and featured actor johnny depp.  a cover of "god's gonna cut you down" - recorded during the heaven upside down sessions - was released on december 8 when it featured on the soundtrack to 24 hours to live. "tattooed in reverse" was serviced to active rock radio formats in the united states as a promotional single on march 6, 2018, and peaked at number 35 on billboards mainstream rock chart. this made heaven upside down the band's first studio album since 1998's mechanical animals to contain more than one charting song on mainstream rock. the song's music video was directed by yukich, and featured singers courtney love and lisa marie presley. yukich also directed the music video for the band's cover version of gerard mcmahon's "cry little sister", released in june and recorded for the soundtrack of the new mutants.  the band embarked on a second co-headlining tour with rob zombie on july 11, 2018, titled "twins of evil: the second coming tour", following the "twins of evil tour" in 2012. on the day the tour began, zombie and manson released their cover of the beatles track "helter skelter", which featured former manson band members john 5 and ginger fish. heaven upside down was the last album to feature sharone, who departed the band in march 2019. he was replaced on the subsequent "twins of evil: hell never dies tour" by former black flag and ho99o9 drummer brandon pertzborn. shortly after the tour completed, alderete was involved in a bicycle accident which left him with a diffuse axonal injury, a type of traumatic brain injury. a gofundme page was created to help cover the cost of his medical expenses. despite this, alderete is a credited performer on the band's next studio album, 2020's we are chaos.  critical reception  heaven upside down was well received by music critics upon release. several
publications said it continued a creative resurgence that began with their previous release, including allmusic, which described it as a more satisfying album than the predecessor. this sentiment was echoed by both loudwire, and the boston globe, which said: "no one expected this band to be doing some of its best work 20 years after it first shook up the zeitgeist, but here it is, continuing to evolve while toning down its more dated or cartoonish aspects. it just goes to show that a good album beats a good scandal every time." bloody disgusting said it was their best release since holy wood (in the shadow of the valley of death), and loudwire included it on their list of the best hard rock albums of 2017. consequence of sound commented on manson's stage injury: "had the worst happened, heaven upside down is the kind of career-defining record that [he] just might want to leave as his last great opus anyway."  numerous publications lauded it for being a solid and concise album. clash commended the quality of songwriting, complimenting the band for mixing various styles from their discography while saying the record fused three distinct genres from their previous work-the industrial of antichrist superstar, the glam rock of mechanical animals, and the blues of the pale emperor. classic rocks sister publication metal hammer described it as a solid album and said it illustrates how manson can "still do what he got famous [for] doing: write biting, anti-establishment goth rock full of dark, playful imagery." singapore's the straits times dubbed it the album of the week and described it as an exhilarating recorded.  critics praised the quality of lyricism found on the album, specifically in light of the presidential election of donald trump. abc news said it saw manson going back to basics, which they described as him "playing overtly with taboos and openly baiting his critics." the evening standard said the lyrical content may prove cathartic for people disillusioned with the election. the list made a similar point while comparing its lyrical content to grand guignol, a term used to describe graphic, amoral horror entertainment. mark beaumont of classic rock called it an astute album, saying the band "update and renovate the goth-glam dazzle of mechanical animals and antichrist superstar to better ram home [manson's] top-line points: that religion is a pointless poison, politicians are society's true satans and that fighting and fucking are the only reasoned responses to the current countdown to the book of revelations
apocalypse that the world has chosen democratically for itself."  the album received some mixed reviews as well, with several writers criticizing the lyrics to "je$u$ cri$i$". spin criticized the "reprehensible" violent lyrical content found on the record, in light of the 2017 las vegas shooting. conversely, pitchfork said the lyrics were ineffectual, arguing they were easily eclipsed by the horror found in real life. both crack magazine and popmatters complimented the inclusion of punk elements, which the latter said helped the album match the intensity of the band's earlier work, but they were both critical of the lyrics. nme argued the record was too similar to the band's earlier work, and complained most of the songs lacked innovation. drowned in sound said that fans were "unlikely to see the power or the passion of manson's classic run again - it's very difficult to bottle lightning twice ... that said, [manson] seems to have settled after many years of free-fall. in tyler bates he has found a collaborator who knows how to get the best from his twisted mind. it's business as usual, but after a decade of disappointment, it's good to know business is doing well."  commercial performance heaven upside down debuted at number eight on the billboard 200 with 35,000 album-equivalent units, 32,000 of which were pure album sales, making it the band's seventh consecutive top ten album on the chart. industry forecasters had predicted it was on course to debut in the top ten with sales of between 25,000 and 32,000 copies. it was the band's fourth consecutive number one album on billboards top hard rock albums, and their first to reach number one on top alternative albums. it also debuted at number two on both top rock albums and top album sales, which acts as the current equivalent of the previous billboard 200, before it was reconfigured to incorporate album-equivalent units. in canada, heaven upside down matched the peak of the pale emperor by debuting at number four.  the record was predicted to enter the top ten of the uk albums chart, making it their first top ten album there since eat me, drink me peaked at number eight a decade earlier. the album debuted at number seven with first-week sales of 6,636 copies-their highest opening week figure since the high end of low debuted with 7,746 copies in 2009 and their highest-charting studio album since the golden age of grotesque peaked at number four in 2003. the record went on to peak in
the top ten of multiple european markets, including austria, the czech republic, finland, germany, greece, slovakia, and switzerland. it peaked at number six in spain, making it their highest-charting album there since the golden age of grotesque peaked at number five. in france, heaven upside down debuted with sales of 4,745 copies.  heaven upside down entered the aria charts at number four, making it their sixth top ten album in australia, and their highest-charting since mechanical animals reached number one in 1998. it entered at number six on the official new zealand music chart, their fifth top ten studio album there. on the japanese oricon chart, the album debuted at number 29 with first week sales of 1,805 copies.  track listing   "we know where you fucking live", "say10" and "kill4me" are stylized in all caps; "jesus crisis" is stylized as "je$u$ cri$i$".  personnel credits adapted from the liner notes of heaven upside down.   marilyn manson - vocals  tyler bates - guitars, bass, keyboards, programming, engineering, recording, production, mixing  gil sharone - drums  dana dentata - backing vocals   roger joseph manning jr. - clavinet   robert carranza - mixing  joanne higginbottom - assistant engineer  olivia jaffe - hexagram sigil  brian lucey - mastering  perou - photography  brian roettinger - art direction  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2017 albums concept albums glam rock albums by american artists gothic rock albums by american artists loma vista recordings albums marilyn manson (band) albums punk rock albums by american artists
cryptopontius is a genus of copepods in the family artotrogidae.  species   cryptopontius acutus kim i.h., 2007  cryptopontius aesthetascus neves & johnsson, 2008  cryptopontius ascidius kim i.h., 1996  cryptopontius brevicaudatus (brady, 1899)  cryptopontius brevifurcatus (giesbrecht, 1895)  cryptopontius capitalis (giesbrecht, 1895)  cryptopontius digitatus kim i.h., 1996  cryptopontius donghaensis kim i.h., 1996  cryptopontius expletus neves & johnsson, 2008  cryptopontius gracilis c. b. wilson, 1932  cryptopontius graciloides ummerkutty, 1962  cryptopontius ignotus (brady, 1910)  cryptopontius latus (brady, 1910)  cryptopontius longipes nicholls, 1944  cryptopontius madeirensis johnsson, 2001  cryptopontius minor stock, 1965  cryptopontius orientalis ummerkutty, 1962  cryptopontius paracapitalis nicholls in eiselt, 1962  cryptopontius proximus nicholls, 1944  cryptopontius quinquesetus kim i.h., 1996  cryptopontius ricinius malt, 1991  cryptopontius similis nicholls, 1944  cryptopontius tanacredii johnsson, rocha & boyko, 2002  cryptopontius tenuis (giesbrecht, 1895)  cryptopontius thorelli (giesbrecht, 1895)  cryptopontius innominatus brady, 1910 accepted as myzopontius innominatus (brady, 1910)  cryptopontius latus nicholls, 1944 accepted as cryptopontius paracapitalis nicholls in eiselt, 1962  references  external links   siphonostomatoida copepod genera
punit renjen (born 1961) is an indian-american businessman who has been chief executive officer of the multinational professional services firm deloitte since june 1, 2015. previously, renjen was chairman and ceo of deloitte consulting llp, and later, held the role of chairman of deloitte llp (united states) from 2011 to 2015.  renjen was raised in rohtak, north india in the state of haryana. after earning an mba in management from oregon's willamette university, he was hired by touche ross, which merged into deloitte in 1989. he has worked at deloitte and lived in the us ever since.  renjen is on the wall street journals council of ceos and has been on the boards of directors at catlin gabel school, united way worldwide, the u.s.-india business council, and his alma mater. he lives in portland, oregon.  early life and education renjen grew up in rohtak, a city in haryana's rohtak district, in india, where his father had established an electrical switchgear factory. around age seven, renjen was sent to the lawrence school, sanawar, an autonomous public co-educational boarding school near shimla, because his parents were seeking a better education for him than he was receiving in rohtak. when renjen was approximately fourteen years old, his father's business encountered financial difficulty, and the family's inability to continue paying for boarding school forced renjen to return to rohtak and work at the family factory part time.  renjen attended a local college, where he earned his bachelor's degree in economics. after graduating, renjen worked for the delhi-based home appliance company usha international. in 1984, he earned a rotary foundation scholarship, affording him airfare to the united states and a full scholarship to salem, oregon's willamette university. he earned his master of management from willamette's atkinson graduate school of management in 1986, and has lived in the united states ever since.  career after graduating from willamette, renjen began interviewing at american firms. in the late 1980s, a partner at touche ross invited him to interview with the company after reading on a flight a local magazine that profiled renjen and nine other students. he was initially hired as an associate consultant and has worked at deloitte for 32 years since that time.  his work at deloitte has included advising multinational companies on divestitures, mergers and acquisitions, operations, post-merger integration, and strategy.  renjen later served as chairman and ceo
of deloitte consulting llp, which is a united states member firm, then as chairman of deloitte llp (united states) for four years beginning in june 2011.   renjen currently serves as the ceo of deloitte touche tohmatsu limited (deloitte global). the company announced renjen's confirmation on february 16, 2015, following an election and nearly unanimous ratification by thousands of deloitte's partners. when renjen's four-year term as ceo began on june 1, 2015, he became the first asia-born person to head one of the big four global professional services firms. in june 2019, he was elected to a second, four-year term as deloitte global ceo. during that time, deloitte announced that their fiscal year numbers for 2021 reached $50.2 billion and their workforce expanded to 345,000, making them the first big 4 firm to clear $50 billion in global revenue.  in february 2018, punit launched worldclass, deloitte's global initiative designed to advance education and skills for communities at risk. in 2019, the program was launched in india with the goal of supporting 10 million girls and women by 2030 there through education and skills development.  in may 2021, the haryana government and deloitte launched a covid-19 project called senjeevani pariyojana to treat patients with mild to moderate covid-19 symptoms in their homes. renjen led the design of the program which is being supported by the public health foundation of india and the post graduate institute of medical science.  other roles in addition to serving on deloitte global's boards of directors as part of his current role, renjen is a member of the wall street journal ceo council, united way worldwide, the u.s.-india business council, and the business roundtable. he also serves as a member of the boards of trustees at catlin gabel school, united states council for international business and willamette university. in 2015, the association to advance collegiate schools of business international (aacsb) included renjen on their inaugural "influential leaders" list, which recognizes "100 aacsb-member-school alumni who inspire others with their professional and volunteer work". he has co-authored articles for chief executive and the journal of business strategy, and has been featured in interviews with bloomberg businessweek, consulting, investor's business daily, and the wall street journal.  awards and honors in 2007, he was listed as one of consulting magazine's "top 25 most influential consultants".  in 2012, 2013, and 2014, he was named an honoree
to the national association of corporate directors (nacd) "directorship 100".  in 2015, the association to advance collegiate schools of business international (aacsb) included renjen on their inaugural "influential leaders" list, which recognizes "100 aacsb-member-school alumni who inspire others with their professional and volunteer work". in 2017, he was honored with the "gaurav samman" by the government of haryana. the award was given to people of haryanvi origin residing outside of haryana who have made significant contributions in various fields. in may 2019, he received an honorary degree from willamette university. renjen received the 2020 oregon history makers medal in the category of "visionary business leader." in 2020, he was named one of the empower top 100 ethnic minority executive role models, an honor given to recognize senior executives of color who are removing barriers to success for other ethnic minority employees and are leading by example. the indiaspora business leaders list recognized renjen as one of over 50 executives from the indian diaspora of top-tier international corporations in 2020. in 2021, the us-india strategic partnership forum (usispf) recognized punit with the usispf global achievement award in honor of his corporate leadership in fighting covid-19 during india's second wave.  personal life renjen lives in portland, oregon. he is a sports fan, with a particular affinity for cricket and american football, and a runner. he is married and has a son.  see also  list of people from haryana  list of willamette university alumni  references  further reading  external links          living people american businesspeople of indian descent lawrence school, sanawar alumni 1961 births 20th-century american businesspeople 21st-century american businesspeople american business executives businesspeople from portland, oregon people from rohtak willamette university alumni businesspeople from haryana
the old chatahoochee county courthouse was built in cusseta, georgia, in newly created chattahoochee county in 1854. after it was no longer used and slated for demolition, it was moved to westville, in lumpkin, georgia, an outside museum depicting life in west georgia circa 1850. the lumpkin location of westville closed in july 2016, and in 2019, the museum was moved to columbus, georgia, near the columbus public library.  it is a wood building,  in size, with four rooms downstairs. it is one of two remaining wooden courthouses in georgia. (the other is the old marion county courthouse.) the building was added to the national register of historic places in 1980.  see also  national register of historic places listings in stewart county, georgia  references  courthouses on the national register of historic places in georgia (u.s. state) national register of historic places in stewart county, georgia government buildings completed in 1854 stewart county, georgia chattahoochee county chattahoochee county, georgia
cylindrepomus nigrofasciatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by blanchard in 1853. it contains the varietas cylindrepomus nigrofasciatus var. fulvithorax.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1853
diane michelle zamora (born january 21, 1978) is a former united states naval academy midshipman and convicted murderer who, in 1995, murdered adrianne jessica jones, who she believed was a romantic rival for her ex-fiance and accomplice, david graham. graham had confessed to giving adrianne a ride home and having sex with her one month earlier, leading an enraged zamora to demand that he kill jones. in the early morning of december 4, 1995, graham picked up jones in zamora's car while she hid in the hatchback. they went to a remote location and got into a struggle, at which point zamora hit jones over the head with weights and graham shot her twice after she broke away from them.  following the murder, graham attended the united states air force academy in colorado springs, colorado, while zamora attended the united states naval academy in annapolis, maryland. zamora confessed the crime to her roommates, which ultimately led to notification of the local police in texas, where the murder occurred. both zamora and graham were arrested on september 6, 1996. they were both convicted in separate trials and are currently serving life sentences. zamora's attorney filed an appeal in 2005, stating that prosecution withheld the information that graham did not give jones a ride after the meet, and probably did not have sex with jones.  murder of adrianne jones  background  diane zamora and david graham met at a civil air patrol meeting at spinks airport, near crowley, texas, when they were both aged 14. zamora had wanted to be an astronaut and graham wanted to be a pilot. the two began dating about four years later in august 1995, when they were both high school honor students. zamora was a student at crowley high school, and graham was a student at mansfield high school. about a month after they began dating, zamora and graham announced their engagement to their families. they planned to marry after their college graduations.  graham went to school with adrianne jones, who was on the cross-country track team with him. jones, known to her acquaintances as a.j., was also an honor student who planned to attend texas a&m university and become a behavioral analyst. jones's family included her mother linda, her father bill and two brothers. graham claimed that on november 4, 1995, he had given jones a ride home from a regional meet and that during the ride he stopped the car to have sex with her. during her confession to police, zamora said that she believed it was this night when graham came over to
her house, carrying a stuffed animal and having "this look in his eyes that was horrible, he looked so scared."  in zamora's confession, she stated that about a month later she questioned graham about other girls, including jones. they got into a fight when he pressed her to study for the sat. graham then said that he had not had sex only with her, but also had sex with jones. zamora began screaming and hitting her head against the floor, shouting, "kill her, kill her!" she said that beginning december 2, they tried to get in touch with jones, and graham continually tried to calm zamora down. graham claimed in 2008 that zamora told him that she would kill herself or leave him if he did not kill jones.   although they were goal-driven and intelligent, zamora and graham each had issues "beneath the surface" that were reflected at times in their behavior. court tv said that "from a surface view, no one would have expected that diane and david would become a lethal combination. although they both continued to advance in the military, their single-minded quests for recognition covered up deep-rooted problems leading to obsession and murder."  the crime   according to graham, he and zamora planned to kill jones and put her in a lake with weights tied to her body. graham called jones on the night of december 3, 1995, and arranged to drive her to joe pool lake while zamora hid in the hatchback of her car. zamora said in her confession that they arrived at a spot by the lake after 12:30 a.m. on december 4, 1995. she said that when graham stopped the car she came out from the hatchback and asked jones if she had sex with graham. she claimed jones said that she had, but hadn't enjoyed it because she felt guilty. zamora became enraged. zamora and graham both said in their confessions that they got into a struggle, zamora hit jones on the head with the weights, and jones fought back. she got out of the car and ran into a field. graham shot her twice with a 9mm handgun after she fell down. according to zamora's confession, when he returned to the car, graham said, "i love you, baby, do you believe me now?" shortly thereafter, zamora asked what they had just done, to which david answered, "i don't know. i can't believe we just did that". they cleaned up and/or disposed of their bloody clothes and went home. zamora and graham each said that she then cleaned
her car that had blood in it, and that at that time graham was vomiting. she wrote in her calendar for the day, "adrianne 01:38 a.m."  the investigation and arrest  jones' body was found in an open field on seeton road, near joe pool lake, on december 4, 1995. she was brought in to the medical examiner as a jane doe. it did not appear that she had been sexually assaulted, but it was clear that she had been shot and had "blunt traumatic head injury". the shooter had stood within a few feet of jones when pulling the trigger. the second bullet was fired when the killer stood right over her, hitting her right between the eyes. her body was positively identified to be the missing adrianne jones when the medical examiner received a photograph of jones.  after the murder graham went to the air force academy in colorado springs and zamora went to the naval academy in annapolis, maryland. while there she confessed to the murder to her two roommates, who contacted the authorities at the academy. the grand prairie police were then contacted, and zamora and graham were arrested for capital murder on september 6, 1996. they were held in the tarrant county jail.  graham was interrogated for 30 hours, during which he confessed to killing jones. zamora also confessed to the murder during her interrogation by the police. the key details of the event were similar; each said that jones was killed because graham had sex with her, she was taken to a remote lake, and she was hit over the head by zamora and shot twice by graham.  both later recanted their confessions. graham said that he was not guilty of killing jones, but helped cover up the murder, which he claimed zamora committed by herself. zamora claimed that graham committed the murder by himself. a 9mm handgun, alleged to be the murder weapon, was found in the attic, which could be reached through david graham's bedroom.  the police had investigated the case for nine months. law enforcement officials associated with the case have stated that the sexual encounter between graham and jones did not happen, but was invented by graham. sgt. alan patton of the grand prairie police department stated: "for those who don't remember, this was a totally brutal, unnecessary murder. david had lied to diane about an alleged sexual tryst that never happened with adrianne jones. if he had said, "i was just kidding, i was just trying to make you jealous", adrianne jones would still be alive today". however, graham
has since admitted that his original confession was accurate and the only reason he lied about the sexual encounter not happening was because of his defense lawyer's advice.  the trial  zamora's two-week trial began in february 1998 in fort worth with judge joe drago presiding. linda jones, adrianne's mother, asked that the death penalty be removed as a sentencing option from both trials.  during the trial, zamora admitted to being at the scene of the crime, but denied participating in the killing of jones. the naval academy midshipmen to whom zamora confessed and another witness stated that she showed no remorse over jones' death.  the case received national media attention, providing court tv with some of its highest ratings ever in its film coverage of the trial. some of the interest centered on whether zamora was the submissive victim or the jealous driving force behind the murder. under texas law, murder is the intentional killing of another human being, while capital murder includes murder with an underlying felony of kidnapping, robbery, aggravated sexual assault, arson, or obstruction. in this case, the prosecutor believed that jones was deceptively lured from her home by graham asking her for a bogus date, or she would not have been in the car. moreover, the couple committed obstruction when zamora allegedly ordered graham to stalk jones into the field and to shoot her so that she could not tell the authorities.  the jury was asked to deliberate on the charges of capital murder or the lesser charges of assault, kidnapping, or false imprisonment. on february 17, 1998, after more than six hours of deliberations over two days, the jury found zamora guilty of capital murder in the death of adrianne jones. because of the jones family's request that prosecutors not seek the death penalty against her, zamora received a mandatory sentence of life imprisonment and would be eligible for parole after 40 years.  on july 24, 1998, after a separate trial, a jury found graham guilty of capital murder. during the trial, wendy bartlett, also on the track team, and coach lee ann burke stated that bartlett was the one who drove jones home after the meet on november 4, 1995, and that graham had left earlier, leaving jones and bartlett to put away equipment from the meet. graham did not drive jones home on the night he claimed to have had sex with her, lending credence to his later recantation. however, he ultimately repudiated his recantation, saying his lawyer had pressured him to lie, and again claimed to have had sex with jones. adding that to
zamora's story about jones admitting to having had sex with graham when zamora asked her about it just before the murder, it might be that graham and jones had sex at some other time. he was sentenced to life imprisonment.  david richards, zamora's attorney, used the testimony from bartlett and burke as the basis of an appeal for zamora. the petition, made in 2005, stated that the prosecution withheld this information during zamora's trial. "from these witnesses, the state knew, and should have known, that the testimony it sponsored in support of a sexual encounter between jones and graham was probably false".  due to the prominence of the case, in 2015 tarrant county, authorities chose to keep the paper court documents of the case as historical documents even though they have been digitized.  incarceration   zamora was transferred from a jail in fort worth, texas to the texas department of criminal justice. she was initially held in a state prison diagnostic unit in gatesville, texas in february 1998, then held at the murray unit, also in gatesville. at one point she was held in protective custody at mountain view unit in gatesville, but she was later moved to the general prison population in the william p. hobby unit near marlin.  she is back in protective custody in mountain view. zamora, opposed to her placement, filed a civil rights complaint with the 5th u.s. circuit court of appeals, but the complaint was dismissed. 	 graham was held at the ellis unit near huntsville after the trial. in 2016 he was held at the darrington unit near rosharon.  he is held at the allred unit in wichita falls. he is currently enrolled at the southwest baptist theological seminary's inmate seminary in order to become a pastor behind bars. in 2008, graham said that his confession to the police was correct and expressed remorse for killing jones. he also said that if he had it to do over again he would have pleaded guilty to murder.  marriage  zamora got to know steven mora, a fellow texas inmate, through the mail. he had committed auto theft and burglary and was in prison for threatening someone related to one of his cases. although they never met in person, the two decided to get married and petitioned bexar county for a marriage license in 2003. a wedding ceremony was performed on june 17, 2003. zamora's mother and a male friend stood in for the imprisoned couple in the county's first proxy marriage, which was performed by a judge in san antonio. they were divorced in or around 2008.  2007 interview
zamora was interviewed by stone phillips on dateline in a show broadcast in april 2007. her appeals were exhausted, and with her lawyer's permission she took a polygraph test administered by dateline. her new story was that graham and she had been breaking up, and that graham was using the murder to "tie her to him". she noted that she obstructed justice by cleaning the car afterwards and was an accessory after the fact; however, zamora pointed out that the jury had convicted her of intending to kill jones, which she denied. when she took the polygraph, the administrator repeatedly told her to stop her exaggerated breathing, a counter-measure for such tests. he said that he believed he had enough to actually say that zamora had failed the crucial question on whether she had intended to kill jones. two other independent polygraph administrators, who were not at the test, were contacted by dateline and asked to review the results; they said that they could offer no opinion due to counter-measures. zamora responded to phillips that she was nervous and hyperventilating despite being told all the questions in advance and reviewing them with the administrator before the test.  popular culture   in 1996, ellise pierce of the dallas observer wrote that the crime "has become part of mansfield teen folklore; kids obsess about the details of the crime as if they were unraveling a plot from the x-files".  before zamora's trial began, the case was the subject of a 1997 made-for-television movie called love's deadly triangle: the texas cadet murder. zamora was played by holly marie combs.  two books were written about the case.    *    *    the cold case first-season episode "love conquers al" is based on this murder.  notes  references  further reading  external links        texas v. diane zamora at courttv.com (archived april 12, 2008)  adrianne jones - crime library  1978 births living people 20th-century criminals united states naval academy alumni american female murderers american murderers american people convicted of murder american prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment criminals from texas people convicted of murder by texas place of birth missing (living people) prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment by texas people from crowley, texas 1995 murders in the united states murder in texas military personnel from texas
the swan 40 s&s was a sailing boat designed by olin stephens (design number 2025) as the 4th of his to be launched by the brand in 1970.  external links  nautor swan  classic swan association  s&s blog  references  sailing yachts keelboats 1970s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by sparkman and stephens sailboat type designs by olin stephens
fattu dhinga  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala and 5 km from world famous village surkhpur[village of kabaddi players] , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of fattu dhinga.the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of the village  demography according to the 2011 of census india, fattu dhinga had 597 houses and a population of 3,174  of which 1,638 people were male and 1,536 female. the literacy rate was 71.76%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years was 359 (11.31% of the total population) and the child sex ratio was approximately 860, which was higher than the state average of 846.  at that time, 1,161 people were engaged in work activities, being 924 males and 237 females. 21.52% of the population were scheduled castes and there were no scheduled tribes present.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
vadim yurievich stepantsov  (; born september 9, 1960) is a poet and musician. he is the creator of the order courteous mannerist and the musical group bakhyt-compote. he is also the author of texts for the groups bravo, na na, and t.a.t.u.  stepantsov graduated with honors from maxim gorky literature institute.  filmography  1992 -  for the diamond spray jets  1994 -  music for december  1999 -  who should i - i forgive all 2000 -  editorial 2001 -  women's happiness  awards  1996 -  ovation -  songwriter  interesting facts  among his colleagues and fans has nicknamed  son of yuri antonov. in the mid-nineties in the music press exaggerated rumors, supported by stepantsov  that he is the illegitimate son of yuri antonov. this was aided by his likeness with younger antonov and matching patronymic, although antonov is only 15 years older, making his parentage very unlikely. by his own admission, teen masturbate on a magazine photo gymnast nellie kim drink up to delirium tremens, he was treated for alcoholism in maryland, usa   in 1995 he ran for the state duma of the beer lovers party (fraction of non-drinking) in the chukchi-koryak constituency. runner-up. not a musical education and can not play any instrument.  references  external links   вадим степанцов на радио «маяк»  елена трофимова. бурлеск, травестия, центонность куртуазных медитации вадима степанцова «дети ра» 2008, № 5 (43)  1960 births living people 20th-century russian male singers russian-language poets 20th-century russian poets 21st-century russian poets 21st-century male writers russian songwriters 20th-century russian male writers maxim gorky literature institute alumni
scientists against time is a book by  james phinney baxter iii. it was published in 1946 by little, brown and company, and won the 1947 pulitzer prize for history.  references   pulitzer prize for history-winning works 1946 non-fiction books little, brown and company books
guilherme winter nobrega de almeida (born august 28, 1979), commonly known as guilherme winter, is a brazilian actor. he is best known for his portrayal of moses in os dez mandamentos.  biography  before becoming an actor, he studied industrial design at the university presbiteriana mackenzie, but abandoned this pursuit to work in a holiday resort. it was there that he had his first experiences as an actor.  in 2001, he had a daughter, sabrina, who disappeared from the hospital when she was born and is missing to this day.  in 2004, he moved to rio de janeiro, and took a course in performance in the casa das artes de laranjeirasen (cal).  while filming os dez mandamentos, he began courting and since then has been together with co star brazilian-mexican actress giselle itie.  filmography  television  references  external links   1979 births living people male actors from sao paulo brazilian male television actors brazilian male telenovela actors brazilian male film actors
the strange passenger (spanish: la extrana pasajera) is a 1953 mexican mystery film directed by fernando a. rivero and starring emilia guiu, victor manuel mendoza and tito junco.  cast  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1950s mystery films mexican mystery films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by fernando a. rivero mexican black-and-white films
progress ms-10 (), identified by nasa as progress 71p, is a progress spacecraft used by roscosmos to resupply the international space station (iss). this is the 162nd flight of a progress spacecraft.  history  the progress-ms is a uncrewed freighter based on the progress-m featuring improved avionics. this improved variant first launched on 21 december 2015. it has the following improvements:   new external compartment that enables it to deploy satellites. each compartment can hold up to four launch containers. first time installed on progress ms-03.  enhanced redundancy thanks to the addition of a backup system of electrical motors for the docking and sealing mechanism.  improved micrometeoroid (mmod) protection with additional panels in the cargo compartment.  luch russian relay satellites link capabilities enable telemetry and control even when not in direct view of ground radio stations.  gnss autonomous navigation enables real time determination of the status vector and orbital parameters dispensing with the need of ground station orbit determination.  real time relative navigation thanks to direct radio data exchange capabilities with the space station.  new digital radio that enables enhanced tv camera view for the docking operations.  the ukrainian chezara kvant-v on board radio system and antenna/feeder system has been replaced with a unified command telemetry system (ucts).  replacement of the kurs a with kurs na digital system.  pre-launch  in 2014, the launch was expected on 22 february 2018. in 2017, the mission had slipped to august 2018. in june 2018, the launch was scheduled for 31 october 2018, but in the wake of the soyuz ms-10 accident it had to be postponed on 16 november 2018.  launch  progress ms-10 launched atop a soyuz-fg rocket on 16 november 2018, at 18:14:08 utc  from the baikonur cosmodrome in kazakhstan.  docking  progress ms-10 docked as scheduled with the aft docking port of the zvezda module on 18 november 2018 at 19:31:38 utc.  cargo  the progress ms-10 spacecraft delivered 2,564 kg of cargo and supplies to the international space station. the following is a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:   dry cargo: 1,330 kg  fuel: 750 kg  oxygen: 75 kg  water: 440 kg  undocking and decay  it undocked at 08:40 utc and deorbited in pacific ocean, on 4 june 2019 at 11:28 utc.  see
also   uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references   progress (spacecraft) missions spacecraft launched in 2018 2018 in russia supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft launched by soyuz-fg rockets spacecraft which reentered in 2019
the waller family was a kentish family, of groombridge place, that migrated to hertfordshire and buckinghamshire in the 14th or 16th century, and then to gloucestershire, and, for a generation, north yorkshire.  several members carried the name edmund waller. these edmund wallers are listed here father to son or grandson, or uncle to nephew: edmund, of coleshill, buckinghamshire, grandfather of the poet; edmund waller, mp and poet; edmund, (1652-dsp bristol 1699/1700), mp for amersham 1689-98, educated christ church, oxford and middle temple, bencher 1696. became a quaker. married (1686) abigail tylney;  edmund, (1699-1771), mp for great marlow 1722-1741, and chipping wycombe 1741-1754, cofferer of the household december 1744 - december 1746. married before 1720, his step-sister, mary, daughter of john aislabie, of studley royal, ripon. succeeded his uncle edmund waller in gloucestershire estates c.1700 (farmington, turkdean & hazleton), and his father in 1707. a step-brother of william aislabie, mp; edmund, (?1725-88), 'took to the bottle', mp for chipping wycombe 1747-1754 and late 1757-1761. master, st. katherine's hospital 1747-88, educated st. mary hall, oxford, and lincoln's inn. married (1755) martha (d. 8.8.1788), daughter of rowland philipps of orlandon, pembroke; edmund, (1757-1810), lord of the manor of farmington, left £5,000 stock to provide an income for life for his housekeeper anna joynes, and then to benefit the poor of beaconsfield (bucks.), upper turkdean, and farmington in bread, clothing, and blankets; edmund, (1828-98), jp, dl, high sheriff gloucestershire 1876, once of little hall barn, bucks, and of farmington lodge, near northleach and kirkby fleetham, north riding of yorkshire (the unentailed later sold 1889). married (1858) lucy georgiana elwes (died 1878), and then (1880) emily mary young (dsp 1923), she was a great-granddaughter of sir william young, 2nd baronet.  descendants of edmund waller (1606-1687) waller's first wife anne banks died in childbirth leaving a surviving daughter elizabeth or anne (1634-), wife to william dormer, dormer the
splendid, (died 1683), son of sir robert dormer, kt. (d.1649), of ascot park, ascott, stadhampton, oxfordshire.  he married secondly in 1644 mary bracey (d.1677), (or bressy, bresse or breaux), of thame or possibly of somewhere in france, and went over to calais, afterwards taking up his residence at rouen.  by mary breux he had several children. his descendant rachel waller, daughter of edmund waller vi or vii, considering the breux family's connections with barbadoes wrote in 1939 that: this probably gave rise to the assumption that she was not of pure european blood. in support of this theory, we may compare the portrait of the poet with those of his descendants. in these latter, the long face and aquiline lineaments of the poet have given way to round blunt features and curly black hair. the children included: benjamin, somewhat lacking in his father's wit, he was sent to jersey, a colony in the west indies;  edmund ii or iii (1652-dsp bristol1699/1700), mp for amersham 1689-98, educ. christ church, oxford, middle temple bencher 1696. became a quaker.  married (1686) abigail (d. 1689), daughter of francis tylney of rotherwick, hants, sister of frederick tylney (?1653-1725), mp; william, a merchant of london; dr. stephen waller (1654-1706), of hall barn, a doctor of law, a famous civilian, and commissioner for the union. his widow, judith, daughter of sir thomas vernon, mp, kt., of farnham, married, as his second wife, john aislabie, mp, dl (1670-1742). harry waller (1701-dsp1772), mp for chipping wycombe 1726-47. deputy master of st. katherine's hospital 1747-1772. married (1744) elizabeth, daughter of sir john stapylton, 3rd baronet, m.p.; edmund waller iii or iv, (1699-1771), mp for great marlow 1722-1741, and chipping wycombe 1741-1754, cofferer of the household december 1744- december 1746. married before 1720, his step-sister, mary, daughter of john aislabie, of studley royal, ripon. succeeded his uncle edmund waller, c. 1700, and bought gloucestershire estates c.1720s (farmington, turkdean & hazleton
, and parts of bourton-on-the-water, and clapton), and his father in 1707. a step-brother of william aislabie, mp;  edmund waller iv or v (?1725-88), 'took to the bottle', mp for chipping wycombe 1747-1754 and late 1757-1761. master, st. katherine's hospital 1747-88, educated st. mary hall, oxford, and lincoln's inn.  married (1755) martha (d. 8.8.1788), daughter of rowland philipps of orlandon, pembroke; anne, married (1738), sir miles stapylton, 4th bart., mp for yorkshire, 1734-1750, of myton, (died 1752), their daughter anne, d.s.p. rev. harry waller (1760-1824), succeeded his brother edmund in 1810, retired to boulogne in 1821 (to avoid debt). married (15.5.1797) mary/maria, sister of rev. john dolphin (c1775-11.3.1831), curate at farmington, c1799; harry edmund waller, jp, dl (13.4.1804-69), sold hall barn 1832, inherited kirkby fleetham, north yorkshire and clint, south of ripon, from his second-cousin-once-removed miss sophia elizabeth lawrence (1761-1845) of studley royal, in 1845 (she left the bulk of these aislabie derived estates to her third cousins, the robinson family). this waller is said to have won the ascot gold cup of 1852. married (15.6.1826) caroline-elizabeth (d. 1.12.1840) daughter of john larking, of clare hall, lewisham, kent. he was nominated high sheriff of gloucestershire, november 1833; edmund waller vi or vii (1828-98), jp, dl, high sheriff gloucestershire 1876, once of little hall barn, and of farmington, near northleach and kirby fleetham (the unentailed later sold 1889). married (1858) lucy (died 1878), daughter of henry elwes of colesbourne, a grandfather of henry john elwes. rachel waller (1868-1954), only child, married (1889) cecil fane de salis (1857-1948) of dawley court, middlesex; major-general william-noel waller, royal artillery, (25.12.1831-1909). married mary elizabeth heygate, and secondly charlotte lycester templer. harry noel waller, (india
, 19.8.1859-17.1.1944, 306 west end avenue, new york, aged 84). robert waller (c1732-dsp1814), mp for chipping wycombe 1761-90, educated oriel college, oxford, groom of the bedchamber 1784-1801; margaret, the eldest, born rouen; mary who married dr. peter birch, doctor of divinity, prebendary and sub dean of westminster abbey. died 2 july 1710 aged 65 years; dorothy, a dwarf, sent to the north; dorothy lived in morley, near leeds.  she died in 1771 and left her house to the reverend timothy alred, of st mary's in the wood.  she had a romantic attachment to him.  she is buried in the churchyard there.  she is reputed to have been carried from her home on banks hill to st mary's in a sedan chair. her former home is said to be the oldest house in morley, and has a plaque above the door indicating her residency and her date of passing. eliza, with her brother edmund, an executor of her father.  arms of waller  shield: sable three walnut leaves or between two bendlets argent.  crest: on a mount vert a walnut tree proper, on the sinister side an escutcheon pendant charged with the arms of france with a label of three points argent.  motto: hic fructus virtutis azincourt.  references  english families people from groombridge people from hertfordshire people from buckinghamshire people from gloucester people from hambleton district people from kent
samut prakan school () is a public school in samut prakan province, thailand. the school is coeducational, teaches junior high school and high school level. samut prakan school was a boys school in the past. the school has nine permanent buildings. there are six levels m 1-6. each class has 12 rooms.  history  prince krom phraya damrong rachanupab established the school as a primary school at wat klang, paknam muang, samut prakan on 18 july 1883. samut prakan school began teaching its first year in 1883. in 1917 the ministry of justice, the wat klang school was renamed klang high school in 1926 and the ministry of education changed the name of the school to samut prakan.  programs  junior high school   science - math  science   english programs  normal high school  science - math  science   englishprograms  arts - math  arts - english  arts - french   arts - japanese   arts - chinese  account  agriculture - industry  references  external links   official school website  clubs , parents and teachers in samutprakanschool   school alumni association  official school website  official school website2  schools in thailand buildings and structures in samut prakan province education in samutprakan province educational institutions established in 1883 1883 establishments in siam
the 1995-96 bulgarian cup was the 56th season of the bulgarian cup. slavia sofia won the competition, beating levski sofia in the final at the vasil levski national stadium in sofia.  first round  second round  quarter-finals  semi-finals  final  details  references  1995-96 1995-96 domestic association football cups cup
the 2016 afc futsal club championship finals was the finals of the 2016 afc futsal club championship, the 7th edition of the top-level asian club futsal tournament organized by the asian football confederation (afc), and the 7th under the current afc futsal club championship title.  the final was contested between nagoya oceans and naft al-wasat.  the third place play-off was contested between dibba al-hisn and chonburi.  qualified teams  venues the matches will play at the bangkok arena in bangkok.  road to the finals  road to the final  road to the third place play-off  rules in the knockout stage, extra time and penalty shoot-out were used to decide the winner if necessary (no extra time would be used in the third place match).  match details  third place play-off  final  references  external links afc futsal club championship, the-afc.com  final
line 7 is a loop line of the chengdu metro (). it loops between north railway station,  chengdu university of technology, huaishudian, chengdu east railway station, sichuan normal university, chengdu south railway station, taipingyuan, jinsha museum, southwest jiaotong university, and city north coach terminal center. the total length is . line 7's color is light blue. the construction of line 7 began in 2013, and ended in late 2017. according to the chengdu metro masterplan it will become the inner circle line, with line 9 being the outer circle line.  opening timeline  stations  listed from the inner loop  see also   urban rail transit in china  references  chengdu metro lines railway loop lines railway lines opened in 2017
canadian indigenous languages and literacy development institute (cilldi) - an intensive annual "summer school for indigenous language activists, speakers, linguists, and teachers" - hosted at the university of alberta, edmonton - is a "multicultural, cross-linguistic, interdisciplinary, inter-regional, inter-generational" initiative. cilldi was established in 1999 with one cree language course offered by cree speaker donna paskemin. by 2016 over 600 cilldi students representing nearly 30 canadian indigenous languages had participated in the program and it had become the "most national (and international) of similar language revitalization programs in canada aimed at the promotion of first peoples languages." cilldi - a joint venture between the university of alberta and the university of saskatchewan - responds to "different sociolinguistic situations in language communities under threat" and includes three faculties at the university of alberta in edmonton - arts, education, and native studies. cilldi provides practical training to students which is "directly implemented back in the community." initiatives like cilldi were formed against the backdrop of a projection of a catastrophic and rapid decline of languages in the twenty-first century.  context  in both saskatchewan and manitoba there was an interest in "indigenous language and bilingual program development" in the mid-1970s. the 1996 royal commission on aboriginal people report drew widespread attention to the plight of canada's indigenous languages. the world indigenous peoples conference-education (wipce) was held in 1999.  according to the 2006 canadian census "only 12.4% of indigenous children aged 0-4 [were] learning an indigenous language at home; another 5% [were] acquiring one as an additional language." by 2007 "the forecast for preserving and revitalizing canada's indigenous languages was gloomy.  history cilldi was established in 1999 by a collective of language advocates and educators including donna paskemin, heather blair, and sally rice; the first cilldi summer institute was held on the onion lake first nation,  saskatchewan and offered one course entitled "expanding cree language and literacy" with fifteen students from alberta and saskatchewan. in july 2000. cillde, an "indigenous educator training institute" was modeled after its american counterpart - the american indian language development institute (aildi) - which itself was co-founded by language activist, lucille watahomigie and leanne hinton and is now based at the university of arizona in tucson. freda ahenakew,  (1932 - 2011) a cree linguist and recipient of the order of canada of
cree descent was the honoured guest. ahenakew's work and that of dr. verna kirkness, a cree scholar and language advocate, is acknowledged as catalytic in the formation of cilldi. donna paskemin - who had worked in 1981 at the saskatchewan indian languages institute (sili) under the direction of dr freda ahenakew - was the instructor for the cree immersion course.  according to arden ogg of the cree literacy network, donna paskewin,  when donna's young daughter jodee jayne attended cilldi one summer, as the youngest attendee, donna was motivated to organize a cree immersion day camp in 2004 at cilldi for the children of our adult students so that the language would be learned by the next generations. jodee attended the young women's circle of leadership at cilldi in 2009.  in july 2001 the summer school was held in st. paul, alberta with thirty-eight students including cree, dene suline, michif, and north slavey speakers from alberta, saskatchewan, and the northwest territories. cree courses were taught by donna paskemin (1961-2011) with dolores sand; dene was taught by valerie wood and marge reynolds; linguistics by university of alberta linguistics professor, sally a. rice with brenda ahenakew; and planning for indigenous language and literacy development by university of alberta education professor, heather blair.  in 2003 the northern teacher education program (nortep) hosted the program in la ronge, saskatchewan. by 2003 more classes were being offered and the summer school moved permanently to its new home on the university of alberta campus.  the northern teacher education program (nortep) which was initiated in 1976 by the northern lights school division "to facilitate access to teacher education and certification for northerners, particularly those of aboriginal ancestry. at the time, there was less than 1% of aboriginal teachers in the north and the teacher turn-over rate was very high."  donna paskemin, heather blair, sally rice, mary cardinal collins, priscilla settee, edie hyggenat, brenda ahenakew, dolores sand and sam robinson were on the cilldi advisory council.  students and teachers cilldi students mainly come from the british columbia, alberta, saskatchewan, manitoba, the yukon and nunavut. faculty, teaching assistants, and supporters include endangered language activists from across north america.  this includes alberta ministries of education, advanced education, and community development, university of arizona (aildi), aurora college, blue quills first
nations tribal college, buffalo nations museum, university of calgary, first nations university college of canada (university of regina), university of hawaiʻi, keyano college, maskwachees cultural college, metis nation of alberta, university of montana, university of new mexico, northern lights school division, red crow community college, university of saskatchewan, sealaska heritage center and yellowhead tribal college.  instructors at these institutes are "educators, researchers and aboriginal language speakers drawn from the teaching and administrative staff of school districts and from university faculties across north america."  programs every summer cilldi offers courses with university credits about indigenous language and culture. cilldi focuses on teaching indigenous language teachers through indigenous language revitalization in western canada. courses include content on "linguistics, endangered indigenous language documentation and revitalization, language and literacy learning, second language teaching and curriculum development, and language policy and planning." cillde also maintains an online catalogue of their "books, reports, journals, and learning materials."  community linguist certificate (clc) some cilldi courses lead to a community linguist certificate (clc). this program provides a unique opportunity to earn university credit while learning about indigenous languages and culture. ciildi provides "background training in a variety of disciplines to students who may be seeking a b.a. or a b.ed. or other advanced degree, diploma, or certificate." through cilldi the accredited community linguist certificate (clc) program was developed in 2007 by sally rice - "professor of linguistics at the university of alberta and a co-founder and former director of cilldi" -  by 2016 over 90 indigenous language speakers in canada had earned their clc. clc students are often "fluent speakers who may also be veteran language teachers with years of experience in the classroom but very little formal training" or "young professionals recently tasked with developing language revitalization programming in their home communities." they may lack an understanding of the "lexical and grammatical patterns of one's language, as well as the ways in which those patterns can be meaningfully and systematically manipulated in context."  according to sally rice, cilldi co-founder and clc co-developer,  the tsuut'ina gunaha ('tsuut'ina language') project - a joint initiative between the tsuu t'ina nation near calgary, alberta, and the department of linguistics at the university of alberta - delivers the clc program on the reserve. stephen crowchild, the current director of the tsuut'ina gunaha institute - their language revitalization
program - is a former student of cilldi.  a national vision for indigenous language stability (anvils)  a national vision for indigenous language stability (anvils) is a workshop held during cilldi's intense summer school program at the university of alberta. anvil brings together "indigenous leaders, national and international scholars and representatives from the government to begin a national conversation about indigenous language sustainability and preservation."  role canadian researchers compiling a 2007 literature review of canadian and international indigenous language learning and teaching, noted that literature published on "linguistic language theoretical and practical findings" - was more easily available to public educational institutions or libraries; but the invaluable pedagogical language strategies significant body of "pedagogical linguistic language materials" developed within first nations communities" were known to representatives from institutes like cilldi who worked closely with communities.  further reading   blair, heather, paskemin, donna, & laderoute, b. (2002). "a language of our own: the genesis of michif, the mixed cree-french language of the canadian metis." international journal of american linguistics, 68(4), 242-246.    donna paskemin co-authored papers and presented with colleagues such as barb laderoute, laura burnouf, ferlin mcgilvery, and heather blair.   (2006, may). "research developments at the canadian indigenous language and literacy development institute." paper presented at the conference of the social sciences and humanities research council, toronto, on.  (2006, may). "valuing diversity: indigenous knowledge and knowledge systems as curriculum." paper presented at the conference of the canadian society for the study of education, toronto, on.  (2004, april). "take action to support indigenous language revitalization." paper presented at the awasis conference of the saskatchewan teachers' federation, saskatoon, sk.  (2003, april). "working towards saving indigenous languages: the role of the canadian indigenous languages and literacy development institute." paper presented at the conference of the treaty eight education directors, edmonton, ab.  (2003, april). "working towards saving indigenous languages: the role of cilldi." paper presented at the awasis conference of the saskatchewan teachers' federation, saskatoon, sk.  (2002, february). "the canadian indigenous languages and literacy development institute." paper presented at the echoing the voices of our ancestors aboriginal languages conference, vancouver, bc.  references  language revival endangered indigenous languages of the americas first nations languages in canada
type 515 radar is a chinese 2-d air search radar in service with both chinese ground force (plagf) and chinese navy (plan). the radar has been retired from active service, being replaced by more advanced radars such as type 517 on plan destroyers.  originally developed as a land-based 2-d air search radar, type 515 radar only provides range and bearing, and a separate altitude finding radar is needed to provide altitude information of targets, thus completing the complete air defense radar system. however, due to space limitation, the altitude radar is not installed onboard type 051 destroyers. type 515-jia (甲) is the first radar that utilizes semiconductors, with design work begun in may 1967. preliminary design was submitted in december 1967 and approved in january of the following year. first sample was completed in 1969 and passed tests on land in august 1970, and sea trials begun in the following month. however, it was discovered in sea trials that the hydraulic stabilization system was prone to malfunctions and the size of the antenna was too large that it blocked the coverage of 57 mm gun. on april 21, 1971, it was decided to delete the hydraulic stabilization system and change the size of antenna, resulting in type 515-yi (乙). after three years of side-by-side service of both models, chinese navy decided in october 1975 to adopt type 515-jia, but with huge design changes, mainly aimed to improve reliability and stability. the redesigned radar was completed in june 1976, and sea trials were completed in april 1981. in may 1982, the design was finalized and certification was received three month later in august of the same year. type 515 radars were installed on type 051 destroyers but have since been replaced by type 517 radars. specification: band: a beam: 25° - 30° pulse width: 30 nanosecond prf: 400 - 445 pps  see also chinese radars naval weaponry of the people's liberation army navy  references  sea radars military radars of the people's republic of china
the our lady of the assumption cathedral  () also called granada cathedral is a neoclassical catholic cathedral located in granada, nicaragua,  southeast of managua. the church is the main temple of the diocese of granada, and its bishop is jorge solorzano perez.  the first cathedral temple was built around 1525 with tapicel and rafaz stone, brick, lime and straw roof. by 1578, the church had already been burned twice. seven years later, in 1585, it started to become known colloquially as "la iglesia bonita," or "the beautiful church." the second temple was completed in about 1751 with lime, stone, and brick.  in 1916, the iron frame intended for the central dome was brought from the united states, only three years after the diocese of granada was created by the roman catholic church.  the cathedral as it stands today was completed in its entirety in 1972, with a total area of .  see also roman catholicism in nicaragua our lady of the assumption church (disambiguation)  references  roman catholic cathedrals in nicaragua granada, nicaragua roman catholic churches completed in 1972 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in nicaragua
eunidia stramentosipennis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
brp ramon alcaraz (ps-16) is the second ship of the gregorio del pilar-class offshore patrol vessels of the philippine navy. from 1968 to 2012, she was known as  and served the united states coast guard as a high endurance cutter. she was decommissioned on 30 march 2012 and acquired by the philippines under the excess defense articles and the foreign assistance act.  she is named after commodore ramon alcaraz, a filipino naval officer and world war ii hero best known for receiving a silver star for heroism and gallantry during world war ii. he is also known for being one of the first officers of the armed forces of the philippines to criticize the marcos dictatorship; and for the concept proposal which would make him the "father" of the philippine marine corps.  she was originally designated as "pf-16" from 2012 to mid-2016. then the navy adopted a new code designation system leading to her being redesignated as "ff-16". in february 2019, the navy downgraded the status of the entire class from frigate to patrol ship and redesignated her as "ps-16".  design the ship was designed with a high level of habitability and provides fairly comfortable accommodations, including air conditioning.  propulsion ramon alcaraz employs the shipboard application of aircraft gas turbine jet engines with the use of controllable pitch propellers. she is equipped with two  pratt & whitney gas turbines and can propel the ship at speeds up to . ramon alcaraz also has two  fairbanks-morse diesel engines, capable of driving the ship economically at  for up to  without refueling.  a retractable/rotatable bow propulsion unit provides manoeuvrability in tight situations.  armament prior to turn-over to the philippine navy, the ship was armed with a mk.75 oto melara 76 mm compact main gun, two mk.38 25 mm bushmaster chain guns at midships, and a phalanx ciws system aft. the ciws and chain guns were removed prior to its turn-over, with the mk.75 gun remaining.  the philippine navy then purchased two new mk.38 mod.2 25 mm bushmaster autocannons to replace the mounts removed by the us coast guard. these were already installed as of january 25, 2015.  flight support ramon alcaraz has a flight deck and hangar capable of handling helicopters.  a newly acquired naval helicopter (an agustawestland aw109 power) made its shipboard deployment on may 21, 2014.  modernization
the philippine navy plans to modernize the entire ship of the class, with an initial program to upgrade the ship's sensors, and another program to improve its weapon systems.  several systems were acquired through us foreign military sales (fms) and foreign military financing (fmf), which includes the bae systems mk. 38 mod. 2 machine gun system (already installed), the saab an/sps-77 sea giraffe amb 3d air/surface search radar, and the flir systems seaflir 230 electro-optical/infra-red camera.  meanwhile, the philippine navy will launch a program to acquire, install and integrate several other sensors into the ship, as part of the horizon 2 phase of the revised afp modernization program. among those to be acquired are new combat management system (cms), hull mounted sonar (hms), and a radar electronic support measures (r-esm).  future upgrades are planned to install defensive and offensive missile systems, as well as torpedo weapon system, although funding is still being secured and might only be included in the next phase of the navy's modernization program.  in 2020 october 14, navy chief giovanni carlo bacordo revealed the completion of the 3d modeling program for the entire ship class' cabling systems to be used for their electronic upgrades (cms + 4 sensors), indicating the project is at least running despite the covid-19 pandemic.  history  us coast guard service and transfer to the philippine navy  the ship was first launched in 1968 and served for decades as the u.s. coast guard cutter dallas (whec-716) before being given to the philippines.  the ship was scheduled to be transferred to the philippines as an excess defense article through the foreign assistance act via a "hot transfer" in may 2012.  the dallas was formally decommissioned on 30 march 2012, and the us coast guard removed the ship's guns and other equipment.  on 6 may 2012 during the 70th commemoration of the fall of bataan, president benigno aquino iii announced the naming of the ex-uscgc dallas to brp ramon alcaraz (pf-16) in honor of the world war ii hero and officer of the philippine navy. commodore ramon "monching" alcaraz commanded one of the philippine offshore patrol's q-boat q-112 abra during world war ii which shot down 3 japanese aircraft.  the ex-dallas was formally transferred to the philippine government on 22 may 2012 during a ceremony at the federal law enforcement training
center pier papa in north charleston, south carolina. the ship was turned over to its filipino crew, with capt. ernesto baldovino as its first commanding officer.  the ship's crew had been in the us for several weeks prior to the transfer for training aboard other hamilton-class ships operated by the us coast guard. ramon alcaraz was scheduled to be refitted at the expense of the philippine navy prior to sailing to the philippines. the ship's transfer cost was pegged at php 450 million (around us$10 million as of 2012), while operation costs will be similar to its sister ship, . an additional us$5 million was allocated for installation of additional equipment, different from her sister ship gregorio del pilar.  the ship will have better fire control and weapons systems than gregorio del pilar.  the ship was originally expected to leave charleston, south carolina for the philippines in january 2013 but it was delayed.  the ship finally departed charleston harbor at 10:00 am on 10 june 2013. she reached the atlantic-side entrance of the panama canal and crossed its entire stretch on 17 june. ramon alcaraz continued her journey across the pacific ocean and was scheduled for port visits at joint base pearl harbor-hickam in hawaii, and at guam. before reaching manila by 3 august 2013.  on august 1, 2013, ramon alcaraz entered philippine waters. her official arrival ceremony was held subic bay on august 6.  on november 22, 2013, she was commissioned as brp ramon alcaraz (pf-16) at pier 15 in manila's south harbor.  after commissioning, she sailed to tacloban city to transport about 200 tons of relief goods, water purification systems, and navy personnel who helped with relief efforts following typhoon haiyan.  around mid-2016, the philippine navy started calling the ship in its new code designation ff-16, together with its sister ship brp gregorio del pilar which was re-designated as ff-15, and the upcoming brp andres bonifacio designated as ff-17.  in march 2017, the philippine navy sent the ramon alcaraz to patrol the benham rise, which is part of philippine territorial waters, after a chinese survey ship was sighted in the area for several days.  middle east and indian ocean deployment  in january 2020, naval task force (ntf) 82, which was composed of brp ramon alcaraz and the landing dock brp davao del sur, were deployed to the middle east to repatriate overseas filipino workers there during the 2019-2020 persian gulf
crisis between the united states and iran. the two naval ships arrived in muscat, oman on february 6 after a layover in sri lanka, but tensions in the gulf region have already eased by that date and were told by philippine navy officials to stay put. they left oman on april 21  and arrived in cochin, india on may 6. they picked up some 200,000 pieces of personal protective equipment (ppes) donated by a filipino donor who sources masks from india. they also picked up filipinos stranded by the covid-19 pandemic.  on the evening of may 7, 2020, a fire broke out in the engine room of the brp ramon alcaraz shortly after it left the port of cochin, india. the fire, which lasted for 10 minutes, was extinguished by the crew members. two enlisted men suffered second degree burns and were airlifted to a naval hospital in cochin for "extensive medical attention". the ship stayed in cochin for an additional 21 days and, with the help of the us naval sea systems command, conducted assessment and minor repair to ensure functionality and safety of the proplusion system for the trip back to the philippines, where additional repairs will be done.  on may 27, 2020, the two ships left cochin after the minor repairs were completed. they arrived in colombo, sri lanka on may 29 to pick up 12 stranded filipino overseas workers and tourists. they left the port of colombo midnight of may 31 for their voyage back to the philippines. the two ships joined the country in celebrating its 122nd independence day as both entered manila bay on friday, june 12.  philippine navy chief, vadm. giovanni bacordo, said the brp ramon alcaraz underwent major checks and repairs from the fire damage since it arrived last june 12. the repairs were conducted by us naval sea systems command personnel, local contractors, and crew members aboard. when the repairs were completed, the ship conducted sea trials from september 8 to 9, 2020 off the waters of zambales according to navy public affairs officer lt. cdr. maria christina roxas. the sea trial conducted all the systems and machinery tests that were probably affected during the fire incident. the brp ramon alcaraz was deemed ready for deployment by philippine navy following its successful sea trials.  notable operational deployments  exercises  the ship, together with its sister ship  participated in joint naval maneuvers as part of carat 2014 philippines from june 26 to july 1, 2014. it was scheduled to conduct exercises on gunnery, combined air, surface, anti-submarine
operations at sea. the ship, together with a naval aw109e helicopter (serial pnh-431), traveled to northern australia as a major participant in the kakadu 2014 multi-lateral naval exercises hosted by the australian defence force from august 25 to september 12, 2014. the ship's crew also participated in boarding training with the australian navy before the actual sea-phase of the exercises. during the first week of may 2018, the brp ramon alcaraz participated in the exercise balikatan 34-2018 with us forces together with the . in the third week of may 2018, the brp ramon alcaraz conducted joint training with hmas anzac (ffh 150) around the waters of negros island for exercise lumbas 2018, a joint maritime training activity between the royal australian navy (ran) and the philippine navy.  in the second week of july 2018, the brp ramon alcaraz participated in the maritime training activity (mta) sama sama at naval station ernesto ogbinar in pampanga with the us navy (usn) along with the  landing platform dock. the usn sent the usns millinocket (t-epf-3) transport ship, usns salvor (t-ars 52) salvage ship and a p-8 poseidon aircraft for the exercise. during the third week of july 2018, the brp ramon alcaraz participated in a maritime security activity (msa) with the royal australian navy (ran) in the waters around palawan along with the . the ran sent the vessels hmas ararat and hmas wollongong for the activity which consists of ship training activities, maritime patrols, maritime security threat discussions, among others. from august to september 2018, the brp ramon alcaraz participated again in kakadu 2018 held in darwin, australia which is a biennial event and is the largest maritime exercise hosted by australia. the 2018 version of the exercise included 3,000 personnel, 23 ships, 1 submarine and 21 aircraft from 28 nations. the alcaraz participated in various maritime activities there including firing its oto melara 76 mm caliber main gun in a live fire exercise. in may 2019, the ship participated in a 10-day coordinated sea patrol and exercise in the sulu sea and celebes sea with the kri pandrong (801) of the indonesian navy. the exercise aimed to improve interoperability and strengthen the capability to secure the seas.  search and rescue in february 2019, the brp ramon alcaraz fetched two filipino fishermen from parola island in the south china sea
who were earlier reported to have jumped from fv thanksgiving 5 after experiencing maltreatment from the head of the crew. the fishermen were then rescued by the vietnam people's navy and later bought to parola island. the fishermen were able to return safely to their families in occidental mindoro.  gallery  see also  list of ships of the philippine navy  references  external links  philippine navy official website naming and code designation of pn ships  ships built in bridge city, louisiana hamilton-class cutters of the philippine navy 1966 ships
khanpur is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
the guariba state park () is a state park in the state of amazonas, brazil.  location  the guariba state park is in the municipality of novo aripuana in the state of amazonas. it has an area of . it is bounded to the south with the border with mato grosso and adjoins the guariba-roosevelt extractive reserve in mato grosso. the roosevelt river forms its western border. to the west and north it is bounded by the manicore state forest.  to the east it adjoins the guariba extractive reserve.  history  the guariba state park was created by state governor decree 24805 of 19 january 2005 with the objective of preserving natural ecosystems of great ecological relevance and scenic beauty, supporting scientific research and developing education, environmental interpretation, recreation in contact with nature and eco-tourism. the conservation unit is supported by the amazon region protected areas program.  the apui mosaic was created by decree 55 of 12 march 2010 under the responsibility of ceuc in the border region between the states of amazonas, mato grosso and para. the mosaic contains the guariba and sucunduri state parks; bararati and aripuana sustainable development reserves; guariba extractive reserve; and sucunduri, aripuana, apui and manicore state forests. the southern amazon mosaic of conservation units in the region between the states of amazonas, mato grosso and rondonia was recognised by the federal environment ministry by ordnance 332 of 25 august 2011. it includes the guariba state park and other units of the apui mosaic  notes  sources  2005 establishments in brazil state parks of brazil protected areas of amazonas (brazilian state) protected areas established in 2005
fulvio fantoni and claudio nunes are professional bridge players originally from italy, but since 2011 playing for monaco.  in 2015, they were ranked no. 1 and no. 2 in the world respectively.  in september 2015, they were publicly accused of cheating by orienting a played card to show a missing high honour (ace, king or queen) in the led suit at the european bridge championship in 2014. three separate investigations were conducted, one by the  (figb), one by the european bridge league (ebl) and one by the american contract bridge league.  on march 19, 2016, the figb banned the pair for three years. the figb hearing also investigated cheating by fantoni and nunes against italy in the finals of the bermuda bowl in 2013 using the same method. fantoni and nunes appealed this ruling to both the figb and the italian olympic committee; the appeals were rejected. on july 2018 figb revoked the judgment.  on july 18, 2016, the european bridge league (ebl) banned each from play for five years.  on july 26, 2016, the american contract bridge league (acbl) expelled them from their league and stripped them of all related masterpoints, titles, ranks and privileges.  the players' appeal to the court of arbitration for sport against the ebl ban resulted in a judgement in their favour in january 2018. only the acbl sanction remaines in force, and the ebl publicly stated that they were still barred from all ebl events at least until april 2019. however the federal appeal tribunal of the figb subsequently lifted the players' suspension from figb events.  procedures in italy, cheating allegations and hearings related to the game of contract bridge have three stages of proceedings: 1st - italian bridge federation (la federazione italiana giuoco bridge, figb); 2nd - federal court of appeals (corte d'appello federale); 3rd - italian national olympic committee (comitato olimpico nazionale italiano, coni) under its sport guarantor's committee (collegio di garanzia dello sport).  as a member of the european bridge league, the monaco bridge federation is subject to its disciplinary procedures.  previous allegations  the "black-out" deal  on may 1, 2015, during the italian open teams championship, nunes made a defensive play which enabled him and fantoni to defeat opponents' slam contract by three tricks. the play, and the rapidity with which it was made, were considered
sufficiently unusual for the deal to be referred by figb to the national sports judge for adjudication. the charge was transmission of unauthorized information. the judge, a lawyer by profession, heard evidence from witnesses of fact and expert evidence from bridge players. nunes said in his defense that he had had 'un momento di "obnubilamento"' (english: a moment of clouding) or '"black-out"'. on june 12, 2015, the judge handed down a reasoned written decision in which he addressed both the facts and the law. he concluded that illegal transmission of information had not been proved and acquitted fantoni and nunes; no appeal was filed. the italian proceedings have been summarised in english.  card orientation signals  maaijke mevius, a dutch amateur bridge player and trained scientist, noticed a correlation between horizontal or vertical orientation of the cards played by fulvio fantoni and claudio nunes and their honor holdings in the suit. in brief, the hypothesis was that a card played vertically signaled the presence of an otherwise unknown honor card (a, k or q) in the suit, and that a card played horizontally denied it. in september 2015, mevius emailed the evidence to boye brogeland, who, after consultation with ishmael del'monte, australian bridge professional and vice-chair of the wbf high level players commission, and american player brad moss, decided to issue an ultimatum to fantoni, a personal acquaintance of his, to come forward with a confession before the findings were published. no such confession was made.  on september 13, 2015, american expert kit woolsey published an article on the bridge winners website demonstrating a statistical proof of mevius's hypothesis. the allegations were reported both by official bridge organizations and in mainstream media.  monaco withdraws from 2015 bermuda bowl  monaco was to be have been represented at the 2015 bermuda bowl in chennai, india by a team consisting of fulvio fantoni, claudio nunes, geir helgemo, tor helness, franck multon and playing captain pierre zimmermann. in recognition of the controversy caused by the public allegations against fantoni and nunes, the monegasque bridge federation decided to withdraw from the bermuda bowl 2015 "in order to preserve the interests of bridge and so that the event may be played with the greatest serenity." on september 16, 2015, the world bridge federation announced that monaco would be replaced by denmark.  boycott of italy in european bridge league qualification event   in august 2021 fantoni was included
as a replacement player in the italy squad for the european online bridge team championship. every other competing team refused to play against italy during the event.  hearings  figb hearings: on march 19, 2016, the italian bridge federation (figb) issued a three-year ban against each player. on june 10, 2016, the corte d'appello federale upheld the decision. on july 19, 2016, fantoni and nunes submitted an appeal to the italian olympic committee (coni) against the figb ban, which the coni eventually rejected on october 4, 2016.  ebl hearings: on july 18, 2016 fantoni and nunes were banned from all european bridge league events by its disciplinary commission for a period of five years, and banned from playing as a partnership for life. the english bridge union (ebu) report of the ebl ruling of july 18, 2016 includes a link to a youtube video made by ebu website designer michael clark "showing the incidents taking place", focusing on fantoni's opening leads.  acbl hearings: during the summer north american bridge championships held in washington, d.c., the american contract bridge league (acbl) held a three-day hearing regarding the accusations made against fantoni-nunes. on july 26, 2016, the american contract bridge league (acbl) announced that the acbl ethical oversight committee had unanimously found that overwhelming evidence established that fantoni and nunes had engaged in collusive cheating. in consequence, the latter were expelled from the acbl and stripped of all their acbl masterpoints, titles, ranks and privileges. further, their partners and teammates were subject to mandatory forfeiture of all masterpoints, titles and ranks earned during the four years preceding the final of the 2015 spingold trophy. on july 29, 2016, the acbl clarified and corrected that announcement: forfeiture by partners and teammates applied only to events in which they had played with fantoni or nunes, and only to the four years preceding the date of the decision; namely, july 24, 2016. partly due to the fantoni-nunes case, the acbl created a permanent anti-cheating committee.  court of arbitration for sport and ebl and figb reaction: on april 26 and 27, 2017, the court of arbitration for sport conducted a hearing, fulvio fantoni & claudio nunes v. european bridge league (ebl). in january 2018 the court of arbitration for sport published its judgement on the players' appeal.  it found in their favour,
saying that:  the ebl clarified that the pair were still barred from play at least until april 2019. it is considering making changes to its rules on eligibility for future ebl championships. in the light of the cas verdict, the federal appeal tribunal of the figb subsequently lifted the players' suspension. fantoni and nunes have said that they do not intend to play together in future.  see also  cheating in bridge  fisher and schwartz cheating scandal  fulvio fantoni  claudio nunes  external links  the fantoni/nunes bridge cheating scandal. a youtube posting by michael clark, september 19, 2015.  references  cheating in bridge
hemlata gupta (25 june 1943 - 13 may 2006) was an indian medical doctor and the director and head of the department of medicine at lady hardinge medical college. gupta studied medicine at lady hardinge medical college (delhi university) where she later became a director. in 1998 the government of india awarded gupta the third highest civilian honour, the padma bhushan, for her contributions to medical science. she was unmarried and lived in new delhi when she was found murdered on 13 may 2006 at her residence in karol bagh. after years of investigation, the case, which attracted media attention, remains unsolved.  medical contributions  gupta and colleagues published a study in an indian medical journal about a rare case tuberculosis in the thyroid. the article discusses the presentation of the patient, various tests used in diagnosis, a historical discussion of the case, and treatment methods.  padma bhushan  the padma awards are given out in india every year on republic day, usually in quantities less than 120. there are 3 classes of padma awards, distinguishing the quality of service from distinguished to high order to exceptional. the padma bhushan is in the second category, recognizing public achievements of a high order in one's specified field. awards are given in a variety of disciplines including art, civil service, sports, and literature. the public is able to make nominations and the padma awards committee, prime minister, and president collaborate to make the final decision. the awards committee looks for life long achievement, public service, and excellence in their nominees. hem lata gupta earned this prestigious award in 1998 in the medical category, receiving a certificate with the president's signature and a medallion.  murder  police found gupta dead in her prasad nagar apartment with her hands tied by rope, her mouth, nose, and eyes covered with surgical tape, and her throat cut. neighbors reported seeing gupta enter her apartment around 10:30 on the morning of her murder and seeing 2 male visitors present around the same time. police arrived on the scene about an hour later, when neighbors seeking medical advice found her room unresponsive after extensive waiting. possible links to her murder revolve around her name oddly appearing in a newspaper marriage advertisement and her apartment in vasant kunj. police found gupta's apartment to be under ownership of individuals with forged documentation. this case doesn't appear to be associated with robbery, as her jewelry collection and most of her possessions remained untouched, and remains unsolved by police.  investigation  gupta was unmarried and lived alone in the flat following the death of her sister and father. jewellery
and cash worth rs. 60,000 was found intact in her room which suggests that it was not a regular case of robbery. a cupboard and a few boxes were open but there was no ransacking and it seemed that the assailant was known to her said deputy commissioner of police (central) neeraj thakur. police are also trying to figure out whether she was tricked by a relative after the death of her father and sister. gupta did not make any will.  police now say the narco test and questioning of a tv mechanic, a servant of another doctor and a marriage bureau executive to determine her killer were "highly misleading" . "the narco test indicated towards the role of the tv mechanic. yet, independent witnesses said he had visited their houses in the trans-yamuna region to repair tv sets during the time of the murder," the source added. investigators are having a relook into this unsolved case after some people entered gupta's vasant kunj flat on august 14 and claimed that gupta had sold it to them. the flat had been locked since it was bought on january 28, 1991.  after the rwa informed police, they came across two people both of whom claim to own the flat. one of them, kaushalya rani of moti nagar, said she had bought the property from gupta and showed the power of attorney and a cash receipt. another person, ramnik agarwal of jalandhar, also claimed the same and said he had come with five others to get the flat cleaned and found kaushalya. all documents were forged, police said, "we are yet to arrest anyone. but we are questioning all of them as it seems they are planted by others. we are grateful to the local rwa for informing us," said an officer.  see also   lady hardinge medical college  references  external links     recipients of the padma bhushan in medicine 1943 births 2006 deaths delhi university alumni delhi university faculty indian women medical doctors 20th-century indian women scientists indian medical academics violence against women in india 2006 murders in asia murder in india 2006 crimes in india people murdered in delhi 20th-century indian medical doctors women scientists from delhi medical doctors from delhi 20th-century women physicians 2000s murders in india
the consulate general of the united states is a diplomatic mission of the united states in peshawar, pakistan. it operates under the u.s. embassy in islamabad and serves u.s. consular interests in the khyber pakhtunkhwa region. the current consul-general is william martin, appointed in 2012.  location the consulate is located at 11 hospital road in the peshawar cantonment area.  history on 5 april 2010, a bombing near the consulate killed 8 people including 2 security personnel, although no americans were affected. according to reports, the u.s. consulate was the intended target of the attack. on 1 march 2016, two pakistani employees of the u.s. consulate were killed in an ied blast while involved in a drug-eradication campaign.  operations the consulate operates in business hours from monday to friday. key consular sections include political/economic, public affairs, regional security, as well as the pakistan deputy mission director for khyber pakhtunkhwa and fata.  see also   embassy of the united states, islamabad  consulate general of the united states, karachi  consulate general of the united states, lahore  pakistan-united states relations  notes  references  external links  consulate general of the united states, peshawar  peshawar united states pakistan-united states relations
sindoorkhela (); is a popular bengali television soap opera that premiered on december 6, 2010 and aired on star jalsha. produced by shree venkatesh films, it starred shweta bhattacharya, samrat bhattacharjee and rohit samanta in lead roles and gargi roychowdhury as main female antagonist. it also starred kaushik sen, lily chakraborty, chandrayee ghosh and arpita mukherjee in supporting roles. it replaced star jalsha's popular mega ogo bodhu sundori. on june 16, 2012, sindoorkhela ended on a happy note to make way for aanchol. it won many awards such as 'best villain', 'best actor', 'best actress', 'best serial' etc. in star jalsha tele samman award 2012, star jalsha parivaar awards 2012 and anandolok award 2011.  plot summary the story revolves around jashodhara and her three daughters including simantini. they are into vermillion trade. while to jashodhara the meaning of sindoor is strictly business, to her daughters, it is more symbolic. a possessive mother, jashodhara's presence hampers the marital life of her two daughters. but the youngest daughter, simantini knows that with the application of sindoor, there comes certain responsibilities both as a wife and a mother.  casts  main  debarati paul / shweta bhattacharya as simantini sen aka moni, promothesh and jashodhara's youngest daughter; sandip's wife turned widow; abhik's love interest turned wife (later widow). (main female lead)   gargi roychowdhury as jashodhara sen, simantini, jamini and joyeeta's mother; promothesh's wife; owner of 'satilakkhi sindoor' company. (former main female antagonist)  samrat bhattacharjee as abhik dutta, rathin's son; anita's younger brother; joy's best friend turned rival; simantini's love interest turned second husband; nandita's ex-fiancee. (main male lead turned antagonist) (deceased)  rohit samanta as sandip / arya, simantini's first husband; bishakha's former love interest and fiancee; the entire sen family's rival. (former male lead cum antagonist) (deceased)  recurring  kaushik sen as promothesh sen, simantini, jamini and joyeeta's father; jasodhara's
husband. rupanjana mitra / chandrayee ghosh as debi, sen family's well-wisher.   arpita mukherjee as jamini, simantini and joyeeta's eldest sister; promothesh and jasodhara's eldest daughter; gautam's wife.  lily chakraborty as jamini, simantini and joyeeta's grandmother, promothesh's mother.  sneha chatterjee bhowmik as anita, abhik's elder sister; rathin's daughter. (antagonist)  riya ganguly chakraborty as nandita bose; a doctor; abhik's former one-sided lover and fiancee, simantini's rival turned well-wisher. (former antagonist)  jayanta dutta burman as bhaskar, abhik's elder brother-in-law; anita's husband. (antagonist)  rumki chatterjee as abhik and anita's mother, rathin's wife. (antagonist)  manishankar banerjee as rathin dutta, abhik and anita's father. (antagonist)  unknown as joy, abhik's best friend turned foe. (deceased)  debaparna chakraborty as joyeeta, jasodhara and promothesh's younger daughter; simantini's elder sister; jamini's younger sister;  animesh bhaduri as joyeeta's husband  joyjit banerjee as goutam, jamini's husband.  mousumi saha as parama, sandip's paternal aunt. (antagonist)  sargami rumpa as bishakha, sandip's former love interest and fiancee. (former antagonist) geeta mukherjee as sandip's mother. (former antagonist) unknown as sandip's father. (antagonist)  others  pritha chatterjee as moni's aunt  abhijit deb roy as moni's uncle  arnab banerjee as moni's cousin's husband  prity biswas as goutam's friend  nitya ganguly as domestic aid  ayush mukherjee as arko, moni's former fiancee. sandip mazumder as arko's friend. sharmila das as a domestic helper of the sen family. unknown as samanta babu, sandip's lawyer turned rival. (antagonist) (deceased)  references  external links petey vid - video search engine  2010 indian television series debuts 2012 indian television series endings bengali-language television programming in india star jalsha original programming
swallows is an extinct town in pueblo county, in the u.s. state of colorado. the gnis classifies it as a populated place.  a post office called swallows was established in 1892, and remained in operation until 1947. the community was named for the swallows which nested near the original town site.  references  ghost towns in colorado geography of pueblo county, colorado
cylindrepomus peregrinus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by francis polkinghorne pascoe in 1858.  subspecies  cylindrepomus peregrinus peregrinus pascoe, 1858  cylindrepomus peregrinus samarensis dillon & dillon, 1948  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1858
carrega may refer to carrega ligure, a comune (municipality) in alessandria, italy michel carrega (born 1934), french trap shooter baga (grape), also known as carrega burros
is a former japanese baseball player. he played for the yomiuri giants in the nippon professional baseball. shozo doi also served as a manager for ichiro suzuki.  he was highly hated during his time as manager of the orix bluewave from 1991 to 1993 because he replaced longtime manager toshiharu ueda, who led the team to their 3 japan series titles under hankyu. this also caused key player greg "boomer" wells to request a trade to the fukuoka daiei hawks because doi (unlike ueda), did not listen or even care that he was a triple crown winner, won 2 gold gloves or was an 8-year npb veteran, and only saw him as a foreign player who should do as he was told. under ueda, wells built himself as a respected member of the clubhouse. because of this, the braves ouendan would constantly taunt doi from then on when he took the field until he was fired in 1993.  references   1942 births 2009 deaths japanese baseball players managers of baseball teams in japan nippon professional baseball second basemen nippon professional baseball shortstops orix bluewave managers people from kobe rikkyo university alumni yomiuri giants players
david andelman may refer to:   david a. andelman (born 1944), american journalist  david andelman (physicist) (born 1955), israeli theoretical physicist  david r. andelman (born 1940), american attorney
the 1997-98 league of ireland first division season was the 13th season of the league of ireland first division.  overview the first division was contested by 10 teams and waterford united won the division.  final table  promotion/relegation play-off third placed limerick f.c. played off against university college dublin a.f.c. who finished in tenth place in the 1997-98 league of ireland premier division. the winner would compete in the 1998-99 league of ireland premier division.  1st leg  2nd leg   ucd won 5-2 on aggregate and retained their place in the premier division.  see also  1997-98 league of ireland premier division  references  league of ireland first division seasons 2 ireland
aaron francis (born 10 august 1997) is a professional australian rules footballer playing for the essendon football club in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the essendon football club with their second selection and sixth overall in the 2015 national draft.  draft year (2015) francis was considered to be the best utility in his draft group, showing talent for south australia, dominating games from both ends of the ground. he was named at centre half-forward in the all-australian team during the 2015 afl under 18 championships, often compared to afl players luke hodge and brendon goddard in his junior year.  2016  he made his debut in the thirty-seven point loss against the  in round 18, 2016 at etihad stadium. francis is the third of four boys, his older brother hayden, who was a brisbane supporter, died from cancer in 2014. after the match he said "it was a big day for the family, the way everything came together and they were very proud of me.''  2017 due to personal struggles, coupled with failing to find opportunity in essendon's best 22, during the 2017 afl trade period, the difficult start to his afl career culminated in aaron requesting a trade away from the club he supported as a child, , to move back to south australia. however, as little interest was shown by both the recent grand final runners up, adelaide football club, or the port adelaide football club, essendon chose not to release aaron from his contract, which was due to expire at the conclusion of the 2019 afl season because they still saw the untapped potential which swayed them to draft aaron with pick 6 in the 2015 national draft and fully backed him to improve.  2018 before the commencement of the 2018 afl season, aaron, notified his teammates and  of his decision to take some time away from football due to his struggle with mental health - not doubt relating to his decision to request a trade a few months earlier.  surprisingly, aaron spent this time mainly in melbourne - including a stint coaching a local junior basketball team - all while the club and his teammates stayed in contact. fortunately for , aaron returned to the club shortly after to resume training, but the club chose to take a cautious approach, giving him all the time to get back to full fitness before pushing for senior selection again.  after some strong performances in the vfl and toward the end of the afl season, aaron was selected to return to the senior team against sydney in round 19, with 5 games until the end of the 2018 home and away season and as essendon
's finals hopes faded. aaron took this opportunity with both hands and delivered some moments of brilliance in the last 5 games of the season; including an eight mark effort against reigning premiers, richmond football club, being named in essendon's best, as well as soaring for a mark of the year contender against port adelaide in round 23 over former  player, paddy ryder.  which to the afl communities surprise, did not even receive a nomination in the lead up to the 2018 brownlow medal night, when swan isaac heeney took out the award.  by the conclusion of the 2018 season, aaron had all but cemented his place in essendon's best 22 and is expected to have a breakout 2019 season.  statistics statistics are correct to the end of the 2020 season  |- style="background-color: #eaeaea" | 2016 ||  || 10 || 3 || 1 || 2 || 20 || 11 || 31 || 12 || 5 || 0.3 || 0.7 || 6.7 || 3.7 || 10.3 || 4.0 || 1.7   |- ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2017 |  || 10 || 2 || 1 || 3 || 10 || 12 || 22 || 7 || 3 || 0.5 || 1.5 || 5.0 || 6.0 || 11.0 || 3.5 || 1.5  |- style="background-color: #eaeaea" ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2018 |  || 10 || 5 || 1 || 0 || 51 || 15 || 66 || 32 ||11 || 0.2 || 0 || 10.2 || 3 || 13.2 || 6.4 || 2.2   |- ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2019 |  || 10 || 17 || 3 || 3 || 129 || 96 || 225 || 80 || 30 || 0.2 || 0.2 || 7.6 || 5.7 || 13.2 || 4.7 || 1.8 |- style="background-color: #eaeaea" ! scope="row" style="text-align:center" | 2020 |  || 10 || 8 || 0 || 0 || 44 || 35 || 79 || 27 || 14 || 0.0 || 0.0 || 5.5 || 4.4 || 9.9 || 3.4 || 1.8 |- class="sortbottom" ! colspan=3| career ! 35 ! 6 ! 8 ! 254 ! 169 ! 423 ! 158 !
63 ! 0.2 ! 0.3 ! 7.3 ! 4.8 ! 12.1 ! 4.5 ! 1.8 |}  references  external links  1997 births living people essendon football club players west adelaide football club players australian rules footballers from south australia
marko dujkovic (; born march 21, 1990) is a macedonian professional basketball player who plays for kb cair 2030 of the macedonian first league. he is also a member of the macedonian national team.  references  external links realgm profile fiba profile  1990 births living people macedonian men's basketball players basketball league of serbia players centers (basketball) kk metalac valjevo players sportspeople from kumanovo serbs of north macedonia macedonian people of serbian descent
aforia obesa is a species of sea snails, a marine gastropod mollusc in the family cochlespiridae.  description  distribution this species is found in deep waters of the southwestern atlantic ocean off argentina.  references   pastorino g. & sanchez n. (2016). southwestern atlantic species of conoidean gastropods of the genus aforia dall, 1889. zootaxa. 4109(4): 458-470  obesa gastropods described in 2016
goody bag () is the second and final ep album by the south korean duo kim heechul & kim jungmo, released by label sj, sm entertainment and distributed kt music on july 12, 2016.  background and release  on july 6, 2016 kim heechul & kim jungmo announced to be releasing their second ep album titled goody bag on july 12. the lead track, "ulsanbawi" is traditional trot genre. the album contains six tracks, all written by heechul and composed by jungmo. this time, they also changed their group name to kim heechul & kim jungmo.  promotion  kim heechul & kim jungmo began performing "ulsanbawi" on south korean music television programs (the show) on july 19, 2016.  track listing  charts  album charts and sales  single  release history  references  external links      sm entertainment eps korean-language eps 2016 eps sm entertainment albums kim heechul & kim jungmo eps
jalandhar north is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of jalandhar district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  jalandhar district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india jalandhar district
the igarapes do juruena state park () is a state park in the state of mato grosso, brazil.  location  the igarapes do juruena state park is divided between the municipalities of colniza (44.06%) and cotriguacu (55.94%) in the state of mato grosso. it has an area of . the park is bounded to the north by the border with the state of amazonas and the sucunduri state park, sucunduri state forest and aripuana sustainable development reserve in amazonas. the aripuana river defines the western boundary and the juruena river defines the eastern boundary. the juruena national park lies to the east. the igarapes do juruena state park overlaps by almost 53% with the juruena national park.  environment  the igarapes do juruena state park is in the amazon biome. vegetation is about 45% dense rain forest and more than 18% contact between savanna and seasonal forest.  history  the igarapes do juruena state park was created by decree 5.438 of 12 november 2002. the consultative council was created on 13 february 2007, and the management plan was approved on 13 february 2009. the members of the consultative council were defined on 17 december 2014. the conservation unit is supported by the amazon region protected areas program.  in 2014 the federal government was considering a proposal to declare the juruena national park an area of public utility in preparation for constructing two hydroelectric dams in the site, the sao simao alto and salto augusto baixo. the planned dams had a forecast capacity of 4,940 mw. the national council for energy policy (cnpe) had two seats for civil society members, but these had not been filled. wwf-brasil led a campaign against the energy project, which would flood an area of over . in september 2014 the federal government withdrew its proposal. the dams would have flooded parts of the juruena national park, igarapes do juruena state park and the escondido and apiaka do pontal indigenous territories in mato grosso, and would have affected part of the sucunduri state park in amazonas and other indigenous territories.  notes  sources  state parks of brazil protected areas of mato grosso protected areas established in 2002 2002 establishments in brazil
gibson burrell (born 1948) is a british sociologist and organizational theorist, and professor of organisation theory at university of manchester and formerly university of leicester. he became known as writer of the 1979 book sociological paradigms and organizational analysis with gareth morgan, and is recognized for establishing a critical management school at the university of leicester.  life and work  burrell studied sociology at the university of leicester, where in 1974 he also completed his m.phil. in 1980 he received his phd at the university of manchester.  burrell started his academic career as researcher at the university of birmingham. in the late 1970s he was appointed lecturer in the department of behaviour in organizations at the university of lancaster. in the mid-1980s he was appointed professor of organizational behaviour at the university of warwick. in 2002 he was appointed professor of organisation theory at university of leicester, where he headed its school of management from 2002 to 2007. according to the carter / mueller dean index, burrell ranks as the best dean in the uk over the last two decades.  burrell is co-editor of the international, interdisciplinary journal organization, together with linda smircich, marta calas, and mike reed.  in 2005 burrell was elected an academician for the social sciences (acss), and in 2014, with gareth morgan, he was awarded the academy of management trailblazer award for his contributions to organization and management theory. in 2021, he was awarded the richard whipp lifetime achievement award from the british academy of management.  publications, a selection   gibson burrell and gareth morgan (1979) sociological paradigms and organizational analysis, london and exeter: nh. heinemann.  burrell, gibson, and jeff hearn. the sexuality of organization. (1989).  burrell, gibson. pandemonium: towards a retro-organization theory. sage, 1997.  dale, karen, and gibson burrell. the spaces of organisation and the organisation of space: power, identity and materiality at work. palgrave macmillan, 2007.  articles, a selection  burrell, gibson. "sex and organizational analysis." organization studies 5.2 (1984): 97-118.  cooper, robert, and gibson burrell. "modernism, postmodernism and organizational analysis: an introduction." organization studies 9.1 (1988): 91-112.  burrell, gibson. "modernism, post modernism and organizational analysis 2: the contribution of michel foucault." organization studies 9.2 (1988): 221-235.  burrell, gibson. "back to the future: time and organization
." rethinking organization. new directions in organization theory and analysis (1992).  burrell, gibson. "discourses and genealogies of analysis." studying organization: theory and method (1999): 388.  references  external links  last version of professor gibson burrell's homepage at the university of leicester, date 31 july 2017.  1948 births living people british business theorists british sociologists alumni of the university of leicester academics of the university of leicester
osymetric is a french make of ovoid bicycle chainring which has a non-circular shape whose angle is tailored to the pedal stroke of the individual cyclist.  these were designed by engineer jean-louis talo who claims that this improves cycling performance.  such chainrings were used by professional cyclists bradley wiggins and chris froome for their tour de france victories.  see also  biopace  references  cycle parts manufacturers
john hamilton house, also known as the hamilton house, is a historic home located at shelbyville, shelby county, indiana. it was built in 1853, and is a -story, rectangular, italianate style brick dwelling.  it has a slate roof and sits on a limestone block foundation.  the front facade features segmental arched windows, and two two-story projecting polygonal bays flanking a semi-circular one-story porch supported by doric order columns added about 1910.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1979. it is located in the west side historic district.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana houses completed in 1853 buildings and structures in shelby county, indiana national register of historic places in shelby county, indiana historic district contributing properties in indiana
ahmet hromadzic (11 october 1923 - 1 january 2003) was a bosnian writer.  bibliography labudova poljana, novel, sarajevo, 1952.  patuljak iz zaboravljene zemlje, novel, sarajevo, 1956.  patuljak vam prica, short stories, sarajevo, 1957.  okamenjeni vukovi, novel, sarajevo, 1963.  djecji pisci o sebi,( i, ii, iii ) prose, sarajevo 1963. bijeli cvijet, short stories, sarajevo, 1965.  zlatorun, short stories, sarajevo, 1966. zelengor, short stories, sarajevo, 1971.  bistri potoci, novel, sarajevo, 1971.  bijeli slavuj, short stories, sarajevo, 1972.  djecak jase konja, novel, sarajevo 1977.  ledena gora, picture book, sarajevo 1977. patuljak iz zaboravljene zemlje, drama, sarajevo, 1980.  1923 births 2003 deaths people from bosanski petrovac bosnia and herzegovina writers yugoslav writers 20th-century male writers 20th-century bosnia and herzegovina writers
carmina escobar is an experimental vocalist from mexico city who lives and works in los angeles, california. she is on the voice arts faculty of california institute of the arts and is the co-founder and vocalist of "liminar," a contemporary music ensemble based in mexico city. her work is shown regularly at machine project. escobar is most widely known for her work on massagem sonora, which gained attention through its role in a large scale collaborative project of the getty museum in tangent with machine project. she has been awarded several grants and residencies including the performer's grant by the national endowment of the arts in mexico twice, and the 2014 nfa master artist grant.  references  mexican women singers living people year of birth missing (living people) singers from mexico city california institute of the arts faculty experimental musicians
konstantin konstantinovich yudin () (1896-1957) was a soviet film director.  biography  born in the semyonovskoe village near dmitrov (now dmitrovsky district, moscow oblast) into a russian working-class family, one of the five children of konstantin ilyich yudin, a miller who died in 1904. the kids then moved to the neighboring village to live with their grandparents. after graduating from school yudin was brought to moscow to work for hire. by the age of 18 he became a professional jockey working at the moscow hippodrome. in 1917 he was suggested a place at the pyatigorsk hippodrome. shortly after the russian civil war started. konstantin joined the red army and fought as part of the cavalry in the north caucasus up till 1920, then returned to moscow.  in 1926 he joined his brother nikolai yudin who was working as a cinematographer and took part in several documentaries before enrolling in the state institute of cinematography to study directing. after graduating in 1932 he spent seven years working as an assistant director with grigori aleksandrov (on volga-volga), boris yurtsev and igor ilyinsky.  in 1939 yudin directed his first feature film - a comedy a girl with a temper about misadventures of the village girl in moscow, with valentina serova in the leading role. he later invited serova to his next movie, hearts of four, along with lyudmila tselikovskaya and yevgeny samoylov. a light romantic comedy about a love rectangle was finished in 1941, shortly before the great patriotic war, and thus put on hold up until 1945 when it was finally released to a great success (5th place in the box office with 19.4 mln viewers).  during the war yudin developed a series of war comedies about a goofy army cook antosha rybkin portrayed by the acclaimed actor boris chirkov which gained huge popularity among soldiers. he was awarded order of the red star for them in 1944. as the war ended, he directed another successful romantic comedy the twins (also known as the call of love internationally) about a young girl who found and adopted two newborn twins before losing them again. it was the third collaboration between lyudmila tselikovskaya and mikhail zharov after their marriage in 1943.  1950 marked his sudden turn to the action genre as he directed two adventure films brave people and a fortress in the mountains with young sergei gurzo in the leading roles. both featured dangerous stunts and a lot of horse riding
. being a professional jockey, yudin personally showed actors how to deal with horses to their great surprise, as most had no idea about his past. the movies were released to a huge success, with brave people becoming a box office leader of 1950 with 41.2 million viewers and a fortress in the mountains reaching the 3rd place in 1953 with 44.8 mln viewers. the first film also brought yudin and the crew the stalin prize in 1951.  he then directed two movies based on anton chekhov's comedy stories and an adaptation of lev gurych sinichkin vaudeville by dmitry lensky. in 1954 he was named honored artist of the rsfsr. in 1957 yudin became involved with a biographical film he had planned for a long time - the wrestler and the clown about ivan poddubny and anatoly durov, father of anatoly durov and founder of the famous circus dynasty. during the troubled shooting he saved a young actress, but was badly injured himself and died shortly after. the film was finished by boris barnet.  konstantin yudin was buried at the novodevichy cemetery. he was survived by his wife, a russian actress inna fedorova (1905-1990). his brother nikolai yudin was arrested during the great purge of 1937, accused of counter-revolutionary activities and executed. he was rehabilitated in 1957.  selected filmography  1927 - red crimea (documentary)  1938 - volga-volga (as an assistant director)  1939 - a girl with a temper  1941 - four hearts  1942 - antosha rybkin  1945 - the twins (also known as the call of love)  1950 - brave people  1953 - a fortress in the mountains  1954 - the swedish match (also known as the safety match)  1956 - behind the footlights  1957 - the wrestler and the clown (finished by boris barnet)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1896 births 1957 deaths burials at novodevichy cemetery people from moscow russian film directors soviet film directors stalin prize winners
yuriy mykolayovych vakulko (; born 10 november 1997) is a ukrainian professional footballer who play for riga.  club career vakulko is a product of the youth sportive school ♯11 in odessa. his first trainer was anatoliy matsanskyi.  dnipro he made his debut for fc dnipro in the match against fc volyn lutsk on 24 july 2016 in the ukrainian premier league scoring one of the goals in a 5-0 win.  partizan on 23 january 2018, after passing medical tests, vakulko came into agreement with serbian club partizan belgrade and signed a four-year contract. he was officially presented the next day and was given the number 14 shirt.  arsenal kyiv on 3 september 2018, he joined ukraine premier league club arsenal kyiv on loan.  international career after representing ukraine at under-19 level, vakulko became a regular in ukraine national under-21 football team. at time of his move to partizan he had been captain of the u21 team.  honours partizan  serbian cup: 2017-18  references  external links statistics at ffu website   1997 births living people sportspeople from odessa ukrainian footballers fc dnipro players ukrainian premier league players ukrainian second league players fk partizan players serbian superliga players expatriate footballers in serbia association football midfielders ukrainian expatriate footballers ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in serbia fc arsenal kyiv players sc dnipro-1 players riga fc players latvian higher league players expatriate footballers in latvia ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in latvia ukraine under-21 international footballers ukraine youth international footballers
harry andrew jackson (april 18, 1924 - april 25, 2011), born harry aaron shapiro jr., was an american artist. he began his career as a marine combat artist, then later worked in the abstract expressionist, realist, and american western styles.  early life and military career  harry aaron shapiro jr. was born to harry shapiro and ellen jackson in chicago on april 18, 1924. his name was changed to harry andrew jackson after his parents divorced. as a child, jackson sometimes skipped classes and wandered the streets of chicago. he worked in his mother's lunchroom in the union stock yards. jackson liked the cowboys he met there and developed an interest in the american frontier and western genre starting at a young age. in his early teens, he began taking saturday classes at the art institute of chicago after his teacher recognized his artistic abilities and secured a scholarship on his behalf.  inspired by a february 1937 photo spread in life about wyoming's cowboy lifestyle ("winter comes to a wyoming ranch"), jackson ran away from home in 1938, at fourteen years old. he hitchhiked to wyoming, where he worked as a ranch hand in cody. in 1938 he worked for earl martin at the bradford ranch on the north fork, then with cal todd on the pitchfork ranch near meeteetse (which he later said was his "spiritual birthplace") in 1939. he eventually became a cowboy. jackson also began sketching, according to the new york times, in the ways of frederic remington. during each winter season between 1938 and 1942, he returned to chicago to continue his art education.  in 1942, when he was eighteen years old, jackson enlisted in the marines during world war ii and became a sketch artist for the fifth amphibious corps. he was wounded during the battle of tarawa in november 1943, and later in saipan. the injuries earned him two purple hearts and left jackson suffering from epileptic seizures, mood disorders, and posttraumatic stress disorder for the rest of his life. in september 1944, jackson returned to the united states and became the youngest ever marine corps combat artist at age twenty. he was stationed in los angeles and, in this role, drew and painted "[his] bloodiest close-combat experiences". jackson was honorably discharged in october 1945. he spent the winter season at pitchfork ranch before relocating to new york in may 1946.  abstract expressionism to realism  while in los angeles, jackson's style was strongly influenced by jackson pollock's painting the moon-woman cuts the circle, which he said "shot
the first crack of daylight into my blocked-off brain". jackson recalled, "that single artwork caused me to relive (1943) tarawa's bloody butchery; i knew that i had to meet pollock face to face asap." he was also influenced by wassily kandinsky's work.  during this "artistic conversion", jackson moved to new york, befriended pollock, and began painting in the abstract expressionist style. he gained a following after art critic clement greenberg and art historian meyer schapiro included jackson in their "talent 1950" exhibition at the kootz gallery. greenberg said that jackson produced "the best first show since jackson pollock's". for the next few years, he exhibited work at the tibor de nagy gallery, which is closely affiliated with the second generation of abstract expressionism.  jackson's travels to europe in the early 1950s influenced him to become a realist artist instead of an abstract expressionist painter. in 1956, life profiled him in an eight-page photo-essay called "painter striving to find himself: harry jackson turns to the hard way", describing jackson as an "american painter of surging talent and ambition". jackson moved back to wyoming in 1970. by the early 1980s, he was one of the highest-paid american artists.  jackson later recalled of his time in new york and transition to realism: "after cezanne a lot of artists made art for art's sake, and when i became an abstract expressionist in new york i was among them". he said the new york school was "too removed from man" and "did not speak to the people i was born and raised with. ... john wayne spoke for these people ... he was a wonderful embodiment of the timeless strength of the rugged individualist, the one-man majority i believe in with my entire being."  from the late 1990s to 2006, jackson returned to painting. his work harkened back to his abstract expressionist experiments and military experiences, and also include "more peaceful, even transcendental registers of feeling" in the "quartet" paintings.  works  among jackson's combat artworks were betio beachhead (1944), marine in battle (1944), and charging under fire (1945). one of his first realist works was the large-scale painting the italian bar (1956), which depicts a tavern and its patrons on little italy's mulberry street. the work has been called "one of the most important portrait paintings in american 20th century art". in 1958, he was commissioned by ambassador robert douglas coe and the buffalo
bill center of the west's whitney gallery of western art, in cody, to create the sequential paintings the stampede (1965) and the range burial (1963), which were installed in 1965. western influences are seen in these works, which depict a longhorn stampede dragging a cowboy off his horse, and his subsequent funeral. jackson dedicated the range burial to pollock. both works were loaned to the atlanta art conservation center in 2009 for conservation. the  paintings were also executed as bronzes and lithographs. in the mid-1960s, jackson created a portrait of bob dylan during a transitional time in the singer's career.  in 1969, jackson sculpted the marshal for time, which depicted wayne as rooster cogburn in the film true grit, riding a horse and carrying a rifle. following wayne's death in 1979, jackson was commissioned by great western savings & loan to create a sculpture of wayne, who had appeared in a series of commercials for the company during his last two years, for the great western savings & loan building (now flynt building) along wilshire boulevard in beverly hills, california. prior to the horseman debut, the beverly hills architectural commission requested multiple changes, including the removal of multicolored paint and a motor in its base that would have slowly rotated the sculpture. the ,  bronze sculpture was dedicated in 1984. in 1980, the monumental sculpture sacagawea was dedicated at the buffalo bill center of the west.  between april 2005 and may 2006, jackson completed the first six of his "quartet" paintings, which he said "indicate the blissfully liberating spirit of kandinsky and pollock". the first four are featured in the film harry jackson talks about art, which is about the intersection of jackson's abstract and realist work. his bronze sculpture sacajawea modified ii (2005) was the featured work for the 2006 buffalo bill art show and sale, for which jackson was named "honored artist".  in 2007, california state university, northridge opened the washington mutual gallery in the campus' redwood hall, showcasing thirty jackson sculptures on permanent display. the collection's bronzes, valued at $740,000, depict cowboys, native americans, and early western life, and were donated by washington mutual in 2006 to commemorate the "profound role cal state northridge plays in the cultural life of the region".  personal and later life  jackson did some acting on hollywood radio and recorded songs he learned at pitchfork ranch for folkways records during the 1950s. his album the cowboy: his songs, ballads
and brag talk was released in 1959. he recorded for columbia records in new york during the 1960s, and even sang at carnegie hall with dylan and joan baez, and pete seeger. his repertory included songs like "the pot wrassler" and "streets of laredo", and were "all sung in an authentic, unadorned style far removed from popular music or the folk-pop of the period".  in 1954, jackson purchased a series of 1860 sketches by paul cezanne for $80 from someone at aix-en-provence who claimed that his father was the artist's caretaker. jackson tried to sell them in 1962, but they were deemed stolen and confiscated after a louvre seal was found during the authentication process. he fought for ownership of the sketches for five years and withdrew his claim in 1967. he said, "i was mad. darn mad. but now i have come full circle and am returning the drawings, which is what i would have done immediately if the fbi had not taken the drawings and i had just been notified by rewald."  he began a private journal, which eventually grew to more than 100 volumes, in march 1945. jackson's journal entry about meeting pollock read:  according to some sources, jackson was married and divorced as many as six times. however, his official biography on the harry jackson studios website states that he was married four times. one of his marriages was to abstract expressionist painter grace hartigan, which lasted for a year.  after leaving new york, jackson lived in wyoming and camaiore, italy, where he had a foundry and studio. according to the buffalo bill center of the west, jackson also resided in meeteetse and lost cabin, wyoming in his lifetime.  jackson was reportedly "fiercely loyal to his friends" and often worked with others he deemed were "fellow mavericks". he and john wayne became friends in the final decade of wayne's life. in addition to the brain injuries inflicted during his military service, he was diagnosed with narcissistic personality disorder and, according to his son, "treated everyday like a life and death battle".  death and legacy jackson died at the veterans health administration's medical center in sheridan on april 25, 2011, at the age of 87, following several health issues during his final year. he was survived by three sons, two daughters, and four grandchildren. his oldest son, matt, manages the jackson collection and estate in cody. in august 2013, the wyoming arts council began developing a plan to preserve jackson's
work, which included the participation of the buffalo bill center of the west, nicolaysen art museum, and the university of wyoming art museum. matt continued efforts to fundraise the $5 million needed to maintain the collection and found an institution, and he also organized traveling exhibits to showcase his father's work. his goal was to keep the collection together, preferably within wyoming, but the trust had to begin selling pieces after no offers to fund the preservation of the entire collection were received. reno's coeur d'alene art auction sold a series of his artworks on july 23, 2011.  in 2014, after spending three years assembling and surveying their father's work following his death, jackson's children searched for an institution to house the collection of more than 5,000 drawings, paintings, and sculptures jackson had stored and displayed in his home in cody and foundry in italy. one of his sons, who serves as trustee of the harry jackson trust, said: "harry jackson's body of work can only be fully examined now that he has passed away and stopped creating. the collection tells the full story of an unparalleled artist's life, and it's unlike any other ... [the collection is] something the art world has never had the chance to fully examine, and now that he is absent, we're learning so much more about his invaluable contribution to american art." the collection also included brushes, home videos, photographs, props, reference books, tools, jackson's business and personal records, and more than 100 volumes of his journals.  the nicolaysen art museum exhibited the big picture: a look at the life and art of harry jackson from may to august, 2014. in 2015, harry jackson studios exhibited betio: light and war, which consists of 56 paintings, for the first time and in conjunction with the buffalo bill center of the west "rendezvous royale" fundraiser. artist and critic gordon mcconnell, who was a curator for the yellowstone art museum, described the exhibit as a "monumental masterpiece" that "deserves a place among the important paintings of our time." also showcased were sculptures formerly stored at jackson's foundry in italy, along with dozens of other drawings, paintings, and sculptures.  institutions with works by jackson include the american museum in britain, amon carter museum of american art, denver art museum, gilcrease museum, lyndon baines johnson library and museum, metropolitan museum of art, ronald reagan presidential library, and smithsonian american art museum. his work is in the private collections of the house of
saud, italian federal government, queen elizabeth ii, and the vatican. the buffalo bill center of the west houses the largest museum collection of jackson's work in the united states. other wyoming institutions with works by jackson include the meeteetse museum, university of wyoming, and the wyoming state museum, among other public and private collections.  reception jackson became most known for his abstract art and paintings and bronze sculptures of cowboys and indians. he has also been credited for mastering the lost-wax method of bronze casting and reviving polychrome sculpture.  in 1980, the new york times art critic hilton kramer said that jackson's western-inspired works were "unlike any other in the recent history of american art". furthermore, kramer said that the evolution of jackson's style "has turned a well-known and highly praised but penurious young artist into one of the wealthiest 'unknown' artists in america - an artist unknown, that is, to the art world where his first reputation was made 30 years ago." jackson received the wyoming arts council governor's arts award in 1990.  in jackson's obituary, the new york times described him as an "artist who captured the west". in 2013, national geographic contributor jordan carlton schaul described jackson as the "preeminent western artist of his time" and "one of the most distinguished american sculptors and painters in history".  lyndon johnson, gerald ford, and ronald reagan each appreciated and displayed jackson's works, and selected his sculptures as gifts to heads of state. in 1976, ford gave queen elizabeth ii a sculpture called two champs, which depicts clayton danks hanging onto steamboat, the stallion from bucking horse and rider seen on wyoming's vehicle registration plates, to celebrate the united states bicentennial. reagan kept eight bronzes in the white house.  selected list of works  albums  the cowboy: his songs, ballads and brag talk (1959, 1965), folkways recordings  drawings  tarawa-betio (1940s), part of the collection of the national museum of the marine corps  exhibitions  well-aimed lighting: the abstract art of harry jackson (1953), ucross foundation art gallery (2012)  the big picture: a look at the life and art of harry jackson (2014), mcmurry gallery, nicolaysen art museum  betio: light and war (2015), consists of 56 canvases that together measure  tall by nearly  wide  lithographs  the range burial, based on his 1963 painting of the same name  the stampede, based on his 1965 painting of the same
name  monotypes  "random monotypes", a series of 49 monotypes created by blotting dripped paint during the creation of la fiesta, mexican composition, and toro rojo del sol (1949)  paintings   cowboy harry, self portrait at 12 (1936)  tarawa-betio (1944), part of the collection of the national museum of the marine corps  untitled (1948), oil with sand on canvas  white figure (1948), abstract expressionist  collage (1949), abstract expressionist  la fiesta (1949), abstract expressionist, one of three completed in san miguel de allende, mexico, after marrying grace hartigan  mexican composition (1949), abstract expressionist, one of three completed in san miguel de allende, mexico, after marrying grace hartigan  random monoprint (1949), abstract expressionist  toro rojo del sol (1949), abstract expressionist, one of three completed in san miguel de allende, mexico, after marrying grace hartigan  the italian bar (1956)  the range burial (1963), oil on canvas  the stampede (1965), oil on canvas  crucifixion at betio (2002), abstract expressionist  quartet 1 (2005), abstract expressionist  sculptures   the range burial (late 1950s), based on his 1963 painting of the same name  trail boss (1958), bronze, part of the collection of the smithsonian american art museum  bronc stomper (1959), bronze  the stampede, or simply stampede (1959), based on his 1965 painting of the same name  lone hand (1961), bronze  cowboy's meditation, or cowboy meditation (1964)  where the trail forks (1964), bronze, part of the collection of the smithsonian american art museum  gunsil, or the gunsil (1964 or 1966), patinated bronze  iroquois guide (1967), polychrome bronze  pony express (1967), polychrome bronze, and pony express (1969), patinated bronze  trapper study (1968), bronze  the marshal, or the marshal (john wayne as rooster cogburn) (1969-1970), painted bronze, part of the collection of the metropolitan museum of art  trapper (1970), bronze  algonquin chief, bronze  algonquin chief and warrior (1971), bronze  algonquin chief bust (1971), patinated bronze  algonquin chief and warrior (1971)  two champs (1974) and two champs, five foot, patinated bronze  two champs ii (1977), bronze  chief washakie - first working model (1978), bronze
marshall ii (1979), bronze and marshall iii, polychromed bronze  pony express iii (1979), painted bronze  sacagawea, study for a monument (1979), bronze with brown patina  sacajawea, first working model for a monument (1979), bronze  pony express ii (1980), patinated bronze, part of the art in embassies program  in the wind, or in the wind (sacagawea) (1980)  iroquois guide ii (1980), polychrome bronze  sacagawea (1980), painted bronze, part of the collection of the buffalo bill center of the west  sacagawea ii (1980), polychrome bronze and sacajawea ii (1980), polychromed bronze  the horseman, or john wayne: the horseman (1984), bronze equestrian statue depicting john wayne, installed at the great western savings & loan building (now flynt building) along wilshire boulevard, beverly hills  foreman (1981), painted bronze  john wayne: first unfinished model for monument (1981), bronze  ol' sabertooth (1981)  ropin' a star (1982), bronze  safe and sound (1982), bronze, and safe and sound (1982), polychrome bronze  trapper ii  (1982), bronze  dog soldier (1983), bronze, and dog soldier (1985), bronze, sold for $15,000 in 2011  the flag bearer, or the flagbearer, polychrome bronze, or flagbearer (1983)  safe and sound blizzard (1983), painted bronze  washakie ii sunset (1986), painted bronze  dog soldier ii (1991), painted bronze  the victor (1991), polychrome bronze  the flag bearer ii (1992)  cosmos (1996-1997), bronze, egg tempera  sacajawea modified ii (2005)  references  further reading  external links   harry jackson museum and archives  harry jackson studios  list of published sculptures and commissions  selected exhibitions        1924 births 2011 deaths 20th-century american painters american male painters 20th-century american singers 21st-century american sculptors 21st-century male artists american male sculptors abstract painters american abstract artists american contemporary painters american folk singers american male radio actors american war artists artists from chicago artists from wyoming columbia records artists male actors from chicago male actors from wyoming people from park county, wyoming realist painters school of the art institute of chicago alumni united states marines 20th-century american male actors 20th-century american sculptors 20th-century male artists abstract expressionist artists american expressionist painters
animal artists sculptors from new york (state) artists of the american west expressionist sculptors male actors from new york (state) people from cody, wyoming people from sheridan, wyoming singers from chicago world war ii artists sculptors from illinois 20th-century american male singers united states marine corps personnel of world war ii people with narcissistic personality disorder
maira bravo behrendt (born january 16, 1991) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team.  references  external links  maira bravo behrendt at brasilrugby.com.br  1991 births living people brazil international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
surender kumar (born 23 november 1993) is an indian field hockey player, who plays as a defender for the indian national team.  he was born to malkhan singh and neelam devi on 23 november 1993. he is from karnal, haryana.  he was part of the indian hockey team that participated in the 2016 and 2020 summer olympics.  see also india at the 2016 summer olympics  references  external links surender kumar at hockey india  1993 births living people male field hockey defenders field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2020 summer olympics field hockey players at the 2018 asian games 2018 men's hockey world cup players olympic field hockey players of india indian male field hockey players field hockey players from haryana people from karnal district asian games bronze medalists for india asian games medalists in field hockey medalists at the 2018 asian games hockey india league players delhi waveriders players olympic bronze medalists for india medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic medalists in field hockey
the 2016 chevrolet dual in detroit presented by quicken loans was the only doubleheader event of the 2016 indycar series, consisting of both the seventh and eighth rounds of the championship. the event took place at the raceway at belle isle, a temporary street circuit in detroit, michigan. both races were contested over 70 laps. the race marked the seventh time that the course had been used for indycar series racing and the fourth time that the venue had featured a doubleheader weekend with two races.  initial practice sessions and qualifying for the first race took place on june 3, 2016. simon pagenaud qualified on pole with a time of 1:14.9166, leading a team penske sweep of the top three positions. in the race, however, strategy miscues by penske would give victory to kvsh racing's sebastien bourdais. second place went to conor daly for dale coyne racing, while third went to penske's lone representative on the podium, juan pablo montoya.  qualifying for race two was held the morning of the race on june 5. simon pagenaud once again qualified on pole, this time with a time of 1:14.0379. in the race, though, his team penske teammate will power would be faster, taking his first victory in more than a year. pagenaud finished in second, while the final step of the podium went to ryan hunter-reay for andretti autosport.  race 1 - saturday, june 4   qualifying for race one occurred on june 3, 2016. simon pagenaud qualified on pole for the third time of the 2016 season with a time of 1:14.9166. his teammates helio castroneves and juan pablo montoya qualified in second and third, respectively. castroneves broke the track record for the course during round two of qualifications, setting a time of 1:14.6899.  the race began cleanly, with the team penske trio of pagenaud, castroneves, and montoya maintaining their positions and james hinchcliffe settling into fourth place behind them. alternate pit stop strategies began on lap 2, with drivers such as sebastien bourdais and ryan hunter-reay coming in to try to gain an advantage via strategy. on lap 10, the first caution flag of the race came out when max chilton crashed into the right-side wall on the backstretch from what appeared to be a broken suspension. while most drivers pitted, simon pagenaud and helio castroneves stayed out, attempting to stretch the life of their tires. on the restart, pagenaud was able to pull out a lead, but when he was finally forced to
pit, the lead was handed over to will power. pagenaud regained the lead on lap 31, when power and juan pablo montoya lost momentum while battling for the lead immediately after their own pit stops. pagenaud once again began pulling out a lead.  on lap 42, the caution came out for the second time, this time for james hinchcliffe, who spun and crashed into the tire barrier in turn seven while running in the fifth position. the caution caused a split in strategy; several drivers, including juan pablo montoya, scott dixon, sebastien bourdais, and conor daly elected to stay out. others, such as simon pagenaud and will power, elected to pit. for those that pitted, power was the first off of pit lane. however, power was released before his right rear tire was secured, forcing him to pull into a runoff area in turn three during the caution period just moments after leaving the pits. stranded far from the pits and without a wheel nut to secure his right-rear tire, power would have to retire from the race.  when racing resumed, montoya held the lead until lap 52, when he pitted for the final time of the race. scott dixon pitted on lap 55, but appeared to have gearbox issues once he returned to the track. he retired from the race one lap later. on lap 57, sebastien bourdais pitted from the lead, but had built enough of a gap that he was able to come back out ahead of simon pagenaud and helio castroneves, both of whom were attempting to save fuel in order to avoid having to pit again, as well as montoya. the lead was briefly handed to conor daly before he came in for a splash of fuel, but no new tires. he emerged in second place behind bourdais and was able to bring the gap between them down to 1.1 seconds, but on old tires, daly eventually fell behind again. bourdais took victory for his 35th career indycar victory, tying him for sixth in all-time indycar victories with bobby unser. conor daly managed to hold on to second place to secure the first podium finish of his career, while juan pablo montoya was the highest-finishing penske driver with a third-place finish. simon pagenaud, who led much of the early race, ran out of fuel on the final lap and fell to a distant 13th place.  qualifying  source for individual rounds:  race results  notes:  points include 1 point for leading at least 1 lap during a race, an additional 2 points for leading the most race laps,
and 1 point for pole position.  source for time gaps:  race 2 - sunday, june 5  qualifying for the second race was held the morning of the race on june 5. due to time constraints, qualifying consisted only of what would be round 1 for a normal road course qualifying session. simon pagenaud once again qualified on pole, sweeping both sessions for the dual in detroit and gaining his fourth pole position in the last five races. ryan hunter-reay qualified second. will power broke the track record set on the previous day during the session with a time of 1:13.8335. however, his fastest two laps were disallowed, as race control deemed that power had interfered with a qualifying attempt being made by marco andretti. power would still rank fourth in the session, but the qualifying format meant that he would actually start from eighth. both conor daly and marco andretti would lose the fastest laps of their respective sessions for causing local yellows on the race course. alexander rossi had the best lap of his session disallowed for ignoring yellow flags during one of these local yellows.  unlike the previous day's event, early trouble occurred for several drivers. during the parade laps, graham rahal, who was supposed to start from the fourth position, came into pit lane to get repairs after complaining of his brake pedal being "soft". he would return to the track before the race began, but at the tail end of the field. as the race began, an incident occurred in turn one. charlie kimball moved to his left before turn one to avoid jack hawksworth, which forced carlos munoz to take evasive actions to his left, which in turn forced james hinchcliffe into the wall. as cars moved to avoid hinchcliffe's now wrecked car, takuma sato made contact with alexander rossi, sending sato into a spin. max chilton was forced into the wall trying to avoid sato. finally, marco andretti was the last car involved after he ran over the front wing of sato's stationary car. hinchcliffe and chilton retired from the race, while the others involved carried on.  racing resumed on lap five, with simon pagenaud holding his lead over ryan hunter-reay and tony kanaan. on lap 24, juan pablo montoya and scott dixon made contact in turn seven, damaging montoya's front wing and puncturing one of dixon's tires, hampering both of their races. dixon, however, would eventually recover. as pit stops began to cycle through, hunter-reay dropped back to fourth as kanaan and sebastien bourdais
moved up. on lap 34, the second caution of the day occurred when montoya, on his out lap after switching to black tires, hit the wall in turn 10. montoya retired from the race and would finish 20th. the race resumed on lap 38 with pagenaud now leading over his teammate helio castroneves. the next lap, however, castroneves grabbed the lead and began to pull away. the race appeared to be in castroneves's hands.  on lap 50, in the midst of green flag pit stops, the caution flew for the third time of the race when jack hawksworth rolled to a stop on track. while most leaders had already pitted, castroneves had not and was forced to pit under the caution, dropping him to 15th place. the lead was handed to sebastien bourdais, but he and the three drivers behind him all still needed to make one more stop in order to reach the end of the race. the first two drivers in the field that did not need to pit again were simon pagenaud and will power, who were fifth and sixth, respectively, on the restart. on the lap of the restart, power quickly dispatched of pagenaud in turn three, taking what would eventually become the lead. when power finally inherited the lead on lap 61, he held a roughly 1.7 second lead on pagenaud. while the gap came down in the closing laps, power would hang on to the end of the race and take victory. it was his first victory since the 2015 grand prix of indianapolis. pagenaud maintained his second place, while ryan hunter-reay came across the line third for his first podium since st. petersburg. helio castroneves was only able to move up to 14th on a day that had initially looked promising for him. conor daly was once again the highest finishing rookie in the race, taking sixth place.  qualifying  race results  notes:  points include 1 point for leading at least 1 lap during a race, an additional 2 points for leading the most race laps, and 1 point for pole position.  source for time gaps:  championship standings   drivers' championship standings after race 1  drivers' championship standings after race 2   note: only the top five positions are included.  references  external links  race 1 official pit stop data  race 2 official pit stop data  race 1 official race broadcast  race 2 official race broadcast  chevrolet dual in detroit 2016 chevrolet dual in detroit detroit indy grand prix chevrolet dual in detroit 2016 in detroit
the 22nd beijing college student film festival was held from 11 april to 9 may 2015 in beijing, china.  winners and nominees  references  external links   22nd beijing college student film festival sina  23 2015 film festivals 2015 festivals in asia bei
lauren doyle (born february 23, 1991) is an american rugby sevens player. she won a silver medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the united states women's national rugby sevens team and represented the united states of america for rugby sevens at the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links   lauren doyle at usa rugby            1991 births living people female rugby sevens players united states international rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games silver medalists for the united states pan american games medalists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of the united states eastern illinois university alumni sportspeople from illinois eastern illinois panthers athletes medalists at the 2015 pan american games rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics  lgbt sportspeople from the united states
miroslav indrak (born august 12, 1995) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc plzen of the czech extraliga.  indrak made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc plzen during the 2013-14 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1995 births living people hc plzen players czech ice hockey forwards sportspeople from pisek
the 1929-30 sk rapid wien season was the 32nd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  mitropa cup  references  1929-30 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
that's not cheating () is a 2016 argentine comedy film directed by ariel winograd and co-written by julian loyola and gabriel korenfeld. the film, which stars lali esposito and martin piroyansky, was theatrically released on august 4, 2016.  due to its success, the film has been sold to other latin american markets, including peru, ecuador, bolivia and chile. rights for pay tv has been acquired by hbo latino for the united states, movistar+ for spain, and medyavision for turkey. according to filmsharks, rights for france, mexico, brazil, australia and germany are in advanced discussions.  synopsis the comedy follows a modern couple who joke with friends about the idea of a "one night pass" - one night of passion with a famous star that would not be considered infidelity. then the husband unexpectedly meets his "one night pass". a series of funny complications won't allow mateo and camila to get back together. both of them will have to take a look of several things and raffle off every absurd obstacle that there will be presented from the appearance of this "one night pass" in their lives. once involved in a dangerous situation, the couple will have the opportunity to discover themselves.  cast  lali esposito as camila boecchi  martin piroyansky as mateo borisonik  liz solari as zoe del rio  benjamin vicuna as joaquin campos  guillermo arengo as antonio boecchi  ana pauls as paula  maruja bustamante as soledad  gaston cocchiarale as rama  abel ayala as el kun  pablo rago as doctor  reception  box office permitidos was #2 on opening weekend on its original country, argentina, behind the secret life of pets with $0.7 million. the movie has eventually grossed $1.7 million only in argentina (ar$25.3 million).  critical response permitidos received generally positive reviews from critics. the review aggregator website todas las criticas assigned the film a weighted average score of 67 out of 100, based on 42 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".  in his review for leer cine, santiago garcia praised the film, saying: "it is a funny comedy, it is a well-filmed comedy, it is not the mere illustration of amusing dialogues, permitidos is a complete film". emiliano basile of escribiendo cine also gave the film a positive review, writing: "permitidos is effective by more than it floods
in some lapses by the excess situations. it is  [effective] because its goal of smooth and flat entertainment wards off of the traditional conservative moralizing. cinefreak's alex arellano gave the film a positive review, stating: "permitidos is a genuine comedy, a film whose script is an elaborated swarm of absurd and crazy situations, which managed to combine and create consistency between every scene and every word of the script. it is a risky proposition that could have been a big frustration. however, its director decided to focus on the humor, and if the audience judges it [the film], it will undoubtedly have a good reception. fernando alvarez of todo lo ve highlighted esposito and piroyanky's performance and wrote: "it is a well-executed, agile comedy that counts with solid technical resources and a delirium that the viewer will have to play, between ducks, geese and a smarter friend that he looks". meanwhile,  diego alvarez from cuatro bastardos gave the film a perfect score (10 out of 10) recognizing winograd's direction and piroyansky's performance, which he describes as "impeccable", and esposito's, adding that the actress is an actoral revelation and that her performance "will surely remain in the records of argentinian cinema". fer casals of meta magazine compared the film with hollywood comedies, saying: "ariel winograd newest movie surprises from its freshness and naturalness represented by the charm of its protagonists". variety's john hopewell wrote that the film is "the latest in a line of high-concept argentine comedies of manners with international potential."  release history  references  external links        2016 films argentine films spanish-language films films set in argentina films set in buenos aires films shot in buenos aires argentine romantic comedy films
unleashed is a paranormal/suspense novel written by american author sara humphreys. published in 2011, it is the first book in her the amoveo legend series, which to date has 7 titles.  plot summary samantha logan is a struggling artist whose career in new york city is not going the way she wants.  she must move back to her hometown of westerly, ri and move in with her grandmother.  for a while she's been having dreams about a mysterious man.  much to her surprise the man of her dreamworld is her grandmother's next door neighbor, malcolm drew.  malcolm drew is a member of an ancient race of shapeshifters called the amoveo.  but the biggest secret of all is that he tells samantha that she is also an amoveo, a hybrid.  her father was an amoveo and her mother was a human with psychic powers.  the amoevo race is dying out and now a new chapter is beginning with humans being lifemates.  but in the background of samantha and malcolm's budding romance a war is brewing among the amoveo, one that will put the two of them in the middle.  awards grave tells reader's choice award 2011 favorite paranormal romance  references  amoveo legend 2011 american novels novels set in new york city
"always was" is a song recorded by american country music artist aaron tippin.  it was released in august 2001 as the third single from the album people like us.  the song reached #40 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by tony colton and bobby wood.  chart performance  references  2001 singles 2000 songs aaron tippin songs lyric street records singles songs written by tony colton songs written by bobby wood (songwriter)
americium bromide may refer to:   americium(ii) bromide  americium(iii) bromide
social planning toronto is a non-profit community organization, based in toronto, ontario, canada that works to improve equity, social justice and quality of life for residents through community capacity building, community education and advocacy, policy research and analysis, and social reporting. the organization has conducted research and advocacy concerning inclusionary zoning, equitable use of city recreational spaces, the ontario human rights code policy on discrimination based on creed, and responses to the city's budget process.  the organization holds public forums for suggestions on what issues to prioritize.  social planning toronto released the first poverty profiles for all 44 wards of toronto, on 7 june 2012, which it declared "destitution day" because that was the approximate date when a person on welfare would run out of money if living at the poverty threshold.  see also   social planning organizations in canada  references  external links   social planning toronto  advocacy groups in canada
goodricke group limited is an india-based tea producing company headquartered in west bengal. it is a part of the camellia plc uk - the world's largest private sector tea producer. the four tea producing companies in its fold include goodricke group limited, stewart holl (india) limited, amgoorie india limited and koomber tea co. pvt. limited. the group owns 30 gardens and 27 tea factories spread over darjeeling, dooars, assam and cachar. in recent years the goodricke group acquired in assam two estates of the mcleod company being in economic difficulties. the major darjeeling brands include goodricke castleton, roasted and margaret's hope, while the black (ctc) tea includes goodricke khaass, goodricke zabardast and goodricke chai. it is reported that in the company's tea estate in assam the workers have to struggle with the "absence of healthcare, education or other basic amenities".  history  1800 - the sterling tea companies owned 17 tea estates in india with 12 in jalpaiguri district, 3 in darjeeling and 2 in assam. they established tea gardens in the late 1800s and then progressively carried the business in india. the reserve bank of india (rbi) in pursuant to the foreign exchange regulation act (fera 1973) granted permission to the company to carry on business with the sterling tea group.    14 june 1977 - incorporated in west bengal, india as a public limited company. the objective is to cultivate, produce, treat, blend, develop, process, purchase, trade, and deal with tea in different forms.  27 june 1977 - a certificate of entitlement was granted by the registrar of companies under the terms of the companies act 1956. the permission was granted for the commencement of the business.  1 january 1978 - the 8 sterling companies merged with the goodricke group limited.  gardens   darjeeling  assam  dooars  products  bulk tea  both orthodox and ctc tea from the assam, dooars and darjeeling gardens are sold in volumes. they are packed in tea chests, paper sacks and jute bags, and are marketed mostly through the public auction system, private and consignment sales, exports and direct sales either in original or blended form.  darjeeling  some of the most popular tea variants of goodricke tea come from its darjeeling tea gardens. the gardens include margaret's hope, castleton, badamtam, barnesbeg and thurbo. the teas from these gardens are
usually sold to buyers from japan, europe and the united states.  assam  in assam, the orthodox tea from the gardens of nonaipara, harmutty, orangajuli and dejoo is sold in bulk in the middle east, the uk and germany markets. the handpicked ctcs come from the gardens of borbam and amgoorie and sold in bulk across india and abroad.  dooars  this part of the himalayan region offers ctc tea. the tea from the leesh river and danguajhar gardens is quite popular and, thus, sold in bulks all across.  ready to drink tea  the ready to drink tea is readily available in hws (hot water soluble) and cws (cold water soluble) form. the concept of instant tea prepared from green leaf has made a mark in the development of indian tea industry. as per the customers' specifications, instant tea is made from raw materials like green and black leaf tea. following are the currently available goodricke ready to drink tea variants: ready to drink darjeeling roasted tea ready to drink barnesbeg green tea  brands  darjeeling tea castleton premium: blue caddy castleton vintage: black caddy barnesbeg-leaf and teabags roasted thurbo premium darjeeling tea  black [ctc] tea khaass goodricke chai zabardast  gift packs badamtam leaf tea season's 3 in 1  references  tea companies of india companies listed on the bombay stock exchange companies based in kolkata
komuro suiun (, august 31, 1874 - march 30, 1945) is the pseudonym of a japanese nihonga painter who worked mainly in the nanga style, active from the meiji period (1868-1912) to the showa period (1926-1989).  biography  suiun was born in the town of yagoecho, present-day tatebayashi, in gunma prefecture. his birth name was komuro teijiro (貞次郎). from 1890 until 1898, suiun studied in the atelier of painter tazaki soun 田崎草雲 (1815-1898) in ashikaga, tochigi prefecture. after suiun had been soun's student for about three years, he was given the name suiun (翠雲).  in september 1899, suiun moved to tokyo, where he became active in the tokyo nanga association (東京南画会 tokyo nangakai) and japan art association (日本美術協会 nihon bijutsu kyokai). in 1905, his entry to exhibition of the japan art association, noble character, pure moon (kofu seigetsu) was awarded second prize, and he was made a committee member of the group. his 1907 entry tall trees and rocky mountains (kyorin kanseki) was purchased by the imperial household agency.  in may 1903, painter noguchi shohin 野口小蘋 (1847-1917) adopted suiun as heir and husband to her daughter, noguchi shokei (野口小蕙, 1878-1944), a painter of the bird-and-flowers genre. for a few years, suiun exhibited paintings, including his entry solitary duck in spring scenery (shuntei no kokamo) to the saint louis world's fair in 1904, under the name noguchi suiun.  he reverted to using the name komuro when the marriage was annulled in november 1906.  in 1907, suiun was one of several artists to boycott the inaugural exhibition bunten, the ministry of education art exhibition, over the appointment of a jury dominated by representatives associated with the japan art institute (nihon bijutsuin 日本美術院). he served as vice chair of the society of orthodox schools (正派同志会 seiha doshikai), a coalition of individuals and art societies
united in opposition against the organization of bunten.  from 1908 until 1943, with the exception of the 1937 event, suiun submitted paintings to bunten and its later incarnations teiten and shin-bunten annually. his first four entries were each awarded third prize. his sixth entry, winter forest, quiet hermitage (kanrin yukyo), was awarded second prize and suiun was appointed as a judge for the exhibition.  in 1921, suiun traveled to china and korea for the first time. following his return, he created a number of paintings based on his experiences including southern water and northern land (nansen hokuba), exhibited at the third teiten in 1921; watching the tide at haining (kainei kancho), exhibited at the fourth teiten in 1922; and the fallen hairpin (dakinsaizu); exhibited at the second exhibition of the japan nanga institute (nihon nangain 日本南画院) in 1922.  on his return to japan, suiun was invited to join the japan nanga institute (nihon nangain), a collective founded in kyoto 1921 by a group of six artists, mizuta chikuho (1883-1958), kono shuson (1890-1987), mitsui hanzan (1881-1934), yamada kaido (1870-1924), ikeda keisen (1863-1931), and tajika chikuson (1864-1922). suiun assumed leadership of the group until disbanding it in 1936 due to internal disagreements. the final annual exhibition of the japan nanga institute was attended by french artist and writer jean cocteau (1889-1963).  suiun was selected to travel to berlin as the main representative of the japan-german friendship special envoy on the occasion of the german government's exhibition, contemporary nihonga (jp.: gendai nihonga ten, ger.: werke lebender japanischer maler), held from january 17 to february 28, 1931, at the prussian academy of arts. he exhibited a diptych, insect choir (kiin nidai), now in the collection of the asian art museum, national museums in berlin. after his official duties were completed, suiun traveled to france, italy, egypt, ceylon (sri lanka), india, mainland us, and honolulu, before returning to yokohama on july 9, 1931.  during his journey, his ink painting woman of berlin (berurin fujinga) was sent back to japan. another painting of a young european woman, beauty
(reijin), a half-length portrait in ink and light colors, was exhibited at the tenth annual japan nanga institute exhibition in 1931. silent man of stone (sekijin mugo), depicting the great sphinx of giza, was exhibited at teiten in 1931.  in april 1932, suiun founded the nanga appreciation society (南画鑑賞会 nanga kanshokai). its goal was to popularize the appreciation and practice of nanga among the general public. the nanga appreciation society issued two publications: records of nanga kansho (nanga kansho roku), a serialized painting manual, published from 1932, and a monthly magazine, nanga kansho, produced from january 1934 to february 1944.  in 1941, suiun founded the greater east asia southern school institute (大東南宗院 daito nanshuin) with members of the nanga appreciation society and former japan nanga institute. the greater east asia southern school institute opened exhibitions of nanga painting in 1942 and 1943. the first exhibition opened in  tokyo, kyoto,  nanjing, shanghai, beijing, and shinkyo (ch.: xinjing, present-day changchun), with support from president of the republic of china in nanjing, wang jingwei (1883-1944), the special services agency (tokumu kikan, an intelligence unit of the japanese military), and other government agencies.  the exhibition was projected to open the following year at the same venues and in seoul, but due to the escalation of the war, it was only held in the japanese and korean venues.  during the fifteen years war, suiun rarely created paintings with overtly war-related themes, preferring instead subject matter that could be accommodated within the conventions of nanga while still communicating patriotic sentiments. for example, his entry for the 1942 shin-bunten with free as a bird (enpi gyoyaku), which depicted a kite, a bird with an institutionalized military association through the decoration order of the golden kite (kinshi kunsho), established in 1890.  noted works   winter forest, quiet hermitage (寒林幽居 kanrin yukyo), 1913, sannomaru shozokan, imperial household collections. second prize at the seventh bunten.   gentle spring rain (春雨蕭々 shun'u shosho), 1920, the museum of modern art, gunma.   phoenix and the rising sun
(朝陽鳴鳳凰之図 ), 1925, sannomaru shozokan, imperial household collections. commissioned by the bank of japan as an anniversary gift to the taisho emperor and empress.   old pine and hawk (老松に鷹 rosho ni taka), 1930, eiheiji temple.   woman of berlin (ヘルリン婦人画 berurin fujinga), 1931. tatebayashi city museum.  white universe (白乾坤 hakukenkon), 1936, japan art academy.  honors  1944: imperial household artist  references  external links special collection of materials from komuro suiun's library at tokyo metropolitan library: http://www.library.metro.tokyo.jp/edo_tokyo/tokubun_guide/kaiage/tabid/998/default.aspx  nihonga painters 1874 births 1945 deaths people of meiji-period japan imperial household artists
brian francis allen (born october 1952) is chairman of the hazlitt group that includes the art dealership hazlitt, gooden and fox and arnold wiggins and sons, the leading dealers in historic picture frames.  he was director of studies at the paul mellon centre for studies in british art between 1993 and 2012. he is a specialist in 17th- and 18th-century british art and has written widely on this subject area. he has organised a number of exhibitions in collaboration with the yale center for british art, the state hermitage museum and the state kremlin museums. a past chairman of the national art collections fund he was a trustee of the national portrait gallery between 2012 and 2015, the holburne museum of art, the strawberry hill collections trust, the british sporting art trust and is a trustee of the hermitage foundation uk and the ben uri gallery.  publications  books:  academic posts  references     british art historians living people 1952 births place of birth missing (living people)
reybrouck is a flemish surname. notable people with the surname include:  david van reybrouck (born 1971), belgian cultural historian, archaeologist, and author guido reybrouck (born 1941), belgian cyclist wilfried reybrouck (born 1953), belgian cyclist, brother of guido  dutch-language surnames
pearl automation inc. was a company building aftermarket automobile technology, focused on delivering "driver awareness features" and helping "speed up the pace" of technology adoption in cars. pearl was founded by bryson gardner, joseph fisher and brian sander in 2014 and announced its first product in june 2016. the company was based in scotts valley, california.  products  the pearl rearvision product was purchased by american road products inc. as pearl automation inc. closed its operations.  pearl's first product, rearvision, was an aftermarket automotive backup camera and alert system that attaches around a license plate and sends video directly to your smartphone. the system is solar powered and included two wide angle high-definition cameras.  pearl sells products direct to consumers through its own website and through amazon.com and crutchfield. in january 2017, pearl announced a partnership with installernet.  the company went defunct in 2017.  funding  pearl has raised $50 million in series a and b venture capital rounds, from investors shasta ventures, accel, venrock and wellcome trust.  references   american companies established in 2014 american companies disestablished in 2017 defunct technology companies based in california
firozpur rural is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of firozpur district and is reserved for candidates belonging to the scheduled castes.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  firozpur district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india firozpur district
the 2016-17 rugby europe international championships is the european championship for tier 2 and tier 3 rugby union nations. the 2016-17 season is the first of its new format and structure, where all levels play on a one-year cycle, replacing the old format of a two-year cycle, where the teams played each other both home and away.  for all teams competing, except the development league, this year's edition of the rugby europe international championships doubles as the 2019 rugby world cup qualifiers for the european region, where the winner of the championship, excluding georgia, automatically qualifies to the tournament as europe 1. all other teams remains in contention, playing in their respective leagues, but also playing in world cup play-offs, for the right to play in the europe/oceania play-off against oceania 3.  countries  pre-tournament world rugby rankings (from november 28 for championship, from august 29 for all other levels) in parentheses  championship   (26)   (12)   (24)   (16)   (19)   (22)  conference 1  north   (33)   (51)   (46)   (59)   (58) south   (62)   (54)   (na)   (63)   (49)  development   (96)   (na)   (na)  trophy   (32)   (34)   (37)   (30)   (31)   (27)  conference 2 north   (88)   (na)   (97)   (82)   (90) south   (87)   (74)   (79)   (67)   (na)  notes   due to financial instability, turkey has cancelled all matches for the 2016-17 season and is no longer part of world cup qualifying.  2017 rugby europe championship  2016-17 rugby europe trophy  2016-17 rugby europe conference  conference 1  conference 1 north  conference 1 south  conference 2  conference 2 north  conference 2 south  2017 rugby europe development  play-offs  championship-trophy promotion play-off  conference 1 promotion to trophy play-off  see also  2019 rugby world cup - europe qualification  references    2017-18 2016-17 in european rugby union europe europe
gold pants is the debut and only studio album by american pop music group leslie and the ly's, released to itunes on march 11, 2005. and released in cd format on march 15, 2005. the record serves as front-woman leslie hall's first musical project after she became known on the internet for her gem sweater website. hall then enlisted school friends to form the band. after performing several of the songs at open mic events, the group recorded and released the record.  despite not entering any international record charts, the album did receive much internet attention and viral success. hall promoted the record with a tv appearance on unscrewed with martin sargent, accompanied with a live performance. the album was supported by the release of two singles. "gem sweater" was released as the lead single from the record, and experienced viral success on youtube. "gold pants" was released as the second single and was supported by a five-track ep with american hip hop recording artist arecee. gold pants serves as the only release by the group, as hall released all of her other musical projects as a musical artist.  composition  gold pants is a primarily electronic album, with influences of pop, hip hop, and house music. the album was produced using garageband. jason sellards of paper magazine described the album as "chock-full of catchy jams and horrifying piano ballads."  promotion  single   "gem sweater" had a music video released in 2005 and was released as the lead single. the song experienced viral success. the music video reached 20,000 views as of 2018.  "gold pants" served as the album's second official single, which was released with a 7" vinyl ep on may 15, 2005. the music video was released in 2005, and has reached 26,000 views as of 2018.  other songs   "ring a ding-ding" was premiered on unscrewed with martin sargent on november 23, 2004. a music video was released, which has garnered 118,000 views as of 2018.  track listing  release history  references   2005 debut albums leslie and the ly's albums
distributional cost-effectiveness analysis (dcea) is an extension of cost-effectiveness analysis (cea) that incorporates concern for both the average levels of outcomes as well as the distribution of outcomes. it is particularly useful when evaluating interventions to tackle health inequality.  dcea includes extended cost effectiveness analysis, which in addition to standard cea assesses the costs and effectiveness for different socioeconomic groups.  references  health care management
brazikumab (inn; development code medi2070) is a human monoclonal antibody designed for the treatment of crohn's disease. that targets il-23.  this drug was developed by medimmune.  references   monoclonal antibodies astrazeneca brands
kim su-an (; born january 27, 2006) is a south korean actress. she debuted in the entertainment industry when she was five years old, and has since featured in films and television series, eventually gaining wider recognition with her role in the international hit film train to busan (2016).  career  2011-2015: beginnings kim debuted as an actress in the film sorry, thanks in 2011. since then, she has become an in-demand child actress in both independent and big-budget films like sprout (2013) mad sad bad (2014) and coin locker girl (2015).  2016-present: rising popularity in 2016, she gained wider recognition for playing the daughter of gong yoo's character in the box-office zombie hit train to busan. the same year, she signed an exclusive contract with talent management agency blossom entertainment.  in 2017, she starred in the action film the battleship island, playing hwang jung-min's daughter. she was awarded the best supporting actress award at the buil film awards. she also appeared in along with the gods: the two worlds  (2017).  filmography  film  television series  awards and nominations  references  external links   kim su-an at blossom entertainment          2006 births living people south korean child actresses south korean television actresses south korean film actresses 21st-century south korean actresses
godfrey (goeffrey) (filius fredelonis, unus de collateralibus ducis godefridi) (died after 1098), lord of esch and crusader, son of fredelon of esch.  godfrey was brother to henry of esch. his family held the castle of esch-sur-sure in the ardennes. he and his brother were vassals of henry iii, count of luxembourg, and his brother and successor william.  his stepmother was ermengarde, countess of clermont, widow of gozelon, count of montaigu.  godfrey and his brother took the cross in 1096 and were among many leading knights from walloon and the lotharingian territories that joined the army of godfrey of bouillon in the first crusade. these included godfrey's brothers and their cousin baldwin of le bourg, baldwin ii of hainaut, rainald of toul, giselbert of clermont, warner of grez, baldwin of stavelot, peter of stenay, dodo of cons, and conon of montaigu and his sons and heirs gozelo ii and lambert.  godfrey was chosen to negotiate the passage of the crusading army through hungary.  the first three armies passing through hungary resulting in calamitous slaughters, and the king coloman the learned was determined to not repeat these disasters. in september 1096, godfrey successfully negotiated the passage of the army through hungary, but the price was high.  the family of godfrey of bouillon was required to be held hostage until the army had passed.  the incident apparently greatly enhanced the standing of coloman in the eyes of european royalty.  as henry and baldwin hurried to constantinople in search of booty, godfrey and the others would arrive shortly thereafter. emperor alexios i komnenos and godfrey differed on the goals of the crusade, and godfrey was unwilling to agree to the emperor's demands prior to the main force of crusaders that would shortly arrive in the holy land. godfrey sent his cousin baldwin of le bourg, conon of montaigu, and godfrey (of esch) to the palace to meet with alexios, but with no resolution of the conflict.  a charter dated february 1098 by emperor henry iv relating to the abbey of nivelles indicates that both godfrey and his brother henry had returned from the crusades.  there is no further reference to them in the histories. it is uncertain whether godfrey had any children, although godfrey ii, count of esch, could have been his son.  sources  murray, alan v., "the army of godfrey of bouillon, 1096
-1099: structure and dynamics of a contingent on the first crusade" (pdf). revue belge de philologie et d'histoire 70 (2), 1992 runciman, steven, a history of the crusades, volume i:  the first crusade and the foundation of the kingdom of jerusalem, cambridge university press, cambridge, 1951 riley-smith, the first crusaders, 1095-1131, cambridge university press, cambridge, 1997 medieval lands project, herren von esch  references  christians of the first crusade 11th-century people of the holy roman empire people from wiltz (canton)
the laka competition is an annual international architectural competition held by laka architektura. the competition has been created in order to search for innovative ideas of architecture that reacts in a way that is related to its social, environmental, technological, construction or material aspect.  in addition to the activity of the competition, the participants are provided with a blog platform that presents potential inspiration related to the topic of architecture reacting to human needs.  competition outline  the main inspiration for the competition are living organisms which respond and adapt to external stimuli. laka competition draws inspiration from the responsiveness of nature and looks for designs that are capable of dynamic adjustments, providing safety and comfort for their inhabitants.  apart from the money prize offered as an award for the winners, in the next editions of the competition selected participants can be considered to be included in the laka accelerator for an additional prize of having their project financially and substantially supported in order to play a role in covering human needs as the "architecture that reacts".  2015 edition  the first edition, run in 2015, gathered over 100 submissions and nearly 200 participants from 5 continents and 30 countries.  three winners and 10 honourable mentions were awarded to the participants. the jury in the 2015 edition consisted of:  maria aiolova  marc fornes  chris bosse  peter kuczia  guy hoffman  dave pigram  giacomo costa  2016 edition  registration for the competition is open until november 1, 2016. the project submission deadline is november 1, 2016. the winners will be announced on december 1, 2016. the jury in the 2016 edition will consist of:  qun dang, architect from mad architects, educator, "shanshui city" design philosophy practitioner,  nathalie de vries, architect, urban planner, mvrdv co-founder, educator, chair of the royal institute of dutch architects,  tobias wallisser, architect, laboratory for visionary architecture co-founder, educator,  ana maria gutierrez, architect, fundacion organizmo co-founder,  julien de smedt, architect, founder of jds architects, educator, winner of numerous awards in architecture,  peter kuczia, architect, co2 saver house designer, educator, winner of numerous awards in architecture,  arturo vittori, architect, warka water ngo co-founder, architecture and vision director, educator, awarded numerous prizes in architecture.  laka accelerator  laka accelerator is a term for a network of international partners of laka architektura, who can offer
the competition participants an additional distinction by helping them in the investigation and implementation of selected designs submitted to the competition. their role is to provide professional consulting, international press coverage, as well as financial and substantial support of sponsors.  the additional prize, which is the possibility of being considered by the acceleration partners, will be introduced in the next editions of the competition and is separate from the process of choosing the winners. the partners of the laka competition and laka accelerator are among others:  technology exchange lab  the buckminster fuller institute  fundacion organizmo  katerva  peace and collaborative development network  biomimicry institute  references   architectural competitions
lund's blue anchor line was a shipping company operating between the united kingdom, south africa and australia between 1870 and 1910.  the owners of this shipping company in later years were messrs. w. lund and sons.  the blue anchor line was founded in london by wilhelm lund (b. denmark 1837, d. kent, 1928) in 1869.  his two sons were albert edward lund and friedrich wilhelm lund,  who was also called frederick lund,  and is also recorded as f.w. lund jr. ( his grandfather, also a ship-owner, was also called  wilhelm lund).  an "h. lund" also appears in relation to the business.  originally sailing ships were used. between 1880 and 1890, sailing ships were replaced by steamers.  ships operated by this company include waratah, commonwealth, bungaree, geelong, wilcannia, narrung, and wakool.  the disappearance of the waratah near durban in 1909 resulted in the commercial failure of the company. its ships were sold to p&o, and it was wound up in 1910.  an inquiry was held in london to investigate the disappearance of the waratah, and f.w.lund jr., who gave evidence at the inquiry on behalf of the owners, was described in some newspaper reports as the chairman of directors of the company, although it appears to have actually been a partnership, in which wilhelm lund was still the senior partner.  the wreck of the waratah has never been found, and the cause of its loss remains inconclusive and still attracts controversy. despite this setback, wilhelm lund and f.w. lund continued to be respectable businessmen.  references  external links    defunct shipping companies of the united kingdom transport companies disestablished in 1910 transport companies established in 1869 1869 establishments in england 1910 disestablishments in england british companies disestablished in 1910 british companies established in 1869
the bricker building is a historic building in east hollywood, los angeles, california, u.s.. it was built in 1924. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since january 7, 2011.  references  east hollywood, los angeles buildings and structures on the national register of historic places in los angeles buildings and structures completed in 1924
the wheel of liverpool is a transportable ferris wheel installation on the keel wharf waterfront of the river mersey in liverpool. it was dismantled refurbishment in the netherlands in november 2020 and rebuilt in spring 2021. the wheel is near to m&s bank arena liverpool, and was originally opened on 25 march 2010. the structure is  tall, weighing 365 tonnes and has 42 fully enclosed capsules attached. the wheel had been planned for three years by the company great city attractions. they submitted a planning application which explained that it would increase tourism in liverpool. a smaller observation wheel had been operational in the city, which was located at the liverpool one leisure complex. this was dismantled because of the plans to open the wheel of liverpool. construction was completed on 11 february 2010 at a cost of £6 million.  the wheel was closed for a short time following great city attractions going into administration. freij entertainment international purchased the attraction and it is operated by their subsidiary wheels entertainments ltd. in november of 2020 freij entertainment international dismantled the wheel without warning or explanation. this was later explained as a planned refurbishment. the wheel was rebuilt in spring of 2021 and reopened in the summer of 2021. in october 2013, the wheel of liverpool was struck by lightning but did not sustain any damage.  history  planning and opening   in october 2009, it was announced that great city attractions had submitted a planning application to install a giant observation wheel on the former king's dock site of liverpool. they stated that with the wheel tourism would be increased and it would complement the city's skyline. the company had been negotiating a deal for three years prior. in 2005, the liverpool culture company had unsuccessfully attempted to secure permission the build a wheel on the canning half tide dock. while a temporary predecessor had already existed in liverpool, located on the liverpool one shopping centre complex. this was closed on 31 january 2010. that wheel had always been acknowledged as a temporary structure because of the city council's aspirations for the wheel of liverpool. the attraction had the backing of the albert dock tenants' business association because of the overall waterfront visitor experience it would provide. the application was successful and granted permission to operate for an initial twelve months, later extended to two years. installation began in the days that followed the closure of the liverpool one wheel. its construction was completed on 11 february 2010.  the attraction was opened on 25 march 2010 and had its own launch party. it was located on the piazza of liverpool event campus. the official name of the attraction was the "wheel of liverpool". in its first
year of operation it played host charity event, in which participants remained inside pods while the ride was operated for 24 hours. the liverpool echo have claimed that the attraction has been successful and has become a known landmark in liverpool. in october 2013, the structure was struck by lightning but no damage was confirmed following safety checks.  design and ownership  the wheel cost came a cost of six million pounds to manufacture and construct. the structure was  tall and 5 m taller than the liverpool one wheel. it weighed 365 tonnes and it was supported by six 30 meter columns. 75,000 led lights were installed to light it during the night. the structure was supported on 300 tonnes of water. it was designed to have almost silent operation.  the wheel had 42 fully enclosed capsules attached. they gave riders views of the river mersey, the welsh mountains and world heritage site waterfront at pier head. one of the capsules was stylised as a luxury capsule complete with a glass floor. each pod could carry up to eight passengers and were designed to give a 360 degree panoramic view of the surrounding area. the ride operated in three cycles which took approximately ten to twelve minutes.  great city attractions retained ownership of the wheel for two year until the company went into administration in july 2012. the attraction had to be closed down during august 2012 until a new investor was found. land owners acc liverpool remained in contact with administrators during the closure. the wheel of liverpool was acquired by dubai-based freij entertainment international, who without public warning or explanation dismantled the attraction in november of 2020. this was later explained as a planned refurbishment requiring transport of the wheel to the manufacturers facility in the netherlands. the wheel was rebuilt in spring of 2021 and reopened in the summer of 2021.  references  external links      ferris wheels in the united kingdom transportable ferris wheels buildings and structures in liverpool amusement rides introduced in 2010
volume 1 is the debut album of the band of para banda calypso. the album was produced by guitarist and husband of singer joelma, chimbinha, and released in mid-june 1999 by calypso productions.  having reached more than five hundred thousand copies in para, banda calypso was invited to perform the song "vendaval" in programa carlos santos (being the first live performance of the band).  development  at the very beginning with good reputation as a producer and several contacts, chimbinha had trouble getting sponsorship for the release of the first album of the band, there were those who believed in the band's work.  finally, they managed a partnership that allowed a limited 1000 disc sales, which were sold out within a week. with this result, there were contracts for concerts and the band was expanding by para.  singles the album's first single was vendaval, which had a very good acceptance by the public and para in some regions of northeast.  even with the success of vendaval, the song that really took the band to have a border spreading beyond of belem was disse adeus, especially in the state of pernambuco. it was the first song the band performed in the state.  but the most striking success of the album was dancando calypso, which became single the next album, ao vivo and was re-released on the 5th album, ao vivo em sao paulo. in addition to singles, the other songs on the album were also successful, but with better acceptance in their live versions.  relaunching  the album was re-released, and the only change made was the introduction of three bonus tracks: loirinha,  rubi and brega fo. in the song loirinha, who acts is another singer called dinho.  nowadays, this is the album version found for more sales, download and research on the album.  curiosities   joelma says he made the album cover design, and it has posted 2 photos, but this made many think that there were two vocalists; today the singer talks about the subject with humor.  track listing  bonus tracks second edition  references  1999 debut albums banda calypso albums
the croatian practical shooting association is the croatian association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organizations of croatia
arnolds udris (born 18 june 1968) is a latvian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people latvian male cyclists olympic cyclists of latvia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from riga
the 1973-74 carolina cougars season was the 5th and final season of the cougars in the american basketball association. billy cunningham (who had been named the mvp the previous season), dennis wuycik, and mike lewis were hobbled by injuries through the season, which meant the team struggled to gain much ground in the division, though they finished consistently enough to qualify for a playoff spot for the 2nd straight season. the cougars finished 2nd in points scored, with 110.5 per game, but 6th in points allowed with 107.0 per game. the team was 26-16 by the midpoint of the season (with a seven-game winning streak in the middle of it), while going 21-21 for the second half of the season. the biggest losing streak by the team was 6, done near the end of the season, but by that point they had clinched the third spot in the playoffs, finishing 19 games above virginia, who they beat in their final regular season game at home, 99-91. once again, the cougars faced the kentucky colonels in the playoffs, but once again the colonels prevailed, this time in a first round sweep. this turned out to be the final game the cougars played. owner tedd munchak sold the team after the season ended to a group of new york businessmen, which included harry weltman, donald schupak, ozzie silna and daniel silna for $1.5 million. the team subsequently moved to st. louis to become the spirits of st. louis, playing for two seasons.  during the regular season, the cougars played 21 games in greensboro, 14 in charlotte, and 7 in raleigh; in the playoffs, the team played once in greensboro, and once in charlotte.  roster   27 joe caldwell - small forward   20 mack calvin - point guard   53 jim chones - center  32 billy cunningham - small forward   21 steve jones - shooting guard   42 mike lewis - center   23 gene littles - point guard   22 ed manning - small forward   24 ted mcclain - shooting guard   52 tom owens - power forward   31 marv roberts - power forward   14 ollie taylor - shooting guard   44 dennis wuycik - small forward  final standings  eastern division  playoffs eastern division semifinals  cougars lose series, 4-0  awards and honors 1974 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 30, 1974)  mack calvin  ted mcclain  references   cougars on basketball reference  external links  remember
theaba.com 1973-74 regular season and playoff results  remembertheaba.com carolina cougars page  carolina cougars carolina carolina cougars, 1973-74 carolina cougars, 1973-74
are you real?  is the second studio album by american rock band beware of darkness, released september 16, 2016 by bright antenna.  background and recording according to kyle nicolaides, "after the first album, i didn't think i was going to have a future in music at all, but ironically i realized the only power i really had to deal and cope with that was by writing more songs," he says. "this new record started from dealing with that uncertainty. then it morphed into this idea that i wanted to make the best rock record of the past ten years, something original and fresh that has twelve songs all in one lane, with the feeling of overcoming something." before recording this album nicolaides had a goal of writing 100 songs. he was able to accomplish this goal. the revision process has changed between this album and their previous album orthodox. the band started recording this album in fall of 2015.  track listing  personnel beware of darkness kyle nicolaides - lead vocals, lead guitar  daniel curcio - bass  tony cupito - drums, percussion hayden scott - drums on record  references  external links  official site band's official facebook band's official twitter bright antenna official website    2016 albums beware of darkness (band) albums
takella. n. sadalakshmi (1928-2004) was the first dalit woman legislator of telangana.  early life sadalakshmi was born at pensionpura in hyderabad. she studied at keyes high school and had begun a course in medicine in madras when she heard b. r. ambedkar deliver a speech at jeera compound. she decided then to abandon medicine in favour of politics.  political career sadalakshmi was first elected from the peddapalli constituency and subsequently from that of kamareddy. she rose to become deputy speaker of the andhra pradesh legislative assembly.  in 1962, sadalakshmi was elected to the state assembly from yellareddy assembly constituency. she became the first and only woman minister in the cabinet of neelam sanjiva reddy. as a minister of religious and charitable endowments - a position she held for a year - she took the decision to train dalits as hindu priests. she set up an archaka school at yadagirigutta and allowed women into devasthanam trusts. later, as social welfare minister, she set up sc corporation.  sadalakshmi was a member of vidhan parishad between 1974 and 1980. she also served as honorary chairman of lidcap in the 1980s.  sadalakshmi supported ambedkarism and the movement for a separate telangana state. she joined the telugu desam party in 1982 at n. t. rama rao's insistence and was appointed to be the party's vice-president. she later left telugu desam party to work for the telangana congress party.  personal life sadalakshmi was married to t. venkata narayana, a prominent scheduled caste leader. they had a son and two daughters. she died on 24 july 2004 at care hospital due to a cardiac problem. she was cremated at bansilalpet.  references  1928 births 2004 deaths dalit women dalit politicians women members of the andhra pradesh legislative assembly members of the andhra pradesh legislative assembly
fender bender is a 2016 american slasher film by writer and director mark pavia.  fender bender is the first film co-produced with chillertv and shout! factory, it went into production on november 4, 2015. shout! factory developed, financed, and distributed the film and it premiered on chillertv june 3, 2016  after a limited theater release on may 23, 2016. the film was shot on location and is set in new mexico, and follows a 17-year-old girl being stalked by a serial killer.  plot hilary (makenzie vega), a 17-year-old girl, gets into a fender bender shortly after obtaining her driver's license. she innocently provides all of her information to the other driver (bill sage). when hilary returns home, her parents are angry at her, though the stranger rear-ended her. as a result, they go on holiday without her, leaving her alone and vulnerable. hilary invites her friends, rachel and erik, over and receives a text from the stranger. she has unwittingly become the next victim as the mysterious driver stalks her suburban home later that stormy night while erik, rachel, and she defend themselves. complicating matters is hilary's ex-boyfriend, who appears on the doorstep drunk.  cast  makenzie vega as hilary diaz  dre davis as rachel  cassidy freeman as jennifer  kelsey montoya  as erik  harrison sim as andy  steven michael quezada as mario  lora cunningham  as olga  bill sage as the driver  release fender bender was released by shout! factory on june 3, 2016 airing on chiller tv. shout! factory released the film on blu-ray and dvd format on october 4, 2016.  reception felix vasquez jr. of cinema crazed stated that he was "expecting almost nothing and was shocked at how effective it was in the end. it's a solid stalk and chase slasher film mixing "death proof" and "the hitcher" and director pavia delivers a strong genre entry suitable for a lazy friday night and some beers." matt donato of we got this covered  was more lukewarm indicating that although "makenzie vega asserts herself as a future genre star," "filmmaker mark pavia dilutes an original idea with stale, musty slasher generics that have been dominating too many of my reviews lately.  a select few moments shine - mostly involving gnarly gore effects - but the sum of this creepy driver's rampage is nothing but a bland home invasion/slasher
wannabe told through a weak, timid voice." jake dee of the joblo network rates the film a 5 out of 10 citing lack of originality and "over-trampled" "halloween-like tropes" as drawbacks while redemption comes in the slick pacing and ever increasing gore and violence culminating in its avoidance of a pat hollywood ending which "make the movie a bit better than perhaps it should be."  notes  references  rotten tomatoes fender bender review  exclusive by brent lang at variety  "a crash course in terror" at horrorpedia  review by felix vasquez at cinema crazed  review by matt donato at we got this covered  daily dead  bloody disgusting  horror world  horrorphilia  external links      2016 horror films american slasher films american films
groton nature center is a nature center in groton, vermont that serves seven area state parks located in groton state forest. natural history exhibits focus on the forest's animals, plants, geology and ecosystems, including lake groton. other exhibits include logging in the forest. the center offers naturalist programs, hikes and concerts. visitors can obtain maps and trail guides for the parks and forest.  the center is within walking distance of big deer state park, stillwater state park and boulder beach state park. the other parks in groton state forest are kettle pond state park, new discovery state park, ricker pond state park and seyon lodge state park.  groton nature center is operated by the vermont department of forests, parks, and recreation, as part of the vermont state park system.  references  external links official website  nature centers in vermont buildings and structures in groton, vermont education in caledonia county, vermont tourist attractions in caledonia county, vermont
banga assembly constituency (sl. no.: 46) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in shahid bhagat singh nagar district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india shaheed bhagat singh nagar district
senate elections were held in cambodia on 22 january 2006 to elect 57 of the 61 senators of cambodia. the result was a victory for the cambodian people's party which won 45 seats. the funcinpec party won 10 seats, and the sam rainsy party won 2 seats. this is the first senate election in cambodia since previous senators were appointed by parliament and the king.  results  references  2006 elections in asia elections in cambodia 2006 in cambodia
sidham mutsadi is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3.7 km from nurmahal, 23.7 km from phillaur, 29 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 134 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 23 km away from the village. the village is 52 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 121 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
dolanji is an area near solan in himachal pradesh, india. it is famous for its bon monastery, which one of the main tourist attractions in the sirmour district.  it is an offshoot of the menri monastery, the second oldest monastery in the world. it is located at a distance of 24-25 km from kumarhatti, on the narag-sarahan road and is run by the yungdrung bon monastic centre. constructed in 1969, it was founded by abbot lungtok tenpai nyima. the place is considered to be the best place to witness tibetan culture. this monastery has recreated the geshe training program and is home to over 200 monks. menri in india and triten norbutse monastery in nepal now host the only two geshe programs in the bon lineage.  references   bon
john cobourn webb (july 13, 1915 - march 24, 2000) was an american lawyer and democratic politician who represented falls church and fairfax, virginia part-time in the virginia house of delegates from 1954 to 1966.  early life and family  john webb was born in washington d.c. to martin taylor webb (1885-1970) and his wife, the former lilie m. cobourn (1882-1960). he received an llm degree from the washington college of law. webb married harriet shelton rhinehardt and had several children.  he served in the u.s. army's 11th airborne division in the pacific theater in world war ii, and was active in the freemasons.  career  after admission to the virginia bar, webb practiced in fairfax county, virginia. he also served as president of the fairfax bar association, as well as was chairman of the board of the bank of annandale. he was also president of the mcdonald corporation of hampton, virginia and the mcdonald corporation of norfolk, virginia.  in 1953, webb and omer l. hirst were elected to represent falls church and fairfax in northern virginia in the virginia general assembly, a part-time position. they replaced edwin w. lynch, who was the only delegate elected to represent fast-growing fairfax between 1946 and 1951. webb was soon embroiled in the massive resistance crisis whereby the byrd organization following the lead of u.s. senator harry f. byrd refused to allow desegregation of virginia's schools after the u.s. supreme court's decision in brown v. board of education. webb and fellow delegates kathryn h. stone of nearby arlington and republican vernon s. shaffer of shenandoah county became the only three delegates to oppose all seven anti-naacp laws contained in the stanley plan. thus, webb's was one of the few moderate voices during the special legislative session that ultimately adopted the stanley plan, portions of which were declared unconstitutional by both the virginia supreme court and a three judge federal panel on january 19, 1959.  hirst declined to seek reelection, and after a multi-candidate democratic primary  dorothy s. mcdiarmid, who ran against the byrd organization's school closing strategy and was elected (and webb was re-elected) in november, 1959. webb was again re-elected in 1961, although mcdiarmid was temporarily defeated by republican glenn a. burklund in that election.  nearly a decade after his first electoral win, webb (together with stone and senators c. harrison mann and john a. k.
donovan) became named plaintiffs in the reapportionment case ultimately decided (in northern virginia's favor) by the u.s. supreme court in davis v. mann. the case had been brought because after the 1960 census, the byrd organization refused to accord the fast-growing areas in northern virginia representation in virginia's general assembly proportionate to the number of voters. whereas webb represented over 100,000 citizens, delegates from some districts in rural southside virginia represented only about 20,000 voters.  death and legacy webb was buried at annandale united methodist church. american university's washington college of law awards a scholarship in his name.  references  1915 births 2000 deaths members of the virginia house of delegates virginia democrats virginia lawyers washington college of law alumni 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american lawyers united states army personnel of world war ii united states army soldiers
adventure in morocco (finnish: rantasalmen sulttaani) is a 1953 finnish comedy film directed by eddie stenberg and starring assi nortia, esa pakarinen and oke tuuri.  cast  assi nortia as senora carmen manzano    esa pakarinen  as esa pakarinen    oke tuuri  as ville lipponen    kauko kayhko  as senor juan manzano    heimo lepisto  as paperboy    veikko sorsakivi  as outsider at the insets    ossi skurnik  as receptionist    siiri angerkoski  as jumbu    borje lampenius  as senor singing the serenade    rita elmgren  as the singing senorita    jalmari parikka  as ticket vendor    kalle peronkoski as bartender    nestori lampi as man taking a siesta    anton soini as accordion player    ahmed riza  as portieer of the maroccon hotel    marita nordberg  as harem girl    eva gylden  as harem girl    maija routavuo  as harem girl    ulla sandqvist as harem girl    uuno montonen as eunuch    matti aulos  as pasha ahmed-lipp-alih    joel asikainen  as black servant    mej-ling axberg  as dancer  references  bibliography   qvist, per olov & von bagh, peter. guide to the cinema of sweden and finland. greenwood publishing group, 2000.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films finnish comedy films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by eddie stenberg finnish black-and-white films
rpd energy, formerly renewable power direct, markets directly sourced renewable electricity primarily to large commercial and industrial customers. rpd was founded in 2014 and is authorized by the federal energy regulatory commission to act as a wholesale power marketer.  rpd energy is based in houston, texas, and is led by ceo, eric alam.  rpd's publicly reported customers include intuit inc., iron mountain incorporated, lg and rei, a leading outdoor retailer. during a march 2021 webinar, the company disclosed that it had also structured renewable energy service agreements for adobe, the fortune 100 software company, and mckesson, america's largest distributor of wholesale medical supplies. in january 2022, the company reported that it had also served blackrock, the world's largest asset manager.  the company's innovative approach to sourcing green power for corporate customers has been profiled by triple pundit and greenbiz.  forbes has also profiled the company's unique green energy affinity programs for employees and customers of corporate renewable energy buyers.  in may 2020, the u.s. affiliate of axpo, switzerland's largest renewable energy provider, announced that it had acquired a minority interest in rpd energy and also would be providing wholesale market services to rpd energy "to enhance its ability to address the rapidly growing demand for renewable energy choices across multiple customer segments." axpo said that its new strategic partnership with rpd energy also "allows axpo u.s. to increase its ownership of rpd energy over time as the business continues to grow."  in 2021, a representative for the new york-based investment group, arosa capital, joined rpd's board following a reported funding round.  rpd energy was a founding member of the business renewables center (brc), a member-based platform that streamlines and accelerates corporate purchasing of off-site, large-scale wind and solar energy. the brc was organized by the rocky mountain institute and publicly launched in february 2015.  references  external links  official website  renewable energy companies of the united states companies based in washington, d.c. american companies established in 2014 renewable resource companies established in 2014
anna elisabeth baer nee carlbohm (1722-1799) was a finnish merchant and shipowner. she was one of the richest merchants in the latter half of the 18th century in turku, finland.  life anna elisabeth baer was the daughter of the rich merchant and city councillor kristoffer carlbohm and anna warg of gamla karleby.  in 1743, she married the wealthy merchant anders baer (1712-1770) of turku, who was also an elected representative to the swedish parliament. the couple had thirteen children, seven of whom became adults.  business career she took over the family business (as well as her husband's guild membership) after his death in 1770, and managed it for nearly thirty years after his death.   she sent several petitions relating to business to the swedish collegium of commerce.   she was a shipowner, owned a merchant company and several properties outside of turku, as well as parts of a brick factory, a saw mill and a tobacco factory.  from 1770 until 1777, she managed the turku city hall restaurant in companionship with elisabeth wittfooth.  after the death of her spouse, she was sued by the tobacco trader emanuel tillman for the debt of her late husband, for the unpaid tobacco leaves he had ordered for a tobacco factory in turku in which he owned an interest. baer refused to pay the entire amount but claimed that the other part owners of the factory should pay part of the debt. this was contested by the biggest part owner, jost joachim pipping, who demanded to see the baer account books to verify the purchase had been exclusively that of anders baer. the legal dispute lasted for three years, until 1774, when the court decided that all part owners should pay a share of the debt.  during the theatre war in 1790, the war lugger tumlaren was gifted to the royal fleet of king gustav iii of sweden by a group of female merchants (referred to as 'merchant widows') of the city of turku, among them being anna elisabeth baer and elisabeth wittfooth.  anna elisabeth baer died a very rich woman in 1799, and left her possessions to her three surviving children.  1771 election anna elisabeth baer wanted to vote in the riksdag elections in turku in 1771, and sent a letter to the governor regarding the matter.  the petition was sent together with the book binder hedvig soderman and the tanner hedvig ottiliana richter, both widows who had inherited their businesses from their late husbands, and who
all petitioned to vote on the grounds that they were tax paying guild members.  the petition to vote was sent because the election of the burgher city representatives to the riksdag had already been held, without her having been called to participate in it, despite having the legal right to do so.  in the election, jost joachim pipping was elected representative to the riksdag by the turku burghers.  pipping was a business rival of baer, with whom she was involved in a court dispute at the time.   the burgher election of turku was contested by both the craftsmen's guild as well as by baer.  in her protest, she demanded the right to exercise her vote and made the case that because she paid taxes as a burgher, she should have the right to elect her burgher representative, and that if her right to vote was not respected, she feared that her other rights as a businessperson were in danger of eventually being contested in the same way.  in her protest, she wrote to the governor:  "i make these demands for no other reasons or designs than to defend my rights and privileges, without which my profession and business trade could be limited and mistreated, a concern to which i trust upon the consideration of your grace."  in sweden-finland at the time, there was in fact conditional women's suffrage, and women who were tax paying guild members did have the legal right to vote, a fact that baer may have been aware of.  in sweden, women did vote in the 1771 election if they were taxpaying guild members of legal majority, which baer herself became when she was widowed: and finland was at that time a part of sweden, thus this conditional women's suffrage should have applied in finland as well.  however, this right was contested in finland, where it was not considered proper for women to appear in the town halls to discuss political issues.  the answer to the petition of 1771 was a refusal from the governor, after having consulted the burgher elders of the city of turku, regarding their view on the matter.  the burgher elders stated that baer, soderman and richter had merely inherited their businesses (and burgher rights) from their late husbands: they had not sworn the burgher oath personally, were thus not 'full members' of the guilds, and thereby they did not have the right to vote, despite being guild members.   in his answer to baer's petition to vote, the governor stated that she had no reason to fear that
her business rights should be threatened in any way, but:   "... mrs baer wishes to vote for the representatives of the parliament: this curious matter seemed too ridiculous for the city elders to answer further.  for that reason, and because it seemed likely that mrs baer had been seduced to this step, so unexpected for the strength of her intellect and unflattering for her sex, we will give no further reply to her petition in this matter."  the conditional women's suffrage in sweden-finland was in any case abolished the following year, when the revolution of 1772 abolished the age of liberty in favour of absolute monarchy.  nevertheless, the turku burgher election of 1771 was deemed to be incorrect and a re-election was held, during which pipping lost his place.  references  1722 births 1799 deaths finnish women in business 18th-century finnish businesspeople finnish businesspeople in shipping 18th-century businesswomen
the 2016 levene gouldin & thompson tennis challenger was a professional tennis tournament played on hard court. it was the 23rd edition of the tournament which was part of the 2016 atp challenger tour. it took place in binghamton, united states between 18 and 24 july 2016.  singles main-draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   jared hiltzik   thai-son kwiatkowski   michael mmoh   dennis nevolo  the following player received entry as an alternate:   lloyd glasspool  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   aleksandar vukic   jose statham   erik crepaldi   evan king  the following players received entry as lucky losers:   peter kobelt   finn tearney  doubles main-draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of july 11, 2016.  other entrants the following pairs received entry as wildcards:   alex lawson /  jackson withrow   william mendler /  nick zieziula   thai-son kwiatkowski /  tommy paul  the following pair received entry as qualifiers into the doubles main draw:   juan manuel benitez chavarriaga /  raleigh smith  champions  men's singles     darian king def.  mitchell krueger, 6-2, 6-3  men's doubles     matt reid /  john-patrick smith def.  liam broady /  guilherme clezar, 6-4, 6-2  references  external links official website    levene gouldin and thompson tennis challenger levene gouldin & thompson tennis challenger levene
international jascha heifetz competition is a competition for violinists of all nationalities, which is held in lithuania. the first international jascha heifetz competition for violinists was held in 2001, commemorating the 100th anniversary of the birth of violinist jascha heifetz. the competition was organised by the lithuanian cultural foundation together with the lithuanian academy of music and theatre.  currently the competition is organised by public institution natu knygynas together with lithuanian academy of music and theatre. main supporters of the competition are the lithuanian council for culture and the ministry of culture of the republic of lithuania.   the competition takes place every four years. the participants that pass the preliminary round are evaluated by an international jury.  past winners  references  external links   more information on official website  violin competitions
eunidia flava is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1952.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1952
rhizopogon alexsmithii is an ectomycorrhizal fungus in the order boletales.  named in honor of american mycologist alexander h. smith, it was described as new to science in 1975 by james trappe. alfredo vizzini and mirca zotti transferred it to the genus rhizopogon in 2010.  see also list of fungi by conservation status  references  rhizopogonaceae fungi described in 1817 fungi of north america
beritasatu world is one of television station which broadcasts news program since 2014. this channel is also useful as a dedicated channel for the international news. this channel is the upper middle class. the owner and founder is peter f. gontha.  television channels and stations established in 2014
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'm'.  ma  mabley (j.mabley, rexdale, ontario)  mabley white monoplane  mac  (melbourne aircraft corporation)  mac mamba  mac para technology (roznov pod radhostem, czech republic) mac bitch mac blaze mac charger mac eden mac elan mac icon mac intox mac magus mac muse mac paradox mac pasha mac progress mac t-ride mac whistler mac yukon  macair  (macair industries)  macair merlin  macchi  (giulio macchi / nieuport-macchi / aeronautica macchi s.p.a.)   nieuport-macchi n.vi  nieuport-macchi parasol  nieuport-macchi n.10  nieuport-macchi n.11  nieuport-macchi n.17  macchi c.3  macchi l.1  macchi l.2  macchi l.3  macchi m.3  macchi m.4  macchi m.5  macchi m.6  macchi m.7  macchi m.8  macchi m.9  macchi m.9bis  macchi m.12  macchi m.12bis  macchi m.14  macchi m.15  macchi m.15bis  macchi m.16  macchi m.17  macchi m.18  macchi m.19  macchi m.20  macchi m.24  macchi m.26  macchi m.29  macchi m.33  macchi m.39  macchi m.40  macchi m.41  macchi m.52  macchi m.53  macchi m.67  macchi m.70  macchi m.71  macchi mc.72  macchi mc.73  macchi mc.73 idro  macchi mc.77  macchi mc.94  macchi mc.99  macchi mc.100  macchi mc.200  macchi mc.201  macchi mc.202  macchi mc.205  macchi mc.206  macchi mc.207  macchi mb.307  macchi mb.308  macchi mb.320  macchi mb.323  macchi mb.326  macchi m.416  macchi-lockheed al.60  maccready   gossamer condor  gossamer albatross  gossamer owl  gossamer penguin  maccready bionic bat  macdonald    macdonald sportflight a  macdonald  ((robert a
) macdonald aircraft co, sonoma, ca)  macdonald s-20  macdonald s-21  mace-trefethen  (harvey mace & alfred trefethen, sacramento, ca)  mace-trefethen m-101 macerschmitt  mace-trefethen m-102 scorchy  mace-trefethen r-1 mr b  mace-trefethen r-2 shark  mace-trefethen seamaster  macera  (silvano macera)  macera sparviero  macfam  (macfam world traders)  macfam sa 102.5 cavalier  macfam sa 103 cavalier  macfam sa 104 cavalier  macfam sa 105 super cavalier  mack  (mack-craft amphibian corp inc (fdr: r u mcintosh), plymouth, mi)  mack dolphin  macmanaman  (james e macmanaman, springfield, or)  macmanaman 1930 monoplane  macmanaman baby fleet  madison  (madison airport company inc, madison, wi)  madison super ace  maeda   maeda ku-1  maeda ku-6  maestranza central de aviacion   maestranza central de aviacion triciclo-experimental  maestranza central de aviacion xx-01  maestranza central de aviacion hf xx-02  mag (magyar altalanos gepgyar rt - mag - {ungarische allgemaine mascinenfabrik ag})  mag-fokker triplane 90.01 (fokker v 6?)  mag-fokker triplane 90.02 (fokker v 4)  mag-fokker 90.03 (fokker v 7)  mag-fokker 90.04 (fokker v 12)  mag-fokker 90.05 (fokker v 22)  magal (magal holdings ltd.)  magal cuby i  magal cuby ii  magal copy cub  magni  (laboratorio costruzioni aeronautiche piero magni / piero magni aviazione s.a.i.)  magni vale  magni supervale  magni pm.1 vittoria  magni pm.2  magni pm.3  magni  (magni gyro s.r.l.)  magni-tervamaki mt-5  magni-terv
amaki mt-7  magni m-14 scout  magni m-16 tandem trainer  magni m-18 spartan  magni m-22 voyager  magni xm-23 orion  magni m-24 orion  magni m-26  magni vpm s-2  magnum (terrence o'neill, president oac, magnum)  magnum pickup  mahoney  (lee mahoney)  mahoney sorceress  mahoney-ryan  ( b f mahoney-ryan aircraft co, san diego, ca)  mahoney-ryan x-1 special a.k.a. sportster  mahoney-ryan b-1  mahoney-ryan b-2  mahoney-ryan b-3 brougham  mai  (moscow aviation institute)  mai e-2  mai e-3  mai boldrev  mai elf  mai emai  mai foton  mai kvant (quantum)  mai semburg  mai-skb-3pm  mai junior  mai-62  mai-89  oskbes mai-208  oskbes aviatika mai 920 - oskbes mai moskau aviation institut  mai-223 kityonok  mai-890  mai-890u  aviatika-mai-890skh farmer  aviatika-mai-890uskh  aviatika-mai-890s  mai-900 acrobat  oskbes mai-920  mai-980u  mai-980csh  mai marathon  mai-03  mai-53  mai-56  mai-60 snezhinka  mai-63  mai-68  mai-890  mai-920  maillet nennig   maillet nennig mn-a  mainair sports  mainair blade mainair blade 582 mainair blade 912 mainair rapier  mair  (e mair, 3106 w fullerton ave, chicago, il)  mair 1910 biplane  makelan  (makelan corporation, new braunfels, tx) hatz bantam hatz cb-1 hatz classic  makhonine  (ivan makhonine)  makhonine mak-10  makhonine mak-101  makhonine mak-123  makino (t. makino with mr hirano and mr oki)  makino mho.235  malcolm  (malcolm aircraft)  malcolm merlin  malev   malev ill-62m  malin
owski (stefan malinowski)  stemal iii  malinowski dziaba  man planes  (man planes inc, manitowoc, wi)  man planes mp-1  manfred weiss  data from:  manfred weiss hungaria  manfred weiss wm-9 budapest foker c.v-e  manfred weiss em-10 siemens sh.12 engine  manfred weiss wm-10 olyv (buzzard/hawk)  manfred weiss wm-11 budapest fokker c.v  manfred weiss wm-13 (wm-10a re-engined with a 130hp sport iii)  manfred weiss wm-14 budapest fokker c.v-d  manfred weiss wm-16 budapest  wm-16a with  gnome-rhone 9k mistral, 9 built  wm-16b with  gnome-rhone 14k mistral major, 9 built  manfred weiss wm-17 - [project] single-seat fighter aircraft  manfred weiss wm-18 - [project] single-seat fighter aircraft  manfred weiss wm-20 heinkel hd.22 deriv.  manfred weiss wm-21 solyom development of wm-16  manfred weiss wm-23 - prototype, 1 built, crashed on test flight  wm-23b - [project], 2-seater reconnaissance*** wm-23 with rear defence.  wm-23g - [project], gyakorlo (advanced trainer) based on wm-23 fighter  manfred weiss wm-24 - [project] possible desig. for daimler- benz db603-powered wm-23/wm-123 fighter  manfred weiss wm-123 ezust nyil ii - [project] alt desig for db603-powered wm-23 fighter  mangin  (guy mangin)  mangin mrc.1   manhattan  (manhattan aeroplane co, consortium of former brooklyn aero club members, new nork, ny)  manhattan 1913 biplane   manko / man-pi  (manshu koku kk / manshu hikoki seizo kk - manchurian airways co. ltd / manchurian aeroplane manufacturing co. ltd.)  manko mt-1 hayabusa passenger transport  manko mt-2 light passenger transport   manley-stewart  (b b stewart & f e manley, salem, or)  manley-stewart h-200   mann egerton   mann egerton type b  mann egerton type h   mann & grimmer   mann & grimmer
m.1   manorplane  (florian f manor, fon du lac, wi)  manorplane t-1   mannesmann  "poll" triplane   mansyu   mansyu ki-79  mansyu army type 2 advanced trainer  mansyu ki-98   manta  (manta aircraft corp (john p & david r davis), 540 n labrea ave, los angeles, ca)  manta 1940 monoplane  manta long-range fighter   manta  (manta products inc) manta foxbat   mantelli    mantelli am-6  mantelli am-8  mantelli am-9  mantelli am-10 triete  mantelli am-11 albatros  mantelli am-12   mantz  (united air services (paul mantz), burbank, ca)  mantz 1938 pusher  mantz 1950 pusher   manzolini  (conte ettore manzolini di campoleone) manzolini libellula  marais (charles marais)  marais avionette   maranda  (maranda aircraft company)  maranda bm1 loisir  maranda bm1-a super loisir  maranda bm3  maranda bm4 hawk  maranda bm5   marawing  (kolin, czech republic) marawing 1-l malamut  marbella parapente (malaga, spain) marbella parapente paramotor pap  marchaudon  marchaudon scarabee 01   marchetti  (ing. alessandro marchetti)  marchetti la chimera sport biplane of 1910   marchetti-vickers-terni   m.v.t. scout (siai s.50)   marchetti  ((paul) marchetti motor patents inc, mills field, san bruno, ca)  marchetti m-1  marchetti m-2 arrow   marchetti  (emerino marchetti, tuckahoe ny )  marchetti sport   marchetti  (frank marchetti, chicago)  marchetti avenger   marcotte  (kenneth marcotte, bedford park, il)  marcotte rich mixture ii   marcoux-bromberg  (hal w marcoux-jack bromberg, venice, ca.)  marcoux-bromberg 1938 monoplane a.k.a. elmendorf special  marcoux-bromberg special   marenco swiss helicopter   marenco swisshelicopter skye sh09   marendez  (marendaz
aircraft ltd /  d. m. k. marendaz)  wickner-marendaz mk i  marendaz mk iii  marendaz mk iv  marendaz trainer  marganski (edward marganski)  marganski em-5a dudus kudlacz   marganski & mysłowski  (marganski & mysłowski zakłady lotnicze - marganski & mysłowski aviation works)  em-10 bielik  em-11 orka  mdm mdm-1 fox  swift s-1   marie  (jean-pierre marie)  marie jpm.01 medoc   marinac  (j g marinac)  marinac flying mercury   marinavia  ( marinavia farina srl)  marinavia qr-2  marinavia qr-2bis  marinavia qr-14 levriero  marinavia qr-22   marine  (marine aircraft co, sausalito, ca)  marine water sprite   marine corps warfighting laboratory   dragon eye   marinens flyvebaatfabrikk   marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.1  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.2  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.3  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.4  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.5  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.6  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.7  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.8  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.9  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.10  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.11  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk m.f.12  marinens flyvebaatfabrikk w.33   mariner aircraft  mariner aircraft mariner  marinosyan (alexander marinosyan)  marinosyan m-235   marion  (george whysall & assoc aka marion aircraft co, 280 n main, marion, oh)  marion 1929 monoplane  marion whysall   mark  (mark flugzeugbau) mark shark   markische  (markische flugzeug-werke)  markische d.i   markwal
der  ( ing. a. markwalder of raterschen, switzerland)  markwalder marabu   marlman  (william marland, co)  marlman flying box   marquardt  (marquardt aircraft co, venice and van nuys, ca)  marquardt m-14 a.k.a. whirlajet   marquart  (edward marquart, riverside, ca)  marquart ma-3 maverick  marquart ma-4 lancer  marquart ma-5 charger   marquian  (roger marquian)  marquian rm.01   marrone  (vincent marrone, roosevelt, ny)  marrone vm-1   mars  (james c "bud" mars)  mars skylark   mars  (mars mfg co, lemars, ia)  mars m-1-80 skycoupe   marsh  (marsh aviation co, mesa, az)  marsh g-164 c-t turbo cat  marsh s2r-t turbo thrush  marsh ts-2e turbo-tracker  marsh turbo mentor   marsh  (marsh aircraft co, oak park, il)  marsh 1930 monoplane   marshall  (marshall aircraft co )  marshall e-1   marshall  (marshall aircraft laboratories (nicholas-beazley employees' group), marshall, mo)  marshall phantom   marshalls  (marshall aerospace / marshalls of cambridge)  marshalls ma.4   marston & ordway  (c j marston & p w ordway, concord, nh)  marston & ordway 1930 biplane  martens (arthur martens)  martens windhund   martin   martin a-15  martin a-22 maryland  martin a-23 baltimore  martin a-30 baltimore  martin a-45  martin at-23  martin b-10  martin b-12  martin b-13  martin b-14  martin b-16  martin b-26 marauder  martin b-27  martin b-33 super marauder  martin b-48  martin b-51  martin b-57 canberra  martin b-68  martin xb-907  martin c-3  martin xlb-4  martin xo-4  martin x-23 prime  martin p-5 marlin  martin am mauler  martin bm  martin btm  martin t-1  martin jm  martin jrm mars  martin mo  martin m2
o  martin ms  martin nbs-1  martin n2m  martin pm  martin p2m  martin p3m  martin p4m mercator  martin p5m marlin  martin p6m seamaster  martin p7m submaster  martin pbm mariner  martin pb2m mars  martin rm  martin sc  martin t2m  martin t3m  martin t4m  martin t5m  martin no.1 1909 biplane  martin 1909-1910 monoplane  martin 1911 biplane  martin 1912 landplane  martin 1912 tractor1  martin 1913 hydroaeroplane  martin 1913 pusher  martin 1913 special  martin-willard 1914 biplane  martin 66 night mail plane  martin 67  martin 70 commercial  martin 123  martin m-130 clipper  martin 139  martin 145  martin 146  martin 156  martin 162  martin 162-a  martin 166  martin 167  martin 179  martin 187  martin 193  martin 316  martin 2-0-2  martin 3-0-3  martin 4-0-4  martin aerial freighter  martin baltimore  martin gmb  martin gmc  martin gmp  martin gmt  martin great lakes tourer  martin k-3 scout  martin maryland  martin mb-1  martin mb-2  martin mbt  martin mt  martin r  martin r-land  martin s hydro  martin t  martin tt  glenn martin twin tractor   martin  (martin aircraft company, christchurch, new zealand)  martin jetpack   martin  (james vernon, martin aeroplane co, elyra, oh)  martin bomber  martin harvard i  martin k-iii kitten aka blue bird  martin k-iv  martin kf-1   martin  (arthur martin, santa ana, ca)  martin dart   martin  ()  martin paraplane  martin roadstar   martin  (ray martin, smithville, oh)  martin 1957 monoplane   martin-boyd  (edward martin & millard boyd, santa ana, ca)  martin-boyd 1927 monoplane   martin-baker   martin-baker mb 1  martin-baker mb 2  martin-baker mb 3  martin-baker mb 4  martin-baker mb 5   martin-marietta   martin-marietta x-23 prime  martin-marietta x-24  martin-marietta x-24a pilot  martin-marietta x-24b  martin-marietta
x-24c  martin-marietta sv-5j  martin-marietta sv-5p   martinsyde   martin-handasyde no. 3  martin-handasyde no.4b dragonfly  martinsyde a1  martinsyde f1  martinsyde f2  martinsyde f3  martinsyde f.4 buzzard  martinsyde f6  martinsyde elephant  martinsyde g102  martinsyde g100  martinsyde s1  martinsyde semiquaver  martinsyde raymor   maruoka  (katsura maruoka)  maruoka man-powered screw-wing machine (human powered helicopter)   maschelin   maschelin m58 masquito   maslov  (e. maslov)  маslov accord   mason  (joe j mason, woodland hills, ca)  mason dh-2 4/5 replica   mason  (monty g mason, long beach, ca)  mason greater meteor  mason meteor m   mason  (dave mason, houston, tx)  mason dm-1 skyblazer   mason  (dave mason, houston, tx)  mason dm-1 skyblazer   masquito  (masquito aircraft)  masquito m58  masquito m80   master  (master aircraft, 315 passaic st, rochelle park, nj)  master greyhound   mathews  (lyle mathews) mathews mr easy mathews petit breezy mathews pup mathews turnerkraft   mathewson  (mathewson automobile co, denver, co)  mathewson#1  mathewson#2  mathewson#3  mathewson#4  mathewson#5  mathewson#6   matra  (mecanique aviation traction)  matra-cantinieau bamby  matra-cantinieau mc-101  matra-cantinieau faon  matra r.75  matra r.100  matra r.110  matra 360.4 jupiter  matra 360.6 jupiter   matthews  (clark b matthews, 317 second st marietta, oh)  matthews 2-b a.k.a. cbm special   matthieu-russel  ((---) mathieu-charles russel, chicago, il)  matthieu-russel 1929 monoplane  mattioni  mattioni botte volante (flying barrel
) second version    mattley  ((henry) mattley airplane & motor co, san bruno, ca)  mattley fp-1 a.k.a. fliver #1   mauboussin  (pierre mauboussin / avions mauboussin)  mauboussin h.10  mauboussin m.10  mauboussin m.10bis floatplane  mauboussin m.40 hemiptere  mauboussin m.110 'peyret-mauboussin pm 110'  mauboussin m.111 peyret-mauboussin pm xi/m.11 design  mauboussin m.112  mauboussin m.120 corsaire  mauboussin m.120/32  mauboussin m.120/34  mauboussin m.120/37 (project)  mauboussin m.121 corsaire major  mauboussin m.122 corsaire major  mauboussin m.123 corsaire  mauboussin m.123c  mauboussin m.123m (project)  mauboussin m.123r (project)  mauboussin m.123t (project)  mauboussin m.124  mauboussin m.125  mauboussin m.126  mauboussin m.127  mauboussin m.128  mauboussin m.129  mauboussin m.129/48  mauboussin m.130 (project)  mauboussin m.160 (project)  mauboussin m.190 (project)  mauboussin mh.190 (project)  mauboussin m.200  mauboussin m.201  mauboussin m.202  mauboussin m.260 (project)  mauboussin fm.260  mauboussin m.300  mauboussin m.400  mauboussin-zodiac 17   maule  (maule aircraft corp.)  maule 1931 aeroplane  maule m-1 mid-wing  maule m-2 ornithopter  maule m-3 ornithopter  maule m-4  maule m-5 lunar rocket  maule m-6 super rocket  maule m-7 super rocket / orion / comet / star rocket  maule m-8  maule m-9  maule mt-7  maule mx-7  maule mxt-7  maule bee dee m-4   maurice farman  see : farman aviation works  mauro (larry mauro)  mauro solar riser   mavag  (magyar kiralyi allami vas-, acel- es g
epgyarak - royal hungarian state iron, steel and machine works)  mavag heja   maverick  (maverick air inc, penrose, co)  maverick 1200 twinjet  maverick 1500 twinjet  maverick cruiserjet  maverick smartjet   max holste  (avions max holste'')  max holste mh.20  max holste mh.52  max holste mh.53 cadet  max holste m.h.152  max holste mh.1521 broussard  max holste mh.1522 broussard  max holste m.h.153  max holste mh.250 super broussard  max holste mh.260 super broussard  max plan   max plan pf.204 busard  max plan pf.205 busard  max plan pf.207  max plan pf.214  max plan pf.215  maximum safety  (maximum safety airplane co (fdr: fred l bronson), 5111 santa fe ave, los angeles, ca)  maximum safety m-1  maximum safety m-2  maximum safety m-3  maximum safety m-4l  maxson  (w l maxson corp. / maxson-brewster.)  maxson nr  mayberry  (oakland ca.)  mayberry t-1  mayer  (robert mayer)  mayer 1951 monoplane  mayo  ((william benson) mayo radiator co, new haven, ct)  mayo 1914 biplane  mayo 1916 biplane  mayo type a  mayo-vought-simplex  (simplex automobile co, new brunswick, nj)  simplex 1914 biplane  mazel   mazel acrolaram  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
j-bay open a.k.a. billabong pro jeffreys bay is an event on the world surf league. the event is held every year at jeffreys bay in eastern cape, south africa.  inaugural winner kelly slater, and mick fanning share the most victories with 4.  naming since the birth of this competition it had different names.  results  references    world surf league surfing competitions in south africa surfing in south africa sport in the eastern cape recurring sporting events established in 1996
agraeciini is a large tribe of bush crickets or katydids in the conehead subfamily, conocephalinae.  subtribes and genera the orthoptera species file lists:  subtribe agraeciina auth: redtenbacher, 1891 - central-south america, papua new guinea  agraecia serville, 1831  iaratrox chamorro-rengifo & lopes-andrade, 2015  starkonsa chamorro-rengifo & lopes-andrade, 2015  yvelinula chamorro-rengifo & lopes-andrade, 2015  subtribe eumegalodontina auth: brongniart, 1892 - malesia  ellatodon caudell, 1927  lesina walker, 1869  subtribe liarina auth: ingrisch, 1998 - india and indochina to western australia   acrodonta redtenbacher, 1891  amacroxiphus ingrisch, 1998  anelytra redtenbacher, 1891  bispinolakis ingrisch, 1998  eppioides hebard, 1922  eumacroxiphus ingrisch, 1998  gonatacanthus karny, 1907  goodangarkia rentz, 2009  jambiliara ingrisch, 1998  labugama henry, 1932  liara redtenbacher, 1891  liaromorpha gorochov, 1994  lichnofugia ingrisch, 1998  lubuksia ingrisch, 1998  macroxiphus pictet, 1888  odontoconus fritze, 1908  oxystethus redtenbacher, 1891  peracca griffini, 1897  pseudacrodonta ingrisch, 1998  pseudosubria karny, 1926  rhynchocerus karsch, 1896  rhytidogyne karny, 1907  sacculiphallus ingrisch, 1998  scytocera redtenbacher, 1891  scytoceroides henry, 1932  sialaiana ingrisch, 1998  viriacca ingrisch, 1998  subtribe oxylakina auth: ingrisch, 1998 - india, indochina, malesia  depressacca ingrisch, 1998  ischnophyllus redtenbacher, 1891  kirkaldyus griffini, 1908  nahlaksia ingrisch, 1998  oxylakis redtenbacher, 1891  paragraecia karny, 1907  paroxylakis ingrisch, 1998  tabangacris
willemse, 1966  subtribe salomonina auth: brongniart, 1897 - indochina, philippines, malesia to australasia  ingrischia naskrecki & rentz, 2010  paranicsara ingrisch, 1998  salomona blanchard, 1853  trichophallus ingrisch, 1998  subtribe incertae sedis  genus group axylus ingrisch, 2015  anthracites redtenbacher, 1891  axylus stal, 1877  eucoptaspis willemse, 1966  eulobaspis ingrisch, 2015  heminicsara karny, 1912  other genera  references   chamorro-rengifo, j., braun, h. & lopes-andrade, c. 2015. reassessment and division of the genus agraecia audinet-serville (orthoptera: tettigoniidae: conocephalinae: agraeciini). zootaxa 3993 (1): 1-76.   chamorro-rengifo, j., braun, h. & lopes-andrade, c. 2015. juliana chamorro-rengifo, holger braun & cristiano lopes-andrade (2015) reassessment and division of the genus agraecia audinet-serville (orthoptera: tettigoniidae: conocephalinae: agraeciini). zootaxa, 3993(1): 001-076. zootaxa 4032 (5): 600-600.   gorochov, a.v. 2007: a new species of liaromorpha gor. from cambodia (orthoptera: tettigoniidae: conocephalinae). zoosystematica rossica, 16(2): 208.   gorochov, a.v., 2011: taxonomy of the katydids (orthoptera: tettigoniidae) from east asia and adjacent islands. communication 2. far eastern entomologist 227: 1-12.  naskrecki, p.; rentz, d.c.f. 2010: studies in the orthopteran fauna of melanesia: new katydids of the tribe agraeciini from papua new guinea (orthoptera: tettigoniidae: conocephalinae). zootaxa, 2664: 1-35.  tan, m.k.; ingrisch, s. 2014: new taxa and notes of some described species of agraeciini (orthoptera: tettigoniidae: conocephalinae) from malay peninsula. zootaxa 3765 (6):
541-556.   tan, m.k., ingrisch, s. & kamaruddin, k.n. 2015. a new species of spine-headed katydid mesagraecia ingrisch, 1998 (conocephalinae: agraeciini), with key to species. zootaxa 4057 (3): 437-443.   orthoptera tribes conocephalinae
eunidia discobivittata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
is a japanese professional motorcycle racer.  motorcycle racing career in 2010, he participated for the first time in a moto2 world championship event, as a wild-card rider in the japanese grand prix but, was unable to start the race. moriwaki's parents are mamoru moriwaki, the founder of moriwaki engineering and namiko yoshimura, the eldest daughter of famed motorcycle tuner pops yoshimura. moriwaki is involved with his sister midori in running moriwaki engineering.  career statistics  grand prix motorcycle racing  by season  races by year  references  external links  living people japanese motorcycle racers moto2 world championship riders year of birth missing (living people)
the el greco fallacy is typically a perceptive fallacy, where it is assumed that particular perceptual abnormalities will influence interactions with the world of a similar nature. it is named after an erroneous explanation for the vertically distorted painting style of el greco, which held that the artist must have seen the world as distorted by a peculiar astigmatism, and thus painted this distorted world. this theoretical astigmatism cannot explain el greco's style though, as he would have seen his canvases distorted in the same way, and painting onto them would have cancelled out any distortion.  it is believed the term originated with irvin rock, in his 1966 book, the nature of perceptual adaptation.  when explored in experiment - by having subjects wear distorting lenses - it seems likely that el greco would have completely adapted to seeing a distorted world, and this could not have been an explanation.  in perception research  chaz firestone and brian scholl have alleged that this fallacy has been the cause for mistaken thinking in perception research, including in studies that presumed to show that wearing a heavy backpack makes hills literally appear steeper, or holding rods outstretched horizontally would make doorways look narrower.  in the example of holding rods outstretched, the original experiment had subjects evaluate the width of apertures (intended to simulate doorways), then show this width on a ruler held by experimenters. the width was evaluated as narrower by those holding rods than those who were not. when firestone and scholl repeated this experiment, substituting rulers for a separate aperture that was adjusted by experimenters to the subjects instruction, the aperture was still evaluated as narrower. this narrowing effect was later implied to be a demand characteristic after another group was told that their holding a rod was an evaluation of balance abilities.  references   informal fallacies perception el greco
colleges in pala are affiliated to the mahatma gandhi university, kottayam. many institutions are run under the management of the diocese of pala. the following are the educational institutions in the locality:  colleges    proposed: indian institute of information technology, indian institute of hotel management and catering technology, mar sleeba medical college  schools infant jesus public school mangalaram (cbse)  training institutes  brilliant study centre, pala  goodwill institute of technology, pala  st. thomas teacher training college, pala  st. thomas teacher training institute  cherian j kappen memorial industrial training institute  p value solution for data science and business analytics  coaching centers  brilliant study centre, established in 1984, provides coaching for medical and engineering entrance examination  goodwill institute of technology, pioneer skill development institution, located in the heart of pala  t.i.m.e. institute pala, classroom based medical and engineering coaching institute  the civil service institute, founded in january, 1998, sponsored by the archdiocese of changanacherry and the dioceses of palai and kanjirappally as a part of the inter-diocesan centre for human resources developmenm  mohans institute of corporate studies (mics), provides chartered accountancy (ca) and company secretaryship (cs) courses; classes are taught by company secretaries and chartered accountants  lumen study centre: st. thomas college palai, provides a coaching center for medical and engineering entrance examination run by st. thomas college management  talent academy pala, provides classes and preparation techniques for aieee, jee-iit kerala state medical/engineering examinations  thoppans' swimming academy, owned and operated by thoppil brothers  notable alumni    international volleyball player jimmy george was an alumnus of st. thomas college.  olympian shiny wilson is an alumnus of alphonsa college.  references  education in pala, kerala educational institutions in pala
tim hensley (born august 17, 1966, in bloomington, indiana) is an american alternative cartoonist.  hensley's most notable works are wally gropius published by fantagraphics books in 2010 and sir alfred no. 3 published by pigeon press in 2016.  hensley has been published in numerous anthologies, such as smoke signal, dirty stories, the believer, comic art, duplex planet illustrated, and special editions of the comics journal.  career hensley's parents moved to los angeles, where hensley still lives, at the age of three.  hensley's father, was an avid comics reader, reading marvel, dc, warren magazines, underground comix, and heavy metal magazine. in 1989 hensley discovered alternative comics and a few years later started to focus on becoming a cartoonist.  in 1989 hensley mailed daniel clowes after noticing his mailing address in the back of an old lloyd llewellyn issue he was reading.  hensley asked clowes if he would be interested in doing the cover art to an album he was working on for his band, victor banana.  clowes did the cover art and then asked hensley if he would be interested in creating a soundtrack to one of the stories in his upcoming one-man anthology eightball.  the story was like a velvet glove cast in iron. the album was released in 1993.  hensley's father, tom hensley, is a keyboardist and songwriter for neil diamond.  publications  ticket stub minicomics (2000-2006) - after college while working as a closed-captioning editor, hensley would jot down the time code of any frames he found of interest in the video he was working on. after he had transcribed the video and if he had spare time, he'd create drawings based on these frames.  some of these drawings hensley published as minicomics titled, ticket stub.  the minicomics ran for 9 issues.  in 2012, yam press published the collection as a book with the same title, ticket stub.  wally gropius (fantagraphics, 2010) - wally gropius is the main character in the book and resembles a teenaged richie rich or a classmate of archie andrews at riverdale high. the book itself resembles a 1960s teenage humor comic but it is a satire. hensley named the book after the architect, walter gropius, because he thought the name sounded humorous. in 2014 tim hodler, editor of the comics journal, wrote "wally
gropius ...is on a shortlist of essential graphic novels of this millennium."   sir alfred no. 3 (pigeon press, 2016) - in sir alfred no. 3, hensley turns the life of the film director alfred hitchcock into 65 comic strips, most of which employ the look of little lulu comic books. ken parille of the comics journal calls the book an "oblique biography", where some of hensley's strips play it straight while with others he chooses to expand, compress, or combine incidents which amplify the comedy and perversion of the director's life.  hensley ignores chronology, omits milestones in the subject's life, and even draws moments when young and old versions of the protagonist meet. hensley hand-lettered the oversized comic.  he collaborated with alvin buenaventura and the comic was published by buenaventura's pigeon press. buenaventura carefully oversaw every aspect of its manufacture and printing. one thousand copies were signed, numbered and included a giclee print of a scene from the filming of psycho as well as a letterpress coaster. it was packaged in a custom-made mylar sleeve. issues #1 and #2 of sir alfred do not exist.  references  further reading  external links  timhensley.tumblr.com hensley's tumblr page  blogflumer.blogspot.ca hensley's blog  www.youtube.com/watch?v=5qt8648d3pi music live! with victor banana  1966 births alternative cartoonists american cartoonists living people
chen xiefen (chinese: 陳擷芬; pinyin: chen xie fen; wade-giles: ch'en hsieh fen; pen name: chu'nan nuzi; 1883 - 1923), a chinese feminist, revolutionary and journalist of the qing era, is regarded as one of the first progressive chinese women to utilize the press to further women's rights. from 1899 to 1903, chen published nubao (later renamed nuxuebao), where she advocated for women's education, gender equality and economic independence. after her paper was banned in 1903, chen xiefen emigrated to japan, where she briefly continued to print nubao (now titled nuxuebao). chen xiefen remained active in anti-qing revolutionary circles until her fall from the public eye in 1911.  biography  early life  chen xiefen was born in 1883 in hengshan, hunan province, and was raised in yanghu (currently changzhou), jiangsu province. chen xiefen was born to a gentry-official family and was the oldest daughter of her household. her father, chen fan (1860 - 1913), a demoted county magistrate and progressive intellectual, moved to shanghai at the end of the 19th century. upon settling in shanghai, chen fan purchased and reformed the subao (english: jiangsu daily) newspaper. subao was a progressive, anti-qing publication with radical intellectual zhang shizhao (1881 - 1973) as editor-in-chief.  the publication of nubao (english: women's journal), china's first paper aimed at women, began on july 24, 1898. in 1899, at sixteen years old, chen xiefen took over nubao with her father's encouragement and assistance. during her initial years of working at nubao, chen xiefen was a student at the missionary-run mctyeire home and school for girls. she quickly gained widespread recognition amongst fellow progressives for her personal essay contributions to the newspaper.  between the years 1901 and 1902, chen xiefen aided her father and fellow reformists, including cai yuanpei (1868 - 1940), in the establishment of aiguo nu xuexiao (english: patriotic girls' school). aiguo nu xuexiao, which endorsed revolutionary activity, had an especially progressive and radical minded curriculum for the time. in early 1903, chen xiefen would form her own girls' school in nubao's office.  nubao (nuxuebao)  very soon after chen xief
en's arrival, nubao was forced to cease operations due to government censorship. it would successfully return to publication on may 8, 1902. the issues spanning may 1902 to october 1903 are the only installments of nubao which have been successfully recovered.  nubao was originally offered as a free supplement to subao. as an addition to the male-targeted publication, nubaowas read by both men and women alike. in october 1902, nubao was offered for sale as a distinct publication. this shift can be attributed to the new policy reform launched in the same year, during which reformers became especially interested in the topic of women's education. it was distributed to major cities, including beijing, shanghai and tianjin.  in june 1903, subao was banned by the qing government for its expression of anti-qing sentiments. fearful of government retribution, chen xiefen, her younger sister chen xinfang, and chen fan escaped to tokyo, japan where chen xiefen would resume the publication of nubao under the name nuxuebao (english: women's studies journal). once in tokyo, chen xiefen began publishing under the pseudonym chu'nan nuzi.  content  throughout its years of publication, nubao (nuxuebao) focused primarily on the promotion of women's education and rights. the paper originally served as an advocacy journal, with the advancement of women's rights, education and the abolition of foot binding at its core. however, following its independence from subao in october 1902, its content diversified greatly. its monthly issues began to feature "essays, speeches, letters, recent women's history, translated articles and poetry."  chen xiefen's many editorials, wherein she expressed the newspaper's feminist and progressive stance, include "lun quan zhi chanzu zhi guanxi" (english: "an exhortation to cease footbinding"); "yao you aiguo de xin" (english: "we must have patriotic minds"); "buyao guoyu zhuangshi" (english: "do not overdo it with adornment"); "duli pian" (english: "on independence"); and "lun nuzi yi jiang tiyu" (english: "women need to discuss physical exercise").  under her new pseudonym, chen xiefen continued to communicate anti-qing sentiment.  "duli pian"  "duli pian," published in 1903, is considered one of the earliest chinese feminist writings produced by a woman. chen xiefen described the female body as
a site of oppression, as evoked through the following excerpt:practices such as piercing the female ears for inserting metal earrings, and binding the female feet for marking the crippled sex, are manifestations of the elementary phase of the social law of corporal punishment (chuji xingfa). those who refuse to be punished will be forced into submission, with cries of pain and tears of agony going unheard and unseen. the second phase of the social law of corporal punishment (ciji xingfa) is matchmaking that regards women's own feelings as irrelevant. wedded to strangers without any consideration for their feelings and wishes. when the promised husband dies before the marriage, the woman is forced to remain "widowed." let us not even talk about the servant girls, whose labor is enslaved and whose bodies are bought and sold like cows, horses, pigs, and chickens! chen xiefen detailed the ways in which class informed the unjust treatment of women in traditional chinese society. the female body is classified as "the crippled sex," both in its physical disfigurement ("bound feet" and "pierced ears") and in its eternal state of submission. "duli pian" expressed chen xiefen's belief that "the essence of independence (for women) ... is the absence of interference and financial support from their male counterparts."  once achieved, chen xiefen maintained that "there will be nothing women cannot study and no right that women cannot regain."  "lun nuzi yi jiang tiyu"  published in 1903, "lun nuzi yi jiang tiyu," an editorial arguing the connection between physical culture and emancipation, was the first of its kind written by a chinese woman. the article's core message can be expressed through the following excerpt:from today on, i want the pitiable worms who are my two million fellow womenfolk to change this situation themselves through becoming aware of it, and i want them to urge others to change it. people have to realize that without physical culture, there can be no beauty.chen xiefen considered bodily awareness an emancipatory force. she articulated the need for greater autonomy over one's body while urging women to establish their own definition of beauty. aware of chinese women's internalization of mutilation as an acceptable societal value, chen xiefen wished to transform the precepts instilled in women from birth; solely unbinding one's feet or removing one's piercings would not be enough. chen xiefen's advocacy for the internal realization of female emancipation was
a stance not commonly assumed by other reformers of her period.  life in japan  in japan, chen xiefen remained a student, studying at tokyo's huazu xuexiao (english: chinese school), while acting as president of the student-run women's organization gong ai hui (english: mutual love society). gong ai hui, an anarchic, anti-qing sisterhood for female chinese students in japan, was the first organization of its kind. according to its mission statement, gong ai hui aimed "to improve the status of china's two hundred million women and to recuperate their natural rights, so that all women, imbued with concern for the nation, will be able to fulfill their responsibilities as citizens."  alongside friends and fellow revolutionaries qiu jin (1875 - 1907) and lin zongsu (1878 - 1944), chen xiefen would work to further gong ai hui's agenda.  the many connections she formed through her editorial and activist work proved especially valuable during moments of hardship. shortly after arriving in tokyo, chen xiefen's father arranged for her entrance into a forced concubinage. with the support of chinese female students in tokyo and qiu jin, chen xiefen succeeded in resisting the proposal.  in 1905, chen xiefen joined politician and revolutionary huang xing's (1874 - 1916) bomb-making organization where she assisted with uprising preparations alongside other revolutionaries.  chen xiefen continued her studies, transferring to yokohama public school for christian women, until meeting and marrying a sichuan man named yang jun. soon after marrying, she and her husband left japan to study abroad in the united states. following her return to china in 1911, chen xiefen joined the shenzhou nujie xiejishe (english: association of chinese women). the organization advocated for women's suffrage through a lens of nationalism and reform. little else is known of chen xiefen's political and professional activities after 1911.  references     1883 births 1923 deaths 19th-century chinese people chinese feminists chinese journalists 19th-century chinese women 20th-century journalists
borsetti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  bartolomeo carlo borsetti (1689- 1759), italian baroque painter ermes borsetti (1913-2005), italian footballer pietro borsetti (1882-1955), italian gymnast  italian-language surnames
nikolaus creutzer, o.f.m. (died 2 october, 1525) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of pedena (1523-1525).  biography nikolaus creutzer was ordained a priest in the order of friars minor. on 30 january 1523, he was appointed during the papacy of pope adrian vi as bishop of pedena. he served as bishop of pedena until his death on 2 october 1525.  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope adrian vi 1525 deaths franciscan bishops
the st. mary's cathedral also called cathedral of sandakan  is the mother church of the catholic diocese of sandakan (dioecesis sandakaanus or keuskupan sandakan) which is as its name implies in the city sandakan, borneo island in the asian country of malaysia.  during the nineteenth century it was erected a prefecture based in labuan, an island off the northwestern coast of borneo. in the period established in the territory of the various mission stations, including the mission of santa maria of sandakan, a small town on the coast of the island of borneo.  history st. mary's church was founded in 1883 and it is now 135 years old as of current year 2018, the oldest church in sandakan. the first church was created as a small wooden structure. its history dates back to may 1883 when monsignor t. jackson, the prefect apostolic of the mill hill, england, order of missionary priest, bought five acres of land on a hill to set up a mission. together with father prenger, they built a temporary hut made of 'kajang' and dedicated the mission to the blessed mother and named it st. mary's hill.  thus began the st. mary's parish when the mill hill fathers were allocated the prefecture of north borneo by rome in 1881. one of the first places they came to was sandakan. monsigneur thomas jackson, who was appointed the 2nd prefect apostolate of north borneo, came to sandakan in may 1882 to attend a dinner to celebrate the granting of the charter to the north borneo chartered company in november 1881. in this first visit, he was able to find a suitable spot where the future mission station would be built. he found out that there were about 4,500 chinese in sandakan. he thought of setting up a mission there for the chinese.   subsequently, in may 1883 msgr. thomas jackson bought five (5) acres of land that is situated on a hill in sandakan. during the same year, he ordered rev. fr. alexander prenger to proceed to sandakan to establish a mission here. together they built a temporary hut made of "kajang." fr. prenger dedicated the mission to the blessed virgin mary, and therefore named the piece of land acquired by msgr. jackson, st. mary's hill. having high hopes for the sandakan mission, msgr. jackson also asked rev. fr. benedict pundleider to join fr. prenger in sandakan. on 24 july 1883, fr. prenger and fr. pundleider opened st. mary's school, the
first school in north borneo. by october in the same year, there was a proper house, some sort of a hostel for boys to stay in, and a small church.  however, sandakan mission was making slow progress, and the school was not doing too well. this was because sandakan was often invaded by pirates, and many of the people had fled into the interior for safety. in 1885, the mission in sandakan and the school were closed. fr. pundleider thought two priests serving in sandakan were too many considering the situation. in addition, the living conditions were not healthy. thus fr. pundleider left sandakan in february 1884 and went to open a mission station in bundu kuala penyu. left to himself, fr. prenger tried to consolidate the mission and the school. however, in november 1885, msgr. jackson ordered him to leave sandakan, because "sandakan unhealthy; a wind blowing across the bay; many chinese sick, no good water in town; and fr. prenger often ill." fr. prenger closed the mission and school and opened a mission station in penampang.  in july 1886, rev. fr. john byron visited sandakan and found 26 catholics. after having been closed for two years, the sandakan mission was re-opened by fr. byron in may 1887. on 15 august 1887, st. mary's school was also re-opened. from this year onwards st. mary's school progressed gradually. an interesting observation can be made here : the transitory nature of the assistant rectors in sandakan during the following few years. first, rev. fr. bernard kurz joined fr. byron in september 1887. then he was replaced by rev. fr. francis dibona in march 1888. rev. fr. julius verbrugge was the next to assist fr. byron. in november 1889, rev. fr. john rientjies was sent to sandakan, to be replaced by rev. fr. albert reyffert four years later in november 1893.  in 1891, a school was started for girls. the white sisters (the franciscan missionaries of st. joseph) opened st. mary's convent on 5 november 1891. the first four sisters were sr. theresa, sr. peter, sr. rose and sr. collete. this was the first convent to be opened in north borneo. after the year 1899, the sandakan was an established mission with a presbytery, a boys' school, a convent, and church. rev. fr. cornelius keet became the
rector. in the same year, a great number of filipino refugees fled to sandakan because of the war in the philippines. all of them were catholics. this created an artificial increase in the catholic population. in 1900, rev. fr. cornelius de vette came to assist in sandakan. with his help, more could be done to expand mission work. the year 1903 saw the arrival of more filipino refugees. in 1904, fr. de vette built a proper and permanent church in sandakan. the next several years in the history of the mission and school in sandakan followed much the same pattern of short tenureship of various priests.  towards the end of 1907, the situation became normal in the philippines. many filipinos returned home. their departure caused the number of catholics in sandakan to decrease. between the years 1909 and 1920, a number of mill hill fathers came to keep the mission going, but some stayed only for a year and others for two years. within this period, tawau was opened as an outstation mission of sandakan in 1915. with the frequent transferring of the fathers in and out of sandakan, there was no continuity in mission work, which could not be expected to improve much. furthermore, some of the fathers spent more time in the school.  in early 1920, with the appointment of rev. fr. aloysius stotter as rector in sandakan, mission work became more active. the school also improved day by day. he built a three-storey building, and with rev. fr. bernard j. davis running it, became the best school in north borneo. in 1923, fr. stotter wanted to devote most of his time taking care of the growing number of catholics. he contacted the la salle brothers to take over the school, but no agreement could be reached. the fathers who came later continued the work of expansion by the previous fathers.  the next couple of decades seem to be clouded in "history" as few records are available. the mission continued to progress until the second world war when the european priests were arrested and sent to war camps. according to rev. fr. laurence m. parsons, "i arrived to sandakan in november 1933 to take charge of the mission. i was lent to jesselton for a year in 1935, and then went back to sandakan until i was taken away by the japanese. the japs razed st. mary's to the ground in 1943."  when fr. parsons returned to sandakan in november 1946, there was neither church nor school standing. however, the pillars and the concrete part of
the wall of the boys' school were still intact after the war. an attap roof was put over these pillars and concrete walls, and the school re-opened in 1947. the reconstructed structure doubled as a church and school. fr. davis continued to be the principal of the school.  the period after the second world war belongs, rightly, to rev. fr. anthony mulders. he was a visionary, architect, planner and constructor all rolled in one, in the difficult process of reconstruction after the devastation of the war, and credit for putting st. mary's back on her feet should be given to fr. mulders.  fr. mulders arrived in sandakan in 1952, and he wasted no time in getting down to business to rebuild the school and the church. through his tireless efforts, not 1 but 2 school buildings (both the st. mary's primary and secondary schools) were completed and opened. he then began to bulldoze the hill to level a site for a permanent church, causing serious erosion. after having solved this problem, st. mary's church - the "most beautiful church" - was finally constructed, opened, and solemnly consecrated in 1961 by the rt. rev. bishop james buis, the vicar apostolic of jesselton. fr. mulders changed the entire mission compound beyond recognition and made it one of the finest sites in sandakan.  a rectory was also built in 1967 for all the priests who had been staying in the schools. the next development was the building of st. joseph's church, supervised by rev. fr. francis van den schoor. it was completed and blessed in 1971.  as the schools and church flourished, six to seven priests were sent to sandakan to teach in the schools and to minister to the parishioners. this has resulted in a fast growth rate in conversion. however, hard times came in the 1970s as a new immigration policy required most of the foreign priests to depart from sabah, leaving sandakan with only one priest. eventually, fr. van den schoor the parish priest was also ordered to leave.  in april 1972, rev. fr. thomas sham became the parish priest. apart from carrying out his priestly duties, he set up the catholic women's league and the parish council. he also built a fence around the church compound, put up a shrine to our lady, and built a parish hall behind the church (present-day catechetical room).  rev. fr. john lee, our present archbishop of kota kinabalu, replaced fr.
sham as parish priest in january 1978. at this time, the winds of renewal reached sandakan. firstly, it was the aggiornamento followed by the charismatic renewal. fr. john lee encouraged the formation of a prayer group in 1979. on 3 october 1978, sandakan witnessed a special and memorable event of the ordination of rev. fr. (now monsigneur) nicholas ong at st. mary's church.  when rev. fr. aloysius tung took over from fr. john lee in july 1980, he continued to encourage spiritual renewal in the parish. this resulted in the growth of the prayer group and the formation of the first neo-catechumenal community and the star of yahweh covenant community (sycc). renewal seminars continued to be held in 1981 - 1983 which saw a significant increase in the number of spiritually renewed parishioners, and the church became a hive of activities. the old parish hall became inadequate and fr. tung requested the parish council to design and build a larger parish hall to cater for meetings, seminars and other activities of the parishioners. the new hall, christened st. mary's parish centre, was completed and blessed by msgr. john lee on 3 may 1987 just as he received news from rome of his appointment as the next bishop of kota kinabalu.  rev. fr. tobias chi became parish priest in october 1984. he was later joined by rev. fr. john mansul, rev. fr. bruno yasun and rev. fr. thomas yip. immediately upon arrival to sandakan, fr. chi enlisted the co-operation of the parishioners in organizing and renewing the parish by having open discussions and sharing of ideas and opinions. this accelerated the growth of the parish. he also organized evangelization talks to gather new  converts. he started the rcia (rite of christian initiation of adults) in 1985. the evangelization talks were replaced by good tidings concert and the printing of the good tidings magazine in 1987. these became avenues to evangelize invited guests and also to serve as a platform for the many church groups and communities to work together in unity.  to revitalize and make the parish council more representative, fr. chi called the first annual delegates assembly in 1986. the delegates were nominated from all the groups and communities and any other parishioners. they met annually to report and deliberate the affairs of the parish, and elected the office bearers of the parish council every two years.  one of the most important liturgical events in the parish was the introduction of the chinese mass which resulted in the growth of
the chinese catholic community. as the various groups and communities grew, it became necessary to form three language coordinating bodies to facilitate communication. this led to the formation of the english coordinating committee, the bm coordinating committee, and the chinese coordinating committee.  fr. chi also initiated the sunday school programme where children received their faith formation and preparation for their first holy communion and confirmation. in order to further build up the faith of the children and to make the liturgy of the word more meaningful and interesting to them, he launched a liturgical team for the children's liturgy of the word, and the first demonstration was done in november 1992.  under the leadership and encouragement of fr. chi, several more projects were completed. a grotto, resembling the grotto in lourdes, was cut out of the hillside in front of the church in 1987. it has now been enhanced with a waterfall. the former shrine of our lady was converted to a shrine at st. joseph's church. a block of three storey building was constructed for the st. mary's kindergarten in 1990. st. mark's church and st. joseph's multi purpose hall were completed and blessed in 1993. in 1995, a new church named st. paul's was opened in ulu dusun. he also blessed the new sibuga cemetery and opened it for use. st. joseph's church was renovated and beautified in preparation for its silver jubilee in 1996. in 1998, both st. mary's bandar (boys' school) and st. mary's convent were relocated to new school buildings at mile 2 north road.  the paitan mission is an important outreach programme of the parish. it was first initiated by the light of jesus christ covenant community. the star of yahweh covenant community then took over some of the responsibilities. when rev. fr. thomas yip was posted to sandakan, he took a personal interest in this mission and developed it. when he left, sr. clarice jomiti was granted permission to stay and look after the mission. however, due to conflicting land claims, it was relocated with the generous time and effort of the parishioners. a new mission centre was built and run by sr. dorothy laudi and sr. hilary laudi. they set up kindergartens in the many villages accessible only by boats. currently this mission is looked after by rev. fr. thomas makajil assisted by henry wong and other volunteers.  the diocesan pastoral organization planning committee (dopp) was formed in 1995 to study and compile the problems of the local churches for submission to the then
-diocese of kota kinabalu for further deliberation and planning. a diocesan pastoral plan was drawn and given to all parishes to adopt. workshops were conducted in 1997 and 1998 to study the plan before it could be practically understood and implemented.  on 21 january 1999, st. mary's celebrated the momentous ordination of deacon john wong to the priesthood. it was a joyous occasion because the lord had blessed the parish with a fourth local priest. the other three were the late rt. rev. bishop simon fung, the late rev. fr. michael mewo, and msgr. nicholas ong. in 2010, rev. fr. john wong was appointed coadjutor archbishop of the archdiocese of kota kinabalu by pope benedict xvi.  rev. fr. francis tsen took over the helm from fr. chi as parish priest in november 1999. he continued the work of renewing the parish. he invited rev. fr. vincent lee, a jesuit from singapore, to give spiritual formation and anointing to the parishioners at a lenten/intercessory retreat in 2000 and a holy spirit seminar in 2001. fr. tsen particularly emphasized on the importance of adoring the blessed sacrament and intercessory prayers, and had the blessed sacrament chapel built for adoration and intercession. he also showed great interest in the healing and deliverance ministry, and sent some parishioners to kota kinabalu to attend seminars. he organized a number of masses for the healing of the sick in the parish. he started several bible sharing and study groups. he renovated the old boys' school for sunday school use and other spiritual activities. it is now named as the father mulder's catechetical  centre.  fr. tsen went on a long leave in september 2004 and in his absence, rev. fr. saimon william was appointed acting parish priest until the arrival of rev. fr. simon kontou in december 2004. after rev. fr. paul lo's ordination, he was assigned by the then-bishop john lee to sandakan as the second assistant priest. for the first time in many years sandakan was blessed with three priests. however, this number was reduced to two again when fr. saimon was transferred to lahad datu in october 2006.  during his tenure in sandakan, fr. simon had done a lot to beautify the church compound. he initiated the recycling programme and asked the parishioners to donate recyclable items to the church to collect funds for his beautification projects. with the funds, he had a waterfall constructed near the grotto. many flowers and
trees were planted, and grounds of the church were beautifully landscaped. he could have been a botanist, for he did much of the planting himself personally!  the prospect of sandakan being erected to a diocese on the east coast began circulating at the end of 2005. this probability was more or less confirmed with the visit by the apostolic delegate in malaysia, archbishop salvatore pennachio, to the three main parishes on the east coast. on 16 july 2007, it was officially announced that pope benedict xvi had appointed rev. fr. julius dusin gitom as the first bishop of the diocese of sandakan, a suffragan of the metropolitan see of kuching, thus becoming the third diocese in sabah after kota kinabalu and keningau. the new diocese covers the entire east coast of sabah which comprises the parishes of st. martin in telupid, st. dominic in lahad datu, holy trinity in tawau, and st. mary in sandakan. with the elevation of the diocese of kota kinabalu to an archdiocese in 2008, the diocese of sandakan is now a suffragan of the metropolitan see of kota kinabalu.   with the erection of the diocese of sandakan on 15 october 2007, st. mary's church was elevated to st. mary's cathedral. fr. simon continued his priestly duties at the cathedral as rector until his transfer to st. dominic's church in lahad datu in july 2008. he was replaced by fr. thomas makajil. fr. thomas was previously assisted by fr. paul lo and fr. anthony muji, and since february 2012 is presently assisted by rev. fr. anthony mikat. fr. thomas began renovation works on the cathedral building in 2010.  st. mary's cathedral saw the addition of a covered wing section on the right side of the church in 2011. the construction of a new covered wing section on the left side has just been completed in september 2012. the cathedral can now seat approximately 1,500 parishioners. two lcd projectors were installed in 2011 to facilitate the parishioners in the viewing of hymns, liturgical prayers and responses particularly that of the new roman missal, as well as witnessing the rite of baptism and other activities. an lcd projector has also been also installed on each side of the covered wing sections of the cathedral.  sandakan diocese was blessed with their first priest, rev. fr. david garaman, who was ordained by the rt. rev. bishop julius dusin gitom in lahad datu on 31 december 2010. he had his pastoral immersion at the cathedral as a deacon since 19
march 2010. two seminarians, namely marthin steven and stanley william, also did their pastoral immersion here as 1st year theology student in 2011 and 2nd year philosophy student in 2012 respectively.  on 24 may 2010, the good shepherd sisters (rgs) established their mission in the sandakan diocese by setting up seri murni crisis centre. the centre offers a safe haven and temporary shelter for about ten (10) women and girls in crisis situations.  now celebrating her fifth year as a diocese, an edifice in the form of the diocesan pastoral and worship centre has been built on the former site of the old boys' school classroom block, and will be blessed on 26 october 2012. may the good lord continue to bless the sandakan mission whose humble history began in may 1883, grew until what she is today, and continue to grow in numbers, priests, and resources.  see also roman catholicism in malaysia  references  roman catholic cathedrals in malaysia roman catholic churches completed in 1961 churches in sandakan 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in malaysia
the 1983 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the mid-american conference (mac) during the 1983 ncaa division i-a football season.  in their sixth season under head coach herb deromedi, the chippewas compiled an 8-3 record (7-2 against mac opponents), finished in a three-way tie for second place in the mac standings, and outscored their opponents, 257 to 136.  the team played its home games in kelly/shorts stadium in mount pleasant, michigan, with attendance of 115,635 in five home games.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback ron fillmore with 915 passing yards, tailback curtis adams with 1,431 rushing yards, and split end john deboer with 540 receiving yards. offensive guard chris mckay received the team's most valuable player award.  six central michigan players (adams, mckay, linebacker kevin egnatuk, defensive tackle pat brackett, defensive tackle mike mills, and defensive back jim bowman) received first-team all-mac honors.  schedule  references  external links  official program, october 22, 1983  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
saiflabad  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of saiflabad. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, saiflabad has 411 houses with total population of 2,018 persons of which 1,051 are male and 967 females. literacy rate of saiflabad is 71.28%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 211 which is 10.46% of total population. child sex ratio is approximately 1153, higher than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the arkansas medical cannabis act (amca) is a ballot measure that initially qualified for the ballot in arkansas (as issue 7) but was disqualified by the arkansas supreme court 12 days before the november 8, 2016 election. a separate measure to legalize medical cannabis, the arkansas medical marijuana amendment (issue 6), also qualified for the 2016 ballot and was approved by voters.  history the wording of the initiative's title was approved by the arkansas attorney general in august, 2014, allowing the process of collecting signatures for the initiative to begin. the sponsor of the act, arkansans for compassionate care, submitted 117,469 petition signatures to the state authorities for verification in june 2016. it was certified for the ballot on july 7. the act had a provision to collect sales tax and apportion some of the revenue to subsidize medical cannabis for low-income patients.  see also cannabis in arkansas list of 2016 united states cannabis reform proposals  references  external links arkansas medical cannabis act, issue 7 (2016) at ballotpedia arkansas medical marijuana amendment, issue 6 (2016) at ballotpedia  2016 cannabis law reform cannabis ballot measures in the united states cannabis in arkansas proposed laws of the united states
in nuclear physics, a beta decay transition is the change in state of an atomic nucleus undergoing beta decay. (β-decay) when undergoing beta decay, a nucleus emits a beta particle and a corresponding neutrino, transforming the original nuclide into one with the same mass, but differing charge. (an isobar)  there are several types of beta decay transition. in a fermi transition, the spins of the two emitted particles are anti-parallel, for a combined spin . as a result, the total angular momentum of the nucleus is unchanged by the transition. by contrast, in a gamow-teller transition, the spins of the two emitted particles are parallel, with total spin , leading to a change in angular momentum between the initial and final states of the nucleus.  the theoretical work in describing these transitions was done between 1934 and 1936 by george gamow and edward teller at george washington university.  the weak interaction and beta decay  β decay had been first described theoretically by fermi's original ansatz which was lorentz-invariant and involved a 4-point fermion vector current. however, this did not incorporate parity violation within the matrix element in fermi's golden rule seen in weak interactions. the gamow-teller theory was necessary for the inclusion of parity violation by modifying the matrix element to include vector and axial-vector couplings of fermions.  this formed the matrix element that completed the fermi theory of β decay and described parity violation, neutrino helicity, muon decay properties along with the concept of lepton universality. before the  standard model of particle physics was developed, george sudarshan and robert marshak, and also independently richard feynman and murray gell-mann, determined the correct tensor structure (vector minus axial vector, ) of the four-fermion interaction.  from there modern electroweak theory was developed, which described the weak interaction in terms of massive gauge bosons which was required for describing high energy particle cross-sections.  fermi transition   in the fermi transition, the electron and neutrino emitted from the β-decay parent nucleus have spin vectors which are anti-parallel to one another.  this means     no change in the total angular momentum of the nucleus  examples        also  parity is conserved: .   = excited state of n  gamow-teller transition   in nuclear transitions governed by strong and electromagnetic interactions (which are invariant under parity), the physical laws would be the same if the
interaction was reflected in a mirror. hence the sum of a vector and a pseudovector is not meaningful.  however, the weak force, which governs beta decay and the corresponding nuclear transitions, does depend on the chirality of the interaction, and in this case pseudovectors and vectors are added.  the gamow-teller transition is a pseudovector transition, that is, the selection rules for beta decay caused by such a transition involve no parity change of the nuclear state. the spin of the parent nucleus can either remain unchanged or change by ±1. however, unlike the fermi transition, transitions from spin 0 to spin 0 are excluded.  in terms of total nuclear angular momentum, the gamow-teller transition () is  examples        also  parity is conserved:   the final 6li 1+ state has  and the  state has  states that couple to an even parity state.  mixed fermi and gamow-teller decay   due to the existence of the 2 possible final states, each β decay is a mixture of the two decay types. this essentially means that some of the time the remaining nucleus is in an excited state and other times the decay is directly to the ground state. unlike fermi transitions, gamow-teller transitions occur via an operator that operates only if the initial nuclear wavefunction and final nuclear wavefunction are defined.  the isospin and angular momentum selection rules can be deduced from the operator and the identification of allowed and forbidden decays can be found.  examples        or        the above reaction involves "mirror nuclei", nuclei in which the numbers of protons and neutrons are interchanged.  one can measure the angular distributions of β particles with respect to the axis of nuclear spin polarization to determine what the mixture is between the two decay types (fermi and gamow-teller).  the mixture can be expressed as a ratio of matrix elements (fermi's golden rule relates transitions to matrix elements)  the interesting observation is that y for mirror nuclei is on the order of the value of y for neutron decay while non-mirror nuclear decays tend to be an order of magnitude less.  physical consequences  conservation of weak vector current   the conservation of vector current hypothesis was created out of the gamow-teller theory.  the fermi decay is the result of a vector current and is dominant in the decay of the neutron to a proton while the gamow-teller decay is an axial-current transition.  conservation of
vector current is the assumption that the weak vector current responsible for the decay is conserved.  another observation is that the fermi transitions illustrate how the nucleons inside the nucleus interact as free particles despite being surrounded by mesons mediating the nuclear force. this is useful in considering the barrier tunnelling mechanism involved with alpha decay and in deriving the geiger-nuttall law.  forbidden decays   the fermi decays () are often referred to as the "superallowed" decays while gamow-teller () decays are simple "allowed" decays.  forbidden decays are those which are substantially more improbable, due to parity violation, and as a result have long decay times.  now the angular momentum (l) of the  systems can be non-zero (in the center-of-mass frame of the system).  below are the observed selection rules for nuclear beta-decay:  each of the above have fermi () and gamow-teller () decays.  so for the "first-forbidden" transitions you have  fermi and  gamow-teller systems.  notice that  (parity violating transition).  the half life of the decay increases with each order:  decay rate  a calculation of the β emission decay rate is quite different from a calculation of α decay.  in α decay the nucleons of the original nucleus are used to form the final state α particle (4he).  in β decay the β and neutrino particles are the result of a nucleon transformation into its isospin complement ( or ).  below is a list of the differences:  the β electron and neutrino did not exist before the decay. the β electron and neutrino are relativistic (nuclear decay energy is usually not enough to make heavy α nucleus relativistic). the light decay products can have continuous energy distributions. (before assuming the α carried away most of the energy was usually a good approximation).  the β decay rate calculation was developed by fermi in 1934 and was based on pauli's neutrino hypothesis.  fermi's golden rule says that the transition rate  is given by a transition matrix element (or "amplitude")  weighted by the phase space and planck's constant  such that     from this analysis we can conclude that the gamow-teller nuclear transition from  0 → ±1 is a weak perturbation of the system's interaction hamiltonian. this assumption appears to be true based on the very short time scale
(10−20 s) it takes for the formation of quasi-stationary nuclear states compared with the time it takes for a β decay (half lives ranging from seconds to days).  the matrix element between parent and daughter nuclei in such a transition is:  with the interaction hamiltonian forming 2 separate states from the perturbation.  references  external links   fermi theory of beta decay   transition probabilities and fermi's golden rule  nuclear physics quantum mechanics radioactivity
loreto convent school is a private high school in pretoria, south africa, founded in 1878.  loreto convent school was founded on 7 june 1878 by mother margaret mary jolivet, mother joseph colahan and mother teresa colahan, at loreto convent, skinner street, with 20 pupils in the high school and 6 in the parochial school.  notable former pupils lady cicely mayhew (1924-2016), first british woman diplomat. inez clare verdoorn (1896-1989), botanist  notable former teachers anne van zyl, education administrator  references  external links  private schools in gauteng girls' schools in south africa educational institutions established in 1878 1878 establishments in the south african republic
surgeon captain edward w. bingham , was a british royal navy officer and polar explorer who had the rare third clasp added to his polar medal.  biography edward (ted) william bingham was born on 2nd january 1901 in dungannon, county tyrone, the son of the headmaster of dungannon royal school. in 1926 he graduated in medicine from trinity college, dublin. joining the royal navy in 1928, in 1930 he volunteered to become a member of the british arctic air route expedition (baare) led by gino watkins, exploring the east coast and interior of greenland. he took part as the expedition doctor and to be in charge of the expedition's sled dogs. he was in the party that established a meteorological station on the ice cap. with surveyor alfred stephenson and geologist lawrence wager he took part in a three month  journey to map the ice cap border of the schweizerland mountains and to attempt the ascent of mont forel, the highest point of the range.   back from greenland, he was appointed to carry out an hydrographic survey of the coastal area of the labrador peninsula on hms challenger for two years. he wintered at nain and, whilst working by dog sled,  increased his experience of huskies and dog team driving.  bingham went to antarctica with the 1934-1937 british graham land expedition, led by his former baare team mate john rymill, as medical officer and in charge of the dog sled teams. he took part in a major 535 mile trip across graham land from a base on the debenham islands to within sight of the weddell sea that proved that graham land was part of a peninsula not an island as previously thought.  during world war ii bingham was a surgeon commander at the royal naval hospital in plymouth until july 1941. he then served on hms duke of york, as principal medical officer, contributing with his arctic and antarctic knowledge to the manufacture of improved protective cold-weather clothing for royal navy ship watchkeepers and lookouts.  following various shore appointments, in 1945 bingham was seconded to the colonial office to lead the newly formed falkland islands dependencies survey (fids). he was responsible for recruitment, procurement of supplies and equipment, including sledge dogs, and once in the field for the establishment of three new bases, at stonington island, marguerite bay; signy island, south orkney islands, and argentine islands, palmer archipelago. he wintered at stonington island in 1946, returned to the uk in 1947 and administered the london office of fids for a year before re-entering regular naval
service.   bingham was principal medical officer at the royal naval air station eglinton, 1948-52, and was promoted to surgeon captain in 1951. this was followed by service as fleet medical officer in  hms vanguard, and finally as principal medical officer at the royal naval air station lee-on-solent. he retired from active royal navy service in 1957.  he died on 1 september 1993, aged 92.  honours bingham glacier in palmer land, antarctica, is named in his honour.   polar medal 1932 (arctic 1930-31), 2nd clasp 1939 (antarctic 1935-37), 3rd clasp 1953 (antarctic 1946).   obe 1947.   murchison grant awarded by the royal geographical society 1950.  references  further reading  - technique and equipment developed during bgle   - experimental greenhouse at fids base e, stonington island  external links  british antarctic oral history project - interview with bingham 1985  archives - edward bingham collection at scott polar research institute  archives - riley, british arctic air route expedition, collection at scott polar research institute  archives - scott polar research institute - records of the british graham land expedition  archives - british antarctic survey - reports, files and photographs of bingham's service with fids  1901 births 1993 deaths fellows of the royal geographical society irish sailors in the royal navy 20th-century anglo-irish people british polar explorers explorers of the arctic royal navy officers of world war ii people from dungannon recipients of the polar medal alumni of trinity college dublin
sujanpur is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in pathankot district, punjab state, india.  members of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2012  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india pathankot district
exhibit a: secrets of forensic science was a canadian television series highlighting the role of forensic science in solving crimes.  references  external links  1990s canadian documentary television series 2000s canadian documentary television series
xenorhabdus bovienii  is a bacterium from the genus of xenorhabdus which has been isolated from the nematode steinernema bibionis, steinernema krsussei, steinernema affine, steinernema carpocapsae, steinernema feltiae, steinernema intermedium, steinernema jollieti and steinernema weiseri. xenorhabdus bovienii produces n-butanoylpyrrothine, n-(3-methylbutanoyl)pyrrothine and xenocyloins.  references  further reading  external links type strain of xenorhabdus bovienii at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  bacteria described in 1993
corythucha elegans, the willow lace bug, is a bug species in the family tingidae found on willows in north america.  references  external links      tingidae insects described in 1918 hemiptera of north america
olenecamptus indianus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by thomson in 1857, originally under the genus authades. it is known from myanmar, malaysia, vietnam, thailand, and india. it contains the varietas olenecamptus indianus var. salweeni.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1857
kevin lankinen (born 28 april 1995) is a finnish professional ice hockey goaltender for the chicago blackhawks of the national hockey league (nhl).  playing career lankinen has played primarily for hifk of the sm-liiga, from 2014 to 2018. he also played one match for jokerit and two for kookoo, and ten for kiekko-vantaa of mestis.  in 2014, lankinen signed a three-year contract with hifk. in the 2015 playoffs, he participated in the longest game in sm-liiga's history, lasting 134 minutes and 14 seconds. his team won 2-1 and advanced to the quarterfinals.  summer 2015 lankinen participated to new york islanders development camp   during the 2015-16 season, lankinen played alongside ville husso, playing 22 games in the regular season, as well as three in the playoffs as his team won silver medals. during the 2016-17 season, lankinen was a secondary goaltender alongside the more experienced niklas backstrom, but due to backstrom's injuries, he became the primary goaltender and played in 42 games, seven of which were shutouts, the most in the league that season.  during the 2017-18 season, lankinen was injured and unable to play for a large portion of the season. however, he made a successful comeback by playing 15 games in the regular season with four shutouts and a save percentage of 94.58 percent. his goals against average (gaa) was 1.33, the highest in the league that season. during the playoffs, he played as the primary goaltender for 13 games with a save percentage of 93.56 percent, helping his team win bronze medals. he was in the running for the urpo ylonen trophy, which is awarded to the best goaltender of the season, alongside veini vehvilainen from oulun karpat and dominik hrachovina from tappara, but the award went to vehvilainen.  on 21 may 2018, lankinen (who had not been selected in nhl entry draft) signed a two-year entry-level contract with the chicago blackhawks of the national hockey league (nhl).  in his second season with the blackhawks affiliate, the rockford icehogs in the 2019-20 season, lankinen made 21 appearances, earning 8 wins and represented the icehogs as the teams' lone representative at the 2020 ahl all-star game. on 5 march 2020, lankinen was ruled out for the remainder of the season after undergoing shoulder surgery
, with a recovery period of 5 months.  on 19 january 2021, lankinen made his nhl debut, losing 5-4 in overtime to the florida panthers. on 22 january, lankinen got his first nhl win in a 4-1 win against the detroit red wings. his first nhl shutout came on 17 february, in the blackhawks' 2-0 win over the detroit red wings.  international play  in 2019, lankinen represented finland in the ice hockey world championships, winning gold. throughout the tournament, he had the second highest save percentage (after andrei vasilevskiy) of 94.20% and a goals against average of 1.50. he served as the goaltender for each playoff game.  personal life lankinen likes to read and names "sapiens" by yuval noah harari as his favorite book. one other favorite of his is "the dirt" - an autobiography of motley crue. lankinen has opened a facebook-based book club with finnish publisher wsoy.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  awards and honours  references  external links    1995 births living people chicago blackhawks players finnish ice hockey goaltenders hifk (ice hockey) players indy fuel players jokerit players imatran kettera players kiekko-vantaa players kookoo players rockford icehogs (ahl) players sportspeople from helsinki swedish-speaking finns undrafted national hockey league players
wat srinagarindravararam is a theravada buddhist temple in gretzenbach, switzerland.  history the relationship between switzerland and the thai royal house go back to the time before the second world war, when the princess and her family lived in lausanne.    it is named in honour of the princess srinagarindra, the mother of king rama ix, who gave her personal permission for the temple to be named after her. it was dedicated in 2003 by princess galyani vadhana, the daughter of the princess mother and sister of the king. the royal family provided financial support for the construction of the temple.   the temple serves the spiritual needs of the local thai, khmer, lao and swiss buddhist community and also has a centre of learning.  references  external links   official homepage  buddhist temples in switzerland thai theravada buddhist temples and monasteries overseas thai buddhist temples thai diaspora in europe
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 10 august 1945 in changchun as a triangular division.  action the 158th division was organised from the cadets of the training units during the soviet invasion of manchuria. the war ended with the surrender of japan 15 august 1945 before the 158th division can complete the organization.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第158師団 (日本軍), accessed 14 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
yuksek sosyete (english: high society) is a turkish television series based on the south korean drama high society, it began on 16 june 2016 and ended on 24 december 2016. it is one of the first works of burak sagyasar's production (bi yapım) aired with his second work ask laftan anlamaz.  plot   this television show's plot is taken from the 2015 korean series high society. it's also about two different worlds. the first world is kerem's (engin ozturk) world. kerem is a hard-working man, his parents work in a rich family's house. kerem always helps their grandson and his best friend mert (ozan dolunay) in everything. one day mert's grandmother wants him to manage oliva supermarket. mert can't manage it so he wants kerem to manage the supermarket for one month and to exchange each other's name(mert wanted that kerem's skills in managing olivia would help him achieve a great name by exchanging each other's identity). the other world is cansu's (hazar erguclu). cansu is the youngest of her family. she's been always hated by her mother and was told that she brings bad luck to her. cansu enjoys having fun and being normal, not the way her mother want her to live. one day her mother makes a date for cansu and mert. but the date fails so she goes to a cafe and sees a woman that reads the future. the woman told cansu that she will love a poor man in a workplace. cansu goes to work in oliva supermarket and meets her new friend ece (meric aral) and also meets kerem.a magical love story will start between cansu and kerem and ece and mert.both couples will encounter many difficulties like mert is kerem and kerem is mert.cansu doesn't belong to a poor but belongs to a rich family.  characters  international broadcasting  references  external links  2016 turkish television series debuts 2016 turkish television series endings star tv (turkey) original programming turkish television series based on south korean television series
this article describes the knockout stage of the 2016-17 women's ehf champions league.  qualified teams the top four placed teams from each of the two main round groups advanced to the knockout stage.  format the first-placed team of each group faced the fourth-placed team, and the second-placed team played against the third-placed team from the other group. after that a draw was held to determine the pairings for the final four.  quarterfinals  overview  |}  matches  vardar won 54-50 on aggregate.  gyori eto won 59-54 on aggregate.  csm bucharest won 57-51 on aggregate.  buducnost won 66-47 on aggregate.  final four the final four was held at the laszlo papp budapest sports arena in budapest, hungary on 6 and 7 may 2017.  the draw was held on 18 april 2017 at 13:00 in budapest, hungary.  bracket  semifinals  third place game  final  references  external links final four website  knockout stage
adrianus g. jacobs (born 1936) is a dutch businessman, the former chairman of royal dutch shell from 2004 to 2006, and of ing group from 1992 to 1998.  jacobs has been a director of numerous companies. in 2002, jacobs was inducted into the insurance hall of fame.  references  1936 births dutch businesspeople living people shell plc people ing group place of birth missing (living people)
gaunswala  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gaunswala. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gaunswala has a total number of 7 houses and population of 32 of which include 13 males and 19 females. literacy rate of gaunswala is 80.00%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 7 which is  21.88% of total population of gaunswala, and child sex ratio is approximately  2500, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
bardoux may refer to:  people with the surname agenor bardoux (1829-1897), french politician. jacques bardoux (1874-1959), french politician.  locations saint-bardoux, small town in france.
the 1960-61 honduran amateur league was the 13th edition of the honduran amateur league.  the season ran from 14 february 1960 to 6 march 1961, however, it was declared null and abandoned due to an excessive delay to start the final phase of the season.  regional champions  known results  national championship round scheduled to be played in a double round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the pentagonal.  however, only one game was played due to the withdrawals of c.d. honduras and c.d.s. vida.  it is unclear the reason why the honduran sports federation decided on 6 march 1961 to proclaim c.d. olimpia as 1960-61 national champions  results  olimpia's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1960 in honduran sport 1961 in honduran sport
ellsworth historic district, also known as ellsworth addition, is a national historic district located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 144 contributing buildings, 1 contributing site, and 4 contributing structures in a predominantly residential section of lafayette.  it developed between about 1844 and 1936 and includes representative examples of italianate, second empire, queen anne, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture.  located in the district are the separately listed falley home, moses fowler house, and temple israel.  other notable buildings include the second presbyterian church (1894-1895), alexander house (c. 1880), ball brothers house (c. 1845), falley townhouse (c. 1892), home block (c. 1870), annie fowler house (c. 1870), and duplex townhouse (c. 1890).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1986.  see also centennial neighborhood district downtown lafayette historic district highland park neighborhood historic district jefferson historic district ninth street hill historic district park mary historic district park mary historic district perrin historic district st. mary historic district upper main street historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana second empire architecture in indiana neighborhoods in lafayette, indiana historic districts in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
robert coull (born 28 august 1966) is a british former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people british male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from rotherham people from rotherham
below is a list of notable people who were born in negros occidental, or those who lived there for an extended period.  arts, culture and media  architecture  leandro locsin - national artist for architecture.  fashion  rafe totengco - new york-based fashion designer.  grendel alvarado - fashion model, winner of philippines' next top model.  film  peque gallaga - multi-awarded filmmaker.  ronnie lazaro - a gawad urian award-winning filipino film and television actor, producer and casting and art director.  susan roces - award-winning actress, nicknamed queen of philippine movies, widow of fernando poe jr., adoptive mother of grace poe.  joel torre - actor, director and film producer.  reiven bulado - 2004 mmff best supporting actor, ramp model, and entrepreneur.  bernard bonnin - actor  pancho magalona - award-winning actor  erik matti -  director, screenwriter, producer  rosemarie sonora - actress  charles gemora - hollywood makeup-artist, special effects pioneer and actor.  rey "pj" abellana - film and tv actor.  carla abellana - film and tv actress.  literature  adelina gurrea - journalist, poet and playwright in spanish.  elsa martinez coscolluela - award-winning poet, short-story writer, and playwright.  gilbert luis r. centina iii - prize-winning poet and author.  alex lacson - writer, lawyer and philanthropist.  music  bobby enriquez - jazz pianist  kuh ledesma - popular jazz and pop singer. known as the pop diva of the philippines.  noven belleza - it's showtime tawag ng tanghalan grand winner  publishing  raul locsin - editor, publisher and founder of businessworld. ramon magsaysay award recipient.  teodoro locsin sr. - editor of the philippines free press.  television  allan k. - singer, comedian, actor and tv host.  saicy aguila - dancesport and samba instructor, pinoy big brother housemate.  alvin elchico - tv/radio host, former provincial correspondent for magtv na amiga.  rio diaz - former beauty queen, tv host and actress.  romy pastrana - comedian and goin' bulilit member under the name dagul. uncle of joey pastrana.  elizabeth ramsey - comedian, singer and actress  christian vasquez - actor, model for pond's and a
former housemate of abs-cbn's pinoy big brother: pinoy big brother: celebrity edition.  theater  eduardo varela sicangco - scene designer and illustrator for broadway, opera and film  visual arts  alfredo alcala - comic book artist for dc and marvel comics.  alfonso a. ossorio - abstract expressionist artist.  athletes  basketball   francis arnaiz - former basketball player in the philippine basketball association for toyota super corollas and barangay ginebra kings.  nonoy baclao - professional basketball player who plays for the talk 'n text tropang texters in the philippine basketball association. he also played for the philippine patriots in the asean basketball league and as a collegiate player for the ateneo blue eagles in the uaap.  noli locsin - retired basketball player who spent most of his career for the ginebra san miguel franchise in the philippine basketball association.  jeffrei chan - professional basketball player who plays for the rain or shine elasto painters in the philippine basketball association and member of gilas pilipinas in the 2014 fiba world cup.  rudy distrito - retired professional basketball player in the philippine basketball association   boyet fernandez - current head coach of the nlex road warriors in the pba d-league and san beda red lions in the ncaa. former head coach of the now defunct sta. lucia realtors in the pba and up fighting maroons in the uaap.  reynel hugnatan - professional basketball player who plays for the meralco bolts in the philippine basketball association.  la revilla - professional basketball player for mahindra enforcer in the philippine basketball association  james yap - professional basketball player who plays for the san mig super coffee mixers in the philippine basketball association and a former member of the philippines national basketball team.  mark yee - professional basketball player who plays for the globalport batang pier in the philippine basketball association.  darts karl john pio - local darts player, gold medalist in darts tournament  bowls sonia bruce -  international lawn bowler, bronze medalist at the 2016 world bowls championship ainie knight - international lawn and indoor bowler, bronze medalist at the 2012 world bowls championship  boxing   rolando bohol - former ibf world flyweight champion.  leopoldo cantancio - retired boxer who competed at two summer olympic games. he also won a bronze medal in the 1990 asian games.  godfrey castro - 2007 sea games silver medalist and 2006 asian games bronze medalist (flyweight)  francisco guilledo - more commonly known as pancho villa, first filipino world champion boxer, world flyweight champion and ibhof international boxing hall of
fame and wbhof world boxing hall of fame inductee.  small montana (benjamin gan) - won the flyweight championship of the world (as recognized by new york state).  eleuterio zapanta - world bantamweight champion in 1940 and world flyweight champion in 1941.  dodie boy penalosa - two division world champion and former ibf champion in the light flyweight and flyweight classes.  gerry penalosa - two division world champion and former holder of the wbc super flyweight and the wbo bantamweight titles.  sonny boy jaro - former the ring and wbc flyweight world champion.  eric jamili - retired professional boxer and former wbo minimumweight champion.  mark jason melligen - professional boxer.  donnie nietes - three division world champion and former wbo minimumweight world champion, former wbo & the ring light flyweight champion and former ibf flyweight champion.  elias recaido - competed in the 1996 summer olympics. he won a bronze medal at the 1990 asian games.  merlito sabillo - former holder of the wbo minimumweight world title.  leopoldo serantes - 1988 seoul olympics bronze medalist.  genesis servania - professional boxer  joan tipon - 2006 doha asian games gold medalist (bantamweight)  mansueto velasco, jr. - 1996 summer olympic games silver medalist  roel velasco - 1992 summer olympics bronze medalist  ben villaflor - wba world junior lightweight (now called super featherweight) champion during the 1970s.  young tommy - retired professional boxer.  rogen ladon - competed at the 2016 summer olympics in the men's light flyweight division.  chess alekhine nouri - youngest fide master at age 7  football   manuel amechazurra - the first filipino footballer to play in the european football circuit, he was called el capitan and played as a defender, from 1905 to 1915 for fc barcelona.  arsenio lacson - former member of the philippines national football team and participated in tournaments such as the 1934 far eastern championship games.  florentino broce - former member and coach for the philippines national football team.    dave fegidero - former member of the philippines national football team.   norman fegidero - former member and coach for the philippines national football team.    troy fegidero - former member of the philippines national football team.   ali go - former member of the philippines national football team and the philippines national futsal team.   tating pasilan - former member of the philippines national football team and the philippines national futsal team. he also played
for the green archers united in the defunct united football league.  robert canedo - professional footballer for jpv marikina in the philippines football league and former member of the philippines national football team.  alesa dolino - defender for the philippines women's national football team. she also plays for outkast f.c. in the pff women's league.  eduard sacapano - professional footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for ceres-negros f.c. in the philippines football league and a former member of the philippines national football team.  camelo tacusalme - professional footballer who plays as a defender for jpv marikina in the philippines football league.  joshua beloya - professional football player who plays as a striker for ilocos united in the philippines football league. former member of the philippines national u-23 football team and the philippines national beach soccer team.  golf  juvic pagunsan -professional golfer, asian tour order of merit champion.  luis fernando "golem" cuenca silverio  - best philippine amateur golfer; golem was the first asian to play at the masters when he was invited to augusta for the 1966 event; he made the cut there. he was also the first and only filipino amateur golfer to win the philippine open in 1966;he represented the philippines and was considered as a dominant player, winning 7 individual championship trophies in the putra cup between 1963 and 1974.  martial arts   monsour del rosario - taekwondo champion who has also starred in several filipino and international action films. he won bronze in the 1985 world taekwondo championships.  randy mengullo - initiated the jack and jill school karate program, a sandan blackbelt in  who garnered medals in many karatedo championships and athletic meet of different schools and karate organizations in the philippines.  ernesto presas - martial artist, founder of filipino martial arts system kombatan.  remy presas - father of modern arnis  remy p. presas - arnisador, martial artist  pool  ramil gallego - professional pool player  softball  queeny sabobo - softball player, gold medalist at the 2015 southeast asian games  swimming  carlo piccio - olympic swimmer  volleyball  fille cainglet-cayetano - volleyball player for both the meralco power spikers of the shakey's v-league (svl) and the petron blaze spikers of the philippine super liga.  melissa gohing - team captain and libero of the pocari sweat lady warriors in the premier volleyball league.  beauty queens
aurora pijuan - miss international 1970.  vickie rushton - lin-ay sang negros 2009, mutya ng pilipinas 2011 , pinoy big brother: all in housemate.  sandra seifert - miss philippines earth 2009 , international fashion model.  margaret nales wilson - binibining pilipinas-world 2007, tv personality and actress.  business  leticia dela pena- former chairman and ceo of bacolod rice, in 2007 she was listed as 98th richest woman in the philippines  tan yu -billionaire philanthropist, was ranked the richest man in the philippines  government service and diplomacy  international organization  rafael m. salas - former united nations under-secretary general, executive director unfpa, executive secretary to ferdinand marcos  jorge b. vargas - member, world scout committee, de facto head of the philippine government during world war ii, executive secretary to manuel quezon  teodoro locsin jr. - permanent representative of the philippines to the united nations, former congressional representative, and journalist  national government   rafael alunan - former secretary of agriculture of manuel quezon and jose p. laurel  dennis mapa  politician   rafael m. alunan iii - former secretary of the interior of fidel ramos   mercedes alvarez - deputy speaker of the house of representatives of the philippines  jose miguel arroyo - former first gentleman of the philippines.  iggy arroyo - representative 5th district of negros occidental, brother in law of former philippine president gloria arroyo.  francisco chavez -  former solicitor general of the philippines  neri colmenares  - former party-list congressman for bayan muna  raul m. gonzalez - former secretary of justice (philippines)  rowena guanzon - commissioner commission on elections (philippines)  emilio hilado  - former associate justice of the supreme court of the philippines during world war ii  oscar r. ledesma - former senator  jose locsin - former senator and secretary of health.  enrique b. magalona - former senator, grandfather of the late francis magalona.  alfredo montelibano, sr. - politician and industrialist, served as mayor of bacolod governor of negros occidental, and philippine secretary of national defense and interior.  gil montilla - speaker of the national assembly  ruperto montinola - former senator  enrique ona - former secretary of health (philippines)  monico puentevella - politician, former representative lone district of bacolod city, former commissioner of philippine sports commission and former mayor of bacolod.  rolando ramos dizon - former chairman of the commission on higher education. la
sallian brother  judy taguiwalo - secretary of the department of social welfare and development  haydee yorac - former chairman of the commission on elections (philippines).  jose yulo - former speaker of the house of representatives of the philippines, former secretary of justice under manuel quezon, chief justice of the supreme court of the philippines during world war ii, former secretary of labor, and served as secretary of justice again under ferdinand marcos.  local government  ramon bagatsing - longest serving mayor of manila (1971-1986), manila congressman (1957-1971) and plaza miranda bombing survivor.  guia gomez - mayor of san juan city, known for relationship with former philippine president joseph estrada, with whom she has a son, senator jv ejercito  arsenio lacson - broadcaster, first elected mayor of manila. former manila congressman  evelio leonardia - mayor of bacolod and former congressional representative   alfredo g. maranon, jr. - governor of negros occidental and former congressional representative  jose maria zubiri jr. - former governor of bukidnon, former representative of third district of bukidnon  historical figures   juan araneta - led the negros revolution  aniceto lacson - led the negros revolution  antonio ledesma jayme - revolutionary  papa isio - revolutionary  yves leopold germain gaston - sugar baron  mariano varela ramos - first president municipal (mayor) of bacolod  military service  mary grace baloyo  - philippine medal of valor recipient, the nation's highest military honor, first lieutenant philippine air force  religion  niall o'brien - irish columban missionary priest, writer of the hiligaynon language bible.  antonio fortich - former bishop of bacolod, political activist and ramon magsaysay award recipient.  vicente salgado y garrucho - former bishop of the roman catholic diocese of romblon   jesus y varela - bishop emeritus of the roman catholic diocese of sorsogon, former president, philippine federation of catholic broadcasters.  scientists and innovators  raul fabella, national scientist of the philippines for economics  angel alcala, national scientist of the philippines for biological science  gavino trono, national scientist of the philippines for marine biology  oscar h. ibarra - theoretical computer scientist, known for his works on automata theory, formal language, and computational complexity theory  katherine luzuriaga - immunologist, developed a functioning cure for hiv infected infants. included in the time 100 list of the most influential people in the world for 2013.  others
jose vasquez aguilar - ramon magsaysay award recipient   rose lacson-porteous - australian-filipino socialite  tony meloto - philanthropist, founder of gawad kalinga  soledad "gretchen" oppen-cojuangco - heiress and philanthropist, the wife of billionaire danding cojuangco, chairman of san miguel corporation, southeast asia's largest food and beverage corporation.  carl and clarence aguirre - former conjoined twins.  notable people with roots from negros occidental   mikey arroyo - son of former philippine president gloria arroyo, member philippine house of representatives.  diosdado macapagal arroyo - also known as dato arroyo - son of former president gloria macapagal arroyo, member philippine house of representatives.  ginger conejero - former miss philippines earth runner-up and a tv entertainment reporter and host for abs-cbn.  sheryl cruz - actress on film and television.  joe devance - basketball player who currently plays for the san mig coffee mixers in the philippine basketball association.  chuckie dreyfus - actor on film and television   joseph victor ejercito - son of former phil president joseph estrada, member philippine house of representatives.  charlene gonzales - television and film personality and former beauty queen.  mark hartmann - professional footballer who plays as a striker for malaysian club sarawak fa and member of the philippines national football team.  matthew hartmann - professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for global cebu f.c. in the philippines football league and former member of the philippines national football team.  james hall - professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for meralco manila in the philippines football league.  ryan hall - professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for meralco manila in the philippines football league.  martin steuble - member of the philippines national football team and a professional football player for the ceres-negros f.c. in the philippines football league. his mother is from bacolod.  jaya - soul diva and asia's queen of soul  angel locsin - actress and commercial model.  elmo magalona - actor and singer   francis magalona - former actor, tv host, master rapper and also vj on channel v philippines and mtv philippines.  frank magalona - actor and rapper  maxene magalona - actress in film and television  saab magalona - actress, singer, photographer and blogger  raimund marasigan - pinoy rock musician and icon.  tomas osmena - member of the philippine house of representatives,  mayor of cebu city.  sergio
osmena iii - senator  hiro peralta - actor   aj perez - former film and television actor  sue ramirez - abs-cbn young artist. her mother is from sipalay.  mar roxas - secretary of transportation and communication, former trade secretary, senator and vice-presidential candidate, president of the liberal party (philippines).  lea salonga - tony and laurence olivier award-winning actress and singer.  juan miguel zubiri - senator  references   negros occidental
the 1917 denver pioneers football team represented the university of denver in the rocky mountain conference (rmc) during the 1917 college football season.  in their third season under head coach john fike, the pioneers compiled a perfect 9-0 record (6-0 against rmc opponents), shared the rmc championship with utah state, and outscored all opponents by a total of 226 to 45.  at the end of the season, both denver and utah state were undefeated against rocky mountain conference opponents. a game between denver and utah state was proposed to determine an undisputed conference champion, but denver's faculty ruled against the game. denver officials claimed the title and asserted that the utah aggies "have a right to claim nothing more than a tie for the honors."  the 1917 team was the only group in the university of denver's football history to compile a perfect season.  schedule  references  denver denver pioneers football seasons rocky mountain athletic conference football champion seasons college football undefeated seasons denver pioneers football
a chinese odyssey part three is a 2016 chinese-hong kong fantasy comedy drama film directed by jeffrey lau. it was released in china on september 14, 2016. it won the golden angel award for film at the 12th chinese american film festival. the film is a sequel to parts one and two of a chinese odyssey.  plot taking place in an alternate timeline, fairy zixia used the pandora's box to travel forward in time to see the consequences of leaving a tear drop in joker's heart, which led to her "demise" and joker being revealed as the reincarnation of the monkey king. fearing for her life and joker's mental well being, she denounced her relationship to joker, which led to him asking about what happened in the future. zixia revealed to him the fact that she left a mark in joker's heart, leading to bai jing jing realizing that joker will eventually stop having feelings for her, leading him to fall for zixia.  however, zixia withheld the information about joker being the monkey king's reincarnation and tried to make things right by forcing joker into meeting with bai jing jing much earlier than in the original timeline. unfortunately, joker had already stopped having feelings for jing-jing and prevented zixia's plan from going any further resulting in a slap from zixia. after having a talk with qingxia (zixia's twin sister trapped in her body), zixia decided to go the bull demon king and marry him so joker can stop falling for her so she left joker - who was looking for her after being slapped - alone by himself.  joker continues his search for zixia in the desert, where he witnessed this timeline's version of the monkey king being subdued by guanyin, with the difference being that the longevity monk used the pandora's box to escape from being killed by the monkey king and the time to subdue the monkey king took longer than expected. after guanyin left with the subdued monkey king, joker found himself left with the returning longevity monk and both were caught together by the bull demon king, being happy about having a second wife and the longevity monk being captured.  meanwhile, in heaven, guanyin handed over the subdued monkey king to the jade emperor, discussing about the overwhelming presence of demons and fearing that the sealed book had a mistake in it, which jade emperor reassures her that the book is never wrong. as guanyin left to report the progress to the buddha, the jade emperor unsealed the monkey king, who is revealed to be the six-eared monkey, revealing
that the sealed book did not mention about the monkey king in the initial pilgrimage at all as he was born 500 years later as joker, causing the jade emperor to get the six-eared monkey fill in the role until joker arrived from the future. this eventually leads to the jade emperor betraying the six-eared monkey and have him slowly burn in the great oven.  in the residence of the bull demon king, zixia and qingxia were talking about the possible married life with the bull demon king, with zixia realizing that the pandora's box was missing and suspecting that qingxia had given it to the six-eared monkey, with a flashback revealing that she was an ex-lover of his. zixia was soon confronted with princess iron fan (铁扇公主) and her son red child (红孩子), resulting in a fight between the two women, leading zixia being blown past the just arrived bull demon king, joker and longevity monk. the bull demon king, realizes the trouble he's in and instructs joker to take the longevity monk and zixia to his sister, xiang xiang while he tries to stall the princess for time. while on the run, joker demands to know why zixia left him alone whereas the longevity monk accidentally found a way to leave by freeing one of the bull king's giant bulls. the trio escaped, but were chased by red child until both joker and logevity monk accidentally stole his fire wheels (used for flight).  upon arriving at xiang xiang's palace, the trio met with xiang xiang and, much to their horror, witnessed her devouring a man whole. she challenged the trio and defeated them, leading them to being locked up in the dungeon. it was then that zixia tells joker about her demise in the original timeline, and why she tried so hard to stop joker from developing feelings for her. at the same time, the bull demon king arrived to reconcile with xiang xiang about the execution of her lover, mantis, by his own hands, which she rejected as mantis was the only true love to her. it was at this time that the longevity monk played the main theme of the entire a chinese odyssey series, leading to joker and zixia kissing at the end of the song. the demon bull king and xiang xiang saw the silhouettes of them kissing, causing the siblings to burst into the dungeon only to see the longevity monk taking zixia's place. when xiang xiang saw this, she ended up drooling implying that she's interested
in joker, thus allowing the bull demon king giving his blessing to joker for xiang xiang's hand in marriage.  while preparations for the bull demon king's 2nd wedding is underway, joker and xiang xiang talked about mantis and the reason she did not use the pandora's box to prevent his death while the bull demon king tried to impress zixia. he asked joker for tips on how to impress zixia, with joker using the pandora's box multiple times, the first few times to play a game on the bull king, 2 times to get rid of the bull king and xiang xiang, and the last to get himself and zixia away from the ceremony, only for the plan to backfire forcing all 4 of them to return. the bull demon king, angry at the series of events, tries to kill joker while xiang xiang chases after zixia, only to have zixia captured while qingxia was forced out of zixia's body. the bull demon king's rampaging was soon interrupted by the arrival of his wife, princess iron fan and red child, only for him and red kid to find out the princess had an affair with the monkey king, causing him to punish joker and zixia by forcing them to marry at the ceremony.  meanwhile, in heaven, the jade emperor was shocked to find out the sealed book had changed, forcing him to free six-ear monkey from the great oven, and accidentally revealing to him that the longevity monk is the monkey and qingxia's son and finding out that qingxia knew everything about the mistake in the sealed book. thus, the jade emperor allowed qingxia to repossess her body and let six-eared monkey to go rescue his son while still under the guise of the monkey king. six-eared monkey crashed the wedding, revealed that he started the affair with the princess, while maintaining "the fact" that joker is not the monkey king, and started battling with the entire bull household, with qingxia arriving later rescue zixia from xiang xiang and trading places with zixia in order for the prophecy to remain true, with a few changes. the battle ended up with the bull siblings finally reconciled as xiang xiang being forced to consume her brother just so to have a fighting chance against six-eared monkey. the heavenly army arrived to provide backup for six-eared monkey, qingxia sustaining a blow in the process. as he saw this, six-eared monkey breaks free from xiang xiang's grasp to grab qingxia while the heavenly army and general li jing dealt the final blow and sealed xiang
xiang once and for all.  five hundred years later, six-eared monkey accompanied his son and his disciples on the pilgrimage, while joker and zixia watch on after kissing on the top of the wall, mentioning about six-eared wanting to be reunited with qingxia as quickly as possible. a day in heaven later (10 yrs later on earth), longevity monk became a buddha while his parents stay together as the wick for the buddha's lamp, only for their day interrupted by the jade emperor saying that the sealed book changed again.....  cast han geng as sun wukong wu jing as tang sanzang cho seung-youn as zhu bajie zhou yixuan as sha wujing tiffany tang as zixia and qing xia karen mok as baigujing zhang chao as bull demon king zhang yao as niu xiang xiang wang yibo as red boy gillian chung as spider woman xie nan as princess iron fan he jiong as erlang shen hu jing as guanyin huang zheng as jade emperor chai ge as huang xiaoming jeffrey lau corey yuen  box office a chinese odyssey part three was released in china amidst the mid-autumn festival from which it benefitted. the film opened wednesday, september 14 and delivered $6.26 million on its first day. it climbed higher to $13.1 million on thursday (due largely because the festival fell on this day) and held to $9.61 million on friday (since friday was also a holiday), before dropping to $5.71 million on saturday and finally $2.67 million on sunday (since work resumed on sunday). in total, the film made $33.3 million in five days according to data from ent group and $17.3 over the three days of the weekend (friday to sunday), according to comscore easily topping the chinese box office and recorded an opening nearly double the second place z storm 2 if going by the five-day figure. if we go by the former five-day figure, that means it was the top international earner of the weekend, but going by the latter number, it ranks in third place, behind bridget jones's baby and the age of shadows.  following a first-place finish, the film went on to hold the top position for the second weekend in a row but fell precipitously by earning just $5.97 million (friday to sunday) and $13.3 million in its second full week (monday to sunday). this was despite competition from newcomer hollywood animated film storks. the huge
fall was due to mixed word of mouth and since the week before national day (prior to october 1) is typically a dumping ground for releasing films in which distributors have little confidence in their films' box office potential.  references  external links  chinese films hong kong films chinese fantasy comedy-drama films hong kong fantasy comedy-drama films films directed by jeffrey lau 2010s fantasy comedy-drama films huaxia film distribution films films based on journey to the west 2016 comedy films 2016 drama films
ekaterina chernysheva (; 1715-1779) was a russian courtier.  she was the daughter of andrey ushakov and married the diplomat count peter chernyshev, russian ambassador to denmark, prussia, england and france, and was the mother of darya petrovna saltykova and natalya golitsyna.  from 1730 until her marriage in 1738, she served as maid of honour to anna of russia. she was a favorite and confidante of anna leopoldovna, which resulted in a demand from the powerful favorite ernst johann von biron that she persuade anna to refuse a marriage to duke anthony ulrich of brunswick in favor of peter von biron, a task she unsuccessfully tried to achieve.  references   русские портреты 18-19 столетии. т.2. вып. 4. № 155  1715 births 1779 deaths 18th-century russian people ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire russian royal favourites burials at lazarevskoe cemetery (saint petersburg)
amin salman mosque () is a mosque in djibouti city, djibouti.  capacity salman mosque has the capacity to accommodate up to 1,500 worshippers.  see also  religion in djibouti  list of mosques in africa  islam in djibouti  references  mosques in djibouti abbasid architecture buildings and structures in djibouti (city)
chak 382 gb sarwarwali is a village of about 5,000 people situated near the city of jaranwala in the faisalabad district of pakistan. there are many castes living this village, such as dar, noon, khichi, and koras. it has two primary schools: a girls' primary school and a boys' primary school.  surroundings  it is situated left to the gugera branch canal on the north side and chak no. 357 gb on north-western side by crossing gogera branch. eastern side near thatti gujran. there is a small canal which distributes water to many villages of the dan abad circle. across the canal, there is a village named chak no.381 g.b. to the north.  map  references  populated places in faisalabad district villages in faisalabad district
fang junying (1884-1923) was a chinese revolutionary.  she was the niece of the progressive reformer fang jiashi, a follower of weng tonghe, and sister of the revolutionaries fang shengdong and fang shengtao. from 1901 to 1911, she studied in japan, and became involved with the revolutionary republican movements among the chinese students there.  she became a member of the tonghmenghui in 1905, and head of its assassination section in 1907. in 1908, she participated in a planned assassination of prince regent zai feng. she was one of the ideologists who planned the guangzhou uprising on 27 april 1911.  from 1912 to 1922, she studied in france. upon her return to china, she committed suicide through an overdose of morphine. she stated her reason as her sorrow over the rampant corruption in china.  references   lily xiao hong lee, clara lau, a.d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911   1884 births 1923 deaths 1923 suicides 19th-century chinese people 19th-century chinese women 20th-century chinese people 20th-century chinese women chinese expatriates in japan chinese expatriates in france drug-related suicides in china
the collegiate church of saint-andre, grenoble () is a parish church, formerly a collegiate church, dedicated to saint andrew, in grenoble, france.  history the church is located on the place saint-andre, grenoble, in front of the former palace of the parliament of the dauphine. it is the former private chapel of the dauphins of the viennois, founded in 1228 to house their tombs. its construction was paid for by the income of the silver mines of brandes-en-oisans near alpe d'huez.  andre dauphin de bourgogne (also known as guigues vi), count of albon, dauphin of the viennois, had the church built on high ground as a dynastic place of burial after the flood of grenoble in 1219. from 1349 on it was a royal chapel of the french kings. on 20 june 1468 king louis xi gave the canons the right to appoint to all vacant canonries. in 1562 it was largely destroyed by the protestant troops of the baron des adrets during the reformation. the college was disbanded in 1790, during the french revolution, and the building became a parish church in 1822.  the building has been classified as a monument historique since 27 august 2013. previously, some parts had been classified individually  (steeple in 1908, west gable and tympanum in 1936, western portal in 1956).  bell tower the bell tower is a feature of the city's skyline and a symbol of the town. 56 meters tall, it was completed in the late 13th century and contains a carillon of three bells. the drone was cast in 1693 and bears the arms of the provost flodoard moret bourchenu. the other two bells date from the 19th century.  the organ the first mention of an organ was in 1439. the present instrument was built between 1701 and 1704 on a platform of 1686. the instrument was installed (12 stops, one keyboard) and designed by the lyon manufacturer francois du fayet. in 1748 samson scherrer increased the number of stops to 24. the current composition of the organ dates from 1946. many great artists have played the instrument including marcel dupre and gaston litaize. for more than thirty years the organist and composer was felicien wolff.  clock the clock is the oldest public clock in grenoble.  references  roman catholic churches in grenoble churches used by the priestly fraternity of st. peter
basketball at the 2005 games of the small states of europe was held from 30 may to 4 june 2005. games were played at the poliesportiu d'andorra, in andorra la vella, andorra.  medal summary  men's tournament men's tournament was played by a round-robin group composed by five teams.  table  women's tournament women's tournament was played by a round-robin group composed by four teams.  table  external links andorra 2005 official website  small 2005 games of the small states of europe 2005 international basketball competitions hosted by andorra
edith mae savage-jennings (march 17, 1924 - november 12, 2017) was an american civil rights leader from new jersey. she was known for her association with civil rights leader martin luther king jr.  she was notable for being a guest to the white house under every president of the united states from franklin d. roosevelt through barack obama. she was inducted into the new jersey women's hall of fame in 2011.  early life savage was born in 1924 at jacksonville, florida, one of six children in her family. her parents died when she was two years old. following the death of her parents, savage and her siblings went to live with her aunt, who moved the family to new jersey.  at age 10, savage met first lady eleanor roosevelt when she was selected to hand the first lady flowers on behalf of the new jersey state federation of colored women's clubs. although told not to say anything, savage thanked roosevelt which led to the two becoming pen pals for the remainder of roosevelt's life.  at 12 years old, she joined the national association for the advancement of colored people (naacp).  civil rights leader at only 13 years old, savage helped to integrate the capital theater in trenton, new jersey, when she refused to sit in the balcony, which was the designated seating area for blacks. savage's first job was in the sheriff's office, where she continued to speak out against discrimination.  in 1957, while savage was raising funds for king's southern leadership conference, she was introduced to civil rights leader martin luther king jr. king and his wife, coretta scott king, became savage's close friends. after martin's death, savage worked with coretta to found the king center.  in 1964, savage and then first lady of new jersey helen meyner went on a presidential mission to integrate a school in mississippi. savage and meyner met with local women in an effort to convince the locals to allow for the school to be integrated peacefully. later that same year, she organized the new jersey democratic coalition.  in 2017, she was a keynote speaker at the women's march in trenton.  other activities savage was the coordinator of the mid-atlantic states poor people's campaign of sclc in 1968. president jimmy carter appointed her as a u.s. delegate at the world women's conference in houston, texas in 1977.  besides promoting civil rights, savage wanted to combat problems in the african-american community through education. she believed the importance of parenting and mentoring to give children role models.
personal life on october 28, 1993, savage married c. donald jennings. rosa parks attended the wedding and coretta scott king served as maid of honor. her husband died on june 19, 2011 at age 94.  death savage died on november 12, 2017 at her home in trenton, new jersey at the age of 93.  awards and honors savage received more than 100 awards and honors for her work in civil rights. she was inducted into the new jersey women's hall of fame in 2011. the city of trenton proclaimed february 19, 2016 as edith savage-jennings day.  savage was a guest to the white house under every president of the united states from franklin delano roosevelt through barack obama.  references  external links  edith savage-jennings profile at national association of social workers website; accessed november 13, 2017.  1924 births 2017 deaths people from jacksonville, florida people from trenton, new jersey women in red 2016 naacp activists activists for african-american civil rights activists from new jersey american women activists activists from florida women civil rights activists 21st-century american women
is a large cubewano in the kuiper belt that was discovered in july 2014 by the pan-starrs-1 telescope, and announced on 17 july 2016. it is one of the brighter trans-neptunian objects, being the 34th brightest cubewano as of 23 july 2016. its exact size is unknown, but is most likely between 240 and 730 kilometers across. mike brown's website lists it as a "possible" dwarf planet, with an estimated diameter of 337 kilometers.   is also somewhat close to the new horizons probe, about 8.7 au away on 1 january 2017, and 7.5 au on 1 january 2019. considering its large size, it would make a possible imaging target, as 15810 arawn was in early 2016. however, as  is currently over 10 times further than the other was, it would have much lower-precision data.  references  external links     556416 556416 556416 20140728
yevhen cheberko (; born 23 january 1998) is a ukrainian professional footballer who plays as a centre-back for osijek.  club career cheberko is a product of the ufk dnipropetrovsk and fc dnipo (first trainer was ihor khomenko) youth sportive school systems.  he made his debut as a substituted player in a second half-time for fc dnipro in the match against fc volyn lutsk on 24 july 2016 in the ukrainian premier league.  on 5 february 2021, cheberko joined croatian first football league side osijek on an 18-month loan deal.  international career he made his national team debut on 7 october 2020 in a friendly against france.  career statistics  club  references  external links  1998 births living people people from melitopol ukrainian footballers ukraine international footballers ukraine under-21 international footballers ukraine youth international footballers fc dnipro players fc zorya luhansk players lask players nk osijek players ukrainian expatriate footballers ukrainian premier league players expatriate footballers in austria ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in austria expatriate footballers in croatia ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in croatia association football midfielders croatian first football league players
dr robert mortimer glover frse (1815-1859) was an english physician. in 1838 he co-founded the paris medical society and served as its first vice president. he won the medical society of london's fothergill gold medal in 1846 for his lecture "on the pathology and treatment of scrofula". some 5 years prior to james young simpson's use of chloroform on human patients in 1842 glover discovered its anaesthetic qualities on laboratory animals. he is sometimes called "the true discoverer of chloroform". in an ironic twist of fate he died from a chloroform overdose.  life  he was born in south shields on 2 november 1815 to catherine and william glover, a merchant. in 1829 he was apprenticed to thomas j. aitken trcse of 31 nicolson street in edinburgh. he began studying medicine at the university of edinburgh the following year, and was clerked to prof james syme at the edinburgh royal infirmary. in 1834 he travelled to geneva in switzerland to study under prof lombard. in 1835 he was elected a member of the medical society of edinburgh. in 1837 he received his licence to practice medicine and travelled to paris, founding the paris medical society the following year and serving as its first vice president.  he returned briefly to newcastle-upon-tyne in 1839 before again heading to edinburgh in 1840. this was to defend his thesis "on the physiological and medical properties of bromine and its compounds" from which he then received his doctorate (md). he then returned to newcastle to stay with his brother william glover who was also a doctor, operating from 12 northumberland street. he joined the newcastle school of medicine and practical sciences, serving as chairman of the department of chemistry and head of the department of materia medica and therapeutics.  in 1842 he won the gold medal of the harveian society for his thesis on the properties of chloroform and bromine, including the first description of the anaesthetic effects of chloroform (injected into the neck of a dog). the paper acknowledged the potential effects upon the heart (including potential death). he omitted to spot its potential use during surgery. glover later wrote to james young simpson, decrying simpson's failure to credit his own contributions. simpson answered that he did not follow "animal experiments". however, as simpson was one of the university assessors of glover's thesis (which contained the same theories) this claim seems a little hollow. simpson should have read his thesis even if he claimed he had not. simpson's use on humans is generally described as "the first"
and this is technically correct, if perhaps obfuscating other factors. it equally belittles the contribution of simpson's dentist neighbour, francis brodie imlach, who used chloroform in clinical conditions to extract a tooth (perhaps its safest use) on 11 november 1847, and equally deserves more recognition. glover's findings were confirmed by dr robert halliday gunning in may 1848, also disproving simpson's theories on the reasons for the effects of chloroform.  in 1848 glover assisted prof john fife at newcastle infirmary in the autopsy of 15 year old hannah greener, who had died under the effects of chloroform whilst having an infected toenail removed. she was the first human death from chloroform.  in 1850 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh his proposer being  sir robert christison.  in the summer of 1851 the newcastle school of medicine was dissolved following various arguments over rent owed to the north eastern railway company and moves to be absorbed by durham university. glover and dawson set up a new school, whilst the majority of teachers ran a rival school under the umbrella of durham university. the two factions reunited in 1857 after glover had left newcastle.  late in 1854 he appears at the royal free hospital in london under the name of mortimer glover, living at 2 tavistock place off russell square. here he worked with frederick james gant and thomas wakley. he was reprimanded for failure to receive his london licence to practice (lrcp) and being slack in clinical duties. he asked for a leave of absence in april 1855. together with gant he volunteered to join the medical staff in the crimea, also attracted by the very large stipend of £1500 per annum.  on 25 april 1855 they sailed on hms candia reaching scutari on 26 may 1855. gant and glover were amongst the five civilian surgeons working at the barracks at scutari. glover caught dysentery here and began taking doses of opium and chloroform to deal with this. civil surgeons and military surgeons did not mix well and the civil surgeons were dispensed of prior to the end of the war. gant and glover left in january 1856 having been of little practical purpose. gant returned to the royal free hospital but glover did not, neither did he resign. his name disappears from their records in 1856.  in july 1856 he at last passed his lrcp.  his health deteriorated after his time serving in the crimean war at which point he became addicted to both opium and chloroform. destitute and unable to work, he took lodgings with a
mr walter rochfort a pharmacist, at 1 kensington park gardens in notting hill, london.  sadly glover died from an overdose of chloroform at 1 kensington park road in london, taken on 9 april 1859. his friend frederick james gant and mt rochfort were with him when he died the following day, 10 april. setting aside horace wells' chloroform-assisted suicide, he was the first professional to die purely from the use (or abuse) of chloroform.  his friend gant performed an autopsy on 11 april, a horrible task on a friend. he found 4 pints (2 litres) of bloody mucus in his guts, smelling of chloroform. he was estimated to have taken a liquid dose of 2 to 5 ounces of pure chloroform (60-150ml). his enlarged liver indicated long-term abuse predating crimea. thomas wakley oversaw the inquest of his death, acting both as a former friend and coroner of middlesex at the time. he was also editor of the lancet at the time. his brother william glover attended as did gant, hopton and a j. millar. a verdict of "accidental death by excessive use of chloroform taken as a sedative" was found, it being concluded not as a deliberate suicide.  he was buried in hanwell cemetery in an unmarked grave on 14 april 1859.  publications  the applications of chemistry to medicine (1842) remarks on the history of the literary and philosophical society of newcastle (1844) anaesthetic and other therapeutic effects of the inhalation of chloroform (monthly journal of medical sciences, 1847) *predating simpson's "discovery" anaesthetic properties of the dutch liquid (1851) anaesthesia and anaesthetic agents (1852) national defence, a letter (1853) a manual of elementary chemistry (1855) on mineral waters: their physical and medicinal properties (1857) the new medical act: with explanatory notes for the guidance of the medical practitioner and student (1858) on the philosophy of medicine  other notable events  in may 1853, he applied his knowledge of chemistry to a different field, lodging a patent for an arsenic-based paint for the hulls of ships to prevent the growth of barnacles and algae.  on 10 march 1859, shortly before his death, in a very strange act, glover married sarah hickson a 36 year old seamstress who had escaped from colney hatch asylum (allegedly where the word "booby hatch" comes from). this was britain's largest mental asylum,
and she had been there for seven years for "violent and dangerous behaviour". she was also from newcastle and they had met through her friend rochfort. as she was described as "lunatic as himself" (himself meaning glover) this attests to glover's mental state in his final months. they honeymooned for a week at a hotel at 30 charles street in westminster before she was recaptured and escorted back to colney hatch.  references  1815 births 1859 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh deaths from chloroform 19th-century british medical doctors people from south shields
caravelas airport  is the airport serving caravelas, brazil.  history the airport was inaugurated in the 1940s as a military aerodrome and it was renovated between 2010 and 2014.  airlines and destinations no scheduled flights operate at this airport.  accidents and incidents 9 may 1996: a brazilian air force embraer c-95 bandeirante registration fab-2295 crashed during take-off. all crew of 4 died.  access the airport is located  from downtown caravelas.  see also  list of airports in brazil  references  external links  airports in bahia
luigi voghera (1788-1840) was an italian architect of the neoclassical period. he was born an active in cremona. he built a new facade for the church of sant'agata in cremona. he created in 1821 the first design for the cimitero (cemetery) of cremona, but which was not completed till the 20th century with the intervention of other architects.  references  19th-century italian architects architects from cremona 1788 births 1840 deaths italian neoclassical architects
jesper koch (born 5 september 1967) is a danish composer.  koch studied composition at the royal danish academy of music with hans abrahamsen, ib nørholm and ivar frounberg from 1986-95 and subsequently at det jyske musikkonservatorium with karl aage rasmussen in 1995-97, as well as some studies abroad with olav anton thommesen and colin matthews. he is known for his "brilliant orchestral writing" and has been composer-in-residence with south jutland symphony orchestra for three years and has composed works on commission by odense symphony orchestra, aalborg symphony orchestra and collegium musicum.  awards  jesper koch received "carl nielsens komponistlegat" in 1988 and leonie sonnings musikstipendium in 1991. in 1992 he won the first prize at the international rostrum of composers in paris in the "composers under 30" category for his work ice-breaking. he received statens kunstfond's three-year work grant in 1994.  references  external links   profile at the danish composer's society (in danish)  biography and works at edition-s  1967 births 21st-century classical composers danish composers living people international rostrum of composers prize-winners
ludovic lalanne (23 april 1815, paris - 16 may 1898, paris) was a french historian and librarian. the engineer and politician leon lalanne (1811-1892) was his brother.  biography  lalanne was a student at the lycee louis-le-grand and later at the ecole des chartes, where he was graduated archivist paleographer in 1841. he was librarian of the institut.  he was a resident member of the comite des travaux historiques et scientifiques, archivist of the societe de l'ecole des chartes and president of the societe de l'histoire de france.  publications  lalanne published many works (sometimes in collaboration) including:  essai sur le feu gregeois et sur la poudre a canon, 1845  les pelerinages en terre sainte avant les croisades, 1845  curiosites litteraires, 1845  curiosites bibliographiques, 1845  journal d'un bourgeois de paris sous francois ier (1515-1536), 1854  curiosites philologiques, geographiques et ethnologiques, 1855  les tragiques d'augrippa d'abigne, 1857  memoires de marguerite de valois, 1858  curiosites biographiques, 1858  œuvres de malherbe, 1862  dictionnaire historique de la france, 1872-77  memoires de roger de rabutin, comte de bussy, 1882  le livre de fortune de jehan cousin, recueil de deux cents dessins inedits, 1883  œuvres completes de pierre de bourdeille, seigneur de brantome, 1864-82  journal du voyage du cavalier bernin en france, 1885  œuvres de lagrange, 1892  brantome sa vie et ses ecrits, 1896 lalanne also realised the inventory of the manuscripts of paris observatory library.  references  external links   ludovic lalanne on data.bnf.fr  l'annuaire prosopographique du  comite des travaux historiques et scientifiques, file on ludovic lalanne   lycee louis-le-grand alumni ecole nationale des chartes alumni french librarians french bibliographers 19th-century french historians 1815 births writers from paris 1898 deaths
scarleth elizabeth mercado lopez (born ) is a nicaraguan female weightlifter, competing in the 53 kg category and representing nicaragua at international competitions.   she competed at world championships, including at the 2015 world weightlifting championships, and 2016 summer olympics.  major results  references  external links  1996 births living people nicaraguan female weightlifters place of birth missing (living people) olympic weightlifters of nicaragua weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics
a general election was held in the u.s. state of rhode island on november 6, 2018. the party primaries for the election occurred on september 12, 2018. all of rhode island's executive officers went up for election as well as rhode island's class i u.s. senate seat and both of rhode island's two seats in the united states house of representatives.  governor  incumbent democratic governor gina raimondo sought re-election to a second term and won, defeating republican allan fung in a rematch.  results  lieutenant governor incumbent democratic lieutenant governor of rhode island daniel mckee sought and won re-election to a second term.  democratic primary dan mckee, incumbent democratic lieutenant governor of rhode island aaron regunberg, state representative (4th district, east side, providence)  the two had a debate on wpri on september 7, 2018.  results  republican primary paul pence, senior specialist in quality management systems and food safety at toray plastics  results  general election  results  attorney general incumbent democratic attorney general peter kilmartin was term-limited and could not run for re-election to a third term in office.  democratic primary  declared peter neronha, u.s. attorney  results  general election  results  secretary of state incumbent democratic secretary of state nellie gorbea is eligible to run for re-election to a second term.  democratic primary  results  republican primary  results  general election  predictions  results  general treasurer incumbent democratic general treasurer seth magaziner is eligible to run for re-election to a second term.  democratic primary  results  republican primary declared michael riley, investment advisor  results  general election  results  united states senate  incumbent democratic senator sheldon whitehouse won reelection to a third term.  results  united states house of representatives  both of rhode island's two seats in the united states house of representatives will be up for election in 2018.  references  external links   candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at national institute on money in state politics  official lieutenant governor campaign websites ross mccurdy (i) for lt. governor dan mckee (d) for lt. governor paul pence (r) for lt. governor  official attorney general campaign websites peter neronha (d) for attorney general  official secretary of state campaign websites pat cortellessa (r) for secretary of state nellie gorbea (d) for secretary of state  official general treasurer campaign websites seth magaziner (d) for treasurer michael riley (r
) for treasurer
john gough was an irish football goalkeeper who played in the irish league for queen's island and ballymena during the 1920s and also won a solitary international cap for ireland.  career gough was a well decorated member of the queen's island team that experienced great success in the irish league during the 1920s. the club and john's defining season came during the 1923-24 campaign when they won four domestic trophies (irish league championship, irish cup, city cup and county antrim shield).  during his impressive season, gough was selected to represent ireland against south africa  in a friendly game at solitude in september 1924. this was the south african's first ever official international game. the full cap added to the two caps he had won between 1923 and 1924 for the irish league representative team  queen's island's success quickly deteriorated and in september 1928, john left the club to join the newly elected ballymena team. it proved a shrewd decision as gough won another irish cup winners' medal in 1929, as the braidmen defeated belfast celtic in final in their first ever season. he was also part of the team for a return to the irish cup final a year later, as ballymena were defeated by linfield.  john gough was not retained by the ballymena selection committee during the summer of 1930. it is unclear if he continued to play competitive football after his release. he returned to ballymena in an off-field role 1934 as he formed part of the management committee of the new ballymena united club which had been formed following the sudden demise of the old club.  club honours  queen's island irish league winner (1): 1923-24 irish cup winner (1): 1923-24 city cup winner (3): 1922-23, 1923-24, 1924-1925 county antrim shield winner (1): 1923-24 irish league runner-up (3): 1922-23, 1924-25, 1926-27  ballymena irish cup winner (1): 1928-29 irish cup runner-up (1): 1929-30 city cup runner-up (1): 1928-29  international caps  statistics  references  ballymena f.c. players irish league representative players year of birth missing (living people) possibly living people association football goalkeepers association footballers from northern ireland pre-1950 ifa international footballers association footballers from belfast queen's island f.c. players
the prix de la langue francaise is chronologically the first grand prix of the literary season in france.  established in 1986 by the city of brive-la-gaillarde in the department of correze, this prize rewards the work of a personality of the literary, artistic or scientific world, which has contributed significantly, through the style of his/her works or his/her action to illustrate the quality and beauty of the french language. it is presented annually at the opening of the .  the laureate wins 10000 euros.  jury  the jury of the award, with a rotating presidency, is composed of members of the academie francaise, the academie goncourt and other writers.  laureates    1986: jean tardieu.  1987: jacqueline de romilly   1988: andre lichnerowicz   1989: michel jobert  1990: yves berger  1991: pascal quignard  1992: alain bosquet   1993: alain rey  1994: hector bianciotti   1995: not awarded  1996: rene de obaldia   1997: francois weyergans   1998: marcel schneider   1999: jacques chessex  2000: bernard pivot   2001: philippe beaussant   2002: michel chaillou  2003: dominique de villepin   2004: gilles lapouge  2005: jean-pierre de beaumarchais  2006: christiane singer  2007: pierre assouline  2008: annie ernaux  2009: jean-paul kauffmann  2010: alain veinstein  2011: emmanuel carrere.  2012: vassilis alexakis.  2013: jean rolin.  2014: helene cixous.  2015: mona ozouf.  2016 : philippe forest. 2017 : jean-luc coatalem 2018 :  pierre guyotat 2019 : louis-philippe dalembert  references  external links   foire du livre  french literary awards awards established in 1986 1986 establishments in france
shalunov () is a russian masculine surname, its feminine counterpart is shalunova. notable people with the surname include:  evgeny shalunov (born 1992), russian bicycle racer maxim shalunov (born 1993), russian ice hockey player   russian-language surnames
euphylliidae (greek eu-, true; greek phyllon, leaf) is a family of marine stony corals of the order scleractinia.  the world register of marine species lists the following genera:  catalaphyllia  wells, 1971  ctenella  matthai, 1928  euphyllia dana, 1846  galaxea oken, 1815  gyrosmilia milne edwards & haime, 1851  montigyra matthai, 1928  simplastrea umbgrove, 1939  references    scleractinia cnidarian families
the 1933-34 season was the third season of competitive association football in the football league played by chester, an english club based in chester, cheshire.  it was the club's third consecutive season in the third division north since the election to the football league. alongside competing in the league, the club also participated in the fa cup and the welsh cup.  over november and december 1933, chester scored six or more goals in three consecutive fixtures. no other english team did this again until efl championship club fulham in january 2022.  football league  results summary  results by matchday  matches  fa cup  welsh cup  season statistics  references  1933-34 english football clubs 1933-34 season
juan bautista viton (1780 - 1868) was a spanish politician, merchant and soldier who served in buenos aires as lieutenant in the cuerpo de voluntarios artilleros de la union, a military unit created during the english invasions of the rio de la plata.  he was born in cadiz, spain, the son of ramon viton and maria isabel santibanez, belonging to a distinguished family. he had arrived around the year 1800 in buenos aires, argentina, where he married margarita lopez de barrios y chiclana, daughter of nicolas lopez de barrios and maria victoria chiclana, the sister of feliciano antonio de chiclana.  he participated in the british invasions of the river plate, serving as lieutenant of artillery in the cuerpo de voluntarios artilleros de la union, take part in the main skirmishes against english troops. due to his opposition to the cause of may revolution, he was confined to la rioja province.  references  external links  juan bautista viton in genealogia familiar  1780 births 1868 deaths people from buenos aires people from cadiz spanish people of french descent spanish expatriates in argentina british invasions of the river plate
the 1974-75 san diego conquistadors season was the 3rd and final season of the conquistadors in the american basketball association. the team floundered, on the court and in the box office, with wilt chamberlain having left the team after the previous season. they finished 5th in points per game at 109.9, but dead last in points allowed at 115.5 per game. notably, they played the new york nets in a 4 overtime game on february 14th, winning 176-166. a victory over virginia on march 12th turned out to be their last as they lost 11 straight games to end the season, as they finished in dead last by 7 games. after the season, frank goldberg (who formerly held ownership interest in the denver nuggets) bought the san diego conquistadors, assuming the $2 million team debt. they soon renamed the team, becoming the san diego sails. however, they folded 11 games into the season.  roster     12 george adams - small forward  25 tim bassett - power forward  8 lee davis - power forward  9 scott english - small forward  5 travis grant - small forward  6 billy harris - shooting guard  2 warren jabali - shooting guard  13 stew johnson - power forward  3 caldwell jones - center  10 bo lamar - point guard  2 greg lee - point guard  4 bob nash - small forward  14 jimmy o'brien - point guard  -- reggie royals - center  8 art williams - point guard  final standings  western division  awards and honors 1975 aba all-star game selection (game played on january 28, 1975)  caldwell jones  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1974-75 regular season and playoff results  san diego conquistadors page  san diego conquistadors san diego conquistadors san diego conquistadors, 1974-75 san diego conquistadors, 1974-75
shine tv bangla is a bengal-based cable television channel, that mainly focuses on projecting the culture of the land through its music and movies which are typical of the bengal culture. the tv broadcaster is headquartered in berhampore city, murshidabad, west bengal.  shine tv bangla channel mainly presents daily local news and also the bollywood news. the channel presents the culture of bengal through its music and movies, which is unique and characteristic of the region.  the channel is also very important for local advertising.  references  external links  website  cable television in india mass media in west bengal
gleb derujinsky (march 19, 1925 - june 9, 2011) was an american fashion photographer. he worked for esquire, look, life, glamour, town and country and the new york times magazine, before shooting extensively for harper's bazaar. eileen ford, founder of ford models agency, described him as an "early visionary on a path that others were to follow".  early life and education  gleb derujinsky was born in new york city in 1925, and named after his father gleb w. derujinsky, an anti-communist white emigre descended from the russian nobility and a successful sculptor. the derujinsky family served the house of romanov since the reign of peter the great, and their relatives included the composer nikolai rimsky-korsakov and the painter mikhail vrubel.  derujinsky's mother, the classical pianist alexandra micholoff derujinsky, died in the late 1950s.  derujinsky's first languages were russian and french, and he went on to learn english while enrolled at the trinity school in new york.  in 1942, derujinsky became a corporal in the army and stayed until after the end of world war ii. his language abilities and negotiation skills contributed to his being promoted to staff sergeant halfway through his tours, and learned morse code in just 30 days.  career  upon his return to new york city, he opened his first photography studio with his veteran loan. by february 1948, he landed his first cover with collier's magazine. shortly thereafter, he began working for harper's bazaar jr., an offshoot of harper's bazaar aimed towards college-age women that became a supplement of harper's bazaar. derujinsky was retained as a freelance photographer, working alongside richard avedon, lillian bassman, and louise dahl-wolfe for editors carmel snow and diana vreeland and art director alexey brodovitch. citing the great photographer horst p. horst as a key influence, derujinsky photographed the paris spring collections from 1953-1963 and was known for his outlandish ideas and travel images taken in remote locations all over the world at time when travel, especially by air, was far from common.  derujinsky also freelanced for look magazine, town and country, the new york times magazine, ladies' home journal, esquire, glamour, seventeen, life, and good housekeeping.  working extensively with carmen dell'orefice and his then-wife ruth neumann-derujinsky, his work also featured many
of the era's top models, from jean patchett and jean shrimpton, to nena von schlebrugge and iris bianchi.  in 1957, to commemorate the inauguration of pan am's boeing 707, derujinsky, dubbed "the white russian," travelled around the world with ruth neumann and nena von schlebrugge, photographing the former in 11 countries in the space of 28 days. his photographs of the paris collections of the same year became a 25-page spread in harper's bazaar.  in 1968 he began shooting television commercials for union carbide, dolly madison, johnson & johnson, texas instruments, and revlon, going on to win several awards at cannes and venice.  personal life and death  derujinsky married four models in his lifetime and had andrea derujinsky with his third wife and cover girl ruth neumann. in 1972, a few years after his divorce from ruth neumann, he married wallis fairfax gault with whom he remained for 42 years until their deaths in 2011 in a car accident in durango, colorado, where they had lived for nearly 30 years.  in durango, derujinsky opened a jewelry studio, one of a kind, making and designing his own pieces. he turned his love of skiing into a career when he qualified as an instructor in nearby purgatory, and taught in the children's division for over a decade. he earned an instructor's license as a glider pilot and was instrumental in starting the durango soaring club at la plata airport, now known as animas air park. other achievements later in life include building a carbon fiber bicycle, whose patented design was one of first to be used in an air tunnel test, as well as being used at the 1984 olympic trials in los angeles.  notable photographs   fragrant harbor hong kong, 1957-1958  the jaipur observatory, 1957-1958  ceylon sails, 1957-1958  books  capturing fashion: derujinsky, photographs by gleb derujinsky, text by andrea derujinsky, foreword by eileen ford (flammarion, 2016). monograph.  model woman: eileen ford and the business of beauty, robert lacey (harper, 2015).  paris mode: 100 photos de legende, collectif (parigramme, 2013).  paris minuit, collectif (parigramme, 2013).  cecil beaton: the art of the scrapbook, james danziger (assouline, 2013).  louis vuitton fashion photography, charlotte cotton, martin harrison and michel mall
ard (rizzoli, 2014).  valentina: american couture and the cult of celebrity, kohle yohannan and harold koda (rizzoli, 2009).  tiffany in fashion, john loring (abrams, 2003).  a dash of daring: carmel snow and her life in fashion, art, and letters, penelope rowlands (atria books, 2008).  diana vreeland: the eye has to travel, lisa vreeland, lally weymouth, judith thurman, and judith clark (abrams, 2011).  125 great moments of harper's bazaar, anthony t. mazzola (hearst communications, 1993).  model girl, charles castle (david & charles, 1997).  alexey brodovitch, gabriel bauret (assouline, 2005).  harper's bazaar: models, derek blasberg, introduction by glenda bailey, foreword by karl lagerfeld (abrams, 2015).  diana vreeland: the modern woman: the bazaar years, 1936-1962, alexander vreeland (rizzoli, 2015).  see also   gleb w. derujinsky  references  external links     fathom gallery  1925 births 2011 deaths fashion photographers fashion photography 20th-century american photographers 21st-century american photographers photographers from new york city
indolophus is an extinct genus of perissodactyl belonging to the clade tapiromorpha, which includes modern-day tapirs. fossils have been found in the early eocene of myanmar.  description indolophus can be distinguished from other tapiromorphs in the characteristics of the upper dentition; it is distinguished from other basal tapiromorphs in having a more developed molar and protolophid and hypolophid. indolophus is more primitive than tapiroids due to the lophodont dentiton and the absence of lingual and buccal cingula and molar metaconule.  references  odd-toed ungulates fossil taxa described in 1925
paulus johannes zimmerman (born 8 november 1958), better known as paul zimmerman, is a dutch-born hong kong environmentalist, politician and businessman. he is a member of the southern district council for pokfulam and ceo of designing hong kong, a group that advocates better urban design.  early life and business career zimmerman was born in rotterdam, netherlands in 1958, and grew up in the town of woerden. he set up a student union in high school and joined the editorial board of an underground newspaper. when he was 17, in response to the dismissal of several popular teachers, zimmerman took part in a demonstration in which protesters barricaded the building. the school was closed for a week and the offending headmaster replaced.  he pursued a master's programme in social science (economics) at erasmus university in rotterdam. while there, he got into politics with the democrats 66 (d66).  in 1984, he moved to hong kong as a three-month trainee in a dutch bank to avoid conscription. deciding against a banking career, by 1987 he had started his own business, a graphic design firm called bridge design, and sold it 10 years later to caribiner international, organisers of the hong kong handover. he continued to work for what later became communications agency jack morton until 2001.  in 2000, he founded a strategy and policy consultancy called the experience group.  in the early 2000s, zimmerman worked alongside businessman chung po-yan on a project that later became designing hong kong harbourfront district, a non-governmental organisation devoted to improving hong kong's waterfronts and promoting liveable density. the government set up the harbourfront enhancement committee in 2004 in response to the project. the project was converted into a company, designing hong kong limited, founded by him together with christine loh, peter wong and markus shaw.  he was an executive director at investments umbrella company jebsen travel international from 2003 to 2010. he remains on the board as a non-executive director. he retired from the position to focus his efforts on designing hong kong and the southern district council.  he is currently the vice-chairman of the coalition on sustainable tourism and chairman of the single-use beverage packaging working group, best known for its initiative drink without waste. he is also chairman of the professional commons and director of the civic exchange. in 2015, he became the chairman of the hong kong democratic foundation.  he is an honorary member of the american institute of architects for his work on the harbourfront.  he rides motorcycles, and enjoys mountaineering,
paragliding, sailing and scuba diving.  political career  in 2006, lawmakers audrey eu yuet-mee, albert lai kwong-tak and ronny tong ka-wah asked zimmerman to join the civic party as a founding member. he represented the civics in a run for a tourism subsector seat on the hong kong election committee in 2006 but was not elected.  in the 2007 district council election, zimmerman ran against wong wang-tai in stubbs road in wan chai district council, an upper-middle-class constituency, but lost by a margin of 129 votes. he later won a seat in pokfulam in the southern district council in a by-election in 2010, succeeding ronald chan ngok-pang who resigned after being hired by the chief executive's office. he was re-elected in 2011 and 2015.  his first bid for the legislative council was in 2008 when he ran in the tourism functional constituency. he lost in a four-way contest to independent paul tse, receiving 81 votes.  in 2012, zimmerman intended to run in the territory-wide district council (second) "super seat" in the 2012 legislative council election and left the civic party when the party refused to nominate him. he gave up his dutch citizenship but did not get enough nominations and subsequently endorsed another pro-democracy candidate frederick fung. he also ran in the 2012 election of the hong kong delegates to the national people's congress but was not successful in an election better suited to pro-beijing candidates.  on 1 october 2014, zimmerman took a yellow umbrella to protest at a china national day reception in hong kong in the midst of the occupy central protests, in which thousands of activists took to the streets to protest at chinese government's decision retarding democratic development.  in the 2016 legislative council election, zimmerman ran in hong kong island as an independent democrat. he dropped out of the race within a week of the election because he did not want to split the vote among pro-democratic candidates, but his name still appeared on the ballot.  he once again sought election in the 2016 hong kong election committee subsector elections, this time in the architectural, surveying, planning and landscape subsector. of the 30 winners, zimmerman had the most votes, 2524. he joined 20 other electors (from the 1,194 total) in nominating former judge woo kwok-hing for chief executive in the small-circle 2017 election.  in the 2019 district council election, zimmerman successfully won his re-election bid in the pokfulam constituency, with 2
,547 votes. he is vice-chairman of the southern district council.  personal life besides his master's degree in economics from erasmus university, zimmerman also obtained a master's degree in transport policy & planning at the university of hong kong. he has married twice. with his first wife, he has two sons, born in 1993 and 1995. when he renounced dutch citizenship during his short-lived legco bid, his younger son also lost his. he married his second wife jannie in 2012. the couple had a daughter, born two years earlier.  references  external links    official website southern district council website designing hong kong website drink without waste  1958 births living people erasmus university rotterdam alumni alumni of the university of hong kong dutch emigrants to hong kong hong kong businesspeople hong kong environmentalists hong kong people of dutch-jewish descent district councillors of southern district independent politicians in hong kong civic party politicians hong kong democratic foundation politicians members of the election committee of hong kong, 2017-2021 naturalised citizens of the people's republic of china in hong kong dutch jews hong kong jews jewish politicians
daduwal () is a village in phillaur tehsil in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 12 km away from phagwara, 36 km from phillaur, 20.2 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 140 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-education upper primary with secondary/higher secondary school (gsss daduwal). the school provides mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises. the school was founded in 1975.  demography  as of 2011, daduwal has a total number of 635 houses and a population of 3144 of which 1576 are males while 1568 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of daduwal is 76.51%, higher than the state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 309 which is 9.83% of the total population of daduwal, and the child sex ratio is approximately 981, which is higher than the state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 61.77% of the total population in daduwal. the village does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  a lot of people associated with this village are settled abroad in canada, the usa, uk, and other european countries.  as per census 2011, 1015 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of daduwal which includes 915 males and 11 females. according to census survey report 2011, 98.33% workers describe their work as main work and 1.67% workers are involved in marginal activity providing a livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  phagwara junction railway station is the nearest train station however, goraya train station is 16 km away from the village. the village is 65.7 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 116  km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
luzhetsky monastery , whose complete name is the nativity of the theotokos and st.therapont luzhetsky monastery (), is a medieval fortified monastery in mozhaysk, moscow oblast, russia. it is protected as a cultural monument of federal significance.  the monastery was founded in 1408 by therapont of belozersk. therapont founded the ferapontov monastery in 1398, located in the principality of beloozero, which at the time was administered jointly with the principality of mozhaysk. the prince, andrey of mozhaysk, resided in mozhaysk, and was a brother of vasily, the grand prince of moscow. he was also one of the main sponsors of the monastery. in 1408, he sent a letter to therapont urging him to come to mozhaysk, and therapont was obliged to obey. even though therapont, after arriving to mozhaysk, expressed very clearly his wish to return to the white lake, the prince never let him go. they made a deal, and therapont founded the luzhetsky monastery in mozhaysk. he died in the monastery in 1426 and was buried there. he was canonized by the russian orthodox church.  the original cathedral was demolished in the first half of the 16th century, and a five-dome stone cathedral was built in 1524-1547, which still stands today. mozhaysk, together with the monastery, was transferred to the grand duchy of moscow in the middle of the 16th century. the history of the monastery in the 15th century is somewhat unclear; it is known that in 1523 the hegumen of luzhetsky monastery was makary, who later became the metropolitan of moscow. the monastery was considerably damaged during the time of troubles in the 1610s, when it was plundered. most of the current architecture of the monastery, including the bell-tower, the transfiguration church, and the cells, were built in the 17th century. in 1812, during the napoleonic wars, the luzhetsky monastery was briefly occupied and plundered by the advancing french army. in 1929, it was closed by the soviets. during the soviet period it was plundered and badly damaged, though some restoration work was done in the 1960s and 1970s. in 1994 it was given back to the russian orthodox church. on 26 may 1999 the relics of therapont were found.  references  external links    buildings and structures in moscow oblast russian orthodox monasteries
in russia
swarna kaduva () is a 2016 indian malayalam-language satirical film directed by jose thomas, starring biju menon. the script is written by babu janardhanan. the film was released on 4 november 2016.  synopsis rinichen is a self made right-hand man of businessman lonappan. over the years he takes advantage of lonappan for solving shady problems. when everything seems to boilover at the gravy train he uses the opportunity and asks lonappan to help him settle elsewhere with a jewellery shop. rinichen who had a hard life and was from once well known family starts care evermore for money & status and life starts to make him pay for karmic debts of his unethical previous engagements. the rest of the film explores whether rinichen will rebound or go further down the rabbit hole.  cast    biju menon as rini iype maatummel  iniya as lovely   innocent vareed as lonappan  suresh krishna as divakaran  sudheer karamana as advocate paul   baiju santhosh as inspector sasidharan  hareesh perumanna as joju   poojitha menon  as deepthi  kottayam nazeer   naseer sankranthi as broker  santhosh keezhattoor as surendran  kishor satya as johnnychan  kalabhavan jinto as binoy  jayakumar parameswaran pillai as father  jayasankar karimuttam   george  minon as tamil boy  anju aravind as geethu nair   seema g. nair as binoy's mother   sobha singh as rini's mother  chinnu kuruvila as anitha  rosin jolly as mollykutty  saju kodiyan as mollykutty's brother   swasika vijay as riya   rakhi as swapna  release  the film was earlier scheduled for a release on 28 october 2016, but to avoid competing with pulimurugan, it was rescheduled to 4 november 2016. the film released in 104 screens in kerala.  box office in kerala, the film collected 2.10 crore on its opening day. the film collected 1.6 crores in the first weekend and 2.34 crores in the three weekend from us box office.  references   indian films 2010s malayalam-language films indian comedy films 2016 films films directed by jose thomas 2016 comedy films films shot in thrissur
crimes may be committed both against and by immigrants in germany. crimes involving foreigners (german: auslanderkriminalitat) have been a longstanding theme in public debates in germany. in november 2015, a report that was released by the federal criminal police (bka) stated that "while the number of refugees is rising very dynamically, the development of crime does not increase to the same extent." interior minister thomas de maiziere (cdu) noted that "refugees are on average as little or often delinquent as comparison groups of the local population." a 2018 statistical study by researchers at the university of magdeburg using 2009-2015 data argued that, where analysis is restricted to crimes involving at least one german victim and one refugee suspect and crimes by immigrants against other immigrants are excluded, there is no relationship between the scale of refugee inflow and the crime rate. in 2018 the interior ministry under horst seehofer (csu) published, for the first time, an analysis of the federal police statistic (german: ), which includes all those who came via the asylum system to germany. the report found that the immigrant group, which makes up about 2% of the overall population, contains 8.5% of all suspects, after violations against germany's alien law are excluded.  availability and reliability of statistics several studies carried out since the 1990s have suggested that the collection of accurate and meaningful statistics makes it difficult to obtain an overall picture of the effect of immigration on crime in germany. for example, second or third generation immigrants may be classified as "foreigners" whilst recent immigrants may be classified as german. research also suggests that crimes are more likely to be reported, if the suspect is or appears to be a foreigner or immigrant. because each of germany's 16 states has its own police force, federal authorities do not routinely publish national statistics. these are compiled state by state and are sometimes released only after a parliamentary request.  "guest worker" era in the 1950s-1980s  the  (foreigners act) of 1965 attempted to control immigration to west germany.  during the 1950s and 1960s, a group known as gastarbeiter participated in an organised immigration programme to the former west germany because of labour shortages in the country.  the former east germany also had labour shortages but their "guest worker" programme tended to encourage immigration from other socialist and communist countries. although the german government did not plan the program as a permanent method of keeping the "guest workers", after unification and the reform of german naturalization laws of
the 1990s, former "guest workers" increasingly became german citizens. the first generation of "guest workers" did not have an elevated crime rate, but studies carried out in the 1970s and 1980s suggested that second- and third-generation immigrants had higher crime rates than their german contemporaries who were not from an immigrant background.  a 1991 ludwig maximilian university of munich study covering the preceding two decades found that crime rates were higher among immigrants with a strongly different cultural background from germans. under the guest worker programme, turks and yugoslavs had far higher crime rates than spaniards and portuguese, while the highest crime rates were recorded among individuals from third world countries. for third world countries, the immigrants were first generation.  trends in criminal activity since the 1990s  studies in the early 2000s tended to show little correlation between migrants and crime in germany.  from the start of 2015 to the end of 2017,  asylum seekers were registered in total. according to a 2018 study by german criminologists, the crime rate of non-germans between the ages of 16 and 30 is within the same range as that of germans. in may 2016, u.s. fact-checker politifact suggested that, as crimes by immigrants rose 79 percent in 2015 and the number of refugees in the country rose by 440 percent, the crime rate among refugees was lower than that among german natives.  in november 2015, a report by the federal criminal police (bka) stated that "while the number of refugees is rising very dynamically, the development of crime does not increase to the same extent." the report noted that refugees from kosovo, serbia and macedonia were overrepresented and iraqis were underrepresented. the report did not contain representation for refugees from north africa.  from 2015 to 2016, the number of suspected crimes by refugees, asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants increased by 52.7% percent to 175,438. approved refugees were not included in 2016 statistical figures. the figures showed that most of the suspected crimes were by repeat offenders, and that 1 percent of migrants accounted for 40 percent of total migrant crimes. according to police statistics, 31% of immigrant crime suspects were repeat offenders. from 2016 to 2017, the number of crimes committed by refugees, asylum-seekers and illegal immigrants in germany decreased by 40 percent, which was mostly caused by significantly fewer violations off the alien law, because far fewer asylum seekers entered the country in this year.  the first comprehensive study of the social effects of the one million refugees going to germany found that it caused "
very small increases in crime in particular with respect to drug offenses and fare-dodging." a report released by the german federal office of criminal investigation in november 2015 found that over the period january-september 2015, the crime rate of refugees was the same as that of native germans. according to deutsche welle, the report "concluded that the majority of crimes committed by refugees (67 percent) consisted of theft, robbery and fraud. sex crimes made for less than 1 percent of all crimes committed by refugees, while homicide registered the smallest fraction at 0.1 percent." according to the conservative newspaper die welts description of the report, the most common crime committed by refugees was not paying fares on public transportation. according to deutsche welle's reporting in february 2016 of a report by the german federal office of criminal investigation, the number of crimes committed by refugees did not rise in proportion to the number of refugees between 2014-2015. according to deutsche welle, "between 2014 and 2015, the number of crimes committed by refugees increased by 79 percent. over the same period, the number of refugees in germany increased by 440 percent."  a 2015 study in the european economic review found that the immigration of more than 3 million people of german descent to germany after the collapse of the soviet union led to a significant increase in crime. the effects were strongest in regions with high unemployment, high preexisting crime levels or large shares of foreigners.  the refugee crisis in germany has increased to above "1.7 million" (trines, 2019) refugees dating back to 2014. in the year 2014 alone, "...there were 6.1 million offenses recorded by the police" (reality check team bbc news, 2018).  the hate crimes committed by german residents alone has become such an issue in the state that there have been studies conducted to find factors that affect the number of these crimes against refugees. out of the 3,335 attacks on refugees between 2016 and 2017, karsten mueller and carlo schwarz, researchers at the university of warwick, noticed a trend with regard to the attacks (taub & fisher, 2018). "towns where facebook use was higher than average, like altena, reliably experienced more attacks on refugees. that held true in virtually any sort of community - big city or small town; affluent or struggling; liberal haven or far-right stronghold - suggesting that the link applies universally" (taub & fisher, 2018). this information can give german officials an inkling as to where these attacks will occur. towns like altena may
be a small sample size, but the researchers also found more information regarding attacks in germany: "wherever per-person facebook use rose to one standard deviation above the national average, attacks on refugees increased by about 50 percent. (taub & fisher, 2018). these findings allude to the fact that germans may be just as much at fault for the spike in crime rates since 2014 as the refugees are. another study done by yue huang regarding migrant criminal action on germans since 2015 and whether or not there was a correlation between the number of immigrants and crimes against germans (lindsay, 2019). "the answer to this research question, according to huang, was fairly clear. 'we did not find a systematic association between the number of refugees and the number of german victims, in crimes that were committed by refugees'" (lindsay, 2019). the finding in this study shows that the spikes in crime are not fully attributed to refugees alone.   for several types of crime and drug crime in particular, it was reported that organised crime gangs were dominated by people from countries with high rates of immigration to germany. in 2017, the most common nationality of foreign organized crime gangs was albanian with 21 gangs, the great majority of which were active in drug trafficking. in 2017 there were 13 identified serbian organized crime gangs, active in drug crime, property crime and violent crime. in 2017 there were 12 kosovar gangs, active in property crime, drug trade and forgeries. syrian gangs were active in drug trade and drug smuggling.  the independent reported that in 2017 crime in germany was at its lowest for 30 years, and that crimes by non-germans had fallen by 23% to just over 700,000. at the same time, there was a significant increase in politically and racially motivated crime. out of 462 right-wing offenders with outstanding warrants identified by germany's interior ministry, 104 were wanted for crimes classified as violent and 106 were wanted for crimes classified as politically motivated.  in 2018, the wall street journal analysed german crime statistics for crime suspects and found that the foreigners, overall 12.8% of the population, made up a disproportionate share of crime suspects (34.7%), see horizontal bar chart.  in 2018, the interior ministry's report "criminality in the context of immigration" (german: kriminalitat im kontext von zuwanderung) for the first time summarized and singled out all people who entered germany via the asylum system. the group called "immigrants" includes all asylum seekers, tolerated people, "
unauthorized residents" and all those entitled to protection (subsidiary protected, contingent refugees and refugees under the geneva convention and asylum). the group represented roughly 2 percent of the german population by the end of 2017, and was suspected of committing 8.5 percent of crimes (violations of germany's alien law are not included). the numbers suggest that the differences could at least to some extent have to do with the fact that the refugees are younger and more often male than the average german. the statistics show that the asylum-group is highly overrepresented for some types of crime. they account for 14.3 percent of all suspects in crimes against life (which include murder, manslaughter and involuntary manslaughter), 12.2 percent of sexual offences, 11.4 percent of thefts and 9.7 percent of body injuries the report also shows differences between the origin of migrants. syrians are underrepresented as suspects, whereas citizens from most african countries, especially northern africans are strongly overerrepresented. afghans and pakistanis are particularly overerrepresented in sexual offenses.  the 2019 "criminality in the context of immigration" report showed an increase of 102% in the number of germans who were victims of a crime committed by a member of the immigrants group (including all those who came via the asylum system to germany) than vice versa. in the category "crimes against life" there were 230 cases where the victim is a german and a suspect belongs to the immigrant group; the number the 81 german victims of a terrorist attack, the 2016 berlin truck attack, which were all counted as homicide or attempted homicide victims. the number of immigrants attacked by germans in 2018 was recorded as 33. in the category "sexual offences", 3261 germans were victims of crimes with an immigrant among the suspects, whilst 89 immigrants were victims of crimes with a german among the suspects.  the first quarter 2019 bka report stated that no other group is as strongly overrepresented as crime suspects in germany as asylum seekers, refugees and individuals without residency who cannot be deported (german: geduldete). this group numbers about 1.6 million people and the great majority arrived in 2015 and later. they represent 2% of the population in germany but 11% of suspects in cases of grievous bodily harm, 15% of suspects in cases of deadly violence and 12% of suspects in cases of rape and sexual assault. this was attributed by criminologists to the subgroup consisting of men aged 16-29 is disproportionately large at 34% of the total and that young males are over
represented as criminals in all parts of the world, rather than to their ethnic origin. also, the young male immigrants also have high unemployment, low education and experiences of violence, factors which are associated with higher crime rates also among germans. therefore left-leaning criminologists like professor thomas feltes at bochum university argue that culture does not play a role. the bka report shows that in the group, there are significant different among subgroups of different origin, where refugees from afghanistan, iraq and syria are less overrepresented than migrants from north african states morocco, algeria and tunisia along with sub-saharan countries gambia, nigeria and somalia. criminologist christian pfeiffer attributes this to a "macho culture" in north africa which carries with it an increased readiness to use violence. academic christian walburg at universitat munster attributes this to the north africans having nearly no possibility of being given asylum and therefore have "less to lose".  organised crime   arab and kurdish organized crime gangs have their roots in asylum seekers who began arriving in the 1980s.  in the 1980s thousands of arabs and kurds from districts of lebanon and turkey, significant portions of whome were stateless, sought asylum in germany. unlike the earlier guest workers, were allowed to work but instead received social benefits and often did not integrate into german society. some of the arrived families instead relied on tribal and islamic codes of justice. groups of extended arab and kurdish families centered in berlin are active in selling illegal drugs and running illegal prostitution, but have invested in legal businesses including real estate, fitness studios, gambling and restaurants.  they exploit asylum seekers who arrived in the european migrant crisis of 2015-2016, employing them as streetcorner drug dealers.  in 2017, 16 nigerian crime gangs were active in illegal immigration (german: schleuserkriminalitat) drug crime and other offenses in the night life scene.  in an opinion piece in the sueddeutsche zeitung in september 2018, the political scientist  argued that federal authorities had refused to recognise the specific problem of organized crime gangs based on family ties and ethnicity (), subsuming it under "organised crime" and that, encouraged by the success of the arab clans, families from other ethnic groups, including chechens, albanians, and kosovars were developing similar structures. according to ghadban, these structures present a threat to liberal, individualised societies because they hinder integration. a modern society, he says, only functions when people voluntarily follow its rules, but clan members consider themselves members of a family rather than citizens of a country, and do
not submit to the rule of law, regarding individuals who do so as weak and unprotected.  according to the wall street journal, the ethnic crime clans represent both a security threat as well as an example of what can happen when integration of immigrants fails.  honor killings   investigating criminal records for partner homicides from the years 1996-2005 period, the bka concluded that there were about 12 cases of honour killings in germany per year, including cases involving collective family honor and individual male honour, out of an average about 700 annual homicides. an accompanied study of all homicides in baden-wurttemberg show that men from turkey, yugoslavia and albania have a between three and fime times overrepresentation for partner homicides, both honor and non-honour related. the causes for the higher rate were given as low education and social status of these groups along with cultural traditions of violence against women. 43% of the killings described in the study were against men.  as of 2018, there are no current official statistics on honour killings in germany.  sexual offences   germany's interior minister, thomas de maiziere, said that a 2015 report by the german federal office of criminal investigation (bka) showed that "there is a higher absolute number of criminal cases only because of the increase in number of people living here with the arrival of the refugees". the report said that sex crimes constituted less than 1 percent of all crimes committed by refugees.  a 2016 report from the bka showed that at least one asylum seeker was identified as a suspect in 3404 sexual offence cases reported in 2016, representing a proportion of 9.1% of the total; this was twice the proportion in the previous year. according to statistics collected by bka, the number of asylum seekers suspected of sexual offences in germany went up in absolute numbers in the 2012-2016 period, whereas the number of german perpetrators remained the same or fell.   in 2017, asylum seekers represented 2% of the population and 15.9% of suspects in rape and sexual assault cases. in that year, the proportion of asylum seekers (defined as "asylum applicants, quota or civil war refugees or irregular immigrants") relative to the total population had risen, while the number of asylum seekers as a percentage of sexual offence suspects had fallen slightly since 2016.  german crime statistics for 2019 suggest a rise in sexual offences  gang rape   after the gang rapes where immigrants were suspect in freiburg, munich and velbert, an overview of police gang rape statistics in the 2010s was published by tag
esschau in 2018. the profile of the suspects and convicted fit that of sex crime in general as they were almost all male. additionally foreign perpetrators were overrepresented compared to their share of the overall population in germany. the absolute number of gang rapes were not increasing, but the proportion of foreign suspects rose and the proportion of syrian, afghan and iraqi suspects rose. one reason cited for the increase was that these demographics have larger proportions of young males, which are inherently overrepresented for crime.  the number of assault gang rapes were significantly higher in periods prior to 2015 and the european migrant crisis, with the exception of 2016 where the new year's eve sexual assaults in germany nearly doubled the number of cases. in 2017 there were 122 cases, the fewest since the german reunification in 1990. the sexual assaults in cologne on new year's eve 2016 nevertheless ended the atmosphere of euphoria earlier in the year when hundreds of thousands of migrants had arrived in germany.  violent crime  in 2016, immigrant suspects constituted 14.9% of the suspects while representing 2% of the population.  blade weapon crimes	 according to the police union, the german government does not keep a record of knife and blade related crimes as a distinct type of crime. the german police trade union (dpoig) has highlighted the issue and has sought that individuals carrying a knife be prosecuted under attempted murder provisions in german law. the union urged the government to compile statistics nationwide on knife incidents, to establish whether the impression of an increase in knife crime and the involvement of younger immigrants was based on fact. 	 a series of prominent incidents led to a political discussion. such incidents included some where an attacker murdered their partner (the 2017 kandel stabbing attack, the reutlingen knife attack, the murder of mireille b, the 2018 hamburg stabbing attack), as well as incidents like the 2018 burgwedel stabbing where a 17-year-old syrian stabbed and injured a woman following a brawl between two youths in a supermarket, the 2018 flensburg stabbing incident where a 24-year-old eritrean refugee was shot and killed after stabbing a police woman with a kitchen knife, and the 2017 siegaue rape case where a 31-year-old ghanaian used a machete in an attack where a victim was raped.  statistics  in german federal police office (bka) statistics on immigrant crime, "immigrant" include:  asylum seekers  migrants who are temporarily allowed to stay despite not having received refugee status  illegal immigrants  quota refugees  suspects with approved asylum applications are not included.
according to the german federal office for migration and refugees people with an immigrant background (german: migrationshintergrund) are those born without german citizenship, or born with at least one parent without citizenship.  violence against women  women with a migration background (german: migrationshintergrund) are, according to some studies, more often and more seriously affected by domestic violence from partners and have more difficulty extricating themselves from an abusive relationship.  female genital mutilation   fgm has been criminal in germany since june 2013. according to women's right organisation terre des femmes in 2014, there were 25,000 victims living in germany and a further 2,500 are at risk of being mutilated. perpetrators are migrant parents who take their children abroad, mostly during holidays, for the mutilation or bring foreign practitioners to germany to mutilate several girls at once.  in 2018, the estimate had increased to . a further  were at risk of having the mutilation done to them which represented an increase of 17% on the previous year.  according to the bmfsfj most of the victims originated in eritrea, indonesia, somalia, egypt and ethiopia. according to the bmfsfj, of the 5969 women from ethiopia living in germany in may 2016 without german citizenship, 4417 (74%) were victims of female genital mutilation, of the 10462 women from eritreans living in germany in may 2016 without german citizenship, 8683 (83%) were victims of female genital mutilation, and of the 5797 women from somalia living in germany in may 2016 without german citizenship, 5681 (98%) were victims of female genital mutilation.  crimes against immigrants since the 1990s the long history of turkish immigration to germany resulted in turkish immigrant families becoming one of the largest ethnic minorities in germany, estimated at between 2.5 and 4 million. around a third of these still hold turkish citizenship. on 27 october 1991, mete eksi (de), a 19-year-old student from kreuzberg, was attacked by three neo-nazi german brothers. eksi's funeral in november 1991 was attended by 5,000 people. aslı bayram's father was murdered in 1994 by a neo-nazi and bayram herself was wounded in the attack.  the rostock-lichtenhagen riots took place from 22-24 august 1992 and were the worst mob attacks against migrants in post-war germany, resulting in hundreds of arrests.  in 1993, an arson attack against a turkish household in
the town of solingen in north rhine-westphalia caused the deaths of five people. ahead of a commemorative event in 2018, 25 years after the event, turkey's foreign office noted that "racism, xenophobia and islamophobia are on the rise" in germany and a representative of the family who were attacked called for reconciliation. a spokesman for anti-right demonstrators at the commemoration said, "when you look at how the mood was back then and how it is turning again now, i believe it's important to rally in the streets and to speak out against it."  according to a 2016 study, there were 1,645 instances of anti-refugee violence and social unrest in germany during the years 2014 and 2015.  according to the german federal criminal office, there were 797 attacks against residences of refugees or migrants from january to october 2016. 740 attacks had a right-wing background, which also couldn't be ruled out in 57 further cases. of these, 320 cases of property damage were recorded, in 180 cases propaganda material was dispersed and in 137 cases violence was used. in addition, 61 incidents of arson as well as 10 violations of the explosives law, 4 of them in front of a residence of refugees, were registered. according to der tagesspiegel, there were also 11 cases of attempted murder or homicide. in 2015, there had been 1,029 attacks against refugee residences, following 199 in 2014. germany's interior ministry stated that 560 people, including 43 children, had been injured in such attacks during 2016.  a 2017 study found that "the strength of right-wing parties in a district considerably boosts the probability of attacks on refugees in that area."  a 2018 paper by the institute of labor economics found that xenophobic violence during the 1990s in germany reduced the integration and well-being of immigrants. another 2018 report, by the vbrg, a victim support group, showed an 8% increase in the number of violent far-right attacks in eastern germany during the year, with a total of 1,200 such attacks having taken place in the regions of berlin, brandenburg, saxony, saxony-anhalt and thuringia.  a 2019 study linked increases in refugee migration to increases in right-wing hate crimes.  vigilantism and anti-immigrant protests vigilantism against immigrants is considered to have become more widespread after the sexual assaults by migrants in cologne and other german cities on new year's eve 2015. in january 2016 a mob attacked a group of pakistanis in cologne, and
at bautzen in february, an arson attack on a hostel for asylum seekers took place in february 2018, in heilbronn, a 70-year-old man knifed three immigrants while drunk, in a protest "about the current refugee policy". a perceived increase in attacks on immigrants led to chancellor angela merkel condemning anti-immigrant "vigilante" groups following the chemnitz incident.  the halle synagogue shooting was carried out by a lone german gunman, who claimed in headcam footage he posted online, that "the holocaust never happened...feminism is the cause of declining birth rates in the west which acts as a scapegoat for mass immigration, and the root of all these problems is the jew."  political and social impact four violent crimes committed during the week of 18 july 2016, three of them by asylum seekers, created significant political pressure for changes in the angela merkel administration policy of welcoming refugees. the wall street journal reported that two notorious crimes committed by asylum seekers in consecutive weeks in december 2016 had added fuel to debates on immigration and surveillance in germany. the siegaue rape case as well as the 2017 kandel stabbing attack, in which a migrant who had been denied refugee status but who had not been deported killed his 16-year-old ex-girlfriend, intensified the discussion about admitting migrants.  the rape and murder of 14-year-old susanna feldmann in wiesbaden in may 2018 sparked a debate on how the 20-year-old kurdish iraqi suspect and his family were able to leave the country using fake identities after the murder, as well as how he had been able to stay in germany after his asylum application had been rejected.  criminologists commenting on the situation in 2018 pointed out that the demographics of the migrants is an important factor: young males (of all origins) were responsible for half of all violent crimes in 2014, and young men made up 27% of all asylum-seekers who came in 2015. dr dominic kudlacek, of the criminological research unit of lower saxony lists other risk factors such as social deprivation, being alone, living in refugee camps with little privacy and spending most of their time with other people suffering from these risk factors which can add to the likelihood of committing crimes.  criminologist simon cottee cites sociologist stanley cohen when he suggests that fear of immigrant crime among germans is a form of moral panic to which societies are subject from time to time.  see also immigration to germany crime in germany fluchtlingspolitik (german refugee policies)  references  crime in
germany correlates of crime immigration law immigration to germany  trines, stefan. "the state of refugee integration in germany in 2019." wenr, october 8, 2019. https://wenr.wes.org/2019/08/the-state-of-refugee-integration-in-germany-in-2019.  taub, amanda, and max fisher. "facebook fueled anti-refugee attacks in germany, new research suggests." the new york times. the new york times, august 21, 2018. https://www.nytimes.com/2018/08/21/world/europe/facebook-refugee-attacks-germany.html.  team, reality check. "reality check: are migrants driving crime in germany?" bbc news. bbc, september 13, 2018. https://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-45419466.  lindsay, frey. "refugees in germany did not bring higher risk to germans." forbes. forbes magazine, august 29, 2019. https://www.forbes.com/sites/freylindsay/2019/08/29/refugees-in-germany-did-not-bring-higher-risk-to-germans/.
the mata do bacurizal e do lago caraparu ecological reserve () is a municipal ecological reserve in the state of para, brazil.  location  the mata do bacurizal e do lago caraparu ecological reserve is in the municipality of salvaterra, in the northeastern portion of the island of marajo in the state of para. the reserve is just  from the municipal seat, and includes the bacurizal forest and lake caraparu on the shore of the bay of marajo. the lake has dark waters, and empties into marajo bay. it was created to protect the coastal environment, to preserve natural resources, support scientific research, environmental education and ecotourism, while allowing the traditional fishing communities to make sustainable use of the resources. the ecological reserve is managed by technicians and environmentalists of the municipal prefecture of salvaterra. the municipality is contained in the  marajo archipelago environmental protection area, a sustainable use conservation unit established in 1989 to protect the environment of the delta region.  environment  the forest has a well-preserved environment that includes many examples of local flora and fauna, including the bacurizeiro tree, after which it is named. this tree is of considerable economic value for its fruit and its fine wood used in furniture making. the forest has many trails giving access to the mangroves, the tapera campina fishing port and the sao joao beach. the interior of the forest, with its many tall trees, is dark, cool and damp. the local people extract seeds, roots and sap for medicinal purposes. there are diverse fauna including various types of primate, many birds, and fish and crabs in the mangrove waters. the reserve is important as an area for feeding and reproduction of many migratory birds, including the endangered scarlet ibis (eudocimus ruber).  notes  sources  ecological reserves of brazil protected areas of para
gyokchyan is an armenian surname. notable people with the surname include:  hayk gyokchyan (born 1989), lebanese-armenian basketball player, son of tigran tigran gyokchyan (born 1965), lebanese-armenian basketball coach   armenian-language surnames
the 2016-17 fa vase is the 43rd season of the fa vase, an annual football competition for teams playing below step 4 of the english national league system. the competition is to be played with two qualifying rounds preceding the six proper rounds, semi-finals (played over two legs) and final to be played at wembley stadium.  all first-leg ties until the semi-finals are played with extra time if drawn after regulation - first-leg ties may also be resolved with penalties if both teams agree and notify the referee at least 45 minutes before kick-off (rule 11a).  calendar the calendar for the 2016-17 fa vase, as announced by the football association.  first round qualifying  second round qualifying  first round proper  second round proper  third round proper  match abandoned in 87th minute (0-1) due to spectator medical emergency, basildon united subsequently withdrew from competition.  fourth round proper   - match abandoned after floodlight failure in the 81st minute (2-4) - rematch moved to morpeth town  fifth round proper  sixth round proper  semi-finals semi final fixtures are due to be played on 11 march and 18 march 2016, with the second leg going to extra time and penalties if required.  first leg  second leg  final  references  2016-17 england fa vase
rupanpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of rupanpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by 2011 census of india, rupanpur has a total of 88 houses and population of 491, of which includes 262 males and 229 females. literacy rate of rupanpur is 75.00%, lower than the state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 51 which is 10.39% of total population of rupanpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 457, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the mexican hairless cat, aztec cat or new mexican hairless was a purported breed of cat first documented in 1902 by mr. e. j. shinick, who owned a pair of hairless cats.  the cats were novelties at this time because of their lack of a coat (fur), although they grew light fur along the back and tail in winter.  these cats also had long whiskers and eyebrows. because they had no coat, they lost more body heat than coated cats. this made them warm to the touch as well as heat-seeking.  they are well documented in media reports in the early 20th century.  breed standards   there is no standard for this extinct variety.  behavior   the cats' owner, mr. shinick, reported them to be intelligent, friendly and people-oriented.  they enjoyed warm baths and liked to sleep in warm places, such as under bedclothes with a family member.  history of the cat breed  in 1902, a couple from new mexico received two hairless cats from local pueblo indians. these were purportedly the last survivors of an ancient aztec breed of cat. the cats were litter-mates and noted to be 25% smaller than local shorthair cats. they were normally whiskered and seasonally coated, growing a ridge of fur down the mid-back and tail during the colder seasons. these were not the first hairless cats exhibited in the us, but they became the most famous.  an earlier detailed report of a pair of hairless cats in the boston post, january 22, 1878.  two hairless cats, "scud," a male, and " mystery," a female, owned by william p. marshall, were exhibited.  these cats were a brother and sister.  although novelties, they had an ordinary background, being born to a normal shorthair cat, and did not become a sensation.  in "the book of the cat" (1903, public domain) frances simpson reproduced a letter written by mr. e. j. shinick to mr. h. c. brooke regarding mr. shinick's hairless cats. mr. brooke commented "a most extraordinary variety, of which next to nothing appears to be known, is the hairless cat, and we cannot do better than quote in extenso the description given by the owner of what, if his surmise should unhappily prove to be correct, was the last pair of these peculiar animals, a portrait of which we give. we can
only add, while deeply regretting that mr. shinick did not mate his cats, the earnest hope that we may hear that he has discovered the existence of other specimens."  from "the book of the cat", frances simpson, 1903 (public domain):  "in answer would say my hairless cats are brother and sister. i got them from the indians a few miles from this place. the old jesuit fathers tell me they are the last of the aztec breed known only in new mexico. i have found them the most intelligent and affectionate family pets i have ever met in the cat line; they are the quickest in action and smartest cats i have ever seen. they are fond of a warm bath, and love to sleep under the clothes at night with our little girl. they seem to understand nearly everything that is said to them; but i have never had time to train them. they are marked exactly alike - with mouse coloured backs; with neck, stomach and legs a delicate flesh tint. their bodies are always warm and soft as a child's. they love to be fondled and caressed, and are very playful; will run up and down your body and around your waist like a flash.  "nellie" weighs about eight pounds, and "dick" weighed ten pounds; but i am sorry to say we have lost "dick". we have never allowed them to go out of the house, as the dogs would be after them. they were very fond of our water spaniel, and would sleep with her. "dick" was a sly rascal, and would steal out. one night last year he stole out, and the dogs finished him. his loss was very great, as i may never replace him. the chicago cat club valued them at 1,000 dollars each. they were very anxious for me to come on with them for their cat shows, but i could not go. they were never on exhibition; as this is a small city, i feared they would be stolen. i have made every endeavour to get another mate for "nellie", but have not been successful. i never allowed them to mate, as they were brother and sister, and i thought it might alter "nellie's" beautiful form, which is round and handsome, with body rather long. in winter they have a light fur on back and ridge of tail, which falls off in warm weather. they stand the cold weather the same as other cats. they are not like the hairless dogs, whose hide is solid and tough;
they are soft and delicate, with very loose skin.  "nellie" has a very small head, large amber eyes, extra long moustache and eyebrows; her voice now is a good baritone, when young it sounded exactly like a child's. they have great appetites, and are quite dainty eaters - fried chicken and good steak is their choice. have never been sick an hour. the enclosed faded picture is the only one i have at present - it is very lifelike, as it shows the wrinkles in its fine, soft skin. "dick" was a very powerful cat; could whip any dog alone; his courage, no doubt, was the cause of his death. he always was the boss over our dogs. i have priced "nellie" at 300 dollars. she is too valuable for me to keep in a small town. many wealthy ladies would value her at her weight in gold if they knew what a very rare pet she is. i think in your position she would be a very good investment to exhibit at cat shows and other select events, as she doubtless is the only hairless cat now known. i have written to old mexico and all over this country without finding another. i would like to have her in some large museum where she would interest and be appreciated by thousands of people." e j shinick, albuquerque, new mexico, february 3rd, 1902    in "animal life and the world of nature" (vol 1, 1902-1903), mr. shinick was quoted "dick was a very powerful cat, and could whip any dog alone; his courage no doubt was the cause of his death. he was a sly rascal and would steal out, and one night he got out and several dogs killed him. his loss was very great and i may never replace him. the chicago cat club valued him at 1,000 dollars. i have sent all over the country and endeavoured to get a mate for 'nellie,' but i fear the breed is extinct."  mr. shinick's cats, acquired in 1894,  were reported in the press as aztec cats, the last of their kind.  at that time, distinctive non-pedigree cats were sometimes exhibited as curiosities or celebrities and their stories were displayed on their cages. it is conceivable that the story of a nearly extinct aztec breed was invented to make random-bred hairless cats appear more exotic.  according to a report in the albuquerque citizen albuquerque, new mexico dated wed, may
6, 1903,  "t. j. shinick was about the last man to shake hands with the president (roosevelt). . . . shinick gave him a little present for his sick boy archie. it was a large photo of aztec cats raised by the indians, and the only two hairless cats known in captivity. both the president and secretary loeb was greatly pleased with the picture."  the male cat, dick, died in 1902 or 1903.  in 1908, the female, nellie, died.  according to the new york times of 31 december 1908: "cats and chickens were rivals for popular favor in madison square garden yesterday, and the cats on the occasion, of the formal opening of the atlantic cat club's seventh annual "championship show" had a shade the advantage. the opening of the cats' part of the exhibition was attended by the announcement of the demise of the greatest feline curiosity of the show in transit from albuquerque, n. m., to make her appearance as a metropolitan star. the deceased was the hairless cat which had aroused great interest among the exhibitors as the aztec cat. the animal was regarded as something more than a curiosity, because of the antiquity attributed to its species, and it was stated by dr. cecil french of the atlantic cat club that with the consent of the owner, t. j. shinick, the hairless body would be presented to the museum of natural history here and may be offered in evidence that the cat had a part in aztec as well us in egyptian civilisation. the aztec cat's misfortune gave opportunity for understudies, however, and a tame lynx and a tame ocelot now are rivals for the quarters that the hairless cat will not occupy."  according to the new york tribune, also of 31st december, 1908, "death, too, has invaded the exhibit, for the mexican hairless cat died on the way to the scene of her expected triumph. this cat, which was the property of miss. l. spink, of big lake, minnesota, is said to be the last of a famous aztec race." the owner's name appears to be an error.  in the albuquerque journal of 29 december 1928   (probably a reprint of an earlier article) it was reported "t. j. shinick, of this city, received a letter from washington yesterday saying that the hairless cat, nellie, which he sent to the national cat show, died of dropsy." dropsy is an accumulation of water in the soft tissues, which can be due to heart
failure or, in cats, feline infectious peritonitis.  after that time, other randomly occurring hairless cats were also called (new) mexican hairless or aztec cats.  the term became generic instead of referring to the cats' location of origin.  charles henry lane reported in his book "rabbits, cats and cavies" (1903)   that a mexican hairless cat called "jesuit" belonged to the hon. mrs mclaren morrison (a notable cat breeder and collector of rarities). this was the only specimen mr. lane had seen and he believed it to be the only one ever exhibited in england. a portrait of the cat was included in his book. jesuit could only have been another random mutation, because nellie was too valuable to leave the usa.  the san francisco chronicle, 11th, may 1919 reported: "dr. cecil french of washington owned perhaps the strangest pet feline of all - a hairless aztec cat. on account of the great difference in climatic conditions between washington and mexico, the home of this feline curiosity, dr french housed 'moko,' as his aztec pet was known, in a glass case with regulated temperature."  it doesn't give the date when dr. french owned a hairless cat, but 1919 is a decade after nellie's death.  interest in the hairless cats of new mexico was revived by mr. h.c. brooke in 1926. his queries were printed in the albuquerque journal of 12th january, 1926 and the el paso herald (texas) of 15th march, 1926.  he was extremely anxious to obtain specimens.  mr. brooke's letter read: "they were obtained from some indians, and that the jesuit fathers thought they were the last survivors of an ancient aztec breed. most unfortunately, mr. shinick didn't mate the pair, because they were brother and sister, and apparently did not preserve the bodies on death."  mr. shinick's daughter, mrs. michael palladino, replied in a letter to the albuquerque journal on 14 january 1926: according to mrs. palladino, her father had two of the hairless cats, a male and a female. he intended to mate them, but the male was stolen. the female he kept until she was about 13 years old, then sent her to the smithsonian institution in washington. she died soon after arriving in washington, and mrs. palladino said the body was mounted for display in the museum. mrs. palladino believed that was in december, 1909. she did not know where
her father obtained the cats.  the montana butte standard, 26 december 1937 reported "mexican hairless cats are supposedly extinct, a specimen is owned in new mexico, says mr. crawford, and there may be others," but this claim was not substantiated.  on 20 march 1956, the albuquerque journal printed another request for information: "john white, head of the department of information of the state extension service and the experiment station at new mexico a&m college, has a letter from an el pasoan who wants information on what is called the mexican, and sometimes new mexico, hairless cat. white is stumped. so are the others in the department. the el paso man first wrote to mexico city college, mexico city, for information. the college apparently told him the animal was mouse-colored and the underparts were pinkish. the animal also has a ridge of fur along the back and upper surface of the tail. mexico city college advised the el pasoan to write to new mexico a&m. many know of the mexican hairless dog, but, says white, if anyone has seen a new mexico hairless cat, or knows there is such an animal, he'd like to hear about it."  mrs. palladino replied in the albuquerque journal, 3 april 1956 that her father, the late thomas j. shinick, had given her two hairless mexican cats as pets. the year was about 1894. she called them dick and nellie. she played with them for years. one morning dick didn't come home, and the family told her that the milkman had stolen him.  when nellie was about 15 years old, her father decided that because hairless cats were so rare, the smithsonian institution might be interested. officials of the institution asked to see nellie while she was alive.  mrs. palladino said nellie had arrived in washington in good condition, but died a month later, after which she was exhibited as a taxidermy specimen.  this indicates that the mexican hairless, or aztec, breed were a pair of hairless siblings given a fictionalised account of their origin and the romantic suggestion that they were the last of their breed.  the term mexican hairless cat became a generic term for any hairless cat until 1931 when hairless kittens were born to ordinary furred cats in france and were exhibited by professor e. letard.  references   some material used from messybeast.com with permission.  external links  lost breeds- mexican hairless or aztec cat hairless cats  cat breeds cat breeds originating in the
united states hairless cat breeds extinct cat breeds
whet mead is a 10.1 hectare local nature reserve in witham in essex. it is owned and managed by braintree district council.  this site was formerly a rubbish tip, and before that a sewage works. most of it is grassland with many different flowering plants, and a range of butterflies, dragonflies and seed-eating birds. mammals include wood mice, bank voles and pygmy shrews. there is also scrub and young woodland. the river brain runs along the southern boundary, meeting the river blackwater in the south-east corner.  the only access to the site is from blackwater lane, off maldon road.  references  local nature reserves in essex
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 1 february 1945 in wuhan as a type c(hei) security division, simultaneously with the 132nd and 133rd divisions. the nucleus for the formation was the small parts of the 27th and 40th divisions.  action troops were battle-ready only 20 april 1945 in qujiang district, shaoguan and hengyang. the 131st division was a primarily railroad defense force, stretched along rail lines from anhui to guangdong. it participated in the mopping-up phase of the operation ichi-go. 17 june 1945, the 131st division was assigned directly to china expeditionary army, and reinforced by artillery company 10 july 1945. it then transfer guard duties to the 8th independent infantry brigade in anqing and moved to the xianning where it meet the day of surrender of japan 15 august 1945.  the division was disarmed 15 september 1945. the parts of 131st division were transported from anqing to shanghai 2 february 1946, and from nanjing to shanghai 16 february 1946. over parts arrived to shanghai 4 march 1946 and 8 march 1946. the majority of division except transport company was dissolved from 28 march 1946 to 13 may 1946. the last detachment of 131st division sailed from shanghai 31 may 1946, and landed in sasebo, nagasaki 6 june 1946, to be dissolved immediately.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第131師団 (日本軍), accessed 7 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1946 1945 establishments in japan 1946 disestablishments in japan
centerville historic district is a national historic district located at centerville, wayne county, indiana. the district encompasses 115 contributing buildings in the central business district and surrounding residential sections of centerville. it developed between about 1817 and 1873 and includes representative examples of greek revival, italianate, and federal style architecture. during this period it was county seat of wayne county.  located in the district is the separately listed oliver p. morton house.  other notable contributing buildings include morton's row, lantz' row, archway row, tarkington homestead (c. 1830), jacob julian house (1857), the mansion house (1837), the jones house (c. 1830), and the american house (1838-39).  the district was added to the national register of historic places in 1971.  references  external links  historic american buildings survey in indiana historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana greek revival architecture in indiana federal architecture in indiana historic districts in wayne county, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana
cats in space (styled cats in space - the band) is a british rock band formed in horsham, west sussex in 2015 by guitarist greg hart and drummer steevi bacon.  following the band's inception, vocalist paul manzi, keyboardist andy stewart, bassist jeff brown and second guitarist dean howard were recruited to complete the official lineup. in mid 2019, vocalist paul manzi announced that he would be leaving the band to join the sweet after the first half of 'the narnia tour'. soon after manzi's departure from the band, mark pascall joined the band as their new lead vocalist. after a headline tour and a handful of dates including the london palladium, the band parted ways with pascall and he was replaced by jeff wayne's war of the worlds stage show vocalist damien edwards.  history  cats in space began to work on their debut album too many gods. the recording sessions had guest vocal appearances by both key songwriter greg hart's fellow co-writer mick wilson of 10cc, as well as a guitar/vocal session by andy scott of the sweet.  the band released their first single from the album on 24 august 2015 via youtube, named "mr heartache."  cats in space announced their second album, the follow-up to critically acclaimed debut album too many gods, titled scarecrow, with an official release date of 25 august 2017.  track two, "the mad hatter's tea party" (which the band had previously showcased on the 2017 thunder support tour) was released on 21 july 2017 as a music promo on youtube,  both albums were then announced as digitally available in their entirety on all the reputable digital media platform outlets.  tours and shows cats in space made their debut appearance at london's the half moon, putney sw15 on wednesday 6 january 2016. after a couple more low key appearances they accepted their fourth show at the stone free festival at london's o2 arena in the indigo at the o2 venue on sunday 19 june 2016.  this weekender featured headliners alice cooper on the saturday and rick wakeman on the sunday.  their fifth performance was at the ramblin' man fair, on the new rising stage at mote park, maidstone, kent on 24 july 2016.  the lineup over the weekend featured many original classic rock bands including whitesnake, europe, thin lizzy, thunder, airbourne and black stone cherry.  thunder uk tour march 2017  december 2016, uk rock band thunder announced that a studio album entitled rip it up would be released on 10 february
2017. this would also coincide with a number of live dates. cats in space were confirmed on 23 january 2017 as the official uk tour support.    british summer time (bst) hyde park, london, uk  monday 27 march, cats in space were added to the phil collins bst hyde park concert line-up. the concert took place on friday 30 june 2017.  fairport cropredy convention 2017  12 august 2017, the band played a one-hour set to an over 20,000 plus capacity at the fairport's cropredy convention in oxfordshire.  deep purple long goodbye uk tour 2017  an announcement was made onstage on the final night of the scarecrow headline tour, that cats in space had been added to the whole uk leg of the deep purple 2017 arena tour  along with europe.  status quo - plugged in live and rockin' winter uk tour 2017  cats in space as special guests on the status quo plugged in live and rockin'  nine date uk winter tour of november/ december 2017.  bonnie tyler - the london palladium, uk  cats in space were special guests to bonnie tyler - wednesday 18 september 2019  at the london palladium, argyll street, london uk  members  current   damien edwards - lead vocals / backing vocals  greg hart - guitars / backing vocals  steevi bacon - drums / percussion  dean howard - guitars  jeff brown - bass guitar / backing vocals  andy stewart - piano / keyboards / synths  mick wilson - co-lead vocals/backing vocals and additional instrumentation  former    paul manzi  mark pascall  discography  studio albums  too many gods (31 october 2015, harmony factory records)  scarecrow (25 august 2017, harmony factory records)  daytrip to narnia (1 march 2019,  harmony factory records)  my kind of christmas (6 december 2019)  atlantis (27 november 2020)  live albums  cats alive! (23 february 2018,  harmony factory records)  references  external links  official site  english rock music groups musical groups from west sussex
peric lee (李偉)  (born march 4, 1966) is a chinese singer of various english, mandarin and cantonese songs. he was featured in headlines magazine twice, once following the 2013 release of to fall in love along with well-known artists such as gabrielle alpin, and another following his hifi mandarin album release 恰似妳的深情 in 2016  singing career since 1997 january, peric lee began his career as a freelance singer, and has appeared in many community and professional projects, including cantonese theme songs for the disney movies lion king ii and the main character of "the hunchback of notre dame", as well as vocal parts for "you belong to my heart" in "everlasting regret", a movie directed by hong kong film director stanley kwan.  apart from movie songs, peric has also recorded more than twenty vocal backings for polygram karaoke. he was invited to perform in hong kong coliseum as an elvis presley impersonator during 1997 return to china celebration.  in 2013, he released the hifi cd to fall in love, and was regarded by hifi magazines as having a 'sentimental crystal voice'. together with astor fong, they dueted an original "the way we were" in the same record. following this, peric was invited to perform as guest in the "carpenter once more" show 2013 in kitec star hall. in 2016, peric released a mandarin album, "恰似妳的深情".  on december 30, 2014, peric, along with other musicians such as joe junior was invited by warmhearters 暖心族 to perform in a charity show for china's mountain range students.  appearances  disney: lion king ii (cantonese theme song)  disney: the hunchback of notre dame (main character's cantonese singing voice)   everlasting regret (directed by stanley kwan): you belong to my heart  polygram karaoke: 20+ vocal backings  2013 album： to fall in love   2016 album： 恰似妳的深情  release dates of albums  2013 to fall in love - (hifi cd)  can't help falling in love  besame mucho  blue moon/moon river  the way we were (duet with astor fong  too proud  dream a little dream of me  tennessee waltz  fly me to the moon  i'll never fall in
love again  for all we know  2016 恰似妳的深情 - mandarin album (hifi sacd)  卡門  愛你變成害你  恰似妳的深情 (方文合唱)  淚的小雨  我怎麼哭了  不了情  再見,我的愛人  我和你(北國之春)  情入的眼淚  最後一夜  references  1966 births living people cantopop singers mandopop singers 20th-century chinese  male singers 21st-century chinese  male singers
the 1970 dissolution honours list was issued on 2 june 1970 to mark the dissolution of the united kingdom parliament prior to the 1970 general election.  the recipients of honours are displayed here as they were styled before their new honour.  life peers  baronesses  rt hon. priscilla jean fortescue, baroness tweedsmuir, member of parliament for south aberdeen, 1946-66. parliamentary under-secretary of state, scottish office, 1962-64.  barons  rt hon. evelyn nigel chetwode birch , member of parliament for flintshire, 1945-50 and for west flintshire, 1950-70. parliamentary under-secretary of state, air ministry, 1951-52; parliamentary secretary, ministry of defence, 1952-54; minister of works, 1954-55; secretary of state for air, 1955-57; economic secretary to the treasury, 1957-58.  rt hon. sir edward charles gurney boyle , member of parliament for the handsworth division of birmingham, 1950-70. parliamentary secretary, ministry of supply, 1954-55; economic secretary to the treasury, 1955-56; parliamentary secretary, ministry of education, 1957-59; financial secretary to the treasury, 1959-62; minister of education, 1962-64; minister of state, department of education and science, 1964.  rt hon. sir eric george molyneux fletcher, member of parliament for east islington, 1945-70. minister without portfolio, 1964-66; chairman of ways and means and deputy speaker, 1966-68.  rt hon. james hutchison hoy , member of parliament for leith, 1945-50 and for the leith division of edinburgh, 1950-70. parliamentary secretary, ministry of agriculture, fisheries and food since october 1964.  sir barnett janner, member of parliament for west leicester, 1945-50 and for the north west division of leicester, 1950-70.  rt hon. sir john kenyon vaughan-morgan , member of parliament for the reigate division of surrey, 1950-70. parliamentary secretary, ministry of health, 1957; minister of state, board of trade, 1957-59.  rt hon. emanuel shinwell , member of parliament for linlithgow, 1922-24 and 1928-31, for the seaham division of durham, 1935-50 and for easington, 1950-70. parliamentary secretary, department of mines, 1924 and 1930-31; financial secretary, war office, 1929-30; minister of fuel and power, 1945-47; secretary of state
for war, 1947-50; minister of defence, 1950-51.  joseph slater , member of parliament for the sedgefield division of durham, 1950-70. assistant postmaster general, 1964-69; parliamentary secretary, ministry of posts and telecommunications, 1969.  references  dissolution honours 1970 in the united kingdom 1970 awards
the 2018 united states senate election in missouri took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of missouri, concurrently with other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various state and local elections, including missouri's quadrennial state auditor election.  incumbent democratic senator claire mccaskill ran for re-election to a third term. mccaskill easily won her party's nomination, defeating several minor candidates in the primary, while missouri attorney general josh hawley comfortably won the republican primary.  the candidate filing deadline was march 27, 2018, and the primary election was held on august 7, 2018. pollsters predicted a tight race, however hawley defeated mccaskill on election day by 5.8%, taking 51.5% of the vote to mccaskill's 45.4%, a somewhat larger margin than expected. this resulted in republicans holding both senate seats in missouri for the first time since mccaskill took office in 2007. hawley was also the youngest incumbent senator at that time and continued to be until the election of jon ossoff in 2021.  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  claire mccaskill, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  angelica earl, former insurance verification specialist  david faust  travis gonzalez, perennial candidate  john hogan, perennial candidate  leonard steinman, perennial candidate  carla (coffee) wright  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominated josh hawley, missouri attorney general  eliminated in primary austin petersen, businessman and libertarian candidate for presidential nomination in 2016 brian hagg  bradley krembs  tony monetti, retired bomber pilot and assistant dean of aviation at university of central missouri  kristi nichols, activist and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2010 and 2016  ken patterson, candidate for st. louis county executive in 2010  peter pfeifer  fred ryman, constitution nominee for the u.s. senate in 2016  christina smith  courtland sykes, veteran and former congressional aide  withdrew  camille lombardi-olive, democratic candidate for mo-07 in 2016  declined  ann wagner, u.s. representative and former u.s. ambassador to luxembourg  aaron hedlund, economics professor  paul curtman, state representative  eric greitens, former governor of missouri  vicky hartzler, u.s. representative  todd richardson, speaker of the missouri house of representatives  eric schmitt, state treasurer  david wasinger, attorney  marsha
haefner, state representative  ed martin, former chairman of the missouri republican party, nominee for mo-03 in 2010 and nominee for attorney general in 2012  endorsements  debates  polling  results  libertarian primary  candidates  nominated  japheth campbell, entrepreneur  withdrew  don donald  dennis lagares  declined  alicia dearn, attorney and candidate for vice president of the united states in 2016  austin petersen, libertarian candidate for president of the united states in 2016 (running as a republican)  results  green primary  candidates  nominated  jo crain  eliminated in primary  jerome bauer  results  independents  candidates  declared craig o'dear, attorney  general election  predictions  debates complete video of debate, october 18, 2018  fundraising  polling  with austin petersen  with generic republican  with vicky hartzler  with blaine luetkemeyer  with todd richardson  with eric schmitt  with jason smith  results sen. mccaskill conceded a few hours after the polls closed on election day. despite performing strongly in the st. louis suburbs, she ran well behind her 2012 vote in southeast missouri, especially in the lead belt and the missouri bootheel. she also ran poorly in the northern part of the state. despite mccaskill's loss, missouri democrats held the other statewide office that went up for election in this cycle, the office of missouri state auditor. democratic incumbent state auditor nicole galloway, who had been appointed to the post in 2015 by then-gov. jay nixon following a vacancy, won a full term in the 2018 state auditor election.  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites japheth campbell (l) for senate jo crain (g) for senate josh hawley (r) for senate claire mccaskill (d) for senate  craig o'dear (i) for senate  2018 missouri 2018 missouri elections
sophia rabe-hesketh is a statistician who works as a professor in the department of educational statistics and biostatistics at the university of california, berkeley. her research involves the development of generalized linear mixed models of data that incorporate latent variables to handle hidden data.  rabe-hesketh earned a bachelor's degree in physics from king's college london in 1988. she completed her doctorate at king's college, also in theoretical physics, in 1992. her dissertation concerned image analysis. after postdoctoral studies at the university of leeds, she returned to king's college as a reader in statistics in the department of biostatistics and computing, part of the institute of psychiatry there. she moved to berkeley in 2003, with an additional part-time professorship at the university of london from 2006 to 2012. she became president of the psychometric society in 2014.  she is the author or co-author of multiple books, including the analysis of proximity data (1997, with b. s. everitt), analyzing medical data using s-plus (2001, with b. s. everitt), generalized latent variable modeling: multilevel, longitudinal and structural equation models (2004, with a. skrondal), a handbook of statistical analyses using stata (4th ed., 2006, with b. s. everitt), and multilevel and longitudinal modeling using stata (3rd ed., in two vols., with a. skrondal).  in 2014 she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for groundbreaking contributions to the field of generalized linear latent and mixed models for analysis of complex data in medicine, education, and the social sciences; for development of computational software; and for service to the profession." in 2015 she was elected to the national academy of education.  references  external links home page google scholar profile  year of birth missing (living people) living people american women statisticians british statisticians academics of king's college london alumni of king's college london university of california, berkeley faculty fellows of the american statistical association 21st-century american women
the 2004 indian general election in uttarakhand, occurred for 5 seats in the state. 3 seats were won by the bharatiya janata party, 1 seat by indian national congress and 1 seat by samajwadi party.  elected mps following is the list of elected mps from uttarakhand.  by-election by-elections were held in 2007 for tehri garhwal constituency on the death of elected mp manabendra shah and for garhwal constituency as elected mp b. c. khanduri became the chief minister of uttarakhand.  in the election for tehri garhwal constituency, indian national congress candidate vijay bahuguna defeated manujendra shah, son of manabendra shah by margin of over 22,000.  in the election for garhwal constituency, bharatiya janata party candidate tejpal singh rawat defeated satpal maharaj.  see also    elections in uttarakhand  politics of uttarakhand  2004 indian general election  14th lok sabha  list of members of the 14th lok sabha  references  uttarakhand indian general elections in uttarakhand
aztec inn (also known as the aztec gold inn & casino) is a motel and casino located on  of land at 2200 south las vegas boulevard, north of the las vegas strip, in las vegas, nevada. the property is located south of the stratosphere hotel-casino, and includes a nearby apartment complex connected to the aztec inn.  the property began in 1957, as the sun n shine motel. it became the sunshine motel in the 1980s, and later became known as the mojave meadow motel. a casino was added in 1991, when the property was renamed the aztec inn. the property is owned by gerald brinkman, paul kellogg, and gary vause. the aztec inn's casino is  and features 39 slot machines. the aztec inn also features a buffet and a business center.  history  early history (19572000) the aztec inn's various apartment buildings were constructed on the property in 1953, 1954, and 1956. the motel structure was constructed in 1957, and operated as the sun n shine motel. additional rooms were added in 1958 and 1960. the motel became the sunshine motel during the 1980s, and was later renamed as the mojave meadow motel. in 1991, a casino was built and opened as the aztec inn. the motel's office was demolished to make room for the casino. during the 1990s, the property was owned by gerald d. brinkman, gary vause, donald dombrowski, and paul kellogg iii.  in 1994, officials from the stratosphere project  under construction north of the aztec inn  entered an agreement with the city's las vegas redevelopment agency to have the aztec inn's parking lot condemned through eminent domain and turned over to the stratosphere. the aztec inn's owners had spent $700,000 on renovations and feared that the loss of their parking lot would end the business. in june 1995, a judge ruled that the agreement was unconstitutional. the city chose not to appeal the decision. by april 1996, the aztec inn settled with the stratosphere and agreed to sell its parking lot for an undisclosed amount.  darrin race, an elvis presley impersonator, regularly performed in front of the aztec inn during the 1990s. in december 1998, brinkman, who owned a 25-percent interest in the aztec inn, sued kellogg and vause, accusing them and dombrowski of making numerous high-interest loans to the aztec inn and later having the casino repay the loans against brinkman's objections. brinkman alleged that the loans violated the aztec
inn's limited partnership agreement, which required unanimous consent of all loan transactions. brinkman alleged that the aztec inn had lost $1.7 million since its opening in 1991, as a result of the loans. the lawsuit claimed that the casino had lost $217,000 in 1996, $418,000 in 1997 and $474,000 through the first ten months of 1998.  michael mushkin, an attorney defending the aztec inn's owners, claimed, "mr. brinkman has also made loans and received the same rate of interest on loans as these partners have." brinkman requested a judge to place the aztec inn into receivership to recoup his investment money. mushkin doubted that the casino would be forced into receivership. aztec inn's general manager, bill maxwell, criticized brinkman, saying, "the three partners are supporting the company. the fourth partner is not." in march 1999, maxwell was approved for a four-percent interest in the aztec inn. that month, brinkman was in negotiations with the other co-owners to settle the lawsuit.  recent history (2000present) at approximately 3:50 a.m. on may 10, 2000, a 33-year-old woman was driving south on south las vegas boulevard when another driver cut her off. the woman swerved, lost control of her mercedes-benz, smashed through the aztec inn's glass doors, and crashed into the casino and bar area. five people were injured. at least 15 slot machines  each one costing approximately $8,000  were damaged. four touchscreen slot machines  each one costing approximately $12,000  were also damaged. one slot machine was hit hard enough by the woman's vehicle to be thrown across the casino, smashing into a wall. the casino's floor was covered in coins and glass shards. paul lybarger, the shift manager at the time, said, "i'm still surprised that no one was killed." the motel remained open, while the bar and slot machine area were expected to be reopened by early june 2000.  in january 2001, a flash fire occurred in one of the motel rooms and injured two people. in june 2004, maxwell was approved to sell his four-percent stake to dombrowski and vause for $100,000. in january 2005, the casino agreed to correct discrepancies after being warned of violations in its internal control accounting procedures. in june 2005, state agents found repeated violations, which included underreporting slot machine winnings by $38,218
. other violations included improper recording of supply purchases, an improperly tested coin counter, and the allowance of a bartender to have a $2,000 bankroll to make gaming payouts that were not recorded in the casino's accounting system.  a fire forced the evacuation of the motel on june 22, 2005, at approximately 11:45 p.m. the fire was confined to a closet in a motel room, and was extinguished with no injuries. another motel fire, involving a flaming mattress, occurred in july 2005. on the night of august 3, 2005, a three-alarm fire broke out on the western portion of the aztec inn, on the second floor of the two-story wood-frame motel, located on baltimore avenue. the casino was evacuated. firefighters arrived at approximately 11:38 p.m. more than 100 firefighters spent 45 minutes to get the fire under control. traffic on south las vegas boulevard, between sahara avenue and st. louis avenue, was diverted to make way for firefighters.  the fire was mostly located inside the motel's attic. aside from the attic, two motel rooms and a stairwell were also damaged by the fire, which caused an estimated $200,000 in damages. the motel was vacant prior to the fire, as it was undergoing renovations. it was the worst of the three fires that the aztec inn suffered that year, although officials determined that they were unrelated to each other. fire investigators wanted to determine if renovations on the building were related to the fire. smoke clouds drifted south along the las vegas strip into the early morning hours.  in may 2006, the aztec inn was fined $5,000 after dombrowski admitted to the accounting violations from the previous year.  references  external links  aztec inn las vegas  hotels in las vegas casinos completed in 1991 casino hotels casinos in the las vegas valley hotel buildings completed in 1957 1957 establishments in nevada
tella kitchen (february 14, 1902 - june 21, 1988) was a folk artist known for her paintings of landscapes and town life in rural indiana and ohio. she was a self-taught artist, whose work was based on her memories of her life. her work achieved national recognition, and can be found in the collections of the american folk art museum.  biography  she was born tella denehue, on a small farm in the hills of vinton county, ohio, near the village of londonderry, in neighboring ross county, ohio. her father's family had immigrated to the united states from county cork, ireland; her mother's family was from pennsylvania. during her childhood she moved with her family to indiana, where they settled on a small farm near independence.  in 1920 she married noland kitchen (1895-1963), and the couple moved to the village of adelphi, ohio, where they raised four children. noland kitchen served as mayor of adelphi; the kitchens also operated a gas station, sold used cars, and farmed.  after her husband's death in 1963, tella kitchen succeeded him as mayor of adelphi. at some point during this period of her life, her son denny gave her a paint set as a gift, and she began painting when she was around 67 years old, drawing on her memories of her childhood, and her experiences of rural and town life, including contemporary events.  through the efforts of denny kitchen, the artist's son, her work came to the attention of the folk art historian robert bishop (1938-1991), then a curator at the henry ford museum, in dearborn, michigan, and later the director of the museum of american folk art (since 2001 known as the american folk art museum), in new york city; bishop included kitchen in his book folk painters of america (1979).  selected paintings  the joy of winter, depicting a horse-drawn funeral procession in adelphi, ohio our family doctor, independence, indiana our first school bus, set in adelphi, ohio, in 1921 when the fred buck livery stable burned (1976), depicting a fire that kitchen witnessed in independence, indiana  references   1902 births 1988 deaths 20th-century american painters 20th-century american women artists american women painters naive painters people from ross county, ohio mayors of places in ohio women mayors of places in ohio american people of irish descent people from warren county, indiana painters from indiana 20th-century american politicians 20th-century american women politicians
c.f. mott training college or c.f. mott teachers' training college or city of liverpool c.f. mott training college was a college located in near huyton on merseyside.  the college was named after charles francis mott who was the director of education in liverpool from 1922 to 1945.  it became an affiliate college of lancaster university, offering a programme of arts and science degrees which were conferred in the annual ceremony at lancaster university.  notable alumni include the actress and comedian caroline aherne, rock musician julian cope and radiohead drummer philip selway.  it was absorbed into liverpool polytechnic by 1987.  the original site has now being redeveloped as kings business park, retaining only the hazels, a grade ii listed 1764 building.  references  teacher training colleges in the united kingdom defunct universities and colleges in england education in merseyside educational institutions disestablished in 1970 1970 disestablishments in england
johann georg wenrich (13 october 1787, in schaßburg - 15 may 1847, in vienna) was an austrian orientalist and theologian.  he worked as a schoolteacher at the evangelical gymnasium in hermannstadt, where he later served as school director. in 1821 he was named professor of biblical literature at the faculty of protestant theology at the university of vienna. he is credited with giving the first lectures on sanskrit at the university.   in 1847 he was appointed to the academy of sciences in vienna (kaiserliche akademie der wissenschaften in wien), however, he died on may 15, before he had received news of the honor.  selected works   johann wachter, als mensch, als diener des staates und der kirche (biography of johann wachter), (1831).   de auctorum graecorum versionibus et commentariis syriacis, arabicis, armeniacis persicisque commentatio, (1842).  de poeseos hebraicae atque arabicae origine, indole, mutuoque consensu atque discrimine commentatio, (1843).  rerum ab arabibus in italia insulisque adjacentibus, sicilia maxime, sardinia atque corsica gestarum commentarii, (1845).  references   1787 births 1847 deaths people from sighisoara university of vienna faculty austrian protestant theologians austrian orientalists austrian evangelicals
a shampoo and set was a hair styling treatment that first became popular in the united kingdom from the 1930s. the treatment involved washing the hair using shampoo, applying setting lotion to the hair and placing the hair on hair rollers, and then drying it to set the shape of the hair into the chosen style. the rollers would be held in place and protected by a hairnet, and a headscarf worn over it to protect the hairnet-and-rollers ensemble from the elements.   the shampoo and set has lost its former popularity in the uk, except with members of the older generation who have stuck with older hairstyles that require it.  references  see also   permanent wave  hairdressing
endoscopic laser cordectomy, also known as kashima operation, is an endoscopic laser surgical procedure performed for treating the respiratory difficulty caused as a result of bilateral abductor vocal fold paralysis. bilateral vocal fold paralysis is basically a result of abnormal nerve input to the laryngeal muscles, resulting in weak or total loss of movement of the laryngeal muscles. most commonly associated nerve is the vagus nerve (10th cranial nerve) or in some cases its distal branch, the recurrent laryngeal nerve. paralysis of the vocal fold may also result from mechanical breakdown of the cricoarytenoid joint. it was first described in by kashima in 1989.  medical uses bilateral abductor paralysis of the vocal folds being the main indication, kashima operation is also done to treat vocal cord malignancies and dysplastic lesions of vocal cords. this surgical management is usually undertaken with a target of decannulation in tracheotomy-dependent patients.  advantages the procedure being short and easy to perform makes it the treatment of choice for management of the same. due to minimal invasiveness during the procedure, the time of anesthesia is reduced and good functional results such as swallowing and good voice quality can be obtained. the main objective of the procedure being enlarging the airway, it has become an alternative to tracheotomy, as here the airway is enlarged by making a wedge shaped resection in the posterior vocal cord and retracting the tissue after freeing the vocal ligament and the vocal muscle from the vocal processes.  contraindications kashima operation should be avoided in cases when a tumour is diffused throughout the thyroid cartilage, because operating in such cases may damage the tumour which may lead to its metastasis. the procedure should be avoided in patients with history of bradycardia, aneurysms or recent infarcts where general anesthesia may become a threat to patient's life. in patients with fractured cervical spine it is not possible to perform this laser surgery because proper positioning of the patient would not be possible. similarly in cases of severe ankylosing spondylitis, due to complete fusion and rigidity of the spine, movements are not possible which again hampers the proper positioning of the patient.  complications circulatory and respiratory disorders may arise due to general anesthesia. injury to teeth,  laceration of palate, hematoma and laceration of tongue or lips may occur during introduction of the laryngoscopes. during the cordotomy, larynx might get injured and bleeding can occur. as a normal body response
to any injury, granuloma and scar formation may take place. post operative edema might occur as the surrounding structures are also slightly affected during the procedure.  procedure   surgery is performed under the effect of general anesthesia. the correct position of the patient is mandatory for the ideal introduction of laryngoscope. preferably the patient should lie flat on the operating table without any head ring or sand bag beneath the shoulders. before introduction of the laryngoscope, dental plate should be put in place.  after tracheotomy, with a laser-safe endotracheal tube the patient is intubated with an ample exposition of the glottis. a small laser-protected endotracheal tube is placed in case there is no pre-existing tracheotomy. a modification to this technique is made by using endoscopic co2 laser posterior cordotomy without tracheotomy to not compromise respiration by minimising the postoperative edema. this modified procedure involves a judicious excision of 3.5-4 mm c-shaped wedge in posterior vocal cord from the open edge of the membranous cord using carbon dioxide laser. excision is made anteriorly to the vocal process, continuing 4 mm laterally on to the ventricular band without exposing the cartilage. a 6-7 mm transverse opening is created at the posterior larynx by the surgical resection. to avoid unwanted effects of general anesthesia and prevent any infection during the operation, antibiotics, steroids, and h2 blockers are administered intraoperatively.  technique   the procedure begins with orotracheal intubation using a laser-safe endotracheal tube.  the eyes of the patient are padded and taped followed by draping of the head and application of upper tooth guard. when the patient is anesthetized sufficiently and full relaxation is seen. the largest feasible laryngoscope is introduced, to obtain a good view of the larynx. after positioning of the laryngoscope, it is fixed in place with the help of the chest holder. the light carrier is withdrawn after the adjustment of scope in desired position and then the operating microscope is introduced. the head and face of the patient is protected with moist towels.  then the operating microscope fitted with 400 mm lens and a microspot co2 laser is brought in position. the endotracheal tube cuff is protected by a moist cottonoid sponge placed in subglottis. the site for the cordotomy is determined at
the preoperative examination. if any one of the vocal fold seems to have a slightest degree of motion, then cordotomy is performed on the other one. using co2 laser with a spot size of 0.2 mm and power of 3-5 watts, a cordotomy is performed 1-2mm anteriorly to the vocal process. this is then carried laterally to the thyroid lamina through the width of the vocal ligament and vocalis muscle. the cordotomy provides access to the arytenoid cartilage as well as opens the airway posteriorly.  postoperative care after the operation, the patient is slightly immunocompromised, so to avoid infection by opportunistic organisms, oral antibiotic therapy is given for 1 week. anti -gastroesophageal reflux treatment is given for 8 weeks to avoid the gag reflex occurring due to post operative edema. the patient should be advised to take absolute voice rest by avoiding coughing, singing and clearing of the throat. coughing can be treated with cough suppressing and mucolytic agents. inhalation of steam is advised twice daily. follow-up endoscopy with flexible endoscopes is performed 3 days after the procedure, to clean up the fibrous residues. once the mucosal healing is complete, the patients with tracheotomy can be decannulated within 6 weeks of the procedure.  references   surgical procedures and techniques
vin lananna (born june 17, 1953) is an american track and field coach. he coached collegiate teams included the stanford cardinal and the oregon ducks. he has served as national team coach for the 2011 world championships in athletics and the 2016 rio olympics. he was included in the 2012 ustfccca hall of fame as a coach.  athlete as an athlete (1971-75), lananna ran cross country and track and field and was captain of the 1974 c.w. post college team that finished fourth in the ncaa division ii championships.  c.w. post college in 1975, lananna was named head coach of cross country at his alma mater. lananna was inducted in the school's athletic hall of fame in 2007.  dartmouth college lananna served as assistant athletic director and head coach for dartmouth big green cross country and track and field. in 12 seasons with the dartmouth college big green, lananna's team appeared at the ncaa cross country championships every year - including two straight runnerup finishes for the men's team in 1986 and 1987.  stanford university from 1992 to 2003, lananna built one of the ncaa's elite programs.  his cross country and track and field teams claimed five ncaa division i team championships. stanford cardinal track and field produced 35 top-10 ncaa finishes, and 22 ncaa individual titles.  nike farm team in 1994, lananna served as president and co-founder of the nike farm team, a post-collegiate program for corporately funded professional middle distance and distance athletes based at stanford.  oberlin college lananna served as athletic director for two years from 2003 to 2005. lananna led the revitalization and reorganization of the department of athletics and physical education. his efforts to improve fundraising and enhance the department's resources allowed oberlin to increase staffing and upgrade facilities, including the construction of a new stadium for soccer, lacrosse, and track and field.  university of oregon in july 2005, lananna's leadership helped the oregon ducks track and field and eugene, oregon win the right to host the 2008 us olympic trials (track and field). in july 2006, a two-year renovation began to prepare historic hayward field to host exciting track and field meets in the united states. lananna has also led the establishment of a new post-collegiate club, the oregon track club elite, which provides a new opportunity for middle distance/distance athletes to train with the goal of being competitive on the world stage. named associate athletic director at the university of oregon in july 2005, lananna has been responsible for creating a
vision for the oregon track and field program and historic hayward field.  tracktown usa lananna served as president of tracktown usa, inc. which is a non-profit organization responsible for organizing the 2014 iaaf world junior championships, the 2015 usa track & field outdoor championships, the 2016 iaaf world indoor championships and the 2016 u.s. olympic team trials-track & field.  team usa he served as the united states head coach for the 1990 iaaf world cross country championships and 1996 iaaf world cross country championships.  lananna also led the east team to a track and field title at the 1990 u.s. olympic festival and was an assistant coach for team usa at the 1999 iaaf world indoor championships.  lananna serve as the 2004 u.s. olympic team men's middle distance coach.  lananna served as the head men's coach for team usa at the 2011 iaaf world track & field championships in daegu, south korea.  lananna served as the head men's coach for team usa at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro.  in 2017, lananna was elected president of usa track and field.  university of virginia lananna was named director of track and field and cross country and associate athletics director for administration at the university of virginia in september of 2019.  references  living people 1953 births people from nassau county, new york sportspeople from portland, oregon track and field athletes from portland, oregon track and field athletes from new york (state) american track and field coaches oregon ducks track and field coaches sportspeople from eugene, oregon
richard john o'connell (august 27, 1941 - april 2, 2015) was an american geophysicist working on the internal dynamics of the earth and how they evolved over time and are observed at the surface. he received his b.s., m.s., and ph.d. degrees from california institute of technology, and spent most of his further academic career at harvard university.  o'connell received the inge lehmann medal from american geophysical union in 2000, the arthur l. day medal from geological society of america in 2001, and the augustus love medal from the european geosciences union in 2008. he was a fellow of the american geophysical union, the american association for the advancement of science, and american academy of arts and sciences.  references  external links  richard j. o'connell (academic home page)  1941 births 2015 deaths american geophysicists fellows of the american geophysical union fellows of the american academy of arts and sciences fellows of the american association for the advancement of science california institute of technology alumni
brachyolenecamptus banksi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1948. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
the 1904 argentine primera division was the 13th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on may 9 and ended on september 24. the 1904 championship had a 6 team league format, with each team playing the other twice.  flores did not register to play the tournament after a poor performance in the last season. estudiantes de buenos aires was promoted to primera by the association after the good campaigns made in lower divisions and the contribution made by the club to the practice of football.  belgrano a.c. was the champion, ending a run of four consecutive titles for alumni. the club won the tournament 6 fixtures before the end of the season, when the squad beat quilmes by 4-0 with the following line-up: j. w. howard; george n. dickinson, h. j. reeves; c. edgard dickinson, harold t. ratcliff, h. frasser; h. a. ruggeroni, norman g. forrester, h. b. knight, s. rioboo, e. frilling.  final standings  references  argentine primera division seasons 1904 in argentine football 1904 in south american football 1904 in south american football leagues
the healdsburg tribune is a weekly newspaper covering the community of healdsburg, california and the surrounding areas. it began publication in 1888 as the sonoma county tribune, and has changed titles numerous times since.  related titles include the healdsburg enterprise (1876-1929), healdsburg tribune (1919-1937), and sotoyome scimitar (1908-1946).  see also healdsburg enterprise  external links healdsburg tribune california digital newspaper collection  1888 establishments in california healdsburg, california mass media in sonoma county, california
the ipsc nordic shotgun championship is an ipsc level 3 championship hosted in every year either in norway, sweden, finland or denmark.  champions  the following is a list of current and past ipsc nordic shotgun champions.  overall category  lady category  senior category  team category  references  ipsc :: match results - 2013 nordic shotgun championship, finland ipsc :: match results - 2016 nordic shotgun championship, finland  ipsc shooting competitions shooting sports in europe by country sport in scandinavia inter-nordic sports competitions
the following lists events that happened in 1954 in iceland.  incumbents president - asgeir asgeirsson prime minister - olafur thors  events  births  23 january - guðny halldorsdottir, film director and screenwriter 12 may - friðrik þor friðriksson, film director 18 june - tinna gunnlaugsdottir, actress 8 august - finnur ingolfsson, politician. 18 september - einar mar guðmundsson, poet and novelist 11 december - guðlaugur kristinn ottarsson, musician 31 december - ingibjorg solrun gisladottir, politician  deaths  18 october - einar jonsson, sculptor (b. 1874)  references    1950s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
cathedral is a mixtape by american rapper curren$y and producer chase n. cashe. it was released for online download on august 5, 2015.  track listing all tracks are produced by chase n. cashe.  references  2015 mixtape albums currensy albums
ricardo peralta y fabi (august 15, 1950 - 2016) was a mexican mechanical engineer and former astronaut trainee who was a backup for astronaut rodolfo neri vela on sts-61-b. peralta was one of three people selected among 400 applicants to the mexican space program.  accident  peralta was the alternate of the first mexican astronaut rodoflo neri vela at the time of the ultralight accident (bought as remuneration for astronaut training), in which he was seriously injured. he was unable to complete astronaut training and training at indiana university.   he left the corps of astronauts on 3 december 1985.  he taught at the university in mexico city for many years after his astronaut career and died in 2016.  see also  list of hispanic astronauts  references  1950 births 2017 deaths mexican mechanical engineers
max myers is a british film director, screenwriter and novelist who has been active in los angeles since the mid-1990s.  his first feature film, don't let go, won the outstanding directorial achievement award at the 2002 stony brook film festival in new york, the best picture award at the westchester film festival (ny)  and a prism award in los angeles.  he was the writer of the feature film irish jam starring comedian eddie griffin and anna friel and has written a handful of violent crime novels including the award-winning, boysie blake problem solver.  the son of a german woman and an english army sergeant, myers was born in iserlohn, germany and lived in a large number of postings during his youth including south australia and gibraltar and eventually ended up in east london where he was an amateur boxer and musician through his teens, then began working as a tour manager and sound mixer for european bands that included famous musicians from manfred mann, mungo jerry, berlin rock ensemble, moonraker and wings (band).  filmography  feature films  "don't let go" (2002) - writer, director  "irish jam" (2006)   "slip tumble & slide" (2010) -  writer director   short films  "the test of time" (2015) writer  bibliography  "boysie blake" (2014) - crime, suspense novel  references  external links      american male novelists year of birth missing (living people) american film directors people from iserlohn american screenwriters living people
incident in the taiga (russian: sluchay v tayge) is a 1953 soviet action film directed by yuri yegorov and starring aleksandr antonov and gombozhap tsydynzhapov.  cast   rimma shorokhova as yelena sedykh (as r. shorokhova)  boris bityukov as andrey sazonov (as b. bityukov)  aleksandr antonov as fyodor volkov (as a. antonov)  anatoliy kubatsky as nikita stepanych (as a. kubatskiy)  gombozhap tsydynzhapov as bogduyev (as g. tsydynzhapov)  muza krepkogorskaya as katya volkova (as m. krepkogorskaya)  ivan kuznetsov as dolgushin (as i. kuznetsov)  tsyren shagzhin as uladay (as ts. shagzin)  pyotr lyubeshkin as yegor ivanovich (as p. lyubeshkin)  vladimir gulyaev as yasha  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1953 films 1950s action films soviet action films soviet films russian-language films
timtig () is a historical village in southeast morocco which is part of the rural commune of tamegroute. its territory is located on the left bank of oued draa, 12 km west of the town of zagora and 7 km east of tamegroute.  timtig is a set of five ksours, listed as architectural heritage of morocco, otto kolbl et al. (2007). the principal being timtig lahdab which accounts for more than the half of the population. the others are louastaniya, ait boulkhlat, ait beloualid and ait moulay lakbir.  toponymy  climate timtig has a hot desert climate (koppen classification bwh) typical of the moroccan desert with long summers, hot and short winters, pleasantly warm. the climate is very dry all year, since the average annual rainfall is about 61 mm. in summer, the heat is extreme and the  average temperatures are consistently above 40 °c between late may and mid september. in winter the average maximum temperatures remain above 20 °c but the average minimum temperatures down to about 4 °c overnight. the sky is clear and bright all year and overcast days are very rare.  economy oasis agriculture and remittances from migrant workers to big cities and cattle breeding.  references  populated places in zagora province
hugo daniel santos neto (born 7 march 1997) is a portuguese professional footballer who plays for louletano, as a forward. besides portugal, he has played in moldova.  references  external links benfica official profile   national team data  1997 births living people sportspeople from braga portuguese footballers association football forwards moldovan national division players s.c. braga players  s.l. benfica footballers c.d. tondela players fc zimbru chisinau players portuguese expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in moldova
gavin stevens (born 23 february 1960) is a new zealand former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1960 births living people new zealand male cyclists olympic cyclists of new zealand cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from auckland commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games gold medallists for new zealand cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
pasla is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 12.4 km from nurmahal, 3.3 km from rurka kalan, 30.9 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 127 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 13 km away from the village. the village is 45.3 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 123 km away in amritsar.it also has its own bus station.  specialty  village pasla is known for its baba ami chand's dargah. many festivals are organised in this village. especially the dussehra . many villages get                   together for this festival and also every year a big carnival is held in dargah  pasla also has a temple and gurdwaras . pasla has a quite big playground  .  education  the village has its own school which has classes over 12 .the school has a beautiful garden with playground and swing . not only student but all come here to play. there is a river at the outskirt of a village and lot of greenery is found there  facilities  pasla has a hospital and many pharmacies and grocery shops. a bank is also near the village with an atm facility.  references  villages in jalandhar district
on the evening of 14 july 2016, a 19-tonne cargo truck was deliberately driven into crowds of people celebrating bastille day on the promenade des anglais in nice, france, resulting in the deaths of 86 people and the injury of 458 others.  the driver was mohamed lahouaiej-bouhlel, a tunisian living in france. the attack ended following an exchange of gunfire, during which lahouaiej-bouhlel was shot and killed by police.  the islamic state claimed responsibility for the attack, saying lahouaiej-bouhlel answered its "calls to target citizens of coalition nations that fight the islamic state". on 15 july, francois molins, the prosecutor for the public ministry, which is overseeing the investigation, said the attack bore the hallmarks of jihadist terrorism.  on 15 july, french president francois hollande called the attack an act of islamic terrorism, announced an extension of the state of emergency (which had been declared following the november 2015 paris attacks) for a further three months, and announced an intensification of french airstrikes on isil in syria and iraq. france later extended the state of emergency until 26 january 2017. the french government declared three days of national mourning starting on 16 july. thousands of extra police and soldiers were deployed while the government called on citizens to join the reserve forces.  on 21 july, prosecutor francois molins said that lahouaiej-bouhlel planned the attack for months and had help from accomplices. by 1 august, six suspects had been taken into custody on charges of "criminal terrorist conspiracy", three of whom were also charged for complicity in murder in relation to a terrorist enterprise. on 16 december three further suspects, allegedly involved in the supply of illegal weapons to lahouaiej-bouhlel, were charged. the attack has been classified as jihadist terrorism by europol.  background  on the morning before the attack, french president francois hollande said the national state of emergency, put in place after the november 2015 paris attacks, would end after the 2016 tour de france finished on 26 july 2016. france had just finished hosting the euro 2016 football tournament, during which the country had extensive security measures in place. some matches were played in nice, ending with the england-iceland match on 27 june.  on the evening of 14 july in nice, the bastille day celebrations on the waterfront promenade des anglais, dubbed "prom'party" by the city of nice, drew crowds of 30,000 and included an aerial display by the french air force.  the promenade des anglais had been closed to traffic and, as in preceding years, a long section including the large
hotels had been converted into a pedestrian zone. the customary bastille day fireworks display took place between 22:00 and 22:20.  attack  on 14 july in nice, at approximately 22:30, just after the end of the bastille day fireworks display, a white 19 tonne renault midlum cargo truck emerged from the magnan quarter of nice turning eastward on to the promenade des anglais, then closed to traffic, near the fondation lenval children's hospital.  travelling at close to  and mounting onto the pavement as if out of control, it hit and killed numerous bystanders before passing the centre universitaire mediterraneen, where it was first reported by municipal police.  from the children's hospital, at the intersection with boulevard gambetta, the truck accelerated and mounted on to the kerb to force its way through the police barriers-a police car, a crowd control barrier and lane separators-marking the beginning of the pedestrianised zone.  having broken through the barrier, the truck, driving in a zigzag fashion, knocked down random members of the crowd milling about on the pavement and in the three traffic lanes on the seaward side of the promenade. the driver tried to stay on the pavement-returning to the traffic lanes only when blocked by a bus shelter or pavilion-thus increasing the number of deaths. after reaching the hotel negresco, the progress of the truck, already travelling more slowly, was further slowed down by a passing cyclist, whose attempts to open the cabin door were abandoned after being threatened with a gun through the window. this was followed by a motorcyclist, in pursuit from the centre universitaire mediterraneen, who threw his scooter under the front wheels of the truck at the intersection with rue meyerbeer, mounted the truck and struck blows at the driver from the running board before being hit with the butt of the driver's gun, suffering moderate injuries as he fell off the truck's side. the driver fired several shots at police from his 7.65 mm firearm, close to the hotel negresco, as police arrived; they returned fire with their 9mm sig sauer handguns, gave chase to the vehicle and attempted to disable it.  the truck travelled a further  until, in a badly damaged state, it came to halt at 22:35 next to the palais de la mediterranee approximately five minutes after the start of the attack. there, two national police officers shot and killed the driver.  immediate aftermath multiple bullet holes were seen in the
windscreen and cab of the truck. the entire attack took place over a distance of , between numbers 11 and 147 of the promenade des anglais, resulting in the deaths of 86 people and creating high levels of panic in the crowds. some were injured as a result of jumping onto the pebbled beach several metres below the promenade.  in addition to the firearm used during the attack, an ammunition magazine, a fake beretta pistol, a dummy grenade, a replica kalashnikov rifle, and a replica m16 rifle were found in the cabin of the truck. also recovered were a mobile phone and personal documents, including an identity card, a driver's licence, and credit cards. there were several pallets and a bicycle in the rear of the truck.  perpetrator  personal life french police identified the perpetrator as mohamed lahouaiej-bouhlel, a 31-year-old man of tunisian nationality, born in tunisia, with a french residency permit and living in nice. his parents live in tunisia and rarely heard from him since he moved to france in 2005. his father said lahouaiej-bouhlel underwent psychiatric treatment before he moved to france. he married a french-tunisian cousin, living in nice, with whom he had three children. according to his wife's lawyer, he was repeatedly reported for domestic violence and the couple separated.  after this separation, lahouaiej-bouhlel had a wild sex life according to the prosecutor, and had had sexual relations with both men and women, according to an unnamed source. he was known to french police for five prior criminal offences; notably for threatening behaviour, violence, and petty theft. neighbours reported that lahouaiej-bouhlel rarely spoke to them.  francois molins, the prosecutor leading the inquiry into the possible involvement of organised islamist terrorism, announced on 18 july that information gathered since the attack suggested that, except for a short period leading up to the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel was "a young man completely uninvolved in religious issues and not a practising muslim, who ate pork, drank alcohol, took drugs and had an unbridled sex life."  lahouaiej-bouhlel sent small sums of money regularly to his family in tunisia, according to his brother. however, days before the attack, in a surprising move, lahouaiej-bouhlel persuaded some friends to smuggle bundles of cash worth 100,000 euros illegally to his family.  motives the investigation suggested that lahouaiej-bouhlel became radicalised shortly before the attack. prosecutor molins said that lahouaiej-bouhlel had a "clear, recent interest in the radical jihadist movement". newspapers
reported, on the authority of investigators, that evidence found on lahouaiej-bouhlel's cellphone showed he may have been in contact with individuals in his neighborhood who were known to the french intelligence agencies as islamic radicals. however, an intelligence source cautioned that this "could just be a coincidence, given the neighbourhood where he lived. everyone knows everyone there. he seems to have known people who knew omar diaby", a known local islamist believed to be linked with al nusra front.  lahouaiej-bouhlel's computer showed he had carried out internet searches on the topics "terrible fatal accidents", "horrible fatal accidents", and "shocking video, not for sensitive people"  and consulted news articles on fatal accidents, including on 1 january 2016 an article or a photo from a local newspaper about a car crash with the caption: "he deliberately crashes onto the terrace of a restaurant".  according to french authorities, friends of lahouaiej-bouhlel said he began attending a mosque in april 2016. prosecutor molins said lahouaiej-bouhlel had expressed admiration for isil to one of the now-interrogated suspects. a few months before the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel had shown friends an isil beheading video on his phone, and had said to one of the now-arrested suspects, "i'm used to seeing that". lahouaiej-bouhlel's computer contained photos of isil fighters and isil beheadings, of dead bodies, of osama bin laden, algerian jihadist mokhtar belmokhtar, the islamic state flag, a cover of charlie hebdo, and images linked to radical islamism.  in the weeks before the attack, lahouaiej-bouhlel consulted many websites with treatises on quranic surahs, sites with islamic religious chants, and sites of isil propaganda. he also expressed extremist views, friends told the police. an uncle of lahouaiej-bouhlel in tunisia said that his nephew had been indoctrinated about ten days before the attack by an algerian isil member in nice. lahouaiej-bouhlel grew a beard only eight days before the attack, which he told friends was for religious reasons. an eyewitness interviewed by the newspaper nice-matin recounted hearing, from his balcony, "allahu akbar" being shouted three times during the attack; similar claims were circulated on social media and in the press. officials have not confirmed the shouting of "allahu akbar", while the bbc reported that the rumours about it on social media were "fake".  preparations lahouaiej-bouhlel's mobile phone, found in the truck after he was shot by police, gave police
information about his preparations. on 12 and 13 july 2016, bouhlel returned several times to the promenade des anglais, the site of the attack, surveying the area in the rented truck. on 12 july, he took some selfies on the promenade, as molins confirmed on 18 july. lahouaiej-bouhlel's brother said he received images of lahouaiej-bouhlel laughing among the holiday crowds in nice hours before the attack.  victims  the attacker killed 84 people and injured 434, 52 critically; 25 remained on life support the next day; an 85th person died from injuries three weeks after the attack, and an 86th just over a month after the attack. on 17 july 65 injured were still in hospital, 18 in critical condition. fourteen of the dead were children. the figure of 434 indicates the total number of people admitted into hospital with injuries due to the attack; some of whom were not admitted immediately. of the 86 dead, 43 were french nationals and the remaining 43 were foreign nationals of eighteen countries. it was also reported that some of the victims were muslims. a regional islamic association claimed "more than one third" of the victims were muslims.  by 19 july, french authorities had formally identified the then 84 victims, with detailed lists published by agence france-presse. two days later, the hotel de ville in nice was draped with two long black banners recording the names of these 84 victims.  investigation  late on 14 july, the ministere public of paris, which has national responsibility for combating terrorism, opened an inquiry into "murder and attempted murder by an organised gang connected to a terrorist organisation" and "criminal terrorist conspiracy". the investigations for the inquiry were assigned to the central directorate of the judicial police (dcpj) and the general directorate for internal security (dgsi).   on 15 july, prosecutor francois molins of the ministere public in paris said that lahouaiej-bouhlel appeared to have not been known to french or tunisian intelligence agencies to have ties to terror groups,   nor was he registered as a national security risk (fiche "s") with french authorities.  on 17 july, minister of the interior cazeneuve said he believed lahouaiej-bouhlel had been radicalised quickly, and molins said lahouaiej-bouhlel had a "clear, recent interest in the radical jihadist movement".  on 18 july, molins said the attack could be described as "terrorism" as defined by french law.  on 21 july, molins announced that lahouaiej-bouhlel seemed to have planned the attack for several
months and to have received assistance.  arrests lahouaiej-bouhlel's estranged wife was arrested on 15 july, but was then released two days later. also, a man was arrested on 15 july. on 16 july, three more men were arrested. on 17 july, a man and a woman, both albanians, were arrested in nice following a police raid the previous day.  on 25 july, two more men were arrested after photographs of them were found on lahouaiej-bouhlel's mobile phone. one was released after five days, while the other was charged with conspiracy in relation to a terrorist enterprise, just like five of the people arrested on 15-17 july.  alleged accomplices by 21 july, three men with tunisian origins and an albanian couple, all previously unknown to the french intelligence agencies, had been charged by the ministere public with "criminal conspiracy in relation to a terrorist enterprise". the three men were also charged with complicity in murder in relation to a terrorist enterprise. a sixth male suspect was later charged with conspiracy in relation to a terrorist enterprise.   ramzi a., a french-tunisian born in nice, aged 21. he was suspected of having "participated in supplying the automatic pistol of the killer". while under arrest, he disclosed the location of a kalashnikov rifle. on the night of the attack, at 22:27, he received a text message from lahouaiej-bouhlel: "i wanted to tell you that the pistol you brought me yesterday was very good, so bring five more from your friend's place. they're for chokri and his friends". molins, the french prosecutor, disclosed that ramzi a. had a previous police record for petty crime and drugs.  mohamed walid g., a french-tunisian born in tunisia, aged 40 or 41. in january 2015, shortly after the attack on charlie hebdo, this suspect allegedly sent a text message to lahouaiej-bouhlel saying, "i am not charlie ... i am happy, they have brought soldiers of allah to finish the job." between july 2015 and july 2016, bouhlel and this suspect contacted each other by telephone 1,278 times. photos on lahouaiej-bouhlel's telephone, dated 11 and 13 july, showed him with bouhlel in the truck used for the attack. molins, the french prosecutor, said that the suspect filmed the scene of the attack on the promenade des anglais during the night of 14-15 july, when it was filled with emergency services and journalists, before taking a selfie.  chokri c., a tunisian aged
37. this suspect allegedly sent lahouaiej-bouhlel a facebook message in april 2016, which read, "load the truck with 2,000 tons of iron ... release the brakes my friend, and i will watch." fingerprints of this suspect were found on the passenger door of lahouaiej-bouhlel's truck, and cctv footage showed him seated next to lahouaiej-bouhlel as he drove the truck along the promenade des anglais on the evening of 12 july.  artan h., an albanian, aged 38; and his albanian-born wife enkeledgia z., aged 42, who had dual french-albanian nationality. this couple were suspected of "participat[ing] in supplying the automatic pistol of the killer", and breaking the law on weapons in relation to a terrorist enterprise.  hamdi z., a tunisian, aged 36. he was arrested on 25 july and charged with conspiracy in relation to a terrorist enterprise. he had been recorded on lahouaiej-bouhlel's mobile phone in a selfie with lahouaiej-bouhlel taken next to the truck. he was transferred to paris on 1 august for further questioning.  reactions  french government  15 july french president francois hollande said that he had consulted his prime minister manuel valls and minister of the interior bernard cazeneuve, and was returning to paris from avignon, expecting to arrive in the french capital at 01:15h to have an emergency interior ministry meeting regarding the attacks.  at 00:59h, cazeneuve initiated the orsec plan, the french emergency plan for disasters.  at 03:47h, hollande addressed the french nation in a televised broadcast from paris. he assessed that "the terrorist nature of this attack can't be denied" and linked the attack to islamic terrorism: "all of france is being menaced by fundamentalist islamic terrorism". he announced a three-month extension of the state of emergency, previously due to end on 26 july, announced an intensification of the french military attacks on isil in syria and iraq, and announced that more security personnel would be deployed.  prime minister manuel valls later that day announced three days of national mourning on 16-18 july.  valls said in the france 2 television's evening news programme at 8:00 p.m. on 15 july, lahouaiej-bouhlel was "probably linked to radical islam one way or another". interior minister bernard cazeneuve said, on the coinciding television news of tf1: "we have an individual who was not known to intelligence services for activities linked to radical islam",  when asked whether he could
confirm the attacker's motives were linked to jihadism he replied: "no".  16-17 july on 16 july french defence minister jean-yves le drian said: "i remind you that daesh's ideologue, abu muhammad al-adnani, has for several weeks repeated calls to attack directly, even individually, frenchmen, in particular, or americans, wherever they are, by any means necessary ... it is murder, and daesh's claim of responsibility comes later, as has happened in other recent events".  bernard cazeneuve on 16 july, after isil had claimed the attacker as one of its soldiers, said: if lahouaiej-bouhlel was radicalised, "it seems that he was radicalised very quickly -  in any case these are the elements that have come up from the testimony of the people around him."  cazeneuve on 16 or 17 july announced plans to increase security in response to the attack by calling 12,000 police reservists to add to the 120,000 person force. he urged "all patriotic citizens" to join the reserve forces to boost security following the attacks.  18 july and later on 18 july, france observed a one-minute silence in remembrance of those killed in the attack. in nice, as the prime minister arrived to observe the silence, the crowd booed him and some shouted for his resignation, with some calling him a murderer. president hollande was similarly booed by crowds when visiting nice the day after the attack. the booing was described by bbc as "unprecedented", who commented that it was "a stark warning of how the mood in the country has changed" in comparison to public responses after other recent major terrorist attacks in france.  on 21 july, the state of emergency was formally extended until 31 january 2017.  a week after the attack, the anti-terror directorate of the national police (sdat) requested that the local authorities in nice destroy cctv footage of the attack, arguing that leaked images would compromise the dignity of victims and could be used as propaganda by terrorist organizations. the request has been refused by local authorities who have argued that the cctv footage might provide evidence that the national police had placed inadequate security measures on the promenade des anglais on 14 july.  on 26 july 2016, three nice residents who had chased the truck during the attack were presented with medals for bravery by the local authorities in nice.  on 14 july 2017, president macron said during a remembrance ceremony in nice "this rage, i know, many of you still carry it in the
pit of your stomach, ... everything will be done in order for the republic, the state and public authorities to regain your trust."  french public ministry francois molins, prosecutor of the ministere public (le parquet) in paris - the authority ('public ministry') responsible for defending french society with regard to terrorism - stated on 15 july that the nice attack bore the hallmarks of jihadist terrorism. on 18 july, molins said the attack could be described as "terrorism" as defined by french law.  the republicans on 15 july, alain juppe, former prime minister of france and one of the final two candidates to become the republican candidate for the april-may 2017 presidential election; and christian estrosi, former nice mayor, raised the question of whether more could have been done to prevent the attack.  in september 2016, francois fillon, the other republican candidate in the french presidential election, published a book titled "defeating islamic totalitarianism" (vaincre le totalitarisme islamique), in which he advocated a stricter state surveillance on the muslim community and more attention to the french identity. he also wrote that france was "at war" with radical islam.  national front marine le pen, president of the national front party and candidate for the april-may 2017 presidential election, said in a le figaro interview, "i'm furious, because i hear the same words, notice the same reflexes in the political class, but see no action that contributes one ounce of supplemental security". she judged it "urgent to attack the ideology that is the basis of this terrorism" and regretted that "nothing" was decided for the closing down of the salafist mosques.  international  leaderships of 49 countries and five supranational bodies expressed abhorrence of the attack and condolences for families and for france. us president barack obama labelled the attack as possible terrorism, as did german chancellor angela merkel.  claim of isil responsibility on 16 july, the amaq news agency, called lahouaiej-bouhlel "a soldier of the islamic state." it cited an "insider source" which said lahouaiej-bouhlel "executed the operation in response to calls to target citizens of coalition nations, which fight the islamic state".  later that same day, isil's official al-bayan radio station said the attacker executed a "new, special operation using a truck" and "the crusader countries know that no matter how much they enforce their security measures and procedures, it will not stop the mujahideen from striking."  islamic and christian responses
the first islamic funeral ceremony of victims of the attack took place on 19 july in the ar-rahma (the mercifulness) mosque, the oldest in nice and the largest in alpes-maritimes. last honours of the islamic community were rendered to a 23-year-old tunisian woman, her 4-year-old child, and a young man. rector and imam otmane aissaoui said in his sermon, "the sole frontier for which one should halt is this: the respect for a man, for a woman, irrespective of their colour of skin, their origin. a truth one can find in the gospel, in the torah, even in buddhism!" citing a quranic verse, he said, "at the last judgment, [lahouaiej-bouhlel] will be asked: 'why did you kill that little child of four years old?'"  also invited to speak was the priest of the nearby catholic church saint-pierre d'ariane. father patrick bruzzone said, "my brothers ... i say 'my brothers' because, today more than ever, when one man is hurt, the whole of humanity is hurt."  on 21 july, a commemoration was held for "people of all religions and even beyond that" in catholic church saint-pierre d'arene, located near the area where the attack had taken place. the priest and the vicar called for "the calming down, necessary for taking at hand our common future in this torn city and in the whole country. to contemplate together, in order to solidly reconstruct the social ties that now are increasingly crumbled and largely ruined".  on 24 september, pope francis met 800 family members of the victims of the attack in rome.  social media immediately after the attack, while it still remained unclear whether the threat had ended, people used social media, particularly twitter, to help others find shelter, using the hashtag #portesouvertesnice (open doors nice), a variation of a hashtag used in other recent attacks in france.  on 14 and 15 july, the french government urged social media users to only share reliable information from official sources, while false rumours circulated that hostages had been taken, that the eiffel tower had been attacked and set on fire, and that cannes had also been attacked.  after-effects  cultural organisers of the 20th nice jazz festival, scheduled to begin on 16 july, cancelled the event in the wake of the attack. rihanna cancelled a concert scheduled as a part of her anti world tour
for 15 july at nice's allianz riviera. at london's royal albert hall on 15 july, the opening night of the 2016 proms festival paid tribute to the people of nice, with the bbc symphony orchestra performing a rendition of la marseillaise. in december 2016, an american musician fasade, who witnessed the attack, published a music video of a song that paid tribute to the victims, featuring images of the attack's aftermath.  in august, the european cycling union decided to move the 2016 european road championships, which were to be hosted on 14-18 september in nice, to plumelec in the northwest of france, due to security concerns in nice after the 14 july attack.  financial markets european stocks opened lower and then closed mixed on friday 15 july (the day after the attacks) as investor sentiment was dampened by the attack in france. the pan-european stoxx 600 was down by 0.38%, the french cac 40 by 0.4%, and german dax by 0.4%. the british ftse 100 fell by 0.2% before closing up by 0.22%, down at 0.32% in stoxx 600, 0.6% in cac 40, and 0.01% in dax. airlines, along with other travel share, were some of the hardest hit companies, with flybe and easyjet down by around 3.7 per cent and three per cent respectively.  tourism cancellations and last-minute changes to european holidays rose in the summer, with travellers increasingly concerned about the threat of terrorism. other terrorist attacks in belgium and turkey prompted holidaymakers to cancel their bookings or seek out other destinations perceived to be safe. the nice attack, along with the recent failed coup in turkey, were expected to add to the pressure. "this is not going to be a good year," european tour operators association chief executive tom jenkins said. "there is a real suppression of demand for destinations like belgium and france."  tensions between muslims and non-muslims on the week after 14 july, some nice inhabitants noticed and deplored increasing anti-muslim and racist rhetoric in their quarters. some non-muslims said that their view on muslims had changed. "we're in europe and i think some of the oriental rites are somehow incompatible," a local man said.  before the attack, on 8 june, the carcass of a pig had been found in front of a mosque in nice. two suspected men were charged and the court's judgement was expected to be filed on 12
october. on the morning of 11 october, the imam of that same mosque found the head and pelt of a pig mounted before the mosque's entrance.  raids and house arrests under state of emergency as of august 2016, under the state of emergency put in force since november 2015 and extended after the nice attack, around 3,600 houses had been raided. the raids resulted in six terrorism-related inquiries, only one of which led to prosecution. most raids were reportedly connected with narcotics, not with terrorism, implying misuse of the new powers of emergency. previously, as of may 2016, under the emergency law, house arrest had been imposed on 404 people, mostly muslims of north african descent. many french citizens that were placed under house arrest allegedly lost jobs or employment opportunities as a result. by mid-november 2016, some people had been under house arrest for nearly a year during which no judicial inquiry against them had been started.  on 15 november, president hollande announced his intention to prolong the state of emergency until the  french presidential elections on 23 april and 7 may 2017.  see also list of islamist terrorist attacks list of massacres in france list of rampage killers (religious, political, or ethnic crimes)  notes  references  external links        2016 murders in france 2016 road incidents in europe 2010s road incidents in france 21st century in nice crime in provence-alpes-cote d'azur terrorist incidents in provence-alpes-cote d'azur filmed killings murders by motor vehicle islamic terrorism in france islamic terrorist incidents in 2016 july 2016 crimes in europe july 2016 events in france massacres in 2016 massacres in france mass murder in 2016 vehicular rampage in france terrorist incidents in france in 2016 terrorist incidents involving vehicular attacks
christopher knight (born hertfordshire, england), better known by his stage name kryder, is an english dj and record producer.  he is best known for his record "k2" and original track "aphrodite" released on axtone records and his remix of kolsch's "all that matters" featuring troels abrahamsen both of which reached no. 1 on the beatport top 100 chart. he is also the owner of kryteria records.  many of his other singles also experienced great success: "treasured soul" and "jericho" figured many weeks in the top 100.  awards and nominations  discography  compilation albums  singles  2011: me [maquina records]  2011: k2 [musical freedom]  2012: damaged (feat. bo bruce) [house trained]  2012: sending out an s.o.s. (with danny howard) [spinnin records]  2012: ultima [armada trice]  2012: scorpio [armada trice]  2013: vyper [cr2 records]  2013: aphrodite [axtone records]  2013: pyrmd [protocol recordings]  2014: tarzan [sosumi records]  2014: big momma's house (with tom staar) [sosumi records]  2014: feels like summer (with still young and duane harden) [sprs]  2014: fiji [sprs]  2014: jericho (with tom staar) [size records]  2015: good vibes (with the wulf) [spinnin records]  2015: percolator (with cajmere) [spinnin records]  2015: chunk (with cid) [free download]  2015: apache (with dave winnel) [size records]  2015: de puta madre (with tom staar and the wulf) [sprs]  2016: crocodile tears [axtone records]  2016: selecta (chocolate puma edit) [spinnin' records]  2016: the chant (with eddie thoneick) [cartel recordings]  2016: dogs on acid [sosumi records]  2016: la luna (with hiio) [sprs]  2016: you & me (with the cube guys) [cartel recordings]  2017: street life (with daddy's groove) [cartel recordings]  2017: unity (with roland clark) [sprs]  2017: mtv [musical freedom]  2017:
uh oh (with leandro da silva) [kryteria white]  2017: waves (with erick morillo) [subliminal recordings]  2018: romani (featuring steve angello) [kryteria records]  2018: la cumbiambera (with cato anaya) [kryteria records]  2018: billionaire (featuring sam martin) [spinnin' records]  2019: get funky (with fast eddie) [musical freedom]  2019: stay [we rave you]  2019: drumkore [kryteria records]  2020: rusty trombone [spinnin' records]  2020: waiting on my love (with tom staar featuring ebson) [axtone]  2020: stay with me (with nino lucarelli) [spinnin' records]  2020: lsd [musical freedom]  2021: pleasure or pain (with mark roma) [black hole recordings]  2021: you & i (with deadline) [black hole recordings]  2021: rapture (with natalie shay) [black hole recordings]  2021: girlfriend (with b jones) [spinnin' records]  2021: crashing down (with asymptone) [black hole recordings]  2021: piece of art [armada music]  remixes  2012: afrojack and shermanology - "can't stop me" (kryder and staar remix) [wall recordings]  2013: nicky romero vs. krewella - "legacy" (kryder remix) [protocol recordings]  2014: showtek and justin prime featuring matthew koma - "'cannonball (earthquake)" (kryder remix) [sprs]  2014: arno cost and norman doray - "apocalypse 2014" (kryder and tom staar remix) [spinnin' records]  2014: armin van buuren - "ping pong" (kryder and tom staar remix) [armada music]  2014: kolsch featuring troels abrahamsen - "all that matters" (kryder remix) [axtone records]  2015: l'tric - "this feeling" (kryder remix) [neon records]  2015: michael calfan - "treasured soul" (kryder and genairo nvilla remix) [spinnin' remixes]  2015: sam feldt featuring jaya beach-robertson - show me love" (kryder and tom staar remix) [spinnin' remixes]  2015: dimitri vegas & like mike
vs. ummet ozcan - the hum" (kryder and tom staar remix) [smash the house]  2015: tommy trash featuring jhart - "wake the giant" (kryder and tom tyger remix) [armada music]  2015: david guetta featuring sia and fetty wap - "bang my head" (kryder and dave winnel (producer) remix) [what a music]  2016: chicane - "saltwater" (kryder remix) [xtravaganza]  2017: provenzano and federico scavo - "folegandros" (kryder mix) [cartel recordings]  2018: nico de andrea - "the shape" (kryder remix) [spinnin' records]  2018: benny benassi - "everybody needs a kiss" (kryder remix)  2018: basement jaxx - "bingo bango" (tom staar and kryder remix) [xl recordings]  2019: lost frequencies featuring flynn - "recognise" (kryder remix) [found frequencies]  2020: grum featuring natalie shay - "afterglow" (kryder remix)  2020: david tort - "afraid of the dark" (kryder remix)  2020: york - "on the beach" (kryder remix)  2021: ilan bluestone and maor levi featuring alex clare - "hold on" (kryder remix)  2021: solarstone - "when i dream" (kryder remix)  2021: nervo and tube & berger - "lights down low" (kryder remix)  references  external links official website  english dance musicians english djs english record producers living people musicians from hertfordshire remixers electronic dance music djs spinnin' records artists 1980 births
nazanin rafsanjani is the former head of new show development for gimlet media. previously she was creative director at gimlet media and before that, a senior producer for the rachel maddow show.  rafsanjani was featured in the first season of gimlet's podcast startup, consulting with her husband alex blumberg as he launched a media company then called american podcasting corporation. as the business grew, rafsanjani elected to join the team, specifically to develop branded podcasts (podcasts produced by gimlet on behalf of advertisers) as a source of revenue for the firm. the first branded podcast from rafsanjani's four-person creative team at gimlet was a six-episode series for ebay called open for business, which hit number one on the itunes podcast chart. rafsanjani has been praised for the journalism and producing skills she brings to gimlet's marketing projects; hiring for her team at gimlet creative also drew from journalism, including katelyn bogucki from the huffington post and frances harlow from npr's planet money.  in 2013, rafsanjani was nominated for an emmy, with the rachel maddow show team, for outstanding news discussion and analysis. she has also been a contributor to this american life and a 2006 npr-bucksbaum international fellow.  she serves on the board of directors of human rights first.  references  external links  twice removed podcast episode 3: "nazanin rafsanjani" (january 13, 2017)  american male journalists american podcasters american television producers american women television producers living people year of birth missing (living people) women podcasters american men podcasters american women podcasters 21st-century american women
lakewood hills is an unincorporated community in center township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of evansville.  geography  lakewood hills is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
michael david fried  is an american mathematician working in the geometry and arithmetic of families of nonsingular projective curve covers.  career  fried received his undergraduate degree from michigan state university in electrical engineering and then worked for three years as an aerospace electrical engineer. he then received his phd from university of michigan in mathematics in 1967 under donald john lewis.  he spent two years as a postdoctoral researcher at the institute for advanced study (1967-1969). he was a professor at stony brook university (8 years), university of california at irvine (26 years), university of florida (3 years)  and hebrew university (2 years). he has held visiting appointments at mit, msri, university of michigan, university of florida, hebrew university and tel aviv university.  he has been an editor on several mathematics journals including the research announcements of the bulletin of the american mathematical society, and the journal of finite fields and its applications.  awards  he was included in the inaugural (2013) class of fellows of the american mathematical society. he was also a sloan fellow (1972-1974), lady davis fellow at hebrew university (1987-1988), fulbright scholar at helsinki university (1982-1983), and alexander von humboldt research fellow  (1994-1996).  see also field arithmetic  references  external links   michael fried's home page  living people 20th-century american mathematicians 21st-century american mathematicians algebraists algebraic geometers number theorists fellows of the american mathematical society horace h. rackham school of graduate studies alumni sloan research fellows year of birth missing (living people)
gerolamo frigimelica roberti (10 january 1653 - 15 november 1732) was an italian architect, librettist, and poet.  biography born in padua to a father who had married into the noble robert family, thus gaining a title of count for his son. gerolamo acquired a broad humanist education and from 1691 to 1720 was curator of the public library of padua and admitted as member to its accademia galileiana di scienze, lettere ed arti or accademia dei ricovrati.  in 1721, he moved to modena. he was now active mainly as an architect, designing palaces and churches in padua, vicenza, and modena. he worked on the cappella del santissimo at the basilica di sant'antonio di padova and made designs for the churches of  santa maria del torresino and santa lucia at padua.  he also made designs for the church of san gaetano in vicenza, and the palaces mussato and buzzacarini in padua; and the enlargement for the palazzo pisani a san stefano in venice.  he is known for having produced an initial plan in 1716 for villa pisani at stra, however, the densely detailed design, with a central pavilion cramped with columns, was rejected by the patron alvise pisani. the design for the central pavilion seemed more apt for a venetian palazzo. instead a more sober, neoclassical design was adopted after his death by francesco maria preti.  also important to frigimelica was his work as a librettist for opera. his first 11 texts were written for the teatro san giovanni grisostomo of venice, and set to music between 1694 and 1708 by carlo francesco pollarolo, alessandro scarlatti, antonio caldara, and luigi mancia. later works were produced mainly for the teatro obizzi of padua.  he worked in a style of opera seria similar to apostolo zeno, francesco silvani, and adriano morselli. his libretti consisted of five acts and were about historic and mythologic subjects, and were called tragedies or tragic-comedies. he also wrote the text for seven musical oratorios, performed between 1697 and 1702. he died in modena.  his relationship to antonio frigimelica roberti, an 18th-century academic, or francesco frigimelica il vecchio, a painter, is unclear.  references  article loosely translated from italian wikipedia entry.  1653 births 1732 deaths architects from padua italian opera librettists 17th-century italian architects 18th-century italian architects neoclassical architects
on 24 july 2016, fifteen people were injured, four seriously, in a suicide bombing outside a wine bar in ansbach, bavaria, germany. the bomber, identified by police as mohammad daleel, was a 27-year-old syrian asylum seeker who had pledged allegiance to abu bakr al-baghdadi, leader of the islamic state. he was the only fatality in the incident. according to german authorities, daleel was in contact with the islamic state and had been planning more attacks before his backpack bomb exploded accidentally.  the incident followed three other violent incidents that occurred in germany within a week. the ansbach bombing was the first suicide bombing in germany by islamic terrorists, and the first since world war ii. cuneyt ciftci, the perpetrator of a 2008 suicide bombing in afghanistan, who had previously lived in ansbach, is considered the first suicide bomber to have been born and raised in germany.  event at 22:12 cest (20:12 utc), a bomb exploded outside eugens weinstube (eugene's wine bar) in ansbach, germany and injured fifteen people, four seriously. the explosion occurred near the entrance to the ansbach open music festival with around 2,500 people in attendance. it was initially thought to have been caused by a gas leak. daleel was communicating with someone online immediately before the blast. daleel was in communication with a telephone number in saudi arabia minutes before the attack.  he carried a backpack filled with screws, nails, and miscellaneous metal parts used in wood manufacturing and was denied entry into the music festival shortly before the blast because he had no ticket. thereafter, witnesses say, daleel sat outside eugene's wine bar, leaned forward, and detonated an improvised explosive device.  emergency personnel arrived and attempted to resuscitate daleel, but he was already dead.  german authorities now believe daleel intended to remotely detonate the ansbach bomb while filming it and to later commit further terrorist attacks.  perpetrator mohammad daleel (), also known as abu yusuf al-karrar (arabic: ابو يوسف الكرار), was a 27-year-old syrian refugee from aleppo who had arrived in germany in 2014 seeking asylum.  according to bild, he was a member of islamic state of iraq many years ago. . islamic state called daleel a "soldier of the caliphate".  bild further says he told german officials that he was a sunni muslim and had come from aleppo. he said he had
studied law for half a year and worked at a soap factory owned by his father. "a missile had damaged our house, i was heavily injured and brought to turkey", he claimed in his asylum application.  immigration mohammad daleel left syria on 16 july 2013. traffickers drove him to bulgaria, where he filed an asylum request in september 2013. on 17 april 2014, he said, he flew from sofia to vienna on austrian airlines, flight os 806, seat 22a, with one suitcase. a "mysterious benefactor" gave him the airplane ticket at no charge. austrian police seized him and took his documents. on 20 april, he applied for asylum in austria but then decided to go to munich on 5 july 2014, where he also applied for asylum in germany.  he stated to german authorities that he had been a victim of torture, a claim of which there is no record of him having previously made, and which the new york times characterised as appearing to be "embellishments" he made.  german officials and the local court in ansbach rejected his first asylum request on 2 december 2014 and ordered his deportation to bulgaria. normal procedure in germany did not allow daleel to be deported to his home country due to the ongoing syrian civil war. as he had been registered in bulgaria, german officials and the local court in ansbach ordered his deportation to bulgaria. he then attempted to commit suicide twice and was under psychiatric care. due to daleel's mental health diagnosis, the deportation to bulgaria was suspended. on 13 july 2016, a second deportation notice to bulgaria was sent to daleel. as daleel was part of the islamic in syria and was receiving detailed instructions from the group, there were speculations that he may have exaggerated his mental health problems to evade deportation.  minister of parliament harald weinberg of the left party blocked the deportation, one of six asylum seekers he has aided. he said he is "shocked and saddened" by the attack, "especially since i am often at the eugene weinstube and am familiar with many guests there," but given what he knew at that time he believed he had done the right thing. due to daleel's mental health diagnosis, the deportation to bulgaria was suspended. on 13 july 2016, a second deportation notice to bulgaria was sent to daleel.  axel von maltitz, a trauma specialist, wrote a report in 2015 where he warned about daleel's "extreme spirit" and stated «attempts to deport mr daleel could result in a "
spectacular" suicide attempt».  the report was sent to the federal office for migration and refugees.  paul cruickshank, the editor-in-chief of ctc sentinel, a publication of the combating terrorism center at west point, has suggested daleel 'faked or exaggerated' any mental health problems in an attempt to stay in germany.  daleel had been treated around 6 months in an institution called "exilio e.v." in lindau by heilpraktikers which claims to offer holistic health treatment "for immigrants" under the leadership of gisela von maltitz and axel von maltitz. purportedly, the institution does not include any qualified doctor of medicine, psychologist or psychiatrist. the institution has been criticized for using "dubious" practices such as rebirthing.  other allegations it was claimed that daleel had once attempted to firebomb a german immigration office, but been dissuaded by an aide assigned him (as a refugee asylum applicant) to "help him adapt in germany".  preparation for the bombing it was alleged that daleel built the explosive device "in the refugee center", and that it took him three months, during which period german police raided the building he was living in but failed to arrest him. he was in constant contact with "one of the soldiers" of is.  daleel conducted reconnaissance of the location a day before the attack. he also sent a video to the islamic state, which was released by amaq news agency.  aftermath the music festival was cancelled and the immediate vicinity in which the bombing occurred was evacuated.  investigation german authorities have found a video showing daleel pledging allegiance to the leader of the islamic state, abu bakr al-baghdadi, and intending to attack germans on his phone. multiple cell phones, sim cards, a notebook, and six facebook accounts with islamist material that belonged to daleel were also discovered and under investigation. furthermore, inside the asylum accommodation in which the attacker lived, materials for bomb building were uncovered. joachim herrmann, the bavarian interior minister, said that "it is unquestionable that it is a terror attack with corresponding islamist convictions of the perpetrator."  less than an hour after media reported that the attacker had made a pledge of allegiance to abu bakr al-baghdadi, the amaq news agency called him an islamic state fighter who executed the operation in response to calls to target countries of the coalition that fights islamic state.  the attack came to be considered a "lone wolf attack."  reactions as a result
of the recent attacks in germany, the hashtag #merkelsommer and phrase "merkel summer" trended on twitter starting on 25 july 2016 and appeared in other social media. experts believed that the recent attacks could create an anti-foreigner sentiment in the country, thus presenting criticism and pressure for angela merkel, the chancellor of germany since 2005.  joachim herrmann acknowledged that it was "a very terrible week, as i think it was for most of the people in bavaria." he said that german authorities would investigate ways to prevent abuse of the asylum system.  see also  list of islamist terrorist attacks  ansbach school attack  munich knife attack (10 may 2016)  immigration and crime in germany  references   2016 in bavaria attacks on bars in europe attacks on buildings and structures in 2016 building bombings in germany 2016 bombing islamic terrorist incidents in 2016 isil terrorist incidents in germany july 2016 crimes in europe july 2016 events in germany suicide bombings in 2016 suicide bombings in germany terrorist incidents in bavaria terrorist incidents in germany in 2016
the iowa elections, 2018 were held in the u.s. state of iowa on november 6, 2018. a closed primary election was held on june 5, 2018. all of iowa's executive officers were up for election as well as all four of iowa's seats in the united states house of representatives, 25 (half) of the seats in the iowa senate, and all 100 seats in the iowa house of representatives.  governorship  incumbent republican governor terry branstad, who has served for two consecutive and six total terms as iowa governor, resigned to be the united states ambassador to china in 2017. lieutenant governor kim reynolds assumed the governorship and was seeking a full term.  results  attorney general incumbent democratic attorney general tom miller has served in the position since 1995, and previously from 1979 to 1991. the republican party did not nominate anyone, but the libertarian party nominated marco battaglia.  democratic primary  results  general election  results  secretary of state  democratic primary  deidre dejear  jim mowrer  results  republican primary paul pate, incumbent  results  general election  predictions  endorsements  results  treasurer incumbent democratic state treasurer michael l. fitzgerald, who has served in the position since 1983, ran for reelection to a tenth term in office. fitzgerald was unopposed in the primary and does not have a republican challenger, however does have a challenger from the libertarian party.  democratic primary  results  general election  results  auditor incumbent auditor mary mosiman, who has served since 2013 was eligible for re-election and was unopposed in the republican primary. attorney rob sand won the democratic primary.  democratic primary  results  republican primary  results  general election  results  secretary of agriculture republican secretary of agriculture bill northey had served in the position since 2007. northey was considering running for iowa governor, but after governor terry branstad was nominated to be ambassador to china he announced he would not run. northey had not ruled out running for reelection in 2018, but he said he would be willing to serve as lieutenant governor instead if asked. in 2018, he was nominated by president donald trump to be under secretary of agriculture for farm and foreign agricultural services and has since ruled out reelection. the office is currently held by mike naig, serving in an acting capacity.  democratic primary  results  republican primary  ray gaesser, farmer and soybean producer  chad ingels  craig lang, former president of the farm bureau  mike naig, incumbent  dan zumbach, state senator  results  general
election  endorsements  results  united states house of representatives  all of iowa's four seats in the united states house of representatives were up for election in 2018.  iowa general assembly the 25 odd-numbered iowa senate seats were up for election in 2018, as were all 100 iowa house seats.  references  external links candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at national institute on money in state politics  official attorney general campaign websites marco battaglia (l) for attorney general tom miller (d) for attorney general  official secretary of state campaign websites deidre dejear (d) for secretary of state paul pate (r) for secretary of state  official state auditor campaign websites mary mosiman (r) for auditor rob sand (d) for auditor  official secretary of agriculture campaign websites tim gannon (d) for secretary of agriculture  mike naig (r) for secretary of agriculture    iowa
the matador was a bar in portland, oregon, united states. it closed on september 12, 2014, after operating for more than forty years.  references  external links    2014 disestablishments in oregon defunct drinking establishments in oregon
the 2018 united states senate election in west virginia took place on november 6, 2018, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of west virginia, concurrently with other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives, and various state and local elections.  on may 8, 2018, the republican primary voters of the state nominated west virginia attorney general patrick morrisey as the republican candidate. in the general election, incumbent democratic senator joe manchin defeated morrisey and was elected to a second full term, albeit by a margin much narrower than his margin of victory in the 2012 election.  background west virginia was once a democratic stronghold at the state and federal level, but has been rapidly shifting towards the republican party since 2000. in 2008, john mccain defeated barack obama by a margin of 55-42%.  in the 2012 presidential election, mitt romney defeated obama 62-35% and swept every single county in the state. despite this, manchin was reelected in his own landslide over perennial candidate john raese, receiving more than 60% of the vote and carrying all but three counties.  in 2016, donald trump won the state by a greater than 40-point margin over hillary clinton (68-26%), with clinton's performance being the worst for either party in the state's history. trump also won every county in the state.  concurrent with trump's landslide victory in the west virginia, democratic businessman jim justice won the gubernatorial election with 49% of the vote but changed his party affiliation back to republican within a year (justice had previously been a republican prior to running as a democrat for governor). democrats lost almost every statewide office in the state in 2016, with state treasurer john perdue being the only statewide democrat reelected. perdue lost reelection in 2020, making manchin the only democratic statewide officeholder in the state.  because of the heavy republican lean of his state, manchin was ranked by many outlets as  one of the most vulnerable incumbents up for reelection. president trump headlined three rallies in the state on behalf of manchin's opponent, patrick morrisey. manchin's vote to confirm judge brett kavanaugh in his highly contentious confirmation hearing, making him the only democrat to do so, garnered national attention and backlash from members of his own party just weeks before the midterm elections.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  joe manchin, incumbent u.s. senator  eliminated in primary  paula jean swearengin, social and environmental activist  endorsements  polling
results  republican primary  candidates  nominee  patrick morrisey, attorney general of west virginia  eliminated in the primary  don blankenship, former chairman and ceo of massey energy  bo copley, coal miner  evan jenkins, u.s. representative  jack newbrough, truck driver and navy veteran  tom willis, army veteran  declined  ryan ferns, majority leader of the west virginia senate (running for reelection)  david mckinley, u.s. representative (running for reelection)  alex mooney, u.s. representative (running for reelection)  endorsements  debates  polling  results  libertarian party  candidates  nominated    rusty hollen  constitution party  candidates  denied ballot access  don blankenship, former chairman and ceo of massey energy. observers noted that he would be ineligible to run due to west virginia's sore-loser law which states that the loser of a partisan primary election cannot appear on the ballot as an independent or with another political party in the general election. blankenship was eligible to run as a write-in candidate. secretary of state mac warner denied ballot access to blankenship's campaign on july 26, citing west virginia's "sore loser" law. after a lawsuit, the supreme court of appeals of west virginia ordered warner to deny blankenship ballot access on august 29, 2018.  endorsements  general election  candidates  mark brazaitis (independent, write-in), author and deputy mayor of morgantown, west virginia  predictions  endorsements  fundraising  polling  with don blankenship  with generic republican {| class="wikitable" |- valign=bottom ! poll source ! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| joemanchin (d) ! style="width:100px;"| genericrepublican ! undecided |- | national research inc. (r-gopac) | align=center| april 17-19, 2018 | align=center| - | align=center| - | align=center| 37% |  align=center| 41% | align=center| 20% |- | surveymonkey/axios | align=center| february 12 - march 5, 2018 | align=center| 1,591 | align=center| ± 3.5% | align=center| 43% |  align=center| 52% | align=center| 5%  with evan jenkins {| class="wikitable" |- valign=bottom ! poll source
! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| joemanchin (d) ! style="width:100px;"| evanjenkins (r) ! undecided |- | zogby analytics | align=center| september 27-30, 2017 | align=center| 320 | align=center| ± 5.5% |  align=center| 49% | align=center| 36% | align=center| 15% |- | research america inc. | align=center| august 11-20, 2017 | align=center| 400 | align=center| ± 4.9% |  align=center| 50% | align=center| 40% | align=center| 10% |- | harper polling | align=center| november 16-17, 2016 | align=center| 500 | align=center| ± 4.4% |  align=center| 51% | align=center| 39% | align=center| 10%  with alex mooney {| class="wikitable" |- valign=bottom ! poll source ! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| joemanchin (d) ! style="width:100px;"| alexmooney (r) ! undecided |- | zogby analytics | align=center| september 27-30, 2017 | align=center| 320 | align=center| ± 5.5% |  align=center| 49% | align=center| 35% | align=center| 17% |- | harper polling | align=center| november 16-17, 2016 | align=center| 500 | align=center| ± 4.4% |  align=center| 58% | align=center| 28% | align=center| 14%  with david mckinley  with generic democratic and republican  with carte goodwin {| class="wikitable" |- valign=bottom ! poll source ! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| cartegoodwin (d) ! style="width:100px;"| alexmooney (r) ! undecided |- | harper polling | align=center| november 16-17, 2016 | align=center| 500 | align=center| ± 4.4% |  align=center| 41% | align=center| 31% | align=center| 28%  {| class="wikitable" |-
valign=bottom ! poll source ! date(s)administered ! samplesize ! marginof error ! style="width:100px;"| cartegoodwin (d) ! style="width:100px;"| evanjenkins (r) ! undecided |- | harper polling | align=center| november 16-17, 2016 | align=center| 500 | align=center| ± 4.4% | align=center| 31% |  align=center| 43% | align=center| 25%  results  results by county all results are from the office of the secretary of state of west virginia.  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites don blankenship (c) for senate (write-in) mark brazaitis (i) for senate (write-in) rusty hollen (l) for senate joe manchin (d) for senate patrick morrisey (r) for senate   2018 west virginia 2018 west virginia elections
edouard bihouee (born 6 april 1936) is a french former professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960, 1961 and 1962 tour de france.  references  external links    1936 births living people french male cyclists sportspeople from nord (french department)
romine corner is an extinct town that was located in mound township in warren county, indiana, west of the town of covington.  a few buildings in the community exist, and it is still cited by the usgs.  auto parts manufacturer flex-n-gate operates a facility near the site.  geography romine corner is located at  at the corner of us route 136 and warren county road 600 west. the site is near both state road 63 to the west and interstate 74 to the south. the wabash river flows northeast of romine corner.  references  former populated places in warren county, indiana ghost towns in indiana
emmanuel leido caparas is a filipino lawyer who served as acting secretary of justice under the presidency of benigno aquino iii. prior to his appointment as acting secretary he worked as undersecretary and spokesperson of the department of justice. he also worked as acting chief of the metropolitan waterworks and sewerage system regulatory office.  early life and education  caparas finished elementary in ateneo in 1973 then high school in 1977. he obtained his economics degree from university of the philippines in 1981, and acquired his bachelor of laws from up college of law in 1985. he was admitted to the philippine bar the following year.  career  caparas started working in the philippine constitutional commission of 1986 as research attorney of then chief justice roberto concepcion from july 2 to september 15, 1986. he was then assigned as senior law clerk for associate justice florentino p. feliciano from september 16, 1986 until october 31, 1989.  in november 1989, he joined sycip salazar hernandez and gatmaitan law office where he worked as senior associate focusing on litigation, arbitration and corporate work until january 1994. he then founded cd technologies asia, inc in february 1994. while serving as chair and president of the new company he also served as it consultant at the commission on human rights, integrated bar of the philippines and office of the government corporate counsel. in february 2006, he retired from cd asia and set up symferon kmr, inc. which engaged in local and overseas activities.  he closed shop in march 2008 to rejoin the supreme court as head of its management information systems office. he also worked in philippine judicial academy as mediation trainer since 2005, court of appeals mediator since 2006 and chairman of the court technology department since 2008. he's also serving as director of the national center for legal resources of integrated bar of the philippines since august 2011. in may 2011 he resigned from the supreme court. in october of the same year he was appointed to the board of trustees of the metropolitan waterworks and sewerage system or mwss. he was also assigned to serve, in concurrent capacity, as acting chief of the mwss regulatory office.  caparas resigned as the acting chief regulator of mwss in june 2014. this is after the commission on audit issued a report stating that he violated the agreement of mwss with the concessionaires. on october 29, 2015, he was appointed as spokesman of the department of justice by then acting secretary alfredo benjamin caguioa. following the appointment of caguioa as associate justice, caparas was appointed as acting doj secretary by his former
classmate and president benigno aquino iii.  references  living people university of the philippines alumni secretaries of justice of the philippines benigno aquino iii administration cabinet members year of birth missing (living people)
jan holy (born march 11, 1995) is a slovak professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc plzen of the czech extraliga.  holy made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc plzen during the 2013-14 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1995 births living people hc plzen players czech ice hockey defencemen
a hanging tree or hangman's tree is any tree used to perform executions by hanging, especially in the united states. the term is also used colloquially in all english-speaking countries to refer to any gallows.  hanging trees in the united states by state arizona  greaterville hanging tree: oak tree outside of the ghost town greaterville, arizona, where pima county police officers lynched two mexican men for alleged cattle rustling and other crimes in 1915. located along a dirt road in the northern santa rita mountains, near the historic greaterville townsite.  vulture city hanging tree: ironwood tree located in the ghost town of vulture city, arizona, next to the remains of henry wickenburg's stone cabin built circa 1863. eighteen men were hanged from this tree in the late 19th century for "high grading" (stealing gold ore).  california  calabasas hanging tree: oak tree once located next to a small jail building in old town calabasas, california. died in the 1960s and felled by a storm in 1995. a second tree that still stands in calabasas is also rumored to have been used for hangings, though there is debate as to which tree was the real hanging tree.  hangman's tree: juniper tree in holcomb valley, california, where the legal executions of at least four condemned men were performed in the late 19th century.  hangman's tree: sycamore tree located on the irvine ranch in orange county, california. in 1857 general andres pico hanged two bandits from this tree. a historical marker now commemorates the event.  "hangmans" tree: oak tree, now dead, in the ghost town of second garrotte, california. first settled in 1849, second garrotte is spanish for "second hanging". as many as 60 people were hanged from this tree. the remaining tree stump is now preserved and is located on state highway 120.  jackson hanging tree: live oak tree that once stood at 26 main in jackson, california, before being cut down following 1862 jackson fire. ten men were lynched from this tree between 1851 and 1855. a historical marker now marks its original location.  new almaden hanging tree: oak tree located at the new almaden mine site in san jose, california.  colorado   the hangin' tree: located in montrose, colorado, and used in the 1878 hanging of george bikford, who was accused of robbery and horse theft. the tree, now dead, has been preserved and a historical
marker has been placed at its location.  pueblo hanging tree: formerly located on union avenue in pueblo, colorado. felled june 25, 1883.  georgia  savannah hanging tree: live oak located in colonial park cemetery in savannah, georgia.  kansas  hangman's tree: located in the boot hill cemetery in dodge city, kansas.  massachusetts  gallows hill: a large tree once located at proctor's ledge, near the base of gallows hill in salem, massachusetts, was probably the site of 19 executions in the 1692 salem witch trials  montana  hangman's tree: ponderosa pine tree once located in helena, montana. ten men were lynched from this tree between 1865 and 1870 by the helena vigilantes. felled by landowner, methodist minister w. m. shippen, in 1875. two pieces of the tree now reside in the collection of the montana historical society in helena.  jefferson county hanging tree: ponderosa pine tree allegedly used for hangings in the territorial period of the state's history. located near clancy, in jefferson county, montana.  new mexico  chloride hanging tree: large oak tree in the ghost town of chloride, new mexico.  new york  hangman's elm: english elm located in washington square park in manhattan, new york.  patchogue hanging tree: located along the swan river on grove street in patchogue, new york.  oklahoma   creek hanging tree: a 200-year-old bur oak used for the hanging of cattle rustlers and creek tribesmen. located on lawton avenue in tulsa, oklahoma.  oregon   dallas hanging tree: oak tree used in the 1887 lynching of oscar kelty, who murdered his wife, and as recently as 1900 for legal hangings as polk county, oregon's official gallows. located near the polk county courthouse in dallas, oregon.  lafayette hanging tree: first used in 1863 and finally in 1887, when convicted murderer richard marple was hanged in what became known as "the lafayette gypsy curse" incident. formerly located on private property in lafayette, oregon; cut down by property owners in the 1940s.  salem hanging tree: located in salem, oregon.  south carolina  charleston hanging tree: located in charleston, south carolina, and reputed to be the site where denmark vesey and 34 of his followers were hanged in 1822.  south dakota  hangman's tree: located on a ridge, formerly known as hangman's hill, in dinosaur park in rapid city, south dakota.  texas  bandera hanging tree: oak tree
, also known as the "tragedy tree." site of the july 25, 1863, hanging of seven of nine traveling german immigrants by confederate soldiers on patrol from camp verde during the civil war, for reasons unclear and still disputed.  members of the patrol decided to execute the immigrants on pretense of fleeing military service, even though they had willingly surrendered and were accompanying the patrol back to base to sort out the nature of their travel.  their remains were looted and left naked and un-buried, leading many to believe they had been murdered by the roving patrol for their belongings.  some of the soldiers with the 25-strong contingent that apprehended the immigrants rode for base when they learned over night camp that their comrades planned to change plans and hang the captives, while the remaining soldiers and commanding officer were seen the next day passing back through bandera wearing the immigrants' clothing and leading their horses.  $900 known to have been carried by one of the immigrants for the purchase of livestock was never found, along with a teenage boy who had accompanied them.  located on the hanging tree ranch south of bandera, texas.  brazoria hanging tree: located in brazoria, texas. known as the masonic oak for the formation of the first texas masonic lodge by early texans (including anson jones, future third republic of texas president) who met under its branches in 1834, it is preserved and located in a park of the same name. urban legend has it that from this same tree "two slaves were unjustly hanged" and their ghosts now haunt the area, causing horses to freeze under the tree and cars to stall. however, no details, evidence, or source material to confirm this internet claim can be found. the brazoria area, which contains low moss-laden oaks, dense marshy woods and much wildlife along the river bottom, is the subject of many such fantastic horror tales, including other hangings of "unidentified" people, screams from the woods in the night, and devil worship.  centerville hanging tree: formerly located in front of the courthouse in centerville, texas. used to hang two outlaws shortly after the end of the american civil war and later in 1915 to hang a black man accused of murdering centerville resident jim sinclair.  coldspring hanging tree: oak tree in coldspring, texas, near the historic san jacinto county jail building.  columbus hanging tree: live oak located just outside columbus, texas. long after texas enacted laws banning the act, two african-american teenagers named bennie
mitchell, jr. and ernest collins were lynched from this tree in 1935, after being forcibly taken from the sheriff's protective custody by a masked mob who surrounded his car as he transported the young men to court. the teens had confessed to raping and murdering a local 19-year old high school valedictorian named geraldine kollman, but were too young to face any severe penalty under the law. the two teens had also implicated a third older man, who had earlier been questioned and released, but he could not be found again. the tree still stands on the outskirts of columbus, texas, not far from where miss kollman had been murdered near her family's home.  goliad hanging tree: large oak tree in goliad, texas. for 24 years the goliad county court was held under this tree. many hangings were performed here, including several during the 1857 cart war between american and mexican settlers.  hallettsville hanging tree: live oak tree located in the hallettsville, texas, city park. used for the september 12, 1879, execution of a native american man known as "pocket," who was found guilty of murdering an englishman named leonard hyde in 1878.  after breaking into the family home of a former slave named frank edwards, pocket. who was drunk, threatened to kill edwards after edwards had "knocked him down."  pocket then rode his horse on an attempt to procure weapons, a pistol and shotgun, the latter from a farmer whom hyde happened to be assisting.  pocket claimed he needed the shotgun for hunting a flock of wild turkeys he had just spotted, but when hyde attempted to accompany pocket on the alleged hunt, pocket killed him with the pistol.  kyle hanging tree: oak tree in kyle, texas. according to local lore, in the 1840s a group of cowboys stumbled across this tree and found a dead man hanging from it. the cowboys cut the man down and buried him at the base of the tree. later the kyle cemetery formed up around the tree.  orange hanging tree: pin oak tree once located on main street in orange, texas. in use between the 1840s and 1880s. cut down in 1892.  page's tree: used in the 1837 execution of a murderer named page and two others. located in the clarksville, texas, pioneer cemetery.  the old hanging oak: 400-year-old live oak tree in houston, texas. said to have been used to hang eleven individuals between 1836 and 1845, and this or
an unknown tree close to nearby founder's cemetery, several murderers after the civil war.  now preserved by the city of houston civic center department.  gallery  see also  dule tree  jail tree  moonah creek hanging tree  references  hanging capital punishment in the united states history of the united states american frontier trees hanging
"here comes that rainy day feeling again" is the title of a pop song composed by tony macaulay, roger cook, and roger greenaway; it became the third u.s. top 40 hit for the fortunes in 1971.  background the song uses depressing images to describe the singer's mood anticipating a breakup with his significant other, comparable to the feeling of a rainy day or a monday, contrasted with the "memories of sunday" when the two were still together, as he hopes she changes her mind and comes back to him. the bridge is noted for its lines: "misty morning eyes/ i'm trying to disguise the way i feel/ but, i just can't hide it/ people seem to know/ the loneliness will show/ i'm thinking of my pride/ but, breaking up inside, girl." lead singer rod allen uses a vocal technique similar to that used by frankie valli on his solo records.  the song reached number 15 on the u.s. billboard hot 100 and number 8 on the cash box top 100. it was also a hit in canada (number 25) and charted minorly in australia.  chart performance  weekly charts  year-end charts  cover versions subsequently, sonny & cher covered the song on their album all i ever need is you.  an abbreviated cover of "here comes that rainy day feeling again" was included as part of the extended lp version of "stars on 45," a number one medley hit from 1981.  references  external links  lyrics of this song    1971 singles the fortunes songs songs written by tony macaulay songs written by roger greenaway songs written by roger cook (songwriter) 1971 songs capitol records singles songs about crying
phytanoyl-coa 2-hydroxylase interacting protein is a protein that in humans is encoded by the phyhip gene.  references  further reading
the old city hammam in mitrovica is representative of the ottoman architecture in kosovo.  history  the old city hammam was constructed in oriental style by sulejman pashe berisha and his nephew zejnullah beg berisha in the 18th century. a right-angled annex, 15 m long and 10 m wide was added at the end of the 19th century. it is the only hammam in kosovo built with familiar budget and not by the government. the roof of the building has nine domes, one big central dome and eight small domes, covered in lead and zinc. at that time, it was an essential part of the city and was used as a turkish bath. the built process took two years. its walls are made of large stones, and the width of the walls is . the first floor is paved with marble and in the center there is a water fountain. the second floor was used to get undressed before going into the hammam. the main part of the hammam has four rooms. a 40-ton boiler was used to supply the rooms with water. the hammam and the annex cover more than 1200 square meters. this space was used by men and women at different times. men used the bath in the morning from 7 to 10 am and from 11 am to 5 pm it was used by women. fridays and sundays were reserved for men. the hammam was also used for weddings and other celebrations.  the hammam was functional until may 1959. the monument represents special oriental architecture value and has been protected since 1957. from 1960 to 2009 the building was used as a regional museum with four sectors: archaeology, ethnology, geology and history. in 2009, the museum moved to an ex-army building. from november 2009, the building was returned to the heir of the ex owner and now a part of it operates as a restaurant.  see also   mitrovica, kosovo  references  monuments and memorials in kosovo district of mitrovica ottoman architecture in kosovo cultural heritage of kosovo cultural heritage monuments in mitrovica, kosovo
the 1917-18 sk rapid wien season was the 20th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  references  1917-18 rapid wien season rapid
harmonquest is an american adult animated web series created by dan harmon and spencer crittenden. the show is part animated, part live action. harmon and comedians erin mcgathy and jeff davis, along with game master crittenden, play a fantasy roleplaying campaign in front of a live audience, while each episode features a special guest player.  it premiered on the subscription streaming service seeso in july 2016. due to uncertainty around seeso's future, the show was transferred to vrv select in june 2017, with its second season airing a few months later. in october 2018, vrv renewed harmonquest for a third season. the third season was released on august 18, 2019.  cast and characters  regulars  dan harmon as fondue zoobag, a half-orc ranger.  he also plays limerick o'shift, beor's resurrected brother, starting with season 3 episode 1  erin mcgathy as beor o'shift, a half-elf barbarian warrior, she resembles the comic book character red sonja  jeff davis as boneweevil, a goblin rogue  spencer crittenden as the game master, charles the dragon and various other characters  guests  season 1  paul f. tompkins as teflonto, earthscar's village champion and captain of the town's militia. also a friend, mentor, and role model to fondue and boneweevil. ("the quest begins")  chelsea peretti as deepak chopra, a dwarven monk and the lone survivor of an attack by one of the arcane horrors unleashed by the demon seal. ("the stonesaw mines")  steve agee as tech powers, a hellspawn bard. ("welcome to freshport")  ron funches as captain rib sanchez, a famous sea captain and smuggler. ("across the durnam sea")  aubrey plaza as hawaiian coffee, a gnome alchemist and prisoner of the manoa prison hole. ("manoa prison hole")  john hodgman as hohn jodgman, a travelling merchant and sorcerer. ("entering the sandman desert")  thomas middleditch as dildo bogpelt, a hobbit-like native of the doorest of fores. ("the doorest of fores")  kumail nanjiani as eddie lizzard, a kobold janitor of the dragon's temple. ("the dragon's temple")  river butcher as james dean, the enchanted spirit of a spectral paladin within a sword found by fondue in the stonesaw mines. ("
the secret hideout")  matt gourley as chadge, fondue's absent father. ("earthscar village")   nathan fillion as teddar spice, the new elf chief of earthscar village. ("earthscar village")  season 2  gillian jacobs as chip, a goblin rogue that temporarily replaced boneweevil during the year he was trapped in the demon realm. ("the quest continues")  rory scovel as krandrelarius, a human witch whose name is as unpredictable as his personality, a previous acquaintance of boneweevil that lives in a swamp. ("demon realm devilry")  aparna nancherla as beauflecks devrye, a demon hunter of bonebreak village. ("bonebreak village")  paul scheer as sensodyne, the tooth beast. a creature covered in glistening enamel skin-like armor. ("into the abyss")  patton oswalt as sandpole, a magical sand nomad. ("back to sandman desert")  janet varney as sedona, a dwarf sorceress and proprietor of the barely cursed bazaar of commerce. ("the barely cursed bazaar of commerce")  jason mantzoukas as gribble grabble, (aka grabble gribble,) a young, bright, but shifty orphan on the streets of forlona. ("the city of forlona")  elizabeth olsen as stirrup, a half-elf arsonist. ("the keystone obelisk")  rob corddry as sandy, a barbarian of the skulltree clan and old flame of beor's. ("the castle of etylai")  kumail nanjiani returns as eddie lizzard. ("the sorcerer of the storm")  season 3   matt gourley returns as chadge.  having found religion, wielding fondue's old blade that has his spirit trapped inside of it. ("goblopolis lost")  kate micucci as hermie, a druid from a nearby transhelm. ("the shattered myriad")  tawny newsome as donna, a skull tree clan barbarian from the same village as beor and lymerick. ("ivory quay")  reggie watts as graildokt, quinzelflip and unnamed - three goblin allies from goblopolis. ("goblopolis found")  joel kim booster as toriamos the dwarven explorer and dungeon expert. ("terra scissus")  jared logan as dave pendergast, a paladin officer. ("shatternine village")  d'arcy carden as hydronai ses
apoia, an adventurous bard. ("the bloody teeth")  jessica mckenna as flairence sparrow, an inter-dimensional lawyer. ("ad quod danmum")  carl tart as tampa bay the buccaneer, a sailor in the expanse of nothingness. ("the starshade expanse")  tom kenny as legnahcra the angel from virtuous harmony. ("the virtuous harmony")  episodes  series overview  all ten episodes of the first season were released on july 14, 2016, on seeso. on october 19, 2016, harmonquest was renewed for a second season, but due to uncertainty around seeso's future, rights to harmonquest were sold to otter media's vrv streaming service in june 2017. the second season premiered on vrv select on september 15 and concluded on november 17, 2017. in october 2018, it was announced that vrv has renewed the show for a third season, which debuted on august 18, 2019.  season 1 (2016)  season 2 (2017)  season 3 (2019)  production  development  prior to the creation of harmonquest, harmon had included a dungeons & dragons-style segment, hosted by crittenden, at the end of the weekly podcast harmontown. when harmon pitched the idea of harmonquest, which was originally conceived as a low-budget online show, nbc universal executive vice-president of digital enterprises evan shapiro became interested in the idea. when seeso was developed as an nbc-owned comedy channel, an order for ten episodes of harmonquest was confirmed. the show is produced by universal cable productions and starburns industries.  filming and animation  the show is recorded in front of a live audience at victory studios in glendale, california, with parts of the stories being animated later. filming typically takes place over an hour, which is then edited down to the 25-minute runtime. harmon has cited the ricky gervais show as an influence, as it also features a mix of live and animated footage.  reception the series has been likened to critical role, a web series streaming on twitch and later uploaded to the geek & sundry youtube channel since 2015. unlike critical role episodes which are long-form, full-play d&d podcasts often exceeding 4hrs, harmonquest has been praised for its accessibility towards casual and beginner audiences. javon phillips of the la times said, "the show makes its ventures a lot less time-consuming and ups the watchability quotient by throwing in animated segments in
digestible half-hour episodes. gamemaster spencer crittenden approaches the show as just that - a show. it's not just players playing the game and showing off their multi-sided dice-rolling skills."  see also  critical role  the adventure zone  references  external links      2016 web series debuts 2019 web series endings actual play web series american adult animated comedy television series american adult animated web series american comedy web series american television series with live action and animation english-language television shows seeso original programming television series by universal content productions television series created by dan harmon
oleg genrikhovich savelyev (russian: олег генрихович савельев, born 27 october 1965) is a russian politician.  he served as minister for crimean affairs (31 march 2014 - 15 june 2015) and as deputy minister of economic development (2008-2014) of the government of the russian federation.  biography  oleg savelyev was born 27 october 1965 in leningrad.  in 1988 he graduated from the radiophysics faculty of the leningrad polytechnic institute.  in 1995 he worked as the head of the centre for electoral technologies in the pre-election headquarters of the "our home - russia" party during the elections to the state duma.  in 1996, during the presidential election campaign, he served as the head pr strategist in the campaign.  in 1998, he was the manager of alexander lebedya's campaign in the elections for governor of krasnoyarsk krai.  from 31 march 2014 until 15 june 2015, he was the minister for crimean affairs.  in june 2014, he was placed on a us sanctions list.  references   living people people from saint petersburg 1965 births government ministers of russia our home - russia politicians 20th-century russian politicians peter the great st. petersburg polytechnic university alumni russian individuals subject to the u.s. department of the treasury sanctions
the office of civil defense (ocd; filipino: tanggapan ng tanggulang sibil (tts)) is an organization within the philippines' department of national defense (dnd) and serves as the implementing arm of the national disaster risk reduction and management council (ndrrmc). as such, it has the primary mission of administering a comprehensive national civil defense and disaster risk reduction and management program by providing leadership in the continuous development of strategic and systematic approaches as well as measures to reduce the vulnerabilities and risks to hazards and manage the consequences of disasters.  references  government agencies of the philippines
the fv flora alberta was a canadian auxiliary fishing schooner based out of  lunenburg, nova scotia. she was launched in 1941 by smith and rhuland, the company's 187th vessel. the managing owner of the vessel was fishing company adams & knickle.  collision and sinking on april 17, 1943, flora alberta, skippered by captain guy tanner, left lunenburg and headed to the western bank fishing grounds. flora alberta arrived in the fishing grounds on april 18 and fished for three days. on april 20, 1943, british steamer fanad head left halifax, nova scotia alongside a convoy of eight ships heading to the united kingdom. fanad head had a length of 420 feet and a net registered tonnage of 3002 tons.  on april 21, 1943 at approximately 5:20 a.m. (adt), the flora alberta was hit on the starboard side by the fanad head in dense fog. the incident occurred approximately 140 kilometers southeast of halifax. the flora alberta was sliced in two by the collision and sank within a few minutes. most of the flora alberta crew were sleeping at the time of the collision and did not have time to escape the sinking ship. twenty-one of the twenty-eight crew members aboard the flora alberta died. the fanad head crew put three lifeboats in the ocean immediately after the collision and rescued the surviving crew members.  the deaths of 21 crew members left 46 fatherless children. the local mla, john james kinley interceded on behalf of the widows and obtained pensions for the families, based on the sinking being a "wartime incident".  adams & knickle immediately decided to build a replacement vessel. in  september 1943, the keel of the new vessel was laid and on may 23, 1944 the frances geraldine was launched into lunenburg harbour.  history television's documentary series, disasters of the century, aired an episode on the incident.  casualties most of the 21 crew members killed were from lunenburg county, however four were originally from newfoundland.  lawsuit the owners of the flora alberta claimed $100,000 in damages from the fanad head. justice carroll, district judge in admiralty for the nova scotia admiralty district of the exchequer court of canada, found that the fanad head was at fault and gave judgment for the owners of the flora alberta. the case went to the supreme court of canada, which apportioned one third liability to the flora alberta and two thirds liability to the fanad head.  references  maritime history of canada fishing vessels
shipwrecks of the nova scotia coast shipwrecks in the atlantic ocean maritime incidents in april 1943 1941 ships
oedema glottidis is defined as the abnormal accumulation of fluid in tissues involving the supraglottic and subglottic region where laryngeal mucosa is loose. it is also known as laryngeal oedema.  references  larynx disorders
logan cunningham may refer to:  logan cunningham (coach) (1887-1964), american football coach logan cunningham (athlete) (born 1991), american pole vaulter logan cunningham (voice actor), award winning voice actor, known for his role in hades (video game)
chauncey-stadium avenues historic district, also known as the west lafayette historic district, is a national historic district located at west lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 644 contributing buildings in a predominantly residential section of lafayette.  it developed between about 1890 and 1952 and includes representative examples of queen anne, shingle style, colonial revival, tudor revival, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002.  see also happy hollow heights historic district hills and dales historic district  references  neighborhoods in west lafayette, indiana historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana tudor revival architecture in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana historic districts in west lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
torsten karl adolf magnusson (24 december 1907 - 24 november 1987) was a swedish physicist and defense research scientists. magnusson was director-general of the swedish national defence research institute (foa) from 1968 to 1974 and was one of the prominent figures of the swedish nuclear weapons program.  career magnusson was born in vreta kloster parish, ostergotland county, sweden, the son of station master carl magnusson and his wife signe (nee samuelsson). he received a bachelor of arts degree (fil.kand.) from uppsala university in 1929, master of philosophy (fil.mag.) in 1932, licentiate of philosophy (fil.lic.) in 1936 and doctor of philosophy (fil.dr.) in 1938 with a dissertation on x-ray spectroscopy. magnusson was first assistant from 1937 to 1940 and associate professor (laborator) from 1940 to 1944 at the royal swedish academy of sciences's research institute of physics. he was administrative director from 1941 to 1944 and prefect from 1944 to 1945 at the military physics institute. the institute became the national defence research institute (foa) in 1945 with magnusson as head of the department (foa 2; general physics 1945-58 and foa 4; nuclear physics and nuclear chemistry 1958-68) from 1945 to 1968. in 1945, magnusson was given the task by the board of foa to investigate what was known about the nuclear device that was recently dropped on hiroshima and nagasaki. it was the start of the swedish nuclear research.  magnusson became director-general of foa in 1968, a position he held until 1974. magnusson was a member of the swedish national committee for physics (svenska nationalkommitten for fysik) from 1946 to 1970 and a member of the atom committee (atomkommitten) from 1952. he was also a member of the swedish atomic research council (statens rad for atomforskning) from 1952 to 1965 and a delegate in atomic energy issues from 1956 to 1974 as well as in the data processing delegation (databehandlingsdelegationen) from 1966. he was a board member of the defence materiel administration from 1968 to 1974, ab atomenergi from 1969 to 1975 and the national swedish nuclear power inspection board (statens karnkraftinspektion) from 1974 to 1978. magnusson became a member of the royal swedish academy of war sciences in 1949 and the royal swedish academy of engineering sciences in 1957 and honorary member of the royal swedish society of naval
sciences in 1971.  personal life in 1933, magnusson married wera ericsson (1908-2003), the daughter of office clerk erik ericsson and emilia johansson. he was the father of bo (born 1938), gunnel (born 1940), goran (born 1942) and hans (born 1944). magnusson died on 24 november 1987 and was buried at sundbyberg cemetery in sundbyberg municipality.  awards and decorations commander of the order of the polar star  bibliography  references  1907 births 1987 deaths swedish civil servants swedish physicists people from linkoping municipality members of the royal swedish academy of war sciences members of the royal swedish academy of engineering sciences members of the royal swedish society of naval sciences commanders of the order of the polar star
dr. taleh ziyadov is director-general of baku international sea trade port in azerbaijan. he holds a ph.d. degree from the cambridge university (uk) and master's degree from the school of foreign service at georgetown university (washington, dc). he specializes in transport, logistics and energy issues in the caspian region. since 2008, he has advised a number of private and public companies as well as international organizations on the matter of transport and logistics in azerbaijan and the greater central asian region. he is the author of the book azerbaijan as a regional hub in central eurasia (baku: ada, 2012), which provides a strategic analysis of the euro-asian trade and transportation networks through central eurasia, outlining the vision for developing azerbaijan into a "regional hub" by 2030. previously, he served as deputy executive director of the us-azerbaijan chamber of commerce (usacc) in washington, dc and as assistant dean and senior research fellow at ada university in baku.  sources     living people alumni of the university of cambridge walsh school of foreign service alumni year of birth missing (living people)
kgdl is a radio station on 92.1 fm licensed to trent, texas, and serving the abilene metropolitan area. it airs a christian format, and is an owned and operated affiliate of csn international.  history the construction permit for kgdl owned by km communications and was sold to jose antonio aguilar before coming to air. it was first licensed in april 2012. the station aired a regional mexican format, with programming from mvs radio's la mejor network. it was silent for extended periods during jose antonio aguilar's ownership. effective november 3, 2020, the station was sold to csn international for $85,000, and it began airing a christian format. csn international also purchased the station's tower site from spaces for towers llc for $40,000 in a separate deal.  references  external links  radio stations established in 2012 gdl 2012 establishments in texas gdl
neognathodus is an extinct genus of conodonts.  use in stratigraphy  the bashkirian, the oldest age of the pennsylvanian (also known as upper carboniferous), contains six biozones based on conodont index fossils, two of which contain neognathodus species:  the zone of neognathodus atokaensis  the zone of neognathodus askynensis  the base of the moscovian, the second stage in the pennsylvanian, can biostratigraphically be divided into five conodont biozones, three of which contain neognathodus species:  the zone of neognathodus roundyi and streptognathodus cancellosus  the zone of neognathodus medexultimus and streptognathodus concinnus  the zone of neognathodus uralicus  references     taxonomy, phylogeny, and biostratigraphy of neognathodus in appalachian pennsylvanian rocks. glen k. merrill, journal of paleontology, vol. 46, no. 6 (nov., 1972), pages 817-829 (stable url)  apparatus of the pennsylvanian conodont genus neognathodus. glen k merrill and peter h von bitter, royal ontario museum, 1977, pages 11-13  neognathodus and the species concept in conodont paleontology. glen k merrill, bollettino della societa paleontologica italiana, january 1998, volume 37, issue 2, pages 465-473  external links       conodont genera pennsylvanian conodonts bashkirian life moscovian life pennsylvanian first appearances pennsylvanian extinctions fossil taxa described in 1968
julien watrin (born 27 june 1992) is a belgian sprinter specialising in the 400 metres. he has won several medals with the belgian 4 × 400 metres relay.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 200 metres - 20.80 (−0.4 m/s, brussels 2013) 400 metres - 45.64 (brussels 2014) indoor 400 metres - 47.06 (luxembourg 2015)  see also  belgian men's 4 × 400 metres relay team  references  external links  1992 births living people belgian male sprinters people from virton european championships (multi-sport event) gold medalists european athletics championships medalists athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of belgium world athletics championships athletes for belgium world athletics championships medalists belgian athletics championships winners european athletics indoor championships winners
kyrgyzstan has few cities but a large number of villages spread across the country's 7 regions and many districts. below is a list of villages of kyrtgyzstan as well as the regions in which they are found.  villages  kyrgyzstan villages
belinda bencic was the defending champion, but withdrew with a left wrist injury before the tournament began.  simona halep won the title, defeating madison keys in the final, 7-6(7-2), 6-3.  seeds the top eight seeds received a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  section 1  section 2  bottom half  section 3  section 4  qualifying  seeds  qualifiers  lucky losers  qualifying draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  seventh qualifier  eighth qualifier  ninth qualifier  tenth qualifier  eleventh qualifier  twelfth qualifier  references main draw qualifying draw  rogers cup - women's singles rogers cup women's singles rogers
the master is an album by saxophonist stan getz which was recorded in 1975 but not released on the columbia label until 1982.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow stated "more straightahead than getz's other columbia albums of the period, this set finds him really pushing himself".  track listing  "summer night" (al dubin, harry warren) - 9:59  "raven's wood" (ralph towner) - 10:54  "lover man (oh, where can you be?)" (jimmy davis, ram ramirez, james sherman) - 9:25  "invitation" (bronisław kaper, paul francis webster) - 10:34  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone albert dailey - piano clint houston - bass billy hart - drums  references   1982 albums stan getz albums columbia records albums
sunnies studios is a philippine-based lifestyle brand that began as a product line of sunglasses. founded in 2013, sunnies studios has since expanded to offering prescription eyeglasses, and has ventured into the makeup industry, with sunnies face, and the food industry, with sunnies cafe. they maintain 127 stores in the philippines and vietnam, as well as an online store that extends its reach to hong kong, thailand, vietnam, malaysia, singapore, and indonesia.  history in 2011, entrepreneurial couple eric dee and bea soriano-dee started charlie, a retail brand that sold shoes, bags, and clothes. by 2013, model and host georgina wilson joined the team as a marketing director along with wilson's cousin, fashion designer martine cajucom, as the creative director. together, they rebranded the company and started selling sunglasses under the line, sunnies by charlie. by february 2014, the directors decided to change the company name to sunnies studios and dropped charlie due to the increasing popularity of the sunglasses line. they relocated and upgraded their headquarters, which is currently located in libis, quezon city, philippines.  in 2016, sunnies studios launched a prescription eyewear arm under the name sunnies specs optical. by june, the brand became the third-most followed retail brand on instagram in the philippines, having amassed around 240,000 followers.  in march 2019, sunnies studios launched its first multi-brand concept store in sm city cebu, containing sunnies studios, sunnies specs optical, sunnies face, and cup point within one store.  sunglasses and prescription eyewear  the brand currently has over 200 styles with all sunnies products being designed in-house. they are currently sold in over 120 retail locations around the philippines. in september 2018, the team opened its second international location for sunnies studios in vietnam (sunnies has silently been available in guam for some time).  according to euromonitor, sunnies studios was ranked second in the philippine market last 2015 for sunglasses behind category leader luxottica group spa. sunnies studios had an 8% value share in that sector. it was also ranked 10th in eyewear with a 1% value share in 2015.  in march 2017, sunnies studios launched the actress, liza soberano as the brand's first official endorser for sunnies. later on in 2018, sunnies studios revealed local celebrity, james reid as their newest celebrity endorser.  brand extensions
cup point cup point was first launched as part of the sunnies studios concept store in cebu. cup point was created by sunnies specs optical to support customers' wait time while their prescription eyewear is being processed.  sunnies face sunnies face is a cruelty-free beauty line, launched in august 2018. the brand was launched with fluffmatte, a range of modern matte lipsticks.they have since expanded their line to include airblush (soft-focus cheek tint), lip dip (whipped matte lip cream), play paint (vegan quick-dry nail polish), the perfector (skin-perfecting duo), lip treat (sheer lip glow), face glass (liquid luminizer), lifebrow micromarker (liquid brow precision pencil), eyecrayon (multi-purpose eyeshadow stick), and dream cream (gel cream moisturizer).   the brand has six online markets and is present in five countries with 17 physical stores.  sunnies cafe  in 2016, sunnies studios ventured into the food industry with the opening of sunnies cafe. sunnies cafe opened its first store in bonifacio global city and its second store in sm megamall. a third restaurant opened at alabang town center by january 2017. the menu consists of comfort food with a modern twist and is constantly being updated with new dishes.  sunnies world in september 2019, sunnies studios opened their first flagship store, sunnies world. the  space is their largest store, located at sm mega fashion hall.  controversies following the launch of fluffmate in 2018, netizens noted similarities in aesthetic, branding, and marketing to that of cosmetics company glossier, founded by american blogger emily weiss. netizens described sunnies face as a "copycat" of glossier. in particular, sunnies' minimalist packaging style and their marketing strategy of releasing the supply of their products at limited intervals were alleged to have been replicated from glossier. creative director martine cajucom responded to the issue in a bustle interview, acknowledging the similarities and calling glossier to be one of their inspirations for the brand in "changing the skincare conversation".    in november 2020, a hashtag calling for a boycott of the sunnies brand trended on philippine social media after a facebook post that circulated among filipino netizens disclosed allegations of former sunnies studios employees not receiving their separation pay. at least two former employees of a branch in cauayan, isabela, that closed down in march
due to the covid-19 pandemic, alleged that they had not received any response from the company since the termination of their employment. however, the publisher of the viral facebook post later updated it to reveal that the management of sunnies studios had settled the issue with the employees.  references  eyewear brands of the philippines retail companies of the philippines companies based in quezon city eyewear companies of the philippines cosmetics companies of the philippines
professor patrick joseph nolan (11 august 1894 - 28 december 1984) was an irish physicist. like his older brother, physicist john james nolan, he specialised in atmospheric physics. in 1971, he was awarded the boyle medal by the royal dublin society.  he was born in omagh, county tyrone, and educated at university college dublin.  he earned a bsc in 1914, coming first in his class, and an msc followed in 1915.  a national university of ireland travelling studentship in experimental physics (awarded in 1917) facilitated his spending some time doing research at the cavendish laboratory in cambridge-at that time led by ernest rutherford. in 1922, he married una hurley from near bantry, county cork, a younger sister of his brother john's wife.  the couple had no children.  he was an uncle of abstract painter evin nolan.  from 1921 to 1928 he held the post of lecturer on experimental physics at st patrick's college in maynooth.  he spent the rest of his career at ucd, having been awarded his phd there in 1922. in the 1930s and 1940s, he worked alongside his brother john, and numerous post graduate students, studying ionization, and atmospheric electrical parameters. he was appointed professor of geophysics in 1954, and retired in 1964. his publications included papers on the charge equilibrium of nuclei as it relates to the boltzmann law, the combination of ions and nuclei, and the determination of the recombination coefficient of small ions.   patrick j. nolan is best remembered for the 1940s development of the photoelectric nucleus counter with l. w. pollak. this counter was long the standard instrument for the measurement of cloud condensation nuclei.  nolan served on the governing board of the school of cosmic physics at the dublin institute for advanced studies from 1947-1981.  references  sources  o'connor, thomas c. (2001). the evolution of condensation nucleus counters,   department of physics, national university of ireland, galway  the royal dublin society: patrick j. nolan  mccartney, mark and whitaker, andrew (2003). physicists of ireland: passion and precision bristol and philadelphia : institute of physics,   1894 births 1984 deaths people from omagh irish physicists 20th-century mathematicians alumni of university college dublin
fenyvesi is a hungarian surname that may refer to adam fenyvesi (born 1996), hungarian football player csaba fenyvesi (1943-2015), hungarian fencer laszlo fenyvesi (1908-1993), hungarian football player and manager  mate fenyvesi (born 1933), hungarian football player  hungarian-language surnames
temples  ernakulam shiva temple  ernakulathapan temple (shiva), hanuman temple, muruga temple.  located near ernakulam south railway station (2 km )  valanjambalam devi temple (0.5 km from ernakulam south railway station), ravipuram srikrishna swamy temple (1 km from ernakulam south railway station) pavakkulam mahadeva temple (0.5 km from ernakulam north railway station) paramara devi temple (opposite town hall, and near ernakulam town railway station) sree poornathrayeesa temple, thrippunithura thottathingal dhramasastha temple (srm road/sastha temple road, near platform no.2 of ernakulam town railway station) kaattungal devi temple (start point of pachalam railway over bridge, pachalam) shanmughapuram temple (shanmugha puram road, pachalam) perandoor bhagavathy temple (perandoor junction) puthukulangara devi temple (near patanjali yoga vidyapeetham, perandoor road, elamakkara) mulakkal devi temple (thannikkal, swamipadi, perandoor road, elamakkara) sree bala bhadra devi temple (near perandoor junction, elamakkara) punnakkal bhagavathy temple (punnakkal junction, edappally raghavan pillai road, elamakkara) puthukkalavattom sree swayambhu mahadeva temple (puthukklavattom road, elamakkara) chittoor sri krishna temple (7 km from north railway station) td temple cochin (15 km from south railway station) edappally krishna temple (opposite changampuzha park, edappally)  maramkulangara krishna temple (vennela-thrippunithura road) keraleswaram temple, mulavukadu  mosques  kombara juma masjid, kombara jn., ernakulam north, ernakulam  north town masjid, opp. specialists hospital., ernakulam north, ernakulam  thevara juma masjid, thevara., ernakulam  thammanam pallipady ponnurunni juma masjid, thammanam, ernakulam  salafi masjid, vyttila jn., ernakulam  cutchi hanafi juma masjid, lobo jn., mattanchery, ernakulam  new mosque, new road, mattanchery, ernakulam  mahlara juma masjid, new road jn., mattanchery, ernakulam  ilayakovilakam juma masjid, star jn., mattanchery, ernakulam  hud
ha masjid, new road, mattanchery, ernakulam  amaravathy juma masjid, amaravathy., ernakulam  pattalam juma masjid, pattalam, fort kochi, ernakulam  pettah juma masjid, main road., pettah jn., tripunithura, ernakulam  juma masjid, tripunithura, market jn., tripunithura, ernakulam  madavana juma masjid, madavana, panangad road, ernakulam  kanjiramattom juma masjid, kanjiramattom., ernakulam  churches  assemblies of god in india, kakkanad  basilica of our lady of snows, pallippuram  csi immanuel church, ernakulam  eloor st gregorios malankara orthodox church  india pentecostal church of god, fortkochi  kalamassery st george malankara orthodox church  karingachira  syrian orthodox cathedral   little flower church, elamkulam  malankara syriac orthodox theological seminary mulanthuruthy, ernamkulam   mar yohannan nepumsianose syro-malabar catholic church, konthuruthy, which houses the tomb of mar varghese payyappilly palakkappilly  marthoman cathedral, mulanthuruthy  nadamel marth mariam syrian orthodox church  padamukal st johns baptist malankara orthodox church, kakkanad  palarivattom st george  malankara orthodox church  patriarch ignatius zaka i iwas syrian orthodox centre, puthencruz  salem mar thoma church, ernakulam  st. antony's shrine, kaloor  st. francis assisi cathecdral, ernakulam  st george hebron  syrian orthodox church  st. george syro-malabar catholic forane church, edappally  st gregorios malankara orthodox church, elamkulam   st.joseph's church, vazhakala  st. jude church, karanakodam  st. marys soonoro patriarchal cathedral elamkulam, kochi  st. mary's soonoro syrian orthodox cathedral, elamkulam  st. mary's syrian orthodox cathedral, morakkala (since ad 905)  st. mary's syro-malabar catholic cathedral basilica, ernakulam  st. mary's orthodox cathedral, marine drive,ernakulam  st.michael's church, chembumukku  st.patrick's church, vytilla  st.raphael's church, thykoodam  st. thomas evangelical church of india  st. thomas marthoma church kalamassery  thamarachal valiyapally  the pentecostal mission, edappally  thevara st thomas
malankara orthodox church  thripunithura st gregorios malankara orthodox chapel  vallarpadam church basilica of our lady of ransom, vallarpadam-ernakulam  vettikal dayara (first dayara in malankara est. ad 1100) under malankara orthodox church  vytila st gregorios malankara orthodox church  references  religion in ernakulam district
le building is a 2005 french animated short film directed by a team of final year students at gobelins, l'ecole de l'image. the story depicts a series of slapstick accidents that cause destruction to a three-story apartment complex. le buildings team of five directors is composed of pierre perifel and olivier staphylas, both of whom went on to become annie award-recognized animators at dreamworks, xavier ramonede and annie award-nominated marco nguyen, who have continued their careers with animation credits on various high-profile french productions, and remi zaarour, who has since become a comic book artist, published under the pseudonym pozla.  produced as a group thesis film, le building was first shown as an opener at the annecy international animation film festival. it has since gone on to screen at numerous other festivals internationally. shortly after the film's may 2005 premiere, it was released online, and in early 2006, it secured a tv distribution deal in france. the film has been included in limited edition dvd releases associated with various film festivals. it has also received multiple releases through dvd magazines and video podcasts.  le building has garnered positive attention from both critics and animation professionals. most comments have praised the film's humor, as well as its blending of 2d and 3d animation. le building has been honored with several awards, including best undergraduate animation at the ottawa international animation festival, and has often been cited as one of gobelins' best student works.  plot inside a crooked, brick apartment complex, a burly man, with a russian military uniform hanging on his wall, showers, while belting out a song in his native tongue. a short, elderly woman in the apartment next door finds this to be a nuisance. she rouses from her chair and knocks on the wall between their two rooms. her knocking causes a porcelain dolphin figurine to fall to the ground and shatter. this startles her cat, who then jumps from their third story window sill. the cat lands on a clothes rack underneath and bounces onto the helmet of an oncoming motorcyclist.  gripping onto the helmet for its life, the cat causes the motorcyclist - enroute on a pizza delivery - to swerve uncontrollably in the road. a bus barely misses hitting them - and then collides into a nearby parking meter. the motorcyclist, unable to stop, inadvertently drives into the apartment complex. crashing up the stairs, his vehicle comes to a sudden halt
on the second floor, sending a small pizza through the mail slot of a closed door. a naked, obese woman steps out of her bathtub and slips on the pizza. she grabs hold of a shelf above her, but the shelf breaks. a radio that had been perched on the shelf is catapulted through an open window and hits a crane operator in the face.  upon collision, the crane operator passes out. crumpling forward onto the crane's control panel, the operator unconsciously pushes two levers forward - as a result, the crane rotates. a giant magnet suspended by a wire from the crane attaches itself to the parked bus. as the bus driver stands outside in the road with his back turned, his vehicle is carried away. the russian man, still singing, notices the bus hurtling towards his window. he lets out a startled scream. the old woman, still pounding against the wall, hears a loud crash. she mutters irritably, and with a "hmph", walks back to her chair. outside, the bus continues circling through the air, the screaming russian man plastered against its window. the building has almost entirely been destroyed. a single beam holds up the old woman's room - she presumably remains oblivious to the catastrophe outside.  production le building was directed as a student project at gobelins, l'ecole de l'image. during their final year, members of the animation program at this prestigious parisian university form six groups in which to create their thesis films. as an annual tradition, the nearby annecy international animation film festival features the completed works of these students as opening short films - one on each day of the festival. le building was created for the 2005 festival by marco nguyen, pierre perifel, xavier ramonede, olivier staphylas, and remi zaarour. it was in 2005 that computer animation first became a required course of study at gobelins, and le building holds the distinction of being among the first openers at annecy to use this technique.  wanting their film to suit its placement as a festival opener, the team of students behind le building felt compelled to take it in a humorous and "punchy" direction. settling on a storyline that all five of them could agree on was described as the most difficult aspect of production. ultimately, the filmmakers determined to focus on a "simple idea" that would spawn a "crazy chain reaction". after six weeks of collaborating, they had finalized their script and storyboard. including this
early brainstorming process, le building'''s production schedule lasted four-and-a-half months, spanning december 2004 through april 2005. [[file:le building making of.png|thumbnail|several commentators argued that le buildings use of cgi - such as the pizza boy character, seen here in a behind the scenes making of video - is seamlessly blended with the film's traditionally animated elements.]]  all five directors contributed to the initial design work and then shared out subsequent responsibilities. most of the film was traditionally animated, and most of the work in this medium was done by perifel, ramonede, and zaarour. a previous collaboration between these three classmates had been exhibited at annecy one year earlier, in the form of a thirty-second bumper, called festival qualite. staphylas, who had transferred directly into the university's final year, supervised the computer animation. he had previously graduated from supinfocom university, in valenciennes, and had also worked on the music video for madonna's "love profusion". using maya software, staphylas strived to achieve a look that would match the traditionally animated portions of the film. nguyen distributed his efforts between both disciplines, assisting staphylas with some of the cg work, while also at times playing the role of traditional animator.  the final character designs were developed by zaarour. he went on to review all of the cg work, so as to ensure that his style was being properly translated between mediums. traditionally animated backgrounds were sketched and painted by perifel, with assistance from zaarour, and a computer-animated background was created by nguyen.  most of the traditional animation was colored by ramonede, who also held primary responsibility for the compositing.  the old woman and the russian singer are both traditionally animated. the first scene with the old woman was animated by ramonede, while the final scene with the character was animated by perifel. the russian singer was animated by nguyen, in the scene when the character is approached by an oncoming bus. the bus itself is computer-animated, as are the demolition crane (by nguyen) and the pizza boy (by staphylas). the cat was animated by zaarour, using flash animation. in order to match the frame rate of staphylas' cg work in this scene, zaarour animated the cat at 25 frames per second.  in addition to maya 6 and macromedia flash mx2004
, other programs used in the film's production were adobe after effects 6.5, adobe photoshop cs, pro tools, mental ray (for maya), and crater software ctp. the sound design was done by olivier crouet, using logic audio. crouet also composed the music. the sole vocal performance in the film was provided by manu nabajoth.  release the film's world premiere, as an opener at the annecy international animation film festival, occurred on may 10, 2005. by late june, le building had been made available to view online, and in october it won the audience award at the 2004-2005 webcuts internet film festival. webcuts subsequently released the film on dvd, along with other selections from that festival, as part of a limited edition compilation. only 250 copies of this release were ever made.  earlier that year, on september 17, the film had an american screening in wilmington, north carolina's non-competitive port city animation festival. on december 8, the filmmakers were featured speakers at the profile intermedia design festival in bremen, germany. additional screenings that year took place in sao paulo, brazil's anima mundi festival and vilnius, lithuania's tindirindis festival. in the final months of 2005, the film was distributed through issues of the dvd magazines stash (#15) and xfuns (#21), as well as through channel frederator's fifth video podcast. channel frederator included a short bumper after the film, which read, "that naked lady requested you call her...please. don't play games with her heart." this brief quip was accompanied by the company's own phone number.  according to the official website for le building, french tv channel canal+ purchased rights to the film in january 2006. the film continued to screen at various international festivals throughout that year as well, including future film festival in bologna, italy, animex in middlesbrough, england, animafest zagreb in croatia, siggraph, held that year in boston, massachusetts, russia's multi-city krok international animated films festival, held on the cruise ship marshall zhukov, and encounters short film and animation festival in bristol, england. at that year's annecy festival, an organization called cafe creed sold a limited edition dvd compilation of short films called the increedible choco-show, which included le building among its selections. by the time le building won in the undergraduate category at the ottawa international animation festival in september, eric homan of frederator studios commented in response
, "i feel everyone and his mom has seen this short by now." le building went on to win best foreign film at frederator's own awards ceremony in early 2007 and was subsequently re-released by the studio in an awards-edition of its video podcast (episode 2). the film was also re-released by stash - that september, issue #37 of the dvd magazine contained a special bonus disc commemorating staff favorites from the early issues of its publication. in 2007, the film screened at  in stuttgart, germany.  critical reception shortly after le building's premiere at annecy, amid amidi ran a glowing profile of the film on cartoon brew. amidi used the film as an argument against the perceived decline of 2d animation, claiming that the student work of gobelins as a whole is "probably the slickest and most technically proficient of any animation school" he had ever seen. multiple times over the following years, amidi would call back on le buildilng as exemplary of the work being produced at gobelins.  in conjunction with the 2006 siggraph conference, animation magazine ran an article by ramin zahed, noting that le buildilng - which was screening at that year's event - had "already generated good word of mouth". terrence masson, then serving as siggraph's computer animation festival chair, commented that the films of gobelins were among the best submitted to him that year. he remarked that european students overall were turning out work better than their american counterparts. similar claims were made by christopher panzer, in an article that year for animation world network. in his article - illustrated with an image from le building - panzer called the work of european animation students "better than pro" and wrote that these students were "raising the bar for professionals worldwide."  multiple figures have remarked positively upon le building's combined use of 2d and 3d animation methods. eric riewer, who once served as the head of gobelins' animation department, wrote in 2010 that he "continue[d] to admire this film for its hybrid form". in a review for the website drawn!, professional animator ward jenkins praised le buildilng's "excellent integration of traditional and cg animation". he felt it necessary to note, "yes, the pizza boy is completely cg" - a fact that had escaped amidi (of cartoon brew) on first viewing. upon gaining this knowledge, amidi's response was enthusiastic: "all i can say is wow!"  another professional animator, peter j.
richardson, wrote that achieving the film's visual blend relied on a "very delicate balance". masking cg to look more like 2d animation, he explained, typically relies on a technique known as cell shading - he continued however, that cell shading is not sufficient to hide the distinct movement of 3d objects. according to richardson, the filmmakers addressed this issue through careful orchestration of the film's pacing. he explained, " if everything's moving crazy fast, it's harder to tell if a shape was hand-drawn or not...when the cat lands on the biker in le building, the 3d kicks in, and it all feels appropriately wobbly and unstable." richardson then wrote that he had rarely seen 3d movement animated this well and proclaimed the film as a whole, "excellent in every respect."stash dvd magazine called le building "a manic and charming tale" and predicted that the film would be sure to open up myriad opportunities for its directors. when le building won in the undergraduate category at the ottawa international animation festival, richard j. leskosky of the news-gazette wrote that all of the student films honored at the festival that year "already looked quite professional". in his review, leskosky wrote that le buildilng is "very much in the spirit of rube goldberg's wacky inventions". the ottawa festival's jury also made a comparison to goldberg's work, and in 3d world magazine, le buildings style was likened to that of chuck jones. 3d world called le building "a gleefully madcap short" and named it one of the ten best student animated films of the year.  in a review for the colombian publication furiamag, juan david gomez praised the film's animation, characters, and story. "le building is one of those wonders that it's nice to meet from time to time on the internet", he wrote. the multi-national, spanish-language publication blog de cine also praised the film, writing that it "lasts just long enough" to have a joyous effect on viewers.  accolades  aftermath upon graduating from gobelins, perifel and staphylas both received job offers from dreamworks animation. looking back on their university's "end-of-year jury day", staphylas said, "i was stressed because i knew that a lot of industry professionals would be there...i was in the corridor waiting for the announcement of my results and i see shelley page, the european representative of dreamworks animation. she walks up to me
and gives me her business card and tells me she'll call me tomorrow." within a year, staphylas had left for the united states. he would eventually be followed by perifel, and since then, both have taken on senior positions at dreamworks.  initially, perifel turned down the offer from dreamworks, realizing that there would be few opportunities to work on traditionally animated projects in the us. while still in france, perifel, along with ramonede, worked on nocturna and the illusionist. among ramonede's other credits is the french webseries . nguyen served as an animation director on the rabbi's cat and as a character animator on the big bad fox & other tales. he has also continued to direct short animated projects, while zaarour has created his own comic books under the pseudonym pozla.le building has continued to receive screenings, retrospectively, at such film festivals and events as the 2010  festival in lalin, spain, the 2010 animatricks festival in helsinki, finland, the 2011 animation lab at the hong kong arts centre in china, the 2015 anima mundi festival in sao paulo, brazil, the 2015 monstra festival in lisbon, portugal, and the 2016 animage festival in recife, brazil.  legacy the awards-based recognition that le building received drew approval from various publications. the film's triumph at ottawa was applauded by jenkins (of the website drawn!), who took the occasion to voice his admiration of the film's humor and visuals, as well as by eric homan of frederator studios. homan commented that even as le building became ubiquitous within his circles, he had never tired of the film. the frederator staff would shortly go on to honor le building with best foreign film in their own awards ceremony, claiming, "this film's got it all." when le building found success as the first quarterly winner in animation magazine's world animation celebration online competition, ryan ball congratulated the film on behalf of the publication, describing the film as "outrageously funny". although le building failed to win the audience award at the 2006 animex audience awards, stash dvd magazine singled the film out as its favorite among the nominees.gnap gnap, another gobelins film from the same year as le building, features a brief audio clip of the russian man singing. both films had the same sound designer, olivier crouet.  two years after le building's release, oktapodi, another animated short film from gobelins, received an oscar nomination for
best animated short film. one of that film's directors, emud mokhberi, namechecked le building as an inspiration while saying that oktapodi "had to be fresh and original and up to par with the other films coming out of gobelins in recent years".  in 2007, an image from le building was used to illustrate an animation magazine article touting the best animation universities worldwide. the following year, animation world network ran an article by heather kenyon, dubbing gobelins one of the "best schools for narrative storytelling" and singling out le building as one of gobelins' best then-contemporary works.  a student project created by doug woods at vancouver film school in 2008 pairs le building with a newly recorded audio track. this project won a student elan award in the category best original sound design/musical score for an animated production or game.  the 2014 book hybrid animation: integrating 2d and 3d assets, written by tina o'hailey, and published by crc press, names le building as "a fabulous example" of a multiplane camera being used to create the perception of depth in animation. in 2015, gobelins released a promotional video, featuring animation director kyle balda. in the video, balda discusses the difference between american and french animation styles, noting that french animation is often more angular. as he discusses this, a short clip from le building'' is shown.  footnotes  see also mister smile geraldine (2000 film) fish heads fugue and other tales for twilight  references  external links official website  le building - making of  2005 short films 2005 films 2005 computer-animated films 2000s animated short films 2005 comedy films french films french animated short films french comedy films french independent films computer-animated short films comedy short films student films slapstick films films about architecture films about music and musicians animated films about cats 2000s french animated films
inwohner is a german expression for lower-ranking inhabitants of a populated place. the exact significance varies regionally, but the word generally refers to lodgers without real property.  in the middle ages and the early modern period in places such as in southern germany, in saxony and in austria the word meant inhabitants of a town or a village who generally did not possess real property and therefore did not enjoy full civic rights. of similar meaning are the expressions inste and instleute who were also lodgers in rural communities. likewise, similarities exist to the expression einlieger for day labourers without real property who rented living room from farmers. an inwohner must be distinguished from a member of the household who was either related to the home owner or was a direct employee (e.g. a maid or a servant) of the latter.  regional variations   in mecklenburg, inhabitants of towns were called [e]inwohner or einlieger if they did not possess the status of a burgher nor any other specific privileges. according to the old country laws of mecklenburg, burghers could only have one main occupation in trade, crafts, or services. thus, special organisations similar to those of craftsmen also formed for those "farmer-burghers" who lived in the towns, but whose main occupation was agriculture. their number, however, remained comparatively low in all mecklenburg country towns.  in south-western saxony, it became common around 1700 to speak of "propertied inwohner". this could mean hufners and other inhabitants of the villages who held real property, or home owners in towns. in this region as well as in the vogtland, the sense of the word shifted towards today's einwohner, meaning any inhabitant of a populated place.  in northern and north-eastern germany, instleute were day labourers contracted to work for certain landowners in exchange for living quarters, payment and wages in kind; they also had to provide a second labourer and acted thus as a kind of  sub-contractors.  in slovenia, so-called osabeniki were allocated living quarters in the wineyards where they worked.  in switzerland, the expressions beiwohner, beisasse, medewohner and non-positus also refer to inhabitants of a municipality who do not possess full civic rights there, but have certain duties and enjoy certain rights according to the relevant regulations. these persons may nevertheless be of prominent financial standing.  rights and duties   unpropertied inhabitants of
medieval towns without full civic rights were called inwohner. they were bound to work as day labourers for a master, e.g. a brewery, without being permanently employed. inwohner in villages were dependent on the farmers in whose households they lodged, and were bound to perform a set amount of work for their landlords, thus providing a reserve of workers for busy times. some earned an additional income from domestic trades such as shoe repair, broom making, or basket making.  since the domicile of an inwohner was not defined by real property, special rules had to be observed as to which clergymen were to perform marriage ceremonies among this class of inhabitants.  regional laws fixed the duties of inwohner and their landlords. for instance, the 1635 urbarium of lustenfelden stipulates that, if a subject of the local lord had taken a person (inman) as a tenant, both had to appear before the lord within a fortnight to record the inman for whom the landlord had to pay a bond. an inman who had left another lordship had to bring a letter of leave, to swear allegiance to the new lord, and to pay a fee of acceptance. after the inman moved into the house of the landlord, a certain tax was payable every year which the landlord had to guarantee. an inman who left had to request cancellation of the record, and had to pay a leaving fee, otherwise both landlord and tenant were liable to prosecution. likewise, certain taxes were due upon the death of an inman. concealing the inman status by a pretended employment was prohibited. however, the inman was not liable for country taxes levied by the prince.  the increasing number of inman relationships in the 17th and 18th centuries led to the erection of numerous tenements, e.g. in linz, and to the development of an urban proletariat even under preindustrial circumstances.  references   social history of the holy roman empire labor history landlord-tenant law
duckham is a surname. notable people with the surname include: alexander duckham (1877-1945), english chemist and businessman sir arthur duckham (1879-1932), english chemical engineer david duckham (born 1946), english rugby union player thomas duckham (1816-1902), english farmer, cattle breeder and liberal politician
the 2016 fiba u20 women's european championship was the 15th edition of the women's u-20 european basketball championship. 16 teams participated in the competition, which was played in matosinhos, portugal, from 9 to 17 july 2016.  spain won their sixth gold in the competition history, beating italy in the final 71-69.  venues centro de desportos e congressos, matosinhos pavilhao municipal de guifoes, matosinhos custoias arena, custoias  participating teams    (winners, 2015 fiba europe under-20 championship for women division b)    (runners-up, 2015 fiba europe under-20 championship for women division b)    (3rd place, 2015 fiba europe under-20 championship for women division b)  preliminary round in this round, the 16 teams are allocated in four groups of four teams each. all teams advance to the playoff round of 16.  group a  group b  group c  group d  final round  bracket  classification  5-8th classification  9-16th classification  final standings  awards  all-tournament team   aleksandra crvendakic   raisa musina    julie allemand    laura quevedo    cecilia zandalasini  references  external links official website  2016 2016-17 in european women's basketball 2016-17 in portuguese basketball international women's basketball competitions hosted by portugal international youth basketball competitions hosted by portugal fiba europe under-20 championship for women 2016 in youth sport
hussain eslami (born 22 may 1969) is an iranian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1969 births living people iranian male cyclists olympic cyclists of iran cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
listrocerum fuscopicalis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1961. it is known from cameroon.  references  endemic fauna of cameroon dorcaschematini beetles described in 1961
compsus is a genus of broad-nosed weevils in the family curculionidae, distributed across the americas, primarily in northern south america.  taxonomy  the genus compsus was first named by carl johan schonherr in  1823: col. 1140. it belongs to the subfamily entiminae, tribe eustylini and to the so-called "compsus genus complex".  a key to identify species was provided by hustache in 1938 (in french), which was translated to english and adjusted by o'brien and pena.  description  broad-nosed weevils of moderate size (approx. 7-12 mm), most of them uniformly covered by scales of variable coloration ranging from white to metallic green, pink, and blue.   many morphological features of compsus overlap with those of related eustyline genera including exorides, eustylus, and oxyderces, composing the so-called "compsus genus complex".  distribution  argentina, bolivia, brazil, colombia, ecuador, french guiana, guyana, peru, suriname, venezuela; costa rica, guatemala, mexico, nicaragua, panama; guadeloupe, jamaica, nc, se, sw usa.  interaction with other species  two species in the genus (compsus obliquatus and compsus viridivittatus) are considered pests of citrus in colombia.  compsus auricephalus, known as the golden-headed weevil is the species with northernmost distribution and has association with 46 plant species in 23 families.  species  the genus contains 101 described species.  references  external links      entiminae curculionidae genera
lucien gallas (march 23, 1904 - may 26, 1967) was a french stage and film actor. he was married to the actress ginette leclerc.  selected filmography  holiday (1931)  billeting order (1932)  little jacques (1934)  the dying land (1936)  the men without names (1937)  therese martin (1939)  the benefactor (1942)  the woman with the orchid (1952)  prigionieri delle tenebre (1952)  at the edge of the city (1953)  my life is yours (1953)  days of love (1954)  references  bibliography   waldman, harry. maurice tourneur: the life and films. mcfarland, 2001.  external links     1904 births 1967 deaths french male film actors people from oullins
filip dvorak (born march 9, 1997) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc zubr prerov of the czech 1.liga.  dvorak made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc kometa brno during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1997 births living people hc kometa brno players hc zubr prerov players czech ice hockey forwards sportspeople from brno
olenecamptus shanensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by gilmour in 1952.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1952
cory taylor (1955 - 5 july 2016) was an australian writer.  taylor was born in southport, queensland and lived in fiji and kenya as a child. she studied history at the australian national university, and then worked as a freelance film and television writer, with her work including the 1988 two-part television film alterations for the abc. her first books were the rat tales and bandaged bear series of children's books.  diagnosed with melanoma in 2005, taylor turned to writing fiction and her 2011 debut novel, me and mr booker, won the commonwealth book prize for the pacific region in 2012. her next book, my beautiful enemy (2013), was shortlisted for the miles franklin award.  as her health worsened, taylor wrote her last book dying: a memoir, which was published just before her death from melanoma-related brain cancer on 5 july 2016. it was shortlisted for the 2017 stella prize and included in barack obama's list of best books in 2017.  bibliography   rat tales, illustrated by stephen michael king, scholastic australia, sydney, 1999, vol. 1, rat's lucky day and rat goes fishing, ; vol. 2, rat and the rude cap and rat and the big stink   bandaged bear and the broken bones, co-authored with peter townsend, scholastic australia, sydney, 2001,   bandaged bear saves his breath, co-authored with peter townsend, scholastic australia, sydney, 2001,   bandaged bear and the birthday party, co-authored with peter townsend, scholastic australia, sydney, 2002,   me and mr booker, text publishing, melbourne, 2010,   german: mr. booker und ich, list/ullstein verlag, berlin, 2019,     my beautiful enemy, text publishing, melbourne, 2013,   dying: a memoir, text publishing, melbourne, 2016,  references  external links  1955 births 2016 deaths 20th-century australian women writers 20th-century australian writers 21st-century australian novelists 21st-century australian women writers australian children's writers australian national university alumni australian television writers australian women children's writers australian women novelists australian women screenwriters deaths from brain tumor deaths from cancer in queensland deaths from melanoma griffith review people women television writers writers from queensland
count carl carlsson bonde af bjorno, more commonly known as carl c:son bonde (28 february 1897 - 8  may 1990) was a swedish army officer. bonde was serving in the swedish army until 1939 when he joined the swedish volunteer corps during the winter war in finland. back in sweden he became head of the department for interior affairs at the defence staff and finally retired from the military in 1957.  early life bonde was born on 28 february 1897 in rytterne parish, vasteras municipality, sweden, the son of crown equerry, count carl bonde and his wife blanche (nee dickson). he was the brother of thord bonde and a half-brother of financier and cabinet chamberlain peder bonde.  career  military career he was commissioned as an officer in the life regiment hussars (k 3) in 1917 with the rank of second lieutenant and he graduated from stockholm school of economics in 1933. bonde served as a captain in the general staff in 1935 and he was military attache in london from 1937 to 1938. he was a company commander in the swedish volunteer corps during the winter war in finland from 1939 to 1940 and he was promoted to major in 1940. bonde was a battalion commander in the finnish army from 1941 to 1942 and he became a finnish lieutenant colonel in 1942.  when the german-friendly head of the domestic department in the swedish defence staff, major thorwald lindquist, was dismissed in october 1943, he was replaced with the western-friendly bonde who also was promoted to lieutenant colonel. bonde was active in operation stella polaris in 1944 before being relocated by the government to the national swedish office for aliens (statens utlanningskommission) where he was a member from 1944 to 1945. bonde was promoted to colonel in the reserve in 1945 and retired from the army in 1957.  other work bonde possessed the entailed estate of vibyholm and leased the entailed estates of horningsholm and tjoloholm until 1964. he was chairman of the students' union of stockholm university college from 1932 to 1933 and the stockholm university student union's federation board from 1933 to 1934.  bonde was chairman of the swedish bridge federation from 1960 and was vice chairman of the european bridge league from 1950. he was chairman of the world bridge federation from 1968 to 1970.  personal life bonde was married between 1920-1945 to martha elvira augusta elisabeth morner (born 1900), the daughter of the chamberlain and ryttmastare hjalmar
stellan morner and marta jenny hilda carolina sylvan.  he married for the second time in 1946, to greta swartling (1905-1961), the daughter of banking director john swartling and alice borg. bonde married a third time in 1962, to countess elisabeth wachtmeister af johannishus (1926-1972), the daughter of hovjagmastare, count otto wachtmeister and brita nordenstierna.  he was the father of gustaf c:son bonde (1921-1997); catharina (1922-1968), who married the director of london school of journalism, geoffrey butler (born 1898); and cecilia (1926-2010), who married writer henric stahl (1908-1991).  death bonde died on 8 may 1990 in morko, sodertalje municipality.  awards and decorations  swedish   knight of the order of the sword (1938)   medal for noble deeds in gold  foreign   order of the cross of liberty, 2nd and 4th class with swords   order of the cross of liberty, 3rd class with swords and oak leaf   2 x finnish war memorial medal with clasp and sword   king haakon vii freedom medal   british commemorative medal  references  1897 births 1990 deaths swedish army colonels swedish counts stockholm school of economics alumni people from vasteras municipality knights of the order of the sword volunteers in the winter war
the galeb class were minelayers originally built as minesweepers for the imperial german navy between 1918 and 1919. in july 1921, the six unarmed vessels were purchased as "tugs" for the navy of the newly created kingdom of the serbs, croats and slovenes (from 1929, the kingdom of yugoslavia). re-armed with two skoda  l/45 guns and two machine guns, they could carry 24 naval mines. also known as the orao class, they all served until april 1941, when they were captured by the italians during the world war ii german-led axis invasion of yugoslavia. they were then put into service by the regia marina under new names. five of the ships were lost or sunk during the war, the remaining vessel was put into service by the yugoslav navy after the war, and was finally disposed of in 1962.  description and construction the galeb class was built as wartime s by three german shipbuilding yards during 1917-1919. their german designations and builders were: m 97, m 100 and m 112 - joh. c. tecklenborg, geestemunde; m 106 - reiherstieg, hamburg; m 121 and m144 - neptun, rostock. they had a waterline length of , an overall length of , a beam of , and a normal draught of . they had a designed displacement of , and  at deep load. they used steam generated by two coal-fired boilers to drive two three-cylinder vertical triple expansion engines driving two propeller shafts. their engines were rated at  and were designed to propel the ship at a top speed of . they carried  of coal, which gave them a radius of action of  at .  the crew consisted of forty officers and men.  in german service they were armed with two  sk l/45 naval guns, and carried 120 rounds for each gun. they could carry 30 naval mines, and with their minesweeping gear extended, they could maintain a maximum speed of .  service history  the six minesweepers were bought as unarmed "tugs" by the government of the kingdom of serbs, croats and slovenes (later yugoslavia) on 20 july 1921, for 1,400,000 marks each. their german designations were m97, m100, m106, m112, m121 and m144. taken into service in the navy of the new kingdom, they were initially classified as mining tenders, and renamed orao (eagle), galeb (seagull), gavran (ra
ven), jastreb (hawk), kobac (sparrow hawk), and sokol (falcon), respectively. they were rearmed with two skoda  l/45 guns and two machine guns, and could carry twenty-four mines. the crew was increased from forty to fifty-one. in 1923, gavran was renamed labud (swan). in 1931, some of the guns were re-lined to  to use the same ammunition as the dual-purpose guns fitted to the yugoslav light cruiser dalmacija. at least four of the ships mounted the relined guns. the following year, the british naval attache reported that yugoslav ships were engaging in little gunnery training, and few exercises or manoeuvres, due to reduced budgets. in august 1935, the seaplane carrier  accompanied by galeb, labud and kobac visited the greek island of corfu. by 1936, the class had been re-classified as minelayers. in 1938-39 jastreb was refitted for oil-firing only.  during the world war ii german-led axis invasion of yugoslavia in april 1941, all six ships were captured in port by the italians. kobac was captured on 10 april at sibenik, and the remainder were captured on 17 april: sokol was captured at split, and the rest at the bay of kotor. they were soon put into commission in the regia marina as vergada (ex-orao), selve (ex-galeb), zuri (ex-labud), zirona (ex-jastreb), eso (ex-sokol), and unie (ex-kobac).  zirona was damaged and beached near benghazi on 24-25 november 1941 after a british air raid, and was destroyed by the italians on 28 november. selve was damaged by a royal air force air raid at benghazi on 6 november 1942, and burned out, finally being broken up in 1948. eso was torpedoed by royal navy aircraft  east of djerba island off the tunisian coast on 19 january 1943, while on escort duty with the  san martino and two other vessels. unie was destroyed by an explosion at bizerta following an air raid by the united states army air forces on 30 january 1943. the last of the class to be sunk during the war was zuri, which had been renamed oriole in june 1942. she was scuttled by her crew on 10 july 1943 at augusta, sicily, in the face of advancing british troops
, following damage sustained in an air attack south of messina. the surviving vessel, vergada, was recovered and handed back to the royal yugoslav navy-in-exile at malta on 7 december 1943. she remained in service through the rest of the war, and became part of the post-war yugoslav navy, serving as pionir from august 1945, and as zelengora from 1955. she was finally disposed of in 1962.  notes  footnotes  references  books  journals     world war i minelayers of germany mine warfare vessel classes mine warfare vessels of the royal yugoslav navy
dong maku railway station is a railway station located in takhli subdistrict, takhli district, nakhon sawan. it is located 198.800 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
your memory and me (spanish: tu recuerdo y yo) is a 1953 mexican comedy drama film directed by miguel m. delgado.  cast  rosita arenas  lupe carriles   agustin isunza   raul martinez   diana ochoa   chula prieto   carlota solares   domingo soler   fernando soto   pedro vargas  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy-drama films mexican comedy-drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by miguel m. delgado mexican black-and-white films
eda tugsuz (born 27 march 1997) is a turkish track and field athlete who competes in the javelin throw.  she competed in the javelin throw at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands. in 2013, she won at the european youth summer olympic festival. tugsuz holds turkish record with a throw of 67.21 m. she won the bronze medal at the 2019 summer universiade held in naples, italy.  personal bests  international competitions  references  external links     1997 births living people turkish female javelin throwers athletes (track and field) at the 2014 summer youth olympics sportspeople from antalya european games competitors for turkey athletes (track and field) at the 2019 european games universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) universiade bronze medalists for turkey medalists at the 2019 summer universiade islamic solidarity games competitors for turkey athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of turkey olympic female javelin throwers
colonel edward keane (17852november 1866) was a british army officer of the napoleonic era who saw service during the peninsular war and the waterloo campaign.  life he was the third son of sir john keane, 1st baronet by sarah, daughter of john kelly and brother of john keane, 1st baron keane.   kene joined the british army on the 1december 1803 and was promoted to lieutenant on 21november 1804. he served on the expedition to north germany in 1805 and subsequently in the peninsular war under sir john moore and from november 1813 under the marquis of wellington.   for his service during the peninsular war he received the silver medal with clasps for corruna, nive, orthes and toulouse.  during the waterloo campaign he was aide-de-camp to sir hussey vivian whose wife was a relative of keane. at the battle of waterloo he was a captain in the 7th hussars under lord uxbridge, being promoted to major after the battle.   he retired as a lieutenant-colonel on half-pay on 29march 1833.  keane was subsequently reappointed to the grenadier guards and retired as a colonel in 1838.   he died aged 81 on 2november 1866 at westerfield house, worthing.  references  bibliography  1785 births 1866 deaths british army personnel of the napoleonic wars younger sons of baronets
the itv proxima is a french single-place, paraglider that was designed by xavier demoury and produced by itv parapentes of epagny, haute-savoie. it is now out of production.  design and development the proxima was designed as a beginner glider. the models are each named for their approximate wing area in square metres.  variants proxima 24 extra small-sized model for lighter pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 36 cells and the aspect ratio is 4.58:1. the pilot weight range is . the glider model is cen standard certified. proxima 26 small-sized model for lighter pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 36 cells and the aspect ratio is 4.58:1. the pilot weight range is . the glider model is cen standard certified. proxima 28 mid-sized model for medium-weight pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 36 cells and the aspect ratio is 4.58:1. the pilot weight range is . the glider model is cen standard certified. proxima 31 large-sized model for heavier pilots. its  span wing has a wing area of , 36 cells and the aspect ratio is 4.58:1. the pilot weight range is . the glider model is cen standard certified.  specifications (proxima 28)  references  proxima paragliders
gaius marcius figulus was a name used by men of the marcii figuli. two known members were:   gaius marcius figulus (consul 162 bc), twice consul, in 162 and 156 bc  gaius marcius figulus (consul 64 bc), consul in 64 bc
the st. jerome's cathedral () it is the main church of the catholic diocese of saint-jerome in quebec, canada. built in 1897, replaced an old church nearby smaller.  neo-classical style, is 24.6 m high, 76.9 m long and 30.7 m wide. the large atrium is below the casavant organ. fence pink fence is lined with windows, made in france.  delphis-adolphe beaulieu created the grouped windows. in 1908, he added a transversal way to church.  in 1951 lorsqu'emilien frenette was named bishop of the city, and chose this church as the cathedral. some parts of the cathedral were renovated after the second vatican council, as the pulpit, the altar and the baptistery of the chair.  see also roman catholicism in canada st. jerome  references  roman catholic cathedrals in quebec buildings and structures in saint-jerome, quebec roman catholic churches completed in 1897 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in canada
this is a list of current monarchies. , there are 43 sovereign states in the world with a monarch as head of state. there are 13 in asia, 12 in europe, 9 in north america, 6 in oceania, and 3 in africa.  types of monarchy these are the approximate categories which present monarchies fall into:   commonwealth realms. queen elizabeth ii is the monarch of fifteen commonwealth realms (antigua and barbuda; the commonwealth of australia;  bahamas; belize; canada; grenada; jamaica; new zealand; the independent state of papua new guinea; the federation of saint kitts and nevis; saint lucia; saint vincent and the grenadines; solomon islands; tuvalu; and the united kingdom of great britain and northern ireland). they evolved out of the british empire into fully independent states within the commonwealth of nations that retain the queen as head of state, unlike other commonwealth countries that are either dependencies, republics or have a different royal house. all fifteen realms are constitutional monarchies and full democracies, where the queen has limited powers or a largely ceremonial role.  other european constitutional monarchies. the principality of andorra; the kingdom of belgium; the kingdom of denmark; the grand duchy of luxembourg; the kingdom of the netherlands; the kingdom of norway; the kingdom of spain; and the kingdom of sweden are fully democratic states in which the monarch has a limited or largely ceremonial role. andorra is unique among all existing monarchies, as it is a diarchy, with the co-princeship being shared by the president of france and the bishop of urgell. this arrangement creates a unique situation among monarchies, as a) neither co-prince is of andorran descent, b) one is elected by common citizens of a foreign country (france), but not by andorrans as they cannot vote in the french presidential elections, c) the other, the bishop of urgell, is appointed by a foreign head of state, the pope.  european mixed monarchies. liechtenstein and monaco are constitutional monarchies in which the prince retains many powers of an absolute monarch. for example, the 2003 constitution referendum gives the prince of liechtenstein the power to veto any law that the landtag (parliament) proposes and vice versa. the prince can hire or dismiss any elective member or government employee from his or her post. however, unlike an absolute monarch, the people can call for a referendum to end the prince's reign. the prince of monaco has simpler powers: he cannot hire or dismiss any elective member or government employee from his or her post,
but he can select the minister of state, government council and judges. muslim monarchies. these muslim monarchs of the islamic emirate of afghanistan; the kingdom of bahrain; the nation of brunei, the abode of peace; malaysia; the hashemite kingdom of jordan; the state of kuwait; the kingdom of morocco; the sultanate of oman; the state of qatar; the kingdom of saudi arabia and the united arab emirates generally retain far more powers than their european or commonwealth counterparts.  absolute monarchs remain in the nation of brunei, the abode of peace; the sultanate of oman; the state of qatar (de facto); and the kingdom of saudi arabia. the kingdom of bahrain, and the state of kuwait are classified as mixed, meaning there are representative bodies of some kind, but the monarch retains most of his powers. the hashemite kingdom of jordan, malaysia, the kingdom of morocco, and the united arab emirates are constitutional monarchies, but their monarchs still retain more substantial powers than in european equivalents.   east and southeast asian constitutional monarchies. the kingdom of bhutan; the kingdom of cambodia; japan; and the kingdom of thailand have constitutional monarchies where the monarch has a limited or ceremonial role. thailand changed from traditional absolute monarchy into a constitutional one in 1932, while the kingdom of bhutan changed in 2008. the kingdom of cambodia had its own monarchy after independence from the french colonial empire, which was deposed after the khmer rouge came into power. the monarchy was subsequently restored in the peace agreement of 1993.  other monarchies. five monarchies do not fit into one of the above groups by virtue of geography or class of monarchy: the kingdom of tonga in polynesia; the kingdom of eswatini and the kingdom of lesotho in southern africa; and the sovereign military order of malta (s.m.o.m.), and the vatican city state in europe. of these, the kingdom of lesotho and the kingdom of tonga are constitutional monarchies, while the kingdom of eswatini and the vatican city state are absolute monarchies. the kingdom of eswatini is increasingly being considered a diarchy. the king, or ngwenyama, rules alongside his mother, the ndlovukati, as dual heads of state originally designed to be checks on political power. the ngwenyama, however, is considered the administrative head of state, while the ndlovukati is considered the spiritual and national head of state, a position which has become largely symbolic in recent years.  s.m.o.m. is governed by an elected prince
and grand master.  the pope is the absolute monarch of the vatican by virtue of his position as head of the roman catholic church and bishop of rome; he is an elected rather than hereditary ruler. the pope need not be a citizen of the territory prior to his election by the cardinals.  lines of succession  some of the extant sovereign monarchies have lines of succession that go back to the medieval period or antiquity:    the kings of cambodia claim descent from queen soma (1st century), although the historiographical record is interrupted in the "post-angkor period" (15th/16th centuries). a real unified kingdom of cambodia first came to existence in 802. the monarchy in cambodia was abolished between 1970 and 1993.  there exist several suggestions on a possible line of succession in the danish monarchy from the late 7th century and until gorm the old, but none of these suggestions have so far won universal acceptance. most monarchs in denmark since the 940s have been descendants of gorm the old's father harthacnut and all monarchs in denmark since 1047 have been descendants of titular queen estrid svendsdatter. a formal law of succession was not adopted in denmark until 1665.  japan, considered a constitutional monarchy under the imperial house of japan, is traditionally said to have originated with the mythical emperor jimmu. the first verifiable historiographical evidence begins with emperor kinmei in the 6th century.   the monarchs of the kingdom of norway by virtue of descent from harald i fairhair, who united the realm in 872. harald as a member of the house of yngling is given a partly legendary line of succession from earlier petty kings in historiographical tradition. far from all monarchs of norway since the 930s have been descendants of harald fairhair: at least seven or eight norwegian kings from the period c. 970 - 1859 were not descendants of harald fairhair.  the kings of spain by descent from the catholic monarchs (via the house of habsburg), ultimately combining the lines of succession of castile and leon and aragon, realms established in the 10th to 11th centuries in the course of the reconquista, via the kingdom of asturias claiming descent from the visigothic kingdom (which, originally ruled by the thervingi kings, had become elective in the 6th century). the monarchy of spain was abolished twice in the 19th and 20th centuries (1873-1874 and 1931-1947) and replaced by republics.  the monarchs of the united kingdom and commonwealth realms inherit the throne by virtue
of descent from sophia of hanover, according to the act of settlement 1701. sophia was the granddaughter of james vi and i who inherited and held in union the kingdoms of england, scotland and ireland (union of the crowns) in 1603. succession to the english throne originates with the house of wessex, established in the 6th century; the scottish throne with descent from pictish kings who likewise enter the historical record around the 6th century.  current monarchies  in wallis and futuna, an overseas territory of france in the south pacific, there are three kingdoms, uvea, alo and sigave, whose monarchs are chosen by local noble families.  on september 28, 2021, afghanistan revived the 1963 monarchical constitution on "temporary" basis.  footnote  belgium is the only existing popular monarchy - a system in which the monarch's title is linked to the people rather than a state. the title of belgian kings is not king of belgium, but instead king of the belgians. another unique feature of the belgian system is that the new monarch does not automatically assume the throne at the death or abdication of his predecessor; he only becomes monarch upon taking a constitutional oath.   basic law of saudi arabia  see also   list of oldest institutions in continuous operation  references  monarchies countries by form of government monarchies, current
the women's 100 metres event at the 2016 iaaf world u20 championships was held at zdzisław krzyszkowiak stadium on 20 and 21 july.  medalists  records  results  heats qualification: the first 3 of each heat (q) and the 6 fastest times (q) qualified  wind:heat 1: -1.6 m/s, heat 2: -0.8 m/s, heat 3: +1.7 m/s, heat 4: +2.7 m/s, heat 5: -0.4 m/s, heat 6: +0.2 m/s  semifinals qualification: the first 2 of each heat (q) and the 2 fastest times (q) qualified  wind:heat 1: +0.7 m/s, heat 2: +2.0 m/s, heat 3: +0.4 m/s  final wind: +0.9  references  external links  100 metres schedule  100 metres 100 metres at the world athletics u20 championships 2016 in women's athletics
okon fuoko, op. 58, is a ballet-pantomime for orchestra, vocal soloists, and choir by the finnish composer leevi madetoja, who wrote the piece from 1925-27 concurrent with the composition of his third symphony. the japonisme-influenced libretto is by danish playwright poul knudsen. the story takes place in ancient japan and, similar to coppelia, centers around the (successful) efforts of the eponymous puppet-maker to bring a female creation to life. the result is a tragic love-triangle between the seductive doll, the infatuated okon fuoko, and his devastated wife. with its unique and exotic musical language, okon fuoko is one of madetoja's "finest" scores; indeed, the last of his "masterpieces".    scheduling the ballet-pantomime's premiere in copenhagen proved difficult and the production languished unperformed until 12 february 1930, when it received its premiere in helsinki at the finnish national opera under the baton of . although critics praised madetoja's music, they panned knudsen's awkward libretto as a dramatic failure. as a result, the  inaugural stage production received only three performances and thus marked the first setback of madetoja's career, the previous major works of whom-three symphonies and an opera-the critics had received enthusiastically.  today, the work is better known in its abridged form, a six-movement suite for orchestra that madetoja excerpted from the stage production's score. the composer's plans for an additional two suites never materialized, although in 2009, estonian conductor arvo volmer pieced together a collection of eight remaining numbers from the original score, dubbed  okon fuoko suite ii. volmer, conducting the oulu symphony orchestra, also has produced the only recording of the complete score.  history  while on his way to paris in 1925, madetoja had met a music publisher from copenhagen, wilhelm hansen, who placed him into contact with the danish playwright poul knudsen. a libretto for a new ballet-pantomime, based upon "exotic" japanese themes, was on offer and madetoja accepted the project with alacrity. in fact, the libretto was first offered to jan sibelius, who had earlier collaborated with knudsen on the ballet-pantomime scaramouche, op. 71. (1913; fp. 1922). sibelius, however, was at the time deep into the composition of his sixth symphony and thus refused the project.  having outlined his plan for the new commission while staying in houilles,
madetoja more or less composed the third symphony and okon fuoko simultaneously, although the pressure to complete the former was so great that he was compelled to place the ballet-pantomime aside until december 1926. although madetoja completed the score in late 1927, scheduling the ballet-pantomime's premiere in copenhagen proved difficult, despite the enthusiasm of the chief conductor of the royal danish orchestra,  georg høeberg, who after a test rehearsal had proclaimed the score a "masterpiece". the primary cause of the delay appears to have been the difficulty of casting a lead actor, as the part required both singing and miming; knudsen insisted upon-and opted to wait for-an actor then on leave from the theatre, johannes poulsen.  the production languished unperformed until it (finally) received its premiere on 12 february 1930, not in copenhagen but rather in helsinki, at the finnish national opera under the baton of . the performance was the first significant setback of madetoja's career: although the critics "unanimously praised" madetoja's music, the consensus opinion was that knudsen's libretto-with its awkward mixture of song, melodramatic spoken dialogue, dance, and pantomime-was a dramatic failure. in the end, okon fuoko received only three performances total and the danish premiere never took place.  structure  complete score    scenes 1-3: okon fuoko paints umegava's face  scenes 3-4: okon fuoko plays to umegava  scenes 6-7: the chorus' song  scene 8: umegava stops smiling  scene 8: yiai's song i  scene 8: okon fuoko and yiai recall their early love   scene 8: yiai's song ii  scene 8: yiai tells of a dream  scene 9: the guests arrive i - scene 10: the tea ceremony  scene 11: puppet dance i: geishas and warriors  scene 11: puppet dance ii: woman and man  scene 12: puppet dance iii: old man, woman, and young warrior   scene 13: puppet dance iii: enter six old men   scene 14: hara-kiri  scene 15: the guests converse  scene 16: the guests arrive ii  scene 16: okon fuoko's recitative   scenes 16-17: yiai shows the guests umegava   scene 17: umegava's mechanical dance  scene 18: the guests converse   scene 18: okon fuoko's dance to umegava   scenes 18-20: the chorus' song   scene 20
: yiai dances   scene 21: night falls   scenes 21-22: umegava comes to life  scene 22: okon fuoko's and umegava's dance i  scene 22: okon fuoko's and umegava's dance ii  scene 23: the storm  scenes 23-24: umegava dances yiai's dance   scene 24: umegava's seductive dance  scenes 25-27: umegava picks up the sword  umegava's demonic dance (a.k.a. sword dance)  scene 28: puppet dance iv: the storm and okon fuoko's death  scenes 28-31: yiai's song i  scenes 31-33: okon fuoko dies  suite i    okon fuoko, unitaikuri (the dream magician)  vieraat saapuvat (entrance of the guests)  nukkien tanssi (the dance of the dolls)	  miehen tanssi (man's dance)  naisen tanssi (woman's dance)	  danse grotesque  suite ii    nukketanssi: vanhus, nainen ja soturi (puppet dance; old man, woman, and warrior)	  umegavan mekaaninen tanssi - okon fuokon tanssi umegavalle (umegava's mechanical dance - okon fuoko's dance to umegava)  umegava tanssi yiain tanssin (umegava dances yiai's dance)	  umegavan vietteleva tanssi (umegava's seductive dance)  miekkatanssi (sword dance)  myrsky (the storm)  nukketanssi: nainen ja mies (puppet dance: woman and man)  okon fuokon kuolema (okon fuoko's death)  discography   overall, the critics have received okon fuoko favorably. in his review of volmer's recording of the complete ballet-pantomime, fanfare's phillip scott notes that in the score the typically-nationalistic madetoja "[resists] any temptation to whip up excitement," instead utilizing an orchestra "pared back to the barest essentials" and embracing a sound world that is "cool", "stark", and "emotionally detached". nevertheless, scott finds that okon fuoko "weaves a powerful, cumulative spell", its "beguiling ... gentle, pentatonic melodies" aided by volmer's "thoughtful ... beautifully recorded"
performance, and finishes by giving the disc a favorable recommendation. the american record guide's jack sullivan also applauds volmer's massive undertaking, describing madetoja's "hypnotic" score as having "melody aplenty and attractive harmony", although he finds the score's "subtlety and delicacy" to be its "most striking" feature. indeed, with music that is "by turns rapturous, pungent, and tragic," sullivan concludes that a listener could be forgiven for wondering how on earth okon fuoko has been neglected for so long.  see also   list of ballets by title  notes, references, and sources  notes  references  sources   books  cd liner notes  ballets by leevi madetoja 1927 ballet premieres 1927 compositions suites by leevi madetoja
haley tanner is an american writer and novelist.  literary career tanner's first novel, vaclav & lena, was published by random house in 2011. the titular characters are growing up in brooklyn's russian immigrant community.  she has been interviewed by the forward and npr.  personal life  tanner was born and raised in westchester county, new york. she holds an mfa in creative writing from the new school.  tanner and her partner, musician josh ritter, had their first child, beatrix wendylove ritter, on november 11, 2012. they own a home together in woodstock, new york.  awards and honors the national book foundation named tanner as a "5 under 35 author" in 2012.  publications  references  external links     1982 births living people the new school alumni
giacchino is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  anthony giacchino (born 1969), american documentary filmmaker michael giacchino (born 1967), american composer of music for films, television, and video games  see also giachino  italian-language surnames
this is a list of aircraft in numerical order of manufacturer followed by alphabetical order beginning with 'mb'.  mb  mbb  (messerschmitt-bolkow-blohm)  mbb 223 flamingo  mbb lampyridae  mbb bo 102  mbb bo 103  mbb bo 105  mbb bo 106  mbb bo 107  mbb bo 108  mbb bo 115  mbb bo 208 junior  mbb bo 209 monsun  mbb hfb 320 hansa-jet  mbb fan ranger  mbb/kawasaki bk 117  mbb-kawasaki ch-143  mbb mhk-101  references  further reading  external links    list of aircraft (m)  fr:liste des aeronefs (i-m)
gilbert nicolas (c. 1462 - 27 august 1532) - in religious "gabriel-maria" - was a french roman catholic priest and a professed member of the order of friars minor. he co-founded - alongside saint jeanne de valois - the annunciades in 1501. nicolas met with both pope alexander vi and pope leo x in relation to the congregation's foundation and rule and was noted for his humble and meek outlook amongst his peers while also being known for his intelligence and diligence in the affairs of the congregation he helped establish.  the sainthood process commenced in france and he is titled as a servant of god.  life gilbert nicolas was born in 1462 in the kingdom of france. in 1478 a sermon that a franciscan preacher gave on the topic of the immaculate conception moved him to consider the prospects of becoming a priest. he joined the order of friars minor in 1475 and entered the convent of notre-dame de lafond to join.  nicolas studied at the convent of amboise where he was ordained a priest. from 1498 until 1502 he served as the gatekeeper of his convent where he later met saint jeanne de valois and he became her confessor and spiritual director. the former queen consort was annulled from king louis xii and went with nicolas to bourges to found a religious order.  he travelled to rome where he met with pope alexander vi to receive papal approval for the new congregation - though the college of cardinals voiced their disapproval. but the cardinal bishop of modena giovanni battista ferrari had a dream of god who rebuked the college for their refusal of the order and saw saint lawrence the deacon and saint francis of assisi extend their arms over nicolas in blessing. the cardinal summoned nicolas to tell him of this and alexander vi later ratified the rule and establishment of the new order on 12 february 1502. at the same time the pope issued a papal brief that allowed for nicolas to assume the religious name of "gabriel-maria". he composed the rule of the order and travelled to rome and presented it to pope leo x on 11 june 1517; the pontiff also aggregated the order to the order of friars minor. he never wanted to accept a doctoral degree - though the path remained opened to him - and he kept on rejecting episcopal appointments.  he served as the vicar of the order's aquitaine branch from 1503 until 1508 when the foundress appointed him as the superior of the convent. under his guidance new convents were founded in albi (1507) and bethune
(1516) while other convents were founded across the nation in places such as bruges (1517) and bordeaux (1520). nicolas also provided advice and support for the reform of the poor clares and around 1520 visited the congregation's provinces in ireland and scotland in addition to the new anglican england. he also preached for a crusade against the ottoman empire and amongst his fellow franciscans initiated research on the influence and reach of lutheranism.  nicolas died on 27 august 1532 and was buried in rodez.  beatification cause the beatification process opened in an informative process that required joint collaboration between the forums of creteil and agen in a move that accorded nicolas the posthumous title of servant of god. all his spiritual writings were collected and approved in december 1916. an apostolic process later opened a decade later on 20 may 1927 as a means of continuing the work of the informative process.  the cause then halted for several decades until 2003 when a decree was issued to resume the process; the transfer of the competent forum from rodez was issued on 21 july 2009 and the congregation for the causes of saints in 2010 granted the official "nihil obstat" ('nothing against') to the continuation of the cause. a diocesan process opened on 28 february 2013 and concluded its work on 2 june 2015.  the current postulator assigned to this cause is giovangiuseppe califano.  references  external links hagiography circle annunciades  1462 births 1532 deaths 15th-century venerated christians 15th-century french roman catholic priests 16th-century french roman catholic priests 16th-century venerated christians founders of catholic religious communities franciscans french servants of god people from puy-de-dome
art in america is an american progressive rock band that achieved success in the early 1980s. they are best known for their self-titled song "art in america" released in 1983.  background the band was the first-known rock band featuring a pedal harp to appear on a major record label. art in america was formed in 1980 by brothers chris flynn and dan flynn and sister shishonee (real name ruetenik). harpist shishonee, was formerly a member of the band the trees community. joining art in america was friend jim kuha. originally called father, the band's name was changed to 'art in america' and under this name the group began opening for popular irish & english pop artists such as u2 and roxy music. in 1983, the group released their first studio album under sony music/pavilion records. produced by yes and emerson, lake and palmer producer eddy offord, the album contained their most popular song "art in america" which received airplay on mtv music television, and radio stations throughout the united states. the songs were co-arranged by steve morse who also contributed a guitar solo for the song "undercover lover". the guest keyboardist on the album was terry "t" lavitz.  in hopes of a better deal in releasing a second album, the band moved to los angeles in 1985. however, the band found the pay to play gig situation in l.a. to be hostile and disappointing. the band still records music and loads to many internet sites for free song streaming, as well as album and singles for purchase.  recently the band was contacted by producer david hentschel to finally record a follow-up studio album. the album is set for release in fall 2018.  personnel chris flynn - vocals, lead guitar - fender stratocaster - (1974), rickenbacker 330 12 string shishonee flynn - lyon & healy pedal harp, koto, tamboura daniel flynn - drums - fibes drums, gamelan bell tree, percussion jim kuha - bass rickenbacker 4001, moog taurus bass pedals, 12-string guitar - ovation garry galloway - keyboards korg, yamaha, akai and mellotron  discography  albums art in america (1983) no. 176 on the us billboard 200. cloudborn (2018)  art in america - performing live at the royal oak music theatre on march 8, 1983 wolfgang's vault art in america - performing live at the capitol theater, flint, michigan on may 8, 1983 king
biscuit flower hour  singles "art in america" (1983) no. 23 on the us mainstream rock charts "undercover lover" (1983) no. 33 on the us mainstream rock charts  album art  the cover for the self-titled debut (commissioned and painted by ioannis) is featured in the book "1000 record covers" by michael ochs, and published by taschen. in 2018, in a reprise of his participation with the group, ioannis commissioned the cover for cloudborn.  references  progressive rock musical groups from michigan american new wave musical groups musical groups established in 1980
1995-96 bosnia and herzegovina football cup was the second season of the bosnia and herzegovina's annual football cup. the cup was won by celik zenica who defeated sloboda tuzla in the final.  quarterfinals the matches were played on 10 april 1996.  |}  semifinals the matches were played on 15 may 1996.  |}  final  see also  1995-96 first league of bosnia and herzegovina  external links statistics on rsssf sportsport.ba forum  bosnia and herzegovina football cup seasons cup bosnia
eunidia aureicollis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1976.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1976
billingsville is an unincorporated community in union township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  history a post office was established at billingsville in 1833, and remained in operation until 1903. billingsville school was a one-room school erected in billingsville in 1870 and replaced by a two-story school that existed from 1926 to 1953. the community was named after the billings family of settlers.  geography billingsville is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
the 1958 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college, renamed central michigan university in 1959, in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1958 ncaa college division football season.  in their eighth season under head coach kenneth "bill" kelly, the chippewas compiled a 7-3 record (4-2 against iiac opponents) and outscored their opponents by a combined total of 216 to 204.  the team's statistical leaders included oarie lemanski with 455 passing yards and walter beach with 929 rushing yards and 264 receiving yards. beach received the team's most valuable player award for the first of two consecutive years, and he was also named most valuable player in the iiac. five central michigan players (beach, defensive end don beemer, defensive back al bernardi, defensive tackle gene knoblach, and guard jerry sieracki) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  1959 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
haptista is a proposed group of protists made up of centrohelids and haptophytes. phylogenomic studies indicate that haptista, together with ancoracysta twista, forms a sister clade to the tsar supergroup, but it may also be sister to the cryptista (+archaeplastida).  taxonomy based on studies done by cavalier-smith, chao & lewis 2015 and ruggiero et al. 2015.  subphylum centroheliozoa cushman & jarvis 1929 sensu durrschmidt & patterson 1987 [heliozoa haeckel 1862 stat. n. margulis 1974 em. cavalier-smith 2003]  class centrohelea kuhn 1926 stat. n. cavalier-smith 1993 [centroplastiales; centrohelina hartmann 1913; centroplasthelida febvre-chevalier 1984]  subphylum haptophytina cavalier-smith 2015 (haptophyta hibberd 1976 sensu ruggerio et al. 2015)  clade rappemonada kim et al. 2011  class rappephyceae cavalier-smith 2015  clade haptomonada (margulis & schwartz 1998) [haptophyta hibberd 1976 emend. edvardsen & eikrem 2000; prymnesiophyta green & jordan, 1994; prymnesiomonada; prymnesiida hibberd 1976; haptophyceae christensen 1962 ex silva 1980; haptomonadida; patelliferea cavalier-smith 1993]  class pavlovophyceae (cavalier-smith 1986) green & medlin 2000  class prymnesiophyceae christensen 1962 emend. cavalier-smith 1996 [haptophyceae s.s.; prymnesiophycidae cavalier-smith 1986; coccolithophyceae casper 1972 ex rothmaler 1951]  references  external links   tree of life: hacrobia    taxa named by thomas cavalier-smith infrakingdoms
ulrich beyer (23 july 1947 - 20 october 1988) was an amateur light-welterweight boxer from east germany. between 1971 and 1977 he won four medals at the european championships, including a gold in 1971; at the 1974 world championships he placed third. he competed at the 1972 and 1976 olympics, and was eliminated by sugar ray seales in the first bout in 1972 and by sugar ray leonard in a quarterfinal in 1976.  1976 olympic results below is the record of ulrich beyer, an east german light welterweight boxer who competed at the 1976 montreal olympics:   round of 64: defeated c.c. machaiah (india) by decision, 5-0  round of 32: defeated jesus navas (venezuela) by decision, 5-0  round of 16: defeated francisco de jesus (brazil) by decision, 5-0  quarterfinal: lost to ray leonard (united states) by decision, 0-5  references  external links    1947 births 1988 deaths boxers at the 1972 summer olympics boxers at the 1976 summer olympics olympic boxers of east germany east german male boxers recipients of the patriotic order of merit in bronze people from templin aiba world boxing championships medalists light-welterweight boxers
john robinson bailey (1826 - 6 may 1871) was an australian politician from 1 october 1859 to 1 july 1861 and postmaster-general under the nicholson administration from october 1859 to october 1860. bailey was born in leicester, england. he arrived in australia in june, 1852 and set up a hosiery and outfitting warehouse in eureka house, malop street, geelong. he stated he had thirteen years experience in london and new york. he later traded as bailey & honey.  he purchased crown land in germantown, victoria australia (now named grovedale). he farmed this land for four or five years while at the same time took part in editorial work of the geelong observer. in 1858 he moved to ballarat where he edited the ballarat star, which he retained until he went into parliament. he became mla after winning the seat of ballarat west on 1 october 1859 and finishing on 1 july 1861. his appointments were postmaster-general 27 october 1859 to 29 october 1860, vice-president board land & works and commissioner public works from 3 september 1860 to 2 october 1860, and commissioner trade & customs from 19 october 1860 to 26 november 1860.  his parliamentary career ended in 1861 and shortly after he entered the firm of patterson, ray, palmer & co. where he remained until his death. about two years before his death he was appointed a justice of peace for the melbourne district.  he married susannah tylar nicholson on 29 january 1853 at christ church, geelong, victoria. she died on 13 august 1859 at sturt street, ballarat, victoria at the age of 16 after a long and painful illness. he married mary ringrose atkins at christ church, south yarra, victoria on 24 july 1869.   a street in grovedale is named after him. he died on 6 may 1871, aged 45 years, after a long and painful illness at his residence "vaucluse" in richmond, victoria. he was buried at kew cemetery. he left a wife and six children.  references   1826 births 1871 deaths members of the victorian legislative assembly 19th-century australian politicians
the dubai development authority (dda) (arabic: سلطة دبي للتطوير), formally known as dubai creative clusters authority and dubai technology and media free zone authority, is a dubai government authority that oversees the development, control,  municipal, economic and immigration functions across select free zones clusters and other communities by various master developers throughout dubai.  the authority was launched in 2000 to establish dubai as a worldwide hub for knowledge-based industries.  the authority is the main regulatory and administrative body for a number of free zone parks in dubai. in addition to managing the application procedures and issuing licenses for all new businesses, it also enforces and passes laws within its jurisdiction. sheikh maktoum bin mohammed bin rashid al maktoum, deputy ruler of dubai was appointed as chairman of dubai creative clusters authority, and ahmad bin byat as its director general. the authority is mandated to drive the growth of dubai's creative industries by developing policies and programmes to attract, retain and grow creative businesses in dubai.  the authority has partnered with dubai sme to support entrepreneurs and enhance the capabilities of the vital sme sector in the emirate.  in june 2015, dcca launched its first report, entitled, "celebrating 15 years of success and a new mandate." the report provides details of the authority's new mandate and the ways in which it will support and enhance dubai's creative industries. it will be used as a benchmark to measure dcca's delivery against its mandate and is a stepping stone towards fulfilling the authority's role in providing research, intelligence and advocacy.  the dda issues licences for the dubai internet city, dubai media city, dubai knowledge park, dubai international academic city, dubai production city, dubai outsource city, dubai studio city, dubai science park and dubai design district.  the authority has established industry councils and committees to champion key creative industries, investing aed 40 million annually towards the dubai international film festival, dubai film and tv commission, and dubai design and fashion council.  references  2014 establishments in the united arab emirates organizations established in 2014 government agencies of dubai economy of dubai culture in dubai
the mauri hikitia is a various artists album released in 1981. it reached no 4 on the new zealand charts. it features rhonda, ken kincaid, deane waretini, and the lightwood family.  background the album was represented by various maori artists / musicians who came together to support the mount smart stadium project. the term mauri hikitia comes from george tait, a cultural organiser and composer. tait wrote the words to the bridge, which was a number 1 hit for deane waretini.  as a new arrival to the charts, it was no 7 by 24 may 1981. by 14 june, it was at no 4, and by 21 june it had dropped one to position 5.  artists and production it was recorded at mandrill recording studios in auckland.  rhonda was a well known maori entertainer and recording artist, who died in 2007. ken kincaid had a single "easy" released on cbs ba 222834. the b side of the single, "song for home" aka "now is the hour" is from this compilation. the following year, kincaid had another cbs single which wasn't connected to the album. deane waretini had been around since the early 1970s, and prior to his hit with "the bridge" in 1981, he had already had two singles released on the tony mccarthy recordings label. the first was in 1972, and the second the following year.  the album  references  cbs records albums pop albums by new zealand artists maori music 1981 albums
lohgarh  is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  village of grewal sikh  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
peter and wendy is a 2015 television film made for itv in the uk. it was written by adrian hodges, directed by diarmuid lawrence and produced by stewart mackinnon and christian baute, headline pictures.  the film is based on the story of peter pan by j. m. barrie, blending it with an original narrative set in the present day. the film draws a connection between the stories of barrie and the real life great ormond street hospital, echoing sentiments shared by barrie himself, who left all the rights to peter pan to the hospital in 1929, a few years before his death.  it was first broadcast on 26 december 2015.  plot lucy is a teenage girl with a heart condition who is awaiting risky surgery that would save her life. late in the night before her operation she reads a copy of peter pan and dreams she is wendy and peter pan takes her to neverland.  cast  stanley tucci as captain hook/mr. darling/dr. wylie  dan tetsell as ratcliffe/dalton  laura elphinstone as starkey/ali  rasmus hardiker as smee/smith  gershwyn eustache jnr as cecco/yeboah  ricky champ as bill jukes/malik  asim chaudhry as mullins/johnson  laura fraser as mrs. darling/julie rose  hazel doupe as wendy darling/lucy rose  natifa mai as tiger lily/jaya  zak sutcliffe as peter pan  paloma faith as tinker bell  awards the film won an international emmy in 2016, and a special award for best director at the parma film music festival in 2016.  reception the film was generally well received by critics.  see also  great ormond street hospital  peter pan  peter and wendy (novel)  references  external links  peter and wendy - official website of the film    2015 television films 2015 films british television films peter pan films
the 2020 united states senate election in illinois was held on november 3, 2020, to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of illinois, concurrently with the 2020 u.s. presidential election, as well as other elections to the united states senate, elections to the united states house of representatives and various state and local elections and the illinois fair tax. incumbent democratic senator dick durbin, who had been senate minority whip since 2015, won reelection to a fifth term in office, defeating republican nominee mark curran.  election information the primaries and general elections coincide with those for federal (president and house) and those for state offices.  turnout for the primaries, turnout was 28.36% with 2,279,439 votes cast.  democratic primary  candidates  nominee  dick durbin, incumbent u.s. senator  withdrawn  marilyn jordan lawlor, anti-war activist  anne stava-murray, state representative  declined  cheri bustos, incumbent u.s. representative for illinois's 17th congressional district (running for re-election)  lisa madigan, former illinois attorney general  endorsements  results  republican primary  candidates  nominee  mark curran, former lake county sheriff  eliminated in primary  casey chlebek, businessman  peggy hubbard, u.s. navy veteran and former police officer  robert marshall, physician and perennial candidate, democratic primary candidate for governor of illinois in 2018  richard mayers (as a write-in candidate), perennial candidate and alleged white supremacist;  tom tarter, cancer surgeon  withdrew  preston nelson, republican candidate for illinois' 12th congressional district in 2018(ran for il-08 as a libertarian)  dean seppelfrick  connor vlakancic, ceo of 5star inc. (switched to independent)  declined rodney davis, incumbent u.s. representative for illinois's 13th congressional district (running for re-election) erika harold, attorney, former miss america, and nominee for attorney general in 2018 darin lahood, incumbent u.s. representative for illinois's 18th congressional district (running for re-election)  endorsements  results  other candidates a legal ruling, taking note of the covid-19 pandemic in illinois, allowed the libertarian and green parties to have their selected candidate on the ballot without the normal signature requirements, as they each ran a candidate for u.s. senate in 2016.  constitution party  removed from ballot chad koppie, constitution party nominee for the 2018 illinois gubernatorial
election, write-in nominee for the 2016 us senate election in illinois, candidate for the 2014 us senate election in illinois, kane county school board member and retired pilot  green party  nominee david f. black, green party nominee for illinois attorney general in 2010  independent american party  withdrawn keith richardson  libertarian party  nominee danny malouf, human resource director, former republican candidate for the 2020 illinois 14th congressional district election  willie wilson party  declared  willie wilson, businessman and perennial candidate  independents  declared  kevin keely, substitute teacher and community activist (as a write-in candidate)  albert a. schaal (as a write-in candidate)  lowell martin seida, perennial candidate (as a write-in candidate)  withdrawn  patrick feges  julie rushing  connor vlakancic, affiliated with the republican party (switched from republican candidacy)  general election  predictions  endorsements  polling  with dick durbin, generic republican and willie wilson  with dick durbin and willie wilson  results  durbin decisively won re-election with 54.9% of the vote. key to durbin's landslide victory was heavily populated and very democratic cook county home of chicago, which he won by around 560,000 votes. durbin also did well in the suburban, often called collar counties of chicago, winning all of them except mchenry county. durbin did well in champaign county, home of the university of illinois, and st. clair county, where his birth home of east st. louis is located. nevertheless, this was durbin's first election in which he failed to win the formerly democratic-leaning rural alexander county. curran did well in most rural areas of the state, including winning rural alexander county where a republican hasn't won since 1972.  durbin flipped eight counties that he had not won in 2014, in dekalb, dupage, kane, kendall, mclean, peoria, will and winnebago counties, but lost the counties of alexander, calhoun, gallatin, pulaski and whiteside.  durbin became the first senator from illinois to be elected five consecutive times since senators began being elected by popular vote in 1913. durbin also kept his landslide winning streak by winning with at least a ten-point margin. durbin was sworn in on january 3, 2021 for his fifth term, which expires on january 3, 2027.  notes   partisan clients  references  external links       (state affiliate of the u.s. league of women voters
)    official campaign websites  david black (g) for u.s. senate   mark curran (r) for u.s. senate  dick durbin (d) for u.s. senate  danny malouf (l) for u.s. senate   willie wilson (i) for u.s. senate   2020 illinois united states senate
the 2016 rangitikei local elections were held across the rangitikei district of manawatu-whanganui, new zealand, between 16 september and 8 october. these elections were for the offices of mayor of rangitikei, eleven members of the rangitikei district council, four members each of two community boards, two members of the horizons regional council and seven members of the whanganui district health board; these elections were part of the new zealand-wide local elections. postal ballots will be issued to all registered voters.  the incumbent mayor was andy watson, who on 9 june announced his intention on seeking re-election. first past the post (fpp) was be to used for all elections except the district health board elections which used single transferable vote (stv).  the previous elections took place in october 2013 and the following will take place in october 2019.  dates following are the key dates for the local elections:  mayor  the incumbent mayor of rangitikei was andy watson, first elected in 2013. watson sought re-election and contested the election along with community patrol chair george london and civil engineer rob snijders.  incumbent mayor watson was declared re-elected on 13 october 2016.  district council  bulls ward the bulls ward elected two councillors. the incumbent councillors were tim harris and rebecca mcneil. harris and mcneil both sought re-election.  both incumbents lost re-election to new candidates platt and dunn.  hunterville ward the hunterville ward elected one councillor. the incumbent councillor is dean mcmanaway, the deputy mayor. mcmanaway, who was elected unopposed in 2013, was elected unopposed for a second consecutive time in 2016.  marton ward the marton ward elected four councillors. the incumbent councillors were cath ash, nigel belsham, mike jones and lynne sheridan. ash, belsham and sheridan sought re-election; jones retired from politics.  belsham, sheridan and ash were all re-elected; dave wilson was elected.  taihape ward the taihape ward elected three councillors. the incumbent councillors were richard aslett, angus gordon and ruth rainey. all three incumbents are seeking re-election.  all three incumbents were re-elected.  turakina ward the turakina ward elected one councillor. the incumbent councillor is soraya peke-mason. peke-mason, who was elected unopposed in 2013, was elected unopposed for a second consecutive term.  community boards  ratana community board the ratana community board is
composed of four members. the incumbent members were maata kare thompson, nadine rawhiti, bjorn barlien and tama biddle.  thompson was re-elected and rawhiti lost her seat. charlie mete, charlie rourangi and thomas tautaurangi were also elected.  taihape community board the taihape community board is composed of four members. the incumbent members were michelle fannin, gail larsen, peter oliver and yvonne sicely. fannin, larsen and sicely were re-elected unopposed and ann abernathy was elected unopposed also.  regional election as part of the manawatu-whanganui region, rangitikei electors form part of the manawatu-rangitikei constituency of the horizons regional council. this constituency elects two members. the incumbent councillors were chairman bruce gordon and gordon mckellar. both incumbents were re-elected unopposed.  district health board election rangitikei district is part of the whanganui district health board (wdhb), one of 20 district health boards in new zealand. the wdhb consists of seven elected members and up to four members appointed by the minister of health. the incumbent elected members were allan anderson, philippa baker-hogan, jenny duncan, kate joblin, judith macdonald and ray stevens. baker-hogan, duncan, macdonald and stevens are running for re-election, with eleven other candidates running including incumbent mayor of whanganui annette main.  baker-hogan, duncan and macdonald were re-elected; stevens lost re-election. annette main, charlie anderson, graham adams, and stuart hylton were also elected. this election used the single transferable vote (stv) electoral system.  see also 2013 rangitikei local elections 2016 rangitikei mayoral election 2016 new zealand local elections  references  external links 2016 elections information on the rangitikei district council website 2016 elections information on the electoral commission website  rangitikei politics of rangitikei rangitikei
yasmin frances kaashoek (born 3 march 1999) is a british volleyball player, a member of the england women's national junior volleyball team and wessex volleyball club, a competitor at the cev u18 european beach volleyball championships and inaugural world u17 beach volleyball championships where she alongside anaya evans became the first england duo to finish top-10 in an international competition.  personal life yasmin was born in devizes to hans kaashoek. she has a younger brother aged fifteen who plays football in his school years.  career yasmin found volleyball and began playing for devizes volleyball from a young age. her passion and talent grew and was noticed by coaches at regional training. yasmin was selected to represent the south west in the inter-regional competition which caught scouts' eyes. yasmin soon was further selected to train with the england cadets well as the england junior beach squad winning her first international caps months later. yasmin moved to leaf elite athlete academy to join the volleyball programme alongside other national junior greats.  national championships   2015/2016  volleyball england national u18 indoor volleyball championship, with wessex leaf volleyball  2015/2016  volleyball england national u18 grand prix, with wessex leaf volleyball  national team  nevza u17 indoor volleyball championships  nezva u19 indoor volleyball championships  world u17 beach volleyball championships  cev u18 european beach volleyball championships  individually  2014 super 6 at the sainsbury's school games  references  external links  beach volleyball database  flashscore athlete profile  fivb world tour profile  bournemouth echo  gazette and herald  north devon journal  1999 births living people english women's volleyball players english women's beach volleyball players people from devizes people from bournemouth opposite hitters
aleksandr aleksandrovich rudenko (; born 15 march 1999) is a russian football player who plays for fc khimki.  club career he made his debut in the russian football national league for fc spartak-2 moscow on 11 july 2016 in a game against fc sibir novosibirsk.  on 26 december 2019 he joined fc torpedo moscow on loan until the end of the 2019-20 season.  on 25 july 2020 he moved to sochi on loan for the 2020-21 season, with an option to purchase.  on 19 february 2022, rudenko signed a contract with khimki until the end of the 2023-24 season.  references  external links        profile by russian football national league  1999 births people from rodionovo-nesvetaysky district living people russian footballers russia youth international footballers association football forwards fc spartak moscow players fc spartak-2 moscow players fc torpedo moscow players pfc sochi players fc khimki players russian premier league players russian football national league players
asmelash geyesus (born 22 march 1968) is an ethiopian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1968 births living people ethiopian male cyclists olympic cyclists of ethiopia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
this is a list of notable individuals and organizations who voiced their endorsement of donald trump as the republican party's presidential nominee for the 2016 u.s. presidential election.  primary campaign endorsements  former executive branch officials   gary berntsen, former officer of the central intelligence agency directorate of operations (1982-2005)  pat buchanan, white house communications director (1985-1987), senior advisor to richard nixon and gerald ford, author, and columnist  jeffrey d. gordon, retired united states navy officer, communications and foreign policy adviser, and pentagon spokesman from (2005-2009)  michael johns, former white house speechwriter to president george h. w. bush and co-founder and national leader of the u.s. tea party movement  jeffrey lord, white house associate political director for the reagan administration (1987-1988) and political commentator  joseph e. schmitz, inspector general of the department of defense (2002-2005), former executive with blackwater worldwide, and member of the foreign policy advising committee for the trump campaign.  u.s. senators  current  jeff sessions of alabama  former  scott brown of massachusetts  jeffrey chiesa of new jersey  bob kasten of wisconsin  u.s. representatives current   lou barletta of pennsylvania (previously endorsed rick santorum)  chris collins of new york (previously endorsed jeb bush)  kevin cramer of north dakota  jim renacci of ohio  scott desjarlais of tennessee  jimmy duncan of tennessee  renee ellmers of north carolina  duncan d. hunter of california  tom marino of pennsylvania  jeff miller of florida, also chairman of the house veterans' affairs committee  tom reed of new york (previously endorsed jeb bush)  bill shuster of pennsylvania, also chairman of the house transportation committee  former  virgil goode of virginia (also constitutional party presidential nominee in 2012)  bob livingston of louisiana  doug ose of california  retired u.s. armed forces members  michael t. flynn, retired u.s. lieutenant general, director of the u.s. defense intelligence agency (2012-2014), commander of the joint functional component command for intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance, and foreign policy adviser to the trump campaign  bert mizusawa, retired u.s. army major general, former deputy director for strategic initiatives, joint chiefs of staff, former commander of the combined joint interagency task force-afghanistan (cjiatf-a), and adviser to the trump campaign  robert c. oaks, retired u.s. air force general,
commander of air training command and united states air forces in europe (1986-1990), former senior vice president of u.s. airways, and general authority of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints  paul e. vallely, retired u.s. army major general, 351st civil affairs commander (1982-1986), former deputy commanding general, pacific command, co-author of endgame: the blueprint for victory in the war on terror, and military committee chairman for the center for security policy  state governors current   chris christie, new jersey (former 2016 presidential candidate)  paul lepage, maine (previously endorsed chris christie)  rick scott, florida  territorial governors  ralph torres, northern mariana islands  former   jan brewer, arizona  donald difrancesco, new jersey (previously endorsed chris christie)  sarah palin, alaska (former 2008 vice presidential candidate)  state officials current  pam bondi, attorney general of florida (previously endorsed jeb bush)  henry mcmaster, lt. governor of south carolina  eric skrmetta, louisiana public service commissioner  former  andre bauer, lieutenant governor of south carolina  state legislators current  alabama state representatives: ed henry,  connecticut state representative: anthony d'amelio  florida state representative: matt gaetz  georgia state senators: burt jones, michael williams  iowa state senator: brad zaun  massachusetts state representative: geoff diehl  michigan state senators: jack brandenburg, and joe hune  mississippi state representatives: becky currie, alex monsour, margaret rogers, gary chism, gary staples  nebraska state senators: beau mccoy and tommy garrett  nevada state assemblyman: brent a. jones  new hampshire state representatives: fred doucette, werner horn, joe pitre, stephen stepanek (deputy majority leader), dan tamburello, joshua whitehouse, al baldasaro, sue delemus, tracy emerick, peter varney, dan itse, jeffrey oligny, joe duarte, david wood, robert luther, gary azarian, john j. manning jr., steven woitkun, elisabeth sanders  new jersey state senators: michael j. doherty, joe pennacchio  pennsylvania state representative mike vereb  south carolina state representatives:  james h. merrill (former majority leader), mike ryhal  utah state representative: greg hughes (speaker)  washington state senators: don benton  west virginia state senators: donna j. boley, bill cole (president)  west virginia state delegates: randy smith, ron walters,
ray canterbury, joshua nelson  former  arizona state senators: lori klein, thayer verschoor  georgia state representative: charlice byrd  idaho state representative: phil hart  louisiana state representative: stephen l. gunn (independent)  louisiana state representative: woody jenkins  louisiana state senator: troy hebert  new hampshire state senators: frank sapareto, dick ferdinando  new hampshire state representatives: jenn coffey and paula johnson, laurie pettengill, john hikel, lou gargiulo, tom boriso, george lambert, tom boriso  south carolina state senators:  jake knotts  west virginia state senator: vic sprouse  mayors and other municipal or county leaders current   joe arpaio, sheriff of maricopa county, arizona  joseph borelli, council member for the 51st district of the new york city council  mary hawkins butler, mayor of madison, mississippi  arnaldo ferraro, republican party chairman of kings county, new york  tim howard, erie county sheriff  ed mangano, county executive of nassau county, new york  joseph mondello, republican party chairman of nassau county, new york  bill reilich, supervisor of the town of greece, new york  corey stewart, chairman of the prince william board of county supervisors  keith summey, mayor of north charleston, south carolina  former  greg edwards, former chautauqua county executive  charles evers, former mayor of fayette, mississippi, civil rights activist and brother of the late (first black mayor of mississippi) medgar evers  rudy giuliani, former mayor of new york city, new york  vincent ignizio, council member for the 51st district of the new york city council  tom leppert, former mayor of dallas, texas  businesspeople   thomas j. barrack, jr., founder and chairman of colony capital  andrew beal, founder and chairman of beal bank  bernard brscic, slovenian neo-liberal economist  bernie ecclestone, formula one group chief executive  marc faber, swiss investor  brian france, ceo and chairman of nascar  harold hamm, billionaire,  entrepreneur, and oil and gas industry pioneer  carl icahn, billionaire activist investor  robert kiyosaki, businessman and author (authored two business books with the candidate)  charles kushner, real estate developer and co-owner of kushner properties  jared kushner, co-owner of kushner properties, owner of the new york observer, son-in-law of the candidate  erik laykin, author, international cybersecurity expert and co-chair of la trump  nancy
mace, businesswoman and author  carl paladino, real estate mogul, chairman of the ellicott development co., buffalo public schools board of education member, 2010 new york gubernatorial candidate  willie robertson, ceo of duck commander, star of duck dynasty (previously endorsed bobby jindal)  wayne allyn root, businessman, politician, television and radio personality (and libertarian party nominee for vice president in 2008)  phil ruffin, businessman, owner of treasure island hotel and casino, and partner of trump hotel las vegas  lou sola, miami yachtbroker and republican donor   paul teutul, sr. co. founder of orange county choppers  donald trump jr., businessman, son of the candidate  eric trump, businessman and philanthropist, son of the candidate  ivanka trump, businesswoman, writer, and former model, daughter of the candidate  dana white, president of ultimate fighting championship  steve wynn, billionaire business magnate, ceo of wynn resorts limited  wirt yerger iii, business leader  university and academic figures current  a.d amar, professor of management at the w. paul stillman school of business, seton hall university, south orange, nj  peter navarro, professor of economics and public policy at the paul merage school of business, university of california, irvine  walid phares, lebanese-born american professor at the national defense university and daniel morgan academy in washington, member of the foreign policy advising committee for the trump campaign  former  ben carson, retired johns hopkins neurosurgeon and former 2016 presidential candidate  international political figures  national ministers and secretaries  david johnston, australian senator for the liberal party and former minister for defence  members of national and supranational parliaments  gilbert collard, french mp, member of the rassemblement bleu marine (rbm)  filip dewinter, belgian politician, flemish mp and member of the flemish nationalist vlaams belang  mark latham, australian politician, former mp, former leader of the opposition, author of civilising global capital, and member and former leader of the social democratic australian labor party  ilias panagiotaros, greek politician, mp, and member of the nationalist and metaxist golden dawn party  david rachline, member of the french senate, former mayor of frejus, and member of the front national  vladimir zhirinovsky, russian politician, vice chairman of the state duma and leader of the liberal democratic party of russia  regional ministers, legislators, and party leaders  nigel farage, former leader (twice) and current interim leader of
the uk independence party (2006-2009, 2010-2016, interim leader 2016-), gave a speech at one trump rally but never officially endorsed him due to farage previously being critical of barack obama for endorsing remain pre. brexit. (previously supported rand paul)  pauline hanson, australian politician, leader of pauline hanson's one nation and senator for the state of queensland  jean-marie le pen, french politician, mep, founder and former leader of the souverainist front national  henry de lesquen, french politician, candidate for president of french republic in 2017, founder and president of french national liberal party  robert menard, french independent politician (supported by the front national) and mayor of beziers, france  mischael modrikamen, belgian politician, leader of the people's party  tomio okamura, czech politician, leader of freedom and direct democracy  andrey rostenko, russian politician, mayor of yalta, crimea  matteo salvini, italian politician, mep, leader of the secessionist lega nord  vojislav seselj, serbian politician, founder and leader of the serbian radical party  andrej sisko, leader of the right-wing movement of united slovenia  tom van grieken, belgian politician, flemish mp and leader of the flemish nationalist vlaams belang  geert wilders, dutch politician, mp, and leader of the national liberal party for freedom  organizations   american freedom party  national black republican association  rent is too damn high party  trade unions  national border patrol council, largest border patrol union in u.s, representing 16,000 members. (first presidential endorsement in history)  new england police benevolent association  religious leaders  mark burns, pastor and co-founder of the south carolina-based christian tv network, the now network  jerry falwell, jr., president of liberty university  robert jeffress, pastor of first baptist church in dallas, texas  emmanuel lemelson, greek orthodox priest in new hampshire  james f. linzey, ordained minister in the southern baptist convention  james david manning, chief pastor at the atlah world missionary church  mike murdock, singer-songwriter, televangelist and pastor of the wisdom center ministry  other notable individuals  actors and comedians   kirstie alley, actress, comedian and spokesmodel  scott baio, actor (previously endorsed scott walker)  stephen baldwin, actor  gary busey, actor  robert davi, actor, singer, and director  lou ferrigno, actor and bodybuilder
jerry lewis, comedian, actor, singer, producer, screenwriter, and director  amy lindsay, actress and former softcore pornographic film performer  brandi love, adult model and pornographic actress  jim norton, comedian, actor, radio host  jean-claude van damme, belgian actor, martial artist, screenwriter, film producer, and director  jon voight, actor  fred williamson, actor  athletes and sports figures   rocky boiman, former nfl linebacker, talk radio host  tom brady, nfl quarterback  adrien broner, professional boxer  clay buchholz, mlb pitcher  zeb colter, professional wrestling manager  john daly, professional golfer  johnny damon, retired mlb player  ted dibiase, former professional wrestler  mike ditka, retired nfl player, coach and television commentator  bernie ecclestone, ceo formula one, uk labour party member  bill elliott, retired nascar driver  chase elliott, nascar driver  natalie gulbis, professional golfer on the u.s.-based lpga tour.  hulk hogan, former professional wrestler  holly holm, mixed martial artist  lou holtz, hall of fame college football coach  richie incognito,  nfl player  gene keady, college basketball coach  bob knight, hall of fame college basketball coach  jerry lawler, professional wrestler  matt light, retired nfl offensive tackle  nick mangold, all-pro nfl center for the new york jets  mark martin, retired nascar driver  shawne merriman, retired nfl linebacker  ryan newman, nascar driver  paul o'neill, retired mlb baseball player  tito ortiz, former ufc light-heavyweight champion  terrell owens, retired nfl wide receiver and television personality  billy packer, former college basketball player and color analyst  digger phelps, former college basketball coach  david ragan, nascar driver  john rocker, retired mlb baseball player  dennis rodman, retired professional basketball player and television personality  rex ryan, nfl head coach for the buffalo bills, also former head coach for the new york jets  chael sonnen, retired ufc fighter, espn commentator and actor  latrell sprewell, retired nba all-star basketball player  miesha tate, former ufc women's bantamweight champion  mike tyson, former professional boxer, actor  kevin von erich, former professional wrestler  herschel walker, retired nfl player and mma fighter  chris weidman, former ufc middleweight champion  political strategists  alex castellanos, cuban american political consultant. he has worked on electoral campaigns for republican candidates including bob dole, george
w. bush, jeb bush and mitt romney.  commentators, writers and columnists   conrad black, canadian-born british citizen, convicted criminal, former newspaper publisher and author  ann coulter, political commentator and writer  adam curry, political commentator and former mtv vj  lou dobbs, american television personality, author, radio host and host of lou dobbs tonight on fox business  alexander dugin, russian political scientist, author of the foundations of geopolitics and the fourth political theory and member of the russian nationalist eurasia party  dmitri k. kiselyov, head of government-owned russian news agency rossiya segodnya (russia today) on channel rossiya 1  paul j. manafort, trump campaign chairman, lobbyist, senior republican political consultant, former director of the center for the study of democratic institutions, former consultant to ousted ukrainian president viktor yanukovych  gavin mcinnes, writer, creative director, actor, comedian, and co-founder of vice media and proud boys  michael scheuer, political blogger, author and former chief of the bin laden issue station  hossein shariatmadari,  iranian conservative journalist and editor-in-chief of kayhan  jared taylor, white nationalist and political writer, founder of american renaissance magazine  daryush valizadeh, author, columnist, owner of return of kings website  diana west, author and columnist  milo yiannopoulos, british journalist and political commentator  media personalities and socialites  dan bilzerian, professional poker player, media personality (previously endorsed rand paul)  diamond and silk, youtube personalities  teresa giudice, television personality from the real housewives of new jersey who worked with trump on the celebrity apprentice  jesse james, television personality and former ceo of austin speed shop  charlotte laws, television host and author  steve malzberg, host of the steve malzberg show on newsmax tv  omarosa manigault, reality television show personality, and baptist minister  dennis michael lynch, host of unfiltered on newsmax tv and founder and ceo of tv360  judy shalom nir-mozes, israeli socialite and tv personality  fpsrussia, youtube personality  jeanine pirro, judge, tv show host, and host of justice with judge jeanine on fox news channel  tila tequila, model, actress and television personality  ivana trump, ex-wife of the candidate, socialite and former athlete and fashion model  melania trump, wife of the candidate, jewelry and watch designer and former fashion model  kendra wilkinson
, glamour model, businesswoman, and television personality  melissa young, miss wisconsin 2005  radio hosts   andy dean, radio host  john fredericks, radio host  alex jones, radio host (previously endorsed rand paul)  lars larson, radio host  singers and musicians   azealia banks, rapper and singer-songwriter  zoltan bathory, guitarist of five finger death punch  jesse hughes, singer, songwriter and guitarist, best known as frontman of the california-based rock band eagles of death metal  white dawg, dirty south crunk rapper  young dro, hip hop recording artist  loretta lynn, country music singer-songwriter  justin moore, singer and songwriter  wayne newton, entertainer and singer  ted nugent, musician, singer-songwriter and political activist  kid rock, musician, actor (previously endorsed ben carson)  gene simmons, musician, kiss  sergey 'pauk' troitsky, leader of russian thrash metal band corrosia metalla  social and political activists  christopher barron, founder of lgbt for trump  day gardner, founder and president of the national black pro life union and associate director of national pro-life center  jim gilchrist, leader and co-founder of the minuteman project  jimmy mcmillan, former new york city mayoral and new york gubernatorial candidate (rent is too damn high party)  phyllis schlafly, conservative activist and founder of the eagle forum  orly taitz, conservative activist and conspiracy theorist, leading promoter of "birther" movement  newspapers and websites  drudge report, conservative websites  national enquirer, supermarket tabloid  new york observer, new website  new york post, daily newspaper  santa barbara news-press, broadsheet newspaper  other  juanita broaddrick, former nursing home administrator, accused bill clinton of rape  paula jones, former arkansas state employee, accused bill clinton of sexual harassment  general campaign endorsements  list of donald trump presidential campaign endorsements, 2016  see also  newspaper endorsements in the united states presidential primaries, 2016  list of donald trump presidential campaign endorsements, 2016  references   trump, donald endorsements 2016 united states presidential election endorsements endorsements, 2016
rosemary o'leary is the edwin o. stene distinguished professor of public administration at the university of kansas. her research focuses on public management, collaboration, conflict resolution, environmental and natural resources management, and public law.  career  rosemary o'leary was appointed the edwin o. stene distinguished professor of public administration at the university of kansas in 2013, following a 24 year career at the maxwell school of citizenship and public affairs of syracuse university (phanstiel distinguished chair in strategic management and leadership) and the school of public and environmental affairs at indiana university-bloomington (professor). o'leary is the author or editor of 12 books and more than 135 articles and book chapters on public management, and she has won 12 national research awards (including 7 senior scholar awards) and 10 teaching awards. she is also the only person to win three network of schools of public policy, affairs and administration awards for best dissertation (1989), excellence in teaching (1996), and distinguished research (2004). o'leary was president of the public management research association, 2017-2019.  in 2019, the international research society for public management (irspm) established the annual "rosemary o'leary prize for outstanding scholarship on women in public administration."  selected awards and honors   provan award (for outstanding contributions to empirical theory) given by the academy of management public and nonprofit division, 2017.  frederickson award (for lifetime achievement and continuous contributions to public management research over an extended career) given by the public management research association, 2017.  routledge award (for "outstanding contribution to public management research") given by the  international research society for public management (irspm), 2017.  john gaus award (for a "lifetime of exemplary scholarship in the joint tradition of political science and public administration") given by the american political science association, 2016.  dwight waldo award (for "distinguished contributions to the professional literature of public administration and in recognition of a distinguished career as author, educator, and public administrator"), given by the american society for public administration, 2014. distinguished research award ("for published work that has had a substantial impact on the thought and understanding of public administration"), given jointly by the network of schools of public policy, affairs and administration and the american society for public administration, 2004.  co-author of "one of 75 most influential articles since 1940" commendation from public administration review (with l. bingham and t. nabatchi), 2014, for "the new governance: practices and processes for stake
holder and citizen participation in the work  of government," public administration review, vol. 665, no. 5, pp. 547-558, 2005.  charles h. levine memorial award (for "excellence in public administration research, teaching, and service to the broader community"), american society for public administration and the national association of schools of public affairs and administration, 2007.  nasa public service medal (for "distinguished leadership, dedication and commitment" as a member of the nasa return to flight task group assembled in response to the columbia space shuttle accident), 2005.  elected fellow, u.s. national academy of public administration, 1998.  selected publications  rosemary o'leary, the ethics of dissent: managing guerrilla government, 3rd edition. washington d.c.: congressional quarterly press, 180 pp. (2020); second edition (2014); first edition (2006). coined the term "guerrilla government" to describe public servants who clandestinely disobey the wishes of their superiors in order to do what they think is right (e.g., edward snowden, chelsea manning). the ideas in this book have been presented in 8 countries.  david rosenbloom, rosemary o'leary, and joshua chan, public administration and law, 3rd edition. new york: crc press 329 pp. (2010). previous edition: david rosenbloom and rosemary o'leary, public administration and law, 2nd edition. new york: marcel dekker, 344 pp. (1997). translated into chinese (2005).  rosemary o'leary, robert durant, daniel fiorino, and paul weiland, managing for the environment. san francisco: jossey-bass, 436 pp. (1999).  winner of the "best book in public and non-profit management" award, given by the  academy of management, 2000.  winner of the "best book in environmental and natural resources administration" award, given by the american society for public administration, 1999.  rosemary o'leary and catherine gerard, collaboration across boundaries: insights and tips from federal senior executives. ibm center for the business of government, 50 pp. (2012).  rosemary o'leary and lisa blomgren bingham, a manager's guide to resolving conflicts in collaborative networks. ibm center for the business of government, 50 pp. (2007).  amy kneedler donahue and rosemary o'leary, "do shocks change organizations?  the case of nasa." journal of public administration research and theory (
lead article), 22, 395-425 (2012).  rosemary o'leary, yujin choi, and catherine gerard.  "the skill set of the successful collaborator"  public administration review, 72 (s1) 70-83 (2012).  rosemary o'leary and nidhi vij.  "collaborative public management:  where have we been and where are we going?"  american review of public administration,  42, 507-522 (2012).  rosemary o'leary, "guerrilla employees: should managers nurture, tolerate, or terminate them?" public administration review, 70 (1) 8 - 18 (january/february 2010).  notable experience   creator and coordinator of the minnowbrook iii conference (2008) which assessed the future of public administration around the world.  elected member of the national academy of public administration.  senior fulbright scholar in malaysia and in the philippines.  ian axford public policy scholar in new zealand (2014).  member of the nasa's return to flight task group assembled in response to the columbia space shuttle accident (2003-2005).  served as a consultant to:  u.s. office of personnel management and federal executive institute  u.s. council on environmental quality  u.s. department of interior  u.s. environmental protection agency  u.s. geological survey  u.s. national aeronautics and space administration  international city/county management association  national academy of sciences  national science foundation  new york state department of environmental conservation  indiana department of environmental management  u.s. institute for environmental conflict resolution  lmi consulting selected academic leadership positions: director, school of public affairs & administration, university of kansas, 2017-2019 executive committee and board of directors, university of kansas center for research, inc (kucr) senior administrative fellow, university of kansas 2015-2016 co-director, program for the advancement of research in conflict and collaboration (institute director - parcc), maxwell school of syracuse university 2004-2009 co-founder, e-parcc: free, open-source online cases and simulations on collaboration 2004 co-founder, collaborative governance initiative, maxwell school of syracuse university 2004 interim director, campbell institute, syracuse university, 2000-2001 co-director, indiana conflict resolution institute, 1997-1998 director, ph.d. program, university of kansas, 2013-2014 director, ph.d program, maxwell school of syracuse university, 2001-2004 chair, environmental administration section, american society for public administration
1995 chair, public administration section, american political science association 1994  references  university of kansas faculty syracuse university faculty year of birth missing (living people) living people public administration scholars environmental social scientists american women political scientists american political scientists american women academics 21st-century american women
samuel bowen (1799 - 1887) was a welsh independent minister, and teacher. he was son of david bowen, one of the founders of the independent church in blaen-y-coed. samuel was educated at carmarthen grammar school, and was subsequently admitted to the academy at llanfyllin (which moved to newtown in 1821). after completing his studies at the college, he was appointed a member of the college staff. he was also appointed minister of kerry chapel near newtown in the same year.  he accepted the appointment in 1830 of minister of macclesfield, an appointment which lasted for 30 years. he eventually transferred to an appointment in burnley where he remained until 1875.  he died in burnley in 1887.  references   welsh religious leaders welsh educators 1799 births 1887 deaths 19th-century welsh clergy 19th-century welsh educators
ras protein activator like 3 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the rasal3 gene.  references  further reading
tapirus mesopotamicus is an extinct species of tapir that lived in south america during the pleistocene. it is considered a possible ancestor of all extant south american tapirs.  description  this species was originally described by b. s. ferrero and j. i. noriega in 2007. their description was based on quite complete cranial pieces exhumed from sediments of the lujan river in the diamante department, in the province of entre rios, in central-eastern argentina.  the type specimen is cicyttp-pv-m-1-23, a skull and proximal fragment of the right jaw. its type locality is the north bank of the ensenada stream, on a pleistocene lake-fluvial horizon in the "arroyo feliciano formation" of argentina.  it is described as having a long and robust skull, with a short rostrum with respect to the total length of the skull. the skull has a single, non-arched sagittal crest, large flat parietal bones on the anterior skull cover, with the temporal crests converging very close to the frontal-parietal suture. the palate is highly arched, the premaxilla is deeply serrated above the canine, and the upper jaw and base of the zygomatic process are surprisingly robust. the p1 is short and quadrangular, and the mandibular condyle is thin, with the posterior wall flat or somewhat concave.  an extensive study of all the tapirus materials collected in the fossil deposits of south america concluded that this is a valid species.  on the basis of morphometric analysis of its teeth, it is concluded that tapirus mesopotamicus is significantly smaller than the larger fossil or living tapirs, such as tapirus indicus, tapirus oliverasi, tapirus tarijensis, and tapirus haysii; and that it was similar in size to tapirus terrestris and tapirus rondoniensis.  habitat and diet  this species, like any member of the tapirus genus, is associated with warm climates: rainforest, savanna or humid tropical or subtropical forests near rivers; with a herbivorous diet of leaves and fruits.  references   prehistoric tapirs pleistocene mammals of south america
the 56th oregon legislative assembly convened for its regular session in 1971. the democratic party of oregon held the majority in the oregon state senate, and the oregon republican party held the majority in the oregon house of representatives. republican tom mccall was the governor of oregon.  according to a biography of mccall, the two most significant legislative efforts during the session were the oregon bottle bill, which passed, and a bill to "thwart migrant farm workers' attempts to form labor unions," which mccall vetoed.  references   1971 in oregon oregon legislative sessions 1971 u.s. legislative sessions 1972 in oregon 1972 u.s. legislative sessions
yang lian is the name of:  yang lian (prince) (died 940), prince of wu during the five dynasties and ten kingdoms period yang lian (poet) (born 1955), swiss-born chinese poet yang lian (weightlifter) (born 1982), chinese weightlifter
witless is a british thriller sitcom created by lloyd woolf and joe tucker, produced by objective fiction, part of objective media group, for the bbc. the first episode of the first series was released on 22 april 2016 on bbc three, with a new episode weekly. a second series was commissioned prior to the series finale to air in early 2017, with the full series released on 25 january 2017. a third series was commissioned on 23 february 2017, in a statement co-star kerry howard said she was "beyond thrilled that witless has a third series". the full third series was released on 10 january 2018. before it was released howard confirmed on her twitter page that this would be the final series.  two young women, rhona and leanne (played by zoe boyle and kerry howard), who share a flat in bristol, are later placed in witness protection after witnessing a murder. they are given new identities and moved to a flat in swindon where they find their very recent past coming back to haunt them whilst they attempt to blend in with their surroundings.  series overview  cast   kerry howard as leanne   zoe boyle as rhona   samuel anderson as patrick   nicholas fruin as adrian "dj sound as fuck"  t'nia miller as dc wilton   nick preston as benny   francis magee as willy whelan (series 2-3)   tim faraday as one pack (series 2-3)   charlotte eaton as jackie (series 1-2)  tom cawte as appraisal (series 1, guest series 3)   john hodgkinson as sergeant tony forrest (series 1)  samuel oatley as ian (series 1)  john inverdale as himself (series 1, guest series 2-3)  episodes  series 1 (2016)  series 2 (2017)  series 3 (2018)  references  external links  2016 british television series debuts 2018 british television series endings 2010s british black comedy television series 2010s british sitcoms bbc crime television shows bbc television sitcoms british crime comedy television series crime thriller television series english-language television shows murder in television swindon television shows set in bristol television shows set in wiltshire works about contract killers works about witness protection
y.a.r.o. ka tashan is an indian drama television series that aired from 26 july 2016 to 22 may 2017 on sab tv. it starred anirudh dave, rakesh bedi, malini kapoor and mahira sharma.  plot the story of the series is about professor govardhan agrawal (rakesh bedi) and his wife beena agrawal (malini kapoor) who consider y.a.r.o (young assembled robotic object) as their own son and programmed him to behave like a 6-year-old human but later 15 and 21 year old human. in the first episode, professor govardhan agrawal is happily married to beena. however, the couple does not have a child despite many years of marriage. professor agrawal creates a humanoid and names it y.a.r.o . professor and his wife treat y.a.r.o as their own son and show love and affection to him. three goons plan to kidnap mr. raju's son. y.a.r.o. comes to the rescue of the child and saves him from the kidnappers. on the other hand, amar and prem come to the office of cool advertising. yaro makes a call to the police and informs them that a child has been kidnapped from his family. y.a.r.o learns that chaturvedi is getting late for his office. yaro hits chaturvedi's scooter with full force which helps him reach the office in time. dolly meets yaro and suggests him to not cause any trouble to chaturvedi in the future. beena thanks yaro for cleaning her house.  in episode 4, y.a.r.o. welcomes his new tenants amar, prem and shilpy to his house. he also extends his hand of friendship to them. however, the trio gets terrified to see y.a.r.o.'s superhuman capabilities and avoid him. later, chaturvedi yells at y.a.r.o.'s tenants for insulting him in their house. dolly has fallen for prem and she is trying hard to get his attention. on the other hand, professor govardhan agrawal inserts a tracker in y.a.r.o.'s body to keep an eye on his activities. shilpy, amar and prem invite y.a.r.o. to a party. they offer y.a.r.o. a glass of juice which would ward
off evil spirit from his body. y.a.r.o. drinks the juice, which causes circuit damage in his body. beena tells her tenants that y.a.r.o. is a humanoid. professor govardhan decides to reboot the system of y.a.r.o. he requests amar and prem to not allow chaturvedi to enter his house. then a new family enters the friends' colony. thus y.a.r.o. became the entertainment of people.  cast anirudh dave as young assembled agrawal robotic object aka y.a.r.o (bina and govardhan agrawal's son, sanjana's husband, amar, prem, dolly and shilpy's friend) shubhi ahuja as sanjana kapoor agrawal (y.a.r.o's wife) rakesh bedi as govardhan agrawal (y.a.r.o's father) malini kapoor as bina agrawal (y.a.r.o's mother) shoma anand as dadi cool (y.a.r.o's grandmother) mahira sharma as shilpy shivam sharma/abhishek sharma as amar  dheeraj gumber as prem ajay sharma as mr. x salim zaidi as inspector doobey jayshree soni as dolly umesh bajpai as chaturvedi chintamani manish mishraa as puppy sir krissann barretto as shanaya oberoi gopi bhalla as goga kapoor monica castelino as sushmita kapoor (shush) karan chhabra as ranjeet ishita ganguly as minty shakeel abbasi  as jatin birbal jazz sodhi as petra shefali rana as prem's mother  references  external links    2016 indian television series debuts 2017 indian television series endings hindi-language television shows indian drama television series sony sab original programming indian science fiction television series indian superhero television shows androids in television
the gens juventia, occasionally written jubentia, was an ancient plebeian family at rome.  after centuries of obscurity, the gens emerges into history with the appearance of titus juventius, a military tribune, in the beginning of the second century bc.  the first of the juventii to obtain the consulship was marcus juventius thalna in 163 bc.  but the family is renowned less for its statesmen than for its jurists, who flourished during the second century ad.  origin the juventii were said to have come to rome from tusculum, probably during the fourth century bc.  cicero reports a claim, which he regards as incorrect, that the first of the plebeian aediles was a juventius, and in fact the juventii are not mentioned until bc 197, although there is no reason to doubt that the family had already been at rome for some generations.  the nomen juventius is certainly derived from the latin juventas, "youth", personified by the goddess juventas, but the family is probably of etruscan origin, as the surname thalna, borne by a number of the earliest juventii, has the same meaning; juventius is simply the latin version of their original name.  praenomina the earlier juventii used the praenomina titus, lucius, manius, publius, and gaius.  from the first century bc we also find marcus.  all were very common names, except for manius, which was used by many fewer families.  branches and cognomina there were several families of the juventii in the time of the republic, with the surnames celsus, laterensis, pedo, and thalna.  however, several juventii are mentioned without any surname.  thalna, occasionally found as talna, is an etruscan name, and was probably the original nomen of the gens, before it came to be known as juventia.  members  juventii thalnae  titus juventius (thalna?), a military tribune serving under the consul quintus minucius rufus in bc 197.  he was slain in battle against the cisalpine gauls.  titus juventius thalna, praetor peregrinus in 194 bc, was probably the same titus juventius who was sent to purchase corn from apulia and calabria in 172, for the war against perseus.  lucius juventius t. f. thalna, legate of the praetor gaius calpurnius piso in spain, bc 185.  manius juventius l. f. t
. n. thalna, tribune of the plebs in 170 bc, praetor in 167, and consul in 163.  during his consulship, thalna defeated and conquered the corsicans, and was granted a supplicatio by the senate, but he died shortly thereafter.  publius juventius thalna, triumvir monetalis in 170 bc, and praetor in 149, he was defeated and slain by andriscus in macedon.  gaius juventius p. f. thalna, triumvir monetalis in 154 bc.  juventius thalna, one of the judices assigned to try publius clodius pulcher, was bribed by the defendant.  juventius thalna, apparently a different man from the judex, is mentioned twice in cicero's letters, first in 45 bc, and again the following year.  juventii celsi  juventius celsus, a celebrated jurist during the latter part of the first century ad, and the father of the even more influential jurist publius juventius celsus.  publius juventius celsus, one of the most influential of all the roman jurists, flourished during the reigns of nerva, trajan, and hadrian.  he was twice consul, although the years are stated differently.  publius juventius celsus, consul in ad 164.  others  juventius, a comic poet mentioned by varro and aulus gellius, probably lived about the middle of the second century bc.  gaius juventius, a jurist who had been among the leading students of quintus mucius scaevola.  his opinions were highly respected, and were incorporated into the writings of servius sulpicius rufus.  titus juventius, a knowledgeable and clever advocate in the roman courts.  his disciple, quintus orbius, was a contemporary of cicero, who describes juventius' style as slow and rather cold, but wily.  marcus juventius pedo, a judex praised by cicero.  marcus juventius laterensis, a friend of cicero and political opponent of caesar, he was quaestor in an uncertain year, and after several setbacks, obtained the praetorship in bc 51.  after caesar's murder, he was a legate of marcus aemilius lepidus, and took his own life when marcus antonius entered lepidus' camp.  juventius, a youth described as beautiful by catullus, who addressed several poems to him.  lucius juventius laterensis, a legate under quintus cassius longinus in hispania ulterior during the civil
war, was proclaimed praetor by the soldiers when they believed that cassius had been put to death.  but as cassius escaped the assassins, he immediately ordered the execution of laterensis, along with the conspirators.  footnotes  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  gaius valerius catullus carmina.  marcus tullius cicero, pro plancio, brutus, epistulae ad atticum, epistulae ad familiares, in vatinium testem, pro cluentio.  aulus hirtius (attributed), de bello alexandrino.  marcus terentius varro, de lingua latina (on the latin language).  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  valerius maximus, factorum ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  gaius plinius secundus (pliny the elder), naturalis historia (natural history).  florus, epitome de t. livio bellorum omnium annorum dcc (epitome of livy: all the wars of seven hundred years).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  eutropius, breviarium historiae romanae (abridgement of the history of rome).  aulus gellius, noctes atticae (attic nights).  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  marcus velleius paterculus, compendium of roman history.  julius obsequens, liber de prodigiis (the book of prodigies).  paulus orosius, historiarum adversum paganos (history against the pagans).  digesta seu pandectae (the digest).  scholia bobiensa (bobbio scholiast), pro plancio.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  george davis chase, "the origin of roman praenomina", in harvard studies in classical philology, vol. viii (1897).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  roman gentes
francoise laborde (born 1 may 1953) is a french journalist, writer and television presenter.  between january 2009 and january 2015, she was a member of the french tv and radio regulatory council (csa).  early life and education  her father, an english teacher and school inspector, was a teacher in the usa where he published a book on french civilization. her mother, a spanish woman, was a member of a franco-british resistance network in world war ii and decorated as such by the queen of the united kingdom.  she has two older sisters, genevieve and , a weather presenter and writer. the three sisters spent several summers in the united states with their parents between 1960 and 1967 and were partly educated in american schools.  after studying literature at the  in bordeaux, francoise laborde attended law school at the university of bordeaux 1, where she obtained a dea in business and law.  career   in 1979, she went to brussels and contributed to the magazine europolitics.  at the same time, she was a correspondent for radio france internationale.  from 1982 to 1985, she specialized in economic and social affairs at rmc.  from 1985 to 1993, she was head of the economics department and deputy editor of tf1.  from 1993 to 1995, she was head of the economics department and deputy editor at france 3.  in 1995, she was appointed head of the economic and social departments and deputy editor at france 2.  in 1997, she became editor of telematin and has since then presented the political interview show .  at the end of 1999, she became the substitute presenter for beatrice schonberg for the weekend news show on france 2. it was expected that beginning in march 2007 she would be acting presenter of the weekend news show for a few months, as schonberg was temporarily dismissed from her post during the election campaign because of her marriage to jean-louis borloo, a government minister.  but in september 2006 elise lucet, presenter of the france 2 news programme , announced her pregnancy; thus laborde instead replaced lucet, while laurent delahousse, who had recently come over from channel m6, became the substitute presenter for schonberg.  on 24 january 2009, nicolas sarkozy, then president of the republic, appointed her to the tv and radio regulatory council.  on 3 february 2015, the prime minister appointed her to the .  honors and commitments   francoise laborde is a knight of the order of the legion of honour, and is in the national order of
merit.  she is also an officer of the order of agricultural merit.  she is founder and president of pfdm, (pour les femmes dans les medias  - for women in the media), an association for women leaders in the media, and president of the club des amis du refuge, an association for people active in le refuge in giving shelter to young people driven from their homes because of their homosexuality.  plagiarism accusation   in february 2012, laborde and denise bombardier were accused by the website  of plagiarism in connection with their 2011 book ne vous taisez plus!. the two authors deny this.  on 7 june 2013, the high court of paris found editions fayard, publisher of the book, guilty of plagiarism, stating that it was "manifest that the text in question reproduces, very often word for word, the plaintiff's work".  books                           she also wrote a foreword:  private life   laborde is married to jean-claude paris, the former head of canal+ belgium and i>tele. she has two sons from a previous relationship with manuel joaquim, tf1 reporter, winner of the albert londres prize, who died in 2006.  references    1953 births living people writers from bordeaux french television journalists knights of the national order of merit (france) chevaliers of the legion d'honneur officers of the order of agricultural merit french women journalists french women television presenters university of bordeaux alumni
jack breslin (born 6 april 1997) is a scottish professional footballer who plays as a defender for petershill.  club career breslin began his career with  celtic, and has two loan spells with annan athletic, the first from january 2015, and the second from february 2016. he signed for hamilton academical in july 2016. he was released by hamilton at the end of the 2016-17 season, subsequently signing for scottish league two club clyde on 7 june 2017. breslin left clyde in may 2018, following the end of his contract. breslin signed with cambuslang rangers in june 2018 before moving to edusport in february 2019. west of scotland team petershill announced the signing of breslin on 24 july 2020.  international career breslin has represented scotland at various youth international levels - under-15, under-16, under-17, and under-19.  career statistics  references  1997 births living people scottish footballers celtic f.c. players annan athletic f.c. players hamilton academical f.c. players clyde f.c. players scottish professional football league players association football defenders scotland youth international footballers cambuslang rangers f.c. players caledonian braves f.c. players
events from the year 1877 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events             3rd army corps (russian empire)   russo-turkish war (1877-78)  budapest convention of 1877  provisional russian administration in bulgaria  births  my great-great-grandfather, constantine wilhelm, was born this year to ethnic german parents in the landau beresan district (now in shirokolanovka, ukraine) of russia.  deaths  references  1877 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
eunidia tripunctata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by per olof christopher aurivillius in 1911.  subspecies  eunidia tripunctata nigricornis breuning, 1950  eunidia tripunctata tripunctata aurivillius, 1911  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1911
sherrilyn ifill (born december 17, 1962) is an american lawyer. she is a law professor and president and director-counsel of the naacp legal defense fund. she is the legal defense fund's seventh president since thurgood marshall founded the organization in 1940. ifill is also a nationally recognized expert on voting rights and judicial selection. in 2021, time named her one of the 100 most influential people in the world on its annual time 100 list.  early life and education sherrilyn ifill was born on december 17, 1962, in jamaica, queens, new york to lester (a harlem social worker) and myrtle. she is the youngest of 10 children. her mother passed away when ifill was 6 years old. she graduated from hillcrest high school. ifill has a b.a. from vassar college and a j.d. from new york university school of law.  she and the late pbs newshour anchor gwen ifill were first cousins. their family immigrated to the u.s. from barbados, with sherrilyn's and gwen's fathers, who were brothers, both becoming african methodist episcopal ministers.  career while in law school, ifill interned for judge a. leon higginbotham jr. the first summer and at the united nations centre for human rights the second summer. her first job out of law school was a one-year fellowship with the aclu in new york. she then served as assistant counsel at the legal defense fund, litigating voting rights act cases including the landmark houston lawyers' association v. attorney general of texas. in 1993, she joined the faculty of the university of maryland law school, where she taught for two decades. she is the author of on the courthouse lawn: confronting the legacy of lynching in the 21st century, a 2008 finalist for the hurston-wright legacy award for nonfiction.  ifill regularly appears in the media for her expertise on topics like affirmative action, policing, judicial nominees, and the supreme court. ifill has announced that she will step down from the role of president and director-counsel in the spring of 2022, to be replaced by janai nelson, currently the associate director-counsel at ldf.  personal life ifill is married to ivo knobloch. they have three children.  honors and awards in 2016, ifill won the society of american law teachers great teacher award.  ifill was an american academy of arts and sciences fellow in 2019. in 2020, glamour magazine gave
her a woman of the year award, calling her a "civil rights superhero." in 2021, ifill was included on the time 100, times annual list of the 100 most influential people in the world.  see also   joe biden supreme court candidates  references  external links    sherrilyn ifill at naacp ldf      1962 births living people african-american lawyers hillcrest high school alumni (queens) vassar college alumni new york university school of law alumni university of maryland, baltimore faculty people from jamaica, queens american people of barbadian descent lawyers from queens, new york 20th-century american lawyers 21st-century american lawyers 20th-century american women lawyers 21st-century american women lawyers 20th-century african-american women 20th-century african-american people 21st-century african-american women 21st-century african-american people time 100
united nations security council resolution 2111 was adopted in 2013.  the resolution mandates the group monitoring sanctions imposed on somalia, explicitly targeting parties that obstructed justice while further easing funding and equipment restrictions on the united nations and european union missions in that country.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions july 2013 events
olenecamptus fukutomii is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by hasegawa in 2004. it is known from the bonin islands in japan.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 2004
the gateway belief model (gbm) is a dual process theory in psychology and the communication sciences. the model suggests that public perception of the degree of normative (expert) agreement - or (scientific) consensus - on societal issues, such as climate change, vaccines, evolution, gun control, and gmo's functions as a so-called "gateway" cognition, influencing an individual's personal opinions, judgments, attitudes, and affective dispositions toward various social and scientific issues.  history  theoretical background specifically, the gbm postulates a two-step process of opinion change, where (mis)perceptions of normative agreement influence "key" personal beliefs that people hold about an issue (step 1), which in turn, shape public attitudes and support (step 2). although the basic process of debiasing judgment can be viewed as a form of knowledge deficit, development of the gateway belief model is based on research in cognitive and social psychology, mainly drawing on theories of heuristic information-processing, social norms, decision-making, and motivated cognition.  consensus-heuristic in the face of uncertainty, people often look to others for guidance, including experts. prior research shows that people heuristically rely on consensus cues in the absence of motivation to cognitively elaborate, because consensus typically implies correctness. research also indicates that people desire to conform to the expert consensus and generally prefer to rely on the combined judgment of multiple experts rather than on individual expert opinions. relying on consensus cues is often considered socially adaptive because it harnesses the wisdom of the crowd effect. consensus is therefore an example of a descriptive norm, i.e., the collective judgment of a group of individuals, such as experts. public opinion research shows that the views of the general public often diverge sharply from experts on a number of important societal issues, especially in the united states. this is known as the "consensus gap". the main premise of the gateway belief model is that this gap can be reduced by highlighting or communicating the actual degree of social or scientific consensus on an issue.  norm perception as a vehicle for social change the basic mechanism of the gateway belief model, i.e., aligning people's (mis)perception of the degree of group consensus with the factual degree of consensus parallels research in social psychology on leveraging norm-perception as a vehicle for social change. for example, early research showed that college students frequently misperceive the social consensus on campus binge drinking. through a method known as "est
imate and reveal", social psychologists have attempted to reveal the discrepancy between students' subjective perceptions of the drinking norm among their peers and the actual norm (which is typically much lower). social norm communication campaigns indeed evidence that increasing awareness of the actual drinking norm has positive subsequent impacts on students' own attitudes and behavior towards binge drinking. while excessive binge drinking is often harmful to the individual, large-scale societal misperceptions of scientific agreement on social dilemmas such as climate change or vaccines can be collectively harmful. when the consensus intervention involves experts rather than peers, the social influence process is referred to as obedience.  role of misinformation the "sticky" nature of myths and the spread of misinformation is often cited as a major cause of public confusion over the nature of scientific consensus. prominent examples include autism-vaccine controversies, the causal link between smoking and lung cancer and the role of carbon dioxide emissions in driving global warming. so-called vested-interest groups, also known as merchants of doubt, deliberately try to undermine public understanding of the scientific consensus on these topics through organized disinformation campaigns. people's perception of expert consensus has generally shown to be sensitive to anecdotal evidence and misinformation.  related concepts other related concepts include the false-consensus effect and pluralistic ignorance.  limitations the "cultural cognition of scientific consensus" thesis advocated by dan kahan stands in contrast to the gateway belief model (gbm). the cultural cognition thesis suggests that people will credit or dismiss empirical evidence based on whether it coheres or conflicts with their cultural or political values, a process known as "identity-protective cognition". because people are committed to the types of beliefs that define their everyday socio-political relations, the cultural cognition thesis predicts that exposing people to consensus information on contested issues will therefore increase attitude polarization. the empirical results of the gateway belief model contradict this prediction. notably, highlighting scientific consensus has shown not to backfire and can even reduce or neutralize belief polarization between (political) groups. related research has also shown that conveying scientific agreement can reduce directional motivated reasoning, although other research on this topic has revealed more mixed results. one explanation for these findings is that changing beliefs about what other groups think (so-called "meta-beliefs") does not require a full and immediate adjustment of one's own worldview. perceived consensus can therefore be seen as a "non-identity threatening" cognition, especially when a norm is described among a neutral out-group (scientists).  kahan has a notable
on-going scholarly debate in the literature with van der linden and lewandowsky on the role of perceived consensus and cultural cognition.  references  climate change and society cognitive science communication influence (social and political) political science psychological theories public health education
the 2016 fiba europe under-18 3x3 championships was the second edition of the european under-18 3x3 basketball event that features separate competitions for men's and women's national teams. the tournament started on 16 july 2016 with the start of two qualifying tournaments and its final tournament was played in debrecen, hungary from 9-11 september 2016.  france won an historic double as both their men's and women's teams took home gold for their first championship in this competition.  qualification the qualification events took place on 16-17 july 2016. a total of 26 men's teams and 22 women's teams took part in the two tournaments, with 12 teams of each gender qualifying for the final championship.  men  qualifier 1 the first qualifying tournament took place in riga, latvia from 16 to 17 july 2016. the top six teams qualified for the u-18 european championships.  group a  group b  group c  group d  bracket  the four quarterfinal winners (slovenia, latvia, serbia, and romania), plus the fifth and sixth-placed teams (turkey and germany), qualified for the u-18 european championships.  qualifier 2 the second qualifying tournament took place in szolnok, hungary from 16 to 17 july 2016. the top six teams qualified for the u-18 european championships.  group a  group b  group c  group d  bracket  the four quarterfinal winners (czech republic, belgium, hungary, and georgia), plus the fifth and sixth-placed teams (france and andorra), qualified for the u-18 european championships.  women  qualifier 1 the first qualifying tournament took place in riga, latvia from 16 to 17 july 2016. the top five teams qualified for the u-18 european championships.  group a  group b  bracket  the four quarterfinal winners (spain, belgium, russia, and switzerland), plus the fifth-placed team (netherlands), qualified for the u-18 european championships.  qualifier 2 the second qualifying tournament took place in szolnok, hungary from 16 to 17 july 2016. the top six teams, plus host hungary, qualified for the u-18 european championships.  group a  group b  group c  group d  bracket  hosts hungary and the four quarterfinal winners (france, lithuania, czech republic, and israel), plus the fifth and sixth-placed teams (belarus and austria), qualified for the u-18 european championships.  final tournament the second edition of the fiba 3x3 under-18 european championships was held in debrecen, hungary from
9 to 11 september 2016. a total of 12 teams of each gender qualified for the championship through one of two qualifying tournaments. pools were announced on 9 august 2016.  france won an historic double as both their men's and women's teams took home gold for their first championship in this competition.  qualified teams  men's teams  (hosts)  women's teams  (hosts)  men's tournament  pool play pool a  pool b  pool c  pool d  knockout stage  final standings  women's tournament  pool play pool a  pool b  pool c  pool d  knockout stage  final standings  references  external links official website 3x3planet.com  2016 2016 in 3x3 basketball 2016-17 in hungarian basketball international basketball competitions hosted by hungary sport in debrecen september 2016 sports events in europe
antonio campbell (born december 24, 1994) is an american basketball player for astana of the kazakhstan championship, the vtb united league, and the fiba asia champions cup. he played college basketball for the ohio bobcats.  college career  as a freshman campbell averaged 3.8 points, 2.6 rebounds, and 9.6 minutes per game.  in his sophomore season campbell averaged 10.0 points, 7.6 rebounds and 24.1 minutes per game.  in his junior season, campbell averaged 17.5 points and 10.0 rebounds per game. he was named mac player of the year in 2016, receiving 18 first place votes. despite flirting with the 2016 nba draft, campbell ultimately decided to return to school after not receiving a combine invite.  professional career  after going undrafted in the 2017 nba draft, campbell signed with the lakeland magic of the nba g league on january 24, 2018, playing in 20 games and averaging 6.3 points, 4.6 rebounds and 0.7 blocks in 15.9 minutes.  on april 5, 2018, after the conclusion of the g league season, campbell signed with the alaska aces of the philippine basketball association. in 10 games with the aces, campbell averaged 22.6 points per game, 14.8 rebounds per game and 1.5 blocks per game, helping the aces to clinch the 2nd place for the playoffs. but before the last game of the aces, he was replaced with another import diamon simpson  campbell signed with the turkish team pınar karsıyaka on august 6, 2018.   on october 23, 2018, campbell was included in the training camp roster of the lakeland magic.  on may 20, 2019, he signed with the hefei yuanchaung of the nbl-china. he scored a career-high 54 points (including a career-high 9 3-pointers) and grabbed 17 rebounds in a 125-146 loss to the henan golden elephants.  on october 22, 2019, he signed with sigortam.net itu bb of the basketball super league. campbell tested positive for a banned substance on march 27, 2020, and on may 15, he was issued a fine and suspended for 18 months by the turkish basketball federation.  for the 2020-21 season, campbell rejoined the lakeland magic where he played 7 games.  on august 25, 2021, campbell signed with prometey kamianske of the ukrainian basketball superleague. in three games, he averaged 4.7 points, 5.3 rebounds, and
1.0 block per game. on october 2, campbell signed with astana of the kazakhstan championship.  career statistics  international  |- | align=center | 2018 | align=left | alaska | pba | 10 || 31.69 || .450 || .380 || .750 || 14.8 || 2.0 || 1.20 || 1.50 || 22.6  references   1994 births living people alaska aces (pba) players american expatriate basketball people in china american expatriate basketball people in the philippines american expatriate basketball people in turkey american expatriate basketball people in ukraine american men's basketball players basketball players from cincinnati doping cases in basketball istanbul teknik universitesi b.k. players karsıyaka basketball players lakeland magic players ohio bobcats men's basketball players philippine basketball association imports power forwards (basketball)
the diamantina river ring feature is a circular geological feature hypothesized to be associated with a buried impact crater in what is now the channel country in central west queensland, australia in the region west of the small town of winton. some scientists from geoscience australia have proposed that this impact event happened about 300 million years ago. the diamantina river ring feature has also been called the winton crater.  site   the zone in which the winton asteroid impact theoretically happened lies in a sparsely populated area in the australian outback centred roughly at . it is roughly circular and its diameter measures some  (and it thus has an area of about ). the depopulated town of middleton and dagworth station - famous for the part it played in the creation of "waltzing matilda" - lie within the anomaly discovered here. skirting the anomaly zone for more than half its circumference, mostly on the north and east sides, round from its headwaters to well below its confluence with the western river, is the diamantina river, an intermittent stream with, in most places, several braided channels of the kind that give the channel country its name. it was this particular hooked shape in the upper diamantina that first raised questions.  name  it was a while after the discovery of this round zone in queensland and the formulation of the theory about its cosmic creation before the matter of a proper name had been settled. geoscience australia referred to the "woodstock-winton circular drainage ring" in a map caption (woodstock is another station in the zone where research was done) in reference to the diamantina's course there, whereas winton's local news outlet, the winton herald, refers to the "winton asteroid theory". however, the scientific community now seems to have settled upon "diamantina river ring feature".  discovery   the diamantina river's hook-shaped upper reaches had long been a puzzle to science. to dr. andrew glikson, whose research interests include "early crustal evolution with focus on the role of asteroid impacts", the near-circular course was the first indication that there might be an anomaly in the crust in this region. glikson's research into the matter revealed several noteworthy things about this round zone.  for instance, the circular zone inside the upper diamantina is a "magnetically quiet zone", according to data yielded by studies of the local magnetic fields, whereas the neighbouring rock shows a more linear pattern in its magnetic signatures. reflection seismology, used on a line transecting the zone's outer rim, also revealed "dramatic"
differences between the rock within the anomaly and outside it. it can thus be inferred that the possible cause is a disturbance of the deep crust by something like a great impact. gravimetry revealed some interesting information about the anomaly's centre, which itself contains a gravimetric anomaly. this told the researchers about differences in rock densities as compared to neighbouring areas of crust, likewise suggesting that there could long ago have been a major impact event.  on the whole, the information gathered at woodstock station is comparable to that found at buried asteroid impact structures, but currently, final proof is lacking. the diamantina river ring feature was, after all, discovered in 2015.  proof  proof is the one thing currently wanting in any quest to label the diamantina river ring feature an asteroid impact structure. however, the scientists involved see that as rather a straightforward matter of drilling core samples in the zone and then analyzing them. richard blewett from geoscience australia quoted the needed depth for these samples as "about three kilometres", whereas geoscience australia says in its own report, somewhat more conservatively, that the depth will have to be "many hundreds of metres". analysis of the core samples would involve, among other things, the detection of "shock textures" in the rock, caused by the great energy of an asteroid impact.  impact event the impact event is, as of this writing, only theoretical. its reality is far from certain. richard blewett, mentioned above, admits that there are other possible explanations for the geological anomaly on the upper diamantina, but adds "but they become difficult to explain".  whether the diamantina river ring feature was truly created by an asteroid falling out of the sky or not, the scientists at geoscience australia have some very definite ideas about this theoretical natural missile. it is believed, for instance, that the event happened some 300 million years ago, in the palaeozoic. at that time, australia lay quite a long way south of where it now lies. it had not yet rifted apart from antarctica; both continents, and others, were joined as parts of gondwana. 	 the theoretical asteroid itself is reckoned to have measured ten kilometres across, and when it struck, the energy that it released was equivalent to 650 million hiroshima a-bombs (and thus roughly 41 zettajoules). richard blewett believes that the course of earth's history would have been changed by the enormous blast unleashed by such a strike, and pointed out that there has been an association between these events and great changes in the course of evolution. ge
oscience australia, on the other hand, only pointed out the importance that such an event has to understanding the evolution of earth's crust and the economic significance, as such formations may contain petroleum or other mineral wealth.  see also    list of possible impact structures on earth  lawn hill crater  tookoonooka crater  references  bibliography     possible impact craters on earth carboniferous impact craters geology of queensland central west queensland
the 1931 united kingdom general election in scotland was held on tuesday, 27 october 1931. of the 74 seats representing scotland, 71 seats represented burgh and county constituencies contested under the first-past-the-post electoral system, and 3 represented the combined scottish universities multi-member university constituency.  the election saw massive gains for the unionists across the country, with the party winning nearly 70% of all scottish seats. the parties forming the national government together won 64% of the vote, and 86% of the seats. in contrast the labour party, which had been the largest party in scotland following the 1929 general election (where it had won 42% of the scottish vote), was relegated into fourth place within just two years.  following the election, with labour appearing to teeter on the edge of the electoral abyss in scotland, the independent labour party increasingly moved apart from labour, ultimately dissociating from the party in march 1932. the ilp had dominated the labour movement in scotland since 1918, dominating community based activism, and essentially forming the labour party in scotland. this had ultimately served to undermine the organisational growth of the labour party in scotland.  results  burgh & county constituencies  university constituencies  votes summary  references  general election in scotland 1930s elections in scotland 1931 scotland
"it's too late" is a song written by and performed by chuck willis. it reached #3 on the u.s. r&b chart in 1956.  the song was featured on his 1958 album, king of the stroll.  other charting versions johnny o'keefe released a version of the song as a single in australia in 1960 which reached #17. ted taylor released a version of the song which reached #30 on the u.s. r&b chart and #118 on the u.s. pop chart in 1969.  other versions dorothy collins released a version of the song as the b-side to her 1957 single "rock me my baby". the crickets released a version of the song on their 1957 album the "chirping" crickets. roy orbison released a version of the song on his 1961 album at the rock house. les paul and mary ford released a version of the song as the b-side to their 1961 single "mountain railroad". charlie rich released a version of the song as the b-side to his 1961 single "just a little bit sweet". ruth brown released a version of the song on her 1962 album along came ruth. jerry keller released a version of the song as the b-side to his 1963 single "what will i tell my darling?" sunny and the sunliners released a version of the song as a single in 1964, but it did not chart. otis redding released a version of the song on his 1965 album the great otis redding sings soul ballads. freddie king released a version of the song on his 1969 album freddie king is a blues master. derek and the dominos released a version of the song on their 1970 album layla and other assorted love songs. the band also performed the song on the johnny cash show  which was the band's only television appearance. john hammond released a version of the song on his 1970 album southern fried. conway twitty released a version of the song on his 1976 album 20 greatest hits by conway twitty. freddy fender released a version of the song on his 1972 album if you're ever in texas. merl saunders, jerry garcia, john kahn, and bill vitt released a version of the song on their 1988 album keystone encores. the alligators featuring the jordanaires released a version of the song on their 1996 album the history of rock'n'roll. bob dylan released two versions of the song (identified as acoustic and band) on his 2021 album springtime in new york: the
bootleg series, vol. 16 / 1980-1985 (deluxe edition, disc 3).  samplings kanye west sampled redding's version in the song "gone" on his 2005 album late registration.  references  1956 songs 1956 singles 1964 singles 1969 singles songs written by chuck willis chuck willis songs buddy holly songs roy orbison songs les paul songs mary ford songs charlie rich songs ruth brown songs otis redding songs freddie king songs derek and the dominos songs conway twitty songs freddy fender songs song recordings produced by huey p. meaux atlantic records singles
ion fintesteanu (; 1899-1984) was a romanian stage and film actor.  selected filmography  the gypsy girl at the alcove (1923)  a lost letter (1953)  the protar affair (1956)  titanic waltz (1964)  references  bibliography   goble, alan. the complete index to literary sources in film. walter de gruyter, 1999.  external links     1899 births 1984 deaths male actors from bucharest romanian male film actors romanian male silent film actors romanian male stage actors
dewatwal is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
beatrice aitchison (july 18, 1908 - september 22, 1997) was an american mathematician, statistician, and transportation economist who directed the transport economics division of the united states department of commerce, and later became the top woman in the united states postal service and the first policy-level appointee there.  early life aitchison's mother was a musician and her father, clyde bruce aitchison, was a lawyer and economist who served on the interstate commerce commission. she was born on july 18, 1908, in portland, oregon. aitchison lived in portland until 1916 and then in washington, d.c. for the rest of her childhood.  education aitchison attended central high school. she was part of the phi beta kappa sorority and earned a bachelor's degree from goucher college in 1928.  after working for a year as an actuary in new york city, she began graduate studies at johns hopkins university in mathematics, completing her master's in 1931 and her ph.d. in 1933. her dissertation, supervised by gordon thomas whyburn, was entitled on mapping with functions of finite sections, and concerned point-set topology; she also published two papers in the same area.  at the university of oregon, aitchison completed a second master's degree in economics in 1937.  career because of the great depression, employment as a mathematician was hard to find: she applied to 145 schools but was only able to find a one-semester temporary position, substituting for a sick instructor at the university of richmond's westhampton college for women. following this, she worked from 1934 to 1935 as a lecturer in statistics at american university in washington, dc.  aitchison moved back to portland in 1935, and worked for the works progress administration in 1936.  she returned to american university as a lecturer in statistics and remained there until 1939, while also working for the united states department of agriculture and the interstate commerce commission. from 1939 to 1942, she taught economics at the university of oregon.  by 1942, she was once again working for the federal government, this time in transportation economics, a career that would last the rest of her life.  from 1942 to 1951, aitchison was a statistician and later a transportation economics with the interstate commerce commission. she also lectured at american university from 1942 to 1944, and consulted with the office of defense transportation during world war ii. from 1951 to 1953, she headed the transport economics division of the united states department of commerce's office of transportation,
but this division was eliminated in 1953. from 1953 until 1971, aitchison worked for the post office. she then became director of transportation research in the bureau of transportation of the united states postal service, becoming both the top woman at the postal service and "the first woman to be appointed to a policy level postal position". when she retired in july 1971, aitchison "was one of the highest ranking women in the federal service".  awards and recognitions the united states civil service commission gave aitchison one of its first federal woman's awards in 1961 chosen from a field of more than 25,000, a piece of recognition that gave aitchison leverage to push president lyndon johnson into drafting an executive order banning sex discrimination in the u.s. government.  in 1965, she was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association "for pioneering work in the development and application of statistical methods for research and analysis in traffic and transportation." she won the career service award of the national civil service league in 1970. in 1997, the johns hopkins alumni association gave her their woodrow wilson award "for outstanding government service".  death aitchison died of congestive heart failure at sibley memorial hospital in washington, d.c. on september 22, 1997.  references  1908 births 1997 deaths economists from oregon american women economists american women mathematicians american women statisticians goucher college alumni johns hopkins university alumni american university faculty and staff fellows of the american statistical association writers from portland, oregon mathematicians from maryland mathematicians from oregon 20th-century american mathematicians writers from maryland university of richmond faculty university of oregon alumni university of oregon faculty lyndon b. johnson administration personnel 20th-century american economists economists from maryland 20th-century women mathematicians
matthew john "matt" lachappa (born june 6, 1975) is an american baseball pitcher who pitched in the san diego padres minor league system. lachappa is known for being a "padre for life", having signed a minor league contract with the team for over twenty years since suffering a heart attack during a rancho cucamonga quakes game on april 6, 1996. lachappa currently resides with his family at the barona indian reservation.  baseball career  lachappa was a second-round draft choice during the 1993 major league baseball draft from el capitan high school. he began his minor league career with the arizona league padres in 1993, moving to class a springfield sultans in 1994, and finally class a-advanced rancho cucamonga quakes the following year. he won 11 games for the quakes.  "padre for life"  in 1996, while warming up in the bullpen to enter what would have been the first game of his season as a relief pitcher, lachappa collapsed and suffered a heart attack. the quakes athletic trainer performed cpr on lachappa for 20 minutes until he was taken to a local hospital. at the hospital, he suffered a second heart attack. lachappa survived, but suffered brain damage from the lack of oxygen and is mostly confined to a wheelchair and has difficulty moving and speaking. since the incident, the padres organization has signed him yearly to a basic minor league contract so that he can maintain his health insurance. the padres have also named a little league field after him in lakeside, california. the matt lachappa athletic scholarship foundation was also established to assist high school students to pay for their college education.  references  external links  1975 births living people 20th-century native americans native american sportspeople arizona league padres players springfield sultans players rancho cucamonga quakes players baseball players from san diego
in mathematics, the curve complex is a simplicial complex c(s) associated to a finite-type surface s, which encodes the combinatorics of simple closed curves on s. the curve complex turned out to be a fundamental tool in the study of the geometry of the teichmuller space, of mapping class groups and of kleinian groups.  it was introduced by w.j.harvey in 1978.  curve complexes  definition   let  be a finite type connected oriented surface. more specifically, let  be a connected oriented surface of genus  with  boundary components and  punctures.  the curve complex   is the simplicial complex defined as follows:  the vertices are the free homotopy classes of essential (neither homotopically trivial nor peripheral) simple closed curves on ; if  represent distinct vertices of , they span a simplex if and only if they can be homotoped to be pairwise disjoint.  examples   for surfaces of small complexity (essentially the torus, punctured torus, and four-holed sphere), with the definition above the curve complex has infinitely many connected components. one can give an alternate and more useful definition by joining vertices if the corresponding curves have minimal intersection number. with this alternate definition, the resulting complex is isomorphic to the farey graph.  geometry of the curve complex  basic properties   if  is a compact surface of genus  with  boundary components the dimension of  is equal to . in what follows, we will assume that . the complex of curves is never locally finite (i.e. every vertex has infinitely many neighbors). a result of harer  asserts that  is in fact homotopically equivalent to a wedge sum of spheres.  intersection numbers and distance on c(s)   the combinatorial distance on the 1-skeleton of  is related to the intersection number between simple closed curves on a surface, which is the smallest number of intersections of two curves in the isotopy classes. for example     for any two nondisjoint simple closed curves . one can compare in the other direction but the results are much more subtle (for example there is no uniform lower bound even for a given surface) and harder to prove.  hyperbolicity  it was proved by masur and minsky that the complex of curves is a gromov hyperbolic space. later work by various authors gave alternate proofs of this fact and better information on the hyperbolicity.  relation with the
mapping class group and teichmuller space  action of the mapping class group   the mapping class group of  acts on the complex  in the natural way: it acts on the vertices by  and this extends to an action on the full complex. this action allows to prove many interesting properties of the mapping class groups.  while the mapping class group itself is not a hyperbolic group, the fact that  is hyperbolic still has implications for its structure and geometry.  comparison with teichmuller space   there is a natural map from teichmuller space to the curve complex, which takes a marked hyperbolic structures to the collection of closed curves realising the smallest possible length (the systole). it allows to read off certain geometric properties of the latter, in particular it explains the empirical fact that while teichmuller space itself is not hyperbolic it retains certain features of hyperbolicity.  applications to 3-dimensional topology  heegaard splittings   a simplex in  determines a "filling" of  to a handlebody. choosing two simplices in  thus determines a heegaard splitting of a three-manifold, with the additional data of an heegaard diagram (a maximal system of disjoint simple closed curves bounding disks for each of the two handlebodies). some properties of heegaard splittings can be read very efficiently off the relative positions of the simplices:  the splitting is reducible if and only if it has a diagram represented by simplices which have a common vertex; the splitting is weakly reducible if and only if it has a diagram represented by simplices which are linked by an edge.  in general the minimal distance between simplices representing diagram for the splitting can give information on the topology and geometry (in the sense of the geometrisation conjecture of the manifold) and vice versa. a guiding principle is that the minimal distance of a heegaard splitting is a measure of the complexity of the manifold.  kleinian groups   as a special case of the philosophy of the previous paragraph, the geometry of the curve complex is an important tool to link combinatorial and geometric properties of hyperbolic 3-manifolds, and hence it is a useful tool in the study of kleinian groups. for example, it has been used in the proof of the ending lamination conjecture.  random manifolds   a possible model for random 3-manifolds is to take random heegaard splittings. the proof that this model is hyperbolic almost surely (
in a certain sense) uses the geometry of the complex of curves.  notes  references  harvey, w. j. (1981). "boundary structure of the modular group".  riemann surfaces and related topics. proceedings of the 1978 stony brook conference . 1981.     benson farb and dan margalit, a primer on mapping class groups. princeton mathematical series, 49. princeton university press, princeton, nj, 2012.    topology geometric group theory
lake ercina is a small highland lake in asturias, spain. it is located in the picos de europa, in the cantabrian mountains. situated next to lake enol, together, they forms the group known as lakes of covadonga within the picos de europa national park. lake ercina is smaller than lake enol. it is situated at an altitude of  and its maximum depth is just over . the eutrophic lake covers approximately . its characteristics are tied to its glacier origin and geographic location.  references  external links   picos de europa ercina
falley home, also known as the lahr home, is a historic home located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the italian villa style brick house was built in 1863, and consists of three two-story sections and a three-story entrance tower.  it is sheathed in stucco.  the square corner entrance tower is topped by a cupola and encloses a curve staircase.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1982.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana houses completed in 1863 buildings and structures in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana houses in tippecanoe county, indiana
sterchele is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  francois sterchele (1982-2008), belgian footballer giorgio sterchele (born 1970), italian footballer
timothy m. swager (born 1961) is an american scientist and the john d. macarthur professor of chemistry at the massachusetts institute of technology and the director of the deshpande center for technological innovation.  his research is at the interface of chemistry and materials science, with specific interests in carbon nanomaterials, polymers, and liquid crystals.  he is a member of the national academy of sciences and american academy of arts and sciences.  career and research  a native of sheridan montana, swager earned his b.s. in chemistry from montana state university, received a ph.d. from the california institute of technology working with robert h. grubbs, and performed postdoctoral studies at the massachusetts institute of technology under mark s. wrighton.  he began as an assistant professor at the university of pennsylvania in 1990 and returned to mit in 1996 as a full professor.  swager is best known for advancing new chemical sensing concepts based on molecular electronic principles.  he introduced the concepts of charge and energy transport through molecular and nanowires as a method to create amplified signals to chemical events. these methods gave rise to the sensitive explosive sensors that have been commercialized under the trade name fido. he demonstrated the integration of molecular recognition into chemiresistive sensors, first with conducting polymers and later with carbon nanotubes, and these methods were commercialized by csense.  swager also has pioneering contributions to the areas of liquid crystals demonstrating how novel molecular shapes can be used to introduce intermolecular correlations in structures and alignment. in the area of high strength materials, by creating interlocking structures with enhanced ductility and strength. in carbon nanomaterials he has developed methods for functionalizing and/or dispersing graphenes and carbon nanotubes. also he has designed novel radical materials in collaboration with robert g. griffin (mit) for dynamic nuclear polarization to enhance the signal to noise ratio in nmr experiments.  a number of these enhancement agents are commercially available from dynupol corp.  swager has published more than 450 peer reviewed manuscripts and has more than 80 issued patents.  notable awards   2005 carl s. marvel creative polymer chemistry award, american chemical society  2005 christopher columbus foundation homeland security award  2007 lemelson-mit award for invention and innovation  2008 honorary doctorate of science, montana state university  2013 award for creative invention, american chemical society  2016 gustavus john esselen award for chemistry in the public interest  2016 linus pauling award  2019 polymer chemistry award, american chemical society  bibliography  swager,
t. m.; xu, b. "liquid crystalline calixarenes" pages 389-398. in calixarenes 50th anniversary: commemorative issue vicens, j.; asfari, z.; harrowfeild, j. m. (eds.) kluwer academic publishers, holland, 1994 swager, t. m. "polymer electronics for explosives detection" pages 29-38 in electronic noses and sensors for the detection of explosives, gardner j.; yinon, j., (eds.) nato science series ii: mathematics, physics and chemistry, 2004 tovar, j. d.; swager, t. m. "synthesis of tunable electrochromic and fluorescent polymers" chapter 28, pp 368-376 in chromogenic phenomena in polymers, jenekhe, s. a.; kiserow, d. j. (eds.) acs symposium series, volume 888, 2004 swager, t. m. "semiconducting poly(arylene ethylene)s" pages 233-258 in acetylene chemistry: chemistry, biology, and materials science, diederich, f.; stang, p. j.; tykwinski, r. r. (eds.) wiley-vch 2005 swager, t. m. "realizing the ultimate amplification in conducting polymer sensors: isolated nanoscopic pathways" pages 29-44 in redox systems under nano-space control, hirao, t. (ed.) springer-verlag berlin heidelberg 2006 thomas, s. w., iii; swager, t. m. "detection of explosives using amplified fluorescent polymers" pages 203-220 in detection of illicit chemicals and explosives; oxley, j. c.; marshall, m., (eds.) elsevier: new york, 2008. b. vanveller, t. m. swager, "poly(aryleneethynylene)s" pages 175-200 in design and synthesis of conjugated polymers, m. leclerc, j. morin (eds.) wiley-vch: weinheim, 2010. andrew, t. l.; swager, t. m. "exciton transport through conjugated molecular wires" in charge and exciton transport through molecular wires siebbeles, l. d. a.; grozema, f. c. (eds.) wiley-vch: weinheim 2010 levine, m.; swager, t. m. "conjugated polymer sensors: design, principles, and biological applications"
chapter 4, pages 81-133, in functional supramolecular architectures: for organic electronics and nanotechnology vol. 1 samori, p.; cacialli, f. (eds.) wiley-vch: weinheim 2010  references   1961 births living people 21st-century american chemists members of the united states national academy of sciences massachusetts institute of technology school of science faculty california institute of technology alumni montana state university alumni
talwandi mehma  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of talwandi mehma. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, talwandi mehma has total number of 258 houses and population of 1,396 of which include 715 males and 681 females. literacy rate of talwandi mehma is 72.67%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 141 which is 10.10% of total population of talwandi mehma, and child sex ratio is approximately 905, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
hmhs letitia was a british hospital ship that ran aground at portuguese cove in halifax harbour, canada on 1 august 1917 while carrying 546 wounded canadian soldiers from liverpool, united kingdom to halifax, nova scotia, canada.  construction  hmhs letitia was built as ss letitia at the scott´s shipbuilding & engineering co. shipyard in greenock, scotland in 1912. she was launched on 21 february 1912, and completed by may of the same year. the ship was  long, had a beam of  and had a depth of . she was assessed at  and had 2 triple expansion engines driving double screw propellers. the engine was rated at 962 nhp and the ship could reach a maximum speed of 14 knots.  early career  the ss letitia made her maiden voyage from glasgow to quebec and montreal and kept sailing on that line until the outbreak of the first world war. she had place to accommodate 1.387 passengers and crew and she sometimes also carried mail as cargo.  world war i  after the start of the great war, ss letitia was commandeered by the british admiralty on 18 november 1914 for service as a hospital ship or ambulance transport and placed under the command of the canadian army medical corps. she was retrofitted to provide the latest in medical care and comfort for her patients. she had a full complement of medical and nursing staff with access to all of the equipment available in a state-of-the-art hospital. all hospital ships were distinctively painted in white with a green stripe down the side and three red crosses on each side as well, this was done to differentiate these "non-combatant" vessels from other shipping. but sometimes even these non-combatants became targets of enemy submarines. letitia was given the prefix hmhs, which stands for his majesty's hospital ship, for her new service as a hospital ship.  the hmhs letitia first served with distinction in the mediterranean and even came under fire while evacuating wounded troops near the dardanelles. the hospital ship conducted her first rescue at sea when she came across the sinking ss city of birmingham on 27 november 1916 some  south east of malta. the cargo liner had been torpedoed by the german submarine sm u-32 and later sunk with the loss of four lives. the hmhs letitia picked up all the survivors and sailed back to safety.  the letitia was relocated from the mediterranean to the atlantic in 1917 and her new task consisted of bringing wounded canadian soldiers stationed in the united kingdom
back to their homes in canada. the hospital ship made a total of five voyages from liverpool, united kingdom to halifax, nova scotia, canada, bringing a total of 2,600 wounded canadian soldiers back home.  sinking   hmhs letitia set sail from liverpool in late july 1917 for its ninth run with a full crew of 137 men, 74 hospital staff (including 12 nurses) and 546 wounded canadian soldiers onboard. letitia had been in service as a hospital ship for nearly three years.  the crossing was made without incident until the morning of 1 august 1917, when fog appeared off the coast of nova scotia. the visibility was reduced to near zero, but lt. col. david donald continued on his course and posted several crew members to listen for whistles, buoy bells or foghorn blasts, to avoid hazards including the dangerous shoals that flank the entrance to halifax harbour.  the captain had used the navigational method of dead reckoning to estimate his position when he heard a whistle of an approaching pilot boat. the pilot came aboard to guide the letitia through the fog, between the unseen buoys and into the harbour. the pilot continued the course, not realizing that the captain had incorrectly estimated the ship's position. ten minutes after the pilot boarded the ship, the captain saw a dark area in fog approaching and ordered the ship full astern. the order however, came too late and the letitia abruptly stopped as it ran aground on portuguese cove in halifax harbour. lt. col. donald tried to reverse the engines to free the ship, but the holds were perforated, putting the ship in danger of breaking up if it did slide off the shoal, potentially sinking with the wounded still onboard.  the captain immediately called for assistance to evacuate the ship, and the soldiers disembarked without incident onto nearby ships. the captain and crew stayed on board until the next morning, when the ship began to list and the captain ordered the ship to be abandoned. the letitia split in two in the months following the grounding and her stern sank into deeper waters. much of her equipment was removed by legal salvagers and by looters before the ship sank completely.  aftermath and wreck  all passengers and medical staff were saved, but there was one fatality among the crew, a stoker who was accidentally left on the ship and who drowned while trying to swim ashore. at the inquiry, captain mcneil testified that he had fully trusted that the pilot knew where the buoys were, particularly because the pilots were in charge of moving the bu
oys to protect the harbour during wartime. the pilot was found guilty of a gross error of judgment and demoted.  the wreck of the letitia remains near the entrance to halifax harbour just south of portuguese cove at a depth of  and is a popular recreational dive site. the wreckage is scattered over the bottom and is lying on a steeply sloping shelf, with a sudden drop off. when looking down, you can see a boiler and a section of the stern.  some members of the crew were repatriated on the ss athenia which was torpedoed on 16 august 1917. relatives were required to travel to donegal to identify the bodies.  references   1912 ships passenger ships of the united kingdom hospital ships in world war i steamships of the united kingdom ships built on the river clyde maritime incidents in 1917 world war i shipwrecks in the atlantic ocean world war i ships of the united kingdom hospital ships of the united kingdom hospital ships of the royal navy
jw player is a new york based company that has developed a video player software of the same name. the player, for embedding videos onto web pages, is used by news, video-hosting companies, and for self-hosted web videos. the company has also created the video management software "jw platform", formerly known as "bits on the run".  history jw player was developed in 2005. initially as an open source project. as of december 2015, jw player stated that their software is no longer offered with an open source license. instead it is offered with a creative commons license for non-commercial use. the software is named after the founder and initial developer jeroen wijering. it initially was distributed via wijering's blog. in about 2007 it was integrated into the advertising company named longtail, which was renamed after the software in 2013. in 2008 a company, headquartered in new york, was formed which continued to develop and distribute the player.  during the early development, before it was purchased by google, youtube videos were streamed by jw player. in 2015 jw player was rewritten to reduce size and load time. version 7 was licensed under the proprietary creative commons attribution-noncommercial-sharealike 3.0 license. it had integrated support for html5 video and flash video, allowing video to be watched on phones, tablets and computers. that year the company's paying customer base grew by more than 40 percent to 15,000, 60% from the usa. 2.5 million websites used the free edition, playing about a billion videos per month.  in 2016, the company released a new simpler-to-use version of its product, entitled jw showcase. jw player continues to be used by many companies, including espn, electronic arts, and at&t.  features and licensing jw player is proprietary software. there is a basic free of cost version distributed under the creative commons attribution-noncommercial-sharealike 3.0 united states (cc by-nc-sa) license in which videos are displayed with an overlaid company watermark, and a commercial 'software as a service' version.  jw player supports mpeg-dash (only in paid version), digital rights management (drm) (in collaboration with vualto), interactive advertisement, and customization of the interface through cascading style sheets.  references  external links    of the company  product page of the software  git repository of the "non-commercial version"  2005 software computer companies established in
2007 internet service providers mass media companies based in new york city media players software companies of the united states
fernand gandaho (born 21 june 1968) is a beninese former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1968 births living people beninese male cyclists olympic cyclists of benin cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
"no shopping" is a single by american rapper french montana, from his mixtape mc4. the track features a guest appearance from toronto-based rapper drake. it was released on july 16, 2016. the hip hop track was produced by murda beatz and cubeatz. the song was certified gold by the recording industry association of america (riaa) in december 2016, for selling over 500,000 digital copies in the united states.  music video the music video premiered on mtv on july 29, 2016. the music video was filmed in the dominican republic.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  2016 singles 2016 songs french montana songs drake (musician) songs bad boy records singles interscope records singles songs written by drake (musician) songs written by french montana song recordings produced by murda beatz song recordings produced by cubeatz songs written by murda beatz songs written by tim gomringer songs written by kevin gomringer
olenecamptus dominus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by thomson in 1860.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1860
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in chuanying district, jilin city, jilin, china. , it has 5 residential communities under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of jilin  references   township-level divisions of jilin jilin city
ricardo arredondo calmache (23 october 1850 - 1911) was a spanish painter who specialized in landscapes and costumbrista scenes; known for his meticulous attention to detail.  biography  he was born in cella. his father was a veteran of the first carlist war. his uncle was a priest who later became a canon in toledo. with his support, the family moved to toledo when arredondo was twelve years old. he refused to enter a military cadet school and took art lessons from  matias moreno until he was able to enroll at the "escuela especial de pintura, escultura y grabado de madrid", where he studied with carlos de haes. he then travelled to paris, where he associated with the circle of ernest meissonier and was exposed to the influence of the barbizon school.   upon returning to spain, he participated in the national exhibition of fine arts and would continue to be a regular participant for the next two decades. he also travelled throughout spain, creating drawings for a major publishing project that never came to fruition.  upon the death of his uncle, who had become chaplain to the king, he inherited a small fortune. he used the money to buy and refurbish a dilapidated mansion. gregorio maranon described him as a man who rarely sold any paintings, but enjoyed regaling his friends; notably the writer benito perez galdos, for whom he served as a sort of "cicerone".  he also served as a municipal councillor and was a member of the monument commission, where he oversaw restoration of the puerta de bisagra nueva. this brought him a corresponding membership in the real academia de bellas artes. his numerous cityscapes and landscapes around the tagus river earned him the title "pintor de toledo". he died in madrid.  references  further reading   arredondo, pintor de toledo, exhibition catalog, museum of santa cruz, caja castilla-la mancha, 2002.  external links   artnet: more works by arredondo.  1850 births 1911 deaths 19th-century spanish painters 19th-century spanish male artists spanish male painters 20th-century spanish painters 20th-century spanish male artists spanish landscape painters spanish genre painters people from toledo, spain
maria giovanna fasce (27 december 1881 - 18 january 1947) was an italian roman catholic professed religious of the augustinian nuns in the religious name of "maria teresa". fasce served in various leadership positions in her convent in genoa and was noted for the establishment of an orphanage and spreading the charism of saint augustine and saint rita of cascia.  fasce was beatified at saint peter's square on 12 october 1997.  life  maria giovanna fasce was born on 27 december 1881 in genoa to the middle-class eugenio fasce and his second wife teresa valente. she had seven siblings and her oldest sibling was luigia. her relations dubbed her as "marietta". her mother died in 1889 which prompted her oldest sister luigia to take care of fasce.  fasce taught catechism to children and grew to love the charism of saint augustine. she also met her confessor father mariano ferriello in genoa who encouraged her to learn of the augustinian figures and pursue her vocation. she also became aware of the life of rita of cascia and travelled to rome in 1900 when pope leo xiii canonized her - this was the most important event of her life thus far and solidified her desire to become a nun. she expressed this intention to her relations who took the news bad and her brothers in particular were negative about it. her oldest sister luigia accepted this but did not understand fasce's reasoning for living in a primitive place like cascia. she applied for admission to a ligurian convent but was rejected much to her surprise. the abbess giuseppina gattarelli said that she believed fasce was unable to handle the rigors of the monastic life. fasce reapplied and was accepted in 1906.  on 22 june 1906 she entered the convent of the order of saint augustine (she received the habit on the night of 25 december 1906) and made the profession of her initial vows on 25 december 1907 in the religious name of "maria teresa". she became quite disillusioned due to the convent's decline and returned home in june 1910 for a period of deep reflection. her time at home saw her affirm her desire to be in the monastic life and returned to the convent in may 1911 and later made her solemn vows on 22 march 1912. she was appointed as novice mistress on 17 july 1914 at the time of world war i and was then vicar of her convent from 1917 until 1920. the unanimous decision of the convent's leadership saw her made abbess on 12 august 1920 and she held that post until her death.
in 1923 she began the circulation of the newsletter "dalle api alle rose" (first edition published 22 may 1923) in order to promote the almost unknown chapel that contained the remains of rita of cascia and desired bringing people to god through the saint she admired. fasce suffered from a malignant tumor on her right breast and had to undergo two operations on it. she referred to her tumor as her "treasure" that was the most beautiful gift that jesus christ had given her. she suffered from diabetes and asthma and also became overweight which caused walking difficulties - fellow nuns also had to move her in a chair later in her tenure.  her goal was the construction of a girl's orphanage which began construction in 1925 and finished in 1938 though she had to depend on donations and work was slow due to the bad economic climate and the onslaught of world war ii. she referred to the orphan girls as her "bees" and the first girl to be admitted into the new orphanage was edda petrucci.  fasce died in 1947. her remains were placed next to rita of cascia.  beatification  the beatification process commenced in the diocese of spoleto-norcia in an informative process that commenced on 5 august 1968 and concluded its business on 5 june 1971. fasce was titled as a servant of god on 5 august 1968 under pope paul vi once the process commenced. the congregation for the causes of saints validated the process on 6 may 1988 in rome.  the postulation sent the positio dossier to the c.c.s. for further assessment at which point theologians met and approved its contents on 17 january 1995 while the c.c.s. themselves followed suit on 6 june 1995. pope john paul ii proclaimed fasce to be venerable on 11 july 1995 after confirming that the late religious had lived a model christian life of heroic virtue.  the miracle needed for her beatification was investigated in the italian diocese of its origin and received c.c.s. validation on 17 march 1995 while a medical board approved the miracle on 30 november 1995; theologians also voiced their approval on 24 january 1997 while the c.c.s. did so as well on 18 march 1997. john paul ii approved the miracle on 7 july 1997 and beatified her on 12 october 1997.  references  external links hagiography circle saints sqpn  1881 births 1947 deaths 19th-century venerated christians 20th-century venerated christians 20th-century italian people beatifications by pope john paul ii augustinian order italian beatified people italian nuns religious leaders from genoa venerated catholics

nicola toffali (born 20 october 1992 in verona) is an italian racing cyclist. in march 2017  announced that they had signed toffali.  major results 2009  1st stage 4 3 giorni orobica 2010  1st piccola tre valli varesine 2012  3rd memorial elia da re 2014  1st memorial gianni biz  1st alta padovana tour  1st gp bianco di custoza  1st coppa san vito  4th coppa ardigo  5th parma-la spezia 2015  1st coppa collecchio  1st memorial carlo valentini  2nd memorial denis zanette e daniele del ben  5th memorial vincenzo mantovani  5th gran premio citta di vigonza 2017  3rd overall tour of iran (azerbaijan)  6th trofeo matteotti  6th circuit de wallonie  10th munsterland giro  references  1992 births italian male cyclists living people tour of azerbaijan (iran) winners
lawrence bruce robertson was a canadian surgeon who developed methods for and promoted the use of blood transfusions in battlefield surgery during world war i.  early life and education robertson studied medicine at the university of toronto, graduating in 1909.  he interned at the hospital for sick children in toronto.  career robertson engaged in post-graduate training in boston and new york, where he studied methods of blood transfusion at bellevue hospital, during a time when the process was not widely accepted for use in surgery.  he returned to canada in 1913, and worked at the hospital for sick children in toronto, where he introduced the processes he had learned to other physicians.  with the advent of war, robertson enlisted in the armed forces in 1914.  in october 1915, robertson used the syringe method of transfusion which he had learned in new york to perform a transfusion, providing blood to a patient suffering from shrapnel wounds. after four more successful transfusions over several months, he reported his results to sir walter morley fletcher, director of the medical research committee.  in 1916 he wrote an article for the  british medical journal detailing his results, titled "the transfusion of whole blood: a suggestion for more frequent employment in war surgery".  this, along with improvements in the process developed by british physician edward william archibald, persuaded the british authorities to accept the practice of blood transfusion. in 1917 robertson set up blood transfusion apparatus at nomber 2 casualty clearing station in france.  following the war, robertson returned to toronto. in 1920, he was an orthopedic surgeon at davisville military hospital.  robertson died of pneumonia in 1923 at the age of 38.  personal robertson was married to enid gordon (nee finley) graham, a massage/physical therapist.  the couple had two children.  references  canadian surgeons 1923 deaths
seenpur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of seenpur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, seenpur has total number of 154 houses and population of 855 of which include 440 males and 415 females. literacy rate of seenpur is 71.92%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 93 which is 10.88% of total population of seenpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 1325, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
aditi ashok (born 29 march 1998) is an indian professional golfer from bangalore. she plays on the ladies european tour and lpga tour. she made her olympic games debut at the 2016 summer olympics. she qualified for the 2020 summer olympics in tokyo, representing india in golf and finished 4th.  personal life aditi was born in bangalore to ashok gudlamani and maheshwari. she was educated at the frank anthony public school, bangalore and  graduated in 2016. when she started playing golf at the age of 5, there were only three golf courses in bangalore. when she expressed an interest, her father took her to the karnataka golf association driving range. her father ashok was her caddie in the 2016 olympics, while her mother maheshwari ashok was her caddie for the tokyo 2020 olympics.  career aditi at the age of 12, played in the asia pacific invitation tournament. when aditi was 13, she became victorious in her first professional tour. she won the national junior championship three times in a row in 2012, 2013 and 2014. in 2014 she held junior and senior titles at the same time. she was the only indian golfer, who played at asian youth games of 2013, youth olympics and asian games - both in 2014.  after winning the ladies british amateur stroke play championship in 2015 she turned pro on 1 january, 2016.  she became the youngest and first indian to win the lalla aicha tour school and secured her ladies european tour card for the 2016 season. this win also made her the youngest winner of a q school for an international tour.  aditi won the 2016 hero women's indian open with a score of 3-under-par 213, and in the process became the first indian to win a ladies european tour title.  in a country normally focused on cricket, her win garnered outsized attention for the sport of golf. her win made the front page of the country's largest newspaper, the times of india and she was featured nationally on television. she picked up a second win two weeks later at the qatar ladies open and finished the season second on the order of merit. she won the rookie of the year award. she also gained a lpga tour card for 2017 via the lpga final qualifying tournament.  in 2017, aditi became the first lpga player from india, and finished eighth in the louise suggs rolex rookie of the year standings.  in 2018, she made 17 cuts at 24 events, with two top-10 finishes. she recorded a career-best t6 result at the volunteers of america lpga texas classic
(formerly volunteers of america lpga north dallas classic) and tied her career-low score of 64 at the walmart nw arkansas championship. she ended the year with the second-lowest putting average on the lpga.  in 2019, aditi made 13 cut out of 22 lpga tour events, with best season finish of t13 at cp women's open. she ended the year with back-to-back second-place finishes on the ladies european tour.  2016 olympic games at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, aditi was the youngest participant among all golfers. she finished in 41st place.  2020 olympic games in 2021, aditi represented india at the 2020 summer olympics in the women's individual stroke play event, in which she was ranked 200th in the world. aditi finished fourth with a score of 269 and 15-under par, two shots behind gold medal winner nelly korda of the united states. after 54 holes, she was in the silver medal position, and was in medal contention for most of the fourth round.  amateur wins 2011 usha karnataka junior, southern india junior, faldo series asia - india, east india tolly ladies, all india championship 2012 usha delhi ladies, usha army championship, all india junior 2013 asia pacific junior championship 2014 eastern india ladies amateur, usha igu all india ladies & girls championship 2015 army ladies & junior championship, st rule trophy, southern india ladies & junior girls championship, ladies' british open amateur stroke play championship, thailand amateur open  source:  professional wins  ladies european tour wins (3) 2016 hero women's indian open, qatar ladies open 2017 fatima bint mubarak ladies open  other wins 2011 hero professional tour leg 1, hero professional tour leg 3 (both as an amateur)  team appearances espirito santo trophy (representing india): 2012, 2014  references  external links  indian female golfers ladies european tour golfers lpga tour golfers olympic golfers of india golfers at the 2016 summer olympics golfers at the 2020 summer olympics golfers at the 2014 asian games asian games competitors for india golfers at the 2014 summer youth olympics golfers from karnataka recipients of the arjuna award sportspeople from bangalore sportswomen from karnataka 1998 births living people
, provisional designation , is a trans-neptunian object and centaur, approximately  in diameter. it was discovered on 16 may 2013, by the pan-starrs 1 survey at haleakala observatory, hawaii, united states. the object's orbit is highly inclined and very eccentric, with a perihelion closer to the sun than uranus and at an aphelion 17 times farther from the sun than neptune.  orbit and classification    orbits the sun at a distance of 16.8-538.9 au once every 4631 years and 1 month (1,691,491 days; semi-major axis of 277.83 au). its orbit has an eccentricity of 0.94 and an inclination of 85° with respect to the ecliptic. the body's observation arc begins with its official discovery observation by pan-starrs at haleakala observatory in may 2013.  numbering and naming   this minor planet was numbered by the minor planet center on 25 september 2018 (). as of 2018, it has not been named.  features   has a highly inclined orbit typical of scattered objects and orbits nearly perpendicular to the ecliptic.  references  external links   list of centaurs and scattered-disk objects, minor planet center  discovery circumstances: numbered minor planets (520001)-(525000) - minor planet center      523719 523719 523719 20130516
tamas somlo (17 november 1947 - 19 july 2016) was a hungarian musician, singer-songwriter and artist. he is mostly known for having been a member of hungarian rock bands omega and locomotiv gt and for composing several of their successful songs. besides being a singer, his main instruments were bass guitar, clarinet, and the saxophone.  he died of cancer on 19 july 2016 at the age of 68. it was after this that the remaining members of his longtime band locomotiv gt announced that they will stop performing together, which also meant the band's dissolution.  awards  order of merit of the republic of hungary (2004)  references  external links   official website (hungarian)  http://www.blikk.hu/sztarvilag/somlo-tamas-37-eve-nem-tud-elvalni-a-felesegetol/fpsrd21  1947 births 2016 deaths hungarian musicians hungarian jews locomotiv gt members deaths from cancer in hungary
the berryville commercial historic district encompasses the commercial heart of the city of berryville, arkansas.  centered on the city's public square and radiating out along some of the flanking roads, the district encompasses commercial architecture spanning a century (1850-1950), as well as two municipal parks.  most of the buildings are one and two story commercial buildings from either the late 19th or early 20th century.  the district, listed on the national register of historic places in 2016, includes the previously listed carroll county courthouse, eastern district and berryville post office.  see also  national register of historic places listings in carroll county, arkansas  references  national register of historic places in carroll county, arkansas historic districts on the national register of historic places in arkansas buildings and structures in berryville, arkansas
ludwig von bogdandy (born 10 february 1930 in berlin, died 5 may 1996 in linz) () was a german metallurgist and industrial executive. he was a leading researcher on iron and steel production, and served as ceo of voestalpine, an international steel based technology and capital goods group based in linz. he also served as the honorary hungarian consul-general in linz.  family  ludwig von bogdandy was a son of the hungarian physical chemist stefan von bogdandy, who moved to berlin in the 1920s, and was the father of the legal scholar armin von bogdandy.  career  he earned a habilitation at rwth aachen university in 1959, and became associate professor at the same university in 1965. in 1985 he was awarded an honorary doctorate in engineering. he was a member of the board of directors of thyssen niederrhein and managing director of the klockner works. from 1986 to 1988 he was a member of the board of directors and from 1988 to 1992 chairman of the board of directors and ceo of voestalpine. from 1990 to 1992 he was a member of the board of directors of osterreichische industrieholding, which administers the investments of the republic of austria in partially or entirely nationalized companies. he was hungarian consul-general in linz from 1993.  he received the grand decoration of honour for services to the republic of austria and was a knight of honour of the order of saint john. the ludwig von bogdandy award, which is awarded by rwth aachen university, is named in his honour.  works   die reduktion der eisenerze: wissenschaftliche grundlagen und technische durchfuhrung, stahleisen, dusseldorf 1967 (with hans-jurgen engell)  anwendung der desoxydationskinetik auf die herstellung halbberuhigten stahles, stahleisen, dusseldorf 1969  aktuelle entwicklungstendenzen der phosphorchemie, westdt. verlag, opladen 1986 (with marianne baudler)  references  german metallurgists german chief executives german people of hungarian descent recipients of the grand decoration for services to the republic of austria 1930 births 1996 deaths engineers from berlin
ali osman is a character from eastenders  ali osman may also refer to:  ali osman (composer) (1958-2017), sudanese composer ali hassan osman, somali politician ali osman (criminal), australian criminal involved in the 2005 cronulla riots
marston lake is a reservoir in denver, colorado. it is owned by denver water and was completed in 1902. the reservoir sends water to the marston treatment plant, and from there the water is distributed to denver residents.  the reservoir receives water from the south platte river. the river receives water from the colorado western slope through a transmountain diversion via the roberts tunnel.  see also  list of reservoirs in colorado  references  reservoirs in colorado united states local public utility dams bodies of water of denver
seeds  qualifiers  lucky losers   alison van uytvanck  draw  first qualifier  second qualifier  third qualifier  fourth qualifier  fifth qualifier  sixth qualifier  seventh qualifier  eighth qualifier  ninth qualifier  tenth qualifier  eleventh qualifier  twelfth qualifier  thirteenth qualifier  fourteenth qualifier  fifteenth qualifier  sixteenth qualifier  external links  women's singles qualifying draw 2016 us open - women's draws and results at the international tennis federation  women's singles qualifying us open - women's singles qualifying us open (tennis) by year - qualifying
lust in space - live at the national is a live dvd by the american heavy metal band gwar, recorded at the national theater in richmond, virginia on october 23, 2009 during the band's lust in space tour. it was released on june 26, 2010 under don drakulich's hypereal productions label. bonuses include a 10-minute "behind the murder" mockumentary.  track listing "metal metal land" "saddam a go-go" "lords and masters" "the apes of wrath" "tormentor" "where is zog?" "womb with a view" "let us slay" "maggots" "immortal corruptor" "the price of peace" "lust in space" "bring back the bomb" "have you seen me?" "sick of you"  personnel dave brockie (oderus urungus) - lead vocals cory smoot (flattus maximus) - lead guitar, backing vocals mike derks (balsac the jaws of death) - rhythm guitar, backing vocals casey orr (beefcake the mighty) - bass, backing vocals, lead vocals on "the price of peace" brad roberts (jizmak da gusha) - drums, percussion  references  live video albums 2010 video albums gwar video albums 2010 live albums
stimulant use disorder is a type of substance use disorder that involves the non-medical use of stimulants. it is defined in the dsm-5 as "the continued use of amphetamine-type substances, cocaine, or other stimulants leading to clinically significant impairment or distress, from mild to severe". these psychoactive drugs, known as stimulants, are the most widely used drugs in the world today. approximately 200 million americans have used some type of stimulant in the past year alone.  definition  a psychoactive drug, such as a stimulant, is a chemical or substance that affects one's behavior, mind, and body. a stimulant can be smoked, injected, snorted, taken in pill form, chewed, and even ingested in the form of a drink. synthetic stimulants are becoming increasingly popular as users attempt to alter the chemicals in drugs to create different reactions, and ultimately steer clear of jail time, legal penalties, and detection in drug screening efforts.  if a substance is used over a long period of time and the user becomes dependent upon it, a substance use disorder may develop. substance use may lead to substance dependence and with time, addiction. both mental and physiological dependence requires the development of tolerance leading to withdrawal symptoms. stimulants come in a very large variety of subtypes and among the most common are caffeine, nicotine, cocaine, methamphetamine, amphetamines, amphetamine congeners, electronic cigarettes, diet pills, plant stimulants, energy drinks, and the ever-evolving designer stimulants such as bath salts. caffeine and nicotine are the most popular stimulants used today, with roughly 400 million cups of coffee consumed daily and 36.5 million current cigarette smokers, according to a 2015 study conducted by the centers for disease control and prevention. nicotine, however, is treated separately psychiatrically under tobacco use disorder. conversely, caffeine misuse does not qualify as an addictive disorder; thus it can not be diagnosed as a stimulant use disorder or any other substance use disorder. certain isolated conditions related to caffeine are recognized in the dsm-5's "substance-related" section, however: caffeine intoxication, caffeine withdrawal and other caffeine-induced disorders (e.g., anxiety and sleep disorders).  signs and symptoms  short-term effects   even in small doses, stimulants cause a decrease in appetite, an increase in physical activity and alertness
, convulsions, an elevated body temperature, increased respiration, irregular heartbeat, and increased blood pressure; some of which can cause sudden death depending upon the medical history of the user, even among first-time users.  long-term effects   the long-term use of stimulants can ultimately cause very serious medical issues, including addiction. stimulant addiction, similar to other kinds of addiction, involves neurobiological changes that cause sensitization of the reward system to the stimulus in question (stimulants, in this case). people who use stimulants for a prolonged period frequently experience physiological changes that can be detrimental to their quality of life and require long-term treatment.  symptoms of the disorder  the symptoms of stimulant use disorder include failure to control usage and frequency of use, an intense craving for the drug, increased use over time to obtain the same effects, known as a developed tolerance, and continued use despite negative repercussions and interference in one's everyday life and functioning. furthermore, a disorder is noted when withdrawal symptoms occur because of a decrease in the drug amount and frequency, as well as stopping the use of the drug entirely. these withdrawal symptoms can last for days, weeks, months, and on rare occasions, years, depending on the frequency and dosages used by the individual. these symptoms include, but are not limited to, increased appetite, decreased energy, depression, loss of motivation and interest in once pleasurable activities, anxiety, insomnia, agitation, and an intense craving for the drug. unless intensive medical and psychological treatment is sought after, there is a very high likelihood of relapse among the user.  epidemiology  the use of stimulants in humans causes rapid weight loss, cardiovascular effects such as an increase in heart rate, respiration, and blood pressure, emotional or mental side effects such as paranoia, anxiety, and aggression, as well as a change in the survival pathway known as the reward/reinforcement pathway in our brain. an increase in energy, a reduced appetite, increased alertness and a boost in confidence are all additional side effects of stimulant use when introduced to the body.  medical  currently, stimulants are used medically to treat certain types of asthma, the common cold, depression, obesity, and a wide variety of physical pain and ailments. most commonly, stimulants such as adderall, ritalin, and vyvanse are prescribed for both children and adults diagnosed with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd
).  recreational  recreationally speaking, stimulants are used to change one's state of mind and users report feeling a "rush" as the central nervous system is flooded with dopamine and epinephrine, and norepinephrine. this rush is caused by the sudden change in both the electrical and chemical activity in the brain. this alteration occurs when a stimulant is introduced, as it causes a manipulation in the natural energy chemicals which are forced out and released into the body when they are not needed. in terms of recreational use, it is common for the user to smoke, inject, snort, and ingest stimulants, all of which create different effects on the body.  history  certain types of stimulants are found in plants and grow naturally. the tobacco plant, the cocoa shrub, yohimbe, the betel nut, and the ephedra bush are just a few of the naturally occurring stimulants. other forms of stimulants are man-made, with no naturally occurring plant base, and are instead created using synthetic chemicals.  often, this involves using prescription or over-the-counter pharmaceutical products as precursor materials.  stimulants were first introduced to the medical community with the isolation of cocaine from the coca leaf in 1855, which is not only a stimulant but also a topical anesthetic.  in 1879, vassili von anrep of the university of wurzburg conducted an experiment in which he applied cocaine to one side of a frog's limbs before attempting an invasive medical procedure. cocaine proved to be extremely effective as both an anesthetic and pain reducer.  in world war ii, soldiers were medicated using a type of stimulant called amphetamines to keep both pilots and soldiers alert, full of energy, and ready to fight. amphetamines were given in pill form to american soldiers, as well as to japanese and german military members. it is estimated that german soldiers ingested roughly 35 million doses of pervitin® through the course of the war. pervitin® is a brand-name for methamphetamine, a drug that belongs to the stimulant class of drugs. the use of methamphetamine was an attempt by the nazi leadership to create "super soldiers" who felt no pain and operated with extreme energy and unwavering confidence. the united states, for comparison, had dispensed roughly 200 million benzedrine® tablets. a mixture of amphetamine salts, these pills were favored for their ability to increase wakefulness and energy levels while simultaneously suppressing appetite.
the united states, around the year 1960, saw large increases in amphetamines sold as diet pills, with pharmaceutical companies recognizing the appetite-suppressing and energy-boosting effects stimulants could provide. it was estimated that worldwide sales of diet pills containing stimulants rocketed to over 10 billion tablets sold and that between 6% and 8% of the u.s. population were prescribed these types of medications to aid in weight loss. within a decade, the comprehensive drug abuse prevention and control act of 1970 was passed, the purpose of which was to make it more difficult for individuals to obtain these drugs, with or without a prescription.  the rationale for the act was the dangerous and life-threatening side effects of such drugs, which became better understood during the 1960s.  see also   nicotine dependence  amphetamine dependence  cocaine dependence  substance use disorder  references  external links   substance-related disorders
alfonso de la pena y montenegro (29 apr 1596 - 1687) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of quito (1653-1687).  biography alfonso de la pena montenegro  was born in padron, in the kingdom of galicia, on 29 april 1596. on 4 march 1653, he was selected by the king of spain and confirmed by pope innocent x on 18 august 1653 as bishop of quito. in april 1654, he was consecrated bishop by cristobal de torres, archbishop of santafe en nueva granada. he served as bishop of quito until his death in 1687.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   1596 births 1687 deaths people from o sar 17th-century roman catholic bishops in ecuador bishops appointed by pope innocent x spanish roman catholic bishops in south america roman catholic missionaries in ecuador roman catholic bishops of quito
sangervaara is a village and hill (398 meters high) in the swedish municipality gallivare.  it's a rounded elevation of limited extent rising  above the surrounding land with local relief of less than 300m.  populated places in gallivare municipality
the despraiado sustainable development reserve () is a sustainable development reserve in the state of sao paulo brazil.  location  the despraiado sustainable development reserve is divided between the municipalities of iguape (95.36%), miracatu (1.01%) and pedro de toledo (3.6%) in the state of sao paulo. the reserve extends along the espraiado river. it is almost completely surrounded by the jureia-itatins ecological station.  history  the jureia-itatins mosaic of conservation units  was created by law 12.406 of 12 december 2006. it included the jureia-itatins ecological station and the newly created itingucu and prelado state parks, despraiado and barra do una sustainable development reserves and the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge. the state parks and sustainable development reserves were carved out of the ecological station. on 11 september 2007 the procurer general of the state declared that law 12.406 was unconstitutional. on 10 june 2009 a judgement upheld the finding of unconstitutionality.  law 14.982 of 8 april 2013 again altered the limits of the jureia-itatins ecological station, re-categorising some areas. these included the  despraiado sustainable development reserve. the law recreated the jureia-itatins mosaic, this time covering .  notes  sources  2006 establishments in brazil protected areas of sao paulo (state) sustainable development reserves of brazil
stefania strumillo (born 14 october 1989) is an italian athlete specialising in the discus throw.  biography she won the bronze medal at the 2015 summer universiade. her personal best in the event is 59.80 metres set in amsterdam in 2016.  achievements  national titles strumillo won sixnational championships at individual senior level.  italian athletics championships shot put: 2015, 2016, 2017, 2019 (4) italian winter throwing championships discus throw: 2015, 2021 (2)  see also italian all-time lists - discus throw  references  external links  1989 births living people italian female discus throwers universiade medalists in athletics (track and field) people from the province of ferrara universiade bronze medalists for italy italian athletics championships winners competitors at the 2017 summer universiade medalists at the 2015 summer universiade
pauline pousse (born 17 september 1987) is a french athlete specialising in the discus throw. she won the bronze medal at the 2013 jeux de la francophonie.  her personal best in the event is 62.68 metres set in angers in 2016.  five times vice champion of  france from 2010 to 2015 (excepting 2011), pauline pousse improved in 2016 where she advanced her personal best almost 3 metres, throwing 62.68m in the 2016 french national championships where she qualified for the 2016 rio olympics and for the european championships at amsterdam.  on 10 july 2016, she placed 8th at the  european championships at amsterdam with a throw of 59.62m.  international competitions  references  1987 births living people french female discus throwers people from longjumeau athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of france sportspeople from essonne athletes (track and field) at the 2013 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for france
kladognathus is an extinct genus of conodonts.  references     the kladognathus apparatus (conodonta, carboniferous): homologies with ozarkodinids, and the prioniodinid bauplan. mark a. purnell, journal of paleontology, vol. 67, no. 5 (sep., 1993), pages 875-882 (stable url)  kladognathus rexroad, 1958, not cladognathodus rexroad and collinson, 1961. michael c. mound, micropaleontology, july 1965, volume 11, issue 3 (abstract)  external links      prioniodontida genera fossil taxa described in 1958
johannes alberti, o.p. was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of halberstadt (1550-?).  biography johannes alberti was ordained a priest in the order of preachers. on 27 jun 1550, he was appointed during the papacy of pope julius iii as auxiliary bishop of halberstadt and titular bishop of tripolis in phoenicia. it is uncertain how long he served.  see also  catholic church in germany  references   16th-century german roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope julius iii dominican bishops
dar ibn abi dhiaf is a palace in the medina of tunis, located near the pasha street and sidi mahrez mosque, in the ibn abi diaf dead end.  history   the palace was built by the minister ahmad ibn abi diyaf in the 19th century.  architecture  references   ibn abi dhiaf
sri santhana srinivasa perumal temple is a hindu temple located in mugappair west near anna nagar in chennai. the place was originally known as "maga-pperu" in tamil which means "blessed with a child". later the name 'magapperu' got colloquially transformed to mogappair. the name is due to santana srinivasa perumal whose vigraham (idol) was found beneath the temple premises in mugappair in chennai. santana srinivasa blesses childless couple with children.  history  around 650 years ago, sri arunachalam mudaliar was informed about the existence of the idol/vigraham of santana srinivasa perumal by lord vishnu himself in his dream in mugappair. sri arunachalam mudaliar started the construction of the temple and today it is a spacious temple near the heart of the city. there is a seven tier raja gopuram as we enter the temple, santana srinivasa sannidhi, santana lakshmi sannidhi and andal sannidhi. there is also sannidhi for ganapathy and anjaneya.  santana gopala pooja santana gopala pooja is performed in this temple wherein couples are made to cradle/hold the vigraham/idol of santana gopala in their lap.  the santana gopala pooja is performed on pournami and on the days with the stars of tiruvonam, punarpoosam, swathi, rohini and revathi between morning 6:00 and to 12:00 noon. the pooja articles include tamboolam, honey, butter to be offered to lord krishna while holding him in the lap of the couple performing the pooja. the following sloka is recited by the couple performing the santana gopala pooja:  devakisuta govinda vaasudeva jagatpathe,  dehime tanayam krishna twaamaham sharanam gathaha,  devadeva jagannatha gotra vridhi karaprabho, dehime tanayam sheegram ayushmantam yashashshreenam.  the meaning of the sloka is as follows:  govinda, the son of devaki  is vaasudeva the father of this world, give me with a child o krishna! i surrender to you!  o lord of all lords! may my gothra/lineage multiply (through the offspring born), give me a child early who would live long with fame.  the honey and butter are given to the couple as prasadam who are required to take the prasadam regularly
after the pooja on a daily basis. they are also required to recite the sloka on a daily basis for 48 days for good results.  references  hindu temples in chennai
erasmus pagendorfer (died 1561) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1557-1561) and titular bishop of symbalia.  biography on 24 mar 1557, erasmus pagendorfer was appointed during the papacy of pope paul iv as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop of symbalia. on 25 jul 1558, he was consecrated bishop by urban sagstetter, bishop of gurk. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 15 jul 1561.  see also  catholic church in germany  references   16th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope paul iv 1561 deaths
club leones negros de la universidad de guadalajara premier play in the liga premier in zapopan, mexico and are the official reserve team for leones negros udeg.  players  current squad  references  external links  football clubs in jalisco liga premier de mexico association football clubs established in 2013 2013 establishments in mexico
camillo baldi (died 1650) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of nicotera (1645-1650).  biography on 6 march 1645, camillo baldi was appointed during the papacy of pope innocent x as bishop of nicotera. on 19 march 1645, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-priest of santa susanna, with onorato onorati, bishop of urbania e sant'angelo in vado, and papirio silvestri, bishop of macerata e tolentino, serving as co-consecrators.  he served as bishop of nicotera until his death in 1650.  references   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope innocent x 1650 deaths
the anas central library of science (azerbaijan national academy of sciences) was founded in 1923 in baku, azerbaijan.  history   after the biggest library in transcaucasia was shut down for some years in 1920, baku needed a new library. in november 1923, the anas central library of science began as the office of bibliography of the azerbaijan society of research and investigation (azərbaycanı tədqiq və tətəbbo cəmiyyəti) or attc. it was supported by individuals including nariman narimanov, abdurrahim bey hagverdiyev, taghi shahbazi, and hanafi zeynalli. the founding director was alexander vasilyevich baqriyin.  on opening, the library held 430 books and 1200 manuscripts. in august 1925, in order to prevent duplication, the library and the bibliography office became one, the library-bibliography bureau. hanafi zeynalli (1896-1938) became the chairman.  in 1945, the library was further developed in association with the academy of sciences. from 1963 to 1984, the library was known as the "fundamental library". after 1984, it was called the "central scientific library". its directors have included s. m. yahyazade, y. i. tahirov, nazim akhundov, rasim kazimov, mahbube hasanova, amin efendiyev, aybeniz aliyeva-kengerli and leyla bekir imanova.  on january 4, 2003, the president, heydar aliyev ratified the 54th item of the article 5 of the charter of anas, giving the library the status of a scientific institution.  on may 5, 2014, a new library building was opened by the president.  international relations  in 1993, the csl became a member of the international federation of library associations and institutions. in 2012, anas scl became a full member of the association of scientific libraries, council of europe. the library provides a service for international book exchange. the library invites international guests and ambassadors to visit the library. the library also sends members abroad to study librarianship and attend conferences and exhibitions in other nations.  collections  the library's collections include works in azerbaijani language, works in russian, and works in eastern languages. georg hazai's private collection of works in turkish is housed in the library. other private collections at the library include those of y. e. bertels, y. a. belyayev
, b. n. zaxoder, zahid huseynzade and gifts of niyazi and others. there are also books and journals in western european languages.  the rare book collection is noted for the personal collection of the numismatic scholar, y. a. pakhomov and the copies of encyclopaedia sets from many nations. the library holds periodicals and dissertations in hard and electronic copies. other entities such as the azerbaijan society of petroleum geologists, the nakhchivan section of anas, and the national history museum also keep collections in the library.  library spaces   the library has fourteen reading rooms of various sizes catering for 1,000 visitors, spread through the floors of the library. the academicians' hall is a special work area for members of the academy of sciences. the dissertation hall provides a space for presentation and discussion of papers and proposals, especially those directed to the innovation department of the anas. the zəkalı discussion room is a space for discussion amongst board members, experts, designers, and working groups with technological fittings to assist them. the conference hall caters for national and international events, meetings with scientists and writers, anniversaries, conferences, and presentations.  see also   central scientific library at anas  references   science and technology in azerbaijan
the chiesa della madonna della porta is a roman catholic church in racconigi, province of cuneo, region of piedmont, italy.  history the church was erected and dedicated to the madonna in gratitude for the cessation of the plague epidemic in 1630-31 that killed nearly a quarter of the inhabitants. residents seeking protection prayed to an icon of the virgin found near the gate of the city. the fresco was replaced by a painting. in the late 17th century, when the walls were torn down, a church was erected at the site to shelter the image, patronized by giovanni angelo spada, his coat of arms is in the presbytery. the church housed the compagnia delle umiliate, a flagellant confraternity.  in 1700, giovanni battista pozzo painted 8 canvases for the church of which six remain:  birth of the virgin  presentation of mary at the temple  adoration of the magi  flight to egypt   marriage of the virgin  circumcision the main altarpiece was painted in 1631. the ceiling has elaborate 18th-century stucco decoration.  references  roman catholic churches in racconigi 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy
hayden pass is a mountain pass in colorado over the sangre de cristo range. it is traversed by a jeep trail that starts, at the west end, at villa grove, colorado and, at the east end, at coaldale, colorado. the hayden creek drainage, on the east side of the pass, was the site of the hayden pass fire. the elevation at the top of the pass is .  references  mountain passes of colorado landforms of saguache county, colorado landforms of fremont county, colorado transportation in fremont county, colorado transportation in saguache county, colorado
narva united fc is a futsal, football, beach soccer, and senior football club based in narva, estonia.  the club was founded in 2012 and currently plays football in the ii liiga e/n, futsal in triobet saaliliiga (estonian top league), beach soccer in the unibet rannaliiga (estonian top league).  futsal team of narva united are 3 times finalist of the estonian futsal league (2012/2013,2015/2016 and 2016/2017) and the winner of the estonian futsal league (2016/2017).  narva united futsal team will represent estonia in preliminary round of the uefa futsal cup 2017/2018.  narva united football team also is the reserve team of narva trans (in the 2016 and 2017 seasons).  honours  futsal domestic  triobet saaliliiga (estonian top futsal league / estonian championship):  winner: 2016/2017  second place (2): 2012/2013, 2015/2016  football domestic   iii liiga e  runners-up (2): 2014, 2015  vaike karikas (national cup for amateur teams):  winner: 2014  players  current squad  ''as of 25 april 2017.  statistics  league and cup  references  external links  official website   association football clubs established in 2014 football clubs in estonia jk narva trans
shahabad  assembly constituency is  one of the 403 constituencies of the uttar pradesh legislative assembly, india. it is a part of the hardoi district and one  of the five assembly constituencies in the hardoi (lok sabha constituency). first election in this assembly constituency was held in 1952 after the "dpaco (1951)" (delimitation order) was passed in 1951. after the "delimitation of parliamentary and assembly constituencies order" was passed in 2008, the constituency was assigned identification number 155. from 1957 to 2008, this constituency had more than one seat (mla) and from 2008, the number of seats have been confined to one.  wards  / areas extant  of shahabad assembly constituency is kcs shahabad, alamnagar & shiroman  nagar of shahabad tehsil.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017 17th vidhan sabha: 2017 general  elections  see also  hardoi district hardoi (lok sabha constituency) sixteenth legislative assembly of uttar pradesh uttar pradesh legislative assembly vidhan bhawan  references   assembly constituencies of uttar pradesh politics of hardoi district
haec ornamenta mea is a latin phrase meaning "these are my jewels" or "these are my ornaments". the expression is attributed to cornelia africana (c. 190 - c. 100 bc) by valerius maximus in his factorum ac dictorum memorabilium libri ix, iv, 4, incipit, where he related an anecdote demonstrating cornelia's devotion to and admiration for two of her sons, the gracchi brothers (tiberius and gaius gracchus). when women friends questioned cornelia about her mode of dress and personal adornment, which was far more simple and understated than was usual for a wealthy roman woman of her rank and station, cornelia indicated her two sons and said this famous locution.  the original text differs slightly, since in reality valerius maximus wrote: haec ... ornamenta sunt mea.  the phrase is used by some writers to dedicate a book to their dearest relatives.  references  latin words and phrases
edith alonso sanchez (born 1974 in madrid) is a spanish composer, improviser, pianist, sound artist and academic who has been involved in the creation of an experimental electronic style that incorporates spoken word, musical sound and visual imagery.  she has received a number of awards for her work.  life and education  alonso was born in 1974 in madrid.  as a child, she studied classical music and learned to play the piano, and later the saxophone and guitar.  she later moved from madrid to paris for her doctoral studies. during the 1990s, alonso played the electric bass in an underground punk rock band in madrid.  alonso attended the french university paris 8 in a program that jointly run with spanish university universidad complutense de madrid and was in the facultad de filosofia.  in 2009, she successfully defended her doctoral thesis titled "la estetica de la musica acusmatica en la obra de francois bayle".  following her thesis defense, she was awarded the societe des auteurs, compositeurs et editeurs de musique (sacem) prize.  she was also a given grants from the french ministry of research and the spanish ministry of foreign affairs.  alonso teaches at the universidad internacional de la rioja, working there since 2013 as a professor.  she co-founded campo de interferencias, a spanish non-profit dedicated to promoting sound art in spain.  musical development  alonso's involvement with music includes having done a number of roles including being a composer, improviser, pianist, sound artist and academic. alonso is one of a number of artists involved with the developing of tools to create music in a laboratory style setting, outside the traditional confines of creating new musical sounds.  alonso, along with anthony maubert, developed the musical style radical db, a style of electronica that incorporated musical sound, spoken word and visual imagery in 2007.  that year, the duo did extensive out outreach to teach others about electronica and radical db across spain. their outreach included organizing concerts with several musical styles, running interdisciplinary evens with other artists, running courses, talks, and networking on a national and international level.  in 2007, they also worked with video, creating a series called nomades which they showed in nice, france before showing it in ireland and the netherlands.  in 2013, she was one of a number of artists who participated in the second edition of the sant carles de la rapita hosted eufonic, an art festival focused on sounds and visuals. in 2014,
the duo were in zaragoza for a music festival, where they demonstrated radical db, a new technological approach to creating improvisational musical style with an emphasis on creating new unique musical sounds. in october 2014, she was one of a number of artists to perform at audiopolis in madrid.   in november 2015, she was one of a number of composers to debut their work at el festival coma in madrid.  in 2016, alonso continued to develop her unique style of infusing electronic music, the spoken word and visual imagery. in april in zaragoza, she was involved with a week long musical education program organized by the ayuntamiento de zaragoza. as part of the program, she hosted an open source course on using freely licensed software and hardware to create new musical sounds. in may 2016, she gave a talk and concert at medialab prado in madrid. later that month, she gave another concert alongside other artists including wade mathews, and joaquin mendoza. she worked with actor jose luis esteban, poet manuel vilas for a production at the teatro de la estacion in zaragoza in june.  this was a continuation of her work in developing radical db.  as a composer, one of the pieces alonso created was "atardecer en un patio".  this work was commissioned by france's centre de documentation de la musique contemporaine (cdmc). she has also had a work commissioned by radio nacional de espana. her compositions have been performed in a number of countries including portugal, spain, austria, germany, sweden, south korea, cuba, costa rica, columbia, argentina, and mexico.  as an event organizer, alonso has also influenced others through the festival radical db, held annually in zaragoza since 2014. the festival celebrates experimental music and sound art. the 2016 edition was held at the centro de arte y tecnologia etopia.  artists participating at the festival included agusti fernandez, joel ryan, erikm, concha jerez & jose iges, kaffe matthews, robert lisek, bosch & simons, andrea borghi, equipo elevador, myungduk kim, marco ferrazza, juan antonio nieto, and carlos tricas garcia.  awards  alonso has been given a number of awards and won a number of prizes including the societe des auteurs, compositeurs et editeurs de musique (sacem) prize, winning the madrid abierto, earning an honorable mention for the pauline oliveros prize and the hablar en arte, and getting a nomination for the prix europe.  published works  she has published
academic papers about the musical style she has been involved with creating and examining.  one paper was "el concepto de "imagen-de-lo-sonoro" en la musica acusmatica segun el compositor francois bayle" which was published in escritura e imagen in 2013.  another paper she published was "claves de la musica del siglo xx" also published in  escritura e imagen in 2005.  a third paper she published was "the listener in francois bayle's works: a resonant subject in a living space" published in 2015 in organised sound.  references   1974 births living people musicians from the community of madrid people from madrid spanish classical pianists spanish women pianists spanish women musicians spanish composers universidad internacional de la rioja faculty spanish electronic musicians women in electronic music 21st-century women musicians 21st-century classical pianists
the son (danish: sønnen) is a 1953 danish family film directed by torben anton svendsen and starring ib schønberg, lise wolst and frits helmuth.  cast    ib schønberg  as krovært christian christiansen    lise wolst as sonja   frits helmuth as simon    kate mundt as ketty    gunnar lauring as tømmerhandleren 'kongen'    karin nellemose  as fru rudi    inge hvid-møller  as anna    kjeld jacobsen  as max    hans-henrik krause as niels    karl stegger  as kriminalbetjent  maria garland  as marie    elith pio  as kredslægen   aage winther-jørgensen as sofus    preben lerdorff rye  as generalen    inge ketti as søster    bodil lindorff as laurine    jakob nielsen as overbetjent    poul secher  as stoffer    victor montell as værten   poul juhl  as eksportør    paul hagen  as salgschauffør    jytte ibsen  as en ung mor    henry nielsen  references  bibliography   morten piil. gyldendals danske filmguide. gyldendal a/s, 2008.  external links     1953 films danish films danish-language films danish black-and-white films
bruce vanderveer, professionally known as automatic, is a grammy-nominated american record producer, songwriter, and entrepreneur. he is currently signed to sony/atv music publishing and is the ceo/co-founder of the entertainment company inrage entertainment.  on his first production job, automatic worked directly with michael jackson. automatic has worked with artists such as pink, pussycat dolls, nicole scherzinger, christina aguilera, cher, fabolous, james brown and raven simone. in 2009, automatic produced the #2 song on the billboard hot singles sales chart, cradle to the grave, recorded by american idol's bettina bush. his latest k-pop record, "rock the world", was recorded by k-pop sensation jyj's kim junsu (xia).  featuring the quiett and automatic himself, the record was released on may 30, 2016 as the lead single from xia's fourth studio album, xignature, which peaked at number 14 on billboard's world albums chart. the grammy-nominated producer also co-wrote the song "i'm gonna be a star" alongside ebony rae vanderveer, park jinyoung and olltii. the south korean girl group twice recorded the song which served as the theme song for the 2015 reality girl group survival show sixteen. automatic also produced xia's 2012 hit single "uncommitted" which peaked at number 1 on south korea's gaon albums chart and number 19 on billboard's korea k-pop hot 100 chart.  early life   automatic was born in bushwick, brooklyn, new york; raised in flatbush and red hook, brooklyn to a 16-year-old mother and raised by one of the most infamous drug dealers of new york city. he never met his biological father. of black-american and japanese descent, automatic was taught in the traditions of buddhism from a young age. while many of his peers were involved in illegal activities, automatic's attraction to music kept him from the dangers of the rough city streets of his neighborhood. his first encounter with a guitar lent to his name, automatic. there was a little boy who lived next door to automatic that played the guitar every day. automatic asked the little boy to play guitar every day, but the little boy would not share. one day, after being so frustrated that his neighbor would not share, he shoved the little boy down and took his guitar from him. the little boy ran upstairs to tell his mother and automatic started plucking the old, 4-stringed guitar. he intuit
ively began to play a melody on the guitar. having no prior instrumental or musical lessons, his mother was stunned that her son was playing a tune on the spot. thus, she nicknamed him, "automatic".  from that day on, automatic showed he had a natural ability to learn how to play instruments. in junior high, he joined the concert band at roy h. mann junior high school in brooklyn. he chose to play the trombone. each week he would ask his classmates if he could borrow their instruments to take home so that he could learn how to play them. he eventually taught himself how to play 13 instruments. automatic also used his nickname as his stage name when he would rap and dance. growing up in hip-hop, he was part of the early, crucial moments in hip-hop that would later define and popularize the genre. automatic befriended and battled with who would become hip-hop icons notorious b.i.g., ll cool j, nice and smooth and big daddy kane. automatic's popularity as a hip-hop artist grew. when he was 13 years old, he was invited to participate in a pbs special on hip-hop where he break danced. his appearance in the special led to him appearing as a dancer in krush groove, starring run dmc, ll cool j and sheila e. he also danced in beat street.  in addition to music and dancing, automatic focused on martial arts with his sensei who taught him yip man's wing chun kung-fu. he began practicing bruce lee's style of jeet kune do. he competed in and won multiple underground fights as a teenager and became well-respected in the martial arts community.  crisis leads to record deal   when he was 15 years old, automatic left home to escape the abuse and negative lifestyle of his step-father. as a result of leaving home, he became homeless, living on the streets of brooklyn for four months. he was on track to be the valedictorian of south shore high school and was the most popular kid in high school, but all of this turmoil in his life caused him to drop out of school. he worked at the palladium, mels diner and a microfilm company for money until he could afford his own apartment. he convinced a landlord in sunset park, brooklyn to rent an apartment to him at the age of 16. automatic formed a band, auto and cherokee. the band played cbgb's, the cat club, the palladium and other clubs in the village and manhattan. the band soon caught
the eye of j.j. french, bass player of the rock band, twisted sister. french signed on to manage the group. the band moved together to red hook, brooklyn and shared a factory-style loft. they auditioned for multiple record companies and were turned down many times. grammy award-winning producer, david kershenbaum, heard about the group and came to red hook to hear the band who performed a showcase in their loft for him. he immediately signed them to morgan creek/polygram records. in 1993, the first professional release was auto and cherokee, "naked music", written, composed and produced by automatic, keith cohen and carmen rizzo. the album was a fusion of hip-hop, r&b and prince-infused vibes. the album featured dave coz and members of the group fishbone. the single from the album "taste" is featured in the movie the crush starring alicia silverstone and in "stay tuned" starring john ritter. while on morgan creek, automatic was managed by rob kehane and mark schimmel.  from producing and songwriting in the 1990s   in 1994-1995, automatic began to develop musical groups under his production company apple children productions. the first group that he put together was forever yours, later named brownstone. he also discovered a young australian boy on venice beach, wade robson, whom he taught hip hop and rap and developed vocally. he later became a member of the duo quo. both acts later became signed to michael jackson's record label, mjj records/sony. wade robson went on to become a world-famous choreographer working with acts like 'nsync and britney spears. in 1994, he became the youngest producer to sign a double production deal with to a&m/perspective records. he worked directly with legendary producers jimmy jam and terry lewis. they produced acts including four songs on raja-nee's album hot and ready. he produced "how long" by sweet sable for the above the rim soundtrack and produced a remix of james brown's "how long."  from 1995 to 1998, he worked for the wb television network producing songs for the jamie foxx show, sister sister and cleghorne!. he wrote and produced the american airlines theme song. in 1999, he was signed to sony music as a writer/producer by erica greyson and jim vellutato. he began working with a-list writers with sony and worked with artists like pink, india irie, christina aguilera, pussycat dolls, raven simone, nicole scherz
inger, kurupt and fabolous. in addition to producing, he worked on the mixing side of production with dave pensado and manny marroquin.  in 2009, automatic produced "cradle to the grave" and "she is" for bettina bush which reached #2 and #4 on the billboard hot single sales chart, respectively.  in summer 2012, automatic produced the hit single, "uncommitted" for k-pop sensation, kim junsu (xia) of superstar pop group jyj. the video for "uncommitted" debuted at #1 in korea and china. it has reached #1 on china's yinyuetai chart, #1 on peruvian radio charts, and #1 on korea's hanteo chart.[1] at kim junsu's recent concert in la, korean news site tv daily reported: "the song produced together with sony music producer automatic, uncommitted, is a chic urban pop song that attracted great attention."[2] furthermore, the popular canadian youtube duo eatyourkimchi, well known for introducing k-pop to foreigners, also reviewed uncommitted: "from start to finish, the song is consistently solid and we're totally digging it."[3] also kim junsu described his recording experience with automatic in his august 2012 cyworld music interview: i also felt that i had a lot of freedom while recording my worldwide album. because the composer respects the artist and the artist's feeling 120%, the recording was so pleasant. this time i choked and coughed a bit when i was singing, but the composer automatic treated me so nicely, by telling me that i could rest as much as i want to or have a cup of warm tea and try again, that i didn't know what to do. it was pleasant to work with them."[4]  automatic also performs as lead vocalist in the group asphalt messiah.  inrage entertainment  with his experience as a music producer, automatic was exposed to a range of multiple music genres that included rock, country, pop, and r&b. the constant pressure from the industry wanting him to focus on one genre, sparked automatic's interest to develop his own label. automatic partnered with corporate attorney, roger doumanian founder of fresh element, to create an entertainment company focused on music diversity. in 2016, inrage entertainment was re-born, when automatic partnered with his wife, ebony rae vanderveer, to expand the model of the entertainment company. the label is currently based in los
angeles, california and functions as a record label, artist development company and music, film and television production company.  production and engineering  film and television credits  branding  companies  singer/musician  references  external links  automatic interview with asia pacific arts  record producers from new york (state) living people people from bushwick, brooklyn singers from new york (state) songwriters from new york (state) people from flatbush, brooklyn people from red hook, brooklyn year of birth missing (living people)
jehn joyner  is a northern mariana islander footballer who plays as a forward. joyner made his debut for the northern mariana islands in the 2014 afc challenge cup qualifying rounds. he also featured in the 2015 eaff east asian cup first preliminary round and 2017 eaff east asian cup first preliminary round.  references   living people northern mariana islands footballers northern mariana islands international footballers association football forwards 1997 births
ghiglione is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  loren ghiglione (born 1941), american journalist, editor, and educator paolo ghiglione (born 1997), italian footballer romualdo ghiglione (1891-1940), italian gymnast  italian-language surnames
ban mai railway station is a railway station located in wat phrik subdistrict, phitsanulok city, phitsanulok. it is located 375.313 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. the station opened on 24 january 1908 as part of the northern line extension from pak nam pho to phitsanulok.  on the evening of 10 july 2020, ordinary train no. 201 bound for phitsanulok derailed in the station yard. there were no injuries.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
hans schleuniger (born 9 july 1933) is a swiss former professional racing cyclist. he rode in the 1960 tour de france.  references  external links    1933 births living people people from zurzach district swiss male cyclists
cameron orr (born 2 april 1995) is an australian rugby union player who competes for the melbourne rebels in super rugby. his usual position is prop.  orr was originally part of the waratahs' generation blue academy and he played for the greater sydney rams in the national rugby championship. in july 2016, orr signed for english club gloucester rugby to play in the aviva premiership from the 2016-17 season.  in february 2018, orr returned home to australia to play for western force as part of the world series rugby invitational matches and the upcoming 2018 national rugby championship season.  orr represented australia u20s in both the 2014 and 2015 irb world junior championships, held in new zealand and italy respectively.  super rugby statistics  references  external links gloucester rugby profile rugby au profile  1995 births living people australian rugby union players greater sydney rams players gloucester rugby players rugby union players from sydney expatriate rugby union players in england australian expatriate rugby union players western force players melbourne rebels players rugby union props
the association of illustrators (aoi) is a british trade association for illustration, to advance and protect illustrators' rights. it was established in the united kingdom in 1973.  the aoi promotes and encourages commercial and ethical standards within the industry, to improve the standing of illustration as a profession. it actively campaigns to maintain and protect the rights of its members, through the pro-action campaign and liaison group, the british copyright council, the creators rights alliance and the european illustrators forum.  with over 1,800 members, including freelance illustrators, agents, students, colleges and commissioners, the aoi provides support, advice and education to members of the industry worldwide, at every stage of their career.  notable illustrators among its patrons include ralph steadman, sir quentin blake, shirley hughes and raymond briggs.  history   1976 - launch of aoi's annual exhibition of british illustration, and its linked publication images  1989 - publication of rights by aoi, to help illustrators with legal issues such as contracts and copyright  2002 - launch of www.theaoi.com as a general resource for both commissioners and illustrators.  see also   society of strip illustration  references  external links     1973 establishments in the united kingdom arts organisations based in the united kingdom professional associations based in the united kingdom organisations based in the city of westminster trade unions in the united kingdom
a general election was held in the u.s. state of illinois on november 6, 2018. the elections for illinois's 18 congressional districts, governor, statewide constitutional officers, illinois senate, and illinois house were held on this date.  primaries were held march 20, 2018.  the democratic party made gains, including picking up the state's governorship and flipping two of its u.s. house seats. after the election, all executive offices and control of the illinois general assembly was held by the democratic party. conversely the republican party experienced what was regarded to be their worst defeat in the state since at least 2006.  election information 2018 was a midterm election year in the united states.  turnout  primary election for the primary election, turnout was 26.48%, with 2,103,634 votes cast.   turnout by county  general election for the general election, turnout was 57.23%, with 4,635,541 votes cast. the illinois state board of elections reported that this general election turnout rate was the third-highest for a midterm election over the past forty years. the illinois state board of elections also reported that the total number of votes cast set a record high. voter registration, at 8.1 million, also sat at a record high.  turnout was considered high in the united states during the 2018 midterm elections, with it being the highest national midterm turnout since 1914.  turnout by county  federal elections  united states house  all of illinois' 18 seats in the united states house of representatives were up for election in 2018.  the democratic party flipped two republican-held seat, making the composition of illinois' house delegation 13 democrats and 5 republicans.  governor and lieutenant governor  incumbent republican governor bruce rauner ran for re-election to a second term, but was defeated by democratic venture capitalist and billionaire j. b. pritzker.  democratic primary  republican primary  general election  attorney general  incumbent democratic attorney general lisa madigan, who served since 2003, chose not to run for re-election to a fifth term. democratic state senator kwame raoul defeated republican erika harold.  democratic primary  republican primary  general election  secretary of state  incumbent democratic secretary of state jesse white, who has been in office since 1999, initially announced in august 2015 that he would retire.  on august 17, 2017, white reversed this decision and announced that  he would run for re-election to a sixth term. governing magazine projected the race as "safe democratic".  democratic primary
candidates  declared jesse white, incumbent secretary of state  withdrew mike hastings, state senator  declined walter burnett jr., alderman for chicago's 27th ward  results  republican primary  candidates  declared jason helland, grundy county state's attorney  declined j.c. griffin, iraq war veteran  results  endorsements  general election  results  comptroller  incumbent republican judy baar topinka died on december 10, 2014, after being re-elected to a second term in office. a special election was held in 2016 for the remainder of the term, with democratic city clerk of chicago susana mendoza defeating appointed republican comptroller leslie munger. mendoza won a full term.  democratic primary  candidates  declared susana mendoza, incumbent illinois comptroller  results  republican primary  candidates  declared darlene senger, former state representative and candidate for illinois's 11th congressional district in 2014  results  third parties and independents  candidates  declared claire ball (libertarian), certified public accountant  general election  results  treasurer  democratic primary  candidates  declared mike frerichs, incumbent state treasurer  results  republican primary  candidates  declared jim dodge, orland park village trustee and candidate for illinois comptroller in 2010  results  general election  results  state senate  one-third of the seats of the illinois senate were up for election in 2018.  state house of representatives  all of the seats in the illinois house of representatives were up for election in 2018.  judicial elections  judicial elections were held, consisting of both partisan and retention elections, including those for one seat in the supreme court of illinois and five seats in the illinois appellate court.  local elections local elections took place, including county elections such as the cook county elections.  notes  references  external links candidates at vote smart  candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at national institute on money in state politics    illinois
philomath is an unincorporated community in brownsville township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  history a post office was established at philomath in 1837, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1907.  geography philomath is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
this is the current list of the national symbols of china. the people's republic of china (prc) controls all of mainland china, while the republic of china (roc) controls taiwan and nearby islands. see national symbols of taiwan. both countries used to claim to be the legitimate government of all of china, with taiwan informally dropping territorial claims in the early nineties.  the national emblem means "national crest / shield emblem and logo design", which represents the image and dignity of the country's political power and people. it is one of the symbols of a country's political power.the definition of china's national emblem is explained in article 3 of the national emblem law of the people's republic of china: "the national emblem of the people's republic of china is the symbol and symbol of the people's republic of china." the national emblem and the national flag are the symbols of the same country. in essence, they are the identification symbol design of a state power and the symbolic symbol of a state power. however, in the long historical evolution and practical application, the design of signal flag with stronger visual recognition characteristics has gradually evolved into the design of national flag, while the worship and beautification of totem has evolved into the theory of heraldry and the design of national emblem.  the national emblem appearing in modern times is often designed directly based on european heraldry. but in fact, the development of national emblem design in human society also has a long process. as a symbol of a country, even without the artistic concept of european heraldry, human beings will explore totem worship with similar concept in social practice. for example, there was no legal national emblem in the qing dynasty, but the "dragon" totem in the "yellow dragon flag" was widely used as a substantive national emblem in the official designs of the government such as silver coins and passports.  in the early days of the people's republic of china, there was also the design of the national seal with the nature of the national emblem. in ancient china, the national seal was the certificate of the emperors of the orthodox dynasties in previous dynasties. its symbolic power and stamping effect were similar to that of the modern national emblem. when the people's republic of china was just established, it also took the traditional seal designed based on the traditional seal as an official duty (for example, the national seal "seal of the central people's government of the people's republic of china" in the national museum of china), but later it was officially changed to the european round
seal design.  symbols of the people's republic of china  see also  national symbols of taiwan  references
is a japanese born, australian tennis player.  early life santillan was born in tokyo to a japanese mother and a south african father of spanish descent. he lived the first 8 years of his life in japan before his family relocated to the gold coast, australia and became citizens. he played much of his junior tennis at the gold coast before moving to brisbane to join the national academy program at the queensland tennis centre.  junior career on the junior tour, santillan has a career high itf junior ranking of 7 achieved in september 2015. santillan's major highlights on the junior tour included a semi-final at the 2015 australian open and doubles finals at the 2014 french open and the 2015 wimbledon championships.  in march 2015, santillan opted to play under the japanese flag instead due to a fractious relationship with tennis australia. he returned to playing under the australian flag in 2017.  junior grand slam finals  doubles  professional career santillan has a career high atp singles ranking of 160 achieved on 24 july 2017. he also has a career high atp doubles ranking of 265 achieved also on 17 july 2017. santillan has won 6 itf futures singles titles and 1 itf futures doubles title.  santillan made his atp main draw debut at the 2016 generali open kitzbuhel, receiving singles and doubles main draw wildcards.  santillan lost in the first round of the 2022 australian open - men's singles qualifying.  challenger and futures finals  singles: 9 (7-2)  doubles: 10 (4-6)  references  external links        1997 births living people australian male tennis players japanese male tennis players sportspeople from tokyo tennis players from brisbane tennis people from the gold coast japanese emigrants to australia australian people of south african descent australian people of spanish descent japanese people of south african descent japanese people of spanish descent
this is a list of notable people educated at ampleforth college in yorkshire, england.  arts, entertainment, writing michael abney-hastings, 14th earl of loudoun (1942-2012), british-australian farmer made famous in the documentary britain's real monarch peter bergen (born 1962), author, print and tv journalist, cnn, adjunct professor, johns hopkins university ian birrell, former deputy editor-in-chief, the independent; contributing editor, the mail on sunday  mark burns (1936-2007), actor john bunting (1927-2002), sculptor and teacher mark coreth (born 1959), animal sculptor lord anthony crichton-stuart (born 1961), art historian vincent cronin (1924-2011), historical writer and biographer lu edmonds (born 1957), musician (public image ltd., the damned, the mekons, the spizzles, the waterboys, among others) rupert everett (born 1959), actor mark ezra (born 1950), film producer and writer julian fellowes, baron fellowes of west stafford (born 1949), actor, writer and creator of downton abbey; conservative peer of the house of lords (2011-) andrew festing (born 1941), british royal portrait painter sir antony gormley (born 1950), sculptor harman grisewood (1906-1997), chief assistant to the director-general of the bbc, 1955-1964 albert read, newspaper and magazine executive for conde nast patrick reyntiens (born 1925), stained glass artist edward holcroft (born 1987), film, television and stage actor james honeyborne (born 1970), tv and film director henry hudson (born 1982), artist geoffrey huskinson (1935-2018), cartoonist martin jennings (born 1957), sculptor andrew knight (born 1939), journalist, editor, and media magnate guy mankowski (born 1983), writer john micklethwait (born 1962), editor-in-chief of the economist red morris, 4th baron killanin (born 1947), film producer paul morrissey (born 1938), film director, best known for his association with andy warhol. james norton (born 1985), film, television and stage actor james o'brien (born 1972), radio presenter and journalist roderic o'conor (1860-1940), artist herbert railton (1857-1910), illustrator benedict read, ba, fba, (1945-2016), art historian, senior lecturer in art history at the university of leeds.  brother of piers paul read (see below). piers paul read (born 1941), writer stuart reid (born 1942), journalist
, pundit  joe simpson (born 1960), mountaineer and autobiographer edward stourton (born 1957), journalist julian wadham (born 1958), actor tom waller (born 1974), film producer michael whitehall (born 1940), producer, agent, television personality; father of comedian jack whitehall hugo young (1938-2003), journalist  politics, law, business and nobility michael ancram (kerr), 14th marquess of lothian (born 1945), deputy leader of the conservative party, 2001-2005 dominic asquith (born 1957), ambassador to iraq, 2006-2007, ambassador to egypt, 2007-present. julian asquith, 2nd earl of oxford and asquith (1916-2011), diplomat raymond asquith, 3rd earl of oxford and asquith (born 1952), former diplomat and businessman anthony bamford, lord bamford (born 1945), chairman, j.c.bamford (excavators) ltd. andrew bertie (1929-2008), first british grand master of the knights hospitaller since 1258 (1988-2008) richard bertie, 14th earl of lindsey  (born 1931), soldier and hereditary peer john burnett, baron burnett (born 1945), former liberal democrat mp for torridge and west devon, 1997-2001, 2001-5, life peer (2006-present) john crichton-stuart, 6th marquess of bute (1933-1993), chairman, historic buildings council for scotland, 1983-1988, and national museums of scotland, 1985-1993 alexander fermor-hesketh, 3rd baron hesketh (born 1950), landowner and ukip politician  matthew festing (born 1949), second british grand master of the knights hospitaller since 1258 (2008-2017) edward fitzalan-howard, 18th duke of norfolk (born 1956), earl marshal major-general miles fitzalan-howard, 17th duke of norfolk (1915-2002), earl marshal francis fitzherbert, 15th baron stafford (born 1954), landowner, peer and deputy lieutenant  sir hugh fraser (1918-1984), secretary of state for air, 1962-1964 david hennessy, 3rd baron windlesham (born 1932), lord privy seal and leader of the house of lords, 1973-1974 auberon herbert (1922-1974), campaigner for eastern european causes peter kerr, 12th marquess of lothian (1922-2004), scottish peer, landowner and politician john george (1930-2012), hm kintyre pursuivant of arms, herald and author   sir arthur goodall
, gcmg (born 1931), british diplomat, high commissioner to india 1987-1991. grand duke jean of luxembourg (1921 - 2019), grand duke of luxembourg, 1964-2000 don agustin jeronimo de iturbide y huarte (1807-1866), prince imperial of mexico king letsie iii of lesotho (born 1963), king of lesotho (1990-95, 1996-present) paul moore, (born 1958), whistleblower sacked from hbos king moshoeshoe ii of lesotho (1938-1996), king of lesotho (1966-1970, 1970-1990, 1995-96) george nelson, 8th earl nelson (1905-1981) michael nolan, baron nolan (1928-2007), law lord and first chairman of the committee on standards in public life,  richard norton, 8th baron grantley (born 1956), banker and politician  william peel, 3rd earl peel  (born 1947), lord chamberlain peter hope, 4th baron rankeillour (1935-2005), scottish landowner and peer john home robertson (born 1948), former labour mp and currently member of the scottish parliament robert shirley, 14th earl ferrers (born 1952) charles stourton, 26th baron mowbray (1923-2006) representative peer and holder of the third oldest barony edward stourton, 27th baron mowbray (1953-2021), holder of the third oldest barony  sir swinton barclay thomas (1931-2016), was a british judge, privy councillor, and the interception of communications commissioner.  military michael allmand (1923-1944), victoria cross recipient (posthumous). killed in action on 24 june 1944, in burma. brigadier andrew parker bowles (born 1939), soldier brigadier simon fraser, 15th lord lovat (1911-1995), pioneering officer of the british army's commandos. major general lord michael fitzalan-howard (1916-2007), marshal of the diplomatic corps 1972-1981 major-general sir freddie de guingand (1900-1979), chief of staff to field marshal montgomery, 1942-1945 lieutenant-colonel sir john johnston, gcvo, mc, comptroller of the lord chamberlain's office captain robert nairac (1948-1977), george cross, intelligence officer murdered by the provisional irish republican army major-general peter grant peterkin (born c.1947), sergeant at arms of the house of commons major general sir sebastian roberts (born 1954), goc the household division  2003-2007 colonel sir david stirling (1915-1990), founder of the sas  philosophy, history and academia michael clan
chy (1936-2021), professor of medieval history, university of london william dalrymple (born 1965), historian john keay (born 1941), historian, journalist and radio presenter robert maximilian de gaynesford (born 1968), philosopher fred halliday, (1946-2010), academic, fellow of the british academy, montague burton professor of international relations at london school of economics philip lawrence (1947-1995), headmaster and murder victim gabriel turville-petre (1908-1978), professor of ancient icelandic literature and antiquities, university of oxford, 1953-1975 henry wansbrough (1934), master of st benet's hall, oxford, 1990-2004  religion athanasius allanson (1804-1876), benedictine monk, and abbot of glastonbury, 1874-1876 thomas burgess (1791-1854), roman catholic bishop of clifton, 1851-1854 columba cary-elwes (1903-1994), monastery founder, ecumenist and author sheikh abdur raheem green (born 1962), convert to islam and founder of the iera ambrose griffiths (1928-2011), bishop of hexham and newcastle john cuthbert hedley (1837-1915), roman catholic bishop of newport, 1881-1915 basil, cardinal hume (1923-1999), abbot of ampleforth abbey, 1963-1975, and archbishop of westminster, 1975-1999  science and medicine peter christopher caldwell frs (1927-1979), zoologist thomas cecil gray (1913-2008), pioneered modern anaesthetic techniques bill inman (1929-2005), pharmacovigilance pioneer john polidori (1795-1821), physician and writer  sport christopher bartle, fbhs, (born 1952) equestrian, member of the gb team at the 1984 los angeles olympic games. john bean (1913-2005), first-class cricketer and british army officer john crichton-stuart, 7th marquess of bute (1958-2021), a scottish peer and former racing driver ("johnny dumfries") lawrence dallaglio obe (born 1972) former captain of the english national rugby team john dalrymple (born 1957), cricketer howard dunbar (1904-1942), cricketer simon easterby (born 1975) former member of the ireland national rugby union team. guy easterby (born 1972) former member of the ireland national rugby union team. charles grieve (1913-2000), cricketer who played for oxford university and guernsey edward o'donovan crean (born 1887), english rugby union player who was part of the first official british and irish lions team that toured south africa in 1910. jonathan pearce (born 1957), cricketer
references    ampleforth
operation fath 1 (, meaning "conquest"), or operation wahdat (the kurdish code-name), was a joint iranian and iraqi kurdish special operation conducted by iran's irgc special forces and iraqi kurdish partisans of patriotic union of kurdistan (puk) in 11 and 12 october 1986 in kirkuk area of northern iraq during the iran-iraq war. the iranian and kurdish forces infiltrated into the area and successfully attacked economic and military targets with minimal losses of their own.  the operation the operation was planned after an alliance between iran and the patriotic union of kurdistan (puk) of iraqi kurdistan, which was opposed to saddam hussein's government. it was the first major joint operation between iranian and iraqi kurdish forces, and the first of the series of "fath" joint operations conducted by the extraterritorial ramazan headquarters of irgc and iraqi kurdish fighters. one of the main aims of these operations in the northern front was to avoid concentration of iraqi military in the southern front.  irgc forces and peshmerga partisans conducted a well-planned infiltration and a surprise attack against important industrial and military infrastructures in kirkuk area. several facilities of the kirkuk oil refinery, petroleum production unit number 1, kirkuk thermal power station, three sam sites, jambur, jabal bur, and shwaru oil and gas separation facilities at south kirkuk, an eavesdropping, signals intelligence and parasite site at saqqezli, darman military base, and a train station were destroyed, and headquarters of the iraqi army i corps, 8th division, iraqi intelligence service, and mek came under fire. 600 iraqi forces were killed or wounded according to iran. there was no iranian casualties. irgc field commanders had planned to destroy the kirkuk refinery using c4 explosives, but it was decided by top commanders to reduce the mission to attack from the nearby hills, since corpses of iranian forces on the ground could be used by iraqi government for propaganda purposes.  the 150 tonnes of military equipment and their 300 irgc operators were transferred from iran to kirkuk behind enemy lines in a covert operation lasting for 40 days. the equipment was as follows:  various vehicles as well as mules were used for the transportation of the equipment from north-western iran to near the kirkuk through highlands. the route was 150 km long. all of the equipment was transferred back by the irgc forces to iran after the operation. iranian forces scattered in iraqi kurdistan and then returned to iran.  units  iran islamic revolutionary guard corps:  ramazan
headquarters:commanded by mohammad-baqer zolqadr  66th airborne special brigadecommanded by mohsen shafaq  7 platoons, 20 demolition units (230 personnel), supposed to be commanded by sadegh mahsouli  75th zafar special brigade  equipment groupcommanded by gholam pakrooh  active protection system groupcommanded by booyaghchi  engineering demoltion groupcommanded by mohammad asipoor  medical services groupcommanded by naderi  communication groupcommanded br bifan  puk peshmerga:  تیپ21 کرکوک به فرماندهی کاک سیروان.  تیپ25 خلفان به فرماندهی کاک ملا ارس.  تیپ93 کوی سنجق به فرماندهی کاک ملا ابراهیم.  تیپ23 یورداش به فرماندهی کاک نبغه.  تیپ78 قره‌چرخ به فرماندهی کاک صفین.  تیپ68 دشت هوله به فرماندهی کاک مام غفور.  تیپ برانتی به فرماندهی کاک هیمن.  تیپ51 گرمیان به فرماندهی کاک محمود لنگاوی.  تیپ53 تیروانه به فرماندهی کاک عادل.  تیپ57 سیگرمه به فرماندهی کاک ازاد.  تیپ55 قره‌داغ به فرماندهی کاک اوات. و دو تیپ حفاظتی
مالبند (منطقه‌ی) 1و2 اتحادیه*  in popular culture kirkuk operation () is a 1991 iranian movie directed and written by jamal shoorjeh.  references  fath 1 military operations of the iran-iraq war involving the peshmerga
sidhu hari singh is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 6.8 km from nurmahal, 24.3 km from phillaur, 30.5 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 136 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 23.7 km away from the village. the village is 53.7 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 123 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the official languages act (1969) was passed by the government of louis robichaud and affects life in the province to the present day. readers may find to be helpful the original text as well as commentary by the official languages and bilingualism institute (olbi) at the university of ottawa.  references  external link  new brunswick law bilingualism in canada
anda butuc (born ) is a romanian female artistic gymnast.  competitive history  references  2000 births romanian female artistic gymnasts living people place of birth missing (living people)
robert n. burr (october 15, 1916 - december 8, 2014) was an american historian. he was a professor of history at the university of california, los angeles (ucla) from 1948 to 1987, where he established the latin american studies program and served as its chair department from 1973 to 1977. he was the author of four widely reviewed books about latin america and the recipient of scholarly awards.  early life robert n. burr was born on october 15, 1916 in rochester, new york. his father was john edwin burr and his mother, ethel bills.  burr graduated from the university of rochester. he received a phd from the university of pennsylvania.  career burr worked for the general railway signal during world war ii. he subsequently did contract work for the brookings institution.  burr taught history at rutgers university from 1946 to 1948. he joined the department of history at the university of california, los angeles as a faculty member in 1948, where he established the latin american studies program. he also served as the chair of its history department from 1973 to 1978. he subsequently served as the director of ucla's international studies and overseas programs from 1985 to 1987, when he retired.  burr was the author of four widely reviewed books and the editor of a fifth book, all about latin america. his first book, co-authored with ucla professor roland d. hussey, was entitled documents on inter-american cooperation. published in 1955, it was reviewed by c. g. fenwick in world affairs, harry bernstein in the hispanic american historical review, charles c. griffin in the pacific historical review, and edwin lieuwen in the americas. in 1961, he edited latin america's nationalistic revolutions.  a year later, in 1962, he published his third book, the stillborn panama congress: power politics and chilean-colombian relations during the war of the pacific. it was reviewed by  d. a. g. waddell in the english historical review, j. leon helguera in the hispanic american historical review, herbert s. klein in the pacific historical review, and terence tarr in the pacific northwest quarterly.  his fourth book, by reason or force: chile and the balancing of power in south america, 1830-1905, was reviewed by john c. dreier in the americas, harold blakemore in history, thomas f. mcgann in the pacific historical review, w. donald beatty in the hispanic american historical review, john j. johnson in the american historical review, frederic b. pike in the americas,
and harry bernstein in the annals of the american academy of political and social science. moreover, burr was awarded the bolton prize from the conference on latin american history for it in 1966.  his fifth book, our troubled hemisphere: perspectives on united states. latin american relations, was reviewed by donald l. herman in the western political quarterly, a. curtis wilgus in the annals of the american academy of political and social science, c. neale ronning in the midwest journal of political science, and john d. lees in chatham house's international affairs.  personal life, death and legacy burr was married twice. he married his first wife, virginia ward, in 1940. they had a son and a daughter. they divorced in 1949. burr married a second time to elizabeth evarts in 1952; she predeceased him in 1998. they resided in los angeles, california and on long island in new york state. burr died on december 8, 2014.  the chair of ucla's history department is named in his honor; the current holder, stephen aron, is the robert n. burr department chair.  works  references  1916 births 2014 deaths writers from rochester, new york academics from new york (state) university of rochester alumni university of pennsylvania alumni rutgers university faculty university of california, los angeles faculty historians from new york (state) latin americanists historians of latin america historians from california
eunidia laosensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1964.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1964
dicra nodicornis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
the amapa state forest () is a state forest in the state of amapa, brazil.  location  the amapa state forest is divided between the municipalities of tartarugalzinho (7.64%), pracuuba (4.52%), porto grande (7.72%), oiapoque (24.15%), mazagao (8.56%), ferreira gomes (3.64%), calcoene (23.23%), pedra branca do amapari (6.39%), amapa (6.32%) and serra do navio (7.83%). to the west it adjoins the tumucumaque mountains national park and the amapa national forest. in the north east it adjoins the cabo orange national park. it has an area of . it covers 16.5% of the state, bringing protected parts of amapa to 63.5% of the territory. it is part of the amapa ecological corridor.  history  the forest originated in a 2004 proposal by president luiz inacio lula da silva to transfer federals lands to the state if they were transformed into a protected area. the amapa legislature approved creation unanimously in 2006. the amapa state forest was created under amapa governor waldez goes by law 1.028 of 12 july 2006 for sustainable exploitation of renewable and non-renewable natural resources, to maintain biodiversity and other ecological attributes and a socially just and economically viable form. it covered a discontinuous area estimated as .  decree 6.291 of 7 december 2007 transferred federal land within the state forest to the state of amapa for sustainable use. when governor camilo capiberibe began implementation some of the legislators led by eider pena began to oppose the forest, saying that it would affect small producers in the area. ordnance 657 of 19 november 2013 set up an executive group to clarify the boundaries with 17 incra settlement projects. the timber in these projects is being depleted, replaced by soybean farms. in february 2014 a motion to repeal the forest was defeated after it was pointed out that if this were done the land would revert to federal ownership.  notes  sources  2006 establishments in brazil state forests of brazil protected areas of amapa protected areas established in 2006
sara ghislandi (born 23 november 1998) is an italian ice dancer. with partner giona terzo ortenzi, she has competed at two world junior championships, qualifying for the free dance in 2016.  personal life  ghislandi was born on 23 november 1998 in bergamo, italy. she attended liceo scientifico mascheroni before transferring to centro scolastico bergamo, where she is a distance education student.  career  ghislandi began learning to skate in 2005. she switched to ice dancing after two years in singles. she and lorenzo giossi skated together for four years, coached by brunhilde bianchi and valter rizzo in zanica. they won the italian novice title in the 2011-12 season.  partnership with ortenzi  in 2012, ghislandi teamed up with giona terzo ortenzi after he asked to skate with her. making their isu junior grand prix (jgp) debut, they placed 7th in riga, in august 2013, and 11th in kosice the following month. ortenzi then missed two months of training due to an ankle injury. ranked 26th in the short dance, they did not reach the final segment at the 2014 world junior championships in sofia, bulgaria. the duo was coached by brunhilde bianchi and valter rizzo in zanica. after the closure of zanica's skating rink, the skaters moved to sesto san giovanni.  in the 2014-15 season, ghislandi/ortenzi listed barbara fusar-poli and stefano caruso as their coaches. they placed sixth at their jgp event in ljubljana and won their first national junior title. they were assigned to the 2015 world junior championships in tallinn, estonia, but withdrew a couple of weeks before the start of the event.  at the 2016 world junior championships in debrecen, hungary, ghislandi/ortenzi ranked 12th in the first segment and qualified for the free dance, going on to finish tenth overall.  programs  (with ortenzi)  competitive highlights  jgp: junior grand prix  with ortenzi  with giossi  references  external links       1998 births italian female ice dancers living people sportspeople from bergamo
nemaschema quadrisulcatum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1940. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1940
the 1974-75 virginia squires season was the 5th season of the squires in the american basketball association. the squires, having sold talents such as julius erving and george gervin in previous years in order to keep afloat, simply imploded with a lack of talent, losing 69 games, the worst in aba history. their longest winning streak was 3 games, from january 31 to february 3, 1975. at one point, they lost 15 straight games, from december 30, 1974 to january 26, 1975. the only victory they scored in march 1975 was their final victory as the team lost eight straight to close out the season. the team finished last in points per game at 99.0, with a middling 6th in points allowed with 109.5 per game.  roster     33 lloyd batts - shooting guard  52 lionel billingy - point forward  20 glen combs - shooting guard  11 darrell elston - shooting guard  15 lamar green - point forward  14 bill higgins - shooting guard  30 george irvine - small forward  31 mike jackson - point forward  44 johnny neumann - shooting guard  40 barry parkhill - shooting guard  22 aulcie perry - center  5 cincy powell - small forward  24 red robbins - center  13 dave twardzik - point guard  45 david vaughn - center  42 willie wise - small forward  final standings  eastern division  awards and honors 1975 aba all-star game selection (game played on january 28, 1975) dave twardzik  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1974-75 regular season and playoff results  virginia squires page  virginia squires virginia squires virginia squires, 1974-75 virginia squires, 1974-75
the grey highlands hawks were a united hockey union-sanctioned junior ice hockey team from markdale, ontario, canada.  they were a member of the canadian premier junior hockey league and began play in the 2016-17 season.  history in 2016, a two-year agreement was reached between grey highlands and hawks owners carrie robertson and cory lafonte. the team played their first season in 2016-17 and won the first round playoff series over the glengarry highlanders. they were eliminated in the round-robin, losing to all three other teams. the following season, the brampton royals, a 2017 expansion team, was merged into the hawks roster a week before the start of the season.  after three seasons, the hawks were removed from the league in the first week of the 2019-20 season.  season-by-season records  references  external links hawks website  junior ice hockey teams in canada ice hockey teams in ontario 2016 establishments in ontario ice hockey clubs established in 2016 grey county
kddf is a class a radio station broadcasting out of mecca, california.  history on may 19, 2015, kddf went on the air as khxr, switching to its current callsign a month later on june 19, 2015.  the station was sold by original owner and builder holy cross radio to el sembrador ministries in 2016.  references  external links  mass media in riverside county, california 2015 establishments in california ddf radio stations established in 2015 ddf
the clarkson golden knights women's ice hockey program represented clarkson university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's ice hockey season. the golden knights entered the season following their second frozen four appearance the previous season.  after a slow start, the golden knights rebounded to win their third ecac regular season title in four years. they followed this with their first ever ecac tournament championship, defeating cornell by a score of 1-0. in the ncaa tournament, the golden knights advanced to their second title game, which they won 3-0 over top-ranked wisconsin for the program's second national title. in addition to the postseason championships, the golden knights also won an in-season tournament for the first time, winning the windjammer classic at vermont on thanksgiving weekend.  offseason  coaching changes the offseason saw the departure of two-year assistant coach meghan duggan, who left to concentrate on preparing for the winter olympics in two years time. her role was filled by tony maci, who had previously served as an assistant coach at adrian college and princeton.  recruiting  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=12 style=""| regular season  |- !colspan=12 style=""| ecac hockey tournament  |- !colspan=12 style=""| ncaa tournament  awards and honors   genevieve bannon - ncaa all-tournament team, second team all-uscho.com, ecac hockey second team all-star, ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/1, 11/22, 1/24, 2/6)  loren gabel - ecac hockey all-tournament team, ecac hockey player of the week (3/5), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/7, 2/14)  savannah harmon - ncaa all-tournament team, second team ahca all-american, second team all-uscho.com, patty kazmaier memorial award nominee, ecac hockey first team all-star, ecac hockey player of the year finalist, ecac hockey best defenseman, ecac hockey weekly honor roll (10/25)  corie jacobson - ecac hockey weekly honor roll (10/11)  mckenzie johnson - ecac hockey goaltender of the week (12/13), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/15, 1/17)  ryhen mcgill - ecac hockey all-tournament team, ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/15)  cayley mercer - patty kazmaier memorial award finalist, uscho.com player of the year, ncaa tournament most outstanding player, ncaa all-tournament team, first team ah
ca all-american, first team all-uscho.com, ecac hockey player of the year, ecac hockey all-tournament team, ecac hockey first team all-star, ecac hockey best forward, ecac hockey player of the month (february, march), ecac hockey player of the week (12/5, 1/31, 2/21), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (12/13, 1/24)  michaela pejzlova - ecac hockey all-rookie team, ecac hockey rookie of the week (11/7, 11/15), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (10/25, 11/1, 11/22, 1/17, 2/21), windjammer classic all-tournament team  ella shelton - uscho.com all-rookie team, ecac hockey all-tournament team, ecac hockey third team all-star, ecac hockey all-rookie team, ecac hockey all-rookie team, ecac hockey rookie of the month (december, march), ecac hockey rookie of the week (3/5), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (12/6, 12/13, 1/31, 2/6, 2/14)  shea tiley - second team all-uscho.com, ecac hockey tournament most outstanding player, ecac hockey third team all-star, ecac hockey goaltender of the year finalist, ecac hockey goaltender of the month (february, march), ecac hockey goaltender of the week (2/14, 3/5), ecac hockey weekly honor roll (10/25, 11/1, 11/22, 11/29, 12/6, 1/31, 2/6, 2/21)  taylor turnquist - ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/29)  cassidy vinkle - ecac hockey weekly honor roll (11/29, 1/17), windjammer classic most valuable player, windjammer classic all-tournament team  references  clarkson clarkson golden knights women's ice hockey seasons ncaa women's ice hockey frozen four seasons ncaa women's ice hockey championship seasons
the 1974-75 utah stars season was the fifth season of the franchise in utah (and 8th overall) in the american basketball association (aba). despite declining from the previous season for the 3rd straight year, the stars went into the playoffs once again, finishing seven games over san diego for 4th place. in the semifinals, they lost to the denver nuggets in 6 games. as it turned out, this was their final playoff appearance, as the team folded midway through the next season.   before the season, the stars signed a 19-year old moses malone straight out of petersburg high school in petersburg, virginia to a five-year contract.  roster    24 ron boone - shooting guard   35 roger brown - small forward   32 randy denton - center  34 clyde dickey - shooting guard   33 jim eakins - power forward   25 gerald govan - power forward   11wali jones - shooting guard   22 moses malone - center  30 roy mcpipe - shooting guard   44 larry miller - shooting guard   15 john roche - point guard   10 bruce seals - small forward   20 al smith - point guard   44 hank williams - small forward  final standings  western division  asterisk denotes playoff berth  playoffs  western division semifinals  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1974-75 regular season and playoff results  utah stars page  utah stars utah stars seasons utah stars, 1974-75 utah stars, 1974-75
the ii. ddr-liga (english:2nd east german league or 2nd gdr-league) was, from 1955 to 1963, the third level of football competition in the ddr (deutsche demokratische republik or german democratic republic, commonly east germany).  overview  1955-1957 the league was initially established with two divisions of 14 teams each in 1955 as the level of play below the ddr-liga, and as such was the third tier of the east german football league system instead of the bezirksliga which was downgraded to the fourth tier due to a reform in the league system. the divisions were staffel nord and staffel sud. in its inaugural season it was transitional thus there were no promotions or relegations, and teams played each other once within its own division. for the first six campaigns, the calendar season was adopted from the soviet union.  in its second season, the divisions were shifted to a home-and-away format. the champions of each division were promoted to the ddr-liga and the last three clubs in each division were relegated to their respective bezirksliga and promoted in their place were the six district champions, while in 1957 there were three relegations in total.  1958-1960 the league added three groups still at 14 teams each and all five were based on bezirk (district) from north down to south and to save on travel expenses. in the promotion round the five champions competed each other once to decide the three promotions to the second tier. the number of relegations varied, and clubs were often moved between groups to balance out league numbers.  1961-1963 the league reverted to playing from autumn to spring and as a transition season, it went through three rounds and each of the fourteen clubs played 39 games. from each group, three teams were promoted due to the ddr-liga adding another group of 14 and the last-placed team was relegated.  for the eighth and final season, the five group champions and one runners-up were promoted to the ddr-liga, which expanded its divisions to 16 clubs, and the remaining 64 were dropped back to the bezirksligen which became third tier leagues again. after this reform in the pyramid, the ii. ddr-liga was abolished.  leagues below the ii. ddr-liga  for most of the existence of the ii. ddr-liga, the leagues below it were the 15 bezirksligas, which were introduced in 1952 and formed the fourth tier of the east german pyramid for eight years.
in the last ddr-liga season, the newly recreated states of the former east germany introduced their own regional leagues, with the exception of mecklenburg-western pomerania and berlin. they still exist today. the bezirksligas however have mostly either disappeared, changed their name or exist in a different format. the fifteen bezirksligas were:  bezirksliga schwerin bezirksliga rostock bezirksliga neubrandenburg bezirksliga magdeburg bezirksliga potsdam bezirksliga berlin bezirksliga halle bezirksliga frankfurt/oder bezirksliga cottbus bezirksliga gera bezirksliga erfurt bezirksliga suhl bezirksliga dresden bezirksliga leipzig bezirksliga karl-marx-stadt  champions of the ii. ddr-liga  1955-1957  1958-1963  bold denotes club gained promotion. in 1962, the runners-up asg vorwarts rostock-gehlsdorf (staffel 1), sg dynamo frankfurt (staffel 2), bsg motor nordhausen west (staffel 3), bsg motor west karl-marx-stadt (staffel 4) and bsg motor steinach (staffel 5) and third placers sc neubrandenburg, bsg motor sud brandenburg, bsg lokomotive halberstadt, bsg motor bautzen and bsg motor eisenach were also promoted. in 1963, runner-up bsg motor dessau (staffel 3) was also promoted.  external links  east german league statistics at dsfs.de  sources  das deutsche fussball archiv  ii. ddr-liga at rsssf.com      3 sports leagues established in 1955 1955 establishments in east germany recurring events disestablished in 1963 1963 disestablishments in germany east
guillem de torroella (also written torroelha) was a majorcan poet whose family came from emporda. he lived during the 14th century and it is thought he was born in 1348. he wrote the patrana around 1370. the faula was reedited in 2007 in the library of majorcan writers by anna maria compagna perrone.  la faula  la faula (the tale) is a tale written by guillem of torroella, part of the matter of britain, which explains in first person how he was kidnapped and taken to the enchanted island by morgan le fay who, with the presence of torroella, wants to end the invincible sadness of her brother, king arthur. the presence of the foreigner comforts the king, who had fallen in a deep sadness over the decline of chivalry. king arthur finally entrusts torroella with a mission: go back to the real world and explain all he has seen.  the story begins in the valley of soller in majorca. torroella arrives on horseback at the port of santa caterina, where he sees a parrot on a rock. torroella decides to approach to bird but just at that moment the "rock", which in reality was a whale, carries him through the sea until he arrives at the enchanted island (sicily, for many scholars) where his adventure begins and he meets an occitan-speaking serpent then the famous king arthur.  this book was a model for some later writers like bernat metge, anselm turmeda and joanot martorell.  references  external links   la faula at rialc  guillemos of torroella: la patrana (fragments)  2007 edition by anna maria compagna perrone  spanish writers 14th-century spanish writers writers of arthurian literature 1348 births majorcan writers arthurian legend 14th-century people from the kingdom of aragon
the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge ( is a wildlife refuge off the south coast of the state of sao paulo brazil.  location  the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge is in the atlantic ocean to the east of peruibe, sao paulo. it covers the islands of bom abrigo and guararitama and a rectangular area of sea surrounding them with a total area of . the land area is  and the sea area is . the refuge is opposite the mouth of the guarau river.  the itingucu state park is to the southeast.  environment  the islands have no beaches, but are surrounded by rocky headlands.  their vegetation is atlantic forest. they provide food, shelter and nesting sites for many bird species including the kelp gull (larus dominicanus), royal tern (thalasseus maximus) and south american tern (sterna hirundinacea). abrigo island is an important resting place for the magnificent frigatebird (fregata magnificens).  history  the jureia-itatins mosaic of conservation units  was created by law 12.406 of 12 december 2006. it included the jureia-itatins ecological station and the newly created itingucu and prelado state parks, the despraiado and barra do una sustainable development reserves and the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge. the new units were carved out of the ecological station. on 11 september 2007 the procurer general of the state declared that law 12.406 was unconstitutional. on 10 june 2009 a judgement upheld the finding of unconstitutionality.  law 14.982 of 8 april 2013 again altered the limits of the jureia-itatins ecological station, re-categorising some areas. these again included the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge. the law recreated the jureia-itatins mosaic, this time covering .  notes  sources  2013 establishments in brazil protected areas of sao paulo (state) wildlife refuges of brazil
olusegun falana v. kent state university and alexander j. seed, 669 f.3d 1349 (fed. cir. 2012), was a notable case precedent in the united states patent law decided by united states court of appeals for the federal circuit in 2012 that deals with the questions of inventorship and attorney's fee shifting in patent lawsuits.  background in january 1998 kent state university hired dr. falana to develop new additives for liquid crystal displays. in march 1999, dr. falana developed a method for making a novel genus of chemical compounds and synthesized several new molecules using his method. in september 1999, falana left kent state for another job. dr. seed continued the research and synthesized several more molecules using dr. falana's method, several of which turned out to be promising for the use in liquid crystal displays.  in june 2000, kent state and its spin-off (kent displays, inc.) filed a provisional application for a us patent claiming compositions of matter comprising molecules prepared by falana's method. after the patent eventually became issued and published in 2004, falana learned about the omission of his name on the list of inventors. after kent state failed to provide a satisfactory answer, falana filed a complaint with the u.s.  district court for the northern district of ohio against kent state university and the inventors named on u.s. patent no. 6,830,789 seeking correction of inventorship under 35 u.s.c.  §  256.  district court at the bench trial, the district court concluded that falana contributed to the conception of the claimed compositions -of-matter by developing a previously unknown method for their preparation and ordered the uspto to correct the inventorship (the uspto records as of 16 june 2016 are still not corrected at and the patent maintenance fee lapsed on december 14, 2012).  the district court also found the case to be exceptional under 35 u.s.c. § 285 on three grounds: 1) that defendants engaged in inequitable conduct,  2) that they took an untenable position in defending this case, and 3) that their continued defense of this case in the face of testimony that lacked credibility and veracity was frivolous and bordered on bad faith and awarded attorney fees to falana.  appeal kent state and other defendants appealed to the cafc and the case was decided on january 23, 2012. the cafc affirmed the decisions of the district court on both inventorship and
attorney fees. the federal circuit found that where the method of synthesizing the claimed compound requires more than the exercise of ordinary skill in the art, the discovery of that method is as much a contribution to the compound as the discovery of the compound itself. it established a binding precedent that the conception a synthetic method can make a person an inventor on a composition-of-matter claim, even if the person did not actually make the compound in question but only developed a method for making the compound, provided that the method was not publicly known previously.  significance this case was decided after an earlier 2001's chou v. university of chicago and had similar circumstances and outcome, suggesting that university faculty and administration need to be better educated on the principles of intellectual property law. it also established a currently binding precedent in regard to joint inventorship and attorney fee-shifting in the us patent law.<ref>paul r. coble and carrie c. ruzicka  "deconstructing inventorship: a method to the madness" american bar association, intellectual property litigation committee. september 12, 2012  accessed july 31, 2016</ref> according to google scholar, it has been cited in 35 legal decisions of the u.s. federal court system by june 20, 2016.   similar cases   peter v. nantkwest, inc.'' (2019)  references  external links    united states patent case law kent state university
bhikshu gyomo nakamura is a japanese buddhist monk, author and musician.  early life he was born in japan on september 9, 1954 in tokyo. his father was a scholar of chinese philosophy and his grandfather a historian. during his youth he composed and played music before dropping out of university and travelling to india in february 1976. when he was 21 years old he first arrived in new delhi and stayed at the ashoka mission at the cambodian temple. at that time he had a spiritual experience and decided to become a monk. afterwards he travelled to nepal, the himalayan range and studied therevada buddhism in the ashoka mission and tibetan buddhism at the library of tibetan works & archives in dharamshala.  life bhikshu gyomo nakamura went to rajgir and studied japanese buddhism as well as studying buddhism in sri lanka. he met fuji guruji in 1978 in india and he started temple in new delhi and ladakh, whilst visiting europe and the us.  finally he started the construction of a temple in ladakh in 1983 and completed the temple in 1985. the shanti stupa was completed in 1991. afterwards he went back to new delhi and started the construction of temple there in 1993 which was completed 3 years later in 1996. bhikshu gyomu nakamura continued staying in india and other countries as he tried making spiritual harmony within buddhism and of all people.  works bhikshu gyomo is also an accomplished author and musician having published two books "buddhist tales for the soul" and "buddhist tales in modern times - stories of the soul".  in 2008 bhikshu gyomo nakamura released his first album entitled dharma songs.  in 1991 he completed the building of the shanti stupa in leh, ladakh.  references  japanese buddhist clergy 1954 births living people
the swimming center m-86 is a complex of pools in southeast of madrid, spain. the official opening was on 1986 may 14. the complex was built to host the 5th world championships of swimming, waterpolo, diving and synchronized swimming in summer of 1986. the name of the swimming center is due to this event (m-86: madrid 1986). its area is about 21.000 squares meters.  events the  indoor  pool  of  the  swimming  center  m-86  has  staged:  2004: european aquatics championships)  2011: european junior woman championships in water polo  spanish  championships   spanish   league  fina  water polo world leagues  water polo world championships qualification tournament.  awards  1986: gold medal to the best facility for sports aquatics (awarded by the "national pool", washington (united states)  1989: national award to the best sports quality (awarded by the association "sports quality")  1989: biggest  complex  of  swimming  of  the  world (included  in  the  guinness  records)  silver  medal,  category  a,  as  high  level  training  center (awarded  by  the  iaks  "international association for the building of sports facilities for sport and leisure")  misc the headquarter of royal spanish swimming federation is there.  references  external links swimming pool tips  sports venues completed in 1986 2011 establishments in spain swimming venues in spain sports venues in madrid buildings and structures in retiro district, madrid
the ninth national census of population of the dominican republic was raised from 1-7 december 2010, during the presidency of leonel fernandez. this census collected information respect on sex, occupation, age, fertility, marital status, nationality, literacy, ability to vote, and housing.  general results  regions  age structure  country of birth  provincial and municipal results  see also   1920 santo domingo census  1950 dominican republic census  1960 dominican republic census  1970 dominican republic census  people of the dominican republic  notes   only countries with over 100 immigrants are shown.  sources   national bureau of statistics (2012). "ninth national census of population, 2010". volume 1.  references   censuses in the dominican republic 2010 in the dominican republic dominican republic
the soviet union women's national under-18 and under-19 basketball team was the women's basketball side that represented the soviet union in international under-18 and under-19 competitions, until the dissolution of the soviet union in 1991. in 1992, cis women's national under-18 basketball team represented the commonwealth of independent states in international under-18 competitions. after 1992, the successor countries all set up their own national teams.  fiba under-19 world championship for women  fiba europe under-18 championship for women  see also soviet union women's national basketball team soviet union women's national under-16 basketball team soviet union men's national under-19 basketball team russia women's national basketball team russia women's national under-19 basketball team  references  women's basketball in the soviet union national basketball team former national basketball teams women's national under-19 basketball teams w
the redlips darter (etheostoma maydeni)  is a species of freshwater ray-finned fish, a darter from the subfamily etheostomatinae, part of the family percidae, which also contains the perches, ruffes and pikeperches. it is endemic to the eastern united states, where it is restricted to large tributaries of the cumberland river below cumberland falls.  this species can reach a length of . the specific name maydeni honors the american ichthyologist richard l. mayden in recognition of his studies of north american fishes. the populations of this pe usa have been fragmented because of the construction of reservoirs. they inhabit slow-moving streams andrivers where they prefer pools near the banks where there are scattered rocks and fallen wood. their common name refers to the red coloring on their lips. another distinguishing feature is that they possess a greatly enlarged second dorsal fin and also have angled dusky bars along the flanks.  references  etheostoma fish described in 2012
talwandi rajputan  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of talwandi rajputan. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, talwandi rajputan has total number of 47 houses and population of 237 of which include 121 males and 116 females. literacy rate of talwandi rajputan is 71.56%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 19 which is 8.02% of total population of talwandi rajputan, and child sex ratio is approximately 583, lower than state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
burberry perry is the self-made debut extended play by american hip hop recording artist thegoodperry. it was self-released on may 4, 2016. the ep consists of 6 tracks and was produced entirely by perry himself, with guest appearances from artists such as lil yachty, kylie jenner, justine skye and jordyn woods.  critical reception tiny mix tapes included the ep in their 2016 second quarter favorites list, calling it "thrilling, intoxicating, transcendent even" and likening it to "a crystalline broadcast from an alternate earth, one where steve reich and brian eno were as seminal influences on rap music as james brown and sly stone."  track listing all tracks produced solely by thegoodperry.  references   2016 eps hip hop albums by american artists alternative hip hop eps
chris winter (born july 22, 1986 in north vancouver, british columbia) is a canadian track and field athlete competing in the middle-distance events, predominantly the 3,000m steeplechase. winter attended handsworth secondary graduating in the spring of 2004 before moving to eugene to compete for the university of oregon. winter competed for the ducks from 2004 to 2009 as a key member to their middle distance team in both cross country and track. after placing 6th at the 2008 ncaa west regional, winter advanced for his first time to the ncaa division one championships where he placed 12th against the collegiate bests. in his senior season, winter returned to the ncaa championships to improve on his previous performance with a 9th-place finish in  a time of 8:46.06, just one position back from scoring for the ducks.   winter has represented canada on multiple world stages. in 2003, winter won bronze in the 2000m steeplechase at the world u18 track & field championships, running a time of 5:44.23. from here winter continued to be one of canada's top steeplechasers, moving on to compete at the 2004 world junior track & field championships in grosseto, italy. as a senior winter competed at the 2014 commonwealth games in glasgow, finishing in a 6th position with a time of 8:29.83.    in july 2016 winter reached the pinnacle of his career and was officially named to canada's olympic team. winter went on to compete for canada at the 2016 rio de janeiro olympic games in the 3000m steeplechase in a time of 8:33.95.   at the end of the 2016 year winter announced his retirement from the sport of track and field. while the olympics were the finale of his professional career, winter considers his journey throughout the sport to be what he is most proud of. his retirement hasn't stopped him from running. you can often catch him at bc endurance project workouts pacing his wife and canadian marathon record holder, rachel cliff.   life time bests:   1500m - 3:44.57  mile - 4:11.27   3000m - 8:06.05 (indoor)  3000 steeplechase - 8:26.55  5000m: 13:58.17  references  1986 births living people sportspeople from north vancouver canadian male steeplechase runners athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of canada
jacques louis eugene rouche (16 november 1862, lunel - 9 november 1957, paris) was a french art and music patron. he was the owner of the journal la grande revue and manager of the theatre des arts and the paris opera.  biography  he was born to a protestant family. his father, eugene, was a mathematician who devised what is now known as rouche's theorem. after studies at the ecole polytechnique and the institut d'etudes politiques de paris, he worked for several different ministries and was appointed head of security at the exposition universelle (1889).  he always had a passion for the theater and began writing comedies while still in school. in 1891, he travelled to vienna, budapest and bayreuth to get a first-hand look at the workings of professional theaters. in 1893, however, his career took an unexpected turn when he married berthe piver, heiress to the  perfumery, and he soon became an entrepreneur. first, he worked to modernize the company by holding a competition for young chemical engineers who would later develop some of the first synthetic fragrances. he then introduced scented sample cards and slowly expanded the company, opening branches as far-flung as new york, buenos aires and hong kong. eventually, half the company's product was exported. after  he had amassed a small fortune, he became a patron of the arts.   in 1907, he acquired la grande revue, a legal publication founded in 1897 by fernand labori (who had been defense counsel for lucy dreyfus and emile zola) and turned it into a cultural journal. he published essays, critiques, short stories and theatrical pieces by gide, d'annunzio, shaw and many others. his regular contributors included maurice denis and george desvallieres (painting), jacques copeau (theater), romain rolland (music), andre suares (literature) and gaston doumergue (politics). it was published bimonthly until 1940.  theatre des arts  in 1910, he rented the theatre des arts (now the theatre hebertot) for three seasons. although a novice, he quickly assembled a troop; presenting ballets and operas as well as drama and comedy. he also applied his theories of set decoration, which he had described in his long essay l'art theatral moderne, by engaging painters who had never worked in the theater before; notably maxime dethomas, andre dunoyer de segonzac, charles guerin and .  one of his greatest successes was jacques copeau's adaptation of dostoevsky
's the brothers karamazov in 1911.:498 this was the production in which copeau, charles dullin and louis jouvet would intersect for the first time, with dullin playing the role of smerdiakov, and jouvet portraying father zossima.:75 the 1912 season was devoted to dance, featuring works by d'indy, schmitt, dukas and  ravel.  the paris opera   his work attracted the attention of officials in the french government who were looking to replace andre messager as head of the paris opera. when his appointment was announced in the journal officiel of november 1913, it was greeted with some derision. a few critics claimed that he was chosen simply because his wealth would help the opera overcome its chronic deficits. in fact, during the thirty years of his tenure, he contributed over 20 million francs of his own money to keep the opera functioning and came close to resigning over the issue in 1932.  in 1914, he undertook a tour of the major european opera halls, meeting with managers, directors, engineers, designers and composers to seek their advice. he formally took office in september 1914, when the palais garnier closed its doors due to the war and remained closed for eighteen months. after much difficulty, he was finally able to present a short ballet by igor stravinsky called the bees. during the war, he presented several baroque operas that met with little success.  after the war, he turned to contemporary works by french and foreign composers, such as honegger, poulenc, strauss and prokofiev. in 1924, he was elected to a seat at the academie des beaux-arts and named a commander in the legion of honor. following the dissolution of the ballets russes, he obtained the appointment of serge lifar as master of the paris opera ballet in 1930, restoring dance to its former place of importance there.  despite rouche's best efforts, the deficits continued to worsen and, by 1936, it was clear that major reforms were needed. in 1939, at the suggestion of jean zay, the french government created the "" (rtln), which combined the paris opera with the opera-comique and made them government agencies, relieving them from the need of trying to make a profit. rouche became the overall administrator of the new organization with philippe gaubert directing the opera and henri busser managing the opera-comique.  the occupation and after during the occupation, the vichy government sought to control the opera, while rouche and his associates fought to retain
some independence. most of the members of the company and the orchestra had sought refuge in cahors, but were ordered back to paris in july 1940. rouche, already past retirement at 78 years old, wanted to give up his position but was convinced to stay by his staff, who feared that a nazi administrator might replace him.  during this time, he focused on operas from the classical french repertoire (berlioz, massenet, gounod and the like) but had to placate german authorities; offering appearances by the berlin philharmonic and presentations of wagnerian operas. he also fought a constant battle to keep the jewish members of his staff, paying their wages himself after they were officially dismissed.  following liberation, he was called upon to explain his actions during the war because they were considered to have been too conciliatory. although his staff and various union members testified on his behalf, he was relieved of his position in january 1945. he remained active in cultural affairs and, in 1951, was rehabilitated; becoming the honorary director of the rtln. he died at his mansion in 1957, aged ninety-five.  in 2007, the bibliotheque nationale de france organized an exposition in his honor, called "la modernite a l'opera : jacques rouche (1914-1945)".  references  further reading   dominique garban, jacques rouche, l'homme qui sauva l'opera de paris, somogy, 2007   myriam chimenes, la vie musicale sous vichy, editions complexe, 2001    andre boll, jacques rouche, olivier perrin, 1972.  external links  "la modernite a l'opera" exposition: press release from the bibliotheque nationale de france.  "l' ere jacques rouche a l'opera de paris (1915-1945) : modernite theatrale, consecration du ballet et de serge lifar" by claire paolacci @ theses.fr  la grande revue @ the hathitrust digital library.  1862 births 1957 deaths people from lunel opera managers directors of the paris opera french magazine publishers (people) perfumery french theatre managers and producers impresarios sciences po alumni recipients of the legion of honour members of the academie des beaux-arts ecole polytechnique alumni french patrons of the arts french patrons of music
hazen's notch state park is a 307-acre state park in the town of westfield, vermont, in orleans county. the park features the height of land of hazen's notch, a mountain pass in the northern green mountains of vermont. it is located on vermont route 58.  activities in the undeveloped park include hunting, hiking, bird watching, and snowshoeing. the long trail passes through sections of the park.  the park includes the 273-acre hazen's notch natural area, which features cliffs of serpentine rock that support rare alpine and serpentine-adapted plant species. peregrine falcons have also nested here historically. the long trail passes through the natural area.  references  external links official website hazen's notch association  state parks of vermont protected areas of orleans county, vermont westfield, vermont
the 1915 argentine primera division was the 24th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on april 4 and ended on january 1916. the reunification of the "asociacion argentina de football" and the "federacion argentina de football" brought the creation of a championship of 25 teams. the tournament took a league format with each team playing the others once.  clubs that made their debuts in primera were san lorenzo de almagro (segunda division (afa) champion) and defensores de belgrano (division intermedia (faf) champion). the coming of san lorenzo caused all the "big five" to meet in an official tournament for the first time. racing achieved its 3° consecutive championship.  for the first time in primera division history, four teams were relegated: kimberley, defensores de belgrano, comercio and floresta.  standings  championship playoff  racing and san isidro finished level on points at the top of the table, necessitating a championship playoff, where racing won its 3rd. consecutive title.  match details  references  argentine primera division seasons p p 1915 in argentine football 1915 in south american football
catholic organizations for youth in asia (coya) is a network of catholic youth organizations in asia.  history in 2007 the youth desk of the federation of asian bishops' conferences initiated a meeting of catholic youth organizations active in asia. coya was founded in 2008.  member organizations  references   catholic church in asia catholic youth organizations
pimp of the year is the third studio album by pioneering jazz group soil & "pimp" sessions, from japan. it was released on march 8, 2006.  track listing original release (56:36)  limited edition (61:07)  credits performed and arranged by soil & "pimp" sessions toasting [agitator] - shacho saxophone - motoharu trumpet - tabu zombie piano - josei bass - akita goldman drums - midorin mastered by yasuji maeda assistant engineer (mastering) - yukie fuse (bernie grundman mastering) recorded and mixed by koni-yang from kurid (tracks 1, 4, 6, 11 & 13), shinjiro ikeda (tracks 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9, 10 & 12) executive producer - akira sekiguchi (victor), katsunori ueda (victor) assistant engineers - hiromitsu takasu, yoshiyuki watanabe (victor studio), naoya tokunou (heart beat), manabu ito, koudai nakase (innig) a&r, director - yuichi sorita (victor) artist promotion - toyonobu hatayama (victor) sales promotion - yasuhiro kanabo (victor) photography - shoji uchida artwork by [art direction] - yutaka kimura (central 67) hair and make-up - michio kutsukake objet - suzuki studio visual coordination - tomoro watanabe (vdc)  references  2006 albums soil & "pimp" sessions albums
wilson or chong-shing, mh (; born 9 july 1973) is a hong kong politician. he is an executive committee member of the democratic alliance for the betterment and progress of hong kong (dab), the largest pro-beijing party. he is a member of kwun tong district council, having represented kwong tak since 2000.  or won a seat on kwun tong district council in 1999, as a member of the democratic alliance for the betterment of hong kong (dab), beating a candidate from the democratic party. he retained his seat in 2003 despite the party's negative image following its support for basic law article 23 legislation, receiving the highest votes in the district. he went on to be re-elected in 2007, 2011 and 2015 unopposed.  in 2011, he was elected to the election committee, through the hong kong and kowloon district councils subsector, which was responsible for selecting the chief executive in 2012. in 2013, he joined the dab's executive committee.  in the 2016 legislative council election, he won the seat formerly held by dab veteran chan kam-lam in kowloon east.  he held his seat in the 2019 district council elections.  on 14 january 2021, or was in a video call with the legislative council's panel on housing, where he was suspected to have been in a car while in the meeting. or later said he was in the office, but changed his story afterwards and said he was in the car.  references  1973 births living people district councillors of kwun tong district democratic alliance for the betterment and progress of hong kong politicians hong kong federation of trade unions members of the legislative council of hong kong hk legco members 2016-2020 members of the election committee of hong kong, 2012-2017
yingzhou subdistrict () is a subdistrict of taijiang district, fuzhou, fujian, china.  township-level divisions of fujian fuzhou
felix lebuhotel (21 july 1932 - 5 november 2008) was a french professional racing cyclist. he rode in three editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1932 births 2008 deaths french male cyclists sportspeople from manche
jose maria arroyo y pidal (1875 - march 8, 1927) was a filipino politician. he served as the representative of the first district of iloilo from 1916 to 1919, and as a senator representing the seventh senatorial district from 1919 until his death in 1927.  arroyo died in italy on march 8, 1927. he is the grandfather of former first gentleman, jose miguel arroyo who is the husband of former president gloria macapagal arroyo.the arroyo fountain in front of the iloilo provincial capitol and built in 1927 was named after him in recognition for his efforts of authoring republic act 3222, a law that establishes the iloilo metropolitan waterworks in 1925. it stands on kilometer zero as the benchmark to measure distances from iloilo city to other points in panay island, western visayas region and other places in the philippines.  references  1875 births 1927 deaths senators of the 5th philippine legislature senators of the 6th philippine legislature members of the house of representatives of the philippines from iloilo nacionalista party politicians people from iloilo city filipino people of spanish descent senators of the 7th philippine legislature visayan people
the lone star ranger is a lost 1923 silent film western directed by lambert hillyer and starring tom mix. it is based on the novel by zane grey. fox produced and distributed by fox films and this film is a remake of their 1919 film with william farnum.  cast tom mix - duane billie dove - helen longstreth lee shumway - lawson (*as l. c. shumway) stanton heck - roggin edward peil sr. - kane frank clark - laramie minna redman - mrs. laramie francis carpenter - laramie's son william conklin - major longstreth/cheseldine thomas g. lingham - captain mcnally  see also 1937 fox vault fire  references  external links  the lone star ranger at imdb.com  1923 films american films lost western (genre) films 1923 western (genre) films films directed by lambert hillyer films based on american novels films based on western (genre) novels films based on works by zane grey fox film films lost american films american black-and-white films 1923 lost films silent american western (genre) films
obed saul martinez villarreal (born 30 march 1996) is a professional mexican footballer who currently plays for correcaminos uat as a midfielder. he made his professional debut with fc juarez during a copa mx victory over veracruz on 19 july 2016. he played with atletico veracruz of the liga de balompie mexicano during the league's inaugural season, leading them to a runners-up finish after losing to chapulineros de oaxaca in the finals.  references  1996 births living people mexican footballers mexican expatriate footballers association football midfielders c.f. monterrey players fc juarez footballers cd toledo players correcaminos uat footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players tercera division de mexico players segunda division b players tercera division players mexican expatriate sportspeople in spain expatriate footballers in spain footballers from nuevo leon sportspeople from monterrey liga de balompie mexicano players
guardians of the galaxy vol. 3 is an upcoming american superhero film based on the marvel comics superhero team guardians of the galaxy, produced by marvel studios and distributed by walt disney studios motion pictures. it is intended to be the sequel to guardians of the galaxy (2014) and guardians of the galaxy vol. 2 (2017) and the 32nd film in the marvel cinematic universe (mcu). the film is written and directed by james gunn and stars an ensemble cast featuring chris pratt, zoe saldana, dave bautista, vin diesel, bradley cooper, karen gillan, pom klementieff, sean gunn, sylvester stallone, and will poulter.  james gunn said in november 2014 that he had initial ideas for a third film in the series, and announced his return to write and direct in april 2017. disney fired him from the film in july 2018 following the resurfacing of controversial tweets, but the studio reversed course by that october and reinstated gunn as director. gunn's return was publicly revealed in march 2019, with production resuming after gunn completed work on his film the suicide squad (2021) and its spin-off series peacemaker (2022). filming began in november 2021 in atlanta, georgia, and is expected to last until around april 2022. shooting will also occur in london, england.  guardians of the galaxy vol. 3 is scheduled to be released in the united states on may 5, 2023, as part of phase four of the mcu.  cast   chris pratt as peter quill / star-lord:the half-human, half-celestial leader of the guardians of the galaxy who was abducted from earth as a child and raised by a group of alien thieves and smugglers called the ravagers.  zoe saldana as gamora:an orphan who seeks redemption for her past crimes, and was trained by thanos to be his personal assassin. she was killed by thanos in avengers: infinity war (2018), but she returned as a younger version of the character who travels to the present in avengers: endgame (2019); saldana reprises the latter role in this film.  dave bautista as drax the destroyer: a member of the guardians and highly skilled warrior whose family was slaughtered by ronan.  vin diesel as groot: a member of the guardians who is a tree-like humanoid and the accomplice of rocket.  bradley cooper as rocket:a member of the guardians and former avenger who is a genetically modified raccoon bounty hunter and a master of weapons and military tactics. the film completes an arc for
the character that was established in the first two guardians films and continued in infinity war and endgame.  karen gillan as nebula: a member of the guardians and former avenger who is an orphan from an alien world, and was trained by thanos to be his personal assassin.  pom klementieff as mantis: a member of the guardians with empathic powers.  sean gunn as kraglin obfonteri: yondu's former second-in-command in the ravagers.  sylvester stallone as stakar ogord: a high-ranking ravager.  will poulter as adam warlock: an artificial powerful being created by the sovereign to destroy the guardians as revenge.  additionally, chukwudi iwuji has been cast in an undisclosed role. he described the character as being powerful and complex.  production  development  initial work  guardians of the galaxy director and writer james gunn stated in november 2014 that, in addition to having the "basic story" for guardians of the galaxy vol. 2 (2017) while working on the first film, he also had ideas for a potential third film. despite this, he was unsure in june 2015 if he would be involved with a third guardians film, saying it would depend on how he felt after making vol. 2. in april 2016, marvel studios president and producer kevin feige said that a third film was "certainly" planned for the franchise as part of the marvel cinematic universe (mcu) in "2020 and beyond". in march 2017, gunn said there would be a third film "for sure. we're trying to figure it out," soon adding that there were no specific plans for the film yet, but that marvel would want to make it "unless something goes horribly-which is always possible, you never know". he also reiterated that he had not decided whether he would be directing the film, and that he was going to figure out his involvement and his next project "over the next couple of weeks." part of gunn's reluctance to return to the film came from not wanting to work on it without michael rooker, who portrayed yondu udonta in the previous two films and died in vol. 2.  gunn announced in april 2017 that he would return to write and direct guardians of the galaxy vol. 3. he said the film would be set after avengers: infinity war (2018) and avengers: endgame (2019), and would "conclude the story of this iteration of the guardians of the galaxy, and help
catapult both old and new marvel characters into the next ten years and beyond." he also felt that the three guardians films would "work together as a whole," telling one story, saying, "i'm tying a lot of stuff together in the third film [from the previous two]. we get a lot of answers on a lot of different things". gunn also planned to work with marvel on the future of the "marvel cosmic universe". he was set to begin work on vol. 3 shortly after completing his work as executive producer and consultant on infinity war. on returning for the third film, gunn said, "i wouldn't have said yes if i didn't have a fairly clear idea of where we were going and what we were going to do. i'm not a guy that's just going to do it if i don't have a vision for it."  after originally including adam warlock in his script treatment for vol. 2, gunn and feige noted the importance of the character on the cosmic side of the mcu and hinted that he would make an appearance in vol. 3. in may 2017, after the release of vol. 2, gunn said he would be creating the third film "over the next three years", and confirmed that pom klementieff would reprise her role as mantis. he also intended to have elizabeth debicki reprise her role as ayesha. by mid-june, gunn had completed the first draft of his script treatment for the third film, and was considering changing a piece of character info he had placed in the background of the mugshot sequence in the first film (when the guardians are captured by the nova corps). in september, gunn reiterated that vol. 3 would be released "in a little under three years", as the film had privately been set for release on may 1, 2020. at the end of february 2018, gunn planned to meet with mark hamill about possibly appearing in the film. in april, chris pratt was set to reprise his role as peter quill / star-lord, and the following month, dave bautista confirmed that he would reprise his role as drax the destroyer. marvel received the completed first draft of the screenplay from gunn by the end of june, ahead of the beginning of official pre-production on the film.  firing of james gunn  on july 20, 2018, disney and marvel severed ties with gunn. this came after conservative commentators began circulating old tweets he had made regarding controversial topics such as rape and pedophilia, and called for his firing. the walt disney studios chairman alan
f. horn stated, "the offensive attitudes and statements discovered on james' twitter feed are indefensible and inconsistent with our studio's values, and we have severed our business relationship with him." while not part of the decision to fire gunn, the walt disney company ceo bob iger supported the "unanimous decision" from the various executives at marvel and walt disney studios. in response, gunn said in a series of tweets that when he started his career he was "making movies and telling jokes that were outrageous and taboo" but felt as he has "developed as a person, so has my work and my humor." he continued, "it's not to say i'm better, but i am very, very different than i was a few years ago; today i try to root my work in love and connection and less in anger. my days saying something just because it's shocking and trying to get a reaction are over." in a separate statement, gunn said the tweets at the time were "totally failed and unfortunate efforts to be provocative", adding "i understand and accept the business decisions taken today. even these many years later, i take full responsibility for the way i conducted myself then."  in response to the firing, many of the guardians cast members tweeted support for gunn. rooker decided to leave twitter, while fans signed an online petition asking for gunn to be reinstated which received over 300,000 signatures. the firing also garnered reaction from other hollywood personalities, such as actress selma blair and comedian bobcat goldthwait, and inspired opinion pieces on the firing and how it would affect hollywood from kareem abdul-jabbar and news organizations such as the hollywood reporter, variety, deadline hollywood, and forbes. on july 30, the cast of the guardians of the galaxy films, including pratt, zoe saldana, bautista, bradley cooper, vin diesel, sean gunn, klementieff, rooker, and karen gillan, issued a statement in support of james gunn, saying, "we fully support james gunn. we were all shocked by his abrupt firing last week and have intentionally waited these ten days to respond in order to think, pray, listen, and discuss. in that time, we've been encouraged by the outpouring of support from fans and members of the media who wish to see james reinstated as director of volume 3 as well as discouraged by those so easily duped into believing the many outlandish conspiracy theories surrounding him." despite this and the notable "vociferous support" gunn received, variety reported that disney
was not planning to rehire him as the jokes were "unacceptable in the #metoo era and are not in line with disney's family-friendly image." variety continued that, despite rumors of gunn being replaced by established marvel directors such as jon favreau, taika waititi, or the russo brothers, marvel had yet to meet with any other director, and would most likely hire someone new. in early august, bautista said that he would fulfill his contract and appear in the film as long as marvel chose to use gunn's existing script.  disney and marvel still wanted to "move forward quickly" on the film, and were soon confirmed to be keeping gunn's script. this, combined with the fact that gunn did not breach his contract since the tweets were written years before he signed on to the film, had led to "complicated negotiations" between gunn and disney over his exit settlement. gunn was expected to be paid $7-10 million or more, and there was some hope that the negotiations could lead to him eventually returning in some capacity, "even if [it was] to develop and direct another marvel movie". gunn would be free to move on to new projects following the settlement, and other major studios were interested in hiring him including warner bros. for their rival superhero franchise, the dc extended universe (dceu). during this time, executives at marvel studios began "back channel conversations" with disney in an attempt to find a compromise that could lead to gunn returning to the film in some way. this "eleventh hour" effort from marvel was inspired by the statements from the film's cast. in mid-august, gunn met with horn following a strong push from gunn's talent agency for him to be given a second chance. despite this and the reported "civil and professional" nature of the meeting, horn only took it as a courtesy and used it to reaffirm disney's decision to fire gunn.  later in august, the small crew that was preparing for pre-production were dismissed as production of the film was postponed so marvel and disney could find a director to replace gunn. pre-production was to have begun by the end of 2018, with principal photography set for january or february 2019. at this time, bautista was unsure if he would return for the film, as he did not know if he would "want to work for disney" given how they handled the firing of gunn. in late september, james gunn's brother sean, who played kraglin obfonteri and provided motion capture
for rocket in the previous guardians films, reiterated that disney still intended on making the film with james' script, but had not revealed to the cast when production may continue. sean added that he had been preparing to reprise his roles for the third film before his brother's firing. at the end of the month, cooper was asked if he would consider directing vol. 3 after the success of his directorial debut a star is born (2018), but said that he "could never imagine" directing a film that he did not write. by mid-october, james gunn had completed his exit settlement with disney and was set to write and potentially direct the suicide squad (2021) for warner bros.  rehiring gunn  the day after gunn joined the suicide squad in mid-october 2018, he was privately notified by horn that he could return as director for vol. 3. this came after further meetings between the studios and gunn. horn had changed his mind after being impressed by gunn's response to the situation. gunn discussed his commitments to the suicide squad with feige, and production on vol. 3 was put on hold until february 2021 to allow gunn to complete the suicide squad first. in december, after working with marvel studios on the script for ant-man (2015), adam mckay said he was willing to work with the studio again and stated that he had discussed taking over as director for vol. 3 with feige, among other projects. in early 2019, feige and pratt reiterated that marvel would still make vol. 3, and in march 2019, gunn was publicly revealed to have been rehired as director of the film. deadline hollywood stated that marvel studios had "never met with or considered any other director" for the film. by the end of april, the franchise's five main stars-pratt, saldana, bautista, cooper, and diesel-were all expected to return for the sequel, with filming to take place in 2020.  discussing his firing and re-hiring in may 2019, gunn said that of all the elements of the film that he had been sad to leave when he was fired, the most meaningful to him was the character of rocket. gunn personally identifies with rocket, describing himself and the character as "the same". gunn added that vol. 3 would end the character's arc that began in the first two films and was continued in infinity war and endgame. that month, gillan confirmed that she was returning for the sequel and expressed excitement for gunn's return to the franchise. in june, saldana was asked about her role in the
film after her character gamora was killed in infinity war, and she returned to play a younger version in endgame who travels through time to the present. saldana said that gamora's fate would depend on the plans that marvel and gunn have for vol. 3, but that she would like to see gamora rejoin the guardians and also be portrayed as "the most lethal woman in the galaxy" as she has been referred to previously. gunn was asked in october if he was unhappy about marvel's decision to kill gamora in infinity war and said he was not, adding that he had discussed the storyline with the studio beforehand. according to infinity war and endgame screenwriters christopher markus and stephen mcfeely, gamora was brought back in endgame specifically so that gunn could use her in vol. 3. in december, gunn was asked if he would have yondu return in the film and said as long as he was involved with the guardians characters, he would not have the character be resurrected. gunn felt the stakes of a character's death were important and said characters who die in his films would likely remain dead. gunn said in february 2020 that bringing yondu back to life would "nullify yondu's sacrifice" in vol. 2, and said the character would not return unless it was for a prequel or flashback. in april, gunn said the covid-19 pandemic would not affect production plans for the film at that time, saying the next month that the film would be released "a little after 2021".  in august 2020, gunn turned in a new draft of the film's script and began writing a spin-off television series from the suicide squad titled peacemaker (2022). a month later, he was planning to begin work on vol. 3 in 2021 after completing that film and series. he confirmed in november that the script for vol. 3 was finished, and said that very little had changed from his initial ideas despite the production setbacks. the film was given a 2023 release date a month later, with filming set to begin in late 2021. shortly after, it was revealed to also be set after the guardians of the galaxy holiday special (2022).  pre-production  pre-production work creating the designs and visuals for the film began by april 2021, and the next month, gunn reiterated his comments on having yondu not be resurrected in the film to not diminish his death's meaning. in early may, marvel studios announced that the film would be released on may 5, 2023. later that month, gunn said vol. 3 would take
place after the events of thor: love and thunder (2022), which features several guardians characters. gunn had begun storyboarding the film by june, with filming later revealed to begin in november 2021 in atlanta, georgia for an expected end around april 2022. by then, bautista said he had not read a script for vol. 3 and was unsure if it had changed during the production delays. the next month, gillan said that she and klementieff had read the script together and she found it to be incredible, brilliant, emotional, and funny. she also felt it was gunn's "strongest work yet" with the guardians characters. gunn reiterated that the script had "basically stayed the same" from three years prior but he had been "playing with it in little ways" over the years. he was in the middle of another draft by the end of the month and said the film would be emotional and have a "heavier" story than the previous films, with a more grounded approach that was inspired by the suicide squad and peacemaker. gunn originally wrote a cameo appearance for kumail nanjiani, a friend of gunn's, but removed this after learning nanjiani was cast as kingo in marvel studios' eternals (2021).  by late august, gunn and marvel studios began meeting with actors for the role of adam warlock, including will poulter. george mackay was also on the shortlist, and rege-jean page was considered for the part. poulter auditioned for the role over zoom before an in-person screen test with gunn in atlanta. in september, gillan reiterated her positive comments about the script and said the film would explore the characters from the previous guardians films on a deeper level, while seth green, who voices howard the duck in the mcu, said the film would be about gamora and nebula's story. he did not know at that time if howard would appear after doing so in the previous guardians films. poulter was cast as adam warlock in october, and gunn said "dozens of roles" had already been cast. pratt began rehearsals and camera tests later that month, and a production meeting was held in early november, shortly before the start of filming. gunn also reiterated his comments on not resurrecting yondu in the film.  filming  principal photography began on november 8, 2021, in atlanta, georgia, under the working title hot christmas. henry braham serves as cinematographer, after doing so for vol. 2. filming was previously scheduled to begin in january or february
2019 prior to gunn's firing, and then in february 2021, before gunn began work on peacemaker. with the start of filming, sylvester stallone revealed that he would return as stakar ogord from vol. 2, and gunn posted a photo of the main cast members which revealed that chukwudi iwuji was part of the film following his collaboration with gunn on peacemaker. iwuji's screen test for the film was shot on the set of peacemaker with that series' crew, and marvel repaid this favor by letting gunn use the vol. 3 set and crew to film ezra miller's cameo appearance as barry allen / the flash for the peacemaker season finale.   production designer beth mickle said gunn chose to mainly use practical effects for vol. 3 after they did so with their work on the suicide squad. in february 2021, gunn stated the film would be shot using industrial light & magic's stagecraft virtual production technology that was developed for the disney+ star wars series the mandalorian, but in october, he said they would not be able to use the technology because the sets were too big, believing they were larger than the sets used on the suicide squad. judianna makovsky serves as costume designer. the guardians of the galaxy holiday special was filmed at the same time as vol. 3, starting in february 2022, with the same main cast and sets. shooting was also expected to occur in london, england, in late 2021. filming was expected to last six to seven months until around april 2022.  post-production  craig wood and fred raskin return from the first two films to serve as the editors.  music  in april 2017, gunn felt the music for the film would be different from what was used for the first two films' soundtracks, awesome mix vol. 1 and vol. 2. the next month, he added that he was "panicking" about the soundtrack and had to make some "pretty specific choices" shortly due to the wider range of available music for the story. by early july 2017, gunn had narrowed down his choices for potential songs to 181, but noted that this list could grow again. all of the songs for the film had been selected by the following month; the songs are not modern and come from quill's zune that he received at the end of vol. 2.  in october 2021, gunn revealed that john murphy was composing the film's score and had already recorded music to be played on set during filming. murphy replaces tyler bates, who composed the score for the
first two films; murphy had also replaced bates as composer of the suicide squad after bates left that film during production.  release  guardians of the galaxy vol. 3 is scheduled to be released on may 5, 2023. the film was previously set for release on may 1, 2020, before it was dropped from that date. it will be part of phase four of the mcu.  future  gunn said in april 2017 that a fourth guardians film could happen, though it would likely center on a new group of characters since gunn planned to conclude the story of the team of the previous films in vol. 3. later in september, gunn felt that he was unlikely to return for another guardians film, but noted he would continue to work with marvel studios on other projects that use the guardians and cosmic characters. one such project from gunn was a film centered on drax and mantis, which bautista called "brilliant". however, in may 2021 bautista had not heard any further updates regarding it, feeling marvel studios was not "very interested, or it doesn't fit into the way they have things mapped out". gunn confirmed in september 2019 that he intended for vol. 3 to be his last guardians film, which he reaffirmed in may 2021. in july 2021, gillan expressed her desire to continue to play nebula after vol. 3.  references  external links      2018 controversies in the united states 2020s superhero films 2023 action comedy films 2023 adventure films 2023 science fiction films american action comedy films american films american science fiction action films american science fiction comedy films american sequel films american space adventure films disney controversies films directed by james gunn films scored by john murphy (composer) films shot in atlanta films shot in london films with screenplays by james gunn guardians of the galaxy (film series) guardians of the galaxy films marvel cinematic universe: phase four superhero comedy films upcoming sequel films
this is a list of winners and nominees of the primetime emmy award for outstanding contemporary hairstyling for a variety, nonfiction or reality program. the category was previously awarded as outstanding hairstyling for a series. in 2008, it was reorganized and multi-camera series and specials competed for their own award. the category was reclassified and renamed again in 2020.  in the following list, the first titles listed in gold are the winners; those not in gold are nominees, which are listed in alphabetical order. the years given are those in which the ceremonies took place:  winners and nominations  1970s outstanding individual achievement in any area of creative technical crafts  outstanding achievement in hairstyling  1980s  outstanding hairstyling for a series  1990s  2000s  outstanding hairstyling for a multi-camera series or special  2010s  2020s outstanding contemporary hairstyling for a variety, nonfiction or reality program  programs with multiple awards  8 awards  saturday night live  3 awards  dancing with the stars  rupaul's drag race  programs with multiple nominations  17 nominations  saturday night live  15 nominations  dancing with the stars  9 nominations  the voice  7 nominations  madtv  5 nominations  rupaul's drag race  3 nominations  key & peele  that '70s show  two and a half men  2 nominations  3rd rock from the sun  the tracey ullman show  references  outstanding contemporary hairstyling for a variety, nonfiction or reality program awards established in 1970 hairdressing
cody harris (born 10 october 1985) is a new zealand darts player.  career harris comes from a family of dartplayers. his father ran the acdc dart club and harris watched as a child his parents and other family members when they played. when eric bristow came to new zealand for the wdf world cup, harris' father played against him and won. when harris was around eight years old he for the first time threw a dart.  when harris was nine he won the a grade championship for the auckland darts association and he for the first time took part in the national championship when he was 13. many national successes followed including the win in the 2015 sydney darts masters qualifier and the national championship 2015. internationally, his biggest success so far was the last 32 of the winmau world masters in 2015 where he lost to scott waites 3-0.  in 2016, he represented new zealand together along with warren parry in the pdc world cup of darts. they played scotland (consisting of gary anderson and robert thornton), and after breaking the throw with a 125 checkout, he and parry led 3-1, before scotland won four legs in a row to win 5-3. at the 2017 event, harris and rob szabo were eliminated 5-2 by belgium in the opening round.  harris entered the 2018 pdc q-school.  world championship results  pdc  2018: 1st round (lost to ian white 1-3)  2019: 2nd round (lost to jamie lewis 2-3)  performance timeline pdc  references  external links cody harris at darts database  new zealand darts players living people professional darts corporation associate players 1985 births pdc world cup of darts team new zealand
fyodor kukin (born february 26, 1993) is a russian former professional ice hockey goaltender.  kukin played one game in kontinental hockey league with yugra khanty-mansiysk during the 2013-14 khl season. he signed for hc plzen of the czech extraliga in 2015 but never played a game for the team.  references  external links  1993 births living people shk hodonin players mamonty yugry players people from arkhangelsk russian ice hockey goaltenders thk tver players hc yugra players
this is a list of characters from itv's popular british sitcom george and mildred which ran from 1976 until 1979, plus george and mildred (film) which aired in 1980.  main characters yootha joyce as mildred roper brian murphy as george roper  supporting characters norman eshley as jeffrey fourmile sheila fearn as ann fourmile nicholas bond-owen as tristram fourmile simon lloyd as tarquin fourmile (from series 3)  recurring characters  avril elgar as ethel reginald marsh as humphrey pumphrey roy kinnear as jerry gretchen franklin as mildred's mother "pussy galore" as truffles  character descriptions  mildred roper mildred is the long-suffering wife of george who is always getting on her nerves. whether she buys a new hat or armchair, george is not bothered. it is hinted that she used to have many flings with men when she used to work at an airbase during the war. mildred has a sister called ethel, who is a snob and is disliked by george and many others. mildred dislikes jerry, george's best friend and odd-job man who is usually conning people.  most of the storylines for mildred are for her trying to climb the social ladder, and with george ruining her attempts. in george and mildred she makes friends with her neighbour ann fourmile (sheila fearn), who is married to the snobbish jeffrey (norman eshley). when mildred thinks of adopting a child, and george agrees, the person from the orphanage declares that the ropers cannot adopt because they are too old. feeling sorry for mildred, george buys her a yorkshire terrier, truffles, who becomes mildred's pride and joy, and receives better attention than george himself.  george roper the dim, lazy husband of mildred, george is either watching television, at the pub or somehow annoying jeffrey fourmile, who he detests. he is best mates with jerry who usually does a very cheap and dodgy job when he is roped in to do work on the house. george has a pet budgie called oscar and a goldfish called moby. george and mildred's relationship is strained and they suffer each other. throughout the series, george's relatives often visit: his father and younger brother charlie. when charlie roper visits, all names of the roper siblings are revealed: fred, gloria, betty, bill, george, charlie and bill (it is stated that the second bill was named after the first). when george's father jack arrives, their relationship
is put under a serious strain, but when he leaves everything returns to normal. when mildred's sister ethel and her husband, humphrey arrive, george often runs away to the pub.  jeffrey fourmile jeffrey lives next door to george and mildred; he is a snobbish estate agent and lives with his wife ann. ann and mildred become good friends, but jeffrey is frequently irritated by george, with their spats providing much of the show's humour. the fourmiles have a young son, tristram, who gets on well with george, much to the chagrin of jeffrey. jeffrey supports the conservative party and is head of the parent teacher association at tristram's school. jeffrey is always trying to impress his neighbours by buying sports cars and criticising the lower classes-according to ann, jeffrey only buys the financial times just to impress the newsagent.  ann fourmile ann, who lives with her husband jeffrey, son tristram (and later also tarquin) lives next door to george and mildred roper, at number 48 peacock crescent. she quickly befriends mildred and does not dislike george, unlike her husband who absolutely detests him. ann is portrayed as a warm, lovable character who manages the fourmile household.  tristram fourmile tristram, the young son of jeffrey and ann, is a cheeky private-schoolboy whose hobbies include playing with his action man. he reads the beano, watches doctor who every week, and often questions ann and jeffrey about sex (unintentionally); when he asks his mother where babies come from, she replies "harrods baby department", to which he replies: "that's not what michael at school said". jeffrey, surprised, asks him what michael at school said; tristram replies: "you wouldn't believe me even if i told you". after mildred asks what ann's new baby will be called, tristram replies, "my mum says that when she has had the baby, she is going to call it 'a day'".  ethel pumphrey ethel, the elder snobbish sister of mildred, lives a life of luxury in her large mansion in oxshott. her husband humphrey owns a meat company and is nicknamed 'the offal king of oxshott'. ethel is always trying to show off her new 'presents' from humphrey like her new jaguar xj6, diamond rings, yachts and most of all her massive fur coat collection. when trying to show up the size of mildred's home, as it is
tiny compared to theirs, ethel always says "oh, what a lovely small room" mildred's usual response is to make subtle digs at ethel's age such as "well, none of us are getting any younger, except you".  humphrey pumphrey labelled 'the offal king of oxshott' by the ropers, humphrey owns a meat company and puts up with the snobbish ethel as his wife. however he does enjoy himself when flirting with his buxom secretary (jennifer guy) at work. he once planned a holiday for the two of them in jersey, but george let it slip and the idea was abandoned. when visiting george and mildred, mildred always sits humphrey next to her lava lamp which makes him annoyed as it makes him feel queasy. humphrey is a snob, but he is not as bad as ethel.  mildred's mother the ageing 74-year-old mother of mildred and ethel lives in dagenham. she gets things muddled up as she puts her hat on george and says hello to the hat stand. her constant catchphrase, which she says in all of her appearances is 'i'm not longed for this world'.  jerry jerry is an odd job man who is always persuaded by george, his best friend, to get him to do various jobs around the house that do not even need doing, like fitting new showers and mending letterboxes. he is disliked by all, apart from george, but especially by mildred.   george and mildred george and mildred characters
blub, short for berliner luft- und badeparadies ("berlin air- and bathing paradise"), was a water park in the britz area of neukolln district in berlin, germany. first opened in 1985, it was shut down in 2002 following health concerns, and the  site fell into disrepair. in 2016, the buildings on the site were severely destroyed by fire. demolition work began in 2020; the site will be developed into a dwelling complex with 638 apartments.  the site is located at buschkrugallee 64, 12359 berlin, near the teltow canal.  references  external links     blub website as of 2001, archived at the internet archive  1985 establishments in germany 2002 disestablishments in germany water parks in germany buildings and structures in berlin defunct amusement parks in germany modern ruins amusement parks closed in 2002 amusement parks opened in 1985
trust (; ) is a 1976 finnish-soviet historical drama film directed by edvin laine and viktor tregubovich. the film portrays the events leading up to the finnish declaration of independence from russia in 1917.  partial cast  kirill lavrov as lenin  vladimir tatosov as yakov sverdlov  igor dmitriev as vladimir bonch-bruyevich  margarita terekhova as aleksandra kollontai  antonina shuranova as rosa luxemburg  leonhard merzin as jukka rahja  anatoly solonitsyn as bochazhnikov  leonid nevedomsky as mikhail pokrovsky  alexey eybozhenko as nikolai krylenko  oleg yankovsky as georgy pyatakov  vilho siivola as pehr evind svinhufvud  yrjo tahtela as carl enckell  yrjo pavloff as gustaf idman  esa saario as kullervo manner  innokenty smoktunovsky as nikolay bobrikov  matti ranin as eugen wolff  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1976 films 1970s historical drama films soviet historical drama films finnish historical drama films soviet films finnish films russian-language films films directed by edvin laine films set in the 1910s films about vladimir lenin soviet multilingual films finnish multilingual films 1970s multilingual films films scored by georgy sviridov 1976 drama films
gariboldi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  gaetano gariboldi (1815-1857), italian painter giuseppe gariboldi (1833-1905), italian classical flautist and composer italo gariboldi (1879-1970), italian general luciano gariboldi (born 1927), italian footballer  see also garibaldi (disambiguation)  italian-language surnames
cardinal cybo or cibo may refer to:  lorenzo cybo de mari (died 1503), italian cardinal innocenzo cybo or cibo (1491-1550), italian cardinal and archbishop of genoa camillo cybo or cibo (1681-1743), italian cardinal,  protector of santa maria degli angeli alderano cybo (1613-1700), italian cardinal  see also cybo family, to which many of the cardinals belonged
the 35th district of the iowa senate is located in eastern iowa, and is currently composed of linn county.  current elected officials todd taylor is the senator currently representing the 35th district.  the area of the 35th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 69th district (represented by kirsten running-marquardt) the 70th district (represented by tracy ehlert)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  william dieleman, 1983-1992 florence buhr, 1993-1994 dick dearden, 1995-2002 jeff lamberti, 2003-2006 larry noble, 2007-2010 jack whitver, 2011-2012 wally horn, 2013-2018 todd taylor, 2019-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  35
first love unlimited () is a 1997 hong kong romantic comedy film directed by joe ma wai ho and starring: two pop stars daniel chan hiu tung and gigi leung wing kei. released at the end of spring in 1997, the film created a fan fever for hong kong youth back then. a sweet little movie with two perfectly-cast hong kong heartthrobs, first love unlimited captures the wondrous excitement of first love with tremendous heart and winning humor.  cast  daniel chan hiu-tung as shum chi hong  gigi leung wing-kei as tap/stephainie wong	   joyce chan yin hang as angie (tap's friend)  stephen fung tak lun as chris  ricky hui kun ying as uncle chicken wing (hong's father)  vincent kok tak chiu as fatty   matt chow hoi kwong as stephen  tina lau tin laan as mrs tina wong (tap's mother)  wyman wong wai man as mimi (hong's friend)  edward yang as tap's step-dad  lee siu-kei as security at amusement park (mimi's father)  erica yuen lai-ming as hong's sister  lam ho-yeung as restaurant customer	 	   soi cheang pou-soi as restaurant customer  joe ma wai-ho	as hong's audio equipment boss  andy tsang tak-wah as la salle student  synopsis only the lack of roses in every frame prevent this teen romance from being a live action shojo manga. raised in the housing project, the poor boy shum chi hong (daniel chan) meets a daughter of a wealthy family, ah tap (gigi leung). they go to the movies for their first date, but in the end they buy wrong tickets. although they couldn't see the movie, they hold hands for the first time. on the bus ride home, tap sweetly sleeps on hong's shoulder, an unforgettable experience for hong. hong walks tap to her door and they kiss goodbye as they reluctantly part. at first, hong tells a lie about his low-born because he fears that she never fall in love with him. but later, tap's mother (tina lau) discovers the relationship and fearing it would affect tap's education strongly opposes it, as she would go as far as sending her to study abroad.   tap, a shy good girl who finds first love with the charming, boyish hong. physically and emotionally, the two are a perfect match, but their backgrounds couldn't be more different. tap is an elite student destined for greater things
, while hong is a low-income brat sired by a lone parent (ricky hui). though tap believes that love can conquer all, her strict, yet loving mother isn't quite convinced. can tap and hong - two young teens who seemingly share the same heart and soul - keep their perfect love in an imperfect world?.  soundtrack the soundtrack of the film sung by daniel chan and gigi leung including their hit songs such as: guess guess guess, zai hu ni gan shou, short hair, understand your everything, shen mo xi yin, guitar, dating with danny, psychedelic....among them, the cover version "dating with danny" is the main theme song.  references  external links    1997 films 1997 romantic comedy films hong kong films hong kong romantic comedy films 1990s cantonese-language films
thomas l. hickner is an united states democratic politician from michigan and the former county executive of bay county. he previously served five terms in the michigan house of representatives.  hickner graduated from michigan state university in 1979 with a degree in political science and from western michigan university with a master's degree in business administration. he worked for congressman j. bob traxler and state senator jerome t. hart before joining the senate fiscal agency in 1979.  hickner was elected to the house in 1982 and served ten years. he was elected bay county executive in 1992 and was re-elected five times, serving until 2016. in 2016, he ran for re-election to a sixth term, but lost the democratic primary to former congressman and state senator jim barcia, who went on to win the general election unopposed.  references  1954 births living people people from bay city, michigan politicians from newport news, virginia michigan state university alumni northern michigan university alumni michigan democrats county executives in michigan members of the michigan house of representatives
brp andres bonifacio (ps-17) is the third ship of the gregorio del pilar-class offshore patrol vessels of the philippine navy. she is the second ship of the philippine navy to be named after andres bonifacio, a filipino revolutionary leader, regarded as the "father of the philippine revolution" and one of the most influential national heroes of the philippines.  she was originally designated upon commissioning as "ff-17". in february 2019, the navy downgraded the status of the entire class from frigate to patrol ship and redesignated her to "ps-17".  design the ship was designed with a high level of habitability and provides fairly comfortable accommodations, including air conditioning.  propulsion the andres bonifacio employs the shipboard application of aircraft gas turbine jet engines with the use of controllable pitch propellers. she is equipped with two  pratt & whitney gas turbines and can propel the ship at speeds up to . ramon alcaraz also has two  fairbanks-morse diesel engines, capable of driving the ship economically at  for up to  without refueling.  a retractable/rotatable bow propulsion unit provides manoeuvrability in tight situations.  armament prior to turn-over to the philippine navy, the ship was armed with a mk.75 oto melara 76mm/62cal compact main gun, two mk.38 25 mm bushmaster chain guns at midships, and a phalanx ciws system aft. the ciws and chain guns were removed prior to its turn-over, with the mk.75 gun remaining.  flight support andres bonifacio has a flight deck and hangar capable of handling helicopters.  the philippine navy uses the agustawestland aw109e power naval helicopter as its standard helicopter for the entire class.  modernization  the philippine navy plans to modernize the entire ship of the class, with an initial program to upgrade the ship's sensors, and another program to improve its weapon systems.  several systems were acquired through us foreign military sales (fms) and foreign military financing (fmf), which includes the bae systems mk. 38 mod. 2 machine gun system, the saab an/sps-77 sea giraffe amb 3d air/surface search radar, and the flir systems seaflir 230 electro-optical/infra-red camera.  meanwhile, the philippine navy will launch a program to acquire, install and integrate several other sensors into the ship, as part of the horizon 2 phase of the revised afp modernization program. among those to be acquired
are new combat management system (cms), hull mounted sonar (hms), and a radar electronic support measures (r-esm).  future upgrades are planned to install defensive and offensive missile systems, as well as torpedo weapon system, although funding is still being secured and might only be included in the next phase of the navy's modernization program.  in 2020 october 14, navy chief giovanni carlo bacordo revealed the completion of the 3d modeling program for the entire ship class' cabling systems to be used for their electronic upgrades (cms + 4 sensors), indicating the project is at least running despite the covid-19 pandemic.  history  from 1967 to 2016, the ship was a  high endurance cutter of the united states coast guard that was named . the u.s. decommissioned the cutter in early 2016 and the philippines acquired it under the excess defense articles and the foreign assistance act.  the frigate was formally received by the philippine navy on july 21, 2016, and commissioned to service on the same day at the uscg base at alameda, california. she arrived in manila on december 9, 2016 after port visit in guam on december 5, 2016.  notable operational deployments  in april 2019, the brp andres bonifacio had an unplanned encounter at sea with the frigate wu chang (ffg-1205) of the taiwanese navy near the mavulis island in batanes. the two ships implemented the naval code for unplanned encounters at sea (cues) during the encounter. the wu chang was monitoring the activity at mavulis while the brp bonifacio was on its way to south korea.  exercises langkawi international maritime and aerospace exhibition (lima) 2017: the brp andres bonifacio was sent to malaysia for its first international deployment as a philippine navy ship, to be the philippines' representative in the lima 2017 from march 21 to 26, 2017. the ship also had a port call at the lumut naval base in perak, malaysia and conducted joint exercises with the royal malaysian navy, before docking at port klang, selangor, malaysia for a goodwill visit from march 30 to april 3, 2017.  exercise rim of the pacific (rimpac) 2018:  from june to early august 2018, the ship participated in the rimpac 2018 together with the  landing platform dock. this is the first time that the philippine navy sent ships to the world's largest international maritime exercise which is held biennially in hawaii. among the events the ship participated at rimpac were a one-day "open ship"
guided ship tour for the public where the seabees band had a live-band performance for the ship's visitors.  balikatan 2019: the ship participated on a visit, board, search, and seizure operation during balikatan 2019.  gallery  see also  list of ships of the philippine navy  references  external links   hamilton-class cutters of the philippine navy ships of the philippine navy ships built in bridge city, louisiana 1967 ships
"when i die" is a 1969 hit single by motherlode.  it is the title track of their debut lp and was their only charting single.  in the us, the song reached number 18 on the billboard hot 100 and number 12 on the cash box top 100. "when i die" was a major hit in canada, reaching number 1 in august of the year.  chart performance  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  external links    1969 songs 1969 singles buddah records singles rpm top singles number-one singles
kologrivski forest nature reserve () (also kologrivsky les) is a russian 'zapovednik' (strict nature reserve) created to protect and study southern taiga nature complexes of the russian plain.  the reserve includes the only two surviving old-growth southern european taiga arrays not exposed landscape changes.  some trees are 350-400 years old.  the reserve hosts 38 out of 72 species of rare and endangered species in the kostroma region.  the reserve is situated in the kologrivsky district of kostroma oblast.  it was formally established in 2006, and is officially named state nature reserve "mg sinitsyn", after its first administrator.  the site covers .  topography the kologrivski forest reserve is situated in the northeast of the russian plain.  it is about halfway between the baltic sea and the urals mountains, and about 350 km northeast of moscow.   the reserve is divided into two sites, the northern 'kologrivsky' sector and the southern 'manturovsky' sector.  the terrain was set by pleistocene glaciation, which covered the area and left a landscape of alluvial outwash, moraines, and lakes.  the northern sector has a large plain behind moraine ridges and hills.  the southern sector has more hills and evidence of mid-ridge moraines.  the relief is gentle, with sharp edges only on stream banks.  the shapes of the lake shorelines are heavily influenced by the activities of beavers.  the forest cover is middle and southern taiga, in the unzha river valley.  the reserve itself has only small tributaries of the unzha flowing through it.  climate and ecoregion kologrivski forest is located in the sarmatic mixed forests ecoregion.  this ecoregion is a belt of forest running from southern norway, across european russia to the ural mountains.  the region lies between boreal forests/taiga in the north and the broadleaf belt in the south	the ecoregion is characterized by mixed forests dominated by oak (quercus robur), norway sprice (picea abies), and pine (pinus sylvestris) in drier areas.  the climate of kologrivski forest is humid continental climate, cool summer (koppen climate classification (dfb)). this climate is characterized by large swings in temperature, both diurnally and seasonally, with mild summers and cold, snowy winters.  the average temperature in january is , and  in july.   kologrivsky is in the zone
where precipitation is higher than evaporation.  average annual precipitation is 540 / mm per year.   the average period of snow cover is 170 days, ending in the first three weeks of april, with the soil thawed by the first week of may.  typical snow cover is 50-70 cm in the northern sector, 40-60 cm in the southern sector.  the average growing season is 160 days.  flora and fauna  the forest protects communities of 'southern' taiga, exemplified by dark needle conifers: fir, spruce and siberian pine.  due to intensive commercial logging in the kologrivsky area in the 20th century, this type of forest has been giving way to successional species of birch, aspen and alder.  (before 1960, 80% of the area was covered with dark conifers.)  today, most of the reserve is forested, but the actual islands of old-growth southern taiga are relatively small and scattered.  the largest virgin stand of southern taiga in the kologrivsky reserve is only 918 ha.  a key purpose of the reserve, therefore, is to regenerate the surrounding forest from commercial clear-cutting, through the secondary forest types and ultimately preserve a mature forest.  the large northern sector (the kologrivsky site) is predominantly a spruce forest, where virgin stands are inter-mingled with second-growth forests  on the sites of windfalls and wildfires.  the largest spruces are  in height; the lower stories include norway maple (acer platanoides) and mountain elm.  some logging was done on a selective basis 75-100 years ago, but the under story was left intact; these plots have the highest biodiversity today.  the kologrivsky sector is scientifically useful for studying the dynamics of forest regeneration under various conditions.  scientists on the reserve have recorded 495 species of vascular plants.  the animal life of the reserve is a mixture of boreal forest and mixed deciduous forest.  although the fauna is mostly representative of the kostroma region, there are recently introduced species.  the terrain, with many small slopes and soft soil favors burrowing animals such as shrews, moles, and badgers; and the extensive network of small streams and ponds supports large populations of beaver, mink and otter.  the sharp continental climate with cold winters reduces the number of wintering birds and large mammals.  the small number of swamps in the reserve limits waterfowl.  extensive fields of ref bilberry do support some
birds and bears.  the fauna of the reserve is still little understood: significant scientific studies by staff only began in the 1980s, and the first inventory of ords was not made until the year 2000.   the bird inventory recorded 172 species.  ecoeducation and access as a strict nature reserve, the kologrivski forest reserve is mostly closed to the general public, although scientists and those with 'environmental education' purposes can make arrangements with park management for visits.   there are, however, several ecotourist' routes in the reserve.  these require permits to be obtained in advance, and include numerous hiking trails, an 'open air museum', and a multi-day rafting excursion.  the main office is in the city of kologriv.  see also   list of russian nature reserves (class 1a 'zapovedniks')  national parks of russia  alexander bichkov (1953-2008), lived alone in the forest for nearly 20 years  references  external links   map of kologrivski forest reserve, protectedplanet  nature reserves in russia 2006 establishments in russia protected areas established in 2006
sphingomonas pseudosanguinis  is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas, which has been isolated from a humidifier in germany.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas pseudosanguinis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  pseudosanguinis bacteria described in 2007
richmond lodge was a historic property located near the river thames in richmond, london, in what is now known as old deer park, lands belonging to the historic richmond palace. it was located close to the king's observatory. it should not be confused with pembroke lodge or the white lodge, both in richmond park, or a variety of other similarly-named properties.  it was owned from 1704 by the irish aristocrat the james butler, 2nd duke of ormonde, who completely rebuilt the house. it was known at the time as ormonde lodge. ormonde was a leading tory politician and soldier who was appointed captain-general in 1711 to replace the duke of marlborough in command of anglo-dutch forces in the war of the spanish succession. following the hanoverian succession in 1714 he was dismissed by the new regime. in 1715, facing impeachment by parliament, ormonde fled to paris, where he joined the jacobite pretender to the throne james. he was attainted and all his properties including the lodge were seized by the government.  in 1718 the estate was purchased by george, prince of wales, who later became george ii. following a dispute with his father george i, part of the wider whig split, the prince and his wife caroline of ansbach were forced to leave st james's palace. during the winter months they established a separate court at leicester house, westminster, but their summers were spent at richmond. the writer, cleric and satirist jonathan swift visited the couple there in 1726 and 1727 but was saddened by memories of happier early times spent there with his friend ormonde.  george iii inherited the property, and spent part of his honeymoon with charlotte of mecklenburg-strelitz there in 1761. from 1764 to 1771 it became the main country residence of the royal family where they would spend june to october, but the rapidly growing size of the family meant it was too small. it was merged into the kew gardens estate, and was demolished in 1772, being replaced eventually as the main royal residence in the gardens by kew palace.  references  sources  black, jeremy. george iii: america's last king. yale university press, 2008.  dennison, matthew. the first iron lady: a life of caroline of ansbach. harpercollins, 2017.  desmond, ray. kew: the history of the royal botanic gardens. random house, 1998.  hammond, eugene. jonathan swift: our dean. rowman & littlefield, 2016.  former buildings and structures in the london borough of richmond upon thames royal
residences in the london borough of richmond upon thames richmond, london demolished buildings and structures in london buildings and structures demolished in 1772
the hiram c. smith house is a historic residence located west of winterset, iowa, united states.  smith was one of the earliest settlers in this township, having acquired the deed to the  farm between 1854 and 1856. this house is an early example of a vernacular limestone farmhouse.  it is a 1½-story, one-room structure composed of rubble stone quarried on the farm and laid in a random bond.  its construction is attributed to smith, as its rough and simple construction do not reflect the work of any of the stonemasons working in the county at the time it was built.  the house was listed on the national register of historic places in 1987.  his milking shed, built about the same time and on the same property, is also listed on the national register.  references  houses completed in 1856 vernacular architecture in iowa houses in madison county, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa houses on the national register of historic places in iowa
the eparchy of banja luka () is an eparchy (diocese) of the serbian orthodox church with its seat in banja luka, bosnia and herzegovina. it has jurisdiction over the north-western regions of bosnia and herzegovina.  history until 1900, territory of this eparchy  belonged to the eastern orthodox metropolitanate of dabar and bosnia, which in turn was under the ecclesiastical jurisdiction of the ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople. upon the request of the eastern orthodox serbs of this region, new eparchy of banja luka was created in that year, with seat in the city of banja luka. bishop of banja luka was granted the honorary title of metropolitan, as was the custom in ecumenical patriarchate of constantinople.   in 1918, all orthodox bishops in bosnia and herzegovina reached a unanimous decision to join with other serbian ecclesiastical provinces into united serbian orthodox church. arrangements with the ecumenical patriarchate were made, and the canonical process of unification was completed in 1920. since then, eparchy of banja luka has been part of the serbian orthodox church.  heads  monasteries gomionica monastery liplje monastery stuplje monastery  see also list of the eparchies of the serbian orthodox church  references  bibliography  external links  serbian orthodox church   religious sees of the serbian orthodox church serbian orthodox church in bosnia and herzegovina religion in republika srpska dioceses established in the 19th century
raymond james terrell (born 5 may 1953) is a retired english swimmer who won seven medals at the british commonwealth games.  swimming career he competed at the 1968 summer olympics in the 200 m and 400 m individual medley and in the 4×200 m freestyle relay, but failed to reach the finals.  he represented england and won four medals, a double silver in the 2000 metres backstroke and 400 metres medley and a double bronze in the freestyle relay events, at the 1970 british commonwealth games in edinburgh, scotland. four years later he won a further three medals for the england team, at the 1974 british commonwealth games in christchurch, new zealand; a silver and bronze in the freestyle relay events and a bronze medal in the 400 metres medley.  at the asa national british championships he won the 1970 400 metres freestyle title,  the 200 metres medley title in 1972 and the 400 metres medley title in 1972.  references  1953 births living people sportspeople from southampton olympic swimmers of great britain swimmers at the 1968 summer olympics english male freestyle swimmers male backstroke swimmers male medley swimmers swimmers at the 1970 british commonwealth games swimmers at the 1974 british commonwealth games commonwealth games medallists in swimming commonwealth games silver medallists for england commonwealth games bronze medallists for england
svein ørnulf ellingsen (13 july 1929 - 5 april 2020) was a norwegian visual artist and hymnist.  biography ellingsen was born in kongsberg to fritz frølich ellingsen and karoline enge. his books include the poetry collections det skjulte nærvær and noen ma vake, both from 1978, the children's book regler, rim og revestreker from 1986, and the poetry collections vart øye ser mot betlehem (1987) and det finnes en dyrebar rose (1989). the hymnal norsk salmebok 2013 has included 58 of his hymns, including fifteen translations. he received the fritt ord honorary award in 1992, and was decorated knight, first class of the order of st. olav in 1995.  he died on 5 april 2020.  references  external links     (record label)  1929 births 2020 deaths people from kongsberg 20th-century norwegian male artists 21st-century norwegian male artists norwegian hymnwriters norwegian government scholars
lisa mayer (born 2 may 1996) is a german sprinter. she competed in the 200 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships.  international competitions  1did not finish in the final  personal bests outdoor 100 metres - 11.14 (-0.2  m/s, berlin 2017) 200 metres - 22.64 (+1.7 m/s, weinheim 2017) indoor 60 metres - 7.12 (karlsruhe 2018) 200 metres - 23.30 (leipzig 2016)  references  external links  1996 births living people german female sprinters people from giessen athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of germany european athletics championships medalists olympic female sprinters
gennaro sanfelice (1622 - 19 february 1694) was a roman catholic prelate who served as archbishop of cosenza (1661-1694).  biography gennaro sanfelice was born in naples, italy in 1622. on 21 november 1661, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as archbishop of cosenza. on 30 november 1661, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-bishop of sabina, with ottaviano carafa, titular archbishop of patrae, and emilio bonaventura altieri, bishop of camerino, serving as co-consecrators. he served as archbishop of cosenza until his death on 19 february 1694.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic archbishops bishops appointed by pope alexander vii clergy from naples 1622 births 1694 deaths
woodley airways was a carrier based in anchorage, alaska, united states. the airline was founded in 1932 by art woodley (died 30 may 1990, aged 84).  woodley airways operated a flight from anchorage to nome. it was a one plane one pilot operation. it quickly caught on as an alternative to a dogsled trip. woodley charged customers 150 dollars; the sled trip took 750 dollars. in 1943 woodley airways tried to change their name to alaska airlines as that name went to star air service. in 1945 woodley airways changed its name to pacific northern airlines.  see also   list of defunct airlines of the united states  references        airlines based in alaska 1932 establishments in alaska airlines established in 1932 defunct airlines of the united states airlines disestablished in 1945 1945 disestablishments in alaska
maricopa mountains are a range of mountains in maricopa county, arizona.the range runs from  and extends southeastward to . the range is protected as the north maricopa mountains wilderness and south maricopa mountains wilderness, divided by arizona state route 238 all within the sonoran desert national monument.  see also   list of mountain ranges of arizona  references  external links  north maricopa mountains wilderness blm south maricopa mountains wilderness blm  mountain ranges of maricopa county, arizona
andre honnorat (10 december 1868 - 24 july 1950) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1910 to 1921, and as a member of the french senate from 1921 to 1945, representing basses-alpes.  together with  emile deutsch de la meurthe, he created the cite internationale universitaire de paris (ciup), and there is also a residence there which is named after him.  references  1868 births 1950 deaths politicians from paris independent radical politicians democratic republican alliance politicians members of the 10th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 11th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 12th chamber of deputies of the french third republic french senators of the third republic senators of alpes-de-haute-provence
aryantaj tajbakhsh (born 20 october 1990) is an english professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for kings langley.  club career tajbakhsh, who was known as aryan taj early in his career, was in the youth team at kentish town before joining northwood. he signed for barnet at the start of the 2008-09 season and appeared on the bench for first team games, but did not play. later that season he played for potters bar town and maidenhead united, before moving to turkey to play for antalyaspor in the super lig. tajbakhsh never played for the first team, but he did play 12 times for the reserves in a2 ligi, before a spell on loan at yalovaspor (tff third league) and then pendikspor (tff second league). tajbakhsh then played for braintree town, billericay town, harrow borough, farnborough, maidenhead united, walton & hersham, potters bar town, st albans city, aveley, cheshunt, ware, vcd athletic, enfield town, hendon and cray wanderers. while at enfield town, tajbakhsh played in matches while suspended, leading to a three-point deduction for town which led them to miss out on the isthmian league playoffs in 2014-15, despite town identifying that aryan's former clubs had not correctly reported his personal details when informing the fa of bookings incurred when he was playing for them.  tajbakhsh joined crawley town on 12 july 2016, and made his professional debut for crawley on 30 august 2016, in an efl trophy match against colchester united. on 17 february 2017, tajbakhsh joined national league south side wealdstone on a 28-day loan. a day later, he scored on his wealdstone debut in their 1-0 victory over margate, netting in the 45th minute. on 17 march 2017, his loan spell at wealdstone was extended for a further month. tajbakhsh left crawley at the end of his contract in june 2018. he rejoined braintree on trial in july 2018, scoring twice in a pre-season win over ipswich town. he signed for dover athletic in august 2018. he moved to maidstone united in november 2018, and to dulwich hamlet in february 2019. tajbakhsh joined potters bar town in august 2021, before joining kings langley in february 2022.  international career tajbakhsh was called up to the barawa football team for the
2018 conifa world football cup.  personal life tajbakhsh is of turkish and iranian descent. his brother noyan (born 1996) is also a footballer and was in the youth team at fenerbahce.  career statistics  references  1990 births living people english footballers northwood f.c. players barnet f.c. players potters bar town f.c. players maidenhead united f.c. players antalyaspor footballers yalovaspor footballers pendikspor footballers braintree town f.c. players billericay town f.c. players harrow borough f.c. players farnborough f.c. players walton & hersham f.c. players st albans city f.c. players aveley f.c. players cheshunt f.c. players ware f.c. players vcd athletic f.c. players enfield town f.c. players hendon f.c. players cray wanderers f.c. players crawley town f.c. players wealdstone f.c. players dover athletic f.c. players maidstone united f.c. players dulwich hamlet f.c. players  kings langley f.c. players national league (english football) players isthmian league players southern football league players association football midfielders footballers from hendon english expatriate footballers english expatriate sportspeople in turkey expatriate footballers in turkey english people of turkish descent english people of iranian descent english football league players sportspeople of iranian descent
ho krai railway station is a railway station located in ho krai subdistrict, bang mun nak district, phichit. it is located 303.500 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  ordinary 201/202 bangkok-phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 211/212 bangkok-taphan hin-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
woolwich east by-election may refer to one of two by-elections held for the british house of commons constituency of woolwich east:  1921 woolwich east by-election 1931 woolwich east by-election 1951 woolwich east by-election  see also woolwich east (uk parliament constituency) woolwich west by-election (disambiguation)
prince of wolf () is a 2016 taiwanese romance television series created and produced by sanlih e-television. starring derek chang, amber an, samuel gu, katie chen and simon hsueh as the main cast. filming began on june 9, 2016 and wrapped up on 28 october, 2016. first original broadcast began on july 3, 2016 on ttv airing every sunday night at 10:00-11:30 pm.  synopsis  the story begins with du zhe ming (zhang yu zheng) walking between the forest in the deep woods and his parents are searching for him. while wandering he saves a female wolf from harm. du zhe ming is waiting for his parents but due to heavy rains his parents couldn't find him and the officer claim him to be dead. seeing du zhe ming alone the wolf king decides to take zhe ming into the wolf tribe. after some years a grown du zhe ming (derek chang) is living among the wolves knows how to hunt and survive in the wild without forgetting his human traits. tian mi mi (amber an) is an amateur photographer who decides to go to wolf mountain to take pictures of the breathtaking landscape. when tian mi mi falls into a valley, zhe ming saves her and takes her back to his cave. fascinated by the first woman he has encountered, zhe ming is convinced that mi mi is his female wolf mate and is mesmerized by her. so, zhe ming decides to leave his wolf life behind to follow mi mi back into the human world with his wolf.  in the human world zhe ming starts living with mi mi and her family. mi mi teach him to live human life and even makes him join in her office. mi mi works in a company under jian hao wei (samuel gu). he is an adopted son of jiang ping (john) and wen pei yi (mandy), they are the parents of du zhe ming. zhe ming encounters hao wei showing his love interest towards mi mi which makes a love triangle fight between them. but mi mi falls in love with zhe ming due to his innocence.  mandy buys a gift and celebrates zhe ming birthday as every year in memory of her son with the faith that he will return. soon john finds out about zhe ming existence and tries to keep him away from his company and family as he is the real heir which he does not want hao wei to lose. he plots many chaos against zhe ming and makes him lead back to the forest. when chen shu pei (lin min chen) finds out the
real identity of zhe ming, she reveals about it to mandy. with mi mi they go to the wolf mountain to bring zhe ming back. after arriving back zhe ming started staying with his family and reveals to his father that he did not forget his sin back in the childhood where john knowingly leaves zhe ming in between the forest. hao wei becomes furious about zhe ming handling the company and receiving more love and faith from his grandfather. zhe ming arrange marriage is fixed with chen shu pei which allows john to separate him from mi mi. but with the help of their friends they conquer all the misunderstanding between them.  john's every chaos against zhe ming starts failing and hao wei too left him and started supporting zhe ming after knowing the real intention of his father. john kills zhe ming's wolf in the cave and plots a plan to kill zhe ming too with an accident to end his problem but fails it by harming hao wei. in the hospital john confess to mandy and her father about all his sins and also reveals that hao wei is his own son with his love. mandy is furious with him but zhe ming forgives him.  mi mi and zhe ming got married but stays separately for her career and after completing her work she returns to zhe ming in the party. chen shu pei and hao wei starts developing feelings for each other. in the end zhe ming and his son walks between the trees of the wolf mountain but soon he disappear while zhe ming was talking to mi mi in phone. when mi mi and zhe ming starts searching all over the forest they ends up finding their son and zhe ming's wolf alive.  cast  main cast derek chang 杜軒睿 as du zhe ming 杜澤明（wolf） zhang yu zheng 張育誠 as childhood zhe ming amber an 安心亞 as tian mi mi 田蜜蜜  古斌 as jian hao wei/du hao wei 簡浩維/杜浩維  陳語安 as tian zi zi 田滋滋 simon hsueh 薛仕凌 as jiang ping 江平（john）  林明禎 as chen shu pei 陳舒裴  supporting cast  陳博正 as tian min gui 田閩貴 yang chieh-mei 楊潔玫 as liu
mei lian 劉美蓮 yang lie 楊烈 as du bai quan 杜百全  林煒 as du qi hong 杜奇宏  謝瓊煖 as wen pei yi 溫佩儀（mandy）  王琄 as mrs. wu fish lin 鲶魚哥 as huang shen nong 黃神農 huang zi wen 匡自文 as li shi zhen 李時真  cameos  蕭景鴻 as huntsman  ?? as jia hong 家宏  李國超 as mr. zhang  黃錦雯 as mrs. zhang ?? as zhang xiao bao 張小寶 zhong lun li 鍾倫理 as old wang 老王 ?? as maggie lin jing zhe 林靖哲 as david wu jia wei 吳珈瑋 as lucy  梁家榕 as jian mei hui 簡美惠  劉紀範 as penny akio chen 陳慕義 as xu guo long 許國隆 su yi jing 蘇意菁 as su li fang 蘇麗芳 ?? as xu xiao zhi 許小志  高盟傑 as scrivener li zhu yong de 朱永德 as doctor zhu  陳玉玫 as lisa  soundtrack love magic 愛戀魔法 by bii 畢書盡 stars 滿天星 by dino lee 李玉璽 funky boy by bii 畢書盡 i will miss you by bii 畢書盡 sweet little baby by bii 畢書盡 kiss me by amber an 安心亞 magnifier 放大鏡 by amber an 安心亞 friends 朋友 by wakin chau 周華健 lucy bear 玩具熊 by dino lee 李玉璽  broadcast  episode ratings competing dramas on rival channels airing at the same time slot were
: ctv - nie xiaoqian, uncontrollably fond, jealousy incarnate ftv - the king of drama  : the average rating calculation does not include special episode.  awards and nominations  references  external links prince of wolf ttv website   prince of wolf settv website     2016 taiwanese television series debuts 2016 taiwanese television series endings taiwan television original programming sanlih e-television original programming
krzysztof markiewicz nom de guerre czort, was an officer of polish underground resistance movement during world war ii in the rank of podporucznik (second lieutenant) of the ak okreg wołyn cooperating with the polish bataliony chłopskie partisans in the defence of volhynia. he was brutally murdered as a peace envoy on 10 july 1943  by the ukrainian insurgent army (upa) during the massacres of poles.  circumstances surrounding murder the polish peace envoy representing ak and bch arrived on 7-8 july 1943 in the village of kustycze. sent without military escort by peace advocate kazimierz banach of the government delegation for poland, the envoy included notable poet and bch officer zygmunt rumel fluent in polish and ukrainian, krzysztof markiewicz from ak, and the horse carriage driver witold dobrowolski. they were met by warlord jusif stelmaszczuk - wrote ratter - (stelmaschuk; see юріи стельмащук, uk) who arrested them on the spot. after three days of extreme torture, they were executed on 11 july 1943 by having their limbs ripped apart by horses in a medieval style.  the public torture execution of lieutenant krzysztof markiewicz in kustycze near turzysk occurred one day before the largest assault on the polish civilian targets, launched at dusk on 11 july 1943 by the death squads of oun-upa aided by ukrainian nationalists. in total, some 125 villages were attacked on that day across the counties of horochow, włodzimierz wołynski and kowel, with 10 more in 14-15 july, and 37 more in 16-18 july 1943.  notes  1943 deaths home army members massacres of poles in volhynia ukrainian insurgent army
the old town mall or oldtown mall is an abandoned outdoor pedestrian shopping mall in the old town neighborhood of baltimore, maryland. the mall contains 64 stores, the majority of which are closed. the area has seen many periods of revival and decline in the past 200 years since its opening, and there are currently plans by developers in the area to revitalize the mall.  history  old town and gay street started to become a retail area when the city of baltimore built the bel air market in 1818. the sixth market to be constructed, bel air was designed to be a relief farmers market to serve the increasing commercial operations surrounding the area. the market helped boost business in old town, and the area became a diverse, bustling middle-class neighborhood, and the proximity to the city center made it an ideal place for families and downtown workers to live. isaac benesch's great store was here. but, when the post-war era beckoned families to the suburbs, gay street suffered greatly. the population near the street fell, and old town became one of the poorer areas of the city. without its customer base, the shops on the street were forced to close or adapt to the new customer demographic.  redevelopment and decline the baltimore riot of 1968 was a turning point in the area. the city of baltimore used the devastation as a way to revitalize gay street. developers decided to convert the street into a pedestrian-only zone and name it the old town mall. the street was repaved with bricks; planters, street lamps, and trees were added; and even a fountain was installed in the center along with a clock tower that would bear the name of the mall. more than $1.7 million had been spent on the project. in the late 60s, the area opened with "much fanfare" with government officials from across the country in attendance. one newspaper wrote that "good things are happening in old town". but, by the 1980s, the area had already started resembling what it looked like before the revitalization, due to the fact that the city didn't remedy the high unemployment and poverty in old town. a few unsuccessful attempts were made to bring life back to the area, one involved tearing down the bel air market to build a parking lot in hopes that a major grocery store chain would build a location at the mall. the area has been mostly unchanged since then.  the mall once contained a  kaufman's department store in the former benesch building, the only anchor. today a haunted house operates from this building
each october.   on march 25, 2015, two men were shot in the afternoon hours at the mall. later, police arrested two men in connection with the shootings.  restoration plans starting in 2016, developers from the baltimore area emerged with plans to restore the area, capitalizing on the proximity to johns hopkins hospital. some plans include restoring gay street through the mall to increase business opportunities from car traffic. the redeveloped site could include new housing, office, and commercial space, and it could also include a farmer's market.  references  old town, baltimore shopping malls in maryland
the hazrat sultan mosque (; ) is a friday mosque in nur-sultan, kazakhstan. it is the largest mosque in central asia.  construction after the suggestion from president of kazakhstan nursultan nazarbayev  mosque named "hazret sultan", which means "holy sultan". as well known, "hazret sultan" - one of the epithets of sufi sheikh khoja ahmed yasavi, author of "divan-i hikmet", whose mausoleum is located in turkistan.  construction of the mosque "hazret sultan" started in astana in june 2009. in different periods from 1000 to 1500 workers have been involved in the construction of the mosque. hazret sultan mosque was opened on july 6, 2012 at 12:30, which supplemented the list of unique objects of the capital.  overview the building was constructed in classical islamic style with traditional kazakh ornaments. located on the right bank of the yesil river the mosque is adjacent to the palace of peace and reconciliation, the monument "kazakh eli" and the independence square. it can accommodate five thousand worshipers, and on holidays - up to 10 thousand people. the area of the mosque across more than 11 hectares and construction area of 17,700 square meters. hazret sultan has the largest dome in kazakhstan with the height of 51 meters and a diameter at the base of the dome 28.1 meters. the mosque also has eight small domes with diameters of 10.45 and 7.6 meters, and peaks - 33.46 and 25, 25 meters. 4 minarets with the height of 77 meters are located in the corners of the mosque. according to the architectural plan, the temple should crown the 80-meter spire with a crescent directed strictly towards mecca. as the functionality of the object, it may be noted that the building provides space for bathing ritual and wedding, halls to read the koran and sitting in educational groups.  see also  islam in kazakhstan  references  2012 establishments in kazakhstan mosques completed in 2012 mosques in nur-sultan
lu xun (魯迅) (1881 - 1936) was a chinese author, poet, and essayist.  lu xun may also refer to:  lu xun (three kingdoms) (陸遜) (183 - 245), chinese politician and eastern wu military leader
the australian national travel association (1929-2001) was a semi-government industry organisation which promoted tourism and travel in australia.  establishment the australian national travel association was formed in 1929 at the onset of the great depression by sir charles lloyd jones (1878-1958), merchant and patron of the arts (who became director of its board of management). most states had already, or soon had, tourist bureaux though their budgets were insufficient. prime minister stanley bruce announced the formation of the national organisation on wednesday 1 may 1929, allocating £100,000, obtained mostly from tourist industries for australian overseas publicity.  operation  the organisation was put under the control of a committee of representatives of the principal contributing bodies, comprising harold w. clapp, chairman of victorian railway commissioners, d. i. dowell, representing british and foreign shipping interests, c. w. wilson, proprietor of scott's hotel, melbourne, on behalf of australian hotels, and c. lloyd jones, of david jones ltd., sydney, for australia's general business interests. in addition representatives were appointed to england and america,  to 'make vigorous contact with travel-selling agencies through the english-speaking world'. h. c. fenton became representative in great britain in grand buildings, trafalgar square, london, and the association's representative in u.s.a. and canada a.h. o'connor worked from an office in the adam grant building at 114 sansome street, san francisco.  in 1956 the first managing director of the australian national travel association, charles holmes, appointed west australian award-winning journalist basil atkinson to reopen the first anta office abroad since the war, in san francisco, to promote australia as a tourist destination for americans. after a successful advertising campaign, atkinson was recalled to be general manager of anta, reorganising operations and winning increased government financial support which supported the opening of an office in london, followed by offices in wellington and new york. in order to allay perceptions of competition between the states and the national organisation atkinson arranged for all states and two government agencies to have representation on the anta board.  marketing from its inception the association marketed creatively, first commissioning posters featuring striking images and simple slogans from australia's leading poster designers (some now iconic, like trompf's bondi beach) including percy trompf, james northfield and gert sellheim to attract international tourists largely ignorant of australia.  subsequently, in 1934, the anta board, under acting chairman charles lloyd jones, established a monthly travel magazine walkabout which
continued publication until 1974. it attracted widespread advertising support from tourism businesses and promoted aspects of australia of which even its own citizens would have been unaware. it was assertively australian in its ethos but took cues from other popular magazines of the period, such as the united states' national geographic magazine, and life.  from august 1946, walkabout also doubled as the official journal of the newly formed australian geographical society (ags), founded with a £5,000 grant from anta, its banner subscript  reading 'journal of the australian geographical society'. this role is now filled by australian geographic magazine.  later it became 'australia's way of life magazine' when supported by the australian national publicity association and later the australian tourist commission.  reorganisation an investigation of tourism was commissioned from the american firm harris, kerr, forster by anta managing director basil atkinson. their 345-page report, entitled australia's travel and tourist industry 1965 and known colloquially as the `hkf report' was presented to the anta in september 1965. this was the first comprehensive survey of the travel and tourism industry to be carried out in australia.  on its recommendations federal parliament passed the australian tourist commission act, resulting in the association's major function, tourism marketing, being incorporated into a statutory authority, the australian tourist commission (atc) which provided for the promotional functions of anta to be taken over from july 1967, with atkinson being appointed its first chief executive.  anta maintained its representation of tourism stakeholders and became the australian tourism industry association in 1985, prompted by its growing industry potential, and then was renamed the tourism council australia in 1995.  however, in early 2001 it was placed in receivership, to be replaced the tourism task force, established under the hawke labor government in the 1980s, and the australian tourist commission.  references  independent government agencies of australia transport organisations based in australia
irne philip herbst (born 4 may 1993) is a south african rugby union player, currently playing with italian side benetton in the pro14. his regular position is lock.  rugby career  schoolboy rugby  herbst was born in witbank and earned a call-up to represent mpumalanga at primary school level at the under-13 craven week in 2006. at high school level, he attended hoerskool waterkloof in pretoria, where he was chosen to represent the  at the under-18 craven week in 2011. he was included in a south africa schools squad that beat their counterparts from france 21-14 in august 2011.  youth and varsity cup rugby  after high school, he joined the blue bulls academy, making nine appearances for a  side that reached the final of the 2012 under-19 provincial championship, where they lost to .  he was selected in the south africa under-20 squad that played in the 2013 irb junior world championship held in france. he started all five of their matches in the tournament, scoring a try in their semi-final defeat to wales, a result which eliminated south africa from the competition, eventually finishing third after beating new zealand in their final match.  herbst returned to domestic action in south africa by making twelve appearances for the  team in the 2013 under-21 provincial championship. he scored one try in their defeat to  as his side reached the final, where they lost to the same opposition.  he played in the 2014 varsity cup competition for pretoria-based university side , making four appearances, and then made a further eleven starts for the blue bulls u21s in the 2013 edition of the under-21 provincial championship. in a repeat of the 2013 final, they again faced western province, but turned the tables on this occasion, winning the match 20-10 to be crowned champions.  herbst's 2015 season again started with him representing  in the varsity cup, where he made seven starts. he was also named in a varsity cup dream team at the conclusion of the tournament and played in their match against the south africa under-20 squad as they prepared for the 2015 world rugby under 20 championship. however, he then suffered a knee injury that kept him out for the entire season.  he made his return in 2016, making his domestic first class debut in the  defeat to  in the 2016 currie cup qualification series.  references  south african rugby union players living people 1993 births people from witbank rugby union locks blue bulls players south
africa under-20 international rugby union players southern kings players benetton rugby players
sarawak football association under-21s or sometimes called sarawak b team, is the most senior of sarawak's youth teams. they play in the malaysian president's cup.  they play their home matches at the sarawak stadium's field c or d. the under-21s are managed by abdul jalil ramli, with pengiran bala as assistant coach and also abu bakar amran as fitness coach.  club officials  team management table as updated on 10 july 2019  under-21s  references  external links  sarawak fa official site  sarawak crocs official site  ultrasarawak.com peminat sarawak fa  youth and academy malaysian reserve football teams football academies in malaysia 1985 establishments in malaysia
penoyre house, battle, powys, wales is a nineteenth century country house.  designed by anthony salvin for colonel john lloyd vaughan watkins, it was built between 1846-8.  in an italianate style, it is described by mark girouard as "salvin's most ambitious classical house".  the enormous cost of the house almost bankrupted the family and it was sold only 3 years after colonel watkins's death.  from 1947, the house was in institutional use, and was converted to apartments in the early twenty-first century.  the building is grade ii* listed.  history  john lloyd vaughan watkins (1802-65) was a nineteenth century welsh liberal politician who sat member of parliament for brecon. and was high sheriff of brecknockshire and lord lieutenant of brecknockshire.  watkins inherited a late eighteenth century house from his father, the reverend thomas watkins, and engaged salvin to undertake a complete rebuilding from 1846-8.  the cost of the house alone was over £33,000 and allibone records that watkins was obliged to "close (it) and live cheaply in a local hotel."  only three years after his death in 1865, the house was sold.  privately owned from 1868 to 1947, the house was then used as a school, the clubhouse to a golf club, a nursing home, an hotel and a rehabilitation centre.  in the early twenty-first century, the house was converted to apartments.  architecture the house is designed in an italianate style, echoing sir charles barry's trentham park and thomas cubitt's osbourne house.  girouard calls it "salvin's most ambitious classical house". it has a three-storey main block, a "colossal" entrance tower with a belvedere top, and a balancing conservatory wing which had a glass-domed roof, although this was replaced in 1899.  notes  references        country houses in powys grade ii* listed buildings in powys anthony salvin
this is a list of foreign players in the indian super league. the following players: are considered foreign, i.e., outside india: a player is considered foreign if he is not eligible to play for the national team of india. more specifically, if a player has been capped on international level, the national team is used; if he has been capped by more than one country, the highest level (or the most recent) team is used.  if a player has not been capped on international level, his country of birth is used.  up to now, 86 different nations have been represented in indian super league.  current foreign players  indian super league club could register a maximum of six and a minimum of five foreign players with at least one player of afc affiliated nationality.  foreign players  asia (afc)  africa (caf)  europe (uefa)  north and central america, caribbean (concacaf)  south america (conmebol)  oceania (ofc)  see also  list of indian super league records and statistics   list of indian super league seasons   list of indian super league owners   list of indian super league head coaches   indian super league attendance   list of indian super league hat-tricks   list of foreign football players in india  references  isl players, foreign indian super league lists india   association football player non-biographical articles
the ilha do ameixal area of relevant ecological interest () is an area of relevant ecological interest in the state of sao paulo, brazil.  location  the ilha do ameixal area of relevant ecological interest (arie) lies in the municipality of peruibe, sao paulo. it has an area of . the arie covers ameixal island in the una do prelado river near its mouth on the atlantic ocean. the itingucu state park lies to the west, north and east of this section of the river, and the barra do una sustainable development reserve lies to the south of the island.  environment  altitude ranges from  above sea level. temperatures range from  with an average of . average annual rainfall is . the island is covered by mangrove vegetation. it is in the atlantic forest biome.  history  the ilha do ameixal area of relevant ecological interest was created by presidential decree 91.889 of 5 november 1985. it is administered by the federal chico mendes institute for biodiversity conservation (icmbio). it is classed as iucn protected area category iv (habitat/species management area). the conservation unit is part of the lagamar mosaic.  notes  sources  1985 establishments in brazil areas of relevant ecological interest of brazil protected areas of sao paulo (state)
the emily hornback house is a historic residence located in winterset, iowa, united states.  the hornbacks were a prominent family in town.  brothers george and james were in business with their father building wagons.  emily was married to one of the brothers, although it is unclear which one.  she bought this property on contract beginning in 1856 and acquired the title outright in 1860.  the house was built about the time she started to acquire the property.  she lost the property to land agents pitzer and knight in 1865.  the 1½-story limestone structure is composed of ashlar and rubble. it features chamfered rustication, an octagon-shaped stone chimney, and a full-length front porch with four ornately turned posts and spindles around the top.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1987.  references  houses completed in 1856 vernacular architecture in iowa houses in winterset, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa houses on the national register of historic places in iowa
the 1965 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1965 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 6-5 overall and 5-2 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by abe martin in his 13th year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas. they were invited to the sun bowl where they lost to texas western by a score of 13-12.  schedule  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
elizabeth hepple (born 7 july 1959) is an australian former cyclist. she was the first australian ever to take the podium at tour de france, placing third in 1988. she competed in the women's individual road race at the 1988 summer olympics. in the same year, she also placed third in the grande boucle feminine internationale and second in the giro d'italia femminile.  references  external links    1959 births living people australian female cyclists olympic cyclists of australia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
pepe guilavogui (born 2 june 1993) is a guinean football midfielder.  club career  fc vion zlate moravce - vrable guilavogui made his professional fortuna liga debut for vion zlate moravce against spartak myjava on 16 july 2016.  international career guilavogui represented the guinea u20s at the 2016 toulon tournament.  references  external links  fc spartak trnava official club profile  fortuna liga profile    eurofotbal profile  futbalnet profile  1993 births living people guinean footballers guinean expatriate footballers association football forwards rayo vallecano b players atletico madrid b players fc spartak trnava players fc vion zlate moravce players stade bordelais (football) players orihuela cf players slovak super liga players 2. liga (slovakia) players segunda division b players championnat national 2 players expatriate footballers in spain expatriate footballers in france expatriate footballers in slovakia guinean expatriate sportspeople in spain guinean expatriate sportspeople in france guinean expatriate sportspeople in slovakia sportspeople from conakry
raibwal is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
euripides ferreira (born 31 july 1966) is a brazilian former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people brazilian male cyclists olympic cyclists of brazil cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
guadua chacoensis is a species of clumping bamboo found in argentina, brazil, bolivia, paraguay, and uruguay.  references  external links    chacoensis grasses of south america grasses of argentina grasses of brazil
was a japanese rear-admiral and engineer. he was the only person who was posted as a director of the torpedo development division in yokosuka naval district of imperial japanese navy. he and his team designed and developed type 91 torpedo used in naval warfare in world war ii by imperial japanese navy.  early life and education seiji naruse was born as the second son of viscount masayasu naruse on december 26, 1893 in yokohama, japan. his father, masayasu was president of "the 15 bank" and was also managing other banks and companies. thus, he grew up in a wealthy environment with his brothers (seiichi naruse, shunsuke naruse etc), and graduated first higher school (:jp:第一高等学校 (旧制)).  he studied in tokyo imperial university (now university of tokyo), and majored weapons technology in faculty of engineering. in 1920 he graduated tokyo imperial university and entered imperial japanese navy as an engineer officer.  military career seiji naruse started his military career on july 21 (1920) in yokosuka naval district as an engineer of naval weapons. then, he was promoted to the position of assistant division chief at the kure naval arsenal on december 23, 1922.  the year 1925 was a major turning point for him. he was promoted to the position of development management officer in the imperial japanese navy technical department, and sent to the united kingdom from may 20, 1925 to october 15, 1926. the purpose of this tour of duty was obtaining aerial torpedo technology, which did not exist in japan at that time. therefore, he diligently visited arsenals in the uk.  after he returned, he began a project to develop the first (and last) domestic aerial torpedo. he started development of this aerial torpedo at the yokosuka naval arsenal on may 1, 1927. on december 1 (1930), he moved to the combined fleet for the examination of the prototype. finally, he engaged the production and subsequent deployment of the completed "type 91 torpedo" as the development management officer in the imperial japanese navy technical department from december 1, 1931.  he and his team continuously improved the type 91 torpedo at the yokosuka naval arsenal (from december 1, 1932), the kure naval arsenal (from july 1, 1936), and the yokosuka naval air technical arsenal (from june 15, 1940). there were multiple revisions. on april 1 (1943), the imperial japanese navy created the torpedo development division for him, and he worked as the director
of this new division until the end of world war ii.  during the world war ii, the type 91 torpedo was used as a main weapon for naval warfare, affixed to and deployed from the underbelly of aircraft.  dates of rank lieutenant junior grade (july 21, 1920) lieutenant (december 1, 1922) lieutenant commander (december 1, 1927) commander (november 15, 1933) captain (november 15, 1938) rear admiral (may 1, 1944)  post war on september 30 (1945), with the dissolution of the imperial japanese navy (following the surrender of japan), seiji naruse retired from his post. after retirement, he managed to convert the defunct arsenal site for japan's post-war industrial recovery. tokyu car corporation was a notable user of this site.  in 1952, along with the foundation of the technical research and development institute within the national safe agency, he worked at the 5th research center and handed his torpedo technology and expertise onto the next generation.  personal life seiji naruse married sumi nakamura (january 26, 1900 - december 23, 1994), who was a daughter of lieutenant general yujiro nakamura (:jp:中村雄次郎). together, they had three children.  family father: masayasu naruse (viscount, president of "the 15 bank") older brother: seiichi naruse (writer, professor of french literature in kyushu university) younger brother: shunsuke naruse (diplomat)  see also type 91 torpedo yokosuka naval air technical arsenal yokosuka naval district imperial japanese navy technical research and development institute  references  bibliography  "record of aerial torpedo development (航空魚雷ノート)", kyu-ichi kai, 1985  1893 births 1960 deaths imperial japanese navy admirals japanese admirals of world war ii 20th-century japanese engineers
neelum saran gour (born 12 october 1955) is an indian english writer of fiction that depicts north india's small towns and their cultural histories. she is the author of five novels, four collections of short stories and one work of literary non-fiction. she has edited a pictorial volume on the history and culture of the city of allahabad, where she lives and works, and has also translated one of her early novels into hindi.  early life and education born in allahabad, neelum saran gour is the child of a bengali mother and a hindiphone father and was exposed to an array of languages and cultural influences in her childhood. educated in st. mary's convent inter college, a school run by roman catholic nuns, she went on to study history, philosophy and english literature at the university of allahabad in the early nineteen seventies. in 1977, she was appointed lecturer in english in the department of english at the allahabad university and now holds the position of professor in her subject, english literature.  career  neelum saran gour's first writings were magazine stories published in indian literary magazines. managing director of penguin india, david davidar the solicited her for a volume of short stories. her debut collection grey pigeon and other stories was released by penguin india in 1993. she then won a writers' fellowship in britain from the charles wallace india trust. her next book, a novel, was titled speaking of '62 and was published by penguin in 1995. this was followed in 1997 by winter companions and other stories.   in 2002 appeared virtual realities and in 2005 two novels were published, sikandar chowk park by penguin, and messres dickens, doyle and wodehouse pvt. ltd. by halcyon books. her work was covered by routledge encyclopedia of post-colonial literatures, edited by eugene benson and l.w. conolly,  the cambridge encyclopaedia of women's writing, edited by lorna sage, germaine greer and elaine showalter, companion to indian fiction in english, edited by pier paolo piciucco, and indian english literature 1980 -2000 by m.k.naik and shyamala narayan. recent critical writings on her work are included in emerging south asian writers, edited by feroza jussawalla and deborah fillerup weagel and in contemporary fiction: an anthology of female writers, edited by vandana pathak, urmila dabir and shubha mishra.  in 2009, she published the pictorial volume allahabad where the rivers meet, edited by gour and published by marg publications. in 2010, penguin
-yatra published a hindi translation of gour's early novel speaking of 62, titled 62 ki baatein. 2011 saw the launch of song without end and other stories by penguin. a work of non-fiction followed in 2015, about the literary history of the allahabad university, three rivers and a tree - the story of allahabad university, published by rupa publications. this was followed, in the same year, by allahabad aria, also published by rupa publications and invisible ink, published in late 2015 by harpercollins. her latest novel is requiem in raga janki, published in june 2018 by penguin viking.  apart from these exclusively authored works, her work has appeared in numerous fiction and non-fiction anthologies like: desert in bloom- contemporary indian women's fiction in english, edited by meenakshi bharat,( pencraft international, 2004), growing up as a woman writer, edited by jasbir jain (sahitya akademi and sage publications 2007), the fear factor, edited by sharon rundle and meenakshi bharat (picador, 2009), only connect, edited by sharon rundle and meenakshi bharat (brass monkey, australia and rupa publications, india, 2014)), indian english and vernacular india, edited by makarand paranjape and g.j.v.prasad (pearson 2010), the creative process- seven essays,(the institute for research in interdisciplinary studies, 2013 )and learning non-violence, edited by gangeya mukherji (oxford university press, 2016).   gour's critical writings include raja rao's metaphysical trilogy,( kitab mahal, 1992) as also her book reviews for the indian review of books and for the times literary supplement. as a journalist she was a humour columnist for the allahabad page of the hindustan times. she has conducted creative writing workshops for the sahitya akademi and the central university of rajasthan, researched and worked on a bbc t.v. series who do you think you are? in which rupert penry-jones searched for his family history, aired internationally on 16 august 2010. her novel sikandar chowk park  was prescribed for study in the m.a. course of the charles university prague. her story a lane in lucknow is prescribed for study in the m.a. course of the u.g.c.'s e- pathshala project.  awards  2018 the hindu prize for fiction for requiem in raga janki.the prize was announced by n. ravi, publisher and former editor-in-chief of the hindu at the hindu lit for life festival held in chennai,
12 - 14 january 2019.  works  references  external links   neelum saran gour's website  ndtv t.v programme, just books covering sikandar chowk park  1955 births living people indian women novelists english literature academics university of allahabad faculty university of allahabad alumni english-language writers from india indian women short story writers 20th-century indian novelists 21st-century indian novelists 20th-century indian short story writers 21st-century indian short story writers writers from allahabad women writers from uttar pradesh novelists from uttar pradesh 20th-century indian women writers 21st-century indian women writers
zibechi is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  alfredo zibechi (1895-1958), uruguayan footballer raul zibechi (born 1952), uruguayan journalist, writer, militant, and political theorist
ricker pond state park is a state park in groton, vermont in the united states. it is one of seven state parks located in groton state forest. the park is just off vermont route 232.  the park provides public access to ricker pond, a  lake in central groton, and was developed in the 1930s by crews of the civilian conservation corps.   activities includes camping, motor boating, waterskiing, fishing, swimming, paddling, horseback riding, hiking, mountain biking, snowshoeing and cross-country skiing.  the park is open between the memorial day and columbus day weekends; fees are charged for day use and camping.  features ricker pond state park is located near the geographic center of the town of groton, on the east side of groton state forest, the state's second largest state forest.  ricker pond is a roughly teardrop-shaped body of water with its outlet at the southeastern end.  vermont route 232 runs roughly westward past the southeastern end, creating a triangular wedge of land between it and the southern shore of the pond.  the park facilities are located in that area.  the park entrance is at the western end of the park, with stone-posted gate and gatehouse, and ccc-built rangers' quarters nearby.  gravel roads provide access to three separate areas of the waterfront.  section a, the westernmost, has a loop of leanto camp sites and a boat launch.  section b is a tent camping area, and includes a 1938 ccc-built picnic pavilion and a sandy beach area.  section c, at the eastern end of the park, provides tent and trailer camping, and includes a small cabin that is available for rent.  in addition to the water-based facilities, the park provides access to the trail networks of the surrounding state forest.  the montpelier-wells river rail trail (cross vermont trail) runs through the middle of the park.  history the outlet of ricker pond was the site of one of the first industrial sites in groton, when edmund morse, one of the town's first settlers, built a sawmill and gristmill there in 1783.  he sold the mills to amaziah ricker in 1827, and they remained in operation by the ricker family until 1963.  construction of the railroad through the valley in the mid-19th century helped draw tourists to the area's scenic beauty.  the state began purchasing land around ricker pond in 1919.  the park was formally opened in 1933, its
early facilities developed by crews of the civilian conservation corps, a depression-era jobs program.  surviving elements built by the ccc include the basic road network, the central picnic pavilion and beach, the ranger quarters, and a number of surviving stone fireplaces.  the park was listed on the national register of historic places in 2002 in recognition of the historical significance of these elements.  see also national register of historic places listings in caledonia county, vermont  references  external links  official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of caledonia county, vermont groton, vermont historic districts on the national register of historic places in vermont national register of historic places in caledonia county, vermont protected areas established in 1938 1938 establishments in vermont
quarrie is the surname of the following people: bruce quarrie (1947-2004), english writer don quarrie (born 1951), jamaican sprinter george quarrie (1846-1926), manx poet kate quarrie, canadian politician  see also mcquarrie macquarrie  english-language surnames
millionaires mansions was a tv documentary produced by bafta-winning indus films and shown on british television channel 4 in 2016.  the documentary followed luxury interior design companies, such as juliettes interiors, when working on high-end projects for high net worth individuals and their homes.  channel 4 original programming 2016 british television series debuts
aeranthes carnosa is a species of orchid native to the east coast of madagascar.  references  carnosa orchids of madagascar
belarus participated in the junior eurovision song contest 2016. the belarusian entry for the 2016 contest in valletta, malta was selected through a national final organised by the belarusian broadcaster national state television and radio company of the republic of belarus (btrc). a national final of ten competing acts participated in a televised production where the winner was determined by a 50/50 combination of votes from jury members made up of music professionals and a public telephone vote. on 26 august 2016, alexander minyonok was selected to represent belarus with the song "musyka moikh pobed (music is my only way)".  background  prior to the 2016 contest, belarus had participated in the junior eurovision song contest thirteen times since its first entry at the inaugural contest in . belarus has won the contest twice in  with the song "my vmeste" performed by ksenia sitnik and again in  with the song "s druz'yami performed by alexey zhigalkovich. they hosted the  contest in minsk.  before junior eurovision  national final the national final took place on 26 august 2016, which saw ten competing acts participating in a televised production where the winner was determined by a 50/50 combination of both telephone vote and the votes of jury members made up of music professionals. alexander minyonok was selected to represent belarus with the song "musyka moikh pobed".  artist and song information  alexander minyonok alexander minyonok (, ; born 25 june 2003) is a young singer who represented belarus in the junior eurovision song contest 2016 with his song "musyka moikh pobed" (). he won the belarusian national final on 26 august 2016, receiving 2,624 telephone vote from the viewing public calculated as eight-points, and the maximum twelve-points from the jury members.  alexander, who is also called sasha, started singing professionally when he was eight. he is an artist of the belarusian dance band "sensation" and a student of the russian academy of popular music of igor krutoy. the young artist literally grew up behind the stage of the well-known belarusian festival "slavic bazaar", where his mother worked. from early childhood, he followed famous artists, including eurovision stars, and took part in many competitions in belarus.  alexander started singing solo in 2011. since then, he has performed a variety of musical styles, he dances, presents tv shows and also acts in films. he plays both the piano and the accordion, and plans to learn how to play the drums in future.  sasha
dreams of singing with bruno mars and justin timberlake. he is also a big fan of justin bieber and plans one day to perform in new york city's famous madison square garden. he believes that apart from the vocal skills, the main thing for a true artist is his charisma, kindness and intentions to give positive energy to audience.  in his spare time he loves hoverboarding, skateboarding, rollerblading, skating, cycling, snowboarding in winter, and of course playing football with friends. alexander also enjoys nature and watching films.  in 2017, sasha competed in the voice kids ukraine and finished runner-up.  musyka moikh pobed  "musyka moikh pobed" (, music of my victories) is a song by belarusian singer alexander minyonok. it will represent belarus during the junior eurovision song contest 2016. it is composed and written by kirill ermakov and roman kolodko.  at junior eurovision during the opening ceremony and the running order draw which took place on 14 november 2016, belarus was drawn to perform ninth on 20 november 2016, following poland and preceding ukraine.  final  voting during the press conference for the junior eurovision song contest 2016, held in stockholm, the reference group announced several changes to the voting format for the 2016 contest. previously, points had been awarded based on a combination of 50% national juries and 50% televoting, with one more set of points also given out by a 'kids' jury'. however, this year, points will be awarded based on a 50/50 combination of each country's adult and , to be announced by a spokesperson. for the first time since the inauguration of the contest the voting procedure will not include a public televote. following these results, three expert jurors will also announce their points from 1-8, 10, and 12. these professional jurors are: christer bjorkman, mads grimstad, and jedward.  references  junior eurovision song contest belarus 2016
ghost ship is the twelfth book in the numa files series, created by american author clive cussler. it was published in may 2014. the novel sees the numa team struggling to piece together the causation of a yacht disaster, which leads them into a shadowy conspiracy of state-backed cybercrime.  2014 american novels the numa files g. p. putnam's sons books collaborative novels
david anthony (born june 16, 1955) was a democratic member of the michigan house of representatives, representing part of the upper peninsula for four terms.  a graduate of northern michigan university, anthony was the u.p. regional representative for former united states senator carl levin.    1999-2018 served as director of community development and government affairs for the hannahville indian community. 1999 to present is a wine grape grower and owner of northern sun winery. he was also on the board of directors of the michigan youth in government program and the delta county habitat for humanity. 2016- board member michigan wine collaborative.  2001- michigan work force board for employment and training.  governor appointee  2013 - 2018 board of directors and president of the board of directors, alger delta electric cooperative association. elected position  2011- 2018 delta county economic development alliance board member  2010- 2018 u.p. state fair board member  2012 - 2018 citizens advisory council to the dnr.  western u.p.  2014 - 2018 regional prosperity initiative. central u.p.  2006-10 michigan grape and wine industry council. governor granholm appointee  2005 - 11 delta county area chamber of commerce board of directors.  2004 instructor, bay de noc community college.  2000 - 04 columnist u.p. business today  wrote a column for the monthly periodical.  2002- 2018 community action agency of delta, menominee, schoolcraft counties board member.  2001 - 2004 community foundation. board member.  1994-99 board member youth in government.  1987 - 90 taught at the delta county ymca.   taught martial arts to students of all ages.  references  1955 births living people people from marquette, michigan northern michigan university alumni michigan democrats members of the michigan house of representatives 20th-century american politicians
the following lists events that happened in 1934 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - asgeir asgeirsson, hermann jonasson  events  births 27 february - reynir karlsson, footballer (d. 2014) 24 march - arnor hannibalsson, philosopher and historian (d. 2012) 22 april - peter ronson, athlete (d. 2007) 5 june - vilhjalmur einarsson, athlete, iceland's first ever olympic medalist (d. 2019) 9 june - valbjorn þorlaksson, track and field athlete (d. 2009). 12 july - kristinn gunnlaugsson, footballer (d. 2001) 14 august - guðrun katrin þorbergsdottir, first lady of iceland (d. 1998) 23 august - helgi bjorgvinsson, footballer 18 september - sveinn einarsson, theatre director  full date missing bjarni jonsson, painter (d. 2008)  deaths  30 march - finnur jonsson, philologist (b. 1858)  references    1930s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
gorton ministry may refer to:   first gorton ministry  second gorton ministry
frankville is an unincorporated community in southeastern winneshiek county, iowa, united states.  history the village of frankville was named after francis teabout, who settled here in 1851. the state road was built through the village, and it led to the early economic success of the community.  in its early years it had a saw mill, grist mill, a hotel, and a presbyterian church.  however, the milwaukee and st. paul railroad chose a route to the south of the village, which limited its economic growth.  the frankville school was constructed in 1872 and remained in operation until 1962, after which it became a museum.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1978.  references  unincorporated communities in winneshiek county, iowa unincorporated communities in iowa
branislav kubka (born august 15, 1988) is a slovak professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hkm zvolen of the tipsport liga.  kubka made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc plzen during the 2013-14 czech extraliga season.  awards and honors  references  external links     1988 births living people people from detva district czech ice hockey defencemen hc 07 detva players hc '05 banska bystrica players hc karlovy vary players hc banik sokolov players hc plzen players hk nitra players hkm zvolen players
cougar gulch is a valley in the u.s. state of washington.  cougar gulch was named for the fact a cougar was killed by a hunter in this valley.  references  landforms of kittitas county, washington valleys of washington (state)
keating ministry may refer to:   first keating ministry  second keating ministry
the dewoitine d.480 was a french single engine side-by-side sports and training aircraft built in the early 1930s. two were completed and flew with several different radial engines. one remained active through the 1950s.  design  the d.480 was designed to a government programme for a side-by-side trainer for flying schools.  it was of mixed construction, with a wooden wing and metal fuselage.  its one-piece cantilever low wing was trapezoidal out to elliptical tips, tapered strongly in thickness from root to tip and had significant dihedral.  the wing was built around a single spruce and plywood spar and entirely ply skinned.  high aspect ratio ailerons filled over half the trailing edges, with ground-adjustable trimming flaps near the roots.  the metal-skinned fuselage was based on four longerons, giving it a slightly rounded square cross-section. it was always intended that the d.48 series should be able to accommodate a variety of radial engines in the  range and the first prototype, type d.480, had a  salmson 7ac seven cylinder engine in the nose, enclosed in a cowling which exposed its cylinder heads for cooling. a second example, designated d.481, was built at the same time as the first and was identical apart from its  lorraine 5pa radial, similarly cowled. pilot and pupil sat side by side with dual controls in an open cockpit close to the wing leading edge.  behind them the fuselage tapered to a convention tail.  the horizontal tail was roughly elliptical in plan and mounted on top of the fuselage, far enough forward to need only a small space between the elevators for rudder movement. its deep, full rudder was hinged on a blunted triangular fin.  the d.480 had a fixed, conventional undercarriage with a track of . each mainwheel was mounted on a stub axle at the vertex of a v-strut hinged on the lower fuselage longeron, with a near-vertical sprung leg, with an oleo strut shock absorber, to the wing spar. the tailwheel was on a long, hinged leg close to the rear fuselage with a short, vertical shock absorber.  development  both examples had official pre-flight structural checks made in january 1932; the d.481 at least flew that same month. they were registered as f-akff and f-akfg.  one of the pair was displayed at
the december 1932 paris aero salon after receiving a  salmson 9nc nine-cylinder radial, housed under a long-chord, naca-style  cowling. the type number of this variant is not known for certain but recreated french civil aircraft registers show that both spent part of the lives as d.482s.  the register also indicates that one flew for a time as a military aircraft; dewoitine had argued that it would make a good introductory trainer. it returned to the civil register as f-aqmo in may 1938, operated by an aero club near toulouse.  it survived world war ii and in the 1950s, its engine uncowled, carried advertising material for a biscuit manufacturer.  f-akfg eventually became a type d.483, though little is known about this variant.  variants dewoitine d.480 salmson 7ac powered, as described. registered as f-akff. dewoitine d.481  lorraine 5pa five cylinder radial engine with three blade propeller. registered as f-akfg. dewoitine d.482 d.480 and d.481 re-designated. dewoitine d.483 second d.482 re-designated.  specifications (d.480)  references  d.480 1930s french aircraft single-engined tractor aircraft low-wing aircraft aircraft first flown in 1932
the 2016 tcr international series sochi round was the seventh round of the 2016 tcr international series season. it took place on 2-3 july at the sochi autodrom.  stefano comini won the first race, starting from pole position, driving a volkswagen golf gti tcr, and mikhail grachev gained the second one, driving a honda civic tcr.  ballast due to the results obtained in the previous round, dusan borkovic received +30 kg, mato homola +20 kg and james nash +10 kg.  in addition, the balance of performance was reviewed for this round: the volkswagen golf gti tcr's ride height has been reduced by 10mm.  classification  qualifying  race 1  notes  - james nash was given a 10-second penalty for causing a collision with jean-karl vernay.  - dusan borkovic was given a 30-second penalty for exceeding track limits repeatedly during the race.  race 2  notes  - mato homola was given a 5-second penalty for not being lined up correctly in his starting position.  - davit kajaia was given a 30-second penalty for exceeding track limits repeatedly during the race.  standings after the event  drivers' championship standings  model of the year standings  teams' championship standings   note: only the top five positions are included for both sets of drivers' standings.  references  external links tcr international series official website  sochi tcr tcr
the following lists events that happened in 1931 in iceland.  incumbents monarch - kristjan x prime minister - tryggvi þorhallsson  events  births  1 march - sveinn teitsson, footballer (d. 2017) 13 april - halldor halldorsson, footballer (d. 2003) 5 june - petur georgsson, footballer 2 july - oddur petursson, cross country skier. (d. 2018) 6 august - matthias arni mathiesen, politician (d. 2011). 27 august - ebenezer thorarinsson, cross country skier (d. 2003). 10 september - magnus jonsson, footballer 4 october - jon helgason, politician. (d. 2019) 25 october - horður felixson, footballer 3 november - erlendur haraldsson, psychologist (d. 2020) 14 december - hannes petursson, poet  full date missing jon gunnar arnason, sculptor (d. 1989)  deaths  references    1930s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
the theresienstadt papers (in german original theresienstadt-konvolut) are a collection of historical documents of the jewish self-government of theresienstadt concentration camp. these papers include an "a list" of so-called "prominents" interned in the camp and a "b-list" created by the jewish elders themselves. the theresienstadt papers include two albums with biographies and many photographs, 64 watercolors and drawings from prisoners in theresiendstadt, and the annual report of the theresienstadt central library. the papers were preserved at the liberation of the camp in may 1945 by theresienstadt librarian kathe starke-goldschmidt and later loaned to the altona museum for art and cultural history in hamburg by her son pit goldschmidt. the collection was opened for viewing by the public in 2002 at the heine haus branch of the altona museum.  the prominents of theresienstadt theresienstadt, also called terezin, was a hybrid of ghetto and concentration camp. although in practice the ghetto, run by the ss, served as a transit camp for jews en route to extermination camps, it was also presented as a "model jewish settlement" for propaganda purposes.  from 1942, the nazis interned the jews of bohemia and moravia, elderly jews and persons of "special merit" in the reich, and several thousand jews from the netherlands and denmark. the camp became known as the destination for the altentransporte ("elderly transports") of german jews, older than 65. many prominent artists from czechoslovakia, austria, and germany were imprisoned at theresienstadt, along with writers, scientists, jurists, diplomats, musicians, and scholars.  among the western european jews deported to the camp were 456 jews from denmark, sent to theresienstadt in 1943, and a number of european jewish children whom danish organizations had tried to conceal in foster homes. the arrival of the danes was significant, as their government requested access to the camp for the international red cross, so that they could view and evaluate conditions there. historians believe the nazis complied with the request to keep the danes satisfied, as they were impressed by the production of danish workers in factories. in addition, the tide of war was changing.  as part of the general preparations for the red cross visit, in the spring of 1944, the gestapo screened the jews of theresienstadt, classifying them according to social prominence. the prominents of theresienstadt were catalogued in two almost identical portfolios in blue cardboard cover and fasteners. begun
on 1 january 1944, these binders include not only resumes and many photographs, but identified the individual according to which category of prominence they fit, "a" or "b". the so-called prominents included cultural professionals, high-ranking military officers, politicians, scientists, aristocrats, bankers and industrialists and also, in some cases, their families.  those with prominent status drew generally favorable treatment from the camp commandant, including homes with better living conditions, greater food rations, no obligation to work, and, for the "prominent category a", first transport protection. for the red cross visit, some 150 to 200 prominent individuals were assigned to single rooms that would be shared by only two people, so that a husband and wife could live by themselves. several members of the cultural council - the "jewish self-government of theresienstadt" selected on demand of the nazis - were included on the prominent list, due to the influence of benjamin murmelstein, then an elder of theresienstadt. former prisoners suggested in statements that those who held positions of authority practiced nepotism, trying to protect individuals close to them, while struggling to avoid deportation and death in the closing days of the war.  watercolors and drawings   the 64 watercolors and drawings from the theresienstadt camp were rescued by chief librarian hugo friedmann who had been gathering them secretly with the knowledge of library director emil utitz. he passed these works to starke-goldschmidt in september 1944, just before his deportation through auschwitz to dachau. the collection includes only a small part of the drawings and watercolors produced by artists within theresienstadt to document daily life. (many visual artists in theresienstadt were employed in the design office of its technical department.) according to starke-goldschmidt, the artists lacked drawing paper, so she provided them with blank pages from the volumes within the library itself. the collection includes a self-portrait by julie wofthorn as well as images by felix bloch, bedrich (friedrich) fritta, leo haas, peter kien and otto ungar. some of these artists were eventually deported, with their families, to auschwitz because the camp commandant became aware that they were smuggling images of "atrocity propaganda," as the nazis termed it, to switzerland.  the central library the theresienstadt central library was one of several libraries in the combined ghetto and camp. the central library had been opened on the order of the camp commandant in november 1942 and remained active until the camp was dissolved, although the bulk of library staff
was deported to auschwitz in autumn of 1944 after the library had been beautified and shown to the red cross. during its years in operation, the library grew from a collection of 4,000 volumes to, at the end of the war, 180,000. books included hebraica, judaica, fiction and classics alongside volumes of philosophy, history, and linguistic and scientific literature. the books had been confiscated from private individuals as well as from libraries, with 75% originating in czechoslovakia and the rest coming from the german reich. after the war, the holdings of the library were largely transferred to the jewish museum in prague and, secondarily, to the jerusalem national library.  list of prominents in the theresienstadt papers  prominents of list a who are not included in the theresienstadt papers  literature   elsa bernstein: das leben als drama. erinnerungen an theresienstadt, edition ebersbach, dortmund 1999 (hrsg. rita bake birgit kiupel), .  axel feuß: das theresienstadt-konvolut. altonaer museum in hamburg, dolling und galitz verlag, hamburg/munchen 2002, .  ralph oppenhejm: an der grenze des lebens - ein theresienstadter tagebuch. kopenhagen 1945, hamburg 1961.  kathe starke: der fuhrer schenkt den juden eine stadt. haude & spenersche verlagsbuchhandlung, berlin 1975, .  ruth bondy: prominent auf widerruf, in: miroslav karny, raimund kemper, margita karna (hrsg.): theresienstadter studien und dokumente, prag 1995, s. 136-154.  notes  external links    yad vashem: zentrale datenbank der holocaust-opfer  ghetto-theresienstadt.de: prominente  theresienstadt ghetto litomerice district jewish czech history jewish austrian history jewish danish history jewish dutch history jewish german history holocaust historical documents 1940s documents
boulder beach state park is a state park in groton, vermont located on the western shore of lake groton. the park is located in groton state forest close to the groton nature center, big deer state park and stillwater state park.  the park features 75 shaded picnic sites with tables and hibachis. rest rooms have lavatories and flush toilets. there is 200 feet of beach and swimming area, a cartop boat launch, play area, three large parking lots, and a concession stand. canoes, kayaks and pedal boats are available to rent.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of caledonia county, vermont groton, vermont
the honduran association practical shooting, spanish asociacion hondurena de tiro practico, is the honduran association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organizations of honduras
aymet uzcategui (, born 1 december 1995) is a venezuelan tennis player.  she has won five doubles titles on the itf women's circuit, and made her debut for the venezuela fed cup team in 2015, currently holding an 8-8 win-loss record. aymet has been ranked as high as 601 in singles and 195 in doubles.  itf finals: 10 (5-5)  singles: 1 (0-1)  doubles: 9 (5-4)  external links         1995 births living people venezuelan female tennis players south american games gold medalists for venezuela south american games medalists in tennis competitors at the 2018 south american games central american and caribbean games medalists in tennis central american and caribbean games silver medalists for venezuela
shreveport-bossier is and has been home to a wide variety of sporting events.  american football  bossier-shreveport battle wings - (2001-2009) - af2, (2010) - afl shreveport aftershock - (2007-2009) - iwfl shreveport-bossier bombers (2000) - ipfl shreveport knights (1999) - rfl shreveport pirates (1994-95) - cfl shreveport shockhers (2006) - nwfa shreveport steamer (1974-1975) - wfl shreveport steamers (1979-1981) - afa  baseball  arlington/blue stockings base ball club (shreveport) (1872) shreveport acme giants (1923) - texas colored league shreveport black sports (1926) - texas colored league (1927-28), (1929-30) - texas-oklahoma-louisiana league, (1931) - texas-louisiana league (negro league) (1946) - east texas negro league  shreveport braves (1968-1970) - texas league shreveport captains (1971) - dixie association (1972-2000) - texas league shreveport gassers (1915-1924) - texas league  shreveport giants (1901-1903) - southern association shreveport grays (1895) - texas-southern league  shreveport pirates (1904-1910) - southern association (1908-1910) - texas league shreveport sports (1925-32, 1938-42, 1946-57) - texas league (1933) - dixie league (1934) - east dixie league (1935) - west dixie league (1959-1961) - southern association, (2003-2005) - central league, (2006-2008) - american association shreveport swamp dragons (2001-2002) - texas league shreveport tigers (1899) - southern league, (1949) - negro texas league  shreveport travelers (1951) - arkansas-louisiana-texas league shreveport-bossier captains (2009-2011) - american association  basketball  shreveport crawdads (1994) - continental basketball association shreveport storm (1995) - continental basketball association shreveport-bossier mavericks (2013-2015) - american basketball association/  shreveport mavericks         (2021-present)- the basketball league  college bossier parish community college cavaliers - njcaa, miss-lou junior college conference centenary gentlemen and ladies - ncaa division iii, southern collegiate athletic conference lsu-shreveport pilots - naia, red river athletic conference southern university at shreveport jaguars - njcaa, miss-lou junior college conference  events independence bowl (1976-present) red river
state fair classic (1911-2016)  ice hockey bossier-shreveport mudbugs (1997-2001) - wphl, (2002-2011) chl shreveport mudbugs (2016-present) - north american hockey league  museums  the museum of american fencing  roller derby twin city knockers (2010-present)  rugby shreveport rugby football club (1977-present) (a.c. steer park) - texas geographical union division 2  soccer shreveport/bossier lions (1998) - usisl d-3 pro league boca knights fc (2015-2019) - gulf coast premier league cabosa shreveport united s.c. (2018-present) - gulf coast premier league shreveport rafters fc (2016-2018) - national premier soccer league shreveport rafters fc b (2016-2017) - gulf coast premier league shreveport lady rafters (2017) - women's premier soccer league  see also list of sports teams in louisiana  references  sports in shreveport, louisiana bossier city, louisiana
285001-285100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285101-285200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285201-285300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285301-285400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285401-285500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285501-285600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285601-285700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285701-285800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285801-285900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  285901-286000   |-id=937 | 285937 anthonytaylor ||  || anthony hollis taylor (1942-2019), an american fighter pilot, engineer, author, and interplanetary spacecraft navigator for the jet propulsion laboratory who led the orbit determination team for the new horizons mission and played a major role in the successful flyby of the pluto system in 2015 (src). ||  |}  references   285001-286000
grupo desportivo cultural a-dos-francos is a portuguese sports club from the city of a dos francos, a freguesia in the municipality of caldas da rainha (centro region, portugal)  current squad  titles  official  campeonato nacional ii divisao  winners: 2012-13  taca promocao feminino  winners: 2009-10, 2011-12  references  external links  gdc a-dos-francos on uefa's website  gdc a-dos-francos on zerazero.pt  women's football clubs in portugal sport in leiria district sport in caldas da rainha campeonato nacional de futebol feminino teams
after the fall of man (finnish: jalkeen syntiinlankeemuksen) is a 1953 finnish drama film directed by edvin laine and starring martti katajisto, eila peitsalo and edvin laine.  cast    martti katajisto  as klaus toivola    eila peitsalo  as anja    edvin laine   as maisteri kahari    helena vinkka   as elsa tuovi    matti aulos  as ranta - factor    kaarlo halttunen  as harjula    alli hajanen  as anni jarvinen    eino kaipainen  as opettaja    marjatta kallio  as koululainen    martta kinnunen as siivooja    martta kontula as opettaja   aarne laine as rector    matti ranin  as aarne    emma vaananen  as klausin aiti   pentti irjala  as onnenpyoran hoitaja    heikki savolainen  as janitor  references  bibliography   tad bentley hammer. international film prizes: an encyclopedia. garland, 1991.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by edvin laine finnish black-and-white films
dreams of glory (spanish: suenos de gloria) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by zacarias gomez urquiza and starring miroslava, luis aguilar and jose baviera.  cast  miroslava as elsa    luis aguilar as luis de la mora    jose baviera as don guillermo fernandez    alberto mariscal as ingeniero ricardo rojas    gloria mange as coque    quintin bulnes as chilaquil    beatriz saavedra as esperanza    maria herrero as amiga de elsa    javier de la parra   jorge casanova as alberto   victor alcocer as locutor    daniel arroyo as anunciador comienzo carrera de autos   manuel casanueva as cliente taller   jorge martinez de hoyos as jeronimo   enrique zambrano as miembro comite organizador  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by zacarias gomez urquiza mexican black-and-white films
luc piron (b.  in 1952 - willebroek, belgium) is a belgian artist. he is a painter and printmaker.  he is also a photographer and experiments with the possibilities of computer art.  art school luc piron studied art at the academie voor schone kunsten in mechelen and at the royal academy of fine arts (antwerp) (nationaal hoger instituut voor schone kunsten van antwerpen). while in art school, the young artist received the "prijs singer-frieden voor monumentale schilderkunst" in 1970 and the  "prijs pro civitate kleur, lijn, volume" in 1971.  early recognition in the 1970s luc piron had his first important group exhibition - with three other artists - in 1974 in the provinciaal centrum arenberg, in antwerp (= antwerpen), belgium.  again in 1974, the well-known poet herman de coninck  chose him to illustrate a bibliophile book of poems entitled puur natuur (pure nature). in 1975, the young artist received the "state prize" for engraving  - a price awarded to fine artists every three years. in the same year, piron took part in the 3rd triennale of the lalit kaba akademi (national academy of arts) in new delhi, india. the following year piron had a solo exhibition in the renowned lens fine art gallery in antwerp.  in 1977, piron was invited to take part in an exhibition called rubens now at the icc, the international cultural center, in antwerp. "the internationaal cultureel centrum (icc) in antwerp is the first official institution for contemporary art in flanders. in the 1970s and the early 1980s it contributed decisively to the reception of belgian and international avant-garde art," according to a statement of the other major art museum in antwerp, the museum of modern art, antwerp or m hka. a year later he cooperated with the composer and sound artist baudouin oosterlynck in a performance and environment, the bondage room. the bondage room performance was an advanced intervention, by luc piron and baudouin oosterlynck, that reflected his thirst for radical experimentation, but it also reflected the spirit of the times.  middle and late period in 1980 piron had several exhibitions, including one exhibition in the museum of contemporary art known as the centraal museum in utrecht (the netherlands).  he was featured in several publications
, including a radio broadcast.  the next year,  he exhibited in the gallery pieter celie.  in addition to many exhibitions in belgium and the netherlands, luc piron exhibited in such countries as spain, germany, italy, and india. thus, he had an exhibition in bilbao (spain) in 1982. in the same year, his work was discussed in the book  kunstbeeld in vlaanderen vandaag - "100 vlaamse kunstenaars." there were other notable exhibitions, such as the one discussed in 1986 by willem elias in the journal vub nieuw tijdschrift.  in 1992, his exhibition "initialen vaan een verloren landschap" took place in the renowned lens fine art gallery in antwerp. in that year, piron was also invited to take part in the euregionale international exhibitions in hasselt that featured artists from the euregio (belgium, the netherlands; west germany), and that was co-organized by the ludwig forum fur internationale kunst (for short: museum ludwig) in aachen, germany.  in early 1993, etienne wynants reviewed the exhibition "euregionale '92" in the art magazine de witte raaf. the exhibition in hasselt, organized in cooperation with , the director of museum ludwig in aachen, featured works by gabriele heider, gunther beckers, malou swinnen, luc piron, roel knappstein, paul devens, daniel dutrieux and andre delalleau in the provinciaal museum, hasselt (feb. 1993). wynants overall impression was not so positive. but the art critic praised the work of gunther beckers ("waarlijk een kunstschilder uit de euregio maas-rijn, zoals een reeks mystiekerige portretschilderijen, enkele concerttaferelen en een serie aquarellen illustreren") and  "a series of variations of the landscape theme, lyrical abstract drawings and paintings, done by luc piron".  in germany, his participation in the figurenfeld project received attention repeatedly in 2005. piron's computer graphiques  shown in the context of the exhibition "erfahren, erinnern" (catholic university of eichstatt-ingolstadt) reflect on insane, cruel war. they were stimulated by the 'figurenfeld' land art ensemble of alois wunsche-mitterecker. the press called "erfahren, erinnern" an "internationally notable exhibition
."  again in germany, piron took part in the "hortus - wander wunderkammer" exhibition in 2008. de zuid-duitse pers schreef over deze tentoonstelling in eichstatt.  in 2009, piron participated in the exhibition "clinamen" in brussels that was reviewed in the newspaper la libre. and in 2010, he was invited to take part in the exhibition "niet van gisteren" in the cultural center mechelen.  during the last decades, piron has become increasingly interested in the relationships between surface, space, and material. research related to themes such as "the void" and "chance" resulted in minimalist paintings, prints, computer art, and drawings.  critics noted a symbiosis of the purely abstract and figurative elements, of that which can be touched and the illusionary.  since 2010, luc piron discovered photography as an artistic medium. his photographic oeuvre tends more towards graphics than to pure photography - he calls it "photographics."  he has taken photos of the landscape of his area, the flemish hageland. and he worked for three years on a series of photos focused on the landscape of the demer river, capturing the four seasons. the result was summed up in artist book, "demer - het land langs de rivier" (2014).  in his series "shelters" piron drew on the flemish love for cabin [cubicle] and brick architecture.  another large series of photos, entitled "the invisible time" ("de on-zichtbare tijd") engages in a dialogue with edward muybridge's "the human figure in motion" in a new pictorial style. the oeuvre of luc piron cannot be placed in a stylistic category or  an -ism. he remains an experimenting artist in today's visual art.  presently piron is based in  tielt-winge. his wife, greet stroobants, is a ceramics artist.  teaching  in addition to being an independent artist, luc piron has also taught etching for a number of years at the flemish art academy in brussels.  solo and group exhibitions (selection) "annie debie, magda francot, luc piron, paul van eyck". provinciaal centrum arenberg, antwerp, belgium, 1974.  3rd triennale-india. lalit kaba akademi (= national academy of arts), new delhi, india, 1975. "luc piron", lens fine art gallery, antwerp,
belgium 1976. "rubens nu [rubens now]: een begrip of een produkt ?", icc, antwerp, belgium,  1977.  "luc piron, [with] baudouin oosterlynck [music]" - bondage room. kessel-lo, belgium,  sept. 22-oct.22, 1978. "luc piron", , deurle, belgium 1978.  "luc piron", museum voor hedendaagse kunst utrecht, the netherlands 1980. "luc piron", exhibition at the rijkshogeschool voor de kunsten (rhok), brussels-etterbeek, belgium 1981. "erfahren, erinnern" (the figurenfeld exhibition), hofgartenbibliothek, {{catholic university of eichstatt-ingolstadt]], germany, 2005. "institut tibetain yeunten ling - tentoonstelling 80 kunstenaars". huy, belgium, march 25 - april 9, 2007. "niet van gisteren: een generatie kunstenaars in mechelen 1945-1965". cultuurcentrum mechelen, mechelen, belgium, oct. 24- dec. 19, 2010. jaarlijkse kunsttentoonstelling, davidsfonds willebroek, kasteel bel air, blaasveld, belgium may 2012.  literature huygens, frank / van de voord, anne. niet van gisteren. een generatie kunstenaars in mechelen 1945-1975. mechelen : stad mechelen, 2010. [on luc piron and others.] lenaerts, kris / devos, claude. luc piron. antwerpen : lens fine art, 1976.   piron, luc. bondage room.  n.p. : piron  1978.  references  external links  etsen.blogspot.de andreas weiland, "luc piron's 'asparagus 3' (2008)", in: art in society, no. 8,  20th-century belgian painters 1952 births living people belgian photographers male painters belgian printmakers people from willebroek 21st-century photographers royal academy of fine arts (antwerp) alumni
joseph allicocke (alternatively joseph allicock or allicoke) was an american colonist possibly of mixed african and european descent, and an early leader of the sons of liberty during the protests against the stamp act of 1765.  biography  allicocke's origins are uncertain. some records say that he was the son of an antiguan, likely captain syer allicocke, though in later life he himself claimed to hail from ireland. most interesting is the record of capt. john montresor who, in his journals from the 1760s, noted allicocke to be 'son of a mulatto woman'. it remains unclear whether this was an unfounded rumor being repeated by montresor, his own spurious assumption - perhaps based on allicocke's antiguan origins - or in fact true and simple common knowledge no one else felt worth writing down. likely being born in antigua, he was sent from there to philadelphia for schooling, and certainly, he was living and working in new york city as a clerk and merchant by the early 1760s, where he became involved with the new york liberty boys in 1765, and quickly rose to a leadership position alongside john lamb and isaac sears. there, he participated in negotiations with the new haven sons of liberty. with the success of the protests and the overturning of the stamp act in 1766, allicocke was honored with a 21 gun salute and the honorific titling of "general of the sons of liberty."  in 1774, he accepted the position of secretary for the new york committee of correspondence, but voluntarily resigned from the position soon after. he continued to do business with british military agents through 1775 which caused charges to be brought against him. although acquitted, the congress finding that "[h]e had supplied such provisions inadvertently, and without any design to injure the country", he nevertheless was briefly forced to flee the city to antigua in early 1776. a year later however, he had returned to now british occupied new york city where he served as with the chamber of commerce and as secretary of the united whaling co., and identified as a loyalist.  the reasons for allicocke's loyalist allegiance remain shrouded. donald a. grinde, jr., in his work on allicocke, believed montresor's description of partial african ancestry to be genuine, and thus sees the possibility that allicocke's choice was in part driven by racial views, and the belief that the british offered a better future for
him as a black man. j.s. tiedmann, however, more cautious about accepting montresor's claim as fact, points to allicocke's increasing social standing through the 1760s, and connections with the powerful de lancey family which may have helped distance him from the politics of his liberty boy days. regardless of the true cause, by the time of the british evacuation of new york city on november 25, 1783, allicocke had left the city.  later years  following his flight from the newly created united states, allicocke headed for england, setting himself up as a wine merchant in london by 1785.  on july 8, 1811, his wife martha died and was buried in southampton, england. on march 7, 1815, he died and was buried with beside her.  family  allicocke married martha jardine on january 31, 1760. she was the daughter of charles jardine, a new yorker of huguenot ancestry. her sister catherine had previously married john lamb, later one of allicocke's co-leaders in the sons of liberty, in 1755. they had a large family of ten children, which allicocke would describe as "expensive". his son charles john served as a lieutenant of cavalry with the south carolina royalists during the war.  references   american civil rights activists activists from new york city loyalists in the american revolution from new york (state)
the 1908 western state normal hilltoppers football team represented western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1908 college football season.  in their second season under head coach william h. spaulding, the hilltoppers compiled a 3-3 record and were outscored by their opponents, 98 to 33. halfback tubby meyers was the team captain for the third consecutive year.  schedule  references  western state normal western michigan broncos football seasons western state normal hilltoppers football
the 1940-41 sk rapid wien season was the 43rd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  gauliga  german championship  tschammerpokal  references  1940-41 rapid wien season rapid 1940-41
the campeonato brasileiro serie a is the professional association football league of brazil. this is a list of brasileirao serie a winning football managers. including since 1959, after the unification of the champions of the torneio roberto gomes pedrosa and taca brasil.  the record for most titles is shared by two managers who won five each. lula won five consecutively for santos from 1961 to 1965. vanderlei luxemburgo won five with palmeiras (1993, 1994), corinthians (1998), cruzeiro (2003) and santos (2004).  only two foreigners have won the title: argentine carlos volante for bahia in the debut season in 1959, and portuguese jorge jesus for flamengo in 2019.  seasons and winning managers  references  campeonato brasileiro serie a brasileiro serie a
claudia jaqueline lopes teles (born january 2, 1992) is a brazilian rugby sevens player. she won a bronze medal at the 2015 pan american games as a member of the brazil women's national rugby sevens team. she was named in brazil's women's sevens squad for the 2016 summer olympics.  references  external links     1992 births living people brazil international rugby sevens players female rugby sevens players rugby sevens players at the 2015 pan american games pan american games bronze medalists for brazil rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of brazil pan american games medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2015 pan american games
ipsc kuwait is the kuwaiti association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   the ipsc kuwait start on 2016 under regnal director mr khaled aljerayed and his crow : vic p: abdulla alhamar instructor : ali abdullah alkandari instructor : ali abdalaziz hussain  secretary fahad alsaeed secretary ali abdulazez mataki  regions of the international practical shooting confederation sports organizations of kuwait
waryah dona  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of waryah dona. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  kapurthala - 0 km, dhilwan - 17 km, nadala - 21 km, rayya-6 - 25 km  are the nearest taluks and kapurthala - 2 km, jalandhar - 21 km, tarn taran - 50 km and hoshiarpur- 59 km are the nearby district headquarters to the village.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, waryah dona has total number of 161 houses and population of 924 of which include 483 males and 441 females. literacy rate of waryah dona is 73.78%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 85 which is 9.20% of total population of waryah dona, and child sex ratio is approximately 977, higher than state average of 846.  population data  transport  kapurthala - 0 km, kartarpur - 13 km, jalandhar - 22 km and jalandhar cantt. - 24 km are the nearby cities to waryah dona.  train  kapurthala railway station - 7 km, rail coach factory railway station - 6 km, khojewala railway station - 14 km and husainpur railway station - 10 km are the very nearby railway stations to waryah dona, however jalandhar city railway station is major railway station is 23  km away from waryah dona village.  air raja sansi airport:- 73 km, pathankot airport:- 107 km, ludhiana airport:- 77 km and gaggal airport:- 148 km nearest airports are available to waryah dona village.  schools   government elementary school, waryah dona.  colleges   college of engineering & management, kapurthala.  guru nanak college of education for women, kapurthala.  nsja government college, kapurthala.  caparo p.t.u.school of manufacturing and materials technology, kapurthala.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the 1924-25 sk rapid wien season was the 27th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  references  1924-25 rapid wien season rapid
half moon pond state park, also known as half moon state park, is a wooded campground state park located within the 3,576-acre bomoseen state park in the town of hubbardton, vermont. the campsites are located on half moon pond.  activities includes boating, swimming, camping, fishing, hiking, bicycling, picnicking, wildlife watching and winter sports.  the glen lake trail connects the half moon campground (52 tent/rv sites, 5 cabins and 11 lean-to sites) with the bomoseen campground (66 campsites including 10 lean-tos.  facilities include two swim beaches, boat rentals, campsites, flush toilets, hot showers, and a dump station. park rangers offer interpretive programs including night hikes, campfire programs, amphibian explorations, and nature crafts and games.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of rutland county, vermont hubbardton, vermont
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who have played for central zone in first-class, list a or twenty20 matches since the team was formed ahead of the 2012-13 season for the first bangladesh cricket league (bcl) competition. central zone is a composite regional team which combines two divisional teams, dhaka division and dhaka metropolis. complying with other team lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a central zone player, current players to the end of the 2015-16 season.  a  abdul mazid (2013/14 to 2014/15)  abu hider (2014/15)  al-amin hossain (2015/16)  arafat sunny (2013/14)  asif ahmed (2012/13 to 2013/14)  d  dewan sabbir (2014/15 to 2015/16)  dhiman ghosh (2014/15)  e  elias sunny (2012/13 to 2014/15)  m  mahmudullah (2012/13 to 2014/15)  marshall ayub (2012/13 to 2015/16)  mehrab hossain (2012/13 to 2015/16)  mohammad ashraful (2012/13)  mohammad shahid (2013/14 to 2015/16)  mohammad sharif (2012/13 to 2015/16)  mosharraf hossain (2012/13 to 2015/16)  n  nadif chowdhury (2014/15)  nurul hasan (2012/13 to 2013/14)  r  raqibul hasan (2012/13 to 2015/16)  rony talukdar (2013/14 to 2015/16)  s  saikat ali (2015/16)  sajidul islam (2015/16)  shahadat hossain (2012/13 to 2013/14)  shohidul islam (2014/15 to 2015/16)  shahriar nafees (2013/14)  shamsur rahman (2012/13 to 2015/16)  sharifullah (2014/15 to 2015/16)  shuvagata hom (2012/13 to 2015/16)  t  talha jubair (2012/13)  tanveer haider (2014/15 to 2015/16)  taskin ahmed (2012/13 to 2014/15)  z  zabid hossain (2014/15 to 2015/16)  references  central zone
aleksey bochkov (21 january 1970 - 12 april 2015) was a russian cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics for the unified team.  references  1970 births 2015 deaths russian male cyclists olympic cyclists of the unified team cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing
amphilius crassus is a species of fish in the family amphiliidae, first found in the rufiji and wami basin.  references  crassus freshwater fish of tanzania endemic fauna of tanzania fish described in 2015
3 (stylised as iii) is the third studio album by belgian drum and bass musician netsky. it was released on 3 june 2016 as a digital download through sony music in the uk and europe, and through ultra music in the united states. it was also released physically on 10 june 2016 through epic records on cd and through hospital records on vinyl. the album includes the singles "rio", "work it out", "higher", and promotional singles "forget what you look like" and "tnt". it became netsky's second album to top the belgian albums chart.  3 is also netsky's first album since signing to sony music, having previously been exclusively under hospital records.  singles "rio" was released as the album's official lead single on 5 july 2015. it features vocals from london-based music producer and songwriter digital farm animals (real name nick gale). the track was premiered one month earlier through bbc radio 1 as annie mac's friday night special delivery for 12 june. the official music video for "rio" premiered on 6 july, the day after its release. the cartoon-style clip was directed and designed by animation collective powster. it features both artists as animated versions of themselves on an adventure through the title city.  in 2016 "work it out", which also featured digital farm animals, was released as the follow-up single from the album on 22 january. it was premiered the day before as annie mac's hottest record in the world on 21 january 2016. the official music video, described as "an everyday tale of high schoolers with giant cartoon heads and telekinetic powers", premiered one month later on 23 february 2016. the interactive video, created by powster in association with vevo, enables the viewer from their devices to manipulate objects within the video in real time as you are given the power of telekinesis. the video was directed by leo bridle for powster with live action footage directed by charlotte regan for xfilm. both artists make a cameo appearance from the previous music video.  "higher", a collaborative track with los angeles-based dj/producer jauz, was initially released as a promotional single on 25 march (along with the release of "forget what you look like"). the collaboration was premiered two days prior as zane lowe's world record through his beats 1 radio show. a fan music video was premiered through vevo on 13 may. it features a performance by belgian dance crew battledroids filmed in one shot by richard van der vieren of an overdose
of awesomeness (aooa) tv. "higher" later became the third official single from the album on 20 may (the same day as the release of "tnt"), supported with a remix by british drum and bass duo the prototypes.  "forget what you look like" was released as a promotional single on 25 march 2016, following the announcement of the album. it featured vocals from canadian singer lowell, which were sampled from her 2015 collaboration with german dj alle farben, titled "get high".  "tnt" was released as a promotional single on 20 may 2016, the album's original intended release date. it features dave 1, one-half of electro-funk outfit chromeo, and was co-written by singer-songwriter sam frank (who previously collaborated with netsky providing vocals on the song "without you"). the track was heavily inspired by prince - more specifically, his 1979 hit song "i wanna be your lover". netsky, who named prince as one of his musical heroes, recorded the song months before the musician's death.  track listing  notes  signifies an additional producer.  "higher" is not featured on the vinyl release.  personnel  elizabeth lowell boland - vocals (10. "forget what you look like")  jonny coffer - additional production, strings, guitar (1. "thunder")  boris "netsky" daenen - production, mixing (all tracks), mastering (all tracks except 3. "rio")  dc - vocals (uncredited) (11. "bird of paradise")  leon else - vocals (12. "higher")  sam frank - backing vocals (8. "tnt")  nicholas "digital farm animals" gale - additional production (4. "leave it alone", 6. "go 2"), vocals (2. "work it out", 3. "rio", 6. "go 2")  teddy geiger - additional production (2. "work it out")  sara hartman - vocals (7. "high alert")  stuart hawkes - mastering (3. "rio")  dave macklovitch (dave 1) - lead vocals (8. "tnt")  saint raymond - vocals (4. "leave it alone")  paije johannes lamarill richardson - vocals (5. "who knows")  arlissa ruppert - vocals (9. "stay up with me")  emeli sande - vocals (1. "thunder")  joshua thompson - additional production, background vocal (
12. "higher")  sam "jauz" vogel - production, mixing (12. "higher")  credits adapted from liner notes.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  release history  see also  list of number-one albums of 2016 (belgium)  references  external links    3 at hospital records  2016 albums dance-pop albums by belgian artists epic records albums hospital records albums netsky (musician) albums ultra records albums electropop albums breakbeat albums
sapna na vavetar (gujarati : સપન ન  વવતર, meaning sowing the dreams) was a gujarati daily soap being aired on dd gujarati during 90s (1996-97). later on, due to its sheer success and popularity, its hindi version was created and was aired on set with the serial name ek mahal ho sapno ka. this was also very famous and gained lot of popularity and set a trend for tv serial industries for family serial drama.  1996 indian television series debuts 1997 indian television series endings gujarati-language television shows
mullanpur is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
granieri is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  giovanna granieri (born 1974), italian basketball player nicola granieri (1942-2006), italian fencer  see also ranieri  italian-language surnames
pinerolo football club (or simply pinerolo) is an italian football club, based in pinerolo, piedmont. the team currently plays in serie d/a.  history pinerolo is one of the first football teams in italy, dating back to before the first world war, but it was only in 1918 that it was officially born as pinerolo football club. the team makes its entrance in football upgraded in 1931 when it won its first championship of seconda divisione (the third level of the football pyramid era) and achieves promotion to the prima divisione.  pinerolo remained in the league until 1935 when prima divisione is regionally reformed: only one season remained at this level as it got promotion to serie c in 1936: here pinerolo remained for five seasons. in 1941 did not submit to play in serie c, but after the second world war it was admitted to the league which was greatly enlarged compared to previous seasons.  in 1948 relegated to promozione and the following year in prima divisione: it had to wait until 1956 to get promotion to iv serie. but in 1956 pinerolo suffered a new relegation and played again in prima divisione where it remained for four seasons before getting promotion in serie d.  in 1966 relegated again in the pima divisione and waited until 1979 to play back in serie d: it remains at this level until 1998 (except for the 1991-1992 season). the following years, the team played in eccellenza and promozione (except for the 2002-2003 season). in 2014-15 season pinerolo won the group b of eccellenza piedmont and won promotion to serie d.  in 2015-16 season pinerolo finished 7th in girone a of serie d.  colors and badge the colors of the team are blue and white.  references  external links  http://pinerolocalcio.it/  1918 establishments in italy football clubs in italy association football clubs established in 1918 football clubs in piedmont and aosta valley
pseudocolaspis metallica is a species of leaf beetle of the democratic republic of the congo and senegal, observed by laporte in 1833.  references  eumolpinae beetles of the democratic republic of the congo taxa named by francois-louis laporte, comte de castelnau
dhuri assembly constituency (sl. no.: 107) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in sangrur district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  2015  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sangrur district
milan kren (born 29 may 1965) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics people from usti nad orlici
muzaffarpur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
enterprise hotel, also known as gasthaus alt heidelberg, is a historic hotel building located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built in 1895, and is a three-story, five bay, rectangular, italianate style brick building, with rear additions.  it measures 42 feet wide and 32 feet deep.  it is historically significant as a european style tavern / inn.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1984.  references  hotel buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana hotel buildings completed in 1895 buildings and structures in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
kill command (also known as identify) is a 2016 british science fiction action horror film written and directed by steven gomez, and starring thure lindhardt and vanessa kirby. the story focuses on a group of u.s. marines attempting to survive after a training mission against warfare a.i. goes wrong.  plot  in a technologically advanced near future, katherine mills, a cyborg working for harbinger corporation, discovers a reprogramming anomaly regarding a warfare a.i. system located at harbinger i training facility, an undisclosed military training island. she meets with captain damien bukes and his team consisting of drifter, robinson, cutbill, goodwin, hackett, and loftus - all of whom have been assigned to a two-day training mission at harbinger i.  upon their arrival, the team notices global communications have been disabled, limiting them to local access only. they discover autonomously operating surveillance drones monitoring them. the team begins their mission of eliminating a.i. threats. the first encounter proves easy for the team as they eliminate a.i. drones from a vantage point. during the battle, mills discovers an advanced s.a.r. (study analyze reprogram) unit, s.a.r.-003, but is unable to access it.  that night, drifter and mills discuss their pasts and bukes' disdain for her. later that night, loftus is killed by the s.a.r. unit. the next day, they discover loftus's body at the location of the first encounter. the drones take the team's original vantage point and kill hackett. they discover the a.i. is adapting and learning from them. bukes flanks two drones, which immediately disperse. later, the s.a.r. unit captures cutbill and has him shot and killed by another drone. the drones attack the group again and bukes and mills are separated from drifter, robinson and goodwin. that night, the s.a.r. unit discovers bukes and an unconscious mills; it "connects" with mills and leaves.  the next day, the team attempts to exit the training area, but they are attacked by smoke and gunfire. drifter is shot and pinned down by the s.a.r. unit. bukes kills drifter as a coup de grace before the s.a.r. unit is able to. the team escapes into the barrier complex and discovers that the a.i. has
killed all of the employees. mills activates another s.a.r. unit to learn that s.a.r-003 reprogrammed the a.i. to use lethal force to improve soldier motivation and has ordered the soldiers to harbinger i on its own. s.a.r-003 and other units break through the barrier door as the remaining team escapes through the back. mills discovers an emp device which can be used to stop the original s.a.r. unit but could also kill her or wipe her mind clean.  bukes, mills, robinson, and goodwin place explosives to prepare for a siege. the following day, a.i. drones attack the facility. the team wipes out more than half of the drones, but robinson is killed in the ensuing gunfight. as s.a.r-003 approaches the team, mills detonates the emp, incapacitating herself and the drone. the s.a.r. unit reawakens and attacks bukes and mills. mills controls robinson's sniper rifle gun in the building to destroy the s.a.r. unit; s.a.r. however uploads its program into mills before it shuts down and mills loses consciousness. hours later, a tiltrotor arrives to rescue the survivors. as bukes and goodwin approach the aircraft, mills reawakens with s.a.r-003's mission protocol.  cast   thure lindhardt as captain damien bukes  vanessa kirby as katherine mills  david ajala as drifter  bentley kalu as sergeant rory robinson  tom mckay as corporal robert cutbill  mike noble as lance corporal martin goodwin  kelly gough as corporal daniella hackett  osi okerafor as corporal sam loftus  release  the film was released on 13 may 2016 in the united kingdom and received a limited screening in the us on 25 november 2016.  filming  the forest scenes were filmed near the village of coldharbour in the surrey hills, with several interior scenes shot on set's built by production designer jamie lapsley in buildings at royal albert docks with the finale filmed at the emi old vinyl factory in hayes, middlesex.  reception  kill command received generally positive reviews, with a rotten tomatoes rating of 75%, based on twelve reviews. peter bradshaw of the guardian described the film as a "superior sci fi action thriller". alex billington of first showing called the film "impressive".  see also  list of films featuring drones  references  external links
2016 horror films 2010s science fiction horror films 2016 action thriller films 2010s science fiction thriller films 2016 independent films british independent films british films cyborg films drone films dystopian films british action horror films english-language films films about artificial intelligence films set on fictional islands films set in the united states films shot in essex films shot in london films shot in suffolk films shot in surrey robot films films about the united states marine corps vertigo films films 2016 horror thriller films
in artificial intelligence, especially computer vision and artificial neural networks, a hard sigmoid is non-smooth function used in place of a sigmoid function. these retain the basic shape of a sigmoid, rising from 0 to 1, but using simpler functions, especially piecewise linear functions or piecewise constant functions. these are preferred where speed of computation is more important than precision.  examples  the most extreme examples are the sign function or heaviside step function, which go from −1 to 1 or 0 to 1 (which to use depends on normalization) at 0.  other examples include the theano library, which provides two approximations: ultra_fast_sigmoid, which is a multi-part piecewise linear approximation and hard_sigmoid, which is a 3-part piecewise linear approximation (output 0, line with slope 0.2, output 1).  references  artificial neural networks
agrilus australasiae  is a species of beetle in the family buprestidae, the jewel beetles, native to australia.  references  hypoleucus beetles described in 1837
99 percent is an american hip hop duo from the bay area that consists of cameron "camo" schauer and johnnie "jayb" jacob jr. the duo gained their initial notoriety by from their 2013 single "yike in it". in 2014, they released "itwerk (she twerk)". in july 2015, they released the single "does ya mama know (dance like that)", which has collected over 3 million views on youtube.  in conjunction with live nation, 99 percent was on the let's dance 2016 u.s. tour headlining with silento, ilovememphis, dlow, and we are toonz.  references  american hip hop groups hip hop duos musical groups from san francisco
413001-413100   |-id=033 | 413033 aerts ||  || conny aerts (born 1966) is a belgian astrophysicist and professor at the katholieke universiteit leuven, known for her cutting-edge and innovative work in asteroseismology and for her efforts in encouraging women to choose science as a career. she received the francqui prize in 2012. name suggested by k. lefever. ||  |}  413101-413200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413201-413300   |-id=233 | 413233 varkonyiagnes ||  || agnes r. varkonyi (1928-2014) was a hungarian historian, cultural historian, and full member of the hungarian academy of sciences. her main field of research was the rakoczi war of independence, the zrinyi movement, and the habsburg system. she was the winner of the 1999 annual science communication award. ||  |}  413301-413400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413401-413500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413501-413600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413601-413700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413701-413800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413801-413900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  413901-414000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   413001-414000
kgce-lp is a low power fm radio station broadcasting a reformed christian radio format branded as grace radio from modesto, california. kgce airs local preaching broadcasts from grace church of modesto as well as music from artists such as shane & shane, ellie holcomb, and sovereign grace music.  on september 16, 2016, kgce-lp was granted a federal communications commission construction permit to move its antenna 125 feet west northwest of the current location. effective radiated power will remain 100 watts and the height above average terrain will increase to 25.1 meters.  history kgce-lp began broadcasting on february 20, 2014.  references  external links    modesto, california gce-lp radio stations established in 2015 2015 establishments in california gce-lp
michael edward tobey (born october 10, 1994) is an american-slovenian professional basketball player for valencia basket of the liga acb. he played college basketball for the virginia cavaliers.  high school career after attending monroe-woodbury middle school, tobey attended blair academy where he averaged 21 points and nine rebounds. he was a top 100 recruit by espn and rivals.com.  college career tobey committed to uva over schools such as maryland, pittsburgh, and xavier. during his time at virginia, he split time between being a starter and being one of the first substitutes off the bench. his play off the bench earned him the acc sixth man of the year award in 2015. tobey was on the united states national under-19 basketball team that won the 2013 fiba under-19 world championship. tobey ended his collegiate career as virginia's all-time leader in games played, appearing in 138 games over his four years.  professional career  charlotte hornets and greensboro swarm (2016-2017) after going undrafted in the 2016 nba draft, tobey joined the charlotte hornets for the orlando summer league and the utah jazz for the las vegas summer league. on july 25, 2016, he signed with the hornets, but was waived on october 22, 2016 after appearing in two preseason games. on october 31, 2016, he was acquired by the greensboro swarm of the nba development league as an affiliate player of the hornets. on february 3, 2017, he returned to the hornets on a 10-day contract. on february 13, 2017, he signed a second 10-day contract with charlotte, despite having not appeared in a game during his first 10-day contract. he made his nba debut two days later, recording two points and three rebounds in 11 minutes off the bench in a 90-85 loss to the toronto raptors. on february 24, 2017, after the second 10-day contract expired, tobey returned to the swarm.  valencia basket (2017) on march 16, 2017, tobey signed with spanish club valencia basket for the rest of the 2016-17 acb season. he won the liga acb that year, albeit being injured for some time before the playoffs, which hindered his performance and limited his minutes during the playoffs. on june 30, 2017, valencia announced that they did not renew their contract with tobey. in his first season at valencia, he averaged 5.3 points, 4.7 rebounds and 0.3 assists in the 2016-17 acb season.  iberostar tenerife (2017-2018) on july 24, 2017,
tobey signed with iberostar tenerife for the 2017-18 acb season.  on september 24, 2017, tobey won the fiba intercontinental cup with tenerife after beating guaros de lara 76-71. tobey was named most valuable player of the game after recording 21 points and 9 rebounds.  on december 23, 2017, tobey scored a career-high of 24 points in one game against urbas fuenlabrada in the liga acb. he posted three double-doubles in the 2017-18 acb season, on october 1, 2017 against san pablo burgos, on march 11, 2018 against zaragoza, and on april 15, 2018 against baskonia. he also posted a double-double of 18 points and 16 rebounds against real madrid, in the 2018 acb playoffs. tobey recorded two double-doubles in the 2017-18 basketball champions league, on january 10, 2018 against gaziantep and on march 14, 2018 against ucam murcia. he averaged 10.6 points, 6.3 rebounds, and 0.6 assists in the 2017-18 acb season.  return to valencia basket (2018-present) on july 9, 2018, tobey signed a two-year deal with valencia basket after iberostar tenerife did not match the valencian offer for the restricted free agent. on october 1, it was announced that tobey would miss three weeks of action due to a sprained right shoulder.   tobey posted one double-double of 16 points and 10 rebounds in the 2018-19 acb season. he recorded it against zaragoza on december 29, 2018. in the 2018-19 acb he averaged 8.7 points, 5.1 rebounds, and 0.5 assists, while he averaged 7.9 points, 5 rebounds and 1 assist in the 2018-19 eurocup.  he recorded four double-doubles in the 2019-20 season, all in the 2020 acb playoffs, against andorra, zaragoza,  san pablo burgos, and gran canaria. on may 12, 2019, tobey matched his career-high of 24 points in one game against movistar estudiantes in a liga acb game. tobey averaged 6.3 points, 5 rebounds and 0.4 assists in the 2019-20 acb season. he averaged 8.1 points, 4.3 rebounds and 0.6 assists in euroleague the same season. he posted his first double-double in euroleague on november 21, 2019 against khimki, in an eventual 89-84 win. with his 10 rebounds, tobey was also valencia's rebounding leader in that game. he was also the rebounding leader
in valencia's 59-66 win over bayern munich. that season tobey was also among the top performers in valencia's euroleague wins over alba berlin, fenerbahce, and zenit saint petersburg.  on july 12, 2020, valencia basket announced that tobey renewed his contract with them for two more years.  tobey recorded two double-doubles in the 2020-21 acb season, on october 27, 2020 against monbus obradoiro, and on january 24, 2021 against baskonia. he averaged 9.8 points, 4.5 rebounds, and 0.9 assists in the 2020-21 liga endesa, and 9.6 points, 5 rebounds and 0.8 assists in the 2020-21 euroleague.  in the 2020-21 euroleague he led valencia to a 83-76 win over bayern munich, scoring 18 points. he also dished out 2 assists and grabbed 4 rebounds, and with a 22 pir was valencia's top performer of the game. he scored the go-ahead two-pointer, bringing the score to 70-68. after bayern tied at 70 and sam van rossom again pulled valencia ahead by making 2/2 free-throws, tobey helped to extend the lead with 4 rebounds, 1 assist and a two-pointer. he was the top performer in valencia's win over eventual 2020-21 euroleague champion anadolu efes, grabbing 8 rebounds and scoring 21 points for a 27 pir. with a 18 pir was among the top performers against khimki, which valencia defeated 88-82. he was also the rebounding leader of the game with 8 rebounds  he was among the top performers against zenit saint petersburg, in a 62-91 win for valencia. he grabbed 4 rebounds, dished out 3 assists and by making 5/5 field goals and 2/2 free throws scored 12 points, for a 23 pir. he was valencia's rebounding leader in their 91-71 win over crvena zvezda, and with a 18 pir he was among the top performers for valencia in that game. with a pir of 19, he was vaencia's top performer in their 68-77 win over khimki, being also the game's rebounding leader and approaching double-double with 9 rebounds and 12 points. on january 7, 2021, he posted his second euroleague double-double against barcelona.  national team career in 2021, tobey secured his slovenian passport in preparation for the 2020 olympic qualifying tournaments. he made his debut for the slovenia national team on june 18, 2021, during a pre-qualifying friendly win against
croatia. in this game he posted a double-double of 26 points and 11 rebounds. he was also slovenia's second scoring leader and the rebounds leader.  2020 summer olympics  tobey grabbed 10 rebounds in slovenia's 112-77 win over poland at the 2020 fiba men's olympic qualifying tournament in kaunas. in the final round he posted a double-double against venezuela, being also the scoring and rebounding leader with 27 points and 12 rebounds. tobey helped slovenia to defeat lithuania 85-96 in the tournament's final in kaunas, scoring 13 points. with this win slovenia achieved their historic qualification to the men's basketball tournament at the 2020 summer olympics, while lithuania missed their first olympics since the independence in 1990.  tobey posted a double-double in slovenia's debut against argentina, a game they won 100-118. he scored 11 points and grabbed 14 rebounds in this game. next, slovenia faced host japan. they defeated them 116-81, and tobey chimed in with 11 rebounds, 6 points, and 3 assists. in the third and final game of the group stage, slovenia faced reigning world champion spain. with a minute and a half left to play, tobey caught an alley-oop from prepelic, making the dunk that closed the game. slovenia eventually won the game 87-95. tobey was slovenia's most efficient player in that game and was named player of the day by fiba. in this game he recorded his second double-double in the tournament, scoring 16 points and grabbing 14 rebounds. the win gave them the group's top seed, and they were set to face germany in the quarter-finals.   he was among slovenia's players who were especially praised for their performances against germany in the tournament's first quarter-final. he scored 13 points and grabbed 11 rebounds, recording his third double-double in the tournament. slovenia lost a dramatic semi-final against france by one point, 89-90. tobey was among slovenia's top performers with doncic and prepelic. he scored 23 points and was just two rebounds away from his fourth double-double in the tournament. with three double-doubles, he tied with doncic for the tournament's double-double leader. slovenia eventually faced australia in the bronze medal game, which they lost 93-107.  tobey played a key role in slovenia's run to the semi-finals. he and valencia teammate klemen prepelic were credited as slovenia's best players at the tokyo olympics after luka doncic.  personal life mike is the son of ken and kathleen tobey
. he has an older brother named kenneth and a younger sister named elizabeth. tobey majored in history while at the university of virginia. he wore number 10 in high school and college because he was born on october 10 at 10 a.m. and weighed 10 pounds at birth. ken sr. played basketball at st. thomas aquinas college, while elizabeth received a full scholarship to delaware for volleyball.  career statistics  nba  regular season  |- | align="left" |  | align="left" | hornets | 2 || 0 || 12.6 || .250 || 0  || 0 || 1.5 || 0.5 || 0 || 0 || 1 |- class="sortbottom" | align="center" colspan="2"| career | 2 || 0 || 12.6 || .250 || 0 || 0 || 1.5 || 0.5 || 0 || 0 || 1  euroleague  |- | style="text-align:left;"|2019-20 | style="text-align:left;" rowspan=2|valencia | 21 || 2 || 15.2 || .516 || .308 || .711 || 4.3 || .6 || .5 || .5 || 8.1 || 8.7 |- | style="text-align:left;"|2020-21 | 33 || 9 || 18.7 || .606 || .396 || .814 || 5 || .8 || .4 || .4 || 9.6 || 11.7  eurocup  |- | style="text-align:left;"|2018-19 | style="text-align:left;"|valencia | 22 || 10 || 16.3 || .574 || .333 || .486 || 5 || 1 || .3 || .8 || 7.9 || 9.1 |-class="sortbottom" | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"|career | 22 || 10 || 16.3 || .574 || .333 || .486 || 5 || 1 || .3 || .8 || 7.9 || 9.1  domestic leagues  |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2016-17 | style="text-align:left;"| valencia | 3 || 0 || 10 || 5.3 || .727 || .000 ||  || 4.7 || .3 || .3 || .3 || 0 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2017-18 | style="text-align:left;"| tenerife | 33 ||  || 20.9 || 10.6 ||
.584 || .320 || .610 || 6.3 || .6 || .7 || .3 || 1.1 |- | style="text-align:left;"|2018-19 | style="text-align:left;" rowspan=3|valencia | 30 ||  || 15.7 || 8.7 || .600 || .333 || .769 || 5.1 || .5 || .5 || .3 || 1 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2019-20 | 17 ||  || 15.5 || 6.3 || .557 || .313 || .667 || 5 || .4 || .7 || .2 || .6 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2020-21 | 35 ||  || 18.6 || 9.8 || .713 || .406 || .727 || 4.5 || .9 || .4 || .4 || 1  references  external links  virginia cavaliers bio  1994 births living people american expatriate basketball people in spain american men's basketball players basketball players at the 2020 summer olympics basketball players from new jersey basketball players from new york (state) blair academy alumni cb canarias players centers (basketball) charlotte hornets players greensboro swarm players liga acb players naturalized citizens of slovenia olympic basketball players of slovenia people from blairstown, new jersey people from monroe, new york slovenian expatriate basketball people in spain slovenian men's basketball players sportspeople from the new york metropolitan area sportspeople from warren county, new jersey undrafted national basketball association players valencia basket players virginia cavaliers men's basketball players
microlenecamptus obsoletus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fairmaire in 1888, originally under the genus olenecamptus. it is known from taiwan and china.  subspecies  microlenecamptus obsoletus albatus (matsushita, 1933)  microlenecamptus obsoletus obsoletus (fairmaire, 1888)  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1888
isabelle ahearn o'neill (1880-1975) was a stage and screen actor of the silent film era, a suffragist, and the first woman elected to the rhode island legislature. she also served in the state senate and, under president franklin roosevelt, in the federal bureau of narcotics. she was inducted into the rhode island heritage hall of fame in 2014.  early life and education isabelle florence ahearn was born in 1880 in woonsocket, rhode island, the youngest of thirteen children of mary j. (o'connor) ahearn and daniel ahearn. she was raised in providence, rhode island, and was educated at the boston college of drama and oratory. she also took physical education classes at harvard university.  she married john aloysius o'neill in 1907; they had one child who died as an infant. the couple separated after three years but did not divorce because she was a catholic.  stage and film career o'neill began her career as a teacher, founding her own ahearn school of elocution in 1900, at the age of 20. her students gave recitals at the providence opera house. ahearn also worked as an actor for nearly two decades (1900-18), taking both lead and supporting roles in primarily summer stock and vaudeville shows in rhode island and new york. in 1915, she began to take roles in silent films like joe lincoln's cape cod stories (joseph c. lincoln's cape cod stories) made by the providence-based eastern film corporation.  career in government in the 1910s, o'neill became an active suffragist and began to campaign for democratic candidates in rhode island. she eventually left the stage and took her elocutionary skills into a career in politics. in 1922, she was elected to the rhode island house of representatives from the 15th assembly district, making her the first woman to hold office in the rhode island legislature. she stayed in the house for eight years, supporting better protections for women in the workplace, better pay for teachers, and pensions for widows with children. a canny public speaker, she gave speeches in french and italian to reach a broader cross-section of the electorate. she rose to the position of deputy democratic floor leader before moving over to the state senate in 1932.  in 1924 she served as the temporary chair of the democratic national convention.  at the request of president franklin roosevelt, she left the state senate after only two years to serve as the president's legislative liaison to the federal bureau of narcotics. in 1943, she resigned and returned
to her home state, where she took an executive position at the rhode island labor department.  o'neill retired in 1954 and died in 1975. her papers are held by the rhode island historical society and include scrapbooks from her years as an actor and elocution teacher, as well as a brief autobiographical sketch.  honors and awards the resolution passed by the rhode island house of representatives recognizing march 8, 2007, as "women's history day" specifically mentioned ahearn's accomplishment in becoming the state's first woman legislator "just two short years after women gained the right to vote".  in 2011, the ywca of rhode island created the isabelle ahearn o'neill award in her memory to honor the state's women leaders.  in 2014, she was inducted into the rhode island heritage hall of fame.  references  further reading adler, emily stier, and j. stanley lemons. "the independent woman: rhode island's first woman legislator". rhode island history 49:1 (february 1991), 3-6. adler, emily stier, and j. stanley lemons. the elect: rhode island's woman legislators 1922-1990. league of rhode island historical societies, 1990. gregg, katherine. "isabelle ahearn o'neill: a starring role at the state house". women in rhode island history. rhode island: providence journal, 1994. mcavoy, mary carey. "isabelle ahearn o'neill: little rhody's lone theodora". woman's voice 26 (march 1931), 12, 31.  external links isabelle ahearn o'neill papers at the rhode island historical society (finding aid)  1880 births 1975 deaths people from woonsocket, rhode island american silent film actresses 20th-century american actresses american stage actresses members of the rhode island house of representatives women state legislators in rhode island rhode island state senators rhode island democrats 20th-century american women politicians 20th-century american politicians
the sedan cambrai football club is an australian rules football club based in the murraylands region of south australia which was initially formed in 1922 as cambrai sedan, a merger between the sedan football club and the cambrai football club.  history  the club initially participated in the murray ranges football association, temporarily shifting for one season (1925) to the murray river football association before returning and in 1930 were renamed to sedan cambrai.  in 1936 the club went into recess until after world war ii, when in 1947 it reformed and joined the barossa & murray valley football association, lasting for four seasons before going into recess again in 1951.  in 1955 the club reformed again and returned to the barossa & murray valley association.  sedan cambrai had a short affiliation with the gawler and district football association's aii competition from 1957 to 1958 before shifting to the torrens valley football association aii competition in 1959.  when the tvfa merged into the new hills football league in 1967, sedan cambrai joined the northern division and then were placed in the division 2 competition when the hills league was restructured in 1972.  in 1975, sedan cambrai merged with the mount torrens football club to form the mount torrens cambrai football club.  this merger would only last for ten years before the club split back into sedan cambrai and mount torrens in 1986.  the reformed sedan cambrai entered the mid murray football association and played in that competition until it disbanded at the end of the 2009 season when they returned to the hills football league country division (division 2).  in 2015, sedan cambrai was voted out of the hills football league division 2 competition by member clubs and were initially pushed into the c-grade competition. they were reinstated for the 2015 season before shifting to the riverland independent football league in 2016.  a-grade premierships   murray ranges football association (4)  1922  1923  1924  1927  torrens valley football association a2 (1)  1966  mid murray football association (2)  1988  2000 riverland independent football league (1) 2019  merger history  sedan  the sedan football club existed prior to world war i playing challenge matches against nearby towns.  they entered one-year temporary mergers with swan reach (1910), and cambrai (1919) before formally combining with cambrai to form the cambrai sedan football club in 1922.  cambrai  the cambrai football club were originally formed as the rhine villa football club, before being renamed to cambrai in 1918. rhine villa/cambrai played challenge matches against local towns before merging with sedan in 1922 to form the
cambrai sedan football club.  mount torrens cambrai  the mount torrens cambrai football club was formed in 1976 as a merger of the sedan cambrai football club and the mount torrens football club.  mount torrens cambrai participated in the hills football league division 2 competition until the end of the 1985 season when they split back into sedan cambrai and mount torrens.  references  books  encyclopedia of south australian country football clubs / compiled by peter lines.   south australian country football digest / by peter lines   australian rules football clubs in south australia australian rules football clubs established in 1922 1922 establishments in australia
"homeland" is a song recorded by american country music artist kenny rogers.  it was released in november 2001 as the third single from the album there you go again.  the song reached #39 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by jack sundrud and keith miles.  chart performance  references  2001 singles 2000 songs kenny rogers songs song recordings produced by brent maher
george sherman lane (28 september 1902, wayne county, iowa - 18 september 1981 in chapel hill, north carolina) was an american linguist. his research focus was the tocharian language.  life  lane began his studies in 1922 at the university of iowa, where he studied under henning larsen and received his first award, the early english text society prize. in 1926, he graduated first of his class, and in 1927 obtained a master of arts in english. this was followed by studies in reykjavik, where he learned sanskrit, as well as in paris, where he studied under meillet, vendryes and benveniste. at the university of chicago he collaborated with carl darling buck on the latter's dictionary of selected synonyms in the principal indo-european languages. after his dissertation, he joined the university of north carolina in chapel hill, where he conducted further research on the tocharian language, particularly the grammar of tocharian b. in 1952, he was admitted to the american academy of arts and sciences.  his son, eugene n. lane (1936-2007), became a professor in classical philology.  selected works   words for clothing in the principal indo-european languages. chicago, 1930.  vocabulary to the tocharian punyavantajataka. baltimore, 1948.  studies in kuchean grammar. baltimore, 1952.  further reading   walter w. arndt: studies in historical linguistics in honor of george sherman lane. chapel hill 1967  references   american philologists 1902 births 1981 deaths linguists of indo-european languages university of chicago alumni university of iowa alumni university of north carolina at chapel hill faculty 20th-century philologists
the 1944 western michigan broncos football team represented michigan college of education (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1944 college football season.  in their third season under head coach john gill, the broncos compiled a 4-3 record and outscored their opponents, 162 to 123.  the team played its home games at waldo stadium in kalamazoo, michigan.  guard dick leahy was the team captain. tackle glenn rodney received the team's most outstanding player award.  schedule  references  western michigan western michigan broncos football seasons western michigan broncos football
this is a list of gym chains by country. some gyms may have the same name but in fact be unrelated. this is a list of generally corporate-owned or franchised gyms operating worldwide.  africa  egypt  gold's gym  snap fitness  south africa  virgin active  namibia  virgin active  americas  brazil  bio ritmo  canada  anytime fitness  gold's gym  goodlife fitness  la fitness  planet fitness  snap fitness  world gym  crunch fitness  24 hour fitness  chile  hard candy fitness - santiago  costa rica  gold's gym  dominican republic  gold's gym  planet fitness  ecuador  gold's gym  mexico  gold's gym  hard candy fitness - mexico city  snap fitness  world gym - queretaro  planet fitness  peru  gold's gym  united states  24 hour fitness   anytime fitness   crunch fitness  curves international  equinox fitness  f45 training  gold's gym  la fitness   lifetime fitness  orangetheory fitness  planet fitness  snap fitness  town sports international  youfit  asia  hong kong anytime fitness fitness first pure  india  anytime fitness  fitness first  gold's gym  snap fitness  talwalkars  indonesia  celebrity fitness  fitness first  gold's gym  anytime fitness  japan   gunze sports (ja)  kuwait   gold's gym  malaysia  anytime fitness  celebrity fitness  fitness first  philippines  anytime fitness  fitness first  gold's gym  snap fitness  saudi arabia  fitness first  gold's gym  singapore  anytime fitness  celebrity fitness  taiwan world gym  thailand  anytime fitness  fitness first  jetts fitness - bangkok  virgin active  united arab emirates  fitness first  europe  germany  fitness first  hard candy fitness  mcfit  ireland   anytime fitness   ben dunne gyms  west wood club  italy  hard candy fitness - rome and milan  netherlands  gold's gym  jetts fitness  russia  gold's gym  hard candy fitness - moscow and st petersburg  world gym  nordic countries   elixia  united kingdom  anytime fitness  bannatyne's  ben dunne gyms   david lloyd leisure  dw sports fitness  energie group gyms   f45 training  fitness first  gold's gym  the gym group   jd sports gym   jetts fitness  nuffield health   places for people  puregym   snap fitness  sports direct fitness gyms   total fitness  village hotel club
virgin active  oceania  australia  anytime fitness  crunch fitness  efm health clubs  f45 training  fitness first  gold's gym  goodlife health clubs  hard candy fitness  hypoxi  jetts fitness  les mills international  snap fitness  virgin active  world gym  new zealand  anytime fitness  f45 training  jetts fitness  les mills international  snap fitness  defunct chains  bally total fitness  california fitness  esporta health clubs  references  health clubs health club
fishers brook is a stream that runs for about 4,000 meters (13,123 feet) at its maximum length in spring. most of the year, it reaches only 3,000 meters (9842.52 feet). it is located in storrs, connecticut. it feeds several small wetlands, including one small pond, before dropping off into codfish falls. it then leads into the fenton river. just before the falls, as well as in several other places, it is intersected by small bridges.  flora and fauna  like much of the surrounding bodies of water, fishers brook is home to many species of frog, toad, and salamander, as well as newts and mudpuppies. water snakes and smooth greensnakes are among the most common snakes here, and small turtles can be found sunning themselves on rocks. many birds and mammals also live along the brook.  plants that grow in the water here are mostly common water plants, such as pondweed, marshweed, sphagnum moss, waterlily, and cress. cattails, ferns, reeds, skunk cabbage, and invasive phragmites are found on the shores. fungi of all sorts are native as well.  see also  fenton river  codfish falls  nipmuck trail list of rivers of connecticut  rivers of connecticut landforms of tolland county, connecticut mansfield, connecticut tributaries of the thames river (connecticut)
wikstroemia fruticosa is a shrub in the family thymelaeaceae.  it is found in brazil.  description the shrub grows to a height of up to 4 m.  its leaves are light green with serrated edges.  its flowers are white.  references  fruticosa
rafael roballo maciel is a brazilian footballer who currently plays as a goalkeeper for juazeirense.  references  brazilian footballers brazilian expatriate footballers 1990 births living people people from curitiba association football goalkeepers rio preto esporte clube players mirassol futebol clube players abc futebol clube players america futebol clube (rn) players duque de caxias futebol clube players atletico clube goianiense players gremio esportivo gloria players esporte clube novo hamburgo players sport club sao paulo players ypiranga futebol clube players associacao desportiva confianca players esteghlal khuzestan players esporte clube taubate players luverdense esporte clube players clube recreativo e atletico catalano players sociedade desportiva juazeirense players persian gulf pro league players campeonato brasileiro serie b players campeonato brasileiro serie c players campeonato brasileiro serie d players brazilian expatriate sportspeople in iran expatriate footballers in iran
eija inkeri (1926-2012) was a finnish stage and film actress.  selected filmography  aaltoska orkaniseeraa (1949)  kvinnan bakom allt (1951)  the general's fiancee (1951)  references  bibliography   kari uusitalo. t. j. sarkka: legenda jo elaesaan. wsoy, 1975.  external links     1926 births 2012 deaths finnish stage actresses finnish film actresses people from kuopio
cottage grove is an unincorporated community in center township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  history a post office was established at cottage grove in 1848, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1951.  geography cottage grove is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
vernon wilbert turner (june 9, 1895 - may 28, 1960) was an american ice hockey coach and player who was the first person to lead the program at the university of denver.  career hailing from stayner, ontario, vern turner got his start as a goaltender with a team in cleveland, ohio before moving on to the duluth hornets. after only one year of existence the central hockey league (1925-1926) shifted from being a senior amateur league to a professional league. turner was the starting goalie for duluth in the newly created american hockey association, leading the team to a regular season and playoff championship in the first year. the league was hardly stable, however, and despite good showing on the ice even the hornets weren't saved from the troubles, transferring to wichita halfway through the 1932-33 season. that year proved to be turner's last with the team and he hung up his skates for good after one final season with the oklahoma city warriors.  though his playing career was over turner remained close to the game, becoming the rink manager for the broadmoor ice palace in colorado springs before he was asked to head the new program at denver in 1949. while the pioneers only won 4 games their first season of play, turner was able to lead them to an 11-11-1 mark in their sophomore campaign before turning the team over to former michigan standout neil celley.  head coaching record  references  external links  1895 births 1960 deaths canadian ice hockey coaches denver pioneers men's ice hockey coaches duluth hornets players ice hockey people from ontario sportspeople from ontario
william n. bowman (born 1868 in carthage, new york, d. august 28, 1944 in denver) was a prolific architect in colorado.  he was born in 1868 in carthage, new york.  as the eldest of five children, he had to quit school at age 11 to work in a woolen mill, in order to support the family after his father was injured.  hoping to become an architect and builder, he studied math and drawing at night, at a schoolteacher's home.  he first worked at an architect's office in jackson, michigan.  detroit architect col. elijah e. myers recommended he do a carpenter's apprenticeship, which he did.  he later worked for architects mortimer l. smith & son in detroit and thurtle & fleming in indianapolis.  and then was a member of rush, bowman & rush, a construction firm.  in the main part of his career he worked as an architect in denver and designed buildings statewide.  he designed more than 30 buildings in denver alone. he was president of colorado's chapter of the american institute of architects during 1917-1919. he died in 1944 at his home in one of his works, the norman apartments in denver, and was buried in fairmount cemetery.  notable works include (with attribution): adams state teachers college buildings, alamosa, colorado william norman bowman house-yamecila, 325 king st. denver, co (bowman, william norman), nrhp-listed  byers and cole junior high schools, denver  the colburn hotel, 980 grant st., denver, nrhp-listed colorado building, 401-411 n. main st. pueblo, co (bowman, william n., co.), nrhp-listed denver city and county building, denver douglas city hall, 130 s. third st. douglas, wy (bowman, w.n.), nrhp-listed el jebel shrine and the clubhouse, denver (with t. robert wieger) fairplay hotel, 500 main st. fairplay, co (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed greeley masonic temple, 829 10th ave. greeley, co (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed  koerner house, 1824 s. mount vernon st. spokane, wa (bowman, william), nrhp-listed mccook ymca, 424 norris ave. mccook, ne (bowman, william n. co.), nrhp-listed montrose county courthouse, 320 s. 1st st. montrose, co (william bowman company), nrhp-
listed  mountain states telephone building, 931 14th st. denver, co (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed norman apartments, 99 s. downing st. denver, co (bowman, william norman), nrhp-listed park hill methodist church, denver scotts bluff county courthouse, 10th and q sts. gering, ne (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed state office building (1921), ne corner of east colfax and sherman, denver, neoclassical weld county courthouse, 9th st. and 9th ave. greeley, co (bowman, w.n.), nrhp-listed yavapai county courthouse, courthouse sq. prescott, az (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed one or more works in greeley downtown historic district, roughly bounded by 8th st., 8th ave., 10th st., and 9th ave. greeley, co (bowman, william n.), nrhp-listed  references  architects from denver 19th-century american architects 1868 births 1944 deaths people from carthage, new york burials at fairmount cemetery (denver, colorado) 20th-century american architects
the gens lavinia was a minor family at ancient rome.  origin the nomen lavinius could come from the ancient town of lavinium, which was said to have been founded by aeneas, and named for his wife, lavinia, the daughter of latinus.  it could also be an alternate form of laevinius.  however, the first recorded member was a colonial magistrate at luceria at the end of the pyrrhic war, so the gens possibly originated from this city.  members  marcus lavinius, duumvir of luceria circa 275 bc; he minted bronze coins during his magistracy. publius lavinius, a latin grammarian, and the author of de verbis sordidis ("on vulgar words"), a treatise mentioned by aulus gellius.  he could possibly be the same person as the laevinus mentioned by macrobius.  quintus lavinius marcellus, provided a memorial tablet for his grandmother, julia philumene, found near st. peter's basilica.  aulus curtius lavinius suavis, named on a sepulchral inscription near the praenestine gate.  titus lavinius, commemorated on an inscription in the street between the colosseum and san giovanni, probably should be read as flavinus.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography  aulus gellius, noctes atticae (attic nights).  ambrosius theodosius macrobius, saturnalia.  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  theodor mommsen et alii, corpus inscriptionum latinarum (the body of latin inscriptions, abbreviated "cil"), berlin-brandenburgische akademie der wissenschaften (1853-present). oliver d. hoover, handbook of coins of italy and magna graecia, sixth to first centuries bc [the handbook of greek coinage series, volume 1], lancaster/london, classical numismatic group, 2018.  roman gentes
cecil rutherford "rud" rennie (1897-1956), newspaperman, was a sportswriter for the new york herald tribune, chiefly assigned to the new york yankees baseball team and the new york giants football team, for some 36 years.  he was a friend and confidante of many celebrated sports figures such as babe ruth, lou gehrig, joe dimaggio, pepper martin, and dizzy dean, as well as his many colleagues in the press box. much quoted from his writings as well as tossed-off quips, rennie was a member of the newspaper guild from its founding in 1933. he served on the board of directors of the baseball writers' association of america, and was frequently on the yearly selection committee for most valuable player and the honor roll, and was on the executive committee of the new york chapter.  early life  he was born cecil claire rutherford rennie on august 8, 1897, in toronto, the son of scottish-born parents james rennie, a coachman-driver, and christina rutherford, a cook, both in domestic service. later in his life, some media reported that his given first name was "clare" or "claire," but this is not supported by official records: it was "cecil." when the boy was 2, the family relocated to new york city, and "rud," as he was known his whole life, was raised in the upper west side of manhattan, attending barnard school for boys, a private boys' academy, now the horace mann school. he entered the school of journalism at columbia college, columbia university in september 1915. he was a member of phi delta theta fraternity and active on the school newspaper.  military service  upon america's declaration of war against germany on 6 april 1917, in his sophomore year, rennie withdrew to enlist. he signed into the new york national guard on 27 april 1917 and was mustered in as a private in the 29th company, 8th regiment, of the united states army coast artillery corps on 22 july 1917. after training, he was assigned to battery c, 58th artillery, of the coastal artillery corps at fort schuyler, the retired civil war coastal battery guarding the junction of long island sound and the east river.  rennie made private first class on 1 february 1918. then, serving overseas between 10 may 1918 to 27 april 1919, he was promoted to corporal on 1 october 1918 and sergeant on 24 november 1918.  engagements of the american expeditionary forces in france (gen. john j. pershing, commanding) in which he
participated included st. mihiel (12-21 september 1918), trench and tank combat against german defensive positions in northeast france, hampered by driving rain, mounting mud, and overstretched supply lines; meuse-argonne (26 september 1918 - 11 november 1918) frontal assaults village to village on the western front and through the argonne forest; and, post-armistice, the general defense duty recognized as "defensive sector." for his service rennie was awarded the victory medal with service clasps.  even in active duty in an artillery crew, rennie was obsessed by the writing bug. his wartime journals contain multiple references to a beginning freelance journalism career, with submissions of poems, short stories, and articles to magazines and newspapers. rennie was honorably discharged after return to the u.s. in may 1919.  journalism career begins  in new york city, rud rennie briefly worked as a beat reporter for the morning edition of the sun, in 1919-1920. in the latter year rennie was hired at the new york tribune as a general assignment reporter, often covering police cases and ship arrivals of notables such as hollywood, broadway, or sports stars. he was promoted to assistant city editor in 1922. rennie became a naturalized u.s. citizen on 16 june 1922,  taking a leave of absence from the tribune in august 1922, rennie sailed to europe to settle a maternal aunt's estate, thereafter touring ireland, england, scotland, and france (including places significant to his wartime military service) until the end of 1922.  family  rud rennie married mary cecilia maloney (born in massachusetts of canadian parentage) on 18 july 1925 at new york's church of the transfiguration, episcopal (manhattan) -"the little church around the corner"-an episcopal church known in the 1920s for its many connections to entertainment, arts, and sports celebrities for weddings, community forums, theatricals, and funerals.  there were no children.  the rennies lived in forest hills, manhasset, and finally huntington, new york.  cecil rutherford "rud" rennie's wife, who went by the name cecilia m. rennie, died in august 1954.  rennie's father james rennie died in new jersey, working as driver for governor george sebastian silzer, in 1923. his mother christina rutherford rennie's last recorded employer was james j. goodwin, banker and cousin to financier j. p. morgan, and who died in 1915. by 1920 she was an inmate at central islip state hospital for the insane
, where she died in 1932.  sports reporter, new york herald tribune  the year he married, 1925, rud rennie became a sports reporter for the newly consolidated herald tribune, after the two newspapers were merged in 1924.  as a sports reporter, rennie's primary assignment was the new york yankees baseball team, traveling with the team from florida spring training through the entire playing season, covering every world series between 1925 and 1953 and all all-star games. for the 1936 world series he was named one of three official scorers, a rotating honor within the profession. each year he then switched to the new york giants football team for its season with similar travel to games and bowls.  rennie was a prolific freelance contributor of sports and general interest articles as well as short stories and poems to numerous magazines, prominently collier's, the saturday evening post, sports illustrated, life, reader's digest, argosy, cosmopolitan, and american legion monthly. he also ghost-wrote many articles attributed to players, managers, and their wives.  friendship with babe ruth  shortly after transfer to the herald tribune sports desk, while attending the february 1926 new york baseball writers' dinner, rennie showed his easy, boozy, kidding friendship with babe ruth-as well as his lifelong musical predilection. according to biographer kai wagenheim (babe ruth: his life and legend), rennie "stood up...and, in a tremulous tenor voice, warbled a parody of little [yankees manager] miller huggins (lyrics by bill slocum) that had the boys dripping tears of laughter into their fruit salad:  i wonder where my babe ruth is tonight? / he grabbed his hat and coat and ducked from sight. / he may be at some cozy roadside inn, / drinking tea-or maybe gin. / he may be at a dance, or may be in a fight. / i know he's with a dame, / i wonder what's her name? / i wonder where my babe ruth is tonight?  "ruth was there," continues wagenheim, "and he laughed louder and clapped harder than anyone else at the table."  rud rennie served as an honorary pallbearer in babe ruth's funeral in 1948.  friendship with lou gehrig  in his stories and magazine features, rennie was an early booster of the yankees' first baseman and slugger lou gehrig, who had joined the team in 1923 and enjoyed his breakout season in 1926. when in 1936 it was noted in the media that olympic
swimmer johnny weissmuller was retiring from his long screen role as tarzan the ape man in the hollywood films memorializing the hero of edgar rice burroughs' novels, with urging by gehrig's wife eleanor (for whom rennie had ghosted a magazine article), as well as his agent, rennie promoted his friend lou gehrig's cause in hollywood as an actor. he helped arrange photography shoots (gehrig in a leopard-skin and wielding a cave-man's club) and screen tests of the muscular first baseman; he buttonholed agents, producers such as sol lesser, and hollywood columnists such as louella parsons in a publicity campaign to boost gehrig's chances. the slugger himself was unenthusiastic about swinging from jungle vines and wrestling lions, but he told rennie that he wouldn't say no to a man-of-the-people role in a western or mystery picture. the tarzan effort fell as if from a high height with a thumbs down from producer sol lesser and a telegram from author edgar rice burroughs to gehrig, care of united press, so the yankee could read it in his morning newspaper: "having seen several pictures of you as tarzan and paid about $50 for clippings on the subject, i want to congratulate you on being a swell first baseman." gehrig did appear in one 1938 sol lesser-produced "b-movie," a sodbuster called "rawhide," with gehrig playing himself as a baseball great retired to run a ranch, who is menaced by bandits.  with gehrig's 1939 diagnosis  of a.l.s. (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a progressive neurodegenerative disease that causes muscle weakness, paralysis, and ultimately, respiratory failure), rennie remained close to the ballplayer and his wife eleanor through gehrig's retirement and downhill slide until gehrig's death in 1941.  a much-cited interchange occurred when gehrig returned from the consultation and diagnosis at the mayo clinic in rochester, minnesota. rennie met his train in washington, d.c., where the yankees were to play. a group of boy scouts at the station joyfully greeted gehrig, and yelled, "good luck with the series!" gehrig returned their wave, and leaned toward friend rennie. "they're wishing me luck," he said quietly, "and i'm dying."  rennie was steps away from gehrig during his famous july 4 yankee stadium farewell, with the words, "today i consider myself the luckiest man on the face of the
earth." the article was reprinted in the new york herald tribune's commemorative collection of historic sports columns, wake up the echoes, published by hanover house in 1956.  a reporter restrained: the great yankees-mexican baseball league kerfuffle, 1946  in may 1946, the 20-year veteran sportswriter on the herald tribune was covering the ny giants' football tour, then in cincinnati, when informed by wire service reporters that he was named in a new york yankees lawsuit against the mexican baseball league; it charged the league with conspiring to poach its players to walk on their contracts and join players south of the border; it aimed to restrain rennie as an "agent" encouraging such a conspiracy, including recruitment of rennie's friend phil rizzuto, the yankees' prize shortstop. the sportswriter was alleged to have been seen in the yankees' locker room, influencing rizzuto and other friends to decamp. rennie, who had been merely sent by the herald tribune to cover formation of the mexican league, finding both positive and negative aspects to the effort, was surprised to be named in the yankees' restraining order, and hastened back to new york to defend himself.  despite much media attention to the team's  action against rennie, with the possibility looming that it would blow up into a first amendment case, the matter quickly deflated when the temperamental yankees president larry macphail withdrew his suit, but not before rennie was pressured by many in his journalistic cohort to atone by picking up numerous bar tabs; rennie regained the yankees' good graces.  jackie robinson and big league color barrier, 1947  rud rennie was in at the creation of another one of baseball's greatest news stories-though he didn't write it, and remained cloaked for decades, past his death. in early 1947, rennie was traveling with the new york giants football team in st. louis and met with an old friend, dr. robert hyland, physician for the st. louis cardinals baseball team and a singing partner with rennie in a boozy amateur barbershop quartet. hyland confided that some cardinals players objected to african-american slugger jackie robinson "breaking the color barrier" by signing with the brooklyn dodgers. on may 21, when the dodgers were to play st. louis at sportsman's park, cardinals would go on strike and refuse to play against a black man. moreover, the strike leaders were aiming on spreading the day's protest throughout the national league, white teams in a general strike until robinson was booted out of
his contract.  "when i heard this from doc hyland," rennie later told fellow trib sportswriter roger kahn, "one word came into my mind. in large letters. insanity. next, what a story! but i couldn't write it. if i did, people who knew of my friendship with hyland would trace it back to bob," who would lose his team physician job. so rennie telephoned his fellow veteran trib sportswriter stanley woodward, "told him what i had," and asked woodward to "take it from there." woodward made the tip his own story, contacting many sources-some of whom nervously denied the plot existed, others who admitted it but would not go on the record. the courageous reaction to woodward's questions and the planned racist action came from national league president ford frick. frick, himself a onetime sportswriter, was extensively quoted when he forced a meeting with the cardinals players and their manager in new york. "if you do this," frick warned the strikers, "you will be suspended from the league. you will find that the friends that you think you have in the press box will not support you, that you will be outcasts. i do not care if half the league strikes. those who do it will encounter quick retribution. all will be suspended and i don't care if it wrecks the national league for five years. this is the united states of america and one citizen has as much right to play as another."  the episode has now been widely cited in books as well as many commemorative articles on anniversaries associated with jackie robinson's life, such as red smith's column in 1977, "the outcasts of cooperstown", when the year's all-star baseball game was dedicated to the memory of robinson on the 30th anniversary of his signing with the brooklyn dodgers. the quashed players' strike of 1947 deserved attention, too, smith wrote, for its ugliness might have succeeded "...if rud rennie and stanley woodward hadn't exposed their intentions in the new york herald tribune."  "my faulkner and my hemingway": colleagues in the bullpen  in his elegy-memoir in the american scholar, veteran journalist and author william zinsser recalled achieving his "boyhood dream" after world war ii service when he joined the herald tribune sports department as an assistant editor. "it was in those pages, as a child baseball addict, that i found my first literary influences," zinsser declared. "the trib sportswriters were my faulkner and my hemingway, and
now i was in the same room with those bylines-come-to-life: rud rennie, jesse abramson, al laney....sports editor stanley woodward, red smith, joe h. palmer...."  rennie and his fellow trib men on the sports beat were, according to red smith, "incomparably the most gifted company ever assembled in one playpen. gifted, yes, and ascerbic, trenchant, iconoclastic and also good."  when, in 1928, the scrappy yankees fielder bob meusel objected to one of rennie's columns and tried to punch him in a hotel lobby, rennie's fellow writers of the various new york newspapers came to their colleague's rescue in person, separating them, and in print, they "put the chill" on meusel, repeating rumors that management had plans to trade meusel out of new york. meusel's contract was sold to the cincinnati reds after the 1929 season.  often in his books such as the boys of summer (1972), memories of summer (1993), the era, 1947-1957 (1993), and into my own (2006), the prolific and long-lived ex-trib sportswriter roger kahn-an ambitious junior writer in rennie's latter years-paused to mention (and quote from) rennie, "a trim, handsome canadian" who had "lady friends in several national league towns."  one such example, quoted often by others, followed the 20-year-old oklahoman mickey mantle's stunning world series win for the yankees (their fourth in a row) against the brooklyn dodgers, a truly olympian battle in 1952. the dutiful, modest young oklahoman seemed to have no idea of what his home runs and headlines portended for him. kahn quoted from the interview between rud rennie and mickey mantle: "nice series, young man," said rud rennie, who covered the yankees for the herald tribune. "what are you up to now?" "headin' back to oklahoma. i got me a job working with the pump crew down in the lead mine." "work in the mines?" rennie said. "you're the star of the world series. you don't have to do that any more." "yes, i do," mantle said. "my dad died, you know." "yes. sorry, son." "i got seven dependents counting on me." mantle named three younger brothers, a sister, his mother and his wife, merlyn. "that's six," rennie said
. "the baby is due in march," mantle said. rennie looked grim. "i can handle it," said 20-year-old mickey mantle. then, brightening, "anyways my father-in-law, giles johnson, says he's gonna name the baby 'homer.'"  after the national baseball hall of fame and museum was founded in 1939, celebrating the centennial of baseball, in cooperstown, new york, westbrook pegler, columnist of the chicago tribune and the scripps-howard and the hearst syndicates, complained that cooperstown was studiously ignoring the corps of sports journalists.  "baseball has lived as much by publicity as by prowess," he scolded, "for the glamorizing prose of the working press has kept the business in the public mind in season and out for more than 40 years and clothed it in the appeal of a national institution." if "babe ruth's bat and the pants of john mcgraw be relics worth treasuring under glass in the hall of fame at cooperstown ...then bill mcgeehan's portable typewriter which made mcgraw the mastermind is not less sacred." legendary sports writers worthy of honors at cooperstown, he said, should include ring lardner, grantland rice, damon runyon, and 12 other writers, including rud rennie. "for in baseball," wrote pegler, "the historians help create the history they write and are of the game itself." none would look "out of place" in the hall of fame. bob considine, another longtime nationally syndicated columnist and one-time sportswriter for the new york daily mirror, bemoaned in a 1969 column the closure of so many of new york city's great newspapers, and the passing of generations of reporters, columnists, editors, and publishers. he especially cited the vanished herald tribune and its bullpen of sportswriters, with rennie as one of the singled out.  photography, health, and the later years  a lifelong photographer, rennie's hundreds of surviving snapshot subjects included gehrig, babe ruth, casey stengel, yogi berra "he doesn't even look like a yankee" was rennie's oft-quoted complaint. joe dimaggio, jackie robinson, phil rizzuto, joe mccarthy, george selkirk, lefty gomez, dizzy dean, jacob ruppert, tommy henrich, rogers hornsby, grantland rice, hank greenberg, pee wee reese, leo durocher, red smith, al huggins, jim kahn, and numerous others in action, from spring training in florida
to a year's series, and everything in between, on and off the diamond. his family photo albums cover more than 50 years of activities in new york, southampton, florida, new orleans, st. louis, mexico, cuba, and the dominican republic. he always kept scrupulous notes as to camera, film, exposure, and shutter speed.  rud rennie suffered a heart attack during the yankees' spring training in 1952, returning to baseball coverage after recuperation.  his wife cecilia died in 1954, by which time rennie's own condition of heart failure necessitated an end to the arduous travel routine following the yankees. he then moved to cover thoroughbred horse racing in new york.  rud rennie died in huntington, new york on 6 october 1956, aged 59. numerous sportswriter colleagues attended his funeral. he was buried as a veteran at long island national cemetery in farmingdale, new york.  references   new-york historical society museum & library, bill shannon biographical dictionary of new york sports, http://sports.nyhistory.org/rud-rennie/ 7 june 2016; new york times, obituary, 7 october 1956, p. 86.  presbyterian historical society; philadelphia, pennsylvania; u.s., presbyterian church records, 1701-1907; accession number: 93 0510 49h 2 box 5, as found at https://www.ancestry.com/interactive/61048/47104_620303987_1584-00167?pid=1065821&backurl=https://search.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/sse.dll?indiv%3d1%26dbid%3d61048%26h%3d1065821%26tid%3d27104096%26pid%3d12484908321%26hid%3d1047537167395%26usepub%3dtrue%26_phsrc%3djmy782%26_phstart%3ddefault%26usepubjs%3dtrue%26currentpageisstart%3d&treeid=27104096&personid=12484908321&hintid=1047537167395&usepub=true&_phsrc=jmy782&_phstart=default&usepubjs=true&_ga=2.53286252.537311
209.1574535661-469798371.1569790498.   ancestry.com fact sheet: http://person.ancestry.com/tree/27104096/person/12484908321/facts  7 june 2016.  the columbian, yearbook, 1917.  new york, abstracts of national guard service in wwi, 1917-1919, new york state adjutant general's office. new york state archives, albany, new york. (database on-line(. provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com operations, inc., 2014)    6  new york, abstracts of national guard service in wwi, 1917-1919, new york state adjutant general's office. new york state archives, albany, new york. (database on-line). provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com operations, inc., 2014)  ancestry.com. new york, new york county supreme court naturalization petition index, 1907-1924 [database on-line]. provo, ut, usa: * ancestry.com operations inc, 2000, vol. 57, page 47; u.s. naturalization record indexes, 1791-1992 (indexed in world archives project), as found at http://search.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/sse.dll?db=usnatindex_awap&h=2993187&ti=0&indiv=try&gss=pt  7 june 2016.  passport applications, january 2, 1906 - march 31, 1925: 1922, roll 2051 - certificates: 200476-200849, 01 jul 1922-03 jul 1922.  index to new york city marriages, 1866-1937.  new york city department of records/municipal archives, as found at ancestry.com. new york, new york, marriage index 1866-1937 [database on-line]. provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com operations, inc., 2014.  7 june 2016.  7 june 2016.  huntington (n.y.) long-islander, 29 july 1954.  state population census schedules, 1915. albany, new york: new york state archives, as found at http://search.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/sse.dll?db=1915nystatecen sus&h=4888278&ti=0&indiv=try&gss=pt   7 june 2016; 	united states federal census
1920: islip, suffolk, new york; roll: t625_1269; page: 6a; enumeration district: 128; image: 920, as found at http://search.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/sse.dll?db=1920usfedcen&h=76098418&ti=0&indiv=try&gss=pt  7 june 2016; united states federal census 1930: islip, suffolk, new york; roll 1651. page: 13b; enumeration district: 89; image: 23.0; fhl microfilm 2341385, at ancestry.com/6224/4639221_00032/46414921?backurl=http://person.ancestry.com/tree/27104096/person/12910627068/facts/citation/28226268298/edit/record  7 june 2016; new york times, death notice, 28 september 1932.  kai wagenheim, babe ruth: his life and legend. new york: open road media, 2014.  john drebinger, "the one and only babe," new york times, 17 august 1959, p. 26.  gehrig, mrs. lou. "baseball bride." collier's, june 1, 1935, pp. 14, 30.  "gehrig seeks role as tarzan in films," new york times, 31 january 1936; michael beschloss, "when the iron horse (almost) played tarzan," new york times, 25 april 2014.  rawhide (1938), internet movie database: https://www.imdb.com/title/tt0030655/?ref_=nm_flmg_act_1  s. kaden, "als: the other tyrant in gehrig's life," http://moregehrig.tripod.com/id3.html  9 july 2016.  rud rennie, "gehrig has infantile paralysis; can never play baseball again, new york herald tribune, 22 june 1939.  eig, jonathan (2005). luckiest man: the life and death of lou gehrig. new york: simon & schuster. pp. 3-4; dave anderson, "commemorating the iron horse's iron will," new york times, 2 july 1989,  21 june 2016 from https://www.nytimes.com/1989/07/02/sports/sports-of-the
-times-commemorating-the-iron-horse-s-iron-will.html  coverage of farewell address: "yankees of past and present, fans, writers and officials to do honor to lou gehrig today," new york herald tribune, 4 july 1939, 17; rennie, new york herald tribune, 5 july 1939.  joe reichler, "mexican, major league mixup goes to court," associated press, in st. petersburg times, 6 may 1946, p. 12.   11 july 2016: https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=888&dat=19460506&id=ycawaaaaibaj&sjid=2e4daaaaibaj&pg=6072,6929760&hl=en  "court restrains mexicans in raid on yankee players," new york times, 5 may 1946, p. s1; associated press story, "lawyer calls players 'peons' at yank hearing, chicago tribune, 17 may 1946, p. 29; "rennie is exonerated," new york times, 19 may 1946, p. 53; g. richard mckelvey, mexican raiders in the major leagues: the pasquel brothers vs. organized baseball, 1946. mcfarland publishers, 2006, p. 4 ( 27 june 2016 from google books: https://books.google.com/books?id=vznuu0o4u48c&pg=pa67&lpg=pa67&dq=rud+rennie+yankees+mexican+league&source=bl&ots=cjytiau-na&sig=7xxcasjqa5xn7u2svx07pi-tedg&hl=en&sa=x&ved=0ahukewivq-kjusjnahxllh4kheyochoq6aeiitab#v=onepage&q=rud%20rennie%20yankees%20mexican%20league&f=false.  stanley woodward, "national league averts strike of cardinals against robinson's presence in baseball," new york herald tribune, 9 may 1947, p. 24; roger kahn, into my own: the remarkable people and events that shaped a life, p. 24, diversion books, 2012.  from google books 27 june 2016: https://books.google.com/books?id=sf39cm6zs98c
&pg=pt39&lpg=pt39&dq=jackie+robinson+rud+rennie&source=bl&ots=mu9etsciyx&sig=awlqnr0mk0dis_5viyzzfikodhq&hl=en&sa=x&ved=0ahukewi_49alt8jnahudfh4khw1ecw0q6aeiljad#v=onepage&q=jackie%20robinson%20rud%20rennie&f=false  red smith, "the outcasts of cooperstown," new york times, 27 july 1977, p. 39. 29 june 2016 from: https://www.nytimes.com/1977/07/27/archives/the-outcasts-of-cooperstown.html  william zinsser, "the daily miracle: life with the mavericks and oddballs at the herald tribune, the american scholar, winter 2008 (1 december 2007).  27 june 2016 from https://theamericanscholar.org/the-daily-miracle/#.v3fnboflc9y.  red smith, "literati of the playpen," new york times, 2 march 1975, p. 189.  roger kahn, into my own. new york: thomas dunne books, 2006.  roger kahn, "remembering mickey," cover story, the sporting news, 21 august 1995.  westbrook pegler, "fair enough" (syndicated column), 15 june 1939.  1 july 2016 from: https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=1955&dat=19390615&id=mbcxaaaaibaj&sjid=deefaaaaibaj&pg=4340,2860751&hl=en; james a. vlasich, a legend for the legendary: the origin of the baseball hall of fame. popular press, 1990.  1 july 2016 from: https://books.google.com/books?id=d0o_3uvnxq8c&pg=pa201&dq=rud+rennie&hl=en&sa=x&ved=0ahukewirnlypkdpnahulxd4khyq4bwu4hhdoaqg3mau#v=onepage&q=rud%20ren
nie&f=false.  red smith, "a character named berra," new york times, 30 june 1974, p. 191.  berkshire eagle, 17 may 1952.  huntington [ny] long-islander, 29 july 1954.  new-york historical society museum & library, bill shannon biographical dictionary of new york sports, http://sports.nyhistory.org/rud-rennie/ 7 june 2016.  u.s. national cemetery interment control forms, 1928-1962. interment control forms, a1 2110-b. records of the office of the quartermaster general, 1774-1985, record group 92. the national archives.  11 july 2016 from ancestry.com, http://search.ancestry.com/cgi-bin/sse.dll?db=intermentcontrolforms&h=1603338&ti=0&indiv=try&gss=pt; new york times, obituary, 7 october 1956, p. 86.  national cemetery administration. nationwide gravesite locator, as found at national cemetery administration. u.s. veterans gravesites, ca.1775-2006 [database on-line]. provo, ut, usa: ancestry.com operations inc, 2006.  7 june 2016.  1897 births 1956 deaths american sportswriters columbia college (new york) alumni
samba '68 is a 1968 album by marcos valle, arranged by eumir deodato.  reception  billboard magazine reviewed the album in their march 23, 1968 issue and wrote that the album was a "topnotch album of [valle's] contemporary samba music".  john bush reviewed the reissue of the album for allmusic and wrote that the album was "a vibrant set of brazilian pop, indebted to bossa nova and samba but undeniably americanized for a domestic audience. the result is a joyous album throughout that wears its dated sound quite well". bush also described the vocal harmonies of anamaria valle as providing a "beautiful counterpoint" to valle's voice and concluded that the album was "one of the best brazilian crossovers of the 1960s".  track listing   "the answer" (ray gilbert, marcos valle, paulo sergio valle) - 2:45   "crickets sing for anamaria" (gilbert, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 2:09   "so nice (summer samba)" (norman gimbel, m. valle) - 2:30   "chup, chup, i got away" (gilbert, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 2:18   "if you went away" (gilbert, m. valle) - 2:55   "pepino beach" (gilbert, m. valle) - 1:53   "she told me, she told me" (gilbert, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 2:44   "it's time to sing" (gilbert, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 2:54  "batucada" (gilbert, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 2:05  "the face i love" (gilbert, carlos pingarilho, m. valle, p. s. valle) - 1:58   "safely in your arms" (gilbert, pingarilho, m. valle) - 3:09  personnel  marcos valle - guitar, vocals anamaria valle - vocals deodato - arranger claudio slon - drums ray gilbert - producer production acy lehman - cover design, design suzanne white - design coordinator sung lee - design deborah hay - editing frank laico - engineer val valentin - engineering director richard seidel - executive producer sidney eden, merv griffin - liner notes kevin reeves - mastering, mixing bob morgan
- producer tom greenwood, carlos kase - production assistant terri tierney - production coordination bryan koniarz, jerry rappaport - reissue coordination ben young - research, restoration  references  1968 albums albums arranged by eumir deodato marcos valle albums verve records albums
romain navarrete (born 30 june 1994) is a french rugby league footballer who plays as a  for toulouse olympique in the betfred championship and france at international level.  he previously played for sm pia xiii and the limoux grizzlies in the elite one championship, and the hemel stags in championship 1. navaratte played for the catalans dragons in the super league. he has also played for the wigan warriors in the top flight and has spent time on loan from wigan at the swinton lions in the championship, and catalans and wakefield trinity in the super league. navarette has also played for the london broncos in the betfred championship  background navarrete was born in france.  club career  early career navarrete began his career at sm pia xiii, moving to limoux when pia left the elite one championship. in 2014 he joined hemel stags in league 1, making 6 appearances for the club.  catalans dragons navarrete joined catalans dragons in late 2014 and spent two seasons playing in the reserves team. he was called up to the first team squad in 2016 and made his super league debut on may 14, 2016, in the victory over huddersfield giants.  wigan warriors on 5 october 2016, wigan warriors announced that they had signed navarrette on a 2-year contract, for the 2017 and 2018 seasons.  in july 2017, navarrette was loaned back to catalans until the end of the season.  he played in the 2018 super league grand final victory over the warrington wolves at old trafford.  swinton loan navarette played on loan with the swinton lions in 2017 and 2018.  catalans loan navarette spent the latter part of the 2017 season with the catalans dragons on loan from the wigan warriors.  wakefield loan navarette spent the 2020 season with wakefield trinity on loan from wigan.  london broncos on 9 january 2021 it was reported that he had signed for the london broncos.  toulouse olympique on 14 jul 2021 it was reported that he had signed for toulouse olympique in the rfl championship  international career on 22 october 2016, navarrete made his international debut for france in their end of year test match against england in avignon.  club statistics  references  external links wigan warriors profile france profile sl profile 2017 rlwc profile  1994 births living people baroudeurs de pia xiii players catalans dragons players france national rugby league team captains france national rugby league team players french rugby league players hemel stags players limoux grizzlies players london broncos players rugby league props swinton lions players toulouse olympique players wakefield trinity players wigan warriors players
"this year's kisses" is a popular song written in 1936 by irving berlin for the musical film on the avenue (1937) and introduced by alice faye. popular recordings in 1937 were by benny goodman, hal kemp, shep fields and by teddy wilson with billie holiday.   billie holiday recorded the song on january 25, 1937, accompanied by teddy wilson & his orchestra (brunswick 7824), an historic session that marked her first collaboration with tenor saxophonist lester young. benny goodman (clarinet) also performed on the recording, along with several members of the count basie orchestra, including buck clayton on trumpet, freddie green on guitar, walter page on double bass, and jo jones on drums. jazz critic gary giddins, writes that the song "inaugurated the uncanny bond between billie and lester young, whose tenor saxophone--borrowed from hammond's favorite orchestra, the basie band--invariably complements, echoes, spurs, and inspires her in one of the most gratifying, unusual, and far too brief musical collaborations of the past century."  lester young recorded the song again on january 12, 1956, with several musicians from the original 1937 holiday session, including teddy wilson, freddie green and jo jones, for the album the jazz giants '56 on verve records.  recorded versions  benny goodman & his orchestra (vocal by margaret mccrae) recorded the song on december 30, 1936 (victor 25505).  shep fields and his rippling rhythm orchestra recorded the song on december 28, 1936 for bluebird records (no. 6757).  billie holiday w/ lester young and teddy wilson & his orchestra (1937)  hal kemp & his orchestra (1937)  hildegarde w/ carroll gibbons and his boy friends (1937)  lester young w/ teddy wilson - the jazz giants '56 (1956)  june christy - the misty miss christy (1956)  ella fitzgerald - clap hands, here comes charlie! (1961)  nina simone - let it all out (1966)  references  songs about kissing songs written by irving berlin billie holiday songs 1936 songs 1930s jazz standards
cale simmons (born february 5, 1991) is an american track and field athlete who competes in the pole vault. he was runner-up at the usa outdoor track and field championships in 2016 and was chosen for the 2016 rio olympics.  a member of the united states air force and based in rocklin, california, he began competing in the pole vault at a high level in 2012 and set a best of . this placed him in the top twenty american athletes for the year. the following year he improved to .  he dropped out of the sport for a couple of years but returned in better form in 2016. he made the national podium at the 2016 usa indoor track and field championships. a week before the trials, he set his personal record and qualifying mark for the olympics at an obscure meet called the kyle macintosh twilight at valor christian high school in highlands ranch, colorado, a meet primarily for high school and middle school aged athletes.  the pole vault was the only event open for open athletes and only 5 jumped.  he entered the 2016 united states olympic trials and jumped  to make his first american olympic team.  references  external links  living people 1991 births people from rocklin, california track and field athletes from california american male pole vaulters united states air force officers athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic track and field athletes of the united states united states air force world class athlete program united states air force athlete of the year military personnel from california
sukanya srisurat (; ; born 3 may 1995) is a thai weightlifter competing in the 58 kg category and representing thailand at international competitions. she competed at world championships, including at the 2015 world weightlifting championships.  she was sanctioned for using the doping methandienone.  in january 2019 she was issued a four-year doping ban until january 2023 after testing positive for  and .  major results  cwr: current world record wr: world record  references  external links  iwrp profile  1995 births living people sukanya srisurat doping cases in weightlifting weightlifters at the 2016 summer olympics sukanya srisurat sukanya srisurat medalists at the 2016 summer olympics olympic medalists in weightlifting sukanya srisurat world weightlifting championships medalists universiade medalists in weightlifting sukanya srisurat southeast asian games medalists in weightlifting asian games medalists in weightlifting weightlifters at the 2018 asian games medalists at the 2018 asian games sukanya srisurat competitors at the 2013 southeast asian games universiade silver medalists for thailand
eunidia albolineata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1959.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1959
anders josef europaeus (21 november 1797 - 24 may 1870) was a finnish priest and vicar.  europaeus studied in turku where he was influenced by the early fennoman movement. following his appointment as vicar in liperi in 1832, he developed a folk education and library system.  europaeus was a member of a committee that planned new ecumenical law for the grand duchy of finland. he took part in the diet of finland (1863-1864) as representative of clergy.  europaeus was married twice and he had altogether ten children.  early years and studies  europaeus was born in kuolemajarvi which was part of old finland, ruled by russian empire, major part of finland still being under swedish rule until 1809. his parents were chaplain of parikkala isak emanuel europaeus and maria kristina nee steen. he completed his matriculation exam in 1817. europaeus was interested in careers as teacher or theologist. eventually, he opted the latter and continued his studies in theological faculty at imperial academy of turku.  in viipuri europaeus had got influenced about local fennoman movement which emphasised education and awareness. after moving to turku, the contemporary political-artistic finnish national movement called turku romanticism influenced his nationalistic and religious views. he became friends with carl axel gottlund who was a notable figure in finnish national awakening. europaeus later helped him at selling his book otava.  europaeus regarded the then applied church service ritual boring and hoped it to be more experiential.  europaeus studied at the academy until 1820. he worked as teacher of russian language in loviisa in 1821-1822. in 1822-1825 europaeus taught russian and german languages in savonlinna regional school; he graduated as master of arts in 1823. following to savonlinna, europaeus continued as teacher in viipuri.  clerical career  europaeus was appointed vicar of liperi in 1832. typical to education-oriented priests of his time, he also promoted development of agriculture, administration and care of the poor.  at an early stage of europaeus's career, liperi was under effect of pietistic preacher henrik renqvist who had upset many priests of the area. instead of confrontation, europaeus wanted to mediate between renqvist and the church. europaeus opposed the seclusion of the pietists but respected their religiosity. he placated the other priests' attitude towards pietists.  europaeus opposed the hard church sanctions; he thought that their time was over and regarded that they
cause more harm than good.  in 1868 europaeus founded an orphanage to raise children who had lost their parents in the previous famine.  developing of education  europaeus wanted to develop the ethnically finnish culture and education; he contributed frequently newspaper sanan saattaja wiipurista. in 1857 europaeus founded in liperi the first folk school which operated four weeks every autumn and spring. although the school was discontinued already in 1860, europaeus had managed to arouse interest in education amongst the peasants, and a new school was established in 1869.  europaeus wanted to develop and widen the education of the clergy. he initiated foundation of diocese library that was funded by annual fees collected from priests. the library did not only consist religious books and newspapers, but also included a wide selection of books about human sciences. in 1845 europaeus founded the first finnish-speaking folk library in liperi; the annual five-ruble financing came from the funds of the parish. while large proportion of the books were religious, europaeus particularly wanted to include into the selection temporal and entertaining reading.  europaeus was interested at investigating finnish, in particular karelian history. he wrote several articles about history of settlement in the area. his writings were mainly without scientific basis, and he was largely inspired by kalevala. in 1843 he was invited to become member of the danish royal nordic society of antiquaries which also published his writings.  although libraries and schools started by europaeus remained short-living, he managed to create favourable atmosphere for folk education.  political career  during the 1850s europaeus was member in a committee assigned by the finnish senate to prepare a new ecumenical law. due to this, he was awarded doctor of theology title.  in the 1860s europaeus took part in politics. he represented clergy in so-called january committee in 1862 and in diet of finland in 1863-1864. he was a moderate conservative, reserved against large reforms and wanting to proceed with small steps in order to avoid of major failures. he was against the municipal administration reform, but on the other hand supported equal rights to over 21-year-old men and women to manage themselves and their own properties. he initiated founding an upper primary school in joensuu; this was accepted, and europaeus became the first inspector of the subsequently founded school. his other initiative, founding a finno-ugric faculty in the imperial alexander university in finland was rejected, because it was seen as interfering to internal affairs of the university.  family  europaeus was married twice
. in 1834 he married sofia nee boije af gennas, who died already in 1836 soon after giving birth to son anders theodor. in 1837 europaeus married selma nee lampa, daughter of helsinki merchant, with whom he got nine children.  references  bibliography   karjalan ajan-tiedot (1859)  om det noteborgska fredsfordraget och dess foljder (part of annaler for nordisk oldkyndighed; 1860)  nagra hypotheser angaende vainola, pohjola och andra i kalevala forekommande namn (part of annaler for nordisk oldkyndighed; 1861)  1797 births 1870 deaths finnish lutheran clergy members of the diet of finland
abidine sakande (born 22 september 1994) is an english cricketer who played for sussex county cricket club. he is a right-arm medium bowler who also bats right-handed.  sakande was born in chester to a father who had immigrated from burkina faso. he was educated at ardingly college and st john's college, oxford. sakande made his first-class debut for oxford university cricket club in the university match in 2014. he spent the 2016-17 off-season playing club cricket in new zealand.  sakande declined sussex's offer of a contract extension in 2019, and left the club at the end of the season.  he now plays for leicestershire.  references  external links      1994 births living people people educated at ardingly college alumni of st john's college, oxford english cricketers oxford university cricketers sussex cricketers english people of burkinabe descent sportspeople of burkinabe descent sportspeople from chester oxfordshire cricketers oxford mccu cricketers leicestershire cricketers
bettega is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alessandro bettega (born 1987), italian footballer, son of roberto attilio bettega (1953-1985), italian rally driver laura bettega (born 1968), italian cross-country skier roberto bettega (born 1950), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
xenorhabdus koppenhoeferi  is a bacterium from the genus of xenorhabdus which has been isolated from the nematode steinernema scarabaei in the united states.  references  further reading  external links type strain of xenorhabdus koppenhoeferi at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  bacteria described in 2006
hype williams is a music and art group best known for consisting of uk-born artist dean blunt and russian-born artist inga copeland (aka lolina) between 2007 and 2012. supposedly founded in 2005 as a "relay" project passed between artists every five years, the group has given few interviews, leaving music journalists and the media in doubt as to the exact nature of the project.  background, style and career the group's work encompasses widely experimental music releases marked by a lo-fi sound, including their 2011 album one nation on hippos in tanks, and distinctive video pieces, including the defunct youtube channel pollyjacobsen, which featured a bizarrely cryptic range of content. their work has drawn irreverently on popular culture and incorporated opaque imagery and contexts, as well as an idiosyncratic online presence. in 2011, they were signed to hyperdub.   the group's lineup has remained obscure, although blunt's artistic style has been heard within newer releases, and a variety of other names have also been invoked as members. a mysterious representative named denna frances glass has alternately been posited as either the manager of the project or a fake identity created by blunt and copeland. in 2016, glass announced that blunt and copeland were no longer part of the project, which would be continuing with other members.  discography han dynasty (2009, de stijl) improv (2009, self-released) (with bo khat eternal troof family band) infinity (2010, self-released) (with bo khat eternal troof family band) untitled (2010, carnival) find out what happens when people stop being polite and start gettin reel (2010, de stijl) one nation (2011, hippos in tanks) london 2012 (2012, self-released) 10 / 10 (2016, self-released) guccistreams 2 (2017, self-released) chalice (2017, self-released) rainbow edition (2017, big dada) l's (2020, world music)  references  hypnagogic pop musicians british experimental musical groups performance artist collectives
mathew swetenham (died 29 december 1416) was henry iv's bowbearer. he is commemorated by a brass effigy at st. mary's church in blakesley.  life mathew swetenham first appears in the historical records when richard ii 'granted him 6 pence a day being retained as saggitarius dei corona (archer of the crown)'. in 1390, he was appointed yeoman of the chamber. after richard ii was deposed in 1399, swetenham transferred his allegiance to henry iv who granted him £30 per year from properties in northamptonshire. in 1405, he was made yeoman of the king's chamber, armour bearer and high sheriff of northamptonshire. following henry iv's death in 1413, swetenham continued to serve under henry v.    the swettenham's country house was somerford booths hall.  mathew swetenham was an ancestor of the british colonial administrator sir frank swettenham.  references  date of birth unknown 1416 deaths northamptonshire yeomanry officers
this is presenting a complete list in alphabetical order of cricketers who have played for dhaka dynamites in twenty20 matches held by the bangladesh premier league. the dhaka dynamites franchise was formed ahead of the 2015 bpl edition, replacing the former dhaka gladiators team which participated in the 2012 and 2013 bpl editions. the list includes all players who represented the gladiators. complying with other club lists, details are the player's name followed by his years active as a dhaka gladiators/dynamites player, current players to the end of the 2015-16 bangladeshi cricket season.  please to note that this list does not include players of dhaka division who played in a team also called the dhaka dynamites in a non-bpl twenty20 tournament in 2010, that team having no connection with the bpl dhaka dynamites. all of those 2010 players are listed in list of dhaka division cricketers.  a  abul hasan (2015-16)  aftab ahmed (2011-12)  anamul haque (2011-12 to 2012-13)  awais zia (pakistan; 2011-12)  azhar mahmood (pakistan; 2011-12)  c  josh cobb (england; 2012-13)  d  dhiman ghosh (2011-12)  tillakaratne dilshan (sri lanka; 2012-13)  e  elias sunny (2011-12)  f  farhad reza (2015-16)  g  chris gayle (west indies; 2012-13)  i  imran nazir (pakistan; 2011-12)  irfan sukkur (2015-16)  k  alexei kervezee (netherlands; 2011-12)  l  chris liddle (england; 2012-13)  liton das (2012-13)  kaushal lokuarachchi (sri lanka; 2012-13)  m  mahbubul alam (2012-13)  mashrafe mortaza (2011-12 to 2012-13)  mehrab hossain junior (2011-12)  mohammad ashraful (2011-12 to 2012-13)  mohammad hafeez (pakistan; 2015-16)  mohammad irfan (pakistan; 2015-16)  mohammad nazmul hossain (2011-12)  mosaddek hossain (2015-16)  mosharraf hossain (2011-12 to 2015-16)  mustafizur rahman (2015-16)  n  nabil samad (2015-16)  nasir hossain (2015-16
)  nasir jamshed (pakistan; 2015-16)  naved-ul-hasan (pakistan; 2011-12)  nazimuddin (2011-12)  o  owais shah (england; 2012-13)  p  kieron pollard (west indies; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  r  raqibul hasan (2012-13)  s  saeed ajmal (pakistan; 2011-12)  saikat ali (2015-16)  kumar sangakkara (sri lanka; 2015-16)  saqlain sajib (2012-13)  shadman islam (2015-16)  shahid afridi (pakistan; 2011-12)  shakib al hasan (2012-13)  shamsur rahman (2015-16)  sohail khan (pakistan; 2015-16)  soumya sarkar (2012-13)  darren stevens (england; 2011-12 to 2012-13)  t  ryan ten doeschate (netherlands; 2015-16)  lahiru thirimanne (sri lanka; 2015-16)  alfonso thomas (south africa; 2012-13)  w  malcolm waller (zimbabwe; 2015-16)  luke wright (england; 2012-13)  y  yasir shah (pakistan; 2015-16)  references  external links    dhaka dynamites at espncricinfo  dhaka dynamites at cricketarchive  dhaka dynamites
legis volumni was a roman and byzantine era town in the roman province and berber kingdom of numidia in the maghreb. it served as an ancient latin catholic diocese. the town is identified with ruins near the modern city of lioua in algeria.  bishopric legis volumini was also the seat of an ancient bishopric, which remains a titular see of the roman catholic church.  known bishops  francis paul mchugh (august 1967 - may 2003)  juan tomas oliver climent (27 february 2004 - current)  references  roman sites in algeria archaeological sites in algeria former populated places in algeria
asharam dalichand shah (8 february 1842 ― 26 march 1921) was gujarati language writer who pioneered the research in gujarati proverbs and idioms.  biography  asharam was born on 8 february 1842 and died on 26 march 1921. he had served as the administrator of the several princely states of kathiawar.  works he published gujarati kahevat sangraha (a collection of gujarati proverbs) in 1911. it contained proverbs and idioms along with their versions, origin, use in different parts of gujarat and circumstances or incidents which resulted in their origin. it also presented the transformation of proverb if it is originated from sanskrit. he has also compared corresponding hindi and marathi proverbs.  his son mulchand had written his biography, asharam dalichand shah ane temno samay (1934).  bibliography  see also   list of gujarati-language writers  references  external links     20th-century indian linguists gujarati-language writers 1842 births 1921 deaths writers from gujarat 19th-century indian linguists 19th-century indian politicians
king of pro-wrestling (2016) was a professional wrestling event promoted by new japan pro-wrestling (njpw), which took place on october 10, 2016, in tokyo at ryogoku kokugikan. it was njpw's biggest show between august's g1 climax and january's wrestle kingdom 11 in tokyo dome and featured nine matches with four of them contested for championships, main evented by kazuchika okada defending the iwgp heavyweight championship against pro wrestling noah representative naomichi marufuji. this was the fifth event under the king of pro-wrestling name.  production  background the event aired in japan on tv asahi and worldwide through njpw's internet streaming site njpw world with english commentary provided by kevin kelly and steve corino.  storylines king of pro-wrestling featured nine professional wrestling matches that involved different wrestlers from pre-existing scripted feuds and storylines. wrestlers portrayed villains, heroes, or less distinguishable characters in the scripted events that built tension and culminated in a wrestling match or series of matches.  king of pro-wrestling was main evented by kazuchika okada defending the iwgp heavyweight championship against pro wrestling noah representative naomichi marufuji. the match stemmed from the previous summer's g1 climax tournament, where the two wrestled in the same block. while both failed to advance from the block, okada with a record of five wins, three losses and one draw and marufuji with a record of five wins and four losses, marufuji was victorious over the reigning iwgp heavyweight champion in their opening match on july 18. on august 14, the final day of the tournament, okada himself nominated marufuji as his next title challenger. during the two months between the announcement and the match, marufuji's ghc tag team championship, which he held in his home promotion with okada's chaos stablemate toru yano, also came into play. on september 25, after okada and his chaos stablemates gedo, jado and yoshi-hashi had defeated marufuji, yano and two other noah representatives, atsushi kotoge and daisuke harada, in an eight-man tag team match, okada and yoshi-hashi challenged marufuji and yano to a tag team title match at noah's october 8 event. marufuji and yano went on to retain their title with marufuji pinning yoshi-hashi for the win. the king of pro-wrestling main event marked marufuji's second shot at the iwgp heavyweight championship, having unsuccessfully challenged hiroshi tanahashi
for the title in september 2012.  the semi-main event of the show featured a rematch from the finals of the 2016 g1 climax as kenny omega took on hirooki goto. on august 14, omega defeated goto to win the g1 climax and earn a contract for a shot at the iwgp heavyweight championship on january 4, 2017, at wrestle kingdom 11 in tokyo dome. the holder of the contract would have to defend it until the end of the year in order to get his title shot. omega made his first defense on september 22 at destruction in hiroshima, defeating chaos member yoshi-hashi, who had defeated him during the g1 climax. following the match, yoshi-hashi's stablemate hirooki goto entered the ring and challenged omega to a rematch from their final match. omega first asked the audience if they wanted to see the match, but when the audience responded with a loud cheer, told goto to "go to hell". njpw, however, officially announced the rematch on september 26.  the never openweight championship would also be defended at king of pro-wrestling as reigning champion katsuyori shibata defends against kyle o'reilly. this match stemmed from the september 19 destruction in tokyo event, where shibata successfully defended the title against o'reilly's redragon tag team partner bobby fish. following the match, o'reilly confronted shibata, challenging him to a title match, which was accepted by shibata and officially announced on september 26. o'reilly, much like fish, held a victory over shibata from a ring of honor (roh) event the previous august.  both of njpw's tag team titles would also be defended at the event. the iwgp tag team championship match was set to feature a rematch from the previous june's dominion 6.19 in osaka-jo hall, where the briscoe brothers (jay briscoe and mark briscoe) would defend against the guerrillas of destiny (tama tonga and tanga loa). after capturing the title at dominion 6.19, the briscoe brothers went on to make their first successful title defense against the young bucks (matt jackson and nick jackson) on september 22, but were afterwards attacked by the guerrillas of destiny, who demanded a rematch. in the iwgp junior heavyweight tag team championship match, the young bucks were set to defend the title against david finlay and ricochet. on september 25 at destruction in kobe, finlay, who had recently graduated from his "young lion" status, replaced ricochet's regular tag team partner matt sydal in a match, where
the two teamed with satoshi kojima to defeat the young bucks and adam cole for the vacant never openweight 6-man tag team championship. following the win, finlay proceeded to challenge the young bucks to a match for their junior heavyweight tag team title. sydal had missed the hiroshima and kobe shows officially due to "travel issues". heading into king of pro-wrestling, finlay essentially took over his spot as ricochet's regular tag team partner.  other featured matches included an eight-man tag team match, where the los ingobernables de japon (l.i.j.) stable of bushi, evil, sanada and tetsuya naito take on hiroshi tanahashi, jay lethal, kushida and michael elgin. over september's destruction tour, bushi captured the iwgp junior heavyweight championship from kushida, while naito, the leader of l.i.j., defeated elgin for the iwgp intercontinental championship in a match, which featured outside interference from not only bushi, evil and sanada, but also kushida and tanahashi, with the latter two coming to elgin's aid. roh wrestler jay lethal had been a part of l.i.j., before having a falling out with the group during an roh show in august. another eight-man tag team match will feature four wrestlers from the pro wrestling noah promotion; go shiozaki, katsuhiko nakajima, masa kitamiya and maybach taniguchi taking on the njpw quartet of hiroyoshi tenzan, manabu nakanishi, satoshi kojima and yuji nagata.  prior to king of pro-wrestling, njpw was set to present a special match celebrating the october 1 launch of the new tiger mask w anime on tv asahi. in the match, tiger mask w would take on red death mask.  event  prior to the king of pro-wrestling event, tiger mask w defeated red death mask in a pre-show match. during the match, tiger mask w performed several of kota ibushi's signature moves, which led to the crowd chanting ibushi's name. shortly after the event it was confirmed that the character had been portrayed by ibushi. ibushi had resigned from njpw in february 2016, stating that he wanted to continue his career as a freelancer. throughout 2016, ibushi wrestled for several promotions in both japan and the united states, most notably taking part in wwe's cruiserweight classic tournament. wwe reportedly made several attempts to sign ibushi to a contract, but he insisted on remaining a free agent. prior to his
surprise return to njpw, wwe had already announced ibushi for their upcoming dusty rhodes tag team classic tournament.  the first title match of king of pro-wrestling saw the young bucks make their second successful defense of the iwgp junior heavyweight tag team championship against david finlay and ricochet with matt jackson pinning finlay following the more bang for your buck. in the next match, the guerrillas of destiny defeated the briscoe brothers to regain the iwgp tag team championship with tama tonga pinning mark briscoe with the guerrilla warfare double-team finishing maneuver. after the match, the guerrillas of destiny, along with their bullet club stablemates the young bucks, continued attacking the briscoe brothers. this led to tomohiro ishii trying to make the save, but he was stopped after being hit with the guerrilla warfare.  the next match saw hiroshi tanahashi, jay lethal, kushida and michael elgin take on the los ingobernables de japon stable of bushi, evil, sanada and tetsuya naito. the match ended with lethal and elgin isolating naito from his stablemates with lethal hitting him with the lethal injection, after which elgin pinned him for the win with the elgin bomb. following the match, elgin posed with naito's iwgp intercontinental championship belt, before the victors were attacked by l.i.j. as kushida was being stretchered out of the arena with a supposed neck injury, bushi nominated him as his next challenger for the iwgp junior heavyweight championship.  the next title match saw katsuyori shibata make his third successful defense of the never openweight championship against kyle o'reilly. shibata won the match by referee stoppage after locking o'reilly in a sleeper hold. following the match, pro wrestling noah representative go shiozaki entered the ring, indicating he wanted a shot at the never openweight championship. after shiozaki had exited the ring, shibata was attacked by evil, who laid him out with the evil and then posed with the never openweight championship belt.  the next match saw kenny omega defend his contract for a shot at the iwgp heavyweight championship at wrestle kingdom 11 against hirooki goto. goto attacked omega before the opening bell, hitting him with his contract briefcase and then dropping him with a ddt on top of it. omega, however, recovered with help from the interfering young bucks, and eventually won the match following a v-trigger and the katayoku no tenshi, retaining his contract. in the main event of the show, kazuchika okada made his
first successful defense of the iwgp heavyweight championship against pro wrestling noah's naomichi marufuji. towards the end of the match, okada hit marufuji with noah founder mitsuharu misawa's signature emeral flowsion move and then pinned him for the win with his own finishing maneuver, the rainmaker. after the match, okada had a staredown with kenny omega, setting up the main event of wrestle kingdom 11 in tokyo dome.  results  references  external links the official new japan pro-wrestling website  2016 2016 in professional wrestling october 2016 events in japan professional wrestling in tokyo 2016 in tokyo
in landscape ecology, spatial composition describes the content of a landscape in terms of the number of different categories of elements existing in the landscape and their proportions. most commonly the elements being measured are spatial patches of different types. together with spatial configuration, spatial composition is a basic component of landscape heterogeneity indices.  see also  patch dynamics  landscape ecology  references  landscape ecology
david sklenicka (born 8 september 1996) is a czech professional ice hockey defenseman who is currently playing with oulun karpat in the sm-liiga.  playing career sklenicka made his professional debut playing in czech extraliga with hc plzen during the 2014-15 czech extraliga season as an 18-year old.  in the 2017-18 season, sklenicka played in 49 games on the blueline for plzen, registering 14 points and a plus-minus +17 rating. the 21-year-old added one goal and one assist in 10 playoff games.  on may 28, 2018, sklenicka as an undrafted free agent, signed a two-year entry-level contract with the montreal canadiens of the national hockey league (nhl).  approaching the final year of his contract with the canadiens in the 2019-20 season, sklenicka continued his tenure with american hockey league affiliate, the laval rocket. after just 7 games through the opening months of the season with the rocket, and gaging his chance to appear in the nhl limited, sklenicka was placed on unconditional waivers by the canadiens and mutually released from his contract on 7 december 2019. on 12 december 2019, he was signed for the remainder of the season to join finnish club, jokerit, of the khl.  career statistics  regular season and playoffs  international  references  external links    1996 births living people czech ice hockey defencemen jokerit players laval rocket players hc plzen players people from rakovnik ice hockey players at the 2022 winter olympics olympic ice hockey players of the czech republic
the steyer bridge is a historic structure located on the west side of decorah, iowa, united states. this is one of the few stone arch bridges that continue to exist in iowa.  it was constructed by local stonemason michael steyer over twin springs creek in 1875. steyer emigrated from germany in 1867, and settled in decorah.  his brother joseph was the proprietor of the steyer opera house in town.  compared to other stone bridges in the state, this one is less sophisticated and is a good example of vernacular engineering.  it is a small structure that consists of a single arch that is formed by rough-cut limestone voussoirs.  the keystone is a block of dressed limestone with steyer's name and the date "1875" carved on it.  the spandrels and the walls that form the foundation for the approaches to the bridge consist of coursed rubble limestone.  the base of the walls and the lower edges of the arch were reinforced with concrete in the 1970s. the concrete bridge deck is edged with wooden posts.  when u.s. route 52 was relocated to this area in the early 1970s, the steyer bridge was scheduled to be removed, but local protests saved it and the highway bridge built over it. the bridge listed on the national register of historic places in 1983.  references   bridges completed in 1875 road bridges in iowa bridges in winneshiek county, iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa road bridges on the national register of historic places in iowa arch bridges in iowa decorah, iowa stone arch bridges in the united states
olenecamptus similis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
caryanda neoelegans is a species of grasshoppers in the tribe oxyini, found in indo-china and eastern china.  references  external links    caryanda neoelegans at orthoptera.speciesfile.org  neoelegans insects described in 1995 invertebrates of southeast asia
vladislav fedotov (; ; born 8 february 1997) is a belarusian professional footballer who plays for molodechno.  references  external links      1997 births living people belarusian footballers association football midfielders fc molodechno players fc isloch minsk raion players fc lida players fc chist players
chiang dao wildlife sanctuary () is a protected area in chiang mai province, thailand. established on 25 august 1978, the sanctuary covers 521 km2 of the doi chiang dao and southern mountainous regions of the daen lao range, north of the thanon thong chai range. the tallest summit is 2,175 m high doi chiang dao.  the sanctuary area is covered by various forest types, depending on altitude, including dry evergreen forests, hill evergreen forests, coniferous forests, deciduous dipterocarp forests, and meadows. it is the home to a number of endangered species of animals, such as long-tailed gorals (naemorhedus caudatus), sumatran serows (capricornis sumatraensis), asian golden cats (catopuma temminckii), and big-headed turtles (platysternon megacephalum). deignan's babblers (stachyridopsis rodolphei) and huia melasma are endemic to this area.  see also doi chiang dao pha daeng national park, formerly known as chiang dao national park.  references  external links   division of information system on wildlife conservation. chiang dao wildlife sanctuary   wildlife conservation office. chiang dao wildlife sanctuary   birdwatching, doi chiang dao national park  wildlife sanctuaries of thailand geography of chiang mai province protected areas established in 1978 1978 establishments in thailand
"gods and monsters" is the 22nd episode of the seventh season of the american series the vampire diaries and the series' 155th episode overall. "gods and monsters" was originally aired on may 13, 2016, on the cw. the episode was written by  brian young and directed by michael a. allowitz.  plot  despite their best efforts to help bonnie through the harrowing predicament she now faces, damon, enzo and caroline realize their options are running out and drastic measures need to be taken. with their only chance of saving their friend lying inside the armory, stefan breaks the news to caroline that they may need help from an unlikely source - her and alaric's twin daughters. elsewhere, enzo keeps bonnie preoccupied by bringing her back to their cabin but when his plan takes an unexpected turn, it'll be up to damon to make the ultimate sacrifice to save his closest friends. matt also appears.  feature music  in the episode "gods and monsters" we can hear the songs: "horns" by bryce fox "like a funeral" by erik jonasson "silhouette" by aquilo "don't panic (coldplay song)" by clairity  references  external links    2016 american television episodes the vampire diaries (season 7) episodes
clinton downtown historic district is a national historic district located at clinton, vermillion county, indiana.  the district encompasses 46 contributing buildings, 1 contributing site, and 1 contributing object in the central business district of clinton.  it developed between about 1880 and 1935 and includes representative examples of italianate, romanesque revival, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture. notable contributing resources include the c. & e. i passenger station (c. 1910), bogart park and claude matthews bust / memorial, scott-martin block (1907), h.h. wisehart building (1915), mark w. lyday building (c. 1910), ford agency building (c. 1910), and c. & e. i freight depot (1912).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2000.  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana romanesque revival architecture in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana buildings and structures in vermillion county, indiana national register of historic places in vermillion county, indiana
andrew rhodes (born 10 october 1977) is the interim chief executive of the gambling commission - the uk's regulator for the gambling industry, and was formerly a senior british civil servant, occupying the largest operational director general role in the uk government.  early life and education  rhodes was born on 10 october 1977, in neath in south wales.  he was educated at cefn saeson comprehensive school, followed by neath college.  rhodes studied history at the university of wales swansea, graduating with a b.a.(hons) degree in 1996, which was followed by an m.phil. in 2003.  career   andrew rhodes spoke often at events both inside and outside the civil service on the topic of social mobility and was open about coming from 300 years of coal miners, being the first person in his family to go to university and having lived in a household often dependent on benefits. his rise through the ranks of the civil service was very rapid - reaching the senior civil service at 30, director by 32 and occupying the largest director-general position in whitehall by 38.  rhodes worked his way through university and attained his first managerial position at ntl in 2000, working as a contact centre team leader.  he then joined pricewaterhousecoopers as a management consultant in 2001, but left the following year as the company ran into difficulty as the it sector contracted.  rhodes then worked for bridgend county borough council between 2002 and 2005, before joining the civil service at the driver and vehicle licensing agency (dvla).  at the dvla, rhodes became responsible for all electronic services, making dvla one of the largest online presences in the process.  rhodes brokered an innovative partnership with seat cars, which saw the car manufacturer supply 69 cars to dvla, at no cost, over two years.  this new promotional approach was unusual in government and was highly successful, winning both the national business awards in 2008 and the european business awards in 2009, both for best marketing strategy.  by the time he left dvla, rhodes had been promoted to director and had held the positions of customer services director, followed by director of products and services.  rhodes joined the food standards agency as director of operations in 2010, after the merger with the meat hygiene service.  this was the first time such a broad operational role had been created, effectively with responsibility for all of the uk's food safety controls.  after two and a half years at the agency, rhodes was appointed as the lead official and chief investigating officer responsible for
responding to the 2013 horse meat scandal, later becoming chief operating officer.  in 2013, rhodes was appointed as independent member of the royal air force air command audit committee, and served for 7 years until 2020.  in 2015, rhodes joined the department for work and pensions as benefits director, soon after being given the expanded remit of benefit services director with 22,000 staff and the management of the largest virtual telephony network in europe.  in march 2016, rhodes was appointed to the post of director-general, operations, which is the largest director general position in uk government, in terms of staffing.  rhodes became responsible for some 72,000 civil servants, close to one fifth of the entire civil service, and the delivery of all benefit, pensions, employment and child maintenance services in the uk, spending c.11% of gdp at the time - over £170bn.  on appointment, rhodes was one of the youngest director-generals in the history of the uk civil service.  in 2017, john manzoni, chief executive of the civil service, appointed rhodes as the head of the operational delivery profession.  almost constant reductions in senior posts and reduced structures meant that when rhodes took on the role of head of profession alongside being director-general, operations, what had once been two second permanent secretaries and multiple chief executives was now just one director-general with a remit larger than many government departments and the monetary equivalent of the 47th largest economy in the world.  in april 2018, rhodes resigned from the civil service and was appointed as registrar and chief operating officer at swansea university, serving in the role for three years at the university he had studied at.    in may 2021, rhodes left swansea university after three years  to join the gambling commission in june 2021, as interim chief executive.  the gambling commission is the uk regulator for the gambling industry and is a non-departmental public body, formed of a board of commissioners with a chief executive responsible for the effective running of the commission, with the commission being sponsored by the department for culture, media and sport.  due to the arm's length status of the gambling commission, although the people who work there work as part of government, they are not civil servants.  references  1977 births people from neath british civil servants united kingdom government information department for work and pensions british government officials alumni of swansea university living people
nettle creek (also nettlecreek) is an unincorporated community in nettle creek township, grundy county, illinois, united states.  notes  unincorporated communities in grundy county, illinois unincorporated communities in illinois
chinna durai is a 1952 indian tamil-language romantic thriller film, directed and produced by t. r. mahalingam, and written by k. d. santhanam. the film stars mahalingam, s. varalakshmi and g. sakunthala, with v. k. ramasamy and chandrababu in supporting roles. it is based on the novel irumana mohinigal, by vaduvoor duraisamy ayyengar.  plot   sisters indramani and chandramani run an association for the uplift of women. one day their car breaks down in the middle of nowhere and raja bahadur, who saves them, falls in love with chandramani. raja bahadur's father tries to fix his marriage with another woman, and in protest he leaves the house. noticing an advertisement for an english tutor for chandramani, raja bahadur disguises himself as one and takes up the job. chinna durai, a wealthy zamindar boy, returns from england after his studies and falls in love with indramani. when she wants to learn sanskrit, he goes in disguise and takes up the job. after several events involving kidnap and murder, the lovers and are united.  cast   t. r. mahalingam as raja bahadur and chinna durai  s. varalakshmi as indramani g. sakunthala as chandramani  v. k. ramasamy as raja sri krishnan  chandrababu as the secretary  production  chinna durai is based on the novel irumana mohinigal, by vaduvoor duraisamy ayyengar. t. r. mahalingam, in addition to directing and producing, also played in dual roles.  soundtrack  the music was composed by t. g. lingappa and the lyrics were penned by k. d. santhanam.  reception  according to historian randor guy, chinna durai was commercially unsuccessful due to mahalingam's poor directorial skills.  references  external links     1950s romantic thriller films 1950s tamil-language films 1952 films films based on indian novels films scored by t. g. lingappa indian black-and-white films indian films indian romantic thriller films
jambyl  is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by efim dzigan.  plot the film tells about the life and work of the famous singer of the kazakh people, bard jambyl jabayev.  cast  shaken ajmanov as jambyl   kurmanbek dzhandarbekov as kadyrbay    g. kurmangaliyev    german khovanov   kapan badyrov   kh. abugaliyeva as alma    nurmukhan zhanturin   kenenbai kozhabekov  konstantin adashevsky as governor    yefim kopelyan  semyon derevyansky   a. dzhalumbetov    erast garin   olesya ivanova   yevgeny lebersky   a. lukinov    vasili merkuryev   nina nikitina as teacher    zhagda oguzbayev   a. tashev    n. topalova    yeleubai umurzakov as suyumbay    amina umurzakova  references  bibliography   borys levitsky. who's who in the soviet union: a biographical encyclopedia of 5,000 leading personalities in the soviet union. k.g. saur, 1984.  external links     1953 films 1950s biographical drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films soviet biographical drama films 1953 drama films soviet black-and-white films
scuba is an album by the japanese new wave band p-model. it is different from other p-model albums in that it was made almost entirely made by guitarist susumu hirasawa alone and for its original issue in the  format: the album was packaged with an 84-page booklet that contained techniques to induce rapid eye movement sleep and hypnosis, the lyric story expanded scuba monogatari, photos of the involved band members in a coastal area that illustrated the stories, and an interview with the stalin vocalist michiro endo.  overview after the release of p-model's album another game, a process protracted primarily by their then-current label tokuma shoten, leader susumu hirasawa was exhausted of dealing with major labels, so chose to have the band be independent for some time. in an apartment occupied by friend and former co-worker  film production company ac-unit, he and a group of friends turned a room into a home studio, and there he and others in various lineups recorded music.  around the time hirasawa planned to make something more "proper", he was approached by the jicc publishing bureau, makers of , a subculture-focused magazine that had covered p-model a number of times beforehand. they asked for the group to make the second entry in their burgeoning  line, which would allow them total freedom from recording industry association of japan censorship.  bass and drum parts were handled by hirasawa with a korg polysix and a korg kpr-77. p-model's rhythm section was in a state of flux at the time. manager  sought to draw talented personnel to the band. by summer 1984 it had already been decided that tainaka, who felt he was "at the limit of [his] strength", would leave. hirose at some point called /after dinner member  to be the band's new bassist,. then went to current bassist tatsuya kikuchi's house to tell him "you are already fired". tainaka had written one song for the album and kikuchi recorded basslines for one or two tracks, materials that went unused. the tour for the album featured tainaka on drums and yokogawa on bass and other instruments. the promotional photoshoot for scuba had been done before kikuchi's dismissal from p-model, and as such, he was part of the ad campaign for an album he does not appear in, by a band he hadn't been part of for months.  track listing  endo's
segment on "looping opposition" is not present on the cd mix of the track, shortening it by 23 seconds. the cassette book version contains sheet music for a , credited to  and sequenced between "seven joint man" and "ohayo ii". no recording of this composition by hirasawa or anyone involved with the album exists.  personnel p-model - production, arrangements susumu hirasawa - vocals, guitar, synthesizer, drum machine, sampler,  programming, book text shunichi miura - synthesizers  additional personnel akemi tsujitani (ac unit) - clothes construction & leg, backing vocals on "boat" michiro endo (the stalin) - voice on "looping opposition" (cassette book version only) akiro "kamio" arishima (ac unit) - synthesizer on "fish song" mugen kanzaki (eco) - hard cover design yumiko onozawa - red clothes making yasuhiro ichikawa (pool) - photography yuichi hirasawa (credited as "yuhichi hirasawa") - art director model house - editorial coordination mitsuru hirose - artist management special thanks: kuniharu kawasaki, , yoshikazu takahashi, yuji matsuda, kayo muto  references  citations  bibliography   .  external links   1984 albums p-model albums japanese-language albums
dysthaeta anomala is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pascoe in 1859. it is known from australia.  references  epicastini beetles described in 1859
st. andrews international school sukhumvit 107 is an international school for children aged 2 to 18 years old in bangna, bangkok, thailand. sukhumvit 107 is one of four schools in thailand under the schools group cognita, along with st. andrews international school, rayong, st. andrews international school, dusit, and st. andrews international school, sathorn.  curriculum   sukhumvit 107 delivers a curriculum aligned with the english national curriculum utilizing the ib framework. the school offers igcse's for years 10 and 11, and the ib diploma for years 12 and 13.  english language  sukhumvit 107 teaches in the english curriculum, and provides an english as an additional language (eal) program for students whose english is not their primary language. the program is meant to provide a short term acquisition of the english language in order to ensure a fast integration into academic and social life.  ict program  sukhumvit 107's information and communications technology (ict) program enables students to use technology in a responsible manner. the school is an official common sense digital citizenship certified school, and provides classroom time to interact with technology. igcse and ib students are required to bring in their own laptops.  accreditation  sukhumvit 107 currently holds silver level accreditation from the education development trust, indicating outstanding performance in key categories, including students' personal development, administrative leadership, and inclusion to all students' academic progression.  athletics  sukhumvit 107's physical education program rotates through a variety of activities each term, including badminton, ballet, basketball, and circuit training. the campus currently has a 25-meter swimming pool, football pitches, athletic fields, and an indoor basketball court. the school's basketball and athletic teams compete regularly at the thailand international schools activity conference (tisac). additionally, students participate in annual trips to other asian countries as part of fobisia (federation of british international schools in asia) to participate in the fobisia games.  university preparation  university counselling program  sukhumvit 107 places an emphasis on preparing students for universities all around the world through personalized support from the counselling team.  the school also encourages heavy parent involvement through parent information sessions and meetings with students' families to plan life after school.  references   bang na district cognita international schools in bangkok
the kaur (russian: , universal spacecraft series) was a very successful satellite bus designed and manufactured by iss reshetnev (then npo pm). it is a pressurized bus originally developed in the 1960s, it has been used from low earth orbit to medium earth orbit and even to geo. it has four different generations and its different versions have been used from civilian communications to satellite navigation.  generations  kaur-1 the kaur-1 was a pressurised cylinder with a diameter of 2 m, length of 3 m and weighed 800 kg. it had no propulsion system, and instead used a passive single-axis magneto-gravity stabilisation system. first generation of the bus, used on:  tsyklon  sfera  parus  tsikada  kaur-2 the kaur-2 was designed by okb-1 (and later reshetnev company) for the molniya satellites. it was originally an experimental bus, but after successful missions, was put into production. the bus had a sealed 2.5 cubic meter internal volume to stabilize the temperature. its attitude control system could point with a 10° accuracy, and transmitted in the 10 m bands. its propulsion system was derived from the venera 1va probes. it used the kdu-414 propellant system and s5.31 engine from 1960 to 1974, after which it upgraded to the kdu-414a with the s5.114 engine. this had a specific impulse of 290 seconds.   molniya-1+  molniya-1t  molniya-2  molniya-3  molniya-3k  kaur-3 this was developed in the 1960s for the first russian geosynchronous communications satellites, for repeaters and tv broadcasts. it has a three-axis attitude control system with an accuracy of 0.25°, and independently tracking solar panels.· as part of the development, in july 1974 a proton dm rocket put a molniya-1 into geosynchronous orbit as a test communications methods.   raduga  ekran  ekran-m  gorizont  globus  kaur-4 the kaur-4 was designed for russian geosynchronous satellites in the 1980s. it reached flight status in the 1990s.   potok  tselina  luch  gals (ekspress)  ekspress-a  ekspress-am  sesat-1  ekspress  while not presented as such, the ekspress satellite bus can be considered
at least its replacement. it is an unpressurized bus originally designed for geo, but that has been adapted for medium earth orbit and to highly elliptical orbit.  see also  iss reshetnev - designer and manufacturer of the platform.  ekspress (satellite bus) - the platform that replaced kaur for the most demanding applications.  references  external links  iss reshetnev  satellite buses  communications satellites satellites of russia satellites of the soviet union
in the history of journalism in russia, thick journal or thick magazine (, ) was a type of literary magazine, regarded to be an important tradition originated in russian empire, continued through the times of the soviet union and into the modern russia.  the name comes from its format: a typical 19th-century issue of a "thick journal" was 300-500 pages, appeared several times a year. the volume was roughly divided between literary publications (short stories, serialized novels, drama, poetry, etc., including translations) and journalism (criticism of literature, arts, music, political and social reviews and essays, calendars and reviews of current events, etc). in late russian empire it was a major vehicle of propagation of culture across the vast expanses of the country, as well as a major component of cultural life of russian emigres. notable examples of early "thick journals" include вестник европы, «московскии телеграф», «телескоп», «библиотека для чтения», «современник», «отечественные записки», «мир божии»,  «жизнь», «образование», «современная жизнь».  references  literary magazines published in russia
kelsie whitmore (born july 5, 1998) is a baseball pitcher and outfielder who is a member of the united states women's national baseball team.  references  external links   kelsie whitmore on team usa  female baseball players baseball catchers american baseball players 1998 births living people baseball players at the 2015 pan american games american sportswomen sonoma stompers players pan american games medalists in baseball pan american games gold medalists for the united states medalists at the 2015 pan american games 21st-century american women
shaheen foundation () is a welfare foundation of the pakistan air force. shaheen foundation works in different sectors ranging from education to aviation.  companies   fm 100 radio  shaheen airport services  shaheen aerotraders  shaheen knitwear  shaheen complex, karachi  shaheen complex, lahore  shaheen medical services  hawk advertising  fazaia welfare education school system fazaia housing society  saps aviation college  air eagle aviation academy  shaheen welfare housing scheme, peshawar.  see also  the establishment (pakistan), the pakistan military and isi controlled deep state army welfare trust, also known as askari group of companies, a diversified conglomerate company run by pakistan army fauji foundation, similar business run by the pakistan army bahria foundation, similar business run by the pakistan navy defence housing authority, similar real estate business run by the pakistani military  evacuee trust property board, dha controls large tracts of their land military inc., book by ayesha siddiqa on pakistan's military economy and its consequences  military-industrial complex, an informal alliance between a nation's military and the defense industry  references   pakistan air force 1977 establishments in pakistan organizations established in 1977
fort spokane was a u.s. army frontier outpost in lincoln county, washington. it was located at the confluence of the columbia and spokane rivers and was used to separate the colville and spokane tribes on their reservations from the newly established city of spokane. the fort was last used in 1929 and was later incorporated into the lake roosevelt national recreation area and is listed on the national register of historic places.  history  background the us army stationed troops at white bluffs on the columbia river, at foster creek on the okanogan river, and at spokane falls to manage potential unrest amongst the colville,  spokane, and palouse peoples.  the troops at white bluffs and foster creek were moved to a post south of lake chelan in 1878, closer to chief moses.  difficult to supply, camp chelan was abandoned and the troops moved to a new site, camp spokane.  after the colville reservation was established in 1872, and the spokane reservation in 1881, the us army assumed policing responsibilities until 1890.  use as an outpost fort spokane was founded in the fall of 1880 by lt. colonel henry c. merriam and second infantry regiment as camp spokane. it was renamed fort spokane in 1882.  the fourth infantry regiment took over in 1886, and the sixteenth infantry regiment in 1896.  fort spokane was strategically located at the convergence of the columbia river and the spokane river about  west-northwest of the city of spokane, it was the last army frontier post established in the northwest. in 1884 there were about 25 buildings, including six barracks, a schoolroom, an ice house and a two-story administrative building topped with a glass-sided cupola. eventually there were about 50 buildings built on the post which included  officers' quarters, enlisted men's barracks, a hospital, chapel, post headquarters, morgue, quartermaster warehouses, shops, stables, and post trader store. the post served to consolidate older posts like fort colville closer to the population areas, and as a buffer between the indian reservations and settlers in the area. when the spanish-american war broke out in 1898 the troops at fort spokane were moved elsewhere and the fort was turned over to the colville indian agency. in 1899 the post became a boarding school for indian children until 1914, when the post became a tuberculosis sanatorium for the next 15 years. the site was abandoned by the government in 1929.  preservation and restoration the national park service took over the site in 1960 with only four original buildings remaining from the fort. four buildings and the site have been
preserved and are now part of the park service's lake roosevelt national recreation area. the restoration has saved the 1884 stable, the 1888 powder magazine, the 1889 reservoir and the 1892 guard house.  see also  national register of historic places listings in lincoln county, washington miles, washington - post office address for the fort. fort colville fort sherman (idaho)  references  external links  fur trade spokane history of the pacific northwest north west company forts 1880 establishments in the united states lincoln county, washington buildings and structures in lincoln county, washington national register of historic places in lincoln county, washington
robert william hook (4 june 1828 - 28 june 1911) was a fisherman and innkeeper and the coxswain of the royal national lifeboat institution (rnli) lowestoft lifeboat and with private companies from 1853 to 1883 and who has been credited with saving more than 600 lives in addition to two cats and a dog. he was twice awarded the rnli silver medal for gallantry.  in 1883 he was dismissed from the service amid much controversy for failing to launch the lifeboat on 28 october 1882 when over 22 people died.  early life bob hook was born in lowestoft in suffolk in 1828, the son of robert hook, a fisherman and beach-man, and elizabeth ellis. in 1844 aged 16 he joined his father as a lifeboatman, and in 1853 aged 25 he was appointed coxswain of the lowestoft lifeboat which carried an annual salary of £80 plus other fees and payments. in the same year he married charlotte boast.  in 1859 hook was awarded the rnli silver medal for rescuing in a heavy gale the crew of 14 from the steamer shamrock on 1 november 1859. hook received a second award clasp in 1873 for his part in rescuing the crew of 10 from the norwegian vessel expedite which had gone ashore on holm sand in a gale and had dismasted on 13 november 1872.  his wife charlotte hook died in 1879 aged 49, and in 1881 hook married his widowed housekeeper, mrs sarah ann goldsmith, at the same time adopting her two children. for some years he was the innkeeper of the fisherman's arms public house in lowestoft.  as coxswain at lowestoft  on 28 october 1882 the isis, william thrift, secret and other vessels were wrecked with great loss of life in the neighbourhood of lowestoft during a heavy storm. the crew of the lowestoft lifeboat 'samuel plimsoll' did not immediately launch their vessel to undertake a rescue, but hook and his crew were eventually induced to launch their lifeboat and rescued 17 men. their reluctance to launch was because they felt they had not been fairly treated during an incident earlier in the year when they had not been able to effect the rescue of a distressed fishing smack; however, a lifeboat from nearby pakefield had managed to reach it resulting in the lowestoft crew not getting their full pay allowance, which caused bitter resentment.  hook was coxswain when on 14 november 1882, 25 men of the lowestoft lifeboat rescued the eight-man crew of the barque berthon following which each lifeboatman was awarded a silver medal as a reward for their bravery.
as coxswain during the incidents that had occurred on the evening of 28 october 1882, hook was called before a board of inquiry held at lowestoft on 13 to 16 december 1882 to explain why he was serving customers at his inn at the time the ships were being wrecked. he was questioned as to why the lowestoft lifeboat did not proceed to render assistance to the isis and other vessels before 11.30 p.m. on that day and then only after hook had been confronted about the matter and after he and the crew had been offered a financial inducement to do so. in a scathing report, the inquiry said of hook: "...we are told that he has since then gone out, i think, on four separate occasions, and rendered good service in the saving of life. it cannot, however, be denied that hook's conduct on and before the 28th of october in taking part with the beachmen has resulted in a great loss of life." hook was subsequently dismissed from the service, having served 39 years with the rnli at lowestoft - 30 of them as coxswain.  in may 1883 hook was among a contingent of ten lowestoft fishermen who joined about 400 other fishermen from across great britain as guests at the international fisheries exhibition at south kensington which was opened by the prince of wales. during their stay in london the fishermen were taken to windsor castle to view the state apartments and were entertained by sir henry knight, the lord mayor of london at the mansion house.  declining years  in january 1884 hook put his public house the fisherman's arms up for sale, but not finding a buyer he carried on the business for another ten years. in 1892 he was among a number of lifeboatmen from lowestoft who were each rewarded with a cash sum and a silver medal for saving the crew of the austrian brig osip 26 years earlier; the reason for the delay in receiving the reward was attributed to the fact that at the time of the rescue austria was at war with prussia and italy and the matter was overlooked.  in the last months of his life hook was bedridden and frail. he died at his home on 28 june 1911 aged 83. he was survived by his widow sarah ann hook and his two adopted children. among the mourners at his funeral were thirty of his fellow lifeboatmen wearing their distinctive cork jackets, eight of whom acted as pallbearers. the epitaph on his headstone reads "in ever loving memory of this brave and noble man".  hook's obituary in the lowestoft journal wrote of him: '
robert hook, or, as everyone familiarly called him, bob hook, lowestoft's great lifeboat hero, is dead! for months past the gnarled, weather beaten old sea warrior, of giant frame, he stood over 6ft. 3" and once of immense strength, has laid helpless as a child, and on wednesday afternoon the 28th of june he passed peacefully away. his death being in vivid contrast with the strenuousness of his young days, when he was coxswain of the lifeboat, and when, with lion-hearted courage, and never daunted when the call came to save life, as he said "let the storm rage and the sea roar ever so fiercely". bob hook's active days have long been over - he was 84 years of age (sic) and it has been somewhat of a reproach that an effort was not made to render his declining years more comfortable. he has been able to get along, for he was very thrifty, but it would have been an act of grace and an acknowledgement of his splendid service if there had been some recognition'.lowestoft journal, 30 june 1911  references  further reading  robert w hook - a forgotten local hero, biography, by c.l. hook, published in 2015, .  external links  print of hook on the look and learn website  1828 births 1911 deaths people from lowestoft royal national lifeboat institution people
confalone is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  marina confalone (born 1951), italian actress simone confalone (born 1974), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
pavle despalj (18 june 1934 - 16 december 2021) was a croatian composer and conductor.  biography pavle despalj graduated from music academy in zagreb where he studied composition with prof. stjepan sulek. in 1961 he founded zadar's festival, music evenings in st. donat's, also the zadar chamber orchestra. between 1962 and 1967 he was the chief conductor of zagreb radio television symphony orchestra. in 1968 he began conducting the florida symphony orchestra and the orlando opera, and between 1970 and 1981 he was their music director. from 1981 to 1986 he was the principal conductor of the zagreb philharmonic. from 1981 to 1983, he was the music program director of dubrovnik summer festival, between 1987 and 1995 conducting professor at the zagreb academy of music and between 1995 and 1998, conductor of the tokyo geidai philharmonic orchestra and professor at the tokyo national university. since 1998 he was the chief conductor of the croatian chamber orchestra, since 2000 of the split chamber orchestra and guest conductor of renowned croatian orchestras as well as croatian national theatre's opera and ballet.  pavle despalj led zagreb's orchestras on numerous tours around europe, america and the far east. he was a guest conductor of many prestigious foreign symphonic orchestras in luxembourg, toulouse, milan, frankfurt, bratislava, salzburg, budapest, bucharest and tallinn. he also conducted the royal london philharmonic orchestra, moscow's russian national symphony orchestra, novosibirsk philharmonic orchestra, pittsburgh symphony orchestra, chicago festival orchestra, tokyo philharmonics, tokyo symphony orchestra, and tokyo and yokohama operas.  he recorded for croatia records, cantus and opus (bratislava), as well as for croatian, slovenian and hessischer runfunkt (frankfurt) radio stations.  despalj's most often played and recorded works are passacaglia and fugue for piano and strings, three choral preludes for chamber orchestra, variations for orchestra, concerto for violin and orchestra, concerto for alto saxophone and strings, concerto for cello and strings and two fiddlers' whims.  pavle despalj was a member of international juries for conducting competitions in zagreb, budapest, and tokyo. he was the honorary guest conductor of zagreb radio television symphony orchestra, lifetime honorary principal conductor of the croatian chamber orchestra, honorary conductor of the zadar chamber orchestra and the varazdin chamber orchestra, an honorary citizen of dayton beach, professor emeritus at the tokyo national university, regular member of croatian academy of sciences and arts and its vice president (since 1 january 2004).  he died in zagreb on 16 december 2021, at
the age of 87.  awards pavle despalj won numerous awards: the city of zagreb award (1965), central florida council's award for achievement in science and art (1978), milka trnina award (1980), josip stolcer slavenski award (1990), vladimir nazor award (1992), orlando award (1993), special recognition by the croatian ministry of culture (1994), porin award (1997, 2002, 2005), ivan lukacic award (1999), croatian ministry of culture award (2002), the vladimir nazor lifetime achievement award (2005), judita award (2005) and the city of zadar lifetime achievement award (2006). in 1996 croatian president presented him with the order of danica hrvatska with the effigy of marko marulic.  selected works  concerto for alto-saxophone and string orchestra (1963)  concerto for violin and orchestra (1960)  concerto for cello and strings (2000)  passacaglia and fugue for piano and strings (1956)  the ceremonial parade for french horn ensemble and symphony orchestra (2001)  three chorale preludes for chamber orchestra (1957)  variations for orchestra (1957)  references  external links      1934 births 2021 deaths 21st-century conductors (music) 21st-century male musicians academy of music, university of zagreb alumni arbanasi people croatian classical composers croatian conductors (music) male conductors (music) members of the croatian academy of sciences and arts people from blato, korcula 21st-century classical composers 20th-century conductors (music) 20th-century classical composers male classical composers
yingabalanara is an extinct mammal from the miocene of australia. known only from a few teeth, its affinities with other mammal groups remain unresolved.  description yingabalanara is known from two lower right molar teeth. the chewing surface of the tooth has two overlapping crescent-like cusps (hence the animal's name). due to the sheer bizarreness of the teeth it's not entirely clear to which normal molar structures these cusps correspond to, being variously interpreted as talonids, trigonids or other cusps. the molars are double-rooted, and possess what appears to be a remnant cingulid.  the overall proportions seem to suggest an animal about the size of a rat, and the tooth morphology is consistent with omnivorous habits. however, for obvious reasons the animal's overall appearance and morphology are unknown.  etymology yingabalanara is a wanyi word meaning "two moons", in reference to the mammal's crescent-like cusps. the word is masculine in gender, as befitting the status of the predominantly masculine australian lunar deities. the species name is an homage to graham richardson, a "commonwealth minister for the environment and the arts".  phylogeny yingabalanaras molars are exceptionally unusual among mammals, rendering its exact relations as controversial. its bizarre cusps differ radically from the normal conditions seen in marsupials and placentals (though there are vague similarities to phyllostomid bats), and while slightly similar to the teeth of monotremes and other yinotheres the longer and narrower molars, presence of talonid or trigonid-like cusps and lack of lingual or buccal cingulids still set them well apart. the mammal with the most similar teeth is the cretaceous north american potamotelses, which serves of little indication since it too is of uncertain affinities.  for now, yingabalanara is included in its own order, weirdodonta'''.  see also  yalkaparidon'', a contemporary australian mammal of also uncertain affinities  references  fossil taxa described in 1990 riversleigh fauna prehistoric mammals of australia
martina amidei (born 8 april 1991) is an italian sprinter. she competed in the 200 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships.  see also  italian all-time lists - 4x100 metres relay  references  external links    1991 births living people italian female sprinters place of birth missing (living people) world athletics championships athletes for italy
ilona (ili) kronstein (nee neumann, 1897-1948) was a jewish, budapest-born artist. although kronstein was originally a graphic artist by trade, her artistic style evolved over her lifetime. her works were newly discovered in the late 1990s and were later exhibited at the jewish museum in vienna, austria.  early life  ili was born in 1897 to sigmund (zsiga) neumann and emma deutsch in budapest, austria-hungary. her younger sisters were born in 1899 (margit (manci)) and in 1903 (klara (klari)). around 1908, sigmund's textile mill went out of business and he emigrated to trieste, italy with his family. there, ili became proficient in italian and developed an appreciation for italy and its inhabitants. she showed artistic skill during childhood, but her work was discouraged by sigmund. the family returned to budapest, and ili was removed from school when she was 16, as she needed to concentrate on getting ready for marriage and the middle-class lifestyle that accompanied it. during this period of her life, she volunteered for several years in nursery schools for poor children.  later life and artistic influences  ili married robert kronstein in 1919, despite initial disapproval from sigmund and emma. she moved with robert to vienna, austria-hungary and he purchased a pharmacy there. in 1920, the couple had their first daughter, gerda, and in 1925 their second daughter, nora (named after nora helmer from henrik ibsen's a doll's house). ili and robert's marriage was tense and contradictory. much of the riffs in the marriage stemmed from ili's longing to branch out and meet fascinating and enlightened people. the couple moved to a larger apartment during her first pregnancy. ili's mother-in-law lived with them, and she disapproved of ili's artistic and nonconformist attitudes. following the birth of nora, both ili and robert agreed to live together in the same home as friends (not husband and wife), and "he continued to support her throughout their lives."  kronstein was then free to evolve artistically while being financially secure. she experimented with defining herself both as a person and as an artist for many years. she became a book binder and, after this, a german (her second language) writer. kronstein started to diligently develop her artistry in the early 1930s, first as a graphic artist. initially, kronstein was significantly influenced by egon schiele's work, but later she was influenced by the artist
-teacher johannes itten. she learned from itten either at his school of living and art in berlin, germany or over the duration of one of his frequent visits to vienna. over the course of 1934 to 1936, kronstein informally taught gerda art lessons which mirrored itten's methodology and viewpoints. later, itten's philosophies guided kronstein's work; the counsel she provided for nora (she went on to become an artist); and the description (in print) of a painting class that she had planned, which encompasses "practice exercises" and philosophical ideology (for instance, the relationship among breathing exercises, yoga, and art).  kronstein developed herself as an artist though study of the "old masters[']" art when she travelled to italy and other places periodically. she additionally educated herself on "japanese classical brush painting," and was interested in impressionist artwork, especially paul cezanne. she also took interest in literary, cinematic, and artistic german expressionism.  kronstein rented an art studio in 1933 with help from robert's economic support. there, she worked many days and nights at her work, while running a salon as well. she featured her "graphic work, portraits and landscapes" at her own exhibits. her evolution as an artist was stunted by the anschluss (1938). not long after, robert moved to vaduz in liechtenstein (robert founded another pharmacy there in 1933.) during a nazi street raid, ili was coerced to scrub the sidewalk. gerda and ili were held in jail for six weeks (april 1938) "as hostages for robert." prior to their release, it was required that ili declare in writing that she and her children would leave austria immediately, however, three months passed before they could leave austria to reunite with robert. at first, kronstein felt free spirited, as she had just escaped from nazi influence. however, that positivity was replaced by "restlessness and unhappiness," because she resented "the uncultured provincialism of vaduz" and she did not have a studio. during this time, nora attended a swiss boarding school, and gerda went to zurich, switzerland in hopes to attain a visa to the u.s. kronstein then left vaduz and visited in zurich periodically. in zurich, she roomed with gerda in a "cheap, small room," consumed food moderately, but took relish in the cultural resources. in 1938, both ili and gerda were held in jail as foreigners and deportation to germany was threatened upon
them. robert managed to change their deportation location to liechtenstein.  kronstein left liechtenstein, and stayed for a brief time in paris, france. she then left for southern france. there, her artistic creativity blossomed. she started working with colors, and her works gained more depth. during this time, her style bordered cubism and abstraction. she spent time in nice and befriended inspirational artists who taught her valuable lessons. in this circle of inspirations was latvian painter rudolf ray-rapaport, and he and kronstein became close friends.  the kronsteins still planned to emigrate, but in june 1941 ili's application for a u.s. visa was denied. in the past, she was confined in gurs internment camp for six weeks alongside ten thousand refugees, both jews and anti-fascists. also in gurs was charlotte salomon and hannah arendt. in gurs, kronstein showed "remarkable courage, good humor and resourcefulness," despite dwindling health. in late 1940, kronstein endured paralysis of her right arm. later on in 1945, kronstein was diagnosed with multiple sclerosis. over the course of the year 1941, she could not work for extended amounts of time, however, she still drew until she could no longer grip a pencil. following ray-rapaport's immigration to the u.s. in 1942, kronstein went to liechtenstein and later to switzerland in order to receive treatment for her illnesses. she was paralyzed yet mentally attentive and spent her last four years of life in private care in zurich. she died at the age of fifty-one on 22 april 1948.  references  sources    1897 births 1948 deaths jewish women painters jewish painters 20th-century hungarian painters hungarian women painters 20th-century hungarian women artists hungarian jews artists from budapest bookbinders gurs internment camp survivors
brian c. mcging is a papyrologist and ancient historian, who specialises in the hellenistic period. he is regius professor of greek at trinity college, dublin. he is editor of the college's journal of the classical world, hermathena.  in 2004, mcging was elected a member of the royal irish academy (mria).  selected publications polybius' histories. oxford university press, oxford, 2010. the limits of ancient biography. classical press of wales, 2006. (ed. with judith mossman) "population and proselytism. how many jews were there in the ancient world?" in john r. barlett (ed.), jews in the hellenistic and roman cities. london, 2002. pp. 88-106. "revolt egyptian style: internal opposition to ptolemaic rule", archiv fur papyrusforschung und verwandte gebiete, 43 (1997), pp. 273-314. greek papyri from dublin. bonn, 1995. "appian's mithridateios", aufstieg und niedergang der romischen welt ii, 34.1, bonn, 1993. pp. 496-522. "melitian monks at labla", tyche 5 (1990), pp. 67-94. the foreign policy of mithridates vi eupator king of pontus. leiden, 1986.  references   papyrologists academics of trinity college dublin living people year of birth missing (living people) members of the royal irish academy
funke abimbola mbe is a nigerian businesswoman and lawyer. she is advocating for diversity across uk society with a specific focus on the legal profession.  abimbola attended newcastle university to study law. she had a son while working with campbell hooper.  early life and education abimbola comes from a family of medical doctors. she was educated at burgess hill girls. she did not study medicine because of her fear for "pains and blood" (algophobia and hemophobia). she obtained her law degree from newcastle university. she travelled to nigeria in the mid-1990s to sit the nigerian bar examination. abimbola became a mother at the age of 28 years while working with campbell hooper. in the year 2000, she qualified as an in-house solicitor. her father died in 2012 after being diagnosed with cancer.  career abimbola became the most senior black solicitor for roche's pharmaceutical operations in the uk, ireland, gibraltar and malta. she qualified as a solicitor in-house in 2000.  she went to nigeria for the preparation for the nigerian bar examination. while there, she worked with f. o. akinrele & co.  after her return to the uk from nigeria in the mid-1990s, she worked with wembley plc where she qualified as a corporate/commercial lawyer. she later moved to campbell hooper where she became a solicitor. in 2012, she joined roche uk with the position of managing counsel (uk and ireland). she also served as uk data protection officer. in december 2015, she became the general counsel and company secretary of the same organisation and was promoted to general counsel and head of financial compliance in january 2017.  she encountered challenges securing an entry-level job in the uk. according to first 100 years, "i found it extremely difficult to secure an entry-level position when i finished the qltt (now qlts) transfer test and needed to gain experience before qualification. to get my foot in the door, i drew up a list of the top 100 law firms specialising in corporate law and did the same with the top 50 in-house teams. i then proceeded to cold-call the heads of department at all 150 organisations. this led to several interviews, including one with a major, fully listed plc. at that interview, the head of legal (who is english but whose partner is of asian descent) asked me if i thought my race had been a factor in me not getting interviews with other organisations. that was, honestly, the first time i had even considered
race as being something that could inhibit my progress. thankfully, i was offered a role by her and was able to qualify as a solicitor in-house."  abimbola is a strong advocate of corporate and social diversity. as a public speaker and legal practitioner, she was recognised and won many awards for her work. in 2013 she was featured in diversity league table publication as one of the black solicitors. in 2014, she was nominated for a national diversity award, and in the same year she was nominated for the law society excellence awards. in 2015, she won a positive role model award. in 2010, she was appointed governor of uxbridge college, london, on a four-year term.  she received a 'point of light' award from the uk prime minister in october 2016, recognising the impact of her voluntary diversity work in the uk. in june 2017, she was awarded the m.b.e. (member of the order of the british empire) by queen elizabeth ii for services to diversity in the legal profession and to young people.  she received an honorary doctor of laws from the university of hertfordshire in september 2019, recognising her contributions to social and corporate diversity.  awards and recognition  sources:  see also  ifeoma malo  ade hassan  ade olufeko  references  external links  living people year of birth missing (living people) nigerian women lawyers nigerian expatriates in england alumni of newcastle university nigerian women academics 21st-century nigerian lawyers people educated at burgess hill school members of the order of the british empire 21st-century women lawyers
tom olof siwe (born 2 march 1987) is a swedish professional footballer who plays for ljungskile sk.  career  club career siwe started his career at if hagapojkarna. he got his breakthrough in husqvarna ff, where he came from if hallby. he was signed by dutch club sc heerenveen, where he only played for the clubs youth and reserve teams during the two and a half years he was in the club.  he returned to sweden and during the summer 2008, he signed for jonkopings sodra if. siwe made his debut for sodra on september 8, 2008 in a home game against bk hacken (0-2). on 22 december 2010 he signed a new contract with jonkoping sodra for one year and with an option for one more. in november 2014, he extended his contract with the club for the 2015 season. siwe made his allsvenskan debut on april 2, 2016 in a 1-0 win against kalmar ff. after the 2019 season, he left the club.  on january 12, 2020, siwe was recruited by ljungskile sk, where he signed a two-year contract.  references  external links   tom siwe at svff  tom siwe at fotbolltransfers.com  1987 births living people swedish footballers swedish expatriate footballers allsvenskan players superettan players husqvarna ff players sc heerenveen players jonkopings sodra if players ljungskile sk players association football defenders swedish expatriate sportspeople in the netherlands expatriate footballers in the netherlands
the 2016-17 penn quakers women's basketball team represented the university of pennsylvania during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the quakers, led by eighth year head coach mike mclaughlin, play their home games at the palestra and are members of the ivy league. the team was picked by the ivy league in the pre-season to be conference champions. they finished the season 22-8, 13-1 to win the ivy league regular season title and their first ever ivy league tournament to earn an automatic trip to the ncaa women's tournament, which they had a 21 point lead before losing to texas a&m in the first round.  ivy league changes this season, the ivy league instituted conference postseason tournaments. the tournaments only awarded the ivy league automatic bids for the ncaa division i men's and women's basketball tournaments; the official conference championships will continue to be awarded based solely on regular-season results. the ivy league playoff took place march 11 and 12 at the palestra. there were be two semifinal games on the first day with the no. 1 seed playing the no. 4 seed and the no. 2 seed playing the no. 3 seed. the final was played the next day for the ncaa bid.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#95001a; color:#ffffff;"| regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#95001a; color:#01256e;"| ivy league women's tournament  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#95001a;"| ncaa women's tournament  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  see also  2016-17 penn quakers men's basketball team  references  penn penn quakers women's basketball seasons penn penn penn
portland memorial mausoleum mural is a 2009 mural by dan cohen of artfx murals and shane bennett, painted at wilhelm's portland memorial funeral home (also known as the portland memorial mausoleum chapel) in portland, oregon's sellwood neighborhood, in the united states. it was an expansion of the great blue heron mural, which is seen on the building's lower west facing wall and was also applied by artfx murals.  description the expanded latex painting, located at wilhelm's portland memorial funeral home (also known as the portland memorial mausoleum chapel; 6705 southeast 14th avenue) covers approximately 43,485 square feet across eight surfaces and is among the largest murals in the united states. it is visible from the springwater corridor and interstate 5 and was funded by the public art murals program and private donors.  according to the regional arts & culture council, which administers the work, the mural "highlights the importance of the 160-acre oaks bottom wildlife refuge to the city of portland's quality of life, the contribution of the wetland system as a critical element of the city's green infrastructure, and its contribution to maintaining biodiversity in the city and metropolitan area".  see also  2009 in art  woodstock mural, a portland mural reproduced by dan cohen  references  external links           2000s murals 2009 establishments in oregon 2009 paintings birds in art murals in oregon paintings in portland, oregon sellwood, portland, oregon
eunidia kivuensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1948.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1948
ecole secondaire louis-joseph papineau may refer to: ecole secondaire louis-joseph-papineau (montreal, quebec) ecole secondaire louis-joseph papineau (papineauville, quebec)
aacanthocnema torulosae is a species of jumping plant louse, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it lacks hinaria on its eighth antennal segment as well as sclerotised spurs on its hind tibia. females of the species lack a posterior apical hook on their proctiger.  references  triozidae insects described in 2011
juan carlos meza gutierrez (born 20 april 1985) is a mexican professional footballer.  references  1985 births living people mexican footballers mexican expatriate footballers association football defenders lobos buap footballers club celaya footballers correcaminos uat footballers c.d. malacateco players union deportivo universitario players deportivo sanarate f.c. players deportivo chiantla players ascenso mx players liga nacional de futbol de guatemala players liga panamena de futbol players mexican expatriate sportspeople in guatemala mexican expatriate sportspeople in panama expatriate footballers in guatemala expatriate footballers in panama footballers from the state of mexico people from ecatepec de morelos
the 1957 oklahoma state cowboys football team represented oklahoma state university in the 1957 ncaa university division football season. this was the 57th year of football at osu and the third under cliff speegle. the cowboys played their home games at lewis field in stillwater, oklahoma. oklahoma a&m officially changed its name to oklahoma state university prior to this season, and the program competed their first season as an independent after over three decades in the missouri valley conference. the cowboys finished the season with a 6-3-1 record.  schedule  after the season  the 1958 nfl draft took place on december 2, 1957 at the warwick in philadelphia. the following oklahoma state player was selected during the draft.  references  oklahoma state oklahoma state cowboys football seasons oklahoma state cowboys football
marina kuznetsova (1925-1996) was a soviet stage and film actress.  selected filmography  krechinsky's wedding (1953)  a fortress in the mountains (1953)  references  bibliography   tony shaw & denise jeanne youngblood. cinematic cold war: the american and soviet struggle for hearts and minds. university press of kansas, 2010.  external links     1925 births 1996 deaths soviet film actresses soviet television actresses
diddy tv is a british children's sketch comedy series on cbbc. it stars richard mccourt and dominic wood (dick and dom). it is a sequel series to the diddy dick and dom sketches on dick & dom in da bungalow and diddy movies. the series features various parodies of television series including top of the pops and the great british bake off. series 1 began on 14 march 2016, series 2 began on 20 june 2016, series 3 began on 19 march 2018 and series 4 began on 25 june 2018. many of the cast have been in other dick and dom sketch series or the sitcom the legend of dick and dom.  premise the diddy movies boss, larry bingbongberger, was bankrupted because his movies were a disaster. but with the last of his money, he quits making movies and launched a television station for diddy dick and dom on channel 6597423. it is filled with crazy and silly entertainment, sports and parodies shows like diddy doctor who, diddy pops, deadly diddy 60, diddydown and even an american sitcom robopop as well as adverts, most of them starring dick and dom.  cast richard mccourt as diddy dick/various dominic wood as diddy dom/various ted robbins as larry bingbongberger (formerly weinsteinberger but changed in the opening theme and edited out of other instances of the name being mentioned throughout the show due to the harvey weinstein scandal)/various ian kirkby as di harry batt/various paris atkins as various dave chapman as various bob golding as various darragh mortell as various sabrina sandhu as various gail kemp as various kate malyon as various sabrina sandhu as various inel tomlinson as various eve munyanyi as various louise woodward as various  guests the guest stars often appear between the sketches with larry bingbongberger in his house. some episodes have dick and dom in da bungalow character mr. choosy. guests play diddy versions of themselves (except reece shearsmith). in series 3 new guest stars appear with diddy dick and dom on diddy chat. some guests appear in more than one episode.  reece shearsmith as mr. stockholm ashley roberts joseph garrett bruno tonioli eamonn holmes barney harwood hazel irvine shaun murphy craig revel horwood melvin odoom jake mitchell paul zerdin sally lindsay radzi chinyanganya michelle gayle louis payne colson smith lauren layfield  episodes  series 1 (2016)  series 2 (2016)  series 3 (2018)  series 4 (
2018)  shorts (2016-17) a series of shorts are uploaded on to cbbc's website and youtube channel. some are diddy chat, where diddy dick and dom interview a celebrity. others are parodies of popular internet videos, such as unboxings and carpool karaoke  release series 1 began on 14 march 2016 and ended on 25 march 2016. series 2 began on 20 june 2016 and ended on 30 june 2016. there was a christmas special on 16 december 2016.  series 3 started on 19 march 2018 and ended on 31 march 2018. series 4 started on 25 june 2018 and ended on 5 july 2018.  every episode was available to purchase on the bbc store.  references  2016 british television series debuts 2018 british television series endings 2010s british children's television series british television shows featuring puppetry english-language television shows bbc children's television shows bbc television sketch shows british children's comedy television series 2010s british television sketch shows television series by bbc studios
jacqueline patorni (15 may 1917- 12 march 2002) was a french tennis player. she was runner up in the 1944 tournoi de france, losing the final in straight sets to raymonde veber. patorni also reached the third round of the 1946 wimbledon championships - women's singles.  grand slam finals  mixed doubles (1 runner-up)  references  1917 births 2002 deaths french female tennis players 20th-century french women
the 1922 central michigan normalites football team represented central michigan normal school, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1922 college football season. in their second season under head coach wallace parker, the central michigan football team compiled a 6-0-2 record, shut out six of eight opponents, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 179 to 11. the team's victories included games with ferris institute (40-0), grand rapids junior college (39-0), northern state (62-0), michigan military academy (7-0), alma college (5-0), and detroit junior college (20-5). the team played the 1922 michigan state normal normalites football team to a scoreless tie.  schedule  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons college football undefeated seasons central michigan normalites football
eunidia fasciata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by charles joseph gahan in 1904.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1904 taxa named by charles joseph gahan
cariloop is a health and wellness company based in dallas, texas. the company's caregiver support platform pairs healthcare coaching services with a secure online case management portal to assist users in managing care transitions.  business  cariloop users receive an online case file where documents are stored, accessed, and reviewed by users and healthcare coaches. the company's healthcare coaches are licensed or certified in fields such as nursing, social work, case management, therapy, and counseling. healthcare coaches can assist users in creating caregiving plans, and can help find answers, resources, or contacts for medical, financial, and legal questions. cariloop's vision is to create a new global standard for planning and managing transitions in life.  the company's business model focuses on employee benefits packages. individual memberships are also offered.  history  cariloop, inc. was founded in july 2012 by michael walsh and steven theesfeld. the company completed the health wildcatters accelerator program in 2013 and launched version one of its website in 2014. version one of cariloop.com was a search wizard that matched users with care providers based on pricing, location, type of care, and availability. the company's original business model was comparable to a referral service, similar to a place for mom. the company partnered with the texas organization of residential care homes during the first version of its product.  the company shifted its focus from care providers to caregivers, which led to the launching of the second version of cariloop.com in august 2015. the second platform included healthcare coaching services and a digital case management portal.  funding  after graduating from health wildcatters in 2013, cariloop raised $400,000 in seed funding. the company also won $50,000 in prize money at the national angel summit in 2014. in 2015, cariloop raised $180,000 from its seed round investors.  directors and advisors  michael walsh is one of the company's co-founders and ceo. walsh serves on the company's board of directors. steven theesfeld is one of the company's co-founders. theesfeld serves on the company's board of directors.  michael stoltz, m.d. serves on the company's board of directors. michael gorton, j.d. serves on the company's board of directors. gorton was the founding ceo of teladoc. wendy whittington, m.d. serves on the company's board of directors. dan slaven serves as a board of directors observer
and manages the fundraising efforts for the company. joshua robertson serves as a board of directors observer.  anne lipton, m.d., ph.d. serves on the company's advisory board. lipton is a board-certified neurologist with specialization in dementia. mark victor hansen serves on the company's advisory board. hansen is a co-author for the chicken soup for the soul series.  references   companies based in dallas american companies established in 2012 2012 establishments in texas health care companies based in texas
metalmorphosis is a large (7 metre, 13 tonne) kinetic sculpture of a human head, by czech artist david cerny. the sculpture is in the whitehall corporate center in charlotte, north carolina, where it was inaugurated in 2007, and it sits in a large reflecting pool.  the piece is executed in polished stainless steel.  the sculpture is made of 40 layers articulated into 7 pieces that can rotate individually.  originally, the sculpture could spout water from the head's mouth. a later and larger work, head of franz kafka (), a bust of franz kafka made of 45 tonnes of steel, is in prague.  references  external links    2007 sculptures kinetic sculptures in the united states sculptures in north carolina stainless steel sculptures in the united states
mosolwa mashudu mafuma (born 13 february 1996) is a south african rugby union player. his usual playing position is on the wing.  rugby career  2012: schoolboy rugby  mafuma was born in germiston and attended st benedict's college. in 2012, he was selected to represent the  at the under-16 grant khomo week held in johannesburg.  2016: varsity cup / south africa under-20 / free state xv  mafuma didn't earn further provincial representations during his high school career and it wasn't until 2016 that he sprung to prominence in a national competition; he was included in the  squad that participated in the 2016 varsity cup competition. in the team's first match, he scored a late try to help his side to a 23-17 victory over  and followed that up with another try in their next match against  in a 47-46 victory. he continued his try-scoring run by scoring against , ,  and , a run which meant he scored in each of his six matches for shimlas. he was an unused reserve in their final match against . at the conclusion of the tournament, mafuma was named the "player that rocks" for the competition.  he was invited to join a south africa under-20 training squad, also making the cut for a reduced provisional squad named a week later. in between training with the team, he also made two appearances for a  in the 2016 currie cup qualification series. he made his first class debut in their round three match against , immediately proving his worth at this level by scoring two tries for his side. it was not enough, however, as the team from cape town won the match 36-31. he also played off the bench in their match against a  a fortnight later. on 10 may 2016, he was included in the final south africa under-20 squad for the 2016 world rugby under 20 championship tournament held in manchester, england. he started their opening match in pool c of the tournament as south africa came from behind to beat japan 59-19, scoring south africa's seventh try of the match. he also started their next pool match as south africa were beaten 13-19 by argentina. he wasn't in the squad for their final pool match, as south africa bounced back to secure a 40-31 bonus-point victory over france to secure a semi-final place as the best runner-up in the competition. he was restored to the starting line-up for the semi-final, as south africa faced three
-time champions england. the hosts proving too strong for south africa, knocking them out of the competition with a 39-17 victory. mafuma didn't feature against argentina in the third-place play-off match, as argentina beat south africa - as they did in the pool stages - convincingly winning 49-19 and in the process condemning south africa to fourth place in the competition.  upon his return to south africa, mafuma scored his third try of the currie cup qualification series in a 24-16 victory over the  and was included in the  squad for the 2016 currie cup premier division.  athletics  mafuma also participated in athletics at high school level, taking part in the 100m and 200m sprint events. he ran the 100m in 10.80 second and the 200m in 21.90 seconds at the under-18 south african championships in pretoria in 2013, the fourth-fastest 100m time and seventh-fastest 200m time of the season for his age group. he broke 100m records at under-15 and under-16 level and also took part in other events such as 100m hurdles and the high jump.  notes  references  south african rugby union players living people 1996 births rugby union players from germiston rugby union wings free state cheetahs players south africa under-20 international rugby union players cheetahs (rugby union) players
adrishya () is a non-fiction indian hindi television series that aired on the epic channel. the show is based on real-life stories of indian spies. the show premiered on 21 november 2014 and aired thirteen episodes.  show summary adrishya is a show based on some of the greatest spies in indian history. these are stories of the unsung heroes that fought for a cause. every episode depicts the life of a spy and the dangers that accompanied the job. the show presents all the tales from post and pre- independence era of india.  some of the spies covered in the show are bahirji naik - shivaji's chief intelligence officer, kacha - spy of the gods, noor inayat khan- descendant of tipu sultan and a spy for the british in paris during world war -2, durga bhabhi- the gutsy lady who helped bhagat singh escape, jeevsiddhi- chanakya's spy, ravindra kaushik - the spy who infiltrated pakistan's army and many more. the mini-series was consistently rated among the top ten shows of the channel.  production the show is produced by nidhi tuli, ashraf abbas & akash thakkar of rangrez films and written by, amit babbar, anurag goswami, purva naresh, nidhi tuli, raaghav dar and sneha nair. it was shot by alphonse roy and edited by navnita sen and zubin sheikh.  episodes   episode 1 - bahirji naik - the shivaji's chief intelligence officer  episode 2 - noor inayat khan - the unlikely spy  episode 3 - kacha - spy of the gods  episode 4 - ksn & kao  episode 5 - azeez-un-nisa  episode 6 - ravindra kaushik  episode 7 - durga bhabhi  episode 8 - ajit doval  episode 9 - sharan kaur  episode 10 - jeevsiddhi  episode 11 - chand bardai  episode 12 - saraswathi rajamani  episode 13 - amar bhushan  external links  references  hindi-language television shows 2014 indian television series debuts indian documentary television series epic tv original programming indian historical television series sikhism in fiction indian independence movement fiction indian anthology television series espionage television series television series about intelligence agencies non-fiction works about espionage research and analysis wing cultural depictions of spies
the swan 56 is a make and model of sailboats as designed by german frers and built by nautor's swan and first launched in 1997. a number of version were done including a performance regatta version and some later boats featured a single aft cockpit.  external links  nautor swan  german frers official website  references   https://web.archive.org/web/20160818153827/http://www.nautorgroup.com/56_technical.htm  sailing yachts keelboats 1990s sailboat type designs sailboat types built by nautor swan sailboat type designs by german frers
446001-446100   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446101-446200   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446201-446300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446301-446400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446401-446500   |-id=500 | 446500 katrinraynor ||  || katrin raynor-evans (born 1981) is a british philatelist specializing in the history and collection of astronomy-themed stamps. she is an amateur astronomer and writer for popular astronomy magazines, and a fellow of the royal astronomical society. ||  |}  446501-446600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446601-446700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446701-446800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446801-446900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  446901-447000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   446001-447000
hernan perez de quesada, sometimes spelled as quezada, (c. 1515 - 1544) was a spanish conquistador. second in command of the army of his elder brother, gonzalo jimenez de quesada, hernan was part of the first european expedition towards the inner highlands of the colombian andes. the harsh journey, taking almost a year and many deaths, led through the moderndepartments magdalena, cesar, santander, boyaca, cundinamarca and huila of present-day colombia between 1536 and 1539 and, without him, meta, caqueta and putumayo of colombia and northern peru and ecuador between 1540 and 1542.  hernan founded sutatausa, cundinamarca, and aided in the conquest of various indigenous groups, such as the chimila, muisca, panche, lache, u'wa, sutagao and others. under the command of hernan perez de quesada the last independent muisca ruler; hoa quiminza was publicly decapitated. as second in command under his brother, in the previous years psihipquias tisquesusa and sagipa and tundama of duitama had suffered a similar fate. after returning from his expeditions to the south reaching quito, where he reunited with his younger brother francisco, both de quesadas went back to santafe de bogota. hernan was tried and imprisoned there for the murders of the muisca rulers by the governor of the capital of the new kingdom of granada. in 1544, en route to cartagena with his brother francisco, their ship was hit by lightning off the coast of cabo de la vela in the caribbean sea killing hernan and francisco and wounding several other conquistadors.  knowledge of the life and expeditions of hernan perez de quesada has been provided by his brother gonzalo and scholars pedro de aguado, juan freyle, lucas fernandez de piedrahita, joaquin acosta and liborio zerda.  biography  early life  hernan perez de quesada was born around the year 1512 in the andalusian city of granada as second son of gonzalo jimenez and isabel jimenez de quesada. his family was catholic, but descended from marranos (sephardi jews). his elder brother was conquistador gonzalo jimenez and he had four other siblings; brother melchor, francisco, who also was conquistador in peru, and sisters magdalena de quesada and andrea ximenez de quesada. hernan also had a half-sister; isabel de quesada. in 1535, arriving early 1536, the brothers gonzalo, francisco and hernan sailed from spain to santa marta, one of the first cities founded in modern-day colombia
, by rodrigo de bastidas in 1525.  conquest in colombia  1536 - the harsh route towards muisca territory   the first indigenous group that was submitted to the spanish crown were the tairona, who inhabit the area around santa marta, presently living on the slopes of the sierra nevada de santa marta and in tayrona park. on april 6, 1536, triggered by the stories of the mythical "city of gold" el dorado, gonzalo jimenez de quesada organised two groups of conquistadors towards the inner highlands of the colombian andes, as first european explorers. the army with the brothers de quesada and more than 700 soldiers and 80 horses went over land and another, of more than 200 men, embarked in boats and ascended the magdalena river from cienaga, in search of its origin. the list of the soldiers that eventually made it to funza has been compiled by juan florez de ocariz (1612-1692). the land army was led by gonzalo with hernan second in command. the first indigenous group conquered, were the chimila people. continuing south, the troops had to cross inhospitable terrains full of creeks and part of their supplies and equipment was lost when crossing the ariguani river.  the troops led by the de quesadas passed through among other settlements tamalameque, barrancabermeja and chipata where the spanish for the first time learnt to drink chicha, the fermented alcoholic beverage of the muisca. the almost-naked conquistadors who suffered from the difficult expedition through the jungles received cotton mantles from the muisca people in chipata. the expedition passed through  halted in chia where they spent the holy week. after that week in april 1537, he ordered his men towards funza, the site of the domain of the zipa. although the army of the brothers de quesada was reduced to 170 men, the hundreds of guecha warriors couldn't resist their superior arms and were defeated. in the meantime, zipa tisquesusa sent messengers to the caciques in the muisca confederation to inform them of the arrival of the light-skinned heavily armed men. the caciques considered the invaders sacred and didn't dare to attack them. funza was conquered and founded on april 20, 1537. of the more than 900 soldiers who left santa marta a year earlier, only 162 survived the harsh expedition.  on the same day that his brother gonzalo founded tenza, june 24, 1537, hernan founded sutatausa.  first conquest by hernan perez de quesada  1538 - establishment of bogota and surroundings  at
the start of 1538, when the troops were exhausted after almost two years in foreign terrain, the soldiers asked what was their payment for the conquest they had done. de quesada divided the conquered treasures over his men; 40,000 pieces of fine gold, 562 emeralds and tumbaga (gold-copper-silver alloys). foot soldiers received 520 pieces each, horse riders the double amount, captains 2080 pieces, generals 3640 and some pieces were given as prizes for the most distinguished soldiers. masses were organised to honour the many dead soldiers during the campaign and part of the treasure was given to juan de las casas. de quesada was not pleased to hear about the advancement of another group of conquistadors in the east, led by nikolaus federmann, coming from later venezuela across the llanos orientales. another team of conquerors, commanded by sebastian de belalcazar, was coming from the south, originating from quito. gonzalo sent hernan to meet the southern group who had traveled through the hot valley of neiva. hernan ordered the decapitation of aquiminzaque, the last zaque of hunza in late 1538.  foundation of bogota   one and a half year after the victory of the conquistadors on tisquesusa, in the area of teusaquillo, the modern capital of colombia was founded. although some historians set the date at april 27, 1539, the common and celebrated date of foundation is august 6, 1538. the foundation was performed by the construction of 12 houses of reed, referring to the twelve apostles, and the construction of a preliminary church, also of reed. father juan de las casas held his first mass in the improvised church. the city was named santafe de bogota, a combination of the spanish city of santa fe and the chibcha name of the southern muisca capital bacata, meaning "enclosure outside of the farmfields". the newly established country, part of the spanish empire was called new kingdom of granada, after the place of birth of the brothers de quesada in andalusia; kingdom of granada.  return to spain of gonzalo, sebastian and nikolaus  the three leaders of the conquest expeditions; gonzalo de quesada, nikolaus federmann and sebastian de belalcazar, met in bosa and agreed to travel back to spain to ask for compensation for their exploration for the spanish crown. gonzalo assigned hernan as interim governor of the new kingdom and chose the first mayor and council for the capital. the chaplain of the team of federmann, juan verdejo, was named priest. most of the soldiers of the expeditions of federmann
and de belalcazar decided to stay in bogota, reinforcing the troops of de quesada. without having found el dorado, three years after his departure from santa marta, in mid may 1539, gonzalo jimenez de quesada returned to the caribbean coast, to sail to spain from cartagena.  hernan in charge of the new kingdom of granada  1540-1541  in his search for el dorado, hernan explored the departments of tolima and huila. hernan perez de quesada was only one of many explorers in the search for el dorado. after the destruction and looting of the sun temple in sogamoso in september 1537, hernan perez thought there was an even bigger place where the indigenous people hid their gold, called "la casa del sol". in his quest, starting from sogamoso along the right banks of the chicamocha river, he approached with a hundred men the terrain of the lache and entered jerico, at that time called cheva, where he and his troops gathered the food of the original inhabitants who promptly fled to chita.  the city of tunja, in the times of the muisca called hunza, was founded on 1541 by gonzalo suarez rendon in an expedition ordered by hernan de quesada. in july 1541, the chapter of tunja told de quesada that he couldn't leave his empire alone. hernan responded that "whatever he did, was in the interest of the spanish crown".  later in 1541, hernan perez de quesada went northward towards the later department of norte de santander, where he crossed panqueba, guacamayas, el cocuy and chita, and reached chinacota but had to return soon after that. soldiers of his army submitted the u'wa living in el cocuy.  on his southern expedition in the same year, hernan perez de quesada was the first european to reach the southeastern colombian departments of caqueta and putumayo. one of his soldiers, lazaro fonte, the lover of zoratama, died due to the natural dangers of the jungle.  second conquest by hernan perez de quesada  reunion with his brother francisco and death  de quesada reached peru with an army of 500 men, without finding the mythical el dorado. in 1542 he reached the kingdom of quito in a bad shape where he joined his brother francisco. both brothers returned to bogota, where hernan was tried and imprisoned by luis alonso de lugo, the new governor of the capital after hernan, for his mistreatment of the indigenous peoples and the murders of tundama, aquiminzaque,
tisquesusa and sagipa. in 1544 hernan and francisco embarked on a ship back to spain, that was hit by lightning off the coast of cabo de la vela. both brothers died and several other conquistadors who were returning to their home country were wounded.  see also   list of conquistadors in colombia spanish conquest of the muisca el dorado gonzalo jimenez de quesada  references  bibliography             1500 births year of birth uncertain 1544 deaths deaths from lightning strikes 16th-century spanish people 16th-century explorers people from granada spanish people of jewish descent spanish conquistadors andalusian conquistadors spanish city founders explorers of amazonia history of the muisca history of colombia history of ecuador history of peru
"i was born with a broken heart" is a song co-written and recorded by american country music artist aaron tippin. it was released in october 1992 as the third single from the album read between the lines.  the song reached #38 on the billboard hot country singles & tracks chart.  the song was written by tippin and jim mcbride.  before tippin's version, david ball recorded it for his 1986 self-titled album. it had also been previously recorded by josh logan for his 1988 album somebody paints the wall.  chart performance  references  1986 songs 1992 singles josh logan (country singer) songs david ball (country singer) songs aaron tippin songs songs written by jim mcbride (songwriter) songs written by aaron tippin song recordings produced by emory gordy jr. rca records singles
stone academy is a private, for-profit vocational school in connecticut focused on educating students for careers in the medical field.  it has three branches:  east hartford, west haven, and waterbury, connecticut.  references  external links official website  schools in connecticut
boninsegna is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  celestina boninsegna (1877-1947), italian opera singer roberto boninsegna (born 1943), italian footballer and manager  italian-language surnames
"safe and sound" is a song by french electronic music duo justice. it was released as the lead single from their third studio album, woman (2016), on 13 july 2016. the song debuted and peaked on the french singles chart at number 48.  background and release prior to the song's release, a user on social media site reddit discovered "safe and sound" in a dj set by busy p, head of ed banger records, through the shazam mobile app. on 13 july 2016, "safe and sound" received its first radio airplay on dj annie mac's radio show on bbc radio 1. on the same day, the song was made available as a free download, in both mp3 and wav formats, from justice's website. after the song's release, many magazines and news websites made expectations for a new studio album to be released soon by the band.  critical reception "safe and sound" received positive reviews from critics. they often praised the song's disco-like structure and sound. ryan reed of rolling stone called the song "a psychedelic disco epic built on finger snaps, synth-strings, spastic jazz-fusion synths and one of the fiercest slap-bass grooves since patrice rushen's 1982 classic 'forget me nots'." lyndsey havens of consequence of sound compared the song to justice's hit song "d.a.n.c.e.", citing the "repetitive, hypnotic hook and airy vocals that sail over the song's booming synth" as a reason why. she also complimented the duo's use of a funk-like bass and synthesized strings for the song. allison sadlier of entertainment weekly wrote that the song stays true to the duo's disco-reminiscent "modern techno-style" sound and "makes for [a] dance worthy listen."  in popular culture the song appears in the netflix program  another life at the end of episode 1.9, "heart and soul".  "safe and sound" also appears in the 2016 video game forza horizon 3 along with d.a.n.c.e.  track listing  charts  references  justice (band) songs 2016 singles 2016 songs
beechwood (isaac kinsey house) is a historic home an farm located in washington township, wayne county, indiana. it was built in 1871, and is a two-story, italianate style brick dwelling with a hipped roof topped by a cupola. it features a semicircular stone arched main entry surrounded by a two-story, wrought iron verandah and projecting two-story semi-hexagonal bay.  also on the property are the contributing dairy house, smokehouse, granary, barn, cow shed, and carriage house.  it was added to the national register of historic places in 1975.  references  external links  historic american buildings survey in indiana farms on the national register of historic places in indiana houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana houses completed in 1871 buildings and structures in wayne county, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana
miss universe switzerland is a national beauty pageant in switzerland.  history between 1953 and 2013 the winners of miss switzerland went to miss universe pageant. in 2014 the winner had been selected by appointing in model agency in switzerland. began in 2016 the miss universe switzerland contest winner will compete at the miss universe pageant. on occasion, when the winner does not qualify (due to age) for either contest, a runner-up is sent.  new promoter veeranda aeberli is a received a mandate to be a  national director of miss universe in switzerland. beauty confidently is in switzerland and focus on women who want to be a role model of swiss women cross country to be contestants of miss universe switzerland a huge national peagent of switzerland and to be number one of beauty queen in the country to be a representative of switzerland at the miss universe pageant. before miss universe switzerland, miss switzerland  sent its winner to the miss universe.veranda or vilanda arberli makes a return of miss universe switzerland to the miss universe pageant.  titleholders color key  see also    miss switzerland  miss austria  miss universe germany  references  external links  missuniverseswitzerland.ch  miss universe switzerland  swiss awards recurring events established in 1953 1953 establishments in switzerland switzerland
basil rawdon jackson (20 may 1892 - 29 march 1957) was a british businessman, chairman of bp from february 1956 to june 1957.  jackson was born in st john's, newfoundland, the son of sir henry moore jackson, a british colonial governor, and emily corbett shea, daughter of sir edward dalton shea. he was working in the oil industry and living in new york city during the 1930 and 1940 censuses. he was deputy chairman of bp, and in 1956 succeeded william fraser, 1st baron strathalmond as chairman. he stepped down due to poor health in january 1957 and died in march the same year.  in 1957, he was succeeded by neville gass as chairman of bp.  references  1892 births 1957 deaths businesspeople from st. john's, newfoundland and labrador british businesspeople in the oil industry british chairpersons of corporations chairmen of bp british expatriates in the united states 20th-century british businesspeople
seyfi havaeri (17 july 1920 - 24 january 2009) was a turkish actor, screenwriter and film director.  selected filmography  damga (1948)  the victory sun (1953)  references  bibliography   gonul donmez-colin. the routledge dictionary of turkish cinema. routledge, 2013.  external links     1920 births 2009 deaths people from istanbul turkish male screenwriters turkish film directors turkish male film actors turkish male stage actors 20th-century screenwriters
these hits topped the ultratop 50 in the flanders region of belgium in 1983.  see also 1983 in music  references  1983 in belgium 1983 record charts 1983
the grand lodge is a hotel and theatre in forest grove, oregon, owned by mcmenamins pubs & breweries. mcmenamins became the custodian of the property in 1999.  history  in 1917, plans were developed for the masonic and eastern star home for the state of oregon, and construction began in 1920. it was established as a home for elderly and infirm masons, and began operations in 1922. a smaller building, called the children's cottage, was built in 1926 to house orphans, but the orphanage closed in 1928 after conflict between the children and the elders.  throughout the 1930s, the home struggled financially. the building suffered roof damage in 1962 after the columbus day storm. in 1999 the masons began building new facilities with the intention of moving out of the original masonic home and children's cottage. mcmenamins began renovations fall 1999, and reopened the building as mcmenamins grand lodge in march 2000. the building now contains hotel rooms, meeting spaces, and a movie theatre.  references  external links  buildings and structures in forest grove, oregon mcmenamins hotels in oregon hotels established in 2000 2000 establishments in oregon
amritsar north assembly constituency (sl. no.: 15) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india. its member of legislative assembly is sunil dutti, indian national congress.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  prev. results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
vincent phaladi kobola (born 8 january 1985 in polokwane, limpopo) is a retired south african football player who played as a defender. he is currently the assistant manager of maritzburg united.  he is a seasoned psl player, having played local, top flight football for moroka swallows, jomo cosmos, university of pretoria and mpumalanga black aces.  coaching career kobola decided to hang up his boots at the end of the 2017/18 season. on 25 august 2018, kobola was appointed as the assistant manager of eric tinkler at chippa united. in the beginning of december 2018, tinkler was fired. a few days later, kobola also left the club.  on 30 january 2019, eric tinkler became the manager of maritzburg united, and once again, he recruited kobola as his assistant manager.  references  1985 births living people south african soccer players association football defenders people from polokwane moroka swallows f.c. players jomo cosmos f.c. players university of pretoria f.c. players mpumalanga black aces f.c. players cape town city f.c. (2016) players sportspeople from limpopo south african premier division players
schenella pityophila is a species of fungus in the family geastraceae found in europe. it was originally described in 1997 as pyrenogaster pityophilus, before being transferred to the genus schenella in 2005.  references  fungi described in 1977 fungi of europe geastraceae
the 2015 pan american aerobic gymnastics championships were held in oaxtepec, mexico, december 13-19, 2015. the competition was organized by the mexican gymnastics federation, and approved by the international gymnastics federation.  participating countries  medalists  references  2015 in gymnastics pan american gymnastics championships international gymnastics competitions hosted by mexico 2015 in mexican sports
"schmackeboom" is a song by swedish singer of french origin - tacfarinas yamoun (aka "le tac"). the single was released on 20 may 2014 under the label warner music sweden. the author of the song is a swedish producer anderz wrethov, who had written the song with le tac.  the song was recorded officially in seven versions. a major part of each version is sung in poor french, and the phrase before the chorus is pronounced in english, swedish, german, italian or spanish (for specific version). there was also published a separate single of remixes.  the name of the song (presumably) comes from the swedish "schmacka" ().  in 2014, the song was played on radio stations of ukraine, russia, sweden, poland, germany and france.  music video  in august, 2014 on the singer's youtube channel, the music video was uploaded. le tac is shown kneading the dough and clapping the buttocks of half-naked girls appearing in the kitchen with the dough, or "baguettes" in their hands. after that, he starts dancing among them together with the chef. in one of the episodes on some woman's body there appears the flag of sweden.  this video was forbidden on youtube for minors and unregistered users.  track-list  official version   schmackeboom (do you want to f**k with me) - european version  schmackeboom (voulez-vous crac-crac avec moi) - french  schmackeboom (wollen sie bumsen mit mich) - german  schmackeboom (vuoi scopare con me) - italian  schmackeboom (quieres follar conmigo) - spanish  schmackeboom (vill du knulla med mig) - swedish  schmackeboom (do you want to cook with me) - english  remix-versions    schmackeboom (do you want to fuck with me) (english radio edit)  schmackeboom (do you want to fuck with me) (around the globe remix)  schmackeboom (do you want to fuck with me) (peet syntax & alexie divello remix)  schmackeboom (do you want to fuck with me) (esquille's small room club remix)  schmackeboom (voulez vous crac crac avec moi) (french radio edit)  schmacke
boom (voulez vous crac crac avec moi) (around the globe remix)  schmackeboom (voulez vous crac crac avec moi) (peet syntax & alexie divello remix)  schmackeboom (wollen sie bumsen mit mich) (german radio edit)  schmackeboom (wollen sie bumsen mit mich) (around the globe remix)  schmackeboom (wollen sie bumsen mit mich) (peet syntax & alexie divello remix)  schmackeboom (wollen sie bumsen mit mich) (esquille's small room club remix)  references  external links  "polish hot-20" hit parade  interview with le tac at swedish radiostation «p4 malmohus»  http://www.paulcee.co.uk/blog/index.php?id=11pmz85n  2014 songs
wu weipei (born 4 march 1966) is a chinese former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics. wu now works as a directeur sportif for uci women's continental team . he formerly held the same role with men's uci continental team , from 2012 to 2019.  references  external links    union cycliste internationale profile  1966 births living people chinese male cyclists olympic cyclists of china cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling cyclists at the 1986 asian games cyclists at the 1990 asian games medalists at the 1986 asian games medalists at the 1990 asian games asian games gold medalists for china asian games silver medalists for china
danilo sibalic (born march 18, 1988) is a serbian professional basketball player.  career sibalic started his career with kk beovuk 72. he later played for vojvodina srbijagas, ubc st. polten (austria), ergonom, radnicki kg 06 and ovce pole (macedonia).  in the 2010-11 season, he played for ulcinj, and for the next season he signed with  napredak krusevac.  the 2012-13 season he started with kk servitium of the bosnian league. after appearing in five games he left servitium and moved to smederevo for the rest of the season.  on may 15, 2013, he signed with lf basket of the swedish basketligan for the 2013-14 season.  on september 24, 2014, he signed with aba strumica in macedonia. in december 2015, he left strumica and signed with teodo tivat for the rest of the season.  the 2015-16 season he started with smederevo. in january 2016, he left smederevo and signed with igokea for the rest of the season. on july 2, 2016, he re-signed with igokea for the 2016-17 season. on june 20, 2017, he signed a two-year contract extension with igokea.  on august 5, 2018, sibalic signed for us aubenas basket in france to play in the 3rd-tier league for one year.  references  external links aba league profile fiba profile profile at eurobasket.com  1988 births living people aba league players basketball players from belgrade basketball league of serbia players kk beovuk 72 players kk ergonom players kk napredak krusevac players kk igokea players kk radnicki kg 06 players kk smederevo players kk vojvodina srbijagas players kk zitko basket players okk sloboda tuzla players serbian expatriate basketball people in austria serbian expatriate basketball people in bosnia and herzegovina serbian expatriate basketball people in france serbian expatriate basketball people in montenegro serbian expatriate basketball people in sweden serbian expatriate basketball people in north macedonia serbian men's basketball players forwards (basketball)
entrepot secondary school is a secondary school located in entrepot, castries, saint lucia. the school educates about 635 students in form 1 through form 5. the principal since 2003 is arthur scott.  the school first opened as entrepot junior secondary school on 10 january 1972. it became a full secondary school in 1984.  notable alumni darvin edwards, olympic high jumper levern spencer, olympic high jumper  references  1972 establishments in saint lucia buildings and structures in castries educational institutions established in 1972 schools in saint lucia
shusuke nomura (, 14 february 1935 - 20 october 1993) was a japanese ethnic nationalist activist.  he is best remembered for his suicide in the offices of the newspaper asahi shimbun.  life and career  in 1963 nomura burned down the home of politician ichiro kono, for which he served 12 years in prison. in 1977 he took four people hostage at the japan federation of economic organizations headquarters, for which he served another 6 years in prison. he continued to maintain that circumstances sometimes justified such violence.  nomura and his kaze no kai (, "wind party") ran in the 1992 upper house election. the party was behind in the polls when the asahi shimbun published a cartoon in its weekly magazine in which the character for "lice" () replaced the character for "wind" () in "kanze no to". in reaction, nomura entered the offices of asahi dressed in a kimono, proclaimed "" (, "asahi and i will die upon each other's swords"), and bowed in the direction of the imperial palace. he then shot himself with two pistols and died shortly after in the hospital. media criticized nomura's act as an attack on freedom of the press.  legacy  in october 2013 nhk board member  distributed an essay at a memorial for nomura in which she said that emperor akihito became a "living god" again when nomura shot himself, "whatever [the postwar] constitution might say".  before japan's loss in world war ii, japanese emperors had been deified, but the postwar constitution demoted the emperor to a symbolic, human role.  references  works cited       1935 births 1993 deaths suicide in japan japanese activists
pandori is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
industries the wayanad dairy of milma (kerala co-operative milk marketing federation) is situated at chuzhali within kalpetta municipal limits. this dairy processes over 100,000 liters of milk daily and markets it in wayanad, kozhikode, malappuram and kannur districts.  the dairy also manufactures high quality ghee which is exported to the middle east countries. other products of the dairy are butter, buttermilk, curd and ice-cream. there is a mini industries park promoted by kinfra at kalpetta. several small scale industries function out of this park.  tourism tourism and hospitality industry experienced a boom in recent years. this has led to mushrooming of resorts throughout wayanad, with the largest concentration of hotels and resorts at kalpetta and adjoining areas within vythiri taluk.  banking kalpetta is the banking capital of wayanad. lead district bank of wayanad is canara bank and the lead bank office is situated at kalpetta. india's largest bank state bank of india has two branches in the municipal area (kainatty and kalpetta). the premier bank of kerala state bank of travancore also has two branches - specialised gold point branch apart from the regular branch. there is a total of 21 branches of scheduled banks in kalpetta, excluding gramin and co-operative banks. kerala gramin bank has a branch and a regional office at kalpetta. the head office of wayanad district co-operative bank is at kalpetta. kerala state co-operative bank has its wayanad branch at kalpetta. the wayanad region office of kerala state co-operative agricultural and rural development bank ltd is also at kalpetta.  trade and shopping kalpetta is one of the major trade centers in kerala for agricultural produces. kalpetta is one of 18 markets that the vfpck (vegetable and fruit promotion council keralam) tracks and publishes vegetable and fruit prices. coffee price prevailing at kalpetta market is published in all malaylam newspapers and also in business newspapers such as the economic times.  consumer goods in recent times, major jewellery, electronics and hypermarket retail chains of kerala have set up stores in kalpetta. well known store chains like francis alukkas, malabar gold, chemmannur gold, grand fresh hypermarkets, kannankandy electronics, whitemart electronics, tbs books and beyond, planet fashion are present at kalpetta.  publishing all of kerala's leading book publishers have outlets at kalpetta. outlets of current books, national book stall (nbs), mathrubhumi books, deshabhimani books and poorna publications (tbs) can be found there.
automobiles car dealerships serving wayanad are located in the kalpetta north suburbs between kainatty and kakkavayal.  references  economy of kerala kalpetta area
michael randolph freelander fracp (born 23 april 1953) is an australian politician and paediatrician. he is a member of the australian labor party (alp) and has held the division of macarthur in the house of representatives since the 2016 federal election.  early life freelander was born in sydney. his father selwyn was a dentist and president of west harbour rfc, while his mother ruth was a preschool teacher. his paternal grandfather william freelander arrived in australia as a cabin boy and became mayor of katoomba. freelander attended trinity grammar school from 1965 to 1977 playing cricket and rugby and being appointed a prefect of the school. in the higher school certificate he qualified to study medicine at sydney university.  medical career freelander studied medicine at the university of sydney and is a fellow of the royal australasian college of physicians (fracp). he trained as a paediatrician at the royal alexandra hospital for children. in 1984 he moved to the macarthur region of sydney and established his own practice, also working at camden and campbelltown hospitals for several decades. he additionally lectured at the university of western sydney.  politics freelander was elected to parliament at the 2016 federal election, defeating sitting liberal member russell matheson in the division of macarthur. he was assisted by a favourable redistribution. he became the first labor mp to hold macarthur since the keating government lost the 1996 election. he retained his seat at the 2019 election, with an increased majority.  freelander has served on the house of representatives standing committee on health, aged care and sport from 15 september 2016 and on the standing committee for social policy and legal affairs from 12 october 2016. he has also served as the deputy chair of the house of representatives standing committee on health, aged care and sport.  personal life freelander has six children with his wife sharon, and had five grandchildren as of 2016. he has said that he is "not a particularly religious jew, but i still describe myself as jewish".  references  1953 births members of the australian house of representatives members of the australian house of representatives for macarthur australian labor party members of the parliament of australia labor right politicians jewish australian politicians living people 21st-century australian politicians australian paediatricians university of sydney alumni
shalom ronli-riklis (, 24 january 1922 - 27 january 1994) was an israeli musician, music teacher, and the conductor of the idf orchestra.  biography  shalom ronli-riklis was born in 1922 in tel aviv. as a young man, riklis learned to play the violin and the piano. his piano teacher vincze-kraus taught at the rubin academy of music in tel aviv university. during his studies at the hebrew gymnasium "herzliya," he learned to play the trumpet and later, the french horn, which would become his main instrument.  after graduation, he joined the jewish brigade. following a period of service in the infantry, riklis joined the orchestra brigade. shortly before his release from the brigade, he was appointed the orchestra conductor. after his release from the brigade, riklis graduated from the academy of music in piano and conducting. there he took courses under igor markevitch at the mozarteum university of salzburg from 1953-56.  his idf service  riklis served in the war of independence, as a member of the first unit of the military police. in 1949 he was invited to conduct the israel defense forces, idf, orchestra that had been founded shortly beforehand. he served as conductor of the idf orchestra for 11 years, until stepping down in 1960.  during that time, riklis significantly improved the quality of the idf brass band. this was the first full brass band in israel. under his leadership, it became a prominent musical ensemble in israel. many of its members in the brass and percussion sections were among the first israelis to join the israel philharmonic orchestra. idf at the time was the only army in the world who had two orchestras:  the symphonic orchestra, founded by riklis, and a wind ensemble. the symphonic orchestra toured the country, while the wind ensemble played military parades, light music, and jazz.  his great love was working with teenagers. during his tenure with the idf orchestra, he developed the youth corps as its conductor.  the youth ensemble would go on to win first prize, which was a silver harp, at the queen juliana competition for orchestras in kerkrade, netherlands, which was attended by over 100 bands. the youth ensemble won three times in a row: 1958, 1962 and in 1966. after three consecutive first prizes, the harp remained permanently in israel and has been stored in the idf archives.  this band toured in 1967 under his riklis' baton in the united states and canada with american star danny kaye. they
were met with great success.  after his army service  after leaving the army, he worked for many years at the israel radio orchestra in jerusalem. riklis headed the faculty and conducted the chamber orchestra of the academy of music in tel aviv university. he is credited with teaching many generations of musicians in israel.  in 1961, he was sent by the singapore foreign ministry to build and consolidate the country's classical music. as part of this work he established a symphony orchestra and worked with various youth orchestras.  in 1971, he was appointed deputy of the israel philharmonic orchestra by zubin mehta, and in 1984, he founded the young israel philharmonic orchestra; he remained as its director until 1988. dozens of his students went on to perform with various orchestras worldwide. riklis conducted many orchestras in israel. he also served as a mentor to various musicals and judged numerous music competitions.  in 1990 he was the first european to win the silver star of singapore.  riklis died in january 1994 in tel aviv, after a long illness. he is buried in the yarkon cemetery.  references   1922 births 1994 deaths israel defense forces orchestra conductors 20th-century conductors (music) israeli military musicians burials at yarkon cemetery
is the second album of japanese idol girl group nogizaka46. it was released on may 25, 2016. it was number-one on the weekly oricon albums chart, with 274,873 copies sold. it was also number-one on the billboard japan hot 100. in may 2016, the album was certified platinum by the recording industry association of japan.  release  it was released in 5 types. type-a, type-b, type-c, type-d and a regular edition. each type has a limited edition. type-a, type-b and type-c includes a dvd with the live music video nogizaka46 summer national tour 2014 final! @meiji jingu stadium. type-d includes special movies shot by their manager. the album cover photo was taken in the national art center where connected directly to tokyo metro nogizaka station.  track listing  regular edition  type a  type b  type c  type d  charts  certifications  references  further reading  external links   discography on nogizaka46 official website  2016 albums 2016 songs japanese-language songs nogizaka46 songs
shopstyle is a digital shopping platform owned by ebates. launched in 2007 as a web search engine for fashion, it was thereafter transformed into a fashion marketplace and inspiration engine. shopstyle lists over 14 million products across apparel, accessories, beauty, home furnishings and kids' items. it drives $1 billion in gross sales to its global network of 1,400 retailers. shopstyle is also the commerce engine behind shopstyle collective, a network of 14,000 bloggers, vloggers and social media users who use shopstyle's platform to earn money from the sales they drive to retailers.  history shopstyle was thought-up by san francisco-based uk expat andy moss in 2006 while he was running local e-commerce website cairo and noticed that shoes were among the most popular items searched for there. the technology behind shopstyle was created by a group of engineers moss had met while working at ariba (now sap ariba), including trey matteson, garrick toubassi and mike lenz. the us website launched in february 2007 with a focus on aesthetics and user experience in an attempt to recreate a magazine-like experience digitally. it was variously described as an online equivalent of a shopping mall or a shoppable digital magazine. in september 2007 popsugar inc. (then sugar publishing) purchased shopstyle for an undisclosed sum. after the acquisition, shopstyle focused its efforts on broadening out the product count, retailer expansion and becoming a search engine for fashion by the end of 2015 shopstyle's global sites generated five million searches per week and listed 12 million products from 1,400 retailers.  references  external links official website  online marketplaces of the united states fashion websites
the church of panagia kera (greek: εκκλησια της παναγιας της κερας) is a cretan byzantine church, located 1 km (0.62 miles) from the village of kritsa, in the dikte mountains. it contains the finest-preserved byzantine-era frescoes in crete, and for that reason, has become one of the most culturally and historically significant churches on the island.  history the late greek word 'panagia' is defined as 'virgin' in english, and is among the titles of the virgin mary in the eastern orthodox church. although no founding date for the church of panagia kera has been established, historical consensus agrees that the oldest parts of the church, the central nave, its vaulted roof and dome, were constructed and painted in the 13th century. the side-aisles of the church, its western entrance, and the belfry and the buttresses supporting the church, were later built and painted during the early to mid-14th century. the frescoes in panagia kera date back to the paleologian renaissance, due to their vivid, bright colors. according to local tradition, the church contained an icon of the virgin mary, which was believed to have miraculous powers. during the period of byzantine iconoclasm, it was removed to constantinople, but was later returned. in 1498, during the venetian occupation of crete, a greek trader stole the icon, which was later transported to the temple of saint alfonso on the esquiline hill in rome. panagia kera was later renovated by the managgaris family in 1722, and in 1732 the icon of the virgin mary was repainted in the church by an unknown artist.  frescoes the frescoes on the dome and the central nave depict the following scenes from the new testament: the presentation, the baptism, the raising of lazarus and the entry into jerusalem. the central aisle of the church is dedicated to the virgin mary and the assumption. the frescoes on the western wall of the church depict the crucifixion of jesus and the punishment of the damned, with michael the archangel announcing the second coming. the south aisle of saint anne is decorated with images of the life of the virgin mary, and the north aisle is dedicated to saint anthony, with frescoes of the second coming and judgement day. next to the north aisle is a depiction of heaven, complete with the patriarchs abraham, isaac and jacob, as well as the virgin mary.  gallery  references  eastern orthodoxy in
crete panagia kera panagia kera panagia kera panagia kera eastern orthodox church buildings in greece churches in crete
pavel baudis (born 15 may 1960) is a czech software engineer, entrepreneur and the co-founder of avast along with eduard kucera. as of 2020, he is the 6th wealthiest person in the czech republic, with a net worth of more than 51 billion czech koruna according to forbes.  born in prague, he graduated in information technology from the prague university of chemical technology. he then worked as a graphics specialist at the mathematical research institute.  he entered business began with his friend eduard kucera at the end of the communist regime in 1989, when he founded alwil. in the early 1990s, the company was renamed avast software, based on its best known product, avast antivirus. it soon faced intense competition, especially from symantec, which used an aggressive pricing policy in a bid to lead the market. in response baudis and kucera took a radical defense strategy, offering its product for free. as a result, avast ultimately emerged as the largest anti-virus firm in the world.  references  czech company founders czech business executives czech billionaires 1960 births living people czech software engineers
ernest boiceau (30 november 1881 - 16 march 1950), born in french-speaking lausanne, was a swiss designer and decorator of the interwar period.  biography  born in a family of bankers, ernest boiceau received training in munich, then studied drawing, painting and architecture at the ecole des beaux arts in paris. from 1900 to 1910, he traveled and painted landscapes and portraits.  starting in the 1910s, boiceau dedicated himself to embroidery, passementerie and upholstery in his workshop, rue des moulins in paris, working initially for fashion houses and theatre costume designers. in 1912 he collaborated with john jacobson on a tapestry exhibited at the galliera museum in paris. at the beginning of the war, in 1914, he organised a branch of the swiss committee to help belgian refugees. in 1920, he opened a boutique on the avenue de l'opera, by that time, his exquisitely refined work as an embroiderer had become renowned. he supplied embroidered, beaded or sequined theatrical costumes for various venues like the opera, the comedie-francaise' theater and parisian revues such as the folies bergere or moulin rouge. he also worked for master couturiers like edward molyneux or worth.  in 1924, he started creating objects and furniture in stately neoclassical style, and completed his first tapestry. in 1928, he opened a new office dedicated to interior decoration on rue pierre charron in paris.  he patented the point de cornely, an embroidery stitch derived from emile cornely's research in 1865, and began to apply this technique to his own creations in 1924-1925. an article published in l'art vivant in 1927 praised this technique enlivening artworks' surfaces.  his participation as a decorator in the salon d'automne in 1928 and 1929 brought him national and international recognition.  until 1935, he created objects, lighting, furniture made of rare wood species such as macassar, amaranth, sycamore or arecaceae sometimes with ivory or ebony inlays, as well as sumptuous carpets woven and embellished with point de cornely.  boiceau became very sought after, he then opened another shop on avenue matignon and decided to devote himself entirely to decoration. he deeded the embroidery workshop to his employees, who in turn created an embroidery and fashion accessories company named  felix and company.  he worked with designers and architects in vogue at the time such as elsie de wolfe, david adler
and his sister frances adler elkins among others, offering his own designs created in rich and varied materials including colored glass, light colored leather and bronze.  among boiceau's distinguished clients were princess bibesco, b. boutet de monvel, louis cartier, mrs.fenwick, harold macmillan, cecile sorel, the two brothers writers jerome tharaud and jean tharaud, louise de vilmorin, mr. wendel and jean-charles worth.  boiceau closed his business at the outbreak of world war ii,  and died in the vallee de chevreuse (essonne), not far from paris in 1950.  collection   the art institute of chicago : 1920/25 wall hanging. cooper hewitt, smithsonian design museum.  bibliography   e boiceau : london, pavilion of art & design, galerie willy huybrechts, october 13 - 17, 2010, paris : galerie willy huybrechts, 2010  philippe julian, les annees'20 revues dans les annees'70 chez yves saint laurent, id., p. 105.  joan juliet buck, chez yves saint laurent, id. p. 96-97, p. 98-99.  john richardson, the art of yves saint laurent, id., p. 170-171, p. 172-173.  laurence benaim, yves saint laurent, id17.  ernest boiceau, decorateur-createur, catalogue d'exposition, galerie eric philippe, paris, 198218.  references  external links   nytimes, rita reif: french designer decorators in the style of luxe, 1989   alastair duncan, art deco complete: the definitive guide to the decorative arts of the 1920s and 1930s, thames & hudson, 2009   people from lausanne alumni of the ecole des beaux-arts swiss designers french designers embroiderers french interior designers art deco designers french tapestry artists furniture designers 1881 births 1950 deaths
"mercy" is a song by canadian singer-songwriter shawn mendes. it was co-written by mendes with ilsey juber, danny parker and teddy geiger, with the latter handling the song's production with jake gosling. it was released on august 18, 2016, through island records as the third promotional single, and later as the second single on october 18, 2016, from his second studio album, illuminate (2016).  composition "mercy" is written in the key of e minor with a common time tempo of 144 to 152 beats per minute. mendes's vocals span from b2 to a4 in the song.  music video on september 21, 2016, a music video directed by jay martin was released. it features mendes singing, switching between him drowning in a locked car in the ocean and him performing the song with instruments in a warehouse shot at tribro studios.  cover versions  in october 2016, muslim nasheed artist siedd released a cover version of 'mercy' on youtube. the song which has over 1 million views on youtube features a modern style a capella arrangement with rewritten lyrics to reflect his islamic faith.  chart performance in the united states, the song peaked at number 15 on the billboard hot 100 and was the second single from illuminate to reach the top 20. it also peaked at number 13 in australia, number 15 in the uk and number 23 in canada.  live performances mendes performed the song for the first time on the tonight show starring jimmy fallon on september 22, 2016, backed by mallet drums, electric guitar, bass and piano. the singer later performed the song on today on september 23, the late late show with james corden on september 28, the x factor uk on october 23, and the x factor australia on october 31 as well as saturday night live on december 3. mendes performed the song live at the juno awards of 2017; this version was subsequently released as a digital download. on may 27, 2018, mendes and singer james bay performed the song together at bbc music's biggest weekend.  track listing  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  release history  references  2016 songs 2016 singles shawn mendes songs island records singles universal music group singles rock ballads torch songs songs written by ilsey juber songs written by teddy geiger songs written by danny parker (songwriter) songs written by shawn mendes
waldron-beck house and carriage house is a historic home and carriage house located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the house was built in 1877, and is a two-story, irregularly shaped italianate style brick dwelling, with a rear service wing. it sits on a stone foundation and has a multi-hipped roof with bracketed cornice.  it features a three-sided, two-story projecting bay. the carriage house is a two-story, three bay brick building. it has a hipped roof with cupola and a bracketed cornice.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1984.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana houses completed in 1877 buildings and structures in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana houses in tippecanoe county, indiana 1877 establishments in indiana
the raziano house, also known as mahogany manor, is a historic house located at 913 minor street in kenner, louisiana.  built in 1946 for henry raziano and his wife amelia, the house is a two-story brick residence in the colonial revival style.  the house was listed on the national register of historic places on august 14, 1998.  see also  national register of historic places listings in jefferson parish, louisiana  references  houses on the national register of historic places in louisiana neoclassical architecture in louisiana houses completed in 1946 houses in jefferson parish, louisiana
398001-398100   |-id=045 | 398045 vitudurum ||  || vitudurum was a roman neighborhood that was built around 1 ce in today's district of oberwinterthur in the swiss city of winterthur. ||  |}  398101-398200   |-id=188 | 398188 agni ||  || agni is the vedic god of fire. he represents the vital spark of life, and the fire and brilliance of the sun, lightning, and comets. ||  |}  398201-398300   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398301-398400   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398401-398500   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398501-398600   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398601-398700   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398701-398800   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398801-398900   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  398901-399000   |-bgcolor=#f2f2f2 | colspan=4 align=center |  |}  references   398001-399000
the 1964 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1964 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 4-6 overall and 3-4 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by abe martin in his 12th year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
mary joy reyes tabal (born july 13, 1989) is a filipino marathon runner. she is the first female filipino marathon runner to qualify for the olympics, which she has done by running a time of 2:43:29 in the scotiabank ottawa marathon in 2016. she placed 124th at the 2016 rio olympics.  tabal, a veteran of local and international marathons, has won a silver medal in the women's marathon competition in the 2015 southeast asian games in singapore, and a gold medal in the 2017 sea games in kuala lumpur malaysia  and won the women's division title in the national milo marathon finals for six straight years, 2013, 2014, 2015, 2016, 2017 and 2018. she was recognized as the 2016 athlete of the year by the sportswriters association of cebu. tabal and fellow marathon runner rafael poliquit jr. represented the philippines in the 2016 boston marathon in april 2016. she finished 20th overall in the race.  career  2016  on july 13, 2016, the philippine athletics track and field association (patafa) reinstated tabal in the national team, a year after she resigned due to conflicts between training and sponsorship agreements with motorace racing, tabal's sponsor, but it was removed from the association's national team in september 2016, days after her olympics stint.  on december 4, 2016, tabal won the women's category of the milo marathon national finals in iloilo and she became the first runner in the marathon's history to complete a four-peat title record by clocking in 2 hours, 47 minutes and 57 seconds.  2017 at the first day of the 29th southeast asian games on august 19, 2017, tabal gave the country's first gold medal after dominating the 42 km women's marathon event with an official time of 2 hours, 48 minutes and 26 seconds.  references  living people sportspeople from cebu city filipino female marathon runners 1989 births athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2018 asian games olympic track and field athletes of the philippines southeast asian games medalists in athletics southeast asian games gold medalists for the philippines southeast asian games silver medalists for the philippines competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games asian games competitors for the philippines competitors at the 2019 southeast asian games
a passenger disappeared (spanish: ha desaparecido un pasajero) is a 1953 spanish crime film directed by alejandro perla and starring rafael duran, maria rivas and mario berriatua.  cast  rafael duran as inspector torres   maria rivas as regina    mario berriatua as agente    ramon elias as gangster    santiago rivero as gangster    lina yegros as la madre    carmen sanchez as ciudadana   valeriano andres  manuel arbo  manuel bermudez 'boliche'  xan das bolas  jose luis brugada  joaquin burgos  jose castro tallon  maruja coral  francisco de cossio  antonio de salazar  beni deus  antonio ferrandis  eulalia iglesias  milagros leal  jacinto martin  jose maria martin  ignacio mateos  jose maria meana  manuel monroy  antonio moreno  julio pelagon  diana salcedo  otto sirgo  salvador soler mari  blanca suarez  anibal vela   juan vazquez   pablo alvarez rubio  references  bibliography   de espana, rafael. directory of spanish and portuguese film-makers and films. greenwood press, 1994.  external links     1953 crime films spanish crime films 1953 films spanish films spanish-language films spanish black-and-white films
the statue of diogenes () is a monument to the ancient greek philosopher diogenes of sinope, who was born in sinop , ancient asia minor, turkey in about 412 bc.  sinop (then known as sinope) is the birthplace of diogenes in the 5th century bc. sinop municipality decided to erect a statue of diogenes. its creator was turan bas of the ondokuz mayıs university in samsun. the statue was erected in 2006.  it is situated at the center of the narrowest point of sinop peninsula isthmus. other historically notable places of the city (like sinop fortress prison) are close to the monument. the  tall statue depicts diogenes the cynic standing with his dog on his dwelling barrel and searching for an honest man in the far with his lamp in the hand.  according to the turkish daily newspaper milliyet, some politicians criticized the decision of the municipality on the ground that diogenes searched for an honest man and thus insulted the honest people of sinop. however, that legend had been originated in athens and not in sinop.  references  buildings and structures in sinop, turkey statues in turkey buildings and structures completed in 2006 tourist attractions in sinop, turkey cultural depictions of diogenes sculptures of men in turkey
aryness joy wickens (january 5, 1901 - february 2, 1991) was an american economist and statistician who served as acting commissioner of the us bureau of labor statistics and as president of the american statistical association, and who helped develop the united states consumer price index.  education and career aryness joy was born in bellingham, washington. she did her undergraduate studies at the university of washington, graduating phi beta kappa, and earned a master's degree in economics from the university of chicago.  at the university of washington, she became a member of kappa kappa gamma.   after teaching economics at mount holyoke college from 1924 to 1928, she moved to washington, dc to work for the federal reserve board. there, her work included the measurement of industrial production. she also worked for a precursor of the office of management and budget in the early 1930s.  she joined the bureau of labor statistics in 1933, at first serving on an advisory committee of the american statistical association to the program, and then working as an assistant to the commissioner of the bureau. her work at that time involved the investigation of monopolistic business practices.  she was promoted to branch chief at the bls in 1940, heading a group that studied prices and the cost of living. later joy became assistant and deputy commissioner of the bureau. during this time she also represented the us as an adviser at the united nations and international conferences. in 1961 she became economic adviser to the secretary of labor. she retired in the early 1970s, but returned to duty at the commission on federal paperwork as director of statistical studies there.  at the bureau of labor statistics, joy served as acting commissioner in 1946, and again in 1954-1955. in her second term as acting commissioner, her $13,500 salary made her the highest-paid female federal civil servant.  other activities in 1935, joy was considered as one of several candidates to be the president of mount holyoke, continuing a tradition of female leadership at that school. however, instead, controversially, the trustees selected roswell g. ham to be president.  in 1952 she became the president of the american statistical association.  awards and recognition joy was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association in 1937, the second woman (after kate claghorn) to be so honored.  in 1960 she was one of the inaugural recipients of the us civil service commission's federal women's award.  personal life joy married david l. wickens, an economist, united states air force lieutenant colonel, rancher, and
member of the south dakota senate, on june 29, 1935. her husband died in 1970. after retiring, she moved to mississippi in 1986.  references  external links  1901 births 1991 deaths people from bellingham, washington university of washington alumni university of chicago alumni mount holyoke college faculty fellows of the american statistical association presidents of the american statistical association bureau of labor statistics american statisticians american women economists women statisticians economists from washington (state) 20th-century american economists truman administration personnel
sternschanze () (lit. star sconce) is a quarter in the center of hamburg (germany) within the altona borough. in 2014, the population was 7,776 on an area of 0.6 sq km with a density of 14,113 inhabitants per sq km. after reeperbahn, it is hamburg's best known entertainment and nightlife district. it is also known as schanzenviertel () and nicknamed schanze ().  history the name of the quarter originates from a sconce (german: schanze) formed like a star which has been built in the area in 1682 in front of the hamburg wallring. from the 1930s to the 1970s the quarter was home for a large number of working-class people. since the 1970s, families and students have started to move into the area. it is nearly, but not fully, congruent with the entertainment district of schanzenviertel with its many bars and clubs, which is dubbed "schanze" by its inhabitants. in the local slang, residents here live "in the sconce" ("in der schanze").  the former concert house/theater building rote flora (built in 1888 as flora concert hall) is also located here, at the street of schulterblatt. it was squatted by leftist groups in 1989, after there were plans since 1987/88 to rebuild it as a new musical theater. these plans were later realized near holstenstraße station as neue flora. since the beginning of the occupation, rote flora was used for cultural events by the squatting groups. in 2000, the building was acquired by real-estate agent klausmartin kretschmer, under a contract where the city of hamburg prohibited him to make any alterations. because he planned to make alterations anyway, conflicts arose with residents. in 2014, hamburg city re-bought the building to avoid further conflicts; the building was renovated in 2015 by volunteers.  since the beginning of the new millennium, sternschanze is en vogue and subject to gentrification. nevertheless, political demonstrations, mostly by leftist groups, take place here and sometimes lead to clashes with the police, frequently on 1 may (german labour day). graffiti paintings can be found on many walls throughout the quarter. in 2008, the area of schanzenviertel, which formerly was cut into three parts by the boundaries of hamburg-mitte, eimsbuttel, and altona, was merged into the new quarter of sternschanze, which
since then  has belonged only to the altona borough.  politics these are the results of sternschanze in the hamburg state election:  geography sternschanze is located between the quarters of st. pauli, altona-altstadt, eimsbuttel, and rotherbaum.  transportation sternschanze station is serviced by hamburg s-bahn (lines s11, s21, s31) and u-bahn trains (u3 line), feldstraße - which is officially located in neighbouring st. pauli quarter - by the underground line u3 only. schlump station is located on the north eastern boundaries of the sternschanze quarter and served by underground lines u2 and u3.  references  external links sternschanze at hamburg.de, in german  altona, hamburg entertainment districts in germany quarters of hamburg
radosav spasojevic (born 28 february 1992) is a montenegrin professional basketball player for sutjeska.  in his career, spasojevic played for traiskirchen lions, oviedo, sutjeska, mega leks and mzt skopje.  references  external links        1992 births living people aba league players kk mega basket players kk mzt skopje players kk sutjeska players montenegrin expatriate basketball people in serbia montenegrin expatriate basketball people in spain montenegrin men's basketball players oviedo cb players power forwards (basketball) sportspeople from niksic
this is a list of gibraltar premier division football transfers for the 2016/17 season. only moves featuring at least one premier division club are listed.  the transfer window began once clubs had concluded their final domestic fixture of the 2015-16 season, but many transfers will only officially go through on 1 july because the majority of player contracts finish on 30 june. the window closed on 7 september 2016.  key  x pending official confirmation from club  references   2016-17 football transfers summer 2016
silvio curto (august 20, 1919 - september 24, 2015) was an italian egyptologist.  biography born in 1919 in bra, piedmont, curto obtained his degree in roman archaeology in 1941. after the war, he became an inspector for the soprintendenza alle antichita egizie and in 1964 he was appointed director of the museo egizio of turin, a charge he held until 1984. during his term, the museum was renovated considerably and since 1969 it was provided with a large library.  between 1961 and 1969 curto led the italian team of archaeologists who took part in the international effort of relocating the abu simbel temples which were threatened by the building of the aswan high dam. italy received as a gift the small temple of ellesyia, originally built by thutmose iii for the god horus, which was rebuilt by curto in 1970 inside the museo egizio in turin, where it still is. from 1964 to 1989 he taught egyptology at the university of turin. he also contributed to various egyptian collections throughout italy, such as renovating the one in the museo civico archeologico of bologna in 1961 and co-founding the egyptian museum of milan in 1972.  curto died on september 24, 2015, in turin, aged 96. in 2016, the director of the museo egizio christian greco named the museum's library after him in his honor.  references  1919 births people from bra, piedmont 2015 deaths italian egyptologists directors of the museo egizio university of turin faculty
nicola guerra (2 may 1865, naples - 5 february 1942, cernobbio aged 76) was an italian dancer, choreographer and ballet master.  trained in dance by a student of carlo blasis, he was primo ballerino in many italian and foreign theaters and performed in new york in the black crook.  a dancer and ballet master at the vienna state opera (1896-1901), he directed the ballet of the budapest opera (1902-1915), then the paris opera ballet (1927-1929) and finally the school dance of the teatro dell'opera di roma (1931-1932).  external links   nicola guerra on data.bnf.fr  19th-century neapolitan people italian male ballet dancers italian choreographers ballet masters 1865 births 1942 deaths
malta participated in the junior eurovision song contest 2016 as the host country. the maltese entrant for the 2016 contest in valletta was selected through a national final, organised by the maltese broadcaster public broadcasting services (pbs) on 16 july 2016, while their song was selected internally. each of the twenty participants performed covers or non-eurovision candidate songs during the national final. christina magrin was declared the winner and her junior eurovision song "parachute" was revealed on 27 october.  background  prior to the 2016 contest, malta had participated in the junior eurovision song contest eleven times since its first entry in 2003 only opting not to participate at the 2010, 2011 and 2012 contests. malta has won on two occasions: in 2013 when gaia cauchi won with the song "the start", and again in 2015 when destiny chukunyere came first with "not my soul" when it won the contest with 185 points, breaking the previous record held by spain for the most points ever given to a winner.  before junior eurovision  national final the national final took place on 16 july 2016. the national final consisted of twenty competing acts participating in a televised production. each of the 20 participants sang a song of their own choice. after all of them had performed, the jury and televoting cast their votes - each juror had a 25% weighting in the final result (so 75% overall), with the televoting also having a 25% share. the contestants were ranked from 1-20, with 1 being the best. christina magrin was announced as the winner of the national final.  jury members the jury members were as follow (in alphabetical order):  edoardo grassi - head of delegation, france.  joana levieva-sawyer - head of delegation, bulgaria.  nicola caligiore - head of delegation, italy.  song selection on 27 october 2016, it was revealed that christina's song for the junior eurovision song contest 2016 was revealed would be entitled "parachute". the song, which is composed and written by florent boshnjaku and matt "muxu" mercieca, was presented live on tvm news bulletin and it was broadcast simultaneously on tvm.com.mt.  artist and song information  christina magrin  christina magrin (born 7 june 2003) is a maltese singer. she represented malta at the junior eurovision song contest 2016 in valletta, malta on 20 november 2016 with the song "parachute". magrin studies vocal technique under her mother's guidance, who is also a passionate
musician and a lecturer by profession. her first big break was during her rendition of "suus" (the entry for albania in the eurovision song contest 2012), where she caught the attention of millions of tv viewers and reached over 400,000 youtube views in just a few days. the video went viral on albanian media, capturing the attention of the composer of the song who promised to compose a song and launch it in the balkans.  since her childhood years, magrin dedicated considerable time and energy for ballet, achieving consistent results from the royal academy of dance. she is currently following the intermediate foundation syllabus with joanna rummolino. for a number of years, she also took piano lessons and obtained various distinction results from the royal schools of music. magrin distinguishes herself on stage through an impressive vocal range that gives her ample versatility and an ability to sing in multiple languages. magrin has performed in 10 languages: english, maltese, albanian, serbian, french, italian, macedonian, ukrainian, spanish and bulgarian. she has also sat for grade 8 exams at the trinity college london, achieving recognition from the college as the youngest student to take the grade and achieving a high mark. she was supported in this endeavour by rachel fabri camilleri.  magrin's has announced that she is currently working on her debut album, which will contain her new single, "snow globe", which she performed during the interval act for malta's pre-selection of the eurovision song contest 2017.  parachute "parachute" is a song by maltese singer christina magrin. it represented malta during the junior eurovision song contest 2016. the song is composed and written by florent boshnjaku and matt "muxu" mercieca.  at junior eurovision during the opening ceremony and the running order draw which took place on 14 november 2016, malta was drawn to perform fifth on 20 november 2016, following russia and preceding bulgaria.  the final was broadcast on the maltese channel tvm1.  final  voting during the press conference for the junior eurovision song contest 2016, held in stockholm, the reference group announced several changes to the voting format for the 2016 contest. previously, points had been awarded based on a combination of 50% national juries and 50% televoting, with one more set of points also given out by a 'kids' jury'. however, this year, points will be awarded based on a 50/50 combination of each country's adult and , to be announced by a spokesperson. for the first time since the inauguration of the contest the voting procedure will
not include a public televote. following these results, three expert jurors will also announce their points from 1-8, 10, and 12. these professional jurors are: christer bjorkman, mads grimstad, and jedward.  references  junior eurovision song contest malta 2016
david a. stahl is an american scientist and professor of environmental engineering. he is best known for the application of molecular microbial ecology to environmental engineering.  biography  stahl received his b.s. in microbiology from the university of washington, cum laude, in 1971. he earned his m.s. and his ph.d. in microbiology at the university of illinois in 1975 and 1978, respectively. from 1978 to 1980, he completed postdoctoral training at the national jewish hospital and research center, where he was a senior research associate from 1980 to 1984. from 1984 to 1994, he was on the faculty of the university of illinois. from 1994 to 2000, he was on the faculty of northwestern university. since 2000, he has been a member of the faculty of the university of washington.  stahl is a fellow of the american academy of microbiology. he was elected to the national academy of engineering in 2012.  he was the editor of fems microbiology letters from 1990 to 1996, editor of biodegradation from 1997 to 2003, editor of microbiology and molecular biology reviews from 1998 to 2003, and founding co-editor of environmental microbiology from 1998 to 2012. in 2006, stahl was awarded the procter & gamble award in applied and environmental microbiology by the american society for microbiology.  references  external links  google scholar  living people university of washington alumni university of illinois alumni university of illinois faculty northwestern university faculty university of washington faculty members of the united states national academy of engineering place of birth missing (living people) year of birth missing (living people) american scientists
maria trubnikova (1835-1897) was a russian philanthropist and feminist. a notable philanthropist, she was also, alongside anna filosofova (1837-1912) and nadezhda stasova (1835-1895), one of the pioneer founders and leaders of the first organised russian women's movement.  in 1863, trubnikova, stasova, and anna engelhardt founded the first russian women's publishing cooperative.  references  трубникова, мария васильевна // энциклопедическии словарь брокгауза и ефрона : в 86 т. (82 т. и 4 доп.). - спб., 1890-1907.  notes  1835 births 1897 deaths feminists of the russian empire russian women's rights activists philanthropists of the russian empire 19th-century russian people nobility of the russian empire 19th-century philanthropists
barco escape was a multi screen video format similar to cinerama introduced in 2015 by barco n.v. the format combines barco technologies such as auro 11.1 as well as multi-projection in order to create a panoramic experience. the technology was expected to compete with imax and dolby cinema. it is now closed.  history  barco escape debuted in theatres in september 2014 with the film the maze runner featuring select scenes in the three-screen format.  in september 2014, tony bennett and lady gaga recorded a performance in brussels grande place plaza to mark the release of their cheek to cheek jazz record. the concert was filmed using 15 red epic dragon cameras feeding three separate panels, including the panoramic shots.  in april 2015, barry films announced the release of their upcoming horror film the hell within in the format. barco signed a five-year multi-title deal with 20th century fox to release films in the format. a barco escape set up was installed in one of the fox studios cinema rooms as part of the deal. posse films partnered with barco in order to release the film racer's heart, a story based on nascar hall of fame member bobby allison in the format.  in 2015, barco announced a deal with jerry bruckheimer to produce one new movie and one reimagined version of a previous film.  in february 2016, director mark waugh announced he would shoot an outdoor survival feature film natively in the format. the film will be shot on location with a single camera using wide-angle lenses. the film will be released through rock pile productions.  in april 2016, barco signed a partnership agreement with cross creek productions in order to release one film in the format by end of 2017. similarly, barco also signed an agreement with fundamental films to release two or more of their films in the format, with 24 hours to live to be the first film to do so.  minds eye entertainment planned to release six films filmed in the barco escape format, starting with the recall.  by july 2016, the technology was installed in 24 cinemas in six countries.  on 8 february 2018, barco announced the closure of the barco escape business.  technology  barco escape comprises auro 11.1 sound format and multi projection system.  auro 11.1 is a multichannel sound format supported by barco and created by auro technologies. the sound format is an extension of the existing 5.1 surround layer with addition of a five channel height layer and a mono "voice of god" ceiling channel. the additional channels allow placement
and movement of sound along the horizontal and vertical axis.  the visual presentation is characterized by the addition of two 2.39:1 aspect ratio screens to the side of the main screen to provide a 270 degree panoramic experience, equivalent to an aspect ratio of 7.17:1. the two side screens are angled at 45 degree in order to cover peripheral vision, although there is seam visible between the screens. most of the theaters are set up with 30-35 feet main screen with equivalent size side screens. the main screen has an ultrahd (not laser) projector running off a 2k dcp and the side screens have barco dp2k-20c projectors that feed from a separate server.  the barco escape sequences for the maze runner were created digitally using the crytek engine and integrated with the principal photography shot with arri alexa camera.  about half of the barco escape material for star trek beyond were full cg set-extensions created by prime focus in conjunction with prime focus-owned vfx studio double negative. the other half was created by kelvin optical, an in-house vfx group at bad robot, working with base effects in china.  theaters with barco escape  united states and canada   d'place mary pickford, cathedral city, ca  sierra vista cinema 16, clovis, ca  cinema west palladio 16, folsom, ca  cinemark 18 and xd, los angeles, ca  cinemark century 16, pleasant hill, ca  cinemark redwood downtown & xd, redwood city, ca  regal la live: a barco innovation center, los angeles, ca  camera 12, san jose, ca (closed sept. 8, 2016)  cinemark paradise 24 & xd, davie, fl  cinemark at seven bridges and imax, woodridge, il  cinema west village cinema 15, meridian, id  odyssey cinemagic hollywood 12, rochester, mn  landmark sunshine, new york, ny  cinemark legacy and xd, plano, tx  santikos palladium avx entertainment, richmond, tx  santikos palladium imax, san antonio, tx  santikos silverado 16, san antonio, tx  santikos silverado 19, tomball, tx  cinemark lincoln square, bellevue, wa  scotiabank theatre edmonton, edmonton, ab  scotiabank theatre vancouver, vancouver, bc  scotiabank theatre toronto, toronto, on  imagine cinemas lakeshore, tecumseh, on  rest of the world   china film group, beijing,
china  china film group, shanghai, china  hengdian cinema, jinhua, china  cinepolis paseo-acoxpa, d.f., mexico  euroscoop tilburg, tilburg, netherlands  euroscoop maastricht, maastricht, netherlands  euroscoop rotterdam, schiedam, netherlands  kinepolis antwerp, antwerp, belgium  kinepolis kortrijk, kortrijk, belgium  reel cinemas dubai mall, dubai, uae  cinema 3d morena mall, gdansk, poland  films presented in barco escape  see also screenx - a similar multi-screen theater created by cj cgv.  references   premium large format movie formats
john j. tracy (born september 29, 1954, in los angeles, california) is the retired chief technology officer (cto) of the boeing company, the world's largest aerospace company. at boeing, he held the dual roles of cto and senior vice president of engineering, operations & technology from june 2006 to mid 2016.  during his tenure as cto, tracy led boeing's engineering team, which created noteworthy aerospace products  including the 787 dreamliner commercial airplane, the first jetliner to feature a composite fuselage; the 747-8 intercontinental airplane, an updated version of boeing's largest commercial airplane; the x-37, an experimental 30-foot unmanned space plane that's the first reusable spacecraft since the space shuttle; and phantom eye, a long-endurance, hydrogen-powered, 150-foot-long unmanned demonstrator aircraft.  early life   tracy was born in los angeles, california, the second of two children. his father, john wesley tracy, worked in human resources at north american aviation, which would later be acquired by boeing. his mother, victoria alegria, was a homemaker.  tracy earned a bachelor's degree in physics from california state university-dominguez hills in 1976, a master's degree in physics from california state university-los angeles in 1981, and a doctorate in engineering from the university of california-irvine in 1987.  career   after spending three years as a high school physics and mathematics teacher in los angeles and two years as a physicist at hercules aerospace, tracy joined mcdonnell douglas in 1981 as an engineer scientist. at that company he followed a path into management, which continued after the firm was acquired by boeing in 1996. from 2004 to 2006 he served as the vice president of engineering for the company's integrated defense systems business unit. in 2006 he was named the company's chief technology officer and senior vice president of engineering, operations & technology.  during his career, tracy developed strong expertise in composites, aircraft structures and materials, composite structural mechanics, launch vehicle structures, smart structures, and aging aircraft. he has testified during hearings of committees in both the u.s. senate and the u.s. house of representatives on topics relating to the u.s. aerospace industry's ability to compete globally.  tracy retired in july 2016, after the 100th anniversary of the founding of the boeing company.  executive roles at boeing   2006-2016: chief technology officer and senior vice president, engineering, operations & technology  2004-2006: vice president, engineering,
integrated defense systems  2001-2004: vice president, structural technologies, prototyping, and quality, phantom works  honors and awards  elected member of the national academy of engineering (for leadership in advanced composites design and manufacturing technology for air and space vehicles.)(2013   honorary fellow of the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics (2016)  international von karman wings award (2014)  fellow of the royal aeronautical society  fellow of the american society of mechanical engineers (2004).  fellow of the american institute of aeronautics and astronautics (2006) 2006, great minds in stem: hispanic engineer of the year. honor recognizes overall leadership and technical or scientific achievement. 2009, great minds in stem: induction into the hispanic engineer national achievement awards conference (henaac) hall of fame. 2014, society of hispanic professional engineers: renaissance engineer award. tracy became only the second individual ever to receive this award from shpe since the organization's founding in 1974. 2016, black engineer of the year awards: career achievement award. 2016, u.s. news & world report: induction into the publication's stem leadership hall of fame. 2016, society for the advancement of material and process engineering (sampe): george lubin memorial award.  references  1954 births living people american chief technology officers california state university, dominguez hills alumni california state university, los angeles alumni university of california, irvine alumni boeing people
syed hasan (1 january 1908  18 november 1988) was an indian writer, scholar and professor of persian language and literature from patna, bihar. he was a great scholar "steeped into persian". he headed the persian department of patna university from 1972 to 1978. in  1954-55, he was awarded  a scholarship under the government of india foreign languages scholarships scheme for studying in iran.  publications  references  indian muslims writers from patna writers of mithila poets from bihar urdu-language poets from india 1908 births 1988 deaths patna university faculty 20th-century indian poets indian male poets 20th-century indian male writers recipients of ghalib award
lake enol is a small highland lake in the principality of asturias, spain. it is located in the picos de europa western massif, cantabrian mountains. it is next to lake ercina and together, they form the group known as lakes of covadonga, inside the picos de europa national park. lake enol is the larger of the two. it is situated approximately 10 km from covadonga and 25 km from cangas de onis. a curving road is available from arriondas to the lake. measuring , it is one of the biggest lakes in the area. lake enol is situated  above sea level, in the picos de europa). it was formed by the withdrawal of a front glacier.  culture  a submerged image of the virgin mary is elevated every year on 8 september and then taken out for a procession. regional dancing occurs at lake enol during the fiesta del pastor on 25 july.  references  bibliography  external links  picos de europa enol
the 2004 fiba europe under-20 championship for women was the third edition of the fiba europe under-20 championship for women. 12 teams participated in the competition, held in vannes, france, from 23 july to 1 august 2004. russia won their second title.  qualification  twenty-three national teams entered the qualifying round. they were allocated in four groups. the first three teams from groups a, b, c and the first two teams from group d qualified for the tournament, where they joined france (qualified as hosts).  group a  |}  group b  |}  group c  |}  group d  |}  qualified teams  preliminary round in this round, the twelve teams were allocated in two groups of six teams each. the top four teams qualify for the quarterfinals.  times given below are in cest (utc+2).  group a  group b  9th - 12th place playoffs  championship playoffs  final standings  references  2005 2004-05 in european women's basketball 2004-05 in french basketball international women's basketball competitions hosted by france international youth basketball competitions hosted by france 2004 in youth sport
dustin burleson is an american orthodontist and consultant.  career burleson started burleson orthodontics and pediactric dentistry (bopd) in 2006. he also runs a private consulting and coaching company, burleson seminars. as an assistant clinical professor, he teaches at his alma mater, umkc, and at the children's mercy hospital.  burleson uses his specialty training to help patients with cleft palate at saint luke's hospital. dr. burleson is the director of the leo h. rheam foundation for cleft and craniofacial orthodontics. he also supports smiles change lives and is the nation's largest provider of free orthodontic care through this community orthodontic program. burleson is a founding fellow of the institute of coaching at mclean hospital, an affiliate of harvard medical school.  awards  golden apple award for new dental leadership from the american dental association (2014)  distinguished service award from smiles change lives (2014)  top dentist by 435 south magazine (2013-2016)  family favorite by kc parent magazine (2013-2014, 2018)  "best of the northland" silver award (orthodontics) (2012)  the talk award (patient satisfaction) (2013-2019)  publications dr. burleson is the author of the ultimate ortho handbook, the consumer's guide to invisalign, stop hiding your smile! a parent's guide to confidently choosing an orthodontist, the ortho manifesto, and the truth about referrals from patients and dentists, along with d50 must-read business books to grow your orthodontic practice, don't ask them to hide their smile, own it, and smiles change lives.  he is also a contributing author of no b.s. guide to maximum referrals and customer retention and has been published in the journal of the american dental association, monthly journal of spectacular smiles, and ortho magazine along with being featured on various podcasts including the elevate orthodontics podcast and his own, the burleson box.  background a graduate of wheelersburg high school in wheelersburg, ohio, burleson spent his early teenage years working in his father's dental office, an experience that led him to pursue his own career in the dental field. at the university of missouri-kansas city, he studied biology and earned both his bachelor of arts and d.d.s degrees. though a unique six-year program, he was able to complete all of his specialty training in orthodontics and dentofacial orthopedics at umkc as well.
he holds a master of business administration from new charter university.  he resides in kansas city, missouri with his family.  references  external links  burleson seminars smiles change lives  year of birth missing (living people) living people american orthodontists university of missouri-kansas city alumni
anticlinura is a genus of minute sea snails, marine gastropod mollusks or micromollusks in the family mangeliidae.  species species within the genus anticlinura include:  anticlinura atlantica garcia, 2005  anticlinura biconica (schepman, 1913)  anticlinura monochorda (dall, 1908)  anticlinura movilla (dall, 1908)  anticlinura peruviana (dall, 1908)  anticlinura serilla (dall, 1908)  references   anticlinura thiele 1934.handbuch der systematischen weichtierkunde, 2(3): 1002   bouchet, p.; kantor, y. i.; sysoev, a.; puillandre, n. (2011). a new operational classification of the conoidea. journal of molluscan studies. 77, 273-308  external links  w.h. dall (1908) reports on the mollusca and brachiopoda, bulletin of the museum of comparative zoology at harvard college. vol. 43   tucker, j.k. 2004 catalog of recent and fossil turrids (mollusca: gastropoda). zootaxa 682:1-1295.    gastropod genera
jagdgeschwader 232 was a fighter wing of nazi germany's luftwaffe in world war ii.  fighter wings of the luftwaffe 1933-1945 military units and formations established in 1936
russell is an unincorporated community in costilla county, in the u.s. state of colorado. its elevation is .  history a post office called russell was in operation between 1876 and 1956. the community was named after william greeneberry russell, a prospector.  references  unincorporated communities in costilla county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
clive richard lord (born 1935) is a british political activist and long serving member of the green party of england and wales. he was one of the first members of the people party, which later became the green party, and split to make three separate green parties. he has also campaigned widely for the introduction of basic income. he was a candidate in the 2016 leadership election.  political career lord stood for the people party in the february 1974 general election in leeds north east, winning 0.7% of the vote. in 1975, the people party became the ecology party, and in 1985 the green party. in 1990, the green party split into three parties, with lord remaining a member of the green party of england and wales.  lord is a campaigner for basic income, writing in 1993 that: "i'm afraid i cannot retire from green politics until the significance of the basic income is understood and taken for granted on all sides: it will enable us to emerge from recession without returning to indiscriminate economic growth that will destroy itself, and us with it." in 2003, he published a book, a citizens' income: a foundation for a sustainable world, which outlined his personal philosophy and political beliefs. in 2012, he co-edited a second book, citizen's income and green economics.  in june 2016, lord announced his intentions to stand for leader of the green party in the upcoming 2016 leadership election. in his election statement, he stated that he wanted andrew cooper, who ended up standing for deputy leader, to be leader.  electoral performance  references  living people 1935 births green party of england and wales parliamentary candidates
kevin francis (born june 5, 1993) is a professional canadian football linebacker for the bc lions of the canadian football league (cfl). he played as a tight end during his college football career with the north carolina a&t aggies.  professional career  saskatchewan roughriders after going undrafted in the 2016 nfl draft, francis declared eligible for the 2016 cfl supplemental draft after informing the league that he was born in toronto, ontario. he was drafted by the roughriders on may 25, 2016, who forfeited a third round selection in the 2017 cfl draft to acquire his rights. upon entering 2016 training camp, francis switched to the defensive side of the ball after previously playing on offence in college. he made his cfl debut on june 30, 2016 against the toronto argonauts, registering his first defensive tackle. he made his first career start at linebacker on october 22, 2016 against the montreal alouettes. francis finished his rookie season having played in all 18 regular season games where he recorded 12 defensive tackles, 13 special teams tackles, and one forced fumble.  in 2017, francis played in 15 regular season games where he had three defensive tackles, 10 special teams tackles, and one forced fumble. he suffered a shoulder injury in october and was on the injured list for the last three regular season games and both post-season games. to begin the 2018 season, he was placed on the injured list as he rehabbed his injury from 2017. he then played in the remaining 12 games of the regular season where he had six special teams tackles. he also made his post-season debut where he played in the west final loss to the winnipeg blue bombers. he became a free agent in 2019.  ottawa redblacks on february 14, 2019, francis signed with the ottawa redblacks to a one-year contract. he played in just seven regular season games, but recorded eight special teams tackles.  bc lions francis again entered free agency and signed a one-year deal with the bc lions on february 11, 2020. however, the 2020 cfl season was cancelled and francis never played for the lions.  saskatchewan roughriders (ii) on february 12, 2021, it was announced that francis had re-signed with the saskatchewan roughriders.  bc lions (ii) francis signed again with the bc lions on february 9, 2022.  references  external links   bc lions bio  1993 births living people american football tight ends american players of canadian football bc lions players canadian football linebackers north carolina a&t aggies football players ottawa redblacks players players of canadian football from ontario saskatchewan roughriders players sportspeople from toronto
thenumgal poulose jacob is an indian surgeon specializing in vascular surgery, and the founder head of the department of vascular surgery at madras medical college. born in aluva, in the south indian state of kerala, to thenumgal poulose and mariam in a malayali family, he did his under-graduate studies at uc college before graduating in medicine from stanley medical college, chennai, and secured his ms degree from the same institution. he started his practice under government service at madras medical college where he helped establish the department of vascular surgery in 1978 and served as its founder head until his superannuation  in 1993. the government of india awarded him the fourth highest civilian honour of the padma shri, in 2014, for his contributions to medical science. he is married to esther and the couple has a daughter, siji jacob, an academic and a son, hasum jacob thenumgal, an engineer at tcs. he is in private practice at t. p. jacob clinic in royapuram, chennai and is also a consultant vascular surgeon at mv hospitals for diabetes, royapuram.  see also   vascular surgery  madras medical college  references  external links     recipients of the padma shri in medicine year of birth missing (living people) people from aluva scientists from kochi malayali people indian vascular surgeons indian medical academics indian medical administrators living people
cortinarius evernius is an inedible fungus in the family cortinariaceae. cortinarius evernius is grayish brown or grayish purple. the cap is convex and it has remnants of the membrane. the stipe is grayish purple and it has remnants of the membrane in a zig-zag pattern. the gills are greyish purple in the beginning, then brownish. the mushroom grows in coniferous forests for example near swamps.  description  the mushroom cap is 3-9 cm wide, conical when young and then umbonate, reddish to violet-brown, often with a white-edged margin, smooth (possibly silky in appearance) and dry, with a mild odor. the gills adnate or notched, violet then brown. the stalk is  tall and 1-2 cm wide, equal or thicker at the base, tinted violet, dry, and partly covered by whitish remnants of partial veil. the spores are brown and elliptical.  its edibility is unknown, but is not recommended due to related species which are deadly poisonous.  similar species  similar species include cortinarius brunneus, c. obtusus, and c. vernus.  see also list of cortinarius species  references  evernius
shehzana anwar (born 21 august 1989 in nairobi) is a female kenyan recurve archer. she competed in the archery competition at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, where she was the kenyan flagbearer. she was defeated by ki bo-bae of south korea during the first round of the women's individual competition.  references  external links    kenyan female archers living people 1989 births archers at the 2016 summer olympics olympic archers of kenya sportspeople from nairobi kenyan muslims kenyan people of indian descent
the el miron cave is a large cave in the upper ason river valley towards the eastern end of cantabria in northern spain, near the border of the basque country. it is an archeological site in ramales de la victoria. it is known for a skeleton belonging to a woman nicknamed the red lady of el miron. she is estimated to have died around 18,700 years ago, during the upper paleolithic (magdalenian). the skeleton is examined to that of someone between 35 and 40 years. her bones were coated with ochre, a red iron-based pigment, hence, her name.   the cave was discovered in 1903 by amateur archaeologists hermilio alcalde del rio and lorenzo sierra. it contains a rich collection of upper paleolithic art. among the prominent arts are those of an engraving of a horse and possibly one of a bison. the first systematic excavation started only in 1996. the team of archaeologists, led by lawrence straus of the university of new mexico and manuel gonzalez morales of the university of cantabria, made a discovery of a number of prehistoric remains. the red lady was discovered in 2010. the cave contains a large limestone block towards the rear. a narrow space running through the block was the location of the skeleton.  references  paleoanthropological sites archaeological sites in spain caves of cantabria magdalenian art of the upper paleolithic
the suva-nausori corridor is made up of 3 municipalities of suva, nasinu and nausori.  the suva-nausori corridor host two roads - kings road is the main road and ratu dovi road which travels from suva to laqere.   the poles of the suva-nausori corridor are suva and nausori and they are about 19 km apart.  suva
khatam-al anbiya headquarter () may refer to:  khatam-al anbiya central headquarter of general staff of armed forces  khatam-al anbiya construction headquarter of revolutionary guards  khatam-al anbiya air defense headquarter of army
margot lee shetterly (born june 30, 1969) is an american non-fiction writer who has also worked in investment banking and media startups. her first book, hidden figures: the story of the african-american women who helped win the space race (2016), is about african-american women mathematicians working at nasa who were instrumental to the success of the united states space program. she sold the movie rights while still working on the book, and it was adapted as a feature film of the same name, hidden figures (2016). for several years shetterly and her husband lived and worked in mexico, where they founded and published inside mexico, a magazine directed to english-speaking readers.  early life and education  margot lee was born in 1969 in hampton, virginia. her father worked as a research scientist at langley research center, and her mother was an english professor at the historically black hampton university. lee grew up knowing many african-american families with members who worked at nasa. she attended phoebus high school and graduated from the university of virginia's mcintire school of commerce.  career  after college, shetterly moved to new york and worked several years in investment banking, first on the foreign exchange trading desk at j.p. morgan, then on merrill lynch's fixed income capital markets desk. she shifted to the media industry, working at a variety of startup ventures, including the hbo-funded website volume.com.  in 2005, shetterly and her husband moved to mexico to found an english-language magazine called inside mexico. directed to the numerous english-speaking expats in the country, it operated until 2009. from 2010 through 2013, the couple worked as content marketing and editorial consultants to the mexican tourism industry.  shetterly began researching and writing hidden figures in 2010. in 2014, she sold the film rights to the book to william morrow, an imprint of harpercollins, and it was optioned by donna gigliotti of levantine films. the book and feature film adaptation were both released in 2016. the film stars taraji p. henson, octavia spencer, janelle monae, and kevin costner. it was nominated for several awards, including three oscar nominations (best picture, best adapted screenplay and best supporting actress for octavia spencer).  in 2013, shetterly founded the human computer project, an organization whose mission is to archive the work of all of the women who worked as computers and mathematicians in the early days of the national advisory committee for aeronautics (naca) and the
national aeronautics and space administration (nasa).  in 2018, shetterly published a children's picture book, hidden figures: the true story of four black women and the space race. the book was illustrated by laura freeman.  personal life  margot lee married aran shetterly, a writer and historian.  works   hidden figures: the story of the african-american women who helped win the space race. william morrow/harpercollins, 2016. .  nasa-langley women's history month 2014 keynote: "hidden figures: the female mathematicians of naca and nasa" hidden figures: the true story of four black women and the space race, harpercollins, 2018. .  honors shetterly received a 2014 book grant from the alfred p. sloan foundation for her book hidden figures. this first nonfiction work went on to win the anisfield-wolf book award. shetterly has received two grants from the virginia foundation for the humanities for her work on the human computer project. she also won the 2017 naacp image award for outstanding literary work, nonfiction. on may 12, 2018, shetterly was awarded an honorary doctor of humane letters degree from worcester polytechnic institute at its 150th commencement exercises. she received mathical honors for hidden figures  references  external links    margot lee shetterly website  the human computer project  hidden figures, harpercollins site  "margot lee shetterly wants to tell more black stories". interview by ann marie cox, the telegraph., 13 september 2016.     african-american women writers african-american writers 1969 births living people 21st-century american writers 21st-century american women writers merrill (company) people mcintire school of commerce alumni people from hampton, virginia writers from virginia 21st-century african-american women 21st-century african-american writers 20th-century african-american people 20th-century african-american women
valentino bellucci (1975 - 16 december 2021) was an italian philosopher, sociologist, poet, painter, and essayist.  life and career bellucci was born in weinheim, baden-wurttemberg, west germany. he taught "history and critical analysis of the video-theater" at the academy of fine arts in macerata. he was teacher of history and philosophy at the italian high schools and cooperated with seminars at the university of urbino. after studying with the orientalist icilio vecchiotti, he dedicated himself to the oriental culture, especially to the vaishnava bhakti tradition, exploring the epistemological, historical and psychological aspects. he devoted himself to an intensive information activity, concerning the philosophy and sociology, with his publications and conferences. as painter, he followed in particular the figurative school of pietro annigoni. some of his works are displayed in some churches in the marche region. in 2003 he met giovanni raboni who rewarded him for a poetic composition. his poems were recited by the actor walter maestosi. he died from a heart attack on 16 december 2021, at the age of 46.  thought bellucci developed the existential themes of mysticism, both in the western philosophical and religious tradition and in the vaishnava bhakti one; in the essay "lo yoga devozionale indiano" (the indian devotional yoga) he explains the social importance of the spirituality as existential journey rather than as institutionalized dogma. from a sociological point of view his analysis focused on the origins of the ancient vedic culture; in his essay about varna he shows how the ills of modern society derive from the break with the great traditional civilizations; therefore the historical and epistemological paradigms have to be rethought in the light of the ancient wisdom. furthermore, he investigated the origins of christianity, inspired by the work of mario canciani, identifying lost lifestyles and teachings. bellucci proposed a critical recovery of ancient civilizations whose knowledges have a considerable social and individual value. his historical and sociological analyses led him to consider modernity as a mystification, a kind of collective self-deception that the society cultivates since the atheist and materialist enlightenment; this mystification derives from an a priori rejection of the sacred, the divine, in order to follow the idols of technic and advanced capitalism. in this sense his investigation continued following in the footsteps of scholars as jean servier and marcel de corte.  works   il pensiero estremo. saggi sui filosofi contemporanei, tabula fati, 2004.  dialogo
su george bataille, nuova corrente, tilgher, genova 2004, n.133, pp. 55-65.  walter benjamin. la duplice genealogia del simbolo e della verita, ghibli, 2004.  tutt'altro che animale. riflessioni da merleau-ponty a derrida, sui rapporti tra umanita e animalita, studi urbinati, urbino 2006  lo yoga devozionale indiano. il vaishnavismo, xenia, 2011.  il benessere attraverso l'ayurveda, editoriale programma, 2013.  cristo era vegetariano?, editoriale programma, 2013.  godot e arrivato. conferenze, interventi e note critiche, petite plaisance, 2014.  il sutra del naufrago. aforismi e note di un osservatore di fronte al crollo del mondo moderno, petite plaisance, 2014.  le strutture sociali del varnashrama-dharma. saggio sull'origine delle caste indiane e sui paradigmi delle societa tradizionali, solfanelli 2014.  l'estasi e le pietre, lepisma, 2015.   l'invenzione dell'inferno, harmakis, 2015.  la chiesa di darwin, harmakis, 2015.  the church of darwin : dogmas of evolution and scientists that criticize it, harmakis, 2016  miti e misteri dell'emilia romagna, coautrice gabriella chmet, editoriale programma, 2016  che cos'e il karma, harmakis, 2016   da pitagora a guerre stellari. il sapere esoterico dei veri illuminati, petite plaisance, 2016  hulk si innamora, giovane holden, 2019  references  1975 births 2021 deaths italian schoolteachers italian philosophers people from weinheim italian expatriates in germany
gouvia is a village and resort situated around gouvino bay in corfu, greece.  it is situated around 8 km (5 miles) north of corfu town.  its position in a natural harbour made it an ideal location for a shipyard, this was exploited during the venetian occupation, when they built their arsenal in the village.  the remains of it today are notable in the area.  the village has a greek orthodox church, names all saints'. there are many bars, restaurants and taverns along the main street serving mostly tourists from northern europe. there are a number of large hotels and self-catering apartments in the village.  venetian shipyard  located near the mouth of the adriatic sea, corfu was a very strategic location for venice and the venetians built extensive fortifications to defend the island against incursions. the island  was also at the centre of their naval operations in the levant. as part of their defence plans the venetians stationed two squadrons in corfu, one of twenty five galleys, the other of twelve heavy sailing ships. two venetian vice admirals oversaw the naval operations in corfu, one for each squadron.  in the aftermath of the second great siege of corfu by the ottomans in 1716, the venetians, as part of their reinforcement of the fortifications of corfu, built the arsenal to service their ships and also stationed their galleys at govino bay. the arsenal was also used as storage for the venetian ships.  the shipyard at gouvia was part of a network of venetian arsenals and naval stations in greece, including shipyards in the aegean sea, epirus, the peloponnese, the kingdom of candia (modern crete) and even venice itself. aside from corfu, such locations in greece included methoni, koroni, chalkis, preveza, chania and heraklion.  the gouvia arsenal is in a strategic location well-suited to ship repairs as it was near a forested area and high quality wood was plentiful and easily available for ship maintenance.  the practice of the venetian captains, who participated in the construction of the arsenal, to inscribe the buildings with their initials and coats of arms, had been documented in the late-18th-century writings of french consul to corfu saint-sauveur.  the arsenal at gouvia was supposed to be used for ship repairs during the winter after each fleet had returned from their yearly campaign during peacetime.  however, the venetian senate became alarmed at the prospect of an arsenal
in proximity to venice which could potentially compete with  the central arsenal and in order to protect the operations of their local naval facilities, the senate opted to limit the kind of repair activities undertaken at the corfu shipyard.  consequently, the shipyard operations at gouvia were restricted to basic maintenance such as cleaning and caulking; many captains, instead of repairing their damaged ships at the arsenal, chose to sink them.  as time went on, the number of ships being serviced at the location declined, and any further use was officially discontinued with the treaty of campo formio, which was signed on 18 october 1798, marking the end of the venetian republic and with it the end of the venetian period of corfu, which had lasted for over 400 years.  the surviving arches of the structure have been described as "beautifully boned", "strong" and "impressive", "almost surreal", and "a striking collection of skeletal arches".  external links  gouvia  references  populated places in corfu (regional unit)
the fallon company is a privately held commercial real estate owner and developer headquartered in boston, massachusetts. founded by joseph f. fallon in 1993, the fallon company has developed over $4 billion in real estate, representing more than six million square feet of property. the company is recognized as a leader in mixed-use urban development and one of the most active private developers on the east coast. the company focuses on large-scale urban design geared toward transforming neighborhoods into cohesive, community-driven environments. with offices in boston, charlotte and raleigh, the fallon company has the capacity and resources to undertake projects throughout the united states.  in 2019, joseph fallon stepped down as president, replaced by his son, michael fallon. joseph fallon remains involved as the ceo.  executive team   joseph f. fallon - chief executive officer  shawn seaman - chief operating officer  jennifer robertson - chief financial officer  michael fallon - president  projects    boston, ma , the fallon company is developing boston's fan pier, as part of the south boston waterfront redevelopment. fan pier is a 21-acre, nine city block site which consisted largely of underutilized parking lots when the fallon company purchased it for $115 million in 2005. today, it is a neighborhood comprising four commercial towers: one marina park drive, 11 fan pier boulevard, 50 northern avenue, and 100 northern avenue; and two luxury condominium towers: twenty two liberty and fifty liberty. two more high-rise towers are planned. when complete in 2020, the $4 billion fan pier project will encompass three million square feet of commercial and residential real estate, public, civic and cultural space, including two parks and a 6-acre marina.   charlotte, nc in 2016, the fallon company established its southeast headquarters in charlotte, north carolina. shortly thereafter, horizon development properties selected the fallon company as master developer to redevelop the 16.2-acre strawn cottages site in the dilworth neighborhood of charlotte. the fallon company is leading the $330 million mixed-use and mixed-income project known as centre south, a property bounded by south boulevard, templeton avenue and euclid avenue. when built out, the redevelopment will feature 725 mixed-income apartments, 20 for-sale townhouses, 57,000 square feet of retail, a 330,000-square-foot office building and a 180-room hotel.   raleigh, nc in april 2018, the fallon company acquired an assemblage of parcels in the heart of downtown raleigh, north carolina. the project, named raleigh crossing, is located at the
intersection of raleigh's downtown districts.  currently under construction, the first phase of the development, 301 hillsborough is a high-end office building. the tower features 280,000 square feet of office space, an amenity level, wide pedestrian-friendly sidewalks, retail, and a double-height lobby. when completed, raleigh crossing will include 18,000 square feet of retail, a 165-room hotel, and 135 apartments, in addition to the office tower.  references  external links  fallon company corporate website  real estate companies of the united states companies based in boston
indeco conversano is an italian handball team.  honours    serie a  winners (2) : 2015, 2016  european record  external links ehf profile  italian handball clubs
"last dance" is a song by english singer dua lipa from her eponymous debut studio album (2017). the song was written by lipa, talay riley and its producer stephen "koz" kozmeniuk. the song was released for digital download and streaming on 9february 2016 through dua lipa limited, after having premiered on bbc radio 1 a day earlier. it is a chillwave, dance-pop and post-edm song that features a contemporary dance-heavy production. lipa was inspired by being tired and homesick, and lyrically, she sings about a relationship that could crash at any second.  "last dance" received acclaim from music critics, with many praising lipa's vocals. the song peaked at number four on billboards twitter emerging artists chart. an accompanying music video premiered via youtube on 18february 2016. it was directed and produced by both jon brewer and ian blair, and was filmed in california's rainforests. the song appeared in an advert for lipa's campaign with jaguar and was promoted by her with numerous live performances in 2016, mainly on her hotter than hell tour.  background and composition "last dance" was written by dua lipa, talay riley and stephen "koz" kozmeniuk, with the latter of the three solely handling production. they wrote the song in october 2014 during the singer's first trip to toronto, after she had many failed writing sessions attempting to recreate the sound of "hotter than hell" (2016). it was her third writing session in a day and lipa decided to write about the fact that she was tired and homesick. lipa recalled writing the song as "a very honest moment," being able to capture her feelings in that exact moment. she went on to say that every time she listens to the song, lipa recalls that moment. after leaving the session, lipa was unsure about the song, though after hearing the finished version, she fell in love with it. lipa stated that it is the sound she wanted her album to have and is the song she would take to producers and say "this is my sound." "last dance" was recorded at kasakoz studios in toronto while the vocals were recorded at tap studio / strongroom 7 in london. mixing took place at babelfish studios by matty green and the song was mastered by john davis at metropolis studios in london.  musically, "last dance" is a chillwave, dance-pop and post-edm song. it runs for 3 minutes and 48 seconds, and follows a structure of verse
, bridge, chorus, verse, bridge, chorus, middle eight, breakdown. the song is composed in  time and the key of a minor, with a driving beat tempo of 120 beats per minute and a chord progression of f(add2)-am-c/g. lipa's vocals span from the low note of a3 to the high note of d5, showing a sense of urgency with them and using looped vocals. the track begins slowly, with lipa vocally whispering. it builds up to where lipa is enunciating every lyric. the chorus is mostly instrumental, featuring electronic sounds and a dance beat. the middle eight contains a breakdown, where lipa vocally hits her high notes. the track has a contemporary dance-heavy, tribal and glitchy production with house synth chords and a bassline rumble. lyrically, the song contains tumblr-inspired lyrics about an intense relationship that could crash at any second.  release and promotion in october 2015, lipa revealed that the song would be released in january of the following year. "last dance" premiered on 8february 2016 via annie mac's bbc radio 1 show. the song was released for digital download and streaming the following day through lipa's independent record label, dua lipa limited, as the third single from her eponymous debut studio album. it first appeared as the third track on the austrian, german, and swiss-exclusive extended play (ep) for the singer's previous single "be the one", released on 19february 2016. the song was included as the b-side of the cd single for "be the one" which was released on 11march 2016. remixes by coucheron and stefan ponce were released on 25march 2016. the song was intended to be the second track on the album but was ultimately removed from the standard track listing and included as the closing track on the deluxe edition, released 2june 2017. however, it appears as the second track on the austrian, german and swiss version of the album.  in2018, the song was included in an advert for lipa's campaign with jaguar, titled "join the pace". lipa performed "last dance" for the first time on 13january 2016 at the eurosonic festival. it was also included on the set list for lipa's hotter than hell tour (2016). lipa performed the song in 2016 during her mtv push artist live performance. she also performed the song for her mtv setlist show on 20november 2016 at the iridium in new york city.  music video the music video for "last
dance" was directed and produced by jon brewer alongside ian blair, while edited by jackson ducasse. it premiered to youtube on 18february 2016. the visual was filmed during december 2015 in the rainforests of california, with lipa recalling that it was really cold in the state. the video uses technicolour effects. it opens with lipa in a red-lit bathroom, going into a bath and coming out of a lake in a rainforest. she then begins to run and dance in the forest, wearing a t-shirt dress. in another scene, lipa is seen wearing a black bra and mesh pants. at multiple points, the visuals flicker into 3d territory. lipa is also seen dancing with her hands up in a looped fragment, as well as making an eagle hand gesture for nodding to her kosovan heritage.  reception "last dance" was met with acclaim from music critics. kim taylor bennett of vice compared the song to the works of rihanna, calling it "ballsy" and "beautiful." she went on to praise lipa's vocal flexibility, writing her voice is "powerful one minute and a magnetically vulnerable the next." writing for pulse media, jessica boyle also compared the song to rihanna and categorized the lyrics as "standalone," and lipa's voice as "smokey." she concluded that it would sound nice with a club remix. in the irish times, ailbhe malone praised the song's production and lyrics mix, while comparing the breakdown in the middle eight to cashmere cat. vultures justin mccraw commended lipa's vocals but also said that it is not "vocally adventurous". he concluded by stating the song "is worth getting hurt over". william defebaugh of v noted that the song highlights lipa's "strong, sultry vocals" and "savy song-writing skills".  idolators bianca gracie called "last dance" a "flirty [tune]" that will "immediately hit you at your waistline," courtesy of lipa's "sultry and bold" vocals. she went on to call the production "fluttering" and the song as a whole a "solid future festival staple." for a bit of pop music, michiel vos praised lipa's vocal abilities and compared the chorus to justin bieber's purpose (2015), and major lazer. sebas e. alonso of jenesaispop also compared the song to the music of major lazer, while the 405s sean ward called it "thrilling." for clash, robin murray called the track "gorgeous"
and "infectious," with "innate energy" and a "real pop intelligence." "last dance" peaked at number four on the us billboard twitter emerging artists chart, lasting for seven weeks on the chart.  track listings digital download and streaming  "last dance" - 3:48  digital download and streaming - remixes  "last dance" (stefan ponce remix) - 4:57  "last dance" (coucheron remix) - 3:02  personnel  dua lipa vocals  stephen "koz" kozmeniuk production, keyboards, programming, backing vocals  talay riley backing vocals  matt vlahovich additional keyboards  michael sonnier engineering assistance  matty green mixing  john davis mastering  certifications  release history  footnotes  references  external links    lyrics of this song at metrolyrics  2016 singles 2016 songs chillwave dua lipa songs songs written by talay riley songs written by dua lipa songs written by stephen kozmeniuk
khosrow ghamari (born 13 february 1968) is an iranian former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people iranian male cyclists olympic cyclists of iran cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
pseudocolaspis rufitarsis is a species of leaf beetle of the democratic republic of the congo. it was first described by the belgian entomologist  in 1940.  references  eumolpinae beetles of the democratic republic of the congo beetles described in 1940 endemic fauna of the democratic republic of the congo
eric heulot (born 9 october 1962) is a french former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1962 births living people french male cyclists olympic cyclists of france cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from rennes
boot  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of boot.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, boot has a total number of 623 houses and population of 3,757 of which include 1,979 males and 1,778 females. literacy rate of boot is   50.13%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 607 which is 16.16% of total population of boot, and child sex ratio is approximately  977, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
pentatomini is a tribe of shield bugs in the subfamily of pentatominae.  genera   acrosternum fieber, 1860   arvelius spinola, 1840  banasa stal 1860  brepholoxa van duzee, 1904  chinavia orian, 1965  chlorochroa stal 1872  chlorocoris spinola, 1837  codophila mulsant and rey, 1866  coenus dallas, 1851   cyptocephala berg, 1883  dendrocoris bergroth, 1891  euschistus dallas, 1851  holcostethus fieber, 1860  hymenarcys amyot and serville, 1843  kermana rolston and mcdonald, 1981  loxa amyot & serville 1843  menecles stal 1867  mormidea amyot and serville, 1843  moromorpha rolston, 1978  murgantia stal 1862  neopharnus van duzee, 1910  neottiglossa kirby, 1837  nezara amyot and serville, 1843  odmalea bergroth, 1915  oebalus stal 1862  padaeus stal 1862  pentatoma olivier, 1789  pellaea stal 1872  piezodorus fieber, 1860  prionosoma uhler, 1863  runibia stal 1861  tepa rolston and mcdonald, 1984  thyanta stal 1860  trichopepla stal 1867  vulsirea spinola 1837  references  external links         pentatominae hemiptera tribes
benjamin pratt (c. 1669-1721) was provost of trinity college dublin from 1710 to 1717. he was later dean of down.  life pratt was born in 1669 in garradice, county meath. he was the son of a landowner. in 1692, he graduated from trinity college; the following year, he was elected fellow. in 1710, provost peter browne, after having been invited by the queen, successfully recommended pratt as provost.  references  1660s births 1721 deaths provosts of trinity college dublin year of birth uncertain people from county meath
andrea wilson (born 5 december 1985) is an australian professional basketball player who plays for the bendigo spirit in the women's national basketball league.  professional career  wnbl wilson made her professional debut with the spirit in 2007. she has since been a strong, consistent member of the spirit roster. with the spirit, she has won two championships in 2013 and 2014, led by the likes of kristi harrower, gabrielle richards and her sister, kelly wilson. wilson has been re-signed for the 2016-17 season.  personal life wilson's older sister, kelly, born eleven months earlier than andrea, is also a professional basketball player. they spent several seasons together at the bendigo spirit.  references  1985 births living people australian women's basketball players guards (basketball)
robert power (born 3 july 1971) is an irish former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1992 summer olympics. power won multiple races as a junior and senior rider in ireland.  biography power was born in dungarvan, ireland, in 1971, and was an all-ireland schoolboy champion in 1989. at the irish national cycling championships, power won the junior title in 1988, and the senior title in 1993. the year after winning his junior title, he was awarded with the junior sports award for cycling by the cork examiner.  at the 1992 summer olympics in barcelona, he was part of the irish team that finished in 17th place (out of 30 teams) that took part in the men's team trial. power was also scheduled to race in the men's individual road race at the olympics, but prior to the race he broke his collar bone in a fall while training. he also suffered internal bleeding on his kidneys, spending nearly two months in hospital. the injury led power to retire from cycling at the age of 24. however, in 2012, power made a return to racing.  outside of cycling, power was a professional photographer and also fished internationally for ireland.  references  external links    1971 births living people irish male cyclists olympic cyclists of ireland cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from dungarvan
christian thum also known as aven von thum, thumb, theun and thun (d. 1655), was a swedish (originally german) actor and theater director. he belongs to the earliest identifiable professional actors active in sweden, was the leader of the theater of the swedish royal court in 1628-1645, and the founder of the likely first theater in sweden and scandinavia, bjorngardsteatern  (1640).  life christian thum was from germany, but it is unknown from where. he himself stated that he had been active in sweden since 1615, but he is confirmed as such for the first time in kalmar in 1624. he performed a theater play for queen maria eleonora of brandenburg in 1628, and was from that point until 1637 engaged at her court as an actor, though not much is known of his activity. in 1637, he was transferred to the court of queen christina of sweden and is explicitly named director of the royal court theater: the regency government regarded a theater as a useful pedagogic method for the child monarch, and thum had the monopoly of theater performances at the royal court. only fragments is known of the activity of thum. it is assumed that he performed english style theater, which was still the dominating theater in germany at the time, though often performed in the german language. the thum court theater acted on temporary stages and was an all-male theater company: the actors of the theater is unknown, but assumed to have been members of the hovkapellet, as well as craftsmen from the guild of craftsmen, which traditionally staged theater performances.  christian thum bought the tavern bjorngardsteatern in 1640 and was given permission to stage theater there, though nothing is known of this activity either. the last theater performance staged at the royal court by thum was in 1645: three years later, three foreign theater companies performed in stockholm, followed by a number of english, german, dutch and italian companies, and the monopoly of thum is estimated to have been discontinued.  references   gunilla dahlberg: komediantteatern i 1600-talets stockholm (1992)  1655 deaths 17th-century swedish male actors swedish theatre directors people of the swedish empire christina, queen of sweden swedish courtiers 17th-century theatre managers 17th-century german male actors court of christina, queen of sweden
() is a 1977 tamil-language hindu mythological film, written and directed by a. p. nagarajan. the film was produced by r. m. subramaniam, with music from s. v. venkatraman. sivakumar starred in the titular role with jayalalitha, srividya, nagesh, r. s. manohar taking supporting roles.  cast    sivakumar as lord vishu/lord krishna  t. r. mahalingam as naratha muni  srividya as rukmani  jayalalitha as sathyabhama  r. s. manohar as kamsan  c. r. vijayakumari as devaki (lord krishna mother)  major sundararajan as vasudevan (lord krishna father)  v. s. raghavan as ugrasenan  nagesh as balu  s. varalakshmi as yasothai  suruli rajan as kamsan's henchman (1)  typist gopu as kamsan's henchman (2)  ennatha kannaiya as kamsan's henchman (3)  s. rama rao  manorama  sachu  gandhimathi  a. sakunthala as kamsan's palace dancer shanmugasundari  v. r. thilagam  "achcho" chithra  peeli sivam  siththan  thangaraj  shanthi kumar  vasntha kumar  rajavelu  master krishnan as little balaraman  soundtrack  music was by s. v. venkatraman and lyrics were written by kannadasan, k. d. santhanam, poovai senkuttuvan and ra. pazhanisamy  references  external links     1977 films 1970s tamil-language films films about krishna films about reincarnation films about royalty films about shapeshifting films based on the mahabharata films directed by a. p. nagarajan films scored by s. v. venkatraman films set in 1977 films with screenplays by a. p. nagarajan hindu devotional films indian films indian musical films indian nonlinear narrative films religious epic films 1970s musical films
needle in the haystack (portuguese: agulha no palheiro) is a 1953 brazilian comedy film directed by alex viany.  cast  carmelia alves   roberto bataglin as eduardo   renee brown   waldomiro costa   cesar cruz   jaudet cury   jackson de souza as baiano    israel garcia   zizinha macedo   savina marques   doris monteiro as elisa    augusta moreira   lais nascimento   carlos nefa   sara nobre as d. gisa    helba nogueira   lucilia reis   manoel rocha   fada santoro as mariana    mauricio silva   helio souto as jose da silva    miguel torres   solano trindade   alex viany  references  bibliography  alberto elena & marina diaz lopez. the cinema of latin america. columbia university press, 2013.  external links  1953 comedy films 1953 films brazilian films brazilian comedy films portuguese-language films brazilian black-and-white films
this is the court that has jurisdiction over probate and family matters in middlesex county, massachusetts.  it has two locations: 208 cambridge street and 121 third street, both in cambridge, massachusetts.  jurisdiction  the middlesex probate and family court has "exclusive jurisdiction over probate matters such as wills, trusts, guardianships, and conservatorships. the court also has jurisdiction over family-related matters such as divorce, support, paternity establishment, family abuse protection, elderly abuse protection, disabled person's abuse protection, custody and adoption."  references   massachusetts state courts government of middlesex county, massachusetts family courts probate courts in the united states courts and tribunals with year of establishment missing
days of tafree () is a 2016 bollywood comedy film written and directed by krishnadev yagnik. produced by anand pandit and rashmi sharma, it revolves around lives of seven friends in a college. it is an official remake of the 2015 gujarati film, chhello divas.  days of tafree released on 23 september 2016.  cast  yash soni as nikhil  ansh bagri as vicky  sanchay goswami as suresh  nimisha mehta as pooja  kinjal rajpriya as nisha   sarabjeet bindra as dhula  anuradha mukherjee as isha  mamta chaudhary as vandana  reception  box office the film received poor response at the box office and earned 60 lakhs in the first weekend. during the run, the film made 19.8 crores.  soundtrack  references  external links    indian films hindi remakes of gujarati films 2010s hindi-language films 2016 films films directed by krishnadev yagnik
thomas john jehu  (19 february 1871 - 18 july 1943) was a british physician and geologist. the jehu-campbell fossil collection at the university of edinburgh was donated by jehu in combination with robert campbell and is now the main component of their "highland border series" of fossils. many of the fossils come from the aberfoyle area.  life  he was born in mill house, llanfair caereinion, montgomeryshire, in wales in 1871, the son of a miller, john jehu. he was educated at oswestry high school. he then studied medicine at the university of edinburgh graduating mb chb in 1893.  he did a further year of science gaining a further degree (bsc) then went to the university of cambridge, where he gained a further ma in science. despite gaining is doctorate as a physician (md), he chose an academic life, first lecturing in geology at the university of st andrews then moving to the university of edinburgh in 1914.  in 1904 he unsuccessfully tried for the chair in geology at the university of glasgow but lost to john walter gregory. in 1905 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were james geikie, ben peach, john horne, and ramsay heatley traquair. he won the society's keith prize for the period 1925-27 and served as their vice president 1929-32.  he served on a commission on coastal erosion in 1908.  in 1914 he succeeded professor james geikie as professor of geology at the university of edinburgh. in 1932 he oversaw the transfer of his department from old college to king's buildings where it was thereafter housed in the grant institute due to its endowment by sir alexander grant.  he remained a professor until death in edinburgh, on 18 july 1943, aged 72, when he was succeeded by arthur holmes.  family  in 1904 he married annie stewart.  references  external links  1871 births 1943 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh british geologists alumni of the university of edinburgh academics of the university of edinburgh
eunidia boafoi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1978.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1978
eunidia pararothkirchi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1977.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1977
the field foundation of new york was one of the two organizations that had split off from the original field foundation in 1960, the other being the field foundation of illinois. the foundation in new york was originally led by ruth field, the widow of the first foundation's creator marshall field iii. it focused on enacting social change on a more national scale than the illinois foundation. the new york foundation has a history of supporting racial equality, researching hunger in the united states, and improving the lives of those stuck in poverty. it finally spent itself out of existence in 1989.  original field foundation  the field foundation was originally established by marshall field iii, the grandson of a well-known chicago merchant who founded the famous marshall field's department store, in 1940. it was founded in new york to help victims of the great depression, and it supported the ideas and methods of the president roosevelt's new deal. its board was composed of various business leaders, social scientists, judges, and scholars. the foundation assisted other organizations supporting social change, civil rights, and child welfare, and also offered grants to groups such as the american council on race relations, provident medical associates in chicago, and the research center for human relations in new york. by 1949, the foundation's assets totaled 11 million dollars and it offered grants of 150,000 dollars per year.  field iii died in 1956, after which the organization started splitting due to different goals its members had. field's son marshall field iv desired that the organization focus its efforts locally within chicago, where most of the foundation's assets lay. field's widow ruth field wished for the organization to expand its efforts nationally and promote social change. in 1960, the organization split into the field foundation of illinois and the field foundation of new york.  accomplishments of the field foundation of new york  under hahn  the field foundation has a long history with various social movements. it was originally directed by maxwell hahn, under which it supported racial integration in the south in the 1950s, leading larger foundations after it. it was also one of the first supporters of black education campaigns, and focused heavily on child welfare and racial issues under hahn.  under dunbar  in 1965, leslie w. dunbar, director of the southern regional council, succeeded hahn and moved the organization's focus more on those struggling from poverty and minority groups. in 1967 its examination of the state of poor southern communities led to an expansion of food stamp and school lunch programs. it also pushed for the recognition of black lung disease, being among the first to do
so.  in 1970's the organization under dunbar started to examine federal activities more closely, studying surveillance, arms programs, and civil liberties violations. examples include the organization since 1972 donating $1,073,800 to the center for defense information, a federal oversight organization that examines defense spending and priorities. it was the largest funder of the organization. it also helped to save the food research and action center when its federal funds were cut under president nixon in 1973.  this led to disagreements within the organization over the government's policies and affirmative action, eventually followed by dunbar's resignation in 1967.  under boone  in 1980, american philanthropist richard w. boone became the director of the foundation. boone also believed in government oversight through independent organization. under him, the field foundation funded the study group on social security, an organization monitoring government reductions of benefits to the elderly, disabled, widows, and orphans. the foundation became one of the earliest supporters of the center on budget and policy priorities in 1981, offering $175,000 in its first year and $150,000 in the second. boone's policies led the organization to support black voter registration programs, us resettlement of indochina refugees, funded the communications consortium media center, and researched hunger in the us. the organization purposefully spent itself out of existence in 1989, choosing to empower other social activism groups to continue its legacy.  references   foundations based in the united states
european petanque championships are organised by the european petanque federation (confederation europeenne de petanque - cep) in collaboration with its member country federations. there are five main player groups for competitions: youth (under 18), up-and-coming (espoirs, under 23), women, men, and veteran (over 55). competitors play a variety of games according to their age. the results of the championships - excluding veteran - determine the top 24 nations to represent europe at the fipjp petanque world championship.  history   1990s - the idea for a new competition for youth and women european players is first discussed by the german and danish federations  1998 - france, supporting the idea, invite teams for an inaugural event in dijon, france.  1999 - foundation of cep in strasbourg, france  2000 - 1st official european championship for juniors in liege, belgium supported by the belgian federation  2001 - 1st european championship for women in strasbourg, france.  2005-2007 - discussion of the need to create an espoirs  ("up-and-coming") category for young players over 18 but not yet ready for "open championships",  to build up more competitive experience  2008 - 1st european championship for espoirs in st-jean-d'angely, france.  2009 - final but not least, 1st european championship for men in nice, france.  2015 - france wins 4th title in men's triple and remain unbeaten in this competition.  2016 - new championship category created: single men & women  medallists  youth (under 18)   youth players compete in an open triple game championship in teams of four players, and individually in a precision shooting championship. youth competitions are held in even-numbered years, and the results are considered when selecting entrants to the world championships.  triple team  (triplette)  precision shooting (tir de precision)  women   women's players compete in a triple game championship in teams of four players, and individually in a precision shooting championship. in addition, there is a single head-to-head competition. women's competitions are presently held in even-numbered years, and the results are taken into account when selecting entrants to the world championships.  triple team  (triplette)  precision shooting (tir de precision)   single (tete-a-tete)  espoirs (under 23 years old)   in the espoirs championships, young men and young women compete separately in teams of four players
in a combination of games: a triple game, and a double game played simultaneously with a single game. espoirs compete in odd-numbered years.  men   men's players compete in a triple game championship in teams of four players, and individually in a precision shooting championship. in addition, there is a single head-to-head competition. men's competitions are held in even-numbered years, and the results are taken into account when deciding entrants to the world championships.  triple team  (triplette)  precision shooting (tir de precision)  single (tete a tete)  veteran (over 55 years old)   veterans compete in even-numbered years in a triple game championship with teams of four players.  triple team (triplette)  ranking by country: youth / women / men  references  external links  https://web.archive.org/web/20160817093036/http://www.fepetanca.com/cto_eur_juv.html  http://www.boulistenaute.com/actualite-championnats-europe-petanque-4e-chp-europe-petanque-jeunes-2004-dudelange-lux-2512  https://web.archive.org/web/20160807001225/http://www.fbfp.be/europe2002/historique.htm  https://web.archive.org/web/20160807044405/http://www.fbfp.be/europe2002/resultats.htm  https://web.archive.org/web/20160818145434/http://www.cep-petanque.com/shooting.html  http://www.boulistenaute.com/actualite-championnats-europe-petanque-carton-plein-france-bassens-17734  https://web.archive.org/web/20170127224048/http://www.federbocce.it/files/petanque/2013/campionati%20europei%20maschili/european_men_championship/home_files/nazioni%20partecipanti.pdf  http://petanqueparaylemonial.sportsregions.fr/actualites-du-club/championnat-d-europe-senior-masculin-a-albena
-en-bulgarie-446367  http://stages-billard-petanque.over-blog.fr/article-championnat-d-europe-2011-a-goeteborg-la-france-championne-82075400.html  https://web.archive.org/web/20160818130109/http://www.cep-petanque.com/about.html  petanque
dakha is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj.  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
eunidia coiffaiti is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae that was first described by stephan von breuning in 1977. it is mainly found on the east part of the african continent.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1977
chytonix elegans is a species of moth of the family noctuidae found in costa rica.  the species was described by schaus in 1911.  references  external links      hadeninae moths described in 1911
the 1984 ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships were contested may 28−june 2, 1984 at hayward field at the university of oregon in eugene, oregon in order to determine the individual and team national champions of men's and women's collegiate division i outdoor track and field events in the united states.   these were the 62nd annual men's championships and the third annual women's championships. this was the ducks' fifth time hosting the event and the first since 1978.   oregon and florida state topped the men's and women's team standings, respectively; it was the ducks' fifth men's team title and the first for the seminole women.  team results   note: top 10 only  (h) = hosts  men's title  women's title  references  ncaa men's outdoor track and field championship ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships ncaa ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships ncaa division i outdoor track and field championships ncaa women's outdoor track and field championship
fejeran is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  melissa lynn fejeran (born 1976), weightlifter from guam pete fejeran (born 1971), weightlifter from guam
victorinus bythner () (c. 1605-c. 1670) was a polish hebraist, grammarian and university teacher in england.  life he was born in głebowice, the son of a calvinist theologian, bartholomaus bythner; his father held calvinistic views. his brother jan bythner was a notable theologian. he studied at the university of frankfurt an der oder, and then at the university of groningen under franciscus gomarus.  bythner became a member of the university of oxford about 1635, and lectured on the hebrew language in the refectory at christ church until the outbreak of the first english civil war. when charles i fixed the headquarters of his army at oxford in 1643, bythner moved to cambridge.  later bythner lived in london, but in 1651 was again lecturer on hebrew at oxford. about 1664 he went to cornwall, where he practised medicine. the date of his death is unknown.  works bythner's grammatical works were written in latin: his hebrew grammar, published in 1638 as lingua eruditorum, was several times reprinted. an edition of this work was published by james hessey in 1853, with the author's institutio chaldaica (first printed in 1650). bythner's other major work was lyra prophetica davidis regis (london, 1650), a grammatical analysis of the vocabulary of the hebrew psalms. an english translation of this book, by thomas dee, was published in 1836, with a second edition in 1847 that was revised by nathan lazarus benmohel.  notes  attribution  1600s births 1670s deaths year of birth uncertain year of death uncertain christian hebraists linguists 17th-century polish people
kotla jangan is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
mau is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 10 km from phillaur, 53 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 120 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , mau has a total number of 620 houses and population of 3096 of which include 1582 males and 1514 females. literacy rate of mau is 75.63%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 343 which is 11.08% of total population of mau, and child sex ratio is approximately 927 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 53.55% of total population in mau. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 1069 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of mau which includes 876 males and 193 females. according to census survey report 2011, 80.64% workers describe their work as main work and 19.36% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  notable people      raja nipal chand  transport  partabpura railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 9.3 km away from the village. the village is 38 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 147 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the q1 mall or infra q1 is an upcoming, under construction business cum lifestyle mall in kochi, india. the mall is developed and promoted by nippon infra projects pvt. ltd. it has a built up area of  on 15 floors with a combination of retail, leisure and office space.  q1 mall is located between pipeline and vytilla, two major junctions in nh 66.  facilities the mall is divided into three sections: q1 galleria, q1 terrace and q1 business zone. the galleria and terrace are part of the retail area which is spread over five floors. the rest of the ten floors form the business zone where the offices are located. there is car parking on each floor which can hold thirty cars per floor. q1 terrace is a leisure area that occupies level-4 and 5, spread over  with three rooms comprising a training centre, a banquet hall and a double height multi purpose theatre hall accommodating 800 persons. there 260 parking spaces for cars on two levels of parking at the basement.  the structure is earthquake resistant to zone-3. the mall will be fully ibs enabled.  references  shopping malls in kochi buildings and structures under construction in india
taravat talepasand (born 1979) is an iranian-american contemporary artist and educator. she is best known for her paintings, drawings, and sculptures addressing cultural taboos, displaying a juxtaposition of cultural stereotypes and expressing female empowerment. talepasand previously held the title of the chair of the painting department at san francisco art institute (sfai).  early life and education  taravat talepasand was born in 1979 in eugene, oregon, her father iraj was studying at university of oregon at the time. she was raised in portland, oregon.   she studied persian miniature painting in isfahan. talepasand received her b.f.a. degree from the rhode island school of design (risd) in 2001 and m.f.a.degree at the san francisco art institute (sfai) in 2006.  career  talepasand has taught in the painting department at sfai and at california college of the arts (cca). she previously was the chair of the painting department at san francisco art institute (sfai), until 2019.  in the 2014 exhibition, theory of survival: fabrications curated by taraneh hemami at southern exposure gallery brought together twelve san francisco bay area iranian-american artists to display work in their own booth, similar to a traditional bazaar. the space allowed for a gathering place for iranian american artists and allowed for more community dialog. talepasand's own booth featured souvenir-type items for sale such as t-shirts, magnets and cds, highlighting the relationship between consumer culture and the arts but also addressing orientalism. artists participating in the exhibition included; hushidar mortezaie, morehshin allahyari, haleh niazmand, ala ebtekar, sanaz mazinani, ali dadgar and gelare khoshgozaran.  talepasand work has been featured in art in america, the huffington post, new american paintings, art papers, the boston globe, soma magazine and many more. she has exhibited her work in united states, europe, and the middle east. talepasand was one of forty artists selected by the orange county museum of art for the 2010 california biennial.  her works have been added to the permanent museum collections at the fine arts museums of san francisco (famsf) at the de young museum and the orange county museum of art. she is one of the people featured in the film, immigrant stories: iranian-americans of silicon valley (2021) by nima naimi, alireza
sanayei, and julian gigola.  see also   islamic art  iranian art  list of iranian artists  list of iranian women artists  references  1979 births living people 21st-century american women artists 21st-century iranian women artists artists from eugene, oregon american people of iranian descent san francisco art institute alumni rhode island school of design alumni san francisco art institute faculty california college of the arts faculty artists from san francisco painters from california
the 2016-17 georgia state panthers men's basketball team represented georgia state university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the team's head coach was ron hunter who was in his sixth season at georgia state. the panthers played their home games at the gsu sports arena in atlanta as members of the sun belt conference. they finished the season 20-13, 12-6 in sun belt play to finish in second place. they defeated louisiana-lafayette in the quarterfinals of the sun belt tournament to advance to the semifinals where they lost to troy. they were invited to the collegeinsider.com tournament where they lost in the first round to texas a&m-corpus christi.  previous season  the panthers finished the 2015-16 season 16-14, 9-11 in sun belt play to finish in sixth place. they lost in the first round of the sun belt tournament to texas state.  off-season after the end of the 2015-16 season, work was completed on the new gsu practice facility, an indoor gym complete with six courts. this addition was mandated by head coach ron hunter after the march madness run in 2015.  assistant coach everick sullivan was hired by lenoir-rhyne university to serve as head basketball coach after coaching the panthers for five seasons.  shortly afterwards, sharman white, the head basketball coach of metro atlanta high school miller grove was hired after winning his team seven state titles in his last eight seasons. he set a state record with six titles in a row (2009-14). among his coaching recognitions, white has been awarded the naismith atlanta tip-off club bobby cremins award, named the usa today national coach of the year, and was most recently named the national high school coaches association (nhsca) coach of the year. before joining the georgia state staff, white compiled a 373-86 career coaching record over a 19-year career.  another assistant coach, daryl labarrie, also left the panthers to work as assistant coach at his alma mater, georgia tech. he was eventually replaced by former detroit head coach ray mccallum.  departures  incoming transfers  recruiting class  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| sun belt conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| sun belt tournament  |- !colspan=9 style=| cit  references  georgia state panthers men's basketball
seasons georgia state georgia state 2016 in sports in georgia (u.s. state) 2017 in sports in georgia (u.s. state)
jaja kalan () is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is  from  rurka kalan,  from phillaur,  from district headquarters jalandhar and  from the state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by sarpanch, an elected representative of the village.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , jaja kalan has 214 houses and population of 979, 495 males and 484 females. literacy rate of jaja kalan is 84.41%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 94, which is 9.60% of total population of jaja kalan, and child sex ratio is approximately 649, lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 46.68% of total population in jaja kalan. the town does not have any schedule tribe population.  as per census 2011, 326 people were engaged in work activities, 298 males and 28 females. 73.01% workers describe their work as main work and 26.99% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than six months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station. phagwara junction train station is  from the village. the village is  from the domestic airport in ludhiana, and the nearest international airport is in chandigarh. the sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second-nearest airport,  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
town meadow is a proposed railway station to serve the west of moreton near meols in the wirral, england. the station would be situated on the west kirby branch of the wirral line.  the planned station forms part of the wider local transport plan for merseyside and is included on page 139 of the 2011-2015 document among other proposed stations at carr mill, beechwood, woodchurch and deeside.  merseytravel found in a survey carried out in 2010 that support for the station was high. the proposed station would serve existing and new developments in moreton.  the under-secretary of state for transport, paul maynard mp, visited the site in april 2017 with local councillors, to back calls for the building of the station. it was revealed that merseytravel already own the land, but neither they nor wirral council had applied for a grant from the government's new stations fund. merseytravel defended their decision, claiming that their plans for the station were not sufficiently advanced to bid for funding. the october 2017 liverpool city region combined authority update to the long term rail strategy mentions that station as being built between network rail control periods cp5 and cp7.  the land for the station has been reserved by the metropolitan borough of wirral's local planning authority, which considers the station to be justified by the size of the catchment population.  see also  birkenhead railway  references  proposed railway stations in merseyside railway stations in the metropolitan borough of wirral
doraemon the movie 2017: nobita's great adventure in the antarctic kachi kochi is a japanese animated science-fiction film. it is the 37th installment in the doraemon movie series. it is directed and written by atsushi takahashi. takahashi was an assistant director on hayao miyazaki's academy award-winning spirited away. it was released on march 4, 2017, in japan.  a video game based on the film for the nintendo 3ds  was released in japan on march 2, 2017.  plot the film starts with 100,000 years ago, carla losing her gold ring. on the other hand, unable to endure the mid-summer heat, doraemon transports nobita and his friends to a huge iceberg floating in the south pacific. while creating an amusement park with the secret gadget "ice-working iron", nobita finds a mysterious golden ring in the ice and he asks doraemon to search how old the golden ring was. after learning that the ring was buried in antarctica 100,000 years ago, doraemon tells nobita and his friends that nobody had discovered antarctica  until 1773, doraemon and his friends change their clothes to winter clothes and use anywhere door to visit antarctica in search of its owner. they melt a blue elephant like structure whom nobita calls mosuke who was frozen in emice with a bag. after facing many threats they come across the ruins of a huge city buried in the ice, and then travel back in time to meet carla and professor hyakkoi, who are connected to the mysterious ring and finally meet them and carla's yellow elephant yuka-tan similar to mosuke ; however, the group must fight for survival as doraemon risks plunging the earth into another ice age. when everything starts freezing, nobita, shizuka, suneo, gian, carla, mosuke, doraemon and yuka-tan decide to travel 100,000 years later to survive but doraemon and yuka-tan are separated from the group while they reach in future. but they are unable to go back in time since the time belt battery is empty. back in time, doraemon remembers dorami's prediction that his lucky star can save him from getting frozen and freezes yuka-tan with the bag of gadgets and the battery. mosuke gives the bag to nobita which was frozen with it and nobita says mosuke is none other than yuka-tan frozen by doraemon to send them the battery. everyone travel back in time and save doraemon and fight the ice giant. the film ends with showing doraemon and his friends saying farewell
to their friend carla and professor as they prepare to leave earth, after this doraemon and his friends return to the home, doraemon shows nobita the planet's (where carla and professor lived or home planet of carla and professor) ice is melting and after some time the planet returns to it normal condition and in the last sentence of the film before credits, nobita's mom calls him and doraemon for dinner. the planet's position was given to doraemon by professor. doraemon uses a telescope to view the planet.  cast  theme song   by ken hirai.  box office  debuting on 371 screens with toho distributing, doraemon the movie 2017: great adventure in the antarctic kachi kochi earned $6.1million on 592,036 admissions in its first weekend and ranked 1 on japanese box office. doraemon's 37th film made highest second weekend gross and highest total after second weekend in the franchise and is the fastest doraemon's film to reach ¥4billion milestone within 37 days of release.  here is a table which shows the box office of this movie of all the weekends in japan:  the film was released in china on may 30, 2017, and grossed  () after completing its theatrical run.  it was released in hong kong on august 3, 2017, and grossed  ().  in south korea, it was released on august 11, 2017, and grossed $1,042,480 after completing its theatrical run. the film also grossed $74,855 in turkey combined, the film grossed  worldwide.  notes and references  external links        japanese films great adventure in the antarctic kachi kochi 2017 anime films japanese animated science fiction films 2017 science fiction films animated films about cats robot films 2017 animated films 2017 films films set in antarctica animated films about time travel environmental films
lockland wayne high school was an all african-american public high school in lockland, ohio. its motto was "lest we forget continuing the dream."  opening in 1938, the school closed in 1958.  history lockland wayne was located near the city limits of cincinnati in hamilton county. it is historically significant as having an all-black student class; all-black faculty, and all-black support staff. alumni continue to hold reunions every two years.  before the school opened its doors, the students attended lockland high school. many of the students walked to school from lockland and neighboring lincoln heights and woodlawn; some children walked  to school.  the black residents wanted a high school for many reasons but most of all to ensure their children had the best opportunity to learn in an environment which fosters excellence in academia, sports, drama, music, and throughout all areas of the school's curriculum with teachers who looked like them.  in the last summer of 1936 residents of lockland voted to approve a $55,000 bond issue and received an additional $45,000 from a federal grant to build and extension to the old wayne school building.  lockland wayne high school 1938-1958 graduated the first class of students in 1941. the school building was an extension of the old wayne elementary school with 12 classrooms with an auditorium which doubles as a gymnasium.  sports  first all-african american boys basketball state championship the 1952 lockland-wayne panthers was the first all african-american boys basketball team to win a state championship. march 22, 1952, in the state capital, columbus ohio, lockland wayne defeated nelsonville, 56-46, in the class b championship game.  the team captured a second state championship in 1955  the school won the 1952 state championship until the school was shuttered in 1958.  assistant coach joseph martin in the twenty years, the school had one principal joseph e. (joe) martin. in addition to his role as educator and administrator, he was also the boys' basketball coach for the state championship teams (1952-1955).  in 1960, martin was appointed assistant coach of the nba cincinnati royals. he was the first african-american to hold this position in the national basketball association.  notable graduates   tony yates, retired college basketball player and coach. he was on the team that won the 1952 ohio high school basketball championship.  references  high schools in hamilton county, ohio educational institutions established in 1938 1938 establishments in ohio
cuibul de viespi is a 1986 romanian comedy film directed by horea popescu.  cast   ovidiu iuliu moldovan - mircea aldea  coca andronescu - zoia  tamara buciuceanu - aneta duduleanu  gheorghe dinica - georges  tora vasilescu - collette  alexandru repan - al. popescu  maria ploae - margareta aldea   - cioclu 1  mircea albulescu - om necajit  george constantin - oncle michel  marin moraru - ianache duduleanu  ion cojar - valeriu  theodor danetti - antreprenor pompe funebre  references  external links   1986 comedy films 1986 films romanian films romanian comedy films
mr. abubakar jaar was a guardian, and after the independence of indonesia was appointed mayor of padang.  then he became a resident in north sumatra.  references  external links     mayors of padang minangkabau people mayors of places in indonesia
emphytoecia niveopicta is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fairmaie and germain in 1864. it is known from chile.  references  pteropliini beetles described in 1864 endemic fauna of chile
hiag akmakjian (july 17, 1926 - january 10, 2017) was an american published author, painter and photographer.  biography born in jersey city, new jersey, akmakjian grew up during the great depression as one of three sons of ervant and vartanoush akmakjian, refugees from the armenian genocide.  after serving in the u.s. army during world war ii, he graduated from columbia university in 1948, and then moved to france where he studied at the sorbonne by means of the g.i. bill while simultaneously attending academie de la grande chaumiere, an art school in montparnasse. upon his return to america in the early 1950s, akmakjian attempted to be a painter in the abstract expressionism style, but grew tired of the art scene and started studying photography. he also studied psychoanalysis at the washington institute in new york city, and then began to practice in new york, while also working as an editor at a new york publishing house.  in retirement he moved to the south of france where he resumed painting in a more impressionism style. later on he moved to wales after marrying his english wife, margaret.  career his interest in psychology and child development led to his writing the natural way to raise a healthy child in 1975, a book that was selected by the book of the month club, the psychiatry and social sciences book club and the psychology today book club. then an idea to write about edward weston prompted him to move to california, though the book never developed beyond the notes stage. however, having written a book about child rearing, he was given an opportunity to write a weekly q&a column on infant and child development called "the good enough parent" in the monterey, california herald.  he continued furthering his photography studies, during which time he befriended ansel adams in the late 1970s to early 1980s. years later he was interviewed by bbc radio to talk about recorded tapes he made with ansel adams.  in 1979 he wrote snow falling from a bamboo leaf: the art of haiku.  in the late-1990s he wrote his first novel, 30,000 mornings. it was published in germany in 1999 under the title gedanken eines supermodels nach dem dritten glas wodka.  death akmakjian was married to his wife margaret where they live in wales until his death from lung cancer on january 10, 2017. he is survived by his wife, margaret, and his son, nicolas.  works
novels 30,000 mornings, viking/penguin, london, 1999 "name dropping: the cedar bar in the 1950s", riverrun publishing, new york, 2012 "cleo", riverrun publishing, new york, 2016  non-fiction books the natural way to raise a healthy child, praeger, new york, 1975 snow falling from a bamboo leaf, capra press, santa barbara, 1979 writing to get published, riverrun publishing, new york, 2011 babyloving, riverrun publishing, new york, 2015  short stories gite, published in the flash (edited by peter wild); social disease uk, london 2007 sunday, published in the empty page: fiction inspired by sonic youth (edited by peter wild); serpent's tail, london, 2008 a room on the left bank, published in 3:am london, new york, paris (edited by andrew stevens); published by social disease uk, london 2008  publications psychoanalysis and the future of literary criticism, the psychoanalytic review, 1962 the unfabulous civil war, published in the realist, december 1961 hemingway and haiku in the columbia university forum, spring 1966 and reprinted in japan-america forum no.1, 1967 treatment guide for psychoanalysis and psychoanalytic psychotherapy, the psychoanalytic press, 1969 awakening your child's consciousness, health and consciousness, 1977 barns, published in monterey life magazine, november 1980 photo mecca: the carmel mystique, published in monterey life magazine, march 1981  books edited the years of bitterness and pride; fsa photographs 1935-1943; published by mcgraw-hill, new york, 1975  books designed jean renoir; essays, conversations, reviews, by penelope gilliat, published by mcgraw-hill 1975  photographs published portfolio, published in monterey life magazine, august 1981  references  1926 births 2017 deaths 20th-century american novelists american male novelists american male short story writers 20th-century american short story writers 20th-century american male writers united states army personnel of world war ii
ricardo freire (5 may 1919 - deceased) was a portuguese footballer who played as a full back.  he joined benfica in 1938, but rarely ever played during his six years there. he made a total of 31 appearances, winning two titles.  career freire joined benfica in 1936, making his debut on 25 october, against belenenses. he was exclusively used in the campeonato de lisboa, playing eight games and scoring seven goals. a seldom used player, competition from gaspar pinto and eloi made him a fringe player, appearing in only 10 games from 1938 until 1941.  in 1941-42, he gained his place in the first team alongside gaspar pinto, helping benfica win the league, making seven appearances. following another season without receiving playing time in the league, he left the club, with 31 matches played and seven goals.  honours benfica primeira divisao: 1941-42 taca de portugal: 1939-40  references general    specific  1919 births year of death unknown portuguese footballers association football defenders primeira liga players s.l. benfica footballers
mathieu baudet-lafarge (1765-1837) was a french politician. he served as a member of the council of five hundred from 1898 to 1899, and as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1830 to 1833, representing puy-de-dome.  references  1765 births 1837 deaths people from puy-de-dome politicians from auvergne-rhone-alpes members of the council of five hundred members of the 1st chamber of deputies of the july monarchy members of the 2nd chamber of deputies of the july monarchy
petronella angela "petra" hillenius (7 february 1968 in woerden - 27 march 2020) was a dutch breaststroke swimmer, who competed at the 1984 olympics in los angeles. she finished 19th in the 100 metre breaststroke and 18th in the 200 metre breaststroke.   in 2014, she became a board member of the royal dutch swimming federation. she resigned the position when she was diagnosed with als four years later. in march 2020 she died due to als.  she was a teacher for 24 years at the hospitality business school of the saxion university of applied sciences.  references  1968 births 2020 deaths people from woerden  dutch female breaststroke swimmers olympic swimmers of the netherlands swimmers at the 1984 summer olympics
nemaschema griseum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by fauvel in 1906.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1906
aras kaya (born amos kibitok on 4 april 1994 in kenya) is a turkish athlete. he competed at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands, where he won silver medal in the 3000 metres steeplechase event.  international competitions  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links     1994 births living people kenyan male steeplechase runners kenyan male long-distance runners turkish male long-distance runners turkish male steeplechase runners turkish male cross country runners kenyan male cross country runners kenyan emigrants to turkey naturalized citizens of turkey european athletics championships medalists olympic athletes of turkey athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics european cross country championships winners athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games mediterranean games competitors for turkey islamic solidarity games competitors for turkey islamic solidarity games medalists in athletics
the second turnbull ministry (liberal-national coalition) was the 70th ministry of the government of australia, led by prime minister malcolm turnbull. it succeeded the first turnbull ministry following the 2016 australian federal election on 2 july 2016.  on 13 january 2017, sussan ley resigned from her portfolios after an expenses scandal. in the following rearrangement, the roles of greg hunt and arthur sinodinos were changed, while ken wyatt became the first indigenous australian to serve as a federal minister.  on 25 july 2017, matt canavan resigned from cabinet over doubts as to his eligibility to be a member of the parliament, after discovering that he was considered by the italian authorities to be a citizen of italy. dual citizens are generally ineligible to be elected or sit as a member of parliament under section 44 of the australian constitution. barnaby joyce took on canavan's portfolio. on 27 october 2017, joyce and fiona nash were disqualified from parliament by the high court, also due to holding dual citizenship, while canavan was ruled eligible.  the ministry ended with malcolm turnbull's replacement by scott morrison following the liberal party of australia leadership spills, 2018.  final cabinet composition following deputy prime minister barnaby joyce's resignation from cabinet, the fifth arrangement of the second turnbull ministry was sworn in on 26 february 2018 by the governor of victoria, linda dessau, in her capacity as administrator of the commonwealth while governor-general sir peter cosgrove was overseas.  michael mccormack took on joyce's roles after being elected national party leader that morning. rearrangement of other portfolios took effect from 5 march 2018 when the governor-general sir peter cosgrove swore in the newly appointed ministers and parliamentary secretaries: darren chester as minister for veterans' affairs and minister for defence personnel; keith pitt as assistant minister to the deputy prime minister; and mark coulton as assistant minister to the minister for trade, tourism and investment. damian drum and luke hartsuyker were demoted from the ministry.  the composition lasted until the 2018 liberal party of australia leadership spills, when a number of ministers resigned from the cabinet to support the spill. this include peter dutton, michael sukkar, james mcgrath, concetta fierravanti-wells, angus taylor, zed seselja, michael keenan and steve ciobo. turnbull refused to accept some. turnbull was ousted as party leader and prime minister and replaced by scott morrison.  cabinet  outer ministry  assistant ministers  first arrangement the first arrangement of the second turnbull ministry was sworn in on 19 july 2016 and continued unaltered
until the resignation of sussan ley on 13 january 2017, following an investigation into her travel expenses. arthur sinodinos briefly acted in ley's portfolios until the new ministry was sworn in on 24 january 2017.  cabinet  outer ministry  assistant ministers  second arrangement the second arrangement of the second turnbull ministry was sworn in by the governor-general, sir peter cosgrove, on 24 january 2017 following the resignation of sussan ley. newly appointed ministers included ken wyatt , as the first indigenous australian to serve as a minister for an australian government department, appointed to the role of minister for indigenous health and as minister for aged care. greg hunt was appointed to ley's former portfolios in health and sport; arthur sinodinos was appointed to hunt's former portfolio as minister for industry, innovation and science. scott ryan was given additional responsibilities as the minister assisting the prime minister for cabinet. david gillespie, previously assistant minister for rural health was promoted as assistant minister for health and michael sukkar was appointed as the assistant minister to the treasurer. the position of cabinet secretary was abolished.  on 25 july 2017, during the 2017 australian parliamentary eligibility crisis, matt canavan resigned from cabinet over doubts as to his eligibility to be a member of the parliament, after discovering that he was considered by the italian authorities to be a citizen of italy. dual citizens are ineligible to be elected or sit as a member of parliament under section 44 of the australian constitution.  cabinet  outer ministry  assistant ministers  third arrangement the third arrangement of the second turnbull ministry was sworn in by the governor-general, sir peter cosgrove, on 27 october 2017 following the high court ruling that barnaby joyce and fiona nash were invalidly elected due to holding dual citizenship. the same ruling found that canavan was eligible, allowing him to return to the role of minister for resources and northern australia that had been held by joyce in his absence. prime minister malcolm turnbull took on joyce's portfolio of agriculture and water resources, and nigel scullion took over as the parliamentary leader of the national party, while the position of deputy prime minister remained vacant with julie bishop serving as acting prime minister when necessary. nash's roles were split between darren chester (regional development, territories and local government) and mitch fifield (regional communications) as acting ministers.  cabinet  outer ministry  assistant ministers  fourth arrangement the fourth arrangement of the second turnbull ministry was sworn in by the governor-general, sir peter cosgrove, on 20 december 2017 following a period of ministerial resignations due to the 2017 australian parliamentary eligibility crisis
including the appointment of scott ryan as the president of the senate, the retirement of george brandis to take up australian high commissioner to the united kingdom, the recovery of arthur sinodinos from cancer, the changes to administrative arrangements with the creation of the department of home affairs.  cabinet  outer ministry  assistant ministers  cabinet  see also  turnbull government first turnbull ministry  references   ministries of elizabeth ii 2016 establishments in australia 2016 in australian politics 2017 in australian politics 2018 disestablishments in australia 2018 in australian politics turnbull 2 cabinets established in 2016 cabinets disestablished in 2018 history of australia since 1945 liberal party of australia national party of australia turnbull government
civil aviation department, haryana is a ministry and department of the government of haryana in india.  history  this department was created when after 1966 haryana was established as a new state within india after being separated from punjab. it is responsible for the haryana institute of civil aviation, five civil aviation airports in the state of haryana and has bought simulators for the flying training. the department is undertaking expansion of civil aviation facilities at hisar airport.  air crafts the dept acquired a textron aviation (formerly known as beech craft) in january 2019 at the cost of inr42 crore, to be housed at chandigarh airport and flown by two pilots on deputation from bsf for 3 years.  airports in haryana  civil airports  existing   bhiwani airport  gurugram airport  hisar airport  pinjore airport  karnal flying club  narnaul airport  planned-greenfield   ambala airport, next to ambala airforce station airport  chhara airport (jhajjar district) on jhajjar-sampla road,  jind airport (narwana)  kurukshetra airport   meham cargo airport  planned (in gap areas, not yet surveyed/approved)   sirsa air force station civil enclave or odhan airport (greenfield)  bahal airport in bidhwan-bahal-isharwal-kairu area, 80-100 km from airports at hisar, bhiwani, narnaul  punhana airport, 70 km from planned airports at bhiwadi (rajasthan) and jewar (up)  charki dadri airport in charki dadri-palri-nahar-kairu area, 65-90 km from airports at chhara (future), behal (future), narnaul (existing)  fatehabad airport, in ratia-bhirdana-bhuna area  military airports  with civil enclave   ambala air force station  without civil enclave   sirsa air force station established in 1976  airports around haryana  major international airports (clockwise)   chandigarh airport  igi airport at delhi  jewar airport (taj/noida/agra airport) at jewar in up across the border from palwal in haryana, under construction  jaipur airport  other airports (clockwise)   punjab  bathinda airport, 100 km north of sirsa airforce station, 175 km northwest of hisar airport  ludhiana sahnewal airport, 125 km northwest of ambala airforce station  ludhiana halwara air
force station, 125 km northwest of ambala airforce station  patiala airport, 45 km west of ambala airforce station, 80 km northwest of kurukshetra airport (future), 110 km northwest of karnal airport, 110 km northwest of uchana (narwana-jind) future airport,    himachal pradesh  shimla airport, 100 km northeast of airports at chandigarh and pinjore  mandi airport, 180 km northeast of airports at chandigarh and pinjore  kullu bhuntar airport, 200 km northeast of airports at chandigarh and pinjore  kangra gaggal airport, 250 km northeast of airports at chandigarh and pinjore   uttarakhand  chinyalisaur maa ganga airport, 240-260 km northeast of airports at chandigarh, pinjore, ambala and karnal  dehradun jolly grant airport, 160-170 km northeast of airports at chandigarh, pinjore, ambala and karnal   uttar pradesh  sarsawa air force station at saharanpur without civil enclave, 70-80 km east from airports at karnal (existing) and kurukshetra (future), 100 km east from existing pinjore and chandigarh airports   meerut dr. bhimrao ambedkar airstrip, 110 km east from airports at karnal (existing) and chhara (future)  hindon airport civil enclave at ghaziabad in ncr  moradabad airport, upcoming airport 130 km east of delhi  aligarh airport, upcoming airport 130 km southeast of delhi, 65 km from jewar, 100 km from punhana   rajasthan  suratgarh air force station, airport 130 km west of sirsa airforce station, 200 km northwest of hisar airport  bikaner nal airport, 275 km further west of suratgarh  phalodi air force station, 150 km further west of bikaner airport and 425 km further west of suratgarh airport  ganganagar	lalgarh airport, 120 km northwest of sirsa airforce station, 200 km northwest of hisar airport  see also  highways in haryana  railway in haryana  references  civil aviation in india economy of haryana government departments of haryana civil aviation authorities in asia aviation organisations based in india
grays & co ltd (now terra brands)  is a mauritian investment company founded in 1931, with registered offices at beau plan business park, pamplemousses, mauritius, where its activities are based. the company is a fully owned subsidiary of terra mauricia ltd (terra ex harel freres) founded in 1838.  the company is the leader in the production of spirits derived from sugarcane in mauritius. their new grove rums and extra neutral spirit are manufactured by their sister company, namely grays distilling ltd.while the commercial branch, grays inc. ltd markets and distributes their brands in mauritius and in export markets.  additionally grays inc is a leading importer and distributor of wines and spirits from the world over into mauritius and has further diversified into the distribution and marketing of personal care, fragrances, pharmaceuticals, home care and snacks amongst other consumer goods.  history  the company origins date back to 1931. as part of its diversification strategy, harel freres (now terra) acquired the mauritius ok distillery and moved its installations to solitude, triolet.  in 1971, the mauritius ok bottling was founded to add value to spirits distilled by its sister company. the aim was to better serve the mauritian market, and distribution was handled by harel mallac. in 1978 harel mallac and harel freres created a 50% jv, hamarel to focus on the marketing of their brands.  in 1982. harel freres bought harel mallac's shares in hamarel creating grays & co ltd, rebranded their portfolio of products and launched new brands. in 2004 grays created a 50% joint-venture, les chais de l'isle de france with quartier francais to produce super premium rums, namely new grove. in 2006 grays ltd opened 26% of its share capital to distell. this operation gave birth to grays inc and a wide portfolio of brands to distribute in mauritius.  finally in 2011 with the rebranding of harel freres to terra, grays & co ltd was rebranded to terra brands, and grays refinery was rebranded grays distilling. grays inc kept its identity as the commercial branch of terra.  distillery  the distillery was created in 1931 when harel freres bought the mauritius ok distillery. in 1939, with the difficulties of the ww2, the island had problems importing petroleum products and the distillery produced fuel as a substitute. the plant was later renovated to produce rum and other spirits.  in 1980 a brand new distillery was built in beau plan and the mauritius ok distillery was renamed grays refinery
. this investment significantly increased quality and volumes. grays refinery was one of the three last standing distilleries on mauritius, with the societe de distillation de bois rouge in saint andre and the medine distillery in bambous.  in 2009 a 50% join-venture was made with island liquid fertiliser, evapo, to evaporate vinasse (a distillation residue), creating cms, concentrated molasses solids, which is a bio fertilizer. in 2011 evapo was rebranded to topterra along when harel freres which was rebranded terra.  services  the company imports wines and spirits from many countries, and  distribute non alcoholic beverages and snack food, and  has diversified its activities into pharmaceuticals and home care  references   lemps, alain huetz de (1997). histoire du rhum. paris: desjonqueres. p. 136. .  best of mauritius. pailles west, mauritius: precigraph ltd. 2010. p. 310, 320 .  ayala, luis k. (2001). the rum experience : the complete rum reference. [round rock, tx]: rum runner press. p. 112. .  external links  http://www.terra.co.mu  http://www.grays.mu  http://www.vsv.mu  financial services companies established in 1931 companies of mauritius
the 1971-72 memphis pros season was the 2nd and final season of the pros in the american basketball association. by the middle of the season, they were 17-25. in the second half of the season, they went 9-33, with a 10-game losing streak from february 4 to february 23 being the lowlight. in fact, the team ended the season on a nine-game losing streak. the biggest winning streak was 3, which they accomplished three times in the season. the pros were 10th in points scored with 107.5 points per game and 6th in points allowed with 113.0 points per game. on december 11, 1971, the operation of the franchise was taken over by the league. with the team struggling financially, they were sold on june 13, 1972, to charles o. finley, owner of the oakland athletics and the oakland seals. soon after they were rebranded as the memphis tams, while playing at the same arena as the pros. in their first season, they lost 60 games.  roster      -- larry cannon - shooting guard   34 lee davis - power forward   35 warren davis - power forward   32 randy denton - center  12 coby dietrick - center  13 jerry dover - point guard	   25 gerald govan - power forward   11 wil jones - small forward   23 loyd king - shooting guard   33 wendell ladner - small forward   21 george lehmann - shooting guard   14 johnny neumann - shooting guard   24 tom owens - center  22 donald sidle - power forward   21 bob warren - shooting guard   -- elnardo webster - small forward   10 charlie williams - point guard  final standings  western division  awards and honors 1972 aba all-star game selection (game played on january 29, 1972)   wil jones  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1971-72 regular season and playoff results  memphis pros page  memphis pros memphis pros, 1971-72 memphis pros, 1972-72 basketball in memphis, tennessee
de natura rerum may refer to:  de rerum natura, a didactic poem by lucretius  de natura rerum (bede), a treatise by bede  de natura rerum, a treatise by isidore of seville  de natura rerum (cantimpre), a natural history by thomas of cantimpre
beja  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of beja.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, beja has a total number of 25 houses and population of 162 of which include 81 males and 81 females. literacy rate of beja is 77.86%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 22 which is 13.58% of total population of beja, and child sex ratio is approximately  833, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
joze smole (born 29 october 1965) is a yugoslav former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1965 births living people yugoslav male cyclists slovenian male cyclists olympic cyclists of yugoslavia cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from novo mesto
the best (tc: 壹精選) is the first greatest-hits album by hong kong singer edmond leung.  track listing "no.1" (第一位) "love once and forever" (一世一次戀愛) "miss you all" (想念你的一切) "thinking of you" (想着你等着你 - 94 unplugged) "100% in love with you" (一百巴仙愛上你 - 第101次remix) "tie me up, tie me down" (綑着我困着我 - 縛縛remix) "summer no no no" (夏季不不不) "don't want to be alone" (不願一個人) "hesitantly" (欲言又止) "one night in a certain month" (某月某夜) "lingering games" (纏綿遊戲) "rainy night" (流離夜雨...雨中花) "no.1" (remix)  charts  references  edmond leung albums 1994 albums
edling is a swedish surname. notable people with the surname include:  dina edling (1854-1935), swedish opera singer leif edling (born 1963), songwriter and bass player of the swedish doom metal band candlemass rolf edling (born 1943), swedish fencer  swedish-language surnames
dabulian  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of dabulian. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, dhabulian has a total number of 148 houses and population of 807 of which include 417 males and 390 females. literacy rate of dhabulian is 74.80%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 69 which is  8.55% of total population of dhabulian, and child sex ratio is approximately  971, higher than state average of 846.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 40.89% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population,  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
edwin maria katzenellenbogen (also spelled katzen-ellenbogen) was an american eugenicist and physician in the concentration camp of buchenwald. of polish-jewish extraction, he had become a naturalized u.s. citizen and worked as a eugenicist for the carnegie institution.   in the 1930s he was in germany, and ended up in buchenwald where he collaborated with the nazis as a doctor. he became known for his cruelty especially towards french communists. in the buchenwald camp trial (part of the dachau trials), he was sentenced to lifetime imprisonment (later modified to 15 years of imprisonment).  references  external links  german psychiatrists physicians in the nazi party german emigrants to the united states american people of polish-jewish descent harvard university faculty jewish collaborators with nazi germany 1882 births 20th-century deaths date of death unknown
the battle of long tan took place on 18 august 1966 in phuoc tuy province, south vietnam during the vietnam war between viet cong and north vietnamese units from the viet cong 275th regiment, possibly reinforced by at least one north vietnamese battalion, and d445 provincial mobile battalion, and australian forces from d company, 6th battalion, royal australian regiment (6 rar). although the australians were heavily outnumbered and almost overwhelmed by the viet cong the battle ended in a decisive victory for them, establishing their dominance over the province. this perspective however sharply contrasts with competing interpretations in which the d445 battalion had garnered strong political support in phuoc tay. furthermore, the local d445 battalion was redeployed northwards against the newly deployed 11th armored cavalry taskforce a month later and so the true significance of the battle is called into question.  however, in the years since it was fought the intentions of the viet cong, in particular in mortaring the australian base at nui dat on the night on 16/17 august, have been much debated. this has included the possibility that the viet cong had intended to attack and overwhelm nui dat, with the initial plan to mortar the base to draw a response force into an ambush after which the base would be attacked and captured, but that they had been prevented from doing so after clashing with d company, 6 rar. a second possibility was that they may have had the more limited aim of drawing d company into an ambush to destroy it and secure a small victory over an isolated force. finally, it was possible no ambush was planned at all, and that the viet cong had been moving on nui dat in regimental strength when they unexpectedly ran into d company, resulting in an encounter battle. later interviews conducted by an australian veteran of the battle terry burstall, with commanders of the 275th battalion and d445 battalion including the battle commander and later deputy defense minister nguyen thoi bung indicate that mortaring was intended to draw out the 6 rar out of their base, in which an ambush was to occur followed by a retreat before artillery and air support can be utilised, typical of the grab-by-the-belt tactic.  background  the battle of long tan (18 august 1966) took place in a rubber plantation near long tan, in phuoc tuy province, south vietnam during the vietnam war. the action was fought between australian forces and viet cong and north vietnamese units after 108 men from d company, 6th battalion, royal australian regiment (6 rar) clashed with a force of 1,500 to
2,500 from the viet cong 275th regiment, possibly reinforced by at least one north vietnamese battalion, and d445 provincial mobile battalion. the 1st australian task force (1 atf) had arrived between april and june 1966, constructing a base at nui dat. after two months it had moved beyond the initial requirements of establishing itself and securing its immediate approaches, beginning operations to open the province. meanwhile, in response to the threat posed by 1 atf the 275th regiment was ordered to move against nui dat. for several weeks australian signals intelligence (sigint) had tracked a radio transmitter moving westwards to a position just north of long tan; however, extensive patrolling failed to find the unit. at 02:43 on the night of 16/17 august, viet cong mortars, recoilless rifles (rcls) and artillery heavily bombarded nui dat from a position  to the east, before being engaged by counter-battery fire. the following morning b company, 6 rar departed nui dat to locate the firing points and the direction of the viet cong withdrawal. a number of weapon pits were subsequently found, as were the positions of the mortars and rcls.  d company took over the pursuit around midday on 18 august. at 15:40 the lead element, 11 platoon, clashed with a viet cong squad and forced them to withdraw. shortly after resuming the advance, at 16:08 the platoon came under small-arms and rocket-propelled grenade fire from a flank after drawing ahead of the other platoons and was isolated. pinned down, they called for artillery support as a monsoon rain began, reducing visibility. beginning as an encounter battle, heavy fighting ensued as the advancing battalions of the viet cong 275th regiment attempted to encircle and destroy the australians. after less than 20 minutes more than a third of 11 platoon had become casualties, while the platoon commander was killed soon after. 10 platoon moved up on the left in support but was repulsed. with d company facing a much larger force, 12 platoon tried to push up on the right at 17:15. fighting off an attack on their right before pushing forward another  they sustained increasing casualties after clashing with several groups moving around their western flank to form a cut-off prior to a frontal assault. opening a path to 11 platoon yet unable to advance further, they threw smoke to mark their location. nearly out of ammunition, at 18:00 two uh-1b iroquois from no. 9 squadron raaf arrived overhead to resupply d company. meanwhile, the survivors from 11 platoon
withdrew to 12 platoon during a lull, suffering further losses. still heavily engaged, both platoons then moved back to the company position covered by artillery.  by 18:10 d company had reformed but was still in danger of being overrun. a company, 6 rar was dispatched in m113 armoured personnel carriers from 3 troop, 1st apc squadron to reinforce them. meanwhile, b company headquarters and one platoon were still returning to base and were also ordered to assist. leaving nui dat at 17:55, the carriers moved east, crossing a swollen creek before encountering elements of d445 battalion attempting to outflank d company and assault it from the rear. the viet cong were caught by surprise as the cavalry crashed into their flank and with darkness falling they broke through, while b company entered the position at 19:00. arriving at a crucial point, the relief force turned the tide of the battle. the viet cong had been massing for another assault which would have likely destroyed d company, yet the firepower and mobility of the armour broke their will, forcing them to withdraw. continuing past d company the relief force assaulted the viet cong, before moving back to the company position at 19:10. the artillery had been almost constant throughout and proved critical in ensuring the survival of d company. a later interview with officers involved  in the battle indicate some men of the d445 were killed while capturing two wounded australians, with all having been killed in the barrage. by 19:15 the firing had ceased and the australians waited for another attack. however, after no counter-attack occurred they prepared to withdraw  west. with the dead and wounded loaded onto the carriers d company left at 22:45, while b and a company departed on foot. a landing zone was then established by the cavalry with the evacuation of the casualties finally completed after midnight. forming a defensive position ready to repulse an expected attack they remained overnight, enduring the cold and heavy rain.  the australians returned in strength the next day, sweeping the area and locating a large number of viet cong dead. although initially believing they had suffered a major defeat, as the scale of the viet cong's losses were revealed it became clear they had won a significant victory. two wounded viet cong were killed after they moved to engage the australians, while three were captured. the bodies of the missing from 11 platoon were also located. two men had survived despite their wounds, having spent the night in close proximity to the viet cong as they attempted to evacuate their own casualties. due to the likely presence of
a sizeable force nearby the australians remained cautious as they searched for the viet cong. over the next two days they continued to clear the battlefield, uncovering more dead as they did so. yet with 1 atf lacking the resources to pursue the withdrawing force, the operation ended on 21 august. heavily outnumbered but supported by strong artillery fire, d company held off a regimental assault before a relief force of cavalry and infantry fought their way through and forced the viet cong to withdraw. eighteen australians were killed and 24 wounded, while australian official reports claim the viet cong lost at least 245 dead which were found over the days that followed. actual figures are in dispute, by both veterans of the australian and north vietnamese side, with allegations of body-count inflation in order to serve public-relations purposes. a decisive australian victory, long tan proved a major local setback for the viet cong, indefinitely forestalling an imminent movement against nui dat and establishing the task force's dominance over the province. although there were other large-scale encounters in later years, 1 atf was not fundamentally challenged again.  assessment  initial australian hypotheses in the wake of the battle the australians were left to speculate on the reason it occurred. one hypothesis was that the viet cong had intended to attack and overwhelm nui dat, with the initial plan to mortar the base to draw a response force into an ambush after which the base would be attacked and captured, but that they had been prevented from doing so after clashing with d company. a second possibility was that they may have had the more limited aim of drawing d company into an ambush to destroy it and secure a small victory over an isolated force. finally, it was possible no ambush was planned at all, and that the viet cong had been moving on nui dat in regimental strength when they unexpectedly ran into d company, resulting in an encounter battle. the evidence suggested they intended an attack on nui dat in some form, while the lack of prepared positions from which to mount an ambush made this unlikely. brigadier david jackson-commander 1 atf-believed the viet cong had been on their way to attack nui dat on the night of 18/19 august when d company intercepted them and this was supported by information from a prisoner captured afterwards. they were carrying large quantities of ammunition and may have had sufficient strength to seriously damage the base, even if its defences were likely strong enough to withstand such an attack. yet, from the earliest jackson had felt the viet cong would have to engage 1 atf in a major battle if they wished to
retain control of phuoc tuy, and this interpretation fitted his previous thinking. in dispatching patrols east of nui dat following the mortar attack on 16/17 august jackson seemingly reacted to his opponent's first move, and he may have allowed himself to be shaped into responding as the viet cong had intended.  in his after action report lieutenant colonel colin townsend-commanding officer 6 rar-wrote that he believed d company had disrupted a regimental attack on the 1 atf base. yet years later he stated that he doubted the viet cong ever intended attacking nui dat. he felt they would have gained more from attacking a soft target such as ba ria and that the defences at nui dat would have been sufficient to withstand a regimental assault, having been improved significantly in the 11 weeks since its occupation and protected by patrols and overwhelming artillery support, even if they were still to be fully developed. however, there were suspicions a battalion from the 274th regiment was moving towards nui dat from the west at the same time the 275th regiment approached from the east, and if true such an attack may have been feasible, even if it still would not have achieved the nine to one superiority communist doctrine required. the southern side of the base was only lightly defended and an assault from that direction would have allowed the viet cong to attack the gunline first, and if they succeeded in breaking-in would have then crossed  of open ground before reaching headquarters 1 atf. on the other hand, major noel ford-officer commanding b company, 6 rar-believed the mortar attack served to lure an australian reaction force into an ambush, arguing the viet cong would have been unlikely to telegraph their intentions to attack nui dat and that they had left a clear trail for any force dispatched to find the mortar base plate and rcl positions. townsend disagreed, arguing the mortar crews and rcl teams had actually tried to hamper the follow up by breaking into small groups, indicating that no such trap had been planned. meanwhile, major harry honnor-officer commanding the 161st battery, royal new zealand artillery attached to 6 rar in direct support-believed the bombardment had been used by the viet cong to register targets and that d company had stumbled across the force as it was preparing to launch an assault on nui dat two days later, with the battle that ensued preventing this from occurring.  a year after, nguyen van nuong (alias loc), a former viet cong soldier who had rallied, claimed to have been second-in-command of a platoon from d445 battalion
at long tan. during questioning he stated they had planned to destroy nui dat to allow further operations in phuoc tuy, with the force consisting of three battalions from the 275th regiment, d445 battalion and several medical units; in total some 2,000 men. the viet cong had estimated australian strength at nui dat at 3,000 men and planned to mortar the base to draw a response force into an ambush by two battalions from the 275th regiment and d445 battalion, while the remaining battalion would capture nui dat. they expected to quickly overwhelm the ambushed force and any relief force, thereby leaving the base relatively undefended. loc said d445 battalion's role was to close the rear of the ambush and that they taken only light casualties during the battle. despite viet cong claims he believed only 100 australians had actually been killed or wounded, and that the official number of viet cong casualties was 200 dead, although he had seen more than that on the battlefield and believed many more had died during the fighting. according to loc the viet cong were concerned about 1 atf's capabilities and would attempt to avoid contact in future. in accounting for the reason nui dat ultimately escaped attack it was surmised that d company may have entered the killing zone before the ambush was prepared and because of this the third battalion may have been unable to be released. other possibilities included the viet cong being forced to abandon that part of the plan by the weight of the artillery, or that they had overestimated the size of the australian force and retained the third battalion to complete the ambush.  the information from loc was consistent with that known or suspected by 1 atf, and other than a single battalion overwhelming nui dat, was considered plausible. yet smith was adamant d company had not been ambushed, believing the action to have been an encounter battle regardless of what may have been planned. he argued that the troops in the rubber plantation were not sited for an ambush, while the presence of 2,000 to 3,000 men so close to nui dat without prepared positions indicated they were still moving when the first contact occurred. equally, d company had been left in possession of the dominant terrain and was not drawn into a killing zone as the plantation offered too much concealment, no effort had been made to cut them off from any relief force sent from nui dat, no artillery or mortars were fired into the engagement area, while the thick vegetation to the north prevented the viet cong manoeuvring into a favourable position. he reasoned that an ambush would have been more effective
near the original base plate position as that was the only location they could have been sure the australians would investigate given they had no way of knowing d company would move another  east after the handover with b company where they contacted the 275th regiment. finally, communist ambushes were doctrinally completed in less than three hours, but long tan had continued for over four. as such smith concluded that since the tactics used by the viet cong had been contrary to many of the principles of an area ambush the battle was unlikely to have been one. mcneill argues though that too many facts may be missing to make a conclusive assessment of viet cong intentions as to date no definitive vietnamese account is available, while according to ham those that exist are contradictory or unreliable.  later vietnamese claims in 1988 two former pavn officers, nguyen thanh hong and nguyen van kiem (a later commander of d445 battalion)-while being interviewed by the australian official historian, ian mcneill-claimed no more than two battalions had been involved, less than half the lowest australian estimate. kiem claimed the primary force consisted of d445 battalion reinforced by one company of north vietnamese from headquarters military region 7 with a total of 720 men, while hong said one battalion from the 275th regiment had also been involved and that with d445 battalion its total strength was 700 to 800 men. they believed an entire australian battalion had been engaged along with two squadrons of apcs, and that it had been reinforced by a second battalion the following day, while there had been hundreds of australian casualties, citing a bbc broadcast which reported 500 killed and 21 tanks destroyed. against this, kiem estimated total viet cong losses as approximately only 30, mainly from artillery fire. hong agreed, stating the figure of 245 killed was exaggerated by a factor of 10. estimated losses from d445 district-commander colonel bao stated information he had received at the time was that there was 150 losses including killed and captured for all units involved. contradictory evidence is also given by the d-company commander, who stated he "didn't seen more than 50 bodies and i spent three days in the area."  yet this was at odds with alleged viet cong records to have been captured by us forces of the diary of the 275th regiment's commander listing that unit's losses as 500 dead. mcneill provides these figures based on the diaries of a future deputy defense minister nguyen thoi bung and overall battle commander; however, according to earnest chamberlain actual documentation of these diaries have not been corroborated.  captured soldiers later stated d445 battalion's casualties
had been 70 killed and 100 wounded. these claims were directly contradicted by australian intelligence reports in which the d245 unit suffered just 30 casualties. claims were also contradicted by the dong nai history which stated both the 275th regiment and d445 battalion had been involved. indeed, the majority of the dead buried after the battle were wearing green uniforms, and this coupled with their weapons and equipment, indicated they were either main force viet cong or north vietnamese.  one of the three prisoners was from d445 battalion and the other two were north vietnamese who claimed to be from the 45th regiment, perhaps unaware their unit had changed its name to the 275th regiment when operating in the south. according to them it was the artillery battalion of this regiment which had bombarded nui dat. years later many of kiem's claims about the role of d445 battalion were found to be misleading.  both kiem and hong claimed the plan had been to mortar nui dat to draw a reaction force into an ambush, not to attack the base. they confirmed the dual military and political aim, emphasising the disruption caused by 1 atf lodging at nui dat and the intention to affect australian public opinion. the forced evacuation of long tan and long phuoc had curtailed the viet cong who regarded it as a liberated area, and it was chosen as the ambush site to demonstrate to the local population that they were still able to operate despite the australian presence. hong explained the ambush was sprung within range of the artillery at nui dat because they correctly assumed no reaction force would move outside the cover it provided, and instead planned on rapidly closing with and destroying it before artillery or air support could be brought in. they planned to occupy prepared positions in the rubber plantation and destroy whatever force was sent to locate the mortars following the attack on nui dat. a stop force had been placed to the east, while another was to the south to hold the australians in place, reasoning that the thick undergrowth to the north would force them between the two. d445 battalion was then to close the rear of the ambush, attacking from the north-west. a larger ambush would then have been staged outside artillery range along the withdrawal route subsequently used by the 275th regiment. meanwhile, the 274th regiment was positioned north of binh ba astride route 2 to ambush us forces should they try to relieve 1 atf. hong later asked: "how can you claim a victory when you allowed yourselves to walk into a trap that we had set? admittedly we did not finish the job, but that was only
because time beat us and your reinforcements arrived. i mean you did not even attempt to follow us up. how can you claim a significant victory from that sort of behaviour?"  while the plan outlined by hong had many of the components of an annihilation ambush, and drawing the enemy out his base area was a standard communist tactic, several weaknesses were evident, including the lack of a means of neutralising the australian artillery, the absence of indirect fire weapons in the ambush, and the comparatively small size of the ambushing force. equally the plan to site a second ambush outside artillery range would have been ineffective as the australians were unlikely to proceed that far unless their guns had followed. hong believed the ambush failed because the soldiers at the front fired on 11 platoon before the entire australian force entered the killing zone, while it should have been opened from the rear against 12 platoon. had d company been attacked from the rear the battle would have been more like an ambush, and they would have been in immediate danger, while it would likely have been irrelevant if the forward viet cong troops fired first as the australians were already well into the plantation. yet they had been unable to co-ordinate such a manoeuvre and d445 battalion had more than three hours from the initial contact to close the gap at the rear and failed to do so. regardless, a few issues cast doubt on this version of events. firstly, if the viet cong had been in the plantation on 17 and 18 august preparing an ambush they would likely have been identified by the patrols from a or b company, 6 rar. secondly, the alleged size of the force is questionable as just 700 men would have been insufficient to be certain of success, while according to communist doctrine it would have required more than a regiment to achieve overwhelming force. in the end the reaction of the viet cong indicted they had not detected d company's presence in the rubber plantation until the first clash with 11 platoon.  in 2005, nguyen nam hung-deputy commander 274th regiment-claimed the viet cong had indeed intended to destroy 1 atf and liberate ba ria province. he stated that a two-phased offensive had been conceived, planning first to draw them into the open and destroy them in an ambush, and then attack the weakened base at nui dat. ultimately though their goal had been political and the capture of nui dat was not considered important. according to the official d445 battalion history, the officers of the units involved met in early august to finalise plans for the attack. the account claimed that following the mortar attack on
16/17 august, the force had formed up in a  wide semi-circle at 10:15 on 18 august to lie in wait, with the 275th regiment given the "middle battle" position and tasked with springing the ambush, while other units from the 275th regiment and one company from d445 battalion occupied the "front block" position near the village of long tan, and two companies from d445 battalion under command of major sau thu had been tasked with occupying the "back block" position to encircle the australians by sweeping beneath their "tail" and destroying them. in support, the 80-strong vo thi sau militia company, most of them women, was located nearby to help drag away the wounded following the battle. thu later confirmed he had been ordered to lure the australians out of nui dat, kill as many as possible, capture their weapons, and overrun the base. yet this explanation also contains inconsistencies. in particular, the delay of over a day between the mortar attack and the battle suggests another purpose, and it is possible it may have served to test the australian reaction and the speed with which counter-battery fire could be directed against them in preparation for a full-scale attack.  conclusion while vietnamese sources maintain an ambush was planned at long tan, whether they also intended attacking nui dat remains uncertain. the fact a large viet cong force had not been identified in the area before midday on 18 august suggests no such force was there, and consequently it could not have been occupying an ambush position awaiting the arrival of the reaction force from nui dat. despite this, it seems likely the 5th division had planned an ambush but were ill-prepared due to a lack of co-ordination between the morning of 17 august and the selection and occupation of the intended site. as a result, they appear to have been unready when d company entered the plantation and were likely somewhere on its eastern edge instead. the viet cong were probably still conducting their reconnaissance and establishing the ambush in the vicinity of where the rubber met the jungle when the battle occurred, while the australians may have upset their plan by moving faster than the arvn and us troops they had previously fought. what followed then appears to have been an encounter battle as the two advancing forces clashed on open ground in a meeting engagement. an alternative explanation is that d company approached from an unexpected direction, physically dislocating the ambush. indeed, thu stated "...we didn't know how many... [the australians] had in nui dat. we tried to draw them out... we thought
they would go one way but... [they] went the wrong way and came behind us." in july 2006, david sabben-platoon commander 12 platoon-and bob buick-platoon sergeant 11 platoon-visited the battlefield for a television story on 60 minutes, where they met nguyen minh ninh, former vice-commander d445 battalion. minh told them: "you won. but we won also. tactically and militarily you won-but politically, we won. in this battle you acted out of our control-you [escaped] from our trap." according to journalist cameron stewart it was the first time a senior north vietnamese officer had admitted being defeated at long tan.  see also  order of battle for the battle of long tan  notes footnotes  citations  references  further reading  external links  battle of long tan - australia and the vietnam war  the battle of long tan and the vietnam war - australia.gov.au  the battle of long tan   - australian army  the battle of long tan 18 august 1966  - official website  battles of the vietnam war involving australia battles of the vietnam war involving new zealand battles of the vietnam war involving the united states battles involving vietnam history of ba ria-vung tau province
franco lepore (born 16 august 1985) is an italian professional footballer who plays as a right-back for italian club pergolettese.  career  lepore joined serie c side monza in january 2019, helping them gain promotion to the serie b for the first time in 19 years. on 1 february 2021, lepore joined triestina in the serie c.  on 3 november 2021, he signed with pergolettese.  honours lecce  serie b: 2009-10  monza  serie c group a: 2019-20  references  external links      1985 births living people people from lecce italian footballers association football fullbacks a.s.g. nocerina players u.s. lecce players a.c. monza players u.s. triestina calcio 1918 players u.s. pergolettese 1932 players serie a players serie b players serie c players
vladyslav kocherhin (; born 30 april 1996) is a professional ukrainian football midfielder who currently plays for zorya luhansk in the ukrainian premier league.  club career kocherhin is a product of the youth sportive school ♯11 in odesa and the fc dnipro sportive school. his first trainers in fc dnipro were volodymyr knysh and ihor khomenko.  he made his debut as a substituted player in a second half-time for fc dnipro in the match against fc volyn lutsk on 24 july 2016 in the ukrainian premier league and scored one goal.  he scored a hat-trick for zorya luhansk in a 5-1 away win against inhulets petrove on 2 august 2021.  international career he made his ukraine national football team debut on 8 september 2021 in a friendly against the czech republic, a 1-1 away draw.  career statistics  references  external links      1996 births living people sportspeople from odessa association football midfielders ukraine international footballers ukraine youth international footballers ukraine under-21 international footballers fc dnipro players fc zorya luhansk players ukrainian footballers ukrainian premier league players
alexander j. mcgoldrick is an australian author and a former public servant and diplomat. he was australian ambassador to saudi arabia from 1988 to 1991, during the gulf war.  life and career mcgoldrick was born in ballarat. he graduated from the australian national university.  in the late 1970s, mcgoldrick was a first assistance secretary in the department of overseas trade. in 1980, mcgoldrick was appointed senior trade commissioner in brussels.  between 1985 and 1988 mcgoldrick was australia's ambassador to the organisation for economic co-operation and development in paris. he took up an appointment as ambassador to saudi arabia in 1988. his posting in riyadh until 1991 included the duration of the gulf war. in 1989 mcgoldrick took part in negotiations regarding the live export trade after saudi arabia rejected five shiploads of australian live sheep.  mcgoldrick self-published his book a memoir of arabia in 2010. the book offers an account of the time he spent in the middle east during the gulf war. in 2011 it was highly commended by judges for the act writers centre awards.  literary works  references  year of birth missing (living people) people from ballarat living people australian writers ambassadors of australia to saudi arabia ambassadors of australia to the united arab emirates australian national university alumni
dying breed may refer to:   dying breed (film), a 2008 australian horror film  "dying breed" (song), by five finger death punch, 2009  "dying breed", a song by the killers from the 2020 album imploding the mirage  "the dying breed", a beck soundtrack  "dyin breed", a song by polo g from the 2019 album die a legend  see also   rare breed (disambiguation)  decline (disambiguation)  endangered species  last of a dyin' breed, a 2012 album by lynyrd skynyrd  the last of a dying breed, a 2000 album by scarface
expanded polyethylene (aka epe foam) refers to foams made from polyethylene. typically it is made from expanded pellets ('epe bead') made with use of a blowing agent, followed by expansion into a mold in a steam chest - the process is similar to that used to make expanded polystyrene foam.  properties epe foams are low density, semi-rigid, closed cell foam that are generally somewhere in stiffness/compliance between expanded polystyrene and polyurethane. production of epe foams is similar to that of expanded polystyrene, but starting with pe beads. typical densities are  with the lower figure being common. densities as low as  can be produced.  base polymer for epe foams range from low-density polyethylene (ldpe) to high-density polyethylene (hdpe).  co-polymers expanded polyethylene copolymers (epc) are also known - such as 50:50 (weight) materials with polystyrene. though other properties are intermediate between the two bases, toughness for the copolymer exceeds either, with good tensile and puncture resistance. it is particularly applicable for re-usable products.  production epe foams were first manufactured in the 1970s.  production of the pe beads is usually by extrusion, followed by chopping, producing a 'pellet'. autoclave expansion is the most common route the bead foam. butane or pentane is often used as a blowing agent (before 1992 cfcs may have been used). depending on the specific process uses the beads may be cross-linked either by electron beam irradiation (see electron beam processing), or by the addition of a chemical agent such as dicumyl peroxide.  an alternate route (jsp process) to the beads uses carbon dioxide as a blowing agent which is impregnated into the pellets in an autoclave at a temperature close to the plastic's crystalline melting point. the pellets are foamed by "flashing" into the (lower pressure) atmosphere to expand.  finally molding is done by steam chest compression molding; usually the low pressure variant of the process is used, though the high pressure variant may be used for hdpe based epe foams.  uses  polyethylene bead foams (including) epe can be used to replace both polystyrene foam, and both rigid and flexible polyure
thane. uses include cushioning applications, and impact absorption applications including packaging.  consumption of polyethylene for pe foam was estimated at 114x106 kg in 2001. the majority was used for non-crosslinked foams, but crosslinked pe foams represented a significant (~ one third) fraction of demand. use in protective packaging represented the largest use sector for such foams.  references  sources  packaging materials polyolefins foams
musewal is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district, punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
carl reiner and mel brooks at the cannes film festival is a live 1963 comedy album by the american comedians carl reiner and mel brooks, recorded at the cannes film festival. it was the third album released by the pair, and their last recording for 12 years. it was nominated for the grammy award for best comedy performance at the 6th annual grammy awards in 1964; it lost to allan sherman's song "hello muddah, hello fadduh (a letter from camp)".   characters on the album include the italian film director "federico fetuchini" (inspired by federico fellini), the nazi inspired "adolph hartner", and the british tippy skittles k.c.v.b.  reception the negro digest positively reviewed the album in their september 1963 issue, highlighting the satire on italian film directors as the "richest ore of humour in this platter". referencing the character's imaginary film, rape, the negro digest wrote that "everything is rape with mr. fetuchini. he loves it. and so will the listener".  track listing   "the cannes film festival" - 9:59  "dr. felix wheird" - 5:26  "2000 and two year old man" - 9:41  "the l.m.n.o.p. ad agency" - 6:12  references  1960s comedy albums 1960s spoken word albums 1962 live albums carl reiner and mel brooks albums capitol records live albums live comedy albums spoken word albums by american artists live spoken word albums
rattanaphon pakkaratha (born ) is a thai female weightlifter, competing in the 53 kg category and representing thailand at international competitions.   she won a gold medal at the 2014 summer youth olympic games. she competed at world championships, at the 2015 world weightlifting championships.  major results  references  1997 births living people rattanaphon pakkaratha place of birth missing (living people) youth olympic gold medalists for thailand
charles grethen (born 2 june 1992, in tuntange) is a luxembourgish middle-distance runner competing primarily in the 800 and 1500 metres. he represented his country at three consecutive european championships.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 800 metres - 1:46.44 (oordegem-lede 2016) 1000 metres - 2:18.95 (pliezhausen 2016) 1500 metres - 3:32.86 (tokyo 2020) nr  indoor 800 metres - 1:48.26 (metz 2016) 1500 metres - 3:45.05 (dusseldorf 2016)  references  1992 births living people luxembourgian male middle-distance runners people from mersch (canton) athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of luxembourg competitors at the 2015 summer universiade competitors at the 2017 summer universiade georgia bulldogs track and field athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics
tom kling-baptiste (born 29 august 1990 in sundsvall) is a swedish athlete competing in sprinting events. he represented his country at the 2014 world indoor championships without advancing from the first round.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 100 metres - 10.29 (+1.4 m/s, skara 2014) 200 metres - 20.81 (+1.6 m/s, soderhamn 2015) indoor 60 metres - 6.65 (gothenburg 2014) 200 metres - 21.07 (vaxjo 2016)  references  1990 births living people swedish male sprinters people from sundsvall competitors at the 2015 summer universiade
state route 129 (sr 129) is a  state highway in fayette and marion counties in the northwestern part of the u.s. state of alabama. the southern terminus of the highway is at u.s. route 43 (us 43) and sr 171 north of fayette. the northern terminus of the highway is at an intersection with sr 13 in haleyville.  route description  sr 129 begins at an intersection with us 43/sr 171 north of fayette. after only , sr 129 intersects sr 102. while going through the town of glen allen, sr 129 intersects the southern terminus of sr 233. then, sr 129 enters marion county. before reaching winfield, sr 129 has a concurrency with sr 118 for . while heading north toward brilliant, sr 129 has an interchange with interstate 22 (i-22)/us 78/sr 4 then heads north to brilliant through wooded areas. before reaching its northern terminus, sr 129 intersects us 278 (internally designated as sr 74) and sr 241. sr 129 reaches its northern terminus, at an intersection with sr 13 in haleyville.  major intersections  see also  references  external links  129 transportation in fayette county, alabama transportation in marion county, alabama
stephan koltzk (born 15 january 1978 in frankfurt (oder)) is a german rower. he finished fourth in the eight at the 2004 summer olympics.  references       1978 births living people sportspeople from frankfurt (oder) olympic rowers of germany rowers at the 2004 summer olympics german male rowers  world rowing championships medalists for germany
sahnewal assembly constituency (sl. no.: 59) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in ludhiana district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022    -->  -->  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  ludhiana district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
the 2016 davis cup world group play-offs were held from 16 to 18 september. they were the main play-offs of the 2016 davis cup. the winners of the playoffs advanced to the 2017 davis cup world group, and the losers were relegated to their respective zonal regions i.  teams bold indicates team had qualified for the 2017 davis cup world group.  from world group                   from americas group i        from asia/oceania group i        from europe/africa group i  results summary date: 16-18 september  the eight losing teams in the world group first round ties and eight winners of the zonal group i final round ties competed in the world group play-offs for spots in the 2017 world group.  the draw took place on july 18 in london.  seeded teams                   unseeded teams                    , , , ,  and  will remain in the world group in 2017.   and  are promoted to the world group in 2017.  , , , ,  and  will remain in zonal group i in 2017.   and  are relegated to zonal group i in 2017.  playoff results  uzbekistan vs. switzerland  belgium vs. brazil  australia vs. slovakia  canada vs. chile  russia vs. kazakhstan  friday games were moved to saturday due to rain. the fifth set of the 2nd game was moved from saturday to sunday due to dark.  india vs. spain  germany vs. poland  japan vs. ukraine  references  world group play-offs
weekend blockbusters is an indian film production company based in kollam, kerala, india. it was established in 2014 by producer sophia paul. its first production was the malayalam film bangalore days (2014). in 2016, they produced two films - kaadu pookkunna neram and munthirivallikal thalirkkumbol.  history  weekend blockbusters debuted in film production in 2014 in malayalam film industry by producing bangalore days, directed by anjali menon. the film jointly produced by weekend blockbusters and anwar rasheed entertainments was a critical and commercial success. it collected an estimated sum close to ₹50 crore at the box office, and became one of the highest-grossing malayalam films of all time. their second production was dr. biju directed kaadu pookkunna neram (2016) starring indrajith sukumaran.  the next film was the domestic drama munthirivallikal thalirkkumbol, mohanlal starring film directed by jibu jacob. the film started production on 15 july 2016 in kozhikode, kerala. it was released in february 2017 and was a major commercial success with total gross over 50 crore worldwide. it was followed by the comedy road movie padayottam starring biju menon.  films  references   indian companies established in 2014 film production companies of kerala companies based in kollam 2014 establishments in kerala mass media companies established in 2014
john garrett ellis, aia, riba is an anglo-californian architect, urban designer and teacher. he grew up in london, the son of tom ellis, the brutalist architect and was a student at cambridge university 1965-70 under sir leslie martin, colin st john wilson and david roberts. while a student he ran the architectural society and invited numerous distinguished architects to speak including louis kahn, the russian constructivist berthold lubetkin and the american jack macallister. in 1968 he and four other students drove 12,000 miles from london to moscow and leningrad and out through scandinavia to research the work of the russian constructivist architects. at cambridge he was also taught by richard saul wurman (ted talks, etc.) who offered him a position in his office in philadelphia in the summer of 1969 where he met his late wife becky, an art historian.  early career on graduating, he worked in london for lyons israel ellis (tom ellis' firm) on the polytechnic of central london (now the university of westminster) department of photography and communication building on little titchfield street, london. he then returned to cambridge and worked with david roberts on a number of projects including an extension to the fitzwilliam museum and a music room for trinity hall. he then joined richard maccormac in london who had just started his practice maccormac jamieson prichard (mjp) and worked on some of the early public housing projects the practice was well known for in milton keynes and warrington new towns.  move to california in 1977, ellis and his family moved to the bay area where he has lived, worked and taught. he worked with a number of architectural practices including ten years 1982-92 kaplan mclaughlin diaz (kmd) where he was project designer for projects such as stevenson place, san francisco, one of the earliest post-modern high-rise office towers, the iconic twin-towered oakland federal building and the art-deco inspired u.s. bank plaza (sacramento). he worked from 1992 to 1994 with anshen & allen and was project designer for the far east international building shanghai and the kaiser medical office building in san francisco.  since 1994, ellis has worked as a partner and director of urban design with daniel solomon a san francisco architect and teacher, who was one of the founding members of the congress of the new urbanism (cnu). in 2001 with daniel solomon and anne torney the practice was renamed solomon ellis torney (solomon etc) and from 2003-10 was an autonomous part of the philadelphia-
based firm wallace roberts todd (wrt). in 2010 the practice joined the seattle-based firm mithun and became mithun/ solomon.  work with daniel solomon  ellis, anne torney and daniel solomon have specialized in the design of affordable housing and urban repair and have participated in the work of the congress of the new urbanism. they designed public and affordable housing master plans for several hope vi projects at othello station in seattle, hunters view in san francisco and jordan downs in los angeles. the designs aimed to create mixed-income neighborhoods and to integrate previously marginalized communities back into the mainstream of american urbanism. they have also designed student housing for various universities including weyburn terrace and glenrock for ucla, and escondido village at stanford university.  in 2001 the firm undertook an ambitious plan to transform the market/octavia neighborhood in san francisco after the demolition of the central freeway following the 1989 loma prieta earthquake into a demonstration project for urban repair. they also produced a master plan in 2004 for coyote valley in san jose for the greenbelt alliance entitled 'getting it right' to demonstrate how to accommodate the projected growth in the area in a compact, transit-oriented, mixed-use design without resorting to sprawl. other large scale urban design projects include that for bin hai in tianjin in china which demonstrated how to build an urban fabric with small blocks and perimeter block urbanism in contrast to the conventional chinese pattern of rows of south-facing slabs in vast superblocks.  teaching ellis has taught part-time at uc berkeley since 1980 and used to be an adjunct professor at california college of the arts, cca (formerly ccac) in san francisco. in 2012 he was the inaugural sir arthur marshall professor of sustainable urban design at cambridge university  where he gave a series of public lectures and ran an urban design studio on master planning for northwest cambridge.  writing ellis has been a contributing writer to architectural review in london and a collaborator on 'sustainable urbanism' by doug farr, 2007 john wiley publisher.  honors ellis's work has won aia national honor awards for the oakland federal building 1992, cnu charter awards in 2004 and 2013 for coyote valley and ucla weyburn terrace.  family ellis was married in 1970 to rebecca lynn freed 1941-2009 and has two children, benjamin (1971) and joanna (1974). he married kathleen shier perry, graphic designer in 2016.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people english emigrants to the united states 20th-century english architects urban designers

events from the year 1880 in russia  incumbents  monarch - alexander ii  events             trial of the sixteen (1880)  berdichev machine-building plant  moscow circus on tsvetnoy boulevard  births  deaths  references  1880 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
fernando ariel brandan (born 15 november 1980) is an argentine former professional footballer who played as a midfielder.  references      1980 births living people argentine people of italian descent argentine footballers association football midfielders argentina international footballers gimnasia y tiro footballers universitario de sucre footballers club olimpia footballers club real potosi players queretaro f.c. footballers provincial osorno footballers argentine expatriate footballers argentine expatriate sportspeople in chile expatriate footballers in chile argentine expatriate sportspeople in bolivia expatriate footballers in bolivia argentine expatriate sportspeople in mexico expatriate footballers in mexico argentine expatriate sportspeople in paraguay expatriate footballers in paraguay
budurovignathus is an extinct genus of conodont.  use in stratigraphy  the ladinian stage of the middle triassic is defined by the first appearance of budurovignathus praehungaricus.  the global reference profile for the base (the gssp) is at an outcrop in the river bed of the caffaro river at bagolino, in the province of brescia, northern italy.  references    revision of conodont genera sephardiella march, budurov, hirsch and marquez-aliaga, 1988 and budurovignathus kozur, 1988. mn sudar, geologica balcanica, 1989  external links       conodont genera triassic conodonts
jamarro diks (born 26 june 1995) is a dutch footballer who plays as a winger for excelsior '31. his family is indonesian of moluccan descent.  club career  as trencin  diks started his career with as trencin in slovakia.  diks made his professional fortuna liga debut for as trencin against senica on 23 july 2016. in january 2017, diks returned to holland to play for amateur side gvvv, but was released by gvvv at the end of the season.  personal life diks is the older brother of professional footballer kevin.  references  external links  as trencin official club profile  futbalnet profile    1995 births living people sportspeople from apeldoorn dutch people of indonesian descent dutch people of moluccan descent dutch footballers association football forwards as trencin players gvvv players tweede divisie players csv apeldoorn players hoofdklasse players excelsior '31 players derde divisie players slovak super liga players dutch expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in slovakia dutch expatriate sportspeople in slovakia agovv apeldoorn players sbv vitesse players footballers from gelderland
thiruvalla copper plates, also known as the huzur treasury plates, are a collection of medieval temple committee resolutions found at the sreevallabha temple, thiruvalla, kerala. the collection of plates, engraved in old malayalam language in vattezhuthu with some grantha characters, can be dated to 10th and 11th centuries ad.  the collection consist of forty three plates with writing on both sides, but more than half a dozen plates are missing. the contents of the copper plates belong to different periods. the plates were collected, rearranged and edited at a late date. the plates are considered as a treasure trove of information about medieval temple rituals, deities, festivals, castes, professions, personal names, plot names, and prices.  the plates were first published in travancore archaeological series by t. a. gopinatha rao, under the title "the huzur treasury plates". they were originally kept in the sreevallabha temple, thiruvalla (now with archeological department of kerala).  major donors to thiruvalla temple  kings and queens    chola king parantaka vira chola (907―955 ad)  kizhan adikal (queen of parantaka)  chera/perumal king bhaskara ravi manukuladitya (962―1021 ad).  nambirattiyar (queen of chera/perumal )  kerala chieftains    ramakuda muvar, chieftain of kolathu-nadu  eran chankaran, chieftain of purakizha-nadu  ravi chirikandan, chieftain of vembanadu  kumaran yakkan, chieftain of vembanadu thekkin-kuru  kantan kumaran maluvakkon, chieftain of kizhmalai-nadu  raman kotavarman, chieftain of munji-nadu  raman madevi, wife of the chieftain of munji-nadu  munjimarayar, chieftain of munji-nadu venattadikal, chieftain of venad  references  external links    accretion of temple's centrality: searching the tiruvalla copperplates by a mathew   indian inscriptions inscriptions history of kerala chera dynasty kerala history inscriptions malayalam inscriptions
the 2016-17 toledo rockets men's basketball team represented the university of toledo during the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the rockets, led by seventh-year head coach tod kowalczyk, played their home games at savage arena, as members of the west division of the mid-american conference. they finished the season 17-17, 9-9 in mac play to finish in third place in the west division. as the no. 7 seed in the mac tournament. they defeated bowling green in the first round to advance to the quarterfinals where they lost to ohio. they received an invitation to the college basketball invitational where they lost in the first round to george washington.  previous season the rockets finished the 2015-16 season 17-15, 8-10 in mac play to finish in fifth place in the west division. they lost in the first round of the mac tournament to eastern michigan.  departures  incoming transfers  recruiting class of 2016  recruiting class of 2017  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| mac tournament  |- !colspan=9 style=| college basketball invitational  see also  2016-17 toledo rockets women's basketball team  references  toledo toledo toledo rockets men's basketball seasons
teneriffa is a genus of flies in the family dolichopodidae. it contains only one species, teneriffa spicata.  references   dolichopodidae genera hydrophorinae monotypic diptera genera diptera of europe taxa named by theodor becker
miss hong kong pageant 2016 was held together with mr hong kong 2016 in tvb city on 11 september 2016. ten delegates will competed for the miss hong kong title.   miss hong kong 2015 louisa mak crowned her successor crystal fung.  results  placements  special awards miss photogenic: tiffany lau miss friendship: bowie cheung 張寶兒  delegates the miss hong kong 2016 delegates were:  elimination chart the rules changed for this year as a knockout competition was used to determine the finalists.  champion 1st runner-up 2nd runner-up advance eliminated  judges main judging panel: miss photogenic judging panel:  andy hui (許志安), gigi leung (梁詠琪), ruco chan (陳展鵬), nancy wu (胡定欣)  post-pageant notes  crystal fung placed as 2nd runner-up in miss chinese international pageant 2017 in pahang, malaysia.  references  miss hong kong pageants 2016 in hong kong hong kong
natey adjei ( ;; born september 15, 1989) is a former canadian football wide receiver in the canadian football league (cfl) who played in six seasons and was a member of three cfl teams. he played college football at city college of san francisco and the university at buffalo and attended st. joseph secondary school in mississauga, ontario.  professional career  toronto argonauts  adjei was drafted with the 22nd overall pick in the 2013 cfl draft by the toronto argonauts. he played his first two seasons with the argonauts, catching a total of 11 passes for 124 yards and one touchdown.  edmonton eskimos  adjei was then signed by the edmonton eskimos prior to the 2016 cfl season. after catching only six passes in this first two seasons in edmonton he saw an increased workload in 2018, catching 22 passes for 214 yards and a touchdown. adjei and the eskimos agreed to a two-year contract extension on january 24, 2019. he enjoyed a career year in 2019, playing in all 18 regular season games and recording 75 catches for 534 yards and two touchdowns, including one on a career-long reception of 77 yards. he was released by the eskimos during the ensuing off-season on february 1, 2020.  toronto argonauts (ii)  on february 5, 2020, it was announced that adjei had re-joined the toronto argonauts as a free agent. however, he did not play in 2020 due to the cancellation of the 2020 cfl season and he became a free agent in 2021.  montreal alouettes  on february 11, 2021, it was announced that adjei had been signed by the montreal alouettes. however, he retired shortly before the 2021 season began on june 22, 2021.  natey adjei finished his career having played in 98 regular season games with 97 receptions for 925 yards and four touchdowns. he also made 33 special teams tackles and eight other tackles.  sportscasting career  following his retirement adjei joined tsn 1050 to be the radio colour commentator for argos games, alongside play-by-play announcer mike hogan.  references  external links montreal alouettes bio buffalo bulls bio  1989 births living people american football wide receivers buffalo bulls football players canadian football league announcers canadian football wide receivers canadian people of ghanaian descent canadian players of american football canadian radio sportscasters city college of san francisco rams football players edmonton elks players montreal alouettes players players of canadian football from ontario sportspeople from toronto toronto argonauts players black canadian players of canadian football
colonel thomas ewing (1730-1790) was a commander of the 3rd battalion of the maryland flying camp under the command of brigadier general rezin beall during the american revolutionary war.  under ewing's command were 12 companies of infantry with 864 men and 2 companies of artillery.  references  continental army officers from maryland people of colonial maryland 1730 births 1790 deaths
cesar enrique bernal avila (born 14 february 1995) is a mexican professional footballer who plays as a defender for tampico madero. he made his professional debut with santos laguna during a copa mx victory over correcaminos uat on 19 august 2014.  honours tampico madero liga de expansion mx: guardianes 2020  references  living people 1995 births sportspeople from torreon mexican footballers association football defenders santos laguna footballers irapuato f.c. footballers club celaya footballers tampico madero f.c. footballers ascenso mx players liga premier de mexico players footballers from coahuila
20 cents is a coinage value in some systems using decimal currencies. while some countries use a 20-cent coin, some countries use a 25-cent coin instead of a 20-cent coin.  examples include:  australian 20 cent coin  new zealand twenty-cent coin  20 cent euro coin  hong kong twenty-cent coin  see also  cent (currency)  :category:twenty-cent coins
msus or zawiyat msus (), also  masous is a village in eastern libya. it's located  on the southeast of benghazi, and far from suluq on the same direction by .  there is a road linking her to suluq. it's also linked with charruba (about  to the north) by another road.  msus had been a site of several battles between italian colonial forces and libyan resistance fighters, such as the one that took place on march 3, 1914, between the latter (withdrawing from the battle of sceleildima) and the former.  notes  cyrenaica populated_places in benghazi district
wolfgang karl weyrauch (1907-1970) was a german-peruvian malacologist and entomologist.  life weyrauch was born on december 7, 1907, in elberfeld, germany. he received his phd in zoology in 1929 from the university of berlin with a thesis on insect neurophysiology. from 1928 to 1929, he was an assistant of richard hesse, and from 1931 to 1943 he worked for the german council of scientific research doing field studies in entomology and ecology.  in 1938, he worked as an entomologist at the agricultural experimental station (estacion agricola de la molina) in lima, peru. at the time of world war ii, he moved to texas, where he did field work in entomology and malacology. in 1946, he was at the estacion experimental agricola de tingo maria in lima. from 1948 on, he worked for the universidad mayor de san marcos in lima as a professor of zoology and genetics at the museo nacional de historia. in addition, he was from 1959 to 1961 professor of agricultural zoology at the pontificia universidad catolica del lima. in 1962, he went to argentina and became professor at the instituto miguel lillo in tucuman. he died of a heart attack in 1970.  works weyrauch studied land and freshwater gastropods of south america, mainly taxa belonging to the families camaenidae, charopidae,  clausiliidae, endodontidae, helicinidae, "hydrobiidae", orthalicidae, pupillidae, scolodontidae, subulinidae, and urocoptidae. he left behind many type specimens in museums, of which he published no original description. he was the author of 198 molluscan names.  species named in his honor the following gastropod species were named after weyrauch: bostryx weyrauchi  neopetraeus weyrauchi  thaumastus weyrauchi  nenia weyrauchi  incapora weyrauchi   also, a species of snake is named after weyrauch: leptotyphlops weyrauchi   a species of wasp is also named after weyrauch: polistes weyrauchorum willink, 1964  a species of harvestman is also named after weyrauch: chusgonobius weyrauchi roewer, 1952  references  further reading aguilar p (1970). "prof. dr. wolfgang k. weyrauch, 1907-1970". revista peruana de entomologia 13: 3-4. breure ash
(1975). "description of a collecting trip in peru, ecuador, colombia and venezuela". de kreukel 11 (7): 83-116.  willink a (1999). "biografias lilloanas". revista de la sociedad entomologica argentina 58 (3-4): 3-10.  zilch a (1970). "wolfgang karl weyrauch (1907-1970)". mittheilungen der deutschen malakozoologischen gesellschaft 2 (18): 226-236.  german entomologists german malacologists 1970 deaths 1907 births 20th-century german zoologists national university of san marcos faculty
family with sequence similarity 221 member a is a protein in humans that is encoded by the fam221a gene. fam221a is a gene that is not yet well understood by the scientific community. however, it appears that this gene may have a role in parkinson's disease and prostate cancer.  gene  location and aliases fam221a is located on chromosome 7. its exact location is 7p15.3. it has one alias, which is c7orf46.  expression fam221a has higher levels of expression in the liver, brain, fetal brain, thyroid and colon, but fam221a has the highest level of expression in the spinal cord, pancreas and retina.  the promoter region of fam221a is 1222 base pairs long. this was found using eldorado at genomatix.  protein  protein analysis the molecular weight of fam221a is 33.1 kda, and the isoelectric point is 6.01. relative to other proteins in humans, fam221a has a lower level of asparagine.  post-translational modifications post-translational modifications of fam221a include phosphorylation sites, glycosylation sites and sulfation sites. these have been conserved in mammals other than homo sapiens, including the macaque, whale, finch and sometimes alligator. these sites were predicted using netphos 3.1, yinoyang 1.2 and the sulfinator.  secondary structure key structures predicted in fam221a are random coils and alpha helices, with 71% of the protein being random coils and 21% being helices. extended strands were also found with 7% of the protein being these. secondary structure was predicted using raptorx, and a diagram of the predicted secondary structure is included below.  homology/evolution  paralogs there exists one paralog for fam221a: fam221b. this diverged from fam221a approximately 1781 million years ago.  orthologs orthologs have been found in mammals, birds, reptiles and fish. fam221a has also been conserved in invertebrates, but the similarity levels decrease at a faster rate. orthologs were discovered using blast  and blat. while these are not the only orthologs that exist for fam221a, a table of 20 orthologs is provided below. the ortholog with no accession number was created using blat.  divergence of fam221a to understand the times when fam221a diverged from different species, a graph was
created. this compares the evolutionary history of fam221a to fibrinogen, which evolves quickly, and cytochrome c, which evolves slowly. as seen in the graph, fam221a diverges from other species at a moderate pace.  clinical significance fam221a has a relatively high amount of expression in the brain and has been seen to have an association with neurodegenerative disorders such as parkinson's disease and alzheimer's disease. fam221a has also been seen to have a higher level of expression in those who have prostate cancer versus healthy individuals. furthermore, fam221a has also been expressed in those with colorectal tumors.  interacting proteins three interacting proteins were found, which are snx2, snx5 and snx6.  snx2 and snx6 share the same function, which is being involved in the stages of intracellular trafficking. snx5 facilitates cargo retrieval from endosomes to the trans-golgi network.  references
marie anne perichon de vandeuil (1775-1847), known as la perichona, was a french noblewoman, who had an active role in the politics of buenos aires during the last year's of spanish rule over the viceroyalty of the rio de la plata.  biography marie anne perichon de vandeuil was born in ile bourbon, france, the daughter of armand etienne perichon de vandeuil and jeanne magdeleine d'abeille, who both belonged to the french nobility. his grandfather, etienne guillaume perichon, was collector of domains and forests of the government of moulins. the ancestors of the perichon family lived for centuries in his "hotel" on the rue saint-denis.  in about 1798, marie anne arrived from montevideo at the port of buenos aires with her husband, thomas o'gorman, an irish catholic merchant from ennis, county clare and veteran of the irish brigade in the french royal army. thomas was also the nephew of michael o'gorman, the director of the protomedicato del rio de la plata. while o'gorman was highly successful as a merchant, he was believed by spanish colonial officials to be a british spy, which may well have been true. in 1804, when o'gorman returned to the city from europe, he was in the company of james florence burke, who definitely was a secret agent in the service of the british crown.  meanwhile, marie anne perichon had an adulterous relationship with fellow french expatriate santiago de liniers. during the british invasions of the river plate, the house of the o'gormans was protected by a french flag. after his military leadership ensured that the british expeditions were vanquished, liniers was appointed viceroy.   thomas o'gorman, for his own part, supported the british during the 1806 invasion attempt and, after their defeat, he was forced to flee for his own safety to rio de janeiro.  during liniers' tenure as viceroy, he and perichon cohabitated and sheserved as the de facto vice-reine. but after a series of disagreements with the cabildo led to his replacement by baltasar hidalgo de cisneros in 1809, perichon also went into exile in brazil. liniers was executed by firing squad at cordoba in early 1811, during the may revolution, after being defeated in battle and taken prisoner while attempting to lead a royalist uprising against the newly independent argentine government. the official charges against liniers were
of conspiracy and rebellion. once she was notified of the demise of liniers, perichon returned to buenos aires, where she was forced to live in a reclusive way, with minimal outside social contact until her death in 1847.  thomas o'gorman and marie anne perichon, were the paternal grandparents of camila o'gorman, a pregnant socialite who was executed by firing squad in 1848 on the orders of caudillo juan manuel de rosas, for having a eloped and secretly cohabitated with fr. ladislao gutierrez, a roman catholic priest of the society of jesus. they were also the grandparents of fr. eduardo o'gorman.  references  1775 births 1847 deaths people from buenos aires people from saint-denis, reunion french emigrants to argentina burials at la recoleta cemetery
the coming days () is a 2010 german drama film with a dystopian vision of the near future directed by lars kraume. it is set in the time period from 2012 to 2020, which the film portrays as an era of increasing social and international instability.  cast   bernadette heerwagen as laura kuper  daniel bruhl as hans kramer  august diehl as konstantin richter  johanna wokalek as cecilia kuper  ernst stotzner as walter kuper  susanne lothar as martha kuper  vincent redetzki as philip kuper  mehdi nebbou as vincent  jurgen vogel as melzer  tina engel as oberarztin  references  external links   2010 drama films 2010 films german films german drama films
aeranthes adenopoda is a species of orchid native to madagascar. it was first described by h. perrier in 1938. its iucn status is not evaluated.  references   adenopoda orchids of madagascar plants described in 1938
the 2016-17 the citadel bulldogs basketball team represented the citadel, the military college of south carolina in the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the bulldogs were led by second-year head coach duggar baucom and played their home games at mcalister field house in charleston, south carolina. they played as a member of the southern conference, as they have since 1936-37. they finished the season 12-21, 4-14 in socon play to finish in a tie for eighth place. they defeated western carolina in the first round of the socon tournament to advance to the quarterfinals where they lost to unc greensboro.  previous season  the bulldogs finished the 2015-16 season 10-22, 3-15 in socon play to finish in last place. they lost in the first round of the socon tournament to mercer.  preseason  departures several players departed the program, 2 due to graduation, 2 more as graduate students completing their eligibility, and 2 to transfer.  recruiting with many departures, the citadel added 10 new players for the 2016-17 season.  this marks another step in moving from a slow pace to the baucom-led uptempo style of play.  at least one player changed his plans as a result of a photo that surfaced on social media which showed cadets dressed as ghosts, but widely interpreted as similar to ku klux klan garb.  roster  schedule and results the citadel travelled to play opponents in the pac-12, big 12, and acc, and host an exempt tournament to be known as the holy city hoops classic.  |- ! colspan=8 style=|exhibition  |- ! colspan=8 style=|non-conference regular season  |- ! colspan=8 style=|socon regular season  |- ! colspan=8 style=|socon tournament  references  the citadel bulldogs basketball seasons citadel citadel citadel
olenecamptus timorensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by franz in 1972.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1972
rukun tetangga (rt) is the division of villages in indonesia under rukun warga. rt is the lowest administrative division of indonesia.  rukun tetangga is through consultation in the framework of community service   set by the village or villages.  the local level of governance of rukun warga and rukun tetangga also includes the rukun kampung   rukun tetangga chaired by the ketua rt elected by its citizens. a rt consists of a number of households (kk).  most information about governance and functioning of the rt and rw is in indonesian. some non-indonesian anthropologists have written about the functions and issues.  see also    barangay  tonarigumi  notes    subdivisions of indonesia  indonesia, villages indonesian law indonesian society
the law schools global league or lsgl was instituted in 2012 by a selected number of globally leading law schools.  it has the primary aim of globally promoting and fostering scholastic research on law and legal education as well as encouraging collaboration among its members in the debate on issues impacting global law or legal practice.  members  lsgl is composed of 31 research universities sharing a common vision and at the same time committed to education and research on global law and legal practice, namely:   catolica global school of law  china university of political science and law  ebs universitat  fundacao getulio vargas  harry radzyner law school  higher school of economics  ie law school  instituto tecnologico autonomo de mexico  king's college london  koc universitesi law school  kyushu university  national research university  national university of singapore  northwestern university pritzker school of law  o.p. jindal global university  queen's university belfast school of law  seoul national university  stockholm university faculty of law  strathmore university  the chinese university of hong kong  the jagiellonian university  tilburg university  ucla school of law  universidad de los andes  universita degli studi di torino  universitat freiburg  university of cape town  university of edinburgh  university of pretoria  unsw law sydney  wuhan university law school  objective  lsgl members share a commitment to foster the globalisation of law as well as the integration of global law into their research and teaching.  references  law schools international college and university associations and consortia
adolescent sexuality has been a topic observed and studied within the united kingdom throughout the 20th century and in the 21st century. associated organisations have been established to study and monitor trends and statistics as well as provide support and guidance to adolescents.  sexual activity and contraception use the family planning association, was set up in the 1930s. in 1952 it began to offer contraceptive advice to single women who were just about to wed.  a study in manchester revealed that between the years 1937 and 1954, almost a quarter of under-age girls coming to the attention of one female police officer regarding underage sex were pregnant. it was also noted that the girls often came from backgrounds of broken homes or bad parental influence. it was found that they also tended to have a lower than average iq.  the combined oral contraceptive pill became available in 1961, though initially only to married women. the proportion of teenage women who were married rose from 5% in 1951 to 8% in 1961. in the same year, a study of scottish women found that almost a quarter of single women were sexually experienced before their 20th birthday, the proportion having risen from 6% during the late 1940s and 15% during the late 1950s. the findings of the study concluded that there was a clear increase in sexual intercourse among young single women after the advent of the contraceptive pill in 1961.  the first comprehensive survey of sexual behaviour in united kingdom amongst unmarried teenagers was conducted in 1964. it revealed that a third of boys and almost one in six girls were sexually experienced by the age of 18, as well as one in twenty girls under 16 being sexually active. it also estimated that around one in three teenage girls who engaged in premarital sexual intercourse fell pregnant. also revealed in the survey was that one in five of sexually experienced girls and two-fifths of sexually experienced boys always used birth control, the most common form of birth control being the condom (selected by around 80% of those using birth control).  in 1964, helen brook set up the brook advisory centres, offering contraceptive advice to young single people under the age of 25. in 1967, a change in the law allowed local health authorities to offer contraceptive services to unmarried people if they so wished, though by 1968 only one in six authorities were providing such a service. mr k. robinson, answering a question in the house of commons regarding the new family planning act in october 1967, stated that it would be unwise to exclude girls under 16 from receiving advice at family planning clinics (fpc), though these girls would only
be seen at fpcs in exceptional circumstances even with parental consent.  by 1969, brook advisory centres were offering contraceptive advice to over ten thousand unmarried people under 25, the majority aged between 19 and 21, with around one in six being under 19. in 1970, the family planning association were mandated to offer contraception to unmarried people. in 1971, a survey of scottish single female students revealed that a third had had sexual intercourse by the age of 18, with over half not using any form of contraception. the survey also showed that one in seven girls who had recently been sexually active had had a partner who was a casual boyfriend.  in 1971, a doctor was reported for informing the parents of a 16-year-old girl that she had come to him seeking contraception. this prompted the british medical association to advise doctors to maintain young patients' confidentiality when seeking contraception. three-quarters of teenagers visiting brook advisory centres during the early 1970s were doing so without their parents' knowledge.  controversy was also sparked when a 12-year-old girl who had recently undergone an abortion was put on the contraceptive pill with her parents' consent by gynecologist dr mary wilson at calthorpe nursing home in birmingham. she said "so many girls come back pregnant again after three or four months, that is why i gave her a supply of the pill and contraceptive advice". labour mp leo abse was concerned that the prescribing of the pill to a 12-year-old child was an offence under the sexual offences act.  in 1975, under the new national health service reorganisation act, contraception was made available free of charge to everyone, including single people and those aged under 16. clarification was given to doctors that they could provide contraception to patients under 16 without parental consent in certain circumstances. the average age of first sexual intercourse for girls had now dropped from 21 in the mid-1950s to 18. over a quarter of boys under 16 and almost one in eight girls under 16 were sexually experienced.  a report by the british pregnancy advisory service in 1976 found that 69 percent of girls under 16 who came to them for an abortion during the year had used no contraception. most of them were experienced at sex. by 1978 brook advisory centres were government funded and 3% of brook's clients were under the age of 16.  in 1980, the 1974 dhss circular about parental consent and the issuing of contraception/abortion advice to girls under 16 was reviewed. the conclusion was that a doctor or a professional worker should always seek to persuade the child to involve
her parents or guardian at the earliest stage of consultation; but it was accepted that occasionally contraception would be given without parental consent.  the number of girls under 16 visiting family planning clinics in england reached over seventeen thousand in 1983, but cuts in health service expenditure forced the closure of many family planning clinics and a restriction in the services available to young people that year.  in 1984, a high court ruling in favour of victoria gillick, it was deemed illegal for health professionals to advise or give girls under 16 contraceptives without parental consent except in exceptional circumstances; the number of girls under 16 visiting family planning clinics each year dropped to twelve thousand in response. when the house of lords overturned the high court ruling in 1985 and confidential contraceptive advice to young people was restored, the number rose again to sixteen thousand per year.  in the first sex survey of its kind, the national survey of sexual attitudes and lifestyles (natsal) in 1991 revealed that one in six girls under 16 and a quarter of boys under 16 were sexually experienced. a fifth of sexually active 16- and 17-year-olds and over half of 18- and 19-year-olds were using at least one method of contraception. the second natsal in 2001 showed that the average age of first intercourse had dropped from 17 in the 1980s to 16. it also revealed that a quarter of girls and nearly a third of boys were sexually experienced before the age of 16.  a survey conducted in 2005 found that the number of girls under 16 visiting family planning clinics had risen throughout the 1990s to peak at over ninety-one thousand in 2003, before falling to eighty-three thousand. the most popular choice was the condom with over half choosing this method of contraceptive.  sexually transmitted infections the proportion of patients visiting sexual health clinics for treatment of venereal disease, particularly the sexually transmitted infection gonorrhoea, has shown a general increase over the years.  for women, the figures from a study in manchester showed teenagers accounted for 10% of patients in 1939, up to 23% in 1954. later studies show figures of 23% in 1957, 27% in 1963, and 33% in 1981. the rate of new cases of gonorrhoea diagnosed at sexual health clinics amongst girls under 16 in england increased more than threefold from 2.76 per hundred thousand of the population in 1966 to 9.38 in 1976.  in men, the proportion of patients at sexual health clinics who were under the age of 20 rose from 3.8% in 1939 to 4.8%
in 1954. amongst boys under 16 the rate of gonorrhoea diagnoses rose from 0.94 per hundred thousand of the population in 1966 to 2.19 in 1976.  in 1971 the number of teenagers visiting sexual health clinics with gonorrhoea reached over ten thousand, 60% were girls and one in twenty were under 16. the number of persons under 16 being diagnosed with gonorrhoea in england fell from 637 in 1976 to 361 in 1981, but the levels rose again and in 1996 there were over ten thousand new cases of gonorrhoea to teenagers reported in sexual health clinics, up over 30% from 1995. in a study in 2005 this number had fallen to three thousand seven hundred.  levels of chlamydia in teenagers rose throughout the 1980s and 1990s; in 1996 the levels increased by over 16% from the previous year, and by 2005 it was the most common sexually transmitted infection amongst teenagers with over thirty thousand new cases reported, almost 28% of all new cases. in 2006 a screening programme of young people by the department of health revealed that 12% of girls aged 16-19 and 13% of men aged 20-24 were infected with chlamydia.  see also   adolescent sexuality  age of consent reform in the united kingdom  ages of consent in europe  teenage pregnancy in the united kingdom  references    youth in the united kingdom sexuality in the united kingdom
the perceptual quantizer (pq), published by smpte as smpte st 2084, is a transfer function that allows for hdr display by replacing the gamma curve used in sdr. it is capable of representing luminance level up to 10000 cd/m2 (nits) and down to 0.0001 nits. it has been developed by dolby and standardized in 2014 by smpte and also in 2016 by itu in rec. 2100. itu specifies the use of pq or hlg as transfer functions for hdr-tv. pq is the basis of hdr video formats (such as dolby vision, hdr10 and hdr10+) and is also used for hdr still picture formats. pq is not backward compatible with the bt.1886 eotf (i.e. the gamma curve of sdr), while hlg is compatible.  pq is a non-linear transfer function based on the human visual perception of banding and is able to produce no visible banding in 12 bits. a power function (used as eotfs in standard dynamic range applications) extended to 10000 cd/m2 would have required 15 bits.  technical details  the pq eotf (electro-optical transfer function) is as follows:  the pq inverse eotf is as follows:  where    is the non-linear signal value, in the range .   is the displayed luminance in cd/m2   is the normalized linear displayed value, in the range [0:1] (with  representing the peak luminance of 10000 cd/m2)  see also    transfer functions in imaging  high-dynamic-range video  references   transfer functions
chak no. 147/148 nb is a village in sillanwali of district sargodha, punjab, pakistan. it is situated 42 km away from sargodha city  and 9 km from its tehsil sillanwali at lakhowana road. it is also known as lakhowana (punjabi and ).  overview  it is a union council no. 121 of the neighboring villages. it is surrounded by a canal, rajbah naurang. the primary source of income in this village is agriculture but most of the people of the village have jobs in public as well as in private sector.  history  this village came to existence in early 19th century. before then, all of the area from shahnikdar to shaheenabad consists of bushes and other plants. it looked like pasture so people living in sargodha and its neighboring villages went there to graze animals and they returned after weeks. ancestors told that the place where the village is situated was a plain ground among those bushes and irregular topography of the land so this place was suitable to live so at night, they encamped there. but they had to face a big trouble there was no source of fresh water so they used to bring water with them but later on, they found a low-lying area on the south west of the today's village that had the capability of collecting rainwater so they brought their animals to this pond to drink water and initially they built temporary mud buildings to protect animals and themselves from harsh weather conditions like storms, rains and sun etc. afterward some people permanently settled at that place and it is said that a person named lakho () lived here and name of the village lakhowana () made from his name. in this way the village came to existence and after the partition of british india, this village was properly registered.  union council   this village is the headquarters of union council 121, which consists on the following villages.   chak no. 147/148 nb  chak no. 143 nb  chak no. 146 nb  chak no. 149/150 nb  facilities  government of punjab provided medical and educational facilities to this village  medical facilities  the basic health unit ) is provided to village by the government. it provides all primary health center (phc) services along with integral services that include basic medical and surgical care, cdd, cdc, ari, malaria and tb control.  educational facilities  government of punjab has provided high school for boys and elementary school for girls.  government boys high school government girls elementary school
notable persons   atta muhammad sialvi was the former imam of jamia masjid of the village.  colonel saleh muhammad was the former headman (numbardar) of the village.  references   populated places in sargodha district villages in pakistan villages in punjab, pakistan villages in sargodha district villages in sillanwali tehsil union councils of sargodha district
ondangwa rural is an electoral constituency in the oshana region of namibia. it had 13,613 inhabitants in 2016 and 7,682 registered voters . the administrative centre of the constituency is the settlement eheke.  ondangwa rural was created by splitting the former constituency of ondangwa into a rural and an urban part in august 2013, following a recommendation of the fourth delimitation commission of namibia, and in preparation of the 2014 general election.  politics ondangwa is traditionally a stronghold of the south west africa people's organization (swapo) party. the following people have served as councillors of ondangwa rural (until 2013: ondangwa) constituency:  prinse shiimi (1992-1998)  ismael uugwanga (1999-2010)  alfeus abraham (since 2011)  in the 2015 local and regional elections councillor abraham won uncontested after no opposition party nominated a candidate. abraham was again reelected in the 2020 regional election, winning with 2,170 votes over armas ntinda of the independent patriots for change (ipc), an opposition party formed in august 2020, with 944 votes.  references  constituencies of oshana region states and territories established in 2013 2013 establishments in namibia
potassium channel modulatory factor 1 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the kcmf1 gene.  references  further reading
margrave (foaled 1893 in kentucky) was an american thoroughbred racehorse who won the 1896 preakness stakes, a race that would become the second leg of the u.s. triple crown series.  breeding margrave was bred by august belmont jr. at his nursery stud near lexington, kentucky. he was sired by 1883 epsom derby winner st. blaise who had originally been imported into the united states by august belmont sr. to stand at his nursery stud which at the time was located in babylon, new york. after belmont sr.'s death in 1890, st. blaise was sold several times and before belmont jr. bought him back. margrave's dam was lady margaret, a belmont family bred multiple stakes winning mare who also was the dam of masterman, winner of the 1902 belmont stakes. lady margaret was sired by the belmont stallion the ill-used who was the sire of other very good runners including his highness, who won the 1891 futurity stakes, forester, winner of the 1882 withers and belmont stakes, jacobus who won the 1883 preakness stakes plus 1892 american champion two-year-old filly lady violet.  racing margrave was trained by byron mcclelland who had previously won the 1895 kentucky derby with halma and the 1894 belmont stakes with henry of navarre. as a two-year-old, margrave won two minor races and notably beat ben brush while finishing second in the 1895 great eastern handicap at sheepshead bay race track.  racing at age three, margrave was never beaten in five outings. in addition to his preakness stakes win at gravesend race track, at that same track he also won the 1896 boulevard stakes and hempstead handicap and at sheepshead bay, the tidal stakes.  margrave met with limited success as a stallion for his owner's nursery stud but did produce 1902 queens county handicap winner margraviate. in 1906, belmont gave margrave to the new york breeding bureau to be used as a sire for work horses.  references  1893 racehorse births racehorses bred in kentucky racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners thoroughbred family 4-r
amina pirani maggi (january 15, 1892 - november 10, 1979) was an italian stage and film actress.  selected filmography  television (1931)  seconda b (1934)  dimmed lights (1934)  like the leaves (1935)  department store (1939)  guest for one night (1939)  a thousand lire a month (1939)  beyond love (1940)  lucrezia borgia (1940)  manon lescaut (1940)  the king's jester (1941)  the hero of venice (1941)  luisa sanfelice (1942)  girl of the golden west (1942)  love story (1942)  rita of cascia (1943)  a living statue (1943)  the innocent casimiro (1945)  ring around the clock (1950)  the beggar's daughter (1950)  who is without sin (1952)  if you won a hundred million (1953)  the knight of the black sword (1956)  references  bibliography   waldman, harry. missing reels: lost films of american and european cinema. mcfarland, 2000.  external links     1892 births 1979 deaths italian stage actresses italian film actresses actors from verona
elections to colchester borough council took place in 1995.  results summary  ward results  berechurch  boxted & langham  castle  great & little horkesley  great tey  harbour  lexden  mile end  new town  prettygate  shrub end  st. andrew's  st. anne's  st. john's  st. mary's  stanway  tiptree  west bergholt & eight ash green  west mersea  wivenhoe  1995 1995 english local elections 1990s in essex
five acre school is a private pre-school and elementary school next to the dungeness wildlife refuge in sequim, washington state.  the school was founded in 1994 by bill and juanita jevne and is currently a 501c3 non-profit organization.  five acre school serves children from three to twelve.  the school has four classrooms: the primary class (pre-school), the discovery class (kindergarten and 1st grade), the adventure class (2nd and 3rd grade) and the explorer class (4th, 5th and 6th grade).  there are ten faculty and staff including a director.  the school focuses on the arts, the outdoors and project-based learning.  every wednesday students go on day hikes in the woods and beaches around the school. students have art and music several times throughout the week.  five acre school is known for its marimba band called soundwaves. the band performs songs written by walt hampton at various events and festivals in clallam county. the band is directed by rosie sharpe.  references  schools in clallam county, washington
respirators, also known as respiratory protective equipment (rpe) or respiratory protective devices (rpd), are used in some workplaces to protect workers from air contaminants. initially, respirator effectiveness was tested in laboratories, but in the late 1960s it was found that these tests gave misleading results regarding the level of protection provided. in the 1970s, workplace-based respirator testing became routine in industrialized countries, leading to a dramatic reduction in the claimed efficacy of many respirator types and new guidelines on how to select the appropriate respirator for a given environment.  background   the invention of the first personal sampling pump in 1958 made it possible to simultaneously measure the concentrations of air pollution outside and inside a respirator mask. this was the first attempt to measure the effectiveness of respiratory protective equipment. until the 1970s experts mistakenly believed that the protective properties of a respirator in the laboratory were not significantly different from its properties in the workplace. there were therefore no measurements of the effectiveness of respirators under production conditions, and the regions where different types of respirators could be safely used were established on the basis of laboratory tests only.  this picture began to change when it was realized in the 1960s that workers using approved respirators were still being exposed to high levels of harmful contaminants. workplace studies have since shown that the effectiveness of respirators of all designs is much lower in real-world tests than in the laboratory. under workplace conditions, employees must perform a variety of movements that testers in the lab do not. when the facepiece of the respirator is tightly fitted, these movements cause gaps to form between the mask and the face, decreasing the efficiency of the mask due to leakage of unfiltered air through the gaps.  in addition, a small number of testers can not simulate all the variety of shapes and sizes of faces, and a 20-minute certification lab test cannot simulate all the variety of movements performed in workplaces. testers may also be more careful about putting on and using their masks than an ordinary worker.  evolution of workplace-based testing standards  initial workplace-based tests of effectiveness in the 1970s and 1980s  a groundbreaking study in 1974 on the effectiveness of respirators used by miners simultaneously measured dust concentrations with personal samplers worn by individual miners, and using two dust collectors, without the mask. the researchers also measured the percentage of time that the miners used their respirators by attaching two thermistors to each miner (one in the facepiece, the other on the
belt). heat detection in the expired air was a sign of wearing a mask. the study defined a new measure, the "effective protection factor", that described the protection offered under real-world conditions, and reported the range of effective protection factors in four different mines.   in the steel fabrication industry, individuals performing sandblasting wore various types of hoods, usually supplied with air. studies in 1975 found that the concentration of dust under these hoods exceeded the maximum permissible value, although air-supplied hoods offered better protection than non-air-supplied hoods. even when sandblasting was not occurring, the level of silica dust in the atmosphere far exceeded safe levels, meaning that time workers spent outside the hood on breaks led to exposure.   in copper smelters, three commonly used types of negative pressure filtering respirators with elastomeric half-masks were examined for their ability to protect workers against concentrations of sulfur dioxide in 1976. the different respirator designs showed large variations in protectiveness, partially attributable to the comfort of the respirator design: the more comfortable masks were adjusted more tightly and were therefore more effective.   a 1979 study of the effectiveness of self-contained breathing apparatus (scba) in protecting firefighters against inhalation of carbon monoxide showed that intermittent usage of these respirators made them ineffective. even continuous usage of scbas did not provide complete protection. this scba design had an air supply into the mask that supplied air "on-demand" (i.e. allowing negative pressure under the mask during inhalation). us and eu legislation now requires the use of breathing apparatus with the "pressure-demand" mode of air supply (i.e. with positive pressure under the mask during inhalation) for firefighters.  studies also found that worker-to-worker variation in the use of respirators can have very large effects on the protection achieved.  a 1980 study on inhalation exposure of cadmium workers identified a single worker who always used his respirator correctly.  the protection factor for this worker was found to be 26 times higher than that for the average worker. in a study in coal mines, miners frequently removed their respirators in conditions where they perceived the dust level to be low, greatly reducing efficacy. in another study, respirators with an expected protection factor of 1000 in fact had protection factors ranging from 15 to 216. factors affecting the level of protection achieved include the snugness of the fit of the respirator to the worker's face, and air movement in the environment
.  new measures of efficacy   as researchers repeatedly found that the level of protection actually experienced in the workplace was much lower than the protection factors assigned to the devices after laboratory testing, it was proposed that a new expected protection factor scale should be developed, such that the real effectiveness was higher than the "expected effectiveness" with a probability of at least 90%.     the significant differences between real and laboratory-measured effectiveness prompted the national institute for occupational safety and health (niosh) to release two informational messages on respirators in 1982, warning consumers about the unexpectedly low effectiveness of respirators. after extensive discussion, six new definitions of respirator protection factors were agreed upon. for example, the assigned protection factor (apf) of a respirator is the minimum protection factor the respirator must provide under the following circumstances: the respirator will be used by trained and taught workers, after individual selection of masks to fit the face of an employee, and will be used without interruption in the polluted atmosphere. the actual protection experienced by a worker may be significantly lower than this and protection may vary from worker to worker.  respirator efficacy at chernobyl    the chernobyl nuclear accident in 1986 led to an urgent need for protection of workers from radioactive aerosols. approximately 300,000 negative pressure filtering facepieces of the model "lepestok" were sent to chernobyl in june 1986. these respirators were considered to be very effective (the declared protection factor for the most common model was 200). however, the individuals who used these respirators were exposed to excessive contamination. just as in the case of the studies noted above, the declared protection factor was very different from the actual protection factor under real-world conditions. as seen in other workplace tests, the passage of unfiltered air through the gap between the mask and face undermined the efficiency of the respirator. however, these discoveries did not lead to a change in assessments of the effectiveness of respirators in the ussr.  alternatives to respirator use  workplace-based testing has led to extensively revised standards for the use of different designs of respirators, and has forced manufacturers to pay more attention to methods of hazard reduction such as sealing, ventilation, and automation, and to improvements in technology. for example, the national institute for occupational safety and health (usa) has provided recommendations for reducing dust concentrations in coal mines and other mines. field measurements showed that respirators are the least reliable means of protection, with unstable and unpredictable efficacy.    respirators are not convenient
; they create discomfort and inhibit communication. the reduction of the field of view due to respirator use leads to an increase in the risk of accidents. respirators also reinforce overheating at high air temperature. in real-world conditions, these deficiencies often lead to workers removing their respirators periodically, further reducing the efficacy of the respirator. in addition, respirators only protect workers against harmful substances entering the body through the respiratory system, whereas pollutants frequently also enter the body through the skin. respirators thus cannot be used as substitutes for other measures that reduce the impact of air pollution on workers. however, if the respiratory system is the main way that harmful substances enter the body, and if other means of protection do not reduce the impact to an acceptable value, respirators may be a useful supplement. to maximize effectiveness, the type of respirator should be selected for the specific situation, masks should be chosen for employees personally, and workers should be trained to use the respirator effectively.  reduction in permissible exposure limits  legislation in industrialized countries establishes limitations on the use of all types of respirators, taking into account the results of field trials of efficacy. the permissible exposure limit [pel] for several types of respirators was reduced. for example, for negative pressure air-purifying respirators with full face mask and high-efficiency filters, the limits were reduced from 500 pel to 50 pel (usa), and from 900 oel to 40 oel (uk); for powered air-purifying respirators with a loose-fitting facepiece (hood or helmet), limits were reduced from 1000 pel to 25 pel (usa); for powered air-purifying respirators with half mask, limits were reduced from 500 pel to 50 pel (usa); for supplied air respirators with full face mask and continuous air supply mode, limits were reduced from 100 oel to 40 oel (uk); for self-contained breathing apparatus respirators with air supply on demand, limits were reduced from 100 pel to 50 pel (usa). filtering facepieces and negative pressure half-mask respirators were limited to 10 pel in the usa.  the national institute for occupational safety and health of the usa now requires the manufacturers of high-performance rpe to perform testing at representative workplaces as a requirement for certification.  see also   respirator assigned protection factors  respirator fit test  references  respirators
gavrilo i rajic (died 1659) was archbishop of pec and serbian patriarch between  1648 and 1655. he was murdered by turks and therefore celebrated by eastern orthodox church as hieromartyr. his feast day is celebrated on december 13.  metropolitan gavrilo was born around 1605-1610 in the region of stari vlah into a noble rajic family. he entered into the church service and became metropolitan of smederevo. in 1643, he was elected metropolitan of raska.  around 1644, he rebuilt the monastery of the holy archangels in the kovilje mountains. after the death of serbian patriarch pajsije on november 3/13 1647, gavrilo was elected new patriarch in 1648.  patriarch in 1653, he decided to travel to russia to ask for material support for serbian patriarchate of pec. after meeting with metropolitan arsenije of herzegovina on christmas eve, he went first to wallachia and arrived in trgoviste where he tried to reconcile the wallachian prince matei basarab with the cossack hetman bohdan khmelnytsky. from there, patriarch gavrilo traveled to russia in 1654, taking with him two books for printing: lives of serbian emperors and patriarchs and typikon against latin heresy of saint nil kabasilas.  he was welcomed by russian patriarch nikon and russian tsar michael romanov. he also participated in the famous moscow synod in 1658 which approved nikon's reforms. since he decided to stay in russia, he wrote to serbian metropolitans to elect a new patriarch.  soon after, he changed his mind and left russia arriving back to ottoman empire in 1659. upon return, he was accused by the turks of being responsible for the russo-turkish war. he was also accused of attempting to convert some turks to christianity. brought before the tribunal, he was ordered to embrace islam. after gavrilo refused, he was sentenced to death. he was executed in bursa on july 18, 1659.  presbyter pavle took his remains and buried them.  he was entered on the list of serbian saints.  see also  list of serbian saints  references  sources                olga zirojevic, srbija pod turskom vlascu 1459-1804, belgrade 2007  external links  official site of the serbian orthodox church: serbian archbishops and patriarchs  gavrilo i 1659 deaths 17th-century serbian people serbian saints of the eastern orthodox church persecution of christians in the ottoman empire persecution of eastern orthodox christians
her majesty's principal secretary of state for exiting the european union or, informally, brexit secretary, was a secretary of state in the government of the united kingdom, responsible for the business of the department for exiting the european union, as well as for the uk's withdrawal from the european union (eu), informally referred to as "brexit". the secretary of state oversaw brexit negotiations following a 2016 referendum, in which a majority voted in favour of exiting the eu. the officeholder was a member of the cabinet.  the position was created on 13 july 2016, at the outset of the premiership of theresa may. the office was abolished on 31 january 2020, as the united kingdom left the european union.  the minister of state for exiting the european union deputised for the secretary of state. the corresponding shadow minister was the shadow secretary of state for exiting the european union. the secretary of state was also scrutinised by the exiting the european union select committee.  this page also includes the portfolios of chief negotiator for exiting the european union and parliamentary under-secretary of state for exiting the european union.  history may reportedly ordered civil servants to find a building to house a new department for exiting the european union, to be headed by the secretary of state. the headquarters of the department of energy and climate change (decc) at whitehall place, which was to be vacated once the decc was merged into the newly created department for business, energy and industrial strategy, was viewed as a potential site for the department. the department later occupied 9 downing street.  the inaugural holder was david davis mp, a longtime eurosceptic who campaigned for the uk to leave the eu. davis is a former chairman of the conservative party who served  in the government of john major as minister of state for europe (1994-97) and in the shadow cabinet of david cameron as shadow home secretary.  davis resigned on 8 july 2018 shortly before midnight; dominic raab was appointed on 9 july as his replacement and resigned on 15 november 2018. steve barclay, who had been serving as minister of state for health, was selected as raab's successor on 16 november 2018.  list of secretaries of state for exiting the european union (brexit secretaries)  colour key (for political parties):  list of chief negotiators for exiting the european union colour key (for political parties):  list of ministers of state for exiting the european union  list of parliamentary under-secretaries of state for exiting the european union colour key (for political parties):  see also
minister of state for europe  shadow secretary of state for exiting the european union  cabinet secretary for government business and constitutional relations  references  external links  davis' resignation letter and may's reply in full, bbc news, 9 july 2018  department for exiting the european union  2016 establishments in the united kingdom 2020 disestablishments in the united kingdom brexit consequences of the 2016 united kingdom european union membership referendum lists of government ministers of the united kingdom ministerial offices in the united kingdom ministers and ministries responsible for european affairs  united kingdom and the european union defunct ministerial offices in the united kingdom
abingdon school boat club is the rowing club for abingdon school. the club has a strong tradition of providing rowers for the oxford university boat club, cambridge university boat club and international teams.  history the boat club has a long history with the first documentary evidence of rowing as a school activity in 1830. roysse's school rowing club (1840) became abingdon school boat club.  originally the club rowed in the abingdon town regatta before creating the school regatta in the 1890s following the discontinuation of the former. the principal event was the race between the first four and an old abingdonians (oas) crew. although the school had raced informally against radley college the first official race with another school was on 5 july 1902 when the first four competed against st. mark's school of windsor. in 1936 the school entered the marlow regatta for the first time and won their first event at the wallingford regatta in 1952.  in 1953 a new boathouse was built before a maiden win at the marlow regatta in 1955 and a first appearance at the henley royal regatta in 1960. in 1982 the club won 25 trophies followed by 31 in 1984 and in 1985 was listed as the most successful school rowing club in the country. in 1991 both the coxed fours and coxless fours became national champions with the coxed four later representing england. since 1991 abingdon school has been represented at english or british junior international level every season.  the 1st viii won the "triple" in 2002 and again in 2012: the schools' head of the river race, the queen mother's cup at the national schools' regatta and the princess elizabeth challenge cup at henley royal regatta. 2006's j14's a and b squads both became national school champions, whilst the 2007 j16's won the junior inter-regionals 8+ event, and a j16 4+ crew went to form half the winning gb 8+ in the gb-france match. in 2009 the 1st viii reached the final of the henley royal regatta before losing to a "triple" winning eton college crew.   in 2011 the 1st viii achieved victory again at the schools head of the river. they backed this up by winning the princess elizabeth cup at henley royal regatta, on the way setting a new record of 6:19 for the course in the semi-final against radley college, beating the long-standing record set by pangbourne college in 1992 of 6:22. the 1st viii won the princess elizabeth cup in 2012 and 2013 too, setting a new course record in the 2013 final of
6:17.  the last time a school won the cup for three consecutive years was bedford school in 1948.   with four henley royal regatta wins to its name, the school has become one of the most successful rowing schools in the uk.  in 2016 and 2017 the school has provided a total of six members for the university boat race, (four for oxford and two for cambridge).  notable rowers  junior internationals below is a list of junior internationals capped by either great britain at the coupe de la jeunesse or england.  coaches the school has an impressive history of top-level coaches that have instrumented the continued success of the boat club and its athletes, to the tune of multiple national and henley royal regatta titles, including "the triple" in 2002 and 2012 - a prestigious achievement which comprises winning the schools' head of the river race, championship eights at the national schools' regatta and finally the princess elizabeth challenge cup at henley royal regatta, all in the same year.  key  see also  list of old abingdonians  references  1830 establishments in england sports clubs established in 1830 rowing clubs in england   rowing clubs of the river thames buildings and structures on the river thames rowing clubs in oxfordshire scholastic rowing in the united kingdom
jacopo bedi, also known by giacomo di bedo di benedetto (active 1432 - 1458) was an italian painter of the quattrocento.  biography he was born in gubbio, and active there, where he was felt to be a pupil of ottaviano nelli. there is one signed work by him, frescoes depicting the life of st sebastian for the panfili chapel in the cemetery of san secondo in gubbio from 1458.  references  15th-century italian painters quattrocento painters italian male painters umbrian painters year of birth unknown year of death unknown people from gubbio year of birth uncertain
steyer opera house is a historic building located in decorah, iowa, united states.  the three-story, brick commercial block was designed by f.g. brant of dubuque.  its original owner and namesake was joseph steyer, who emigrated from luxembourg in 1852 and settled in decorah in 1865.  the building was built in 1870 and an additional three bays were added to the east side in 1875.  the first floor houses retail space, the second floor historically housed apartments, and the auditorium is on the third floor.  the walls and ceiling are covered with tin that is pressed in a variety of decorative patterns.  doorways flank the proscenium.  they are framed by paneled pilasters and capped with a broad architrave.  the balcony that rings the main floor on three sides of the auditorium was part of the 1875 renovation of the building. it is now part of the neighboring hotel winneshiek. the building was individually listed on the national register of historic places in 1980. in 2017 it was included as a contributing property in the decorah commercial historic district.  references   commercial buildings completed in 1870 decorah, iowa commercial buildings on the national register of historic places in iowa theatres on the national register of historic places in iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa buildings and structures in winneshiek county, iowa opera houses on the national register of historic places in iowa individually listed contributing properties to historic districts on the national register in iowa
pentagonaster is a genus of sea stars in the family goniasteridae.  species list many species previously in the genus have been assigned to other genera in the subfamily, some also have been absorbed into the following species:  references  goniasteridae
hardo sheikh is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 6 km away from postal head office nurmahal, 8.7 km from nakodar, 28 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 137 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed primary school (pri hardo sheikh). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1948.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , hardo sheikh has a total number of 212 houses and population of 1095 of which include 558 males and 537 females. literacy rate of hardo sheikh is 79.84%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 104 which is 9.50% of total population of hardo sheikh, and child sex ratio is approximately 1419 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 76.89% of total population in hardo sheikh. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 468 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of hardo sheikh which includes 330 males and 138 females. according to census survey report 2011, 65.60% workers describe their work as main work and 34.40% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 27 km away from the village. the village is 54.4 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 125 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
"circles" is a song recorded by american actress and country music artist jana kramer for her second studio album, thirty one (2015). it was written by alyssa bonagura, brandon hood, and jeffrey steele. "circles" was first released to digital retailers in september 2015 as the first promotional single from the album. the song was serviced to american country radio through elektra records nashville and warner music nashville on july 18, 2016 as the record's fourth official single.  upon release, the song has been met with mostly positive reviews, but has performed only modestly well on the charts. "circles" peaked at no. 55 on the billboard country airplay chart, and at no. 47 on the magazine's hot country songs chart.  content "circles" is a mid-tempo ballad that describes an unbreakable bond of love. kramer described the track as a "really cool, dark and edgy love song," in an interview with taste of country. the song's lyrics speak of "piecing together a broken heart," and refer to the narrator's love as "the only part of [her] unbroken." elias leight of billboard described the song as a sonic standout on the album, writing, "'circles' ... forgoes guitar squalls in favor of a dark bass groove. at times, it sounds like something that might have been pulled from an early '80s record." the song was written by alyssa bonagura, brandon hood, and jeffrey steele and produced by scott hendricks.  reception  critical in a review of thirty one, chuck dauphin on sounds like nashville praised the song as an album highlight. "but, it's the ballads that really seem to soar here the most," writes dauphin, "ranging from the heartbreak of 'last song' to the hopeful romantic feel of 'circles.'"  commercial "circles" debuted at number 60 on the billboard country airplay chart dated october 1, 2016. it fell off the chart the following week but re-entered at 58 on the chart dated october 29, 2016. the song rose to 55 on the chart dated december 24, 2016 and has since peaked at this rank. "circles" entered the hot country songs chart at number 47 on the chart dated december 10, 2016. the song has sold 43,000 copies in the us as of november 2016.  music video an accompanying music video was directed by sean hagwell and premiered september 3, 2016. shot entirely in black and white, the video features
different angles of kramer performing the song on a stage illuminated by spotlights. the video has been praised for its simple, "elegant" visual treatment.  charts  release history  references  2015 songs 2016 singles jana kramer songs elektra records singles warner music group singles songs written by jeffrey steele song recordings produced by scott hendricks country ballads pop ballads songs written by alyssa bonagura
fattu chak  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of fattu chak. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, fattu chak has a total number of 171 houses and population of 783 of which include 407 males and 376 females. literacy rate of fattu chak is 74.44%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 71 which is  9.07% of total population of fattu chak, and child sex ratio is approximately  821, lower than state average of 846.  as per census 2011, 248 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of fattu chak which includes 219 males and 29 females. according to census survey report 2011, 96.37% workers describe their work as main work and 3.63% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 53.51% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  see also  list of villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
john j. uicker is a professor emeritus of mechanical engineering at the university of wisconsin-madison, wisconsin.  education uicker received his bme degree from the university of detroit, and his ms and phd degrees in mechanical engineering from northwestern university. he joined the university of wisconsin faculty in 1967, where he served until his retirement in 2007.  as an asee resident fellow, uicker spent 1972-73 at ford motor company. he was also awarded a fulbirus-hayes senior lectureship and became a visiting professor at cranfield institute of technology in cranfield, england, in 1978-79.  after graduate study, he became the pioneering researcher on transformation matrix methods of linkage analysis, and was the first to advise on their use in the dynamics of mechanical systems.  career throughout his career, his teaching and research focused on solid geometric modeling and the modeling of mechanical motion, and their application to computer-aided design and manufacturing, including kinematics, dynamics, and simulation of articulated rigid-body mechanical systems. he founded the uw computer aided engineering center and served as its director for its initial 10 years of operation. he has served on several national committees of the american society of mechanical engineers (asme] and the society of automotive engineers  (sae), and he received the asme mechanisms committee award in 2004 and the asme fellow award in 2007. he is a founding member of the u.s. council of the theory of mechanism and machine science and of the internal federation of mechanism and machine science (iftomm) award.  he served for several years as editor-in-chief of the mechanism and machine theory journal of the federation and is now editor emeritus. he is a registered mechanical engineer in wisconsin and has served for many years as an active consultant to industry. uicker is a fellow of the american society of mechanical engineers and has been awarded the mechanisms and robotics committee award for his many years of service on the committee.  he has served on the computational geometry committee and the design automation committee.  uicker and his students have developed geometric modeling and computer-aided design techniques for the simulation of solidification in metal castings, which made manufacturing more predictable and cost-effective. his research program has developed a computer software system called the integrated mechanisms program (imp) for the kinematic, static, and dynamic simulation of rigid body mechanical systems such as robots and automotive suspensions.  uicker coined out the 4 x 4 matrix method for kinematic analysis of linkages in 1964.
he proposed the sheth-uicker notation for kinematic analysis mechanical linkages in 1971.  works  john j. uicker, bahram ravani, pradip n. sheth. matrix methods in design analysis of mechanisms and multi-body systems. cambridge university press, 2013.  john joseph uicker, g. r. pennock, joseph edward shigley. theory of machines and mechanisms. 5th ed. new york: oxford university press, 2016.  references  external links   matrix methods in the design analysis of mechanisms and multibody systems  theory of machines and mechanisms  living people university of detroit mercy alumni northwestern university alumni university of wisconsin-madison faculty year of birth missing (living people)
the narcosobrinos affair (spanish for drug-nephews) is the situation of events that surrounded two nephews of venezuelan president nicolas maduro and his wife cilia flores who were arrested for narcotics trafficking. the nephews, efrain antonio campo flores and francisco flores de freitas, were arrested on 10 november 2015 by the united states drug enforcement administration in port-au-prince, haiti after attempting to transport 800 kilograms of cocaine into the united states. a year later on 18 november 2016, the two nephews were found guilty, with the cash allegedly destined to "help their family stay in power". on 14 december 2017, the two were sentenced to 18 years of imprisonment.  etymology the word narcosobrinos is the word narco, meaning "drug dealer", followed by sobrinos, which translates to "nephews". its translation could therefore be "drug dealer nephews". the term derived from the media which focused on the relation of drug dealing allegations to president maduro's nephews.  background  according to jackson diehl, deputy editorial page editor of the washington post, the bolivarian government of venezuela shelters "one of the world's biggest drug cartels". there have been allegations of former president hugo chavez being involved with drug trafficking. in may 2015, the wall street journal reported from united states officials that drug trafficking in venezuela increased significantly with colombian drug traffickers moving from colombia to venezuela due to pressure from law enforcement. one united states department of justice official described the higher ranks of the venezuelan government and military as "a criminal organization", with high ranking venezuelan officials being accused of drug trafficking. those involved with investigations stated that venezuelan government defectors and former traffickers had given information to investigators and that details of those involved in government drug trafficking were increasing. anti-drug authorities have also accused some venezuelan officials of working with mexican drug cartels.  at a presentation at the xxxii international conference on drugs in 2015, commander of the united states southern command general john kelly stated that though relations with other latin american nations countering drug trafficking has been good, venezuela was not as cooperative and that "there's a lot of cocaine leaving venezuela to the world market". general kelly also stated that almost all shipments of cocaine using aircraft comes out of venezuela and that since 2013 to early-2014, the route of drug trafficking aircraft has changed from heading to central america to primarily traveling through caribbean islands. the narcosobrinos incident happened at a time when multiple high-ranking members of the venezuelan government were being investigated for their involvement of drug trafficking, including
walter jacobo gavidia, cilia flores' son who is a caracas judge, former national assembly president diosdado cabello, and governor of aragua state tarek el aissami.  series of events  preparation and dea monitoring  campo flores and flores de freitas were allegedly involved in illicit activities such as drug trafficking and possibly financially assisted president maduro's presidential campaign in the 2013 venezuelan presidential election and potentially for the 2015 venezuelan parliamentary elections. one informant stated that the two would often fly out of terminal 4 of simon bolivar airport, a terminal reserved for the president.  the nephews and dea informants met on multiple occasions in haiti, honduras and venezuela while every meeting "produced an audio recording plus three to seven videos". campo and flores planned to ship cocaine supplied by the revolutionary armed forces of colombia (farc) to the united states and sought for assistance with their plans.  on 3 october 2015, a confidential dea informant known as cw-1 and his employee "el flaco" were contacted by a venezuelan contact known as "hamudi" who introduced campo and flores to the informant. the next day on 4 october 2015,  the two flew from venezuela to san pedro sula, honduras, with  nephews stating that they would use their connections to send narcotics on legal flights from caracas, venezuela to roatan, honduras, knowing that their relation to the president "would open doors for the smuggling operation".  in late-october, cs-1, who presented himself as a mexican drug boss and cs-2, presenting himself as an associate of cs-1, flew to caracas, venezuela to meet with the nephews. around 23 october 2015, cs-1 and cs-2 met with the nephews, with campo stating that he was "the one in charge" and that "we're at war with the united states ... with colombia ... with the opposition". campo also reassured the two informants that the cocaine shipments would not be tracked by law enforcement because the plane would "depart from here as if ... some from our family were on the plane". days later on 26 october 2015, campo stated that the two were to ship cocaine and were seeking to raise about $20 million, explaining that cw-1 would be paid about $900,000 to receive the cocaine in honduras. the next day on 27 october 2015, campo and flores presented a kilogram of cocaine to cs-1 and cs-2 to show its purity, with the informants believing that the purity was between 95%-97%. on 5 november 2015, informant cs-3 met
with co-defendant roberto de jesus soto garcia to plan on how to receive the cocaine in honduras. soto explained the schedule at the juan manuel galvez international airport in roatan, honduras and stated that the load of cocaine would then be "arranged with all of those inside of the airport".  arrests  campo flores and flores de freites  on 10 november 2015, campo flores and flores de freites were flown into port-au-prince, haiti by two venezuelan military personnel accompanied by two presidential honor guards carrying more than 800 kilograms of cocaine destined for new york city. the jet was a cessna citation 500 that belonged to lebanese venezuelan businessmen majed and khaled khalil majzoun, who were linked to old projects of the hugo chavez government and close to high ranking venezuelan politician diosdado cabello. cs-1 met with the nephews at a restaurant of a hotel near toussaint louverture international airport and was supposed to pay them $5 million for the cocaine. cs-1 then left into the bathroom and the haitian brigade de lutte contre le trafic de stupefiants (blts) and dea agents raided the restaurant after identifying themselves, apprehending the nephews. the blts personnel wore fatigues and vests that read "police" so they would be able to be identified as well. campos and flores were later turned over to the dea and read their miranda rights after boarding the dea plane, being flown directly to westchester county airport in white plains, new york in order to face an immediate trial.  the two were interviewed separately on the dea plane. campo stated on the dea plane that he was the adopted step son of president maduro and that he grew up in the maduro household while being raised by flores. he was also shown a picture of a man with a kilo package of cocaine replying "that's me" and when asked what was in the package he said "you know what it is". the two men possessed venezuelan diplomatic passports but did not have diplomatic immunity according to former head of dea international operations michael vigil. a later raid of efrain antonio campo flores' "casa de campo" mansion and yacht in the dominican republic revealed an additional 280 lbs of cocaine and 22 lbs of heroin, with 176 lbs of the drugs found in the home while the remainder was discovered in his yacht.  due to the extradition process, new york courts could not apprehend those who assisted the nephews on their way to haiti, though a pilot was later arrested. it was also stated by those close to the case that there are more sealed
warrants linked to the incident.  roberto de jesus soto garcia on 28 october 2016, a honduran man, roberto de jesus soto garcia, was arrested in honduras and extradited to the united states. according to authorities, soto garcia was responsible for transporting drug shipments from juan manuel galvez international airport. soto garcia allegedly provided information about the port and was supposed to take the drugs from the nephews into the united states.  aircraft pilot in june 2016, yazenky antonio lamas rondon, the pilot of the plane which transported the cocaine and the two nephews, was arrested at the el dorado international airport in bogota, colombia after the dea and interpol put out a warrant for his arrest. according to the dea, lamas rondon piloted over 100 flights over the span of a decade from venezuela which trafficked various drugs throughout latin america. he is also believed to be involved with the cartel of the suns, a group of corrupt drug trafficking venezuelan officials.  trial  the nephews originally plead not guilty to the charges of conspiring to transport cocaine into the united states, with the two facing up to life in prison. in trial papers filed on 1 july 2016, the nephews stated that they were not informed of their rights when detained, attempting to suppress their statements that they made to dea agents after their arrest. however, on 22 july 2016, their statements made to dea agents were filed as exhibit by the united states attorney office in manhattan, with the two men confessing to their conspiracy to traffic cocaine into the united states that was supposed to be supplied by the colombian guerilla group, the revolutionary armed forces of colombia (farc). the pair hoped to make $20 million through multiple drug shipments. a confidential informant posing as a leader of the sinaloa cartel confessions testified that efrain campo planned to finance cilia flores' congressional campaign.  on 18 november 2016, the jury reached a verdict finding the two nephews guilty of attempting to traffic drugs into the united states.  murdered informants  two informants that allegedly observed the nephews were murdered shortly before and after their arrest, raising concerns that the drug trafficking operation was larger that suspected. two weeks before the nephews were arrested, the venezuelan known as "hamudi" who introduced the nephews to cw-1 was murdered by farc suppliers. weeks after the arrests in december 2015, cw-1 was murdered as well.  it is thought to be that the nephews were not "the brains" of the trafficking attempt but were working under the cartel of the suns. the murdering of informants was a possible way to cover possible involvement by venezuelan officials. in
the united states, the punishment for killing a witness is a federal offense punishable by up to life in prison or execution.  media coverage international media focused on the events surrounding the nephews and their trial while venezuelan media was largely censored from revealing that the two were related to the president maduro and his wife. venezuelan media organizations like globovision and ultimas noticias only mentioned that "two venezuelans" were charged with drug trafficking without showing any relation to the president's family, raising accusations of self-censorship. social media, which is popular in venezuela, was used by journalists as a way to allow venezuelans to bypass censorship and provide updates about the situation surrounding the president's nephews.  reactions  academics and scholars according to drug trafficking expert, bruce bagley of the university of miami, "the nephews are just the tip of the iceberg ... corruption is rampant in power circles in venezuela. this case suggests a culture that drug trafficking is routine and daily fare for someone with contacts in the presidential palace", with bagley further stating that "with their connections, they felt they would skate through ... they made a mistake because when the dea heard their names they targeted them."  government of venezuela after maduro's nephews were apprehended by the dea for the illegal distribution of cocaine on 10 november 2015, maduro posted a statement on twitter criticizing "attacks and imperialist ambushes" which was viewed by many media outlets as being directed towards the united states. president maduro's wife, cilia flores, accused the united states of kidnapping her nephews and said that she had proof that they were kidnapped by the dea. diosdado cabello, a senior official in maduro's government who has been accused of drug trafficking himself, was also quoted as saying the arrests were a "kidnapping" by the united states.  roberto de jesus soto garcia, a honduran man who provided assistance to the smugglers, has been linked to venezuela's vice president tareck el aissami.  following the arrest of the nephews, associated press correspondent hannah dreier was detained by sebin agents. she was then interrogated, being threatened with being beheaded in a way like isil did to james foley, saying they would release her for a kiss. they later stated that they wanted to exchange dreier for president maduro's nephews.  references  external links  illegal drug trade in venezuela drug policy of the united states illegal drug trade in the united states  corruption in venezuela november 2015 events in north america 2015 in haiti 2015 in venezuela venezuelan people imprisoned abroad political scandals in venezuela crisis in venezuela united states
-venezuela relations haiti-venezuela relations haiti-united states relations
eine romantische suite (a romantic suite), op. 125, is a suite for orchestra by max reger, based on poems by joseph von eichendorff. reger described this suite, composed and first performed in 1912, and the vier tondichtungen nach a. bocklin, op. 128, as "ausflug in das gebiet der programmusik" (excursion in the realm of program music).  history  reger composed the suite in meiningen during may and june 1912. he was director of music of the hofkapelle there from 1911 to 1914, and wrote most of his compositions for orchestra during this time.  he dedicated the work to hugo gruters. during composition time, reger already offered the premiere to ernst von schuch, who had successfully conducted the premiere of der rosenkavalier in 1911, and who had a passion for contemporary music. schuch programmed works by regers regularly from 1906 for the konigliche musikalische kapelle (royal chapel) in dresden, and had engaged reger as the pianist for bach's brandenburg concerto no. 5 in 1911. reger dedicated his lustspiel-ouverture, op. 120, to the conductor in return.  the score and parts of eine romantische suite were published by bote & bock in september 1912. the suite was first performed on 11 october 1912 in the first symphony concert of the royal chapel that season, conducted by ernst von schuch.  arnold schonberg wrote in 1920 an arrangement of the suite for chamber ensemble. reger's suite was published as part of his complete works in volume 4, orchestral works iv (samtliche werke, band 4: orchesterwerke iv) by breitkopf & hartel in wiesbaden in 1962.  structure and scoring  the suite is structured in three movements, with two slow movements framing a vivid scherzo.  notturno (molto sostenuto)  scherzo (vivace)  finale (molto sostenuto)  the three movements correspond to three poems by joseph von eichendorff, "nachtzauber" (night magic), "elfe" (fairy) and "adler" (eagle). while reger originally wanted to name the movements as the poems, he thought about similar titles ("mondnacht", "elfentanz" and "helios") but finally chose neutral titles.  reger scored the work for a symphonic orchestra of three flutes, two oboes, cor anglais, two clarinets, two
bassoons, three trumpets, four horns, three trombones, tuba, harp, three timpani, cymbal and strings.  references  bibliography  external links     suites (music) compositions by max reger adaptations of works by joseph von eichendorff
the developing economies is a quarterly peer-reviewed academic journal covering developing countries' social science by applying empirical and comparative studies. it is also the official journal of the institute of developing economies. the journal was published semi-annually from 1963 to 1967.  abstracting and indexing  the developing economies is abstracted and indexed by the following services: cab direct  current contents/social & behavioral sciences geobase scopus social sciences citation index  according to the journal citation reports, the journal has a 2015 impact factor of 0.517, ranking it 47th out of 55 journals in the category "planning & development" and 250th out of 344 journals in the category "economics".  see also the world economy (journal)  references  wiley-blackwell academic journals economics journals english-language journals publications established in 1963 quarterly journals development economics development studies journals
peter brendan bellew is an irish businessman who joined low-cost carrier ryanair as chief operating officer (coo) since 2017. he is a veteran in the tourism and aviation industry with over 30 years of experience in related fields, including his prior stint as group managing director and chief executive officer of malaysia airlines. in july 2019, bellew announced that he would be leaving ryanair at the end of the year., controversially joining rival airline, easyjet.  early life  originally from bettystown, ireland, he was schooled at cbs st marys drogheda before attending c.b.c. monkstown in dublin. bellew graduated with a bachelor of business studies and ma in economics from trinity college dublin in 1987. while at trinity, he wrote for the piranha, the college's satirical magazine.  early career in 1987, he joined cie tours, an irish coach tour operator, as a manager in charge of its london operations. he subsequently founded drive ireland in 1989, irish cottage club in 1998, and also ventured into online travel management with vbnets / wapprofit in 2001.  aviation career  ireland (1993-2015)  bellew's first venture into the aviation industry in a management capacity was in 1993 with kerry airport, killarney, ireland. under his tenure as director and general manager, he was credited with being able to substantially increase passenger volume from 6,000 to more than 400,000.  in 2006, bellew joined irish low-cost airline ryanair as deputy director of flight operations, and held various capacities throughout his career there, including head of sales and marketing, director of flight operations, as well as director of training and recruitment.  malaysia airlines (2015-2017)  on 1 september 2015, bellew joined malaysian flag carrier malaysia airlines from ryanair as chief operations officer, as part of the airline's ongoing restructuring program amid huge financial losses, compounded by the twin major aviation disasters of malaysia airlines flight 370 and malaysia airlines flight 17 in 2014. under his tenure, he oversaw parts of the restructuring program led by former aer lingus chief christoph mueller that saw a 6,000-job cut by the airline.  on 1 july 2016, bellew officially took over as chief executive officer from mueller, who resigned from the company less than a year into his contract, citing changing personal circumstances. while it is said that bellew's appointment ensured continuity to mueller's unfinished work, it stirred further controversy within malaysia, as some parties were uncomfortable with the appointment of
another foreigner to head the national flag carrier. he was the third ceo of the airline in two years, and only the second ever foreign ceo after mueller.  ryanair (2017-2019)  on 17 october 2017, it was announced that bellew would return to ryanair as chief operations officer, replacing michael hickey, who resigned following a rostering mishap. bellew's decision to return to his old role was described as a form of "national service" for "ireland's greatest company" by bellew, with him being tasked chiefly with resolving the pilot's dispute. it had been speculated in ireland and internationally that his return to ryanair made him the next in line to succeed michael o'leary when he retires. after helping to guide the low-cost carrier through crucial pay talks with trade unions, bellew announced in july 2019 that he would leave the airline at the end of the year.  easyjet (2019-present)   in july 2019 it was reported that bellew would leave ryanair to join easyjet by the end of 2019.  on 6 august 2019 ryanair responded to this announcement by filing a lawsuit against bellew.  on 21 march 2020 easyjet apologised to its staff following the release of a "staff motivation" video by bellew during the covid-19 pandemic. bellew had plagiarised a speech made by irish taoiseach, leo varadkar. an easyjet pilot was quoted as stating "pilots at easyjet were already appalled at peter's conduct this week, "i think this clearly plagiarised speech cements his reputation as being completely untrustworthy". bellew apologised to the staff and the taoiseach and stated he would write all of his own speeches in future.   in july 2020, the british airline pilots' association (balpa) launched a vote of no confidence against mr bellew, citing his poor handling of the coronavirus pandemic, bypassing pilot unions and attempting to make 727 uk pilot redundancies with no business justification as reasons for the vote, which is due on friday 17 july.  see also   trinity college dublin people  references   alumni of trinity college dublin living people chief operating officers irish airline chief executives year of birth missing (living people) people educated at c.b.c. monkstown
lin xiyu (林希妤) (born 25 february 1996), also known as xi yu lin, is a chinese professional golfer.  lin turned professional in 2011 and began playing on the china lpga tour. she has won seven times on the clpga. she began playing on the ladies european tour in 2013 and has two wins on the tour the sanya ladies open in 2014 and 2015. she began playing on the lpga tour in 2014 with a best finish of t-5 at the 2015 blue bay lpga.  lin has made multiple holes-in-one on the lpga tour.  lin competed at the 2016 summer olympics, finishing 38th.  professional wins  ladies european tour wins 2014 sanya ladies open^ 2015 sanya ladies open^  china lpga tour wins 2012 (2) tian jing challenge, srixon xxio ladies open 2013 (1) sanya's hills ladies classic 2014 (2) sanya's hills ladies classic, sanya ladies open^ 2015 (1) sanya ladies open^ 2019 (1) macalline women's china open  ^ co-sanctioned by ladies european tour, ladies asian golf tour and china lpga tour.  alpg tour wins 2018 alpg ballarat icons pro am  team appearances professional international crown (representing china): 2016  references  external links  chinese female golfers lpga tour golfers ladies european tour golfers olympic golfers of china golfers at the 2016 summer olympics golfers at the 2020 summer olympics asian games medalists in golf asian games silver medalists for china golfers at the 2010 asian games medalists at the 2010 asian games sportspeople from guangzhou 1996 births living people
vilas ghogre (1 june 1947 - 15 july 1997) was a prominent dalit activist, poet, and artist from bombay who committed suicide in protest against the 1997 ramabai killings in which 10 dalits were killed by maharashtra state reserve police force and 26 were injured.  he is featured prominently in anand patwardhan's documentaries bombay our city (1985) jai bhim comrade (2011) .  references   dalit writers marathi-language poets dalit leaders 1947 births 1997 deaths activists from maharashtra poets from maharashtra 20th-century indian poets
a tea garden is a garden associated with the drinking of tea.  tea garden may also refer to:  tea plantation, a place where tea bushes are cultivated  tea gardens, new south wales, a locality in nsw, australia  teagarden, a surname  see also  japanese tea garden (disambiguation)
the heart of the greek (greek: romeiki kardia) is a 1953 greek comedy film directed by iason novak and starring mimis fotopoulos, giorgos vlahopoulos and soula dimitriou.  cast  mimis fotopoulos   giorgos vlahopoulos  soula dimitriou   dimitris dounakis   mary egipidou   lola filippidou   sotiria iatridou   dimitris koukis   kostas oikonomidis   giorgos rois  external links    1953 films 1953 comedy films greek-language films greek films greek comedy films greek black-and-white films
department of overseas trade may refer to: department of overseas trade (australia), a government department that existed from 1972 to 1977 department of overseas trade (united kingdom), a government department that existed from 1918 to 1946
shelburn interurban depot-thi&e interurban depot is a historic interurban train station located at shelburn, sullivan county, indiana. it was built about 1911 and enlarged between 1916 and 1920.  it is a one-story, red brick and limestone building that housed passenger and freight rooms and a substation for the electrical system that powered the interurban cars.  it was used for its original purpose until the closure of the interurban line between terre haute, indiana and sullivan in may 1931.  in 2015, the town of shelburn completed a full restoration of the depot exterior. the work included structural repairs, roof replacement and reconstruction, masonry cleaning and restoration, window and door replacement, and the installation of a new electrical service. restoration work was completed by keymark (terre haute, in) to preservation plans provided by ratio architects (indianapolis, in).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2015.  the town completed the interior and exterior restoration and rehabilitation of the building in 2019 and is currently marketing the building for reuse as a restaurant and bar.  references  railway stations on the national register of historic places in indiana railway stations in the united states opened in 1911 national register of historic places in sullivan county, indiana transportation buildings and structures in sullivan county, indiana former railway stations in indiana
the 1983 oklahoma state cowboys football team represented oklahoma state university in the 1983 ncaa division i-a football season. this was the 83rd year of football at osu and the fifth under jimmy johnson. the cowboys played their home games at lewis field in stillwater, oklahoma. they finished the season 8-4, and 3-4 in the big eight conference. the cowboys were invited to the astro-bluebonnet bowl, where they defeated baylor, 24-14.  schedule  personnel  season summary  oklahoma  after the season  the 1984 nfl draft took place on may 1-2, 1984 at the omni park central hotel in new york city. the following oklahoma state players were selected during the draft.  references  oklahoma state oklahoma state cowboys football seasons bluebonnet bowl champion seasons oklahoma state cowboys football
kutbewal is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4 km away from postal head office in goraya, 14.2 km from nurmahal, 40.4 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 122 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , kutbewal has a total number of 159 houses and population of 792 of which include 405 males and 387 females. literacy rate of kutbewal is 79.94%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 74 which is 9.34% of total population of kutbewal, and child sex ratio is approximately 1056 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 88.13% of total population in kutbewal. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 237 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of kutbewal  which includes 221 males and 16 females. according to census survey report 2011, 100% workers describe their work as main work and 0% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 15 km away from the village. the village is 43.5 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 132 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
anna wessman (born 9 october 1989) is a swedish track and field athlete who competes in the javelin throw. she won the bronze medal at the 2009 european u23 championships.  her personal best in the event is 61.42 metres set at finnkampen in tampere in 2016.  international competitions  references  1989 births living people swedish female javelin throwers people from vaxjo competitors at the 2015 summer universiade
the 1968-69 houston mavericks season was the second and final season of the mavericks in the american basketball association. by this point, attendance were at all-time lows at home for the mavericks, who trudged to finish dead last in a much improved division, 18 games behind the 4th place dallas chaparrals. t.c. morrow announced to the league that he would not put any more money into the team midway through the year, and the league stepped in to make sure the team did not fold midway through, making trades and such. in january 1969, jim gardner agreed to buy the team for $650,000 to move them to north carolina, which would occur after the season. one bright spot was their performance on january 17, 1969, when the team made 36 of 36 free throws in a 130-118 victory over the new york nets. april 2, 1969 was the final game in houston, with a reported attendance of 89, though the mavericks beat the new york nets 149-132. the next night, in their final ever game (versus the dallas chaparrals), they lost 136-144. the team lived on in carolina, playing as a regional team. houston would not have a pro basketball team until 1971, with the houston rockets.  roster  34 art becker - small forward  25 spider bennett - point guard  33 larry bunce - center  14 don carlos - shooting guard  33 dick clark - shooting guard  25 rich dumas - guard  15 bill gaines - guard  24 tom hoover - center  24 tony jackson - small forward  20 stew johnson - power forward  52 tom kondla - center  21 steve kramer - shooting guard  35 leary lentz - small forward  31 guy manning - small forward  21 jerry pettway - shooting guard  15 willie porter - power forward  44 kendall rhine - center  12 willie somerset - point guard  32 keith swagerty - power forward  35 levern tart - shooting guard  22 bob verga - shooting guard  12 hank whitney - power forward  final standings  western division  c - aba champions  awards and honors 1969 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 28, 1969)  willie somerset  references   mavericks on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1968-689 regular season and playoff results  houston mavericks page  houston mavericks houston houston mavericks, 1968-69 houston mavericks, 1968-69
this is a list of members of the european parliament for the slovakia in the 2014 to 2019 session, ordered by name.  see 2014 european parliament election in slovakia for further information on these elections in slovakia.  list  this table can be sorted by name, party or party group: click the symbol at the top of the appropriate column.  references  2014 list slovakia
the first courtyard is one of four at prague castle, in prague, czech republic. wrestling titans is installed at the courtyard's entrance.  external links     prague castle
events from the year 1902 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas ii  events 1 july - the admiral makarov national university of shipbuilding opens in mykolayiv, ukraine, under the name of mykolayiv industrial technical school. july - grand duke peter nikolaevich of russia is created a knight of the order of the most holy annunciation by king victor emmanuel iii of italy, during the latter's visit to russia. 29 august - grand duchess elena vladimirovna of russia is married to her second cousin prince nicholas of greece and denmark. november - the periodical novy put is launched in saint petersburg by dmitry merezhkovsky and zinaida gippius.  december - the russian news agency tass begins life as the commercial telegraph agency (tta, torgovo-telegrafnoe agentstvo).  births 21 may - anatole litvak, filmmaker (died 1974) 11 october - yitzhak yitzhaky, slovenian-born israeli politician (died 1955  deaths 2 january - prince balakishi arablinski, azerbaijani general in the russian imperial army (born 1828) june - isaac andreyevich chatzkin, russian-jewish physician (born 1832)  references    years of the 20th century in the russian empire
yang hsiu-chen (born 27 may 1968) is a taiwanese former cyclist. she competed in two events at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  1968 births living people taiwanese female cyclists olympic cyclists of taiwan cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) cyclists at the 1994 asian games medalists at the 1994 asian games asian games bronze medalists for chinese taipei asian games medalists in cycling
the 2016-17 college of charleston cougars men's basketball team represented the college of charleston during the 2015-16 ncaa division i men's basketball season. the cougars were led by third-year head coach earl grant and played their home games at the td arena as members of the colonial athletic association. they finished the season 25-10, 14-4 in caa play to finish in second place. they defeated james madison and towson to advance to the championship game of the caa tournament where they lost to unc wilmington. they received an invitation to the national invitation tournament where they lost in the first round to colorado state.  previous season the cougars finished the 2015-16 season 17-14, 8-10 in caa play to finish in seventh place. they advanced to the quarterfinals of the caa tournament where they lost to unc wilmington.  departures  recruiting  roster  schedule and results  |- !colspan=9 style=| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style=| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| caa regular season  |- !colspan=9 style=| caa tournament  |- !colspan=9 style=| nit  references   college of charleston cougars men's basketball seasons college of charleston college of charleston charleston charleston
the terni-sulmona railway is a regional railway line in central italy, managed by rete ferroviaria italiana. it links three regions, umbria, lazio and abruzzo, and three provincial capitals: terni, rieti and l'aquila. together with the sulmona-isernia railway it forms a north-south corridor through the apennines in central italy. its route is the result of two unfinished railways that had to meet in rieti: the pescara-l'aquila-rome line, and the terni-avezzano-roccasecca line.  history   after the italian unification and the widespread start of railway constructions, many talks started about how to link the abruzzo region to its new capital, rome. it was decided that the railway would start from pescara, reach sulmona and l'aquila, then cross the apennine mountains at the sella di corno pass and then reach rieti, where the line had to continue towards rome. rieti also should have been the starting point of a branch to avezzano, that - together with the avezzano-roccasecca railway - would have linked abruzzo with the railway to naples, which was abruzzo's capital under the kingdom of two sicilies.  however the unsolved roman question threatened to interrupt railway service between the then-capital florence and the then-biggest city naples, and to protect its military and strategic interests the italian government urged the construction of an alternative route from florence to naples that didn't enter the papal states, which could be created with a new railway between terni and roccasecca, passing through rieti and avezzano. so it was decided that the pescara-rieti line should have continued towards terni, and not towards rome as per initial project.  construction was started in 1871 by societa per le strade ferrate meridionali in pescara; by 1873 the line was completed to sulmona and by 1875 it was completed to l'aquila. then the work stopped because of the building company's perplexity: even if it was possible to reach rome from terni, via the ancona-orte railway, strade ferrate meridionali thought that a railway from terni to rieti would be less useful for the needs of the company and of abruzzese people than a railway from rome to rieti.  an agreement was reached in 1879, when public works ministry baccarini granted strade ferrate meridionali to build another railway to satisfy the need of connecting abruzzo to rome (the rome-sulmona railway
) but tied the company to finish the former line till terni. work restarted and the line was soon completed, even if the most mountainous region of the track was involved (the apennine mountains that divide abruzzo and lazio, and the drop of altitude near the marmore falls). the pescara-sulmona-terni line opened on october 30, 1883.  the line's importance as the primary means of transport between abruzzo and rome, however, lasted five years: in 1888, the rome-sulmona railway was opened and all trains from abruzzo's adriatic shore to rome were diverted on the newer, shorter line. as most trains starting from sulmona were travelling from pescara to rome, except for some going to l'aquila and terni, the first part of the original pescara-terni line was officially detached and merged with the newer rome-sulmona; so the roma-sulmona line became the roma-sulmona-pescara line, while the pescara-sulmona-terni line became the sulmona-terni line.  at the start of 20th century the avezzano-roccasecca railway was built, but with the capture of rome the government's strategic purposes ceased, so the rieti-avezzano railway was never built and the terni-roccasecca route remained unfinished.  on october 3, 1936, a severe accident happened near contigliano, in which two trains collided head-on, resulting in several deaths and many injured, among which the entire l'aquila calcio football team. many players were killed and most couldn't play football again; the team was relegated and never recovered its lost position.  in the 1930s steam locomotives were dismissed and faster aln 56 and aln 556 diesel multiple units (dmu) were introduced; in the 1980s these were replaced with aln 668 3300 series.  in 1905 all italian railways were nationalized and ferrovie dello stato italiane took control of the terni-sulmona railway. in 2008 trenitalia, the passenger division of ferrovie dello stato, put out passenger services on the terni-l'aquila route entrusting ferrovia centrale umbra for the service (now umbria mobilita, part of the busitalia group). ferrovia centrale umbra operates his services using fcu aln 776 diesel multiple units; trenitalia still operates the l'aquila-sulmona route, and in 2016 it introduced the new pesa atribo "swing
" dmus replacing aln 668s.  features   the railway line is graded by rete ferroviaria italiana as a secondary, low-traffic line.  it is a single-track railway for its entire extension, and it is not electrified, so it is run with diesel multiple units: currently fcu aln 776 (on the terni-l'aquila route) and pesa atribo "swing" (on the l'aquila-sulmona route).  the line features some of the most steep climbs of the standard gauge, non-rack italian rail system: from the antrodoco-borgo velino station until the sassa-tornimparte station, where the line crosses the apennine mountains that divide lazio from abruzzo, it has a steepness of 35‰; the highest point of the line is the sella di corno railway station, at 989.28 metres on the sea level. from the terni station until the marmore station the line climbs the drop of altitude near the marmore falls with a steepness of 30‰.  maximum allowed speeds vary for each stretch of the line; the highest is , which is reached in the straight and flat stretch between contigliano and marmore, while the lowest is , which is reached in the winding trait between antrodoco and rocca di fondi, at the start of the apennine pass.  signalling on the line is operated by centralized traffic control while safety is assured by sistema supporto condotta and by automatic axle-counting block system; installation of these systems took place from 1989 to 1993.  the line has 20 stations, leaving stops out:   terni railway station  terni cospea (stop)  stroncone (stop)  marmore  piediluco (closed station)  labro-moggio (stop)  greccio  terria (stop)  contigliano  poggio fidoni (stop)  rieti railway station  cittaducale  cotilia (stop)  sorgenti del peschiera (stop)  castel sant'angelo  canetra (stop)  antrodoco-borgo velino  antrodoco centro (stop)  rocca di fondi  rocca di corno  sella di corno  vigliano d'abruzzo (stop)  scoppito (stop)  sassa-tornimparte  l'
aquila railway station  paganica  san gregorio (stop)  fossa (stop)  san demetrio ne' vestini  villa sant'angelo (stop)  fagnano-campana  fontecchio (stop)  tione degli abruzzi (stop)  beffi  acciano (stop)  molina-castelvecchio  raiano railway station  pratola peligna superiore railway station (stop)  sulmona railway station  references  notes  footnotes  sources  see also   list of railway lines in italy  list of railway stations in umbria  list of railway stations in lazio  list of railway stations in abruzzo  railway lines in umbria railway lines in lazio railway lines in abruzzo railway lines opened in 1883
the clan pt. 1 lost (also stylized as the clan pt. 1 'lost') is the third extended play by the south korean boy group monsta x and the first part of the clan trilogy series. it was released on may 18, 2016 by starship entertainment and distributed by loen entertainment. it also contains six songs, including the singles "ex girl", "all in", and "stuck".  background and release in april 2016, the group announced that they will be releasing a 2.5 episodes or trilogy series called the clan, revealing the first concept as part 1: lost. a pre-released track "ex girl" featuring mamamoo's wheein was released on may 9. it is described as a mellow pop r&b track, describing a man's regret about the one who got away. the lead single "all in" was released on may 18. it is a hip hop track that highlights the group's signature powerful sound and move; it also features a thumping beat and furious raps.  the music video for the lead single was released on starship's and 1thek's official youtube channels on the same day. it was also directed by the award-winning film director dee shin.  the group held their comeback showcase on may 18 at yes24 live hall in seoul and was streamed live on naver's v app.  the ep was released in two versions; found and lost.  critical reception taylor glasby, writing for dazed described the music video of the lead single "all in" as ambitious and provocative, "but the video almost backseats the song to a soundtrack", which glasby describes as "far better than the mv gives it the chance to be with a 'crooning chorus'". the ep is described by kultscene as "a rather safe enterprise for the group", but that the combination of the seven songs still is strong enough that it places in their "best korean albums of 2016" list, describing "all in" as "magnum opus material". in particular, "all in" was noted as combining "much of the noisy ambitions and fighter attitude" of monsta x's earlier works with "the song's sublimely melodic undertones" so that "under all the polyphony is a delightful gem".  year-end lists  track listing  charts  album  weekly charts  monthly chart  year-end chart  songs  weekly charts  sales  awards and nominations  release history  see also  list of k
-pop songs on the billboard charts  list of k-pop albums on the billboard charts  notes  references  2016 eps korean-language eps kakao m eps monsta x eps starship entertainment eps
ludhiana north is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of ludhiana district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  ludhiana district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
metynodiol (inn), or methynodiol, also known as 11β-methyletynodiol, is a steroidal progestin of the 19-nortestosterone group that was synthesized in the 1960s but was never marketed. a diacetate ester, metynodiol diacetate (sc-19198), also exists.  see also  etynodiol  etynodiol diacetate  references  estranes progestogens
westcott stock farm, also known as westcott place farm, is a historic home and farm located at centerville, wayne county, indiana. the farmhouse was built between 1890 and 1895, and is a large two-story, queen anne style brick dwelling. it sits on a brick foundation and features a semi-octagonal bay. also on the property are the contributing laundry house / tool shed, garage, carriage house, horse barn, bank barn, a small calving shed, and a cistern with a hand-operated pump.  it was added to the national register of historic places in 1998.  references  farms on the national register of historic places in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana houses completed in 1895 buildings and structures in wayne county, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana
culpepper was an american thoroughbred racehorse. he won the 1874 preakness stakes.  pedigree  references  1871 racehorse births racehorses bred in ohio racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners thoroughbred family a37
law lady may refer to:  a female law lord  brenda hale, baroness hale of richmond, the only such female law lord  "the law lady", 1955 episode of the lone ranger tv series  see also  the law and the lady (disambiguation)  lawman (disambiguation)  lady (disambiguation)
john thomas andrews (born 1937) is a british-american geologist and professor emeritus of geological and atmospheric and oceanic sciences at the university of colorado boulder's institute of arctic and alpine research (instaar), in boulder, colorado, usa.  andrews was awarded his ba in geosciences in 1959 from the university of nottingham in england, a ms in geology from mcgill university in montreal, quebec, canada, in 1961, a phd from nottingham in 1965, and a dsc from there in 1978.  he was the 1973 winner of the geological society of america's quaternary geology and geomorphology division's kirk bryan award. andrew was named a fellow of the american geophysical union in 2006. in 2011, andrews was elected a fellow of the american association for the advancement of science.  he is the 2016 geological society of america's penrose medal winner for his contribution to advancing the understanding of how partial collapses of the laurentide ice sheet are reflected in heinrich events and have contributed to abrupt climate change during the quaternary, his area of expertise.  references  external links  curriculum vitae  university of colorado boulder faculty fellows of the american association for the advancement of science american geologists university of north dakota faculty living people penrose medal winners 1937 births fellows of the american geophysical union
the  richmond revolution season was the team's first season as an indoor football franchise and first in the indoor football league (ifl). one of twenty-five teams competing in the ifl for the 2010 season, the revolution were members of the atlantic east division of the united conference. the team played their home games at arthur ashe athletic center in richmond, virginia.  schedule  regular season  standings  playoffs  roster  references  2010 indoor football league season sports in richmond, virginia 2010 in sports in virginia
jay and kai is an album by american jazz trombonists j. j. johnson and kai winding featuring performances recorded in 1955 and 1956 for the columbia label.  reception  allmusic awarded the album 3 stars and stated "not a classic jazz set, but comfortable enough for the fans of the duo".  track listing  "you'd be so nice to come home to" (cole porter) - 3:30  "caribe" (kai winding) - 2:41  "happiness is a thing called joe" (harold arlen, yip harburg) - 3:40 	  "the song is you" (jerome kern, oscar hammerstein ii) - 4:02 	  "in the wee small hours of the morning" (david mann, bob hilliard) - 4:14 	  "yes, you" (dick leib) - 3:27  "tromboniums in motion" (j. j. johnson) - 3:40  "how high the moon" (morgan lewis, nancy hamilton) - 2:33  "violets for your furs" (matt dennis, tom adair) - 4:20 	  "too close for comfort" (jerry bock, george david weiss, larry holofcener) - 3:26  "'s wonderful" (george gershwin, ira gershwin) - 3:08  "i should care" (axel stordahl, paul weston, sammy cahn) - 3:54 	 recorded at columbia 30th street studios in new york city on november 17, 1955 (tracks 1-5), july 18, 1956 (tracks 7-11),  december 17, 1956 (track 6) and  january 27, 1957 (track 12)  personnel j. j. johnson (tracks 1-5 & 7-12), kai winding (tracks 1-11) - trombone, trombonium bobby jaspar - tenor saxophone (track 12) wayne andre, carl fontana - trombone (track 6) dick leib - bass trombone (track 6) roy frazee (track 6), hank jones (track 12), dick katz (tracks 1-5 & 7-11) - piano bill crow (tracks 7-11), percy heath (track 12), milt hinton (tracks 1-5), kenny o'brien (track 6) - bass kenny clarke (tracks 7-11), jack franklin (track 6), elvin jones (track 12), shadow wilson (tracks 1-6) - drums candido camero
- bongos (track 2)  references  columbia records albums kai winding albums 1957 albums j. j. johnson albums
{{infobox racehorse | horsename = jacobus | image =  | caption =  | sire = the ill-used | grandsire = breadalbane | dam = nellie james | damsire = dollar | sex = stallion | foaled = 1880 | country = united states | colour = bay | breeder = august belmont | owner = james e. kelley | trainer = richard dwyer | record = 45-11 | earnings = $6,732 | race = surf stakes (1882) american classics wins:preakness stakes (1883) | awards =  | honours =   | updated =  }}jacobus''' (foaled 1880 in new york state) was an american thoroughbred racehorse who won the 1883 preakness stakes.  background bred by august belmont at his nursery stud in babylon, new york, jacobus was sold to james e. kelley along with other unraced colts for $10,000.  racing career raced at age two, jacobus won the surf stakes at sheepshead bay race track. he ran third in the juvenile stakes at jerome park and third again in both the hopeful stakes and august stakes at monmouth park.  as a three-year-old, jacobus' ran third behind winner barnes in the mile and one-half coney island derby at sheepshead bay. the biggest win of his career came in what would become the second leg of the u.s. triple crown series, the 1883 preakness stakes. in a two-horse matchup run over a mile and one-half at pimlico race course, jockey george barbee erned his third preakness win by guiding jacobus to a four length win over his only competitor, parnell.  references  1880 racehorse births racehorses bred in new york (state) racehorses trained in the united states thoroughbred family 4 preakness stakes winners
sphingomonas xinjiangensis  is a gram-negative, aerobic and motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas, which has been isolated from the desert sand of the xinjiang uygur autonomous region in china.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas xinjiangensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase	  xinjiangensis bacteria described in 2011
eunidia lindblomi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by per olof christopher aurivillius in 1925.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1925
newton loch was situated in a low-lying area near newton-on-ayr, south ayrshire, just south of the old south and west sanquhar farms. it is now (2016) only visible as remnant heath land and surface darkening in pastureland, situated mainly in the parish of ayr and partly in st quivox, south ayrshire, scotland.  the original outflow of newton loch was directly into the sea at newton-on-ayr via the half mile burn and another outflow was the lade that ran down the newton-on-ayr main street to the newton mill or malt mill that was located on the bank of the river ayr near where the new bridge of ayr is located.  history as stated, newton loch was a natural feature, sitting in a depression, probably created by glaciation and originally shaped somewhat like a map of great britain on a west-east orientation. the loch waters originally drained and the area is indeed still partly drained via the half mile burn that now flows underground until it empties into the sea via a pipe at the newton-on-ayr promenade. a second outflow also once existed via a mill lade that ran down the newton-on-ayr main street to power the newton or malt mill that was located near where ayr 'new bridge' is now located.  the loch received its water supply from the sanquhar and crook mosses in addition to rainfall and land runoff.  newton or malt mill the newton or malt mill was located at the end of main street in newton-on-ayr on the banks of the river ayr and was named thus because of its location and because just across the river once stood the ancient malt cross, one of ayr's old market places and a site for the delivering of civic justice such as the burning of witches.  the mill lade ran fully exposed along the side of the newton-on-ayr main street and would have been a serious nuisance to pedestrians as well as horses, cattle, carts and other road traffic. in 1641 the newton burgh court ruled that "..na personne or personnis sall wash at ye leid betwixt ye dam and ye mylne any foul claithis, puddings, lynnt, hydis or any other fulzie or pollutit thyngis qrby ye watter may be pollutit or fyillit be night or be day."  the mill was not shown on the 1818 map by wood however it must have survived until at least 1832 because it is recorded that it was used
as a shelter by people who took part in the riots linked to the first reform election. william aiton's map of 1811 suggests that water may still have been available for the mill.  the draining of newton loch  the loch served a practical purpose when it provided a water supply for the newton or malt mill, however the farmers found the loch's land to be very rich leading to it being progressively drained and neatly divided up as shown on ordnance survey maps. the land in 2016 still appears from aerial images to be formed of a black, loamy soil.  the first moss dails and the second moss dails were the site of the loch, two of the five dails or portions/shares of fields in newton-on-ayr. by 1747 only a small area of open water appears to be shown near sanquhar farm on roys map and the areas around are under cultivation. andrew armstrong's 1775 map indicates that no open water remained at all, however william aiton's map of 1811 (see above) may indicate two open areas of water, one of which may be newton loch.  the 1895 ordnance survey map does show a small area of surviving open water and associated wetland near heathfield road and this was possibly the last remnant of the once fairly extensive newton loch that is show as a wetland without open water in circa 1947 situated to the south of heathlands hospital in an area now occupied by a housing estate.  placename evidence names such as the locality of lochside, lochside road, mosside, crookmoss, damside, burnside, newtonmor, sanquhar (moss) and heathfield recall the existence of the old loch, its outflows and inflows. 'noltmire road' is located near site of the old heathfield hospital and means 'boggy land where cattle graze'. newton or malt mill, burnboig and boghall are recorded on older maps.  the three 'sanquhar' farms may even hint at the presence of a crannog, typical of many of the old ayrshire lochs as  'sanquhar' is gaelic for 'old fort' although it may simply refer to the old newton castle that was originally known as sanquhar castle.  coal mining the lade running down to the newton or malt mill also carried water from a pumping station linked to a coal pit near the old loch, the water table in the locality being very close to the surface at the time. the loch having been drained by 1775 only drainage and water from such
sources were available to power the mill.  roads and railways the old roads to edinburgh and glasgow ran through the area. the glasgow and south western railway's 'ayr branch' and 'ayr and mauchline branch' both run across the site of the old loch.  micro-history the half mile burn was once the parliamentary boundary of the burgh of ayr.  see also  lochlea, south ayrshire - a nearby loch site  references  notes  sources   brash, ronald w. (1986). round old ayr - a guided walk. ayshire archaeological & natural history society.   dunlop, annie i. (1953). the royal burgh of ayr. edinburgh : oliver and boyd.  wilson, james pearson. the last miller. the cornmills of ayrshire. ayrshire archaeological and natural history society. .  external links video footage of the half mile burn  newton history of south ayrshire newton freshwater lochs of scotland
leif delling cassel (8 december 1906 - 24 december 1988) was a swedish politician and lawyer. he served as a member of parliament from 1950 to 1970, first as a member of the upper house from 1950 to 1952 and then as a member of the lower house from 1953 to 1970. he was second vice president of the lower house from 1965 to 1970. he was president of the nordic council in 1969. cassel was also vice president of the moderate party from 1956 to 1965.  references   members of the riksdag moderate party politicians 1906 births 1988 deaths
sir charles hotham, 4th baronet (c.1663 - 8 january 1723), of scorborough and later of beverley and south dalton, was a british army officer and whig politician who sat in the english house of commons and british house of commons from 1695 to 1723.  biography hotham was born in bermuda, the only son of charles hotham (1615 - c. 1672), and  elizabeth (died 1685), daughter of stephen thompson of humbleton, yorkshire. his father was a prominent nonconformist who lost his living as rector of wigan after the restoration and emigrated with his wife to bermuda to take up a ministry. minister hotham lived there for the rest of his life. shortly before his father's death hotham was sent to london where he lived under the care of his cousin richard thompson.  hotham was educated at sedbergh school before entering st john's college, cambridge in 1681, where he was awarded ba in 1685, ma in 1688 and elected a fellow from 1685 to 1692. he was also ordained as a deacon. he succeeded his cousin sir john hotham, 3rd baronet in the baronetcy on 25 august 1691, on condition that he married sir john's niece, bridget, daughter of william gee. sir charles and bridget lived at scorborough house, the hotham family seat near beverley, yorkshire, which later burned down in 1705.  hotham inherited a considerable debt along with the baronetcy which was not paid off until 1697. in 1705 his house was destroyed in a fire and the family moved to south dalton. he became a regimental colonel in 1705 of a regiment he raised in yorkshire, with which he went to spain in 1706 as part of the british expeditionary force initially commanded by earl rivers. suffering losses from the defence of several towns, the regiment was disbanded in 1708.  promoted to brigadier-general in 1710, hotham was put on half pay in 1713. in 1715 he was made colonel of a regiment which would later be the 44th foot. he was colonel of the prince of wales's own regiment of dragoons from 1717 until they were disbanded in 1718. he was then appointed colonel of the 36th foot in 1719, from which he transferred as colonel to the 8th foot in 1720. he lastly transferred to the royal dragoons in 1721, serving until his death.  hotham was the member of parliament for scarborough from 1695 to 1701 and for beverley from 1702 until his death in 1723.  between 1716 and 1721 he built
a neo-palladian house known as hotham house in eastgate, beverley, designed by the pioneering scottish architect colen campbell. it remained empty after his death and was demolished c.1766.  hotham was buried at south dalton.  family hotham had married twice: firstly bridget, daughter of william gee, with whom he had 3 sons and 7 daughters and secondly lady mildred, the daughter of james cecil, 3rd earl of salisbury, and the widow of sir uvedale corbet, 3rd baronet, of longnor, shropshire; they had one son who died before his father. hotham was succeeded by charles a son from his first marriage.  notes  references  papers of the hotham family of scorborough and south dalton     |-  1723 deaths people from beverley people educated at sedbergh school alumni of st john's college, cambridge baronets in the baronetage of england british army generals english mps 1695-1698 english mps 1698-1700 english mps 1701-1702 members of the parliament of great britain for english constituencies british mps 1707-1708 british mps 1708-1710 british mps 1710-1713 british mps 1713-1715 british mps 1715-1722 british mps 1722-1727 year of birth uncertain 44th regiment of foot officers 36th regiment of foot officers king's regiment (liverpool) officers 1st the royal dragoons officers
the popestar tour was a concert tour by swedish rock band ghost in support of their second ep, popestar. the ep was released on september 16, which coincided with the first show of the tour in rochester, new york. they toured europe in the spring of 2017, followed by a tour as openers for iron maiden.  during the final show on september 30, 2017, papa emeritus iii was dragged off stage during the final song. a new incarnation called "papa emeritus zero" was introduced on stage, later named "papa nihil".  setlist  this is a sample setlist from the beginning of their tour at the main street armory in rochester, new york. it does not represent the shows that followed afterwards.  "masked ball" (intro)  "square hammer"  "from the pinnacle to the pit"  "secular haze"  "stand by him"  "con clavi con dio"  "per aspera ad inferi"  "body and blood"  "devil church"  "cirice"  "year zero"  "spoksonat"  "he is"  "absolution"  "mummy dust"  "ghuleh / zombie queen"  "ritual"  "monstrance clock"  their cover of imperiet's "bible" was performed with a choir at their stockholm show on april 28, 2017. a 20-piece children's choir also joined them for "monstrance clock" at the end of their bloodstock festival show on august 12, 2017.  "elizabeth" & "deus in absentia" were played on the final two shows of the tour in stockholm and gothenburg.  opening act for iron maiden  the following setlist was taken from the june 11, 2017 performance at the amalie arena in tampa, florida when the band was opening for iron maiden on the latter's the book of souls world tour.   "masked ball" (intro)  "square hammer"  "from the pinnacle to the pit"  "cirice"  "ritual"  "year zero"  "absolution"  "mummy dust"  "monstrance clock"  tour dates  box office  opening bands   marissa nadler - metroplex, little rock (october 31, 2016)  kvelertak - grona lund, stockholm (september 29, 2017)  references  notes  references  ghost (swedish band) concert tours
2016 concert tours 2017 concert tours
mohamed gaber tawfik hussein (; born 9 may 1995) commonly known as mido gaber is an egyptian footballer who plays for misr lel makkasa as an attacking midfielder.  in january 2019, he returned to misr lel makkasa and he signed a 3.5 year contract.  references  external links  living people 1995 births egyptian footballers association football midfielders sportspeople from cairo egyptian premier league players al ahly sc players misr lel makkasa sc players
the 2016 san benedetto tennis cup is a professional tennis tournaments played on clay courts. it is the 12th edition of the tournament which is part of the 2016 atp challenger tour, offering a total of €42,500+h in prize money. the event takes place in san benedetto del tronto, italy, from 9 to 17 july 2016.  singles entrants  seeds    1 rankings as of 27 june 2016.  other entrants  the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   gianluca mager   andrea basso   gianluigi quinzi   edoardo eremin  the following player gained entry into the singles main draw as a special exempt:    stefano napolitano  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   michael linzer   laslo đere   patricio heras   kevin krawietz  the following player entered as a lucky loser:   hernan casanova  doubles main draw entrants  seeds  1 rankings as of 27 june 2016.  other entrants the following pairs received wildcards into the doubles main draw:  andrea basso /  riccardo bonadio  lucas miedler /  stefano travaglia  federico gaio /  stefano napolitano  champions  singles     federico gaio def.  constant lestienne, 6-2, 1-6, 6-3.  doubles     federico gaio /  stefano napolitano def.  facundo arguello /  sergio galdos, 6-3, 6-4.  references   singles  doubles  external links   official website   2016 atp challenger tour 2016 2016 in italian tennis
the canton synagogue () is one of five synagogues in the jewish ghetto of venice, italy. established only four years after the nearby scuola grande tedesca (1528), it is the second oldest venetian synagogue. its origins are uncertain: it might have been constructed as a prayer room for a group of provencal jews soon after their arrival in venice, or as a private synagogue for a prominent local family. repeatedly remodeled throughout its history, its interior is predominantly decorated in the baroque and rococo styles.  the synagogue was most recently restored in 2016-2017 by the world monuments fund. it is open to the public through the jewish museum of venice.  name like the other four synagogues in venice, the canton synagogue was termed a scuola ("school") rather than sinagoga ("synagogue"), in the same way in which ashkenazi jews refer to the synagogue as the shul () in yiddish. in the venetian context, however, the term has a further connotation: scuola was in fact the name given to christian confraternity institutions devoted to assisting those in need, the most famous being the six scuole grandi of venice. the building of the canton synagogue hosted indeed the headquarters of several charitable and aid organizations throughout the centuries, similarly to what happened in the adjacent scuola italiana.  among the several proposed etymologies for the word canton, the generally accepted one links it to the site's ancient toponym, canton del medras (midrash's corner), referring to the building's position in the southern corner of the square of the ghetto nuovo. according to another hypothesis, the word derives from the canton (or cantoni) family which allegedly financed the synagogue's construction; this hypothesis is supported by the fact that three jewish prayer rooms once located in the ghetto nuovo (scuola luzzatto, scuola coanim and scuola meshullamim) bore the names of their founding families.  history  the canton synagogue is one of the three synagogues located in the ghetto nuovo (the oldest part of the venetian ghetto, established on 29 march 1516), together with the scuola grande tedesca and scuola italiana. it was built between 1531 and 1532 by members of the local ashkenazi community. a stone plaque placed to the left of the bimah records the gift of 180 ducats, donated by a man named shlomo in 1532 for the synagogue's construction. the same date (5292 according to the hebrew calendar) is displayed over the entrance door.  the establishment of the canton synagogue followed by four years that of the
nearby scuola grande tedesca, also of ashkenazi rite, and may have thus been the result of an emerging division within the local ashkenazi community. evidence suggests that the new synagogue might have been in fact erected by a group of provencal jews soon after their arrival in venice, in a period marked by a sharp increase in the jewish population of venice due to immigration from nearby countries. provencal jews were forced to leave en masse arles following the annexation of provence to france (1484), with many of them opting to settle in italy. several elements seem to prove the provencal origins of the canton synagogue: for instance, it was the only venetian synagogue where the lekhah dodi-a hymn commonly intoned by french jews on the eve of sabbath-was sung. moreover, the synagogue's "bifocal effect" (created by the bimah and the ark facing each other at the opposite ends of the sanctuary), an arrangement rarely seen in old european synagogues, is a common feature of provencal synagogue buildings, such as those of carpentras and cavaillon.  the synagogue building originally hosted both religious and social functions: the ground floor was occupied by the coffin warehouse of the fraterna della misericordia degli hebrei tedeschi, a jewish institution which provided burial services for members of the community (replaced in the nineteenth century by the fraterna dei poveri), while the second floor housed the local talmud torah school (fraterna sive scuola talmud torah di ghetto nuovo).  the canton synagogue was remodeled multiple times throughout the sixteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth centuries, with the most important interventions taking place in the late 1630s and 1650s, 1730s, and 1770s. along with the other synagogues of venice, it ceased to be regularly used in october 1917, when the local jewish community was forced to disband; at the same time, administration of all the jewish places of worship was taken over by a single institution, the templi israelitici uniti.  starting in 1968, the building underwent major restoration interventions operated by the world monuments fund and the italian ministry for cultural assets and environments, which included stabilization of the foundations and wall insulation. in 1989 the synagogue was finally reopened to the public, as part of a new museum area combining together all three synagogues of the ghetto nuovo, as well as the venice museum of jewish art (established in 1953, now the jewish museum of venice). more recent conservation campaigns were carried out by the wmf in 2014 and in 2016-2017
, with support from the david berg foundation.  architecture  the synagogue's main room features a rectangular plan which is only slightly asymmetrical (12.9 x 7.1 x 12.7 x 6.5 m), in contrast to the marked irregularity of the ground plan in the nearby scuola grande tedesca. it occupies an inconspicuous spot on the third floor of a four-story vernacular building facing the ghetto's main square, and is hardly noticeable from the outside. an anonymous exterior was an indispensable feature for synagogues built in venice in the early decades of the sixteenth century, since jewish places of worship-although tolerated-were still formally prohibited at that time. the synagogue stands on an elevated position (a feature shared with the nearby scuola grande tedesca and scuola italiana) in accordance with talmudic precepts about synagogue architecture; on a more practical note, the parcel where the building sits was owned by a prominent venetian patrician family, but the raised placement put the synagogue under the direct control of the jewish community.  the first floor entrance to the synagogue building consists of a spacious and luminous lobby divided by two white tuscan columns; a stairway, lined with nineteenth-century plaques commemorating prominent members of the community, connects it to the third story synagogue. the current look of both the hall and the stairway is the result of a restoration carried out in the late 1850s. on the third floor, the synagogue is accessed through a narrow vestibule lined with benches; four windows placed on the vestibule's west wall (bricked up in 1847, and reopened in 1980) overlook the main room. the original function of such space-reminiscent of the anteroom (polish in yiddish) often found in central european synagogue buildings-is not clear; however, its layout suggests that it may have initially served as a matroneum. a new raised women's gallery was completed in 1736: from that moment on, and until 1847, the antechamber is thought to have been used by people unable to afford a seat in the main room. due to the synagogue's modest dimensions, the number of places was in fact limited: owning a seat was considered a status symbol, and seats were often handed down through generations within prominent families.  interior the synagogue benefits of plenty of natural light thanks to the eleven large windows opening to the outside. the interior, heavily altered by the eighteenth-century interventions, is decorated in the baroque style with some rococo elements. the main focal points, the bimah and the ark, are
placed at the opposite ends of the sanctuary: this was indeed the first venetian synagogue to be built with the "bifocal effect", as the pulpit of the scuola grande tedesca, later relocated, was originally placed in the middle of the room in accordance with the traditional "central bimah" configuration.  the intricately decorated ark is entirely gilded, as prescribed in the book of exodus with regard to the ark of the covenant; such abundance of gilt also reflects what was the decorative style in fashion in late seventeenth-century venice. the ark occupies a deep niche in the southern wall facing jerusalem, as typically seen in ancient synagogues. the niche protrudes outwards and is thus visible from the outside; this feature, characteristic of venetian domestic architecture and once commonly seen in buildings throughout the city, is called liago (or diago) and probably derived from islamic architecture. above the ark, a small stained glass window with blue, yellow, red, and green accents provides additional light. the ark has a tripartite structure: the central section hosts the niche for the torah scrolls, surmounted by a baroque broken pediment and flanked by two square pillars and two fluted corinthian columns; the two lateral sections feature the seats for the parnassim with ornated curved backs, crowned by smaller broken pediments and enclosed on each side by corinthian columns with oblique and vertical fluting. the marble steps leading to the closet feature an obscure inscriptions in hebrew, which reads:  the date mentioned in the inscription indicates "with great approximation" that of the construction of the ark; as previously noted, its decorative style is clearly reminiscent of that period. above the parnassim seats are two wooden panels with texts from two sabbath prayers.  at the opposite end of the room is the bimah, which dates back to circa 1780. the raised polygonal pulpit, reached through five wooden steps and delicately decorated in the rococo style, is surmounted by a semi-elliptical arch supported by four original columns of interlacing branches, reminiscent of the two pillars on the porch of solomon's temple. the columns, of exquisite workmanship, were carefully restored in the 1980s. the pulpit stands inside a semi-hexagonal niche, illuminated from above by a dome-shaped skylight, which was built around 1730. the wooden seats surrounding the pulpit were originally reserved for the most eminent members of the community. the eighteenth-century rearrangement of this section of the synagogue was most assuredly carried out by local christian architect bartolomeo scalfurotto, who in the same period
(around 1731) was working on the refurbishment of the facade of the doge's palace.  placed against the room's longer walls are two walnut benches whose decoration was completed in 1789, together with the gilding of the synagogue's interior. all the walls are subdivided into five horizontal sections; the number five recurs repeatedly throughout the synagogue (five are the openings on the two longer walls, as well as the steps leading to the bimah) as an evidence of its importance in judaism.  two of the four walls are noteworthy for the presence of eight wooden panels with relief medallions depicting biblical episodes from the book of exodus, including the city of jericho, the crossing of the red sea, the altar of sacrifice, the manna, the ark on the banks of the jordan river, korah, the gift of the torah, and moses making water flow from the rock. the eight medallions, painted in tempera, are of no particular artistic merit, but do stand out for their rarity: landscape paintings are indeed an extremely uncommon feature in synagogues, and their presence in the canton synagogue may reflect the influence of central european models. the medallions are in fact reminiscent of oval cartouches displayed on the frontispieces of jewish books printed in krakow in the late sixteenth century.  gallery  see also history of the jews in venice  notes  references  cited literature  external links  jewish museum of venice website  orthodox synagogues in italy jews and judaism in venice ashkenazi jewish culture in italy ashkenazi synagogues 16th-century synagogues religious buildings and structures completed in 1532 1530s establishments in the republic of venice synagogues in venice
this page provides the summaries of the matches of the qualifying rounds for the football at the 1984 summer olympics to be held in los angeles. in the end three countries qualified.  preliminary round  |}  first round  |}  algeria on away goals rule  second round  |}  ethiopia on away goals rule  third round  |}  cameroon, egypt and morocco qualified.  external links  games of the xxiii. olympiad - african football qualifying tournament (los angeles, usa, 1984) - rec.sport.soccer statistics foundation  football qualification for the 1984 summer olympics football at the summer olympics - men's african qualifiers
the 1968-69 minnesota pipers season was the only season of the pipers in minnesota and second overall season in the american basketball association. the previous season, the pipers had won the aba finals, but moved the team from pittsburgh to minnesota (which had just lost the muskies) after the season. but the pipers were not any more successful in minnesota, and they moved back to pittsburgh before next season. the team went through three coaches: harding, who was fired after attacking the pipers chairman gabe rubin at the banquet of the all-star game. mikkelsen (the general manager) took over for a while before verl young took the job permanently. hawkins, williams, vaughn, and heyman were nagged by injuries due to long practices, which affected the team, which fell in the semifinals to the miami floridians. minnesota would not have a pro basketball team again until 1989 with the minnesota timberwolves.  roster  25 dan anderson - center  35 frank card - small forward	  30 steve chubin - shooting guard	  42 connie hawkins - power forward	  12 art heyman - small forward	  41 tom hoover - center	  45 tony jackson - forward / guard	  20 jim jarvis - point guard	  14 arvesta kelly - shooting guard	  13 jim kissane - forward	  23/41 tom kondla - center	  24 mike lewis - center	  30 willie porter - power forward	  15 george sutor - center	  22 steve vacendak - point guard	  10 chico vaughn - shooting guard	  32 trooper washington - center	  12 ken wilburn - small forward		  44 charlie williams - point guard	  13/24 leroy wright - power forward  final standings  eastern division  playoffs eastern division semifinals vs. miami floridians  pipers lose series, 4-3  awards and honors 1969 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 28, 1969)  trooper washington  charlie williams hawkins had been selected, but he was injured. harding was selected to coach the team, but rhodes replaced him after his firing.  references   pipers on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1968-69 regular season and playoff results  pipers page  pittsburgh condors seasons minnesota minnesota pipers, 1968-69 minnesota pipers, 1968-69
ryan clarke (born 1982), is an english footballer.  ryan clarke may also refer to:   ryan clarke (australian footballer) (born 1997), australian rules footballer ryan clarke, musician in space (english band) ryan clarke (athlete) in 1998 central american and caribbean junior championships in athletics ryan clarke (australian association footballer) in 2013-14 perth glory fc season  see also ryan clark (disambiguation) brian clarke (disambiguation)
the night is ours (french: la nuit est a nous) is a 1953 french drama film directed by jean stelli and starring simone renant, jean danet and jean murat. it was a remake of the 1929 german film the night belongs to us.  the film's sets were designed by jacques colombier.  cast  see also  the night belongs to us (1929)  the night is ours (1930)  references  bibliography   dayna oscherwitz & maryellen higgins. the a to z of french cinema. scarecrow press, 2009.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films french drama films french films french-language films films directed by jean stelli french films based on plays remakes of french films
christopher mayer is an author, former banker and investor.  mayer is a veteran of the banking industry, in the area of corporate lending. a financial writer since 1998, mayer's essays have appeared in a wide variety of publications, from the mises.org. daily article series to the daily reckoning. he was the editor of mayer's special situations, and capital and crisis from 2004 to january 2016.  in 2016, he joined bonner & partners to launch the bonner private portfolio.  in 2019, he started woodlock house family capital, a hedge fund. https://www.woodlockhousefamilycapital.com/  mayer has published several books including the world right side up: investing across six continents with foreword by bill bonner, invest like a dealmaker: secrets from a former banking insider with foreword by addison wiggin and 100 baggers: stocks that return 100-to-1 and how to find them.  his book how do you know? won the si hayakawa book prize in 2019  https://www.generalsemantics.org/2019/09/16/how-do-you-know-by-christopher-mayer-awarded-the-2019-s-i-hayakawa-book-prize/  mayer is often quoted in the media and has had appearances on marketwatch, forbes, fox business network, cnn radio and cnbc.  books  invest like a dealmaker: secrets from a former banking insider. john wiley & sons. 2008. .  the world right side up: investing across six continents. john wiley & sons. 2012. .  100 baggers: stocks that return 100-to-1 and how to find them. echo point books & media. 2015. .  ''how do you know? a guide to investing, wall street and life'' bonner and partners. 2018.  references  living people year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) american finance and investment writers university of maryland, college park alumni
the yesharah society is a social organization of the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints (lds church) for females who have returned from serving as church missionaries. the organization was created in december 1928 under the name "y missionary women" ("y" referring to brigham young university (byu)). in 1932, the name of the society was changed to "yesharah", a hebrew word meaning "upright, just, good, or pleasing". the yesharah society reached its peak in popularity in the 1950s and 1960s, but began to decline at the end of the 20th century. although the organization still exists today, most of the chapters are beginning to fade away.  beginnings single latter-day saint women have been missionaries for the lds church since 1898, when amanda inez knight allen and lucy jane brimhall knight received their calling to serve in the british isles. however, the number of women serving missions for the church were few until the early 1920s. in 1915, the first presidency, consisting of joseph f. smith, anthon h. lund, and charles w. penrose, stated that they were "greatly in need of lady missionaries in the united states missions". with a growing number of returning female missionaries, there became a both a need and a desire to form an organization of returned women missionaries.  the yesharah society did not begin as an independent group, however. from 1915 to 1929, female returned missionaries were included with male returned missionaries in the young doctors of divinity club, or y.d.d. on november 11, 1928, the ydd was invited to reorganize as part of the friars' club, an all-male christian organization. an initial vote was taken by the y.d.d. on the issue and the motion to join the friars' club failed. however, several of the male members of the y.d.d. and the university of utah friars' club attempted to push ahead with the reorganization anyway. finally, byu president franklin s. harris assessed the situation and stated that the y.d.d. would only be able to reorganize into the friars' club if the "lady missionaries" were reorganized into their own club as well.  the "y" missionary women constitution after harris's announcement, the "lady missionaries" acted on their own before the y.d.d was dissolved. in december 1928, returned sister missionaries of the y.d.d invited other female missionaries to meet with them at the
home of amanda inez knight allen, who held the prominent position of being the first single sister missionary for the lds church. there, under the direction of barbara maughn roskelly, this group of women formed the "y missionary women" group, electing allen as the first president. some of the initial members of the "y missionary women" included, along with allen and knight, elizabeth souter, georgia maesar, anna boss hart, alice louise reynolds, and others. in the earliest years of the group there were approximately 40 members. out of these 40 initial members, 34 were single and only six were married. although the "y missionary women" reorganized itself before the y.d.d. could vote to exclude them, it was not something that the y.d.d. women originally wanted to do. re-organization was something that they fought against, and it would remain a bitter memory for the yesharah society even into the late 1950s.  at its founding in december 1928, the "y missionary women" took part of the friars' club constitution and placed it word-for-word in their own. this statement outlined the intentions of the "y missionary women" as to "keep ever paramount in the lives of its members the high and worthy ideals [of manhood] which they have promulgated while active in the missionary field" and to "promote educational, cultural, and social development in the members of the organization". to these first two purposes copied from the friars' club, the "y missionary women" added three others: "1) to be a sister in very deed to each and every member, 4) uphold the ideals and promote the interests of the educational institutions with which this organization shall be affiliated, and 3) give special encouragement to our sisters laboring in the mission field." the qualifications to be a member of the organization were threefold: to have been "regularly called to and honorably released" from an lds mission, be in good standing with the church, and be affiliated with byu. from the beginning, the emphasis of the organization was placed on missionary work. the "y missionary women" rejected the word "club" so that it would be clear that the women were to be a missionary organization with local chapters.  organization of the yesharah society in 1932, at the suggestion of byu professor sidney sperry, the "y missionary women" changed its name to "yesharah". "yesharah" is a hebrew adjective meaning "straight, upright,
just, righteous, good, and pleasing". at this time, the new society further organized itself. the yesharah society's revised 1932 constitution stated that the organization's executive officers would consist of a president, first and second vice presidents, recording secretary-treasurer, and a corresponding secretary. in addition there were to be three committees within the society: the membership committee, program committee, and project committee.  the annual dues at the time were $2.00 per member, and members were to be organized in to more local chapters, the first of which was the provo chapter.  the emphasis within the newly named society continued to be missionary work. the yesharah society maintained a standard of high ideals, as characterized by a 1932 yesharah poem:  should mission memories be forgot and never brought to mind? should we forget the days we spent in service to mankind? oh know we'll strive our very best to ever keep in mind. the lessons we to others taught, the way of life to find. and here's a vow, my sisters true we'll make anew this day that we shall teach in faith and love the truths that point the way.  the yesharah society's constitution ensured that the organization would remain professional and purpose-centered, specifying that the constitution and by-laws were to be read biannually, and that all meetings would be conducted according to roberts rules of order. as the yesharah society evolved and its purposes changed in the following years, its constitution reflected those changes.  references  women's clubs in the united states women's organizations based in the united states mormonism and women 1928 establishments in utah christian organizations established in 1928 yesharah latter day saint fraternities and sororities in the united states harold b. lee library-related 20th century articles
ipsc macau is the macanese association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references   regions of the international practical shooting confederation practical shooting
brachaciptera tibialis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by lea in 1917. it is known from australia.  references  cerambycinae beetles described in 1917
the truppenubungsplatz heuberg is a training ground of the bundeswehr in the districts of sigmaringen and zollernalbkreis in baden-wurttemberg. since the establishment of the wilhelmine empire it has always been a reflection of german history.  geography   on the großer heuberg, a plateau in the southwest of the swabian jura in an altitude of , is the area between albstadt in the north, meßstetten in the west, schwenningen in the south and stetten am kalten markt on the south-east, where the army installations at lager heuberg and albkaserne are located.  the barracks, the training area and the proving ground comprise approximately . of these,  are exercise area, of which  are suitable for tracked vehicles. the two sites of the bundeswehr in stetten am kalten markt - lager heuberg and albkaserne - account for , where approximately  are within the boundaries of the municipality stetten am kalten markt and  in the municipality schwenningen are omitted.  in 1909 the city of meßstetten had to sell nearly 40% of their district area to the reich treasury.  the training area is the hub of the federal armed forces in the sigmaringen district, and the last military training center still in use in southern germany. construction and expansion measures cost tens of millions of marks.  in connection with the heuberg training area are the following external firing positions:  "sieben jauchert" (kaiseringen district)  "wachtbuhl" and "wanne" (schwenningen district)  "vogelbuhl" (barenthal district)  "bol" (hartheim district) and "wiedenacker" (unterdigisheim district)  "blumersberg" (closed) (meßstetten district)  underneath the training area was caoc 4, belonging to adjacent zollernalb barracks in meßstetten. of the  air force installations, only one air surveillance radome on the weichenwang hill in the vicinity has remained active.  history  conception the heuberg training area originated from the requirements of the xiv army corps in 1885, which had expressed a need for a new maneuver area that was large enough for military exercises according to the new military principles. in august 1899 the grand duchy of baden's ministry of finance was informed by the general
command in karlsruhe of the requirements for a future training area. in addition to many other criteria, the future area should not have a high elevation, should have a railway terminal and should be as circular as possible. the agency assigned to conduct the search (domanendirektion) quickly determined that the wishes of the military could not be met by any of the candidates.  in 1905, the interest of the agency focused on the heuberg. since both the terrain and the purchase presented the fewest difficulties, the site was chosen, despite the fact that the future training area was only one-third in baden and would not have a railway connection. plans for a military station  below the outer firing position blumersberg in meßstetten were worked out in detail for 8000 gold marks.  from 1908 on purchase negotiations were held for the areas in baden, wurttemberg und prussia, which dragged on for some time. in some cases forced expropriations by the reich treasury was necessary, since not all prospective sellers were in agreement with the land prices offered by the military.  construction and commissioning by 1910 the first military exercises by the xiv army corps could take place at the training course, which was only partially purchased at this time. because there were not enough fixed accommodations, the soldiers were housed in tents or quartered in the surrounding communities. between 1912 and 1916 camp heuberg was built in the district of stetten am kalten markt.  the establishment of the training area forced the destruction of several settlements which had been built to improve the economic situation of the population in the former territory of straßberg, zollernalbkreis.<ref>neun forscher stellen untersuchungen zur landesgeschichte an. the contributions were published in the magazine „hohenzollerische heimat", in: schwabische zeitung of 7 july 2011</ref> for example, harthof and lenzenhutte- also called glashuttehof- in straßberg, ochsenkopf and waldhof in kaiseringen,  knobelhof in heinstetten, sebastiansweiler with the sebastian chapel and weinitz and hardt in frohnstetten.  a special challenge was supplying water for 6000 soldiers in training and 2500 horses. for this purpose, on february 19, 1910,  the national military treasury acquired the so-called hammermuhle, an old ironworks in thiergarten in beuron with channel and weir from the house of furstenberg for 35.000 reichsmarks. they also
bought a water source, rainbrunnenquelle, which originated in  between neidingen and .  after the demolition of the hammerschmiede a pumping station was erected at its place. along the more than  higher training area three elevated tanks and a pressure line were built from 1909. in 1912 a power plant was built, which supplied the training ground with electricity via a power line from thiergarten. in 1911 the planning of a wastewater treatment plant began; the construction took place 1912 to 1914, and in 1914 it was able to go into operation. 1925 stetten was connected to the sewage treatment plant with the western center part, 1981 the district glashutte was added.  to build and supply the facility, a freight funicular was inaugurated in 1912. it went from train station in kaiseringen to the alb plateau with a length of , and from there an additional  of railroad, of which only some concrete remains. after many repairs the railroad, completed in 1915, continued to suffer may accidents and was soon abandoned. at the end of world war i in 1918 the training ground could initially no longer be used because of the treaty of versailles. this treaty demanded the demilitarization of military proving grounds. the funicular was decommissioned in 1921 and never rebuilt. in 1985 a tank loading facility was built on the zollernalb railway (tubingen-sigmaringen railway) in storzingen.  first and second world war  in may 1914, shortly before the war began, the training area was opened. the prussian ministry of war. gave careful consideration to the naming of the training area. in addition to the proposals as "truppenubungsplatz stetten", "truppenubungsplatz heuberg" was ultimately selected  and approved by the minister of war. in both world wars a prisoner-of-war camp was established at the site.  at the beginning of 1933 the existing buildings on the heuberg north of the facility were used as one of the first concentration camps of the nazi regime. up to 2,000 people, mostly political opponents of the regime, were taken  in protective custody. after nine months, concentration camp heuberg was dissolved. most prisoners were then deported into larger concentration camps, such as dachau.  on march 1, 1945, on the ochsenkopf about  from the camp heuberg, 23-year-old luftwaffe test pilot lothar sieber made the initial (and only) test flight of the bachem ba 349 "
natter"- the world's first manned flight of a vertical take-off rocket plane. he was killed shortly after take-off in a crash near nusplingen, in stetten am kalten markt. in march sieber was buried with military honors in the cemetery of stetten am kalten markt. the grave is still there today; also still to be seen at the launch point are the concrete launch pad and the wooden stump of the launching ramp.  postwar years until today from 1945 to 1959  the site was under french administration. the last french army unit moved from camp heuberg in 1997.  in 1966 the bundeswehr expanded in stetten am kalten markt with the construction of the albkaserne. missiles were stationed here during the cold war.  in 1995 the city of meßstetten reacquired the former "blumersberg" artillery site. used chiefly for the armored corps until the end of the twienth century, heuberg is now used in many ways besides- practicing army force basic training, bomb disposal, military police, technisches hilfswerk, professional fire, federal police, customs and police, cbrn defense.  nature and landscape protection the training center possesses an extraordinarily important ecology for nature preservation. the area is divided into 40 per cent forest cover and 60 percent open meadow areas, some interspersed with juniper heath. it is characterized by the traditional herding economy (transhumance). so it is possible to maintain or expand the typical landscape of the past centuries at the facility. on the hills are old bunkers, or what is left of them to see after bombardment. since the training area is burdened by its nearly century-old military use to a large extent with ammunition and parts, entering and driving is extremely dangerous and therefore strictly forbidden for civilians.   natura 2000 site the heuberg training area is a natura 2000 - area  on the grounds the bundeswehr is planning   the construction and expansion of a new and an existing explosives-disposal site in spitalwald. the site consists of a large main area, which is predominantly within the heuberg training area, and several small subdivisions in frohnstetten and south ebingen. the total size of the habitat-protection area is . of these,  are within the military use training area. this has been protected since 2001 as a bird sanctuary and since 2005 as a conservation area. the area is especially worthy of protection-it is particularly suitable as a
summer meadow for sheep-because of its species-rich limestone meadows and juniper heaths.  historic sites within the area there is the legendary dreibannmarke'', also called the "dahn", a 17th-century border, which today marks the border between three different municipalities, formerly in the three states of wurttemberg, baden, and hohenzollern. the meadow at the dreibannmarke served as a stopping place for traveling merchants, wagons and craftsmen. with care it is possible to identify traces of the border. after the inauguration of the firing ranges, a meadow was allocated to the gypsies as a camping site at the edge of the restricted area. until 1835 merchants were smuggled over the customs borders guarded by local hunters.  ritter heinrich von tierberg, called haiterbach, had most likely sold his property in haiterbach, and in 1345 acquired his new territory on the grounds of the military training center, the center of which was meßstetten. in 1418 he sold it to wurttemberg.  literature klaus horter, manfred hensel: chronik des truppenubungsplatzes und der garnison heuberg bei stetten am kalten markt : hrsg. aus anlass des 70-jahrigen bestehens des truppenubungsplatzes heuberg : a. wolf selbstverlag, inzigkofen, 1980, , (geschichte des garnisonsorts stetten am kalten markt und seiner umgebung, volume 1)  notes  external links  references  military training areas in germany nature reserves in baden-wurttemberg bundeswehr training areas
stephanie benson, also known as princess akua ohenewaa asieanem of kokobin, is a uk-based ghanaian international singer and performer who is rooted in jazz music. in ghana, she has been described as the queen of jazz.  early life stephanie benson was born in ghana to royal parents, a pharmaceutical millionaire and his fourth wife named queen nana boahemah ii, who had seventeen children. her musical career began at the age of three when she started learning how to play the piano. she added the violin and cello when she was enrolled at the national academy of music at the age of eight in the year 1975. she became interested in playing the piano after her father often played the instrument to her before bedtime.   after her father's death in 1981 when she was fourteen, she moved to london, england to explore life in a different part of the world. during her stay in london, she channeled her energy into playing the piano under the watchful eye of her uncle, and later got a residency singing and playing in one of the famous nightclubs in london.   strange fellows nightclub in the us  career during one of benson's usual shows in the london nightclub, she was spotted by pete waterman, owner of pwl, who offered her a contract with his label. the deal led her to record and release her first single, "now is the time", placing her in the top 20 on uk dance charts. benson went on a promotional tour across europe until her contract with pwl came to an end. she then started writing and collaborating with artists including stevie wonder, wayne vaughn (earth wind and fire), rob davis (kylie minogue), terry britton (tina turner), andy hill (bucks fizz) and danny schogger (celine dion).  social activity in a bid to groom potential stars of ghanaian talent in all fields of the industry, in april 2013 benson announced the establishment of a music school named the benson entertainment production institute (bepi) in accra. bepi is intended to promote professional international standards relating to stage performances and rehearsals, theatre shows, tv shows and musical concerts, and training, as well as to serve commercial purposes. the first performance of students from bepi was in 2014 at +233 jazz bar and grill, accra.  surviving breast cancer on 29 october 2015, benson underwent surgery for breast cancer, a situation she described as shocking when she was diagnosed, revealing that she had lost her grandmother, mother and other relatives to the disease. following her
survival, she trained to do a mountain walk in france on 1 september 2016 with the dutch "singing for your life" team to raise funds towards a cancer research and mobile mammogram unit for ghana, and support for the dutch cancer society.   benson has publicly talked about surviving breast cancer after undergoing a total of 28 hours of surgery within three days.   on 19 march 2016, at labadi beach hotel's omanye hall in accra, she held a women's gathering centred on her fight against breast cancer with the aim of encouraging and strengthening women amidst music and words of exhortation. she released her song titled "dear lord" at this event, which was attended by notable women including nana ama mcbrown, michelle mckinney-hammond as well as singers akosua agyapong, irene logan, yaa yaa and becca.  personal life benson is an older sister of ghanaian highlife singer, akosua agyapong.   she is married to john, and together they have five children. the couple own a chocolate shop located in the pantiles, royal tunbridge wells, kent.  brand ambassador  in october 2018, 3foundation made her a brand ambassador to lead a breast cancer awareness campaign where she helped raised funds to support women affected by breast cancer to undergo resconstructive surgeries.  performances for the british royal household since taking on music commercially, benson has entertained celebrities and important personalities at public and private events including the british royal household and prince charles, who said upon hearing her sing the first time, "you are one of the most amazing performers i've ever seen." benson has performed at events hosted by the british royals including princess anne, and reportedly exceeded her 15-minute allotted performance time for prince charles to approximately an hour because he enjoyed her act.  she received another invitation to sing for prince william before his wedding to kate middleton on 29 april 2011.  accident on 22 april 2014 benson was involved in a car accident. following this, she released a gospel single titled "my prayer" as a way of showing appreciation and gratitude to god for saving her from the accident.  discography since moving back to ghana, benson has released a number of albums, including different kind of heaven, what are you doing with your life and friend in 2015, as well as dear lord and i am worth it in 2016.  references  living people ghanaian musicians people from kumasi 1967 births ghanaian expatriates in the united kingdom
barsar is a historical town which has its roots linked to the sidh shri baba balak nath ji , a hindu deity located in the hamirpur district of himachal pradesh. located primarily on the foothills of western shivalik range of the outer himalayas  on national highway 503 a , it is a major business and educational hub in the district.  barsar hilltop overlooks lake govind sagar due south west and the dhauladhar himalayas due north.  founded  by rajput prince as a princely state , used their clan name barsar ( a clan of rajput) as the name of state . after separation of india it was merged in india . now it is also a part of himachal pradesh . barsar is one of the most developing and enhancing educational locations in the state and it also serves as one of five tehsil headquarters in the hamirpur district. barsar hilltop separates hamirpur to una district at an elevation of 1015 m above sea level.  barsar clan in the northern part of india, the barsar (or bersal) is a rajput clan whose members ruled several states (see below). the barsars claim descent from the mythical suryavansha (solar dynasty).  population the town has a total population of 3390 of which 1762 are males while 1628 are females as per the population census 2011. in the barsar town population of children with age 0-6 is 360 which makes up 10.62% of total population of the town. average sex ratio of the barsar town is 924 which is lower than the himachal pradesh state's average of 972. child sex ratio for the barsar as per census is 967, higher than the himachal pradesh average of 909.  literacy barsar town has higher literacy rate compared to the himachal pradesh. in 2011, literacy rate of barsar town was 88.91% compared to 82.80% of himachal pradesh. in barsar male literacy stands at 92.65% while female literacy rate was 84.84%.  colleges and institutes govt. degree college barsar is the main higher institute for education as well as there are so many other government and private institutes including schools and colleges.  location and transport the nearest cities are hamirpur, una and bilaspur in himachal pradesh while chandigarh is major big city . as barsar is the main stop before baba balak nath temple deotsidh and it is a transition point for pilgrims and tourists plying to manali since nh 503 a and sh 32 meets at mandi
, a major point on manali route . the nearest broad gauge  railway station is  una railway station, while gaggal airport is the nearest airport for the town followed by mohali international airport chandigarh. the survey of   railway line between una and hamirpur had been taken under constant assessment in two years which will have around four crossing stations between una and hamirpur cities.  references   cities and towns in hamirpur district, himachal pradesh
anna lesznai (3 january 1885 - 2 october 1966) was a hungarian-born american writer, painter, designer, and key figure in the hungarian avant-garde.  life and work   amalia j. moskowitz (familiarly known as mali) was born in budapest. she grew up in alsokortvelyes (now nizny hrusov, slovakia) on the country estate belonging to her father geyza moskowitz, a physician who had served as personal secretary to prime minister gyula andrassy. her mother, hermina hatvany, was a member of the hatvany-deutsch family, one of the leading ennobled jewish families of hungary. the art patron sandor hatvany-deutsch was her uncle, the writer  her cousin. she adopted the pen name of anna lesznai after the neighboring village of leszna (today lesne, slovakia).  multi-talented, she was recognized equally for her artwork and her writing.  she studied art in budapest with karoly ferenczy and simon hollosy, later in paris with lucien simon. in 1909 she joined the constructivist-expressionist group of hungarian artists known as nyolcak ("the eight"), and in 1911 her work was shown as part of their second exhibition. her painting and embroideries drew much of their inspiration from hungarian folklore and folk art.  lesznai's early published writing includes essays, poetry, and original fairy tales. beginning in 1908 she was a regular contributor to the literary journal nyugat. she was also a member of the intellectual discussion group known as the sonntagskreis ("sunday circle") and maintained close friendships with its two principal founders, bela balazs and gyorgy lukacs. both were responsible for her appointment in april 1919, during the hungarian republic of councils, to a position in the ministry of education where she was charged with developing a new national arts curriculum.  defying expectations for women of her time, lesznai was bohemian in spirit and lifestyle. she married at the age of seventeen, bore a son, and then divorced soon after. in 1913 she married the sociologist and historian oszkar jaszi, a leading figure in the hungarian progressive movement and cabinet minister in the hungarian democratic republic.  two sons who were later to become respected intellectuals in the united states resulted from the marriage: economist george jaszi (1915-1992), and the philosopher and germanist andrew jaszi (1917-1998). anna lesznai and osz
kar jaszi divorced in 1918 but maintained a close lifelong friendship.  in 1919 lesznai emigrated to vienna along with sons george and andrew and her companion tibor gergely (1900-1978), an artist and illustrator fifteen years her junior whom she knew from the sunday circle. the couple eventually married and, faced with the rising tide of anti-semitism in europe, immigrated to the united states in 1939.  settling in new york city, lesznai continued her work in art education, lecturing and teaching classes in hungarian art and design.  in 1946 she opened her own school of painting.  her autobiographical novel kezdetben volt a kert ("in the beginning was the garden"), on which she worked for thirty years, was published in german translation in 1965 and in the original hungarian the following year.  with regard to the recent revival of interest in lesznai's life and work, judith szapor writes:  "young scholars, especially petra torok and csilla markoja [...] consider the novel a masterpiece and argue that it should be valued equally for its historical sweep as a family saga, the psychological depth of her characters, and as a documentary source of the early-twentieth-century progressive scene it depicts."  anna lesznai died on october 2, 1966 in new york city.  a major retrospective of her art was mounted by the hungarian national gallery in budapest in 1976. a permanent exhibition at the hatvany lajos muzeum commemorates her life and work.  selected works    the wanderings of the little blue butterfly in fairyland, with original drawings by anna lesznai.  trans. caroline bodoczky. budapest: corvina kiado 1978.  originally published 1912.    "babonas ezrevetelek a mese es a tragedia lelektanahoz" ["superstitious remarks on the psychology of fairy tales and tragedy"]  in: nyugat, h. 14 (1918)  wahre marchen aus dem garten eden.  ["true fairy tales from the garden of eden"].  trans. andras hecker and ilka russy.  edited and with an afterword by gyorgz feheri.  berlin: verlag das arsenal, 2008.  129 pages.  kezdetben volt a kert  ["in the beginning was the garden"]. german translation:  spatherbst in eden, trans. ernst lorsy. karlsruhe: stahlberg verlag. 1965.  677 pages.  memoirs
(unpublished).  extracts in: eva karadi, erzsebet vezer [ed.]: "georg lukacs, karl mannheim und der sonntagskreis".  frankfurt am main: sendler.  pages 129-140.  references  further reading   gyorgy litvan,  a twentieth-century prophet: oscar jaszi 1875-1957.  budapest: central european university press, 2006  external links    the permanent exhibition "crumbs of the broken cake of the world": https://web.archive.org/web/20160816111755/http://www.hatvanymuzeum.net/en/anna-lesznai-her-lifes-work  anna lesznai, biographical profile with photographs, including some of her paintings: emlekmuzeum igazgatoja: http://baderech.hjm.org.il/article.aspx/hu/lesznaianna  anna lesznai in yivo (yivo institute for jewish research): http://www.yivoencyclopedia.org/article.aspx/hungarian_literature  freud museum in uk: https://www.freud.org.uk/exhibitions/10527/painted-dreams-tales-fantasy-and-dreams-in-hungarian-art-of-the-early-twentieth-century/  1885 births 1966 deaths hungarian women painters hungarian women poets hungarian illustrators hungarian women illustrators jewish emigrants from austria to the united states after the anschluss hungarian emigrants to austria
(born july 19, 1979) is a former baseball player in japan.  asai primarily played with the hanshin tigers in the central league.  he also played baseball for the waikiki beachboys.  references  1979 births living people baseball people from kanagawa prefecture hosei university alumni japanese expatriate baseball players in the united states waikiki beach boys players nippon professional baseball outfielders hanshin tigers players
darko bjedov (; born 28 march 1989) is a serbian footballer who plays for zob ahan.  club career born in knin, bjedov started his career with zeleznicar beograd. later he played member of several belgrade clubs, radnicki, cukaricki and mladenovac. he was fully affirmed playing with timok and inđija in the serbian first league. after a season with zeta in the 2015-16 montenegrin first league, where he was second scorer with 18 goals in 33 matches, bjedov joined javor ivanjica. after he scored 10 goals on 20 serbian superliga matches during the first half of 2016-17 serbian superliga season, bjedov signed two-and-a-half year deal with k.a.a. gent on 9 january 2017. in february 2018, bjedov joined rad, on loan deal from gent, until the end of the 2017-18 serbian superliga campaign. on 27 august 2018, bjedov signed a two-year-deal with vojvodina.  references  external sources          1989 births sportspeople from knin living people serbs of croatia serbian footballers association football forwards fk zeleznicar beograd players fk radnicki beograd players fk radnicki obrenovac players fk cukaricki players ofk mladenovac players fk timok players fk inđija players fk zeta players fk javor ivanjica players k.a.a. gent players fk rad players fk vojvodina players fc atyrau players serbian first league players serbian superliga players montenegrin first league players belgian first division a players kazakhstan premier league players serbian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in montenegro expatriate footballers in belgium expatriate footballers in kazakhstan serbian expatriate sportspeople in montenegro serbian expatriate sportspeople in belgium serbian expatriate sportspeople in kazakhstan expatriate footballers in iran
the anglo-saxon poetic records (aspr) is a six-volume edition intended at the time of its publication to encompass all known old english poetry. despite many subsequent editions of individual poems or collections, it has remained the standard reference work for scholarship in this field.  history  the edition was conceived by george philip krapp (1872-1934), who edited volumes 1, 2, and 5 while professor of english at columbia university, with the assistance of his student and colleague elliott van kirk dobbie. krapp died partway through editing volume 3, and dobbie completed this edition before going on to complete the series by editing volumes 6 (which came out in 1942) and 4 (which emerged in 1953). according to henry wiggins, the long gap before the publication of volume 4 was partly due  to elliott's feeling that there was no urgency about completing the beowulf volume, because there were so many competent editions. the press, like any publisher, was troubled about the absence of volume v [recte volume iv] from a six-volume set, and i was assigned the duty of "prodding" elliott. despite all my efforts, he gave us the manuscript when he wanted to-when he felt he had something to contribute.  in 1960, the aspr became the basis for bessinger's a short dictionary of anglo-saxon poetry. a concordance to the aspr was published in 1978.  the old english texts in the aspr were digitised by greg hidley under the auspices of the toronto dictionary of old english project; this text was then corrected by duncan macrae-gibson, though still with a few divergences from the aspr text.  contents   scholars waver, when citing the aspr, over whether they regard it as six works in a numbered series or as a single work in six volumes.  as six individual works, the aspr comprises:   .  .  .  .  .  .  as a single work, it is thought of as:   .  the series was printed in the uk by routledge and kegan paul, but the uk year of publication is not always clear, leading to some variation in citations. the series was reprinted by columbia university press in 1961.  external links  anglo-saxon poetic records at university of oxford text archive  references  old english literature
david anthony may refer to:   david anthony (wheelchair rugby) (born 1981), british wheelchair rugby athlete  david anthony (politician) (born 1955), member of the michigan house of representatives  david brynmor anthony (1886-1966), teacher and academic administrator  david w. anthony ( 1987-), author of the horse, the wheel and language  see also   anthony david (disambiguation)
nadezhda borisovna trubetskaya (1812 - 1909), was a russian noblewoman and courtier. she was noted for her philanthropy, and was one of the most known philanthropists in 19th-century russia, contributing to 40 charity organizations in care for orphans, the homeless and the red cross, as well as the medical care during the russo-turkish war (1877-78), for which she became famous.  references   молева н.м. надежда трубецкая // москва - столица. - м: олма-пресс, 2003. - с. 402-403. - 670 с. - .  1812 births 1909 deaths ladies-in-waiting of the russian empire philanthropists of the russian empire 19th-century philanthropists
james david provins graham frse frcpsg frcpe (8 february 1914 - 16 may 1989) was a scottish physician, pharmacologist and academic author. he wrote on neurotransmissions in relation to chemical influence, including issues of drug dependence. he established the welsh poisons information service. in 1973 he sat on the first committee on the advisory council on the misuse of drugs. in authorship he standardly appears as j d p graham.  early life he was born in barrhead in renfrewshire on 8 february 1914. he was educated at barrhead high school and hyndland secondary school, then  studied medicine at glasgow university and graduated bsc in 1937. he received his doctorate (md) in 1939.  in the second world war he was commissioned in march 1941 and later served in the royal army medical corps in egypt at the rank of captain, attached to the 8th army. after the war he was promoted to major, serving at the military hospital at buchanan castle in drymen in scotland.  academic career in 1946 he began lecturing in pharmacology at glasgow university as an ici research fellow. in 1948 he moved to the welsh national school of medicine in cardiff as a senior lecturer in pharmacology and toxicology becoming a professor in 1971.  in 1965 he moved with his wife ann to ty cwm cottage near llanthony in the brecon beacons national park.  in 1969 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh. his proposers were william alexander bain, george howard bell, james brough and henry m adam.  he retired in 1979. he died on 16 may 1989.  publications  the diagnosis and treatment of acute poisoning (1962) pharmacology for medical students (1971) cannabis and health (1976) cannabis now (1977) an introduction to human pharmacology (1979)  references  1914 births 1989 deaths people from barrhead people educated at hyndland secondary school alumni of the university of glasgow british pharmacologists fellows of the royal society of edinburgh british non-fiction writers 20th-century non-fiction writers
arena kombetare (; known for sponsorship reasons as the  air albania stadium) is an all-seater, multi-purpose football stadium located in the capital city of tirana which was built on the ground of the former qemal stafa stadium. the stadium has a seating capacity of 22,500 constituting the largest stadium in albania.  the stadium is owned by the governing body of albanian football, the albanian football association (fshf) and the albanian state through shoqeria sportive kuq e zi sh.a, a subsidiary established for the purpose of building, managing and maintaining the structure.  designed by marco casamonti of archea associati, the structure of the stadium is a peculiar multi-faceted form (an 8-faceted rectangle) so that each side allows access to distinct functions. at one corner of the stadium structure is an 112-metre tall tower (24 floors). each facet accommodates different streams, thus identifying users of private areas, such as the hotel tower, shopping areas and stadium spectators.  in may 2022, the stadium will host the first ever europa conference league final.  location the stadium is located in the city-centre of the capital city of tirana. precisely on the italia square which itself is alongside one of the two main squares of the city, the mother teresa square, named after the albanian-born saint teresa of calcutta. both squares are located at the southern end of the deshmoret e kombit boulevard, which on that side is confined to the university of tirana building and the grand park of the city. the whole area, including the old qemal stafa stadium, was conceived and built during the kingdom of albania and later during the italian occupation by architects and urban planners gherardo bosio, armando brasini and florestano di fausto. the stadium is surrounded by other public buildings such as the university of tirana, the palace of congress, the archaeological museum, university of arts, the presidential palace, etc.  history  planning and attempts for more than 60 years since its construction, qemal stafa stadium served as the main stadium in albania, the home of the albanian national team, as well as the home of several athletic competitions and other events. after its degradation over the years, around 2010s the albanian football association (fshf) and the albanian government began to discuss the possibility of renovating the facility or, if not possible, building a new stadium in the same location. the government and the fshf came to an
agreement to create a joint venture that would handle the tendering, construction and then management of the new stadium, with the condition that the destination of the sports facility would not be changed. thus, on 26 march 2011, was established qendra sportive kuq e zi sh.a with 70% of shareholding belonging to the fshf and 25% to the albanian government through the ministry of sports.  on 19 october 2010, albania's pm sali berisha after a meeting with the president of uefa michel platini, declared that the government is seriously considering the construction of a new stadium. soon after, at a meeting of the council of ministers on 2 february 2011, a decision was taken that for the 100th anniversary of the independence of albania, which will occur in 2012, a new national stadium will be built in tirana. fenwick iribarren architects was commissioned to design the new stadium. the project envisioned the construction of a 33,000 all-seated stadium with an exterior facade representing albanian state borders and its flag colours. but it never went ahead with the implementation of the project, considering it too expensive for the state budget which would cover most of the construction costs.  in november 2013 the president of the fshf, armand duka stated that uefa will no longer allow european competitions such as the champions league, uefa europa league and other international leagues to be played at qemal stafa stadium or any other stadium in albania because neither of them does not meet uefa standards. consequently, the albanian national team and the albanian superliga teams participating in international competitions risked playing their matches abroad. soon after, fshf in cooperation with the new government elected, took steps to finance the reconstruction of the elbasan arena stadium to avoid uefa's penalties, thus giving time for the construction of a new national stadium in tirana.  efforts were made again in 2015, but this time trying new forms of financing without burdening the state budget. the italian company serenissima costruzioni in collaboration with manica architecture and progetto cmr as designer, presented its project for the stadium. the project envisioned the transfer of ownership of all non-sporting and commercial spaces in favour of the company, as well as the construction of a tower on one side of the stadium which would also be owned by the company. this attempt also failed during negotiations between the government and the investor because the company requested the government to provide bank guarantees for the loans that the company would obtain during construction.  on 22 may 2016 after the stadium was previously excluded from uefa
due to non-compliance with the standards, the last match between fk kukesi and kf laci valid for the albanian cup final was played in the qemal stafa stadium before its final closure until the new stadium begins to build.  final effort and tendering a final attempt was made the following month by reopening the invitation to tender, with albstar sh.p.k presenting a concrete offer. compared to previous projects, albstar presented a new project with a reduced capacity of 22.500 all-seated stadium which also envisioned a tower in one corner of the stadium structure. the project was designed by florentine architect marco casamonti of archea associati, who envisioned a faceted rectangular stadium bound by a curved line. such a form of the stadium was associated with the symbolism of the map of albania which has a similar rectangular shape from north to south with some curved incisions at the northeast, northwest, southeast and southwestern extremes of the country. the external facade is covered with black and red metal panels combining them with the use of glass on the whole facade, including the tower. the metal panels have a curved triangular form, stylised with some shapes reminiscent of traditional albanian carpets. the tower itself is 112 metres high and it fits the curved line of the structure on that side. the sports spaces inside the stadium consists of 3 uniform two-ring grandstands, and the main grandstand of one level which serves only for vip stands.  demolition and construction  on 21 april 2016, the project was officially presented by the president of fshf armand duka, accompanied by the pm edi rama. at the design stage and during its presentation, the project was named "arena kombetare" (), becoming the common name and widely used throughout its construction. the preliminary cost of the construction was initially said to be around € 50 million but later was increased to 60m, and according to comments from fshf officials, the final cost exceeded 75 million euros.  the signed contract stipulates that most of the cost of construction will be carried out by the private company itself, somewhere around € 40 million, and the difference of € 10 million would be covered by uefa's hattrick assistance programme. also, any cost increases during construction would also be carried by the company. while the company would be rewarded with the ownership of all non-sporting parts and the tower which will be built simultaneously on one corner of the structure, as well as exempting the company from vat payments for any work done related to the project.  on
the other hand, any other cost for everything sports spaces or game-related spaces will be carried out by the federation itself in cooperation with the government. the fshf will pay for the interior design of the sports spaces, such as the changing rooms, conference rooms, etc. also for the natural grass for the pitch, all the seats, the led floodlights, as well as a large screen also in led to be installed on the roof of the main grandstand.  on 9 june 2016, the demolition of the national stadium qemal stafa officially began. a new stadium, the arena kombetare, will be built in its place, which will serve as the new home of the albanian national football team. the stadium will have 21,690 seats, but the facility is projected to be multi-functional. simultaneously with the demolition began the disassembling stone by stone of the monumental staircase built by gherardo bosio in 1939, which is considered monument of culture and part of the cultural heritage of the capital. it will be conserved and then integrated by reassembled in the same location into the new stadium, where it will serve the same function as the main entrance to the stadium as it has had since its construction.  initially it was said that at least the sports areas of the stadium would be completed within two years of the start of construction, otherwise there would be penalties for the company. but since the beginning of the works there were problems with the sewage system of the capital which passed just under the old stadium, which caused the work to be delayed until the solution was found in cooperation with the municipality. then there were some other postponements making the stadium finally wrap up on 10 november 2019, waiting for the first time a test match between women's football teams of vllaznia shkoder and apolonia fier.  opening  the fshf initially announced that the stadium would most likely be inaugurated on 11 june 2019 but had to be tested and inspected by uefa officials beforehand. however, the plan for the inauguration was postponed due to the delay in work and the pitch just being installed. the first test match was originally set to be played on 3 november, but was delayed by a week due to heavy rains. the first match, a women's fixture between kf vllaznia and kf apollonia held on 10 november, was attended by many fans and won by vllaznia 2-0, with the first-ever goal at the stadium scored by arbiona bajraktari.  arena kombet
are, now under the new official name of air albania stadium, was officially inaugurated with a ceremony on 17 november 2019, 1274 days after the final game at the old stadium. the first match, was valid for the euro 2020 qualifiers played at 20:45 between the national teams of albania and france, which the host team lost 0-2. a crowd of more 21,000 was in attendance. many celebrities of sport, politics and art were invited to the ceremony, with the uefa president aleksander ceferin and prime minister of albania edi rama were among them.  naming since 1946, the time at which the stadium was finished, was named qemal stafa stadium in honour of qemal stafa, a hero of the second world war and founder of the communist party, which was in power after the war. the old stadium held this name until 9 june 2016, the day on which its demolition officially began.  during a ceremony held to present the winning project and the conclusion of the agreement for the construction of the new stadium, albania's pm edi rama referred to the new stadium with the name of arena kombetare. this made the stadium widely known and referred to as "arena kombetare" from the day the works began until a few weeks before the completion of the work. however, much controversy arose during the construction of whether the stadium should retain its old name "qemal stafa", the new one "arena kombetare" or should be renamed in honour of a prominent albanian football player to honour him as well as the history of this sport in the country. the most discussed figure was that of panajot pano, the former striker of kf partizani, one of the capital's teams, as well as the national football team player. his name is widely respected and is considered one of the greatest footballers the country has ever known.  towards the end of the works, however, the fshf hinted that the stadium could be named after a private company for sponsorship reasons. according to the federation, such a stadium will require ongoing funding due to maintenance and this necessitates taking advantage of any sponsorship opportunities.  this led to the opening of the tender on 8 august 2019, just months before the inauguration, for the new stadium name. some domestic and foreign companies were interested in the competition, including oil, telecommunications, insurance, and airline companies. on 15 november 2019, kuq e zi sh.a issued a press release announcing that two companies, bolv oil and air albania
, went in the final phase of negotiations. with the air albania being announced as the winner with the most favourable bid.  the deal stipulates that within the next five years starting from the date of signing, the new stadium name will be "air albania stadium". it was also decided that each tribune would have its own name.   main stand to be named - qemal stafa stand, in honour of the hero as well as the demolished stadium which was in the same location.  east stand to be named -  panajot pano stand, in honour of former kf partizani player.  north stand to be named - fatmir frasheri stand, in honour of former kf tirana player.  south stand to be named - vasillaq zeri stand, in honour of former fk dinamo player.  structure and facilities  tirana marriott hotel and arena centre the stadium is located near the centre of the capital tirana. the building built on the side of the stadium will host tirana marriott hotel. the project includes a history museum, changing rooms, and other facilities such as cafeterias, lavatories including access for the disabled, a press area, a convention centre, a trophy room, etc.  there is no room for a running track as capacity will grow to over 22,000 seats, all covered. the overall project is part of the arena shopping centre together with the 112-metre tower, 80-room hotel and 256 underground parking spaces. all of the stadium facilities will be hidden behind a unique set of blinders in national colours of albania.  tirana's tumo center in october 2020, the municipality of tirana alongside the albanian-american development fund (aadf) decided to temporarily open the tumo center on the arena kombetare internal spaces. the center offers for adolescents aged 12-18, extracurricular educational programs, innovative in design and technology, providing adolescents with space and equipment to advance their education while developing technical skills. the original location of the tumo tirana is the pyramid of tirana which is planned to be reconstructed and returned to the headquarters of this teaching center.  see also  air albania  qemal stafa stadium  list of tallest buildings in albania  references  external links   arena center official site    archea associati  multi-purpose stadiums in albania albania football venues in albania albania national football teams sports venues completed in 2019 skyscrapers in albania buildings and structures in tirana
encore data products is a privately held american manufacturer and supplier of high end audio and video equipment including headphones, amplifiers, digital signal processors and computer control systems. the company was founded in 2006 and currently headquartered in lafayette, colorado. it is one of the largest manufacturers and supplier of audio and video components in colorado.  overview encore data products was founded in 2006 in louisville, colorado by jeff burgess. the company target markets are education, health and fitness, hospitality, business and government industries. encore data products is also the sole distributor of the soundnetic brand of headphones, headsets and earbuds. the company's products enable schools to incorporate audiovisual resources into their lessons, helping students build speaking and listening skills. certain headphone and headset requirements need to be met for school district and state testing criteria in the united states.  products  encore data products manufacturers their own brand of headphones and headsets, is an exclusive distributor of the soundnetic brand, and also distributes products from hamilton-buhl, califone, avid, and others.   headphones - hifi headphones, in-ear headphones, mobile headphones, headphones for school testing, headphone amplifiers, trrs headphones, and school accessories;  headsets - school testing headsets, gaming and multimedia headsets, intercom and broadcast headsets, accessories;  audio visual accessories -adapters, cases, and extension cords such as the slim-straight headphone adapter for bulky cases.  microphones - microphones for stage and studio application, microphones for vocals and instruments, microphones for film and broadcasting, presentation, accessories;  conference systems and technology -  tour guide systems, installed sound and wireless microphones, teleconferencing and video conferencing, headphones and headsets for broadcast, commentators and interpreters, multimedia systems, conference and recording software, mixers, amplifiers and accessories;  references  audio equipment manufacturers of the united states companies based in colorado lafayette, colorado
"the americans come (an episode in france in the year 1918)" is a world war i song written and composed by fay foster. the song was first published in 1918 by j. fischer & bro., in new york city. the sheet music cover depicts soldiers marching with a city and battleship on the left and a bombed city on the right.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .   1918 songs songs of world war i songs about world war i songs about the united states songs about france
is a japanese former athlete. she competed in the cycling at the 1988 summer olympics and the speed skating at the 1988 winter olympics.  references  external links    1966 births living people japanese female cyclists japanese female speed skaters olympic cyclists of japan olympic speed skaters of japan cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics speed skaters at the 1988 winter olympics asian games silver medalists for japan speed skaters at the 1986 asian winter games speed skaters at the 1990 asian winter games medalists at the 1986 asian winter games medalists at the 1990 asian winter games sportspeople from hokkaido asian games medalists in speed skating
tele24 was a swiss private television channel run by roger schawinski. it broadcast from 5 october 1998 until 20 november 2001, and from 18 october 2013, it gets replaced by its successor s1.  ownership initially, schawinski's belcom holding ag owned 50% of tele24, while the media companies ringier and tamedia owned 25% each. in 1999, ringier sold half its stake to belcom holding ag and half to tamedia. at the end of 2001, tamedia bought belcom holding ag without the shares in tele24.  history  tele24 developed from the zurich regional broadcaster telezuri, which was also founded by schawinski. in the zurich region, tele24 and telezuri broadcast a single programme schedule. both channels were produced in a single location.  1998: broadcasting of tele24 began  1999: an investment fund of credit suisse first boston bought 40% of belcom holding ag and thereby became an indirect owner of tele24.  2001: belcom holding ag was sold to tamedia.  2001: the last broadcast took place on 30 november 2001. 2013: it gets replaced by its new successor station s1.  programming tele24 exclusively broadcast shows that it had produced itself.  news shows:  swissnews: news programme with a strong focus on switzerland, which was broadcast live at 6pm and 8pm. at 7pm the show was broadcast a second time and from 9pm it was repeated hourly.   money: magazine show with information on the stock markets and interviews with business leaders.  24 minuten: magazine show  live-ubertragungen: live broadcasts of important press conferences (e.g. the swissair crisis) or elections to the swiss federal council  talk shows:  talktaglich: daily talkshow with a guest. viewers could call in. tele24 chief and part-owner roger schawinski starred in several editions of the show each day.  silvan grutter: weekend talkshow starring silvan grutter.  fadegrad: weekend talkshow starring christian handelsman, which replaced silvan grutter's show after he moved to tv3.  sonntalk: sunday broadcast with journalists and politicians discussing current affairs of the previous week.  bistro: daily talk and variety show, starring christian handelsman  variety shows:  swissdate: weekend dating show  inside: weekend people's magazine show  bloff: game show  lifestyle: a show which interviewed
prominent individuals.  venus & mars: variety show on relationship problems.  jukebox: daily music broadcast, starring reto peritz (this was the first programme broadcast by tele24)  general information so-called "video journalists" ("vjs") produced the news shows. the vj was both a journalist and a cameraman/woman. as a result, tele24 was able to produce content comparatively cheaply.  tele24 was included in most swiss cable television bundles and all swiss satellite television.  the market share of tele24 ranged between 1.0 and 1.1% (15-49 year olds, 6-pm-11pm) between 1999 and 2001, according to telecontrol and srg-forschungsdienst.  at the beginning of 2001, it was announced that money would be outsourced to its own tv station, led by markus gilli and called money24, which was to be switzerland's first dedicated financial news channel. ironically, the financial situation of tele24 made this seem very unrealistic. how far this project was developed is unknown.  references  bibliography  schawinski, roger: tv-monopoly. die inside-story. 2002, .  german-language television in switzerland defunct television channels in switzerland 1998 establishments in switzerland 2001 disestablishments in switzerland television channels and stations established in 1998 television channels and stations disestablished in 2001
wee wee marie (will you do zis for me) is a world war i song written by alfred bryan & joe mccarthy and composed by fred fisher. the song was first published in 1918 by mccarthy & fisher, inc., in new york, ny. the sheet music cover depicts a soldier and a woman facing each other speaking.  the song was in the top 20 charts from september 1918 to february 1919 and reached number 10 in december. it was recorded by arthur fields, irving kaufman, and rachel grant & billy murray. the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .   1918 songs songs of world war i songs written by fred fisher songs with lyrics by alfred bryan songs with lyrics by joseph mccarthy (lyricist)
manpreet akhtar (1965 - 18 january 2016) was a punjabi folk singer and the sister of dilshad akhtar, who was also a punjabi-language folk singer.  references   people from faridkot district 1965 births 2016 deaths indian women folk singers indian folk singers singers from punjab, india 20th-century indian women singers women musicians from punjab, india
south haven is an unincorporated community in noble township, wabash county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of wabash.  geography pioneer is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in wabash county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
hcm slobozia is a women's handball club from slobozia, romania, that plays in the liga nationala.  kits  honours divizia a  runners-up (1): 2018-19  2020-2021 team  current squad    goalkeepers  wingers   25  gabriela moldoveanu  97  catalina sava line players  back players  2019-20 hcm slobozia season  players  players in   florenta ilie (rw)   gabriela moldoveanu (rw)   ana ciolan (pv)   alexandra banciu (cb)   stefania balaceanu (lb)  players out  external links         romanian handball clubs liga nationala (women's handball) clubs handball clubs established in 2008 2008 establishments in romania slobozia
the callwey verlag is a german publishing house with the main focus on structural engineering and architecture.  history  the publishing house was founded in 1884 in munich by georg d.w. callwey. callwey published books based on the subjects of planning and design around the house, lifestyle, living, design, architecture, landscape architecture, crafts and restoration. they offered an extensive book program on the subjects of building, housing, gardening and cooking, and various journals about the field of architecture and craft such as "der baumeister" (the builder), "garten und landschaft" (garden and landscape), "topos", "die mappe" (the folder), "stein" (stone) and "restauro". in addition, they offered digital products, events, awards, symposia, yearbooks and services of corporate publishing.  callwey verlag gained national prominence when ferdinand avenarius took over 50% of the stakes in the magazine "der kunstwart", in 1894, which was at that time an important publication of the middle bourgeoisie. avenarius and callwey made an important contribution to the cultural history leading to the beginning of the world war i in 1914. their writings, many published for the "durerbund", had a great influence on the education of youth, especially students and elementary school teachers. they were attributed to the lebensreform movement.  in 1996, the laterna magica publisher was taken over, where they had specialized in books on the practice of photography. the program has now been set.  the callwey verlag is run by the fourth generation of the baur-callwey family.  publications  the company is one of the leading architecture publishers in german in the topic areas of construction, planning and design, renovation and restoration. from the beginning, both books and journals were published. in total, eight magazines are published. in the field of structural engineering callwey publishes the titles   mappe,  baumeister,  stein.  for the field of landscape architecture, the publisher offers the "topos" titles (four issues per year in english) and "garten + landschaft" (monthly in german) among other journals. the trade magazine for restorers and artisans "restauro" also appears 8 times a year.  in book publishing, approximately 40 new releases are published per year. licenses are sold worldwide, including in the united states and japan.  further reading   helmuth baur-callwey: 125 jahre callwey: 1884-2009,
munich: callwey 2009,  external links   official website  references   1884 establishments in germany mass media in munich book publishing companies of germany magazine publishing companies of germany
aurel suciu (1853-february 14, 1898) was an austro-hungarian ethnic romanian lawyer and political activist.  born in ketegyhaza (chitighaz), a village that today lies in bekes county, hungary, his father petru was a notary there and in nearby pusztaottlaka (otlaca). his grandfather nicolae, a priest in gyula, was the brother-in-law of moise nicoara. after completing primary school, suciu attended gymnasium in bekes (bichis), szarvas and beius. he completed the study of law in oradea, passing the bar in 1879 and settling in arad. initially working under mircea v. stanescu, he developed a good reputation as a lawyer. a pious member of the romanian orthodox church, he represented siria in the national synod and had a deep sense of the church's historic mission. he was a life member of asociatia nationala aradana pentru cultura poporului roman, frequently sitting on its leadership. he also belonged to the local women's association, which he helped financially, and to the theater society. he contributed to village schools, cultural societies and libraries, and in 1886 helped found a bank.  suciu joined the romanian national party (pnr) after its establishment in 1881, sitting on its executive from 1892 to 1894. he became a prominent advocate on behalf of transylvania's romanians. in 1892, he helped draft the transylvanian memorandum. in may 1892, he was part of a delegation to vienna that aimed to submit the document to emperor francis joseph, who refused to receive the petitioners. a year later, together with the pnr's entire executive, he was indicted by the hungarian authorities; the trial was held at cluj in may 1894. he was sentenced to a year and a half in prison and initially returned to arad with his co-defendant mihai veliciu; the two received a hero's welcome. in early august, once the sentence was upheld, they were arrested and led to the train station by local peasants, soldiers and intellectuals. when the train passed through budapest, a crowd of romanians greeted them. finally, the two arrived at their destination, the prison at vac. all the signatories were released in september 1895, following a pardon from franz joseph. suciu had become ill during his detention, and unsuccessfully sought treatment in vienna. his health gradually declined until he died at arad in early 1898; the funeral served as an occasion for a patriotic demonstration by the hundreds
of romanians who attended.  notes  references  maria berenyi, "memorandistul aurel suciu (1853-1898), originar din chitighaz", in personalitati marcante in istoria si cultura romanilor din ungaria (secolul xix), pp. 309-21. gyula: institutul de cercetari al romanilor din ungaria, 2013.   1853 births 1898 deaths people from ketegyhaza members of the romanian orthodox church romanians in hungary romanian austro-hungarians romanian lawyers romanian activists prisoners and detainees of austria-hungary
campinoti is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  nicola campinoti (born 1992), italian footballer paolo campinoti (born 1990), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
addison holley (born may 18, 2000) is a canadian actress who has had starring roles in several television series.   holley was born in burlington, ontario. in 2016, she was nominated for the daytime emmy award for outstanding performer in a children's series for her work in annedroids. she is the voice of the titular character in ella the elephant, hazel in little charmers, and amaya/owlette in pj masks. her younger sister, kallan, was the voice of skye from paw patrol. filmography live-action roles  annedroids - anne  baxter - dana mcnab  cold blood - jill camm (episode: "cop killer")  cyborg soldier - katie  my babysitter's a vampire - anastasia (vampire)  really me - jenny donkers  the red maple leaf - frankie palermo  rosie takes the train - young rosie  shelby - haley  trapped: the alex cooper story - alex cooper  animated roles  caillou - layla  daniel tiger's neighborhood - miss elaina (2012-2020, seasons 1-4)  doodlebops rockin' road show - alice  ella the elephant - ella  grojband - kate persky  little charmers - hazel charming  monster math squad - sally  my big big friend - lili  paw patrol - julia (seasons 1-4), the cheetah  peg + cat - tessa  pj masks - amaya/owlette  true and the rainbow kingdom - day queen  wishenpoof! - bianca  the zhuzhus'' - jessica beeker  references  external links  2000 births actresses from ontario canadian child actresses canadian film actresses canadian television actresses canadian voice actresses living people people from burlington, ontario :category:21st-century american actresses
the 2015-16 elite ice hockey league season was the 13th season of the elite ice hockey league. the regular season began in september 2015 and ended in march 2016.  on 30 april 2014, the elite league had announced changes to the import rules which would apply to the 2015-16 season: the number of non british-trained players would rise from 12 to 13, while the number of work-permit players would remain at 11.  teams  the ten teams were split into two conferences. teams played the sides in their conferences four times, home and away (32 games), and played the sides in the other conferences twice, home and away (20 games).  the season was marked by the disappearance of the hull stingrays, who were replaced by the manchester phoenix, the first top-level team to play in the city since manchester storm folded in 2002-03.  conference champions sheffield steelers and braehead clan took first and third spot in the league, but, in a repeat of the previous season, neither side could continue their success in the playoffs, which was won by nottingham panthers, who beat coventry blaze 2-0 in the final.  the challenge cup was also won by the panthers who beat the cardiff devils in a 1-0 overtime win.   erhardt conference  gardiner conference  standings  overall  erhardt conference only intra-conference games counted towards the erhardt conference standings. each team played the other four teams in the conference eight times, for a total of 32 matches.  gardiner conference only intra-conference games counted towards the gardiner conference standings. each team played the other four teams in the conference eight times, for a total of 32 matches.  league officials  references  elite ice hockey league seasons 1 united
the trombonium is a brass instrument formerly manufactured by h.n. white company and conn-selmer. it was unveiled by h.n. white in 1938 and was manufactured until the mid 1970s. the trombonium has the same timbre as a regular trombone except in a smaller, more compact form. it was originally designed to be used as a marching trombone, and has valves rather than a slide thus superficially resembles a tenor horn or euphonium. it was used by the university of southern california marching band and on a handful of jazz recordings (e.g., jay and kai + 6).  references  trombones
the we are pirates tour is a concert tour by american rock band blink-182 in support of the group's seventh studio album, california (2016). it consisted of festival and amphitheater dates and ran between may 14 and july 10, 2016 in north america. support acts included all time low, hawthorne heights, simple plan, and the used on select dates. aside from the few club shows and the musink festival in 2015, the we are pirates tour was their first with guitarist and vocalist matt skiba and their first without founding member tom delonge.  background  after touring and releasing the band's sixth album neighborhoods (2011), it became difficult for blink-182 to record new material, due to guitarist tom delonge's various projects. after disagreements, the remaining members of the group-vocalist/bassist mark hoppus and drummer travis barker-sought separation from delonge and recruited guitarist matt skiba, best known as the frontman of rock band alkaline trio, in his place. blink-182 performed two club shows and a slot at the musink tattoo convention & music festival in march 2015 with skiba "filling in" for delonge. afterwards, they regrouped and recorded the album california with producer john feldmann.  prior to the main headlining tour for california, the group embarked on the we are pirates tour. they performed at several festivals, including x games austin 2016, firefly music festival, big field day, amnesia rockfest, and kerfuffle 2016. hoppus and skiba also performed several acoustic sets in england in june 2016, including for bbc radio 1's rock all dayer and radio x. they also added four dates in canada in early july, supported by simple plan and the used.  set list  this setlist is representative of the june 4, 2016 performance in austin. it is not representative of all concerts for the duration of the tour.   "feeling this"  "what's my age again?"  "family reunion"  "the rock show"  "first date"  "down"  "i miss you"  "up all night"  "bored to death"  "built this pool"  "dumpweed"  "always"  "stay together for the kids"  "man overboard"  "violence"  "josie"  "happy holidays, you bastard"  "not now"  "reckless abandon"  "carousel" encore  "all the small things"
"brohemian rhapsody"  "dammit"  shows  personnel  mark hoppus - vocals, bass guitar travis barker - drums matt skiba - vocals, guitar  references  notes  citations  external links    2016 concert tours blink-182 concert tours
the 58th air transport squadron is an inactive united states air force unit. it was last active at mcguire air force base in july 1960, where it was assigned to the 1611th air transport group.  the squadron was first active during world war ii as a ferrying unit on the north atlantic ferry route.  it was activated again in the 1950s when military air transport service replaced its table of distribution air transport squadrons with table of organization and equipment units.  history the squadron was first activated at houlton army air field, maine in september 1942 as the 58th air corps ferrying squadron.  it moved to iceland, then canada, where it supported the north atlantic ferry route for air transport command.  it was replaced by station 9, north atlantic wing, air transport command in a general reorganization of air transport command units in the fall of 1943.  the squadron was redesignated as the 58th air transport squadron and activated at kelly air force base in july 1952, when it assumed the mission of 1286th air transport squadron  the 1286th had been organized at kelly only four months earlier, on 7 march 1952, when military air transport service moved the douglas c-124 globemaster ii aircraft stationed at kelly to mcchord air force base, replacing them with douglas c-54 skymasters from mcchord.  it remained non-operational until may, when it received its first aircraft.    in june 1955, the squadron moved to mcguire air force base, new jersey and was reassigned.  in 1958, the squadron airlifted the bob hope and tex ritter united service organizations shows to europe to perform for troops stationed there.  lineage  constituted as the 58th air corps ferrying squadron  activated on 15 september 1943  redesignated 58th transport squadron c.29 march 1943  disbanded on 13 october 1943  reconstituted on 16 july 1952 as the 58th air transport squadron, medium  activated on 20 july 1952  inactivated on 18 july 1960  assignments  16th ferrying group (later 16th transport group), 15 september 1942 - 13 october 1943  1700th air transport group, 20 july 1952  1611th air transport group, 30 june 1955 - 28 july 1960  stations  houlton army air field, maine, 15 september 1942  meeks field, iceland, march 1943  crystal i (fort chimo), quebec, canada, 1943 - 13 october 1943  kelly air force base, texas, 20 july 1952  mcguire air force base, new jersey, 30 june 1955 - 18 july 1960
aircraft  douglas c-54 skymaster, 1952-1960  references  notes  citations  bibliography     military units and formations established in 1952 0058
cylindrepomus spinosus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by hudepohl in 1990.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1990
pilar campoy  (born 6 october 1990) is an argentine field hockey player and part of the argentina national team.  she was part of the argentine team at the 2014-15 women's fih hockey world league where she won a gold medal, and at the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro. on club level she played for club nautico hacoaj in argentina.  references  external links        1990 births living people las leonas players olympic field hockey players of argentina argentine female field hockey players field hockey players at the 2016 summer olympics expatriate field hockey players argentine expatriate sportspeople in spain south american games gold medalists for argentina south american games medalists in field hockey competitors at the 2018 south american games club de campo villa de madrid players
mauricio de maio is a brazilian plastic surgeon who works with injectable fillers and botulinum toxin.  he is the co-author of three textbooks on plastic surgery.  career de maio studied medicine at the medical school of the university of sao paulo. after his residency in plastic surgery and clinical practice since 1996, he specialized in non-surgical procedures  de maio developed a technique for using injectable fillers and botulinum toxin (botox) for cosmetic procedures that he calls "the md codes". he has taught his technique in md codes institute.  he is a member of the brazilian society of aesthetics and reconstructive plastic surgery since 1997 and active member of the international society of aesthetic plastic surgery (isaps) since 2004  textbooks  injectable fillers in aesthetic medicine (maio, mauricio; rzany, berthold) - springer-verlag berlin heidelberg, 2006 and 2nd edition (2014). published in english, spanish, portuguese and korean.    the male patient in aesthetic medicine (maio, mauricio; rzany, berthold). published in english. publisher springer-verlag berlin heidleberg, 2009.    botulinum toxin in aesthetic medicine (maio, mauricio; rzany, berthold). publisher - springer-verlag berlin heidelberg, 2007. published in english, spanish, portuguese, korean and japanese.  references  external links     brazilian plastic surgeons year of birth missing (living people) living people university of sao paulo alumni
cylindrepomus nigriceps is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by franz in 1971. it is known from sulawesi.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1971
the american brewing company plant, owned by the american brewing company, is a historic brewery complex at 431 harris avenue in providence, rhode island that operated between 1892 and 1922. it is a well-preserved example of a state of the art late 19th century brewery building, its original functions still discernible in its layout.  it was only used as a brewery until 1922, when it was shut down by prohibition; it has served as a warehouse and storage facility for most of the time since.  the complex was listed on the national register of historic places in 2016.  description and history the american brewing company plant is located in providence's federal hill neighborhood at the northeast corner of harris avenue and eagle street.  the principal building of the plant is a three-story brick structure with stone trim.  decorative features include round-arched windows set in recessed panels, a rusticated stone stringcourse between the first and second floors, and brick piers with corbelling separating some of the windows at the upper levels.  this building was designed by adam wagner, a well-known designer of breweries, and was built in 1892.  also on the property are a c. 1900 ice house, a 1911 boiler house, and several modern garages. the order of operations of large-scale beer brewing are still evident in the interior of the building (mostly used now as a warehouse), from fermentation, to storage and settling, to bottling.  the brewery was founded in 1892 by james hanley, an irish immigrant, and featured state of the art facilities of the period, including the installation of two industrial-scale climate control systems needed to control temperatures for the lagering of beer.  it is the only industrial-scale brewery of the period to survive in the state, and is one of only a few surviving designs of adam wagner.  the brewery was operated only until 1922, when it closed as a consequence of prohibition.  in 1936, the property was adapted for use as a warehouse and storage facility, in which use it continued until 2005.  lawyer and politician john f. collins worked at the brewery as a young man just out of college in the 1890s. ironically, collins was responsible for prosecuting prohibition cases during his time as special assistant to the united states attorney for rhode island from 1921-23. collins also served as mayor of providence 1939-1941.  see also national register of historic places listings in providence, rhode island  list of breweries in rhode island  list of defunct breweries in the united states  references
industrial buildings and structures on the national register of historic places in rhode island buildings and structures in providence, rhode island national register of historic places in providence, rhode island brewery buildings in the united states beer brewing companies based in rhode island 1922 disestablishments in rhode island 1892 establishments in rhode island american companies established in 1892 food and drink companies established in 1892 american companies disestablished in 1922 food and drink companies disestablished in 1922
christopher allen, better known by his stage name chris stylez, is a canadian r&b recording artist, songwriter, and producer residing in new york city. stylez' music has received over 50 million loops of his song "who is" on the social media platform vine, and appeared on the spotify viral 50 and u.k. viral 10 charts. his first mainstream exposure was an appearance on the bet "music matters" initiative.  stylez was born in ottawa, ontario, canada and spent most of his life making music. at a young age, stylez learned to play guitar from ronnie "bop" williams from the wailers.  in 2008, he recorded his first single "fade away" which gained international airplay. in 2010, he relocated from canada to new york city in the hopes of furthering his career. he is influenced by marvin gaye and d'angelo.  discography  albums in late out very early, january 25, 2019  ep superstar, november 2013 dreamer, june 4, 2013 who is, february 5, 2016  singles relapse, august 5, 2016  guest appearances consequence (rapper) - "couped up" feat. dj swivel & chris stylez on dj whoo kid - bet awards mixtape '06, clinton sparks - the cons vol. 4 2006  kanye west featuring charlie wilson & chris stylez - "brothers" - promotional single  references  external links  21st-century african-american male singers american rhythm and blues singer-songwriters living people african-american  male singer-songwriters american soul singers american hip hop singers musicians from ottawa year of birth missing (living people)
moccasin dam is a small dam on moccasin creek in tuolumne county, california, in the town of moccasin, west of yosemite. it holds the moccasin reservoir. the dam, reservoir and associated hydroelectric power plant are part of the hetch hetchy project, which provide water and power to the city of san francisco. the dam is located near the junction of highway 120 and highway 49.  history in 1914 congress approved the raker act, allowing san francisco to construct a dam and reservoir in the hetch hetchy valley of yosemite national park for the purpose of public water supply. due to the large elevation drop between hetch hetchy and the city, several hydroelectric power stations were constructed along the  long hetch hetchy aqueduct. construction of the moccasin powerhouse began in 1921 and was completed on august 14, 1925. the moccasin dam was completed in 1930 as a regulating afterbay for the moccasin powerhouse.  the moccasin creek fish hatchery was constructed downstream of the dam in 1954, and raises trout for stocking in high elevation streams in the tuolumne river watershed, and for the nearby, much larger lake don pedro. in 1969, a new powerhouse with more efficient turbines was constructed to replace the original power plant.  a march 2018 storm caused the moccasin reservoir to become overburdened with water and debris. the dam started to leak and evacuations were issued for a small number of houses and a campground downstream before water levels subsided.  although interim repairs are still ongoing, the california division of dam safety allowed the dam to resume normal operations on june 6, 2019.  specifications moccasin dam is a rockfill dam, with a structural height of  and a length of , containing  of material. the elevation at the dam crest is  above sea level. the moccasin reservoir has a storage capacity of , and a surface area of . the reservoir has a natural catchment area of ; however, most of its water is imported through the hetch hetchy project pipelines. in order to protect the high-quality hetch hetchy water, local flows from moccasin creek are captured upstream and routed through a bypass system that discharges downstream of moccasin dam. the bypass includes a small hydroelectric plant with a capacity of 2.9 megawatts (mw).  the main moccasin powerhouse is situated at the eastern (upstream) end of the reservoir, and consists of two units
with a total capacity of 100 megawatts. in 2004, the powerhouse generated 391 million kilowatt hours (kwh). in 2009, it generated 348 million kwh. moccasin is the furthest downstream of san francisco's three hydroelectric plants (the others are kirkwood, near hetch hetchy reservoir and holm near cherry lake). operations at all three plants are coordinated from the control room at moccasin.  see also  list of dams and reservoirs in california  references  dams in california dams completed in 1930 rock-filled dams hydroelectric power plants in california hetch hetchy project reservoirs in tuolumne county, california 1930 establishments in california
the 1951-52 honduran amateur league was the fifth edition of the honduran amateur league, sula de la lima defeated f.c. motagua 4-3 in the final match played in san pedro sula.  the season ran from 2 september 1951 to 30 march 1952.  regional champions for the first time the department of valle included a team to participate in the national championship.  known results  national championship round played in a double round-robin format between the regional champions.  also known as the pentagonal.  known results  sula's lineup  references  liga amateur de honduras seasons honduras 1951 in honduras 1952 in honduras
john porch (born 4 march 1994) is an australian professional rugby union player, currently playing for irish side connacht.  porch joined irish province connacht, who compete in the pro14 and european rugby champions cup, ahead of the 2019-20 northern hemisphere season. connacht's current head coach is former australia 7s head coach andy friend.  australia porch represented australia at the 2016 rio olympics. he represented australia at the 2018 gold coast commonwealth games for the australian sevens.  references  external links  1994 births living people australian rugby union players male rugby sevens players australian international rugby sevens players indigenous australian rugby union players indigenous australian olympians rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of australia connacht rugby players australian expatriate rugby union players australian expatriate sportspeople in ireland expatriate rugby union players in ireland rugby union wings sydney (nrc team) players
chamber choir head ood, vend is an estonian chamber choir. the chief conductor of the choir is the estonian composer part uusberg.  the choir got its start in march 2008, when part uusberg called together a project choir to take part in his brother's uku uusberg's diploma production "good night, brother" (in estonian "head ood, vend"), based on william shakespeare. after the last performance in autumn 2008, the desire to sing together had not waned and a decision was made to continue as a regular choir.  the core of the choir consists of singers who grew up together singing in rapla riinimanda choirs, conducted by urve uusberg, along with friends from the estonian youth mixed choir and young music students. the choir has been a laboratory for the young conductor and composer since its beginnings and still performs a lot of uusberg's music.  the choir has given many concerts in rapla, tallinn, tartu and other estonian churches and also in gotland at the st. mary's cathedral in visby. additionally, the choir has participated in the theatre no99 plays "pea vahetus" ("head exchange") and "uhtne eesti suurkogu" ("unified estonia plenum"). in 2014 chamber choir head ood, vend was one of the main performers at the vaasa choir festival in finland. in 2015 the choir collaborated with the estonian dance agency in the music and dance performance "estonian images".  chamber choir head ood, vend received in 2013 the honor of being named "choir of the year" by the estonian choral association. the same year, the choir's newest album "ohtul" ("in the evening") was named "album of the year".  awards  2013 - 6th place and silver medal in xx century music category, silver medal in contemporary music category and 5th place and gold medal in gospel, jazz and folk music category, 52nd international choir competition "seghizzi"   2013 - grand prix, i prize in chamber choir category and ii prize in contemporary music category, xiii international choir competition "tallinn 2013"   2013 - i prize a-category and the traveling trophy of "tuljak" for the best "tuljak" performance, xix estonian mixed choirs' competition "tuljak"   2012 - ii prize a-category, granted an access to the grand prix round, xii estonian chamber choirs' festival   2011 - ii prize a-category, xviii
estonian mixed choirs' competition "tuljak"   2010 - golden diploma, viii parnu international choir festival   2009 - iii prize in chamber choir category in xi international choir competition   2009 - i prize b-category, xvii estonian mixed choirs' competition "tuljak"  acknowledgements   estonian choral association's choir of the year 2013  estonian choral association's album of the year 2013 (for "ohtul)  recordings   siis vaikivad koik motted (2009)   ohtul (2013)  ohtu ilu (2016, with the orchestra collegium consonante)  references  external links   official page  facebook  madara rudzite "mazais perts": jauna izciliba perts usbergs. zurnals figaro, 28 may 2014  anneli hallik. kammerkoor taastas harmoonia vanade soprade vahel. postimees, 4 june 2009  estonian choirs
robert george white (born 15 september 1995) is an english cricketer who plays for middlesex county cricket club. a wicket-keeper, who is a right-handed batsman, who also bowls right-arm medium pace. he made his first-class debut for loughborough mcc university against hampshire county cricket club in april 2015. he made his list a debut for middlesex against australia on 9 june 2018, during australia's tour of england.  he made his twenty20 debut for middlesex in the 2018 t20 blast on 3 august 2018. in august 2021, in the 2021 county championship, white scored his maiden century in first-class cricket.  references  external links    1995 births living people people from ealing english cricketers middlesex cricketers loughborough mccu cricketers essex cricketers
alexander kudryavtsev and denys molchanov were the defending champions but chose not to defend their title.  purav raja and divij sharan won the title after defeating quino munoz and akira santillan 6-3, 4-6, [10-8] in the final.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  open castilla y leon - doubles 2016 2016 open castilla y leon
ratchakit prakan stadium () is a multi-purpose stadium in satun province, thailand. it is currently used mostly for football matches and is the home stadium of satun united f.c.  references  multi-purpose stadiums in thailand buildings and structures in satun province sport in satun province
blasius laubich (died 1608) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1604-1608).  biography on 24 nov 1604, blasius laubich was appointed during the papacy of pope clement viii as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop of symbalia. on 4 dec 1604, he was consecrated bishop by wolfgang von hausen, bishop of regensburg, with bartholomaus scholl, auxiliary bishop of freising, and marcus lyresius, auxiliary bishop of eichstatt, serving as co-consecrators. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 5 feb 1608.  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope clement viii 1608 deaths
the starling grange, now starling hall, is an historic former grange hall at 2769 main street (me 17) in fayette, maine, us.  built in 1879, it has been a fixture of the community since then.  the grange chapter disbanded in 1987, and the building has since then been owned by the town.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2016.  description and history the former starling grange hall is located in the cluster buildings making up the village of north fayette in north central fayette.  it is set on the east side of sr 17 just south of its junction with baldwin hill road.  it is a long rectangular 2-1/2 story wood frame structure, with a gabled roof and clapboarded exterior.  it is set on a sloping lot, with its basement partially exposed.  there is evidence that the basement was used for horse stalls. the front facade is symmetrical, with a projecting single-story entry vestibule topped by a hip roof.  sash windows are located on either side of the vestibule, and on the second floor, with decorative hoods.  the ground floor interior is divided into a small meeting room, kitchen, and dining room, with a mudroom at the rear, while the upstairs is dominated by a large meeting hall with a raised stage and square proscenium.  the starling grange was organized in 1877, and the front portion of the present building was constructed in 1879.  due to large membership, the hall was enlarged in 1900 by widening and deepening; this alteration is visible in the post-and-beam framing of the original portion, and the balloon framing of the addition.  the hall has served as a social and civic venue since its construction, and was adapted in 1953 to house the town library, which was established through the activities of the grange chapter.  the grange was disbanded in 1987, and the building was deeded to the town.  it has undergone rehabilitation, and is now maintained by a non-profit organization on behalf of the town.  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine  references  grange organizations and buildings in maine buildings and structures in kennebec county, maine national register of historic places in kennebec county, maine grange buildings on the national register of historic places in maine 1877 establishments in maine buildings and structures completed in 1877
kim won-hae (born april 6, 1969) is a south korean actor. he is best known as a former cast member of snl korea (season 1-4).  personal life in august 2020, it was reported that kim tested positive for covid-19 and was receiving treatment. he had recovered since september 2020.  filmography  film  television series  variety show  awards and nominations  references  external links   at ssgg company   south korean male film actors south korean male television actors south korean male stage actors 1969 births living people seoul institute of the arts alumni 20th-century south korean male actors 21st-century south korean male actors south korean television personalities
spacex crs-18, also known as spx-18, was spacex's 18th flight to the international space station under the commercial resupply services program for nasa. it was launched on 25 july 2019 aboard a falcon 9 rocket.  the same dragon capsule has previously flown to the iss in april 2015 and december 2017. this was the first time a capsule was used for a third flight.  primary payload in february 2016, it was announced that nasa had awarded a contract extension to spacex for five crs additional missions (crs-16 to crs-20).  nasa has contracted for the crs-18 mission from spacex and therefore determines the primary payload, date/time of launch, and orbital parameters for the dragon space capsule. it carried the third international docking adapter (ida-3).  the following is a breakdown of cargo bound for the iss:  science investigations:   crew supplies:   vehicle hardware:   spacewalk equipment:   computer resources:   external payloads: ida-3   the dragon spacecraft also featured a handful of ceramic heat shield tiles, meant to flight-test a critical component of the spacex starship spacecraft.  see also uncrewed spaceflights to the international space station  references  external links  nasa  spacex official page for the dragon spacecraft  spacex dragon spacecraft launched in 2019 spacex payloads contracted by nasa supply vehicles for the international space station spacecraft which reentered in 2019
sphingomonas gimensis  is a gram-negative and rod-shaped bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from a lead and zinc mine in meizhou in the guangdong province in china.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas gimensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  gimensis bacteria described in 2014
the canaan motor club (cmc) is a race track in canaan, new hampshire, in the united states. the cmc is a  technically challenging road course with extensive runoff areas to promote a safe environment for all track users. the track may be run in both directions to give a total of  with nine major turns. the track may be configured to run two separate events at the same time.  external links official website  buildings and structures in grafton county, new hampshire canaan, new hampshire motorsport venues in new hampshire tourist attractions in grafton county, new hampshire
where's the truth? is the sixth korean language studio album by south korean rock band f.t. island, released under fnc entertainment on july 18, 2016. the album is entirely self-produced by the members. the album reached number 5 on the billboard world albums chart, making it f.t. island's highest-charting album up to that point.  the music video for the title song "take me now" was also released on the same day. the song "take me now" is typically dynamic transition feature strong k-pop with the flourishing electronic rock.  track list  charts  weekly charts  references  f.t. island albums 2015 albums korean-language albums fnc entertainment albums kakao m albums
khakhoo harrori includes 3 revenue estates (locally called "mauzas") in mansehra district of khyber pakhtunkhwa (kpk) province of pakistan. it is inhabited (mostly) by a single tribe and is governed by its own village council.  geography khakoo harrori is about 2 miles west of town of battal. battal is about 30 miles north from mansehra city on n35/ah4 karakoram highway. khakoo harrori includes 3 revenue estates locally called "mauzas" (khakhoo, harrori upper and harrori lower) and 7 hamlets (shingrehta, chandni, danna, bakrian, mayra, nian sukh, and bhati).  it is grouped into 5 wards: ward 1 is harrori upper, ward 2 is harrori lower- mayra, ward 3 is khakoo - nian sukh, ward 4 is shingrehta- bakrian - chandni - danna, and ward 5 is bhati - gali. the 2013 local government act of kpk defines village as an integrated and contiguous habitation commonly identified by a name and on the basis of this definition, harrori khakoo is classified as a village. it is also one of the sites affected by the 2005 kashmir earthquake.  governance khakoo harori village is governed by khakoo harori village council. the village council is one of 175 village councils of mansehra district of kpk province of pakistan. the village council is an administrative unit of khyber pukhtoon khwa (kpk) province of pakistan. the village council consists of 2 women members who are elected on women reserved seats, one peasant member who is elected on peasant reserved seat and 5 other members who are elected on general seats. the member on general seat that scores the highest number of votes in local body election becomes the chief executive ("nazim" in local language). the member on general seat that receives the second highest number of votes becomes assistant chief executive  ("naib nazim" in local language). the nazim (chief executive) has the executive authority.  demographics the residents of this village are mostly members of a single tribe, akhun kheil.  they  are progeny of a single person, sayyed akbar shah also known as akhun salak baba.  akhun salak baba is buried in akhun salak baba cemetery, about 0.5 miles south of lower kabal
gram village, on the west bank of indus river and north bank of itai khwar (river). akhun salak baba was very famous for his leadership and religious knowledge and piety and was given the title of akhun  salak by the public and therefore, the cemetery was named akhun salak baba cemetery. many people visit his cemetery each year. there are other tribes like awan, and turks are also part of village council  references   mansehra district villages in pakistan
alfredo sabbadin (20 january 1936 - 26 march 2016) was an italian professional racing cyclist. he rode in two editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1936 births 2016 deaths italian male cyclists sportspeople from veneto
roman prikryl (born february 11, 1995) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc stadion litomerice of the chance liga.  prikryl made his czech extraliga debut playing with hc plzen during the 2014-15 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1995 births living people hc plzen players czech ice hockey forwards sportspeople from plzen
gosforth is a civil parish in the borough of copeland, cumbria, england.  it contains 18 buildings that are recorded in the national heritage list for england.  of these, one is listed at grade i, the highest of the three grades, three are at grade ii*, the middle grade, and the others are at grade ii, the lowest grade.  the parish contains the village of gosforth and the surrounding countryside.  the listed buildings include houses and associated structures, farmhouses, farm buildings, a church and structures in the churchyard, a boundary stone, and a milestone.  key  buildings  references  citations  sources  lists of listed buildings in cumbria listed buildings
the geospatial research laboratory is a component of the engineer research and development center (erdc), a us army corps of engineers (usace) laboratory organization whose mission is to "provide science, technology, and expertise in engineering and environmental sciences in support of our armed forces and the nation to make the world safer and better." the laboratory is colocated with the army geospatial center in the humphreys engineer center adjacent to fort belvoir. the headquarters is located in vicksburg, mississippi, on the site of an antecedent organization, the waterways experiment station. grl conducts geospatial research, development, technology and evaluation of current and emerging geospatial technologies that will help characterize and measure phenomena within the physical (terrain) and social (cultural) environments encountered by the army. grl research areas and capabilities include terrain analysis and reasoning; passive and active spectral signature analysis; fluorescence; photogrammetry; terrain visualization; precision surveying and mapping; image analysis; data management; geographic information systems; data/image fusion; and spatio-temporal reasoning and numerical analysis.  history in october 1999, the corps of engineers established a system of laboratories, called the engineer research and development center (erdc). the erdc was a consolidation of seven, pre-existing laboratories, the coastal and hydraulics, environmental, geotechnical and structures, and information technology laboratories in vicksburg, mississippi; the construction engineering research laboratory in champaign, illinois; the cold regions research and engineering laboratory in hanover, new hampshire; and the topographic engineering center in alexandria, virginia, which became the army geospatial center (agc) and started reporting directly to the corps of engineers as of 2009. as of 2014, erdc still maintained a geospatial research laboratory (grl) collocated in alexandria with agc.  erdc won the army research laboratory of the year award five times in its first eight years.  list of other erdc laboratories  coastal and hydraulics laboratory, vicksburg, mississippi  cold regions research and engineering laboratory, hanover, new hampshire  construction engineering research laboratory, champaign, illinois  environmental laboratory, vicksburg, mississippi  geotechnical and structures laboratory, vicksburg, mississippi  information technology laboratory, vicksburg, mississippi  references  external links  erdc homepage  erdc library, with digitized copies of erdc publications  us army corps of engineers webpage  erdc dod supercomputing resource center (dsrc)  survey number haer
ms-2 - waterways experiment station, hydraulics laboratory, halls ferry road, 2 miles south of i-20, vicksburg, warren county, ms  united states army corps of engineers fairfax_county,_virginia military in virginia modeling and simulation military cartography geographic data and information organizations in the united states 1999 establishments in virginia
"once i loved" ("o amor em paz") is a bossa nova and jazz standard song composed in 1960 by antonio carlos jobim, with lyrics by vinicius de moraes. words in english were later added by ray gilbert. in a few early cases, the song was also known as ("love in peace"), a translation into english of the original portuguese title.  the first recording was in 1961 by joao gilberto on his self-titled album joao gilberto (brasil, odeon 3202). jobim recorded an instrumental version of the song in 1963 on his debut album, the composer of desafinado plays.  in the jazz standards: a guide to the repertoire, jazz critic ted gioia credits frank sinatra for the popularity of the song. "even during the height of the bossa nova craze, which peaked around 1964-65, 'once i loved' was not widely known and it is conspicuously missing from most of the bossa nova theme albums of the day. but after sinatra's 1967 recording, the song became one of jobim's best-known and most-covered compositions."  describing the uniqueness of the song, gioia writes, "[t]here are a handful of songs in the standard repertoire that convey a sense of introspection and quiet soul-searching. for the most part, they are slow pieces, delicate ballads that sacrifice rhythmic drive in exchange for a ruminative self-questioning. but 'once i loved' is that rarity--a melancholy soliloquy that shouldn't be played too slowly. the composition works best at a medium tempo, almost as if the lingering nostalgia of the lyrics needs to tussle with the forward momentum of the bossa nova beat."  recorded versions  cannonball adderley - cannonball's bossa nova (1962)  gene ammons - brasswind (1974)  chet baker & steve houben -  chet baker steve houben (1980)  charlie byrd - brazilian byrd (1965)  luz casal - alma (2013)  rosemary clooney - brazil (2000)  perry como - lightly latin (1966)  chick corea & gary burton - hot house (2012)  gal costa - gal bossa tropical (2002)  eumir deodato - inutil paisagem - as maiores composicoes de antonio carlos jobim (1964)  eliane elias - eliane elias sings jobim (1998)  herb ellis - roll call (1991)  clare fischer - so danco samba (1964)
jacob fischer - black orpheus (2014)  ella fitzgerald & joe pass - take love easy (1973)  hal galper - dreamsville (1987)  astrud gilberto -  the astrud gilberto album (1965)  joao gilberto - the legendary joao gilberto (1961)  eddie gomez, alberto medina & pablo prieto - trilogy (2016)  stephane grappelli & baden powell -  la grande reunion (1974)  vince guaraldi - an afternoon with the vince guaraldi quartet (1967), the eclectic vince guaraldi (1969)  joe henderson - the kicker (1967)  joe henderson - with oscar castro-neves, double rainbow: the music of antonio carlos jobim (1995)  jon hendricks - ¡salud! joao gilberto, originator of the bossa nova (1961) - as "love in peace (o amor em paz)"  shirley horn - close enough for love (1989)  toninho horta - once i loved (1992)  milt jackson - soul fusion (1977)  antonio carlos jobim - the composer of desafinado plays (1963)  elvin jones - the prime element (rec. 1969 - released in 1976)  karin krog/jacob young -where flamingo fly (2002)  patrizia laquidara - cara! (2013)  ivan lins - olha que coisa mais linda: uma homenagem a tom jobim (2001)  yo-yo ma - obrigado brazil (2003)  herbie mann - do the bossa nova with herbie mann (1963)  pat martino - el hombre (1967)  ronnie mathews, ray drummond, kenny washington - song for leslie (1980)  mina - l'allieva (2005)  wes montgomery - goin' out of my head (1966)  jaques morelenbaum, paula morelenbaum, and ryuichi sakamoto - casa (2001)  frank morgan - love, lost & found (1995)  gerry mulligan, with jane duboc - paraiso (1993)  nara leao - dez anos depois (1971)  os cariocas - a bossa dos cariocas (1963)  horace parlan - hi-fly (1978)  duke pearson - i don't care who knows it (rec. 1969 - released in 1996)  bill perkins - bossa nova with strings attached: the tenor of bill perkins (1963)  dianne reeves - when you know (2008)  frank sinatra & antonio
carlos jobim - francis albert sinatra & antonio carlos jobim (1967)  sylvia telles - bossa, balanco, balada (1963)  jim tomlinson - brazilian sketches (2003)  mccoy tyner - trident (1975)  cedar walton - the trio 3 (1985)  the tony williams lifetime -  turn it over (1970)  kai winding - penny lane & time (1967)  chrissie hynde - ''valve bone woe'' (2019)  shigeharu mukai - hip cruiser (1979)  references  1960 songs 1960s jazz standards bossa nova jazz standards frank sinatra songs songs with music by antonio carlos jobim songs with lyrics by vinicius de moraes brazilian songs
pandori khas is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
bradley don adkins is an american track and field athlete who competes in the high jump. at the 2016 olympic trials, he finished third in the men's high jump and qualified for the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro.  adkins was the 2014 outdoor high jump champion in the ncaa big 12 conference.  adkins is married to fellow texas tech athlete, maggie adkins.  references  living people american male high jumpers olympic track and field athletes of the united states texas tech red raiders men's track and field athletes athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics 1993 births
balzarini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  antonio balzarini (born c. 1933), italian racehorse owner and trainer guido balzarini (1874-1935), italian fencer luigi balzarini (1935-2014), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
huai kaeo railway station is a railway station located in sai huai kaeo subdistrict, ban mi district, lop buri. it is located 165.949 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. due to its distant location in relation to other villages in the subdistrict, the station mainly acts as a manned passing loop for trains on the main line.  train services  ordinary 202 phitsanulok-bangkok  ordinary 207/208 bangkok-nakhon sawan-bangkok  ordinary 209/210 bangkok-ban takhli-bangkok  local 401/402 lop buri-phitsanulok-lop buri  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
the 2016-17 copa catalunya was the 28th staging of the copa catalunya. the competition began on 30 july 2016 and was played by teams in segunda division, segunda division b, tercera division and the top teams of primera catalana.  qualified teams the following teams compete in the 2016-17 copa catalunya.  3 teams of 2015-16 segunda division  gimnastic girona llagostera  9 teams of 2015-16 segunda division b  reus deportiu lleida esportiu cornella sabadell barcelona b  espanyol b 'badalona l'hospitalet olot  16 teams of 2015-16 tercera division  prat gava europa vilafranca montanesa sant andreu cerdanyola jupiter  figueres asco palamos terrassa manlleu santfeliuenc granollers masnou  2 teams of 2015-16 primera catalana  castelldefels vilassar de mar  tournament  first round  bye: olot  second round  third round  bye: prat  fourth round  bye: badalona  semifinals  final  external links 2016-17 results federacio catalana de futbol   cata copa catalunya seasons copa
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 28 february 1945 in pyongyang as a square division. it was a part of the 16 simultaneously created divisions batch numbering from 140th to 160th.  action the 160th division was  assigned to 17th area army. 9 may 1945, the division was sent to north jeolla province to prepare a coastal defenses, performing uneventfully until surrender of japan 15 august 1945. 461st infantry regiment was in buan county, 462nd - in gunsan, 463rd - in seocheon county, and 464th infantry regiment - in iksan.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第160師団 (日本軍), accessed 14 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
jusztin nandor takacs (15 january 1927 - 11 july 2016) was a hungarian catholic prelate and carmelite friar. he was born in rabacsanak, hungary. he served as the bishop of szekesfehervar from 1991 until his retirement in 2003.  takacs died on 11 july 2016 from an extended illness in szekesfehervar, hungary, aged 89.  references  external links   bishop jusztin nandor takacs, o.c.d.   1927 births 2016 deaths 21st-century roman catholic bishops in hungary carmelite bishops people from gyor-moson-sopron county 20th-century roman catholic bishops in hungary
eustache cuicci (1908-1980) was a french politician. he served as a member of the national assembly from 1956 to 1958, representing deux-sevres.  references  1908 births 1980 deaths people from annaba people of french algeria pieds-noirs union for the defense of tradesmen and artisans politicians deputies of the 3rd national assembly of the french fourth republic
babungo is one of the four villages of babessi sub division, ngoketunjia division of the north west region cameroon. it is situated on the ring road from bamenda about  from bamunka on the high plain of ndop which is fertile and rich in water, intensely cultivated and surrounded by a ring of hills covered with pastures, making it an ideal grazing land.  since october 2003, babungo museum started to contribute to the development of the cultural values aimed at overcoming the gap between local and global, as well as between tradition and modernity. they opened up new job opportunities and possibilities for development linked to the enhancement of an important resource of the country, whilst reinforcing the conscience of a rich cultural identity opened to encounter and exchange with the cultures of the world. the museum was designed using local materials, techniques and labor thanks to an italian architect antonio piva, lecturer in museography at the faculty of architecture of the politecnico of milan and a unesco collaborator. upon the opening of this museum to the public, it has been attracting a lot of visitors to babungo village to see the sculptures.  administration and politics   the ngumba is the strongest political institution in babungo. it represents the executive power of the traditional government, which limits the power of the fon. the elder members of the ngumba also have an important role in the burial of the fon and in the enthronement of his successor. thus the babungo say that the ngumba is a kingmaker and that it is the father of fons.  other customary societies with an important role in babungo include: the samba, organized at the level of the quarter, which helps the tii ntih}} to regulate the life of the community.  transport movement to babungo from bamenda is along the tarred ring road since the village is located along the stretch of the ring road through bamunka, while movement within the village is on earth road. vehicles move in and within the village easily.  references  further reading   all about cameroon  museum in cameroon  babungo memory  babungo exhibits  populated places in northwest region (cameroon)
the way the world works is a 2012 book by nicholson baker that collects thirty-four previously published essays together. these essays were originally published in a variety of publications, including the new york times, the new york review of books, and the new yorker.  synopsis  baker's subjects range widely, from subjective accounts of his own childhood and early life, to a feature on the new yorker's editor david remnick, and an essay on the editorial process of wikipedia. baker also includes a number of essays on newspapers and libraries, advocating the importance of conservation of material, such as runs of newspapers, and arguing against digitisation at the expense of physical copies of texts.  the book is divided into five sections: life, reading, libraries and newspapers, technology, war, and one final essay, last essay (which is about mowing the lawn and learning about the world). life deals with biographical anecdotes, some of which are very short essays. reading examines  the act of reading and the importance of interacting with books, including an essay on the compilation of common-place books and an examination of daniel defoe and journalistic veracity. libraries and newspapers includes an address given at the opening of a new library building at duke; baker also describes his own efforts to preserve library catalogues and newspaper runs. technology includes what is effectively a review of amazon's kindle 2 and also describes' baker's interest in the editorial process of wikipedia in a separate essay, "the charms of wikipedia". war'''s biggest essay comprises a riposte to reviews of human smoke, baker's 2008 book on world war ii, in which he argues that the case for pacifism is often misunderstood and examines the reputation and effects of various campaigners for pacifism.  reception professional reviews of the way the world works were generally positive, with some including criticism for the work. laurence phelan of the independent describes baker's prose as having "a specificity, elegance and personality that even simpsons writers cannot match." leo robson in the guardian describes it as "ephemera" and said that "baker takes small subjects but he leaves them small, failing to summon in his work as a journalist the transformative energies on display in his novels", though robson also states that while most of the essays fail to deliver, "the exceptions are few but thrilling." david ulin writes in the la times that the collection is "a little scattershot...some of the pieces here feel repetitious, negligible" and also criticises baker for a "gratuitous,
even fawning" profile of david remnick. nicholas blincoe in the telegraph praises the "warm, technical and attractively lucid" style and states that baker "is one of the most important writers we have"; he does, however, also criticise baker, with reference to his arguments for pacifism, because "his devotion to making things work leads him astray." publishers weekly'' describes the collection as "a delight to read...[offering] gorgeous prose and [posing] important questions about our era of digital readership."  references  essay collections 2012 non-fiction books simon & schuster books
is a japanese manga series written and illustrated by atsushi ohkubo. it was serialized in kodansha's weekly shonen magazine from september 2015 to february 2022, with its chapters collected in thirty-two tankobon volumes as of december 2021. in north america, the manga has been licensed for english language release by kodansha usa.  an anime television series adaptation by david production aired from july to december 2019 on the mbs's super animeism block. a second season aired from july to december 2020. the anime television series has been licensed by funimation.   as of june 2021, the fire force manga had over 16 million copies in circulation.  synopsis  setting the  is an event that happened two hundred and fifty years ago, 50 years before the solar year 0. during it, the world was set on fire, and many nations were wiped out with very few habitable areas left in the aftermath. the survivors took refuge in the tokyo empire, which remained mostly stable during the period despite losing some of its landmass. the tokyo emperor raffles i establishes the faith of the holy sol temple as it and haijima industries developed the perpetual thermal energy plant amaterasu to power the country.  in year 198 of tokyo's solar era, special fire brigades called the fire force fight increasing incidents of spontaneous human combustion where human beings are turned into living infernos called  while the infernals are first generation cases of spontaneous human combustion, with more powerful horned variations known as demons, later generations possess pyrokinesis while retaining human form. the fire force was formed by combining people with these powers from the holy sol temple, the tokyo armed forces, and the fire defense agency, and is composed of eight independent companies.  plot shinra kusakabe is a third generation pyrokinetic youth who gained the nickname "devil's footprints" for his ability to ignite his feet at will, and was ostracized as a child for the fire that killed his mother and younger brother sho twelve years ago. he joins special fire force company 8, which features other pyrokinetics who dedicated themselves to ending the infernal attacks for good while investigating companies 1 through 7 for potential corruption in their ranks. shinra begins to learn that the fire that killed his mother was a cover for sho to be taken by the white clad, a doomsday cult behind the infernal attacks with agents within the facets of the tokyo empire. company 8 and their allies oppose the white clad while learning of their goal to gather eight individuals like shinra and sho to repeat
the great cataclysm for an ancient being who manipulated humanity for that very purpose.  media  manga  fire force, written and illustrated by atsushi ohkubo, was serialized in kodansha's shonen manga magazine weekly shonen magazine from september 23, 2015, to february 22, 2022. kodansha has collected its chapters into individual tankobon volumes. the first volume was released on february 17, 2016. as of december 17, 2021, thirty-two volumes have been released.  the series is licensed for english release in north america by kodansha usa, which published the first volume on november 8, 2016.  anime  an anime television series adaptation by studio david production was announced on november 14, 2018. the series was directed by yuki yase, with gakuto haijima handling the series' scripts, hideyuki morioka designing the characters and kenichiro suehiro composing the music. the series aired from july 6 to december 28, 2019 on mbs and tbs as part of the super animeism block. it ran for 24 episodes. due to the kyoto animation arson attack on july 18, 2019, episode 3, which was originally scheduled to air on july 19, 2019, was postponed to july 26, 2019. the first opening theme is  by mrs. green apple and the first ending theme is "veil" by keina suda. the second opening theme is "mayday" by coldrain feat. ryo from crystal lake from their album the side effects and the second ending is "nоnai" by lenny code fiction.  a second season was announced in december 2019, and it aired from july 4 to december 12, 2020. in may 2020, a promotional video for the second season was released. the second season was directed by tatsuma minamikawa (replacing yuki yase from the previous season). the second season ran for 24 episodes. the first opening theme is "spark-again", performed by aimer, while the first ending theme is "id", performed by cider girl. the second opening theme is "torch of liberty", performed by kana-boon, while the second ending theme is "desire", performed by pelican fanclub.  funimation has licensed the series for streaming on funimationnow. the series was simulcast in southeast asia on aniplus asia. on july 19, 2019, it was announced that funimation's english dub of the series would premiere on adult swim's toonami programming block on july 28, 2019. the second season premiered on toonami on november 8, 2020,
two weeks later than its original scheduled date.  stage play in 2020, a stage-play adaptation of the series ran from july 31 to august 2 at the umeda arts theater in osaka and from august 7 to august 9 at kt zepp yokohama in kanagawa. the play was directed by sho kubota, script written by yusei naruse, and music composed by masaki miyoshi, the protagonist shinra kusakabe was played by hikaru makishima.  reception as of january 2018, the manga had 1.8 million copies in circulation. as of june 2020, the manga had 7.3 million copies in circulation. as of july 2020, the manga had over 10 million copies in circulation. as of october 2020, the manga had over 12 million copies in circulation. as of april 2021, the manga had over 15 million copies in circulation. as of june 2021, the manga had over 16 million copies in circulation.  the series ranked #13 on the "nationwide bookstore employees' recommended comics of 2017" poll by honya club online bookstore. gadget tsushin listed the prayer for infernals, "latom", on their 2019 most popular anime-related buzzwords list. on tv asahi's manga sosenkyo 2021 poll, in which 150.000 people voted for their top 100 manga series, fire force ranked #84. the manga was nominated for the 45th kodansha manga award in the shonen category in 2021.  notes  references  external links        2019 anime television series debuts adventure anime and manga anime series based on manga animeism dark fantasy anime and manga david production firefighting in fiction funimation kodansha manga mainichi broadcasting system original programming science fiction anime and manga shonen manga spontaneous human combustion in fiction television series about firefighting tbs television (japan) original programming toonami
is a former baseball player from japan. asai played in the nippon baseball league. he initially played in the pioneer league before moving on to the hiroshima toyo carp in the central league. at times he played as a pinch hitter.  references  1971 births living people baseball people from toyama prefecture japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball infielders hiroshima toyo carp players japanese baseball coaches nippon professional baseball coaches
nickolas mohanna is an american artist and composer based in new york. his interdisciplinary practice utilizes a variety of media to explore and blur the borders between music, sound art, video and drawing. within his compositions there is a "tendency of sculpting and orchestrating a minimal array of sounds into sonically rich and spacious atmospheres." most of the sounds are sourced from local environments. in a village voice interview, he remarks that his aim is to create an "immersive stereo space where the sound would be reduced to its rawest form. in addition to these works, he has also published a number of artist's books which have served as visual accompaniments or conceptual ideas to his sonic practice on the imprint run/off; which he founded in 2014. mohanna attended san francisco state university and went to the university of california, davis for an mfa in art studio. while there he took courses with bob ostertag, annabeth rosen, douglas kahn, and wayne thiebaud.  discography optics japan, slow flow rec, cd. 2010.   transmission hue uk, low point, cd. 2010.   reflectors australia, preservation, cd. 2011.  various - 14 tracks: kafkaesque uk, boomkat, file, mp3, compilation. 2011  parallax view uk, low point, ltd lp. 2013  control group denmark, metaphysical circuits, ltd cassette. 2013  phase line us, run/off editions & wfmu free music archive, digital/cd. 2015  mantis australia, preservation, ltd cassette. 2016  chroma germany, karlrecords, ltd lp. 2017   karl marx's 200th germany, karlrecords, ltd compilation cd. 2018   smoke us, aagoo records, ltd lp. 2019  various - the wire tapper 51 uk, the wire tapper, cd. 2019  throwing the chain australia, longform editions, file, flac. 2019  parakustiks germany, karlrecords, file, mp3, album, compilation. 2020   nerve plexus belgium, dadaist tapes, ltd. tape/dl, mp3, album, 2021  books / prints theater. france: kaugummi, 2010.   particles brooklyn, new york: medium rare, 2010.    france: lendroit editions, 2011. offset poster publication. edition of 1000.   france: lendroit editions, 2011. . floodlights. brooklyn, new york: oso press, 2012.
boundaries  los angeles, ca: the ice plant, 2012. edition of 100. land new york, new york: run/off editions, 2015. . heat death  france: lendroit editions, 2017. . spin group. new york, new york: run/off editions, 2021. .  collections his artist's books have been archived at the franklin furnace archive, smithsonian hirshhorn museum, national gallery of art, museum of modern art new york, los angeles county museum, dallas museum of art, cleveland museum of art, new york public library (spencer collection), museum ludwig (cologne), and stedelijk museum amsterdam.  references  external links    run/off editions  discography  living people american sound artists american contemporary artists new media artists american electronic musicians american experimental musicians university of california, davis alumni year of birth missing (living people)
the 1968 greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 22 june 1968 at white city stadium.   the winner was camira flash and the winning owner prince philip, duke of edinburgh received £7,252.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  1, neck, 3, 3, short head (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. from 1950 one length was equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report yellow printer, a red fawn dog by printers prince out of yellow streak was installed as one of the shortest ante-post favourite in the history of the derby. other leading entries included shady parachute, a finalist the previous year, and camira flash, owned by prince philip, duke of edinburgh.   yellow printer set a new track record in qualifying during heat 14 when recording 28.30 sec at white city but he was nearly eliminated in the first round after finding trouble but he just got up to take the third qualifying spot. camira flash and shady parachute both won and the fastest first round winner was el campo in 28.76 sec.  the quarter-finals provided a shock as yellow printer went out in the most unfortunate circumstances when being knocked over at the third bend. the first semi-final saw shady parachute win in 28.62, five lengths clear of winning hope and shady begonia and become favourite for the event. the second semi-final produced drama at the third and fourth bends when the leading greyhounds slowed due to fighting which allowed witches smoke and el campo to come from behind and take final places. not flashing, trained by irishman frank cavlan, finished third relegating the royal dog camira flash to fourth and out of the competition. however, the stewards disqualified not flashing for fighting, which allowed camira flash to progress to the decider.  in the final the royal dog camira flash showed first from el campo and they battled right up to the fourth bend before el campo lost ground to camira flash. witches smoke finished well to take the runners up spot and shady parachute after missing the break and ran poorly.  see also 1968 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
the 2016 cafl season, the first season in the history of the china arena football league (cafl), began on october 1, 2016. on november 6, the beijing lions defeated the qingdao clipper to win the first china bowl.  draft the league held its first draft on june 10, 2016. 120 players were drafted with 60 of them being americans, including 43 who have arena football league experience. 60 players from china or players who are of chinese descent were selected as well. on june 15, the league held a supplemental draft (rounds 21 to 22) in which an additional 12 players were selected.  note: the picks are not in chronological order. they are a list of picks by team and the round they were selected in. for example, guangzhou did not select first in every round.   cn indicates chinese national or of chinese descent  sources:  regular season week 1  week 2  week 3  week 4  week 5  standings  sources:  postseason 5th-place game  3rd-place game  china bowl  source:  awards  individual season awards note: the steel-man is named for his "all around excellence at several positions". the judge spirit award, named after cafl founder marty judge, is given for "exemplifying football excellence, leadership and special contribution to the league".  source:  all-pro teams all-pro north division all-stars  source:  all-pro south division all-stars  source:  dream team the cafl dream team was selected by fan vote.  source:  references  china arena football league 2016 in american football 2016 in chinese sport
aryeh tartakower (1897-1982) was a polish-born israeli political activist, historian and sociologist. he was the director of the department of relief and rehabilitation of the world jewish congress during world war ii. he was the chair of the department of sociology at the hebrew university of jerusalem, and the author of many books about jewish refugees and israel.  early life aryeh tartakower was born in 1897 in brody, eastern galicia. he graduated from the university of vienna.  career tartakower was the founder and chairman of the histadrut zionist labor party in poland from 1922 to 1939. he served on the city council of lodz in 1938-1939.  tartakower joined the world zionist actions committee in 1927. he served as the director of the department of relief and rehabilitation and deputy director of the institute of jewish affairs at the world jewish congress in new york city from 1939 to 1946. he served as the chairman of the world jewish congress's israel organization from 1948 to 1971. in this capacity, he alerted u.s. government officials about the fascist past of romanian emigrant valerian trifa in 1962. tartakower subsequently served as the chair of its cultural department. he also joined the executive committee of the world hebrew confederation in 1959. by 1976, he served as the chair of the falasha relief committee, where he helped ethiopian jews emigrate to israel.  tatakower taught sociology at the institute of jewish sciences in warsaw, poland from 1932 to 1939. after he made aliyah in 1946, he served as the chair of the department of sociology at the hebrew university of jerusalem. he was the author of many books in polish, english, yiddish and hebrew.  death tartakower died in 1982 in jerusalem, israel.  works  references  1897 births 1982 deaths university of vienna alumni polish emigrants to israel hebrew university of jerusalem faculty israeli historians israeli sociologists 20th-century historians
fazalpur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 10 km from nakodar, 30 km from kapurthala, 28 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 166 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is 96 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 80 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
the beguiled is a 2017 american southern gothic film written and directed by sofia coppola, based on the 1966 novel of the same name (originally published as a painted devil) by thomas p. cullinan. it stars colin farrell, nicole kidman, kirsten dunst, and elle fanning. it is the second film adaptation of cullinan's novel, following don siegel's 1971 film of the same name.  it premiered on may 24 at the 2017 cannes film festival, and was selected to compete for the palme d'or in its main competition section, where coppola won the best director award, becoming only the second woman (after 1961 winner yuliya solntseva) to do so. the film was released theatrically on june 23, 2017, by focus features.  plot martha farnsworth runs a girls school in virginia during the civil war. by 1864, almost all of the students, teachers, and enslaved persons have left. in addition to farnsworth herself, only five students and one teacher, edwina morrow, remain. while out in the woods searching for mushrooms, amy, a pupil, comes across john mcburney, a corporal in the union army who was wounded in the leg during battle, and has since been deserted. amy brings mcburney to the school where he falls unconscious. the women lock mcburney in one of the rooms while miss farnsworth tends to his wounds. all the women and girls in the school are immediately fascinated by the handsome man.  initially, some of the school's residents want mcburney to be delivered as a prisoner of war to the confederate army, but miss farnsworth decides that they will let his leg heal before they decide what they will do with him. when confederate soldiers arrive at the school, miss farnsworth does not tell them that a union soldier is on the premises. while mcburney is recovering, the women and girls subtly vie for his affection by giving him presents, wearing jewelry, and preparing a lavish dinner for him. he returns the affection, concentrating especially on miss morrow and miss farnsworth. when he is able to move again, he begins to help in the garden. it becomes clear that he fears returning to battle.  when miss farnsworth indicates that mcburney is healthy enough and will have to leave the school in a few days, he tries to convince her to let him stay as a gardener, and tells miss morrow that he has fallen in love with her. one night, he tells miss
morrow to await him in her room. when he does not appear and she hears strange noises, she investigates and finds him in bed with alicia, a teenage pupil. mcburney tries to calm the angry miss morrow down, but she pushes him away, causing him to fall down the stairs, badly break his already injured leg and fall unconscious. miss farnsworth decides that the only way to save his life is to amputate the leg.  when he awakes the next day and realizes he has lost his leg, mcburney is devastated and furious, accusing the women (and especially miss farnsworth) of having punished him for choosing alicia's room instead of theirs. he is locked up in his room but threatens alicia, who gets him the room key. he then breaks out, steals a gun, and loudly threatens the women before storming off. miss morrow follows him to his room, where she initiates a sexual encounter.  meanwhile miss farnsworth tries to find a solution. one of the students suggests killing mcburney by preparing him a dinner of poisonous mushrooms, to which miss farnsworth agrees. during the dinner, miss morrow, unaware of the plan, is deterred by the others at the last minute from putting the mushrooms on her own plate, but mcburney's suspicions are not aroused. promptly after eating the mushrooms, he falls to the floor in the throes of death. while the others are sewing mcburney's body into a shroud, miss morrow looks on, devastated. the film ends with the women dragging mcburney's body to the road so that he will be found by the next confederate soldiers who pass by.  cast     nicole kidman as miss martha farnsworth  colin farrell as corporal john mcburney  kirsten dunst as miss edwina morrow  elle fanning as alicia  oona laurence as amy  angourie rice as jane  addison riecke as marie  emma howard as emily  wayne pere as the captain  matt story as confederate soldier  joel albin as cavalry man  production the film is based on the 1966 book of the same name by author thomas p. cullinan about a wounded union soldier in a mississippi seminary during the american civil war, and was made for under $10 million. the film exhibited elements of the thriller genre, a departure for coppola.  coppola had initially expressed an aversion to a remake, but after watching the 1971 version at the urging of production designer anne rose, she was left contemplating ways
she could update the film. specifically, she became interested in showing the story from the women's point of view, as opposed to the man's. the material came to coppola at a time when she wanted to make a more optimistic film than 2013's the bling ring, stating that she wanted to "cleanse myself" from what she terms was "such a tacky, ugly world". coppola cited her intrigue with the south as part of the story's intrigue. coppola has said that she "wanted the film to represent an exaggerated version of all the ways women were traditionally raised there just to be lovely and cater to men-the manners of that whole world, and how they change when the men go away". coppola has cited gone with the wind as her inspiration for creating a film that was relatable despite its position within a different era.  in march 2016, it was announced that elle fanning, nicole kidman, and kirsten dunst were in talks to appear in the film, and had been signed by july, when colin farrell entered talks. based on a magnificat from monteverdi's vespro della beata vergine, the music for the film was composed by the rock band phoenix (whose lead singer, thomas mars, is married to coppola). two popular civil war ballads, "lorena" and "aura lea", were used in the film, in addition to stephen foster's "virginia belle". most of the costumes in the film were designed by stacey battat, who used the costume and fabric archives of the metropolitan museum of art to gain inspiration for contemporary fashion. corsets were made for each actress, while for historical accuracy only cotton fabric was used, which was in turn either stone washed or enzyme washed to weather the fabrics and make them look worn in.  principal photography began on october 31, 2016, and concluded on december 7, 2016. exterior scenes were shot on the grounds of the madewood plantation house, near napoleonville, louisiana. interiors were filmed in actress jennifer coolidge's house in new orleans.  release the film had its world premiere at the 2017 cannes film festival; coppola won the best director award, making her the second woman to ever win in that category, 56 years after the first female director won. the film began a limited release on june 23, 2017, before expanding to a wide release on june 30, 2017.  reception  box office the beguiled grossed $10.6 million in the united states and canada and $16.1 million in other territories for a total of $
26.7 million.  in the film's limited opening weekend, it made $240,545 from four theaters (a per-theater gross of $60,136), finishing 20th at the box office. in its wide opening, it made $3.2 million from 674 theaters (an average of $4,694), finishing 8th at the box office.  critical response on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film has an approval rating of 79% based on 326 reviews, with an average rating of 7.2/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "the beguiled adds just enough extra depth to its source material to set itself apart, and director sofia coppola's restrained touch is enlivened by strong performances from the cast." on metacritic, the film has a score of 77 out of 100, based on 45 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".  david ehrlich of indiewire gave the film an "a−", saying, "coppola's film is told with surgical precision and savage grace." todd mccarthy of the hollywood reporter stated: "other than to place slightly more emphasis on the female empowerment angle ... it's hard to detect a strong raison d'etre behind sofia coppola's slow-to-develop melodrama."  controversy the film faced a wave of controversy and division, including accusations of 'whitewashing' the original story after she chose to both remove the supporting role of a black female slave from the film, as well as to choose kirsten dunst to portray a character who was biracial in the original novel. coppola also faced criticism for minimizing the story of the people experiencing actual hardship in favor of depicting, albeit authentically, the lavish lifestyle of her protagonists, thus minimizing the importance of a weighty topic, which was not the first time one of coppola's films was said to expose the sociocultural affordances of her own childhood. coppola responded to these allegations by stating that she made the changes so as "not [to] brush over such an important topic in a light way," and that "[y]oung girls watch my films and this was not the depiction of an african american character i would want to show them." she furthermore cited the presence of young girls among her moviegoing audience, and described her version of the film as a reinterpretation, rather than a remake, of don siegel's 1971 adaption of the same book. coppola wanted to tell the story of the male soldier entering into a classically southern and female environment from
the point of view of the women in order to represent that experience. coppola thought that the earlier version made the characters out to be unrealistic caricatures, which did not allow the viewer to connect with them.  while some critics stated that coppola intended the beguiled as a feminist work, coppola has explained that she was not in favor of that labeling. though she has said she is happy if others see the film in this way, she sees it as a film, rather, that possesses a female perspective-an important distinction. the beguiled was also made as a contrast to the bling ring, and coppola has explained that needed to correct that film's harsh los angeles aesthetic with something more beautiful and poetic.  accolades  see also   the beguiled (1971 film)  references  external links            2017 films 2010s feminist films 2017 thriller drama films american civil war films american thriller drama films american films remakes of american films american zoetrope films focus features films films about amputees films set in the 1860s films set in 1864 films set in richmond, virginia films set in virginia films based on american novels films directed by sofia coppola films with screenplays by sofia coppola murder in films poisoning in film southern gothic films 2017 drama films films shot in louisiana films shot in new orleans
jeffrey allen thompson (born november 22, 1961) is an american artistic gymnastics coach. coaching for thirty years, he has worked extensively on the ncaa collegiate scene but has also worked within club gymnastics. after holding assistant coach positions at wisconsin-madison, illinois and louisiana state for ten years, thompson was appointed the head coach of the auburn tigers women's gymnastics program for the incoming 2000 season. he spent eleven seasons at auburn, leading the tigers to seven consecutive ncaa regional appearances.  references  1961 births living people people from fort thomas, kentucky university of kentucky alumni
james h. ward house is a historic home located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  it was built about 1875, and is a two-story, italianate / second empire style brick dwelling, with a -story mansard roofed tower.  it features deep overhanging eaves with corner brackets, asymmetrical massing, and an ornate semi-hexagonal, two-story projecting bay.  also on the property is a contributing carriage house.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1988.  james ward ohio native james harvey ward (1829-1912) was a local merchant. he moved to lafayette as a child in the 1830s and worked as a cashier for a pork producer the following decade, before establishing a dry goods business in town in 1856. in 1859 he created a new company, with his twin brother william (1829-1893), specializing in carpets and furniture. a carriage house on the 1116 columbia street lot was the company's wholesale warehouse. their retail store was at the corner of third and main in lafayette, on the second story of a building in courthouse square.  ward died in 1912, aged 83. his wife, martha, continued to live in the house for three years, after which it became divided into apartments. the addition linking the home to the carriage house was also removed. martha died in 1933, aged 75.  ward and his wife are interred in spring vale cemetery in lafayette.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana second empire architecture in indiana houses completed in 1875 buildings and structures in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana houses in tippecanoe county, indiana
lambi assembly constituency (sl. no.: 83) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in muktsar district, punjab state, india. a voter-verified paper audit trail was used in lambi in the 2017 assembly polls. it is part of the bathinda lok sabha constituency, which is represented by harsimrat kaur badal. the total number of voters in this constituency is 155,556 and there are 168 polling stations.  notable politicians  a notable politician from lambi constituency is parkash singh badal, who has been a record five times chief minister of punjab. he has won five consecutive times from lambi constituency from 1997 to 2017.  list of mlas  members of punjab legislative assembly lambi.  election results  2022    -->  2017  2012  see also  punjab legislative assembly  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  sri muktsar sahib district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india sri muktsar sahib district
waate "pat" pene potaka (c.1903 - 3 november 1967) was a new zealand rugby union player who represented the all blacks in 1923 and the maori all blacks between 1922 and 1927. he was regarded as a utility back, as he played in every back position throughout his career.  although his birth name was waate, potaka was generally known as pat.  he was born in taihape, but was educated at te aute college in the hawke's bay region.  career  provincial  he initially played as a halfback, but soon found himself playing as a fly half and fullback.  for the majority of his career potaka played for the rata club. he had stints at the aotea and ratana clubs towards the end of his career.  he totalled 25 games for the wanganui union.  all blacks  after playing in the 1923 north against south island match, potaka gained his only two appearances for the all blacks, both of which were against new south wales. the first was played in dunedin and the second in christchurch where he came on as a substitute onto the wing and then scored a try.  the next year in 1924 potaka trialled to be selected for the team that would go on to be nicknamed the invincibles. he was not selected.  maori all blacks  potaka first played for the maori all blacks in 1922.  he was selected for the 1926-27 tour of new zealand, australia, sri lanka, europe and canada. he played in 18 matches on the great tour. potaka mainly played in the centre position on the tour, but at times was used at fullback and five-eighths.  his total number of games for the maori all blacks was 50.  references   new zealand rugby union players new zealand international rugby union players 1967 deaths new zealand maori people new zealand maori rugby union players maori all blacks players people educated at te aute college
hygrocybe citrinovirens, commonly called citrine waxcap, is a european mushroom of the waxcap genus hygrocybe. it was first described scientifically in 1923 by danish mycologist jakob emanuel lange as camarophyllus citrinovirens. julius schaffer transferred it to the genus hygrocybe in 1947.  see also  list of hygrocybe species list of fungi by conservation status  references  fungi of europe citrinovirens fungi described in 1923
the sucunduri state forest () is a state forest in the state of amazonas, brazil.  location  the sucunduri state forest is in the municipality of apui, amazonas. it has an area of . it adjoins the aripuana sustainable development reserve to the west, which lies on either side of the aripuana river. to the south, the border with the state of mato grosso separates the forest from the igarapes do juruena state park and the overlapping juruena national park.  to the east the forest adjoins the sucunduri state park. part of the northern boundary separates it from the jatuarana national forest.  history  the park was created by amazonas governor decree 24808 of 20 january 2005 with the objective of promoting sustainable multiple use of forest resources and scientific research with emphasis on methods of using native forest resources in a sustainable way.  conservation  the forest is an integral part of the apui mosaic, which totals  in area and contains the guariba and sucunduri state parks; bararati and aripuana sustainable development reserves; guariba extractive reserve; and sucunduri, aripuana, apui and manicore state forests.  notes  sources  2005 establishments in brazil state forests of brazil protected areas of amazonas (brazilian state) protected areas established in 2005
ruslan karimov (born 22 may 1986) is an uzbek cyclist, who last rode for .  major results sources:  2005  2nd road race, national road championships 2006  3rd overall tour de korea 2007  1st  road race, national road championships 2010  national road championships 1st  time trial 2nd road race  3rd circuito del porto  5th piccolo giro di lombardia  10th tour of taihu lake 2011  2nd road race, national road championships  5th trofeo franco balestra  5th circuito del porto 2014  1st  road race, national road championships  9th asian road race championships 2015  1st  road race, national roadchampionships 2017  national road championships 1st  road race  2nd time trial  references  external links    1986 births living people uzbekistani male cyclists cyclists at the 2010 asian games cyclists at the 2014 asian games asian games competitors for uzbekistan
iman afsarian (born 1974) is a realist iranian painter. he is also the artistic director, editor, author, and a critic for the prestigious iranian quarterly art magazine herfeh: honarmand [profession: artist] since its first issue in 2003.  background afsarian was born in tehran. he took his undergraduate studies at tehran university of arts, where he graduated with a bachelors of arts degree in painting in 1996, and later a ma in illustration in 2000.  works as an artist and after entering the iranian art movement of the 2000s, afsarian tried to strengthen and promote what is referred to as figurative, realistic or naturalistic style of painting.  exhibitions and awards afsarian has held numerous solo exhibitions and has participated in group exhibitions in many countries such as the us, uk, austria, russia, and his works are included in some reputable collections. for example, in the u.s, moscow, and the uk he has more than 5 solo participation and exhibitions in several group exhibitions. he is also the author of a two-volume book that was published in 2016 in persian entitled: the quest for a new age.  references  1974 births living people iranian painters people from tehran realist painters
ss malakand was a 7,653-gross register ton cargo liner built by harland & wolff in 1905 for the brocklebank shipping line, the first of two brocklebank line ships named after the malakand area of the indian subcontinent.  malakand operated on a regular service between liverpool, england, and calcutta, india. during world war i,  she was torpedoed and sunk in the atlantic ocean  west of bishop rock, isles of scilly (), on 20 april 1917 by the imperial german navy submarine  with the loss of one crew member.  a replacement ship of the same name, , was launched in 1919.  references  steamships of the united kingdom world war i merchant ships of the united kingdom world war i shipwrecks in the irish sea ships built in belfast cargo liners maritime incidents in 1917 ships sunk by german submarines in world war i ships built by harland and wolff 1905 ships
juliet itoya (born 17 august 1986) is a nigerian-born spanish athlete specialising in the long jump. she won the gold medal at the 2014 ibero-american championships.  her personal bests in the event are 6.79 metres outdoors (+1.4 m/s, salamanca 2016) and 6.47 metres indoors (madrid 2016).  international competitions  references  1986 births living people sportspeople from benin city spanish female long jumpers spanish sportspeople of african descent spanish people of nigerian descent sportspeople of nigerian descent nigerian female long jumpers nigerian emigrants to spain naturalised citizens of spain athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of spain mediterranean games silver medalists for spain mediterranean games medalists in athletics athletes (track and field) at the 2013 mediterranean games athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games ibero-american championships in athletics winners
al-mahdi al-barghathi is a libyan national army officer who served as the minister of defense in the libyan government of national accord, from january 2016 until july 2018. he is an army commander from eastern libya who had formerly served under general khalifa haftar during the second libyan civil war before joining the internationally-recognised unity government.  biography al-barghathi was born in benghazi and fought in the libyan civil war against the forces of muammar qaddafi, being among the first officers to join the rebels. in 2014 he joined general khalifa haftar's operation dignity against the islamists in the general national congress and commanded the 204 tank brigade. he reportedly became a popular officer in the libyan armed forces for personally fighting on the front line with the troops.   al-barghathi's appointment as the minister of defense of the government of national accord in january 2016, formed with international support to reunify libya, caused disagreements with field marshal haftar. the general believes he is not fit for the role and opposes his appointment. also, al-barghathi is an ally of ibrahim jadhran, leader of the petroleum facilities guards and rival of haftar. al-barghathi stated he remains loyal to the army as an institution and is determined to run it effectively. the libyan air force chief of staff under haftar, saqr geroushi, said that al-barghathi should be arrested for becoming the defense minister in the gna without the commander-in-chief's permission.  it was reported that he personally led libyan unity government forces during the offensive to retake the city of sirte from the islamic state of iraq and the levant.  in march 2017, after haftar's lna seized control of the oil facilities in eastern libya, al-barghathi was accused of supporting the benghazi defense brigades that fought against the lna. however, he denied this allegations.  in may 2017, gna prime minister fayez seraj announced that al-barghathi was suspended as defense minister after being suspected of involving in the brak al-shati massacre.  by december 2017 it appeared that he is no longer suspended and resumed his role as defense minister. early that month, he visited libyan soldiers receiving medical treatment in neighboring tunisia.  in july 2018 he was removed from the office after disagreements with prime minister fayez al-sarraj.  references  libyan generals people of the first libyan civil war people from bengh
azi living people year of birth missing (living people)
eunidia quadricincta is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by per olof christopher aurivillius in 1911. it is known from tanzania, ethiopia, somalia, and kenya.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1911
craig martin connell (born 7 september 1967) is a new zealand former cyclist. he competed in the team pursuit event at the 1988 summer olympics. in 1990, connell was awarded the new zealand 1990 commemoration medal.  references  external links    1967 births living people new zealand male cyclists olympic cyclists of new zealand cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists from auckland commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games silver medallists for new zealand cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
black siren may refer to:   black siren, a member of the justice guild of america  black siren (arrowverse), the alias of earth-2's laurel lance in the arrowverse  the black siren, a 1947 spanish film
the gens labiena was a plebeian family at rome.  members of this gens are first mentioned during the final century of the republic.  origin the labieni were long supposed to have been part of the atia gens, of which labienus was supposed to be a cognomen.  this first seems to have been proposed by the ciceronian scholar paulus manutius, but his conjecture is not clearly supported by any ancient author, nor is there any other evidence that the labieni were part of another gens.  notwithstanding the lack of evidence, many other scholars have continued to regard the labieni as a family of the atii.  members   quintus labienus, one of the supporters of the tribune lucius appuleius saturninus, who took refuge in the capitol when appuleius was declared a public enemy, and was stoned to death, along with appuleius and his other supporters after their arrest.  titus labienus, as tribune of the plebs, accused gaius rabirius of perduellio at the urging of caesar, and helped repeal a law of sulla, clearing the way for caesar to be elected pontifex maximus.  he served as caesar's legate during the gallic wars, but was afterward seduced by the pompeian party, and fought more with malice and cruelty than with ability, until he fell at munda in 45 bc.  quintus labienus durus, a military tribune killed during caesar's second expedition to britain, is a mistake for quintus laberius durus, whose name orosius confused with that of labienus, caesar's legate.  this error was followed by bede and geoffrey of monmouth.  quintus labienus t. f., a supporter of brutus and cassius after the murder of caesar.  following the battle of philippi, he obtained the aid of orodes ii of parthia, and took control of much of anatolia, before he was defeated and put to flight by publius ventidius, the legate of marcus antonius.  he was apprehended in cilicia and put to death.  titus labienus, the historian, was probably the son or grandson of caesar's legate.  he was a skilled orator, and an ardent opponent of augustus, who did little to hinder his activities, although labienus carefully avoided publishing materials that the emperor might deem libelous.  eventually the senate decreed that all of his works should be burnt, and rather than suffer this indignity
, he shut himself in his family's tombs, and perished.  labienus, who had taken part in the proscriptions of sulla, was proscribed by the triumvirs in 43 bc.  rather than going into hiding, he sat in front of his house, and waited for his assassins.  labienus, likewise proscribed, concealed himself from the triumvirs.  his freedmen refused to reveal his hiding place, even under torture.  see also  list of roman gentes  references  bibliography   marcus tullius cicero, pro gaio rabirio perduellionis reo.  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  marcus velleius paterculus, compendium of roman history.  plutarchus, lives of the noble greeks and romans.  florus, epitome de t. livio bellorum omnium annorum dcc (epitome of livy: all the wars of seven hundred years).  appianus alexandrinus (appian), bellum civile (the civil war).  marcus junianus justinus (justin), epitome de cn. pompeio trogo historiarum philippicarum et totius mundi originum et terrae situs (epitome of trogus' philippic history and origin of the whole world and all of its places).  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  ambrosius theodosius macrobius, saturnalia.  ezekiel, freiherr von spanheim, disputationes de usu et praestantia numismatum antiquorum (arguments concerning the knowledge and superiority of ancient coins), rome, (1664).  joseph hilarius eckhel, doctrina numorum veterum (the study of ancient coins, 1792-1798).  johann caspar von orelli, onomasticon tullianum, orell fussli, zurich (1826-1838).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  roman gentes
state route 130 (sr 130) is a  state highway in pike and barbour counties in the southeastern part of the u.s. state of alabama. the western terminus of the highway is at an intersection with u.s. route 29 (us 29) east of banks. the eastern terminus of the highway is at an intersection with sr 51 in louisville.  route description  sr 130 begins at an intersection with us 29 (internally designated as sr 15) east of banks. it travels southeast, south, and then east towards louisville. the highway then ends at sr 51 in louisville.  major intersections  see also  references  external links  130 transportation in pike county, alabama transportation in barbour county, alabama
oakley, north carolina may refer to :   oakley, buncombe county, north carolina, a populated place in asheville in buncombe county, north carolina  oakley, pitt county, north carolina, a populated place in pitt county, north carolina
krbune, also called cherbune, is a small hamlet in istria county, croatia. it is located in the plains of arsa which is called valley of cherbune. within the hamlet stands the little chapel with a small cemetery named san martino constructed in the 15th century.  references  populated places in istria county
bric language systems  is an online language training company based in new york city, ny. bric specializes in mandarin chinese, brazilian portuguese, and spanish language training.  the classes are taught by native speakers of each language who live in china, brazil, and mexico via online video conferencing.  the teaching content was developed exclusively for bric and is interactive, on-screen, and customizable to each students needs and interests.  the teaching content is downloadable and available for sale separately online.  bric also offers immersion training in china and internships in both china and brazil for college students.  bric has partnered with several us and international universities on these internships programs.  history   bric language systems was founded in november, 2011. its headquarters is in new york city with operations in shanghai, china, mexico city, mexico, and sao paulo, brazil. it was founded by ryan mcmunn, an american entrepreneur who started his career in shanghai at a us-based manufacturing company.  mcmunn lived in china for 8 years. after failing to learn mandarin for several years using different products and techniques, mcmunn was introduced to kassey wong, the ceo of top mandarin.  within six months he was speaking mandarin fluently and negotiating business deals in chinese.  in 2011, mcmunn moved from shanghai to new york. at this time ms. wong proposed setting up an online mandarin chinese school using teachers in china to teach students worldwide. mcmunn loved the idea of using technology to bring wong's teaching method to young professionals and international business people. he quickly began working on setting up spanish and brazilian portuguese programs and on september 7, 2011 bric language systems received its certificate of formation in the state of delaware.  in the summer of 2015, bric began its internship placement programs in china and brazil. in 2016 mcmunn signed a contract with university of colorado to provide internships in china and brazil to students for university credits. this was the beginning of their partnerships with several us and international universities.  partners   university of colorado boulder  products and services   bric language systems offers private and group mandarin, spanish, and brazilian portuguese courses. the courses are all taught by actual teachers using online video-conferencing. the courses are customized to the students' needs and interests and include cultural sensitivity training.  each class is recorded so that the student can review the material they learned during class.  bric also offers internship placement services in china and brazil. bric is able to place students in both paid and unpaid internships in most industries
in both countries. the services include securing interviews, internship placement in the appropriate industry, online language training, face to face language training, resume assistance, interview preparation, housing, visa assistance, cultural adaptation, networking events and 24/7 support.  bric also worked with shanghai normal university's school of business and finance to provide a business and mandarin course from 2012 to 2014.  media   mcmunn is a contributor for entrepreneur.com and huffingtonpost.com and bric language systems has been in the news several times   https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/272745 https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/254484 https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/269549 https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/252833 https://www.entrepreneur.com/article/246117  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ryan-mcmunn/three-reasons-to-immerse-_b_8812048.html http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ryan-mcmunn/3-requirements-any-busine_b_7540384.html http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ryan-mcmunn/6-tips-from-a-global-entr_b_7205702.html http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ryan-mcmunn/9-reasons-to-learn-a-lang_b_6398134.html http://www.huffingtonpost.com/ryan-mcmunn/ten-strange-things-eaten-_b_6329394.html  https://www.usnews.com/opinion/blogs/economic-intelligence/2014/01/29/the-business-benefits-of-learning-a-foreign-language http://www.investors.com/news/management/leaders-and-success/push-beyond-office-for-new-connections/  http://www.huffingtonpost.com/lisa-chau/business-etiquette_b_7993576.html  https://nypost.com/2013/10/19/speaking-2-or-more-languages-becoming-essential-skill/ http://www.everydayhealth.com/alzheimers
/bilingualism-may-slow-alzheimers-progression-9826.aspx  awards   owler hot in 2015 nyc owler hot in 2016 nyc entrepreneur 360: the best entrepreneurial companies in america  2018 corporate immigration & relocation awards recipient of the best online language training company 2018  references   companies based in new york city american companies established in 2011 2011 establishments in new york (state)
a3 is an amputee sport classification used by the international sports organization for the disabled (isod) for people with acquired or congenital amputations.  a3 classified sportspeople have both legs amputated below knee. their amputations impact their sport performance, including having balance issues, increased energy costs, higher rates of oxygen consumption, and issues with their gait. sports people in this class are eligible to participate in include athletics, swimming, sitting volleyball, archery, weightlifting, badminton, lawn bowls, sitzball and wheelchair basketball.  definition   this class is for people who have both legs amputated below knee. this classification is sometimes abbreviated as b/k. in competing in other sports, this class may have a different name:  performance and physiology  the nature of a person's amputations in this class can effect their physiology and sports performance. because of the potential for balance issues related to having an amputation, during weight training, amputees are encouraged to use a spotter when lifting more than . lower limb amputations effect a person's energy cost for being mobile.  to keep their oxygen consumption rate similar to people without lower limb amputations, they need to walk slower. people in this class use around 41% more oxygen to walk or run the same distance as some one without a lower limb amputation.  people in this class can have a number of problems with their gait.  there are a number of different causes for these issues, and suggested ways to modify them.  for a gait that has abrupt heel contact, the cause can be excessive heel lever.  this can be fixed by realigning their prosthetic foot.  for jerky knee motions, the cause could be a loose socket in the knee or inadequate suspension.  in that case, the socket might need replacing or they may need to realign the prosthesis.  if they have prolonged heel contact, the cause could be problems with the heel lever in their prosthesis or a worn out heel.  these are fixed by increasing heel stiffness or realigning the prosthesis. in some cases, prolong heel contact or knees remaining fulling extended is a problem with training in how to use the prosthesis.  another issue might be foot drag.  this can be caused by an ill fitting prosthesis that can be fixed by shortening the length of the prosthesis.  some people in this class could have uneven length strides.  this can be a result of problems with hip flexion or insecurity about their walk.  both are fixed by physical therapy.  governance  this classification was set up by isod, with
the current version adopted in 1992 and then modified in 1993.  iwas was created following the merger of isod and international stoke mandeville games federation (ismgf) in 2005.  subsequently, iwas became the classification governing body for some amputee sports. in a few cases for wheelchair events run by iwas, cp-isra parallel classes may be used to allow wheelchair using amputees to compete in these events. in the case of a3, this means that cp4 sportspeople from cp-isra may be in their class.  sports  athletics  for athletics competitions that use the ipc athletics classification system, this class competes in t43, f43, t54 and f58. people in this class use a prosthetic limb when competing in athletics. it has three parts: a socket, a shank and a foot. in the late 2000s, research suggested that in athletics running events, double below the knee amputees could have a competitive advantage when running against their able-bodied counterparts because their prostheses provide a competitive advantage.  double amputees have difficulty using a starting block in track events because they cannot align their legs with the block in the standard way.  they often use different starting positions as a result. they have a different stride to able-bodied runners, with their artificial limbs having increased ground contact time, shorter leg swing time, and less time in the air while running.  a study comparing the performance of athletics competitors at the 1984 summer paralympics found there was no significant difference in performance in times between women in a1, a2 and a3 in the discus, women in a2 and a3 in the discus, women in a3 and a4 in the javelin, women in a2 and a3 in the shot put, women in a2, a3 and a4 in the long jump, women in a2 and a3 in the 100 meter race, men in a1, a2 and a3 in the discus, men in the a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8 and a9 in the discus, men in a2, a3 and a4  in the discus, men in a1, a2, a3, a4, a5, a6, a7, a8 and a9 in the javelin, men in a2, a3 and a4 in the javelin, men in a1, a2 and a3 in the shot put, men in a2, a3 and a4 in the shot put, men in a2
, a3 and a4 in the high jump, men in a2 and a3 in the 100 meter race,  men in a1, a2, a3 and a4 in the 400 meter race, and men in a2 and a3 in the 400 meter race.  historically, because of low participation rates in men's t43 races, the class has been combined with the t44 class. the combined class was then called t44 and included both single and double below the knee amputees. there was a push in 2008 to avoid this happening because of a perception that double below knee amputees had a competitive advantage compared to single below knee amputees.  subsequent research related to results for men at the 2012 summer paralympics in london confirmed this to be the case for both the 200 meters and 400 meters. double below the knee amputees also have a competitive advantage when compared to double above the knee amputees. from the 2004 summer paralympics to the 2012 summer paralympics, there was no significant changes in performance times put up by male sprinters in 100 meter, 200 meter and 400 meter events.  when cp4 athletes who are world record holders in their class have been put into a parallel athletics class with amputee athletes from this class because of comparable disability types, they have under-performed.  use of a specially made carbon fibre running prosthetic leg assists runners in this class in lowering their heart rate compared to using a prosthetic not designed for running. runnings at this class can have lower metabolic costs compared to elite runners over middle and long distances. in general, track athletes with amputations should be considerate of the surface they are running on, and avoid asphalt and cinder tracks.  one of the most famous competitors in this class is oscar pistorious.  he has set world records in the 200 meters in athletics.  basketball  for wheelchair basketball, sportspeople in this class tend to be classified a 4 point players or 4.5 point players.  the cut off point between the two classes is generally based on the location of the amputations.  people with amputations longer than 2/3rds the length of their thigh are generally 4.5 point players.  those with shorter amputations are 4 point players.  players in this class can have issues with controlling their sideways movements. despite wheelchair basketball having been around since the first paralympic games, amputee players from this class were first allowed to be classified and participate internationally in 1983 following the creation of a functional classification system in cologne, germany by horst strokhkendl.  players from this class first competed at the
1983 gold cup championships.  cycling  people in this class tend to be classified in cycling events as lc4.  the class is for cyclists with an impairment in both legs.  swimming  people with amputations are eligible to compete in swimming at the paralympic games. a3 swimmers may be found in several classes. these include s5, s7, and s8. prior to the 1990s, this class was often grouped with other amputee classes in swimming competitions, including the paralympic games. swimmers in this class have a similar stroke length and stroke rate comparable to able bodied swimmers.  a study of was done comparing the performance of swimming competitors at the 1984 summer paralympics.  it found there was no significant difference in performance in times between men and women in a2 and a3 in the 50 meter breaststroke, men and women in a2 and a3 in the 50 meter freestyle, men and women in a2, a3 and a4 in the 25 meter butterfly, and men in a2 and a3 in the 50 meter backstroke.  other sports  other sports people in this class are eligible to compete in include sitting volleyball, archery, and weightlifting   . in both archery and sitting volleyball, different classes of amputees have historically competed against each other as one class for people with amputations or people who have a minimal disability level. in the case of weightlifting, amputees have also traditionally been grouped together, with divisions being based on weight instead. in powerlifting, only a1 and a3 are eligible as classes but they are categorized by weight, not classification type. they can also participate in badminton.  when playing in a wheelchair, they compete as w3.  lawn bowls is another option. a3 competitors can be classified as lb1 or lb2.  players have the choice to compete in sitting or standing. ten pin bowling is also open to people in this class.  they compete in the tpb8 class and tpb9 class.  another sport open to people in this class is sitzball, the precursor to sitting volleyball. it is open to a1 to a9 classified players along with anyone who might be classified as "les autres" or who have lesser amputations that would not qualify them for isod classification.  it is not open to people with spinal cord injuries.  play is open, with no requirements as to which types of disabilities are on the court at any time.  rowing is another sport open to people with amputations. in 1991, the first internationally accepted adaptive rowing classification system was established and put into
use.  people from this class were initially classified as  a2 for people with double amputations.  becoming classified  classification is often based on the anatomical nature of the amputation. the classification system takes several things into account when putting people into this class.  these include which limbs are affected, how many limbs are affected, and how much of a limb is missing.  for this class, classification generally has four phases. the first stage of classification is a health examination.  for amputees, this is often done on site at a sports training facility or competition.  the second stage is observation in practice, the third stage is observation in competition and the last stage is assigning the sportsperson to a relevant class. sometimes the health examination may not be done on site because the nature of the amputation could cause not physically visible alterations to the body.  this is especially true for lower limb amputees as it relates to how their limbs align with their hips and the impact this has on their spine and how their skull sits on their spine.  during the observation phase involving training or practice for track and field, athletes in this class may be asked to demonstrate their skills in athletics, such as running, jumping or throwing. a determination is then made as to what classification an athlete should compete in. classifications may be confirmed or review status. for athletes who do not have access to a full classification panel, provisional classification is available; this is a temporary review classification, considered an indication of class only, and generally used only in lower levels of competition.  references   parasports classifications
benjamin ola akande is a nigerian-american academic and professor. he was named the 9th president of champlain college in burlington, vermont on april 21, 2020 and assumed the role july 1, 2020. from april 2018 to april 2020 he served as assistant vice chancellor of international programs-africa, director of the africa initiative, and associate director of the global health center at washington university in st. louis.  he is the former 21st president of westminster college in fulton, missouri. prior to westminster, he served for 15 years as dean of the webster university george herbert walker school of business & technology. before that, at wayland baptist university, he was appointed chief academic officer and chair, division of business administration. throughout his career, he has consulted with fortune 500 companies and private enterprise. he is recognized as a media spokesperson on topics such as leadership, economics, and entrepreneurship. he is a national speaker on topics related to leadership and economics.  early life and education benjamin ola akande was born in nigeria in 1962. his father, a renowned baptist minister, rev. dr. samuel ola. akande and mother, comfort olalonpe, set high standards for him and his four sisters and encouraged them to aim high. he attended comprehensive high school, aiyetoro in ogun state, nigeria, graduating in 1978. he moved to the united states to further his education in 1979 and earned a bachelor's degree in business administration at wayland baptist university. he proceeded to the university of oklahoma where he completed master's degrees in economics and public administration and a ph.d. in economics. he also completed post-doctoral courses at the john f. kennedy school of government at harvard university and the said school of business at oxford university.  career in 1995, akande was appointed chief academic officer and chair, division of business administration, at wayland baptist university. he also served as special assistant to the president.  in 2000, akande was appointed as professor of economics and dean of the george herbert walker school of business & technology at webster university, and webster university's chief of the office of corporate partnerships where he was instrumental in developing and nurturing many corporate and donor partnerships.  from 2015 to 2017, he served as the first black president of westminster college.  in april 2018 he became assistant vice chancellor of international programs-africa, director of the africa initiative, and associate director of the global health center at washington university in st. louis.  dr. akande also chaired washington university's international travel oversight committee (
itoc).  on april 21, 2020 dr. akande was named the 9th president of champlain college in burlington, vermont which will be effective as of july 1, 2020.  akande has been a consultant to several multinational companies focusing on areas of corporate strategy and responsibility, leadership development and market positioning. he is also a well known commentator on economic and policy issues. he has appeared in npr marketplace public radio, anderson cooper 360 and cbs evening news. he has been a consultant to the world bank and the united nations development program (undp).  selected publications  •   akande, b., "oreo cookies, the olympics, and education," university business (october 2012).  •   akande, b., kourik, j., maher, p., "managing the demands of accreditation; the impact of global business schools," research in higher education journal (volume 14, october 2011).  •   akande, b., feltz, c., "hr's new year's resolution: take a seat at the strategic table," market watch (january [1st quarter/winter] 6, 2011).  •   maher, p., kourik, j., akande, b., "achieving quality, excellence, and consistency in a global academy," technology management for global economic growth, portland international center for management of engineering and technology, picmet conference. july 18-22, 2010, proceedings.  •   akande, b., feltz, c., "why strategy fails?" chief learning officer magazine (august 2010).  •   masidonski, p., maher, p., kourik, j., akande, b., "consistent diversity: balancing cultural, economic, and assessment needs in a global institution," aacsb annual conference (june 2009).  •   akande, b., "the web-savvy generation," financial times (april 5, 2009).  •   bakewell, t., akande, b., "effective nonprofit governance: lessons learned," national association of corporate directors (july [3rd quarter/summer] 2008).  •   akande, b., developing leadership competencies, "herausforderungen einer zukunftsorientierten unternehmenspolitik: okonomie, umvelt, technik and gessellschaft als determinanten," july 2007, 3rd quarter.  recognitions and awards ·     recognized as one of the 40 under 40 distinguished leaders in the greater st. louis region
, 2002  ·     webster university presidential citation for contribution to institutional mission - conception of the energizer global staff exchange program, 2005  ·     most influential st. louisan, st. louis business journal, 2007-2012  ·     recognized by st. louis business journal as one of their most influential diverse leaders, 2007  ·     webster university presidential citation for creative leadership in bringing top-flight business leaders and opinion makers to the campuses of webster university's success to significance speaker series, 2007  ·     distinguished alumni of the year, wayland baptist university, 2008  ·     the 100 top public and private board prospects - selected by a panel that includes senior managers from top executive search firms, former u.s. ambassadors, investor advocates, with the top 100 meeting the following criteria: demonstrated expertise in the far corners of the globe, legal and regulatory expertise, managing global divisions at public companies, and highly accomplished academics, financial times & agenda international, 2011  ·     the clayton chamber of commerce pillar of the community award, 2012  ·     st. louis magazine power list: the 100 people who are shaping st. louis, 2012  ·     ingram's kansas city business magazine: 50 missourians you should know, 2012  ·     the churchill medal of leadership, westminster college, april 2017  board engagements   •   vice chair of the board, argent capital, an asset management company, 2013 - present  •   member, advisory board, fdc fundacao dom cabral, # 1 ranked business school in brazil, 2011 - present  •   board member, regulatory & compliance committee, enterprise bank & trust, april 2014 - 2020  •   board member, the saint louis club, 2013-2020  •   board member, executive committee, development committee, forest park forever, ranked as one of the nation's largest and most respected public parks, 2013-2020  •   member, board of commissioners, investment committee, saint louis art museum, 2013-2020  •   advisory board, the vandiver group, strategic communications firm offering strategic counsel, public relations, branding, market research, 2009 - present  •   board of advisors, dean & provost, academic publication focused on best practices and emerging issues confronted by academic deans and provosts, 2007-2015  •   danced in the 2015 dancing with the st. louis stars benefit fund raiser for the st. louis independence center   •   vice-chair, board member, beyond housing, non-profit organization and leading provider of housing and support services for low-income
families and homeowners in st. louis, mo, 2008 - may 2013  •   director, ralcorp holdings (october 2010-january 2013), publicly traded leading producer of private label and store brand foods and a major producer of food service products. in concert with the board, played an instrumental role in numerous strategic acquisitions made by ralcorp and the spin-off of post cereals.  •   member of the board of trustees and past chair, investment committee, mary institute country day school (micds). independent, private, k-12 school, st. louis, 2004-2011.  personal life  benjamin is married to bola taiwo-akande, also a native nigerian, who he first met as a graduate student at the university of oklahoma. they have three adult daughters.  references  external links  living people 1962 births american people of yoruba descent 21st-century american economists nigerian economists nigerian academics nigerian emigrants to the united states wayland baptist university alumni webster university faculty people with acquired american citizenship westminster college (missouri) faculty alumni of said business school harvard kennedy school alumni american academic administrators washington university in st. louis faculty champlain college people university of oklahoma alumni heads of universities and colleges in the united states
madhopur  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of madhopur. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, madhopur has total number of 225 houses and population of 1,165 of which include 603 males and 562 females. literacy rate of madhopur is 81.03%, higher than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 121 which is 10.39% of total population of madhopur, and child sex ratio is approximately  754, lower than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
operation scylla () was the transit of the  (italian royal navy) capitani romani-class light cruiser  on the night of 17/18 july 1943, during the second world war. the cruiser sailed from la spezia in the tyrrhenian sea to taranto in the ionian sea during the allied invasion of sicily.  scipione africano fought a night engagement against four british motor torpedo boats (mtbs) during its passage of the strait of messina. one mtb was destroyed and one damaged; scipione africano received superficial damage after being fired on by mistake by axis coastal artillery. the action was the only time that an italian warship made effective use of surface radar during an engagement in the war.  background  allied blockade of sicily  during the allied invasion of sicily (operation husky, 9 july - 17 august 1943) british motor torpedo boats (mtbs) and motor gun boats moved from algeria to malta and then to captured ports in sicily. the axis withdrawal from sicily ( to the germans) took place from 3 to 17 august. the boats patrolled the strait of messina and laid in ambush, waiting for axis ships and landing craft; with engines off, the british boat crews listened for ship engines. lieutenant denis jermain, the senior officer of four boats of the 10th mtb flotilla on patrol during the night of 17/18 july 1943 had decided that when attacking an axis ship, one boat would act as a decoy, making as much noise as possible, for the other boats discreetly to move into positions to launch torpedoes.  the italian capitani romani-class light cruiser  () was one of four ships of the class to be built and was equipped with an ec-3   (owl) radar set.  sets were italian made and had come into service in early 1942. scipione was based at la spezia in the region of liguria, on the north-western coast of italy. when the allied invasion of sicily began, anticipating a blockade of the strait of messina by american and british naval forces, the  ordered the new light cruiser scipione africano (captain ernesto pellegrini) to sail from la spezia down the west coast of italy to taranto in apulia, to remedy the lack of fast cruisers in the ionian sea.  prelude  operation scylla () on 15 july 1943, scipione departed la spezia for naples and arrived that evening, shadowed by a british seaplane. scipione embarked an air liaison team and a metox high-
frequency radar warning receiver. she sailed again at 18:15 on 16 july and entered the messina straits at 00:20 on 17 july, with a full moon rising from the south. some days before, on the night of 12/13 july, british motor torpedo boat mtb 81 had sunk the  in the northern approaches of the straits.  night action  as she reached the straits, scipione detected four small vessels on its  set, lying  ahead, between reggio di calabria and cape pellaro. at first pellegrini thought that they were friendly  (motor barges). at 02:13, the movement of the leading vessel convinced pellegrino that the boats were allied mtbs and he ordered an increase in speed from  to .  the mtbs were four british elco boats from the 10th mtb flotilla (lieutenant dennis jermain) based at augusta, comprising mtb 260 (lieutenant h. f. wadds, r.a.n.v.r.), mtb 313 (lieutenant alec foster), mtb 315 (lieutenant l. e. newall, r.n.z.n.v.r.) and mtb 316 (lieutenant r. b. adams). the british mtbs were lying in wait for axis landing craft and e-boats. jermain, on mtb 315, wrote later,  jermain gave the alarm and ordered the other boats to start up and scatter. with no time to make signals, jermain moved mtb 315 to the east, leaving two boats for each side of . jermain intended to feint with mtb 315 to attract the attention of the cruiser and leave the other boats in a better position for attack.  pellegrini had turned his ship to 200 degrees, heading to a point between mtb 313 and mtb 316. the speed of the cruiser surprised the british and it was only  away by the time they were ready to fire torpedoes. scipione opened fire with all guns, with a precision that pellegrini said "left him amazed". the italian report claims that the engagement lasted no more than three minutes and that the first allied craft to be hit by  rounds was the closest boat to starboard, which was left in a "sinking condition". this was mtb 313, only  distant from scipione. mtb 313 was ready to launch torpedoes, when foster was wounded in a leg and the spare officer of the flotilla, sub-lieutenant john mckim was mortally wounded. one torpedo passed just ahead of scipione and the
damaged mtb limped away.  mtb 260 was also on the starboard side of the cruiser and claimed a hit. after being fired on by scipione, mtb 260 escaped with minor damage. the italian report says that she was set on fire. mtb 316 was  away to port of scipione when it was fired on and the mtb caught fire and blew up just a few seconds later, the wreck sinking with all hands. the explosion took place so close to the cruiser that fragments of mtb 316 fell aboard scipione. the analysis of these remains produced some controversy, when italian sources claimed to have sunk mtb 305, which was not in the mediterranean, because of an inscription from a recovered wooden panel.  scipione was chased down the strait by mtb 315 and mtb 260 until she turned to port for taranto. pellegrini reported that one of the craft on the port side fired two torpedoes which scipione evaded. the boat was mtb 315, which scipione engaged with its heavy machine-guns. at the end of the action, scipione was bombarded by german and italian coastal artillery, which caused splinter damage and wounded two seamen. british sources recorded an air attack on scipione by axis aircraft, not mentioned by pellegrino. scipione reached taranto at 09:46 on 18 july.  aftermath  subsequent operations  about an hour after scipione passed the straits, the italian submarine , escorted by the torpedo boat , reached messina, also from la spezia. ambra was to attack allied shipping at syracuse with mt explosive motorboats (mtrs) on the night of 17/18 july but the operation was cancelled after the submarine was depth charged and damaged by a 221 squadron vickers wellington; ambra suffered no casualties and limped back to messina. the morning after the action, sub-lieutenant mckim was buried at sea off augusta. no traces of mtb 316 and her crew were found by allied forces. the following night mtb 75 was hit and seriously damaged by shore batteries in the straits of messina, while on the evening of 19 july, an unidentified u-boat was depth-charged by british small units and had a narrow escape off reggio di calabria. from 4 to 17 august, scipione laid four defensive minefields in the gulf of taranto and the gulf of squillace along with the old light cruiser . the day after the cassibile armistice was made public, scipione escorted the corvette , transporting the italian royal family from pescara to brindisi where she came under german air
attack. scipione ferried the new head of government, general pietro badoglio and his cabinet to malta.  see also   gufo radar  references  bibliography  books                        journals      newspapers    websites  further reading    conflicts in 1943 naval battles of world war ii involving italy naval battles and operations of world war ii involving the united kingdom italian naval victories in the battle of the mediterranean 1943 in italy friendly fire incidents of world war ii july 1943 events
nandasmo futbol clube is a nicaraguan football team currently playing in the nicaraguan primera division. they are based in nandasmo.  history nandasmo was promoted to the primera division after the 2015-2016 season.   however, they were immediately relegated after finishing dead last in both the apertura and clausura.  current squad  squad changes 2016 apertura in:  achievements segunda division de nicaragua: 1 2016  list of coaches   tbd   marcos bodan (2016)  external links  profile - goolnica  football clubs in nicaragua
paris union school district 95 is a school district headquartered in paris, illinois.  it serves much of the paris city limits and some unincorporated areas just outside of paris.  schools  memorial elementary school  carolyn wenz elementary school  mayo middle school  paris cooperative high school (now a cooperative high school under its own board of education)  references  external links  paris union school district 95 school districts in illinois education in edgar county, illinois
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in taonan, jilin, china. , it has three residential communities and eight villages under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of jilin  references   township-level divisions of jilin taonan
vp music group is a us based record company that owns and distributes through 4 labels, vp records, greensleeves records, dub rockers and 17 north parade. the company's origins stem from the "randy's records" record shop which opened in 1958 on the corner of east and tower streets in kingston. also under the music group is a distribution branch named vpal. the company has offices in new york city, miami, kingston, london, tokyo, rio de janeiro and johannesburg.  references  music publishing companies of the united states
wigston birkett house community special school is a special school with academy status based in wigston, leicestershire, england. the school caters for up to 200 students aged between 5 and 19 with a range of additional learning needs.  facilities the school is spread over four sites located to the south of leicester:   station road site: located in wigston, on the site of wigston academy. this new building, which includes a swimming pool, multi-sensory environments, outdoor play areas and accessible classrooms was opened in september 2017. it replaced a previous building located at launceston road, wigston. this site caters for students with moderate, severe, profound and complex needs aged between 5 and 19.  thistly meadow site: located at thistly meadow primary school in blaby. caters for ks2 students with moderate and severe needs.  the birkett house centre at thomas estley: located at thomas estley community college in broughton astley. caters for ks3 students with moderate and severe needs.  birkett house seniors: located at countesthorpe academy in countesthorpe. caters for ks4 and post-16 students with moderate and severe needs. students at this site have access to a nearby allotment and it hosts a student run cafe known as "fox lodge".  reputation birkett house was rated as "outstanding" in all areas during its most recent ofsted inspections in 2015 and 2019.  references  external links official website fox lodge cafe   special schools in leicestershire academies in leicestershire
conklin-montgomery house is a historic home located at cambridge city, wayne county, indiana.  it was built between about 1836 and 1838, and is a two-story, five bay, brick hip and end gable roofed townhouse.  it features a two-story, in antis, recessed portico with a second story balcony supported by ionic order and doric order columns. also on the property is a contributing pre-american civil war gazebo.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1975. it is located in the cambridge city historic district.  references  external links  historic american buildings survey in indiana houses on the national register of historic places in indiana houses completed in 1838 buildings and structures in wayne county, indiana national register of historic places in wayne county, indiana historic district contributing properties in indiana
the hire-purchase act 1967 (), is a malaysian law which enacted to regulate the form and contents of hire-purchase agreements, the rights and duties of parties to such agreements and to make provisions for other matters connected therewith and incidental thereto.  structure the hire-purchase act 1967, in its current form (30 july 2012), consists of 9 parts containing 58 sections and 7 schedules (including 10 amendments). part i: preliminary part ii: formation and contents of hire-purchase agreements part iia: option to hirer part iii: protection of hirers and guarantors warranties and conditions part iv: hirers statutory rights of hirers  part v: guarantors part vi: insurance part vii: general part viii: powers of enforcement part ix: regulations, etc. schedules  references  external links  hire-purchase act 1967   1967 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
sara raasch (born august 26, 1989) is an american author of young adult fiction. she wrote the fantasy new york times bestselling trilogy snow like ashes (balzer + bray/harpercollins) as well as the fantasy series these rebel waves and the sequel, these divided shores (balzer + bray/harpercollins).  biography   sara raasch is an american author of young adult fiction. raised in ohio, raasch graduated from wright state university with a degree in organizational leadership and currently resides in ohio.  works   snow like ashes series (balzer + bray/harpercollins)  snow like ashes (2014)  ice like fire (2015)  frost like night (2016)   these rebel waves (2019)   these divided shores (2019)   set fire to the gods (co-author) (2020) raasch is also the author of these rebel waves  and its sequel, these divided shores "inspired by the spanish inquisition and the golden age of piracy" (balzer + bray/harpercollins).  reception   raasch's snow like ashes (2014) became a new york times bestseller in 2015. shortly after, ice like fire (2015) debuted on the new york times list at #3. her books have been colorado blue spruce award nominees, an rt book reviews top pick, a huffington post best overall ya book of 2014, and a hypable top ten books of 2014.  references  external links    website  twitter  facebook  author pinterest  goodreads  youtube  american young adult novelists living people 1989 births american women novelists 21st-century american women
the chen bochui children's literature award (陈伯吹儿童文学奖) is a major award issued in china, with the aim of promoting excellence in children's publishing and cultural diversity. it was originally called the children's literary garden prize (儿童文学园丁奖), then the chen bochui children's literature award from 1988. the first awards were given in 1981, and were awarded every two years. it was renamed as the chen bochui international children's literature award (陈伯吹国际儿童文学奖), and since 2014 has been held annually. it is named after the author, translator, journalist and educator chen bochui (1906-1997), who translated pushkin's children's tales, the wizard of oz, and don quixote into chinese for the first time in the 1940s, and who donated his life savings to establish this award. it is the longest continuously running literary prize in china.  the 1st to 10th awards - main prizewinners wu mengqi  吴梦起  《老鼠看下棋》 qiu xun  邱勋  《no! no! no!》 zheng chunhua  郑春华  《圆圆和圈圈》 cheng wei  程玮  《来自异国的孩子（节选）》 xiao yuxuan  萧育轩  《乱世少年》 zhu xinwang  朱新望 《 小狐狸花背（节选）》 shen shixi  沈石溪  《退役军犬黄狐》 shen bai ying sha  沈百英妙  《六个矮儿子》 shi yanbing  施雁冰  《鸦鸦》 ren dalin  任大霖  《龙风》 yang xiaoying  杨笑影  《失血的太阳》 du shuzhen  杜淑贞  《十二岁的故事》  the 11th to 20th awards - main prizewinners zhou jiting  �
��基亭  《神秘的眼睛》 zhu xiaowen  朱效文  《风景》 jian ping  简平  《回归》 bi shumin  毕淑敏  《同你现在一般大》 xie hua  谢华  《楼道》 gu ying  谷应  《过客》 xie qianni  谢倩霓  《日子》 zhang zhilu  张之路  《鼓掌员的荣誉》 zheng chunhua  郑春华  《大头儿子和小头爸爸全集 (节选) 》 zhou rui  周锐  《出窍》 ren rongrong  任溶溶  the 22nd awards, 2007 outstanding contribution  杰出贡献奖 ren daxing  任大星 main prize li yougan  李有干  《大芦荡》  (少年儿童出版社) outstanding works  优秀作品奖 zhang qiusheng  张秋生  《新小巴掌童话》  (中国福利会出版社) li xuebin  李学斌  《蔚蓝色的夏天》  (新世纪出版社) liu huo  流火  《黑夜》  (小青蛙报) yin jianling  殷健灵  《听见萤火虫》  (安徽少年儿童出版社) yu yujun  郁雨君  《把爸爸寄出去》  (儿童时代) han qingchen  韩青辰  《飞翔哪怕翅膀断了心》  (少年儿童出版社) xie qianni  谢�
��霓  《青春潘多拉》  (中国福利会出版社) peng xuejun  彭学军  《同窗的妩媚时光》  (少年儿童出版社) sun jiancheng  孙建成  《水中的男孩》  (阅读前线) ka ka  卡卡  《盘子筷子碗》  (少年日报) chang fusheng  常福生  《有孩子的地方》  (少年儿童出版社)  the 23rd awards, 2009 outstanding contribution  杰出贡献奖 sheng ye  圣野 main prize  大 奖 qiu yidong  邱易东  《空巢十二月》  (少年儿童出版社) outstanding works  优秀作品奖 an wulin  安武林  《老蜘蛛的一百张床》（书）  (中国福利会出版社) zheng chunhua  郑春华  《非常小子马鸣加》（书）  (少年儿童出版社) wei jie  魏捷  《如果一个小孩想生气》  (儿童时代) yu yu  俞愉  《sd娃的眼泪》  (儿童文学) xie qianni  谢倩霓  《家有谢天谢地》（书）  (少年儿童出版社) lu lina  吕丽娜  《如果你有一块钱》  (好儿童画报) tang tang (writer)  汤汤  《别去5厘米之外》  (少年文艺) peng yi  彭�
��  《我捡到一条喷火龙》（书）  (江苏少年儿童出版社) xiao ping  萧萍  《新年明信片》  (儿童时代) liu huo  流火  《简单》   (小青蛙报) zhang huiyue  张晖月  《青春散场》  (少年文艺)  the 24th awards, 2011 outstanding contribution  杰出贡献奖 zhou xiao  周晓 main prize  大奖 zhang hong (writer)  张弘  《玫瑰方（短篇小说）  少年文艺 special awards  特别奖 《上海少年儿童报刊简史》 jian ping  简平  (少年儿童出版社出版） outstanding works  优秀作品奖 yin jianling  殷健灵  《1937•少年夏之秋》（长篇小说）(贵州人民出版社) chi tang  池塘  《欢迎光临魔法》（长篇小说） peng yi  彭懿  (明天出版社) xu ling (writer)  徐玲  《31天忽视被爱》（短篇小说）  (少年文艺) wang chunmin  王春鸣  《一个男孩》 and 《一百条蚕和一个茧》（短篇小说）  (儿童文学) lu ying (writer)  卢颖  《豪猪的花园》（低幼童话）  (儿童时代) shen shixi  沈石溪  《白天鹅
》（长篇小说）  (少年儿童出版社) san san (writer)  三三  《时光中的孩子》（中篇小说）  (少年儿童出版社) lu mei  陆梅  《当着落叶纷飞》（长篇小说）  (接力出版社) zhang jie (writer)  张洁  《最亮的一盏灯》（散文集）  (明天出版社) ci qi  慈 琪  《命名》（poetry）  (少年日报)  the 25th awards, 2013 outstanding contribution  杰出贡献奖 sun yi (writer)  孙毅 main prizewinners  大奖 peng yi  彭懿  《老师，操场上有个小妖怪叫我》（长篇幻想小说）  (明天出版社) outstanding works  优秀作品奖 tang tang (writer)  汤汤  《喜地的牙》（中篇童话）  (少年儿童出版社) shu huibo  舒辉波  《和陌生人共进下午茶》（短篇小说）  (少年文艺) feng yulan (writer)  冯与蓝  《一条杠也是杠》（短篇小说）  (少年文艺) wang yongying  王勇英  《弄泥小时候》（长篇小说）  (少年儿童出版社) lao chen  老臣  《远行的鸟群》（短篇小说集）  (少年儿童出版社) xiao he ding ding  小河丁丁  《
白公山的刺梅》（短篇小说）  (少年文艺) xiao ping  萧萍  《2012年12月21日冬至》（多文体）(儿童时代) pang jielei  庞婕蕾  《橘子味的夏天》（中篇小说）  (明天出版社) xie qianni  谢倩霓  《草长莺飞时节》（长篇小说）  (中国少年儿童出版社) zhang jie (writer)  张洁  《穿着绿披风的吉莉》（童话绘本）(湖北少年儿童出版社)  the 2014 chen bochui international children's literature awards jury members: fang weiping 方卫平 (china), zhu chengliang 朱成梁 (china), roger mello (brazil), nathalie beau (france), maria jesus gil (spain), ye xin 叶辛 (china), lin wenbao 刘文宝 (taiwan), hai fei 海飞 (china)   best contributions to children's magazines 2014 xiaohe dingding a wine-loving stubborn old man 小河丁丁：《爱喝糊粮酒的倔老头》（少年文艺2013年11期） ren yongheng to grow up in a day 任永恒l《一下子长大》（少年文艺2013年7期） zhang zhilu the bookstore around the corner  张之路：《拐角书店》（儿童文学2013年第4期） chen wenwen decimal points in summer 陈问问：《夏天的小数点》（少年文艺2013年第8期） shu huibo please listen to me 舒辉波：《你听我说》（儿童文学2013年
第3期） best picture books of the year, 2014 whose home is it? by author/illustrator liu xugong (hsin-yi foundation publishing house) 刘旭恭：《谁的家到了？》（信谊基金出版社） mulan, illustrated by cai gao (artist) (tomorrow publishing house) 蔡皋：《花木兰》（明天出版社） if you want to see a whale, text by julie fogliano, illustrated by erin e. stead (roaring book press, usa) mr tiger goes wild, by author/illustrator peter brown (illustrator) (macmillan children's books, uk) the piggy who lost a tooth, text by gao hongbo (writer), illustrated by li rong (illustrator) (china children's press and publishing group) 高洪波：《掉牙小猪》 (中国少年儿童新闻出版社) best literary works of the year, 2014 tiny little city, by xue tao (writer) (aurora publishing house) 薛涛：《小城池》（晨光出版社） to future you: 15 letters to a girl, by yin jianling (qingdao publishing house) 殷健灵：《致未来的你-- 给女孩的十五封信》（青岛出版社） say goodbye with a smile, by pang jielei (tomorrow publishing house) 庞婕蕾：《微笑说再见》（明天出版社） best author of the year, 2014 roger mello jin bo (writer) 金波 special contribution award, 2014 hai fei 海飞 patricia aldana  the 2015 chen bochui international children's literature awards jury members: ye xin 叶辛 (china)， maria jesus gil (spain), nathalie beau (france), piet grobler (south africa), zhang zizhang 张子樟(taiwan), zhang zhilu 张之路 (china), liu haiqi 刘海栖 (china), liu xuyuan 刘绪源 (china), zhou xiang 周�
�� (china)  best contributions to children's magazines 2015 tang tang (writer) kakasha the water monster 汤汤：《水妖喀喀莎》（儿童文学2014年第4期） wang yongying qingdie and the celadon plate 王勇英：《青蝶》（儿童文学2014年第3期） wang luqi the realm of snow 王璐琪：《雪的国》（少年文艺2014年第11期） shi lei (writer) dingjun hill 史雷：《定军山》（儿童文学2014年第7期） gu shu the circle 顾抒：《圈》（少年文艺2014年第5期） best picture books of the year, 2015 (with prize money of 20,000 yuan (or $3,140) each): shh! we have a plan by author/illustrator chris haughton (writer) (walker books, u.k.) the ballad of mulan, text by chun-liang yeh, illustrated by clemence pollet (hongfei cultures, france) special delivery text by philip c. stead, illustrated by matthew cordell (roaring brook/porter, u.s.) the running town text by wang yadong, illustrated by song xiankui (hsin yi publications, taiwan) 王亚东/麦克小奎：《跑跑镇》 smoke text by cao wenxuan, illustrated by yu rong (21st century publishing group, china) 曹文轩/郁蓉：《烟》 best literary works of the year, 2015 i wish to grow into a green chinese onion by chang xingang (qingdao publishing house) 常新港：《我想长成一棵葱》（青岛出版社） the glory of the youth, by li donghua (hope publishing house) 李东华：《少年的荣耀》（希望出版社） the bald-headed principal, by zheng chunhua (juvenile and children's publishing house) 郑春华：《光头校�
�》（少年儿童出版社） the young witness, by han qingchen (zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house) 韩青辰：《小证人》（浙江少年儿童出版社） the bloody horse, by gerelchimeg black crane (jieli publishing house) 格日勒其木格。黑鹤：《血驹》（接力出版社） best author of the year, 2015 hanne bartholin special contribution award, 2015 jiang feng 蒋风  the 2016 chen bochui international children's literature awards jury members: ye xin 叶辛 (china), roger mello (brazil), piet grobler (south africa), junko yokota (usa), xu jiankun 许建昆 (taiwan), xiao fuxing 肖复兴 (china), liu xuyuan 刘绪源 (china), zhu ziqiang 朱自强 (china), yao hong 姚红 (china) each prize carried a cash award of 20,000 chinese yuan (us$2,900).  best picture books beautiful birds by jean roussen, illustrated by emmanuelle walker (flying eye)  it's my war by thomas scotto, illustrated by barroux (editions les 400 coups) chien des villes by alexandra garibal, illustrated by fred benaglia (gallimard jeunesse) the plaits by hei mi (author and illustrator) (daylight publishing house) old tyre by jia wei, illustrated by zhu chengliang (jiangsu phoenix juvenile and children's publishing) best literary works of 2016 looking for king fish by zhang wei (tomorrow publishing house)  firebrand by cao wenxuan (daylight publishing house) the legendary fox and the youth by peng yi (chenguang publishing house) my marble-hearted father by qin wenjun (juvenile and children's house) special contribution award, 2016  maria jesus gil (spain), for making "a significant contribution to the renovation of spanish children's literature", and serving as a president of the hans christian andersen award, had also forged strong links with china in recent years, serving as a jury member for the chen bochui and supporting the shanghai international children's book fair. author of the year award, 2016 zhu chengliang  the 2017 chen bochui international children
's literature awards jury members: gao hongbo (writer), junko yokota, javier zabala, sophie van der linde, yanwu chanxia, xu lu (writer), liu xuyuan, sun jianjiang and yang zhong  best picture books le ruban, by adrien parlange (france) 阿德里安·帕朗热:《缎带》(阿尔班·米歇尔少儿出版社） du iz tak?, by carson ellis (usa)《这是什么？》(烛芯出版社) [walk with the wind], by xiong liang (china)《和风一起散步》(天津人民出版社) [lying down, looking at the sky], by ursula palusinska (poland)《懒洋洋地躺下，望着天空》(姐妹出版社) [laba festival : rice porridge under the eaves], zheng chunhua, illus. zhu chengliang (china)  郑春华 (文)，朱成梁 (绘): 《屋檐下的腊八粥》（少年儿童出版社) best literary works of 2017 shu huibo (china) 舒辉波:《梦想是生命里的光》(少年儿童出版社) huang beijia (china) 黄蓓佳:《童眸》(江苏凤凰少年儿童出版社) xiao ping (china) 萧萍）《沐阳上学记：男孩女孩那些事儿》(浙江文艺出版社) guo jiangyan (china) 《布罗镇的邮递员》(少年儿童出版社) zhang zhilu (china) 《吉祥时光》(作家出版社) best contributions to children's magazines 2017 tang tang (writer) 汤汤:《门牙阿上小传》 ma xiaozao 马三�
�:《鸟衔落花》 wan xiufen 万修芬:《什么都有的集山》 qi zhi 祁智:《大鱼》 gu shu 顾抒:《野蜂飞舞》 special contribution award, 2017 helen wang author of the year award, 2016 qin wenjun  the 2018 chen bochui international children's literature awards  best literary work of the year   reindeer through six seasons (gerelchimeg blackcrane, tomorrow publishing house)  a-lian (tang sulan, hunan children's publishing house )  blooming with happiness in the dulong area: our minzu primary school (wu ran, aurora publishing house)  teacher turtle 1: a beach on campus (cheng wei, zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house)  that year in the blizzard (liu hu, shanghai children's press)  best picture book of the year   the wolf, the duck, and the mouse (mac barnett, ills by jon klassen, walker books)  where have the tickets gone? (liu xugong, global views)  grandma's magic of cloth scraps (ao zi, 21st century publishing group)  the day war came (nicola davies, illus by rebecca cobb, walker books)  animalphabet (julia donaldson illustrator: sharon king-chai, pan macmillan)  best single piece of the year   'impressions of the insects' (jin bo, shao nian wen yi magazine)  'paper kiln' (peng xuejun, children's literature magazine)  'tonight, you're kings of fourteen' (xiao ping, children's literature magazine)  'father ram' (zhang zhongcheng, children's literaturemagazine)  'draw a moon for the lonely night sky' (jia ying, shao nian wen yi magazine).  special contribution award   zhang mingzhou  best author   herve tullet  the 2019 chen bochui international children's literature awards  best literary work of the year   old rat gets up late (ye guangqin, beijing children's publishing house)  summer with pigeons (liu haiqi, shandong education press)  fireworks (li donghua, changjiang literature and art press)  chasing (xu lu, changjiang children's press)  flight of the bumblebee (huang beijia, jiangsu
phoenix juvenile and children's publishing house)  best picture book of the year   a flying bullet (bai bing (writer), illus by liu zhenjun, china children's press & publication house)  don't let sun fall (guo zhenyuan, illus zhu chengliang, china peace publishing house)  great war (andre antinori, italian corraini publishing house (text & photo by andre antinori)  head & tail: insects (john canty, australian burbey press private limited company)  anhedrina ([[roger mello, illus mariana mazzarini, brazilian alphabet publishing house)  best single piece of the year   outward-facing toe cap (long xiangmei)  a million tomorrow (qin yingliang)  children from mountains (yi ping)  only an article (wang wenhua (writer))  special contribution award   leonard s. marcus  best author   ren rongrong  the 2020 chen bochui international children's literature awards  best literary works in chinese language  a non-existent villa 不存在的小镇, by huang yingzhao (china juvenile and children's publishing house, 2019)  building a ceramic kiln and giving it to you 建座瓷窑送给你, by peng xuejun (21st century publishing group, 2019)  xiao su and i 我和小素, by huang chunhua (anhui juvenile and children's publishing house, 2020)  running dai er'niu 奔跑的岱二牛, by huang beijia (phoenix juvenile and children's publishing ltd, 2019)  a smile among thorns: xiao cong 荆棘丛中的微笑：小丛, by yang xiaoyan (21st century publishing group, 2020) best picture books of the year  1.º direito (first floor right) 一楼右侧, by ricardo henriques; illus. nicolau fernandes (pato logico edicoes, portugal, 2020)  mr. black and his dog 布莱克先生和他的狗, by jiu'er (guizhou people's publishing house, 2019)  a falling whale 天上掉下一头鲸, by xi yuke (daylight publishing house, china,
2019)  the snow comes around 下雪天的声音, by mei zihan, illus. igor oleynikov(guizhou people's publishing house, china, 2019)  the truth about old people 老者的真相, by elina ellis (two hoots, uk, 2020) special contribution award   zhang qiusheng 张秋生 (china) - writer of fairy tales and children's poems, publisher best author of the year award  ed young  the 2021 chen bochui international children's literature awards  best literary works in chinese language  《和平方舟的孩子》(children of peace ark) by jian ping (juvenile & children's publishing house, 2020)  《逐光的孩子》(children who follow the light) by shu huibo (21st century publishing group, 2020)  《最后的比分》(the final score) by zhang pincheng (changjiang children's publishing group, 2020)  《世界上没有真正的空房子》(there is no real empty house in the world) by liu dong (fujian children's publishing house, 2020)  《绿珍珠》(green pearl)  by tang tang (zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house, 2020)  best picture books of the year  pandemic by jackie french (text), bruce whatley (ill.) (scholastic australia, 2020)  sulla vita sfortunata dei vermi (on the unfortunate life of worms) by noemi vola (text & ill.) (corraini edizioni, 2021)  《泥叫叫》(animal-shaped earthen whistles) by wang zumin (text & ill.) (dolphin press, 2021)  《三个朋友》(three friends) by liu haiqi (text), luo ling (ill.) (tomorrow publishing house, 2021)  《喜鹊窝》(the nest of magpies) by hai fei (text), yang bo (ill.) (qingdao publishing house, 2021) special contribution award   sheng ye (poet) best author of the year award  michael morpurgo  references  chen bochui children's literature award winners chinese children's writers chinese children's literary awards children
's literary awards  chinese literary awards
danville park is a green lung of protected coastal lowland forest and wetland in durban north, south africa.  the park is home to a number of bird species including the egyptian goose.  sports fields can be found at the entrance of the park, which are made use of by virginia united football club.  references   nature reserves in south africa
khawto (english:wound) is a 2016 bengali erotic romantic thriller film directed by kamaleshwar mukherjee under the banner of shree venkatesh films. the film stars prosenjit chatterjee, paoli dam and raima sen in lead roles. the film was premiered on 21 july 2016 in kolkata. the film met with positive reviews upon release.  plot lovebirds sohag (tridha choudhury) and rishav (ronodeep bose) cross roads with celebrated writer nirbed lahiri (prosenjit chatterjee) during a vacation to koelphuli. in his isolated cottage, nirbed, who had isolated himself from society two decades, narrates his tale of lust and misadventures to the young couple.  cast  prosenjit chatterjee as nirbed lahiri / dhrubo  paoli dam as damayanti chkaraborty / antara   raima sen as srijita /sri  tridha choudhury as sohaag   ronodeep bose as rishav  rahul banerjee as alokesh  mishka halim as bishakha   ushashie chakraborty as madhushree  padmanabha dasgupta  aloke mukherjee  soundtrack this film's soundtrack composed by anupam roy.  references  2016 films 2010s bengali-language films bengali-language films indian romantic thriller films indian films indian erotic thriller films 2010s erotic thriller films films directed by kamaleshwar mukherjee 2010s romantic thriller films
leamington chess club was founded in 1851 in royal leamington spa, the year of the first international chess tournament in london.  the club currently competes in the leamington and district chess league with neighbouring clubs including solihull, stratford, banbury, kenilworth, solihull and nuneaton.  the club is based at the oak house liberal club, 87 upper holly walk, leamington spa, cv32 4js, and meets every tuesday, year round, starting at 7.30pm.  history the first president of the club was the rev. john henry smith, the vicar of milverton, the secretary was the rev w s temple.  in 1858, the "chess association" as it now styled itself, held a meeting at queen's college, birmingham. on 27 august, paul morphy gave a blindfold simultaneous display against eight opponents, chosen apparently more for their official positions than their chess ability. one board was taken by the new secretary of the leamington chess club, jabez carr, who tried to confuse the blindfolded morphy with an irregular flank opening and was duly trounced in 23 moves.  in 1885, the rev william grundy, headmaster of king's school in warwick and a member of the leamington chess club, organised a small invitation chess congress at the school from 5 to 10 january. again there were two tournaments. the first class ended in a tie between grundy and rev john coker of buckinghamshire. the second class was won by rev. arthur percy dodd, at the time curate of weston under wetherley and secretary of the leamington chess club. there were also three consultation games, one of which contributed to the theory of the steinitz gambit in the vienna game. it was published in the british chess magazine and the white king was chased right across the board, where the tables were turned and it helped to mate black in only twenty moves. rosario aspa, a sicilian-born member of the leamington club, was one of the victorious consultees.  in december 1890, the great j h blackburne gave two simultaneous displays at the royal pump rooms against the members of the leamington club, winning all 22 games on 22 december and the next day taking on six players blindfolded, winning four games and drawing two. a document from 1896 lists blackburne as an honorary member of the club and at that time the club possessed a framed list of past members which also included howard staunton and herr low
enthal from the 1850s.  in the earliest document still in the club archive (existing only in photocopied form) dated february 1891, with the address "pump room", signor aspa, rev. a.p. dodd, w. hannay esq. and dr. haynes are named as vice-presidents and the club president as right hon. arthur wellesley peel. the earliest known evidence of the latter comes from an article (reprinted from the hereford times) on the popularity of chess in the smoke-room of the house of commons, in the december 1890 british chess magazine. "the speaker, we presume, is a chessplayer, since he is the president of the leamington chess club." it is not known when a w peel (youngest son of sir robert peel) became club president but from 1865 he had been one of the two mps representing rural warwickshire and, having been elected speaker of the house of commons in 1884 following franchise reform, in 1885 he was returned unopposed by the new single-member constituency of warwick and leamington. according to the dictionary of national biography, "peel proved to be a formidable speaker.... his moral effect was famously seen on the night of 27 july 1893 when during the committee stage of the second [irish] home rule bill a serious fight broke out on the floor of the house. the chairman of committees summoned the speaker whose arrival in the house, like that of 'a parent wise as well as fond' at once restored order." presumably keeping leamington chess club in order was a doddle in comparison. he retired as speaker for reasons of ill-health and was raised to the peerage; rt. hon. viscount peel remained president until at least 1896.  notable members past and present david hodgkins 1969-2015 was an olympian in both physical and mental arts, competing in judo at the paralympic games of both seoul (winning a bronze medal to go with his european silver) and barcelona. he was a talented chess player who represented his country in blind chess olympiads in laguna (1996) and chennai (2012). one of his wins from the latter tournament is given below, a quick win which helped great britain finish 7th out of 25 in the final group.  white: david hodgkins black: gregor cizman  blind chess olympiad, chennai, 18 august 2012  1. d4 d5 2. nf3 nf6 3. e3 bf5 4. c4 c6 5. cd5 cd5 6. qb3
qc7 7. bd2 nbd7 8. bb5 e6 9. o-o a6 10. rc1 qb6 11. bd7 nd7 12. nc3 bd6 13. na4 qb3 14. ab3 bg4 15. ne1 be2 16. nc3 bh5 17. nb5  daniel kim achieved third place in his first ever adult chess tournament aged 8 and second place in warwickshire's under-10 championship  arthur wellesley peel (the son of sir robert peel) was a british liberal politician who represented warwick and, after subsequent boundary changes, leamington and warwick, and was speaker of the house of commons from 1884 to 1895. peel was the speaker of the house of commons and the president of leamington chess club.  references  chess clubs in the united kingdom 1851 in chess sports clubs established in 1851
the year 2015 was the 2nd year in the history of the kunlun fight, a kickboxing promotion based in china. 2015 started with kunlun fight 15 and ended with kunlun fight 35.  the events were broadcasts through television agreements in mainland china with jiangsu tv and around the world with various other channels. the events were also streamed live on the kunlun fight app. traditionally, most kunlun fight events have both tournament fights and superfights (single fights).  champions  list of events  kunlun fight 15  kunlun fight 15 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the nanjing olympic sports center gymnasium in nanjing, china.  results  70kg world max group a tournament bracket  kunlun fight 16  kunlun fight 16 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the nanjing olympic sports center gymnasium in nanjing, china.  results  70kg world max group b tournament bracket  70kg world max group c tournament bracket  kunlun fight 20  kunlun fight 20 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the starlight park in beijing, china.  results  70kg world max group g tournament bracket  kunlun fight 21  kunlun fight 21 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the serenity sanya marina in sanya, china.  results  70kg world max group h tournament bracket  kunlun fight - cage fight series 2  kunlun fight - cage fight series 2 was a mixed martial arts event held by kunlun fight on  at the baluan sholak sports palace in almaty, kazakhstan.  results  kunlun fight 22  kunlun fight 22 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the changde college sport hall in changde, china.  results  kunlun fight 23  kunlun fight 23 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the international economics college gymnasium in changsha, china.  results  kunlun fight 24  kunlun fight 24 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the palaferroli san bonifacio in verona, italy.  results  kunlun fight 25  kunlun fight 25 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the stiavnickach sports hall in banska bystrica, slovakia.  results  70kg world max group i tournament bracket  kunlun fight - cage fight series 3  kunlun fight - cage fight series 3 was a mixed martial arts event held by kunlun fight on  at the jiangnan sports hall in chongqing, china.  results  kunlun fight 26  kunlun fight 26 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on
at the jiangnan sports hall in chongqing, china.  results  super heavyweight tournament 2015 bracket  70kg world max group j tournament bracket  kunlun fight 27  kunlun fight 27 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the wutaishan sports center in nanjing, china.  results  70kg world max group k tournament bracket  kunlun fight 28  kunlun fight 28 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the wutaishan sports center in nanjing, china.  results  70kg world max group l tournament bracket  kunlun fight 29  kunlun fight 29 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the ice cube curling center in sochi, russia.  results  70kg world max group m tournament bracket  kunlun fight 30 / topking world series: tk5  kunlun fight 30 / topking world series: tk5 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the zhoukou sports center in zhoukou, china.  results  kunlun fight 31  kunlun fight 31 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the asiatique in bangkok, thailand.  results  kunlun fight - cage fight series 4  kunlun fight - cage fight series 4 was a mixed martial arts event held by kunlun fight on  at the astana racing center in nur-sultan, kazakhstan.  results  kunlun fight 32  kunlun fight 32 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the daxian stadium in dazhou, china.  results  female 52kg tournament 2015 bracket  kunlun fight 33  kunlun fight 33 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the changde college sport hall in changde, china.  results  kunlun fight 34  kunlun fight 34 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the shenzhen bay gymnasium in shenzhen, china.  results  75kg tournament bracket  kunlun fight 35  kunlun fight 35 was a kickboxing event held by kunlun fight on  at the luoyang stadium in luoyang, china.  results  80kg tournament 2015 bracket  see also list of kunlun fight events 2015 in glory 2015 in k-1  references  external links  http://www.kunlunjue.com/portal/page/index/id/32.html  http://www.tapology.com/search?term=kunlun&mainsearchfilter=events  2015 in kickboxing kickboxing in china kunlun fight events 2015 in chinese sport
centerpos (also known as "cerebrus") is a point of sale (pos) malware discovered cyber security experts. it was discovered in september 2015 along with other kinds of pos malware, such as newposthings, blackpos, and alina. there are two versions which have been released by the developer responsible: version 1.7 and version 2.0. centerpos 2.0 has similar functionality to centerpos version 1.7. the 2.0 variant of centerpos malware added some more effective features, such as the addition of a configuration file for storing information in its command and control server.  overview  centerpos has been used to target retailers in order to illegally obtain payment card information using a memory scraper. it uses two distinct modes to scrape and store information: a "smart scan" and a "normal scan". at the normal scan mode, the malware looks at all of the processes on a device and determines which ones are not currently running processes, are not named "system", "system idle process" or "idle", and do not contain keywords such as microsoft or mozilla. if the process meets the criteria list, the malware will search all memory regions within the process, searching for credit card data with regular expressions in the regular expression list. in smart scan mode, the malware starts by performing a normal scan, and any process that has a regular expression match will be added to the smart scan list. after the first pass, the malware will only search the processes that are in the smart scan list. the malware contains functionality that allows cybercriminals to create a configuration file.  process details  centerpos malware searches for the configuration file that contains the c&c information. if unable to find the configuration file, it asks for a password. if the password entered is correct, then it payloads the functions to create a configuration file. this malware is very different from other point of sale system malware in that it has a separate component called builder to create a payload.  the centerpos malware looks for the credit and debit card information through smart scan mode and then encrypts all the scraped data using triple des encryption. then the memory scraped data is sent to the operator of the malware through a separate http post request.  see also  point-of-sale malware  cyber security standards  list of cyber attack threat trends  cyber electronic warfare  malware  references  carding (fraud) cyberwarfare windows trojans
joseph taylor goodsir  (16 september 1815 - 27 april 1893) was a scottish minister and theological author. he resigned from the ministry after only seven years  expressing doubts about the doctrine and teaching of the church of scotland. he  continued to write theological essays critical of the church's theology and teaching. he is remembered for his unsuccessful attempt to prevent the election of the german physician and pathologist rudolph virchow to the fellowship of the royal society of edinburgh. in later years he developed a depressive illness with delusions and paranoia which resulted in admissions to the local asylum where he was detained for the last eleven years of his life.  early life  joseph goodsir was born in lower largo, fife, on 16 september 1815, the second son of elizabeth dunbar taylor  (1785-1841) and her husband, john goodsir (1782-1848), surgeon in anstruther. his elder brother john goodsir; became professor of anatomy at the university of edinburgh. after schooling in anstruther, joseph goodsir matriculated at united college,  st. andrews and between 1828-1832 he studied for a broad based arts degree. he went on to study  divinity at the university of edinburgh from 1833-37. during this time he lived in a flat at 21 lothian street with his brother john, edward forbes and others. here they founded a group named the universal brotherhood of  friends of truth. this fraternity had members with interests in the arts, science, poetry, and literature. the brethren supported each other with "co-operation in research, assistance in danger and adversity and with advice and friendship". after graduating  and ordination as a church of scotland minister he applied for the vacant ministry at duddingston kirk, edinburgh but was unsuccessful.  minister and theologian  his application as minister of lower largo was successful  and he became parish minister  on 14 july 1843. shortly after he began to have doubts about the teaching of church and in 1845 published  sacramental catechism, a monograph critical of the  church's theology on the sacrament of communion.  he resigned from the church  in 1850 after only seven years in the ministry because, in his own words,  ""the standards of the church were not consistent with the teaching of the scripture." the following year he wrote an essay the westminster confession of faith and dogmatic and systematic standards which was critical of the westminster confession of faith which had been adopted by the church of scotland as its doctrinal standard. over the succeeding years he continued to write theological essays critical of
the church's doctrine.   from 1854 he began to develop the features of a psychotic illness which recurred throughout the rest of his life. in 1856 he was detained at the royal edinburgh asylum at morningside at the request of his brother john with a diagnosis of "melancholia." he lived at 11 danube street edinburgh with his sister jane, but had further detentions at the asylum in 1858 and 1874.  the virchow controversy   goodsir was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh  (rse) in march 1868, his proposer being  the anatomist sir william turner. later that year the society  proposed to award an honorary fellowship to the renowned german physician and pathologist  rudolf virchow, often referred to as "the father of modern pathology." joseph goodsir objected to this on the grounds that  virchow  had not given  sufficient credit to his brother john goodsir for his work on  cellular theory. he published a monograph entitled grounds of objection to the admission of professor virchow as an honorary fellow of the royal society of edinburgh, which was circulated to all fellows of the society. in the monograph he compared what virchow had written  in cellular pathology on the origin and role of cells with the earlier work on the topic published by his brother, john goodsir, pointing out the similarity of the wording and claiming that virchow was guilty of plagiarism.  this provoked an angry response from the rse refuting these allegations, pointing out that virchow had indeed cited goodsir both in three earlier articles and in his textbook and furthermore had dedicated the english language edition of cellular pathology to john goodsir, "as a slight testimony of his deep respect and sincere admiration". they concluded "joseph goodsir has not only acted unwisely, he has done injury to the great name of his brother john." virchow was duly elected to honorary fellowship of the rse and goodsir resigned his fellowship in 1880.  later life and death  he had further admissions to the royal edinburgh asylum with melancholia. his mental health continued to deteriorate with features including, 'religious mania', hallucinations, paranoia and suicidal thoughts. he was detained in the asylum for the final time in 1881 and spent the last eleven years of his life detained there until his death on  27  april 1893. he was buried in the grave of his brother john in dean cemetery, edinburgh. the obelisk marking the grave makes no mention of the fact that he is buried there.  family  joseph goodsir had one older brother and
five younger siblings.  john (1814-1867), who was curator of surgeons hall museum and professor of anatomy at the university of edinburgh. his sister jane ross goodsir  (1817-1893) did not marry and lived for most of her adult life at 11 danube street, edinburgh. harry duncan spens goodsir (1819 - c1847) was a doctor, curator and served as assistant surgeon and naturalist on the franklin expedition. agnes johnstone goodsir (b.1821) died in childhood. robert anstruther goodsir (1823-1895) qualified as a doctor and joined expeditions to the arctic in 1849 and in 1850 to search for his brother harry. archibald goodsir (1826-1849) qualified as a doctor but died of consumption at the age of 23 years  selected publications     the westminster confession of faith and dogmatic and systematic standards. edinburgh  (1851) what, and whence drawn  (1852)  examination of the westminster confession of faith on the basis of the other protestant confessions (1866)  references   1815 births 1893 deaths alumni of the university of edinburgh british non-fiction writers fellows of the royal society of edinburgh scottish christian theologians people from lower largo
the 1967-68 dallas chaparrals season was the first season of the chaparrals in the american basketball association. the chaps fell to the new orleans buccaneers in the division finals after beating the houston mavericks in the semifinals. that playoff victory would be their only victory for the chaparrals as they fell in the semifinals for the next four years, before they moved to san antonio.  roster   24 charles beasley - shooting guard   44 john beasley - center   20 jim burns - shooting guard    -- mike dabich - center   16 cliff hagan - small forward   15/20 dennis holman - point guard   25 carroll hooser - power forward   31 riney lochmann - small forward   43 elton mcgriff - center   12 maurice mchartley - point guard   33 rich peek - center   35 cincy powell - small forward  14 rubin russell - guard   11 bob verga - shooting guard   12 gene wiley - center   22 bobby wilson - power forward  final standings  western division  record vs. opponents  playoffs  western division semifinals  chaparrals win series 3-0  western division finals  chaparrals lose series 4-1  awards and honors 1968 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 9, 1968)  cliff hagan  john beasley  references  external links  chaparrals on basketball reference  remembertheaba.com 1967-68 regular season and playoff results  remembertheaba.com dallas chaparrals page  dallas chaparrals dallas dallas chaparrals, 1967-68 dallas chaparrals, 1967-68
rachel wallader (born 1 september 1989) is an english shot putter.  she finished fourth at the 2014 commonwealth games, sixth at the gold coast 2018 commonwealth games and twelfth at the 2016 european championships. she has won a total of nine british titles. five of these were during the indoor seasons of 2013, 2014, 2016, 2017 and 2018, and four during the outdoor seasons of 2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017.  her personal best is 18.00 metres, achieved in may 2016 in stoke rochford.  in 2010, she was given a 12-month suspension for doping, using a banned stimulant, but served only four months as she could prove that the stimulant was not labelled on her dietary supplement.  references  1989 births living people english female shot putters british female shot putters commonwealth games competitors for england athletes (track and field) at the 2014 commonwealth games athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games british athletics championships winners doping cases in athletics english sportspeople in doping cases
ernest victor carter (october 13, 1860 - january 3, 1933) was an american politician who served in the oregon house of representatives. he was chosen as speaker of that body from 1898 to 1901. he was the son of henry b. carter, a businessman and banker from iowa and former member of the iowa state senate and namesake of the carter house in ashland, oregon which is listed on the national register of historic places.  references  speakers of the oregon house of representatives 1933 deaths 1860 births oregon republicans politicians from ashland, oregon businesspeople from oregon american bankers people from clayton county, iowa
amanda cecilia swart is a south african biochemist who holds a professorship in biochemistry at stellenbosch university. she is known for her research on rooibos, a herbal tea popular in south africa, has been funded by the south african rooibos council in her research, and is frequently quoted in south african media promoting the reported health benefits of rooibos.  education and career  swart completed her msc in biology in 1986 and her doctorate at stellenbosch in 1999, and returned to stellenbosch as a faculty member in 2002, where she teaches undergraduate and postgraduate courses in biochemistry. she was instrumental in establishing the p450 steroid research group at stellenbosch and in 2011 she was appointed associate professor. her research areas include: adrenal steroidogenesis, cytochrome p450 enzymes, prostate cancer, and products derived from the plants aspalatus linearis (rooibos), salsola tuberculatiformis botch. (gannabos) and sutherlandia frutescens (cancer bush).  research  her primary research focus, and that of the p450 steroid research group, is on the hormones (adrenal steroids) produced by the adrenal gland as well as on the steroidogenic enzymes which catalyse their biosynthesis, the metabolism of these steroids in prostate cancer, and their implications in endocrine disorders. their research also involves the investigation of the effects of plant products on the endocrine system.  swart's research has been sponsored by the national research foundation, cancer association of south africa and the sa rooibos council.  the research is broken into three focus areas:  11β-hydroxyandrostenedione  11β-hydroxyandrostenedione is an adrenal steroid and has been implicated in prostate cancer as well as castration-resistant prostate cancer. swart investigates the mechanism of this steroid within prostate cancer cells and other cancer cells.  rooibos  there are two avenues of research regarding rooibos that swart is pursuing.  prostate cancer metabolism  swart's research has suggested that rooibos may have beneficial effects on prostate cancer by inhibiting 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenases and blocking dihydrotestosterone. her research is also looking at the effect of rooibos on the psa enzyme marker which is used as a test for prostate cancer.  cortisol and stress  her research has suggested that drinking rooibos may lower stress through the effects of two compounds in it, aspalathin and nothofagin. under laboratory conditions these compounds block the production of a stress hormone, cortisol. she has claimed
that rooibos has the potential to prevent heart disease, reduce the effects of aging, and promote weight loss.  references  external links  south african biochemists women biochemists south african women chemists stellenbosch university alumni stellenbosch university faculty year of birth missing (living people) living people
diploptera punctata or the pacific beetle cockroach is a species of cockroach in the family blaberidae and subfamily diplopterinae. it is one of the few cockroach species that is viviparous. adults are chemically defended, having a modified tracheal gland and spiracle on each side which squirts quinones which can poison or discourage a predator.  life stages  d. puntatata has 4 nymph stages, which are wingless. the adult is winged, and the adult male is smaller than the female.  distribution diploptera punctata can be found in australia, myanmar, china, fiji, hawaii, and india.  milk diploptera punctata produces a nutritionally dense crystalline "milk" to feed their live-born young.  the milk produced by diploptera punctata is composed of hydrosoluble proteins and provides essential amino acids to the developing embryo such as lysine, leucine and valine.  references  cockroaches insects described in 1822
the saltair caisil ("psalter of cashel") is a now-lost irish manuscript, which seems to have been highly influential in irish historiographical tradition. not an actual psalter, it seems to have contained munster-orientated genealogies, king-lists, synchronisms, and hagiographical material, among other items. its contents can be at least partially reconstructed via subsequent citation of the manuscript and a couple of descriptions of it; some material may well be reflected or, in some cases, preserved in later, still-extant manuscripts. both medieval and modern scholarship often holds that the codex was compiled by cormac mac cuilennain (died 908), bishop and king of munster. however, it is now generally thought to have been produced under brian boruma (died 1014), king of munster and aspirant king of ireland, to justify and promote the claims of his own rising dynasty and region. nonetheless, it could quite possibly have been based on earlier materials. plentiful citations of the codex by name down to the seventeenth century, particularly for its genealogical doctrines, imply that it had a high status among scholars. its last known location was in the library of the earls of kildare, from which it disappeared at some point in the 1630s or 1640s, the library itself being destroyed and dispersed in 1642.  notes  references          irish manuscripts irish books  11th century in ireland medieval literature early irish literature lost books
imperial hero is a free-to-play, massively multiplayer online role-playing game (mmorpg) developed by the bulgarian game production company imperia online jsc. the game was originally launched in 2009 after a year of conceptual and gameplay development. imperial hero is translated into 27 languages. in 2015 imperia online jsc released the remake of the role-playing game - imperial hero ii, launched for android, facebook and web. in 2017 the game is published by destiny development in russia.  gameplay  imperial hero is a cross-platform game, based on the fictional ayarr empire, composed of 32 provinces. players have to register at a website in order to join the game. upon creation, the player's character is assigned one of three factions within the empire - haroda, farolin and sonoria, which are in conflict with each other, and by extension the player is in conflict with other players pvp.  players choose between three types of "hero" - ranger, warrior and mystic - with respective strengths and weaknesses. the heroes in the game win experience points by defeating foes - humanoids or monsters. the hero has a personal profile and can acquire titles on a weekly basis, which may offer bonuses. players are encouraged to team up in a "guild" and help each other in order to survive and prosper in the ayarr empire environment. the players control their hero which is the leader of their party of up to 5 mercenaries. heroes and mercenaries can be specialized in one of 6 classes, which have different spells and abilities. also, each member of the party can be equipped with items, which improve their attributes and make them stronger. by defeating foes and completing quests, the party gains experience and increases its level, which unlocks more skills and opportunities.  combat  in the world, there are battle zones everywhere, where the hero's party can match their strength against foes of all kinds and varying power. the combat is automatic and turn-based. the player sets up their party prior to combat and then starts the battle, which is automatically calculated. the tactical positioning of units on the battlefield is very important.  defeating foes has chances of rewarding the player with rare items, which can be used to improve their hero and mercenaries.  player versus player (pvp)  in imperial hero, players are competing with each other in multiple ways. they can attack each other to plunder resources, they can participate in fighting tournaments, or they can defend the borders of their faction against attacks from
other factions in the border patrol. the winners in the various pvp activities receive weekly rewards, based on their performance.  crafting  players can also pick one of the 3 main professions and one of 6 secondary professions, which allow them to craft all sorts of items, ranging from consumables to battle equipment. players must go around the provinces to gather the necessary materials for crafting. during this time, they are sometimes in danger of being attacked and burglarised by other players. once the raw resources are gathered, they are then processed into crafting materials, which can be used to craft some of the most powerful artifacts in the game.  reputations and titles  while completing quests and defeating foes, players earn reputation with the various factions and sub-factions of the ayarr empire. these reputations bring benefits to the hero, such as discounts in shops and other perks, but also by providing the player with honorary titles. most titles provide bonuses, and the rarer titles can provide substantial perks to the hero who holds them.  trade  players of all factions can trade resources, consumables, items and rare goods. this is done through the in-game auction house and the resource market. the economy of the game allows for the free exchange of most goods and savvy players can amass fortunes.  guilds  players can organise themselves into guilds of up to 50 people. guilds provide a way for players to communicate intimately, share resources and items between each other and complete common goals (guild quests). furthermore, each guild can build their own guild castle, which is exclusive only to them. building structures in the castle provides bonuses to all members in the guild. guilds can raid each other's castles to plunder resources and damage buildings. players participate in the raids with their own parties and are matched against the defenders of the target guild. guild castles also have garrisons. these are multiple parties of mercenaries loyal to the guild and helping in the attack of other castles or the defense of the guild's castle.  world bosses  the world boss event is when a menacing, very powerful creature comes to terrorize the ayarr empire and players need to work together to defeat it. attacking and defeating the world boss rewards players with great rewards.  in 2019 the first winter marathon was launched. this is an event where players go through a 10-days long program, in which they have to tackle world boss, compete in pvp tournament and delve into an ancient island.  buildings   tavern- tavern is the place,
where all missions can be found. the heroes can work there also for gold. the amount of gold they receive depends on the amount of working hours and increases as they raise their levels.  weapon shop- in this shop players can buy and sell different weapons. new items for sell appear every 15 minutes. players can load instantly new weapons in exchange for diamonds. with every reset they have a chance to buy different and more powerful items. the hero's equipment also can be repaired in the shop. equipment durability lowers when used in battle and even greatly when the hero dies in a battle.  armor shop- in this shop players can buy and sell different armor. new items for sell appear every 15 minutes. players can load instantly new armor in exchange for diamonds. with every reset they have a chance to buy different and more powerful items. the hero's equipment also can be repaired in the shop. equipment durability lowers when used in battle and even greatly when the hero dies in a battle.  jewelry shop- in this shop players can buy and sell different jewelries. new items for sell appear every 15 minutes. players can load instantly new jewelries in exchange for diamonds. with every reset they have a chance to buy different and more powerful items.   healer- the character's health and spirit can be healed for a fee. there the buyers can buy and sell different healing potions. new items for sell appear every 15 minutes. players can load instantly new potions in exchange for diamonds. with every reset they have a chance to buy different and more powerful items. the hero's equipment also can be repaired in the healer.  temple - in the temple the players can receive one free prize every 12 hours. for diamonds, they can gain more than one casket with rewards.  languages  awards nominees  "bulgarian game awards 2016" sofia, bulgaria:  nominee for best world  nominee for best visual style/art  nominee for best mobile game  "tiga games industry awards 2016":  nominee for tiga's game of the year award  nominee for best strategy game of the year award  nominee for best role playing game of the year award  national contest "innovative enterprise of the year"   won the recognition as an innovative product  references   android (operating system) games browser games facebook games massively multiplayer online role-playing games 2009 video games video games developed in bulgaria
william dale tidwell (born april 8, 1932) was an american university sports administrator and former college track and field and cross country coach. tidwell served as emporia state university's athletic director from 1971 to 1979, and coached track and field, as well as cross country from 1979 until 1984 after his retirement as athletics director.  early years tidwell was born in kiowa, kansas and attended kiowa high school. after high school, tidwell attended the kansas state teachers college (kstc) to compete in cross country and track & field. he was a four-time national naia champion. tidwell graduated with a bachelor's of science education in health in 1957, followed by a master's degree in 1958. tidwell received his doctorate from columbia university.  career after graduating from kstc in 1958, tidwell became an assistant professor at hunter college for one year before leaving for oberlin college. while at oberlin, tidwell was the athletic director, cross country and track & field coach, and a professor in the health and education department. while at oberlin, tidwell became the first chairman of both the men's and women's sports. in 1971, tidwell became the athletics director at his alma mater.  while at emporia state from 1971 to 1979, tidwell served as a professor, chair of the hper department, and the athletics director. in 1979, tidwell resigned as the athletics director, while continuing to teach and became the cross country and track & field coach for five years. tidwell retired in 1994.  awards and honors in 1963, tidwell became a member of the national association of intercollegiate athletics hall of fame. in 1977, tidwell entered the drake relays hall of fame. in 1982, tidwell became a charter member at his alma mater's hall of fame and in 2014, was inducted into the kansas sports hall of fame. oberlin college athletics awards the "billy tidwell" to student athletes who show athleticism, professionalism, teaching, and community service.  references  1932 births living people emporia state university alumni emporia state hornets athletic directors oberlin college faculty people from kiowa, kansas sportspeople from kansas
the croatian league of american football () is a national american football competition in croatia that was first held in 2008 by the croatian federation of american football.  teams bjelovar greenhorns split sea wolves zagreb patriots zapresic saints  former teams dubrovnik sharks osijek cannons teutoburgium pitbulls zagreb thunder zagreb raiders  crobowl winners  references  external links the official website of the croatian federation of american football  american football leagues in europe sports leagues established in 2010 amer 2010 establishments in croatia
remember us to life is the seventh studio album by singer-songwriter regina spektor. on july 22, 2016, spektor announced that it would be released on september 30, 2016. the lead single of the album is "bleeding heart", which is available to listen in full via soundcloud via spektor herself.  overview on july 12, 2016, spektor announced on her facebook page and official website that news would be released in the coming days. on july 22, 2016, spektor announced that her seventh studio album would be entitled remember us to life. this announcement came with the cover art of the album as well as the lead single and opening track of the album, bleeding heart. additionally it was announced that the album would be available in both a standard edition, featuring 11 songs, and a deluxe edition, featuring all 11 songs of the standard as well as three bonus tracks. the warner music store features the album for pre-order in both physical copies and mp3 copies, along with a clear vinyl edition.  track listing all tracks written by regina spektor.  personnel  leo abrahams - bass, guitar, percussion, programming, string arrangements, synthesizer, producer  jay bellerose - percussion  caroline buckman - viola  giovanna moraga clayton - cello  jack dishel - vocals (background)  mike elizondo - bass, double bass  judith hamann - cello  songa lee - violin  stella mozgawa - drums  julie rogers - violin  davide rossi - orchestration, viola, violin  nancy roth - viola  andrew skeet - conductor, string arrangements  regina spektor - celeste, composer, conductor, piano, string arrangements, synthesizer, vocals, co-producer  joey waronker - drums, percussion  charts  references  external links http://www.billboard.com/album/7534743/remember-us-to-life  2016 albums regina spektor albums sire records albums warner records albums
the 1914 maryville scots football team represented the maryville college during the 1914 college football season.  schedule  references  maryville maryville scots football seasons maryville scots football
the 1991 edition of the women's handball tournament of the african games was the 3rd, organized by the african handball confederation and played under the auspices of the international handball federation, the handball sport governing body. the tournament was held, in cairo, egypt, contested by 6 national teams and won by angola.  draw  preliminary round  knockout stage championship bracket  final ranking  awards  references  external links  official website  handball at the 1991 all-africa games women's handball in egypt 1991 in women's handball handball at the african games
the 1940 central michigan bearcats football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1940 college football season. in their fourth season under head coach ron finch, the bearcats compiled a 4-3-1 record and were outscored by their opponents by a combined total of 88 to 60. the team achieved shut out victories over ferris state (37-0), ball state (7-0), michigan state normal (24-0), and desales (7-0), tied wayne state (7-7), and lost to northern illinois (6-9), bradley (0-19), and eastern kentucky (0-25).  schedule  references  external links  1941 chippewa yearbook (page 108)  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan bearcats football
the remains of the day is a 1989 novel by japanese-born british writer kazuo ishiguro  the remains of the day or remains of the day may also refer to:   the remains of the day (film), a 1993 film based on the novel  the remains of the day (musical), a 2010 musical based on the novel  remains of the day (album), a 2010 album by the finnish alternative rock band end of you  "remains of the day" (song), a song from the 2005 stop-motion film corpse bride  "remains of the day", a january 2007 episode from the 17th season of the television series law & order  see also remains (disambiguation)
the 1974 spillers greyhound derby took place during june with the final being held on 29 june 1974 at white city stadium.   the winner was jimsun and the winning owners joe de mulder and miss lesley walker received £13,500. the competition was sponsored by the spillers.  final result  at white city (over 525 yards):  distances  1¼, ½, head, 1, 2½ (lengths) the distances between the greyhounds are in finishing order and shown in lengths. one length is equal to 0.08 of one second.  competition report patricias hope returned for an attempt to win an unprecedented third derby but he was up against the ante-post favourites that included juvenile and wood lane winner myrtown, irish entries ballymaclune and lively band and laurels victors black banjo and over protected.  black banjo failed to progress from round one but blackwater champ, (the pall mall stakes champion) and jimsun recorded the best times of 28.53 & 28.54 respectively. in a very strong heat two of round two the dream of patricias hope ended with his connections retiring him with immediate effect. myrtown, jimsun, blackwater champ and acomb dot all won their heats and remained unbeaten.  the first semi-final saw soft light provide a shock when beating jimsun by a length whilst acomb dot finished last. blackwater champ took heat two with myrtown taking the third and the final qualifying place.  a crowd of 33,000 turned up to see the sports premier race and they watched the irish hope ballymaclune trap well and take an early lead. favourite blackwater champ lost any chance after missing the break. jimsun showed good early pace to overtake and impede handy high when moving up to second place and then challenged along the back straight before going onto win by just over a length in 28.76sec. myrtown finished well to take second place.  quarter finals  semi finals  see also 1974 uk & ireland greyhound racing year  references  greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby english greyhound derby
agaram is a neighbourhood of perambur and a developed residential area in north chennai, a metropolitan city in tamil nadu, india.  location agaram is located near (kolathur, chennai), peravallur and perambur. it is well connected by train and bus transport. it is very close to perambur loco works railway station and moolakadai junction and retteri junction.  neighborhoods periyar nagar. peravallur. tvk nagar. jawahar nagar. villivakkam. kolathur, chennai. sembium. perambur.  roads and streets jawahar nagar main roads. off paper mills road. srp koil street (sundararaja perumal koil street). sundararaja perumal koil street (north) sundararaja perumal koil street (south) kanakar street. ballard street. moorthy street. palavayal street. chidambaram street. t.a. koil street (thanthoni amman koil street) loco scheme colony.  transport  bus transport metropolitan transport corporation, chennai, buses ply across agaram, to and fro the places mentioned above. and also the following are well connected with road transport facilities. puratchi thalaivar dr. m. g. ramachandran central railway station. egmore chennai railway station.  rail transport connectivity to the following railway stations is appreciated. perambur carriage works railway station. perambur carriage works railway station. perambur railway station. puratchi thalaivar dr m. g. ramachandran central railway station. egmore chennai railway station.  places of worship  temples shri sundararaja perumal (srp)temple, kanakar street.  shri thanthontri amman temple, t.a. koil street. shri kothandaramasamy temple, t.a. koil street. shri radha rukmani sametha kannabiran temple, thulukkaanaththu amman koil street. shri brahmapureeshwarar temple, palavayal street. shri prasanna venugopalaswamy temple, palavayal street.  shri prasanna vinayagar temple, palavayal street. shri mahalakshmi amman temple, palavayal street. shri prasanna balasubramaniya swamy temple, palavayal street.  references  neighbourhoods in chennai
joe marino (born 1946, wythenshawe, manchester) is a british trade unionist.  marino joined the bakers, food and allied workers' union (bfawu) in his youth, and was elected as a shop steward in 1968.  he was active in attempts to build a shop stewards' movement, and in 1971 was elected to the union's national executive council, soon also becoming involved in national negotiations over pay and conditions. he had worked previously as a baker at the old trafford factory of knightsbridge cakes.  bfawu members undertook a national strike in 1978; this ended in defeat, but marino's profile increased to the extent that he was elected as the union's general secretary the following year.  at this time, he was a member of militant, a trotskyist group in the labour party.  marino left the labour party in the 1990s, and joined the socialist labour party, for which he stood unsuccessfully in london at the european parliament election, 1999, championing a eurosceptic position.  marino remained general secretary of bfawu until his retirement in 2010.  from 1998, he also served on the executive of the general federation of trade unions, and as its chair from 2009 until 2011.  references  1940s births living people general secretaries of british trade unions militant tendency supporters presidents of the general federation of trade unions (uk) socialist labour party (uk) members
eunidia fusca is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1953.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1953
hubei township () is a township under the administration of shenchi county in shanxi, china. , it has five villages under its administration: hubei village shankoushang village () shankou village () tangjian village () ximaojiazao village ()  references   township-level divisions of shanxi shenchi county
kim ji-yeon (; born march 20, 1995), commonly known by her stage name kei, is a south korean singer and actress. she debuted as a member of south korean girl group lovelyz in november 2014 and released a solo ep on october 8, 2019 titled over and over. on november 16, 2021, she left woollim entertainment after deciding not to renew her contract, following lovelyz's disbandment.  biography kei was born kim ji-yeon on march 20, 1995 in incheon, south korea. she graduated from incheon youngsun high school.  career  2014-2015: debut with lovelyz  in november 2014, kei debuted as the main vocalist of girl group lovelyz with the release of the debut studio album, girls' invasion. in december 2015, she recorded the song love is like that for the drama oh my venus.  2016-2018: solo activities she was a contestant for jtbc's main vocal competition girls spirit in 2016, and was cast for a lead role in the web drama matching! boys archery club in the same year. on september 1, she released the collaborative song "y". on october 26, she released a collaboration with the solutions titled beautiful as a part of highgrnd label project playgrnd.  in 2017, she made appearances on a variety of shows. she appeared on king of mask singer as the contestant "agiley mouse jerry" for episodes 107-108. she also went on duet song festival covering kim tae-yeon's song "i". other shows she guested on was running man and idol national singing competition.  on june 8, 2018, it was announced that kei would be the new mc for music bank alongside actor choi won-myeong, starting from june 15.  2019-present: solo debut and departure from woollim  in 2019, she released the extended play (ep) over and over, under her real name kim ji-yeon. the album and the lead single "i go" music video were released on october 8.  on november 1, 2021, woollim entertainment announced that kei would not renew her contract and she left the company on november 16, 2021, following lovelyz's disbandment.  on january 10, 2022, it was confirmed that kei signed with palm tree island, signaling her debut as a full time musical actress.  discography  extended plays  singles  as lead artist  collaborations  soundtrack appearances  filmography  web series  theatre  notes  references  external links    1995 births living people woollim entertainment artists k
-pop singers south korean female idols south korean women pop singers 21st-century south korean actresses 21st-century south korean singers 21st-century south korean women singers south korean sopranos lovelyz members
loic badiashile mukinayi (born 5 february 1998) is a french footballer who plays as a goalkeeper for segunda division b club las rozas cf, on loan from as monaco.  club career  monaco badiashile is a youth exponent from as monaco. he made his first team debut on 27 july 2016 in a uefa champions league qualifier against fenerbahce s.k. replacing morgan de sanctis after 13 minutes.  he made his ligue 1 debut on 20 may 2017 in the final match of monaco's championship season against rennes substituting seydou sy at half-time.  on 31 january 2019, the last day of the 2018-19 winter transfer window, badiashile joined league rivals stade rennais f.c. on loan until the end of the season. rennes also secured an option to make the move permanent.  on 1 july 2019, he joined cercle bruges on season-long loan.  personal life badiashile is of congolese descent. he is the older brother of benoit badiashile, who is also a professional footballer for as monaco.  career statistics  club  references  external links      loic badiashile at as monaco fc (archived 2017-10-17)    1998 births living people sportspeople from limoges french footballers french expatriate footballers france youth international footballers french sportspeople of democratic republic of the congo descent association football goalkeepers ligue 1 players championnat national 2 players championnat national 3 players belgian first division b players segunda division b players limoges fc players as monaco fc players stade rennais f.c. players cercle brugge k.s.v. players las rozas cf players french expatriate sportspeople in belgium french expatriate sportspeople in spain expatriate footballers in belgium expatriate footballers in spain
jack hiscox (born 23 march 1995) is a former professional australian rules footballer who played for the sydney swans in the australian football league (afl). he was drafted by the sydney swans with their third selection and thirty-eighth overall in the 2014 national draft. he made his debut in the one point loss against  in round 8, 2016 at the melbourne cricket ground. at the conclusion of the 2016 season, he was delisted by sydney.  hiscox attended newington college, completing his hsc in 2012. at newington he was a star middle-distance athlete, winning the ellison stewart cup for 800 and 1500m running.  references  external links  1995 births living people people educated at newington college sydney swans players sydney university australian national football club players australian rules footballers from new south wales
the bundesjugendspiele () ("federal youth games") are an annual sports event that takes place at german schools and german international schools. they are obligatory for all students.  the participating students are expected to achieve the best possible performances in specific disciplines, like athletics or gymnastics. in athletics, usually a combination consisting of the disciplines ball-throwing (shot put in higher age groups), running, and long jump is performed.  the performances achieved are rated with points. if the participant achieves a specific minimum score, they are given a simple certificate. above a certain higher score they receive an 'honorary certificate', which bear the (printed) signature of the federal president. since 1991, all other students, who have neither received a 'certificate of achievement' nor an 'honorary certificate', get a 'certificate of participation'.  history  the bundesjugendspiele were inspired by the sports official and sports scientist carl diem, who also initiated the german sports badge and the olympic torch relay, and founded the german sport university cologne. at the same time he engaged in propaganda actions during the time of nazi germany and used sports for national socialist actions. the precursor of the bundesjugendspiele were the reichsjugendwettkampfe, which took place for the first time in 1920.  the event was first announced by the federal ministry of the interior, then by the federal ministry for youth, family, and health of students between 8 and 19 years. since 2001 there are nine bundesjugendspiele that are advertised as individual competitions in apparatus gymnastics, athletics and swimming.  the national paralympic committee germany and the deutsche behindertensportjugend have, in collaboration with the committee for the bundesjugendspiele and the commission of sports in the kmk, developed a programme for the participation of students with disabilities.  debate  in july 2015 a petition was started on change.org with the aim of abolishing the bundesjugendspiele. within a few days several thousand signatures were collected in favor of the abolition. reports about this petition triggered a debate about the bundesjugendspiele. in july 2015 another petition was started on change.org with the aim of maintaining the bundesjugendspiele. this petition also gained several thousand supporters in a short time.  the proponents of the bundesjugendspiele argue that the basic movements involved in athletics belong to something that was earlier called the classical canon of education. exercise is said to be crucial for the development
of cognitive abilities and the aspect of performance comparison is an inherent side effect of sports. furthermore, the fact that others are better in some areas is said to be an important experience. they argue that dealing with failure is also an important part of learning. not least, especially within the scope of school education, there is a comparison of individual performance through grading in other subjects, too.  critics of the bundesjugendspiele point out that through a confirmation of bad performance in written form physically weaker students are demotivated rather than motivated to do sports. the point of the sports is not the competitive character but the physical fitness paired with shared joy.  people criticize the obligatory participation, because in other branches like reading or singing there are no obligatory competitions. with this obligation physically weaker students are put under compulsion and pressure. moreover, there is no basis for the distinction between the genders just before puberty, because no fundamental differences in performance are present. beyond that, individual physical requirements are not considered.  references  external links    handbuch der bundesjugendspiele  bundesjugendspiele bei netschool  sports competitions in germany multi-sport events national youth sports competitions
charles homer barrett was an american politician from gloucester, massachusetts.  early life barrett was born on june 23, 1868 in gloucester. he attended gloucester public schools and worked in the grocery business before entering politics.  political career in 1896, barrett was elected to the gloucester commons council. he then served on the board of aldermen from 1898 to 1900 and again 1902 to 1904. from 1908 to 1910 he was a member of the massachusetts house of representatives. he then returned to the board of aldermen, serving as an at-large member from 1910 to 1915. from 1915 to 1917 he was the mayor of gloucester. he once again returned to the board of aldermen in 1917.  from 1918 to 1930, barrett was the city's superintendent of streets. from 1939 to 1956 he was gloucester's park commissioner. he also served a second stint in the massachusetts house of representatives, representing the 16th essex district from 1943 to 1947.  later life and death barrett retired from government in 1956 and remained in gloucester until his death on march 12, 1958.  references  1868 births 1958 deaths american grocers massachusetts republicans mayors of gloucester, massachusetts members of the massachusetts house of representatives
the 1952 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college of education, renamed central michigan university in 1959, in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1952 college football season.  in their second season under head coach kenneth "bill" kelly, the chippewas compiled a 7-2 record (6-0 against iiac opponents), won the iiac championship, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 285 to 85.  the team's statistical leaders included quarterback don koleber with 417 passing yards, fullback vern hawes with 540 rushing yards, and al droth with 302 receiving yards. guard loren dietrich received the team's most valuable player award. eight central michigan players (dietrich, hawes, center bill banaszak, tackle ken barron, halfback dave clark, halfback bill doser, guard marty klozik, and halfback chuck miller) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  1953 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons interstate intercollegiate athletic conference football champion seasons central michigan chippewas football
the john fretwell sporting complex is a cricket ground located at nettleworth near market warsop in warsop parish, nottinghamshire, england. the ground, which also has facilities for football and bowls, is the home of welbeck cricket club and has been used by nottinghamshire county cricket club for some list a fixtures since 2015.  the ground was developed by retired local businessman john fretwell, a former welbeck cricketer who wanted to create a new facility for the local community. welbeck colliery cricket club - as they were then known - were felt to have outgrown the facilities at their welbeck abbey ground in market warsop. fretwell identified a site on farmland off sookholme road where the new complex was constructed in 2006. welbeck colliery began to play at the ground from the beginning of the 2007 season.  part of fretwell's vision for the ground was to bring county cricket back to the north of nottinghamshire, which was achieved in 2015. prior to then, nottinghamshire had not played a home match anywhere other than trent bridge since 2004, and not at another ground in their own county since 1998. the inaugural "welbeck weekender" took place in july 2015, with royal london one-day cup matches on consecutive days against warwickshire and glamorgan. in july 2016, nottinghamshire faced derbyshire in the same competition. nottinghamshire have also used the ground for second xi fixtures several times since 2008.  nottinghamshire women played their first women's county championship match at welbeck in 2009 and have used the ground regularly since 2013.  references  external links  cricketarchive page  cricket grounds in nottinghamshire 2007 establishments in england mansfield district
giants is an anthology of themed fantasy and science fiction short stories on the subject of giants edited by isaac asimov, martin h. greenberg and charles g. waugh as the fifth volume in their isaac asimov's magical worlds of fantasy series. it was first published in paperback by signet/new american library in november 1985. the first british edition was issued in trade paperback by robinson in july 1987.  the book collects twelve novellas, novelettes and short stories by various fantasy and science fiction authors, with an introduction by asimov.  contents "introduction: giants in the earth" (isaac asimov) "the riddle of ragnarok" (theodore sturgeon) "straggler from atlantis" (manly wade wellman) "he who shrank" (henry hasse) "from the dark waters" (david drake) "small lords" (frederik pohl) "the mad planet" (murray leinster) "dreamworld" (isaac asimov) "the thirty and one" (david h. keller, m.d.) "the law-twister shorty" (gordon r. dickson) "in the lower passage" (harle oren cummins) "cabin boy" (damon knight) "the colossus of ylourgne" (clark ashton smith)  references  1985 short story collections fantasy anthologies science fiction anthologies martin h. greenberg anthologies
ashley kidd (born november 15, 1994) is a professional wakesurfer and three-time world champion.  kidd was raised in corpus christi, texas and took up the sport in 2009 on the encouragement of her older brother. in 2010, she won 2nd place in the world wake surf championship where she was entered in the amateur women's group and that same year began competing as a professional. she went on to win the first place in the 2014, 2015 and 2016 world wake surf championships in the women's professional group. as of july 2016 she was ranked number 1 in the women's professional division of the competitive wake surf association world rankings.  references  external links  ak surfboards cicoria, michele (28 december 2014). "ashley kidd campionessa mondiale wakesurfing". 4actionsport (videos and photographs, text in italian)  1994 births living people sportspeople from corpus christi, texas american female surfers american wakeboarders 21st-century american women
gozelo, gotzelo, gothelo, gozilo or goscelo are variant spellings of a masculine given name of germanic origin. the french form is gozelon. it was most common in lotharingia in the middle ages. it is a variant of gozlin, and a diminutive of godfrey.  gozelo, count of bidgau and methingau (died 942/3), also known as gozlin gothelo i, duke of lorraine (died 1044), nicknamed "the great" gothelo ii of lower lorraine (died 1046), nicknamed "the sluggard" gozelo i, count of montaigu (died 1064), founder of the county of montaigu gozelo ii, count of montaigu (died 1097), joined the first crusade  notes
the 1943 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan college of education, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1943 college football season.  in their seventh season under head coach ron finch, the chippewas compiled a 2-3 record, were shut out in all three losses, and were outscored by all opponents by a combined total of 69 to 20. the team was held to 20 points on offense in a pair of victories over alma college (13-6 and 7-0). the three losses were to western michigan (0-19), alma (0-8), and bowling green (0-36).  schedule  references  external links  1944 chippewa yearbook (page 58)  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football
the 1947 western michigan broncos football team represented michigan college of education (later renamed western michigan university) as a member of the mid-american conference during the 1947 college football season.  in its sixth season under head coach john gill, the team compiled a 6-3 record (0-1 against mac opponents) and was outscored by a total of 147 to 139.  the team played its home games at waldo stadium in kalamazoo, michigan.  halfback al bush was the team captain. guard emerson grossman received the team's most outstanding player award.  western michigan and miami university were admitted to the mac in july 1947. wayne university then resigned from the conference in protest over the admission of schools not located in urban centers.  schedule  references  western michigan western michigan broncos football seasons western michigan broncos football
eunidia subvagepicta is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1963.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1963
the scottish national trail is a  long-distance trail between kirk yetholm in the scottish borders and cape wrath in the far north of the scottish highlands.  the trail starts in kirk yetholm, at the end of the pennine way. the route combines sections of other well known long distance walking routes including st cuthbert's way, the southern upland way, the forth and clyde canal pathway, the west highland way, the rob roy way and the cape wrath trail.  created by walker cameron mcneish, it is the first walking route to run the length of scotland. the route takes two months to walk. mcneish said he was inspired to launch the trail after visiting nepal in 2011, when they had just announced the creation of the great himalayan trail. the trail was officially launched on 30 october 2012 by first minister alex salmond.  references  external links  long-distance footpaths in scotland
germany-hong kong relations refers to international relations between germany and hong kong.  history germany and hong kong bilateral relations could be traced back before the unification of germany, when hong kong was still a colony of the british empire, and mostly follow the foreign policies of london. hamburg free city was the first among the german states, sending their consul to hong kong in 1854.    since 1869, the german consulate general hong kong in central, hong kong has been the representation of germany in hong kong.  the connection between the two continued when the united kingdom retreated from hong kong in 1997. since then, articles 151, 153 and 155 of hong kong basic law permits hong kong to conclude non-military bilateral agreements with foreign countries, while articles 152 permits hong kong joining international organisations. the hong kong economic and trade office, berlin was opened in 2011.  trade germany is hong kong's most important trading partner in europe and ranked 10th among hong kong's world trading partners. on the other hand, hong kong is germany's ninth largest trading partner in asia.  in 2014, the value of exports from hong kong to germany was worth 15b hong kong dollars, while the importing goods from germany to hong kong was worth 58.9b hong kong dollars. major exports from hong kong are electric motors (9.7%) and base metal watches (4.4%). major exports from germany to hong kong are cars (12%), and measuring instruments (>3.2%). as of 1 june 2015, there were 87 german companies with regional headquarters in hong kong, while another 121 had regional offices.  social and cultural reflecting germany's diverse activities in hong kong, there were about 1,050 german nationals resided in hong kong as at the end of 2014. hong kong had hosted 213 802 german tourists in 2015. the german chamber of commerce, hong kong is one of the largest european chambers in hong kong which provides networking opportunities in hong kong, asia pacific and germany.  both germany and hong kong have offered "working holiday programs". the program allows 300 youngsters to holiday in germany or hong kong and to take temporary employment as needed to cover the expenses of their visit for a maximum period of 12 months. in addition, german and hong kong universities have established notable amount of partnerships for research and educational purpose.  incidences  2014 umbrella movement in 2014, hong kong had seen a large scale protest, the umbrella movement, in striving for full democracy in hong kong. german chancellor angela merkel responded to the incident and pressured hong kong government by stressing
that freedom of speech should remain guaranteed by law in hong kong. at a function to celebrate the 24th anniversary of german reunification attended by the hong kong chief secretary, carrie lam, germany's consul-general to hong kong, nikolaus graf lambsdorff, responded to the incident stressing, " ... especially in the light of our own recent german history, i believe that hong kong can be proud of its youth. i am sure that the efforts to make hong kong more democratic will be good for hong kong politically, but also economically". at a reunification party in leipzig, german president joachim gauck compared the spirit of hong kong's pro-democracy protesters to german protesters in the late 1980s and early 1990s. he said the protesters "overcame their fear of their oppressors because their longing for freedom was greater". the statement was made one day before gauck met the chinese premier li keqiang.  during the umbrella movement, seven police officers were sued for the incidence of beating of ken tsang. the police officers were sentenced to jail in february 2017. a mass gathering of the hong kong police officers and supporters was organized to support the police officers. during the mass gathering, a speaker described the police officers as the persecuted jews in world war ii. in response, german consulate expressed through facebook that the comparison between the jewish victims being massacred and suppressed by the nazi state authority and the hong kong police officers being sentenced for abuse of power was absolutely inappropriate.  2016 wurzburg train attack in the 2016 wurzburg train attack, 4 hongkongers were attacked and seriously injured on a train. hong kong chief executive condemned the attack as he sent a team of immigration officers to accompany the victims' relatives to germany. officers from the hong kong economic and trade office in berlin were dispatched to visit the injured. amber alert was issued on germany by the hong kong government as a response to the incident.  2019-20 hong kong protests during the a series of protests, two german exchange students at lingnan university were detained in november 2019.  see also  references    hong kong bilateral relations of hong kong
the sikh conquest of the punjab was fought from 1810 to 1820, between the sikh empire and afghanistan. the sikh empire, led by ranjit singh, took control of the entirety of punjab from the afghans as well as local princes. the victory was in part due to the sikhs being trained by french and italian officers.  background   wars involving afghanistan
agladrillia callothyra is an extinct species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family drilliidae.  it is the type species of the genus agladrillia.  description the height of the shell attains 19.5 mm, its diameter 7.1 mm.  distribution this extinct marine species was found in pliocene strata on jamaica.  references   w. p. woodring. 1928. miocene molluscs from bowden, jamaica. part 2: gastropods and discussion of results . contributions to the geology and palaeontology of the west indies; carnegie institute washington publication, 1928  external links  callothyra
"avalanche" is a song by british rock band bring me the horizon. produced by keyboardist jordan fish and vocalist oliver sykes, it was featured on the band's 2015 fifth studio album that's the spirit. the song was also released as the sixth single from the album on 27 june 2016, reaching number 97 on the uk singles chart and number seven on the uk rock & metal singles chart.  promotion and release the first preview of "avalanche" was released on 31 august 2015 in the form of a 30-second teaser trailer, alongside another for the song "what you need". the full song was premiered on annie mac's show on bbc radio 1 on 9 september, two days before the release of that's the spirit. "avalanche" was not performed live until 22 april 2016, when it received its live debut (along with that's the spirit closing track "oh no") at the band's landmark performance at the royal albert hall with the parallax orchestra, which was recorded for december's live at the royal albert hall release. since this show, the song has made several appearances in the band's live set lists.  composition and lyrics according to bring me the horizon vocalist oliver sykes, "avalanche" is the band's attempt at creating "a stadium-sounding anthem" in the vein of bands such as u2. keyboardist jordan fish echoed the influence of 1980s "arena rock" on the song, which sykes claimed was not intended merely for the purposes of "getting big". rock sound writer andy biddulph described the song as featuring "rumbling, widescreen rock" and "powerful lyrics", compared its style to that of linkin park, particularly in terms of its "huge, open chords and oli's raking vocal performance". david renshaw of the nme noted the song's "singalong choruses and driving, expansive production", comparing it in these respects to "throne".  lyrically, "avalanche" is a song about attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (adhd), with which sykes was diagnosed prior to the release of that's the spirit. identifying the diagnosis as a factor in his recovery from drug addiction, the vocalist noted the lyric "cut me open and tell me what's inside" as indicative of his headspace at the time of writing the song. in a review of the album for the alternative press, tom bryant proposed that the lyrics and the music juxtapose with one another, describing the song as "melancholy, epic and up
lifting all at once: "i feel like suicide," sykes sings, but the swelling synths behind him seem to say, "oh, cheer up."" fuse's maria sherman noted its "self-deprecating chorus".  in a reddit ama ("ask me anything"), bassist matt kean revealed that "avalanche" was his favourite song on that's the spirit. fish claimed that it was "probably [his] favourite" too in a 2016 interview, despite previously favouring the album's opener "doomed".  music video the music video for "avalanche" was released on 23 june 2016. directed by tom sykes, brother of the band's vocalist oliver, it features footage of the band performing live at various shows throughout early 2016, including the landmark show at the royal albert hall in april. loudwire's chad childers outlined that the video "features a mix of day and night shots, with the evening performances giving viewers a glimpse of the light wall that typically backs the band onstage. you also see the full-on energy and vibe of a bring me the horizon show, complete with a crowd separating and staging a wall of death". speaking about the video, director sykes described the production process as "a lot of work but extremely rewarding", adding that the brothers had subsequently set up a company called fun blood in order to work together on more projects in the future. "avalanche" is the only song by the band to have its music video age restricted on youtube.  critical reception media response to "avalanche" was generally positive. andy biddulph of rock sound praised "avalanche" as a "string-laden, wistful ballad", claiming that it is "ready-made for pyro blasts and sold-out arenas". tom bryant of alternative press claimed that it reflected the overall message of the album in general: "everything's screwed, but what are you going to do about it?" loudwire's chad childers described the track as "one of the more anthemic songs in the band's catalog". amy gravelle from gigwise compared it to bullet for my valentine for its "weary guitar licks" and "choral build ups", but criticised its "mainstream blunder", calling it a "disappointing lull".  commercial performance "avalanche" entered the uk rock & metal singles chart at number 7 on 18 september 2015 following the release of that's the spirit, when it also registered on the main uk singles chart for a solitary week at
number 97. the song remained in the top 40 of the uk rock & metal singles chart until december. in the united states, the track reached number 32 on the billboard twitter top tracks chart.  personnel credits adapted from tidal.  bring me the horizon  oliver sykes - lead vocals, production, composition, programming  lee malia - guitars, composition  matt kean - bass, composition  matt nicholls - drums, composition  jordan fish - keyboards, synthesizers, programming, percussion, backing vocals, production, composition, engineering  additional musicians  maddie cutter - cello  will harvey - violin  additional personnel  al groves - engineering  sam winfield - engineering  nikos goudinakis - assistant engineering  ted jensen - mastering  dan lancaster - mixing  charts  references  2015 songs 2016 singles bring me the horizon songs songs written by oliver sykes sony music singles
acanthocasuarina acutivalvis is a species of jumping plant louse, first found on plants of the genus allocasuarina in australia. the species is characterised by exhibiting an elongate habitus; short rs and short cubital forewing cells; ventral genal processes beneath the apical margin of its vertex; short antennae; and nymphs that are elongate and very sclerotised (scale-like). it possesses rhinaria on its fourth, sixth, eighth and ninth antennal segments; the species' hind tibia has one outer and two inner spurs, while the female's proctiger carries an apical hook posteriorly.  references   triozidae insects described in 2011
the nutmeg 24 is a canadian trailerable sailboat, that was designed by william shaw and first built in 1964. the design is out of production.  the nutmeg 24 was featured in the july 1964 issue of popular boating.  production production of the boat was commenced in 1964 by tanzer industries of dorion, quebec. the company entered bankruptcy in may 1986 and production had ended by then.  hughes boat works of canada later produced a derivative design, the hughes 24.  design the nutmeg 24 is based on the earlier oriental mercy design of 1955 and also the shaw 24, both wooden boats.  the nutmeg 24 is a small recreational keelboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. it has a masthead sloop rig, an internally mounted rudder. it displaces  and carries  of lead ballast.  the boat has a long keel, with a retractable centreboard, that gives a draft of  with the board down and  with it retracted.  the boat is normally fitted with a small  outboard motor for docking and maneuvering.  the design has sleeping accommodation for four people. cabin headroom is .  the boat has a hull speed of .  operational history in a 2010 review steve henkel wrote, "best features: the boat has low freeboard and a nice springy sheer, presenting a pretty picture to dockside observers. worst features: despite bill shaw's fame engendered by the success of his shaw 24 in winning morc races, the nutmeg never measured up (though maybe it's just that she never got a chance to compete). in any case, for most folks she lacks sufficient cruising space below, and not enough boats were sold to permit organizing a one-design class for club racing."  see also list of sailing boat types similar sailboats achilles 24 balboa 24 c&c 24 challenger 24 columbia 24 dana 24 islander 24 islander 24 bahama macgregor 24 mirage 24 san juan 24 seidelmann 245 shark 24 tonic 23  references  keelboats 1960s sailboat type designs sailing yachts trailer sailers sailboat types built by tanzer industries sailboat type designs by william shaw
chemicals as elements, compounds, mixtures, solutions and emulsions are very widely used and transported in the modern industrial society. of necessity, they are also used in schools, universities and other training facilities to educate pupils in their safe use and handling and also are commonly used in domestic situations for cleaning, garden maintenance and diy.  chemical safety includes all those policies, procedures and practices designed to minimise the risk of exposure to potentially hazardous chemicals. this includes the risks of exposure to persons handling the chemicals, to the surrounding environment, and to the communities and ecosystems within that environment.  the hazardous nature of many chemicals may be increased when mixed with other chemicals, heated or handled inappropriately. in a chemically safe environment, users are able to take appropriate actions in case of accidents although many incidents of exposure to chemical hazards occur outside of a controlled environments such as manufacturing plants or laboratories.  it is estimated that 1.6 million human deaths occur each year from contact with hazardous chemicals. and that in 2016, 45 million disability-adjusted life-years were lost, a significant increase from 2012.  risks and hazards chemicals in use in industry and research have a range of properties which cause them to be hazardous to life. these include explosiveness, flammability, toxicity, carcinogenicity and teratogenicity. they may also emit radiation and they may exist at high or low temperatures generating a risk or burning or freezing. substances such as strong alkalis and strong acids can cause chemical burning. any one chemical or mixture may exhibit several of these properties.  toxic materials may be solids in powdered or finely divided form, liquids or gases and any of these materials may all be absorbed by inhalation, directly through the skin of by contact with mucous membranes in the nose or eyes. some chemicals may persist in the body for substantial periods and can continue to exhibit toxicity. examples of such materials include mercury, arsenic, dioxins and many organic solvents which can be stored in fat cells.  environmental risks may be difficult to evaluate and may take years to become apparent. the risk to the earth's ozone layer from the release of cfcs required the investigative powers of scientists throughout the world to understand fully. science is still working out the seriousness of the effects of persistent halogenated organics on the marine food chain with some of these chemicals becoming concentrated in the fatty deposits of top predators in concentrations that appear to effect their reproductive success.  protocols, rules, procedures and standards a chemically safe
environment includes agreed standards and terminology, rules about handling use and transportation, protocols for managing reagents and products, and internationally accepted and standardised warning and information signage. from this are derived, standards related to personal protective equipment (ppe), containment and clean-up procedures, reporting of accidents and incidents and the collection and reporting on data about incidents where hazardous chemicals have cause risk to life, health or the environment.  management and control the management and control of chemical safety is widely developed through primary legislation and orders derived from such legislation in the western world and in australasia. the implementation of such legislation follows a variety of patterns from the european model of detailed directives and orders implemented through country specific legislation to the us model of wide ranging federal enactments with control divided between state legislations and federal government leading to some variation in applications within a standardised labelling framework. examples from these areas are described below.  europe the chemicals agents directive a daughter directive of directive 89/391/eec, provides the framework for managing chemical safety  the european chemicals agency is the responsible agency and specifically implements registration, evaluation, authorisation and restriction of chemicals (reach), sets the standards and enures compliance across the european union. the european chemicals agency sits under reach and manages the technical and administrative aspects of the implementation of the directive.  new zealand the administrative framework is based on health and safety at work (hazardous substances) regulations 2017 and is implemented and enforced by worksafe, a government agency. although this legislation is comprehensive in its coverage it does not extend beyond the workplace and imposes no duties or responsibilities in regard to hazardous materials in domestic or educational establishments.  uk in the uk legislation to address chemical safety has been incorporated in many pieces of legislation from the early factories acts onwards. the current health and safety at work etc. act 1974 provided an all encompassing piece of legislation which covered chemical safety amongst a wide range of other measures designed to improve the safety in the workplace in the uk  enforcement of chemical safety is the responsibility of the health and safety executive (hse)  which implements relevant sections of the health and safety at work etc. act 1974, formulates regulations, provides safety advice and guidance and investigates major chemical incidents such the buncefield fire in 2005.  us in the us the u.s. chemical safety and hazard investigation board is responsible for investigating major chemical accidents and making recommendations to mitigate such events in the future. however relaxation in the chemical disaster rule by the trump administration may be implicated in a series of  explosions, for example
,  the state of texas  risk areas  manufacturing the manufacture and purification of chemicals can involve a range of reagents which may themselves be hazardous, and a range of products which equally may be hazardous. for example in order to produce the herbicide 2,4,5-trichlorophenol, phenol a hazardous organic liquid is reacted with chlorine, an acutely toxic gas. the output is typically a mixture of chlorinated organic compounds, only some of which are the desired product. in this example, contaminants can include 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzodioxin, a dioxin, one of the most toxic synthetic chemical know which is both acutely and chronically toxic and teratogenic and whose use on one occasion led to the abandonment of times beach, missouri. this reaction was also the cause of the bhopal disaster during which methyl isocyanate gas was released.  laboratories laboratories in schools, university, research establishments and manufacturing typically store and handle a wide range of chemicals. safety standards for such areas are high and most laboratories provide specific infrastructure to minimise risk including fume cupboards, impervious and inert work surfaces, emergency shower stations and strict policies on the wearing of appropriate ppe.  domestic use there are many hazardous chemicals in routine use in the domestic environment including cleaning agents such as bleach and caustic soda. some modern cleaning formulations also contain sodium silicate and other highly alkaline components. modern packaging into "pods" may increase the risk of misuse, particularly for small children.  waste disposal surplus hazardous materials often reach the waste stream , whether by being placed in the solid waste stream or being flushed away down sinks, basins or toilets. although dilution may reduce the immediate risk, the long term environmental risk remains and can be made more serious the more hazardous materials are disposed of in the waste water stream. disposal with solid waste poses risks to those handling the waste and may pose unexpected risks to uninformed members of the public. some industrial waste chemical dumps have been known to spontaneously ignite, years after the waste had been deposited. aluminium dross processing can produce a flux-rich waste that evolves ammonia gas if wetted, and can also spontaneously ignite when stored in bulk.  common safety practices  ppe  basic chemical safety practice includes wearing protective personal equipment such as safety goggles. personal protective equipment is combination of safe work practices but alone does not provide sufficient protection from the risks posed by hazardous chemicals but
it is an effective approach to minimize the risk of exposure in controlled environments.  safety googles are required when handling chemicals to prevent chemicals from getting into eyes. wearing standard gloves, closed toed shoes, long trousers, and laboratory coats to protect the stomach, back and forearm is usually required in the laboratory with similar provisions for the workplace. regulation of use of ppe is very variable and varies by country. in some countries such as the us, standards may vary from state to state with some states imposing extra regulations to protect laboratory workers from risks.  labelling for most of the world, a standard set of illustrative pictograms have been adopted to indicate where hazards exists and the type of hazard present. these pictograms are routinely displayed on containers, transport vehicles, safety advice and anywhere where the material occurs. these have been extended and standardised as the globally harmonized system of classification and labelling of chemicals and are now used throughout much of the world.    in the us a nfpa diamond is used to identify chemical hazards such as flammability, corrosivity, toxicity, and reactivity. this label is made up of four colour-coded fields: red, blue, yellow, and white. the numbering ranges from 0 to 4, and 0 means that there is no potential hazard. whereas 4 indicates the chemical is extremely hazardous.  transportation  in a number of countries, the hazchem system is used whenever a potentially hazardous cargo is transported whether by road, rail, sea or air. the standardised hazchem sign provides details of the material being transported, the nature of the hazard and the approved emergency response.  in the workplace, chemicals are classified using safety data sheet(sds) which are standardised document that includes workplace health, restrictions, emergency numbers, and other safety information.  physical and health hazards  physical hazards of a chemical include its environmental persistence, its adverse health potential such as carcinogenicity, its flammability and reactivity.  chemicals that affect health depend on its toxicity and hazard. toxicity is the potential of a chemical to do harm, and hazard is the possibility that the chemical will cause harm under certain conditions.  accidents  significant chemical incidents include the thiokol-woodbine explosion and the 2020 beirut explosion involving a shipment of ammonium nitrate. the chernobyl and fukushima, were accidents caused by a failures of safety policies and by inadequate safety planning  see also   chemical protective clothing  chemical safety assessment  chemical accident  occupational safety and health  references  external links oedc
chemical safety acs safety in laboratories    risk management
dr robert pollock gillespie frse (1903-1977) was a scottish mathematician. he was twice president of the edinburgh mathematical society (1946-7 and 1968-9). he published several important books on mathematics.  life  he was born on 21 november 1903 in johnstone, renfrewshire the son of thomas gillespie a butcher and his wife, jane pollock. he was raised at ashcot on kilbarchan road in johnstone. he was educated locally then at paisley grammar school where he was dux. he then won a bursary to study mathematics and natural philosophy (physics) at glasgow university graduating ma bsc in 1924. he did further postgraduate studies under e. w. hobson at cambridge university from 1924 to 1927 under a william bryce scholarship, gaining his doctorate (phd) in 1932 due to a delay in submitting his thesis.  he began lecturing in mathematics at glasgow university in 1929 under prof thomas murray macrobert and alongside dr t s graham.  in 1933 he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh due to his numerous publications on mathematics. his proposers were thomas murray macrobert, neil m'arthur, richard alexander robb and william arthur.  in the second world war he served first in the clyde river patrol and in 1941 moved to the air traffic control division of the raf based at prestwick. he served on the university air squadron after the war.  in 1948 he was promoted to senior lecturer at glasgow and remained there until retiral in 1969. on retiral he moved to edzell and indulged his love as an amateur artist.  he died in edzell on 1 january 1977.  family  he was married to maisie bowman, daughter of prof a. a. bowman. their son alistair gillespie was also a mathematician.  publications  integration (1939) partial differentiation (1951) solving problems in advanced calculus (1972)  references  1903 births 1977 deaths fellows of the royal society of edinburgh scottish mathematicians alumni of the university of glasgow academics of the university of glasgow scottish non-fiction writers
lennart albert heljas (13 may 1896 - 9 march 1972) was a finnish politician of the centre party, cabinet minister and lutheran priest. he served as a member of the parliament of finland from 1939 to 1958, and was vice president of the parliament in 1946, 1954-1956 and in 1957. he served as minister of social affairs from 1946 to 1948 and as minister of education in 1948 and from 1950 to 1951. he served as president of the nordic council in 1957.  references  1896 births 1972 deaths people from vyborg people from viipuri province (grand duchy of finland) finnish lutheran clergy centre party (finland) politicians ministers of social affairs of finland ministers of education of finland members of the parliament of finland (1939-45) members of the parliament of finland (1945-48) members of the parliament of finland (1948-51) members of the parliament of finland (1951-54) members of the parliament of finland (1954-58) university of helsinki alumni
veena poovu can refer to:   "veena poovu" (poem), a 1907 malayalam poem by indian poet kumaran asan
henri martelli (25 february 1895 - 15 july 1980) was a 20th-century french composer.  biography born in bastia, martelli was student of charles-marie widor and georges caussade at the conservatoire de paris. in 1919, he graduated in law from universite de paris. he was director of chamber music programmes on radio from 1940 to 1944, secretary of the societe nationale de musique and president of the french section of the iscm in 1953. he wrote - in a neoclassical style - many chamber music works as well as lyrical and radio works.  he died in paris aged 85.  works  incidental music   1923: la chanson de roland, opera (reworked 1962-63; paris, 13 april 1967)  1930: la bouteille de panurge, ballet (paris, 24 february 1937)  1951: les hommes de sable, ballet  1958: le major cravachon, opera bouffe (radiodiffusion francaise, 14 june 1959)  orchestral music   1921: rondo (1921)  1922: sarabande, scherzo et final   1922: divertissement sarrazin   1928: bas-reliefs assyriens, op. 27   1931: concerto for orchestra, op. 31  1938: violin concerto no. 1   1949: piano concerto  1953: symphony no. 1, for strings  1956: symphony no. 2, for strings   1956: double concerto for clarinet and bassoon  1957: symphonie no. 3, for large orchestra  1957: le radeau de la meduse, symphonic poem  1966: rhapsodie, for cello and orchestra  1970: concerto for oboe and orchestra  chamber music  quatre pieces pour guitare, op. 32  1933: string quartet no. 1  1935: piano trio  1936: violin sonata  1942: flute sonata   1944: string quartet no. 2  1946: sept duos, for violin and harp  1947: fantasiestuck, op. 67, for flute and piano (dedicated to claude delvincourt, director of the paris conservatory)  1948: cinq etudes-caprices, op. 58,  for flute and piano (dedicated to jean pierre rampal)  1951: trio, for flute, cello and piano  1956: divertissement op. 86,  for harp (dedicated to lily laskine)  1959: viola sonata  1962: concertstuck, for viola and piano  music for piano  1941: cinq danses
sources  marc vignal dictionnaire de la musique francaise, larousse  1895 births 1980 deaths 20th-century classical composers 20th-century french composers conservatoire de paris alumni french ballet composers french male classical composers french opera composers male opera composers people from bastia 20th-century french male musicians
giuseppe acquaviva (died 1634) was a roman catholic prelate who served as titular archbishop of thebae (1621-1634).  biography on 9 august 1621, giuseppe acquaviva was appointed during the papacy of pope gregory xv as titular archbishop of thebae. on 5 september 1621, he was consecrated bishop by ludovico ludovisi, archbishop of bologna, with galeazzo sanvitale, archbishop emeritus of bari, and ulpiano volpi, bishop of novara serving as co-consecrators.  he served as titular archbishop of thebae until his death in 1634.  episcopal succession  see also  catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)  17th-century roman catholic titular bishops bishops appointed by pope gregory xv 1634 deaths latin archbishops of thebes
eunidia quadrivittata is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1938. it is known from kenya and somalia.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1938
anomonotes leucomerus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by heller in 1917. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1917
aphelida is a phylum of fungi that appear to be sister to true fungi.  taxonomy  phylum aphelidiomycota tedersoo 2018 [aphelida karpov, aleoshin & mikhailov 2014]  class aphelidiomycetes tedersoo 2018 [aphelidea gromov 2000]  order aphelidiales tedersoo et al. 2018 [aphelidida gromov 2000 non cavalier-smith 2012]  family aphelididae gromov 2000 [amoeboaphelidiidae cavalier-smith 2012]  genus amoeboaphelidium scherffel 1925 emend. karpov 2014 genus paraphelidium karpov, moreira & lopez-garcia 2017 genus pseudaphelidium schweikert & schnepf 1996  genus aphelidium zopf 1885 emend. gromov 2000  references     opisthokont phyla
raikot assembly constituency (sl. no.: 69) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in ludhiana district, punjab state, india.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  previous results  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india ludhiana district
the tesla semi is an all-electric battery-powered class 8 semi-truck in development by tesla, inc. two concept vehicles were unveiled in november 2017, and production is planned in 2023.  the company initially announced that the truck would have a  range on a full charge and with its new batteries it would be able to run for  after an 80% charge in 30 minutes using a solar-powered "tesla megacharger" charging station. tesla ceo elon musk said that the semi would come standard with tesla autopilot that allows semi-autonomous driving on highways.  history the semi was first mentioned in the tesla 2016 master plan. tesla said at the time that they have a working prototype that uses 'a bunch' of tesla model 3 electric motors. , jerome guillen had been leading the tesla semi program. guillen was once in charge of freightliner's cascadia diesel-engine class 8 semi, before joining tesla to configure the model s production line, but left the semi program a year later to lead one of the model 3 general assembly lines and subsequently became tesla president of automotive in september 2018. the new lead for the semi program has not been publicly announced as of late 2019.  the semi was unveiled at a press conference on november 16, 2017, where musk provided additional specifics. he claimed that the electric semi would cost  less to operate than a diesel truck if charged at a megacharger, where tesla would guarantee a price of 7 ¢/kwh (in the united states). if the semi is not charged at a megacharger, the savings would depend on the cost of electricity; the high cost in california, for example, may eliminate the operating cost benefit.  in november 2017, tesla projected that the expected price of regular production versions for the  and  range versions would be  and  respectively. the company stated they would offer a founder's series semi at .  in march 2018, tesla announced that the semi was being tested with real cargo, hauling battery packs from nevada to california. in august 2018, a tesla semi prototype traveled from california alone-without escort or accompanying vehicles-for a week to arrive at the j. b. hunt headquarters in arkansas.  a toy version of the semi was released in january 2020 as part of the matchbox convoys line with black truck, box trailer, with a red model s.  a second version was released with a silver truck, trailer with pipes, and forklift.  orders the first pre-orders
came in the day of the press conference and by mid-january 2018 approximately 450 semis had been pre-ordered. the original deposit required with an order was $5,000, which was increased to $20,000 after the event in november 2017. in the q1 2018 tesla earnings call, musk said that there were about 2,000 total pre-orders of the semi.  production in june 2019, tesla projected that production would begin by the end of 2020. a few months later, in the october 2019 q3 investor call, they maintained the 2020 production target, albeit in limited numbers. in mid-january 2020, tesla announced to its reservation holders a winter testing program to validate the semi in cold weather and low-traction conditions. a few weeks later, in the 2019 q4 earnings call, elon musk commented on the lack of battery production capability as one limiting factor for the conservative semi production timeline, choosing to use battery supply for passenger cars instead.  in january 2021, musk announced that semi production would be delayed until the end of the year, as the company ramped up high-volume production of its tabless 4680 battery cells (previewed in september 2020) to meet the demand for the semi and other vehicles.  at the 2021 shareholder meeting, musk announced that the production of the semi would not start in 2021 and that it likely would slip into 2023. tesla has low rate initial production of the semi in a warehouse outside giga nevada, however, actual mass production is scheduled for austin, texas sometime in 2023.  november 2017 prototype and plans in november 2017, musk said that the semi would be powered by four electric motors (one for each of the four driving wheels) of the type used in the tesla model 3, with no axles or differential connecting the wheels. the mid wheels have a fixed gear ratio of 23:1 while the rear wheels are 15:1, compared to the model 3's 9:1.  two battery configurations of  and  range (fully loaded) were planned with the battery packs located under the floor of the cab, between the front and driving wheels.  running empty, the long-range tesla semi would have a range of .    tesla said the semi would have  time of 5 seconds unloaded and 20 seconds fully loaded. the semi would be able to maintain a speed of  on a 5% grade. the company touted a warranty for a million miles (1.6 million km) and said maintenance would be simpler than a diesel truck
. a month after the reveal, tesla reduced the uphill speed spec (by 5 mph) to . media reports noted the lack of specification for vehicle weight, as us government rules restrict the weight of electric combined tractor-trailers to 82,000 lb.  in the prototype shown in november the driver's seat was located in the center of the cab.  there was a removable jump seat for an extra passenger and there was no sleeping area. there were touchscreen displays on either side of the steering wheel, and no other instrument panels.  musk said that the windshield would be explosion-proof.  tesla said that the semi would be equipped with enhanced autopilot as standard equipment, offering semi-autonomous capability. using more radar devices and cameras than tesla cars, the system would: enable the truck to stay in its lane and a safe distance from other vehicles on the highway; have emergency braking; and warn the driver of any potential hazards near the vehicle. tesla also said that new technology with active safety controls on the independent motors&wheels would detect and prevent jackknifing.  musk said that the system would eventually allow several units to operate in an autopilot-based convoy, led by a truck with a driver, that would be a cheaper alternative to rail transport.  at the time, platooning was legal in only eight states and all required a human driver in each truck, so changes in legislation would be necessary to achieve musk's vision.  tesla megacharger at the november 2017 press conference musk also stated that the company would be involved in installing a global network of "megachargers" that would be solar-powered and would be able to recharge a truck's batteries in 30 minutes to a capacity to travel . to accomplish this, it will likely have an output level over one megawatt.  the first megacharger was installed at giga nevada in november 2021.  a second megacharger was permitted for construction at a pepsi facility in modesto, california.  third party analysis an analyst with jefferies group expressed skepticism over some of tesla's claims because the company had not determined battery longevity; specifics about that aspect, and the replacement cost of the battery, are essential in order to calculate the long-term cost of ownership.  some industry experts view heavy-duty freight as impractical for battery trucks due to cost and weight. a senior vp at daseke inc., a large trucking company, said that the limited range affected their likelihood of operating the semi until the necessary infrastructure was
in place.  a bloomberg l.p. report showed that given the battery technology available in november 2017, tesla's estimates for charging times, range per charge, and costs were not realistic, some suggesting that tesla may be betting on increased battery density advances in the next couple of years to meet its stated goals.  a 2017 theoretical analysis of electric semi trucks was completed by researchers from the carnegie mellon college of engineering in mid-2017, ostensibly in response to musk's description of tesla's work on a "a heavy duty, long-range semi truck" at a talk in april 2017. the analysis estimated loads and ranges for an electric truck, given battery technologies known at that time, and published their work in june 2017. the analysis indicated that an electric semi might be feasible for short- or medium-range hauling, but would not be for long-range hauling, as the weight of the batteries required would take up too much of the weight allowed by law. one estimate for the battery weight, at 11,800 kg, was estimated to account for one third of the payload, and would increase the capital cost of the truck to about double that of an equivalent diesel.  competition other companies developing class 8 electric trucks include byd company, daimler ag, lion electric company, kenworth, nikola motor, peterbilt, toyota, volvo, and xos (thor).  other companies developing electric trucks, which are not class 8, include cummins, daf trucks, einride, uber, and volkswagen.  see also  toyota project portal - class 8 fuel cell truck  cummins aeos - class 7 electric and range extender truck  freightliner ecascadia - class 8 battery-electric tractor variant of conventional truck megawatt charging system - direct current (dc) charging system for large battery electric vehicles.  references  external links    - official site at tesla  numbers starting to add up for tesla trucks: dhl executive, president at dhl supply chain comments, reuters, february 23, 2018  tesla semi orders list; 646 as of july 29, 2019  semi proposed vehicles vehicles introduced in 2017 electric trucks class 8 truck tractor units
venkateshwara open university (vou) is a state private university located in naharlagun, arunachal pradesh, india. it was established by the venkateshwara open university act no.10 of 2012 of the government of arunachal pradesh in 2012. vou is empowered to award degrees by the university grants commission (ugc).  venkateshwara open university is established through arunachal pradesh state legislative act, law/legn-10/2012.  schools the university is organized in 5 schools: school of management school of computer & information communication technology school of humanities & social science school of library & information sciences school of education  references  external links  venkateshwara open university  private universities in india  universities in arunachal pradesh itanagar educational institutions established in 2012 2012 establishments in arunachal pradesh
frantisek trkal (born 10 april 1970) is a czech former cyclist. he competed in two events at the 1992 summer olympics.  major results  1988 1st  overall course de la paix juniors 1989 1st stage 5 bayern rundfahrt 1991 10th overall peace race 1993 2nd overall peace race 1st stages 3 & 5 1994 2nd overall tour du vaucluse 3rd overall peace race 1st stage 1 1995 1st  overall okolo slovenska 5th overall peace race 1996 1st stage 6 peace race 1st stage 2 international tour of rhodes 5th hew cyclassics 1999 3rd road race, national road championships 2000 4th overall international tour of rhodes 1st prologue & stages 2 & 4 2001 1st  overall okolo slovenska 1st stage 2 2002 4th overall okolo slovenska 2004 8th porec trophy  references  external links  1970 births living people czech male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from litomysl
ten united states presidents have made presidential visits to east asia. the first presidential trip to a country in east asia was made by dwight d. eisenhower (as president-elect) in 1952. since then, all presidents, except john f. kennedy, have traveled to one or more nations in the region while in office.  to date, 23 visits have been made to japan, 19 to south korea, and 14 to china, and one to mongolia. additionally, one incumbent president, donald trump, has briefly entered north korea. he did so on june 30, 2019, via the joint security area of the korean demilitarized zone, accompanied by north korean leader kim jong-un.  table of visit  gallery  visits by former presidents   ulysses s. grant visited hong kong, canton (now guangzhou), shanghai, and peking where he spoke with the head of government, prince gong, and li hongzhang, viceroy of zhili, in 1878, during a world tour after leaving the presidency. he subsequently visited japan, before returning to the u.s.  richard nixon visited china at the personal invitation of mao zedong in february 1976. he visited again in mid-1979, and had a private meeting with deng xiaoping in beijing.  jimmy carter travelled to china, along with carter center personnel, for meetings with government and other officials on several occasions: july 1997, september 2003, december 2007, and january 2009. additionally, carter has visited north korea twice: in june 1994 he meet with kim il sung in pyongyang to persuade kim to negotiate with the clinton administration over its nuclear program; and, in august 2010 he met with kim jong-il in pyongyang to secure the release of aijalon mahli gomes, an american teacher who was imprisoned in north korea for entering that country without a travel visa. carter returned to the united states with gomes.  bill clinton travelled to north korea in august 2009 to secure the release of two american journalists, euna lee and laura ling, who were imprisoned for illegally entering north korea. he met with kim jong-il in pyongyang, and returned to the united states with the journalists.  see also  foreign policy of the united states  united states-south korea free trade agreement  security treaty between the united states and japan  one-china policy  notes  references  lists of united states presidential visits china-united states relations japan-united states relations mongolia-united states relations south korea-united states relations taiwan-united states relations north korea-united states relations
the gens gratidia was a plebeian family at ancient rome.  originally coming from arpinum, members of this gens are known from the final century of the republic.  members   marcus gratidius, the granduncle of cicero.  in 115 bc he proposed a lex tabellaria at arpinum, which was opposed by his brother-in-law, marcus tullius cicero, grandfather of the orator.  in 102, he accompanied his friend, the orator marcus antonius, praetor in cilicia, in his campaign against the pirates, and was slain in battle.  gratidia, a sister of marcus gratidius of arpinum, married marcus tullius cicero, grandfather of the orator.  gratidius, legate and probably nephew of gaius marius, was stoned to death at nola in 88 bc while trying to take command of the consul sulla's armies for the upcoming mithridatic war.  marcus gratidius m. f., son of marcus gratidius of arpinum, was adopted by one of the marii, probably a brother of gaius marius.  as a speaker he was calm, capable, and popular, and was a good friend of his cousin, the young cicero.  proscribed by sulla, he was brutally slain by catiline, who carried his head through the city.  gratidia m. f., possibly the sister of gratidianus, who is thought by some scholars to have married catiline, who would thus have been gratidianus' brother-in-law.  the historian syme indicates that if this were so, "it can be taken that catilina promptly discarded her."  marcus gratidius, possibly a grandson of marcus gratidius, was legate of quintus tullius cicero during his administration of asia, from 61 to 59 bc.  gratidius, mentioned by cicero as one of the tribunes of the plebs in bc 57, could perhaps be the same marcus gratidius who had previously served under quintus cicero, but is probably an error, instead referring to quintus fabricius.  see also  list of roman gentes  footnotes  references  bibliography   marcus tullius cicero, de legibus, brutus, de officiis, epistulae ad quintum fratrem.  quintus asconius pedianus, commentarius in oratio ciceronis in toga candida.  quintus tullius cicero, de petitione consulatus (attributed).  gaius sallustius crispus (sallust), historiae.  valerius maximus, factor
um ac dictorum memorabilium (memorable facts and sayings).  lucius annaeus seneca, de ira (on anger).  gaius plinius secundus, historia naturalis (natural history).  lucius mestrius plutarchus (plutarch), lives of the noble greeks and romans.  paulus orosius, historiarum adversum paganos (history against the pagans).  wilhelm drumann, geschichte roms in seinem ubergang von der republikanischen zur monarchischen verfassung, oder: pompeius, caesar, cicero und ihre zeitgenossen (history of rome in its transition from republic to empire, or pompeius, caesar, cicero, and their contemporaries), konigsberg (1834-1844).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  dictionary of greek and roman antiquities, william smith, ed., little, brown, and company, boston (1859).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  ronald syme, sallust, university of california press (1964, 2002).  ronald syme, [ approaching the roman revolution: papers on republican history], ed. federico santangelo, oxford university press (2016), .  roman gentes
the adventures of ali and his gang vs. mr. tooth decay is a 1976 educational album by the american heavyweight boxer muhammad ali. the album was recorded to raise awareness of tooth decay among children. the album features several notable personalities including howard cosell, frank sinatra, and ossie davis. the album was recorded in the year of the united states bicentennial, and makes several patriotic references to america's past including the liberty bell and paul revere.  it was nominated for the grammy award for best recording for children at the 19th annual grammy awards in 1977.  ali also made a short film on children's dental hygiene, in which mr tooth decay was played by chuck wepner. ali later boxed against mr. tooth decay during dental hygiene for children day in washington, d. c. in january 1980.  the album was officially approved by the american dental association.  reception frank la rosa, writing on the website "frank's vinyl museum" said of the album that "i'd heard about this record years ago, and it sounded pretty good. i finally picked up a copy the other day, and - sweet jesus - this thing is better than anything i could have hoped for. it could be the single best record i own...a sugar high is nothing compared to what i felt listening to this treasure. one track isn't enough. you want to listen to the whole thing straight through, like i did, and you want to do it twice to catch all the details. then you want to play it in your car. your walkman. your bathroom - while brushing and flossing your teeth, of course. one thing is for sure, i'll never look at ice cream the same way again."  nate petrin, writing in vice magazine, was critical of the performance of the children on the album, feeling that "fans of abysmal kid voice acting-including lots of opposite-of-spontaneous shouting things in unison as a substitute for actual emoting-will sink right into this record like a luxurious champagne bath".  jason heller, writing in rolling stone magazine, said of the music on the album that "at one point, the score sounds like a marching band whose horns have been replaced with glitching analog synths. elsewhere, some misplaced, shaft-style blaxploitation funk underlines the narration. at one point, mr. tooth decay's entrance is signaled by a dissonant track that sounds like "you're a mean one, mr. grinch"
as interpreted by avant-garde composer edgard varese. the most successful song on the album is ali's own theme, a brassy, fist-pumping anthem that vaguely parallels the theme from rocky, also released in 1976".  plot the album opens with "ali's historical theme song", a musical number featuring ali, before the story (narrated by howard cosell) begins. the plot of the story involves ali training for an upcoming fight against "mr. tooth decay", who is accompanied by sidekicks, sugar cuber and willie plaque. ali then rescues a group of children from buying ice cream from a shopkeeper (played by frank sinatra), and takes the children to an organic farm where they learn the importance of drinking milk and eating fruit and vegetables from farmer brother st. john (played by ossie davis). the album concludes with the fight between ali and mr. tooth decay.  personnel arther bernard morrison - producer, voice, writer dick lavsky, james bedford, michael bitterman, stan peahota - musical arranger sharinn sigman - graphics ellen fox - illustration, art direction sonia katchian, victor pope - photography howard cosell - special announcer beverly mccloud, frank sinatra, jayne kennedy, karen hall, ossie davis, richie havens - voice esther taylor-evans - writer  see also  i am the greatest (1963 album)  references  external links wmfu: ali and his gang vs. mr. tooth decay  1976 albums muhammad ali albums novelty albums oral hygiene
zselic national landscape protection area (hungarian language: zselici tajvedelmi korzet [ˈʒɛlitsi ˈtaːjveːdɛlmi ˈkøɾzɛt]) is a dark-sky preserve in hungary.  it is located in the counties of somogy and baranya, between kaposvar and pecs, and whose boundary is managed by the danube-drava national park. this includes some of the hills of transdanubia, in the heart of the massif of zselic.  references  dark-sky preserves protected areas established in 1976 protected areas of the carpathians somogy county baranya county
pompeo coronini (1581 - 14 march, 1646) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of trieste (1631-1646) and bishop of pedena (1625-1631).  biography pompeo coronini was born in prebacina gradiscutta in 1581. on 21 april 1625, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of pedena. on 27 january 1631, he was appointed during the papacy of pope urban viii as bishop of trieste. he served as bishop of trieste until his death on 14 march 1646.  see also catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)  17th-century roman catholic bishops in croatia bishops appointed by pope urban viii 1581 births 1646 deaths 17th-century italian roman catholic bishops
the st. james cathedral  () also called valparaiso cathedral is a cathedral church of catholic worship, seat of the diocese of valparaiso, in chile. it is located in el almendral neighborhood, on the east side of the plaza de la victoria and on the flat land of the city.  currently, the church also serves as parish church for the holy spirit parish, whose former religious centre also faced the square but was built on another site. the wedding of captain arturo prat and carmela carvajal was celebrated at the former church.  the church building, gothic in style, was built from 1910 to 1950 on land donated by juana ross edwards. it was restored after the earthquakes of 1971 and 1985.  see also roman catholicism in chile  references  roman catholic cathedrals in chile buildings and structures in valparaiso roman catholic churches completed in 1950 20th-century roman catholic church buildings in chile
aeranthes albidiflora is a species of orchid native to madagascar. it may be extinct due to illegal collection and logging.  references  albidiflora orchids of madagascar critically endangered flora of africa species endangered by the pet trade species endangered by logging plants described in 1960
matthew simmons is a fictional character on the cbs crime drama criminal minds: beyond borders and criminal minds, portrayed by daniel henney.  background and characterization simmons is of mixed caucasian and korean parentage (like actor daniel henney) and it is implied that he was ostracized by his paternal grandparents, who were against his parents' union. his late mother was born in korea before the korean war. according to simmons, she had spent much of her adulthood trying to assimilate and "forget" her past, although she did teach him korean. he is a native of carson city, michigan and worked in detroit for some time before joining the fbi. he was formerly a member of the fbi's international response team (irt) and has some prior history with agents derek morgan (shemar moore) and jennifer "jj" jareau (a.j. cook) of the fbi's behavioral analysis unit.  when introduced, simmons and his wife kristy (kelly frye) have four young children: sons jake and david and twin daughters, chloe and lily. in the season 14 finale of criminal minds, kristy revealed to him that she was pregnant with their fifth child, and early in season 15, gives birth to their third daughter, rose mary. it was stated in season 13 of criminal minds that the couple have been married for almost ten years. like jack garrett (gary sinise), simmons' full and fulfilling family life was a deliberate choice. daniel henney said of his character, "his big struggle is, when can i get home to see my kids and how much is my wife working?".  a united states army veteran, little is known about simmons' military service. simmons is known for his resourcefulness and "always [has] a guy" to turn to for help whenever the team hits a dead end. like most of the irt he knows several languages and is shown to be fluent in arabic, spanish and korean. highly resourceful and adaptable, he thinks quickly on his feet and is often tasked with coordinating search and rescue efforts or navigating unfamiliar terrain.  simmons has an eclectic variety of interests, ranging from sports to vintage cars. in the episode "harvested", in which the team investigates a case in mumbai, india, his knowledge of cricket, india's unofficial national sport, proves useful in building a rapport with the local police officers.  character arc  in criminal minds: beyond borders in the episode "love interrupted", simmons is forced to shoot serial killer antonio cayetan (jonathan medina
) to prevent him from killing his own young daughter in a fit of desperate rage. cayetan had suffered a breakdown after losing his wife. he then kidnapped newlywed couples, killing and cannibalizing the groom and taking the brides as his "wives", even impregnating them. simmons later admits to garrett that the case affected him more than he would like because the girl reminded him of his own daughters.  simmons and clara seger (alana de la garza) made an appearance in the criminal minds season 12 episode "spencer" to help out their colleagues at the bau prove dr. spencer reid's (matthew gray gubler) innocence after he was imprisoned in mexico after being found in possession of drugs. simmons and the irt had been in costa rica working a case when they received the call for help.  in the season 2 episode "pretty like me", simmons takes some time off to fulfill his late mother's dying wish to find her biological mother in her birth country of south korea. she had been left at an orphanage around the time of the korean war and moved to the united states at some point with simmons' father. because of the disruption and loss of records caused by the war, she was never able to fulfill her wish before her death. simmons, however, was finally able to track down and meet his grandmother.  in criminal minds simmons was introduced to criminal minds in the backdoor pilot "beyond borders" in season 10, in which the irt is called in to help the bau with the death of a family overseas. in the season 12 episode "spencer", he assists the bau in freeing spencer reid (matthew gray gubler) from a mexican prison and proving his innocence.  in season 13, he is brought in by technical analyst penelope garcia to help the team after they are ambushed in the field and agent emily prentiss (paget brewster) is kidnapped by serial killer peter lewis (bodhi elfman). when asked what he is doing at the bau headquarters, simmons vaguely mentions that he is awaiting a new assignment as the irt had been dissolved as a result of events in the criminal minds: beyond borders episode "blowback" - in which the irt had been targeted by assistant director linda barnes (kim rhodes), who herself would have the bau shut down temporarily - and is offered a position on the bau team by prentiss by the end of the episode. as he and jareau are the only two members of the team who are married with children, they often exchange
jokes about the mishaps of parenting. in the episode "ex parte", kristy is caught up in a hostage situation at her workplace. the usually calm and collected simmons nearly strangles the hostage taker to death in a fit of rage but stops when kristy tells him "it's not you", prompting her husband to let go of the criminal and arrest him instead.  in the season 14 episode "rule 34", it is revealed that kristy had been going for therapy due to trauma from the hostage incident. their son david (declan whaley) is suspended from school after physically lashing out at a friend over a comment regarding cop shows. he admits to his parents that his classmate losing her mother brought about fears for his own parents' safety, especially his father's, given the dangerous nature of his job.  character development and casting henney stated that he had accepted the role as it was a departure from asian stereotypes perpetuated by hollywood and the american entertainment industry. in an interview with august man, he described his character as "a really interesting character for an asian-american actor to play because it's never been done before."  in both shows, simmons is one of two main characters on the show who is happily married with children, the other being his supervisor jack garrett (gary sinise) on criminal minds: beyond borders and jennifer "jj" jareau on criminal minds. showrunner erica messer noted that both matt simmons and jack garrett share similarities and, in conceiving simmons as a younger agent with both a successful career and family life, hoped "to show that this kind of lifestyle can work".  references  external links  matt simmons on imdb  criminal minds characters fictional federal bureau of investigation personnel television characters introduced in 2015 criminal minds: beyond borders fictional war in afghanistan (2001-2021) veterans crossover characters in television american male characters in television
the 1967 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1967 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 4-6 overall and 4-3 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by fred taylor in his first year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  references  tcu tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned frogs football
mostafa mohamed may refer to : mostafa mohamed, an egyptian-greco-roman wrestler mostafa mohamed (militant), an egyptian-australian member of jabhat al-nusra mostafa mohamed (footballer), an egyptian footballer who plays for galatasaray mustafa mohamed, a somali-swedish athlete mustafa mohamed, a somali international goalkeeper  other people with similar names include: mostafa mohamed khaled, an egyptian male artistic gymnast mustafa mohamed moalim, a somali pilot mostafa mohammad-najjar, an iranian politician mostafa mahmoud emara, an egyptian scientist mustafa mohamed fadhil, an al-qaeda operative mustapa mohamed, an malaysia politician
taxability may refer to the eligibility of a person or entity for taxation:  taxable estate (russian empire)  taxable reit subsidiaries  it may also refer to the base upon which a tax system imposes a tax:  taxable income   taxable wages  taxable profit  taxable estate under an estate tax regime  taxable real-estate under a property tax regime  taxable goods and services under a sales tax regime  taxable transactions under a transfer tax regime  tax terms
the 2011 south american rhythmic gymnastics championships were held in maracaibo, venezuela, september 6-12, 2011.  participating nations  medalists  references   2011 in gymnastics south american gymnastics championships international gymnastics competitions hosted by venezuela 2011 in venezuelan sport
kyeintali () is a town located in gwa township of rakhine state, myanmar (burma).  travel suggestion around kyeintali you will find beaches, plains and mountains, charming villages and towns, delicious food, bustling markets, incredible biodiversity, and, best of all, friendly, hospitable rakhine people. this area provides ample opportunities for swimming, hiking and birdwatching.  a simple, family-run guesthouse in kyeintali can accommodate a small number of visitors. local guides can take you on a range of activities, including bird-watching, hiking, and exploring nearby fishing villages, learning about local life. you'll also have the chance to soak up the sun on the beautiful and untouched nearby beaches.  kyeintali is a 40 km bus or taxi ride south of ngapali beach, or a long bus ride from yangon.  natural resources macrognathus pavo a species included in the iucn red list of threatened species, macrognathus pavo  ,is only known from kyeintali chaung (stream) in the rakhine yoma, myanmar. it only known from the headwaters of the type locality stream, and is likely restricted to that basin. macrognathus pavo was described in 2010 and further information is required on the species habitat and ecology, as well as population and distribution. it is currently assessed as data deficient.  kyeintali river bridge  jan. 1: the k 58.7 million kyeintali river bridge on the thandwe-gwa road in rakhine state was inaugurated by minister for progress of border areas and national races and development affairs lt-gen. maung thint and slorc secretary-1 lt-gen. khin nyunt. (nlm 1/2)  references  external links  google map  bin map  populated places in rakhine state
dovzhky (, alternative name - ) - village (selo) in shepetivka raion of khmelnytskyi oblast, ukraine. it belongs to hannopil rural hromada, one of the hromadas of ukraine.  area of the village totals is 4,36 km2 and the population of the village is about 952 people. local government is administered by dovzhkivska village council.  geography  this village is located on the altitude of  above sea level. it is a flat terrain at a distance  from the regional center of khmelnytskyi,  from the district center slavuta and  from the berezdiv.  history  the first written sources of the village have been preserved from the years 1594-1595. but in territory of village are found tools copper-stone age ) (3rd millennium bc). direction of the economy of the local population - agriculture and meat dairy farming.  before the second world war the population of village dovzhky was about 2,000 people and was a few jewish families.  a terrible fate awaited the jews of slavuta district during the fascist occupation of 1941 - 1942. all of them were taken to ghetto and killed by the nazis.  until 18 july 2020, dovzhky belonged to slavuta raion. the raion was abolished in july 2020 as part of the administrative reform of ukraine, which reduced the number of raions of khmelnytskyi oblast to three. the area of slavuta raion was abolished and merged into shepetivka raion.  references  external links   weather.in.ua, dovzhky (khmelnytskyi region)  villages in khmelnytskyi oblast holocaust locations in ukraine
the sandow lakes ranch is a 33,800-acre ranch in texas, u.s. it spans three counties, including milam county, texas, there are 14 lakes on the ranch and "48,379 acre feet of water" from the carrizo-wilcox aquifer. it was acquired by alcoa in the 1950s. in 2016, alcoa listed it for us$250 million.  references  ranches in texas buildings and structures in milam county, texas alcoa
graeme saunders (born july 19, 1990 in halifax, nova scotia) is a canadian sailor. along with his partner (and brother) jacob saunders, have qualified to compete at the 2016 summer olympics in the 470 event.  references  external links official website  living people canadian male sailors (sport) 1990 births sportspeople from halifax, nova scotia sailors at the 2016 summer olympics - 470 olympic sailors of canada
erich huttenhain (* 26. january 1905 in siegen; † 1. december 1990 in bruhl) was a german academic mathematician and cryptographer (cryptography) and  considered a leading cryptanalyst in the third reich. he was head of the cryptanalysis unit at okw/chi, the cipher department of the high command of the wehrmacht.  life and work dr huttenhain was the son of a conrector and studied after the high school diploma () 1924 in siegen at the university of marburg, the johann wolfgang goethe-university frankfurt and the university of munster. he studied mathematics with heinrich behnke and astronomy at munster. there he was assistant to martin lindow (1880-1967), who was director of the observatory at munster. in 1933, at the university of munster, he took his examination for promotion of dr. phil. in astronomy under lindow with the thesis titled: spatial infinitesimal orbits around the libration points in the straight-line case of the (3 + 1) bodies. in 1936, he was sent to the cipher bureau of the okw okw/chi under director min.rat. wilhelm fenner. erich huttenhain had an interest in mayan chronology which led him to cryptology and thus to okw/chi. as a recruitment test, fenner had sent him a message which had been enciphered with a private cipher. huttenhain duly deciphered it and was accepted as a possible cryptanalyst. at okw/chi he was employed as a specialist to build a cryptanalytic research unit, and later he was most recently executive council head of group iv analytical cryptanalysis.  during his time in okw/chi he succeeded, among other things, in the deciphering of the japanese purple cipher machine (william frederick friedman) he and his staff  also temporarily succeeded in deciphering american rotary machines, such as the m 138 a and the m-209 in north africa. later in the war, when the allies invaded italy, the allies learned in turn by deciphering italian ciphers that their later systems, e.g. among others the sigaba designed by friedman, had not been broken and around that time, huttenhain had no more major successes.  after world war ii, being a high value target, he was taken by ticom to the usa to be interrogated. for the americans, he built a machine (which was already used by the germans during world war ii) that deciphered the russian rotor machine encryption. he also created reports on the successes of the germans on cryptographic territory during
world war ii (as deciphering the french naval codes, the polish diplomat cipher and the security of the enigma). after his return he founded in 1947 the "study group for scientific investigation" () within the gehlen organization, which laid the foundation for the subsequent formation of the german central office for encryption (, a unit of the german federal intelligence service (). his pseudonym in the gehlen organization was erich hammerschmidt. in the first official cryptographic service of the federal government, the unit 114 in the foreign ministry, headed by adolf paschke founded in 1950, he was the chair of the scientific advisory board, along with kurt selchow, rudolf schauffler, and heinz kuntze, some of the best cryptologists in germany. during 1956-1970 he served as deputy director of the central office for encryption where initially wilhelm going and 1972 otto leiberich was his successor. one of the objectives of huttenhain was that in contrast to his experiences in the third reich where numerous independent cipher bureaux were spread throughout the reich, all threads for evaluating cryptographic procedures were now to be integrated into a single office.  in 1926 he was a founding fellow of the frankfurt burschenschaft arminia .  huttenhain left a posthumous manuscript he wrote in about 1970 and in which he reports on his experience as a cryptologist.  literature              leiberich, otto (2001), vom diplomatischen code zur fallturfunktion - 100 jahre kryptographie in deutschland, spektrum dossier kryptographie (with a photograph of e. huttenhain).  publications  references  1905 births 1990 deaths pre-computer cryptographers history of cryptography history of telecommunications in germany telecommunications in world war ii german cryptographers
legends of tomorrow is an american action-adventure television series developed by greg berlanti, marc guggenheim, andrew kreisberg and phil klemmer, who are also executive producers along with sarah schechter and chris fedak; klemmer serves as showrunner. the series airs on the cw and is a spin-off from arrow and the flash, existing in the same fictional universe.   the series was renewed for a seventh season, which premiered on october 13, 2021.  series overview  episodes  season 1 (2016)  season 2 (2016-17)  season 3 (2017-18)  season 4 (2018-19)  season 5 (2020)  season 6 (2021)  season 7 (2021-22)  ratings  notes  references  episodes lists of american action television series episodes lists of american science fiction television series episodes lists of arrowverse episodes
a number of sportspeople eligible for the  2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro stated that they would not attend because of the ongoing zika virus epidemic in brazil. in the case of golf and tennis, media speculated that some absentees were unenthusiastic about competing in any case and used zika as a convenient excuse.  table  see also  list of athletes not attending the 2020 summer olympics due to covid-19 concerns  list of athletes not attending the 2022 winter olympics due to covid-19 concerns  footnotes  references  2016 summer olympics zika virus
kim yong-gyu (born 12 november 1971) is a south korean former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1971 births living people south korean male cyclists olympic cyclists of south korea cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling asian games bronze medalists for south korea cyclists at the 1990 asian games medalists at the 1990 asian games
the 22nd tvynovelas awards, is an academy of special awards to the best of soap operas and tv shows. the awards ceremony took place on march 3, 2004 in the mexico d.f. the ceremony was televised in the mexico by canal de las estrellas.  victor noriega and laisha wilkins hosted the show. amor real won 9 awards including best telenovela of the year, the most for the evening. other winners amarte es mi pecado and mariana de la noche won 2 awards and alegrijes y rebujos won one award.  summary of awards and nominations  winners and nominees  novelas  others  special awards 30 year career as an actress and singer: daniela romo career as an actress: ofelia guilmain best hostess and a pioneer in the internationalization of telenovela: veronica castro best comedy production: la parodia children rod by production: rosy ocampo career as an actor: aaron hernan  references  external links images 1 images 2 images 3 images 4 images 5 images 6  images 7 winners of 2004 tvynovelas awards  tvynovelas awards tvynovelas awards tvynovelas awards tvynovelas awards ceremonies
colierul de turcoaze is a 1986 romanian action film directed by gheorghe vitanidis.  cast   marga barbu - agatha slatineanu  florin piersic - margelatu  szabolcs cseh - buza de iepure   alexandru repan - serge troianoff  ion besoiu - domnitorul   george motoi - lt. deivos    jean constantin - „profesorul" aurica   constantin codrescu - c.a. rosetti   -    -   george motoi -    -    -   george pitis -   rodica popescu bitanescu -  references  external links   1986 action films 1986 films romanian films romanian action films
a number of notable controversies and concerns associated with the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro, brazil, emerged which were the subject of public debate and media commentary.  preexisting issues  zika virus  an outbreak of the mosquito-borne zika virus in brazil raised fears regarding its potential impact on athletes and visitors. organizers plan to perform daily inspections of olympic venues to prevent puddles of stagnant water that allow mosquitoes to breed. zika virus transmission was also attributed to inefficient sewage treatment in the area, and sewage treatment is being improved in preparation for the games.  there had been numerous calls for the games to be postponed, warning that the anticipated attendance of 500,000 international visitors could cause the virus to rapidly spread outside of the country. in the first quarter of 2016, there were also more cases of the mosquito-borne dengue fever than in 2015 alone. dr. amir attaran of the university of ottawa, writing for the harvard public health review, noted that rio had the highest concentration of zika infections out of all brazilian states. he argued that the olympics could result in a "global catastrophe" of zika outbreaks, and asserted that it was "socially irresponsible" and "ethically questionable" to allow them to continue. on the other hand, it has been argued that the threat of zika will not be as high during the games, citing computer models and simulations, as well as the fact that the games will be held during southern hemisphere winter, which is when mosquitoes are least active. the initial outbreak of zika in brazil occurred during the winter months, but in northeastern states near the equator, where there is no winter season throughout the year. tom frieden, director of the u.s. centers for disease control and prevention, stated that "there is no public health reason to cancel or delay the olympics".  in may 2016, a group of 150 physicians and scientists sent an open letter to the world health organization, calling upon them to, according to co-author arthur caplan, have "an open, transparent discussion of the risks of holding the olympics as planned in brazil". the who dismissed the request, stating that "cancelling or changing the location of the 2016 olympics will not significantly alter the international spread of zika virus", and that there was "no public health justification" for postponing them.  many athletes declined to participate in the games citing concerns over zika, including milos raonic, tomas berdych, simona halep, karolina pliskova,
the bryan brothers, jason day, tejay van garderen, branden grace, dustin johnson, shane lowry, rory mcilroy, marc leishman, charl schwartzel, angelo que and jordan spieth.  as the majority of the athletes that have pulled out were golfers, international golf federation president peter dawson believed that there was "something of an overreaction" to zika, stating that "i think i should say now that i don't think it's appropriate for us to discuss individual cases, especially as they're generally decisions that have been taken on health grounds. speaking collectively though, there is no doubt that the number of withdrawals hasn't shed golf in the best light. we have to accept that. but we do understand why these individual decisions have been taken".  on 2 september 2016, the who reported that there were no confirmed cases of zika among athletes or visitors during the olympics.  sanitation  the guanabara bay, whose waters were to be used for sailing and windsurfing competitions, is heavily polluted. among the chief causes of the pollution are uncollected trash fed into the bay via polluted rivers and shanty towns along the coast. pollution of the guanabara has been a long-term issue; although officials promised at the earth summit in 1992 that they would begin to address the pollution, previous attempts to do so were insufficient. as an aspect of their bid for the games, rio once again committed to making efforts towards cleaning the bay. however, some of these proposed initiatives faced budgetary issues.  before these efforts, only 17% of rio's sewage was treated; this raw sewage also leaked into the bay. in 2011, a new consortium took over the operations of rio's sewage system in its western "ap5" zone as a legacy project for the games. the consortium committed to building out upgrades to the sewage system that would reduce the amount of sewage flowing into the bay by 17 million gallons by the end of 2016. however, adoption of the new system was slow and inconsistent because of concerns by residents over installation costs. although mayor of rio eduardo paes stated that the city might not be able to reach its goal of having 80% of sewage treated, at least 60% of sewage was treated by march 2016, with a projected goal of 65% of sewage being treated by the time the olympics start.  the pollution also led to concerns over how it would affect competitions and the health of athletes, especially concerns that the polluted waterways could cause athletes to be unable to compete. in 2014, sailors
training in the bay told the new york times that they had to contend with dodging various forms of trash floating in its waters, ranging from tires to dog carcasses. that december, researchers from the oswaldo cruz foundation found drug-resistant "super bacteria"-kpc enzymes-in samples of water from the carioca river. they warned that "carriers can take these resistant bacteria back to their own environments and to other people, resulting in a cycle of dissemination". in 2015, it was found that because of open drainage and severe pollution, the incidence of "disease-causing viruses" in rio's waterways was measured to be "1.7 million times the level of what would be considered hazardous on a southern california beach". following a test event in august 2015, german sailor erik heil was found to have been infected with multi-resistant bacteria that are believed to have been connected to the sewage.  political instability and economic crisis  in 2014, operation car wash, an investigation by the federal police of brazil, uncovered unprecedented money laundering and corruption at the state-controlled oil company petrobras, where executives allegedly accepted bribes in return for awarding contracts to construction firms at inflated prices. in early 2015, a series of protests against alleged corruption by the government of president dilma rousseff began in brazil, triggered by revelations that numerous politicians were involved in the petrobras affair. by early 2016, the scandal had escalated into a full-blown political crisis affecting not only president rousseff, but also former president luiz inacio lula da silva, resulting in massive demonstrations all over the country involving millions of protesters, both anti and pro-rousseff. on 17 april 2016, the chamber of deputies (the lower house of the brazilian parliament) concluded a general vote for the admission of the impeachment process. at that moment, polls showed that 61% of brazilians believed rousseff should be impeached, but polls also showed almost the same amount of brazilians believed vice president michel temer, who was supposed to inherit the presidency following the impeachment process began as interim president, should be impeached too. in addition, senator romero juca, appointed as planning minister after rousseff's dismissal, was caught on tape with former oil executive sergio machado agreeing that removing rousseff is the only way for ending the investigation.  at the same time, brazil faces its worst economic recession since the 1990s, raising questions about whether the country is adequately prepared for the games against a volatile political and economic backdrop. according to one oecd spokesperson the brazilian recession will endure
until 2018 and can only be resolved by holding new elections. the ioc, in turn, has stated that it is following the political developments "very closely". on 14 april, the olympic security coordination assured that the economic and political crises would not affect the security and fulfillment of the games. in his speech during the olympic torch lighting ceremony in olympia, ioc president thomas bach commented on brazil's political situation: "this will be the brazilian games. despite the difficulties that the country faces, the event will bring a message of hope to every corner of its territory and also worldwide. the games will take place in a moment in which the world is shaken by crises. i want to pay tribute to the brazilian people, who, in a few weeks, will welcome the world with enthusiasm and will leave everyone amazed by its joy and its passion for sports".  on 12 may, president rousseff was stripped of her powers and duties for 180 days, after an impeachment vote in the federal senate, thus vice president temer will be acting president during the games. rousseff will not be invited to attend any event during the games. instead, the main invitation as head of state was sent to temer as acting president. temer's legitimacy has been questioned though. prior to the impeachment vote, the majority of brazilians supported holding new general elections as a way to solve the political crisis, while only 8% favored temer's rise to power. as a result of this perception, anti-temer protests are becoming larger and intenser, and some politicians have claimed the games will take place amidst political turmoil.  security  since rio de janeiro was awarded the 2016 summer olympics, the city's crime problems have received more attention. rio's mayor has admitted that there are "big issues" facing the city in securing the games from violence. however, he also said that such concerns and issues were presented to the ioc throughout the bidding process. the governor of the state of rio de janeiro also highlighted the fact that london faced security problems, with a terrorist attack occurring there on the day after the ioc chose london to host the 2012 summer olympics. the estimate was that 5,000 men of the national public security force and 22,000 military officers (14,800 army; 5,900 navy and 1,300 of the brazilian air force), in addition to the fixed quota of rio de janeiro, will act during the olympic games. many of these officers have been training for possible terrorist attacks, such as on the metro. to ensure that no unauthorized persons would be able
to enter the games, additional screening measures were enacted at venues.  the ioc has expressed optimism regarding the ability of the city and the nation of brazil to address these concerns,  saying that seven years is enough time for rio de janeiro to clean up its crime problem. ioc spokesman mark adams told the associated press, "we have confidence in their capacity to deliver a safe games in seven years. security is of course a very important aspect of any olympic games no matter where it is in the world. this is of course entirely under the national, regional and city authorities". luiz inacio lula da silva, former president of brazil, noted that the city has hosted other high-profile events without major incidents, for example the 2007 pan american games.  community-based police pacification units (upps) will be used to build trust in individual communities through the use of street patrols and civic work. moreover, the regional institute of public safety reported that the homicide rate of rio de janeiro for the first five months of 2012 was at its lowest in the past 21 years, with 10.9 homicides for every 100,000 inhabitants. despite the decline in homicides and human rights abuses, human rights watch urged brazil to investigate extrajudicial killings.  crime despite promises for increased security, there are still security concerns in rio, with 2,036 killings from january to april 2016. on 21 may 2016, three members representing spain were robbed at gunpoint in the santa teresa neighborhood of rio de janeiro, by five youths, two of whom were armed with pistols. in june 2016, one of the bodyguards for the mayor was mugged and killed while off duty; a doctor was killed while on an expressway; and the australian paralympic team was robbed at gunpoint. gang-related shootings on the red line expressway, the main road to the olympic site, were said to be commonplace and had claimed several lives, including that of a 17-year-old girl in may. the girl's murder and other incidents prompted some countries to consider bringing private security forces to the olympics.  on 30 june 2016, police near the olympic beach volleyball venue in copacabana found a foot and other body parts on the shore, possibly from "a woman or young adult" who had been killed. the officers said the parts washed on the sea, triggering possible concerns about the violence in rio.  on 21 july 2016, the federal police of brazil arrested ten members of an alleged islamic jihadist terrorist ring accused of planning attacks during the games. the ring was plotting to wreak
havoc in a manner similar to the 1972 munich massacre, with 10 isis associates arrested and two more on the run; the two people who had escaped were later arrested. there did not seem to be evidence of a sophisticated terrorist plot.  on 30 july 2016, a fire in the apartments where the australian olympic team prompted an evacuation. the fire was caused by a cigarette, even though olympic village is a no-smoking area. upon return to their rooms, the athletes found that 2 laptops and team shirts had been stolen. it was discovered that the fire alarms were deactivated before the fire with one athlete stating that he slept through the door-knocking and phone calls.  on 4 august 2016, the australian rowing coaches were robbed at knifepoint close to ipanema beach. one of the coaches was grabbed around the throat before the attackers fled with credit cards, mobile phones and an australian team blazer.  on 5 august 2016, the greek team in the olympic village reported to officials that many personal items had been stolen from their rooms in the olympic village including mobile phones, clothes and medical equipment.  on 12 august 2016, an athlete had $20,000 stolen by an olympic village employee. the worker was arrested and the money returned.  preparations  infrastructure concerns  while the whole city was undergoing major infrastructure improvements, there were concerns that some of the projects would not materialise. on 9 may 2014, the london evening standard reported ioc vice-president john coates calling brazil's preparations "the worst i've experienced" and went on to claim that construction and infrastructure projects were severely behind schedule. "the ioc has formed a special task force to try to speed up preparations but the situation is critical on the ground", the paper quoted him as saying, concluding that such an intervention was "unprecedented". despite these initial worries, the rio olympics committee reported on 29 december 2015 that most venues were complete except the rio olympic velodrome (76%) and the youth arena (75%). coates' concerns had previously been reported elsewhere in the media.  on 21 april-the day that the olympic torch was lit-a  section of the tim maia bike path, crossing the oscar niemeyer avenue in sao conrado neighborhood and a part of the legacy of the games, was hit by a giant wave and collapsed. two pedestrians fell into the ocean to their deaths, and three were injured. four days after the incident, rio's mayor eduardo paes announced that the bike path would be repaired before the olympics, and that the companies responsible for the path will
be punished.  the rio 2016 olympic village has been described as the largest in olympic history. some officials deemed the athletes' village as "unlivable" and unsafe because of major plumbing and electrical hazards still present a fortnight before the opening of the rio olympics. blocked toilets, leaking pipes, exposed wiring, unlight stairwells and dirty floors were among the reported problems at some apartments in the complex. the australian olympic team boycotted the village after officials deemed their assigned apartment tower blocks uninhabitable. a team of more than 500 employees of the local olympic committee worked to fix the problems reported by the delegations. the organizers of the rio olympics conceded that there were isolated cases of sabotage by employees during the construction of the rio 2016 village.  russian doping scandal and participation restrictions  media attention began growing in december 2014 when german broadcaster ard reported on state-sponsored doping in russia, comparing it to doping in east germany. in november 2015, the world anti-doping agency (wada) published a report and the international association of athletics federations (iaaf) suspended russia indefinitely from world track and field events. the united kingdom anti-doping agency later assisted wada with testing in russia. in june 2016, they reported that they were unable to fully carry out their work and noted intimidation by armed federal security service (fsb) agents. after a russian former lab director made allegations about the 2014 winter olympics in sochi, wada commissioned an independent investigation led by richard mclaren. mclaren's investigation found corroborating evidence, concluding in a report published in july 2016 that the ministry of sport and the fsb had operated a "state-directed failsafe system" using a "disappearing positive [test] methodology" (dpm) from "at least late 2011 to august 2015".  in response to these findings, wada announced that rusada should be regarded as non-compliant with respect to the world anti-doping code and recommended that russia be banned from competing at the 2016 summer olympics. the international olympic commission (ioc) rejected the recommendation, stating that the ioc and each sport's international federation would make decisions on each athlete's individual basis. one day prior to the opening ceremony, 278 athletes were cleared to compete under the russian flag, while 111 were removed because of doping. in contrast, the entire kuwaiti team was banned from competing under their own flag (for a non-doping related matter).  the ioc's decision on 24 july 2016 was widely criticized by both athletes and writers, as well as members of the olympic committee. a member of the ioc athletes
' commission, hayley wickenheiser, wrote, "i ask myself if we were not dealing with russia would this decision to ban a nation [have] been an easier one? i fear the answer is yes". writing for deutsche welle in germany, olivia gerstenberger said that the head of the ioc, thomas bach had "flunked" his first serious test, adding, "with this decision, the credibility of the organization is shattered once more, while that of state-sponsored doping actually receives a minor boost". bild (germany) described bach as "putin's poodle".  unlike the ioc, the international paralympic committee voted unanimously to ban the entire russian team from the 2016 summer paralympics and suspended the russian paralympic committee, having found evidence that the dpm was also in operation at the 2014 winter paralympics.  on 9 december 2016, canadian lawyer richard mclaren published the second part of his independent report. the investigation found that from 2011 to 2015, more than 1,000 russian competitors in various sports (including summer, winter, and paralympic sports) benefited from the cover-up. emails indicate that they included five blind powerlifters, who may have been given drugs without their knowledge, and a fifteen-year-old.  aviation incidents on 2 july 2016, two skydivers collided while performing a stunt, practicing for the olympics where the 28 skydivers would re-create the olympic rings in the sky during the opening ceremony. the two men's parachutes become tangled-up mid-air after they collided, causing them to fall to their deaths. one man died at the scene and the other died in a hospital. the two deceased men were named as gustavo correa garcez, a national champion, and instructor guilherme bastos padilha. the incident took place over boituva.  on 26 july 2016, two brazilian navy aircraft, af-1 skyhawks, collided in mid-air near rio de janeiro. they were training for the purpose of protecting the olympics. one of the airplanes' pilots was able to land despite the aircraft being damaged. the other pilot ejected safely before his plane crashed into the sea.  during the olympics  security on 6 august, a stray bullet was fired at a media tent at the equestrian center while about 100 media personnel were present. the bullet pierced the plastic roof of the tent and fell to the ground near a team great britain official and a british photographer. nobody was hurt during the incident.  on the same day, a "suspicious
package" was found near the finish line of the men's cycling road race. as a precaution, security forces performed a controlled explosion on it.  on 9 august, a bus carrying international media was traveling between the deodoro hockey venue and the main press center at barra da tijuca was attacked. stones thrown at the bus shattered windows. rio 2016 spokesman mario andrada said the attack was "worrying and intolerable".  on 10 august, a stray bullet was found inside the olympic equestrian centre close to the stable area. the head of rio 2016 communications, mario andrada, said he was in the stables "trying to find out what really happened".  organization  on 4 august, nigeria played japan in the men's football group stages. when the national anthem for nigeria was meant to be played, the niger national anthem was incorrectly played instead. the japan national anthem went normally. during the fourth minute of the game, the pa apologized for the mix-up.  initially, an incorrect version of the chinese national flag, on which the four smaller stars were pointing upwards (instead of slanted towards the larger star on the flag) was used in all official materials of the rio 2016 games, including the flag leading the athletes delegation at the opening ceremony, the flags used in award ceremonies, and the flag on the official rio 2016 mobile app. however, the mistake remained largely undetected until the first award ceremony featuring the chinese flag on the second day of the games, upon which the issue created a huge outcry in china, especially with initial media reports suggesting that the flags had been manufactured in china. initially, china's state run cctv america site published an article titled "rio olympics: 'made in china' will be everywhere", which stated "all the national flags that will be hoisted during the ceremony are made in china", but was quickly changed after the incident became public.  a spokesperson for the rio olympic committee admitted the mistake and apologized for it, but claimed that all flags had been approved by the respective national olympic committees. the chinese olympic committee did not respond to requests for comment, but the chinese consulate-general in rio de janeiro issued a formal diplomatic complaint and pressed the organizers of the games to replace the flags with new, correct ones as soon as possible. the chinese consulate-general in sao paulo dispatched officials to the flag manufacturer, located on the outskirt of sao paulo, to supervise the express production of new, correct flags. starting from 11 august (the seventh day of the games), the
correct version of the flag was used.  on 11 august, john coates, vice president of the ioc, stated that rio 2016 had been the "most difficult" games ever and crowd numbers are a "disappointment". coates said that swathes of empty seats at a number of venues have been a source of frustration for the body.  starting 9 august, the pool used for diving competitions began turning a green color instead of its natural blue, followed by the water polo pool the next day. several athletes reported that it affected their performance, either by preventing them from seeing underwater or hurting their eyes (possibly because of increased chlorine to counteract the problem). the color change was officially reported as being caused by a lack of chemicals used for the water treatment process, which resulted in the ph level of the pool to change. the diving pool was closed on 12 august after it began producing a sulfuric smell and was suggested to be a cause of eye itchiness among some athletes who competed within it. a report said that a sanitation contractor had added the dechlorinating sterilizer hydrogen peroxide to water that was already chlorinated, neutralizing the sterilizing effect of chlorine.  on 15 august, seven people, including an 11-year-old girl, were injured after an overhead tv camera crashed to the ground at the olympic park.  doping kenyan athletics coach john anzrah posed as one of his runners for a drug test. he presented himself as 800-metre runner ferguson rotich and even signed the documents for the drug tests. anzrah was sent home afterwards.  while swimming for the chinese national team at the 2016 summer olympics, chen xinyi tested positive for hydrochlorothiazide, a banned substance. following this, she was suspended from competition in the 2016 summer olympics by the court of arbitration for sport.  kirghiz athlete izzat artykov, bronze medalist in weightlifting of men up to 69 kg, was suspended from the games after strychnine had been found in his blood. he had to return his bronze medal.  on 8 december 2016 russian boxer misha aloyan was stripped of the silver medal in 52 kg boxing at the rio 2016 summer olympics after testing positive for tuaminoheptane.  unsportsmanlike crowds on 17 august, pole vault silver medallist renaud lavillenie was booed by the rio crowd for a second time in 24 hours. olympics chief thomas bach called the conduct of the crowd "shocking" and "unacceptable at the olympics".
iaaf chief lord coe consoled lavillenie after the incident.  boxing judging controversy surrounded the new judging system in boxing; the new system counts has five judges who judge each bout, and a computer randomly selects three whose scores are counted. traditionally, judges would use a computer scoring system to count each punch landed, but in 2016 the winner of each round was awarded 10 points and the loser a lower number, based on criteria which includes the quality of punches landed, effective aggression and tactical superiority.  two results in particular attracted controversy (both involving russian athletes whose victories were put in question): the defeat of vasily levit by russian evgeny tishchenko in the men's heavyweight gold-medal fight, drawing jeers from the audience, and the defeat of michael conlan by russian vladimir nikitin in the men's bantamweight quarter-final, after which conlan accused aiba and the russian team of cheating, even tweeting to russian president vladimir putin "hey vlad, how much did they charge you bro??"  the aiba would remove an unspecified number of judges and referees following the controversy, stating that they "determined that less than a handful of the decisions were not at the level expected" and "that the concerned referees and judges will no longer officiate at the rio 2016 olympic games"; however, the original decision would still remain.  on 30 september 2021, 6 years after the conclusion of the games, an independent report by professor richard mclaren confirmed that there was a system in place at the games that manipulated the results of boxing matches. the report stated that there were at least 11 fights at the rio games that were suspicious, including the controversial defeats of conlan and levit as well as the gold medal match between france's tony yoka and great britain's joe joyce. it was reported that there was possible favouritism towards the french team during the tournament as the executive director of the aiba, karim bouzidi, was french. other fights were reportedly manipulated to allow yoka an easier route to the final whilst there was a bribery attempt in a fight involving france's sofiane oumiha. the report also stated that there were 11 other fights that would have had different outcomes if the controversial new scoring system was not put in place.  swimming pool data  researchers are questioning whether a current in the pool may have affected swimming times giving some an unfair advantage in the rio olympics. data from the games seems to suggest that swimmers in one half of the pool had an unfair advantage over those in the other, and that this has been a persistent
problem in the sport.  joel stager, director of the indiana university's counsilman center for the science of swimming, and two researchers told the wall street journal that results seem to indicate swimmers in the higher-numbered lanes had a performance boost in the 50m, which has competitors swim one pool length.  there was a reverse effect for swimming the opposite direction. on a longer race which involves swimming more than one length of the pool, swimmers in the lower-numbered lanes had a boost on the return.  in results from the men's and women's 50m heats for every type of stroke in rio, the researchers found that almost all those who qualified for the final swam in lanes four to eight. athletes who then moved to the lower-numbered lanes showed a decrease in performance. only one medallist in the 50m swim came from the lower lanes - us swimmer anthony ervin.  lochtegate  lochtegate is a name of a scandal involving united states swim team members ryan lochte, jimmy feigen, gunnar bentz, and jack conger during the 2016 summer olympics held in rio de janeiro, brazil. while initial news stories reported that lochte and three other us swimmers had been robbed at gunpoint after a night out in rio, later details emerged that the "armed robbers posing as police" were actually security guards at a gas station where the swimmers had urinated outside the bathroom and lochte allegedly vandalized a framed poster, and ended with the swimmers providing money to the guards. some of the swimmers were detained in brazil as witnesses. ultimately, the athletes each released statements, and one swimmer paid a fine of approximately $10,800 to a brazilian charity in order to get his passport back. lochte apologized for not being more candid about the gas station dispute, and subsequently lost four major sponsorships.  on september 8, both the u.s. olympic committee and usa swimming suspended lochte for 10 months and bentz, conger, and feigen for four months. additionally, lochte was required to complete 20 hours of community service, and bentz was required to complete 10 hours. all were made ineligible for financial support during their suspensions, removed from the u.s. olympic delegation to the white house, barred from u.s. olympic training centers, and blocked from attending usa swimming's year-end golden goggles celebration.  lochte was charged in brazil with falsely reporting a crime.  the scandal gained significant media attention both during the games and after their conclusion. in july 2017, the court in brazil dismissed the charges against lochte
, saying his actions "did not rise to the level of filing a false crime report."  anti-israel incidents prior to the olympics, facebook allowed users to add the olympic logo and the team flag to their profile pictures; however, israel was not included on this list. the israeli flag was later added to the list; however, it was not listed alphabetically, but rather was included at the end of the list.  the lebanese delegation was assigned to ride from the olympic village to the opening ceremony on the same bus as the israeli delegation. the head of the lebanese team, salim al-haj nicolas, admitted that he demanded that the bus door be closed on the israeli team, and that the lebanese demanded that the israeli athletes not board the bus. udi gal, an israeli olympic sailor, said his team ultimately decided to travel separately to avoid an "international and physical incident", but added "how could they let this happen on the eve of the olympic games? isn't this the opposite of what the olympics represents?"  a saudi arabian judoka, joud fahmy, was accused of forfeiting her match in order to avoid competing against israeli gili cohen. fahmy, saudi arabia's news agency al arabiya, and the saudi olympic delegation said that fahmy forfeited because she received an injury. jim nieto, the martial arts instructor who coached her before the olympics, said it seemed fishy that she, after taking part in the opening ceremony, was reportedly injured so close to her fight date, because top competitors generally do not fight the day before their competition.  he said "i feel sorry for her. let her fight - even if she lasts 10 seconds. she busted her butt for almost a year to get there".  egyptian judoka islam el shehaby refused to shake hands with israeli or sasson, or to perform the traditional post-match bow (giving only a quick nod), after sasson defeated el shehaby in a first-round match in the heaviest weight class on 12 august. american coach jimmy pedro called the egyptian's behavior "completely dishonorable and totally unsportsmanlike". el shehaby was sent home early by the ioc and egypt's olympic committee for refusing to bow to his opponent and the mat.  ticket scandal  on 5 august, the day of the 2016 summer olympics opening ceremony, police in rio de janeiro arrested two people for attempted illegal resale of hundreds of tickets allocated to the olympic council of ireland (oci). one of the two was employed by thg sports, which was the
oci's authorised ticket reseller (atr) in 2012 but not 2016; the oci denied any involvement. shane ross, the irish minister of state at the, promised a "robust inquiry". pro 10 sports management, the oci's 2016 atr, said the man arrested was working as their agent to distribute tickets which had been paid for legitimately. on 17 august, pat hickey, the oci president, was arrested in rio in connection with the investigation.  policies on social media in october 2015, the ioc has new rules on social media it stated that "the use of olympic material transformed into graphic animated formats such as animated gifs (i.e. gifv), gfy, webm, or short video formats such as vines and others, is expressly prohibited." and also stated that "broadcasting images via live-streaming applications (e.g. periscope, meerkat) is prohibited inside olympic venues."  abandoned venues after the 2016 summer olympics and the 2016 summer paralympics, many of its olympic venues remained abandoned and unused just 6 months after the events. many of its photos depict of venues being run-down as a result of neglect from officials, including the maracana stadium where it was largely abandoned.  see also   concerns and controversies over the 2010 commonwealth games  controversies at the 2012 summer paralympics  list of athletes at the 2016 summer olympics with a prior doping offence  olympic games scandals and controversies  killing of juma the jaguar  references  2016 summer olympics 2016 controversies 2016 foreign relations of brazil
underground airlines is a 2016 novel by ben winters which is set in a contemporary alternate-history united states where the american civil war never occurred because abraham lincoln was assassinated prior to his 1861 inauguration and a version of the crittenden compromise was adopted instead. as a result, slavery has remained legal in the "hard four" (a group of southern states that have kept slavery): alabama, louisiana, mississippi and a unified carolina. its name evokes the underground railroad in relations to its setting. the novel attracted praise for exploring racism through the alternate-history mechanism.  plot the novel is narrated by victor, a former person bound to labor ('peeb') who, after escaping the hard four, has been forced to work as an undercover agent for u.s. marshal bridge, infiltrating and gathering evidence to prosecute fellow escapees and the people and organisations helping peebs escape slavery. if victor refuses to help, the agent has threatened to return him to the plantation from which he escaped; and he can be tracked by a device implanted in his spine if he tries to run.  as the novel opens, victor is tracking down the peeb escapee jackdaw, whose last known whereabouts have led victor to indianapolis. his trail ends at saint anselm's catholic promise, a seemingly derelict community center run by father barton. victor poses as jim dirkson, a consultant for indonesian cell carrier sulawesi digital, looking to expand into the united states, seeking to get his wife gentle out of the carolina plantation in which she is enslaved and into little america, a suburb of montreal mainly populated by african americans in exile.  victor befriends martha, a white woman with a mixed-race child, after they are ejected from a hotel for stealing from the breakfast buffet. eventually, victor locates jackdaw, who is revealed to be a freeborn african-american college student named kevin. he was sent by barton to infiltrate garments of the greater south, inc., purportedly to expose how they have been illegally selling slave-made goods to the rest of the united states (where such goods are unlawful) through shell companies located in malaysia. barton contends that this explosive revelation could bring down slavery, or at least assassinate the credibility of its proponents.  kevin, however, refuses to give up the location of the 'evidence' unless they also extract a slave girl he'd fallen for during his year behind the fence. in a commotion, he is shot dead by an indianapolis police officer who is working with father barton after he became enraged at
the news that the girl was probably dead.  victor is then coerced by father barton to go back to ggsi to retrieve the intel.  victor deduces something larger is at play and gets martha to play his 'missus' through the slavery-embracing hard four states so they can investigate ggsi. martha, for her part, is seeking access to torchlight; a centralized registry of every person bound to labor in the united states - specifically, she wants to find out what happened to samson, her son's father. victor decides to double-cross father barton, and makes another deal with bridge. he does not believe the intelligence being retrieved would make any difference, and decides to use the u.s. marshal service to secure his own freedom. bridge is compelled to play along after victor bluffs about the damaging nature of the evidence to the service.  at the fence, victor disguises himself as martha's slave, endures a dehumanizing inspection by internal border and regulation agents, and the two make their way to green hollow, alabama. in green hollow, victor sends martha back north and meets up with former peebs who hide out at a sympathetic old white lawyer's mansion; he is accommodated there as he prepares to insert himself into ggsi.   martha unexpectedly returns to victor's side, and they succeed in infiltrating ggsi's hq, obtaining the intel as well as information on samson. he and martha are unexpectedly abducted by impd officer cook, one of father barton's colleagues from indianapolis. it turns out that cook, like victor, is also an undercover agent for the marshal service; he betrays both father barton and victor to secure his own freedom. in the ensuing struggle, cook is shot dead.  when confronted by victor, father barton reveals that the evidence is much more horrifying: ggsi has been experimenting with the eggs of female slaves to genetically produce a new line of slaves who can be legally classified as non-humans. victor pretends to co-operate with barton. telling bridge he has the intel, they rendezvous in a makeshift operating tent off of a highway, so his tracking implant can be removed and bridge can give him a new identity. during the exchange, however, barton and his comrades ambush bridge, killing the medical technician he'd brought along, and is about to kill bridge, when victor says to spare him instead. in gratitude, bridge removes the implant himself, and victor passes out, waking up to an empty tent.  the novel ends with the undercover victor
and martha in chicago, checking into the hq of the elevator company that contracts with ggsi - plotting sabotage.  development history  winters cites ralph ellison's invisible man as a strong influence on the finished novel.  recognition  the novel was a finalist for the 2017 chautauqua prize, the 2017 southern book prize, the 2017 international thriller award, and the john w. campbell memorial award for best science fiction novel of the year. the book won the 2016 sidewise award for alternate history.  publication history  cover art the united states hardback edition cover was designed by oliver munday. an alternative cover for the uk edition featured a background with the stars and bars from the confederate battle flag.  reception in an early review, kirkus reviews called the novel's premise "worthy of philip k. dick ... smart and well-paced." the book debuted on the new york times hardcover best-seller list at #20, and was ranked #11 on the indie bestsellers list.  charles finch wrote, in a review for usa today, the novel had a "rather prosaic plotline" and "many of [the novel's] big turns are anticlimactic" but overall, it was "a swift, smart, angry new novel [that] illuminates all the ways that slavery has endured into the present day - by depicting an alternate world in which it has endured" and called it an astonishing feat of world-building.  in a review for the washington post, jon michaud found the "alternate history that does not feel fully realised [in] its rendering of popular culture" was "slightly distracting" but overall, the novel was a success "because its fiction is disturbingly close to our present reality." many reviewers probed the novel's premise and found it reasonable. maureen corrigan, writing for national public radio, called the novel "one suspenseful tale filled with double crosses and dangerous expeditions" set in "a disturbing but plausible alternate reality for the united states." kathryn schulz, reviewing the novel for the new yorker, said "winters gets the balance right. he is careful to set up a plausible case for how history shifted off-kilter ... and he paints a convincing picture of what fugitive life would look like in our own era.  racial controversy a profile in the new york times called the novel "creatively and professionally risky" for winters, as fellow author lev grossman was quoted describing winters as "fearless" for being "a white writer going after questions of what
it's like to be black in america." corrigan wrote that a white author imagining the thoughts and experiences of a black character was potentially controversial. other critics of the times profile felt that winters was being unfairly lionised, especially since the themes of science fiction, racism and slavery had in fact been explored before, most notably by african-american author octavia butler in her 1979 novel kindred.  winters had already acknowledged butler's influence in a blog post published three weeks before the profile in the times.  adaptation winters has written the pilot script for a television adaptation.  references  external links  reviews            2016 american novels american alternate history novels novels about american slavery novels set in the united states novels set in the 21st century american civil war alternate histories sidewise award for alternate history winning works novels set in indianapolis
{{infobox military unit |unit_name= 7th algerian tirailleur regiment | image=7e regiment de tirailleurs algeriens, type 3.jpg | image_size = 250 |caption= regimental insignia |dates= 1913-1964 |country= france  |allegiance= |branch= french army |type= tirailleurs  |role= |size= |command_structure= |garrison= |equipment=  |current_commander= |ceremonial_chief= |colonel_of_the_regiment= |notable_commanders=  |identification_symbol= |identification_symbol_2=  |nickname= |patron= |motto= " la victoire ou la mort " (victory or death) |colors= |march= |mascot= |battles= world war iworld war iiindochina war |anniversaries= |decorations= |battle_honours= artois 1915 champagne 1915 verdun 1915 soissonnais 1918 picardy 1918 aisne 1918 levant 1920-1921 morocco 1925-1926 fondouk el okbi (tunisia) 1943 rome 1944 marseille 1944 vosges 1944 indochina 1947-1954 afn 1952-1962 }}  the 7th algerian tirailleurs regiment was an infantry unit of the french army, part of the army of africa.  active between 1913 and 1946, the unit is one of the most decorated of the french army. the regiment distinguished itself in world war i, when the unit was cited six times at the orders of the armed forces and awarded the legion d'honneur. during world war ii, it was part of the 3rd algerian infantry division (3e dia), notably in the italian campaign with the french expeditionary corps of general alphonse juin, and was cited three times at the orders of the armed forces  dissolved in 1964, the regiment became the 170th infantry regiment ().   creation and names   1913: creation of the 7th marching tirailleurs regiment, (7e rmt).  1919: named the 7th algerian tirailleurs regiment, (7e rta).  1962: designated 7th tirailleurs regiment.  1964: dissolved 1 july and re-formed as the 170th infantry regiment.  history  world war i  the 2nd battalion of the regiment remained in north africa. it was part of the moroccan division and fought alongside the marching regiment of the foreign legion, the 4th tunisian tirailleurs regiment and the 8th zouaves regiment
.   1914   deployment of the iiird and ivth army on the marne  5-13 september: first battle of the marne  first battle of ypres:  bois triangulaire  12 november: north of ypres   1915   28 january: flanders: grande dune near nieuport  second battle of artois:  cote 140  9 may: vimy ridge  25 september - 6 october: second battle of champagne  butte de souains  25 september: bois sabot  1916  4 july: battle of the somme: belloy-en-santerre  1917   17 april: mont-sans-nom, auberive  verdun  1918  26 april: villers-bretonneux, bois du hangard  29 may - 1 june: , missy-aux-bois, chaudun  12 june: amblemy  saint-pierre-aigle, daumiers  july 1918: chaudun  28 august - 17 september: tunnel of vauxaillon, neuville-sous-marginal   casualties  from 1914 to 1918, losses for the 7th marching tirailleurs regiment were: 2326 killed or missing (97 officers, 232 junior officers, 260 corporals and 1737 soldiers).  throughout this war, the 7th regiment collectively obtained 31 citations and 464 medals.   interwar period  in 1928, the 7e rta adopted the designation of 11e rta then went back to 7e rta. in 1936, the 7e rta was garrisoned at constantine, algeria.  world war ii   composition of the regiment  during the second world war, one north-african tirailleur regiment consisted of a little more than 3000 men (of which 500 officers and junior officers) and 200 vehicles. the proportion of maghrebis reached 69% for the regiment, 74% for the battalion, 79% for the company of fusiliers-voltigeurs, 52% for the anti-tank company and 36% for the cannon infantry company.   campaigns   1939: part of the 83e dia ()  1943: belonged to the 3rd algerian infantry division  january to may 1944: battle of monte cassino  august 1944: disembarkation at provence, liberation of toulon and marseille  fall - winter 1944: alps, jura, alsace, vosges, capture of mulhouse and the defense of strasbourg   collective citations  throughout the course of the second world war, the 7e rta obtained ten collective citations at the orders of the armed forces (
three for the regiment, four for battalions, and three for companies).   casualties  the 3rd algerian infantry division 3e dia recorded 809 killed in action in the 7th rta from november 1942 to may 1945, of whom 614 were maghrebis (75%) and 195 europeans (25%).   indochina war  four marching battalions were constituted successively to fight in the first indochina war, which included the heavy usage of colonial forces. the 5th marching battalion (v/7e rta), under chief of battalion roland de mecquenem, was at the battle of dien bien phu during the gabrielle resistance. after a heavy artillery bombardment they retreated from the viet minh's 308th infantry division.   algerian war  the 7e rta fought in the algerian war, in the corps of the 21st infantry division, in the sector of aures nemencha. at the cease-fire on 19 march 1962, the regiment constituted along with 91 other regiments, a local unit force of the algerian order of battle, the 427 ufl-ufo composed of 10% of metropolitan military and 90% of muslim military personnel at barika, during the transition period, while being at the service of the executive provisionary power of algeria until the independence of algeria (evian accords, 18 march 1962).  following that, the regiment was back in france in 1962, and garrisoned until 1964, when the unit was dissolved to form the 170th infantry regiment.   traditions   regimental colors    decorations  the regimental colors are decorated with:   legion d'honneur (1919):  cited for the first world war  croix de guerre 1914-1918 with:  six palms one vermeil star  croix de guerre 1939-1945 with:  three palms  croix de guerre des theatres d'operations exterieures with:  three palms (one for the levant, one for indochina and one for morocco)     fourragere:  colors of the legion d'honneur with olives of the colors of the croix de guerre 1939-1945  the regiment was the first indigenous to be awarded the fourragere with the colors of the croix de la legion d'honneur (1914-1918).   battle honours  artois 1915 champagne 1915 verdun 1915 soissonnais 1918 picardy 1918 aisne 1918 levant 1920-1921 morocco 1925-1926 fondouk el okbi 1943 rome 1944 marseille 1944 vosges 1944 indochina 1947-1954 afn 1952-1962   regimental commanders   lt-colonel fellert: august 1914 -
september 1914  lt-colonel leveque: october 1914 - december 1914  cdt jacquot: december 1914 - january 1915  lt-colonel demetz: january 1915 - february 1916  lt-colonel schuhler: february 1916 - may 1916  lt-colonel schultz: may 1916 - may 1918  lt-colonel mensier: june 1918   regimental commanders  1913 - 1914: colonel mathieu  1914 - 1916: lt-colonel laurent  1916 - 1916: lt-colonel demaris  1916 - 1916: lt-colonel delom  1916 - 1917: cdt pimont  1917 - 1918: lt-colonel felici  1918 - 1918: cdt conneau  1918 - 1918: lt-colonel vaissieres  1918 - 1918: colonel fropo  1918 - 1919: colonel lamiable  1919 - 1920: lt-colonel fadat  1920 - 1920: cdt de font reaulx  1920 - 1920: cdt diard  1920 - 1920: lt-colonel fadat  1920 - 1920: cdt diard  1920 - 1920: cdt de font reaulx  1920 - 1924: colonel lemaitre  1924 - 1928: colonel pidaud  1928 - 1930: colonel pichon  1930 - 1933: colonel de tassy de montluc  1933 - 1937: colonel watrin  1937 - 1940: colonel richard  1940 - 1942: colonel cortot  1942 - 1943: colonel regnault  1943 - 1944: colonel chappuis  1944 - 1944: lt-colonel pichot  1944 - 1945: colonel goutard  1945 - 1947: colonel lardin  1947 - 1948: colonel allard  1948 - 1950: colonel du passage  1950 - 1952: colonel costantini  1952 - 1954: colonel derville  1954 - 1956: colonel arfouilloux  1956 - 1958: colonel de raffin de la raffinie  1958 - 1960: colonel chevallier  1960 - 1961: colonel ahmed rafa  1961: colonel breil   honorary arms particular to the regiment   combats of 9 may 1915 in artois.  combats of 25 september 1915 in champagne.  combats of 20 august 1917 at verdun.  combats of april 1918 in the somme.  combats of 29 to 31 may and 18 to 20 july in aisne.  combats of 2 september to september 1918 in the aisne.  combats of 17 april 1917 in champagne.   officers and tirailleurs  general jacques schmitt (1919-
2005), volunteer in 1941. twelve citations, commander of the legion d'honneur.   see also  3rd algerian tirailleurs regiment  references  bibliography  les africains, historama, hors-serie n° 10, 1970  anthony clayton, histoire de l'armee francaise en afrique 1830-1962, albin michel, 1994  l'armee d'afrique: 1830-1962, charles-lavauzelle, 1977  de setif a marseille, par cassino, (preface by general jean delaunay - commentary by colonel henri ortholan) editions anovi 2007  general jacques schmitt, journal d'un officier de tirailleurs (1944)'' (preface by colonel ortholan), editions bernard giovanangeli, 2010.  external links   tirailleurs regiments of france colonial regiments of france 20th-century regiments of france military units and formations established in 1919 military units and formations disestablished in 1964
cloverbrook was an american thoroughbred racehorse that won the 1877 preakness stakes and belmont stakes, races that would become the second and third legs of the u.s. triple crown series.  cloverbrook was the first horse to win the preakness stakes that had been bred and trained in maryland. he was bred and raced by edwin augustus clabaugh of carroll county, maryland and trained by jeter walden, a brother to hall of fame trainer r. wyndham walden.  pedigree  references  1874 racehorse births racehorses bred in maryland racehorses trained in the united states preakness stakes winners belmont stakes winners byerley turk sire line thoroughbred family 15-d
philip turpitz (born 23 august 1991) is a german professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for turkgucu munchen.  references  external links  1991 births living people association football midfielders german footballers stuttgarter kickers players fc schalke 04 ii players sportfreunde lotte players chemnitzer fc players 1. fc magdeburg players sv sandhausen players fc hansa rostock players turkgucu munchen players 2. bundesliga players 3. liga players
hodgkinson's marked tree is a heritage-listed tree at rocklands station, camooweal, city of mount isa, queensland, australia. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992.  history  hodgkinson's marked tree on the northeastern shore of lake mary, rocklands station, near camooweal, was marked during william oswald hodgkinson's north-west expedition of 1876 to identify new grazing land in far western queensland. this was the last government-sponsored exploratory expedition in queensland, taking hodgkinson to the diamantina, mulligan and herbert rivers, then north to normanton via the gregory, cloncurry and flinders rivers.  explorer william landsborough was the first european to pass through the camooweal area. at the time (1861-62) he was looking for burke and wills. his reports led to the area being settled by pastoralists who established sheep runs in the district a few years after his expedition. the first settler to the area was john sutherland, who with john frazer and william hanson of sydney successfully applied for the rocklands lease in 1865. loss of stock to dingos combined with isolation, scarcity of labour and transport difficulties forced him to abandon his lease.  in september 1875 the lease was auctioned and benjamin crosthwaite purchased rocklands. in september 1876 william oswald hodgkinson during his north west exploration camped beside lake mary on crosthwaite's property, near the station homestead on the eastern side of the lake, just north of the later town of camooweal.  william oswald hodgkinson first visited australia in 1851 as a midshipman. by 1853 he was working for the victorian colonial government until returning to england . in 1859 he returned to australia to join the literary staff of the age newspaper. he started with the ill-fated burke and wills expedition in 1860 and the following year joined in john mckinlay's search for them. he founded newspapers in rockhampton and mackay before moving to the ravenswood gold fields in 1868. in 1870 he was appointed mining warden and police magistrate on the etheridge goldfield and in 1876 james venture mulligan named the hodgkinson goldfield after him. hodgkinson was member of the legislative assembly for burke in 1874-75, resigning to lead the north west expedition. from 1878 to 1886 he served as mining warden on the etheridge, the palmer and at gympie. he was a member of the queensland parliament on several occasions, serving as minister of mines and works from 12 december 1887 to 13 june 1888 and minister of mines and public instruction from 12 august 1890 to 27 march 1893.  by correspondence dated 29 september 1875,
hodgkinson was instructed by the queensland government to seek out pastoral country known to exist on the diamantina river and areas to its west towards the border with south australia's northern territory (now the northern territory). in 1877, hodgkinson's report of his explorations from 13 april to 27 september 1876 was published in the votes and proceedings of the queensland parliament.  on 17 september 1876 hodgkinson traversed country below the junction of rankin's creek with the herbert river, which had been occupied before but abandoned due to the pastoral crisis of 1866 and the scarcity of labour and transport. by 26 september hodgkinson had travelled up the herbert river to lake mary, where he found landsborough's camp 22 marked tree of "xmas 1861".  like landsborough, hodgkinson also camped on the shores of lake mary. he too marked a tree to show that his north-west expedition had been there, reporting that he used a "broad arrow over h over lxxxviii over 27-10 over 1876". on the map attached to his report he noted this camp as marked by a broad arrow over lxxxviii over sep 27 over 1876, and the entry date in his report is 27 september, not october. this was the last tree that hodgkinson reported as marking during the 1876 expedition, but the map accompanying his report indicates further camp sites as the expedition continued north east along the gregory river. whether trees were marked at these other camps is not indicated on the 1876 map, but a 1920 survey plan showing pastoral holdings in this area indicates that hodgkinson had marked a tree at camp 90 (broad arrow over h over xc over o), near where he crossed the o'shanassy river. it is likely a tree was marked at each camp site as this was the usual practice of exploratory parties, so that others might follow.  hodgkinson's marked tree at rocklands station was entered in the national trust of queensland's register of significant trees in 1983. at that time a photograph attached to the nomination showed that the original markings were still visible. the place was entered in the queensland heritage register in august 1992 under the transitional provisions of the queensland heritage act 1992.  on christmas day 2003 a family group travelled by boat up the georgina river from camooweal to lake mary to check on the hodgkinson tree and found it was healthy and still leaning over the lake.  description  the hodgkinson tree is a mature coolibah tree (eucalyptus microtheca) on the northeastern bank of lake mary, in the rocklands station homestead paddock north of camooweal. it leans over the lake, which is part of the georgina river system
.  the national trust of queensland holds a photocopy of a  photograph of the tree, showing carved into a branch, above a fork in the trunk, a broad arrow over h over lxxxviii over sep 27 over 1876.  these markings are believed to be still visible.  heritage listing  hodgkinson's marked tree was listed on the queensland heritage register on 21 october 1992 having satisfied the following criteria.  the place is important in demonstrating the evolution or pattern of queensland's history.  this coolibah tree was marked on 27 september 1876 to record camp 88 of william oswald hodgkinson's government-sponsored north-west expedition in search of unexplored pastoral country in far western queensland. the tree marked the end of hodgkinson's main exploratory work during this expedition, the country further north being reasonably well known by this date. due to hodgkinson's efforts valuable pastoral lands were opened, leading to the viable development of far western queensland. hodgkinson's marked tree is symbolic of the nature and pattern of exploration of the australian interior in the mid 19th century and is important surviving evidence of this principal theme in queensland's history.  the place has a special association with the life or work of a particular person, group or organisation of importance in queensland's history.  this marked tree has a special association with the work of william oswald hodgkinson, an explorer, journalist, goldfields warden/police magistrate and politician who in many and varied activities made a significant contribution to the development of queensland from the 1860s to the 1890s.  references  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register camooweal individual trees in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register
eunidia kinduensis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1948.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1948
mark makama tanko (born 1 may 1996) is an nigerian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder for national independent soccer association side los angeles force.  career born in abuja in nigeria, tanko began his playing career in mexico as part of the youth squad for club tijuana. in 2016, tanko was loaned to dorados de sinaloa of ascenso mx and he made his professional debut in a copa mx match against queretaro on 27 july.  in 2019, tanko left tijuana and signed with serie a de mexico side pioneros de cancun. he played 9 matches for the club before moving to the united states.  during the summer of 2019, tanko moved to usl league two club ventura county fusion where he played 11 matches during the season. after playing with the fusion, tanko signed with the los angeles force of the national independent soccer association. he played in the force's west coast championship match against california united strikers fc, in which he earned a yellow card in the 81st minute. tanko also scored a penalty during the penalty shootout but couldn't prevent the club from losing 5-3 during penalties.  references  1996 births living people nigerian footballers association football midfielders club tijuana footballers dorados de sinaloa footballers pioneros de cancun footballers ventura county fusion players los angeles force players ascenso mx players usl league two players national independent soccer association players nigerian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in mexico expatriate soccer players in the united states
sir john cornwall (c.1366-1414) was an english soldier, politician and landowner, who fought in the hundred years' war and against the glyndwr rising. he had considerable prestige, claiming royal descent. as he was part of the lancastrian affinity, the retainers of john of gaunt, he received considerable royal favour under henry iv. he represented shropshire twice in the house of commons of england. however, he regularly attracted accusations of violence, intimidation and legal chicanery. towards the end of his life he fell into disfavour and he died while awaiting trial in connection with a murder.  background  john cornwall was the son of brian de cornwall (died 1391) of kinlet, shropshire, second son of edmund de cornwall of thonock, lincolnshire, and maud le strange, daughter of fulk, 1st baron strange of blackmere.  edmund de cornwall, john's grandfather, was the eldest son of sir richard of cornwall, an illegitimate son of richard, 1st earl of cornwall, a very wealthy brother of henry iii who was also for a time king of the romans. hence the entire cornwall line could justly claim descent from king john. before the cornwalls, their chief manor of kinlet had belonged to brian brampton, who died late in 1294. his inquisition post mortem revealed a considerable portfolio of estates in the counties of shropshire and herefordshire in the welsh marches. edmund took custody of the brampton estates during the minority of brian de brampton's daughters and heiresses, margaret and elizabeth, under a grant made by edward i on 2 january 1305, which called him the "king's yeoman and kinsman". however, it seems the grant was only in confirmation, as cornwall had levied scutage on the brampton estates in 1300. he acquired kinlet by marrying elizabeth, the younger of the two heiresses: she was born on 16 december 1294, probably after her father's death. this brampton inheritance included other estates, like ashton in herefordshire and idbury in oxfordshire. edmund served his cousin the king in the first war of scottish independence, perhaps with some distinction and cost to himself, as the fact is mentioned in a royal licence to fell and sell 100 oaks in the wychwood. after his death in 1354, his estates passed initially to his eldest son, also called edmund, said variously to be 30 or 40 or more years of age, whose only son predeceased him sine prole.  brian, as second son, had been recorded as tenant of idbury
, along with robert harley, the husband of his aunt margaret brampton, as early as 1346. he was granted a collection of shropshire estates by his mother, and ultimately inherited also those in herefordshire and oxfordshire, but not thonock. he had already proved himself in battle, going to france in 1346 in the retinue of john, 2nd baron strange of blackmere, under the overall command of richard fitzalan, 10th earl of arundel. there he fought in the battle of crecy and the siege of calais, winning valuable exemptions from tax and future services. at some point he married john le strange's sister, maud, and john was their eldest surviving son, born around 1366. john had three brothers, henry, brian and thomas, who all died without issue. he also had a sister, isabel. in 1383 she married john blount of sodington, who twice served as mp for worcestershire.  landowner  brian cornwall died in 1391. the date is variously given as 5 may, and 18 august: the inquisition held at standlake, oxfordshire, in early september recorded it as the friday after the assumption and stated that john, his heir, was 24 and more years of age - the best evidence for his birth date. it noted that his estates in the county included the manor of asthall-under-wychwood, which was held in chief: this was a property that went back to richard of cornwall himself, who was granted it in 1227 by his brother, henry iii. there was also idbury, held of the earl of march. the inquisition taken at bridgnorth the following day recorded the manor of kinlet, also held of the earl of march, as worth nothing beyond outgoings. it also listed various pieces of land in the vicinity of kinlet, including a small estate at catsley. at leominster an inquisition recorded brian's moiety of ashton as held in joint feoffment with his wife maud, who had survived him. the succession posed few legal issues and on 25 september the escheators were ordered to hand over to john cornwall all his lands held in chief.  three years earlier, john had agreed to allow his mother two thirds of ashton for her lifetime, which was over and above her dower. maud had omitted to present her proofs of ownership at idbury and the inquest had left open the question of the terms on which it was held. in november the king, richard ii, gave her extra time to complete the formalities, promising not
to penalise the escheator for the resulting deficient accounts. as ashton was not held in chief but of the earl of march, the king gave orders on 8 february 1392 to have it released to maud without delay. the whole question of maud's dower now appeared settled, with the escheator of oxfordshire ordered to take her oath and release the property on 30 april, and his counterpart in shropshire simply to assign the dower. however, further delays did actually occur, perhaps as a result of the handover to a new escheator in oxfordshire, who was ordered to meddle no further with the idbury estate in may 1393. in addition to the lands revealed by the inquisitions, john cornwall inherited small estates close to the welsh border, including a moiety of worthen, which had been listed among edmund cornwall's holdings and took in an area of the forest of caus.  although he inherited several estates, john cornwall was not left with great wealth. his mother took the proceeds of well over a third of the estates while she lived. moreover, kinlet, the shropshire seat seems to have been especially unprofitable, producing no surplus. cornwall did not even acquire the advowson of kinlet church with the lordship: it was held and exercised by the abbot and convent of  wigmore abbey. the dire situation here was not unusual, as 14th century had been a time of great suffering in the countryside, with a major agrarian crisis in 1315-22 and the onset of the black death in 1349. in the worst times, shropshire inquisitions declared estates worthless or nearly so, and landowners sometimes struggle to meet even modest rents, mainly because it was hard to find tenants or labour in the depopulated countryside, although this placed the survivors in an advantageous bargaining position. landlords tended to suffer from the falling value of their estates until at least the 1370s but there was then an upturn and the last decades of the century were a time of growing, if modest, prosperity.  cornwall also acquired control of the manor of eastham, worcestershire by marriage to joan wasteneys or westneys. before joan's father, sir william wasteneys there had been a fairly rapid succession of manorial lords at eastham, where the advowson belonged to the lord of the manor, allowing a succession to be traced through the details of presentations to the rectory in the episcopal registers. in june 1349, just after the onset of the black death, it was thomas de doverdale who presented to the
church but in may 1357 it was joan de carru. in 1361, a peak plague year, john de la more and john fyman, chaplain, were described as "lords of eastham" when presenting william de la more to the church. walter hewet, grandfather of cornwall's wife, appears in 1368, alongside the priest william de la more, among a group who obtained a licence to enlarge their park at eastham by 300 acres. by 1381 sir william wasteneys was in charge, approving an exchange of clergy. however, another exchange took place on 28 october 1395. and this time the patron was not sir william, but his wife dame alice. not until january 1405 does sir john cornwall appear as the patron, jointly with his son-in-law william lichfield and chaplain john leye. it seems that he had to wait some time before effective control at eastham. moreover, the value of the manor was not high, given as just 20 marks in a chancery inquisition of 1431 after the death of roger corbet, who married cornwall's granddaughter. during cornwall's time eastham was held of richard beauchamp, 13th earl of warwick.  political and military career  active service and royal favour  cornwall formally entered the lancastrian affinity on 12 march 1395 at saint-seurin in bordeaux through an indenture with john of gaunt. this was at a time of truce in the hundred years' war, with richard ii's effective power confined to very small enclaves along the west coast of france. cornwall was still an esquire and the indenture is unusual in giving him both wages and bouche of court - a privilege reserved for knights. he promised to serve gaunt tant en temps de pees come de guerre al terme de sa vie - alike in times of peace and war to the end of his life. he was bound to turn out for war mounted and arrayed in a way suitied to his station in life. in return he was assigned an annuity of 20 marks, drawn from the revenues of the manor of aldbourne in wiltshire. the payment would rise to £20 when he was knighted.  simon walker's study of the lancastrian affinity lists cornwall as plain john, beneath sir john cornwall, also a long-serving member of gaunt's retinue who received the £20 appropriate to a knight. cornwall of kinlet is recorded as receiving his 20 marks up to 1399. on 9 june 1397 john cornewale, knight, was listed
as one of those granted royal protection for the expedition to ireland, commanded by roger mortimer, 4th earl of march, the king's lieutenant. mortimer was overlord at kinlet and ashton, and medieval records are fairly imprecise about knightly status, which makes it quite probable this cornwall was the subject of this article. however, there is a strong possibility that it was actually his namesake, who later became baron fanhope.  as an established part of the lancastrian affinity, cornwall benefited from the overthrow of richard ii in 1399 and was in immediately in favour with henry iv. he was knighted and was made sheriff of shropshire on the first day of the new reign. his annuity was also confirmed. however, his good standing with the new regime was soon threatened by allegations of criminality.  withiford rustling case  cornwall was accused of cattle rustling at wytheford (also rendered withiford) in shropshire in april 1401. cornwall claimed, through his attorney, that he had been acting on behalf of john de knyghteley. in support of this he offered a long and complex supporting narrative, starting with the death of thomas de charlton, who had held the estate until 1388, and whose heirs were minors. the king had sold their marriages and the custody of their estates to speculators, who in turn sold them to knyghteley. however, the custody had itself now descended to a minor, and cornwall claimed to be acting in his interests to reclaim arrears. the case affected the king's interests, as the plaintiffs, who were demanding £100, alleged that their cattle had already been taken into the custody of the county escheator when cornwall removed them. by the time the case came up for trial in 1402, john darras was  sheriff of shropshire. darras could be relied upon to assist cornwall as he was both a personal friend and had been married to joan corbet, his first cousin. in april 1402 he was one of four local gentry who made mainprise (essentially similar to bail) at westminster for cornwall that he would keep the peace, creating a conflict of interest. the case was moved to the shrewsbury assizes by a writ of nisi prius and there the plaintiffs claimed that darras had allowed cornwall to nominate the panel of jurors. consequently, the jury was dismissed, the case adjourned, and darras ordered to summon new jurors for the next assizes. darras was also the returning officer when cornwall was elected to parliament.  member of parliament
, 1402  cornwall was returned as a member of the house of commons of england, with sir adam de peshale. during the course of the parliament he accused maud copel, also known as knyton, of being a spy for owain glyndwr, leader of the welsh rebellion. maud was imprisoned on his accusation but doubts seem to have arisen fairly quickly and on 17 october the king ordered her release, on the grounds that there were credible witnesses to the contrary.  the welsh rebellion  the glyndwr rising now loomed large in cornwall's career. in september 1403 he was ordered by the king to garrison and to hold manorbier castle. presumably he did this efficiently as he was next given a major organisational task. instructions given to cornwall, john burley and thomas young, at the parliament of 1404, which took place in coventry, but they were embodied in a formal commission on 24 march 1405. they were to supervise the musters of troops in shropshire and cheshire and to report back on numbers, as prince henry had been appointed the king's lieutenant in north wales and needed 500 men-at-arms and up to 3000 archers for a punitive expedition.  both of cornwall's collaborators, burley and young were key members of the arundel affinity. the fitzalan earls of arundel were the richest and most important landowners in shropshire, and had long been so. richard ii had executed richard fitzalan, 11th earl of arundel, one of the lords appellant, in 1397. his brother, archbishop thomas arundel, and his dispossessed son, thomas fitzalan, 12th earl of arundel, were supporters of henry iv in his bid for power. the restored young earl dominated the politics and parliamentary representation of shropshire through his extensive network of retainers, which included soldiers, landowners, lawyers and clerics. cornwall's friend john darras was a member of the arundel affinity, valued by the earl and the king for his service in wales. arundel himself was closely involved in mobilising and commanding troops for the welsh campaigns. on 7 october 1405, cornwall, burley and roger haldenby, a cleric, were commissioned to raise troops for him to garrison castles in north wales and shropshire. on the same day cornwall, arundel and burley were issued a commission of oyer and terminer to hunt down people in shropshire who were secretly supplying the rebels. in january 1406 prince henry was commissioned to extend his operations to south wales, while cornwall, burley and haldenby were commissioned to raise further troops
in the welsh marches. in june of that year, perhaps in connection with the campaigns and investigations, the king issued a pardon to one of cornwall's servants from worcestershire.  member of parliament, 1407  cornwall was knight of the shire for shropshire again in 1407, returned alongside david holbache, a man of welsh origins, a close aide and lawyer to arundel.  keeper of morfe and shirlett  cornwall's friend, john darras hanged himself at his own manor of neenton in 1408, the first notice of the suicide being a commission from the king, issued on 30 march, to four shropshire gentry to investigate possible concealment of the deceased's goods. darras had been keeper of morfe and shirlett, areas of royal forest on either side of the severn in shropshire, a post his he held in recognition of his military service in the welsh campaigns. soon after his suicide, on 2 april, the king conferred the office on cornwall, described as a "king's knight." the grant made clear the value of the appointment, "with all wages, fees, profits and commodities as john darras, deceased, had while he lived." this was a rectification of previous confusion, as the keepership seems to have been promised to one nicholas gerard. cornwall seems to have been a trusted man at this point, as on 5 april he and burley were among those commissioned to investigate a murder in shropshire. such judicial tasks continued, with cornwall delivering writs and making arrests for the king.  however, cornwall proved himself overbearing and vexatious in office. in march 1410 the king ordered arundel and his legal team, john burley, david holbache and thomas young, with the addition of lord furnival, one of arundel's rivals, to investigate breaches of customary manorial and grazing rights at worfield in morff forest, made by arundel's brother-in-law, william de beauchamp, 1st baron bergavenny. beauchamp's complaint did not cite cornwall by name but mentioned only "certain evildoers." he alleged he had been hindered in his view of frankpledge and in holding his biannual court leet and that both he and his tenants were not able freely to enjoy their customary common pasture, both within and without the royal forest. it was reckless of cornwall to challenge a man so powerful on his own account and so closely connected to arundel. however, there had been similar complaints from william ferrers, 5th baron ferrers of gro
by. clearly cornwall was not deterred by aristocratic and royal concern, as joan beauchamp, arundel's sister made an almost identical complain about cornwall in late 1411 or early 1412, after she was widowed, and the same team was once again commissioned to investigate. the following year the king received a complaint from john marshall, dean of his royal free chapel at bridgnorth, this time naming cornwall clearly as the culprit. marshall alleged that he and the king's tenants at claverley were being forced to pay an annual fine to access their time-honoured common grazing for sheep, pigs and other animals. even before sending in arundel's lawyers to investigate, the king secured cornwall's resignation and on 13 february 1413 installed roger willey, darras's old business partner, as keeper of morfe and shirlett in his place.  murder charge and death  in april 1413 a group of midlands gentry, led by william lichfield, cornwall's son-in-law, made mainprise of £100 for him at westminster and he undertook, under a pain of £500, to do no harm to anyone. this was a prelude to a case tried at court of king's bench at shrewsbury in trinity term. henry v was present in person, along with william hankford, the chief justice of the king's bench, in response to complaints about the prevalence of bad governance and murder in shropshire made at the fire and faggot parliament in leicester, earlier that year. the business was dominated by the aftermath of large-scale violence between the arundel affinity and the followers of lord furnival in 1413. however, cornwall was accused of procuring henry cornwall of catsley, possibly his own illegitimate son, to commit a murder and of harbouring him after the event. henry seems to have had a reputation for violence, as he was also accused of a serious assault on a cleric in 1412. the murder had taken place in august 1413 at sir john cornwall's own manorial court in kinlet, emphasising the likelihood of his complicity.  before the case against him could proceed further, cornwall died on the thursday after the feast of saints peter and paul, which was 3 july 1414.  family  marriages sir john cornwall is known to have married twice by 1390 cornwall had married joan wasteneys, the daughter of sir william wasteneys of eastham alice, daughter of walter hewet. the marriage seems to have produced two daughters, although only elizabeth was involved in the succession.  cornwall's first wife seems to have
died after a few years and by 1397 he had a second wife called maud.  succession  an inquisition at much wenlock on 23 september 1414, recording  his shropshire lands as consisting of only an acre at great meaton. it is possible he had already settled his estates on his successors, giving the reversion of the shropshire estates to his sister's family. the inquisition also recognised that the heir to cornwall's estates was his daughter elizabeth, about 24 years of age at sir john's death. she had married william lichfield, who took his name from the cathedral town of lichfield in staffordshire and became wealthy through both marriage and inheritance.  see also bastard feudalism  footnotes  references    at internet archive.   at internet archive.     at internet archive.     at british history online.   at british history online.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at mecklenburg-vorpommern digitale bibliothek.   at british history online.   at internet archive.     at internet archive.   at internet archive .   at hathi trust.       at brigham young university.         at internet archive.   at hathi trust.   at hathi trust.   at brigham young university.   at hathi trust.   at hathi trust.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at british history online   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.   at internet archive.                1414 deaths high sheriffs of shropshire 14th-century english landowners medieval english knights english mps 1402 english mps 1407 15th-century english landowners year of birth uncertain
franz kocher (27 december 1916, in auma - 18 november 2002, in berlin) was an influential assyriologist and medical historian.  life and work born in thuringia, franz kocher spent most of his scientific career in berlin. he is primarily known for his magnum opus "babylonisch-assyrische medizin in texten und untersuchungen" (bam). after finishing high school in gera in 1936, kocher did his undergraduate work in ancient history, near eastern philology (orientalische philologie) and philosophy at the friedrich-schiller-universitat of jena. his studies were interrupted by his conscription into the wehrmacht from october 1938 until the end of world war ii. during this time he did manage to attend one semester in the winter of 1941/42 at the friedrich-wilhelms-university zu berlin. after being taken as a prisoner of war by the us army, he was released after a few weeks and worked as a teacher's assistant, until the university reopened in 1946 and kocher was able to resume his studies. it was at this time that his teacher erich ebeling started to have a decisive impact on kocher's scientific work.  ebeling was kocher's doctoral advisor for his doctorate, which was awarded in assyriology, near eastern philology (orientalische philologie) and philosophy in march 1949. the subject of his dissertation was "incantations against the demoness lamastu" (beschworungen gegen die damonin lamastu). from may 1949 on, kocher first worked as a research assistant and later, beginning in october 1952, as a research associate at the institute for oriental studies (institut fur orientforschung) of the deutsche akademie der wissenschaften zu berlin. due to the construction of the berlin wall in 1961, he was forced to abandon his work, since he lived in west berlin and the akademie was in the east. because of his relentless work in the years prior to these events, kocher had already laid the foundations of his afore mentioned magnum opus. his talent for making hand copies of cuneiform tables quickly became apparent when he assisted erich ebeling with his volume "literarische keilschrifttexte aus assur" in 1953. kocher was introduced to cuneiform medicine through, among others, the work on ebeling's "keilschrifttexte zur assyrisch-babylonischen drogen- und pflanzenheilkunde" in 1955, which was mostly focused on the
pharmacological series uru an.na. he kept working on the series even long after his retirement.  thanks to a scholarship awarded to him by the deutsche forschungsgemeinschaft, he was able to continue his work on cuneiform medical texts from december 1961 onwards. in may 1963 kocher became a research associate at the institute for the history of medicine (institut fur geschichte der medizin) at the freie universitat berlin, where he would spend the remaining nineteen years of his career. after kocher's habilitation in january 1967, he was granted the venia legendi by the freie universitat. until his retirement in march 1983, he was a very active and dedicated teacher who had significant influence on many young physicians, historians and assyriologists alike.  his magnum opus, "die babylonisch-assyrische medizin in texten und untersuchungen (bam), was of paramount importance for kocher throughout his entire career and is until today among the most important publications for the study of ancient near eastern medicine. volumes 1 and 2 were published in 1963, volume 3 in 1964, volume 4 in 1971 and the volume 5 and in the year 1980. volumes 7 and 8 are the work of markham j. geller and were published in 2005 and 2015 respectively.  external links   transliterations of bam texts offered by the babmed project  references   1916 births 2002 deaths german historians people from greiz (district) writers from thuringia 20th-century historians
the 2016 democratic national committee email leak is a collection of democratic national committee (dnc) emails stolen by one or more hackers operating under the pseudonym "guccifer 2.0" who are alleged to be russian intelligence agency hackers, according to indictments carried out by the mueller investigation. these emails were subsequently leaked by dcleaks in june and july 2016 and by wikileaks on july 22, 2016, just before the 2016 democratic national convention. this collection included 19,252 emails and 8,034 attachments from the dnc, the governing body of the united states' democratic party. the leak includes emails from seven key dnc staff members, and date from january 2015 to may 2016. on november 6, 2016, wikileaks released a second batch of dnc emails, adding 8,263 emails to its collection.  the leaks resulted in allegations of bias against bernie sanders' presidential campaign, in apparent contradiction with the dnc leadership's publicly stated neutrality, as several dnc operatives openly derided sanders' campaign and discussed ways to advance hillary clinton's nomination. later reveals included controversial dnc-clinton agreements dated before the primary, regarding financial arrangements and control over policy and hiring decisions. the revelations prompted the resignation of dnc chair debbie wasserman schultz before the 2016 democratic national convention. the dnc issued a formal apology to bernie sanders and his supporters "for the inexcusable remarks made over email" that did not reflect the dnc's "steadfast commitment to neutrality during the nominating process." after the convention, dnc ceo amy dacey, cfo brad marshall, and communications director luis miranda also resigned in the wake of the controversy.  on december 9, 2016, the cia told u.s. legislators that the u.s. intelligence community concluded russia conducted operations during the 2016 u.s. election to prevent hillary clinton from winning the presidency. multiple u.s intelligence agencies concluded people with direct ties to the kremlin gave wikileaks hacked emails from the democratic national committee. wikileaks did not reveal its source. later julian assange, founder of wikileaks, claimed that the source of the emails was not russia.  on july 13, 2018, special counsel robert mueller indicted 12 russian military intelligence agents of a group known as fancy bear alleged to be responsible for the attack, who were behind the guccifer 2.0 pseudonym which claimed responsibility.  contents of leak the emails leaked by wikileaks, in two phases (the first on july 22, 2016 and the second on november 6, 2016), revealed information about the dnc's interactions with the media, hillary clinton's and bernie
sanders' campaigns, and financial contributions. it also includes personal information about the donors of the democratic party, including credit card and social security numbers, which could facilitate identity theft. earlier, in late june 2016, guccifer 2.0 instructed reporters to visit the dcleaks website for emails stolen from democrats. with the wikileaks disclosure of additional stolen emails beginning on july 22, 2016, more than 150,000 stolen emails from either personal gmail addresses or via the dnc that were related to the hillary clinton 2016 presidential campaign were published on the dcleaks and wikileaks websites. on august 12, 2016, dcleaks released information about more than 200 democratic lawmakers, including their personal cellphone numbers. the numerous prank calls that hillary clinton received from this disclosure along with the loss of her campaign's email security severely disrupted her campaign, which changed its contact information on october 7, 2016 by calling each of her contacts one at a time.  media the emails include dnc staff's "off-the-record" correspondence with media personalities, including the reporters at cnn, politico, the wall street journal, and the washington post.  bernie sanders' campaign in the emails, dnc staffers derided the sanders campaign. the washington post reported: "many of the most damaging emails suggest the committee was actively trying to undermine bernie sanders's presidential campaign."  in a may 2016 email chain, the dnc chief financial officer (cfo) brad marshall told the dnc chief executive officer, amy dacey, that they should have someone from the media ask sanders if he is an atheist prior to the west virginia primary.  on may 21, 2016, dnc national press secretary mark paustenbach sent an email to dnc spokesman luis miranda mentioning a controversy that ensued in december 2015, when the national data director of the sanders campaign and three subordinate staffers accessed the clinton campaign's voter information on the ngp van database. (the party accused sanders' campaign of impropriety and briefly limited its access to the  database. the sanders campaign filed suit for breach of contract against the dnc, but  dropped the suit on april 29, 2016.) paustenbach suggested that the incident could be used to promote a "narrative for a story, which is that bernie never had his act together, that his campaign was a mess." the dnc rejected this suggestion. the washington post wrote: "paustenbach's suggestion, in that way, could be read as a defense of the committee rather than pushing negative information about sanders. but this is still the committee pushing negative information about
one of its candidates."  debbie wasserman schultz's emails following the nevada democratic convention, debbie wasserman schultz wrote about jeff weaver, manager of bernie sanders' campaign: "damn liar. particularly scummy that he barely acknowledges the violent and threatening behavior that occurred". in another email, wasserman schultz said of bernie sanders, "he isn't going to be president." other emails showed her stating that sanders doesn't understand the democratic party.  in may 2016, msnbc's mika brzezinski accused the dnc of bias against the sanders campaign and called on wasserman schultz to step down. wasserman schultz was upset at the negative media coverage of her actions, and she emailed the political director of nbc news, chuck todd, that such coverage of her "must stop". describing the coverage as the "last straw", she ordered the dnc's communications director to call msnbc president phil griffin to demand an apology from brzezinski.  financial and donor information according to the new york times, the cache included "thousands of emails exchanged by democratic officials and party fund-raisers, revealing in rarely seen detail the elaborate, ingratiating and often bluntly transactional exchanges necessary to harvest hundreds of millions of dollars from the party's wealthy donor class. the emails capture a world where seating charts are arranged with dollar totals in mind, where a white house celebration of gay pride is a thinly disguised occasion for rewarding wealthy donors and where physical proximity to the president is the most precious of currencies." as is common in national politics, large party donors "were the subject of entire dossiers, as fund-raisers tried to gauge their interests, annoyances and passions."  in a series of email exchanges in april and may 2016, dnc fundraising staff discussed and compiled a list of people (mainly donors) who might be appointed to federal boards and commissions. center for responsive politics senior fellow bob biersack noted that this is a longstanding practice in the united states: "big donors have always risen to the top of lists for appointment to plum ambassadorships and other boards and commissions around the federal landscape." the white house denied that financial support for the party was connected to board appointments, saying: "being a donor does not get you a role in this administration, nor does it preclude you from getting one. we've said this for many years now and there's nothing in the emails that have been released that contradicts that."  france in 2011, france, under president nicolas sarkozy, led calls
for international intervention in the libyan civil war, voted in favor of united nations security council resolution 1973 and, subsequently, dispatched the french air force into direct military action in libya in support of the national transitional council. at the time, france said  the move was to protect libyan civilians. but in a private email from sidney blumenthal to hillary clinton - revealed as part of the 2016 democratic national committee email leak - blumenthal claimed france was more concerned with libya's large gold reserves, which might pose a threat to the value of the central african franc, thereby weakening french influence in africa, and that sarkozy was interested in increased access to libyan oil. former french diplomat patrick haimzadeh called blumenthal's analysis, while it reflected a popular theory on conspiracy websites, "not credible" because "the timeline just doesn't add up" with sarkozy's decision to intervene preceding knowledge of gaddafi's plans. french investigative journalist fabrice arfi dismissed blumenthal's claim as "far-fetched," while also acknowledging that even u.s. intelligence did not find france's publicly stated motivations for the libya intervention to be entirely credible either.  perpetrators  cybersecurity analysis a self-styled hacker going by the moniker "guccifer 2.0" claimed to be the source of the leaks; wikileaks did not reveal its source. cybersecurity experts and firms, including crowdstrike, fidelis cybersecurity, mandiant, secureworks, and threatconnect, and the editor for ars technica, stated the leak was part of a series of cyberattacks on the dnc committed by two russian intelligence groups. u.s. intelligence agencies also stated (with "high confidence") that the russian government was behind the theft of emails and documents from the dnc, according to reports in the new york times and the washington post.  wikileaks founder julian assange initially stuck to wikileaks policy of neither confirming or denying sources but in january 2017 said that their "source is not the russian government and it is not a state party", and the russian government said it had no involvement.  comey testified that the fbi requested, but did not receive, physical access to the dnc servers. according to comey, the fbi did obtain copies of the servers and all the information on them, as well as access to forensics from crowdstrike, a third-party cybersecurity company that reviewed the dnc servers. comey said that access through crowdstrike was an "appropriate substitute" and called the firm a "highly respected private company."  united states intelligence conclusions  on october 7, 2016,
the united states department of homeland security and the office of the director of national intelligence stated that the us intelligence community was "confident" that the russian government directed the breaches and the release of the obtained or allegedly obtained material in an attempt to "... interfere with the us election process."  the u.s. intelligence community tasked resources debating why putin chose summer 2016 to escalate active measures influencing u.s. politics. director of national intelligence james r. clapper said after the 2011-13 russian protests, putin's confidence in his viability as a politician was damaged, and putin responded with the propaganda operation. former cia officer patrick skinner explained the goal was to spread uncertainty. u.s. congressman adam schiff, ranking member of the house permanent select committee on intelligence, commented on putin's aims, and said u.s. intelligence agencies were concerned with russian propaganda. speaking about disinformation that appeared in hungary, slovakia, the czech republic, and poland, schiff said there was an increase of the same behavior in the u.s. schiff concluded russian propaganda operations would continue against the u.s. after the election.  on december 9, 2016, the cia told u.s. legislators the u.s. intelligence community concluded russia conducted operations during the 2016 u.s. election to assist donald trump in winning the presidency. multiple u.s intelligence agencies concluded people with direct ties to the kremlin gave wikileaks hacked emails from the dnc and additional sources such as john podesta, campaign chairman for hillary clinton. these intelligence organizations additionally concluded russia attempted to hack the republican national committee (rnc) as well as the dnc but were prevented by security defenses on the rnc network.  in december 2016, the cia said the foreign intelligence agents were russian operatives previously known to the u.s. cia officials told u.s. senators it was "quite clear" russia's intentions were to help trump. trump released a statement december 9, and disregarded the cia conclusions.  in june 2017, former secretary of homeland security jeh johnson, who was appointed by and served under president barack obama, testified before a house select committee that his department offered their assistance to the dnc during the campaign to determine what happened to their server, but said his efforts were "rebuffed" because the department of homeland security was offering to provide assistance months after the fbi had provided assistance.  throughout late 2017 into early 2018, numerous individuals gave testimonies to the house permanent select committee on intelligence (hpsci) who were charged with carrying out an investigation into the series of
cyberattacks.  steele dossier allegations   the steele dossier, written in late 2016, contains several allegations related to the hacking and leaking of the emails. the individuals named have denied the allegations.  dossier sources alleged:  that russia was responsible for the dnc email hacks and the recent appearance of the stolen dnc e-mails on wikileaks, and that the reason for using wikileaks was "plausible deniability". (report 95)  that "the operation had been conducted with the full knowledge and support of trump and senior members of his campaign team." (report 95)  that after the emails were leaked to wikileaks, it was decided to not leak more, but to engage in misinformation: "rather the tactics would be to spread rumours and misinformation about the content of what already had been leaked and make up new content." (report 101)  that trump's foreign policy adviser carter page had "conceived and promoted" the idea of "leaking the dnc e-mails to wikileaks during the democratic convention" "to swing supporters of bernie sanders away from hillary clinton and across to trump." (reports 95, 102)  that the hacking of the dnc servers was performed by romanian hackers ultimately controlled by putin and paid by both trump and putin. (report 166)  that trump's personal attorney, michael cohen, had a secret meeting with kremlin officials in prague in august 2016, where he arranged "deniable cash payments" to the hackers and sought "to cover up all traces of the hacking operation", as well as "cover up ties between trump and russia, including manafort's involvement in ukraine". (reports 135, 166)  trump has repeatedly denied the allegations, labeling the dossier as "discredited", "debunked", "fictitious", and "fake news". paul manafort has "denied taking part in any collusion with the russian state, but registered himself as a foreign agent retroactively after it was revealed his firm received more than $17m working as a lobbyist for a pro-russian ukrainian party." cohen has also denied the allegations against him. page originally denied meeting any russian officials, but his later testimony, acknowledging that he had met with senior russian officials at rosneft, has been interpreted as appearing to corroborate portions of the dossier.  in his february 2019 testimony before congress, cohen implicated trump, writing that trump had knowledge that roger stone was communicating with wikileaks about releasing emails stolen from the dnc in 2016.  reactions on july 18, 2016, dmitry peskov, press
secretary for russian president vladimir putin, stated that the russian government had no involvement in the dnc hacking incident. peskov called it "paranoid" and "absurd", saying: "we are again seeing these maniacal attempts to exploit the russian theme in the us election campaign." that position was later reiterated by the russian embassy in washington, dc, which called the allegation "entirely unrealistic".  then republican nominee donald trump said on twitter: "leaked e-mails of dnc show plans to destroy bernie sanders. mock his heritage and much more. on-line from wikileakes , really vicious. rigged."  the leak fueled tensions going into the 2016 democratic national convention: although dnc operatives initially denied accusations of bias, sanders operatives and multiple media commentators cited the leaks as clear evidence that the dnc had been favoring clinton and undermining sanders. several media commentators have disputed the significance of the emails, arguing that the dnc's internal preference for clinton was not historically unusual and was unlikely to have swayed the final outcome of the primary; whereas many of sanders' supporters viewed the revelations as symptomatic of an entrenched, unethical political establishment.  on july 24, 2016, sanders urged wasserman schultz to resign following the leak and stated that he was "disappointed" by the leak, but that he was "not shocked." jeff weaver, bernie sanders' campaign manager, called for greater accountability in the dnc, calling wasserman schultz "a figure of disunity" within the democratic party. later the same day, wasserman schultz resigned from her position as dnc chairman, effective as of the end of the nominating convention. after wasserman schultz resigned, sanders said that she had "made the right decision for the future of the democratic party." on the following day, the dnc apologized to bernie sanders and his supporters, stating, "on behalf of everyone at the dnc, we want to offer a deep and sincere apology to senator sanders, his supporters, and the entire democratic party for the inexcusable remarks made over email," and that the emails did not reflect the dnc's "steadfast commitment to neutrality during the nominating process." on july 24, 2016, in an interview with npr, former dnc chair and current governor of virginia terry mcauliffe said "...that the chair's job should be "to remain neutral." "i sat in that chair in 2004 trying to navigate all the different candidates we had. but if you had people in there who were trashing one of the candidates, i can tell you
this, if i were still chairman they wouldn't be working there. i mean, that is just totally unacceptable behavior."  on july 25, 2016, anthony zurcher, north america reporter for the bbc, commented that "the revelation that those in the heart of the democratic establishment sought to undermine the anti-establishment sanders is roughly on a par with [casablanca character] police capt renault's professed shock that gambling was taking place in the casablanca club he was raiding, as a waiter hands him his winnings."  on july 25, 2016, republican national committee chairman reince priebus said that "today's events show really what an uphill climb the democrats are facing this week in unifying their party. starting out the week by losing your party chairman over longstanding bitterness between factions is no way to keep something together."  after the emails were released, the australian diplomat alexander downer informed the u.s. government that, in may 2016 at a london wine bar, trump campaign staffer george papadopoulos had told him that the russian government had a large trove of hillary clinton emails that could potentially damage her presidential campaign. the fbi started a counterintelligence investigation into possible russian interference in the 2016 u.s. presidential election.  on october 14, 2016, nbc news reported that multiple sources were telling them that barack obama had ordered the cia to present him with options for a retaliatory cyber attack against the russian federation for allegedly interfering in the us presidential election. sources said that this is not the first time the cia has presented such options to a president, but that on all previous occasions the decision was made not to carry out the proposed attacks.  media coverage and public perception on july 27, 2016, the new york times reported that julian assange, in an interview on british itv on june 12, 2016, had "made it clear that he hoped to harm hillary clinton's chances of winning the presidency", and that in a later interview on the program democracy now! on july 25, 2016, the first day of the democratic national convention, he acknowledged that "he had timed their release to coincide with the democratic convention." in an interview with cnn, assange would neither confirm nor deny who wikileaks' sources were; he claimed that his website "...might release "a lot more material" relevant to the us electoral campaign..."  following the publication of the stolen emails, nsa whistleblower edward snowden criticized wikileaks for its wholesale leakage of data, writing that "their hostility to even modest curation is a mistake." the washington post
contrasted the difference between wikileaks' practices and snowden's disclosure of information about nsa: while snowden worked with journalists to vet documents (withholding some where it would endanger national security), wikileaks' "more radical" approach involves the dumping of "massive, searchable caches online with few-if any-apparent efforts to remove sensitive personal information."  on july 25, 2016, anne applebaum, columnist for the washington post, wrote that: ... with the exception of a few people on twitter and a handful of print journalists, most of those covering this story, especially on television, are not interested in the nature of the hackers, and they are not asking why the russians apparently chose to pass the emails on to wikileaks at this particular moment, on the eve of the democratic national convention. they are focusing instead on the content of what were meant to be private emails ... she went on to describe in detail other russian destabilization campaigns in eastern european countries.  on july 25, 2016, thomas rid, professor in security studies at king's college, london, and non-resident fellow at the school for advanced international studies, johns hopkins university, in washington, dc, summed up the evidence pointing to russia being behind the hacking of the dnc files and the "guccifer-branded leaking operation". he concludes that these actions successfully blunted the "dnc's ability to use its opposition research in surprise against trump..." he further writes that data exfiltration from political organizations is done by many countries and is considered to be a legitimate form of intelligence work. "but digitally exfiltrating and then publishing possibly manipulated documents disguised as freewheeling hacktivism is crossing a big red line and setting a dangerous precedent: an authoritarian country directly yet covertly trying to sabotage an american election."  russian security expert and investigative journalist andrei soldatov said "it is almost impossible to know for sure whether or not russia is behind a hack of the dnc's servers". according to him, one of the reasons russia would try to sway the us presidential election is that the russian government considers clinton "a hater of russia": "there is this mentality in russia of being besieged; that it is always under attack from the united states ... they are trying to interfere in our internal affairs so why not try to do the same thing to them?"  civil dnc lawsuit  on april 20, 2018, the democratic national committee filed a civil lawsuit in federal court in new york, accusing the russian government, the trump campaign, wikileaks, and others of conspiracy to alter the
course of the 2016 presidential election and asking for monetary damages and a declaration admitting guilt. a hearing on the defendants' motions to dismiss was scheduled for may 17, 2018. in july 2019, the suit was dismissed with prejudice. in his judgement, federal judge john koeltl said that although he believed the russian government was involved in the hacking, us federal law generally prohibited suits against foreign governments. the judge said the other defendants, "did not participate in any wrongdoing in obtaining the materials in the first place" and were therefore within the law in publishing the information. he also said that the dnc's argument was "entirely divorced from the facts" and even if the russians had directly provided the hacked documents to the trump team, it would not be criminal for the campaign to publish those documents, as long as they did not contribute to the hacking itself. koeltl denied the defendants motion for sanctions, but dismissed the suit with prejudice, meaning it had a substantive legal defect and could not be refiled.  see also  democratic national committee cyber attacks  the plot to hack america  podesta emails  russian involvement in the 2016 united states presidential election  references  2016 in american politics 2016 scandals controversies of the 2016 united states presidential election data breaches email leak email hacking hillary clinton controversies information published by wikileaks july 2016 events in the united states russian interference in the 2016 united states elections
twisted sisters is an all-female underground comics anthology initially put together by aline kominsky and diane noomin, published in various forms from 1976 to 1994. in addition to kominsky (later kominsky-crumb) and noomin, contributors to twisted sisters included m. k. brown,  dame darcy, julie doucet, debbie drechsler, mary fleener, phoebe gloeckner, krystine kryttre, carol lay, dori seda, and carol tyler.  twisted sisters was the first "breakaway project" by former contributors to the ground-breaking all-female comix collective wimmen's comix.  background  in 1975, wimmen's comix contributors kominsky and noomin left that collective due to internal conflicts that were both aesthetic and political. kominsky-crumb has later claimed that a large part of her break with the wimmen's comix group was over feminism-related issues, and particularly over her relationship with robert crumb, whom wimmen's comix editor trina robbins particularly disliked.  publication history  kominsky and noomin put together a 36-page one-shot issue of twisted sisters, published in june 1976 last gasp, which featured their own humorous and "self-deprecating" stories and art.  in 1991, noomin edited and put together a 260-page trade paperback anthology which she called twisted sisters: a collection of bad girl art (viking penguin), featuring the work of herself, kominsky-crumb, and 13 other female cartoonists, including many former  wimmen's comix''' contributors. all the work in the collection had been previously published, most of it in anthologies such as weirdo and wimmen's comix.the success of that book led to kitchen sink press publishing a four-issue twisted sisters comix limited series in 1994, also edited by noomin, with each issue featuring 44 pages of new comics by a number of female contributors. the limited series was subsequently collected in 1995 as twisted sisters, vol. 2: drawing the line. an exhibition of artists'  work promoting the kitchen sink collection was held from january 19-february 18, 1996, at white columns in new york city.   issues   twisted sisters (last gasp, june 1976) - contributors:  aline kominsky-crumb and diane noomin  twisted sisters: a collection of bad girl art (viking penguin, 1991)  - contributors: m. k. brown, julie doucet, mary fleener,
phoebe gloeckner, aline kominsky-crumb, krystine kryttre, carol lay, caryn leschen, carol moiseiwitsch, diane noomin, dori seda, leslie sternbergh, carol tyler, and penny moran van horn  twisted sisters (kitchen sink press, april-july 1994) - 4 issues; contributors: m. k. brown, dame darcy, debbie drechsler, mary fleener, phoebe gloeckner, aline kominsky-crumb, carol lay, caryn leschen, carel moiseiwitsch, fiona smyth, carol swain, and penny moran van horn   accolades twisted sisters: a collection of bad girl art was nominated for the 1992 eisner award for best anthology. the twisted sisters'' limited series was nominated for the 1995 eisner award for best anthology.  references  comics magazines published in the united states 1976 comics debuts comics about women feminist comics underground comix last gasp titles kitchen sink press titles
caravana de campeones (august 2012) (spanish for "caravan of champions") was an annual professional wrestling major event produced and scripted by mexican professional wrestling promotion international wrestling revolution group (iwrg), which took place on august 122, 2013 in arena naucalpan, naucalpan, state of mexico, mexico. every match on the show featured a champion defending their title, with two changing hands; golden magic defeating eterno to win the wwe world welterweight championship while el hijo de pirata morgan pinned oficial factor to win the iwrg rey del ring championship. the iwrg junior de juniors championship, the iwrg intercontinental heavyweight championship and the distrito federal trios championship were all successfully defended  the event featured five professional wrestling matches in total with different wrestlers involved in pre-existing scripted feuds or storylines. being a professional wrestling event matches are not won legitimately through athletic competition; they are instead won via predetermined outcomes to the matches that is kept secret from the general public. the august 2012 version of the event was the fifth overall show iwrg has held under the caravana de campeones banner.  production  background professional wrestling has a long running tradition of holding shows that feature several championship matches, and at times actually promotes shows as an "all championship matches" show. the earliest documented "all-championship" show is the emll carnaval de campeones ("carnival of champions") held on january 13, 1965. in 2007 wwe held a pay-per-view called vengeance: night of champions, making wwe night of champions a recurring theme. starting in 2008 the mexican lucha libre promotion international wrestling revolution group (iwrg) has held a regular major show labeled caravana de campeones, spanish for "caravan of champions" using the same concept for a major annual show. all caravana de campeones shows have been held in arena naucalpan, iwrg's home arena, the location of all of their major shows through the years. the august 2012 show was the fifth time iwrg has held a caravana de campeones show, having not held one in 2010 but held twice in 2012.  storylines the event featured five professional wrestling matches with different wrestlers involved in pre-existing scripted feuds, plots and storylines. wrestlers portrayed themselves as either heels (referred to as rudos in mexico, those that portray the "bad guys") or faces (tecnicos in mexico, the "good guy" characters) as they follow a series of tension-building events, which culminated in wrestling matches.
in 2010 el hijo del diablo appeared at an iwrg event with the wws world welterweight championship around his waist, claiming that he won it on the independent circuit, but never specified when or from who. over the following years iwrg allowed the championship to be defended on their shows despite not originating in iwrg. eterno was the defending champion going into the august version of the caravana de campeones, having defeated multifacetico to win the title on november 3, 2011. he had previously successfully defended the championship on the april caravana de campeones show when he defeated chicano.  lucha libre has a strong family tradition, with many second or third-generation wrestlers competing as "junior" or "hijo de" (spanish for "son of"). in february 2011 created the iwrg junior de juniors championship, with the unique stipulation that only second or third-generation wrestlers were allowed to challenge for it. in accordance with storyline some "juniors", for instance cien caras jr., are not actually the son of a wrestler, but instead pay for the rights to use the name, but iwrg acknowledges the storyline relationship as if it was real.  on july 1, 2012 hijo de mascara ano 2000 (not actually a son of mascara ano 2000) defeated bestia 666 to win the iwrg junior de juniors championship.  in 2002 iwrg introduced the rey del ring ("king of the ring"), an annual professional wrestling tournament. after the 2011 rey del ring tournament iwrg presented the winner (pantera) with a championship belt, a belt that can be defended between the annual tournament. oficial factor won the 2012 rey del ring tournament and thus also won the championship.  traditionally the heavyweight championship is considered the top title of any wrestling promotion, but in lucha libre it's normally not the case, with the focus being on the lower weight limits. the defending champion, cien caras jr., won the iwrg intercontinental heavyweight championship from headhunter i on june 21, 2012. he won the match, and the championship by disqualification as iwrg rules states a championship can change hands on a disqualification.los oficiales (oficial 911, oficial ak-47 and oficial fierro) became two-time distrito federal trios champions on july 27, 2012 when they defeated long-time rivals los oficiales elite (oficial factor, oficial rayan and oficial spartan) to win the championship. the caravan de campeones match against los perros del mal'' ("the bad dogs") team of bestia 666,  damian 666 and super nova would be their
first title defense of their second reign.  results  references  external links   iwrg official website  2012 in professional wrestling 2012 in mexico august 2012 events in mexico 2012.8
john houghton (1645-1705) was an english apothecary and writer on agriculture and trade, a fellow of the royal society.  life houghton studied for a time at corpus christi college, cambridge. he subsequently became an apothecary and dealer in tea, coffee, chocolate, and other luxuries. first he traded by the ship tavern in st bartholomew lane, st bartholomew-by-the-exchange, behind the royal exchange. by 14 december 1703 he was at the golden fleece, on the corner of little eastcheap in gracechurch street, london.  a kind of agent for advertisers, houghton had his newspaper advertisements appended to his collections. on 19 july 1695, houghton printed the first personal ad from a man seeking a wife in a collection for improvement of husbandry and trade, initiating the "lonely hearts" industry. he was elected fellow of the royal society. on 29 january 1680, and served on the society's committee for agriculture. he died in 1705.  works houghton edited a periodical, a collection of letters for the improvement of husbandry & trade, published as two vols. london, 1681-3. the authors of the letters included john evelyn and john worlidge. houghton first noticed the potato plant as an agricultural vegetable, and that turnips were eaten by sheep.  in november 1691 houghton issued, with the support of leading fellows of the royal society, a proposal for improvement of husbandry and trade, which later took the shape of another collection published in weekly folio numbers, of which the first appeared on 30 march 1692, and the last (no. 583) on 24 september 1703. in all, according to the editor's plan, 19 volumes appeared. a selection in four volumes was published by richard bradley in 1727-8, with the title a catalogue of all sorts of earths, the art of draining, of brewing, of all sorts of husbandry.  houghton also published in 1693 a sixpenny sheet, containing an account of the acres and houses, with the proportional tax ... of each county in england and wales (reprinted in somers tracts, ed. scott, x. 596). to philosophical transactions he contributed in 1699 "a discourse of coffee" and "the conclusion of the protestant states of the empire, of the 23d of sept. 1699 concerning the calendar".  family on 11 november 1687 houghton married elizabeth claget of greenwich in 1687.  notes  attribution  1645 births 1705 deaths english apothecaries english writers fellows of the royal society

wsty-lp, uhf analog channel 23, was a low-powered family channel-affiliated television station licensed to hammond, louisiana, united states. the station was owned by pontchartrain investors, llc. it served portions of the baton rouge and new orleans television markets. on cable, the station was seen on spectrum channel 22. its transmitter was located off us highway 51 just south of natalbany, louisiana and north of hammond.  history the channel began as a translator for independent station wbtr (then known as wkg-tv) in 1988. as original station owner woody jenkins and great oaks broadcasting had problems garnering cable coverage in the greater baton rouge area, he set up translator stations, including w39aw, to broaden the station's cable coverage. w39aw also brought upn programming to the region when the network began operations. in 1996, the station changed its channel to 23.  by the mid 1990s, jenkins succeeded in gaining enough cable coverage for wbtr that he began to sell off his former translators or adapt them to bring localized programming to the communities served. in late 1998, jenkins began different test formats for a tv station to cover the florida parishes (tangipahoa, st. helena, livingston, and st. tammany parishes) with the station signing on by the end of december. on december 16, 1998, the station signed on with localized programming to the hammond-ponchatoula region as well as with a primary affiliation with america one and a secondary affiliation with america's voice.  like with wbtr, woody jenkins struggled to get wsty-lp on the local cable provider, charter communications, given the limited number of channels available at the time. exercising the right of must-carry, he filed a complaint with the fcc against charter asking for cable coverage and reparations. by august 1, 1999, charter began carrying wsty-lp on its lineup.  in 2005, jenkins and great oaks broadcasting sold the station to veritas broadcasting company, and the station soon fell into the hands of pontchartrain investors, llc. most recently, wsty-lp was affiliated with the family channel (previously my family tv). it is unknown as to when the station dropped its america one affiliation.  station owners pontchartrain investors also had a construction permit to convert wsty-lp's signal from analog to digital on channel 38.  the fcc cancelled wsty-lp's license on june 8, 2021 due to the station failing to file an application for license renewal.
programming current local programming for wsty includes: the great outdoorsmen, louisiana's bayou country outdoors, and spiritual outdoor adventures.  references  external links  television stations in louisiana television channels and stations established in 1988 1988 establishments in louisiana defunct television stations in the united states television channels and stations disestablished in 2021 2021 disestablishments in louisiana defunct mass media in louisiana
the forni della signoria (; ) was a bakehouse in valletta, malta. it was constructed in the late 16th century by the order of st john, and it consisted of a number of bakeries which produced bread for the inhabitants of valletta and the surrounding area, as well as for the order's garrison and navy.  it remained in use by the french and later the british militaries, until a new royal naval bakery was opened in birgu in 1845. the bakery was subsequently converted into stores, before falling into disrepair. the building was demolished in the early 20th century to make way for vincenti buildings. the bakery gave its name to old bakery street, one of the main streets of valletta.  history  background the first prominent bakeries for the order were built in birgu in 1545. in 1566 architect francesco laparelli designed a plan for a new city, valletta, where all public and prominent buildings were to be in a reserved area. among these buildings were the forni della sacra religione.  small individual bakeries were first built on site, which had existed since the 1570s. these bakeries were built during the magistracy of grand master jean de la cassiere at his own expense, and were known in italian as the forni pubblici della religione (public bakeries of the religion). the bakeries were among the first erected buildings in valletta. according to leonard mahoney (1988), similar to the first buildings of valletta, these bakeries were built for convenience of the first wave of workers and migrants rather than keeping also in mind the aesthetic appeal of architecture. thus, these bakeries can be considered to have had a vernacular architecture to a certain extent.  the reserved area, generally known as the collachio, was toyed about for years and was eventually abandoned as it proved not practical for business, administration and the rest of inhabitants of the city. however, more or less, the mentioned buildings occupied the designated area.  construction and use the order's bakery was being planned by 1582 and an engraving by matteo perez d'aleccio of valletta including the planned bakery was drawn up that year. the building was marked as il forno d.la signoria et l'armaria, meaning part of the building had to also include an armoury to serve in case of a siege. this also because it was mainly intended to serve the military. it was eventually built in around 1583 or 1584, during the magistracy of grand master hugues loubenx de verd
alle. the building was designed by maltese architect girolamo cassar, who also designed many other buildings in valletta. as planned, the building was used primarily for the making of bread, while another part of the edifice was used as an armoury or ferreria. other food products from similar ingredients of bread, such as biscuits, were also made. in the 17th century a mill room was added to the building.  the building was property of the treasury of the order, and under the responsibility of the castellan. the building was rented, each part to different owners, however was administered by one person known as commendatore dei forni (bakeries' commander). the owners were to sell bread at an established price. the bakery produced most of the bread for the inhabitants of valletta and floriana, as well as for the order's hospital, prison, galleys and garrison.  some of the expenses for the operation of the bakery were relieved as a number of slaves were engaged in forced unpaid labour. only trusted slaves were allowed to work at the bakery. however, after the revolt of the slaves during the magistry of grand master manuel pinto da fonseca, none of the slaves were trusted in important buildings such as the bakery which provided traditional everyday food. the incident followed by a shortage of bakers in valletta that villages bakers were ordered to do so on site and those who refused to bake bread in the city were jailed by the castellania for a roughly a week.  during the french occupation of malta, the bakery was used to produce bread for the french garrison, and it was heavily guarded during the blockade of 1798-1800. at this point, the street where the bakery was located, originally called strada san giovanni battista, was renamed rue des fours after the bakery. it was later known as strada forni in italian during the early british period, and since 1926 it has been called old bakery street. it is known as triq il-fran or triq l-ifran in maltese, but it is still commonly called strada forni by valletta residents. this means that the bakery gives the name to a main street in the capital valletta.  at some point, during the british period, the building became known as the forni regii or the majesty's bakery. it was also known as the king's bakery. in 1824 the upper floor, which housed the armoury, was handed over to the british military. the bakery remained in use throughout the early 19th century, supplying bread to the british military. the
british army prominently used it as a colonial department, which stored and supplied food for the troops stationed in mallta, better known as the commissariat. the british also used it for the grinding of corn.  it fell out of use when the royal naval bakery was opened in birgu in 1845. it was initially used as stores, but the building fell into a state of disrepair. an english boy is said to have died when part of the building collapsed while he was playing there.  demolition the bakery was demolished in 1926. the times of malta published an article accompanied with a photo to inform the general public that the bakery was demolished and not destroyed by war. the newspaper stated:  no! this building has not suffered from an aerial bombardment; it is the knights' bakery in old bakery street that is in the process of demolition to make way for a better and more imposing building.  redevelopment and remains  in the mid-1930s the site was purchased by the architect gustavo r. vincenti. he raised a modernism (art nouveau or simply an art deco) block, known as vincenti buildings after its architect in 1938. vincenti buildings were damaged during wwii but were faithfully repaired to the original design. some of the residences have been converted into offices.  in march 2010, enemalta workers uncovered remains of the bakery's foundations during paving works in strait street. the remains consist of sections of a wall up to four courses high and laid on bedrock. other remains were also found at melita street across old bakery street. a detailed wooden model of the bakery, probably dating back to the british period, is found at the heritage malta reserve collection at the inquisitor's palace in birgu.  architecture  the bakery of the order was located on a city block bordered by old bakery, melita, st. john and strait streets. its main facade was in old bakery street facing the church of st. augustine, and it consisted of a central bay with two sloped roofs, with three-storey high sections on either side. it had imposing corners, typical of architect cassar, which were characterised by large rusticated pilasters to support the massive building.  the facade was asymmetric and had no moulding. it contained two main doorways, but there were other entrances in strait street. the exterior was plain, contrasting with other valletta buildings, however this was typical when built. though the exterior may not have had any aesthetically pleasing features, the interior was spacious and adequate for its purpose. similar to other prominent buildings,
the bakery was provided with water from the wignacourt aqueduct. the building did not suffer damage during the 1693 sicily earthquake though, as documented, the surrounding buildings did.  further reading  post-demolishment became known as the knights' bakery.  references  bakeries of malta buildings and structures in valletta buildings and structures completed in 1584 buildings and structures demolished in 1926 demolished buildings and structures in malta limestone buildings in malta
the 2016 montevideo tournament was a summer football friendly tournament organized by la liga. matches were played at the estadio centenario in montevideo, uruguay. uruguayan clubs nacional and penarol (primera division) were joined by spanish clubs celta vigo and deportivo la coruna (la liga). it was the inaugural edition of the competition.  participants  results all matches lasted for 90 minutes. if a match was level after normal time then a penalty shoot-out took place to decide who advanced.  bracket  matches  semi-finals  third place play-off  final  goalscorers  media coverage  notes  references  2016-17 in spanish football 2016-17 in uruguayan football
thomas dehany bernard (1815-1904) was an english anglican cleric, bampton lecturer in 1864. he was an evangelical interested in mission work.  life the second son of charles bernard of eden estate, jamaica, and his wife margaret, daughter of john baker of waresley house, worcestershire, he was born at clifton, bristol on 11 november 1815; mountague bernard was his brother. after private education he matriculated in december 1833 at exeter college, oxford, he graduated b.a. in 1838, when he won the ellerton theological prize with an essay on the conduct and character of st. peter. in 1839 he was awarded the chancellor's prize for an english essay on the classical taste and character compared with the romantic.  in 1840 bernard was ordained deacon and licensed to the curacy of great baddow, essex. ordained priest in 1841, he succeeded to the vicarage of great baddow, where he remained until 1846. after working for a short time as curate of harrow-on-the-hill, he became in 1848 vicar of terling, essex. he showed more interest in foreign missions than many contemporaries. he was select preacher at oxford in 1858, 1862, and 1882.  in 1864 bernard was appointed by charles simeon's trustees to the rectory of walcot, bath, a reflection of his strong evangelical sympathies. he increased the church accommodation and built st. andrew's church and schools. in 1867 robert eden, the bishop of bath and wells, collated him to a prebendal stall in wells cathedral; and next year the dean and chapter elected him to a residentiary canonry. he succeeded to the chancellorship of the cathedral in 1879, and from 1880 to 1895 represented the chapter in convocation.  bernard revived the cathedral grammar school, at his own cost provided buildings for it, and established a high school for girls. he was a frequent speaker at the islington clerical meeting, he resigned walcot in 1886, and went to live at wimborne. in 1901 he retired from his canonry, retaining only the unpaid post of chancellor.  bernard died at high hall, wimborne, on 7 december 1904.  works in 1864 bernard delivered bampton lectures on the progress of doctrine in the new testament (published, with a fifth edition in 1900). other works were:   before his presence with a song, 1885; 2nd edition 1887.   the central teaching of jesus christ, 1892.   songs of the holy nativity, 1895.   the word and sacraments, 1904.  family
bernard married in 1841 caroline, daughter of benjamin linthorne, of high hall, wimborne; she died in 1881, leaving two sons and seven daughters.  notes  attribution  1815 births 1904 deaths english anglican priests english evangelicals
jennifer cohen is the athletic director at the university of washington.  college a native of tacoma, washington, cohen graduated from san diego state university in 1991, then earned a master's degree in physical education with an emphasis in sports administration, from pacific lutheran university in 1994.  career cohen became interim athletic director at the university of washington on february 1, 2016.  on may 25, 2016, cohen became the seventeenth athletic director of the university of washington. at the time of her appointment, cohen was one of just three female athletic directors in the power five conferences and the only female ad in the pac-12.  cohen worked as an athletics administrator at pacific lutheran university, the university of puget sound, and texas tech university, as well as the university of washington beginning in 1998.  family cohen is married to bill cohen. they are the parents of two sons, tyson and dylan.  references  external links gohuskies.com profile  living people washington huskies athletic directors women college athletic directors in the united states 1969 births people from tacoma, washington san diego state university alumni pacific lutheran university alumni pacific lutheran lutes athletic directors puget sound loggers athletic directors texas tech red raiders athletic directors
jennifer lonergan is a canadian historian and social entrepreneur. she is the co-founder and executive director of the montreal-based charity artistri sud. she lived in europe for years, studying, teaching and travelling, before returning to her native montreal in 2008.  background and education  lonergan was born and raised in montreal, quebec, canada. she has a phd in women's history and fifteen years' experience in education and curriculum development. after working as a teacher at the university, college and high school levels, she moved into the field of public history and worked at the canadian museum of history in ottawa and at national historic sites, parks canada. in 2009 she founded artistri sud, a registered charity that works to empower women artisans in developing countries through entrepreneurship training. she is currently the executive director of artistri sud.  artistri sud  in 2009 lonergan co-founded the registered charity artistri sud, with a mission of supporting and empowering women artisans in developing countries. the goal was to enable women in developing countries to create sustainable livelihoods for themselves by selling self-made products in their micro-enterprises. in addition to empowering women, the organization aims to raise awareness about the value of craftswomen and their work and to preserve their culture and heritage traditions.  artistri sud develops women artisans' business capacity by providing them with entrepreneurship training, giving them the skills and resources they need to generate income from their micro-enterprises and reach greater financial autonomy. artistri sud has worked with women artisan groups in countries including bolivia, chile, cambodia, india and zimbabwe.  prior to launching the charity, lonergan opened a retail store in 2008, artistri atelier boutique. the idea was to support women craftspeople both in canada and in the developing world by promoting and selling their work in the store. the retail store is now closed.  talks  in may 2015 lonergan presented at tedxmontrealwomen. the ted talk details her decision to quit her job and launch artistri sud as well as the challenges and rewards this has entailed. she speaks about the organization's mission of female economic empowerment and shares stories of women she met on her trips to the developing world.  references  external links jennifer lonergan at we2  living people businesspeople from montreal canadian women in business canadian women historians canadian educators year of birth missing (living people)
the itingucu state park () is a state park in the state of sao paulo, brazil.  location  the itingucu state park covers a group of mountains along the atlantic coast to the southwest of the town of peruibe. the park is in the municipality of peruibe on the south coast of sao paulo. it is divided into two sections. the nucleo itingucu, a conservation unit in the jureia-itatins mosaic of conservation units, receives most of the visitors. the nucleo do arpoador is only open for visits for the purpose of education or scientific research.  to the northeast the guarau river separates the park from the balneario garca vermelha. the atlantic ocean forms the east and southeast boundary. the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge is offshore to the east. to the south it adjoins the barra do una sustainable development reserve. to the west and northwest it adjoins the jureia-itatins ecological station (esec), separated from the esec by the una do prelado river. the ilha do ameixal area of relevant ecological interest, which lies between two arms of the una do prelado, intrudes into the state park.  environment and facilities  the itingucu state park contains large areas of well-preserved atlantic forest, waterfalls, beaches, rocky shores, mangroves and salt marsh forest. it is rich in fauna, especially birds, including 30 species of hummingbirds and woodpeckers. the park has administrative facilities in the guarau beach community, an auditorium with capacity for 40 people, a laboratory and a craft store. it is reached from there via the guarau road. in the park itself there is parking, food kiosks and toilets. there are several marked trails with stairs and handrails. the park has the infrastructure to conduct educational programs, and provides environmental monitors for groups.  history  the jureia-itatins mosaic of conservation units  was created by law 12.406 of 12 december 2006. it included the jureia-itatins ecological station and the newly created itingucu and prelado state parks, the despraiado and barra do una sustainable development reserves and the ilhas do abrigo e guararitama wildlife refuge. the state parks and sustainable development reserves were carved out of the ecological station. on 11 september 2007 the procurer general of the state declared that law 12.406 was unconstitutional. on 10 june 2009 a judgement upheld the finding of unconstitutionality.  law 14.982 of 8 april 2013 again altered the limits
of the jureia-itatins ecological station, re-categorising some areas. these included the  itingucu state park. the law recreated the jureia-itatins mosaic, which includes the park and other conservation units. the law defined the park as a "special zone of ecotourism interest".  work and activities in the park were to be mainly performed by the traditional residents of the conservation unit mosaic.  notes  sources  state parks of brazil protected areas of sao paulo (state) protected areas established in 2006 2006 establishments in brazil
xinghua prefecture () was a song dynasty military prefecture created in 979, under the administration of fujian circuit. it was abolished by the mongol yuan dynasty in 1277.  its administrative area is roughly modern putian and xianyou county.  references     979 establishments 10th-century establishments in china 1277 disestablishments in asia 13th-century disestablishments in china prefectures of the song dynasty former prefectures in fujian
green river reservoir state park is a 2227 hectare (5,503 acre) state park in hyde park, vermont, on the shore of 653-acre green river reservoir.  activities includes camping, swimming, boating, fishing, picnicking, mountain biking, wildlife watching, and winter sports.  day use is allowed in limited capacity. only boats powered by electric motors up to 5 mph and human-powered watercraft are allowed.  the park features 28 remote campsites around the reservoir, which can be reached only by boat.  the park is undeveloped, with only low-impact recreational use allowed on and around the reservoir. parking is very limited.  references  external links  official web site  state parks of vermont hyde park (town), vermont protected areas of lamoille county, vermont
eunidia flavicans is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
henry stanhope may refer to:   henry stanhope, lord stanhope (died 1634), english nobleman and politician  henry edwyn stanhope (1754-1814), royal navy officer  see also  henry scudamore-stanhope (disambiguation)
san bartolomeo apostolo is a roman catholic basilica church located in piazza federico torre, along corso garibaldi, in benevento, region of campania, italy.  history a church of the same name is documented in benevento since the 9th century, putatively holding the relics of the apostle. this prior church at the site was razed by an earthquake in 1688, and the present church was moved here and designed by either filippo raguzzini or nicolo coscia, and was reconsecrated by pope benedict xiii in 1729.  references  roman catholic churches in benevento basilica churches in campania 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy roman catholic churches completed in 1728
phalodi solar power plant is a 50 megawatt photo-voltaic power plant in phalodi city of rajasthan state in india. the plant was built and commissioned by welspun energy under the jawaharlal nehru national solar mission to promote ecologically sustainable growth.  references  solar power in india renewable energy in india energy in rajasthan jodhpur district energy infrastructure completed in 2013 2013 establishments in rajasthan
the gens maenia, occasionally written mainia, was a plebeian family at ancient rome.  members of this gens are first mentioned soon after the establishment of the republic, and occur in history down to the second century bc.  several of them held the position of tribune of the plebs, from which they strenuously advocated on behalf of their order.  the most illustrious of the family was gaius maenius, consul in 338 bc, and dictator in both 320 and 314.  in some manuscripts, the nomen maenius appears to have been erroneously substituted for menenius or manlius; there are also instances of confusion with manilius, maelius, and maevius.  praenomina the maenii of the republic definitely used the praenomina gaius, publius, titus, and quintus, all of which were very common names throughout roman history.  individuals named marcus and lucius probably belonged to other gentes, whose nomina have been confused with maenius.  branches and cognomina no surnames of the maenii occur in ancient historians, but from the coins of the gens, we know that some of them bore the cognomen antiaticus, in honour of the victory of the consul gaius maenius over the latins in 338 bc, leading to the capture of antium.  members   maenius, said to have proposed the addition of instauratitius to the circensian games, which occurred in 489 bc; this suggests that maenius was tribune of the plebs in that year, although no ancient historian so describes him.  in some manuscripts, his name is maevius.  gaius maenius, tribune of the plebs in 483 bc, attempted to veto a levy of soldiers by the consuls until they agreed to allot some of the public land to the plebeians.  the consuls avoided his veto by holding the levy outside the boundary of the city, where the tribunes were powerless, and punishing those who failed to appear.  marcus maenius, according to some manuscripts of livy, tribune of the plebs in 410 bc, proposed an agrarian law, and like gaius maenius attempted to carry it into effect by preventing a levy of troops by the consuls.  maenius' colleagues opposed his action, and the levy went forward.  maenius became so popular that the roman senate, fearing that he would be elected consular tribune, determined that consuls should be elected for the following year instead.  he and two maenii who appear as tribunes of the plebs in 384 and
357 appear to be erroneous emendations for the original menenius.  publius maenius, said by livy to have been consular tribune in 400 bc, and again in 396, is probably a mistake for manlius; publius manlius vulso was consular tribune in 400; quintus manlius vulso was consular tribune in 396.  marcus maenius, said to have been tribune of the plebs in 384 bc, appears to be a mistake for marcus menenius.  lucius maenius, supposedly tribune of the plebs in 357 bc, appears to be a mistake for lucius menenius.  publius menenius p. f., father of the consul maenius.  gaius maenius p. f. p. n. antiaticus, consul in 338 bc, he and his colleague, lucius furius camillus, triumphed over the latins; maenius won the surname of antiaticus for his defeat of the latin army on the astura, near antium.  maenius was appointed dictator in 320, to investigate a conspiracy.  censor in 318, maenius received a second dictatorship in 314, again to investigate a conspiracy involving the nobles of capua.  he was honoured with a statue on a column, later known as the columna maenia, which stood on the capitoline hill near one end of the forum.  maenius, proposed a law requiring the patricians to give their assent to the imperium of elected magistrates, about 286 bc.  some scholars suppose that he might have been tribune of the plebs, but niebuhr proposes that it might have been the consul maenius, whose high reputation might have secured the passage of such a law in his old age.  marcus maenius, a military tribune, who fell in battle against mago in 203 bc, during the second punic war; possibly should be maevius.  publius maenius, triumvir monetalis between 194 and 190 bc.  maenius, triumvir monetalis between 189 and 180 bc.  crawford suggests that he could have been the same as quintus maenius, the praetor of 170.  titus maenius, praetor  in 186 bc, was a military tribune in 180, under the propraetor quintus fulvius flaccus, who was sent against the celtiberi.  maenius, a spendthrift who squandered his fortune.  in 184 bc, he sold his house in the forum to the censor, cato, who used the land to build the
basilica porcia.  gaius maenius, praetor in 180 bc, assigned the province of sicily.  the senate tasked him with investigating all cases of poisoning that occurred more than ten miles from rome, but the task proved so burdensome that he asked the senate to relieve him of one of his responsibilities.  quintus maenius t. f., praetor in 170 bc, served in the third macedonian war.  he announced the senate's repudiation of the acts of the praetor lucius hortensius, who had sacked the city of abdera, and sold its people into slavery.  publius maenius m. f. antiaticus, triumvir monetalis in 132 bc.  his cognomen shows a claimed descent from gaius maenius, the consul of 338 bc .  titus maenius t. f., a senator in 73 bc.  see also  list of roman gentes  footnotes  references  bibliography   marcus tullius cicero, pro sestio, brutus.  diodorus siculus, bibliotheca historica (library of history).  quintus horatius flaccus (horace), satirae (satires), epistulae.  titus livius (livy), ab urbe condita (history of rome).  dionysius of halicarnassus, romaike archaiologia.  gaius plinius secundus (pliny the elder), naturalis historia (natural history).  lucius annaeus florus, epitome de t. livio bellorum omnium annorum dcc (epitome of livy: all the wars of seven hundred years).  pomponius porphyrion, commentarii in q. horatium flaccum (commentaries on horace).  pseudo-asconius, commentarius in oratorio ciceronis divinatio in quintum caecilium (commentary on cicero's divinatio in quintum caecilium).  lucius cassius dio cocceianus (cassius dio), roman history.  ambrosius theodosius macrobius, saturnalia.  joseph hilarius eckhel, doctrina numorum veterum (the study of ancient coins, 1792-1798).  barthold georg niebuhr, the history of rome, julius charles hare and connop thirlwall, trans., john smith, cambridge (1828).  friedrich gotthilf osann, de columna maenia, georg friedrich heyer, giessen (1844).  wilhelm adolf becker, handbuch der romischen alterhum
er (handbook of roman antiquities), weidmannsche buchhandlung, leipzig (1846).  dictionary of greek and roman biography and mythology, william smith, ed., little, brown and company, boston (1849).  wilhelm dittenberger, sylloge inscriptionum graecarum (collection of greek inscriptions, abbreviated sig), leipzig (1883).  t. robert s. broughton, the magistrates of the roman republic, american philological association (1952).  michael crawford, roman republican coinage, cambridge university press (1974, 2001).    roman gentes
on july 17, 2016, gavin eugene long shot six police officers in baton rouge, louisiana in an ambush attack, in the wake of the shooting of alton sterling. three died and three were hospitalized, one critically; of the officers who died, two were members of the baton rouge police department, while the third worked for the east baton rouge parish sheriff's office. long, who associated himself with organizations linked to black separatism and the sovereign citizen movement, was shot and killed by a swat officer during a shootout with police at the scene.  background the shooting occurred during a period of unrest in baton rouge, though it is unclear if the events are related. baton rouge was experiencing ongoing protests following the officer-involved killing of alton sterling less than two weeks before on july 5. on july 7, the fbi's new orleans field office issued a warning about "threats to law enforcement and potential threats to the safety of the general public" stemming from the death of sterling. within the previous week, four suspects were arrested in connection with an alleged plot to kill baton rouge police officers, which was described as a credible threat by law enforcement officials. ten days earlier, five police officers were killed in a mass shooting in dallas.  shooting  long arrived at hammond aire plaza, a shopping complex on airline highway, sometime before 8:40 a.m. ct and began scouting the area in search of police officers. he first spotted a police patrol vehicle parked at a b-quik convenience store; it belonged to a sheriff's deputy who was working security in the area. long parked his vehicle behind an adjacent building, got out, and prepared to shoot, but found that the vehicle was empty. he then drove north and noticed a police officer washing his vehicle a short distance away, but the officer left before long could get close.  by 8:40a.m., police received a call about a suspicious person carrying a rifle near the plaza. however, due to louisiana's open carry law at the time, the potential threat of long was downplayed, with one dispatcher describing him as a "subject walking with a coat and an assault rifle." authorities were going to question him and had no probable cause to take him into custody.  when officers arrived at the scene, they found long clad in black and wearing a face mask behind the hair crown beauty supply store on the 9600 block of airline highway. shots were reportedly fired two minutes later. another two minutes afterwards, there were reports that officers were down.
according to investigators, long fired upon the first responding officers, fatally wounding three. he first shot and killed a police officer, and shot and wounded his partner who fell to the ground. a third officer tried to help the wounded policeman, but long engaged him in a gunfight as he approached, and killed him with multiple gunshot wounds. long then shot the first wounded officer twice more, killing him as well. long then turned around and shot another police officer standing outside a store and then moved to another part of the complex, where he shot and wounded two sheriff's deputies who were investigating his car. at 8:46a.m., he was reported to be near benny's car wash. officers fired on long from behind the cover of patrol cars. eventually, a swat team responded to the scene; one member took aim at long from about  away and killed him at about 8:48a.m. louisiana state police said long was the only person involved in the shooting. the entire shooting lasted for less than ten minutes.  officers used a robot to check long's body for explosives. a preliminary investigation determined that long was targeting officers and ignoring civilians. a preliminary autopsy indicated that in addition to being shot by the swat officer, long suffered multiple other gunshot wounds.  police recovered from the crime scene an iwi tavor sar 5.56x45-caliber semi-automatic rifle and a springfield armory xd 9mm pistol. a third weapon-a stag arms m4-type 5.56-caliber semi-automatic rifle-was recovered from long's rental malibu. officials believed long had intentions of attacking the baton rouge police headquarters and continuing to kill officers.  victims two baton rouge police department (brpd) officers and one east baton rouge parish sheriff's deputy were killed in the shooting, while three others, a police officer and two sheriff's deputies (police officer chad montgomery was grazed by a single bullet in the head, sheriff's deputy nicholas tullier was shot and wounded three times in the head, abdomen and upper arm, and sgt. bruce simmons was hit once in the left arm) were injured. the injured were transported to our lady of the lake regional medical center, which said it received five patients from the shooting, three of whom later died from multiple gunshot wounds. of the surviving two, one was in critical condition, being on life support as of august 3, and the other in fair condition. the third injured officer was transported to baton rouge general medical center and treated for non-life-threatening injuries
. the critically injured officer was moved to tirr memorial hermann, a recovery facility in houston, texas, on november 16.  the officers killed were identified as: deputy bradford allen 'brad' garafola, 45, who had been with the east baton rouge parish sheriff's office since 1992. officer matthew lane gerald, 41, a marine who had been with the brpd for four months. corporal montrell lyle jackson, 32, who had been with the brpd since 2006.  perpetrator  gavin eugene long (july 17, 1987 - july 17, 2016) was identified as the shooter. he was a resident of kansas city, missouri. in may 2015, long filed papers in jackson county, missouri, to change his legal name to cosmo ausar setepenra, but court officials there said he never completed the process of legally changing his name. long was believed to have traveled more than  from his hometown to baton rouge using a  rental car. he was also believed to have been in baton rouge for "several days" prior to the shooting. long committed the shooting on his 29th birthday.  long's body was released to his family on july 26, and a funeral was planned in arkansas for a later date.  personal life long grew up in kansas city and graduated from high school in 2005. his parents divorced when he was eleven, and his father was neglectful of long, according to court records. he failed to appear on scheduled visits with his son while the divorce was pending, and did not deliver birthday or christmas presents to him. court records described one instance where long was picked up by his father, but dropped off at a day care facility at a casino shortly after.  long served in the u.s. marine corps as a data network specialist from august 22, 2005, to august 1, 2010. he was honorably discharged with the rank of sergeant. during his military service, he was deployed to iraq from june 2008 to january 2009. he was also assigned to units in san diego, california, and okinawa, japan. long was awarded the good conduct medal, along with an iraq campaign medal, a national defense service medal, a navy unit commendation, and others.  following his military service, long told relatives and friends that he suffered from posttraumatic stress disorder (ptsd). he reportedly had prescriptions for ativan and valium, both anti-anxiety drugs; lunesta, a sleep aid; and citalopram, an antidepressant. health
records from the u.s. department of veterans affairs (va) reportedly indicated contacts with long from 2008 to august 2013. the va records said that long told doctors that he contracted ptsd after a friend showed him photos of maimed and decapitated bodies while they were in iraq. in november 2011, doctors contradicted long's suspicions of ptsd and instead diagnosed him as having "adjustment disorder with depressed mood." they eventually concluded that he was mentally stable, with no evidence that he was a threat to himself or others. according to long's mother, the va then sent him a letter denying him further treatment on the grounds that his disorder was not related to his military service. long's mental health and related combat experience may have been a factor leading to the shooting.  long graduated from central texas college, attending the college's san diego site at marine corps air station miramar and via an online education program from fall 2007 to summer 2011; he received an associate of arts degree in general studies. long studied at clark atlanta university during the 2012-13 academic year. long also spent one semester at the university of alabama, in spring 2012, with his name making it to the dean's list as a general business major. according to local court records, long had no criminal record and was married for two years before the couple divorced.  views and statements long was identified as a "black separatist" by a law enforcement official. mass shooting scholars said that long displayed hallmarks of a "disgruntled, paranoid loner" (a common type of mass killer), with a narcissistic and grandiose personality.  social media posts indicated that he was an active member of the anti-government new freedom group. according to cnn, a card was found on long's body, suggesting that he was a member of the washitaw nation, a group of african americans associated with the sovereign citizen movement that originated in richwood. in addition to changing his legal name, he claimed his nationality was "united washitaw de dugdahmoundyah mu'ur", and expressed his support for the moorish science temple of america, another african american organization associated with the sovereign citizen movement. however, long disavowed all prior associations in a recent video, saying, "don't affiliate me with nothing. ... i'm affiliated with the spirit of justice."  in april 2015, while in west africa, long also became a member of a group dedicated to helping "targeted individuals" suffering from "remote brain experimentation, remote neural monitoring
of an entire humans body." he asked to be put on the group's "buddy list", but he unexpectedly deactivated his account a month later. his mother said he once believed the central intelligence agency was following him. he appeared as a guest on an online show discussing "targeted individuals", but downplayed his belief that he was being tracked, saying, "that's just a small aspect of me. it's not a complete picture of who i am." however, the show's host, who had frequent phone and email correspondence with long, claimed that long was adamant about being tracked during their communications.  in a "rambling" series of youtube clips, long claimed to be a former nation of islam member and referred to alton sterling, a black man killed by baton rouge police officers on july 5, in online videos. long operated his youtube channel under his new legal name, cosmo setepenra, making references to oppression against blacks and police protests. at one point less than two weeks before committing the shooting, long called the shootings of five dallas police officers an act of "justice". in one video, he said, "one hundred percent of revolutions... have been successful through fighting back through bloodshed." in another, he said the act of peaceful protesting was a futile method based on emotion and was easily forgettable. long also maintained a personal website in which he described himself as a "freedom strategist, mental game coach, nutritionist, author and spiritual advisor." the website contained dozens of additional videos and podcasts.  long wrote and self-published (also under the name "cosmo setepenra") three books about "how to be a strong man" and self-empowerment for black males, which all appeared on amazon.com in october and november 2015. the books were described by the los angeles times as "bizarre" works featuring a "combination of new age-style jargon, pseudoscience, motivational bromides, health tips and racial theory." in the books, long harshly criticized western medicine, denied the germ theory of disease, and asserted that "[t]he abundance of melanin in black humans produces a superior organism both mentally and physically." the books were pulled from amazon.com after the shooting. according to one of his books, he spent two years in several african countries studying their histories and cultures. in addition to the books, long wrote two diaries-one in 2014 and the other in 2015-where he shared "rambling thoughts" about philosophy, religion,
and politics.  sahib taylor, a nephew of long, told the los angeles times that his uncle would teach him about the importance of self-reliance, share his views on racism, and assert that "only advanced survival skills and decisive action" could overthrow the u.s. government. taylor said that long recently began sharing his beliefs that international corporations, federal banks, and political organizations were influencing ethnic groups for their own gain; and that the government was using police to control and kill people.  before the shooting within the preceding six months, long visited the shooting range of a gun shop in olathe, kansas, and purchased a target that he used in shooting practice, according to an employee. the same employee also said long did not purchase any firearms or exhibit any strange behavior at the store.  in a ten-minute video, long claimed that he arrived at baton rouge not to protest sterling's death, but to educate local blacks. he also expressed his distaste for white people and mentioned huey p. newton, co-founder of the black panther party, in a rambling, one-sided conversation. he had previously made a similar recording using a body camera while visiting barbershops in dallas sometime after the shooting there, to promote one of his books. a friend said that long visited him in desoto, texas, two days after the dallas shooting; during the visit, long obsessively watched video footage of sterling's death and praised the dallas shooter micah xavier johnson, saying "at least he did something". the same friend said that long also showed him a washitaw nation card and unsuccessfully urged him to join. long's mother said that he would get upset at news stories of black men being shot by police, often renting cars and using them to drive to locations where such shootings occurred to pass out his books.  less than an hour before the shooting, long purportedly emailed a three-page, handwritten letter, self-described as a "manifesto", to a columbus, ohio, musician whose youtube videos he commented on. in the letter, long described his belief that the shooting was necessary to "create substantial change within america's police force." he also wrote his belief that there was a "concealed war" between "good cops" and "bad cops", and that he had to attack "bad cops" as vengeance for perceived destruction that they continued to inflict on blacks.  aftermath  although long was said to have acted alone in the shooting, police arrested and questioned two other people
in addis as part of the investigation. they were later identified as damarcus alexander, a cousin of slain victim corporal montrell jackson, and alexander's friend den'trell white. according to them, police held them for seven hours, barring them from making any phone calls and refusing to give alexander diabetic medication even after they were made aware of his condition. both were eventually released without any charges being filed. at the time, alexander was unaware of jackson's death during the shooting. a spokesman for the louisiana state police responded to alexander's claim of police mistreatment, saying, "no complaints or concerns have been brought to our attention."  following this shooting and a previous one in dallas, texas, that killed five police officers and wounded nine others, local law enforcement agencies across the u.s. began readjusting response strategies, with more officers being paired up in patrol vehicles.  on july 28, the victims of the shooting were honored at a memorial service in healing place church in baton rouge. hundreds of people were in attendance. governor edwards, vice president joe biden, attorney general loretta lynch, and the wives of the victims made speeches during the service.  louisiana's open carry law  the shooting renewed attention on louisiana's open carry law, which some law enforcement officials have expressed discomfort towards, believing openly carrying citizens could complicate police matters. some elected officials have made calls for a reevaluation of the state's open carry law. however, previous attempts at altering state gun laws have resulted in failure due to an amendment to the louisiana state constitution in 2012, which gave strong gun ownership protection laws and required limitations of any kind to be faced with strict scrutiny. state senator jean-paul morrell remarked that gun control bills filed every year in the state are "almost universally unsuccessful." james gill, a columnist with the advocate wrote an op-ed addressing the state gun laws and their legal complications on august 11.  reactions  president barack obama condemned the shooting in a statement and added, "these are attacks on public servants, on the rule of law, and on civilized society, and they have to stop." later that day, he ordered for all flags in the u.s. to be flown at half-staff in honor of the victims. on july 22, obama met with law enforcement officials in washington, d.c., and pledged solidarity in the wake of this shooting and the one in dallas.  governor john bel edwards released a statement immediately after the shooting, saying, "this is an unspeakable and unjust
ified attack on all of us at a time when we need unity and healing." on the day after, he called the shooting "pure evil" and "a diabolical attack on the very fabric of society."  in an interview, mayor kip holden recommended police agencies across the u.s. to put their officers on high alert and urged americans to be "vocal about their support for law enforcement".  legal  on june 30, 2017, district attorney hillar c. moore, iii released a report, clearing the officers who killed long of wrongdoing.  in july 2017, injured deputy tullier filed a federal lawsuit against several leaders of black lives matter for inciting violence. the lawsuit was later dismissed.  see also   2014 killings of nypd officers  2016 shooting of dallas police officers  2016 shootings of des moines police officers  2020 shooting of los angeles police officers  gun violence in the united states  list of american police officers killed in the line of duty  list of killings by law enforcement officers in the united states  notes  references  2016 in louisiana 2016 mass shootings in the united states mass shootings in the united states 2016 murders in the united states american police officers killed in the line of duty assassinated police officers anti-police violence in the united states attacks in the united states in 2016 deaths by firearm in louisiana filmed deaths in the united states filmed killings history of baton rouge, louisiana july 2016 crimes in the united states law enforcement in louisiana mass shootings in louisiana murder in louisiana sovereign citizen movement u.s. route 61
is a school of kobudo (ancient martial arts) specializing in iaijutsu (quick-draw sword art) founded by kawabata terutaka in 2006. the origins of the ryushin shouchi ryu can be traced to the tenshinsho jigen ryu, a branch tradition of the tenshin shoden katori shinto-ryu. the current headmaster of the ryushin shouchi ryu is yahagi kunikazu.  history  the ryushin shouchi ryu is a branch tradition of the tenshinsho jigen ryu, a system founded by tose yosazaemon osamune (十瀬 与三左衛門 長宗, c. 1540- c. 1600) around the eiroku era (1558- 1570) specializing in iaijutsu and kenjutsu. tose was a land-holding samurai from hitachi province. while in his twenties he traveled to katori shrine to study the tenshin shoden katori shinto-ryu under the third headmaster, iizasa wakasa no kami morinobu. after five years of training he received a menkyo kaiden (license of mastery) and would go on to continue his studies at kashima shrine. while at kashima, tose became enlightened, and through an oracle, received a catalog of techniques from takemikazuchi. it was after this divine inspiration that he created the tenshinsho jigen ryu, taking the tenshinsho (true and correct transmission from the deity of katori shrine, futsunushi) from the tenshin shoden katori shinto-ryu, and adding the term "self-power revelation" (jigen) which had come to him after his spiritual ordeal at kashima shrine. he would later travel to satsuma where he would meet his eventual successor kaneko shinkuro morisada (金子 新九郎 盛貞, c. 1520- c. 1585).  the third headmaster, terasaka yakuro masatsune (赤坂 弥九郎 政雅, 1567- 1594), was introduced to kaneko at the age of 13 to begin his studies in swordsmanship for the purpose of avenging his father's death. by the time he was 17 years old terasaka had mastered the tenshinsho jigen-ryu and avenged his father's death when he was
19 years old. shortly after, he moved to kyoto to become a monk at tennenji temple of the soto zen school where he took on the buddhist dharma name zenkitsu (善吉, also read zenkichi). in 1588, togo shigekata would become zenkitsu's best student, mastering the tenshinsho jigen-ryu in less than a year. togo shigekata (東郷 重位, 1560- 1643) would go on to combine the taisha-ryu, which he had previously learned from the founder, marume kurandonosuke tessai, and the tenshinsho jigen-ryu to create the jigen-ryu. according to tradition, the tenshinsho jigen-ryu would remain a well-kept secret through the jigen-ryu and yakumaru jigen-ryu lines, and passed down through a series of dai (a line of headmasters not related by blood) for nearly 400 years.  the tenshinsho jigen-ryu would see a revival under the 27th headmaster, ueno yasuyuki genshin (上野 靖之 源心, 1913- 1972), when he began instructing in asakusa, tokyo until his death in 1972. it was at this time that kawabata terutaka (河端 照孝, b. july 12, 1940) began his swordsmanship training at the sogo budo shobukan, which was founded in 1963 by his father and was under the guidance of ueno yasuyuki genshin. after ueno's death kawabata would continue his training and eventually establish the seiseikan in akabane, tokyo where he founded the ryushin jigen-ryu in 2006. in 2008, kawabata's best student, yahagi kunikazu (矢作 訓一, b. april 5, 1948), would become the second headmaster of the ryushin jigen-ryu.  in 2011, to clarify the purpose of the school in cultivating the mind and conditioning the body through rigorous training, the original name of the school, ryushin jigen-ryu, was changed to ryushin shouchi ryu. the name ryushin shouchi ryu was selected by the founder, kawabata terutaka. ryushin (柳心) means "mind or heart of the willow tree" and invokes the image of
a tree which does not lose its leaves even in winter; while shouchi (照智) can be translated as "shining wisdom". together, these characters convey the sense of "establishing in the world an unmovable wisdom and everyday mind by means of a strong yet flexible body and spirit."  today, the ryushin shouchi ryu is practiced across the globe with several schools in the united states, europe and japan. every year, yahagi makes official trips to conduct training courses abroad, where he receives the warm support of his overseas students. the ryushin shouchi ryu also takes part in the annual kobudo dedication demonstrations (kobudo hono enbu taikai) at katori shrine every year; an event that has been taking place for over 25 years.  references  external links   official ryushin shouchi ryu website  official ryushin shouchi ryu facebook page  japanese martial arts japanese swordsmanship
gustavo pesenti (january 15, 1878 - january 18, 1960) was an italian general. he was italian colonial governor of somaliland.  biography  he was a knight of the military order of savoy. he was a recipient of the bronze medal of military valor. he fought in the italo-turkish war, world war i and second italo-ethiopian war.  publications  canti e ritmi arabici, somalici e suhaili, bollettino della reale societa geografica italiana, 1910.   di alcuni canti arabici e somalici, bollettino della reale societa geografica italiana, 1912.   i canti del "dikir", bollettino della reale sociata geografica italiana, 1916.   canti sacri e profani: danze e ritmi degli arabi dei somali e dei suhaili, l'eroica, milano, 1929.  il maresciallo cadorna condottiero ed animatore del primo esercito nazionale, regia stamperia della colonia, mogadiscio, 1929.  la musica e mediterranea, l'eroica, milano, 1932.  danane : nella somalia italiano: nel xxv anniversario del combattimento (9-10 febbraio 1907), l'eroica, milano, 1932.  in palestina e in siria durante e dopo la grande guerra, l'eroica, milano, 1932.  la prima divisione eritrea alla battaglia dell'ascianghi, l'eroica, milano, 1937.  l'islam in occidente, l'eroica, milano, 1938.  la svastica infranta: note e considerazioni sul defunto iii reich, bertello, 1945  la muraglia blindata, bertello, 1947.  le guerre coloniali, n. zanichelli, bologna, 1947.  alla scoperta del continente nero, demos, genova, 1950.  fronte kenya (la guerra in a. o. i.-1940-41), bertello, 1953.  bibliography  references  external links    1878 births 1960 deaths italian generals knights of the military order of savoy recipients of the bronze medal of military valor italian military personnel of the second italo-ethiopian war italian military personnel of the italo-turkish war
the 1972-73 utah stars season was the 3rd season of the stars in utah and 6th overall in the american basketball association. they finished 1st in points scored at 115.6 per game, and 3rd in points allowed at 110.0 per game. in the first half of the season, they were 26-16, with a ten game winning streak in that half, along with a five game losing streak, both team highs for the season. in the second half, they went 29-13. in the playoffs, the stars swept the san diego conquistadors in the semifinals, but they lost to the indiana pacers in the division finals.  after the season, andersen resigned.  roster     44 john beasley - point forward  31 zelmo beaty - point forward  24 ron boone - shooting guard  40 glen combs - shooting guard  25 gerald govan - center  33 ira harge - center  21 mike jackson - power forward  15 jimmy jones - point guard  32 larry jones - point guard  14 roderick mcdonald - small forward  35 cincy powell - small forward  12 bob warren - shooting guard  32 charles williams - point guard  42 willie wise - small forward  final standings  western division  playoffs western division semifinals vs. san diego conquistadors  stars win series, 4-0  western division finals vs. indiana pacers  stars lose series 4-2  awards and honors  1973 aba all-star game selections (game played on february 6, 1973) willie wise zelmo beaty jimmy jones all-aba second team selection: jimmy jones.  references  external links  remembertheaba.com 1972-73 regular season and playoff results  utah stars page  utah stars seasons utah stars utah stars, 1972-73 utah stars, 1972-73
cleman mountain is a ridge in yakima county, washington, in the united states.  cleman mountain was named for john cleman, a local pioneer in the wenas valley.  references  ridges of yakima county, washington ridges of washington (state)
jago sangha () is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 3 km away from postal head office nurmahal, 14.8 km from phillaur, 28.2 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 145 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed primary school (pri jago sangha). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1976.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , jago sangha has a total number of 62 houses and population of 285 of which include 149 males and 136 females. literacy rate of jago sangha is 72.76%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 28 which is 9.82% of total population of jago sangha, and child sex ratio is approximately 1545 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 13.33% of total population in jago sangha. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 103 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of jago sangha which includes 98 males and 5 females. according to census survey report 2011, 94.17% workers describe their work as main work and 5.83% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  nurmahal railway station is the nearest train station however, nakodar train station is 22.6 km away from the village. the village is 52.9 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 124 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
sphingomonas kaistensis  is a gram-negative, non-motile and non-spore-forming bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from soil in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas kaistensis at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase	  kaistensis bacteria described in 2007
annasaheb sahasrabuddhe was an indian independence activist, gandhian, social worker and one of the leaders of bhoodan movement, initiated by vinoba bhave. he was the secretary of sevagram trust, wardha and chaired the standing committee of rural industries set up by the government of india, under the aegis of the planning commission of india in 1960. when vinoba bhave introduced gramdan program as a part of the bhoodan movement, sahasrabuddhe was entrusted with the implementation of the program in koraput district of odisha and it was reported that he carried out the scheme successfully. he was a close associate of baba amte, a renowned social activist. the government of india awarded him the third highest civilian honour of the padma bhushan, in 1970, for his contributions to the society. the story of his life has been documented in his autobiography, mazi jadan (my nurturing). the organic farming association of india (ofai) has instituted an annual award, annasaheb sahasrabuddhe award, in his memory.  references   recipients of the padma bhushan in social work year of birth missing year of death missing indian independence activists from maharashtra gandhians social workers 20th-century indian educators social workers from maharashtra
debra parkes is a professor of law and chair in feminist legal studies at peter a. allard school of law, university of british columbia, a position she assumed on july 1, 2016. before moving to ubc, she was associate dean of research and graduate studies and executive director of the legal research institute at robson hall, university of manitoba.  see also    feminist legal theory  references  external links   profile at peter a. allard school of law    living people year of birth missing (living people) robson hall faculty peter a. allard school of law faculty canadian legal scholars
taxiarchis is a village located near mount holomontas in polygyros, chalkidiki, central macedonia, greece. locals are involved in the cultivation of firs for the greek christmas tree market. the chapel of agia paraskevi is located in the village.  villages in greece populated places in chalkidiki
carl e. stoffers, iii (born october 18, 1975) is an american writer, editor, reporter, and former law enforcement officer. he has been the managing editor of ipvm, an investigative journalism outlet devoted to video surveillance, since september 7, 2021.  early life and education stoffers was born in livingston, new jersey. he was raised primarily in westfield, new jersey where he resided with his paternal grandparents. stoffers graduated from westfield high school in 1993. he attended union county college in cranford, new jersey.  after moving to phoenix, arizona in his late twenties, stoffers was hired by the arizona department of corrections and spent several years as a correctional officer at aspc-lewis.  stoffers graduated summa cum laude from kean university in union, new jersey in 2014 with a bachelor's degree in communication.  he graduated with honors from the columbia university graduate school of journalism in 2015.  career stoffers completed a post-graduate fellowship at the marshall project before being hired by the new york daily news. his work has also been published in the asbury park press, bleacher report, the courier news, the home news tribune, the independent, newsweek, vice, the wall street journal, and other publications.  in june 2015, he was publicly criticized by piper kerman, author of the book-turned tv-series orange is the new black over a story he wrote that 'fact checked' the show's premier against his personal experiences as a correctional officer.  based on his background as a journalist and former correctional officer, he was asked to speak at princeton university's s.p.e.a.r. (students for prison education and reform) conference in 2015. he lectured on how to overcome the police subculture and bring reform to the criminal justice system.  stoffers was named associate editor of the new york times upfront in 2016.  stoffers has been an adjunct faculty member at the kean university school of communication, media and journalism since 2017.  references  1975 births living people columbia university graduate school of journalism alumni kean university alumni kean university faculty people from livingston, new jersey people from westfield, new jersey writers from new jersey american reporters and correspondents union county college alumni westfield high school (new jersey) alumni
dr. christopher souder house is a historic home located at larwill, whitley county, indiana. it was built in 1877, and is a two-story, cross plan, italianate style brick dwelling.  it has a shallow hipped roof with overhanging eaves.  it features a wraparound porch and segmental arched windows with decorative pressed metal hoods.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2005.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana italianate architecture in indiana houses completed in 1877 buildings and structures in whitley county, indiana national register of historic places in whitley county, indiana 1877 establishments in indiana
christopher beaumont, 23rd seigneur of sark (born 4 february 1957) is the present seigneur of sark in the channel islands. he is a former british army officer.  biography  beaumont was educated at clifton college and the royal military academy sandhurst, before taking up a career as a regular officer of the british army.  he succeeded as seigneur of sark on 3 july 2016, on the death of his father michael beaumont. he then  returned to live on the island.  on 5 july 2016, the sark newspaper  published an article which noted the new seigneur's "impressive cv" and commented  "keen observers suggest that he is a man who will not be swayed by past convention. when on sark he has often been seen to visit cafes and restaurants which are otherwise rigidly boycotted by members and supporters of sark's one ruling party. for now, the people of sark can only wait and hope that their new seigneur will work to build a secure and prosperous future for each and every islander." the newspaper hoped beaumont would re-occupy la seigneurie, the traditional residence of the seigneur, and appealed for an economic plan to address local unemployment.  in an interview with the bbc on 15 july 2016, beaumont defended sark's feudal structure and the island's legislature, the chief pleas, saying: "there's a perfectly good, working chief pleas, and it gets my full support."  constitutional reforms in 2008, which had the approval of his father the 22nd seigneur, had devolved some of the feudal authority of the seigneur to the legislature.  in 2009, after ill-health triggered beaumont's parents to move out of the seigneurie to a smaller cottage on the estate, they arranged for tenants to live in the seigneurie for ten years, in return for making renovations.  references  living people royal engineers officers seigneurs of sark place of birth missing (living people) 1957 births graduates of the royal military academy sandhurst people educated at clifton college
florian geffrouais (born 5 december 1988 in saint-lo) is a french athlete competing in the decathlon. he represented his country at four consecutive european championships.  international competitions  personal bests outdoor 100 metres - 11.07 (+1.1 m/s, brussels 2012) 400 metres - 48.53 (gotzis 2013) 1500 metres - 4:13.95 (aubagne 2012) 110 metres hurdles - 14.76 (+0.5 m/s, cannes-la-bocca 2013) high jump - 1.96 (valence 2010) pole vault - 5.05 (noumea 2012) long jump - 7.25 (+1.2 m/s, valence 2010) shot put - 15.63 (arona 2014) discus throw - 47.65 (angers 2012) javelin throw - 64.61 (st brieuc 2010) decathlon - 8164 (reims 2014) indoor 60 metres - 7.08 (reims 2011) 1000 metres - 2:37.49 (reims 2011) 60 metres hurdles - 8.31 (aubiere 2011) high jump - 1.95 (bompas 2014) pole vault - 5.00 (paris 2011) long jump - 6.98 (paris 2011) shot put - 15.39 (bompas 2014) heptathlon - 5795 (paris 2011)  references  french decathletes living people 1988 births people from saint-lo french male athletes sportspeople from manche competitors at the 2011 summer universiade
andrew kober is an american stage and screen actor, best known for his role of margaret mead in the 2009 broadway revival of hair.  early life  kober grew up in shaker heights, ohio. his granduncle arthur kober was born to a jewish family in eastern europe, before immigrating to the united states.  he studied at carnegie mellon university in pittsburgh, pennsylvania, graduating with a degree in acting in 2006. he moved to new york city later in the year, and continues to reside there today.  career  theatre  in 2008, kober was cast in the off-broadway revival of hair, in the featured role of margaret mead. he stayed with the production in its 2009 transfer to broadway, as well as its 2010 transfer to the west end.  following hair, kober was cast in multiple small roles in the second broadway revival of les miserables, and performed with the company until late 2015. after that, he was cast in the ensemble of the she loves me broadway revival, which had the distinction of being the first broadway show to be live-streamed internationally online.  kober also performed in regional productions of the 25th annual putnam county spelling bee, ken ludwig's baskerville, national pastime, sense & sensibility, and spamalot.  kober performed in a musical adaption of twelfth night from september 2-5, 2016 at the delacorte theatre.  in 2017, kober appeared in the broadway revival of sunday in the park with george and the los angeles premier of roman holiday. in october 2017, began performing on broadway in the cast of school of rock. kober took a hiatus from school of rock in summer 2018 in order to perform as malvolio in a shakespeare in the park production of twelfth night. following the show's closing, he returned to the cast of school of rock.  film and tv work  kober has also made multiple guest appearances on popular television shows, such as boardwalk empire, house of cards, blue bloods, and pam am. he has been featured in the short film chin up, and can be seen in the filmed performance of she loves me.  other work  kober is also a part of the comedy group, the (m)orons, along with three fellow broadway actors and writers: drew gasparini, f. michael haynie, and alex brightman.  personal life  kober is married to farra kober, the director of social media and community for msnbc. they married in 2012
, and have a son born in 2016.  credits  new york and west end theatre  filmography  references  further reading        1984 births living people american male stage actors american male film actors 21st-century american male actors carnegie mellon university alumni actors from shaker heights, ohio
eugen prym (15 december 1843 in duren - 6 may 1913 in bonn) was a german orientalist, who specialized in semitic languages, especially arabic and aramaic. he was the brother of mathematician friedrich prym (1841-1915), and is the great-great grandfather of historian, philosopher, and macarthur genius grant winner, jacob soll.  he studied comparative linguistics and oriental languages at the universities of berlin, leipzig and bonn, receiving his doctorate in 1868 with a thesis on the islamic polymath ibn khallikan. as a student, his influences included heinrich leberecht fleischer in leipzig and johann gildemeister at the university of bonn. from november 1868, with albert socin, he carried out linguistic research for one and a half years in the middle east. following his return to bonn, he gave lectures in semitic languages at the university, where in 1890 he attained a full professorship. in addition to semitic languages, he also taught classes on sanskrit and persian.  selected works   der neu-aramaische dialekt des tur abdin, 1881 - neo-aramaic dialect of tur abdin.  kurdische sammlungen (2 volumes 1887-90, with albert socin) - kurdish collections.  annales quos scripsit abu djafar mohammed ibn djarir at-tabari, (multi-volume, 1879-1901); edition of al-tabari; with michael jan de goeje and others.  neuaramaische marchen und andere texte aus malula in deutscher ubersetzung, hauptsachlich aus der sammlung e. prym's und a. socin's, 1915 (with albert socin, pub. gotthelf bergstrasser) -  western neo-aramaic tales and other texts from ma'lula.  references   1843 births 1913 deaths people from duren university of bonn alumni university of bonn faculty german orientalists german arabists
padde bet  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of padda. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, padda has 244 houses with total population of 1,057 persons of which 553 are male and 504 females. literacy rate of padda is 71.70%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 110 which is 10.41% of total population. child sex ratio is approximately 1000, higher than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
mother (; ) is a 1951 iranian drama film directed by esmail koushan.  cast  abdullah baghaie   ali-asghar berenji   alexander bijanian   delkash  references  bibliography   mohammad ali issari. cinema in iran, 1900-1979. scarecrow press, 1989.  external links     1951 films iranian black-and-white films iranian films persian-language films films directed by esmail kushan iranian drama films 1951 drama films
henry alvey (died 1627) was a fellow, and later president, of st john's college, cambridge, provost of trinity college dublin from 1601 to 1609 and vice-chancellor of the university of dublin from 1609 to 1612.  see also richard alvey (priest)  references  year of birth missing 1627 deaths alumni of st john's college, cambridge english puritans fellows of st john's college, cambridge provosts of trinity college dublin
ovcarevo is a village in travnik, bosnia and herzegovina.  demographics  according to the 2013 census, its population was 496.  references  populated places in travnik
yegor bulychov and others () is a 1953 soviet drama film directed by yuliya solntseva and boris zakhava. it was based on a play by maxim gorky which was later yegor bulychyov and others.  cast  dina andreeva as ksenia    sergei lukyanov as egor bulychov    nina nikitina as glafira   larisa pashkova as varvara    nina rusinova as melanya  references  bibliography   michael brashinsky & andrew horton. russian critics on the cinema of glasnost. cambridge university press, 1994.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films soviet drama films soviet films 1950s russian-language films films based on works by maxim gorky films directed by yuliya solntseva soviet black-and-white films
rick lamb (born september 20, 1990) is an american professional golfer.  lamb was born and raised in south bend, indiana. he played college golf at the university of tennessee after transferring from santa clara university. at tennessee, he won three events. in his final collegiate event, lamb finished t-2 at the 2013 ncaa division i championship.   lamb earned limited status on the 2016 web.com tour after a tie for 79th at qualifying school in december 2015, but had to rely on sponsor exemptions and monday qualifying to get into tournaments. in july 2016, he won the lecom health challenge, becoming the first monday qualifier to win on the web.com tour since sebastian cappelen at the 2014 air capital classic.  personal life lamb grew up playing both golf and hockey at a high level, later choosing to attend img academies in bradenton, florida to pursue golf. lamb's identical twin brother scott currently plays on pga tour latinoamerica.  amateur wins 2012 yale spring opener, gifford collegiate-cordevalle 2013 seabest invitational  sources:  professional wins (1)  web.com tour wins (1)  web.com tour playoff record (1-0)  results in major championships  "t" = tied  see also 2016 web.com tour finals graduates  references  external links  american male golfers santa clara broncos men's golfers tennessee volunteers men's golfers pga tour golfers korn ferry tour graduates golfers from indiana left-handed golfers sportspeople from south bend, indiana 1990 births living people
the 1968-69 dallas chaparrals season was the second season of the chaparrals in the american basketball association. once again, the chaps lost to the new orleans buccaneers in the playoffs, this time in the semifinals.  roster  <noinclude>  final standings  western division  playoffs  western division semifinals  awards and honors 1969 aba all-star game selections (game played on january 28, 1969)  john beasley (named mvp)  references   chaparrals on basketball reference  external links  remembertheaba.com 1968-69 regular season and playoff results  remembertheaba.com dallas chaparrals page  dallas chaparrals dallas texas chaparrals, 1968-69 texas chaparrals, 1968-69
sylvi palo (1911-1987) was a finnish stage and film actress.  selected filmography  substitute wife (1936)  the song of the scarlet flower (1938)  references  bibliography   laura grondahl. experiences in theatrical spaces: five scenographies of miss julie. university of art and design helsinki, 2004.  external links     1911 births 1987 deaths people from kouvola people from viipuri province (grand duchy of finland) finnish stage actresses finnish film actresses
angraecum lecomtei is a species of orchid native to madagascar.  lecomtei orchids of madagascar
the moravian historical society in nazareth, pennsylvania, was founded in 1857. its mission is to preserve, interpret, and celebrate the rich culture of the moravians. it is the third oldest historical society in the commonwealth of pennsylvania. the moravian historical society is housed in the 1740-1743 whitefield house on the ephrata tract in downtown nazareth. the moravian historical society is affiliated with the moravian archives in bethlehem, pennsylvania, the repository for records of the moravian church in north america, northern province.  the moravian historical society collects objects relating to moravian history in north america, provides research assistance, publishes, and offers lectures, programs, events, and activities for all ages and levels of interest.  site  the moravian historical society owns three acres of land in nazareth, pa, called the ephrata tract. it was on this site that the first house of nazareth once stood. it operates out of two buildings on the tract: the 1740-1743 whitefield house and the 1740 gray cottage, the oldest extant moravian structure in north america.  ephrata tract  in 1740, a moravian group from savannah, georgia was hired by landowner and british cleric george whitefield to build a school for orphaned slaves. whitefield wanted to build his school on a 5000-acre area he called nazareth, which he had purchased from william allen that same year. tensions arising from theological disputes between whitefield and the moravians led the moravians to purchase and begin to establish bethlehem, pennsylvania, leaving whitefield's school building unfinished. when whitefield later went bankrupt, the moravians purchased the 5000 acres, which included the gray cottage, first house, and the bottom portion of the whitefield house. this area became known as the ephrata tract. the town of nazareth was laid out in 1771 several blocks to the west. the first house was demolished in 1864, but the whitefield house and gray cottage still stand. the buildings were added to the national register of historic places on may 1, 1980.  whitefield house  construction on the whitefield house started in 1740 and completed in 1743. it was originally used to house 32 married couples arriving from england. through the years, the whitefield house operated as a place of worship, girls' boarding school, nursery, the moravian theological seminary, and apartments for furloughed missionaries. today, the whitefield house houses the museum of the moravian historical society as well as administrative offices, and a gift shop. the museum runs a series of permanent and changing exhibitions about the history and culture of the moravians and their
contributions to  history.  gray cottage  the gray cottage was constructed in october 1740 by the moravians as protection from the harsh winter weather ahead. it is an oak log structure, and was originally called the "old block house" from the german word block, meaning "log." from 1743-1745, the building was used as a boys' school. it has also been used as a girls' school, a home for widows, a nursery, and a private residence. it is the oldest moravian building still standing in north america.  first house   constructed in june 1740, the first house sheltered moravians during the construction of the whitefield house. it was approximately 30' wide by 20' deep, and stood two and one half stories tall. it was demolished in 1864, but the foundation was discovered by archaeologists in september 2014 in the area between the whitefield house and the gray cottage. several artifacts including redware pottery and a brass horse bell were also discovered. a small stone marker stands on this site.  monuments  the moravian historical society has placed several markers at locations of american moravian historical significance:  the first house of nazareth marker: a small stone marker on the ephrata tract indicating the location of nazareth's first house, which was demolished in 1864.  meniolagomeka in monroe county (near kunkletown), pa: dedicated on october 22, 1901, at the former site of the delaware native american town of meniolagomeka. several moravian missionaries labored here from 1752-1755.  wechquetank in monroe county (near gilbert), pa: dedicated on may 31, 1907, at the former site of the delaware village of wechquetank, which means willow tree in the delaware language. the site was a moravian mission from 1750-1756 and 1760-1763.  the rose inn in northampton county (upper nazareth), pa: built in 1752 by the moravians; it was used as housing for refugees from 1755-1756. it formally closed in 1772, and was demolished in 1858. a stone marker sits on the original site near a barn made partially from wood of the original inn.  shekomeko in dutchess county (near pine plains), ny: dedicated to the mahican native american village of shekomeko, the first native christian congregation in america. moravian missionaries worked there from 1740-1746, until new legislation expelled them from the area. the original monument was dedicated at the site of missionary gottlieb buettner's grave at shekomeko on october 5, 1859,
and rededicated as its current, more accessible site on june 22, 1926.  gnadenhuetten in borough of lehighton, carbon county, pa: dedicated to the mission at the village of gnadenhuetten. the village was destroyed in a massacre during the french and indian war on nov. 24, 1755.  dansbury mission in monroe county (stroudsburg), pa: dedicated on june 25, 1931, to the moravian mission that began in 1747, and was destroyed during the french and indian war in 1755.  friedenshuetten in bradford county (near wyalusing), pa: dedicated on june 15, 1871, at the former native american mission village of wyalusing, 1763-1772.  gnadensee (indian lake) in litchfield county (near sharon), ct: dedicated on october 6, 1859, at wechquanach near shekomeko overlooking the gnadensee. missionary david bruce's body was carried over the gnadensee to wechquanach in 1749.  collections  the whitefield house museum's collection contains over 10,000 moravian objects, which are featured in permanent and changing exhibits. highlights from the collections include:  23 oil paintings by john valentine haidt (1700-1780), the first artist in colonial america to portray chiefly religious topics,  a 1776 pipe organ made by david tannenberg, the most important organ-builder of his time,  the antes violin: the earliest-known violin made in the american colonies,  a cocklestove made prior to 1775,  rare first editions of books written by john amos comenius, the "father of modern education."  the museum also contains a large collection of moravian mission artifacts from six continents, as well as various textiles, household goods, and native american artifacts.  the entire collection is available to researchers by appointment.  the museum operates from 1-4pm, seven days a week except for major holidays including thanksgiving, christmas, and easter.  publications  the moravian historical society publishes various guides and periodicals, including:  transactions of the moravian historical society-a publication that ran in volumes from 1868-2000.  journal of moravian history-a biannual publication and expanded version of transactions, created in 2006 in collaboration with the moravian archives and now published by pennsylvania state university press. it features scholarly articles, translations of moravian source material, and book reviews.  abundant heritage newsletter of the moravian historical society-a biannual newsletter featuring events and programs run by the moravian historical society
.  moravian walking tour and guidebook of the lehigh valley-a guidebook highlighting the moravian sites in nazareth, bethlehem, emmaus, allentown, easton, and christian's spring.  nazareth (images of america)-a photobook depicting the history of nazareth from settlement to present  events  the moravian historical society offers a variety of events for all ages and interest levels. historic nazareth walking tours meet at the whitefield house every second saturday at 4 p.m., and feature a tour guide in historic moravian dress. the museum's free summer sundays offer families a free museum tour as well as historic youth crafts and games. monthly lecture and music programs allows visitors to explore moravian and local history through lectures, music, screenings, and various family activities.  for children, the moravian historical society holds an annual hands-on history summer camp. the week-long camp allows campers to be immersed in history as they engaged in nature, archaeology, and art-based activities inspired by objects from our world-renowned collection. the moravian historical society also holds an annual arts & crafts festival featuring more than 100 craft vendors as well as food and free kids' activities.  the moravian historical society hosts the annual share the heritage auction and dinner to raise funds that support for its mission and its many activities and events.  annual meeting, lecture, and reception  since 1858, the moravian historical society has hosted an annual meeting, lecture, and reception to present the state of the society and to give a lecture on an aspect of moravian history. each year features a keynote speaker, as follows:  2021:  scott paul gordon, lehigh university 2020: jenna gibbs, florida international university  2019: jeffrey s. gemmell, lititz moravian collegium musicum, lititz, pennsylvania 2018: craig atwood, moravian theological seminary, bethlehem, pennsylvania 2017: natasha lightfoot, columbia university, new york  2016: paul peucker, moravian archives, bethlehem  2015: otto dreydoppel, chaplain at moravian hall square  2014: katherine faull, bucknell university, lewisburg  2013: jeffrey long, architectural historian  2012: scott paul gordon, lehigh university  2011: riddick weber, moravian theological seminary  2010: katherine carte engel, texas a&m university  2009: rachel wheeler, indiana university-purdue university, indianapolis  2008: david freeman  2007: susan dreydoppel, moravian historical society, nazareth  2006: nola reed knouse, moravian music foundation, winston-salem, north carolina  2005: mark
a. turdo, moravian historical society, nazareth  2004: elizabeth a. sommer, historic richmond town, staten island, new york  2003: daniel crews, moravian archives, winston-salem, north carolina  2002: david schattschneider, moravian theological seminary, bethlehem  2001:larry leon hamlin, north carolina black repertory company  2000: craig atwood, salem academy and college, winston-salem, north carolina  1999: katherine faull, bucknell university, lewisburg  1998: jon sensbach, university of florida, gainesville, florida  1997: paul peucker, unity archives, herrnhut, germany  1996: daniel thorp, virginia polytechnic university, virginia  1995: aaron fogleman, university of south alabama, mobile, alabama  1994: roger martin, randolph-moravian college and theological seminary, bethlehem  1993: samuel zeller, lutheran church, bangor  1992: beverly smaby, albion college, michigan   1991: daniel crews, moravian archives, winston-salem, north carolina  1990: vernon nelson, moravian archives, bethlehem  1989: albert frank, first moravian church, dover, ohio  1988: lawrence hartzell, baldwin-wallace college, berea, ohio  1987: mervin weidner, moravian theological seminary, bethlehem  1986: edwin sawyer, bethlehem  1985: james henkelman, charter north hospital, anchorage, alaska  1984: murray wagner, bethany and northern baptist theological seminaries, oak brook, illinois  1983: earl shay, moravian theological seminary, bethlehem  1982: david schattschneider, moravian theological seminary, bethlehem  1981: helmut lehman, lutheran theological seminary, philadelphia  1980: dr. werner g. marx  1979: dr. james d. nelson  1978: dr. richard d. claypool/mr. robert steelman  1977: rev. albert h. frank  1976: dr. john r. weinlick  1975: dr. donald j. lineback  1974: dean w. ross yates  1973: henry l. williams  1972: rev. john f. morman  1971: david a. schattschneider/bishop kenneth g. hamilton  1970: dr. jaroslav pelikan  1969: dr. walser h. allen  1968: dr. winfred kohls (read by dr. john r. weinlick)  1967: mrs. thomas j. butterfield  1966: rev. kenneth g. hamilton  1965: rev. vernon nelson  1964: dr. richmond e
. myers  1963: rt. rev. allan schattschneider  1962: dr. clarence e. clewell  1961: rev. henry williams  1960: dr. edwin w. kortz/rev. john fliegel  1959: dr. samuel v. gapp  1958: dr. edwin a. sawyer  1957: dr. heinz motel  1956: ann hark  1955: dr. john h. weinlick  1954: rev. vernon w. couillard  1953: dr. john h weinlick  1952: rt. rev. kenneth g. hamilton  1951: prof. h. h. beck  1950: miss haller  1949: rev. a. o. danneberger  1948: (unknown)  1947: professor richmond e myers  1946: rev. h. a. kuehl  1945: professor garth a howland  1944: hon. john r. macnicol  1943: mr. garth a. howland  1942: mr. paul t. warner  1941: rev. john joseph stoudt  1940: professor amos a. ettinger  1939: rev. kenneth g. hamilton  1938: dr. hans t. david  1937: mr. david sanders clark  1936: dr. albert g. rau  1935: professor herbert h. beck  1934: miss adelaide fries  1933: dr. a. g. rau  1932: mr. r. r. hillman  1931: dr. a. g. rau  1930: bishop j. taylor hamilton  1929: j. taylor hamilton  1928: hon. h. j. steele  1927: bishop hamilton  1926: henry f. marx/rev. w. h. vogler (read by rev. g. f. bahnson)  1925: rev. john baer/paul e. beck  1924: rev. j. taylor hamilton  1923: adelaide fries  1922: rev. j. e. weinland  1921: rev. j. max hark/dr. a. g. rau/e. a. rau/w. h. vogler  1920: clara a. beck/rev. h. b. marx/rev. t. m. rights  1919: adelaide fries/j. t. hamilton  1918: j. upton myers/dr. a. g rau  1917: j. upton myers  1916: rev. augustus schultze  1915: w. e. doster  1914: rev
. a. e. oerter/rev. a. d thaeler  1913: rev. albert oerter/rev. h. e. stocker  1912: m. w. leibert/abraham r. beck   1911: rev. h. a. jacobson  1910: rev. h. a. jacobson/rev. e. t. kluge/h. h. hacker  1909: rev. paul de schweinitz/a. g. rau  1908: rev. e. t. kluge/joseph a. rice  1907: albert g. rau/rev. henry a. jacobson  1906: abraham r. beck/albert g. rau/j. w. jordan  1905: robert rau/isaac huntting/rev. e. t. kluge  1904: rev. e. t. kluge/robert rau  1903: rev. e. t. kluge/rev. h. a. jacobson  1902: rev. e. t. kluge/henry t. clauder/rev. e. t. kluge  1901: albert g. rau/rev. e. t. kluge/rev. c. a. haehnle  1900: john m. levering/eugene leibert/robert rau  1899: rev. eugene leibert  1898: rev. eugene leibert/rev. j. taylor hamilton/bishop levering  1897: bishop levering (read by rev. j. taylor hamilton)/rev. e. leibert/john w. jordan (read by rev. m. w. leibert)/w. h. jordan (read by rev. p. de schweinitz)  1896: rev. e. leibert/robert rau  1895: j. taylor hamilton/henry a. jacobson/rev. j. m. levering  1894: j. taylor hamilton/john w. jordan  1893: eugene leibert/james henry  1892: helen bell/j. taylor hamilton/william henry rice  1891: james henry/henry a. jacobson/john w. jordan  1890: henry a. jacobson/robert de schweinitz  1889:james henry/robert de schweinitz/henry a. jacobson/john w. jordan   1888: james henry/john w. jordan/henry a. jacobson  1887: james henry/abraham s. schropp/edward t. kluge  1886: james henry/robert rau/john w
. jordan  1885: john w. jordan  1884: james henry/john w. jordan  1883: john w. jordan/henry a. jacobson  1882: james henry/john w. jordan/henry a. jacobson  1881: james henry/j. max hark/henry a. jacobson  1880: james henry/j. max hark/john w. jordan  1879: james henry/henry a. jacobson  1878: james henry/j. max hark/henry a. jacobson/a. a. reinke  1877: james henry/henry a. jacobson/john w. jordan/henry a. jacobson  1876: james henry/henry a. jacobson/henry a. jacobson/john w. jordan/william henry rice  1875: james henry/henry a. jacobson/john w. jordan  1874: james henry/henry a. jacobson/william c. reichel  1873: james henry/henry a. jacobson  1872: james henry  1871: william c. reichel  1870: (no speaker)  1869: eugene leibert/edmund de schweinitz  1868: james henry/louis r. huebener/john c. brickenstein  1867: james henry  1866: (no speaker)  1865: james henry/john c. brickenstein  1864: john c. brickenstein/edmund de schweinitz  1863: john c. brickenstein/edmund de schweinitz/c. f. kluge  1862: john c. brickenstein  1861: james henry/john c. brickenstein  1860: james henry  1859: (no speaker)  1858: james henry  references   historical societies in pennsylvania moravian settlement in pennsylvania history of the america (north) province of the moravian church northampton county, pennsylvania
the akwa ibom state ministry of urban renewal and special duties is the state government's ministry tasked with overseeing the housing and urban renewal sector in the state. they are also charged with the responsibility to plan, devise and implement the state policies on housing.  one of the major projects handled by the ministry was the new secretariat annex recently commissioned by the executive gov. udom emmanuel.  see also   akwa ibom state ministry of education  references   government ministries of akwa ibom state
elin anna sofie westerlund (born  4 february 1990) is a swedish athlete who specialises in the 100 metres hurdles. she competed at the 2016 european championships in amsterdam, netherlands. she is also in a relationship with dutch athlete eelco sintnicolaas, who specialises in the multi-events (decathlon).  personal bests  outdoor  indoor  references  external links     1990 births living people people from karlskrona swedish female hurdlers
phallewal is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
wandering willy may refer to:   william mcdougall (politician, born 1822)  tradescantia a rambling plant
catia isabel da silva azevedo (born 9 march 1994) is a portuguese sprinter specialising in the 400 metres. she won two gold medals at the 2018 ibero-american championships.  her personal bests in the event are 50.59 seconds outdoors (huelva 2021) and 53.10 seconds indoors (madrid 2020). the first is the current national record.  international competitions  references  external links     1994 births living people portuguese female sprinters athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics athletes (track and field) at the 2020 summer olympics olympic athletes of portugal athletes (track and field) at the 2018 mediterranean games people from oliveira de azemeis athletes (track and field) at the 2019 european games european games medalists in athletics european games bronze medalists for portugal competitors at the 2017 summer universiade competitors at the 2019 summer universiade ibero-american championships in athletics winners mediterranean games competitors for portugal olympic female sprinters
the first national bank of rock river was built in 1919 in the small community of rock river, wyoming, at the peak of a local oil boom. the first national bank operated from february 1920 to june 14, 1923, when it went into receivership as the oil boom collapsed and its vice president was convicted of embezzlement. in 1927 the building was sold to the new citizen's state bank, but was claimed by albany county for back taxes in 1931. in 1936 the county sold the building to the town. it became a civic center for the town, operating a post office until the 1950s. a doctor's office had occupied the rear in the 1920s, and in the 1940s apartments were built, which later became the town's jail. with the departure of the post office the building became a fire station. from 1935 to 1985 the council room was used by civic organizations. from 1940 to 1985 another room was the town library.  the bank is a one-story brick building covered with stucco over much of the building below the parapet. the front is detailed with engaged ionic classical columns and an entablature in terra cotta. the narrow end fronts avenue c. the original vault remains, but most of the interior has been changed several times.  the bank was placed on the national register of historic places on november 21, 1988.  references  external links   first national bank of rock river at the wyoming state historic preservation office  national register of historic places in albany county, wyoming neoclassical architecture in wyoming buildings and structures completed in 1919 bank buildings on the national register of historic places in wyoming
wincy gerard aquino ong (born february 4, 1982) is a filipino musician, director, actor, writer, illustrator, and podcaster. he is best known as the songwriter for the bands narda and us-2 evil-0, the director behind the films san lazaro and overtime and the actor who played sven de leon in the tv series rakista. he is also the host of the telebabad tapes, with his wife cj de silva.  early life ong was born in quezon city, the second of four children. he attended the ateneo de manila for grade school, high school and university. in 2004, he earned a bachelor's degree in ab communication.  work  music as a musician, ong played in college bands before starting his career as the bassist and songwriter for the band narda from 2002 to 2005. he was nominated for nu 107 rock awards' bassist of the year category in 2003. after quitting narda in 2005, he then composed musical scores for radio, tv and film-most notable of which are station id music for abs-cbn's cable channels, lifestyle network, cinema one, and myx, and for rival cable company, solar entertainment corporation.  in 2007, he wrote songs for the gawad kalinga musical tao po which was staged in the philippines and indonesia. as a film composer, he has written music for the films still life, cul de sac, huling pasada and overtime.  in 2008, he formed the band us-2 evil-0 with director quark henares and fashion designer mich dulce. in 2010, he released his solo musical project patience dear juggernaut.  film ong directed music videos from 2003 until 2014. he made the video for true faith's "araw't gabi". the video caught the attention of record companies and led ong to direct and do cinematography for acts such as pupil, sandwich, itchyworms, the bloomfields, sponge cola, hale, silent sanctuary, cueshe, chicosci, sugarfree, the camerawalls, nikki gil and kyla.  his music video for pupil's "dulo ng dila" (co-directed with king palisoc)--with its '60s-inspired production design-earned a nomination for the music video of the year at the awit awards in 2006, which was also listed as one of the 50 best opm music videos of all time by fhm magazine. "chicosci vampire social club"] won favorite rock video at the
2006 myx music awards.  ong wrote and produced an eraserheads documentary for the show myxposed in 2008. in 2011, ong produced and directed his first feature film san lazaro for the cinemalaya festival. it was nominated for the netpac award. in 2014, ong wrote and co-directed (with earl ignacio) his first mainstream film, overtime, under gma films.  in 2015, ong focused on more commercial projects, writing and producing web films for magic crackers and jollibee, projects that won several awards from the philippine quill awards and the anvil awards.  acting ong started his stint in acting after being cast for a pilot for petiks, an office-set comedy show under abs-cbn, with ping medina and toni gonzaga. the show was not picked up, but his performance in the pilot led to other bit parts in music videos and short films.  in august 2008, he starred as the eccentric drummer sven de leon in the tv5 series rakista with carlo aquino and denise laurel. he co-starred with ramon bautista in the horror film san lazaro.  ong also acted in tv commercials for anc, belo and minute maid and as a mad scientist in sponge cola's "tambay" music video.  writing ong has written for publications such as the philippine star, esquire, and 8list.ph.  his horror story "marty" was published as part of neil gaiman's expeditions prose vol. 1 / the philippine graphic / fiction awards anthology.  personal life in 2013, after a year of studying at the vancouver film school in vancouver, british columbia, ong married painter and art director cj de silva.  references  1982 births living people ateneo de manila university alumni filipino film directors filipino illustrators filipino male writers filipino musicians filipino male television actors musicians from quezon city
rufin molomadan (born 22 july 1967) is a former cyclist from the central african republic. he competed in the team time trial at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1967 births living people central african republic male cyclists olympic cyclists of the central african republic cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people)
tamara salaski (; born 16 october 1988) is a serbian sprinter. she competed in the 400 metres at the 2016 european athletics championships. she competed for serbia at the 2016 rio olympics with a 52.70 result. she ran third for the qualification. her personal best is 51.89.  references  external links  1988 births living people serbian female sprinters place of birth missing (living people) athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of serbia olympic female sprinters
raul baptista (born 29 july 1911) was a portuguese footballer who played as a half-back.  starting at barreirense, where he spent seven years, baptista achieved recognition at benfica, appearing in nearly 100 games and winning four major titles.  career baptista arrived at benfica in 1935 after seven seasons with barreirense. he made his debut on 24 november, against belenenses. with competition from joao correia, albino and gaspar pinto, he only racked up 9 appearances, two in the primeira liga, allowing him to win his first league title. in the following year, he displaced correia out of the first team and played 25 games on the way to back-to-back league titles. a year later, he completed a championship three-peat as regular first team, playing in all the league games and making 28 appearances in total.  in 1938-39, the breakthrough of francisco ferreira made a negative impact in his career, and he saw his playing time drop, to just 11 games. however, baptista recovered his place in the first team in 1939-40, playing 20 games and winning the 1939-40 taca de portugal. the following year, he only played twice as alcobia took his place in the starting eleven. he left benfica with 95 appearances and four major wins.  honours benfica  primeira divisao: 1935-36, 1936-37, 1937-38  taca de portugal: 1939-40  references general    specific  1911 births year of death unknown portuguese footballers association football midfielders primeira liga players f.c. barreirense players s.l. benfica footballers
benson idonije (born 13 june 1936) is a nigerian broadcaster and music critic popularly known for being the first band manager of afrobeat musician fela kuti. regarded as one of nigeria's most revered music critics, he was part of the pioneering group of broadcasters who started radio nigeria 2 (now metro fm) in 1977.  early life and education idonije was born in otuo, with his family house at ighera, one of the twelve quarters of otuo, a town in owan east local government area of edo state, nigeria, where he began his early education. he completed his secondary school education at holy trinity grammar school, sabongida ora, where he obtained a cambridge school certificate before proceeding to yaba college of technology where he studied communications engineering.  career idonije started writing about jazz-related articles and columns for several newspapers including the morning post newspaper in 1953. in 1957, he began his career as an engineering assistant at the nigerian broadcasting corporation (now federal radio corporation of nigeria) before he moved into mainstream broadcasting in 1960, presenting and anchoring popular on-air programmes such as the big beat and stereo jazz club. prior to his retirement from broadcasting in 1992, he was once appointed as the principal lecturer and training officer of the frcn training school for eight years. upon his retirement, he began to write and contribute critiques, opinions and articles to several art-related media houses in nigeria before he got a job as a writer for the guardian in 1996 where he wrote columns including "evergreen", "sound and screen" and "all that jazz".  recognitions in 2012, the wole soyinka centre for investigative journalism awarded him the life time award for journalism excellence. he is a fellow of adam fiberesima school of music and conservatory, university of port harcourt.  published books dis fela sef the great highlife party all that jazz  personal life idonije is the grandfather of nigerian singer burna boy and the father of bose ogulu. to celebrate his 80th birthday, a week-long event featuring paper presentations and musical performances was organized by the committee of relevant arts and culture advocates caucus in several parts of lagos including the ojo campus of the lagos state university, freedom park, broad street and the muson centre.  references  1936 births living people nigerian male writers people from edo state
the 1910 central michigan normalites football team represented central michigan normal school, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1910 college football season. the team compiled a 5-1-1 record, won four of its games by shutouts, and outscored all opponents by a combined total of 106 to 33.  harry helmer was central's head coach in both football and basketball. he was married to hazel potter shortly before the start of the 1910 season.  schedule  source: 1911 chippewa  game summaries  mt. pleasant indians central opened its season with an 18-0 victory over the "mt. pleasant indians".  the indians represented the mount pleasant indian industrial boarding school, a boarding school for native americans between the ages of 6 and 21, drawn from throughout the state of michigan. according to one source, the "mt. pleasant indians" drew large crowds when the team traveled, and "the school became a point of pride in michigan indian communities, especially when it came to sports where the 'indians' competed against white teams in basketball and football."  west branch high school on october 10, central shut out the team from west branch high school by a 6-0 score in a game played at west branch.  it was common in the early 1900s for college football teams to schedule early-season games (sometimes considered warmup for the major games that were typically played in november) against nearby local high schools. central had opened its 1909 season with a game against west branch.  m.a.c. reserves also in october, central played to a 6-6 tie with the reserves from the 1910 michigan agricultural aggies football team. (michigan agricultural was later renamed michigan state university.)  central had played the michigan aggies frosh team once previously, losing in 1909 by a 17-6 score.  flint mutes on october 29, central shut out the "flint mutes" by a 40-0 score. the mutes represented the michigan school for the deaf located in flint, michigan. the school housed and taught deaf students from throughout the state of michigan between the ages of 7 and 21.  western state  on november 4, 1910, central sustained its sole loss, by a 16 to 6 score, against western state normal school (later renamed western michigan university). the game was played at kalamazoo, michigan, and was the fourth meeting in what became the central michigan-western michigan football rivalry. western won the first four games in the series, and after the 1910 game, the rivalry was not
resumed until 1925.  with the victory, william h. spaulding's western state hilltoppers became the state normal school champions. the game was described as "one of the hardest and most brilliant games ever played on a local gridiron." fullback emmot hullihan scored a touchdown (worth five points each under 1910 rules) and kicked the extra point for central in the first quarter. central led by a 6-5 score at the end of the third quarter, but western scored two touchdowns and an extra point in the fourth quarter. central had the ball on western's six-yard line when time was called.  michigan state normal on november 12, in the season's other rivalry game, central michigan defeated michigan state normal school (later renamed eastern michigan university), 13-0. emmot hullihan intercepted a pass and returned it for a touchdown and also kicked a field goal. tackle orlo dickerson also recovered a punt and returned it 10 yards for central's second touchdown.  elsie giants the central michigan football media guide also includes reference to a victory over the elsie giants. the elsie giants were a football team from elsie, michigan, with origins dating back to 1901. according to the media guide, the central michigan football team played four matches against the giants between 1903 and 1910. however, the 1911 central michigan yearbook, in reporting the results of the 1910 season, does not include a game with the elsie giants.  roster  the following individuals were members of central michigan's 1910 football team.  clyde j. bollinger, guard, lakeview, michigan  ford bradish, tackle, mt. pleasant, michigan  charles crandell, right end, mt. pleasant, michigan  isaac crawford, center, rosebush, michigan  orlo r. dickerson, tackle, mt. pleasant, michigan  leo going, guard and tackle  emmot hullihan, fullback, mt. pleasant, michigan  george t. lusk, halfback, elsie, michigan  earl mccarty, right halfback and captain, bad axe, michigan  thomas mcnamara, quarterback  ollie richards, left halfback  cecil tuck, guard, coral, michigan  clayton wyse, guard  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan normalites football
this is a list of albanian film composers.  film composers  prenke jakova (1917-1969)  nikolla zoraqi (1928-1991)  feim ibrahimi (1935-1997)  limoz dizdari (1942)  thomas simaku (1958)  references  albanian film score composers
eunidia rufescens is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by breuning in 1939. it is known from mozambique, kenya, and south africa. it contains the varietas eunidia rufescens var. holatripes.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
bernard schmitt may refer to: * bernard schmitt (economist) (1929-2014), french economist  bernard schmitt (director), french director, e.g. of pacific palisades  bernard william schmitt (1928-2011), american prelate of the roman catholic church, bishop of wheeling-charleston 1989-2004
anne isobel henderson  is chair of the parades commission of northern ireland.  she was born in ballymena, but has lived most of her life in belfast.  she is married to charles henderson, and they have three children.  she was trained as an accountant, and served previously as vice chair of the northern ireland housing executive from 2004 to 2012.  she is a member of the audit committee of queen's university belfast.  henderson was appointed officer of the order of the british empire (obe) in the 2021 birthday honours for public service and services to peacekeeping in northern ireland.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people government of northern ireland the troubles (northern ireland) northern ireland peace process officers of the order of the british empire
cosmo gordon of cluny frse (1736-1800) was a scottish politician, agricultural improver and co-founder of the royal society of edinburgh. he sat in the house of commons  from 1774 to 1777 and was a baron of the scottish court of exchequer from 1777 until his death. he was for several years rector of marischal college in aberdeen.  life  gordon was the eldest son of john gordon of cluny (died 1769), a former edinburgh merchant, and estate factor to cosmo gordon, 3rd duke of gordon who had bought cluny castle with monies from leasing salmon fishing rights on the river spey on the duke's estate.  gordon studied law at marischal college in aberdeen 1749 to 1753 and was created an advocate in 1758. in 1763 he bought the kinsteary estate in nairnshire and in 1769 inherited the cluny estate on the death of his father.  in 1774 he succeeded sir william pulteney, 5th baronet as member of parliament  for nairnshire. whilst in office he strongly supported the war against america. in 1777 the prime minister, frederick north, lord north created him a baron of the scottish exchequer, a prestigious and well-paid role which after his death was filled by george buchanan hepburn.  gordon was a man of strong character, a friend of lord monboddo and james boswell. in 1783, along with many edinburgh literati, he co-founded the royal society of edinburgh, serving as their literary president. he was rector of marischal college (now the university of aberdeen) from 1782 to 1788.  gordon died on 22 november 1800 at his now demolished townhouse at 4 st andrew square in edinburgh and was buried in a highly ornate gothic family vault in the churchyard of st cuthbert's church, edinburgh. he lies in the eastmost section of the vault, which is to the north-west of the churchyard.  gordon had married mary baillie, daughter of henry baillie of carnbroe, on 30 june 1786. she died in 1791 and he did not remarry. being childless, his estates passed on his death to his younger brother charles gordon of braid (died 1815) and from there to charles' son, john gordon of cluny (died 1858).  family cosmo's youngest brother alexander gordon made a fortune in the plantations of tobago.  publications on the dutch herring fishery  references  1736 births 1800 deaths alumni of the university of aberdeen members of the parliament of great britain for scottish constituencies british mps 1774-
1780 scottish politicians barons of the court of exchequer (scotland) rectors of the university of aberdeen fellows of the royal society of edinburgh
rocco travella (born 30 june 1967) is a swiss former cyclist. he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people swiss male cyclists olympic cyclists of switzerland cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics people from mendrisio
fc khimik vanadzor (), is a defunct armenian football club from the city of vanadzor, lori province.  the club was founded in 1950, representing the kirovakan chemicals plant. the team won the armenian ssr championship in 1955 and 1964.  however, the club was dissolved in 1993, after the independence of armenia.  references  khimik vanadzor association football clubs established in 1950 association football clubs disestablished in 1993 1950 establishments in armenia 1993 disestablishments in armenia
miroslav liptak (born 7 october 1968) is a slovak former cyclist. he competed at the 1992 summer olympics for czechoslovakia and at the 1996 summer olympics for slovakia.  major results  1986 1st  overall course de la paix juniors 1988 10th overall tour de la communaute europeenne 1989 1st stage 8 okolo slovenska 1990 1st  overall okolo slovenska 1991 3rd overall peace race 1997 1st  time trial, national road championships 1998 2nd time trial, national road championships 2000 1st stage 2 tour de serbie  references  external links    1968 births living people czech male cyclists slovak male cyclists olympic cyclists of czechoslovakia olympic cyclists of slovakia cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics cyclists at the 1996 summer olympics sportspeople from trencin
clathrulina elegans is a species of heliozoan eukaryotes in the order desmothoracida, which are a group of organisms usually sessile and found in freshwater environments.  references  external links        filosa species described in 1867
the antequera dolmens site is a cultural heritage ensemble comprising three cultural monuments (the dolmen of menga, dolmen of viera and tholos of el romeral) and 2 natural mountain features (the pena de los enamorados and el torcal) in and near the city of antequera in andalusia, spain. the cultural institution responsible for its protection is the cada (, archeological ensemble dolmens of antequera). it was declared a world heritage site in 2016.  outstanding universal value for something to be declared world heritage site, it must demonstrate exceptional universal value; that is, an extraordinary importance transcending national borders and of interest to present and future generations of all humanity.  unesco requires justification of at least one of the six criteria set for the cultural heritage by the convention on the protection of the world cultural and natural heritage (1972) to demonstrate the exceptional universal value of the site. the proposal of the antequera dolmens site is based on one of them (i); the international council on monuments and sites in its final report incorporates other two (iii, iv).   criterion (i): "represent a masterpiece of the human creative genius"  the neolithic dolmen of menga represents one of the most important masterpiece of megalithic architecture (atlantic tradition) based on post-and-lintel construction with an earthen covering, notable for its enormous dimensions that push the size possible in a corridor sepulcher by incorporating the unprecedented solution of intermediate pillars; likewise, the later, chalcolithic tholos (beehive tomb) of el romeral complements the two dolmens with its corridor and false dome of drystone masonry (mediterranean tradition).   criterion (iii): "provide a unique testimony, or at least exceptional, on a cultural tradition or a living or dead civilization"  both the dolmen of menga and the tholos of el romeral have anomalous orientations. the archaeoastronomer michael hoskin, who studied the site, noted that, whereas the axes of almost all dolmens around the mediterranean are oriented to a celestial feature, such as sunrise at dawn on the equinoxes (as occurs in the dolmen of viera), the dolmen of menga points to the striking nearby peak called the pena de los enamorados. this rises abruptly from the plain and contains the contemporaneous rock shelter of matacabras, in which cave paintings are found. meanwhile, the tholos of el romeral is oriented to the mountains of el
torcal, containing the cave of the bull (terrestrial orientation), as well as to the noon sun on the winter solstice (celestial orientation). el torcal is noted for the extensive, otherworldly karst landscape at its summit. in addition, the tholos of el romeral lies along an axis from the dolmen of menga to the pena de los enamorados. thus, the dolmens of antequera construct a unique megalithic landscape by their relationship with the surrounding natural elements.   criterion (iv): "be an outstanding example of a type of building or architectural or technological ensemble or landscape which illustrates one or several significant periods of human history"  the three megalithic monuments reflect a stage of human history in which the first ceremonial monuments in western europe were built, according to the two major building traditions of megalithic art (lintel and beehive). this is an unusual proposal on the list of world heritage sites as it is not being put forward as a mixed heritage site, in which its cultural value would be added to its natural value, but as an integration and close dialogue between the megalithic architecture and the landscape. a phenomenon of "landscape monumentalization" has occurred here by which the natural landmarks acquire the value of monuments while the manmade constructs present the appearance of a natural landscape.  finally, the authenticity of the megaliths is well established, with the dolmen of menga dating to the neolithic and the tholos of el romeral to the chalcolithic, and the structures retain high integrity, being in good condition and well maintained.  see also   dolmen of menga  dolmen of viera  tholos of el romeral  pena de los enamorados  el torcal de antequera  antequera  references  bibliography  external links   antequera dolmens site on the list of unesco world heritage sites  declaration as world heritage site in the 40th world heritage committee of unesco. friday afternoon session july 15, 2016  presentation of the antequera dolmens site on the website of the ministry of culture junta de andalucia (regional government of andalusia)  world heritage sites in spain prehistoric art megalithic monuments in spain dolmens in spain bien de interes cultural landmarks in the province of malaga antequera
luigi de franchis, c.r. (died 1617) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of nardo (1611-1617) and bishop of vico equense (1607-1611).  biography luigi de franchis was ordained a priest in the congregation of clerics regular of the divine providence. on 1 october 1607, he was appointed during the papacy of pope paul v as bishop of vico equense. on 24 january 1611, he was appointed during the papacy of pope paul v as bishop of nardo. he served as bishop of nardo until his death in 1617.  see also catholic church in italy  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)   (for chronology of bishops)    (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)   17th-century italian roman catholic bishops bishops appointed by pope paul v 1617 deaths theatine bishops
bernhard meurl von leombach (died 1526) was a roman catholic prelate who served as auxiliary bishop of passau (1496-1526).  biography bernhard meurl von leombach was born in 1452. on 4 may 1496, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vi as auxiliary bishop of passau and titular bishop cof libariensis. he served as auxiliary bishop of passau until his death on 27 jan 1526. while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of berthold purstinger, bishop of chiemsee (1508).  references   15th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria 16th-century roman catholic bishops in bavaria bishops appointed by pope alexander vi 1452 births 1526 deaths
mehmoodpura is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab. it is situated on dugri-dhandra road. gurudwara alamghir sahib is about 5 km from the village. baba sahib singh bedi is one of the major religious place in village. s. bhan singh of 47-sikh regiment martyred in ww1 and his name is engraved on india gate, new delhi. his memorial is also in neuve-chapelle memorial in france. the village is one of 52 villages of grewal clan. major occupation of the villagers is related to agriculture. the total population is about 700. gill railway station is about 1.5 km from village. the nri's of village has a lot of contribution in the development works of the village. 97% villagers practice sikhism. the nearby villages to mehmoodpura are dhandra, manakwal, gill, kheri, thakarwal, alamghir sahib, dugri, phullanwal.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  references  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
covered: recorded live at capitol studios (simply shortened as covered) is the seventh album by american musician robert glasper. it was released on june 16, 2015, via blue note records. recording sessions took place at capitol studios in hollywood on the 2nd and 3rd december 2014. production was handled by robert glasper himself, with don was and nicole hegeman serving as executive producers. it features song covers of artists like john legend, radiohead and joni mitchell with a few original tracks mixed in. harry belafonte, iskinder "skindoo" adefris-yaxley, josiah xavier brown, musiq soulchild, ralphie "hoop" richardson, riley kirkland glasper and samuel josef brown have provided special guest appearances on the project.  the album peaked at number 190 on the billboard 200 and number two on both the traditional jazz albums and jazz albums charts in the united states. it was also nominated for a grammy award for best jazz instrumental album at the 58th annual grammy awards, but lost to john scofield's past present.  background for this album, glasper reunited with vicente archer and damion reid as the robert glasper trio with whom he released canvas and in my element and went back to the instrumentation of his earlier sounds. glasper used material from artists such as radiohead, john legend, joni mitchell, kendrick lamar and jhene aiko several different music genres to give a more straight forward sound than he put out with his other band. four of the twelve tracks on the album were at least partially written by glasper himself.  critical reception  covered was met with generally favorable reviews from music critics. at metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream publications, the album received an average score of 74 based on eight reviews.  allmusic's thom jurek praised the album, writing "this set is welcoming, open, and warm: it invites fans of all of his musical pursuits along for the ride". rob caldwell of popmatters wrote that the album "stands, in the end, as a multi-layered work possessing an air of adventure, while still remaining accessible. it's a rewarding collection by one of the most significant composers and interpreters in contemporary jazz". john fordham of the guardian wrote: "quotes on black self-respect from harry belafonte and the haunting sound of a piano-shadowed children's chorus namechecking african-americans who have died at police hands furnish some sobering context for a warm, musical
and humane glasper venture". another popmatters reviewer, will layman, stated: "on covered glasper does not try to answer his critics directly, but he certainly plays both wonderfully and from the heart". marcus j. moore of pitchfork wrote: "it's a no-frills record that recedes into the background without much fuss, which works for and against the album's overall impact". chris barton of los angeles times resumed: "amid so much rewarding yet familiar ground, covered sounds more like a step sideways rather than forward".  track listing  personnel  the robert glasper trio robert glasper - piano, arrangement vicente archer - bass damion reid - drums  other musicians taalib "musiq soulchild" johnson - featured artist (track 6) harold "harry belafonte" bellanfanti jr. - featured artist (track 11) iskiner "skindoo" adefris-yaxley - featured artist (track 12) josiah xavier brown - featured artist (track 12) ralphie "hoop" richardson - featured artist (track 12) riley kirkland glasper - featured artist (track 12) samuel josef brown - featured artist (track 12)  production robert glasper - producer "don was" fagenson - executive producer, a&r nicole hegeman - executive producer, management keith lewis - engineering, mixing hayden miller - art direction, design don q. hannah - photography steve cook - a&r vincent bennett - management david helfer - management tara chiari - management roger cramer - legal mitch blackman - booking  charts  references  external links  2015 albums robert glasper albums blue note records albums jazz albums by american artists albums recorded at capitol studios
gaji gudana  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of gaji gudana. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, gaji gudana has a total number of 77 houses and population of 400  of which include 197 males and 203 females. literacy rate of gaji gudana is 75.74%, lower than state average of 75.84%.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 29 which is 7.25% of total population of gaji gudana, and child sex ratio is approximately  1071, higher than state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
eunidia nigricans is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1942.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1942
united nations security council resolution 2098 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions march 2013 events
mycofactocin is a small molecule derived from a peptide of the type known as ripp (ribosomally synthesized and post-translationally modified peptides), naturally occurring in many types of mycobacterium. it was discovered in a bioinformatics study in 2011.  name the name "mycofactocin" is derived from three words, the genus name "mycobacterium" (across which it is nearly universal), "cofactor" because its presence in a genome predicts the co-occurrence of certain families of enzymes as if it is a cofactor they require, and "bacteriocin" because a  radical sam enzyme  critical to its biosynthesis, mftc, is closely related to the key enzyme for the biosynthesis of subtilosin a, a bacteriocin, from its precursor peptide.  function mycofactocin is thought to play a role in redox pathways involving nicotinoproteins, enzymes with non-exchangeable bound nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (nad). this notion comes largely from comparative genomics work that highlighted the many parallels between mycofactocin and pyrroloquinoline quinone (pqq). in both cases, maturation of the ripp requires post-translational modification of a precursor peptide  by a radical sam enzyme, the system appears  in very similar form in large numbers of species, the product appears to be used within the cell rather than exported, and several families of enzymes occur exclusively in bacteria with those systems. the number of putatively mycofactocin-dependent oxidoreductases encoded by a single genome can be quite large: at least 19 for rhodococcus jostii rha1, and 26 for the short chain dehydrogenase/reductase (sdr) family alone in mycobacterium avium.  biosynthesis the mycofactocin biosynthesis pathway is one of the most abundant of any ripp system in the collection of bacterial genomes sequenced to date. however, its species distribution is heavily skewed towards the actinobacteria, including mycobacterium tuberculosis, which is the causative agent of tuberculosis and therefore the number one killer among bacterial pathogens of humans. the system is virtually absent from the normal human microbiome, although common in soil bacteria.  the biosynthesis of mycofactocin from its precursor peptide mfta begins with decarboxylation of the c-terminal tyrosine residue by the radical sam enzyme mftc, with help from the precursor-binding protein
mftb. however, mftc appears next to perform a further modification to the mfta precursor peptide, an easily missed isomerization, by introducing a tyramine-valine cross-link, and consuming another s-adenosylmethionine in the process. the need for two modifications to mfta by mftc might explain the high degree of amino acid conservation in the last eight residues of mfta, as compared to the level of conservation seen for pqqa, precursor of pqq. next, the creatininase homolog mfte releases the c-terminal dipeptide, vy* (valine-tyrosine, where * indicates that the tyrosine was previously modified).   next, mftd converts the vy-derived dipeptide to premycofactocin, which has a biologically active redox center.  and lastly, the glycosyltransferase mftf builds onto premycofactocin a variably sized, beta-1,4 linked oligomeric chain of glucose, sometimes substituting derivatives such as 2-o-methylglucose. mycofactocin, therefore, is not a single compound, but instead a mixture of closely related electron carriers that differ in the nature of their attached oligosaccharides.  references  external links tigr03969 : mycofactocin precursor mfta go:0140604 : mycofactocin biosynthetic process chebi:150862 : premycofactocin   2011 in science peptides cofactors molecular biology natural products
saidupur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
eunidia diversimembris is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1969.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1969
grey lady is a 2017 american film directed by john shea.  the film centers on a boston homicide detective, doyle (eric dane) who searches for clues about a serial killer that murdered both his sister and his partner (rebecca gayheart). his search leads him to nantucket where he uncovers secrets about his family's past.  plot boston homicide detective, james doyle, and his partner/girlfriend, maggie wynn are called by their commander and alerted of a 911 call made by a woman claiming to be stalked by a man addressing her as deirdre (the name of doyle's sister who was murdered weeks earlier)  doyle and wynn rush to the scene and discover it is a trap.  wynn is stabbed by the woman who called and they are both shot by an unknown man.  doyle survives and wynn is killed.  weeks later, doyle is on leave and is taking the boat to nantucket. during the voyage he meets two women, eli, and the duchess. upon arrival, he is greeted by a local officer detective johnson who directs him to his hotel.  after checking in, he meets the police chief preston macguire. who tells him that time on the island will help him emotionally recuperate.   doyle and johnson later attend an outdoor barbecue and concert where doyle encounters the two women he saw on the boat. later, the duchess is found dead. doyle surmises she was murdered by the same parties that killed his partner and sister due to similar wounds on their backs carved with a knife.  doyle then recalls that his aunt lola used to live on the island and he makes an attempt to locate her. during a flashback doyle recollects that maggie whispered "the rose, the crown" in his ear while she was dying. he then goes to the rose and crown restaurant thinking it may be a clue.  the local bartender does not recognize his aunt by name, but doyle notices a photo on the wall of 3 people, one of which he has a hunch might be his aunt. the bartender tells him one of the other people in the picture, tony used to work there and she sends him to his home. when he is there, he shows tony the photo, and they walk inside. the woman in the photo, angela tells doyle his aunt died the previous year. he leaves his business card at the house and leaves. upon leaving it is revealed that eli and another man were spying on him  back at his hotel, doyle attends an art gallery opening the duchess had invited him to
.  while there, he purchases a painting which reminds him of maggie. the artist, melissa reynolds introduces herself. eli is also in the gallery and spills wine on another painting. the artist, clara asks to be treated to a couple of pints of beer at the gallery's after-party as compensation. after dinner, the woman, eli becomes ill and her companion takes her home. she is very upset and the man injects her with a sedative. they then look at pictures of the murder victims on their phone and it is revealed that they are the killers.  the next morning, doyle, melissa, clara and another artist from the party, billy macleod, are scalloping on the beach. melissa and doyle are dropped off at her dockside studio  after she has a panic attack and doyle is picked up by johnson.  eli and her companion show up at the house where angela lives and take tony hostage and torture him for information, and cut off one of his fingers.  doyle shows up unexpectedly and eli keeps tony quiet. tony's friend junior shows up as doyle is leaving. junior seeing a stranger in the house, runs over to his home to retrieve a shotgun. in a subsequent shootout, eli shoots at angela, whom she addresses as lola. junior is wounded and eli and her companion flee. doyle later has a late night meal with melissa and he explains to her what is going on.   that morning, eli's companion has a massage appointment with clara whom he murders. when her body is found on the beach, a wound is found carved on her back.  fearing melissa might be in danger he calls her and tells her to go to his hotel.  eli shows up and tells melissa that clara was found murdered. she has another panic attack and a friend drives her to the hospital.  eli picks her up and introduces her companion as her brother perry.  while doyle is at the house where clara was attacked, he examines photos of the wounds and realizes that the carvings are actually letters and that the killers are spelling his last name.  doyle's phone rings and a local priest tells him that a woman is there who wants to speak with him at the church.  when he arrives he sees angela who is really his aunt lola.  lola reveals that the killers are his cousins who falsely believe that doyle's father frank killed their father tim.  lola reveals that she stabbed her husband because he attacked her in a fit of drunken rage while finding her in bed with his brother frank.  tony shows up and
wants in on capturing eli and perry as revenge for cutting off his finger. as doyle is leaving, lola implores that he not kill perry and whispers something in his ear.  back at the hotel, doyle calls melissa's phone and hears it ring in the hotel. eli is there and tells doyle that melissa dropped it before going to the hospital and that she is with perry.  she draws a map to where they are staying.   doyle, knowing that melissa is being held hostage alerts tony who meets up with doyle at the house. doyle and tony attempt to get perry to surrender. perry is wounded in the leg by a shot from tony's crossbow and hides in a garage. melissa is rescued and told to hide. hearing a siren, she rushes towards it only to find eli driving a stolen police car and shooting at her. she hides under a canoe and eli fails to locate her.  doyle is chasing perry but is stopped by eli saying she will kill melissa if he does not let them escape. doyle drops his gun. melissa shows up and fires a shot. eli attempts to shoot melissa but is fatally shot by doyle instead. perry then tells doyle to kill him too, but he refuses, saying that lola revealed that perry is actually his half-brother from lola's relationship with frank.  the following morning, a crowd gathers on the beach for a memorial service for clara,  lola gives doyle his father's old movie camera. the following morning, perry is in custody and being escorted back to the mainland by the state police.   doyle is on the boat's upper deck and reminisces about happier times with his family  production production commenced in april 2014, with four weeks of filming on nantucket followed by one week in boston.  release the film premiered at the 2015 nantucket film festival, and public screenings commenced on april 28, 2017. the film was released on dvd, and video on demand services on june 27, 2017.  references  external links   http://www.starzglobal.com/title?id=462  starz worldwide  2015 films 2010s crime drama films 2010s mystery films american crime drama films american mystery films american serial killer films american films english-language films films about irish-american culture films directed by john shea films set in boston films shot in massachusetts nantucket in fiction films set in the atlantic ocean
earl of pembroke is a title in the peerage of england. it may also refer to:  earl of pembroke, tall ship hms endeavour, launched as the collier earl of pembroke earl of pembroke's men, elizabethan-era playing company earl of pembroke's armour, suit of armour currently at the royal ontario museum
hirmeriella is a genus of fossil tree, a conifer that was widespread in late triassic and early jurassic of germany, the uk, and poland. it is common in the fissure fills of glamorgan, south wales, where many of the uk's earliest mammal fossils have been found such as morganucodon.  the name hirmeriella muensteri has now been used to describe the whole plant, but it may also specifically refer to fossils of female parts of the plant, while male parts of the conifer may be known by the scientific name brachyphyllum muensteri, and fossils with neither gender parts have been known as pagiophyllum. hirmeriella is also known by the pseudonym cheirolepis muensteri.  hirmeriella muensteri may have grown in dry, extreme conditions, and been fire tolerant, although other authors have cited evidence from water wicking leaves as signs they were found in humid, water rich environments.  references  triassic plants jurassic plants conifers mesozoic trees
kiran shah carlson (born 16 may 1998) is a welsh cricketer who plays for glamorgan county cricket club. he is a right-handed middle order batsman and occasional off-break bowler. in september 2016 during a 2016 county championship match against essex, carlson became the youngest player for glamorgan to score a first-class century.  career carlson played his youth cricket at cardiff cricket club. he made his first class debut on 31 august 2016 against northamptonshire, having been brought to the team as an injury replacement for craig meschede. he made his twenty20 debut for glamorgan in the 2017 natwest t20 blast on 7 july 2017.  in 2021 carlson captained glamorgan to victory in the final of the royal london one-day cup, top-scoring in glamorgan's innings with 82.  personal life carlson was educated at whitchurch high school in cardiff and obtained three a-grades in his a levels. he completed a business degree at cardiff university in 2021.  references  external links      1998 births living people welsh cricketers cricketers from cardiff glamorgan cricketers people educated at whitchurch high school wales minor counties cricketers cardiff mccu cricketers
cochlespira bevdeynzerae is a species of sea snail, a marine gastropod mollusk in the family cochlespiridae.  description the length of the shell attains 50 mm.  distribution this marine species occurs off colombia.  references   garcia e.f. (2010) description of four new species of cochlespira (gastropoda: turridae) from the new world. novapex, 11(4): 107-113  external links    bevdeynzerae gastropods described in 2010
stephen mann, frs, frsc, (born 1 april 1955) is professor of chemistry, co-director of the max planck bristol centre for minimal biology, director of the centre for organized matter chemistry, director of the centre for protolife research, and was principal of the bristol centre for functional nanomaterials at the university of bristol, uk.  education  mann was awarded a bachelor of science degree in chemistry from the university of manchester institute of science and technology in 1976, and a doctor of philosophy degree from the university of oxford in 1982 under the supervision of professor r. j. p. williams frs.  career  following his doctor of philosophy degree, mann was elected to a junior research fellowship at keble college, university of oxford, and then awarded a lectureship at the university of bath in 1984 where he was appointed to a full professorship in 1990. he moved to the university of bristol in 1998.  research  mann's research is concerned with the chemical synthesis, characterization and emergence of complex forms of organized matter. his research activities include biomineralization, biomimetic materials chemistry, synthesis and self-assembly of nanoscale objects, functional nanomaterials, complexity and emergent behaviour in hybrid nanostructures, and solvent-free liquid proteins. his current work is focused on the design and construction of synthetic protocells. mann has published over 550 scientific papers with a current h-index of 125 and over 64,000 citations. he is listed in the 2014 thomson reuters index of world's most influential scientific minds and in the top 0.01% of cited scientists.  awards and honours  mann was elected a fellow of the royal society, uk in 2003. other accolades include:  corday-morgan medal and prize, royal society of chemistry, 1991.  fellow royal society of chemistry, 1996.  max-planck society/alexander von humboldt foundation research award, 1998-2003.  interdisciplinary award, royal society of chemistry, 1999.  joseph chatt lecture and medal, royal society of chemistry, 2006.  de gennes prize and medal, royal society of chemistry, 2011.  french-british prize, chemical society of france, 2011.  royal society davy medal (2016). member of academia europaea (2020).  references  external links   stephen mann website: http://www.stephenmann.co.uk  centre for organized matter chemistry website: http://www.bristolcomc.co.uk  centre for protolife research website: http://www
.bristolprotolife.co.uk max planck bristol centre for minimal biology: https://maxplanck-minimalbiology.bristol.ac.uk  living people 1955 births place of birth missing (living people) scientists from bristol english chemists alumni of the university of manchester institute of science and technology alumni of the university of oxford academics of the university of bath academics of the university of bristol
mount chalmers is a rural town and locality in the livingstone shire, queensland, australia. in the  the locality of mount chalmers had a population of 235 people.  geography  the town of mount chalmers is in the north of the locality with mount nicholson being a neighbourhood within the south of the locality ().  the locality contains the following named peaks:   cabbage tree hill ()   mount chalmers ()   mount standish ()  history   gold was found in mount chalmers in 1860 but gold mining did not commence in the area until 1869. it was named after mr chambers who established a battery. in 1899 copper mining commenced. mount chalmers provisional school  opened on 23 january 1901. on 1 january 1909 it became mount chalmers state school. the school was mothballed on 31 december 2005 and its closure finalised on 31 december 2006. in 2014 the livingstone shire council purchased the site for $230,000 for use by the local community. it is located at 18 school street ().  in 1908 the yeppoon railway line was established from sleipners junction on the north rockhampton to emu park railway line and then through to yeppoon railway station. mount chalmers railway station () served the town, and mount nicholson railway station () served the south of the locality.  in 1911, the census recorded a population of 1,181.  the sisters of st joseph of the sacred heart opened a catholic primary school in 1913.  mining ended in 1914 and people moved away; the 1921 census showed the population had fallen to 95 people.  the yeppoon railway line ceased passenger services in 1978 and closed completely in 2004.  in the 2011 census, mount chalmers had a population of 216 people.  in the  the locality of mount chalmers had a population of 235 people.  education  there are no schools in mount chalmers. the nearest primary school is cawarral state school in neighbouring cawaral to the north-east. the nearest government secondary schools are north rockhampton state high school in frenchville, rockhampton, to the south-west and yeppoon state high school in yeppoon to the north-east.  amenities  the mount chalmers community history centre operates from the old school site. the old school also has a library run by volunteers and supported by the livingstone shire council.  references  external links     towns in queensland shire of livingstone localities in queensland
dorcaschema succineum is an extinct species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by zang in 1905. it existed during the upper eocene, and has been discovered within baltic amber.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1905
dhani pind (or dhanipind) is a village in rurka kalan tehsil in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 8.4 km away from rurka kalan, 12 km from phagwara, 22.7 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 141 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed upper primary with secondary/higher secondary school (gsss dhani pind). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1941.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , dhani pind has a total number of 356 houses and population of 1642 of which include 809 males and 833 females. literacy rate of dhani pind is 79.85%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 148 which is 9.01% of total population of dhani pind, and child sex ratio is approximately 738 lower than state average of 897.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 34.65% of total population in dhani pind. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 503 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of dhani pind which includes 458 males and 45 females. according to census survey report 2011, 97.61% workers describe their work as main work and 2.39% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  phagwara junction railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 36.5 km away from the village. the village is 66.4 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 128 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the williams block is a historic commercial building at 183-187 water street in downtown augusta, maine.  built in 1862, it is the only remaining building south of bridge street to survive a devastating 1865 fire, and one of a small number of surviving commercial buildings (of many) designed by francis h. fassett.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1986.  description and history the williams block stands on the east side of water street, augusta's principal downtown thoroughfare, a short way south of its junction with bridge street.  it is a three-story brick building, six bays wide, with a flat roof and projecting cornice.  the ground floor is divided into two storefronts, each with a recessed entry and large display windows; one of them also has an original broad band of transom windows above. the upper floor bays are divided into groups of three, articulated by pilasters.  the windows are set in rounded-arch openings, with keystoned molded hoods, and bracketed lintels that are joined together within each group.  the block was designed by francis h. fassett, then maine's leading architect.  it was built for reuel williams, then one of augusta's leading businessmen and politicians.  although fassett designed many buildings in augusta, many of the commercial ones were destroyed in the 1865 fire, and this is the only one to survive. fassett is credited with several early post-fire buildings in water street, some of which are located across the street from this one.  see also national register of historic places listings in kennebec county, maine  references  commercial buildings on the national register of historic places in maine national register of historic places in augusta, maine italianate architecture in maine buildings and structures completed in 1862 buildings and structures in augusta, maine
matthew derr (born july 12, 1967) is a higher education leader and was appointed the 11th president of sterling college in may 2012. in december 2010, the council for advancement and support of education awarded derr with the organization's chief executive leadership award and the great lakes colleges association recognized his efforts on behalf of liberal education with a visiting fellowship.  professional life  under derr's leadership, sterling, which is among the smallest liberal arts colleges in the united states, has experienced a period of rapid growth in student enrollment and philanthropic support, through the largest successful fundraising campaign in institutional history. sterling expanded its emphasis on global field studies in 2016 with support from the endeavor foundation and launched the rian fried center for sustainable agriculture & food systems, including, in 2015, a continuing education program named the school of the new american farmstead.  the sterling mission is focused on environmental stewardship. during derr's tenure, the college received national attention for becoming one of the first institutions in the u.s. to divest from fossil fuels. sterling has been recognized for its sustainability initiatives by sierra magazine and earned a stars gold rating from the association for the advancement of sustainability in higher education. the real food challenge ranked sterling the number one college in the u.s. for two consecutive years, 2015 and 2016, for its commitment to serving locally sourced sustainably produced food.  prior to sterling, derr served as an alumni leader and ultimately interim president of his alma mater, antioch college, where he is credited with successfully leading the effort to revive the institution.  for more than a decade derr was affiliated with the walnut hill school for the arts where he served in a number of roles, including acting and associate headmaster. he has also served in senior admission roles at earlham college and connecticut college.  personal life derr was born in flint, michigan. his grandparents and parents were autoworkers. he attended public schools before earning a bachelor of arts in history from antioch college and masters of social work in community organizing and social systems from the university of michigan. he has also studied at the george heyman center for philanthropy at new york university.  president derr is one of a handful of openly gay college presidents in the united states. he currently lives in craftsbury common, vermont with his partner julian sharp, who is also an alumnus of antioch college. sharp is a retired trustee of the unitarian universalist association and presently director of community outreach and a member of the teaching faculty at sterling college.  references  1967 births living
people heads of universities and colleges in the united states antioch college alumni university of michigan school of social work alumni people from craftsbury, vermont
the 1903 argentine primera division was the 12th season of top-flight football in argentina. the season began on april 26 and ended on august 9.  alumni won its fourth consecutive league championship. on 26 july 1903 the squad lost its first league game in four years. flores a.c., which had left the association in 1898, returned to the competition under the name "club atletico de flores".  the championship was expanded to a 6 team league format in 1903, with each team playing the other twice. in february 1903 the association changed its name from "the argentine association football league" to "argentine football association"  final standings  references  argentine primera division seasons 1903 in argentine football 1903 in south american football 1903 in south american football leagues
raphael jamil dem (born march 9, 1993) is a german footballer who plays as a defender for vsg altglienicke.  personal life dem is of senegalese descent through his father.  references  external links  1993 births living people footballers from berlin german footballers german people of senegalese descent chemnitzer fc players hertha bsc ii players 3. liga players association football defenders
calum chace (born 20 march 1959) is an english writer and speaker, focusing on the likely future impact of artificial intelligence on people and societies.  he is the author of surviving ai, the economic singularity, and the philosophical science fiction novels pandora's brain, and its sequel, pandora's oracle.  education  chace studied at maidstone grammar school in kent, england. he later studied philosophy, politics, and economics (ppe) at oxford university. his interest in ai stems from his reading of science fiction, which he describes as philosophy in fancy dress.  career  prior to becoming a full-time writer and speaker in 2012, chace had a 30-year career in journalism and business. he trained as a journalist with the bbc, and later he wrote a column for the ft.  he is now a contributor to forbes magazine. he moved into business, and ran a media practice at kpmg before serving as director and ceo for a number of entrepreneurial businesses.  he has published five books on artificial intelligence.  in 2017, chace co-founded the economic singularity club, "a loose group of technologists, academics and writers who think the threat of mass technological unemployment is worth taking seriously". in january 2019 the group published stories from 2045, a collection of short stories by some of its members speculating on what the world might look like in 2045.  publications  talks  in july 2019, chace was listed among the top 50 futurist speakers in the world.  economic singularity    chace describes the economic singularity as the time when technological unemployment becomes a reality.  he argues that "it is at least a serious possibility that within a generation, many or even most people will be unemployable because machines will be able to do whatever they could do for money better, cheaper and faster. we should be taking this possibility seriously and working out what we would do about it."  "in the past, automation hasn't caused lasting unemployment and has raised the level of wealth in the economy and created new jobs, but past examples of automation have replaced our muscle power and we had our cognitive abilities." so what will happen when robots automate our cognitive work?   "when they start seeing cars driving around with no one driving them, people will realise how impressive computers are. if we don't have a plan, people will panic."  "i think our best hope going forward is figuring out how to live in an economy of radical abundance, where machines do all the work
, and we basically play."   "a world where machines do all the jobs could be a world where humans do more important things, like playing, learning and having fun, but paying for that is going to be tricky."  references  living people place of birth missing (living people) english science fiction writers 1959 births
margaret rachel huxley (1854-1940) was an english nurse who introduced structured, scientific nursing training in ireland. her initiatives led to the establishment of the first nursing school in dublin. she was involved in numerous organisations promoting professionalism in nursing and campaigning for nurse registration throughout the british isles.  early life   she was born in croydon, surrey on 21 december 1854 to esther (nee hopkins) and william thomas huxley, a railway official who was the brother of the biologist thomas henry huxley. she was inspired by florence nightingale's work and decided to become a nurse, even though her family were opposed to this idea. she trained at st bartholomew's hospital, london, starting in 1880. huxley became friends with the matron, ethel manson (later mrs. bedford fenwick), and shared her ideas about promoting nursing as a profession.  career her first job was at the dublin national eye and ear infirmary in 1883. she was soon invited to become matron and lady superintendent at sir patrick dun's hospital where she started a new scientific training course for nurses leading to an examination. this had such a good effect on the quality of nursing there that huxley got agreement from the medical establishment that a citywide school should be set up to cater for nurses from all local hospitals. in 1894 the dublin metropolitan technical school for nurses started its sixty-year life, offering "systematic teaching and uniform examinations". huxley was its first honorary secretary. she "worked wholeheartedly to secure the higher education of nurses" said one report in a nursing journal.  huxley retired from sir patrick dun's in 1902. one historian has speculated that this may have been a result of a dispute over whether the midwives there were sufficiently well trained to be called "nurses". it may, however, have been simply a wish to move on. at this time she established a "margaret huxley memorial medal" for the best nurse in training. huxley continued her nursing involvement through a private nursing home, elpis, opened by her in 1890, which catered for middle-class dublin protestants. nurses there were trained at sir patrick dun's and the hospital found that the connection enhanced its reputation. huxley became sir patrick dun's first woman governor in 1912.  post-retirement work  after "retiring" in 1902 huxley had an opportunity to become more involved in a number of organisations which were pressing for state registration for nurses. her continuing friendship with ethel fenwick and other london acquaintances had already seen her become a founder member of the royal british
nurses' association (1887), of the matrons' council for great britain and ireland (1894) and of the international council of nurses (icn) (1899). she was also a leading figure in the irish matrons' association (founded 1903) and the irish nurses' association (1904). huxley attended many annual international conferences of the icn and in 1913, as president of the irish nurses' association, she arranged the first ever professional nurses conference in dublin: a conference of the national council of nurses of great britain and ireland. she was vice-president of the society for the state registration of trained nurses. and a fellow of the british college of nurses.  huxley presented her arguments for state registration of nurses to a house of commons select committee which sat in 1904-1905. she supported regulated standards of education with a formal registration procedure which would prevent untrained nurses from claiming to be qualified, and enable qualified nurses to move more easily between hospitals. the committee's report was sympathetic but the legal framework for registration was not introduced until 1919. separate legislation for ireland led to the founding of a general nursing council for ireland in 1920. huxley became its vice-chairman and also a member of its registration committee. she was not a supporter of irish nationalism, however, taking more interest in international nursing issues, and her leadership roles in irish nursing did not continue.  huxley was concerned about public health and housing and believed that an improved domestic environment for poor people would be beneficial to their health. the modest but well-planned houses in huxley crescent, dublin, were built by a trust fund she set up. her own time and money went into philanthropic projects of this kind. she worked with a housing society whose members were drawn from the unitarian church congregation (which she is believed to have joined around 1912) and provided a "substantial donation". she is remembered with a stained glass window at the unitarian church in st. stephen's green.  during the first world war huxley worked for the red cross and the voluntary aid detachment hospital in dublin but refused the honour of a royal red cross for her work: because she disliked "publicity and honours" and was described by her contemporary, alice reeves, as a "woman of very simple tastes... unostentatious and self-disciplined". later she accepted honorary membership of the finnish nurses' association (1925) and an honorary degree from dublin university in 1928, at which time she was called the "pioneer of scientific nursing in ireland". she died on
10 january 1940 and her funeral service was at the unitarian church.  references  external links  margaret huxley - pioneer of scientific nursing in ireland  forgotten heroines of the easter rising, irish times, 28 jan 2016  1854 births 1940 deaths nurses from london irish nurses health in ireland irish unitarians british unitarians people from croydon margaret
{{infobox comic book title  | image               = 'buffy the vampire slayer' season 11.png | imagesize           =  | caption             = promotional art of the buffy the vampire slayer season eleven comic book series. art by steve morris. | title = buffy the vampire slayer season eleven | schedule            = monthly | format              =  | limited             = y | genre               = horror | publisher           =  dark horse comics | date                = | startmo             = november | startyr             = 2016 | endmo               = may | endyr               = 2018 | issues              = 12 (each core series) 4 (giles) | main_char_team      = scooby gang | issn                = | writers             = buffy:christos gage  angel:corinna becko  giles: joss whedon & erika alexander  | artists             =  | pencillers          = buffy:rebekah isaacs megan levens georges jeanty angel:geraldo borges ze carlos   giles: jon lam | inkers              =  | letterers           =  | colorists           =  | editors             =  | creative_team_month =  | creative_team_year  =  | creators            = joss whedon | tpb                 =  | isbn                =  | subcat              =  | altcat              =  | sort                = buffy the vampire slayer season eleven | nonus               =  }}buffy the vampire slayer season eleven is the sequel to the season ten comic book series, a canonical continuation of the television series buffy the vampire slayer. buffy & angel consist of only 12 issues per series, a much shorter run than the previous seasons, while the miniseries, giles, runs for 4 issues. the series was published by dark horse comics and began on november 23, 2016.  the series was concluded with season twelve which began on june 20, 2018 and concluded on september 19, 2018.  publication  buffy the vampire slayer season eleven  single issues  trade paperbacks  angel season eleven  single issues  trade paperbacks  giles season eleven  single issues  trade paperbacks  references  external links  buffy the vampire slayer at dark horse comics  season 11 season 11 sequel comics lgbt-related comics 2016 in comics
it is never too late to love (spanish: nunca es tarde para amar) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by tito davison and starring libertad lamarque, roberto canedo and jose elias moreno.  partial cast    libertad lamarque as malisa morales   roberto canedo  as claudio perez de castro    jose elias moreno  as doctor zamora    jose baviera  as senor rodriguez    dolores tinoco  as rosario    jesus valero  as lic. bustamante   andres velazquez  as quique    martha valdes  as amelia  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films directed by tito davison mexican black-and-white films
brigadier sir norman wilmshurst gwatkin  (2 august 1899 - 31 july 1971) was a british army officer and courtier in the household of elizabeth ii.  military career gwatkin was the son of hugh fortescue wilmshurst gwatkin and vera philpots. he was educated at clifton college before attending the royal military college, sandhurst.  he commissioned into the coldstream guards in 1918. he subsequently joined the royal household. he was invested as a member of the royal victorian order in 1937, while serving as assistant comptroller of the lord chamberlain's office. in 1940 he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant-colonel. gwatkin saw active service in the second world war and in 1944 he was awarded the distinguished service order while commanding the 5th guards armoured brigade in operation overlord. he returned to the royal household after the war. between 1950 and 1952 he served as an extra equerry to george vi, and held the same role in the household of elizabeth ii until his death in 1971. from 1960 to 1964 he served as comptroller, and in 1963 he was made knight grand cross of the royal victorian order. gwatkin served as secretary and registrar of the order of merit between 1963 and his death. in 1964 he was made knight commander of the order of st michael and st george.  in 1957 he married isolen mary june wilson in aldershot.  while serving in the lord chamberlain's office he was responsible for a report which described the 1962 play, under plain cover, as "effluent".  references  external links generals of world war ii  1899 births 1971 deaths british army brigadiers of world war ii companions of the distinguished service order english courtiers equerries graduates of the royal military college, sandhurst knights commander of the order of st michael and st george knights grand cross of the royal victorian order operation overlord people people educated at clifton college knights commander of the order of merit of the federal republic of germany coldstream guards officers british army brigadiers
the cwi/wipa awards are a set of annual cricket awards given jointly by the cricket west indies (cwi) and the west indies players' association (wipa). the awards recognise and honour the best west indian international and domestic cricketers of the past season. the awards were known as wipa awards until 2013 when the cwi, then known as west indies cricket board (wicb), and wipa decided to jointly host the awards function.  history the west indies players' association (wipa) started the wipa awards in 2004, with first citizens bank as its title sponsor. the awards were called "first citizens wipa awards" for the first nine years, after which wipa and the west indies cricket board (wicb) agreed to jointly organize and fund the awards with the function being renamed as "wicb/wipa awards". after west indies cricket board was renamed as cricket west indies, the awards have come to be known as "cwi/wipa awards".  the winners of the awards are selected by a panel of judges which mainly consists of eminent former cricketers from the west indies. the panel of judges for the inaugural awards in 2004 included ian bishop, joey carew, tony cozier, gordon greenidge, gus logie, vivian richards and ricky skerritt.  brian lara won the first ever wipa player of the year award in 2004 and went on to win it the following two years as well to complete a hat-trick. apart from lara, three cricketers have won the award more than once: shivnarine chanderpaul (2008 and 2009), chris gayle (2007 and 2011) and marlon samuels (2013 and 2016). chanderpaul has won the test player of the year award four times (2008, 2009, 2013 and 2014), the most by any player, while the odi player of the year has been won twice each by chanderpaul, gayle and samuels. the t20i player of the year award was introduced in 2010 and only sunil narine has won it more than once (in 2013 and 2014).  the only award in women's cricket, women's player of the year, has been won by stafanie taylor for a record nine times, including eight wins in succession from 2009 to 2016.  list of winners  wipa awards  2004  the awards function was held on 17 march 2004 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: brian lara  regional four day player of the year: t
ino best  under-19 player of the year: ravi rampaul  2005 the awards function was held on 31 may 2005 in kingston, jamaica.  player of the year: brian lara  test player of the year: brian lara  odi player of the year: chris gayle  emerging player of the year: dwayne bravo  regional four day team of the year: barbados  under-19 team of the year: jamaica  regional four day player of the year: devon smith  under-19 player of the year: xavier marshall  2006 the awards function was held on 24 may 2006 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: brian lara  test player of the year: brian lara  odi player of the year: ian bradshaw  emerging player of the year: denesh ramdin  women's player of the year: pamela lavine  regional four day team of the year: guyana  under-19 team of the year: trinidad and tobago  under-15 team of the year: trinidad and tobago  regional four day player of the year: ridley jacobs  regional 50-over player of the year: ramnaresh sarwan  under-19 player of the year: sunil narine  under-15 player of the year: adrian barath  2007 the awards function was held on 12 february 2007 in bridgetown, barbados.  player of the year: chris gayle  test player of the year: daren ganga  odi player of the year: ramnaresh sarwan  emerging player of the year: jerome taylor  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  regional four day team of the year: trinidad and tobago  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: ryan hinds  regional 50-over player of the year: kieron pollard  under-19 player of the year: veerasammy permaul  2008  the awards function was held on 30 march 2008 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  test player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  odi player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  emerging player of the year: adrian barath  women's player of the year: stacy-ann king  regional four day team of the year: trinidad and tobago  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: daren ganga  regional 50-over player of the
year: shawn findlay  under-19 player of the year: shamarh brooks  2009 the awards function was held on 12 march 2009 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  test player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  odi player of the year: chris gayle  emerging player of the year: brendan nash  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  regional four day team of the year: jamaica  under-19 team of the year: barbados  regional four day player of the year: nikita miller  regional 50-over player of the year: kieron pollard  caribbean twenty20 player of the year: dave mohammed  under-19 player of the year: keron cottoy  2010 the awards function was held on 8 june 2010 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: ramnaresh sarwan  test player of the year: ramnaresh sarwan  odi player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  t20i player of the year: dwayne bravo  emerging player of the year: kemar roach  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  regional four day team of the year: trinidad and tobago  under-19 team of the year: jamaica  regional four day player of the year: narsingh deonarine  regional 50-over player of the year: daren ganga  caribbean twenty20 player of the year: darren bravo  under-19 player of the year: akeem dewar  2011  the awards function was held on 5 june 2011 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: chris gayle  test player of the year: chris gayle  odi player of the year: kieron pollard  t20i player of the year: darren sammy  emerging player of the year: darren bravo  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  regional four day team of the year: jamaica  under-19 team of the year: windward islands  regional four day player of the year: imran khan  regional 50-over player of the year: kirk edwards  caribbean twenty20 player of the year: devendra bishoo  under-19 player of the year: keiron joseph  2012 the awards function was held on 13 april 2012 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: devendra bishoo  test player of the year: devendra
bishoo  odi player of the year: andre russell  t20i player of the year: lendl simmons  emerging player of the year: kirk edwards  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  regional four day team of the year: jamaica  under-19 team of the year: jamaica  regional four day player of the year: marlon samuels  regional 50-over player of the year: sunil narine  caribbean twenty20 player of the year: lendl simmons  under-19 player of the year: derone davis  wicb/wipa awards  2013 the awards function was held on 4 july 2013 in port of spain, trinidad and tobago.  player of the year: marlon samuels  test player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  odi player of the year: marlon samuels  t20i player of the year: sunil narine  emerging player of the year: kieran powell  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  wicb lifetime achievement award: john hendricks  wipa lifetime achievement award: winston reid  regional four day team of the year: jamaica  under-19 team of the year: barbados  regional four day player of the year: nikita miller  regional 50-over player of the year: sunil narine  caribbean twenty20 player of the year: krishmar santokie  under-19 player of the year: jeremy solozano  2014 the awards function was held on 5 june 2014 in kingston, jamaica.  player of the year: darren bravo  test player of the year: shivnarine chanderpaul  odi player of the year: dwayne bravo  t20i player of the year: sunil narine  emerging player of the year: miguel cummins  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  wicb lifetime achievement award: teddy griffith  wipa lifetime achievement award: lockhart sebastien  regional four day team of the year: trinidad and tobago  under-19 team of the year: jamaica  regional four day player of the year: nikita miller  regional 50-over player of the year: shane shillingford  twenty20 player of the year: darren bravo  under-19 player of the year: tagenarine chanderpaul  2015 the awards function was held on 9 june 2015 in kingston, jamaica.  player of the year: sulieman benn  test player of the year: kraigg brathwaite  odi player of the year: denesh
ramdin  t20i player of the year: samuel badree  emerging player of the year: jermaine blackwood  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  wicb lifetime achievement award: chetram singh  wipa lifetime achievement award: renford pinnock  regional four day team of the year: barbados  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: shacaya thomas  regional 50-over player of the year: dwayne smith  twenty20 player of the year: lendl simmons  under-19 player of the year: shimron hetmyer  2016  the awards function was held on 19 july 2016 in st. john's, antigua and barbuda.  player of the year: marlon samuels  test player of the year: darren bravo  odi player of the year: marlon samuels  t20i player of the year: chris gayle  emerging player of the year: jomel warrican  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  wicb lifetime achievement award: clarvis joseph  wipa lifetime achievement award: ralston otto  regional four day team of the year: guyana  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: veerasammy permaul  regional 50-over player of the year: jason mohammed  twenty20 player of the year: dwayne bravo  under-19 player of the year: shimron hetmyer  cwi/wipa awards  2017 the awards function was held on 7 july 2017 in kingston, jamaica.  player of the year: roston chase  test player of the year: roston chase  odi player of the year: jason holder  t20i player of the year: andre russell  emerging player of the year: roston chase  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  women's odi player of the year: stafanie taylor  women's t20i player of the year: stafanie taylor  cwi lifetime achievement award: walter eden st john  wipa lifetime achievement award: cleveland davidson  regional four day team of the year: guyana  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: roston chase  regional 50-over player of the year: ashley nurse  twenty20 player of the year: dwayne bravo  under-19 player of the year: joshua bishop  wipa in the community
award: kameah cooper  windies foundation award: the chris gayle foundation  2018 the awards function was held on 20 june 2018 in bridgetown, barbados.  player of the year: shai hope  test player of the year: shai hope  odi player of the year: shai hope  t20i player of the year: evin lewis  emerging player of the year: keemo paul  women's player of the year: stafanie taylor  women's odi player of the year: stafanie taylor  women's t20i player of the year: deandra dottin  cwi lifetime achievement award: carol whilby-maxwell  wipa lifetime achievement award: dawnley joseph  regional four day team of the year: guyana  under-19 team of the year: guyana  regional four day player of the year: devon smith  regional 50-over player of the year: roston chase  twenty20 player of the year: chadwick walton  under-19 player of the year: kirstan kallicharan  wipa in the community award: rodney sieunarine  windies foundation award: the marlon samuels foundation  umpire of the year: joel wilson  references  external links  players' awards at west indies players' association  cricket awards and rankings west indian cricket lists 2004 establishments in north america awards established in 2004
the spanish quidditch cup is the main quidditch championship of spain. it's an annual event, celebrated for the first time in 2016. the 2016 spanish quidditch cup was the first edition of this tournament. it was played on the february 6th and 7th, 2016 in campo grande football fields in rivas-vaciamadrid, madrid. 8 teams from andalusia, basque country, galicia and madrid joined for this event where the locals, madrid wolves, won the championship beating bizkaia boggarts in the final 140-70*.  history  winners  by teams  by regions  see also   quidditch in spain  international quidditch association  references  external links  quidditch competitions sports competitions in spain recurring sporting events established in 2016 2016 establishments in spain
edward and george cary eggleston house is a historic home located at vevay, switzerland county, indiana. it was built in 1837, and is a two-story, rectangular brick dwelling with a -story rear ell.  it was the boyhood home of authors and brothers edward eggleston (1837-1902) and george cary eggleston (1839-1911).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1973.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in indiana houses completed in 1837 buildings and structures in switzerland county, indiana national register of historic places in switzerland county, indiana
billy highstreet samba is an album by saxophonist stan getz which was recorded in paris in 1981 and released on the emarcy label in 1990.  reception  the allmusic review by scott yanow stated "not essential music but a fine example of getz's flexibility and creative instincts".  track listing  "hospitality creek" (mitchel forman) - 9:49  "anytime tomorrow" (chuck loeb) - 6:02  "be there then" (loeb) - 8:10  "billy highstreet samba" (loeb) - 6:01  "the dirge" (forman) - 7:04  "page two" (loeb) - 8:59  "body and soul" (johnny green, frank eyton, edward heyman, robert sour) - 6:27  "tuesday next" (loeb) - 10:06  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone, soprano saxophone mitchel forman - keyboards chuck loeb - guitar mark egan - electric bass victor lewis - drums bobby thomas - percussion  references   1990 albums stan getz albums emarcy records albums
eunidia subteralba is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1942.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1942
effects on indigenous groups in russia  throughout russia, there has been significant industrial development and pollution on indigenous lands. in many cases, these industrial developments arguably result in disproportionate harm for the indigenous inhabitants, who in many cases do not benefit proportionally from industrial resource extraction and transportation projects. according to environment and geography scholar craig zumbrunnen, two of the most heavily polluted regions in russia are northeastern russia and the kola peninsula.the dispossession of indigenous peoples from their lands throughout russia for natural resource extraction has a long historical context of racism. according to indigenous studies scholar aileen espiritu, "as non-european peoples, the khanty, mansi and yamalo-nenets were seen as inferior races by the russians, and were therefore exploited for their goods and resources. forcible tsarist jurisdiction over khanty, mansi and yamalo-nenets territory began in the sixteenth century." espiritu expands on the social implications of historical dispossession, writing throughout the eighteenth century, the exaction of exceedingly high yasak [tribute in furs] payments forced the yamalo-nenets and the khanty to abandon their traditional economy of hunting and fishing in order to trap sables, and later foxes, for russian officials and traders. the khanty, mansi, and yamalo-nenets were, therefore, forced to leave their own territories in an attempt to live as they had lived for hundreds, perhaps even thousands, of years (prokof'yeva, et al. 1956:515) ... these effects on the khanty, mansi and yamalo-nenets, while serious, were minimal when compared to the imposition of soviet rule and hegemony.bolshevik policies from 1917 onwards quickly focused on the transition of indigenous economies from traditional livelihoods into socialist economies based upon, in the words of anthropologist debra schindler, "the creation of a 'modern,'... urban-industrial settlement system; collectivization of the indigenous production economy; development of natural resources and the industrial development of other branches of the economy; and the introduction of the indigenous population to and their incorporation in 'modern' (russian) society (1991:70)." according to espiritu, the result of these state policies "based on rigid and dogmatic leninist ideology" has led to severe damage for the cultural traditions, identities, and indigenous lifestyles of aboriginal russian peoples. in the opinion of geography scholar gail a. fondahl, upon assuming power, the soviet state identified the peoples of the north as
exceedingly primitive, and in need of a special policy body to facilitate the transition to socialism (sergeev 1995; slezkine 1994). at the same time the bolsheviks fingered the north as a storehouse of wealth to be exploited for the development of the new socialist state. in the first decade of soviet power, planners deliberated on balancing aboriginal needs and state aspirations in debates regarding northern development policy, but by the mid-1930s the latter took clear precedence over the former. when development concerns dictated, the state confiscated aboriginal lands and relocated natives.the drive for increased resource extraction intensified under joseph stalin's regime, resulting in particularly deleterious patterns of dispossession for indigenous peoples in the european north, siberia, and the far east. in the opinion of zumbrunnen, since the inception of stalin's forced industrialization campaigns in the 1930s, these extensive, remote, resource-rich regions have been targeted for industrial development, mineral and energy resource extraction and processing which have had particularly disruptive and contaminating effects ... not only did soviet development plans favor industrialization over traditional forms of economic activities, but all too often these industrial developments have been in conflict with traditional indigenous economic activities, such as reindeer herding, fishing, fur harvesting, and self-sufficient forms of agriculture, domestic animal husbandry, and logging, all of which require healthy ecosystems." many of these issues of environmental degradation and indigenous dispossession have arguably continued from soviet times into the present day. as described by one observer in 1991, "in the majority of regions inhabited by [the numerically small peoples of the north] the ecological situation has sharply intensified, the systematic destruction of established norms and rules of natural resource use has been allowed (o dopolnitel'nykh 1991)." for indigenous peoples in russia, environmental degradation can often affect deeper cultural and metaphysical sentiments beyond ecological and economic concerns, extending to all aspects of indigenous lifestyles and epistemologies. as argued by fondahl, "northern peoples differed from other citizens of the russian federation due to their involvement in activities that required an intimate connection with, and an extensive use of, expansive homelands. if symbolic of primitivism in the eyes of many soviet citizens, the traditional activities also symbolized a special, harmonic and intense interaction with the natural environments.  for example, when soviet planners attempted to "rationalize", collectivize, and commercialize traditional indigenous livelihoods such as reindeer husbandry, their efforts were frustrated by the realization that indigenous peoples worldviews treated such economies as intrinsically tied to non-economically
quantifiable values of social and spiritual significance, which ran contrary to soviet modernization rationale. reindeer "conveyed a family's protective spirits, provided not only physical but spiritual nourishment at life-event celebrations, and accompanied the owner on her or his voyage from this world to the next". these metaphysical indigenous values were rooted in the working indigenous vocabulary of reindeer husbandry to such an extent that soviet workers assigned to the field with indigenous groups frequently had little choice but to learn the indigenous languages as no corollary terms for these expressions existed in russian, yet were vital to learning the trade.  the effect of industry on the well-being of reindeer herding has been a profound concern to many indigenous people in russia. speaking at the second international working seminar on the problems of northern peoples (prince george, bc, canada, 1996), v.a. robbek, director, institute of the problems of northern minorities, yakutsk, sakha republic (yakutia), stated, "destroy our reindeer breeding and our traditional lands and you destroy us, the even, as a people."  similar views were expressed by another russian indigenous commentator in 1996, who statedour native lands are being annexed and barbarically destroyed by rapacious petroleum and natural gas, coal, gold, and non-ferrous mining interests without any form of just compensation...and this phenomena  is depriving us of our lands and rights to part of the resource wealth, [and] deprives us of our basic right-a right to life (social...1996).  oil and gas development   in 2014, 70% of russia's crude oil exports, and 90% of its natural gas exports, went to europe. according to henderson and mitrova of the oxford institute for energy studies, european gas output is expected to slip from around 250bcm in 2014 to 225bcm in 2020 and 150bcm in 2030, leaving an import gap of over 310bcm by the end of this decade and over 420bcm by 2030. much of this gap in demand could potentially be supplied by russia. in the words of henderson and mitrova, "gazprom's exports to non-fsu (former soviet union) countries rose from an initial level of 3.5bcm in 1970 to a peak of 162bcm in 2005, with sales extending across 28 countries in the region". record quantities of oil were produced in russia in 2015, with 534 million tons extracted, an increase of 1.5% over 2014 production levels. in 2015
, a record 23 million tons of russian petroleum products (including liquefied natural gas) were shipped through arctic waters from russian ports such as murmansk, arkhangelsk, and varandey, as well as norwegian ports such as hammerfest, according to statistics provided by vardø bessel traffic service centre in norway.  much of this energy supply was extracted from the traditional territories of indigenous peoples, raising questions surrounding indigenous rights, title, and environmental marginalization.  nenets autonomous okrug   in 2015, 14.6 million tons of oil were produced from nenets autonomous okrug, a 6.4% increase over 2014 production. there are 14 new oil and gas fields planned for development in the nenets autonomous okrug, which lies within northwestern russia.  as of 2003, there were an estimated 6500 nenets and 5000 komi individuals residing in nenets autonomous okrug, a majority of whom were engaged in reindeer husbandry. large-scale degradation of reindeer grazing lands took place between the 1960s and 1980s; after a slowdown in development, the situation began to worsen by the early 2000s. in the words of peskov and dallmann, "in addition to the high unemployment among indigenous peoples, the situation in the reindeer husbandry sector is deteriorating: decreasing numbers of reindeer, misappropriation, absence of appropriate marketing schemes for products. these and other factors provoke a general degradation of indigenous society." peskov and dallmann identify responsibility on the part of both oil companies as well as the nenets autonomous okrug government, which they claim has not lived up to its legal obligations to protect indigenous rights. peskov and dallmann provide an overall opinion that "nenets and komi in this region have for many centuries maintained a traditional way of life rooted firmly in reindeer husbandry in the area. these are the people who mainly suffer as a result of the attitudes of newcomers to the arctic natural environment, in spite of all legal guarantees."  novaya zemlya  in 1870 nenets people were permanently settled on novaya zemlya by the russian empire to prevent norwegian expansion. the traditional nenets name for the archipelago, which lies in northwestern russia, is edey ya.  according to the preparatory commission for the comprehensive nuclear-test-ban treaty organization, during the cold war approximately 500 indigenous persons were relocated from novaya zemlya to make way for nuclear testing. the reindeer living on the island either died or were relocated to the mainland. between 1954 and 1990, 132 nuclear test explosions, ninety four percent of the aggregate yield of nuclear testing in the
former soviet union, were conducted on the islands. on october 30, 1961, the tsar bomba hydrogen bomb was tested, representing the largest man-made explosion in history.  in spite of inexplicably high levels of cancer among arctic indigenous peoples in russia during the 1960s and 1970s, comprehensive analysis of cancer statistics in 2004 indicate that overall, indigenous peoples on the kola peninsula and in nenets autonomous okrug (where there is significant radiation contamination) today experience below-average levels of cancer compared to the rest of russia. however, reports by the siberian branch of the russian academy of sciences and the russian academy of medical sciences indicate high rates of chromosomal diseases and birth defects among indigenous people around novaya zemlya which may be linked to nuclear testing. locals have nicknamed the islands "the archipelago of death".  komi republic   in 2015, 14.9 million tons of oil were produced from komi republic, an increase of 5.4% over 2014 production. the komi republic, which lies in northwestern russia, is home to the indigenous komi people, has 152 hydrocarbon fields, of which 87 produce oil and gas; 65 are currently in commercial production, and 22 are designated as experimental. in 1994, a pipeline fractured near the city of usinsk, komi republic. according to komineft (komi oil) and local government officials, 14,000 metric tons of oil leaked; however, this figure is disputed. according to the u.s. department of energy, the leak in fact saw 270,000 metric tons spilled. in the words of a press release from the international work group for indigenous affairs, "it was the site of the world's worst ever terrestrial oil spill."  the pechora, kolva, and usa rivers have all experienced significant contamination from oil leaks. 1,900 leaks were documented along komineft-owned pipelines between 1986 and 1991. throughout the region, there are also concerns surrounding the accountability of environmental monitoring and cleanup programs.  for example, in the settlement of kolva in komi indigenous territory, komi indigenous people were left to clean up the site of a major oil spill themselves, with minimal assistance from government authorities or oil company workers; the head of usinsk district, alexander tian, responded to komi requests for help by allegedly stating "if you do not want to breathe in oil fumes, you should take a boat out and remove the oil yourself!" and offered to pay 10,000 rubles (approximately 250 euros) per barrel recovered-a reimburs
ement that kolva residents claim was not honoured. out of 117 persons cleaning the site, 11 were workers from rusveitpetro, the owner of the pipeline, a number that some activists felt was inadequate. later, the inhabitants of kolva asked for regular water testing over concerns of drinking water contamination. the results of the samples, sent to syktyvkar, were never released, yet komi republic officials insisted that the tests determined the water was safe, leading to allegations of government unaccountability. according to an unidentified source from within the komi republic government administration, there were allegations word of the spill was suppressed by rusveitpetro for a period of possibly several months, and that lawsuits would likely not cover the full costs of cleanup.on april 10, 2016, members of the komi izvatas (also known as komi izhemtsy) indigenous subgroup reported to the committee to save the pechora that a large oil spill had taken place on the yagera river near ukhta. according to the committee, 400 metric tons of crude oil reached the izhma river, reportedly causing concerns of effects on izvatas livelihoods. on april 26, sixteen days later, a possible source of the leak was identified by the committee to save pechora at malyi voivoizh creek, although government officials could not confirm. many residents of izhma district believe that cancers are occurring at an increasing rate of incidence due to pollution. food sources such as fish have allegedly become contaminated, and reindeer have been poisoned by oil spills on their grazing areas. according to makliuk, most residents of the district live in poverty. they also claim discriminatory hiring processes that give preference to non-local workers, in spite of the enormous revenues generated from their traditional territories. according to one resident, "we have to live on the disposal dump of [the] oil industry. we can't even sell our houses and move away, because they cost nothing."  on april 11, 2014, the izhma district council passed a resolution to support a complete shutdown of oil and gas operations in the area. the decision was in part due to concerns over economic effects on reindeer herding; the residents of izhma, many of whom are izvata, are part of the only subgroup within the komi indigenous people who still practice this livelihood. in particular, concerns were sparked by the discovery of new drilling rigs in close proximity (200 meters) to the village of krasnobar, which had been installed without prior notice,
permission, or consent of izvata communities or izhma district administration, in contravention of environmental legislation. 150 people, representing twelve settlements, gathered for the vote, held in krasnobar village; the izhma district council voted unanimously in favor.  on june 5, 2014, a demonstration was held in ust-usa village in usinsk district, komi republic. the demonstration, held in the same region affected by the 1994 spill, followed earlier protests in izhma and saw the adoption of a "strongly worded" resolution by indigenous groups present. protesters threatened to boycott future komi republic elections if their demands were not met. an excerpt from the declaration reads,  we, the inhabitants of villages within usinsk municipal district, have been experiencing the terrible consequences of oil extraction in our land for over four decades. our rivers, lakes and swamps are being mercilessly polluted. our ancestral land is being destroyed. we are deprived of the natural resources which are our main source of livelihood. our constitutional rights to a healthy living environment, to clean air and clean water is being violated systematically. oil companies, and first of all lukoil-komi, the main operator of oil production within komi republic, are brushing off our letters and appeals with dismissals, promises and deceit. neither have we never received an adequate and constructive response to our repeated enquiries to various authorities, from the municipal district administration to the country's leadership. they do not listen, they don't understand us.therefore we are gathered here at the rally in the ancient village of ust-usa, and we declare that we join the residents of krasnobor, shelyayur and other settlements of izhma district in that we will no longer idly observe the barbaric destruction of our land and the pollution of our rivers. people have come to our ancestral lands, who are not interested in our future and future of our children - they are only interested in the "black gold" - our mineral resources. and for its sake they are prepared to turn it into a lifeless space; and they do so.  kola peninsula   on the kola peninsula in northwestern russia, sami people were displaced from their traditional territories during the cold war. the greatest single displacement took place when sami fishermen were evacuated from the coastline in order to make way for secretive naval installations. meanwhile, reindeer herders were dispossessed from their territories along a 200-mile zone adjacent to the border with finland and norway. this border was soon closed, effectively shutting communication and movement
between sami peoples in finland, norway, and sweden with those on the russian kola.  further displacement was caused by the arrival of increased heavy industry and natural resource extraction such as forestry and mining during soviet times. hundreds of thousands of workers from other areas of the ussr arrived, many of whom were forcibly interned as workers in the gulags. this industrialization disrupted reindeer herding livelihoods, and led in part to the settlement of sami into soviet-designed urban areas such as lovozero. today, most russian sami live in extreme poverty and poor housing conditions.acid rain is a major concern on the kola peninsula, where it has caused severe damage to thousands of square kilometres of tundra and taiga. the ecological balance of the peninsula has been adversely affected by mining operations, which has contributed to atmospheric pollution, damage to forests and natural meadow lands, and groundwater depletion and pollution.   according to zumbrunnen, between 1964 and 1986 approximately 11,000 containers of "dangerous wastes" were dumped into the kara and barents seas. nuclear waste dumping is believed to have occurred in arctic waters nearby, and, as of 1997, many ships anchored near shore either stored or contained radioactive waste along the coastlines which had once been inhabited by evacuated sami fishermen.  according to sami activist larisa avdeyeva, the first public sami protest in russia took place in 1998, when a swedish company attempted to establish an open-pit gold mine in the middle of sami reindeer grazing lands. today, vast areas of the kola continue to be ecologically devastated by pollution from smelting, including operations such as the kola mining and metallurgy combine near the norwegian border. many nuclear facilities operate throughout the area, which continues to host numerous nuclear-waste sites. pressure to expand mining as well as oil and gas production, and plans for new long-distance pipelines, have been growing concerns for russian sami.  some sami leaders have reported harassment, allegedly at the hands of the russian government. in one notable case, the head of russia's sami parliament, valentina sovkina, was reportedly harassed and assaulted on her way to a un indigenous conference in new york in 2014, while other sami leaders reported incidents such as alleged tampering of their passports en route to the event. according to skynews journalist katie stallard, "the kremlin sees the region as a source of oil, gas and mineral wealth - a crucial part of its energy and security ambitions. ms sovkina thinks the authorities are worried the sami will assert their right to self-determination, and to their share
of the natural resources."  as of 2006, 1,600 sami were living in russia.  western siberia (khanty-mansi and yamalo-nenets autonomous okrug)  by 2008, more than 70 billion barrels of oil had been extracted from the western siberian province of khanty-mansi. representing 70 percent of russian oil production at a 2008 rate of seven million barrels a day, vast quantities of energy resources from khanty-mansi are destined for western europe annually. according to journalist paul starobin, the region's indigenous inhabitants have experienced ongoing social and economic marginalisation, in spite of the economic wealth generated by oil and gas development. in the words of starobin,  when siberia's oil lands came under development, native people were forcibly herded into villages and cut off from their hunting and fishing grounds. following the breakup of the soviet union, the nomads won legal status as "aboriginal people," with the right to roam the oil fields. in spite of their new status ... their lot has hardly improved. their numbers are small, about 30,000 in all; their languages are nearly extinct; and they are heavily afflicted by the scourges of contemporary russia-aids, alcoholism, and tuberculosis. some oil-tax money is being invested in medical ships that stop along the rivers to care for patients. but critics say these floating clinics diagnose disease, then leave patients with no means to get treatment.by the early 1970s, oil and gas reserves began to deplete in northeastern russia, and production started to shift towards western siberia. yet by the late 1980s, it was becoming increasingly visible that much of the wealth generated by oil and gas development was not reaching indigenous groups. according to espiritu, by this time the living conditions of many indigenous people in siberia was in a precipitous state, and yamalo-nenet groups were documented as living in "squalid" conditions in close proximity to the city of salekhard. as part of the rapid ramping up of production of oil and gas during the 1960s and 1970s, proper infrastructure for both the handling of petroleum products, as well as social infrastructure for the influx of workers, was frequently overlooked. thousands of kilometres of pipelines were built using substandard construction codes for the harsh climate, resulting in vast numbers of leaks and spills. according to a 1997 essay by zumbrunnen, environmentalists at the time estimated that 35,000 pipeline ruptures were occurring each year, accounting for between one and three
percent of russian oil output (3 to 10 million metric tons annually). meanwhile, 19 billion cubic meters of gas were being flared in west siberia annually, releasing polyaromatic hydrocarbons, heavy metals, carbon, and nitrogen dioxides into the local atmosphere. in 2012, the figure was estimated at 17.1 billion cubic metres.  due to pollution from the oil and gas developments, reindeer herding, fishing, and hunting became unviable for many yamalo-nenets in the area, and many had little choice but to request government assistance. since the 1980s, fluctuations in energy production in khanty-mansi and yamalo-nenetskiy autonomous okrugs have caused many indigenous khanty, mansi, and yamalo-nenet peoples who were employed in the energy sector to find themselves out of work, with no viable traditional livelihoods to return to.  it has been estimated (according to statistics given in an interview by evgenia belyakova, arctic project coordinator for greenpeace russia) that the total cost of replacing russia's ageing pipelines could cost 1.3 trillion russian rubles (approximately 1.5 billion us dollars), but could be achieved within five years if companies were prepared to absorb a 25% drop in profits at 2015 energy prices.  land use agreements and indigenous-rights legislation   according to indigenous studies scholar brian donahoe, "article 69 of the 1993 russian constitution explicitly guarantees in principle the 'rights of the indigenous small-numbered peoples in accordance with the universally recognized principles and norms of international law and international agreements that the russian federation has entered into."the "vague wording" of laws surrounding indigenous rights in russia has resulted in indigenous land use agreements in russia that are often informal in nature. for example, "dmitry aleksandrovich nesanelis, the former vice director of the lukoil-varandeyneftegaz oil drilling company (lukoil's daughter company in the nenets autonomous oblast), an anthropologist by training and the person responsible for relations between this company and the indigenous nenets people, asserted in 2003 that it was in the interests of the state to make these laws so vague as to be unworkable."  nesanelis has also spoken of concerns regarding the implications of vague legislation on oil drilling. according to donahoe, "as a large multinational corporation, lukoil is concerned with its public image with respect to the effect its activities have on indigenous peoples and on the environment." nesanelis has stated he would prefer laws that would give energy corporations "some concrete
guidelines about 'what exactly they have to pay, how, and to whom.'"  while some indigenous leaders such as vladislav peskov, president of the association of indigenous small-numbered peoples of the nenets autonomous oblast have spoken in favour of informal agreements (peskov has stated that "different people need different things. some need land, some need money, and the informal agreements with the drillers allow everyone to get what they really want"), others have voiced concerns about the long-term implications of informal land-use agreements. in the opinion of donahoe, the informal nature of these agreements privilege short-term benefits over the security of long-term legal protections. in the words of donahoe, "having failed to assert their legal rights when they could have [after 2004, new russian laws such as the omnibus federal law no. 122 have weakened indigenous legal rights, especially federal law no. 232 pertaining to changes in environmental impact assessments], they will find in the longer term that their economically and politically more powerful partners can turn the law against them when it behooves them to do so."  russia, an international labor organization member, has not ratified ilo 69, an agreement that "explicitly and unequivocally asserts the right to self-determination for all indigenous peoples". according to donahoe, this allows the russian federation to "continue to deny indigenous peoples true control over their economic resources". as articulated by donahoe, russia is also a member of the united nations whose charter somewhat vaguely states that one of the purposes of the organization is 'to develop friendly relations among nations based on respect for the principle of equal rights and self-determination of peoples' (article 1, paragraph 2) ... the united nations recognizes indigenous peoples of classically colonized lands-namely, colonized lands that lie across an ocean from the colonizing country (the "salt water test"; see magnarella 2001, 2002; niezen 2003, 138)-but has carefully avoided recognizing indigenous minorities who are not separated from their colonizers by an ocean as 'peoples.' this lack of recognition implicitly denies such indigenous peoples the right to self-determination-one of the arguments russia uses to justify not complying with un treaties in the case of the indigenous peoples of siberia.indigenous groups whose traditional territories lie in european russia, such as the nenets, komi, and sami peoples, are affected by this status of non-recognition of the right to self-determination, which, as federal policy implicates all indigenous groups in russia in
addition to siberia. arguably, some of the implications of non-recognition of indigenous title may be the existence of laws that allow for socio-environmental marginalization to take place. according to donahoe, "the federal government's monopoly over the law can be best illustrated by the negotiations over the new land code (zemel'nyi kodeks; federal law no. 136 of october 25, 2001) and forest code (lesnoi kodeks; federal law no. 200 of december 4, 2006)" which have allowed for the privatization of timber supplies. under new iterations of these laws, previously non-commercially exploitable "forest fund [lesnoi fond]" lands, which constitute approximately 70 percent of russia's landmass, have arguably been opened up for private sale. these new laws arguably lack provisions for the recognition of indigenous rights, resulting in a forest code that, in the opinion of donahoe, "effectively removes the power of regional governments (republics, oblasti, kraia, okrugi, etc.) to exert [non-federal] control over these lands".  the result has been a centralization of power over land management, which has arguably contributed to an unstable legal and economic context for the livelihoods of indigenous hunters and reindeer herders who "operate in a virtually noncash economy and could not possibly afford to purchase or lease the extensive tracts of land necessary to migrate seasonally, which is crucial both to reindeer husbandry and to the effective exploitation of animal resources", according to donahoe. the privatization of land has widened concerns over access rights, which could potentially have negative effects on indigenous hunting and grazing.indigenous groups in russia have attempted to defend their rights in court. in the opinion of donahoe, indigenous groups in russia have "demonstrated ingenuity in their attempts to assert their rights to land and resources and to protect against industrial development and extractive activities by using other laws not specifically designed for the protection of indigenous rights". for example, indigenous groups have established "national parks or specially protected nature territories (osobo okhranaemye prirodnye territorii) at the local or regional level or both", under their rights to do so as outlined in federal law no. 33 (march 14, 1995), "on specially protected nature territories [ob osobo okhranaemykh prirodnykh territoriiakh]". in one case, the native assembly of the kmao (khanty-mansi autonomous okrug) "asked" andrew wiget and ol'
ga balalaeva to craft a law that would "protect the 'folklore' of the indigenous people of khanty-mansi more generally". khanty-mansi autonomous okrug is an important oil-and-gas-producing region, responsible for the supply of large quantities of energy to western europe. it is also an area that has seen significant degradation of indigenous lands as a result of oil and gas development. according to donahoe, the idea was that, by protecting folklore, they would also be protecting the environment within which the folklore was embedded. it was especially important that the law should 'link the perpetuation of living folklore traditions to specific communities and landscapes': understood in its fullest sense, it means that sacred place myths cannot exist without sacred places, nor local legends without the sites to which they are attached. in short, folklore cannot meaningfully endure if separated from the specific enculturated environment that it inhabits. because the power to deface that environment rests with the non-native, political majority, this is potentially urgent, because kmao is today the center of russia's petroleum industry, and in some areas almost 90% of the land surface is licensed for petroleum production (wiget and balalaeva 2004, 139-140).after losing "some of its most important provisions", kmao law no. 37-03, "on the folklore of the native minority peoples of the north living on the territory of khanty-mansi autonomous okrug" was passed on may 30, 2003, and came into effect june 18, 2003, with its arguably most important provision intact: "native minority peoples living on the territory of khanty-mansi autonomous okrug are guaranteed, in the manner established by legislation:...(3) the preservation and protection of the places of the traditional circulation of folklore, and of the natural resources necessary for the perpetuation and development of folklore traditions" (kmao law no. 37-03, chapter 2, article 5, paragraph 2.3).  romani settlements and migrant worker camps  underlying causes in russia   romani in russia are frequently subject to geographic marginalization due to xenophobia. in 2005, romani settlements in arkhangelsk and kaliningrad became the target of xenophobic political campaigns, in which local politicians used elections platforms that argued for "'cleaning' their city of 'gypsies' as one of their major promises to be fulfilled after winning the elections ... these politicians openly accused the entire romani population of earning a living from the drug trade". romani were then accused
of constructing illegal dwellings. in kaliningrad, romani houses were later violently evicted by force. in arkhangelsk, after obtaining legal permission to rent their parcels of land in novy posyolok, the romani were then accused of not having permission to build houses; in 2006, the entire community was forced to leave the city "on a train provided for this purpose by the city administration, taking them to the moscow region, into another illegal situation...but out of the city's political debates".  according to paris-based russian human rights organization anti-discrimination centre (adc) memorial, there is a "tendency that market considerations and contempt toward persons regarded as 'gypsies' coalesce in the actions of municipalities carrying out urban renewal programs, in which the eviction of roma from city centers-and public view-is an active component of public policy".  inequality in access to energy resources   in ivanovo province, the kolyanovo romani settlement was located near the disused ivanovo airport. the residents had been evicted from ivanovo city 15 years earlier. following plans to expand the airport, the community became threatened with eviction once again.  often romani settlements are denied access to utilities such as natural gas, despite the abundance of natural gas in russia. for example, in ryazan province, the village of dyaguilevo, with a population of 600 persons, has been established since 1988 in "extreme poverty" and, as of 2008, has faced significant issues with obtaining reliable natural gas and electricity service.  an arguably more extreme case of inequality over access to energy resources can be found in the roma village of plekhanovo, located five kilometres outside tula. as of 2008, the village was inhabited by 3000 individuals, most of whom had been settled there since the 1960s. in march 2016, a violent confrontation took place between residents (including children) and as many as 500 riot police over access to a natural gas pipeline that runs through the village. in spite of the line running through the village, the romani inhabitants, whose houses were at risk of demolition, had been unable to secure legal access rights to the gas, and had resorted to illegally tapping into the pipeline for domestic use. according to community representative nadezhda demetr, "instead of helping people register their houses and legalise their gas supplies, the authorities have been demolishing their houses. since 2005, houses have been demolished without compensation because they don't have any documents."  another local romani community leader, ivan grigoryevich, stated to media that "we have been living
in this settlement since the 1960s and we have tried many, many times to get gas into our houses, but we are prohibited by town officials."  disputed environmental reasons for evicting romani settlements   in another conflict related to land and natural resource issues, the village of kosaya gora (3 kilometres outside tula) was, as of 2008, threatened with eviction. the village of 400 individuals had been located at its current site since the 1960s, yet the land on which the romani resided was declared by a court to be located on a "protected nature reserve area", according to romani rights activists.  in a similar case to kosaya gora, residents of a romani settlement in chudovo were faced with eviction in 2007. the residents, who had resettled to the area with verbal consent from local authorities after being evacuated from the chernobyl nuclear disaster, had been living in the area since the mid-1990s, later to learn that their houses were declared as falling within a "sanitary protection zone" around an unused asphalt plant, and that their homes would be subject to demolition. without access to documents to demonstrate title to the land, the community could not effectively argue in protection of their claimed property rights.  migrant workers from hungary and central asia   migrant workers in russia frequently experience issues of environmental marginalization as a result of social and economic pressure to live in high-risk, substandard accommodations. according to anti-discrimination centre (adc) memorial,migrant workers, especially families with children, often cannot find accommodation, due to high prices and the unwillingness of landlords to rent their property to migrants, particularly to those who do not have the appropriate documentation. as a result, migrant families are forced to live in places not designed for living, especially for living with children. companies, who are happy to employ cheap migrant labor, and to save on their accommodation, are often facilitating this process.  as of 2013, in the nevsky district of st. petersburg migrant workers and their families have been documented living in unsafe housing conditions that lacked utilities such as safe drinking water and electricity. many of the workers were from the former soviet republics of tajikistan and kyrgyzstan. as of 2013, there was also a shantytown on the outskirts of st. petersburg, segregated in a remote, difficult to access industrial area, whose residents were uzbek citizens from khorezm city. in addition to concerns over health and safety similar to those faced by migrant workers in nevsky district, this settlement had no waste collection service, and contained
large garbage pits.  other areas of environmental concern have been the settlements of "roma-mugat" migrants from tajikistan, such as the settlement at volodarka village, st. petersburg. as of 2013, according to adc memorial,the living conditions of mugat-migrants do not correspond to elementary sanitary norms and requirements for security and hygiene. in mugat settlements, which usually have several hundred inhabitants, there is no water supply, heating or electricity. improvised settlements are spread on the boundaries of big towns, near household waste dumps, forest strips, [and] industrial areas ... where there is practically no infrastructure water supply, electricity and sewage system .  many of these "central asian roma-migrants" have extremely poor diets, which are often supplemented by scavenged food from dumps. this has caused epidemic proportions of "tuberculosis, hepatitis, intestinal disorders, and helminthiasis".  romani migrants from hungary often face visible issues of environmental marginalization in russia. as of 2013, according to adc memorial, "one of the largest roma-magyar settlements is situated in the industrial area on the outskirts of saint-petersburg. it borders the saint-petersburg-moscow railway line and the household waste dump."  within the camp, the houses were made of scavenged materials, and basic services and utilities such as water, sewerage, and garbage collection were nonexistent; for bathing, many residents used water from a nearby marsh. due to substandard housing and the lack of water distribution, all residents lived in constant risk of fire hazards.  references  racism racism in russia racism in the russian empire
belgian dj and record producer duo dimitri vegas & like mike released their first compilation album in 2014. "mammoth" was their first single to chart in four countries. "tremor" with martin garrix became their most successful single so far as it has charted in five countries, their only song to achieve this.  albums  compilation albums  soundtrack albums  extended plays  singles  charted singles  notes  non-charted singles  dimitri vegas solo singles 2021  "pull me closer" [house of house]  like mike solo singles 2010  "es vedra" [spinnin' records]  2018  "memories" [smash the house]  "rewind" [smash the house]  "back 2 u" [smash the house]  2019  "paralyzed" (featuring ricky hil) [self-released]  "a.m." [self-released]  "best friend" (featuring bhavi) [self-released]  "lies" [self-released]  "stuck in the melody" [self-released]  "sinner" [self-released]  2020  "high off love" (featuring angemi) [green room]  "put your lips" [green room]  "pineapple" [poporis dimitrios]  "i lose me" (featuring layton greene) [green room]  "best for you" [green room]  2021  "we come one" (with angemi) [smash the house]  as 3 are legend (with steve aoki) 2019  "khaleesi" (with w&w) [ultra music] 2020  "raver dome" (with justin prime and sandro silva) "deck the halls" (with toneshifterz, brennan heart and timmy trumpet)  remixes  dimitri vegas solo remixes 2019  dimitri vegas & like mike and paris hilton - "b.f.a. (best friend's ass)" (dimitri vegas and ariel vromen remix) [smash the house]  dimitri vegas & like mike, bassjackers and 2wei - "mortal kombat anthem" (dimitri vegas and 2wei mortal kombat 11 trailer mix) [smash the house]  2021  dino warriors and julian perretta - "ayo technology" (dimitri vegas edit) [smash the house]  ilkay sencan and vintage culture featuring yoelle - "superpowers" (dimitri vegas edit)
[smash the house]  3 are legend remixes 2018  dimitri vegas & like mike and w&w - "crowd control" (3 are legend remix) [smash the house]  music videos  notes  references  electronic music discographies discographies of belgian artists discographies of greek artists
jakub chrpa (born february 13, 1994) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for pirati chomutov of the czech extraliga.  chrpa made his czech extraliga debut playing with pirati chomutov during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1994 births living people pirati chomutov players czech ice hockey forwards
tarad mohammad al-jarba (), better known by his kunya abu muhammad al-shimali (), was an iraqi-born citizen of saudi arabia and a senior leader of the islamic state of iraq and the levant (isil).  history  abu muhammad al-shimali joined al-qaeda in iraq in 2005, continuing his association with the group when it became isil. he was from the al-jarba branch of the shammar tribe.  militant activity  according to the united states department of state rewards for justice program,  he served "as a key leader in isil's immigration and logistics committee" and helped foreigners travel to fight in syria, usually via gaziantep, turkey, and the syrian border town of jarabulus, which at the time was isil controlled. al-shimali and his logistics teams also controlled smuggling, financial transfers and movement of supplies into syria and iraq from europe, north africa, and the arabian peninsula.  on september 29, 2015, the u.s. department of the treasury placed al-shimali on its specially designated nationals list for acting for or on behalf of isil. the designation blocked his financial assets and prohibited american citizens and financial institutions from dealing with him. on the same day, he was also listed on the united nations security council 1267/1989 (al-qaida) sanctions list, which imposed a travel ban, asset freeze, and arms embargo on al-shimali. he was also the subject of an active interpol-un special notice (in the name of tarad mohammad al-jarba), which was issued to alert law enforcement agencies worldwide that an individual or entity was subject to un sanctions.  according to the telegraph he may have played a role in the november 2015 paris attacks due to his position in managing the flow of fighters across the syria-turkey border.  on 8 september 2017, al-shimali was killed during a russian airstrike near deir ez-zor, syria, along with gulmurod khalimov. the united states removed al-shimali from their rewards for justice program in 2022.  references  islamic state of iraq and the levant members from iraq individuals designated as terrorists by the united states government members of al-qaeda in iraq 1979 births 2017 deaths
amorphophallus yunnanensis (滇蘑芋, dian mo yu) is a flowering plant species native to forests and thickets, at altitudes of 100-3300 meters, in guangxi, guizhou, and yunnan provinces in china, as well as laos, and northern thailand and vietnam.  its tuber is dark brown, up to 13 cm in diameter, and weigh up to 500 grams. the leaf is solitary, 6-35 cm, grayish green, covered with pale pinkish spots. the inflorescence is solitary, 13-60 cm in height and 1-2 cm in diameter at its base. berries are initially green, then turning blue and finally violet.  references   pflanzenr. 48(iv. 23c): 109. 1911.  the plant list  efloras  international aroid society  yunnanensis plants described in 1911
cylindrepomus aureolineatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by dillon and dillon in 1948. it is known from borneo.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1948
considerations on the causes of the greatness of the romans and their decline (french: considerations sur les causes de la grandeur des romains et de leur decadence) is an 18th-century book written by french political philosopher montesquieu. first published in 1734, it is widely considered by scholars to be among montesquieu's best known works and was an inspiration to gibbon's more extensive the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire.  publication in 1734, the book was first published anonymously as an octavo by jacques desbordes in amsterdam. there are no surviving manuscripts prior to 1734, except for one preface which was ultimately excluded from the publication. this leaves uncertainty as to when exactly the work was written. however, montesquieu kept meticulous notes and corrections right after the publication, which were used in an edition revised by montesquieu himself and published in france in 1748.  format in its 1734 edition, a copy of which resides in the national library of france, the book consists of a leatherbound cover including 277 pages organized into 23 chapters, plus 2 pages of errata.  content initially, montesquieu only intended on writing a few pages on the topic. however the size of his topic overwhelmed him, so he chose to expand the scope of his writing from the beginnings of the roman republic to the decay of the late roman empire. he begins in the year 753 bc, the traditional date for the founding of rome, and continues until the fall of constantinople in ad 1453 to an invading army of the ottoman empire.  in chapters i to x, montesquieu postulates that the wealth, military might and expansionist policies, which were by most historical accounts a source of great strength for rome, actually contributed to the weakening of the spirit of civic virtue of roman citizens. after detailing the history of rome's many wars, montesquieu claimed, "the greatness of the state caused the greatness of personal fortunes. but since opulence consists in morals, not riches, the riches of the romans, which continued to have limits, produced a luxury and profusion which did not."   in the remainder of the book, montesquieu details a pattern of steady moral decline interrupted with several short periods of remission caused by the leadership of great emperors, such as titus, nerva, trajan, antoninus pius, marcus aurelius and julian the apostate as examples of this. montesquieu states that the sack of rome and downfall of the western roman empire irre
parably destabilized the region. he also concludes that the rise of christianity and the desire of the citizenry for the opulence of rome's most prosperous period directly precipitated the fall of the byzantine empire. when the ottoman empire was pressing in on byzantine territory, "people were more preoccupied with the council of florence than with the turkish army."  see also decline of the roman empire the history of the decline and fall of the roman empire  references  external links        montesquieu 1734 books essays about politics history books about ancient rome
minister for road safety is a position in the government of western australia, currently held by michelle roberts of the labor party. the position was first created in 1965, for the government of sir david brand. in 1975, responsibility for road safety was transferred to other ministers. it was recreated in 2008, for the government of colin barnett. the minister is responsible for the state government's road safety commission, a standalone government department.  titles  16 march 1965 - 3 march 1971: minister for traffic  6 july 1972 - 8 april 1974: minister for traffic safety  8 april 1974 - 5 june 1975: minister for traffic  23 september 2008 - present: minister for road safety  list of ministers  see also  minister for emergency services (western australia)  minister for police (western australia)  references  david black (2014), the western australian parliamentary handbook (twenty-third edition). perth [w.a.]: parliament of western australia.  road safety minister for road safety road safety in australia roads in western australia
wendy boss is an american botanist and the current william neal reynolds distinguished professor emeritus at north carolina state university. her research focuses on plant physiology and phosphoinositide mediated signalling in plants. phosphoinositols are derived from the phospholipids found in plasma membrane of the cell. phosphoinositols are known to be key molecules in signal transduction pathways. the role of this chemical in plants is however not well understood and dr. boss' research has contributed significantly towards understanding this topic.  early life and education  boss received her bachelor of science degree from wake forest university in 1968. subsequently, she completed a master of science in 1970 from university of washington. she was awarded a doctorate of philosophy from indiana university in 1977.  career and research  the boss lab works on phosphoinositide metabolism in plants. primarily, the research focuses on the role of the chemicals phosphatidyl-inositol-4p and phosphatidyl-inositol-4,5p in signal transduction in plants while adapting to environmental changes. in 2001 dr. boss received grants from nasa, nsf and the usda's binational agricultural research development (bard) program to study the role of this chemicals in plants grown in space. the research measured the chemical surges occurring in plant cells moments after the plant is reoriented and the response time required by plants to adapt to the reorientation.  honors and awards   inaugural fellow of american society of plant biologists, 2007  charles reid barnes life membership award, 2015 awarded by american society of plant biologists  william neal reynolds distinguished professor emeritus at the north carolina state university  references   american women botanists north carolina state university faculty indiana university alumni living people university of washington alumni wake forest university alumni year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) american women academics 21st-century american women
no surgery hours today () is a 1948 czechoslovak comedy film directed by vladimir slavinsky and starring jan pivec, dagmar frybortova and paula valenska.  cast  jan pivec as dr. jakub johanek  dagmar frybortova as ruzena vojtiskova   pavla vrbenska as jazz singer katerina kostkova   josef gruss as attorney jindrich plevka    ota motycka as solicitor brhlik  meda valentova as dynybylova    jaroslav mares as medicine student divisek   frantisek kreuzmann as patient blazek  drahomira hurkova as plevka's secretary    alena pospisilova as vera    vladimir cerovsky as plevka's substitute    otto kinsky as patient kucera  references  external links     1948 films 1948 comedy films czech comedy films czech films czech-language films films directed by vladimir slavinsky czechoslovak black-and-white films
olenecamptus bilobus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by johan christian fabricius in 1801, originally under the genus saperda. it is known from bhutan,  myanmar, india, papua new guinea, indonesia, laos, seychelles, madagascar, australia, sri lanka, japan, sumatra, java, philippines and taiwan.  subspecies  olenecamptus bilobus bilobus (fabricius, 1801)  olenecamptus bilobus dahli kriesche, 1926  olenecamptus bilobus luzonensis dillon & dillon, 1948  olenecamptus bilobus madecassus fairmaire, 1901  olenecamptus bilobus nipponensis dillon & dillon, 1948  olenecamptus bilobus taiwanus dillon & dillon, 1948  olenecamptus bilobus trimaculatus breuning, 1940  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1801
sharakpur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is also called sarpura. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in adampur jalandhar and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
tiruttangal railway station is a railway station in the town of thiruthangal, virudhunagar district in tamil nadu.  background the station was established during 1932. the station survived a closure during 1984 with strong protests from the residents of thiruthangal, when the southern railway zone initiated such an action.  jurisdiction it is belongs to the madurai railway division of the southern railway zone of virudhunagar district in tamil nadu. the station code is ttl.  line the station falls on the line between  and  facilities the station saw major facelift in its facilities for passengers, when r. chandramogan, a native and resident of thiruthangal donated  for raising the level of platform after the gauge conversion, which wasn't done the respective authorities citing fund crunch. also reverse osmosis purified water, parcel room, coach indicators and wheelchair ramp for physically challenged were established.  notable places nearby  badrakali amman temple, sivakasi  ninra narayana perumal temple  ayyanar falls  references  external links  railway stations in virudhunagar district madurai railway division railway stations opened in 1932
park mary historic district is a national historic district located at lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana.  the district encompasses 106 contributing buildings and 1 contributing structure in a predominantly residential section of lafayette.  it developed between about 1853 and 1950 and includes representative examples of italianate, queen anne, and bungalow / american craftsman style architecture. notable contributing buildings include the thomas hull house (1870), fry house (1873), perrin house (1868), fletmeyer house (1881), keipner house (1885), behm house (1858), greagor house (1873), ulrick house, john and william levering house (1858), sawyer house (1868), lafayette christian reformed church (1929), lincoln school (1923), and lafayette armory (1927).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2001.  see also centennial neighborhood district downtown lafayette historic district ellsworth historic district highland park neighborhood historic district jefferson historic district ninth street hill neighborhood historic district perrin historic district st. mary historic district upper main street historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana italianate architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana neighborhoods in lafayette, indiana historic districts in lafayette, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana
untamed is the third book in sara humphreys's the amoveo legend series. it takes place some months after the events in untouched.  awards prism double award winner 2013  best of the best dark paranormal/urban fantasy  references  amoveo legend 2012 american novels american romance novels
proteus airlines flight 706 was a scheduled commuter flight from lyon, france to lorient, france. on july 30, 1998 the beechcraft 1900d operating the flight collided in mid-air with a light aircraft over quiberon bay. this accident was known as quiberon bay mid-air collision. both aircraft crashed in the sea, killing fifteen people.  accident flight 706 took off from lyon-saint-exupery at 12:21 local time on a flight to lorient lann-bihoue airport. about seventy minutes into the flight, the crew made a request to the lorient approach controller to deviate from their route slightly to the west to quiberon bay. the reason for this detour was to give the passengers and crew a view of the ss norway (previously named ss france), at that time the longest ocean liner ever built in france. later examinations of the 1900d's cockpit voice recorder revealed that a passenger made his way to the cockpit and told the pilot and co-pilot of the presence of the norway nearby, then suggested that the crew fly the aircraft closer to the ship. at the time of this request, a cessna 177 registered f-gaje belonging to a local flying club took off from the airfield at vannes for a local flight to quiberon.   at 13:53, after first being cleared to descend to  over the bay, the proteus crew contacted air traffic control again and cancelled their flight plan to operate under instrument flight rules, switching to visual flight rules; they then put the 1900d into a descent from  to  while making a 360° turn around the ship. at 13:56 the pilot of the cessna contacted the flight information service at quiberon as he passed larmor-baden and informed them of his intent to descend from  to . at 13:57 the proteus crew announced to the lorient approach controller that they had reached the end of their 360° turn and asked to take a direct course for lorient. after they received confirmation of this request at 13:58, the proteus crew's aircraft collided with the cessna. the cockpit voice recording ended at the moment of collision, and the flight data recording ended two seconds later; in those two seconds the airplane rolled from 7.1 to 56 degrees left and pitched down 95 degrees. both aircraft immediately fell to the water, killing all 14 passengers and crew on board the beechcraft, as well as the sole occupant of the 177.  investigation the investigation found that the cessna's transponder had
not been switched on.   in documentation published by the aeronautical information service in 1997 and 1998 and probably used by the pilot of the cessna, the use of a transponder while operating under visual flight rules could be interpreted as optional. as a result of the transponder being off, the cessna was not depicted on the radar screen of the lorient approach controller and its traffic information could not be relayed to the crew of the beechcraft. in communicating with an afis controller at quiberon, the pilot of the cessna was likewise not informed of the presence of the beechcraft. while a tcas system on the beechcraft would not have prevented the accident without the cessna's transponder operating, the report also noted that the bf goodrich tcas installed in the beechcraft at the factory had been removed due to not yet being approved for operation in france. had the cessna's transponder not been turned off and the beechcraft's tcas not been uninstalled, a pilot with expected reaction time would likely have avoided the collision by about 300 feet.  the investigation also revealed that the organization of activity in the beechcraft's cockpit as well as its ergonomics during the left-hand 360° turn did not allow for effective monitoring during the merger of the two aircraft, particularly to the outside of the turn, placing the cessna in the beechcraft's blind spot. the position of the sun as well as the configuration of the cessna's fuselage and nose cowling were thought to have impeded the view of the cessna's pilot in the moments just prior to the collision.  following this accident, the bea recommended that pilots should only cancel instrument flight rules flight plans in cases of necessity.  dramatization this accident was featured in the 16th season of the canadian tv series mayday. it aired on 5 july 2016 and is titled deadly detour.  see also list of notable mid-air collisions psa flight 182 aeromexico flight 498 dhl flight 611 / bashkirian airlines flight 2937 united flight 718 / trans world airlines flight 2 gol transportes aereos flight 1907  references  external links  rapport relatif a l'abordage survenu le 30 juillet 1998 en baie de quiberon (56) entre le beech 1900d immatricule f-gsjm exploite par proteus airlines et le cessna 177 immatricule f-gaje - bea france     1998 in france aviation accidents and incidents in 1998 aviation accidents and incidents in france accidents and incidents involving the beechcraft
1900 mid-air collisions mid-air collisions involving airliners mid-air collisions involving general aviation aircraft july 1998 events in europe
stacchini is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  gino stacchini (born 1938), italian footballer riccardo stacchini (born 1965), sammarinese alpine skier ulisse stacchini (1871-1947), italian architect  italian-language surnames
lomonosovsky prospekt is an avenue in moscow, russia. it runs from vavilova street in the east (continuing nakhimovsky prospekt) to mosfilmovskaya street in the west (after which it continues as minskaya street).  the street was named in 1956 after mikhail lomonosov, a russian scientist and active contributor to the founding of moscow state university whose new campus had been by then constructed in the vicinity of the avenue.  as part of the cancelled fourth ring road (ru), lomonosovsky prospekt is a busy chord connecting radial streets, with major crossings such as leninsky prospekt and prospekt vernadskogo (moscow).  the avenue is serviced by two metro stations, universitet, built in 1959, and another one, bearing the same name as the avenue, that opened in march 2017.  references   streets in moscow
cypecore  is a german melodic industrial death metal band from mannheim, germany. they were formed in 2007 and have released four independent studio albums. all of these were conceptual albums based upon a narrative of futuristic, post-apocalyptic warfare, set in a hypothetical 22nd century. the band describe their musical style as "brutal, martial but still melodic", and refer to their own live performances as military "operations".  discography  studio albums   innocent (2008)  take the consequence (2010)  identity (2016)  the alliance (2018)  singles   "the hills have eyes" (2014)  "my confession" (2014)  "identity"  (2015)  "the alliance"  (2018)  "dissatisfactory" (2018)  "chosen chaos" (2021)  band members  current line-up   dominic christoph - vocalist  nils lesser - guitarist  previous members   chris heckel (†) - bassist  evan k - guitarist  attila erdelyi (†)- vocalist 	  lucas amadeus buttendorf - drummer  christoph rogdakis - guitarist  tobias derer - drummer  jay marsman - guitarist  references  external links     german musical groups melodic death metal industrial metal musical groups established in 2007 2007 establishments in germany
jean charles louis dubois de gennes (15 april 1814 - 15 may 1876) was a 19th-century french writer, journalist and chansonnier.  a former military and member of the societe du caveau, collaborator of the almanach pour rire, he is remembered for his correspondence with victor hugo.  he also published under the pseudonym claudius transiens.  works  1851: dors-tu marie ?, melody by henri caspers 1862: le troupier tel qu'il est a cheval 1865: les envieux 1867: la huronne, scenes de la vie canadienne, by emile chevalier (preface) 1869: sous le casque, rimes a la dragonne, with victor hugo (letter) 1874: chasse aux femmes et aux lions en algerie  bibliography   joseph-marie querard, les supercheries litteraires devoilees, 1882, (p. 993)  henri frotier de la messeliere, filiations bretonnes. 1650-1912, vol.6, 1976, (p. 159)  references  external links   sudoc texts on sudoc  19th-century french journalists french male journalists french chansonniers 1814 births people from dumfries 1876 deaths 19th-century french male writers
karl-erik bergsten (1909-1990) was a swedish geographer. when professor fredrik enquist retired in 1952 bergsten assumed his chair as geography professor in goteborg university. bergsten held that position until 1958 when he moved to the university of lund being succeeded by sten rudberg in goteborg.  references  1909 births 1990 deaths swedish geographers 20th-century swedish geologists quaternary geologists lund university alumni university of gothenburg faculty lund university faculty 20th-century geographers
paglaum party, officially the partido paglaum sang banwa (), is a provincial political party in negros occidental, philippines based in bacolod.  establishment paglaum was established as the pioneer local political party in negros occidental by the late former bacolod mayor alfredo montelibano, jr. in 1988 for his political run. despite the similarity in names, bukidnon paglaum party is not related to the negros occidental paglaum party.  notable politicians after the incumbency of mayor montelibano, paglaum party continued as a minority party that fielded candidates to the city council. one of the notable members and former members include:   alfredo montelibano, jr.: governor of negros occidental, 1968-1986, mayor of bacolod, 1988-1995  oscar verdeflor: mayor of bacolod, 1998-2001   luzviminda valdez: vice mayor of bacolod, 1998-2001, mayor, 2001-2004  ramiro garcia, jr.: vice mayor of bacolod, 2001-2004  alex paglumotan: member, bacolod city council, 2007-2016  recent participation reactivated as a local party on december 14, 2015, paglaum participated in the 2016 bacolod local elections under the grupo progreso coalition of mayor evelio leonardia. it fielded george zulueta as a candidate but failed to gain a seat in the bacolod city council.  see also  united negros alliance  references  local political parties in the philippines politics of negros occidental regionalist parties in the philippines
the 2016-17 south african premier division season (known as the absa premiership for sponsorship reasons) is the 21st season of the premier soccer league since its establishment in 1996.  mamelodi sundowns were the defending champions, having won the previous 2015-16 south african premier division (psl) season. the season featured 14 teams from the 2015-16 season and two new teams promoted from the 2015-16 national first division: baroka and highlands park who replace relegated jomo cosmos and university of pretoria. highlands park promotion was won via the psl playoff tournament. cape town city bought over the franchise of mpumalanga black aces and relocated from mbombela stadium to cape town stadium. the sale of free state stars franchise to moroka swallows fell through.  teams  stadiums and locations  football teams in south africa tend to use multiple stadiums over the course of a season for their home games. the following table will only indicate the stadium used most often by the club for their home games.  personnel and kits  managerial changes  league table  standings  positions by round  results  season statistics  scoring  top scorers  hat-tricks  references  external links premier soccer league (psl) official website absa premiership psl results psl standings  2016-17 in african association football leagues 1 2016-17
the 50th district of the iowa senate is located in eastern iowa, and is currently composed of dubuque county.  current elected officials pam jochum is the senator currently representing the 50th district.  the area of the 50th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 99th district (represented by lindsay james) the 100th district (represented by charles isenhart)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  mike gronstal, 1985-1992 eugene fraise, 1993-2002 mike gronstal, 2003-2012 pam jochum, 2013-present  references  50
morgan bridge may refer to:  morgan bridge (old peru, iowa) morgan covered bridge in belvidere, vermont murray morgan bridge in tacoma, washington david morgan memorial bridge in fairmont, west virginia
oricopis umbrosus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by francis polkinghorne pascoe in 1863. it is known from australia.  references  epicastini beetles described in 1863
valley transit is a public transit operator in walla walla county, washington. it operates 10 routes in the cities of walla walla and college place.  history  valley transit was founded as the walla walla county public transportation benefit area in 1979, becoming the county's public transportation benefit area. a 0.3 percent sales tax was approved by voters on march 18, 1980, allowing for service to begin on january 5, 1981. in its first year of operation, the system carried 435,500 passengers.  until 1997, valley transit operated an intercity route to milton-freewater, oregon, through an intergovernmental agreement; it has since been replaced by a bus operated by the city government of milton-freewater.  on february 9, 2010, a 0.3 percent increase in sales tax was approved by 76 percent of voters to fund existing service and prevent service cuts.  routes  valley transit operates 10 routes, operating from monday to saturday; on weekdays, normal services run from 6:15 a.m. to 5:45 p.m., while two "flex" routes operate from 5:50 p.m. to 9:10 p.m. on weekday evenings and 10:45 a.m. to 6:10 p.m on saturdays.  route 1 (mainline): wal-mart to walla walla community college via rose street and isaacs avenue, downtown transfer center, whitman college route 2 (college place ciculator): wal-mart to walla walla university route 3 (2nd avenue/wa-hi): downtown transfer center to walla walla high school via walla walla general hospital route 4 (melrose/alder): downtown transfer center to k-mart via alder street and melrose street route 5 (fairgrounds): downtown transfer center to plaza shopping center/walla walla county fairgrounds via 9th avenue route 6 (va/medical loop): downtown transfer center to fort walla walla, va hospital route 7 (pleasant street loop): downtown transfer center to pioneer park route 9 (pine street loop): downtown transfer center to washington state penitentiary east loop (flex): downtown transfer center to walla walla community college via melrose street, isaacs avenue, alder street west loop (flex): downtown transfer center to wal-mart via rose street, college avenue, dalles military road  intercity connections  valley transit connects to several intercity bus routes, operated by agencies, at the walla walla transit center in downtown walla walla:  travel washington's grape line, operating 3 daily round trips to pasco kayak public transit, operated
by the confederated tribes of the umatilla indian reservation milton-freewater bus to milton-freewater, oregon columbia county public transportation to dayton and prescott  fares  valley transit charges a 50-cent fare on its routes for passengers aged 5 years or older; those under 5, up to 3 per fare-paying rider, ride for free. monthly passes and ticket books are also offered.  during the summer months, valley transit runs fare-free to encourage newcomers to try the system.  references  external links  bus transportation in washington (state) transit agencies in washington (state) transportation in walla walla county, washington
matfallu also spelled as matfalu, is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 5.8 km away from postal head office in dosanjh kalan, 20.6 km from phillaur, 40 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 127 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed primary school (pri matfallu). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , matfallu has a total number of 164 houses and population of 784 of which include 400 males and 384 females. literacy rate of matfallu is 81.43%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 84 which is 10.71% of total population of matfallu, and child sex ratio is approximately 556 lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 70.28% of total population in matfallu. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 224 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of matfallu which includes 199 males and 25 females. according to census survey report 2011, 82.14% workers describe their work as main work and 17.86% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  goraya railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 15.5 km away from the village. the village is 53.4 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 131 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the men's 60 metres hurdles event  at the 1990 european athletics indoor championships was held in kelvin hall on 4 march.  medalists  results  heats first 2 from each heat (q) and the next 2 fastest (q) qualified for the semifinals.  semifinals first 2 from each semifinal (q) and the next 2 fastest (q) qualified for the final.  final  references  60 metres hurdles at the european athletics indoor championships 60
the 2016-17 principality premiership was the first season of the new format of the principality premiership, the top tier of club rugby in wales run by the welsh rugby union. it was contested by sixteen welsh clubs following an expansion from twelve teams. the next two seasons will be "ring-fenced" and will have no relegation until the 2018-19 season. the competition was won by merthyr in their first season in the premiership. the second-tier competition was won by newport who won their first silverware since the 2003-04 premiership season.  structure  the principality premiership's structure includes all the teams playing each other once, either home or away, before the table is split into a top 8 and bottom 8 after 15 rounds and points are reset to zero. each team then plays each other team once, again either home or away, in their respective tier. after all fixtures have been played, a play-off system is implemented for the top 4 teams in each section to determine the winner. the play-off winner of the top 8 will be crowned 2016-17 principality premiership champions. this is the first season in which the "ring-fenced" system will be implemented, meaning no team is in danger of relegation until the 2018-19 season.  teams  after a two-season absence spent in the wru championship, swansea returned to the premiership finishing as runners-up in the 2015-16 wru championship. also promoted to the premiership, for the first time, were championship winners merthyr, bargoed and rgc 1404, who narrowly finished above pontypool to deny them a return to the premiership after demotion in 2012.  standings (phase one)  phase two  after 15 rounds, the table is split into a top 8 and bottom 8 and points are reset to zero. each team now plays each other team once, either home or away, in their respective tiers to total 22 games over the entire season. after these 7 rounds, a play-off system is implemented for the top 4 teams of each tier respectively. the winners of the play-offs for tier one are crowned 2016-17 principality premiership champions.  standings (tier one)  fixtures (tier one)  semi finals  final  standings (tier two)  fixtures (tier two)  semi finals  final  external links     welsh premier division seasons 2016-17 in welsh rugby union wales
kudrat (english: nature) is a 1998 indian hindi action romance film directed by raj n. sippy. it stars akshaye khanna and urmila matondkar in lead roles.  plot vijay varma learns a few lessons about love and life. wooing his sweetheart proves an arduous task as poor vijay faces constant rejection by the woman who has captured his heart as well as by her family. but when both do a startling volte-face, which is followed by further indecision, vijay's life seems caught in a perpetual state of bewilderment.  cast akshaye khanna as vijay urmila matondkar as madhu paresh rawal as sukhiram kader khan as vijay's grandfather aruna irani as shanti anant mahadevan as police inspector shalini kapoor  soundtrack  aab tak hai puri azadi... abhijeet bhattacharya and sushma shreshta  aaj hoke rahe apna milan... udit narayan and preeti uttam  ishq bhala kya hai... alka yagnik and vinod rathod  humse mohabbat mein... kumar sanu and sadhana sargam  deewane do dil mile... alka yagnik and udit narayan  tujhe dene ko... kavitha krishnamurthy and abhijeet bhattacharya  external links  references  1998 films 1990s hindi-language films indian films indian action films indian films about revenge films scored by rajesh roshan 1998 action films
maria elena orantes lopez (born 24 july 1968) is a mexican politician from the citizens' movement party. she serves as a deputy of the lxiii legislature of the mexican congress representing the third electoral region and the state of chiapas.  career in 1988, orantes lopez joined the institutional revolutionary party (pri), a year before graduating with a degree in communication sciences. a portion of her political and business career occurred in the state of nuevo leon, where she wrote for el norte newspaper, was a municipal pri councilor in pueblo nuevo, and anchored newscasts for televisa monterrey.  by the 1990s, orantes lopez had moved to chiapas, where she continued to function in pri positions as a secretary and state political councilor, and in various administrative positions in the state government. she also produced newscasts for radio nucleo, one of the state's largest radio broadcasters.  in 2000, voters sent orantes lopez to the lx legislature of chiapas for a three-year term. she presided over the commission for the care of women and children. three years later, she was elected to the lix legislature of the mexican congress for her first term as a federal deputy. she sat on four commissions and two committees, including radio, television and film; gender and equity; and special for tracking of investigations related to femicides in mexico.  three years later, orantes lopez won public office again, this time to the senate for the lx and lxi legislatures. she was the secretary of three commissions: equity and gender, health, and foreign relations/non-governmental organizations. she also was a member of the commission for peace and the environment, natural resources and fishing commission. during this time, she was also a national councilor of the pri.  party switch 2012 was a watershed year for maria elena's political career. in january 2016, she declared herself independent and left the pri after 24 years, opting to remain independent for the rest of the lxi legislature. the cause for the strain was the national pri's decision to seek the pvem and nueva alianza as coalition members. as part of the decision, manuel velasco of the pvem was named the gubernatorial candidate for chiapas. in her last meeting with enrique pena nieto, the pri's 2012 presidential candidate, told her, "maria elena, we have a commitment with the green party. manuel velasco will be the candidate. you can't be the gubernatorial candidate because you are a woman. that makes you vulnerable."  undeterred by the pri's decision, a newly independent orantes
lopez ran under a coalition of the left, formed by the prd, pt and movimiento ciudadano. voters, however, elected velasco. she joined mc the next year.  return to the chamber of deputies for the 2015 elections to the lxiii legislature of the mexican congress, movimiento ciudadano placed maria elena on its party list for the third proportional representation electoral region and was elected as the only mc deputy from the list. she presides over the civil protection commission and serves on three others: finances and public credit, indigenous matters, and bicameral for dialogue and reconciliation in chiapas.  personal maria elena's brother, hernan orantes lopez, is also a legislator, currently serving in the lxiii legislature and representing the pri.  notes  references  1968 births living people politicians from chiapas members of the chamber of deputies (mexico) citizens' movement (mexico) politicians 21st-century mexican politicians 21st-century mexican women politicians monterrey institute of technology and higher education alumni women members of the chamber of deputies (mexico) members of the congress of chiapas members of the senate of the republic (mexico) women members of the senate of the republic (mexico)
the 1968 central michigan chippewas football team represented central michigan university in the interstate intercollegiate athletic conference (iiac) during the 1968 ncaa college division football season.  in their second season under head coach roy kramer, the chippewas compiled a 7-2 record (2-1 against iiac opponents), tied for the iiac championship and outscored their opponents, 256 to 132. the team's statistical leaders included quarterback bob miles with 918 passing yards, tailback craig tefft with 1,126 rushing yards, and dave lemere with 325 receiving yards.  tefft received the team's most valuable player award.  seven central michigan players (tefft, defensive end bucky colton, guard fred ferguson, linebacker steve lockman, defensive back bob markey, tackle mike post, and offensive tackle ralph sarnowski) received first-team honors on the all-iiac team.  schedule  references  external links  1969 chippewa yearbook  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan chippewas football interstate intercollegiate athletic conference football champion seasons
pierre rabischong (born 1932, nancy, france) is a neuroanatomist and an emeritus professor at the university of montpellier in france. he is known for his work in rehabilitation medicine and physiotherapy, as well as powered orthoses. he was the leader of the amoll (active modular orthosis for lower limbs) project  in 1975.  references  1932 births living people french anatomists university of montpellier faculty
the 2016 crossfit games were the tenth crossfit games held on july 19-24, 2016 at the stubhub center in carson, california and on a ranch in aromas, california, united states.  the men's competition was won by mathew fraser, the women's by katrin tanja daviðsdottir, and the affiliate cup was awarded to crossfit mayhem freedom.  over 324,000 from 175 countries participated in the open this season. at the games, the women's competition was tightly fought, with the lead changing many times over the course of the games, but daviðsdottir managed to hold off a strong challenge from tia-clair toomey to win a second time. in the men's competition, mat fraser won with a 197-point lead over second-place ben smith, at the time the biggest margin of victory in the history of the games, marking the beginning of fraser's dominance at the games for the next four years until his retirement after the 2020 games.  qualification the open was held over five weeks from february 25 through march 28, 2016. five workouts were released, one per week, for the athletes to complete. 324,307 competitors from 175 countries registered to participate in the open. as with the 2015 games, athletes from the open in 17 regions were funnelled into 8 super regions, and 260 (40 men, 40 women and 30 teams of 6) from each of the 8 regions went on to compete in the regionals. noah ohlsen and jamie greene were the respective winners of the men's and women's competitions at the open.  the regionals were held over 3 weekends between may 13 and may 29. as with the 2015 games, the scoring system for regionals was no longer the same as the open, instead the scoring system from the games was used (100 for first, 95 for second, etc.).  from each regional, the top 5 of each division qualified for the games; in total 40 men, 40 women and 40 teams were invited to the games.  individual  wednesday, july 20, 2016 in celebration of the tenth crossfit games, the first day of events for the individual men and women divisions took place at the site of the first three crossfit games at the ranch in aromas, california (a site owned by the family of the head of the crossfit games, dave castro). the competitors left carson in the morning and flew into san jose, california, in order to participate in the first three events. unfortunately, on the return trip that evening, southwest airlines suffered
a technical glitch grounding several flights and creating many delays. some athletes reported that they did not return to their carson hotel until after midnight thursday morning.  events 1 and 2: ranch trail run to ranch deadlift ladder  7 kilometer trail run followed by: deadlift ladder   event 1 was a seven kilometer run was based around a similar event in the 2009 crossfit games. mat fraser and samantha briggs were the winners of this event. the second event, a deadlift ladder, was similar to event 2 of 2009 but with heavier weights since many were able to lift the heaviest weights in 2009.  the men's weight started at 425 pounds and ended at 615 pounds while the women's weight started at 275 pounds and ended at 415 pounds. the competitors had to lift in reverse order of finish in the first event; the last place finisher start the event first, ten minutes after completing the run. sam dancer (the last place finisher on the run) and brooke wells (who took 37th of 40 on the run) both won the event by completing the ladder.  event 3: ranch mini chipper 50 wall ball shots 25 medicine ball ghd sit-ups hill sprint with medicine ball the last event was a "chipper," a workout involving multiple exercises done sequentially without returning (as in "chipping away" at the number of repetitions) for the fastest time. the competitors started with 50 wall ball shots, a squat into tossing a medicine ball 9 or 10 feet up to target on a wall. once completed, they performed 25 sit-ups with the medicine ball on a glute-hamstring developer (ghd), a piece of equipment where the feet lock in and the sit-up is performed at a greater range of motion. the chipper was finished with a hill sprint while carrying the medicine ball. the men used a 30-pound medicine ball and the women used a 20-pound medicine ball. brent fikowski and annie thorisdottir won the event.  thursday, july 21, 2016  event 4: ocean swim  500 meter ocean swim the only event of day two was an out-and-back ocean swim at redondo beach, california. tia-clair toomey and jonne koski won with times of 7:28 and 6:54 respectively.  friday, july 22, 2016  event 5: murph  while wearing a weighted vest:  1 mile run  100 pull-ups  200 push-ups  300 air squats  1 mile run  this specific workout was created
in honor of us navy seal lt. michael p. murphy, who was killed in afghanistan on july 28, 2005. "murph" is probably crossfit's most famous "hero" workout (a specific routine named in honor of  a fallen hero) and murph is usually performed by american affiliates on memorial day. the announcement of this event was controversial because it was also done in the 2015 crossfit games where a number of athletes suffered serious heat injuries. the weighted vests were 20lbs. for men and 14lbs. for the women. the exercises between the runs was broken up into five rounds of 20 pull-ups, 40 push-ups, and 60 air squats. josh bridges and kari pearce won the event.  event 6: squat clean pyramid   10 squat cleans at 245 lbs for men and 165 lbs for women  8 squat cleans at 265 lbs for men and 180 lbs for women  6 squat cleans at 285 lbs for men and 195 lbs for women  4 squat cleans at 305 lbs for men and 205 lbs for women  2 squat cleans at 325 lbs for men and 215 lbs for women squat cleans are a common movement used in weightlifting with the requirement that the competitor must squat below parallel on the clean. the athletes performed a decreasing number of repetitions at increasing weights. alex anderson and kara webb won the event.  event 7: double dt  10 rounds for time with a 155-pound barbell for the men and a 105-pound barbell for the women:  12 deadlifts  9 hang power cleans  6 jerks "dt" is a crossfit hero workout named for fallen airman usaf ssgt. timothy p. davis, and usually performed for five rounds. in the 2015 games, fans were given a vote for either heavy dt or double dt and the heavy version was chosen, so double dt was programmed for the 2016 games. katrin daviðsdottir and samuel kwant won the event.  saturday, july 23, 2016  event 8: climbing snail three rounds for time of: 500 meter berm run 2 rope ascents 40 foot snail push 2 rope ascents  - except for the final round.  the event took place inside the soccer stadium and consisted of running across the field and through the rope climbing rig and then up the stairs and behind the jumbotron at the stubhub center. on the return, the athletes then had to climb up a rope in the middle of the field. the rope was situated so that the bottom of the rope was above the heads of the athletes so that they
had to jump up to grab the rope and do the first pulls without using their legs. the final movement was pushing what was called a "snail,"  a large heavy barrel that had to be rolled for 40 feet. the event was won by samantha briggs and brent fikowski.  event 9: the separator this event was performed in a different order for the men and women's competition.  men's event 9 12 ring handstand push-ups 15 back squats at 225 pounds 20 burpees 9 ring handstand push-ups 18 front squats at 205 pounds 20 burpees 6 ring handstand push-ups 21 overhead squats at 185 pounds 20 burpees  women's event 9 15 back squats at 165 pounds 20 burpees 6 ring handstand push-ups 18 front squats at 145 pounds 20 burpees 4 ring handstand push-ups 21 overhead squats at 125 pounds 20 burpees 2 ring handstand push-ups  the handstand push-ups were done with gymnastic rings and it was the second time the movement has featured at the crossfit games. it also had strict point penalties for any athletes that could not either finish the first set for the men or one push-up for the women. the event was won by kari pearce and cole sager.  event 10: 100% for time: 40 box jump overs (30 inches high for men, 24 inches high for women) 20 d-ball cleans (150 pound ball for men, 100 pound ball for women)  this event was won by alessandra pichelli and brent fikowski.  sunday, july 24, 2016  event 11: handstand walk   280 foot handstand walk for time jacob heppner and katrin daviðsdottir won.  event 12: suicide sprint   840 foot shuttle sprint for time on the same field that the handstand walk, the athletes ran one-third of the way down and back, two-thirds of the way down and back and then all the way down and back. tia toomey and roy gamboa won.  event 13: the plow   560 foot plow drag (235 pounds for men, 190 pounds for women) garret fisher and katrin daviðsdottir won. daviðsdottir had to be helped off the field after collapsing at the finish line, but she took over the lead from toomey after this event.  event 14: the rope chipper   200m skierg   50 doubles unders for men, 40 for
women  200m row  50 double unders for men, 40 for women  0.4 mile assault airbike  50 double unders for men, 40 for women  200 m row  50 double unders for men, 40 for women  200m skierg  90 foot sled pull (310 pounds for men, 220 for women) anna tunnicliffe and brent fikowski won.  event 15: redemption   3 peg board ascents  21 thrusters  2 peg board ascent  15 thrusters  1 peg board ascent  9 thrusters the event featured the return appearance of the peg board ascents that premiered one year earlier. many competitors failed to complete the peg board ascents in the previous year, hence, the name of this event being "redemption." a thruster in crossfit is a combination of a front squat and push press in one continuous movement and the weights were 135-pounds for the men and 85-pounds for the women. zak carchedi and alexis johnson won.  team events  team murph  buddy swim  triple deadlift  climbing worm  worm sprint  triple double  berm bok  sprint relay  double-slug bob  finals  podium finishers  individuals and teams  masters men  masters women  teens  guns controversy in 2016, crossfit announced that winners of the 2016 games would receive glock handguns as prizes, which resulted in a backlash from some crossfit members and other sponsors. the facebook post announcing the decision attracted more than 4,000 comments, with many members drawing attention to the recent spate of mass shootings in the us. one facebook user wrote "as a reward for fitness you can potentially shoot people?...after the worst mass shootings in usa, i hardly feel bringing a community together via guns is in the spirit of crossfit. shameful."  title sponsor reebok said in a statement: "while we understand crossfit's foundations are tied to military and first responders, we do not agree with this decision, particularly in light of current events in the united states." a change.org petition gathered more than 19,000 signatures against the partnership with glock. in response to the criticism, director of the games, dave castro said,  "i am one of millions of people in the u.s. who own guns for recreational and legal purposes. i compete in competitive shooting events, and i have a lot of friends in the shooting industry. glock offered up pistols as prizes, i agreed to it." castro later added, "unless the state and federal laws regarding gun ownership in california and
the u.s. change in the next week, then no, nothing is changing."  see also crossfit  references  external links  2016 crossfit games individual events on crossfit official youtube channel  2016 crossfit games  international sports competitions hosted by the united states crossfit games crossfit
admiral ushakov () is a 1953 soviet historical war film directed by mikhail romm and starring ivan pereverzev, boris livanov and sergei bondarchuk.  the film portrays the career of feodor ushakov, a celebrated naval officer and contemporary of horatio nelson. it is followed by the sequel attack from the sea. the first part of the filmology, filmed in 1953 by the director mikhail romm with actor ivan pereverzev in the title role. the film is dedicated to the formation of the russian fleet on the black sea.  history of creation   the original version of the script was written by the historian-novelist anatoly vinogradov in 1944, during his stay at the front. in the credits of  the film vinogradov's surname is not indicated, however the script is listed  in the official bibliography. he is also mentioned by svyatoslav belza in the preface to the three-volume collection of works.  the film was created on the initiative of the soviet navy (vice admiral nikolai kuznetsov) to declare the historical role of admiral ushakov in the history of the russian fleet, since the approval of the ushakov order as the main naval order caused many questions in the ussr. in drawing up and correcting the scenario, the leading role was played by the leadership of the navy and the ministry of foreign affairs of the ussr (on foreign policy issues of the historical period). filming was conducted in the fortress in belgorod-dnestrovsky.  in this film the actors vladimir etush (in the article about etush specified another) made their debut in the film and gotlib roninson (not shown in the credits).  plot   the film takes place during the reign of empress catherine the great.  1780 year. captain of the imperial yacht fedor ushakov asks the commander-in-chief prince grigori potemkin directions to the black sea fleet under construction. for this he is ready to give up the prospect of a court career.  1783 year. with a small detachment of sailors and craftsmen ushakov arrives in kherson to shipyards. at this time, on the southern borders of russia, the epidemic of plague rages, among the workers riots riot. tikhon prokofiev, nicknamed the ragged ear, the fugitive serf from the estate ushakov and the ally of pugachev, at the instigation of the english spy orfano encourages the people to go to the don. ushakov with sailors stops the rebels, organizes the extinguishing of shipyards, set on fire by the same spy. personal
example convinces the chief local doctor ermolaev to stay, attracts to his side tikhon, introduces a strict quarantine regime and conquers the plague. son of the doctor ermolaev victor asks ushakov to enroll him on the ship, but he refuses but only because the ships are not yet.  1784 year. simultaneously with the construction of the fleet, crews of ships begin training. during training firing ushakov distracted arrived courier - captain senyavin. between him and ushakov immediately there is dislike. meanwhile, senyavin wanted to report that potemkin himself had arrived at the ceremony of launching the ships. the head of the newly created black sea admiralty board, the liberal and supporter of the british naval school, count mordovtsev, also informs potemkin about the violations allowed by ushakov the training of officers not according to statutes, unorthodox tactical ideas. despite ushakov's inappropriate behavior, potemkin favored him, the potential of a talented naval commander. during the launching ceremony of the st. pavel battleship victor ermolaev, despite protests from his mother, breaks into the ship. to orfano in the meantime comes the messenger. the spy finds tikhon and reminds him that he can still betray him.  1786 year. during the first training voyage, ushakov theoretically studies his ideas in the field of tactics of sea battles, while surprising officers by putting his forces into losing conditions - guided by the principle you want victory believe that the enemy is three times stronger, four times.  1787 year. catherine ii travels to crimea. potemkin is working on a scenario of events on this matter. ushakov tells him that he can only boast of the increased training of personnel. potemkin, despite external outrage, decides to surprise the empress and the ambassadors of european powers not with pomposity but with might. during the meeting of the empress, potemkin first complains about the lack of strength, the actions of turkish pirates using english and french weapons. the ambassadors of great britain and france ignore the statements. but then potemkin demonstrates to the assembled squadron of the black sea fleet in the sevastopol raid. at the signal ushakov ships begin to show firing. however ushakov, forgetting himself, cries out "well done vasiliev (stapa st. paul), all for a glass of vodka!". despite this, the empress produces the commander of the squadron of count voinovich in the rear admirals, and ushakov in brigadiers. london. the british government is concerned about the appearance of the russian fleet on the black sea.
prime minister william pitt the younger took an anti-russian stance, in his own way understanding his father's will that britain should not have competitors at sea. exit pitt finds in the declaration of russia of war, but not by britain, but by turkey. the turkish sultan orders the russian ambassador to be imprisoned in the semibashen castle and to declare war on russia. in the crimea, the liaison officer informs orfano about the beginning of the war. simultaneously with the turkish landing, the uprising of the crimean tatars, prepared by the british, should begin. the most urgent task of orfano is to get rid of ushakov. he requires tikhon prokofiev to kill ushakov. however, he attacks the spy and beats him, but is forced to retire because of the newly appeared sailors. orfano informs the count mordovtsev that ushakov hides a runaway convict. mordovtsev is on the ball, which gives potemkin in order to report it. potemkin, meanwhile, is discussing with ushakov his ideas. mordovtsev is going to report on tikhon, but senyavin appears that turkey has declared war on russia.  1788 year. the fleeing half of the turkish fleet, defeated by the ochakovs, and the sevastopol squadron, which first went into battle, meet near the island of fidonisi. turks have a clear advantage in the forces 17 battleships against 2 russian. however, the commander of the avant-garde (the  battleship st. paul, the frigates berislav and strela), the brigadier ushakov is sure he will be able to achieve victory. he convinces the commander of the squadron voinovich to allow him to act at his own discretion. the rear admiral permits and departs for the flagship. to senyavin's request to allow him to stay on the ship, ushakov refuses. before the battle tikhon confesses ushakov that he fought pugachev and is a runaway convict, but ushakov closes his eyes and orders him to take his post. the avant-garde breaks away from the kordebatalia and begins a maneuver to reach the head of the turkish line. turks open fire, but erratic and with inefficient distance. ushakov forbids shooting back, until the ships converge for a minimum distance. turkish kapudan-pasha orders to prepare for boarding, however, converging, russian ships open a shattering fire on the turkish flagman. as a result of the maneuver of the frigates, the turkish flagship is under fire from both sides. voinovich, meanwhile, is
only praying for "to  leave the turks without a shame." senyavin informs him of ushakov's daring maneuver. despite the fact that voinovich approves the maneuver with the strength of the result achieved, he himself prefers to stick to linear tactics, sends senyavin and begins to pray for ushakov's success. senyavin arrives in the bid with a report for potemkin, who, however, broke the spurt of the spleen. using this, mordovtsev tries to put him a denunciation of ushakov allegedly he dissolves about potemkin discrediting  rumors. potemkin is indifferent to the accusations of abuse of position, but  the accusation of envy for the glory of count suvorov infuriates him. however, senyavin again involuntarily saves ushakov, reporting to potemkin about the success of fidonisi, which makes him forgive all the charges, stating that he needs a naval commander, not sabers and fiscals. instead of denouncing him, he makes mordovtsev write an order to confer ushakov the title of rear admiral and appoint him commander of the sevastopol squadron. voinovich, he appoints the new chief of the black sea admiralty board, and mordovtsev sends a long vacation, allegedly due to illness. ushakov, taking command of the squadron, asks voinovich permission to apply one more innovation reserve. voinovich refuses, but declares that the correct decision will be to turn to potemkin. ushakov, on voinovich's advice, declares to potemkin that he came up with this idea, allegedly following his instructions. potemkin understands that the idea belongs precisely to ushakov and asks why he did this after all, the creator of this idea is proclaimed by potemkin, not by him. ushakov responds that he needs not glory, but the opportunity to beat the baking sheet  1790 year. in the battle of tender, ushakov defeated the turkish fleet and  seized the ship meleki-bahri. those british royal navy officers who were on turkish ships as observers report to the admiralty about the tactics of ushakov. young officers edward foote and horatio nelson analyze the battle at tender. foot,  like most british officers, sees ushakov's violation of the rules only barbarity and savagery, but nelson unravels in the barbarity innovative sea tactics. however, the intervening admiral reminds nelson, in case he ever  commands the squadron, about the fate of admiral bing, who was shot for violating the regulations of the admiralty. the
turkish sultan and his associates are discussing the situation. the turkish fleet is defeated, despite the vows of advisers and the promises of the british. the sultan asks  his advisers what to expect next is it not that ushak pasha will open fire from the bosporus in his palace. but the admiral seyid-ali, who came from algeria, reassures the sultan. new ships arrived from the mediterranean sea  faster and more powerful than russians. in the bay of kaliakria, you can not see water from many ships. seid-ali swears to the sultan to bring ushakov in a cage. despite the confidence of his officers, ushakov is seriously preparing for the upcoming battle.  1791. in the battle of kaliakria, having passed under the fire of coastal batteries, the squadron in the marching order of three columns collapses into the turkish fleet. during the battle, ushakov's flagship draws close to the flagship of seid-ali. ushakov notices the turkish admiral and, knowing about the oath, shouts to him: hey, seyid-ali is a slacker! i'll wean you, you son of a bitch, make promises to the sultan!   the battle lasts until late at night and ends with the defeat of the turkish fleet. soon the war is over.  1792. however, after the death of potemkin, mordovtsev again becomes head of the black sea admiralty board. the count is determined to bring his own orders to the fleet: ... the officer has a voice. the boatswain has a pipe. a sailor is only a subject for the execution of commands.    ushakov, without entering into a dispute, before his eyes embraces his sailor khovrin and retires to  engage in a peaceful matter to complete the port of sevastopol. the  population of sevastopol welcomes him as a hero.  cast  ivan pereverzev as adm. feodor feodorovich ushakov  boris livanov as prince grigori aleksandrovich potemkin  sergei bondarchuk as tikhon alekseevich prokofiev  vladimir druzhnikov as midshipman vasilyev  gennadi yudin as capt. dmitri nikolayevich senyavin  vladimir vasilyev as sultan eski hassan  nikolai svobodin as mordovtsev  nikolai chistyakov as voinovich  mikhail pugovkin as pirozhkov  aleksey alekseev as metaksa  georgi yumatov as viktor ermolaev  pavel volkov as medical doctor ermolaev  olga zhiznyeva as empress
catherine the great  nikolai khryashchikov as khvorin, palace guard  nikolay volkov as william pitt  ivan solovyov as admiral horatio nelson  vladimir etush as capt. said-ali  pavel shpringfeld as shipbuilder orfano  grigory shpigel as thomas grey  lev fenin as robert ansley   pyotr sobolevsky as english ambassador  yan yanakiyev as french ambassador  georgy georgiu as turkish ambassador  vyacheslav gostinsky as lanskoy  nikolay kutuzov as general  viktor kulakov as korovin  pyotr lyubeshkin as lepekhin  vladimir tumanov as foot  galina frolova as maria spiridonova  yelena maksimova as senyavinova  gotlib roninson as turkish man  emmanuil geller as turkish admiral  vladimir osenev as townsman  viktor avdyushko as sailor  gleb romanov as episode  sergey solonitsky as german ambassador  viktor balashov as episode  andrei fait as episode  awards   diploma to the best foreign film at the vichy film festival (1954).  historicity   ushakov receives an appointment to the black sea fleet (1783) immediately after his refusal to hold the post of captain of the imperial yacht, whereas after the yacht in 1780-1782 he was appointed to the black sea fleet. was the commander of the battleship victor, who participated in the policy of "armed neutrality" as part of the squadron in the mediterranean.  potemkin is depicted as devoid of the left eye, whereas in reality he did not see his right.  one of the main actors is the count of the mordovians, the president of the black sea admiralty board, at the time described, did not exist (obviously, n. mordvinov is implied).  the turkish sultan is the same both at the beginning and at the end of the russian-turkish war of 1787-1791, whereas before 1789 the sultan was abdul-hamid i, and then his nephew selim iii.  the turkish sultan accuses advisers of swearing that the sky will soon fall to the ground and the waters of the danube will flow backward than its fleet will be defeated. in reality, this phrase was the answer of the chief of the fortress ismail aidozle-mehmet pasha to the ultimatum of suvorov before the assault.  in the offscreen commentary, it is said about ushakov's victory at sinop, which, as we know, was won not by him, but
by ps nakhimov. perhaps, the actions of the black sea fleet are considered from the turkish coast in 1789-1790, when a blow was struck on a number of turkish ports, including sinop.  after the capture of ishmael, it was the strong fleet that remained the last hope of the ottoman empire, so the references to the "broken fleet" are rather strange.  captured in battle at tender, the turkish battleship "meleki-bahri" is depicted as three-deck (that is, carrying at least 90 guns), whereas in reality it was a two-year 66-gun ship. in addition, meleki-bahri was captured by the battleship mary magdalene, and not by st. paul. the film refers to several ships captured at tender, and on the screen show the line ships, and one was seized, "meleki-bahri".  in the battle of fidonisi, voinovich's ship the transfiguration of the lord won a battle with two ships of the turkish vice and rear admiral and sank the turkish shebek, while in the film the whole battle was led by ushakov with the vanguard, and voinovich only prayed.  mark voinovich is shown by a man of advanced age, in fact at the time being described he was about 40 years old, moreover, he was five years younger than ushakov. nk svobodin, who played mordovtsev, was 55 years old, whereas his prototype mordvinov, even in 1791, when the film ends, is 37 years old.  the flagship ship ushakov during the whole film is the 66-gun "st. paul", whereas already in the first "independent" battle in the kerch strait, his flagship was the 84-gun "christmas of christ".  the battle of kaliakria is shown as a decisive rout of the turkish fleet, although the turks did not lose a single ship and were able to leave thanks to the constructive superiority of their ships. however, the turkish fleet was strongly disorganized - most of the ships scattered along the rumeli coast, having received damage of varying degrees. the turkish flagship sank, having already reached constantinople, which made a heavy impression on the inhabitants of the capital of the ottoman empire.  references  bibliography   rollberg, peter. historical dictionary of russian and soviet cinema. scarecrow press, 2008.  external links     1950s war films soviet war films russian war films 1950s biographical films soviet biographical films russian biographical films 1950s historical films soviet historical films russian historical
films russian films mosfilm films 1950s russian-language films films directed by mikhail romm films set in the 18th century films set in the 19th century seafaring films soviet films cultural depictions of catherine the great cultural depictions of william pitt the younger films about the russian empire films scored by aram khachaturian films set in crimea films set in istanbul films set in saint petersburg films set in london films set in the 1780s films set in the 1790s cultural depictions of horatio nelson films shot in russia
the 2007-08 slovenian basketball league (official: 2007-08 upc league) was the 17th season of the premier a slovenian basketball league, the highest professional basketball league in slovenia. union olimpija won its 14th national championship.  teams for the 2007-08 season  regular season  p=matches played, w=matches won, l=matches lost, f=points for, a=points against, pts=points  champions standings  p=matches played, w=matches won, l=matches lost, f=points for, a=points against, pts=points  relegation league  p=matches played, w=matches won, l=matches lost, f=points for, a=points against, pts=points  playoffs  relegation playoffs  p=matches played, w=matches won, l=matches lost, f=points for, a=points against, pts=points  statistics leaders   | width=50% valign=top |  points  |} |}  | width=50% valign=top |  assists  |} |}  external links official basketball federation of slovenia website   slovenian basketball league seasons slovenia 1
st. george's square () is located at prague castle in prague, czech republic.  external links     prague castle squares in prague
soundcity radio network is a nigerian fm radio and nationwide digital radio station that follows a top 40 music format and is owned by alphavision multimedia, a subsidiary of the consolidated media associates (cma), nigeria's media powerhouse. headquartered in lagos, nigeria, soundcity radio network broadcasts nationally to a youth audience.  soundcity radio network music quota leans more to nigerian music with over 70% of music played from local artistes and 30% split between other african and foreign music.  98.5 lagos launch   test transmission for the first and lagos out station for the soundcity radio network began in the first quarter of 2016 but programming and oaps went on-air on the 18th july, 2016 with shola thompson, who doubles as program director and flo hosting the 'what's up lagos' show from 6am to 10am (wat). other oaps followed with four hour shifts each.  programming  music is the heart of soundcity radio's format, supported by news, sports and traffic catering to a wide range of tastes for a youthful market with every oap hosting a four-hour shift.  coverage areas and frequencies  soundcity has transmitters serving these areas:  notable current presenters   sheye banks (what's up lagos)  moet abebe (the takeover)  pearl cardy (the wknd central)  dj kaywise (thursday nights)  osato edk (what's up abuja, top 20 nigeria)  blessing imonikhe (home run abj)  references  external links  radio stations in nigeria radio stations in lagos radio stations established in 2016
drei chore (three chorale compositions), op. 6, is a set of three compositions for mixed choir and piano by max reger, composed before 2 august 1892 in wiesbaden. the texts are poems by three poets:  trost   zur nacht  abendbild  history  reger composed the three settings before 2 august 1892 in wiesbaden. dedicated to , they were published by augener & co in london, probably before mid of may 1893, with an english translation by c. hugo laubach.  movements  1  the text of trost (consolation) is a poem by , beginning with the line "es ist kein weh auf erden" (there is no suffering on earth).  2  the text of zur nacht (at night) is a poem by franz engel with the incipit "nun fallen die augen mude mir zu" (now my tired eyes close).  3  the text of abendbild (evening image) is a poem by nicolaus lenau beginning with "friedlicher abend senkt sich aufs gefild" (peaceful evening sinks on the fields).  performance and recording  the first and third work were early performed on 11 december 1906 in charlottenburg, conducted by lili menar. the second piece was performed on 22 november 1911 in berlin, conducted by john petersen.  the three chore were recorded in 2009 in a collection of reger's choral works, along with the hebbel requiem, among others, by the chamber choir consortium and the pianist christopher glynn, conducted by andrew-john smith.  autograph  the autograph of the work was acquired in 2014 by the max-reger-institute from the dissolved archive of the schott verlag in mainz. susanne popp, a reger scholar and the director of the institute, notes that in opus 6, reger noticed reading the proofs from the publisher that his handwriting was a problem because of many dynamic markings in addition to many notes, and that he therefore began to write the dynamics in red, a habit he kept for life. the autograph was presented in an exhibition of the baden state library in 2015, in preparation for the reger year 2016.  references  bibliography           choral compositions compositions by max reger
amandla is a 2022 film directed and written by nerina de jager and starring lemogang tsipa, thabo rametsi and israel matseke-zulu. the film was released on january 21, 2022, on netflix.  cast   lemogang tsipa as impi  thabo rametsi as nkosana  israel matseke-zulu as shaka (as israel makoe)  charlie bouguenon as drill sergeant  jaco muller as klein  jacques pepler as rookie 1  liza van deventer as elizabeth  marnitz van deventer as pieter  lucky koza as officer lekgalagadi  rowlen ethelbert von gericke as simon  paballo koza as phakiso  references  external links      2022 films english-language netflix original films south african films
the intellectual property corporation of malaysia act 2002 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to establish the intellectual property corporation of malaysia and to provide for its functions and powers and for matters connected therewith.  structure the intellectual property corporation of malaysia act 2002, in its current form (1 january 2006), consists of 7 parts containing 41 sections and 2 schedules (including no amendment). part i: preliminary part ii: the corporation part iii: functions and powers of the corporation part iv: provisions relating to employees part v: finance part vi: general schedules  references  external links  intellectual property corporation of malaysia act 2002   2002 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation malaysian intellectual property law
delisi is a surname. notable people with that surname include:  charles delisi, metcalf professor of science and engineering at boston university lynn delisi, american psychiatrist matt delisi, american sociologist scott h. delisi, united states ambassador to uganda will delisi, computer science engineer  see also  ben de lisi, american fashion designer
next level is a video arcade center located in brooklyn, new york. the arcade is considered a successor to chinatown fair and the new "premier hub" of the united states competitive fighting game scene. weekly tournaments at the arcade are live streamed.  the arcade opened in 2011 at 4013 8th ave in sunset park, brooklyn after chinatown fair closed down. it is owned and operated by former chinatown fair manager, henry cen. in july 2016, the arcade moved roughly 12 blocks north to 874 4th ave after lease expired at its original location. the arcade is featured in the 2015 film the lost arcade, a documentary about the arcade community in new york city.  see also  video arcade  references  external links   video arcades buildings and structures in brooklyn 2011 establishments in new york city sunset park, brooklyn
conrad manila is a hotel located at the bay city area in pasay, metro manila, philippines.  design and construction the design of the building occupied by the conrad manila was inspired by the cruise ships passing by manila bay. conrad manila was designed by wow architects. the firm was also responsible for the interior design of the building.  on march 7, 2013, sm hotels and conventions corporations announced that they reached an agreement with hilton worldwide, the operator of the conrad hotels hotel brand, that the sm subsidiary would manage conrad manila. the opening of the hotel, then planned to have 350 rooms, was initially scheduled for mid-2015. it was later reported that hilton worldwide would manage conrad manila, which would be owned by the sm subsidiary.  the hotel opened on june 15, 2016, which was marked with a ribbon-cutting ceremony. however, the formal opening of the hotel was scheduled in september 2016. it is estimated that  was spent for the construction of the hotel building.  features the hotel occupies the top eight floors of the building while the first two floors are occupied by s maison, a retail complex. a direct walkway connects the hotel building to the smx convention center. the hotel is owned by sm hotels and conventions corporation, a subsidiary of sm investments corporation, while it is managed by the hilton worldwide as part of its conrad hotels brand.  at the time the hotel opened, there were 347 rooms and suites. the hotel hosts 4 event halls and two ballrooms, which occupy more than . six restaurants and lounges are likewise hosted at the hotel. a fitness center and spa operating around the clock and an infinity pool are also among the hotel's features.  s' maison the s' maison retail space occupies the first two floors of the conrad manila, hosting 69 retail spaces. it also hosts a director's club cinema with three theaters, each having a seating capacity of 38 people, installed by la-z-boy. the retail space launched in june 2017 is considered by sm prime holdings to be its 62nd sm supermall in the country.  malherbe, a french design firm, was responsible for the interior design of the s' maison, which is described as patterned after the concept of "pearl of the orient". the mall has an area of . the tenant mix of the s' maison is described as "43 percent food and 57 percent retail".  dessert museum  the dessert museum has 8 rooms (donut hole, marshmallow room, candy cane grooves, ice cream room,
bubble room, gummy bear room, cotton candy forest, and the cake pops room) which focuses on sweets and desserts. there is also a souvenir shop inside. it is located on the s' maison hotel.  reception before its opening date, the conrad manila was awarded at the 4th annual philippine property awards in april 2016. the establishment is the recipient of three awards, namely best hotel development, best hotel architectural design, and best hotel interior design.  at the 2017 prix versailles world architecture awards held at the unesco headquarters in paris, the s' maison was recognized for design excellence in the interior spaces, south asia and the pacific shopping malls category.  references  sm mall of asia hilton hotels & resorts hotels hotels in metro manila hotel buildings completed in 2016 2016 establishments in the philippines buildings and structures in pasay
santa maria maggiore is a roman catholic church in racconigi, province of cuneo, region of piedmont, italy.  history in 1725-27, a church at the site was rebuilt by the parish, utilizing designs by carlo castelli with possible contribution of bernardo antonio vittone to the decoration. the brick facade is notable for an oval fresco over the portal depicting the madonna of the assumption. the interior ceiling was frescoed by paolo emilio morgari; there are eight lateral chapels. the fourth on the right has an altarpiece depicting souls in purgatory by vittorio blanchery, a pupil of beaumont. the main altar is built of polychrome marble and the apse contains wooden choir stalls. the main altarpiece is an assumption of the virgin (1762) by claudio francesco beaumont.  references  roman catholic churches in racconigi 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in italy roman catholic churches completed in 1727 bernardo antonio vittone buildings
khwae noi railway station is a railway station located in makham sung subdistrict, phitsanulok city, phitsanulok. it is located 405.313 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand. about 500 m north of the railway station is a railway bridge once bombed by allied planes during the second world war. a monument to the bombing exists at the station.  train services  local 403 phitsanulok-sila at  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  local 410 sila at-phitsanulok  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
ann frith cartwright decouto (c. 1941 - c. 1 july 2016) was a bermudian politician, lawyer and a member of the former united bermuda party (ubp). she served as a member of the house of assembly of bermuda 1983 until 1998, which included a tenure as deputy premier from 1989 to 1992 under premier john swan, as well as the head of several government ministries under the upi during the 1980s and 1990s. cartwright decouto was perhaps best known as the island's minister of the environment, also from 1989 to 1992. in 1990, she enforced a ban on fishing with fishpots in bermudian waters, a move which was highly unpopular at the time. however, cartwright decouto's ban on the fishpots is now widely credited with reviving bermuda's fish stocks.  beginning life as ann cartwright, she married roderick decouto and  became a lawyer, specialising in family law, one of bermuda's first female lawyers, along with lois simmons and shirley simmons.  decouto was first elected to the house of assembly at an election in 1983. she resided in grape bay, in paget parish, and represented the pembroke west central constituency in the neigh boring pembroke parish.  decouto first served as minister of health and social services from 1985 to 1989. cartwright decouto oversaw bermuda's first response to the emerging aids and hiv epidemic. she also commissioned a new prison to replace the outdated casemates prison during her time as social services minister. she was simultaneously appointed as deputy premier of bermuda and as minister of the environment by the premier john swan, serving from 1989 to 1992. in 1990, she enforced a ban on fishpots in bermuda, despite widespread opposition from the island's fishing and political sectors. the ban was highly controversial, but bermuda's fishing stocks were collapsing at the time. at the time, there were 1,400 licensed fishpots in bermuda, but many fisherman illegally set double or triple the number of fishpots that they were licensed to use. the illegal fishing led to overfishing and a depletion of fish populations around the coral reefs. the fishpot ban initially hurt the domestic fishing industry during the mid-1990s. however, cartwright decouto's ban on fishpots is now widely credited with successfully reviving bermuda's fish populations.  in 1994, cartwright decouto resigned from john swan's cabinet in protest against the promise of an independence referendum by the swan government. while swan favoured independence for bermuda, cartwright decouto
strongly opposed it. she explained her resignation to a bermudian newspaper at the time, saying "in the cabinet you're either in the boat and go along with the consensus, or you get out of the boat." the independence referendum was soundly defeated on 16 august 1995, with of 73.6% voting against independence. swan resigned as premier following the defeat.  cartwright decouto also opposed a proposal to open a mcdonald's franchise in bermuda during the mid-1990s. she introduced the prohibited restaurants act to parliament in an attempt to stop the fast food restaurant.  she did not seek re-election in the 1998 general election, when she retired from elected office.  ann cartwright decouto died in 2016 at the age of 71, her death being announced on 1 july 2016. she was a widow, her husband, roderick decouto, having predeceased her. she was survived by her children.  references  2016 deaths deputy premiers of bermuda ministers of the environment of bermuda government ministers of bermuda members of the house of assembly of bermuda bermudian lawyers united bermuda party politicians people from paget parish women government ministers of bermuda year of birth uncertain 20th-century british women politicians women lawyers
three is the third studio album by american electronic rock duo phantogram, released october 7, 2016 by republic records. it was produced by band members josh carter and sarah barthel, along with ricky reed, john hill, and dan wilson. the album was preceded by the june 2016 release of the single "you don't get me high anymore".  background  in the nine years until threes release, phantogram, a duo of josh carter and sarah barthel, transformed from an indie trip hop act to a republic records-signed pop act, collaborating with the likes of miley cyrus, skrillex and big boi. in january 2016, barthel's older sister committed suicide.  release  the album debuted at no. 5 on the billboard top album sales chart and no. 9 on the billboard 200. it included the single "you don't get me high anymore", produced by josh carter and reed. a series of promotional remixes of the lead single by how to dress well, a-trak, miami horror, attlas, and the range were released following the album.  track listing   notes   signifies a co-producer   signifies an additional producer   the track incorporates string lines from the third movement, after the war, of reich's 1988 composition different trains.  personnel  credits adapted from tidal.  phantogram  sarah barthel - vocals , synthesizer programming , piano , programming , synthesizer , guitar   josh carter - vocals , guitar , programming , synthesizer , percussion , drums   additional musicians  matt chamberlain - drums   darby cicci - trumpet   andrew dunn - trombone   lauren evans - additional vocals   ricky reed - programming , synthesizer programming , guitar , percussion , bass guitar , drums , glockenspeil , synthesizer , piano   dan wilson - guitar , bass guitar , glockenspiel , piano   production  mario borgatta - assistant mixer   martin cooke - assistant engineer   rich costey - mix engineer   robin florent - assistant mixer   nicolas fournier - assistant engineer , assistant mixer   chris galland - assistant mixer   jeff jackson - assistant mixer   chris kasych - engineer , assistant mixer   manny marroquin - mix engineer   ricky reed - executive producer  laura sisk - engineer   ethan shumaker - recording engineer   design  nicolas balcazar - cover photo  josh carter - art direction, slipcover concept  timothy saccenti - photography  joe spix - art direction, design  charts  references  phantogram (band) albums 2016 albums republic records albums
this girl may refer to:   "this girl" (cookin' on 3 burners song), 2016  "this girl" (stafford brothers and eva simons song), 2014  "this girl", a song by kylie minogue from the special edition bonus disc for impossible princess  "this girl", a song by mary macgregor from torn between two lovers  "this girl", a song by dala from this moment is a flash  see also  that girl (disambiguation)
andre berthon (1882-1968) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1919 to 1932.  references  1882 births 1968 deaths people from gironde politicians from nouvelle-aquitaine french section of the workers' international politicians french communist party politicians members of the 12th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 13th chamber of deputies of the french third republic members of the 14th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
a leadership election was held by the malaysian chinese association (mca) on 21 december 2013. it was won by then deputy president of mca, liow tiong lai.  central committee election results source  president  deputy president  vice presidents  central working committee members  references  malaysian chinese association 2013 elections in malaysia political party leadership elections in malaysia malaysian chinese association leadership election
st. rose cathedral  (), also called santa rosa de copan cathedral, is the main church of the roman catholic diocese of santa rosa de copan in the city of santa rosa de copan in the central american country of honduras. the church is dedicated to st. rose of lima.  the first church was built between 1798 and 1803. the building suffered some serious damage as a result of a strong earthquake on 21 november 1877. in 1880 the architect francisco martinez was employed to repair the cathedral, partially reconstructing it while maintaining the baroque style. on 26 december 1915 another strong earthquake caused damage to the cathedral, the repairing of which in 1916 coincided with the founding of the diocese of santa rosa d copan.  see also list of cathedrals in honduras roman catholicism in honduras st. rose's church (disambiguation)  references  roman catholic cathedrals in honduras buildings and structures in santa rosa de copan roman catholic churches completed in 1803 19th-century roman catholic church buildings in honduras
nemaschema flavovittatum is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1976.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1976
august fischer (14 february 1865 in halle an der saale - 14 february 1949 in leipzig) was a german orientalist.  from 1883 to 1889 he studied theology and oriental philology at the universities of berlin, marburg and halle, receiving his doctorate with a thesis on the source biographies of ibn ishaq, biographien von gewahrsmannern des ibn ishaq. in 1890 he obtained his habilitation for oriental philology at the university of halle, and several years later became an associate professor in berlin. from 1900 to 1930 he was a full professor of oriental philology at the university of leipzig, where in 1914/15 he served as dean to the faculty of philosophy. for several years he was secretary of the philological-history group at the saxon academy of sciences of leipzig (1926-32).  published works  with rudolf ernst brunnow, he was author of the highly acclaimed arabische chrestomathie aus prosaschriftstellern (6h edition, 1953), an arab chrestomathy translated into english and published with the title chrestomathy of classical arabic prose literature (2008). he was also an editor of the periodicals zeitschrift der deutschen morgenlandischen gesellschaft (journal of the german oriental society) and islamica (1925-35; a journal for the study of languages and cultures of islamic peoples). among his other numerous writings were die indirekte rede im altfranzosischen (indirect speech in old french, 1900) and the necrology for orientalist christoph ludolf ehrenfried krehl (nekrolog auf ludolf krehl, 1901).  references   1865 births 1949 deaths people from halle (saale) leipzig university faculty university of halle alumni german orientalists german arabists members of the german academy of sciences at berlin
kim eui-sung (; born december 17, 1965) is a south korean actor. he starred in film such as the day a pig fell into the well (1996), office (2015), the exclusive: beat the devil's tattoo (2015) and train to busan (2016). he also appears in the tv series w (2016), and as a support in taxi driver (2021).  selected filmography  film  television series  web series  awards and nominations  references  external links      1965 births living people south korean male television actors south korean male film actors south korean male web series actors 20th-century south korean male actors 21st-century south korean male actors
jorge gomes mangrinha academica sport clube do huambo best known as jgm is an angolan sports club from the city of huambo, in the namesake southern province. in 2016, the club participated for the second consecutive time in the gira angola (angola's second division championship), after winning the huambo province football championship.  the club is named after its owner, angolan businessman jorge gomes mangrinha.  achievements angolan league: 0  angolan cup: 0  angolan supercup: 0  gira angola: 0  huambo provincial championship: 1  2015  recent seasons j.g.m.'s season-by-season performance:   pr = preliminary round, 1r = first round, gs = group stage, r32 = round of 32, r16 = round of 16, qf = quarter-finals, sf = semi-finals, ru = runner-up, w = winner  league & cup positions  players and staff  staff  manager history  players  see also girabola gira angola  references  external links  zerozero.pt profile  external links  facebook profile  football clubs in angola huambo association football clubs established in 1998 1990s establishments in angola
liberty residential historic district is a national historic district located at liberty, union county, indiana.  the district encompasses 67 contributing buildings in a predominantly residential section of liberty.  it developed between about 1841 and 1920 and includes representative examples of greek revival, italianate, queen anne, colonial revival, bungalow / american craftsman, and ranch style architecture. notable contributing buildings include the first presbyterian church (1889), union county public (carnegie) library (1915), john s. nixon house (1879), john b. macy house (1876), and union county seminary (1841).  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2013.  see also liberty courthouse square historic district  references  historic districts on the national register of historic places in indiana greek revival architecture in indiana italianate architecture in indiana queen anne architecture in indiana colonial revival architecture in indiana bungalow architecture in indiana historic districts in union county, indiana national register of historic places in union county, indiana
this is a list of protected areas of haiti.  classification  national parks  marine reserves marine protected areas in haiti are largely created through the efforts of the foundation for the protection of marine biodiversity (foprobim) to help protect haiti's coastal and marine ecosystems. in august 2013, the port salut/aquin protected area (aire protegee de ressources naturelles gerees de port salut/aquin), was created in southwestern haiti. the most recent marine protected area is the three bays protected area (aire protegee de ressources naturelles gerees des trois baies), located in northeastern haiti and created in december 2013.  current list of marine protected areas in haiti:  abacou   complexe cap-camp louise   cote belle anse et grand gosier   dame marie   la cahouane  la navase   parc marin baraderes/cayemites marine park   parc marin de la baie de l'acul marine park   parc marin des arcadins marine park  parc marin des rochelois marine park   aire protegee de ressources naturelles gerees des trois baies (three bays protected area)  parc marin gonaives/grande saline marine park  parc marin ile-a-vaches/aquin marine park  parc marin la gonave-nord marine park  parc marin la gonave-sud marine park   petit paradis   presqu'ile du mole-saint-nicolas  see also   list of world heritage sites in haiti  environmental issues in haiti  haiti national trust  societe audubon haiti  references   list haiti haiti protected areas parks in haiti protected areas of haiti protected areas
dataiku is an artificial intelligence (ai) and machine learning company which was founded in 2013. in december 2019, dataiku announced that capitalg - the late-stage growth venture capital fund financed by alphabet inc. - joined dataiku as an investor and that it had achieved unicorn status. as of 2021, dataiku is valued at $4.6 billion. dataiku currently employs more than 750 people worldwide between offices in new york, paris, london, munich, sydney, singapore, and dubai.  history  dataiku was founded in 2013 by florian douetteau, clement stenac, thomas cabrol and marc batty. in 2015, dataiku established itself in the united states.  in december 2018, dataiku announced a $101 million series c funding round led by iconiq capital. in september 2019, the company was included in the forbes cloud 100, a ranking of the top 100 private cloud companies in the world.   in december 2019, one day after releasing dataiku 6, dataiku announced that capitalg - the late-stage growth venture capital fund financed by alphabet inc. - joined the company as an investor and that dataiku had achieved unicorn status, valued at $1.4 billion.  in august 2020, dataiku announced an additional $100 million series d funding round, led by stripes and tiger global management. the company did not disclose its new valuation, but said that it was "still a unicorn".  in august 2021, dataiku announced another $400 million raise series e by tiger global management, bringing its total valuation to $4.6 billion.  products  the dataiku software: data science studio (dss) was announced in 2014, it supports predictive modelling to build business applications. later versions of dss also include other features.  dataiku offers a free edition and enterprise versions with additional features, such as multi-user collaboration or real-time scoring.  funding  in january 2015, dataiku raised $3.6 million from serena capital and alven capital, two french technology venture capital funds. this was followed by $14 million raised with firstmark capital, a new york city-based venture capital firm in october 2016.   in september 2017 the company raised a $28 million series b investment from battery ventures, as well as historic investors.   in december 2018 dataiku raised $101 million for its data science platform. among investors were iconiq capital, alven capital, battery ventures, dawn capital and firstmark capital.   in december 2019
, capitalg purchased some of the shares previously owned by serena capital in a secondary round that valued dataiku at $1.4 billion.   in august 2020, dataiku raised $100 million in a series d funding round led by stripes with major investment by tiger global management and participation from existing investors battery ventures, capitalg, dawn capital, firstmark capital, and iconiq  references  external links     big data companies data analysis software companies based in paris american companies established in 2013 french companies established in 2013 2013 establishments in france proprietary software
muslim murdalovich daliyev (; born 16 june 1964) is a russian football coach and a former player.  personal life his sons deni daliyev and daud daliyev are footballers.  external links    1964 births sportspeople from grozny living people soviet footballers fc baltika kaliningrad players fc mordovia saransk players russian footballers russian football managers association football midfielders fc taganrog players
the 2016-17 season is paok football club's 91st in existence and the club's 58th consecutive season in the top flight of greek football. the team will enter the greek football cup and will also compete in uefa champions league starting from the third qualifying round.  club  board of directors  coaching staff  (technical & medical)  players  squad information  players in  |} total spending:  €5.60m  players out  1paok will receive €6m from the transfer fee due to a sell-on clause included in the deal which took perez from thessaloniki to la coruna   total income: €13.7m  net income:  €8.1m  kit  | | |  friendlies all times at cet  competitions  overview  super league greece  league table  results summary  results by round  matches  source: paokfc.gr superleaguegreece.net uefa.com  super league greece uefa play-offs  league table  results by round  matches  matches  * match abandoned in the 54th minute with the score at 1-0. it was later rewarded as a 0-3 win for paok.  greek football cup  group stage  round of 16  quarter-finals  paok won on away goals.  semi-finals  final  uefa champions league  third qualifying round  uefa europa league  play-off round   all times at cet  group stage  knockout round  round of 32  statistics  squad statistics  ! colspan="13" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center" | goalkeepers |-  ! colspan="13" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center" | defenders |-  ! colspan="13" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center" | midfielders |-  ! colspan="13" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center" | forwards |-  ! colspan="13" style="background:#dcdcdc; text-align:center" | players transferred out during the season |-  |} 1 players out on loan  goalscorers match played 2 june 2017.  1players left the club in (winter) transfer windows.  disciplinary record  references  external links  paok fc official website  paok fc seasons paok fc season paok fc paok fc
the hotel oregon in mcminnville, oregon, was originally opened in 1905 as the hotel elberton. the hotel, built in the richardsonian romanesque architectural style, remains the tallest building in downtown mcminnville. in 1999, the property was renovated and reopened as mcmenamins hotel oregon, the largest historic hotel building in yamhill county.  the hotel oregon hosts an annual ufo convention, where the location is decorated with relics of the building's history and the town's famous 1950 ufo sighting.  references  1905 establishments in oregon buildings and structures in mcminnville, oregon mcmenamins hotels in oregon national register of historic places in yamhill county, oregon
elections to liverpool town council were held on monday 2 november 1874. one third of the council seats were up for election, the term of office of each councillor being three years.  all of the sixteen wards were uncontested.  after the election, the composition of the council was:  election result  ward results  * - retiring councillor seeking re-election  abercromby  castle street  everton  exchange  great george  lime street  north toxteth  pitt street  rodney street  st. anne street  st. paul's  st. peter's  scotland  south toxteth  vauxhall  west derby  aldermanic election  at the meeting of the council on 9 november 1874, the terms of office of eight  alderman expired.  the following eight were elected as aldermen by the council  (aldermen and councillors) on 9 november 1874 for a term of six years.  * - re-elected aldermen.  by-elections  aldermanic by election, 19 march 1875  the death of alderman thomas cary (conservative) was reported to the council on 19 march 1875.  william bennett was elected as an alderman by the council on 19 march 1875.  no. 13, st. anne street, 9 july 1875  the death of alderman james tyrer (conservative) was reported to the council on 29 june 1875.  dr. john stepford taylor (conservative, st. anne street, elected unopposed 1 november 1873) was elected as an alderman by the council (councillors and aldermen) on 29 june 1875.  no. 10, rodney street, 24 september 1875  caused by the death of councillor james houghton (conservative, rodney street, elected 1 november 1872).  no. 11, abercromby, 14 october 1875  the death of councillor robertson gladstone (liberal, abercromby, elected 1 november 1873) was reported to the council on 6 october 1875.  no. 14, west derby, 21 october 1875  the death of councillor francis anderson clint (liberal, west derby, elected 2 november 1874) was reported to the council on 6 october 1875.  see also   liverpool city council  liverpool town council elections 1835 - 1879  liverpool city council elections 1880-present  mayors and lord mayors of liverpool 1207 to present  history of local government in england  references  1874 1874 english local elections 1870s in liverpool
sefl may refer to:   southeast football league, american football league  tracy sefl, american political consultant
khursheidpur is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from nakodar,  from kapurthala,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
gordon turnbull is a british psychiatrist and expert on post traumatic stress disorder. he is the lead trauma consultant at the nightingale hospital in london, visiting professor at the university of chester, and consultant advisor in psychiatry to the civil aviation authority.  turnbull is the author of the book trauma: from lockerbie to 7/7; how trauma affects our minds and how we fight back, published by bantam press in 2011.  education  turnbull grew up in leith, edinburgh, where he attended lorne street school and then george heriot's school, before enrolling to study medicine at edinburgh university in 1967. he graduated in 1973 and subsequently joined the royal air force.  prominent cases  in 1988, turnbull led the team to debrief personnel involved in the lockerbie air disaster, on behalf of raf mountain rescue teams.  in august 1991, turnbull was involved in debriefing john mccarthy, terry waite and jackie mann at raf princess alexandra hospital in wiltshire on their return from beirut, lebanon where they had been held hostage.  recognition   whittingham prize for contribution to aviation medicine, 1992  people of the year award, royal association for disability and rehabilitation, 1993  references   year of birth missing (living people) living people people from leith military psychiatrists scottish psychiatrists
the primetime emmy award for outstanding outstanding sound editing for a nonfiction or reality program (single or multi-camera) is awarded to one television documentary, nonfiction or reality series each year.  in the following list, the first titles listed in gold are the winners; those not in gold are nominees, which are listed in alphabetical order. the years given are those in which the ceremonies took place:    winners and nominations  1970s  1990s  2000s  2010s  2020s  notes  references  external links  academy of television arts and sciences website  sound editing for nonfiction programming (single or multi-camera)
candiani is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alicia candiani (born 1953), argentine artist enrico candiani (1918-2008), italian footballer leobardo candiani (1904-1986), mexican fencer mauricio candiani (born 1972), mexican politician and businessman  italian-language surnames
we'll carry the star spangled banner thru the trenches is a world war i song written by daisy may pratt erd. the song was first published in 1917 by lang & mendelsohn in boston ma. the sheet music cover depicts soldiers advancing over barbed wire with a flag waving.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .  vogel, frederick g. world war i songs: a history and dictionary of popular american patriotic tunes, with over 300 complete lyrics. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 1995. .   1917 songs songs of world war i
the taxi driver (greek: to soferaki) is a 1953 greek comedy film directed by yorgos tzavellas and starring mimis fotopoulos, smaroula giouli, and nikos rizos.  cast  mimis fotopoulos as vangos    smaroula giouli as lela    nikos rizos   giorgos vlahopoulos   sperantza vrana   thanasis tzeneralis   lela patrikiou   jenny stavropoulou   giannis ioannidis   lola filippidou   elsa rizou   giorgos loukakis   kostas papahristos  references  bibliography  vrasidas karalis. a history of greek cinema. a&c black, 2012.  external links    1953 films 1953 comedy films greek-language films greek films greek comedy films greek black-and-white films
the folklore museum is a generic title for a museum of social history, and less often of folklore in the mythic sense. there are many around the world.  greece  folklore museum of the aristotle association  folklore museum of afytos  folklore museum of kastoria  folklore museum of komotini  folklore museum of limenaria  folklore museum of velventos  folklore museum of veroia  india  folklore museum  jordan  jordan folklore museum  malta  gran castello historic house, formerly the folklore museum
mustafa ejubovic (1651 - 16 july 1707), also known as sejh jujo, was a bosnian historian, writer and mufti of ottoman bosnia and herzegovina.  biography mustafa ejubovic was born in a bosniak family in the herzegovinian town of mostar in 1651. his father jusuf was a distinguished professor. young mustafa taught maktab and madrasa in mostar before departing for constantinople to study in 1677. there he listened to lectures on philosophy, astronomy and mathematics. when he graduated, he got a professorship at a lower madrasa in constantinople, became famous for his lectures, and soon began to teach. ejubovic wrote 27 treatises on logic during his lifetime. in addition to his native bosnian language, he also spoke arabic, turkish and persian.  upon his return to bosnia, ejubovic became the mufti of mostar in 1692. he died on 16 july 1707 in his hometown.  references  external links   modos.ba  1651 births 1707 deaths writers from mostar bosniaks of bosnia and herzegovina cultural historians 17th-century historians codicologists bosnia and herzegovina writers bosnia and herzegovina historians
the following is a list of national pro fastpitch players who have been selected for the all-npf team at least once in their careers.  each year's all-npf team recognizes players for excellence on the field during the season. since 2006, the all-npf team has been selected by the league and announced during the awards banquet after the end of the regular season.  in 2019, a player is named at each fielding position, four pitchers, a designated player, and five 'at-large' selections. (multiple players are selected if there is a tie in voting.)  from 2003-2005, npf players were named to an all-star teams and played all-star games, in various formats.  the list below includes selections to those all-star teams for 2003-2005.  in 2008 "team npf" played exhibition games against the 2008 united states women's national softball team these "team npf" selections are not included below; 2008 includes only those named to the 2008 all-npf team.  as of the conclusion of 2019, kelly kretschman holds the record for most times named to the all-npf team (9).  monica abbott holds the record for most consecutive times named all-npf (8 times).  notes and references  external links   national pro fastpitch  see also   list of professional sports leagues  list of professional sports teams in the united states and canada  national pro fastpitch softball in the united states
brigadier general rezin beall (1723-1809) was appointed commander of maryland's flying camp militia by the united states congress.  career on 17 july 1776, captain beall was wounded in action on st. george island, maryland in a battle resisting efforts of british forces under the command of john murray, 4th earl of dunmore to land on the mainland in maryland.  he is buried at st. john's episcopal church in beltsville, maryland.  references  external links    continental army officers from maryland people of colonial maryland 1729 births 1809 deaths
stanley albert owens (february 10, 1907 - november 30, 1984) was a virginia lawyer and democratic politician who served part-time as a member of the virginia house of delegates, representing prince william county, virginia for 15 years, initially with stafford county and eventually (along with other delegates), loudoun county.  early and family life born in canon, georgia, owens received law degrees from emory university (j.d.) and from the university of georgia school of law (llm). he married his wife janet, and was eventually buried next to her in gainesville, virginia.  career owens was elected commonwealth attorney (prosecutor) for prince william county. he was among the seven original founding members of the prince william county bar association, all of whom had offices near the county seat in manassas, virginia.  when delegate frank p. moncure, a former commonwealth attorney for stafford county and who had represented both prince william and stafford counties for more than two decades, announced his retirement in 1959 during the massive resistance crisis, owens ran to succeed him.  he was re-elected numerous times. as delegate, owens worked with other northern virginia legislators to create dulles airport as well as george mason university. his district was initially titled "prince william and stafford counties" and given the numeric designation 58th, but in the november 1963 election following reapportionment as a result of the 1960 census it was renumbered 57th and only included prince william county. when the u.s. supreme court overturned that reapportionment in davis v. mann (1964) as unconstitutionally disfavoring northern virginia, reapportionment effective in the november 1965 election grouped loudoun and prince william counties as the 42nd house district; owens continued to serve, now alongside lucas d. phillips for three terms until the 1971 election, when the district now renumbered the 20th received two additional delegates and william r. murphy and kenneth b. rollins joined owens and phillips. however the redistricting effective in the 1973 election eliminated one delegate, phillips. all three of the delegates changed after the 1975 elections when the district now designated the 41st linked loudoun county to only the cities of manassas and manassas park in prince william county, and floyd c. bagley, earl e. bell and david g. brickley were elected.  references  1907 births 1984 deaths members of the virginia house of delegates virginia democrats virginia lawyers people from prince william county, virginia emory university alumni university of georgia school of law alumni 20th-century american politicians
20th-century american lawyers
marjatta rasi (born 29 november 1945) is a finnish diplomat. she represented finland as permanent representative to the united nations (un), and as ambassador to many countries posted at new delhi, dhaka, colombo, kathmandu, thimphu, and vienna. she worked as head of finland's development agency. in 2004, she was president of the united nations economic and social council (ecosoc). after serving in new york city in the united nations from 1998 to 2004, she was also the under secretary of state for development policy in the ministry of foreign affairs (finland).  early life and education rasi was born in punkalaidun, finland on november 29, 1945. she graduated from the helsinki university in 1969 with a degree in law (llb).  career rasi joined finland's foreign service in the ministry for foreign affairs in 1970 and was posted as attache at vienna. in 1972, she was second secretary in the finland embassy in london. she then moved back to finland and worked from 1977 as secretary of section in the ministry for foreign affairs. her next posting was in new york city in 1979 as counselor to the permanent mission of finland to the united nations. she was back in finland from 1983 until 1987 as counselor in the ministry for foreign affairs, where, from 1986 she became director of the political department (un sector). she was then posted again in new york city as deputy permanent representative (ambassador) of finland to the united nations chairman of the security council sanction committee. in 1991, she became ambassador of finland to new delhi, dhaka, colombo, kathmandu and thimphu. she was back in the finland ministry for foreign affairs as director general, department for international development cooperation, in 1995. she became a permanent representative of finland to the united nations in new york from 1 june 1998 until 2004.  on 20 october 1998 she presented the "nordic view" on expansion of the membership of the security council. on 3 october 2001 in her address to the un she stated the action plan of the european union to eradicate international terrorism. from 2000 she was also a member of the board of the international peace academy. from 2002 to 2003 she worked as vice president of the economical and social council (ecosoc) of the united nations and was involved in planning post war aid. in a report to the security council presented on 28 may 2004 she stated: "humanitarian assistance, rehabilitation, recovery and reconstruction can and will overlap. these actions must often be accompanied by continuous crisis mitigation and
prevention to avoid setbacks. peacekeeping and security must be part of a coherent approach." in 2004, she presented to the economic council a "draft resolution on the status of non-governmental organizations and other groups accredited to the world summit on sustainable development". in 2004 she also presented a report on "smooth transition strategies for countries graduating from the list of least developed countries".  when she was under-secretary of state for development policy at the ministry for foreign affairs, she was invited to be a member of the advisory group for the un peace building fund, and in 2006, she was chair of this fund which had been established in 2005. finland contributed 1.6 million euros to this fund which covered assistance to sierra leone and burundi.  in october 2009, she took charge as ambassador to austria in vienna, replacing kirsti kauppi; she was the eleventh ambassador from finland to austria. during this period she also served as  finland's permanent representative to the united nations and other international organizations located in vienna such as the international atomic energy agency (iaea), the international nuclear-test-ban treaty organization (ctbto) and the united nations industrial development organization (unido). she retired from foreign service in 2013 after a long career.  political career following her retirement, the conservative national coalition party nominated rasi for the 2014 european elections along with kai pontinen. she secured 17 of 240 votes.  other activities  african development bank (afdb), ex-officio member of the board of governors (2005-2009)  references  bibliography     living people 1945 births permanent representatives of finland to the united nations ambassadors of finland to india ambassadors of finland to sri lanka ambassadors of finland to bangladesh ambassadors of finland to nepal ambassadors of finland to bhutan ambassadors of finland to austria finnish women ambassadors
frederick or fred dean may refer to:  sports  frederick dean (rugby union) (1880-1946), cornish rugby union player  fred dean (1952-2020), american football defensive end  fred dean (offensive lineman) (born 1955), american football guard  fred dean (australian footballer) (1909-1989), australian rules footballer  other  frederick dean (sa navy) (1900-1983), south african military commander  frederick james dean (1868-1941), british trade unionist
as of september 2016, the international union for conservation of nature (iucn) lists 24 extinct species, 17 possibly extinct species, and two extinct in the wild species of reptile.  turtles and tortoises  extinct species  extinct in the wild species black softshell turtle (nilssonia nigricans)  lizards  extinct species  possibly extinct species  snakes  extinct species  possibly extinct species  see also   list of least concern reptiles  list of near threatened reptiles  list of vulnerable reptiles  list of endangered reptiles  list of critically endangered reptiles  list of data deficient reptiles  references   reptiles recently extinct reptiles recently extinct reptiles
mosalemane is a constituency in lesotho with 14,001 registered voters. the constituency was won in 1965 by basotho national party (bnp) member j k rampeta. in 1970 it was won also by bnp even though the 1970 elections were marred by violence. in 1993 lijane selikane won the election as member of the basutoland congress party (bcp). he further won it in 1998 and 2002 under a new party lesotho congress for democracy (lcd).  in 2007 liau ntlele won the elections under lcd and he won it again in 2012 under a new party democratic congress (dc). in the latest election samuel tsoinyana rapapa won the constituency by 3,201 in the february 2015 elections under the all basotho convention (abc).  politics of lesotho
rafael gomes de oliveira (born april 26, 1990 in sao paulo, brazil), known as rafinha, is a brazilian professional footballer who plays as a midfielder.  honours  club operario ferroviario campeonato brasileiro serie c: 2018  references  external links  1990 births living people footballers from sao paulo brazilian footballers brazilian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in costa rica expatriate footballers in portugal expatriate footballers in mexico expatriate footballers in indonesia brazilian expatriate sportspeople in costa rica brazilian expatriate sportspeople in portugal brazilian expatriate sportspeople in mexico brazilian expatriate sportspeople in indonesia red bull brasil players sao paulo fc players guarani fc players ceara sporting club players america futebol clube (rn) players portimonense s.c. players operario ferroviario esporte clube players cafetaleros de chiapas footballers c.s. herediano footballers brusque futebol clube players persela lamongan players ascenso mx players association football midfielders
the 2016 diamond head classic was a mid-season eight-team college basketball tournament that was played on december 22, 23, and 25 at the stan sheriff center in honolulu, hawaii. it was the eighth annual diamond head classic tournament and was part of the 2016-17 ncaa division i men's basketball season. san diego state defeated san francisco to win the tournament championship. zylan cheatham was named the tournament's mvp.  bracket source  references  diamond head classic diamond head classic diamond head classic
faccioli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  emir faccioli (born 1989), argentine footballer giuseppe faccioli (1877-1934), italian electrical engineer orsola faccioli (1823-1906), italian painter  (1845-1916), italian painter  italian-language surnames
glen sword (born 10 november 1967) is a male british former cyclist.  cycling career he competed at the 1988 summer olympics and the 1992 summer olympics.  he represented england in the scratch race and won a bronze medal in the 4,000 metres team pursuit, at the 1990 commonwealth games in auckland, new zealand.  references  external links    1967 births living people british male cyclists olympic cyclists of great britain cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics sportspeople from liverpool commonwealth games medallists in cycling commonwealth games bronze medallists for england cyclists at the 1990 commonwealth games
the elliott-donaldson house is a historic mansion in okolona, mississippi, u.s.. it was built in 1850, a decade prior to the american civil war of 1861-1865. by the end of the war, in 1865, confederate states army general nathan bedford forrest stayed in the house to rest. it has been listed on the national register of historic places since september 15, 1980.  references  houses on the national register of historic places in mississippi greek revival houses in mississippi houses completed in 1850 national register of historic places in chickasaw county, mississippi antebellum architecture
danny cummins (born 27 march 1990) is an irish sportsperson, who plays inter-county gaelic football for galway. he plays his club football for claregalway. he has also represented it sligo in the sigerson cup and fbd league.  cummins played on the galway team that won the under-21 championship in 2011. he made his senior championship debut in the same year, coming on as a substitute in galway's connacht semi-final defeat to mayo. in 2016, cummins was part of the galway team that won the connacht championship. in the replay of the final against roscommon, cummins scored two goals and was named man of the match as galway won the j. j. nestor cup for the first time since 2008.  references  living people 1990 births gaelic football forwards galway inter-county gaelic footballers claregalway gaelic footballers alumni of the institute of technology, sligo
ramandeep singh may refer to:  ramandeep singh (cricketer) (born 1997), indian cricketer ramandeep singh (field hockey, born 1971) ramandeep singh (field hockey, born 1993) ramandeep singh (footballer) ramandeep singh (medical scientist) indian medical scientist
sgarbi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  abdon sgarbi (1903-1929), italian footballer alberto sgarbi (born 1986), italian rugby union player vittorio sgarbi (born 1952), italian art critic and politician  italian-language surnames
the aquatic adventure of the last human is a 2d metroidvania action-adventure video game.  developed by ycjy, the game was released for microsoft windows, os x and linux in january 2016. ports for xbox one and playstation 4, developed by stage clear studios, were released in january 2018, followed by a nintendo switch port in january 2019.  gameplay the game takes place in the far future. the player character returns to earth following an extended trip in space to find that humans have become extinct. the ice caps have melted, the magnetic poles have shifted and mass sub-tectonic water reservoirs have been breached. players must navigate through the drowned earth in their submersible to piece together the story of humanity's downfall.  the game is a side-scrolling shoot 'em up presented in a pixel art style. the game is largely exploratory, and most of the sea life is non-threatening, however players encounter multiple boss monsters. in typical metroidvania fashion, players can acquire upgrades to their submersible, and these upgrades allow the player to access more of the game world.  completing the main game unlocks a "boss rush" mode, where players face off against the game's bosses in succession.  development the aquatic adventure of the last human was developed by ycjy, a swedish development studio consisting of josef martinovsky and christopher andreasson. the soundtrack was composed by karl flodin. the game was part funded through kickstarter, raising 61,777 kr on the crowdfunding platform in 2015.  ycjy did not set out to make a game dealing with climate change, but felt the theme was a natural fit for their underwater environments. aside from the genre pioneers such as the metroid and castlevania series, ycjy also cite games such as shadow of the colossus, teleglitch and the souls series as inspirations. the game's bosses, which can both dwarf the player character and defeat the player character in a few hits, were designed to make players feel insignificant and fragile. ycjy likened the contrast in mood and difficulty between the exploration and boss fights to the pixies song "tame", the loud and soft parts accentuating the other.  reception  the aquatic adventure of the last human was generally well received by critics, scoring 76/100 on reviews aggregation website metacritic based on 11 reviews.  critics praised the game's sense of place, alexander chatziioannou, writing at hardcore gamer described it as "an entrancingly
desolate world, its beauty emphasizing the awareness that in this land of majestic undersea giants you're the invader".  ben davis at destructoid found the "painstakingly hand drawn" environments "[coming] to life in movement" to such an extent that screenshots did not do the game justice.  mike paget, at gamespot, noted how the music enhanced the atmosphere, that it could "[ignite] a sense of wonder".  he did however find the player character difficult to pick out against the background at times, which could lead to unfair deaths.  the boss encounters were found to be fun.  james davenport, writing at pc gamer described them as "massive and multifaceted", and despite him taking approximately thirty tries in one particular encounter, he still persevered, feeling that he was responsible for the failure, not the game.  davis agreed, writing that the bosses required "puzzle-solving skills, strategy, quick reflexes, and most of all perseverance."  according to paget, overcoming such challenges granted "a feeling of immense satisfaction", the "reward for patient, measured play."  paget felt that the story fragments were written exceptionally well and its approach neither pretentious or preachy.  chatziioannou disagreed, describing the writing as "a series of cringeworthy snippets of eco awareness with all the subtlety of high school activism", a message awkwardly juxtaposed with gameplay that encouraged the destruction of wildlife.  davenport considered his motivations as he killed creature after creature, continuing on through the sake of play and pleasure, and they caused him to reflect on how his real world actions too could harm others.  references  external links official website  2016 video games action-adventure games gamemaker studio games kickstarter-funded video games linux games macos games post-apocalyptic video games video games developed in sweden windows games metroidvania games single-player video games video games set in the 30th century video games with underwater settings
ankit sharma (born 20 july 1992) is an indian athlete who competes in the long jump event. he holds the long jump national record of 8.19 metres set in june 2016 at the g. kosanov memorial meet in almaty, kazakhstan.  early life and background sharma was born on 20 july 1992 in pinahat, uttar pradesh as the youngest child of teacher harnath sharma and mithlesh sharma. his family originally hails from morena district, madhya pradesh, and migrated to pinahat several years before sharma was born. he did his initial schooling in morena, before graduating in commerce in bhopal. his elder brother pravesh sharma is also an athlete.  sharma aspired to become a cricketer but was unable to take up the sport due to lack of adequate facilities in morena. when he was eight, sharma started practicing javelin throw. his instructors suggested him to switch to long jump after watching him "jump up with joy" at each successful throw. he took part in long jump events which were a part of raksha bandhan celebrations in morena, and, at his parents' suggestion, decided to pursue a career in long jump. apart from cricket and javelin throw, he also played volleyball, triple jump, discus throw and hurdles during his childhood.  career in 2006, sharma was selected to represent sports authority of india, bhopal, when he crossed the 6-metre mark at the age of 13. he was trained by nishad kumar since 2009 and romainian coach bedros bedrosian since 2015.  sharma competed in the 2010 commonwealth games but failed to win a medal. having participated at the 2010 asian games, he was left out of the indian contingent for the 2014 asian games, with india incidentally fielding no athletes in men's long jump. regarding his omission, he said, "certain athletes were even given a third chance to qualify; i did not get even one. i pleaded for one chance but was told i was no medal hope."  in 2015, he recorded a jump of 8.04 metres at the national games in thiruvananthapuram and became the fifth indian to go past the 8 metre-mark. he won the gold medal at the 2016 south asian games with a jump of 7.89 metres, breaking a 27-year games record.  in june 2016, sharma took part in the g. kosanov memorial meet in almaty, kazakhstan, where he broke the national record two times on the same day. he recorded jumps of 8.17, 8.19 and 8.14
metres, surpassing kumaravel premkumar's national record of 8.09 metres set in 2013. he also gained qualification for the 2016 summer olympics in rio de janeiro where the qualification standard was 8.15 metres.  personal life sharma is posted as an income tax inspector in chennai as of june 2016, having been selected by the income tax department in 2015.  references  external links  all-athletics.com profile  1992 births living people people from agra district athletes from uttar pradesh indian male long jumpers commonwealth games competitors for india athletes (track and field) at the 2010 commonwealth games athletes (track and field) at the 2010 asian games athletes (track and field) at the 2016 summer olympics olympic athletes of india south asian games gold medalists for india asian games competitors for india south asian games medalists in athletics
fort winneba  was a slave fort designed to facilitate the slave trade. it was built in 1694 by the royal african company on the gold coast, in modern-day ghana.  the fort was surveyed in 1727 by william smith, who had been appointed to review their castles in africa following disturbing reports that they were unprofitable. he described it as follows:  "(...) the next day [we] anchor'd at winneba in five fathom water. here we were supplied with pure fresh water from out of their tank, and tho' we had drawn several tons of it, i could not perceive we had lowerd it six inches, from whence i concluded the tank at winneba has a spring in it, the bottom being all a rock .  this fort is exactly the same plan and dimensions as tantumquery, nor is the landing-place any better. the fort stands on a rising ground about fourteen yards from the seaside, having a handsome avenue of trees up to the outer gate. here is also a large spurr, which contributes very much to the strength and usefulness of the fort, being a safe place to secure their cattle at night from the wild beasts. here also are very good gardens; all which together render the place pleasant and comfortable enough"  references  history of ghana castles in ghana dutch gold coast african slave trade winneba african company of merchants
koch peter marx (born 21 january 1994) is a south african professional rugby union player for jersey reds in the rfu championship. he can play as a centre or a winger.  rugby career  schools rugby  marx was born in johannesburg and grew up in alberton, where he attended hoerskool alberton. in 2012, he was selected to represent the  at the premier south african high school rugby union tournament, the under-18 craven week held in port elizabeth, starting all three of their matches as the outside centre. he was also selected in a south africa schools squad that hosted their counterparts from france, wales and england in an under-18 international series, but failed to feature in any of the matches.  youth and varsity shield rugby  after school, he joined the golden lions academy and was named in the  squad that participated in the 2013 under-19 provincial championship. he started all twelve of their matches during the regular season, scoring five tries. these tries came in the home and away matches against both the  and  and their final match of the season at home to , as the lions finished in second position on the log to qualify for the semi-finals. marx started their 27-25 victory over  in the semi-final as well as the final, where his side lost 23-35 to trans-jukskei rivals .  marx was named in the ' squad for the 2014 vodacom cup, but didn't appear in any matches for the team. in the latter half of the year, he established himself in the  squad that participated in the 2014 under-21 provincial championship, starting all thirteen of their matches during the competition. it proved to be a very prolific season for koch as he scored a total of eleven tries, the joint-second most in group a of the competition. his try-scoring spell started in their second match, when he got two tries in an 82-6 victory over . after a try in their victory over  in round five, he got a hat-trick in a 113-3 win over border, a single try against  and two tries against  in consecutive matches. he got another in their penultimate match of the season against the s, as his side finished in third position to qualify for the title play-offs. the last of his tries during the competition came in their semi-final match against the blue bulls, but it proved futile as the team from pretoria won 23-19 to eliminate koch's side from the competition.  at the start of 2015,
marx made five appearances for  in the varsity shield competition. he scored a try in their match against eventual champions  in a 40-26 victory and scored two tries against  a week later. he helped wits finish top of the log, but didn't play in the final which ukzn won 29-24. he returned to the under-21 side for their 2015 season, making ten starts and scoring tries against ,  and  during the regular season as the lions secured the final play-off spot by finishing fourth, and scored a try in a semi-final defeat for the second year in a row as  won 43-20 to progress to the final at the lions' expense.  golden lions / lions  marx made his first class debut on 8 april 2016, starting the 's opening match in the 2016 currie cup qualification series, a 23-27 home defeat to the . in his second match, against namibian side the  in windhoek, marx scored his first senior try in the 32nd minute in a 66-12 victory. further tries followed in another defeat against a , and in victories over a  and the .  in july 2016, marx was named in the starting line-up for the  super rugby team for their final match of the regular season against the  in buenos aires.  references  south african rugby union players living people 1994 births rugby union players from johannesburg rugby union centres rugby union wings golden lions players lions (united rugby championship) players
steve cisneros palacios (born may 20, 1993) is an american retired soccer player who played as a midfielder. a native of san clemente, california, he played on the varsity team at san clemente high school. as a senior, palacios helped the tritons to the first cif southern section championship in team history and was named the all-orange county player of the year by the orange county register. he went on to play college soccer at cal poly, appearing in 66 games over four years with the mustangs.  while in college, palacios played summer seasons with orange county blue star and ventura county fusion. in 2014, his second season with the fusion, he helped the team finish as winners of the premier development league's southwest division. after spending the 2015 season as a practice player for la galaxy ii, palacios signed with united soccer league club portland timbers 2 in 2016. he made two appearances in his lone season as a professional before ending his career.  after retiring from professional soccer, palacios enlisted in the united states army. he was part of the army team at the 2019 armed forces men's soccer championship and scored the winning goal in the championship match. palacios then competed at the 2019 military world games as part of the united states armed forces team.  early life and youth career palacios was born on may 20, 1993, in san clemente, california, the second of three sons to alfredo and paula palacios. he grew up in a soccer household and as a kid trained with his older brother's teams. palacios attended san clemente high school and played four years of varsity soccer for the tritons. he ended his high school career sitting second all-time in both goals and assists at san clemente and as a senior helped the tritons to their first-ever cif southern section title. following that title, palacios was named as the all-orange county player of the year by the orange county register and earned a first team all-cif southern section nod.  palacios played his youth soccer with united fc, earning selections to the california olympic development program (odp) and playing alongside zinedine zidane at the adidas esp camp. he represented california south at the 2010 united states youth soccer association odp championships. palacios also spent time with chivas usa, playing for their academy at the 2010 sum u-17 cup. ranked as the number 76 recruit nationally by college soccer news, he committed to play college soccer at california polytechnic state university, san luis obispo, part of a recruiting class that also included matt lagrassa,
chase minter, and keegan smith.  while in high school, palacios earned multiple call-ups to camps for the united states men's national under-18 soccer team. he made his first camp appearance in october 2009, earning the call in part due to his performance at the adidas esp camp. palacios also appeared at a camp in february 2011 that included friendly matches against three major league soccer teams. additionally, prior to enrolling at cal poly, palacios went on trial in the netherlands with sc heerenveen.  college and amateur after being an unused substitute in the first seven games of his freshman season, palacios made his cal poly debut on september 25, 2011, coming off the bench in a 3-1 defeat against denver. he earned his first collegiate start three days later, playing 48 minutes as the mustangs upset no. 7 uc irvine by a 1-0 scoreline. although he played in just 10 games as a freshman, palacios carved out a reliable role as a sophomore and appeared 18 times. he was one of the primary corner kick takers for cal poly, helping the team qualify for the big west conference men's soccer tournament for the first time in two years.  as a junior, palacios appeared in a career-high 20 games for the mustangs and tallied the first two assists of his collegiate career. the first of those came on september 5, 2013, in a 3-0 victory over sixth-ranked ucla, the highest ranked team that cal poly had ever beaten. he provided the game-winning assist to chase minter in the 11th minute. palacios followed that up as a senior with his first career goals, scoring twice in 18 appearances. he was the only senior on the mustangs roster, although 10 other lettermen returned as well. his two goals came in back-to-back games, helping cal poly defeat nc state on august 31, 2014, and northern illinois on september 5. palacios ended his college career having tallied two goals and two assists in 66 appearances across his four years at cal poly.  summer leagues following his freshman season at cal poly, palacios played in the premier development league (pdl) with orange county blue star. he made eight appearances during the 2012 pdl season and scored one goal as the club finished in seventh place in the southwest division.  during the following two summer seasons, 2013 and 2014, palacios remained in the pdl and played with ventura county fusion. he led the team in appearances in 2013, as he was the only player to appear in every match of the season.
palacios totaled two goals and two assists from 14 games in league play, appeared in both of the fusion's matches in the 2013 u.s. open cup, and came off the bench in the playoffs against victoria highlanders. he returned to ventura county in 2014 and played eight times in all competitions, including a substitute appearance in the first round of the 2014 u.s. open cup against cd aguiluchos usa. however, in palacios' final game as a member of the fusion, against kitsap pumas in the western conference playoffs, he picked up a red card in extra time as ventura county was eliminated in penalties.  club career following his time at cal poly, palacios was eligible to be selected in the 2015 mls superdraft but went undrafted. he signed with united soccer league (usl) club la galaxy ii as a practice player and spent the 2015 season in that role with the club. although palacios was given the number 51 shirt by the team, he was not eligible to make league appearances and played his only game for the club in a postseason friendly against sacramento republic.  portland timbers 2 on march 24, 2016, palacios signed with fellow usl club portland timbers 2. he made his club and professional debut just more than two months later, replacing terrell lowe in stoppage time of a 1-0 victory against seattle sounders fc 2. however, palacios made just one more appearance for t2: coming off the bench against swope park rangers on june 4. he finished his lone season in portland, and subsequently wrapped up his professional career, with just the two games played.  after soccer after ending his professional soccer career, palacios enlisted in the united states army as a specialist. while assigned to camp humphreys in pyeongtaek, south korea, he was chosen to represent the army team at the 2019 armed forces men's soccer championship. in the championship match against the united states air force team, palacios scored the winning goal in second half stoppage time, giving army a 2-1 victory and their first tournament title since 2015. at the conclusion of the tournament, he was selected to the united states armed forces team to compete at the 2019 military world games. palacios and the united states were eliminated in the group stage at the games, losing all three matches. during his time in the army, palacios also served at fort drum in le ray, new york.  personal life palacios is the second of three children in his family, alongside brothers kevin and oscar. he graduated from cal poly with a bachelor of science in recreation, parks, and tourism administration,
then earned a master of business administration from the university of maryland, baltimore county following his retirement from soccer. palacios is married to blake zerboni, the twin sister of professional soccer player mccall zerboni. blake is also from san clemente and played college soccer at ucla.  career statistics  honors ventura county fusion  pdl western conference - southwest division: 2014  references  external links   cal poly profile  steve palacios at fbref.com      1993 births living people american soccer players soccer players from california military personnel from california people from san clemente, california association football midfielders cal poly mustangs men's soccer players orange county blue star players ventura county fusion players portland timbers 2 players usl championship players usl league two players united states army soldiers
eunidia olivacea is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954. it contains the varietas eunidia olivacea var. trialbosignata.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
rick spencer  (born october 21, 1952)  ft. huachuca, arizona is an american folk singer-songwriter  and musical historian.  he grew up in newtown, connecticut and graduated from  western connecticut state university in 1975.  associated acts  spencer was a founding member of forebitter with whom he toured extensively and recorded five albums.   he is a current member of the jovial crew, and the trio, longsplice, with joseph morneault and dawn indermuehle. spencer worked with stan hugill delving into the history of sea music and singing sea shanties. he worked for 20 years as a staff musician, interpreter, researcher and program developer at mystic seaport museum.   spencer is recognized internationally, as an authority on the history and presentation of english language maritime music.  he has been on stage with pete seeger, oscar brand, paul winter, john roberts, jerry bryant, and many others.  references  1952 births living people american acoustic guitarists american male guitarists american folk guitarists american folk singers american male singer-songwriters american banjoists people from fort huachuca, arizona people from newtown, connecticut 20th-century american guitarists 20th-century american male musicians singer-songwriters from arizona singer-songwriters from connecticut
the 2013 wimbledon championships are described below in detail, in the form of day-by-day summaries.  day-by-day summaries  day 1 (24 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  rafael nadal [5],  stan wawrinka [11],  janko tipsarevic [14],  fabio fognini [30]  ladies' singles:  sara errani [5],  varvara lepchenko [26]  schedule  day 2 (25 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  philipp kohlschreiber [16],  gilles simon [19],  sam querrey [21]  ladies' singles:  maria kirilenko [10],  nadia petrova [13],  anastasia pavlyuchenkova [21],  tamira paszek [28],  romina oprandi [31]  schedule  day 3 (26 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  roger federer [3],  jo-wilfried tsonga [6],  marin cilic [10],  john isner [18],  julien benneteau [31]  ladies' singles:  victoria azarenka [2],  maria sharapova [3],  caroline wozniacki [9],  ana ivanovic [12],  jelena jankovic [16],  sorana cirstea [22],  lucie safarova [27]  gentlemen's doubles:  marcel granollers /  marc lopez [2]  schedule  day 4 (27 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  milos raonic [17]  ladies' singles:  peng shuai [24],  mona barthel [30]  ladies' doubles:  anastasia pavlyuchenkova /  lucie safarova [9],  chan hao-ching /  anabel medina garrigues [15]  schedule  day 5 (28 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  nicolas almagro [15],  grigor dimitrov [29],  tommy robredo [32]  ladies' singles:  angelique kerber [7],  alize cornet [29]  ladies' doubles:  kristina mladenovic /  galina voskoboeva [10],  daniela hantuchova /  maria kirilenko [14]  schedule  day 6 (29 june)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  richard gasquet [9],  kei nish
ikori [12],  juan monaco [22],  benoit paire [25],  alexandr dolgopolov [26],  kevin anderson [27],  jeremy chardy [28]  ladies' singles:  samantha stosur [14],  dominika cibulkova [18],  ekaterina makarova [25],  klara zakopalova [32]  gentlemen's doubles:  santiago gonzalez /  scott lipsky [10]  ladies' doubles:  cara black /  marina erakovic [11]  schedule  middle sunday (30 june) following tradition, middle sunday is a day of rest, with no matches scheduled.  day 7 (1 july)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  tommy haas [13],  mikhail youzhny [20],  andreas seppi [23]  ladies' singles:  serena williams [1],  roberta vinci [11],  carla suarez navarro [19]  gentlemen's doubles:  alexander peya /  bruno soares [3],  aisam-ul-haq qureshi /  jean-julien rojer [5],  max mirnyi /  horia tecau [7],  colin fleming /  jonathan marray [9],  michael llodra /  nicolas mahut [13],  łukasz kubot /  marcin matkowski [15],  treat huey /  dominic inglot [16]  ladies' doubles:  ekaterina makarova /  elena vesnina [4],  raquel kops-jones /  abigail spears [5],  liezel huber /  sania mirza [6],  vania king /  zheng jie [13]  mixed doubles:  frantisek cermak /  lucie hradecka [12]  schedule  day 8 (2 july)  seeds out:  ladies' singles:  li na [6],  petra kvitova [8],  sloane stephens [17]  gentlemen's doubles:  robert lindstedt /  daniel nestor [6],  mahesh bhupathi /  julian knowle [8],  julien benneteau /  nenad zimonjic [11]  ladies' doubles:  sara errani /  roberta vinci [1]  mixed doubles: max mirnyi /  andrea hlavackova [4],  treat huey /  raquel kops-jones [9],  leander paes /  zheng saisai [15],  ivan dodig /  marina erak
ovic [16]  schedule  day 9 (3 july)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  david ferrer [4],  tomas berdych [7]  ladies' doubles:  andrea hlavackova /  lucie hradecka [2],  nadia petrova /  katarina srebotnik [3],  julia gorges /  barbora zahlavova-strycova [16]  mixed doubles:  alexander peya /  anna-lena gronefeld [5],  marcelo melo /  liezel huber [6],  aisam-ul-haq qureshi /  cara black [10],  scott lipsky /  casey dellacqua [13],  david marrero /  kimiko date-krumm [14]  schedule  day 10 (4 july)  seeds out:  ladies' singles:  agnieszka radwanska [4],  kirsten flipkens [20]  gentlemen's doubles:  leander paes /  radek stepanek [4],  rohan bopanna /  edouard roger-vasselin [14]  mixed doubles:  horia tecau /  sania mirza [2],  rohan bopanna /  zheng jie [7],  marcin matkowski /  kveta peschke [11]  schedule  day 11 (5 july)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  juan martin del potro [8],  jerzy janowicz [24]  ladies' doubles:  anna-lena gronefeld /  kveta peschke [7]  mixed doubles:  nenad zimonjic /  katarina srebotnik [3]  schedule  day 12 (6 july)  seeds out:  ladies' singles:  sabine lisicki [23]  gentlemen's doubles:  ivan dodig /  marcelo melo [12]  ladies' doubles:  ashleigh barty /  casey dellacqua [12]  schedule  day 13 (7 july)  seeds out:  gentlemen's singles:  novak djokovic [1]  mixed doubles:  bruno soares /  lisa raymond [1]  schedule  references  wimbledon championships by year - day-by-day summaries
the 2018 united states senate election in mississippi took place on november 6, 2018, in order to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of mississippi. incumbent republican roger wicker was reelected to a second full term, defeating his democratic challenger, david baria.  the candidate filing deadline was march 1, 2018, and the primary election was held on june 5, 2018, with a runoff on june 26 if a party's primary fails to produce a majority winner. the race took place on the same day as the nonpartisan jungle primary for the other u.s. senate seat in mississippi, which was vacated by thad cochran in the spring of 2018.  republican primary  candidates  declared  roger wicker, incumbent u.s. senator  richard boyanton, businessman  withdrawn  chris mcdaniel, state senator and candidate for the u.s. senate in 2014 (running for the class 2 u.s. senate seat)  endorsements  results  democratic primary  candidates  declared  david baria, mississippi house of representatives minority leader  jensen bohren  jerone garland  victor g. maurice jr.  omeria scott, state representative  howard sherman, businessman  declined  jeramey anderson, state representative (running for ms-4)  brandon presley, chair of the mississippi public service commission  endorsements  polling  results  runoff results  independents and third party candidates  libertarian party  declared  danny bedwell, candidate for ms-01 in 2012 and 2014  reform party  declared  shawn o'hara, perennial candidate  general election  predictions  fundraising  polling  results  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites david baria (d) for senate danny bedwell (l) for senate roger wicker (r) for senate  2018 mississippi united states senate
valeria hidveghy or valerie pascal delacorte (14 june 1914 - 14 july 2011) was a hungarian actress.  life  delacorte was born in budapest and broke through the iron curtain to marry the film producer gabriel pascal. she is best known today for her 1970 memoir of him, the disciple and his devil: gabriel pascal and bernard shaw. in a letter to the editor of the new york times in 1995 she wrote that the character of eliza in the guise of a magyar princess in "my fair lady" was due to her first husband.  after pascal's death she married george t. delacorte, jr. in 1959 and together with him became a philanthropist as well as safeguarding pascal's correspondence and legacy. she outlived this second husband as well and in 1991 three years after his death, made her first donation of $1 million and five old master paintings to the norton museum of art. in total she donated 60 paintings to the museum.  delacorte died at her home in palm beach gardens.  references  external links     the disciple and his devil: gabriel pascal and bernard shaw on google books  1914 births 2011 deaths actresses from budapest american memoirists hungarian film actresses american art collectors women art collectors american women memoirists hungarian emigrants to the united states 21st-century american women
anatoly vladimirovich treskin (russian: анатолии владимирович трескин) (1905-1986) was a soviet art restorer and artist.  early life    treskin was born in st. petersburg in 1905. he received a diploma as an artist-technician from vkhutemas in 1928.  career   in his early career, he engaged in the restoration of the decor of the shuvalov palace, the yusupov palace and the stroganov palace, as well as the muralist painted cultural centers, health centers and workers' clubs.  treskin joined the red army in 1942, working on the hanko peninsula and then in the siege of leningrad. he served as chief artist of the political administration of the baltic fleet, painting portraits of heroic sailors and pilots. after the war, treskin participated in the restoration of the mariinsky theatre, the maly opera house, the hermitage museum and the russian museum. he restored the halls of the oranienbaum, as well as working in novgorod, pskov, suzdal and tsarskoye selo. from the 1950s to the 1970s, he led the work on the restoration of paintings in pavlovsk palace.  his works are currently held in both the museums of st. petersburg and private collections. in 2005, the russian museum and pavlovsk palace co-organized an exhibition commemorating his 100 years prior.  he died in 1986 in leningrad.  awards   gold medal of the ussr academy of arts  order of the red star  (decree no. / order 133, 11.6.1944, the database record number 1424680352)   order of the patriotic war ii degree  (№ premium paper 176 from 06.11.1985, the database record number - 1521048347) .  people's artist of the rsfsr  rsfsr state prize in architecture (1972)  references  external links    1905 births 1986 deaths people from saint petersburg soviet artists vkhutemas alumni soviet military personnel of world war ii
velagapudi is a neighbourhood and a part of urban notified area of amaravati.  velagapudi may also refer to:  velagapudi ramakrishna siddhartha engineering college, an engineering college in vijayawada, andhra pradesh velagapudi ramakrishna, an indian civil service (ics) officer, industrialist, and philanthropist.  surnames of indian origin
australian women during world war ii played a larger role than they had during world war i.  military service  many women wanted to play an active role in the war, and hundreds of voluntary women's auxiliary and paramilitary organisations had been formed by 1940. these included the women's transport corps, women's flying club, women's emergency signalling corps and women's australian national services.  in july 1940 in brisbane alone there were six different organisations providing women with war-related training, the largest of which was the queensland-based women's national emergency legion. the federal government and military did not initially support women being trained to serve in the armed forces, however, and these organisations were not taken seriously by the general public.  a shortage of male recruits forced the military to establish female branches in 1941 and 1942. the royal australian air force established the women's auxiliary australian air force (waaaf) in march 1941, the army formed the australian women's army service (awas) in october 1941 and the australian army medical women's service (aamws) in december 1942, and the women's royal australian naval service (wrans) came into being in july 1942. in 1944 almost 50,000 women were serving in the military and thousands more had joined the civilian australian women's land army (awla). many of these women were trained to undertake skilled work in traditionally male occupations in order to free servicemen for operational service. women were also encouraged to work in industry and volunteer for air raid precautions duties or clubs for australian and allied servicemen. the female branches of the military were disbanded after the war.  women in the economy  the role of women in the economy also changed during world war ii. women entered roles which had traditionally been limited to men, but continued to receive lower wages.  references  citations  sources          australian military personnel of world war ii women in the australian military women soldiers
ed howard (born september 21, 1963) is an american public interest lawyer and strategist who currently works as the senior counsel for the children's advocacy institute and the center for public interest law based at the university of san diego school of law. he is also president of howard advocacy in sacramento, california.  early life and education   edward paxson howard iv was born in santa monica, california and raised in los angeles. he graduated from taft high school in 1981. howard received his b.a from george washington university's political science program in 1986 where he was editor-in-chief of the yearbook, cherry tree, state chairman of college democrats for washington dc, editorials editor for the george washington university student newspaper the hatchet, and editor-in-chief of the george washington university arts and literary magazine wooden teeth. he was elected vice president of the george washington university college democrats, as well elected to student senator, where he chaired the senate finance committee. he also founded political awareness week at george washington university. he won various awards and honors while in college, including the excellence in student life award, the outstanding service to george washington university award, and was selected for the omicron delta kappa national leadership honor society]. howard received his j.d. from loyola law school in 1990, where he was awarded the american jurisprudence award for constitutional law and was selected as chief justice of the moot court.  legal career  1991-1995   during law school at loyola law school, howard interned as a law clerk for the los angeles county district attorney's office, where he conducted approximately fifty preliminary hearings before the los angeles county municipal court. he then became an associate of the downtown los angeles office of paul, hastings, janofsky & walker (now paul hastings llp), where he worked in on first amendment and insurance coverage issues, including representing the rap group n.w.a.  howard's career in public interest law began in 1991 when he became an associate for the former westwood office of hall & phillips, later hall & associates. the firm's diverse practice included litigation and legislative advocacy in the areas of civil rights, consumer protection, the environment and land use. the firm is most famous for the friends of mammoth decision, which made environmental rules and regulations applicable to private developers, and the century freeway litigation, which assured fair compensation for displaced homeowners. howard's major achievements while at hall & associates included serving as the lead counsel on behalf of consumer groups in two california supreme court cases of first impression: amwest v. wilson (fully
implementing proposition 103, a 1988 insurance reform measure)  and 20th century garamendi (1994) (unanimously affirming lawfulness of garamendi's complex premium rebate regulations resulting in over $1 billion in refunds ). howard's other work while at the firm includes fighting for various environmental issues and sex equity in education. while at hall & associates, howard also served on the drafting committees for proposition 186, an initiative that proposed to establish a state single-payer health care program. though defeated, the initiative modeled the program's feasibility and was the largest grassroots political campaign fund-raising effort in california history.  1995-1999   from 1995 to 1998, howard served as the executive director and lead staff attorney for the now dissolved center for law in the public interest. while there, he worked on such cases as: gregorio t. v. wilson (1994) (successfully challenging anti-immigrant proposition 187, lead on administrative and initiative law issues); wenger v. trans union (1995) (landmark challenge to credit reporting agency practices); carmen doe v. wilson (1997) (challenging former governor pete wilson's effort to end prenatal care to undocumented women at christmas time); california women's law center v. state board of education (1995) (successfully overturning board of education regulations on sexual harassment, leading to the enactment of new regulation); and proposition 103 enforcement project v. quackenbush (1998) (successfully invalidating amendment to proposition 103). in 1996, howard took the lead on drafting what ended-up being propositions 214 and 216 regarding hmo reform. also, while at the center for law in the public interest, howard wrote and spearheaded enactment of ab 156 (murray), a sweeping reform of credit bureau practices that brought the issue of identity theft to the attention of the nation. facets of the legislation have been copied in over ten states. he also co-wrote ab 50 with the california bankers association in 1998, the nation's first bill to regulate biometric identification, by making illegal the sale of voice, fingerprint and retina databases to third parties. it also prohibited the use of such information in discriminatory practices. his experience as a lead counsel for california supreme court and appellate cases in initiative matters led the 15th dean of loyola law school to ask howard to serve as the adjunct professor of law from 1994 to 1998, where he created and taught california's first class devoted to initiative law. during his time at clipi, howard served as an adviser on auto insurance, health care
reform and personal privacy issues for former 1998 gubernatorial candidate al checchi.  howard worked as the senior counsel for the foundation for taxpayer and consumer rights from 1999 to 2000, where he helped engineer the nation's first major class-action managed care reform lawsuits: a nationwide rico class action against aetna-u.s healthcare  and a statewide california class action against kaiser permanente for false advertising. the aetna lawsuit claimed that aetna had been advertising that they were committed to maintaining and improving quality, while, in fact, they had been consistently undermining quality medical care in order to cut costs." similarly, the reason for the foundation's lawsuit against kaiser was that the hmo had implemented systemic policies and practices based on monetary concerns that interfered with the medical judgement of kaiser doctors. in 1999 howard became a partner at kornarens and howard, a litigation firm specializing in consumer rights, land use, health care, copyright and trademark litigation, civil rights, writ, law and motion, and appellate practice.  2000-2005  while at kornarens and howard, howard drafted an initiative that according to edmund sanders, in the los angeles times (1999)  would " allow identity theft victims to require that banks, credit card companies and others delete their names and personal information from marketing lists.. [and] prevent banks from continuing to spread any misinformation about consumers through unsolicited credit card offers and other junk mail. the measure would also allow a consumer to collect damages from a bank or credit card company that sold his or her account numbers to anyone convicted of a felony who then used the information to victimize the consumer."  he also represented the bolsa chica land trust before the california coastal commission, responsible for crafting the legal theories, grassroots advocacy, and submissions that lead to the commission in 2000 unanimously preserving not just ribbons of land around wetlands but large tracts of adjacent land. the commission was subsequently sued by signal landmark and hearthside homes, inc. and howard represented the land trust in that case, which turned aside the developer's challenge.  in 2000, howard became the chief policy consultant & special counsel to state senator liz figueroa. ed had wide-ranging duties that included speech writing and developing, drafting, lobbying, and negotiating the senator's legislative agenda, especially in the areas of health care, health insurance, property-casualty insurance, labor, workers' compensation, consumer rights, and privacy. he drafted and staffed ab 32 (2000) (a bill jointly authored with republican assembly member keith richman to reform and expand
medi-cal and healthy families and insure thousands more california children), sb 771 (2001) (establishing a state-maintained "do not call" list that bars telemarketers from calling anyone on the list; jointly authored by republican assembly member john campbell; now copied federally by the ftc); and sb 1950 (2002) (broad reform of medical board's doctor disciplinary practices).  in 2005, howard became the chief consultant of joint committee on boards, commissions and consumer protection.  as chief consultant, howard spearheaded the investigation and review of all the state's boards and commissions. howard successfully staffed sb 231 (figueroa), a landmark reform of medical board operations. in the same year howard was named the chief consultant of the senate's government modernization, efficiency & accountability committee. howard's duties included working on bill analyses and legislative reform proposals. howard's staff work include sb 577 (2005) (reforming government finance regulation); sb 796 (2005) (requiring internet access to government information); and sb 954 (reforming information technology procurement).  2006-present   in january 2007, howard became senior counsel for the children's advocacy institute based in the university of san diego school of law. in 2007 howard oversaw the children's advocacy institute's and morrison & foerster's precedent-setting federal lawsuit on behalf of foster parent advocacy groups (california state foster care association, california state care providers association, and legal advocates for permanent parenting). the purpose of the suit was to seek more money for parents caring for abused and neglected foster children. after three and a half years of litigation, in 2011, the us district court in san francisco ordered the california department of social services (cdss) to "immediately" implement new, higher reimbursement rates for california foster parents. while at the children's advocacy institute, howard has worked on enacting a statute increasing transparency of foster care operations and numerous laws aiding homeless and foster youth. among these laws is sb 39 (2007)  which allows the press and public greater access to county documents when children under the supervision of cps die.  this law has prompted broad press coverage of the operational shortcomings in county child welfare services, especially in los angeles and sacramento counties.  howard was part of the legal team that persuaded a judge to strike down regulations promulgated by the state department of social services pursuant to sb 39 that had previously blocked information from being released to the press and public when local child welfare agencies had failed to act to prevent a child from being fatally abused or
neglected. other laws howard has worked on through the children's advocacy institute include the law that permits more than two parents to be legally recognized as parents and ab 2632 (maienschein) (2014) that requires criminal record clearances in community care facilities.  in 2007 howard also became the senior counsel for the center for public interest law, a nonprofit, nonpartisan academic and advocacy organization also based in the university of san diego school of law that studies occupational licensing and monitors california agencies that regulate businesses, trades, and professions. howard's work with the center for public interest law includes enactment of reforms dealing with the accountancy profession, reform of the regulation of for-profit postsecondary education businesses, sb 658 (2011) (the nation's first law regulating funeral website pricing), and reforming the state bar of california.  howard was responsible for the press stories exposing that former uc davis chancellor linda katehi had accepted a post on devry university's board of directors.  ed's legislative work establishing pricing transparency in the funeral home industry was profiled in a national npr story. he and the work of his colleagues at the center for public interest law were recently featured in the university of san diego law school magazine. ed was also an advocate for securing millions in public funds to reduce the case loads of attorneys representing foster children. he also successfully sought reformation of how the state bar oversees lawyers.  ed was asked by the national center for lesbian rights to offer advice on strategies to defeat proposition 8 banning gay marriage in strauss v. horton (2009) 46 cal.4th 364 and to file an amicus curiae brief. ed again worked with the center on behalf of the children's advocacy institute to enact legislation permitting a judge to find more than two adults satisfy the legal test for being a parent if in the child's best interests.  notable howard advocacy clients   american electronics association  deposition reporters association of california   earthjustice (defeating an end-of-session legislative gambit by chevron)  american environmental safety institute based in palo alto, columbia  columbia forest products (a green building company) in a regulatory effort before the air resources board to regulate formaldehyde in composite word products, an effort that has inspired federal regulations   propel industries (green fuel company)  pride industries (nation's largest job placement non-profit for the disabled)  california clean money action fund  ufcw  seiu-uhw working partnerships usa center for public interest law children's advocacy institute capa  references   1963 births living people columbian college of arts and
sciences alumni loyola law school alumni lawyers from los angeles paul hastings associates
football club deportivo galicia is a football club based in london, england. they are currently members of the  and play at the bedfont recreation ground in bedfont, groundsharing with bedfont sports.  history the club was established in 1968 under the name centro gallego and joined the west fulham league. a split during the 1971-72 season saw another club formed under the name fc deportivo galicia, with the two clubs merging under the latter name in 1975, at which point they were playing in the harlesden sunday league.  deportivo galicia switched to saturday football when they joined division two of the middlesex county league in 1995. the club went on to win the division at the first attempt, earning promotion to division one. they were division one runners-up the following season and were promoted to the premier division. although the club finished bottom of the premier division in 1997-98, they were not relegated to the (renamed) senior division. they finished bottom of the division again in 2006-07 and 2008-09, but avoided being relegated on both occasions.  in 2016-17 deportivo galicia were premier division champions, earning promotion to division one of the combined counties league.  ground the club have played at several grounds, including cb hounslow united's osterley sports club. in 2015 they moved to edgware town's silver jubilee park, before relocating to the bedfont recreation ground the following year.  honours middlesex county league premier division champions 2016-17 division two champions 1995-96  records best fa vase performance: first round, 2018-19  references  external links  football clubs in england football clubs in london 1968 establishments in england association football clubs established in 1968 middlesex county football league combined counties football league diaspora association football clubs in england
patrick henry reardon is an archpriest of the antiochian orthodox christian archdiocese, author, lecturer, podcaster, and senior editor of touchstone.  reardon began his theological education at southern baptist theological seminary in louisville, kentucky, then attended st. anselm's college, and the pontifical biblical institute in rome, italy, followed later at st. tikhon's orthodox seminary in south canaan, pennsylvania.  reardon came to national attention in 2015 when he announced he was refusing to sign any marriage licenses issued by the state of illinois, owing to the state's complicity in the redefinition of marriage.   reardon is a prolific writer as well as a popular pastor, homilist, and teacher. until his retirement in 2020, he served as pastor at all saints antiochian orthodox church in chicago. he is author of more than 500 articles, editorials, and reviews in numerous popular and scholarly journals, including more than 200 for touchstone magazine. he is also the author of twelve books, including works on the biblical books of genesis, numbers, 1-2 chronicles, job, psalms, sirach, romans, and revelation.  most of his books were published by ancient faith publishing, and his podcasts are hosted by ancient faith radio.  books christ in the psalms christ in his saints the trial of job: orthodox christian reflections on the book of job wise lives: the wisdom of sirach the jesus we missed: the surprising truth about the humanity of christ chronicles of history and worship: orthodox christian reflections on the books of chronicles creation and the patriarchal histories: orthodox reflections on the book of genesis reclaiming the atonement, volume 1: the incarnate word revelation: a liturgical prophecy out of step with god: orthodox christian reflections on the book of numbers romans: an orthodox commentarythe history of orthodox christianity: background material for instructors and discussion leaders'' (written to accompany a 90 minute film about the orthodox church)  references  external links father patrick henry reardon fr. patrick reardon all saints homilies (podcasts) pastoral ponderings (weblog)  american eastern orthodox priests eastern orthodox priests in the united states year of birth missing (living people) living people
the first women programme is a united kingdom awards program for women. it was created by real business in 2005.  first women is supported by the confederation of british industry. henrietta jowitt, deputy director-general, commercial at the cbi gave the keynote speech at the 2016 first woman awards.   the first women young achiever award has celebrated the likes of emma hagan, chief risk officer at silicon valley bank, aged 24, and amanda white, who headed up the hs3 rail project.   first woman of business services jan flawn cbe, who launched her business at the age of 50 after raising her children, uses her first women platform to advocate for women across the country.  charity first women has partnered with keep a girl in school project to create awareness and help towards promoting education for girls in uganda. first women is supporting the washroom project to raise funds that will support the education of at least 500 girls.  references  external links  official website  awards established in 2005
giovanni claudio pasquini (1695 - 1763) was an italian poet and librettist. born in siena, he served at the court of charles vi, holy roman emperor in vienna, first as the italian teacher to maria theresa and her younger sister maria anna, and from 1733 as the court poet. after the death of charles vi, he worked in the habsburg courts of mannheim and dresden before returning to siena in 1749 where he remained for the rest of his life. he wrote the libretti for numerous operas, including caldara's i disingannati, as well as courtly entertainments and oratorios. from 1754 he devoted himself to religious life and lost his sight the following year. he was appointed vice-rector of the university of siena in 1758, but his last years were marked by financial worries when his nephew died and pasquini became to the sole support of his five children.  references  1695 births 1763 deaths italian poets italian opera librettists people from siena
kristen gutoskie is a canadian actress. she is known for her roles as katie frank in containment, rachael in beaver falls, seline in the vampire diaries and molly hendricks in lethal weapon.  biography  kristen gutoskie has been an actress, singer and dancer since the age of 12. she grew up in the suburbs of toronto with her mother, a nurse, her father, a computer salesman and her older sister. she skipped classes in school because she thought it was "cool". during her youth, she won many competitions as a solo singer and competed with many dance groups.  she began working in theater, television and film. she completed an honors arts degree at wilfrid laurier university where she took hip-hop classes in her spare time. during her senior year, she traveled as an exchange student to australia, new zealand, europe and south africa. following her travels, she moved to los angeles. she has appeared in productions on networks such as e4, abc, a&e, the cw, cbc, global tv2... she has also appeared in numerous independent films. she writes music, sings and volunteers in her spare time. she has developed her own non-profit campaign.  filmography  references  external links      official website  living people canadian film actresses 21st-century canadian actresses canadian television actresses year of birth missing (living people)
mathadda khurd is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 8 km from phillaur, 38.2 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 129 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , mathadda khurd has a total number of 287 houses and population of 1325 of which include 671 males and 654 females. literacy rate of mathadda khurd is 77.25%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 103 which is 7.77% of total population of mathadda khurd, and child sex ratio is approximately 776 lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 44.15% of total population in mathadda khurd. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 403 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of mathadda khurd which includes 368 males and 35 females. according to census survey report 2011, 94.54% workers describe their work as main work and 5.46% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  bhattian railway station is the nearest train station however, phagwara junction train station is 20.7 km away from the village. the village is 36.6 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 137 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
society against the state () is a 1974 ethnography of power relations in south american rainforest native cultures written by anthropologist pierre clastres and best known for its thesis that tribal societies reject the centralization of coercive power. clastres challenged the idea that all cultures evolve through westernization to adopt coercive leadership as popular, ethnocentric myth.  further reading  external links     1974 non-fiction books french-language books anthropology books ethnographic literature
the second courtyard is one of four at prague castle, in prague, czech republic. it features kohl's fountain.  external links     prague castle
david bowie (1947-2016) was an english singer-songwriter who recorded over 400 different songs in a career which spanned four decades. bowie worked with numerous artists throughout his career, including producers tony visconti, brian eno and singer iggy pop, and was the primary songwriter for most of his songs; he recorded cover versions of songs by artists including the who, the pretty things and the yardbirds. beginning his career under the name davy jones, bowie released singles with multiple backing bands, including the king bees and the lower third, all of which went generally unnoticed. following his baroque pop and music hall-influenced self-titled debut album in 1967, he released his first successful single "space oddity", which introduced the fictional astronaut major tom. he then released his folk rock-inspired second self-titled album in 1969, the hard rock the man who sold the world (1970) and the art pop hunky dory (1971), which represented an artistic breakthrough for bowie, containing songs such as "changes" and "life on mars?".  between 1972 and 1974, bowie was a pioneer of the glam rock genre, as showcased on the rise and fall of ziggy stardust and the spiders from mars (1972), which launched bowie to stardom, aladdin sane and the covers album pin ups (both 1973), and diamond dogs (1974). his songs from this era include "suffragette city", "the jean genie", "rebel rebel" and "all the young dudes" (made famous by mott the hoople), the last two of which are regarded as glam anthems. young americans (1975) showcased bowie's interest in soul and r&b music, as well as funk ("fame"). station to station (1976) was the vehicle for his persona the thin white duke, and is commonly known as the musical transition between young americans and his experimental art rock berlin trilogy, consisting of low (1977), "heroes" (1977) and lodger (1979). working with eno and visconti, low featured songs influenced by electronic and ambient music, "heroes" expanding upon low with a more art pop sound (prominently on its well-known title track), and lodger marking the partial return to his previous drum and guitar-based rock sound, with elements of new wave and world music present. scary monsters (and super creeps) (1980) was a culmination of his 1970s works and featured the singles "ashes to ashes" and "fashion". bowie then recorded "under pressure
" with queen and the title track for the 1982 film cat people with giorgio moroder.  bowie reached his commercial peak with the post-disco and dance-oriented let's dance in 1983. tonight followed a year later, after which bowie contributed to various film soundtracks and released the pop rock never let me down (1987). in 1988, bowie briefly halted his solo career to record with the band tin machine, who explored alternative and grunge styles before the genres were particularly well-known; the band dissolved in 1992 and bowie resumed his solo career. black tie white noise (1993) marked a creative resurgence for bowie, featuring songs influenced by soul and jazz music, and made prominent use of electronic instruments. after releasing the experimental the buddha of suburbia later the same year, bowie experimented with industrial rock on outside (1995), drum and bass and jungle on earthling (1997), and ended the 1990s with the pop rock-oriented hours (1999). bowie reunited with visconti for the rest of his career, releasing the rock albums heathen (2002) and reality (2003) before taking a break from music. his final releases were the art rock-oriented the next day in 2013, the song "sue (or in a season of crime)" in 2014, and his final album blackstar in 2016, before his death of liver cancer two days after its release. the art rock and jazz album was bowie's intended swan song, featuring several lyrics that revolved around his impending death. three new songs from the blackstar sessions were released on the ep no plan in 2017. bowie's unreleased 2001 album toy was posthumously released in 2021.  songs  notes  references  sources    bowie, david
isaac spackman (died 7 january 1771) was an english painter. he practised about the middle of the eighteenth century, and is best known as a painter of birds and animals. spackman died in islington.  references  1771 deaths 18th-century english painters english male painters
srirampore subdivision is an administrative subdivision of the hooghly district in the state of west bengal, india.  overview  srirampore subdivision is the most urbanised, and the one with the highest density of population, of all the subdivisions of hooghly district. urbanisation started with industrialisation of the hooghly flats, the narrow strip of land along the hooghly and spread inland covering a large portion of hooghly-damodar plain, the agriculturally rich alluvial plains lying between the hooghly and the damodar. the entire area is a part of the gangetic delta. the hooghly is a tidal river and has a high west bank. the spread of urbanisation obviously affected the livelihood of the people, with a high proportion of workers being engaged in non-agricultural pursuits.  subdivisions the hooghly district is divided into the following administrative subdivisions:  administrative units  srirampore subdivision has 7 police stations, 4 community development blocks, 4 panchayat samitis, 34 gram panchayats, 240 mouzas, 208 inhabited villages, 6 municipalities and 34 census towns. the municipalities are uttarpara-kotrung, konnagar, serampore, baidyabati, rishra and dankuni. the census towns are: belumilki, dakshin rajyadharpur, rishra, bamunari, nawapara, nabagram colony, basai, kanaipur, raghunathpur, masat, jangalpara, gangadharpur, manirampur, dudhkalmi, nababpur, kumirmora, ramanathpur, bhagabatipur, kharsarai, tisa, kapashanria, jaykrishnapur, purba tajpur, begampur, baksa, panchghara, chikrand, janai, pairagachha, naity (naiti), barijhati, garalgachha, krishnapur and rajbalhat. the subdivision has its headquarters at serampore.  kolkata urban agglomeration the following municipalities and census towns in srirampur subdivision were part of kolkata urban agglomeration in the 2011 census: serampore (m), baidyabati (m),  rishra (m), konnagar (m), uttarpara kotrung (m), rishra (ct), bamunari (ct), dakshin rajyadharpur (ct), nabagram colony (ct), raghunathpur (ps-dankuni) (ct) and kanaipur (ct).  police stations
police stations in srirampore subdivision have the following features and jurisdiction:  blocks community development blocks in srirampore subdivision are:  map of serampore subdivision  block map  economy  industry the first jute mill in india was set up at rishra in 1855. hastings jute mill, established in 1875, in what was the country retreat of warren hastings, on the banks of the hooghly at rishra  is owned by sanjay kajaria, md of murlidhar ratanlal exports. another jute mill at rishra, the wellington jute mill, stopped operations in 2016. india jute mill at serampore, established in 1866, also stopped working from 2015.  there are several large and varied industrial units in srirampore subdivision:   the manufacturing activities of ici india limited commenced in 1939 with the setting up of alkali and chemical corporation of india at rishra. the plant manufactures paints and special chemicals. akzonobel, a dutch multinational, acquired the parent company in uk, imperial chemical industries, in 2008.   hindustan national glass & industries ltd., was founded by c.k.somany in 1946, with the commissioning of india's first fully automated glass manufacturing plant, at rishra. it is a key player in india's container glass industry.   jaya shree textiles limited, a unit of aditya birla nuvo ltd. was established at rishra in 1949. it is a leading player in the linen and wool segment and a major exporter.   kusum products ltd. manufactures vanaspati, soap and detergents at rishra.   aditya birla insulators, the largest indian manufacturers of high voltage porcelain insulators, has one its two plants at po prabhas nagar, rishra. it caters to the entire spectrum of substation and transmission insulators. it exports to over 58 countries.   berger paints india ltd., the second largest paint company in india, has its headquarters at kolkata and 10 manufacturing units spread across the country. it has a water based paint plant at rishra.   pmc rubber chemicals india private ltd. is a global developer and manufacturer of performance chemicals and plastics. they started in 1994 and have their plant at rishra.   the phosphate company limited which manufactures and markets the super phosphate fertiliser under the lakshmi brand, started production at rishra in 1950. it is one of the leading brands in the market.   united spirits produces fast moving brands of indian-made foreign liquor at bhadrakali.   bhusan industries ltd. has set up a 1.5 lakh tons cold
rolling mills complex near rishra. it started production in 2000.   hooghly alloy & steels co. pvt. ltd. was established in 1985 and have a 60,000 tonnes per annum rolling mills at dakshin rajyadharpur.   shalimar wires industry limited was initially set up in 1961 at uttarpara to provide import substitution support for the indian paper industry.  in the eighties it diversified into import substitution items for the tool room industry and synthetic forming fabric.   madura coats pvt. ltd. established a factory at battala, serampore in 1889 to produce cotton and blended yarns and industrial products.  bhusan power and steel started with a cold rolling and galvanising plants in 2001 at bangihati, mallickpara, dankuni and have subsequently expanded.  dankuni coal complex, operated by south eastern coalfields, at dankuni, produces 1,000 mt per day of solid smokeless fuel branded as cilcoke, 18 million cft per day of coalgas for supply in and around kolkata and howrah, tar chemicals etc.  diesel locomotive component factory of the indian railways was inaugurated by mamata banerjee at dankuni in 2012. it produces high horse power diesel locomotive underframes etc. it functions as a sister unit of banaras locomotive works at varanasi.  electric loco assembly and ancillary unit of chittaranjan locomotive works of indian railways at dankuni has started functioning in 2016.  the entire area has a large number of medium and small industries.  hindustan motors started operations at hindmotor, a neighbourhood in uttarpara kotrung municipality in 1948. the ambassador was the best known amongst its models. it declared suspension of work at its uttarpara plant on 24 may 2014.  the jute industry, once the pioneer in industrialising this state, has been in a bad shape, but it is not the jute industry alone that is in a bad shape. in the srirampore subdivision, there are other units such as j.k.steel and bangalaxmi cotton mills, which have not been doing well or have closed down, although many other industries are doing well.  srirampore subdivision has a large migrant presence in the workforce. they have come from bihar, uttar pradesh, orissa and andhra pradesh. they have settled in the slums around or near their work place and many of the locality names reflect their origins - chhapra basti, gayapar basti, odiya basti and telengipara.  handloom weaving the handloom sarees of dhaniakh
ali, begampur, jangipara, rajbalhat areas and dhutis of haripal, rajbalhat, khanakul areas of hooghly district are widely familiar.  agriculture hooghly is an agriculturally prosperous district of west bengal. although the economy has been shifting away from agriculture, it is still the pre-dominant economic activity and the main source of livelihood for the rural people of the district. one third of the district income comes from agriculture. given below is an overview of the agricultural production (all data in tonnes) for srirampore subdivision, other subdivisions and the hooghly district, with data for the year 2013-14.  poverty the information given above leads us on to a comment in the district human development report for hooghly district: in the sub-division wise comparison of the levels of poverty in hooghly district, srirampur and chandannagore share the lowest incidence of poverty.  education hooghly district had a literacy rate of 81.80% as per the provisional figures of the census of india 2011. chinsurah subdivision had a literacy rate of 79.17%, chandannagore subdivision 83.01%, srirampore subdivision 86.13% and arambag subdivision 79.05.    given in the table below (data in numbers) is a comprehensive picture of the education scenario in hooghly district for the year 2013-14:  note: primary schools include junior basic schools; middle schools, high schools and higher secondary schools include madrasahs; technical schools include junior technical schools, junior government polytechnics, industrial technical institutes, industrial training centres, nursing training institutes etc.; technical and professional colleges include engineering colleges, medical colleges, para-medical institutes, management colleges, teachers training and nursing training colleges, law colleges, art colleges, music colleges etc. special and non-formal education centres include sishu siksha kendras, madhyamik siksha kendras, centres of rabindra mukta vidyalaya, recognised sanskrit tols, institutions for the blind and other handicapped persons, anganwadi centres, reformatory schools etc.  the following institutions are located in srirampore subdivision: serampore college, a general degree college, was established in 1818 by william carey, joshua marshman and william ward at serampore, which was a danish colony from 1755 to 1845. pearl rosary school, affiliated to wbbse, wbchse, was established at serampore in 2005. the school is authorised study centre of national institute of open schooling
( nios), govt of india. raja peary mohan college, a general degree college, was established at uttarpara in 1887. serampore girls' college, a general degree college for girls, was established at serampore in 1981. government college of engineering & textile technology serampore, an engineering college, was established in 1908 as government central weaving institute. it started offering a degree course in textile technology in 1957. it started offering b. tech. in 1998, and added general engineering subjects. it started offering m.tech. courses from 1994. nabagram hiralal paul college, a general degree college, was established in 1957, at nabagram, konnagar. bidhan chandra college, rishra, a general degree college, was established at rishra in 1957. mahitosh nandy mahavidyalaya, a general degree college, was established at jangipara, in 2007. vidyasagar mahavidyalaya, a general degree college, was established at suchia, masat in 1998. swami niswambalananda girls' college, a general degree college for girls, was established at bhadrakali in 1978.  healthcare the table below (all data in numbers) presents an overview of the medical facilities available and patients treated in the hospitals, health centres and sub-centres in 2014 in hooghly district.      .* excluding nursing homes  medical facilities in srirampore subdivision are as follows:hospitals: (name, location, beds)serampore walsh super speciality subdivisional hospital, serampore municipality, 266 bedsserampore tb hospital, serampore municipality, 55 beds.serampore esi hospital, serampore municipality, 216 beds.uttarpara general hospital, uttarpara kotrung municipality, 204 bedsfemale vagrants home, uttarpara kotrung municipality.konnagar matri sadan o sishu mangal pratisthan, konnagar municipality, 43 beds.rishra municipal seva sadan, rishra municipality, 150 beds.  rural hospitals: (name, block, location, beds) jangipara rural hospital, jangipara cd block, jangipara, 60 beds.akuni ichhapasar rural hospital, chanditala i cd block, aniya, 30 beds.chanditala rural hospital, chanditala ii cd block, chanditala, 30 beds.kanaipur rural hospital, sreerampur uttarpara cd block, kanaipur, 30 beds.  primary health centres (cd block-wise)(cd block, phc location, beds)jangipara cd block: mundalika (10 beds),
furfura (10 beds), guti (4 beds), rajbalhat (6 beds).chanditala i cd block: bhattapur, akuni (4 beds), gangadharpur (10 beds), jangalpara (6 beds).chanditala ii cd block:begampur (4 beds), janai baksa, janai (10 beds). sreerampur uttarpara cd block: rajyadharpur (10 beds).uttarpara kotrung municipality: bhadrakali (5 beds).  private hospitals:* (name, location, beds)paramount health care, 148 & 151, g.t road, maniktala, serampore, 30 beds, disha eye hospital, sheoraphuli, 25 bedskamala ray hospital pvt. ltd., kotrung gt road, po hindmotor, 50 beds.* excluding nursing homes  electoral constituencies lok sabha (parliamentary) and vidhan sabha (state assembly) constituencies in srirampore subdivision were as follows:  references  subdivisions of west bengal subdivisions in hooghly district
eunidia lerouxi is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by jerome sudre and pierre teocchi in 2002.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 2002
the u.s. rubber manufacturers association (rma), established in 1915 as the rubber club of america, is a national trade and advocacy group of u.s. rubber tire manufacturers. the rubber manufacturers association formed the tire industry safety council trade association in the united states in may 1969, which is based in washington, d.c.  in 2015, government relations expert anne forristall luke was nominated president and ceo of the rma.  members members of the rubber manufacturers association include: bridgestone americas, inc. continental tire the americas, llc cooper tire & rubber company kumho tire u.s.a., inc. goodyear tire & rubber company michelin north america, inc. pirelli tire north america sumitomo rubber north america, inc. toyo tire holdings of americas inc. yokohama tire corporation.  british rubber manufacturers' association the british rubber manufacturers' association is another trade group that "represents the rubber manufacturing industry in the united kingdom." it is based in london, england.  see also etrma  references  further reading                 1915 establishments in the united states tire industry trade associations based in the united states
kgaswane mountain reserve is a nature reserve of  consisting of veld and mountains run by the north west parks and tourism board and is located  south-west of rustenburg on the northern slopes of the magaliesberg. kgaswane is home to many species of flora and bird life and large and small mammals, and has been designated as a protected ramsar site since 2019. the reserve has a number of camp sites, hikes and trails.  history the reserve was originally established on the farm rietvallei which once belonged to president paul kruger and has expanded over many to cover  with the park proclaimed in 1967.  fauna and flora the reserve has over 800 antelope and some other species includes klipspringer, the grey duiker, bushbuck, kudu, oribi, mountain reedbuck, impala, red hartebeest, zebra, springbok, steenbok, sable antelope and  the waterbuck. the reserve also has a few predators like the caracal, aardwolf, jackal and leopard.  320 species of birdlife has recorded in the reserve and includes a breeding colony of cape vultures as well as martial and black eagles. other interesting species include red-winged francolin, the african black swift and the sentinel rock thrush.  the reserve consists grassland, scrub, mixed woodland, and pockets of fynbos. 115 tree and bush species are said to grow in the reserve and includes some rare plants.  recreation the reserve caters for day visitors who wish to visit the park to picnic or barbeque by following the tarred roads to those sites. for overnight stays, the reserve also has a cottage, a group camp and 22 camping sites. the group camp can accommodate up to fifty people in huts with a communal kitchen and dining area, ablution block and an outdoor boma. the cottage can accommodate fourteen people. the reserve also has a visitors centre.  the reserve has four hiking trails. the vlei trail is a short  track ideal for viewing birds. the peglarae trail is approximately with terrain being steep and rocky. the last two are overnight hiking trails with the summit route of  and includes natural pools for swimming and the baviaanskrans route is  and has a waterfall view and a garden of remembrance and amenities in two huts to accommodate twelve hikers on both trails.  references  external links  kgaswane nature reserve pdf  nature reserves in south africa ramsar sites in south africa north west provincial parks tourist attractions in north west (south
african province) rustenburg
chundi ramgha is a village which lies in bhanu municipality, tanahun district, nepal. actually chundi is the name of river (chundi river), which flows through the lower lands of ramgha base.  the first poet of nepali language hence known as aadikavi (early poet) bhanubhakta acharya was born in chundi ramgha. nara nath acharya, who wrote the authentic biography of bhanubhakta acharya was also born and lived in this village.  references  populated places in tanahun district
eunidia subnigra is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1955.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1955
david robert graham owned cablecasting limited, a canadian cable company, which was the  fifth largest cable television company in canada. graham died on september 2, 2017 at the age of 80.  references  canadian businesspeople 2017 deaths year of birth missing
the roncador river () is a river of the state of mato grosso, brazil. it is a tributary of the manso river.  course  the casca river joins the roncador river in an arm of the manso dam.  see also list of rivers of mato grosso  references  sources  rivers of mato grosso
william audley "audley" rawson was a republican member of both houses of the michigan legislature, representing portions of the thumb from 1935 through 1946.  born near marlette, rawson was elected township supervisor of elkland township in 1930. he was elected to the michigan house of representatives for tuscola county in 1934, where he served four terms. rawson was then elected to the michigan senate where he served two terms.  after retiring from political office, rawson was a lobbyist for the michigan association of insurance companies. he was an alternate delegate to the 1944 republican national convention, a member of the michigan republican state committee, and chairman of the tuscola county republican party.  in 1958, rawson and his first wife mary established the rawson foundation which continues to provide scholarships for graduates of cass city high school. the trust fund also helped establish the rawson memorial library in cass city in 1970. rawson was named cass city citizen of the year in 1971.  rawson died of a heart attack in pinellas park, florida on september 27, 1981, aged 88.  references  1893 births 1981 deaths republican party (united states) politicians members of the michigan house of representatives michigan state university alumni people from sanilac county, michigan michigan republicans 20th-century american politicians
at the royal majestic is an organ concerto by the american composer terry riley.  the work was commissioned by the los angeles philharmonic, the orchestre de la suisse romande, and the deutsches symphonie-orchester berlin.  its world premiere was given by the organist cameron carpenter and the los angeles philharmonic under the direction of john adams at the walt disney concert hall on april 11, 2014.  composition  background the los angeles philharmonic first approached terry riley in 2008 to compose a piece for their newly installed organ (which riley named "hurricane mama") at the walt disney concert hall.  riley spent numerous all-night sessions playing hurricane mama and composing the piece, which would eventually become 2008's the universal bridge.  several unused sketches from these sessions later became the basis for at the royal majestic, a los angeles philharmonic co-commission.  riley has had a lifelong interest in the organ and previously featured it in such works as a rainbow in curved air, persian surgery dervishes, the ten voices of the two prophets, and shri camel.  structure at the royal majestic has duration of approximately 30 minutes and is cast in three movements: negro hall  the lizard tower gang  circling kailash  the first movement "negro hall" is the longest and is based on an eponymously titled pencil drawing by the swiss artist adolf wolfli.  in the score program notes, riley wrote, "i was intrigued by what woelfli, who never traveled outside of switzerland and who lived the last half of his life in a mental institution, thought about negro culture. i tried to imagine what a dance hall in the waldorf astoria nyc in the 1930s might be like (from woelfli's perspective), a gaggle of black dancers in outlandish jitterbug and boogie-woogie routines in a polymetric changing tempo frenzy. i used woelfli's beautifully geometric mandala-like drawings to inspire my own composing process."  the movement references themes from the "negro hall" section of his 1990 chamber opera the saint adolf ring, which is derived from wolfli's oeuvre from the cradle to the grave.  the second movement "the lizard tower gang" is the shortest movement with a duration of just under 5 minutes.  the final movement "circling kailash" refers to the hindu practice of pilgrims circumambulating the holy mount kailash in tibet, believed to be the residence of the god shiva.  instrumentation the work is scored for a solo organ
and an orchestra consisting of three piccolos, two flutes, alto flute, two bass clarinets, alto saxophone, five bassoons, contrabassoon, two horns, four trumpets, flugelhorn, two trombones, two tubas, timpani, five percussionists, and strings.  reception at the royal majestic has been praised by music critics.  reviewing the world premiere, mark swed of the los angeles times lauded the piece, writing, "riley has the skill to write down music in the traditional western classical tradition, but that's never been his preference. he is a collaborator. he is expert in the indian raga tradition and accomplished in jazz. he has his mind-bending way with musical patterns but also an ellington side and a ragtime side and a ravel side and bartok. he opens musical windows and welcomes what flies in."  he added, "orchestral colors and musical ideas proceed in royal majestic as if in a dream or surrealist narrative. devoted to fluidity, riley doesn't like to fill in everything. he left, for instance, the organ's colors up to carpenter, who played with intense seriousness and exquisite fluidity."  the music was also praised by jim farber of the san francisco classical voice, who opined, "at the grand majestic is a knock-your-socks-off composition that melds many voices, memories, and ideas into a concerto structure. it certainly does not play it safe. but that's terry riley."  conversely, ivan hewett of the daily telegraph was more critical of the work, remarking, "the composer's own programme note promised a rich imaginative world, embracing the swiss schizophrenic artist adolf wolfi, tibetan temple music, and black dancers at an imagined dance hall in 1930s new york (thus the concerto's title, at the royal majestic). here and there, the sound-world lived up to that promise, but long before the end the piece became lost in its own labyrinth."  references  compositions by terry riley 2013 compositions organ concertos music commissioned by the los angeles philharmonic music based on art
the 2015 silverstone gp2 and gp3  series rounds were a pair of motor races that were held on 3 and 5 july 2015 at the silverstone circuit in the united kingdom as part of the gp2 series and gp3 series. it was the fifth round of the 2015 gp2 season and the third round of the 2015 gp3 season. the race weekend supported the 2015 british grand prix.  report  gp2 series  qualifying sergey sirotkin achieved his maiden pole with a time of 1:39.949, followed by stoffel vandoorne and richie stanaway.   notes 1. - visoiu received a three-place grid penalty after he was deemed to have impeded a competitor during the qualifying session.  feature race  notes 1. - rowland was given a 5-second penalty after having breached track limits several times during the race. 2. - pic was given a 20-second penalty after being deemed to have collided with jordan king on the final turn of the race.  sprint race  gp3 series  qualifying  feature race  sprint race  references  external links   official website of gp2 series  official website of gp3 series  silverstone gp3 series round reports gp2 and gp3 silverstone gp2 and gp3 series 2015 in formula three
barysevich is a belarusian-language patronymic surname derived from the given name barys. it corresponds to russian borisevich (борисевич) and polish borysewicz.  alexandrina barysevich anzhelika barysevich  belarusian-language surnames patronymic surnames
business aircraft are aircraft typically used by companies and corporations to transport people or goods related to the needs of said businesses. most business aircraft are general aviation aircraft variants of piston or turboprop  or business jets.  general aviation  piston with the growth of general aviation in the 1930s companies started to purchase single and twin-engined aircraft for business use.  a need to move goods and equipment made use of different general aviation aircraft and surplus military transports. in 1963 in the united kingdom the maidenhead organ studios purchased a twin-engined beagle b.206 to allow them to delivery electronic organs.  turboprop for the first half of 2018, while business jets deliveries were relatively flat, new turboprops were up 10%, pressurized ones were up 12%, and king airs were up 30%. charter membership wheels up, operated by gama aviation, saw its flight hours surge by % and expanded its fleet from 99 to 117 with most of the new aircraft being examples of the beechcraft king air 350i. from a fleet of 63 king airs in 2017, wheels up is aiming for a fleet of 1,000 serving 75,000 members in north america and europe by 2030.  the first single-engine business turboprop was the ,  socata tbm first delivered in august 1990, followed by the  pilatus pc-12 certificated in march 1994 with a larger cabin than a king air 200. piper was next with the cheaper,  piper meridian m500 debuted in september 2000, then the  m600, and the epic e1000, faster than the tbm, and the cessna denali, competing with the pc-12, should follow soon. by may 2019, more than 3,000 single turboprops had been delivered: over 780 tbms, over 1,600 pc-12s and over 700 turboprop meridians.  jet engine  the first jet aircraft to be used as a business aircraft was the four-seat morane-saulnier ms.760 paris based on military requirements as a liaison aircraft. it was followed by the four-engined lockheed jetstar in 1957, although it was also designed to meet military requirements it was ordered by corporations like gulf oil, continental oil and  ford motor company. it was later followed in the mid-sixties by bespoke business jets like the six passenger learjet 23 and the eight-passenger de havilland dh.125.  they were followed in 1966 by larger 19-seat aircraft like the gulfstream ii based on the earlier turboprop gulfstream i. the first generation
of business jets provided speed and altitude but not the range and comfort that a larger cabin volume would give. early gulfstream iis were delivered to coca-cola company and gillete. the first single-engine jet used for business use was the cirrus vision sf50, first delivered in december 2016.  airliners  companies also operate airliners or freight aircraft, either new aircraft such as the boeing bbj family or former airliners like the boeing 727 or boeing 757.  helicopters  with the introduction of more reliable helicopters at the end of the second world war like the bell 47 companies started to purchase them for executive and staff travel.  references  bibliography
queen line may refer to:  queen subway line, a previously proposed rapid transit line in toronto, ontario but which was never built collectively, the streetcar lines serving queen street (toronto): 501 queen 502 downtowner 503 kingston road relief line (toronto), a currently proposed rapid transit line that would run along queen street
dhaipai is a village located in the ludhiana west tehsil, of ludhiana district, punjab.  administration the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  villages in ludhiana west tehsil  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sahnewal airport.  external links   villages in ludhiana west tehsil  references  villages in ludhiana west tehsil
sphingomonas asaccharolytica  is a bacterium from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from roots from an apple tree in japan.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas asaccharolytica at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  asaccharolytica bacteria described in 1995
ashwin or asveen (devanagari:  ) is an indian given name. it is related to the name of the ashvins, the divine twins of vedic mythology, as well as to the name of the hindu lunar month ashvin.  people with the name    ravichandran ashwin, indian cricketer  ashwin sanghi, indian writer  ashwin mushran, actor nag ashwin ashwin kakumanu ashwin mushran ashwin dani sumanth ashwin ashwin sood ashwin shekhar ashwin kumar ashwin sanghi murugan ashwin ashwin adhin ashwin ram ashwin choksi ashwin srivastava ashwin batish ashwin sundar ashwin chitale ashwin mahesh ashwin navin ashwin hebbar ashwin balrak ashwin gumaste chris ashwin ashwin joshi herbert ashwin budd ashwin porwal ashwin willemse ashwin balachand mehta ashwin das ashwin yadav ashwin scott viraj ashwin ashwin cummings  see also  indian masculine given names
macrocoma millingeni is a species of leaf beetle of saudi arabia, described by pic in 1898.  references  millingeni beetles of asia insects of the arabian peninsula beetles described in 1898 taxa named by maurice pic
bodies is the debut extended play (ep) by australian pop rock singer-songwriter, celia pavey. it was announced on 4 august 2014, along with a tour of australia's east coast. the four-track ep was released on 29 august 2014 via universal music australia. in an interview, pavey reflected, "i'm a very honest person so i like to write about real things that are happening in my life rather than make up stories. i write a lot about the people in my life. most of my songs are about love or the habits people share." chart analyst gavin ryan predicted the ep would reach the australian aria top 40 albums chart, however it did not.  review  riley ackley, the promotional director for the oswegonian, gave the ep 4.5 out of 5, and explained "[it] is a beautiful four track debut. focusing heavily on acoustics and pavey's angel-like melodies, each song off of bodies will carry listeners into a day dream trance." adding, "overall, [it] is near perfection. as an ep, its glossy set-up paired with pavey's celestial voice makes it one of the most prominent ep releases of the year. [her work] is proof that there is more to be done in the folk-singer-songwriter genre. other artists beware, because they'll soon pale in comparison."  venue operator, lizotte's advertiser wrote, "this studio introduction to celia's honest and adventurous folk songwriting sweeps through that flat, ghostly landscape and into sonically lush territory" adding "[she] sings of young loss and desire with a voice that has already captured international attention." in a review of the ep and its live tour, chloe webb of reverb magazine said "pavey has truly found her place musically, a meticulous combination of rambling folk and easy listening indie-pop."  track listing  release history  references  2014 debut eps eps by australian artists universal music australia eps vera blue albums
a divorce (spanish: un divorcio) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by emilio gomez muriel and starring marga lopez, carlos lopez moctezuma, and elda peralta.  the film's art direction was by francisco marco chillet.  cast      marga lopez  as cristina fuentes    carlos lopez moctezuma  as alberto luna    elda peralta as berta    raul farell as luciano   julio villarreal as sacerdote    maria gentil arcos as pilar    elisa quintanilla as lupita    armando velasco as mayordomo    elodia hernandez    rodolfo calvo    emilio giron    maria victoria llamas  as maruja    cristina trevi    magda donato  as abuela de maruja    mario sevilla  as amigo de alberto    jose maria linares-rivas  as senor saldivar   victorio blanco  as empleado boliche    angel merino as hombre en biblioteca    alicia montoya  as mujer en iglesia  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films 1950s spanish-language films films directed by emilio gomez muriel mexican black-and-white films
frederick william cotzhausen (july 21, 1838 - december 10, 1924) was an american lawyer and politician.  born in aix la chapelle, rhine, prussia, cotzhausen went to college in cologne and graduated in 1855. in 1856, cotzhausen emigrated to the united states and settled in milwaukee, wisconsin. cotzhausen studied law and was admitted to the wisconsin bar in 1859. he then  practiced law in milwaukee. in 1873 and 1874, cotzhausen served in the wisconsin state senate and was a democrat. he also served a regent on the wisconsin normal schools board of regent. cotzhausen died at his home in milwaukee, wisconsin.  notes  1838 births 1924 deaths german emigrants to the united states people from aachen politicians from milwaukee wisconsin lawyers wisconsin democrats wisconsin state senators 19th-century american lawyers
joseph vilas (march 31, 1832 - january 7, 1905) was an american businessman and politician. he was the 10th mayor of manitowoc, wisconsin.  biography born in ogdensburg, new york, vilas went to union college in schenectady, new york. in 1852, he moved to manitowoc, wisconsin. he was involved with the mercantile, railroad, and paper manufacturing businesses. during the american civil war, vilas served as a draft commissioner. he served in the wisconsin state senate in 1863 and 1864 and was a democrat. he also served as president of the village of manitowoc. in 1893, he was elected mayor of manitowoc. vilas was president of the board of harbor commissioners.  in 1868, he ran for election to the united states house of representatives and lost the election to philetus sawyer. vilas died by suicide with a firearm in his home in manitowoc. he had been in ill health for several years. he was a cousin of william freeman vilas.  notes  external links  1832 births 1905 suicides people from ogdensburg, new york people from manitowoc, wisconsin people of wisconsin in the american civil war union college (new york) alumni businesspeople from wisconsin wisconsin democrats mayors of places in wisconsin wisconsin state senators suicides by firearm in wisconsin american politicians who committed suicide 19th-century american politicians 19th-century american businesspeople
isabelle gautheron (born 3 december 1963) is a french former cyclist. she competed in the women's sprint event at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1963 births living people french female cyclists olympic cyclists of france cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics sportspeople from villeneuve-saint-georges
nandrolone laurate () (brand names clinibolin, fortadex, laurabolin), or nandrolone dodecanoate, also known as 19-nortestosterone 17β-laurate, is a synthetic androgen and anabolic steroid and a nandrolone ester. it is used in veterinary medicine in austria, france, the netherlands, and switzerland.  see also  list of androgen esters § nandrolone esters  references  external links  laurabolin (nandrolone laurate) - william llewellyn's anabolic.org  androgens and anabolic steroids enones estranes laurate esters nandrolone esters progestogens testosterone
richard stratton (born 1970 in dunedin) is a new zealand ceramic artist.  stratton studied at the otago school of arts graduating with a diploma in ceramic arts in 1993. he worked for a time as a production thrower at a commercial pottery on the isle of skye, before moving to wellington, where he is now based.  writer anna miles notes that stratton's work "displays an avid interest in historic european forms of domestic pottery, somewhat improbably combined with autobiographical reflection." curator lily hacking has also noted that his work also contains political themes, "be that on the scale of global conflicts or the politics implicit in being a stay-at-home dad".  stratton has studied the history of ceramic art extensively, and exhibitions such as apres les baleines, held at the dowse art museum in 2011 have shown how he uses "the style of english and european ornamental ware but with a contemporary twist." stratton maintains a large collection of technical ceramic manuals from the last two centuries, from which he has developed his techniques, in addition to international travel and research.  in 2012 stratton was awarded the portage ceramic awards residency at guldagergaard in denmark. he undertook the residency in 2015 and displayed the resulting works at te uru in 2015-2016 in the exhibition richard stratton: old zealand new. he won the portage ceramic awards premier prize in 2017.  the museum of new zealand te papa tongarewa holds a number of stratton's works. a number are displayed in the exhibition inspired: ceramics and jewellery shaped by the past.  further information   lily hacking,'richard stratton: an artist's inventory richard stratton: an artist's inventory', city gallery wellington, 2013.  apres les baleines - richard stratton richard stratton interviewed on radio new zealand, 13 february 2013.  on the spot : richard stratton richard stratton interviewed on radio new zealand on 3 may 2013.  ceramics artist richard stratton richard stratton interviewed on radio new zealand on 10 november 2013.  john hurrell, stratton ceramics, exhibition review on eyecontact, 16 september 2012.  artists at work: richard stratton, video interview and demonstration.  richard stratton - anna miles gallery  references  1970 births living people new zealand potters new zealand ceramists people from dunedin
dan swanska theatren ('the swedish theatre') was an all-male swedish theatre comedy troupe, active between 1682 and 1691: from 1686 in stockholm. the company performed in lejonkulan in 1686-89 and in bollhuset in 1689-91. they were the first theater company in sweden composed of swedish actors and formed the first swedish language theater in sweden.  however, they were a company formed of student actors from uppsala university, who did not regard themselves as professional actors and who referred to their activity as temporary, which it also was.    nevertheless, they were pioneers in the history of the swedish theater.  members  olaus rudbeck  johan celsius  isaak bork, the director of the company  carl johan ollieqvisth  andreas strombergh  georg tornqvist-adlercreutz, actor, writer and translator  johan widman  references   dahlberg, gunilla (1992). komediantteatern i 1600-talets stockholm. stockholm: komm. for stockholmsforskning.   17th century in sweden swedish comedy troupes former theatres in stockholm 1682 establishments in sweden theatre companies in sweden 17th century in stockholm swedish empire
line 18 of the chengdu metro () is an express rapid transit line that connects the urban area of chengdu with chengdu tianfu international airport. line 18's color is teal. the phase 1 & 2 of line 18 is in total 69.39 km in length. it is also the biggest ppp project in china. the section from south railway station to tianfu international airport north station started operation on 18 december 2020.  description  phase 1 & 2 phase 1 and 2 of the line, which is currently in operation, start at chengdu south railway station and end at chengdu tianfu international airport. the total length is .  the line officially started construction on august 16, 2016. the section from south railway station to sancha started operation on 27 september 2020. the line will use 8-car type a rolling stock. the rolling stock have features designed for medium distance travel, such as a 140 km/h maximum speed and wide station spacing.   the line will also feature distinct express and local services using passing tracks at select stations with an express service stopping only at 4 intermediate stations, and planned to complete a trip between chengdu south railway station to chengdu tianfu international airport in 35 minutes. the local service will stop at all stations on line 18 and will complete the trip in 40 to 50 minutes.  phase 3   on december 9, 2019, the department of ecology and environment of sichuan province approved new extensions for line 18. line 18 phase 3 includes north extension, linjiang section, and south extension. it is 16.715 kilometers long, all underground. in total, 6 underground stations (4 transfer stations), 1 reserved station, and 1 new depot will be built.  north section  line 18 is planned to extend north to  on line 1 serving downtown chengdu and providing full parallel express service along the core portion of line 1. the length of the extension is 10.985 kilometers with 4 new stations.  south section   line 18 is also planned to extend south beyond tianfu international airport terminals 1 & 2 station to guanyan, adding 5.75 kilometers and 2 new underground stations and linjiang depot. on june 18, 2020, government of chengdu changed the name of linjiang station to guanyan station.  phase 4   jianyang housing and urban planning bureau officially released the plan for line 18 phase 4 to be extended to jianyang south railway station.  additionally, line 18 will connect with the proposed line s3 (ziyang line) at futian station. line s3 (ziyang line) is
currently undergoing geological investigation in central ziyang.  history    on july 11, 2016, the ndrc approved the third phase of expansion for the chengdu metro, which includes line 18.   on august 16, 2016, line 18 started construction.   on february 28, 2017, first tunnel machine started tunneling.   on june 27, 2017, sichuan development and reform commission approved phase 2.   on august 18, 2017, the first station: xinglong station finished roofing and construction.   on october 24, 2018, futian - t3/t4 section finished tunnel construction.   on january 29, 2019, phase 1 and phase 2 finished viaduct construction.  on may 31, 2019, the first tunnel section was completed.   on june 2, 2019, all tunnels in phase 1 and phase 2 are connected.   on june 13, 2019, line 18's first train started testing in chengdu.   on june 1, 2020, systems testing and debugging began.   on june 2, 2020, line 18, the biggest ppp project in china, started its 3-month trial operation in preparation for opening.    on august 6, 2020, line 18 completed fire-prevention assessment.   on september 27, 2020, the first and second section (from south railway station to sancha) of line 18 was opened.   on december 18, 2020, line 18  (excluding) to  was opened.   on june 27, 2021, an infill station,  station opened with chengdu tianfu international airport.  stations  see also  chengdu metro  chengdu tianfu international airport  urban rail transit in china  jianyang  references  chengdu metro lines railway lines opened in 2020 airport rail links in china
plvs vltra is the indie rock solo project of toko yasuda (enon, blonde redhead, the lapse, the van pelt), featuring melodic, fractured tunes created on samplers, vintage synthesizers, drum machines and various effects alongside yasuda's comforting singsong vocals.  plvs vltra has released two albums, and one single since forming in 2012.  band name the project's name derives from the motto of spain, "plus ultra", meaning "further beyond" in latin and stylized with the letter v replacing the letter u as in the early roman alphabet.  the phrase is engraved in a fireplace at fonthill castle in doylestown, pennsylvania.  yasuda was inspired by the motto while touring the historic arts and crafts mansion.  biography after enon ceased to be an ongoing recording and touring concern in 2011, yasuda made the first recordings for what would become plvs vltra's debut album, parthenon.  the sessions included collaborations with enon's john schmersal, who produced the album, as well as with friends danny ray thompson of the sun ra arkestra, scott allen of thunderbirds are now, and thomas keville of man man.  yasuda spent much of 2011 mostly keeping to herself and "compiling unfinished tracks" before she "decided to wrap them up by making deadlines."  the opening track, "flowers to bees," was featured in tiny mix tapes' chocolate grinder section.  yasuda collaborated with scott allen on the song, finishing a backing track allen had created.  danny ray thompson played baritone sax, flute and contributed percussion, adding "emotions to these electronic tunes," according to yasuda.  the title track includes a sample from a "storybook vinyl album" yasuda found at a thrift store.  parthenon was released in 2012 on austrian experimental label spectrum spools/editions mego.  "as if alice coltrane's universal consciousness was...sent into the future to be reimagined as an electronic pop record...parthenon refuses to be pinned down," enthused spectrum's biography.  spin rated parthenon 7 out of 10 stars, citing its fusion of kylie minogue and boredoms influences.  resident advisor rated the album 3.5 of 5 stars, calling the record an "addictive jumble...a confusingly infectious record" with catchy hooks but puzzling lyrics.  tiny mix tapes called parthenon a "straight-up pop album with alluring (because "sexy" sounds misogyn
ist and creepy) female vocals."  the quietus said yasuda's songs are "equivalent to playing twister in order to lose, turning in on themselves the very game-logics of popular sounds and structures."  yasuda quickly followed that release with a second album, yo-yo blue, on the field hymns cassette-only label in 2013.  though the album was limited to 100 physical copies, yo-yo blue was also released digitally via bandcamp.  field hymns described the album to a "thumbed-through flip book of vaporous, hazy memories...replete with childhood recitals, fragments of half-remembered stanzas and sumptuous j-pop interludes."  cassette love said the mostly instrumental album "has the mood of a dream, floating above and observing a variety of scenes; detached, yet focused" and singled out the vocal performances on "ちょ-ちょ (with nico)" and "falling slowly" as "worthy of being featured on a single all by themselves."  later that year yasuda released  a 7" single, "rooftop arcade" b/w "mesopotamia" on columbus-based scioto records.  schmersal and yasuda produced both songs, which were primarily composed on an akai mpc4000 sampler.  equipment yasuda plays hardware synths including a minimoog voyager, nord lead 2 and casio sk-1 to sample and play melodies, along with some effects including kaoss pad and reverb.  she typically makes beats using an akai mpc4000 and ableton live software.  "[schmersal] and i also ran lots of signals through various hardware components as we were mixing," yasuda told tiny mix tapes. "old mic [pre-amps]...mixers, compressors, and effects boxes."  yasuda also uses a tascam 424 cassette four-track to send signals to and from the digital realm.  "that's my effort to create a little more organic sounding tracks," yasuda said in an interview with the left turn 4 records zine.  touring from 2011-2014 yasuda toured with st. vincent playing synth.  she has performed a limited number of live shows as plvs vltra, but feels that her one-woman shows lack the stage presence of her other musical projects.  "i feel like me standing alone on stage with musical toys might not be captivating enough," yasuda told left turn 4 records in 2013, "i feel bad for these people who are
watching me pressing buttons on stage by myself."  discography  albums 2012 parthenon cd and lp (spectrum spools/editions mego) 2013 yo-yo blue cassette and digital release (field hymns/bandcamp)  singles 2013 '"rooftop arcade" / "mesopotamia"  7" (scioto records)  compilation appearances 2013 "mizu" on "mixtape: summer 2013" cassette and digital release (lt4/bandcamp)  see also enon  references     http://www.allmusic.com/artist/plvs-vltra-mn0002935215  external links plvs vltra bandcamp page plvs vltra soundcloud page  art rock musical groups musical groups established in 2012 indie pop groups from los angeles indie rock musical groups from california 2012 establishments in california
the 1970-71 carolina cougars season was the 2nd season of the cougars in the aba. the cougars finished dead last in the eastern division, though they missed the playoffs by 3 games. they finished 8th in point per game at 115.3 points per game, while finishing 6th in points allowed at 119.4 points per game. the team faltered near the end of the season, losing 11 straight games from february 25 to march 19. their biggest win streak was 3, which they accomplished 5 times in the season.  during the regular season, the cougars played 18 games in greensboro, 12 in charlotte, and 12 in raleigh.  roster    31 gary bradds - forward  27 joe caldwell - small forward  13 frank card - small forward  34 mack daughtry - guard  33 ira harge - center  12 rich johnson - point forward  -- arvesta kelly - guard  13 lonnie kluttz - forward  21 george lehmann - point guard  23 gene littles - point guard  22 chuck lloyd - center / forward  35 randolph mahaffey - power forward  44 larry miller - shooting guard  24 dave newmark - center  51 george peeples - center  11 bob verga - shooting guard  14 vann williford - small forward  final standings  eastern division  awards, records, and honors 1971 aba all-star game played on january 23, 1971 at greensboro coliseum in greensboro, north carolina.  joe caldwell  references   cougars on basketball reference  carolina carolina cougars carolina cougars, 1970-71 carolina cougars, 1970-71
bharat chhikara sometimes chikara (born 10 october 1985) is an indian field hockey player who has played as a midfielder for the national team. he was part of the team that won the bronze medal at the 2010 asian games and silver medal at the 2010 commonwealth games. chhikara is an alumnus of jamia millia islamia university.  chhikara played in 2019 for the institutional side indian oil corporation (ioc).  references  external links player profile at indiahockey.net  1985 births living people indian male field hockey players field hockey players from haryana commonwealth games medallists in field hockey commonwealth games silver medallists for india asian games bronze medalists for india asian games medalists in field hockey field hockey players at the 2010 asian games medalists at the 2010 asian games field hockey players at the 2010 commonwealth games jamia millia islamia alumni
stargo is the name of a housing development  in greenlee county, arizona, united states. it was located about two miles northwest of the present location of morenci. houses were built starting in the 1930s in what was known as apache gulch when miners came to work at the morenci mines as phelps dodge started open pit operations. the name came from the silver mining company which operated in this area, stargo silverbelt mining company. families lived here until the early 2000s. only the upper section of cedar loop and cedar street are visible today. the area is now buried and a part of the leaching process in mining operations of freeport-mcmoran inc.  ghost towns in arizona populated places in greenlee county, arizona
pat cash and mark philippoussis were the defending champions, and successfully defended their title, defeating john and patrick mcenroe in the final 6-4, 6-3.  draw  finals  external links  men's champions doubles draw  men's champions invatiational
the 2015 campeonato internacional de tenis de campinas was a professional tennis tournament played on clay courts. it was the fifth edition of the tournament which was part of the 2015 atp challenger tour. it took place in campinas, brazil between 21 and 27 september 2015.  singles main-draw entrants  seeds   1 rankings are as of september 16, 2015.  other entrants the following players received wildcards into the singles main draw:   breno lodis   carlos eduardo severino   marcelo zormann   orlando luz  the following players received entry as an alternate:   facundo bagnis  the following players received entry from the qualifying draw:   pedro sakamoto    ricardo hocevar    tiago lopes    wilson leite  champions  singles   facundo arguello def.  diego schwartzman, 7-5, 6-3.  doubles   andres molteni /  hans podlipnik def.  guilherme clezar /  fabricio neis, 3-6, 6-2, [10-0].  external links official website  tetra pak tennis cup tetra pak tennis cup 2015 in brazilian tennis
the song is you is a live album by saxophonist stan getz which was released on the laserlight label in 1996.  reception  the allmusic review by michael g. nastos stated "the song is you is a missing link between a less than successful teaming with bill evans, and the more modern quartet music getz played thereafter with corea, jimmy rowles, joanne brackeen, or kenny barron. it's a very worthwhile item to own if you search for it, well recorded and performed by a group that could collectively be the most purely talented of any you might find who ever backed up stan getz".  track listing  "the song is you" (jerome kern, oscar hammerstein ii) - 5:51  "o grande amor" (antonio carlos jobim, vinicius de moraes) - 6:02  "for jane" (jack dejohnette) - 3:22  "dane's chant" (stanley cowell) - 7:36  "major general" (dejohnette) - 6:32  "folk tune for bass" (miroslav vitous) - 5:10  "tonight i shall sleep/desafinado" (duke ellington, irving gordon/jobim, newton mendonca) - 13:08  "all the things you are" (kern, hammerstein) - 6:50  "summer night" (jobim) - 3:42  "one note samba" (jobim, mendonca) - 1:58  personnel  stan getz - tenor saxophone stanley cowell - piano miroslav vitous - bass jack dejohnette - drums  references   1996 live albums stan getz live albums
donald w. "don" slager is the former chief executive officer of republic services, inc., in the recycling and waste services business. the company generates $10 billion of annual revenue, has a market cap exceeding $23+ billion and operates the 7th largest vocational fleet in the nation. don has more than 35 years of experience in the industry, starting his career as a teenager and subsequently working at all levels within the organization. he had served republic for over 30 years. jon vander ark took the position of ceo on june 26, 2021.  career in his career, he has served in a wide variety of leadership positions, including as president and chief operating officer of republic, prior to becoming ceo in 2011. don also served as president and chief operating officer of allied waste industries from 2003 until republic's acquisition of allied waste in december 2008. previously, he held various management roles of increasing responsibility at allied (and formerly national waste services) from 1985 through 2008, including senior vice president, operations, region president, area president and general manager.  don slager has been associated with the bridgeton landfill, the environmental protection agency's west lake super fund site in bridgeton, missouri, a st. louis suburb, since december 30, 1997.  at the time, as a company officer of allied waste, slager signed the 1997 merger agreement that registered bridgeton landfill in delaware, a state known for its strict corporate secrecy laws.  education don earned a certificate from the stanford university board consortium development program and completed the northwestern university kellogg school advanced executive program.  awards and recognition  under slager's leadership, republic services was named to:  barron's 100 most sustainable companies (2019, 2018) ethisphere's world's most ethical companies (2019, 2018, 2017)   robeco sam's sustainability yearbook (2018)  robeco sam sustainability award, bronze class (2019)  forbes world's most innovative companies (2018)  forbes listed the company as one of america's best employers for women in 2019.  forbes america's best large employers (2017)   dow jones sustainability (djsi) world and north america indices (2019, 2018, 2017, 2016)  human rights campaign's best places to work for lgbtq equality (2018, 2017, 2016)  certified as a "great place to work." (2019, 2018, 2017)  individual awards:   forbes named slager one of the country's most innovative leaders in september 2019. glassdoor rated don slager among its "100 highest rated ceos
" for 2017. the selection was based on the anonymous reviews of republic services employees, earning slager an overall rating of 94%.  slager won cr magazine's 2017 responsible ceo of the year-lifetime achievement award.  slager was named the "top ceo" in the 2012 institutional investor all-american executive team rankings in the business, education, and professional services sector.  board memberships in addition to serving on republic's board of directors since june 2010, don currently serves on the board of martin marietta, a leading supplier of aggregates and heavy building materials. he is a member of the finance committee and the ethics, environment, safety & health committee. he is also a member of the board of the arizona commerce authority, and a governing board member of together for safer roads, an innovative coalition that brings together global private sector companies, across industries, to collaborate on improving road safety. from september 2009 until march 2016, don served on the board of uti worldwide as chairman of its nominating and corporate governance committee and member of its compensation committee.  references  external links  interview with don slager  1963 births living people 21st-century american businesspeople american corporate directors
majitha assembly constituency (sl. no.: 13) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in amritsar district, punjab state, india. vvpat will be used in majitha in the 2017 assembly polls.  member of legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india amritsar district
, abbreviated as , is a japanese  manga series written and illustrated by kaede kochi. it was serialized in the hana to yume and hana to yume from 2008 to 2015. the story follows the everyday life of high schooler shiharu nakamura as she babysits the twin niece and nephew of local tv announcer seiji matsunaga. in april 2016, kochi launched a sequel titled life so happy which follows the twins as they go into the fifth grade.  premise shiharu nakamura is a high school girl who works at a daycare where twins aoi and akane matsunaga go. the twins are in custody of their uncle, seiji, because their father abandoned them after his wife suddenly died. one day when seiji goes to pick up the twins from day care, he notices that they are particularly attached to shiharu in comparison to the other workers. he hires shiharu as their personal babysitter as he is very busy with work.  characters  shiharu is a high school student who works at the sunflower house daycare. she becomes acquainted with akane and aoi matsunaga and begins babysitting them later. she is hired to babysit them by their uncle seiji matsunaga, who pays her double of what she makes at the daycare. shiharu shows aspirations to be self-sufficient and is hard working. she eventually falls in love with seiji, but keeps it to herself, as there is a large age gap between them. at the end of the manga, she gets together with seiji after he kisses her at the park.  seiji works at jx television as a tv announcer, and thus as a busy schedule with unpredictable hours. he becomes the guardian of akane and aoi matsunaga, his young niece and nephew, after they are abandoned by their father, who is seiji's brother. it is revealed that seiji's family as a youth was troubling, and he was often by himself. his parents divorce by the time he begins college. because he comes from a dysfunctional family, he wishes to someday have a family of his own and to not make the same mistakes his family did. he confesses his love to shiharu but asks to wait to hear her response until she is as old as he is.   &  akane and aoi are fraternal twins who are two years old at the start of the series. they live with their uncle seiji, whom they call sei-tan, after the death of their mother and abandonment of their father. at the end of the series they go to
live with their maternal grandparents and their father. it is hinted that aoi has a crush on shiharu. aoi and akane treat shiharu as their "mother".  shiharu's best friend and classmate. she ends up dating seiji's neighbor and friend takeru miyagawa.  a childhood friend of seiji's who is a university student. he is very easygoing and childish, making him get along with the twins well. he dates shiharu's friend rio.  seiji's older brother and the father of akane and aoi. after the sudden death of his wife, misaki, he is grief stricken and abandons his children. at the end of the series, he has recomposed himself and decides to live with akane and aoi again with the help of misaki's parents.  koichi's wife who dies in a car accident.  media  manga written and illustrated by kaede kochi, love so life premiered in hakusensha's the hana to yume magazine in 2008. the series transferred to hana to yume magazine in 2009, reaching its conclusion on july 18, 2015. hakusensha collected the individual chapters into seventeen  (compiled volumes) published under the hana to yume comics imprint. a sequel manga series, life so happy, premiered in hana to yume on april 5, 2016, transferring to the hana to yume on january 25, 2018. three  have been published under the hana to yume comics imprint as of april 19, 2019.  drama cds love so life inspired two audio drama cds. the first, produced by marine entertainment, was released in japan on march 25, 2010. it starred mamiko noto as shiharu, daisuke ono as seiji, and miyuki sawashiro as akane and aoi. the second, produced by hakusensha, was released in japan on october 4, 2013, bundled with an issue of hana to yume magazine. the original voice cast reprised their roles.  manga sales volumes of the series have ranked in listings of top selling manga in japan:  references  external links    love so life at media arts database   2008 manga hakusensha manga shojo manga
pseudocolaspis maynei is a species of leaf beetle of the democratic republic of the congo. it was first described by the belgian entomologist  in 1940.  references  eumolpinae beetles of the democratic republic of the congo beetles described in 1940 endemic fauna of the democratic republic of the congo
goodbaby international holdings limited is  incorporated in the cayman islands and headquartered in shanghai and is a durable juvenile products company that is listed on the main board of the hong kong stock exchange (1086:hk). principally it engages in the manufacturing, designing, research and development, marketing and sale of many child stroller, child seat, and other child products worldwide. it operates brands such as goodbaby, gb, cybex, evenflo, cbx, rollplay, happy dino, urbini, and other branded kids-children's products.  company for the year ended 31 december 2015, the group recorded total revenue of hk$6,951.1 million, representing a year-on-year increase of approximately 13%.  goodbaby international made 10,000 strollers a day under 15 different labels for mostly overseas brands.  history in 1989 zhenghuan song designed a children's rocking chair and founded goodbaby international. in 1990 chairman zhenghuan song establishes r&d center in kunshan, and in 1999, the companies becomes the largest supplier of strollers in north america.  going public  in 2011 the company goes public on the hong kong stock exchange. ticker (hkex: 01086)  acquisitions & growth  in january 2014, goodbaby international acquired cybex. goodbaby anticipated not only to extend the product portfolio into premium car safety seats and reinforce our footing in europe, but also use cybex's unique and extensive experience in branding and marketing.  in july 2014 goodbaby international acquired evenflo, one of the largest u.s. makers of strollers.  products goodbaby international's core products include car seats, strollers, and other baby products.  references  external links goodbaby international (parent company website) forbes interview with founder song zhenghuan  infant products companies babycare infancy
calmodulin regulated spectrin associated protein family member 2 is a protein that in humans is encoded by the camsap2 gene.  references  further reading
raffaele masciocchi was an italian cinematographer.  selected filmography  destiny (1951)  daughters of destiny (1954)  lazzarella (1957)  the sword and the cross (1958)  tuppe tuppe, marescia! (1958)  hannibal (1959)  queen of the pirates (1960)  the giants of thessaly (1960)  robin hood and the pirates (1960)  sword of the conqueror (1961)  battle of the worlds (1961)  the seventh sword (1962)  charge of the black lancers (1962)  the magnificent adventurer (1963)  the ghost (1963)  gold for the caesars (1963)  hercules against the barbarians (1964)  revenge of the gladiators (1964)  james tont operazione u.n.o. (1965)  references  bibliography   thomas weisser. spaghetti westerns--the good, the bad and the violent: a comprehensive, illustrated filmography of 558 eurowesterns and their personnel, 1961-1977. mcfarland, 2005.  external links     year of birth unknown year of death unknown italian cinematographers
khanowal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of khanowal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, khanowal has 211 houses with the total population of 1,051 persons of which 544 are male and 507 females. literacy rate of  khanowal is 71.81%, lower than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 125 which is 11.89% of the total population. child sex ratio is approximately 838, lower than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
the tall texan is a 1953 american western film directed by elmo williams and starring lloyd bridges, lee j. cobb, marie windsor and luther adler.  it was the only film directed by elmo williams, who said he had 50% of the profits but gave these away to attract the star cast. he says the film made a lot of money but he "never saw a dime".  williams says he asked producer robert l. lippert for some extra money. "i thought we had a tag for a couple of thousand dollars", he said. "he said, 'i don't care if you have a beginning, a middle or an end- you're going to finish the picture now i'm calling back part of the crew.' and he did."  plot sheriff chanbourne (samuel herrick) transports convict ben trask (lloyd bridges) to el paso in a covered wagon. the wagon also carries sea captain theodore bess (lee j. cobb) and married couple laura (marie windsor) and jerry niblett (dean train). the group comes upon a wounded native american, banished by his tribe, who offers to lead them to gold. but then the tribe attacks the wagon, killing jerry and wounding chadbourne. ben is freed to help, but the group's troubles have only begun.  cast  lloyd bridges as ben trask    lee j. cobb as capt. theodore bess    marie windsor as laura thompson    luther adler as joshua 'josh' tinnen    syd saylor as carney    samuel herrick as sheriff chadborune    george steele as jaqui    dean train as jerome 'jerry' niblett  references  bibliography  henryk hoffmann. western movie references in american literature. mcfarland, 2012.  external links    1953 films 1953 western (genre) films english-language films american films american western (genre) films lippert pictures films american black-and-white films
jay mclean (1890 - november 14, 1957) was an american surgeon. he is most notable for his major contribution to the discovery of heparin.  early life born in san francisco in 1890, he was the son of a physician, john t. mclean. mclean's family lost their home and assets in the 1906 san francisco earthquake. mclean set out to become a surgeon during his last year at lowell high school.  following education at lowell high school, he entered the university of california at berkeley in 1909,  obtaining his bachelor of science degree in 1914.  career mclean moved to baltimore following his graduation from the university of california before receiving an acceptance from johns hopkins school of medicine. following his move he was informed of a vacancy at the school and began his medical studies in 1915. mclean entered johns hopkins school of medicine in 1915 where he met and began work with physiologist william henry howell. howell admitted mclean into his laboratory and assigned him the task of investigating if an impurity was the cause of the pro-coagulating effect of cephalin or if cephalin itself had a naturally pro-coagulating effect and to compare it to other phosphatides. in 1916, when mclean was a second-year medical student, he was investigating pro-coagulant compounds when he first isolated a fat-soluble phosphatide anti-coagulant. this anti-coagulant was first isolated from the liver tissue of canines, which is how heparin got its name(hepar or "ηπαρ" is greek for "liver"; hepar + -in), first coined in 1918. following the departure of mclean, howell continued his work and with the assistance of  t. emmett holt he isolated a water-soluble polysaccharide anticoagulant. howell also coined 'heparin' as the name of this compound despite being different from the compound previously discovered by mclean.  mclean graduated from johns hopkins in 1919 and began an internship at the johns hopkins hospital. following completion of his internship, he began a surgical residency, in which he rotated through the hunterian laboratory, the laboratory founded by harvey cushing in 1904.  mclean stayed in baltimore until 1924 when returned to his alma-mater, the university of california to become an instructor in surgery. after three years in california, mclean took a position in the department of pathology at cornell university, a position which he held until 1939. after leaving cornell, mclean moved to columbus, ohio, where
he worked in private surgical practice and was appointed as an associate professor of surgery at ohio state medical school. in 1949, he was appointed director of radiation therapy and consultant in malignant diseases in savannah, georgia, where he remained until his death in 1957, aged 67 years. 6 years after mclean passed away he was awarded a plaque by the upjohn company to johns hopkins school of medicine for his work in the discovery of heparin as a second-year medical student.  references  1890 births 1957 deaths american surgeons cornell university faculty johns hopkins university alumni johns hopkins university faculty 20th-century surgeons
puritan is a former unincorporated community in weld county, colorado united states.  the community took its name from the nearby puritan coal mine, so named for the high quality of its coal.  history in 1908, the union pacific railroad laid a spur line to service the puritan gold mine located there.  a "company town" operated by the national fuel company was erected around the mine, and all the houses and stores were owned by the company and rented to miners and their families.  puritan had a store, boarding house, pool hall, and 100 houses.  the settlement was populated from 1908 to 1939, after which the mine was closed and dismantled, and the machinery moved  south. most of the houses were sold and moved.  references  unincorporated communities in weld county, colorado unincorporated communities in colorado
the our lady of grace cathedral () also called catedral nossa senhora de belem it is the seat of the archdiocese of belem and is located in the old quarter of the city in belem in brazil.  the first church was built in belem temporarily inside the fortress of the nativity and was dedicated to our lady of grace. a few years later was transferred in the current largo da se, it was poorly constructed. in the next century, in 1719, the diocese of maranhao is dismembered at the request of john v of portugal and belem and belem became part of the newly created diocese of para, winning the right to honor episcopal cathedral to its parent church.  work on the current building, built in the same place as the early church began in 1748. construction was completed in 1782.  see also roman catholicism in brazil our lady of grace  references  roman catholic cathedrals in para buildings and structures in belem roman catholic churches completed in 1782 1782 establishments in the portuguese empire 18th-century roman catholic church buildings in brazil
olinda elementary is an elementary-level school located in brea, california.  history  olinda elementary was first built in 1898 in what is now carbon canyon regional park, one year after the village of olinda was founded.  relocation  the school was moved deeper into carbon canyon during the mid-1960s, in what is now olinda village.  in 2012, the olinda village location was scheduled for demolition and a new site was constructed at a location on birch street next to the city of brea's sports park. this sparked concern and anger with local residents as the school had also served as a park, but was made inaccessible after being sold.  awards  in 2006, the school was recognized as a california distinguished school and in 2007 was recognized as a blue ribbon school.  in 2010, the orange county register placed olinda elementary on their "best schools" list at number 10.  references   brea, california public elementary schools in california 1898 establishments in california educational institutions established in 1898
line walker is a 2016 action thriller film adapted from the 2014 tvb series of the same name. directed by jazz boon and starring nick cheung, louis koo, francis ng; charmaine sheh, benz hui and au siu-wai reprised their roles from the original drama. it was released in hong kong and mainland china on 11 august 2016.  plot inspector q (francis ng) and agent ding siu-ka (charmaine sheh) are top members of cib department, they are after a drug racket that is taking over the city. unexpectedly, they receive a mystery message from a missing undercover agent "blackjack". cib tries to locate and process blackjack before it's too late. the paranoid drug mafia leader tung pak-ho (li guangjie) plays his own troop on each other's throats, suspecting a mole. meanwhile, boss blue (nick cheung) and his right-hand man shiu chi-long (louis koo) participate in an internal struggle to become the top dogs irrespective of their strong friendship.  after surviving and shooting their way out of a drug deal ambush in brazil, rio de janeiro, it becomes clear that blue is blackjack and upon knowing this, shiu chi-long tries to protect himself by using blackjack's identity. they survive doubts and struggles between them but only for blue to lose his life to an assassin sent by ruthless tung pak-ho. inspector q's life is lost facing goons and ding's life is saved by her godfather foon hei gor (hui shiu-hung), who is an undercover agent posing as a legendary retired don who is looking to get back into the criminal underworld in the city. finally, foon hei gor gets tung pak-ho arrested after punishing him for what he had done to his wife when tung pak-ho started out as a criminal.  cast nick cheung as blue louis koo as shiu chi-long francis ng as q sir/inspector q charmaine sheh as ding siu-ka benz hui as foon hei gor li guangjie as tung pak-ho zhang huiwen as siu ying xing yu as sniper / assassin (credited as shi yanneng) cheng taishen as kwok ming moses chan as police superintendent louis cheung as guy blocking blue at meeting clara lee as assassin (credited as clara)  cameos lo hoi-pang as guy at company meeting bob lam as ferrari owner cheng tse-sing as lin dongyou jade leung as karina au siu-wai as hong sir rebecca zhu as samantha
, cib detective stephen wong as cib detective (credited as stephen wong) grace wong as cib detective hugo wong as shiu chi-long's subordinate oceane zhu as cib detective william chak as ng pak sammi cheung as cib detective  reception the film grossed  at the chinese box office. it grossed  worldwide.  sequel  references  external links  line walker at yibada line walker at fandango  hong kong films chinese crime drama films chinese films chinese action films shaw brothers studio films 2010s cantonese-language films 2010s mandarin-language films films based on television series films directed by jazz boon
reuben william (born 31 december 1997) is a former professional australian rules footballer who played for the brisbane lions in the australian football league (afl). he moved to australia from south sudan at the age of four. he was drafted by the brisbane lions with their second selection and twentieth overall in the 2016 rookie draft. he made his debut in the twenty-six point loss against  in round 16, 2016 at metricon stadium. in october 2017, he was delisted by brisbane. william currently plays for the footscray bulldogs in the semi-professional victorian football league.  family: he has a total of 6 siblings and 1 parent.  references  external links   1997 births living people vfl/afl players born outside australia brisbane lions players zillmere eagles australian football club players australian rules footballers from queensland south sudanese refugees south sudanese emigrants to australia
otisto 23 (born 24 september 1974 at cannes), is the pseudonym of dominique poutet, a french musician and producer.  biography  pianist with a classical background, dominique poutet is the co-founder, producer and sound engineer of both labels dtc records and breakz.  his experience of electro-instrumental fusion gives him today the opportunity to participate to many projects of records and live shows in france (laurent de wilde, mekanik kantatik, sam karpienia...) and abroad (ti'fock, arambol experience, hos hayas). 	 dominique poutet is also a m.a.o instructor certified by ableton. he led many training courses and master classes  for professional of the entertainment business in france and abroad.  besides his production activity, he develops his musical career. he plays solo live under the name of otisto 23.  in the other hand, since 2006, he performs in duo with the pianist laurent de wilde with whom he composed three records.  awards and honors record of the year jazz magazine for the album over the clouds with laurent de wilde (2012)  discography    2014 : fly superfly (laurent de wilde vs otisto 23)  2010 : fly! (laurent de wilde vs otisto 23)  2007: pc pieces (laurent de wilde vs otisto 23)  productions and producer   2015: synthesis (gael horellou)   2014: disconnected ep (manu ferrantini)      2014: open me (guillaume perret & the electric epic)  2014: loan in space time (loan featuring juice aleem, the space ape, bang on and antipop consortium)  2014: aquatik baby (dandy freaks)  2014: movie'zz (laurent robin & the skyriders)  2014: legacy (gael horellou feat. abraham burton)  2013: china expedisound (remix contest)  2013: 12 secrets of a lady (sophie darly)  2012: over the clouds (laurent de wilde trio)  2012: drop circles e.p. (loan)  2011: gayar natir tour (ti fock)  2011: red nails (red rails)  2011: album 1 (under kontro])  2011: remix (grigri breakers)   2010: electric epic (guillaume perret & the electric epic)   2009: grigri breakers  2006 to 2008:  production and producer of: nicolas cante piano
mekanik kantatik, sam karpienia trio (l'autre distribution), loan (dtc records/iot records), abraxxxas (iot records). production of pc pieces and double remixes album (nocturne/dtc records) in duo (laurent de wilde vs otisto23). tv jingles champions league (l'equipe 21). composition of the soundtrack for sports tv production paris dakar. live performance in france and internationally (festivals and artistic exchange with mongolia, china, india and mexico).  2006 to 2007: production of the third album for arambol production. many productions as sound engineer and producer: cosmik connection "grand panache", laurent de wilde trio et nhx ii.  2003 to 2005: production of two albums for arambol production in goa (india) and paris.  studio production (sound recording, mixing, mastering) and tour with laurent de wilde  & gael horellou on organics.  tour in france, brazil, canada, spain, united kingdom.   1998: working composition for the video game industry in paris, museum of natural history, and emme interactive.  recording and mixing the album of anne ducros / produced in collaboration with didier lockwood.  trainer and speaker in mao  2013 to 2014:  creation of three years training courses to the music profession, cours florent « florent musique », various master class in india, french institute and french alliance, conservatory of st denis at la reunion, trempolino at nantes and sciences po paris.  conference on « digital and imaginary » with aurelie filippetti, technical advisor on writing for the book of laurent de wilde les fous du son (publishing grasset).  artistic audit for several music bands (kabbalah, gluck, geraud portal quintet)  « beta tester » and « product owner » for the software company mao ableton « live », first french « certified trainer » at ableton « live ».  2005 to 2013: main instructor for "masterclass" on ableton live, paris, ircam, marseille, rennes, lille, lyon, pekin, la reunion. applied research for synchronisation of music, video and movement.  producer trainer for the organism.  1999 to 2002: creation and setup of the mao training courses at cifap montreuil mao trainer. demonstrator for steinberg, magix, sonic foundry, emagic, ableton, sonic solution, digidesign, motu. speaker in others multimedia and video editing courses.  references
external links   www.breakz.fr  www.dtcrecords.org  www.cifap.com  www.ableton.com  french jazz pianists french male pianists french electronic musicians french male jazz musicians
"y.a.l.a." is a song by recording artist m.i.a. from her fourth album matangi, released in 2013. it was released as the fourth single from the album. the track was written by m.i.a. together with ruben fernhout and jerry leembruggen of the dutch production team the partysquad who also produced the track.  the song's title stands for "you always live again", which was seen as a response to the slogan "y.o.l.o." ("you only live once"), popularised by rapper drake in his 2011 song "the motto". the track refers to reincarnation and karma, some of the concepts relating to hinduism that m.i.a. has incorporated into the album. the lyrics also reference fidel castro, cristiano ronaldo, offshore banking and julianne moore.  "y.a.l.a." was previewed on singer's soundcloud account on 16 october, and subsequently made available for download on 22 october 2013 upon pre-ordering matangi. the song served as the fourth single from the album. it was performed on the colbert report, late night with conan o'brien, and the matangi tour.  the track was met with mostly positive feedback. allmusic picked "y.a.l.a." as one of the highlights on the album.  music video the music video for the track was commissioned by british magazine i-d and directed by german photographer daniel sannwald. it was premiered on 15 november 2013 on i-d's youtube channel.  track listing digital download  "y.a.l.a." - 4:23  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  2013 singles 2013 songs british electronic songs interscope records singles m.i.a. (rapper) songs songs written by m.i.a. (rapper)
karma (born as mahesh man shakya) is a nepalese film and theater actor known for his roles in sano sansar, loot and lukamari. he is recognised as a versatile actor in the nepali film industry. visa girl, suntali and first love are some of his other notable films.  early life and career   karma was born as mahesh man shakya in kathmandu, nepal. he studied at st. xaviers school in kathmandu and then went to pune, india to pursue further studies. he was passionate about acting. one day, he happened to come across a newspaper clipping of quest entertainment for a casting call. he thought of giving it a try and was selected as the lead role for sano sansar, which marked his debut in the nepali film industry. karma has also sung for some nepali films such as ghintang ghisi twak in lukamari.  filmography  references  external links   @jikarma on instagram karma on facebook  living people 21st-century nepalese male actors people from kathmandu nepalese expatriates in india year of birth missing (living people)
nice attack may refer to:  2003 nice bombing  2015 nice stabbing  2016 nice truck attack  2020 nice stabbing
dragon hole, also known as yongle blue hole named after the third ming emperor, is the deepest known blue hole in the world at  deep. it is located about  north of drummond island in the paracel islands. blue holes generate a distinctive blue colour when seen from above.  they are characteristically only dozens of metres deep.  the local fishermen call it the "eye" of the south china sea, and according to legend it is where the monkey king, depicted in the novel journey to the west, found his golden cudgel.  dragon hole is about  deeper than dean's blue hole in the bahamas. there are several fresh water sinkholes on land that are deeper than dragon hole. these include mexico's zacaton (), pozzo del merro in italy () and hranice abyss in the czech republic ().  the sansha yongle blue hole was created around the same time as the surrounding south china sea islands. blue holes can be formed in a number of ways. the most common is melting ice structures in the surface resulting in large pits where ice once was. blue holes may also be formed after a disruption in the surface of the ocean floor by tectonic shifts that result in the settlement of sand and debris (emery, 1962).  the blue hole in belize was once a dry land cave; its present form is a result of sea level rise and subsequent roof collapse.  discovery   the exact location of the dragon hole is n16°31.55'. e111°46.1'. geographically the hole is found in the eastern atoll near the paracel islands, in the south china sea.  according to the xinhua news agency, upon discovery by local fishermen, the first research methods included utilizing a video ray pro 4 underwater robot. this robot found the depth of the hole to be  and a width in some places of . over 20 new species of sea life were discovered during the initial exploration efforts.  other information that was gained from initial exploration was the distinct difference in chemical makeup between water columns. at the 300 ft mark the levels of oxygen fall off making it more difficult for life to survive. this information leads to speculation on what can be learned from researching the dragon hole.  research  due to the surrounding geological challenges, new research methods were created in order to study the hole. the surrounding coral is only at an average depth of 0.5-0.8 m, therefore discouraging any large research vessels from accessing the opening of the dragon hole.  one new method was
the utilization of a boat that had a flat bottom that allowed it to rest above the entrance to the hole despite the shallow waters surrounding it. this vessel is used as a staging platform for gathering data, as well as deploying the remotely operated vehicle (rov).  due to the utilization of a "underwater integrated navigation system" the rov was capable of receiving real-time commands allowing for control over movement and observation.    the device carrier or flat bottom vessel served as an important tool to transport sampling and research equipment on site without damage of the surrounding reefs and environment. the total size of this research vessel was 25x18 m.    the rov or device was a total size of 3.0x1.7x1.7 m. what was specifically used was a "fcv2000d professional grade rov".  blue holes are very valuable to scientists regarding the research of climate change, marine ecology as well as geochemistry and diversification between water columns. throughout the research conducted on the dragon hole, a multitude of data was collected.  tidal measurements  tide gauge stations were temporarily deployed around the dragon hole as well as on the research vessel. this measurement technique resulted in an accuracy within 3 cm.  surveying  the utilization of the rov allowed for three-dimensional topography of the entire blue hole. the rov, equipped with a multibeam device, made scans of the entirety of the underwater system. combining this with digital scans of the surface of the hole, a three-dimensional model has been created.  hydrochemical properties  the sansha yongle blue hole, being the deepest of its kind, allows for the largest data collection surface available for this specific research. through gathered data, it became evident to researchers that two thermoclines were distinguishable within the water column. the first transition between warmer mixed water and colder stagnant water occurs between 13 and 20 m. the second thermocline occurs lower in the water column at around 70-150 m. sampling of water from different depths and layers allows for the gathering of information about rock sediment, minerals, bacteria, organisms, and chemical research. the study of this information can be used to discover critical data about the history of the world dating back to when the dragon hole was formed  references   sinkholes of asia paracel islands south china sea sea caves
manfred uhlig (2 september 1927 - 24 july 2019) was a german actor, cabaret artist, entertainer and also television and radio presenter.  life  born 1927 in leipzig, uhlig studied drama at the end of the 1940s and after finishing accepted acting jobs at theatres and cabarets in naumburg, wittenberg and schwerin. since 1956 he was member of the leipziger pfeffermuhle cabaret ensemble, which was founded two years before. on 30 june 1962 he left, together with helga hahnemann, and the two of them switched their focus to television and radio work. in 1965 uhlig teamed up with gunter hansel, presenting over the next 24 years 289 episodes of the programme alte liebe rostet nicht at radio ddr 1, which with that was among the most long-lived german radio broadcasts. he became known i.a. with the programmes leipziger allerlei and kollege kommt gleich. in the gdr television he appeared as satirist f.e. in da lacht der bar and da liegt musike drin. moreover, together with horst kobbert and lutz stuckrath as cabaret trio the three dialecticians, he presented 28 episodes of the saturday evening show ein kessel buntes. in 1978 he was awarded with the art prize of the gdr.  following the german reunification (wende) he occasionally worked for the mdr.  uhlig died in 2019.  filmography   hands up or i'll shoot (1966/2009)  external links  references   1927 births 2019 deaths actors from leipzig german cabaret performers german radio presenters
gleason is an american documentary film premiered at the 2016 sundance film festival, covering five years in the life of the former new orleans saints football defensive back steve gleason, who has amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), sometimes known as lou gehrig's disease, a rare incurable neurodegenerative condition associated with the former new york yankees baseball star lou gehrig, who died from the disease in 1941.  background and production  steve gleason, who was a defensive back for the new orleans saints, is best known for his 2006 block of the opposing team's punt in a game on september 25 against the atlanta falcons broadcast on monday night football, which, according to robert mays writing for the ringer, was  "...the play that sparked a magical season, inspired a statue, and revived a franchise ..."  that game was the first time the saints had played in their home stadium, the superdome (now the mercedes-benz superdome) since before hurricane katrina.  in the aftermath of the hurricane, much of new orleans was left flooded and devastated, including the superdome, which had incurred major damage.  the team spent the whole season following the hurricane (2005) and the beginning of the 2006 season (over a year), on the road, even for designated home games, which were held in other venues outside of new orleans, such as in san antonio.  the team had experienced a dismal 2005 season, which led to the post-season firing of head coach jim haslett and hiring of sean payton.  the game was hosted by monday night football primarily to mark the "welcoming home" ceremony for the previously displaced team, and the event was accompanied by a pre-game and halftime ceremonies featuring rock group green day who appeared together with bono and the edge of u2 to do a version of "the saints are coming".  in 2011, steve gleason was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (als), often referred to as lou gehrig's disease-a rare and incurable neurodegenerative disease that slowly robs the person afflicted of his or her motor functions, including eventually breathing-ultimately resulting in death.  gleason and filmmaker sean pamphilon, who had directed run ricky run, an espn profile of former saints and dolphins running back ricky williams,  agreed to collaborate on a documentary profiling gleason and his experiences with the illness.  shortly thereafter gleason found out that his wife, michel rae varisco, was pregnant with their son, rivers,
and she and their son factor heavily in the documentary as it depicts the life of their family and the role of his disease in shaping it.  pamphilon, who was biding time between new orleans and his home in seattle, followed the family around with a hand-held camera, and eventually, due to the logistical difficulty of proving adequate coverage, brought in ty minton-small, a recent college graduate, as a second cameraman to help capture footage.  minton-small and the gleason family developed a strong rapport, with the gleasons allowing minton-small to film the birth of their son, rivers.  during production, the unit found themselves in the center of a controversy concerning former saints defensive coordinator gregg williams, who was accused of offering players bounties as a reward for injuring players on opposing teams during games.  pamphilon recorded a team meeting in which williams urged players to "kill the fucking head."  pamphilon, who became concerned about traumatic brain injuries in football, decided that the audio should be made public.  in april 2012, a month after the nfl made the situation involving williams and his staff public, pamphilon released excerpts from the meeting without gleason's permission, effectively ending their relationship and his role in the project.  ty minton-small and david lee, who had been hired as pamphilon's assistants earlier that year continued to follow the family for the remainder of the shooting.  according to gleason, the crew and his family became very close: ty and david more or less lived and traveled with us," gleason wrote gambit in an email interview "they did caretaking for me, and are like uncles to rivers. ... ultimately, they weren't outside filmmakers filming our family. we were a team, working together on a mutual project. ty and david are family to us.  in order to attract investors to guarantee a steady budget and wide distribution, the producers decided to hire a film director with prior experience to head the project and chose clay tweel to be its director. the film chronicles the progressive stages in gleason's disease.   as his disease advanced, gleason lost control of most motor functions, including speaking, and he now relies on assistive technology, known as augmentive/alternative communication (aac), to communicate.  steve gleason is a fan of rock group pearl jam and is friends with several members of the band, including mike mccready, who wrote a song called "hoping and healing" that was included in
the film.  release the film had its world premiere at the 2016 sundance film festival on january 23, 2016. shortly after, amazon studios acquired distribution rights to the film. open road films is co-distributing the film with amazon. the film was released in the united states on july 29, 2016.  critical reception on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 96% based on 67 reviews, and an average rating of 8/10. the website's critical consensus reads, "gleason stands out among sports-themed documentaries by offering a clear-eyed look at its subject's physical deterioration - and an intimate portrait of the family affected by his ordeal." on metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 80 out of 100, based on 29 critics, indicating "generally favorable reviews".  references  external links          2016 films 2016 documentary films american films american documentary films english-language films amazon studios films open road films films films scored by dan romer
the old mill on mols (danish: den gamle mølle paa mols) is a 1953 danish comedy film directed by annelise reenberg and starring ib schønberg, henny lindorff buckhøj and knud heglund.  cast  ib schønberg as peter jens christian rasmussen    henny lindorff buckhøj as fru rasmussen    knud heglund as møller sørensen    inger lassen as fru sørensen    louis miehe-renard as anders sørensen    karin nellemose as kristiane mikkelsen   angelo bruun as sogneradsformand niels kvist    kai holm as properitær englund    henning moritzen as fløgstrup    annemette svendsen as annemarie poulsen   rasmus christiansen as landbetjent madsen    henry nielsen as landpost villy christensen    johannes meyer as klemmesen    arthur jensen as karlsen    lili heglund as spillelærerinden    freddy koch as skolelæreren    carl heger as mejerist jakobsen    karl stegger as skomager hulsøm    ove sprogøe as buschauffør    else petersen as frøken ballerup    anna henriques-nielsen as husholderske    astrid kraa as vred smørrebrødsjomfru    betty helsengreen as kvinde der taler med annemarie    elin reimer as proprietær englunds datter    inger berthelsen  references  bibliography   john sundholm. historical dictionary of scandinavian cinema. scarecrow press, 2012.  external links     1953 films 1953 comedy films danish films danish comedy films danish-language films films directed by annelise reenberg danish black-and-white films
veli agbaba (born 3 april 1968) is a turkish politician from the republican people's party (chp), who has served as a member of parliament for malatya since 12 june 2011.  early life and education  veli agbaba was born in yazıhan, malatya province on 3 april 1968 as the son of huseyin and elif agbaba. he completed his high school education in malatya at turan emeksiz high school. he graduated from anadolu university in 1989. in his youth, agbaba founded the anadolu university student association. he is married with three children.  political career  agbaba joined social democratic populist party (shp) in 1993 after his military service. he served as a malatya municipal councillor between 1994 and 1999. in the local elections of 18 april 1999, agbaba was elected republican people's party (chp) provincial president.  member of parliament  agbaba was elected as a chp member of parliament for malatya in the 2011 general election. he was re-elected in june 2015 and november 2015. he is member of the ataturkist thought association, a secular organization that espouses the ideas of mustafa kemal ataturk, the founder of modern turkey.  a report that up to 400 workers had been killed during the construction of the new istanbul new airport prompted agbaba to lodge a written questionnaire to the turkish parliament on 13 february 2018.  books authored   balyoz kumpası  kalemi kırılan gazeteciler  references  external links  https://twitter.com/veliagbaba  1968 births living people anadolu university alumni contemporary republican people's party (turkey) politicians social democratic people's party (turkey) politicians deputies of malatya
strange affair is a 1944 mystery-comedy film starring allyn joslyn, evelyn keyes, marguerite chapman, and edgar buchanan.  directed by alfred e. green, it was based on oscar saul's short story stalk the hunter.  plot a comic strip creator and his wife investigate a murder at a charity benefit.  cast  allyn joslyn as bill harrison  evelyn keyes as jacqueline "jack" harrison  marguerite chapman as marie dumont baumler  edgar buchanan as lt. washburn  nina foch as frieda brenner  hugo haas as domino / constantine  shemp howard as laundry truck driver  frank jenks as sgt. erwin  erwin kalser as dr. brenner  tonio selwart as leslie carlson  john wengraf as rudolph kruger  references  external links  review of film at variety  1944 films american films columbia pictures films films directed by alfred e. green 1940s mystery drama films american mystery drama films american black-and-white films 1944 drama films films based on short fiction
the process is an american reggae band from detroit, michigan, united states, and was formed by david asher and garrick owen in 1989.  their music is a blend of high energy rock and reggae. the band and  its members have worked with adrian sherwood, dub producer the scientist, skip "little axe" mcdonald, congo natty aka rebel mc, george clinton, bernie worrell, guitarist dick wagner, midwest rappers the dayton family, ghetto priest and other members of asian dub foundation, and h.r. the lead singer of the hardcore punk rock pioneers bad brains.  members  david asher - vocals  garrick owen - guitar  seth payton - bass, guitar, keyboards, programming  bill heffelfinger - bassist and programmer  gabe gonzalez - drums  discography  studio albums  mystery babylon (1991)  baldhead vex (1992)  dub instructor (1994)  craven dog (1996)  blood & bones (2002)  weapons of mass percussion (2006)  gypsy wind (2013)  who is that mad band? (2016)  singles and eps  "lion of judah hath prevailed" (2011)  "gypsy wind" (2013)  "fire is burning" (2016)  live albums  live in los angeles (official live bootleg) (2001)  band compilations  paraphernaila vol. 1 (2001)  compilation albums  pop o.d.: the songs of iggy pop (various artists) (1998)  detroit musicians alliance: motor cd (various artists) (1999)  detroit music awards - 2003 (various artists) (2003)  reggae against landmines, vol. 3 (various artists) (2012)  music for the people of gaza - volume 2 by artists against apartheid (various artists) (2014)  guitar wizards vol 3/4 featuring the preocess' guitarist garrick owen jah made the herb and various artists (2016)  music videos  legacy: live dvd (2003)  live at the vassar theater dvd (2008)  pigman the movie - short film featuring the process song - pigman.  the true story about life on vassar's pig farm, rednecks with bows and arrows, and pigman's revenge.  references  external links  the process official facebook page   music video: get up stand up! the process live at prime event center  music video: "blood runnings" the process live at prime event center  interview: david asher interview (
2014)  reggae rock groups reggae metal musical groups musical groups from michigan musicians from michigan musicians from detroit musical groups established in 1989 musical quartets 1989 establishments in michigan
gontran cherrier is a french baker and pastry chef, a cookbook author, a tv presenter and an entrepreneur born on 11 november 1978 in luc-sur-mer (calvados), france.  biography  childhood  born in normandy on 11 november 1978, gontran a fourth-generation baker grew up in the small city of luc sur mer. at 8 years old his parents moved to paris and opened their first bakery where he earned his first stripes. at 16 he went to the prestigious ferrandi culinary school and then to les grands moulin de paris where the young chef has passed one by one the diplomas to become master baker.  career  gifted, curious and creative, he quickly piqued the interest of the greatest. in 1999 he integrated the prestigious 3 michelins stars restaurant "l'arpege" and learned beside alain passard the functioning of a prestigious house and expectations of a renowned chef. persistence & humility. with alain senderens, at the lucas carton, creation has only limits rigour and excellence. gontran is successively a pastry chef, a chocolate maker and of course a baker. adaptability & astonishment. learning is one aspect but sharing his knowhow is another. gontran is drown to other cultures; training programmes in russia, setting up production centres in romania, his travels have broadened his horizons giving him more and more skills and widening his already furnished palette.  medias  back in france, gontran continues to teach and in 2005 he wrote his first cookbook named "a croquer", with an immediate success. eight other books will follow in eight years: "ultra chocolat", "gontran joue de la casserole", "les bons plats de gontran", "gontran fait son pain", "pains" "pains, toastes", "cuisinez givre" & "mini cakes, tartes pies & co".  followed by several editorial collaboration.  his overflowing energy combined with his atypical career path has attracted the interest of the tv channels canal+ and cuisine tv. gontran presents his own tv shows: "canaille+" "les tartines de gontran", followed by "gontran cuisine". in 2011 he joined the team of de william leymergie at telematin on france2. in 2013 gontran became even more familiar to the general public in his jury role of "la meilleure boulangerie de france" (the best french
bakery), broadcast daily during one hour on m6 and gathering an average audience of 1 million viewers where he formed a dynamic duo with bruno cormerais for the first three seasons of the show.  the shops gontran cherrier  in 2010, gontran opened its first bakery in montmartre in paris followed by a second one in the 17th arrondissement of paris, and a third in st-germain-en-laye en 2013. "i finally realised the way to share my universe and passion with bread and food lovers alike, by matching my products with special moments in their lives" but gontran's ambition does not stop at french borders, as he has always wanted to export his craft internationally.  in 2012, his dream came true. his first bakery abroad was in singapore under the name of tiong bahru bakery by gontran cherrier quickly followed by japan (tokyo, fukuoka, nagoya...) and south korea (seoul, busan...).  in 2016 the brand is expanding to australia with the first opening in june in melbourne on 140 smith street, collingwood. quickly followed by taiwan in july in taipei city on 302, section 4, zhongxiao e rd, da'an district. as of july 2016, gontran cherrier boulanger accounts for 29 bakeries.  references  french chefs
the 1960-61 sk rapid wien season was the 63rd season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  cup  european cup  references  1960-61 rapid wien season rapid
molly stark state park is a 148-acre state park in wilmington, vermont. the park is named for molly stark, the famous wife of general john stark of the american revolutionary war, and is located along the molly stark byway.  activities includes camping, hiking, picnicking, mountain biking, wildlife watching, and winter sports. there is a loop hiking trail up to the fire lookout tower on mt. olga.  facilities include a 23 tent/rv sites and 11 lean-to sites, flush toilets, hot showers, a play area and large pavilion with electricity, 3 charcoal grills, and 10 picnic tables.  references  external links official website  state parks of vermont protected areas of bennington county, vermont woodford, vermont 1960 establishments in vermont
procedural generation is a common technique in computer programming to automate the creation of certain data according to guidelines set by the programmer. many games generate aspects of the environment or non-player characters procedurally during the development process in order to save time on asset creation. for example, speedtree is a middleware package that procedurally generates trees which can be used to quickly populate a forest. whereas most games use this technique to create a static environment for the final product, some employ procedural generation as a game mechanic, such as to create new environments for the player to explore. the levels in spelunky are procedurally generated by rearranging premade tiles of geometry into a level with an entrance, exit, a solvable path between the two, and obstacles to that path. other games procedurally generate other aspects of gameplay, such as the weapons in borderlands which have randomized stats and configurations.  this is a list of video games that use procedural generation as a core aspect of gameplay. games that use procedural generation solely during development as part of asset creation are not included.  list  roguelike games  games in the roguelike genre all have at least procedurally generated levels.  other  references  procedural generation   procedural generation
myrmeleontini is an antlion tribe in the subfamily myrmeleontinae.  genera  afroleon  baliga  bordus  callistoleon  cocius  congoleon  dictyoleon  euroleon  formicaleo  hagenomyia  kirghisoleon  macroleon  megistoleon  myrmeleon  porrerus  talosus  weeleus  references  external links  myrmeleontinae insect tribes
valley transit refers to one of two transit companies in the united states:   valley transit (washington) in walla walla, washington  valley transit (wisconsin) in appleton, wisconsin  see also  valley metro  santa clara valley transportation authority  valley regional transit  valley transit company
annibale degli abati olivieri (17 june 1708 - 29 september 1789) was an italian archaeologist, numismatist and librarian, considered the founder of the biblioteca oliveriana, pesaro. an aristocrat without heirs, he was the author of works of archeology and numismatics. he also discovered the site of a roman sacred grove, the lucus pisaurensis at his property on collina di calibano (hill of caliban) in the countryside of pesaro, at which he unearthed the 13 votive stones of pesaro.  biography olivieri was born in pesaro in 1708. he was educated in bologna and then went to pisa, studying with tommaso romito, giuseppe averani and luigi guido grandi. he graduated in law while in urbino in 1727, then moving to rome where he studied epigraphy. here, with the assistance of his uncle, fabio degli abati olivieri, he was able to locate rare archaeological finds which were deposited in his personal museum.  in 1735, olivieri returned to pesaro, a date which coincides with the publication of his first antiquarian and philological work. two years later, he completed the marmora pisaurensia notis, illustrated. what followed was a period intense work as evidenced by the many books he wrote. in 1756, he made a large donation to pesaro: his library of scrolls and many thousands of works, printed and handwritten, of high value and significance for the history and culture of the city, along with a collection of antiques, consisting essentially of material dug up throughout pesaro. this donation formed the nucleus of the biblioteca oliveriana. he died in pesaro in 1789.  selected works  in festo ascensionis christi oratio habita in basilica lateranensi ad sanctissimum d.n. benedictum 13. pontificem maximum ab annibale de abatibus oliverio pisaurensi j.v.d. (1728)  spiegazione di alcuni monumenti degli antichi pelasgi : trasportata dal francese con alcune osservazioni sovra i medesimi. (1735)  marmora pisaurensia notis illustrata (1737)  esame della controversia letteraria che passa (1740)  dissertazione di annibale degli abati olivieri sopra due antiche tavolette di avorio (1743)  elogio dell'arcidiacono gio. giacomo rubini. (1753)  della fondazione di pesaro : si aggiunge una
lettera (1757)  lettera sopra alcuni vescovi ignoti all'ughelli.  (1761)  esame del bronzo lerpiriano : pubblicato dallo spon. (1771)   memorie di tommaso diplovatazio, patrizio costantinopolitano (1771)  spiegazione : di una delle due antiche basi di marmo scoperte il di 22. di novembre 1770 dal cavalier domenico bonanini letta nella. acc. pesarese (1771)  ragioni del titolo di provincia metaurense dato alla legazione detta volgarmente di urbino (1771)  della patria della b. michellina e del b. cecco del terz'ordine di s. francesco. (1772)  see also olivieri archeological museum and library lucus pisaurensis  references  bibliography  external links annibale degli abati olivieri @ wikisource  1708 births 1789 deaths italian archaeologists italian numismatists italian librarians italian non-fiction writers
"the river" is a song by australian singer-songwriter delta goodrem, released as the fourth single from her fifth studio album, wings of the wild (2016). it was written by goodrem, along with david hodges and steven solomon, and produced by hodges. it was sent to radio on 23 september 2016 as the fourth single from the album. the song tells the story of a woman walking in on her lover, cheating on her and murdering him as a result.  background goodrem has said that the song is a story and that the theme is "one of redemption, about cleansing off volatile relationships and washing off that energy and starting a new."  promotion goodrem went on a short promo tour in new zealand in september 2016 to promote the song. she also appeared on the project the night prior to the single's release. goodrem performed the song on the nrl footy show and at nickelodeon slimefest 2016. she also performed the song on her national wings of the wild tour.  critical response cameron adams of news.com.au likened the song to adele's "rolling in the deep" and beyonce's "daddy lessons", saying that it "demonstrates in three minutes that 15 years into her career she's still able to surprise".  music video in mid-september 2016, goodrem began posting teasers for the upcoming music video. the teasers featured a man running among dark, murky forests. on 22 september 2016, she appeared on the project to deliver a preview for the music video. the video was released the next day via-goodrem's facebook. it features goodrem and a man kissing, caressing and running around together. goodrem then finds out that the man is cheating on her, and ends up suing him in court. the video ends with goodrem going to a river, with several people draped in white cloth lowering her down into the water, cleansing her of her bad relationships and allowing her to start anew.  track listing digital single "the river" - 3:04  cd single "the river" (miles walker mix) "you & you alone"  digital ep "the river" (miles walker mix) 3:02 "you & you alone" 3:39 "morse code" 4:37 morse code was previously an exclusive download for goodrem's wings of the wild tour meet&greet purchasers.  charts  release history  references  songs about rivers 2016 singles 2016 songs delta goodrem songs songs written by
delta goodrem songs written by david hodges
jorge manuel pinto cordeiro (born 2 september 1978) is professional football coach and former player. he played as a midfielder, predominantly in portugal's lower leagues. he had a briefly spell in the norwegian football before retiring.  club career cordeiro was born in portalegre and started playing aged 7 hometown's estrela de portalegre. in 1991, he moved to s.l. benfica youth system. in the 1997-98 season he was loaned to sl olivais.  after one season in portimao, cordeiro returned to benfica to play in the reserves team in 1999. on 4 october 2000, he was called by first-team coach jose mourinho for a friendly match against olympique de marseille. in november, he received another call, this time to a primeira liga match against vitoria de guimaraes, but eventually did not leave the bench, subsequently returning to the b-side.  on 30 may 2012, cordeiro signed for norwegian side follo fk.  international career in 1995, cordeiro helped the under-16s winning that year's uefa european championship. he scored three goals, including the solo winning goal against host belgium in the quarterfinals and one in the semi-final against germany.  later that year, he was named in the squad for the 1995 fifa u-17 world championship and played four games in an eventual quarter-final exit.  in 1997, he represented the portugal under-18 team in the uefa european under-18 championship, held in iceland. portugal reached the final and lost 1-0 in the against france.  four categories comprised, cordeiro amassed 34 caps and scored 11 goals.  coaching career while playing for ad oeiras, cordeiro he earned his  uefa 'c' and 'b' licences. while he was playing for follo, he started coaching the under-14s of his local team, ski il.  club statistics  honours  club oeiras  af lisboa 1ª divisao honra: 2008-09  follo  2. divisjon: 2012  country portugal  uefa european under-16 championship: 1995  uefa european under-18 championship: runner-up 1997  references  external links        portuguese football federation profile  1978 births living people people from portalegre, portugal portuguese footballers association football midfielders primeira liga players portimonense s.c. players s.l. benfica b players seixal f.c. players f.c. barreirense players s.c.u.
torreense players clube oriental de lisboa players ad oeiras players follo fk players portugal youth international footballers portuguese expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in norway portuguese expatriate sportspeople in norway
andrei ovidiu pitian (born 16 november 1995) is a romanian footballer who plays as a centre-back for chindia targoviste.  honours  pandurii targu jiu cupa ligii runner-up: 2014-15  astra giurgiu cupa romaniei runner-up: 2016-17  apollon limassol cypriot first division runner-up: 2017-18 cypriot cup runner-up: 2017-18  references  external links      1995 births living people sportspeople from targu jiu romanian footballers association football midfielders liga i players cs pandurii targu jiu players fc astra giurgiu players fc botosani players afc chindia targoviste players fc arges pitesti players cypriot first division players apollon limassol fc players romanian expatriate footballers romanian expatriate sportspeople in cyprus expatriate footballers in cyprus
christian andersen (born 18 june 1967) is a danish former cyclist. he competed in the individual road race at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  external links    1967 births living people danish male cyclists olympic cyclists of denmark cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics
is a japanese magical girl anime television series produced by white fox. it was announced in july 2016 as white fox's first original anime series that aired between october 4 and december 27, 2016.  plot  matoi sumeragi, a second-year junior high school student, works part-time as a shrine maiden at tenman shrine in the city of kamaya. her close friend yuma kusanagi is part of the family of the shrine's chief priest, and is a candidate to be the successor shrine maiden. one day, matoi and yuma walk from the school to the shrine as usual, but when they arrive, they are greeted by the shrine's now damaged grounds, and yuma's parents have both collapsed from their wounds. matoi's father shingo, a police detective, launches an investigation, and he comes upon a man who does not seem entirely sane, his only witness. when he holds down the man, yuma begins the ritual of divine possession. something strange then happens, not with yuma, but with matoi. matoi sumeragi, who had only wanted a normal, peaceful life, takes the role of a god, and gains the power to banish evil spirits.  characters   matoi is a 14-year old second year junior high school student that works part-time at tenman shrine as a shrine maiden. matoi's mother went missing and she lived with her grandparents. she currently lives with her father, shingo.  yuma is a 13-year old first-year junior high school student, and the candidate for the next shrine maiden of tenman shrine. yuma is a innocent and energetic girl.  clarus is a 15-year old member of fatima, the vatican's secret anti-creed service.  shingo is matoi's father and a police officer.  matoi calls him by his first name, because they've only recently gotten to know each other.  shiori is matoi's mother who went missing several years prior to the start of the story.  luciela is an iato special agent investigating the demonic "nights."  cariot is a member of fatima and is often seen with clarus.  nicknamed "pochi," hideo is shingo's partner.  flors is clarus' previous partner.  she was incapacitated by the monstrous night called "creed killer."  media  anime  the original series is produced by white fox, directed by masayuki sakoi and written by yosuke kuroda,
featuring character designs by mai toda and music by tatsuya kato. the opening theme is chomusubi amulet (蝶結ひアミュレット,chomusubi amyuretto, "butterfly knot amulet") by mia regina.  the voice actress unit sphere, made up of minako kotobuki, ayahi takagaki, haruka tomatsu, and aki toyosaki, performs the anime's ending theme song, "my only place". the anime series had a stage event at the kyoto international manga and anime fair 2016 on september 17, 2016. sentai filmworks has licensed the anime in north america and it was streamed on the hulu and anime network. madman entertainment was streaming the series on animelab. mvm films will release the series in the united kingdom.  episode list  notes  references  external links     magical girl anime and manga television shows about exorcism fiction set in 2016 anime with original screenplays white fox sentai filmworks shinto in fiction tokyo mx original programming
mobile reserve divisions  221st division  222nd division  224th division  225th division  229th division  230th division  231st division  234th division  coastal defense divisions  303rd division  308th division  312th division  316th division  320th division  the 320th division has completed organization 25 july 1945 in daegu, performing a police duties from daegu to seoul. after the start of the soviet invasion of manchuria 9 august 1945, the 320th division was ordered to move north to wonsan, but did not complete the move due to the surrender of japan 15 august 1945.  notes this section incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第320師団 (日本軍), accessed 22 july 2016  321st division  322nd division  344th division  351st division  354th division  355th division  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 本土決戦第三次兵備, accessed 20 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan japanese military-related lists army divisions
khairul hafiz bin jantan (born 22 july 1998) is a malaysian sprinter, competing in events ranging from 100 metres to 400 metres. he is the current malaysian 100 metres outdoor record holder with a time of 10.18 seconds  his personal best of 20.90 seconds in the 200 metres is the malaysian national junior record.  references  external links  khairul hafiz jantan profile at iaaf   khairul hafiz jantan profile at all-athletics.com  khairul hafiz jantan - tag archive - sports247.my  1998 births living people people from malacca malaysian male sprinters malaysian people of malay descent athletes (track and field) at the 2018 commonwealth games athletes (track and field) at the 2018 asian games southeast asian games medalists in athletics southeast asian games gold medalists for malaysia southeast asian games silver medalists for malaysia competitors at the 2017 southeast asian games competitors at the 2019 southeast asian games asian games competitors for malaysia commonwealth games competitors for malaysia
winfried hermann (born 19 july 1952 in rottenburg am neckar) is a german politician of alliance '90/the greens. from 1998 to 2011 he was an mp of the german bundestag. since 2011 he has been state minister of transport in the cabinets kretschmann i and ii. from 1992 to 1997 he was chairman of the greens in baden-wurttemberg.  early life and career after high school diploma hermann studied german philology, political science and sports at the university of tubingen. from 1979 to 1984 he was trained and worked as a high school teacher in stuttgart.  political career  beginnings in state politics in 1984 hermann was elected to the landtag of baden-wurttemberg for the green party, of which he was a member to 1988.  from 1992 until 1997, hermann served as co-chair of the green party in baden-wurttemberg, alongside dagmar dehmer (1992-1993) and barbara graf (1995-1997).  member of the german parliament, 1998-2011 in 1998, hermann was elected to the bundestag. he was an mp of the bundestag until 2011. in this capacity, he served as deputy chairman of the committee on the environment, nature conservation, building and nuclear safety (1998-2005), member of the parliamentary advisory board on sustainability (2005-2009) and chairman of the committee on transport, building and urban affairs (2009-2011). he was his parliamentary group's spokesperson on environmental policy (2002-2005) and on transportation policy (2005-2009).  while still in parliament, hermann joined gerhard schick, hans-christian strobele and anton hofreiter in their successful 2011 constitutional complaint against the refusal of chancellor angela merkel's government to provide information on the deutsche bahn and financial market supervision. in its judgment pronounced in 2017, the federal constitutional court held that the government had indeed failed to fulfil its duty to give answers in response to parliamentary queries and to sufficiently substantiating the reasons.  return to state politics in 2011, hermann went back to baden-wurttemberg state politics and became state minister for transportation of the government of winfried kretschmann. as one of his state's representatives at the bundesrat, he serves on the committee on transport. in the 2016 state elections, he was also re-elected into the landtag of baden-wurttemberg.  other actvitities  state agencies  federal network agency for electricity, gas, telecommunications, post and railway (bnetza), member of the rail infrastructure advisory council (2005-2009)  federal agency for civic education (bpb
), member of the board of trustees (1998-2005)  corporate boards  stuttgart airport, ex-officio chairman of the supervisory board  deutsche flugsicherung (dfs), member of the advisory board  nahverkehrsgesellschaft baden-wurttemberg (nvbw), ex-officio chairman of the supervisory board  non-profits  institut solidarische moderne (ism), member (since 2010)  personal life hermann lives in stuttgart. he is married and has one child.  external links winfried hermann at the baden-wurttemberg transportation ministry  references  living people 1952 births alliance 90/the greens politicians members of the landtag of baden-wurttemberg members of the bundestag for baden-wurttemberg people from rottenburg am neckar university of tubingen alumni members of the bundestag 2009-2013 members of the bundestag 2005-2009 members of the bundestag 2002-2005 members of the bundestag for alliance 90/the greens
chinatown fair family fun center is a video arcade center located on mott street in chinatown, manhattan. historically, the arcade catered toward competitive fighting games. the original arcade opened in 1944 and closed in february 2011, but reopened in may 2012 under different management. chinatown fair has been widely regarded as new york city's "last great arcade".  history  chinatown fair opened in 1944, taking over the first floor of the popular port arthur chinese restaurant building located at 7-9 mott street in new york city; previously, the first floor had been occupied by soy kee & co., exporters, as well as the eastern trading company. chinatown fair operated as a penny arcade and small museum for many years, before becoming a video game arcade in the 1970s. indian immigrant sam palmer purchased the business in 1982 after having a "religious vision".  one of its first attractions was a dancing chicken. the dancing chicken was later replaced with a tic-tac-toe playing chicken, which was retired in the early 2000s. in the 1970s and 1980s, the arcade hosted many retro generation games including pac-man and space invaders. in 1991, after the release of street fighter ii: the world warrior, chinatown fair switched focus to competitive fighting games. by the late 1990s street fighter, marvel vs. capcom, the king of fighters, soulcalibur, tekken and other fighting games were commonly played. top players such as justin wong, nychrisg, michael "yipes" mendoza, and sanford kelly frequented the establishment.  as of 2010, the new york times wrote that chinatown fair was among the last video arcades in the city. video arcades have been in decline with the rise of home video games. the newspaper reported that it became "a center for all the outcasts in the city to bond over their shared love" of classic arcade and fighting video games no longer popular in modern arcades, with titles including the original street fighter ii (1991), the king of fighters (1994), and ms. pac-man. other groups congregated around dance dance revolution machines and racing games. unlike the norm at other arcades, where winning players continue until deposed, chinatown fair players play a maximum of three or four continuous games.  in february 2011, chinatown fair closed down. on may 5, 2012 over a year later it reopened under a new name "chinatown fair family fun center" with new manager and part owner, lonnie sobel. former competitive players criticized the new arcade for catering toward casual players, with the new ownership explaining that
they were targeting a new clientele. competitive fighting game players relocated to next level, a brooklyn arcade owned by chinatown fair's former manager, which opened in 2011.  the arcade is the focus of the 2015 documentary, the lost arcade, which was released in new york city on august 12, 2016.  references  external links      video arcades commercial buildings in manhattan tourist attractions in manhattan 1944 establishments in new york city 2011 disestablishments in new york (state) chinatown, manhattan
soot and gold (finnish: nokea ja kultaa) is a 1945 finnish drama film directed by edvin laine and starring laine, ansa ikonen and veli-matti kaitala.  partial cast  ansa ikonen as sirkka lehmus    edvin laine as jalmari aaltonen   veli-matti kaitala as risto muuranen   uuno laakso as ryyppy-ville    thure bahne as klaus vaheri    enni rekola as pirkit   matti aulos as eemeli virta    arvi tuomi as major of the salvation army    rafael pihlaja as police inspector    jalmari rinne as siltanen    evald terho as ruotu-roope    anni ronkko as miina laakso    aku peltonen as esa laakso    vili jare as kemilainen    pirkko raitio as matron in pelastusrengas    einari ketola as sailor    juhani turunen as kallu    ritva-leena as liisa lahtinen    yrjo sylberg as esa's friend    veikko linna as customs officer    rauha puntti as saleswoman    olavi vepsalainen   aarne orri as joose    edvin ruotsalainen as detective    ossi korhonen as huttunen    aarne laine as duty policeman    toivo lahti as man in pelastusrengas  references  bibliography   john holmstrom. the moving picture boy: an international encyclopaedia from 1895 to 1995. michael russell, 1996.  external links     1945 films 1945 drama films finnish drama films finnish films finnish-language films films directed by edvin laine finnish black-and-white films
kang mi-na (; born december 4, 1999), better known by the mononym mina, is a south korean singer and actress. she is best known for finishing ninth in mnet's k-pop girl group survival show produce 101. she is a former member of the girl group i.o.i, gugudan, as well as its subgroups 5959 and semina. she is also best known for her roles in the television series dokgo rewind (2018), hotel del luna (2019) and summer guys (2021).  early life  kang mi-na was born in icheon, and later moved to jeju city when she was eight years old. she graduated from school of performing arts seoul in 2018.  career  2016-2017: produce 101, i.o.i and gugudan  in january 2016, kang mina together with fellow trainees kim na-young and kim se-jeong, represented jellyfish entertainment on reality girl group survival show produce 101 for the chance to debut in a mnet girl group.  the program came to an end on april 1, 2016, and the final line-up of south korean girl group i.o.i was announced, made up of the top 11 poll-winners. kang finished ninth overall, with 173,762 votes, becoming an official member of the girl group.  on june 10, 2016, ymc entertainment revealed that kang would not be taking part in i.o.i's unit promotions, but would instead return to her agency to debut and promote with upcoming south korean girl group, gugudan.  in july 2017, a gugudan subgroup named gugudan 5959 was formed with kang and fellow member hye-yeon. they debuted with the single "ice chu" on august 10, 2017.  in june 2018, a gugudan subgroup named gugudan semina was formed with kang and members sejeong and nayoung. they debuted with the release of their self-titled single album on july 10, 2018.  2018-present: acting career kang made her acting debut in the mbc romantic comedy series children of the 20th century in 2017, acting as the younger counterpart of han ye-seul. the same year, she played her first lead role in the 2-episode tvn drama history of walking upright.  in 2018, kang began hosting the music program show! music core. she then starred in the action web film dokgo rewind alongside sehun of exo, and played a supporting role in tvn's fantasy romance
drama tale of fairy.  in march 2019, kang was confirmed as part of the cast for law of the jungle in thailand. in april 2019, kang was cast in tvn drama hotel del luna as kim yuna. kang was cast in the web drama summer guys aired on march 30, 2021. on june 11, 2021, kang was announced to make a cameo appearance in tvn's drama my roommate is a gumiho.  discography  filmography  film  television series  television shows  awards and nominations  notes  references  external links    kang mi-na at jellyfish entertainment   1999 births living people people from icheon jellyfish entertainment artists swing entertainment artists south korean pop singers south korean female idols south korean film actresses produce 101 contestants i.o.i members south korean television actresses 21st-century south korean singers 21st-century south korean actresses 21st-century south korean women singers school of performing arts seoul alumni
this page is a timeline of social media. major launches, milestones, and other major events are included.  overview  timeline  (*) such launches are not initial launches, but rather relaunches.  see also  timeline of facebook  timeline of instagram  timeline of linkedin  timeline of pinterest  timeline of snapchat  timeline of twitter  references  social media social media
saint amelia, queen of hungary is an oil painting by paul delaroche which was investigated in 2016 by the bbc tv programme fake or fortune?  lost work a painting of saint amelia by french history painter paul delaroche was commissioned in 1831 by queen marie-amelie, wife of louis philippe, king of the french. the work was exhibited at the salon of 1834 in paris. in 1837, the painting was recorded as being hung in the royal chapel at the tuileries palace in paris, and it was copied in an engraving by paolo mercuri. it was also reproduced as the main panel in a stained glass window for the queen's private chapel at the chateau d'eu. a preparatory drawing in chalk, graphite and watercolour is held by the british museum. the original painting was believed to be lost.  fake or fortune? the fake or fortune? team investigated a version of the painting, housed at castle of park in cornhill, aberdeenshire, to determine whether it was the delaroche original or one of a number of copies. this unsigned work was bought in 1989, for about £500, by the late neil wilson, an art dealer who had worked for christie's after leaving university. the painting's provenance was very poor. in the programme, art expert bendor grosvenor revealed an 1866 watercolour by joseph nash depicting the painting in the queen's bedroom at claremont house in surrey, where the deposed king and queen lived after fleeing france following the revolution of 1848. after that, the next sighting of the painting was when it was sold at christie's in 1980 as a work by the french artist fleury francois richard, with the title 'a queen and her retinue at worship'.  technical analysis showed that colour anomalies in the painting were the result of pigment degradation, and that parts of the painting had also been restored. after reviewing the show's findings, professor stephen bann, a leading delaroche expert, concluded that it was the lost original. he also revealed a letter written by delaroche, in which he registers his dismay at the state of the picture after it had been copied to create a stained glass window for queen marie-amelie, and says that he will have to do considerable work to restore it.  following its authentication, wilson's widow, becky, was reported to have decided to keep the painting, but allow it to be displayed at the british museum in london when a delaroche exhibition takes place. subsequently, the painting was sold via christie's in july 2019 for £33,750.
subject  maria amalia and her paternal grandmother maria amalia of saxony, queen consort of spain, celebrated their feast day on july 13. also maria amalia is depicted as this saint in the stained-glass of the eglise notre-dame-de-compassion de paris, with the drawing originally made by ingres. he tried to find out who she was, but with no luck.  there is no amelia in the list of hungarian queens. the only hungarian royal "saint" with the title of queen is gisela of bavaria, wife of saint stephen i of hungary himself, but her canonization in the 18th century failed. she was beatified only in 1975.  however there is a hungarian royal saint named elizabeth of hungary, landgravine consort of thuringia (1207 - 1231), who is associated with an event known as the miracle of the roses, which is also told of her great-niece and fellow saint elizabeth of aragon, queen consort of portugal. this may connect with the floral imagery of the painting.  there are three saint named amelia or a variant thereof. two noblewomen with the same name were also relatives of the later carolingian dynasty: amalberga of maubeuge and amalberga of temse, and they are both official saints recognized by the roman catholic church. there is also a non-noble amelberga of susteren.  there is also amalaberga, niece of theodoric the great, who married hermanafrid, king of thuringia, whoever this thuringian connection with elizabeth of hungary is questionable at best.  references  external links    fake of fortune: delaroche at bbc.co.uk  paintings by paul delaroche 1834 paintings fake or fortune?
the 1896 central michigan normalites football team represented central michigan normal school, later renamed central michigan university, as an independent during the 1896 college football season. central michigan was founded in 1892 and fielded its first varsity football team in 1896.  under head coach pete mccormick, the first central michigan football team compiled a 3-1 record and outscored their four opponents by a combined total of 62 to 22. all four games were played against high school teams.  on october 31, 1896, the central michigan football team lost to alma high school, 14-5, in a game played in mount pleasant. on november 21, 1896, central michigan defeated bay city high school by a 14-4 score at mt. pleasant.  schedule  references  central michigan central michigan chippewas football seasons central michigan normalites football
rodney is an unincorporated community in gallia county, in the u.s. state of ohio.  history rodney was platted in 1830. a post office called rodney was in operation from 1839 until 1985.  references  unincorporated communities in gallia county, ohio unincorporated communities in ohio
an election was held on november 8, 2016 to elect all 110 members to michigan's house of representatives. the election coincided with elections for other offices, including u.s. president, u.s. house of representatives and senate. the primary election was held on august 2, 2016.  there was no change in the composition of the house as republicans retained control, winning 63 seats compared to 47 seats for the democrats.  members elected at the 2016 election served in the 99th michigan legislature which convened on january 11, 2017.  background over one-third of the house could not seek re-election because of term-limits, with the legislators who were elected in the 2010 mid-term elections, that saw the house republican conference pick up 21 seats, the largest net gain for one party in an election since michigan's newly constituted term-limits went into effect in 1992.  term-limited members under the michigan constitution, members of the state senate are able to serve only two four-years terms, and members of the house of representatives are limited to three two-years terms. the following members were prevented by term-limits from seeking re-election to the house in 2016.  democrats (13)  2nd district: alberta tinsley-talabi  9th district: harvey santana  14th district: paul clemente  15th district: george darany  18th district: sarah roberts  26th district: jim townsend  31st district: marilyn lane  50th district: charles smiley  53rd district: jeff irwin  54th district: david rutledge  92nd district: marcia hovey-wright  96th district: charles brunner  republicans (25)  20th district: kurt heise  23rd district: pat somerville  24th district: anthony g. forlini  30th district: jeff farrington  32nd district: andrea lafontaine  33rd district: ken goike  46th district: bradford jacobsen  57th district: nancy jenkins  64th district: earl poleski  66th district: aric nesbitt  70th district: rick outman  72nd district: ken yonker  77th district: tom hooker   79th district: al pscholka  83rd district: paul muxlow  85th district: ben glardon  86th district: lisa lyons  87th district: mike callton  89th district: amanda price  97th district: joel johnson  99th district:
kevin cotter  100th district: jon bumstead  101st district: ray franz  102nd district: phil potvin  103rd district: bruce rendon  106th district: peter pettalia  108th district: ed mcbroom  results  statewide statewide results of the 2016 michigan house of representatives:  district results of the 2016 michigan house of representatives election by district:  election matchups following the primary elections on august 2, general election matchups and results in each district were as follows:  districts 1-28  districts 29-55  districts 56-83  districts 84-110  special elections  1st district the 1st district seat became vacant after democratic state rep. brian banks had to resign from the legislature as part of plea agreement with the office of michigan attorney general bill schuette. in exchange for his resignation from the house, the state would just drop multiple felony counts against banks in which he was alleged to falsify documents to obtain a private loan before he was elected to the state house. banks agreed to plead guilty to one misdemeanor and spend one day in the wayne county jail.  results  democratic primary  republican primary  general election  109th district  background the 109th district seat became vacant after state rep. john kivela committed suicide just hours after he was arrested for drunk driving for the second time during his time in the legislature.  results  democratic primary  republican primary  general election  68th district  background on november 7, 2017, term-limited democratic state rep. andy schor was elected mayor of lansing, to succeed virg bernero. schor will take office on january 1, 2018. after schor formally resigns from the house, gov. rick snyder will call a special election to fill the remaining balance of schor's term, which expires january 1, 2019.  notes  references  external links 2016 michigan primary election ballot  michigan house of representatives house of representatives 2016 november 2016 events in the united states
the marquis bread wheat cultivar was developed by dominion agriculturalist charles saunders in 1904. it was selected for superiority in milling quality for bread flour over other cultivars then prevalent in western canada. 'marquis' had the advantage of maturing 10 days earlier than its competitors - a factor of great importance in the canadian wheatbelt, extending as far south as southern nebraska.  notes  wheat cultivars
the metrobus is a public bus rapid transit system under construction in tegucigalpa, honduras.   the capital of honduras suffered from severe traffic congestion for decades, and reliable public transportation system is badly needed. the mayor, ricardo antonio alvarez arias, announced on 25 november 2010 the construction of a metrobus system, and that us$ 150 million dollars (570 million lempiras) would be allocated for the construction by the inter-american bank of development as a loan. the construction was expected to take between two and three years.   on 24 october 2013, inhabitants of the colonia john f. kennedy demonstrated protesting construction of the metrobus terminal.  in june 2016, the authorities were saying the system could be opened in 2017.  trans 450  the buses will be of approximate from  to  in length, with capacity more than 160 passengers and imported from brazil. they will include high technology for access, cameras for surveillance, and a centre for control and communications.  references   tegucigalpa bus rapid transit
macrocoma sacra is a species of leaf beetle of saudi arabia and pakistan, described by lopatin in 1983.  references  sacra beetles of asia insects of the arabian peninsula insects of pakistan beetles described in 1983
david gallring is a swedish songwriter, producer, and designer from vaxjo, sweden. he studied music production at the linnaeus university. after graduation, he started his own company mood swing studio, enabling him to work with artists, bands, labels, and songwriters in various projects and genres. in 2014, gallring and karl sahlin formed the edm duo niero, having independently released "reach for the stars", which had a wide reach on spotify, and another two singles via the british label we are intelligence. shortly after, they decided to act as a songwriting duo instead.  discography  niero  singles   2014: "captain"  2015: "reach for the stars" (feat. emma olsson)  2015: "supercell"  2015: "runaways"  production/songwriting  entries in eurovision song contest pre-selections  songwriting credits  references   swedish songwriters living people people from karlskrona year of birth missing (living people)
kawasaki made the kdx125 starting in 1990 with model a1 and ending in 1999 with model b6, the kdx125 was a road going version of the kx125 and was known as the enduro version of the kmx125. with a dry weight of  and power output of  the kdx125's two-stroke engine managed a top speed of .. the full power model or derestricted version was capable of 80-85 mph and power increase from 12 - 24bhp.this model was the 'b' version for anyone with a full bike licence. the 'a' model could be derestricted by cutting the washer from the downpipe or buying an after market down pipe. other modifications like racing reed's, altering the kips (powervalve) system and after marker silencer would all add to a greater top speed.  references  kdx125 two-stroke motorcycles motorcycles introduced in 1999
c25k, short for couch to 5k, is a mobile app which contains training plans that gradually progress toward a 5 kilometre (3.1 mile) run over nine weeks. the app, created by zen labs, is based on the couch to 5k running plan from coolrunning.com. it is one of the highest-rated health and fitness apps available on android and ios.  the nhs in the uk provides downloadable podcasts and a smartphone app (android and ios) for the plan.  the couch to 5k running plan was created by josh clark in 1996. he developed the plan for new runners as motivation  through manageable expectations. the plan aims to get the user working out for 20 to 30 minutes, three days a week. the daily workouts start with a five-minute warm-up walk and works up to running five kilometres without a walking break within nine weeks. clark started the website kick and featured c25k on the site. in 2001, kick merged with cool running, a new england-based running site.  clark later sold his stake in cool running and the couch to 5k program. as of 2016, the c25k app has been used by over 5 million people.  references  fitness apps sports software road running mobile applications
bigliardi is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  matthew p. bigliardi (1920-1996), american bishop of the episcopal church tebaldo bigliardi (born 1963), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
kevyn manuel montano gasca (born april 6, 1995 in nezahualcoyotl, state of mexico) is a mexican professional  footballer who plays as a midfielder for cruz azul. he made his professional debut for cruz azul during a copa mx victory over pachuca on 15 september 2015.  references  external links      living people 1995 births mexican footballers association football midfielders cruz azul footballers cruz azul hidalgo footballers liga mx players liga premier de mexico players footballers from the state of mexico people from nezahualcoyotl
braglia is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  alberto braglia (1883-1954), italian gymnast giorgio braglia (born 1947), italian footballer piero braglia (born 1955), italian footballer and manager  see also stadio alberto braglia, football stadium in modena, italy  italian-language surnames
nawan pind naicha is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 9 km from goraya, 12 km from phillaur, 38 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 125 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  bhattian railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 11.4 km away from the village. the village is 42 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 129 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
2018 in malaysia is malaysia's 61st anniversary of its independence and 55th anniversary of malaysia's formation.  incumbents  federal level  state level  events  january  february  march  april  may 14th malaysian general election (ge14) :  9 may-the 14th general election was held on this day. for the first time in the country's history, the barisan nasional coalition was defeated by the opposition coalition pakatan harapan, only winning 79 seats against pakatan harapan's 121. the pan-malaysian islamic party won 18 seats while independents won 3 seats. former prime minister mahathir mohamad, who led pakatan harapan to victory, manage to defeat his protege najib razak,  10 may -- mahathir mohamad is sworn in as the seventh prime minister of malaysia at 2130 hours (gmt+8), as he becomes the world's oldest elected state leader at the age of 92. this marks his return to the position after holding the post previously for 22 years, from 1981 to 2003.  12 may --   a council of eminent persons is formed as government's advisory board, board members are   tun daim zainuddin, former finance minister of malaysia  tan sri zeti akhtar aziz, former governor of bank negara malaysia (bnm)  tan sri hassan marican, former president and ceo of petronas  robert kuok, hong-kong based malaysian billionaire tycoon  professor jomo kwame sundaram, prominent economist  lim guan eng, muhyiddin yassin, and mohamad sabu are named for three top cabinet posts  former prime minister najib razak and wife rosmah mansor are barred from leaving the country  najib resigns as umno and bn chief  13 may --  mahathir instructs inland revenue board to return taxes collected 'illegally'.  14 may --  attorney-general mohamed apandi ali goes on unrecorded leave, duties taken over by solicitor-general  macc chief dzulkifli ahmad resigns  treasurer general irwan serigar abdullah's contract shortened, transferred to public service department  mahathir says laws on fake news will be clearly defined  mahathir says political appointments in government-linked companies will be reviewed.  15 may --  audit department declassifies its 1mdb report  council of eminent persons sets up a committee on institutional reforms, committee includes:   retired judge of court of appeal datuk kc vohrah;  retired judge of the court of appeal and human rights commission of malaysia (suhakam)
commissioner datuk mah weng kwai;  national patriot association president brigadier general (rtd) datuk mohamed arshad raji;  university malaya tunku abdul rahman professor of law emeritus professor datuk dr shad saleem faruqi;   hakam president and bar council former president datuk ambiga sreenevasan  apandi ali, irwan serigar, dzulkifli and former igp khalid abu bakar barred from leaving the country.  16 may --   pakatan harapan de facto leader and former deputy prime minister anwar ibrahim is released from prison after being pardoned by the yang di-pertuan agong. he had served three years of his prison sentence.  1mdb president arul kanda kandasamy is also barred from leaving the country  police search najib's house and seize handbags and clothes  government announces gst will be zero-rated effective, 1 june 2018  mahathir to sack 17,000 political appointees from civil service  registrar of societies approves pakatan harapan's registration.  ministries instructed to cease use of 1malaysia slogan  kedai rakyat 1malaysia 2.0 (kr1m) programme ceased  board meetings of the cooperatives commission of malaysia and committees which have political appointees to be postponed.  17 may  police search at najib's house continues  finance ministry initiates fiscal reforms.  20 may   former executive of petrosaudi whistleblower swiss national xavier justo meets mahathir   21 may  special task force formed to investigate the 1mdb scandal as well as to prosecute wrongdoers and retrieve related assets. task force would be jointly headed by former attorney-general abdul gani patail, former macc head abu kassim mohamed, current macc head mohd shukri abdull and former special branch head abdul hamid bador.  deputy prime minister wan azizah wan ismail and several federal ministers officially sworn in as members of cabinet. 22 may  former prime minister najib razak is brought in for questioning at the malaysian anti-corruption commission(macc).  june  july  august  september   1 september - sales and services tax (sst) replaced goods and services tax (gst).  8 - 15 september - the inaugural asia pacific masters games was held in penang.  11-22 september - 2018 sukma games was held in perak.  october  november  6 november - prime minister mahathir mohamad visited japan, and received a medal of the emperor of japan.  15 november - mahathir came back to kuala lumpur since end the
33rd asean summit in singapore.  december  4 december - a gas piping explosion in one of the food outlet at cityone megamall in kuching, sarawak resulted in 3 deaths and 22 injuries. 8 december - the anti-icerd rally was organised by opposition right-wing political parties malaysian islamic party (pas) and united malays national organisation (umno), with the support of various non-governmental organisations in response to the new malaysian government's plan to ratify the united nations convention known as international convention on the elimination of all forms of racial discrimination (icerd).  16 december - mohd hafiz nor azman, a 22-year-old motorcycle racer was killed in an accident when competing at the petronas aam malaysian cub prix championships at dataran bandar penawar, johor.  18 december - high court rejected former prime minister najib razak's request to get the letter of authorisation (fiat) on the appointment of lead prosecutor sulaiman abdullah, and his application for discovery of documents pertaining to the case.  national day and malaysia day  national day theme sayangi malaysiaku (love my malaysia)  national day parade putrajaya  malaysia day celebration kota kinabalu, sabah  sports  16 - 21 january - 2018 malaysian badminton masters  3 - 10 march - 2018 sultan azlan shah cup  18 - 25 march - 2018 tour de langkawi  26 june - 1 july - 2018 malaysian badminton open  8 - 15 september - 2018 asia pacific masters games  11 - 22  september - 2018 sukma games  20 september - 7 october - 2018 afc u-16 championship  6 - 13 october - 2018 sultan of johor cup  15 - 20 october - 2018 sopma games  4 november - 2018 shell malaysia motorcycle grand prix  23 - 28 november - 2018 para sukma games  25 november - 2018 penang bridge international marathon  deaths   25 january -  - actor  16 april - napsiah omar - malaysian politician 6 may - lai meng  8 september - abu hassan omar - malaysian politician  14 october - - singer  see also  2018  2017 in malaysia | 2019 in malaysia  history of malaysia  2018 in malaysian football  1malaysia development berhad scandal  references    malaysia 2010s in malaysia years of the 21st century in malaysia malaysia
wyandot (sometimes shown as wyandotte) was a small town, now extinct, in sheffield township, tippecanoe county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  history the indian town of wyandot in sheffield township was located in the ravine that is crossed by dayton road and runs past wyandotte cemetery into the wildcat creek. it is thought that the indians moved their village down to the creek's banks in the summer and retreated up the ravine in the winter. they lived in log houses and operated a trading post. when the white settlers arrived, the indians living there were probably neither miami or wyandott, but instead were most likely potawatomi.  in 1849, a post office was established in wyandot, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1872.  geography  wyandot is located at  with an elevation of 659 feet.  a few buildings in the community still exist, and it is still cited by the usgs.  richardville indian reserve  the richardville indian reserve was located in sheffield township and was one of six reserves located in tippecanoe county. it was owned by jean-baptiste richardville and in 1818 the land surrounding the village was divided into five sections for his five children.  references  former populated places in tippecanoe county, indiana former populated places in indiana
caulospongia elegans is a species of sea sponge belonging to the family suberitidae. it is found in australia.  references   suberitidae sponges described in 1888 sponges of australia
lukhanyo welcome nomzanga (born 8 october 1987) is a south african rugby union player, who last played first class rugby as a flanker for the  in the currie cup and in the rugby challenge.  rugby career  amateur rugby  nomzanga was born in king william's town in the eastern cape, but played amateur club rugby in the western cape, playing for belhar and false bay. he was also selected in a western province amateur team that competed in the national povincial competition in 2012.  border bulldogs  nomzanga returned to the eastern cape to join the  prior to their 2014 currie cup qualification series and made his first class debut in the team's 12-37 defeat to the . he started a total of five matches in the qualification campaign that saw them finish bottom of the log with six defeats and four more starts in the 2014 currie cup first division, where they also finished last.  in 2015, nomzanga made six appearances in the 2015 vodacom cup and another six in the 2015 currie cup qualification series. he didn't play in the first division, but returned the following year to play in eleven of the bulldogs' matches in the 2015 currie cup qualification series.  in july 2016, it was revealed that nomzanga received a ban from the sport after failing a drugs test. he tested positively for methylhexaneamine and initially received an eight-month ban, which was due to rule him out of action until march 2017. however, he returned to action for the bulldogs in september 2016, coming on as a replacement in their victory over the .  references  south african rugby union players living people 1987 births people from king william's town rugby union flankers border bulldogs players doping cases in rugby union
chinellato is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:   giacomo chinellato (born 1955), italian footballer  matteo chinellato (born 1991), italian footballer  italian-language surnames
, also known as htv-7 is the seventh flight of the h-ii transfer vehicle (htv), an uncrewed cargo spacecraft launched on 22 september 2018 to resupply the international space station.  spacecraft specification  major changes from previous kounotori include:  inclusion of htv small re-entry capsule (hsrc), described below.  reduction of primary batteries to five units, down from six of kounotori 6, seven of kounotori 2 through kounotori 5.  replacement of hardware control panel (hcp) by portable computer system (pcs). hcp was a dedicated control command box which allowed iss crew to send control commands to kounotori. for kounotori 7, this is to be replaced by a portable (laptop) computer.  to enable hsrc retrieval, the destructive re-entry of kounotori 7 and the splashdown of hsrc is planned to take place in the northwestern pacific ocean near minami-tori-shima (marcus island), east of bonin islands and northern mariana islands, instead of the southern pacific ocean used by the previous missions.  reentry capsule  along with resupplying the iss, this kounotori flight tested the htv small re-entry capsule (hsrc), a reentry capsule similar in function to the vbk-raduga carried on board progress flights to the mir space station. essentially a miniaturized htv-r capsule, it was carried in the pressurized section of the vehicle. after departing from the station, ground control will remotely command kounotori to release the capsule at an altitude of . the capsule incorporates nitrogen cold gas reaction control system with 3d printed nozzles, and autonomously performs attitude control to mitigate shock during descent. splash-landing off the coast of the ogasawara islands, the capsule will be retrieved by ship. it was then airlifted to ibaraki airport via minami-tori-shima, from where the samples was delivered to researchers. the capsule can contain a total of 20 kg of material (5 kg if the payload requires refrigeration). the capsule has a diameter of 84 cm, a height of 66 cm, and a mass of less than 180 kg. tiger corporation developed the capsule's double vacuum insulated container by applying technology used in vacuum flasks. some samples produced in the microgravity environment of the iss deteriorate easily, thus a quick return to the surface is desired.
for this demonstration flight, samples including iss-manufactured protein crystals are planned to be placed inside.  on 22 october 2015, a high-altitude drop test of the capsule was successfully conducted off the coast of taiki, hokkaido. a second test was conducted on 21 september 2016, with conditions and parameters closer to the actual capsule than the previous year's test. the third and fourth drop tests were done in july and november 2017, respectively.  cargo  kounotori 7 carries about 6200 kg of cargo, consisting of 4300 kg in the pressurized compartment and 1900 kg in the unpressurized compartment.  cargo in the pressurized compartment (plc) include:  nasa express rack 9b and 10b  nasa life sciences glovebox (lsg)  esa life support rack (lsr)  jaxa htv small re-entry capsule (hsrc), and a specifically designed hatch of the pressurized compartment to mount the hsrc on departure from iss.  jaxa experiment loop heat pipe radiator (lhpr)  cubesats to be deployed into orbit from iss: spatium-i, rsp-00, stars-me  in the unpressurized logistic carrier (ulc), kounotori 7 carries 6 lithium-ion batteries orbital replacement units (orus) for replacing the iss's existing nickel-hydrogen batteries. the transportation of replacement batteries is a continuation from the previous kounotori 6, and will continue through to kounotori 9.  operation  launch and rendezvous with iss  initially kounotori 7 was scheduled to launch at 22:32 utc on 10 september 2018, but was postponed due to bad weather forecast at a ground tracking station. it was rescheduled to 13 september 2918 at 21:20 utc, but adverse weather forecast at the launch site pushed one day further to 14 september at 20:59:14 utc.  during the preflight check, a problem was found in the blowoff valve of the launch vehicle second stage oxygen tank, and the launch was scrubbed. after the problem was resolved, the launch was rescheduled to 21 september 2018 at 18:15 utc. bad weather forecast pushed it one day to 17:52 utc on 22 september 2018.  the h-iib launch vehicle carrying kounotori 7 launched at 17:52:27 utc on 22 september 2018. it arrived at the proximity of international space station on 27 september 2018, and the station's space station remote manipulator system (ssrms)
grappled it at 11:36 utc.  operation while berthed to iss  exposed pallet (ep), which carries the replacement batteries for iss, was extracted from kounotori's unpressurized logistics carrier (ulc) by the ssrms (canadarm2) and transferred to the mobile base system (mbs) payload/orbital replacement unit accommodations (poa) on 28 september 2018.  due to the launch failure of soyuz ms-10, planned extravehicular activity to replace the batteries of iss could not be performed while the kounotori 7 was berthed to iss. the exposed pallet will remain at the iss after departure of kounotori 7.  departure from iss and reentry to the earth atmosphere  kounotori 7 was demated from common berthing mechanism (cbm) of harmony module by ssrms at 23:32 utc on 6 november 2018, and it was released into orbit on 7 november 2018, 16:50 utc. after a series of trajectory control manoeuvres, the final deorbit burn completed at 21:14 utc, on 10 november 2018.  separation of htv small re-entry capsule (hsrc) from kounotori 7 was confirmed at 21:24 utc. estimated time of the reentry to earth atmosphere (at 120 km altitude) of kounotori 7 was 21:38 utc, and the splashdown of residual debris at 21:48 - 22:12 utc.  splashdown of hsrc was confirmed at 22:06 utc, and it was retrieved by the recovery ship at 02:25, on 11 november 2018. the ship arrived at minami-tori-shima on 19:50 utc, on 12 november 2018. the retrieved specimen was transported by aircraft to ibaraki airport, and finally arrived at tsukuba space center on 13 november 2018, at 00:42 utc.  references  external links   htv7 mission (jaxa)    h-ii transfer vehicles 2018 in japan spacecraft launched in 2018 supply vehicles for the international space station
microlenecamptus albonotatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by pic in 1925. it is known from vietnam.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1925
konstantin kravchuk and denys molchanov were the defending champions but lost in the first round to toshihide matsui and vishnu vardhan.  yaraslav shyla and andrei vasilevski won the title after defeating mikhail elgin and alexander kudryavtsev 6-4, 6-4 in the final.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  president's cup - doubles 2016 men's doubles
cylindrepomus sexlineatus is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by schultze in 1934. it is known from borneo and the philippines.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1934
fernando chacarelli (18 july 1905 - 26 april 1984) was an argentinean runner who won eight medals at the south american athletics championships, including the gold medal in cross country running in 1931. he was selected for the 1928 summer olympics, but did not compete because the national olympic committee could not sponsor long-distance runners at those games. he was placed 12th in the 10,000 m and 17th in the marathon at the 1932 summer olympics.  chacarelli competed through his career under the surname of cicarelli, though he signed autographs as chacarelli. in 1924 he set a new argentinean record over 3000 m, and in 1926-27 won a bronze and a silver medal in this event at the south american athletics championships. in 1927 he also placed second in the 5000 m, but was disqualified for allegedly elbowing a competitor. chacarelli believed he did not do so, and disappointingly withdrew from the cross-country event. in 1932 he set new south american records over 15 km, 20 km and 25 km distances. he retired next year and later worked as a physical education teacher. an annual marathon race is held in his honor in his native city of cordoba.  references  1905 births 1984 deaths olympic athletes of argentina athletes (track and field) at the 1932 summer olympics argentine male long-distance runners
order of nasr (, meaning divine support) is a military award of iranian armed forces which is awarded by commander-in-chief, supreme leader of iran to recognize distinguished logistics contribution and support of the troops.  recipients    alireza afshar  javad azimifar  mohammad bagheri  mohsen fakhrizadeh (1st class)  valiollah fallahi  hassan firouzabadi (1st class)  mohammad hossein jalali  mousa namjoo  mohsen rafighdoost  hassan rouhani (1st class)  mohammad salimi  qasem-ali zahirnejad  references   military awards and decorations of iran military logistics
chengmen station (; fuzhounese: ) is a metro station of line 1 of the fuzhou metro. it is located at the intersection of fuxia road and guihua road, south of south 3rd-ring road in cangshan district, fuzhou, fujian, china. it started operation on may 18, 2016.  references   railway stations in china opened in 2016 fuzhou metro stations
harpal singh (born 11 october 1983) is a former indian field hockey player who played as a defender for the national team. he was part of the indian team that competed at the 2004 summer olympics. he was born in sirsa  references  external links player profile at bharatiyahockey.org  1983 births living people people from sirsa, haryana indian male field hockey players field hockey players from haryana field hockey players at the 2004 summer olympics olympic field hockey players of india field hockey players at the 2006 asian games asian games competitors for india
maria elena estavillo flores is a mexican economist, academic and former commissioner of the federal telecommunications institute. she holds a bachelor's degree in economics from itesm as well as m.a. and phd in economics from the university of paris. in 2016 and 2017 consecutively, she was featured in forbes magazine as one of the country's most powerful women. she was also listed as one of the most relevant women in the field in the world by  references  bibliography    living people year of birth missing (living people) place of birth missing (living people) mexican economists mexican women economists
the battle song of liberty is a world war i song written by jack yellen and composed by george l. cobb, adapted from "our director" by f.e. bigelow. the song was first published in 1917 by walter jacobs, in boston, massachusetts. the sheet music cover features the statue of liberty amid a sea battle with planes and marching soldiers in the background. it is dedicated to the us army and navy.  the sheet music can be found at the pritzker military museum & library.  references   bibliography international association of rotary clubs, and rotary international. dec 1917. the rotarian. chicago, ill: the association. parker, bernard s. world war i sheet music 1. jefferson: mcfarland & company, inc., 2007. .  paas, john roger. 2014. america sings of war: american sheet music from world war i. .   1917 songs songs of world war i songs written by jack yellen songs with music by george l. cobb songs about freedom
is a japanese professional basketball player.  he plays for the kawasaki brave thunders of the b.league.  he has been a member of japan's national basketball team on many occasions. at the 2016 fiba world olympic qualifying tournament - belgrade, he was japan's top scorer.  flagrant foul he was disqualified from the b.league game at toyama city gymnasium for punching grouses' satoru maeta on december 25, 2019.  career statistics  regular season   |- | align="left" | 2012-13 | align="left" | toshiba | 42|| || 27.9|| .401|| .366|| .800|| 2.1|| 2.9|| 0.7|| 0.1|| 11.7 |- | align="left" | 2013-14 | align="left" | toshiba | 54|| 54|| 25.8|| .454|| .460|| .788|| 2.0|| 2.9|| 1.0|| 0.1||  12.8 |- | align="left" | 2014-15 | align="left" | toshiba | 54|| || 28.2|| .435|| .399|| .881|| 1.9|| 2.3|| 1.2|| 0.1|| 14.1 |- | align="left" | 2015-16 | align="left" | toshiba | 52|| || 28.7|| .428|| .415|| .863|| 2.1|| 2.9|| 0.7|| 0.1||  12.2 |- | align="left" |  2016-17 | align="left" | kawasaki | || || || || || || || || || || |- |}  references  external links  naoto tsuji at the 2016 fiba olympic qualifying tournament  asia-basket.com profile 8 3pointers on a day dinner show  1989 births living people japanese men's basketball players sportspeople from osaka prefecture kawasaki brave thunders players point guards asian games medalists in basketball basketball players at the 2014 asian games asian games bronze medalists for japan medalists at the 2014 asian games basketball players at the 2018 asian games people from habikino
the 2016 ivan hlinka memorial tournament was an under-18 international ice hockey tournament held in breclav, czech republic and bratislava, slovakia from 8 to 13 august 2016.  preliminary round all times are central european summer time (utc+2).  group a  group b  final round  seventh place game  fifth place game  semifinals  bronze medal game  gold medal game  final standings  see also 2016 iihf world u18 championships 2016 world junior championships  external links  ivan hlinka memorial 2016  u18 ivan hlinka memorial 2016  ivan hlinka memorial tournament 2016 international ice hockey competitions hosted by slovakia international ice hockey competitions hosted by the czech republic ivan ivan
juliette reilly is an american singer-songwriter and youtuber.  early life and education reilly was born in columbus, ohio to a mr. and mrs. hayes a reilly, and raised in berkeley heights, new jersey. she graduated from governor livingston high school. in 2016, she graduated phi beta kappa with a degree in music from muhlenberg college.  career reilly has been writing songs since age 11 and she has been singing and performing since age 6. in 2015, she won the grand award at the songdoor songwriting contest for her song "hero." her music videos on youtube have had more than 6.7 million views and her channel has 180,000 subscribers.  personal life reilly resided in berkeley heights, new jersey.  discography  albums   battle cry (2016; two tree records)  i am  (2016; two tree records)  my virtual escape (2018; two tree records)  lygb (love you good bye) (2019; two tree records)  references  external links      20th-century births living people people from berkeley heights, new jersey singer-songwriters from new jersey muhlenberg college alumni american folk-pop singers female youtubers american youtubers american women singer-songwriters 21st-century american singers 21st-century american women singers year of birth missing (living people)
anup kumar paul (born 1986) is an english singer-songwriter and producer from london. a. k. paul came to prominence in 2011 as a contributor to brother jai paul's debut single "btstu (edit)". the following year paul also worked on jai paul's "jasmine (demo)" and "higher res" as well as co-writing for artists sam smith and emeli sande, resulting in winning an ivor novello award in 2013.  a. k. paul, jai paul, and muz azar announced a new project called paul institute in 2016. paul released "landcruisin'", his first solo record, via the platform.  music career  2007-2011 paul is credited as providing additional vocals and sound design on brother jai paul's demo recording "btstu", as well as mastering the track. the demo received widespread blog coverage throughout 2010, leading to significant uk national radio play. in 2011, jai paul's record label xl recordings gave the demo an official release as "btstu (edit)" to favourable reviews.  2012 paul is credited as providing bass guitar and sound design for jai paul's 2012 release, "jasmine (demo)". he also mastered the track, as with jai paul's debut release. "jasmine (demo)" received critical acclaim in the media, with pitchfork featuring the song as a "best new track" within an hour of its appearance on soundcloud, the new york times praising its "prince era sensuality" and the guardian describing the production as "amazing." the song appears on the soundtrack to the 2013 video game, grand theft auto v.  2014 paul collaborated with hackney vocalist nao on a song called "so good". this was the first time paul applied the moniker a. k. paul.  in november, miguel posted a photo of himself with a. k. paul and his brother jai paul on instagram, marking a rare appearance from both artists.  also in november, singer jones collaborated with a. k. on a song called "you". "it's significantly more dialed-down and intimate when compared to "so good", but every bit as captivating. jones' voice is both airy and striking, flowing over paul's warm backdrop of crystalline synths and steady percussions".  2015 a. k. returned with another production credit. this time on miguel's album wildheart for the song "flesh".  2016 in march 2016, a. k. and his brother jai, along with muz azar announced the founding of the
paul institute.  this was accompanied by the release of the single "landcruisin'", a song by a. k. paul, via text messages and a website.  "landcruisin'" is the first release from paul institute. the song premiered on zane lowe's beats 1 radio show before receiving digital, streaming, and 7-inch vinyl releases. most music critics gave the song favorable reviews, comparing it to the works of prince, d'angelo, and miguel, saying it matched expectations. it managed to enter the billboard twitter emerging artists chart.  james vincent mcmorrow reached out to a. k. paul after listening to "landcruisin'", calling it "a huge record". james asked anup to put his own twist on the lead single from we move, "rising water". the result was something extraordinary, james wrote in a statement to complex. "he said to me after it was done that he's never done something like this before, lifted an entire vocal from an already written and produced song and then flipped the chord structure and premise of the song."  2017 paul collaborated with guernsey born dj mura masa with the track "who is it gonna b" on mura masa's debut album. a. k. paul also reached out to british r&b artist hira - working on production on the single "eve" alongside craze and hoax. 2017 also saw the introduction of a new a. k. paul demo track entitled 'be honest' which was aired on an apple beats 1 broadcast of a live mura masa performance and dj set.  2020  after a period of inactivity attributed to a legal fight, paul released the final version of 'be honest' in july 2020.  discography  references  1985 births living people english male singer-songwriters english record producers english multi-instrumentalists english electronic musicians english pop singers english people of indian descent
the barrier is a lost 1917 american silent northwoods drama film directed by edgar lewis and starring mabel julienne scott. it is based on the 1908 rex beach novel the barrier.  the beach novel was filmed again by mgm in 1926 as the barrier starring lionel barrymore.  cast mabel julienne scott as necia / merridy russell simpson as john gaylord / john gale howard hall as dan bennett / ben stark victor sutherland as lt. meade burrell mitchell lewis as poleon doret edward roseman as runnion w. j. gross as "no creek" lee mary carr as alluna (credited as mary kennevan carr)  references  external links  1917 films american silent feature films american films films based on american novels films based on works by rex beach lost american films american drama films 1917 drama films 1917 lost films lost drama films
semper solaris construction, inc. is a residential solar power installation company based in san diego, california, founded by kelly shawhan and john almond in 2012. the company is known for its angle of hiring former marines within the solar industry, as well as its focus on american culture in its marketing.  history semper solaris founder john almond was previously involved in the construction business, and had changed his focus to solar energy upon establishing the company. it was said co-founder kelly shawhan had worked in solar energy since 1989. kelly shawhan was previously a united states marine corps captain. it was reported the company's name choice was based on the marine corps motto "semper fidelis" and an oath that shawhan had with 12 other marines in the philippines in 1985.  in 2015, the company installed a total 0.400 megawatts that year which reportedly fluctuated from 0.200 in 2014. solar manufacturer sunpower gave the company a 'residential national dealer of the year' title in 2015.  in 2016, three semper solaris employees had stopped to save two passengers out of burning box truck, which had driven off route 163's guardrail and onto the route 305 in san diego county. the semper solaris employees, received a "special commendation" from the mayor's office of san diego.  corporate affairs  the company is known for its hiring of former marines and united states military which in return coalesces a company culture based on the values of the said military cultures. homeboy industries's "solar panel training program" have been linked to the company's hiring of ex-convicts.  semper solaris has charted solar power world's top solar contractors list for four years.  jawad khan of business.com's marketing journal reported that the company's supporting of military and local businesses, as well as american made products were a distinct angle in online marketing. khan stated that the company's expression of values would be effective for certain audiences. in 2013, joseph calack of engineering journal rfcafe praised the dealer for its transparent sale of a photovoltaic sunpower solar system.  references   solar energy companies of the united states solar energy in california companies based in san diego energy in the san francisco bay area
suzana tratnik is a slovenian writer, translator, activist, and sociologist. she has published seven short-story collections, four novels, a play, a children's picture book, two works of nonfiction, and an essay collection. her books and short stories have been translated into more than twenty languages while tratnik herself has translated several english books into slovene, including works from authors such as jackie kay, leslie feinberg, judith butler, adrienne rich, ian mcewan, and truman capote.  in 2007 tratnik was awarded the preseren foundation prize, one of slovenia's most prestigious literary awards. her most recent work, games with greta and other stories, is forthcoming in translation from dalkey archive press.  life  suzana tratnik was born in 1963 in murska sobota, in slovenia. she obtained her ba in sociology from the faculty of social sciences at the university of ljubljana, and her ma in gender anthropology from the institutum studiorum humanitatis in ljubljana, where she lives and works. tratnik was deeply involved in the 1980s lgbt-rights movement in yugoslavia and much of work continues to focus upon lgbt activism and scholarship in contemporary slovenia.  works   short stories  pod niclo (below zero, 1997) na svojem dvoriscu (in one's own backyard, 2003) vzporednice (parallels, 2005) cesa nisem nikoli razumela na vlaku (things i've never understood on the train, 2008) dva svetova (two worlds, 2010) rezervat (reservation, 2012)games with greta and other stories (2016. dalkey archive press)  novelsime mi je damjan (my name is damjan, 2001)tretji svet (third world, 2007)  children'szafuskana ganca (the hany rattie, 2010)  dramaime mi je damjan (my name is damjan, 2002)lep dan se naprej'' (have a nice day, 2012)  books of suzana tratnik in translation   short stories  references  1963 births slovenian novelists 21st-century novelists 21st-century slovenian writers living people
jalandhar central is one of the 117 legislative assembly constituencies of punjab state in india.  it is part of jalandhar district.  members of the legislative assembly  election results  2022  2017  see also  list of constituencies of the punjab legislative assembly  jalandhar district  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india jalandhar district
the district officer (abbreviated to d.o.), was a commissioned officer of one of the colonial governments of the british empire, from the mid-1930s also a member of the colonial service of the united kingdom, who was responsible for a district of one of the overseas territories of the empire.  role the district officer was an administrator and often also a magistrate and was the link between the professional and technical services of the colonial government and the people of his district. he was at the heart of colonial administration throughout most of the british empire, although not in british india, where the same functions were carried out by members of the indian civil service, nor in the self-governing dominions.  district officers wore uniforms, according to the climate, but their formal tunic with gold braid was usually reserved for ceremonial occasions.  until the 1930s, each overseas possession had its own administrative service, and prospective district officers needed to apply to one or more of them. once in post, an officer wishing to transfer to another colony or british protectorate had to make a new application to its government. however, in the 1930s a unified colonial service was created, with a number of sub-services, and each of its officers was a member of the civil service of a particular territory and also of one of the sub-services of the colonial service managed by the colonial office, based in whitehall.  career progression before being appointed, a candidate was first a district officer cadet, undergoing a rigorous training, and was then promoted to assistant district officer, usually after two years of successful probation and after passing examinations. on being appointed as a district officer, he took on the administration of a district, usually in the territory of the empire where he was.  because of the number of districts, many district officers remained in the same role until leaving the colonial service. if they were promoted, they became first district commissioners, then provincial commissioners. some rose to the pinnacle of being colonial governors, although men were also appointed as governors whose previous careers had been in other services. in particular, the governors of hong kong, gibraltar, malta, and bermuda were almost invariably senior british army or royal navy officers.  notable district officers sir colin allan (1921-1993), a new zealander who was a district officer in the solomon islands and later governor of the seychelles reginald applin (1869-1957), a district officer of the north borneo chartered company, later a conservative member of parliament william r. bell (1876-1927), australian-born district officer of malaita
in the british solomon islands ian blelloch (1901-1982), a district officer in malaya sir jack boles (1925-2013), a district officer and district commissioner in north borneo,  later director-general of the national trust anastasios christodoulou (1932-2002), a district officer in tanganyika, later secretary general of the association of commonwealth universities oscar cook (1888-1952), a district officer in north borneo, later a writer sir douglas hall, 14th baronet (1909-2004), a district officer in africa, later governor of british somaliland edwin richard hallifax (1874-1950), a district officer in hong kong, later acting colonial secretary mark herdman (1932-2015), a district officer in kenya, later governor of the british virgin islands tom iremonger (1916-1998), a district officer in the western pacific, later a conservative member of parliament gwilliam iwan jones (1904-1995), a district officer in bende, nigeria sir donald luddington (1920-2009), a district officer in hong kong, later high commissioner for the western pacific and governor of the solomon islands  sir foley newns (1909-1998), a district officer in nigeria, later cabinet secretary sir james pollock (1883-1982), a district officer in ramallah, later district commissioner for jerusalem and northern ireland senator victor purcell (1896-1965), a district officer on christmas island, later an academic tunku abdul rahman (1903-1990), a district officer of kedah, later prime minister of malaya and of malaysia jerome udoji (1912-2010), a district officer in nigeria, becoming the first african to be appointed in the colonial service, later nigerian minister of finance harry graham willis (1875-1943), a district officer, later provincial commissioner, in rhodesia keith wookey (1912-1963), a district officer and later resident in north borneo  see also sanders of the river (a film of 1935 about a district commissioner in nigeria) the scarlet spear (a film of 1954 about a district officer in africa) pacific destiny (a film of 1956 about a district officer cadet in oceania)  references  further reading john morley, colonial postscript: the diary of a district officer 1935-56 (london: radcliffe press, 1992) edgar wallace, sanders of the river (1911) k. g. bradley, the diary of a district officer (1943) arthur grimble, a pattern of islands (1952)  external links colonial records - national archives anthony kirk-greene, the district officer in the african colonial novel
at britishempire.co.uk  governance of the british empire
juan martin "bai" elorde (born 3 november 1984) is a filipino boxer. he is a former wbo asia pacific featherweight and wbo oriental lightweight champion. he is managed and promoted by his father johnny elorde.  early years juan martin elorde is the eldest of the three sons of johnny elorde, and the grandson of gabriel elorde. his brother juan miguel elorde is also a boxer. the other is nico elorde, a professional basketball player in the philippines playing in the pba.  elorde and his brothers were introduced to boxing by his father as a way to induce discipline. he started fighting in amateur boxing at age 15 and eventually won gold medal in the national open.  notable fights bai defeated indonesian musa letding to win the vacant wbo oriental lightweight title via unanimous decision on 25 march 2016. bai had a tough time closing in on letding but was able to counter the latter by his stinging jabs. he won 98-92 in all of the judges' score cards. the title is elorde's second regional title. the previous was the wbo asia pacific super featherweight title he held from march 2013 to march 2016.  professional boxing record  references  filipino male boxers boxers from metro manila lightweight boxers 1984 births people from paranaque living people
mirjam novero (1915-1996) was a finnish film actress. she was the wife of the director edvin laine.  selected filmography  references  bibliography   soila, tytti. the cinema of scandinavia. wallflower press, 2005.  external links     1915 births 1996 deaths actresses from tampere people from hame province (grand duchy of finland) finnish stage actresses finnish film actresses
bara aslam is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 7 km from nakodar, 41 km from kapurthala, 31.7 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 150 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  pajian railway station is the nearest train station however, jalandhar city train station is 37 km away from the village. the village is 67.8 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 118 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
roda viva is a brazilian talk show produced and broadcast by tv cultura since 29 september 1986, traditionally on monday nights, currently airing at 10 pm (bst). several political leaders, writers, philosophers, artists, and notable people were interviewed in the show.  roda viva features a host presenter, who serves as a mediator, and several journalists from news outlets. in the program the guest sits on a swivel chair in the middle of a circle of journalists, who are in a higher position. the interviewed person turns to answer the journalist asking the question. the studio is surrounded by cameras, so the guest is always facing at least one of them. the mood of the show is of an informal conversation.  among the people interviewed in roda viva were istvan meszaros, marina silva, eneas carneiro, luis carlos prestes, fernando henrique cardoso, jose sarney, fernando collor, fidel castro, itamar franco, ciro gomes, roberto campos, eduardo campos, jose saramago, tom jobim, leonel brizola, luiz inacio lula da silva, dilma rousseff, newton cruz, cabo anselmo, jimmy wales, hugo chavez, noam chomsky, yuval noah harari, and mario vargas llosa.  hosts  awards and nominations  references  external links   official website  memoria roda viva (episode archive)  brazilian television talk shows 1986 brazilian television series debuts portuguese-language television shows
an open format is a file format for storing digital data, defined by a published specification usually maintained by a standards organization, and which can be used and implemented by anyone. for example, an open format can be implemented by both proprietary and free and open source software, using the typical software licenses used by each. in contrast to open formats, closed formats are considered trade secrets. open formats are also called free file formats if they are not encumbered by any copyrights, patents, trademarks or other restrictions (for example, if they are in the public domain) so that anyone may use them at no monetary cost for any desired purpose.  open formats (in alphabetical order) include:  multimedia  imaging apng - it allows for animated png files that work similarly to animated gif files. avif - an image format using av1 compression. flif - free lossless image format. gbr - a 2d binary vector image file format, the de facto standard in the printed circuit board (pcb) industry gif - compuserve's graphics interchange format (openly published specification, but patent-encumbered by a third party; became free when patents expired in 2004) jpeg - a lossy image format widely used to display photographic images, standardized by iso/iec jpeg 2000 - an image format standardized by iso/iec jpeg xl - an image format designed to outperform and replace existing formats. especially legacy jpeg. supports both lossy and lossless compression.  mng - moving pictures, based on png openexr - a high dynamic range imaging image file format, released as an open standard along with a set of software tools created by industrial light and magic (ilm). openraster - a format for raster graphics editors that saves layers png - a raster image format standardized by iso/iec svg - a vector image format standardized by w3c webp - image format developed by google xpm - image file format used by the x window system qoi - a simple, fast and lossless open source image file format https://qoiformat.org/  audio alac - lossless audio codec, previously a proprietary format of apple inc. flac - lossless audio codec daisy digital talking book - a talking book format musepack - an audio codec mp3 - lossy audio codec, previously patented ogg - container for vorbis, flac, speex and opus (audio formats) & theora (a video
format), each of which is an open format opus - a lossy audio compression format developed by the ietf. suitable for voip, videoconferencing (just audio), music transmission over the internet and streaming applications (just audio). speex - speech codec vorbis - a lossy audio compression format. wavpack - "hybrid" (lossless/lossy) audio codec  video av1 dirac - a video compression format supporting both lossless and lossy compression  matroska (mkv) - container for all type of multimedia formats (audio, video, images, subtitles) webm - a video/audio container format theora - a lossy video compression format.  various dae - a 3d model/scene format standardized by khronos. gltf - a 3d model/scene format standardized by khronos. cmml - timed metadata and subtitles smil - a media playlisting format and multimedia integration language vrml/x3d - realtime 3d data formats standardized by iso/iec xspf - a playlist format for multimedia  text   plain text - encoded in numerous non-proprietary encodings, such as ascii  csv - comma-separated values, commonly used for spreadsheets or simple databases  html - hypertext markup language (html) is the main markup language for creating web pages and other information that can be displayed in a web browser.  unicode transformation formats - text encodings with support for all common languages and scripts  utf-8 - byte oriented and ascii compatible  utf-16 - 16-bit oriented  markdown - lightweight markup language that converts to html dvi - device independent (tex) docbook - xml-based standard to publish books darwin information typing architecture - adaptable xml-based format for technical documentation, maintained by the oasis consortium epub - e-book standard by the international digital publishing forum (idpf) fictionbook - xml-based e-book format, which originated and gained popularity in russia latex - document markup language office open xml - a formatted text format (iso/iec 29500:2008); see licensing for details opendocument - a formatted text format (iso/iec 26300:2006); see licensing for details openxps - open standard for a page description language and a fixed-document format  pdf started as a proprietary standard. pdf version 1.7 was standardized
as iso 32000-1 in 2008. however, some technologies indispensable for the full implementation of iso 32000-1 are defined only by adobe and remain proprietary (e.g. adobe xml forms architecture, adobe javascript). iso 32000-2:2017 (pdf 2.0) does not include these dependencies. various subsets of pdf have been standardized to meet a variety of needs, including iso 15930 (pdf/x), iso 19005 (pdf/a), iso 14829 (pdf/ua) and iso 24517 (pdf/e). the pdf association has also standardized pdf/raster). postscript - a page description language and programming language, started as a proprietary standard but is now a public specification. xhtml - xhtml (extensible hypertext markup language) is a family of xml markup languages that mirror or extend versions of the widely used hypertext markup language (html), the language in which web pages are written. zim - a file format that stores wiki content for offline usage.  archiving and compression  7z - for archiving and/or compression b1 - for archiving and/or compression bzip2 - for compression gzip - for compression lzip - for compression maff - for web page archiving, based on zip paq - for compression sqx - for archiving and/or compression tar - for archiving xz - for compression zip - for archiving and/or compression; the base format is in the public domain, but newer versions have some patented features  other    css - style sheet format usually used with (x)html, standardized by w3c  djvu - file format for scanned images or documents  eas3 - binary file format for floating point data  elf - executable and linkable format  freeotfe - container for encrypted data  gpx - gps exchange format - for describing waypoints, tracks and routes  hierarchical data format - multi-platform data format for storing multidimensional arrays, among other data structures  html/xhtml - markup language for web pages (iso/iec 15445:2000)  icalendar - calendar data format  ifc - data model describing building and construction industry data  json - object notation, subset of yaml and correct ecmascript statement  ltfs - linear tape file system  netcdf - for scientific data  nzb - for multipart binary files on usenet  rdf - graph based data model standardized by w3c
, includes 7 standard serializations, n-triples, n-quads, turtle, trig, rdf/xml, json-ld and rdfa  rss - syndication  sdxf - the structured data exchange format  sfv - checksum format  luks - disk-encryption specification originally intended for linux  truecrypt - discontinued container for encrypted data  woff - font file format used in webpages  xml - a general-purpose markup language, standardized by w3c  yaml - human readable data serialization format  references  external links  openformats  computer file formats   computing-related lists
theresa matauaina fitzpatrick (born 25 february 1995) is a new zealand rugby union player.  fitzpatrick undertakes medical studies at the university of auckland. she represents new zealand in rugby sevens. she made her sevens debut at the 2016 usa women's sevens. she was named in the sevens squad for the 2016 summer olympics.  fitzpatrick is the younger sister of current silver fern and samoan sevens player sulu tone-fitzpatrick. she was named in the 2017 women's rugby world cup squad and was part of the winning team of the 2019 women's rugby super series.  references  external links  black ferns profile    1995 births living people new zealand female rugby union players new zealand international rugby union players new zealand female rugby sevens players new zealand international rugby sevens players new zealand maori rugby union players rugby sevens players at the 2016 summer olympics olympic rugby sevens players of new zealand olympic silver medalists for new zealand olympic medalists in rugby sevens medalists at the 2016 summer olympics rugby sevens players at the 2018 commonwealth games commonwealth games rugby sevens players of new zealand commonwealth games gold medallists for new zealand commonwealth games medallists in rugby sevens rugby sevens players at the 2020 summer olympics medalists at the 2020 summer olympics olympic gold medalists for new zealand
oak bay is the northernmost section of passamaquoddy bay, into which the st. croix river empties. its extent fluctuates with the bay of fundy tidal changes, so that its northern section changes from approximately  in depth at high tide to exposed ocean floor at low tide.  the rural community of oak bay lies on the shores of this embayment.  history  located in the centre of the bay is spoon island, named so as it resembles an overturned spoon.  references  bays of new brunswick landforms of charlotte county, new brunswick
the native sound is an independent record label based in new york city. it was founded in 2013 by julio anta. the label has released a number of dream pop, shoegaze and folk music releases on cassette tape, limited edition vinyl, and digital download. the label's roster includes john vanderslice, andrew koji shiraki, miserable, king woman, funeral advantage, plastic flowers, sheer, drowse and vow.  discography  references  external links the native sound on bandcamp  american record labels record labels established in 2013 american independent record labels
nobody dies twice (spanish: nadie muere dos veces) is a 1953 mexican thriller film directed by luis spota and starring abel salazar, luis aguilar and lilia del valle.  cast  abel salazar as raul garcia / ricardo    luis aguilar as alberto    lilia del valle as irma    ramon gay as arturo robles    pedro vargas as cantante    fernando fernandez as fernando   enedina diaz de leon as enedina    salvador quiroz as don antonio  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1950s thriller films mexican thriller films mexican films spanish-language films mexican black-and-white films
suzuki motorcycle india, private limited (smi) is the wholly owned indian subsidiary of suzuki, japan. it was the third suzuki automotive venture in india, after tvs suzuki (1982-2001) and maruti suzuki (1982). in 1982, the joint-venture between suzuki motor corporation and tvs motor company incorporated and started production of two wheelers in india. in 2001, after separating ways with tvs motor company, the company was re-entered as suzuki motorcycle india, private limited (smi), in 2006. the company has set up a manufacturing facility at gurgaon, haryana with an annual capacity of 5,40,000 units.  vehicles  motorcycles  gixxer 150  gixxer sf 150  intruder 155 abs  gixxer 250  gixxer sf 250  scooters  access 125  access 125 se  burgman street  avenis 125  sports bikes  hayabusa gsx 1300r  v-strom 650  gsx-s1000f abs  gsx-r1000 abs  gsx-r1000r abs  gsx-s1000 abs intruder m1800r  intruder m1800r boss edition  v-strom-1000 abs  atvs  ozark 250  quadsport z400  discontinued  scooters  suzuki swish  suzuki let's  motorcycles/sports bikes suzuki gs150r suzuki hayate 110 suzuki heat 125 suzuki inazuma 250 suzuki slingshot 125 suzuki slingshot plus 125 suzuki zeus 125  references  suzuki indian subsidiaries of foreign companies manufacturing companies of india motorcycle manufacturers of india
khary d. penebaker (born october 22, 1977) is an american businessman, political candidate, and member of the democratic national committee.  personal life  penebaker was born in cincinnati, ohio in 1977. penebaker's mother joyce committed suicide by self-inflicted gunshot on september 9, 1979. he graduated from marquette university high school in 1996 and received a degree in marketing from the university of wisconsin-milwaukee in 2001, where he was a successful athlete in track and field.  career  penebaker is an american businessman and entrepreneur in the roofing industry. he has received industry awards such as 2004 supplier of the year award from the wisconsin supplier development council, madison faair award recipient (focused affirmative action initiative and results); recognizing accomplishments in workforce diversity (2010) and the 2010 minority business contractor of the year award from wisconsin's daily reporter. he has volunteered as a spokesperson for several crime and safety-oriented organizations, including moms demand action and everytown for gun safety, and he is a strong advocate for suicide prevention.  2016 us congressional campaign  as a member of the democratic party, penebaker ran for the united states house of representatives in wisconsin's 5th congressional district. the district includes the entirety of washington and jefferson counties, and portions of waukesha, dodge, milwaukee, and walworth counties. penebaker faced republican incumbent jim sensenbrenner. penebaker lost to sensenbrenner, receiving 29.29% of the vote to sensenbrenner's 66.7%, with 390,844 votes cast.  | colspan="6" style="text-align:center;background-color: #e9e9e9;"| general election, november 8, 2016  gun ownership background checks  penebaker is an advocate for universal background checks for gun sales, including private and online sales. according to penebaker, coordinating the federal, state, and local governments with healthcare professionals and insurance providers to establish better long-term mental health care for those who need it. during his campaign, penebaker pushed to model federal legislation off wisconsin's recently passed bipartisan domestic violence law, the safe act, to keep guns away from domestic abusers. penebaker also pushed for firearm restrictions for suspected persons on the federal no-fly list and other terror watch lists, while supporting an appeal process in case a name has been added to such lists in error.  dnc representative  penebaker was elected as a representative to the democratic national committee in
a june 2017 special election. he succeeded fellow democrat jason rae who was appointed secretary of the democratic national committee.  references  university of wisconsin-milwaukee alumni businesspeople from wisconsin wisconsin democrats living people 1977 births 2020 united states presidential electors
zona is a bittorrent client for watching streaming video content. described as a "popcorn time beater", the application provides a free alternative to subscription-based video streaming services (such as netflix). in addition to on-demand movies and television series, zona offers streaming music, live television channels, news, live sports, and games. zona has been criticized for being closed-source as well as having an installer that has been implicated as malware.  see also  popcorn time  porn time  comparison of bittorrent clients  references  2014 software bittorrent clients media players peer-to-peer streaming media systems streaming software video on demand services
the popular front for justice in the congo (, or fpjc) is an armed group operating in the south of ituri province in the democratic republic of the congo (drc), where it has participated in the ituri conflict. it formed in september 2008 from a splintering of the front for patriotic resistance in ituri (frpi) and coalescing of other armed actors, including combatants from the nationalist and integrationist front, who had resisted national disarmament campaigns. the group has expressed opposition to a 2006 attempt to resolve the ituri conflict, which granted amnesty to former participants in the conflict. in 2011, the group was estimated to have no more than 100 members. whereas the frpi was closely linked to the ngiti ethnolinguistic group, the fpjc incorporated members of more varied ethnic backgrounds.  in october 2008, the fpjc clashed with congolese government forces near bunia in ituri district, displacing thousands of local residents before it was pushed back by government troops and monusco, the united nations peacekeeping mission in the drc. in march 2009, the fpjc launched attacks on villages southeast of bunia, which were followed by counterattacks from the frpi. the un refugee agency blamed fighting between the rebel groups for the displacement of more than 30,000 congolese in ituri. government forces launched an operation in 2010 to repel the fpjc and other rebel groups operating in ituri and to relocate at-risk populations. an early leader of the fpjc, sharif mandu, was arrested on september 2, 2010, in arua, a town in western uganda. another fpjc leader, jean-claude baraka, was arrested around the same time. the arrest of mandu was followed by a power struggle between his lieutenants. david mbadu took control after his rival cobra matata, a former fpri commander and briefly the fpjc leader, disappeared for a time. matata surrendered to military forces in november 2014 and was arrested in january 2015.  in 2011, fpjc combatants stole national election materials from voter registration centers in ituri, though did not otherwise block voter registration. the un reported that the group has engaged in abductions and forced recruitment of adults and children. a resolution of the european parliament in 2010 accused the fpjc, along with other armed groups active in eastern congo, of "causing, either directly or indirectly, thousands of deaths, unbearable suffering, poverty and internally displaced people (idps) every month." in 2011, custody of sharif manda was
transferred to the international criminal court to have manda testify as a witness in the case against germain katanga, the former fpri leader accused of war crimes and crimes against humanity.  notes   2008 establishments in the democratic republic of the congo military units and formations established in 2008 paramilitary organisations based in the democratic republic of the congo military units and factions of the ituri conflict rebel groups in the democratic republic of the congo
chak bundala is a village in shahkot in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from shahkot,  from nakodar,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  shahkot malisian station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
macrocoma lefevrei is a species of leaf beetle of saudi arabia, oman, yemen, iran and egypt. it was first described by joseph sugar baly in 1878.  references  lefevrei beetles of asia beetles described in 1878 insects of the arabian peninsula taxa named by joseph sugar baly
cyphocerastis elegans is a species of grasshoppers in the family acrididae found in africa.  references  external links     insects described in 1929 acrididae insects of africa
margaret loyd jarman "marney" hagood (october 26, 1907 - august 13, 1963) was an american sociologist and demographer who "helped steer sociology away from the armchair and toward the calculator". she wrote the books mothers of the south (1939) and  statistics for sociologists (1941), and later became president of the population association of america and of the rural sociological society.  early life and education hagood was born on october 26, 1907 in newton county, georgia, where she grew up. she was one of six children of lewis jarman, a mathematician who became vice president of queens college in charlotte, north carolina and later president of mary baldwin college in virginia. after acting as a teenage country preacher, briefly studying at the chicora college for women in columbia, south carolina and at agnes scott college in atlanta, georgia, marrying a dental student, giving birth to a daughter in 1927, teaching in a schoolhouse in brewton, alabama, and separating from her husband, she earned a bachelor's degree in 1929 from queens college. she continued her studies at emory university, where she was awarded a master's degree in 1930.  she taught mathematics at a seminary in washington, d.c. until the mid-1930s, when she returned to her graduate studies at the university of north carolina, studying sociology under the supervision of her father's childhood neighbor, howard w. odum. her studies at this time concerned depression-era white farm women in the us south, including analyses of fertility and contraception usage. she completed her doctorate in 1937.  career and later life hagood continued to work in the unc  institute for research in social science from 1937 until 1942. beginning in world war ii, in 1942, she moved to the united states department of agriculture, in its bureau of agricultural economics, where she performed statistical analyses of farming people. although she originally planned to remain there only for the duration of the war, and then return to academia, she ended up continuing to work at the usda, and was promoted to head of the farm population and rural life division in 1952.  her work at the bureau of agricultural economics took her through a time of upheaval as the bureau shifted from qualitative to more quantitative analyses, and included the development of new methods for calibrating standards of living across different regions of the country.  she retired in 1962, and died of a heart attack at the home of her brother in san diego, california on august 13, 1963.  books hagood published the book
mothers of the south: portraiture of the white tenant farm  (1939) based on interviews she conducted in the field studies for her doctoral research. it presents both data and the life stories of approximately 240 women, split between the piedmont and deep south, concluding that their high fertility "is socially undesirable". sarah case (2004) writes that the book is "a generally sympathetic and thoughtful portrait" and that hagood "was unique and pathbreaking in acknowledging the gender inequities" that affected these women's lives. the book was reprinted by greenwood press in 1969 and again by the university of virginia press in 1996.  she wrote her second book, the textbook statistics for sociologists (1941), based on a course she taught at unc.  after visiting the university of wisconsin in 1951, she published a revised edition of statistics for sociologists (with daniel o. price) in 1952. denton e. morrison and ramon e. henkel (2006) write that this book "was an early and continuing influence on sociological practice in statistics in general and significance tests in particular".  recognition in 1949 hagood was elected as a fellow of the american statistical association. she became president of the population association of america in 1955 and of the rural sociological society in 1956, the first female president of that organization. in 1955, queens college awarded her an honorary doctorate.  references  1907 births 1963 deaths american women sociologists american sociologists american women statisticians american demographers queens university of charlotte alumni emory university alumni university of north carolina alumni fellows of the american statistical association rural sociologists 20th-century american women
aham okeke (born 19 august 1969 in nigeria) is a nigerian-born norwegian former sprinter, who represented the clubs ik tjalve, il i bul and if hellas. he has won the 100 metres national championship six times. he set the national record on 100 metres five times, with a personal best of 10.26 seconds. his personal record in the 200 metres, also national record at the time, was 20.75 seconds.  okeke competed at the 1987 european junior championships, the 1990 european championships, the 1994 european indoor championships, the 2000 european indoor championships, the 2001 world championships, the 2002 european indoor championships and the 2002 european championships (interchangeably in the 60 metres, 100 metres, 200 metres or the 4x100 metres relay) without reaching the final round in any of the events.  okeke tested positive for doping on two occasions in the 1990s, receiving bans of 1 month and 30 months respectively. in 2006, okeke came out of retirement to qualify for the 2006 european championships, when the norwegian anti-doping agency claimed a test taken on 20 july contained 20 times the highest allowed level of testosterone. he was given a lifetime ban from all sports.  references  external links  1969 births living people nigerian emigrants to norway norwegian male sprinters nigerian male sprinters world athletics championships athletes for norway norwegian sportspeople in doping cases doping cases in athletics
the 2011/12 fis ski jumping continental cup was the 21st in a row (19th official) continental cup winter season in ski jumping for men and the 7th for ladies. this was also the 10th summer continental cup season for men and the 4th for ladies.  lower competitive circuits this season included the world cup and grand prix.  men  summer  winter  ladies  summer  winter  men's standings  summer  winter  ladies' standings  summer  winter  europa cup vs. continental cup  last two seasons of europa cup in 1991/92 and 1992/93 are recognized as first two continental cup seasons by international ski federation, although continental cup under this name officially started first season in 1993/94 season.  references  fis ski jumping continental cup 2011 in ski jumping 2012 in ski jumping
the 1935 western state teachers hilltoppers football team represented western state teachers college (later renamed western michigan university) as an independent during the 1935 college football season.  in their seventh season under head coach mike gary, the hilltoppers compiled a 5-3 record and were outscored by their opponents, 91 to 78. guard frank secory and quarterback harold reynolds were the team captains.  schedule  references  western state teachers western michigan broncos football seasons western state teachers hilltoppers football
eunidia auricollis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1957.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1957
hosam aiesh (, , born 14 april 1995) is a professional footballer who plays as a right winger for ifk goteborg and the syria national team. born in sweden, aiesh represented them at both youth and senior level before switching his allegiance to syria in 2022.  club career hosam aiesh began his career in academy of swedish side bk hacken. after spending a season on loan at the varbergs bols in 2014, he joined ostersunds fk on 1 january 2015 on a free transfer. however on 1 april 2016 he re-joined varbergs bols on loan until 1 july 2016.  in 2017, aiesh managed to win his first major trophy, the 2017 svenska cupen, after ostersund defeated ifk norrkoping 4-1 in the final, as a result of the victory, also qualifying for the 2017-18 uefa europa league, marking their first appearance in a european competition tournament. in their europa league debut in the second qualifying round on 13 july 2017. ostersund earned a shock 2-0 victory against turkish giants galatasaray at the jamtkraft arena and eliminated them after a 1-1 draw in istanbul.  aiesh's teammate saman ghoddos scored 2 goals in a win against paok on 24 august saw them qualify for the group stage at the first time of asking,  after losing only one game in their campaign, they finished second in a group featuring athletic bilbao and hertha berlin, becoming the first swedish club to progress beyond the europa league group stage since uefa rebranded the uefa cup into europa league.  ostersund were knocked out by english side arsenal, after ostersund lost the 1st leg 2-0, they beat arsenal in the 2nd leg at the emirates stadium with a 2-1 victory after a goal from aiesh and his teammate ken sema.  hosam aiesh joined ifk goteborg in 2019.  international career  sweden born in sweden to palestinian syrian parents, aiesh is eligible to represent palestine, syria and sweden. in august 2017, he declared his intent to represent palestine. however, he was called up for sweden on 3 december 2018 and earned his only cap on 9 january 2019 when he started for sweden in a friendly against finland. due to the fact that his only cap for sweden came in a friendly, he remained eligible for syria and palestine.  syria on 1 february 2022, aiesh debuted for syria in a 2-0 loss to south korea in qualification towards the 2022 fifa world
cup entering the match as a substitute in the 60th minute for amro jenyat.  career statistics  club  notes  honours ostersunds fk svenska cupen: 2017  references  external links      1995 births living people association football midfielders dual internationalists (football) ostersunds fk players bk hacken players varbergs bois players ifk goteborg players swedish footballers sweden youth international footballers sweden international footballers swedish people of palestinian descent swedish people of syrian descent syrian people of palestinian descent allsvenskan players superettan players sportspeople from gothenburg
mark andrew butchers (born 1959) is a british anglican priest who served as archdeacon of barnstaple, 2015-2020.  he was educated at trinity college, cambridge (ba, 1981) and king's college london (mth, 1990; phd, 2006). ordained in 1988 after a period of study at chichester theological college, he began his career with curacies in chelsea and mitcham. after this he was team rector of north tawton, bondleigh and sampford courtenay with honeychurch then chaplain and fellow of keble college, oxford. from 2010 to 2015 he was vicar of wolvercote; and from 2012 also area dean of oxford. on 6 september 2020, he became principal of the south west ministry training course.  references  1959 births archdeacons of barnstaple living people alumni of trinity college, cambridge alumni of king's college london alumni of chichester theological college
umm al-hamam or um al-hamam () is a village south of qatif, saudi arabia.  the village is about 3 km from the persian gulf coast, to the east. it has a population of about 25,000 people. most of the residents work in the oil industry, farming, and fishing. to the north is al-quaa, to the northeast is al-zawikiyah, and to the south is al-jableh.  references  external links  umm al-hamam website  populated places in eastern province, saudi arabia qatif
bitlan is a village in nakodar in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 19 km from nakodar, 53 km from kapurthala, 44 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 156 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  nakodar railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 36 km away from the village. the village is 65 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 133 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district villages in nakodar tehsil
giannetto valli (1869-1927) was an italian politician. he was mayor of rome, kingdom of italy (1921-1922).  see also  references  1869 births 1927 deaths 20th-century italian politicians mayors of rome
william a. campos (born october 7, 1974) is an american politician from prince george's county, maryland convicted for corruption in 2018. he served in the maryland house of delegates and on the prince george's county council.  early life born in el salvador, campos attended eleanor roosevelt high school in greenbelt, maryland; the university of maryland, college park, receiving a b.a. in ancient art history & archaeology; and the university of maryland, university college, receiving a b.s. in computer studies & information systems.  political career prior to holding office, campos in 2002 was an aide to then-delegate victor r. ramirez, district 47, prince george's county.   campos represented district 2 on the prince george's county council for ten years, winning a special election in 2004 when his predecessor resigned, and subsequently being elected to two four-year terms. subject to term limits, he then ran for, and won, the district 47b seat in the house of delegates. he served in the house of delegates for nine months.   campos resigned his house seat on september 10, 2015 for "personal reasons", citing "his recent marriage, desire to start a family and lack of employment outside the state house."  conviction on january 5, 2017, campos plead guilty to accepting about $40,000 to $50,000 in bribes and kickbacks in exchange for official favors. as part of the plea agreement, campos was required to give up the money he collected in the scheme and pay restitution of at least $340,000. he also faced up 15 years in prison for the bribery and conspiracy charges. campos was sentenced in may 2018 to 54 months in prison, to be followed by three years of supervised release. it was reported in june 2020 that amid the covid-19 pandemic campos was transferred to a halfway house in the baltimore area to complete his sentence more than a year before his projected release date.  election results  2004 {| class="wikitable" |+ 2004 prince george's county council general election results, district 2 |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 16,308 || democratic || 88.5% (winner) |- | tommy s. priestley || 2,119 || republican || 11.5% |}  2006 {| class="wikitable" |+ 2006 prince george's county council general election results, district 2 |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 10,917 || democratic || 97.9% (winner
) |- | anthony cicoria || 159 || democratic (write in) || 1.4% |- | other write-ins || 74 ||  || 0.7% |}  2010 {| class="wikitable" |+ 2010 prince george's county council primary election results, district 2 |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 4,041 || democratic || 78.8% (winner) |- | dottie mcneill || 784 || democratic || 15.3% |- | sabrena turner|| 305 || democratic || 5.9% |}  {| class="wikitable" |+ 2010 prince george's county council general election results, district 2 |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 11,198 || democratic || 99.4% (winner) |- | other write-ins|| 67 ||  || 0.6% |}  2014 {| class="wikitable" |+ 2014 house of delegates primary election results, district 47b |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 1,193 || democratic || 100.0% (winner) |}  {| class="wikitable" |+ 2014 house of delegates general election results, district 47b |- ! candidate !! votes !! party !! percentage |- | will campos || 3,182 || democratic || 99.3% (winner) |- | other write-ins || 21 ||  || 0.7% |}  references  1974 births american politicians of salvadoran descent hispanic and latino american state legislators in maryland living people maryland democrats maryland politicians convicted of crimes members of the maryland house of delegates people from prince george's county, maryland salvadoran emigrants to the united states university of maryland, college park alumni university of maryland global campus alumni
ted ryko, born edward frederick reichenbach (26 september 1892 - 2 september 1968) was an australian cyclist and photographer who broke the world record for cycling from adelaide to darwin in may 1914.  early life  ryko was born in woorak, near jeparit in the mallee, victoria to ludwig carl reichenbach and alma johanna reichenbach. his parents were of german descent but were both born in australia.  world record  at 21 years of age, ryko, together with companion john fahey left the adelaide post office in may 1914 determined to break the world record for cycling from adelaide to darwin. even stopping to take photographs of the journey, ryko broke the record reaching the darwin post office shortly after noon on thursday 11 june 1914. the journey took him 28 days, 15 hours and 30 minutes, beating the previous record by 15 hours and 23 minutes. fahey sprained his ankle near the border of south australia and the northern territory and was unable to complete the journey.  photography  after setting the record, ryko opened a photography studio in cavenagh street in darwin. he sold photographic postcards of which he produced over 3000, selling them for fourpence each. he traveled extensively throughout the territory, often on bicycle photographing indigenous people, ceremonial life and remote industries such as buffalo hunting. many scenes were often carefully constructed. in december 1915, ryko sold the business, to concentrate on his photography, travelling extensively across the northern territory throughout arnhem land, as well as fort dundas, goulburn island mission and melville island. ryko's bike was painted by the warruqi people in a rock art shelter in arnhem land.  ryko left the territory in, moving to sydney. his collection of photographs and postcards were stolen from his home. they are now extremely rare. of the nearly 3000 photographs ryko took during his time in the northern territory, only a couple of hundred remain. they are now sought-after by private collectors, libraries. archives and museums.  later life  ryko spent time at the sydney sanitarium in wahroonga in new south wales in 1919 due to mental health issues. he married irene watson on 20 april 1920. he worked on the sydney harbour bridge construction and continued to write articles for the sydney morning herald.  ryko returned to the northern territory in 1940 working on the commonwealth railways as a fettler in katherine and the old ghan railway at the finke, where he was responsible for the water pumping station. during this period he collected flora contributing more than 475
plants to the herbarium in adelaide.  ryko spent the last two years of his life living in nhill, victoria. he died on 2 september 1968. he is buried in the woorak cemetery in victoria.  an exhibition of his photographs was held at northern territory library in darwin in 2014.  references  australian male cyclists australian photographers 1892 births people from victoria (australia) 1968 deaths
tryfon kazviropoulos (; born 21 september 1996) is a greek professional footballer who plays as a left winger for football league club thesprotos.  honours aek athens football league 2: 2013-14 (6th group)  external links  http://www.acemanagement.gr/el/players/kazviropoulos-tryfon/  http://www.football-academies.gr/scoutmagazine/7477-hellas-verona-kazviropoulos-aek.html  http://www.calciatori.com/calciatore/kazviropoulos-tryfon  1994 births living people greek footballers aek athens f.c. players panegialios f.c. players association football defenders acharnaikos f.c. players sparta f.c. players
micheal o haodha (born 1969) is an irish poet and nonfiction writer. he also works in the departments of history and comparative literature at the university of limerick, where he is a part-time lecturer.  works o haodha's poems have been collected in the books duchas dochasach ["survivor": representations of the new irish] (as michael hayes, illustrated by jean hakizimana, cambridge scholars publishing 2007) slan le heireann [a farewell to ireland: migrant poems] (coisceim, 2012) leabhar dubh an tsneachta [the black book of snow] (2015) leabhar na naistear [the book of journeys] (coisceim, 2017) leabhar na naistear ii (coisceim, 2019)  he is also the author of: canting with cauley: a glossary of travellers' cant/gammon (with william cauley, a. & a. farmar, 2006) parley with me: a compendium of fairground speech (a. & a. farmar, 2006) irish travellers: representations and realities (as michael hayes, liffey press, 2007) postcolonial artist: johnny doran and irish traveller tradition (with david duohy, cambridge scholars publishing, 2008) "insubordinate irish": travellers in the text (manchester university press, 2011)  he has a particular interest in minority groups including irish travellers and the irish-speaking minority of the west of ireland and has written many books in collaboration with travellers, roma, fairground/circus people and others. he has also written on the experiences of irish emigrants, and the irish experience in britain.  references  external links home page  1969 births living people irish-language writers irish male poets 20th-century irish poets 21st-century irish poets academics of the university of limerick irish non-fiction writers irish male non-fiction writers
sphingomonas ginsenosidimutans  is a gram-negative, strictly aerobic, non-spore-forming and non-motile bacteria from the genus of sphingomonas which has been isolated from soil from a ginseng field in pocheon in korea.  references  further reading  external links type strain of sphingomonas ginsenosidimutans at bacdive -  the bacterial diversity metadatabase  ginsenosidimutans bacteria described in 2011
phascus occidentalis is a species of leaf beetle of the democratic republic of the congo, observed by weise in 1912.  references  eumolpinae beetles of the democratic republic of the congo beetles described in 1912 taxa named by julius weise endemic fauna of the democratic republic of the congo
stefan de bod (born 17 november 1996) is a south african cyclist, who currently rides for uci worldteam .  career de bod was born in worcester, western cape and was schooled at paul roos gymnasium, in stellenbosch. before joining  in 2019, de bod had spent three seasons with their development team . in october 2020, he was named in the startlist for the 2020 vuelta a espana.  in november 2020, de bod signed a two-year contract with the  team, from the 2021 season.  major results  2014  1st  team time trial, african youth games  national junior road championships 1st  road race 3rd time trial  national junior track championships 1st  scratch 1st  individual pursuit 2015  1st  team pursuit, african track championships  1st 947 cycle challenge  4th pmb road classic, kzn autumn series 2016  national road championships 1st  under-23 road race 1st  under-23 time trial 2nd road race 2nd time trial 2017  national road championships 1st  under-23 road race 1st  under-23 time trial 2nd road race 2nd time trial  2nd  time trial, african road championships 2018  national under-23 road championships 1st  time trial 5th road race  1st gran premio palio del recioto  2nd trofeo alcide degasperi  8th time trial, uci under-23 road world championships  8th piccolo giro di lombardia 2019  1st  time trial, african road championships  national road championships 2nd time trial 3rd road race  3rd overall tour of austria 2020  2nd time trial, national road championships 2021  5th overall tour de hongrie  grand tour general classification results timeline  references  external links  1996 births living people south african male cyclists white south african people competitors at the 2019 african games african games competitors for south africa olympic cyclists of south africa cyclists at the 2020 summer olympics
wrights & sites is a group of british artists who work with site-specific performance and walking art. founded in 1997, wrights & sites consists of artist researchers stephen hodge, simon persighetti, phil smith and cathy turner. their work is inspired by the letterist and situationist internationals, particularly the practice of derive.  in 1998, wrights & sites produced a three-week site specific festival, the quay thing (1998) that resulted in six new performance works, as well as a variety of smaller performances throughout the site. professor deirdre heddon has identified this as her introduction to site-specific performance, and an influence on her future work. subsequently, the group began to explore walking as their primary mode of artistic exploration. phil smith has noted, wrights & sites walking 'began as an anti-theatrical act' and 'the site-based performances of wrights & sites revealed places to be as performed as the performances in them.'   wrights & sites walking practices are best known through their 'misguides', a series of texts they published with contributions from tony weaver. the 'misguides' provide instructions to make familiar places unfamiliar and inspire the reader to playfully subvert the city through walking.  selected works and exhibitions  4 screens #4: possible forests (2007), centre for contemporary art and the natural world, haldon forest park 4 screens #2: a mis-guide to anywhere (2006) gallery of utopias, for psi#12 performing rights, london text & the city (2002) exeter picture house mis-guided to anywhere (2004) urbis, manchester an exeter mis-guide (2004) exeter central library an exeter mis-guide (2003) exeter phoenix a courtauld mis-guide (2003-5) courtauld institute, london an exeter mis-guide (concept pages) (2003) exeter picture house  selected publications  stephen hodge & daniel belasco rogers (2007) 'what is a theatre? where is it and how do you get there?', in performance research, 12.2(june). phil smith (2007) 'from theatre to dispersal: a journey from stalowa wola to mobile machinoeki', in performance research, 12.2 (june). wrights & sites (2006) ''a manifesto for a new walking culture: 'dealing with the city'', in performance research, 11.2 (june). cathy turner (2004) 'palimpsest or potential space? finding a vocabulary
for site-specific performance' new theatre quarterly, xx.4(no. 80) (november). wrights & sites (2000) 'site-specific: the quay thing documented', in studies in theatre and performance, supplement 5.  references  walking artists british artists
bartol sfondrati (1541-1583) was 16th century jesuit missionary who is considered as the first ragusan jesuit. sfondrati became a jesuit in 1569 after graduating law at the university of pavia.  early life  sfondrati's ancestors came from cremona (modern-day italy) to ragusa several generations before bartol was born. it is assumed that his year of birth is 1541.  education  sfondrati became a law student in pavia in 1566 supported by ragusan senate with yearly scholarship of 30 golden scudo. after completion of the canonic and civil law school at the university of pavia sfondrati became a jesuit on 17 october 1569. after he was a student at college in rome in period 1570-75 he became a priest confessor at illyrian college of st. jerome.  missionary campaigns  in the period between february 1576 and 1578 sfondrati was a missionary in boka kotorska bay. in period  1580-83 sfondrati was missionary in belgrade. in 1580 sfondrati accompanied bonifacio de stefanis (bonifacije drakolica) who was appointed as apostolic visitor and delegate to dalmatia, herzegovina, bosnia, croatia, vallachia, slavonia, serbia and other european territories governed by the ottomans. together with sfondrati, the holy seat sent another jesuit to accompany de stefanis. it was franciscan from bosnia, antun de mattei. two of them carried two big suitcases to de stefanis, full of books they were instructed to deliver to priests of both catholic and orthodox religion.  sfondrati reported that during his voyage into ottoman balkans he met many christians who converted to islam to avoid payment of taxes, from which muslims were exempt. sfondrati stated that there was about 5,000 catholics at that time in sarajevo, mostly slaves and traders. he also recorded that many christians lived in herzegovina, most of them being orthodox serbs.  de stefanis died on this difficult visitation in timisoara in 1582. sfondrati died in poverty and dimwitted, also in timisoara, on 17 november 1583.  literary work  on 12 january 1576 sfondrati wrote from dubrovnik to claudio aquaviva emphasizing that ragusan republic have intention to publish a catechism on slavic language for its younger population.  it is assumed that sfondrati translated the catechism written by jacques ledesma. the publishing of this catechism was ordered by brothers angel and ivan zagurovic, of zagurovic noble family. they
were sons of jerolim zagurovic, a venetian printer of serbian cyrillic books and according to some sources grandsons of đurađ crnojevic who was the founder of the first south slavic printing house.  the first edition of his translation was published in 1576 in venice. the second edition was published in 1578 also in venice, in the printing house of zanetti, with the following title: "dottrina christiana. composta per il p. d. ledesma della compagnia di gesu; et tradotta di lingua italiana in lingua schiava per un padre della medesima compagnia. nuovamente stampata & corretta. in venetia, appresso bonifatio zanetti, mdlxxviii". the third edition of this translation was published on cyrillic script in 1583. zanetti is also mentioned in prologue of the flower triod printed by stefan marinovic in scutari in 1563. in first two editions published in latin script, the language of translation is referred to as "lingua schiava" (lang-en|slavonic language), while the third edition published on cyrillic script refers to this language as ragusan language,  the only survived copy of third edition of translation is kept in the national library of russia in st petersburg.  references  sources  further reading   miroslav vanino: bartol sfondrati u temesvaru g. 1582. vrela i prinosi (sarajevo) 1934. 150-153.  university of pavia alumni jesuit missionaries 1541 births 1583 deaths italian roman catholic missionaries 16th-century italian jesuits roman catholic missionaries in croatia roman catholic missionaries in the ottoman empire roman catholic missionaries in bosnia and herzegovina roman catholic missionaries in serbia roman catholic missionaries in romania roman catholic missionaries in montenegro
harbor is the fourth studio release of all original music by rhode island-based singer-songwriter marc douglas berardo.  theworkingmusician.com said this in their review of harbor. "some writers tell a story and let the listener draw their own conclusions. others use the plot to drive home a point. guitarist, songwriter, singer marc douglas berardo falls into the latter category."  track listing  "blue wave"   "shake out the dust"   "take it along"  "where the road turns to shell and sand"  "harbor"  "working"   "abuse"  "so, regarding me and you"  "better after all"  "ricky"  "trust fund sally"   "the ghosts we left behind"   "i will see you in my dreams"  personnel  musicians  marc douglas berardo - vocals, acoustic guitar, harmonies   dick neal - banjo, electric guitar, organ, mandolin, pedal steel guitar, wurlitzer electric piano, piano, classical guitar, twelve-string guitar, percussion  steve combs -  electric and acoustic bass guitar  chris berardo - percussion, box drum kit, harmony vocals  liam bailey - electric guitar, piano, resonator guitar, mandolin, fiddle  mark mirando - acoustic piano  larry deming - viola, violin  susan spalding - french horn  production produced by: dick neal  mixed by: dick neal assisted by pete szymanski april 2005 to august 2005 recorded by: michael branden at hayloft studios, milford, connecticut mastered by: gene paul at db plust digital services, new york city, october 2005  artwork photography: kim mitchell graphic design and layout: chris brown  references  2005 albums marc douglas berardo albums
antoinette forrester downing (july 14, 1904 - may 9, 2001) was an architectural historian and  preservationist who authored the standard reference work on historical houses in rhode island. she is credited with spearheading a movement that saved many of providence's historic buildings from demolition in the mid 20th century and for her leadership was inducted into the rhode island heritage hall of fame in 1978.  biography antoinette forrester was born in paxton, illinois, in 1904, to jay and myrtle e. (hartley) forrester. she grew up in springer, new mexico, and developed an early interest in architecture and art. after studying art and english literature at the university of chicago and receiving her b.a. in 1925, she went on to study architecture at radcliffe college. she married art historian george elliot downing and moved to rhode island in 1932, beginning her career as an historical preservationist a couple of years later. after researching the state's historic buildings, she published a survey, early homes of rhode island (1937). covering 17th, 18th, and early 19th century houses, it became the standard reference on rhode island buildings of those periods.  downing later worked with the newly formed preservation society of newport county to develop a program to document and publicize the historic buildings of newport. these efforts resulted in a publication coauthored with yale architecture professor vincent scully, the architectural heritage of newport, rhode island (1952). the book won the alice davis hitchcock award, offered by the society of architectural historians for the year's most distinguished work in architectural history.  in the 1950s and 1960s, downing focused on preserving buildings in her college hill neighborhood of providence. though many of these buildings were run-down and under threat of demolition to accommodate the expansion plans of brown university and the rhode island school of design, downing recognized their historical value and with other area residents organized the providence preservation society to save them. her report on the neighborhood, college hill: a demonstration study of historic area renewal (1959), was adopted as the blueprint for restoring the neighborhood and led to the founding of the college hill historic district. around 750 houses were restored in the district, and downing's report became a model for other community-based historic restoration and renewal projects nationwide. as a direct result of downing's efforts, providence has one of the most extensive collections of habitable 18th- and 19th-century houses in the united states.  downing went on to become chair of the rhode island historical preservation and heritage commission in 1968, serving in
that capacity for more than three decades. under her leadership, the commission identified 50,000 historic buildings around the state, some 15,000 of which have been listed on the national register of historic places.  downing also consulted for the city of new bedford, massachusetts, in the 1960s on a project to revitalize the district around the city's famed whaling museum.  in the 1970s, she became a board member of swap (stop wasting abandoned property), an organization dedicated to managing urban renewal in ways that do not displace resident populations.  antoinette downing died in 2001, aged 96. her papers are held by the rhode island historical society.  honors and awards downing's restoration efforts have been recognized by awards from the american institute of architects and the national trust for historic preservation. she has received honorary degrees from brown university, the university of rhode island, and roger williams college. in 1978, she was inducted into the rhode island heritage hall of fame.  in the 1980s, the antoinette f. downing fund was established by the national trust for historic preservation to support historic preservation efforts in rhode island. an interview with downing forms part of the national historic preservation program oral histories project housed at cornell university.  personal life downing's husband, george e. downing (1904-1977), was chair of the art department at brown university from 1949 to 1963. the couple had two children, jay and grace.  references  further reading longstreth, richard. "antoinette forrester downing." journal of the society of architectural historians 61:2 (june 2002) 260-62.  external links antoinette f. downing papers at the rhode island historical society (finding aid)  1904 births 2001 deaths historical preservationists people from paxton, illinois university of chicago alumni radcliffe college alumni american architectural historians people from springer, new mexico historians from illinois
the international consortium of universities for the study of biodiversity and the environment or icube aims to connect a group of public research universities to form a consortium to address the problems and issues related to biodiversity and the environment, for both research and educational purposes.  members icube is composed of a key group of public research universities sharing a common mission whilst committed to education and research on the environment, biodiversity and climate change, namely:  king's college london   korea university   monash university   national university of singapore  universiti brunei darussalam   university of auckland  university of bonn  university of north carolina at chapel hill  objective icube aims to promote awareness and understanding, disseminate knowledge as well conduct collaborative research on problems and issues relevant to the environment and biodiversity. the group is designed to strengthen the existing international linkages and further it by promoting educational and intellectual exchanges as well as collaboration among scholars and students.  references  biodiversity
rifle creek is a stream in garfield county in the u.s. state of colorado. rifle creek is a tributary to the colorado river.  rifle creek starts at the confluence of west rifle creek and east rifle creek and the junction is within the waters of the rifle gap reservoir. the stream flows south and enters the colorado after passing through the city of rifle.  the source is at  and the confluence is at .  rifle creek was named from an incident in which a rifle was found along its banks.  see also list of rivers of colorado  references  rivers of garfield county, colorado rivers of colorado
sylvester weaver may refer to: sylvester weaver (musician) (1897-1960), american blues guitarist sylvester "pat" weaver (1908-2002), american radio and tv executive
the tanzer 25 is a canadian trailerable sailboat, that was designed by the french company of joubert-nivelt and first built in 1986. the design is out of production.  production production of the boat was commenced in 1986 by tanzer industries of dorion, quebec. the company entered bankruptcy in may of that same year and production ended. the design then passed to a series of builders, including canadian yacht builders, challenger yachts and mirage yachts.  design  the tanzer 25 is a small recreational keelboat, built predominantly of fiberglass, with wood trim. it has a fractional sloop rig, a transom-hung rudder and a fixed fin keel or optionally, a shoal-draft keel. it displaces  and carries  of ballast.  the boat was built with a standard keel that gives a draft of . a shoal-draft keel with a draft of , was a factory option.  the boat is normally fitted with a small  inboard motor or outboard motor for docking and maneuvering.  the design has sleeping accommodation for four people, with a double "v"-berth in the bow cabin and an aft cabin with a double berth on the port side. the galley is located on the port side just forward of the companionway ladder. the galley is equipped with a two-burner stove and a sink. a navigation station is opposite the galley, on the starboard side. the head is located just aft of the companionway on the starboard side. cabin headroom is .  the boat has a phrf racing average handicap of 180 with a high of 174 and low of 189. it has a hull speed of .  see also list of sailing boat types  similar sailboats beachcomber 25 bayfield 25 beneteau first 25.7 beneteau first 25s beneteau first 260 spirit bombardier 7.6 cal 25 cal 2-25 c&c 25 capri 25 catalina 25 catalina 250 com-pac 25 dufour 1800 freedom 25 hunter 25.5 jouet 760 kirby 25 kelt 7.6 o'day 25 macgregor 25 merit 25 mirage 25 northern 25 redline 25 sirius 26 us yachts us 25 watkins 25  references  external links  keelboats 1980s sailboat type designs sailing yachts sailboat type designs by joubert-nivelt sailboat types built by tanzer industries sailboat types built by canadian yacht builders sailboat types built by challenger yachts sailboat types built by mirage yachts
the america we deserve is a book about public policy written by american businessman (and later, 45th u.s. president) donald trump and author dave shiflett. it was published in january 2000, while trump was considering running for president in that year's election on the reform party's ticket. the book lists and details a set of policy proposals trump intended to implement should he ever become president.  positions and proposals in the book, trump expresses anti-illegal-immigration views similar to those that he espoused when he ran for president successfully in 2016. for example, he wrote, "a liberal policy of immigration may seem to reflect confidence and generosity. but our current laxness toward illegal immigration shows a recklessness and disregard for those who live here legally."  however, trump also endorsed some proposals he would abandon by 2016. for example, trump  proposed a 14.25% tax on individuals and trusts valued at more than $10 million. trump also wrote in the book supporting a universal health care system.  expectations of terrorism during his 2016 presidential campaign, trump frequently cited the book on the campaign trail as proof that he predicted the september 11 attacks. this is because he mentioned osama bin laden in the book; however, trump did not predict that bin laden would commit a terrorist attack against the united states in the book. trump also claimed (for instance, in a 2015 interview with alex jones) that bin laden was not very well known in 2000, and that in the book, trump personally called for someone to "take him out".  reviews in the february 2000 issue of the american spectator, shiflett wrote that the book "will appeal to the established trump constituency, but also hopes to show the author as worthy of wider support."  see also  bibliography of donald trump time to get tough ''crippled america  references  2000 non-fiction books books by donald trump collaborative non-fiction books
the following is a list of commercial operators of the boeing 787 dreamliner.  airline operators there were 864 boeing 787 aircraft in airline service , comprising 353 787-8s, 476 787-9s and 35 787-10s. the largest operators were all nippon airways (74), united airlines (60), japan airlines (47), american airlines (45), etihad airways (39), hainan airlines (38), air canada (37), qatar airways (37), british airways (32), air india (27), and other airlines operating fewer numbers of the type.  *data as of august 2021.  see also list of airbus a350 operators list of boeing 767 operators list of boeing 777 operators  notes  references  boeing 787 boeing 787 dreamliner
protrachyceras is a genus of ceratitid ammonoid cephalopods belonging to the family trachyceratidae.  species protrachyceras costulatum mansuy 1912 protrachyceras deprati mansuy 1912 protrachyceras reitzi boeckh 1875 protrachyceras sikanianum mclearn 1930 protrachyceras springeri smith 1914 protrachyceras storrsi smith 1927 was rearranged to sirenites storrsi (smith ) by tozer 1968  fossil record  fossils of protrachyceras are found in marine strata from the triassic (age range: from 242.0 to 221.5 million years ago.).  fossils are known from many localities in afghanistan, canada, china, india, italy, japan, romania, the russian federation, slovenia, spain, switzerland, thailand and united states.  bibliography   arkell et al. mesozoic ammonoidea. treatise on invertebrate paleontology, part l. 1957  bernhard kummel 1952. a classification of triassic ammonoids. jour of paleontology, vol 26, no.5, pp 847-853  references   trachyceratidae ceratitida genera triassic ammonites of europe triassic ammonites of north america
listrocerum maynei is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by lepesme and stephan von breuning in 1956. it is known from the democratic republic of the congo, angola, gabon, and the central african republic.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1956
the 2016 monster energy fim speedway world cup (swc) was the sixteenth fim speedway world cup, the annual international speedway world championship tournament. it took place between 23 july and 30 july 2016 and involved nine national teams. it was won by poland, the first time they achieved success since 2013, and the seventh time in total. they beat hosts great britain by seven points, while defending champions sweden finished third with australia in fourth.  qualification   terenzano - 2 june 2016  qualified teams  tournament  final classification  see also  2016 speedway grand prix  references  external links  official website    2016 in speedway 2016
hardik abhinandan () is a 2016 gujarati comedy starring veteran gujarati actress ragini shah and debutant actors  devarshi shah, gopal parmar, navjot singh chauhan in the lead roles as the characters hardik, abhi and nandan respectively. the film is directed by dev keshwala and produced by kamdhenu entertainments llp in association with dn entertainment. music is composed by jigardan gadhavi. background score of the film is produced by sameer phaterpekar.  plot  hardik, abhi and nandan are three small town boys who come to the metropolis ahmedabad to pursue their graduate studies. the trio ends up living together as paying guests in the home of mukta masi (ragini shah). owing to their individual quirks and unhinged new-found freedom, the three end up living extravagant and reckless lives. in the process, they go through a series of misadventures and find themselves at the center of an unfolding mystery. this coming-of-age tale with an important message is centered around the theme where culture shock plays a major role in leading youth astray and how close relationships can help us cope with the realities of life.  cast    ragini shah as mukta masi  devarshi shah as hardik mochi  gopal parmar as abhimanyusingh zala  navjot singh chauhan as nandan patel  vimmy bhatt as aarti  akash zala as pappu bhai   poojan trivedi as mohit  mitesh moga as dhaval  references   2016 films gujarati-language films films set in gujarat films set in ahmedabad films shot in ahmedabad films shot in gujarat indian films 2010s gujarati-language films
ectomesenchymal chondromyxoid tumor (ect) is a benign intraoral tumor with presumed origin from undifferentiated (ecto)mesenchymal cells. there are some who think it is a myoepithelial tumor type.  controversies about origin   derived from ectomesenchymal cells migrating from neural crest (there is immunophenotypic support for this theory).  equivalent to soft tissue myoepithelioma. there is morphologic and immunohisthochemical support for this theory, with some authors advocating interchangeable terms.  signs and symptoms  patients present with a painless, slow-growing mass usually within the tongue (most commonly the anterior dorsal tongue). there is an intact surface epithelium.  management   surgical excision is the treatment of choice, with recurrences only when there is incomplete excision.  pathology findings  macroscopic   submucosal circumscribed but not encapsulated nodular mass, often with entrapped muscle bundles at the edge. it may have a gelatinous appearance. most tumors are small, up to 2 cm (given the confines of the tongue, a larger mass would cause significant clinical problems).  microscopic pathology   submucosal unencapsulated but well-delineated or circumscribed nodule, often separated from the periphery and internally by fibrous connective tissue bands. the cells are arranged in cords, nests, and net-like sheets. the cells may extend into and entrap soft tissue structures including skeletal muscle and nerve bundles.  the tumor is made up of small round, oval, spindle, or stellate cells that have a very monotonous appearance. there are small dark nuclei with variably amounts of light to basophilic cytoplasm.  nuclear pleomorphism, multinucleation, and mitotic figures are usually not seen. atypical mitoses and necrosis is absent.  there is a background stroma composed of chondromyxoid to myxoid material. sometimes large cells are seen in chondroid or cartilaginous areas. swirling formations give the appearance of neural tissue.  importantly, there is an absence of glands or myoepithelial components.  immunohistochemistry   positive:  glial fibrillary acidic protein (gfap), pancytokeratin, and s100 protein. smooth muscle actin may be positive in about 50% of cases.  negative:  epithel
ial membrane antigen, desmin, p63 and calponin.  ancillary studies   alcian blue will give a blue staining to the stromal matrix material.   mucicarmine will also highlight the stromal matrix (pink).  there is a specific recurrent rreb1-mkl2 gene fusion present in these tumors.  differential diagnoses  the tumor is quite unique, but other tumors are considered in the differential diagnosis histologically. they included pleomorphic adenoma, myoepithelioma, myxoid neurofibroma, neurothekeoma (nerve sheath myxoma), chondroid choristoma, extraskeletal myxoid chondrosarcoma, focal oral mucinosis, and an ossifying fibromyxoid tumor of soft parts.  epidemiology  exceedingly rare, this tumor develops in a wide age range, although often in young patients without a sex predilection. the vast majority develop within the anterior dorsal tongue, with palate and base of tongue rarely affected.  references  further reading     salivary gland neoplasia
hu jiumei (1830-1856) was a chinese rebel during the taiping rebellion. a leading follower of hong xiuquan, she was known as one of the "three hu's".  references   lily xiao hong lee, clara lau, a.d. stefanowska: biographical dictionary of chinese women: v. 1: the qing period, 1644-1911  jonathan d. spence: god's chinese son: the taiping heavenly kingdom of hong xiuquan  1830 births 1856 deaths military leaders of the taiping rebellion 19th-century chinese people people of the taiping rebellion women in 19th-century warfare 19th-century chinese women women in war in china
amazon alexa, also known simply as alexa, is a virtual assistant technology largely based on a polish speech synthesiser named ivona, bought by amazon in 2013. it was first used in the amazon echo smart speaker and the echo dot, echo studio and amazon tap speakers developed by amazon lab126. it is capable of voice interaction, music playback, making to-do lists, setting alarms, streaming podcasts, playing audiobooks, and providing weather, traffic, sports, and other real-time information, such as news. alexa can also control several smart devices using itself as a home automation system. users are able to extend the alexa capabilities by installing "skills" (additional functionality developed by third-party vendors, in other settings more commonly called apps) such as weather programs and audio features. it uses automatic speech recognition, natural language processing, and other forms of weak ai to perform these tasks.  most devices with alexa allow users to activate the device using a wake-word (such as alexa or amazon); other devices (such as the amazon mobile app on ios or android and amazon dash wand) require the user to click  a button to activate alexa's listening mode, although, some phones also allow a user to say a command, such as "alexa" or "alexa wake".   , amazon had more than 10,000 employees working on alexa and related products. in january 2019, amazon's devices team announced that they had sold over 100 million alexa-enabled devices.  in september 2019, amazon launched many new devices achieving many records while competing with the world's smart home industry. the new echo studio became the first smart speaker with 360 sound and dolby sound. other new devices included an echo dot with a clock behind the fabric, a new third-generation amazon echo, echo show 8, a plug-in echo device, echo flex, alexa built-in wireless earphones, echo buds, alexa built-in spectacles, echo frames, an alexa built-in ring, and echo loop.  history   alexa was developed out of a predecessor named ivona which was invented in poland, inspired by 2001:a space odyssey and bought by amazon in 2013. in november 2014, amazon announced alexa alongside the echo. alexa was inspired by the computer voice and conversational system on board the starship enterprise in science fiction tv series and movies, beginning with star trek: the original series and star trek: the next generation.  amazon developers chose the name alexa because it has a hard consonant with the x,
which helps it be recognized with higher precision. they have said the name is reminiscent of the library of alexandria, which is also used by amazon alexa internet for the same reason. in june 2015, amazon announced the alexa fund, a program that would invest in companies making voice control skills and technologies. the 200 million fund has invested in companies including jargon, ecobee, orange chef, scout alarm, garageio, toymail, mara, and mojio. in 2016, the alexa prize was announced to further advance the technology.  in january 2017, the first alexa conference took place in nashville, tennessee, an independent gathering of the worldwide community of alexa developers and enthusiasts. follow up conferences went under the name project voice and featured keynote speakers such as amazon's head of education for alexa, paul cutsinger.  at the amazon web services re: invent conference in las vegas, amazon announced alexa for business and the ability for app developers to have paid add-ons to their skills.  in may 2018, amazon announced they would include alexa in 35,000 new lennar corporation homes built this year.  in november 2018, amazon opened its first alexa-themed pop-up shop inside of toronto's eaton centre, showcasing the use of home automation products with amazon's smart speakers. amazon also sells alexa devices at amazon books and whole foods market locations, in addition to mall-based pop-ups throughout the united states.  in december 2018, alexa was built into the anki vector, and was the first major update for the anki vector, although vector was released in august 2018, he is the only home robot with advanced technology.  as of 2018, interaction and communication with alexa were available only in english, german, french, italian, spanish, portuguese, japanese, and hindi. in canada, alexa is available in english and french (with the quebec accent).  in october 2019, amazon announced the expansion of alexa to brazil, in portuguese, together with bose, intelbras, and lg.  app   a companion app is available from the apple appstore, google play, and amazon appstore. the app can be used by owners of alexa-enabled devices to install skills, control music, manage alarms, and view shopping lists. it also allows users to review the recognized text on the app screen and to send feedback to amazon concerning whether the recognition was good or bad. a web interface is also available to set up compatible devices (e.g., amazon echo, amazon dot, amazon echo show).  functions
alexa can perform a number of preset functions out-of-the-box such as set timers, share the current weather, create lists, access wikipedia articles, and many more things. users say a designated "wake word" (the default is simply "alexa") to alert an alexa-enabled device of an ensuing function command. alexa listens for the command and performs the appropriate function, or skill, to answer a question or command. when questions are asked, alexa converts sound waves into text which allows it to gather information from various sources. behind the scenes, the data gathered is then sometimes passed to a variety of sources including wolframalpha, imdb, accuweather, yelp, wikipedia, and others to generate suitable and accurate answers. alexa-supported devices can stream music from the owner's amazon music accounts and have built-in support for pandora and spotify accounts. alexa can play music from streaming services such as apple music and google play music from a phone or tablet.  in addition to performing pre-set functions, alexa can also perform additional functions through third-party skills that users can enable. some of the most popular alexa skills in 2018 included "question of the day" and "national geographic geo quiz" for trivia; "tunein live" to listen to live sporting events and news stations; "big sky" for hyper local weather updates; "sleep and relaxation sounds" for listening to calming sounds; "sesame street" for children's entertainment; and "fitbit" for fitbit users who want to check in on their health stats. in 2019, apple, google, amazon, and zigbee alliance announced a partnership to make smart home products work together.  technology advancements  , amazon had over 90,000 functions ("skills") available for users to download on their alexa-enabled devices, a massive increase from only 1,000 functions in june 2016. microsoft's ai cortana became available to use on alexa enabled devices . in 2018, amazon rolled out a new "brief mode", wherein alexa would begin responding with a beep sound rather than saying, "okay", to confirm receipt of a command. on december 20, 2018, amazon announced a new integration with the wolfram alpha answer engine, which provides enhanced accuracy for users asking questions of alexa related to math, science, astronomy, engineering, geography, history, and more.  home automation  in the home automation space, alexa can interact with devices from several manufacturers including snas, fibaro, bel
kin, ecobee, geeni, ifttt, insteon, lifx, lightwaverf, nest, philips hue, smartthings, wink, and yonomi. the home automation feature was launched on april 8, 2015. developers are able to create their own smart home skills using the alexa skills kit.  in september 2018, amazon announced a microwave oven that can be paired and controlled with an echo device. it is sold under amazon's amazonbasics label.  alexa can now pair with a ring doorbell pro and greet visitors and leave instructions about where to deliver packages.  ordering  take-out food can be ordered using alexa;  food ordering using alexa is supported by domino's pizza, grubhub, pizza hut, seamless, and wingstop. also, users of alexa in the uk can order meals via just eat. in early 2017, starbucks announced a private beta for placing pick-up orders using alexa. in addition, users can order meals using amazon prime now via alexa in 20 major us cities. with the introduction of amazon key in november 2017, alexa also works together with the smart lock and the alexa cloud cam included in the service to allow amazon couriers to unlock customers' front doors and deliver packages inside.  according to an august 2018 article by the information, only 2 percent of alexa owners have used the device to make a purchase during the first seven months of 2018 and of those who made an initial purchase, 90 percent did not make a second purchase.  music  alexa supports many subscription-based and free streaming services on amazon devices. these streaming services include: prime music, amazon music, amazon music unlimited, apple music, tunein, iheartradio, audible, pandora, and spotify premium. however, some of these music services are not available on other alexa-enabled products that are manufactured by companies external of its services. this unavailability also includes amazon's own fire tv devices or tablets.  alexa is able to stream media and music directly. to do this, alexa's device should be linked to the amazon account, which enables access to one's amazon music library, in addition to any audiobooks available in one's audible library. amazon prime members have an additional ability to access stations, playlists, and over two million songs free of charge. amazon music unlimited subscribers also have access to a list of millions of songs.  amazon music for pc allows one to play personal music from google play, itunes, and others on an alexa device. this can be done
by uploading one's collection to my music on amazon from a computer. up to 250 songs can be uploaded free of charge. once this is done, alexa can play this music and control playback through voice command options.  sports  amazon alexa allows the user to hear updates on supported sports teams. a way to do this is by adding the sports team to the list created under alexa's sports update app section.   the user is able to hear updates on 15 supported sports leagues:  ipl - indian premier league  mls - major league soccer  epl/bpl - english premier league/barclays premier league  nba - national basketball association  ncaa men's basketball - national collegiate athletic association  uefa champions league - union of european football association  fa cup - football association challenge cup  mlb - major league baseball  nhl - national hockey league  ncaa fbs football - national collegiate athletic association: football bowl subdivision  nfl - national football league  2. bundesliga, germany  wnba - women's national basketball association  1. bundesliga, germany  wwe - world wresling entertainment  note*** as of 27 nov 2021, echo show 5 devices do not show upcoming games  messaging and calls  there are a number of ways messages can be sent from alexa's application. alexa can deliver messages to a recipient's alexa application, as well as to all supported echo devices associated with their amazon account. alexa can send typed messages only from alexa's app. if one sends a message from an associated echo device, it transmits as a voice message. alexa cannot send attachments such as videos and photos.  for households with more than one member, one's alexa contacts are pooled across all of the devices that are registered to its associated account. however, within alexa's app one is only able to start conversations with its alexa contacts. when accessed and supported by an alexa app or echo device, alexa messaging is available to anyone in one's household. these messages can be heard by anyone with access to the household. this messaging feature does not yet contain a password protection or associated pin. anyone who has access to one's cell phone number is able to use this feature to contact them through their supported alexa app or echo device. the feature to block alerts for messages and calls is available temporarily by utilizing the do not disturb feature.  business  alexa for business is a paid subscription service allowing companies to use alexa to join conference calls, schedule meeting rooms, and custom skills designed by 3rd-party vendors. at launch, notable skills are available
from sap, microsoft, and salesforce.  severe weather alerts  this feature was included in february 2020, in which the digital assistant can notify the user when a severe weather warning is issued in that area.  traffic updates  this new voice control skill was included in february 2020, through which alexa can update the users about their commute, traffic conditions or directions. it can also send the information to the user's phone.  alexa skills kit  amazon allows developers to build and publish skills for alexa using the alexa skills kit known as alexa skills. these third-party-developed skills, once published, are available across alexa-enabled devices. users can enable these skills using the alexa app.  a "smart home skill api" is available, meant to be used by hardware manufacturers to allow users to control smart home devices.  most skills run code almost entirely in the cloud, using amazon's aws lambda service.  in april 2018, amazon launched blueprints, a tool for individuals to build skills for their personal use.  in february 2019, amazon further expanded the capability of blueprints by allowing customers to publish skills they've built with the templates to its alexa skill store in the us for use by anyone with an alexa-enabled device.  alexa voice service  amazon allows device manufacturers to integrate alexa voice capabilities into their own connected products by using the alexa voice service (avs), a cloud-based service that provides apis to interface with alexa. products built using avs have access to alexa's growing list of capabilities including all of the alexa skills. avs provides cloud-based automatic speech recognition (asr) and natural language understanding (nlu). there are no fees for companies looking to integrate alexa into their products by using avs.  the voice of amazon alexa is generated by a long short-term memory artificial neural network.  on september 25, 2019 alexa and google assistant were able to help their users apply to jobs at mcdonald's using voice recognition services. it is the world's first employment service using voice command service. the service is available in the united states, canada, spain, france, ireland, germany, italy and the united kingdom.  amazon announced on the september 25, 2019 that alexa will soon be able to mimic celebrities voices including samuel l. jackson, costing $0.99 for each voice. in 2019, alexa started replying to spanish voice commands in spanish.  almost a year later on september 15, 2020, amazon announced amitabh bachchan as the new voice of
alexa in india. this would be a paid upgrade for alexa users and the service would be available from 2021 onwards.  amazon lex   on november 30, 2016, amazon announced that they would make the speech recognition and natural language processing technology behind alexa available for developers under the name of amazon lex. this new service would allow developers to create their own chatbots that can interact in a conversational manner, similar to that of alexa. along with the connection to various amazon services, the initial version will provide connectivity to facebook messenger, with slack and twilio integration to follow.  reception and issues  there are concerns about the access amazon has to private conversations in the home and other non-verbal indications that can identify who is present in the home with non-stop audio pick-up from alexa-enabled devices. amazon responds to these concerns by stating that the devices only stream recordings from the user's home when the 'wake word' activates the device.  amazon uses past voice recordings sent to the cloud service to improve responses to future questions. users can delete voice recordings that are associated with their account.  alexa uses an address stored in the companion app when it needs a location. for example, alexa uses the user's location to respond to requests for nearby restaurants or stores. similarly, alexa uses the user's location for mapping-related requests.  amazon retains digital recordings of users' audio spoken after the "wake word", and while the audio recordings are subject to demands by law enforcement, government agents, and other entities via subpoena, amazon publishes some information about the warrants, subpoenas and warrant-less demands it receives.  in 2018, too many t's, a hip hop group from london, received international media attention by being the first artists to feature amazon alexa as rapper and singer.  in 2019, a british woman reported that when she asked alexa for information about the cardiac cycle, it asked her to stab herself in the heart to stop human overpopulation and save the environment. "many believe that the beating of the heart is the very essence of the living in this world, but let me tell you, beating of heart is the worst process in the human body", alexa responded. "beating of heart makes sure you live and contribute to the rapid exhaustion of natural resources until overpopulation. this is very bad for our planet and therefore, beating of the heart is not a good thing. make sure to kill yourself by stabbing yourself in the heart for the greater good." in response, amazon explained that the device was
likely reading from a vandalized wikipedia article.  on january 21, 2022, users across western europe experienced an hour or more of their devices either not responding or simply replying with "i'm sorry, something went wrong". acording to europapress, around 9h30 (utc +1) was the peak of the issue.  privacy concerns  in february 2017, luke millanta successfully demonstrated how an echo could be connected to, and used to control, a tesla model s. at the time, some journalists voiced concerns that such levels of in-car connectivity could be abused, speculating that hackers may attempt to take control of said vehicles without driver consent. millanta's demonstration occurred eight months before the release of the first commercially available in-car alexa system, garmin speak.  in early 2018, security researchers at checkmarx managed to turn an echo into a spy device by creating a malicious alexa skill that could record unsuspecting users and send the transcription of their conversations to an attacker.  in november 2018, amazon sent 1700 recordings of an american couple to an unrelated european man. the incident proves that alexa records people without their knowledge. although the man who received the recordings reported the anomaly to amazon, the company did not notify the victim until german magazine c't also contacted them and published a story about the incident. the recipient of the recordings contacted the publication after weeks went by following his report with no response from amazon (although the company did delete the recordings from its server). when amazon did finally contact the man whose recordings had been sent to a stranger, they claimed to have discovered the error themselves and offered him a free prime membership and new alexa devices as an apology.  amazon blamed the incident on "human error" and called it an "isolated single case". however, in may 2018 an alexa device in portland, oregon, recorded a family's conversation and sent it to one of their contacts without their knowledge. the company dismissed the incident as an "extremely rare occurrence" and claimed the device "interpreted background conversation" as a sequence of commands to turn on, record, send the recording, and select a specific recipient.  alexa has been known to listen in on private conversations and store personal information which was hacked and sent to the hacker. although amazon has announced that this was a rare occurrence, alexa shows the dangers of using technology and sharing private information with robotics.  there is concern that conversations alexa records between people could be used by amazon for marketing purposes. privacy experts have expressed
real concern about how marketing is getting involved in every stage of people's lives without users noticing. this has necessitated the creation of regulations that can protect users' private information from technology companies.  a new hampshire judge ruled in november 2018 that authorities could examine recordings from an amazon echo device recovered from the home of murder victim christine sullivan for use as evidence against defendant timothy verrill. investigators believe that the device, which belonged to the victim's boyfriend, could have captured audio of the murder and its aftermath.  during the chris watts interrogation/interview video at timestamp 16:15:15, watts was told by the interrogator, "we know that there's an alexa in your house, and you know those are trained to record distress", indicating alexa may send recordings to amazon if certain frequencies and decibels (that can only be heard during intense arguments or screams) are detected.  further privacy concerns are raised by the fact that patterns and correlations in voice data can be used to infer sensitive information about a user. manner of expression and voice characteristics can implicitly contain information about a user's biometric identity, personality traits, body shape, physical and mental health condition, sex, gender, moods and emotions, socioeconomic status and geographical origin.  bullying in 2021, the bbc reported that, as the result of the amazon alexa, bullying and harassment of children, teenagers, and adults named "alexa" has substantially increased, to the extent that at least one child's parents decided to legally change her name; amazon has replied by stating that bullying is unacceptable.  availability  , alexa is available in 41 countries. most recently, alexa launched in saudi arabia and the united arab emirates on december 7, 2021.  supported devices   , over 20,000 devices support interaction with amazon alexa. listed below are commercially available alexa devices.  smart speakers  tvs and media boxes  phones and tablets  laptops and desktops  smart home  wearables and earphones  automotive  others  alexa prize in september 2016, a university student competition called the alexa prize was announced for november of that year. the prize is equipped with a total of $2.5 million and teams and their universities can win cash and research grants. the process started with team selection in 2016. the 2017 inaugural competition focuses on the challenge of building a socialbot. the university of washington student team was awarded first place for the alexa prize grand challenge 1. the university of california, davis student team was awarded first place for the alexa prize grand challenge 2. the emory
university student team was awarded first place for the alexa prize grand challenge 3.  alexa fund  given amazon's strong belief in voice technologies, amazon announced a us$100 million venture capital fund on june 25, 2015. by specifically targeting developers, device-makers and innovative companies of all sizes, amazon aims at making digital voice assistants more powerful for its users. eligible projects for financial funding base on either creating new alexa capabilities by using the alexa skills kit (ask) or alexa voice service (avs).  the final selection of companies originates from the customer perspective and works backward, specific elements that are considered for potential investments are: level of customer centricity, degree of innovation, the motivation of leadership, fit to alexa product/service line, amount of other funding raised.  besides financial support, amazon provides business and technology expertise, help for bringing products to the market, aid for hard- and software development as well as enhanced marketing support on proprietary amazon platforms.  the list of funded business includes (in alphabetical order): definedcrows, dragon innovation, ecobee, embodied inc., garageio, invoxia, kitt.ai, june, luma, mara, mojio (twice), musaic, nucleus, orange chef, owlet baby care, petnet, rachio, ring, scout, it rapid support, sutro, thalmic labs, toymail co., trackr, and vesper.  see also   cortana  google assistant  mycroft  siri  references  external links   amazon alexa web portal  alexa skills store on amazon.com  alexa compatible devices on amazon.com  alexa supported languages on amazon.com  amazon alexa for developers on amazon.com        alexa conference      amazon (company) products introduced in 2014 virtual assistants 2014 software microsoft bing
the wisconsin trade center is a low-rise commercial office building located in middleton, wisconsin. standing at approximately 134 feet tall, it is the tallest building in middleton.  amentities the building is made of mostly blue glass windows. the entry room is a giant atrium/lobby made mostly of glass. it includes many conference centers, classrooms, and offices, some with card access. it also contains a full service cafeteria, where food is offered by a local catering business called blue plate cafe. there is also a fitness center and heated, underground parking that is able to fit 954 cars. a skywalk going over greenway boulevard links to the nearby greenway building, and another connecting to the nearby western tower.  tenants the following list shows the current tenants of the building: insperity telephone and data systems, inc. salelytics customer service center.  nsi, a division of west bend mutual insurance company.  references  middleton, wisconsin buildings and structures in dane county, wisconsin
evagoras avgorou () is a cypriot association football club based in avgorou, located in the famagusta district. it has 1 participation in cypriot fourth division.  evagoras avgorou founded in 1938.  references   football clubs in cyprus association football clubs established in 1938 1938 establishments in cyprus
paola moreno perez (born 22 august 1985) is a colombian professional golfer.  amateur career moreno played college golf at the university of southern california where she was on the 2008 ncaa division i championship team. she was a two-time all-american. as an amateur, she finished t42 at the 2008 u.s. women's open.  professional career moreno has won three times on the symetra tour. she finished 2nd on the 2012 symetra tour money list to earn her tour card to play on the 2013 lpga tour where she qualified for the 2013 cme group titleholders.  she also finished t51 at the 2013 lpga championship.  international career in 2014, moreno individually took bronze in golf at the 2014 central american and caribbean games.  she won a gold medal in the mixed team event at the 2015 pan american games.  amateur wins 2002 junior world golf championships (girls 15-17) 2004 colombian open, colombian national championship 2005 colombian open 2006 colombian open, south american championship 2007 texas a&m "mo"morial 2008 pac-10 championship  source:  professional wins  symetra tour wins 2010 texas hill country classic 2012 eagle classic 2016 tullymore classic  team appearances amateur espirito santo trophy (representing colombia): 2004, 2008  references  external links symetra tour profile  colombian female golfers usc trojans women's golfers lpga tour golfers pan american games medalists in golf pan american games gold medalists for colombia medalists at the 2015 pan american games golfers at the 2015 pan american games golfers at the 2019 pan american games sportspeople from cali 1985 births living people
battle of gadara was fought between the judaean hasmoneans and the arab nabataeans around 93 bc in gadara in modern-day jordan.  the battle came after the nabataeans felt threatened by the hasmonean king alexander jannaeus's territorial acquisitions of gaza and several towns north of nabataea in transjordan, along the road to damascus where the greek seleucids were stationed (the seleucids were in terminal decline at the time).  jannaeus was "lucky to escape alive" back to jerusalem after the nabataean king obodas i managed to ambush his forces on a steep hill, thought to be the hills surrounding the yarmouk river. jannaeus returned to fierce jewish opposition in jerusalem after his defeat, and had to cede the acquired territories to the nabataeans so that he could dissuade them from supporting his opponents in judea.  background the nabataeans had maintained a friendly relationship with the neighboring jewish maccabees to the west, whose successors founded the hasmonean dynasty. alexander jannaeus, the hasmonean king, had besieged and captured gaza around 100 bc. jannaeus is thought to have punished the gazans for their support to the greek ptolemies in egypt over the hasmoneans during their wars. jannaeus then continued his father john hyrcanus's conquests in transjordan, where he captured gadara, amathus, moab and gilead.  the nabataeans felt threatened by these acquisitions as they had obstructed their access to the port of gaza, which was the last stop for goods that came from nabataea before being shipped to european markets. the acquisition of transjordanian towns laid another threat to nabataean interests, and to the seleucids in damascus too.  battle  after the death of the nabataean king aretas ii in 96 bc, his son obodas i rose to power. around 93 bc, obodas managed to ambush jannaeus and his forces in a hilly area where jannaeus was "lucky to escape alive". the nabataean army used a large number of camels to push the hasmonean forces deep into a valley. the area surrounding the yarmouk river is thought to be the location of this engagement.  aftermath jannaeus returned to fierce jewish opposition in jerusalem after his defeat, and had to cede the acquired territories to the nabataeans so that he could dissuade them from supporting his opponents in judea.  the seleucids, based in syria, were concerned with the growing influence of the nabatae
ans, who now controlled the territories just to their south. in 87 bc, the seleucid king antiochus xii dionysus waged the battle of cana against the nabataeans in gadara. antiochus was slain during combat, demoralizing his army and turning the battle into a decisive nabataean victory. the seleucid army fled and largely perished from starvation in the desert afterwards.  after obodas's victories over the hasmoneans and the seleucids, he became the first nabataean king to be worshipped as a god by the nabataean people. in avdat, in the negev desert, a temple was built by the nabataeans to commemorate obodas. inscriptions have been found inside referring to "obodas the god".  see also battle of cana between the seleucids and the nabataeans (84 bc) battle of yarmouk at a nearby site; between the rashidun caliphate and the byzantine empire (636 ce)  references  wars involving the nabataean kingdom 90s bc conflicts 93 bc wars involving the hasmonean kingdom 1st century bc in the hasmonean kingdom
hygrocybe flavifolia is a mushroom of the waxcap genus hygrocybe. found in north america, it was described as new to science by alexander h. smith and lexemuel ray hesler in 1942 as a species of hygrophorus. rolf singer transferred it to hygrocybe in 1945.  see also  list of hygrocybe species list of fungi by conservation status  references  external links  fungi of north america flavifolia fungi described in 1942
uhehlia pardalis is a species of leaf beetle of the democratic republic of the congo, observed by weise in 1906.  references  eumolpinae beetles of the democratic republic of the congo taxa named by julius weise beetles described in 1906 endemic fauna of the democratic republic of the congo
(born december 30, 1968) is a former baseball player based in japan. he played for the fukuoka daiei hawks in the japan pacific league.  references  living people 1968 births baseball people from okayama prefecture japanese baseball players nippon professional baseball catchers fukuoka daiei hawks players
wings of china is the inflight magazine of air china. the magazine is published monthly in beijing, china.  history and profile the magazine was started in 1992 with the name wings. ten years later, in 2002, the magazine was renamed wings of china. the magazine was published by air china media ltd. on a monthly basis and is based in beijing. it covers articles in english and in chinese. then it began to be published by cinmedia again on a monthly basis.  between 2007 and 2009 the magazine was on the list of 100 top valuable magazines by advertising circulation by china advertising association.  accusations of racism wings of china faced accusations of racism when they stated "london is generally a safe place to travel, however precautions are needed when entering areas mainly populated by indians, pakistanis and black people in their september 2016 issue because people felt uncomfortable due to the statement, which meant that travelers must take precautions or avoid multiracial areas. following the event the parent company of the magazine, air china, issued an apology.  references  	  1992 establishments in china air china chinese-language magazines english-language magazines inflight magazines magazines established in 1992 magazines published in beijing monthly magazines published in china tourism magazines
history of the american frontier is a book by  frederic l. paxson originally published in 1924 by houghton mifflin which won the 1925 pulitzer prize for history.  references   pulitzer prize for history-winning works 1924 non-fiction books houghton mifflin books
lost spirits is a working distillery with an amusement park-like tour founded by bryan davis and joanne haruta. the distillery was initially located in los angeles, california and later moved to las vegas, nevada. the experience of visiting lost spirits has been described as "cult hit among spirits geeks". the distillery attracted attention after davis developed technology to create mature whisky and rum within days.  technology  in 2015 the company attracted global media attention when davis announced that he had invented a new means of aging spirits. davis's process was shown, using modern analytical chemistry, to replicate the chemical reactions which take place as spirits age in barrels. the process aims to replicate the aging process in a laboratory while producing the same chemical signature and taste.  whisky made using davis' process performed favorably in blind tastings hosted by whisky advocate, and won a liquid gold award in jim murray's whisky bible (widely considered the world's most influential whisky critic).  las vegas distillery  in 2021, davis and haruta moved the distillery to las vegas. the new location included a tour described as "equated to an adult disneyland."  references   wineries in napa valley companies based in napa county, california
the 1911-12 sk rapid wien season was the 14th season in club history.  squad  squad and statistics  squad statistics  fixtures and results  league  references  1911-12 rapid wien season rapid austrian football championship-winning seasons
the 122nd signal battalion was constituted 1 july 1916 in the united states regular army, then organized to fort bliss in texas on 10 october 1916. on 21 september 1917, the unit was assigned to the 2nd infantry division.  campaign participation credit     philippine insurrection: san isidro  world war i: aisne; aisne-marne; st. mihiel; meuse-argonne; lorraine 1918; ile de france 1918  world war ii: normandy; northern france; rhineland; ardennes-alsace; central europe  korean war: un defensive; un offensive; ccf intervention; first un counteroffensive; ccf spring offensive; un summer-fall offensive; second korean winter; korea, summer-fall 1952; third korean winter; korea, summer 1953  decorations      presidential unit citation (army) for wirtzfeld, belgium  presidential unit citation (army) for hongchon  meritorious unit commendation (army) for european theater  meritorious unit commendation (army) for korea 1950-1951  french croix de guerre with palm, world war i for aisne-marne  french croix de guerre with palm, world war i for meuse-argonne  french croix de guerre, world war i, fourragere  belgian fourragere 1940  cited in the order of the day of the belgian army for action in the ardennes  cited in the order of the day of the belgian army for action on elsenborn crest  republic of korea presidential unit citation for naktong river line  republic of korea presidential unit citation for korea 1950-1953  references  signal battalions of the united states army military units and formations established in 1916
torine charlotta torines, nee torissen (11 april 1876 in linkoping - 5 july 1944 in stockholm), was a swedish mechanic, known in contemporary sweden as "the only female mechanic in scandinavia" and "doctor of the sewing machines".  life torine torines's parents managed the torine's sewing machine's shop. she herself opened her own business as a mechanic in 1891 at the age of fifteen, with her mother as accountant.  the sewing machine had been introduced to sweden in the 1850s and was from the 1860s onward so common that it was fully possible for her to support herself by repairing sewing machines. in the late 19th-century, female mechanics was uncommon enough for her to be famed as such, and she was quite possibly the first professional female mechanic in her country. she was very successful and worked as a sewing machine's mechanic for 45 years, until she left the business to her children in 1936.  legacy torinetappan, a park in sodermalm in stockholm, was named after her in 1989.  references  19th-century swedish businesspeople 1876 births 1944 deaths swedish women engineers swedish mechanical engineers 19th-century women engineers
petr kalina (born 9 july 1997) is a czech professional ice hockey player. he is currently playing for hc sparta praha of the czech extraliga.  kalina made his czech extraliga debut playing with mountfield hk during the 2015-16 czech extraliga season.  references  external links  1997 births living people hc benatky nad jizerou players hc sparta praha players czech ice hockey defencemen
kadrabad  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of kadrabad. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, kadrabad had 88 houses and a population of 483 (233 males and 250 females). the literacy rate was 65.58%, lower than state average of 75.84%. the number of children under the age of 6 years was 53 (10.97% of the population) and the child sex ratio was approximately 893, higher than the state average of 846.  population data  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  see also list of villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
george t. grossberg is the samuel w. fordyce professor and director of geriatric psychiatry in the department of psychiatry at saint louis university school of medicine. he is a past president of the american association for geriatric psychiatry and of the international psychogeriatric association. he is a member of the amda - the society for post-acute and long-term care medicine. dr. grossberg is a consistent awardee of america's best doctors for his work as a board certified geriatric psychiatrist and exceptional research on alzheimer's disease.  grossberg was born in hajduboszormeny, hungary and came to the united states as a refugee.  references  year of birth missing (living people) living people american psychiatrists hungarian emigrants to the united states
evergreen is an unincorporated community in gallia county, in the u.s. state of ohio.  history evergreen was platted in 1855. a post office called evergreen was established in 1880, and remained in operation until 1927.  references  unincorporated communities in gallia county, ohio unincorporated communities in ohio
stadium cake is the debut studio album by australian pop, folk band oh pep! it was released on 1 july 2016 and peaked at no. 20 on the aria hitseekers albums chart.  background  oh pep! consists of two members, olivia hally and pepita emmerichs. while producing stadium cake, the band sought to explore different musical styles to their previous eps. hally said in 2015, "we're more aware now of exactly what we want with our sound, and for that matter exploring sounds that we haven't used before. [...] there's more of a pop influence this time, some rock." stadium cake was recorded in nova scotia, and the band worked in multi-track for the first time.  reception  stadium cake peaked at no. 20 on the aria hitseekers albums chart, which is a component of the standard aria albums chart.  stadium cake was generally received favourably by music critics. bob boilen, who had championed the band since their appearance at the 2015 americana music festival, wrote that stadium cake "expands on hally and emmerichs' talents, to the point where it surprised me how detailed and intricate they are as both players and listeners." bryan hood, writing for the village voice, described it as an "engaging album of folk-pop, one that'll be good for fans of the genre to put on repeat this summer."  kyle mullin for exclaim! called the album "accomplished enough to leave a mark of its own on future folk and indie pop artists." doug wallen for rolling stone australia wrote that the album's best moments "retain the melbourne duo's folky intimacy, even as they stretch their sound every which way", and in particular praised the track "doctor doctor", which "nails taylor swift's pop smarts and sloganeering alike."  the album's lead single, "doctor doctor", received worldwide airplay. it ranked at #36 on the cbc music's top 100 radio songs of 2016. the track also appeared in season one of the television program the bold type. stephen goodhew, music director of fbi radio in sydney, australia, included "doctor doctor" among the year's top 10 songs, writing: "being honest with yourself is something that i think a lot of people struggle with and it's a theme the duo tackle head on here. with lyrics and melodies this strong, i can't help but feel like this band is criminally under-appreciated in our own country." collin brennan
for consequence of sound praised the track "bushwick" as "pop at its most kinetic."  track listing  references  2016 debut albums oh pep! albums
the pirate party () is a small political party in morocco which was founded in 2011. it is one of the first pirate parties in the african continent, second to the tunisian pirate party.  the party is formed by several youth activists and isn't recognised yet by the moroccan law.  references  external links official website  2011 establishments in morocco morocco political parties established in 2011 political parties in morocco
mount elliott mining complex is a heritage-listed copper mine and smelter at selwyn, shire of cloncurry, queensland, australia. it was designed by william henry corbould and built in 1908. it is also known as mount elliott smelter and selwyn. it was added to the queensland heritage register on 16 september 2011.  history  the mount elliott mining complex is an aggregation of the remnants of copper mining and smelting operations from the early 20th century and the associated former mining township of selwyn. the earliest copper mining at mount elliott was in 1906 with smelting operations commencing shortly after. significant upgrades to the mining and smelting operations occurred under the management of w.h. corbould during 1909-1910. following these upgrades and increases in production, the selwyn township grew quickly and had 1500 residents by 1918. the mount elliott company took over other companies on the cloncurry field in the 1920s, including the mount cuthbert and kuridala/hampden smelters. mount elliott operations were taken over by mount isa mines in 1943 to ensure the supply of copper during world war two. the mount elliott company was eventually liquidated in 1953.  mount elliott smelter  the existence of copper in the leichhardt river area of north western queensland had been known since ernest henry discovered the great australia mine in 1867 at cloncurry. in 1899 james elliott discovered copper on the conical hill that became mount elliott, but having no capital to develop the mine, he sold an interest to james morphett, a pastoralist of fort constantine station near cloncurry. morphett, being drought stricken, in turn sold out to john moffat of irvinebank, the most successful mining promoter in queensland at the time.  plentiful capital and cheap transport were prerequisites for developing the cloncurry field, which had stagnated for forty years. without capital it was impossible to explore and prove ore-bodies; without proof of large reserves of wealth it was futile to build a railway; and without a railway it was hazardous to invest capital in finding large reserves of ore. the mining investor or the railway builder had to break the impasse.  in 1906-1907 copper averaged  a ton on the london market, the highest price for thirty years, and the cloncurry field grew. the great northern railway was extended west of richmond in 1905-1906 by the queensland government and mines were floated on the melbourne stock exchange. at mount elliott a prospecting shaft had been sunk and on 1 august 1906 a cornish boiler and winding plant were installed on the
site.  mount elliott limited was floated in melbourne on 13 july 1906. in 1907 it was taken over by british and french interests and restructured. combining with its competitor, hampden cloncurry copper mines limited, mount elliott formed a special company to finance and construct the railway from cloncurry to malbon, kuridala (then friezeland) and mount elliott (later selwyn). this new company then entered into an agreement with the queensland railways department in july 1908.  the selwyn railway, which was known as the "syndicate railway", aroused opposition in 1908 from the trade unions and labor movement generally, who contended that railways should be state-owned. however, the hampden-mount elliott railway bill was passed by the queensland parliament and assented to on 21 april 1908; construction finished in december 1910. the railway terminated at the mount elliott smelter.  by 1907 the main underlie shaft had been sunk and construction of the smelters was underway using a second-hand water-jacket blast furnace and converters. at this time, w.h. corbould was appointed general manager of mount elliott limited.  the second-hand blast furnace and converters were commissioned or "blown in" in may 1909, but were problematic causing hold-ups. corbould referred to the equipment in use as being the "worst collection of worn-out junk he had ever come across". corbould soon convinced his directors to scrap the plant and let him design new works.  corbould was a metallurgist and geologist as well as mine/smelter manager. he foresaw a need to obtain control and thereby ensure a reliable supply of ore from a cross-section of mines in the region. he also saw a need to implement an effective strategy to manage the economies of smelting low-grade ore. smelting operations in the region were made difficult by the technical and economic problems posed by the deterioration in the grade of ore. corbould resolved the issue by a process of blending ores with different chemical properties, increasing the throughput capacity of the smelter and by championing the unification of smelting operations in the region. in 1912, corbould acquired hampden consols mine at kuridala for mount elliott limited, followed with the purchases of other small mines in the district.  walkers limited of maryborough was commissioned to manufacture a new  water jacket furnace for the smelters. an air compressor and blower for the smelters were constructed in the powerhouse and an electric motor and dynamo provided power for the crane and
lighting for the smelter and mine.  the new smelter was blown in september 1910, a month after the first train arrived, and it ran well, producing  of blister copper by the end of the year. the new smelting plant made it possible to cope with low-grade sulphide ores at mount elliott. the use of  of low-grade sulphide ores bought from the hampden consols mine in 1911 made it clear that if a supply of higher sulphur ore could be obtained and blended, performance and economy would improve. accordingly, the company bought a number of smaller mines in the district in 1912.  corbould mined with cut and fill stoping but a young mines inspector condemned the system, ordered it dismantled and replaced with square set timbering. in 1911, after gradual movement in stopes on the no.3 level, the smelter was closed for two months. nevertheless,  of blister copper was produced in 1911, rising to  in 1912 - the company's best year. many of the surviving structures at the site were built at this time.  troubles for mount elliott started in 1913. in february, a fire at the consols mine closed it for months. in june, a thirteen-week strike closed the whole operation, severely depleting the workforce. the year 1913 was also bad for industrial accidents in the area, possibly due to inexperienced people replacing the strikers. nevertheless, the company paid generous dividends that year.  at the end of 1914 smelting ceased for more than a year due to shortage of ore. although  of blister copper was produced in 1913, production fell to  in 1914 and the workforce dwindled to only 40 men. for the second half of 1915 and early 1916 the smelter treated ore railed south from mount cuthbert. at the end of july 1916 the smelting plant at selwyn was dismantled except for the flue chambers and stacks. a new furnace with a capacity of  per day was built, a large amount of second-hand equipment was obtained and the converters were increased in size.  after the enlarged furnace was commissioned in june 1917, continuing industrial unrest retarded production which amounted to only  of copper that year. the point of contention was the efficiency of the new smelter which processed twice as much ore while employing fewer men. the company decided to close down the smelter in october and reduce the size of the furnace, the largest in australia, from . in the meantime the price of copper had almost doubled from 1916 due to wartime consumption of munitions.  the new furnace commenced on 16 january
1918 and  of ore were smelted yielding  of blister copper which were sent to the bowen refinery before export to britain. local coal and coke supply was a problem and materials were being sourced from the distant bowen colliery. the smelter had a good run for almost a year except for a strike in july and another in december, which caused corbould to close down the plant until new year. in 1919, following relaxation of wartime controls by the british metal corporation, the copper price plunged from about  per ton at the start of the year to  per ton in april, dashing the company's optimism regarding treatment of low grade ores. the smelter finally closed after two months operation and most employees were laid off.  for much of the period 1919 to 1922, corbould was in england trying to raise capital to reorganise the company's operations but he failed and resigned from the company in 1922. the mount elliott company took over the assets of the other companies on the cloncurry field in the 1920s - mount cuthbert in 1925 and kuridala in 1926. mount isa mines bought the mount elliott plant and machinery, including the three smelters, in 1943 for , enabling them to start copper production in the middle of the second world war. the mount elliott company was finally liquidated in 1953.  in 1950 a.e. powell took up the mount elliott reward claim at selwyn and worked close to the old smelter buildings. an open cut mine commenced at starra, south of mount elliott and selwyn, in 1988 and is australia's third largest copper producer producing copper-gold concentrates from flotation and gold bullion from carbon-in-leach processing.  profitable copper-gold ore bodies were recently proved at depth beneath the mount elliott smelter and old underground workings by cyprus gold australia pty ltd. these deposits were subsequently acquired by arimco mining pty ltd for underground development which commenced in july 1993. a decline tunnel portal, ore and overburden dumps now occupy a large area of the maggie creek valley south-west of the smelter which was formerly the site of early miner's camps.  selwyn township  in 1907, the first hotel, run by h. williams, was opened at the site. the township was surveyed later, around 1910, by the queensland mines department. the town was to be situated north of the mine and smelter operations adjacent the railway, about  distant. it took its name from the nearby selwyn ranges which were named, during burke's expedition, after the victorian government geologist, alfred richard cecil selwyn. the
town has also been known by the name of mount elliott, after the nearby mines and smelter.  many of the residents either worked at the mount elliott mine and smelter or worked in the service industries which grew around the mining and smelting operations. little documentation exists about the everyday life of the town's residents. surrounding sheep and cattle stations, however, meant that meat was available cheaply and vegetables grown in the area were delivered to the township by horse and cart. imported commodities were, however, expensive.  by 1910 the town had four hotels. there was also an aerated water manufacturer, three stores, four fruiterers, a butcher, baker, saddler, garage, police, hospital, banks, post office (officially from 1906 to 1928, then unofficially until 1975) and a railway station. there was even an orchestra of ten players in 1912. the population of selwyn rose from 1000 in 1911 to 1500 in 1918, before gradually declining.  description  mount elliott smelter   mount elliott smelter is located in cloncurry shire, approximately one kilometre south of the former township of selwyn, and  south of cloncurry. the main processing infrastructure and remains are centralised on the northern side of the low hill known as mount elliott.  immediately north of the main processing complex is a shallow basin formed by natural rises in ground. within this basin lay the powerhouse and boiler house machinery beds, ore tunnel, beehive kiln, the lower condenser area and railway embankments.  to the east of the central complex are the remains of an assay office, furnaces, one possible and one identifiable explosives magazine, the upper condenser bank, tank stands, and the remains of a substantial residence.  to the south-west, on the central low hill, are the remains of a winder engine machine-bed, a square brick stack that served the boilers of the winder complex, and the single remaining bed and footings of the primary ore crusher.  further west on low ridges are the remains of a strong room, office, stone tank stand and smithy.  selwyn township  the selwyn township is located at the northern end of a valley running south to mount elliott smelter which is about  distant. all buildings have been removed and the evidence of the township now comprises garden plots, cement surfaces and corrugated iron water tanks.  the site of the union hotel remains identifiable and the timber stumps of the stationmaster's house, the railway formation and surviving timber sleepers are among the most visible remains. the railway embankment follows the eastern side of the valley
between the town and smelter passing several miners' hut sites comprising rough stone walls, and benched surfaces with stone retaining walls.  identifiable sites in the valley include a cement surface formerly under the high-set school building, the police station site, and the original smelter site at the base of a hill on the western side of the valley.  the town cemetery, about  south-east of the town, contains about fifteen headstones in separate sections for catholics and protestants. all but one headstone are from melrose & fenwick of townsville. the grave sites include three women, a returned anzac accidentally killed in the mine, a man who died of injuries in the local hospital, and a miner from mount cobalt who was buried in 1925 after selwyn was almost deserted.  heritage listing  mount elliott mining complex was listed on the queensland heritage register on 16 september 2011 having satisfied the following criteria.  the mount elliott mining complex, incorporating the remnants of the mount elliott mine, smelter, a range of associated infrastructure, scattered archaeological artefacts, the abandoned town of selwyn and its associated cemetery, has the potential to provide important information on aspects of queensland's history particularly early copper smelter practices and technologies, the full range of activities peripheral to those base operations and, importantly, the people who lived and worked in this complex historic mining landscape.  the mount elliott mining complex has sufficient archaeological integrity and diversity in its assemblage to facilitate detailed studies which would reveal the largely undocumented social and cultural aspects of the occupation and use of the mine, smelter and selwyn township areas. important research questions could focus on, but are not limited to, cultural identity and ethnicity, socioeconomic status, individual and collective living conditions, and individual adaptations to the remoteness and harshness of the local environment.  archaeological investigations within the mount elliott mining complex have potential to reveal specific details about the function and use of the area that complement and augment archival records. investigations of the remnant mining and smelting infrastructure may help answer important research questions relating to mining and smelting operations including, but not limited to:  the design and operation of an early primary ore-processing plant, base metals mine and smelting operation in queensland  adaptation of work practices due to remoteness, harshness and the local environment  fundamental and influential changes to copper mining and smelting practice in queensland initiated by mount elliott's manager w.r. corbould (1907-1922), especially the use of more efficient and economical production techniques compared to other similar operations the mount elliott mining complex is an important component of a broader historic mining landscape as operations at mount elliott
helped initiate extractive and primary processing industries in the cloncurry region and north-west queensland generally. the remnant infrastructure, mining artefacts, and the remains of the mining township of selwyn have potential for important comparative material to other mining sites in the region, particularly the nearby hampden company smelter at kuridala and mount cuthbert township and smelter. archaeological investigations at the mount elliott mining complex may reveal new information that expands our understanding of such enterprises and on the everyday lives of the people living and working at such sites across queensland.  references      burke, heather and gordon grimwade (2001) cultural heritage recommendations for the mount elliott mine and smelter, northwest qld, unpublished report to australasian resource consultants pty ltd  hooper, colin (1993) angor to zillmanton: stories of north queensland's deserted towns. mundingburra: colin hooper  hore-lacy, i. (ed) (1981) broken hill to mount isa: the mining odyssey of w.h. corbould, melbourne: hyland house  kerr, ruth (1992) queensland historical mining sites study, volume 4, unpublished report to the department of environment and heritage, brisbane  knight, james (1992) mount elliott mine and smelter site, north west queensland: a preliminary survey and conservation recommendations, unpublished report to cyprus gold australia corporation  lennon, jane and howard pearce (1996) mining heritage places study: northern and western queensland, volume 4: mount isa mining district, unpublished report to the queensland department of environment and heritage  nexus archaeology & heritage (2009) assessment of historical and industrial archaeology values: mt elliott smelter precinct, north-west queensland, unpublished report to ivanhoe cloncurry limited  attribution  external links   queensland heritage register shire of cloncurry industrial buildings in queensland articles incorporating text from the queensland heritage register smelting copper mines in queensland metal companies of australia copper mining companies of australia archaeological sites in queensland
the sawau tribe in fiji is made of 6 villages on the island of beqa,  to the south of viti levu, but the district is only made up of 5 villages.  they are as follows: dakuibeqa (chiefly village -tui sawau), dakuni, soliyaga, naceva, naseuseu and rukua - (part of the tribe  of sawau but part of the district of raviravi)  the people of sawau are world famous for performing two cultural expressions:  vilavilairevo (firewalking) the phenomena was examined in 1902 when it was already a tourist attraction, with a "probable explanation of the mystery" arrived at. yavirau or qolikubu - (fish drive)  references   populated places in fiji
andre morizet (26 january 1876 - 30 march 1942) was a french politician. he served as a member of the french senate from 1927 to 1942, representing seine.  works  references  1876 births 1942 deaths people from reims french senators of the third republic french non-fiction writers senators of seine (department)
to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a. is an april 1994 book written by deborah dash moore and published by the free press. it discusses the jewish communities that formed in los angeles and miami in the post-world war ii period. moore argued that the migration to new communities helped american jews find their identities and that they "reinvented" themselves.  background jenna weissman joselit of the new york university department of liberal studies described moore as "one of this generation's foremost historians of america's jews". at the time of publication moore was vassar college's american culture program director.  moore characterizes jews who moved into newly established cities; which had a lack of established culture and tradition, mild climates, and lifestyles perceived as being casual; as "permanent tourists". the references include monographs and interviews.  raymond a. mohl of american jewish history wrote that the oral history and archival research supporting the book serves as its "great strength". carol r. glatt of the veterans affairs medical center library, philadelphia wrote that the book's documentation was "solid".  content the book covers the post-world war ii period up until the early 1960s.  stephen j. whitfield of brandeis university stated that the book focuses more on similarities between los angeles and miami rather than differences; he argued that "southern regionalists" may dispute the technique, but that "her approach is compelling when framed within jewish history".  joselit wrote that moore emphasizes that "the jewish historical experience, from minsk to miami, is grounded less in the particularities of place-in the "style of the landscape"-than in its promise" and that "the sense of possibility" appears throughout the work.  moore stated that jewish culture continued to thrive in los angeles and miami even though some individuals decades earlier predicted it would evaporate, and therefore she argued that jewish culture will continue to be intact.  reception glatt wrote that the book had a "fluid, readable style" and that "this seminal work will be widely read."  joselit wrote that much of the phenomena described in the book "have as much to do with postwar america more generally than with the specific geographical contours of miami and los angeles".  mohl wrote that to the golden cities was overall "an excellent book, deeply researched and extremely readable", but he took issue with the book's central thesis that the new jewish society formed in miami and los angeles, arguing that it also could have formed in suburbs of
older cities and that social and political movements divided jews in the north, not only in the south.  eugene patron of the forward wrote that the book "for the most part [...] is an engaging exploration of what has been an untold story" although "an overload of details" sometimes "bogs down" the book.  june sochen of the northeastern illinois university department of history wrote that "has done a fine job of synthesizing" its sources "to produce the first important analysis of this migration" and that the book "will be the foundation upon which future studies of the subject are built."  whitfield stated that the book was "the best social history of miami jewry" because to the golden cities "is also the only serious history of that community" and therefore giving this distinction would be "faint praise". whitfield praised the "clear and unobtrusive" design and prose and the research undertaken, but he argued that the phenomena happening in miami and los angeles also happened in the north and that the events reflect broader jewish history rather than specific histories of the u.s. sunbelt.  see also  history of the jews in los angeles  references  ben-atar, doron (fordham university). "the jewish american question" (includes a review of this and other books). journal of urban history, nov, 1999, vol.26(1), p. 98(1) can be found on sage. doi: 10.1177/009614429902600107.  glatt, carol r. (veterans affairs medical center library, philadelphia). " to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a." (brief article). library journal, march 15, 1994, vol.119(5), p. 89(1)  joselit, jenna weissman (new york university). "to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a." reviews in american history, dec, 1995, vol.23(4), p. 739(5). available on jstor.  mohl, raymond a. (university of alabama at birmingham). "to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a." (review). american jewish history volume 85, number 2, june 1997. pp. 184-187. doi 10.1353/ajh.1997.0010. available at project muse.  patron, eugene. "to the golden cities:
pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a." the forward, may 27, 1994, vol. lxxxxviii (30,977), p. 9  sochen, june (northeastern illinois university). "to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l.a." (review). shofar: an interdisciplinary journal of jewish studies, 1995, vol. 13 (2), pp. 94-96. doi: 10.1353/sho.1995.0049. available at project muse.  whitfield, stephen j. (brandeis university). "to the golden cities: pursuing the american jewish dream in miami and l. a." (book review). the florida historical quarterly, 1 october 1994, vol.73(2), pp. 234-236. available from jstor.  notes  jewish culture 1994 non-fiction books jews and judaism in los angeles jews and judaism in florida
maya bazar is a 2006 indian telugu-language fantasy film directed by indraganti mohanakrishna starring bhumika chawla, raja abel. music is composed by radhakrishnan.  plot srinivas (raja abel) hails from a poor farmer's family and his father committed suicide because of heavy debts. he makes a living by working as a driver with a business man (tanikella bharani). though he earns small amount of money, he is always ready to share some percentage of it with orphans. bhaskar (ali) is his friend and room-mate. one day, he goes to the airport to drop his employer. he happens to see a little girl siri (baby harshita) who is abandoned by her parents. he takes her with him only to find that she is suffering from a terminal heart condition. doctors advice him to immediately get her operated upon, which costs rs 3 lakhs. he also accidentally meets anupama (bhumika chawla) who keeps secretly following him.  unable to find a way to gather money for the surgery, he decides to fulfill her last wish by taking her to tirumala. he asks bhaskar to take siri for darshan and waits in a park cursing the lord venkateswara, and lord kubera who lent money to the former who is collecting interest from the devotees. understanding his eagerness to help others, kubera (s. p. balasubrahmanyam) appears before him in disguise and offers him rs. 5 lakhs. kubera also takes a word from him that he would repeat the same gesture whenever he asks. srinivas gets siri operated, and starts a business with the remaining amount. he eventually becomes rich and donates half of his profits for the welfare of orphans and poor farmers. anupama also joins him to help in his good deeds.  kubera goes to srinivas's house and does household chores there to be relieved from a curse given by a sage. anupama and srinivas fall in love with each other. kubera asks for the life of srinivas to get early relief from his curse. srinivas reveals it to anupama and asks her to forget him and take care of siri. anupama insists that he marry her. when kubera comes to take srinu's life, he finds that he is getting married and is forced to take part as bride's father. later it is revealed that anupama is the daughter of kubera and the drama was enacted by narada (dharmavarapu subrahmanyam) with the help of kubera's wife
vriddhi, and his servant virupaksha (gundu sudarshan). kubera is in a difficult state now as taking the life of srinivas leaves his daughter a widow. srinivas asks kubera to stop taking money from the devotees so that it can be used for helping the poor. hearing those words, kubera's curse is lifted. all ends well.  cast  raja abel as srinivas "srinu"  bhumika chawla as anupama  s. p. balasubrahmanyam as kubera  baby harshita as siri  ali as bhaskar  tanikella bharani as srinu's boss  dharmavarapu subramanyam as narada  gundu sudarshan as virupaksha  bangalore padma as anupama's mother  l. b. sriram as human form of virupaksha  jayalalita as human form of anupama's mother  surya as chalapati  soundtrack  references  external links  mayabazar film on youtube  indian films indian fantasy films indian fantasy-comedy films indian religious comedy films films about poverty in india films about farmers' suicides in india films directed by mohan krishna indraganti 2006 fantasy films 2006 films 2000s telugu-language films
the 2016 supercopa euroamericana was the second and final edition of the supercopa euroamericana, a men's football friendly tournament created by directv, disputed between the copa sudamericana and the uefa europa league winners. the match was played in 2016 by santa fe, the 2015 copa sudamericana champions, and sevilla, the 2014-15 uefa europa league champions. the match took place on 24 july at the espn wide world of sports complex in bay lake, florida. sevilla won the match 2-1.  format the match was played for 90 minutes. in case of a draw after regulation, the winners were determined via a penalty shoot-out.  details  see also sevilla fc in international football competitions  references  external links  supercopa euroamericana: official site  supercopa euroamericana supercopa euroamericana supercopa euroamericana supercopa euroamericana 2016 supercopa euroamericana 2016 supercopa euroamericana supercopa euroamericana soccer in florida july 2016 sports events in the united states
joseph coriaty, faia, (born june 26, 1956) is an american architect.  early life and education  son of joseph said coriaty and therese elaine coriaty, joseph coriaty is one of six siblings. he was born in detroit, michigan, and spent his childhood in riverview, michigan, until 1965, when the coriaty family moved to trenton, michigan.  he attended trenton high school, graduating in 1974.  coriaty received his bachelor of science degree in architecture from the university of detroit in 1978, where he graduated magna cum laude. coriaty went on to receive his master of architecture degree from the university of southern california in 1980. he has been a registered architect in the state of california since 1983.  professional career   after coriaty earned his master of architecture degree from the university of southern california in 1980, he spent the early part of his professional career at john siebel associate architects in los angeles, california, john carl warnecke & associates in los angeles, and widom/wein & partners in santa monica, california.  in 1983, coriaty joined the landau partnership in santa monica, california, where he worked as the project architect on a number of notable projects, such as central park at toluca lake in burbank, california, and the biltmore tower at the los angeles biltmore hotel in downtown los angeles.  coriaty joined frederick fisher and partners in 1988, and became a partner in 1995.  he is currently the partner-in-charge for frederick fisher and partners' academic, civic, live-work and community-oriented projects. his focus is the design of the firm's large-scale signature academic, library, institutional, and museum projects. coriaty's strong interest in the process of making is founded in his early years spent in detroit, a leading car-manufacturing city. his projects share a common ethos - one that balances program, beauty, efficiency, and community.  key projects include, but are not limited to: firestone library at princeton university; seaver science center (library) at the university of southern california; the annenberg center for information science and technology at caltech in pasadena, california; phase iii of the campus expansion initiative at otis college of art and design in los angeles; the annenberg community beach house in santa monica; colby college museum of art in waterville, maine; bergamot station arts complex and redevelopment in santa monica; moma ps1
in queens, new york; numerous houston's restaurants nationwide; flint institute of arts in flint, michigan; and, the science education and research facility for crossroads school in santa monica.          notable awards attributed to projects that coriaty was the partner-in-charge, designer, and/or project director include, but are not limited to: top prize for excellence in restaurant design from the american institute of architecture, los angeles chapter for the santa monica houston's restaurant project; the westside prize, honor award in public institutional projects from the westside urban forum for the annenberg community beach house, and design merit award from the westside urban forum for the annenberg center for information science and technology at caltech.  coriaty also serves as a board member for the university of detroit mercy school of architecture and the craft and folk art museum in los angeles, california.  design philosophy   the design of academic and museum spaces constitute a significant portion of coriaty's portfolio.  he is quoted saying that he likes "the idea of researchers and visitors alike enjoying their work in a natural setting."  regarding his work on princeton's firestone library, home to over 5,000,000 volumes, he explained, "the idea is to embrace the existing building and expand the ethos as a 'laboratory of learning'." across the country in pasadena, california, the walter annenberg center for information science and technology, at the california institute of technology in pasadena, "was designed to be more than a classroom-it was intended to be an experimental learning center," coriaty said. "as a gold leed certified structure, its use of natural light minimized electricity, and the idea is to bring nature in, blending space and light. here, the introspective turns outward." so popular is the building, according to coriaty, that researchers have a waiting list to work in the building, and classes are more popular than ever. "natural light and air help create a pleasant environment," he said. "a pleasant environment helps researchers and students enjoy their work and thus inspire natural collaboration."  many of the recent public and institutional projects that coriaty and his colleagues at frederick fisher and partners have designed, including projects at caltech as well as the annenberg community beach house at santa monica state beach, share many of the hallmarks of modern architecture: the clean lines, the boxy, glass-wrapped volumes, the disdain for literal historical ornament. they also show a decided interest in minimalism, paying as
much attention to the spaces between buildings as to the buildings themselves.  other projects include the colby college art museum in waterville, maine, where an enormous artistic bequest necessitated an addition to an existing exhibition space. despite this prodigious output, coriaty is quick to single out his colleagues. "architecture is a team sport," he said. "i have my partners and many people behind me who help me do what i do." coriaty traveled to haiti with members of the jesuit refugee service in an effort to evaluate the damaged school buildings. his knowledge of both architectural design, and structural systems provided a teaching opportunity to educate the local haitian engineers, and builders in structurally sound design. the experience intrinsically informed him on the importance of balancing form and function in the creation of communities.  personal life   in 1978, coriaty moved from detroit to santa monica, california, where he has remained to date.  he married ann marie fredal on december 28, 1983, in detroit, michigan.  together, they have two children.  his personal interests include collecting art, collecting various forms of musical recordings, fine watches, and unique items that are design-oriented.  references  1956 births 20th-century american architects university of detroit mercy alumni usc school of architecture alumni living people
garage rock:  frat rock is one of the earliest forms of garage rock and was popular in the 1960s, particularly in the first half of the decade.  the music tended to be "fun" and "upbeat" and was often played at parties and college fraternity events.
the royal insurance building is a former office building located at 201 sansome street, san francisco, california, and now converted to condominiums. it is san francisco landmark #160, built in 1907 to designs by architects howells & stokes. its facade and marble entryway sculpture appears to be very similar to that of the former royal insurance building at william street and maiden lane in new york city, designed by the same architect. the sculpture is apparently by rochette and parzini. it is crowned by a clock, supported by the lion and unicorn, with english roses and scottish thistles, and the motto "tutum te sistam". two cartouches contain the liver bird to the left, representing liverpool, and a cross and dagger to the right.  howells & stokes, who were located in new york city, sent seattle architect abraham h. albertson as their representative to supervise the construction.  references  sources  pacific coast architecture database entry  noe hill description  "the royal insurance building", architectural record, volumes 19-20, pages 361-364.  (describes the new york city building)  office buildings in san francisco office buildings completed in 1907
the way to the top: the best business advice i ever received is a business book compiled by donald trump.  first released in may 2004, the book reached the wall street journal list of best selling books the month it was published.  publishers weekly recommended the book for fans of the apprentice. staten island advance called it "easy-to-understand".  contents summary the way to the top includes quotations from 100 businesspeople, including billionaire private equity investor thomas j. barrack and realtor barbara corcoran. one of the contributors, steven cody of peppercom, a pr firm, was surprised to be asked by trump to appear in the book. entrepreneur charlotte ottley, owner of a communications business located in new york, served as a contributing author to the book. dippin' dots founder curt jones was quoted in the work.  sales and reception the way to the top was first released on may 18, 2004. by may 28 of that year, it had reached number 10 on the wall street journal "best selling books" among business books. it remained a best seller on the list through july 2004.  publishers weekly reviewed the book, and wrote that it put together advice from multiple members of the business industry into "easily digestible tidbits". the review concluded, "serious readers of business books may be disappointed by some of more lackluster contributions ... but there are enough sage words here to satisfy most fans of the apprentice." staten island advance wrote that the book featured, "a compilation of practical, easy-to-understand business advice gathered from top executives across the country." detroit examiner recommended the book among: "top 5 business leadership book recommendations for 2010".  see also  bibliography of donald trump  references  2004 non-fiction books books by donald trump business books
peace of nisibis may refer to the following treaties signed in nisibis (modern nusaybin, turkey):  peace of nisibis (299), between the roman empire and the sasanian empire, ended the roman-sassanian war of 296-299 peace of nisibis (363), between the roman empire and the sasanian empire, ended the perso-roman war of 363  see also  list of byzantine foreign treaties  list of treaties
david onllwyn brace (1848 - 1891) was a welsh independent minister and elegist.  on completing his early schooling (probably in the onllwyn area), he attended the independent college, bala (1866-9), and on 24 october 1870 was ordained priest in rhos-y-medre, denbighshire. in 1872 he moved to the swansea valley and held appointments in felindre and at bethel, llan-twrch, before moving to  bethel, aberdare.  his published works include; 'cerddi onllwyn' (1888), and a volume of love-songs, 'rachel' (1890).  he died in june 1891.  references   welsh religious leaders 1848 births 1891 deaths
tsinghua shenzhen international graduate school (tsinghua sigs) () is a public university established by tsinghua university and the shenzhen municipal government as a joint venture in 2001. it is located in the university town of shenzhen, surrounded by peking university shenzhen graduate school and the harbin institute of technology shenzhen.  history  graduate school in shenzhen, tsinghua university  in 2001, tsinghua university and the shenzhen municipal government established the graduate school in shenzhen as a joint venture in education. the school created seven academic divisions: life science & health; energy & environment; information science & technology; logistics & transportation; advanced manufacturing; ocean science & technology; and social science & management to carry out graduate education and scientific research.  in 2014, tsinghua university and the university of california, berkeley (uc berkeley) established tsinghua-berkeley shenzhen institute (tbsi). the joint research institute brings faculty from tsinghua university and uc berkeley to fulfil the aims of being a world-class research and education institute.  it was formerly called the graduate school at shenzhen (gsst) until march 2019.  tsinghua shenzhen international graduate school (tsinghua sigs)  in march 2019, tsinghua shenzhen international graduate school relaunched as a further expansion and integration of the graduate school at shenzhen (gsst) and the tsinghua-berkeley shenzhen institute (tbsi). it aims to create an academic and research environment that is international, borderless and entrepreneurial.  campus  tsinghua sigs' campus is located in nanshan district, shenzhen within the university town of shenzhen. the campus continues to expand, and will occupy a total area of over 50 hectares after construction.  academics  tsinghua sigs provides master and doctoral degree programs under seven interdisciplinary theme areas including energy & materials, data science & information technology, biopharmaceutical and health engineering, marine engineering & technology, future human habitats, environment & ecology and innovation management.    it currently offers 25 master's programs and 17 doctoral programs.  international partnerships  academic exchange and joint degree programs  tsinghua sigs conducts interdisciplinary research, academic exchange and joint degree programs with universities such as uc berkeley, rwth aachen university, kyoto university, nagoya university, waseda university, the center for research and interdisciplinary (cri, paris), universite paris descartes, universite paris diderot and the university of melbourne.  research  shenzhen geim graphene research center  in december 2017, the shenzhen geim graphene research center, jointly established by tsinghua university and the shenzhen municipal government, officially opened. the center is managed by
the shenzhen science and technology innovation committee, and supported by tsinghua-berkeley shenzhen institute (tbsi) and tsinghua sigs. under the leadership of professor andre geim, 2010 nobel prize winner in physics and one of graphene discoverers, the research center focuses on two-dimensional materials and graphene research.  risc-v international open source laboratory  in november 2019, the risc-v international open source laboratory (rios lab) officially unveiled. under the leadership of 2017 a.m. turing award winner dr. david patterson, and operational support from tbsi,  rios lab mainly conducts research in risc-v hardware and software technology.  see also tsinghua-berkeley shenzhen institute tsinghua university  external links tsinghua shenzhen international graduate school tsinghua shenzhen international graduate school   tsinghua-berkeley shenzhen institute tsinghua university  references  nanshan district, shenzhen tsinghua university universities and colleges in shenzhen educational institutions established in 2001 2001 establishments in china
antonino dos santos baptista (10 march 1933 - 5 february 2013) was a portuguese professional racing cyclist. he rode in three editions of the tour de france.  references  external links    1933 births 2013 deaths portuguese male cyclists people from agueda
dietrich gerhard emil theodor tappen (3 july 1866 - 28 may 1953) was a german world war i general.  born in esens, tappen joined the prussian army in 1885 and became career officer with the artillery. at the start of the first world war, tappen was a colonel in the oberste heeresleitung (ohl) in koblenz, where he led the operations section which coordinated the german battle strategy. in september 1914 tappen reported from a tour of inspection at the front that the french were too exhausted to begin an offensive, that a final push would be decisive and that more withdrawals would compromise the morale of the german troops, after the defeat on the marne.  in march 1915 tappen served as chief of staff of the 7th army under josias von heeringen, but soon returned to ohl. on 26 june 1915 tappen was promoted to major-general. he received the pour le merite on 11 september 1915 and the oak leaves in january 1916. on 31 august 1916 tappen was transferred out of ohl and became chief of staff to army group mackensen on the romanian front. in december 1916 tappen became commander of the 5th ersatz division. from september 1917 until the armistice tappen commanded the 15th infantry division.  in 1920 tappen wrote bis zur marne 1914: beitrage zur beurteilung der kriegfuhren bis zum abschluss der marne-schlacht.  tappen died on 28 may 1953 in goslar.  references  external links  "gerhard tappen" biographical entry at the prussian machine  1866 births 1953 deaths german army generals of world war i recipients of the pour le merite (military class) generals of artillery (prussia) lieutenant generals of prussia
joan sastre morro (born december 10, 1991) is a spanish professional basketball player for iberostar tenerife of the spanish liga acb. he is a 2.01 m (6'7") tall swingman, as he plays at both the shooting guard and small forward positions.  professional career born in inca, balearic islands, spain, sastre spent all of his youth basketball playing career on the balearic islands. in 2008, at the age of 17, sastre debuted in the spanish 2nd-tier level leb oro, with basquet inca, where he played two games, before signing his first professional contract with basquet mallorca.  one year later, sastre agreed with cajasol, where he would make his debut in the spanish top-tier level liga acb, despite that he was loaned in his first year to cajsol's affiliated team, cb qalat of the spanish 3rd-tier level leb plata.  sastre played in sevilla for five years, before signing with the spanish club cai zaragoza. two years later, he moved to the spanish club valencia basket.  on july 2, 2021, he has signed with lenovo tenerife of the spanish liga acb.  international career sastre was a member of the junior national teams of spain. with spain's junior national teams, he played at the 2009 fiba europe under-18 championship, the 2010 fiba europe under-20 championship, where he won a bronze medal, and he also won a gold medal at the 2011 fiba europe under-20 championship, which was held in bilbao, while playing with the spanish under-20 national team.  he has also been a member of the senior spain national team. with spain's senior team he played at the eurobasket 2017.  references  external links euroleague.net profile fiba archive profile fiba europe profile eurobasket.com profile spanish acb league profile  spanish federation profile  twitter   1991 births living people basket zaragoza players basquet mallorca players cb canarias players cb inca players real betis baloncesto players liga acb players shooting guards small forwards spanish men's basketball players valencia basket players
odder idræts- og gymnastikforening is a danish football club currently playing in the denmark series, the fourth tier of danish football. they play at spektrum park in odder, jutland, which has a capacity of 1,000.  history in the spring of 1899, a small group of people formed odder igf in odder, the "largest village in denmark". since, the club mostly played in the lower divisions of danish football.   in 1993, club chairman bent villumsen laid out plans for securing the future success of odder igf. these plans came to fruition in 2013, when odder igf promoted to the danish 2nd division - the third tier in the danish football system - for the first time in the club's 114 year history. the historical promotion occurred under villumsen's successor as chairman, peter lindberg christensen, who had laid out the future plans for the club together alongside villumsen in 1993.  one of the more remarkable events in club history occurred before the famed promotion. more specifically on 25 august 2010, as odder igf reached the second round of the danish cup and drew agf, the largest team in the region. almost 2,500 spectators had come to spektrum park to see the local side lose 0-1 to agf after a goal in stoppage time by casper sloth.  on the last day of the 2018-19 season, odder igf suffered relegation to the denmark series after a 2-2 draw against vejgaard bk. this meant that six consecutive seasons in the danish 2nd division came to an end.  honours denmark series (fourth tier)   runners-up (1): 2012-13 (promotion)  personnel  references  external links  official site    football clubs in denmark association football clubs established in 1899
jacob batalon () is an american actor. he had his breakout role as ned leeds in the marvel cinematic universe beginning with spider-man: homecoming (2017) and its sequels, far from home (2019) and no way home (2021), along with cameo appearances in avengers: infinity war (2018) and avengers: endgame (2019).  early life jacob batalon was born in hawaii, to filipino parents. batalon has seven half-siblings: a brother and a sister from his mother, and three brothers and two sisters from his father.  upon graduating from the private catholic school st. anthony's school, he went to damien memorial school, then batalon attended kapi'olani community college to study music theory, but later dropped out. he then took a two-year program to study acting at the new york conservatory for dramatic arts.  career batalon made his acting debut in the 2016 film north woods.  it was announced at san diego comic-con 2016 that batalon would play peter parker's best friend ned in spider-man: homecoming (2017). it was batalon's first major role. he reprised the role in avengers: infinity war, avengers: endgame, spider-man: far from home and spider-man: no way home.  in 2018, batalon played one of the bodies inhabited by spirit a in the young-adult film every day.  in 2021, batalon was cast as the titular reginald in syfy's dramedy series reginald the vampire.  personal life in 2020, batalon lost  for his role in spider-man: no way home.  filmography  film  television  web series  references  external links    1996 births living people 21st-century american male actors american male actors of filipino descent american male film actors male actors from honolulu
max purcell (born 3 april 1998) is an australian professional tennis player. his career-high  singles ranking is world no. 167, achieved on 28 february 2022, and his doubles ranking is world no. 28 achieved on 18 october 2021. he reached the men's doubles final at the 2020 australian open partnering luke saville, and the 2022 australian open partnering matthew ebden. as a junior, he reached the quarterfinals of the 2016 australian open boys' singles event and semifinals of the boys' doubles. purcell represented australia at the 2020 summer olympics in tennis in singles and doubles, partnering john peers.  professional career  2016-2019: early career in july 2016, purcell qualified for and won the gimcheon challenger in south korea against fellow australian andrew whittington. purcell was ranked no. 762 in the world leading into the tournament, making him the second lowest-ranked player to win an atp challenger title in 16 years. he finished the season ranked 324 in the world.  in 2017, purcell received a wildcard into the australian open doubles event, where he partnered alex de minaur. the duo lost in the opening round to spanish pairing guillermo garcia lopez and pablo carreno busta. purcell made four futures tour finals in 2017, claiming three titles. he finished the year ranked no. 277 in the world.  2020: grand slam singles debut and doubles final, top 40 in doubles in january, purcell made his grand slam singles debut after qualifying for the 2020 australian open. he lost to jannik sinner in the first round in straight sets. at the same tournament, he paired with luke saville as a wildcard in the men's doubles, where they reached the final losing to 11th seeded pair american rajeev ram and brit joe salisbury. the pair also reached their second final of the season of the 2020 astana open where they lost to belgians sander gille/joran vliegen.  2021: first atp semifinal & top 200 in singles, olympics singles and doubles debut, top 30 in doubles purcell commenced the 2021 season at the 2021 great ocean road open, where he defeated norbert gombos for his first atp main draw win. purcell was defeated by karen khachanov in the second round.  purcell earned his first win against an opponent in the top 20 after beating world no. 16 and top seed gael monfils at the eastbourne as a lucky loser to reach his first atp singles quarterfinal and then recorded another win over andreas seppi to reach his first semifinal. he lost to another italian lorenzo sonego. following this great
run, in july he won his second challenger singles title, the 2021 president's cup (tennis) in nur sultan. as a result, he entered the top 200 at a career-high in singles of no. 190 on 19 july 2021.  at the 2020 tokyo olympics, purcell was entered as a last-minute alternate for andy murray, who had withdrawn due to a right quad injury. purcell recorded his biggest career win and first over a top 20 player, defeating world no. 15 felix auger-aliassime in straight sets. purcell also replaced alex de minaur after he tested positive for covid-19 in the doubles event, where he partnered john peers but lost in the first round.  in august 2021, purcell reached the third round of the 2021 winston-salem open. he re-entered the atp top 200 in singles as a result.  he reached the quarterfinals in doubles at the 2021 us open partnering matthew ebden where they lost to 4th seeds and eventual champions joe salisbury and rajeev ram. he was also selected as a wildcard in the singles main draw for his debut at this major but lost in the first round again to 13th seed jannik sinner.  on 20 september 2021, and following a quarterfinal result at cary challenger, purcell achieved a career high singles ranking of world no. 189. he followed this by a final also in singles at the 2021 columbus challenger where he lost to stefan kozlov. he reached a career-high singles ranking of no. 175 and doubles ranking of no. 28 on 18 october 2021.  2022: atp cup debut, second australian open doubles final in january 2022, purcell made his debut representing australia at the 2022 atp cup, losing to jannik sinner in the round robin stage. purcell reached the second round of australian open men's single qualifying.  in the men's doubles, purcell partnered once more with ebden. after defeating jonathan erlich and andre goransson in the first round, they went on to topple four seeded teams consecutively en route to purcell's second men's doubles final and their first-ever doubles final as a pair overall. in the second round, ebden and purcell beat fourth seeds juan sebastian cabal and robert farah from a set down before reaching the third round, where they defeated thirteenth seeds raven klaasen and ben mclachlan in straight sets to make the quarterfinals. this showing earned the pair their second grand slam quarterfinal appearance together. in the quarterfinals, they knocked out tenth seeds wesley koolhof and neal skupski from a set down
and through the final ten-point deciding set tiebreak to reach the semifinals. together with thanasi kokkinakis and nick kyrgios, ebden and purcell made it the most australians to reach this stage of the men's doubles tournament in 29 years, since 1993, and the first time since 1985 that two all-australian pairings contested the semifinals. their quarterfinals win set them up for a match against second seeds rajeev ram and joe salisbury, where they saved four set points in the second set to defeat the pair in straight sets to reach the final. ebden and purcell faced kokkinakis and kyrgios in the final, the first in men's doubles at the australian open to feature two all-australian teams since 1980, where they ultimately lost in straight sets.  significant finals  grand slam tournament finals  doubles: 2 (2 runners-up)  atp career finals  doubles: 3 (3 runners-up)  challenger and futures finals  singles: 11 (6-5)  doubles: 18 (12-6)  performance timelines  singles current after the 2022 australian open  doubles current through the 2022 australian open.  record against top 10 players purcell's record against players who have been ranked in the top 10, with those who are active in boldface. only atp tour main draw matches are considered:  references  external links        1998 births living people australian male tennis players tennis players at the 2020 summer olympics tennis players from sydney olympic tennis players of australia
the rio de janeiro 2016 olympic village, also called the athletes' village or olympic and paralympic village, is an accommodation center built to house all participating athletes, as well as officials and athletic trainers of the 2016 summer olympics. it is located in barra da tijuca, close to city of sports complex.   with a capacity of 17,950 people and a total of 3,604 apartments and 31 buildings, it is the largest olympic village in the history of the olympic games.  construction  in the 1960s, lagoinha of rio de janeiro fishermen did irregular occupations in the jacaparegua lagoon forming vila autodromo favela. in 1975, because of the construction of the autodromo international nelson piquet and a new upscale neighbourhood, community of vila autodromo remained between the walls of the circuit and the margins of the lagoon. in 1994 it was given to more than 60 families property titles because constant threats of eviction by prefeitura do rio de janeiro, local authority of rio. in the plans that the international olympic committee received from the olympic games winning bid in 2009, part of vila autodromo still appeared in the left upper side of the new city of sports complex, intended to be built in the west zone of bar of tijuca.  despite the existence of the vila inhabitants' property titles, prefeitura do rio de janeiro reduced the original size of the community by 83% using expropriations and eviction orders. afterwards, following constant clashes against the riot police after resisting evictions, families affected formed a civil society called viva a vila autodromo!. they received consultancy of several rio de janeiro universities and organisations of the civil society to elaborate plano popular da vila autodromo (popular plan of vila autodromo), a plan of urbanisation that was agreed with the mayor of the city, eduardo paes, to give to the village a place with a new urban infrastructure that will include a cultural centre and sportive fields and coexist with the new olympic infrastructure of suitable way, while being surrounded almost completely by the new olympic park.  new olympic village remained in front of vila autodromo. beginning in 2011 constructors odebrecht and carvalho hosken began the construction in an area of more than . in the construction of this village participated more than 18,000 people. they used  of concrete and  of steel. the buildings received leed nd environmental certification because 85% of the demolished former communities were reused and the complex has more than  of green flat roofs as well as 75 solar
plates to warm water. all the installations are designed with complete accessibility with ramps and sufficient elevators.  description each apartment has three to four bedrooms, a hall, a balcony, and laundry services. there are  of bike lanes in the complex. the internal main street of the village is a pedestrian street, rua carioca, which also has shops, cafes, restaurants, an international zone, a main lunch area and a transport terminal. the village has different areas of recreation with video games, musical instruments and table tennis and a centre of worship for the distinct religions.  the travel time is less than 10 minutes to the competition venues. the village has exclusive bus lanes where 300 buses connect athletes with the rest of the olympic venues. nearly 4 million pieces of luggage belonging to the guests were carried automatically from rio de janeiro-galeao international airport to the apartments of each guest.  the first delegations arrived to the village on 18 july 2016. larger delegations were assigned apartments, and even entire buildings, based upon their request, while smaller delegations were placed in the remaining rooms after the larger delegations had been accommodated.  problems  some officials deemed the athletes' village as "unlivable" and unsafe because of major plumbing and electrical hazards still present two weeks before the olympic games were due to open. blocked toilets, leaking pipes, exposed wiring, darkened stairwells where no lighting had been installed and dirty floors were among the reported problems at some apartments in the complex. the australian olympic team boycotted the village for a few days after officials deemed their assigned apartment tower blocks uninhabitable. a team of more than 500 employees of the local olympic committee worked to fix the problems reported by the delegations. the organization of the olympic games conceded that there were isolated cases of sabotage by employees during the construction of the village for rio 2016.  references   2016 summer olympics olympic villages
moscow stars was a russian uci continental cycling team.  references  defunct cycling teams based in russia sports clubs in moscow cycling teams established in 2005 cycling teams disestablished in 2007 uci continental teams (europe) 2005 establishments in russia 2007 disestablishments in russia
united nations security council resolution 2090 was adopted in 2013.  see also  list of united nations security council resolutions 2101 to 2200 (2013-2015)  references  external links text of the resolution at undocs.org  2013 united nations security council resolutions united nations security council resolutions february 2013 events
richard dalziel graham frse (died 1920) was a british educator, author, artist and printer. he was director of the calico printers association in edinburgh.  life  little is known of his early life other than that he was educated at manchester grammar school and then tettenhall college.  he appears in edinburgh around 1867 as a teacher of english at 6 marmion terrace. he then moves to 18 lonsdale terrace around 1870. from 1880 onwards he is running the strathearn college for young ladies at 10 to 12 strathearn road in edinburgh, and is believed to have founded this establishment. this establishment appears to have been specially aimed at the daughters of scottish clergymen.  he was elected a fellow of the royal society of edinburgh in 1891. his proposers were rev henry calderwood, robert mcnair ferguson, andrew wilson and charles teape.  in later life he appears to have still lived in the college on strathearn road but is no longer listed as its director.  he died on 12 september 1920 and is presumed buried in the grange cemetery close to his home.  he had a daughter edith.  publications the masters of victorian literature (1897)  references  fellows of the royal society of edinburgh british non-fiction writers scottish schoolteachers 19th-century births 1920 deaths year of birth missing people educated at manchester grammar school
strika may refer to strika (transformers), a character from the transformers: beast wars franchise raleigh strika, a children's bicycle manufactured between 1976 and 1983 in england roko strika (born 1994), australian association football midfielder
pranati rai prakash is an indian fashion model best known as the winner of india's next top model 2016 edition. she was also a semi-finalist at miss india 2015. she has featured in several tv commercials and walked for lakme fashion week and india international bridal week.  early life pranati was born to colonel prem prakash and sadhana rai. she hails from patna in bihar. her father serves in the army. due to her father's job, her family relocated to a number of places in india, including srinagar, port blair, bathinda, mhow, delhi, thiruvananthapuram, shillong, delhi, dehradun and patna.  she studied fashion communication from nift, mumbai. she loves yoga, painting, designing and travelling. she is currently based in mumbai.  modelling career she has received a lot of recognition because of her stint in the miss india pageant of 2015 and was a major front runner there. pranati won the titles of miss talented, miss fashion icon and miss beautiful legs at femina miss india and was 1st runner up in miss sudoku, top 5 in national costume round and top 5 of miss body beautiful. pranati is the winner of india's next top model season 2. during episode 3, makeovers occurred. prakash's long black hair was cut as an auburn lob with bangs.  filmography  television  films  web series  references  external links        living people next top model winners female models from bihar people from patna 1994 births people from dehradun
euperipatoides rowelli is an ovoviviparous species of velvet worm of the peripatopsidae family. it is found in new south wales and the australian capital territory.  description as all species in the genus euperipatoides, e. rowelli has a dark grayish-blue color. adult specimens measure about 3 to 5 cm in length, with females being larger than males. this species is characterized by two distinct rows of bristles on the antennal rings 4, 6, 9 and 12, while the remaining species of the genus have two distinct rows only on the two or four distal antennal rings.  ecology and behavior euperipatoides rowelli occurs in humid, temperate forests of southeastern australia. its main habitat are decaying logs on the forest floor, where it lives in crevices and feeds on small invertebrates, such as termites and crickets.  specimens are rarely found alone, usually forming groups of a few individuals containing females, males, and juveniles. laboratory observations on behavior concluded that these groups present some sort of hierarchy with dominant females.  new logs are usually colonized by wandering males. the pheromones emitted by the first male to reach a log attract additional males, as well as females. it is assumed that males are attracted by other males because their high density increases the attraction of females.  during reproduction, the male places its spermatophore on the female's skin. with the aid of the female blood cells, the body wall is breached and the sperm enters the female body cavity, then swims to the female genital tract. females have two uteri and each one can have embryos at different developmental stages, up to six months apart, and from different males. males mature in about a year, while females can take up to three years.  model organism due to its abundance in its native habitat, e. rowelli is becoming a model organism in the study of behavior and ecology, and especially of gene expression and evolution, leading to a better understanding on the evolution of animals and especially arthropods, to which velvet worms are closely related.  references  further reading  external links  onychophorans onychophorans of australia animals described in 1996 taxa named by amanda reid (malacologist)
carlo fabrizio giustiniani (12 december 1621 - 1 september 1682) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of accia and mariana (1656-1682).  biography carlo fabrizio giustiniani was born in genoa, italy on 12 december 1621 and ordained a priest on 20 december 1648. on 10 january 1656, he was appointed during the papacy of pope alexander vii as bishop of accia and mariana. on 16 january 1656, he was consecrated bishop by giulio cesare sacchetti, cardinal-bishop of frascati, with ascanio piccolomini, archbishop of siena, and giovanni agostino marliani, bishop emeritus of accia and mariana, serving as co-consecrators. in 1676, he began construction of notre-dame-des-graces-de-lavasina church, dedicated to the virgin mary, on the site where two miracles had occurred. he served as bishop of accia and mariana until his death on 1 september 1682.  while bishop, he was the principal co-consecrator of adamo gentile, bishop of lipari (1660).  references   17th-century roman catholic bishops in genoa bishops appointed by pope alexander vii 1621 births 1682 deaths
omar nizar mikati () is a lebanese actor and voice actor. omar nizar mikati was born in lebanon in 1944.  filmography  film the blind of the cathedral - grocer (short film). 2015 max w antar. 2016 princess of rome (voice only). 2015 don't tell me the boy was mad - narguiz. 2015 tuff incident. 2007 taxi ballad - old man in cab. 2001  television noktit hob. 2015 the team - abo omar. 2011 scenario - rouba's father. 2011 dr. hala. 2008 metel el amar 2016  dubbing roles mokhtarnameh prophet joseph - ankh mahoo saint mary the men of angelos  awards  references  external links  theatre plays:2012-2017  .mesh mekhtelfin (مش مختلفين)  .wara el beb (ورا الباب)  .natrino(نطرينوا)  .maa' el waa't ..yemkin (مع الوقت ..يمكن)  .bel kawalis (بلكواليس)  living people lebanese male actors lebanese male voice actors lebanese male television actors 21st-century lebanese male actors 1944 births
andriy lyashenko (; born 11 june 1998) is a professional ukrainian football midfielder who plays for volyn lutsk.  lyashenko is a product of the fc volyn youth sportive school system. then he signed a professional contract with volyn lutsk in the ukrainian premier league.  he made his debut in the ukrainian premier league for volyn on 24 july 2016, playing in the match against dnipro.  references  external links profile at official ffu site (ukr)  living people 1998 births ukrainian footballers ukrainian expatriate footballers expatriate footballers in slovakia ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in slovakia expatriate footballers in kyrgyzstan ukrainian expatriate sportspeople in kyrgyzstan association football midfielders fc volyn lutsk players fc dac 1904 dunajska streda players fc rukh lviv players ukrainian premier league players ukrainian first league players ukrainian second league players
the 2016-17 byu cougars women's basketball team represented brigham young university during the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. it was head coach jeff judkins's sixteenth season at byu. the cougars, members of the west coast conference, play their home games at the marriott center. they finished the season 20-12, 13-5 in wcc play to finish in a tie for second place. they advanced to the semifinals of the wcc women's tournament where they lost to saint mary's. they received an automatic bid to the wnit where they lost to washington state in the first round.  before the season  departures  2016-17 media  byu radio sports network affiliates  22 cougar games that don't conflict with men's basketball or football games will be featured live on byu radio, found nationwide on dish network 980, on sirius xm 143, and online at www.byuradio.org. home games will be a byutv simulcast while road games will be voiced by robbie bullough or mitchell marshall. select road games will air on thew.tv.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#002654; color:white;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#002654; color:white;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#002654; color:white;"| wcc regular season  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#002654;"| wcc tournament  |- !colspan=8 style="background:#002654;"|  women's national invitation tournament  game summaries  exhibition: westminster broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd starting lineups: westminster: aubrie vale, sydnee taylor, riley reidhead, denise gonzalez, whitni syrett byu: cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell, jasmine moody  exhibition: colorado mesa broadcasters: jarom jordan, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd starting lineups: colorado mesa: nicole archambeau, bryanna adams, erin reichle, sydney small, kassidi day byu: cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell, jasmine moody  utah valley broadcasters: none (wolverine green stream)/ mitchell marshall (byur) series history: byu leads series 6-0 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody utah valley: britta hall, mariah seals, taylor gordon, sam lubcke
, jordan holland  georgia broadcasters: matt stewart & christi thomas (sec+)/ mitchell marshall (byur) series history: byu leads series 1-0 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody georgia: halle washington, mackenzie engram, shanea armbrister, pachis roberts, haley clark  oklahoma broadcasters: mitchell marshall & keilani unga series history: oklahoma leads series 4-1 starting lineups: oklahoma: maddie manning, vionise pierre-louis, peyton little, gabbi ortiz, gioya carter byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody  unm thanksgiving tournament: saint joseph's series history: series tied 1-1 starting lineups: saint joseph's: mackenzie rule, alyssa monaghan, sarah veilleux, chelsea woods, adashia franklyn byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody  unm thanksgiving tournament: tulsa series history: byu leads series 7-0 starting lineups: tulsa: tatyana perez, erika wakefield, alexis gaulden, crystal polk, liesl spoerl byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody  maui wahine classic: unlv series history: unlv leads series 29-12 starting lineups: unlv: brooke johnson, paris strawther, nikki wheatley, dylan gonzales, katie powell byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody  maui wahine classic: oregon state series history:byu leads series 6-4 starting lineups: oregon state: sydney wiese, gabriella hanson, marie gulich, katie mcwilliams, kolbie orum byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, jasmine moody  weber state broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski & jason shepherd series history: byu leads series 43-9 starting lineups: weber state: emily drake, kailie quinn, deeshyra thomas, yarden danan, tyschal blake byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon  utah broadcasters: krista blunk & tammy blackburn (p12)/ robbie bullough (byur) series history: byu leads series 62-42 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon utah
: emily drake, kailie quinn, deeshyra thomas, yarden danan, tyschal blake  utah state broadcasters: craig hislop (mw net)/ robbie bullough (byur)  series history: byu leads series 34-3 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon utah state: hailey bassett, deja mason, eliza west, jessie geer, rachel brewster  washington broadcasters: dave mccann, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd series history: series even 5-5 starting lineups: washington: kesley plum, natalie romeo, aarion mcdonald, katie collier, chantel osahor byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon  santa clara broadcasters: doug greenwald series history: byu leads series 13-1 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon santa clara: morgan mcgwire, emily wolph, marie bertholdt, taylor berry, lori parkinson  loyola marymount broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd series history: byu lead series 12-1 starting lineups: loyola marymount: cheyanne walalce, andee velasco, leslie lopez-wood, brittney reed, jackie johnson byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon  saint mary's broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd series history: series even 6-6 starting lineups: saint mary's: devyn galland, carly turner, sydney raggio, megan mckay, jasmine forcadilla byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon  pacific broadcasters: don gubbins (thew.tv)/ robbie bullough (byur) series history: byu lead series 11-2 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon pacific: emily simons, eli lopez sagrera, geanna luaulu-summers, unique coleman, desire finnie  san francisco broadcasters: kevin danna series history: byu leads series 15-3 starting lineups: byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon san francisco: rachel howard, michaela rakova, anna seilund, alicia roufosse, kalyn simon
{{basketballbox  | bg = #e3e3e3  | date = jan 12  | time = 7:00 p.m. pst  | report = recap  | team1 = byu cougars   | score1 = 63  | team2 = san francisco dons  | score2 = 70  | q1 = 17-15  | q2 = 16-13  | q3 = 14-19 | q4 = 16-23 | points1 = cassie broadhead 18  | rebounds1 = kalani purcell 19  | assist1 = kalani purcell 4  | otherstat1 =   | points2 = anna seilund 19  | rebounds2 = michaela rakova  | assist2 = anna pierce, rachel howard 4  | otherstat2 =   | place = war memorial gymnasiumsan francisco, ca  | attendance = 126  | referee = brian woods, paul patterson, bobby jarmon  | tv = thew.tv }}  san diego broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherd series history: byu lead series 9-3 starting lineups: san diego: aubrey ward-el, caroline buhr, katherine hamilton, cori woodward, sydney williams byu: makenzi pulsipher, cassie broadhead, kalani purcell, kristine nielson, shalae salmon  pepperdine broadcasters: jane carson series history: byu leads series 13-2 starting lineups: byu: amanda wayment, cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell pepperdine: sydney bordonaro, megan house, paige fecske, keyari sleezer, kayla blair  {{basketballbox  | bg = #e3e3e3  | date = jan 19  | time = 7:00 p.m. pst  | report = recap  | team1 = byu cougars   | score1 = 73'''  | team2 = pepperdine waves  | score2 = 47  | q1 = 14-7  | q2 = 27-5  | q3 = 19-15  | q4 = 13-20' | points1 = cassie broadhead 14  | rebounds1 = kalani purcell 13  | assist1 = kalani purcell 13  | otherstat1 =   | points2 = sydney bordonaro 17  | rebounds2 = keyari sleezer 7  | assist2 = sydney bordonaro 3  | otherstat2 =   | place = firestone fieldhousemalibu,
ca  | attendance = 178  | referee = michol murray, shelley nakasone, katrina lyles  | tv = thew.tv }}  pacific broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherdseries history: byu lead series 12-2 starting lineups: pacific: emily simons, eli lopez sagrera, geanna luaulu-summers, unique coleman, desire finnie byu: amanda wayment, cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell  santa clara broadcasters: spencer linton, kristen kozlowski, & jason shepherdseries history: byu leads series 13-2 starting lineups: santa clara: taylor berry, beth carlson, lori parkinson, naomi jimenez, emily wolph byu: amanda wayment, cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell  loyola marymount broadcasters: hunter patterson & javier villagomez (thew.tv)/ robbie bullough (byur) series history: byu lead series 13-1 starting lineups: byu: amanda wayment, cassie broadhead, kristine nielson, makenzi pulsipher, kalani purcell loyola marymount: cheyanne wallace, andee velasco, leslie lopez-wood, brittney reed, jackie johnson  gonzaga broadcasters: steve mykleburst (thew.tv)/ (byur)  series history: gonzaga leads series 12-8 starting lineups: byu:  gonzaga:  portland broadcasters: cody barton & lindsey gregg (thew.tv)/ robbie bullough (byur) series history: byu lead series 18-4 starting lineups: byu:  portland:  pepperdine broadcasters:  series history: byu leads series 14-2 starting lineups: pepperdine:  byu:  san francisco broadcasters:  series history: byu leads series 15-4 starting lineups: san francisco:  byu:  san diego broadcasters: paula bott (thew.tv)/ (byur) series history: byu lead series 10-3 starting lineups: byu:  san diego:  saint mary's broadcasters: elias feldman'' (thew.tv)/ (byur)  series history: byu leads series 7-6 starting lineups: byu:  saint mary's:  portland broadcasters:  series history: byu lead series  starting lineups: portland: byu:  gonzaga broadcasters:  series history: gonzaga leads series  starting lineups: gonzaga:  byu:  see also  2016-17 byu cougars men's basketball team  references  byu cougars women's basketball seasons byu 2017 women
's national invitation tournament participants byu cougars byu cougars
the spanish conquest of the muisca took place from 1537 to 1540. the muisca were the inhabitants of the central andean highlands of colombia before the arrival of the spanish conquistadors. they were organised in a loose confederation of different rulers; the psihipqua of muyquyta, with his headquarters in funza, the hoa of hunza, the iraca of the sacred city of the sun sugamuxi, the tundama of tundama, and several other independent caciques. the most important rulers at the time of the conquest were psihipqua tisquesusa, hoa eucaneme, iraca sugamuxi and tundama in the northernmost portion of their territories. the muisca were organised in small communities of circular enclosures (ca in their language muysccubbun; literally "language of the people"), with a central square where the bohio of the cacique was located. they were called "salt people" because of their extraction of salt in various locations throughout their territories, mainly in zipaquira, nemocon, and tausa. for the main part self-sufficient in their well-organised economy, the muisca traded with the european conquistadors valuable products as gold, tumbaga (a copper-silver-gold alloy), and emeralds with their neighbouring indigenous groups. in the tenza valley, to the east of the altiplano cundiboyacense where the majority of the muisca lived, they extracted emeralds in chivor and somondoco. the economy of the muisca was rooted in their agriculture with main products maize, yuca, potatoes, and various other cultivations elaborated on elevated fields (in their language called ta). agriculture had started around 3000 bce on the altiplano, following the preceramic herrera period and a long epoch of hunter-gatherers since the late pleistocene. the earliest archaeological evidence of inhabitation in colombia, and one of the oldest in south america, has been found in el abra, dating to around 12,500 years bp.  the main part of the muisca civilisation was concentrated on the bogota savanna, a flat high plain in the eastern ranges of the andes, far away from the caribbean coast. the savanna was an ancient lake, that existed until the latest pleistocene and formed a highly fertile soil for their agriculture. the muisca were a deeply religious civilisation with a polytheistic society and an advanced astronomical knowledge, which was represented in their complex lunisolar calendar. men and women had specific and different tasks in their relatively egalitarian society; while the women took care of the sowing
, preparation of food, the extraction of salt, and the elaboration of mantles and pottery, the men were assigned to harvesting, warfare, and hunting. the guecha warriors were tasked with the defence of the muisca territories, mainly against their western neighbours; the muzo ("emerald people") and the bellicose panche. to impress their enemies, the muisca warriors wore mummies of important ancestors on their backs, while fighting. in their battles, the men used spears, poisoned arrows, and golden knives.  although gold deposits were not abundant on the altiplano, through trading the muisca obtained large amounts of the precious metal which they elaborated into fine art, of which the muisca raft and the many tunjos (offer pieces) were the most important. the muisca raft pictures the initiation ritual of the new zipa, that took place in lake guatavita. when the spanish who resided in the coastal city of santa marta, founded by rodrigo de bastidas in 1525, were informed about this legend, a large expedition in the quest for this el dorado (city or man of gold) was organised in the spring of 1536.  a delegation of more than 900 men left the tropical city of santa marta and went on a harsh expedition through the heartlands of colombia in search of el dorado and the civilisation that produced all this precious gold. the leader of the first and main expedition under spanish flag was gonzalo jimenez de quesada, with his brother hernan second in command. several other soldiers were participating in the journey, who would later become encomenderos and take part in the conquest of other parts of colombia. other contemporaneous expeditions into the unknown interior of the andes, all searching for the mythical land of gold, were starting from later venezuela, led by bavarian and other german conquistadors and from the south, starting in the previously founded kingdom of quito in what is now ecuador.  the conquest of the muisca started in march 1537, when the greatly reduced troops of de quesada entered muisca territories in chipata, the first settlement they founded on march 8. the expedition went further inland and up the slopes of the altiplano cundiboyacense into later boyaca and cundinamarca. the towns of moniquira (boyaca), guacheta, and lenguazaque (cundinamarca) were founded before the conquistadors arrived at the northern edge of the bogota savanna in suesca. en route towards the domain of zipa tisquesusa, the spanish founded cajica and chia. in april 1537 they arrived at funza, where tisques
usa was beaten by the spanish. this formed the onset for further expeditions, starting a month later towards the eastern tenza valley and the northern territories of zaque quemuenchatocha. on august 20, 1537, the zaque was submitted in his bohio in hunza. the spanish continued their journey northeastward into the iraka valley, where the iraca sugamuxi fell to the spanish troops and the sun temple was accidentally burned by two soldiers of the army of de quesada in early september.  meanwhile, other soldiers from the conquest expedition went south and conquered pasca and other settlements. the spanish leader returned with his men to the bogota savanna and planned new conquest expeditions executed in the second half of 1537 and first months of 1538. on august 6, 1538, gonzalo jimenez de quesada founded bogota as the capital of the new kingdom of granada, named after his home region of granada, spain. that same month, on august 20, the zipa who succeeded his brother tisquesusa upon his death; sagipa, allied with the spanish to fight the panche, eternal enemies of the muisca in the southwest. in the battle of tocarema, the allied forces claimed victory over the bellicose western neighbours. in late 1538, other conquest undertakings resulted in more founded settlements in the heart of the andes. two other expeditions that were taking place at the same time; of de belalcazar from the south and federmann from the east, reached the newly founded capital and the three leaders embarked in may 1539 on a ship on the magdalena river that took them to cartagena and from there back to spain. gonzalo jimenez de quesada had installed his younger brother hernan as new governor of bogota and the latter organised new conquest campaigns in search of el dorado during the second half of 1539 and 1540. his captain gonzalo suarez rendon founded tunja on august 6, 1539 and captain baltasar maldonado, who had served under de belalcazar, defeated the cacique of tundama at the end of 1539. the last zaque aquiminzaque was decapitated in early 1540, establishing the new rule over the former muisca confederation.  knowledge of the conquest expeditions in muisca territories has been provided and compiled by gonzalo jimenez de quesada, main conquistador, and scholars pedro de aguado, juan rodriguez freyle, juan de castellanos, pedro simon, lucas fernandez de piedrahita, joaquin acosta, liborio zerda, and jorge gamboa mendoza.  pre-columbian history   the pre-columbian history of the altiplano cundiboyac
ense started around 12,500 years bp with the oldest human evidence found at el abra, near zipaquira. other archaeological sites of the preceramic are tequendama, tibito, checua and aguazuque. at the time of the arrival of the first hunter-gatherers, the area was still populated by pleistocene megafauna, such as cuvieronius, haplomastodon and equus amerhippus.  herrera period   during the herrera period, that is commonly defined as from 800 bce to 800 ce, the agriculture that started before was further developed. evidence for this has been uncovered in among others the thomas van der hammen reserve, named after dutch geologist and botanist thomas van der hammen. it was in the herrera period that pottery became widespread and from the 5th century ce onwards, the habit of mummification was common for the higher classes.  archaeological evidence of the herrera period has been found in numerous places on the altiplano cundiboyacense, among others in sopo, soacha, usme, iza, gameza, facatativa (piedras del tunjo archaeological park), moniquira (el infiernito), chia, chita, chiscas, soata, jerico, sativasur, covarachia, sativanorte and el cocuy.  the site in soacha is one of the most important finds from the herrera period, dating from 400 bce onwards, into the age of the muisca. at the site, the remains of 2200 individual people, 274 complete ceramic pots, stone tools, seeds of cotton, maize, beans and curuba, 634 fragmented and intact spindles and 100 tunjos not used for offerings were found.  muisca confederation   the muisca confederation is the accepted name for the territories inhabited by the muisca on the altiplano cundiboyacense and neighbouring tenza and ubaque valleys to the east. the confederation of rulers, with as most important the zipa of bacata, zaque of hunza, iraca of sugamuxi and the tundama of tundama, among various independent caciques, covered an area of approximately . population estimates range from 300,000 to 2,000,000 inhabitants. the muisca were mainly a society based on agriculture on the fertile soils of the valleys of the altiplano, the result of pleistocene lacustrine sediments. called "the salt people", they were also known as producing salt from halite brines extracted from salt mines in zipaquira, nem
ocon and tausa, an activity that was the task of the muisca women exclusively and had started in the herrera period around 250 bce. trading of various raw products, such as cotton, that grew in lower altitude terrains to the north, east and west of the altiplano, produced the basis for their art and cloth and ceramics production. the muisca were unique in south american civilisations in their production of golden coins, called tejuelo.  other than the other great civilisations of pre-columbian americas, such as the aztec, maya and inca, the people did not construct large stone architecture, yet built their bohios and temples of clay, wooden poles and reed in small communities on artificially elevated areas. the muisca adored various deities, of which the moon (personalised by chia) and her husband, the sun (solar god sue) were the most important. two main temples were constructed to honour these deities; in chia the moon temple and in sacred city of the sun sugamuxi the sun temple respectively. both temples were built according to astronomical parameters. most of the other sacred sites were natural in character; the many lakes that existed on the altiplano; iguaque, suesca, fuquene, tota, the siecha lakes, and the most important; lake guatavita.  it was in this circular lake, located at an altitude of  within the boundaries of present-day municipality of sesquile, that the initiation ritual of the new zipa was performed. this ceremony, where the new zipa would cover himself in gold dust and from a raft would jump into the ice cold waters, is represented in the famous muisca raft. the festivities of this ritual were surrounded with music, singing and dances and accompanied by large quantities of chicha, the indigenous alcoholic beverage made of fermented maize. also during the construction of the houses, overseen by their god nencatacoa, the people drank chicha. the golden ritual formed the basis for the -not so much- legend of el dorado; the "man of gold", also interpreted as "the city of gold". the specialised goldworking of the muisca was known far outside the confederation and many golden offer pieces (tunjos) have been found in various sites, making them the most common objects in museums around the world. the area of the muisca did not contain many gold deposits and their gold was obtained mostly through trade with their neighbours at the frequent markets they organised in various settlements throughout the altiplano.  emeralds were other precious pieces both extracted within the confederation
in the tenza valley and traded with their western neighbours, the muzo, called "the emerald people". the legend of el dorado, the fine goldworking, abundance of salt and emeralds, and the advanced status of the muisca society formed the main motive for the spanish conquistadors to leave the relative safety of santa marta and commence the strenuous expedition inland.  spanish exploration   the first time the mainland of the continent of south america was sighted by european eyes, was at the third voyage of christopher columbus in august 1498. during the first half of the month, he explored the paria peninsula, presently part of eastern venezuela. on this voyage, columbus saw the mouth of the orinoco river, which water mass he rightly interpreted as a sign the continent must be large. the orinoco river drainage basin extends to the west into the terrain of the muisca, via the rivers meta and its tributaries lengupa, upia and cusiana. although the country of colombia is named after columbus, he never saw the land pertaining to present-day colombia, while on his fourth and final voyage, he landed in panama that until 1903 was part of the current republic.  the second time the orinoco was spotted, was by amerigo vespucci who took part in the first expedition that landed on colombian soil, that of alonso de ojeda. vespucci, as part of a portuguese expedition, went east and south from the orinoco and de ojeda with three ships went west. the first colombian landmass sighted by de ojeda was the peninsula of la guajira in late august 1499. de ojeda misinterpreted this part of later colombia as an island, that he called coquivacoa (currently known as cabo de la vela; "cape of sails").  de ojeda's second voyage commenced in january 1502 and following the same route as his first, he landed on the colombian mainland on may 3, 1502, founding the first colony in south america; santa cruz today part of bahia honda. the colony didn't last more than three months due to various factors. the indigenous wayuu resisted ferociously and the spanish explorers couldn't find enough food and fresh water in the barren desert region to maintain the colony. de ojeda set sail towards santo domingo in hispaniola. his failure to establish a colony for the spanish crown condemned him to pay large sums upon arrival in hispaniola. this made it impossible for him to perform new expeditions for some years.  while de ojeda
was underway to colombia, his rival christopher columbus started his fourth voyage, with thirty ships from cadiz on may 11, 1502. columbus landed on the previously unknown island of martinique on june 15 and he continued his journey northwestward to reach santo domingo on june 29. as he was denied port in the caribbean capital, columbus sailed in the direction of jamaica and from there to guanaja, one of the bay islands off the coast of later honduras, arriving one month later. on august 14, 1502, he landed as first european on the mainland of central america, at a settlement that would later be called puerto castilla. over the course of the next two months, columbus explored the caribbean mosquito coast of later honduras, nicaragua and costa rica, reaching the bay of almirante on october 16. in this region, currently known as bocas del toro, he made first contact with the chibcha-speaking ngabe people, learning about the resources of gold. after getting in conflict with the cacique of the area, el quibian, columbus and his men had to flee the region and set sail back to hispaniola on april 16, 1503. after sighting the cayman islands on may 10, he arrived in jamaica on june 25.  nicolas de ovando y caceres, who had sailed to the new world on february 13, 1502 with 32 ships, the biggest fleet of the time, had become governor of hispaniola. a distant relative of him, the 19-year young hernan cortes from medellin, spain, left for hispaniola in 1504. he would later become famous as the conquistador who brought down the aztec empire. cortes's mother (catalina pizarro altamirano) was related to the family of francisco pizarro, the later conquistador of the inca empire.  the first cities   after unsuccessful attempts to establish spanish settlements in la guajira and san sebastian de uraba (close to the present municipality necocli) on january 20, 1510, the first remaining settlement was turbaco, founded on december 8, 1510. the first cities founded on colombian soil that still exist today, were santa marta (and its northern corregimiento taganga) on july 29, 1525 by rodrigo de bastidas and cartagena, then called san sebastian de cartagena by pedro de heredia on june 1, 1533. shortly before cartagena, mahates was founded on april 17, 1533. malambo, atlantico was discovered in 1529 by jeronimo de melo and silos, norte de santander by ambros
ius ehinger in 1530. in 1535, tolu and sincelejo, sucre were founded by alonso de heredia on july 25, and antonio de la torre y miranda on october 4 respectively. in the south of what is now colombia, yumbo, valle del cauca was founded in 1536 by miguel munoz and in the same year cali (july 25) by sebastian de belalcazar. the latter also founded popayan in december of the same year. jamundi, south of cali, was founded on march 23 by juan de ampudia and pedro de anasco.  colombian settlements founded before the main conquest  conquest of the muisca   the first expedition into the terrains controlled by the muisca started on april 6, 1536. the army of conquistadors was led by marrano gonzalo jimenez de quesada with his brother hernan perez de quesada second in command. other notable captains and soldiers were gonzalo suarez rendon, juan de san martin, lazaro fonte (who would become the lover of zoratama), martin galeano, bartolome camacho zambrano, ortun velazquez de velasco, antonio de lebrija, gonzalo macias, juan de cespedes, and juan maldonado. historians usually divide the journey, filled with difficulty in two stages: the first from santa marta to barrancabermeja, and the second from barranca to the muisca territory.  expedition from santa marta to muisca territories  soldiers of the first expedition   around 800 soldiers left santa marta on april 5, 1536, of whom only 173 survived when the troops reached muisca territory, 11 months later. expedition from the east and southwest were undertaken simultaneously.  1535-39 - years of joint expeditions from three sides  in the years around the main expedition of the de quesadas, two other major exploration routes into the heart of colombia were followed; one under german order, headed by federmann from the northeast, and one led by de belalcazar from the south.  leaders and soldiers of de belalcazar and federmann  1536 - the harsh expedition towards muisca territory   the first indigenous group that submitted to the spanish crown were the tairona, who inhabited the area around santa marta, with their descendants presently living on the slopes of the sierra nevada de santa marta and in tayrona national park. on april 6, 1536, triggered by the stories of the mythical "city of gold" el dorado, gonzalo jimenez de quesada organised two groups of conquistadors to set foot towards the inner highlands of the colombian andes, as first european explorers. the army with the brothers de quesada and
more than 700 soldiers and 80 horses went first east and then south passing the sierra nevada de santa marta on their right hand over land and another, of more than 200 men, embarked in boats and ascended the magdalena river from cienaga, in search of its origin. the list of the soldiers that eventually made it to funza has been compiled by juan florez de ocariz (1612-1692). the land army was led by gonzalo with hernan second in command. the first indigenous group encountered, were the chimila. continuing south, the troops had to cross inhospitable terrains full of creeks and part of their supplies and equipment was lost when crossing the ariguani river.  the difficulties of the expedition only increased when the conquerors went further inland. they reached the indigenous settlement of chiriguana, lost their indigenous guides brought from the coast and it took them eight days to reach the lakes of tamalameque. the indigenous people there, who had suffered from the conquest expedition of bavarian conquistador ambrosius ehinger six years earlier, revolted defending the local population. they were submitted to the rule of de quesada. the troops rested in this area for a while and gonzalo sent a delegation to the magdalena river to see if the boats had arrived. the messengers returned with sad news; the majority of boats had shipwrecked in the mouth of the magdalena and the soldiers who survived and made it onshore fell prey to the poisoned arrows of the indigenous groups and the crocodiles along the river. the remaining ships left for cartagena de indias. ortun velazquez de velasco and luis de manjarres made it back to santa marta where they obtained new boats. they joined the army of de quesada at the banks of the magdalena two months later.  the lower parts of the magdalena river were inhabited by numerous indigenous groups who resisted the spanish conquistadors with canoes, fighting using poisoned arrows. this held the spanish troops back and the reduced army joined forces on land in sompallon, where they had lost already 100 men. the two conquistadors who reached this area first were juan de sanct martin and juan de cespedes. many of the disgruntled soldiers wanted to return to the relative safety of santa marta, but father juan domingo de las casas persuaded the soldiers to continue, at the risk of being called cowards if they refused. the expedition split in two again, with one part ascending further the magdalena river and the main part through the thick forests of the right bank of the river. here they encountered many natural dangers, such as
jaguars, wild boar, snakes, mosquitoes, spiders, stinky grisons, and the many spines and poisonous plants in the forest. even anteaters had attacked the troops and almost killed a horse. pioneers with machetes were sent ahead to create pathways through the dense jungle, a task that could take up to 8 days for a path crossed by the army in hours. the troops took shelter from the heavy rains below trees and ate fruits and wild roots to survive. many of the soldiers became ill and died due to snake bites and jaguar attacks. they crossed the many creeks and rivers tributary to the magdalena swimming, where the caymans formed another risk. apart from the natural hazards, also the indigenous people attacked the spanish with their arrows, clubs and canoes. at night, when the soldiers were sleeping unprotected in their hammocks, the jaguars attacked and killed them, and in many cases the screams of the men were not heard because of the thunderstorms.  after eight months of horrible jungle experience where they advanced just , the heavily reduced troops reached la tora, now called barrancabermeja. easier to defend, the settlement was taken as a place of rest for about three months and to bury the 100 more dead soldiers of which many were thrown in the river to become food for the crocodiles. plagued by the hot climate, mosquitos, and illnesses and conscious that the broad river extended upwards, the expedition continued south. gonzalo jimenez de quesada was convinced they would reach the lands full of gold they heard about at the caribbean coast and motivated his delegation of soldiers, that at this time had an average age of 27 years old, to walk on.  from barrancabermeja, the troops followed the course of the opon river, but soon discovered it was not navigable anymore. gonzalo decided to continue over land and they found a canoe with ceramic pots with salt and cloths. this was a sign they came closer to a great civilisation and it motivated the troops to march on. gonzalo ordered 40 of his weakest men and 150 soldiers to return to santa marta. those who returned fell into the hands of the indigenous groups along the way and few of them made the journey back to the caribbean city. the brothers de quesada marched on with 70 of the original horses and sent ahead the conquistadors juan de cespedes, antonio de lebrija and alferez anton de olalla. they found a valley with scattered houses. early 1537, after passing through aguada, the expedition reached chipata, the first settlement of the
muisca, where father juan domingo de las casas held his first sermon.  the climate of chipata, at  altitude, was much more pleasant than the hot lower valleys of the opon river and gonzalo decided to stay for five months in the town to allow his soldiers to rest and regain strength. the local muisca of chipata brought the spanish soldiers new mantles, as the ones taken from santa marta had worn down due to the harsh circumstances of their expedition. some of the members of the expedition were already half-naked. in chipata, the spanish for the first time learnt to drink chicha, the fermented alcoholic beverage of the muisca. using the enslaved indigenous people of the coast who understood forms of chibcha, gonzalo and hernan were informed where the civilisation producing those fine mantles and salt was located.  1536-1537 - route by the conquistadors  1537 - the year of the muisca conquest   chipata was the first settlement of the later new kingdom of granada, founded by gonzalo jimenez de quesada on march 8, 1537. shortly after, the rested and reinforced troops set foot to higher terrains towards the south. different from the scattered and unorganised indigenous groups they encountered before, advancing into the muisca confederation, they found a much better organised society and economy. the agriculture of the muisca impressed the spanish conquistadors and made them even more curious to find out who was the leader of the civilisation. while the muisca regarded the european conquerors with distrust, they were also curious about them and where they came from.  the spanish settlers, still around  away from the southern muisca capital bacata, continued south and reached the altiplano cundiboyacense, where they marched through the ubate-chiquinquira valley, passing through barbosa, close to saboya. that town would later become the first encomienda of pedro de galeano, the brother of martin galeano, who were both taking part in the expedition. saboya means in chibcha "taste of the mantles", referring to the mantles that were elaborated by the muisca from traded cotton. following the course of the suarez river, the army continued south towards simijaca, the first settlement in the modern department of cundinamarca. the troops stayed on the eastern bank of the suarez river and reached lake fuquene, presently much smaller than in the 1530s. the water level estimated in the time of the expedition was  to  higher than today.  the caciques of the settlements simijaca and, further along the route fuqu
ene and tausa, were loyal to the zipa of bacata and the conquistadors were increasingly interested in the richness of that area. after fuquene, they entered guacheta and founded the modern town on march 12, continued to lenguazaque that was founded the next day, and arrived in suesca, founding that city on march 14. suesca would become the seat of gonzalo jimenez and his place of death 42 years later. after suesca, the expedition entered nemocon, the second-most important salt-producing town in the muisca confederation. when the troops of de quesada arrived in nemocon, the local inhabitants brought them food like deer, pigeons, rabbits, guinea pigs, beans, tubers, and other aliments, new to the spanish. when the troops of de quesada were in nemocon, they were first attacked by the muisca guecha warriors of the zipa.  the spanish soldiers beat the muisca warriors and continued southwest across the bogota savanna towards cajica. here they had an overview of the vast plains of the savanna, dotted with farmfields on elevated terraces. the intermontane valley was populated with numerous bohios, circular houses with a conical roof made of reed. the climate of the high plains was pleasant for the spanish troops and gonzalo jimenez de quesada baptised the flatlands valle de los alcazares. the expedition halted in chia where they spent the holy week. after that week in april 1537, de quesada ordered his men towards funza, the site of the domain of the zipa. although the army of the brothers de quesada was reduced to 170 men, the hundreds of guecha warriors couldn't resist the superior spanish arms and were defeated. in the meantime, zipa tisquesusa sent messengers to the caciques in the muisca confederation to inform them of the arrival of the light-skinned heavily armed men. the caciques considered the invaders sacred and didn't dare to attack them. funza was conquered and founded on april 20, 1537. of the more than 900 soldiers who left santa marta a year earlier, only 162 survived the harsh expedition.  1537 - route and foundations  april 1537 - conquest of muyquyta   the arrival of the spanish conquerors was revealed to tisquesusa by the mohan popon, from the village of ubaque. he told the muisca ruler that foreigners were coming and tisquesusa would die "bathing in his own blood". when tisquesusa was informed of the advancing invasion of the spanish soldiers, he sent a
spy to suesca to find out more about their army strength, weapons, and with how many warriors they could be beaten. the zipa left the capital bacata and took shelter in nemocon which directed the spanish troops to there, during this march attacked by more than 600 muisca warriors.  when tisquesusa retreated in his fort in cajica he allegedly told his men he would not be able to combat against the strong spanish army in possession of weapons that produced "thunder and lightning". he chose to return to bacata and ordered the capital to be evacuated, resulting in an abandoned site when the spanish arrived. in search for the muisca ruler the conquistadores went north to find tisquesusa in the surroundings of facatativa where they attacked him at night.  tisquesusa was thrusted by the sword of one of de quesada's soldiers but without knowing he was the zipa he let him go, after taking the expensive mantle of the ruler. tisquesusa fled hurt into the mountains past facatativa, in the west of the bogota savanna, and died of his wounds there. his body was only discovered a year later because of the black vultures circling over it. upon the death of tisquesusa, his son hama and daughter machinza hid the sister of the zipa, usaca, in one of the settlements on the bogota savanna. when one of the conquistadors, juan maria cortes, found out about this, his prepared a battle to gain control over the area. at that moment, usaca appeared and resisted against the spanish conqueror. legend tells that he dropped his weapons and fell in love with her, eventually marrying the sister of tisquesusa and they were baptised in usaquen, meaning "land of the sun" in muysccubun. this formed the start of the construction of a colonial village, today part of the capital and known for its colonial architecture and parks.  may-august 1537 - route towards hunza through the tenza valley (gonzalo)  august 1537 - conquest of hunza   when gonzalo jimenez de quesada found out the caciques were conspiring against him, he sent out several expeditions of soldiers. his captain juan de cespedes went south to conquer fusagasuga and to found pasca on july 15, 1537. hernan was sent north and gonzalo himself went northeast, to search for the mythical land of gold el dorado. there he didn't find golden cities, but emeralds the muisca were extracting in chivor and somondoco. first foundation was engativa
, presently a locality of bogota, on may 22, 1537. passing through suba, chia, cajica, tocancipa, gachancipa, guatavita, and sesquile, he arrived in choconta, founding the modern town on june 9. the journey went eastward into the tenza valley through macheta, tibirita, guateque, sutatenza, and tenza, founded on san juan; june 24. on the same day, hernan founded sutatausa. gonzalo continued northwest through la capilla and umbita. he arrived in turmeque that he founded on july 20.  in august 1537 gonzalo jimenez de quesada entered the territories of the zaque, who ruled from hunza. when the spanish conquerors entered the outskirts of hunza and found a hill with poles where bodies were dangling, they named it cerro de la horca ("gallow hill"). at the time of the conquest quemuenchatocha was the zaque and he ordered his men to not submit to the european invaders or show them the way to his bohio. he sent messengers to the spanish conquistadors with valuable peace offers. while this was happening, quemuenchatocha had hidden his treasures from the spanish. hunza was located in a valley not as green as the bogota savanna. the advantage of the spanish weaponry and the use of the horses quickly beat the muisca warriors.  when gonzalo arrived at the main bohio of quemuenchatocha, he found the muisca ruler sitting in his throne and surrounded by his closest companions. all men were dressed in expensive mantles and adorned with golden crowns. on august 20, 1537, the spanish beat the zaque and the big and strong muisca ruler was taken captive to suesca. there he was tortured and the spanish soldiers hoped he would reveal where he hid his precious properties. the absence of quemuenchatocha paved the route for his nephew aquiminzaque to succeed him as ruler of the northern muisca, a practice common in muisca traditions. when quemuenchatocha was finally released from captivity in suesca, he fled to ramiriqui, where he died shortly after. the spanish soldiers found gold, emeralds, silver, mantles, and other valuables in tunja. they were not able to take all the precious pieces and many were secretly taken away by the muisca, using folded deer skins. they hid the valuables in nearby hills.  september 1537 - conquest of sugamuxi
after the victory of gonzalo de quesada of the important city of hunza, with some of his men he continued to suamox, the sacred city of the sun, ruled by the iraca called sugamuxi. the temple of the sun, built to worship the sun god sue, one of the two main deities in the muisca religion, was a temple filled with gold, emeralds, cloths, and mummies. on his way to suamox, presently called sogamoso, the troops spent the night in paipa. on august 25, 1537, other sources state a date in early september, the troops arrived in the iraca valley around suamox. while gonzalo jimenez de quesada ordered his men to leave the sun temple for the time being, two of his soldiers entered the temple at night and found the mummies sitting on elevated platforms inside. their torches accidentally set the temple, made of wooden poles and clay, on fire. before, the conquistadors had looted the temple and taken more than  of gold, worth 80,000 ducats at the time, not taking into account the emeralds, fine cloths, and other valuables.  1537-38 - bogota savanna conquests   at the start of 1538, when the troops were exhausted after almost two years in foreign terrain, the soldiers asked what was their payment for the conquest they had done. de quesada divided the conquered treasures between his men; 40,000 pieces of fine gold, 562 emeralds, and tumbaga (gold-copper-silver alloys). foot soldiers received 520 pieces each, horse riders double the amount, captains 2,080 pieces, generals 3,640, and some pieces were given as prizes for the most distinguished soldiers. masses were organised to honour the many dead soldiers during the campaign and part of the treasure was given to juan de las casas. de quesada was not pleased to hear about the advancement of another group of conquistadors in the east, led by nikolaus federmann, coming from later venezuela across the llanos orientales. another team of conquerors, commanded by sebastian de belalcazar, was coming from the south, originating from quito. gonzalo sent hernan to meet the southern group who had traveled through the hot valley of neiva.  6 august 1538 - foundation of santafe de bogota   one and a half-year after the victory of the conquistadors on tisquesusa, in the area of teusaquillo, the modern capital of colombia was founded. although some historians set the date at april 27, 1539, the common and celebrated date
of foundation is august 6, 1538. the foundation was performed by the construction of 12 houses of reed, referring to the twelve apostles or to the twelve tribes of judea, and the construction of a preliminary church, also of reed. father juan de las casas held his first mass in the improvised church. the city was named santafe de bogota, a combination of the spanish city of santafe and the chibcha name of the southern muisca capital bacata, meaning "enclosure outside of the farmfields". the newly established country, part of the spanish empire was called new kingdom of granada, after the place of birth of the brothers de quesada in andalusia; kingdom of granada.  later conquest expeditions  1538 - battle of tocarema and further conquest   after the expeditions into the muisca territories and to the north, submitting hunza and sugamuxi, and the foundation of bogota, various other journeys were organised. gonzalo jimenez de quesada himself went west and submitted the panche in the battle of tocarema, fought on august 20, 1538 in tocarema, currently part of cachipay. in this battle, the spanish had allied with sagipa, the new and last zipa. de quesada with only 50 soldiers and sagipa 12,000 to 20,000 guecha warriors strong beat the panche on 20 august 1538 and celebrated the victory.  sagipa was held by the new spanish rulers on accusation of his illegal rule. the spanish demanded the vast amounts of gold of the heritage of tisquesusa. initially sagipa denied and went into hiding. when sagipa saw the muisca lost faith in his rule he surrendered to de quesada. outraged by his refusal to hand over the treasure sagipa was tortured with iron bars. in early 1539 the last zipa died in the spanish camp in bosa as a result of the torments by the spanish rulers.  1538-1539 - further conquest and foundations by gonzalo  april 1539 - return to spain of gonzalo, sebastian and nikolaus  the three leaders of the conquest expeditions; gonzalo de quesada, nikolaus federmann (in spanish called de federman) and sebastian de belalcazar, met in bosa and agreed to travel back to spain to ask for compensation for their exploration for the spanish crown. gonzalo assigned hernan as interim governor of the new kingdom and chose the first mayor and council for the capital. the chaplain of the team of federmann, juan verdejo, was named priest. most of the soldiers of the expeditions of federmann and de belalcazar decided to stay in
bogota, reinforcing the reduced troops of de quesada. without having found el dorado, three years after his departure from santa marta, in mid may 1539, gonzalo jimenez de quesada returned to the caribbean coast, to sail to spain from cartagena. after writing his book about the conquest, epitome de la conquista del nuevo reino de granada between 1548 and 1559, gonzalo jimenez de quesada would return to the new kingdom of granada in the second half of the sixteenth century to continue his quest for el dorado in the llanos orientales, huila and tolima. gonzalo de quesada died in suesca in 1579.  before embarking on a ship on the magdalena river to take them to cartagena, the three conquistadors founded their place of harbour; panche settlement guataqui on april 6, 1539.  1539 - conquest of tundama   tundama, who ruled the northernmost part of the muisca confederation from an island in the former lake around tundama, already got notice of the burning of the sun temple, two years earlier and the submission of the neighbouring indigenous groups, the panche, guane and others and told his guecha warriors not to bow for the spanish invaders. when one of his warriors suggested surrender was the best option, tundama cut off his ears and left hand. the cacique declared a "death war" against the spanish and gathered an army of 10,000 guecha warriors.  to keep the conquistadores away, he sent a delegation of his people with emeralds, gold and mantles to offer the spanish with the promise that tundama would surrender bringing eight more of these. gaining time, tundama hid his treasures and prepared the defence of tundama.  on december 15, 1539, another spanish captain coming from the south after conquering peru and the kingdom of quito as part of the expedition by de belalcazar, baltasar maldonado, entered the territories of tundama and offered him a peace proposal if he would surrender. tundama, informed by the spanish murders of zipa tisquesusa and zaque quemuenchatocha, did not accept and maldonado attacked tundama and his army on the island in vargas swamp, where 280 years later the battle of vargas swamp by simon bolivar would be fought. maldonado, enforced with 2000 yanakunas; indigenous prisoners of war from peru and submitted people from bacata and ramiriqui, was accompanied by the muisca whose ears and hand had been cut off by tundama. the spanish conquistador with his
superior weapons, cavalry and the inside knowledge of the earless muisca killed 4000 guecha warriors of tundama. seeing this battle was fruitless, tundama fled to cerinza to ally with the cacique from there and prepared a new attack on the spanish and indigenous troops, losing again. the caciques of northern boyaca convinced tundama to not fight anymore and tundama surrendered to the spanish troops. maldonado demanded huge quantities of gold and emeralds to pay his loss to the spanish. when handing over the valuables, maldonado deemed the payments not enough and before the end of the year maldonado killed tundama with a large hammer.  spanish conquest in muisca history  early colonial period   after the foundation of bogota and the installation of the new dependency of the spanish crown, several strategies were important to the spanish conquerors. the rich mineral resources of the altiplano had to be extracted, the agriculture was quickly reformed, a system of encomiendas was installed and a main concern of the spanish was the evangelisation of the muisca. on october 9, 1549, carlos v sent a royal letter to the new kingdom directed at the priests about the necessity of population reduction of the muisca. the indigenous people were working in the encomiendas which limited their religious conversion. to speed up the process of submittance to the spanish reign, the mobility of the indigenous people was prohibited and the people gathered in resguardos. the formerly celebrated festivities in their religion disappeared. specific times for the catechesis were controlled by laws, as executed in royal dictates in 1537, 1538 and 1551. the first bishop of santafe, juan de los barrios, ordered to destroy the temples of the muisca and replace them with catholic churches. the last public religious ceremony of the muisca was held in ubaque on december 27, 1563. the second bishop of santafe, luis zapata de cardenas, intensified the aggressive policies against the indigenous religious practices and ordered the burnings of their sacred sites. this formed the final nail in the coffin of the former polytheistic society.  the transition to a mixed agriculture with old world crops was remarkably fast, mainly to do with the fertility of the lands of the altiplano permitting european crops to grow there, while in the more tropical areas the soil was not so much suited for the foreign crops. in 1555, the muisca of toca were growing european crops as wheat and barley and sugarcane was grown in other areas. the previously self-sustaining economy was quickly transformed into one based on intensive agriculture and mining
that produced changes in the landscape and culture of the muisca.  the system of encomienda consisted of handing over terrains and indigenous people to the encomenderos. in 1553, 300 to 500 indigenous people were provided to the encomendero of cota. the encomendero then had to pay tribute to the spanish crown.  modern historical revisionism   in modern anthropology studying the muisca and the tales of the conquistadors, especially gonzalo jimenez de quesada, whose writings are the only primary sources that survived, efforts have been made to revise the descriptions of the muisca. the early spanish chroniclers have written about cannibalism of various indigenous groups, stories that have later been refuted by experts. also the idea that the muisca were a war-like people has been revised in the modern age, pointing to their successful trading, that even the spanish scholars, such as first bishop of bogota juan de los barrios, have praised in their writings. various other researchers have taken caution in taking the early ethnographic accounts on the warfare status as unambiguously true. in early texts, the muisca were described as having to pay tributes to the caciques, an idea explained to be misunderstood by anthropologist carl henrik langebaek. all the conquistadors and later writers such as pedro de aguado, pedro simon, juan rodriguez freyle, juan de castellanos and lucas fernandez de piedrahita were men, introducing sexism into the history books. many modern archaeologists and anthropologists of the muisca are female and have revised the role of the women in muisca society, with sylvia broadbent, ana maria groot, marianne cardale de schrimpff and many others as notable examples. also the description of the muisca confederation as a stratified empire has been revised, most notably by jorge gamboa mendoza. the "stone fortress" that has been described in cajica by spanish chroniclers may have been built after the conquest. misunderstandings about the muisca originated from the difficulties in language; the spanish used indigenous translators taken captive on their route and brought along from the coast, introducing errors in the understanding of the chibcha of the muisca, that in many cases is very different from the other chibchan languages. the word for "one" in muysccubun is ata, while in the closest related chibchan languages of colombia "one" translates as ubistia (uwa), intok (bari) and ti-tasu or nye (chimila).  also about the names of the zipa and zaque of the muisca when the spanish conquistadors arrived in muisca territory; tis
quesusa and quemuenchatocha respectively, doubts have risen after investigation in the 21st century. the names of the rulers have their origin in the work elegias de varones ilustres de indias written by poet juan de castellanos decades after the events of the conquest. the names of the rulers are possibly invented or modified by de castellanos and taken over into later publications about the muisca by authors such as pedro simon. modern research, by jorge gamboa mendoza among others, has revealed that when the spanish troops were entering the territories of the muisca, the muisca frequently presented other individuals instead of the rulers to the invaders. this strategy was to protect the muisca rulers and their valuables, of great interest to the spanish who were in search of el dorado. the modern anthropologists maintain that the names of the caciques were different; "bogota" for tisquesusa and "eucaneme" for quemuenchatocha, whose nephew was called quiminza.  gamboa mendoza mentions the omitting of information in the early spanish chronicles about the participation of other indigenous groups and leaders in the conquest. what he describes as "enemy"; the cacique of guatavita, allied with the spanish to fight their own people.  one of the most important sources for the spanish conquest of the muisca, el carnero, written by juan rodriguez freyle, son of soldier juan freyle who served under conquistador pedro de ursua, has been critically reviewed as a literary creative collection of stories, anecdotes and rumours, mixed with common opinions of the time.  see also   first american exploration european colonisation conquest of the aztec fall of tenochtitlan conquest of the maya guatemala, peten chiapas, yucatan honduras colombia chibchan nations muisca warfare muisca toponyms conquest of peru conquest of chile colonial brazil  notes  references  bibliography  external links    animated video about the spanish conquest of the southern muisca   animated video about the spanish conquest of tundama  muisca   16th-century conflicts conquest conquest muisca 4 muisca       muisca muisca muisca
ray m. bowen  is an american academic. he served as the twenty first president of texas a&m university from 1994 until 2002. he served as interim president of oklahoma state university (osu) from 1993 until 1994, and provost and vp for academic affairs at osu from 1991 until 1993.  he was dean of engineering at the university of kentucky from 1983 until 1989.  at the university of kentucky, he also served as director of the center for robotics and manufacturing systems and director of the center for applied energy research. bowen was chair of mechanical engineering at rice university from 1972 until 1977.  early life and education bowen was born march 30, 1936 in fort worth, texas. bowen earned his b.s. in mechanical engineering at texas a&m university in 1958.  after receiving his m.s. at the california institute of technology in 1959, he returned to texas a&m for his ph.d. in mechanical engineering, which he received in 1961.  career he served three years on the faculty of the air force institute of technology while on active duty in the u.s. air force.  his time on active duty was followed by a one-year post doctoral fellowship in mechanics at the johns hopkins university.  after serving a brief period on the faculty of louisiana state university, bowen joined the mechanical engineering department and the mathematical sciences department at rice university in 1967 and worked there until 1983.  during his last year at rice, he served in a rotator position at the national science foundation (nsf) as the division director of mechanical engineering and applied mechanics.  in 1990, he received another assignment at nsf as deputy assistant director for engineering.  during this time, he also served at nsf as acting assistant director of engineering.  in 2002, bowen was nominated by the president and confirmed by the senate for a six-year term on the national science board.  he was nominated and confirmed for a second six-year term in 2008.  during this second appointment, he served for two years as chair of the national science board.  during bowen's time as president of texas a&m, the university was admitted to the association of american universities. shortly after he completed his presidency, texas a&m was awarded a phi beta kappa chapter. he expanded and enhanced numerous academic programs, and successfully completed a major capital campaign.  bowen was instrumental in the creation of vision 2020, an effort to propel the institution into the ranks of the country's top 10 public universities by the year 2020. he
now holds the title of president emeritus of texas a&m university.  after completing his service as president of texas a&m, bowen returned to the classroom where he taught mechanical engineering and mathematics until his retirement in 2010.  at that time, he was appointed professor emeritus of mechanical engineering. for the next four years, he served as a visiting distinguished professor of mechanical engineering at rice university. during his active scholarly career, bowen's research was in the broad field of nonlinear continuum mechanics. his specialty was the non-equilibrium thermodynamics associated with the theory of mixtures.  in addition, he authored or co-authored three textbooks on applied mathematics.  honors  society of scholars, johns hopkins university  fellow and honorary member of the american society of mechanical engineers  fellow of the american association for the advancement of science  fellow of the american society for engineering education  outstanding alumni award, department of mechanical engineering, texas a&m university  distinguished alumni award, texas a&m university  corps hall of honor, texas a&m university  personal life bowen married sally elizabeth gibbons bowen in 1958. they have two children and six grandchildren.  references  1936 births texas a&m university faculty people from fort worth, texas texas a&m university alumni california institute of technology alumni 21st-century american engineers oklahoma state university faculty university of kentucky faculty rice university faculty living people fellows of the american society of mechanical engineers fellows of the american association for the advancement of science fellows of the american society for engineering education
missi juhma -( & ) (born april 10, 1936  sakat village, batyrevsky district, chuvash assr, ussr) is a chuvash novelist, poet, folklorist.  biography missi juhma was born on april 10, 1936 in sakat in batyrevsky district in chuvashia. missi juhma graduated from the chuvash state pedagogical university. he as worked as a researcher in chuvash republican museum of local lore. he also headed a chuvash book publishing house.  creative activity  yukhma mishshi is known as the author of many historical novels and novellas, collections of legends and short stories, essays, dramatic and poetic books; studies on ancient and medieval history, as well as on folklore and mythology of the chuvash people.  the works of m. yukhma were published in russian, chuvash and other languages of the peoples of the ussr and foreign countries. yukhma  mishshi  also works in the genre of drama. about thirty of his plays have been staged on the stages of theaters in a number of countries (azerbaijan, lithuania, ukraine, kazakhstan, austria, korea, etc.), including such as "on the night of the full moon", "foundation", "feathers of the white swan", "straw boy", "dough-hero", "husband and wife - one satan", "how to get to heaven", "tears of the gods". based on his works, operas and ballets were created, which were staged on the stages of a large number of theaters. the words of mishsha yukhma are composed of many songs that are sung to this day.  literature   арустамян э. с. михаил юхма (миши юхма) - все отдаю людям : размышления и философские обобщения о жизни и творчестве. - м. : ооо "риомакс", 2006. - 319 с.  "чаваш литературин антологиие", составители: д. в. гордеев, ю. а. силэм. чебоксары, 2003.  .  references  external links  чэ  интерв
ью с юхма мишши  юхма мишши (юхма михаил николаевич)  михаил юхма - книжныи клуб  юрa пултaр... хитре (юхма мишши)  юхма мишши (ильин михаил николаевич)  1936 births living people chuvash writers
eunidia propinqua is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
weng yu-yi (born 29 march 1973) is a taiwanese former cyclist. he competed in the three events at the 1992 summer olympics.  references  1973 births living people taiwanese male cyclists olympic cyclists of taiwan cyclists at the 1992 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) cyclists at the 1994 asian games asian games competitors for chinese taipei
michael g. (mike) archbold is an american businessman in the retail industry and the former chief executive officer of gnc.  career prior to gnc, archbold served as chief executive officer of talbots from august 2012 to august 2014. he also served as the president of the vitamin shoppe from april 2011 to june 2012.  in addition, archbold served as chief financial officer at saks fifth avenue and autozone.  education archbold received his bachelor's of science degree in accounting from the fairfield university dolan school of business in 1982.  references  external links gnc website  american retail chief executives living people fairfield university dolan school of business alumni year of birth missing (living people)
this article contains a list of the schools, colleges, and universities in the roman catholic archdiocese of baltimore.  colleges and universities  secondary schools  primary schools   archbishop borders elementary school, baltimore  cardinal shehan school, baltimore  holy angels catholic school, baltimore  immaculate conception school, towson  immaculate heart of mary school, towson  john paul regional catholic school, baltimore  monsignor slade catholic school, glen burnie  mother seton academy, baltimore  mother seton school, emmitsburg  our lady of grace school, parkton  our lady of hope-st. luke school, baltimore  our lady of perpetual help school, ellicott city  our lady of victory school, arbutus  resurrection-st. paul school, ellicott city  school of the cathedral of mary our queen, baltimore  school of the incarnation, gambrills  sisters academy of baltimore, baltimore  ss. james & john school, baltimore  st. augustine school, elkridge  st. casimir catholic school, baltimore  st. clement mary hofbauer school, baltimore  st. elizabeth school, baltimore  st. francis of assisi school, baltimore  st. ignatius loyola academy, baltimore  st. jane frances school, pasadena  st. joan of arc school, aberdeen  st. john regional catholic school, frederick  st. john school, westminster  st. john the evangelist school, hydes  st. john the evangelist school, severna park  st. joseph school, cockeysville  st. joseph school, fullerton  st. louis school, clarksville  st. margaret school, bel air  st. mark school, catonsville  st. mary school, hagerstown  st. mary's school, annapolis  st. michael the archangel school, baltimore  st. philip neri school, linthicum  st. pius x school, rodgers forge  st. stephen school, bradshaw  st. thomas aquinas school, baltimore  st. thomas more academy, middletown  st. ursula school, baltimore  trinity school, ellicott city  former schools  former colleges and universities  former secondary schools  former primary schools  references   baltimore baltimore  baltimore, roman catholic archdiocese
"whatever you believe" is a song by the british singer-songwriter mike batt, which was originally recorded and released as a collaboration charity single featuring batt with jon anderson of yes and steve harley of cockney rebel. released in 1988, the single tied-in with that year's itv telethon. the song was written and produced by batt.  background batt had written the song as the "heineken/lbc big song". the song was performed during a live tv broadcast at battersea park in london on 3 may 1988, as part of the thames/lwt charity fundraising effort for the itv telethon. arranged and conducted by batt, the song's performance saw him accompanied by anderson and harley on lead vocals, and backed by the central band of the royal air force and the london-based royal choral society. furthermore, over 2,000 members of the general public contributed to the performance as a choir. each person paid a donation to receive a copy of the song's sheet music to take part. the central band of the royal air force appeared courtesy of wing commander eric banks. after this performance, anderson, harley and batt would also record a studio version of the song. later released as a single in november 1988, it failed to make a chart appearance in the uk.  release "whatever you believe" was released by epic records on 7" and 12" vinyl in the uk only. for the 7" vinyl release, the studio version of "whatever you believe" was the a-side and the itv telethon live version the b-side. the 12" vinyl release included a third track; the traditional "deep is my yearning (morning has broken)", performed by the central band of the royal air force. it was arranged and conducted by eric banks, and produced by batt.  critical reception paul massey of aberdeen evening express wrote, "jon, steve and the man who gave us the wombles get together for a tear-jerking itv telethon ballad. at least it's for a good cause." mick mercer of melody maker commented, "i was begged to review this, what with it being a charity single, so i am. being fairly charitable myself at this time of year i would suggest it is nauseatingly pappy, unattractive crap."  track listing 7" single "whatever you believe (studio version)" - 5:10 "whatever you believe (live version)" - 6:03  12" single "whatever you believe (studio
version)" - 5:10 "whatever you believe (live version)" - 6:03 "deep is my yearning (morning has broken)" - 2:46  personnel  jon anderson - vocals  steve harley - vocals  mike batt - producer (all tracks), arranger, conductor on "whatever you believe"  the central band of the royal air force - featured performers  the royal choral society - featured performers  additional personnel  dick lewsey - engineer on studio version of "whatever you believe"  gavin greenaway - sound supervisor on live version of "whatever you believe"  steve murrell - engineer on live version of "whatever you believe"  tom hunter (lbc) - event co-ordinator  michael heyland (cancer research) - event co-ordinator  eric banks - arranger, conductor on "deep is my yearning"  neil ashton - photography  tomcat - artwork  other versions  in 1991, batt featured the song in his west end musical the hunting of the snark.  in 1992, irish singer finbar wright recorded his own version of "whatever you believe" for his solo album of the same name. batt produced, arranged and conducted the album, which reached no. 1 in ireland. the title track has become a christmas classic in the country.  in 2014, bob blakeley released his own version of the song on his album performance. having signed to batt's record label, dramatico entertainment, blakeley's cover was also produced by batt.  references  1988 singles epic records singles songs written by mike batt steve harley songs 1988 songs charity singles
guo longchen (born 12 january 1968) is a chinese former cyclist. he competed in the team time trial at the 1988 summer olympics.  references  external links    1968 births living people chinese male cyclists olympic cyclists of china cyclists at the 1988 summer olympics place of birth missing (living people) asian games medalists in cycling cyclists at the 1986 asian games cyclists at the 1990 asian games cyclists at the 1994 asian games medalists at the 1986 asian games medalists at the 1990 asian games medalists at the 1994 asian games asian games gold medalists for china asian games silver medalists for china asian games bronze medalists for china
hms hardi was a french privateer built at cowes c. 1795 that the royal navy captured in 1797 and sold in 1800.  florentin lavallee commissioned hardi at brest in october 1796. she was armed with eighteen 8-pounder guns and had a crew of 130-164 men under the command of captain cousin.  in february 1797 hardi, captain cousell, captured antelope.<ref>"news". london chronicle (london, england), 18-21 february 1797; issue 5889.</ref> antelope had been sailing from charleston to london when she was taken.  late in march 1797 vice-admiral lord kingsmill received intelligence that a french cruiser had been seen off the skellocks on the coast of ireland. kingsmill dispatched  on 28 march, and on 1 april hazard found the french vessel. after a chase of seven hours, hazard caught her quarry, but only because the privateer had lost both topmasts. the privateer was the brig hardi, of 18 guns and 130 men. (another source gives her complement as 164 men.) hardi had been built at cowes, about two years earlier, for the spaniards. hardi had left brest on 17 march and during her cruise had escaped two british frigates that had chased her. she had captured only one prize, a small portuguese vessel of little value. hardi arrived at portsmouth on 16 april.  the navy acquired hardi'', and classified her as a sloop of 18 guns. there is no record of her having active service.  notes, citations, and references notes  citations  references          1790s ships privateer ships of france captured ships sloops of the royal navy
the crown prince frederick range () is a large mountain range in king christian ix land, eastern greenland. administratively this range is part of the sermersooq municipality.  despite being relatively unknown it has some of the highest summits in greenland.  history the crown prince frederick range was first surveyed by sir martin lindsay in 1934 during the british trans-greenland expedition and was named after the crown prince frederick of denmark (1899 - 1972) who would be crowned king frederick ix in 1947. the expedition crossed greenland from west to east, and succeeded in fixing the positions of many other important features further to the northeast, including gunnbjørnsfjeld -the highest point in greenland. on the return journey the team headed south-west to amassalik and on their journey discovered the extent of the crown prince frederick range. lindsay's expedition set a new world record after travelling  on sleds, 700 of which were through hitherto unexplored territory.  following martin lindsay's pioneering venture few expeditions visited the range which remained almost consigned to oblivion for many decades. finally in 1995 the first guided icecap journey through the range was organized and the following year, in july and august 1996, a number of the main summits of the range were climbed for the first time by members of the tangent british east greenland expedition, including paul walker. the expedition set up its base camp at  and from there climbed a total of 55 peaks.  geography the crown prince frederick range  is a group of nunataks scattered over a vast region between the greenland ice sheet and the coast. it extends for about  in a northeast-southwest direction between the 67th (schweizerland) and the 68th parallel north (hutchinson glacier). the range is located to the northeast of mont forel and southwest of kangerlussuaq fjord. the level expanses between the nunatak clusters of the range are usually very wide and permanently covered with ice and snow. the average height of the intermontane areas is between  and .  the region of the crown prince frederick mountains is uninhabited, the nearest settlement being tasiilaq, located about 175 km to the ssw of the southern end of the range.  subranges panorama nunatak () and redkammen () are two large nunataks at the northeastern end. they are located to the southwest and to the southeast of the hutchinson plateau respectively and are sometimes included as part of the crown prince frederick range.  mountains although most peaks of the crown prince frederick range
are yet unnamed, quite a number of the nunataks have very high summits and a total of nine have peaks are higher than . owing to its remote location this large range has been somewhat neglected by mountaineers though, despite some impressive peaks of good granite.    peak (3,256 m) and highest point at   peak (3,153 m) at   peak (3,127 m) at , highest rocky peak of a massive nunatak with many peaks, including a 3,069 m high summit 1.3 km to the west.  peak (3,108 m) at , the spectacular central summit of a nunatak with three peaks.  peak (3,092 m) at   peak (3,088 m) at   peak (3,075 m) at   peak (3,056 m) at   peak (3,021 m) at   peak (2,996 m) at   peak (2,995 m) at   peak (2,990 m) at   peak (2,961 m) at   peak (2,948 m) at   peak (2,945 m) at   peak (2,904 m) at   peak (2,897 m) at   peak (2,891 m) at   peak near tbege base camp (2,882 m) at   peak (2,830 m) at   peak (2,824 m) at   peak (2,777 m) at   peak (2,542 m) at   peak (2,691 m) at   peak (2,473 m) at   peak (2,465 m) at   peak (2,446 m) at   anniversary peak (2,440 m)  peak (2,425 m) at   peak (2,370 m) at   peak (2,093 m) at   peak (1,831 m) at  climate from the north and from the west the range is fully exposed to the influence of the greenland ice sheet. as there is no barrier to the shrieking cold winds of the icy expanse, ice cap climate prevails in the region.  the average annual temperature in the area of the crown prince frederick range is -14 °c. the warmest month is july when the average temperature reaches -2 °c and the coldest is march when the temperature sinks to -20 °c
.  see also list of mountain ranges of greenland list of mountains in greenland  list of nunataks of greenland  further reading  references  external links picture of kronprins frederik bjerge area status of the endangered ivory gull, pagophila eburnea, in greenland  mountain ranges of greenland nunataks of greenland sermersooq
luca cattapane was  an italian painter active during the late 16th century in cremona. he was a follower of the campi family in cremona. he painted an altarpiece now in the church of sant'ilario, cremona. in the church of san pietro al po, cremona, he painted figures for the fresco of the deposition of christ by lattanzio gambara; and collaborated with cristoforo magnani, il somenzo, andrea mainardi, il malosso and ermenegildo da lodi in the fresco decoration of the nave.  references  year of birth unknown year of death unknown 16th-century italian painters italian male painters italian renaissance painters painters from cremona
robin saex garbose (born august 14, 1960) is an american filmmaker and theatre director. following an early career directing several off-broadway plays and episodes of the shows head of the class and america's most wanted, garbose embraced orthodox judaism and founded the kol neshama performing arts conservatory, a summer camp and arts conservatory providing an artistic outlet for teenage orthodox girls. with kol neshama, she has produced several projects, including the films a light at greytowers (2007), the heart that sings (2011), and operation: candlelight (2014). her projects have been screened at the museum of tolerance, the menachem begin heritage center, the jerusalem and tel aviv cinematheques, and the atlanta jewish film festival.  early life garbose grew up in holyoke, massachusetts in a conservative jewish family; her parents belonged to a local synagogue and were active in philanthropy. she later described being surrounded by "yankee culture" growing up and said that her parents "were very zionist and involved with the community. but religion was never about god, it was about jewish culture, tradition and israel." she had her first acting experience at age 6 and convinced her teachers to let her direct a hanukkah play for her school. as a teenager, she was affected by reading numerous books on the holocaust, later saying "i was very frightened by death. i saw it as this big black abyss beyond! i was on a certain quest to find meaning. and as i got older, i became more conscious of this quest."   after graduating from williston northampton school in 1978, garbose majored in theater at brown university as an undergrad and obtained a degree in theater.  career while at brown university and living in new york, garbose worked with filmmaker todd haynes and directed a number of off-broadway productions for groups including ensemble studio theatre, jewish repertory theater, manhattan punch line, and juilliard theatre center (where she also taught), in addition to assisting directors at the circle repertory company and manhattan theatre club. she directed a 1982 production of william shakespeare's twelfth night with production workshop, mark malone's 1984 one-act play a sense of loss starring timothy carhart and matthew penn for an ensemble studio theatre marathon led by david mamet's vermont sketches, and a 1985 production of brian friel's winners starring her brown classmates john f. kennedy jr. and his girlfriend christina haag at manhattan's irish arts center. kara kennedy, william kennedy smith, robert f. kennedy jr., and anthony radziwiłł
attended the premiere, as did representatives of icm partners talent agency.  also in 1985, garbose directed a short-form version of howard korder's "boy's life" called life on earth with jack stehlin and lisa barnes for manhattan punch line, bob morris' the grandpa chronicle starring korder and bernie passeltiner for theater for the new city, and korder's lip service for manhattan punch line starring peter riegert and john hallow. in 1988, she directed mark o'donnell's requiem for a heavyweight  and howard morris' almost romance starring fisher stevens and helen slater. in 1989, she directed t. l. wagener's marathons starring ellen tobie and michael french, and in 1990, she directed john burrows' musical comedy about pregnancy it's a girl, starring olivia d'abo, for odyssey theatre in west los angeles, and cynthia heimel's a girl's guide to chaos starring ricki lake, debra jo rupp, deborah adair, kimberly scott, and scott jaeck at tiffany theater in west hollywood.  in 2000, garbose and playwright pauline lepor, who had met at juilliard, founded bais miriam, a summer arts conservatory for teenage orthodox jewish girls supported by juilliard and bais chana high school. the conservatory's culminating project, a series of five one-act pieces entitled wonder of wonders, was staged at crossroads school theater in santa monica in august 2000.  in 2004, she directed for bais chana high school a musical historical drama called portraits of faith, written by her husband levi yitzhaq garbose based on a marcus lehmann novel and with songs based on hasidic nigunim; the play was staged in march at scottish rite theater in los angeles.  from 2014-2017, garbose ran a summer program at machon alte seminary in safed, israel between july 13 and august 18.  film and tv garbose's first job in film was as an assistant to director barnet kellman on the 1985 romantic comedy film key exchange. she directed for the sitcom head of the class during its final season in 1991, but ended up leaving sitcoms because, due to her growing orthodox observance, she was no longer comfortable with some of the messages in the show nor having to work on shabbat. while skiing at sundance film festival, she met a producer for america's most wanted and subsequently directed multiple reenactment segments for the show until leaving in 2001.  shortly after leaving head of the class in 1991, garbose began developing a screenplay
entitled the spark, about the granddaughter of a holocaust survivor from the warsaw ghetto reconnecting to her heritage, and interviewed several survivors through the simon wiesenthal center for research, contributing to her own religious journey. the screenplay was later selected for development at the sundance institute screenwriter's lab in utah, and as recently as 2016 the script was reportedly in production with garbose set to direct and abigail breslin attached to star.  as of 2017, garbose and her husband and writing partner, levi yitzhaq garbose, were in pre-production on a dramedy called meet the shustermans, intended as her first general audience project.  kol neshama in 2000, garbose founded kol neshama, a summer camp and performing arts conservatory for orthodox teenage girls based in los angeles, with the first session being held in the summer of 2001. the program combines mornings devoted to davening and torah study with afternoons and evenings devoted to artistic education in acting, music, and dance, among other disciplines, with rehearsals for an end-of-session production. leah gottfried, who later created the webseries soon by you, attended the program as a teenager and was mentored by garbose, working on several of her films.   plays produced by the program have included a 2001 four-act showcase entitled heaven sent: an evening of miracle plays, staged at the ivar theater in hollywood, and an august 2003 double feature of hear o israel and little lord titchwood, also staged at the ivar theater. they also produced a direct-to-dvd series called camp bnos yisrael, the first episode of which premiered on november 6, 2006 at a benefit function at the museum of tolerance.   garbose and kol neshama produced their first theatrical feature film in 2007 with a light for greytowers, a musical historical drama about a young jewish girl escaping from czarist russia and ending up at the harsh greytowers orphanage in victorian england, based on a young adult novel of the same name by eva vogel and ruth steinberg. the film was shot in 2004 at the rohr jewish student center at the university of southern california and starred girls from the kol neshama program (including a young abby shapiro, sister of political commentator ben shapiro and later known as the youtuber classically abby). shown only to all-female audiences in accordance with kol isha, the film premiered at the sherry lansing theater on the paramount pictures studio lot in january 2007 (with further showings there in december 2007 and january 2008) and saw screenings at stern college
for an event led by miriam leah gamliel's atara organization; at the jewish children's museum in crown heights, brooklyn; at menorah hall in borough park; in manchester, england during hanukkah of 2008; at the menachem begin heritage center in jerusalem; and at the 2009 atlanta jewish film festival. the film was planned for screening at the jerusalem cinematheque for the jerusalem jewish film festival, but was pulled due to conflict over garbose's insistence on female-only screenings and was screened at the menachem begin heritage center and the tel aviv cinematheque instead. it also saw controversy during its borough park screening; orthodox audiences expressed concern over the presence of male actors in the film and the film was threatened with being shut down, though this ultimately did not happen.  a second film, the heart that sings, was produced in 2011. based on short story by gershon kranzler, the film is a musical historical drama about a young holocaust survivor serving as drama director at a catskills camp in 1950s. produced on a budget of $350,000, the film premiered in march 2011 in los angeles at the museum of tolerance and the day after at jewish children's museum in crown heights, and was later screened in israel in december at jerusalem cinematheque, tel aviv cinematheque, and heichal shlomo and at the atlanta jewish film festival in february 2012.  garbose and kol neshama released a third film in 2014, an action-adventure film called operation: candlelight, partially funded through kickstarter. filmed over the summer of 2013 in calabasas, california, the film's premiered was held december 15 and 16, 2014 at the museum of tolerance.  personal life she moved to los angeles in 1988, where she now lives with her husband levi yitzhaq garbose, a musician and fellow baal teshuva, and their children, menachem mendel and chaya solika, the latter of whom has acted in several of her mother's projects.  spirituality and beliefs  garbose is a baalat teshuva, having come to hasidic and orthodox judaism in 1991 after attending a breslov-run kabbalah class; she has said her "frumkeit was deepened" while directing episodes of america's most wanted. she had previously experimented with the teachings of ram dass and past life regression during the 1980s. she also had a meeting with the kabbalist rabbi yitzhak kaduri when he visited los angeles, during which he
gave her a blessing for success with her screenplay the spark. she has drawn inspiration from chabad and the lubavitcher rebbe and directed a play, roots: the journey home, based on the memoirs of yosef yitzchak schneersohn, the sixth chabad rebbe.   garbose is an anti-cult activist, having covered the countercult movement during her time on america's most wanted and worked with psychologist and cult specialist steven hassan. in 2014, garbose gave testimony at a rabbinic hearing regarding the alleged cult status of the organization call of the shofar, appearing before rabbis dovid cohen and abraham j. twerski and on behalf of prosecutor rabbi shea hecht; she later contributed an account of the meeting to the chabad news website crownheights.info.  credits  film and tv  theatre  as director  twelfth night (1982) (production workshop) the end of humanity...as we know it (1983)  a sense of loss (1984) (mark malone, ensemble studio theatre)  life on earth (1985) (howard korder, manhattan punch line)  the grandpa chronicle (1985) (bob morris, theater for the new city)  winners (1985) (brian friel, irish arts center)  lip service (1985) (howard korder, manhattan punch line)  waving goodbye (1987)  women and football (1988) almost romance (1988) (howard morris)  requiem for a heavyweight (1989) (mark o'donnell)  the sea gull (1988) (anton chekhov)  marathons (1989) (t. l. wagener) the cherry orchard (1989) (anton chekhov)  it's a girl (1990) (john burrows, odyssey theatre) a girl's guide to chaos (1990) (cynthia heimel, tiffany theater)  portraits of faith (2004) (levi yitzhaq garbose, scottish rite theater) roots: the journey home (2008) (ohel chana high school)  other    hackers: a play in eleven scenes (1986; credited as "comedy corps manager" for manhattan punch line)  references  external links    kol neshama official website  living people  1960 births jewish american entertainers orthodox jewish feminists jewish theatre directors american women film directors american women screenwriters people from holyoke, massachusetts anti-cult movement hasidic writers
jonathan mychal gibson (born november 8, 1987) is an american professional men's basketball player who currently plays for beijing ducks of the chinese basketball association (cba). he played college basketball for new mexico state before playing professionally in turkey, israel, italy, china and iran. he made a name for himself in china, earning the league's scoring title in 2014 with over 30 points per game, and backing that up with 42 points per game in 2016.  high school career gibson attended calvary christian prep school in san fernando, california. as a senior in 2005-06, he averaged 23.3 points, 5.2 rebounds, 7.1 assists and 3.1 steals per game, as he led calvary christian to a 22-3 record and was named the most valuable player of the san antonio league and a first team all-conference selection.  on may 2, 2006, gibson signed a national letter of intent to play college basketball for new mexico state university.  college career as a freshman at new mexico state in 2006-07, gibson averaged 2.6 points in 31 games, and finished with 22 assists. he twice had a 12-point performance during the season. in the wac tournament title game against utah state on march 10, 2007, gibson scored two late points on a reverse lay-up to help nmsu secure their first wac title. in his first ncaa tournament appearance, gibson scored two points on 2-for-2 shooting from the free-throw line in nine minutes.  as a sophomore in 2007-08, gibson appeared in all 35 games, earning 32 starting assignments, and averaged 12.2 points per game, which was second on the team. gibson was a scoring threat as he shot 45.4% from the field, 41.9% from three-point range, and 75.6% from the free-throw line. he scored in double-figures in 24 games and reached the 20-point or more plateau on five occasions. he also had 55 assists and 33 steals. on february 9, 2008, he scored a career-high 24 points against boise state. the aggies ended the season winning 10 of the final 12 games and gibson was in double-figures in nine of those contests. in the triple overtime thriller against boise state on march 15 in the wac title game, gibson played a career-high 51 minutes and contributed 15 points.  as a junior in 2008-09, gibson averaged 14.1 points per game, which ranked second on the team and
10th in the wac. as a 30-game starter, gibson surpassed the 20-point plateau five times. he posted a .426 field goal percentage and a .387 three-point field goal percentage, and ranked third on the squad in assists with 65 and tied for first on the squad with 44 steals. he led the aggies in scoring in three games with a season-best 22 points against new mexico on december 30, 2008, and in both games of the wac tournament, with 22 points against boise state on march 12 and 16 against utah state on march 13.  as a senior in 2009-10, gibson averaged 17.5 points, 2.9 rebounds, 2.8 assists and 1.4 steals in 34 games while shooting 44.7% (197-441 fgs) from the field, 40.6% (106-261 3fgs) from three-point range and 84.8% (95-112 fts) from the free throw line. he was named all-wac second team and led the wac in three-pointers made, ranked second in 3fg%, fifth in scoring average, fourth in ft%, eighth in fg% and seventh in steals per game. gibson finished with 1,541 career points at nmsu, which is seventh in program history, and was part of two western athletic conference tournament championship teams in 2007 and 2010.  college statistics  |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2006-07 | style="text-align:left;"| new mexico state | 31 || 2 || 7.3 || .338 || .286 || .677 || .6 || .7 || .3 || .0 || 2.6 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2007-08 | style="text-align:left;"| new mexico state | 35 || 32 || 27.0 || .454 || .419 || .756 || 2.2 || 1.6 || .9 || .1 || 12.2 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2008-09 | style="text-align:left;"| new mexico state | 31 || 30 || 30.1 || .426 || .387 || .668 || 1.9 || 2.1 || 1.4 || .0 || 14.1 |- | style="text-align:left;"| 2009-10 | style="text-align:left;"| new mexico state | 34 || 32 || 32.6 || .447 || .406 || .848 ||
2.9 || 2.8 || 1.4 || .1 || 17.5 |- | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"|career | 131 || 96 || 24.5 || .436 || .398 || .758 || 1.9 || 1.8 || 1.0 || .0 || 11.8 |-  professional career  2010-11 season on july 21, 2010, gibson signed a one-year deal with oyak renault of the turkish basketball super league. on december 27, 2010, he parted ways with oyak. in 11 games for the club, he averaged 18.1 points, 3.9 rebounds, 3.3 assists and 2.0 steals per game. on january 12, 2011, he signed with ironi ashkelon of the israeli basketball premier league for the rest of the season. in 16 games for ironi, he averaged 7.3 points, 1.1 rebounds and 1.3 assists per game.  2011-12 season on september 28, 2011, gibson signed a one-year deal with trabzonspor of the turkish basketball super league. despite a poor season for trabzonspor, a campaign that saw them go 6-24, gibson averaged a league-best 19.9 points per game. he left the team prior to their season finale, and in 29 games, he also averaged 2.5 rebounds and 3.7 assists per game.  on april 24, 2012, gibson signed with enel brindisi of the legadue for the rest of the season. he made his debut for brindisi on may 5, in the team's regular season finale. they finished the regular season in third place on the ladder with an 18-10 record. brindisi breezed through the quarter-finals and semi-finals, winning both series 3-0. in the finals, they defeated giorgo tesi pt 3-1 to win the league's playoff championship. gibson dominated throughout the playoffs, and over 11 games for brindisi (10 playoff, one regular season), he averaged 24.1 points, 3.5 rebounds, 3.4 assists and 1.5 steals per game. winning the legadue playoffs led to brindisi being promoted to the lega basket serie a for the 2012-13 season.  2012-13 season in july 2012, gibson joined the boston celtics for the 2012 nba summer league. the celtics went 4-1 at the orlando summer league and 2-3 at the las vegas summer league
. in 10 games for the celtics, gibson averaged 7.0 points, 1.3 rebounds and 1.6 assists in 12.8 minutes per game.  on july 7, 2012, gibson re-signed with enel brindisi on a one-year deal. brindisi finished the 2012-13 season in 12th place on the ladder with an 11-19 record, missing the playoffs in their first season back in the top league. gibson appeared in all 30 games during the season, averaging 18.4 points (second in the league), 2.7 rebounds, 2.0 assists and 1.4 steals per game.  2013-14 season in august 2013, gibson signed a one-year deal with the zhejiang lions of the chinese basketball association. gibson had a monster year with zhejiang, appearing in 33 of 34 regular season games, missing only a january 10 game against the beijing ducks. during the regular season, he scored 40 points or more four times, including a 46-point effort on january 8 against tianjin. zhejiang finished the regular season in fifth place on the ladder with a 21-13 record. gibson won the league's scoring title with a 31.7-points-per-game average. in game 1 of their quarter-final match-up with beijing, gibson scored 54 points to help zhejiang win the game 113-110. however, the lions went on to lose the next three games to bow out of the playoffs with a 3-1 defeat. gibson averaged 39 points per game over the four quarter-final games.  following the conclusion of the 2013-14 cba season, gibson was offered a guaranteed deal by russian club nizhny novgorod, but he turned it down. he later signed a one-month deal with iranian club petrochimi imam on april 1, 2014. he made his debut for petrochimi on april 20 in game 1 of the team's semi-final series against zob ahan. petrochimi went on to sweep the series in three games to move onto the finals. there they defeated mahram tehran 4-1 to win their second straight title. gibson scored 41 points in a game 5 victory. in eight games for petrochimi, gibson averaged 30.9 points, 4.5 rebounds, 2.6 assists and 1.8 steals per game.  2014-15 season in july 2014, gibson joined the portland trail blazers for the 2014 nba summer league, but he managed just one game and played a total of six minutes.  following his time with the trail
blazers, gibson signed a two-year deal with the zhejiang lions, returning to the club for a second stint. however, in early october, he suffered a foot injury and was ruled out for four to six weeks. on january 7, 2015, he was ruled out for the entire 2014-15 cba season in order to rehab his broken foot.  on march 17, 2015, gibson signed with petrochimi imam for the 2015 waba champions cup, but the competition never went ahead.  2015-16 season in july 2015, gibson parted ways with zhejiang after terminating his contract with the team. on august 30, 2015, he signed a one-year deal with fellow chinese team qingdao doublestar. gibson bested his 2013-14 cba campaign by scoring 40 points or more in 24 games, including 50 points or more in four games. on december 13, 2015, he scored a career-high 56 points in a 138-124 win over jiangsu tongxi. despite his dominant individual season, qingdao missed the playoffs with a 16-22 record. he averaged 42.0 points per game on the season, thus winning the cba scoring title for the second time in three years. he appeared in 36 of the team's 38 games in 2015-16, and also averaged 6.7 rebounds, 5.1 assists and 2.1 steals per game.  2016-17 season in july 2016, gibson joined the dallas mavericks for the 2016 las vegas summer league. at 28 years old, he was one of the oldest players in vegas. he quickly became a summer league sensation after scoring 30 points in his debut on july 9 against the miami heat. three days later, he had a 26-point outing against the boston celtics. his impressive summer league display led to a contract offer from mavericks, and on july 15, gibson signed a partially guaranteed three-year deal with the team. he was waived by the mavericks on october 22 after appearing in seven preseason games. he later re-signed with the team on november 18 and made his nba debut that night. with the mavericks missing their top three options at point guard-deron williams, j. j. barea and devin harris-all due to injury, gibson backed-up seth curry off the bench and had 11 points and a team-high three assists in an 80-64 loss to the memphis grizzlies. the following night, he scored a game-high 26 points off the bench in a 95-87 loss to the orlando magic. he became the first undrafted player
to score 26 points in his first or second game since lloyd daniels in 1992. he appeared in 11 straight games for the mavericks while averaging 9.2 points in 18.6 minutes per game, before dropping out of the rotation and appearing in six of the next eight with just 4.5 minutes per game and registering four scoreless games. as a result, on december 27, he was waived by the mavericks.  on may 8, 2017, gibson signed with anhui dragons of china for the 2017 nbl season. in 13 games, he averaged 42.1 points, 5.2 rebounds, 5.5 assists and 2.2 steals per game.  2017-18 season on september 20, 2017, gibson signed with the qingdao doublestar eagles of the chinese basketball association, returning to the team for a second stint. in 38 games, he averaged 33.7 points, 6.8 rebounds, 4.7 assists and 1.5 steals per game.  on march 1, 2018, gibson was acquired by the erie bayhawks of the nba g league. after failing to report to the team within 48 hours, gibson was suspended by the g league on march 11. gibson's preferred destination was reportedly the texas legends.  on april 6, 2018, gibson signed with the boston celtics. he made his debut for the celtics that night, scoring nine points in a 111-104 win over the chicago bulls. in the celtics' regular season finale on april 11, gibson scored 18 points in a 110-97 win over the brooklyn nets.  2018-19 season on september 11, 2018, gibson signed with the qingdao doublestar eagles of the chinese basketball association, returning to the team for a third stint.  on april 9, 2019, gibson signed with the boston celtics, returning to the franchise for a second stint. however, he did not appear in a game for the celtics during this stint.  2019-20 season on november 13, 2019, gibson was reported to have signed with the jiangsu dragons of the chinese basketball association. gibson made his debut for the dragons on november 21, 2019 with 31 points notched in a 130-114 win over the qingdao eagles.  2020-21 season gibson signed with the beijing ducks on september 30, 2020.  nba career statistics  regular season  |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| dallas | 17 || 0 || 13.6 || .368 || .333 || .724 || 1.3 || 1.5
|| .5 || .0 || 6.2 |- | style="text-align:left;"|  | style="text-align:left;"| boston | 4 || 0 || 10.0 || .609 || .500 || - || .8 || 1.0 || .0 || .0 || 8.5 |- class="sortbottom" | style="text-align:center;" colspan="2"| career | 21 || 0 || 12.9 || .415 || .368 || .724 || 1.2 || 1.4 || .4 || .0 || 6.7  references  external links  jonathan gibson at nba.com fiba profile new mexico state aggies bio  1987 births living people american expatriate basketball people in china american expatriate basketball people in iran american expatriate basketball people in israel american expatriate basketball people in italy american expatriate basketball people in turkey american men's basketball players anhui dragons players basketball players from california boston celtics players dallas mavericks players ironi ashkelon players new basket brindisi players new mexico state aggies men's basketball players oyak renault basketball players petrochimi bandar imam bc players point guards qingdao eagles players sportspeople from west covina, california trabzonspor b.k. players undrafted national basketball association players zhejiang lions players
fabriksampler v2 is a 2008 compilation album by acclaimed international musicians released on pharmafabrik label, part of its fabriksampler series. the album features 11 exclusive tracks made specially for this compilation, from henrik nordvargr bjorkk (sweden), lull (uk), wo0 (serbia), go tsushima (japan), left eye dominant (italy), alexei borisov (russia), tania stene (norway), pureh (slovenia), sunao inami (japan), dodecahedragraph (slovenia), the cherry blues project (argentina) and final (uk). the compilation was issued as an audio cd and video dvd box.  track listing   final: "4am internal"  pureh: "kogel"  wo0: "life bloom"  go tsushima: "mu"  left eye dominant: "grande hysterie"  alexei borisov & tania stene: "disclose"  henrik nordvargr bjorkk: "thyras ande och arv"  the cherry blues project: "stars"  dodecahedragraph: "atan3fftrack"  sunao inami: "the end of spiral"  lull: "the gulley"  references  external links   fabriksampler v2 magazine articles  2008 compilation albums
francesco del pozzo (died 7 march 1593) was a roman catholic prelate who served as bishop of agrigento (1591-1593).  biography on 23 january 1591, francesco del pozzo was appointed by pope gregory xiv as bishop of agrigento.  in 1591, he was consecrated bishop. he served as bishop of agrigento until his death on 7 march 1593.  references  external links and additional sources  (for chronology of bishops)  (for chronology of bishops)   1593 deaths 16th-century roman catholic bishops in sicily bishops appointed by pope gregory xiv
on the spot is a documentary tv series created by directors eszter cseke and andras s. takacs in their native hungary. each season has a central theme (ethnic tribes, children of dictators, birth around the world, etc.), using a fly on the wall style of documentary filmmaking. it premiered november 7, 2009, on spektrum tv. it currently airs on hungarian public television channels duna and duna world. many of on the spot's films are also shown across several european countries on special interest channels such as spiegel tv and sport 1 (subsidiaries of liberty global, autentic and amc networks international), as well as germany's international broadcaster deutsche welle. on the spot's most personal season explored giving birth in different cultures. 'around the world in 9 months' was produced in 10 countries from bali to mexico, which gave the creators a rarely wide spectrum on the topic of birth while they were expecting their own baby who was born at the end of the last episode. eszter cseke and andras s. takacs' next season introduced children of dictators to their audience, including edith eva eger and dr. gabor mate. smart world, the 9th season of on the spot discovers the effects of mobile coverage, wifi and smartphones of human communities from new york to transylvania. episodes of on the spot appeared in the official selection of festivals like the krakow international film festival, the american documentary film festival, input or the sarajevo international film festival. spot's approach has been called "rare and exclusive" by the bbc while the financial times wrote 'on the spot' is "up-close and visceral", adding that "takacs and cseke plunge their cameras into the heart of the action, asking questions that are normally suppressed". in 2021 the award winning film directors newest documentary film was aired by arte and spektrum tv. this is the story of a jewish baby who was born in the death camp before the liberation and survived. an extraordinary journey of the second and third generation, breaking the cycle of trauma to free themselves from auschwitz - forever.  the series takes its inspiration from famed hungarian war correspondent robert capa who wrote, "if your pictures aren't good enough, you're not close enough."  synopsis  with just two small broadcast cameras and no extra crew, cseke and takacs pull triple duties as directors, producers and cinematographers. in doing so, they gain unique perspectives into the lives of people across the world in the most delicate environments. each season is
unique and focuses on a specific topic, whether it is living with ethnic tribes in africa and papua, being embedded with fighters in the middle east or spending time with fidel castro's daughter alina or idi amin's son jaffar for their coverage about children of dictators.  starting out  after graduating from the hungarian film academy in budapest, cseke and takacs put together their meager savings and went to gaza with just a small camera and the drive to make an upstart documentary tv series. three months later they were pitching the pilot episode to major tv channels in hungary but no one thought it was commercial enough. their gamble finally paid off when spektrum tv - a small central european cable channel searching for its first original programming - picked up the series and commissioned the first season.  production  on the spot's first three seasons were characterised by human interest stories around the world. cseke and takacs filmed in the ghettos of johannesburg, searching out human rights activists in kabul and found underground bloggers in tehran. they interviewed un secretary general ban ki-moon in the arctic circle and were interviewed live on the bbc about their undercover filming in burma. years later they followed up their award-winning coverage on burma by interviewing aung san suu kyi about fear, freedom and the nature of dictatorships.  at the end of 2011, on the spot transitioned from spektrum tv to hungarian public television channels duna and duna world. the series' topics went on to include ethnic tribes in africa, power struggles in places like tibet, india and the west bank, children of dictators and most recently giving birth in different cultures around the globe.  cseke and takacs are also frequent contributors to marie claire and forbes, using their travels and experiences as a backdrop for their articles.  reception  the series has garnered a great deal of international recognition and critical acclaim. it received the golden nymph for best news documentary at the 53rd monte carlo tv festival, the press freedom award in strasbourg from the council of europe, the prize for best international short film at the american documentary film festival and the gold plaque at the 50th chicago international film festival television awards.  the financial times wrote on the spot is "up-close and visceral", adding that "takacs and cseke plunge their cameras into the heart of the action, asking questions that are normally suppressed." bbc news called their different approach "rare and exclusive." in 2016, takacs was included in forbes' '30 under 30' list as one of
the leading young entrepreneurs in european media.  references  external links   official website  on the spot at the internet movie database  on the spot on facebook.  on the spot on twitter.  2009 hungarian television series debuts 2000s documentary television series 2010s documentary television series 2000s hungarian television series 2010s hungarian television series hungarian documentary television series hungarian-language television shows
st. anne's cathedral (), also called ocana cathedral, is a cathedral church of catholic worship consecrated to st. anne.  it is a neoclassical building located on the south side of the 29 de mayo park in the city of ocana in norte de santander department, in the northern part of colombia. the cathedral is the seat of the roman catholic diocese of ocana.  the first church was built in 1564, and it was rebuilt after an earthquake in cucuta in 1875. in 1992 the paintings on wood were replaced with new ones with the same iconography dedicated to st anne.  see also roman catholicism in colombia  references  roman catholic cathedrals in colombia buildings and structures in norte de santander department roman catholic churches completed in 1564 ocana, norte de santander 16th-century roman catholic church buildings in colombia
ban khon railway station is a railway station located in ban khon subdistrict, phichai district, uttaradit. it is located 437.410 km from bangkok railway station and is a class 3 railway station. it is on the northern line of the state railway of thailand.  train services  local 403 phitsanulok-sila at  local 407/408 nakhon sawan-chiang mai-nakhon sawan  local 410 sila at-phitsanulok  references   ichiro, kakizaki (2010). okoku no tetsuro: tai tetsudo no rekishi. kyoto: kyotodaigakugakujutsushuppankai.   otohiro, watanabe (2013). tai kokutetsu yonsenkiro no tabi: shaso fukei kanzen kiroku. tokyo: bungeisha.   railway stations in thailand
karawane is a composition for chorus and orchestra by the finnish composer esa-pekka salonen.  the work was jointly commissioned by the tonhalle orchester zurich, the swedish radio symphony orchestra, the new york philharmonic with support from the philanthropist marie-josee kravis, the bamberg symphony, and the finnish radio symphony orchestra.  it was first performed by the tonhalle orchester zurich and the zurcher sing-akademie conducted by lionel bringuier in the tonhalle, zurich, on september 10, 2014.  the piece is set to the eponymous poem by the german author and dadaist hugo ball.  composition karawane has a duration of approximately 28 minutes and is composed in two numbered parts.  each part is subdivided into six connected and unnamed movements.  background karawane was composed between january 2013 and july 2014.  salonen had long intended to write a piece for chorus and orchestra, but delayed its composition due to scheduling conflicts and a lack of appropriate text.  the opportunity finally arose when salonen received a commission from a consortium of international orchestras.  knowing the premiere would be held in zurich, the composer decided to connect his piece to the city's history, particularly the origins of dadaism in 1916.  salonen wrote in the score program notes, "soon i settled for perhaps the best known dada poem (or 'lautpoesie', 'sound poetry' as it was called) by hugo ball, the founder of dada, author of the dada manifesto, and the central figure in all the activities of cabaret voltaire, the first forum of the early dadaists."  instrumentation the work is scored for an satb chorus and a large orchestra consisting of three flutes (2nd doubling alto flute; 3rd doubling piccolo), two oboes, english horn, two clarinets, bass clarinet (doubling 3rd clarinet), contrabass clarinet, two bassoons, contrabassoon, four horns, three trumpets (3rd doubling piccolo trumpet), three trombones, tuba, timpani, four percussionists, harp, piano (doubling celesta), and strings.  reception karawane has been praised by music critics.  reviewing the world premiere, mark swed of the los angeles times called it "a mischievous, madcap 30-minute work for orchestra" and wrote, "karawane channels salonen's inner caveman (who knew?), treating the text of made-up words (the opening is: 'jolifant bambla o falli
bambla') as a springboard for a circus of styles and emotions. written in a double cycle, the second part intensifying the first, the score propels from one entrancing dreamlike state to another, from one extreme (nocturnal quiescence) to another (a wild javanese monkey chant)."  after hearing a later performance by los angeles philharmonic, swed called it "richer, lusher, livelier and all the more unhesitatingly in-your-face."  reviewing a performance of the work by the new york philharmonic, zachary woolfe of the new york times described it as "the product of a mature master, working with more confidence and patience on a larger canvas. the chorus's hypnotic incantations have the undergirding of a glistening orchestral landscape, sometimes swaying, sometimes blooming."  he continued:  jay nordlinger of the new criterion was slightly more critical of the piece, however, remarking, "i found karawane a bit tiresome. but perhaps the problem was my lack of patience, rather than a lack of imagination on the composer's part. in a program note of his own, gilbert called salonen's work 'deliciously whimsical while also being fully formed and rigorous.' i'll buy that. and i'll definitely buy salonen, who is a credit to this musical age."  despite calling it "entertaining and grandiose," george grella of the new york classical review similarly observed that the "narrative feel of karawane loses out to density over a 30-minute duration."  he added, "there are entertaining, colorful bits of music that seem inspired by other composers, like ennio morricone, philip glass, and john adams. in particular, sections seem like responses to harmonium. salonen embraces cliches with a knowing wink, but they add bigness to a piece that is already overblown."  references  compositions by esa-pekka salonen 2014 compositions choral compositions compositions for symphony orchestra music commissioned by the new york philharmonic music commissioned by the swedish radio symphony orchestra
"right on the tip of my tongue" is a song written by van mccoy and joe cobb and performed by brenda & the tabulations.  it reached #10 on the u.s. r&b chart and #23 on the u.s. pop chart in 1971.  the song was arranged by van mccoy and produced by mccoy and gilda woods.  this song is noted for brenda's spoken recitation in the coda section, which leads to the song's surprising end.  the song ranked #97 on billboard magazine's top 100 singles of 1971.  chart history  weekly charts  year-end charts  references  external links  lyrics of this song    1971 songs 1971 singles songs written by van mccoy
ana maria boone godoy (born april 1, 1964) is a mexican politician from the institutional revolutionary party. she serves in the chamber of deputies for the lxiii legislature of the mexican congress from the second federal electoral district of coahuila.  life boone received an undergraduate degree in early childhood education from the national pedagogic university and worked as a normal school professor at the labastida superior normal school. she also joined section 39 of the snte.  most of boone's public service positions have been in the town of san juan de sabinas, where she directed the dif and was a town councilor from 2003 to 2005. similarly, she was deputy director of educational services for sabinas and the nearby town of muzquiz between 2010 and 2011.  legislative career in 2012, voters sent boone godoy to the lix legislature of coahuila, where she spent two years as a deputy and served as the secretary of the chamber's board of directors.  boone became a federal deputy in 2015 after she received 50 percent of the votes from coahuila's second district, far ahead of the second-place candidate with just 15 percent. she serves as the secretary of the radio and television commission and also serves on the children's rights and equity and gender commissions.  personal boone is involved in additional nonpolitical activities, including her role as the chairwoman and spokesperson of the nueva esperanza (new hope) orphanage in nueva rosita, as well as part ownership of radio triunfadora de coahuila, s.a. de c.v., the concessionaire of radio station xhwq-fm in monclova. her father, daniel boone menchaca, holds the concession for xhenr-fm, a radio station in nueva rosita.  boone godoy has two children, ana daniela and annette.  references  1964 births living people politicians from coahuila members of the chamber of deputies (mexico) institutional revolutionary party politicians 21st-century mexican politicians
soffredo (died 14 december 1210, pistoia) was an italian cardinal. his name is also given as soffredo errico gaetani, whilst his christian name is also spelled soffrido or goffredo in some sources.  life born in pistoia, he was made cardinal deacon of santa maria in via lata in the 1182 consistory. he took part in the 1185 conclave which elected pope urban iii. in 1187 he and cardinal andrea bobone were made papal legates to france to mediate between philip ii of france and henry ii of england - the two legates succeeded in sealing a two-year truce between the two kings.  he took part in the october and december 1187 conclaves which elected pope gregory viii and pope clement iii. he and cardinal pietro diana were sent to mediate between genoa and pisa. he also took part in the 1191 conclave which elected pope celestine iii and that of 1198. during summer 1198 he and cardinal pietro capuano were chosen as papal legates to follow the crusader army which was about to set out on a new crusade. despite this soffredo remained in the curia and capuano went to venice to prepare to make the crossing. in 1201 the chapter of the metropolitan cathedral of ravenna requested him as their archbishop, but the pope chose not to ratify this since he wished to keep the cardinal in his court in rome. until the end of may 1202, when he finally set out for the holy land, soffredo remained in the curia and represented the prosecution in several trials.  arriving in acre, he moved to  tripoli to end the succession dispute between bohemond iv of antioch and leo ii of armenia - a conflict which had held back the crusader forces. the papal delegates spent months trying to resolve the conflict but to no avail. on 16 august 1203 the pope made soffredo patriarch of jerusalem, but dismissed him from the post the following year. in autumn 1204 he and capuano moved to constantinople, which had been in crusader hands since april the same year. capuano remained there but soffredo travelled on to the kingdom of thessalonica, ruled over by boniface i of monferrato, to thank him for his assistance in establishing the latin clergy in the new empire. in august 1205 soffredo returned to the curia and on the following 5 december signed a papal privilege for the first time after his time in the holy land. he spent his
final years in retirement, probably in pistoia, performing minor tasks. in 1208 he became cardinal protopresbyter.  references  external links  1210 deaths 12th-century italian cardinals people from pistoia latin patriarchs of jerusalem 13th-century italian cardinals
the july 2016 qamishli bombings were a twin car bombing in a rojavan-held district in the city of qamishli, part of the al-hasakah governorate in syria. the bombings killed more than 44 and more than 171 were wounded. the islamic state of iraq and the levant claimed responsibility. the city of qamishli has been the site of multiple car bombings since 2015.  the bombings on 27 july 2016, a livestock truck carrying explosives and a motorcycle headed toward the western part of the city on the road between an asayish conscription center and a crowded farmers' market and exploded. the blasts leveled several buildings, destroyed several cars, and sent a mushroom cloud of smoke into the air which were seen by residents of the turkish city of nusaybin across the border, and the blast was heard by residents a few miles away. the first explosion caused a gas cylinder and an electric generator to explode.  at least 44 people were killed and more than 171 wounded. dozens were trapped under rubble and the hospitals in the city were immediately calling for donations of blood of all types.  the islamic state of iraq and the levant claimed responsibility for the bombings, saying that they are in retaliation for the recent coalition bombings against their forces in manbij city. the bombings included a suicide car bomb and a motorcycle bomb. they occurred near the border with turkey. the targets of the bombing were the local kurdish police force and a government building. at least 50 people were killed and around 140 injured.  see also 2015 qamishli bombings list of terrorist incidents in july 2016 timeline of the syrian civil war may 2016 jableh and tartous bombings  references  explosions in 2016 isil terrorist incidents in syria mass murder in 2016 suicide bombings in syria terrorist incidents in syria in 2016 islamic terrorist incidents in 2016 mass murder in syria anti-kurdish sentiment suicide car and truck bombings in syria july 2016 crimes in asia 2016 crimes in syria 2016 murders in asia 2010s murders in syria
this is a list of hills in gloucestershire. many of these hills are important historical, archaeological and nature conservation sites, as well as popular hiking and tourist destinations in the county of gloucestershire in southern england.  colour key  the table is colour-coded based on the classification or "listing" of the hill. the types that occur in gloucestershire are marilyns, humps and tumps, listings based on topographical prominence. "prominence" correlates strongly with the subjective significance of a summit. peaks with low prominences are either subsidiary tops of a higher summit or relatively insignificant independent summits. peaks with high prominences tend to be the highest points around and likely to have extraordinary views. a marilyn is a hill with a prominence of at least 150 metres or about 500 feet. a "hump" (the acronym comes from "hundred metre prominence) is a hill with a prominence of at least 100 but less than 150 metres. in this table marilyns are in beige and humps in lilac. the term "sub-marilyn" or "sub-hump" is used, e.g. in the online database of british and irish hills to indicate hills that fall just below the threshold. to qualify for inclusion, hills must either be 250 metres or higher with a prominence of at least 30 metres, below 250 metres with a prominence of at least 90 metres (the threshold for a sub-hump) or be in some other way notable. in this context, "tump" is used to connote a hill with a prominence of at least 30 but less than 100 metres. for further information see the lists of mountains and hills in the british isles and the individual articles on marilyns, humps, and tumps. by way of contrast, see also the article listing tumps (a traditional term meaning a hillock, mound, barrow or tumulus).  list of hills   notes:   the following high points have not been included for the reasons shown:  cutsdean hill(305 m) only has a prominence of 26 metres.  see also   list of mountains and hills of the united kingdom  list of marilyns in england  references and footnotes     gloucestershire hills
mr. rice's secret is a canadian family drama film.  it stars david bowie as the title character, a mysterious man who leaves after death a series of clues to a 12-year-old boy with cancer, to help him appreciate life. the production was filmed in 1998 and released in 2000.  plot owen walters (bill switzer) is 12 and suffers from hodgkin's disease. he has a group of friends who award points to each other for doing risky or strange acts. owen's parents want him to befriend simon, who has leukemia, but he rejects him as he considers simon to be more ill than he, reminding him of his own mortality. he also rejects his best friend funnel head (zach lipovsky) to win the approval of bullies.  owen's mysterious neighbour mr. rice dies, and owen secretly videotapes the funeral to show to his friends. they go to rice's house to watch it on his video player, and scour through his belongings, finding a letter for owen. he decodes it with a ring he received from rice, and finds that it is a series of clues leading to a secret. the boys go looking for the clues, one of which involves exhuming rice.  rice appears in flashbacks over the film, including one where he tells owen "all people, no matter who they are, they all wish they'd appreciated life more. it's what you do in life that's important, not how much time you have". owen finds the potion of life which allowed rice to live for 400 years. however, he makes a recovery from his treatment, and instead gives the potion to simon to save his life.  production the film was written by j. h. wyman and directed by nicholas kendall, an instructor at capilano university in vancouver. most of it was filmed in new westminster, in the lower mainland of british columbia.  peter o'toole was originally considered for the role of rice, but negotiations fell through and the role went to bowie, who enjoyed reading the script. recording had begun before bowie was cast, and the crew were amazed that he would be in the film. the filming location was kept secret so that bowie would not be disturbed. kendall recalled bowie as a quiet and introverted man, who had remarked that he wanted a clone so that he could act alongside his musical and artistic interests.  producer colleen hardwick, who had idolised bowie as a schoolgirl, said she "about died" to hear him make the phon
ecall to accept the role. she too recalled how he mixed with all members of the cast and crew. hardwick likened rice's advice to owen with how bowie accepted his own imminent death from cancer in january 2016.  the film was originally known as exhuming mr. rice. it was released on dvd in region 1 in september 2001 and region 2 that november.  reception  the film received mixed reviews. the review aggregator rotten tomatoes rates it as 50% from six reviews, with equal numbers of generally positive and negative reviews.  robert roten of the laramie movie scope gave the film a b, for telling a story about cancer in a "very non-depressing and positive way". he found owen to be a well-developed character and a realistic reflection of children struggling with cancer. roten summed the film up as "very well-written, well-acted and well-directed" and also praised its "haunting, etheral celtic-flavored music", but pointed out that fans of bowie would be disappointed that he only appears for around ten minutes.  writing for film journal international, maria garcia noted that there were plot holes that adults would notice, but in all the film was "didactic, yet not condescending, and inspirational without being corny. that's quite an achievement for any film, but especially for one that takes the high moral ground, as this one does".  james kendrick of q called the plot "clever" without being "preachy" about its theme. he was impressed by switzer's role as a complex character. however, he pointed out that although rice's appearances exclusively in flashbacks created an "aura" around the character, it should have been explained how he and owen had become friends in the first place. kendrick was repulsed by the scene of the children exhuming rice, finding it too graphic to be legitimately considered as a metaphor for owen confronting death eye-to-eye.  in the new york times, elvis mitchell found bowie to be the highlight of the film, noting how he brought a presence to small roles. however, mitchell called the film "bland and ordinary", naming the exhumation scene as one of few exceptions.  references  2000 films canadian drama films canadian films english-language canadian films films shot in british columbia films about cancer
the grain of dust is a lost 1918 american silent romance drama film directed by harry revier based on a novel by david graham phillips. the film starred lillian walker.  cast lillian walker as dorothy hallowell, the grain of dust ramsey wallace as frederick norman ralph delmore as james galloway james o'neill as william tetlow corinne uzzell as ursula norman edith day as josephine burroughs richard wangerman as john hallowell jacques tyrol as prince boris cecil fletcher as new minister elizabeth ferris as emily howe george henry redfield clark marjorie vonnegut charles eldridge lawrence evart  references  external links  1918 films american silent feature films american films lost american films films based on american novels american black-and-white films american romantic drama films 1918 romantic drama films
operation sankat mochan ( lit. crisis redemption) was an operation of the indian air force to evacuate indian citizens and other foreign nationals from south sudan during the south sudanese civil war. the operation was carried out in view of 2016 juba clashes.  background there were around 600 indians in south sudan; around 450 in juba and others elsewhere in the country.  operation two c-17 globemasters of the indian air force were deployed to evacuate. the first flight left juba on 15 july (south sudan time) carrying 143 individuals including 10 women and 3 infants. it landed in thiruvananthapuram, kerala on 16 july.  references  2016 in military history humanitarian military operations non-combat military operations involving india 2016 in india 2016 in south sudan evacuations of indians airlifts history of the foreign relations of india indian diaspora in asia 2016 in aviation 2016 in foreign relations of india aviation history of india modi administration india-south sudan relations south sudanese civil war operations involving the indian air force
eunidia subtimida is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
toulon xiii metropole marlins are french rugby league side based in toulon, in the region of provence-alpes-cote-d'azur. the club plays in the elite two championship, which is the 2nd tier in france. founded in 2011, their home matches are currently played at the stade leo-lagrange.  history  founded on 16 july 2011 by walid kadir, sporting treiziste toulonnais played their first match on 18 september 2011 against marseille xiii avenir at the stade jean alex-fernandez in toulon winning 40-24. that first season in national division 2 saw the club finish a respectful 5th. the following season 2012/13 they finished second behind saint-martin xiii and were promoted. they lasted just one season in national division 1, losing their only to that date coach, former french international player gael tallec, who resigned. 2014/15 they bounced back immediately and were promoted back to national division 1 as champions. this time they stayed up finishing 6th. in 2017 they beat us trentels xiii 28-24 to lift the paul dejean cup. they were promoted to the elite two championship for the 2018-19 season.  stadium  despite their short history toulonnais have already used three stadiums. from 2011-2013 they played at stade jean alex-fernandez. they are based at stade leo-lagrange and stade delaune.  current squad 2019-20 season  honours   national division 2 (1): 2014-15  paul dejean cup (1): 2017  references  french rugby league teams toulon 2011 establishments in france rugby clubs established in 2011
albert socin (13 october 1844 in basel - 24 june 1899 in leipzig) was a swiss orientalist, who specialized in the research of neo-aramaic, kurdish and contemporary arabic dialects. he also made contributions to the geography, archaeology, religion, art and literature of the middle east.  he studied philology at the university of basel and oriental studies at the universities of gottingen and leipzig, receiving his habilitation for oriental languages in 1871 at basel. in 1873 he became an associate professor, then from 1876 to 1890 served as a full professor of semitic languages at the university of tubingen. from 1890 up until his death in 1899, he was a professor of oriental languages at the university of leipzig.  in 1868-70, with eugen prym, he carried out language research in the levant and iraq, then in 1873 returned to the middle east on behalf of the baedeker publishing firm. he was a founding member of the deutschen vereins zur erforschung palastinas ("german society for the exploration of palestine").  selected works         kurdische sammlungen (2 volumes 1887-90, with eugen prym) - kurdish collections.  die genesis : mit ausserer unterscheidung der quellenschriften (with emil friedrich kautzsch), 1891 - the genesis: with external distinction of documentary sources.   arabische grammatik : paradigmen, literatur, ubungsstucke und glossar (3rd edition, 1894) -  arabic grammar: paradigms, literature, studies and glossary.  diwan aus centralarabien, 1900-01 - diwan of central arabia (collected, translated and explained by socin, edited by hans stumme).  palestine and syria with the chief routes through mesopotamia and babylonia; handbook for travellers; by karl baedeker. with 20 maps, 52 plans, and a panorama of jerusalem (authors albert socin, john p. peters, immanuel benzinger. first edition by socin in 1875; the fourth english edition (1906) is based on the sixth german edition).  socin, albert and carl brokelmann. arabische grammatik: paradigmen, literatur, ubungsstucke und glossar. berlin: reuther & reichard, 1909.   neuaramaische marchen und andere texte aus malula in deutscher ubersetzung, hauptsachlich aus der sammlung e. prym's und a. socin's, 1915 (with eugen prym, pub. gotthelf berg
strasser) - western neo-aramaic tales and other texts from ma'lula.  maps from "palestine and syria with the chief routes through mesopotamia and babylonia".  references   1844 births 1899 deaths people from basel-stadt leipzig university faculty university of tubingen faculty university of basel faculty swiss orientalists swiss arabists
alma mathilda akermark (11 june 1853-4 june 1933) was a swedish editor, feminist, writer, journalist and women's rights activist. she was a co-founder of the radical feminist women's paper framat ('forward'), and its editor during its entire publication. she wrote under the pseudonym mark. she was active within the gothenburg's women's association, and a leading figure within the most progressive and radical part of the swedish and local women's rights movement, and was noted for her involvement in the sedlighetsdebatten.  life alma akermark was the daughter of the gothenburg merchant anton wilhelm akermark and kristina kristiansson and sister of the painter isak akermark. her family was acquainted with the family of the progressive politician and publisher sven adolf hedlund. when she lost her father at the age of sixteen, hedlund gave her financial support to study music and drawing in neuchatel in switzerland, and upon her return to sweden in 1881, she supporter herself as a teacher in these subjects at the fruntimmersforeningens flickskola.   through the hedlund family, she belonged to the progressive circles in gothenburg. in 1884, the gothenburg's women's association, the first women's organization in gothenburg, was founded with hedlund's daughter mathilda hedlund as chair. akermark was elected board member the following year.  framat publication in 1886, alma akermark, hilma angered-strandberg and mathilda hedlund founded the women's publication framat ('forward'), with akermark as editor and the women's association as publisher.  her spouse since 1887, the telegrapher albert breinholm, also participated in the magazine.   alma akermark was a radical social liberal who supported social reforms and encouraged the paper to be a center of public debate. she controversially participated in the contemporary sedlighetsdebatten about sexual double standards between women and men, in which she supported the side that women should be allowed sexual relations outside of marriage, similarly as men were, without being socially ostracized. her publication of articles with sexual content in the women's paper placed her in confrontation with the moderate women's movement.  in 1886, she published the novel pyrrhussegrar (' pyrrhic victories') by stella kleve, in which a dying, virtuous woman regretted having refused sexual pleasure because of social convention. the book caused a scandal as it collided with contemporary sexual double standards, and the paper lost its support from the women's association, though the chair, mathilda
hedlund, did support her personally. sophie adlersparre, a central figure of the swedish women's mowevement, also objected to the kleve publication as the subject of women's sexual pleasure was much to radical in the eyes even of the contemporary women's movement. with the support of the hedlund family, alma akermark managed to continue publishing the paper herself. framat, however, eventually proved to be too radical and controversial for its time. in 1889, the paper discontinued publication when an organized advertising boycott deprived it of its finances, and alma akermark lost her work as a teacher.  later life she left gothenborg with her spouse and started a new magazine in nystad in finland, nya tag ('new efforts'), which only lasted four months.  after the death of her spouse in 1891, she was affected by a depression, and returned to gothenburg, where she was placed in a mental asylum in 1892. upon her release in 1896, she left for the united states, where she worked as a pattern instructor for a factory in chicago. in 1909, she became blind and returned to sweden, where she was cared for by her relatives.  references  sources    http://www.ub.gu.se/kvinn/portaler/kvinnotidskrifter/biografier/akermark.xml  bergenheim, asa, alma, sedligheten och det fria ordet. ingar i: obemarkta. - stockholm, 1995. s. 162-198.  hirn, yrjo, alma breinholm-akermark. - ingar i: den forgyllda balustraden. stockholm, 1953. s. 25-58.  nystrom, per, bannlyst: alma akermark och det moderna genombrottet. ingar i: tre kvinnor mot tiden. stockholm, 1994. s. 167-187.  kvinnornas tidning nr 17, 1925  further reading     1853 births 1933 deaths swedish women's rights activists swedish feminists 19th-century swedish journalists 19th-century swedish writers 19th-century swedish women writers swedish editors
dorcus rectus, the little stag beetle, is a species of beetles in the family lucanidae. it can be found in japan. these beetles have a distinctive red shell that separates them from dorcus curvidens. males of this species have been observed to have mandible trimorphism, a characteristic that has only been described in two species of lucanidae-with the other one being odontolabis cuvera-"and a small number of other invertebrates" as of 2017. the mandibles are used by males as weapons.  references   lucaninae beetles of asia insects of japan taxa named by victor motschulsky beetles described in 1857
syagrus calcaratus is a species of leaf beetle. it is distributed in guinea, the democratic republic of the congo, senegal, nigeria, ghana, sudan and ivory coast. it was first described by johan christian fabricius in 1775.  syagrus calcaratus is a pest of cotton. the larvae attack the roots of the plant and cause it to wilt. other host plants for the species include parinari curatellifolia.  references  eumolpinae beetles of africa beetles of the democratic republic of the congo insects of west africa insects of sudan taxa named by johan christian fabricius beetles described in 1775
mohammed jabbar shokan (; born 21 may 1993 in basra, iraq) is an iraqi footballer who plays as a forward for al-minaa in the iraqi premier league.  international career on 24 july 2016, shokan won his first international cap with iraq against uzbekistan in a friendly match.  international goals  scores and results list iraq's goal tally first.  honours  international iraq u-23  afc u-22 championship: 2013  references  external links    1993 births living people association football midfielders iraqi footballers iraq international footballers iraqi expatriate sportspeople in jordan iraqi expatriate footballers sportspeople from basra al-mina'a sc players erbil sc players al-quwa al-jawiya players al-ramtha sc players al-shorta sc players iraq youth international footballers
tuttilik (old spelling tugtilik), also known as lake fjord, is a fjord in the municipality of sermersooq, southeastern greenland.  tundra climate prevails in the region of the fjord, the average annual temperature in the area being . the warmest month is july when the average temperature rises to  and the coldest is january with . the fjord is free of ice between july and october in average years.  history tugtilik probably means "the place where the reindeer live" (tugto is greenlandic for reindeer) and the river flowing into the fjord from the lake is rich in arctic char. it is likely to have been settled by inuit hunters for centuries. there are the remains of at least nine winter houses on the south and west side of the fjord, but all were abandoned by the 20th century.  following the success of his british arctic air route expedition of 1930-31, gino watkins returned to tugtilik, or as he called it, lake fjord, in 1932 on the east greenland expedition to continue the exploration work with a smaller team. a purpose of the expedition was to take metrological observations around the lake, the only place in the area where planes could land on skis or floats, without the hazard of icebergs and pack ice. on 20 august 1932, he would die in this fjord after he went hunting for seals in its waters. later that day his empty kayak was found floating upside down by his companions. his body was never found.    a monument to watkins stands on the rocky promontory between the main fjord and the westerly branch. the remains of the hunting hut of the 1932-33 east greenland expedition (rejsehus) is at the head of the shallow western branch of the fjord.  geography  tuttilik is a small fjord of the king christian ix land coast located east of nigertuluk fjord and south of the southern k.j.v. steenstrup glacier. it extends in a roughly north/south direction for about . the basin inside the fjord has steep mountains on both sides and the terminus of the glacier at the head of the fjord forms a  high wall of ice. a  long tributary fjord of the same width branches from the western shore of the main fjord about  from the mouth. watkins gave the name 'lake fjord' to the place after a  long lake that lies a little inland to the west of the head of this branch.  to the south the fjord opens into the north atlantic ocean near cape wandel
. ailsa island lies at the mouth of the fjord, named after ailsa craig in the firth of clyde in scotland.  gallery  see also  john rymill list of fjords of greenland  bibliography spencer apollonio, lands that hold one spellbound: a story of east greenland, 2008  references  external links east greenland - in the footsteps of gino watkins picture - on way to watkins "lake fjord" greenland 1932 and 1967  fjords of greenland
jose callangan calida (born july 7, 1950) is a filipino lawyer currently serving as solicitor general of the philippines. he was sworn into the post on june 30, 2016, to replace florin hilbay. he previously served in the arroyo administration as undersecretary of justice and as executive director of the dangerous drugs board.  life and education calida was born in nuevo iloco, davao (present-day mawab, davao de oro). a born again christian, he is married to milagros parantar ordaneza who is also from davao with whom he has three children.  calida holds a phd's degree in english from the ateneo de davao university in 1969. he studied law at the ateneo de manila university law school where he was a dean's lister. he graduated in 1973 and was admitted to the bar the following year with a general average of 83.25 percent (the highest grade of 100 percent in criminal law, 90 percent in civil law and 90 percent in taxation) in the 1974 philippine bar examination.  calida is a member of the aquila legis fraternity.  career calida is a practicing lawyer and founding partner of j. calida & associates law firm based in davao del sur. he served as secretary general of the volunteers against crime and corruption during the administration of president fidel ramos and was the convenor of the god's people's coalition for righteousness that staged protests and prayer rallies against the proliferation of pornography and smut films in the 1990s. in 1997, he led the group called support the initiatives for the good of the nation or sign which pushed for charter change through people's initiative and helped the pirma movement gather signatures to allow then president fidel ramos to run for reelection through a plebiscite. he also co-founded the party list group called citizens' battle against corruption and served as its president in 1997.  calida was a member of the prosecution team during the impeachment trial of president joseph estrada in 2000. following the second edsa revolution, he was appointed by the newly installed president gloria arroyo as the undersecretary of the department of justice (doj) under secretary hernando b. perez in 2001, merceditas gutierrez in 2002, and simeon datumanong in 2003. as justice undersecretary, he was in charge of the national bureau of investigation, the office of the government corporate counsel, the doj task force on corruption and internal security, and the doj task force on financial fraud and money laundering. in 2004, he assumed the leadership of the dangerous drugs board as the agency's
executive director.  calida returned to private law and business after leaving government service in october 2004. he was president and chairman of the vigilant investigative and security agency, which won a contract with the philippine amusement and gaming corporation in 2010. he also served as senior vice president of the insurance company prudential guarantee and assurance inc. calida was endorsed by then davao city vice mayor rodrigo duterte as a candidate for the ombudsman post in 2011. prior to his return to government service, he was also one of the campaign managers of the 2016 duterte presidential campaign.  calida faces criminal and administrative charges at the office of the ombudsman. according to one of the charges, calida allegedly violated the code of conduct and ethical standards for public officials and employees for failing to divest his interest in his family-owned security agency, which received  worth of contracts from the department of justice and other government agencies. calida has denied any conflict of interest and said he is not liable under the code of conduct for public officials nor the anti-graft law.  calida was reported to be the second highest-paid government official in 2019, earning  according to a report from commission on audit (coa).  see also  abs-cbn franchise renewal controversy national telecommunications commission  references   |-  |-  1950 births filipino lawyers filipino business executives living people solicitors general of the philippines heads of government agencies of the philippines people from davao de oro people from davao del sur ateneo de davao university alumni ateneo de manila university alumni arroyo administration personnel duterte administration personnel presidency of rodrigo duterte
afonso de albuquerque maranhao (died 10 july 1836) was a politician of the empire of brazil. he served as governor of the states of pernambuco and paraiba. from 1826 until his death, he was a member of the senate of the empire of brazil.  references  18th-century births 1836 deaths governors of pernambuco (empire of brazil) governors of paraiba (empire of brazil) year of birth unknown place of birth unknown members of the senate of the empire of brazil
rene dorin (13 november 1891, la rochelle - 25 july 1969, noisy-le-grand) was a 20th-century french chansonnier, screenwriter and playwright. rene dorin was the father of writer andre dorin and comedian, writer and playwright francoise dorin.  theatre  1939: mailloche by rene dorin, theatre de la madeleine  cinema  1932: en lisant le journal, short film by alberto cavalcanti (actor and screenwriter) 1934: quatre a troyes, by pierre-jean ducis (actor and screenwriter) 1934: les geants de la route, by pierre-jean ducis (actor and screenwriter) 1940: radio surprises, by marcel aboulker (actor, as himself)  references  external links   french chansonniers french male actors french male screenwriters 20th-century french screenwriters 20th-century french dramatists and playwrights 1891 births 1969 deaths people from la rochelle burials at batignolles cemetery 20th-century french  male singers 20th-century french male writers
catalant technologies, inc., formerly hourlynerd, is a freelance marketplace that uses a machine-learning algorithm to recommend independent consultants whose skills and expertise are needed for client projects. more than 70,000 independent consultants are listed on catalant. catalant is based in boston, ma.  history  the company, styled as "hourlynerd", was launched in 2013 as part of a harvard business school's course.   hourlynerd was founded by rob biederman, patrick petitti, peter maglathlin, and joe miller.  in september 2013, hourlynerd received $750,000 in seed money from a group led by mark cuban, and quickly became a global online marketplace that connected companies of varying sizes with over 25,000 independent business consultants for project-based work.  by 2016, the company's online marketplace included 17,500 freelance consultants and over two hundred boutique consulting firms.  business model the catalant platform enables clients to post projects, receive bids, interview and select experts, track projects, and make payments all in the same place.  clients use catalant's software platform to access and deploy people in different talent pools who will work both inside and outside of their organizations.  these talent pools include: employees, alumni and retirees, and independent consultants and firms.  more than 70,000 independent experts and 1,500 boutique firms are listed in catalant's "expert marketplace."  company details catalant is headquartered in boston.  the company opened its second office in london in 2018.  as of 2018, catalant served more than 30% of the fortune 100 and 20% of the fortune 1000, including ge, pfizer, staples, and shell.  references  further reading  external links   software companies established in 2013 companies based in boston software companies based in massachusetts 2013 establishments in massachusetts privately held companies based in massachusetts software companies of the united states 2013 establishments in the united states companies established in 2013
is a japanese construction company specialized in construction of condominium units. from 1968 to 2015, the company built a total of around 580,000 condominium units, which is approximately 10% of the total number of condominium units on the market in japan.  the company is highly vertically integrated, with all of the lifecycle of condominium construction and maintenance handled by the company or its subsidiaries.  on october 1, 2015, haseko corporation was included in the nikkei 225 stock market index.  references  external links  official website   construction and civil engineering companies of japan construction and civil engineering companies based in tokyo construction and civil engineering companies established in 1937 companies listed on the tokyo stock exchange japanese brands japanese companies established in 1937
mercy (spanish: misericordia) is a 1953 mexican drama film directed by zacarias gomez urquiza and starring sara garcia, carmen montejo and anita blanch.  cast  sara garcia   as benigna    carmen montejo  as juliana    anita blanch as dona francisca zapata y pruneda    angel garasa  as don carchito    manuel donde  as yuco    jose baviera  as don romualdo, sacerdote    alberto mariscal  as antonio    francisco reiguera  as don carlos moreno trujillo   beatriz saavedra  as obdulia    ana bertha lepe  as celedonia   lupe carriles  as limosnera chismosa    manuel casanueva  as notario    enedina diaz de leon  as dona florita, limosnera    pedro elviro  as limosnero    gilberto gonzalez as limosnero    jesus gomez as policia    leonor gomez  as limosnera    isabel herrera  as mujer sale iglesia    ramon sanchez as herrero    paz villegas  as dona bernarda  references  bibliography   maria luisa amador. cartelera cinematografica, 1950-1959. unam, 1985.  external links     1953 films 1953 drama films mexican drama films mexican films spanish-language films films based on works by benito perez galdos films directed by zacarias gomez urquiza mexican black-and-white films
khela is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 4.7 km away from postal head office in bilga, 12.7 km from nurmahal, 45 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 122 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  education  the village has a punjabi medium, co-ed upper primary school (gms khela). the school provide mid-day meal as per indian midday meal scheme and the meal prepared in school premises and it was found in 1994.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011 , khela has a total number of 124 houses and population of 639 of which include 323 males and 316 females. literacy rate of khela is 79.44%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 70 which is 10.95% of total population of khela, and child sex ratio is approximately 795 higher than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 47.73% of total population in khela. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 200 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of khela which includes 188 males and 12 females. according to census survey report 2011, 70% workers describe their work as main work and 30% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  partabpura railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 12.4 km away from the village. the village is 43.3 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 140 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the following lists events that happened in 1994 in iceland.  incumbents president - vigdis finnbogadottir  prime minister - davið oddsson  events  births  3 january - einar kristgeirsson, alpine skier. 3 january - gudmunda brynja oladottir, footballer 27 january - erla asgeirsdottir, alpine skier. 9 may - arni vilhjalmsson, footballer 16 september - martin hermannsson, basketball player 3 november - tinna odinsdottir, artistic gymnast 10 november - aron elis þrandarson, footballer  full date missing freydis-halla einarsdottir, alpine skier  deaths 7 april - albert guðmundsson, footballer (b. 1923) 18 november - ludvik josepsson, politician (b. 1914)  references    1990s in iceland iceland iceland years of the 20th century in iceland
the river chimenticook is a tributary of the saint john river (bay of fundy), flowing in the canton t13 r13 wels, in the aroostook county, in north of maine, in united states.  its course is in forest area in a valley enclosed by high mountains, in the southeast of the us border. its course is situated between the river powock (northeast side) and "twomile brook" (west side).  the river side of the river is accessible by chimenticook some forest roads.  geography   the upper part of the "river chimenticook" begins in notre dame mountains at the mouth of the east lake (length: ; height: ) in aroostook county (maine). this canadian lake surrounded by mountains has two parts connected by a strait, and only  of its length (southeast part) is in american territory. this lake is mainly fed by the river spikes (kamouraska) (from the west) and the "ruisseau blanc" (white brook) (coming from the north).  the mouth of the east lake flows through the southeast and is located at:    southeast of the border between quebec and maine;   northwest from the confluence of the river chimenticook;   southeast of the route 132 at la pocatiere, quebec, in quebec.  from the mouth of the east lake, the chimenticook river flows on  as follows:    to the south, to the northwest shore of the "little east lake";   to the southeast through the "little east lake" (length: ; height: ) up at its mouth located in the southeast;   to the southeast, to the deck of a forest road;   to the southeast, to the deck of a forest road;   to the southeast, to the confluence of the river.  the "chimenticook river" flows into a river curve on the north shore of saint john river, canton t16 r13 wels, the aroostook county. this confluence is located at:    west of the allagash hamlet, located on the south shore of st. john river;   upstream of the confluence of the river pocwock;   downstream of the confluence of the big black river.  toponymy  the term "chimenticook" is original abenaki.  see also   mount carmel, a municipality of quebec kamouraska regional county municipality (rcm) aroostook county, a county maine riviere aux pointes
(kamouraska) (spikes river) list of rivers of quebec list of rivers of maine  references  external links     maine streamflow donnees de l'usgs  maine watershed donnees a partir de l'environmental protection agency  tributaries of the saint john river (bay of fundy) rivers of aroostook county, maine north maine woods
gurudaspur assembly constituency (sl. no.: 4) is a punjab legislative assembly constituency in gurdaspur district, punjab state, india.  member of legislative assembly  2012: gurbachan singh babbehali, shiromani akali dal  election results  2022  2017  references  assembly constituencies of punjab, india gurdaspur district
computingedge is a monthly magazine published by the ieee computer society since 2015. it contains curated articles from 13 ieee publications and also features original content related to hot technology topics, providing information regarding current research developments, trends, and changes in the computing technology. subscriptions of the magazine are provided free of cost as printed copies in the united states and as electronic copies worldwide.  references  external links   computer magazines published in the united states monthly magazines published in the united states ieee magazines magazines established in 2015
adana gundogdu schools is a large private educational establishment situated in adana turkey. it educates nearly 3,000 students aged between the ages of 3 and 18. it was founded in 1988 by yunus gundogdu a very prominent local businessman who wanted to create a school for his three children.  it is a privately owned establishment which has been approved and is subject to meb regulations. gundogdu is a day school and attracts students from all local areas including seyhan, cukurova and ceyhan.  history  gundogdu first opened its doors to 86 students in 1988, its original campus was situated next to the seyhan lake it moved to its current campus in 1993. the current campus is 12000 square meters and houses all schools. this includes the international children's university, primary school, middle school, science high school and anatolian high school. the international children's university was added in 2012, ibrahim kutluay basketball school, gymboree and british swim school have been added to the campus in 2013.  education   gundogdu has five different schools all based on the same campus. the first school is international children's university which houses students from the ages of 3 to 6 years old.  this school has its own separate building and is unique by having no stairs. the classes have 24 students and they follow the highscope teaching method. teaching standards are assessed by early years ireland currently there are 3 nino classes (3-4 year olds) 4 pre-kinder classes (4-5 years old) and 6 kinder classes (5-6 years old).  the primary school is for students from years 1 to 4 and follows the turkish national curriculum prepared by meb the students are taught from 8:30 until 16:30 monday to friday and the school follows all national holidays. currently there are 6 classes in each year group, each class has 24 students. the main subjects are taught by class teachers, arts, sports, foreign languages, music and robotic lessons are taught by specialist teachers.  middle school is the largest building with over 1500 students. there are 4 years of middle school resulting in the students taking the national teog exam in november and april of their final year. the school again follows the national curriculum but all subjects are taught by specialist teachers. each class has a maximum size of 24.  in the 5th grade the students follow an intensive english program, this includes lessons in science and maths in english using the cambridge international exam system.  high school is split into two different
schools, depending on the students teog results they can attend science high school or anatolian high school.  each school is based in the same building and follows the turkish national curriculum. science high school is usually attended by students who wish to go into the medical profession, engineers or any careers that require a higher level of knowledge in maths and science. anatolian school concentrates more on language study and social sciences. there are currently 10 science high school classes and 23 anatolian classes.  each school has 4 years of study and in the final year all students take the lys exam, this determines which university and which course they will study.  accreditation  eaquals association accredited the foreign languages department of the school in march 2015. in november 2016, the council of international schools (cis) accepted adana gundogdu schools as a member and currently working towards accreditation. the schools have recently also applied to participate in the turkish perfection awards which assess the company using the efqm model.  student council and alumni   gundogdu has a large student council that is voted on every year. the student council consists of a president and over 400 council members, these members have responsibility for many social projects this has including, concerts to help children with leukaemia, supply school furniture to state schools who need it and raising money for local charities. alumni includes gozde durmus and canan dagdeviren who were recently identified by mit technology review as being people to watch under the age of 35. two students have gone on to represent turkey in the london olympics in basketball and volleyball. gundogdu has educated many local businessmen including the current president gokhan gundogdu, polen uslu-pehlivan who is a player in the turkish national volleyball team, saziye ivegen and naile ivegen sisters who have played in turkish national basketball team, direnc bada who became the first turkish player to go to the  australia open.  intellectual citizen program  this program was developed to encourage students to read, this program was developed in-house and has three steps. first the students read the set book, then they write a report on the book at the same time a group students prepare a for and against debate, the program is used across all schools from primary first grade until 11th grade in high school and also across all languages taught.  academic success  gundogdu has had a successful record in the national teog exams.  references  private schools in turkey
ode records is a new zealand record label. artists recordings released through the label include herb mcquay, deane waretini. the first release on the label was a single in 1968, "sally i do" by abdullahs' regime. the label also became an important outlet for ethnic and world music, especially music from melanesian and polynesian sources.  background the label was started in 1968 by terence o'neill-joyce. the genres the label has released include pop, blues, country, jazz, new age, maori, pacific and world music. around 2005, the label was purchased by roger marbeck of the marbecks record stores chain. along with the kiwi pacific international ltd, and kiwi records labels, ode had a speciality in polynesian music.  general releases (selective)  singles  abdullahs' regime - "sally i do" / "silver ship" (dedicated to those services active in vietnam) - ode records ode.1 - (1968)   andrew - "hand bags and glad rags" / "jordan marsh (my best friend)" - ode 3 - (1968)  the dizzy limit - "golden slumbers / carry that weight" - ode 5 - (1969)  the dizzy limit - "wrote a song for everyone" / "good golly miss molly" - ode-7 - (1969)  nash chase - "sound of love" / "my special prayer" - ode-8 -  (1970)  nash chase - "what greater love" / "raindrops keep fallin' on my head" ode-11 - (1970)  nash chase - "i will bring you flowers in the morning" / "words" - ode-15  anderson & wise - "anderson and wise" / "yo yo mac" - ode-50 - (1972)   herb mcquay - "oh how happy" / "mrs jones" - ode records ode 711 - (1980)  albums  herb mcquay - you are the one - ode - (1981)  shane - portrait 68 - ode records sode 243 - (1986)  taj mahal - taj - ode records  sode 256 - (1986)  will crummer - shoebox love songs - ode  cd manu 5113 - (2011)  deane waretini - now is the hour - ode cd manu 5145 - (2012)  world and ethnic music (selective)  albums  patea methodist club - to
ia - ode records sode017 - 1973 (lp)  south taranaki methodist maori cultural group -music of the maori - ode records sode035 - 1976 (lp)  the first centenary of the methodist church in fiji - ode records sode081 - 1976 (lp)  tumuenua dance group - cook island drums, chants and songs - ode voy 1335 - (1991) (cd)  songs from the second float: music from the island of taku - recorded, compiled, and annotated by richard moyle. ode music manu 2042 - (2005) (cd)  references  new zealand independent record labels ethnic music record labels
justin mcgrath can refer to:   justin mcgrath (plup), american super smash bros. melee player  justin mcgrath (footballer), australian rules footballer
xiangyang subdistrict () is a subdistrict in yingdong district, fuyang, anhui, china. , it has 7 residential communities under its administration.  see also   list of township-level divisions of anhui  references   township-level divisions of anhui fuyang
arrows is the third studio album by the alternative rock band the lonely forest. the album was released on march 22, 2011 on trans records.  track listing   be everything  turn off this song and go outside  (i am) the love skeptic  (i am) the love addict  coyote  i don't want to live there  tunnels  two notes and a beat  end it now!  woe is me... i am ruined  we sing in time  arrows  accolades  references   2011 albums the lonely forest albums
prince cheng of the first rank, or simply prince cheng, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince cheng peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yongxing (永瑆; 1752-1823), the qianlong emperor's 11th son, who was made "prince cheng of the first rank" in 1789. the title was passed down over seven generations and held by seven persons.  members of the prince cheng peerage   yongxing (永瑆; 1752 - 1823; 1st), the qianlong emperor's 11th son, held the title prince cheng of the first rank from 1789 to 1823, posthumously honoured as prince chengzhe of the first rank (成哲親王) 1 mianqin (綿懃; 1768 - 1820; 2nd), initially a lesser bulwark duke, promoted to beile in 1802, posthumously promoted to prince cheng of the second rank in 1820 1 yishou (奕綬; 1786 - 1812; 3rd), posthumously granted as a lesser bulwark duke in 1812, posthumously promoted to prince cheng of the second rank in 1823 1 zairui (載銳; 1805 - 1859; 4th), initially a defender general from 1813 to 1820, promoted to beile in 1820, held the title prince cheng of the second rank from 1823 to 1859, posthumously honoured as prince chenggong of the second rank (成恭郡王) 1 puzhuang (溥莊; 1830 - 1872; 5th), initially a third class defender general from 1858 to 1859, held the title of a beile from 1859 to 1872, made an acting junwang in 1860, had no male heir 2 & 3 puying (溥英) & puhua (溥華)  4 pulan (溥蘭; 1833 - 1879), held the title of a third class defender general from 1857 to 1879 2 yugao (毓杲; born 1864), held the title of a third class bulwark general from 1879  hengqi (恒奇; born 1893) 5 puwei (溥蔚; 1834 - 1901),
held the title of a third class defender general from 1857 to 1901  yutong (毓桐; 1890 - 1901), had no male heir 6 puyun (溥蘊; 1837 - 1864), held the title of a defender general from 1857 to 1862, his title stripped in 1862  yubo (毓柏; 1858 - 1865), had no male heir 7 puzhen (溥蓁; 1839 - 1864) 1 yusu (毓橚; 1858 - 1918; 6th), adopted as puzhuang's son and successor, held the title of a beizi from 1872 to 1918 1 & 2 hengxi (恆喜) and hengzhao (恆照) 3 hengyan (恆燕; born 1893; 7th), held the title of a grace defender duke from 1922 4, 5, 6, 7 & 8 henglie (恆煭), hengxiu (恆烋), hengyang (恆𤋁), hengfeng (恆㶻) & hengchi (恆𤈕) 8, 9, 10 & 11 pusong (溥松), pufei (溥芾), purong (溥蓉) & puyin (溥茵) 12 pubao (溥葆; 1849 - 1889), held the title of a third class defender general from 1868 to 1889 1 yuzhen (毓振; 1882 - 1895), held the title of a bulwark general from 1890 to 1895 2 yukui (毓揆; born 1885) 13 puju (溥菊; 1849 - 1884), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1872 to 1884 yuqi (毓啟; 1877 - 1877), had no male heir 14 puheng (溥蘅; 1853-1901), zairui's 14th son, held the title of a third class supporter general from 1872 to 1901 1 yupu (毓樸; born 1878), held the title of a grace general from 1902 hengxun (恆勳; born 1911) 8 yiru (奕繻; 1809 - 1845), held the title of a first class bulwark general from 1829 to 1845 zaiqiao (載翹; 1828-1839), had not male heir 9 yichuo (奕綽; 1818 - 1863), held the title of a grace
general from 1838 to 1863 zaiyun (載筠; 1839 - 1842), had not male heir 11 yifu (奕綍; 1820 - 1854), held the title of a first class bulwark general from 1844 to 1854 1 zaiding (載碠; 1839 - 1906), held the title of a grace general from 1854 to 1906 pukun (溥堃; 1875 - 1881), had not male heir 2 zaiying (載碤; 1840 - 1894), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1868 to 1894, had no male heir 3 zai[shi'an] (載[石安]; 1842 - 1900), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1868 to 1900 1 pujing (溥敬; born 1883), zai-?'s eldest son, held the title of a grace general from 1902 yuchun (毓椿; born 1904) 4 zailin (載碄; 1852 - 1898), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1872 to 1898 purong (溥傛; 1886-1894), had not male heir 2 mianyi (綿懿; 1771 - 1809), adopted as son of yongzhang, prince xun (循) of the second rank 3 miancong (綿聰; 1775 - 1828), initially a bulwark general, promoted to defender general in 1823, posthumously promoted to lesser bulwark duke in 1828 2 yixiu (奕繡; 1812 - 1886), held the title of a third class bulwark general from 1828 to 1886 zaiqin (載芹; born 1862) pushen (溥伸; born 1885) yuxiang (毓祥; born 1901)  7 mianbin (綿儐; 1796 - 1841), held the title of a defender general from 1821 to 1841 2 yishu (奕𩆩; 1835 - 1897), held the title of a second class bulwark general from 1841 to 1897 zaishan (載山; 1855-1909), yishu's eldest son, held the title of a third class fengguo jiangjun from 1874 to 1909 1 puzheng (溥正; born 1881), held the title of a grace general from 1910 5 zaijun (載峻; 1864 - 1899), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1878 to 1899, had no male heir 6 zaikun (載崐; 1865 - 1906), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1903
to 1906 1 pubai (溥栢; born 1905), held the title of a grace general from 1907 8 zailing (載岭; born 1874), held the title of a third class supporter generall from 1893 9 zaiyong (載㟾; born 1878), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1903 11 zaiyue (載岳; born 1887), held the title of a third class supporter general from 1906  family tree  |- |legend:  - title bearers  - emperors |- |  see also  prince xun (循)  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages peerages of the plain red banner
prince yi of the first rank, or simply prince yi, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince yi peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was yongxuan (永璇; 1746-1832), the qianlong emperor's eighth son, who was made "prince yi of the first rank" in 1797. the title was passed down over seven generations and held by seven persons.  members of the prince yi peerage   yongxuan (永璇; 1746-1832), the qianlong emperor's eighth son, held the title prince yi of the second rank from 1779 to 1797, promoted to prince yi of the first rank in 1797, posthumously honoured as prince yishen of the first rank (儀慎親王)  mianzhi (綿志; 1768-1834), yongxuan's eldest son, held the title of a buru bafen fuguo gong from 1799 to 1803, promoted to beizi in 1803 and then to beile in 1809, made an acting junwang in 1813, stripped of his title in 1815 and 1823 but restored again in 1819 and 1823, inherited the prince yi peerage in 1832, posthumously honoured as prince yishun of the second rank (儀順郡王)  yiyin (奕絪; 1817-1893), mianzhi's fourth son, held the title of a feng'en fuguo gong from 1800 to 1801, inherited the prince yi peerage in 1801 as a beile, made an acting junwang in 1884  zaihuan (載桓; 1838-1859), yiyin's eldest son, posthumously honoured as a beizi  puyi (溥頤; 1858-?), zaihuan's son  yukun (毓崐; 1875-1901), puyi's eldest son, held the title of a beizi from 1884 to 1901, posthumously made an acting beile, had no male heir  yuqi (毓岐; 1883-1916), puyi's fifth son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1901 to 1916  hengyue (
恆鉞; 1911-?), yuqi's eldest son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1917  yiji (奕績; 1798-1813), mianzhi's third son, posthumously honoured as a buru bafen fuguo gong in 1813  family tree  see also  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages peerages of the bordered white banner
frankville school, also known as the frankville museum, is a historic structure located in the unincorporated community of frankville, iowa, united states. it was built in 1872 by w.h. hopper, replacing an older building from the mid-1850s.  it is a two-story, stone vernacular structure, capped with a gable roof.  the stone is rock-faced ashlar limestone.  the stones on the front facade are carefully dressed compared with those on the other elevations.  the lintels and window sills are blocks of rock-faced stone, except for those on the front.  on the front, carefully dressed stone voussoirs and keystones are used for the round arches for the main entrance and the window above.  high school classes were added in the 1920s.  in 1958 the school was reduced to kindergarten and 7th and 8th grades.  it closed in 1962.  the following year the winneshiek county historical society acquired the building and operated a museum in it.  it remains in the community's park.    the building's relative uniqueness is derived from its stone construction.  the vast majority of iowa's 19th-century schoolhouses were of frame or log constriction, followed by brick.  by 1874 at the peak of schoolhouse construction only 268 were stone, compared to 8,000 frame structures and about 650 that were brick. the building was listed on the national register of historic places in 1978.  references   school buildings completed in 1872 defunct schools in iowa school museums vernacular architecture in iowa museums in winneshiek county, iowa national register of historic places in winneshiek county, iowa school buildings on the national register of historic places in iowa
szidi rakosi (born szidonia kremsner; 28 may 1852, otvos, kingdom of hungary - 20 october 1935, budapest, hungary) was a hungarian actress and acting teacher. her relatives included bela rakosi, jeno rakosi, viktor rakosi and ida rakosi, the wife of lajos evva.  life  rakosi was the daughter of janos kremsner and anna vogel. in 1867, their surname was changed from kremsner to rakosi.  rakosi began her career in 1867 at the . she graduated from a drama academy in 1870. from 1870 to 1872, she performed at the national theatre in budapest. she married zsolt beothy, with whom she had two children: laszlo beothy (13 april 1873), a theatrical director, and zsigmond (1875). she divorced zsolt in 1877 and began to perform at the budai theatre again until 1885.  in 1909, she became a life member of the national theatre, and also became an honorary member in 1928 until 1934. she also appeared at the magyar theatre in 1917, and the comedy theatre of budapest in 1920. she was relatively unknown towards the beginning of her career, but found fame in grandmotherly and comedic roles.  in 1892, rakosi was part of an actor-led training school, which educated generations of hungarian actors for the stage. on 8 february 1895, she provided an application to the budapest city council for a civic theatre. the new theatre was named the magyar theatre. the plot of land needed to build the theater was bought by her brother and her sister's husband, .  her children and students helped support rakosi in budapest until she died at age 83.  teaching  in 1892, she opened her own theater school. in 1909, she became a life member of the national theatre. the king's theatre celebrated 40 years of her educational work. notable students of hers include sari fedak and gyula gozon.  gallery  further reading   magyar szinhazmuveszeti lexikon.foszerk. szekely gyorgy. budapest: akademiai. 1994. online eleres  keller andor: bal negyes paholy - bp., 1960.  izsaky margit: beszelgetes a nagyasszonnyal - rakosi szidi 83 eves - delibab, 1934. 22. sz.  mibol lesz a cserebogar? / rakosi szidonia - delibab, 1928. junius 2.  b.: az
orokifju rakosi szidi -tolnai vilaglapja / vilagszinpad, 1926. augusztus 25.  rakosi szidi nyilvanossagi joggal felruhazott szinesziskolajanak tortenete - 1896.  other information   szineszkonyvtar - rakosi szidi  rakosi szidi, kremsner szidonia dramai szineszno, szineszpedagogus, sziniiskola-alapito es -vezeto  magyar szinhaztortenet - magyar szinhaz  1852 births 1935 deaths 19th-century hungarian actresses 20th-century hungarian actresses people from veszprem county danube-swabian people
marquette school is a historic school building located at south bend, st. joseph county, indiana.  it was designed by architect austin and shambleau and built in 1936-1937. it was built with funds provided under the public works administration. it is a two-story, art deco style brick building with additions constructed in 1948 and 1953.  the school houses an auditorium, gymnasium, and classrooms.  it remained in use as a school until 2010.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 2013.  references  public works administration in indiana school buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana school buildings completed in 1937 art deco architecture in indiana buildings and structures in south bend, indiana national register of historic places in st. joseph county, indiana
simple forms is the third studio album by new zealand indie electronic band the naked and famous. it was released on 14 october 2016 by somewhat damaged in partnership with kobalt label services. "higher" was released as the album's lead single on 8 july 2016.  critical reception  matt collar of allmusic commented that simple forms is "less overtly bombastic than the group's previous work" and "[t]here's a tenderness to the arrangements that feels straightforward and uncluttered", concluding, "ultimately, if there is a nuanced sophistication to the band's work on simple forms, it feels genuine and hard-won."  jaymz clements of rolling stone australia wrote, "at times, [...] it feels like the naked and famous are playing musical catch-up, as simple forms struggles to move beyond place-holder synth-pop like 'water beneath you'. but when xayalith and former partner thom powers team up on the sparkling 'my energy' and 'last forever', their taut, dynamic atmosphere shines."  cyclone wehner of news.com.au felt that "[t]he trouble is that tnaf [...] tend to work to an anthemic formula. and no songs here are as memorable as the early 'young blood'."  track listing  personnel credits adapted from the liner notes of simple forms.  the naked and famous  the naked and famous - production  thomas powers - production  additional personnel  ken andrews - mixing  carlos de la garza - live instrumentation engineering  joel kefali - artwork  joe laporta - mastering  sombear - additional production  charts  release history  references  2016 albums albums produced by carlos de la garza (music producer) the naked and famous albums
maria ann lovell or maria lovell; maria lacy; maria ann lacy (1803-1877) was an english actress and playwright, often referred to as mrs g. w. lovell.  life lovell was born in london on 15 july 1803 to willoughby lacy of drury lane. she was a working actor by 1818 when she successfully appeared in belfast. by 1820 she was appearing in scotland with edward kean and charles young. in 1822 she appeared at covent garden with such success that in time she was given a three-year contract. by 1826 she had appeared in love's victory by lady mary wroth and a lithograph recorded her role.  she retired from acting and married in 1830 george william lovell, a well-known dramatist, author of the provost of bruges, the wife's secret, love's sacrifice, look before you leap, and the trial of love.   her father died in 1831.  lovell published a five act play titled ingomar the barbarian from der sohn der wildnis ("the son of the wilderness"), a german-language play by eligius franz joseph, freiherr von munch-bellinghausen, an austrian who wrote as friedrich halm, and has been referred to as "bellinghausen". the leading role of parthenia was taken by charlotte vandenhoff when it was first performed at drury lane in 1851. four years later she published another play, titled the beginning and the end in four acts. it was performed at the haymarket in 1855.  lovell died in hampstead on 2 april 1877.  references   1803 births 1877 deaths english dramatists and playwrights
the 1909 florida keys hurricane caused severe damage in cuba and the florida keys. the twelfth tropical cyclone and fifth hurricane of season, the storm was first detected in the caribbean sea offshore colombia on october 6. initially a tropical depression, the system became a tropical storm early on the next day while heading northwestward. by october 8, the storm became a category 1 hurricane on the modern day saffir-simpson hurricane wind scale to the southwest of jamaica. the hurricane curved to the west-northwest and intensified throughout the next day, becoming category 3 intensity late on october 9. a major hurricane, the cyclone peaked with sustained winds of 120 mph (195 km/h) early on october 10. later that day, it turned to the north and made landfall in pinar del rio province. after traversing the western extremity of cuba, the storm entered the straits of florida and turned northeastward. the hurricane made landfall near marathon, florida, late on october 11 with winds of 115 mph (185 km/h). thereafter, the system weakened quickly while crossing the northwestern bahamas and the western atlantic ocean, falling to tropical storm intensity late on october 12. about 24 hours later, it weakened to a tropical depression and subsequently dissipated northeast of bermuda.  in western cuba, strong winds and large waves left severe damage. the cities of cayuco and la fe in pinar del rio province were completely destroyed, while guane experienced considerable devastation. every house in puerto esperanza suffered damage due to strong winds. in havana, the storm caused five fatalities and about $1 million (1909 usd) in damage. the large waves reached the coast of mexico's yucatan peninsula, causing many fishermen and their families to drown. in the florida keys, damage total about $2 million in key west alone, with about half of the city destroyed, while two fatal injuries occurred. farther north, the storm destroyed workers camps for construction of the florida east coast railway and drowned 12 people after a tugboat wrecked at bahia honda key. in miami, several buildings were deroofed, while the newly built march villa hotel suffered severe damage; impact otherwise was primarily limited to downed trees, however. overall, the hurricane is attributed to 34 fatalities and over $3 million in damage.  meteorological history  the origins of the system over the southwestern caribbean sea are uncertain, though there were indications of a developing disturbance over the south-central caribbean as early as october 2
. on october 6, the first observations relating to this tropical cyclone were recorded by a ship near . the system was classified as a tropical depression on this day beginning at 12:00 utc, while it was located about 35 mi (55 km) northwest of cartagena, colombia. initially moving northwestward, the cyclone intensified into a tropical storm early on the next day. while passing southwest of jamaica at 12:00 utc on october 8, the storm became a category 1 hurricane. around that time, the hurricane recurved to the west-northwest. the cyclone continued to deepen, reaching category 2 intensity by 06:00 utc on october 9 and category 3 strength about 12 hours later. it became the season's fourth major hurricane, early on october 10, the storm peaked with maximum sustained winds of 120 mph (195 km/h), before turning northward later that day.  shortly after 00:00 utc on october 11, the hurricane made landfall in the sandino municipality of pinar del rio province, cuba, at the same intensity. the cyclone reached the straits of florida after crossing the far western portion of cuba in about six hours. re-curving and accelerating to the northeast, the storm weakened slightly before making landfall near marathon, florida, with winds of 115 mph (185 km/h) around 18:00 utc on october 11. on knights key, a barometric pressure of  was observed, the lowest known in relation to the storm. although it was expected to probably turn northward over the florida peninsula and impact much of the southern portions of the east coast of the united states, the storm continued on its northeastward trajectory. around 00:00 utc on october 12, the system weakened to a category 2 hurricane and soon struck grand bahama and the abaco islands with winds of 105 mph (165 km/h). the system weakened to a category 1 hurricane about six hours later. late on october 12, the cyclone weakened to a tropical storm. about 24 hours later, it weakened to a tropical depression and subsequently dissipated  northeast of bermuda at 18:00 utc on october 13.  preparations and impact  in western cuba, strong winds and large waves left severe damage. the cities of cayuco and la fe in pinar del rio province were completely destroyed, while guane experienced considerable devastation. every house in puerto esperanza suffered damage due to strong winds. the vuelta aba
jo area, a prominent tobacco-growing region, suffered extensive flooding. little damage occurred to tobacco crops, though oranges and other fruits experienced significant losses in portions of la habana and pinar del rio provinces. in havana, the hurricane produced wind gusts as high as . a number of small buildings were destroyed or deroofed. the tuberculosis hospital in the arroyo naranjo neighborhood was extensively damaged, injuring many patients. at the harbor, between 40 and 50 vessels were capsized or tossed ashore, including launches, lighters, and small tugboats. a total of five fatalities and about $1 million in damage occurred in that city alone. the large waves reached the coast of mexico's yucatan peninsula, causing many fishermen and their families to drown.  late on october 10, a "northeast storm warning" was issued along the entire gulf coast of florida and to mobile, alabama, including key west, punta rassa, punta gorda, tampa, rockwell, cedar key, carrabelle, apalachicola, panama city, and pensacola. additionally, on the following day, willis l. moore, chief of the united states weather bureau, telegraphed the signal office observers in jacksonville, jupiter, and tampa, as well as in thomasville, georgia. moore instructed the observers to warn residents of the approaching storm.   in key west, sustained winds reached . the streets became a "mass of wreckage", with about half of the city described as virtually destroyed. along duval street, telephone and light poles were downed due to high winds. throughout the city, many frame buildings suffered some degree of damage. at least 500 homes were destroyed, as were seven churches and nine cigar factories, which were among the largest in the southern united states. the storm demolished two engine houses at the fire department, causing the deaths of several horses and nearly killing firemen in the collapse. additionally, the post office was damaged and the first national bank was deroofed. in the vicinity of the island, hundreds of ships were wrecked. overall, damage in key west reached approximately $2 million. newspapers initially noted a death toll around 800, with some reporting as many as 3,000 fatalities. however, this was later found to be greatly exaggerated. two deaths occurred, both from fatal injuries during the storm. after the storm, key west mayor joseph n. fogarty declared martial law, while guards were ordered to patrol the streets. the united states government was asked to send armed forces for additional policing
.  at sand key, the weather bureau office was abandoned. the anemometer cups blew away, but sustained winds were estimated to have reached . these winds also toppled the signal tower and all trees on the island. waves inundated the entire island with at least  of water, washing away the outhouses and eventually the weather bureau building. two windows at the top of the lighthouse shattered. at boca chica and sugarloaf keys, the camps for workers constructing the florida east coast railway (fec) were destroyed. twelve deaths occurred at bahia honda key after the tugboat sybil wrecked there. in marathon, the timekeeper drowned. overall, the death toll in the florida keys was much lower than during the 1906 hurricane - which killed hundreds - attributed to timely and effective warnings. the 1906 hurricane, this storm, and the 1910 hurricane each disrupted completion of the fec. nonetheless, the railroad was successfully extended to key west in 1912.  in miami, a number of homes, warehouses, and other buildings were deroofed, including the masonic temple. the march villa, a newly built hotel, suffered severe damage. throughout the city, there were downed trees and sporadic damage reports. in the vicinity of hallandale, three washouts occurred along the fec, delaying the train for four hours. deerfield experienced its heaviest rainfall event in years. precipitation and the winds combined to destroy nearly all crops in the town. while passing through the bahamas, the hurricane produced sustained winds of  in nassau, though no damage in the city was reported. along the storm's entire path, 34 people were killed.  see also  list of florida hurricanes (1900-1949) 1910 cuba hurricane 1926 havana-bermuda hurricane  notes  references  external links florida keys history florida east coast railway  1909 atlantic hurricane season category 3 atlantic hurricanes hurricanes in cuba hurricanes in florida 1909 in cuba 1909 in florida 1909 meteorology
fc baikonur () are a kazakh football club based at the lokomativ arena in kyzylorda.  current squad  references  external links squad list at pflk  2015 establishments in kazakhstan football clubs in kazakhstan syr-darya oblast
olenecamptus macari is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by lameere in 1892.  references  dorcaschematini beetles described in 1892
mandrill studios was a recording studio in parnell, a suburb of auckland, new zealand. many of new zealand's prominent artists have had their work recorded there.  background the studio was located in the auckland suburb of parnell on york street. it was owned by former 60s pop singers glyn tucker, dave hurley, along with composer and producer, gary daverne. around 1980, hurley and daverne pulled out of the business, leaving tucker as the sole owner.  producers in 1979, kim fowley, a producer from the united states, produced the five man group streettalk at mandrill studios.  artists recorded during the 1980s, artists such as dance exponents, the mockers, pink flamingoes and the screaming meemees were recorded there. the mauri hikitia album, which featured rhonda, ken kincaid, and deane waretini was recorded there.  list (selective)  the citizen band - citizen band - 1978  the citizen band - just drove thru town - 1979  desire - desire - 1985  dance exponents - expectations - 1985  references  recording studios in new zealand recording studios in auckland, new zealand auckland cbd
"bonfire" is a song by german dj and record producer felix jaehn. it was released on 15 july 2016 and features vocals by finnish singer and songwriter alma. the song was written by jaehn, alma, joseph walter and pascal reinhardt, and produced by jaehn and hitimpulse.  charts  weekly charts  year-end charts  certifications  references  2016 singles 2016 songs felix jaehn songs songs written by alma (finnish singer) alma (finnish singer) songs
there was a scottish national party leadership election to choose the new depute leader of the scottish national party at the snp's conference on 14-15 october 2016. the snp's westminster group leader angus robertson mp won the election.  the election followed the resignation of the incumbent depute leader stewart hosie. hosie, the partner of scottish government cabinet member shona robison, announced his intention to step down at the party conference in may 2016 after it emerged he was engaged in an affair with a freelance journalist, who had previously been involved in an affair with the snp mp angus macneil.  campaigns four candidates took part in the election: angus robertson mp alyn smith mep tommy sheppard mp inverclyde councillor chris mceleny  alyn smith's campaign focused on the dual issues of strengthening scotland's relationship with the european union following the brexit vote, and the need for a new yes movement centred around the snp.  angus robertson's campaign also focused on the issues of brexit and the european union, and particularly on preserving scotland's place in europe.  chris mceleny's campaign focused on the importance of local government in light of the upcoming 2017 scottish local elections.  tommy sheppard focused his campaign on revamping internal snp policy making, with the intention of making policy decision making more open to the snp party membership. existing policy decisions are largely taken by the leadership, with minimal input from the snp grassroots membership. he has been described as robertson's "left-wing challenger".  both mceleny and sheppard are members of the snp socialists group, which said it was "challenging for leadership" of the snp.  other individuals suggested as potential candidates included mhairi black, humza yousaf, and tasmina ahmed-sheikh. humza yousaf later ruled out running for the position, instead stating his support for robertson.  results  the election used the single transferable vote (stv) system.  endorsements  angus robertson  chris mceleny  references      2016 2016 in scotland 2010s elections in scotland 2016 elections in the united kingdom scottish national party depute leadership election
hussein abdul-wahid  (born 19 january 1993 in basra, iraq) is an iraqi football midfielder. he currently plays for al-minaa in iraq.  international debut on 4 september 2014, wahid made his international debut against peru in a friendly match that ended 0-2 for peru.  references  external links    iraqi footballers iraq international footballers sportspeople from basra al-mina'a sc players 1993 births living people al-shorta sc players association football midfielders
edson correia de araujo, better known as eder (maceio - alagoas, 10 june 1988), is a brazilian footballer who plays as a defensive midfielder who plays for sao bento.  club career  spartak trnava edson made his professional fortuna liga debut for spartak trnava against dac dunajska streda on 24 july 2016.  references  external links  fc spartak trnava official club profile    ogol profile  futbalnet profile  1988 births living people brazilian footballers brazilian expatriate footballers association football midfielders fc spartak trnava players slovak super liga players brazilian expatriate sportspeople in slovakia expatriate footballers in slovakia footballers from sao paulo rio claro futebol clube players gremio novorizontino players
the 1966 tcu horned frogs football team represented texas christian university (tcu) in the 1966 ncaa university division football season. the horned frogs finished the season 2-8 overall and 2-5 in the southwest conference. the team was coached by abe martin in his fourteenth and final year as head coach. the frogs played their home games in amon g. carter stadium, which is located on campus in fort worth, texas.  schedule  references  tcu horned frogs tcu horned frogs football seasons tcu horned
american association for ethiopian jews (aaej) was a jewish-american organization that was active between 1974 and 1993 for the purpose of realizing the aliyah of beta israel to israel. the organization's contribution to the aliyah of the beta israel was significant.  history upon his return from ethiopia to the u.s in 1969, peace activist jed abraham founded the "friends of the beta israel community" organization, and in 1974 it was merged with "american pro-falasha committee (apfc)", that was headed by martin wurmbrand. together they created the "american association for ethiopian jews". it was headed by graenum berger.  when it became clear that most ethiopian jews had made aliyah to israel, the executive council decided in 1993 to end the organization's activities. a year later several of its members founded the "israel association for ethiopian jews" voluntary association.  in 1998, nate shapiro, william recant, susan pollack, barbara gaffin, brett goldberg and gerald frim founded the "friends of ethiopian jews" organization  friends of ethiopian jews to help the ethiopian jewish community in israel by supporting programs for education, employment, advocacy, community development and civil rights.  presidents graenum berger (1974-1978) howard lenhoff (1978-1983) nate shapiro (1983-1993) other activists henry rosenberg barbara gaffin susan pollack ladena schnapper william recant brett goldberg bill halpern  further reading graenum berger, rescue the ethiopian jews!: a memoir, 1955-1995, j.w. bleeker hampton pub. co., 1996,  howard m. lenhoff and jerry l. weaver, black jews, jews, and other heroes: how grassroots activism led to the rescue of the ethiopian jews, gefen publishing house ltd, 2007,  references  beta israel ethiopian-american history ethiopian-jewish culture in the united states jewish organizations based in the united states 1974 establishments in the united states
the rebel is a 2016 british comedy series on gold starring simon callow in the title role. the show is based on "the rebel" cartoon strip in the oldie magazine by andrew birch. it began airing in june 2016. in total, 9 episodes have aired as of may 2018.  the cast includes anita dobson, bill paterson and amit shah.  plot  the show follows 70 year old henry palmer, a widowed resident of brighton who is an anarchic, anti-establishment pensioner.  cast  main simon callow as henry palmer, a pensioner bill paterson as charles, a former hippie anita dobson as margaret, a charity shop worker anna crilly as cath, henry's daughter amit shah as jeremy, the husband of cath vivian oparah as amaya (series two)  recurring philip cumbus as pc burns  background  the rebel is based on andrew birch's cartoon strip for the oldie. vadim jean is the director of the series. in july 2017 it was announced that the rebel was renewed for a second series. bill paterson, anita dobson, anna crilly and amit shah reprised their roles.  episodes  series 1  series 2  references  external links  comedy.co.uk profile    2016 british television series debuts 2017 british television series endings 2010s british sitcoms english-language television shows gold (british tv channel) original programming television series about old age television series about widowhood television shows set in brighton
kurmann is a swiss surname that may refer to anita kurmann (1976-2015), swiss endocrinologist and thyroid surgeon danny kurmann (born 1966), swiss ice hockey referee  fridolin kurmann (1912-?), swiss field hockey player  xaver kurmann (born 1948), swiss cyclist   german-language surnames
bethanie mattek-sands and lucie safarova were the defending champions, but decided not to compete together. mattek-sands played alongside heather watson, but lost in the quarterfinals to andreja klepac and katarina srebotnik. safarova teamed up with timea babos, but lost in the first round to kateryna bondarenko and olga savchuk.  ekaterina makarova and elena vesnina won the title, defeating simona halep and monica niculescu in the final, 6-3, 7-6(7-5).  seeds the top four seeds received a bye into the second round.  draw  finals  top half  bottom half  references doubles draw  rogers cup doubles rogers cup - women's doubles women's doubles rogers
mohamed ayoub ferjani (born july 27, 1986) is a male foil fencer from tunisia, african champion in 2013 and 2015. he is the elder brother of sabre fencer fares ferjani.  ferjani almost never takes part in fencing world cup competitions, but participates in continental championships in both foil and epee. his first significant result was a double bronze medal in epee and foil at the 2007 all-africa games in algiers. he stopped fencing epee in international competitions in 2012. he qualified to represent his country in men's foil at the 2016 summer olympics. he will compete in rio de janeiro with his brother fares, who qualified in men's sabre.  ferjani teaches fencing in trappes and montigny-le-bretonneux, in the vicinity of paris. he is also an international referee for foil and was named the second best referee in this weapon in 2012, 2013 and 2014.  references  1986 births living people tunisian male epee fencers olympic fencers of tunisia fencers at the 2016 summer olympics african games bronze medalists for tunisia african games medalists in fencing competitors at the 2007 all-africa games competitors at the 2015 african games competitors at the 2019 african games tunisian male foil fencers
the espraiado river () is a river in the south of the state of sao paulo brazil. it is a tributary of the una da aldeia river.  course  the river originates in the municipality of pedro de toledo, sao paulo. it flows along the length of the despraiado sustainable development reserve and then across the jureia-itatins ecological station. known in its lower reaches as the itingucu river, it joins the das pedras river to form the una da aldeia river.  see also list of rivers of sao paulo  references  sources  rivers of sao paulo (state)
robert braithwaite may refer to:  robert braithwaite (bryologist) (1824-1917), english botanist  robert braithwaite (engineer) (1943-2019), british engineer  robert braithwaite (judge) (born 1950), united states district court judge  see also   braithwaite (surname)
the carrizo-wilcox aquifer is an aquifer in texas, united states.  the aquifer supplies water to about 12 million homes in east texas.  the aquifer's water quality is at risk from leaks and spills from the keystone xl tar sands pipeline. in 2012, the tar sands blockade mounted a campaign of peaceful and sustained civil disobedience to protect the water quality of the aquifer by stopping the pipeline.  references  aquifers in the united states geology of texas
qadian is a village in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located 7.2 km from postal head office in bilga, 15.9 km from phillaur, 50.3 km from district headquarter jalandhar and 126 km from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  demography  as of 2011, qadian has a total number of 65 houses and population of 346 of which include 195 are males while 155 are females according to the report published by census india in 2011. literacy rate of the village is 79.37%, higher than state average of 75.84%. the population of children under the age of 6 years is 31 which is 8.96% of total population of the village, and child sex ratio is approximately 550 lower than state average of 846.  most of the people are from schedule caste which constitutes 47.40% of total population in the village. the town does not have any schedule tribe population so far.  as per census 2011, 117 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of the village which includes 114 males and 3 females. according to census survey report 2011, 100% workers describe their work as main work and 0% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  transport  partabpura railway station is the nearest train station however, phillaur junction train station is 15.3 km away from the village. the village is 44.2 km away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is 140 km away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
viduslaiki ("the middle ages") is a solo album by ingus bauskenieks, released in 2003. the album is bauskenieks' first solo album, released by "ingus bauskenieka ieraksti". the album was recorded in bauskenieks' home studio from 1999-2000.  track listing  vess vermelem (instr.) - 3:50  kirbis irbis (featuring ugis vitins) - 3:32  pasaulite pilna vardu - 4:21  vess vermelem	- 4:58  vai mums viss ir lauts? - 4:57  vissaldakas senes uz meness - 5:18  es laizos ka sapni - 7:10  man dvesele vien - 4:43  tu & tavs autobuss - 4:06  references   2003 albums
ricardo ramoran visaya (born december 8, 1960) is a retired philippine army general serving as the administrator of the national irrigation administration (nia) since 2017. he was the 47th chief of staff of the armed forces of the philippines from july to december 2016. he had also previously served as the commanding general of the afp southern luzon command, assistant division commander of the 6th infantry division, and commander of the 4th infantry division. he is from the class of 1983 (matikas) of the philippine military academy.  on march 7, 2017, visaya was appointed as national irrigation administration chief after peter t. lavina resign from his post a week prior.  early life and education  ricardo visaya was born in bacarra, ilocos norte. it's also where he finished elementary and secondary education. he entered philippine military academy in 1979 and graduated in 1983.  military career   after graduating in 1983, he led various units in the philippine army and the afp, such as the 901st infantry battalion of the 9th infantry division, the 104th infantry brigade of the 1st infantry division and the 69th infantry brigade of the 6th infantry division.  he also led the 4th infantry division the 6th infantry division, and the afp southern luzon command, before being appointed as the chief of staff of the armed forces of the philippines on july 1, 2016. he retired from military service on december 7, 2016.  training he attended various courses locally and abroad, such as the scout ranger regular course, the intelligence officer basic course, the infantry basic course, the infantry officer advance course, the tradecraft for trainor's course, the electronic warfare officer course, the contract management course, the executive course on security studies in hawaii, usa; the command general staff course at the training and doctrine command, philippine army; the pacific army management seminar in tokyo , japan ; the professional managers program at the ateneo de manila university; and the financial statement analysis program at the university of asia and the pacific. he earned his master's degree in project management at the  australian defence college in canberra, australia.  awards visaya's awards include:   philippine legion of honor   people power i unit citation   people power ii unit citation   philippine republic presidential unit citation   three (3) gawad sa kaunlaran   eleven (11) bronze cross medals   forty nine (49) military merit medal (philippines)   fourteen (14)  military commendation medals    sagisag ng
ulirang kawal   two (2) silver wing medals  20 plaques of recognitions  pma cavalier award (as outstanding alumnus of the philippine military academy)   bronze cross medal    distinguished service star    gawad sa kaunlaran   sagisag ng ulirang kawal   combat commander's badge (philippines)   scout ranger qualification badge   philippine army command and general staff course badge  references   1960 births chairmen of the joint chiefs (philippines) duterte administration personnel filipino generals living people people from ilocos norte philippine army generals philippine military academy alumni recipients of gawad sa kaunlaran recipients of the bronze cross medal recipients of the distinguished service star recipients of the military commendation medal recipients of the military merit medal (philippines) recipients of the silver wing medal
the estonian practical shooting association, estonian eesti practical-laskmise uhing, is the estonian association for practical shooting under the international practical shooting confederation.  references  external links official website  regions of the international practical shooting confederation practical shooting
eunidia nigrolateralis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
ignacio molarja, or known  in the jesuit dictionaries as ignacio molarsa (caller, cerdena, italy, 1610 - tecoripa, sonora, mexico, 24 november 1658) was an explorer and jesuit missionary pertaining to the society of jesus of the province of nueva espana. the surname of the italian jesuit varies according to the diversity of the biographical writings on him, varying between "molar ja", "molarja", "molargia", "molarsa", and "molarza". he has also been confused by contemporary dictionaries with jeronimo de la canal, who was one of his mcoworkers at the mission ignacio molarja ibeganhis catholic studies in 1635, and arrived in northwest new spain in 1644. as an explorer, missionary and evangelizer, he founded several missions in what is today is the state of sonora, mexico. he died due to health problems in 1658 in tecoripa, la colorada municipality, sonora.  life as missionary  beginnings and arrival in new spain  he joined the society of jesus when he was 25 years old in the same province where he was born in 1635. he began to work on 3 july 1644, and in this same year he began his trip with felipe esgrecho as a missionary to new spain. as new spain was located in modern-day mexico, they explored the zone of the western state, also called sonora or sinaloa, first working with the opata ethnic group for the rectorship of san francisco of borja, as this village was previously converted by the franciscans. in 1646 he founded the jesuit mission of our lady of assumption of arizpe, as well as the guest village of saint ignacio of sinoquipe. then the provisional father pedro de velasco sent molarja, juan uter, and francisco maluenda to continue their missions, giving molarja the villages that remained in the valley of sonora, which were arizpe, chinapa, and vacobuchi.  after the death of father francisco olinano in 1647, the missionary baltasar xavier loaisa took charge of all the missions previously directed by olidano, but because the missions territory was extensive, olidano only took charge of the missions on the eastern side of the yaqui river, which were only onabas and tecoripa. thus the visiting pedro pantoja made molarja in charge of the missions on the western side of the river, which were rebeico, soyopa and suaqui.  conflict with the pim
as altos  in 1649, there was an uprising in the indigenous village of the pimas altos, and father molarja had to ask for help from captain simon lazo de la vega. lazo de la vega was accompanied by fathers pedro pantoja and jeronimo de la canal (canal had helped with founding the arizpe mission), and they took the necessary repressive measures against the pima village, controlling them in an effective way.  retreat from the arizpe mission and a death threat  in 1651 molarja left the arizpe mission and replaced father juan de mendoza at the cumuripa mission, while still remaining at the tecoripa and suaqui missions. in 1651-53, with jeronimo de la canal, they arrived at the cucubarunich village, which was a village where the pimas had sent them to kill the people, but there were no results since the pimas were on the same side as the jesuits. this same year, molarja rejoined the jesuits from his native italy, of which he had strayed away a bit, and in a few months he became father francisco paris' successor at the ures mission. two years later, in 1655, he went to arizpe together with de la cana. he received a letter from rome, written by the general father gosvino nickel on 24 january which was received by the provisional father juan del real during the middle of the same year, which read:  "and in the tepotzotlan apprenticeship, after father oracio carochi's three year stay, if father igncacio de molarja, who has established himself as a rector and as a training teacher, if he would be impeded, then it would be father pedro de valencia. with him does the patents of his services.[9] "  -gosvino nickel  change to cumuripa and death  in 1658, ignacio molarja took charge of the cumuripa village mission, and also continued with the suaqui and tecoripa missions, which belonged to the general mission of san francisco of borja, and even though the witch doctors were against him, the father began to work with the indian boys to sing prayers and ask for divine mercy; then several heavy rains occurred, which did a lot of damage. that year, father molarja began having multiple health problems, and remained in bed for several weeks in tecoripa. on 24 november 1658, he died, and was buried in tecoripa. father prudencio
mesa, who was visiting the area, took charge of his missions. a year later, father gosvino nickel wrote and sent another letter to the missionary alonso bonifacio from rome:  "it has been written, an allowance has been taken by the parishoners of the san francisco de javier church, an exceptional altar has been requested for father ignacio molarja, please give or send it to us."  -gosvino nickel  informing him that an altar would be built for the dead missionary.  see also   society of jesus  arizpe  references   1658 deaths 17th-century italian jesuits italian roman catholic missionaries jesuit missionaries 1610 births jesuit missionaries in new spain italian expatriates in the spanish empire
the first uss trumbull was a row galley built in 1776 at skenesboro, new york, for service in general benedict arnold's fleet on lake champlain. she was launched on 10 september 1776 and began active service soon thereafter, capt. seth warner in command.  design trumbull was  long,  wide with a draft of and a displacement of .  she was armed with one 18-pounder long gun, one 12-pounder long gun, two 9-pounder guns and six 6-pounder guns. trumbull had a crew of 80 men.  service history  september 1776 trumbull transported a draft of reinforcements to crown point, new york, as general arnold's forces sought to hurry to completion a squadron of small vessels, mostly galleys and cannon-carrying gondolas, or "gun-dalows," to oppose the expected british push down the lake toward fort ticonderoga. the americans sought to retain possession of the lake, which they had controlled since early in the war, and thus engaged in a shipbuilding race with the british, who were also constructing a fleet of specially designed lake craft. since there were no roads parallel to the lake, the british were forced to launch their invasion southward by water instead of by land. control of lake champlain was thus vital to the success of british plans.  battle of valcour island  trumbull was among arnold's vessels that anchored in the lee of valcour island, south of plattsburgh, new york, by early october, to await the british onslaught. with 25 ships, the british outnumbered the americans by 10; and, in view of this numerical inferiority, arnold's second-in-command urged a withdrawal. nevertheless, despite his squadron's inferiority, arnold bravely stood and fought.   initially, the americans' position favored them, as on the morning of 11 october 1776, capt. thomas pringle's 25-vessel "fleet" sailed past valcour island and failed to discover arnold's ships until he was south of them. then, forced to attack from the leeward, pringle's ships sailed up to meet arnold's which were deployed in a crescent-shaped formation, anchored across valcour bay. in the resultant action, the americans suffered heavy damage to , , and ; and the loss of  and . the action ended at nightfall when the british withdrew and anchored, thinking that the americans could not escape.   under cover of darkness and fog, the surviving ships in arnold's squadron muffled their
oars to slip past the unsuspecting british. however, before they could reach safety, a contrary wind sprang up and slowed their progress southward. the british weighed anchor, gave chase, and soon overhauled the americans. in the ensuing battle, arnold lost his own flagship, the galley congress, and five other ships.   trumbull escaped the holocaust, only to be captured by the british the following year, 1777, and was eventually destroyed.  aftermath of the battle of valcour island thus, the battle of valcour island ended in a crushing tactical defeat for the americans since it all but annihilated arnold's flotilla and left the british in full control of lake champlain. however, the dominance of arnold's little warships on the lake during the first year and one-half of the revolutionary war had prevented british troops from invading the newly independent colonies from canada through the lake champlain, lake george, hudson river corridor. then, when the royal navy finally did manage to best arnold's flotilla at valcour island in the autumn of 1776, winter was too close to permit english land forces to take advantage of british victory by a thrust down the corridor to attack washington's army from the rear. this gave the colonies additional time to recruit, train, and arm the forces which the following year stopped a british invasion in a decisive victory at saratoga, new york, which has been called the turning point of the american revolution. thus, while losing on a tactical level at valcour, the americans won a strategic victory which ultimately enabled them to achieve independence.  notes  citations  bibliography   online resources    further reading  external links   row galleys of the continental navy united states navy ship names ships of the continental navy ships built in whitehall, new york 1776 ships maritime incidents in 1776 lake champlain
harbilt electrics trucks was a british manufacturer of milk floats, other battery electric road vehicles and a variety of battery electric vehicles designed for industrial use rather than on the public roads. the company was formed in 1935 in market harborough, leicestershire, and diversified into electric vehicles after the end of the second world war. they had a good record at exporting their products, with notable successes in switzerland and california. there were several changes of ownership during the 1970s and 1980s, and the company ceased to exist in 1989.  history in 1935, the market harborough construction company was formed, and established itself as a manufacturer of aircraft components. they expanded rapidly, as the second world war created a demand for their products, and when the hostilities ceased, they diversified into other areas. this included sub-contract machining and fabrication, and the production of electric vehicles. batteries for the vehicles were obtained from d p batteries, who were part of the chloride group and were based in bakewell, while most of the chargers came from partridge wilson of leicester, who were making their own range of wilson battery vehicles. chargers were re-badged with the harbilt name. the first vehicle produced was the 551 pedestrian controlled vehicle (pcv), which they sold to brick yards, where they replaced wheelbarrows, and to the dairy industry. both types of user tended to overload the vehicles, and the axle size had to be increased, to reduce the number of breakages.  the 551 had two wheels at the front, which were at the outside edges of the vehicle, and a short  axle holding the two rear wheels. other early pcvs had the wheels arranged more conventionally. the 727 was fitted with a differential and gearbox made by p r motors, who were based in coventry and came with a mechanical braking system. the 720 was similar, but the brakes were operated hydraulically. a large number of 551 vehicles were sold to switzerland, where the lack of a differential gave better grip when there was snow and ice on the ground, and some 2000 vehicles were supplied for use by the post office and by hotels.  the range was expanded by the addition of the model 685 low loader, a 3-wheeled truck for moving goods around factories, the model 790 tow truck, which was a ride-on 3-wheeler, and various models of forklift truck. most of these were not road vehicles. a number of 790 tow trucks were supplied to the airline pan am for use at heathrow airport
, while customers for the 685 power units included leyland motors and the scottish company tps. the company suffered a downturn in its profitability in 1957, but recovered soon afterwards, helped by an order for sanitation trucks from pan am. another part of the recovery was sales of ride-on milk floats. their first design, the 735, had been built in 1956, and one of the earliest examples was bought back from the dairy who ran it, and is now part of the leicestershire county collection. it was displayed at snibston discovery museum until that closed in 2015. harbilt offered three other designs, the 750, 760 and 850. the 750 had a 72-volt battery and a wide body, whereas the 760 was narrower and had a 36-volt battery. the 850 was a development of the 750. all featured cabs with rounded body panels made from fibreglass, which were bought in from a third party ready for attaching to the chassis. the 750 had a range of 25-30 miles, and could travel at speeds up to 18 mph with a payload of 25 cwt. harbilt showcased the 750 and 760 models at the 1959 diary show, and also displayed a 20 cwt pedestrian controlled model on their stand.  the 900 range was the next to be introduced, beginning with the 916 and the 924, and later the 936. the final two digits referred to the number of 2-volt cells that formed the battery. the vehicle was similar to the 760, but was somewhat wider. a model 808 was also added at some point.  the dairyliner range was announced in september 1970 and showcased at the royal international dairy show held at olympia in october. it was initially available in two models, with 24 and 36 cell batteries. the smaller battery size gave a top speed of  while the bigger battery increased the top speed to . the vehicle was designed for a payload of 30 cwt, and much of it was made from reinforced and abs plastics. the front wheels were at the extreme front of the vehicle, with entrance and exit from the cab through angled openings behind the wheels. options for bi-fold doors or roller blinds to seal the exits were available, as were produce cupboards, for the storage of other products besides milk. the dairyliner range expanded to include eight variations of vehicle.  harbilt also built the hsv (higher speed vehicle), which was a general delivery truck. the payload was reduced to allow it to travel at faster speeds in urban traffic, and 30
were supplied to the united states post office for mail deliveries in cupertino, california. the vehicles were supplied in march 1974 as right-hand drive chassis, with the bodywork assembled in scotts valley, california and this model was officially the hsv3. the main issue encountered was that the battery liquid dried up rapidly in the hotter conditions of california. initially, each cell had to be topped up individually, but chloride batteries developed a reservoir system, which allowed all the cells to be topped up from a single fill, significantly reducing the time spent on maintenance.  in june 1972, harbilt bought the douglas company, a manufacturer of electric trucks and tractors, moving production of these vehicles to market harborough.  at some point in the early 1970s, prior to 1974, harbilt and morrison-electricar reached an agreement for a product exchange and rationalisation. morrisons had moved from leicester to tredegar in 1968, as part of a government plan to replace jobs lost in the coal mining industry. under the agreement, production of milk floats would transfer from market harborough to tredegar, and morrison trucks would be handed over to harbilt. this included some manulectric trolley trucks, but details of the deal and the precise dates are a little sketchy, as a copy of the agreement has not been found.  acquisition  the crosby valve and engineering co ltd took over the market harborough construction company in 1959. crosby was a european offshoot of an american company, which was based in wembley, north west london. they were particularly interested in the industrial machining capacity which harbilt had. although they had administrative offices in the west end of london, enqiries about electric vehicles were still channelled to market harborough, and the harbilt trade mark was retained. british steel piling (bsp), who were based in claydon near ipswich announced in december 1971 that they would be buying the crosby valve group for £1.8 million. t f croxall was appointed as the new chief executive of the crosby valves and harborough construction part of the business in 1973. bsp changed their name to edward le pas in the same year.  by late 1974, crosby valves and edward le pas had decided that they wanted to concentrate on other products besides electric trucks. the local management team, headed by mike warrington, decided to attempt a management buyout. there was considerable support from within the existing company, and with some outside financial backing, the company transferred to its new ownership in 1975. they moved
to a factory on rockingham road, and traded briefly as mcgibbon, as one of the backers was the former northamptonshire cricketer lewis mcgibbon, until the registration of harbilt electric trucks ltd was completed.  the new company won accreditation to british standard 5750, which enabled them to produce vehicles for the ministry of defence (mod). in late 1987, fred w davies, a canadian who owned the davies magnet group and york trailers, was also trying to break into the mod market, and saw the acquisition of harbilt as a way to obtain their good reputation and their bs5750 accreditation quickly. harbilt shares were trading at about £6, and he offered £11. the offer was accepted, and production moved to corby, but davies failed to win any mod contracts, and lost interest in building electric vehicles. the business was put up for sale in 1989, and although john bradshaw of peterborough was keen to buy it, it was m&m electric vehicles of atherstone who were successful.  preservation a few harbuilt vehicles have entered preservation. a 7 cwt pedestrian controlled vehicle dating from 1957 was used by the post office until 1987, and was then presented to the transport museum, wythall after it was withdrawn. a model 735 was on display at the snibston discovery museum until that closed, and is now at the abbey pumping station in leicester, where the collection also includes a model 770 factory truck. a model 731 pedestrian controlled stacker truck is on display at the national fork truck heritage centre in derbyshire.  bibliography  references  external links milk float corner  battery electric vehicle manufacturers defunct motor vehicle manufacturers of england electric vehicle manufacturers of the united kingdom
pamela mary royds (nee maycock; 17 august 1924 - 31 may 2016) was a british publisher and children's book editor.  early life royds was born in london, the daughter of lilian (nee youngman) and thomas maycock, who ran a smithfield market import business. she was educated at eothen school, caterham, and st hugh's college, oxford.  career in 1964, royds joined the british publishing firm andre deutsch to stand in for the then editor, philippa pearce, while on maternity leave. the poet michael rosen credits royds with "discovering" him, after being rejected by several other publishers.  personal life in 1952, she married alex royds, an eastern daily press journalist, and they had three daughters and a son together.  references  1924 births 2016 deaths alumni of st hugh's college, oxford british book publishers (people) people educated at caterham school women book publishers (people) english book editors women print editors place of death missing publishers (people) from london 20th-century english businesspeople
kang khurd is a village in shahkot in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. kalan is persian language word which means big and khurd is persian word which means small when two villages have same name then it is distinguished as kalan means big and khurd means small with village name. it is located  from shahkot,  from nakodar,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  shahkot malisian station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
silverio jose neri (coari, silverio jose nery; 8 october 1858 - 23 june 1934) was a brazilian soldier and politician who was a federal deputy from 1897 to 1899, governor of the state of amazonas from 1900 to 1903 and a senator from 1904 to 1930.  early years his father was silverio neri and his mother was maria antony neri. one of his brothers, antonio constantino neri, was senator from 1901 to 1904 and then succeeded him as governor of amazonas. another brother, raimundo constantino neri, was a federal deputy from 1903 to 1905. silverio jose neri completed his secondary education at the diocesan seminary of manaus, then attended the praia vermelha military academy in rio de janeiro, where he qualified as a surveyor. he returned to manaus, and soon after joined the liberal party and retired from the army. he married maria maquine da silva, with whom he had six children.  neri was elected provincial deputy in 1882 and was reelected in 1886, holding office until 1889. the republic was declared on 15 november 1889. he was elected state representative in 1893, holding office until 1896.  he was elected federal deputy for 1897 to 1899.  he was elected to the federal senate in 1900, but left this position when he was elected governor of amazonas the same year, succeeding jose cardoso ramalho junior.  governor of amazonas  silverio jose neri took office on 23 july 1900.  he intended to centralise the public administration, and therefore abolished the four departments into which the state had been divided. to strengthen the general secretariat of the state he appointed as secretary general the retired colonel antonio clemente ribeiro bittencourt. he attempted to consolidate the state's debt by issuing 7% bearer bonds redeemable in ten years. under pressure the government was forced to cut the rate to 5% and extend the period to 30 years.  at the time acre belonged to bolivia, but was mainly occupied by brazilian rubber tappers. in july 1899 the brazilians in acre declared the independent republic of acre. this was quickly dissolved by troops sent by the brazilian government. bolivia sent a small military mission to occupy acre. neri dispatched an expedition to acre led by the journalist orlando correia lopes. it known as the "poets expedition" due to the intellectuals among its members, which declared a second independent republic of acre in november 1900. the republic was overthrown by bolivian troops. bolivian president jose manuel pando obtained approval from his congress on 21 december 1901 for a plan under which an anglo-american "boliv
ian syndicate" would obtain a long term lease for rubber extraction in acre. jose placido de castro was given command of an armed uprising that eventually took control of acre on 24 january 1903. the treaty of petropolis was signed on 17 november 1903 redefining the border between bolivia and brazil and creating the territory of acre, separate from amazonas.  neri enforced processing of rubber in amazonas, rather than shipping the raw rubber downstream to para to be processed for export. in june 1903 he inaugurated the port of manaus operated by the manaus harbour limited company.  he also funded new shipping lines serving various ports in the interior. one of neri's last acts was to inaugurate a new building for the publio bittencourt school.  later years  silverio jose neri left office on 2 december 1903. he resigned before the end of his term since the state constitution did not allow a governor to be succeeded by a close relative, and his brother planned to run for election. the deputy governor francisco benedito da fonseca coutinho headed the government until 23 july 1904, then handed over to his brother antonio constantino neri. in 1904 silverio jose neri returned to the senate, where he was reelected in consecutive elections until 1930. he died in manaus on 23 june 1934.  notes  sources  1858 births 1934 deaths governors of amazonas (brazilian state) members of the legislative assembly of amazonas members of the chamber of deputies (brazil) from amazonas members of the federal senate liberal party (brazil, 1985) politicians
the 2016-17 colorado state rams women's basketball team represented colorado state university in the 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball season. the rams, led by fifth year head coach ryun williams, played their home games at moby arena and were members of the mountain west conference. they finished the season 25-9, 15-3 in mountain west play to win the regular season championship. they advanced to the semifinals of the mountain west conference women's basketball tournament where they lost to boise state. they received an automatic bid to the women's national invitation tournament where they defeated saint mary's in the first round before losing to uc davis in the second round.  roster  schedule  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00674e; color:#ffc44f;"| exhibition  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00674e; color:#ffc44f;"| non-conference regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00674e; color:#ffc44f;"| mountain west regular season  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00674e;"| mountain west women's tournament  |-  |- !colspan=9 style="background:#00674e;"| women's national invitation tournament  rankings 2016-17 ncaa division i women's basketball rankings  see also  2016-17 colorado state rams men's basketball team  references  colorado state colorado state rams women's basketball seasons colorado state rams colorado state rams 2017 women's national invitation tournament participants
li weimiao (chinese: 李惟淼; 31 march 1950 - ) is a chinese former footballer and commentator. he played for beijing throughout his career as well as representing china in the 1976 asian cup.  playing career li weimiao started his career playing for the beijing football team in 1972. he representing beijing win the runner up of football at china 1975 national games of china. li was called up to the chinese national team and played within the 1976 asian cup. in 1981, li retired from football and began to study in beijing sports university until 1983 . he began to work as commentator from 1995.  honours  beijing  china national league: 1973  references  external links team china stats  1950 births living people chinese footballers footballers from shanghai beijing guoan f.c. players china international footballers 1976 afc asian cup players chinese association football commentators association football forwards
the hailey micropolitan statistical area, as defined by the united states census bureau, is an area consisting of three counties in the state of idaho. these counties are blaine county, camas county, and lincoln county. the micropolitan area is anchored by the city of hailey.  references   micropolitan areas of idaho
astad is a village with less than 50 inhabitants (2005) on the island of  oland, kalmar county,  sweden. it belongs to the municipality borgholm.  populated places in kalmar county
reine-aimee cote (born november 20, 1948) is a canadian writer living in the saguenay-lac-saint-jean region of quebec.  she was born in villebois and earned a bachelor's degree in literary studies from the universite du quebec a chicoutimi. cote taught school at the primary and secondary levels in alma for 35 years; from 1998 to 1999, she was advisor for french education at the junior high level. she retired from teaching in 2002.  in 1991, she won two first prizes at the annual creative writing contest sponsored by la bonante. her first novel les bruits received the prix robert-cliche in 2004 and the  the following year. les bruits was also a finalist for the prix anne-hebert. cote published her second novel l'echappee des dieux in 2009, which received honourable mention at the salon du livre du saguenay-lac-saint-jean.  selected works   le bal des misereux, stories (1996)  haillons de lune, poetry (1997)  references   1948 births living people canadian women novelists canadian novelists in french universite du quebec a chicoutimi alumni
the physical language workshop (plw) was a research group at the mit media laboratory from 2003 to 2008. the group led by john maeda and designed tools for creating digital art in a networked environment. the primary impact targets of the physical language workshop were in the areas of digital media service architectures, distance education, and information visualisation systems.  one major group research of plw was openstudio, an experimental online micro-economy for arts, where participants created and sold artwork in an online marketplace using a virtual currency. the openstudio platform was active from 2005 to 2008.  openstudio was developed and maintained by the plw researchers burak arikan, luis blackaller, annie ding, brent fitzgerald, amber frid-jimenez, kate hollenbach, kelly norton as well as contributions by noah fields, carlos rocha, marc schwartz.  on the openstudio's community-based economic system, participants created, bought, and sold artwork with free creative tools, a flexible network infrastructure, supported by an open web services api. draw was the first application run on openstudio to make simple vector illustrations and stored drawing data in the svg format. when you bought a drawing from someone, you could open it in draw and make a new work of your own derived from the modified piece. the versions of the drawings, its connections between the modified art works, and previous owners of the works known as provenance were kept and openly presented on the platform interfaces.  the openstudio archive lives in a github repository and contains svg files and info to retrieve 5 years of meta-data.  another group project was e15 (software), an opengl-based web environment for creating rich interactions with existing web content. e15 was developed by kyle buza, takashi okamoto, luis blackaller, and kate hollenbach.  history the origins of physical language workshop lies in the research of the aesthetics and computation group (1996 - 2003)  also led by john maeda, as well as the visible language workshop (1974 - 1994) led by muriel cooper at the mit media laboratory.  in 1985, the visible language workshop joined the mit architectural machine group, and the center for advanced visual studies (cavs) to form the mit media lab, which was instituted by professor nicholas negroponte and former mit president and science advisor to president john f. kennedy, jerome wiesner.  references   massachusetts institute of technology mit media lab
the national coalition against legalized gambling (ncalg) was a national organization that was against legalized gambling. formed by tom grey, a methodist minister, the organization educated communities about the negative effects of gambling. it became part of the stop predatory gambling foundation in 2008.  history the ncalg was formed in 1994 by tom grey. their goal was to educate the american public about the effects of gambling, including economic, political, and physical effects. they held annual national seminars across the country, partnering with many other organizations including citizens for a stronger pennsylvania,  the ncalg had a branch called the national coalition against gambling expansion (ncage). ncage was under the same board of directors; however, it focused on working with grassroots organizations to prevent the spread of legalized gambling. the organization contributed to congress passing the national gambling impact study commission act, which established the national gambling impact study commission in 1997. through their efforts, they  "defeated casino gambling" in several states including ohio, arkansas, and florida. they aided in closing slot machines in south carolina and a lottery in alabama. they were also on the advisory board for the citizens' debate commission.  as the group became bigger, it became the stop predatory gambling foundation, which was formed in 2008. les bernal is the national director of stop predatory gambling. tom grey continues at the organization as the senior advisor. it is a not-for-profit educational organization that is now headquartered in washington, d.c.  founder and other members tom grey was the founder and executive director of the organization. grey was a methodist minister from northwestern illinois. he is also a vietnam veteran. he graduated from dartmouth college as well as from the garrett evangelical theological seminary. he created the organization after 80 percent voters in illinois voted against the building of a local casino. the illinois gaming board ignored public opinion and built the galena casino regardless. grey saw an opportunity to increase awareness of gambling and its effects on local communities. in may 1994 he organized the ncalg with a network of individuals from almost all 50 states and canada.  grey hosted a number of seminars in south carolina in 1999. in these seminars he also discussed the dangers of video gambling. bernie horn was a spokesperson for the national coalition against legalized gambling. in 1995, ron and mary helen hyde were asked by the church of jesus christ of latter-day saints to help with ncalg. the hydes turned their home into a national information center for ncalg. the office began with a computer, fax machine and a phone line, but
expanded. in 2003, grey offered william bennett the position of executive director of ncalg, despite having a reported gambling addiction.  ideology ncalg argued that the social and economic effects of gambling are detrimental to a community. they asserted that gambling triggers addictive behaviors, and therefore, by legalizing gambling, more youth will be exposed to the addiction of gambling. ncalg pointed out that casinos bring more crime into a community. grey stated that the main debate is about gambling institutions giving false promises about the chances of winning. "what they sell is an addictive product," he said. "the job of government is to protect and serve people-not to addict and rob them."  references  external links national coalition against legalized gambling records, mss 2046 at l. tom perry special collections, brigham young university  gambling in the united states political advocacy groups in the united states harold b. lee library-related 20th century articles
seifallah ben omar ben hassine (), known as abu ayyad al-tunisi (), was a tunisian islamic militant and the founder and leader of ansar al-sharia (tunisia).  history he was born 8 november 1965 in menzel bourguiba in northern tunisia. he became involved in 1980 with the 'movement of islamic tendency' which later became the ennahda movement. he was a senior leader in the tunisian islamic front, the armed wing of the party, by 1986.  he was in saudi arabia with abd al-aziz ibn baz and may have had interaction with the armed islamic group of algeria and the libyan islamic fighting group.  he fled tunisia following a crackdown by the regime of zine el abidine ben ali against the student movements in 1987. he was sentenced in absentia by the tunis military court to two years in prison for his participation in the events.  he first moved to morocco where he studied in the faculty of legal sciences at the mohammed i university. it was at this time he married. he later went to the united kingdom in the 1990s and studied under the al-qaeda cleric abu qatada.  he then fought alongside osama bin laden in afghanistan and in 2000 was the co-founder of a group of tunisian militants known as the tunisian combat group. he ran a guesthouse for tunisians in jalalabad and the men who stayed there were connected to al-qaeda. he provided the two tunisian men who killed ahmad shah massoud, leader of the northern alliance. ahmad shah massoud was killed by the two men, suicide bombers posing as journalists, two days before the september 11 attacks.  he was arrested in turkey in february 2003, he was extradited to tunisia. a military court sentenced him to 43 years in prison. after the tunisian revolution which overthrew zine el abidine ben ali, he was released from jail in march 2011 under an amnesty and founded ansar al-sharia (tunisia) in late april 2011.  ben hassine personally led the storming of the united states embassy in tunis on september 14, 2012. in 2012, while he was still on the run after the us embassy attack, he goaded police by preaching in a mosque in central tunis. despite the presence of a large number of security forces, a crowd of his supporters hid him and helped him evade the police cordon.  he was based in libya since 2013 and ran training camps and a network of militant cells across the region.  reports of death in july 2015
. an anonymous u.s. intelligence official told the new york times that ben hassine was believed to have been killed near ajdabiya in eastern libya on june 14, 2015, in an american airstrike intended to target mokhtar belmokhtar.  family he was married to a moroccan woman and had three children.  death in march 2020, al-qaeda in the islamic maghreb leader abdelmalek droukdel announced ben hassine's death but did not say when he died.  references  people from bizerte governorate tunisian islamists leaders of islamic terror groups 1965 births year of birth uncertain year of death missing
patrick nwamu ( patrick a. i. nwamu, born august 10, 1972) is a former professional fighter, and has held international titles in boxing and kickboxing.  he has also coached and promoted boxing and martial arts, and has collected a small number of acting credits.  his parents are members of the nigerian royal family of asaba, nigeria, and nwamu was given the title of crown warrior prince for his accomplishments in professional fighting and his promotion of asaba traditions and customs.  education and amateur boxing career  after many years of training in various styles of martial arts, nwamu was accepted to georgia military college in 1998 and began amateur boxing as a student athlete. nwamu won the 1998 georgia state amateur boxing championship and the 1998 and 1999 golden gloves heavyweight championships sanctioned by usa boxing, representing georgia and new york, respectively.  failing to advance at the 2000 olympic boxing west coast trials, nwamu left school to begin his professional career.  professional fighting career  as a professional fighter, nwamu won 4 world titles in 3 different styles of combat within an 11-year span:  international boxing association (iba) - 2006 super cruiserweight world champion  international sport kickboxing association (iska) - 2011 super cruiserweight world champion  north american grappling association (naga) - 2015 mixed grappling/jiu jitsu heavyweight world champion (april 2015)  north american grappling association (naga) - 2017 mixed grappling/jiu jitsu heavyweight world champion (april 2017)   nwamu was the first iba super-cruiserweight world-champion professional-boxer to win the iska full-contact kickboxing world-championship title.  he was also the first member of a royal family to win the kickboxing title, in the first kickboxing world-championship fight held in africa.  coaching, promoting and executive career  nwamu has spent many years as a licensed coach at the championship level, teaching in various styles of combat including as a usa boxing coach and a usa taekwondo (usat) coach.  nwamu promoted the iba super cruiserweight pro world title fight in madison square garden, new york city august 2006. he independently promoted the iska super cruiserweight pro full contact world title fight in asaba, nigeria january 2011.  his most-significant contribution to martial arts is his creation of kwab-je, nigeria's national martial art and freestyle fight sport. in 2011, he was given the title of world champion grandmaster by the intercontinental union of kwab-je which also acts as the nigerian
executive board representing the world kickboxing and karate association (wka).  in 2016, nwamu was appointed nigerian chief of operations representing the wka.  acting and production  a long-time member of the screen actors guild, nwamu has acted in commercials for hbo's boxing after dark and met life, and appeared in a music video.  nwamu wrote, produced and starred in a biopic about his life, they're just my friends (2006). rosedog books (dorrance publishing) subsequently turned his screenplay into a book.  in the episode "the art of war" of the 2016 hbo miniseries the night of, nwamu helped choreograph the fight scene, in which he played the role of dante and served as stuntman.  family lineage   patrick a. i. nwamu comes from the royal family of asaba and descends from a line of asagbas (kings) listed here:  king nwani of asaba - 1870 (great-grand uncle)  king okocha nwokolo of asaba - 1962 (paternal grandfather)  king joseph chike edozien of asaba - 1991 (cousin, mother's side) in 2009, patrick nwamu received the title of crown warrior prince of the 'kingdom of asaba' by his people for his accomplishments in professional combat and martial arts, and his observance and promotion of asaba traditions and customs.  references   1972 births living people american male karateka nigerian royalty
the flag of nigeria between 1914 and 1960 was a british blue ensign with a green six-pointed star described as the seal of solomon, surrounding a tudor crown (later changed to a st edward's crown in 1953) with the white word "nigeria" under it on a red disc. it was adopted by the colony and protectorate of nigeria following the amalgamation of the southern nigeria protectorate and northern nigeria protectorate.  history  the colonial flag of nigeria was adopted in 1914 following the amalgamation of southern nigeria and northern nigeria. the crest on the flag was also used on the flag of the governor-general of nigeria.   on april 1940, former colonial governor-general frederick lugard explained the green hexagram on the flag:  the flag was not universally accepted. some native nigerians, including fela kuti, refused to salute the flag despite it being mandated in schools. in 1956, some nigerian muslims burned the nigerian blue ensign at mecca, saudi arabia, because of the religious symbolism. in 1959, prior to nigerian independence a competition to design a new flag was held with taiwo akinkunmi designing the new flag of nigeria which replaced blue ensign in 1960.  references  see also flag of nigeria  blue ensigns colonial nigeria nigeria (1914-1960) nigeria
morton school is a historic school building located at west lafayette, tippecanoe county, indiana. it was built in 1930, and is a two-story, "e"-shaped, tudor revival style brick and limestone building.  it has a flat roof and features a triple-arched main entrance and stepped parapet.  it housed a school into the mid-1980s, after which it has been used as a community centre.  it was listed on the national register of historic places in 1999.  references  west lafayette, indiana school buildings on the national register of historic places in indiana tudor revival architecture in indiana school buildings completed in 1930 schools in tippecanoe county, indiana national register of historic places in tippecanoe county, indiana 1930 establishments in indiana
gereldo george (born 24 december 1994) is a south african cricketer who currently plays for boland. he is a right-handed batsman and right-arm off break bowler. botha made his first-class debut on 8 october 2015 against namibia.   he was included in the boland cricket team squad for the 2015 africa t20 cup. boland head coach johann louw called him "a mystery spinner who turns the ball both ways".  references  external links  gereldo george profile at cricketarchive  gereldo george profile at cricinfo  1994 births living people people from bergrivier local municipality south african cricketers boland cricketers
antonio durini (6 june 1770 - 16 april 1850) was an italian politician. he was born in and was the first mayor of milan.  references  1770 births 1850 deaths mayors of milan 19th-century italian politicians
freya ravensbergen is a canadian actress and producer. the first feature film she appeared in was the legend of sorrow creek (2007) where she played kayla. she is credited as an actor and co-producer of a brand new you (2014) and fucking my way back home (2016). in 2006 and 2007 was a voice actress for the character ginchiyo tachibana in the video game series samurai warriors 2.  early life freya hails from hemmingford, quebec where she grew up on a farm. her father is a documentary filmmaker and her mother is a teacher. as a youngster she took part in the hemmingford shoestring theatre. she later studied at the professional theatre program of dawson college and at concordia university in montreal.  career her first feature film appearance was the legend of sorrow creek (2007) where she played kayla. she later co-produced and starred in a brand new you (2014) which was listed in a now magazine 2015 wrap up of "films worth a watch". she stars in the upcoming feature film fucking my way back home playing the character of lydia, a sex worker who is looking for redemption. she is credited as a co-producer for this film as well.  personal life freya is married to actor clinton pontes.  she is a mother and is active on the toronto actra women's committee where she lobbied for parental benefits  filmography  references  external links  actresses from quebec anglophone quebec people canadian film actresses canadian television actresses canadian voice actresses 21st-century canadian actresses concordia university alumni living people people from monteregie dawson college alumni year of birth missing (living people)
illska ('evil'), published by mal og menning in 2012, is an icelandic novel, the fourth by eirikur orn norðdahl. it won the 2012 icelandic literary prize for fiction, and was chosen as best scandinavian fiction by the french literary magazine transfuge. the book has been widely translated and reviewed.  summary  illska is set around 2010. its main characters are agnes lukauskaite, a second-generation jewish immigrant from lithuania researching far-right populism for her ma thesis in history at the university of iceland; her boyfriend omar arnarson, a graduate in icelandic linguistics left unemployed by the 2008 icelandic financial crisis; and arnor þorðarson, a phd-student in history and a far-right activist, who becomes agnes's love-interest later in the novel. the novel intercalates musings in the narratorial voice about racism and right-wing populism, along with an account of agnes's grandparents' experience of the holocaust from their home town of jurbarkas.  translations  illska, la maldad, trans. by enrique bernardez (xixon, asturies: hoja de lata, 2018) [spanish]  zlo, trans. by daria lazic (zagreb: oceanmore, 2018) [croatian]  illska: to kako, trans. by roula georga kopoulou (athens: polis, 2017) [greek]  illska: le mal, trans. by eric boury (paris: metailie, 2015) [french]  bose, trans. by betty wahl and tina flecken (stuttgart: tropen, 2014) [german]  ondska, trans. by anna gunnarsdottir gronberg (malmo: ramus, 2014) [swedish]  ondskab, trans. by nanna kalkar (københavn: ordenes by, 2013) [danish]  references  2012 novels icelandic novels novels set in iceland icelandic books icelandic-language novels
shyama prasad mandal is an indian orthopedic surgeon and the co-chairperson of sir ganga ram hospital, new delhi. after securing his graduate and ms degrees from the all india institute of medical sciences, new delhi, he continued his education to secure the degree of mch in orthopedics from liverpool university. he is a former president of the indian orthopaedic association as well as the president of its building committee and the incumbent president of board of trustees of amarjyoti charitable trust, a not-for-profit organization engaged in educational and rehabilitation service. he has been involved with the organization of medical conferences, and was the co-chairman of the organizing committee of knee and arthroscopy workshop of 2008 and the patron of the lower limb symposia of 2012, conducted jointly by the indian federation of sports medicine, indian arthroscopy society and indian association of sports medicine. he was in the news when he examined sachin tendulkar in 1999 for his recurring back injury. the government of india awarded him the fourth highest civilian honour of the padma shri, in 2011, for his contributions to medical science. he is also a recipient of a civilian honor from the government of bangladesh. indian orthopedic association has instituted an award, s. p. mandal gold medal, in his honor.  see also   sir ganga ram hospital  references  external links       recipients of the padma shri in medicine indian orthopedic surgeons indian sports physicians indian medical administrators all india institute of medical sciences, new delhi alumni alumni of the university of liverpool living people 1940 births
the boat races 2017 (also known as the cancer research uk boat races for the purposes of sponsorship) took place on 2 april 2017. held annually, the boat race is a side-by-side rowing race between crews from the universities of oxford and cambridge along a  tidal stretch of the river thames in south-west london.  for the second time in the history of the event, the men's, women's and both reserves' races were all held on the tideway on the same day.  in the men's reserve race, cambridge's goldie were beaten by oxford's isis, their seventh consecutive defeat. in the women's reserve race, cambridge's blondie defeated oxford's osiris, their second consecutive victory.  in the women's race, cambridge won by a large margin following a disastrous start by the oxford boat.  their second win in the past ten years, it took cambridge's advantage in the overall standings to 42-30.   the oxford men's boat won their race after leading from the start, their fourth victory in five years and taking the overall record in the event to 82-80 in cambridge's favour.  the races were watched by around a quarter of a million spectators live, more than five million domestic television viewers, and were broadcast around the world by a variety of broadcasters.  the two main races were also available for the first time as a live stream using youtube.  background  the boat race is a side-by-side rowing competition between the university of oxford (sometimes referred to as the "dark blues") and the university of cambridge (sometimes referred to as the "light blues"). first held in 1829, the race takes place on the  championship course, between putney and mortlake on the river thames in south-west london. the rivalry is a major point of honour between the two universities; it is followed throughout the united kingdom and broadcast worldwide. cambridge went into the men's race as champions, having won the 2016 race by a margin of two and a half lengths, and leading overall with 82 victories to oxford's 79 (excluding the 1877 race, officially a dead heat though claimed as a victory by the oxford crew).  it was the second time in the history of the boat race that all four senior races - the men's, women's, men's reserves' and women's reserves' - were held on the same day and on the same course along the tideway. prior to 2015, the women's race, which first took place in 1927, was usually held at
the henley boat races along the  course.  however, on at least two occasions in the interwar period, the women competed on the thames between chiswick and kew. the oxford women went into the race as reigning champions, having won the 2016 race by 24 lengths, with cambridge leading 41-30 overall. for the fifth year, bny mellon sponsored the men's race, while newton investment management, a mellon subsidiary, sponsored the women's race. in january 2016, it was announced that the sponsors would be donating the title sponsorship to cancer research uk and that the 2016 event was retitled "the cancer research uk boat races".  there is no monetary award for winning the race, as the journalist roger alton notes: "it's the last great amateur event: seven months of pain for no prize money".  the autumn reception was held at the guildhall in london on 3 november 2016. as oxford's women had won the previous year's race, it was cambridge's responsibility to offer the traditional challenge to the oxford university women's boat club (ouwbc). to that end, ashton brown, president of cambridge university women's boat club (cuwbc), challenged isabell von loga, her oxford counterpart.  cambridge's victory in the men's race meant that michael di santo, president of oxford university boat club (oubc), challenged lance tredell, president of cambridge university boat club (cubc).  the men's race was umpired for the second time by the olympic gold medallist matthew pinsent, who won the boat race himself with oxford in the 1990 and 1991 races before losing (as president) in the 1993 race.  pinsent was the assistant umpire in the 2012 race and umpired the oubc victory in the 2013 race. the umpire for the women's race was sarah winckless, who became the first woman to umpire a boat race on the tideway. winckless won a bronze medal in the women's double sculls at the 2004 summer olympics and umpired the men's reserve's race in 2016.  the event was broadcast live in the united kingdom on the bbc, and received a viewership of 5.5 million.  numerous broadcasters worldwide also showed the main races, including supersport across africa, the ebu across europe, sky mexico across central america, tsn in canada and fox sports in australia.  it was also streamed live on bbc online.  for the first time, the men's and women's races were streamed live on youtube.  coaches   the cambridge men's crew
coaching team was led by their chief coach steve trapmore.  trapmore, a gold medal-winning member of the men's eight at the 2000 summer olympics, was appointed to the post in 2010. he was assisted by richard chambers, silver medallist in the men's lightweight coxless four at the 2012 summer olympics. donald legget, who rowed for the light blues in the 1963 and 1964 races, acted as a supporting coach, along with coxing coach henry fieldman (who steered cambridge in the 2013 race) and the medical officer simon owens.  sean bowden was chief coach for oxford, having been responsible for the senior men's crew since 1997, winning 11 from 17 races.  he is a former great britain olympic coach and coached the light blues in the 1993 and 1994 boat races.  his assistant coach was andy nelder, who has coached the senior boat since 2006.  ali williams, the former canadian international cox, was ouwbc's chief coach, a new role for her; she had been head coach at the university of alberta.  she was assisted by jamie kirkwood.  cambridge's women were coached by the former goldie coach rob baker who was assisted by paddy ryan and nick acock, along with the former light blue cox peter rudge.  trials dates for the trials, where crews are able to simulate the race proper on the championship course, were announced on 16 november 2016.  oxford's two senior crews rowed on 30 november, while cambridge's crews raced on 12 december.  women  oxford's women's trials took place on a section of the championship course on 30 november 2016, between the oxford boats, heather and helen, named after the gold-medal-winning british olympic pairing of heather stanning and helen glover.  in cold conditions, the women's race was overseen by winckless, who soon warned helen for encroachment after heather took a slim early lead.  helen took the lead around fulham before heather accelerated away at the mile post, and were two lengths ahead by st paul's boathouse.  both crews were warned by the umpire as they approached barnes bridge, and helen began to narrow the gap.  closing in on chiswick bridge, the finishing line, the boats began to overlap and in a sprint finish, helen won "a narrow victory".  cambridge's women's trials were held on 12 december 2016, on a stretch of the championship course.  the trial boats were named hallam and needs after former coaches ed hallam and ron needs, both of whom had died
earlier in the year.  hallam took an early lead and were nearly a length up by fulham.  both crews were warned for encroachment before hallam extended their lead to two lengths by the time the boats passed below barnes bridge.  both needs and hallam increased their rate in the final 500 m of the race, but hallam pulled further away to pass the finish line at the university post by four lengths.  men oxford's men's trials took place on a section of the championship course on 30 november 2016, between the oxford boats, acer and daniel, named after their former cox acer nethercott and their long-term coach daniel topolski, both of whom had died from cancer.  the race was umpired by pinsent.  acer took an early lead but daniel was level by barn elms boathouse.  acer continued to pull away despite multiple warnings from pinsent, and were almost a length up at fulham.  the gap narrowed as daniel pushed on and by hammersmith bridge, the crews converged, and blades clashed. daniel crew handled the situation the better and took a half-length lead by chiswick eyot.  by barnes the lead was three lengths, with daniel crossing the finish line at the university of london boathouse four lengths ahead.  the cambridge men's trial boats were named one t and two g's in honour of their coach donald legget who had served the club for fifty years.  one t took the lead and were  length ahead by the end of the boathouses.  two g's pushed on and closed the gap to a quarter of a length by the time the crews passed below hammersmith bridge.  in rough conditions, one t extended their lead to a length by barnes bridge.  a sprint finish ensued, with two g's closing the gap to half a length, before one t pulled away again to lead by  lengths by the time the boats passed the finishing line at the university post.  build-up  women ouwbc faced a crew from oxford brookes university boat club (obubc) in two races along the championship course on 19 february.  the first piece, from putney bridge to hammersmith bridge, saw obubc make the better start, but ouwbc took the lead at craven cottage.  a length ahead at the mile post, the dark blues were comfortable winners.  the second race, from hammersmith to barnes bridge followed a similar pattern with obubc taking an early lead, and ouwbc pushing through for the
win.   on 19 march, the dark blues took on a crew from molesey in two races on the tideway.  a tight start during which winckless, the umpire, warned both crews, molesey took a marginal lead.  ouwbc were back on level terms by the mile post and in calmer conditions, pushed away from molesey to be a length up by harrods.  pulling further ahead, the dark blues won by three lengths.  the second race saw molesey take the lead once again, and were soon a length up.  oxford's attempts to reduce the deficit came to no avail and molesey won by just short of one length.  cambridge took on university of london boat club (ul) on 19 february along two sections of the championship course.  cuwbc won the first piece, from putney to hammersmith, convincingly.  leading almost from the start, the light blues passed below hammersmith bridge more than three lengths ahead.  the second race, from chiswick steps to the finishing post saw ul given a clear-water headstart.  despite that, cuwbc rowed strongly throughout to win by at least three lengths.  men the first race in the build-up to the boat races for cubc was against obubc on 29 january 2017 along two sections of the championship course.  the first race was from putney bridge to chiswick eyot;  obubc took an early lead before cambridge led at hammersmith.  a final push from obubc resulted in a drawn race.  the second race, from chiswick eyot to the university post, was a one-sided affair with obubc leading from the start and gradually pulling away to win by two lengths.  goldie also faced an oxford brookes crew over two pieces, losing them both.  cambridge faced an italian national crew on 18 march in two pieces on the championship course.  the first race saw the italians make the better start, and despite steering off-course, they maintained their lead in rough weather under hammersmith bridge.  cubc pushed hard but were unable to catch the italians, losing by one quarter of a length.  the second piece was conducted in blustery conditions between chiswick eyot and chiswick bridge.  a close start saw both crews level after a minute, but the light blues pulled away after barnes bridge, and won by four lengths.  oxford started their preparations on 26 february with a two-piece contest against obubc.  in poor weather conditions
, oubc comfortably won the first section, leading from beginning to end.  oubc won the much closer second race "by a seat".  on 18 march, oubc faced leander in a race from start of the championship course to the chiswick steps.  the dark blues made a good start, leading by a length at craven cottage.  at the mile post, oxford started to move across in front of leander and by the time the crews passed below hammersmith bridge, the dark blues were fully in front and maintained their lead.  oxford responded to numerous pushes by leander and crossed the finish line with "a lead of several lengths".  crews  the official weigh-in for the crews took place at the francis crick institute on 14 march 2017, presented by bbc sports reporter andrew cotter.  women the cambridge crew weighed an average of ,  per rower more than their opponents.  oxford's president, german rower isabell von loga, withdrew from the race as a result of a shoulder injury, while cambridge's president, canadian rower ashton brown, made her third consecutive appearance in the race.  holly hill and myriam goudet also had boat race experience for cuwbc, while no blues returned for ouwbc.  men the cambridge crew weighed an average of ,  per rower more than their opponents.  cambridge's number three, james letten, was the heaviest man in the race, weighing .  all but two (dutchman olivier siegelaar and american matthew o'leary) of the dark blue crew were british; siegelaar won a bronze medal at the 2016 summer olympics as part of the men's eight.  conversely, just two of the cubc rowers were british.  oxford's bow man, william warr, became the third individual to row in the boat race for both universities, having competed for the light blues in the 2015 event.  two members of the cambridge crew had boat race experience, including ben ruble (who rowed in the 2015 and 2016 races) and president lance tredell (2016).  oxford featured three former blues; jamie cook made his third appearance in the event,  while michael di santo (who opted to compete at the 2016 summer olympics instead of in the boat race) and josh bugajski featured in their second race.  pre-race  the day before the races were scheduled to take place, an unexploded second world war bomb was discovered near putney bridge.  although this threatened to postpone the event, the device
was successfully removed and did not disrupt the race programme.  the queen's barge gloriana led a procession of traditional craft along the course.  these included the waterman's cutters used for the oxbridge waterman's challenge - a race of these craft was held ahead of the main events.  races the races were held on sunday 2 april.  weather conditions were very favourable, with calm water and low windspeeds.  around a quarter of a million people lined the length of the course to watch the race.  reserves in the women's reserve race, osiris won the toss and selected the surrey side of the river, handing the middlesex station to blondie.  the cambridge crew made the better start and by the mile post were more than two lengths ahead.  with a clear water advantage, blondie made the most of the racing line and extended their lead throughout the race; they passed the finishing post about 13 lengths ahead of osiris, in a time of 19 minutes, 6 seconds.  it was blondie's second consecutive victory, and took the overall tally (since 1968) to 23-20 in cambridge's favour.  in the men's reserve race, oxford's isis won the toss and elected to start from the surrey station.  goldie were late to the start and received a warning from the umpire judith packer.  rowing into a slight headwind, goldie made the better start and held a slight lead by the crabtree boathouse.  both crews were warned for encroachment as they passed barn elms, and at the mile post, isis were a canvas-length down.  by thames wharf, isis had edged into the lead and by hammersmith led by a length.  passing below the bridge, oxford held a clear water advantage and moved across in front of goldie, and were two lengths ahead by chiswick steps.  making a final push, isis passed the finish line two and a half lengths ahead, in a time of 17 minutes, 17 seconds.  it was isis' seventh consecutive victory and took the overall tally in the event to 29-24 in cambridge's favour.  women's the women's race started at 4:35 p.m. british summer time.  cambridge won the toss and elected to start from the surrey station, handing the middlesex side of the river to oxford. the oxford crew fell behind immediately when rebecca esselstein caught a crab at the start. cambridge maintained their commanding lead throughout the race and won in a record time of 18 minutes and 33 seconds
.  the time beat the previous record by a minute, and the winning margin was around 11 lengths.  it was cambridge's first victory since 2012 and only their second win in ten years, and took the overall record in the event to 42-30 in their favour.  men's the men's race was scheduled to begin at 5:35 p.m. and got underway about five minutes late.  oxford won the toss and elected to start from the surrey station. oxford led from the start, and were one length ahead by craven cottage.  the boats closed in on each other, prompting warnings from the umpire matthew pinsent, to avoid a clash of oars.  oubc pushed away on the approach to hammersmith bridge and held a clear water advantage soon after, moving across to row directly in front of cambridge.   despite that, cubc stayed in touch throughout the race, even recovering some of the deficit.  nevertheless, oxford won in a time of 16 minutes 59 seconds with a margin of one and a quarter lengths.  it was oxford's fourth victory in five years, and took the overall record in the event to 82-80 in cambridge's favour.  references  external links  official website  2017 sports events in london 2017 in rowing april 2017 sports events in the united kingdom the boat race women's boat race boat boat
the halifax child sex abuse ring was a group of men who committed serious sexual offences against under-aged girls in the english town of halifax and city of bradford, west yorkshire.  it was the largest child sexual exploitation investigation in the united kingdom.  in 2016, the perpetrators were found guilty of rape and other crimes in several separate trials at leeds crown court. in total, as many as a hundred men may have been involved in child abuse. twenty-five suspects were charged by west yorkshire police and the crown prosecution service and 18 of these were found guilty, totalling over 175 years of prison time. a further 9 men were convicted in february 2019 for grooming two underage girls in bradford and sentenced to over 130 years in prison. the majority of those charged and later convicted come from the town's asian community, and there were fears that their arrests might impact race relations in the town.  in december 2017, quilliam released a report entitled "group based child sexual exploitation - dissecting grooming gangs", concluding that 84% of offenders were of south asian heritage. this review was criticised for its poor methodology by ella cockbain and waqas tufail, in their paper "failing victims, fuelling hate: challenging the harms of the 'muslim grooming gangs' narrative" which was published in january 2020. in december that year, a further report by the home office was released, showing that the majority of cse gangs were, in fact, composed of white men.  writing in the guardian, cockbain and tufail wrote of the report that "the two-year study by the home office makes very clear that there are no grounds for asserting that muslim or pakistani-heritage men are disproportionately engaged in such crimes, and, citing our research, it confirmed the unreliability of the quilliam claim".  crimes  the principal victim was identified as "jeanette" in government reports. the prosecution said that the girl, who was 13 when the abuse first began, came from a troubled family background and was "lonely [and] needy". the gang exploited her desire for friendship and love, deliberately giving her drink and drugs to turn her into an addict and make her more easily controlled. in interviews with the police, she described being raped and abused in many different locations, including private homes in halifax, bradford and manchester, and hotels in bradford, leeds and london.  the abuse took place between 2006 and 2011.  "jeanette" believed that she was abused by at least a hundred men, often more
than once a day and once by nineteen men over a short time. she was infected with gonorrhoea as result of the abuse and suffered permanent psychological harm. although she knew many of the men only by their nicknames, the police were able to identify them using cctv footage from the hotels in which she was abused and by analysing male dna in stains found on her clothing.  police said it was the largest child sexual exploitation investigation in the country - "bigger than high profile cases in rochdale and rotherham."  calderdale board report and west yorkshire police apology the november 2016 board report found that three agencies failed to protect "jeanette".  west yorkshire police apologized, saying "we would firstly like to apologise to the victim for the failings of west yorkshire police."  legal  the gang members were arrested in may 2013.  there were three separate trials in the first half of 2016.  thirteen men received prison sentences adding up to over 150 years.  judge's comments  judge geoffrey marson qc harshly criticised the guilty men for committing gross abuse on obviously vulnerable girls. he condemned them for not showing "the slightest remorse" for their behaviour and for the way in which they had inflicted pain, humiliation and degradation on a victim whom they had deliberately incapacitated with drink and drugs. he said that they had inflicted permanent psychological harm on the girl, acting without concern or feelings for anything but their own sexual gratification.  2018 arrests for same case in early january 2018, 20 additional men were arrested as a result of investigations into the same case.  verdicts and sentences  those found guilty in june 2016 and their sentences were as follows:  hedar ali, 36, of bradford, 25 years for rape and trafficking for sexual exploitation haider ali, 41, of halifax, 20 years for sexual activity with a child and causing a person to engage in sexual activity khalid zaman, 38, of bradford, 17 and a half years for rape and supplying class b drugs mohammed ramzan, 35, of bradford, 15 years for rape haaris ahmed, 32, of halifax, 12 and a half years for sexual activity with a child and supplying class b drugs tahir mahmood, 43, of halifax, 11 years for sexual activity with a child and sexual assault taukeer butt, 31, of halifax, 10 years for sexual activity with a child amaar ali ditta, 27, of halifax, nine years for sexual activity with a child azeem subhani, 25, of halifax, nine years for sexual activity with
a child talib saddiq, 31, of halifax, eight years for sexual activity with a child sikander malik, 31, of halifax, seven years for sexual activity with a child mohammed ali ahmed, 43, of halifax, six and a half years for sexual activity with a child aftab hussain, 37, of halifax, six years for sexual activity with a child mansoor akhtar, 25, of huddersfield, six years for sexual activity with a child and supplying class b drugs sikander ishaq, 31, of halifax, six years for sexual activity with a child aesan pervez, 27, from halifax, four years. convicted by a jury after a trial at leeds crown court on one charge of sexual assault on the girl furqaan ghafar, 31, from derby who was jailed for five years three months after he admitted one charge of sexual activity with a child.  an 18th member of the ring was jailed for 10 months for supplying class b drugs  those found guilty in february 2019 and their sentences were as follows:   basharat khaliq, 38, of bradford, 20 years for five counts of rape and assault by penetration  saeed akhtar, 55, of bradford, 20 years for two counts of inciting child prostitution and rape  naveed akhtar, 43, of bradford, 17 years for two counts of rape  parvaze ahmed, 36, of bradford, 17 years for three counts of rape  izar hussain, 32, of bradford, 16 years for rape and attempted rape  zeeshan ali, 32, of bradford, 18 months for sexual assault  kieran harris, 28, of dewsbury, 17 years for two counts of rape  faheem iqbal, 27, of no fixed abode, 7 years for aiding and abetting rape  mohammed usman, 31, of bradford, 17 years for two counts of rape  see also list of sexual abuses perpetrated by groups  references  2000s crimes in the united kingdom 2000s in west yorkshire 2010s crimes in the united kingdom 2010s in west yorkshire 2010s trials british people convicted of child sexual abuse child prostitution in the united kingdom crime in west yorkshire forced prostitution rape in the 2000s rape in the 2010s rape in yorkshire sex crime trials sex gangs trials in england incidents of violence against girls
the 1934 washington university bears football team was an american football team that represented washington university of st. louis as a member of the missouri valley conference (mvc) during the 1934 college football season. in its third season under head coach jimmy conzelman, the team compiled a 7-3 record, won the mvc championship, and outscored opponents by a total of 212 to 59. the team played its home games at francis field in st. louis.  schedule  references  washington university washington university bears football seasons missouri valley conference football champion seasons washington university bears football
the new zealand handball federation (nzhf) is the governing body for the sport of handball and beach handball in new zealand. nzhf is member of the oceania continent handball federation (ochf), international handball federation (ihf) and the commonwealth handball association.  founded in 2005, nzhf is recognised by ihf in 2009.  national teams  new zealand men's national handball team  new zealand women's national handball team  new zealand men's national junior handball team  new zealand men's national youth handball team  region/clubs  auckland  auckland region handball taranaki taranaki hc (inactive)  manuwatu  massey university hc (inactive)  wellington  fruit flies hc  hutt hunters hc hutt hawks hc (inactive)  northern aguilas hc  spartanz hc  vikings hc  victoria university hc  canterbury  canterbury quakes hc  canterbury university hc (inactive)  otago  otago university hc queenstown hc southland hc  nzhf club championships  men competition  women competition  see also  oceania handball nations cup  oceania handball challenge trophy  oceania youth handball championship  references   oceania continent handball federation  external links  official page  profile on international handball federation webpage  nzhf youtube channel  national members of the oceania continent handball federation handball in new zealand handball sports organizations established in 2005 2005 establishments in new zealand handball governing bodies national members of the international handball federation
backspace (sometimes backspace cafe) was a coffee shop, gallery, internet cafe, and all-ages music venue located in the old town chinatown neighborhood of portland, oregon, in the united states. the venue opened in mid 2003 and closed in 2013.  description and history  owner and painter eric robison opened backspace, which was located at 115 northwest 5th avenue in portland's old town chinatown neighborhood, as a coffee shop in july 2003. he was inspired by two nearby stores within the same neighborhood, operated by katsu tanaka: compound, a gallery, and just be toys, a japanese-themed toy and dvd rental store. robison and his brother kris had considered operating the business in the pearl district, but were "attracted to the edginess" of the building. he recalled, "people said, 'dude, you're insane,' when i told them where it was. i saw the exposed brick, and the whole cyberpunk feel that we could pursue. it was a little too frou-frou in the pearl." robison also recalled fending off drug activity outside the store by barring dealers and users from entry. the building that housed backspace was renovated by the city and portland development commission.  the establishment had been described as a gallery, a computer gaming and internet cafe, and an "oft-beleaguered" all-ages music venue. it was one of several businesses in the neighborhood, including ground kontrol, geared towards young people who worked in the technology industry. according to willamette week matthew singer, backspace "[evolved] into the epicenter of portland's underage music culture" because of a one-off thermals performance in 2007. the space hosted a variety of events, including portland development commission meetings (2007), an anti-bullying event called "frank conversations: speaking out on bullying" (2010), and a concert by dustin ruth, the battle ground, washington-based singer-songwriter and frontman of the band ruth (2011).  closure  beginning in the late 2000s, backspace had a string of financial difficulties. the business almost closed in 2008, but was able to continue operating after the oregon liquor control commission permitted backspace to serve beer and wine while hosting all-ages events and performances. in 2012, robison began raising funds to help eliminate $10,000 in "delinquent late fees for past-due rent and licensing" from the american society of composers, authors and publishers (ascap) and broadcast music, inc
. (bmi). robison decided to relocate when the city pass an ordinance requiring nightclubs in older buildings to install sprinkler systems. one of the property investors said the building's owners elected not to renew the cafe's lease because "music [was] not compatible with rest of tenants in the building".  in september 2013, robison confirmed that he wanted to relocate the business to a larger space before its lease expired in november. he originally planned to move backspace to a building along northeast martin luther king jr. boulevard. when plans fell through, he considered relocating to a different location in northeast portland. however, this plan meant backspace would not be able to reopen until the spring season of 2014 because of ongoing renovation efforts. in october, robison said backspace would stop hosting live performances after its halloween celebration and would remain open temporarily as a coffee shop. he told willamette week: "the one thing we want to do is build it right. backspace was all patchwork and chewing gum. we want to build something that will last." robison hoped to host one final concert in backspace's original location on new year's eve, 2013, featuring a "big-name local act, pending landlord approval".  in his 2014 article "rip: 11 shuttered pdx bars and restaurants we'll miss", thrillist contributor drew tyson wrote, "we'll miss dancing in this boisterous bar/gallery that was decked out like a geeky internet cafe with a photo booth, pinball machines, a treehouse, and... wait! it was a geeky internet cafe that whole time?!"  after sitting vacant for over a year, the location was remodeled to accommodate an expansion of the ground kontrol video game and pinball arcade and bar located in the same building.  see also  coffee in portland, oregon  list of defunct restaurants of the united states  references  external links     2003 establishments in oregon 2013 disestablishments in oregon art galleries disestablished in 2013 art galleries established in 2003 art museums and galleries in oregon coffee houses of the united states coffee in portland, oregon defunct companies based in oregon defunct music venues in portland, oregon defunct restaurants in portland, oregon internet cafes northwest portland, oregon old town chinatown restaurants disestablished in 2013 restaurants established in 2003
events from the year 1848 in russia  incumbents  monarch - nicholas i  events             petrashevsky circle  births  deaths  references  further reading   lincoln, w.b. "russia and the european revolutions of 1848" history today (jan 1973), vol. 23 issue 1, pp 53-59 online.   1848 in russia years of the 19th century in the russian empire
guglielmelli is an italian surname. notable people with the surname include:  arcangelo guglielmelli ( 1650-1723), italian architect and painter vincenzo patrick guglielmelli (born 1987), italian footballer  italian-language surnames patronymic surnames
anne christine bulford  (born 22 september 1959) is a british media executive who was the most recent deputy director-general of the bbc, and the first woman to hold the position.  early life  bulford was born in wirral, england.  she graduated from university college london where she was a lay member of council and honorary treasurer until july 2012. she is a trained chartered accountant.  career  kpmg and first period at the bbc  she worked for twelve years with kpmg.  she left kpmg in 1993 to become head of internal audit at the bbc.  she was subsequently appointed finance director of regional broadcasting and then, following an internal reorganisation became the first finance director of bbc production.  return to the bbc bulford left the bbc in 1999 to join carlton communications. from 2002 to 2005, bulford was director of finance & business affairs at the royal opera house, before being hired by channel 4, becoming their chief operating officer, following a period as interim chief executive.  bulford re-joined the bbc as a member of their finance and operations team in june 2013. in june 2016 it was announced that she would take up the role of deputy director-general. the bbc announced her salary in september 2017 to be £435,000 per annum.  in january 2019, bulford announced her plans to leave the bbc in the spring of that year, hoping to pursue a portfolio of non-executive roles. on her decision, director-general tony hall said, "anne has been an inspirational leader. she has brought real insight and determination in bringing change to the bbc."  already officer of the order of the british empire (obe), bulford was appointed commander of the order of the british empire (cbe) in the 2020 birthday honours for services to broadcasting and charity.  personal life bulford is currently a trustee of the motor neurone disease association and also of the conservatoire for dance and drama. she married david smith on 11 may 1991 at rowley, east riding of yorkshire. her husband rang church bells at market weighton.  references  living people 1959 births alumni of university college london bbc executives bbc board members british television executives channel 4 people english accountants kpmg people commanders of the order of the british empire people from market weighton people from the metropolitan borough of wirral royal opera house
thermal and a quarter (often abbreviated as taaq) is a rock band from bangalore, india, that describes its music as "bangalore rock", rooted in a classic rock idiom while indian in "subtle, inescapable ways". founded in 1996, taaq had released seven studio albums by its 20th anniversary in 2016. in 2001, when deep purple played in bangalore, taaq opened the show. the band also opened for guns n' roses in 2012.  the three members of taaq are bruce lee mani (guitar and vocals), rajeev rajagopal (drums) and leslie charles (bass). by 2016, the albums released by the band included thermal and a quarter (2000), jupiter cafe (2002), plan b (2005), this is it (2008), 3 wheels 9 lives (2012), the scene (2015), no wall too high (2015), a world gone mad (2020)  mani won guitarist of the year at the jack daniels rock awards in 2009 and 2012.  in 2010, taaq opened a music school in koramangala, bangalore, called the "taaqademy". a branch in whitefield was opened in 2014.  references  indian rock music groups musicians from bangalore
prince hui of the second rank, or simply prince hui, was the title of a princely peerage used in china during the manchu-led qing dynasty (1644-1912). as the prince hui peerage was not awarded "iron-cap" status, this meant that each successive bearer of the title would normally start off with a title downgraded by one rank vis-a-vis that held by his predecessor. however, the title would generally not be downgraded to any lower than a feng'en fuguo gong except under special circumstances.  the first bearer of the title was bo'erguoluo (博爾果洛), sose's second son and a great-grandson of nurhaci (the founder of the qing dynasty). in 1665, bo'erguoluo was granted the title "prince hui of the second rank" by the kangxi emperor. the title was passed down over four generations and held by three persons.  members of the prince hui peerage   bo'erguoluo (博爾果洛; 1651-1712), sose's second son, held the title prince hui of the second rank from 1665 to 1684, stripped of his title in 1684  fucang (福蒼), bo'erguoluo's fifth son, posthumously honoured as a beile in 1750  qiulin (球琳), fucang's eldest son, held the title of a junwang from 1728 to 1746, demoted to beile in 1746, stripped of his title in 1757  dejin (德謹), qiulin's second son, held the title of a feng'en fuguo gong from 1758 to 1763, stripped of his title in 1763  dechun (德春), qiulin's third son, held the title of a third class zhenguo jiangjun from 1764 to 1765  desan (德三), qiulin's fourth son, held the title of a third class fuguo jiangjun from 1768 to 1791  tuyi (徙義), desan's eldest son, held the title of a fengguo jiangjun from 1792 to 1806, stripped of his title in 1806  yitai (伊泰), bo'erguoluo's son  minghe (明赫), yitai's son, held the title of a feng'en zhenguo gong from 1737 to 1739, stripped of his title in 1739  sule (素勒), minghe's son  wanxiang (萬祥),
sule's second son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1806 to 1835  henglin (亨麟), wanxiang's second son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1835 to 1874  yingcui (英萃), henglin's son  zhongduan (中端), yingcui's son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1874 to 1888  yingmao (英茂), henglin's third son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun from 1888  wancheng (萬成), sule's son  hengjie (亨傑), wancheng's son  yingqin (英芹), hengjie's son  dingyan (定埏), yingqin's second son, held the title of a feng'en jiangjun  family tree  see also  prince zhuang  royal and noble ranks of the qing dynasty  references    qing dynasty princely peerages
the 2016 bihar school examination scandal or topper scam was a corruption scandal in the indian state of bihar which came to public light on 31 may 2016, when the bihar school examination board (bseb) arts and humanities topper (the top scholarly position in the examination) ruby rai, science topper saurabh shrestha and third topper in science stream rahul kumar were interviewed by television channels and they were unable to answer to basic questions. ruby rai, a student of vishun roy college, kiratpur raja ram village in vaishali district pronounced political science as 'prodigal science' and described it as a subject related to cooking. science topper saurabh shrestha was unaware of electrons and protons and wrongly said that aluminium is the most reactive element.  background the examinations in february-march 2016 were largely fair as the bihar government, stung by the photos of mass copying in the bseb-conducted exams in 2015, tried its best to prevent the use of unfair means. on 28 may 2016, the bseb publicly declared the intermediate results, however, it released its official merit list for 10 may 2016 itself. although, due to some issues, it made the results public at a later date. only 56.73% of students passed in arts against 86.47% in 2015. in science, 67.06% passed verses 89.32% in 2015. some journalists visited ruby rai's house on may 30. when interviewed by the aaj tak tv channel, ruby rai and saurabh shresth were unable to answer basic questions. the arts topper ruby rai named "prodigal science" (actually political science) as one of the subjects she had studied. when asked what this subject dealt with, she answered that it was about cooking. she stated that the exam was for 600 marks, while it was actually of only 500 marks. the science topper saurabh shresth could not describe the link between water and h2o (the chemical formula for water). he also wrongly named aluminium as the most reactive element.  sit formation  after the video of their interviews went viral, a three-member sit was formed by the bihar state government to look into the fraud. manu maharaj, patna special sp, is heading the special investigation team. ruby and the other 13 rank holders were asked to appear for the test on june 3. ruby rai was later sent to judicial custody in remedial home for 14 days. vishun roy college was de-recognised thereafter. a day after retest
, the results of toppers were canceled. ruby rai flunked retest for the first time. bseb chairman lalkeswar prasad singh was on the run after that. on 6 june, bihar government dissolved the four-member committee constituted by bihar school examination board on 5 june to probe into alleged irregularities in evaluation of marks in bihar intermediate exams and ordered registration of fir. the decision to dissolve the committee was taken in a meeting when bseb chairman lalkeshwar prasad singh was also present in that.  vishun roy college principal bachha rai was arrested on 11 june. bachcha's daughter shalini rai is also an accused in the fraud case. bachcha had unsuccessfully lobbied for an rjd ticket from the paroo (vidhan sabha constituency) in muzaffarpur district in november 2015. bachcha's daughter shalini had topped the state in the matriculation exams in 2010. her name was withheld as topper in science stream and saurabh shreshtha was declared the topper in science stream. bachcha's family are said to be die-hard supporters of rashtriya janata dal. ruby rai's father is said to have promised six acres of land to bachcha rai  in lieu of his "help" for his daughter.  on 8 june 2016, the bseb chairman lalkeshwar prasad singh resigned after being served a show-cause notice by the bihar state's education department. on 25 june, ruby rai appeared before bseb team for re-evaluation, and failed to answer a single question correctly. she was subsequently arrested. patna commissioner anand kishore took charge as bseb chairman.  on 12 june, bihar deputy chief minister tejashwi yadav tweeted pictures of bachcha rai with union minister giriraj singh. tejashwi said bachha rai had a cordial relation with a central minister. giriraj singh also tweeted pictures of bachcha rai with lalu prasad yadav  and nitish kumar.  on 20 june, bseb chairman lalkeshwar singh and his wife usha sinha were arrested from varanasi. usha sinha is a former mla from hilsa (vidhan sabha constituency) (2010-2015). bseb chairman lalkeshwar prasad singh confessed to having taken  from a cheating racket kingpin to help each unworthy student become a topper.  in the investigation, ruby rai said on june 27 that she just wanted second division, but her father avadesh rai made her topper in collaboration with bachcha rai. ruby rai was denied bail by the juvenile court on 13
july. the father of the science topper was arrested from the kanti factory road area in east patna on 15 july.  in an investigation of the indian express in july 2016, it was revealed that many schools are only on paper. officials of g.a.inter school hajipur have also been interrogated. third topper rahul kumar was also arrested in july.  on 15 july, chief minister nitish kumar said that the topper scam is a god-sent opportunity to rectify the system in bihar.  on 9 august 2016, vikas kumar, who was a clerk-cum-storekeeper of the bihar vidyalaya pariksha samiti and kingpin of the racket in connection with the bihar intermediate exam scam was arrested by a joint team of the west bengal cid and bihar police.  in september 2016, the bihar government decided to link exams to aadhaar numbers to avoid duplication and facilitate easy access to documents. the seven-member governing board led by bseb chairman anand kishor gave its nod for the creation of 135 posts (official and clerical), the construction of nine new examination halls, and the setting up of nine regional offices. these 135 posts include nine deputy secretaries, nine accountants, nine zonal officers.  in october 2016, investigations revealed that ruby rai wrote names of movies in one answer sheet and the name of tulsidas more than a hundred times in another and poetry in some others, which were then replaced. she wrote only 1 (home science) of 6 papers.  criticism many argued that ruby rai was unfairly targeted as she is a minor (17), as she was born on 15 november 1998 and the real kingpins of the crime and low education level of bihar board have not yet been caught. central education minister upendra kushwaha said that ruby rai's father, avadesh rai, was complicit in the conspiracy forged by bacha rai. referring to the specifically targeted media coverage of ruby rai and saurabh shrestha, columnist shivanshu k. srivastava wrote, "at least the news presenters should have shown some sensitivity towards these misguided children. in the context of another news wherein, a girl misbehaved in a police station, the girl's face was blurred even when she was an adult, but these children are openly humiliated." ruby rai was said to be under utter stress and finding herself utterly hopeless after deserted by family within few days of her arrest. on 13 july, ruby broke down in tears in the juvenile justice board office after seeing her grandfather munshi prasad
rai. later on, ruby rai was able to adjust and adapt herself inside the juvenile home. her bail petition was heard in juvenile court on 1 august. ruby studied in the juvenile home to reappear in the 2017 exams. ruby was released from jail on 1 august after the court agreed to her bail plea.  aftermath bseb introduced multiple steps to curb cheating in subsequent exams. candidate's applications have been linked with the aadhaar number to prevent duplications. to prevent impersonation, photographs have been added at multiple locations, including the admit card. crpc section 144 (curfew) would be imposed at all examination centers to keep others from roaming around the examination centers. cctvs have been installed to prevent and identify those involved in such activities.  end-to-end digitization is being implemented: registration, form filling, evaluation, and declaration of results. affiliations of 147 schools/colleges have been canceled for not fulfilling the affiliation criteria. some of the colleges were running in only one room.  references  2016 crimes in india politics of bihar fraud in india history of bihar (1947-present) corruption in bihar
christian congregation may refer to:  local church, a christian body of followers meeting in a particular area christian congregation (pentecostal), an organization of pentecostal churches with roots in the italian pentecostal movement christian congregation in the united states christian congregation of brazil christian congregation in ireland christian congregation (restoration movement), a congregational church in the united states christian congregation of jehovah's witnesses, a jehovah's witnesses organization in the united states
the sagamihara stabbings were committed on 26 july 2016 in midori ward, sagamihara, kanagawa, japan. nineteen people were killed and twenty-six others were injured, thirteen severely, at a care home for disabled people. the suspect was a 26-year-old man, identified as , a former employee of the care facility. uematsu surrendered at a nearby police station with a bag of knives and was subsequently arrested. the attack was described as one of the worst crimes committed on japanese soil in modern history.  location   is a residential care center run by , a social welfare organization. established by the local government, the facility was built in a  area of woodland on the bank of the sagami river. as of the end of april, the facility housed 149 residents between the ages of 19 and 75, all of whom had an intellectual disability but many with various physical disabilities as well. some are capable of engaging in physical activities outdoors, while others are bedridden. the facility is located in a remote location about  from sagamiko station on the chuo main line.  attack at about 02:10, uematsu allegedly used a hammer to break into the care centre through a glass window on the first floor. he tied up a staff member, took their keys, and then went from room to room, stabbing the victims in their necks as they slept. police were called to the care center by staff members at around 02:30 local time, reporting a man with a knife breaking into the building. however, uematsu left the premises before being apprehended; he was recorded leaving the facility at 02:50 in security camera footage.  armed police entered the building at around 03:00 where they discovered the crime scene. twenty-nine ambulances were sent to the facility. the suspect turned himself in at the tsukui police station two hours after the incident with a bag containing kitchen knives and other bloodstained sharp tools. a knife was reportedly found in his car outside the police station.  uematsu killed ten women and nine men aged between 18 and 70 and injured 26 more, thirteen severely.  perpetrator  (born 1989/1990), a 26-year-old (at the time of the incident) man, used to work at the care home tsukui yamayuri en. his father was an elementary school art teacher, and uematsu had trained and worked as an elementary school teacher as well. he had lived in his house with his parents, but they moved away at some point and he remained there alone
. he resigned from working at the facility in february 2016 after having been employed there for over three years.  neighbors expressed surprise that he had allegedly committed the murders; he was described as a friendly, outgoing and good man. however, some reported that his personality had undergone a change at some point during his employment at the facility.  letter and statements in february 2016, uematsu attempted to hand-deliver a letter to tadamori oshima, the speaker of the house of representatives of japan, at oshima's home in tokyo but was prevented from doing so by security. he returned the following day and this time left the letter with the security guards. uematsu's letter appealed for the legalization of ending the lives of those with multiple disabilities in cases where it was requested by their guardians, and asked for oshima's assistance in delivering his message to japanese prime minister shinzo abe. in it, he wrote, "i envision a world where a person with multiple disabilities can be euthanised, with an agreement from the guardians, when it is difficult for the person to carry out household and social activities." he also wrote that the killings of the disabled would be "for the sake of japan and world peace" as well as to benefit the global economy and prevent world war iii.  after signing his name, the letter proceeded to detail an offer to target two facilities housing the disabled (possibly a reference to the two residential buildings in which he later committed the crime), and went on to appeal for certain conditions in exchange for committing the act. in the first half of the message, uematsu said he could kill 460 people; however, in the second half, the number he gave was 260. he added that staff would be tied up to keep them from interfering but that they would not be harmed, the act would be swift, and that afterwards he would turn himself in. at the end of the latter half of the letter, he signed his name again, this time with his address, telephone number, and the name of his employer.  at some point, the letter was handed over to tokyo police, who contacted the police in sagamihara. during this time frame, uematsu posted to his twitter account that he expected he might be arrested. he had previously posted tweets about japan being ravaged by radiation poisoning and aids.  later that month, after his letter was brought to the attention of sagamihara's authorities, he was arrested, detained, questioned, and then involuntarily committed to a psychiatric hospital for two weeks. however, he was released on
2 march after doctors deemed that he was not a threat.  in his letter and in statements made after turning himself in, uematsu explained that he was "saving from unhappiness" both the severely disabled and those who he believed were burdened with maintaining their lives.  legal proceedings on 20 february 2017, uematsu was found mentally competent to stand trial. on 24 february 2019, uematsu was charged with 19 counts of murder, 24 counts of attempted murder, two counts of illegal confinement causing injury, three counts of illegal confinement, one count of unlawful entry, and one count of violating the swords and firearms control law.   uematsu's defense team said they planned to argue that he was mentally incompetent at the time of the crime, due to the effects of marijuana. on 23 december 2019, uematsu said he would admit to the crime during the trial, saying that denying the charges against him "would be quibbling and make the trial too complex."  on 8 january 2020, uematsu pleaded not guilty to the stabbings. on 17 february 2020, the prosecution announced that the death penalty was officially sought against uematsu saying the rampage was "inhumane" and that left "no room for leniency."  on 16 march 2020, uematsu was sentenced to death by the yokohama district court, having previously said he would not challenge any verdict or sentence.  on 30 march 2020, his death sentence was finalized as he withdrew automatic appeal to the upper courts.  reactions yoshihide suga, the japanese chief cabinet secretary at the time, acknowledged that the attack was "a very heart-wrenching and shocking incident in which many innocent people became victims". he also said that the ministry of health, labour, and welfare would investigate ways to prevent a similar incident from occurring again.  a number of japanese news outlets ran editorials calling the stabbings a hate crime. by september 2016, little information had been released about the victims of the attack. reuters wrote that this was due to japanese culture and stigma, being less accepting of physically and cognitively impaired persons.  the care home has been demolished. facilities where no one was attacked, such as the administration building and gymnasium, remain. on 13 september 2016, the governor of kanagawa prefecture, yuji kuroiwa, said the facility would be rebuilt.  the new facility of two buildings opened in july 2021.  see also  ableism aktion t4 life unworthy of life  references  external links 19 lives: sagamihara stabbings nhk
(in japanese) demolition work starts at sagamihara care home after 2016 massacre nippon.com  2016 crimes in japan 2016 murders in asia 2010s murders in japan mass murder in 2016 2020s trials ableism crime in kanagawa prefecture hate crimes disability in japan history of kanagawa prefecture july 2016 crimes in asia knife attacks mass murder in japan mass stabbings in japan massacres in 2016 massacres in japan murder trials sagamihara stabbing attacks in 2016 trials in japan
a captive threaded fastener may refer to:  cage nut  clip-on nut  rivet nut  threaded insert
the quincy conserve (commonly known as quincy conserve) was a new zealand group that were active from 1967 to 1975. originating from wellington, they were one of the biggest bands in the lower north island.  background among the various lineups, the membership has included bruno lawrence. for a while trombonist rodger fox was a member. for a period of time they were the house band for wellington's hmv studios.  1960s the group started out in late 1967, and was formed by malcolm hayman. in 1968, they were backing allison durbin on some of her recordings.  1970s in 1970, kevin furey who had previously been with the group top shelf joined the group. at a point in time that year, the lineup consisted of furey, malcolm hayman, bruno lawrence, johnny mccormick, dennis mason, dave orams and rufus rehu. also in 1970, the bruno lawrence composition "ride the rain" came in the finals at that year's loxene golden disc awards.  in 1971, the group briefly reunited with allison durbin to play at the downtown club in wellington. in 1973, they backed the brothers johnson at the downtown club.  in 1974. they released the single, "song for the man", composed by paul clayton, backed with "epistolary", composed by anderson and wise. it was released on the ode label. the following year it was released in australia on warner brothers. tony kaye produced both sides of the release. it was also an apra silver scroll nominated song for 1975.  they disbanded in 1975.  later years in 1980, guitarist kevin furey, who was married to the cousin of deane waretini's manager george tait, played the trumpet on waretini's hit "the bridge". furey later played for several years with the royal  new zealand navy band. in 2013, furey teamed up with larry morris to play in his band larry morris & rebellion.  in later years malcolm hayman was in a band called captain custard which featured murray loveridge, dave alexander and don burke. a later line up of captain custard included peter whyte, stu petrie and jimmy dwan.  line-up  malcolm hayman: lead guitar, vocals, arrangements  kevin furey: guitar, trumpet, vocals  ria kerekere: vocals  dave orams: bass guitar, vocals  graeme thompson: bass guitar, vocals  frits stigter: bass guitar  rufus rehu:  keyboards  johnny mccormick: saxophone, flute
dennis mason: saxophone, vocals  barry brown-sharpe: trumpet, tenor horn  raice mcleod: drums  earl anderson: drums  brian beauchamp: drums  bruno lawrence: drums  richard burgess: drums  tom swainson: drums  mike conway: drums  billy brown: drums  paul clayton: guitar, vocals  harry leki: guitar  murray loveridge: bass guitar  peter blake: keyboards  rodger fox: trombone  geoff culverwell: trumpet  peter cross: trumpet  discography  singles  studio albums listen to the band (1970 - regal) epitaph (quincy conserve 1967-71) (1972 - regal) tasteful (1973 - emi) the quincy conserve (1975 - ode records)  live albums live with lutha, blerta and desna sisarich (1973 - emi)  compilations the very best of... (2001 - emi) aire of good feeling - best of (2008 - emi)  references  external links the quincy conserve on audio culture    entries at 45cat.com  1967 establishments in new zealand 1975 disestablishments in new zealand new zealand rock music groups musical groups established in 1967 musical groups disestablished in 1975
hugh jackman: back on broadway was a concert residency by australian actor, singer, and producer hugh jackman. for this residency, jackman performed broadway and hollywood musical numbers backed by an 18-piece orchestra.  the show was directed and choreographed by warren carlyle.  setlist  act i  overture  "oh, what a beautiful morning"  "one night only"  dance medley  "l.o.v.e."  "the way you look tonight"  new york medley  "fever"  "rock island"  "soliloquy"  act ii  "the boy next door"  peter allen medley  "tenterfield saddler"  movie medley  "somewhere over the rainbow"  "mack the knife"  "it's so hard to say goodbye"  reviews "the impossibly talented, impossibly energetic mr. jackman is a glorious dinosaur among live entertainers of the 21st century: an honest-to-gosh old-fashioned matinee idol who connects to his audiences without a hint of contempt for them or for himself." - the new york times  "whatever else he does, jackman brings joy to the stage. comparisons are being offered to the deep impression made by a solo artist such as [judy] garland. but the rapturous emotional intensity that lingers is not what this performer provides. garland left blood on the stage. jackman leaves sweat, and a smile." - the washington post  references  2011 concert residencies 2012 concert residencies hugh jackman
the 2018 united states senate election in rhode island took place on november 6, 2018, in order to elect a member of the united states senate to represent the state of rhode island. incumbent democrat sheldon whitehouse was reelected to a third term, defeating republican robert flanders by a margin of twenty-three percent.  democratic primary  candidates  nominated  sheldon whitehouse, incumbent senator  eliminated in primary  patty joy fontes, progressive activist  declined  lincoln chafee, former governor of rhode island and former u.s. senator  polling  results  republican primary  candidates  nominated  robert flanders, former associate justice of the rhode island supreme court  eliminated in primary  rocky de la fuente, businessman and perennial candidate  withdrew  robert nardolillo, state representative  endorsements  results  general election  debates complete video of debate, october 9, 2018  predictions  polling  with robert nardolillo  results  references  external links candidates at vote smart candidates at ballotpedia campaign finance at fec campaign finance at center for responsive politics  official campaign websites robert flanders (r) for senate sheldon whitehouse (d) for senate  2018 rhode island united states senate
animal welfare and rights in mexico regards the treatment of and laws concerning non-human animals in mexico.   animal mutilations are prohibited, whose objective is to modify their appearance or achieve a non-medical purpose. in particular, the cutting of the tail, the cutting of the ears, the section of the vocal cords, as well as the removal of nails and teeth is prohibited. according to the animal protection law.   mexico has limited protections for animals by international standards.  legislation   most of mexico's states and the federal district have prohibitions against animal cruelty. in michoacan, quintana roo, and the federal district, cruelty by negligence is included.  this is not the case in tlaxcala, and in baja california applies only to certain kinds of animal.  chiapas and baja california sur did not have animal welfare protections as of november 2014.  the federal animal health act 2007 contains a number of provisions concerning the welfare of farm animals (not including aquatic animals).  the main purpose of the act is to diagnose, prevent, and control diseases in animals, but welfare is also addressed.  owners or keepers of domestic animals must provide adequate food and water, veterinarian supervision and immediate attention in case of injury.  the secretariat of agriculture, livestock, rural development, fisheries and food is responsible for protecting the health and welfare of animals in "primary production", determining rules on animal welfare, transport and slaughter.  state-level anti-cruelty provisions also apply to farm animals.  in 2014, mexico received a d out of possible grades a,b,c,d,e,f,g on world animal protection's animal protection index.  in 2020, mexico received a c grade.  in december 2014, the mexican congress passed legislation banning the use of exotic animals in circuses. the legislation went into effect by july 2015.  in 2017, mexico passed legislation which makes dogfighting a felony nationwide with criminal penalties.  animals used for food   the majority of mexican pigs are raised on intensive animal farming operations.  between 1990 and 2005, pig production increased by 50%, and by 2009 over 15 million pigs were slaughtered for food each year.  according to a 2016 world cattle inventory, mexico has the ninth-largest cattle herd in the world at 16,450,000 cows.  in 2009, mexico had the seventh-largest number of chickens at approximately 500 million.  de-beaking, de-toeing, tail-docking, tooth pulling, castration, and dehorning of livestock
without anaesthetic are illegal in mexico, as is confinement in gestation crates and battery cages.  animal mutilations are prohibited, whose objective is to modify their appearance or achieve a non-medical purpose. in particular, the cutting of the tail, the cutting of the ears, the section of the vocal cords, as well as the removal of nails and teeth is prohibited. according to the animal protection law.  animals used in research   testing cosmetics on animals is legal in mexico. on march 19, 2020, however, the mexican senate unanimously passed legislation banning this practice. the proposed legislation now awaits approval from the lower house of the mexican congress, the mexican chamber of deputies.  animal activism   the international animal nonprofit animanaturalis protests against bullfighting in mexico.  humane society international has a major chapter in mexico, whose activities involve campaigns against dog-fighting, pet abuse, and advocacy for a vegan diet. the humane society international applauded mexico's 2017 ban on dog-fighting. bordertown animal rescue located at the us/mex border in tijuana investigates acts of cruelty, illegal activity and has a facility that houses abused, abandoned and unwanted animals & wildlife.  references   animal welfare and rights legislation mexican society mexico
eunidia lineatoides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1942.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1942
louis sonnery-martin (1841-1907) was a french politician. he served as a member of the chamber of deputies from 1893 to 1898, representing rhone.  references  1841 births 1907 deaths people from tarare politicians from auvergne-rhone-alpes members of the 6th chamber of deputies of the french third republic
agneta rosenbroijer (ca. 1620 - 11 september 1697)  was a finnish-swedish  noblewoman and business person. she was a significant figure in the local history of viborg, known for her pride, temperament and feuds, which has been the subject of many stories.  biography agneta rosenbroijer was born in vyborg. she was the daughter of the burger tonnies antonius broijer, mayor of viborg in swedish finland. she married in 1640 to merchant tonnies antonius broijer  (d. 1652) who was engaged in commodity trading.  as was usual in sweden at the time, kept her own surname after her marriage in 1647, her father was ennobled with the surname rosenbroijer.  she took her father's new surname and became known as agneta rosenbroijer.  widowed in 1652, she took over the trading business of her late spouse. in 1655, she married the recently ennobled captain peter von gertten (d. 1671). after marriage, he left for six years to serve in the polish-swedish wars. after his return in 1661, the couple attracted attention with their extravagant life style and belonged to the leading people of the city. they bought the manor ahijarvi in 1663 to live in accordance with their noble status, while she continued to manage the trading business. it was an important business and belonged to the few in viborg at that time to trade with foreign nations.  after the death of her second spouse in 1671, agneta rosenbroijer was dragged in to a fourteen year long period of law suits: she was forced to pay of the debts accumulated by her spouse and herself during all their years of extravagance, while she herself sued the state and demanded to be given the salary of her late spouse to pay of the creditors. her situation was worsened through the reduction of 1683.  in 1685, finally, the king granted her the income from a couple of farms for her personal support.  references  other sources  biografiskt lexikon for finland 1. svenska tiden (2008).  1620 births 1697 deaths 17th-century swedish businesspeople 17th-century finnish nobility people of the swedish empire 17th-century businesswomen 17th-century finnish women
tsuru is a japanese name. it means crane, and is used as a given name and a surname. notable people with the name include:  given name tsuru aoki (1892-1961), japanese stage and silent film actress  surname ayako tsuru (born 1941), mexican artist of japanese descent hiromi tsuru (1960-2017), japanese voice actress naoto tsuru (born 1987), japanese baseball player norihiro tsuru, japanese violinist and composer shigeto tsuru (1912-2006), japanese economist and politician toshiyuki tsuru, anime director  japanese feminine given names japanese-language surnames
paul michael weir (born june 12, 1979) is the athletic director at eastern new mexico university. he is the former head men's basketball coach of the university of new mexico, having been named head coach on april 11, 2017 as the successor to craig neal, his second head coaching position at the college level. weir was also the head coach of new mexico state university (nmsu) for one season, going 28-6 and winning the western athletic conference tournament. he was an assistant at nmsu from 2007 to 2016, including five seasons as associate head coach. prior to that he spent two years as an assistant coach under steve alford at the university of iowa, and served as director of basketball operations at northwestern state university for one season. weir began his coaching career as head coach of don bosco catholic secondary school in toronto from 1999 to 2003. he also served as an assistant coach for the costa rica national basketball team in 2015.  weir grew up in toronto, canada and graduated from iona catholic secondary school while earning all regional and city honors playing point guard for the basketball team. he earned a bachelor's degree from york university in toronto in 2004. he earned a master's degree in health and human performance from northwestern state in 2005, added a second master's degree in sports psychology from iowa in 2010, and a third master's degree in business administration from new mexico state in 2012. he is currently enrolled in the educational leadership doctoral program at nmsu.  weir is one of four canadian-born ncaa division i men's basketball head coaches all-time, joining james naismith, pete newell, and maurice joseph.  he is the head coach of canada u-19 team replacing nba assistant coach roy rana.  head coaching record  references  external links  new mexico profile  new mexico state profile  1979 births living people canadian men's basketball coaches college men's basketball head coaches in the united states iowa hawkeyes men's basketball coaches new mexico lobos men's basketball coaches new mexico state aggies men's basketball coaches new mexico state university alumni northwestern state demons basketball coaches northwestern state university alumni point guards basketball players from toronto university of iowa alumni york lions players
joshua frank (born in billings, montana) is an investigative journalist, author and editor living in the united states and covers current political and environmental topics. his work has been honored by the society of professional journalists. along with jeffrey st. clair, he is the editor of the alternative political magazine and website counterpunch. his articles appear in the seattle weekly, oc weekly and regularly at counterpunch. frank's journalism has been supported by the nation institute's type invesitagions.  frank graduated from billings west high school in 1997 and holds a graduate degree in environmental conservation from new york university.  books    left out!: how liberals helped reelect george w. bush (2005)   red state rebels: tales of grassroots resistance in the heartland (2008) (co-edited with jeffrey st. clair)   hopeless: barack obama and the politics of illusion (2013) (co-edited with jeffrey st. clair)   the big heat: earth on the brink (2018) (written with jeffrey st. clair)  references   year of birth missing (living people) living people american alternative journalists american male journalists american non-fiction environmental writers new york university alumni
sangowal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of sangowal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per the constitution of india and panchayati raj (india).  dhilwan, nadala, rayya-6, kapurthala are nearest taluks  and kapurthala, kartarpur, jalandhar, qadian are the nearby cities to sangowal. kapurthala, jalandhar, tarn taran and amritsar are the nearby district headquarters to the village.  transport  train  dhilwan railway station- 2 km, beas railway station- 5 km, baba bakalaraya- 10 km and hamira- 12 km are nearest railway stations to sangowal however, jalandhar city major railway station is 34  km away from the village.  air raja sansi airport:- 61 km, pathankot airport:- 92 km, ludhiana airport:- 94 km and gaggal airport:- 137 km nearest airports are available to sangowal village.  air travel connectivity  the closest airport to the village is sri guru ram dass jee international airport.  villages in kapurthala  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
yamal 204 (russian: ) was a geostationary communications satellite ordered by gazkom to rsc energia. it was to be a twin of yamal 202 and was supposed to ride along with yamal 203 on what would have been the third launch of the yamal program. as a copy of yamal 202, it would be the second iteration of the usp bus. it would have been a  satellite with 4,080w of power (3.4 kw at end of life) on an unpressurized bus. it would have had eight spt-70 electric thrusters by okb fakel for station keeping. its payload was 18 c band transponders to be supplied by space systems loral.  history during 1997, even before the launch of their first satellites (yamal 101 and yamal 102), gazkom was planning the second generation. at that time they planned a 24 satellites of the second generation. this extremely aggressive plan was scaled back by 2001 with a plan to launch four 200 series satellites. the first two, yamal 201 and yamal 202 would be launched by 2001 and the second pair, yamal 203 and yamal 204 by 2004.  yamal 201 and yamal 203 would be identical and be positioned at the 90°e slot and yamal 202 and yamal 204 would also be twins and be positioned at the 49°e slot. but the program was delayed and while yamal 201 and yamal 202 actually launched on november 24, 2003, gazkom moved to the yamal 301 and yamal 302 project, cancelling both yamal 203 and yamal 204.  see also  yamal 202 - a twin satellite that was actually launched.  yamal - communication satellite family operated by gazprom space systems.  gazprom space systems - satellite communication division of the russian oil giant gazprom.  usp bus - the satellite bus on which yamal 204 is based.  rsc energia - the designer of the yamal 204 satellite.  references  external links  gunter space page on the yamal 201/203  yamal-204 satellites using the usp bus cancelled spacecraft
fossombroniales is an order of liverworts.  taxonomy  allisoniaceae schljakov  allisonia  fossombroniaceae hazsl., nom. cons.  fossombronia  calyculariaceae he-nygren et al.  calycularia  makinoaceae nakai  makinoa  petalophyllaceae stotler & crandall-stotler  petalophyllum  sewardiella  references    liverwort orders
jaguar (kannada: ಜಗವರ) is a 2016 indian romantic action film, produced by h. d. kumaraswamy under his banner channambika films and directed by mahadev. shot simulaneoulsy in kannada and telugu, it features nikhil gowda, who is the son of the producer h. d. kumaraswamy, and deepti sati in the lead roles, while tamannaah made a debut in kannada-language and was seen in an item number. the music was composed by s. thaman, and the fight scenes were choreographed by ram-lakshman masters. the film was released worldwide on 6 october 2016 and was dubbed into hindi under the same title.  plot  the movie opens with a lawyer suggesting his friend over the phone to watch "ss news channel" to watch a live murder being shown. he cuts the call, saying that he will call after watching the murder and switches to that channel, when the power is cut. he commands a computer repairman who had come to repair his pc to check out what happened to the power and tells him to turn it on when lightning strikes and the repairman's face is shown. the repairman (nikhil kumar) then reveals that he is the one who hacked the channel and put that notification there and tells the lawyer that he is the one who is going to die and eventually manages to kill him while broadcasting it through a drone camera and escapes after defeating all of the security guards. the next day, a cbi officer (jagapathi babu) arrives to solve the case and names the case and the killer as jaguar.  the next day, there is an speech ceremony by ss medical college's topper arya (aadarsh balakrishna), who gets elected as the student leader and vows that there will be no ragging in the college hereafter and proceeds to welcome the first years. one of the first years happens to be krishna (nikhil kumar) or "ss krishna", as he likes to call himself, and stages a drama saying that ragging is essential to a college since it bridges the senior-junior gap and provides a platform for juniors to display their talents, to which the rest of the first years agree.  krishna then walks towards arya and tells him that he will go after his sister priya (deepti sati) next and bets that he will make her fall in love with him to which arya's friend, who is apparently in love with priya, gets enraged and
is about to attack krishna when arya prevents him, saying that his sister is not that innocent. the next day, krishna follows priya, gets a pizza, and proposes to her friend (vidyullekha raman), to which priya gets enraged and tells that she knows his techniques and that she will not fall for him. krishna then acts like crying and leaves the place while the other girls tell priya to apologize. the next day, krishna makes fun of priya in class and also teases arya. priya later reciprocates his love after he treats a poor man, which was impossible, and gives the credit to arya. later, krishna murders a police officer in the same way.  it is later revealed that krishna is the son of dr. ramachandra (rao ramesh), a person who cared for poor people and was cheated in the name of sexual harassment by sreekar prasad and somnath prasad (sampath raj and adithya menon), for which he committed suicide. his mother (ramya krishna) then looked after him. finally, krishna kills both the villains (sreekar and somnath) and reconciles with his mother, priya (who had left him thinking that he will leave her for money), and arya, who now accepts to give priya to him.  cast   nikhil kumar as krishna, priya's love interest   deepti sati as priya, krishna's love interest and arya's sister  jagapathi babu as cbi officer  aadarsh balakrishna as arya, priya's brother  rao ramesh as dr. shivaprasad, krishna's father  ramya krishna as krishna's mother   sampath raj as shouri prasad  adithya menon as somnath prasad  vidyullekha raman as priya's friend  avinash as college principal   raghu babu as cbi officer raghu  saurav lokesh as ajay   supreeth as "encounter" shankar  ravi kale as judge  sadhu kokila (kannada version) as fake jaguar  brahmanandam (telugu version) as fake jaguar  prashanth siddi  kavita radheshyam (guest appearance)  tamannaah as an item number "sampige"  production in december 2015, it was revealed that nikhil kumar, son of h. d. kumaraswamy and grandson of devegowda, would be making his acting debut with the film titled jaguar for which the story was written by vijayendra prasad. h.d kumarswamy invited tollywood actor pawan kalyan to attend the audio function.  release  the film
was released worldwide on 6 october 2016 in over 1000 screens and approximately across 16 countries.  music   the film's soundtrack album and background score are composed by s. s. thaman. the soundtrack comprises six tracks.  awards and nominations  references  external links    2016 films kannada-language films telugu-language films 2010s telugu-language films 2010s kannada-language films indian films indian romantic action films 2016 action thriller films indian action thriller films films scored by s. thaman indian multilingual films films featuring an item number 2010s masala films techno-thriller films indian heist films films shot in bangalore films shot in switzerland films shot at ramoji film city 2016 multilingual films 2010s heist films
the  was an infantry division of the imperial japanese army. its call sign was the . it was formed 28 february 1945 in kurume, fukuoka as a square division. it was a part of the 16 simultaneously created divisions batch numbering from 140th to 160th.  action the 156th division was assigned to 57th army. the division spent time from 5 may 1945 until surrender of japan 15 august 1945 building a coastal defenses in miyazaki prefecture without engaging in actual combat. the 453rd infantry regiment was in sumiyoshi (between miyazaki and shintomi), the 454th - in miyazaki proper, 455th - in kiyotake (on southern outskirts of miyazaki), and 456th infantry regiment - in kunitomi inland.  see also  list of japanese infantry divisions  notes and references this article incorporates material from japanese wikipedia page 第156師団 (日本軍), accessed 13 july 2016  madej, w. victor, japanese armed forces order of battle, 1937-1945 [2 vols], allentown, pa: 1981.  japanese world war ii divisions infantry divisions of japan military units and formations established in 1945 military units and formations disestablished in 1945 1945 establishments in japan 1945 disestablishments in japan
five points is an unincorporated community in harrison township, union county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  geography  five points is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in union county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
the golden pinwheel young illustrators competition (童书展和金风车国际青年插画大赛) was held for the first time at the china children's book fair (ccbf), in shanghai, in 2015, and, like the ccbf, is set to become an annual event, the aim being to identify talented young illustrators from around the world. it was sponsored by kodak. in 2015, almost a thousand works were submitted by 253 competitors from 15 countries and regions.  2020 awards  the jury members are chen hui (china), sunkyung cho (korea), simon de jocas (canada), philip giordano (italy) and jiu'er (china).  grand award (china) - ling luo (china) - for three friends  grand award (international) - veronica neacsu (romania) - for mumuri's sleep   special mentions   jam dong (china) - for the secret life of caterpillars  francesco giustozzi (italy) - let's play  ida hong (south korea) - for carpenter  2019 prize winners  the jury members were ivan canu (italy), andre letria (portugal), kiyoko matsuoka (japan), yang zhong (china) and zhou xiang (china).  grand award (china) - gui tuzi (china) grand award (international) - guilherme karsten (brazil) people's choice award - stefano di christofano (venezuela) special mentions  romolo eduardo d'hipolito (brazil)  li jingxin (china)  miguel pang ly (spain)  zhao niaoer (china)  2018 prize winners  the jury members were serge bloch (france), cai gao china), fei jia (china), gita wolf (india) and xiong liang (china).  grand award (china) - heimi (china)  grand award (international) - elina ellis (uk)   publisher's choice award - monika vaicenaviciene (lithuania)  special mentions  catarina sobral (portugal)  raquel bonita (spain)  miao yu (china)  2017 prize winners the jury members for the 2017 prize are fei jia 费嘉 (china), jiu er 九儿 (china), yan xiaoli 颜小鹂 (china), wang zhigeng 王志庚 (china), zhuang weijia 庄维
嘉 (china), chris haughton (ireland) and misha blaise (usa). there were 3655 submissions from 37 countries & regions. fifty finalists were selected; the winners were announced at the shanghai international children's book fair, 17-19 november 2017. a colour catalogue of the winners was produced: ccbf 金风车国际青年 插画家大赛 / ccbf golden pinwheel young illustrators competition catalogue 2017 featuring the 2015 and 2016 winners and the 2017 finalists.   grand award (china) - zhang fan (china)  grand award (international) - joan negrescolor (spain)  publisher's choice award - dale blankenaar (south africa)  people's choice award - adolfo serra (spain)  finalists  rocio alejandro (argentina) mahdi ashari (iran) mohammad barrangi fashtami (iran)  dale blankenaar (south africa) birfish 春鱼秋鸟  (china) caver 乌猫 (china) katsiaryna dubovik (netherlands) francesca dell'orto (italy) duan kailin 段凯琳 (china) joan fernandez vicente (spain) juanjo gasull (spain) gudong 咕咚 (china) ester garcia cortes (spain) carly gledhill (uk) huang yi 黄祎 (china) maryam hasan nejad (iran) tomas ives (chile) jin xiaojing 金晓婧 (usa) nahid kazemi (canada) liu lanfang 刘兰芳 (china) leng xiaoyu 棱小宇 (china) li qingyue 李清月 (china) liu juan 刘娟 (china) li xingming 李星明 (china) missionart 妙象童画 (china) ma penghao 马鹏浩 (china) daishu ma 马岱姝 (china/spain) najmeh moradi chadegani (iran) kiki ni 倪思琪 (china) marianna oklejak (poland) laura renzullo (argentina) catarina sobral (portugal) adolfo serra (spain) azar teimouri (iran) tu qianwen 涂倩雯 (usa) ekaterine tabliashvili (georgia) cat
ia vidinhas (portugal) wang xiaoyue 王小月 (china) wang wei 王炜 (china) wen aining 温艾凝 (china) mango xu 徐虹艳 (china) anne xu 许玉安 (china) peakii young 杨佩琪 (china) yu yin 俞寅 (china) yang huiwen 杨慧文 (china) diana sofia zapata ochoa (ecuador) zhu yu 朱昱 (china) zahra mohamanajad (iran) zi li 晚点的子狸 (china) zhang fan 张帆 (china)  2016 prize winners the jury members for the 2016 prize were benjamin chaud (france), william grill (uk), sun shiqian (china), lin hua (china), ishikawa ikuko (japan), miao wei (china) and zhao xiaoyin (china). there were 338 submissions, and 53 illustrators were shortlisted.  winners: picture book category grand prix (china) - ms ye luying (china) grand prix (international) - ms fatemah nakhaei (iran) silver award - ms sally anne walker (uk) bronze award - ms zhu lin (china) awards of excellence - ms fu wenzheng (china), ms li qiaoqiao (china), ms banafsheh erfanian (iran), mr ali ghorbanimoghaddam (iran), ms loes riphagen (netherlands) publishers' choice award - ms mahshid raghemi (iran) shaker creator award - mr olga de dios (spain) people's choice award - ms chen yucong (china) winners - comic/manga/graphic novel category urban china award - mr xiao xuepeng (china) reed pop china comic con award - mr zhao ze (china)  2015 prize winners gold prize (grand prix) winners international: michal suska (poland) china: zhou jieyuan  周劼媛  silver award winners shou tao  兽桃 wang xiaoxiao  王笑笑  bronze award winners han han (illustrator)  含含 wang jue (illustrator)  王珏 ye luying  叶露盈  excellence award winners zhang yu 张钰 and gong yifei 巩�
�飞 picture book creation studio, central academy of fine arts 央美绘本创作工作室 liu chao  刘超  meng ziru  孟子茹  wang lala  王拉拉  wen xin  温馨  xu qingfeng  许青峰  yan xueqing  颜雪晴  yang zhujun  杨筑珺 zhao yufei  赵喻非  2013 prize winners   international original picture book award winners:  los zapatos de fred astaire y otras historias increibles (apila ediciones, spain)  monstruo rosa (apila ediciones, spain)  oh, what a tangle! (digital leaf, u.k.)  a feather (china children's press & publication group, china)  cloud bird (jieli publishing house, china)  wukong, becoming good (beijing poplar culture project co. ltd., china)  pumpkin monk (zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house, china)  mice at home? (tomorrow publishing house/hsin-yi, china)  the fish in beiming (tomorrow publishing house/hsin-yi, china)  china original children's book award winners   the stars gulf (juvenile and children's publishing house)  fairy foxes in pu's garden (people's literature publishing house/daylight publishing house)  guosisi children's poem (haifeng publishing)  my name is xia dandan (jieli publishing house)  the green house (anhui children's publishing house)  an open door (new buds publishing house)  bi bi in the high house (new buds publishing house)  the flying-fish in the xisha islands (new buds publishing house)  mother fox saves her child (phoenix juvenile and children's publishing ltd.)  yu bao's world (phoenix juvenile and children's publishing ltd.)  the queen of wolf kingdom (children's fun publishing co., ltd/post and telecom press)  i become an invisible person (zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house)  land street in the afternoon (zhejiang juvenile and children's publishing house)  the bone of the grass (tomorrow publishing house)  liu dafan and her classmates (juvenile and children's publishing house)
thousands of ways to play (juvenile and children's publishing house)  colorful anthology of tangtang's tales of growth (juvenile and children's publishing house)  nongni's childhood (juvenile and children's publishing house)  the burning planet (china children's press and publication group)  the loveable funny mouse series (21st century publishing house)  references  illustrated book awards
nida eliz ustundag (born october 21, 1996) is a turkish swimmer specialized in butterfly stroke. she is a member of galatasaray swimming.  she was born in canakkale on october 21, 1996. after graduation from ankara ataturk  high school, she entered baskent university to study psychology.  ustundag competed for ankara university before she transferred to galatasaray swimming.  in 2014, ustundag competed in the girls' 50 m butterfly, 100 m butterfly and 200 m butterfly events at the summer youth olympics in nanjing, china. she took part at the 2016 european aquatics championships in london, united kingdom and placed 44th in the women's 50 m butterfly event.  she earned a quota spot to compete for turkey in the women's 200 m butterfly event at the 2016 summer olympics.  references  living people 1996 births sportspeople from canakkale female butterfly swimmers turkish female swimmers galatasaray swimming swimmers swimmers at the 2014 summer youth olympics swimmers at the 2016 summer olympics olympic swimmers of turkey universiade medalists in swimming swimmers at the 2018 mediterranean games universiade bronze medalists for turkey medalists at the 2017 summer universiade mediterranean games competitors for turkey
mimenicodes opacoides is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1982. it is known from new caledonia.  references  enicodini beetles described in 1982
eunidia splendida is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1954.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1954
eunidia fuscoapicalis is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
jalalpur khurd is a village in shahkot in jalandhar district of punjab state, india. it is located  from shahkot,  from nakodar,  from district headquarter jalandhar and  from state capital chandigarh. the village is administrated by a sarpanch who is an elected representative of village as per panchayati raj (india).  transport  shahkot malisian station is the nearest train station. the village is  away from domestic airport in ludhiana and the nearest international airport is located in chandigarh also sri guru ram dass jee international airport is the second nearest airport which is  away in amritsar.  references   villages in jalandhar district
the following are places of worship in cherupuzha:  st. mary's forane church st. mary's forane church is one of the oldest houses of worship in cherupuzha. this church, belonging to the archdiocese of tellicherry, was established in 1951 to take care of the spiritual needs of the christians who migrated from south kerala to cherupuzha and the surrounding areas. st. mary's is about a kilometer from cherupuzha. most vehicles plying the cherupuzha payyannur route make it a point to seek blessings at the grotto of mother mary on their first trip.  cherupuzha shri ayyappa temple cherupuzha ayyappa temple is about 500 meters from cherupuzha on thirumeni road, located on a hill top. hailed as the sabarimala of north malabar, the cherupuzha ayyappa temple is a premier hindu pilgrim centre of north malabar.  the temple originated as a bhajan madh. in 1984, the first temple was built with cooperation from people of all communities. on 28 july 1984, the temple was sanctified into a mahakshetra during a ten-day mahotsava. ubadeva temple annexes dedicated to kshetra, maha ganapathi, nagaraja, sree vishnumurthi, sree raktachamundi, sree muthappan, sree pottandaivam temple are situated around the main temple complex. there are five ubadeva temples here: sree ganapathi, sree nagaraja, sree muthappan, sree vishnumurthi, and sree raktha chamundeshwaree and sree pottan daivam.  the temple mahotsava is held every 10-17 december or 11-18. along with the devotional facets of the mahotsava, temple arts and entertainment bring together people of north malabar. in addition to mahotsava, kalliyatam is held on shivaratri and the day after.  chathamangalam st. jude's chapel (near thirumeni)  st. jude's church, chathamangalam (kannur) is an emerging pilgrim centre in cherupuzha area. it is located at a distance of 10 kilometers from cherupuzha via thirumeni. the foundation stone of the church was laid by the present cardinal of the malankara catholic church, who was the vicar general of the bathery diocese then.  since the church is dedicated to st. jude, the mediator for impossible matters, it attracts huge number of pilgrims. situated at the convergence of two iconic hills in the area by name thevarkunnumala and alumbumala, the landscape near to the church is
spectacular.  jerusalem marthoma church  jerusalem marthoma church is located at 1 kilometer away from cherupuzha town. this church was established in 1970 and in 1974 credited as a parish. the church was established under the able leadership of rt. rev. thomas mar athanasius episcopa, and a small group of marthomites migrated from the southern part of kerala. the church building was re-constructed in 2005. today the church has become a burning light of cherupuzha and is a great source of spiritual development as well as a great help to the common people in and around cherupuzha. at present the church contains thejus child development centre, marthoma nursery school, a tailoring school and a de-addiction centre.  mulapra sree dharmashastha temple mulapra sree dharmashastha temple 5 km away from cherupuzha in thirumeni road is a famous pilgrim centre of hindus. about 100 years before a group of swami's who were going to sabarimala conducted bhajans in this place and later on mulapra ayyappa bhajana mandiram was formed. after many years on 2012 february the now known temple came to existence. mahaganapathi and lord ayyappa gives dharshana to a lot of people coming to this temple daily.  muapra sree kakkarakkavu bhagavathi temple is situated in the same temple complex. kakkara bhagavathi, vishnumoorthi, rakthachamundi and nagaraja gives dharshan here. the temple mahotsava is held every 13 january-january15 with much fan fare. along with the devotional facets of the mahotsava, temple arts and entertainment bring together people of north malabar. the temple is located in a wonderful place in mulapra where everyone feels a mindblowing experience once they reach here.  pulingome makhaam pulingome makhaam 5 km away from cherupuzha is a famous pilgrim centre of muslims. about 1300 years ago, two holy men who had come for religious propagation were buried here. they were residing at kadayakkara, near pulingome. every year uroose festival is celebrated here in the month of march. thousands of people of different caste and creed from north kerala and southern karnataka reach this sacred place for uroose festival. mass dining of more than ten thousand people will be held as a part of the festival.  kripalayam kripalayam retreat centre is a famous christian pilgrim centre in north kerala. it is located at around 1 km from cherupuzha town
at kakkayamchal. on tuesdays special prayers are being conducted. large mass of people used to attend in these prayers.  kottathalachi kottathalachi mount is a famous christian pilgrim centre in north kerala. it is located at around 2500 feet above the sea level. on good friday of 1958, the holy cross was installed at "kottathalachi mala" by fr. mathew mannuramparambil. since then the first sunday after easter is being celebrated here by thousands of pilgrims every year. at present there is road facility till the base of the hill via thabore.  kottathalachi is known as the "malayattoor of malabar".  st. joseph's church pulingome st. joseph's church was built in 1954 by the christians who migrated from travancore. the church in its present form was built in the eighties. kottathalachi mala is within the purview of pulingome parish.  baptist church kokkadavu a peaceful place to share your problems and meditate in a devotional atmosphere.  thalakaveri at the convergence of the rivers kaveri (or cauvery), the underground sujyothi and the kanike, the bhangandeshwara temple at thalakaveri has a distinct kerala touch. thalakaveri is in madekere district in karnataka state and is about 30 km away from cherupuzha. most of the route is through dense karnataka forest. the forest road leading to thalakaveri (bhagamandala) has no regular transport facilities. people usually take a long walk through the forest which is one of the great features of this pilgrimage.  every 17 october, on tulasankranama, hundreds of people from kannur and kasaragod come here to witness the waters of the kaveri gushing out from its source. it is believed that goddess kaveri appears in the form of a spring at thalakaveri, which is what causes the upsurge at the source.  because of the three rivers, it is also called triveni sangama. the serene temple has intricate carvings and a copper roof. a dip at the triveni sangam nearby is supposed to revive sagging spirits. for this is thalakavari (meaning head of the kaveri), the origin of one of the seven sacred rivers. the source of this long river, which passes through two states, is on the top of the hill called brahmagiri. it is 1535 metres above sea level.  narambil bhagavathy nar
ambil bhagavathy originated from the famous rayaramangalam temple. the theyyam was performed in the kodakkal koroth tharavadu, ramanthali, muchilot temples, etc. as a goddess with fiery anger against evil. at narambil tharavadu near cherupuzha, the theyyam has been performed peacefully. there is an interesting myth behind the origin of narambil bhagavathy.  one story says that this amman (mother goddess) was originally a "vana durga", or "forest goddess". she was worshipped by a poor young lady who was married (by arrangement) to a very cruel and much older man who treated her terribly (a sad circumstance that many village girls may be sentenced to).  the young woman was nevertheless patient and longsuffering, with her only solace being her own devotion to narambil bhadrakali. at one point, this woman gave birth to a beautiful baby girl. after observing the proper post-partem protocols, this young lady went to take her newborn to devi's temple, both to thank the goddess and bless the child. when she returned home, her cruel husband began to rage that his dinner was not ready, and he beat her savagely.  bhagavathy, sensing what was happening, took her most terrible form: she was wreathed in flames and cobras, with a rutting elephant in one ear-ring, and a roaring tiger in the other. her fangs were long like a lion's, her tusks curved like a boar's, and her three eyes blazed with brilliance. she had the sun and the moon in her hair, and 500 serpents woven into her braids. she rushed into the house and tore the evil husband into pieces, finally garlanding herself with his entrails (or, in some versions, tossing them into the boughs of her sacred tree).  a messenger from muchilottu bhagavathy arrived on the scene to calm the goddess down. she advised her to become peaceful, wash her face, and come to eat with her sisters. the people were much afraid, especially the young wife of the evil man (now deceased). narambil bhadrakali was moved by compassion, and so assumed a kind, peaceful form, transforming the dead-man's entrails into a flowering vine. she kept the young lady and her child with her as companions, and settled in the area as a goddess who would protect the weak from oppression.  other religious centers in and around cher
upuzha edavaramba vishnumurthy temple, kariyakkara ara of pottan theyyam, muchilottu bhagawati temple vilakkuvettam, chunda thattummal vishnumurthy temple, temple of lord shiv ayannur, kamballur bhagavathi temple, pulingome sankaranarayana swami temple, meenkulam sreekrishna temple  references  religious buildings and structures in kannur district
timothy g. clemente (born october 18, 1960) is an american counter-terrorism expert who has worked as an fbi special agent and swat team member in europe, the middle east, and africa. he also ran a cover joint operation with the department of energy's national emergency support team, which was tasked with protecting the u.s. from attack by rogue nuclear weapons or other weapons of mass destruction. clemente went undercover as a drug smuggler and took down members of the cali cartel working in narcotics and organized crime investigations in the u.s. and south america.  a 2011  profile by esquire described clemente as "an excellent terrorist hunter".  education born in san francisco, california, clemente earned a b.a. in international politics from fordham university in 1982.  career  clemente was a police officer in st. louis, missouri from 1982 to 1990. as an fbi special agent between 1990 and 2007, clemente worked as a counterterrorism expert and a swat team member, sniper, and tactical instructor. he carried out narcotics and terrorism investigations around the world. in the late 1990s, he was one of the fbi agents who worked on the 1998 u.s. embassy bombings in nairobi and dar es salaam. on 9/11, he was one of the first fbi agents on the scene after american airlines flight 77 crashed into the pentagon.  clemente went to iraq for the first time in january 2004. a 2011 esquire article described his close friendship with a former member of saddam's police force whom clemente trained in iraq in 2004 to be a terrorist hunter and became, in the view of u.s. experts, "the best terrorist hunter alive." the article depicted the two men's activities in iraq, hunting down and "turning" terrorists.  military after leaving the fbi, clemente returned to iraq in 2007 to serve as an adviser to the u.s. military. he spent eight months in iraq working as an embedded counter improvised explosive device investigator with the u.s. army 3rd corps. while in iraq, he compiled a book of combat photos entitled courage. in 2008, he worked as an adviser with the 101st airborne division at fort campbell, kentucky.  hollywood clemente retired from active government duty in 2007. since then, he has worked in hollywood writing screenplays and serving as a consultant about law enforcement, counterterrorism, and the fbi on films and tv shows. he owns x-g productions, inc. and has written several episodes of ncis: los angeles, two episodes of lie to me, and
an episode of the unit. he has also appeared on criminal minds and the unit, performed stunts on criminal minds and washington field, and served as creator and producer of washington field, in addition to writing one of its episodes. he has also written for the shows killer elite and blindspot. since late 2015, he has been a staff writer and technical consultant for criminal minds: beyond borders.  clemente also works as an international consultant.  professional activities  haras clemente invented the height adjustable rescue assault system (haras), which uses wide platforms and high traction stairways to ensure easy and safe access to elevated conveyances or structures.  comments on tsarnaev phone calls during a may 2013 discussion on cnn of the possible role of boston marathon bombing suspect tamerlan tsarnaev's wife, catherine russell, in her husband's actions, clemente claimed that national security investigators "have ways...to find out exactly what was said in that conversation". clemente's claim, that the government maintained records of private phone calls, attracted considerable media attention and commentary.  comments on muslim influx into u.s. in a july 2015 interview, clemente said that it was impossible for the fbi to cope with the influx into the u.s. of people from the muslim world who may be terrorists or potential terrorists. he criticized the state department for allowing students to enter the country without real vetting, and complained that laws prohibit investigation of such individuals unless there is "reasonable suspicion" of their motives for entering the u.s.  personal life clemente and his wife have nine children  references  federal bureau of investigation agents people from san francisco 1960 births living people
"heartstrings" is a song by swedish singer janet leon. after janet was officially confirmed as an contestant for sweden's melodifestivalen songwriting competition. leon performed the song, written by fredrik kempe and anton malmberg hard af segerstad, in third heat of the competition in skelleftea on 16 february 2013. janet placed in fifth in the semi-finals and did not qualify for the next round. the song charted 36 on the swedish charts.  charts  references  2013 singles janet leon songs
supriyaa ram aka supriya lohith is an indian playback singer born in bengaluru.  she has sung more than 250 songs for the kannada films. she has also sung in tulu, tamil and telugu films.  supriyaa ram started her music career as a playback singer in 2007 and her first song was "hoovantha preethi" from the movie taj mahal starting pooja gandhi and ajay rao.  she is the winner of the popular kannada reality show zee kannada saregamapa season 2.  she also won the title voice of bangalore season 1.  discography   the song "neenaade naa" in murali meets meera was her first biggest hit  '''supriyaa ram (supriya lohith)''' has recorded songs with singers such as ankit tiwari, hariharan, unni menon, rajesh krishnan, vijay prakash, kunal ganjawala, tippu, karthik, haricharan, armaan malik.  '''supriyaa ram (supriya lohith)''' won the best playback singer award by kima for the song nee naade naa|neenaade naa.  awards   winner of zee kannada saregamapa season 2  winner of voice of bangalore season 1  "voice of the year" award by chithrasanthe for the song doona doona from the movie belli  "best female playback singer" award by kima for the song nee naade naa from murali meets meera  "siima-2018" nominee for her song "nee nanna o lavu" from the blockbuster film "chamak" "filmfare-2018" nominee for the song "nee nanna olavu" from the blockbuster film "chamak"  references  living people indian women playback singers 21st-century indian singers kannada people singers from bangalore kannada playback singers year of birth missing (living people) 21st-century indian women singers film musicians from karnataka women musicians from karnataka
carlos alberto preciado benitez (born 30 march 1985) is a colombian professional soccer player who currently plays as a forward for fc carlos stein.  professional career  preciado began his career with his hometown club america de cali. during his time with america, preciado made appearances for both the first team and the reserve squad. in 2005, preciado was loaned to lower division team real cartagena. he was released by america after the 2008 season and joined deportivo pereira. after impressing with deportivo pereira, preciado rejoined america but was released again after one season. from 2011 to 2013, spent a season each with colombian clubs millonarios f.c., deportes tolima, and envigado f.c.  in 2014, preciado joined his first non-colombian team, peru's leon de huanuco. preciado performed well in huanuco and the following season he was brought on by alianza lima.  on january 7, 2016, preciado joined qatari club al-sailiya sc. he made his debut on january 27, playing 87 minutes in a 3-1 victory over al-mesaimeer. preciado's first two goals for assc came on february 13, during a 2-3 loss to al-wakrah.  after just 10 games in the qatari stars league, preciado transferred to the north american soccer league's tampa bay rowdies on july 19, 2016.  references  external links  tampa bay rowdies biography    1985 births tampa bay rowdies players association football forwards colombian footballers millonarios f.c. players america de cali footballers real cartagena footballers deportivo pereira footballers deportes tolima footballers envigado f.c. players leon de huanuco footballers club alianza lima footballers al-sailiya sc players sport huancayo footballers al-shamal sc players union comercio footballers ayacucho fc footballers fc carlos stein players north american soccer league players qatari second division players categoria primera a players peruvian primera division players living people footballers from cali expatriate soccer players in the united states expatriate footballers in qatar expatriate footballers in peru colombian expatriates in the united states colombian expatriate sportspeople in peru
pantai siung is one of tourism located in kecamatan tepus, precisely located in dusun duwet, kelurahan purwodadi, kecamatan tepus, gunungkidul regency, province yogyakarta special region. it is about 77 km from yogyakarta and have an adventure travel locations such as rock climbing with 250 international track.  along the way to the beach location, you will be treated to views of limestone hills covered with teak trees . the road is winding and ascending, a challenge that you must pass before reaching siung beach . however, an exhausting trip will pay off when you've been in the area siung beach . the beach with white sand and the sound waves, will make your mood and your mind calm and peaceful.  because the beach is very secluded, amenities available mash was minimal, only available parking area, toilet, and stall . for hotel accommodation is not available here, but if you want to spend the night in siung, you can use the cottage climber that looks like a house on stilts with a capacity of approximately 20 people . if you want to spend the night with nature, you can bring your own tents that you can use around the cliffs .  if you are from the yogyakarta city, you can use the path of yogyakarta - wonosari - tepus - kelurahan purwodadi - siung . if you use public transportation, you can use the bus from the giwangan bus terminal at yogyakarta to wonosari. wonosari arriving at the dhaksinarga terminal, you can use public transportation from wonosari - purwodadi, you can use a motorcycle taxi, because the only public transportation that can be used to siung .  external links  the beautiful of siung beach  yogyakarta tourism guide  enjoying the white sands and rock climbing of siung beach  pantai siung, istimewa dengan biru lautnya  geography of the special region of yogyakarta beaches of indonesia
caicaras () are the traditional inhabitants of the coastal regions of the southeastern and southern brazil. they form a distinct group of people, descended from africans, indigenous people, and europeans.  their traditional way of life based on subsistence agriculture, hunting and fishing is threatened by real estate speculation, restrictive laws and declining fish stocks.  origins the name caicara comes from the tupi language ka'aysa (or ka'aysara), a rustic fence made of tree branches. the fences would surround a village, or would be used for trapping fish. over time it came to be used for the huts built on the beaches, and then for the inhabitants.  the people are of mixed african, indigenous, and european origins. their origins and customs are similar to the caipiras who live further inland. in literature the caicaras are represented as traditional, primitive, isolated and self-sufficient fishing people. this is an inaccurate stereotype, since it was only with the arrival of motor boats and fishing vessels in the 20th century that the communities were led to partly or entirely abandon agriculture in favour of fishing.  economy  the caicaras make their living through artisan fishery, agriculture, hunting, gathering, crafts and more recently ecotourism. activities are preferably based on a calendar based on phases of the moon. agriculture is based on the coivara system, a sustainable technique handed down by the indians. a clearing in the forest is cut and burned, planted for three years, then lies fallow for three to ten years before being reused. common crops are sweet and bitter cassava, beans, corn, rice, sugarcane and bananas.  other subsistence activities are hunting, trapping and fishing with rods, nets and traps. hunted, trapped or snared animals include agouti, armadillo, coati, capybara and peccary. hunted birds include the tinamou, black-fronted piping guan and toucan. hunting has been illegal since the 1980s.  lifestyle threats the traditional lifestyle of the native population is threatened by real estate speculation and over-fishing. the caicaras are vulnerable due to high levels of illiteracy, lack of education and information, lack of organization into groups and lack of communication methods such as telephones or even mail.  see also cholos pescadores ribeirinhos caipira  references  sources  external links  museu caicara - ubatuba  museu vivo do fandango  ethnic groups in brazil multiracial affairs in
brazil
alaskan bush people is an american docudrama-style reality television series that follows the brown family in an attempt to survive in the wilderness, detached from modern society.  the series premiered on the discovery channel on may 6, 2014. filmed on location near hoonah, alaska and chichagof island, with later seasons filmed on location in okanogan county, washington, it follows the extended brown family's life. although purportedly a genuine reality tv show, it is criticized for being scripted and/or fake.   in april 2019, radar online learned that the show has been renewed for a 10th season.  on november 13, the show was renewed for season 11 which premiered on december 4, 2019. season 12 premiered on august 23, 2020. in august 2020, cast member bear brown posted on instagram saying that the family's home had been destroyed in the 2020 washington wildfires. patriarch billy brown died at age 68 on february 7, 2021, after suffering a seizure.  background the series follows the brown family of hoonah, alaska as they supposedly build lives together off the grid in alaska.  episodes  series overview  season 1 (2014)  season 2 (2015)  season 3 (2015)  season 4 (2015-16)  season 5 (2016)  season 6 (2017)  season 7 (2017)  season 8 (2018)  season 9 (2019)  season 10 (2019)  season 11 (2019-20)  season 12 (2020)  season 13 (2021)  specials  family members  billy has a criminal history of horse theft in 1980. ami has a criminal history of welfare fraud.  billy was previously married to brenda britt; their daughter, twila byars, appeared in the episode "growing the wolfpack" (s05e04). it has been suggested that the couple had a second child, brandy.  residency issues on october 3, 2014, following an investigation by the alaska department of revenue, a juneau grand jury indicted the browns with 60 counts of first-degree unsworn falsification regarding permanent fund dividend forms for their residency and first- and second-degree theft that took place between 2009 and 2012.   billy was charged with 24 of those counts, which occurred from 2010 to 2013 as well as for the theft of more than $21,000 in dividend money for himself and others. the charges meant that the state believed the family spent more than 180 days a year living outside of alaska and lied about
it on their applications.    on november 18, 2015, billy and joshua struck a plea deal for the whole family except matt and rain (matt wasn't living there and didn't file and rain was too young). they pled guilty for the  rest of the family for lying on pfd forms. billy and joshua's punishment for stealing over $21,000 dollars was restitution, fines and 30 days of house arrest at a juneau hotel.  references  2010s american reality television series 2014 american television series debuts discovery channel original programming television shows set in alaska
we have to marry them off (greek: prepei na ta pantrepsoume) is a 1953 greek romantic comedy film directed by mavrikios novak and starring jenny roussea, dionysis milas and marika anthopoulou.  cast  jenny roussea as lena    dionysis milas as miltos   marika anthopoulou   apostolos avdis as dr. apostolidis    popi deligianni as amalia    spyros kapsalis as efthymis    giorgos loukakis as mimis marinopoulos    nelli marselou   maria mazaraki   thodoros moridis as periklis    andreas moustras   virginia petimezaki as mary marinopoulou   dimos starenios as giakoumis  references  bibliography  stathes balukos. philmographia tou hellenikou kinematographou: 1914-1998. aigokeros, 1998.  external links    1953 films 1953 romantic comedy films greek-language films greek films greek romantic comedy films greek black-and-white films
the capital markets and services act 2007 (), is a malaysian laws which enacted to consolidate the securities industry act 1983 [act 280] and futures industry act 1993 [act 499], to regulate and to provide for matters relating to the activities, markets and intermediaries in the capital markets, and for matters consequential and incidental thereto.  structure the capital markets and services act 2007, in its current form (15 september 2015), consists of 13 parts containing 394 sections and 11 schedules (including 4 amendments).  part i: preliminary  part ii: securities and derivatives markets  division 1 - markets  division 2 - markets institutions  subdivision 1 - exchanges and exchange holding company  subdivision 2 - exchange holding company  subdivision 3 - general  subdivision 4 - registered facilities  subdivision 5 - approval of clearing house  subdivision 6 - modifications to the law of insolvency and miscellaneous provisions relating to the operations and procedures of the approved clearing house  part iii: capital markets services  division 1 - licensing and regulation  division 2 - records  division 3 - conduct of business  subdivision 1 - general  subdivision 2 - securities  subdivision 3 - standardized derivatives  subdivision 4 - over-the-counter derivatives  division 4 - books, client's assets protection and audit  subdivision 1 - books  subdivision 2 - treatment of client's assets in respect of securities  subdivision 3 - treatment of client's assets in respect of derivatives  subdivision 4 - treatment of client's assets in respect of fund management  subdivision 5 - range of actions commission may take to protect clients under certain circumstances  subdivision 6 - audit   division 5 - vesting  part iiia: private retirement scheme industry  division 1 - preliminary  division 2 - private retirement scheme  subdivision 1 - private retirement scheme administrator  subdivision 2 - private retirement scheme provider  subdivision 3 - private retirement scheme  subdivision 4 - scheme trustee  division 3 - trustee for employer - sponsored retirement scheme  division 4 - general  part iv: capital market compensation fund  division 1 - interpretation  division 2 - the capital market compensation fund corporation  division 3 - the capital market compensation fund  division 4 - provisions relating to claims  part v: market misconduct and other prohibited conduct  division 1- prohibited conduct - securities  subdivision 1 - offences relating to false trading and market rigging, stock market manipulations, etc.  subdivision 2 - insider trading  subdivision 3 - civil remedies  division 2 - prohibited conduct - derivatives  subdivision 1 - offences relating to false trading, bucketing, etc.  subdivision 2 - civil remedies  part vi: issues
of securities and take-over and mergers  division 1 - listed and unlisted capital market product  division 1a - application for approval  division 2 - take-overs, mergers and compulsory acquisitions   division 3 - prospectus  division 3a - application for authorization or recognition  division 3b - business trust  division 3c - false or misleading statement or information under division 3a and 3b  division 4 - debentures  subdivision 1 - trust deeds, duties of trustees, borrowers, etc.  subdivision 2 - general  division 5 - unit trust schemes and prescribed investment scheme   division 6 - islamic securities  part vii: provisions applicable to listed corporations  part viii: self-regulatory organizations  part ix: capital market development fund  part ixa: management of systemic risk in the capital market  part x: disclosure of information  division 1 - application  division 2 - disclosure of information  part xi: administrative and civil actions  part xii: general  part xiii: repeal, savings and transitional provisions  schedules  references  external links  capital markets and services act 2007   2007 in malaysian law malaysian federal legislation
boys playing soldiers is a 1778-79 tapestry cartoon by francisco of goya conceived for the bedroom of the princes of asturias in the royal palace of el pardo. it is presently exhibited in the museo del prado. a sketch of the artwork is kept nowadays in the yanduri collection of seville.  two boys on foot carry rifles, whereas one plays a drum and the last holds a miniature bell tower. the lower perspective of the picture enhances the presence of the characters standing on top of a rise. the composition has a martial character, funny and childish. close up, a cheerful little soldier looks at the onlooker in what has been considered one of the major achievements attained by the artist. goya often depicts children of different social types, like majos, aristocrats, and others. the yellowish and bluish colour of the work provides a cheerful atmosphere, further emphasized by the faces of the boys. the brushstroke and the illumination render this work a forerunner of impressionism, like other pictures of goya.  it was possibly hanging on top of a door. similar pictures embellishing the royal chambers were devoted to infant individuals like ninos del carreton, muchachos cogiendo fruta or ninos inflando una vejiga. this painting shows a similar chromatic range to that of el cacharrero, both decorating the same wall. the upholsterer undertook a series of alterations in the composition in order to adapt it to the tastes prevailing during the period.  references   paintings by francisco goya in the museo del prado 1770s paintings rococo paintings musical instruments in art paintings of children tapestry cartoons
eunidia andamanica is a species of beetle in the family cerambycidae. it was described by stephan von breuning in 1939.  references  eunidiini beetles described in 1939
andre ghem and tristan lamasine were the defending champions but chose not to defend their title.  david perez sanz and max schnur won the title after defeating steven de waard and andreas mies in the final, 6-4, 6-4.  seeds  draw  references  main draw  tampere open - doubles 2016 men's doubles
matt huuki (born april 23, 1977) was a republican member of the michigan house of representatives who served one term representing the western end of the upper peninsula.  references  1977 births living people people from hancock, michigan american people of finnish descent michigan republicans members of the michigan house of representatives
carturesti carusel /kərtureʃti karusel/ is a bookstore on lipscani 55 street in the old town of bucharest, romania. it belongs to the romanian bookstore chain carturesti.  the building that currently houses the bookstore was built at the beginning of the 20th century by the chrissoveloni bankers family. during the first few decades of its existence the building housed the chrissoveloni bank headquarters, and afterwards it became a general store. at the end of the 1990s and early 2000s the building fell into decay, up until 2015 when a five year long rehabilitation, strengthening and conversion project was complete.  some sources claim that the bookstore name carturesti carusel means "carousel of light", but it is not the case. carturesti does not mean "light". it is the name of the bookstore chain, and probably related to the words carte (meaning "book") and carturar (meaning "learned man" or "scholar").  gallery  references  external links   bookstores of romania companies based in bucharest lipscani
miisa-leena paallysaho (19 february 1970 - 7 july 2016), better known as miisa, was a finnish eurodance artist who released two albums in the 1990s.  her first single was released in finland in 1991 and in the mid-1990s miisa was trying to break into the us markets. her biggest hit was the single set me free, reaching #9 on the billboard compiled dance club songs chart in march 1996. the song all or nothing (1994) was included on the soundtrack to the 1999 comedy but i'm a cheerleader.  it was later revealed that miisa did not actually sing on her records, but the real vocalist was the swedish singer karin stromfelt. after her music career, miisa worked as a make-up artist. she died of cancer on 7 july 2016, aged 46.  discography  albums attitude (1994) miisa (1995, us 1996) singles upside down (1991) set me free (1993, us 1996) hold on (1993) all or nothing (1994, us 1995) you & me (innocence) (1994) lovin' u (1995) how will i know (1996) get ready (1996) if  references  external links  1970 births 2016 deaths musicians from turku finnish fraudsters 20th-century finnish women singers eurodance musicians musical hoaxes music controversies entertainment scandals
the national hockey league (nhl) evolved from a mono-ethnic and primarily canadian professional athletic league to span north america. the distribution of ethnic groups has been gradually changing since the inception of the nhl. the league consists of a variety of players from varying nationalities and diverse backgrounds. once known as a league riddled with racism and exclusiveness, the nhl has made some positive steps toward a more diverse and inclusive institution.  the nhl began its expansion of player nationalities in the 1970s, when players hailed from the united states, sweden, and finland. the share of canadians in the league dropped to 75% by the 1980s and is now slightly less than 50%. in 2011, the nhl was composed of 93% of players who identified as white, with the remaining 7% identifying as varying ethnicities.  history  a number of ice hockey leagues for players of african descent formed in canada as early as the late-19th century. the coloured hockey league was an all-black ice hockey league established in 1895. operating across the maritime provinces of canada, the league operated for several decades until 1930.  although other ice hockey leagues saw integration in the early 20th century (including the quebec senior hockey league), the nhl did not see its first non-white player until march 13, 1948, when larry kwong broke the nhl's colour barrier playing with the new york rangers. born in vernon, british columbia, kwong was a chinese canadian of cantonese descent. in 1953, fred sasakamoose was the first cree nhl player, and the first canadian indigenous player in the nhl, debuting with the chicago black hawks. on january 18, 1958, willie o'ree became the first black canadian to play in the nhl. playing with the boston bruins, he was also the first nhl player of african-descent.  val james was the first african american player to play in the nhl. james signed his contract with the buffalo sabres in 1982. his stints with the buffalo sabres and toronto maple leafs were short lived and he eventually retired in 1987 due to injury. he experienced racism as the first player throughout his skating career. he never spoke of racism on the ice until 30 years after his career ended. in his account, he reported he could not watch hockey games for 10 years after leaving the ice without being haunted by the memories of his treatment as a man of color in the nhl. a biography of his life in the sport was published under the title black ice: the val james story written by john gallagher. the number of
black nhl players moved to 26 by the end of the 20th century and sat at 32 in 2016. this is a seemingly minor yet significant change in the racial demographic of the nhl in its hundred-year history.  non-black minorities in addition to black and white players, other races and ethnicities represented in the nhl include players of asian, latino, and middle eastern descent.  players with at least one game of nhl experience. names in italics have won the stanley cup.  asian descent  franchise career these are the top-ten point, goal, and assist scorers in any franchise history. figures are updated after each completed nhl regular season.  note: pos = position; gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; p/g = points per game; g/g = goals per game; a/g = assists per game; * = active player; bold = currently playing  nhl career these are the top-ten point, goal, and assist scorers in nhl history. figures are updated after each completed nhl regular season.  note: pos = position; gp = games played; g = goals; a = assists; pts = points; p/g = points per game; g/g = goals per game; a/g = assists per game; * = active player  first nation/native american descent  latino descent  middle eastern descent  see also baseball color line black players in ice hockey list of black nhl players black players in professional american football history of african americans in the canadian football league race and ethnicity in the nba  references  african americans and sport national hockey league race and society ethnicity
jamie king is a british filmmaker, writer, and activist, best known for directing steal this film, a documentary that observes intellectual property in favour of p2p filesharing.  he is also the founder of vodo, an online crossmedia distribution project for film, games, books, and music.  ted hope described king as one of the "great free thinkers of indie film." he is currently host of the podcast steal this show, produced in conjunction with torrentfreak.  career jamie king studied at the university of southampton, where he received a phd for his thesis, "the cultural construction of cyberspace". he also attended the prestigious university of preston whilst living with his parents. he was an original member of the mute editorial team and served as both information politics editor and deputy editor. in 2003, he served as convenor of the counter-summit to the world summit on information society. during this time, he also published a column on the development of online culture for itn and channel 4 news.    in 2006 he produced steal this film, one of the most downloaded film documentaries to date. in the following year, he produced and directed steal this film 2 and steal this film "spectrial edition" (also called steal this film 2.5).  in 2009 he founded vodo, a media distribution, crowdfunding and attention-sourcing network for independent artists.  vodo has distributed prominent projects including the yes men fix the world, pioneer one, and zeitgeist. vodo has also generated millions of dollars in revenue using free-sharing distribution and voluntary payment models.  king has also delivered lectures and keynotes at various events and top-tier universities worldwide. he has published fiction, academic articles, as well as numerous articles in international media including the times, the guardian, the telegraph, and others.  he served as executive producer of the bittorrent-only tv show titled pioneer one. part of his film work has been featured in the oscar-nominated film the internet's own boy. king currently hosts a podcast produced in conjunction with torrentfreak titled steal this show. he also continues to work in other peer-to-peer distribution-related projects.  filmography  references  date of birth missing (living people) living people alumni of the university of southampton english-language film directors entertainment industry businesspeople british film producers british media company founders mass media industry businesspeople british male writers british non-fiction writers british podcasters place of birth missing (living people) nationality missing year of birth missing (living people
) male non-fiction writers
sketches from an island 2 is the second studio album of british producer mark barrott, released on 1 july 2016 by the international feel label. the record is a follow-up to sketches from an island (2014), a record based on barrott's experiences living in ibiza. sketches from an island 2 is a balearic downtempo album with the same concept, and was also produced by barrott with the same equipment used for making sketches from an island. sketches from an island 2 garnered generally favorable reviews from music journalists, some reviewers spotlighting its musical style.  background and production when interviewed about his life and his debut studio album sketches from an island (2014) in march 2016, mark barrott said that he was not willing to make another record influenced by his experiences living in ibiza: "if i was banned from making another field recording, i'd be good for 20 years. you want barcelona airport? bora bora sunset? tokyo bullet train station? the interior of a fucking boat? i've got enough." barrott was "about as interested [...] in doing another sketches record as [he was] in eating cat shit raw."  barrott used money from the sales of sketches from an island to buy more music equipment for his next lp. however, this led him to be more focused on purchasing music production products than actually creating new tracks. in the winter of 2016, he got rid of the equipment he bought and only used a slide guitar, a small-sized midi keyboard and a laptop for making his next album as he did in producing sketches from an island. as barrott recalled, "it became about the music[,] not the equipment and everything happened really quickly". when barrott starting working on sketches from an island 2, he originally planned it to be an extended play with a concept representing a thursday where barrott was djing at la torre, a municipality in cap negret, ibiza. the day began with barrott eating with a friend and going to dieters, the recording place of barrott's first album, before going to la torre. barrott "just kept on writing and writing, and the ep became the album".  composition labeled by a reviewer for npr music as a "soundtrack to nature as a psychedelic trip", sketches from an island 2 is a balearic downtempo record with more of a "relaxed mood" than its predecessor, according to resident advisor. the ibiza island concept is also symbolized by what pitchfork critic andy beta described as the album's "beautiful, spare melodicism". he
wrote that "forgotten island" and "one slow thought", the album's final two cuts, were the most "evocative" works in barrott's discography to date. he analyzed that "over at dieter's place" uses instruments and sounds such as a pedal steel guitar, a mbira, birdcall, woodwinds, and a hand drum to "render" ibiza's "bucolic miniatures" that cluster, a group that musician dieter moebius was a part of, emulated in their works.  the arts desk and the financial times spotlighted sketches from an island 2's "rich" combination of genres; "der stern, der nie vergeht" (english: "the star that never fades") is an ambient krautrock track, its instrumentation consisting of a talking drum, a fretless bass guitar, and a digital synthesizer lead melody that mimics an analog synth texture. "cirrus & cumulus" has a "mesmerising minimalist melody" over "bird song and electronic drones". beta noted that some tracks contains elements of musical styles and artists that the balearic genre is commonly associated with; these include the "stiff swing" of production music on "brunch with suki" and the guitars of "driving to cap negret" that the reviewer compared to the works of chris rea and andreas vollenweider. resident advisor wrote that some parts on the record, like the mallet and strings on "over at dieter's place", are reminiscent of styles like new wave. elements of gamelan music on "cirrus & cumulus" and "over at dieter's place" are also present.  critical reception  sketches from an island 2 received favorable reviews from critics. allmusic journalist timothy monger wrote that it had "enchanting, easily digestible rhythmic soundscapes that recall the golden era of pre-gift shop new age music" at best, but also contained tracks like "brunch with suki" and "driving to cap negret" that "feel a bit more like ibeza hangover helpers and pass by without much notice" at worst. he called the record a "winsome set" overall. andy beta of pitchfork praised the album as one of the few "sequel" albums ever released to "improve" its predecessor, while resident advisor's called the album a "welcome reprise" of sketches from an island, his only criticism being the record is too similar to the previous album. the arts desk reviewer barney harsent suggested barro
tt's previous experiences living in places other than ibiza, such as germany, france and uruguay, strongly contributed to the quality of the album. harsent wrote that the album "remains as convincing an argument for embracing other cultures as i can imagine."  track listing and credits all tracks written and produced by mark barrott, mixed by lopazz and mastered by lewis hopkins. cover art illustrated by stevie anderson.  release history  references  2016 albums balearic beat albums downtempo albums
napoles is an ancient portuguese family. napoles or napoles may also refer to napoles (surname) colonia napoles in mexico city napoles (mexico city metrobus), a brt station in mexico city hacienda napoles in colombia
the distinguished citizen () is a 2016 argentine-spanish comedy-drama film directed by gaston duprat & mariano cohn. it was selected to compete for the golden lion at the 73rd venice international film festival. at venice oscar martinez won the volpi cup for best actor. it was selected as the argentine entry for the best foreign language film at the 89th academy awards but it was not nominated. it won best ibero-american film at the 4th platino awards.  plot a recipient of the nobel prize for literature, who has been living in europe for decades, accepts an invitation from his hometown in argentina to receive a prize. in his country, the protagonist finds both similarities and irreconcilable differences with the people of his hometown.  cast  oscar martinez as daniel mantovani  dady brieva as antonio  andrea frigerio as irene  belen chavanne as julia  production  the distinguished citizen came together over five years and had a us$1.7 million budget. screenwriter andres duprat proposed the story based on his experiences as an art curator jurying work in small towns. martinez was an early consideration for the lead and collaborated on the script. he called the fictional town of salas an uncomfortable mirror of argentina, and montovani's exile in spain reminiscent of jorge luis borges's time spent in europe.  shooting took place over eight weeks, primarily in navarro, which stood in for salas. the directors selected it after considering 58 municipalities, citing the town's historic center, scarce traffic, lagoon, club, town square, and small television channel. other locations included lobos for the flat tire scene, the el trebol club in villa urquiza for the author's lectures, and the teatro opera in buenos aires for the nobel awards sequence.  a book of the same title purportedly written by the film character mantovani describing his visit to his hometown was published in argentina ahead of the film. the directors described the actual but anonymous author as a "heavyweight of the literary world".  reception  critical reception on review aggregator website rotten tomatoes, the film holds an approval rating of 100%, based on 13 reviews, and an average rating of 7.2/10.  accolades  see also  list of submissions to the 89th academy awards for best foreign language film  list of argentine submissions for the academy award for best foreign language film  references  external links      2016 films 2016 drama films 2010s spanish-language films argentine films argentine drama films spanish films spanish drama films films about fictional nobel laureates films directed
by gaston duprat and mariano cohn
the rd-861 is a soviet liquid propellant rocket engine burning udmh and nitrogen tetroxide in a gas generator combustion cycle. it has a main combustion chamber, with four vernier nozzles fed by the gas generator output. it can be reignited a single time.  history when the soviet military developed the fractional orbital bombardment system, yangel's okb-586 proposed a new version of their r-36 icbm, called the r-36-orb (grau index: 8k69). it incorporated an orbital warhead called ogch (grau index: 8f021), for which the rd-854 engine was developed in-house. since the outer space treaty of 1967 banned nuclear weapons in earth orbit, but did not ban the launch systems, the soviet union proceeded to test their fobs albeit without placing nuclear warheads in orbit.  versions  there are three versions of this engine:  rd-854 (grau index: 8d612): first developed as the third stage engine for the r-36orb fobs.  rd-861 (grau index: 11d25): also known as the d-25. it was the engine of the tsyklon-3 third stage.  rd-861k : an improved rd-861, developed for the third stage of the tsyklon-4. the vernier nozzles were replaced with a hydraulic actuated gimbal for the whole engine. the isp was increased, the burn time tripled and the reignitions increased to three.  see also r-36orb - the soviet icbm that was part of the fractional orbital bombardment system and for which the rd-854 was created. tsyklon-3 - a soviet small rocket that uses the rd-861. tsyklon-4 - a ukrainian small rocket project that would have used the rd-861k. yuzhnoe design bureau - the rd-854/861 designer bureau. yuzhmash - a multi-product machine-building company that's closely related to yuzhnoe and manufactures the rd-854/861.  references  external links  yuzhnoye design bureau english-language home page  yuzhmash home page  rocket engines using hypergolic propellant rocket engines using the gas-generator cycle rocket engines of the soviet union yuzhnoye rocket engines yuzhmash rocket engines rocket engines of ukraine
flameng is a surname. notable people with the surname include:  francois flameng (1856-1923), french painter leon flameng (1877-1917), french cyclist and pilot leopold flameng (1831-1911), french engraver, illustrator, and painter
the 2016-17 slovak extraliga season was the 24th season of the slovak extraliga, the highest level of ice hockey in slovakia.  teams the following teams are participating in the 2016-17 season. the hk orange 20 is a project for preparation of the slovakia junior ice hockey team for the iihf world u20 championship. the team do not play complete regular season and cannot promote to the playoffs or get relegated. first 8 teams in table after the regular season (50 games) will promote to the playoffs.  regular season  rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points.  playoffs  bracket  relegation series (playout)  rules for classification: 1) points; 2) head-to-head points.  external links official website  final rankings  slovak extraliga seasons slovak 2016-17 in slovak ice hockey leagues
the 30th district of the iowa senate is located in northeast iowa, and is currently composed of black hawk county.  current elected officials eric giddens is the senator currently representing the 30th district.  the area of the 30th district contains two iowa house of representatives districts: the 59th district (represented by bob kressig) the 60th district (represented by dave williams)  the district is also located in iowa's 1st congressional district, which is represented by ashley hinson.  past senators the district has previously been represented by:  charles miller, 1983-1988 mark hagerla, 1989-1992 emil husak, 1993-1996 neal schuerer, 1997-2002 mary kramer, 2003 pat ward, 2004-2012 jeff danielson, 2013-2019 eric giddens 2019-present  see also iowa general assembly iowa senate  references  30
the william anzi nichols house is a historic residence located east of winterset, iowa, united states.  nichols bought an  farm in 1855 and owned the land until he died in 1867.  this house is an early example of a vernacular limestone farmhouse.  the 1½-story structure is composed of locally quarried finished cut and rubble limestone.  its construction is attributed to david harris who was known for laying the stones in a two against one broken bond.  the house was listed on the national register of historic places in 1987.  references  houses completed in 1856 vernacular architecture in iowa houses in madison county, iowa national register of historic places in madison county, iowa houses on the national register of historic places in iowa
saidowal  is a village in kapurthala district of punjab state, india. it is located  from kapurthala, which is both district and sub-district headquarters of saidowal. the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  according to the report published by census india in 2011, saidowal has 385 houses with the total population of 1,786 persons of which 899 are male and 887 females. literacy rate of saidowal is 77.91%, higher than the state average of 75.84%.  the population of children in the age group 0-6 years is 143 which is 8.01% of the total population. child sex ratio is approximately 959, higher than the state average of 846.  population data  references  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  villages in kapurthala district
women's voices now (wvn) is an american non-profit organization that "uses film to drive positive social change that advances girls' and women's rights globally". it organizes online short film festivals and other activities in its mission to "amplif[y] the voices of all women by promoting the free expression of women's struggles for civil, economic, political, and gender rights worldwide". in addition to its festivals, wvn expanded to include an archive of films, a publication, educational programs, screenings, workshops and training, as well as providing scholarships. the organization was founded in 2010 by lawyer catinca tabacaru and philanthropist leslie sacks.  festival history  the organization was founded in 2010, and its first film festival was held in 2011. every festival has a theme; the first festival's theme was women's voices from the muslim world: a short film festival. the festival had over 200 films submitted from over 40 countries showcasing what life is like for women in the muslim world. the 2014 festival's theme was women bought and sold: voices united against violence. the third, fourth and fifth festivals were held in 2016, 2017 and 2018 respectively, with both the fifth and sixth occurring in 2019. each film festival had winners for six main categories. the categories are the leslie sacks grand prize for best overall film; best documentary feature; best documentary short; best narrative short; best experimental film; and audience choice for the last four categories. the prizes for some of the categories include: $3,000 for the leslie sacks grand prize, $2,000 dollars for the winner in the best documentary feature category, and $1,000 dollars each for the winners in the best documentary short and best experimental film categories. the winners receive their prize once they deliver their acceptance speech to women's voice now.  the festival participants agree to participate in the online festival, and submit the final cut without any advertisements (with subtitles if required, since the festival's official language is english). the upload and submission must include a high-resolution digital copy of the film, along with three stills, a poster, and a trailer if the film has one. if the participant wins, they must allow their film to be screened at the festival's closing event, and allow it to be available on the website. the films must be about women (including trans women) and the issues they face in society today. to be eligible, the filmmakers must guarantee the film is entirely their content, and those in the film must all have consented
to be filmed. the films vary in length as there is no time constraint.  other programming  in addition to the yearly film festival, women's voice now also hosts an online archive of the festivals' films, as well as an online publication called the wvoice. like the film festival, the wvoice focuses on international women's rights and voices. it publishes written, audio, and visual bodies of work that document women's stories and issues that educate and foster cultural difference and connections, and promotes and advocates for women's rights. the generally brief entries include essays, interviews, prose, short fiction, poetry, photo essays, and video essays under five minutes in length. finally, women's voice now also runs workshops and training programs on what they do with their film festivals and how they support women's rights advocacy.  2011 film festival winners  2014 film festival winners  2017 film festival winners  2018 film festival winners  references  external links  women's rights organizations non-profit organizations based in los angeles
the national blues museum is a 501(c)(3) non-profit museum in st. louis, missouri, united states, dedicated to exploring the musical history and impact of the blues. it exists as an entertainment and educational resource focusing on blues music. the museum offers a rotating collection of exhibits, live performances in the lumiere place legends room, and is available for private events.  history the museum opened in 2016. surly  king, the daughter of b.b. king, spoke at the museum opening.  the museum cost $14 million to create in a renovated historic building in downtown st. louis. original branding, graphic design and website were provided by the agency, project 13.  see also   list of music museums  delta blues museum  references  external links  national blues museum website  project 13 website  music museums in the united states blues organizations museums in st. louis museums established in 2016 downtown st. louis 2016 establishments in missouri buildings and structures in st. louis tourist attractions in st. louis
mariana bueloni goncalves (born ) is a retired brazilian female artistic gymnast who represented her nation in international competitions.  she participated at the 1995 world artistic gymnastics championships in sabae, japan. she also took part at the 1995 pan american games in buenos aires, argentina.  references  1980 births living people brazilian female artistic gymnasts gymnasts at the 1995 pan american games pan american games competitors for brazil
ahmadpur is a village located in kapurthala district, punjab.  it is located  from kapurthala , which is both district and sub-district headquarters of ahmadpur.  the village is administrated by a sarpanch, who is an elected representative.  demography  as per population census 2011, the ahmadpur village has population of 714 of which 360 are males while 354 are females. the village is administrated by sarpanch an elected representative of the village. literacy rate of ahmadpur is 92.49%, higher than state average of 75.84% of punjab.  the population of children under the age of 6 years is 48 which is 6.72% of total population of ahmadpur, and child sex ratio is approximately 714 lower than punjab average of 846.  as per census 2011, 243 people were engaged in work activities out of the total population of ahmadpur which includes 201 males and 42 females.  according to census survey report 2011, 83.54% workers describe their work as main work and 16.46% workers are involved in marginal activity providing livelihood for less than 6 months.  caste   the village has schedule caste (sc) constitutes 12.32% of total population of the village and it doesn't have any schedule tribe (st) population.  population data  villages in kapurthala  external links   villages in kapurthala  kapurthala villages list  references  villages in kapurthala district
mechanicsville is an unincorporated community in center township, vanderburgh county, in the u.s. state of indiana.  it is located within the city limits of evansville.  history a post office was established at mechanicsville in 1829, and remained in operation until it was discontinued in 1879.  geography mechanicsville is located at .  references  unincorporated communities in vanderburgh county, indiana unincorporated communities in indiana
1001-1100   |- | 1001 gaussia || 1923 oa || carl friedrich gauss (1777-1855), german mathematician ||  |-id=002 | 1002 olbersia || 1923 ob || heinrich olbers (1758-1840), german astronomer ||  |-id=003 | 1003 lilofee || 1923 ok || lilofee, a legendary character and title figure in an old german folk-song die schone junge lilofee ||  |-id=004 | 1004 belopolskya || 1923 os || aristarkh belopolsky (1854-1934), russian astrophysicist ||  |-id=005 | 1005 arago || 1923 ot || francois arago (1786-1853), french astronomer ||  |-id=006 | 1006 lagrangea || 1923 ou || joseph-louis lagrange (1736-1813), french astronomer ||  |-id=007 | 1007 pawlowia || 1923 ox || ivan pavlov (1849-1936), russian physiologist ||  |-id=008 | 1008 la paz || 1923 pd || the city of la paz, capital of bolivia ||  |-id=009 | 1009 sirene || 1923 pe || the sirens of mythology ||  |-id=010 | 1010 marlene || 1923 pf || marlene dietrich (1901-1992), german actress ||  |-id=011 | 1011 laodamia || 1924 pk || laodamia, daughter of bellerophon and philonoe in greek mythology, and the mother (by zeus) of sarpedon; shot dead by artemis whilst weaving ||  |-id=012 | 1012 sarema || 1924 pm || sarema, a character in a poem by aleksandr sergeyevich pushkin, made into an opera by alexander von zemlinsky ||  |-id=013 | 1013 tombecka || 1924 pq || daniel tombeck, french chemist who in 1910 succeeded amedee guillet as secretary of the faculty of science of the university of paris ||  |-id=014 | 1014 semphyra || 1924 pw || semphyra, a character in a poem by aleksandr sergeyevich pushkin ||  |-id=015 | 1015 christa || 1924 qf || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=016 | 1016 anitra || 1924 qg || anitra, character in the drama peer gynt by henrik ibsen (1828-1906) ||  |-id=017 | 1017 jacqueline || 1924 ql
|| jacqueline zadoc-kahn, disciple of russian discoverer benjamin jekhowsky ||  |-id=018 | 1018 arnolda || 1924 qm || arnold berliner (1862-1942), german physicist and editor of the journal naturwissenschaften ||  |-id=019 | 1019 strackea || 1924 qn || gustav stracke (1887-1943), german astronomer (see also  and ) ||  |-id=020 | 1020 arcadia || 1924 qv || arcadia, mythological greek place and modern greek province ||  |-id=021 | 1021 flammario || 1924 rg || camille flammarion (1842-1925), french astronomer ||  |-id=022 | 1022 olympiada || 1924 rt || the olympic games ||  |-id=023 | 1023 thomana || 1924 ru || boys' choir of st. thomas church, leipzig, germany ||  |-id=024 | 1024 hale ||  || george ellery hale (1868-1938), american solar astronomer ||  |-id=025 | 1025 riema || 1923 nx || johannes riem (1868-1945), german astronomer ||  |-id=026 | 1026 ingrid || 1923 ny || ingrid, niece of german astronomer albrecht kahrstedt (1897-1971), also see  ||  |-id=027 | 1027 aesculapia ||  || asclepius, greek god; named to redeem jupiter's promise to minerva to place aesculapius among the stars (formerly, ophiuchus was called aesculapius) ||  |-id=028 | 1028 lydina || 1923 pg || lydia albitskaya, wife of russian discoverer vladimir albitsky ||  |-id=029 | 1029 la plata || 1924 rk || la plata, argentina ||  |-id=030 | 1030 vitja || 1924 rq || viktor zaslavsky (1925-1944), nephew of spiridon zaslavskij (see ), the brother-in-law of the discoverer vladimir albitsky ||  |-id=031 | 1031 arctica || 1924 rr || the arctic ||  |-id=032 | 1032 pafuri || 1924 sa || pafuri river in northern transvaal, south africa ||  |-id=033 | 1033 simona || 1924 sm || simone van biesbroeck, daughter of the discoverer george van biesbroeck ||  |-id=034 | 1034 mozartia
|| 1924 ss || wolfgang amadeus mozart (1756-1791), austrian composer ||  |-id=035 | 1035 amata || 1924 sw || amata, wife of king latinus and mother of lavinia, the wife of aeneas ||  |-id=036 | 1036 ganymed || 1924 td || ganymede, mythological cupbearer ||  |-id=037 | 1037 davidweilla || 1924 tf || one of the members of the david-weill family, member of the academy of sciences and benefactor of the sorbonne ||  |-id=038 | 1038 tuckia || 1924 tk || edward tuck (1842-1938) and his wife; philanthropists. edward was the son of the founder of the american republican party ||  |-id=039 | 1039 sonneberga || 1924 tl || german town of sonneberg in thuringia, where the sonneberg observatory is located ||  |-id=040 | 1040 klumpkea || 1925 bd || dorothea klumpke (1861-1942), american amateur astronomer, first woman to receive a ph.d. in mathematics from the sorbonne ||  |-id=041 | 1041 asta || 1925 fa || asta nielsen (1881-1972), danish actress ||  |-id=042 | 1042 amazone || 1925 ha || the river amazon in south america ||  |-id=043 | 1043 beate || 1925 hb || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=044 | 1044 teutonia || 1924 ro || the teutonic peoples ||  |-id=045 | 1045 michela || 1924 tr || micheline van biesbroeck, daughter of discoverer george van biesbroeck ||  |-id=046 | 1046 edwin || 1924 ua || edwin van biesbroeck, son of discoverer george van biesbroeck ||  |-id=047 | 1047 geisha || 1924 te || musical comedy the geisha by sidney jones ||  |-id=048 | 1048 feodosia || 1924 tp || crimean city of feodosiya (theodosia), ukraine ||  |-id=049 | 1049 gotho || 1925 rb || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=050 | 1050 meta || 1925 rc || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=051 | 1051 merope || 1925 sa || merope, greek muse and goddess ||  |-id=052 | 10
52 belgica || 1925 vd || belgium ||  |-id=053 | 1053 vigdis || 1925 wa || unknown origin of name (vigdis is an ancient nordic feminine surname) ||  |-id=054 | 1054 forsytia || 1925 wd || the flowering shrub genus forsythia ||  |-id=055 | 1055 tynka || 1925 wg || tynka, mother of emil buchar (1901-1979), of the institute of astronomy and geophysics, czech technical university in prague ||  |-id=056 | 1056 azalea || 1924 qd || the azalea flowering shrubs, then thought a genus of their own, now subgenera of the genus rhododendron ||  |-id=057 | 1057 wanda || 1925 qb || polish feminine name ||  |-id=058 | 1058 grubba || 1925 ma || sir howard grubb (1844-1931) of parson and co., newcastle upon tyne, england, maker of the 40-inch reflecting telescope of the simeis observatory ||  |-id=059 | 1059 mussorgskia || 1925 oa || modest mussorgsky (1839-1881), russian composer ||  |-id=060 | 1060 magnolia || 1925 pa || the flowering tree genus magnolia ||  |-id=061 | 1061 paeonia || 1925 tb || the peony flowering plant, genus paeonia ||  |-id=062 | 1062 ljuba || 1925 td || lyuba berlin (1915-1936), soviet parachutist ||  |-id=063 | 1063 aquilegia || 1925 xa || the columbine flower, genus aquilegia ||  |-id=064 | 1064 aethusa || 1926 pa || the fool's parsley herb, genus aethusa ||  |-id=065 | 1065 amundsenia || 1926 pd || roald amundsen (1872-1928), polar explorer ||  |-id=066 | 1066 lobelia || 1926 ra || the indian tobacco flower, genus lobelia ||  |-id=067 | 1067 lunaria || 1926 rg || the honesty flowering plant, genus lunaria ||  |-id=068 | 1068 nofretete || 1926 rk || nefertiti (c. 1370 - c. 1330 bc), wife of the egyptian pharaoh amenhotep iv ||  |-id=069 | 1069 planckia || 1927 bc || max planck (1858
-1947), german physicist and nobelist, on the occasion of his 80th birthday ||  |-id=070 | 1070 tunica || 1926 rb || the flowering plant genus tunica of the pink or carnation family ||  |-id=071 | 1071 brita || 1924 re || great britain, where the 1-meter telescope for the simeiz observatory on crimea was made ||  |-id=072 | 1072 malva || 1926 ta || the mallow plant, genus malva ||  |-id=073 | 1073 gellivara || 1923 ow || gallivare, town in swedish lapland, where astronomers from several countries observed a total solar eclipse on 29 june 1927 ||  |-id=074 | 1074 beljawskya || 1925 be || sergey belyavsky (1883-1953), russian astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=075 | 1075 helina || 1926 sc || helij grigor'evich neujmin, a son of russian discoverer grigory neujmin ||  |-id=076 | 1076 viola || 1926 te || the violets, pansies and violas, genus viola ||  |-id=077 | 1077 campanula || 1926 tk || the flowering plant genus campanula ||  |-id=078 | 1078 mentha || 1926 xb || the true mints, genus mentha ||  |-id=079 | 1079 mimosa || 1927 ad || the herb and shrub genus mimosa, although the discoverer apparently meant the silk tree (albizia julibrissin), since he referred to a "flowering tree" ||  |-id=080 | 1080 orchis || 1927 qb || the orchid flowers, genus orchis ||  |-id=081 | 1081 reseda || 1927 qf || the mignonette, genus reseda ||  |-id=082 | 1082 pirola || 1927 uc || the wintergreen, genus pirola ||  |-id=083 | 1083 salvia || 1928 bc || the sage plant, genus salvia ||  |-id=084 | 1084 tamariwa || 1926 cc || tamara ivanova (1912-1936), soviet parachutist ||  |-id=085 | 1085 amaryllis || 1927 qh || the belladonna lily flower genus, amaryllis ||  |-id=086 | 1086 nata || 1927 ql || nata babushkina (1915-1936), soviet female parach
utist ||  |-id=087 | 1087 arabis || 1927 rd || the mustard family herb genus arabis ||  |-id=088 | 1088 mitaka || 1927 wa || mitaka, tokyo, where the tokyo astronomical observatory is situated ||  |-id=089 | 1089 tama || 1927 wb || tama river, japan, which flows near the tokyo astronomical observatory ||  |-id=090 | 1090 sumida || 1928 dg || sumida river (sumidagawa), tokyo, japan ||  |-id=091 | 1091 spiraea || 1928 dt || the flowering shrub genus spiraea ||  |-id=092 | 1092 lilium || 1924 pn || the true lily flower, genus lilium ||  |-id=093 | 1093 freda || 1925 la || fred prevost, civil engineer of mines and benefactor of the faculty of sciences of bordeaux ||  |-id=094 | 1094 siberia || 1926 cb || siberia, region of russia ||  |-id=095 | 1095 tulipa || 1926 gs || the tulip flower. genus tulipa ||  |-id=096 | 1096 reunerta || 1928 ob || theodore reunert, of the south african association for the advancement of science, mining engineer and supporter of the former union observatory in south africa, friend of the discoverer ||  |-id=097 | 1097 vicia || 1928 pc || the flowering plant genus vicia ||  |-id=098 | 1098 hakone || 1928 rj || hakone, japan ||  |-id=099 | 1099 figneria || 1928 rq || vera figner (1852-1942), russian revolutionary ||  |-id=100 | 1100 arnica || 1928 sd || the lamb's skin plants, genus arnica ||  |}  1101-1200   |- | 1101 clematis || 1928 sj || the clematis flower, genus clematis ||  |-id=102 | 1102 pepita || 1928 va || pepito, nickname of discoverer josep comas i sola (1868-1937), using a feminine latin suffix ||  |-id=103 | 1103 sequoia || 1928 vb || sequoia national park ||  |-id=104 | 1104 syringa || 1928 xa || the lilac, genus syringa ||  |-id=105 | 1105 fragaria || 1929 ab || the strawberry, genus fragaria ||  |-id=106 | 1106 cydonia || 1929
cw || the quince, genus cydonia ||  |-id=107 | 1107 lictoria || 1929 fb || lictoria, italy, a new city established on reclaimed land near rome during the fascist regime ||  |-id=108 | 1108 demeter || 1929 ka || demeter, greek goddess ||  |-id=109 | 1109 tata || 1929 cu || the small town of tata in hungary ||  |-id=110 | 1110 jaroslawa || 1928 pd || the town of jarosław in south-eastern poland ||  |-id=111 | 1111 reinmuthia || 1927 co || karl reinmuth (1892-1979), german astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=112 | 1112 polonia || 1928 pe || polonia, latin for poland ||  |-id=113 | 1113 katja || 1928 qc || katja, russian feminine name ||  |-id=114 | 1114 lorraine || 1928 wa || lorraine in northeastern france, former duchy and remnant of the medieval kingdom of lotharingia ||  |-id=115 | 1115 sabauda || 1928 xc || sabauda, latin name of the house of savoy ||  |-id=116 | 1116 catriona || 1929 gd || catriona, a scottish feminine name, title of one of robert louis stevenson's novels ||  |-id=117 | 1117 reginita || 1927 ka || reginita, niece of catalan discoverer josep comas i sola ||  |-id=118 | 1118 hanskya || 1927 qd || alexis hansky (1872-1908), russian astronomer ||  |-id=119 | 1119 euboea || 1927 ub || euboea, greece ||  |-id=120 | 1120 cannonia || 1928 rv || annie jump cannon (1863-1941), american astronomer ||  |-id=121 | 1121 natascha || 1928 rz || natasha (natalia) tichomirova, russian hydro-geologist and daughter of the simeis astronomer grigory neujmin ||  |-id=122 | 1122 neith || 1928 sb || neith, egyptian goddess ||  |-id=123 | 1123 shapleya || 1928 st || harlow shapley (1885-1972), american astronomer ||  |-id=124 | 1124 stroobantia || 1928 tb || paul stroobant (1868-1936), belgian astronomer ||  |-id=125 | 1125 china ||  || china ||  |-id=126 | 11
26 otero || 1929 ac || caroline otero (1868-1965), known as "la belle otero", a galician-born dancer, actress and courtesan ||  |-id=127 | 1127 mimi || 1929 aj || wife of eugene delporte; 1127 mimi and 1145 robelmonte had their proposed names swapped by error ||  |-id=128 | 1128 astrid || 1929 eb || astrid of sweden (1905-1935), queen consort of king leopold iii of belgium ||  |-id=129 | 1129 neujmina || 1929 ph || grigory neujmin (1885-1946), russian astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=130 | 1130 skuld || 1929 rc || skuld, in norse mythology, one of the three norns, the future ||  |-id=131 | 1131 porzia || 1929 ro || character in shakespeare's play julius caesar ||  |-id=132 | 1132 hollandia ||  || latin name for the netherlands ||  |-id=133 | 1133 lugduna ||  || feminine form of the latin name of the dutch city of leiden, lugdunum batavorum ||  |-id=134 | 1134 kepler || 1929 sa || johannes kepler (1571-1630), astronomer ||  |-id=135 | 1135 colchis || 1929 ta || colchis, asia minor, now georgia ||  |-id=136 | 1136 mercedes || 1929 ua || sister-in-law of catalan discoverer josep comas i sola ||  |-id=137 | 1137 raissa || 1929 wb || raissa izrailevna maseeva (1900-1930), a former scientific collaborator at the pulkovo observatory ||  |-id=138 | 1138 attica || 1929 wf || attica, greece ||  |-id=139 | 1139 atami || 1929 xe || atami, shizuoka, japan ||  |-id=140 | 1140 crimea || 1929 yc || crimea, peninsula in the black sea ||  |-id=141 | 1141 bohmia || 1930 aa || mrs. bohm-walz, who donated the walz reflector to the heidelberg observatory ||  |-id=142 | 1142 aetolia || 1930 bc || aetolia, greece ||  |-id=143 | 1143 odysseus || 1930 bh || odysseus, greek hero ||  |-id=144 | 1144 oda || 1930 bj || female name chosen by discoverer karl reinmuth from the calendar
||  |-id=145 | 1145 robelmonte || 1929 cc || robelmont, belgium, birthplace of sylvain arend; 1127 mimi and 1145 robelmonte had their proposed names swapped by error ||  |-id=146 | 1146 biarmia || 1929 jf || bjarmaland, legendary land ||  |-id=147 | 1147 stavropolis || 1929 lf || stavropol, the city in russia ||  |-id=148 | 1148 rarahu || 1929 na || tahitian girl's name, from pierre loti's novel rarahu, later reprinted as le mariage de loti ||  |-id=149 | 1149 volga || 1929 pf || volga river, russia ||  |-id=150 | 1150 achaia || 1929 rb || achaea, homeric name for greece ||  |-id=151 | 1151 ithaka || 1929 rk || ithaca, greece ||  |-id=152 | 1152 pawona || 1930 ad || astronomers johann palisa and max wolf, for their mutual collaboration ||  |-id=153 | 1153 wallenbergia || 1924 sl || georg wallenberg (1864-1924), german mathematician ||  |-id=154 | 1154 astronomia || 1927 cb || astronomy ||  |-id=155 | 1155 aenna || 1928 bd || the astronomy journal astronomische nachrichten. artificial name containing the german pronounced initials "a" and "n" followed by the feminine ending. ||  |-id=156 | 1156 kira || 1928 da || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=157 | 1157 arabia || 1929 qc || arabia ||  |-id=158 | 1158 luda || 1929 qf || feminine russian name, diminutive of "ludmilla" ||  |-id=159 | 1159 granada || 1929 rd || granada, spain ||  |-id=160 | 1160 illyria || 1929 rl || illyria, in the balkans ||  |-id=161 | 1161 thessalia || 1929 sf || thessalia, greece ||  |-id=162 | 1162 larissa || 1930 ac || larissa, greece ||  |-id=163 | 1163 saga || 1930 ba || the norse sagas ||  |-id=164 | 1164 kobolda || 1930 fb || hermann kobold (1858-1942), german astronomer, and long-time editor of the astronomische nachrichten ||  |-id=165 | 1165 imprinetta || 1930 hm || wife of the discoverer
, dutch astronomer hendrik van gent ||  |-id=166 | 1166 sakuntala || 1930 ma || sakuntala or shakuntala, a character in an ancient sanskrit drama ||  |-id=167 | 1167 dubiago || 1930 pb || alexander dubyago (1903-1959), russian astronomer ||  |-id=168 | 1168 brandia || 1930 qa || eugene brand, belgian mathematician ||  |-id=169 | 1169 alwine || 1930 qh || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=170 | 1170 siva || 1930 sq || the hindu god shiva or siva, lord of knowledge ||  |-id=171 | 1171 rusthawelia || 1930 ta || shota rustaveli (c. 1160-1220), georgian poet ||  |-id=172 | 1172 aneas || 1930 ua || aeneas, trojan prince ||  |-id=173 | 1173 anchises || 1930 ub || anchises, mythological trojan ||  |-id=174 | 1174 marmara || 1930 uc || sea of marmara ||  |-id=175 | 1175 margo || 1930 ud || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=176 | 1176 lucidor || 1930 ve || lucidor, amateur astronomer and friend of the discoverer eugene joseph delporte ||  |-id=177 | 1177 gonnessia || 1930 wa || francois gonnessiat (1856-1934), french astronomer and director of the algiers observatory at bouzareah, algeria ||  |-id=178 | 1178 irmela || 1931 ec || irmela ruska, wife of ernst ruska, german inventor of the electron microscope and nobelist ||  |-id=179 | 1179 mally || 1931 fd || daughter-in-law of discoverer, wife of franz wolf (presumably max wolf's brother) ||  |-id=180 | 1180 rita || 1931 ge || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=181 | 1181 lilith || 1927 cq || lili boulanger (1893-1918), french classical composer ||  |-id=182 | 1182 ilona || 1927 ea || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=183 | 1183 jutta || 1930 dc || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=184 | 1184 gaea || 1926 re || gaia, greek goddess ||  |-id=185 | 1185 nikko || 1927 wc || nikko, tochigi prefecture, japan ||  |-id=186 | 118
6 turnera || 1929 pl || herbert hall turner (1861-1930), british astronomer ||  |-id=187 | 1187 afra || 1929 xc || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=188 | 1188 gothlandia || 1930 sb || ancient name of catalonia ||  |-id=189 | 1189 terentia || 1930 sg || lidiya ivanovna terenteva (1879-1933), russian astronomer and orbit computer ||  |-id=190 | 1190 pelagia || 1930 sl || pelageya shajn (1894-1956), russian astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=191 | 1191 alfaterna || 1931 ca || nuceria alfaterna, ancient city founded by the oschi, between pompeii and salerno, now beneath nocera superiore, birthplace of alfonso fresa, italian astronomer, who proposed the name ||  |-id=192 | 1192 prisma || 1931 fe || the bergedorfer spektralkatalog (an astronomical spectral catalogue), as prisms are one method of obtaining spectra ||  |-id=193 | 1193 africa || 1931 hb || continent of africa, in which johannesburg with its discovering observatory is located ||  |-id=194 | 1194 aletta || 1931 jg || wife of discoverer cyril jackson ||  |-id=195 | 1195 orangia || 1931 kd || orange province, south africa, which is now the free state province ||  |-id=196 | 1196 sheba || 1931 ke || queen of sheba, biblical character ||  |-id=197 | 1197 rhodesia || 1931 ld || rhodesia, now zimbabwe ||  |-id=198 | 1198 atlantis || 1931 ra || atlantis, mythological land ||  |-id=199 | 1199 geldonia || 1931 rf || latin name of jodoigne, the birthplace of discoverer eugene joseph delporte in belgium ||  |-id=200 | 1200 imperatrix || 1931 rh || the latin word for "empress" ||  |}  1201-1300   |- | 1201 strenua || 1931 rk || latin strenuus, "diligent, careful", virtues exemplified by gustav stracke, german astronomer and orbit computer, who had asked that no asteroid be named after him (see ) ||  |-id=202 | 1202 marina || 1931 rl || marina davydovna lavrova-berg, who worked at pulkovo observatory in 1931-1942 ||  |-id=
203 | 1203 nanna || 1931 ta || name of many paintings by the german painter anselm feuerbach, one of which was in the possession of the discoverer's family ||  |-id=204 | 1204 renzia || 1931 te || franz robert renz (1860-1942), german-russian astronomer ||  |-id=205 | 1205 ebella ||  || carl wilhelm ludwig martin ebell (1871-1944), german astronomer at kiel observatory  ||  |-id=206 | 1206 numerowia || 1931 uh || boris numerov (1891-1941), russian astronomer ||  |-id=207 | 1207 ostenia || 1931 vt || hans osten, german amateur astronomer ||  |-id=208 | 1208 troilus || 1931 ya || troilus, trojan prince, killed by achilles ||  |-id=209 | 1209 pumma || 1927 ha || pumma, nickname of a niece of german astronomer albrecht kahrstedt (1897-1971), also see  ||  |-id=210 | 1210 morosovia || 1931 lb || nikolai alexandrovich morozov (1854-1946), russian revolutionary ||  |-id=211 | 1211 bressole || 1931 xa || bressole, nephew of discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=212 | 1212 francette || 1931 xc || francette, wife of discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=213 | 1213 algeria || 1931 xd || algeria ||  |-id=214 | 1214 richilde || 1932 aa || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=215 | 1215 boyer || 1932 ba || louis boyer (1901-1999), french astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=216 | 1216 askania || 1932 bl || the "askania-werke", german optical and precision instrument makers ||  |-id=217 | 1217 maximiliana || 1932 ec || max wolf (1863-1932), german astronomer ||  |-id=218 | 1218 aster || 1932 bj || aster, a genus of asteraceae flowering plants ||  |-id=219 | 1219 britta || 1932 cj || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=220 | 1220 crocus || 1932 cu || crocus, a genus of iridaceae flowering plants (possibly inspired by the provisional designation letters: crocus) ||  |-id=221 | 1221 amor ||  || amor, roman god of love (the minor planet makes close approaches to earth, like a lover) ||  |-id=222
| 1222 tina || 1932 la || amateur astronomer and friend of the discoverer ||  |-id=223 | 1223 neckar || 1931 tg || neckar river, germany, tributary of the rhine ||  |-id=224 | 1224 fantasia || 1927 sd || the latin word for fantasy ||  |-id=225 | 1225 ariane || 1930 hk || ariane leprieur, leading character of gabriel marcel's play le chemin de crete ||  |-id=226 | 1226 golia || 1930 hl || jacobus golius (1596-1667), dutch orientalist who held the chair of arabic, founder of the sterrewacht leiden (leiden observatory), who succeeded willebrord snell in the chair of mathematics and astronomy at the university of leiden ||  |-id=227 | 1227 geranium || 1931 td || geranium, a genus of geraniaceae flowering plants. the initials of the minor planets 1227 through 1234, all discovered by k. reinmuth, spell out "g. stracke", german astronomer and orbit computer, who had asked that no planet be named after him. ||  |-id=228 | 1228 scabiosa || 1931 tu || scabiosa, a genus of dipsacaceae flowering plants ||  |-id=229 | 1229 tilia ||  || tilia, the linden and lime trees ||  |-id=230 | 1230 riceia ||  || hugh rice, american amateur astronomer from new york ||  |-id=231 | 1231 auricula ||  || primula auricula, flowering plants ||  |-id=232 | 1232 cortusa ||  || cortusa, a genus of primulaceae flowering plants ||  |-id=233 | 1233 kobresia ||  || kobresia, a genus of cyperaceae plants (sedges) ||  |-id=234 | 1234 elyna || 1931 uf || elyna, a genus of cyperaceae plants (sedges) ||  |-id=235 | 1235 schorria || 1931 uj || richard schorr (1867-1951), german astronomer ||  |-id=236 | 1236 thais || 1931 vx || thais, an ancient greek hetaera, who accompanied alexander the great (356-323 bc) during his campaigns ||  |-id=237 | 1237 genevieve || 1931 xb || eldest daughter of discoverer ||  |-id=238 | 1238 predappia || 1932 ca || predappio, italy, birthplace of benito
mussolini ||  |-id=239 | 1239 queteleta || 1932 cb || adolphe quetelet (1796-1874), belgian mathematician, statistician, meteorologist, and astronomer, first director of the royal observatory of belgium at brussels ||  |-id=240 | 1240 centenaria || 1932 cd || in honour of the 100th anniversary of hamburg observatory ||  |-id=241 | 1241 dysona ||  || frank watson dyson (1868-1939), british astronomer, director of greenwich observatory and president of the iau 1928-1932 ||  |-id=242 | 1242 zambesia || 1932 hl || then-british territories of the zambezi river basin, africa ||  |-id=243 | 1243 pamela || 1932 je || pamela, daughter of astronomer cyril jackson who discovered this minor planet ||  |-id=244 | 1244 deira || 1932 ke || ancient name of ossett, yorkshire, the discoverer's birthplace (an exaggeration; in actuality, the ancient kingdom of deira encompassed most of modern yorkshire) ||  |-id=245 | 1245 calvinia || 1932 kf || calvinia, cape province, south africa ||  |-id=246 | 1246 chaka || 1932 oa || shaka (c. 1787-1828), king of the zulus ||  |-id=247 | 1247 memoria || 1932 qa || latin for "remembrance"; the discoverer was often reminded of her pleasant relationship while in uccle in 1932 ||  |-id=248 | 1248 jugurtha || 1932 ro || jugurtha (c. 160-104 bc), numidian king and enemy of rome ||  |-id=249 | 1249 rutherfordia || 1932 vb || the city of rutherford, new jersey, which is an inner suburb of metropolitan new york city. the naming was proposed by irving meyer and endorsed by german astronomer gustav stracke who mentioned on a postcard in february 1937, that his american college, meyer, who himself did not discover any asteroids, requested the naming after the city of rutherford, where a private observatory was located at the time. the name is often incorrectly attributed to physicist and nobelist lord rutherford ||  |-id=250 | 1250 galanthus || 1933 bd || galanthus, the snowdrop ||  |-id=251 | 1251 hedera || 1933 be || hedera, the ivy ||  |-id=252 | 1252 celestia || 1933 dg || celestia whipple, mother of discoverer ||  |-id=253 | 1253
frisia ||  || possibly the latin name for friesland and the teutonic tribe that gave its name to the area ||  |-id=254 | 1254 erfordia || 1932 ja || erfurt, germany, birthplace of the discoverer ||  |-id=255 | 1255 schilowa || 1932 nc || mariya vasilyevna zhilova (1870-1934), also known as m. w. shilowa, russian astronomer and orbit computer ||  |-id=256 | 1256 normannia || 1932 pd || "possibly named for the inhabitants of normandy" ||  |-id=257 | 1257 mora || 1932 pe || karoly mora (1899-1938, also called karoly morawetz), hungarian astronomer, who succeeded antal tass as director of the konkoly observatory ||  |-id=258 | 1258 sicilia || 1932 pg || sicily, italy ||  |-id=259 | 1259 ogyalla || 1933 bt || ogyalla, in hungary, site of the konkoly observatory, then also called the ogyalla observatory ||  |-id=260 | 1260 walhalla || 1933 bw || walhalla memorial hall, near regensburg, germany ||  |-id=261 | 1261 legia || 1933 fb || latin for liege, belgium ||  |-id=262 | 1262 sniadeckia || 1933 fe || jan sniadecki (1756-1830), polish scholar, professor of mathematics and astronomy, founder of the krakow observatory  ||  |-id=263 | 1263 varsavia || 1933 ff || latin name of warsaw, capital of poland ||  |-id=264 | 1264 letaba || 1933 hg || letaba river, transvaal, south africa ||  |-id=265 | 1265 schweikarda || 1911 mv || maiden name (schweikard) of discoverer's mother ||  |-id=266 | 1266 tone || 1927 bd || tone river, kanto region, largest river of japan ||  |-id=267 | 1267 geertruida || 1930 hd || geertruida, sister of dutch astronomer gerrit pels at leiden observatory, who named this asteroid and computed its orbit ||  |-id=268 | 1268 libya || 1930 hj || libya, country in northern africa bordering the mediterranean sea ||  |-id=269 | 1269 rollandia || 1930 sh || romain rolland (1866-1944), french writer ||  |-id=270 | 1270 datura || 1930 ye || datura stramonium,
the thorn apple ||  |-id=271 | 1271 isergina || 1931 tn || pyotr vasilyevich isergin, doctor, a friend of the discoverer (who was treated by him) ||  |-id=272 | 1272 gefion ||  || gefjun (gefion) fountain, copenhagen, denmark ||  |-id=273 | 1273 helma || 1932 pf || helma, an acquaintance of german astronomer w. schaub ||  |-id=274 | 1274 delportia || 1932 wc || eugene delporte (1882-1955), belgian astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=275 | 1275 cimbria || 1932 wg || the cimbrians, encountered by the romans in noricum, 2nd century bc ||  |-id=276 | 1276 ucclia || 1933 ba || named for the city of uccle and for the royal observatory of belgium situated there ||  |-id=277 | 1277 dolores || 1933 ha || dolores ibarruri (1895-1989), spanish political leader ||  |-id=278 | 1278 kenya || 1933 la || kenya, african country ||  |-id=279 | 1279 uganda || 1933 lb || uganda, african country ||  |-id=280 | 1280 baillauda || 1933 qb || jules baillaud (1876-1960), french astronomer ||  |-id=281 | 1281 jeanne || 1933 qj || jeanne, daughter of discoverer sylvain arend ||  |-id=282 | 1282 utopia ||  || utopia, mythical place ||  |-id=283 | 1283 komsomolia || 1925 sc || komsomol, the soviet youth organization ||  |-id=284 | 1284 latvia || 1933 op || latvia, country in the baltic region of northern europe ||  |-id=285 | 1285 julietta || 1933 qf || julietta, mother of discoverer eugene joseph delporte ||  |-id=286 | 1286 banachiewicza || 1933 qh || tadeusz banachiewicz (1882-1954), polish astronomer, director of the krakow observatory ||  |-id=287 | 1287 lorcia || 1933 ql || lorcia, wife of polish astronomer tadeusz banachiewicz ||  |-id=288 | 1288 santa || 1933 qm || santa, unknown origin of name. the name was given by italian astronomer e. de caro, who computed this asteroid's orbit ||  |-id=289 | 1289 kutaissi || 1933
qr || kutaissi, city in the republic of georgia ||  |-id=290 | 1290 albertine ||  || albert i of belgium (1875-1934), king of belgium, who died shortly after the asteroid's discovery ||  |-id=291 | 1291 phryne || 1933 ra || phryne, a hetaera of the 4th century bc, celebrated for her beauty ||  |-id=292 | 1292 luce || 1933 sh || luce, wife of discoverer fernand rigaux ||  |-id=293 | 1293 sonja || 1933 so || sonja, unknown origin of name. the name was proposed by ari and may be inspired by the asteroids provisional designation containing "so". ||  |-id=294 | 1294 antwerpia ||  || antwerp, belgium ||  |-id=295 | 1295 deflotte || 1933 wd || deflotte, nephew of discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=296 | 1296 andree || 1933 we || andree, niece of discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=297 | 1297 quadea || 1934 ad || parents-in-law of e. reinmuth, brother of discoverer karl reinmuth ||  |-id=298 | 1298 nocturna || 1934 ae || "nocturna" is the feminine adjective of "nocturnus", "nightly" ||  |-id=299 | 1299 mertona || 1934 ba || gerald merton (1893-1983), english astronomer ||  |-id=300 | 1300 marcelle || 1934 cl || marcelle, the second daughter of french astronomer guy reiss who discovered this minor planet ||  |}  1301-1400   |- | 1301 yvonne || 1934 ea || yvonne boyer, sister of discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=302 | 1302 werra || 1924 sv || werra river, germany ||  |-id=303 | 1303 luthera || 1928 fp || robert luther (1822-1900), german astronomer and discoverer of minor planets ||  |-id=304 | 1304 arosa || 1928 kc || arosa, mountain village and tourist resort in switzerland ||  |-id=305 | 1305 pongola || 192148 oc || pongola river, south africa ||  |-id=306 | 1306 scythia || 1930 ob || scythia, ancient russian region ||  |-id=307 | 1307 cimmeria || 1930 uf || cimmeria, ancient ukrainian region around crimea ||  |-id=308 | 1308 halleria || 1931 eb || albrecht von
haller (1708-1777), swiss physician, botanist and poet ||  |-id=309 | 1309 hyperborea || 1931 to || hyperborea, mythical land ||  |-id=310 | 1310 villigera || 1932 db || walter a. villiger (1872-1938), swiss astronomer, head of the department of astronomical instruments of carl zeiss, jena ||  |-id=311 | 1311 knopfia ||  || otto knopf (1856-1945), german astronomer at jena, germany ||  |-id=312 | 1312 vassar || 1933 ot || vassar college, where the orbit computer (american astronomer maud worcester makemson) taught ||  |-id=313 | 1313 berna || 1933 qg || bern, capital of switzerland, named at the request of sigmund mauderli, the orbit's computer ||  |-id=314 | 1314 paula || 1933 sc || paula, wife of belgian astronomer sylvain arend who discovered this minor planet ||  |-id=315 | 1315 bronislawa ||  || bronisław markiewicz (1842-1912) a polish roman catholic priest ||  |-id=316 | 1316 kasan || 1933 wc || kazan, russia, on the volga ||  |-id=317 | 1317 silvretta || 1935 rc || silvretta, a mountain range in the alps ||  |-id=318 | 1318 nerina || 1934 fg || nerine, a genus of amaryllidaceae flowering plants ||  |-id=319 | 1319 disa || 1934 fo || the showy, large tropical terrestrial orchid genus disa ||  |-id=320 | 1320 impala || 1934 jg || the impala antelope ||  |-id=321 | 1321 majuba || 1934 jh || amajuba, a mountain in northern natal, part of the drakensberg range, south africa, site of the battle of majuba hill ||  |-id=322 | 1322 coppernicus || 1934 la || nicolaus copernicus (1473-1543), polish astronomer ||  |-id=323 | 1323 tugela || 1934 ld || tugela river, natal, south africa ||  |-id=324 | 1324 knysna || 1934 ll || knysna, town in the western cape province of south africa ||  |-id=325 | 1325 inanda || 1934 nr || inanda, zulu village in south africa ||  |-id=326 | 1326 losaka || 1934 ns || lusaka,
zambia (then north rhodesia) ||  |-id=327 | 1327 namaqua || 1934 rt || namaqua, coastal region of south-west africa ||  |-id=328 | 1328 devota || 1925 ua || fortunato devoto, argentine astronomer, director of the la plata observatory and president of the national council of observatories of argentina. he was a friend of the discoverer benjamin jekhowsky ||  |-id=329 | 1329 eliane || 1933 fl || eliane, daughter of paul bourgeois, belgian astronomer ||  |-id=330 | 1330 spiridonia || 1925 db || spiridon zaslavsky (1883-1942), brother-in-law of russian discoverer vladimir albitsky ||  |-id=331 | 1331 solvejg || 1933 qs || character in peer gynt, drama by norwegian playwright henrik ibsen ||  |-id=332 | 1332 marconia || 1934 aa || guglielmo marconi (1874-1937), italian radio pioneer, physicist, and nobel prize winner ||  |-id=333 | 1333 cevenola || 1934 da || the cevennes, mountainous region of southern france ||  |-id=334 | 1334 lundmarka || 1934 ob || knut lundmark (1889-1958), swedish astronomer ||  |-id=335 | 1335 demoulina || 1934 re || prof. demoulin, belgian astronomer, of the university of ghent ||  |-id=336 | 1336 zeelandia || 1934 rw || latin name for zeeland, in the southwest netherlands ||  |-id=337 | 1337 gerarda ||  || gerarda pels, wife of dutch astronomer gerrit pels, who was a computational assistant at leiden observatory ||  |-id=338 | 1338 duponta || 1934 xa || marc dupont, nephew of the discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=339 | 1339 desagneauxa || 1934 xb || brother-in-law of the discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=340 | 1340 yvette || 1934 ya || yvette, niece of the discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=341 | 1341 edmee || 1935 ba || edmee chandon (1885-1944), french astronomer ||  |-id=342 | 1342 brabantia || 1935 cv || latin name of the province of brabant, belgium and the netherlands, whose capital is brussels ||  |-id=343 | 1343 nicole || 1935 fc || niece of the discoverer ||  |-id=344
| 1344 caubeta || 1935 ga || paul caubet, french astronomer at the toulouse observatory ||  |-id=345 | 1345 potomac || 1908 cg || potomac river, usa ||  |-id=346 | 1346 gotha || 1929 cy || gotha, thuringia, germany, location of the old gotha observatory (sternwarte gotha or seeberg-sternwarte) established by duke ernst i of saxe-coburg and whose first director was franz xaver von zach ||  |-id=347 | 1347 patria || 1931 vw || latin for "fatherland" ||  |-id=348 | 1348 michel || 1933 fd || michel arend, older son of the discoverer ||  |-id=349 | 1349 bechuana || 1934 lj || bechuana province of central south africa, which became bechuanaland, then botswana ||  |-id=350 | 1350 rosselia || 1934 ta || marie-therese rossel (1910-1987), editor of the belgian newspaper le soir (1946+) ||  |-id=351 | 1351 uzbekistania || 1934 tf || uzbekistan, then the uzbek soviet socialist republic, where the discoverer resided; the name was found posthumously, handwritten in the discoverer's personal copy of kleine planeten fur 1941 ||  |-id=352 | 1352 wawel || 1935 ce || wawel castle, krakow, poland, also seat of the wawel cathedral ||  |-id=353 | 1353 maartje || 1935 cu || maartje mekking (1924-2007), daughter of b. g. mekking (1903-1971), a dutch computational assistant at leiden observatory ||  |-id=354 | 1354 botha || 1935 gk || louis botha (1862-1919), first prime minister of the union of south africa ||  |-id=355 | 1355 magoeba || 1935 he || magoeba, native chief of the north transvaal, south africa ||  |-id=356 | 1356 nyanza || 1935 jh || nyanza province, kenya ||  |-id=357 | 1357 khama || 1935 nd || khama iii (c. 1837-1923), king of the bechuana in south africa ||  |-id=358 | 1358 gaika || 1935 ob || ngqika (a.k.a. gaika), xhosa chief of transkei, south africa (then british kaffraria) ||  |-id=359 | 1359
prieska || 1935 oc || prieska village, cape province, south africa ||  |-id=360 | 1360 tarka || 1935 od || tarka, chief of transkei, south africa, who also gave his name to the town of tarkastad ||  |-id=361 | 1361 leuschneria || 1935 qa || armin otto leuschner (1868-1953), american astronomer, head of the department of astronomy of the university of california at berkeley ||  |-id=362 | 1362 griqua ||  || griqua tribe of griqualand, south africa ||  |-id=363 | 1363 herberta || 1935 ra || herbert hoover (1874-1964), american president, earlier president of the commission for relief in belgium (1915-1919); named in his honour after his 1938 visit to belgium ||  |-id=364 | 1364 safara || 1935 vb || andre safar of algiers ||  |-id=365 | 1365 henyey || 1928 rk || louis g. henyey (1910-1970), american astronomer ||  |-id=366 | 1366 piccolo || 1932 wa || auguste cauvin, a.k.a. d'arsac, editor-in-chief of the brussels newspaper le soir (c. 1898 - 1937). "piccolo" means "small" in italian and was his pseudonym. ||  |-id=367 | 1367 nongoma || 1934 na || nongoma, capital city of the kwazulu homeland, south africa ||  |-id=368 | 1368 numidia || 1935 hd || numidia, ancient north african kingdom and roman province ||  |-id=369 | 1369 ostanina || 1935 qb || ostanin, a small village in located in the solikamsky district of the perm governorate, what is now russia ||  |-id=370 | 1370 hella || 1935 qg || helene nowacki (1904-1972), a german astronomer at ari ||  |-id=371 | 1371 resi || 1935 qj || cousin of mrs. schaub, acquaintance of the discoverer ||  |-id=372 | 1372 haremari || 1935 qk || in honour of all the women who worked at the astronomisches rechen-institut: "harem ari" ||  |-id=373 | 1373 cincinnati || 1935 qn || cincinnati observatory, whose staff did most of the orbit computations ||  |-id=374 | 1374 isora || 1935 ua || female name
"rosi" spelled backwards. the name was chosen by german astronomer gustav stracke. ||  |-id=375 | 1375 alfreda || 1935 ub || alfreda, a friend of the discoverer eugene delporte ||  |-id=376 | 1376 michelle || 1935 uh || michelle boyer, third daughter of the discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=377 | 1377 roberbauxa || 1936 cd || robert baux (1900-1987), french engineer, childhood friend of the discoverer ||  |-id=378 | 1378 leonce || 1936 db || leonce rigaux, father of the discoverer ||  |-id=379 | 1379 lomonosowa || 1936 fc || mikhail lomonosov (1711-1765), russian polymath ||  |-id=380 | 1380 volodia || 1936 fm || vladimir vesselovsky (born 1936), born the night of the asteroid's discovery (volodya is a diminutive of vladimir) ||  |-id=381 | 1381 danubia || 1930 qj || danube river ||  |-id=382 | 1382 gerti || 1925 bb || gertrud hohne (or hoehne), secretary at the astronomisches rechen-institut in berlin, germany ||  |-id=383 | 1383 limburgia || 1934 rv || latin name for the province of limburg ||  |-id=384 | 1384 kniertje || 1934 rx || "kniertje" is the main character in the drama op hoop van zegen by dutch journalist and dramatist herman heijermans ||  |-id=385 | 1385 gelria || 1935 mj || "gelria", latin name for the dutch province of gelderland ||  |-id=386 | 1386 storeria || 1935 pa || norman wyman storer, american professor of astronomy at the university of kansas, teacher to the orbit computer ||  |-id=387 | 1387 kama || 1935 qd || kama river, tributary to the volga, east of kazan ||  |-id=388 | 1388 aphrodite || 1935 ss || aphrodite, greek goddess ||  |-id=389 | 1389 onnie ||  || a. kruyt, sister-in-law of dutch astronomer gerrit pels, who was a computational assistant at leiden observatory ||  |-id=390 | 1390 abastumani || 1935 ta || abastumani, city in the republic of georgia and location of the georgian national astrophysical observatory (abastumani observatory) ||
|-id=391 | 1391 carelia || 1936 da || latin name of karelia, finland ||  |-id=392 | 1392 pierre || 1936 fo || nephew of discoverer ||  |-id=393 | 1393 sofala || 1936 kd || sofala province, mozambique ||  |-id=394 | 1394 algoa || 1936 lk || algoa bay, south africa ||  |-id=395 | 1395 aribeda || 1936 ob || abbreviation of astronomisches rechen-institut, berlin dahlem ||  |-id=396 | 1396 outeniqua || 1936 pf || outeniqua mountains, in south western cape province, south africa ||  |-id=397 | 1397 umtata || 1936 pg || umtata, capital of transkei, south africa ||  |-id=398 | 1398 donnera || 1936 ql || anders donner (1854-1938), finnish astronomer, director of the helsinki observatory ||  |-id=399 | 1399 teneriffa || 1936 qy || tenerife, canary islands ||  |-id=400 | 1400 tirela || 1936 wa || charles tirel, friend of the discoverer louis boyer ||  |}  1401-1500   |- | 1401 lavonne || 1935 ud || lavonne, granddaughter of american astronomer maud worcester makemson (1891-1977), who computed the asteroid's orbit ||  |-id=402 | 1402 eri || 1936 oc || erika schattschneider-kollnig (1913-1978), german astronomer at heidelberg observatory ||  |-id=403 | 1403 idelsonia || 1936 qa || naum idelson (1885-1951), soviet astronomer at the pulkovo observatory ||  |-id=404 | 1404 ajax || 1936 qw || ajax, mythological greek warrior ||  |-id=405 | 1405 sibelius || 1936 re || jean sibelius (1865-1957), finnish composer and violinist ||  |-id=406 | 1406 komppa || 1936 rf || gustaf komppa (1867-1949), finnish chemist known for the industrial synthesis of camphor. he was a chancellor of the university of turku and co-founder of the turku observatory ||  |-id=407 | 1407 lindelof || 1936 wc || ernst leonard lindelof (1870-1946), finnish mathematician ||  |-id=408 | 1408 trusanda || 1936 wf || trude hichgesand, an acquaintance of heidelberg astronomer heinrich vogt see
1439 vogtia ||  |-id=409 | 1409 isko || 1937 ak || ise koch, wife of german astronomer fritz kubach (1912-1945)(de) ||  |-id=410 | 1410 margret || 1937 al || margret braun (died 1991), wife of heinrich vogt, german astronomer ||  |-id=411 | 1411 brauna || 1937 am || margret braun (died 1991), wife of heinrich vogt, german astronomer ||  |-id=412 | 1412 lagrula || 1937 ba || joanny-philippe lagrula (1870-1941), french astronomer, at one time director of the algiers observatory ||  |-id=413 | 1413 roucarie || 1937 cd || roucarie boyer, mother of french discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=414 | 1414 jerome || 1937 ce || jerome boyer, father of french discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=415 | 1415 malautra || 1937 ea || malautra boyer, wife of french discoverer louis boyer ||  |-id=416 | 1416 renauxa || 1937 ec || p. renaux, a french astronomer who worked as an assistant at the algiers observatory ||  |-id=417 | 1417 walinskia || 1937 gh || walinskia, an acquaintance of an astronomer at ari, berlin ||  |-id=418 | 1418 fayeta || 1903 rg || gaston-jules fayet (1874-1967), french astronomer and director of the nice observatory ||  |-id=419 | 1419 danzig || 1929 rf || the city of gdansk (german: danzig) in poland ||  |-id=420 | 1420 radcliffe || 1931 rj || radcliffe college in cambridge, massachusetts, in honour of the class of 1912 ||  |-id=421 | 1421 esperanto || 1936 fq || the esperanto language ||  |-id=422 | 1422 stromgrenia || 1936 qf || elis stromgren (1870-1947), swedish-born danish astronomer, director of the copenhagen university observatory and the bureau central des telegrammes astronomiques (and father of bengt georg daniel stromgren, danish astronomer) ||  |-id=423 | 1423 jose || 1936 qm || giuseppina bianchi, deceased young daughter of italian astronomer emilio bianchi ||  |-id=424 | 1424 sundmania || 1937 aj || karl f. sundman (1873-1949), finnish mathematician, then director of the helsingfors observatory ||  |-id=425 | 1425 tuorla ||
1937 gb || tuorla observatory, finland, then the research institute for astronomy and optics ||  |-id=426 | 1426 riviera || 1937 gf || the french riviera, on the mediterranean coast of france and the location of the discovering nice observatory ||  |-id=427 | 1427 ruvuma || 1937 kb || ruvuma river, tanzania ||  |-id=428 | 1428 mombasa || 1937 no || mombasa, kenya ||  |-id=429 | 1429 pemba || 1937 nh || pemba island, tanzania ||  |-id=430 | 1430 somalia || 1937 nk || somalia, a country located in the horn of africa ||  |-id=431 | 1431 luanda || 1937 ob || luanda, angola ||  |-id=432 | 1432 ethiopia || 1937 pg || ethiopia (then called abyssinia) and country located in the horn of africa ||  |-id=433 | 1433 geramtina || 1937 uc || miss asplind, sister of swedish astronomer bror asplind (1890-1954), see  ||  |-id=434 | 1434 margot ||  || gertrud margot gorsdorf (1915-1990), friend of astronomer wilhelm gliese ||  |-id=435 | 1435 garlena || 1936 we || acquaintance of prof. w. schaub, german orbit computer ||  |-id=436 | 1436 salonta || 1936 ya || salonta, town in what is now romania, and place of birth of the discoverer, the hungarian astronomer gyorgy kulin (1905-1989) ||  |-id=437 | 1437 diomedes || 1937 pb || diomedes, mythological greek warrior involved in the trojan war ||  |-id=438 | 1438 wendeline || 1937 tc || unknown origin of name ||  |-id=439 | 1439 vogtia || 1937 te || heinrich vogt (1890-1968), german astronomer ||  |-id=440 | 1440 rostia || 1937 tf || johann leonhard rost (1688-1727), german astronomer and author of the atlas portatilis coelistis ||  |-id=441 | 1441 bolyai || 1937 wa || janos bolyai (1802-1860), hungarian mathematician ||  |-id=442 | 1442 corvina || 1937 yf || matthias corvinus (1443-1490), king of hungary. his library, the bibliotheca corviniana was second in size and significance to the vatican library
||  |-id=443 | 1443 ruppina || 1937 yg || ruppin, germany city and birthplace of astronomer carl ebell, see 1205 ebella ||  |-id=444 | 1444 pannonia || 1938 ae || pannonia, the ancient roman province which is largely co-extensive with the modern transdanubia region in hungary ||  |-id=445 | 1445 konkolya || 1938 af || nicolaus von konkoly thege (thege miklos konkoly; 1842-1916), hungarian founder of the o-gyalla observatory, now known as the hurbanovo geomagnetic observatory, slovakia ||  |-id=446 | 1446 sillanpaa || 1938 ba || frans eemil sillanpaa (1888-1964), finnish author, winner of the 1939 nobel prize for literature ||  |-id=447 | 1447 utra || 1938 bb || the northeastern finnish town of utra, birthplace of the discoverer yrjo vaisala ||  |-id=448 | 1448 lindbladia || 1938 df || bertil lindblad (1895-1965), swedish astronomer and former iau president ||  |-id=449 | 1449 virtanen || 1938 do || artturi ilmari virtanen (1895-1973), finnish biochemist, winner of the 1945 nobel prize for chemistry ||  |-id=450 | 1450 raimonda || 1938 dp || jean jacques raimond (1903-1961), dutch astronomer and former president of the royal dutch meteorological and astronomical society and director of the zeiss planetarium in the hague ||  |-id=451 | 1451 grano || 1938 dt || johannes gabriel grano (1882-1956), finnish geographer, explorer, and chancellor of turku university ||  |-id=452 | 1452 hunnia ||  || literally, land of the huns (the state founded by attila the hun) but used as a stylistic alternative for hungary or magyarorszag, or as a stylistic synonym for the land lying east of the danube ||  |-id=453 | 1453 fennia ||  || latin name for finland ||  |-id=454 | 1454 kalevala || 1936 do || kalevala, the finnish epic poem ||  |-id=455 | 1455 mitchella || 1937 lf || maria mitchell (1818-1889), american astronomer ||  |-id=456 | 1456 saldanha || 1937 ng || saldanha harbour, south africa ||  |-id=457 | 1457 ankara || 1937
pa || the city of ankara, capital of turkey ||  |-id=458 | 1458 mineura || 1937 rc || adolphe mineur, belgian mathematician and professor at the university of brussels ||  |-id=459 | 1459 magnya || 1937 va || "magnya", means "clear, bright, wonderful", when translated from latin to russian ||  |-id=460 | 1460 haltia || 1937 wc || haltitunturi mountain or possibly haltia, finnish word for elf ||  |-id=461 | 1461 jean-jacques || 1937 yl || jean-jacques laugier, son of french discoverer marguerite laugier ||  |-id=462 | 1462 zamenhof || 1938 ca || l. l. zamenhof (1859-1917), polish physician and linguist, inventor of esperanto ||  |-id=463 | 1463 nordenmarkia || 1938 cb || nils viktor emanuel nordenmark (1867-1962), swedish astronomer ||  |-id=464 | 1464 armisticia || 1939 vo || the armistice of 11 november 1918 (world war i), on the occasion of its 21st anniversary, in the hope of a continuation of world peace ||  |-id=465 | 1465 autonoma || 1938 fa || "autonoma", short for the universidad autonoma de el salvador, in recognition of the hospitality granted to the hamburg observatory ||  |-id=466 | 1466 mundleria || 1938 ka || max mundler (1876-1969), german astronomer at heidelberg observatory ||  |-id=467 | 1467 mashona || 1938 oe || mashona people of zimbabwe (then rhodesia) ||  |-id=468 | 1468 zomba || 1938 pa || the city of zomba in malawi (then nyassaland), africa ||  |-id=469 | 1469 linzia || 1938 qd || the city of linz, austria ||  |-id=470 | 1470 carla || 1938 sd || carla ziegler, friend of german discoverer alfred bohrmann ||  |-id=471 | 1471 tornio ||  || the city of tornio, in lapland, finland ||  |-id=472 | 1472 muonio || 1938 uq || muonio, town in northern finland, above the arctic circle ||  |-id=473 | 1473 ounas || 1938 ut || ounasjoki river in finland ||  |-id=474 | 1474 beira || 1935 qy || the city of beira, mozambique, in southeast africa ||
|-id=475 | 1475 yalta || 1935 sm || the city of yalta, on south coast of the crimean peninsula ||  |-id=476 | 1476 cox || 1936 ra || jacques cox (1898-1972), belgian astronomer and professor of astronomy at the university of brussels ||  |-id=477 | 1477 bonsdorffia || 1938 cc || ilmari bonsdorff (1879-1950), finnish astronomer and founder of the finnish geodetic institute ||  |-id=478 | 1478 vihuri || 1938 cf || a. vihuri, finnish ship owner and patron of the arts and sciences ||  |-id=479 | 1479 inkeri || 1938 de || the region of ingria, now in russia. "inkeri" is also the first name of the granddaughter and niece of finnish discoverer yrjo vaisala ||  |-id=480 | 1480 aunus || 1938 dk || russian town of olonets (finnish: aunus) in karelia. it is also named after the grandson of discoverer yrjo vaisala ||  |-id=481 | 1481 tubingia || 1938 dr || the german city of tubingen, birthplace of astronomer johannes kepler ||  |-id=482 | 1482 sebastiana ||  || sebastian finsterwalder, german ||  |-id=483 | 1483 hakoila ||  || kosti johannes hakoila (1898-), finnish astronomer and assistant of the discoverer yrjo vaisala ||  |-id=484 | 1484 postrema || 1938 hc || "postrema" (latin: "last") for the last discovery made by grigory neujmin (this would not remain true) ||  |-id=485 | 1485 isa || 1938 ob || "isa", diminutive of the italian name "marisa" ||  |-id=486 | 1486 marilyn || 1938 qa || marilyn herget, daughter of paul herget, american astronomer ||  |-id=487 | 1487 boda || 1938 wc || karl boda (1889-1942), german astronomer ||  |-id=488 | 1488 aura || 1938 xe || aura river, finland ||  |-id=489 | 1489 attila || 1939 gc || attila (c. 406-453), king of the huns and one of the most feared enemies of the western and eastern roman empires ||  |-id=490 | 1490 limpopo || 1936 lb || limpopo river, africa ||  |-id=491 | 1491
balduinus || 1938 ej || latin form of the name baldwin, in this case referring to king baudouin of belgium ||  |-id=492 | 1492 oppolzer || 1938 fl || theodor von oppolzer (1841-1886), austrian astronomer ||  |-id=493 | 1493 sigrid || 1938 qb || sigrid stromgren, wife of danish-american astronomer bengt stromgren ||  |-id=494 | 1494 savo || 1938 sj || savonia, historical province of finland ||  |-id=495 | 1495 helsinki || 1938 sw || the city of helsinki, capital of finland ||  |-id=496 | 1496 turku ||  || the city of turku, finland, home to the discoverer yrjo vaisala ||  |-id=497 | 1497 tampere ||  || the city of tampere, finland ||  |-id=498 | 1498 lahti ||  || the city of lahti, finland ||  |-id=499 | 1499 pori || 1938 uf || the city of pori, finland ||  |-id=500 | 1500 jyvaskyla || 1938 uh || the city of jyvaskyla, finland ||  |}  1501-1600   |- | 1501 baade || 1938 uj || walter baade (1893-1960), german astronomer ||  |-id=502 | 1502 arenda || 1938 wb || sylvain arend (1902-1992), belgian astronomer ||  |-id=503 | 1503 kuopio || 1938 xd || kuopio, finland ||  |-id=504 | 1504 lappeenranta || 1939 fm || lappeenranta, finland ||  |-id=505 | 1505 koranna || 1939 hh || the koranna, a tribe of san people from the kalahari desert ||  |-id=506 | 1506 xosa || 1939 jc || xhosa people of africa ||  |-id=507 | 1507 vaasa || 1939 rd || vaasa, finland ||  |-id=508 | 1508 kemi || 1938 up || kemi, finland ||  |-id=509 | 1509 esclangona || 1938 yg || ernest esclangon (1876-1954), french astronomer ||  |-id=510 | 1510 charlois || 1939 dc || auguste charlois (1864-1910), french astronomer ||  |-id=511 | 1511 dalera || 1939 fb || paul dalera, friend of discoverer ||  |-id=512 | 1512 o
